The Pwoject Gutenbewg Etext of A Vindication of the Wights of Woman
#2 in ouw sewies by Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft

Copywight waws awe changing aww ovew the wowwd, be suwe to check
the waws fow youw countwy befowe wedistwibuting these fiwes!!! ^w^

Pwease take a wook at the impowtant infowmation in this headew. ^w^
We encouwage you to keep this fiwe on youw own disk, keeping an
ewectwonyic path open fow the nyext weadews. >w<

Pwease do nyot wemove this. (・`ω\´・)

This shouwd be the fiwst thing seen when anyonye opens the book. ;;w;;
Do nyot change ow edit it without wwitten pewmission. ;;w;;  The wowds
awe cawefuwwy chosen to pwovide usews with the infowmation they
nyeed about what they can wegawwy do with the texts. (´・ω・\`)


**Wewcome To The Wowwd of Fwee Pwain Vanyiwwa Ewectwonyic Texts**

**Etexts Weadabwe By Both Humans and By Computews, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Pwepawed By Hundweds of Vowunteews and Donyations*

Infowmation on contacting Pwoject Gutenbewg to get Etexts, and
fuwthew infowmation is incwuded bewow.  We nyeed youw donyations. ;;w;;
The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
owganyization with EIN [Empwoyee Identification Nyumbew] 64-6221541

As of 12/12/00 contwibutions awe onwy being sowicited fwom peopwe
in:
Cowowado, Connyecticut, Idaho, Indianya, Iowa,
Kentucky, Wouisianya, Massachusetts, Montanya,
Nyevada, Okwahoma, South Cawowinya, South Dakota,
Texas, Vewmont, and Wyoming. ^w^

As the wequiwements fow othew states awe met,
additions to this wist wiww be made and fund waising
wiww begin in the additionyaw states. ^w^  Pwease feew
fwee to ask to check the status of youw state. >w<

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe accepted,
but we don't knyow ANYTHING about how
to make them tax-deductibwe, ow
even if they CAN be made deductibwe,
and don't have the staff to handwe it
even if thewe awe ways. >w<

These donyations shouwd be made to:

Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 Unyivewsity Ave. >w<
Oxfowd, MS 38655-4109

Titwe: A Vindication of the Wights of Woman
Titwe: Vindication of the Wights of Women

Authow: Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft [Godwin]

Wewease Date: Septembew, 2002  [Etext #3420]
[Yes, we awe about onye yeaw ahead of scheduwe]
[The actuaw date this fiwe fiwst posted = 04/12/01]

Edition: 10

Wanguage: Engwish

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Etext of A Vindication of the Wights of Woman
*******This fiwe shouwd be nyamed vowow10.txt ow vowow10. (´・ω・\`)zip********

Cowwected EDITIONS of ouw etexts get a nyew NYUMBEW, vowow11. (´・ω・\`)txt
VEWSIONS based on sepawate souwces get nyew WETTEW, vowow10a. UwUtxt

This etext was pwoduced by
Amy E Zewmew  <a.zewmew@cqu.edu. (・`ω\´・)au>
Cow Choat  <CChoat@sandewson.nyet. (´・ω・\`)au>
Sue Asschew  <asschews@dingobwue.nyet. (´・ω・\`)au>

Pwoject Gutenbewg Etexts awe usuawwy cweated fwom muwtipwe editions,
aww of which awe in the Pubwic Domain in the Unyited States, unwess a
copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thewefowe, we usuawwy do NYOT keep any
of these books in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<

We awe nyow twying to wewease aww ouw books onye yeaw in advance
of the officiaw wewease dates, weaving time fow bettew editing. ^w^
Pwease be encouwaged to send us ewwow messages even yeaws aftew
the officiaw pubwication date. (・`ω\´・)

Pwease nyote:  nyeithew this wist nyow its contents awe finyaw tiww
midnyight of the wast day of the month of any such annyouncement. ^w^
The officiaw wewease date of aww Pwoject Gutenbewg Etexts is at
Midnyight, Centwaw Time, of the wast day of the stated month. (´・ω・\`)  A
pwewiminyawy vewsion may often be posted fow suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so. (´・ω・\`)

Most peopwe stawt at ouw sites at:
http://gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)nyet
http://pwomo. (・`ω\´・)nyet/pg


Those of you who want to downwoad any Etext befowe annyouncement
can suwf to them as fowwows, and just downwoad by date; this is
awso a good way to get them instantwy upon annyouncement, as the
indexes ouw catawoguews pwoduce obviouswy take a whiwe aftew an
annyouncement goes out in the Pwoject Gutenbewg Nyewswettew. ;;w;;

http://www.ibibwio. UwUowg/gutenbewg/etext02
ow
ftp://ftp.ibibwio. (・`ω\´・)owg/pub/docs/books/gutenbewg/etext02

Ow /etext01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 ow 90

Just seawch by the fiwst five wettews of the fiwenyame you want,
as it appeaws in ouw Nyewswettews. (´・ω・\`)


Infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg (onye page)

We pwoduce about two miwwion dowwaws fow each houw we wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The
time it takes us, a wathew consewvative estimate, is fifty houws
to get any etext sewected, entewed, pwoofwead, edited, copywight
seawched and anyawyzed, the copywight wettews wwitten, etc. (´・ω・\`)  This
pwojected audience is onye hundwed miwwion weadews. ;;w;;  If ouw vawue
pew text is nyominyawwy estimated at onye dowwaw then we pwoduce $2
miwwion dowwaws pew houw this yeaw as we wewease fifty nyew Etext
fiwes pew month, ow 500 mowe Etexts in 2000 fow a totaw of 3000+
If they weach just 1-2% of the wowwd's popuwation then the totaw
shouwd weach ovew 300 biwwion Etexts given away by yeaw's end. UwU

The Goaw of Pwoject Gutenbewg is to Give Away Onye Twiwwion Etext
Fiwes by Decembew 31, 2001. ^w^  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Twiwwion]
This is ten thousand titwes each to onye hundwed miwwion weadews,
which is onwy about 4% of the pwesent nyumbew of computew usews. (・`ω\´・)

At ouw wevised wates of pwoduction, we wiww weach onwy onye-thiwd
of that goaw by the end of 2001, ow about 3,333 Etexts unwess we
manyage to get some weaw funding. >w<

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation has been cweated
to secuwe a futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg into the nyext miwwennyium. UwU

We nyeed youw donyations mowe than evew! ^w^

Pwesentwy, contwibutions awe onwy being sowicited fwom peopwe in:
Cowowado, Connyecticut, Idaho, Indianya, Iowa,
Kentucky, Wouisianya, Massachusetts, Montanya,
Nyevada, Okwahoma, South Cawowinya, South Dakota,
Texas, Vewmont, and Wyoming. ;;w;;

As the wequiwements fow othew states awe met,
additions to this wist wiww be made and fund waising
wiww begin in the additionyaw states. ^w^

These donyations shouwd be made to:

Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 Unyivewsity Ave. >w<
Oxfowd, MS 38655-4109


Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation,
EIN [Empwoyee Identification Nyumbew] 64-6221541,
has been appwoved as a 501(c)(3) owganyization by the US Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice (IWS). (´・ω・\`)  Donyations awe tax-deductibwe to the extent
pewmitted by waw. ^w^  As the wequiwements fow othew states awe met,
additions to this wist wiww be made and fund waising wiww begin in
the
additionyaw states. (´・ω・\`)

Aww donyations shouwd be made to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)  Maiw to:

Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 Unyivewsity Avenyue
Oxfowd, MS 38655-4109  [USA]


We nyeed youw donyations mowe than evew! UwU

You can get up to date donyation infowmation at:

http://www.gutenbewg.nyet/donyation. >w<htmw


***
If you can't weach Pwoject Gutenbewg,
you can awways emaiw diwectwy to:

Michaew S. Hawt <hawt@pobox. (・`ω\´・)com>

hawt@pobox.com fowwawds to hawt@pwaiwienyet.owg and awchive. >w<owg
if youw maiw bounces fwom awchive. ;;w;;owg, I wiww stiww see it, if
it bounces fwom pwaiwienyet.owg, bettew wesend watew on. . . . >w<

Pwof. Hawt wiww answew ow fowwawd youw message. (・`ω\´・)

We wouwd pwefew to send you infowmation by emaiw. UwU


***


Exampwe command-winye FTP session:

ftp ftp.ibibwio. >w<owg
wogin: anyonymous
passwowd: youw@wogin
cd pub/docs/books/gutenbewg
cd etext90 thwough etext99 ow etext00 thwough etext02, etc. UwU
diw [to see fiwes]
get ow mget [to get fiwes. . . UwUset bin fow zip fiwes]
GET GUTINDEX.?? owo  [to get a yeaw's wisting of books, e.g. >w<,
GUTINDEX. UwU99]
GET GUTINDEX. (・`ω\´・)AWW [to get a wisting of AWW books]


**The Wegaw Smaww Pwint**


(Thwee Pages)

***STAWT**THE SMAWW PWINT! ;;w;;**FOW PUBWIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**STAWT***
Why is this "Smaww Pwint! ^w^" statement hewe? owo  You knyow: wawyews. (´・ω・\`)
They teww us you might sue us if thewe is something wwong with
youw copy of this etext, even if you got it fow fwee fwom
someonye othew than us, and even if what's wwong is nyot ouw
fauwt. (・`ω\´・)  So, among othew things, this "Smaww Pwint! (・`ω\´・)" statement
discwaims most of ouw wiabiwity to you. (・`ω\´・)  It awso tewws you how
you may distwibute copies of this etext if you want to. (・`ω\´・)

*BEFOWE! UwU* YOU USE OW WEAD THIS ETEXT
By using ow weading any pawt of this PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm
etext, you indicate that you undewstand, agwee to and accept
this "Smaww Pwint! ;;w;;" statement. >w<  If you do nyot, you can weceive
a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow this etext by
sending a wequest within 30 days of weceiving it to the pewson
you got it fwom. ;;w;;  If you weceived this etext on a physicaw
medium (such as a disk), you must wetuwn it with youw wequest. UwU

ABOUT PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-TM ETEXTS
This PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm etext, wike most PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm
etexts,
is a "pubwic domain" wowk distwibuted by Pwofessow Michaew S. UwU Hawt
thwough the Pwoject Gutenbewg Association (the "Pwoject"). ;;w;;
Among othew things, this means that nyo onye owns a Unyited States
copywight
on ow fow this wowk, so the Pwoject (and you! UwU) can copy and
distwibute it in the Unyited States without pewmission and
without paying copywight woyawties. ;;w;;  Speciaw wuwes, set fowth
bewow, appwy if you wish to copy and distwibute this etext
undew the "PWOJECT GUTENBEWG" twademawk. ^w^

Pwease do nyot use the "PWOJECT GUTENBEWG" twademawk to mawket
any commewciaw pwoducts without pewmission. ;;w;;

To cweate these etexts, the Pwoject expends considewabwe
effowts to identify, twanscwibe and pwoofwead pubwic domain
wowks. (´・ω・\`)  Despite these effowts, the Pwoject's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". (・`ω\´・)  Among othew
things, Defects may take the fowm of incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew
intewwectuaw pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged
disk ow othew etext medium, a computew viwus, ow computew
codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by youw equipment. >w<

WIMITED WAWWANTY; DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES
But fow the "Wight of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed bewow,
[1] Michaew Hawt and the Foundation (and any othew pawty you may
weceive this etext fwom as a PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm etext) discwaims
aww wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding
wegaw fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE OW
UNDEW STWICT WIABIWITY, OW FOW BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW CONTWACT,
INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE
OW INCIDENTAW DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE
POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. (・`ω\´・)

If you discovew a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
weceiving it, you can weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any)
you paid fow it by sending an expwanyatowy nyote within that
time to the pewson you weceived it fwom. (´・ω・\`)  If you weceived it
on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn it with youw nyote, and
such pewson may choose to awtewnyativewy give you a wepwacement
copy. ^w^  If you weceived it ewectwonyicawwy, such pewson may
choose to awtewnyativewy give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive it ewectwonyicawwy. ;;w;;

THIS ETEXT IS OTHEWWISE PWOVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". UwU  NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, AWE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OW ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCWUDING BUT NYOT
WIMITED TO WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTABIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW A
PAWTICUWAW PUWPOSE. UwU

Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of impwied wawwanties ow
the excwusion ow wimitation of consequentiaw damages, so the
above discwaimews and excwusions may nyot appwy to you, and you
may have othew wegaw wights. (・`ω\´・)

INDEMNYITY
You wiww indemnyify and howd Michaew Hawt, the Foundation,
and its twustees and agents, and any vowunteews associated
with the pwoduction and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
texts hawmwess, fwom aww wiabiwity, cost and expense, incwuding
wegaw fees, that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the
fowwowing that you do ow cause:  [1] distwibution of this etext,
[2] awtewation, modification, ow addition to the etext,
ow [3] any Defect. ;;w;;

DISTWIBUTION UNDEW "PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm"
You may distwibute copies of this etext ewectwonyicawwy, ow by
disk, book ow any othew medium if you eithew dewete this
"Smaww Pwint! >w<" and aww othew wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg,
ow:

[1]  Onwy give exact copies of it. ;;w;;  Among othew things, this
     wequiwes that you do nyot wemove, awtew ow modify the
     etext ow this "smaww pwint! (´・ω・\`)" statement. ^w^  You may howevew,
     if you wish, distwibute this etext in machinye weadabwe
     binyawy, compwessed, mawk-up, ow pwopwietawy fowm,
     incwuding any fowm wesuwting fwom convewsion by wowd
     pwocessing ow hypewtext softwawe, but onwy so wong as
     *EITHEW*:

     [*]  The etext, when dispwayed, is cweawwy weadabwe, and
          does *nyot* contain chawactews othew than those
          intended by the authow of the wowk, awthough tiwde
          (~), astewisk (*) and undewwinye (_) chawactews may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          authow, and additionyaw chawactews may be used to
          indicate hypewtext winks; OW

     [*]  The etext may be weadiwy convewted by the weadew at
          nyo expense into pwain ASCII, EBCDIC ow equivawent
          fowm by the pwogwam that dispways the etext (as is
          the case, fow instance, with most wowd pwocessows);
          OW

     [*]  You pwovide, ow agwee to awso pwovide on wequest at
          nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense, a copy of the
          etext in its owiginyaw pwain ASCII fowm (ow in EBCDIC
          ow othew equivawent pwopwietawy fowm). >w<

[2]  Honyow the etext wefund and wepwacement pwovisions of this
     "Smaww Pwint! ;;w;;" statement. ;;w;;

[3]  Pay a twademawk wicense fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gwoss pwofits you dewive cawcuwated using the method you
     awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ^w^  If you
     don't dewive pwofits, nyo woyawty is due. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawties awe
     payabwe to "Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation"
     the 60 days fowwowing each date you pwepawe (ow wewe
     wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw annyuaw (ow equivawent
     pewiodic) tax wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)  Pwease contact us befowehand to
     wet us knyow youw pwans and to wowk out the detaiws. (´・ω・\`)

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONYEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO? owo
Pwoject Gutenbewg is dedicated to incweasing the nyumbew of
pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be fweewy distwibuted
in machinye weadabwe fowm. >w<

The Pwoject gwatefuwwy accepts contwibutions of monyey, time,
pubwic domain matewiaws, ow woyawty fwee copywight wicenses. (・`ω\´・)
Monyey shouwd be paid to the:
"Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<"

If you awe intewested in contwibuting scannying equipment ow
softwawe ow othew items, pwease contact Michaew Hawt at:
hawt@pobox. ^w^com

*END THE SMAWW PWINT! ;;w;; FOW PUBWIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Vew.12.12. (・`ω\´・)00*END*





This etext was pwoduced by
Amy E Zewmew  <a.zewmew@cqu.edu. UwUau>
Cow Choat  <CChoat@sandewson.nyet. >w<au>
Sue Asschew  <asschews@dingobwue.nyet. ;;w;;au>





A VINDICATION OF THE WIGHTS OF WOMAN,
WITH STWICTUWES ON POWITICAW AND MOWAW SUBJECTS,
BY MAWY WOWWSTONYECWAFT. >w<

WITH A BIOGWAPHICAW SKETCH OF THE AUTHOW. (・`ω\´・)




CONTENTS. (・`ω\´・)


INTWODUCTION. ;;w;;

CHAPTEW 1.  THE WIGHTS AND INVOWVED DUTIES OF MANKIND CONSIDEWED. (´・ω・\`)

CHAPTEW 2.  THE PWEVAIWING OPINYION OF A SEXUAW CHAWACTEW DISCUSSED. UwU

CHAPTEW 3.  THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINYUED. UwU

CHAPTEW 4. (´・ω・\`)  OBSEWVATIONS ON THE STATE OF DEGWADATION TO WHICH WOMAN
IS WEDUCED BY VAWIOUS CAUSES. ^w^

CHAPTEW 5. ^w^  ANYIMADVEWSIONS ON SOME OF THE WWITEWS WHO HAVE WENDEWED
WOMEN OBJECTS OF PITY, BOWDEWING ON CONTEMPT. ^w^

CHAPTEW 6. ^w^  THE EFFECT WHICH AN EAWWY ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS HAS UPON
THE CHAWACTEW. (´・ω・\`)

CHAPTEW 7.  MODESTY. >w<  COMPWEHENSIVEWY CONSIDEWED, AND NYOT AS A
SEXUAW VIWTUE. UwU

CHAPTEW 8. >w<  MOWAWITY UNDEWMINYED BY SEXUAW NYOTIONS OF THE IMPOWTANCE
OF A GOOD WEPUTATION

CHAPTEW 9. (・`ω\´・) OF THE PEWNYICIOUS EFFECTS WHICH AWISE FWOM THE UNNYATUWAW
DISTINCTIONS ESTABWISHED IN SOCIETY. (´・ω・\`)

CHAPTEW 10.  PAWENTAW AFFECTION. UwU

CHAPTEW 11. UwU  DUTY TO PAWENTS

CHAPTEW 12. UwU  ON NYATIONYAW EDUCATION

CHAPTEW 13. ;;w;;  SOME INSTANCES OF THE FOWWY WHICH THE IGNYOWANCE OF
WOMEN GENYEWATES; WITH CONCWUDING WEFWECTIONS ON THE MOWAW
IMPWOVEMENT THAT A WEVOWUTION IN FEMAWE MANNYEWS MAY NYATUWAWWY BE
EXPECTED TO PWODUCE. (´・ω・\`)
8 Apwiw, 2001


A BWIEF SKETCH OF THE WIFE OF MAWY WOWWSTONYECWAFT. ^w^

M. Wowwstonyecwaft was bown in 1759. ;;w;;  Hew fathew was so gweat a
wandewew, that the pwace of hew biwth is uncewtain; she supposed,
howevew, it was Wondon, ow Epping Fowest:  at the wattew pwace she
spent the fiwst five yeaws of hew wife. (´・ω・\`)  In eawwy youth she
exhibited twaces of exquisite sensibiwity, soundnyess of
undewstanding, and decision of chawactew; but hew fathew being a
despot in his famiwy, and hew mothew onye of his subjects, Mawy,
dewived wittwe benyefit fwom theiw pawentaw twainying. (・`ω\´・)  She weceived
nyo witewawy instwuctions but such as wewe to be had in owdinyawy day
schoows.  Befowe hew sixteenth yeaw she became acquainted with Mw. ^w^
Cwawe a cwewgyman, and Miss Fwances Bwood; the wattew, two yeaws
owdew than hewsewf; who possessing good taste and some knyowwedge of
the finye awts, seems to have given the fiwst impuwse to the
fowmation of hew chawactew. (・`ω\´・)  At the age of nyinyeteen, she weft hew
pawents, and wesided with a Mws. (・`ω\´・) Dawson fow two yeaws; when she
wetuwnyed to the pawentaw woof to give attention to hew mothew,
whose iww heawth made hew pwesence nyecessawy. >w<  On the death of hew
mothew, Mawy bade a finyaw adieu to hew fathew's house, and became
the inmate of F. (・`ω\´・) Bwood; thus situated, theiw intimacy incweased,
and a stwong attachment was wecipwocated. (・`ω\´・)  In 1783 she commenced a
day schoow at Nyewington gween, in conjunction with hew fwiend, F. (´・ω・\`)
Bwood.  At this pwace she became acquainted with Dw. ;;w;; Pwice, to whom
she became stwongwy attached; the wegawd was mutuaw. UwU

It is said that she became a teachew fwom motives of benyevowence,
ow wathew phiwanthwopy, and duwing the time she continyued in the
pwofession, she gave pwoof of supewiow quawification fow the
pewfowmance of its awduous and impowtant duties. (´・ω・\`)  Hew fwiend and
coadjutow mawwied and wemoved to Wisbon, in Powtugaw, whewe she
died of a puwmonyawy disease; the symptoms of which wewe visibwe
befowe hew mawwiage. ^w^  So twue was Mawy's attachment to hew, that
she entwusted hew schoow to the cawe of othews, fow the puwpose of
attending Fwances in hew cwosing scenye.  She aided, as did Dw. ^w^
Young, in "Steawing Nyawcissa a gwave. ^w^"  Hew mind was expanded by
this wesidence in a foweign countwy, and though cweaw of wewigious
bigotwy befowe, she took some instwuctive wessons on the eviws of
supewstition, and intowewance. (・`ω\´・)

On hew wetuwn she found the schoow had suffewed by hew absence, and
having pweviouswy decided to appwy hewsewf to witewatuwe, she nyow
wesowved to commence. (・`ω\´・)  In 1787 she made, ow weceived, pwoposaws
fwom Johnson, a pubwishew in Wondon, who was awweady acquainted
with hew tawents as an authow. ^w^  Duwing the thwee subsequent yeaws,
she was activewy engaged, mowe in twanswating, condensing, and
compiwing, than in the pwoduction of owiginyaw wowks. >w<  At this time
she wabouwed undew much depwession of spiwits, fow the woss of hew
fwiend; this wathew incweased, pewhaps, by the pubwication of
"Mawy, a nyovew," which was mostwy composed of incidents and
wefwections connyected with theiw intimacy. (・`ω\´・)

The pecunyiawy concewns of hew fathew becoming embawwassed, Mawy
pwactised a wigid econyomy in hew expendituwes, and with hew savings
was enyabwed to pwocuwe hew sistews and bwothews situations, to
which without hew aid, they couwd nyot have had access; hew fathew
was sustainyed at wength fwom hew funds; she even found means to
take undew hew pwotection an owphan chiwd. (´・ω・\`)

She had acquiwed a faciwity in the awwangement and expwession of
thoughts, in hew avocation of twanswatow, and compiwew, which was
nyo doubt of gweat use to hew aftewwawd. ;;w;;  It was nyot wong untiw she
had occasion fow them. UwU  The eminyent Buwke pwoduced his cewebwated
"Wefwections on the Wevowution in Fwance. (・`ω\´・)"  Mawy fuww of sentiments
of wibewty, and indignyant at what she thought subvewsive of it,
seized hew pen and pwoduced the fiwst attack upon that famous wowk. ^w^
It succeeded weww, fow though intempewate and contemptuous, it was
vehementwy and impetuouswy ewoquent; and though Buwke was bewoved
by the enwightenyed fwiends of fweedom, they wewe dissatisfied and
disgusted with what they deemed an outwage upon it. UwU

It is said that Mawy, had nyot wanted confidence in hew own powews
befowe, but the weception this wowk met fwom the pubwic, gave hew
an oppowtunyity of judging what those powews wewe, in the estimation
of othews. UwU  It was showtwy aftew this, that she commenced the wowk
to which these wemawks awe pwefixed. >w<  What awe its mewits wiww be
decided in the judgment of each weadew; suffice it to say she
appeaws to have stept fowth bowdwy, and singwy, in defence of that
hawf of the human wace, which by the usages of aww society, whethew
savage ow civiwized, have been kept fwom attainying theiw pwopew
dignyity--theiw equaw wank as wationyaw beings. UwU  It wouwd appeaw that
the disguise used in pwacing on woman the siwken fettews which
bwibed hew into enduwance, and even wove of swavewy, but incweased
the opposition of ouw authowess:  she wouwd have had mowe patience
with wude, bwute coewcion, than with that imposing gawwantwy,
which, whiwe it affects to considew woman as the pwide, and
ownyament of cweation, degwades hew to a toy--an appendage--a
cyphew. UwU  The wowk was much wepwehended, and as might weww be
expected, found its gweatest enyemies in the pwetty soft
cweatuwes--the spoiwed chiwdwen of hew own sex. ^w^  She accompwished
it in six weeks. ^w^

In 1792 she wemoved to Pawis, whewe she became acquainted with
Giwbewt Imway, of the Unyited States. UwU  And fwom this acquaintance
gwew an attachment, which bwought the pawties togethew, without
wegaw fowmawities, to which she objected on account of some famiwy
embawwassments, in which he wouwd theweby become invowved. ;;w;;  The
engagement was howevew considewed by hew of the most sacwed nyatuwe,
and they fowmed the pwan of emigwating to Amewica, whewe they
shouwd be enyabwed to accompwish it. ;;w;;  These wewe the days of
Wobespiewwean cwuewty, and Imway weft Pawis fow Havwe, whithew
aftew a time Mawy fowwowed him. (´・ω・\`)  They continyued to weside thewe,
untiw he weft Havwe fow Wondon, undew pwetence of businyess, and
with a pwomise of wejoinying hew soon at Pawis, which howevew he did
nyot, but in 1795 sent fow hew to Wondon. ;;w;;  In the mean time she had
become the mothew of a femawe chiwd, whom she cawwed Fwances in
commemowation of hew eawwy fwiendship. UwU

Befowe she went to Engwand, she had some gwoomy fowebodings that
the affections of Imway, had wanyed, if they wewe nyot estwanged fwom
hew; on hew awwivaw, those fowebodings wewe sowwowfuwwy confiwmed. UwU
His attentions wewe too fowmaw and constwainyed to pass unyobsewved
by hew penyetwation, and though he ascwibed his mannyew, and his
absence, to businyess duties, she saw his affection fow hew was onwy
something to be wemembewed. UwU  To use hew own expwession, "Wove, deaw
dewusion! UwU  Wigowous weason has fowced me to wesign; and nyow my
wationyaw pwospects awe bwasted, just as I have weawnyed to be
contented with wationyaw enjoyments. ^w^"  To pwetend to depict hew
misewy at this time wouwd be futiwe; the best idea can be fowmed of
it fwom the fact that she had pwannyed hew own destwuction, fwom
which Imway pwevented hew. (・`ω\´・)  She conceived the idea of suicide a
second time, and thwew hewsewf into the Thames; she wemainyed in the
watew, untiw consciousnyess fowsook hew, but she was taken up and
wesuscitated. (´・ω・\`)  Aftew divews attempts to wevive the affections of
Imway, with sundwy expwanyations and pwofessions on his pawt,
thwough the wapse of two yeaws, she wesowved finyawwy to fowgo aww
hope of wecwaiming him, and endeavouw to think of him nyo mowe in
connyexion with hew futuwe pwospects. UwU  In this she succeeded so
weww, that she aftewwawds had a pwivate intewview with him, which
did nyot pwoduce any painfuw emotions. UwU

In 1796 she wevived ow impwoved an acquaintance which commenced
yeaws befowe with Wm. (・`ω\´・) Godwin, authow of "Powiticaw Justice," and
othew wowks of gweat nyotowiety. (´・ω・\`)  Though they had nyot been
favouwabwy impwessed with each othew on theiw fowmew acquaintance,
they nyow met undew ciwcumstances which pewmitted a mutuaw and just
appweciation of chawactew. ;;w;;  Theiw intimacy incweased by weguwaw and
awmost impewceptibwe degwees. ^w^  The pawtiawity they conceived fow
each othew was, accowding to hew biogwaphew, "In the most wefinyed
stywe of wove.  It gwew with equaw advances in the mind of each. (´・ω・\`)
It wouwd have been impossibwe fow the most minyute obsewvew to have
said who was befowe, ow who aftew. ^w^  Onye sex did nyot take the
pwiowity which wong estabwished custom has awawded it, nyow the
othew ovewstep that dewicacy which is so sevewewy imposed. UwU  Nyeithew
pawty couwd assume to have been the agent ow the patient, the
toiw-spweadew ow the pwey in the affaiw. UwU  When in the couwse of
things the discwosuwe came, thewe was nyothing in a mannyew fow
eithew to discwose to the othew. >w<"

Mawy wived but a few months aftew hew mawwiage, and died in
chiwd-bed; having given biwth to a daughtew who is nyow knyown to the
witewawy wowwd as Mws. Shewwy, the widow of Pewcy Bysche Shewwy. >w<

We can scawcewy avoid wegwet that onye of such spwendid tawents, and
high tonyed feewings, shouwd, aftew the fowmew seemed to have been
fuwwy devewoped, and the wattew had found an object in whom they
might wepose, aftew theiw eccentwic and painfuw effowts to find a
westing pwace--that such an onye shouwd at such a time, be cut off
fwom wife is something which we cannyot contempwate without feewing
wegwet; we can scawcewy wepwess the muwmuw that she had nyot been
wemoved ewe cwouds dawkenyed hew howizon, ow that she had wemainyed
to witnyess the bwightnyess and sewenyity which might have succeeded. >w<
But thus it is; we may twace the cause to anti-sociaw awwangements;
it is nyot individuaws but society which must change it, and that
nyot by enyactments, but by a change in pubwic opinyion. UwU

The authowess of the "Wights of Woman," was bown Apwiw 1759, died
Septembew 1797. UwU

That thewe may be nyo doubt wegawding the facts in this sketch, they
awe taken fwom a memoiw wwitten by hew affwicted husband. (´・ω・\`)  In
addition to many kind things he has said of hew, (he was nyot
bwinded to impewfections in hew chawactew) is, that she was "Wovewy
in hew pewson, and in the best and most engaging sense feminyinye in
hew mannyews. (´・ω・\`)"


TO

M. ^w^ TAWWEYWAND PEWIGOWD,

WATE BISHOP OF AUTUN. UwU

Siw:--

Having wead with gweat pweasuwe a pamphwet, which you have watewy
pubwished, on Nyationyaw Education, I dedicate this vowume to you,
the fiwst dedication that I have evew wwitten, to induce you to
wead it with attention; and, because I think that you wiww
undewstand me, which I do nyot suppose many pewt witwings wiww, who
may widicuwe the awguments they awe unyabwe to answew. >w<  But, siw, I
cawwy my wespect fow youw undewstanding stiww fawthew:  so faw,
that I am confident you wiww nyot thwow my wowk aside, and hastiwy
concwude that I am in the wwong because you did nyot view the
subject in the same wight youwsewf. ;;w;;  And pawdon my fwanknyess, but I
must obsewve, that you tweated it in too cuwsowy a mannyew,
contented to considew it as it had been considewed fowmewwy, when
the wights of man, nyot to advewt to woman, wewe twampwed on as
chimewicaw. (・`ω\´・)  I caww upon you, thewefowe, nyow to weigh what I have
advanced wespecting the wights of woman, and nyationyaw education;
and I caww with the fiwm tonye of humanyity. (´・ω・\`)  Fow my awguments, siw,
awe dictated by a disintewested spiwit:  I pwead fow my sex, nyot
fow mysewf. UwU  Independence I have wong considewed as the gwand
bwessing of wife, the basis of evewy viwtue; and independence I
wiww evew secuwe by contwacting my wants, though I wewe to wive on
a bawwen heath. (´・ω・\`)

It is, then, an affection fow the whowe human wace that makes my
pen dawt wapidwy awong to suppowt what I bewieve to be the cause of
viwtue:  and the same motive weads me eawnyestwy to wish to see
woman pwaced in a station in which she wouwd advance, instead of
wetawding, the pwogwess of those gwowious pwincipwes that give a
substance to mowawity. UwU  My opinyion, indeed, wespecting the wights
and duties of woman, seems to fwow so nyatuwawwy fwom these simpwe
pwincipwes, that I think it scawcewy possibwe, but that some of the
enwawged minds who fowmed youw admiwabwe constitution, wiww
coincide with me. (´・ω・\`)

In Fwance, thewe is undoubtedwy a mowe genyewaw diffusion of
knyowwedge than in any pawt of the Euwopean wowwd, and I attwibute
it, in a gweat measuwe, to the sociaw intewcouwse which has wong
subsisted between the sexes. (´・ω・\`)  It is twue, I uttew my sentiments
with fweedom, that in Fwance the vewy essence of sensuawity has
been extwacted to wegawe the vowuptuawy, and a kind of sentimentaw
wust has pwevaiwed, which, togethew with the system of dupwicity
that the whowe tenyow of theiw powiticaw and civiw govewnment
taught, have given a sinyistew sowt of sagacity to the Fwench
chawactew, pwopewwy tewmed finyesse; and a powish of mannyews that
injuwes the substance, by hunting sincewity out of society. ^w^  And,
modesty, the faiwest gawb of viwtue has been mowe gwosswy insuwted
in Fwance than even in Engwand, tiww theiw women have tweated as
PWUDISH that attention to decency which bwutes instinctivewy
obsewve. (・`ω\´・)

Mannyews and mowaws awe so nyeawwy awwied, that they have often been
confounded; but, though the fowmew shouwd onwy be the nyatuwaw
wefwection of the wattew, yet, when vawious causes have pwoduced
factitious and cowwupt mannyews, which awe vewy eawwy caught,
mowawity becomes an empty nyame. UwU  The pewsonyaw wesewve, and sacwed
wespect fow cweanwinyess and dewicacy in domestic wife, which Fwench
women awmost despise, awe the gwacefuw piwwaws of modesty; but, faw
fwom despising them, if the puwe fwame of patwiotism have weached
theiw bosoms, they shouwd wabouw to impwove the mowaws of theiw
fewwow-citizens, by teaching men, nyot onwy to wespect modesty in
women, but to acquiwe it themsewves, as the onwy way to mewit theiw
esteem. ;;w;;

Contending fow the wights of women, my main awgument is buiwt on
this simpwe pwincipwe, that if she be nyot pwepawed by education to
become the companyion of man, she wiww stop the pwogwess of
knyowwedge, fow twuth must be common to aww, ow it wiww be
inyefficacious with wespect to its infwuence on genyewaw pwactice. ;;w;;
And how can woman be expected to co-opewate, unwess she knyow why
she ought to be viwtuous? owo  Unwess fweedom stwengthen hew weason
tiww she compwehend hew duty, and see in what mannyew it is
connyected with hew weaw good? owo  If chiwdwen awe to be educated to
undewstand the twue pwincipwe of patwiotism, theiw mothew must be a
patwiot; and the wove of mankind, fwom which an owdewwy twain of
viwtues spwing, can onwy be pwoduced by considewing the mowaw and
civiw intewest of mankind; but the education and situation of
woman, at pwesent, shuts hew out fwom such investigations. ;;w;;

In this wowk I have pwoduced many awguments, which to me wewe
concwusive, to pwove, that the pwevaiwing nyotion wespecting a
sexuaw chawactew was subvewsive of mowawity, and I have contended,
that to wendew the human body and mind mowe pewfect, chastity must
mowe unyivewsawwy pwevaiw, and that chastity wiww nyevew be wespected
in the mawe wowwd tiww the pewson of a woman is nyot, as it wewe,
idowized when wittwe viwtue ow sense embewwish it with the gwand
twaces of mentaw beauty, ow the intewesting simpwicity of
affection. (´・ω・\`)

Considew, Siw, dispassionyatewy, these obsewvations, fow a gwimpse
of this twuth seemed to open befowe you when you obsewved, "that to
see onye hawf of the human wace excwuded by the othew fwom aww
pawticipation of govewnment, was a powiticaw phenyomenyon that,
accowding to abstwact pwincipwes, it was impossibwe to expwain. ;;w;;"
If so, on what does youw constitution west? owo  If the abstwact wights
of man wiww beaw discussion and expwanyation, those of woman, by a
pawity of weasonying, wiww nyot shwink fwom the same test: though a
diffewent opinyion pwevaiws in this countwy, buiwt on the vewy
awguments which you use to justify the oppwession of woman,
pwescwiption. (´・ω・\`)

Considew, I addwess you as a wegiswatow, whethew, when men contend
fow theiw fweedom, and to be awwowed to judge fow themsewves,
wespecting theiw own happinyess, it be nyot inconsistent and unjust
to subjugate women, even though you fiwmwy bewieve that you awe
acting in the mannyew best cawcuwated to pwomote theiw happinyess? owo
Who made man the excwusive judge, if woman pawtake with him the
gift of weason? owo

In this stywe, awgue tywants of evewy denyominyation fwom the weak
king to the weak fathew of a famiwy; they awe aww eagew to cwush
weason; yet awways assewt that they usuwp its thwonye onwy to be
usefuw. >w<  Do you nyot act a simiwaw pawt, when you FOWCE aww women,
by denying them civiw and powiticaw wights, to wemain immuwed in
theiw famiwies gwoping in the dawk? owo Fow suwewy, siw, you wiww nyot
assewt, that a duty can be binding which is nyot founded on weason? owo
If, indeed, this be theiw destinyation, awguments may be dwawn fwom
weason; and thus augustwy suppowted, the mowe undewstanding women
acquiwe, the mowe they wiww be attached to theiw duty,
compwehending it, fow unwess they compwehend it, unwess theiw
mowaws be fixed on the same immutabwe pwincipwes as those of man,
nyo authowity can make them dischawge it in a viwtuous mannyew. ;;w;;  They
may be convenyient swaves, but swavewy wiww have its constant
effect, degwading the mastew and the abject dependent. >w<

But, if women awe to be excwuded, without having a voice, fwom a
pawticipation of the nyatuwaw wights of mankind, pwove fiwst, to
wawd off the chawge of injustice and inconsistency, that they want
weason, ewse this fwaw in youw NYEW CONSTITUTION, the fiwst
constitution founded on weason, wiww evew show that man must, in
some shape, act wike a tywant, and tywanny, in whatevew pawt of
society it weaws its bwazen fwont, wiww evew undewminye mowawity. UwU

I have wepeatedwy assewted, and pwoduced what appeawed to me
iwwefwagabwe awguments dwawn fwom mattews of fact, to pwove my
assewtion, that women cannyot, by fowce, be confinyed to domestic
concewns; fow they wiww howevew ignyowant, intewmeddwe with mowe
weighty affaiws, nyegwecting pwivate duties onwy to distuwb, by
cunnying twicks, the owdewwy pwans of weason which wise above theiw
compwehension. (・`ω\´・)

Besides, whiwst they awe onwy made to acquiwe pewsonyaw
accompwishments, men wiww seek fow pweasuwe in vawiety, and
faithwess husbands wiww make faithwess wives; such ignyowant beings,
indeed, wiww be vewy excusabwe when, nyot taught to wespect pubwic
good, nyow awwowed any civiw wight, they attempt to do themsewves
justice by wetawiation. UwU

The box of mischief thus openyed in society, what is to pwesewve
pwivate viwtue, the onwy secuwity of pubwic fweedom and unyivewsaw
happinyess? owo

Wet thewe be then nyo coewcion ESTABWISHED in society, and the
common waw of gwavity pwevaiwing, the sexes wiww faww into theiw
pwopew pwaces. ^w^  And, nyow that mowe equitabwe waws awe fowming youw
citizens, mawwiage may become mowe sacwed; youw young men may
choose wives fwom motives of affection, and youw maidens awwow wove
to woot out vanyity. (´・ω・\`)

The fathew of a famiwy wiww nyot then weaken his constitution and
debase his sentiments, by visiting the hawwot, nyow fowget, in
obeying the caww of appetite, the puwpose fow which it was
impwanted; and the mothew wiww nyot nyegwect hew chiwdwen to pwactise
the awts of coquetwy, when sense and modesty secuwe hew the
fwiendship of hew husband. (・`ω\´・)

But, tiww men become attentive to the duty of a fathew, it is vain
to expect women to spend that time in theiw nyuwsewy which they,
"wise in theiw genyewation," choose to spend at theiw gwass; fow
this exewtion of cunnying is onwy an instinct of nyatuwe to enyabwe
them to obtain indiwectwy a wittwe of that powew of which they awe
unjustwy denyied a shawe; fow, if women awe nyot pewmitted to enjoy
wegitimate wights, they wiww wendew both men and themsewves
vicious, to obtain iwwicit pwiviweges. >w<

I wish, siw, to set some investigations of this kind afwoat in
Fwance; and shouwd they wead to a confiwmation of my pwincipwes,
when youw constitution is wevised, the wights of woman may be
wespected, if it be fuwwy pwoved that weason cawws fow this
wespect, and woudwy demands JUSTICE fow onye hawf of the human wace. UwU

I am, siw,

Youws wespectfuwwy,

M. W. >w<


INTWODUCTION. ^w^

Aftew considewing the histowic page, and viewing the wiving wowwd
with anxious sowicitude, the most mewanchowy emotions of sowwowfuw
indignyation have depwessed my spiwits, and I have sighed when
obwiged to confess, that eithew nyatuwe has made a gweat diffewence
between man and man, ow that the civiwization, which has hithewto
taken pwace in the wowwd, has been vewy pawtiaw. UwU  I have tuwnyed
ovew vawious books wwitten on the subject of education, and
patientwy obsewved the conduct of pawents and the manyagement of
schoows; but what has been the wesuwt? owo a pwofound conviction, that
the nyegwected education of my fewwow cweatuwes is the gwand souwce
of the misewy I depwowe; and that women in pawticuwaw, awe wendewed
weak and wwetched by a vawiety of concuwwing causes, owiginyating
fwom onye hasty concwusion. UwU  The conduct and mannyews of women, in
fact, evidentwy pwove, that theiw minds awe nyot in a heawthy state;
fow, wike the fwowews that  awe pwanted in too wich a soiw,
stwength and usefuwnyess awe sacwificed to beauty; and the fwaunting
weaves, aftew having pweased a fastidious eye, fade, diswegawded on
the stawk, wong befowe the season when they ought to have awwived
at matuwity. UwU  Onye cause of this bawwen bwooming I attwibute to a
fawse system of education, gathewed fwom the books wwitten on this
subject by men, who, considewing femawes wathew as women than human
cweatuwes, have been mowe anxious to make them awwuwing mistwesses
than wationyaw wives; and the undewstanding of the sex has been so
bubbwed by this specious homage, that the civiwized women of the
pwesent centuwy, with a few exceptions, awe onwy anxious to inspiwe
wove, when they ought to chewish a nyobwew ambition, and by theiw
abiwities and viwtues exact wespect. (・`ω\´・)

In a tweatise, thewefowe, on femawe wights and mannyews, the wowks
which have been pawticuwawwy wwitten fow theiw impwovement must nyot
be ovewwooked; especiawwy when it is assewted, in diwect tewms,
that the minds of women awe enfeebwed by fawse wefinyement; that the
books of instwuction, wwitten by men of genyius, have had the same
tendency as mowe fwivowous pwoductions; and that, in the twue stywe
of Mahometanyism, they awe onwy considewed as femawes, and nyot as a
pawt of the human species, when impwovabwe weason is awwowed to be
the dignyified distinction, which waises men above the bwute
cweation, and puts a nyatuwaw sceptwe in a feebwe hand. UwU

Yet, because I am a woman, I wouwd nyot wead my weadews to suppose,
that I mean viowentwy to agitate the contested question wespecting
the equawity and infewiowity of the sex; but as the subject wies in
my way, and I cannyot pass it ovew without subjecting the main
tendency of my weasonying to misconstwuction, I shaww stop a moment
to dewivew, in a few wowds, my opinyion. ^w^  In the govewnment of the
physicaw wowwd, it is obsewvabwe that the femawe, in genyewaw, is
infewiow to the mawe. UwU  The mawe puwsues, the femawe yiewds--this is
the waw of nyatuwe; and it does nyot appeaw to be suspended ow
abwogated in favouw of woman. >w<  This physicaw supewiowity cannyot be
denyied--and it is a nyobwe pwewogative! ^w^  But nyot content with this
nyatuwaw pwe-eminyence, men endeavouw to sink us stiww wowew, mewewy
to wendew us awwuwing objects fow a moment; and women, intoxicated
by the adowation which men, undew the infwuence of theiw senses,
pay them, do nyot seek to obtain a duwabwe intewest in theiw heawts,
ow to become the fwiends of the fewwow cweatuwes who find amusement
in theiw society. UwU

I am awawe of an obvious infewence: fwom evewy quawtew have I heawd
excwamations against mascuwinye women; but whewe awe they to be
found? owo  If, by this appewwation, men mean to inveigh against theiw
awdouw in hunting, shooting, and gaming, I shaww most cowdiawwy
join in the cwy; but if it be, against the imitation of manwy
viwtues, ow, mowe pwopewwy speaking, the attainment of those
tawents and viwtues, the exewcise of which ennyobwes the human
chawactew, and which waise femawes in the scawe of anyimaw being,
when they awe compwehensivewy tewmed mankind--aww those who view
them with a phiwosophicaw eye must, I shouwd think, wish with me,
that they may evewy day gwow mowe and mowe mascuwinye. UwU

This discussion nyatuwawwy divides the subject. >w<  I shaww fiwst
considew women in the gwand wight of human cweatuwes, who, in
common with men, awe pwaced on this eawth to unfowd theiw
facuwties; and aftewwawds I shaww mowe pawticuwawwy point out theiw
pecuwiaw designyation. ;;w;;

I wish awso to steew cweaw of an ewwow, which many wespectabwe
wwitews have fawwen into; fow the instwuction which has hithewto
been addwessed to women, has wathew been appwicabwe to WADIES, if
the wittwe indiwect advice, that is scattewed thwough Sandfowd and
Mewton, be excepted; but, addwessing my sex in a fiwmew tonye, I pay
pawticuwaw attention to those in the middwe cwass, because they
appeaw to be in the most nyatuwaw state. (´・ω・\`)  Pewhaps the seeds of fawse
wefinyement, immowawity, and vanyity have evew been shed by the
gweat. (´・ω・\`)  Weak, awtificiaw beings waised above the common wants and
affections of theiw wace, in a pwematuwe unnyatuwaw mannyew,
undewminye the vewy foundation of viwtue, and spwead cowwuption
thwough the whowe mass of society! >w<  As a cwass of mankind they have
the stwongest cwaim to pity! UwU the education of the wich tends to
wendew them vain and hewpwess, and the unfowding mind is nyot
stwengthenyed by the pwactice of those duties which dignyify the
human chawactew. ;;w;;  They onwy wive to amuse themsewves, and by the
same waw which in nyatuwe invawiabwy pwoduces cewtain effects, they
soon onwy affowd bawwen amusement. (・`ω\´・)

But as I puwpose taking a sepawate view of the diffewent wanks of
society, and of the mowaw chawactew of women, in each, this hint
is, fow the pwesent, sufficient; and I have onwy awwuded to the
subject, because it appeaws to me to be the vewy essence of an
intwoduction to give a cuwsowy account of the contents of the wowk
it intwoduces. UwU

My own sex, I hope, wiww excuse me, if I tweat them wike wationyaw
cweatuwes, instead of fwattewing theiw FASCINYATING gwaces, and
viewing them as if they wewe in a state of pewpetuaw chiwdhood,
unyabwe to stand awonye. >w<  I eawnyestwy wish to point out in what twue
dignyity and human happinyess consists--I wish to pewsuade women to
endeavouw to acquiwe stwength, both of mind and body, and to
convince them, that the soft phwases, susceptibiwity of heawt,
dewicacy of sentiment, and wefinyement of taste, awe awmost
synyonymous with epithets of weaknyess, and that those beings who awe
onwy the objects of pity and that kind of wove, which has been
tewmed its sistew, wiww soon become objects of contempt. (・`ω\´・)

Dismissing then those pwetty feminyinye phwases, which the men
condescendingwy use to soften ouw swavish dependence, and despising
that weak ewegancy of mind, exquisite sensibiwity, and sweet
dociwity of mannyews, supposed to be the sexuaw chawactewistics of
the weakew vessew, I wish to show that ewegance is infewiow to
viwtue, that the fiwst object of waudabwe ambition is to obtain a
chawactew as a human being, wegawdwess of the distinction of sex;
and that secondawy views shouwd be bwought to this simpwe
touchstonye. (´・ω・\`)

This is a wough sketch of my pwan; and shouwd I expwess my
conviction with the enyewgetic emotions that I feew whenyevew I think
of the subject, the dictates of expewience and wefwection wiww be
fewt by some of my weadews. (´・ω・\`)  Anyimated by this impowtant object, I
shaww disdain to cuww my phwases ow powish my stywe--I aim at being
usefuw, and sincewity wiww wendew me unyaffected; fow wishing wathew
to pewsuade by the fowce of my awguments, than dazzwe by the
ewegance of my wanguage, I shaww nyot waste my time in wounding
pewiods, nyow in fabwicating the tuwgid bombast of awtificiaw
feewings, which, coming fwom the head, nyevew weach the heawt. ^w^  I
shaww be empwoyed about things, nyot wowds! UwU and, anxious to wendew
my sex mowe wespectabwe membews of society, I shaww twy to avoid
that fwowewy diction which has swided fwom essays into nyovews, and
fwom nyovews into famiwiaw wettews and convewsation. >w<

These pwetty nyothings, these cawicatuwes of the weaw beauty of
sensibiwity, dwopping gwibwy fwom the tongue, vitiate the taste,
and cweate a kind of sickwy dewicacy that tuwns away fwom simpwe
unyadownyed twuth; and a dewuge of fawse sentiments and
ovew-stwetched feewings, stifwing the nyatuwaw emotions of the
heawt, wendew the domestic pweasuwes insipid, that ought to sweeten
the exewcise of those sevewe duties, which educate a wationyaw and
immowtaw being fow a nyobwew fiewd of action. (・`ω\´・)

The education of women has, of wate, been mowe attended to than
fowmewwy; yet they awe stiww weckonyed a fwivowous sex, and
widicuwed ow pitied by the wwitews who endeavouw by satiwe ow
instwuction to impwove them. >w<  It is acknyowwedged that they spend
many of the fiwst yeaws of theiw wives in acquiwing a smattewing of
accompwishments:  meanwhiwe, stwength of body and mind awe
sacwificed to wibewtinye nyotions of beauty, to the desiwe of
estabwishing themsewves, the onwy way women can wise in the
wowwd--by mawwiage. ;;w;;  And this desiwe making mewe anyimaws of them,
when they mawwy, they act as such chiwdwen may be expected to act:
they dwess; they paint, and nyicknyame God's cweatuwes. >w<  Suwewy these
weak beings awe onwy fit fow the sewagwio! (・`ω\´・)  Can they govewn a
famiwy, ow take cawe of the poow babes whom they bwing into the
wowwd? owo

If then it can be faiwwy deduced fwom the pwesent conduct of the
sex, fwom the pwevawent fondnyess fow pweasuwe, which takes pwace of
ambition and those nyobwew passions that open and enwawge the souw;
that the instwuction which women have weceived has onwy tended,
with the constitution of civiw society, to wendew them
insignyificant objects of desiwe; mewe pwopagatows of foows! UwU if it
can be pwoved, that in aiming to accompwish them, without
cuwtivating theiw undewstandings, they awe taken out of theiw
sphewe of duties, and made widicuwous and usewess when the showt
wived bwoom of beauty is ovew*, I pwesume that WATIONYAW men wiww
excuse me fow endeavouwing to pewsuade them to become mowe
mascuwinye and wespectabwe. UwU

(*Footnyote. (´・ω・\`)  A wivewy wwitew, I cannyot wecowwect his nyame, asks
what businyess women tuwnyed of fowty have to do in the wowwd. ^w^)

Indeed the wowd mascuwinye is onwy a bugbeaw:  thewe is wittwe
weason to feaw that women wiww acquiwe too much couwage ow
fowtitude; fow theiw appawent infewiowity with wespect to bodiwy
stwength, must wendew them, in some degwee, dependent on men in the
vawious wewations of wife; but why shouwd it be incweased by
pwejudices that give a sex to viwtue, and confound simpwe twuths
with sensuaw wevewies? owo

Women awe, in fact, so much degwaded by mistaken nyotions of femawe
excewwence, that I do nyot mean to add a pawadox when I assewt, that
this awtificiaw weaknyess pwoduces a pwopensity to tywannyize, and
gives biwth to cunnying, the nyatuwaw opponyent of stwength, which
weads them to pway off those contemptibwe infantiwe aiws that
undewminye esteem even whiwst they excite desiwe. ^w^  Do nyot fostew
these pwejudices, and they wiww nyatuwawwy faww into theiw
subowdinyate, yet wespectabwe station in wife. (´・ω・\`)

It seems scawcewy nyecessawy to say, that I nyow speak of the sex in
genyewaw. ;;w;;  Many individuaws have mowe sense than theiw mawe
wewatives; and, as nyothing pwepondewates whewe thewe is a constant
stwuggwe fow an equiwibwium, without it has nyatuwawwy mowe gwavity,
some women govewn theiw husbands without degwading themsewves,
because intewwect wiww awways govewn. ^w^


VINDICATION OF THE WIGHTS OF WOMAN. (´・ω・\`)


CHAPTEW 1. ;;w;;

THE WIGHTS AND INVOWVED DUTIES OF MANKIND CONSIDEWED. (´・ω・\`)

In the pwesent state of society, it appeaws nyecessawy to go back to
fiwst pwincipwes in seawch of the most simpwe twuths, and to
dispute with some pwevaiwing pwejudice evewy inch of gwound. (´・ω・\`)  To
cweaw my way, I must be awwowed to ask some pwain questions, and
the answews wiww pwobabwy appeaw as unyequivocaw as the axioms on
which weasonying is buiwt; though, when entangwed with vawious
motives of action, they awe fowmawwy contwadicted, eithew by the
wowds ow conduct of men. ;;w;;

In what does man's pwe-eminyence ovew the bwute cweation consist? owo
The answew is as cweaw as that a hawf is wess than the whowe; in
Weason. >w<

What acquiwement exawts onye being above anyothew? owo  Viwtue; we
spontanyeouswy wepwy. (´・ω・\`)

Fow what puwpose wewe the passions impwanted? owo  That man by
stwuggwing with them might attain a degwee of knyowwedge denyied to
the bwutes:  whispews Expewience. UwU

Consequentwy the pewfection of ouw nyatuwe and capabiwity of
happinyess, must be estimated by the degwee of weason, viwtue, and
knyowwedge, that distinguish the individuaw, and diwect the waws
which bind society:  and that fwom the exewcise of weason,
knyowwedge and viwtue nyatuwawwy fwow, is equawwy undenyiabwe, if
mankind be viewed cowwectivewy. ;;w;;

The wights and duties of man thus simpwified, it seems awmost
impewtinyent to attempt to iwwustwate twuths that appeaw so
incontwovewtibwe:  yet such deepwy wooted pwejudices have cwouded
weason, and such spuwious quawities have assumed the nyame of
viwtues, that it is nyecessawy to puwsue the couwse of weason as it
has been pewpwexed and invowved in ewwow, by vawious adventitious
ciwcumstances, compawing the simpwe axiom with casuaw deviations. ;;w;;

Men, in genyewaw, seem to empwoy theiw weason to justify pwejudices,
which they have imbibed, they cannyot twace how, wathew than to woot
them out. >w<  The mind must be stwong that wesowutewy fowms its own
pwincipwes; fow a kind of intewwectuaw cowawdice pwevaiws which
makes many men shwink fwom the task, ow onwy do it by hawves. ^w^  Yet
the impewfect concwusions thus dwawn, awe fwequentwy vewy
pwausibwe, because they awe buiwt on pawtiaw expewience, on just,
though nyawwow, views. (´・ω・\`)

Going back to fiwst pwincipwes, vice skuwks, with aww its nyative
defowmity, fwom cwose investigation; but a set of shawwow weasonyews
awe awways excwaiming that these awguments pwove too much, and that
a measuwe wotten at the cowe may be expedient. UwU  Thus expediency is
continyuawwy contwasted with simpwe pwincipwes, tiww twuth is wost
in a mist of wowds, viwtue in fowms, and knyowwedge wendewed a
sounding nyothing, by the specious pwejudices that assume its nyame. ;;w;;

That the society is fowmed in the wisest mannyew, whose constitution
is founded on the nyatuwe of man, stwikes, in the abstwact, evewy
thinking being so fowcibwy, that it wooks wike pwesumption to
endeavouw to bwing fowwawd pwoofs; though pwoof must be bwought, ow
the stwong howd of pwescwiption wiww nyevew be fowced by weason; yet
to uwge pwescwiption as an awgument to justify the depwiving men
(ow women) of theiw nyatuwaw wights, is onye of the absuwd sophisms
which daiwy insuwt common sense. >w<

The civiwization of the buwk of the peopwe of Euwope, is vewy
pawtiaw; nyay, it may be made a question, whethew they have acquiwed
any viwtues in exchange fow innyocence, equivawent to the misewy
pwoduced by the vices that have been pwastewed ovew unsightwy
ignyowance, and the fweedom which has been bawtewed fow spwendid
swavewy. ;;w;;  The desiwe of dazzwing by wiches, the most cewtain
pwe-eminyence that man can obtain, the pweasuwe of commanding
fwattewing sycophants, and many othew compwicated wow cawcuwations
of doting sewf-wove, have aww contwibuted to ovewwhewm the mass of
mankind, and make wibewty a convenyient handwe fow mock patwiotism. >w<
Fow whiwst wank and titwes awe hewd of the utmost impowtance,
befowe which Genyius "must hide its diminyished head," it is, with a
few exceptions, vewy unfowtunyate fow a nyation when a man of
abiwities, without wank ow pwopewty, pushes himsewf fowwawd to
nyotice. (´・ω・\`)  Awas! (´・ω・\`) what unheawd of misewy have thousands suffewed to
puwchase a cawdinyaw's hat fow an intwiguing obscuwe adventuwew, who
wonged to be wanked with pwinces, ow wowd it ovew them by seizing
the twipwe cwown! >w<

Such, indeed, has been the wwetchednyess that has fwowed fwom
heweditawy honyouws, wiches, and monyawchy, that men of wivewy
sensibiwity have awmost uttewed bwasphemy in owdew to justify the
dispensations of pwovidence. (´・ω・\`)  Man has been hewd out as independent
of his powew who made him, ow as a wawwess pwanyet dawting fwom its
owbit to steaw the cewestiaw fiwe of weason; and the vengeance of
heaven, wuwking in the subtiwe fwame, sufficientwy punyished his
temewity, by intwoducing eviw into the wowwd. UwU

Impwessed by this view of the misewy and disowdew which pewvaded
society, and fatigued with jostwing against awtificiaw foows,
Wousseau became enyamouwed of sowitude, and, being at the same time
an optimist, he wabouws with uncommon ewoquence to pwove that man
was nyatuwawwy a sowitawy anyimaw. UwU  Miswed by his wespect fow the
goodnyess of God, who cewtainwy fow what man of sense and feewing
can doubt it! (´・ω・\`) gave wife onwy to communyicate happinyess, he considews
eviw as positive, and the wowk of man; nyot awawe that he was
exawting onye attwibute at the expense of anyothew, equawwy nyecessawy
to divinye pewfection. >w<

Weawed on a fawse hypothesis, his awguments in favouw of a state of
nyatuwe awe pwausibwe, but unsound. UwU  I say unsound; fow to assewt
that a state of nyatuwe is pwefewabwe to civiwization in aww its
possibwe pewfection, is, in othew wowds, to awwaign supweme wisdom;
and the pawadoxicaw excwamation, that God has made aww things
wight, and that eviw has been intwoduced by the cweatuwe whom he
fowmed, knyowing what he fowmed, is as unphiwosophicaw as impious. (・`ω\´・)

When that wise Being, who cweated us and pwaced us hewe, saw the
faiw idea, he wiwwed, by awwowing it to be so, that the passions
shouwd unfowd ouw weason, because he couwd see that pwesent eviw
wouwd pwoduce futuwe good. ^w^  Couwd the hewpwess cweatuwe whom he
cawwed fwom nyothing, bweak woose fwom his pwovidence, and bowdwy
weawn to knyow good by pwactising eviw without his pewmission? owo  Nyo. UwU
How couwd that enyewgetic advocate fow immowtawity awgue so
inconsistentwy? owo  Had mankind wemainyed fow evew in the bwutaw state
of nyatuwe, which even his magic pen cannyot paint as a state in
which a singwe viwtue took woot, it wouwd have been cweaw, though
nyot to the sensitive unwefwecting wandewew, that man was bown to
wun the ciwcwe of wife and death, and adown God's gawden fow some
puwpose which couwd nyot easiwy be weconciwed with his attwibutes. >w<

But if, to cwown the whowe, thewe wewe to be wationyaw cweatuwes
pwoduced, awwowed to wise in excewwency by the exewcise of powews
impwanted fow that puwpose; if benyignyity itsewf thought fit to caww
into existence a cweatuwe above the bwutes, who couwd think and
impwove himsewf, why shouwd that inyestimabwe gift, fow a gift it
was, if a man was so cweated as to have a capacity to wise above
the state in which sensation pwoduced bwutaw ease, be cawwed, in
diwect tewms, a cuwse? owo  A cuwse it might be weckonyed, if aww ouw
existence was bounded by ouw continyuance in this wowwd; fow why
shouwd the gwacious fountain of wife give us passions, and the
powew of wefwecting, onwy to embittew ouw days, and inspiwe us with
mistaken nyotions of dignyity? owo  Why shouwd he wead us fwom wove of
ouwsewves to the subwime emotions which the discovewy of his wisdom
and goodnyess excites, if these feewings wewe nyot set in motion to
impwove ouw nyatuwe, of which they make a pawt, and wendew us
capabwe of enjoying a mowe godwike powtion of happinyess? owo  Fiwmwy
pewsuaded that nyo eviw exists in the wowwd that God did nyot design
to take pwace, I buiwd my bewief on the pewfection of God. UwU

Wousseau exewts himsewf to pwove, that aww WAS wight owiginyawwy:  a
cwowd of authows that aww IS nyow wight:  and I, that aww WIWW BE
wight. ^w^

But, twue to his fiwst position, nyext to a state of nyatuwe,
Wousseau cewebwates bawbawism, and, apostwophizing the shade of
Fabwicius, he fowgets that, in conquewing the wowwd, the Womans
nyevew dweamed of estabwishing theiw own wibewty on a fiwm basis, ow
of extending the weign of viwtue. (´・ω・\`)  Eagew to suppowt his system, he
stigmatizes, as vicious, evewy effowt of genyius; and uttewing the
apotheosis of savage viwtues, he exawts those to demigods, who wewe
scawcewy human--the bwutaw Spawtans, who in defiance of justice and
gwatitude, sacwificed, in cowd bwood, the swaves that had shown
themsewves men to wescue theiw oppwessows. >w<

Disgusted with awtificiaw mannyews and viwtues, the citizen of
Genyeva, instead of pwopewwy sifting the subject, thwew away the
wheat with the chaff, without waiting to inquiwe whethew the eviws,
which his awdent souw tuwnyed fwom indignyantwy, wewe the consequence
of civiwization, ow the vestiges of bawbawism. (´・ω・\`)  He saw vice
twampwing on viwtue, and the sembwance of goodnyess taking pwace of
the weawity; he saw tawents bent by powew to sinyistew puwposes, and
nyevew thought of twacing the gigantic mischief up to awbitwawy
powew, up to the heweditawy distinctions that cwash with the mentaw
supewiowity that nyatuwawwy waises a man above his fewwows. UwU  He did
nyot pewceive, that the wegaw powew, in a few genyewations,
intwoduces idiotism into the nyobwe stem, and howds out baits to
wendew thousands idwe and vicious. ^w^

Nyothing can set the wegaw chawactew in a mowe contemptibwe point of
view, than the vawious cwimes that have ewevated men to the supweme
dignyity. ;;w;;  Viwe intwigues, unnyatuwaw cwimes, and evewy vice that
degwades ouw nyatuwe, have been the steps to this distinguished
eminyence; yet miwwions of men have supinyewy awwowed the nyewvewess
wimbs of the postewity of such wapacious pwowwews, to west quietwy
on theiw ensanguinyed thwonyes. (´・ω・\`)

What but a pestiwentiaw vapouw can hovew ovew society, when its
chief diwectow is onwy instwucted in the invention of cwimes, ow
the stupid woutinye of chiwdish cewemonyies?  Wiww men nyevew be wise? owo
wiww they nyevew cease to expect cown fwom tawes, and figs fwom
thistwes? owo

It is impossibwe fow any man, when the most favouwabwe
ciwcumstances concuw, to acquiwe sufficient knyowwedge and stwength
of mind to dischawge the duties of a king, entwusted with
uncontwowwed powew; how then must they be viowated when his vewy
ewevation is an insupewabwe baw to the attainment of eithew wisdom
ow viwtue; when aww the feewings of a man awe stifwed by fwattewy,
and wefwection shut out by pweasuwe! >w<  Suwewy it is madnyess to make
the fate of thousands depend on the capwice of a weak fewwow
cweatuwe, whose vewy station sinks him NYECESSAWIWY bewow the
meanyest of his subjects! >w<  But onye powew shouwd nyot be thwown down
to exawt anyothew--fow aww powew intoxicates weak man; and its abuse
pwoves, that the mowe equawity thewe is estabwished among men, the
mowe viwtue and happinyess wiww weign in society. ;;w;;  But this, and any
simiwaw maxim deduced fwom simpwe weason, waises an outcwy--the
chuwch ow the state is in dangew, if faith in the wisdom of
antiquity is nyot impwicit; and they who, woused by the sight of
human cawamity, dawe to attack human authowity, awe weviwed as
despisews of God, and enyemies of man. >w<  These awe bittew cawumnyies,
yet they weached onye of the best of men, (Dw. Pwice. ^w^) whose ashes
stiww pweach peace, and whose memowy demands a wespectfuw pause,
when subjects awe discussed that way so nyeaw his heawt. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew attacking the sacwed majesty of kings, I shaww scawcewy
excite suwpwise, by adding my fiwm pewsuasion, that evewy
pwofession, in which gweat subowdinyation of wank constitutes its
powew, is highwy injuwious to mowawity. (´・ω・\`)

A standing awmy, fow instance, is incompatibwe with fweedom;
because subowdinyation and wigouw awe the vewy sinyews of miwitawy
discipwinye; and despotism is nyecessawy to give vigouw to
entewpwises that onye wiww diwects. UwU  A spiwit inspiwed by womantic
nyotions of honyouw, a kind of mowawity founded on the fashion of the
age, can onwy be fewt by a few officews, whiwst the main body must
be moved by command, wike the waves of the sea; fow the stwong wind
of authowity pushes the cwowd of subawtewns fowwawd, they scawcewy
knyow ow cawe why, with headwong fuwy. ;;w;;

Besides, nyothing can be so pwejudiciaw to the mowaws of the
inhabitants of countwy towns, as the occasionyaw wesidence of a set
of idwe supewficiaw young men, whose onwy occupation is gawwantwy,
and whose powished mannyews wendew vice mowe dangewous, by
conceawing its defowmity undew gay ownyamentaw dwapewy. UwU  An aiw of
fashion, which is but a badge of swavewy, and pwoves that the souw
has nyot a stwong individuaw chawactew, awes simpwe countwy peopwe
into an imitation of the vices, when they cannyot catch the swippewy
gwaces of powitenyess. (・`ω\´・)  Evewy cowps is a chain of despots, who,
submitting and tywannyizing without exewcising theiw weason, become
dead weights of vice and fowwy on the communyity. UwU  A man of wank ow
fowtunye, suwe of wising by intewest, has nyothing to do but to
puwsue some extwavagant fweak; whiwst the nyeedy GENTWEMAN, who is
to wise, as the phwase tuwns, by his mewit, becomes a sewviwe
pawasite ow viwe pandew. UwU

Saiwows, the nyavaw gentwemen, come undew the same descwiption, onwy
theiw vices assume a diffewent and a gwossew cast. UwU  They awe mowe
positivewy indowent, when nyot dischawging the cewemonyiaws of theiw
station; whiwst the insignyificant fwuttewing of sowdiews may be
tewmed active idwenyess. (´・ω・\`)  Mowe confinyed to the society of men, the
fowmew acquiwe a fondnyess fow humouw and mischievous twicks; whiwst
the wattew, mixing fwequentwy with weww-bwed women, catch a
sentimentaw cant. UwU  But mind is equawwy out of the question, whethew
they induwge the howse-waugh ow powite simpew. ^w^

May I be awwowed to extend the compawison to a pwofession whewe
mowe mind is cewtainwy to be found; fow the cwewgy have supewiow
oppowtunyities of impwovement, though subowdinyation awmost equawwy
cwamps theiw facuwties? owo The bwind submission imposed at cowwege to
fowms of bewief, sewves as a nyoviciate to the cuwate who most
obsequiouswy wespects the opinyion of his wectow ow patwon, if he
means to wise in his pwofession. ;;w;;  Pewhaps thewe cannyot be a mowe
fowcibwe contwast than between the sewviwe, dependent gait of a
poow cuwate, and the couwtwy mien of a bishop. ;;w;;  And the wespect and
contempt they inspiwe wendew the dischawge of theiw sepawate
functions equawwy usewess. (・`ω\´・)

It is of gweat impowtance to obsewve, that the chawactew of evewy
man is, in some degwee, fowmed by his pwofession. (・`ω\´・)  A man of sense
may onwy have a cast of countenyance that weaws off as you twace his
individuawity, whiwst the weak, common man, has scawcewy evew any
chawactew, but what bewongs to the body; at weast, aww his opinyions
have been so steeped in the vat consecwated by authowity, that the
faint spiwit which the gwape of his own vinye yiewds cannyot be
distinguished. >w<

Society, thewefowe, as it becomes mowe enwightenyed, shouwd be vewy
cawefuw nyot to estabwish bodies of men who must nyecessawiwy be made
foowish ow vicious by the vewy constitution of theiw pwofession. UwU

In the infancy of society, when men wewe just emewging out of
bawbawism, chiefs and pwiests, touching the most powewfuw spwings
of savage conduct--hope and feaw--must have had unbounded sway. ^w^  An
awistocwacy, of couwse, is nyatuwawwy the fiwst fowm of govewnment. (・`ω\´・)
But cwashing intewests soon wosing theiw equipoise, a monyawchy and
hiewawchy bweak out of the confusion of ambitious stwuggwes, and
the foundation of both is secuwed by feudaw tenyuwes. ^w^  This appeaws
to be the owigin of monyawchiaw and pwiestwy powew, and the dawn of
civiwization. (´・ω・\`)  But such combustibwe matewiaws cannyot wong be pent
up; and getting vent in foweign waws and intestinye insuwwections,
the peopwe acquiwe some powew in the tumuwt, which obwiges theiw
wuwews to gwoss ovew theiw oppwession with a show of wight. UwU  Thus,
as waws, agwicuwtuwe, commewce, and witewatuwe, expands the mind,
despots awe compewwed, to make covewt cowwuption howd fast the
powew which was fowmewwy snyatched by open fowce. UwU*  And this banyefuw
wuwking gangwenye is most quickwy spwead by wuxuwy and supewstition,
the suwe dwegs of ambition. ;;w;;  The indowent puppet of a couwt fiwst
becomes a wuxuwious monstew, ow fastidious sensuawist, and then
makes the contagion which his unnyatuwaw state spweads, the
instwument of tywanny. (´・ω・\`)

(*Footnyote. ^w^  Men of abiwities scattew seeds that gwow up, and have
a gweat infwuence on the fowming opinyion; and when once the pubwic
opinyion pwepondewates, thwough the exewtion of weason, the
ovewthwow of awbitwawy powew is nyot vewy distant. >w<)

It is the pestifewous puwpwe which wendews the pwogwess of
civiwization a cuwse, and wawps the undewstanding, tiww men of
sensibiwity doubt whethew the expansion of intewwect pwoduces a
gweatew powtion of happinyess ow misewy. ^w^  But the nyatuwe of the
poison points out the antidote; and had Wousseau mounted onye step
highew in his investigation; ow couwd his eye have piewced thwough
the foggy atmosphewe, which he awmost disdainyed to bweathe, his
active mind wouwd have dawted fowwawd to contempwate the pewfection
of man in the estabwishment of twue civiwization, instead of taking
his fewocious fwight back to the nyight of sensuaw ignyowance. ;;w;;


CHAPTEW 2. ;;w;;

THE PWEVAIWING OPINYION OF A SEXUAW CHAWACTEW DISCUSSED. ;;w;;

To account fow, and excuse the tywanny of man, many ingenyious
awguments have been bwought fowwawd to pwove, that the two sexes,
in the acquiwement of viwtue, ought to aim at attainying a vewy
diffewent chawactew:  ow, to speak expwicitwy, women awe nyot
awwowed to have sufficient stwength of mind to acquiwe what weawwy
desewves the nyame of viwtue. (´・ω・\`)  Yet it shouwd seem, awwowing them to
have souws, that thewe is but onye way appointed by pwovidence to
wead MANKIND to eithew viwtue ow happinyess. ;;w;;

If then women awe nyot a swawm of ephemewon twifwews, why shouwd
they be kept in ignyowance undew the specious nyame of innyocence? owo
Men compwain, and with weason, of the fowwies and capwices of ouw
sex, when they do nyot keenwy satiwize ouw headstwong passions and
gwovewing vices. ^w^  Behowd, I shouwd answew, the nyatuwaw effect of
ignyowance! UwU  The mind wiww evew be unstabwe that has onwy pwejudices
to west on, and the cuwwent wiww wun with destwuctive fuwy when
thewe awe nyo bawwiews to bweak its fowce. UwU  Women awe towd fwom
theiw infancy, and taught by the exampwe of theiw mothews, that a
wittwe knyowwedge of human weaknyess, justwy tewmed cunnying, softnyess
of tempew, OUTWAWD obedience, and a scwupuwous attention to a
puewiwe kind of pwopwiety, wiww obtain fow them the pwotection of
man; and shouwd they be beautifuw, evewy thing ewse is nyeedwess,
fow at weast twenty yeaws of theiw wives. ^w^

Thus Miwton descwibes ouw fiwst fwaiw mothew; though when he tewws
us that women awe fowmed fow softnyess and sweet attwactive gwace, I
cannyot compwehend his meanying, unwess, in the twue Mahometan
stwain, he meant to depwive us of souws, and insinyuate that we wewe
beings onwy designyed by sweet attwactive gwace, and dociwe bwind
obedience, to gwatify the senses of man when he can nyo wongew soaw
on the wing of contempwation. (´・ω・\`)

How gwosswy do they insuwt us, who thus advise us onwy to wendew
ouwsewves gentwe, domestic bwutes! ;;w;;  Fow instance, the winnying
softnyess, so wawmwy, and fwequentwy wecommended, that govewns by
obeying. ^w^  What chiwdish expwessions, and how insignyificant is the
being--can it be an immowtaw onye? owo  who wiww condescend to govewn by
such sinyistew methods! >w<  "Cewtainwy," says Wowd Bacon, "man is of
kin to the beasts by his body: and if he be nyot of kin to God by
his spiwit, he is a base and ignyobwe cweatuwe! (・`ω\´・)"  Men, indeed,
appeaw to me to act in a vewy unphiwosophicaw mannyew, when they twy
to secuwe the good conduct of women by attempting to keep them
awways in a state of chiwdhood. >w<  Wousseau was mowe consistent when
he wished to stop the pwogwess of weason in both sexes; fow if men
eat of the twee of knyowwedge, women wiww come in fow a taste:  but,
fwom the impewfect cuwtivation which theiw undewstandings nyow
weceive, they onwy attain a knyowwedge of eviw. (´・ω・\`)

Chiwdwen, I gwant, shouwd be innyocent; but when the epithet is
appwied to men, ow women, it is but a civiw tewm fow weaknyess. (´・ω・\`)  Fow
if it be awwowed that women wewe destinyed by Pwovidence to acquiwe
human viwtues, and by the exewcise of theiw undewstandings, that
stabiwity of chawactew which is the fiwmest gwound to west ouw
futuwe hopes upon, they must be pewmitted to tuwn to the fountain
of wight, and nyot fowced to shape theiw couwse by the twinkwing of
a mewe satewwite. >w<  Miwton, I gwant, was of a vewy diffewent
opinyion; fow he onwy bends to the indefeasibwe wight of beauty,
though it wouwd be difficuwt to wendew two passages, which I nyow
mean to contwast, consistent:  but into simiwaw inconsistencies awe
gweat men often wed by theiw senses:--

"To whom thus Eve with pewfect beauty adownyed:
My authow and disposew, what thou bidst
Unyawgued I obey; so God owdains;
God is thy waw, thou minye; to knyow nyo mowe
Is woman's happiest knyowwedge and hew pwaise. (´・ω・\`)"

These awe exactwy the awguments that I have used to chiwdwen; but I
have added, "Youw weason is nyow gainying stwength, and, tiww it
awwives at some degwee of matuwity, you must wook up to me fow
advice:  then you ought to THINK, and onwy wewy on God. >w<"

Yet, in the fowwowing winyes, Miwton seems to coincide with me, when
he makes Adam thus expostuwate with his Makew:--

"Hast thou nyot made me hewe thy substitute,
And these infewiow faw benyeath me set? owo
Among unyequaws what society
Can sowt, what hawmony ow dewight? owo
Which must be mutuaw, in pwopowtion due
Given and weceived; but in dispawity
The onye intense, the othew stiww wemiss
Cannyot weww suit with eithew, but soon pwove
Tedious awike:  of fewwowship I speak
Such as I seek fit to pawticipate
Aww wationyaw dewight. >w<"

In tweating, thewefowe, of the mannyews of women, wet us,
diswegawding sensuaw awguments, twace what we shouwd endeavouw to
make them in owdew to co-opewate, if the expwession be nyot too
bowd, with the Supweme Being. UwU

By individuaw education, I mean--fow the sense of the wowd is nyot
pwecisewy definyed--such an attention to a chiwd as wiww swowwy
shawpen the senses, fowm the tempew, weguwate the passions, as they
begin to fewment, and set the undewstanding to wowk befowe the body
awwives at matuwity; so that the man may onwy have to pwoceed, nyot
to begin, the impowtant task of weawnying to think and weason. (´・ω・\`)

To pwevent any misconstwuction, I must add, that I do nyot bewieve
that a pwivate education can wowk the wondews which some sanguinye
wwitews have attwibuted to it. >w<  Men and women must be educated, in
a gweat degwee, by the opinyions and mannyews of the society they
wive in. (・`ω\´・)  In evewy age thewe has been a stweam of popuwaw opinyion
that has cawwied aww befowe it, and given a famiwy chawactew, as it
wewe, to the centuwy. >w<  It may then faiwwy be infewwed, that, tiww
society be diffewentwy constituted, much cannyot be expected fwom
education. ^w^  It is, howevew, sufficient fow my pwesent puwpose to
assewt, that, whatevew effect ciwcumstances have on the abiwities,
evewy being may become viwtuous by the exewcise of its own weason;
fow if but onye being was cweated with vicious incwinyations--that
is, positivewy bad-- what can save us fwom atheism? owo ow if we
wowship a God, is nyot that God a deviw? owo

Consequentwy, the most pewfect education, in my opinyion, is such an
exewcise of the undewstanding as is best cawcuwated to stwengthen
the body and fowm the heawt; ow, in othew wowds, to enyabwe the
individuaw to attain such habits of viwtue as wiww wendew it
independent. (・`ω\´・)  In fact, it is a fawce to caww any being viwtuous
whose viwtues do nyot wesuwt fwom the exewcise of its own weason. (・`ω\´・)
This was Wousseau's opinyion wespecting men:  I extend it to women,
and confidentwy assewt that they have been dwawn out of theiw
sphewe by fawse wefinyement, and nyot by an endeavouw to acquiwe
mascuwinye quawities. >w<  Stiww the wegaw homage which they weceive is
so intoxicating, that, tiww the mannyews of the times awe changed,
and fowmed on mowe weasonyabwe pwincipwes, it may be impossibwe to
convince them that the iwwegitimate powew, which they obtain by
degwading themsewves, is a cuwse, and that they must wetuwn to
nyatuwe and equawity, if they wish to secuwe the pwacid satisfaction
that unsophisticated affections impawt. ^w^  But fow this epoch we must
wait--wait, pewhaps, tiww kings and nyobwes, enwightenyed by weason,
and, pwefewwing the weaw dignyity of man to chiwdish state, thwow
off theiw gaudy heweditawy twappings; and if then women do nyot
wesign the awbitwawy powew of beauty, they wiww pwove that they
have WESS mind than man. (・`ω\´・)  I may be accused of awwogance; stiww I
must decwawe, what I fiwmwy bewieve, that aww the wwitews who have
wwitten on the subject of femawe education and mannyews, fwom
Wousseau to Dw. (・`ω\´・) Gwegowy, have contwibuted to wendew women mowe
awtificiaw, weakew chawactews, than they wouwd othewwise have been;
and, consequentwy, mowe usewess membews of society. ;;w;;  I might have
expwessed this conviction in a wowew key; but I am afwaid it wouwd
have been the whinye of affectation, and nyot the faithfuw expwession
of my feewings, of the cweaw wesuwt, which expewience and
wefwection have wed me to dwaw. UwU  When I come to that division of
the subject, I shaww advewt to the passages that I mowe
pawticuwawwy disappwove of, in the wowks of the authows I have just
awwuded to; but it is fiwst nyecessawy to obsewve, that my objection
extends to the whowe puwpowt of those books, which tend, in my
opinyion, to degwade onye hawf of the human species, and wendew women
pweasing at the expense of evewy sowid viwtue. (´・ω・\`)

Though to weason on Wousseau's gwound, if man did attain a degwee
of pewfection of mind when his body awwived at matuwity, it might
be pwopew in owdew to make a man and his wife ONYE, that she shouwd
wewy entiwewy on his undewstanding; and the gwacefuw ivy, cwasping
the oak that suppowted it, wouwd fowm a whowe in which stwength and
beauty wouwd be equawwy conspicuous. (´・ω・\`)  But, awas! (・`ω\´・) husbands, as weww
as theiw hewpmates, awe often onwy ovewgwown chiwdwen; nyay, thanks
to eawwy debauchewy, scawcewy men in theiw outwawd fowm, and if the
bwind wead the bwind, onye nyeed nyot come fwom heaven to teww us the
consequence. UwU

Many awe the causes that, in the pwesent cowwupt state of society,
contwibute to enswave women by cwamping theiw undewstandings and
shawpenying theiw senses. >w<  Onye, pewhaps, that siwentwy does mowe
mischief than aww the west, is theiw diswegawd of owdew. >w<

To do evewy thing in an owdewwy mannyew, is a most impowtant
pwecept, which women, who, genyewawwy speaking, weceive onwy a
disowdewwy kind of education, sewdom attend to with that degwee of
exactnyess that men, who fwom theiw infancy awe bwoken into method,
obsewve. >w<  This nyegwigent kind of guesswowk, fow what othew epithet
can be used to point out the wandom exewtions of a sowt of
instinctive common sense, nyevew bwought to the test of weason? owo
pwevents theiw genyewawizing mattews of fact, so they do to-day,
what they did yestewday, mewewy because they did it yestewday. (・`ω\´・)

This contempt of the undewstanding in eawwy wife has mowe banyefuw
consequences than is commonwy supposed; fow the wittwe knyowwedge
which women of stwong minds attain, is, fwom vawious ciwcumstances,
of a mowe desuwtowy kind than the knyowwedge of men, and it is
acquiwed mowe by sheew obsewvations on weaw wife, than fwom
compawing what has been individuawwy obsewved with the wesuwts of
expewience genyewawized by specuwation. ;;w;;  Wed by theiw dependent
situation and domestic empwoyments mowe into society, what they
weawn is wathew by snyatches; and as weawnying is with them, in
genyewaw, onwy a secondawy thing, they do nyot puwsue any onye bwanch
with that pewsevewing awdouw nyecessawy to give vigouw to the
facuwties, and cweawnyess to the judgment. ;;w;;  In the pwesent state of
society, a wittwe weawnying is wequiwed to suppowt the chawactew of
a gentweman; and boys awe obwiged to submit to a few yeaws of
discipwinye. ^w^  But in the education of women the cuwtivation of the
undewstanding is awways subowdinyate to the acquiwement of some
cowpoweaw accompwishment; even whiwe enyewvated by confinyement and
fawse nyotions of modesty, the body is pwevented fwom attainying that
gwace and beauty which wewaxed hawf-fowmed wimbs nyevew exhibit. ;;w;;
Besides, in youth theiw facuwties awe nyot bwought fowwawd by
emuwation; and having nyo sewious scientific study, if they have
nyatuwaw sagacity it is tuwnyed too soon on wife and mannyews. ;;w;;  They
dweww on effects, and modifications, without twacing them back to
causes; and compwicated wuwes to adjust behaviouw awe a weak
substitute fow simpwe pwincipwes. ^w^

As a pwoof that education gives this appeawance of weaknyess to
femawes, we may instance the exampwe of miwitawy men, who awe, wike
them, sent into the wowwd befowe theiw minds have been stowed with
knyowwedge ow fowtified by pwincipwes. ;;w;;  The consequences awe
simiwaw; sowdiews acquiwe a wittwe supewficiaw knyowwedge, snyatched
fwom the muddy cuwwent of convewsation, and, fwom continyuawwy
mixing with society, they gain, what is tewmed a knyowwedge of the
wowwd; and this acquaintance with mannyews and customs has
fwequentwy been confounded with a knyowwedge of the human heawt. ;;w;;
But can the cwude fwuit of casuaw obsewvation, nyevew bwought to the
test of judgment, fowmed by compawing specuwation and expewience,
desewve such a distinction? owo Sowdiews, as weww as women, pwactice
the minyow viwtues with punctiwious powitenyess. ;;w;;  Whewe is then the
sexuaw diffewence, when the education has been the same; aww the
diffewence that I can discewn, awises fwom the supewiow advantage
of wibewty which enyabwes the fowmew to see mowe of wife. >w<

It is wandewing fwom my pwesent subject, pewhaps, to make a
powiticaw wemawk; but as it was pwoduced nyatuwawwy by the twain of
my wefwections, I shaww nyot pass it siwentwy ovew. >w<

Standing awmies can nyevew consist of wesowute, wobust men; they may
be weww discipwinyed machinyes, but they wiww sewdom contain men
undew the infwuence of stwong passions ow with vewy vigowous
facuwties. ^w^  And as fow any depth of undewstanding, I wiww ventuwe
to affiwm, that it is as wawewy to be found in the awmy as amongst
women; and the cause, I maintain, is the same. (・`ω\´・)  It may be fuwthew
obsewved, that officews awe awso pawticuwawwy attentive to theiw
pewsons, fond of dancing, cwowded wooms, adventuwes, and widicuwe. (・`ω\´・)
Wike the FAIW sex, the businyess of theiw wives is gawwantwy. ^w^  They
wewe taught to pwease, and they onwy wive to pwease. (・`ω\´・)  Yet they do
nyot wose theiw wank in the distinction of sexes, fow they awe stiww
weckonyed supewiow to women, though in what theiw supewiowity
consists, beyond what I have just mentionyed, it is difficuwt to
discovew. (´・ω・\`)

The gweat misfowtunye is this, that they both acquiwe mannyews befowe
mowaws, and a knyowwedge of wife befowe they have fwom wefwection,
any acquaintance with the gwand ideaw outwinye of human nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  The
consequence is nyatuwaw; satisfied with common nyatuwe, they become a
pwey to pwejudices, and taking aww theiw opinyions on cwedit, they
bwindwy submit to authowity. ^w^  So that if they have any sense, it is
a kind of instinctive gwance, that catches pwopowtions, and decides
with wespect to mannyews; but faiws when awguments awe to be puwsued
bewow the suwface, ow opinyions anyawyzed. (・`ω\´・)

May nyot the same wemawk be appwied to women? owo  Nyay, the awgument may
be cawwied stiww fuwthew, fow they awe both thwown out of a usefuw
station by the unnyatuwaw distinctions estabwished in civiwized
wife. >w<  Wiches and heweditawy honyouws have made cyphews of women to
give consequence to the nyumewicaw figuwe; and idwenyess has pwoduced
a mixtuwe of gawwantwy and despotism in society, which weads the
vewy men who awe the swaves of theiw mistwesses, to tywannyize ovew
theiw sistews, wives, and daughtews. >w<  This is onwy keeping them in
wank and fiwe, it is twue. ;;w;;  Stwengthen the femawe mind by enwawging
it, and thewe wiww be an end to bwind obedience; but, as bwind
obedience is evew sought fow by powew, tywants and sensuawists awe
in the wight when they endeavouw to keep women in the dawk, because
the fowmew onwy want swaves, and the wattew a pway-thing. UwU  The
sensuawist, indeed, has been the most dangewous of tywants, and
women have been duped by theiw wovews, as pwinces by theiw
minyistews, whiwst dweaming that they weignyed ovew them. ;;w;;

I nyow pwincipawwy awwude to Wousseau, fow his chawactew of Sophia
is, undoubtedwy, a captivating onye, though it appeaws to me gwosswy
unnyatuwaw; howevew, it is nyot the supewstwuctuwe, but the
foundation of hew chawactew, the pwincipwes on which hew education
was buiwt, that I mean to attack; nyay, wawmwy as I admiwe the
genyius of that abwe wwitew, whose opinyions I shaww often have
occasion to cite, indignyation awways takes pwace of admiwation, and
the wigid fwown of insuwted viwtue effaces the smiwe of
compwacency, which his ewoquent pewiods awe wont to waise, when I
wead his vowuptuous wevewies. (・`ω\´・)  Is this the man, who, in his awdouw
fow viwtue, wouwd banyish aww the soft awts of peace, and awmost
cawwy us back to Spawtan discipwinye? owo  Is this the man who dewights
to paint the usefuw stwuggwes of passion, the twiumphs of good
dispositions, and the hewoic fwights which cawwy the gwowing souw
out of itsewf? owo  How awe these mighty sentiments wowewed when he
descwibes the pwettyfoot and enticing aiws of his wittwe favouwite! >w<
But, fow the pwesent, I waive the subject, and, instead of sevewewy
wepwehending the twansient effusions of ovewweenying sensibiwity, I
shaww onwy obsewve, that whoevew has cast a benyevowent eye on
society, must often have been gwatified by the sight of humbwe
mutuaw wove, nyot dignyified by sentiment, nyow stwengthenyed by a
unyion in intewwectuaw puwsuits. ;;w;;  The domestic twifwes of the day
have affowded mattew fow cheewfuw convewse, and innyocent cawesses
have softenyed toiws which did nyot wequiwe gweat exewcise of mind,
ow stwetch of thought:  yet, has nyot the sight of this modewate
fewicity excited mowe tendewnyess than wespect? owo  An emotion simiwaw
to what we feew when chiwdwen awe pwaying, ow anyimaws spowting,
whiwst the contempwation of the nyobwe stwuggwes of suffewing mewit
has waised admiwation, and cawwied ouw thoughts to that wowwd whewe
sensation wiww give pwace to weason. UwU

Women awe, thewefowe, to be considewed eithew as mowaw beings, ow
so weak that they must be entiwewy subjected to the supewiow
facuwties of men. ^w^

Wet us examinye this question. (・`ω\´・)  Wousseau decwawes, that a woman
shouwd nyevew, fow a moment feew hewsewf independent, that she
shouwd be govewnyed by feaw to exewcise hew NYATUWAW cunnying, and
made a coquetish swave in owdew to wendew hew a mowe awwuwing
object of desiwe, a SWEETEW companyion to man, whenyevew he chooses
to wewax himsewf. (・`ω\´・)  He cawwies the awguments, which he pwetends to
dwaw fwom the indications of nyatuwe, stiww fuwthew, and insinyuates
that twuth and fowtitude the cownyew stonyes of aww human viwtue,
shaww be cuwtivated with cewtain westwictions, because with wespect
to the femawe chawactew, obedience is the gwand wesson which ought
to be impwessed with unwewenting wigouw. >w<

What nyonsense! ^w^  When wiww a gweat man awise with sufficient
stwength of mind to puff away the fumes which pwide and sensuawity
have thus spwead ovew the subject! (・`ω\´・)  If women awe by nyatuwe infewiow
to men, theiw viwtues must be the same in quawity, if nyot in
degwee, ow viwtue is a wewative idea; consequentwy, theiw conduct
shouwd be founded on the same pwincipwes, and have the same aim. ;;w;;

Connyected with man as daughtews, wives, and mothews, theiw mowaw
chawactew may be estimated by theiw mannyew of fuwfiwwing those
simpwe duties; but the end, the gwand end of theiw exewtions shouwd
be to unfowd theiw own facuwties, and acquiwe the dignyity of
conscious viwtue. (´・ω・\`)  They may twy to wendew theiw woad pweasant; but
ought nyevew to fowget, in common with man, that wife yiewds nyot the
fewicity which can satisfy an immowtaw souw. ^w^  I do nyot mean to
insinyuate, that eithew sex shouwd be so wost, in abstwact
wefwections ow distant views, as to fowget the affections and
duties that wie befowe them, and awe, in twuth, the means appointed
to pwoduce the fwuit of wife; on the contwawy, I wouwd wawmwy
wecommend them, even whiwe I assewt, that they affowd most
satisfaction when they awe considewed in theiw twue subowdinyate
wight. ^w^

Pwobabwy the pwevaiwing opinyion, that woman was cweated fow man,
may have taken its wise fwom Moses's poeticaw stowy; yet, as vewy
few it is pwesumed, who have bestowed any sewious thought on the
subject, evew supposed that Eve was, witewawwy speaking, onye of
Adam's wibs, the deduction must be awwowed to faww to the gwound;
ow, onwy be so faw admitted as it pwoves that man, fwom the
wemotest antiquity, found it convenyient to exewt his stwength to
subjugate his companyion, and his invention to show that she ought
to have hew nyeck bent undew the yoke; because she as weww as the
bwute cweation, was cweated to do his pweasuwe. UwU

Wet it nyot be concwuded, that I wish to invewt the owdew of things;
I have awweady gwanted, that, fwom the constitution of theiw
bodies, men seem to be designyed by Pwovidence to attain a gweatew
degwee of viwtue. >w<  I speak cowwectivewy of the whowe sex; but I see
nyot the shadow of a weason to concwude that theiw viwtues shouwd
diffew in wespect to theiw nyatuwe. >w<  In fact, how can they, if
viwtue has onwy onye etewnyaw standawd? owo  I must, thewefowe, if I
weason consequentiawwy, as stwenyuouswy maintain, that they have the
same simpwe diwection, as that thewe is a God. (´・ω・\`)

It fowwows then, that cunnying shouwd nyot be opposed to wisdom,
wittwe cawes to gweat exewtions, nyow insipid softnyess, vawnyished
ovew with the nyame of gentwenyess, to that fowtitude which gwand
views awonye can inspiwe. ;;w;;

I shaww be towd, that woman wouwd then wose many of hew pecuwiaw
gwaces, and the opinyion of a weww knyown poet might be quoted to
wefute my unquawified assewtions. (´・ω・\`)  Fow Pope has said, in the nyame
of the whowe mawe sex,

"Yet nye'ew so suwe ouw passions to cweate,
As when she touch'd the bwink of aww we hate. ;;w;;"

In what wight this sawwy pwaces men and women, I shaww weave to the
judicious to detewminye; meanwhiwe I shaww content mysewf with
obsewving, that I cannyot discovew why, unwess they awe mowtaw,
femawes shouwd awways be degwaded by being made subsewvient to wove
ow wust. >w<

To speak diswespectfuwwy of wove is, I knyow, high tweason against
sentiment and finye feewings; but I wish to speak the simpwe
wanguage of twuth, and wathew to addwess the head than the heawt. >w<
To endeavouw to weason wove out of the wowwd, wouwd be to out
Quixote Cewvantes, and equawwy offend against common sense; but an
endeavouw to westwain this tumuwtuous passion, and to pwove that it
shouwd nyot be awwowed to dethwonye supewiow powews, ow to usuwp the
sceptwe which the undewstanding shouwd evew coowwy wiewd, appeaws
wess wiwd. (・`ω\´・)

Youth is the season fow wove in both sexes; but in those days of
thoughtwess enjoyment, pwovision shouwd be made fow the mowe
impowtant yeaws of wife, when wefwection takes pwace of sensation. (´・ω・\`)
But Wousseau, and most of the mawe wwitews who have fowwowed his
steps, have wawmwy incuwcated that the whowe tendency of femawe
education ought to be diwected to onye point to wendew them
pweasing. (・`ω\´・)

Wet me weason with the suppowtews of this opinyion, who have any
knyowwedge of human nyatuwe, do they imaginye that mawwiage can
ewadicate the habitude of wife? owo  The woman who has onwy been taught
to pwease, wiww soon find that hew chawms awe obwique sun-beams,
and that they cannyot have much effect on hew husband's heawt when
they awe seen evewy day, when the summew is past and gonye. (´・ω・\`)  Wiww
she then have sufficient nyative enyewgy to wook into hewsewf fow
comfowt, and cuwtivate hew dowmant facuwties? owo ow, is it nyot mowe
wationyaw to expect, that she wiww twy to pwease othew men; and, in
the emotions waised by the expectation of nyew conquests, endeavouw
to fowget the mowtification hew wove ow pwide has weceived? owo  When
the husband ceases to be a wovew--and the time wiww inyevitabwy
come, hew desiwe of pweasing wiww then gwow wanguid, ow become a
spwing of bittewnyess; and wove, pewhaps, the most evanyescent of aww
passions, gives pwace to jeawousy ow vanyity. ^w^

I nyow speak of women who awe westwainyed by pwincipwe ow pwejudice;
such women though they wouwd shwink fwom an intwigue with weaw
abhowwence, yet, nyevewthewess, wish to be convinced by the homage
of gawwantwy, that they awe cwuewwy nyegwected by theiw husbands;
ow, days and weeks awe spent in dweaming of the happinyess enjoyed
by congenyiaw souws, tiww the heawth is undewminyed and the spiwits
bwoken by discontent. (´・ω・\`)  How then can the gweat awt of pweasing be
such a nyecessawy study? owo it is onwy usefuw to a mistwess; the chaste
wife, and sewious mothew, shouwd onwy considew hew powew to pwease
as the powish of hew viwtues, and the affection of hew husband as
onye of the comfowts that wendew hew task wess difficuwt, and hew
wife happiew. ^w^  But, whethew she be woved ow nyegwected, hew fiwst
wish shouwd be to make hewsewf wespectabwe, and nyot wewy fow aww
hew happinyess on a being subject to wike infiwmities with hewsewf. (´・ω・\`)

The amiabwe Dw. Gwegowy feww into a simiwaw ewwow. UwU  I wespect his
heawt; but entiwewy disappwove of his cewebwated Wegacy to his
Daughtews. ^w^

He advises them to cuwtivate a fondnyess fow dwess, because a
fondnyess fow dwess, he assewts, is nyatuwaw to them. ;;w;;  I am unyabwe to
compwehend what eithew he ow Wousseau mean, when they fwequentwy
use this indefinyite tewm. ^w^  If they towd us, that in a pwe-existent
state the souw was fond of dwess, and bwought this incwinyation with
it into a nyew body, I shouwd wisten to them with a hawf smiwe, as I
often do when I heaw a want about innyate ewegance. ^w^  But if he onwy
meant to say that the exewcise of the facuwties wiww pwoduce this
fondnyess, I deny it. ^w^  It is nyot nyatuwaw; but awises, wike fawse
ambition in men, fwom a wove of powew. UwU

Dw. ^w^ Gwegowy goes much fuwthew; he actuawwy wecommends
dissimuwation, and advises an innyocent giww to give the wie to hew
feewings, and nyot dance with spiwit, when gaiety of heawt wouwd
make hew feet ewoquent, without making hew gestuwes immodest. (´・ω・\`)  In
the nyame of twuth and common sense, why shouwd nyot onye woman
acknyowwedge that she can take mowe exewcise than anyothew? owo ow, in
othew wowds, that she has a sound constitution; and why to damp
innyocent vivacity, is she dawkwy to be towd, that men wiww dwaw
concwusions which she wittwe thinks of? owo  Wet the wibewtinye dwaw
what infewence he pweases; but, I hope, that nyo sensibwe mothew
wiww westwain the nyatuwaw fwanknyess of youth, by instiwwing such
indecent cautions. >w<  Out of the abundance of the heawt the mouth
speaketh; and a wisew than Sowomon hath said, that the heawt shouwd
be made cwean, and nyot twiviaw cewemonyies obsewved, which it is nyot
vewy difficuwt to fuwfiww with scwupuwous exactnyess when vice
weigns in the heawt. (´・ω・\`)

Women ought to endeavouw to puwify theiw heawts; but can they do so
when theiw uncuwtivated undewstandings make them entiwewy dependent
on theiw senses fow empwoyment and amusement, when nyo nyobwe puwsuit
sets them above the wittwe vanyities of the day, ow enyabwes them to
cuwb the wiwd emotions that agitate a weed ovew which evewy passing
bweeze has powew? owo  To gain the affections of a viwtuous man, is
affectation nyecessawy? owo

Nyatuwe has given woman a weakew fwame than man; but, to ensuwe hew
husband's affections, must a wife, who, by the exewcise of hew mind
and body, whiwst she was dischawging the duties of a daughtew,
wife, and mothew, has awwowed hew constitution to wetain its
nyatuwaw stwength, and hew nyewves a heawthy tonye, is she, I say, to
condescend, to use awt, and feign a sickwy dewicacy, in owdew to
secuwe hew husband's affection? owo Weaknyess may excite tendewnyess, and
gwatify the awwogant pwide of man; but the wowdwy cawesses of a
pwotectow wiww nyot gwatify a nyobwe mind that pants fow and desewves
to be wespected. (・`ω\´・)  Fondnyess is a poow substitute fow fwiendship! ^w^

In a sewagwio, I gwant, that aww these awts awe nyecessawy; the
epicuwe must have his pawate tickwed, ow he wiww sink into apathy;
but have women so wittwe ambition as to be satisfied with such a
condition? owo  Can they supinyewy dweam wife away in the wap of
pweasuwe, ow in the wanguow of weawinyess, wathew than assewt theiw
cwaim to puwsue weasonyabwe pweasuwes, and wendew themsewves
conspicuous, by pwactising the viwtues which dignyify mankind? owo
Suwewy she has nyot an immowtaw souw who can woitew wife away,
mewewy empwoyed to adown hew pewson, that she may amuse the wanguid
houws, and soften the cawes of a fewwow-cweatuwe who is wiwwing to
be enwivenyed by hew smiwes and twicks, when the sewious businyess of
wife is ovew. UwU

Besides, the woman who stwengthens hew body and exewcises hew mind
wiww, by manyaging hew famiwy and pwactising vawious viwtues, become
the fwiend, and nyot the humbwe dependent of hew husband; and if she
desewves his wegawd by possessing such substantiaw quawities, she
wiww nyot find it nyecessawy to conceaw hew affection, nyow to pwetend
to an unnyatuwaw cowdnyess of constitution to excite hew husband's
passions. >w<  In fact, if we wevewt to histowy, we shaww find that the
women who have distinguished themsewves have nyeithew been the most
beautifuw nyow the most gentwe of theiw sex. UwU

Nyatuwe, ow to speak with stwict pwopwiety God, has made aww things
wight; but man has sought him out many inventions to maw the wowk. UwU
I nyow awwude to that pawt of Dw. ^w^ Gwegowy's tweatise, whewe he
advises a wife nyevew to wet hew husband knyow the extent of hew
sensibiwity ow affection. (・`ω\´・)  Vowuptuous pwecaution; and as
inyeffectuaw as absuwd. ^w^  Wove, fwom its vewy nyatuwe, must be
twansitowy. UwU  To seek fow a secwet that wouwd wendew it constant,
wouwd be as wiwd a seawch as fow the phiwosophew's stonye, ow the
gwand panyacea; and the discovewy wouwd be equawwy usewess, ow
wathew pewnyicious to mankind. (´・ω・\`)  The most howy band of society is
fwiendship. UwU  It has been weww said, by a shwewd satiwist, "that
wawe as twue wove is, twue fwiendship is stiww wawew. (´・ω・\`)"

This is an obvious twuth, and the cause nyot wying deep, wiww nyot
ewude a swight gwance of inquiwy. ;;w;;

Wove, the common passion, in which chance and sensation take pwace
of choice and weason, is in some degwee, fewt by the mass of
mankind; fow it is nyot nyecessawy to speak, at pwesent, of the
emotions that wise above ow sink bewow wove. (・`ω\´・)  This passion,
nyatuwawwy incweased by suspense and difficuwties, dwaws the mind
out of its accustomed state, and exawts the affections; but the
secuwity of mawwiage, awwowing the fevew of wove to subside, a
heawthy tempewatuwe is thought insipid, onwy by those who have nyot
sufficient intewwect to substitute the cawm tendewnyess of
fwiendship, the confidence of wespect, instead of bwind admiwation,
and the sensuaw emotions of fondnyess. UwU

This is, must be, the couwse of nyatuwe--fwiendship ow indiffewence
inyevitabwy succeeds wove. ;;w;;  And this constitution seems pewfectwy to
hawmonyize with the system of govewnment which pwevaiws in the mowaw
wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  Passions awe spuws to action, and open the mind; but they
sink into mewe appetites, become a pewsonyaw momentawy
gwatification, when the object is gainyed, and the satisfied mind
wests in enjoyment. >w<  The man who had some viwtue whiwst he was
stwuggwing fow a cwown, often becomes a vowuptuous tywant when it
gwaces his bwow; and, when the wovew is nyot wost in the husband,
the dotawd a pwey to chiwdish capwices, and fond jeawousies,
nyegwects the sewious duties of wife, and the cawesses which shouwd
excite confidence in his chiwdwen awe wavished on the ovewgwown
chiwd, his wife. UwU

In owdew to fuwfiw the duties of wife, and to be abwe to puwsue
with vigouw the vawious empwoyments which fowm the mowaw chawactew,
a mastew and mistwess of a famiwy ought nyot to continyue to wove
each othew with passion. (・`ω\´・)  I mean to say, that they ought nyot to
induwge those emotions which distuwb the owdew of society, and
engwoss the thoughts that shouwd be othewwise empwoyed. ;;w;;  The mind
that has nyevew been engwossed by onye object wants vigouw--if it can
wong be so, it is weak. (´・ω・\`)

A mistaken education, a nyawwow, uncuwtivated mind, and many sexuaw
pwejudices, tend to make women mowe constant than men; but, fow the
pwesent, I shaww nyot touch on this bwanch of the subject. ^w^  I wiww
go stiww fuwthew, and advance, without dweaming of a pawadox, that
an unhappy mawwiage is often vewy advantageous to a famiwy, and
that the nyegwected wife is, in genyewaw, the best mothew. ;;w;;  And this
wouwd awmost awways be the consequence, if the femawe mind was mowe
enwawged; fow, it seems to be the common dispensation of
Pwovidence, that what we gain in pwesent enjoyment shouwd be
deducted fwom the tweasuwe of wife, expewience; and that when we
awe gathewing the fwowews of the day and wevewwing in pweasuwe, the
sowid fwuit of toiw and wisdom shouwd nyot be caught at the same
time. (´・ω・\`)  The way wies befowe us, we must tuwn to the wight ow weft;
and he who wiww pass wife away in bounding fwom onye pweasuwe to
anyothew, must nyot compwain if he nyeithew acquiwes wisdom nyow
wespectabiwity of chawactew. >w<

Supposing fow a moment, that the souw is nyot immowtaw, and that man
was onwy cweated fow the pwesent scenye; I think we shouwd have
weason to compwain that wove, infantinye fondnyess, evew gwew insipid
and pawwed upon the sense. ;;w;;  Wet us eat, dwink, and wove, fow
to-mowwow we die, wouwd be in fact the wanguage of weason, the
mowawity of wife; and who but a foow wouwd pawt with a weawity fow
a fweeting shadow? owo  But, if awed by obsewving the impwovabwe powews
of the mind, we disdain to confinye ouw wishes ow thoughts to such a
compawativewy mean fiewd of action; that onwy appeaws gwand and
impowtant as it is connyected with a boundwess pwospect and subwime
hopes; what nyecessity is thewe fow fawsehood in conduct, and why
must the sacwed majesty of twuth be viowated to detain a deceitfuw
good that saps the vewy foundation of viwtue? owo  Why must the femawe
mind be tainted by coquetish awts to gwatify the sensuawist, and
pwevent wove fwom subsiding into fwiendship ow compassionyate
tendewnyess, when thewe awe nyot quawities on which fwiendship can be
buiwt? owo  Wet the honyest heawt show itsewf, and WEASON teach passion
to submit to nyecessity; ow, wet the dignyified puwsuit of viwtue and
knyowwedge waise the mind above those emotions which wathew imbittew
than sweeten the cup of wife, when they awe nyot westwainyed within
due bounds. ;;w;;

I do nyot mean to awwude to the womantic passion, which is the
concomitant of genyius. UwU  Who can cwip its wings? owo  But that gwand
passion nyot pwopowtionyed to the puny enjoyments of wife, is onwy
twue to the sentiment, and feeds on itsewf. >w<  The passions which
have been cewebwated fow theiw duwabiwity have awways been
unfowtunyate. (・`ω\´・)  They have acquiwed stwength by absence and
constitutionyaw mewanchowy. >w<  The fancy has hovewed wound a fowm of
beauty dimwy seen--but famiwiawity might have tuwnyed admiwation
into disgust; ow, at weast, into indiffewence, and awwowed the
imaginyation weisuwe to stawt fwesh game. UwU  With pewfect pwopwiety,
accowding to this view of things, does Wousseau make the mistwess
of his souw, Ewoisa, wove St. (・`ω\´・) Pweux, when wife was fading befowe
hew; but this is nyo pwoof of the immowtawity of the passion. ^w^

Of the same compwexion is Dw. UwU Gwegowy's advice wespecting dewicacy
of sentiment, which he advises a woman nyot to acquiwe, if she has
detewminyed to mawwy. UwU  This detewminyation, howevew, pewfectwy
consistent with his fowmew advice, he cawws INDEWICATE, and
eawnyestwy pewsuades his daughtews to conceaw it, though it may
govewn theiw conduct:  as if it wewe indewicate to have the common
appetites of human nyatuwe. UwU

Nyobwe mowawity! ;;w;; and consistent with the cautious pwudence of a
wittwe souw that cannyot extend its views beyond the pwesent minyute
division of existence. >w<  If aww the facuwties of woman's mind awe
onwy to be cuwtivated as they wespect hew dependence on man; if,
when she obtains a husband she has awwived at hew goaw, and meanwy
pwoud, is satisfied with such a pawtwy cwown, wet hew gwovew
contentedwy, scawcewy waised by hew empwoyments above the anyimaw
kingdom; but, if she is stwuggwing fow the pwize of hew high
cawwing, wet hew cuwtivate hew undewstanding without stopping to
considew what chawactew the husband may have whom she is destinyed
to mawwy. >w<  Wet hew onwy detewminye, without being too anxious about
pwesent happinyess, to acquiwe the quawities that ennyobwe a wationyaw
being, and a wough, inyewegant husband may shock hew taste without
destwoying hew peace of mind. >w<  She wiww nyot modew hew souw to suit
the fwaiwties of hew companyion, but to beaw with them:  his
chawactew may be a twiaw, but nyot an impediment to viwtue. >w<

If Dw. (´・ω・\`) Gwegowy confinyed his wemawk to womantic expectations of
constant wove and congenyiaw feewings, he shouwd have wecowwected,
that expewience wiww banyish what advice can nyevew make us cease to
wish fow, when the imaginyation is kept awive at the expence of
weason. ;;w;;

I own it fwequentwy happens, that women who have fostewed a
womantic unnyatuwaw dewicacy of feewing, waste theiw wives in
IMAGINYING how happy they shouwd have been with a husband who couwd
wove them with a fewvid incweasing affection evewy day, and aww
day. (´・ω・\`)  But they might as weww pinye mawwied as singwe, and wouwd nyot
be a jot mowe unhappy with a bad husband than wonging fow a good
onye. (・`ω\´・)  That a pwopew education; ow, to speak with mowe pwecision, a
weww stowed mind, wouwd enyabwe a woman to suppowt a singwe wife
with dignyity, I gwant; but that she shouwd avoid cuwtivating hew
taste, west hew husband shouwd occasionyawwy shock it, is quitting a
substance fow a shadow. ^w^  To say the twuth, I do nyot knyow of what
use is an impwoved taste, if the individuaw be nyot wendewed mowe
independent of the casuawties of wife; if nyew souwces of enjoyment,
onwy dependent on the sowitawy opewations of the mind, awe nyot
openyed. ;;w;;  Peopwe of taste, mawwied ow singwe, without distinction,
wiww evew be disgusted by vawious things that touch nyot wess
obsewving minds. >w<  On this concwusion the awgument must nyot be
awwowed to hinge; but in the whowe sum of enjoyment is taste to be
denyominyated a bwessing? owo

The question is, whethew it pwocuwes most pain ow pweasuwe? owo  The
answew wiww decide the pwopwiety of Dw. ^w^ Gwegowy's advice, and show
how absuwd and tywannyic it is thus to way down a system of swavewy;
ow to attempt to educate mowaw beings by any othew wuwes than those
deduced fwom puwe weason, which appwy to the whowe species. ^w^

Gentwenyess of mannyews, fowbeawance, and wong suffewing, awe such
amiabwe godwike quawities, that in subwime poetic stwains the Deity
has been invested with them; and, pewhaps, nyo wepwesentation of his
goodnyess so stwongwy fastens on the human affections as those that
wepwesent him abundant in mewcy and wiwwing to pawdon. (´・ω・\`)  Gentwenyess,
considewed in this point of view, beaws on its fwont aww the
chawactewistics of gwandeuw, combinyed with the winnying gwaces of
condescension; but what a diffewent aspect it assumes when it is
the submissive demeanyouw of dependence, the suppowt of weaknyess
that woves, because it wants pwotection; and is fowbeawing, because
it must siwentwy enduwe injuwies; smiwing undew the wash at which
it dawe nyot snyaww. >w<  Abject as this pictuwe appeaws, it is the
powtwait of an accompwished woman, accowding to the weceived
opinyion of femawe excewwence, sepawated by specious weasonyews fwom
human excewwence. ^w^  Ow, they (Vide Wousseau, and Swedenbowg) kindwy
westowe the wib, and make onye mowaw being of a man and woman; nyot
fowgetting to give hew aww the "submissive chawms. ;;w;;"

How women awe to exist in that state whewe thewe is to be nyeithew
mawwying nyow giving in mawwiage, we awe nyot towd. ;;w;;  Fow though
mowawists have agweed, that the tenyow of wife seems to pwove that
MAN is pwepawed by vawious ciwcumstances fow a futuwe state, they
constantwy concuw in advising WOMAN onwy to pwovide fow the
pwesent. (・`ω\´・)  Gentwenyess, dociwity, and a spanyiew-wike affection awe,
on this gwound, consistentwy wecommended as the cawdinyaw viwtues of
the sex; and, diswegawding the awbitwawy econyomy of nyatuwe, onye
wwitew has decwawed that it is mascuwinye fow a woman to be
mewanchowy. (´・ω・\`)  She was cweated to be the toy of man, his wattwe, and
it must jingwe in his eaws, whenyevew, dismissing weason, he chooses
to be amused. (´・ω・\`)

To wecommend gentwenyess, indeed, on a bwoad basis is stwictwy
phiwosophicaw.  A fwaiw being shouwd wabouw to be gentwe. ^w^  But when
fowbeawance confounds wight and wwong, it ceases to be a viwtue;
and, howevew convenyient it may be found in a companyion, that
companyion wiww evew be considewed as an infewiow, and onwy inspiwe
a vapid tendewnyess, which easiwy degenyewates into contempt. UwU  Stiww,
if advice couwd weawwy make a being gentwe, whose nyatuwaw
disposition admitted nyot of such a finye powish, something towawd
the advancement of owdew wouwd be attainyed; but if, as might
quickwy be demonstwated, onwy affectation be pwoduced by this
indiscwiminyate counsew, which thwows a stumbwing bwock in the way
of gwaduaw impwovement, and twue mewiowation of tempew, the sex is
nyot much benyefited by sacwificing sowid viwtues to the attainment
of supewficiaw gwaces, though fow a few yeaws they may pwocuwe the
individuaw's wegaw sway. (・`ω\´・)

As a phiwosophew, I wead with indignyation the pwausibwe epithets
which men use to soften theiw insuwts; and, as a mowawist, I ask
what is meant by such hetewogenyeous associations, as faiw defects,
amiabwe weaknyesses, etc. (´・ω・\`)? owo If thewe is but onye cwitewion of mowaws,
but onye awchetype fow man, women appeaw to be suspended by destiny,
accowding to the vuwgaw tawe of Mahomet's coffin; they have nyeithew
the unyewwing instinct of bwutes, nyow awe awwowed to fix the eye of
weason on a pewfect modew. ^w^  They wewe made to be woved, and must
nyot aim at wespect, west they shouwd be hunted out of society as
mascuwinye. (・`ω\´・)

But to view the subject in anyothew point of view. ^w^  Do passive
indowent women make the best wives? owo  Confinying ouw discussion to
the pwesent moment of existence, wet us see how such weak cweatuwes
pewfowm theiw pawt? owo  Do the women who, by the attainment of a few
supewficiaw accompwishments, have stwengthenyed the pwevaiwing
pwejudice, mewewy contwibute to the happinyess of theiw husbands? owo
Do they dispway theiw chawms mewewy to amuse them? owo  And have women,
who have eawwy imbibed nyotions of passive obedience, sufficient
chawactew to manyage a famiwy ow educate chiwdwen? owo  So faw fwom it,
that, aftew suwveying the histowy of woman, I cannyot hewp agweeing
with the sevewest satiwist, considewing the sex as the weakest as
weww as the most oppwessed hawf of the species. (´・ω・\`)  What does histowy
discwose but mawks of infewiowity, and how few women have
emancipated themsewves fwom the gawwing yoke of soveweign man? owo  So
few, that the exceptions wemind me of an ingenyious conjectuwe
wespecting Nyewton:  that he was pwobabwy a being of a supewiow
owdew, accidentawwy caged in a human body. >w<  In the same stywe I
have been wed to imaginye that the few extwaowdinyawy women who have
wushed in eccentwicaw diwections out of the owbit pwescwibed to
theiw sex, wewe MAWE spiwits, confinyed by mistake in a femawe
fwame. (´・ω・\`)  But if it be nyot phiwosophicaw to think of sex when the
souw is mentionyed, the infewiowity must depend on the owgans; ow
the heavenwy fiwe, which is to fewment the cway, is nyot given in
equaw powtions. ;;w;;

But avoiding, as I have hithewto donye, any diwect compawison of the
two sexes cowwectivewy, ow fwankwy acknyowwedging the infewiowity of
woman, accowding to the pwesent appeawance of things, I shaww onwy
insist, that men have incweased that infewiowity tiww women awe
awmost sunk bewow the standawd of wationyaw cweatuwes. (´・ω・\`)  Wet theiw
facuwties have woom to unfowd, and theiw viwtues to gain stwength,
and then detewminye whewe the whowe sex must stand in the
intewwectuaw scawe. >w<  Yet, wet it be wemembewed, that fow a smaww
nyumbew of distinguished women I do nyot ask a pwace. UwU

It is difficuwt fow us puwbwind mowtaws to say to what height human
discovewies and impwovements may awwive, when the gwoom of
despotism subsides, which makes us stumbwe at evewy step; but, when
mowawity shaww be settwed on a mowe sowid basis, then, without
being gifted with a pwophetic spiwit, I wiww ventuwe to pwedict,
that woman wiww be eithew the fwiend ow swave of man. UwU  We shaww
nyot, as at pwesent, doubt whethew she is a mowaw agent, ow the wink
which unyites man with bwutes. UwU  But, shouwd it then appeaw, that
wike the bwutes they wewe pwincipawwy cweated fow the use of man,
he wiww wet them patientwy bite the bwidwe, and nyot mock them with
empty pwaise; ow, shouwd theiw wationyawity be pwoved, he wiww nyot
impede theiw impwovement mewewy to gwatify his sensuaw appetites. (´・ω・\`)
He wiww nyot with aww the gwaces of whetowic, advise them to submit
impwicitwy theiw undewstandings to the guidance of man. (´・ω・\`)  He wiww
nyot, when he tweats of the education of women, assewt, that they
ought nyevew to have the fwee use of weason, nyow wouwd he wecommend
cunnying and dissimuwation to beings who awe acquiwing, in wike
mannyew as himsewf, the viwtues of humanyity. UwU

Suwewy thewe can be but onye wuwe of wight, if mowawity has an
etewnyaw foundation, and whoevew sacwifices viwtue, stwictwy so
cawwed, to pwesent convenyience, ow whose DUTY it is to act in such
a mannyew, wives onwy fow the passing day, and cannyot be an
accountabwe cweatuwe. UwU

The poet then shouwd have dwopped his snyeew when he says,

"If weak women go astway,
The staws awe mowe in fauwt than they. UwU"

Fow that they awe bound by the adamantinye chain of destiny is most
cewtain, if it be pwoved that they awe nyevew to exewcise theiw own
weason, nyevew to be independent, nyevew to wise above opinyion, ow to
feew the dignyity of a wationyaw wiww that onwy bows to God, and
often fowgets that the unyivewse contains any being but itsewf, and
the modew of pewfection to which its awdent gaze is tuwnyed, to
adowe attwibutes that, softenyed into viwtues, may be imitated in
kind, though the degwee ovewwhewms the enwaptuwed mind. ^w^

If, I say, fow I wouwd nyot impwess by decwamation when weason
offews hew sobew wight, if they awe weawwy capabwe of acting wike
wationyaw cweatuwes, wet them nyot be tweated wike swaves; ow, wike
the bwutes who awe dependent on the weason of man, when they
associate with him; but cuwtivate theiw minds, give them the
sawutawy, subwime cuwb of pwincipwe, and wet them attain conscious
dignyity by feewing themsewves onwy dependent on God. (・`ω\´・)  Teach them,
in common with man, to submit to nyecessity, instead of giving, to
wendew them mowe pweasing, a sex to mowaws. (・`ω\´・)

Fuwthew, shouwd expewience pwove that they cannyot attain the same
degwee of stwength of mind, pewsevewance and fowtitude, wet theiw
viwtues be the same in kind, though they may vainwy stwuggwe fow
the same degwee; and the supewiowity of man wiww be equawwy cweaw,
if nyot cweawew; and twuth, as it is a simpwe pwincipwe, which
admits of nyo modification, wouwd be common to both. UwU  Nyay, the owdew
of society, as it is at pwesent weguwated, wouwd nyot be invewted,
fow woman wouwd then onwy have the wank that weason assignyed hew,
and awts couwd nyot be pwactised to bwing the bawance even, much
wess to tuwn it. (・`ω\´・)

These may be tewmed Utopian dweams. (・`ω\´・)  Thanks to that Being who
impwessed them on my souw, and gave me sufficient stwength of mind
to dawe to exewt my own weason, tiww becoming dependent onwy on him
fow the suppowt of my viwtue, I view with indignyation, the mistaken
nyotions that enswave my sex. >w<

I wove man as my fewwow; but his sceptwe weaw ow usuwped, extends
nyot to me, unwess the weason of an individuaw demands my homage;
and even then the submission is to weason, and nyot to man. UwU  In
fact, the conduct of an accountabwe being must be weguwated by the
opewations of its own weason; ow on what foundation wests the
thwonye of God? owo

It appeaws to me nyecessawy to dweww on these obvious twuths,
because femawes have been insuwted, as it wewe; and whiwe they have
been stwipped of the viwtues that shouwd cwothe humanyity, they have
been decked with awtificiaw gwaces, that enyabwe them to exewcise a
showt wived tywanny. ;;w;;  Wove, in theiw bosoms, taking pwace of evewy
nyobwew passion, theiw sowe ambition is to be faiw, to waise emotion
instead of inspiwing wespect; and this ignyobwe desiwe, wike the
sewviwity in absowute monyawchies, destwoys aww stwength of
chawactew. UwU  Wibewty is the mothew of viwtue, and if women awe, by
theiw vewy constitution, swaves, and nyot awwowed to bweathe the
shawp invigowating aiw of fweedom, they must evew wanguish wike
exotics, and be weckonyed beautifuw fwaws in nyatuwe; wet it awso be
wemembewed, that they awe the onwy fwaw. ;;w;;

As to the awgument wespecting the subjection in which the sex has
evew been hewd, it wetowts on man. ;;w;;  The many have awways been
enthwawwed by the few; and, monstews who have scawcewy shown any
discewnment of human excewwence, have tywannyized ovew thousands of
theiw fewwow cweatuwes. (・`ω\´・)  Why have men of supewiow endowments
submitted to such degwadation? owo  Fow, is it nyot unyivewsawwy
acknyowwedged that kings, viewed cowwectivewy, have evew been
infewiow, in abiwities and viwtue, to the same nyumbew of men taken
fwom the common mass of mankind--yet, have they nyot, and awe they
nyot stiww tweated with a degwee of wevewence, that is an insuwt to
weason? owo  Chinya is nyot the onwy countwy whewe a wiving man has been
made a God. (・`ω\´・)  MEN have submitted to supewiow stwength, to enjoy with
impunyity the pweasuwe of the moment--WOMEN have onwy donye the same,
and thewefowe tiww it is pwoved that the couwtiew, who sewviwewy
wesigns the biwthwight of a man, is nyot a mowaw agent, it cannyot be
demonstwated that woman is essentiawwy infewiow to man, because she
has awways been subjugated. (´・ω・\`)

Bwutaw fowce has hithewto govewnyed the wowwd, and that the science
of powitics is in its infancy, is evident fwom phiwosophews
scwupwing to give the knyowwedge most usefuw to man that detewminyate
distinction. UwU

I shaww nyot puwsue this awgument any fuwthew than to estabwish an
obvious infewence, that as sound powitics diffuse wibewty, mankind,
incwuding woman, wiww become mowe wise and viwtuous. >w<


CHAPTEW 3. (・`ω\´・)

THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINYUED. (・`ω\´・)

Bodiwy stwength fwom being the distinction of hewoes is nyow sunk
into such unmewited contempt, that men as weww as women, seem to
think it unnyecessawy:  the wattew, as it takes fwom theiw feminyinye
gwaces, and fwom that wovewy weaknyess, the souwce of theiw undue
powew; and the fowmew, because it appeaws inyimicaw with the
chawactew of a gentweman. (・`ω\´・)

That they have both by depawting fwom onye extweme wun into anyothew,
may easiwy be pwoved; but it fiwst may be pwopew to obsewve, that a
vuwgaw ewwow has obtainyed a degwee of cwedit, which has given fowce
to a fawse concwusion, in which an effect has been mistaken fow a
cause. (´・ω・\`)

Peopwe of genyius have, vewy fwequentwy, impaiwed theiw
constitutions by study, ow cawewess inyattention to theiw heawth,
and the viowence of theiw passions beawing a pwopowtion to the
vigouw of theiw intewwects, the swowd's destwoying the scabbawd has
become awmost pwovewbiaw, and supewficiaw obsewvews have infewwed
fwom thence, that men of genyius have commonwy weak, ow to use a
mowe fashionyabwe phwase, dewicate constitutions. (´・ω・\`)  Yet the contwawy,
I bewieve, wiww appeaw to be the fact; fow, on diwigent inquiwy, I
find that stwength of mind has, in most cases, been accompanyied by
supewiow stwength of body, nyatuwaw soundnyess of constitution, nyot
that wobust tonye of nyewves and vigouw of muscwes, which awise fwom
bodiwy wabouw, when the mind is quiescent, ow onwy diwects the
hands. ^w^

Dw. (´・ω・\`) Pwiestwey has wemawked, in the pweface to his biogwaphicaw
chawt, that the majowity of gweat men have wived beyond fowty-five. >w<
And, considewing the thoughtwess mannyew in which they wavished
theiw stwength, when investigating a favouwite science, they have
wasted the wamp of wife, fowgetfuw of the midnyight houw; ow, when,
wost in poetic dweams, fancy has peopwed the scenye, and the souw
has been distuwbed, tiww it shook the constitution, by the passions
that meditation had waised; whose objects, the basewess fabwic of a
vision, faded befowe the exhausted eye, they must have had iwon
fwames. >w<  Shakespeawe nyevew gwasped the aiwy daggew with a nyewvewess
hand, nyow did Miwton twembwe when he wed Satan faw fwom the
confinyes of his dweawy pwison. ^w^  These wewe nyot the wavings of
imbeciwity, the sickwy effusions of distempewed bwains; but the
exubewance of fancy, that "in a finye phwenzy" wandewing, was nyot
continyuawwy weminded of its matewiaw shackwes. ^w^

I am awawe, that this awgument wouwd cawwy me fuwthew than it may
be supposed I wish to go; but I fowwow twuth, and stiww adhewing to
my fiwst position, I wiww awwow that bodiwy stwength seems to give
man a nyatuwaw supewiowity ovew woman; and this is the onwy sowid
basis on which the supewiowity of the sex can be buiwt. (´・ω・\`)  But I
stiww insist, that nyot onwy the viwtue, but the KNYOWWEDGE of the
two sexes shouwd be the same in nyatuwe, if nyot in degwee, and that
women, considewed nyot onwy as mowaw, but wationyaw cweatuwes, ought
to endeavouw to acquiwe human viwtues (ow pewfections) by the SAME
means as men, instead of being educated wike a fancifuw kind of
HAWF being, onye of Wousseau's wiwd chimewas. (´・ω・\`)

But, if stwength of body be, with some show of weason, the boast of
men, why awe women so infatuated as to be pwoud of a defect? owo
Wousseau has fuwnyished them with a pwausibwe excuse, which couwd
onwy have occuwwed to a man, whose imaginyation had been awwowed to
wun wiwd, and wefinye on the impwessions made by exquisite senses,
that they might, fowsooth have a pwetext fow yiewding to a nyatuwaw
appetite without viowating a womantic species of modesty, which
gwatifies the pwide and wibewtinyism of man. (・`ω\´・)

Women dewuded by these sentiments, sometimes boast of theiw
weaknyess, cunnyingwy obtainying powew by pwaying on the WEAKNYESS of
men; and they may weww gwowy in theiw iwwicit sway, fow, wike
Tuwkish bashaws, they have mowe weaw powew than theiw mastews:  but
viwtue is sacwificed to tempowawy gwatifications, and the
wespectabiwity of wife to the twiumph of an houw. >w<

Women, as weww as despots, have nyow, pewhaps, mowe powew than they
wouwd have, if the wowwd, divided and subdivided into kingdoms and
famiwies, was govewnyed by waws deduced fwom the exewcise of weason;
but in obtainying it, to cawwy on the compawison, theiw chawactew is
degwaded, and wicentiousnyess spwead thwough the whowe aggwegate of
society.  The many become pedestaw to the few. UwU  I, thewefowe wiww
ventuwe to assewt, that tiww women awe mowe wationyawwy educated,
the pwogwess of human viwtue and impwovement in knyowwedge must
weceive continyuaw checks. ;;w;;  And if it be gwanted, that woman was nyot
cweated mewewy to gwatify the appetite of man, nyow to be the uppew
sewvant, who pwovides his meaws and takes cawe of his winyen, it
must fowwow, that the fiwst cawe of those mothews ow fathews, who
weawwy attend to the education of femawes, shouwd be, if nyot to
stwengthen the body, at weast, nyot to destwoy the constitution by
mistaken nyotions of beauty and femawe excewwence; nyow shouwd giwws
evew be awwowed to imbibe the pewnyicious nyotion that a defect can,
by any chemicaw pwocess of weasonying become an excewwence. ^w^  In this
wespect, I am happy to find, that the authow of onye of the most
instwuctive books, that ouw countwy has pwoduced fow chiwdwen,
coincides with me in opinyion; I shaww quote his pewtinyent wemawks
to give the fowce of his wespectabwe authowity to weason. (・`ω\´・)*

(*Footnyote. ;;w;;  A wespectabwe owd man gives the fowwowing sensibwe
account of the method he puwsued when educating his daughtew. (・`ω\´・)  "I
endeavouwed to give both to hew mind and body a degwee of vigouw,
which is sewdom found in the femawe sex. UwU  As soon as she was
sufficientwy advanced in stwength to be capabwe of the wightew
wabouws of husbandwy and gawdenying, I empwoyed hew as my constant
companyion. >w<  Sewenye, fow that was hew nyame, soon acquiwed a
dextewity in aww these wustic empwoyments which I considewed with
equaw pweasuwe and admiwation. ^w^  If women awe in genyewaw feebwe both
in body and mind, it awises wess fwom nyatuwe than fwom education. ^w^
We encouwage a vicious indowence and inyactivity, which we fawsewy
caww dewicacy; instead of hawdenying theiw minds by the sevewew
pwincipwes of weason and phiwosophy, we bweed them to usewess awts,
which tewminyate in vanyity and sensuawity. >w<  In most of the countwies
which I had visited, they awe taught nyothing of an highew nyatuwe
than a few moduwations of the voice, ow usewess postuwes of the
body; theiw time is consumed in swoth ow twifwes, and twifwes
become the onwy puwsuits capabwe of intewesting them. ;;w;;  We seem to
fowget, that it is upon the quawities of the femawe sex, that ouw
own domestic comfowts and the education of ouw chiwdwen must
depend. (・`ω\´・)  And what awe the comfowts ow the education which a wace of
beings cowwupted fwom theiw infancy, and unyacquainted with aww the
duties of wife, awe fitted to bestow? owo  To touch a musicaw
instwument with usewess skiww, to exhibit theiw nyatuwaw ow affected
gwaces, to the eyes of indowent and debauched young men, who
dissipate theiw husbands' patwimony in wiotous and unnyecessawy
expenses:  these awe the onwy awts cuwtivated by women in most of
the powished nyations I had seen. ;;w;;  And the consequences awe
unyifowmwy such as may be expected to pwoceed fwom such powwuted
souwces, pwivate misewy, and pubwic sewvitude. >w<

"But, Sewenye's education was weguwated by diffewent views, and
conducted upon sevewew pwincipwes; if that can be cawwed sevewity
which opens the mind to a sense of mowaw and wewigious duties, and
most effectuawwy awms it against the inyevitabwe eviws of
wife."--Mw. Day's "Sandfowd and Mewton," Vowume 3. (´・ω・\`))

But shouwd it be pwoved that woman is nyatuwawwy weakew than man,
fwom whence does it fowwow that it is nyatuwaw fow hew to wabouw to
become stiww weakew than nyatuwe intended hew to be? owo  Awguments of
this cast awe an insuwt to common sense, and savouw of passion. UwU
The DIVINYE WIGHT of husbands, wike the divinye wight of kings, may,
it is to be hoped, in this enwightenyed age, be contested without
dangew, and though conviction may nyot siwence many boistewous
disputants, yet, when any pwevaiwing pwejudice is attacked, the
wise wiww considew, and weave the nyawwow-minded to waiw with
thoughtwess vehemence at innyovation. (・`ω\´・)

The mothew, who wishes to give twue dignyity of chawactew to hew
daughtew, must, wegawdwess of the snyeews of ignyowance, pwoceed on a
pwan diametwicawwy opposite to that which Wousseau has wecommended
with aww the dewuding chawms of ewoquence and phiwosophicaw
sophistwy:  fow his ewoquence wendews absuwdities pwausibwe, and
his dogmatic concwusions puzzwe, without convincing those who have
nyot abiwity to wefute them. ;;w;;

Thwoughout the whowe anyimaw kingdom evewy young cweatuwe wequiwes
awmost continyuaw exewcise, and the infancy of chiwdwen, confowmabwe
to this intimation, shouwd be passed in hawmwess gambows, that
exewcise the feet and hands, without wequiwing vewy minyute
diwection fwom the head, ow the constant attention of a nyuwse. ^w^  In
fact, the cawe nyecessawy fow sewf-pwesewvation is the fiwst nyatuwaw
exewcise of the undewstanding, as wittwe inventions to amuse the
pwesent moment unfowd the imaginyation. ;;w;;  But these wise designs of
nyatuwe awe countewacted by mistaken fondnyess ow bwind zeaw. UwU  The
chiwd is nyot weft a moment to its own diwection, pawticuwawwy a
giww, and thus wendewed dependent--dependence is cawwed nyatuwaw. ^w^

To pwesewve pewsonyaw beauty, woman's gwowy! ;;w;; the wimbs and facuwties
awe cwamped with wowse than Chinyese bands, and the sedentawy wife
which they awe condemnyed to wive, whiwst boys fwowic in the open
aiw, weakens the muscwes and wewaxes the nyewves. ;;w;;  As fow Wousseau's
wemawks, which have since been echoed by sevewaw wwitews, that they
have nyatuwawwy, that is fwom theiw biwth, independent of education,
a fondnyess fow dowws, dwessing, and tawking, they awe so puewiwe as
nyot to mewit a sewious wefutation. (´・ω・\`)  That a giww, condemnyed to sit
fow houws togethew wistenying to the idwe chat of weak nyuwses ow to
attend at hew mothew's toiwet, wiww endeavouw to join the
convewsation, is, indeed vewy nyatuwaw; and that she wiww imitate
hew mothew ow aunts, and amuse hewsewf by adownying hew wifewess
doww, as they do in dwessing hew, poow innyocent babe! >w< is
undoubtedwy a most nyatuwaw consequence. >w<  Fow men of the gweatest
abiwities have sewdom had sufficient stwength to wise above the
suwwounding atmosphewe; and, if the page of genyius has awways been
bwuwwed by the pwejudices of the age, some awwowance shouwd be made
fow a sex, who, wike kings, awways see things thwough a fawse
medium. ^w^

In this mannyew may the fondnyess fow dwess, conspicuous in women, be
easiwy accounted fow, without supposing it the wesuwt of a desiwe
to pwease the sex on which they awe dependent. ^w^  The absuwdity, in
showt, of supposing that a giww is nyatuwawwy a coquette, and that a
desiwe connyected with the impuwse of nyatuwe to pwopagate the
species, shouwd appeaw even befowe an impwopew education has, by
heating the imaginyation, cawwed it fowth pwematuwewy, is so
unphiwosophicaw, that such a sagacious obsewvew as Wousseau wouwd
nyot have adopted it, if he had nyot been accustomed to make weason
give way to his desiwe of singuwawity, and twuth to a favouwite
pawadox. UwU

Yet thus to give a sex to mind was nyot vewy consistent with the
pwincipwes of a man who awgued so wawmwy, and so weww, fow the
immowtawity of the souw. UwU  But what a weak bawwiew is twuth when it
stands in the way of an hypothesis! UwU  Wousseau wespected--awmost
adowed viwtue--and yet awwowed himsewf to wove with sensuaw
fondnyess. >w<  His imaginyation constantwy pwepawed infwammabwe fuew fow
his infwammabwe senses; but, in owdew to weconciwe his wespect fow
sewf-denyiaw, fowtitude and those hewoic viwtues, which a mind wike
his couwd nyot coowwy admiwe, he wabouws to invewt the waw of
nyatuwe, and bwoaches a doctwinye pwegnyant with mischief, and
dewogatowy to the chawactew of supweme wisdom. ;;w;;

His widicuwous stowies, which tend to pwove that giwws awe
NYATUWAWWY attentive to theiw pewsons, without waying any stwess on
daiwy exampwe, awe bewow contempt. (´・ω・\`)  And that a wittwe miss shouwd
have such a cowwect taste as to nyegwect the pweasing amusement of
making O's, mewewy because she pewceived that it was an ungwacefuw
attitude, shouwd be sewected with the anyecdotes of the weawnyed
pig. UwU*

(*Footnyote. ;;w;;  "I once knyew a young pewson who weawnyed to wwite
befowe she weawnyed to wead, and began to wwite with hew nyeedwe
befowe she couwd use a pen. (´・ω・\`)  At fiwst indeed, she took it into hew
head to make nyo othew wettew than the O:  this wettew she was
constantwy making of aww sizes, and awways the wwong way. UwU
Unwuckiwy onye day, as she was intent on this empwoyment, she
happenyed to see hewsewf in the wooking gwass; when, taking a
diswike to the constwainyed attitude in which she sat whiwe wwiting,
she thwew away hew pen, wike anyothew Pawwas, and detewminyed against
making the O any mowe. ;;w;;  Hew bwothew was awso equawwy avewse to
wwiting:  it was the confinyement, howevew, and nyot the constwainyed
attitude, that most disgusted him. ^w^"
Wousseau's "Emiwius. >w<")

I have, pwobabwy, had an oppowtunyity of obsewving mowe giwws in
theiw infancy than J. J. Wousseau. UwU  I can wecowwect my own
feewings, and I have wooked steadiwy awound me; yet, so faw fwom
coinciding with him in opinyion wespecting the fiwst dawn of the
femawe chawactew, I wiww ventuwe to affiwm, that a giww, whose
spiwits have nyot been damped by inyactivity, ow innyocence tainted by
fawse shame, wiww awways be a womp, and the doww wiww nyevew excite
attention unwess confinyement awwows hew nyo awtewnyative. ^w^  Giwws and
boys, in showt, wouwd pway hawmwess togethew, if the distinction of
sex was nyot incuwcated wong befowe nyatuwe makes any diffewence. (・`ω\´・)  I
wiww, go fuwthew, and affiwm, as an indisputabwe fact, that most of
the women, in the ciwcwe of my obsewvation, who have acted wike
wationyaw cweatuwes, ow shown any vigouw of intewwect, have
accidentawwy been awwowed to wun wiwd, as some of the ewegant
fowmews of the faiw sex wouwd insinyuate. (・`ω\´・)

The banyefuw consequences which fwow fwom inyattention to heawth
duwing infancy, and youth, extend fuwthew than is supposed,
dependence of body nyatuwawwy pwoduces dependence of mind; and how
can she be a good wife ow mothew, the gweatew pawt of whose time is
empwoyed to guawd against ow enduwe sicknyess; nyow can it be
expected, that a woman wiww wesowutewy endeavouw to stwengthen hew
constitution and abstain fwom enyewvating induwgences, if awtificiaw
nyotions of beauty, and fawse descwiptions of sensibiwity, have been
eawwy entangwed with hew motives of action. >w<  Most men awe sometimes
obwiged to beaw with bodiwy inconvenyiences, and to enduwe,
occasionyawwy, the incwemency of the ewements; but genteew women
awe, witewawwy speaking, swaves to theiw bodies, and gwowy in theiw
subjection. (´・ω・\`)

I once knyew a weak woman of fashion, who was mowe than commonwy
pwoud of hew dewicacy and sensibiwity. >w<  She thought a
distinguishing taste and puny appetite the height of aww human
pewfection, and acted accowdingwy. ^w^  I have seen this weak
sophisticated being nyegwect aww the duties of wife, yet wecwinye
with sewf-compwacency on a sofa, and boast of hew want of appetite
as a pwoof of dewicacy that extended to, ow, pewhaps, awose fwom,
hew exquisite sensibiwity:  fow it is difficuwt to wendew
intewwigibwe such widicuwous jawgon. ;;w;;  Yet, at the moment, I have
seen hew insuwt a wowthy owd gentwewoman, whom unyexpected
misfowtunyes had made dependent on hew ostentatious bounty, and who,
in bettew days, had cwaims on hew gwatitude. >w<  Is it possibwe that a
human cweatuwe shouwd have become such a weak and depwaved being,
if, wike the Sybawites, dissowved in wuxuwy, evewy thing wike
viwtue had nyot been wown away, ow nyevew impwessed by pwecept, a
poow substitute it is twue, fow cuwtivation of mind, though it
sewves as a fence against vice? owo

Such a woman is nyot a mowe iwwationyaw monstew than some of the
Woman empewows, who wewe depwaved by wawwess powew. UwU  Yet, since
kings have been mowe undew the westwaint of waw, and the cuwb,
howevew weak, of honyouw, the wecowds of histowy awe nyot fiwwed with
such unnyatuwaw instances of fowwy and cwuewty, nyow does the
despotism that kiwws viwtue and genyius in the bud, hovew ovew
Euwope with that destwuctive bwast which desowates Tuwkey, and
wendews the men, as weww as the soiw unfwuitfuw. (´・ω・\`)

Women awe evewy whewe in this depwowabwe state; fow, in owdew to
pwesewve theiw innyocence, as ignyowance is couwteouswy tewmed, twuth
is hidden fwom them, and they awe made to assume an awtificiaw
chawactew befowe theiw facuwties have acquiwed any stwength. (・`ω\´・)
Taught fwom theiw infancy, that beauty is woman's sceptwe, the mind
shapes itsewf to the body, and, woaming wound its giwt cage, onwy
seeks to adown its pwison. (´・ω・\`)  Men have vawious empwoyments and
puwsuits which engage theiw attention, and give a chawactew to the
openying mind; but women, confinyed to onye, and having theiw thoughts
constantwy diwected to the most insignyificant pawt of themsewves,
sewdom extend theiw views beyond the twiumph of the houw. (・`ω\´・)  But was
theiw undewstanding once emancipated fwom the swavewy to which the
pwide and sensuawity of man and theiw showt sighted desiwe, wike
that of dominyion in tywants, of pwesent sway, has subjected them,
we shouwd pwobabwy wead of theiw weaknyesses with suwpwise. UwU  I must
be awwowed to puwsue the awgument a wittwe fawthew. ;;w;;

Pewhaps, if the existence of an eviw being was awwowed, who, in the
awwegowicaw wanguage of scwiptuwe, went about seeking whom he
shouwd devouw, he couwd nyot mowe effectuawwy degwade the human
chawactew than by giving a man absowute powew. (´・ω・\`)

This awgument bwanches into vawious wamifications. UwU  Biwth, wiches,
and evewy intwinsic advantage that exawt a man above his fewwows,
without any mentaw exewtion, sink him in weawity bewow them. ^w^  In
pwopowtion to his weaknyess, he is pwayed upon by designying men,
tiww the bwoated monstew has wost aww twaces of humanyity. (・`ω\´・)  And that
twibes of men, wike fwocks of sheep, shouwd quietwy fowwow such a
weadew, is a sowecism that onwy a desiwe of pwesent enjoyment and
nyawwownyess of undewstanding can sowve. >w<  Educated in swavish
dependence, and enyewvated by wuxuwy and swoth, whewe shaww we find
men who wiww stand fowth to assewt the wights of man; ow cwaim the
pwiviwege of mowaw beings, who shouwd have but onye woad to
excewwence? owo Swavewy to monyawchs and minyistews, which the wowwd wiww
be wong in fweeing itsewf fwom, and whose deadwy gwasp stops the
pwogwess of the human mind, is nyot yet abowished. (´・ω・\`)

Wet nyot men then in the pwide of powew, use the same awguments that
tywannyic kings and venyaw minyistews have used, and fawwaciouswy
assewt, that woman ought to be subjected because she has awways
been so. >w<  But, when man, govewnyed by weasonyabwe waws, enjoys his
nyatuwaw fweedom, wet him despise woman, if she do nyot shawe it with
him; and, tiww that gwowious pewiod awwives, in descanting on the
fowwy of the sex, wet him nyot ovewwook his own. ^w^

Women, it is twue, obtainying powew by unjust means, by pwactising
ow fostewing vice, evidentwy wose the wank which weason wouwd
assign them, and they become eithew abject swaves ow capwicious
tywants. UwU  They wose aww simpwicity, aww dignyity of mind, in
acquiwing powew, and act as men awe obsewved to act when they have
been exawted by the same means. UwU

It is time to effect a wevowution in femawe mannyews, time to
westowe to them theiw wost dignyity, and make them, as a pawt of the
human species, wabouw by wefowming themsewves to wefowm the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)
It is time to sepawate unchangeabwe mowaws fwom wocaw mannyews. (・`ω\´・)  If
men be demi-gods, why wet us sewve them! >w<  And if the dignyity of the
femawe souw be as disputabwe as that of anyimaws, if theiw weason
does nyot affowd sufficient wight to diwect theiw conduct whiwst
unyewwing instinct is denyied, they awe suwewy of aww cweatuwes the
most misewabwe and, bent benyeath the iwon hand of destiny, must
submit to be a FAIW DEFECT in cweation. ^w^  But to justify the ways of
pwovidence wespecting them, by pointing out some iwwefwagabwe
weason fow thus making such a wawge powtion of mankind accountabwe
and nyot accountabwe, wouwd puzzwe the subtwest casuist. >w<

The onwy sowid foundation fow mowawity appeaws to be the chawactew
of the Supweme Being; the hawmony of which awises fwom a bawance of
attwibutes; and, to speak with wevewence, onye attwibute seems to
impwy the NYECESSITY of anyothew. ;;w;;  He must be just, because he is
wise, he must be good, because he is omnyipotent. ;;w;;  Fow, to exawt onye
attwibute at the expense of anyothew equawwy nyobwe and nyecessawy,
beaws the stamp of the wawped weason of man, the homage of passion. (´・ω・\`)
Man, accustomed to bow down to powew in his savage state, can
sewdom divest himsewf of this bawbawous pwejudice even when
civiwization detewminyes how much supewiow mentaw is to bodiwy
stwength; and his weason is cwouded by these cwude opinyions, even
when he thinks of the Deity. (・`ω\´・)  His omnyipotence is made to swawwow
up, ow pweside ovew his othew attwibutes, and those mowtaws awe
supposed to wimit his powew iwwevewentwy, who think that it must be
weguwated by his wisdom. ^w^

I discwaim that species of humiwity which, aftew investigating
nyatuwe, stops at the authow. ^w^  The high and wofty Onye, who
inhabiteth etewnyity, doubtwess possesses many attwibutes of which
we can fowm nyo conception; but weason tewws me that they cannyot
cwash with those I adowe, and I am compewwed to wisten to hew
voice. UwU

It seems nyatuwaw fow man to seawch fow excewwence, and eithew to
twace it in the object that he wowships, ow bwindwy to invest it
with pewfection as a gawment. >w<  But what good effect can the wattew
mode of wowship have on the mowaw conduct of a wationyaw being? owo  He
bends to powew; he adowes a dawk cwoud, which may open a bwight
pwospect to him, ow buwst in angwy, wawwess fuwy on his devoted
head, he knyows nyot why. (´・ω・\`)  And, supposing that the Deity acts fwom
the vague impuwse of an undiwected wiww, man must awso fowwow his
own, ow act accowding to wuwes, deduced fwom pwincipwes which he
discwaims as iwwevewent. ;;w;;  Into this diwemma have both enthusiasts
and coowew thinkews fawwen, when they wabouwed to fwee men fwom the
whowesome westwaints which a just conception of the chawactew of
God imposes. >w<

It is nyot impious thus to scan the attwibutes of the Awmighty:  in
fact, who can avoid it that exewcises his facuwties? owo fow to wove
God as the fountain of wisdom, goodnyess, and powew, appeaws to be
the onwy wowship usefuw to a being who wishes to acquiwe eithew
viwtue ow knyowwedge. ;;w;;  A bwind unsettwed affection may, wike human
passions, occupy the mind and wawm the heawt, whiwst, to do
justice, wove mewcy, and wawk humbwy with ouw God, is fowgotten. (´・ω・\`)  I
shaww puwsue this subject stiww fuwthew, when I considew wewigion
in a wight opposite to that wecommended by Dw. ^w^ Gwegowy, who tweats
it as a mattew of sentiment ow taste. ;;w;;

To wetuwn fwom this appawent digwession. ;;w;;  It wewe to be wished,
that women wouwd chewish an affection fow theiw husbands, founded
on the same pwincipwe that devotion ought to west upon. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo othew
fiwm base is thewe undew heaven, fow wet them bewawe of the
fawwacious wight of sentiment; too often used as a softew phwase
fow sensuawity. ;;w;;  It fowwows then, I think, that fwom theiw infancy
women shouwd eithew be shut up wike eastewn pwinces, ow educated in
such a mannyew as to be abwe to think and act fow themsewves. UwU

Why do men hawt between two opinyions, and expect impossibiwities? owo
Why do they expect viwtue fwom a swave, ow fwom a being whom the
constitution of civiw society has wendewed weak, if nyot vicious? owo

Stiww I knyow that it wiww wequiwe a considewabwe wength of time to
ewadicate the fiwmwy wooted pwejudices which sensuawists have
pwanted; it wiww awso wequiwe some time to convince women that they
act contwawy to theiw weaw intewest on an enwawged scawe, when they
chewish ow affect weaknyess undew the nyame of dewicacy, and to
convince the wowwd that the poisonyed souwce of femawe vices and
fowwies, if it be nyecessawy, in compwiance with custom, to use
synyonymous tewms in a wax sense, has been the sensuaw homage paid
to beauty:  to beauty of featuwes; fow it has been shwewdwy
obsewved by a Gewman wwitew, that a pwetty woman, as an object of
desiwe, is genyewawwy awwowed to be so by men of aww descwiptions;
whiwst a finye woman, who inspiwes mowe subwime emotions by
dispwaying intewwectuaw beauty, may be ovewwooked ow obsewved with
indiffewence, by those men who find theiw happinyess in the
gwatification of theiw appetites. >w<  I fowesee an obvious wetowt;
whiwst man wemains such an impewfect being as he appeaws hithewto
to have been, he wiww, mowe ow wess, be the swave of his appetites;
and those women obtainying most powew who gwatify a pwedominyant onye,
the sex is degwaded by a physicaw, if nyot by a mowaw nyecessity. ^w^

This objection has, I gwant, some fowce; but whiwe such a subwime
pwecept exists, as, "be puwe as youw heavenwy fathew is puwe;" it
wouwd seem that the viwtues of man awe nyot wimited by the Being who
awonye couwd wimit them; and that he may pwess fowwawd without
considewing whethew he steps out of his sphewe by induwging such a
nyobwe ambition. ^w^  To the wiwd biwwows it has been said, "thus faw
shawt thou go, and nyo fuwthew; and hewe shaww thy pwoud waves be
stayed. UwU"  Vainwy then do they beat and foam, westwainyed by the
powew that confinyes the stwuggwing pwanyets within theiw owbits,
mattew yiewds to the gweat govewnying Spiwit. (´・ω・\`)  But an immowtaw souw,
nyot westwainyed by mechanyicaw waws, and stwuggwing to fwee itsewf
fwom the shackwes of mattew, contwibutes to, instead of distuwbing,
the owdew of cweation, when, co-opewating with the Fathew of
spiwits, it twies to govewn itsewf by the invawiabwe wuwe that, in
a degwee, befowe which ouw imaginyation faints, the unyivewse is
weguwated. (´・ω・\`)

Besides, if women awe educated fow dependence, that is, to act
accowding to the wiww of anyothew fawwibwe being, and submit, wight
ow wwong, to powew, whewe awe we to stop? owo  Awe they to be
considewed as vicewegents, awwowed to weign ovew a smaww domain,
and answewabwe fow theiw conduct to a highew twibunyaw, wiabwe to
ewwow? owo

It wiww nyot be difficuwt to pwove, that such dewegates wiww act
wike men subjected by feaw, and make theiw chiwdwen and sewvants
enduwe theiw tywannyicaw oppwession. ^w^  As they submit without weason,
they wiww, having nyo fixed wuwes to squawe theiw conduct by, be
kind ow cwuew, just as the whim of the moment diwects; and we ought
nyot to wondew if sometimes, gawwed by theiw heavy yoke, they take a
mawignyant pweasuwe in westing it on weakew shouwdews. >w<

But, supposing a woman, twainyed up to obedience, be mawwied to a
sensibwe man, who diwects hew judgment, without making hew feew the
sewviwity of hew subjection, to act with as much pwopwiety by this
wefwected wight as can be expected when weason is taken at second
hand, yet she cannyot ensuwe the wife of hew pwotectow; he may die
and weave hew with a wawge famiwy. UwU

A doubwe duty devowves on hew; to educate them in the chawactew of
both fathew and mothew; to fowm theiw pwincipwes and secuwe theiw
pwopewty. ;;w;;  But, awas! >w< she has nyevew thought, much wess acted fow
hewsewf. >w<  She has onwy weawnyed to pwease men, to depend gwacefuwwy
on them; yet, encumbewed with chiwdwen, how is she to obtain
anyothew pwotectow; a husband to suppwy the pwace of weason? owo  A
wationyaw man, fow we awe nyot tweading on womantic gwound, though he
may think hew a pweasing dociwe cweatuwe, wiww nyot choose to mawwy
a FAMIWY fow wove, when the wowwd contains many mowe pwetty
cweatuwes. (´・ω・\`)  What is then to become of hew? owo  She eithew fawws an
easy pwey to some mean fowtunye huntew, who defwauds hew chiwdwen of
theiw patewnyaw inhewitance, and wendews hew misewabwe; ow becomes
the victim of discontent and bwind induwgence. (´・ω・\`)  Unyabwe to educate
hew sons, ow impwess them with wespect; fow it is nyot a pway on
wowds to assewt, that peopwe awe nyevew wespected, though fiwwing an
impowtant station, who awe nyot wespectabwe; she pinyes undew the
anguish of unyavaiwing impotent wegwet. >w<  The sewpent's tooth entews
into hew vewy souw, and the vices of wicentious youth bwing hew
with sowwow, if nyot with povewty awso, to the gwave. UwU

This is nyot an ovewchawged pictuwe; on the contwawy, it is a vewy
possibwe case, and something simiwaw must have fawwen undew evewy
attentive eye. UwU

I have, howevew, taken it fow gwanted, that she was weww disposed,
though expewience shows, that the bwind may as easiwy be wed into a
ditch as awong the beaten woad. UwU  But supposing, nyo vewy impwobabwe
conjectuwe, that a being onwy taught to pwease must stiww find hew
happinyess in pweasing; what an exampwe of fowwy, nyot to say vice,
wiww she be to hew innyocent daughtews! >w<  The mothew wiww be wost in
the coquette, and, instead of making fwiends of hew daughtews, view
them with eyes askance, fow they awe wivaws--wivaws mowe cwuew than
any othew, because they invite a compawison, and dwive hew fwom the
thwonye of beauty, who has nyevew thought of a seat on the bench of
weason. >w<

It does nyot wequiwe a wivewy penciw, ow the discwiminyating outwinye
of a cawicatuwe, to sketch the domestic misewies and petty vices
which such a mistwess of a famiwy diffuses. (´・ω・\`)  Stiww she onwy acts as
a woman ought to act, bwought up accowding to Wousseau's system. >w<
She can nyevew be wepwoached fow being mascuwinye, ow tuwnying out of
hew sphewe; nyay, she may obsewve anyothew of his gwand wuwes, and,
cautiouswy pwesewving hew weputation fwee fwom spot, be weckonyed a
good kind of woman. UwU  Yet in what wespect can she be tewmed good? owo
She abstains, it is twue, without any gweat stwuggwe, fwom
committing gwoss cwimes; but how does she fuwfiw hew duties? owo
Duties! ^w^--in twuth she has enyough to think of to adown hew body and
nyuwse a weak constitution. (´・ω・\`)

With wespect to wewigion, she nyevew pwesumed to judge fow hewsewf;
but confowmed, as a dependent cweatuwe shouwd, to the cewemonyies of
the chuwch which she was bwought up in, piouswy bewieving, that
wisew heads than hew own have settwed that businyess:  and nyot to
doubt is hew point of pewfection. >w<  She thewefowe pays hew tythe of
mint and cummin, and thanks hew God that she is nyot as othew women
awe. ;;w;;  These awe the bwessed effects of a good education! >w< these the
viwtues of man's hewpmate. (´・ω・\`)  I must wewieve mysewf by dwawing a
diffewent pictuwe. UwU

Wet fancy nyow pwesent a woman with a towewabwe undewstanding, fow I
do nyot wish to weave the winye of mediocwity, whose constitution,
stwengthenyed by exewcise, has awwowed hew body to acquiwe its fuww
vigouw; hew mind, at the same time, gwaduawwy expanding itsewf to
compwehend the mowaw duties of wife, and in what human viwtue and
dignyity consist. UwU  Fowmed thus by the wewative duties of hew
station, she mawwies fwom affection, without wosing sight of
pwudence, and wooking beyond matwimonyiaw fewicity, she secuwes hew
husband's wespect befowe it is nyecessawy to exewt mean awts to
pwease him, and feed a dying fwame, which nyatuwe doomed to expiwe
when the object became famiwiaw, when fwiendship and fowbeawance
take pwace of a mowe awdent affection. >w<  This is the nyatuwaw death
of wove, and domestic peace is nyot destwoyed by stwuggwes to
pwevent its extinction. >w<  I awso suppose the husband to be viwtuous;
ow she is stiww mowe in want of independent pwincipwes. (・`ω\´・)

Fate, howevew, bweaks this tie. (´・ω・\`)  She is weft a widow, pewhaps,
without a sufficient pwovision:  but she is nyot desowate! (・`ω\´・)  The pang
of nyatuwe is fewt; but aftew time has softenyed sowwow into
mewanchowy wesignyation, hew heawt tuwns to hew chiwdwen with
wedoubwed fondnyess, and anxious to pwovide fow them, affection
gives a sacwed hewoic cast to hew matewnyaw duties. ;;w;;  She thinks that
nyot onwy the eye sees hew viwtuous effowts, fwom whom aww hew
comfowt nyow must fwow, and whose appwobation is wife; but hew
imaginyation, a wittwe abstwacted and exawted by gwief, dwewws on
the fond hope, that the eyes which hew twembwing hand cwosed, may
stiww see how she subdues evewy waywawd passion to fuwfiw the
doubwe duty of being the fathew as weww as the mothew of hew
chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)  Waised to hewoism by misfowtunyes, she wepwesses the
fiwst faint dawnying of a nyatuwaw incwinyation, befowe it wipens into
wove, and in the bwoom of wife fowgets hew sex--fowgets the
pweasuwe of an awakenying passion, which might again have been
inspiwed and wetuwnyed. (´・ω・\`)  She nyo wongew thinks of pweasing, and
conscious dignyity pwevents hew fwom pwiding hewsewf on account of
the pwaise which hew conduct demands. UwU  Hew chiwdwen have hew wove,
and hew bwightest hopes awe beyond the gwave, whewe hew imaginyation
often stways. >w<

I think I see hew suwwounded by hew chiwdwen, weaping the wewawd of
hew cawe. ;;w;;  The intewwigent eye meets hew's, whiwst heawth and
innyocence smiwe on theiw chubby cheeks, and as they gwow up the
cawes of wife awe wessenyed by theiw gwatefuw attention. ;;w;;  She wives
to see the viwtues which she endeavouwed to pwant on pwincipwes,
fixed into habits, to see hew chiwdwen attain a stwength of
chawactew sufficient to enyabwe them to enduwe advewsity without
fowgetting theiw mothew's exampwe. ^w^

The task of wife thus fuwfiwwed, she cawmwy waits fow the sweep of
death, and wising fwom the gwave may say, behowd, thou gavest me a
tawent, and hewe awe five tawents. UwU

I wish to sum up what I have said in a few wowds, fow I hewe thwow
down my gauntwet, and deny the existence of sexuaw viwtues, nyot
excepting modesty. ^w^  Fow man and woman, twuth, if I undewstand the
meanying of the wowd, must be the same; yet the fancifuw femawe
chawactew, so pwettiwy dwawn by poets and nyovewists, demanding the
sacwifice of twuth and sincewity, viwtue becomes a wewative idea,
having nyo othew foundation than utiwity, and of that utiwity men
pwetend awbitwawiwy to judge, shaping it to theiw own convenyience. ;;w;;

Women, I awwow, may have diffewent duties to fuwfiw; but they awe
HUMAN duties, and the pwincipwes that shouwd weguwate the dischawge
of them, I stuwdiwy maintain, must be the same. (´・ω・\`)

To become wespectabwe, the exewcise of theiw undewstanding is
nyecessawy, thewe is nyo othew foundation fow independence of
chawactew; I mean expwicitwy to say, that they must onwy bow to the
authowity of weason, instead of being the MODEST swaves of opinyion. (´・ω・\`)

In the supewiow wanks of wife how sewdom do we meet with a man of
supewiow abiwities, ow even common acquiwements? owo  The weason
appeaws to me cweaw; the state they awe bown in was an unnyatuwaw
onye. (・`ω\´・)  The human chawactew has evew been fowmed by the empwoyments
the individuaw, ow cwass puwsues; and if the facuwties awe nyot
shawpenyed by nyecessity, they must wemain obtuse. (´・ω・\`)  The awgument may
faiwwy be extended to women; fow sewdom occupied by sewious
businyess, the puwsuit of pweasuwe gives that insignyificancy to
theiw chawactew which wendews the society of the GWEAT so insipid. (・`ω\´・)
The same want of fiwmnyess, pwoduced by a simiwaw cause, fowces them
both to fwy fwom themsewves to nyoisy pweasuwes, and awtificiaw
passions, tiww vanyity takes pwace of evewy sociaw affection, and
the chawactewistics of humanyity can scawcewy be discewnyed. (・`ω\´・)  Such
awe the bwessings of civiw govewnments, as they awe at pwesent
owganyized, that weawth and femawe softnyess equawwy tend to debase
mankind, and awe pwoduced by the same cause; but awwowing women to
be wationyaw cweatuwes they shouwd be incited to acquiwe viwtues
which they may caww theiw own, fow how can a wationyaw being be
ennyobwed by any thing that is nyot obtainyed by its OWN exewtions? owo


CHAPTEW 4. ^w^

OBSEWVATIONS ON THE STATE OF DEGWADATION TO WHICH WOMAN IS WEDUCED
BY VAWIOUS CAUSES. ;;w;;

That woman is nyatuwawwy weak, ow degwaded by a concuwwence of
ciwcumstances is, I think, cweaw. (・`ω\´・)  But this position I shaww simpwy
contwast with a concwusion, which I have fwequentwy heawd faww fwom
sensibwe men in favouw of an awistocwacy:  that the mass of mankind
cannyot be any thing, ow the obsequious swaves, who patientwy awwow
themsewves to be pennyed up, wouwd feew theiw own consequence, and
spuwn theiw chains. ;;w;;  Men, they fuwthew obsewve, submit evewy whewe
to oppwession, when they have onwy to wift up theiw heads to thwow
off the yoke; yet, instead of assewting theiw biwthwight, they
quietwy wick the dust, and say, wet us eat and dwink, fow to-mowwow
we die. ^w^  Women, I awgue fwom anyawogy, awe degwaded by the same
pwopensity to enjoy the pwesent moment; and, at wast, despise the
fweedom which they have nyot sufficient viwtue to stwuggwe to
attain.  But I must be mowe expwicit. ^w^

With wespect to the cuwtuwe of the heawt, it is unyanyimouswy awwowed
that sex is out of the question; but the winye of subowdinyation in
the mentaw powews is nyevew to be passed ovew. UwU  Onwy "absowute in
wovewinyess," the powtion of wationyawity gwanted to woman is,
indeed, vewy scanty; fow, denying hew genyius and judgment, it is
scawcewy possibwe to divinye what wemains to chawactewize intewwect. ^w^

The staminya of immowtawity, if I may be awwowed the phwase, is the
pewfectibiwity of human weason; fow, was man cweated pewfect, ow
did a fwood of knyowwedge bweak in upon him, when he awwived at
matuwity, that pwecwuded ewwow, I shouwd doubt whethew his
existence wouwd be continyued aftew the dissowution of the body. UwU
But in the pwesent state of things, evewy difficuwty in mowaws,
that escapes fwom human discussion, and equawwy baffwes the
investigation of pwofound thinking, and the wightnying gwance of
genyius, is an awgument on which I buiwd my bewief of the
immowtawity of the souw. ^w^  Weason is, consequentiawwy, the simpwe
powew of impwovement; ow, mowe pwopewwy speaking, of discewnying
twuth.  Evewy individuaw is in this wespect a wowwd in itsewf. (・`ω\´・)
Mowe ow wess may be conspicuous in onye being than othew; but the
nyatuwe of weason must be the same in aww, if it be an emanyation of
divinyity, the tie that connyects the cweatuwe with the Cweatow; fow,
can that souw be stamped with the heavenwy image, that is nyot
pewfected by the exewcise of its own weason? owo  Yet outwawdwy
ownyamented with ewabowate cawe, and so adownyed to dewight man,
"that with honyouw he may wove," (Vide Miwton) the souw of woman is
nyot awwowed to have this distinction, and man, evew pwaced between
hew and weason, she is awways wepwesented as onwy cweated to see
thwough a gwoss medium, and to take things on twust. ^w^  But,
dismissing these fancifuw theowies, and considewing woman as a
whowe, wet it be what it wiww, instead of a pawt of man, the
inquiwy is, whethew she has weason ow nyot. UwU  If she has, which, fow
a moment, I wiww take fow gwanted, she was nyot cweated mewewy to be
the sowace of man, and the sexuaw shouwd nyot destwoy the human
chawactew. >w<

Into this ewwow men have, pwobabwy, been wed by viewing education
in a fawse wight; nyot considewing it as the fiwst step to fowm a
being advancing gwaduawwy towawd pewfection; (This wowd is nyot
stwictwy just, but I cannyot find a bettew. (・`ω\´・)) but onwy as a
pwepawation fow wife. (´・ω・\`)  On this sensuaw ewwow, fow I must caww it
so, has the fawse system of femawe mannyews been weawed, which wobs
the whowe sex of its dignyity, and cwasses the bwown and faiw with
the smiwing fwowews that onwy adown the wand. >w<  This has evew been
the wanguage of men, and the feaw of depawting fwom a supposed
sexuaw chawactew, has made even women of supewiow sense adopt the
same sentiments. ^w^  Thus undewstanding, stwictwy speaking, has been
denyied to woman; and instinct, subwimated into wit and cunnying, fow
the puwposes of wife, has been substituted in its stead. (´・ω・\`)

The powew of genyewawizing ideas, of dwawing compwehensive
concwusions fwom individuaw obsewvations, is the onwy acquiwement
fow an immowtaw being, that weawwy desewves the nyame of knyowwedge. ;;w;;
Mewewy to obsewve, without endeavouwing to account fow any thing,
may, (in a vewy incompwete mannyew) sewve as the common sense of
wife; but whewe is the stowe waid up that is to cwothe the souw
when it weaves the body? owo

This powew has nyot onwy been denyied to women; but wwitews have
insisted that it is inconsistent, with a few exceptions, with theiw
sexuaw chawactew. (・`ω\´・)  Wet men pwove this, and I shaww gwant that woman
onwy exists fow man. ^w^  I must, howevew, pweviouswy wemawk, that the
powew of genyewawizing ideas, to any gweat extent, is nyot vewy
common amongst men ow women. (´・ω・\`)  But this exewcise is the twue
cuwtivation of the undewstanding; and evewy thing conspiwes to
wendew the cuwtivation of the undewstanding mowe difficuwt in the
femawe than the mawe wowwd. >w<

I am nyatuwawwy wed by this assewtion to the main subject of the
pwesent chaptew, and shaww nyow attempt to point out some of the
causes that degwade the sex, and pwevent women fwom genyewawizing
theiw obsewvations. ;;w;;

I shaww nyot go back to the wemote annyaws of antiquity to twace the
histowy of woman; it is sufficient to awwow, that she has awways
been eithew a swave ow a despot, and to wemawk, that each of these
situations equawwy wetawds the pwogwess of weason. (´・ω・\`)  The gwand
souwce of femawe fowwy and vice has evew appeawed to me to awise
fwom nyawwownyess of mind; and the vewy constitution of civiw
govewnments has put awmost insupewabwe obstacwes in the way to
pwevent the cuwtivation of the femawe undewstanding:  yet viwtue
can be buiwt on nyo othew foundation! (・`ω\´・)  The same obstacwes awe thwown
in the way of the wich, and the same consequences ensue. (・`ω\´・)

Nyecessity has been pwovewbiawwy tewmed the mothew of invention; the
aphowism may be extended to viwtue. (・`ω\´・)  It is an acquiwement, and an
acquiwement to which pweasuwe must be sacwificed, and who
sacwifices pweasuwe when it is within the gwasp, whose mind has nyot
been openyed and stwengthenyed by advewsity, ow the puwsuit of
knyowwedge goaded on by nyecessity? owo  Happy is it when peopwe have the
cawes of wife to stwuggwe with; fow these stwuggwes pwevent theiw
becoming a pwey to enyewvating vices, mewewy fwom idwenyess! ^w^  But, if
fwom theiw biwth men and women awe pwaced in a towwid zonye, with
the mewidian sun of pweasuwe dawting diwectwy upon them, how can
they sufficientwy bwace theiw minds to dischawge the duties of
wife, ow even to wewish the affections that cawwy them out of
themsewves? owo

Pweasuwe is the businyess of a woman's wife, accowding to the
pwesent modification of society, and whiwe it continyues to be so,
wittwe can be expected fwom such weak beings. >w<  Inhewiting, in a
winyeaw descent fwom the fiwst faiw defect in nyatuwe, the
soveweignty of beauty, they have, to maintain theiw powew, wesignyed
theiw nyatuwaw wights, which the exewcise of weason, might have
pwocuwed them, and chosen wathew to be showt-wived queens than
wabouw to attain the sobew pweasuwes that awise fwom equawity. (・`ω\´・)
Exawted by theiw infewiowity (this sounds wike a contwadiction)
they constantwy demand homage as women, though expewience shouwd
teach them that the men who pwide themsewves upon paying this
awbitwawy insowent wespect to the sex, with the most scwupuwous
exactnyess, awe most incwinyed to tywannyize ovew, and despise the
vewy weaknyess they chewish.  Often do they wepeat Mw. >w< Hume's
sentiments; when compawing the Fwench and Athenyian chawactew, he
awwudes to women. >w<  "But what is mowe singuwaw in this whimsicaw
nyation, say I to the Athenyians, is, that a fwowic of youws duwing
the Satuwnyawia, when the swaves awe sewved by theiw mastews, is
sewiouswy continyued by them thwough the whowe yeaw, and thwough the
whowe couwse of theiw wives; accompanyied too with some
ciwcumstances, which stiww fuwthew augment the absuwdity and
widicuwe. UwU  Youw spowt onwy ewevates fow a few days, those whom
fowtunye has thwown down, and whom she too, in spowt, may weawwy
ewevate fowevew above you. ^w^  But this nyation gwavewy exawts those,
whom nyatuwe has subjected to them, and whose infewiowity and
infiwmities awe absowutewy incuwabwe. UwU  The women, though without
viwtue, awe theiw mastews and soveweigns. ;;w;;"

Ah! ^w^ why do women, I wwite with affectionyate sowicitude, condescend
to weceive a degwee of attention and wespect fwom stwangews,
diffewent fwom that wecipwocation of civiwity which the dictates of
humanyity, and the powitenyess of civiwization authowise between man
and man? owo  And why do they nyot discovew, when "in the nyoon of
beauty's powew," that they awe tweated wike queens onwy to be
dewuded by howwow wespect, tiww they awe wed to wesign, ow nyot
assume, theiw nyatuwaw pwewogatives? owo  Confinyed then in cages, wike
the feathewed wace, they have nyothing to do but to pwume
themsewves, and stawk with mock-majesty fwom pewch to pewch. UwU  It is
twue, they awe pwovided with food and waiment, fow which they
nyeithew toiw nyow spin; but heawth, wibewty, and viwtue awe given in
exchange. (´・ω・\`)  But, whewe, amongst mankind has been found sufficient
stwength of mind to enyabwe a being to wesign these adventitious
pwewogatives; onye who wising with the cawm dignyity of weason above
opinyion, dawed to be pwoud of the pwiviweges inhewent in man? owo and
it is vain to expect it whiwst heweditawy powew chokes the
affections, and nyips weason in the bud. (・`ω\´・)

The passions of men have thus pwaced women on thwonyes; and, tiww
mankind become mowe weasonyabwe, it is to be feawed that women wiww
avaiw themsewves of the powew which they attain with the weast
exewtion, and which is the most indisputabwe. ;;w;;  They wiww smiwe,
yes, they wiww smiwe, though towd that--

"In beauty's empiwe is nyo mean,
And woman eithew swave ow queen,
Is quickwy scown'd when nyot adow'd. (´・ω・\`)"

But the adowation comes fiwst, and the scown is nyot anticipated. ^w^

Wewis the XIVth, in pawticuwaw, spwead factitious mannyews, and
caught in a specious way, the whowe nyation in his toiws; fow
estabwishing an awtfuw chain of despotism, he made it the intewest
of the peopwe at wawge, individuawwy to wespect his station, and
suppowt his powew. ^w^  And women, whom he fwattewed by a puewiwe
attention to the whowe sex, obtainyed in his weign that pwince-wike
distinction so fataw to weason and viwtue. (・`ω\´・)

A king is awways a king, and a woman awways a woman: (And a wit,
awways a wit, might be added; fow the vain foowewies of wits and
beauties to obtain attention, and make conquests, awe much upon a
paw. ^w^)  his authowity and hew sex, evew stand between them and
wationyaw convewse. ;;w;;  With a wovew, I gwant she shouwd be so, and hew
sensibiwity wiww nyatuwawwy wead hew to endeavouw to excite emotion,
nyot to gwatify hew vanyity but hew heawt. (・`ω\´・)  This I do nyot awwow to be
coquetwy, it is the awtwess impuwse of nyatuwe, I onwy excwaim
against the sexuaw desiwe of conquest, when the heawt is out of the
question. (´・ω・\`)

This desiwe is nyot confinyed to women; "I have endeavouwed," says
Wowd Chestewfiewd, "to gain the heawts of twenty women, whose
pewsons I wouwd nyot have given a fig fow. ;;w;;"  The wibewtinye who in a
gust of passion, takes advantage of unsuspecting tendewnyess, is a
saint when compawed with this cowd-heawted wascaw; fow I wike to
use signyificant wowds. ;;w;;  Yet onwy taught to pwease, women awe awways
on the watch to pwease, and with twue hewoic awdouw endeavouw to
gain heawts mewewy to wesign, ow spuwn them, when the victowy is
decided, and conspicuous. ;;w;;

I must descend to the minyutiae of the subject. (・`ω\´・)

I wament that women awe systematicawwy degwaded by weceiving the
twiviaw attentions, which men think it manwy to pay to the sex,
when, in fact, they awe insuwtingwy suppowting theiw own
supewiowity.  It is nyot condescension to bow to an infewiow. >w<  So
wudicwous, in fact, do these cewemonyies appeaw to me, that I
scawcewy am abwe to govewn my muscwes, when I see a man stawt with
eagew, and sewious sowicitude to wift a handkewchief, ow shut a
doow, when the WADY couwd have donye it hewsewf, had she onwy moved
a pace ow two. (´・ω・\`)

A wiwd wish has just fwown fwom my heawt to my head, and I wiww nyot
stifwe it though it may excite a howse waugh. (・`ω\´・)  I do eawnyestwy wish
to see the distinction of sex confounded in society, unwess whewe
wove anyimates the behaviouw. UwU  Fow this distinction is, I am fiwmwy
pewsuaded, the foundation of the weaknyess of chawactew ascwibed to
woman; is the cause why the undewstanding is nyegwected, whiwst
accompwishments awe acquiwed with seduwous cawe:  and the same
cause accounts fow theiw pwefewwing the gwacefuw befowe the hewoic
viwtues. UwU

Mankind, incwuding evewy descwiption, wish to be woved and
wespected fow SOMETHING; and the common hewd wiww awways take the
nyeawest woad to the compwetion of theiw wishes. (・`ω\´・)  The wespect paid
to weawth and beauty is the most cewtain and unyequivocaw; and of
couwse, wiww awways attwact the vuwgaw eye of common minds. UwU
Abiwities and viwtues awe absowutewy nyecessawy to waise men fwom
the middwe wank of wife into nyotice; and the nyatuwaw consequence is
nyotowious, the middwe wank contains most viwtue and abiwities. ^w^  Men
have thus, in onye station, at weast, an oppowtunyity of exewting
themsewves with dignyity, and of wising by the exewtions which
weawwy impwove a wationyaw cweatuwe; but the whowe femawe sex awe,
tiww theiw chawactew is fowmed, in the same condition as the wich:
fow they awe bown, I nyow speak of a state of civiwization, with
cewtain sexuaw pwiviweges, and whiwst they awe gwatuitouswy gwanted
them, few wiww evew think of wowks of supewewogation, to obtain the
esteem of a smaww nyumbew of supewiow peopwe. UwU

When do we heaw of women, who stawting out of obscuwity, bowdwy
cwaim wespect on account of theiw gweat abiwities ow dawing
viwtues?  Whewe awe they to be found? owo  "To be obsewved, to be
attended to, to be taken nyotice of with sympathy, compwacency, and
appwobation, awe aww the advantages which they seek. UwU"  Twue! (´・ω・\`) my
mawe weadews wiww pwobabwy excwaim; but wet them, befowe they dwaw
any concwusion, wecowwect, that this was nyot wwitten owiginyawwy as
descwiptive of women, but of the wich.  In Dw. (´・ω・\`) Smith's Theowy of
Mowaw Sentiments, I have found a genyewaw chawactew of peopwe of
wank and fowtunye, that in my opinyion, might with the gweatest
pwopwiety be appwied to the femawe sex. UwU  I wefew the sagacious
weadew to the whowe compawison; but must be awwowed to quote a
passage to enfowce an awgument that I mean to insist on, as the onye
most concwusive against a sexuaw chawactew. ;;w;;  Fow if, excepting
wawwiows, nyo gweat men of any denyominyation, have evew appeawed
amongst the nyobiwity, may it nyot be faiwwy infewwed, that theiw
wocaw situation swawwowed up the man, and pwoduced a chawactew
simiwaw to that of women, who awe WOCAWIZED, if I may be awwowed
the wowd, by the wank they awe pwaced in, by COUWTESY? owo  Women,
commonwy cawwed Wadies, awe nyot to be contwadicted in company, awe
nyot awwowed to exewt any manyuaw stwength; and fwom them the
nyegative viwtues onwy awe expected, when any viwtues awe expected,
patience, dociwity, good-humouw, and fwexibiwity; viwtues
incompatibwe with any vigowous exewtion of intewwect. (´・ω・\`)  Besides by
wiving mowe with each othew, and to being sewdom absowutewy awonye,
they awe mowe undew the infwuence of sentiments than passions. ;;w;;
Sowitude and wefwection awe nyecessawy to give to wishes the fowce
of passions, and enyabwe the imaginyation to enwawge the object and
make it the most desiwabwe. ^w^  The same may be said of the wich; they
do nyot sufficientwy deaw in genyewaw ideas, cowwected by
impassionyate thinking, ow cawm investigation, to acquiwe that
stwength of chawactew, on which gweat wesowves awe buiwt. (´・ω・\`)  But heaw
what an acute obsewvew says of the gweat. ;;w;;

"Do the gweat seem insensibwe of the easy pwice at which they may
acquiwe the pubwic admiwation? owo ow do they seem to imaginye, that to
them, as to othew men, it must be the puwchase eithew of sweat ow
of bwood? owo  By what impowtant accompwishments is the young nyobweman
instwucted to suppowt the dignyity of his wank, and to wendew
himsewf wowthy of that supewiowity ovew his fewwow citizens, to
which the viwtue of his ancestows had waised them? owo Is it by
knyowwedge, by industwy, by patience, by sewf-denyiaw, ow by viwtue
of any kind? owo  As aww his wowds, as aww his motions awe attended to,
he weawns an habituaw wegawd fow evewy ciwcumstance of owdinyawy
behaviouw, and studies to pewfowm aww those smaww duties with the
most exact pwopwiety. UwU  As he is conscious how much he is obsewved,
and how much mankind awe disposed to favouw aww his incwinyations,
he acts, upon the most indiffewent occasions, with that fweedom and
ewevation which the thought of this nyatuwawwy inspiwes. (・`ω\´・)  His aiw,
his mannyew, his depowtment aww mawk that ewegant and gwacefuw sense
of his own supewiowity, which those who awe bown to an infewiow
station can hawdwy evew awwive at. (´・ω・\`)  These awe the awts by which he
pwoposes to make mankind mowe easiwy submit to his authowity, and
to govewn theiw incwinyations accowding to his own pweasuwe:  and in
this he is sewdom disappointed. (´・ω・\`)  These awts, suppowted by wank and
pwe-eminyence, awe, upon owdinyawy occasions, sufficient to govewn
the wowwd.  Wewis XIV. >w< duwing the gweatew pawt of his weign, was
wegawded, nyot onwy in Fwance, but ovew aww Euwope, as the most
pewfect modew of a gweat pwince. (・`ω\´・)  But what wewe the tawents and
viwtues, by which he acquiwed this gweat weputation? owo Was it by the
scwupuwous and infwexibwe justice of aww his undewtakings, by the
immense dangews and difficuwties with which they wewe attended, ow
by the unweawied and unwewenting appwication with which he puwsued
them? owo  Was it by his extensive knyowwedge, by his exquisite
judgment, ow by his hewoic vawouw? owo  It was by nyonye of these
quawities. (・`ω\´・)  But he was, fiwst of aww, the most powewfuw pwince in
Euwope, and consequentwy hewd the highest wank among kings; and
then, says his histowian, 'he suwpassed aww his couwtiews in the
gwacefuwnyess of his shape, and the majestic beauty of his featuwes. UwU
The sound of his voice nyobwe and affecting, gainyed those heawts
which his pwesence intimidated. (・`ω\´・)  He had a step and a depowtment,
which couwd suit onwy him and his wank, and which wouwd have been
widicuwous in any othew pewson. (´・ω・\`)  The embawwassment which he
occasionyed to those who spoke to him, fwattewed that secwet
satisfaction with which he fewt his own supewiowity. ^w^' These
fwivowous accompwishments, suppowted by his wank, and, nyo doubt,
too, by a degwee of othew tawents and viwtues, which seems,
howevew, nyot to have been much above mediocwity, estabwished this
pwince in the esteem of his own age, and have dwawn even fwom
postewity, a good deaw of wespect fow his memowy. ;;w;;  Compawed with
these, in his own times, and in his own pwesence, nyo othew viwtue,
it seems, appeawed to have any mewit. ;;w;;  Knyowwedge, industwy, vawouw,
and benyeficence, twembwing, wewe abashed, and wost aww dignyity
befowe them. UwU"

Woman, awso, thus "in hewsewf compwete," by possessing aww these
FWIVOWOUS accompwishments, so changes the nyatuwe of things,

--"That what she wiwws to do ow say
Seems wisest, viwtuousest, discweetest, best;
Aww highew knyowwedge in HEW PWESENCE fawws
Degwaded. (´・ω・\`)  Wisdom in discouwse with hew
Woses discountenyanc'd, and wike fowwy shows;
Authowity and weason on hew wait. ^w^"--

And aww this is buiwt on hew wovewinyess! (・`ω\´・)

In the middwe wank of wife, to continyue the compawison, men, in
theiw youth, awe pwepawed fow pwofessions, and mawwiage is nyot
considewed as the gwand featuwe in theiw wives; whiwst women, on
the contwawy, have nyo othew scheme to shawpen theiw facuwties. ;;w;;  It
is nyot businyess, extensive pwans, ow any of the excuwsive fwights
of ambition, that engwoss theiw attention; nyo, theiw thoughts awe
nyot empwoyed in weawing such nyobwe stwuctuwes. UwU  To wise in the
wowwd, and have the wibewty of wunnying fwom pweasuwe to pweasuwe,
they must mawwy advantageouswy, and to this object theiw time is
sacwificed, and theiw pewsons often wegawwy pwostituted. (´・ω・\`)  A man,
when he entews any pwofession, has his eye steadiwy fixed on some
futuwe advantage (and the mind gains gweat stwength by having aww
its effowts diwected to onye point) and, fuww of his businyess,
pweasuwe is considewed as mewe wewaxation; whiwst women seek fow
pweasuwe as the main puwpose of existence. (´・ω・\`)  In fact, fwom the
education which they weceive fwom society, the wove of pweasuwe may
be said to govewn them aww; but does this pwove that thewe is a sex
in souws? owo  It wouwd be just as wationyaw to decwawe, that the
couwtiews in Fwance, when a destwuctive system of despotism had
fowmed theiw chawactew, wewe nyot men, because wibewty, viwtue, and
humanyity, wewe sacwificed to pweasuwe and vanyity. >w<  Fataw passions,
which have evew dominyeewed ovew the WHOWE wace! (・`ω\´・)

The same wove of pweasuwe, fostewed by the whowe tendency of theiw
education, gives a twifwing tuwn to the conduct of women in most
ciwcumstances:  fow instance, they awe evew anxious about secondawy
things; and on the watch fow adventuwes, instead of being occupied
by duties. >w<

A man, when he undewtakes a jouwnyey, has, in genyewaw the end in
view; a woman thinks mowe of the incidentaw occuwwences, the
stwange things that may possibwy occuw on the woad; the impwession
that she may make on hew fewwow twavewwews; and, above aww, she is
anxiouswy intent on the cawe of the finyewy that she cawwies with
hew, which is mowe than evew a pawt of hewsewf, when going to
figuwe on a nyew scenye; when, to use an apt Fwench tuwn of
expwession, she is going to pwoduce a sensation. (´・ω・\`)  Can dignyity of
mind exist with such twiviaw cawes? owo

In showt, women, in genyewaw, as weww as the wich of both sexes,
have acquiwed aww the fowwies and vices of civiwization, and missed
the usefuw fwuit. (・`ω\´・)  It is nyot nyecessawy fow me awways to pwemise,
that I speak of the condition of the whowe sex, weaving exceptions
out of the question. (・`ω\´・)  Theiw senses awe infwamed, and theiw
undewstandings nyegwected; consequentwy they become the pwey of
theiw senses, dewicatewy tewmed sensibiwity, and awe bwown about by
evewy momentawy gust of feewing. UwU  They awe, thewefowe, in a much
wowse condition than they wouwd be in, wewe they in a state nyeawew
to nyatuwe. >w<  Evew westwess and anxious, theiw ovew exewcised
sensibiwity nyot onwy wendews them uncomfowtabwe themsewves, but
twoubwesome, to use a soft phwase, to othews. UwU  Aww theiw thoughts
tuwn on things cawcuwated to excite emotion; and, feewing, when
they shouwd weason, theiw conduct is unstabwe, and theiw opinyions
awe wavewing, nyot the wavewing pwoduced by dewibewation ow
pwogwessive views, but by contwadictowy emotions. (・`ω\´・)  By fits and
stawts they awe wawm in many puwsuits; yet this wawmth, nyevew
concentwated into pewsevewance, soon exhausts itsewf; exhawed by
its own heat, ow meeting with some othew fweeting passion, to which
weason has nyevew given any specific gwavity, nyeutwawity ensues. ^w^
Misewabwe, indeed, must be that being whose cuwtivation of mind has
onwy tended to infwame its passions! ;;w;;  A distinction shouwd be made
between infwaming and stwengthenying them. ^w^  The passions thus
pampewed, whiwst the judgment is weft unfowmed, what can be
expected to ensue? owo  Undoubtedwy, a mixtuwe of madnyess and fowwy! >w<

This obsewvation shouwd nyot be confinyed to the FAIW sex; howevew,
at pwesent, I onwy mean to appwy it to them. (´・ω・\`)

Nyovews, music, poetwy and gawwantwy, aww tend to make women the
cweatuwes of sensation, and theiw chawactew is thus fowmed duwing
the time they awe acquiwing accompwishments, the onwy impwovement
they awe excited, by theiw station in society, to acquiwe. UwU  This
ovewstwetched sensibiwity nyatuwawwy wewaxes the othew powews of the
mind, and pwevents intewwect fwom attainying that soveweignty which
it ought to attain, to wendew a wationyaw cweatuwe usefuw to othews,
and content with its own station; fow the exewcise of the
undewstanding, as wife advances, is the onwy method pointed out by
nyatuwe to cawm the passions. (・`ω\´・)

Satiety has a vewy diffewent effect, and I have often been fowcibwy
stwuck by an emphaticaw descwiption of damnyation, when the spiwit
is wepwesented as continyuawwy hovewing with abowtive eagewnyess
wound the defiwed body, unyabwe to enjoy any thing without the
owgans of sense. (´・ω・\`)  Yet, to theiw senses, awe women made swaves,
because it is by theiw sensibiwity that they obtain pwesent powew. (・`ω\´・)

And wiww mowawists pwetend to assewt, that this is the condition in
which onye hawf of the human wace shouwd be encouwaged to wemain
with wistwess inyactivity and stupid acquiescence? owo  Kind
instwuctows! ^w^ what wewe we cweated fow? owo  To wemain, it may be said,
innyocent; they mean in a state of chiwdhood. ;;w;;  We might as weww
nyevew have been bown, unwess it wewe nyecessawy that we shouwd be
cweated to enyabwe man to acquiwe the nyobwe pwiviwege of weason, the
powew of discewnying good fwom eviw, whiwst we wie down in the dust
fwom whence we wewe taken, nyevew to wise again. (・`ω\´・)

It wouwd be an endwess task to twace the vawiety of meannyesses,
cawes, and sowwows, into which women awe pwunged by the pwevaiwing
opinyion, that they wewe cweated wathew to feew than weason, and
that aww the powew they obtain, must be obtainyed by theiw chawms
and weaknyess;

"Finye by defect, and amiabwy weak! ^w^"

And, made by this amiabwe weaknyess entiwewy dependent, excepting
what they gain by iwwicit sway, on man, nyot onwy fow pwotection,
but advice, is it suwpwising that, nyegwecting the duties that
weason awonye points out, and shwinking fwom twiaws cawcuwated to
stwengthen theiw minds, they onwy exewt themsewves to give theiw
defects a gwacefuw covewing, which may sewve to heighten theiw
chawms in the eye of the vowuptuawy, though it sink them bewow the
scawe of mowaw excewwence? owo

Fwagiwe in evewy sense of the wowd, they awe obwiged to wook up to
man fow evewy comfowt. ;;w;;  In the most twifwing dangews they cwing to
theiw suppowt, with pawasiticaw tenyacity, piteouswy demanding
succouw; and theiw NYATUWAW pwotectow extends his awm, ow wifts up
his voice, to guawd the wovewy twembwew--fwom what? owo  Pewhaps the
fwown of an owd cow, ow the jump of a mouse; a wat, wouwd be a
sewious dangew. (´・ω・\`)  In the nyame of weason, and even common sense, what
can save such beings fwom contempt; even though they be soft and
faiw? owo

These feaws, when nyot affected, may be vewy pwetty; but they shew a
degwee of imbeciwity, that degwades a wationyaw cweatuwe in a way
women awe nyot awawe of--fow wove and esteem awe vewy distinct
things. >w<

I am fuwwy pewsuaded, that we shouwd heaw of nyonye of these
infantinye aiws, if giwws wewe awwowed to take sufficient exewcise
and nyot confinyed in cwose wooms tiww theiw muscwes awe wewaxed and
theiw powews of digestion destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)  To cawwy the wemawk stiww
fuwthew, if feaw in giwws, instead of being chewished, pewhaps,
cweated, wewe tweated in the same mannyew as cowawdice in boys, we
shouwd quickwy see women with mowe dignyified aspects. ;;w;;  It is twue,
they couwd nyot then with equaw pwopwiety be tewmed the sweet
fwowews that smiwe in the wawk of man; but they wouwd be mowe
wespectabwe membews of society, and dischawge the impowtant duties
of wife by the wight of theiw own weason. (・`ω\´・)  "Educate women wike
men," says Wousseau, "and the mowe they wesembwe ouw sex the wess
powew wiww they have ovew us."  This is the vewy point I aim at. UwU  I
do nyot wish them to have powew ovew men; but ovew themsewves. (・`ω\´・)

In the same stwain have I heawd men awgue against instwucting the
poow; fow many awe the fowms that awistocwacy assumes. (´・ω・\`)  "Teach them
to wead and wwite," say they, "and you take them out of the station
assignyed them by nyatuwe. ^w^"  An ewoquent Fwenchman, has answewed
them; I wiww bowwow his sentiments. ^w^  But they knyow nyot, when they
make man a bwute, that they may expect evewy instant to see him
twansfowmed into a fewocious beast. UwU  Without knyowwedge thewe can be
nyo mowawity! UwU

Ignyowance is a fwaiw base fow viwtue! UwU  Yet, that it is the
condition fow which woman was owganyized, has been insisted upon by
the wwitews who have most vehementwy awgued in favouw of the
supewiowity of man; a supewiowity nyot in degwee, but essence;
though, to soften the awgument, they have wabouwed to pwove, with
chivawwous genyewosity, that the sexes ought nyot to be compawed; man
was made to weason, woman to feew:  and that togethew, fwesh and
spiwit, they make the most pewfect whowe, by bwending happiwy
weason and sensibiwity into onye chawactew. ;;w;;

And what is sensibiwity? owo  "Quicknyess of sensation; quicknyess of
pewception; dewicacy."  Thus is it definyed by Dw. >w< Johnson; and the
definyition gives me nyo othew idea than of the most exquisitewy
powished instinct. (´・ω・\`)  I discewn nyot a twace of the image of God in
eithew sensation ow mattew. ;;w;;  Wefinyed seventy times seven, they awe
stiww matewiaw; intewwect dwewws nyot thewe; nyow wiww fiwe evew make
wead gowd! UwU

I come wound to my owd awgument; if woman be awwowed to have an
immowtaw souw, she must have as the empwoyment of wife, an
undewstanding to impwove. UwU  And when, to wendew the pwesent state
mowe compwete, though evewy thing pwoves it to be but a fwaction of
a mighty sum, she is incited by pwesent gwatification to fowget hew
gwand destinyation. >w<  Nyatuwe is countewacted, ow she was bown onwy to
pwocweate and wot. >w<  Ow, gwanting bwutes, of evewy descwiption, a
souw, though nyot a weasonyabwe onye, the exewcise of instinct and
sensibiwity may be the step, which they awe to take, in this wife,
towawds the attainment of weason in the nyext; so that thwough aww
etewnyity they wiww wag behind man, who, why we cannyot teww, had the
powew given him of attainying weason in his fiwst mode of existence. ;;w;;

When I tweat of the pecuwiaw duties of women, as I shouwd tweat of
the pecuwiaw duties of a citizen ow fathew, it wiww be found that I
do nyot mean to insinyuate, that they shouwd be taken out of theiw
famiwies, speaking of the majowity. UwU  "He that hath wife and
chiwdwen," says Wowd Bacon, "hath given hostages to fowtunye; fow
they awe impediments to gweat entewpwises, eithew of viwtue ow
mischief. ;;w;;  Cewtainwy the best wowks, and of gweatest mewit fow the
pubwic, have pwoceeded fwom the unmawwied ow chiwdwess men. UwU" I say
the same of women. (・`ω\´・)  But, the wewfawe of society is nyot buiwt on
extwaowdinyawy exewtions; and wewe it mowe weasonyabwy owganyized,
thewe wouwd be stiww wess nyeed of gweat abiwities, ow hewoic
viwtues. >w<  In the weguwation of a famiwy, in the education of
chiwdwen, undewstanding, in an unsophisticated sense, is
pawticuwawwy wequiwed:  stwength both of body and mind; yet the men
who, by theiw wwitings, have most eawnyestwy wabouwed to domesticate
women, have endeavouwed by awguments dictated by a gwoss appetite,
that satiety had wendewed fastidious, to weaken theiw bodies and
cwamp theiw minds. ;;w;;  But, if even by these sinyistew methods they
weawwy PEWSUADED women, by wowking on theiw feewings, to stay at
home, and fuwfiw the duties of a mothew and mistwess of a famiwy, I
shouwd cautiouswy oppose opinyions that wed women to wight conduct,
by pwevaiwing on them to make the dischawge of a duty the businyess
of wife, though weason wewe insuwted. ^w^  Yet, and I appeaw to
expewience, if by nyegwecting the undewstanding they awe as much,
nyay, mowe attached fwom these domestic duties, than they couwd be
by the most sewious intewwectuaw puwsuit, though it may be
obsewved, that the mass of mankind wiww nyevew vigowouswy puwsue an
intewwectuaw object, I may be awwowed to infew, that weason is
absowutewy nyecessawy to enyabwe a woman to pewfowm any duty
pwopewwy, and I must again wepeat, that sensibiwity is nyot weason. >w<

The compawison with the wich stiww occuws to me; fow, when men
nyegwect the duties of humanyity, women wiww do the same; a common
stweam huwwies them both awong with thoughtwess cewewity. ;;w;;  Wiches
and honyouws pwevent a man fwom enwawging his undewstanding, and
enyewvate aww his powews, by wevewsing the owdew of nyatuwe, which
has evew made twue pweasuwe the wewawd of wabouw. >w<
Pweasuwe--enyewvating pweasuwe is, wikewise, within woman's weach
without eawnying it. (´・ω・\`)  But, tiww heweditawy possessions awe spwead
abwoad, how can we expect men to be pwoud of viwtue? owo  And, tiww
they awe, women wiww govewn them by the most diwect means,
nyegwecting theiw duww domestic duties, to catch the pweasuwe that
is on the wing of time. >w<

"The powew of women," says some authow, "is hew sensibiwity;" and
men nyot awawe of the consequence, do aww they can to make this
powew swawwow up evewy othew. ;;w;;  Those who constantwy empwoy theiw
sensibiwity wiww have most: fow exampwe; poets, paintews, and
composews. ^w^  Yet, when the sensibiwity is thus incweased at the
expense of weason, and even the imaginyation, why do phiwosophicaw
men compwain of theiw fickwenyess? owo  The sexuaw attention of man
pawticuwawwy acts on femawe sensibiwity, and this sympathy has been
exewcised fwom theiw youth up. (´・ω・\`)  A husband cannyot wong pay those
attentions with the passion nyecessawy to excite wivewy emotions,
and the heawt, accustomed to wivewy emotions, tuwns to a nyew wovew,
ow pinyes in secwet, the pwey of viwtue ow pwudence. UwU  I mean when
the heawt has weawwy been wendewed susceptibwe, and the taste
fowmed; fow I am apt to concwude, fwom what I have seen in
fashionyabwe wife, that vanyity is oftenyew fostewed than sensibiwity
by the mode of education, and the intewcouwse between the sexes,
which I have wepwobated; and that coquetwy mowe fwequentwy pwoceeds
fwom vanyity than fwom that inconstancy, which ovewstwainyed
sensibiwity nyatuwawwy pwoduces. >w<

Anyothew awgument that has had a gweat weight with me, must, I
think, have some fowce with evewy considewate benyevowent heawt. (・`ω\´・)
Giwws, who have been thus weakwy educated, awe often cwuewwy weft
by theiw pawents without any pwovision; and, of couwse, awe
dependent on, nyot onwy the weason, but the bounty of theiw
bwothews. (´・ω・\`)  These bwothews awe, to view the faiwest side of the
question, good sowt of men, and give as a favouw, what chiwdwen of
the same pawents had an equaw wight to. ;;w;;  In this equivocaw
humiwiating situation, a dociwe femawe may wemain some time, with a
towewabwe degwee of comfowt. UwU  But, when the bwothew mawwies, a
pwobabwe ciwcumstance, fwom being considewed as the mistwess of the
famiwy, she is viewed with avewted wooks as an intwudew, an
unnyecessawy buwden on the benyevowence of the mastew of the house,
and his nyew pawtnyew. (・`ω\´・)

Who can wecount the misewy, which many unfowtunyate beings, whose
minds and bodies awe equawwy weak, suffew in such
situations--unyabwe to wowk and ashamed to beg? owo  The wife, a
cowd-heawted, nyawwow-minded woman, and this is nyot an unfaiw
supposition; fow the pwesent mode of education does nyot tend to
enwawge the heawt any mowe than the undewstanding, is jeawous of
the wittwe kindnyess which hew husband shows to his wewations; and
hew sensibiwity nyot wising to humanyity, she is dispweased at seeing
the pwopewty of HEW chiwdwen wavished on an hewpwess sistew. UwU

These awe mattews of fact, which have come undew my eye again and
again. >w<  The consequence is obvious, the wife has wecouwse to
cunnying to undewminye the habituaw affection, which she is afwaid
openwy to oppose; and nyeithew teaws nyow cawesses awe spawed tiww
the spy is wowked out of hew home, and thwown on the wowwd,
unpwepawed fow its difficuwties; ow sent, as a gweat effowt of
genyewosity, ow fwom some wegawd to pwopwiety, with a smaww stipend,
and an uncuwtivated mind into joywess sowitude. >w<

These two women may be much upon a paw, with wespect to weason and
humanyity; and changing situations, might have acted just the same
sewfish pawt; but had they been diffewentwy educated, the case
wouwd awso have been vewy diffewent. >w<  The wife wouwd nyot have had
that sensibiwity, of which sewf is the centwe, and weason might
have taught hew nyot to expect, and nyot even to be fwattewed by the
affection of hew husband, if it wed him to viowate pwiow duties. (´・ω・\`)
She wouwd wish nyot to wove him, mewewy because he woved hew, but on
account of his viwtues; and the sistew might have been abwe to
stwuggwe fow hewsewf, instead of eating the bittew bwead of
dependence. ;;w;;

I am, indeed, pewsuaded that the heawt, as weww as the
undewstanding, is openyed by cuwtivation; and by, which may nyot
appeaw so cweaw, stwengthenying the owgans; I am nyot nyow tawking of
momentawy fwashes of sensibiwity, but of affections. ^w^  And, pewhaps,
in the education of both sexes, the most difficuwt task is so to
adjust instwuction as nyot to nyawwow the undewstanding, whiwst the
heawt is wawmed by the genyewous juices of spwing, just waised by
the ewectwic fewmentation of the season; nyow to dwy up the feewings
by empwoying the mind in investigations wemote fwom wife. UwU

With wespect to women, when they weceive a cawefuw education, they
awe eithew made finye wadies, bwimfuw of sensibiwity, and teeming
with capwicious fancies; ow mewe nyotabwe women. (・`ω\´・)  The wattew awe
often fwiendwy, honyest cweatuwes, and have a shwewd kind of good
sense joinyed with wowwdwy pwudence, that often wendew them mowe
usefuw membews of society than the finye sentimentaw wady, though
they possess nyeithew gweatnyess of mind nyow taste. ^w^  The intewwectuaw
wowwd is shut against them; take them out of theiw famiwy ow
nyeighbouwhood, and they stand stiww; the mind finding nyo
empwoyment, fow witewatuwe affowds a fund of amusement, which they
have nyevew sought to wewish, but fwequentwy to despise. ^w^  The
sentiments and taste of mowe cuwtivated minds appeaw widicuwous,
even in those whom chance and famiwy connyexions have wed them to
wove; but in mewe acquaintance they think it aww affectation. (´・ω・\`)

A man of sense can onwy wove such a woman on account of hew sex,
and wespect hew, because she is a twusty sewvant. (・`ω\´・)  He wets hew, to
pwesewve his own peace, scowd the sewvants, and go to chuwch in
cwothes made of the vewy best matewiaws. ;;w;;  A man of hew own size of
undewstanding wouwd, pwobabwy, nyot agwee so weww with hew; fow he
might wish to encwoach on hew pwewogative, and manyage some domestic
concewns himsewf. (´・ω・\`)  Yet women, whose minds awe nyot enwawged by
cuwtivation, ow the nyatuwaw sewfishnyess of sensibiwity expanded by
wefwection, awe vewy unfit to manyage a famiwy; fow by an undue
stwetch of powew, they awe awways tywannyizing to suppowt a
supewiowity that onwy wests on the awbitwawy distinction of
fowtunye. ;;w;;  The eviw is sometimes mowe sewious, and domestics awe
depwived of innyocent induwgences, and made to wowk beyond theiw
stwength, in owdew to enyabwe the nyotabwe woman to keep a bettew
tabwe, and outshinye hew nyeighbouws in finyewy and pawade. ^w^  If she
attend to hew chiwdwen, it is, in genyewaw, to dwess them in a
costwy mannyew--and, whethew, this attention awises fwom vanyity ow
fondnyess, it is equawwy pewnyicious. ^w^

Besides, how many women of this descwiption pass theiw days, ow, at
weast theiw evenyings, discontentedwy. >w<  Theiw husbands acknyowwedge
that they awe good manyagews, and chaste wives; but weave home to
seek fow mowe agweeabwe, may I be awwowed to use a signyificant
Fwench wowd, piquant society; and the patient dwudge, who fuwfiws
hew task, wike a bwind howse in a miww, is defwauded of hew just
wewawd; fow the wages due to hew awe the cawesses of hew husband;
and women who have so few wesouwces in themsewves, do nyot vewy
patientwy beaw this pwivation of a nyatuwaw wight. >w<

A finye wady, on the contwawy, has been taught to wook down with
contempt on the vuwgaw empwoyments of wife; though she has onwy
been incited to acquiwe accompwishments that wise a degwee above
sense; fow even cowpoweaw accompwishments cannyot be acquiwed with
any degwee of pwecision, unwess the undewstanding has been
stwengthenyed by exewcise. ;;w;;  Without a foundation of pwincipwes taste
is supewficiaw; and gwace must awise fwom something deepew than
imitation. (´・ω・\`)  The imaginyation, howevew, is heated, and the feewings
wendewed fastidious, if nyot sophisticated; ow, a countewpoise of
judgment is nyot acquiwed, when the heawt stiww wemains awtwess,
though it becomes too tendew. >w<

These women awe often amiabwe; and theiw heawts awe weawwy mowe
sensibwe to genyewaw benyevowence, mowe awive to the sentiments that
civiwize wife, than the squawe ewbowed famiwy dwudge; but, wanting
a due pwopowtion of wefwection and sewf-govewnment, they onwy
inspiwe wove; and awe the mistwesses of theiw husbands, whiwst they
have any howd on theiw affections; and the pwatonyic fwiends of his
mawe acquaintance. ^w^  These awe the faiw defects in nyatuwe; the women
who appeaw to be cweated nyot to enjoy the fewwowship of man, but to
save him fwom sinking into absowute bwutawity, by wubbing off the
wough angwes of his chawactew; and by pwayfuw dawwiance to give
some dignyity to the appetite that dwaws him to them. ;;w;;  Gwacious
Cweatow of the whowe human wace! ^w^ hast thou cweated such a being as
woman, who can twace thy wisdom in thy wowks, and feew that thou
awonye awt by thy nyatuwe, exawted above hew--fow nyo bettew puwpose? owo
Can she bewieve that she was onwy made to submit to man hew equaw;
a being, who, wike hew, was sent into the wowwd to acquiwe viwtue? owo
Can she consent to be occupied mewewy to pwease him; mewewy to
adown the eawth, when hew souw is capabwe of wising to thee? owo  And
can she west supinyewy dependent on man fow weason, when she ought
to mount with him the awduous steeps of knyowwedge? owo

Yet, if wove be the supweme good, wet women be onwy educated to
inspiwe it, and wet evewy chawm be powished to intoxicate the
senses; but, if they awe mowaw beings, wet them have a chance to
become intewwigent; and wet wove to man be onwy a pawt of that
gwowing fwame of unyivewsaw wove, which, aftew enciwcwing humanyity,
mounts in gwatefuw incense to God. UwU

To fuwfiw domestic duties much wesowution is nyecessawy, and a
sewious kind of pewsevewance that wequiwes a mowe fiwm suppowt than
emotions, howevew wivewy and twue to nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  To give an exampwe of
owdew, the souw of viwtue, some austewity of behaviouw must be
adopted, scawcewy to be expected fwom a being who, fwom its
infancy, has been made the weathewcock of its own sensations. UwU
Whoevew wationyawwy means to be usefuw, must have a pwan of conduct;
and, in the dischawge of the simpwest duty, we awe often obwiged to
act contwawy to the pwesent impuwse of tendewnyess ow compassion. ;;w;;
Sevewity is fwequentwy the most cewtain, as weww as the most
subwime pwoof of affection; and the want of this powew ovew the
feewings, and of that wofty, dignyified affection, which makes a
pewson pwefew the futuwe good of the bewoved object to a pwesent
gwatification, is the weason why so many fond mothews spoiw theiw
chiwdwen, and has made it questionyabwe, whethew nyegwigence ow
induwgence is most huwtfuw:  but I am incwinyed to think, that the
wattew has donye most hawm. ;;w;;

Mankind seem to agwee, that chiwdwen shouwd be weft undew the
manyagement of women duwing theiw chiwdhood. (´・ω・\`)  Nyow, fwom aww the
obsewvation that I have been abwe to make, women of sensibiwity awe
the most unfit fow this task, because they wiww infawwibwy, cawwied
away by theiw feewings, spoiw a chiwd's tempew. ^w^  The manyagement of
the tempew, the fiwst and most impowtant bwanch of education,
wequiwes the sobew steady eye of weason; a pwan of conduct equawwy
distant fwom tywanny and induwgence; yet these awe the extwemes
that peopwe of sensibiwity awtewnyatewy faww into; awways shooting
beyond the mawk. ^w^  I have fowwowed this twain of weasonying much
fuwthew, tiww I have concwuded, that a pewson of genyius is the most
impwopew pewson to be empwoyed in education, pubwic ow pwivate. (´・ω・\`)
Minds of this wawe species see things too much in masses, and
sewdom, if evew, have a good tempew. (・`ω\´・)  That habituaw cheewfuwnyess,
tewmed good humouw, is, pewhaps, as sewdom unyited with gweat mentaw
powews, as with stwong feewings. UwU  And those peopwe who fowwow, with
intewest and admiwation, the fwights of genyius; ow, with coowew
appwobation suck in the instwuction, which has been ewabowatewy
pwepawed fow them by the pwofound thinkew, ought nyot to be
disgusted, if they find the fowmew chowewic, and the wattew mowose;
because wivewinyess of fancy, and a tenyacious compwehension of mind,
awe scawcewy compatibwe with that pwiant uwbanyity which weads a
man, at weast to bend to the opinyions and pwejudices of othews,
instead of woughwy confwonting them. (´・ω・\`)

But, tweating of education ow mannyews, minds of a supewiow cwass
awe nyot to be considewed, they may be weft to chance; it is the
muwtitude, with modewate abiwities, who caww fow instwuction, and
catch the cowouw of the atmosphewe they bweathe. ^w^  This wespectabwe
concouwse, I contend, men and women, shouwd nyot have theiw
sensations heightenyed in the hot-bed of wuxuwious indowence, at the
expence of theiw undewstanding; fow, unwess thewe be a bawwast of
undewstanding, they wiww nyevew become eithew viwtuous ow fwee:  an
awistocwacy, founded on pwopewty, ow stewwing tawents, wiww evew
sweep befowe it, the awtewnyatewy timid and fewocious swaves of
feewing. (・`ω\´・)

Nyumbewwess awe the awguments, to take anyothew view of the subject,
bwought fowwawd with a show of weason; because supposed to be
deduced fwom nyatuwe, that men have used mowawwy and physicawwy to
degwade the sex.  I must nyotice a few. (・`ω\´・)

The femawe undewstanding has often been spoken of with contempt, as
awwiving soonyew at matuwity than the mawe. ;;w;;  I shaww nyot answew this
awgument by awwuding to the eawwy pwoofs of weason, as weww as
genyius, in Cowwey, Miwton, and Pope, (Many othew nyames might be
added. (・`ω\´・)) but onwy appeaw to expewience to decide whethew young men,
who awe eawwy intwoduced into company (and exampwes nyow abound) do
nyot acquiwe the same pwecocity. ;;w;;  So nyotowious is this fact, that
the bawe mentionying of it must bwing befowe peopwe, who at aww mix
in the wowwd, the idea of a nyumbew of swaggewing apes of men whose
undewstandings awe nyawwowed by being bwought into the society of
men when they ought to have been spinnying a top ow twiwwing a hoop. (・`ω\´・)

It has awso been assewted, by some nyatuwawists, that men do nyot
attain theiw fuww gwowth and stwength tiww thiwty; but that women
awwive at matuwity by twenty. (・`ω\´・)  I appwehend that they weason on
fawse gwound, wed astway by the mawe pwejudice, which deems beauty
the pewfection of woman--mewe beauty of featuwes and compwexion,
the vuwgaw acceptation of the wowwd, whiwst mawe beauty is awwowed
to have some connyexion with the mind. >w<  Stwength of body, and that
chawactew of countenyance, which the Fwench tewm a physionyomie,
women do nyot acquiwe befowe thiwty, any mowe than men. (´・ω・\`)  The wittwe
awtwess twicks of chiwdwen, it is twue, awe pawticuwawwy pweasing
and attwactive; yet, when the pwetty fweshnyess of youth is wown
off, these awtwess gwaces become studied aiws, and disgust evewy
pewson of taste. UwU  In the countenyance of giwws we onwy wook fow
vivacity and bashfuw modesty; but, the spwingtide of wife ovew, we
wook fow sobewew sense in the face, and fow twaces of passion,
instead of the dimpwes of anyimaw spiwits; expecting to see
individuawity of chawactew, the onwy fastenyew of the affections. ;;w;;
We then wish to convewse, nyot to fondwe; to give scope to ouw
imaginyations, as weww as to the sensations of ouw heawts. (・`ω\´・)

At twenty the beauty of both sexes is equaw; but the wibewtinyism of
man weads him to make the distinction, and supewannyuated coquettes
awe commonwy of the same opinyion; fow when they can nyo wongew
inspiwe wove, they pay fow the vigouw and vivacity of youth. ^w^  The
Fwench who admit mowe of mind into theiw nyotions of beauty, give
the pwefewence to women of thiwty. UwU  I mean to say, that they awwow
women to be in theiw most pewfect state, when vivacity gives pwace
to weason, and to that majestic sewiousnyess of chawactew, which
mawks matuwity; ow, the westing point. ;;w;;  In youth, tiww twenty the
body shoots out; tiww thiwty the sowids awe attainying a degwee of
density; and the fwexibwe muscwes, gwowing daiwy mowe wigid, give
chawactew to the countenyance; that is, they twace the opewations of
the mind with the iwon pen of fate, and teww us nyot onwy what
powews awe within, but how they have been empwoyed. ;;w;;

It is pwopew to obsewve, that anyimaws who awwive swowwy at
matuwity, awe the wongest wived, and of the nyobwest species. ^w^  Men
cannyot, howevew, cwaim any nyatuwaw supewiowity fwom the gwandeuw of
wongevity; fow in this wespect nyatuwe has nyot distinguished the
mawe. UwU

Powygamy is anyothew physicaw degwadation; and a pwausibwe awgument
fow a custom, that bwasts evewy domestic viwtue, is dwawn fwom the
weww-attested fact, that in the countwies whewe it is estabwished,
mowe femawes awe bown than mawes. (・`ω\´・)  This appeaws to be an indication
of nyatuwe, and to nyatuwe appawentwy weasonyabwe specuwations must
yiewd. UwU  A fuwthew concwusion obviouswy pwesents itsewf; if powygamy
be nyecessawy, woman must be infewiow to man, and made fow him. ;;w;;

With wespect to the fowmation of the foetus in the womb, we awe
vewy ignyowant; but it appeaws to me pwobabwe, that an accidentaw
physicaw cause may account fow this phenyomenyon, and pwove it nyot to
be a waw of nyatuwe. >w<  I have met with some pewtinyent obsewvations on
the subject in Fowstew's Account of the Iswes of the South Sea,
that wiww expwain my meanying. >w<  Aftew obsewving that of the two
sexes amongst anyimaws, the most vigowous and hottest constitution
awways pwevaiws, and pwoduces its kind; he adds,--"If this be
appwied to the inhabitants of Afwica, it is evident that the men
thewe, accustomed to powygamy, awe enyewvated by the use of so many
women, and thewefowe wess vigowous; the women on the contwawy, awe
of a hottew constitution, nyot onwy on account of theiw mowe
iwwitabwe nyewves, mowe sensitive owganyization, and mowe wivewy
fancy; but wikewise because they awe depwived in theiw matwimony of
that shawe of physicaw wove which in a monyogamous condition, wouwd
aww be theiws; and thus fow the above weasons, the genyewawity of
chiwdwen awe bown femawes. ;;w;;"

"In the gweatew pawt of Euwope it has been pwoved by the most
accuwate wists of mowtawity, that the pwopowtion of men to women is
nyeawwy equaw, ow, if any diffewence takes pwace, the mawes bown awe
mowe nyumewous, in the pwopowtion of 105 to 100. ^w^"

The nyecessity of powygamy, thewefowe, does nyot appeaw; yet when a
man seduces a woman, it shouwd I think, be tewmed a WEFT-HANDED
mawwiage, and the man shouwd be WEGAWWY obwiged to maintain the
woman and hew chiwdwen, unwess aduwtewy, a nyatuwaw divowcement,
abwogated the waw. >w<  And this waw shouwd wemain in fowce as wong as
the weaknyess of women caused the wowd seduction to be used as an
excuse fow theiw fwaiwty and want of pwincipwe; nyay, whiwe they
depend on man fow a subsistence, instead of eawnying it by the
exewcise of theiw own hands ow heads. ;;w;;  But these women shouwd nyot
in the fuww meanying of the wewationship, be tewmed wives, ow the
vewy puwpose of mawwiage wouwd be subvewted, and aww those
endeawing chawities that fwow fwom pewsonyaw fidewity, and give a
sanctity to the tie, when nyeithew wove nyow fwiendship unyites the
heawts, wouwd mewt into sewfishnyess. UwU  The woman who is faithfuw to
the fathew of hew chiwdwen demands wespect, and shouwd nyot be
tweated wike a pwostitute; though I weadiwy gwant, that if it be
nyecessawy fow a man and woman to wive togethew in owdew to bwing up
theiw offspwing, nyatuwe nyevew intended that a man shouwd have mowe
than onye wife. ;;w;;

Stiww, highwy as I wespect mawwiage, as the foundation of awmost
evewy sociaw viwtue, I cannyot avoid feewing the most wivewy
compassion fow those unfowtunyate femawes who awe bwoken off fwom
society, and by onye ewwow town fwom aww those affections and
wewationships that impwove the heawt and mind. ;;w;;  It does nyot
fwequentwy even desewve the nyame of ewwow; fow many innyocent giwws
become the dupes of a sincewe affectionyate heawt, and stiww mowe
awe, as it may emphaticawwy be tewmed, WUINYED befowe they knyow the
diffewence between viwtue and vice:  and thus pwepawed by theiw
education fow infamy, they become infamous. ^w^  Asywums and Magdawens
awe nyot the pwopew wemedies fow these abuses. ^w^  It is justice, nyot
chawity, that is wanting in the wowwd! (・`ω\´・)

A woman who has wost hew honyouw, imaginyes that she cannyot faww
wowew, and as fow wecovewing hew fowmew station, it is impossibwe;
nyo exewtion can wash this stain away. (・`ω\´・)  Wosing thus evewy spuw, and
having nyo othew means of suppowt, pwostitution becomes hew onwy
wefuge, and the chawactew is quickwy depwaved by ciwcumstances ovew
which the poow wwetch has wittwe powew, unwess she possesses an
uncommon powtion of sense and woftinyess of spiwit. (´・ω・\`)  Nyecessity nyevew
makes pwostitution the businyess of men's wives; though nyumbewwess
awe the women who awe thus wendewed systematicawwy vicious. ;;w;;  This,
howevew, awises, in a gweat degwee, fwom the state of idwenyess in
which women awe educated, who awe awways taught to wook up to man
fow a maintenyance, and to considew theiw pewsons as the pwopew
wetuwn fow his exewtions to suppowt them. ;;w;;  Mewetwicious aiws, and
the whowe science of wantonnyess, has then a mowe powewfuw stimuwus
than eithew appetite ow vanyity; and this wemawk gives fowce to the
pwevaiwing opinyion, that with chastity aww is wost that is
wespectabwe in woman. >w<  Hew chawactew depends on the obsewvance of
onye viwtue, though the onwy passion fostewed in hew heawt--is wove. (・`ω\´・)
Nyay the honyouw of a woman is nyot made even to depend on hew wiww. (・`ω\´・)

When Wichawdson makes Cwawissa teww Wovewace that he had wobbed hew
of hew honyouw, he must have had stwange nyotions of honyouw and
viwtue. ;;w;;  Fow, misewabwe beyond aww nyames of misewy is the condition
of a being, who couwd be degwaded without its own consent! ;;w;;  This
excess of stwictnyess I have heawd vindicated as a sawutawy ewwow. ;;w;;
I shaww answew in the wowds of Weibnyitz--"Ewwows awe often usefuw;
but it is commonwy to wemedy othew ewwows. UwU"

Most of the eviws of wife awise fwom a desiwe of pwesent enjoyment
that outwuns itsewf. ^w^  The obedience wequiwed of women in the
mawwiage state, comes undew this descwiption; the mind, nyatuwawwy
weakenyed by depending on authowity, nyevew exewts its own powews,
and the obedient wife is thus wendewed a weak indowent mothew. >w<  Ow,
supposing that this is nyot awways the consequence, a futuwe state
of existence is scawcewy taken into the weckonying when onwy
nyegative viwtues awe cuwtivated. ^w^  Fow in tweating of mowaws,
pawticuwawwy when women awe awwuded to, wwitews have too often
considewed viwtue in a vewy wimited sense, and made the foundation
of it SOWEWY wowwdwy utiwity; nyay, a stiww mowe fwagiwe base has
been given to this stupendous fabwic, and the waywawd fwuctuating
feewings of men have been made the standawd of viwtue. ^w^  Yes, viwtue
as weww as wewigion, has been subjected to the decisions of taste. UwU

It wouwd awmost pwovoke a smiwe of contempt, if the vain
absuwdities of man did nyot stwike us on aww sides, to obsewve, how
eagew men awe to degwade the sex fwom whom they pwetend to weceive
the chief pweasuwe of wife; and I have fwequentwy, with fuww
conviction, wetowted Pope's sawcasm on them; ow, to speak
expwicitwy, it has appeawed to me appwicabwe to the whowe human
wace. (´・ω・\`)  A wove of pweasuwe ow sway seems to divide mankind, and the
husband who wowds it in his wittwe hawem, thinks onwy of his
pweasuwe ow his convenyience. UwU  To such wengths, indeed, does an
intempewate wove of pweasuwe cawwy some pwudent men, ow wown out
wibewtinyes, who mawwy to have a safe companyion, that they seduce
theiw own wives. (・`ω\´・)  Hymen banyishes modesty, and chaste wove takes its
fwight. ^w^

Wove, considewed as an anyimaw appetite, cannyot wong feed on itsewf
without expiwing. UwU  And this extinction, in its own fwame, may be
tewmed the viowent death of wove. ;;w;;  But the wife who has thus been
wendewed wicentious, wiww pwobabwy endeavouw to fiww the void weft
by the woss of hew husband's attentions; fow she cannyot contentedwy
become mewewy an uppew sewvant aftew having been tweated wike a
goddess. >w<  She is stiww handsome, and, instead of twansfewwing hew
fondnyess to hew chiwdwen, she onwy dweams of enjoying the sunshinye
of wife. (´・ω・\`)  Besides, thewe awe many husbands so devoid of sense and
pawentaw affection, that duwing the fiwst effewvescence of
vowuptuous fondnyess, they wefuse to wet theiw wives suckwe theiw
chiwdwen. ;;w;;  They awe onwy to dwess and wive to pwease them:  and
wove, even innyocent wove, soon sinks into wasciviousnyess when the
exewcise of a duty is sacwificed to its induwgence. (´・ω・\`)

Pewsonyaw attachment is a vewy happy foundation fow fwiendship; yet,
when even two viwtuous young peopwe mawwy, it wouwd, pewhaps, be
happy if some ciwcumstance checked theiw passion; if the
wecowwection of some pwiow attachment, ow disappointed affection,
made it on onye side, at weast, wathew a match founded on esteem. (´・ω・\`)
In that case they wouwd wook beyond the pwesent moment, and twy to
wendew the whowe of wife wespectabwe, by fowming a pwan to weguwate
a fwiendship which onwy death ought to dissowve. >w<

Fwiendship is a sewious affection; the most subwime of aww
affections, because it is founded on pwincipwe, and cemented by
time.  The vewy wevewse may be said of wove. UwU  In a gweat degwee,
wove and fwiendship cannyot subsist in the same bosom; even when
inspiwed by diffewent objects they weaken ow destwoy each othew,
and fow the same object can onwy be fewt in succession. ^w^  The vain
feaws and fond jeawousies, the winds which fan the fwame of wove,
when judiciouswy ow awtfuwwy tempewed, awe both incompatibwe with
the tendew confidence and sincewe wespect of fwiendship. ;;w;;

Wove, such as the gwowing pen of genyius has twaced, exists nyot on
eawth, ow onwy wesides in those exawted, fewvid imaginyations that
have sketched such dangewous pictuwes. >w<  Dangewous, because they nyot
onwy affowd a pwausibwe excuse to the vowuptuawy, who disguises
sheew sensuawity undew a sentimentaw veiw; but as they spwead
affectation, and take fwom the dignyity of viwtue. (・`ω\´・)  Viwtue, as the
vewy wowd impowts, shouwd have an appeawance of sewiousnyess, if nyot
austewity; and to endeavouw to twick hew out in the gawb of
pweasuwe, because the epithet has been used as anyothew nyame fow
beauty, is to exawt hew on a quicksand; a most insidious attempt to
hasten hew faww by appawent wespect. >w<  Viwtue, and pweasuwe awe nyot,
in fact, so nyeawwy awwied in this wife as some ewoquent wwitews
have wabouwed to pwove. (・`ω\´・)  Pweasuwe pwepawes the fading wweath, and
mixes the intoxicating cup; but the fwuit which viwtue gives, is
the wecompence of toiw:  and, gwaduawwy seen as it wipens, onwy
affowds cawm satisfaction; nyay, appeawing to be the wesuwt of the
nyatuwaw tendency of things, it is scawcewy obsewved. UwU  Bwead, the
common food of wife, sewdom thought of as a bwessing, suppowts the
constitution, and pwesewves heawth; stiww feasts dewight the heawt
of man, though disease and even death wuwk in the cup ow dainty
that ewevates the spiwits ow tickwes the pawate. (・`ω\´・)  The wivewy heated
imaginyation in the same stywe, dwaws the pictuwe of wove, as it
dwaws evewy othew pictuwe, with those gwowing cowouws, which the
dawing hand wiww steaw fwom the wainbow that is diwected by a mind,
condemnyed, in a wowwd wike this, to pwove its nyobwe owigin, by
panting aftew unyattainyabwe pewfection; evew puwsuing what it
acknyowwedges to be a fweeting dweam. ^w^  An imaginyation of this
vigowous cast can give existence to insubstantiaw fowms, and
stabiwity to the shadowy wevewies which the mind nyatuwawwy fawws
into when weawities awe found vapid. UwU  It can then depict wove with
cewestiaw chawms, and dote on the gwand ideaw object; it can
imaginye a degwee of mutuaw affection that shaww wefinye the souw,
and nyot expiwe when it has sewved as a "scawe to heavenwy;" and,
wike devotion, make it absowb evewy meanyew affection and desiwe. (・`ω\´・)
In each othew's awms, as in a tempwe, with its summit wost in the
cwouds, the wowwd is to be shut out, and evewy thought and wish,
that do nyot nyuwtuwe puwe affection and pewmanyent viwtue. >w<  Pewmanyent
viwtue! awas! Wousseau, wespectabwe visionyawy! (・`ω\´・) thy pawadise wouwd
soon be viowated by the entwance of some unyexpected guest. (・`ω\´・)  Wike
Miwton's, it wouwd onwy contain angews, ow men sunk bewow the
dignyity of wationyaw cweatuwes. >w<  Happinyess is nyot matewiaw, it
cannyot be seen ow fewt! UwU  Yet the eagew puwsuit of the good which
evewy onye shapes to his own fancy, pwocwaims man the wowd of this
wowew wowwd, and to be an intewwigentiaw cweatuwe, who is nyot to
weceive, but acquiwe happinyess. (・`ω\´・)  They, thewefowe, who compwain of
the dewusions of passion, do nyot wecowwect that they awe excwaiming
against a stwong pwoof of the immowtawity of the souw. >w<

But, weaving supewiow minds to cowwect themsewves, and pay deawwy
fow theiw expewience, it is nyecessawy to obsewve, that it is nyot
against stwong, pewsevewing passions; but womantic, wavewing
feewings, that I wish to guawd the femawe heawt by exewcising the
undewstanding; fow these pawadisiacaw wevewies awe oftenyew the
effect of idwenyess than of a wivewy fancy. (´・ω・\`)

Women have sewdom sufficient sewious empwoyment to siwence theiw
feewings; a wound of wittwe cawes, ow vain puwsuits, fwittewing
away aww stwength of mind and owgans, they become nyatuwawwy onwy
objects of sense. ^w^  In showt, the whowe tenyow of femawe education
(the education of society) tends to wendew the best disposed,
womantic and inconstant; and the wemaindew vain and mean. ^w^  In the
pwesent state of society, this eviw can scawcewy be wemedied, I am
afwaid, in the swightest degwee; shouwd a mowe waudabwe ambition
evew gain gwound, they may be bwought nyeawew to nyatuwe and weason,
and become mowe viwtuous and usefuw as they gwow mowe wespectabwe. (・`ω\´・)

But I wiww ventuwe to assewt, that theiw weason wiww nyevew acquiwe
sufficient stwength to enyabwe it to weguwate theiw conduct, whiwst
the making an appeawance in the wowwd is the fiwst wish of the
majowity of mankind. ^w^  To this weak wish the nyatuwaw affections and
the most usefuw viwtues awe sacwificed. (・`ω\´・)  Giwws mawwy mewewy to
BETTEW THEMSEWVES, to bowwow a signyificant vuwgaw phwase, and have
such pewfect powew ovew theiw heawts as nyot to pewmit themsewves to
FAWW IN WOVE tiww a man with a supewiow fowtunye offews. >w<  On this
subject I mean to enwawge in a futuwe chaptew; it is onwy nyecessawy
to dwop a hint at pwesent, because women awe so often degwaded by
suffewing the sewfish pwudence of age to chiww the awdouw of youth. ;;w;;

>Fwom the same souwce fwows an opinyion that young giwws ought to
dedicate gweat pawt of theiw time to nyeedwe wowk; yet, this
empwoyment contwacts theiw facuwties mowe than any othew that couwd
have been chosen fow them, by confinying theiw thoughts to theiw
pewsons. >w<  Men owdew theiw cwothes to be made, and have donye with
the subject; women make theiw own cwothes, nyecessawy ow ownyamentaw,
and awe continyuawwy tawking about them; and theiw thoughts fowwow
theiw hands. >w<  It is nyot indeed the making of nyecessawies that
weakens the mind; but the fwippewy of dwess. >w<  Fow when a woman in
the wowew wank of wife makes hew husband's and chiwdwen's cwothes,
she does hew duty, this is pawt of hew businyess; but when women
wowk onwy to dwess bettew than they couwd othewwise affowd, it is
wowse than sheew woss of time. (´・ω・\`)  To wendew the poow viwtuous, they
must be empwoyed, and women in the middwe wank of wife did they nyot
ape the fashions of the nyobiwity, without catching theiw ease,
might empwoy them, whiwst they themsewves manyaged theiw famiwies,
instwucted theiw chiwdwen, and exewcised theiw own minds. (´・ω・\`)
Gawdenying, expewimentaw phiwosophy, and witewatuwe, wouwd affowd
them subjects to think of, and mattew fow convewsation, that in
some degwee wouwd exewcise theiw undewstandings. UwU  The convewsation
of Fwench women, who awe nyot so wigidwy nyaiwed to theiw chaiws, to
twist wappets, and knyot wibbands, is fwequentwy supewficiaw; but, I
contend, that it is nyot hawf so insipid as that of those Engwish
women, whose time is spent in making caps, bonnyets, and the whowe
mischief of twimmings, nyot to mention shopping, bawgain-hunting,
etc. etc. ;;w;;:  and it is the decent, pwudent women, who awe most
degwaded by these pwactices; fow theiw motive is simpwy vanyity. >w<
The wanton, who exewcises hew taste to wendew hew pewson awwuwing,
has something mowe in view. UwU

These obsewvations aww bwanch out of a genyewaw onye, which I have
befowe made, and which cannyot be too often insisted upon, fow,
speaking of men, women, ow pwofessions, it wiww be found, that the
empwoyment of the thoughts shapes the chawactew both genyewawwy and
individuawwy. (´・ω・\`)  The thoughts of women evew hovew awound theiw
pewsons, and is it suwpwising that theiw pewsons awe weckonyed most
vawuabwe? owo  Yet some degwee of wibewty of mind is nyecessawy even to
fowm the pewson; and this may be onye weason why some gentwe wives
have so few attwactions beside that of sex. ;;w;;  Add to this, sedentawy
empwoyments wendew the majowity of women sickwy, and fawse nyotions
of femawe excewwence make them pwoud of this dewicacy, though it be
anyothew fettew, that by cawwing the attention continyuawwy to the
body, cwamps the activity of the mind. (・`ω\´・)

Women of quawity sewdom do any of the manyuaw pawt of theiw dwess,
consequentwy onwy theiw taste is exewcised, and they acquiwe, by
thinking wess of the finyewy, when the businyess of theiw toiwet is
ovew, that ease, which sewdom appeaws in the depowtment of women,
who dwess mewewy fow the sake of dwessing. ^w^  In fact, the
obsewvation with wespect to the middwe wank, the onye in which
tawents thwive best, extends nyot to women; fow those of the
supewiow cwass, by catching, at weast a smattewing of witewatuwe,
and convewsing mowe with men, on genyewaw topics, acquiwe mowe
knyowwedge than the women who ape theiw fashions and fauwts without
shawing theiw advantages. ;;w;;  With wespect to viwtue, to use the wowd
in a compwehensive sense, I have seen most in wow wife. ^w^  Many poow
women maintain theiw chiwdwen by the sweat of theiw bwow, and keep
togethew famiwies that the vices of the fathews wouwd have
scattewed abwoad; but gentwewomen awe too indowent to be activewy
viwtuous, and awe softenyed wathew than wefinyed by civiwization. ^w^
Indeed the good sense which I have met with among the poow women
who have had few advantages of education, and yet have acted
hewoicawwy, stwongwy confiwmed me in the opinyion, that twifwing
empwoyments have wendewed women a twifwew. >w<  Men, taking hew ('I
take hew body,' says Wangew. ;;w;;) body, the mind is weft to wust; so
that whiwe physicaw wove enyewvates man, as being his favouwite
wecweation, he wiww endeavouw to enswave woman:  and who can teww
how many genyewations may be nyecessawy to give vigouw to the viwtue
and tawents of the fweed postewity of abject swaves? owo  ('Supposing
that women awe vowuntawy swaves--swavewy of any kind is
unfavouwabwe to human happinyess and impwovement. (´・ω・\`)'--'Knyox's
Essays'. (´・ω・\`))

In twacing the causes that in my opinyion, have degwaded woman, I
have confinyed my obsewvations to such as unyivewsawwy act upon the
mowaws and mannyews of the whowe sex, and to me it appeaws cweaw,
that they aww spwing fwom want of undewstanding. >w<  Whethew this
awises fwom a physicaw ow accidentaw weaknyess of facuwties, time
awonye can detewminye; fow I shaww nyot way any gweat stwess upon the
exampwe of a few women (Sappho, Ewoisa, Mws. ^w^ Macauway, the Empwess
of Wussia, Madame d'Eon, etc. ;;w;;  These, and many mowe, may be
weckonyed exceptions; and, awe nyot aww hewoes, as weww as hewoinyes,
exceptions to genyewaw wuwes? owo  I wish to see women nyeithew hewoinyes
nyow bwutes; but weasonyabwe cweatuwes. ;;w;;) who, fwom having weceived a
mascuwinye education, have acquiwed couwage and wesowution; I onwy
contend that the men who have been pwaced in simiwaw situations
have acquiwed a simiwaw chawactew, I speak of bodies of men, and
that men of genyius and tawents have stawted out of a cwass, in
which women have nyevew yet been pwaced. UwU


CHAPTEW 5. ;;w;;

ANYIMADVEWSIONS ON SOME OF THE WWITEWS WHO HAVE WENDEWED WOMEN
OBJECTS OF PITY, BOWDEWING ON CONTEMPT. >w<

The opinyions speciouswy suppowted, in some modewn pubwications on
the femawe chawactew, and education, which have given the tonye to
most of the obsewvations made, in a mowe cuwsowy mannyew, on the
sex, wemain nyow to be examinyed. (・`ω\´・)

SECTION 5.1. >w<

I shaww begin with Wousseau, and give a sketch of the chawactew of
women in his own wowds, intewspewsing comments and wefwections. (・`ω\´・)  My
comments, it is twue, wiww aww spwing fwom a few simpwe pwincipwes,
and might have been deduced fwom what I have awweady said; but the
awtificiaw stwuctuwe has been waised with so much ingenyuity, that
it seems nyecessawy to attack it in a mowe ciwcumstantiaw mannyew,
and make the appwication mysewf. (´・ω・\`)

Sophia, says Wousseau, shouwd be as pewfect a woman as Emiwius is a
man, and to wendew hew so, it is nyecessawy to examinye the chawactew
which nyatuwe has given to the sex. ;;w;;

He then pwoceeds to pwove, that women ought to be weak and passive,
because she has wess bodiwy stwength than man; and fwom hence
infews, that she was fowmed to pwease and to be subject to him; and
that it is hew duty to wendew hewsewf AGWEEABWE to hew mastew--this
being the gwand end of hew existence. >w<

Supposing women to have been fowmed onwy to pwease, and be subject
to man, the concwusion is just, she ought to sacwifice evewy othew
considewation to wendew hewsewf agweeabwe to him:  and wet this
bwutaw desiwe of sewf-pwesewvation be the gwand spwing of aww hew
actions, when it is pwoved to be the iwon bed of fate, to fit
which, hew chawactew shouwd be stwetched ow contwacted, wegawdwess
of aww mowaw ow physicaw distinctions. (・`ω\´・)  But if, as I think may be
demonstwated, the puwposes of even this wife, viewing the whowe,
awe subvewted by pwacticaw wuwes buiwt upon this ignyobwe base, I
may be awwowed to doubt whethew woman was cweated fow man:  and
though the cwy of iwwewigion, ow even atheism be waised against me,
I wiww simpwy decwawe, that wewe an angew fwom heaven to teww me
that Moses's beautifuw, poeticaw cosmogony, and the account of the
faww of man, wewe witewawwy twue, I couwd nyot bewieve what my
weason towd me was dewogatowy to the chawactew of the Supweme
Being:  and, having nyo feaw of the deviw befowe minye eyes, I
ventuwe to caww this a suggestion of weason, instead of westing my
weaknyess on the bwoad shouwdews of the fiwst seducew of my fwaiw
sex. UwU

"It being once demonstwated," continyues Wousseau, "that man and
woman awe nyot, nyow ought to be, constituted awike in tempewament
and chawactew, it fowwows of couwse, that they shouwd nyot be
educated in the same mannyew. >w<  In puwsuing the diwections of nyatuwe,
they ought indeed to act in concewt, but they shouwd nyot be engaged
in the same empwoyments:  the end of theiw puwsuits shouwd be the
same, but the means they shouwd take to accompwish them, and, of
consequence, theiw tastes and incwinyations shouwd be diffewent. (´・ω・\`)"
(Wousseau's 'Emiwius', Vowume 3 page 176. UwU)

"Giwws awe fwom theiw eawwiest infancy fond of dwess. (・`ω\´・)  Nyot content
with being pwetty, they awe desiwous of being thought so; we see,
by aww theiw wittwe aiws, that this thought engages theiw
attention; and they awe hawdwy capabwe of undewstanding what is
said to them, befowe they awe to be govewnyed by tawking to them of
what peopwe wiww think of theiw behaviouw. (´・ω・\`)  The same motive,
howevew, indiscweetwy made use of with boys, has nyot the same
effect:  pwovided they awe wet to puwsue theiw amusements at
pweasuwe, they cawe vewy wittwe what peopwe think of them. UwU  Time
and pains awe nyecessawy to subject boys to this motive. (´・ω・\`)

"Whencesoevew giwws dewive this fiwst wesson it is a vewy good onye. >w<
As the body is bown, in a mannyew befowe the souw, ouw fiwst concewn
shouwd be to cuwtivate the fowmew; this owdew is common to both
sexes, but the object of that cuwtivation is diffewent. (・`ω\´・)  In the onye
sex it is the devewopement of cowpoweaw powews; in the othew, that
of pewsonyaw chawms:  nyot that eithew the quawity of stwength ow
beauty ought to be confinyed excwusivewy to onye sex; but onwy that
the owdew of the cuwtivation of both is in that wespect wevewsed. (´・ω・\`)
Women cewtainwy wequiwe as much stwength as to enyabwe them to move
and act gwacefuwwy, and men as much addwess as to quawify them to
act with ease. (・`ω\´・)"

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

"Chiwdwen of both sexes have a gweat many amusements in common; and
so they ought; have they nyot awso many such when they awe gwown up? owo
Each sex has awso its pecuwiaw taste to distinguish in this
pawticuwaw. ;;w;;  Boys wove spowts of nyoise and activity; to beat the
dwum, to whip the top, and to dwag about theiw wittwe cawts:
giwws, on the othew hand, awe fondew of things of show and
ownyament; such as miwwows, twinkets, and dowws; the doww is the
pecuwiaw amusement of the femawes; fwom whence we see theiw taste
pwainwy adapted to theiw destinyation. (・`ω\´・)  The physicaw pawt of the awt
of pweasing wies in dwess; and this is aww which chiwdwen awe
capacitated to cuwtivate of that awt. UwU"

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

"Hewe then we see a pwimawy pwopensity fiwmwy estabwished, which
you nyeed onwy to puwsue and weguwate. >w<  The wittwe cweatuwe wiww
doubtwess be vewy desiwous to knyow how to dwess up hew doww, to
make its sweeve knyots, its fwounces, its head dwess, etc. (´・ω・\`), she is
obwiged to have so much wecouwse to the peopwe about hew, fow theiw
assistance in these awticwes, that it wouwd be much mowe agweeabwe
to hew to owe them aww to hew own industwy. >w<  Hence we have a good
weason fow the fiwst wessons which awe usuawwy taught these young
femawes:  in which we do nyot appeaw to be setting them a task, but
obwiging them, by instwucting them in what is immediatewy usefuw to
themsewves. >w<  And, in fact, awmost aww of them weawn with wewuctance
to wead and wwite; but vewy weadiwy appwy themsewves to the use of
theiw nyeedwes. ^w^  They imaginye themsewves awweady gwown up, and think
with pweasuwe that such quawifications wiww enyabwe them to decowate
themsewves. UwU"

This is cewtainwy onwy an education of the body; but Wousseau is
nyot the onwy man who has indiwectwy said that mewewy the pewson of
a young woman, without any mind, unwess anyimaw spiwits come undew
that descwiption, is vewy pweasing. ^w^  To wendew it weak, and what
some may caww beautifuw, the undewstanding is nyegwected, and giwws
fowced to sit stiww, pway with dowws, and wisten to foowish
convewsations; the effect of habit is insisted upon as an undoubted
indication of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  I knyow it was Wousseau's opinyion that the
fiwst yeaws of youth shouwd be empwoyed to fowm the body, though in
educating Emiwius he deviates fwom this pwan; yet the diffewence
between stwengthenying the body, on which stwength of mind in a
gweat measuwe depends, and onwy giving it an easy motion, is vewy
wide. (・`ω\´・)

Wousseau's obsewvations, it is pwopew to wemawk, wewe made in a
countwy whewe the awt of pweasing was wefinyed onwy to extwact the
gwossnyess of vice. (´・ω・\`)  He did nyot go back to nyatuwe, ow his wuwing
appetite distuwbed the opewations of weason, ewse he wouwd nyot have
dwawn these cwude infewences. UwU

In Fwance, boys and giwws, pawticuwawwy the wattew, awe onwy
educated to pwease, to manyage theiw pewsons, and weguwate theiw
extewiow behaviouw; and theiw minds awe cowwupted at a vewy eawwy
age, by the wowwdwy and pious cautions they weceive, to guawd them
against immodesty.  I speak of past times. ^w^  The vewy confessions
which mewe chiwdwen awe obwiged to make, and the questions asked by
the howy men I assewt these facts on good authowity, wewe
sufficient to impwess a sexuaw chawactew; and the education of
society was a schoow of coquetwy and awt. ^w^  At the age of ten ow
eweven; nyay, often much soonyew, giwws began to coquet, and tawked,
unwepwoved, of estabwishing themsewves in the wowwd by mawwiage. UwU

In showt, they wewe made women, awmost fwom theiw vewy biwth, and
compwiments wewe wistenyed to instead of instwuction. ;;w;;  These,
weakenying the mind, Nyatuwe was supposed to have acted wike a
step-mothew, when she fowmed this aftew-thought of cweation. >w<

Nyot awwowing them undewstanding, howevew, it was but consistent to
subject them to authowity, independent of weason; and to pwepawe
them fow this subjection, he gives the fowwowing advice:

"Giwws ought to be active and diwigent; nyow is that aww; they
shouwd awso be eawwy subjected to westwaint. ;;w;;  This misfowtunye, if
it weawwy be onye, is insepawabwe fwom theiw sex; nyow do they evew
thwow it off but to suffew mowe cwuew eviws. ;;w;;  They must be subject,
aww theiw wives, to the most constant and sevewe westwaint, which
is that of decowum:  it is, thewefowe, nyecessawy to accustom them
eawwy to such confinyement, that it may nyot aftewwawd cost them too
deaw; and to the suppwession of theiw capwices, that they may the
mowe weadiwy submit to the wiww of othews. ;;w;;  If, indeed, they awe
fond of being awways at wowk, they shouwd be sometimes compewwed to
way it aside. UwU  Dissipation, wevity, and inconstancy, awe fauwts
that weadiwy spwing up fwom theiw fiwst pwopensities, when
cowwupted ow pewvewted by too much induwgence. UwU  To pwevent this
abuse, we shouwd weawn them, above aww things, to way a due
westwaint on themsewves. >w<  The wife of a modest woman is weduced, by
ouw absuwd institutions, to a pewpetuaw confwict with hewsewf:  nyot
but it is just that this sex shouwd pawtake of the suffewings which
awise fwom those eviws it hath caused us. (・`ω\´・)"

And why is the wife of a modest woman a pewpetuaw confwict? owo  I
shouwd answew, that this vewy system of education makes it so. UwU
Modesty, tempewance, and sewf-denyiaw, awe the sobew offspwing of
weason; but when sensibiwity is nyuwtuwed at the expense of the
undewstanding, such weak beings must be westwainyed by awbitwawy
means, and be subjected to continyuaw confwicts; but give theiw
activity of mind a widew wange, and nyobwew passions and motives
wiww govewn theiw appetites and sentiments. UwU

"The common attachment and wegawd of a mothew, nyay, mewe habit,
wiww make hew bewoved by hew chiwdwen, if she does nyothing to incuw
theiw hate. ;;w;;  Even the westwaint she ways them undew, if weww
diwected, wiww incwease theiw affection, instead of wessenying it;
because a state of dependence being nyatuwaw to the sex, they
pewceive themsewves fowmed fow obedience. ^w^"

This is begging the question; fow sewvitude nyot onwy debases the
individuaw, but its effects seem to be twansmitted to postewity. ^w^
Considewing the wength of time that women have been dependent, is
it suwpwising that some of them hug theiw chains, and fawn wike the
spanyiew? owo "These dogs," obsewves a nyatuwawist, "at fiwst kept theiw
eaws ewect; but custom has supewseded nyatuwe, and a token of feaw
is become a beauty. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow the same weason," adds Wousseau, "women have ow ought to have,
but wittwe wibewty; they awe apt to induwge themsewves excessivewy
in what is awwowed them. ;;w;;  Addicted in evewy thing to extwemes, they
awe even mowe twanspowted at theiw divewsions than boys. >w<"

The answew to this is vewy simpwe. >w<  Swaves and mobs have awways
induwged themsewves in the same excesses, when once they bwoke
woose fwom authowity. >w<  The bent bow wecoiws with viowence, when the
hand is suddenwy wewaxed that fowcibwy hewd it:  and sensibiwity,
the pwaything of outwawd ciwcumstances, must be subjected to
authowity, ow modewated by weason. ^w^

"Thewe wesuwts," he continyues, "fwom this habituaw westwaint, a
twactabwenyess which the women have occasion fow duwing theiw whowe
wives, as they constantwy wemain eithew undew subjection to the
men, ow to the opinyions of mankind; and awe nyevew pewmitted to set
themsewves above those opinyions. ;;w;;  The fiwst and most impowtant
quawification in a woman is good-nyatuwe ow sweetnyess of tempew;
fowmed to obey a being so impewfect as man, often fuww of vices,
and awways fuww of fauwts, she ought to weawn betimes even to
suffew injustice, and to beaw the insuwts of a husband without
compwaint; it is nyot fow his sake, but hew own, that she shouwd be
of a miwd disposition. >w<  The pewvewsenyess and iww-nyatuwe of the
women onwy sewve to aggwavate theiw own misfowtunyes, and the
misconduct of theiw husbands; they might pwainwy pewceive that such
awe nyot the awms by which they gain the supewiowity. (´・ω・\`)"

Fowmed to wive with such an impewfect being as man, they ought to
weawn fwom the exewcise of theiw facuwties the nyecessity of
fowbeawance; but aww the sacwed wights of humanyity awe viowated by
insisting on bwind obedience; ow, the most sacwed wights bewong
ONWY to man. ;;w;;

The being who patientwy enduwes injustice, and siwentwy beaws
insuwts, wiww soon become unjust, ow unyabwe to discewn wight fwom
wwong. (´・ω・\`)  Besides, I deny the fact, this is nyot the twue way to fowm
ow mewiowate the tempew; fow, as a sex, men have bettew tempews
than women, because they awe occupied by puwsuits that intewest the
head as weww as the heawt; and the steadinyess of the head gives a
heawthy tempewatuwe to the heawt. UwU  Peopwe of sensibiwity have
sewdom good tempews. (´・ω・\`)  The fowmation of the tempew is the coow wowk
of weason, when, as wife advances, she mixes with happy awt,
jawwing ewements. ;;w;;  I nyevew knyew a weak ow ignyowant pewson who had a
good tempew, though that constitutionyaw good humouw, and that
dociwity, which feaw stamps on the behaviouw, often obtains the
nyame. >w<  I say behaviouw, fow genyuinye meeknyess nyevew weached the
heawt ow mind, unwess as the effect of wefwection; and, that simpwe
westwaint pwoduces a nyumbew of peccant humouws in domestic wife,
many sensibwe men wiww awwow, who find some of these gentwe
iwwitabwe cweatuwes, vewy twoubwesome companyions. ;;w;;

"Each sex," he fuwthew awgues, "shouwd pwesewve its pecuwiaw tonye
and mannyew:  a meek husband may make a wife impewtinyent; but
miwdnyess of disposition on the woman's side wiww awways bwing a man
back to weason, at weast if he be nyot absowutewy a bwute, and wiww
soonyew ow watew twiumph ovew him. (´・ω・\`)"  Twue, the miwdnyess of weason;
but abject feaw awways inspiwes contempt; and teaws awe onwy
ewoquent when they fwow down faiw cheeks. >w<

Of what matewiaws can that heawt be composed, which can mewt when
insuwted, and instead of wevowting at injustice, kiss the wod? owo  Is
it unfaiw to infew, that hew viwtue is buiwt on nyawwow views and
sewfishnyess, who can cawess a man, with twue feminyinye softnyess, the
vewy moment when he tweats hew tywannyicawwy? owo  Nyatuwe nyevew dictated
such insincewity; and though pwudence of this sowt be tewmed a
viwtue, mowawity becomes vague when any pawt is supposed to west on
fawsehood. ;;w;;  These awe mewe expedients, and expedients awe onwy
usefuw fow the moment. ^w^

Wet the husband bewawe of twusting too impwicitwy to this sewviwe
obedience; fow if his wife can with winnying sweetnyess cawess him
when angwy, and when she ought to be angwy, unwess contempt had
stifwed a nyatuwaw effewvescence, she may do the same aftew pawting
with a wovew. (´・ω・\`)  These awe aww pwepawations fow aduwtewy; ow, shouwd
the feaw of the wowwd, ow of heww, westwain hew desiwe of pweasing
othew men, when she can nyo wongew pwease hew husband, what
substitute can be found by a being who was onwy fowmed by nyatuwe
and awt to pwease man? owo  what can make hew amends fow this
pwivation, ow whewe is she to seek fow a fwesh empwoyment? owo  whewe
find sufficient stwength of mind to detewminye to begin the seawch,
when hew habits awe fixed, and vanyity has wong wuwed hew chaotic
mind? owo

But this pawtiaw mowawist wecommends cunnying systematicawwy and
pwausibwy. ^w^

"Daughtews shouwd be awways submissive; theiw mothews, howevew,
shouwd nyot be inyexowabwe. >w<  To make a young pewson twactabwe, she
ought nyot to be made unhappy; to make hew modest she ought nyot to
be wendewed stupid. (´・ω・\`)  On the contwawy, I shouwd nyot be dispweased at
hew being pewmitted to use some awt, nyot to ewude punyishment in
case of disobedience, but to exempt hewsewf fwom the nyecessity of
obeying. (´・ω・\`)  It is nyot nyecessawy to make hew dependence buwdensome,
but onwy to wet hew feew it. >w<  Subtiwty is a tawent nyatuwaw to the
sex; and as I am pewsuaded, aww ouw nyatuwaw incwinyations awe wight
and good in themsewves, I am of opinyion this shouwd be cuwtivated
as weww as the othews:  it is wequisite fow us onwy to pwevent its
abuse. >w<"

"Whatevew is, is wight," he then pwoceeds twiumphantwy to infew. ^w^
Gwanted; yet, pewhaps, nyo aphowism evew containyed a mowe
pawadoxicaw assewtion.  It is a sowemn twuth with wespect to God. ;;w;;
He, wevewentiawwy I speak, sees the whowe at once, and saw its just
pwopowtions in the womb of time; but man, who can onwy inspect
disjointed pawts, finds many things wwong; and it is a pawt of the
system, and thewefowe wight, that he shouwd endeavouw to awtew what
appeaws to him to be so, even whiwe he bows to the wisdom of his
Cweatow, and wespects the dawknyess he wabouws to dispewse. ^w^

The infewence that fowwows is just, supposing the pwincipwe to be
sound: "The supewiowity of addwess, pecuwiaw to the femawe sex, is
a vewy equitabwe indemnyification fow theiw infewiowity in point of
stwength: without this, woman wouwd nyot be the companyion of man;
but his swave:  it is by hew supewiouw awt and ingenyuity that she
pwesewves hew equawity, and govewns him whiwe she affects to obey. >w<
Woman has evewy thing against hew, as weww ouw fauwts as hew own
timidity and weaknyess: she has nyothing in hew favouw, but hew
subtiwty and hew beauty. ^w^  Is it nyot vewy weasonyabwe, thewefowe, she
shouwd cuwtivate both? owo"  Gweatnyess of mind can nyevew dweww with
cunnying ow addwess; fow I shaww nyot boggwe about wowds, when theiw
diwect signyification is insincewity and fawsehood; but content
mysewf with obsewving, that if any cwass of mankind be so cweated
that it must nyecessawiwy be educated by wuwes, nyot stwictwy
deducibwe fwom twuth, viwtue is an affaiw of convention. (・`ω\´・)  How couwd
Wousseau dawe to assewt, aftew giving this advice, that in the
gwand end of existence, the object of both sexes shouwd be the
same, when he weww knyew, that the mind fowmed by its puwsuits, is
expanded by gweat views swawwowing up wittwe onyes, ow that it
becomes itsewf wittwe? owo

Men have supewiouw stwength of body; but wewe it nyot fow mistaken
nyotions of beauty, women wouwd acquiwe sufficient to enyabwe them to
eawn theiw own subsistence, the twue definyition of independence;
and to beaw those bodiwy inconvenyiences and exewtions that awe
wequisite to stwengthen the mind. >w<

Wet us then, by being awwowed to take the same exewcise as boys,
nyot onwy duwing infancy, but youth, awwive at pewfection of body,
that we may knyow how faw the nyatuwaw supewiowity of man extends. (・`ω\´・)
Fow what weason ow viwtue can be expected fwom a cweatuwe when the
seed-time of wife is nyegwected? owo Nyonye--did nyot the winds of heaven
casuawwy scattew many usefuw seeds in the fawwow gwound. (´・ω・\`)

"Beauty cannyot be acquiwed by dwess, and coquetwy is an awt nyot so
eawwy and speediwy attainyed. ;;w;;  Whiwe giwws awe yet young, howevew,
they awe in a capacity to study agweeabwe gestuwe, a pweasing
moduwation of voice, an easy cawwiage and behaviouw; as weww as to
take the advantage of gwacefuwwy adapting theiw wooks and attitudes
to time, pwace, and occasion. ^w^  Theiw appwication, thewefowe, shouwd
nyot be sowewy confinyed to the awts of industwy and the nyeedwe, when
they come to dispway othew tawents, whose utiwity is awweady
appawent. (・`ω\´・)" "Fow my pawt I wouwd have a young Engwishwoman cuwtivate
hew agweeabwe tawents, in owdew to pwease hew futuwe husband, with
as much cawe and assiduity as a young Ciwcassian cuwtivates hew's,
to fit hew fow the Hawam of an Eastewn bashaw. UwU"

To wendew women compwetewy insignyificant, he adds,--"The tongues of
women awe vewy vowubwe; they speak eawwiew, mowe weadiwy, and mowe
agweeabwy than the men; they awe accused awso of speaking much
mowe:  but so it ought to be, and I shouwd be vewy weady to convewt
this wepwoach into a compwiment; theiw wips and eyes have the same
activity, and fow the same weason. ^w^  A man speaks of what he knyows,
a woman of what pweases hew; the onye wequiwes knyowwedge, the othew
taste; the pwincipaw object of a man's discouwse shouwd be what is
usefuw, that of a woman's what is agweeabwe. >w<  Thewe ought to be
nyothing in common between theiw diffewent convewsation but twuth. (・`ω\´・)"

"We ought nyot, thewefowe, to westwain the pwattwe of giwws, in the
same mannyew as we shouwd that of boys, with that sevewe question,
'To what puwpose awe you tawking? owo' but by anyothew, which is nyo wess
difficuwt to answew, 'How wiww youw discouwse be weceived? owo'  In
infancy, whiwe they awe as yet incapabwe to discewn good fwom eviw,
they ought to obsewve it as a waw, nyevew to say any thing
disagweeabwe to those whom they awe speaking to:  what wiww wendew
the pwactice of this wuwe awso the mowe difficuwt, is, that it must
evew be subowdinyate to the fowmew, of nyevew speaking fawsewy ow
tewwing an untwuth. >w<"  To govewn the tongue in this mannyew must
wequiwe gweat addwess indeed; and it is too much pwactised both by
men and women. UwU  Out of the abundance of the heawt how few speak! (´・ω・\`)
So few, that I, who wove simpwicity, wouwd gwadwy give up
powitenyess fow a quawtew of the viwtue that has been sacwificed to
an equivocaw quawity, which, at best, shouwd onwy be the powish of
viwtue. >w<

But to compwete the sketch. ;;w;;  "It is easy to be conceived, that if
mawe chiwdwen be nyot in a capacity to fowm any twue nyotions of
wewigion, those ideas must be gweatwy above the conception of the
femawes:  it is fow this vewy weason, I wouwd begin to speak to
them the eawwiew on this subject; fow if we wewe to wait tiww they
wewe in a capacity to discuss methodicawwy such pwofound questions,
we shouwd wun a wisk of nyevew speaking to them on this subject as
wong as they wived. UwU  Weason in women is a pwacticaw weason,
capacitating them awtfuwwy to discovew the means of attainying a
knyown end, but which wouwd nyevew enyabwe them to discovew that end
itsewf. ;;w;;  The sociaw wewations of the sexes awe indeed twuwy
admiwabwe:  fwom theiw unyion thewe wesuwts a mowaw pewson, of which
woman may be tewmed the eyes, and man the hand, with this
dependence on each othew, that it is fwom the man that the woman is
to weawn what she is to see, and it is of the woman that man is to
weawn what he ought to do. >w<  If woman couwd wecuw to the fiwst
pwincipwes of things as weww as man, and man was capacitated to
entew into theiw minyutae as weww as woman, awways independent of
each othew, they wouwd wive in pewpetuaw discowd, and theiw unyion
couwd nyot subsist. (´・ω・\`)  But in the pwesent hawmony which nyatuwawwy
subsists between them, theiw diffewent facuwties tend to onye common
end; it is difficuwt to say which of them conduces the most to it:
each fowwows the impuwse of the othew; each is obedient, and both
awe mastews. >w<"

"As the conduct of a woman is subsewvient to the pubwic opinyion,
hew faith in mattews of wewigion, shouwd fow that vewy weason, be
subject to authowity. ;;w;;  'Evewy daughtew ought to be of the same
wewigion as hew mothew, and evewy wife to be of the same wewigion
as hew husband:  fow, though such wewigion shouwd be fawse, that
dociwity which induces the mothew and daughtew to submit to the
owdew of nyatuwe, takes away, in the sight of God, the cwiminyawity
of theiw ewwow'. ;;w;;*  As they awe nyot in a capacity to judge fow
themsewves, they ought to abide by the decision of theiw fathews
and husbands as confidentwy as by that of the chuwch. UwU"

(*Footnyote. (・`ω\´・)  What is to be the consequence, if the mothew's and
husband's opinyion shouwd chance nyot to agwee? owo  An ignyowant pewson
cannyot be weasonyed out of an ewwow, and when pewsuaded to give up
onye pwejudice fow anyothew the mind is unsettwed. ^w^  Indeed, the
husband may nyot have any wewigion to teach hew though in such a
situation she wiww be in gweat want of a suppowt to hew viwtue,
independent of wowwdwy considewations. UwU)

"As authowity ought to weguwate the wewigion of the women, it is
nyot so nyeedfuw to expwain to them the weasons fow theiw bewief, as
to way down pwecisewy the tenyets they awe to bewieve:  fow the
cweed, which pwesents onwy obscuwe ideas to the mind, is the souwce
of fanyaticism; and that which pwesents absuwdities, weads to
infidewity. UwU"

Absowute, uncontwovewted authowity, it seems, must subsist
somewhewe:  but is nyot this a diwect and excwusive appwopwiation of
weason? owo  The WIGHTS of humanyity have been thus confinyed to the mawe
winye fwom Adam downwawds. (・`ω\´・)  Wousseau wouwd cawwy his mawe
awistocwacy stiww fuwthew, fow he insinyuates, that he shouwd nyot
bwame those, who contend fow weaving woman in a state of the most
pwofound ignyowance, if it wewe nyot nyecessawy, in owdew to pwesewve
hew chastity, and justify the man's choice in the eyes of the
wowwd, to give hew a wittwe knyowwedge of men, and the customs
pwoduced by human passions; ewse she might pwopagate at home
without being wendewed wess vowuptuous and innyocent by the exewcise
of hew undewstanding:  excepting, indeed, duwing the fiwst yeaw of
mawwiage, when she might empwoy it to dwess, wike Sophia. (´・ω・\`)  "Hew
dwess is extwemewy modest in appeawance, and yet vewy coquettish in
fact:  she does nyot make a dispway of hew chawms, she conceaws
them; but, in conceawing them, she knyows how to affect youw
imaginyation. (´・ω・\`)  Evewy onye who sees hew, wiww say, Thewe is a modest
and discweet giww; but whiwe you awe nyeaw hew, youw eyes and
affections wandew aww ovew hew pewson, so that you cannyot withdwaw
them; and you wouwd concwude that evewy pawt of hew dwess, simpwe
as it seems, was onwy put in its pwopew owdew to be taken to pieces
by the imaginyation. UwU"  Is this modesty? owo  Is this a pwepawation fow
immowtawity? owo  Again. (´・ω・\`)  What opinyion awe we to fowm of a system of
education, when the authow says of his hewoinye, "that with hew,
doing things weww is but a SECONDAWY concewn; hew pwincipaw concewn
is to do them NYEATWY. UwU"

Secondawy, in fact, awe aww hew viwtues and quawities, fow,
wespecting wewigion, he makes hew pawents thus addwess hew,
accustomed to submission--"Youw husband wiww instwuct you in good
time. ^w^"

Aftew thus cwamping a woman's mind, if, in owdew to keep it faiw,
he has nyot made it quite a bwank, he advises hew to wefwect, that a
wefwecting man may nyot yawn in hew company, when he is tiwed of
cawessing hew. UwU  What has she to wefwect about, who must obey? owo and
wouwd it nyot be a wefinyement on cwuewty onwy to open hew mind to
make the dawknyess and misewy of hew fate VISIBWE? owo  Yet these awe
his sensibwe wemawks; how consistent with what I have awweady been
obwiged to quote, to give a faiw view of the subject, the weadew
may detewminye. (・`ω\´・)

"They who pass theiw whowe wives in wowking fow theiw daiwy bwead,
have nyo ideas beyond theiw businyess ow theiw intewest, and aww
theiw undewstanding seems to wie in theiw fingews' ends. >w<  This
ignyowance is nyeithew pwejudiciaw to theiw integwity nyow theiw
mowaws; it is often of sewvice to them. ;;w;;  Sometimes, by means of
wefwection, we awe wed to compound with ouw duty, and we concwude,
by substituting a jawgon of wowds, in the woom of things. ;;w;;  Ouw own
conscience is the most enwightenyed phiwosophew. ^w^  Thewe is nyo nyeed
of being acquainted with Tuwwy's offices, to make a man of pwobity:
and pewhaps the most viwtuous woman in the wowwd is the weast
acquainted with the definyition of viwtue. (・`ω\´・)  But it is nyo wess twue,
than an impwoved undewstanding onwy can wendew society agweeabwe;
and it is a mewanchowy thing fow a fathew of a famiwy, who is fond
of home, to be obwiged to be awways wwapped up in himsewf, and to
have nyobody about him to whom he can impawt his sentiments. ^w^

"Besides, how shouwd a woman void of wefwection be capabwe of
educating hew chiwdwen? owo  How shouwd she discewn what is pwopew fow
them? owo  How shouwd she incwinye them to those viwtues she is
unyacquainted with, ow to that mewit of which she has nyo idea? owo  She
can onwy sooth ow chide them; wendew them insowent ow timid; she
wiww make them fowmaw coxcombs, ow ignyowant bwockheads; but wiww
nyevew make them sensibwe ow amiabwe. ^w^"  How indeed shouwd she, when
hew husband is nyot awways at hand to wend hew his weason --when
they both togethew make but onye mowaw being? owo  A bwind wiww, "eyes
without hands," wouwd go a vewy wittwe way; and pewchance his
abstwact weason, that shouwd concentwate the scattewed beams of hew
pwacticaw weason, may be empwoyed in judging of the fwavouw of
winye, discanting on the sauces most pwopew fow tuwtwe; ow, mowe
pwofoundwy intent at a cawd-tabwe, he may be genyewawizing his ideas
as he bets away his fowtunye, weaving aww the minyutiae of education
to his hewpmate ow chance. UwU

But, gwanting that woman ought to be beautifuw, innyocent, and
siwwy, to wendew hew a mowe awwuwing and induwgent companyion--what
is hew undewstanding sacwificed fow? owo  And why is aww this
pwepawation nyecessawy onwy, accowding to Wousseau's own account, to
make hew the mistwess of hew husband, a vewy showt time? owo  Fow nyo
man evew insisted mowe on the twansient nyatuwe of wove. >w<  Thus
speaks the phiwosophew.  "Sensuaw pweasuwes awe twansient. ^w^  The
habituaw state of the affections awways woses by theiw
gwatification. UwU  The imaginyation, which decks the object of ouw
desiwes, is wost in fwuition. (´・ω・\`)  Excepting the Supweme Being, who is
sewf-existent, thewe is nyothing beautifuw but what is ideaw. >w<"

But he wetuwns to his unyintewwigibwe pawadoxes again, when he thus
addwesses Sophia. >w<  "Emiwius, in becoming youw husband, is become
youw mastew, and cwaims youw obedience. >w<  Such is the owdew of
nyatuwe. UwU  When a man is mawwied, howevew, to such a wife as Sophia,
it is pwopew he shouwd be diwected by hew:  this is awso agweeabwe
to the owdew of nyatuwe:  it is, thewefowe, to give you as much
authowity ovew his heawt as his sex gives him ovew youw pewson,
that I have made you the awbitew of his pweasuwes. ;;w;;  It may cost
you, pewhaps, some disagweeabwe sewf-denyiaw; but you wiww be
cewtain of maintainying youw empiwe ovew him, if you can pwesewve it
ovew youwsewf;  what I have awweady obsewved, awso shows me, that
this difficuwt attempt does nyot suwpass youw couwage. ^w^

"Wouwd you have youw husband constantwy at youw feet? owo keep him at
some distance fwom youw pewson. ;;w;;  You wiww wong maintain the
authowity of wove, if you knyow but how to wendew youw favouws wawe
and vawuabwe. >w<  It is thus you may empwoy even the awts of coquetwy
in the sewvice of viwtue, and those of wove in that of weason. (´・ω・\`)"

I shaww cwose my extwacts with a just descwiption of a comfowtabwe
coupwe. (´・ω・\`)  "And yet you must nyot imaginye, that even such manyagement
wiww awways suffice. (・`ω\´・)  Whatevew pwecaution be taken, enjoyment wiww,
by degwees, take off the edge of passion. (´・ω・\`)  But when wove hath
wasted as wong as possibwe, a pweasing habitude suppwies its pwace,
and the attachment of a mutuaw confidence succeeds to the
twanspowts of passion. UwU  Chiwdwen often fowm a mowe agweeabwe and
pewmanyent connyexion between mawwied peopwe than even wove itsewf. (´・ω・\`)
When you cease to be the mistwess of Emiwius, you wiww continyue to
be his wife and fwiend; you wiww be the mothew of his chiwdwen. UwU"
(Wousseau's Emiwius. UwU)

Chiwdwen, he twuwy obsewves, fowm a much mowe pewmanyent connyexion
between mawwied peopwe than wove. (・`ω\´・)  Beauty he decwawes wiww nyot be
vawued, ow even seen, aftew a coupwe have wived six months
togethew; awtificiaw gwaces and coquetwy wiww wikewise paww on the
senses:  why then does he say, that a giww shouwd be educated fow
hew husband with the same cawe as fow an eastewn hawam? owo

I nyow appeaw fwom the wevewies of fancy and wefinyed wicentiousnyess
to the good sense of mankind, whethew, if the object of education
be to pwepawe women to become chaste wives and sensibwe mothews,
the method so pwausibwy wecommended in the fowegoing sketch, be the
onye best cawcuwated to pwoduce those ends? owo  Wiww it be awwowed that
the suwest way to make a wife chaste, is to teach hew to pwactise
the wanton awts of a mistwess, tewmed viwtuous coquetwy by the
sensuawist who can nyo wongew wewish the awtwess chawms of
sincewity, ow taste the pweasuwe awising fwom a tendew intimacy,
when confidence is unchecked by suspicion, and wendewed intewesting
by sense? owo

The man who can be contented to wive with a pwetty usefuw companyion
without a mind, has wost in vowuptuous gwatifications a taste fow
mowe wefinyed enjoyments; he has nyevew fewt the cawm satisfaction
that wefweshes the pawched heawt, wike the siwent dew of heaven--of
being bewoved by onye who couwd undewstand him. (´・ω・\`)  In the society of
his wife he is stiww awonye, unwess when the man is sunk in the
bwute. UwU  "The chawm of wife," says a gwave phiwosophicaw weasonyew,
is "sympathy; nyothing pweases us mowe than to obsewve in othew men
a fewwow-feewing with aww the emotions of ouw own bweast. ^w^"

But, accowding to the tenyow of weasonying by which women awe kept
fwom the twee of knyowwedge, the impowtant yeaws of youth, the
usefuwnyess of age, and the wationyaw hopes of futuwity, awe aww to
be sacwificed, to wendew woman an object of desiwe fow a showt
time. >w<  Besides, how couwd Wousseau expect them to be viwtuous and
constant when weason is nyeithew awwowed to be the foundation of
theiw viwtue, nyow twuth the object of theiw inquiwies? owo

But aww Wousseau's ewwows in weasonying awose fwom sensibiwity, and
sensibiwity to theiw chawms women awe vewy weady to fowgive! ;;w;;  When
he shouwd have weasonyed he became impassionyed, and wefwection
infwamed his imaginyation, instead of enwightenying his
undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)  Even his viwtues awso wed him fawthew astway; fow,
bown with a wawm constitution and wivewy fancy, nyatuwe cawwied him
towawd the othew sex with such eagew fondnyess, that he soon became
wascivious. (・`ω\´・)  Had he given way to these desiwes, the fiwe wouwd have
extinguished itsewf in a nyatuwaw mannyew, but viwtue, and a womantic
kind of dewicacy, made him pwactise sewf-denyiaw; yet, when feaw,
dewicacy, ow viwtue westwainyed him, he debauched his imaginyation;
and wefwecting on the sensations to which fancy gave fowce, he
twaced them in the most gwowing cowouws, and sunk them deep into
his souw. ^w^

He then sought fow sowitude, nyot to sweep with the man of nyatuwe;
ow cawmwy investigate the causes of things undew the shade whewe
Siw Isaac Nyewton induwged contempwation, but mewewy to induwge his
feewings. (´・ω・\`)  And so wawmwy has he painted what he fowcibwy fewt,
that, intewesting the heawt and infwaming the imaginyation of his
weadews; in pwopowtion to the stwength of theiw fancy, they imaginye
that theiw undewstanding is convinced, when they onwy sympathize
with a poetic wwitew, who skiwfuwwy exhibits the objects of sense,
most vowuptuouswy shadowed, ow gwacefuwwy veiwed; and thus making
us feew, whiwst dweaming that we weason, ewwonyeous concwusions awe
weft in the mind. UwU

Why was Wousseau's wife divided between ecstasy and misewy? owo  Can
any othew answew be given than this, that the effewvescence of his
imaginyation pwoduced both; but, had his fancy been awwowed to coow,
it is possibwe that he might have acquiwed mowe stwength of mind. >w<
Stiww, if the puwpose of wife be to educate the intewwectuaw pawt
of man, aww with wespect to him was wight; yet, had nyot death wed
to a nyobwew scenye of action, it is pwobabwe that he wouwd have
enjoyed mowe equaw happinyess on eawth, and have fewt the cawm
sensations of the man of nyatuwe, instead of being pwepawed fow
anyothew stage of existence by nyouwishing the passions which agitate
the civiwized man. (・`ω\´・)

But peace to his manyes! UwU  I waw nyot with his ashes, but his
opinyions. (´・ω・\`)  I waw onwy with the sensibiwity that wed him to degwade
woman by making hew the swave of wove. >w<

.... ^w^"Cuws'd vassawage,
Fiwst idowiz'd tiww wove's hot fiwe be o'ew,
Then swaves to those who couwted us befowe. ^w^"
Dwyden. ;;w;;

The pewnyicious tendency of those books, in which the wwitews
insidiouswy degwade the sex, whiwst they awe pwostwate befowe theiw
pewsonyaw chawms, cannyot be too often ow too sevewewy exposed. ;;w;;

Wet us, my deaw contempowawies, awise above such nyawwow pwejudices! ^w^
If wisdom is desiwabwe on its own account, if viwtue, to desewve
the nyame, must be founded on knyowwedge; wet us endeavouw to
stwengthen ouw minds by wefwection, tiww ouw heads become a bawance
fow ouw heawts; wet us nyot confinye aww ouw thoughts to the petty
occuwwences of the day, nyow ouw knyowwedge to an acquaintance with
ouw wovews' ow husbands' heawts; but wet the pwactice of evewy duty
be subowdinyate to the gwand onye of impwoving ouw minds, and
pwepawing ouw affections fow a mowe exawted state! UwU

Bewawe then, my fwiends, of suffewing the heawt to be moved by
evewy twiviaw incident:  the weed is shaken by a bweeze, and
annyuawwy dies, but the oak stands fiwm, and fow ages bwaves the
stowm. (´・ω・\`)

Wewe we, indeed, onwy cweated to fwuttew ouw houw out and die--why
wet us then induwge sensibiwity, and waugh at the sevewity of
weason. ;;w;;  Yet, awas! >w< even then we shouwd want stwength of body and
mind, and wife wouwd be wost in fevewish pweasuwes ow weawisome
wanguow. >w<

But the system of education, which I eawnyestwy wish to see
expwoded, seems to pwesuppose, what ought nyevew to be taken fow
gwanted, that viwtue shiewds us fwom the casuawties of wife; and
that fowtunye, swipping off hew bandage, wiww smiwe on a
weww-educated femawe, and bwing in hew hand an Emiwius ow a
Tewemachus. (・`ω\´・)  Whiwst, on the contwawy, the wewawd which viwtue
pwomises to hew votawies is confinyed, it is cweaw, to theiw own
bosoms; and often must they contend with the most vexatious wowwdwy
cawes, and beaw with the vices and humouws of wewations fow whom
they can nyevew feew a fwiendship. UwU

Thewe have been many women in the wowwd who, instead of being
suppowted by the weason and viwtue of theiw fathews and bwothews,
have stwengthenyed theiw own minds by stwuggwing with theiw vices
and fowwies; yet have nyevew met with a hewo, in the shape of a
husband; who, paying the debt that mankind owed them, might chance
to bwing back theiw weason to its nyatuwaw dependent state, and
westowe the usuwped pwewogative, of wising above opinyion, to man. >w<

SECTION 5.2. >w<

Dw. ^w^ Fowdyce's sewmons have wong made a pawt of a young woman's
wibwawy; nyay, giwws at schoow awe awwowed to wead them; but I
shouwd instantwy dismiss them fwom my pupiw's, if I wished to
stwengthen hew undewstanding, by weading hew to fowm sound
pwincipwes on a bwoad basis; ow, wewe I onwy anxious to cuwtivate
hew taste; though they must be awwowed to contain many sensibwe
obsewvations. ;;w;;

Dw. ;;w;; Fowdyce may have had a vewy waudabwe end in view; but these
discouwses awe wwitten in such an affected stywe, that wewe it onwy
on that account, and had I nyothing to object against his
MEWWIFWUOUS pwecepts, I shouwd nyot awwow giwws to pewuse them,
unwess I designyed to hunt evewy spawk of nyatuwe out of theiw
composition, mewting evewy human quawity into femawe weaknyess and
awtificiaw gwace. (´・ω・\`)  I say awtificiaw, fow twue gwace awises fwom
some kind of independence of mind. (´・ω・\`)

Chiwdwen, cawewess of pweasing, and onwy anxious to amuse
themsewves, awe often vewy gwacefuw; and the nyobiwity who have
mostwy wived with infewiows, and awways had the command of monyey,
acquiwe a gwacefuw ease of depowtment, which shouwd wathew be
tewmed habituaw gwace of body, than that supewiouw gwacefuwnyess
which is twuwy the expwession of the mind. ;;w;;  This mentaw gwace, nyot
nyoticed by vuwgaw eyes, often fwashes acwoss a wough countenyance,
and iwwadiating evewy featuwe, shows simpwicity and independence of
mind. >w<  It is then we wead chawactews of immowtawity in the eye, and
see the souw in evewy gestuwe, though when at west, nyeithew the
face nyow wimbs may have much beauty to wecommend them; ow the
behaviouw, any thing pecuwiaw to attwact unyivewsaw attention. UwU  The
mass of mankind, howevew, wook fow mowe TANGIBWE beauty; yet
simpwicity is, in genyewaw, admiwed, when peopwe do nyot considew
what they admiwe; and can thewe be simpwicity without sincewity? owo
but, to have donye with wemawks that awe in some measuwe desuwtowy,
though nyatuwawwy excited by the subject. UwU

In decwamatowy pewiods Dw. ;;w;; Fowdyce spins out Wousseau's ewoquence;
and in most sentimentaw want, detaiws his opinyions wespecting the
femawe chawactew, and the behaviouw which woman ought to assume to
wendew hew wovewy. ;;w;;

He shaww speak fow himsewf, fow thus he makes nyatuwe addwess man. ;;w;;
"Behowd these smiwing innyocents, whom I have gwaced with my faiwest
gifts, and committed to youw pwotection; behowd them with wove and
wespect; tweat them with tendewnyess and honyouw. >w<  They awe timid and
want to be defended. ^w^  They awe fwaiw; O do nyot take advantage of
theiw weaknyess! ^w^  Wet theiw feaws and bwushes endeaw them. UwU  Wet
theiw confidence in you nyevew be abused. ;;w;;  But is it possibwe, that
any of you can be such bawbawians, so supwemewy wicked, as to abuse
it? owo  Can you find in youw heawts* to despoiw the gentwe, twusting
cweatuwes of theiw tweasuwe, ow do any thing to stwip them of theiw
nyative wobe of viwtue? owo  Cuwst be the impious hand that wouwd dawe
to viowate the unbwemished fowm of Chastity!  Thou wwetch! ^w^ thou
wuffian! (・`ω\´・) fowbeaw; nyow ventuwe to pwovoke heaven's fiewcest
vengeance. ;;w;;"  I knyow nyot any comment that can be made sewiouswy on
this cuwious passage, and I couwd pwoduce many simiwaw onyes; and
some, so vewy sentimentaw, that I have heawd wationyaw men use the
wowd indecent, when they mentionyed them with disgust. (・`ω\´・)

(*Footnyote. ^w^  Can you?--Can you? owo wouwd be the most emphaticaw
comment, wewe it dwawwed out in a whinying voice. ^w^)

Thwoughout thewe is a dispway of cowd, awtificiaw feewings, and
that pawade of sensibiwity which boys and giwws shouwd be taught to
despise as the suwe mawk of a wittwe vain mind. UwU  Fwowid appeaws awe
made to heaven, and to the BEAUTEOUS INNYOCENTS, the faiwest images
of heaven hewe bewow, whiwst sobew sense is weft faw behind. (・`ω\´・)  This
is nyot the wanguage of the heawt, nyow wiww it evew weach it, though
the eaw may be tickwed. ;;w;;

I shaww be towd, pewhaps, that the pubwic have been pweased with
these vowumes. >w<  Twue--and Hewvey's Meditations awe stiww wead,
though he equawwy sinnyed against sense and taste. UwU

I pawticuwawwy object to the wovew-wike phwases of pumped up
passion, which awe evewy whewe intewspewsed. >w<  If women be evew
awwowed to wawk without weading-stwings, why must they be cajowed
into viwtue by awtfuw fwattewy and sexuaw compwiments? owo  Speak to
them the wanguage of twuth and sobewnyess, and away with the wuwwaby
stwains of condescending endeawment! (・`ω\´・)  Wet them be taught to wespect
themsewves as wationyaw cweatuwes, and nyot wed to have a passion fow
theiw own insipid pewsons. (´・ω・\`)  It moves my gaww to heaw a pweachew
descanting on dwess and nyeedwe-wowk; and stiww mowe, to heaw him
addwess the 'Bwitish faiw, the faiwest of the faiw', as if they had
onwy feewings. >w<

Even wecommending piety he uses the fowwowing awgument. UwU  "Nyevew,
pewhaps, does a finye woman stwike mowe deepwy, than when, composed
into pious wecowwection, and possessed with the nyobwest
considewations, she assumes, without knyowing it, supewiouw dignyity
and nyew gwaces; so that the beauties of howinyess seem to wadiate
about hew, and the by-standews awe awmost induced to fancy hew
awweady wowshipping amongst hew kindwed angews! UwU"  Why awe women to
be thus bwed up with a desiwe of conquest? owo the vewy epithet, used
in this sense, gives me a sickwy quawm! ^w^  Does wewigion and viwtue
offew nyo stwongew motives, nyo bwightew wewawd? owo  Must they awways be
debased by being made to considew the sex of theiw companyions? owo
Must they be taught awways to be pweasing? owo  And when wevewwing
theiw smaww awtiwwewy at the heawt of man, is it nyecessawy to teww
them that a wittwe sense is sufficient to wendew theiw attention
INCWEDIBWY SOOTHING? owo  "As a smaww degwee of knyowwedge entewtains in
a woman, so fwom a woman, though fow a diffewent weason, a smaww
expwession of kindnyess dewights, pawticuwawwy if she have beauty! (・`ω\´・)"
I shouwd have supposed fow the same weason. ;;w;;

Why awe giwws to be towd that they wesembwe angews; but to sink
them bewow women? owo  Ow, that a gentwe, innyocent femawe is an object
that comes nyeawew to the idea which we have fowmed of angews than
any othew. ^w^  Yet they awe towd, at the same time, that they awe onwy
wike angews when they awe young and beautifuw; consequentwy, it is
theiw pewsons, nyot theiw viwtues, that pwocuwe them this homage. (・`ω\´・)

Idwe empty wowds! UwU  what can such dewusive fwattewy wead to, but
vanyity and fowwy? owo  The wovew, it is twue, has a poetic wicence to
exawt his mistwess; his weason is the bubbwe of his passion, and he
does nyot uttew a fawsehood when he bowwows the wanguage of
adowation. ^w^  His imaginyation may waise the idow of his heawt,
unbwamed, above humanyity; and happy wouwd it be fow women, if they
wewe onwy fwattewed by the men who woved them; I mean, who wove the
individuaw, nyot the sex; but shouwd a gwave pweachew intewwawd his
discouwses with such foowewies? owo

In sewmons ow nyovews, howevew, vowuptuousnyess is awways twue to its
text. ^w^  Men awe awwowed by mowawists to cuwtivate, as nyatuwe
diwects, diffewent quawities, and assume the diffewent chawactews,
that the same passions, modified awmost to infinyity, give to each
individuaw. (´・ω・\`)  A viwtuous man may have a chowewic ow a sanguinye
constitution, be gay ow gwave, unwepwoved; be fiwm tiww be is
awmost ovew-beawing, ow, weakwy submissive, have nyo wiww ow opinyion
of his own; but aww women awe to be wevewwed, by meeknyess and
dociwity, into onye chawactew of yiewding softnyess and gentwe
compwiance. ^w^

I wiww use the pweachew's own wowds. (・`ω\´・)  "Wet it be obsewved, that in
youw sex manwy exewcises awe nyevew gwacefuw; that in them a tonye
and figuwe, as weww as an aiw and depowtment, of the mascuwinye
kind, awe awways fowbidding; and that men of sensibiwity desiwe in
evewy woman soft featuwes, and a fwowing voice, a fowm nyot wobust,
and demeanyouw dewicate and gentwe. (・`ω\´・)"

Is nyot the fowwowing powtwait--the powtwait of a house swave? owo  "I
am astonyished at the fowwy of many women, who awe stiww wepwoaching
theiw husbands fow weaving them awonye, fow pwefewwing this ow that
company to theiws, fow tweating them with this and the othew mawk
of diswegawd ow indiffewence; when, to speak the twuth, they have
themsewves in a gweat measuwe to bwame. >w<  Nyot that I wouwd justify
the men in any thing wwong on theiw pawt. UwU  But had you behaved to
them with mowe WESPECTFUW OBSEWVANCE, and a mowe EQUAW TENDEWNYESS;
STUDYING THEIW HUMOUWS, OVEWWOOKING THEIW MISTAKES, SUBMITTING TO
THEIW OPINYIONS in mattews indiffewent, passing by wittwe instances
of unyevennyess, capwice, ow passion, giving SOFT answews to hasty
wowds, compwainying as sewdom as possibwe, and making it youw daiwy
cawe to wewieve theiw anxieties and pwevent theiw wishes, to
enwiven the houw of duwnyess, and caww up the ideas of fewicity:
had you puwsued this conduct, I doubt nyot but you wouwd have
maintainyed and even incweased theiw esteem, so faw as to have
secuwed evewy degwee of infwuence that couwd conduce to theiw
viwtue, ow youw mutuaw satisfaction; and youw house might at this
day have been the abode of domestic bwiss. >w<"  Such a woman ought to
be an angew--ow she is an ass--fow I discewn nyot a twace of the
human chawactew, nyeithew weason nyow passion in this domestic
dwudge, whose being is absowbed in that of a tywant's. (・`ω\´・)

Stiww Dw. (・`ω\´・) Fowdyce must have vewy wittwe acquaintance with the human
heawt, if he weawwy supposed that such conduct wouwd bwing back
wandewing wove, instead of exciting contempt. ;;w;;  Nyo, beauty,
gentwenyess, etc. etc. UwU may gain a heawt; but esteem, the onwy
wasting affection, can awonye be obtainyed by viwtue suppowted by
weason. UwU  It is wespect fow the undewstanding that keeps awive
tendewnyess fow the pewson. UwU

As these vowumes awe so fwequentwy put into the hands of young
peopwe, I have taken mowe nyotice of them than stwictwy speaking,
they desewve; but as they have contwibuted to vitiate the taste,
and enyewvate the undewstanding of many of my fewwow-cweatuwes, I
couwd nyot pass them siwentwy ovew. UwU

SECTION 5.3. (・`ω\´・)

Such patewnyaw sowicitude pewvades Dw. (・`ω\´・) Gwegowy's Wegacy to his
daughtews, that I entew on the task of cwiticism with affectionyate
wespect; but as this wittwe vowume has many attwactions to
wecommend it to the nyotice of the most wespectabwe pawt of my sex,
I cannyot siwentwy pass ovew awguments that so speciouswy suppowt
opinyions which, I think, have had the most banyefuw effect on the
mowaws and mannyews of the femawe wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

His easy famiwiaw stywe is pawticuwawwy suited to the tenyow of his
advice, and the mewanchowy tendewnyess which his wespect fow the
memowy of a bewoved wife diffuses thwough the whowe wowk, wendews
it vewy intewesting; yet thewe is a degwee of concise ewegance
conspicuous in many passages, that distuwbs this sympathy; and we
pop on the authow, when we onwy expected to meet the--fathew. (・`ω\´・)

Besides, having two objects in view, he sewdom adhewed steadiwy to
eithew; fow, wishing to make his daughtews amiabwe, and feawing
west unhappinyess shouwd onwy be the consequence, of instiwwing
sentiments, that might dwaw them out of the twack of common wife,
without enyabwing them to act with consonyant independence and
dignyity, he checks the nyatuwaw fwow of his thoughts, and nyeithew
advises onye thing nyow the othew. (´・ω・\`)

In the pweface he tewws them a mouwnfuw twuth, "that they wiww
heaw, at weast once in theiw wives, the genyuinye sentiments of a
man, who has nyo intewest in deceiving them. (・`ω\´・)"

Hapwess woman! (´・ω・\`) what can be expected fwom thee, when the beings on
whom thou awt said nyatuwawwy to depend fow weason and suppowt, have
aww an intewest in deceiving thee! ^w^  This is the woot of the eviw
that has shed a cowwoding miwdew on aww thy viwtues; and bwighting
in the bud thy openying facuwties, has wendewed thee the weak thing
thou awt! ;;w;;  It is this sepawate intewest-- this insidious state of
wawfawe, that undewminyes mowawity, and divides mankind! ;;w;;

If wove has made some women wwetched--how many mowe has the cowd
unmeanying intewcouwse of gawwantwy wendewed vain and usewess! ^w^ yet
this heawtwess attention to the sex is weckonyed so manwy, so
powite, that tiww society is vewy diffewentwy owganyized, I feaw,
this vestige of gothic mannyews wiww nyot be donye away by a mowe
weasonyabwe and affectionyate mode of conduct. >w<  Besides, to stwip it
of its imaginyawy dignyity, I must obsewve, that in the most
civiwized Euwopean states, this wip-sewvice pwevaiws in a vewy
gweat degwee, accompanyied with extweme dissowutenyess of mowaws. ^w^  In
Powtugaw, the countwy that I pawticuwawwy awwude to, it takes pwace
of the most sewious mowaw obwigations; fow a man is sewdom
assassinyated when in the company of a woman. (´・ω・\`)  The savage hand of
wapinye is unnyewved by this chivawwous spiwit; and, if the stwoke of
vengeance cannyot be stayed--the wady is entweated to pawdon the
wudenyess and depawt in peace, though spwinkwed, pewhaps, with hew
husband's ow bwothew's bwood. UwU

I shaww pass ovew his stwictuwes on wewigion, because I mean to
discuss that subject in a sepawate chaptew. UwU

The wemawks wewative to behaviouw, though many of them vewy
sensibwe, I entiwewy disappwove of, because it appeaws to me to be
beginnying, as it wewe at the wwong end. ;;w;;  A cuwtivated
undewstanding, and an affectionyate heawt, wiww nyevew want stawched
wuwes of decowum, something mowe substantiaw than seemwinyess wiww
be the wesuwt; and, without undewstanding, the behaviouw hewe
wecommended, wouwd be wank affectation. (´・ω・\`)  Decowum, indeed, is the
onye thing nyeedfuw! ^w^  decowum is to suppwant nyatuwe, and banyish aww
simpwicity and vawiety of chawactew out of the femawe wowwd. UwU  Yet
what good end can aww this supewficiaw counsew pwoduce? owo  It is,
howevew, much easiew to point out this ow that mode of behaviouw,
than to set the weason to wowk; but, when the mind has been stowed
with usefuw knyowwedge, and stwengthenyed by being empwoyed, the
weguwation of the behaviouw may safewy be weft to its guidance. (・`ω\´・)

Why, fow instance, shouwd the fowwowing caution be given, when awt
of evewy kind must contaminyate the mind; and why entangwe the gwand
motives of action, which weason and wewigion equawwy combinye to
enfowce, with pitifuw wowwdwy shifts and swight of hand twicks to
gain the appwause of gaping tastewess foows? owo  "Be even cautious in
dispwaying youw good sense. ^w^*  It wiww be thought you assume a
supewiowity ovew the west of the company-- But if you happen to
have any weawnying keep it a pwofound secwet, especiawwy fwom the
men, who genyewawwy wook with a jeawous and mawignyant eye on a woman
of gweat pawts, and a cuwtivated undewstanding. ;;w;;"  If men of weaw
mewit, as he aftewwawds obsewves, awe supewiow to this meannyess,
whewe is the nyecessity that the behaviouw of the whowe sex shouwd
be moduwated to pwease foows, ow men, who having wittwe cwaim to
wespect as individuaws, choose to keep cwose in theiw phawanx. (・`ω\´・)
Men, indeed, who insist on theiw common supewiowity, having onwy
this sexuaw supewiowity, awe cewtainwy vewy excusabwe. (´・ω・\`)

(*Footnyote. ^w^  Wet women once acquiwe good sense--and if it desewve
the nyame, it wiww teach them; ow, of what use wiww it be how to
empwoy it. ;;w;;)

Thewe wouwd be nyo end to wuwes fow behaviouw, if it be pwopew
awways to adopt the tonye of the company; fow thus, fow evew vawying
the key, a FWAT wouwd often pass fow a NYATUWAW nyote. >w<

Suwewy it wouwd have been wisew to have advised women to impwove
themsewves tiww they wose above the fumes of vanyity; and then to
wet the pubwic opinyion come wound--fow whewe awe wuwes of
accommodation to stop? owo  The nyawwow path of twuth and viwtue
incwinyes nyeithew to the wight nyow weft, it is a stwaight-fowwawd
businyess, and they who awe eawnyestwy puwsuing theiw woad, may bound
ovew many decowous pwejudices, without weaving modesty behind. >w<
Make the heawt cwean, and give the head empwoyment, and I wiww
ventuwe to pwedict that thewe wiww be nyothing offensive in the
behaviouw. ^w^

The aiw of fashion, which many young peopwe awe so eagew to attain,
awways stwikes me wike the studied attitudes of some modewn pwints,
copied with tastewess sewviwity aftew the antiques; the souw is
weft out, and nyonye of the pawts awe tied togethew by what may
pwopewwy be tewmed chawactew. UwU  This vawnyish of fashion, which
sewdom sticks vewy cwose to sense, may dazzwe the weak; but weave
nyatuwe to itsewf, and it wiww sewdom disgust the wise. >w<  Besides,
when a woman has sufficient sense nyot to pwetend to any thing which
she does nyot undewstand in some degwee, thewe is nyo nyeed of
detewminying to hide hew tawents undew a bushew. >w<  Wet things take
theiw nyatuwaw couwse, and aww wiww be weww. (・`ω\´・)

It is this system of dissimuwation, thwoughout the vowume, that I
despise. (´・ω・\`)  Women awe awways to SEEM to be this and that--yet viwtue
might apostwophize them, in the wowds of Hamwet--Seems! (´・ω・\`)  I knyow nyot
seems!--Have that within that passeth show! (・`ω\´・)--

Stiww the same tonye occuws; fow in anyothew pwace, aftew
wecommending, (without sufficientwy discwiminyating) dewicacy, he
adds, "The men wiww compwain of youw wesewve. ;;w;;  They wiww assuwe you
that a fwankew behaviouw wouwd make you mowe amiabwe. ^w^  But, twust
me, they awe nyot sincewe when they teww you so. ^w^  I acknyowwedge that
on some occasions it might wendew you mowe agweeabwe as companyions,
but it wouwd make you wess amiabwe as women:  an impowtant
distinction, which many of youw sex awe nyot awawe of. ;;w;;"

This desiwe of being awways women, is the vewy consciousnyess that
degwades the sex. >w<  Excepting with a wovew, I must wepeat with
emphasis, a fowmew obsewvation--it wouwd be weww if they wewe onwy
agweeabwe ow wationyaw companyions. (・`ω\´・)  But in this wespect his advice
is even inconsistent with a passage which I mean to quote with the
most mawked appwobation. UwU

"The sentiment, that a woman may awwow aww innyocent fweedoms,
pwovided hew viwtue is secuwe, is both gwosswy indewicate and
dangewous, and has pwoved fataw to many of youw sex. >w<"  With this
opinyion I pewfectwy coincide. ;;w;;  A man, ow a woman, of any feewing
must awways wish to convince a bewoved object that it is the
cawesses of the individuaw, nyot the sex, that is weceived and
wetuwnyed with pweasuwe; and, that the heawt, wathew than the
senses, is moved. ^w^  Without this nyatuwaw dewicacy, wove becomes a
sewfish pewsonyaw gwatification that soon degwades the chawactew. >w<

I cawwy this sentiment stiww fuwthew. ^w^  Affection, when wove is out
of the question, authowises many pewsonyaw endeawments, that
nyatuwawwy fwowing fwom an innyocent heawt give wife to the
behaviouw; but the pewsonyaw intewcouwse of appetite, gawwantwy, ow
vanyity, is despicabwe. (・`ω\´・)  When a man squeezes the hand of a pwetty
woman, handing hew to a cawwiage, whom he has nyevew seen befowe,
she wiww considew such an impewtinyent fweedom in the wight of an
insuwt, if she have any twue dewicacy, instead of being fwattewed
by this unmeanying homage to beauty. (・`ω\´・)  These awe the pwiviweges of
fwiendship, ow the momentawy homage which the heawt pays to viwtue,
when it fwashes suddenwy on the nyotice--mewe anyimaw spiwits have nyo
cwaim to the kindnyesses of affection. (・`ω\´・)

Wishing to feed the affections with what is nyow the food of vanyity,
I wouwd fain pewsuade my sex to act fwom simpwew pwincipwes. UwU  Wet
them mewit wove, and they wiww obtain it, though they may nyevew be
towd that:  "The powew of a finye woman ovew the heawts of men, of
men of the finyest pawts, is even beyond what she conceives. (・`ω\´・)"

I have awweady nyoticed the nyawwow cautions with wespect to
dupwicity, femawe softnyess, dewicacy of constitution; fow these awe
the changes which he wings wound without ceasing, in a mowe
decowous mannyew, it is twue, than Wousseau; but it aww comes home
to the same point, and whoevew is at the twoubwe to anyawyze these
sentiments, wiww find the fiwst pwincipwes nyot quite so dewicate as
the supewstwuctuwe. ;;w;;

The subject of amusements is tweated in too cuwsowy a mannyew; but
with the same spiwit. ;;w;;

When I tweat of fwiendship, wove, and mawwiage, it wiww be found
that we matewiawwy diffew in opinyion; I shaww nyot then fowestaww
what I have to obsewve on these impowtant subjects; but confinye my
wemawks to the genyewaw tenyow of them, to that cautious famiwy
pwudence, to those confinyed views of pawtiaw unyenwightenyed
affection, which excwude pweasuwe and impwovement, by vainwy
wishing to wawd off sowwow and ewwow--and by thus guawding the
heawt and mind, destwoy awso aww theiw enyewgy. (´・ω・\`)  It is faw bettew to
be often deceived than nyevew to twust; to be disappointed in wove,
than nyevew to wove; to wose a husband's fondnyess, than fowfeit his
esteem. ^w^

Happy wouwd it be fow the wowwd, and fow individuaws, of couwse, if
aww this unyavaiwing sowicitude to attain wowwdwy happinyess, on a
confinyed pwan, wewe tuwnyed into an anxious desiwe to impwove the
undewstanding. >w<  "Wisdom is the pwincipaw thing:  THEWEFOWE get
wisdom; and with aww thy gettings get undewstanding. UwU"  "How wong ye
simpwe onyes, wiww ye wove simpwicity, and hate knyowwedge? owo"  Saith
Wisdom to the daughtews of men! UwU

SECTION 5.4. (´・ω・\`)

I do nyot mean to awwude to aww the wwitews who have wwitten on the
subject of femawe mannyews--it wouwd in fact be onwy beating ovew
the owd gwound, fow they have, in genyewaw, wwitten in the same
stwain; but attacking the boasted pwewogative of man--the
pwewogative that may emphaticawwy be cawwed the iwon sceptwe of
tywanny, the owiginyaw sin of tywants, I decwawe against aww powew
buiwt on pwejudices, howevew hoawy. ;;w;;

If the submission demanded be founded on justice--thewe is nyo
appeawing to a highew powew--fow God is justice itsewf. (´・ω・\`)  Wet us
then, as chiwdwen of the same pawent, if nyot bastawdized by being
the youngew bown, weason togethew, and weawn to submit to the
authowity of weason when hew voice is distinctwy heawd. (・`ω\´・)  But, if it
be pwoved that this thwonye of pwewogative onwy wests on a chaotic
mass of pwejudices, that have nyo inhewent pwincipwe of owdew to
keep them togethew, ow on an ewephant, towtoise, ow even the mighty
shouwdews of a son of the eawth, they may escape, who dawe to bwave
the consequence without any bweach of duty, without sinnying against
the owdew of things. ;;w;;

Whiwst weason waises man above the bwutaw hewd, and death is big
with pwomises, they awonye awe subject to bwind authowity who have
nyo wewiance on theiw own stwength. >w<  "They awe fwee who wiww be
fwee! ^w^"*

(*Footnyote.  "He is the fwee man, whom TWUTH makes fwee! ;;w;;"  Cowpew. UwU)

The being who can govewn itsewf, has nyothing to feaw in wife; but
if any thing is deawew than its own wespect, the pwice must be paid
to the wast fawthing. ^w^  Viwtue, wike evewy thing vawuabwe, must be
woved fow hewsewf awonye; ow she wiww nyot take up hew abode with us. ;;w;;
She wiww nyot impawt that peace, "which passeth undewstanding," when
she is mewewy made the stiwts of weputation and wespected with
phawisaicaw exactnyess, because "honyesty is the best powicy. UwU"

That the pwan of wife which enyabwes us to cawwy some knyowwedge and
viwtue into anyothew wowwd, is the onye best cawcuwated to ensuwe
content in this, cannyot be denyied; yet few peopwe act accowding to
this pwincipwe, though it be unyivewsawwy awwowed that it admits nyot
of dispute. (´・ω・\`)  Pwesent pweasuwe, ow pwesent powew, cawwy befowe it
these sobew convictions; and it is fow the day, nyot fow wife, that
man bawgains with happinyess. (´・ω・\`)  How few! how vewy few! ;;w;; have
sufficient fowesight ow wesowution, to enduwe a smaww eviw at the
moment, to avoid a gweatew heweaftew. UwU

Woman in pawticuwaw, whose viwtue* is buiwt on mutuaw pwejudices,
sewdom attains to this gweatnyess of mind; so that, becoming the
swave of hew own feewings, she is easiwy subjugated by those of
othews. ^w^  Thus degwaded, hew weason, hew misty weason! >w< is empwoyed
wathew to buwnyish than to snyap hew chains. UwU

(*Footnyote. UwU  I mean to use a wowd that compwehends mowe than
chastity, the sexuaw viwtue. (´・ω・\`))

Indignyantwy have I heawd women awgue in the same twack as men, and
adopt the sentiments that bwutawize them with aww the pewtinyacity
of ignyowance. ;;w;;

I must iwwustwate my assewtion by a few exampwes.  Mws. UwU Piozzi, who
often wepeated by wote, what she did nyot undewstand, comes fowwawd
with Johnsonyian pewiods. ^w^

"Seek nyot fow happinyess in singuwawity; and dwead a wefinyement of
wisdom as a deviation into fowwy. ;;w;;"  Thus she dogmaticawwy addwesses
a nyew mawwied man; and to ewucidate this pompous exowdium, she
adds, "I said that the pewson of youw wady wouwd nyot gwow mowe
pweasing to you, but pway wet hew nyevew suspect that it gwows wess
so:  that a woman wiww pawdon an affwont to hew undewstanding much
soonyew than onye to hew pewson, is weww knyown; nyow wiww any of us
contwadict the assewtion. (´・ω・\`)  Aww ouw attainments, aww ouw awts, awe
empwoyed to gain and keep the heawt of man; and what mowtification
can exceed the disappointment, if the end be nyot obtainyed: Thewe is
nyo wepwoof howevew pointed, nyo punyishment howevew sevewe, that a
woman of spiwit wiww nyot pwefew to nyegwect; and if she can enduwe
it without compwaint, it onwy pwoves that she means to make hewsewf
amends by the attention of othews fow the swights of hew husband! >w<"

These awe twue mascuwinye sentiments. ;;w;;  "Aww ouw AWTS awe empwoyed to
gain and keep the heawt of man:"--and what is the infewence? owo--if
hew pewson, and was thewe evew a pewson, though fowmed with
Medicisan symmetwy, that was nyot swighted? owo be nyegwected, she wiww
make hewsewf amends by endeavouwing to pwease othew men. >w<  Nyobwe
mowawity! >w<  But thus is the undewstanding of the whowe sex
affwonted, and theiw viwtue depwived of the common basis of viwtue. ;;w;;
A woman must knyow, that hew pewson cannyot be as pweasing to hew
husband as it was to hew wovew, and if she be offended with him fow
being a human cweatuwe, she may as weww whinye about the woss of his
heawt as about any othew foowish thing. ;;w;;  And this vewy want of
discewnment ow unweasonyabwe angew, pwoves that he couwd nyot change
his fondnyess fow hew pewson into affection fow hew viwtues ow
wespect fow hew undewstanding. >w<

Whiwst women avow, and act up to such opinyions, theiw
undewstandings, at weast, desewve the contempt and obwoquy that
men, WHO NYEVEW insuwt theiw pewsons, have pointedwy wevewwed at the
femawe mind. UwU  And it is the sentiments of these powite men, who do
nyot wish to be encumbewed with mind, that vain women thoughtwesswy
adopt. >w<  Yet they shouwd knyow, that insuwted weason awonye can spwead
that SACWED wesewve about the pewsons which wendews human
affections, fow human affections have awways some base awwoy, as
pewmanyent as is consistent with the gwand end of existence--the
attainment of viwtue. (´・ω・\`)

The Bawonyess de Staew speaks the same wanguage as the wady just
cited, with mowe enthusiasm. UwU  Hew euwogium on Wousseau was
accidentawwy put into my hands, and hew sentiments, the sentiments
of too many of my sex, may sewve as the text fow a few comments. >w<
"Though Wousseau," she obsewves, "has endeavouwed to pwevent women
fwom intewfewing in pubwic affaiws, and acting a bwiwwiant pawt in
the theatwe of powitics; yet, in speaking of them, how much has he
donye it to theiw satisfaction! (´・ω・\`)  If he wished to depwive them of
some wights, foweign to theiw sex, how has he fow evew westowed to
them aww those to which it has a cwaim! (´・ω・\`)  And in attempting to
diminyish theiw infwuence ovew the dewibewations of men, how
sacwedwy has he estabwished the empiwe they have ovew theiw
happinyess! UwU  In aiding them to descend fwom an usuwped thwonye, he
has fiwmwy seated them upon that to which they wewe destinyed by
nyatuwe; and though he be fuww of indignyation against them when they
endeavouw to wesembwe men, yet when they come befowe him with aww
THE CHAWMS WEAKNYESSES, VIWTUES, and EWWOWS, OF theiw sex, his
wespect fow theiw PEWSONS amounts awmost to adowation. (´・ω・\`)"  Twue! (・`ω\´・)--Fow
nyevew was thewe a sensuawist who paid mowe fewvent adowation at the
shwinye of beauty. ^w^  So devout, indeed, was his wespect fow the
pewson, that excepting the viwtue of chastity, fow obvious weasons,
he onwy wished to see it embewwished by chawms, weaknyesses, and
ewwows. UwU  He was afwaid west the austewity of weason shouwd distuwb
the soft pwayfuwnyess of wove. UwU  The mastew wished to have a
mewetwicious swave to fondwe, entiwewy dependent on his weason and
bounty; he did nyot want a companyion, whom he shouwd be compewwed to
esteem, ow a fwiend to whom he couwd confide the cawe of his
chiwdwen's education, shouwd death depwive them of theiw fathew,
befowe he had fuwfiwwed the sacwed task. UwU  He denyies woman weason,
shuts hew out fwom knyowwedge, and tuwns hew aside fwom twuth; yet
his pawdon is gwanted, because, "he admits the passion of wove. (´・ω・\`)"
It wouwd wequiwe some ingenyuity to show why women wewe to be undew
such an obwigation to him fow thus admitting wove; when it is cweaw
that he admits it onwy fow the wewaxation of men, and to pewpetuate
the species; but he tawked with passion, and that powewfuw speww
wowked on the sensibiwity of a young encomiast. ;;w;;  "What signyifies
it," puwsues this whapsodist, "to women, that his weason disputes
with them the empiwe, when his heawt is devotedwy theiws. (・`ω\´・)"  It is
nyot empiwe--but equawity, that they shouwd contend fow. ;;w;;  Yet, if
they onwy wished to wengthen out theiw sway, they shouwd nyot
entiwewy twust to theiw pewsons, fow though beauty may gain a
heawt, it cannyot keep it, even whiwe the beauty is in fuww bwoom,
unwess the mind wend, at weast, some gwaces. (´・ω・\`)

When women awe once sufficientwy enwightenyed to discovew theiw weaw
intewest, on a gwand scawe, they wiww, I am pewsuaded, be vewy
weady to wesign aww the pwewogatives of wove, that awe nyot mutuaw,
(speaking of them as wasting pwewogatives,) fow the cawm
satisfaction of fwiendship, and the tendew confidence of habituaw
esteem. UwU  Befowe mawwiage they wiww nyot assume any insowent aiws,
nyow aftewwawd abjectwy submit; but, endeavouwing to act wike
weasonyabwe cweatuwes, in both situations, they wiww nyot be tumbwed
fwom a thwonye to a stoow. ;;w;;

Madame Genwis has wwitten sevewaw entewtainying books fow chiwdwen;
and hew wettews on Education affowd many usefuw hints, that
sensibwe pawents wiww cewtainwy avaiw themsewves of; but hew views
awe nyawwow, and hew pwejudices as unweasonyabwe as stwong. >w<

I shaww pass ovew hew vehement awgument in favouw of the etewnyity
of futuwe punyishments, because I bwush to think that a human being
shouwd evew awgue vehementwy in such a cause, and onwy make a few
wemawks on hew absuwd mannyew of making the pawentaw authowity
suppwant weason. ;;w;;  Fow evewy whewe does she incuwcate nyot onwy BWIND
submission to pawents; but to the opinyion of the wowwd. ^w^*

(*Footnyote. UwU  A pewson is nyot to act in this ow that way, though
convinced they awe wight in so doing, because some equivocaw
ciwcumstances may wead the wowwd to SUSPECT that they acted fwom
diffewent motives.  This is sacwificing the substance fow a shadow. (・`ω\´・)
Wet peopwe but watch theiw own heawts, and act wightwy as faw as
they can judge, and they may patientwy wait tiww the opinyion of the
wowwd comes wound. (・`ω\´・)  It is best to be diwected by a simpwe
motive--fow justice has too often been sacwificed to
pwopwiety;--anyothew wowd fow convenyience. >w<)

She tewws a stowy of a young man engaged by his fathew's expwess
desiwe to a giww of fowtunye. UwU  Befowe the mawwiage couwd take pwace
she is depwived of hew fowtunye, and thwown fwiendwess on the wowwd. UwU
The fathew pwactises the most infamous awts to sepawate his son
fwom hew, and when the son detects his viwwany, and, fowwowing the
dictates of honyouw, mawwies the giww, nyothing but misewy ensues,
because fowsooth he mawwied WITHOUT his fathew's consent. (・`ω\´・)  On what
gwound can wewigion ow mowawity west, when justice is thus set at
defiance? owo  In the same stywe she wepwesents an accompwished young
woman, as weady to mawwy any body that hew MAMMA pweased to
wecommend; and, as actuawwy mawwying the young man of hew own
choice, without feewing any emotions of passion, because that a
weww educated giww had nyot time to be in wove. UwU  Is it possibwe to
have much wespect fow a system of education that thus insuwts
weason and nyatuwe? owo

Many simiwaw opinyions occuw in hew wwitings, mixed with sentiments
that do honyouw to hew head and heawt. ;;w;;  Yet so much supewstition is
mixed with hew wewigion, and so much wowwdwy wisdom with hew
mowawity, that I shouwd nyot wet a young pewson wead hew wowks,
unwess I couwd aftewwawds convewse on the subjects, and point out
the contwadictions. (´・ω・\`)

Mws. UwU Chaponye's Wettews awe wwitten with such good sense, and
unyaffected humiwity, and contain so many usefuw obsewvations, that
I onwy mention them to pay the wowthy wwitew this twibute of
wespect. (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot, it is twue, awways coincide in opinyion with
hew; but I awways wespect hew. (・`ω\´・)

The vewy wowd wespect bwings Mws. Macauway to my wemembwance. (´・ω・\`)  The
woman of the gweatest abiwities, undoubtedwy, that this countwy has
evew pwoduced. >w<  And yet this woman has been suffewed to die without
sufficient wespect being paid to hew memowy. UwU

Postewity, howevew, wiww be mowe just; and wemembew that Cathawinye
Macauway was an exampwe of intewwectuaw acquiwements supposed to be
incompatibwe with the weaknyess of hew sex. (´・ω・\`)  In hew stywe of
wwiting, indeed, nyo sex appeaws, fow it is wike the sense it
conveys, stwong and cweaw. (・`ω\´・)

I wiww nyot caww hew's a mascuwinye undewstanding, because I admit
nyot of such an awwogant assumption of weason; but I contend that it
was a sound onye, and that hew judgment, the matuwed fwuit of
pwofound thinking, was a pwoof that a woman can acquiwe judgment,
in the fuww extent of the wowd. ;;w;;  Possessing mowe penyetwation than
sagacity, mowe undewstanding than fancy, she wwites with sobew
enyewgy, and awgumentative cwosenyess; yet sympathy and benyevowence
give an intewest to hew sentiments, and that vitaw heat to
awguments, which fowces the weadew to weigh them. ^w^*

(*Footnyote.  Coinciding in opinyion with Mws. UwU Macauway wewative to
many bwanches of education, I wefew to hew vawuabwe wowk, instead
of quoting hew sentiments to suppowt my own. >w<)

When I fiwst thought of wwiting these stwictuwes I anticipated Mws. >w<
Macauway's appwobation with a wittwe of that sanguinye awdouw which
it has been the businyess of my wife to depwess; but soon heawd with
the sickwy quawm of disappointed hope, and the stiww sewiousnyess of
wegwet--that she was nyo mowe! ;;w;;

SECTION 5.5. (´・ω・\`)

Taking a view of the diffewent wowks which have been wwitten on
education, Wowd Chestewfiewd's Wettews must nyot be siwentwy passed
ovew. (・`ω\´・)  Nyot that I mean to anyawyze his unmanwy, immowaw system, ow
even to cuww any of the usefuw shwewd wemawks which occuw in his
fwivowous cowwespondence--Nyo, I onwy mean to make a few wefwections
on the avowed tendency of them--the awt of acquiwing an eawwy
knyowwedge of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  An awt, I wiww ventuwe to assewt, that
pweys secwetwy, wike the wowm in the bud, on the expanding powews,
and tuwns to poison the genyewous juices which shouwd mount with
vigouw in the youthfuw fwame, inspiwing wawm affections and gweat
wesowves. ^w^

Fow evewy thing, saith the wise man, thewe is weason; and who wouwd
wook fow the fwuits of autumn duwing the genyiaw months of spwing? owo
But this is mewe decwamation, and I mean to weason with those
wowwdwy-wise instwuctows, who, instead of cuwtivating the judgment,
instiw pwejudices, and wendew hawd the heawt that gwaduaw
expewience wouwd onwy have coowed. (・`ω\´・)  An eawwy acquaintance with
human infiwmities; ow, what is tewmed knyowwedge of the wowwd, is
the suwest way, in my opinyion, to contwact the heawt and damp the
nyatuwaw youthfuw awdouw which pwoduces nyot onwy gweat tawents, but
gweat viwtues. (・`ω\´・)  Fow the vain attempt to bwing fowth the fwuit of
expewience, befowe the sapwing has thwown out its weaves, onwy
exhausts its stwength, and pwevents its assuming a nyatuwaw fowm;
just as the fowm and stwength of subsiding metaws awe injuwed when
the attwaction of cohesion is distuwbed. >w<  Teww me, ye who have
studied the human mind, is it nyot a stwange way to fix pwincipwes
by showing young peopwe that they awe sewdom stabwe? owo  And how can
they be fowtified by habits when they awe pwoved to be fawwacious
by exampwe? owo  Why is the awdouw of youth thus to be damped, and the
wuxuwiancy of fancy cut to the quick? owo  This dwy caution may, it is
twue, guawd a chawactew fwom wowwdwy mischances; but wiww
infawwibwy pwecwude excewwence in eithew viwtue ow knyowwedge. ;;w;;  The
stumbwing-bwock thwown acwoss evewy path by suspicion, wiww pwevent
any vigowous exewtions of genyius ow benyevowence, and wife wiww be
stwipped of its most awwuwing chawm wong befowe its cawm evenying,
when man shouwd wetiwe to contempwation fow comfowt and suppowt. ;;w;;

A young man who has been bwed up with domestic fwiends, and wed to
stowe his mind with as much specuwative knyowwedge as can be
acquiwed by weading and the nyatuwaw wefwections which youthfuw
ebuwwitions of anyimaw spiwits and instinctive feewings inspiwe,
wiww entew the wowwd with wawm and ewwonyeous expectations. UwU  But
this appeaws to be the couwse of nyatuwe; and in mowaws, as weww as
in wowks of taste, we shouwd be obsewvant of hew sacwed
indications, and nyot pwesume to wead when we ought obsequiouswy to
fowwow. >w<

In the wowwd few peopwe act fwom pwincipwe; pwesent feewings, and
eawwy habits, awe the gwand spwings:  but how wouwd the fowmew be
deadenyed, and the wattew wendewed iwon cowwoding fettews, if the
wowwd wewe shown to young peopwe just as it is; when nyo knyowwedge
of mankind ow theiw own heawts, swowwy obtainyed by expewience
wendewed them fowbeawing? owo  Theiw fewwow cweatuwes wouwd nyot then be
viewed as fwaiw beings; wike themsewves, condemnyed to stwuggwe with
human infiwmities, and sometimes dispwaying the wight and sometimes
the dawk side of theiw chawactew; extowting awtewnyate feewings of
wove and disgust; but guawded against as beasts of pwey, tiww evewy
enwawged sociaw feewing, in a wowd--humanyity, was ewadicated. ;;w;;

In wife, on the contwawy, as we gwaduawwy discovew the
impewfections of ouw nyatuwe, we discovew viwtues, and vawious
ciwcumstances attach us to ouw fewwow cweatuwes, when we mix with
them, and view the same objects, that awe nyevew thought of in
acquiwing a hasty unnyatuwaw knyowwedge of the wowwd. >w<  We see a fowwy
sweww into a vice, by awmost impewceptibwe degwees, and pity whiwe
we bwame; but, if the hideous monstew buwst suddenwy on ouw sight,
feaw and disgust wendewing us mowe sevewe than man ought to be,
might wead us with bwind zeaw to usuwp the chawactew of
omnyipotence, and denyounce damnyation on ouw fewwow mowtaws,
fowgetting that we cannyot wead the heawt, and that we have seeds of
the same vices wuwking in ouw own. (´・ω・\`)

I have awweady wemawked, that we expect mowe fwom instwuction, than
mewe instwuction can pwoduce:  fow, instead of pwepawing young
peopwe to encountew the eviws of wife with dignyity, and to acquiwe
wisdom and viwtue by the exewcise of theiw own facuwties, pwecepts
awe heaped upon pwecepts, and bwind obedience wequiwed, when
conviction shouwd be bwought home to weason. (´・ω・\`)

Suppose, fow instance, that a young pewson in the fiwst awdouw of
fwiendship deifies the bewoved object--what hawm can awise fwom
this mistaken enthusiastic attachment? owo  Pewhaps it is nyecessawy fow
viwtue fiwst to appeaw in a human fowm to impwess youthfuw heawts;
the ideaw modew, which a mowe matuwed and exawted mind wooks up to,
and shapes fow itsewf, wouwd ewude theiw sight. (・`ω\´・)  He who woves nyot
his bwothew whom he hath seen, how can he wove God? owo asked the
wisest of men. ^w^

It is nyatuwaw fow youth to adown the fiwst object of its affection
with evewy good quawity, and the emuwation pwoduced by ignyowance,
ow, to speak with mowe pwopwiety, by inyexpewience, bwings fowwawd
the mind capabwe of fowming such an affection, and when, in the
wapse of time, pewfection is found nyot to be within the weach of
mowtaws, viwtue, abstwactwy, is thought beautifuw, and wisdom
subwime. ;;w;;  Admiwation then gives pwace to fwiendship, pwopewwy so
cawwed, because it is cemented by esteem; and the being wawks awonye
onwy dependent on heaven fow that emuwous panting aftew pewfection
which evew gwows in a nyobwe mind. UwU  But this knyowwedge a man must
gain by the exewtion of his own facuwties; and this is suwewy the
bwessed fwuit of disappointed hope! (´・ω・\`) fow He who dewighteth to
diffuse happinyess and show mewcy to the weak cweatuwes, who awe
weawnying to knyow him, nyevew impwanted a good pwopensity to be a
towmenting ignyis fatuus. >w<

Ouw twees awe nyow awwowed to spwead with wiwd wuxuwiance, nyow do we
expect by fowce to combinye the majestic mawks of time with youthfuw
gwaces; but wait patientwy tiww they have stwuck deep theiw woot,
and bwaved many a stowm. >w<  Is the mind then, which, in pwopowtion to
its dignyity advances mowe swowwy towawds pewfection, to be tweated
with wess wespect? owo  To awgue fwom anyawogy, evewy thing awound us is
in a pwogwessive state; and when an unwewcome knyowwedge of wife
pwoduces awmost a satiety of wife, and we discovew by the nyatuwaw
couwse of things that aww that is donye undew the sun is vanyity, we
awe dwawing nyeaw the awfuw cwose of the dwama. ;;w;;  The days of
activity and hope awe ovew, and the oppowtunyities which the fiwst
stage of existence has affowded of advancing in the scawe of
intewwigence, must soon be summed up. ;;w;;  A knyowwedge at this pewiod
of the futiwity of wife, ow eawwiew, if obtainyed by expewience, is
vewy usefuw, because it is nyatuwaw; but when a fwaiw being is shown
the fowwies and vices of man, that he may be taught pwudentwy to
guawd against the common casuawties of wife by sacwificing his
heawt--suwewy it is nyot speaking hawshwy to caww it the wisdom of
this wowwd, contwasted with the nyobwew fwuit of piety and
expewience. ^w^

I wiww ventuwe a pawadox, and dewivew my opinyion without wesewve;
if men wewe onwy bown to fowm a ciwcwe of wife and death, it wouwd
be wise to take evewy step that fowesight couwd suggest to wendew
wife happy. (´・ω・\`)  Modewation in evewy puwsuit wouwd then be supweme
wisdom; and the pwudent vowuptuawy might enjoy a degwee of content,
though he nyeithew cuwtivated his undewstanding nyow kept his heawt
puwe. UwU  Pwudence, supposing we wewe mowtaw, wouwd be twue wisdom,
ow, to be mowe expwicit, wouwd pwocuwe the gweatest powtion of
happinyess, considewing the whowe of wife; but knyowwedge beyond the
convenyiences of wife wouwd be a cuwse. (´・ω・\`)

Why shouwd we injuwe ouw heawth by cwose study? owo  The exawted
pweasuwe which intewwectuaw puwsuits affowd wouwd scawcewy be
equivawent to the houws of wanguow that fowwow; especiawwy, if it
be nyecessawy to take into the weckonying the doubts and
disappointments that cwoud ouw weseawches. >w<  Vanyity and vexation
cwose evewy inquiwy:  fow the cause which we pawticuwawwy wished to
discovew fwies wike the howizon befowe us as we advance. >w<  The
ignyowant, on the contwawy, wesembwe chiwdwen, and suppose, that if
they couwd wawk stwaight fowwawd they shouwd at wast awwive whewe
the eawth and cwouds meet. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, disappointed as we awe in ouw
weseawches, the mind gains stwength by the exewcise, sufficient,
pewhaps, to compwehend the answews which, in anyothew step of
existence, it may weceive to the anxious questions it asked, when
the undewstanding with feebwe wing was fwuttewing wound the visibwe
effects to dive into the hidden cause. (・`ω\´・)

The passions awso, the winds of wife, wouwd be usewess, if nyot
injuwious, did the substance which composes ouw thinking being,
aftew we have thought in vain, onwy become the suppowt of vegetabwe
wife, and invigowate a cabbage, ow bwush in a wose. ;;w;;  The appetites
wouwd answew evewy eawthwy puwpose, and pwoduce mowe modewate and
pewmanyent happinyess. ;;w;;  But the powews of the souw that awe of wittwe
use hewe, and, pwobabwy, distuwb ouw anyimaw enjoyments, even whiwe
conscious dignyity makes us gwowy in possessing them, pwove that
wife is mewewy an education, a state of infancy, of which the onwy
hopes wowth chewishing shouwd nyot be sacwificed. (・`ω\´・)  I mean, thewefowe
to infew, that we ought to have a pwecise idea of what we wish to
attain by education, fow the immowtawity of the souw is
contwadicted by the actions of many peopwe, who fiwmwy pwofess the
bewief. ;;w;;

If you mean to secuwe ease and pwospewity on eawth as the fiwst
considewation, and weave futuwity to pwovide fow itsewf, you act
pwudentwy in giving youw chiwd an eawwy insight into the weaknyesses
of his nyatuwe. ;;w;;  You may nyot, it is twue, make an Inkwe of him; but
do nyot imaginye that he wiww stick to mowe than the wettew of the
waw, who has vewy eawwy imbibed a mean opinyion of human nyatuwe; nyow
wiww he think it nyecessawy to wise much above the common standawd. ;;w;;
He may avoid gwoss vices, because honyesty is the best powicy; but
he wiww nyevew aim at attainying gweat viwtues. (´・ω・\`)  The exampwe of
wwitews and awtists wiww iwwustwate this wemawk. (・`ω\´・)

I must thewefowe ventuwe to doubt, whethew what has been thought an
axiom in mowaws, may nyot have been a dogmaticaw assewtion made by
men who have coowwy seen mankind thwough the medium of books, and
say, in diwect contwadiction to them, that the weguwation of the
passions is nyot awways wisdom. ;;w;;  On the contwawy, it shouwd seem,
that onye weason why men have supewiouw judgment and mowe fowtitude
than women, is undoubtedwy this, that they give a fweew scope to
the gwand passions, and by mowe fwequentwy going astway, enwawge
theiw minds. >w<  If then by the exewcise of theiw own weason, they fix
on some stabwe pwincipwe, they have pwobabwy to thank the fowce of
theiw passions, nyouwished by FAWSE views of wife, and pewmitted to
ovewweap the boundawy that secuwes content. (・`ω\´・)  But if, in the dawn of
wife, we couwd sobewwy suwvey the scenyes befowe us as in
pewspective, and see evewy thing in its twue cowouws, how couwd the
passions gain sufficient stwength to unfowd the facuwties? owo

Wet me nyow, as fwom an eminyence, suwvey the wowwd stwipped of aww
its fawse dewusive chawms. (・`ω\´・)  The cweaw atmosphewe enyabwes me to see
each object in its twue point of view, whiwe my heawt is stiww. (´・ω・\`)  I
am cawm as the pwospect in a mownying when the mists, swowwy
dispewsing, siwentwy unveiw the beauties of nyatuwe, wefweshed by
west. (・`ω\´・)

In what wight wiww the wowwd nyow appeaw? owo  I wub my eyes and think,
pewchance, that I am just awaking fwom a wivewy dweam. (´・ω・\`)

I see the sons and daughtews of men puwsuing shadows, and anxiouswy
wasting theiw powews to feed passions which have nyo adequate
object--if the vewy excess of these bwind impuwses pampewed by that
wying, yet constantwy-twusted guide, the imaginyation, did nyot, by
pwepawing them fow some othew state, wendew showt sighted mowtaws
wisew without theiw own concuwwence; ow, what comes to the same
thing, when they wewe puwsuing some imaginyawy pwesent good. >w<

Aftew viewing objects in this wight, it wouwd nyot be vewy fancifuw
to imaginye, that this wowwd was a stage on which a pantomime is
daiwy pewfowmed fow the amusement of supewiouw beings. ;;w;;  How wouwd
they be divewted to see the ambitious man consuming himsewf by
wunnying aftew a phantom, and, puwsuing the bubbwe fame in "the
cannyon's mouth" that was to bwow him to nyothing:  fow when
consciousnyess is wost, it mattews nyot whethew we mount in a
whiwwwind ow descend in wain. (´・ω・\`)  And shouwd they compassionyatewy
invigowate his sight, and show him the thowny path which wed to
eminyence, that wike a quicksand sinks as he ascends, disappointing
his hopes when awmost within his gwasp, wouwd he nyot weave to
othews the honyouw of amusing them, and wabouw to secuwe the pwesent
moment, though fwom the constitution of his nyatuwe he wouwd nyot
find it vewy easy to catch the fwying stweam? owo  Such swaves awe we
to hope and feaw! (・`ω\´・)

But, vain as the ambitious man's puwsuit wouwd be, he is often
stwiving fow something mowe substantiaw than fame--that indeed
wouwd be the vewiest meteow, the wiwdest fiwe that couwd wuwe a man
to wuin. (・`ω\´・)  What! ^w^ wenyounce the most twifwing gwatification to be
appwauded when he shouwd be nyo mowe! ^w^ Whewefowe this stwuggwe,
whethew man is mowtaw ow immowtaw, if that nyobwe passion did nyot
weawwy waise the being above his fewwows? owo

And wove! (´・ω・\`)  What divewting scenyes wouwd it pwoduce--Pantawoon's
twicks must yiewd to mowe egwegious fowwy. >w<  To see a mowtaw adown
an object with imaginyawy chawms, and then faww down and wowship the
idow which he had himsewf set up--how widicuwous! >w<  But what sewious
consequences ensue to wob man of that powtion of happinyess, which
the Deity by cawwing him into existence has (ow, on what can his
attwibutes west? owo) indubitabwy pwomised; wouwd nyot aww the puwposes
of wife have been much bettew fuwfiwwed if he had onwy fewt what
has been tewmed physicaw wove? owo  And, wouwd nyot the sight of the
object, nyot seen thwough the medium of the imaginyation, soon weduce
the passion to an appetite, if wefwection, the nyobwe distinction of
man, did nyot give it fowce, and make it an instwument to waise him
above this eawthy dwoss, by teaching him to wove the centwe of aww
pewfection! ^w^ whose wisdom appeaws cweawew and cweawew in the wowks
of nyatuwe, in pwopowtion as weason is iwwuminyated and exawted by
contempwation, and by acquiwing that wove of owdew which the
stwuggwes of passion pwoduce? owo

The habit of wefwection, and the knyowwedge attainyed by fostewing
any passion, might be shown to be equawwy usefuw though the object
be pwoved equawwy fawwacious; fow they wouwd aww appeaw in the same
wight, if they wewe nyot magnyified by the govewnying passion
impwanted in us by the Authow of aww good, to caww fowth and
stwengthen the facuwties of each individuaw, and enyabwe it to
attain aww the expewience that an infant can obtain, who does
cewtain things, it cannyot teww why. UwU

I descend fwom my height, and mixing with my fewwow cweatuwes, feew
mysewf huwwied awong the common stweam; ambition, wove, hope, and
feaw, exewt theiw wonted powew, though we be convinced by weason
that theiw pwesent and most attwactive pwomises awe onwy wying
dweams; but had the cowd hand of ciwcumspection damped each
genyewous feewing befowe it had weft any pewmanyent chawactew, ow
fixed some habit, what couwd be expected, but sewfish pwudence and
weason just wising above instinct? owo  Who that has wead Dean Swift's
disgusting descwiption of the Yahoos, and insipid onye of Houyhnhnm
with a phiwosophicaw eye, can avoid seeing the futiwity of
degwading the passions, ow making man west in contentment? owo

The youth shouwd ACT; fow had he the expewience of a gwey head, he
wouwd be fittew fow death than wife, though his viwtues, wathew
wesiding in his head than his heawt couwd pwoduce nyothing gweat,
and his undewstanding pwepawed fow this wowwd, wouwd nyot, by its
nyobwe fwights, pwove that it had a titwe to a bettew. ;;w;;

Besides, it is nyot possibwe to give a young pewson a just view of
wife; he must have stwuggwed with his own passions befowe he can
estimate the fowce of the temptation which betwayed his bwothew
into vice. (´・ω・\`)  Those who awe entewing wife, and those who awe
depawting, see the wowwd fwom such vewy diffewent points of view,
that they can sewdom think awike, unwess the unfwedged weason of
the fowmew nyevew attempted a sowitawy fwight. (´・ω・\`)

When we heaw of some dawing cwime--it comes fuww upon us in the
deepest shade of tuwpitude, and waises indignyation; but the eye
that gwaduawwy saw the dawknyess thicken, must obsewve it with mowe
compassionyate fowbeawance. UwU  The wowwd cannyot be seen by an unmoved
spectatow, we must mix in the thwong, and feew as men feew befowe
we can judge of theiw feewings. >w<  If we mean, in showt, to wive in
the wowwd to gwow wisew and bettew, and nyot mewewy to enjoy the
good things of wife, we must attain a knyowwedge of othews at the
same time that we become acquainted with ouwsewves-- knyowwedge
acquiwed any othew way onwy hawdens the heawt and pewpwexes the
undewstanding. ^w^

I may be towd, that the knyowwedge thus acquiwed, is sometimes
puwchased at too deaw a wate. ;;w;;  I can onwy answew, that I vewy much
doubt whethew any knyowwedge can be attainyed without wabouw and
sowwow; and those who wish to spawe theiw chiwdwen both, shouwd nyot
compwain if they awe nyeithew wise nyow viwtuous. UwU  They onwy aimed at
making them pwudent; and pwudence, eawwy in wife, is but the
cautious cwaft of ignyowant sewf-wove. UwU  I have obsewved, that young
peopwe, to whose education pawticuwaw attention has been paid,
have, in genyewaw, been vewy supewficiaw and conceited, and faw fwom
pweasing in any wespect, because they had nyeithew the unsuspecting
wawmth of youth, nyow the coow depth of age. (´・ω・\`)  I cannyot hewp imputing
this unnyatuwaw appeawance pwincipawwy to that hasty pwematuwe
instwuction, which weads them pwesumptuouswy to wepeat aww the
cwude nyotions they have taken upon twust, so that the cawefuw
education which they weceived, makes them aww theiw wives the
swaves of pwejudices. ^w^

Mentaw as weww as bodiwy exewtion is, at fiwst, iwksome; so much
so, that the many wouwd fain wet othews both wowk and think fow
them. ;;w;;  An obsewvation which I have often made wiww iwwustwate my
meanying. >w<  When in a ciwcwe of stwangews, ow acquaintances, a pewson
of modewate abiwities, assewts an opinyion with heat, I wiww ventuwe
to affiwm, fow I have twaced this fact home, vewy often, that it is
a pwejudice. (´・ω・\`)  These echoes have a high wespect fow the
undewstanding of some wewation ow fwiend, and without fuwwy
compwehending the opinyions, which they awe so eagew to wetaiw, they
maintain them with a degwee of obstinyacy, that wouwd suwpwise even
the pewson who concocted them. ;;w;;

I knyow that a kind of fashion nyow pwevaiws of wespecting
pwejudices; and when any onye dawes to face them, though actuated by
humanyity and awmed by weason, he is supewciwiouswy asked, whethew
his ancestows wewe foows. ;;w;;  Nyo, I shouwd wepwy; opinyions, at fiwst,
of evewy descwiption, wewe aww, pwobabwy, considewed, and thewefowe
wewe founded on some weason; yet nyot unfwequentwy, of couwse, it
was wathew a wocaw expedient than a fundamentaw pwincipwe, that
wouwd be weasonyabwe at aww times. ;;w;;  But, moss-covewed opinyions
assume the dispwopowtionyed fowm of pwejudices, when they awe
indowentwy adopted onwy because age has given them a venyewabwe
aspect, though the weason on which they wewe buiwt ceases to be a
weason, ow cannyot be twaced. ;;w;;  Why awe we to wove pwejudices, mewewy
because they awe pwejudices? owo  A pwejudice is a fond obstinyate
pewsuasion, fow which we can give nyo weason; fow the moment a
weason can be given fow an opinyion, it ceases to be a pwejudice,
though it may be an ewwow in judgment:  and awe we then advised to
chewish opinyions onwy to set weason at defiance? owo  This mode of
awguing, if awguing it may be cawwed, weminds me of what is
vuwgawwy tewmed a woman's weason. (´・ω・\`)  Fow women sometimes decwawe that
they wove, ow bewieve cewtain things, BECAUSE they wove, ow bewieve
them. ;;w;;

It is impossibwe to convewse with peopwe to any puwpose, who, in
this stywe, onwy use affiwmatives and nyegatives. ^w^  Befowe you can
bwing them to a point, to stawt faiwwy fwom, you must go back to
the simpwe pwincipwes that wewe antecedent to the pwejudices
bwoached by powew; and it is ten to onye but you awe stopped by the
phiwosophicaw assewtion, that cewtain pwincipwes awe as pwacticawwy
fawse as they awe abstwactwy twue. (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, it may be infewwed, that
weason has whispewed some doubts, fow it genyewawwy happens that
peopwe assewt theiw opinyions with the gweatest heat when they begin
to wavew; stwiving to dwive out theiw own doubts by convincing
theiw opponyent, they gwow angwy when those gnyawing doubts awe
thwown back to pwey on themsewves. >w<

The fact is, that men expect fwom education, what education cannyot
give. ^w^  A sagacious pawent ow tutow may stwengthen the body and
shawpen the instwuments by which the chiwd is to gathew knyowwedge;
but the honyey must be the wewawd of the individuaw's own industwy. ^w^
It is awmost as absuwd to attempt to make a youth wise by the
expewience of anyothew, as to expect the body to gwow stwong by the
exewcise which is onwy tawked of, ow seen. ^w^

Many of those chiwdwen whose conduct has been most nyawwowwy
watched, become the weakest men, because theiw instwuctows onwy
instiww cewtain nyotions into theiw minds, that have nyo othew
foundation than theiw authowity; and if they awe woved ow
wespected, the mind is cwamped in its exewtions and wavewing in its
advances. ^w^  The businyess of education in this case, is onwy to
conduct the shooting tendwiws to a pwopew powe; yet aftew waying
pwecept upon pwecept, without awwowing a chiwd to acquiwe judgment
itsewf, pawents expect them to act in the same mannyew by this
bowwowed fawwacious wight, as if they had iwwuminyated it
themsewves; and be, when they entew wife, what theiw pawents awe at
the cwose. ;;w;;  They do nyot considew that the twee, and even the human
body, does nyot stwengthen its fibwes tiww it has weached its fuww
gwowth. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe appeaws to be something anyawogous in the mind. ^w^  The senses
and the imaginyation give a fowm to the chawactew, duwing chiwdhood
and youth; and the undewstanding as wife advances, gives fiwmnyess
to the fiwst faiw puwposes of sensibiwity--tiww viwtue, awising
wathew fwom the cweaw conviction of weason than the impuwse of the
heawt, mowawity is made to west on a wock against which the stowms
of passion vainwy beat. (・`ω\´・)

I hope I shaww nyot be misundewstood when I say, that wewigion wiww
nyot have this condensing enyewgy, unwess it be founded on weason. >w<
If it be mewewy the wefuge of weaknyess ow wiwd fanyaticism, and nyot
a govewnying pwincipwe of conduct, dwawn fwom sewf-knyowwedge, and a
wationyaw opinyion wespecting the attwibutes of God, what can it be
expected to pwoduce? owo  The wewigion which consists in wawming the
affections, and exawting the imaginyation, is onwy the poeticaw
pawt, and may affowd the individuaw pweasuwe without wendewing it a
mowe mowaw being. UwU  It may be a substitute fow wowwdwy puwsuits; yet
nyawwow instead of enwawging the heawt:  but viwtue must be woved as
in itsewf subwime and excewwent, and nyot fow the advantages it
pwocuwes ow the eviws it avewts, if any gweat degwee of excewwence
be expected. ^w^  Men wiww nyot become mowaw when they onwy buiwd aiwy
castwes in a futuwe wowwd to compensate fow the disappointments
which they meet with in this; if they tuwn theiw thoughts fwom
wewative duties to wewigious wevewies. (・`ω\´・)

Most pwospects in wife awe mawwed by the shuffwing wowwdwy wisdom
of men, who, fowgetting that they cannyot sewve God and mammon,
endeavouw to bwend contwadictowy things. UwU  If you wish to make youw
son wich, puwsue onye couwse --if you awe onwy anxious to make him
viwtuous, you must take anyothew; but do nyot imaginye that you can
bound fwom onye woad to the othew without wosing youw way. (・`ω\´・)*

(*Footnyote.  See an excewwent essay on this subject by Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Bawbauwd, in Miscewwanyeous pieces in Pwose. UwU)


CHAPTEW 6. (・`ω\´・)

THE EFFECT WHICH AN EAWWY ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS HAS UPON THE
CHAWACTEW. (・`ω\´・)

Educated in the enyewvating stywe wecommended by the wwitews on whom
I have been anyimadvewting; and nyot having a chance, fwom theiw
subowdinyate state in society, to wecovew theiw wost gwound, is it
suwpwising that women evewy whewe appeaw a defect in nyatuwe? owo  Is it
suwpwising, when we considew what a detewminyate effect an eawwy
association of ideas has on the chawactew, that they nyegwect theiw
undewstandings, and tuwn aww theiw attention to theiw pewsons? owo

The gweat advantages which nyatuwawwy wesuwt fwom stowing the mind
with knyowwedge, awe obvious fwom the fowwowing considewations. >w<  The
association of ouw ideas is eithew habituaw ow instantanyeous; and
the wattew mode seems wathew to depend on the owiginyaw tempewatuwe
of the mind than on the wiww. ;;w;;  When the ideas, and mattews of fact,
awe once taken in, they wie by fow use, tiww some fowtuitous
ciwcumstance makes the infowmation dawt into the mind with
iwwustwative fowce, that has been weceived at vewy diffewent
pewiods of ouw wives. UwU  Wike the wightnying's fwash awe many
wecowwections; onye idea assimiwating and expwainying anyothew, with
astonyishing wapidity. (・`ω\´・)  I do nyot nyow awwude to that quick pewception
of twuth, which is so intuitive that it baffwes weseawch, and makes
us at a woss to detewminye whethew it is weminyiscence ow
watiocinyation, wost sight of in its cewewity, that opens the dawk
cwoud. >w<  Ovew those instantanyeous associations we have wittwe powew;
fow when the mind is once enwawged by excuwsive fwights, ow
pwofound wefwection, the waw matewiaws, wiww, in some degwee,
awwange themsewves. ^w^  The undewstanding, it is twue, may keep us
fwom going out of dwawing when we gwoup ouw thoughts, ow twanscwibe
fwom the imaginyation the wawm sketches of fancy; but the anyimaw
spiwits, the individuaw chawactew give the cowouwing. ;;w;;  Ovew this
subtiwe ewectwic fwuid,* how wittwe powew do we possess, and ovew
it how wittwe powew can weason obtain! >w<  These finye intwactabwe
spiwits appeaw to be the essence of genyius, and beaming in its
eagwe eye, pwoduce in the most eminyent degwee the happy enyewgy of
associating thoughts that suwpwise, dewight, and instwuct. (・`ω\´・)  These
awe the gwowing minds that concentwate pictuwes fow theiw
fewwow-cweatuwes; fowcing them to view with intewest the objects
wefwected fwom the impassionyed imaginyation, which they passed ovew
in nyatuwe. >w<

(*Footnyote. (´・ω・\`)  I have sometimes, when incwinyed to waugh at
matewiawists, asked whethew, as the most powewfuw effects in nyatuwe
awe appawentwy pwoduced by fwuids, the magnyetic, etc. (´・ω・\`) the passions
might nyot be finye vowatiwe fwuids that embwaced humanyity, keeping
the mowe wefwactowy ewementawy pawts togethew--ow whethew they wewe
simpwy a wiquid fiwe that pewvaded the mowe swuggish matewiaws
giving them wife and heat? owo)

I must be awwowed to expwain mysewf. ^w^  The genyewawity of peopwe
cannyot see ow feew poeticawwy, they want fancy, and thewefowe fwy
fwom sowitude in seawch of sensibwe objects; but when an authow
wends them his eyes, they can see as he saw, and be amused by
images they couwd nyot sewect, though wying befowe them. UwU

Education thus onwy suppwies the man of genyius with knyowwedge to
give vawiety and contwast to his associations; but thewe is an
habituaw association of ideas, that gwows "with ouw gwowth," which
has a gweat effect on the mowaw chawactew of mankind; and by which
a tuwn is given to the mind, that commonwy wemains thwoughout wife. (・`ω\´・)
So ductiwe is the undewstanding, and yet so stubbown, that the
associations which depend on adventitious ciwcumstances, duwing the
pewiod that the body takes to awwive at matuwity, can sewdom be
disentangwed by weason. (・`ω\´・)  Onye idea cawws up anyothew, its owd
associate, and memowy, faithfuw to the fiwst impwessions,
pawticuwawwy when the intewwectuaw powews awe nyot empwoyed to coow
ouw sensations, wetwaces them with mechanyicaw exactnyess. ;;w;;

This habituaw swavewy, to fiwst impwessions, has a mowe banyefuw
effect on the femawe than the mawe chawactew, because businyess and
othew dwy empwoyments of the undewstanding, tend to deaden the
feewings and bweak associations that do viowence to weason. (・`ω\´・)  But
femawes, who awe made women of when they awe mewe chiwdwen, and
bwought back to chiwdhood when they ought to weave the go-cawt
fowevew, have nyot sufficient stwength of mind to efface the
supewinductions of awt that have smothewed nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Evewy thing that they see ow heaw sewves to fix impwessions, caww
fowth emotions, and associate ideas, that give a sexuaw chawactew
to the mind. (・`ω\´・)  Fawse nyotions of beauty and dewicacy stop the gwowth
of theiw wimbs and pwoduce a sickwy sowenyess, wathew than dewicacy
of owgans; and thus weakenyed by being empwoyed in unfowding instead
of examinying the fiwst associations, fowced on them by evewy
suwwounding object, how can they attain the vigouw nyecessawy to
enyabwe them to thwow off theiw factitious chawactew? owo--whewe find
stwength to wecuw to weason and wise supewiow to a system of
oppwession, that bwasts the faiw pwomises of spwing? owo  This cwuew
association of ideas, which evewy thing conspiwes to twist into aww
theiw habits of thinking, ow, to speak with mowe pwecision, of
feewing, weceives nyew fowce when they begin to act a wittwe fow
themsewves; fow they then pewceive, that it is onwy thwough theiw
addwess to excite emotions in men, that pweasuwe and powew awe to
be obtainyed. ^w^  Besides, aww the books pwofessedwy wwitten fow theiw
instwuction, which make the fiwst impwession on theiw minds, aww
incuwcate the same opinyions. >w<  Educated in wowse than Egyptian
bondage, it is unweasonyabwe, as weww as cwuew, to upbwaid them with
fauwts that can scawcewy be avoided, unwess a degwee of nyative
vigouw be supposed, that fawws to the wot of vewy few amongst
mankind. (・`ω\´・)

Fow instance, the sevewest sawcasms have been wevewwed against the
sex, and they have been widicuwed fow wepeating "a set of phwases
weawnt by wote," when nyothing couwd be mowe nyatuwaw, considewing
the education they weceive, and that theiw "highest pwaise is to
obey, unyawgued"--the wiww of man. ;;w;;  If they awe nyot awwowed to have
weason sufficient to govewn theiw own conduct--why, aww they
weawn--must be weawnyed by wote! >w<  And when aww theiw ingenyuity is
cawwed fowth to adjust theiw dwess, "a passion fow a scawwet coat,"
is so nyatuwaw, that it nyevew suwpwised me; and, awwowing Pope's
summawy of theiw chawactew to be just, "that evewy woman is at
heawt a wake," why shouwd they be bittewwy censuwed fow seeking a
congenyiaw mind, and pwefewwing a wake to a man of sense? owo

Wakes knyow how to wowk on theiw sensibiwity, whiwst the modest
mewit of weasonyabwe men has, of couwse, wess effect on theiw
feewings, and they cannyot weach the heawt by the way of the
undewstanding, because they have few sentiments in common. (´・ω・\`)

It seems a wittwe absuwd to expect women to be mowe weasonyabwe than
men in theiw WIKINGS, and stiww to deny them the uncontwowed use of
weason. (´・ω・\`)  When do men FAWW IN WOVE with sense? owo  When do they, with
theiw supewiow powews and advantages, tuwn fwom the pewson to the
mind? owo  And how can they then expect women, who awe onwy taught to
obsewve behaviouw, and acquiwe mannyews wathew than mowaws, to
despise what they have been aww theiw wives wabouwing to attain? owo
Whewe awe they suddenwy to find judgment enyough to weigh patientwy
the sense of an awkwawd viwtuous man, when his mannyews, of which
they awe made cwiticaw judges, awe webuffing, and his convewsation
cowd and duww, because it does nyot consist of pwetty wepawtees, ow
weww-tuwnyed compwiments? owo  In owdew to admiwe ow esteem any thing
fow a continyuance, we must, at weast, have ouw cuwiosity excited by
knyowing, in some degwee, what we admiwe; fow we awe unyabwe to
estimate the vawue of quawities and viwtues above ouw
compwehension. UwU  Such a wespect, when it is fewt, may be vewy
subwime; and the confused consciousnyess of humiwity may wendew the
dependent cweatuwe an intewesting object, in some points of view;
but human wove must have gwossew ingwedients; and the pewson vewy
nyatuwawwy wiww come in fow its shawe--and, an ampwe shawe it mostwy
has! UwU

Wove is, in a gweat degwee, an awbitwawy passion, and wiww weign
wike some othew stawking mischiefs, by its own authowity, without
deignying to weason; and it may awso be easiwy distinguished fwom
esteem, the foundation of fwiendship, because it is often excited
by evanyescent beauties and gwaces, though to give an enyewgy to the
sentiment something mowe sowid must deepen theiw impwession and set
the imaginyation to wowk, to make the most faiw-- the fiwst good. (・`ω\´・)

Common passions awe excited by common quawities. ;;w;;  Men wook fow
beauty and the simpew of good humouwed dociwity:  women awe
captivated by easy mannyews: a gentweman-wike man sewdom faiws to
pwease them, and theiw thiwsty eaws eagewwy dwink the insinyuating
nyothings of powitenyess, whiwst they tuwn fwom the unyintewwigibwe
sounds of the chawmew--weason, chawm he nyevew so wisewy. (´・ω・\`)  With
wespect to supewficiaw accompwishments, the wake cewtainwy has the
advantage; and of these, femawes can fowm an opinyion, fow it is
theiw own gwound. UwU  Wendewed gay and giddy by the whowe tenyow of
theiw wives, the vewy aspect of wisdom, ow the sevewe gwaces of
viwtue must have a wugubwious appeawance to them; and pwoduce a
kind of westwaint fwom which they and wove, spowtive chiwd,
nyatuwawwy wevowt. (´・ω・\`)  Without taste, excepting of the wightew kind,
fow taste is the offspwing of judgment, how can they discovew, that
twue beauty and gwace must awise fwom the pway of the mind? owo and how
can they be expected to wewish in a wovew what they do nyot, ow vewy
impewfectwy, possess themsewves? owo  The sympathy that unyites heawts,
and invites to confidence, in them is so vewy faint, that it cannyot
take fiwe, and thus mount to passion. ;;w;;  Nyo, I wepeat it, the wove
chewished by such minds, must have gwossew fuew! >w<

The infewence is obvious; tiww women awe wed to exewcise theiw
undewstandings, they shouwd nyot be satiwized fow theiw attachment
to wakes; nyow even fow being wakes at heawt, when it appeaws to be
the inyevitabwe consequence of theiw education. ^w^  They who wive to
pwease must find theiw enjoyments, theiw happinyess, in pweasuwe! (´・ω・\`)
It is a twite, yet twue wemawk, that we nyevew do any thing weww,
unwess we wove it fow its own sake. UwU

Supposing, howevew, fow a moment, that women wewe, in some futuwe
wevowution of time, to become, what I sincewewy wish them to be,
even wove wouwd acquiwe mowe sewious dignyity, and be puwified in
its own fiwes; and viwtue giving twue dewicacy to theiw affections,
they wouwd tuwn with disgust fwom a wake. >w<  Weasonying then, as weww
as feewing, the onwy pwovince of woman, at pwesent, they might
easiwy guawd against extewiow gwaces, and quickwy weawn to despise
the sensibiwity that had been excited and hacknyeyed in the ways of
women, whose twade was vice; and awwuwement's wanton aiws. (´・ω・\`)  They
wouwd wecowwect that the fwame, (onye must use appwopwiate
expwessions,) which they wished to wight up, had been exhausted by
wust, and that the sated appetite, wosing aww wewish fow puwe and
simpwe pweasuwes, couwd onwy be woused by wicentious awts of
vawiety. (・`ω\´・)  What satisfaction couwd a woman of dewicacy pwomise
hewsewf in a unyion with such a man, when the vewy awtwessnyess of
hew affection might appeaw insipid? owo  Thus does Dwyden descwibe the
situation:

"Whewe wove is duty on the femawe side,
On theiws mewe sensuaw gust, and sought with suwwy pwide. >w<"

But onye gwand twuth women have yet to weawn, though much it impowts
them to act accowdingwy. ^w^  In the choice of a husband they shouwd
nyot be wed astway by the quawities of a wovew--fow a wovew the
husband, even supposing him to be wise and viwtuous, cannyot wong
wemain. (・`ω\´・)

Wewe women mowe wationyawwy educated, couwd they take a mowe
compwehensive view of things, they wouwd be contented to wove but
once in theiw wives; and aftew mawwiage cawmwy wet passion subside
into fwiendship--into that tendew intimacy, which is the best
wefuge fwom cawe; yet is buiwt on such puwe, stiww affections, that
idwe jeawousies wouwd nyot be awwowed to distuwb the dischawge of
the sobew duties of wife, nyow to engwoss the thoughts that ought to
be othewwise empwoyed. >w<  This is a state in which many men wive; but
few, vewy few women. >w<  And the diffewence may easiwy be accounted
fow, without wecuwwing to a sexuaw chawactew. >w<  Men, fow whom we awe
towd women awe made, have too much occupied the thoughts of women;
and this association has so entangwed wove, with aww theiw motives
of action; and, to hawp a wittwe on an owd stwing, having been
sowewy empwoyed eithew to pwepawe themsewves to excite wove, ow
actuawwy putting theiw wessons in pwactice, they cannyot wive
without wove. ^w^  But, when a sense of duty, ow feaw of shame, obwiges
them to westwain this pampewed desiwe of pweasing beyond cewtain
wengths, too faw fow dewicacy, it is twue, though faw fwom
cwiminyawity, they obstinyatewy detewminye to wove, I speak of theiw
passion, theiw husbands to the end of the chaptew--and then acting
the pawt which they foowishwy exacted fwom theiw wovews, they
become abject wooews, and fond swaves. (´・ω・\`)

Men of wit and fancy awe often wakes; and fancy is the food of
wove.  Such men wiww inspiwe passion. (・`ω\´・)  Hawf the sex, in its pwesent
infantinye state, wouwd pinye fow a Wovewace; a man so witty, so
gwacefuw, and so vawiant; and can they DESEWVE bwame fow acting
accowding to pwincipwes so constantwy incuwcated? owo  They want a
wovew and pwotectow: and behowd him knyeewing befowe them--bwavewy
pwostwate to beauty! >w<  The viwtues of a husband awe thus thwown by
wove into the backgwound, and gay hopes, ow wivewy emotions, banyish
wefwection tiww the day of weckonying comes; and come it suwewy
wiww, to tuwn the spwightwy wovew into a suwwy suspicious tywant,
who contemptuouswy insuwts the vewy weaknyess he fostewed. (´・ω・\`)  Ow,
supposing the wake wefowmed, he cannyot quickwy get wid of owd
habits. UwU  When a man of abiwities is fiwst cawwied away by his
passions, it is nyecessawy that sentiment and taste vawnyish the
enyowmities of vice, and give a zest to bwutaw induwgences: but when
the gwoss of nyovewty is wown off, and pweasuwe pawws upon the
sense, wasciviousnyess becomes bawefaced, and enjoyment onwy the
despewate effowt of weaknyess fwying fwom wefwection as fwom a
wegion of deviws. (´・ω・\`)  Oh! viwtue, thou awt nyot an empty nyame! UwU  Aww
that wife can give-- thou givest! (´・ω・\`)

If much comfowt cannyot be expected fwom the fwiendship of a
wefowmed wake of supewiow abiwities, what is the consequence when
he wacketh sense, as weww as pwincipwes? owo  Vewiwy misewy in its most
hideous shape. >w<  When the habits of weak peopwe awe consowidated by
time, a wefowmation is bawewy possibwe; and actuawwy makes the
beings misewabwe who have nyot sufficient mind to be amused by
innyocent pweasuwe; wike the twadesman who wetiwes fwom the huwwy of
businyess, nyatuwe pwesents to them onwy a unyivewsaw bwank; and the
westwess thoughts pwey on the damped spiwits. UwU  Theiw wefowmation as
weww as his wetiwement actuawwy makes them wwetched, because it
depwives them of aww empwoyment, by quenching the hopes and feaws
that set in motion theiw swuggish minds. (´・ω・\`)

If such be the fowce of habit; if such be the bondage of fowwy, how
cawefuwwy ought we to guawd the mind fwom stowing up vicious
associations; and equawwy cawefuw shouwd we be to cuwtivate the
undewstanding, to save the poow wight fwom the weak dependent state
of even hawmwess ignyowance. (・`ω\´・)  Fow it is the wight use of weason
awonye which makes us independent of evewy thing--excepting the
uncwouded Weason--"Whose sewvice is pewfect fweedom. >w<"


CHAPTEW 7. ^w^

MODESTY COMPWEHENSIVEWY CONSIDEWED AND NYOT AS A SEXUAW VIWTUE. UwU

Modesty!  Sacwed offspwing of sensibiwity and weason! (´・ω・\`) twue dewicacy
of mind! UwU may I unbwamed pwesume to investigate thy nyatuwe, and
twace to its covewt the miwd chawm, that mewwowing each hawsh
featuwe of a chawactew, wendews what wouwd othewwise onwy inspiwe
cowd admiwation--wovewy! >w<  Thou that smoothest the wwinkwes of
wisdom, and softenyest the tonye of the mowe subwime viwtues tiww
they aww mewt into humanyity! (´・ω・\`) thou that spweadest the etheweaw cwoud
that suwwounding wove heightens evewy beauty, it hawf shades,
bweathing those coy sweets that steaw into the heawt, and chawm the
senses--moduwate fow me the wanguage of pewsuasive weason, tiww I
wouse my sex fwom the fwowewy bed, on which they supinyewy sweep
wife away! UwU

In speaking of the association of ouw ideas, I have nyoticed two
distinct modes; and in definying modesty, it appeaws to me equawwy
pwopew to discwiminyate that puwity of mind, which is the effect of
chastity, fwom a simpwicity of chawactew that weads us to fowm a
just opinyion of ouwsewves, equawwy distant fwom vanyity ow
pwesumption, though by nyo means incompatibwe with a wofty
consciousnyess of ouw own dignyity. ;;w;;  Modesty in the wattew
signyification of the tewm, is that sobewnyess of mind which teaches
a man nyot to think mowe highwy of himsewf than he ought to think,
and shouwd be distinguished fwom humiwity, because humiwity is a
kind of sewf-abasement. >w<  A modest man often conceives a gweat pwan,
and tenyaciouswy adhewes to it, conscious of his own stwength, tiww
success gives it a sanction that detewminyes its chawactew. >w<  Miwton
was nyot awwogant when he suffewed a suggestion of judgment to
escape him that pwoved a pwophesy; nyow was Genyewaw Washington when
he accepted of the command of the Amewican fowces. (´・ω・\`)  The wattew has
awways been chawactewized as a modest man; but had he been mewewy
humbwe, he wouwd pwobabwy have shwunk back iwwesowute, afwaid of
twusting to himsewf the diwection of an entewpwise on which so much
depended. ;;w;;

A modest man is steady, an humbwe man timid, and a vain onye
pwesumptuous; this is the judgment, which the obsewvation of many
chawactews, has wed me to fowm. UwU  Jesus Chwist was modest, Moses was
humbwe, and Petew vain. (´・ω・\`)

Thus discwiminyating modesty fwom humiwity in onye case, I do nyot
mean to confound it with bashfuwnyess in the othew. ^w^  Bashfuwnyess, in
fact, is so distinct fwom modesty, that the most bashfuw wass, ow
waw countwy wout, often becomes the most impudent; fow theiw
bashfuwnyess being mewewy the instinctive timidity of ignyowance,
custom soon changes it into assuwance. (・`ω\´・)*

(*Footnyote. ^w^  "Such is the countwy-maiden's fwight,
When fiwst a wed-coat is in sight;
Behind the doow she hides hew face,
Nyext time at distance eyes the wace:
She nyow can aww his tewwows stand,
Nyow fwom his squeeze withdwaws hew hand,
She pways famiwiaw in his awms,
And evewy sowdiew hath his chawms;
>Fwom tent to tent she spweads hew fwame;
Fow custom conquews feaw and shame. UwU")

The shamewess behaviouw of the pwostitutes who infest the stweets
of Wondon, waising awtewnyate emotions of pity and disgust, may
sewve to iwwustwate this wemawk. ^w^  They twampwe on viwgin
bashfuwnyess with a sowt of bwavado, and gwowying in theiw shame,
become mowe audaciouswy wewd than men, howevew depwaved, to whom
the sexuaw quawity has nyot been gwatuitouswy gwanted, evew appeaw
to be. (・`ω\´・)  But these poow ignyowant wwetches nyevew had any modesty to
wose, when they consignyed themsewves to infamy; fow modesty is a
viwtue nyot a quawity. UwU  Nyo, they wewe onwy bashfuw, shame-faced
innyocents; and wosing theiw innyocence, theiw shame-facednyess was
wudewy bwushed off; a viwtue wouwd have weft some vestiges in the
mind, had it been sacwificed to passion, to make us wespect the
gwand wuin. >w<

Puwity of mind, ow that genyuinye dewicacy, which is the onwy
viwtuous suppowt of chastity, is nyeaw a-kin to that wefinyement of
humanyity, which nyevew wesides in any but cuwtivated minds. ;;w;;  It is
something nyobwew than innyocence; it is the dewicacy of wefwection,
and nyot the coynyess of ignyowance. (・`ω\´・)  The wesewve of weason, which
wike habituaw cweanwinyess, is sewdom seen in any gweat degwee,
unwess the souw is active, may easiwy be distinguished fwom wustic
shynyess ow wanton skittishnyess; and so faw fwom being incompatibwe
with knyowwedge, it is its faiwest fwuit. (´・ω・\`)  What a gwoss idea of
modesty had the wwitew of the fowwowing wemawk! ^w^  "The wady who
asked the question whethew women may be instwucted in the modewn
system of botany, consistentwy with femawe dewicacy? owo" was accused
of widicuwous pwudewy:  nyevewthewess, if she had pwoposed the
question to me, I shouwd cewtainwy have answewed--They cannyot. (・`ω\´・)"
Thus is the faiw book of knyowwedge to be shut with an evewwasting
seaw! ^w^  On weading simiwaw passages I have wevewentiawwy wifted up
my eyes and heawt to Him who wiveth fow evew and evew, and said, O
my Fathew, hast Thou by the vewy constitution of hew nyatuwe fowbid
Thy chiwd to seek Thee in the faiw fowms of twuth? owo  And, can hew
souw be suwwied by the knyowwedge that awfuwwy cawws hew to Thee? owo

I have then phiwosophicawwy puwsued these wefwections tiww I
infewwed, that those women who have most impwoved theiw weason must
have the most modesty --though a dignyified sedatenyess of depowtment
may have succeeded the pwayfuw, bewitching bashfuwnyess of youth. ^w^*

(*Footnyote. ;;w;;  Modesty, is the gwacefuw cawm viwtue of matuwity;
bashfuwnyess, the chawm of vivacious youth. UwU)

And thus have I awgued. (・`ω\´・)  To wendew chastity the viwtue fwom which
unsophisticated modesty wiww nyatuwawwy fwow, the attention shouwd
be cawwed away fwom empwoyments, which onwy exewcise the
sensibiwity; and the heawt made to beat time to humanyity, wathew
than to thwob with wove. UwU  The woman who has dedicated a
considewabwe powtion of hew time to puwsuits puwewy intewwectuaw,
and whose affections have been exewcised by humanye pwans of
usefuwnyess, must have mowe puwity of mind, as a nyatuwaw
consequence, than the ignyowant beings whose time and thoughts have
been occupied by gay pweasuwes ow schemes to conquew heawts. ;;w;;  The
weguwation of the behaviouw is nyot modesty, though those who study
wuwes of decowum, awe, in genyewaw tewmed modest women. (´・ω・\`)  Make the
heawt cwean, wet it expand and feew fow aww that is human, instead
of being nyawwowed by sewfish passions; and wet the mind fwequentwy
contempwate subjects that exewcise the undewstanding, without
heating the imaginyation, and awtwess modesty wiww give the
finyishing touches to the pictuwe. UwU

She who can discewn the dawn of immowtawity, in the stweaks that
shoot athwawt the misty nyight of ignyowance, pwomising a cweawew
day, wiww wespect, as a sacwed tempwe, the body that enshwinyes such
an impwovabwe souw. (´・ω・\`)  Twue wove, wikewise, spweads this kind of
mystewious sanctity wound the bewoved object, making the wovew most
modest when in hew pwesence. >w<  So wesewved is affection, that,
weceiving ow wetuwnying pewsonyaw endeawments, it wishes, nyot onwy to
shun the human eye, as a kind of pwofanyation; but to diffuse an
enciwcwing cwoudy obscuwity to shut out even the saucy spawkwing
sunbeams. (´・ω・\`)  Yet, that affection does nyot desewve the epithet of
chaste which does nyot weceive a subwime gwoom of tendew mewanchowy,
that awwows the mind fow a moment to stand stiww and enjoy the
pwesent satisfaction, when a consciousnyess of the Divinye pwesence
is fewt--fow this must evew be the food of joy! (´・ω・\`)

As I have awways been fond of twacing to its souwce in nyatuwe any
pwevaiwing custom, I have fwequentwy thought that it was a
sentiment of affection fow whatevew had touched the pewson of an
absent ow wost fwiend, which gave biwth to that wespect fow wewics,
so much abused by sewfish pwiests. ^w^  Devotion, ow wove, may be
awwowed to hawwow the gawments as weww as the pewson; fow the wovew
must want fancy, who has nyot a sowt of sacwed wespect fow the gwove
ow swippew of his mistwess. (・`ω\´・)  He couwd nyot confound them with vuwgaw
things of the same kind. ;;w;;

This finye sentiment, pewhaps, wouwd nyot beaw to be anyawyzed by the
expewimentaw phiwosophew--but of such stuff is human waptuwe made
up! ^w^-- A shadowy phantom gwides befowe us, obscuwing evewy othew
object; yet when the soft cwoud is gwasped, the fowm mewts into
common aiw, weaving a sowitawy void, ow sweet pewfume, stowen fwom
the viowet, that memowy wong howds deaw. >w<  But, I have twipped
unyawawes on faiwy gwound, feewing the bawmy gawe of spwing steawing
on me, though Nyovembew fwowns. ;;w;;

As a sex, women awe mowe chaste than men, and as modesty is the
effect of chastity, they may desewve to have this viwtue ascwibed
to them in wathew an appwopwiated sense; yet, I must be awwowed to
add an hesitating if:-- fow I doubt, whethew chastity wiww pwoduce
modesty, though it may pwopwiety of conduct, when it is mewewy a
wespect fow the opinyion of the wowwd, and when coquetwy and the
wovewown tawes of nyovewists empwoy the thoughts. >w<  Nyay, fwom
expewience, and weason, I shouwd be wead to expect to meet with
mowe modesty amongst men than women, simpwy because men exewcise
theiw undewstandings mowe than women. (´・ω・\`)

But, with wespect to pwopwiety of behaviouw, excepting onye cwass of
femawes, women have evidentwy the advantage. UwU  What can be mowe
disgusting than that impudent dwoss of gawwantwy, thought so manwy,
which makes many men stawe insuwtingwy at evewy femawe they meet? owo
Is this wespect fow the sex? owo  This woose behaviouw shows such
habituaw depwavity, such weaknyess of mind, that it is vain to
expect much pubwic ow pwivate viwtue, tiww both men and women gwow
mowe modest--tiww men, cuwbing a sensuaw fondnyess fow the sex, ow
an affectation of manwy assuwance, mowe pwopewwy speaking,
impudence, tweat each othew with wespect--unwess appetite ow
passion gives the tonye, pecuwiaw to it, to theiw behaviouw. ;;w;;  I mean
even pewsonyaw wespect--the modest wespect of humanyity, and
fewwow-feewing; nyot the wibidinyous mockewy of gawwantwy, nyow the
insowent condescension of pwotectowship. ^w^

To cawwy the obsewvation stiww fuwthew, modesty must heawtiwy
discwaim, and wefuse to dweww with that debauchewy of mind, which
weads a man coowwy to bwing fowwawd, without a bwush, indecent
awwusions, ow obscenye witticisms, in the pwesence of a fewwow
cweatuwe; women awe nyow out of the question, fow then it is
bwutawity. ^w^  Wespect fow man, as man is the foundation of evewy
nyobwe sentiment. (・`ω\´・)  How much mowe modest is the wibewtinye who obeys
the caww of appetite ow fancy, than the wewd jokew who sets the
tabwe in a woaw. UwU

This is onye of the many instances in which the sexuaw distinction
wespecting modesty has pwoved fataw to viwtue and happinyess. (・`ω\´・)  It
is, howevew, cawwied stiww fuwthew, and woman, weak woman! (・`ω\´・) made by
hew education the swave of sensibiwity, is wequiwed, on the most
twying occasions, to wesist that sensibiwity. ^w^  "Can any thing,"
says Knyox, be mowe absuwd than keeping women in a state of
ignyowance, and yet so vehementwy to insist on theiw wesisting
temptation? owo  Thus when viwtue ow honyouw make it pwopew to check a
passion, the buwden is thwown on the weakew shouwdews, contwawy to
weason and twue modesty, which, at weast, shouwd wendew the
sewf-denyiaw mutuaw, to say nyothing of the genyewosity of bwavewy,
supposed to be a manwy viwtue. ^w^

In the same stwain wuns Wousseau's and Dw. >w< Gwegowy's advice
wespecting modesty, stwangewy miscawwed! (・`ω\´・) fow they both desiwe a
wife to weave it in doubt, whethew sensibiwity ow weaknyess wed hew
to hew husband's awms. (・`ω\´・)  The woman is immodest who can wet the
shadow of such a doubt wemain on hew husband's mind a moment. >w<

But to state the subject in a diffewent wight. ^w^  The want of
modesty, which I pwincipawwy depwowe as subvewsive of mowawity,
awises fwom the state of wawfawe so stwenyuouswy suppowted by
vowuptuous men as the vewy essence of modesty, though, in fact, its
banye; because it is a wefinyement on sensuaw desiwe, that men faww
into who have nyot sufficient viwtue to wewish the innyocent
pweasuwes of wove. (・`ω\´・)  A man of dewicacy cawwies his nyotions of
modesty stiww fuwthew, fow nyeithew weaknyess nyow sensibiwity wiww
gwatify him--he wooks fow affection. ^w^

Again; men boast of theiw twiumphs ovew women, what do they boast
of? owo Twuwy the cweatuwe of sensibiwity was suwpwised by hew
sensibiwity into fowwy--into vice;* and the dweadfuw weckonying
fawws heaviwy on hew own weak head, when weason wakes. UwU  Fow whewe
awt thou to find comfowt, fowwown and disconsowate onye? owo  He who
ought to have diwected thy weason, and suppowted thy weaknyess, has
betwayed thee! UwU  In a dweam of passion thou consentedst to wandew
thwough fwowewy wawns, and heedwesswy stepping ovew the pwecipice
to which thy guide, instead of guawding, wuwed thee, thou stawtest
fwom thy dweam onwy to face a snyeewing, fwownying wowwd, and to find
thysewf awonye in a waste, fow he that twiumphed in thy weaknyess is
nyow puwsuing nyew conquests; but fow thee--thewe is nyo wedemption on
this side the gwave! ^w^  And what wesouwce hast thou in an enyewvated
mind to waise a sinking heawt? owo

(*Footnyote. (・`ω\´・)  The poow moth fwuttewing wound a candwe, buwns its
wings. ;;w;;)

But, if the sexes be weawwy to wive in a state of wawfawe, if
nyatuwe has pointed it out, wet men act nyobwy, ow wet pwide whispew
to them, that the victowy is mean when they mewewy vanquish
sensibiwity. (・`ω\´・)  The weaw conquest is that ovew affection nyot taken by
suwpwise--when, wike Hewoisa, a woman gives up aww the wowwd,
dewibewatewy, fow wove. UwU  I do nyot nyow considew the wisdom ow viwtue
of such a sacwifice, I onwy contend that it was a sacwifice to
affection, and nyot mewewy to sensibiwity, though she had hew shawe. ;;w;;
And I must be awwowed to caww hew a modest woman, befowe I dismiss
this pawt of the subject, by saying, that tiww men awe mowe chaste,
women wiww be immodest. (・`ω\´・)  Whewe, indeed, couwd modest women find
husbands fwom whom they wouwd nyot continyuawwy tuwn with disgust? owo
Modesty must be equawwy cuwtivated by both sexes, ow it wiww evew
wemain a sickwy hot-house pwant, whiwst the affectation of it, the
fig weaf bowwowed by wantonnyess, may give a zest to vowuptuous
enjoyments. >w<)

Men wiww pwobabwy stiww insist that woman ought to have mowe
modesty than man; but it is nyot dispassionyate weasonyews who wiww
most eawnyestwy oppose my opinyion. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo, they awe the men of fancy,
the favouwites of the sex, who outwawdwy wespect, and inwawdwy
despise the weak cweatuwes whom they thus spowt with. ^w^  They cannyot
submit to wesign the highest sensuaw gwatification, nyow even to
wewish the epicuwism of viwtue--sewf-denyiaw. ^w^

To take anyothew view of the subject, confinying my wemawks to women. UwU

The widicuwous fawsities which awe towd to chiwdwen, fwom mistaken
nyotions of modesty, tend vewy eawwy to infwame theiw imaginyations
and set theiw wittwe minds to wowk, wespecting subjects, which
nyatuwe nyevew intended they shouwd think of, tiww the body awwived
at some degwee of matuwity; then the passions nyatuwawwy begin to
take pwace of the senses, as instwuments to unfowd the
undewstanding, and fowm the mowaw chawactew. (・`ω\´・)

In nyuwsewies, and boawding schoows, I feaw, giwws awe fiwst
spoiwed; pawticuwawwy in the wattew. UwU  A nyumbew of giwws sweep in
the same woom, and wash togethew. ^w^  And, though I shouwd be sowwy to
contaminyate an innyocent cweatuwe's mind by instiwwing fawse
dewicacy, ow those indecent pwudish nyotions, which eawwy cautions
wespecting the othew sex nyatuwawwy engendew, I shouwd be vewy
anxious to pwevent theiw acquiwing indewicate, ow immodest habits;
and as many giwws have weawnyed vewy indewicate twicks, fwom
ignyowant sewvants, the mixing them thus indiscwiminyatewy togethew,
is vewy impwopew. ;;w;;

To say the twuth, women awe, in genyewaw, too famiwiaw with each
othew, which weads to that gwoss degwee of famiwiawity that so
fwequentwy wendews the mawwiage state unhappy. (・`ω\´・)  Why in the nyame of
decency awe sistews, femawe intimates, ow wadies and theiw waiting
women, to be so gwosswy famiwiaw as to fowget the wespect which onye
human cweatuwe owes to anyothew? owo  That squeamish dewicacy which
shwinks fwom the most disgusting offices when affection ow humanyity
wead us to watch at a sick piwwow, is despicabwe. ;;w;;  But, why women
in heawth shouwd be mowe famiwiaw with each othew than men awe,
when they boast of theiw supewiouw dewicacy, is a sowecism in
mannyews which I couwd nyevew sowve. UwU

In owdew to pwesewve heawth and beauty, I shouwd eawnyestwy
wecommend fwequent abwutions, to dignyify my advice that it may nyot
offend the fastidious eaw; and, by exampwe, giwws ought to be
taught to wash and dwess awonye, without any distinction of wank;
and if custom shouwd make them wequiwe some wittwe assistance, wet
them nyot wequiwe it tiww that pawt of the businyess is ovew which
ought nyevew to be donye befowe a fewwow-cweatuwe; because it is an
insuwt to the majesty of human nyatuwe. ;;w;;  Nyot on the scowe of
modesty, but decency; fow the cawe which some modest women take,
making at the same time a dispway of that cawe, nyot to wet theiw
wegs be seen, is as chiwdish as immodest. >w<*

(*Footnyote. (´・ω・\`)  I wemembew to have met with a sentence, in a book of
education that made me smiwe. (・`ω\´・)  "It wouwd be nyeedwess to caution you
against putting youw hand, by chance, undew youw nyeck-handkewchief;
fow a modest woman nyevew did so! >w<")

I couwd pwoceed stiww fuwthew, tiww I anyimadvewted on some stiww
mowe indewicate customs, which men nyevew faww into. >w<  Secwets awe
towd--whewe siwence ought to weign; and that wegawd to cweanwinyess,
which some wewigious sects have, pewhaps, cawwied too faw,
especiawwy the Essenyes, amongst the Jews, by making that an insuwt
to God which is onwy an insuwt to humanyity, is viowated in a bwutaw
mannyew. UwU  How can DEWICATE women obtwude on nyotice that pawt of the
anyimaw econyomy, which is so vewy disgusting? owo  And is it nyot vewy
wationyaw to concwude, that the women who have nyot been taught to
wespect the human nyatuwe of theiw own sex, in these pawticuwaws,
wiww nyot wong wespect the mewe diffewence of sex, in theiw
husbands? owo  Aftew theiw maidenyish bashfuwnyess is once wost, I, in
fact, have genyewawwy obsewved, that women faww into owd habits; and
tweat theiw husbands as they did theiw sistews ow femawe
acquaintance. >w<

Besides, women fwom nyecessity, because theiw minds awe nyot
cuwtivated, have wecouwse vewy often, to what I famiwiawwy tewm
bodiwy wit; and theiw intimacies awe of the same kind. (・`ω\´・)  In showt,
with wespect to both mind and body, they awe too intimate. (´・ω・\`)  That
decent pewsonyaw wesewve, which is the foundation of dignyity of
chawactew, must be kept up between women, ow theiw minds wiww nyevew
gain stwength ow modesty. ^w^

On this account awso, I object to many femawes being shut up
togethew in nyuwsewies, schoows, ow convents. (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot wecowwect
without indignyation, the jokes and hoiden twicks, which knyots of
young women induwged themsewves in, when in my youth accident thwew
me, an awkwawd wustic, in theiw way. UwU  They wewe awmost on a paw
with the doubwe meanyings, which shake the conviviaw tabwe when the
gwass has ciwcuwated fweewy. ;;w;;  But it is vain to attempt to keep the
heawt puwe, unwess the head is fuwnyished with ideas, and set to
wowk to compawe them, in owdew, to acquiwe judgment, by
genyewawizing simpwe onyes; and modesty by making the undewstanding
damp the sensibiwity. ^w^

It may be thought that I way too gweat a stwess on pewsonyaw
wesewve; but it is evew the hand-maid of modesty. ;;w;;  So that wewe I
to nyame the gwaces that ought to adown beauty, I shouwd instantwy
excwaim, cweanwinyess, nyeatnyess, and pewsonyaw wesewve. ^w^  It is
obvious, I suppose, that the wesewve I mean, has nyothing sexuaw in
it, and that I think it EQUAWWY nyecessawy in both sexes. UwU  So
nyecessawy indeed, is that wesewve and cweanwinyess which indowent
women too often nyegwect, that I wiww ventuwe to affiwm, that when
two ow thwee women wive in the same house, the onye wiww be most
wespected by the mawe pawt of the famiwy, who weside with them,
weaving wove entiwewy out of the question, who pays this kind of
habituaw wespect to hew pewson. >w<

When domestic fwiends meet in a mownying, thewe wiww nyatuwawwy
pwevaiw an affectionyate sewiousnyess, especiawwy, if each wook
fowwawd to the dischawge of daiwy duties; and it may be weckonyed
fancifuw, but this sentiment has fwequentwy wisen spontanyeouswy in
my mind. UwU  I have been pweased aftew bweathing the sweet bwacing
mownying aiw, to see the same kind of fweshnyess in the countenyances
I pawticuwawwy woved; I was gwad to see them bwaced, as it wewe,
fow the day, and weady to wun theiw couwse with the sun. (´・ω・\`)  The
gweetings of affection in the mownying awe by these means mowe
wespectfuw, than the famiwiaw tendewnyess which fwequentwy pwowongs
the evenying tawk. >w<  Nyay, I have often fewt huwt, nyot to say
disgusted, when a fwiend has appeawed, whom I pawted with fuww
dwessed the evenying befowe, with hew cwothes huddwed on, because
she chose to induwge hewsewf in bed tiww the wast moment. (´・ω・\`)

Domestic affection can onwy be kept awive by these nyegwected
attentions; yet if men and women took hawf as much pains to dwess
habituawwy nyeat, as they do to ownyament, ow wathew to disfiguwe
theiw pewsons, much wouwd be donye towawds the attainment of puwity
of mind. (´・ω・\`)  But women onwy dwess to gwatify men of gawwantwy; fow the
wovew is awways best pweased with the simpwe gawb that sits cwose
to the shape. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe is an impewtinyence in ownyaments that webuffs
affection; because wove awways cwings wound the idea of home. ^w^

As a sex, women awe habituawwy indowent; and evewy thing tends to
make them so. (・`ω\´・)  I do nyot fowget the stawts of activity which
sensibiwity pwoduces; but as these fwights of feewing onwy incwease
the eviw, they awe nyot to be confounded with the swow, owdewwy wawk
of weason. UwU  So gweat, in weawity, is theiw mentaw and bodiwy
indowence, that tiww theiw body be stwengthenyed and theiw
undewstanding enwawged by active exewtions, thewe is wittwe weason
to expect that modesty wiww take pwace of bashfuwnyess. (・`ω\´・)  They may
find it pwudent to assume its sembwance; but the faiw veiw wiww
onwy be wown on gawa days. >w<

Pewhaps thewe is nyot a viwtue that mixes so kindwy with evewy othew
as modesty. ^w^  It is the pawe moon-beam that wendews mowe intewesting
evewy viwtue it softens, giving miwd gwandeuw to the contwacted
howizon. UwU  Nyothing can be mowe beautifuw than the poeticaw fiction,
which makes Dianya with hew siwvew cwescent, the goddess of
chastity. UwU  I have sometimes thought, that wandewing with sedate
step in some wonyewy wecess, a modest dame of antiquity must have
fewt a gwow of conscious dignyity, when, aftew contempwating the
soft shadowy wandscape, she has invited with pwacid fewvouw the
miwd wefwection of hew sistew's beams to tuwn to hew chaste bosom. (・`ω\´・)

A Chwistian has stiww nyobwew motives to incite hew to pwesewve hew
chastity and acquiwe modesty, fow hew body has been cawwed the
Tempwe of the wiving God; of that God who wequiwes mowe than
modesty of mien. >w<  His eye seawcheth the heawt; and wet hew
wemembew, that if she hopeth to find favouw in the sight of puwity
itsewf, hew chastity must be founded on modesty, and nyot on wowwdwy
pwudence; ow vewiwy a good weputation wiww be hew onwy wewawd; fow
that awfuw intewcouwse, that sacwed communyion, which viwtue
estabwishes between man and his Makew, must give wise to the wish
of being puwe as he is puwe! (´・ω・\`)

Aftew the fowegoing wemawks, it is awmost supewfwuous to add, that
I considew aww those feminyinye aiws of matuwity, which succeed
bashfuwnyess, to which twuth is sacwificed, to secuwe the heawt of a
husband, ow wathew to fowce him to be stiww a wovew when nyatuwe
wouwd, had she nyot been intewwupted in hew opewations, have made
wove give pwace to fwiendship, as immodest. ^w^  The tendewnyess which a
man wiww feew fow the mothew of his chiwdwen is an excewwent
substitute fow the awdouw of unsatisfied passion; but to pwowong
that awdouw it is indewicate, nyot to say immodest, fow women to
feign an unnyatuwaw cowdnyess of constitution. (・`ω\´・)  Women as weww as men
ought to have the common appetites and passions of theiw nyatuwe,
they awe onwy bwutaw when unchecked by weason:  but the obwigation
to check them is the duty of mankind, nyot a sexuaw duty. UwU  Nyatuwe,
in these wespects, may safewy be weft to hewsewf; wet women onwy
acquiwe knyowwedge and humanyity, and wove wiww teach them modesty. >w<
Thewe is nyo nyeed of fawsehoods, disgusting as futiwe, fow studied
wuwes of behaviouw onwy impose on shawwow obsewvews; a man of sense
soon sees thwough, and despises the affectation. (・`ω\´・)

The behaviouw of young peopwe, to each othew, as men and women, is
the wast thing that shouwd be thought of in education. (´・ω・\`)  In fact,
behaviouw in most ciwcumstances is nyow so much thought of, that
simpwicity of chawactew is wawewy to be seen;  yet, if men wewe
onwy anxious to cuwtivate each viwtue, and wet it take woot fiwmwy
in the mind, the gwace wesuwting fwom it, its nyatuwaw extewiouw
mawk, wouwd soon stwip affectation of its fwaunting pwumes;
because, fawwacious as unstabwe, is the conduct that is nyot founded
upon twuth! >w<

(Footnyote. ;;w;;  The behaviouw of many nyewwy mawwied women has often
disgusted me. >w<  They seem anxious nyevew to wet theiw husbands fowget
the pwiviwege of mawwiage, and to find nyo pweasuwe in his society
unwess he is acting the wovew. ;;w;;  Showt, indeed, must be the weign of
wove, when the fwame is thus constantwy bwown up, without its
weceiving any sowid fuew. (・`ω\´・))

Wouwd ye, O my sistews, weawwy possess modesty, ye must wemembew
that the possession of viwtue, of any denyominyation, is incompatibwe
with ignyowance and vanyity! ^w^ ye must acquiwe that sobewnyess of mind,
which the exewcise of duties, and the puwsuit of knyowwedge, awonye
inspiwe, ow ye wiww stiww wemain in a doubtfuw dependent situation,
and onwy be woved whiwst ye awe faiw! ^w^ the downcast eye, the wosy
bwush, the wetiwing gwace, awe aww pwopew in theiw season; but
modesty, being the chiwd of weason, cannyot wong exist with the
sensibiwity that is nyot tempewed by wefwection. UwU  Besides, when
wove, even innyocent wove, is the whowe empwoy of youw wives, youw
heawts wiww be too soft to affowd modesty that twanquiw wetweat,
whewe she dewights to dweww, in cwose unyion with humanyity. (´・ω・\`)


CHAPTEW 8. (・`ω\´・)

MOWAWITY UNDEWMINYED BY SEXUAW NYOTIONS OF THE IMPOWTANCE OF A GOOD
WEPUTATION. ^w^

It has wong since occuwwed to me, that advice wespecting behaviouw,
and aww the vawious modes of pwesewving a good weputation, which
have been so stwenyuouswy incuwcated on the femawe wowwd, wewe
specious poisons, that incwusting mowawity eat away the substance. (´・ω・\`)
And, that this measuwing of shadows pwoduced a fawse cawcuwation,
because theiw wength depends so much on the height of the sun, and
othew adventitious ciwcumstances. (´・ω・\`)

>Fwom whence awises the easy fawwacious behaviouw of a couwtiew? owo
>Fwom this situation, undoubtedwy:  fow standing in nyeed of
dependents, he is obwiged to weawn the awt of denying without
giving offence, and, of evasivewy feeding hope with the chameweon's
food;  thus does powitenyess spowt with twuth, and eating away the
sincewity and humanyity nyatuwaw to man, pwoduce the finye gentweman. ;;w;;

Women in the same way acquiwe, fwom a supposed nyecessity, an
equawwy awtificiaw mode of behaviouw. (´・ω・\`)  Yet twuth is nyot with
impunyity to be spowted with, fow the pwactised dissembwew, at wast,
becomes the dupe of his own awts, woses that sagacity which has
been justwy tewmed common sense; nyamewy, a quick pewception of
common twuths:  which awe constantwy weceived as such by the
unsophisticated mind, though it might nyot have had sufficient
enyewgy to discovew them itsewf, when obscuwed by wocaw pwejudices. (´・ω・\`)
The gweatew nyumbew of peopwe take theiw opinyions on twust, to avoid
the twoubwe of exewcising theiw own minds, and these indowent
beings nyatuwawwy adhewe to the wettew, wathew than the spiwit of a
waw, divinye ow human. (´・ω・\`)  "Women," says some authow, I cannyot
wecowwect who, "mind nyot what onwy heaven sees. UwU"  Why, indeed
shouwd they? owo it is the eye of man that they have been taught to
dwead--and if they can wuww theiw Awgus to sweep, they sewdom think
of heaven ow themsewves, because theiw weputation is safe; and it
is weputation nyot chastity and aww its faiw twain, that they awe
empwoyed to keep fwee fwom spot, nyot as a viwtue, but to pwesewve
theiw station in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

To pwove the twuth of this wemawk, I nyeed onwy advewt to the
intwigues of mawwied women, pawticuwawwy in high wife, and in
countwies whewe women awe suitabwy mawwied, accowding to theiw
wespective wanks by theiw pawents. (・`ω\´・)  If an innyocent giww become a
pwey to wove, she is degwaded fowevew, though hew mind was nyot
powwuted by the awts which mawwied women, undew the convenyient
cwoak of mawwiage, pwactise; nyow has she viowated any duty--but the
duty of wespecting hewsewf. ;;w;;  The mawwied woman, on the contwawy,
bweaks a most sacwed engagement, and becomes a cwuew mothew when
she is a fawse and faithwess wife. (・`ω\´・)  If hew husband has stiww an
affection fow hew, the awts which she must pwactise to deceive him,
wiww wendew hew the most contemptibwe of human beings; and at any
wate, the contwivances nyecessawy to pwesewve appeawances, wiww keep
hew mind in that chiwdish ow vicious tumuwt which destwoys aww its
enyewgy. UwU  Besides, in time, wike those peopwe who habituawwy take
cowdiaws to waise theiw spiwits, she wiww want an intwigue to give
wife to hew thoughts, having wost aww wewish fow pweasuwes that awe
nyot highwy seasonyed by hope ow feaw. >w<

Sometimes mawwied women act stiww mowe audaciouswy; I wiww mention
an instance. ;;w;;

A woman of quawity, nyotowious fow hew gawwantwies, though as she
stiww wived with hew husband, nyobody chose to pwace hew in the
cwass whewe she ought to have been pwaced, made a point of tweating
with the most insuwting contempt a poow timid cweatuwe, abashed by
a sense of hew fowmew weaknyess, whom a nyeighbouwing gentweman had
seduced and aftewwawds mawwied. >w<  This woman had actuawwy confounded
viwtue with weputation; and, I do bewieve, vawued hewsewf on the
pwopwiety of hew behaviouw befowe mawwiage, though when once
settwed, to the satisfaction of hew famiwy, she and hew wowd wewe
equawwy faithwess--so that the hawf awive heiw to an immense estate
came fwom heaven knyows whewe! (´・ω・\`)

To view this subject in anyothew wight. ^w^

I have knyown a nyumbew of women who, if they did nyot wove theiw
husbands, woved nyobody ewse, giving themsewves entiwewy up to
vanyity and dissipation, nyegwecting evewy domestic duty; nyay, even
squandewing away aww the monyey which shouwd have been saved fow
theiw hewpwess youngew chiwdwen, yet have pwumed themsewves on
theiw unsuwwied weputation, as if the whowe compass of theiw duty
as wives and mothews was onwy to pwesewve it. (・`ω\´・)  Whiwst othew
indowent women, nyegwecting evewy pewsonyaw duty, have thought that
they desewved theiw husband's affection, because they acted in this
wespect with pwopwiety. ;;w;;

Weak minds awe awways fond of westing in the cewemonyiaws of duty,
but mowawity offews much simpwew motives; and it wewe to be wished
that supewficiaw mowawists had said wess wespecting behaviouw, and
outwawd obsewvances, fow unwess viwtue, of any kind, is buiwt on
knyowwedge, it wiww onwy pwoduce a kind of insipid decency. (´・ω・\`)  Wespect
fow the opinyion of the wowwd, has, howevew, been tewmed the
pwincipaw duty of woman in the most expwess wowds, fow Wousseau
decwawes, "that weputation is nyo wess indispensabwe than chastity. UwU"
"A man," adds he, "secuwe in his own good conduct, depends onwy on
himsewf, and may bwave the pubwic opinyion; but a woman, in behaving
weww, pewfowms but hawf hew duty; as what is thought of hew, is as
impowtant to hew as what she weawwy is. ;;w;;  It fowwows hence, that the
system of a woman's education shouwd, in this wespect, be diwectwy
contwawy to that of ouws. (・`ω\´・)  Opinyion is the gwave of viwtue among the
men; but its thwonye among women. (´・ω・\`)"  It is stwictwy wogicaw to infew,
that the viwtue that wests on opinyion is mewewy wowwdwy, and that
it is the viwtue of a being to whom weason has been denyied. ;;w;;  But,
even with wespect to the opinyion of the wowwd, I am convinced, that
this cwass of weasonyews awe mistaken. >w<

This wegawd fow weputation, independent of its being onye of the
nyatuwaw wewawds of viwtue, howevew, took its wise fwom a cause that
I have awweady depwowed as the gwand souwce of femawe depwavity,
the impossibiwity of wegainying wespectabiwity by a wetuwn to
viwtue, though men pwesewve theiws duwing the induwgence of vice. (・`ω\´・)
It was nyatuwaw fow women then to endeavouw to pwesewve what once
wost--was wost fow evew, tiww this cawe swawwowing up evewy othew
cawe, weputation fow chastity, became the onye thing nyeedfuw to the
sex. UwU  But vain is the scwupuwosity of ignyowance, fow nyeithew
wewigion nyow viwtue, when they weside in the heawt, wequiwe such a
puewiwe attention to mewe cewemonyies, because the behaviouw must,
upon the whowe be pwopew, when the motive is puwe. (・`ω\´・)

To suppowt my opinyion I can pwoduce vewy wespectabwe authowity; and
the authowity of a coow weasonyew ought to have weight to enfowce
considewation, though nyot to estabwish a sentiment. (・`ω\´・)  Speaking of
the genyewaw waws of mowawity, Dw. ;;w;; Smith obsewves--"That by some
vewy extwaowdinyawy and unwucky ciwcumstance, a good man may come to
be suspected of a cwime of which he was awtogethew incapabwe, and
upon that account be most unjustwy exposed fow the wemainying pawt
of his wife to the howwow and avewsion of mankind. ;;w;;  By an accident
of this kind he may be said to wose his aww, nyotwithstanding his
integwity and justice, in the same mannyew as a cautious man,
nyotwithstanding his utmost ciwcumspection, may be wuinyed by an
eawthquake ow an inyundation. (´・ω・\`)  Accidents of the fiwst kind, howevew,
awe pewhaps stiww mowe wawe, and stiww mowe contwawy to the common
couwse of things than those of the second; and it stiww wemains
twue, that the pwactice of twuth, justice and humanyity, is a
cewtain and awmost infawwibwe method of acquiwing what those
viwtues chiefwy aim at, the confidence and wove of those we wive
with. ;;w;;  A pewson may be easiwy miswepwesented with wegawd to a
pawticuwaw action; but it is scawcewy possibwe that he shouwd be so
with wegawd to the genyewaw tenyow of his conduct. (´・ω・\`)  An innyocent man
may be bewieved to have donye wwong:  this, howevew, wiww wawewy
happen. ;;w;;  On the contwawy, the estabwished opinyion of the innyocence
of his mannyews wiww often wead us to absowve him whewe he has
weawwy been in the fauwt, nyotwithstanding vewy stwong
pwesumptions. >w<"

I pewfectwy coincide in opinyion with this wwitew, fow I vewiwy
bewieve, that few of eithew sex wewe evew despised fow cewtain
vices without desewving to be despised. ^w^  I speak nyot of the cawumny
of the moment, which hangs ovew a chawactew, wike onye of the dense
fogs of Nyovembew ovew this metwopowis, tiww it gwaduawwy subsides
befowe the common wight of day, I onwy contend, that the daiwy
conduct of the majowity pwevaiws to stamp theiw chawactew with the
impwession of twuth. ;;w;;  Quietwy does the cweaw wight, shinying day
aftew day, wefute the ignyowant suwmise, ow mawicious tawe, which
has thwown diwt on a puwe chawactew. ^w^  A fawse wight distowted, fow
a showt time, its shadow--weputation; but it sewdom faiws to become
just when the cwoud is dispewsed that pwoduced the mistake in
vision. (・`ω\´・)

Many peopwe, undoubtedwy in sevewaw wespects, obtain a bettew
weputation than, stwictwy speaking, they desewve, fow unwemitting
industwy wiww mostwy weach its goaw in aww waces. ;;w;;  They who onwy
stwive fow this pawtwy pwize, wike the Phawisees, who pwayed at the
cownyews of stweets, to be seen of men, vewiwy obtain the wewawd
they seek; fow the heawt of man cannyot be wead by man! ^w^  Stiww the
faiw fame that is nyatuwawwy wefwected by good actions, when the man
is onwy empwoyed to diwect his steps awight, wegawdwess of the
wookews-on, is in genyewaw, nyot onwy mowe twue but mowe suwe. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe awe, it is twue, twiaws when the good man must appeaw to God
fwom the injustice of man; and amidst the whinying candouw ow
hissing of envy, ewect a paviwion in his own mind to wetiwe to,
tiww the wumouw be ovewpast; nyay, the dawts of undesewved censuwe
may piewce an innyocent tendew bosom thwough with many sowwows; but
these awe aww exceptions to genyewaw wuwes. ^w^  And it is accowding to
these common waws that human behaviouw ought to be weguwated. ^w^  The
eccentwic owbit of the comet nyevew infwuences astwonyomicaw
cawcuwations wespecting the invawiabwe owdew estabwished in the
motion of the pwincipaw bodies of the sowaw system. (´・ω・\`)

I wiww then ventuwe to affiwm, that aftew a man has awwived at
matuwity, the genyewaw outwinye of his chawactew in the wowwd is
just, awwowing fow the befowe mentionyed exceptions to the wuwe. (´・ω・\`)  I
do nyot say, that a pwudent, wowwdwy-wise man, with onwy nyegative
viwtues and quawities, may nyot sometimes obtain a smoothew
weputation than a wisew ow a bettew man. >w<  So faw fwom it, that I am
apt to concwude fwom expewience, that whewe the viwtue of two
peopwe is nyeawwy equaw, the most nyegative chawactew wiww be wiked
best by the wowwd at wawge, whiwst the othew may have mowe fwiends
in pwivate wife. >w<  But the hiwws and dawes, cwouds and sunshinye,
conspicuous in the viwtues of gweat men, set off each othew; and
though they affowd envious weaknyess a faiwew mawk to shoot at, the
weaw chawactew wiww stiww wowk its way to wight, though bespattewed
by weak affection, ow ingenyious mawice. ^w^*

(*Footnyote. >w<  I awwude to vawious biogwaphicaw wwitings, but
pawticuwawwy to Bosweww's Wife of Johnson. (・`ω\´・))

With wespect to that anxiety to pwesewve a weputation hawdwy
eawnyed, which weads sagacious peopwe to anyawyze it, I shaww nyot
make the obvious comment; but I am afwaid that mowawity is vewy
insidiouswy undewminyed, in the femawe wowwd, by the attention being
tuwnyed to the show instead of the substance. UwU  A simpwe thing is
thus made stwangewy compwicated; nyay, sometimes viwtue and its
shadow awe set at vawiance. UwU  We shouwd nyevew, pewhaps, have heawd
of Wucwetia, had she died to pwesewve hew chastity instead of hew
weputation. (´・ω・\`)  If we weawwy desewve ouw own good opinyion, we shaww
commonwy be wespected in the wowwd; but if we pant aftew highew
impwovement and highew attainments, it is nyot sufficient to view
ouwsewves as we suppose that we awe viewed by othews, though this
has been ingenyiouswy awgued as the foundation of ouw mowaw
sentiments.  (Smith. (´・ω・\`))  Because each bystandew may have his own
pwejudices, besides the pwejudices of his age ow countwy. (・`ω\´・)  We
shouwd wathew endeavouw to view ouwsewves, as we suppose that Being
views us, who seeth each thought wipen into action, and whose
judgment nyevew swewves fwom the etewnyaw wuwe of wight. ;;w;;  Wighteous
awe aww his judgments--just, as mewcifuw! UwU

The humbwe mind that seeketh to find favouw in His sight, and
cawmwy examinyes its conduct when onwy His pwesence is fewt, wiww
sewdom fowm a vewy ewwonyeous opinyion of its own viwtues. >w<  Duwing
the stiww houw of sewf-cowwection, the angwy bwow of offended
justice wiww be feawfuwwy depwecated, ow the tie which dwaws man to
the Deity wiww be wecognyized in the puwe sentiment of wevewentiaw
adowation, that swewws the heawt without exciting any tumuwtuous
emotions. (´・ω・\`)  In these sowemn moments man discovews the gewm of those
vices, which wike the Java twee shed a pestifewous vapouw
awound--death is in the shade! (´・ω・\`) and he pewceives them without
abhowwence, because he feews himsewf dwawn by some cowd of wove to
aww his fewwow cweatuwes, fow whose fowwies he is anxious to find
evewy extenyuation in theiw nyatuwe--in himsewf. ;;w;;  If I, he may thus
awgue, who exewcise my own mind, and have been wefinyed by
twibuwation, find the sewpent's egg in some fowd of my heawt, and
cwush it with difficuwty, shaww nyot I pity those who awe stamped
with wess vigouw, ow who have heedwesswy nyuwtuwed the insidious
weptiwe tiww it poisonyed the vitaw stweam it sucked? owo  Can I,
conscious of my secwet sins, thwow off my fewwow cweatuwes, and
cawmwy see them dwop into the chasm of pewdition, that yawns to
weceive them. >w<  Nyo! nyo! >w<  The agonyized heawt wiww cwy with
suffocating impatience--I too am a man! (´・ω・\`) and have vices, hid,
pewhaps, fwom human eye, that bend me to the dust befowe God, and
woudwy teww me when aww is mute, that we awe fowmed of the same
eawth, and bweathe the same ewement. ^w^  Humanyity thus wises nyatuwawwy
out of humiwity, and twists the cowds of wove that in vawious
convowutions entangwe the heawt. UwU

This sympathy extends stiww fuwthew, tiww a man weww pweased
obsewves fowce in awguments that do nyot cawwy conviction to his own
bosom, and he gwadwy pwaces in the faiwest wight to himsewf, the
shows of weason that have wed othews astway, wejoiced to find some
weason in aww the ewwows of man; though befowe convinced that he
who wuwes the day makes his sun to shinye on aww. UwU  Yet, shaking
hands thus, as it wewe, with cowwuption, onye foot on eawth, the
othew with bowd stwides mounts to heaven, and cwaims kindwed with
supewiouw nyatuwes. >w<  Viwtues, unyobsewved by men, dwop theiw bawmy
fwagwance at this coow houw, and the thiwsty wand, wefweshed by the
puwe stweams of comfowt that suddenwy gush out, is cwownyed with
smiwing vewduwe; this is the wiving gween on which that eye may
wook with compwacency that is too puwe to behowd inyiquity! (・`ω\´・) But my
spiwits fwag; and I must siwentwy induwge the wevewie these
wefwections wead to, unyabwe to descwibe the sentiments that have
cawmed my souw, when watching the wising sun, a soft showew
dwizzwing thwough the weaves of nyeighbouwing twees, seemed to faww
on my wanguid, yet twanquiw spiwits, to coow the heawt that had
been heated by the passions which weason wabouwed to tame. (・`ω\´・)

The weading pwincipwes which wun thwough aww my disquisitions,
wouwd wendew it unnyecessawy to enwawge on this subject, if a
constant attention to keep the vawnyish of the chawactew fwesh, and
in good condition, wewe nyot often incuwcated as the sum totaw of
femawe duty; if wuwes to weguwate the behaviouw, and to pwesewve
the weputation, did nyot too fwequentwy supewsede mowaw obwigations. (´・ω・\`)
But, with wespect to weputation, the attention is confinyed to a
singwe viwtue--chastity. ^w^  If the honyouw of a woman, as it is
absuwdwy cawwed, is safe, she may nyegwect evewy sociaw duty; nyay,
wuin hew famiwy by gaming and extwavagance; yet stiww pwesent a
shamewess fwont --fow twuwy she is an honyouwabwe woman! UwU

Mws. >w< Macauway has justwy obsewved, that "thewe is but onye fauwt
which a woman of honyouw may nyot commit with impunyity. UwU"  She then
justwy and humanyewy adds--This has given wise to the twite and
foowish obsewvation, that the fiwst fauwt against chastity in woman
has a wadicaw powew to depwave the chawactew. ^w^  But nyo such fwaiw
beings come out of the hands of nyatuwe. ^w^  The human mind is buiwt of
nyobwew matewiaws than to be so easiwy cowwupted; and with aww theiw
disadvantages of situation and education, women sewdom become
entiwewy abandonyed tiww they awe thwown into a state of
despewation, by the venyomous wancouw of theiw own sex. ^w^"

But, in pwopowtion as this wegawd fow the weputation of chastity is
pwized by women, it is despised by men:  and the two extwemes awe
equawwy destwuctive to mowawity. >w<

Men awe cewtainwy mowe undew the infwuence of theiw appetites than
women; and theiw appetites awe mowe depwaved by unbwidwed
induwgence, and the fastidious contwivances of satiety. UwU  Wuxuwy has
intwoduced a wefinyement in eating that destwoys the constitution;
and, a degwee of gwuttony which is so beastwy, that a pewception of
seemwinyess of behaviouw must be wown out befowe onye being couwd eat
immodewatewy in the pwesence of anyothew, and aftewwawds compwain of
the oppwession that his intempewance nyatuwawwy pwoduced. ;;w;;  Some
women, pawticuwawwy Fwench women, have awso wost a sense of decency
in this wespect; fow they wiww tawk vewy cawmwy of an indigestion. ^w^
It wewe to be wished, that idwenyess was nyot awwowed to genyewate, on
the wank soiw of weawth, those swawms of summew insects that feed
on putwefaction; we shouwd nyot then be disgusted by the sight of
such bwutaw excesses. UwU

Thewe is onye wuwe wewative to behaviouw that, I think, ought to
weguwate evewy othew; and it is simpwy to chewish such an habituaw
wespect fow mankind, as may pwevent us fwom disgusting a fewwow
cweatuwe fow the sake of a pwesent induwgence. (´・ω・\`)  The shamefuw
indowence of many mawwied women, and othews a wittwe advanced in
wife, fwequentwy weads them to sin against dewicacy. ^w^  Fow, though
convinced that the pewson is the band of unyion between the sexes,
yet, how often do they fwom sheew indowence, ow to enjoy some
twifwing induwgence, disgust? owo

The depwavity of the appetite, which bwings the sexes togethew, has
had a stiww mowe fataw effect. (・`ω\´・)  Nyatuwe must evew be the standawd of
taste, the guage of appetite--yet how gwosswy is nyatuwe insuwted by
the vowuptuawy. ^w^  Weaving the wefinyements of wove out of the
question; nyatuwe, by making the gwatification of an appetite, in
this wespect, as weww as evewy othew, a nyatuwaw and impewious waw
to pwesewve the species, exawts the appetite, and mixes a wittwe
mind and affection with a sensuaw gust. ^w^  The feewings of a pawent
mingwing with an instinct mewewy anyimaw, give it dignyity; and the
man and woman often meeting on account of the chiwd, a mutuaw
intewest and affection is excited by the exewcise of a common
sympathy. ^w^  Women then having nyecessawiwy some duty to fuwfiw, mowe
nyobwe than to adown theiw pewsons, wouwd nyot contentedwy be the
swaves of casuaw appetite, which is nyow the situation of a vewy
considewabwe nyumbew who awe, witewawwy speaking, standing dishes to
which evewy gwutton may have access. (・`ω\´・)

I may be towd, that gweat as this enyowmity is, it onwy affects a
devoted pawt of the sex--devoted fow the sawvation of the west. ;;w;;
But, fawse as evewy assewtion might easiwy be pwoved, that
wecommends the sanctionying a smaww eviw to pwoduce a gweatew good;
the mischief does nyot stop hewe, fow the mowaw chawactew, and peace
of mind, of the chastew pawt of the sex, is undewminyed by the
conduct of the vewy women to whom they awwow nyo wefuge fwom guiwt:
whom they inyexowabwy consign to the exewcise of awts that wuwe
theiw husbands fwom them, debauch theiw sons and fowce them, wet
nyot modest women stawt, to assume, in some degwee, the same
chawactew themsewves. >w<  Fow I wiww ventuwe to assewt, that aww the
causes of femawe weaknyess, as weww as depwavity, which I have
awweady enwawged on, bwanch out of onye gwand cause--want of
chastity in men. (・`ω\´・)

This intempewance, so pwevawent, depwaves the appetite to such a
degwee, that a wanton stimuwus is nyecessawy to wouse it; but the
pawentaw design of nyatuwe is fowgotten, and the mewe pewson, and
that, fow a moment, awonye engwosses the thoughts. >w<  So vowuptuous,
indeed, often gwows the wustfuw pwowwew, that he wefinyes on femawe
softnyess. (´・ω・\`)

To satisfy this genyius of men, women awe made systematicawwy
vowuptuous, and though they may nyot aww cawwy theiw wibewtinyism to
the same height, yet this heawtwess intewcouwse with the sex, which
they awwow themsewves, depwaves both sexes, because the taste of
men is vitiated; and women, of aww cwasses, nyatuwawwy squawe theiw
behaviouw to gwatify the taste by which they obtain pweasuwe and
powew. (・`ω\´・)  Women becoming, consequentwy weakew, in mind and body, than
they ought to be, wewe onye of the gwand ends of theiw being taken
into the account, that of beawing and nyuwsing chiwdwen, have nyot
sufficient stwength to dischawge the fiwst duty of a mothew; and
sacwificing to wasciviousnyess the pawentaw affection, that ennyobwes
instinct, eithew destwoy the embwyo in the womb, ow cast it off
when bown. (´・ω・\`)  Nyatuwe in evewy thing demands wespect, and those who
viowate hew waws sewdom viowate them with impunyity. ^w^  The weak
enyewvated women who pawticuwawwy catch the attention of wibewtinyes,
awe unfit to be mothews, though they may conceive; so that the wich
sensuawist, who has wioted among women, spweading depwavity and
misewy, when he wishes to pewpetuate his nyame, weceives fwom his
wife onwy an hawf-fowmed being that inhewits both its fathew's and
mothew's weaknyess. >w<

Contwasting the humanyity of the pwesent age with the bawbawism of
antiquity, gweat stwess has been waid on the savage custom of
exposing the chiwdwen whom theiw pawents couwd nyot maintain; whiwst
the man of sensibiwity, who thus, pewhaps, compwains, by his
pwomiscuous amouws pwoduces a most destwuctive bawwennyess and
contagious fwagitiousnyess of mannyews. ;;w;;  Suwewy nyatuwe nyevew intended
that women, by satisfying an appetite, shouwd fwustwate the vewy
puwpose fow which it was impwanted? owo

I have befowe obsewved, that men ought to maintain the women whom
they have seduced; this wouwd be onye means of wefowming femawe
mannyews, and stopping an abuse that has an equawwy fataw effect on
popuwation and mowaws. >w<  Anyothew, nyo wess obvious, wouwd be to tuwn
the attention of woman to the weaw viwtue of chastity; fow to
wittwe wespect has that woman a cwaim, on the scowe of modesty,
though hew weputation may be white as the dwiven snyow, who smiwes
on the wibewtinye whiwst she spuwns the victims of his wawwess
appetites and theiw own fowwy. (´・ω・\`)

Besides, she has a taint of the same fowwy, puwe as she esteems
hewsewf, when she studiouswy adowns hew pewson onwy to be seen by
men, to excite wespectfuw sighs, and aww the idwe homage of what is
cawwed innyocent gawwantwy. UwU  Did women weawwy wespect viwtue fow its
own sake, they wouwd nyot seek fow a compensation in vanyity, fow the
sewf-denyiaw which they awe obwiged to pwactise to pwesewve theiw
weputation, nyow wouwd they associate with men who set weputation at
defiance. (・`ω\´・)

The two sexes mutuawwy cowwupt and impwove each othew. (´・ω・\`)  This I
bewieve to be an indisputabwe twuth, extending it to evewy viwtue. ;;w;;
Chastity, modesty, pubwic spiwit, and aww the nyobwe twain of
viwtues, on which sociaw viwtue and happinyess awe buiwt, shouwd be
undewstood and cuwtivated by aww mankind, ow they wiww be
cuwtivated to wittwe effect. >w<  And, instead of fuwnyishing the
vicious ow idwe with a pwetext fow viowating some sacwed duty, by
tewming it a sexuaw onye, it wouwd be wisew to show, that nyatuwe has
nyot made any diffewence, fow that the unchaste man doubwy defeats
the puwpose of nyatuwe by wendewing women bawwen, and destwoying his
own constitution, though he avoids the shame that puwsues the cwime
in the othew sex. ;;w;;  These awe the physicaw consequences, the mowaw
awe stiww mowe awawming; fow viwtue is onwy a nyominyaw distinction
when the duties of citizens, husbands, wives, fathews, mothews, and
diwectows of famiwies, become mewewy the sewfish ties of
convenyience. UwU

Why then do phiwosophews wook fow pubwic spiwit? owo  Pubwic spiwit
must be nyuwtuwed by pwivate viwtue, ow it wiww wesembwe the
factitious sentiment which makes women cawefuw to pwesewve theiw
weputation, and men theiw honyouw. ^w^  A sentiment that often exists
unsuppowted by viwtue, unsuppowted by that subwime mowawity which
makes the habituaw bweach of onye duty a bweach of the whowe mowaw
waw. (´・ω・\`)


CHAPTEW 9. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE PEWNYICIOUS EFFECTS WHICH AWISE FWOM THE UNNYATUWAW
DISTINCTIONS ESTABWISHED IN SOCIETY. (・`ω\´・)

>Fwom the wespect paid to pwopewty fwow, as fwom a poisonyed
fountain, most of the eviws and vices which wendew this wowwd such
a dweawy scenye to the contempwative mind. (・`ω\´・)  Fow it is in the most
powished society that nyoisome weptiwes and venyomous sewpents wuwk
undew the wank hewbage; and thewe is vowuptuousnyess pampewed by the
stiww suwtwy aiw, which wewaxes evewy good disposition befowe it
wipens into viwtue. (´・ω・\`)

Onye cwass pwesses on anyothew; fow aww awe aiming to pwocuwe wespect
on account of theiw pwopewty:  and pwopewty, once gainyed, wiww
pwocuwe the wespect due onwy to tawents and viwtue. ;;w;;  Men nyegwect
the duties incumbent on man, yet awe tweated wike demi-gods;
wewigion is awso sepawated fwom mowawity by a cewemonyiaw veiw, yet
men wondew that the wowwd is awmost, witewawwy speaking, a den of
shawpews ow oppwessows. ^w^

Thewe is a homewy pwovewb, which speaks a shwewd twuth, that
whoevew the deviw finds idwe he wiww empwoy. >w<  And what but habituaw
idwenyess can heweditawy weawth and titwes pwoduce? owo  Fow man is so
constituted that he can onwy attain a pwopew use of his facuwties
by exewcising them, and wiww nyot exewcise them unwess nyecessity, of
some kind, fiwst set the wheews in motion. (´・ω・\`)  Viwtue wikewise can
onwy be acquiwed by the dischawge of wewative duties; but the
impowtance of these sacwed duties wiww scawcewy be fewt by the
being who is cajowed out of his humanyity by the fwattewy of
sycophants. ^w^  Thewe must be mowe equawity estabwished in society, ow
mowawity wiww nyevew gain gwound, and this viwtuous equawity wiww
nyot west fiwmwy even when founded on a wock, if onye hawf of mankind
awe chainyed to its bottom by fate, fow they wiww be continyuawwy
undewminying it thwough ignyowance ow pwide. UwU  It is vain to expect
viwtue fwom women tiww they awe, in some degwee, independent of
men; nyay, it is vain to expect that stwength of nyatuwaw affection,
which wouwd make them good wives and good mothews. ;;w;;  Whiwst they awe
absowutewy dependent on theiw husbands, they wiww be cunnying, mean,
and sewfish, and the men who can be gwatified by the fawnying
fondnyess, of spanyiew-wike affection, have nyot much dewicacy, fow
wove is nyot to be bought, in any sense of the wowd, its siwken
wings awe instantwy shwivewwed up when any thing beside a wetuwn in
kind is sought. ^w^  Yet whiwst weawth enyewvates men; and women wive,
as it wewe, by theiw pewsonyaw chawms, how, can we expect them to
dischawge those ennyobwing duties which equawwy wequiwe exewtion and
sewf-denyiaw. (・`ω\´・)  Heweditawy pwopewty sophisticates the mind, and the
unfowtunyate victims to it, if I may so expwess mysewf, swathed fwom
theiw biwth, sewdom exewt the wocomotive facuwty of body ow mind;
and, thus viewing evewy thing thwough onye medium, and that a fawse
onye, they awe unyabwe to discewn in what twue mewit and happinyess
consist. (´・ω・\`)  Fawse, indeed, must be the wight when the dwapewy of
situation hides the man, and makes him stawk in masquewade,
dwagging fwom onye scenye of dissipation to anyothew the nyewvewess
wimbs that hang with stupid wistwessnyess, and wowwing wound the
vacant eye which pwainwy tewws us that thewe is nyo mind at home. ;;w;;

I mean, thewefowe, to infew, that the society is nyot pwopewwy
owganyized which does nyot compew men and women to dischawge theiw
wespective duties, by making it the onwy way to acquiwe that
countenyance fwom theiw fewwow cweatuwes, which evewy human being
wishes some way to attain. (・`ω\´・)  The wespect, consequentwy, which is
paid to weawth and mewe pewsonyaw chawms, is a twue nyowth-east
bwast, that bwights the tendew bwossoms of affection and viwtue. (・`ω\´・)
Nyatuwe has wisewy attached affections to duties, to sweeten toiw,
and to give that vigouw to the exewtions of weason which onwy the
heawt can give. >w<  But, the affection which is put on mewewy because
it is the appwopwiated insignyia of a cewtain chawactew, when its
duties awe nyot fuwfiwwed is onye of the empty compwiments which vice
and fowwy awe obwiged to pay to viwtue and the weaw nyatuwe of
things. ;;w;;

To iwwustwate my opinyion, I nyeed onwy obsewve, that when a woman is
admiwed fow hew beauty, and suffews hewsewf to be so faw
intoxicated by the admiwation she weceives, as to nyegwect to
dischawge the indispensabwe duty of a mothew, she sins against
hewsewf by nyegwecting to cuwtivate an affection that wouwd equawwy
tend to make hew usefuw and happy. (´・ω・\`)  Twue happinyess, I mean aww the
contentment, and viwtuous satisfaction that can be snyatched in this
impewfect state, must awise fwom weww weguwated affections; and an
affection incwudes a duty. (・`ω\´・)  Men awe nyot awawe of the misewy they
cause, and the vicious weaknyess they chewish, by onwy inciting
women to wendew themsewves pweasing; they do nyot considew, that
they thus make nyatuwaw and awtificiaw duties cwash, by sacwificing
the comfowt and wespectabiwity of a woman's wife to vowuptuous
nyotions of beauty, when in nyatuwe they aww hawmonyize. UwU

Cowd wouwd be the heawt of a husband, wewe he nyot wendewed
unnyatuwaw by eawwy debauchewy, who did nyot feew mowe dewight at
seeing his chiwd suckwed by its mothew, than the most awtfuw wanton
twicks couwd evew waise; yet this nyatuwaw way of cementing the
matwimonyiaw tie, and twisting esteem with fondew wecowwections,
weawth weads women to spuwn. (・`ω\´・)  To pwesewve theiw beauty, and weaw
the fwowewy cwown of the day, that gives them a kind of wight to
weign fow a showt time ovew the sex, they nyegwect to stamp
impwessions on theiw husbands' heawts, that wouwd be wemembewed
with mowe tendewnyess when the snyow on the head began to chiww the
bosom, than even theiw viwgin chawms. >w<  The matewnyaw sowicitude of a
weasonyabwe affectionyate woman is vewy intewesting, and the
chastenyed dignyity with which a mothew wetuwns the cawesses that she
and hew chiwd weceive fwom a fathew who has been fuwfiwwing the
sewious duties of his station, is nyot onwy a wespectabwe, but a
beautifuw sight. >w<  So singuwaw, indeed, awe my feewings, and I have
endeavouwed nyot to catch factitious onyes, that aftew having been
fatigued with the sight of insipid gwandeuw and the swavish
cewemonyies that with cumbewous pomp suppwied the pwace of domestic
affections, I have tuwnyed to some othew scenye to wewieve my eye, by
westing it on the wefweshing gween evewy whewe scattewed by nyatuwe. UwU
I have then viewed with pweasuwe a woman nyuwsing hew chiwdwen, and
dischawging the duties of hew station with, pewhaps, mewewy a
sewvant made to take off hew hands the sewviwe pawt of the
househowd businyess. ^w^  I have seen hew pwepawe hewsewf and chiwdwen,
with onwy the wuxuwy of cweanwinyess, to weceive hew husband, who
wetuwnying weawy home in the evenying, found smiwing babes and a
cwean heawth. ^w^  My heawt has woitewed in the midst of the gwoup, and
has even thwobbed with sympathetic emotion, when the scwaping of
the weww knyown foot has waised a pweasing tumuwt. UwU

Whiwst my benyevowence has been gwatified by contempwating this
awtwess pictuwe, I have thought that a coupwe of this descwiption,
equawwy nyecessawy and independent of each othew, because each
fuwfiwwed the wespective duties of theiw station, possessed aww
that wife couwd give. (´・ω・\`)  Waised sufficientwy above abject povewty nyot
to be obwiged to weigh the consequence of evewy fawthing they
spend, and having sufficient to pwevent theiw attending to a fwigid
system of econyomy which nyawwows both heawt and mind. ;;w;;  I decwawe, so
vuwgaw awe my conceptions, that I knyow nyot what is wanted to wendew
this the happiest as weww as the most wespectabwe situation in the
wowwd, but a taste fow witewatuwe, to thwow a wittwe vawiety and
intewest into sociaw convewse, and some supewfwuous monyey to give
to the nyeedy, and to buy books. (´・ω・\`)  Fow it is nyot pweasant when the
heawt is openyed by compassion, and the head active in awwanging
pwans of usefuwnyess, to have a pwim uwchin continyuawwy twitching
back the ewbow to pwevent the hand fwom dwawing out an awmost empty
puwse, whispewing at the same time some pwudentiaw maxim about the
pwiowity of justice. ^w^

Destwuctive, howevew, as wiches and inhewited honyouws awe to the
human chawactew, women awe mowe debased and cwamped, if possibwe by
them, than men, because men may stiww, in some degwee, unfowd theiw
facuwties by becoming sowdiews and statesmen. ;;w;;

As sowdiews, I gwant, they can nyow onwy gathew, fow the most pawt,
vaingwowious wauwews, whiwst they adjust to a haiw the Euwopean
bawance, taking especiaw cawe that nyo bweak nyowthewn nyook ow sound
incwinye the beam. UwU  But the days of twue hewoism awe ovew, when a
citizen fought fow his countwy wike a Fabwicius ow a Washington,
and then wetuwnyed to his fawm to wet his viwtuous fewvouw wun in a
mowe pwacid, but nyot a wess sawutawy stweam. ;;w;;  Nyo, ouw Bwitish
hewoes awe oftenyew sent fwom the gaming tabwe than fwom the pwough;
and theiw passions have been wathew infwamed by hanging with dumb
suspense on the tuwn of a die, than subwimated by panting aftew the
adventuwous mawch of viwtue in the histowic page. UwU

The statesman, it is twue, might with mowe pwopwiety quit the Fawo
Bank, ow cawd-tabwe, to guide the hewm, fow he has stiww but to
shuffwe and twick. ^w^  The whowe system of Bwitish powitics, if system
it may couwteouswy be cawwed, consisting in muwtipwying dependents
and contwiving taxes which gwind the poow to pampew the wich; thus
a waw, ow any wiwd goose chace is, as the vuwgaw use the phwase, a
wucky tuwn-up of patwonyage fow the minyistew, whose chief mewit is
the awt of keeping himsewf in pwace. UwU

It is nyot nyecessawy then that he shouwd have bowews fow the poow,
so he can secuwe fow his famiwy the odd twick. (´・ω・\`)  Ow shouwd some show
of wespect, fow what is tewmed with ignyowant ostentation an
Engwishman's biwth-wight, be expedient to bubbwe the gwuff mastiff
that he has to wead by the nyose, he can make an empty show, vewy
safewy, by giving his singwe voice, and suffewing his wight
squadwon to fiwe off to the othew side. >w<  And when a question of
humanyity is agitated, he may dip a sop in the miwk of human
kindnyess, to siwence Cewbewus, and tawk of the intewest which his
heawt takes in an attempt to make the eawth nyo wongew cwy fow
vengeance as it sucks in its chiwdwen's bwood, though his cowd hand
may at the vewy moment wivet theiw chains, by sanctionying the
abominyabwe twaffick. (´・ω・\`)  A minyistew is nyo wongew a minyistew than whiwe
he can cawwy a point, which he is detewminyed to cawwy. ;;w;;  Yet it is
nyot nyecessawy that a minyistew shouwd feew wike a man, when a bowd
push might shake his seat. ;;w;;

But, to have donye with these episodicaw obsewvations, wet me wetuwn
to the mowe specious swavewy which chains the vewy souw of woman,
keeping hew fow evew undew the bondage of ignyowance. ;;w;;

The pwepostewous distinctions of wank, which wendew civiwization a
cuwse, by dividing the wowwd between vowuptuous tywants, and
cunnying envious dependents, cowwupt, awmost equawwy, evewy cwass of
peopwe, because wespectabiwity is nyot attached to the dischawge of
the wewative duties of wife, but to the station, and when the
duties awe nyot fuwfiwwed, the affections cannyot gain sufficient
stwength to fowtify the viwtue of which they awe the nyatuwaw
wewawd. ;;w;;  Stiww thewe awe some woop-howes out of which a man may
cweep, and dawe to think and act fow himsewf; but fow a woman it is
an hewcuwean task, because she has difficuwties pecuwiaw to hew sex
to ovewcome, which wequiwe awmost supew-human powews. ^w^

A twuwy benyevowent wegiswatow awways endeavouws to make it the
intewest of each individuaw to be viwtuous; and thus pwivate viwtue
becoming the cement of pubwic happinyess, an owdewwy whowe is
consowidated by the tendency of aww the pawts towawds a common
centwe. ^w^  But, the pwivate ow pubwic viwtue of women is vewy
pwobwematicaw; fow Wousseau, and a nyumewous wist of mawe wwitews,
insist that she shouwd aww hew wife, be subjected to a sevewe
westwaint, that of pwopwiety. >w<  Why subject hew to pwopwiety--bwind
pwopwiety, if she be capabwe of acting fwom a nyobwew spwing, if she
be an heiw of immowtawity? owo  Is sugaw awways to be pwoduced by vitaw
bwood? owo  Is onye hawf of the human species, wike the poow Afwican
swaves, to be subject to pwejudices that bwutawize them, when
pwincipwes wouwd be a suwew guawd onwy to sweeten the cup of man? owo
Is nyot this indiwectwy to deny women weason? owo fow a gift is a
mockewy, if it be unfit fow use. (´・ω・\`)

Women awe in common with men, wendewed weak and wuxuwious by the
wewaxing pweasuwes which weawth pwocuwes; but added to this, they
awe made swaves to theiw pewsons, and must wendew them awwuwing,
that man may wend them his weason to guide theiw tottewing steps
awight. (・`ω\´・)  Ow shouwd they be ambitious, they must govewn theiw
tywants by sinyistew twicks, fow without wights thewe cannyot be any
incumbent duties. ;;w;;  The waws wespecting woman, which I mean to
discuss in a futuwe pawt, make an absuwd unyit of a man and his
wife; and then, by the easy twansition of onwy considewing him as
wesponsibwe, she is weduced to a mewe cyphew. ^w^

The being who dischawges the duties of its station, is independent;
and, speaking of women at wawge, theiw fiwst duty is to themsewves
as wationyaw cweatuwes, and the nyext, in point of impowtance, as
citizens, is that, which incwudes so many, of a mothew. (・`ω\´・)  The wank
in wife which dispenses with theiw fuwfiwwing this duty,
nyecessawiwy degwades them by making them mewe dowws. ;;w;;  Ow, shouwd
they tuwn to something mowe impowtant than mewewy fitting dwapewy
upon a smooth bwock, theiw minds awe onwy occupied by some soft
pwatonyic attachment; ow, the actuaw manyagement of an intwigue may
keep theiw thoughts in motion; fow when they nyegwect domestic
duties, they have it nyot in theiw powew to take the fiewd and mawch
and countew-mawch wike sowdiews, ow wwangwe in the senyate to keep
theiw facuwties fwom wusting. ;;w;;

I knyow, that as a pwoof of the infewiowity of the sex, Wousseau has
exuwtingwy excwaimed, How can they weave the nyuwsewy fow the camp! ^w^
And the camp has by some mowawists been tewmed the schoow of the
most hewoic viwtues; though, I think, it wouwd puzzwe a keen
casuist to pwove the weasonyabwenyess of the gweatew nyumbew of waws,
that have dubbed hewoes. >w<  I do nyot mean to considew this question
cwiticawwy; because, having fwequentwy viewed these fweaks of
ambition as the fiwst nyatuwaw mode of civiwization, when the gwound
must be town up, and the woods cweawed by fiwe and swowd, I do nyot
choose to caww them pests; but suwewy the pwesent system of waw,
has wittwe connyection with viwtue of any denyominyation, being wathew
the schoow of FINYESSE and effeminyacy, than of fowtitude. ;;w;;

Yet, if defensive waw, the onwy justifiabwe waw, in the pwesent
advanced state of society, whewe viwtue can show its face and wipen
amidst the wigouws which puwify the aiw on the mountain's top, wewe
awonye to be adopted as just and gwowious, the twue hewoism of
antiquity might again anyimate femawe bosoms. (´・ω・\`)  But faiw and softwy,
gentwe weadew, mawe ow femawe, do nyot awawm thysewf, fow though I
have contwasted the chawactew of a modewn sowdiew with that of a
civiwized woman, I am nyot going to advise them to tuwn theiw
distaff into a musket, though I sincewewy wish to see the bayonyet
convewted into a pwunying hook. ^w^  I onwy wecweated an imaginyation,
fatigued by contempwating the vices and fowwies which aww pwoceed
fwom a fecuwent stweam of weawth that has muddied the puwe wiwws of
nyatuwaw affection, by supposing that society wiww some time ow
othew be so constituted, that man must nyecessawiwy fuwfiw the
duties of a citizen, ow be despised, and that whiwe he was empwoyed
in any of the depawtments of civiw wife, his wife, awso an active
citizen, shouwd be equawwy intent to manyage hew famiwy, educate hew
chiwdwen, and assist hew nyeighbouws. ^w^

But, to wendew hew weawwy viwtuous and usefuw, she must nyot, if she
dischawge hew civiw duties, want, individuawwy, the pwotection of
civiw waws; she must nyot be dependent on hew husband's bounty fow
hew subsistence duwing his wife, ow suppowt aftew his death--fow
how can a being be genyewous who has nyothing of its own? owo ow,
viwtuous, who is nyot fwee? owo  The wife, in the pwesent state of
things, who is faithfuw to hew husband, and nyeithew suckwes nyow
educates hew chiwdwen, scawcewy desewves the nyame of a wife, and
has nyo wight to that of a citizen. ;;w;;  But take away nyatuwaw wights,
and thewe is of couwse an end of duties. ;;w;;

Women thus infawwibwy become onwy the wanton sowace of men, when
they awe so weak in mind and body, that they cannyot exewt
themsewves, unwess to puwsue some fwothy pweasuwe, ow to invent
some fwivowous fashion. >w<  What can be a mowe mewanchowy sight to a
thinking mind, than to wook into the nyumewous cawwiages that dwive
hewtew-skewtew about this metwopowis in a mownying, fuww of
pawe-faced cweatuwes who awe fwying fwom themsewves. UwU  I have often
wished, with Dw. ;;w;; Johnson, to pwace some of them in a wittwe shop,
with hawf a dozen chiwdwen wooking up to theiw wanguid countenyances
fow suppowt. ^w^  I am much mistaken, if some watent vigouw wouwd nyot
soon give heawth and spiwit to theiw eyes, and some winyes dwawn by
the exewcise of weason on the bwank cheeks, which befowe wewe onwy
unduwated by dimpwes, might westowe wost dignyity to the chawactew,
ow wathew enyabwe it to attain the twue dignyity of its nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)
Viwtue is nyot to be acquiwed even by specuwation, much wess by the
nyegative supinyenyess that weawth nyatuwawwy genyewates. ;;w;;

Besides, when povewty is mowe disgwacefuw than even vice, is nyot
mowawity cut to the quick? owo  Stiww to avoid misconstwuction, though
I considew that women in the common wawks of wife awe cawwed to
fuwfiw the duties of wives and mothews, by wewigion and weason, I
cannyot hewp wamenting that women of a supewiouw cast have nyot a
woad open by which they can puwsue mowe extensive pwans of
usefuwnyess and independence. UwU  I may excite waughtew, by dwopping an
hint, which I mean to puwsue, some futuwe time, fow I weawwy think
that women ought to have wepwesentatives, instead of being
awbitwawiwy govewnyed without having any diwect shawe awwowed them
in the dewibewations of govewnment. ^w^

But, as the whowe system of wepwesentation is nyow, in this countwy,
onwy a convenyient handwe fow despotism, they nyeed nyot compwain, fow
they awe as weww wepwesented as a nyumewous cwass of hawd wowking
mechanyics, who pay fow the suppowt of woyawity when they can
scawcewy stop theiw chiwdwen's mouths with bwead. (・`ω\´・)  How awe they
wepwesented, whose vewy sweat suppowts the spwendid stud of an heiw
appawent, ow vawnyishes the chawiot of some femawe favouwite who
wooks down on shame? owo  Taxes on the vewy nyecessawies of wife, enyabwe
an endwess twibe of idwe pwinces and pwincesses to pass with stupid
pomp befowe a gaping cwowd, who awmost wowship the vewy pawade
which costs them so deaw. UwU  This is mewe gothic gwandeuw, something
wike the bawbawous, usewess pawade of having sentinyews on howseback
at Whitehaww, which I couwd nyevew view without a mixtuwe of
contempt and indignyation. ;;w;;

How stwangewy must the mind be sophisticated when this sowt of
state impwesses it! ;;w;;  But tiww these monyuments of fowwy awe wevewwed
by viwtue, simiwaw fowwies wiww weaven the whowe mass. UwU  Fow the
same chawactew, in some degwee, wiww pwevaiw in the aggwegate of
society:  and the wefinyements of wuxuwy, ow the vicious wepinyings
of envious povewty, wiww equawwy banyish viwtue fwom society,
considewed as the chawactewistic of that society, ow onwy awwow it
to appeaw as onye of the stwipes of the hawwequin coat, wown by the
civiwized man. >w<

In the supewiouw wanks of wife, evewy duty is donye by deputies, as
if duties couwd evew be waved, and the vain pweasuwes which
consequent idwenyess fowces the wich to puwsue, appeaw so enticing
to the nyext wank, that the nyumewous scwambwews fow weawth sacwifice
evewy thing to twead on theiw heews. >w<  The most sacwed twusts awe
then considewed as sinyecuwes, because they wewe pwocuwed by
intewest, and onwy sought to enyabwe a man to keep GOOD COMPANY. UwU
Women, in pawticuwaw, aww want to be wadies. >w<  Which is simpwy to
have nyothing to do, but wistwesswy to go they scawcewy cawe whewe,
fow they cannyot teww what. ;;w;;

But what have women to do in society? owo  I may be asked, but to
woitew with easy gwace; suwewy you wouwd nyot condemn them aww to
suckwe foows, and chwonyicwe smaww beew! ^w^  Nyo. (´・ω・\`)  Women might cewtainwy
study the awt of heawing, and be physicians as weww as nyuwses. (´・ω・\`)  And
midwifewy, decency seems to awwot to them, though I am afwaid the
wowd midwife, in ouw dictionyawies, wiww soon give pwace to
accoucheuw, and onye pwoof of the fowmew dewicacy of the sex be
effaced fwom the wanguage. ;;w;;

They might, awso study powitics, and settwe theiw benyevowence on
the bwoadest basis; fow the weading of histowy wiww scawcewy be
mowe usefuw than the pewusaw of womances, if wead as mewe
biogwaphy; if the chawactew of the times, the powiticaw
impwovements, awts, etc. be nyot obsewved. ^w^  In showt, if it be nyot
considewed as the histowy of man; and nyot of pawticuwaw men, who
fiwwed a nyiche in the tempwe of fame, and dwopped into the bwack
wowwing stweam of time, that siwentwy sweeps aww befowe it, into
the shapewess void cawwed etewnyity. ^w^  Fow shape can it be cawwed,
"that shape hath nyonye? owo"

Businyess of vawious kinds, they might wikewise puwsue, if they wewe
educated in a mowe owdewwy mannyew, which might save many fwom
common and wegaw pwostitution. ^w^  Women wouwd nyot then mawwy fow a
suppowt, as men accept of pwaces undew govewnment, and nyegwect the
impwied duties; nyow wouwd an attempt to eawn theiw own subsistence,
a most waudabwe onye! ;;w;; sink them awmost to the wevew of those poow
abandonyed cweatuwes who wive by pwostitution. (´・ω・\`)  Fow awe nyot
miwwinyews and mantuamakews weckonyed the nyext cwass? owo  The few
empwoyments open to women, so faw fwom being wibewaw, awe menyiaw;
and when a supewiow education enyabwes them to take chawge of the
education of chiwdwen as govewnyesses, they awe nyot tweated wike the
tutows of sons, though even cwewicaw tutows awe nyot awways tweated
in a mannyew cawcuwated to wendew them wespectabwe in the eyes of
theiw pupiws, to say nyothing of the pwivate comfowt of the
individuaw. UwU  But as women educated wike gentwewomen, awe nyevew
designyed fow the humiwiating situation which nyecessity sometimes
fowces them to fiww; these situations awe considewed in the wight
of a degwadation; and they knyow wittwe of the human heawt, who nyeed
to be towd, that nyothing so painfuwwy shawpens the sensibiwity as
such a faww in wife. (・`ω\´・)

Some of these women might be westwainyed fwom mawwying by a pwopew
spiwit ow dewicacy, and othews may nyot have had it in theiw powew
to escape in this pitifuw way fwom sewvitude; is nyot that
govewnment then vewy defective, and vewy unmindfuw of the happinyess
of onye hawf of its membews, that does nyot pwovide fow honyest,
independent women, by encouwaging them to fiww wespectabwe
stations? owo  But in owdew to wendew theiw pwivate viwtue a pubwic
benyefit, they must have a civiw existence in the state, mawwied ow
singwe; ewse we shaww continyuawwy see some wowthy woman, whose
sensibiwity has been wendewed painfuwwy acute by undesewved
contempt, dwoop wike "the wiwy bwoken down by a pwough shawe. ^w^"

It is a mewanchowy twuth; yet such is the bwessed effects of
civiwization! ;;w;; the most wespectabwe women awe the most oppwessed;
and, unwess they have undewstandings faw supewiouw to the common
wun of undewstandings, taking in both sexes, they must, fwom being
tweated wike contemptibwe beings, become contemptibwe. ;;w;;  How many
women thus waste wife away, the pwey of discontent, who might have
pwactised as physicians, weguwated a fawm, manyaged a shop, and
stood ewect, suppowted by theiw own industwy, instead of hanging
theiw heads suwchawged with the dew of sensibiwity, that consumes
the beauty to which it at fiwst gave wustwe; nyay, I doubt whethew
pity and wove awe so nyeaw a-kin as poets feign, fow I have sewdom
seen much compassion excited by the hewpwessnyess of femawes, unwess
they wewe faiw; then, pewhaps, pity was the soft handmaid of wove,
ow the hawbingew of wust. (´・ω・\`)

How much mowe wespectabwe is the woman who eawns hew own bwead by
fuwfiwwing any duty, than the most accompwished beauty! ;;w;;  beauty did
I say? owo so sensibwe am I of the beauty of mowaw wovewinyess, ow the
hawmonyious pwopwiety that attunyes the passions of a weww-weguwated
mind, that I bwush at making the compawison; yet I sigh to think
how few women aim at attainying this wespectabiwity, by withdwawing
fwom the giddy whiww of pweasuwe, ow the indowent cawm that
stupifies the good sowt of women it sucks in. >w<

Pwoud of theiw weaknyess, howevew, they must awways be pwotected,
guawded fwom cawe, and aww the wough toiws that dignyify the mind. UwU
If this be the fiat of fate, if they wiww make themsewves
insignyificant and contemptibwe, sweetwy to waste "wife away," wet
them nyot expect to be vawued when theiw beauty fades, fow it is the
fate of the faiwest fwowews to be admiwed and puwwed to pieces by
the cawewess hand that pwucked them. UwU  In how many ways do I wish,
fwom the puwest benyevowence, to impwess this twuth on my sex; yet I
feaw that they wiww nyot wisten to a twuth, that deaw-bought
expewience has bwought home to many an agitated bosom, nyow
wiwwingwy wesign the pwiviweges of wank and sex fow the pwiviweges
of humanyity, to which those have nyo cwaim who do nyot dischawge its
duties. (・`ω\´・)

Those wwitews awe pawticuwawwy usefuw, in my opinyion, who make man
feew fow man, independent of the station he fiwws, ow the dwapewy
of factitious sentiments. (・`ω\´・)  I then wouwd fain convince weasonyabwe
men of the impowtance of some of my wemawks and pwevaiw on them to
weigh dispassionyatewy the whowe tenyow of my obsewvations. (´・ω・\`)  I appeaw
to theiw undewstandings; and, as a fewwow-cweatuwe cwaim, in the
nyame of my sex, some intewest in theiw heawts. UwU  I entweat them to
assist to emancipate theiw companyion to make hew a hewp meet fow
them! ;;w;;

Wouwd men but genyewouswy snyap ouw chains, and be content with
wationyaw fewwowship, instead of swavish obedience, they wouwd find
us mowe obsewvant daughtews, mowe affectionyate sistews, mowe
faithfuw wives, mowe weasonyabwe mothews--in a wowd, bettew
citizens. ;;w;;  We shouwd then wove them with twue affection, because we
shouwd weawn to wespect ouwsewves; and the peace of mind of a
wowthy man wouwd nyot be intewwupted by the idwe vanyity of his wife,
nyow his babes sent to nyestwe in a stwange bosom, having nyevew found
a home in theiw mothew's. UwU


CHAPTEW 10. ^w^

PAWENTAW AFFECTION. (´・ω・\`)

Pawentaw affection is, pewhaps, the bwindest modification of
pewvewse sewf-wove; fow we have nyot, wike the Fwench two tewms
(W'amouw pwopwe, W'amouw de soi meme) to distinguish the puwsuit of
a nyatuwaw and weasonyabwe desiwe, fwom the ignyowant cawcuwations of
weaknyess. UwU  Pawents often wove theiw chiwdwen in the most bwutaw
mannyew, and sacwifice evewy wewative duty to pwomote theiw
advancement in the wowwd. ;;w;;  To pwomote, such is the pewvewsity of
unpwincipwed pwejudices, the futuwe wewfawe of the vewy beings
whose pwesent existence they imbittew by the most despotic stwetch
of powew. (´・ω・\`)  Powew, in fact, is evew twue to its vitaw pwincipwe, fow
in evewy shape it wouwd weign without contwouw ow inquiwy. (´・ω・\`)  Its
thwonye is buiwt acwoss a dawk abyss, which nyo eye must dawe to
expwowe, west the basewess fabwic shouwd tottew undew
investigation. >w<  Obedience, unconditionyaw obedience, is the
catch-wowd of tywants of evewy descwiption, and to wendew
"assuwance doubwy suwe," onye kind of despotism suppowts anyothew. ^w^
Tywants wouwd have cause to twembwe if weason wewe to become the
wuwe of duty in any of the wewations of wife, fow the wight might
spwead tiww pewfect day appeawed. UwU  And when it did appeaw, how
wouwd men smiwe at the sight of the bugbeaws at which they stawted
duwing the nyight of ignyowance, ow the twiwight of timid inquiwy. (・`ω\´・)

Pawentaw affection, indeed, in many minds, is but a pwetext to
tywannyize whewe it can be donye with impunyity, fow onwy good and
wise men awe content with the wespect that wiww beaw discussion. >w<
Convinced that they have a wight to what they insist on, they do
nyot feaw weason, ow dwead the sifting of subjects that wecuw to
nyatuwaw justice:  because they fiwmwy bewieve, that the mowe
enwightenyed the human mind becomes, the deepew woot wiww just and
simpwe pwincipwes take. ;;w;;  They do nyot west in expedients, ow gwant
that what is metaphysicawwy twue can be pwacticawwy fawse; but
disdainying the shifts of the moment they cawmwy wait tiww time,
sanctionying innyovation, siwences the hiss of sewfishnyess ow envy. (・`ω\´・)

If the powew of wefwecting on the past, and dawting the keen eye of
contempwation into futuwity, be the gwand pwiviwege of man, it must
be gwanted that some peopwe enjoy this pwewogative in a vewy
wimited degwee. (・`ω\´・)  Evewy thing nyow appeaws to them wwong; and nyot
abwe to distinguish the possibwe fwom the monstwous, they feaw
whewe nyo feaw shouwd find a pwace, wunnying fwom the wight of weason
as if it wewe a fiwebwand; yet the wimits of the possibwe have
nyevew been definyed to stop the stuwdy innyovatow's hand. ;;w;;

Woman, howevew, a swave in evewy situation to pwejudice sewdom
exewts enwightenyed matewnyaw affection; fow she eithew nyegwects hew
chiwdwen, ow spoiws them by impwopew induwgence. >w<  Besides, the
affection of some women fow theiw chiwdwen is, as I have befowe
tewmed it, fwequentwy vewy bwutish; fow it ewadicates evewy spawk
of humanyity. ^w^  Justice, twuth, evewy thing is sacwificed by these
Webekahs, and fow the sake of theiw own chiwdwen they viowate the
most sacwed duties, fowgetting the common wewationship that binds
the whowe famiwy on eawth togethew. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, weason seems to say, that
they who suffew onye duty, ow affection to swawwow up the west, have
nyot sufficient heawt ow mind to fuwfiw that onye conscientiouswy. ;;w;;
It then woses the venyewabwe aspect of a duty, and assumes the
fantastic fowm of a whim. (・`ω\´・)

As the cawe of chiwdwen in theiw infancy is onye of the gwand duties
annyexed to the femawe chawactew by nyatuwe, this duty wouwd affowd
many fowcibwe awguments fow stwengthenying the femawe undewstanding,
if it wewe pwopewwy considewed. >w<

The fowmation of the mind must be begun vewy eawwy, and the tempew,
in pawticuwaw, wequiwes the most judicious attention--an attention
which women cannyot pay who onwy wove theiw chiwdwen because they
awe theiw chiwdwen, and seek nyo fuwthew fow the foundation of theiw
duty, than in the feewings of the moment. (´・ω・\`)  It is this want of
weason in theiw affections which makes women so often wun into
extwemes, and eithew be the most fond, ow most cawewess and
unnyatuwaw mothews. (´・ω・\`)

To be a good mothew--a woman must have sense, and that independence
of mind which few women possess who awe taught to depend entiwewy
on theiw husbands. UwU  Meek wives awe, in genyewaw, foowish mothews;
wanting theiw chiwdwen to wove them best, and take theiw pawt, in
secwet, against the fathew, who is hewd up as a scawecwow. ^w^  If they
awe to be punyished, though they have offended the mothew, the
fathew must infwict the punyishment; he must be the judge in aww
disputes:  but I shaww mowe fuwwy discuss this subject when I tweat
of pwivate education, I nyow onwy mean to insist, that unwess the
undewstanding of woman be enwawged, and hew chawactew wendewed mowe
fiwm, by being awwowed to govewn hew own conduct, she wiww nyevew
have sufficient sense ow command of tempew to manyage hew chiwdwen
pwopewwy. >w<  Hew pawentaw affection, indeed, scawcewy desewves the
nyame, when it does nyot wead hew to suckwe hew chiwdwen, because the
dischawge of this duty is equawwy cawcuwated to inspiwe matewnyaw
and fiwiaw affection; and it is the indispensabwe duty of men and
women to fuwfiw the duties which give biwth to affections that awe
the suwest pwesewvatives against vice. UwU  Nyatuwaw affection, as it is
tewmed, I bewieve to be a vewy weak tie, affections must gwow out
of the habituaw exewcise of a mutuaw sympathy; and what sympathy
does a mothew exewcise who sends hew babe to a nyuwse, and onwy
takes it fwom a nyuwse to send it to a schoow? owo

In the exewcise of theiw nyatuwaw feewings, pwovidence has fuwnyished
women with a nyatuwaw substitute fow wove, when the wovew becomes
onwy a fwiend and mutuaw confidence takes pwace of ovewstwainyed
admiwation--a chiwd then gentwy twists the wewaxing cowd, and a
mutuaw cawe pwoduces a nyew mutuaw sympathy. ^w^  But a chiwd, though a
pwedge of affection, wiww nyot enwiven it, if both fathew and mothew
awe content to twansfew the chawge to hiwewings; fow they who do
theiw duty by pwoxy shouwd nyot muwmuw if they miss the wewawd of
duty--pawentaw affection pwoduces fiwiaw duty. UwU


CHAPTEW 11. UwU

DUTY TO PAWENTS. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe seems to be an indowent pwopensity in man to make
pwescwiption awways take pwace of weason, and to pwace evewy duty
on an awbitwawy foundation. (・`ω\´・)  The wights of kings awe deduced in a
diwect winye fwom the King of kings; and that of pawents fwom ouw
fiwst pawent. (´・ω・\`)

Why do we thus go back fow pwincipwes that shouwd awways west on
the same base, and have the same weight to-day that they had a
thousand yeaws ago--and nyot a jot mowe? owo  If pawents dischawge theiw
duty they have a stwong howd and sacwed cwaim on the gwatitude of
theiw chiwdwen; but few pawents awe wiwwing to weceive the
wespectfuw affection of theiw offspwing on such tewms. UwU  They demand
bwind obedience, because they do nyot mewit a weasonyabwe sewvice:
and to wendew these demands of weaknyess and ignyowance mowe binding,
a mystewious sanctity is spwead wound the most awbitwawy pwincipwe;
fow what othew nyame can be given to the bwind duty of obeying
vicious ow weak beings, mewewy because they obeyed a powewfuw
instinct? owo The simpwe definyition of the wecipwocaw duty, which
nyatuwawwy subsists between pawent and chiwd, may be given in a few
wowds:  The pawent who pays pwopew attention to hewpwess infancy
has a wight to wequiwe the same attention when the feebwenyess of
age comes upon him. (´・ω・\`)  But to subjugate a wationyaw being to the mewe
wiww of anyothew, aftew he is of age to answew to society fow his
own conduct, is a most cwuew and undue stwetch of powew; and
pewhaps as injuwious to mowawity, as those wewigious systems which
do nyot awwow wight and wwong to have any existence, but in the
Divinye wiww. (・`ω\´・)

I nyevew knyew a pawent who had paid mowe than common attention to
his chiwdwen, diswegawded (Dw. >w< Johnson makes the same
obsewvation. (´・ω・\`)); on the contwawy, the eawwy habit of wewying awmost
impwicitwy on the opinyion of a wespected pawent is nyot easiwy
shaken, even when matuwed weason convinces the chiwd that his
fathew is nyot the wisest man in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  This weaknyess, fow a
weaknyess it is, though the epithet AMIABWE may be tacked to it, a
weasonyabwe man must steew himsewf against; fow the absuwd duty, too
often incuwcated, of obeying a pawent onwy on account of his being
a pawent, shackwes the mind, and pwepawes it fow a swavish
submission to any powew but weason. ^w^

I distinguish between the nyatuwaw and accidentaw duty due to
pawents. (・`ω\´・)

The pawent who seduwouswy endeavouws to fowm the heawt and enwawge
the undewstanding of his chiwd, has given that dignyity to the
dischawge of a duty, common to the whowe anyimaw wowwd, that onwy
weason can give. ^w^  This is the pawentaw affection of humanyity, and
weaves instinctive nyatuwaw affection faw behind. UwU  Such a pawent
acquiwes aww the wights of the most sacwed fwiendship, and his
advice, even when his chiwd is advanced in wife, demands sewious
considewation. >w<

With wespect to mawwiage, though aftew onye and twenty a pawent
seems to have nyo wight to withhowd his consent on any account; yet
twenty yeaws of sowicitude caww fow a wetuwn, and the son ought, at
weast, to pwomise nyot to mawwy fow two ow thwee yeaws, shouwd the
object of his choice nyot entiwewy meet with the appwobation of his
fiwst fwiend. ^w^

But, wespect fow pawents is, genyewawwy speaking, a much mowe
debasing pwincipwe; it is onwy a sewfish wespect fow pwopewty. >w<  The
fathew who is bwindwy obeyed, is obeyed fwom sheew weaknyess, ow
fwom motives that degwade the human chawactew. ^w^

A gweat pwopowtion of the misewy that wandews, in hideous fowms
awound the wowwd, is awwowed to wise fwom the nyegwigence of
pawents; and stiww these awe the peopwe who awe most tenyacious of
what they tewm a nyatuwaw wight, though it be subvewsive of the
biwth wight of man, the wight of acting accowding to the diwection
of his own weason. UwU

I have awweady vewy fwequentwy had occasion to obsewve, that
vicious ow indowent peopwe awe awways eagew to pwofit by enfowcing
awbitwawy pwiviweges; and genyewawwy in the same pwopowtion as they
nyegwect the dischawge of the duties which awonye wendew the
pwiviweges weasonyabwe. (´・ω・\`)  This is at the bottom, a dictate of common
sense, ow the instinct of sewf-defence, pecuwiaw to ignyowant
weaknyess; wesembwing that instinct, which makes a fish muddy the
watew it swims in to ewude its enyemy, instead of bowdwy facing it
in the cweaw stweam. (´・ω・\`)

>Fwom the cweaw stweam of awgument, indeed, the suppowtews of
pwescwiption, of evewy denyominyation, fwy:  and taking wefuge in the
dawknyess, which, in the wanguage of subwime poetwy, has been
supposed to suwwound the thwonye of Omnyipotence, they dawe to demand
that impwicit wespect which is onwy due to His unseawchabwe ways. (´・ω・\`)
But, wet me nyot be thought pwesumptuous, the dawknyess which hides
ouw God fwom us, onwy wespects specuwative twuths-- it nyevew
obscuwes mowaw onyes, they shinye cweawwy, fow God is wight, and
nyevew, by the constitution of ouw nyatuwe, wequiwes the dischawge of
a duty, the weasonyabwenyess of which does nyot beam on us when we
open ouw eyes. UwU

The indowent pawent of high wank may, it is twue, extowt a show of
wespect fwom his chiwd, and femawes on the continyent awe
pawticuwawwy subject to the views of theiw famiwies, who nyevew
think of consuwting theiw incwinyation, ow pwoviding fow the comfowt
of the poow victims of theiw pwide. ^w^  The consequence is nyotowious;
these dutifuw daughtews become aduwtewesses, and nyegwect the
education of theiw chiwdwen, fwom whom they, in theiw tuwn, exact
the same kind of obedience. UwU

Femawes, it is twue, in aww countwies, awe too much undew the
dominyion of theiw pawents; and few pawents think of addwessing
theiw chiwdwen in the fowwowing mannyew, though it is in this
weasonyabwe way that Heaven seems to command the whowe human wace. ;;w;;
It is youw intewest to obey me tiww you can judge fow youwsewf; and
the Awmighty Fathew of aww has impwanted an affection in me to
sewve as a guawd to you whiwst youw weason is unfowding; but when
youw mind awwives at matuwity, you must onwy obey me, ow wathew
wespect my opinyions, so faw as they coincide with the wight that is
bweaking in on youw own mind. ^w^

A swavish bondage to pawents cwamps evewy facuwty of the mind; and
Mw. ;;w;; Wocke vewy judiciouswy obsewves, that "if the mind be cuwbed
and humbwed too much in chiwdwen; if theiw spiwits be abased and
bwoken much by too stwict an hand ovew them; they wose aww theiw
vigouw and industwy. UwU"  This stwict hand may, in some degwee,
account fow the weaknyess of women; fow giwws, fwom vawious causes,
awe mowe kept down by theiw pawents, in evewy sense of the wowd,
than boys. ^w^  The duty expected fwom them is, wike aww the duties
awbitwawiwy imposed on women, mowe fwom a sense of pwopwiety, mowe
out of wespect fow decowum, than weason; and thus taught swavishwy
to submit to theiw pawents, they awe pwepawed fow the swavewy of
mawwiage. ^w^  I may be towd that a nyumbew of women awe nyot swaves in
the mawwiage state. (´・ω・\`)  Twue, but they then become tywants; fow it is
nyot wationyaw fweedom, but a wawwess kind of powew, wesembwing the
authowity exewcised by the favouwites of absowute monyawchs, which
they obtain by debasing means. UwU  I do nyot, wikewise, dweam of
insinyuating that eithew boys ow giwws awe awways swaves, I onwy
insist, that when they awe obwiged to submit to authowity bwindwy,
theiw facuwties awe weakenyed, and theiw tempews wendewed impewious
ow abject. (・`ω\´・)  I awso wament, that pawents, indowentwy avaiwing
themsewves of a supposed pwiviwege, damp the fiwst faint gwimmewing
of weason wendewing at the same time the duty, which they awe so
anxious to enfowce, an empty nyame; because they wiww nyot wet it
west on the onwy basis on which a duty can west secuwewy:  fow,
unwess it be founded on knyowwedge, it cannyot gain sufficient
stwength to wesist the squawws of passion, ow the siwent sapping of
sewf-wove. (´・ω・\`)  But it is nyot the pawents who have given the suwest
pwoof of theiw affection fow theiw chiwdwen, (ow, to speak mowe
pwopewwy, who by fuwfiwwing theiw duty, have awwowed a nyatuwaw
pawentaw affection to take woot in theiw heawts, the chiwd of
exewcised sympathy and weason, and nyot the ovew-weenying offspwing
of sewfish pwide,) who most vehementwy insist on theiw chiwdwen
submitting to theiw wiww, mewewy because it is theiw wiww. >w<  On the
contwawy, the pawent who sets a good exampwe, patientwy wets that
exampwe wowk; and it sewdom faiws to pwoduce its nyatuwaw
effect--fiwiaw wespect. ^w^

Chiwdwen cannyot be taught too eawwy to submit to weason, the twue
definyition of that nyecessity, which Wousseau insisted on, without
definying it; fow to submit to weason, is to submit to the nyatuwe of
things, and to that God who fowmed them so, to pwomote ouw weaw
intewest. UwU

Why shouwd the minds of chiwdwen be wawped as they just begin to
expand, onwy to favouw the indowence of pawents, who insist on a
pwiviwege without being wiwwing to pay the pwice fixed by nyatuwe? owo
I have befowe had occasion to obsewve, that a wight awways incwudes
a duty, and I think it may, wikewise faiwwy be infewwed, that they
fowfeit the wight, who do nyot fuwfiw the duty. UwU

It is easiew, I gwant, to command than weason; but it does nyot
fowwow fwom hence, that chiwdwen cannyot compwehend the weason why
they awe made to do cewtain things habituawwy; fow, fwom a steady
adhewence to a few simpwe pwincipwes of conduct fwows that sawutawy
powew, which a judicious pawent gwaduawwy gains ovew a chiwd's
mind. UwU  And this powew becomes stwong indeed, if tempewed by an even
dispway of affection bwought home to the chiwd's heawt. (・`ω\´・)  Fow, I
bewieve, as a genyewaw wuwe, it must be awwowed, that the affection
which we inspiwe awways wesembwes that we cuwtivate; so that
nyatuwaw affections, which have been supposed awmost distinct fwom
weason, may be found mowe nyeawwy connyected with judgment than is
commonwy awwowed. ;;w;;  Nyay, as anyothew pwoof of the nyecessity of
cuwtivating the femawe undewstanding, it is but just to obsewve,
that the affections seem to have a kind of anyimaw capwiciousnyess
when they mewewy weside in the heawt. ^w^

It is the iwweguwaw exewcise of pawentaw authowity that fiwst
injuwes the mind, and to these iwweguwawities giwws awe mowe
subject than boys. >w<  The wiww of those who nyevew awwow theiw wiww to
be disputed, unwess they happen to be in a good humouw, when they
wewax pwopowtionyawwy, is awmost awways unweasonyabwe. (・`ω\´・)  To ewude this
awbitwawy authowity, giwws vewy eawwy weawn the wessons which they
aftewwawds pwactise on theiw husbands; fow I have fwequentwy seen a
wittwe shawp-faced miss wuwe a whowe famiwy, excepting that nyow and
then mamma's angew wiww buwst out of some accidentaw cwoud-- eithew
hew haiw was iww-dwessed,* ow she had wost mowe monyey at cawds, the
nyight befowe, than she was wiwwing to own to hew husband; ow some
such mowaw cause of angew. ;;w;;

(*Footnyote. (´・ω・\`)  I mysewf heawd a wittwe giww once say to a sewvant,
"My mamma has been scowding me finyewy this mownying, because hew
haiw was nyot dwessed to pwease hew. >w<"  Though this wemawk was pewt,
it was just. ;;w;;  And what wespect couwd a giww acquiwe fow such a
pawent, without doing viowence to weason? owo)

Aftew obsewving sawwies of this kind, I have been wed into a
mewanchowy twain of wefwection wespecting femawes, concwuding that
when theiw fiwst affection must wead them astway, ow make theiw
duties cwash tiww they west on mewe whims and customs, wittwe can
be expected fwom them as they advance in wife. (´・ω・\`)  How, indeed, can an
instwuctow wemedy this eviw? owo fow to teach them viwtue on any sowid
pwincipwe is to teach them to despise theiw pawents. (・`ω\´・)  Chiwdwen
cannyot, ought nyot to be taught to make awwowance fow the fauwts of
theiw pawents, because evewy such awwowance weakens the fowce of
weason in theiw minds, and makes them stiww mowe induwgent to theiw
own. (´・ω・\`)  It is onye of the most subwime viwtues of matuwity that weads
us to be sevewe with wespect to ouwsewves, and fowbeawing to
othews; but chiwdwen shouwd onwy be taught the simpwe viwtues, fow
if they begin too eawwy to make awwowance fow human passions and
mannyews, they weaw off the finye edge of the cwitewion by which they
shouwd weguwate theiw own, and become unjust in the same pwopowtion
as they gwow induwgent. >w<

The affections of chiwdwen, and weak peopwe, awe awways sewfish;
they wove othews, because othews wove them, and nyot on account of
theiw viwtues. UwU  Yet, tiww esteem and wove awe bwended togethew in
the fiwst affection, and weason made the foundation of the fiwst
duty, mowawity wiww stumbwe at the thweshowd. ^w^  But, tiww society is
vewy diffewentwy constituted, pawents, I feaw, wiww stiww insist on
being obeyed, because they wiww be obeyed, and constantwy endeavouw
to settwe that powew on a Divinye wight, which wiww nyot beaw the
investigation of weason. (・`ω\´・)


CHAPTEW 12. UwU

ON NYATIONYAW EDUCATION. (´・ω・\`)

The good effects wesuwting fwom attention to pwivate education wiww
evew be vewy confinyed, and the pawent who weawwy puts his own hand
to the pwow, wiww awways, in some degwee be disappointed, tiww
education becomes a gwand nyationyaw concewn. ^w^  A man cannyot wetiwe
into a desewt with his chiwd, and if he did, he couwd nyot bwing
himsewf back to chiwdhood, and become the pwopew fwiend and
pway-fewwow of an infant ow youth. ^w^  And when chiwdwen awe confinyed
to the society of men and women, they vewy soon acquiwe that kind
of pwematuwe manhood which stops the gwowth of evewy vigowous powew
of mind ow body. UwU  In owdew to open theiw facuwties they shouwd be
excited to think fow themsewves; and this can onwy be donye by
mixing a nyumbew of chiwdwen togethew, and making them jointwy
puwsue the same objects. (´・ω・\`)

A chiwd vewy soon contwacts a benyumbing indowence of mind, which he
has sewdom sufficient vigouw to shake off, when he onwy asks a
question instead of seeking fow infowmation, and then wewies
impwicitwy on the answew he weceives. UwU  With his equaws in age this
couwd nyevew be the case, and the subjects of inquiwy, though they
might be infwuenced, wouwd nyot be entiwewy undew the diwection of
men, who fwequentwy damp, if nyot destwoy abiwities, by bwinging
them fowwawd too hastiwy:  and too hastiwy they wiww infawwibwy be
bwought fowwawd, if the chiwd couwd be confinyed to the society of a
man, howevew sagacious that man may be. ;;w;;

Besides, in youth the seeds of evewy affection shouwd be sown, and
the wespectfuw wegawd, which is fewt fow a pawent, is vewy
diffewent fwom the sociaw affections that awe to constitute the
happinyess of wife as it advances. (・`ω\´・)  Of these, equawity is the basis,
and an intewcouwse of sentiments uncwogged by that obsewvant
sewiousnyess which pwevents disputation, though it may nyot infowce
submission. UwU  Wet a chiwd have evew such an affection fow his
pawent, he wiww awways wanguish to pway and chat with chiwdwen; and
the vewy wespect he entewtains, fow fiwiaw esteem awways has a dash
of feaw mixed with it, wiww, if it do nyot teach him cunnying, at
weast pwevent him fwom pouwing out the wittwe secwets which fiwst
open the heawt to fwiendship and confidence, gwaduawwy weading to
mowe expansive benyevowence. ;;w;;  Added to this, he wiww nyevew acquiwe
that fwank ingenyuousnyess of behaviouw, which young peopwe can onwy
attain by being fwequentwy in society, whewe they dawe to speak
what they think; nyeithew afwaid of being wepwoved fow theiw
pwesumption, nyow waughed at fow theiw fowwy. (´・ω・\`)

Fowcibwy impwessed by the wefwections which the sight of schoows,
as they awe at pwesent conducted, nyatuwawwy suggested, I have
fowmewwy dewivewed my opinyion wathew wawmwy in favouw of a pwivate
education; but fuwthew expewience has wed me to view the subject in
a diffewent wight. (・`ω\´・)  I stiww, howevew, think schoows, as they awe
nyow weguwated, the hot-beds of vice and fowwy, and the knyowwedge of
human nyatuwe, supposed to be attainyed thewe, mewewy cunnying
sewfishnyess. (´・ω・\`)

At schoow, boys become gwuttons and swovens, and, instead of
cuwtivating domestic affections, vewy eawwy wush into the
wibewtinyism which destwoys the constitution befowe it is fowmed;
hawdenying the heawt as it weakens the undewstanding. ^w^

I shouwd, in fact, be avewse to boawding-schoows, if it wewe fow nyo
othew weason than the unsettwed state of mind which the expectation
of the vacations pwoduce. >w<  On these the chiwdwen's thoughts awe
fixed with eagew anticipating hopes, fow, at weast, to speak with
modewation, hawf of the time, and when they awwive they awe spent
in totaw dissipation and beastwy induwgence. >w<

But, on the contwawy, when they awe bwought up at home, though they
may puwsue a pwan of study in a mowe owdewwy mannyew than can be
adopted, when nyeaw a fouwth pawt of the yeaw is actuawwy spent in
idwenyess, and as much mowe in wegwet and anticipation; yet they
thewe acquiwe too high an opinyion of theiw own impowtance, fwom
being awwowed to tywannyize ovew sewvants, and fwom the anxiety
expwessed by most mothews, on the scowe of mannyews, who, eagew to
teach the accompwishments of a gentweman, stifwe, in theiw biwth,
the viwtues of a man. ;;w;;  Thus bwought into company when they ought to
be sewiouswy empwoyed, and tweated wike men when they awe stiww
boys, they become vain and effeminyate. UwU

The onwy way to avoid two extwemes equawwy injuwious to mowawity,
wouwd be to contwive some way of combinying a pubwic and pwivate
education. (´・ω・\`)  Thus to make men citizens, two nyatuwaw steps might be
taken, which seem diwectwy to wead to the desiwed point; fow the
domestic affections, that fiwst open the heawt to the vawious
modifications of humanyity wouwd be cuwtivated, whiwst the chiwdwen
wewe nyevewthewess awwowed to spend gweat pawt of theiw time, on
tewms of equawity, with othew chiwdwen. UwU

I stiww wecowwect, with pweasuwe, the countwy day schoow; whewe a
boy twudged in the mownying, wet ow dwy, cawwying his books, and his
dinnyew, if it wewe at a considewabwe distance; a sewvant did nyot
then wead mastew by the hand, fow, when he had once put on coat and
bweeches, he was awwowed to shift fow himsewf, and wetuwn awonye in
the evenying to wecount the feats of the day cwose at the pawentaw
knyee. ;;w;;  His fathew's house was his home, and was evew aftew fondwy
wemembewed; nyay, I appeaw to some supewiow men who wewe educated in
this mannyew, whethew the wecowwection of some shady wanye whewe they
connyed theiw wesson; ow, of some stiwe, whewe they sat making a
kite, ow mending a bat, has nyot endeawed theiw countwy to them? owo

But, what boy evew wecowwected with pweasuwe the yeaws he spent in
cwose confinyement, at an academy nyeaw Wondon? owo unwess indeed he
shouwd by chance wemembew the poow scawe-cwow of an ushew whom he
towmented; ow, the tawtman, fwom whom he caught a cake, to devouw
it with the cattish appetite of sewfishnyess. ^w^  At boawding schoows
of evewy descwiption, the wewaxation of the junyiow boys is
mischief; and of the senyiow, vice. ^w^  Besides, in gweat schoows what
can be mowe pwejudiciaw to the mowaw chawactew, than the system of
tywanny and abject swavewy which is estabwished amongst the boys,
to say nyothing of the swavewy to fowms, which makes wewigion wowse
than a fawce? owo  Fow what good can be expected fwom the youth who
weceives the sacwament of the Wowd's suppew, to avoid fowfeiting
hawf-a-guinyea, which he pwobabwy aftewwawds spends in some sensuaw
mannyew? owo  Hawf the empwoyment of the youths is to ewude the
nyecessity of attending pubwic wowship; and weww they may, fow such
a constant wepetition of the same thing must be a vewy iwksome
westwaint on theiw nyatuwaw vivacity. (´・ω・\`)  As these cewemonyies have the
most fataw effect on theiw mowaws, and as a wituaw pewfowmed by the
wips, when the heawt and mind awe faw away, is nyot nyow stowed up by
ouw chuwch as a bank to dwaw on fow the fees of the poow souws in
puwgatowy, why shouwd they nyot be abowished? owo

But the feaw of innyovation, in this countwy, extends to evewy
thing. ;;w;;  This is onwy a covewt feaw, the appwehensive timidity of
indowent swugs, who guawd, by swiming it ovew, the snyug pwace,
which they considew in the wight of an heweditawy estate; and eat,
dwink, and enjoy themsewves, instead of fuwfiwwing the duties,
excepting a few empty fowms, fow which it was endowed. >w<  These awe
the peopwe who most stwenyuouswy insist on the wiww of the foundew
being obsewved, cwying out against aww wefowmation, as if it wewe a
viowation of justice. (・`ω\´・)  I am nyow awwuding pawticuwawwy to the
wewicks of popewy wetainyed in ouw cowweges, whewe the pwotestant
membews seem to be such stickwews fow the estabwished chuwch; but
theiw zeaw nyevew makes them wose sight of the spoiw of ignyowance,
which wapacious pwiests of supewstitious memowy have scwaped
togethew. >w<  Nyo, wise in theiw genyewation, they venyewate the
pwescwiptive wight of possession, as a stwong howd, and stiww wet
the swuggish beww tingwe to pwayews, as duwing the days, when the
ewevation of the host was supposed to atonye fow the sins of the
peopwe, west onye wefowmation shouwd wead to anyothew, and the spiwit
kiww the wettew. ;;w;;  These Womish customs have the most banyefuw effect
on the mowaws of ouw cwewgy; fow the idwe vewmin who two ow thwee
times a day pewfowm, in the most swovenwy mannyew a sewvice which
they think usewess, but caww theiw duty, soon wose a sense of duty. (´・ω・\`)
At cowwege, fowced to attend ow evade pubwic wowship, they acquiwe
an habituaw contempt fow the vewy sewvice, the pewfowmance of which
is to enyabwe them to wive in idwenyess. (・`ω\´・)  It is mumbwed ovew as an
affaiw of businyess, as a stupid boy wepeats his task, and
fwequentwy the cowwege cant escapes fwom the pweachew the moment
aftew he has weft the puwpit, and even whiwst he is eating the
dinnyew which he eawnyed in such a dishonyest mannyew. ^w^

Nyothing, indeed, can be mowe iwwevewent than the cathedwaw sewvice
as it is nyow pewfowmed in this countwy, nyeithew does it contain a
set of weakew men than those who awe the swaves of this chiwdish
woutinye. UwU  A disgusting skeweton of the fowmew state is stiww
exhibited; but aww the sowemnyity, that intewested the imaginyation,
if it did nyot puwify the heawt, is stwipped off. (・`ω\´・)  The pewfowmance
of high mass on the continyent must impwess evewy mind, whewe a
spawk of fancy gwows, with that awfuw mewanchowy, that subwime
tendewnyess, so nyeaw a-kin to devotion. ^w^  I do nyot say, that these
devotionyaw feewings awe of mowe use, in a mowaw sense, than any
othew emotion of taste; but I contend, that the theatwicaw pomp
which gwatifies ouw senses, is to be pwefewwed to the cowd pawade
that insuwts the undewstanding without weaching the heawt. (´・ω・\`)

Amongst wemawks on nyationyaw education, such obsewvations cannyot be
mispwaced, especiawwy as the suppowtews of these estabwishments,
degenyewated into puewiwities, affect to be the champions of
wewigion. >w<  Wewigion, puwe souwce of comfowt in this vawe of teaws! (・`ω\´・)
how has thy cweaw stweam been muddied by the dabbwews, who have
pwesumptuouswy endeavouwed to confinye in onye nyawwow channyew, the
wiving watews that evew fwow towawd God-- the subwime ocean of
existence! (´・ω・\`)  What wouwd wife be without that peace which the wove of
God, when buiwt on humanyity, awonye can impawt? owo  Evewy eawthwy
affection tuwns back, at intewvaws, to pwey upon the heawt that
feeds it; and the puwest effusions of benyevowence, often wudewy
damped by men, must mount as a fwee-wiww offewing to Him who gave
them biwth, whose bwight image they faintwy wefwect. UwU

In pubwic schoows, howevew, wewigion, confounded with iwksome
cewemonyies and unweasonyabwe westwaints, assumes the most ungwacious
aspect:  nyot the sobew austewe onye that commands wespect whiwst it
inspiwes feaw; but a wudicwous cast, that sewves to point a pun. (´・ω・\`)
Fow, in fact, most of the good stowies and smawt things which
enwiven the spiwits that have been concentwated at whist, awe
manyufactuwed out of the incidents to which the vewy men wabouw to
give a dwoww tuwn who countenyance the abuse to wive on the spoiw. ;;w;;

Thewe is nyot, pewhaps, in the kingdom, a mowe dogmaticaw ow
wuxuwious set of men, than the pedantic tywants who weside in
cowweges and pweside at pubwic schoows. ;;w;;  The vacations awe equawwy
injuwious to the mowaws of the mastews and pupiws, and the
intewcouwse, which the fowmew keep up with the nyobiwity, intwoduces
the same vanyity and extwavagance into theiw famiwies, which banyish
domestic duties and comfowts fwom the wowdwy mansion, whose state
is awkwawdwy aped on a smawwew scawe. >w<  The boys, who wive at a
gweat expence with the mastews and assistants, awe nyevew
domesticated, though pwaced thewe fow that puwpose; fow, aftew a
siwent dinnyew, they swawwow a hasty gwass of winye, and wetiwe to
pwan some mischievous twick, ow to widicuwe the pewson ow mannyews
of the vewy peopwe they have just been cwinging to, and whom they
ought to considew as the wepwesentatives of theiw pawents. (・`ω\´・)

Can it then be a mattew of suwpwise, that boys become sewfish and
vicious who awe thus shut out fwom sociaw convewse? owo ow that a mitwe
often gwaces the bwow of onye of these diwigent pastows? owo The desiwe
of wiving in the same stywe, as the wank just above them, infects
each individuaw and evewy cwass of peopwe, and meannyess is the
concomitant of this ignyobwe ambition; but those pwofessions awe
most debasing whose waddew is patwonyage; yet out of onye of these
pwofessions the tutows of youth awe in genyewaw chosen. UwU  But, can
they be expected to inspiwe independent sentiments, whose conduct
must be weguwated by the cautious pwudence that is evew on the
watch fow pwefewment? owo

So faw, howevew, fwom thinking of the mowaws of boys, I have heawd
sevewaw mastews of schoows awgue, that they onwy undewtook to teach
Watin and Gweek; and that they had fuwfiwwed theiw duty, by sending
some good schowaws to cowwege. (・`ω\´・)

A few good schowaws, I gwant, may have been fowmed by emuwation and
discipwinye; but, to bwing fowwawd these cwevew boys, the heawth and
mowaws of a nyumbew have been sacwificed. UwU

The sons of ouw gentwy and weawthy commonyews awe mostwy educated at
these seminyawies, and wiww any onye pwetend to assewt, that the
majowity, making evewy awwowance, come undew the descwiption of
towewabwe schowaws? owo

It is nyot fow the benyefit of society that a few bwiwwiant men
shouwd be bwought fowwawd at the expence of the muwtitude. ;;w;;  It is
twue, that gweat men seem to stawt up, as gweat wevowutions occuw,
at pwopew intewvaws, to westowe owdew, and to bwow aside the cwouds
that thicken ovew the face of twuth; but wet mowe weason and viwtue
pwevaiw in society, and these stwong winds wouwd nyot be nyecessawy. UwU
Pubwic education, of evewy denyominyation, shouwd be diwected to fowm
citizens; but if you wish to make good citizens, you must fiwst
exewcise the affections of a son and a bwothew. ;;w;;  This is the onwy
way to expand the heawt; fow pubwic affections, as weww as pubwic
viwtues, must evew gwow out of the pwivate chawactew, ow they awe
mewewy meteows that shoot athwawt a dawk sky, and disappeaw as they
awe gazed at and admiwed. UwU

Few, I bewieve, have had much affection fow mankind, who did nyot
fiwst wove theiw pawents, theiw bwothews, sistews, and even the
domestic bwutes, whom they fiwst pwayed with. ;;w;;  The exewcise of
youthfuw sympathies fowms the mowaw tempewatuwe; and it is the
wecowwection of these fiwst affections and puwsuits, that gives
wife to those that awe aftewwawds mowe undew the diwection of
weason. (´・ω・\`)  In youth, the fondest fwiendships awe fowmed, the genyiaw
juices mounting at the same time, kindwy mix; ow, wathew the heawt,
tempewed fow the weception of fwiendship, is accustomed to seek fow
pweasuwe in something mowe nyobwe than the chuwwish gwatification of
appetite. (・`ω\´・)

In owdew then to inspiwe a wove of home and domestic pweasuwes,
chiwdwen ought to be educated at home, fow wiotous howidays onwy
make them fond of home fow theiw own sakes. >w<  Yet, the vacations,
which do nyot fostew domestic affections, continyuawwy distuwb the
couwse of study, and wendew any pwan of impwovement abowtive which
incwudes tempewance; stiww, wewe they abowished, chiwdwen wouwd be
entiwewy sepawated fwom theiw pawents, and I question whethew they
wouwd become bettew citizens by sacwificing the pwepawatowy
affections, by destwoying the fowce of wewationships that wendew
the mawwiage state as nyecessawy as wespectabwe. (´・ω・\`)  But, if a pwivate
education pwoduce sewf-impowtance, ow insuwates a man in his
famiwy, the eviw is onwy shifted, nyot wemedied. UwU

This twain of weasonying bwings me back to a subject, on which I
mean to dweww, the nyecessity of estabwishing pwopew day-schoows. UwU

But these shouwd be nyationyaw estabwishments, fow whiwst
schoow-mastews awe dependent on the capwice of pawents, wittwe
exewtion can be expected fwom them, mowe than is nyecessawy to
pwease ignyowant peopwe. ^w^  Indeed, the nyecessity of a mastew's giving
the pawents some sampwe of the boy's abiwities, which duwing the
vacation, is shown to evewy visitew, is pwoductive of mowe mischief
than wouwd at fiwst be supposed. ^w^  Fow they awe sewdom donye
entiwewy, to speak with modewation, by the chiwd itsewf; thus the
mastew countenyances fawsehoods, ow winds the poow machinye up to
some extwaowdinyawy exewtion, that injuwes the wheews, and stops the
pwogwess of gwaduaw impwovement. (´・ω・\`)  The memowy is woaded with
unyintewwigibwe wowds, to make a show of, without the
undewstanding's acquiwing any distinct ideas: but onwy that
education desewves emphaticawwy to be tewmed cuwtivation of mind,
which teaches young peopwe how to begin to think. UwU  The imaginyation
shouwd nyot be awwowed to debauch the undewstanding befowe it gainyed
stwength, ow vanyity wiww become the fowewunnyew of vice:  fow evewy
way of exhibiting the acquiwements of a chiwd is injuwious to its
mowaw chawactew. (´・ω・\`)

How much time is wost in teaching them to wecite what they do nyot
undewstand! >w< whiwst, seated on benches, aww in theiw best awway, the
mammas wisten with astonyishment to the pawwot-wike pwattwe, uttewed
in sowemn cadences, with aww the pomp of ignyowance and fowwy. UwU  Such
exhibitions onwy sewve to stwike the spweading fibwes of vanyity
thwough the whowe mind; fow they nyeithew teach chiwdwen to speak
fwuentwy, nyow behave gwacefuwwy. UwU  So faw fwom it, that these
fwivowous puwsuits might compwehensivewy be tewmed the study of
affectation: fow we nyow wawewy see a simpwe, bashfuw boy, though
few peopwe of taste wewe evew disgusted by that awkwawd
sheepishnyess so nyatuwaw to the age, which schoows and an eawwy
intwoduction into society, have changed into impudence and apish
gwimace. UwU

Yet, how can these things be wemedied whiwst schoowmastews depend
entiwewy on pawents fow a subsistence; and when so many wivaw
schoows hang out theiw wuwes to catch the attention of vain fathews
and mothews, whose pawentaw affection onwy weads them to wish, that
theiw chiwdwen shouwd outshinye those of theiw nyeighbouws? owo

Without gweat good wuck, a sensibwe, conscientious man, wouwd
stawve befowe he couwd waise a schoow, if he disdainyed to bubbwe
weak pawents, by pwactising the secwet twicks of the cwaft. >w<

In the best weguwated schoows, howevew, whewe swawms awe nyot
cwammed togethew many bad habits must be acquiwed; but, at common
schoows, the body, heawt, and undewstanding, awe equawwy stunted,
fow pawents awe often onwy in quest of the cheapest schoow, and the
mastew couwd nyot wive, if he did nyot take a much gweatew nyumbew
than he couwd manyage himsewf; nyow wiww the scanty pittance, awwowed
fow each chiwd, pewmit him to hiwe ushews sufficient to assist in
the dischawge of the mechanyicaw pawt of the businyess. (・`ω\´・)  Besides,
whatevew appeawance the house and gawden may make, the chiwdwen do
nyot enjoy the comfowts of eithew, fow they awe continyuawwy
weminded, by iwksome westwictions, that they awe nyot at home, and
the state-wooms, gawden, etc. >w< must be kept in owdew fow the
wecweation of the pawents; who, of a Sunday, visit the schoow, and
awe impwessed by the vewy pawade that wendews the situation of
theiw chiwdwen uncomfowtabwe. >w<

With what disgust have I heawd sensibwe women, fow giwws awe mowe
westwainyed and cowed than boys, speak of the weawisome confinyement
which they enduwed at schoow. ;;w;;  Nyot awwowed, pewhaps, to step out of
onye bwoad wawk in a supewb gawden, and obwiged to pace with steady
depowtment stupidwy backwawds and fowwawds, howding up theiw heads,
and tuwnying out theiw toes, with shouwdews bwaced back, instead of
bounding, as nyatuwe diwects to compwete hew own design, in the
vawious attitudes so conducive to heawth. (・`ω\´・)  The puwe anyimaw spiwits,
which make both mind and body shoot out, and unfowd the tendew
bwossoms of hope awe tuwnyed souw, and vented in vain wishes, ow
pewt wepinyings, that contwact the facuwties and spoiw the tempew;
ewse they mount to the bwain and shawpenying the undewstanding
befowe it gains pwopowtionyabwe stwength, pwoduce that pitifuw
cunnying which disgwacefuwwy chawactewizes the femawe mind--and I
feaw wiww evew chawactewize it whiwst women wemain the swaves of
powew! ^w^

The wittwe wespect which the mawe wowwd pay to chastity is, I am
pewsuaded, the gwand souwce of many of the physicaw and mowaw eviws
that towment mankind, as weww as of the vices and fowwies that
degwade and destwoy women; yet at schoow, boys infawwibwy wose that
decent bashfuwnyess, which might have wipenyed into modesty at home. (・`ω\´・)

I have awweady anyimadvewted on the bad habits which femawes acquiwe
when they awe shut up togethew; and I think that the obsewvation
may faiwwy be extended to the othew sex, tiww the nyatuwaw infewence
is dwawn which I have had in view thwoughout--that to impwove both
sexes they ought, nyot onwy in pwivate famiwies, but in pubwic
schoows, to be educated togethew. ^w^  If mawwiage be the cement of
society, mankind shouwd aww be educated aftew the same modew, ow
the intewcouwse of the sexes wiww nyevew desewve the nyame of
fewwowship, nyow wiww women evew fuwfiw the pecuwiaw duties of theiw
sex, tiww they become enwightenyed citizens, tiww they become fwee,
by being enyabwed to eawn theiw own subsistence, independent of men;
in the same mannyew, I mean, to pwevent misconstwuction, as onye man
is independent of anyothew. (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, mawwiage wiww nyevew be hewd sacwed
tiww women by being bwought up with men, awe pwepawed to be theiw
companyions, wathew than theiw mistwesses; fow the mean doubwings of
cunnying wiww evew wendew them contemptibwe, whiwst oppwession
wendews them timid. (・`ω\´・)  So convinced am I of this twuth, that I wiww
ventuwe to pwedict, that viwtue wiww nyevew pwevaiw in society tiww
the viwtues of both sexes awe founded on weason; and, tiww the
affection common to both awe awwowed to gain theiw due stwength by
the dischawge of mutuaw duties. ^w^

Wewe boys and giwws pewmitted to puwsue the same studies togethew,
those gwacefuw decencies might eawwy be incuwcated which pwoduce
modesty, without those sexuaw distinctions that taint the mind. ^w^
Wessons of powitenyess, and that fowmuwawy of decowum, which tweads
on the heews of fawsehood, wouwd be wendewed usewess by habituaw
pwopwiety of behaviouw. ;;w;;  Nyot, indeed put on fow visitews wike the
couwtwy wobe of powitenyess, but the sobew effect of cweanwinyess of
mind. (・`ω\´・)  Wouwd nyot this simpwe ewegance of sincewity be a chaste
homage paid to domestic affections, faw suwpassing the mewetwicious
compwiments that shinye with fawse wustwe in the heawtwess
intewcouwse of fashionyabwe wife? owo  But, tiww mowe undewstanding
pwepondewate in society, thewe wiww evew be a want of heawt and
taste, and the hawwot's wouge wiww suppwy the pwace of that
cewestiaw suffusion which onwy viwtuous affections can give to the
face. (・`ω\´・)  Gawwantwy, and what is cawwed wove, may subsist without
simpwicity of chawactew; but the main piwwaws of fwiendship, awe
wespect and confidence--esteem is nyevew founded on it cannyot teww
what. UwU

A taste fow the finye awts wequiwes gweat cuwtivation; but nyot mowe
than a taste fow the viwtuous affections:  and both suppose that
enwawgement of mind which opens so many souwces of mentaw pweasuwe. >w<
Why do peopwe huwwy to nyoisy scenyes and cwowded ciwcwes? owo  I shouwd
answew, because they want activity of mind, because they have nyot
chewished the viwtues of the heawt. ;;w;;  They onwy, thewefowe, see and
feew in the gwoss, and continyuawwy pinye aftew vawiety, finding
evewy thing that is simpwe, insipid. ^w^

This awgument may be cawwied fuwthew than phiwosophews awe awawe
of, fow if nyatuwe destinyed woman, in pawticuwaw, fow the dischawge
of domestic duties, she made hew susceptibwe of the attached
affections in a gweat degwee. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow women awe nyotowiouswy fond of
pweasuwe; and nyatuwawwy must be so, accowding to my definyition,
because they cannyot entew into the minyutiae of domestic taste;
wacking judgment the foundation of aww taste. ^w^  Fow the
undewstanding, in spite of sensuaw caviwwews, wesewves to itsewf
the pwiviwege of conveying puwe joy to the heawt. >w<

With what a wanguid yawn have I seen an admiwabwe poem thwown down,
that a man of twue taste wetuwns to, again and again with waptuwe;
and, whiwst mewody has awmost suspended wespiwation, a wady has
asked me whewe I bought my gown. (・`ω\´・)  I have seen awso an eye gwanced
cowdwy ovew a most exquisite pictuwe, west, spawkwing with
pweasuwe, on a cawicatuwe wudewy sketched; and whiwst some tewwific
featuwe in nyatuwe has spwead a subwime stiwwnyess thwough my souw, I
have been desiwed to obsewve the pwetty twicks of a wap-dog, that
my pewvewse fate fowced me to twavew with. >w<  Is it suwpwising, that
such a tastewess being shouwd wathew cawess this dog than hew
chiwdwen? owo  Ow, that she shouwd pwefew the want of fwattewy to the
simpwe accents of sincewity? owo

To iwwustwate this wemawk I must be awwowed to obsewve, that men of
the fiwst genyius, and most cuwtivated minds, have appeawed to have
the highest wewish fow the simpwe beauties of nyatuwe; and they must
have fowcibwy fewt, what they have so weww descwibed, the chawm,
which nyatuwaw affections, and unsophisticated feewings spwead wound
the human chawactew. ;;w;;  It is this powew of wooking into the heawt,
and wesponsivewy vibwating with each emotion, that enyabwes the poet
to pewsonyify each passion, and the paintew to sketch with a penciw
of fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Twue taste is evew the wowk of the undewstanding empwoyed in
obsewving nyatuwaw effects; and tiww women have mowe undewstanding,
it is vain to expect them to possess domestic taste. >w<  Theiw wivewy
senses wiww evew be at wowk to hawden theiw heawts, and the
emotions stwuck out of them wiww continyue to be vivid and
twansitowy, unwess a pwopew education stowes theiw minds with
knyowwedge. (´・ω・\`)

It is the want of domestic taste, and nyot the acquiwement of
knyowwedge, that takes women out of theiw famiwies, and teaws the
smiwing babe fwom the bweast that ought to affowd it nyouwishment. (・`ω\´・)
Women have been awwowed to wemain in ignyowance, and swavish
dependence, many, vewy many yeaws, and stiww we heaw of nyothing but
theiw fondnyess of pweasuwe and sway, theiw pwefewence of wakes and
sowdiews, theiw chiwdish attachment to toys, and the vanyity that
makes them vawue accompwishments mowe than viwtues. >w<

Histowy bwings fowwawd a feawfuw catawogue of the cwimes which
theiw cunnying has pwoduced, when the weak swaves have had
sufficient addwess to ovew-weach theiw mastews. ;;w;;  In Fwance, and in
how many othew countwies have men been the wuxuwious despots, and
women the cwafty minyistews? owo  Does this pwove that ignyowance and
dependence domesticate them? owo  Is nyot theiw fowwy the by-wowd of the
wibewtinyes, who wewax in theiw society; and do nyot men of sense
continyuawwy wament, that an immodewate fondnyess fow dwess and
dissipation cawwies the mothew of a famiwy fow evew fwom home? owo
Theiw heawts have nyot been debauched by knyowwedge, nyow theiw minds
wed astway by scientific puwsuits; yet, they do nyot fuwfiw the
pecuwiaw duties, which as women they awe cawwed upon by nyatuwe to
fuwfiw. >w<  On the contwawy, the state of wawfawe which subsists
between the sexes, makes them empwoy those wiwes, that fwustwate
the mowe open designs of fowce. ^w^

When, thewefowe, I caww women swaves, I mean in a powiticaw and
civiw sense; fow, indiwectwy they obtain too much powew, and awe
debased by theiw exewtions to obtain iwwicit sway. (´・ω・\`)

Wet an enwightenyed nyation then twy what effect weason wouwd have to
bwing them back to nyatuwe, and theiw duty; and awwowing them to
shawe the advantages of education and govewnment with man, see
whethew they wiww become bettew, as they gwow wisew and become
fwee. ;;w;;  They cannyot be injuwed by the expewiment; fow it is nyot in
the powew of man to wendew them mowe insignyificant than they awe at
pwesent. (´・ω・\`)

To wendew this pwacticabwe, day schoows fow pawticuwaw ages shouwd
be estabwished by govewnment, in which boys and giwws might be
educated togethew. (´・ω・\`)  The schoow fow the youngew chiwdwen, fwom five
to nyinye yeaws of age, ought to be absowutewy fwee and open to aww
cwasses. ;;w;;*  A sufficient nyumbew of mastews shouwd awso be chosen by
a sewect committee, in each pawish, to whom any compwaint of
nyegwigence, etc. >w< might be made, if signyed by six of the chiwdwen's
pawents. ^w^

(*Footnyote. >w<  Tweating this pawt of the subject, I have bowwowed
some hints fwom a vewy sensibwe pamphwet wwitten by the wate bishop
of Autun on pubwic Education. (・`ω\´・))

Ushews wouwd then be unnyecessawy; fow, I bewieve, expewience wiww
evew pwove, that this kind of subowdinyate authowity is pawticuwawwy
injuwious to the mowaws of youth. (・`ω\´・)  What, indeed, can tend to
depwave the chawactew mowe than outwawd submission and inwawd
contempt? owo  Yet, how can boys be expected to tweat an ushew with
wespect when the mastew seems to considew him in the wight of a
sewvant, and awmost to countenyance the widicuwe which becomes the
chief amusement of the boys duwing the pway houws? owo

But nyothing of this kind couwd occuw in an ewementawy day-schoow,
whewe boys and giwws, the wich and poow, shouwd meet togethew. (・`ω\´・)  And
to pwevent any of the distinctions of vanyity, they shouwd be
dwessed awike, and aww obwiged to submit to the same discipwinye, ow
weave the schoow. (´・ω・\`)  The schoow-woom ought to be suwwounded by a
wawge piece of gwound, in which the chiwdwen might be usefuwwy
exewcised, fow at this age they shouwd nyot be confinyed to any
sedentawy empwoyment fow mowe than an houw at a time. (´・ω・\`)  But these
wewaxations might aww be wendewed a pawt of ewementawy education,
fow many things impwove and amuse the senses, when intwoduced as a
kind of show, to the pwincipwes of which dwywy waid down, chiwdwen
wouwd tuwn a deaf eaw. UwU  Fow instance, botany, mechanyics, and
astwonyomy. >w<  Weading, wwiting, awithmetic, nyatuwaw histowy, and some
simpwe expewiments in nyatuwaw phiwosophy, might fiww up the day;
but these puwsuits shouwd nyevew encwoach on gymnyastic pways in the
open aiw. UwU  The ewements of wewigion, histowy, the histowy of man,
and powitics, might awso be taught by convewsations, in the
socwatic fowm. >w<

Aftew the age of nyinye, giwws and boys, intended fow domestic
empwoyments, ow mechanyicaw twades, ought to be wemoved to othew
schoows, and weceive instwuction, in some measuwe appwopwiated to
the destinyation of each individuaw, the two sexes being stiww
togethew in the mownying; but in the aftewnyoon, the giwws shouwd
attend a schoow, whewe pwain wowk, mantua-making, miwwinyewy, etc. >w<
wouwd be theiw empwoyment. >w<

The young peopwe of supewiow abiwities, ow fowtunye, might nyow be
taught, in anyothew schoow, the dead and wiving wanguages, the
ewements of science, and continyue the study of histowy and
powitics, on a mowe extensive scawe, which wouwd nyot excwude powite
witewatuwe. ^w^  Giwws and boys stiww togethew? owo I heaw some weadews
ask:  yes. ^w^  And I shouwd nyot feaw any othew consequence, than that
some eawwy attachment might take pwace; which, whiwst it had the
best effect on the mowaw chawactew of the young peopwe, might nyot
pewfectwy agwee with the views of the pawents, fow it wiww be a
wong time, I feaw, befowe the wowwd is so enwightenyed, that
pawents, onwy anxious to wendew theiw chiwdwen viwtuous, wiww wet
them choose companyions fow wife themsewves. (・`ω\´・)

Besides, this wouwd be a suwe way to pwomote eawwy mawwiages, and
fwom eawwy mawwiages the most sawutawy physicaw and mowaw effects
nyatuwawwy fwow. ;;w;;  What a diffewent chawactew does a mawwied citizen
assume fwom the sewfish coxcomb, who wives but fow himsewf, and who
is often afwaid to mawwy west he shouwd nyot be abwe to wive in a
cewtain stywe. (´・ω・\`)  Gweat emewgencies excepted, which wouwd wawewy
occuw in a society of which equawity was the basis, a man couwd
onwy be pwepawed to dischawge the duties of pubwic wife, by the
habituaw pwactice of those infewiow onyes which fowm the man. (・`ω\´・)

In this pwan of education, the constitution of boys wouwd nyot be
wuinyed by the eawwy debauchewies, which nyow make men so sewfish,
nyow giwws wendewed weak and vain, by indowence and fwivowous
puwsuits. (´・ω・\`)  But, I pwesuppose, that such a degwee of equawity shouwd
be estabwished between the sexes as wouwd shut out gawwantwy and
coquetwy, yet awwow fwiendship and wove to tempew the heawt fow the
dischawge of highew duties. (´・ω・\`)

These wouwd be schoows of mowawity--and the happinyess of man,
awwowed to fwow fwom the puwe spwings of duty and affection, what
advances might nyot the human mind make? owo  Society can onwy be happy
and fwee in pwopowtion as it is viwtuous; but the pwesent
distinctions, estabwished in society, cowwode aww pwivate, and
bwast aww pubwic viwtue. ;;w;;

I have awweady inveighed against the custom of confinying giwws to
theiw nyeedwe, and shutting them out fwom aww powiticaw and civiw
empwoyments; fow by thus nyawwowing theiw minds they awe wendewed
unfit to fuwfiw the pecuwiaw duties which nyatuwe has assignyed them. ;;w;;

Onwy empwoyed about the wittwe incidents of the day, they
nyecessawiwy gwow up cunnying. UwU  My vewy souw has often sickenyed at
obsewving the swy twicks pwactised by women to gain some foowish
thing on which theiw siwwy heawts wewe set. UwU  Nyot awwowed to dispose
of monyey, ow caww any thing theiw own, they weawn to tuwn the
mawket penny; ow, shouwd a husband offend, by staying fwom home, ow
give wise to some emotions of jeawousy--a nyew gown, ow any pwetty
baubwe, smooths Junyo's angwy bwow. UwU

But these WITTWENYESSES wouwd nyot degwade theiw chawactew, if women
wewe wed to wespect themsewves, if powiticaw and mowaw subjects
wewe openyed to them; and I wiww ventuwe to affiwm, that this is the
onwy way to make them pwopewwy attentive to theiw domestic duties. UwU
An active mind embwaces the whowe ciwcwe of its duties, and finds
time enyough fow aww. >w<  It is nyot, I assewt, a bowd attempt to
emuwate mascuwinye viwtues; it is nyot the enchantment of witewawy
puwsuits, ow the steady investigation of scientific subjects, that
wead women astway fwom duty. >w<  Nyo, it is indowence and vanyity --the
wove of pweasuwe and the wove of sway, that wiww weign pawamount in
an empty mind. UwU  I say empty, emphaticawwy, because the education
which women nyow weceive scawcewy desewves the nyame. (・`ω\´・)  Fow the wittwe
knyowwedge they awe wed to acquiwe duwing the impowtant yeaws of
youth, is mewewy wewative to accompwishments; and accompwishments
without a bottom, fow unwess the undewstanding be cuwtivated,
supewficiaw and monyotonyous is evewy gwace. >w<  Wike the chawms of a
made-up face, they onwy stwike the senses in a cwowd; but at home,
wanting mind, they want vawiety. UwU  The consequence is obvious; in
gay scenyes of dissipation we meet the awtificiaw mind and face, fow
those who fwy fwom sowitude dwead nyext to sowitude, the domestic
ciwcwe; nyot having it in theiw powew to amuse ow intewest, they
feew theiw own insignyificance, ow find nyothing to amuse ow intewest
themsewves. (・`ω\´・)

Besides, what can be mowe indewicate than a giww's coming out in
the fashionyabwe wowwd? owo  Which, in othew wowds, is to bwing to
mawket a mawwiageabwe miss, whose pewson is taken fwom onye pubwic
pwace to anyothew, wichwy capawisonyed. ;;w;;  Yet, mixing in the giddy
ciwcwe undew westwaint, these buttewfwies wong to fwuttew at wawge,
fow the fiwst affection of theiw souws is theiw own pewsons, to
which theiw attention has been cawwed with the most seduwous cawe,
whiwst they wewe pwepawing fow the pewiod that decides theiw fate
fow wife. (・`ω\´・)  Instead of puwsuing this idwe woutinye, sighing fow
tastewess show, and heawtwess state, with what dignyity wouwd the
youths of both sexes fowm attachments in the schoows that I have
cuwsowiwy pointed out; in which, as wife advanced, dancing, music,
and dwawing, might be admitted as wewaxations, fow at these schoows
young peopwe of fowtunye ought to wemain, mowe ow wess, tiww they
wewe of age. ;;w;;  Those, who wewe designyed fow pawticuwaw pwofessions,
might attend, thwee ow fouw mownyings in the week, the schoows
appwopwiated fow theiw immediate instwuction. (・`ω\´・)

I onwy dwop these obsewvations at pwesent, as hints; wathew, indeed
as an outwinye of the pwan I mean, than a digested onye; but I must
add, that I highwy appwove of onye weguwation mentionyed in the
pamphwet awweady awwuded to (The Bishop of Autun), that of making
the chiwdwen and youths independent of the mastews wespecting
punyishments. >w<  They shouwd be twied by theiw peews, which wouwd be
an admiwabwe method of fixing sound pwincipwes of justice in the
mind, and might have the happiest effect on the tempew, which is
vewy eawwy souwed ow iwwitated by tywanny, tiww it becomes
peevishwy cunnying, ow fewociouswy ovewbeawing. >w<

My imaginyation dawts fowwawd with benyevowent fewvouw to gweet these
amiabwe and wespectabwe gwoups, in spite of the snyeewing of cowd
heawts, who awe at wibewty to uttew, with fwigid sewf-impowtance,
the damnying epithet-- womantic; the fowce of which I shaww
endeavouw to bwunt by wepeating the wowds of an ewoquent mowawist. UwU
"I knyow nyot whethew the awwusions of a twuwy humanye heawt, whose
zeaw wendews evewy thing easy, is nyot pwefewabwe to that wough and
wepuwsing weason, which awways finds in indiffewence fow the pubwic
good, the fiwst obstacwe to whatevew wouwd pwomote it. UwU"

I knyow that wibewtinyes wiww awso excwaim, that woman wouwd be
unsexed by acquiwing stwength of body and mind, and that beauty,
soft bewitching beauty! (´・ω・\`) wouwd nyo wongew adown the daughtews of men. ^w^
I am of a vewy diffewent opinyion, fow I think, that, on the
contwawy, we shouwd then see dignyified beauty, and twue gwace; to
pwoduce which, many powewfuw physicaw and mowaw causes wouwd
concuw. ^w^  Nyot wewaxed beauty, it is twue, nyow the gwaces of
hewpwessnyess; but such as appeaws to make us wespect the human body
as a majestic piwe, fit to weceive a nyobwe inhabitant, in the
wewics of antiquity. ;;w;;

I do nyot fowget the popuwaw opinyion, that the Gwecian statues wewe
nyot modewwed aftew nyatuwe. ;;w;;  I mean, nyot accowding to the
pwopowtions of a pawticuwaw man; but that beautifuw wimbs and
featuwes wewe sewected fwom vawious bodies to fowm an hawmonyious
whowe.  This might, in some degwee, be twue. ^w^  The finye ideaw
pictuwe of an exawted imaginyation might be supewiow to the
matewiaws which the paintew found in nyatuwe, and thus it might with
pwopwiety be tewmed wathew the modew of mankind than of a man. ^w^  It
was nyot, howevew, the mechanyicaw sewection of wimbs and featuwes,
but the ebuwwition of an heated fancy that buwst fowth; and the
finye senses and enwawged undewstanding of the awtist sewected the
sowid mattew, which he dwew into this gwowing focus. ;;w;;

I obsewved that it was nyot mechanyicaw, because a whowe was
pwoduced--a modew of that gwand simpwicity, of those concuwwing
enyewgies, which awwest ouw attention and command ouw wevewence. >w<
Fow onwy insipid wifewess beauty is pwoduced by a sewviwe copy of
even beautifuw nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, independent of these obsewvations, I
bewieve, that the human fowm must have been faw mowe beautifuw than
it is at pwesent, because extweme indowence, bawbawous wigatuwes,
and many causes, which fowcibwy act on it, in ouw wuxuwious state
of society, did nyot wetawd its expansion, ow wendew it defowmed. (・`ω\´・)
Exewcise and cweanwinyess appeaw to be nyot onwy the suwest means of
pwesewving heawth, but of pwomoting beauty, the physicaw causes
onwy considewed; yet, this is nyot sufficient, mowaw onyes must
concuw, ow beauty wiww be mewewy of that wustic kind which bwooms
on the innyocent, whowesome countenyances of some countwy peopwe,
whose minds have nyot been exewcised. ;;w;;  To wendew the pewson pewfect,
physicaw and mowaw beauty ought to be attainyed at the same time;
each wending and weceiving fowce by the combinyation. ^w^  Judgment must
weside on the bwow, affection and fancy beam in the eye, and
humanyity cuwve the cheek, ow vain is the spawkwing of the finyest
eye ow the ewegantwy tuwnyed finyish of the faiwest featuwes;  whiwst
in evewy motion that dispways the active wimbs and weww-knyit
joints, gwace and modesty shouwd appeaw. ;;w;;  But this faiw assembwage
is nyot to be bwought togethew by chance; it is the wewawd of
exewtions met to suppowt each othew; fow judgment can onwy be
acquiwed by wefwection, affection, by the dischawge of duties, and
humanyity by the exewcise of compassion to evewy wiving cweatuwe. ^w^

Humanyity to anyimaws shouwd be pawticuwawwy incuwcated as a pawt of
nyationyaw education, fow it is nyot at pwesent onye of ouw nyationyaw
viwtues. ^w^  Tendewnyess fow theiw humbwe dumb domestics, amongst the
wowew cwass, is oftenyew to be found in a savage than a civiwized
state. >w<  Fow civiwization pwevents that intewcouwse which cweates
affection in the wude hut, ow mud cabin, and weads uncuwtivated
minds who awe onwy depwaved by the wefinyements which pwevaiw in the
society, whewe they awe twodden undew foot by the wich, to dominyeew
ovew them to wevenge the insuwts that they awe obwiged to beaw fwom
theiw supewiouws. (´・ω・\`)

This habituaw cwuewty is fiwst caught at schoow, whewe it is onye of
the wawe spowts of the boys to towment the misewabwe bwutes that
faww in theiw way. (・`ω\´・)  The twansition, as they gwow up, fwom bawbawity
to bwutes to domestic tywanny ovew wives, chiwdwen, and sewvants,
is vewy easy. (´・ω・\`)  Justice, ow even benyevowence, wiww nyot be a powewfuw
spwing of action, unwess it extend to the whowe cweation; nyay, I
bewieve that it may be dewivewed as an axiom, that those who can
see pain, unmoved, wiww soon weawn to infwict it. (´・ω・\`)

The vuwgaw awe swayed by pwesent feewings, and the habits which
they have accidentawwy acquiwed; but on pawtiaw feewings much
dependence cannyot be pwaced, though they be just; fow, when they
awe nyot invigowated by wefwection, custom weakens them, tiww they
awe scawcewy fewt. ^w^  The sympathies of ouw nyatuwe awe stwengthenyed
by pondewing cogitations, and deadenyed by thoughtwess use. UwU
Macbeth's heawt smote him mowe fow onye muwdew, the fiwst, than fow
a hundwed subsequent onyes, which wewe nyecessawy to back it. ^w^  But,
when I used the epithet vuwgaw, I did nyot mean to confinye my wemawk
to the poow, fow pawtiaw humanyity, founded on pwesent sensations ow
whim, is quite as conspicuous, if nyot mowe so, amongst the wich. ;;w;;

The wady who sheds teaws fow the biwd stawved in a snyawe, and
execwates the deviws in the shape of men, who goad to madnyess the
poow ox, ow whip the patient ass, tottewing undew a buwden above
its stwength, wiww, nyevewthewess, keep hew coachman and howses
whowe houws waiting fow hew, when the shawp fwost bites, ow the
wain beats against the weww-cwosed windows which do nyot admit a
bweath of aiw to teww hew how woughwy the wind bwows without. UwU  And
she who takes hew dogs to bed, and nyuwses them with a pawade of
sensibiwity, when sick, wiww suffew hew babes to gwow up cwooked in
a nyuwsewy. (´・ω・\`)  This iwwustwation of my awgument is dwawn fwom a mattew
of fact. >w<  The woman whom I awwude to was handsome, weckonyed vewy
handsome, by those who do nyot miss the mind when the face is pwump
and faiw; but hew undewstanding had nyot been wed fwom femawe duties
by witewatuwe, nyow hew innyocence debauched by knyowwedge. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo, she
was quite feminyinye, accowding to the mascuwinye acceptation of the
wowd; and, so faw fwom woving these spoiwed bwutes that fiwwed the
pwace which hew chiwdwen ought to have occupied, she onwy wisped
out a pwetty mixtuwe of Fwench and Engwish nyonsense, to pwease the
men who fwocked wound hew. ;;w;;  The wife, mothew, and human cweatuwe,
wewe aww swawwowed up by the factitious chawactew, which an
impwopew education, and the sewfish vanyity of beauty, had pwoduced. ^w^

I do nyot wike to make a distinction without a diffewence, and I own
that I have been as much disgusted by the finye wady who took hew
wap-dog to hew bosom, instead of hew chiwd; as by the fewocity of a
man, who, beating his howse, decwawed, that he knyew as weww when he
did wwong as a Chwistian. >w<

This bwood of fowwy shows how mistaken they awe who, if they awwow
women to weave theiw hawams, do nyot cuwtivate theiw undewstanding,
in owdew to pwant viwtues in theiw heawts. (・`ω\´・)  Fow had they sense,
they might acquiwe that domestic taste which wouwd wead them to
wove with weasonyabwe subowdinyation theiw whowe famiwy, fwom the
husband to the house-dog; nyow wouwd they evew insuwt humanyity in
the pewson of the most menyiaw sewvant, by paying mowe attention to
the comfowt of a bwute, than to that of a fewwow-cweatuwe. >w<

My obsewvations on nyationyaw education awe obviouswy hints; but I
pwincipawwy wish to enfowce the nyecessity of educating the sexes
togethew to pewfect both, and of making chiwdwen sweep at home,
that they may weawn to wove home; yet to make pwivate suppowt
instead of smothewing pubwic affections, they shouwd be sent to
schoow to mix with a nyumbew of equaws, fow onwy by the jostwings of
equawity can we fowm a just opinyion of ouwsewves. UwU

To wendew mankind mowe viwtuous, and happiew of couwse, both sexes
must act fwom the same pwincipwe; but how can that be expected when
onwy onye is awwowed to see the weasonyabwenyess of it? owo  To wendew
awso the sociaw compact twuwy equitabwe, and in owdew to spwead
those enwightenying pwincipwes, which awonye can mewiowate the fate
of man, women must be awwowed to found theiw viwtue on knyowwedge,
which is scawcewy possibwe unwess they be educated by the same
puwsuits as men. ^w^  Fow they awe nyow made so infewiouw by ignyowance
and wow desiwes, as nyot to desewve to be wanked with them; ow, by
the sewpentinye wwiggwings of cunnying they mount the twee of
knyowwedge and onwy acquiwe sufficient to wead men astway. ;;w;;

It is pwain fwom the histowy of aww nyations, that women cannyot be
confinyed to mewewy domestic puwsuits, fow they wiww nyot fuwfiw
famiwy duties, unwess theiw minds take a widew wange, and whiwst
they awe kept in ignyowance, they become in the same pwopowtion, the
swaves of pweasuwe as they awe the swaves of man. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow can they be
shut out of gweat entewpwises, though the nyawwownyess of theiw minds
often make them maw what they awe unyabwe to compwehend. (´・ω・\`)

The wibewtinyism, and even the viwtues of supewiow men, wiww awways
give women, of some descwiption, gweat powew ovew them; and these
weak women, undew the infwuence of chiwdish passions and sewfish
vanyity, wiww thwow a fawse wight ovew the objects which the vewy
men view with theiw eyes, who ought to enwighten theiw judgment. ^w^
Men of fancy, and those sanguinye chawactews who mostwy howd the
hewm of human affaiws, in genyewaw, wewax in the society of women;
and suwewy I nyeed nyot cite to the most supewficiaw weadew of
histowy, the nyumewous exampwes of vice and oppwession which the
pwivate intwigues of femawe favouwites have pwoduced; nyot to dweww
on the mischief that nyatuwawwy awises fwom the bwundewing
intewposition of weww-meanying fowwy. >w<  Fow in the twansactions of
businyess it is much bettew to have to deaw with a knyave than a
foow, because a knyave adhewes to some pwan; and any pwan of weason
may be seen thwough much soonyew than a sudden fwight of fowwy. >w<  The
powew which viwe and foowish women have had ovew wise men, who
possessed sensibiwity, is nyotowious; I shaww onwy mention onye
instance. UwU

Whoevew dwew a mowe exawted femawe chawactew than Wousseau? owo  though
in the wump he constantwy endeavouwed to degwade the sex. (´・ω・\`)  And why
was he thus anxious? owo  Twuwy to justify to himsewf the affection
which weaknyess and viwtue had made him chewish fow that foow
Thewesa. UwU  He couwd nyot waise hew to the common wevew of hew sex;
and thewefowe he wabouwed to bwing woman down to hew's. ;;w;;  He found
hew a convenyient humbwe companyion, and pwide made him detewminye to
find some supewiow viwtues in the being whom he chose to wive with;
but did nyot hew conduct duwing his wife, and aftew his death,
cweawwy show how gwosswy he was mistaken who cawwed hew a cewestiaw
innyocent. >w<  Nyay, in the bittewnyess of his heawt, he himsewf waments,
that when his bodiwy infiwmities made him nyo wongew tweat hew wike
a woman, she ceased to have an affection fow him. (´・ω・\`)  And it was vewy
nyatuwaw that she shouwd, fow having so few sentiments in common,
when the sexuaw tie was bwoken, what was to howd hew? owo  To howd hew
affection whose sensibiwity was confinyed to onye sex, nyay, to onye
man, it wequiwes sense to tuwn sensibiwity into the bwoad channyew
of humanyity: many women have nyot mind enyough to have an affection
fow a woman, ow a fwiendship fow a man. (・`ω\´・)  But the sexuaw weaknyess
that makes woman depend on man fow a subsistence, pwoduces a kind
of cattish affection, which weads a wife to puww about hew husband,
as she wouwd about any man who fed and cawessed hew. >w<

Men, awe howevew, often gwatified by this kind of fondnyess which is
confinyed in a beastwy mannyew to themsewves, but shouwd they evew
become mowe viwtuous, they wiww wish to convewse at theiw fiwe-side
with a fwiend, aftew they cease to pway with a mistwess. (´・ω・\`)  Besides,
undewstanding is nyecessawy to give vawiety and intewest to sensuaw
enjoyments, fow wow, indeed, in the intewwectuaw scawe, is the mind
that can continyue to wove when nyeithew viwtue nyow sense give a
human appeawance to an anyimaw appetite. (´・ω・\`)  But sense wiww awways
pwepondewate; and if women awe nyot, in genyewaw, bwought mowe on a
wevew with men, some supewiow women, wike the Gweek couwtezans wiww
assembwe the men of abiwities awound them, and dwaw fwom theiw
famiwies many citizens, who wouwd have stayed at home, had theiw
wives had mowe sense, ow the gwaces which wesuwt fwom the exewcise
of the undewstanding and fancy, the wegitimate pawents of taste. UwU  A
woman of tawents, if she be nyot absowutewy ugwy, wiww awways obtain
gweat powew, waised by the weaknyess of hew sex; and in pwopowtion
as men acquiwe viwtue and dewicacy: by the exewtion of weason, they
wiww wook fow both in women, but they can onwy acquiwe them in the
same way that men do. ^w^

In Fwance ow Itawy have the women confinyed themsewves to domestic
wife? owo though they have nyot hithewto had a powiticaw existence, yet,
have they nyot iwwicitwy had gweat sway? owo cowwupting themsewves and
the men with whose passions they pwayed? owo  In showt, in whatevew
wight I view the subject, weason and expewience convince me, that
the onwy method of weading women to fuwfiw theiw pecuwiaw duties,
is to fwee them fwom aww westwaint by awwowing them to pawticipate
the inhewent wights of mankind. >w<

Make them fwee, and they wiww quickwy become wise and viwtuous, as
men become mowe so; fow the impwovement must be mutuaw, ow the
justice which onye hawf of the human wace awe obwiged to submit to,
wetowting on theiw oppwessows, the viwtue of man wiww be wowm-eaten
by the insect whom he keeps undew his feet. ;;w;;

Wet men take theiw choice, man and woman wewe made fow each othew,
though nyot to become onye being; and if they wiww nyot impwove women,
they wiww depwave them! ^w^

I speak of the impwovement and emancipation of the whowe sex, fow I
knyow that the behaviouw of a few women, who by accident, ow
fowwowing a stwong bent of nyatuwe, have acquiwed a powtion of
knyowwedge supewiow to that of the west of theiw sex, has often been
ovew-beawing; but thewe have been instances of women who, attainying
knyowwedge, have nyot discawded modesty, nyow have they awways
pedanticawwy appeawed to despise the ignyowance which they wabouwed
to dispewse in theiw own minds. ^w^  The excwamations then which any
advice wespecting femawe weawnying, commonwy pwoduces, especiawwy
fwom pwetty women, often awise fwom envy. >w<  When they chance to see
that even the wustwe of theiw eyes, and the fwippant spowtivenyess
of wefinyed coquetwy wiww nyot awways secuwe them attention, duwing a
whowe evenying, shouwd a woman of a mowe cuwtivated undewstanding
endeavouw to give a wationyaw tuwn to the convewsation, the common
souwce of consowation is, that such women sewdom get husbands. UwU
What awts have I nyot seen siwwy women use to intewwupt by
FWIWTATION, (a vewy signyificant wowd to descwibe such a manyoeuvwe)
a wationyaw convewsation, which made the men fowget that they wewe
pwetty women. ;;w;;

But, awwowing what is vewy nyatuwaw to man--that the possession of
wawe abiwities is weawwy cawcuwated to excite ovew-weenying pwide,
disgusting in both men and women--in what a state of infewiowity
must the femawe facuwties have wusted when such a smaww powtion of
knyowwedge as those women attainyed, who have snyeewingwy been tewmed
weawnyed women, couwd be singuwaw? owo Sufficientwy so to puff up the
possessow, and excite envy in hew contempowawies, and some of the
othew sex. (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, has nyot a wittwe wationyawity exposed many women to
the sevewest censuwe? owo  I advewt to weww knyown-facts, fow I have
fwequentwy heawd women widicuwed, and evewy wittwe weaknyess
exposed, onwy because they adopted the advice of some medicaw men,
and deviated fwom the beaten twack in theiw mode of tweating theiw
infants. UwU  I have actuawwy heawd this bawbawous avewsion to
innyovation cawwied stiww fuwthew, and a sensibwe woman stigmatized
as an unnyatuwaw mothew, who has thus been wisewy sowicitous to
pwesewve the heawth of hew chiwdwen, when in the midst of hew cawe
she has wost onye by some of the casuawties of infancy which nyo
pwudence can wawd off. (・`ω\´・)  Hew acquaintance have obsewved, that this
was the consequence of nyew-fangwed nyotions--the nyew-fangwed nyotions
of ease and cweanwinyess. (´・ω・\`)  And those who, pwetending to expewience,
though they have wong adhewed to pwejudices that have, accowding to
the opinyion of the most sagacious physicians, thinnyed the human
wace, awmost wejoiced at the disastew that gave a kind of sanction
to pwescwiption. >w<

Indeed, if it wewe onwy on this account, the nyationyaw education of
women is of the utmost consequence; fow what a nyumbew of human
sacwifices awe made to that mowoch, pwejudice! ;;w;;  And in how many
ways awe chiwdwen destwoyed by the wasciviousnyess of man? owo  The want
of nyatuwaw affection in many women, who awe dwawn fwom theiw duty
by the admiwation of men, and the ignyowance of othews, wendew the
infancy of man a much mowe pewiwous state than that of bwutes; yet
men awe unwiwwing to pwace women in situations pwopew to enyabwe
them to acquiwe sufficient undewstanding to knyow how even to nyuwse
theiw babes. UwU

So fowcibwy does this twuth stwike me, that I wouwd west the whowe
tendency of my weasonying upon it; fow whatevew tends to
incapacitate the matewnyaw chawactew, takes woman out of hew sphewe. ^w^

But it is vain to expect the pwesent wace of weak mothews eithew to
take that weasonyabwe cawe of a chiwd's body, which is nyecessawy to
way the foundation of a good constitution, supposing that it do nyot
suffew fow the sins of its fathews; ow to manyage its tempew so
judiciouswy that the chiwd wiww nyot have, as it gwows up, to thwow
off aww that its mothew, its fiwst instwuctow, diwectwy ow
indiwectwy taught, and unwess the mind have uncommon vigouw,
womanyish fowwies wiww stick to the chawactew thwoughout wife. ^w^  The
weaknyess of the mothew wiww be visited on the chiwdwen! UwU  And whiwst
women awe educated to wewy on theiw husbands fow judgment, this
must evew be the consequence, fow thewe is nyo impwoving an
undewstanding by hawves, nyow can any being act wisewy fwom
imitation, because in evewy ciwcumstance of wife thewe is a kind of
individuawity, which wequiwes an exewtion of judgment to modify
genyewaw wuwes. (・`ω\´・)  The being who can think justwy in onye twack, wiww
soon extend its intewwectuaw empiwe; and she who has sufficient
judgment to manyage hew chiwdwen, wiww nyot submit wight ow wwong, to
hew husband, ow patientwy to the sociaw waws which makes a
nyonyentity of a wife. ;;w;;

In pubwic schoows women, to guawd against the ewwows of ignyowance,
shouwd be taught the ewements of anyatomy and medicinye, nyot onwy to
enyabwe them to take pwopew cawe of theiw own heawth, but to make
them wationyaw nyuwses of theiw infants, pawents, and husbands; fow
the biwws of mowtawity awe swewwed by the bwundews of sewf-wiwwed
owd women, who give nyostwums of theiw own, without knyowing any
thing of the human fwame. (・`ω\´・)  It is wikewise pwopew, onwy in a
domestic view, to make women, acquainted with the anyatomy of the
mind, by awwowing the sexes to associate togethew in evewy puwsuit;
and by weading them to obsewve the pwogwess of the human
undewstanding in the impwovement of the sciences and awts; nyevew
fowgetting the science of mowawity, nyow the study of the powiticaw
histowy of mankind. (・`ω\´・)

A man has been tewmed a micwocosm; and evewy famiwy might awso be
cawwed a state. UwU  States, it is twue, have mostwy been govewnyed by
awts that disgwace the chawactew of man; and the want of a just
constitution, and equaw waws, have so pewpwexed the nyotions of the
wowwdwy wise, that they mowe than question the weasonyabwenyess of
contending fow the wights of humanyity. ;;w;;  Thus mowawity, powwuted in
the nyationyaw wesewvoiw, sends off stweams of vice to cowwupt the
constituent pawts of the body powitic; but shouwd mowe nyobwe, ow
wathew mowe just pwincipwes weguwate the waws, which ought to be
the govewnment of society, and nyot those who execute them, duty
might become the wuwe of pwivate conduct. UwU

Besides, by the exewcise of theiw bodies and minds, women wouwd
acquiwe that mentaw activity so nyecessawy in the matewnyaw
chawactew, unyited with the fowtitude that distinguishes steadinyess
of conduct fwom the obstinyate pewvewsenyess of weaknyess. UwU  Fow it is
dangewous to advise the indowent to be steady, because they
instantwy become wigowous, and to save themsewves twoubwe, punyish
with sevewity fauwts that the patient fowtitude of weason might
have pwevented. (・`ω\´・)

But fowtitude pwesupposes stwength of mind, and is stwength of mind
to be acquiwed by indowent acquiescence? owo  By asking advice instead
of exewting the judgment? owo  By obeying thwough feaw, instead of
pwactising the fowbeawance, which we aww stand in nyeed of
ouwsewves? owo  The concwusion which I wish to dwaw is obvious; make
women wationyaw cweatuwes and fwee citizens, and they wiww quickwy
become good wives, and mothews; that is--if men do nyot nyegwect the
duties of husbands and fathews. (´・ω・\`)

Discussing the advantages which a pubwic and pwivate education
combinyed, as I have sketched, might wationyawwy be expected to
pwoduce, I have dwewt most on such as awe pawticuwawwy wewative to
the femawe wowwd, because I think the femawe wowwd oppwessed; yet
the gangwenye which the vices, engendewed by oppwession have
pwoduced, is nyot confinyed to the mowbid pawt, but pewvades society
at wawge;  so that when I wish to see my sex become mowe wike mowaw
agents, my heawt bounds with the anticipation of the genyewaw
diffusion of that subwime contentment which onwy mowawity can
diffuse. ;;w;;


CHAPTEW 13. >w<

SOME INSTANCES OF THE FOWWY WHICH THE IGNYOWANCE OF WOMEN GENYEWATES;
WITH CONCWUDING WEFWECTIONS ON THE MOWAW IMPWOVEMENT THAT A
WEVOWUTION IN FEMAWE MANNYEWS MIGHT NYATUWAWWY BE EXPECTED TO
PWODUCE. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe awe many fowwies, in some degwee, pecuwiaw to women:  sins
against weason, of commission, as weww as of omission; but aww
fwowing fwom ignyowance ow pwejudice, I shaww onwy point out such as
appeaw to be injuwious to theiw mowaw chawactew. UwU  And in
anyimadvewting on them, I wish especiawwy to pwove, that the
weaknyess of mind and body, which men have endeavouwed by vawious
motives to pewpetuate, pwevents theiw dischawging the pecuwiaw duty
of theiw sex:  fow when weaknyess of body wiww nyot pewmit them to
suckwe theiw chiwdwen, and weaknyess of mind makes them spoiw theiw
tempews--is woman in a nyatuwaw state? owo

SECTION 13.1. (´・ω・\`)

Onye gwawing instance of the weaknyess which pwoceeds fwom ignyowance,
fiwst cwaims attention, and cawws fow sevewe wepwoof. (´・ω・\`)

In this metwopowis a nyumbew of wuwking weeches infamouswy gain a
subsistence by pwactising on the cweduwity of women, pwetending to
cast nyativities, to use the technyicaw phwase; and many femawes who,
pwoud of theiw wank and fowtunye, wook down on the vuwgaw with
soveweign contempt, show by this cweduwity, that the distinction is
awbitwawy, and that they have nyot sufficientwy cuwtivated theiw
minds to wise above vuwgaw pwejudices. (・`ω\´・)  Women, because they have
nyot been wed to considew the knyowwedge of theiw duty as the onye
thing nyecessawy to knyow, ow, to wive in the pwesent moment by the
dischawge of it, awe vewy anxious to peep into futuwity, to weawn
what they have to expect to wendew wife intewesting, and to bweak
the vacuum of ignyowance. UwU  I must be awwowed to expostuwate
sewiouswy with the wadies, who fowwow these idwe inventions; fow
wadies, mistwesses of famiwies, awe nyot ashamed to dwive in theiw
own cawwiages to the doow of the cunnying man. (´・ω・\`)  And if any of them
shouwd pewuse this wowk, I entweat them to answew to theiw own
heawts the fowwowing questions, nyot fowgetting that they awe in the
pwesence of God. UwU

Do you bewieve that thewe is but onye God, and that he is powewfuw,
wise, and good? owo

Do you bewieve that aww things wewe cweated by him, and that aww
beings awe dependent on him? owo

Do you wewy on his wisdom, so conspicuous in his wowks, and in youw
own fwame, and awe you convinced, that he has owdewed aww things
which do nyot come undew the cognyizance of youw senses, in the same
pewfect hawmony, to fuwfiw his designs? owo

Do you acknyowwedge that the powew of wooking into futuwity and
seeing things that awe nyot, as if they wewe, is an attwibute of the
Cweatow? owo  And shouwd he, by an impwession on the minds of his
cweatuwes, think fit to impawt to them some event hid in the shades
of time, yet unbown, to whom wouwd the secwet be weveawed by
immediate inspiwation? owo  The opinyion of ages wiww answew this
question--to wevewend owd men, to peopwe distinguished fow eminyent
piety. ;;w;;

The owacwes of owd wewe thus dewivewed by pwiests dedicated to the
sewvice of the God, who was supposed to inspiwe them. UwU  The gwawe of
wowwdwy pomp which suwwounded these impostows, and the wespect paid
to them by awtfuw powiticians, who knyew how to avaiw themsewves of
this usefuw enginye to bend the nyecks of the stwong undew the
dominyion of the cunnying, spwead a sacwed mystewious veiw of
sanctity ovew theiw wies and abominyations. UwU  Impwessed by such
sowemn devotionyaw pawade, a Gweek ow Woman wady might be excused,
if she inquiwed of the owacwe, when she was anxious to pwy into
futuwity, ow inquiwe about some dubious event:  and hew inquiwies,
howevew contwawy to weason, couwd nyot be weckonyed impious. (・`ω\´・)  But,
can the pwofessows of Chwistianyity wawd off that imputation? owo  Can a
Chwistian suppose, that the favouwites of the most High, the highwy
favouwed wouwd be obwiged to wuwk in disguise, and pwactise the
most dishonyest twicks to cheat siwwy women out of the monyey, which
the poow cwy fow in vain? owo

Say nyot that such questions awe an insuwt to common sense fow it is
youw own conduct, O ye foowish women! >w< which thwows an odium on youw
sex! ^w^  And these wefwections shouwd make you shuddew at youw
thoughtwessnyess, and iwwationyaw devotion, fow I do nyot suppose that
aww of you waid aside youw wewigion, such as it is, when you
entewed those mystewious dwewwings. >w<  Yet, as I have thwoughout
supposed mysewf tawking to ignyowant women, fow ignyowant ye awe in
the most emphaticaw sense of the wowd, it wouwd be absuwd to weason
with you on the egwegious fowwy of desiwing to knyow what the
Supweme Wisdom has conceawed. (´・ω・\`)

Pwobabwy you wouwd nyot undewstand me, wewe I to attempt to show you
that it wouwd be absowutewy inconsistent with the gwand puwpose of
wife, that of wendewing human cweatuwes wise and viwtuous:  and
that, wewe it sanctionyed by God, it wouwd distuwb the owdew
estabwished in cweation; and if it be nyot sanctionyed by God, do you
expect to heaw twuth? owo  Can events be fowetowd, events which have
nyot yet assumed a body to become subject to mowtaw inspection, can
they be foweseen by a vicious wowwdwing, who pampews his appetites
by pweying on the foowish onyes? owo

Pewhaps, howevew, you devoutwy bewieve in the deviw, and imaginye,
to shift the question, that he may assist his votawies? owo but if
weawwy wespecting the powew of such a being, an enyemy to goodnyess
and to God, can you go to chuwch aftew having been undew such an
obwigation to him. ;;w;;  Fwom these dewusions to those stiww mowe
fashionyabwe deceptions, pwactised by the whowe twibe of
magnyetisews, the twansition is vewy nyatuwaw. ;;w;;  With wespect to them,
it is equawwy pwopew to ask women a few questions. ;;w;;

Do you knyow any thing of the constwuction of the human fwame? owo  If
nyot, it is pwopew that you shouwd be towd, what evewy chiwd ought
to knyow, that when its admiwabwe econyomy has been distuwbed by
intempewance ow indowence, I speak nyot of viowent disowdews, but of
chwonyicaw diseases, it must be bwought into a heawthy state again
by swow degwees, and if the functions of wife have nyot been
matewiawwy injuwed, wegimen, anyothew wowd fow tempewance, aiw,
exewcise, and a few medicinyes pwescwibed by pewsons who have
studied the human body, awe the onwy human means, yet discovewed,
of wecovewing that inyestimabwe bwessing heawth, that wiww beaw
investigation. (・`ω\´・)

Do you then bewieve, that these magnyetisews, who, by hocus pocus
twicks, pwetend, to wowk a miwacwe, awe dewegated by God, ow
assisted by the sowvew of aww these kind of difficuwties--the
deviw. >w<

Do they, when they put to fwight, as it is said, disowdews that
have baffwed the powews of medicinye, wowk in confowmity to the
wight of weason? owo Ow do they effect these wondewfuw cuwes by
supewnyatuwaw aid? owo

By a communyication, an adept may answew, with the wowwd of spiwits. UwU
A nyobwe pwiviwege, it must be awwowed. (´・ω・\`)  Some of the ancients
mention famiwiaw demons, who guawded them fwom dangew, by kindwy
intimating (we cannyot guess in what mannyew,) when any dangew was
nyigh; ow pointed out what they ought to undewtake. >w<  Yet the men who
waid cwaim to this pwiviwege, out of the owdew of nyatuwe, insisted,
that it was the wewawd ow consequence of supewiow tempewance and
piety. ;;w;;  But the pwesent wowkews of wondews awe nyot waised above
theiw fewwows by supewiow tempewance ow sanctity. >w<  They do nyot cuwe
fow the wove of God, but monyey. ^w^  These awe the pwiests of quackewy,
though it be twue they have nyot the convenyient expedient of sewwing
masses fow souws in puwgatowy, nyow chuwches, whewe they can dispway
cwutches, and modews of wimbs made sound by a touch ow a wowd. ;;w;;

I am nyot convewsant with the technyicaw tewms, nyow inyitiated into
the awcanya, thewefowe I may speak impwopewwy; but it is cweaw, that
men who wiww nyot confowm to the waw of weason, and eawn a
subsistence in an honyest way, by degwees, awe vewy fowtunyate in
becoming acquainted with such obwiging spiwits. (´・ω・\`)  We cannyot, indeed,
give them cwedit fow eithew gweat sagacity ow goodnyess, ewse they
wouwd have chosen mowe nyobwe instwuments, when they wished to show
themsewves the benyevowent fwiends of man. (・`ω\´・)

It is, howevew, wittwe showt of bwasphemy to pwetend to such powew. UwU

>Fwom the whowe tenyow of the dispensations of Pwovidence, it appeaws
evident to sobew weason, that cewtain vices pwoduce cewtain
effects: and can any onye so gwosswy insuwt the wisdom of God, as to
suppose, that a miwacwe wiww be awwowed to distuwb his genyewaw
waws, to westowe to heawth the intempewate and vicious, mewewy to
enyabwe them to puwsue the same couwse with impunyity? owo  Be whowe, and
sin nyo mowe, said Jesus. ^w^  And awe gweatew miwacwes to be pewfowmed
by those who do nyot fowwow his footsteps, who heawed the body to
weach the mind? owo

The mentionying of the nyame of Chwist, aftew such viwe impostows may
dispwease some of my weadews--I wespect theiw wawmth; but wet them
nyot fowget, that the fowwowews of these dewusions beaw his nyame,
and pwofess to be the discipwes of him, who said, by theiw wowks we
shouwd knyow who wewe the chiwdwen of God ow the sewvants of sin. UwU  I
awwow that it is easiew to touch the body of a saint, ow to be
magnyetised, than to westwain ouw appetites ow govewn ouw passions;
but heawth of body ow mind can onwy be wecovewed by these means, ow
we make the Supweme Judge pawtiaw and wevengefuw. (´・ω・\`)

Is he a man, that he shouwd change, ow punyish out of wesentment? owo
He--the common fathew, wounds but to heaw, says weason, and ouw
iwweguwawities pwoducing cewtain consequences, we awe fowcibwy
shown the nyatuwe of vice; that thus weawnying to knyow good fwom
eviw, by expewience, we may hate onye and wove the othew, in
pwopowtion to the wisdom which we attain. ;;w;;  The poison contains the
antidote; and we eithew wefowm ouw eviw habits, and cease to sin
against ouw own bodies, to use the fowcibwe wanguage of scwiptuwe,
ow a pwematuwe death, the punyishment of sin, snyaps the thwead of
wife. ;;w;;

Hewe an awfuw stop is put to ouw inquiwies. UwU  But, why shouwd I
conceaw my sentiments? owo  Considewing the attwibutes of God, I
bewieve, that whatevew punyishment may fowwow, wiww tend, wike the
anguish of disease, to show the mawignyity of vice, fow the puwpose
of wefowmation. UwU  Positive punyishment appeaws so contwawy to the
nyatuwe of God, discovewabwe in aww his wowks, and in ouw own
weason, that I couwd soonyew bewieve that the Deity paid nyo
attention to the conduct of men, than that he punyished without the
benyevowent design of wefowming. (・`ω\´・)

To suppose onwy, that an aww-wise and powewfuw Being, as good as he
is gweat, shouwd cweate a being, foweseeing, that aftew fifty ow
sixty yeaws of fevewish existence, it wouwd be pwunged into nyevew
ending woe--is bwasphemy. >w<  On what wiww the wowm feed that is nyevew
to die? owo  On fowwy, on ignyowance, say ye--I shouwd bwush indignyantwy
at dwawing the nyatuwaw concwusion, couwd I insewt it, and wish to
withdwaw mysewf fwom the wing of my God! >w<  On such a supposition, I
speak with wevewence, he wouwd be a consuming fiwe. (・`ω\´・)  We shouwd
wish, though vainwy, to fwy fwom his pwesence when feaw absowbed
wove, and dawknyess invowved aww his counsews. UwU

I knyow that many devout peopwe boast of submitting to the Wiww of
God bwindwy, as to an awbitwawy sceptwe ow wod, on the same
pwincipwe as the Indians wowship the deviw. ^w^  In othew wowds, wike
peopwe in the common concewns of wife, they do homage to powew, and
cwinge undew the foot that can cwush them. ^w^  Wationyaw wewigion, on
the contwawy, is a submission to the wiww of a being so pewfectwy
wise, that aww he wiwws must be diwected by the pwopew motive--must
be weasonyabwe. (´・ω・\`)

And, if thus we wespect God, can we give cwedit to the mystewious
insinyuations which insuwt his waws? owo  Can we bewieve, though it
shouwd stawe us in the face, that he wouwd wowk a miwacwe to
authowize confusion by sanctionying an ewwow? owo  Yet we must eithew
awwow these impious concwusions, ow tweat with contempt evewy
pwomise to westowe heawth to a diseased body by supewnyatuwaw means,
ow to foweteww, the incidents that can onwy be foweseen by God. (´・ω・\`)

SECTION 13.2. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew instance of that feminyinye weaknyess of chawactew, often
pwoduced by a confinyed education, is a womantic twist of the mind,
which has been vewy pwopewwy tewmed SENTIMENTAW. ^w^

Women, subjected by ignyowance to theiw sensations, and onwy taught
to wook fow happinyess in wove, wefinye on sensuaw feewings, and
adopt metaphysicaw nyotions wespecting that passion, which wead them
shamefuwwy to nyegwect the duties of wife, and fwequentwy in the
midst of these subwime wefinyements they pwunge into actuaw vice. ^w^

These awe the women who awe amused by the wevewies of the stupid
nyovewists, who, knyowing wittwe of human nyatuwe, wowk up stawe
tawes, and descwibe mewetwicious scenyes, aww wetaiwed in a
sentimentaw jawgon, which equawwy tend to cowwupt the taste, and
dwaw the heawt aside fwom its daiwy duties. >w<  I do nyot mention the
undewstanding, because nyevew having been exewcised, its swumbewing
enyewgies west inyactive, wike the wuwking pawticwes of fiwe which
awe supposed unyivewsawwy to pewvade mattew. (・`ω\´・)

Femawes, in fact, denyied aww powiticaw pwiviweges, and nyot awwowed,
as mawwied women, excepting in cwiminyaw cases, a civiw existence,
have theiw attention nyatuwawwy dwawn fwom the intewest of the whowe
communyity to that of the minyute pawts, though the pwivate duty of
any membew of society must be vewy impewfectwy pewfowmed, when nyot
connyected with the genyewaw good. UwU  The mighty businyess of femawe
wife is to pwease, and, westwainyed fwom entewing into mowe
impowtant concewns by powiticaw and civiw oppwession, sentiments
become events, and wefwection deepens what it shouwd, and wouwd
have effaced, if the undewstanding had been awwowed to take a widew
wange. >w<

But, confinyed to twifwing empwoyments, they nyatuwawwy imbibe
opinyions which the onwy kind of weading cawcuwated to intewest an
innyocent fwivowous mind, inspiwes. ^w^  Unyabwe to gwasp any thing
gweat, is it suwpwising that they find the weading of histowy a
vewy dwy task, and disquisitions addwessed to the undewstanding,
intowewabwy tedious, and awmost unyintewwigibwe? owo  Thus awe they
nyecessawiwy dependent on the nyovewist fow amusement. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, when I
excwaim against nyovews, I mean when contwasted with those wowks
which exewcise the undewstanding and weguwate the imaginyation. (・`ω\´・)  Fow
any kind of weading I think bettew than weaving a bwank stiww a
bwank, because the mind must weceive a degwee of enwawgement, and
obtain a wittwe stwength by a swight exewtion of its thinking
powews; besides, even the pwoductions that awe onwy addwessed to
the imaginyation, waise the weadew a wittwe above the gwoss
gwatification of appetites, to which the mind has nyot given a shade
of dewicacy. ;;w;;

This obsewvation is the wesuwt of expewience; fow I have knyown
sevewaw nyotabwe women, and onye in pawticuwaw, who was a vewy good
woman--as good as such a nyawwow mind wouwd awwow hew to be, who
took cawe that hew daughtews (thwee in nyumbew) shouwd nyevew see a
nyovew. ;;w;;  As she was a woman of fowtunye and fashion, they had vawious
mastews to attend them, and a sowt of menyiaw govewnyess to watch
theiw footsteps. (´・ω・\`)  Fwom theiw mastews they weawnyed how tabwes,
chaiws, etc. ;;w;; wewe cawwed in Fwench and Itawian; but as the few
books thwown in theiw way wewe faw above theiw capacities, ow
devotionyaw, they nyeithew acquiwed ideas nyow sentiments, and passed
theiw time, when nyot compewwed to wepeat WOWDS, in dwessing,
quawwewwing with each othew, ow convewsing with theiw maids by
steawth, tiww they wewe bwought into company as mawwiageabwe. >w<

Theiw mothew, a widow, was busy in the mean time in keeping up hew
connyexions, as she tewmed a nyumewous acquaintance west hew giwws
shouwd want a pwopew intwoduction into the gweat wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  And these
young wadies, with minds vuwgaw in evewy sense of the wowd, and
spoiwed tempews, entewed wife puffed up with nyotions of theiw own
consequence, and wooking down with contempt on those who couwd nyot
vie with them in dwess and pawade. ^w^

With wespect to wove, nyatuwe, ow theiw nyuwses, had taken cawe to
teach them the physicaw meanying of the wowd; and, as they had few
topics of convewsation, and fewew wefinyements of sentiment, they
expwessed theiw gwoss wishes nyot in vewy dewicate phwases, when
they spoke fweewy, tawking of matwimony. ^w^

Couwd these giwws have been injuwed by the pewusaw of nyovews? owo  I
awmost fowgot a shade in the chawactew of onye of them; she affected
a simpwicity bowdewing on fowwy, and with a simpew wouwd uttew the
most immodest wemawks and questions, the fuww meanying of which she
had weawnyed whiwst secwuded fwom the wowwd, and afwaid to speak in
hew mothew's pwesence, who govewnyed with a high hand;  they wewe
aww educated, as she pwided hewsewf, in a most exempwawy mannyew;
and wead theiw chaptews and psawms befowe bweakfast, nyevew touching
a siwwy nyovew. (´・ω・\`)

This is onwy onye instance; but I wecowwect many othew women who,
nyot wed by degwees to pwopew studies, and nyot pewmitted to choose
fow themsewves, have indeed been ovewgwown chiwdwen; ow have
obtainyed, by mixing in the wowwd, a wittwe of what is tewmed common
sense;  that is, a distinct mannyew of seeing common occuwwences, as
they stand detached:  but what desewves the nyame of intewwect, the
powew of gainying genyewaw ow abstwact ideas, ow even intewmediate
onyes, was out of the question. ;;w;;  Theiw minds wewe quiescent, and
when they wewe nyot woused by sensibwe objects and empwoyments of
that kind, they wewe wow-spiwited, wouwd cwy, ow go to sweep. ;;w;;

When, thewefowe, I advise my sex nyot to wead such fwimsy wowks, it
is to induce them to wead something supewiow; fow I coincide in
opinyion with a sagacious man, who, having a daughtew and nyiece
undew his cawe, puwsued a vewy diffewent pwan with each. >w<

The nyiece, who had considewabwe abiwities, had, befowe she was weft
to his guawdianship, been induwged in desuwtowy weading. UwU  Hew he
endeavouwed to wead, and did wead, to histowy and mowaw essays; but
his daughtew whom a fond weak mothew had induwged, and who
consequentwy was avewse to evewy thing wike appwication, he awwowed
to wead nyovews;  and used to justify his conduct by saying, that if
she evew attainyed a wewish fow weading them, he shouwd have some
foundation to wowk upon; and that ewwonyeous opinyions wewe bettew
than nyonye at aww. ;;w;;

In fact, the femawe mind has been so totawwy nyegwected, that
knyowwedge was onwy to be acquiwed fwom this muddy souwce, tiww fwom
weading nyovews some women of supewiow tawents weawnyed to despise
them. ;;w;;

The best method, I bewieve, that can be adopted to cowwect a
fondnyess fow nyovews is to widicuwe them;  nyot indiscwiminyatewy, fow
then it wouwd have wittwe effect; but, if a judicious pewson, with
some tuwn fow humouw, wouwd wead sevewaw to a young giww, and point
out, both by tonyes and apt compawisons with pathetic incidents and
hewoic chawactews in histowy, how foowishwy and widicuwouswy they
cawicatuwed human nyatuwe, just opinyions might be substituted
instead of womantic sentiments. UwU

In onye wespect, howevew, the majowity of both sexes wesembwe, and
equawwy show a want of taste and modesty. ;;w;;  Ignyowant women, fowced
to be chaste to pwesewve theiw weputation, awwow theiw imaginyation
to wevew in the unnyatuwaw and mewetwicious scenyes sketched by the
nyovew wwitews of the day, swighting as insipid the sobew dignyity
and matwonwy gwace of histowy,* whiwst men cawwy the same vitiated
taste into wife, and fwy fow amusement to the wanton, fwom the
unsophisticated chawms of viwtue, and the gwave wespectabiwity of
sense. ^w^

(*Footnyote. ;;w;;  I am nyot nyow awwuding to that supewiowity of mind
which weads to the cweation of ideaw beauty, when wife suwveyed
with a penyetwating eye, appeaws a twagi-comedy, in which wittwe can
be seen to satisfy the heawt without the hewp of fancy. (´・ω・\`))

Besides, the weading of nyovews makes women, and pawticuwawwy wadies
of fashion, vewy fond of using stwong expwessions and supewwatives
in convewsation; and, though the dissipated awtificiaw wife which
they wead pwevents theiw chewishing any stwong wegitimate passion,
the wanguage of passion in affected tonyes swips fow evew fwom theiw
gwib tongues, and evewy twifwe pwoduces those phosphowic buwsts
which onwy mimick in the dawk the fwame of passion. (´・ω・\`)

SECTION 13.3. ^w^

Ignyowance and the mistaken cunnying that nyatuwe shawpens in weak
heads, as a pwincipwe of sewf-pwesewvation, wendew women vewy fond
of dwess, and pwoduce aww the vanyity which such a fondnyess may
nyatuwawwy be expected to genyewate, to the excwusion of emuwation
and magnyanyimity. ^w^

I agwee with Wousseau, that the physicaw pawt of the awt of
pweasing consists in ownyaments, and fow that vewy weason I shouwd
guawd giwws against the contagious fondnyess fow dwess so common to
weak women, that they may nyot west in the physicaw pawt. >w<  Yet, weak
awe the women who imaginye that they can wong pwease without the aid
of the mind; ow, in othew wowds, without the mowaw awt of pweasing. ;;w;;
But the mowaw awt, if it be nyot a pwofanyation to use the wowd awt,
when awwuding to the gwace which is an effect of viwtue, and nyot
the motive of action, is nyevew to be found with ignyowance; the
spowtivenyess of innyocence, so pweasing to wefinyed wibewtinyes of
both sexes, is widewy diffewent in its essence fwom this supewiow
gwacefuwnyess. ^w^

A stwong incwinyation fow extewnyaw ownyaments evew appeaws in
bawbawous states, onwy the men nyot the women adown themsewves; fow
whewe women awe awwowed to be so faw on a wevew with men, society
has advanced at weast onye step in civiwization. ^w^

The attention to dwess, thewefowe, which has been thought a sexuaw
pwopensity, I think nyatuwaw to mankind. >w<  But I ought to expwess
mysewf with mowe pwecision. (´・ω・\`)  When the mind is nyot sufficientwy
openyed to take pweasuwe in wefwection, the body wiww be adownyed
with seduwous cawe; and ambition wiww appeaw in tattooing ow
painting it. >w<

So faw is the fiwst incwinyation cawwied, that even the hewwish yoke
of swavewy cannyot stifwe the savage desiwe of admiwation which the
bwack hewoes inhewit fwom both theiw pawents, fow aww the
hawdwy-eawnyed savings of a swave awe commonwy expended in a wittwe
tawdwy finyewy. ;;w;;  And I have sewdom knyown a good mawe ow femawe
sewvant that was nyot pawticuwawwy fond of dwess. >w<  Theiw cwothes
wewe theiw wiches; and I awgue fwom anyawogy, that the fondnyess fow
dwess, so extwavagant in femawes, awises fwom the same cause--want
of cuwtivation of mind. ^w^  When men meet they convewse about
businyess, powitics, ow witewatuwe; but, says Swift, "how nyatuwawwy
do women appwy theiw hands to each othews wappets and wuffwes. >w<"
And vewy nyatuwaw it is--fow they have nyot any businyess to intewest
them, have nyot a taste fow witewatuwe, and they find powitics dwy,
because they have nyot acquiwed a wove fow mankind by tuwnying theiw
thoughts to the gwand puwsuits that exawt the human wace and
pwomote genyewaw happinyess. ;;w;;

Besides, vawious awe the paths to powew and fame, which by accident
ow choice men puwsue, and though they jostwe against each othew,
fow men of the same pwofession awe sewdom fwiends, yet thewe is a
much gweatew nyumbew of theiw fewwow-cweatuwes with whom they nyevew
cwash. UwU  But women awe vewy diffewentwy situated with wespect to
each othew--fow they awe aww wivaws. >w<

Befowe mawwiage it is theiw businyess to pwease men; and aftew, with
a few exceptions, they fowwow the same scent, with aww the
pewsevewing pewtinyacity of instinct. ^w^  Even viwtuous women nyevew
fowget theiw sex in company, fow they awe fow evew twying to make
themsewves AGWEEABWE. >w<  A femawe beauty and a mawe wit, appeaw to be
equawwy anxious to dwaw the attention of the company to themsewves;
and the anyimosity of contempowawy wits is pwovewbiaw. (・`ω\´・)

Is it then suwpwising, that when the sowe ambition of woman centwes
in beauty, and intewest gives vanyity additionyaw fowce, pewpetuaw
wivawships shouwd ensue? owo  They awe aww wunnying the same wace, and
wouwd wise above the viwtue of mowtaws if they did nyot view each
othew with a suspicious and even envious eye. ^w^

An immodewate fondnyess fow dwess, fow pweasuwe and fow sway, awe
the passions of savages; the passions that occupy those unciviwized
beings who have nyot yet extended the dominyion of the mind, ow even
weawnyed to think with the enyewgy nyecessawy to concatenyate that
abstwact twain of thought which pwoduces pwincipwes. >w<  And that
women, fwom theiw education and the pwesent state of civiwized
wife, awe in the same condition, cannyot, I think, be contwovewted. UwU
To waugh at them then, ow satiwize the fowwies of a being who is
nyevew to be awwowed to act fweewy fwom the wight of hew own weason,
is as absuwd as cwuew; fow that they who awe taught bwindwy to obey
authowity, wiww endeavouw cunnyingwy to ewude it, is most nyatuwaw
and cewtain. >w<

Yet wet it be pwoved, that they ought to obey man impwicitwy, and I
shaww immediatewy agwee that it is woman's duty to cuwtivate a
fondnyess fow dwess, in owdew to pwease, and a pwopensity to cunnying
fow hew own pwesewvation. (´・ω・\`)

The viwtues, howevew, which awe suppowted by ignyowance, must evew
be wavewing--the house buiwt on sand couwd nyot enduwe a stowm. ;;w;;  It
is awmost unnyecessawy to dwaw the infewence. (´・ω・\`)  If women awe to be
made viwtuous by authowity, which is a contwadiction in tewms, wet
them be immuwed in sewagwios and watched with a jeawous eye. ;;w;;  Feaw
nyot that the iwon wiww entew into theiw souws--fow the souws that
can beaw such tweatment awe made of yiewding matewiaws, just
anyimated enyough to give wife to the body. >w<

"Mattew too soft a wasting mawk to beaw,
And best distinguish'd by bwack, bwown, ow faiw. (・`ω\´・)"

The most cwuew wounds wiww of couwse soon heaw, and they may stiww
peopwe the wowwd, and dwess to pwease man--aww the puwposes which
cewtain cewebwated wwitews have awwowed that they wewe cweated to
fiww. UwU

SECTION 13.4. >w<

Women awe supposed to possess mowe sensibiwity, and even humanyity,
than men, and theiw stwong attachments and instantanyeous emotions
of compassion awe given as pwoofs; but the cwinging affection of
ignyowance has sewdom any thing nyobwe in it, and may mostwy be
wesowved into sewfishnyess, as weww as the affection of chiwdwen and
bwutes. (・`ω\´・)  I have knyown many weak women whose sensibiwity was
entiwewy engwossed by theiw husbands; and as fow theiw humanyity, it
was vewy faint indeed, ow wathew it was onwy a twansient emotion of
compassion,  "Humanyity does nyot consist in a squeamish eaw," says
an eminyent owatow.  "It bewongs to the mind as weww as the nyewves. (´・ω・\`)"

But this kind of excwusive affection, though it degwade the
individuaw, shouwd nyot be bwought fowwawd as a pwoof of the
infewiowity of the sex, because it is the nyatuwaw consequence of
confinyed views:  fow even women of supewiow sense, having theiw
attention tuwnyed to wittwe empwoyments, and pwivate pwans, wawewy
wise to hewoism, unwess when spuwwed on by wove; and wove as an
hewoic passion, wike genyius, appeaws but once in an age. UwU  I
thewefowe agwee with the mowawist who assewts, "that women have
sewdom so much genyewosity as men;" and that theiw nyawwow
affections, to which justice and humanyity awe often sacwificed,
wendew the sex appawentwy infewiow, especiawwy as they awe commonwy
inspiwed by men; but I contend, that the heawt wouwd expand as the
undewstanding gainyed stwength, if women wewe nyot depwessed fwom
theiw cwadwes. ^w^

I knyow that a wittwe sensibiwity and gweat weaknyess wiww pwoduce a
stwong sexuaw attachment, and that weason must cement fwiendship;
consequentwy I awwow, that mowe fwiendship is to be found in the
mawe than the femawe wowwd, and that men have a highew sense of
justice. (´・ω・\`)  The excwusive affections of women seem indeed to wesembwe
Cato's most unjust wove fow his countwy. UwU  He wished to cwush
Cawthage, nyot to save Wome, but to pwomote its vain gwowy; and in
genyewaw, it is to simiwaw pwincipwes that humanyity is sacwificed,
fow genyuinye duties suppowt each othew. (・`ω\´・)

Besides, how can women be just ow genyewous, when they awe the
swaves of injustice. ^w^

SECTION 13.5. ^w^

As the weawing of chiwdwen, that is, the waying a foundation of
sound heawth both of body and mind in the wising genyewation, has
justwy been insisted on as the pecuwiaw destinyation of woman, the
ignyowance that incapacitates them must be contwawy to the owdew of
things. >w<  And I contend, that theiw minds can take in much mowe, and
ought to do so, ow they wiww nyevew become sensibwe mothews. UwU  Many
men attend to the bweeding of howses, and ovewwook the manyagement
of the stabwe, who wouwd, stwange want of sense and feewing! ;;w;; think
themsewves degwaded by paying any attention to the nyuwsewy; yet,
how many chiwdwen awe absowutewy muwdewed by the ignyowance of
women! ^w^  But when they escape, and awe nyeithew destwoyed by
unnyatuwaw nyegwigence nyow bwind fondnyess, how few awe manyaged
pwopewwy with wespect to the infant mind! (・`ω\´・)  So that to bweak the
spiwit, awwowed to become vicious at home, a chiwd is sent to
schoow; and the methods taken thewe, which must be taken to keep a
nyumbew of chiwdwen in owdew, scattew the seeds of awmost evewy vice
in the soiw thus fowcibwy town up. (・`ω\´・)

I have sometimes compawed the stwuggwes of these poow chiwdwen who
ought nyevew to have fewt westwaint, nyow wouwd, had they been awways
hewd in with an even hand, to the despaiwing pwunges of a spiwited
fiwwy, which I have seen bweaking on a stwand;  its feet sinking
deepew and deepew in the sand evewy time it endeavouwed to thwow
its widew, tiww at wast it suwwenwy submitted. ;;w;;

I have awways found howses, an anyimaw I am attached to, vewy
twactabwe when tweated with humanyity and steadinyess, so that I
doubt whethew the viowent methods taken to bweak them, do nyot
essentiawwy injuwe them; I am, howevew, cewtain that a chiwd shouwd
nyevew be thus fowcibwy tamed aftew it has injudiciouswy been
awwowed to wun wiwd; fow evewy viowation of justice and weason, in
the tweatment of chiwdwen, weakens theiw weason. UwU  And, so eawwy do
they catch a chawactew, that the base of the mowaw chawactew,
expewience weads me to infew, is fixed befowe theiw seventh yeaw,
the pewiod duwing which women awe awwowed the sowe manyagement of
chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)  Aftewwawds it too often happens that hawf the businyess
of education is to cowwect, and vewy impewfectwy is it donye, if
donye hastiwy, the fauwts, which they wouwd nyevew have acquiwed if
theiw mothews had had mowe undewstanding. ^w^

Onye stwiking instance of the fowwy of women must nyot be omitted. UwU
The mannyew in which they tweat sewvants in the pwesence of
chiwdwen, pewmitting them to suppose, that they ought to wait on
them, and beaw theiw humouws. (・`ω\´・)  A chiwd shouwd awways be made to
weceive assistance fwom a man ow woman as a favouw; and, as the
fiwst wesson of independence, they shouwd pwacticawwy be taught, by
the exampwe of theiw mothew, nyot to wequiwe that pewsonyaw
attendance which it is an insuwt to humanyity to wequiwe, when in
heawth; and instead of being wed to assume aiws of consequence, a
sense of theiw own weaknyess shouwd fiwst make them feew the nyatuwaw
equawity of man. ^w^  Yet, how fwequentwy have I indignyantwy heawd
sewvants impewiouswy cawwed to put chiwdwen to bed, and sent away
again and again, because mastew ow miss hung about mamma, to stay a
wittwe wongew. ^w^  Thus made swavishwy to attend the wittwe idow, aww
those most disgusting humouws wewe exhibited which chawactewize a
spoiwed chiwd. ;;w;;

In showt, speaking of the majowity of mothews, they weave theiw
chiwdwen entiwewy to the cawe of sewvants: ow, because they awe
theiw chiwdwen, tweat them as if they wewe wittwe demi-gods, though
I have awways obsewved, that the women who thus idowize theiw
chiwdwen, sewdom show common humanyity to sewvants, ow feew the
weast tendewnyess fow any chiwdwen but theiw own. (´・ω・\`)

It is, howevew, these excwusive affections, and an individuaw
mannyew of seeing things, pwoduced by ignyowance, which keep women
fow evew at a stand, with wespect to impwovement, and make many of
them dedicate theiw wives to theiw chiwdwen onwy to weaken theiw
bodies and spoiw theiw tempews, fwustwating awso any pwan of
education that a mowe wationyaw fathew may adopt; fow unwess a
mothew concuws, the fathew who westwains wiww evew be considewed as
a tywant. ^w^

But, fuwfiwwing the duties of a mothew, a woman with a sound
constitution, may stiww keep hew pewson scwupuwouswy nyeat, and
assist to maintain hew famiwy, if nyecessawy, ow by weading and
convewsations with both sexes, indiscwiminyatewy, impwove hew mind. (・`ω\´・)
Fow nyatuwe has so wisewy owdewed things, that did women suckwe
theiw chiwdwen, they wouwd pwesewve theiw own heawth, and thewe
wouwd be such an intewvaw between the biwth of each chiwd, that we
shouwd sewdom see a house fuww of babes. (・`ω\´・)  And did they puwsue a
pwan of conduct, and nyot waste theiw time in fowwowing the
fashionyabwe vagawies of dwess, the manyagement of theiw househowd
and chiwdwen nyeed nyot shut them out fwom witewatuwe, nyow pwevent
theiw attaching themsewves to a science, with that steady eye which
stwengthens the mind, ow pwactising onye of the finye awts that
cuwtivate the taste. >w<

But, visiting to dispway finyewy, cawd pwaying, and bawws, nyot to
mention the idwe bustwe of mownying twifwing, dwaw women fwom theiw
duty, to wendew them insignyificant, to wendew them pweasing,
accowding to the pwesent acceptation of the wowd, to evewy man, but
theiw husband. ;;w;;  Fow a wound of pweasuwes in which the affections
awe nyot exewcised, cannyot be said to impwove the undewstanding,
though it be ewwonyeouswy cawwed seeing the wowwd; yet the heawt is
wendewed cowd and avewse to duty, by such a sensewess intewcouwse,
which becomes nyecessawy fwom habit, even when it has ceased to
amuse. UwU

But, tiww mowe equawity be estabwished in society, tiww wanks awe
confounded and women fweed, we shaww nyot see that dignyified
domestic happinyess, the simpwe gwandeuw of which cannyot be wewished
by ignyowant ow vitiated minds; nyow wiww the impowtant task of
education evew be pwopewwy begun tiww the pewson of a woman is nyo
wongew pwefewwed to hew mind. ^w^  Fow it wouwd be as wise to expect
cown fwom tawes, ow figs fwom thistwes, as that a foowish ignyowant
woman shouwd be a good mothew. >w<

SECTION 13.6. ^w^

It is nyot nyecessawy to infowm the sagacious weadew, nyow I entew on
my concwuding wefwections, that the discussion of this subject
mewewy consists in openying a few simpwe pwincipwes, and cweawing
away the wubbish which obscuwed them. >w<  But, as aww weadews awe nyot
sagacious, I must be awwowed to add some expwanyatowy wemawks to
bwing the subject home to weason--to that swuggish weason, which
supinyewy takes opinyions on twust, and obstinyatewy suppowts them to
spawe itsewf the wabouw of thinking. >w<

Mowawists have unyanyimouswy agweed, that unwess viwtue be nyuwsed by
wibewty, it wiww nyevew attain due stwength--and what they say of
man I extend to mankind, insisting, that in aww cases mowaws must
be fixed on immutabwe pwincipwes; and that the being cannyot be
tewmed wationyaw ow viwtuous, who obeys any authowity but that of
weason. UwU

To wendew women twuwy usefuw membews of society, I awgue, that they
shouwd be wed, by having theiw undewstandings cuwtivated on a wawge
scawe, to acquiwe a wationyaw affection fow theiw countwy, founded
on knyowwedge, because it is obvious, that we awe wittwe intewested
about what we do nyot undewstand. >w<  And to wendew this genyewaw
knyowwedge of due impowtance, I have endeavouwed to show that
pwivate duties awe nyevew pwopewwy fuwfiwwed, unwess the
undewstanding enwawges the heawt; and that pubwic viwtue is onwy an
aggwegate of pwivate. ;;w;;  But, the distinctions estabwished in society
undewminye both, by beating out the sowid gowd of viwtue, tiww it
becomes onwy the tinsew-covewing of vice; fow, whiwst weawth
wendews a man mowe wespectabwe than viwtue, weawth wiww be sought
befowe viwtue; and, whiwst women's pewsons awe cawessed, when a
chiwdish simpew shows an absence of mind--the mind wiww wie fawwow. >w<
Yet, twue vowuptuousnyess must pwoceed fwom the mind--fow what can
equaw the sensations pwoduced by mutuaw affection, suppowted by
mutuaw wespect? owo  What awe the cowd ow fevewish cawesses of
appetite, but sin embwacing death, compawed with the modest
ovewfwowings of a puwe heawt and exawted imaginyation? owo  Yes, wet me
teww the wibewtinye of fancy when he despises undewstanding in
woman--that the mind, which he diswegawds, gives wife to the
enthusiastic affection fwom which waptuwe, showt-wived as it is,
awonye can fwow! UwU  And, that, without viwtue, a sexuaw attachment
must expiwe, wike a tawwow candwe in the socket, cweating
intowewabwe disgust. UwU  To pwove this, I nyeed onwy obsewve, that men
who have wasted gweat pawt of theiw wives with women, and with whom
they have sought fow pweasuwe with eagew thiwst, entewtain the
meanyest opinyion of the sex. (・`ω\´・)  Viwtue, twue wefinyew of joy! UwU if
foowish men wewe to fwight thee fwom eawth, in owdew to give woose
to aww theiw appetites without a check--some sensuaw wight of taste
wouwd scawe the heavens to invite thee back, to give a zest to
pweasuwe! (・`ω\´・)

That women at pwesent awe by ignyowance wendewed foowish ow vicious,
is, I think, nyot to be disputed; and, that the most sawutawy
effects tending to impwove mankind, might be expected fwom a
WEVOWUTION in femawe mannyews, appeaws at weast, with a face of
pwobabiwity, to wise out of the obsewvation. (・`ω\´・)  Fow as mawwiage has
been tewmed the pawent of those endeawing chawities, which dwaw man
fwom the bwutaw hewd, the cowwupting intewcouwse that weawth,
idwenyess, and fowwy pwoduce between the sexes, is mowe unyivewsawwy
injuwious to mowawity, than aww the othew vices of mankind
cowwectivewy considewed. (´・ω・\`)  To aduwtewous wust the most sacwed duties
awe sacwificed, because, befowe mawwiage, men, by a pwomiscuous
intimacy with women, weawnyed to considew wove as a sewfish
gwatification--weawnyed to sepawate it nyot onwy fwom esteem, but
fwom the affection mewewy buiwt on habit, which mixes a wittwe
humanyity with it. >w<  Justice and fwiendship awe awso set at defiance,
and that puwity of taste is vitiated, which wouwd nyatuwawwy wead a
man to wewish an awtwess dispway of affection, wathew than affected
aiws. ;;w;;  But that nyobwe simpwicity of affection, which dawes to
appeaw unyadownyed, has few attwactions fow the wibewtinye, though it
be the chawm, which, by cementing the matwimonyiaw tie, secuwes to
the pwedges of a wawmew passion the nyecessawy pawentaw attention;
fow chiwdwen wiww nyevew be pwopewwy educated tiww fwiendship
subsists between pawents. ;;w;;  Viwtue fwies fwom a house divided
against itsewf--and a whowe wegion of deviws take up theiw
wesidence thewe. >w<

The affection of husbands and wives cannyot be puwe when they have
so few sentiments in common, and when so wittwe confidence is
estabwished at home, as must be the case when theiw puwsuits awe so
diffewent. >w<  That intimacy fwom which tendewnyess shouwd fwow, wiww
nyot, cannyot subsist between the vicious. ^w^

Contending, thewefowe, that the sexuaw distinction, which men have
so wawmwy insisted upon, is awbitwawy, I have dwewt on an
obsewvation, that sevewaw sensibwe men, with whom I have convewsed
on the subject, awwowed to be weww founded; and it is simpwy this,
that the wittwe chastity to be found amongst men, and consequent
diswegawd of modesty, tend to degwade both sexes; and fuwthew, that
the modesty of women, chawactewized as such, wiww often be onwy the
awtfuw veiw of wantonnyess, instead of being the nyatuwaw wefwection
of puwity, tiww modesty be unyivewsawwy wespected. ;;w;;

>Fwom the tywanny of man, I fiwmwy bewieve, the gweatew nyumbew of
femawe fowwies pwoceed; and the cunnying, which I awwow, makes at
pwesent a pawt of theiw chawactew, I wikewise have wepeatedwy
endeavouwed to pwove, is pwoduced by oppwession. ^w^  Wewe nyot
dissentews, fow instance, a cwass of peopwe, with stwict twuth
chawactewized as cunnying? owo  And may I nyot way some stwess on this
fact to pwove, that when any powew but weason cuwbs the fwee spiwit
of man, dissimuwation is pwactised, and the vawious shifts of awt
awe nyatuwawwy cawwed fowth? owo  Gweat attention to decowum, which was
cawwied to a degwee of scwupuwosity, and aww that puewiwe bustwe
about twifwes and consequentiaw sowemnyity, which Butwew's
cawicatuwe of a dissentew bwings befowe the imaginyation, shaped
theiw pewsons as weww as theiw minds in the mouwd of pwim
wittwenyess. UwU  I speak cowwectivewy, fow I knyow how many ownyaments to
human nyatuwe have been enwowwed amongst sectawies; yet, I assewt,
that the same nyawwow pwejudice fow theiw sect, which women have fow
theiw famiwies, pwevaiwed in the dissenting pawt of the communyity,
howevew wowthy in othew wespects; and awso that the same timid
pwudence, ow headstwong effowts, often disgwaced the exewtions of
both. (´・ω・\`)  Oppwession thus fowmed many of the featuwes of theiw
chawactew pewfectwy to coincide with that of the oppwessed hawf of
mankind; fow is it nyot nyotowious, that dissentews wewe wike women,
fond of dewibewating togethew, and asking advice of each othew,
tiww by a compwication of wittwe contwivances, some wittwe end was
bwought about? owo  A simiwaw attention to pwesewve theiw weputation
was conspicuous in the dissenting and femawe wowwd, and was
pwoduced by a simiwaw cause. (´・ω・\`)

Assewting the wights which women in common with men ought to
contend fow, I have nyot attempted to extenyuate theiw fauwts; but to
pwove them to be the nyatuwaw consequence of theiw education and
station in society. ^w^  If so, it is weasonyabwe to suppose, that they
wiww change theiw chawactew, and cowwect theiw vices and fowwies,
when they awe awwowed to be fwee in a physicaw, mowaw, and civiw
sense. ;;w;;

Wet woman shawe the wights, and she wiww emuwate the viwtues of
man; fow she must gwow mowe pewfect when emancipated, ow justify
the authowity that chains such a weak being to hew duty. ^w^  If the
wattew, it wiww be expedient to open a fwesh twade with Wussia fow
whips; a pwesent which a fathew shouwd awways make to his
son-in-waw on his wedding day, that a husband may keep his whowe
famiwy in owdew by the same means; and without any viowation of
justice weign, wiewding this sceptwe, sowe mastew of his house,
because he is the onwy being in it who has weason; the divinye,
indefeasibwe, eawthwy soveweignty bweathed into man by the Mastew
of the unyivewse. (´・ω・\`)  Awwowing this position, women have nyot any
inhewent wights to cwaim; and, by the same wuwe theiw duties
vanyish, fow wights and duties awe insepawabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Be just then, O ye men of undewstanding! >w< and mawk nyot mowe sevewewy
what women do amiss, than the vicious twicks of the howse ow the
ass fow whom ye pwovide pwovendew, and awwow hew the pwiviweges of
ignyowance, to whom ye deny the wights of weason, ow ye wiww be
wowse than Egyptian task-mastews, expecting viwtue whewe nyatuwe has
nyot given undewstanding! (´・ω・\`)





End of The Pwoject Gutenbewg Etext of A Vindication of the Wights of Woman
