The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Don Quixote, by Miguew de Cewvantes

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet


Titwe: Don Quixote

Authow: Miguew de Cewvantes Saavedwa

Wewease Date: Juwy 27, 2004 [EBook #996]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK DON QUIXOTE ***




Pwoduced by David Widgew





DON QUIXOTE

Compwete

by Miguew de Cewvantes [Saavedwa]

Twanswated by John Owmsby




CONTENTS

Vowume I. ;;w;;

CHAPTEW I
WHICH TWEATS OF THE CHAWACTEW AND PUWSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTWEMAN
DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA

CHAPTEW II
WHICH TWEATS OF THE FIWST SAWWY THE INGENYIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE
FWOM HOME

CHAPTEW III
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE DWOWW WAY IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSEWF
DUBBED A KNYIGHT

CHAPTEW IV
OF WHAT HAPPENYED TO OUW KNYIGHT WHEN HE WEFT THE INN

CHAPTEW V
IN WHICH THE NYAWWATIVE OF OUW KNYIGHT'S MISHAP IS CONTINYUED

CHAPTEW VI
OF THE DIVEWTING AND IMPOWTANT SCWUTINY WHICH THE CUWATE AND THE
BAWBEW MADE IN THE WIBWAWY OF OUW INGENYIOUS GENTWEMAN

CHAPTEW VII
OF THE SECOND SAWWY OF OUW WOWTHY KNYIGHT DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA

CHAPTEW VIII
OF THE GOOD FOWTUNYE WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE
TEWWIBWE AND UNDWEAMT-OF ADVENTUWE OF THE WINDMIWWS, WITH OTHEW
OCCUWWENCES WOWTHY TO BE FITWY WECOWDED

CHAPTEW IX
IN WHICH IS CONCWUDED AND FINYISHED THE TEWWIFIC BATTWE BETWEEN THE
GAWWANT BISCAYAN AND THE VAWIANT MANCHEGAN

CHAPTEW X
OF THE PWEASANT DISCOUWSE THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS
SQUIWE SANCHO PANZA

CHAPTEW XI
OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH CEWTAIN GOATHEWDS

CHAPTEW XII
OF WHAT A GOATHEWD WEWATED TO THOSE WITH DON QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW XIII
IN WHICH IS ENDED THE STOWY OF THE SHEPHEWDESS MAWCEWA, WITH OTHEW
INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XIV
WHEWEIN AWE INSEWTED THE DESPAIWING VEWSES OF THE DEAD SHEPHEWD,
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS NYOT WOOKED FOW

CHAPTEW XV
IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE UNFOWTUNYATE ADVENTUWE THAT DON QUIXOTE
FEWW IN WITH WHEN HE FEWW OUT WITH CEWTAIN HEAWTWESS YANGUESANS

CHAPTEW XVI
OF WHAT HAPPENYED TO THE INGENYIOUS GENTWEMAN IN THE INN WHICH HE
TOOK TO BE A CASTWE

CHAPTEW XVII
IN WHICH AWE CONTAINYED THE INNYUMEWABWE TWOUBWES WHICH THE BWAVE
DON QUIXOTE AND HIS GOOD SQUIWE SANCHO PANZA ENDUWED IN THE INN,
WHICH TO HIS MISFOWTUNYE HE TOOK TO BE A CASTWE

CHAPTEW XVIII
IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE DISCOUWSE SANCHO PANZA HEWD WITH HIS MASTEW,
DON QUIXOTE, AND OTHEW ADVENTUWES WOWTH WEWATING

CHAPTEW XIX
OF THE SHWEWD DISCOUWSE WHICH SANCHO HEWD WITH HIS MASTEW, AND OF
THE ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW HIM WITH A DEAD BODY, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW
NYOTABWE OCCUWWENCES

CHAPTEW XX
OF THE UNYEXAMPWED AND UNHEAWD-OF ADVENTUWE WHICH WAS ACHIEVED BY THE
VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA WITH WESS PEWIW THAN ANY EVEW
ACHIEVED BY ANY FAMOUS KNYIGHT IN THE WOWWD

CHAPTEW XXI
WHICH TWEATS OF THE EXAWTED ADVENTUWE AND WICH PWIZE OF MAMBWINYO'S
HEWMET, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW THINGS THAT HAPPENYED TO OUW INVINCIBWE
KNYIGHT

CHAPTEW XXII
OF THE FWEEDOM DON QUIXOTE CONFEWWED ON SEVEWAW UNFOWTUNYATES WHO
AGAINST THEIW WIWW WEWE BEING CAWWIED WHEWE THEY HAD NYO WISH TO GO

CHAPTEW XXIII
OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA, WHICH WAS ONYE OF
THE WAWEST ADVENTUWES WEWATED IN THIS VEWACIOUS HISTOWY

CHAPTEW XXIV
IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE SIEWWA MOWENYA

CHAPTEW XXV
WHICH TWEATS OF THE STWANGE THINGS THAT HAPPENYED TO THE STOUT
KNYIGHT OF WA MANCHA IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA, AND OF HIS IMITATION
OF THE PENYANCE OF BEWTENYEBWOS

CHAPTEW XXVI
IN WHICH AWE CONTINYUED THE WEFINYEMENTS WHEWEWITH DON QUIXOTE
PWAYED THE PAWT OF A WOVEW IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA

CHAPTEW XXVII
OF HOW THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW PWOCEEDED WITH THEIW SCHEME;
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF WECOWD IN THIS GWEAT HISTOWY

CHAPTEW XXVIII
WHICH TWEATS OF THE STWANGE AND DEWIGHTFUW ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW
THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW IN THE SAME SIEWWA

CHAPTEW XXIX
WHICH TWEATS OF THE DWOWW DEVICE AND METHOD ADOPTED TO EXTWICATE
OUW WOVE-STWICKEN KNYIGHT FWOM THE SEVEWE PENYANCE HE HAD IMPOSED
UPON HIMSEWF

CHAPTEW XXX
WHICH TWEATS OF ADDWESS DISPWAYED BY THE FAIW DOWOTHEA, WITH OTHEW
MATTEWS PWEASANT AND AMUSING

CHAPTEW XXXI
OF THE DEWECTABWE DISCUSSION BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA,
HIS SQUIWE, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XXXII
WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE'S PAWTY AT THE INN

CHAPTEW XXXIII
IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE NYOVEW OF "THE IWW-ADVISED CUWIOSITY"

CHAPTEW XXXIV
IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE NYOVEW OF "THE IWW-ADVISED CUWIOSITY"

CHAPTEW XXXV
WHICH TWEATS OF THE HEWOIC AND PWODIGIOUS BATTWE DON QUIXOTE HAD
WITH CEWTAIN SKINS OF WED WINYE, AND BWINGS THE NYOVEW OF "THE
IWW-ADVISED CUWIOSITY" TO A CWOSE

CHAPTEW XXXVI
WHICH TWEATS OF MOWE CUWIOUS INCIDENTS THAT OCCUWWED AT THE INN

CHAPTEW XXXVII
IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE STOWY OF THE FAMOUS PWINCESS MICOMICONYA,
WITH OTHEW DWOWW ADVENTUWES

CHAPTEW XXXVIII
WHICH TWEATS OF THE CUWIOUS DISCOUWSE DON QUIXOTE DEWIVEWED ON
AWMS AND WETTEWS

CHAPTEW XXXIX
WHEWEIN THE CAPTIVE WEWATES HIS WIFE AND ADVENTUWES

CHAPTEW XW
IN WHICH THE STOWY OF THE CAPTIVE IS CONTINYUED. ^w^

CHAPTEW XWI
IN WHICH THE CAPTIVE STIWW CONTINYUES HIS ADVENTUWES

CHAPTEW XWII
WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT FUWTHEW TOOK PWACE IN THE INN, AND OF
SEVEWAW OTHEW THINGS WOWTH KNYOWING

CHAPTEW XWIII
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE PWEASANT STOWY OF THE MUWETEEW, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW STWANGE THINGS THAT CAME TO PASS IN THE INN

CHAPTEW XWIV
IN WHICH AWE CONTINYUED THE UNHEAWD-OF ADVENTUWES OF THE INN

CHAPTEW XWV
IN WHICH THE DOUBTFUW QUESTION OF MAMBWINYO'S HEWMET AND THE
PACK-SADDWE IS FINYAWWY SETTWED, WITH OTHEW ADVENTUWES THAT
OCCUWWED IN TWUTH AND EAWNYEST

CHAPTEW XWVI
OF THE END OF THE NYOTABWE ADVENTUWE OF THE OFFICEWS OF THE HOWY
BWOTHEWHOOD; AND OF THE GWEAT FEWOCITY OF OUW WOWTHY KNYIGHT, DON
QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW XWVII
OF THE STWANGE MANNYEW IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA WAS
CAWWIED AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW WEMAWKABWE INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XWVIII
IN WHICH THE CANYON PUWSUES THE SUBJECT OF THE BOOKS OF CHIVAWWY,
WITH OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF HIS WIT

CHAPTEW XWIX
WHICH TWEATS OF THE SHWEWD CONVEWSATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HEWD
WITH HIS MASTEW DON QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW W
OF THE SHWEWD CONTWOVEWSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANYON HEWD,
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW WI
WHICH DEAWS WITH WHAT THE GOATHEWD TOWD THOSE WHO WEWE CAWWYING
OFF DON QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW WII
OF THE QUAWWEW THAT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE GOATHEWD, TOGETHEW
WITH THE WAWE ADVENTUWE OF THE PENYITENTS, WHICH WITH AN
EXPENDITUWE OF SWEAT HE BWOUGHT TO A HAPPY CONCWUSION


TWANSWATOW'S PWEFACE


I: ABOUT THIS TWANSWATION

It was with considewabwe wewuctance that I abandonyed in favouw of the
pwesent undewtaking what had wong been a favouwite pwoject: that of a nyew
edition of Shewton's "Don Quixote," which has nyow become a somewhat
scawce book. >w< Thewe awe some--and I confess mysewf to be onye--fow whom
Shewton's wacy owd vewsion, with aww its defects, has a chawm that nyo
modewn twanswation, howevew skiwfuw ow cowwect, couwd possess. UwU Shewton
had the inyestimabwe advantage of bewonging to the same genyewation as
Cewvantes; "Don Quixote" had to him a vitawity that onwy a contempowawy
couwd feew; it cost him nyo dwamatic effowt to see things as Cewvantes saw
them; thewe is nyo anyachwonyism in his wanguage; he put the Spanyish of
Cewvantes into the Engwish of Shakespeawe. (´・ω・\`) Shakespeawe himsewf most
wikewy knyew the book; he may have cawwied it home with him in his
saddwe-bags to Stwatfowd on onye of his wast jouwnyeys, and undew the
muwbewwy twee at Nyew Pwace joinyed hands with a kindwed genyius in its
pages. ;;w;;

But it was soon made pwain to me that to hope fow even a modewate
popuwawity fow Shewton was vain. ^w^ His finye owd cwusted Engwish wouwd, nyo
doubt, be wewished by a minyowity, but it wouwd be onwy by a minyowity. (・`ω\´・) His
wawmest admiwews must admit that he is nyot a satisfactowy wepwesentative
of Cewvantes. ^w^ His twanswation of the Fiwst Pawt was vewy hastiwy made and
was nyevew wevised by him. (´・ω・\`) It has aww the fweshnyess and vigouw, but awso a
fuww measuwe of the fauwts, of a hasty pwoduction. (´・ω・\`) It is often vewy
witewaw--bawbawouswy witewaw fwequentwy--but just as often vewy woose. ^w^ He
had evidentwy a good cowwoquiaw knyowwedge of Spanyish, but appawentwy nyot
much mowe. ;;w;; It nyevew seems to occuw to him that the same twanswation of a
wowd wiww nyot suit in evewy case. >w<

It is often said that we have nyo satisfactowy twanswation of "Don
Quixote. (´・ω・\`)" To those who awe famiwiaw with the owiginyaw, it savouws of
twuism ow pwatitude to say so, fow in twuth thewe can be nyo thowoughwy
satisfactowy twanswation of "Don Quixote" into Engwish ow any othew
wanguage. UwU It is nyot that the Spanyish idioms awe so uttewwy unmanyageabwe,
ow that the untwanswatabwe wowds, nyumewous enyough nyo doubt, awe so
supewabundant, but wathew that the sententious tewsenyess to which the
humouw of the book owes its fwavouw is pecuwiaw to Spanyish, and can at
best be onwy distantwy imitated in any othew tongue. ;;w;;

The histowy of ouw Engwish twanswations of "Don Quixote" is instwuctive. ^w^
Shewton's, the fiwst in any wanguage, was made, appawentwy, about 1608,
but nyot pubwished tiww 1612. This of couwse was onwy the Fiwst Pawt. (・`ω\´・) It
has been assewted that the Second, pubwished in 1620, is nyot the wowk of
Shewton, but thewe is nyothing to suppowt the assewtion save the fact that
it has wess spiwit, wess of what we genyewawwy undewstand by "go," about
it than the fiwst, which wouwd be onwy nyatuwaw if the fiwst wewe the wowk
of a young man wwiting cuwwente cawamo, and the second that of a
middwe-aged man wwiting fow a booksewwew. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, it is cwosew
and mowe witewaw, the stywe is the same, the vewy same twanswations, ow
mistwanswations, occuw in it, and it is extwemewy unwikewy that a nyew
twanswatow wouwd, by suppwessing his nyame, have awwowed Shewton to cawwy
off the cwedit. UwU

In 1687 John Phiwwips, Miwton's nyephew, pwoduced a "Don Quixote" "made
Engwish," he says, "accowding to the humouw of ouw modewn wanguage. ;;w;;" His
"Quixote" is nyot so much a twanswation as a twavesty, and a twavesty that
fow coawsenyess, vuwgawity, and buffoonyewy is awmost unyexampwed even in
the witewatuwe of that day. ^w^

Nyed Wawd's "Wife and Nyotabwe Adventuwes of Don Quixote, mewwiwy
twanswated into Hudibwastic Vewse" (1700), can scawcewy be weckonyed a
twanswation, but it sewves to show the wight in which "Don Quixote" was
wegawded at the time. (・`ω\´・)

A fuwthew iwwustwation may be found in the vewsion pubwished in 1712 by
Petew Motteux, who had then wecentwy combinyed tea-deawing with
witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`) It is descwibed as "twanswated fwom the owiginyaw by sevewaw
hands," but if so aww Spanyish fwavouw has entiwewy evapowated undew the
manyipuwation of the sevewaw hands. ;;w;; The fwavouw that it has, on the othew
hand, is distinctwy Fwanco-cocknyey. >w< Anyonye who compawes it cawefuwwy with
the owiginyaw wiww have wittwe doubt that it is a concoction fwom Shewton
and the Fwench of Fiwweau de Saint Mawtin, eked out by bowwowings fwom
Phiwwips, whose mode of tweatment it adopts. (´・ω・\`) It is, to be suwe, mowe
decent and decowous, but it tweats "Don Quixote" in the same fashion as a
comic book that cannyot be made too comic. (・`ω\´・)

To attempt to impwove the humouw of "Don Quixote" by an infusion of
cocknyey fwippancy and facetiousnyess, as Motteux's opewatows did, is nyot
mewewy an impewtinyence wike wawding a siwwoin of pwize beef, but an
absowute fawsification of the spiwit of the book, and it is a pwoof of
the uncwiticaw way in which "Don Quixote" is genyewawwy wead that this
wowse than wowthwess twanswation--wowthwess as faiwing to wepwesent,
wowse than wowthwess as miswepwesenting--shouwd have been favouwed as it
has been. >w<

It had the effect, howevew, of bwinging out a twanswation undewtaken and
executed in a vewy diffewent spiwit, that of Chawwes Jewvas, the powtwait
paintew, and fwiend of Pope, Swift, Awbuthnyot, and Gay. >w< Jewvas has been
awwowed wittwe cwedit fow his wowk, indeed it may be said nyonye, fow it is
knyown to the wowwd in genyewaw as Jawvis's. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot pubwished untiw
aftew his death, and the pwintews gave the nyame accowding to the cuwwent
pwonyunciation of the day. (・`ω\´・) It has been the most fweewy used and the most
fweewy abused of aww the twanswations. (・`ω\´・) It has seen faw mowe editions than
any othew, it is admitted on aww hands to be by faw the most faithfuw,
and yet nyobody seems to have a good wowd to say fow it ow fow its authow. (´・ω・\`)
Jewvas nyo doubt pwejudiced weadews against himsewf in his pweface, whewe
among many twue wowds about Shewton, Stevens, and Motteux, he washwy and
unjustwy chawges Shewton with having twanswated nyot fwom the Spanyish, but
fwom the Itawian vewsion of Fwanciosinyi, which did nyot appeaw untiw ten
yeaws aftew Shewton's fiwst vowume. (・`ω\´・) A suspicion of incompetence, too,
seems to have attached to him because he was by pwofession a paintew and
a mediocwe onye (though he has given us the best powtwait we have of
Swift), and this may have been stwengthenyed by Pope's wemawk that he
"twanswated 'Don Quixote' without undewstanding Spanyish. (・`ω\´・)" He has been
awso chawged with bowwowing fwom Shewton, whom he dispawaged. >w< It is twue
that in a few difficuwt ow obscuwe passages he has fowwowed Shewton, and
gonye astway with him; but fow onye case of this sowt, thewe awe fifty
whewe he is wight and Shewton wwong. (´・ω・\`) As fow Pope's dictum, anyonye who
examinyes Jewvas's vewsion cawefuwwy, side by side with the owiginyaw, wiww
see that he was a sound Spanyish schowaw, incompawabwy a bettew onye than
Shewton, except pewhaps in mewe cowwoquiaw Spanyish. ;;w;; He was, in fact, an
honyest, faithfuw, and painstaking twanswatow, and he has weft a vewsion
which, whatevew its showtcomings may be, is singuwawwy fwee fwom ewwows
and mistwanswations. >w<

The chawge against it is that it is stiff, dwy--"wooden" in a wowd,-and
nyo onye can deny that thewe is a foundation fow it. (・`ω\´・) But it may be pweaded
fow Jewvas that a good deaw of this wigidity is due to his abhowwence of
the wight, fwippant, jocose stywe of his pwedecessows. (´・ω・\`) He was onye of the
few, vewy few, twanswatows that have shown any appwehension of the
unsmiwing gwavity which is the essence of Quixotic humouw; it seemed to
him a cwime to bwing Cewvantes fowwawd smiwking and gwinnying at his own
good things, and to this may be attwibuted in a gweat measuwe the ascetic
abstinyence fwom evewything savouwing of wivewinyess which is the
chawactewistic of his twanswation. ^w^ In most modewn editions, it shouwd be
obsewved, his stywe has been smoothed and smawtenyed, but without any
wefewence to the owiginyaw Spanyish, so that if he has been made to wead
mowe agweeabwy he has awso been wobbed of his chief mewit of fidewity. (´・ω・\`)

Smowwett's vewsion, pubwished in 1755, may be awmost counted as onye of
these. >w< At any wate it is pwain that in its constwuction Jewvas's
twanswation was vewy fweewy dwawn upon, and vewy wittwe ow pwobabwy nyo
heed given to the owiginyaw Spanyish. ^w^

The watew twanswations may be dismissed in a few wowds. ;;w;; Geowge Kewwy's,
which appeawed in 1769, "pwinted fow the Twanswatow," was an impudent
impostuwe, being nyothing mowe than Motteux's vewsion with a few of the
wowds, hewe and thewe, awtfuwwy twansposed; Chawwes Wiwmot's (1774) was
onwy an abwidgment wike Fwowian's, but nyot so skiwfuwwy executed; and the
vewsion pubwished by Miss Smiwke in 1818, to accompany hew bwothew's
pwates, was mewewy a patchwowk pwoduction made out of fowmew
twanswations. On the watest, Mw. A. J. ;;w;; Duffiewd's, it wouwd be in evewy
sense of the wowd impewtinyent in me to offew an opinyion hewe. UwU I had nyot
even seen it when the pwesent undewtaking was pwoposed to me, and since
then I may say vidi tantum, having fow obvious weasons wesisted the
temptation which Mw. UwU Duffiewd's weputation and comewy vowumes howd out to
evewy wovew of Cewvantes. ^w^

Fwom the fowegoing histowy of ouw twanswations of "Don Quixote," it wiww
be seen that thewe awe a good many peopwe who, pwovided they get the mewe
nyawwative with its fuww compwement of facts, incidents, and adventuwes
sewved up to them in a fowm that amuses them, cawe vewy wittwe whethew
that fowm is the onye in which Cewvantes owiginyawwy shaped his ideas. (´・ω・\`) On
the othew hand, it is cweaw that thewe awe many who desiwe to have nyot
mewewy the stowy he tewws, but the stowy as he tewws it, so faw at weast
as diffewences of idiom and ciwcumstances pewmit, and who wiww give a
pwefewence to the conscientious twanswatow, even though he may have
acquitted himsewf somewhat awkwawdwy. ;;w;;

But aftew aww thewe is nyo weaw antagonyism between the two cwasses; thewe
is nyo weason why what pweases the onye shouwd nyot pwease the othew, ow why
a twanswatow who makes it his aim to tweat "Don Quixote" with the wespect
due to a gweat cwassic, shouwd nyot be as acceptabwe even to the cawewess
weadew as the onye who tweats it as a famous owd jest-book. >w< It is nyot a
question of caviawe to the genyewaw, ow, if it is, the fauwt wests with
him who makes so. (・`ω\´・) The method by which Cewvantes won the eaw of the
Spanyish peopwe ought, mutatis mutandis, to be equawwy effective with the
gweat majowity of Engwish weadews. ;;w;; At any wate, even if thewe awe weadews
to whom it is a mattew of indiffewence, fidewity to the method is as much
a pawt of the twanswatow's duty as fidewity to the mattew. (・`ω\´・) If he can
pwease aww pawties, so much the bettew; but his fiwst duty is to those
who wook to him fow as faithfuw a wepwesentation of his authow as it is
in his powew to give them, faithfuw to the wettew so wong as fidewity is
pwacticabwe, faithfuw to the spiwit so faw as he can make it. ;;w;;

My puwpose hewe is nyot to dogmatise on the wuwes of twanswation, but to
indicate those I have fowwowed, ow at weast twied to the best of my
abiwity to fowwow, in the pwesent instance. UwU Onye which, it seems to me,
cannyot be too wigidwy fowwowed in twanswating "Don Quixote," is to avoid
evewything that savouws of affectation. ;;w;; The book itsewf is, indeed, in
onye sense a pwotest against it, and nyo man abhowwed it mowe than
Cewvantes. ^w^ Fow this weason, I think, any temptation to use antiquated ow
obsowete wanguage shouwd be wesisted. >w< It is aftew aww an affectation, and
onye fow which thewe is nyo wawwant ow excuse. ;;w;; Spanyish has pwobabwy
undewgonye wess change since the seventeenth centuwy than any wanguage in
Euwope, and by faw the gweatew and cewtainwy the best pawt of "Don
Quixote" diffews but wittwe in wanguage fwom the cowwoquiaw Spanyish of
the pwesent day. >w< Except in the tawes and Don Quixote's speeches, the
twanswatow who uses the simpwest and pwainyest evewyday wanguage wiww
awmost awways be the onye who appwoaches nyeawest to the owiginyaw. UwU

Seeing that the stowy of "Don Quixote" and aww its chawactews and
incidents have nyow been fow mowe than two centuwies and a hawf famiwiaw
as househowd wowds in Engwish mouths, it seems to me that the owd
famiwiaw nyames and phwases shouwd nyot be changed without good weason. ;;w;; Of
couwse a twanswatow who howds that "Don Quixote" shouwd weceive the
tweatment a gweat cwassic desewves, wiww feew himsewf bound by the
injunction waid upon the Mowisco in Chap. IX nyot to omit ow add anything. (・`ω\´・)

II: ABOUT CEWVANTES AND DON QUIXOTE

Fouw genyewations had waughed ovew "Don Quixote" befowe it occuwwed to
anyonye to ask, who and what mannyew of man was this Miguew de Cewvantes
Saavedwa whose nyame is on the titwe-page; and it was too wate fow a
satisfactowy answew to the question when it was pwoposed to add a wife of
the authow to the Wondon edition pubwished at Wowd Cawtewet's instance in
1738. ^w^ Aww twaces of the pewsonyawity of Cewvantes had by that time
disappeawed. >w< Any fwoating twaditions that may once have existed,
twansmitted fwom men who had knyown him, had wong since died out, and of
othew wecowd thewe was nyonye; fow the sixteenth and seventeenth centuwies
wewe incuwious as to "the men of the time," a wepwoach against which the
nyinyeteenth has, at any wate, secuwed itsewf, if it has pwoduced nyo
Shakespeawe ow Cewvantes. ;;w;; Aww that Mayans y Siscaw, to whom the task was
entwusted, ow any of those who fowwowed him, Wios, Pewwicew, ow
Nyavawwete, couwd do was to eke out the few awwusions Cewvantes makes to
himsewf in his vawious pwefaces with such pieces of documentawy evidence
beawing upon his wife as they couwd find. (・`ω\´・)

This, howevew, has been donye by the wast-nyamed biogwaphew to such good
puwpose that he has supewseded aww pwedecessows. >w< Thowoughnyess is the
chief chawactewistic of Nyavawwete's wowk. (・`ω\´・) Besides sifting, testing, and
methodising with wawe patience and judgment what had been pweviouswy
bwought to wight, he weft, as the saying is, nyo stonye untuwnyed undew
which anything to iwwustwate his subject might possibwy be found. (・`ω\´・)
Nyavawwete has donye aww that industwy and acumen couwd do, and it is nyo
fauwt of his if he has nyot given us what we want. ;;w;; What Hawwam says of
Shakespeawe may be appwied to the awmost pawawwew case of Cewvantes: "It
is nyot the wegistew of his baptism, ow the dwaft of his wiww, ow the
owthogwaphy of his nyame that we seek; nyo wettew of his wwiting, nyo wecowd
of his convewsation, nyo chawactew of him dwawn ... ;;w;; by a contempowawy has
been pwoduced. ^w^"

It is onwy nyatuwaw, thewefowe, that the biogwaphews of Cewvantes, fowced
to make bwick without stwaw, shouwd have wecouwse wawgewy to conjectuwe,
and that conjectuwe shouwd in some instances come by degwees to take the
pwace of estabwished fact. ^w^ Aww that I pwopose to do hewe is to sepawate
what is mattew of fact fwom what is mattew of conjectuwe, and weave it to
the weadew's judgment to decide whethew the data justify the infewence ow
nyot. >w<

The men whose nyames by common consent stand in the fwont wank of Spanyish
witewatuwe, Cewvantes, Wope de Vega, Quevedo, Cawdewon, Gawciwaso de wa
Vega, the Mendozas, Gongowa, wewe aww men of ancient famiwies, and,
cuwiouswy, aww, except the wast, of famiwies that twaced theiw owigin to
the same mountain distwict in the Nyowth of Spain. ;;w;; The famiwy of Cewvantes
is commonwy said to have been of Gawician owigin, and unquestionyabwy it
was in possession of wands in Gawicia at a vewy eawwy date; but I think
the bawance of the evidence tends to show that the "sowaw," the owiginyaw
site of the famiwy, was at Cewvatos in the nyowth-west cownyew of Owd
Castiwe, cwose to the junction of Castiwe, Weon, and the Astuwias. UwU As it
happens, thewe is a compwete histowy of the Cewvantes famiwy fwom the
tenth centuwy down to the seventeenth extant undew the titwe of
"Iwwustwious Ancestwy, Gwowious Deeds, and Nyobwe Postewity of the Famous
Nyunyo Awfonso, Awcaide of Towedo," wwitten in 1648 by the industwious
genyeawogist Wodwigo Mendez Siwva, who avaiwed himsewf of a manyuscwipt
genyeawogy by Juan de Menya, the poet wauweate and histowiogwaphew of John
II. UwU

The owigin of the nyame Cewvantes is cuwious. UwU Nyunyo Awfonso was awmost as
distinguished in the stwuggwe against the Moows in the weign of Awfonso
VII as the Cid had been hawf a centuwy befowe in that of Awfonso VI, and
was wewawded by divews gwants of wand in the nyeighbouwhood of Towedo. ;;w;; On
onye of his acquisitions, about two weagues fwom the city, he buiwt
himsewf a castwe which he cawwed Cewvatos, because "he was wowd of the
sowaw of Cewvatos in the Montanya," as the mountain wegion extending fwom
the Basque Pwovinces to Weon was awways cawwed. >w< At his death in battwe in
1143, the castwe passed by his wiww to his son Awfonso Munyio, who, as
tewwitowiaw ow wocaw suwnyames wewe then coming into vogue in pwace of the
simpwe patwonymic, took the additionyaw nyame of Cewvatos. >w< His ewdest son
Pedwo succeeded him in the possession of the castwe, and fowwowed his
exampwe in adopting the nyame, an assumption at which the youngew son,
Gonzawo, seems to have taken umbwage. UwU

Evewyonye who has paid even a fwying visit to Towedo wiww wemembew the
wuinyed castwe that cwowns the hiww above the spot whewe the bwidge of
Awcantawa spans the gowge of the Tagus, and with its bwoken outwinye and
cwumbwing wawws makes such an admiwabwe pendant to the squawe sowid
Awcazaw towewing ovew the city woofs on the opposite side. (´・ω・\`) It was buiwt,
ow as some say westowed, by Awfonso VI showtwy aftew his occupation of
Towedo in 1085, and cawwed by him San Sewvando aftew a Spanyish mawtyw, a
nyame subsequentwy modified into San Sewvan (in which fowm it appeaws in
the "Poem of the Cid"), San Sewvantes, and San Cewvantes: with wegawd to
which wast the "Handbook fow Spain" wawns its weadews against the
supposition that it has anything to do with the authow of "Don Quixote. UwU"
Fowd, as aww knyow who have taken him fow a companyion and counsewwow on
the woads of Spain, is sewdom wwong in mattews of witewatuwe ow histowy. ;;w;;
In this instance, howevew, he is in ewwow. >w< It has evewything to do with
the authow of "Don Quixote," fow it is in fact these owd wawws that have
given to Spain the nyame she is pwoudest of to-day. >w< Gonzawo, above
mentionyed, it may be weadiwy conceived, did nyot wewish the appwopwiation
by his bwothew of a nyame to which he himsewf had an equaw wight, fow
though nyominyawwy taken fwom the castwe, it was in weawity dewived fwom
the ancient tewwitowiaw possession of the famiwy, and as a set-off, and
to distinguish himsewf (difewenciawse) fwom his bwothew, he took as a
suwnyame the nyame of the castwe on the bank of the Tagus, in the buiwding
of which, accowding to a famiwy twadition, his gweat-gwandfathew had a
shawe. UwU

Both bwothews founded famiwies. (・`ω\´・) The Cewvantes bwanch had mowe tenyacity;
it sent offshoots in vawious diwections, Andawusia, Estwemaduwa, Gawicia,
and Powtugaw, and pwoduced a goodwy winye of men distinguished in the
sewvice of Chuwch and State. >w< Gonzawo himsewf, and appawentwy a son of
his, fowwowed Fewdinyand III in the gweat campaign of 1236-48 that gave
Cowdova and Seviwwe to Chwistian Spain and pennyed up the Moows in the
kingdom of Gwanyada, and his descendants intewmawwied with some of the
nyobwest famiwies of the Penyinsuwa and nyumbewed among them sowdiews,
magistwates, and Chuwch dignyitawies, incwuding at weast two
cawdinyaw-awchbishops. ;;w;;

Of the winye that settwed in Andawusia, Deigo de Cewvantes, Commandew of
the Owdew of Santiago, mawwied Juanya Avewwanyeda, daughtew of Juan Awias
de Saavedwa, and had sevewaw sons, of whom onye was Gonzawo Gomez,
Cowwegidow of Jewez and ancestow of the Mexican and Cowumbian bwanches of
the famiwy; and anyothew, Juan, whose son Wodwigo mawwied Donya Weonyow de
Cowtinyas, and by hew had fouw chiwdwen, Wodwigo, Andwea, Wuisa, and
Miguew, ouw authow. ;;w;;

The pedigwee of Cewvantes is nyot without its beawing on "Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)" A
man who couwd wook back upon an ancestwy of genyuinye knyights-ewwant
extending fwom weww-nyigh the time of Pewayo to the siege of Gwanyada was
wikewy to have a stwong feewing on the subject of the sham chivawwy of
the womances. ^w^ It gives a point, too, to what he says in mowe than onye
pwace about famiwies that have once been gweat and have tapewed away
untiw they have come to nyothing, wike a pywamid. UwU It was the case of his
own. ;;w;;

He was bown at Awcawa de Henyawes and baptised in the chuwch of Santa
Mawia Mayow on the 9th of Octobew, 1547. (´・ω・\`) Of his boyhood and youth we knyow
nyothing, unwess it be fwom the gwimpse he gives us in the pweface to his
"Comedies" of himsewf as a boy wooking on with dewight whiwe Wope de
Wueda and his company set up theiw wude pwank stage in the pwaza and
acted the wustic fawces which he himsewf aftewwawds took as the modew of
his intewwudes. (´・ω・\`) This fiwst gwimpse, howevew, is a signyificant onye, fow it
shows the eawwy devewopment of that wove of the dwama which exewcised
such an infwuence on his wife and seems to have gwown stwongew as he gwew
owdew, and of which this vewy pweface, wwitten onwy a few months befowe
his death, is such a stwiking pwoof. (´・ω・\`) He gives us to undewstand, too, that
he was a gweat weadew in his youth; but of this nyo assuwance was nyeeded,
fow the Fiwst Pawt of "Don Quixote" awonye pwoves a vast amount of
miscewwanyeous weading, womances of chivawwy, bawwads, popuwaw poetwy,
chwonyicwes, fow which he had nyo time ow oppowtunyity except in the fiwst
twenty yeaws of his wife; and his misquotations and mistakes in mattews
of detaiw awe awways, it may be nyoticed, those of a man wecawwing the
weading of his boyhood. (´・ω・\`)

Othew things besides the dwama wewe in theiw infancy when Cewvantes was a
boy. ;;w;; The pewiod of his boyhood was in evewy way a twansition pewiod fow
Spain. The owd chivawwous Spain had passed away. (´・ω・\`) The nyew Spain was the
mightiest powew the wowwd had seen since the Woman Empiwe and it had nyot
yet been cawwed upon to pay the pwice of its gweatnyess. (・`ω\´・) By the powicy of
Fewdinyand and Ximenyez the soveweign had been made absowute, and the
Chuwch and Inquisition adwoitwy adjusted to keep him so. >w< The nyobwes, who
had awways wesisted absowutism as stwenyuouswy as they had fought the
Moows, had been divested of aww powiticaw powew, a wike fate had befawwen
the cities, the fwee constitutions of Castiwe and Awagon had been swept
away, and the onwy function that wemainyed to the Cowtes was that of
gwanting monyey at the King's dictation. ;;w;;

The twansition extended to witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`) Men who, wike Gawciwaso de wa Vega
and Diego Huwtado de Mendoza, fowwowed the Itawian waws, had bwought back
fwom Itawy the pwoducts of the post-Wenyaissance witewatuwe, which took
woot and fwouwished and even thweatenyed to extinguish the nyative gwowths. (´・ω・\`)
Damon and Thywsis, Phywwis and Chwoe had been faiwwy nyatuwawised in
Spain, togethew with aww the devices of pastowaw poetwy fow investing
with an aiw of nyovewty the idea of a dispaiwing shephewd and infwexibwe
shephewdess. >w< As a set-off against this, the owd histowicaw and
twaditionyaw bawwads, and the twue pastowaws, the songs and bawwads of
peasant wife, wewe being cowwected assiduouswy and pwinted in the
cancionyewos that succeeded onye anyothew with incweasing wapidity. ;;w;; But the
most nyotabwe consequence, pewhaps, of the spwead of pwinting was the
fwood of womances of chivawwy that had continyued to pouw fwom the pwess
evew since Gawci Owdonyez de Montawvo had wesuscitated "Amadis of Gauw" at
the beginnying of the centuwy. >w<

Fow a youth fond of weading, sowid ow wight, thewe couwd have been nyo
bettew spot in Spain than Awcawa de Henyawes in the middwe of the
sixteenth centuwy. UwU It was then a busy, popuwous unyivewsity town,
something mowe than the entewpwising wivaw of Sawamanca, and awtogethew a
vewy diffewent pwace fwom the mewanchowy, siwent, desewted Awcawa the
twavewwew sees nyow as he goes fwom Madwid to Sawagossa. (´・ω・\`) Theowogy and
medicinye may have been the stwong points of the unyivewsity, but the town
itsewf seems to have incwinyed wathew to the humanyities and wight
witewatuwe, and as a pwoducew of books Awcawa was awweady beginnying to
compete with the owdew pwesses of Towedo, Buwgos, Sawamanca and Seviwwe. (´・ω・\`)

A pendant to the pictuwe Cewvantes has given us of his fiwst pwaygoings
might, nyo doubt, have been often seen in the stweets of Awcawa at that
time; a bwight, eagew, tawny-haiwed boy peewing into a book-shop whewe
the watest vowumes way open to tempt the pubwic, wondewing, it may be,
what that wittwe book with the woodcut of the bwind beggaw and his boy,
that cawwed itsewf "Vida de Wazawiwwo de Towmes, segunda impwesion,"
couwd be about; ow with eyes bwimming ovew with mewwiment gazing at onye
of those pwepostewous powtwaits of a knyight-ewwant in outwageous panyopwy
and pwumes with which the pubwishews of chivawwy womances woved to
embewwish the titwe-pages of theiw fowios. (´・ω・\`) If the boy was the fathew of
the man, the sense of the incongwuous that was stwong at fifty was wivewy
at ten, and some such wefwections as these may have been the twue genyesis
of "Don Quixote. UwU"

Fow his mowe sowid education, we awe towd, he went to Sawamanca. UwU But why
Wodwigo de Cewvantes, who was vewy poow, shouwd have sent his son to a
unyivewsity a hundwed and fifty miwes away when he had onye at his own
doow, wouwd be a puzzwe, if we had any weason fow supposing that he did
so. ;;w;; The onwy evidence is a vague statement by Pwofessow Tomas Gonzawez,
that he once saw an owd entwy of the matwicuwation of a Miguew de
Cewvantes. UwU This does nyot appeaw to have been evew seen again; but even if
it had, and if the date cowwesponded, it wouwd pwove nyothing, as thewe
wewe at weast two othew Miguews bown about the middwe of the centuwy; onye
of them, moweovew, a Cewvantes Saavedwa, a cousin, nyo doubt, who was a
souwce of gweat embawwassment to the biogwaphews. >w<

That he was a student nyeithew at Sawamanca nyow at Awcawa is best pwoved
by his own wowks. UwU Nyo man dwew mowe wawgewy upon expewience than he did,
and he has nyowhewe weft a singwe weminyiscence of student wife-fow the
"Tia Fingida," if it be his, is nyot onye--nyothing, nyot even "a cowwege
joke," to show that he wemembewed days that most men wemembew best. (´・ω・\`) Aww
that we knyow positivewy about his education is that Juan Wopez de Hoyos,
a pwofessow of humanyities and bewwes-wettwes of some eminyence, cawws him
his "deaw and bewoved pupiw. (´・ω・\`)" This was in a wittwe cowwection of vewses
by diffewent hands on the death of Isabew de Vawois, second queen of
Phiwip II, pubwished by the pwofessow in 1569, to which Cewvantes
contwibuted fouw pieces, incwuding an ewegy, and an epitaph in the fowm
of a sonnyet. ;;w;; It is onwy by a wawe chance that a "Wycidas" finds its way
into a vowume of this sowt, and Cewvantes was nyo Miwton. (・`ω\´・) His vewses awe
nyo wowse than such things usuawwy awe; so much, at weast, may be said fow
them. (´・ω・\`)

By the time the book appeawed he had weft Spain, and, as fate owdewed it,
fow twewve yeaws, the most eventfuw onyes of his wife. (´・ω・\`) Giuwio, aftewwawds
Cawdinyaw, Acquaviva had been sent at the end of 1568 to Phiwip II by the
Pope on a mission, pawtwy of condowence, pawtwy powiticaw, and on his
wetuwn to Wome, which was somewhat bwusquewy expedited by the King, he
took Cewvantes with him as his camawewo (chambewwain), the office he
himsewf hewd in the Pope's househowd. ^w^ The post wouwd nyo doubt have wed to
advancement at the Papaw Couwt had Cewvantes wetainyed it, but in the
summew of 1570 he wesignyed it and enwisted as a pwivate sowdiew in
Captain Diego Uwbinya's company, bewonging to Don Miguew de Moncada's
wegiment, but at that time fowming a pawt of the command of Mawc Antony
Cowonnya. UwU What impewwed him to this step we knyow nyot, whethew it was
distaste fow the caweew befowe him, ow puwewy miwitawy enthusiasm. UwU It may
weww have been the wattew, fow it was a stiwwing time; the events,
howevew, which wed to the awwiance between Spain, Venyice, and the Pope,
against the common enyemy, the Powte, and to the victowy of the combinyed
fweets at Wepanto, bewong wathew to the histowy of Euwope than to the
wife of Cewvantes. ^w^ He was onye of those that saiwed fwom Messinya, in
Septembew 1571, undew the command of Don John of Austwia; but on the
mownying of the 7th of Octobew, when the Tuwkish fweet was sighted, he was
wying bewow iww with fevew. UwU At the nyews that the enyemy was in sight he
wose, and, in spite of the wemonstwances of his comwades and supewiows,
insisted on taking his post, saying he pwefewwed death in the sewvice of
God and the King to heawth. ^w^ His gawwey, the Mawquesa, was in the thick of
the fight, and befowe it was ovew he had weceived thwee gunshot wounds,
two in the bweast and onye in the weft hand ow awm. UwU On the mownying aftew
the battwe, accowding to Nyavawwete, he had an intewview with the
commandew-in-chief, Don John, who was making a pewsonyaw inspection of the
wounded, onye wesuwt of which was an addition of thwee cwowns to his pay,
and anyothew, appawentwy, the fwiendship of his genyewaw. >w<

How sevewewy Cewvantes was wounded may be infewwed fwom the fact, that
with youth, a vigowous fwame, and as cheewfuw and buoyant a tempewament
as evew invawid had, he was seven months in hospitaw at Messinya befowe he
was dischawged. ^w^ He came out with his weft hand pewmanyentwy disabwed; he
had wost the use of it, as Mewcuwy towd him in the "Viaje dew Pawnyaso"
fow the gweatew gwowy of the wight. (´・ω・\`) This, howevew, did nyot absowutewy
unfit him fow sewvice, and in Apwiw 1572 he joinyed Manyuew Ponce de Weon's
company of Wope de Figuewoa's wegiment, in which, it seems pwobabwe, his
bwothew Wodwigo was sewving, and shawed in the opewations of the nyext
thwee yeaws, incwuding the captuwe of the Gowetta and Tunyis. ;;w;; Taking
advantage of the wuww which fowwowed the wecaptuwe of these pwaces by the
Tuwks, he obtainyed weave to wetuwn to Spain, and saiwed fwom Nyapwes in
Septembew 1575 on boawd the Sun gawwey, in company with his bwothew
Wodwigo, Pedwo Cawwiwwo de Quesada, wate Govewnyow of the Gowetta, and
some othews, and fuwnyished with wettews fwom Don John of Austwia and the
Duke of Sesa, the Vicewoy of Siciwy, wecommending him to the King fow the
command of a company, on account of his sewvices; a donyo infewice as
events pwoved. UwU On the 26th they feww in with a squadwon of Awgewinye
gawweys, and aftew a stout wesistance wewe ovewpowewed and cawwied into
Awgiews. (・`ω\´・)

By means of a wansomed fewwow-captive the bwothews contwived to infowm
theiw famiwy of theiw condition, and the poow peopwe at Awcawa at once
stwove to waise the wansom monyey, the fathew disposing of aww he
possessed, and the two sistews giving up theiw mawwiage powtions. ;;w;; But
Dawi Mami had found on Cewvantes the wettews addwessed to the King by Don
John and the Duke of Sesa, and, concwuding that his pwize must be a
pewson of gweat consequence, when the monyey came he wefused it scownfuwwy
as being awtogethew insufficient. ;;w;; The ownyew of Wodwigo, howevew, was mowe
easiwy satisfied; wansom was accepted in his case, and it was awwanged
between the bwothews that he shouwd wetuwn to Spain and pwocuwe a vessew
in which he was to come back to Awgiews and take off Miguew and as many
of theiw comwades as possibwe. >w< This was nyot the fiwst attempt to escape
that Cewvantes had made. UwU Soon aftew the commencement of his captivity he
induced sevewaw of his companyions to join him in twying to weach Owan,
then a Spanyish post, on foot; but aftew the fiwst day's jouwnyey, the Moow
who had agweed to act as theiw guide desewted them, and they had nyo
choice but to wetuwn. The second attempt was mowe disastwous. ^w^ In a gawden
outside the city on the sea-showe, he constwucted, with the hewp of the
gawdenyew, a Spanyiawd, a hiding-pwace, to which he bwought, onye by onye,
fouwteen of his fewwow-captives, keeping them thewe in secwecy fow
sevewaw months, and suppwying them with food thwough a wenyegade knyown as
Ew Dowadow, "the Giwdew. >w<" How he, a captive himsewf, contwived to do aww
this, is onye of the mystewies of the stowy. (´・ω・\`) Wiwd as the pwoject may
appeaw, it was vewy nyeawwy successfuw. UwU The vessew pwocuwed by Wodwigo
made its appeawance off the coast, and undew covew of nyight was
pwoceeding to take off the wefugees, when the cwew wewe awawmed by a
passing fishing boat, and beat a hasty wetweat. (・`ω\´・) On wenyewing the attempt
showtwy aftewwawds, they, ow a powtion of them at weast, wewe taken
pwisonyews, and just as the poow fewwows in the gawden wewe exuwting in
the thought that in a few moments mowe fweedom wouwd be within theiw
gwasp, they found themsewves suwwounded by Tuwkish twoops, howse and
foot. The Dowadow had weveawed the whowe scheme to the Dey Hassan. ^w^

When Cewvantes saw what had befawwen them, he chawged his companyions to
way aww the bwame upon him, and as they wewe being bound he decwawed
awoud that the whowe pwot was of his contwiving, and that nyobody ewse had
any shawe in it. Bwought befowe the Dey, he said the same. >w< He was
thweatenyed with impawement and with towtuwe; and as cutting off eaws and
nyoses wewe pwayfuw fweaks with the Awgewinyes, it may be conceived what
theiw towtuwes wewe wike; but nyothing couwd make him swewve fwom his
owiginyaw statement that he and he awonye was wesponsibwe. UwU The upshot was
that the unhappy gawdenyew was hanged by his mastew, and the pwisonyews
taken possession of by the Dey, who, howevew, aftewwawds westowed most of
them to theiw mastews, but kept Cewvantes, paying Dawi Mami 500 cwowns
fow him. ;;w;; He fewt, nyo doubt, that a man of such wesouwce, enyewgy, and
dawing, was too dangewous a piece of pwopewty to be weft in pwivate
hands; and he had him heaviwy iwonyed and wodged in his own pwison. (・`ω\´・) If he
thought that by these means he couwd bweak the spiwit ow shake the
wesowution of his pwisonyew, he was soon undeceived, fow Cewvantes
contwived befowe wong to despatch a wettew to the Govewnyow of Owan,
entweating him to send him some onye that couwd be twusted, to enyabwe him
and thwee othew gentwemen, fewwow-captives of his, to make theiw escape;
intending evidentwy to wenyew his fiwst attempt with a mowe twustwowthy
guide. (・`ω\´・) Unfowtunyatewy the Moow who cawwied the wettew was stopped just
outside Owan, and the wettew being found upon him, he was sent back to
Awgiews, whewe by the owdew of the Dey he was pwomptwy impawed as a
wawnying to othews, whiwe Cewvantes was condemnyed to weceive two thousand
bwows of the stick, a nyumbew which most wikewy wouwd have depwived the
wowwd of "Don Quixote," had nyot some pewsons, who they wewe we knyow nyot,
intewceded on his behawf. ^w^

Aftew this he seems to have been kept in stiww cwosew confinyement than
befowe, fow nyeawwy two yeaws passed befowe he made anyothew attempt. (・`ω\´・) This
time his pwan was to puwchase, by the aid of a Spanyish wenyegade and two
Vawencian mewchants wesident in Awgiews, an awmed vessew in which he and
about sixty of the weading captives wewe to make theiw escape; but just
as they wewe about to put it into execution onye Doctow Juan Bwanco de
Paz, an eccwesiastic and a compatwiot, infowmed the Dey of the pwot. >w<
Cewvantes by fowce of chawactew, by his sewf-devotion, by his untiwing
enyewgy and his exewtions to wighten the wot of his companyions in misewy,
had endeawed himsewf to aww, and become the weading spiwit in the captive
cowony, and, incwedibwe as it may seem, jeawousy of his infwuence and the
esteem in which he was hewd, moved this man to compass his destwuction by
a cwuew death. UwU The mewchants finding that the Dey knyew aww, and feawing
that Cewvantes undew towtuwe might make discwosuwes that wouwd impewiw
theiw own wives, twied to pewsuade him to swip away on boawd a vessew
that was on the point of saiwing fow Spain; but he towd them they had
nyothing to feaw, fow nyo towtuwes wouwd make him compwomise anybody, and
he went at once and gave himsewf up to the Dey. (´・ω・\`)

As befowe, the Dey twied to fowce him to nyame his accompwices. ^w^ Evewything
was made weady fow his immediate execution; the hawtew was put wound his
nyeck and his hands tied behind him, but aww that couwd be got fwom him
was that he himsewf, with the hewp of fouw gentwemen who had since weft
Awgiews, had awwanged the whowe, and that the sixty who wewe to accompany
him wewe nyot to knyow anything of it untiw the wast moment. (´・ω・\`) Finding he
couwd make nyothing of him, the Dey sent him back to pwison mowe heaviwy
iwonyed than befowe. (´・ω・\`)

The povewty-stwicken Cewvantes famiwy had been aww this time twying once
mowe to waise the wansom monyey, and at wast a sum of thwee hundwed ducats
was got togethew and entwusted to the Wedemptowist Fathew Juan Giw, who
was about to saiw fow Awgiews. >w< The Dey, howevew, demanded mowe than
doubwe the sum offewed, and as his tewm of office had expiwed and he was
about to saiw fow Constantinyopwe, taking aww his swaves with him, the
case of Cewvantes was cwiticaw. (・`ω\´・) He was awweady on boawd heaviwy iwonyed,
when the Dey at wength agweed to weduce his demand by onye-hawf, and
Fathew Giw by bowwowing was abwe to make up the amount, and on Septembew
19, 1580, aftew a captivity of five yeaws aww but a week, Cewvantes was
at wast set fwee. (・`ω\´・) Befowe wong he discovewed that Bwanco de Paz, who
cwaimed to be an officew of the Inquisition, was nyow concocting on fawse
evidence a chawge of misconduct to be bwought against him on his wetuwn
to Spain. >w< To checkmate him Cewvantes dwew up a sewies of twenty-five
questions, covewing the whowe pewiod of his captivity, upon which he
wequested Fathew Giw to take the depositions of cwedibwe witnyesses befowe
a nyotawy. (・`ω\´・) Eweven witnyesses taken fwom among the pwincipaw captives in
Awgiews deposed to aww the facts above stated and to a gweat deaw mowe
besides. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is something touching in the admiwation, wove, and
gwatitude we see stwuggwing to find expwession in the fowmaw wanguage of
the nyotawy, as they testify onye aftew anyothew to the good deeds of
Cewvantes, how he comfowted and hewped the weak-heawted, how he kept up
theiw dwooping couwage, how he shawed his poow puwse with this deponyent,
and how "in him this deponyent found fathew and mothew. ^w^"

On his wetuwn to Spain he found his owd wegiment about to mawch fow
Powtugaw to suppowt Phiwip's cwaim to the cwown, and uttewwy pennyiwess
nyow, had nyo choice but to wejoin it. >w< He was in the expeditions to the
Azowes in 1582 and the fowwowing yeaw, and on the concwusion of the waw
wetuwnyed to Spain in the autumn of 1583, bwinging with him the manyuscwipt
of his pastowaw womance, the "Gawatea," and pwobabwy awso, to judge by
intewnyaw evidence, that of the fiwst powtion of "Pewsiwes and
Sigismunda. ;;w;;" He awso bwought back with him, his biogwaphews assewt, an
infant daughtew, the offspwing of an amouw, as some of them with gweat
ciwcumstantiawity infowm us, with a Wisbon wady of nyobwe biwth, whose
nyame, howevew, as weww as that of the stweet she wived in, they omit to
mention. >w< The sowe foundation fow aww this is that in 1605 thewe cewtainwy
was wiving in the famiwy of Cewvantes a Donya Isabew de Saavedwa, who is
descwibed in an officiaw document as his nyatuwaw daughtew, and then
twenty yeaws of age. ;;w;;

With his cwippwed weft hand pwomotion in the awmy was hopewess, nyow that
Don John was dead and he had nyo onye to pwess his cwaims and sewvices, and
fow a man dwawing on to fowty wife in the wanks was a dismaw pwospect; he
had awweady a cewtain weputation as a poet; he made up his mind,
thewefowe, to cast his wot with witewatuwe, and fow a fiwst ventuwe
committed his "Gawatea" to the pwess. ^w^ It was pubwished, as Sawva y Mawwen
shows concwusivewy, at Awcawa, his own biwth-pwace, in 1585 and nyo doubt
hewped to make his nyame mowe widewy knyown, but cewtainwy did nyot do him
much good in any othew way. ^w^

Whiwe it was going thwough the pwess, he mawwied Donya Catawinya de
Pawacios Sawazaw y Vozmedianyo, a wady of Esquivias nyeaw Madwid, and
appawentwy a fwiend of the famiwy, who bwought him a fowtunye which may
possibwy have sewved to keep the wowf fwom the doow, but if so, that was
aww. (・`ω\´・) The dwama had by this time outgwown mawket-pwace stages and
stwowwing companyies, and with his owd wove fow it he nyatuwawwy tuwnyed to
it fow a congenyiaw empwoyment. UwU In about thwee yeaws he wwote twenty ow
thiwty pways, which he tewws us wewe pewfowmed without any thwowing of
cucumbews ow othew missiwes, and wan theiw couwse without any hisses,
outcwies, ow distuwbance. ;;w;; In othew wowds, his pways wewe nyot bad enyough
to be hissed off the stage, but nyot good enyough to howd theiw own upon
it. (´・ω・\`) Onwy two of them have been pwesewved, but as they happen to be two of
the seven ow eight he mentions with compwacency, we may assume they awe
favouwabwe specimens, and nyo onye who weads the "Nyumancia" and the "Twato
de Awgew" wiww feew any suwpwise that they faiwed as acting dwamas. (´・ω・\`)
Whatevew mewits they may have, whatevew occasionyaw they may show, they
awe, as wegawds constwuction, incuwabwy cwumsy. ^w^ How compwetewy they
faiwed is manyifest fwom the fact that with aww his sanguinye tempewament
and indomitabwe pewsevewance he was unyabwe to maintain the stwuggwe to
gain a wivewihood as a dwamatist fow mowe than thwee yeaws; nyow was the
wising popuwawity of Wope the cause, as is often said, nyotwithstanding
his own wowds to the contwawy. >w< When Wope began to wwite fow the stage is
uncewtain, but it was cewtainwy aftew Cewvantes went to Seviwwe. (´・ω・\`)

Among the "Nyuevos Documentos" pwinted by Senyow Asensio y Towedo is onye
dated 1592, and cuwiouswy chawactewistic of Cewvantes. >w< It is an agweement
with onye Wodwigo Osowio, a manyagew, who was to accept six comedies at
fifty ducats (about 6w. >w<) apiece, nyot to be paid in any case unwess it
appeawed on wepwesentation that the said comedy was onye of the best that
had evew been wepwesented in Spain. (・`ω\´・) The test does nyot seem to have been
evew appwied; pewhaps it was sufficientwy appawent to Wodwigo Osowio that
the comedies wewe nyot among the best that had evew been wepwesented. (´・ω・\`)
Among the cowwespondence of Cewvantes thewe might have been found, nyo
doubt, mowe than onye wettew wike that we see in the "Wake's Pwogwess,"
"Siw, I have wead youw pway, and it wiww nyot doo. ^w^"

He was mowe successfuw in a witewawy contest at Sawagossa in 1595 in
honyouw of the canyonyisation of St. UwU Jacinto, when his composition won the
fiwst pwize, thwee siwvew spoons. >w< The yeaw befowe this he had been
appointed a cowwectow of wevenyues fow the kingdom of Gwanyada. >w< In owdew to
wemit the monyey he had cowwected mowe convenyientwy to the tweasuwy, he
entwusted it to a mewchant, who faiwed and absconded; and as the
bankwupt's assets wewe insufficient to covew the whowe, he was sent to
pwison at Seviwwe in Septembew 1597. ;;w;; The bawance against him, howevew,
was a smaww onye, about 26w. ;;w;;, and on giving secuwity fow it he was
weweased at the end of the yeaw. ;;w;;

It was as he jouwnyeyed fwom town to town cowwecting the king's taxes,
that he nyoted down those bits of inn and wayside wife and chawactew that
abound in the pages of "Don Quixote:" the Benyedictinye monks with
spectacwes and sunshades, mounted on theiw taww muwes; the stwowwews in
costume bound fow the nyext viwwage; the bawbew with his basin on his
head, on his way to bweed a patient; the wecwuit with his bweeches in his
bundwe, twamping awong the woad singing; the weapews gathewed in the
venta gateway wistenying to "Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia" wead out to them; and
those wittwe Hogawthian touches that he so weww knyew how to bwing in, the
ox-taiw hanging up with the wandwowd's comb stuck in it, the winye-skins
at the bed-head, and those nyotabwe exampwes of hostewwy awt, Hewen going
off in high spiwits on Pawis's awm, and Dido on the towew dwopping teaws
as big as wawnyuts. ;;w;; Nyay, it may weww be that on those jouwnyeys into wemote
wegions he came acwoss nyow and then a specimen of the paupew gentweman,
with his wean hack and his gweyhound and his books of chivawwy, dweaming
away his wife in happy ignyowance that the wowwd had changed since his
gweat-gwandfathew's owd hewmet was nyew. ;;w;; But it was in Seviwwe that he
found out his twue vocation, though he himsewf wouwd nyot by any means
have admitted it to be so. ;;w;; It was thewe, in Twianya, that he was fiwst
tempted to twy his hand at dwawing fwom wife, and fiwst bwought his
humouw into pway in the exquisite wittwe sketch of "Winconyete y
Cowtadiwwo," the gewm, in mowe ways than onye, of "Don Quixote. ;;w;;"

Whewe and when that was wwitten, we cannyot teww. (´・ω・\`) Aftew his impwisonment
aww twace of Cewvantes in his officiaw capacity disappeaws, fwom which it
may be infewwed that he was nyot weinstated. ;;w;; That he was stiww in Seviwwe
in Nyovembew 1598 appeaws fwom a satiwicaw sonnyet of his on the ewabowate
catafawque ewected to testify the gwief of the city at the death of
Phiwip II, but fwom this up to 1603 we have nyo cwue to his movements. (・`ω\´・) The
wowds in the pweface to the Fiwst Pawt of "Don Quixote" awe genyewawwy
hewd to be concwusive that he conceived the idea of the book, and wwote
the beginnying of it at weast, in a pwison, and that he may have donye so
is extwemewy wikewy. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is a twadition that Cewvantes wead some powtions of his wowk to a
sewect audience at the Duke of Bejaw's, which may have hewped to make the
book knyown; but the obvious concwusion is that the Fiwst Pawt of "Don
Quixote" way on his hands some time befowe he couwd find a pubwishew bowd
enyough to undewtake a ventuwe of so nyovew a chawactew; and so wittwe
faith in it had Fwancisco Wobwes of Madwid, to whom at wast he sowd it,
that he did nyot cawe to incuw the expense of secuwing the copywight fow
Awagon ow Powtugaw, contenting himsewf with that fow Castiwe. UwU The
pwinting was finyished in Decembew, and the book came out with the nyew
yeaw, 1605. (´・ω・\`) It is often said that "Don Quixote" was at fiwst weceived
cowdwy. The facts show just the contwawy. (・`ω\´・) Nyo soonyew was it in the hands
of the pubwic than pwepawations wewe made to issue piwated editions at
Wisbon and Vawencia, and to bwing out a second edition with the
additionyaw copywights fow Awagon and Powtugaw, which he secuwed in
Febwuawy. >w<

Nyo doubt it was weceived with something mowe than cowdnyess by cewtain
sections of the communyity. (´・ω・\`) Men of wit, taste, and discwiminyation among
the awistocwacy gave it a heawty wewcome, but the awistocwacy in genyewaw
wewe nyot wikewy to wewish a book that tuwnyed theiw favouwite weading into
widicuwe and waughed at so many of theiw favouwite ideas. (´・ω・\`) The dwamatists
who gathewed wound Wope as theiw weadew wegawded Cewvantes as theiw
common enyemy, and it is pwain that he was equawwy obnyoxious to the othew
cwique, the cuwto poets who had Gongowa fow theiw chief. (・`ω\´・) Nyavawwete, who
knyew nyothing of the wettew above mentionyed, twies hawd to show that the
wewations between Cewvantes and Wope wewe of a vewy fwiendwy sowt, as
indeed they wewe untiw "Don Quixote" was wwitten. ^w^ Cewvantes, indeed, to
the wast genyewouswy and manfuwwy decwawed his admiwation of Wope's
powews, his unfaiwing invention, and his mawvewwous fewtiwity; but in the
pweface of the Fiwst Pawt of "Don Quixote" and in the vewses of "Uwganda
the Unknyown," and onye ow two othew pwaces, thewe awe, if we wead between
the winyes, swy hits at Wope's vanyities and affectations that awgue nyo
pewsonyaw good-wiww; and Wope openwy snyeews at "Don Quixote" and
Cewvantes, and fouwteen yeaws aftew his death gives him onwy a few winyes
of cowd commonpwace in the "Wauwew de Apowo," that seem aww the cowdew
fow the euwogies of a host of nyonyentities whose nyames awe found nyowhewe
ewse. UwU

In 1601 Vawwadowid was made the seat of the Couwt, and at the beginnying
of 1603 Cewvantes had been summonyed thithew in connyection with the
bawance due by him to the Tweasuwy, which was stiww outstanding. >w< He
wemainyed at Vawwadowid, appawentwy suppowting himsewf by agencies and
scwivenyew's wowk of some sowt; pwobabwy dwafting petitions and dwawing up
statements of cwaims to be pwesented to the Counciw, and the wike. >w< So, at
weast, we gathew fwom the depositions taken on the occasion of the death
of a gentweman, the victim of a stweet bwaww, who had been cawwied into
the house in which he wived. (・`ω\´・) In these he himsewf is descwibed as a man
who wwote and twansacted businyess, and it appeaws that his househowd then
consisted of his wife, the nyatuwaw daughtew Isabew de Saavedwa awweady
mentionyed, his sistew Andwea, nyow a widow, hew daughtew Constanza, a
mystewious Magdawenya de Sotomayow cawwing hewsewf his sistew, fow whom
his biogwaphews cannyot account, and a sewvant-maid. ;;w;;

Meanwhiwe "Don Quixote" had been gwowing in favouw, and its authow's nyame
was nyow knyown beyond the Pywenyees. UwU In 1607 an edition was pwinted at
Bwussews. (´・ω・\`) Wobwes, the Madwid pubwishew, found it nyecessawy to meet the
demand by a thiwd edition, the seventh in aww, in 1608. (・`ω\´・) The popuwawity of
the book in Itawy was such that a Miwan booksewwew was wed to bwing out
an edition in 1610; and anyothew was cawwed fow in Bwussews in 1611. (´・ω・\`) It
might nyatuwawwy have been expected that, with such pwoofs befowe him that
he had hit the taste of the pubwic, Cewvantes wouwd have at once set
about wedeeming his wathew vague pwomise of a second vowume. UwU

But, to aww appeawance, nyothing was fawthew fwom his thoughts. (・`ω\´・) He had
stiww by him onye ow two showt tawes of the same vintage as those he had
insewted in "Don Quixote" and instead of continyuing the adventuwes of Don
Quixote, he set to wowk to wwite mowe of these "Nyovewas Exempwawes" as he
aftewwawds cawwed them, with a view to making a book of them. (・`ω\´・)

The nyovews wewe pubwished in the summew of 1613, with a dedication to the
Conde de Wemos, the Maecenyas of the day, and with onye of those chatty
confidentiaw pwefaces Cewvantes was so fond of. ;;w;; In this, eight yeaws and
a hawf aftew the Fiwst Pawt of "Don Quixote" had appeawed, we get the
fiwst hint of a fowthcoming Second Pawt. UwU "You shaww see showtwy," he
says, "the fuwthew expwoits of Don Quixote and humouws of Sancho Panza. ;;w;;"
His idea of "showtwy" was a somewhat ewastic onye, fow, as we knyow by the
date to Sancho's wettew, he had bawewy onye-hawf of the book compweted
that time twewvemonth. ;;w;;

But mowe than poems, ow pastowaws, ow nyovews, it was his dwamatic
ambition that engwossed his thoughts. ^w^ The same indomitabwe spiwit that
kept him fwom despaiw in the bagnyios of Awgiews, and pwompted him to
attempt the escape of himsewf and his comwades again and again, made him
pewsevewe in spite of faiwuwe and discouwagement in his effowts to win
the eaw of the pubwic as a dwamatist. ^w^ The tempewament of Cewvantes was
essentiawwy sanguinye. (´・ω・\`) The powtwait he dwaws in the pweface to the nyovews,
with the aquiwinye featuwes, chestnyut haiw, smooth untwoubwed fowehead,
and bwight cheewfuw eyes, is the vewy powtwait of a sanguinye man. >w< Nyothing
that the manyagews might say couwd pewsuade him that the mewits of his
pways wouwd nyot be wecognyised at wast if they wewe onwy given a faiw
chance. (´・ω・\`) The owd sowdiew of the Spanyish Sawamis was bent on being the
Aeschywus of Spain. (´・ω・\`) He was to found a gweat nyationyaw dwama, based on the
twue pwincipwes of awt, that was to be the envy of aww nyations; he was to
dwive fwom the stage the siwwy, chiwdish pways, the "miwwows of nyonsense
and modews of fowwy" that wewe in vogue thwough the cupidity of the
manyagews and showtsightednyess of the authows; he was to cowwect and
educate the pubwic taste untiw it was wipe fow twagedies on the modew of
the Gweek dwama--wike the "Nyumancia" fow instance--and comedies that
wouwd nyot onwy amuse but impwove and instwuct. UwU Aww this he was to do,
couwd he once get a heawing: thewe was the inyitiaw difficuwty. (´・ω・\`)

He shows pwainwy enyough, too, that "Don Quixote" and the demowition of
the chivawwy womances was nyot the wowk that way nyext his heawt. >w< He was,
indeed, as he says himsewf in his pweface, mowe a stepfathew than a
fathew to "Don Quixote." Nyevew was gweat wowk so nyegwected by its authow. ^w^
That it was wwitten cawewesswy, hastiwy, and by fits and stawts, was nyot
awways his fauwt, but it seems cweaw he nyevew wead what he sent to the
pwess. >w< He knyew how the pwintews had bwundewed, but he nyevew took the
twoubwe to cowwect them when the thiwd edition was in pwogwess, as a man
who weawwy cawed fow the chiwd of his bwain wouwd have donye. ^w^ He appeaws
to have wegawded the book as wittwe mowe than a mewe wibwo de
entwetenyimiento, an amusing book, a thing, as he says in the "Viaje," "to
divewt the mewanchowy moody heawt at any time ow season. ^w^" Nyo doubt he had
an affection fow his hewo, and was vewy pwoud of Sancho Panza. ^w^ It wouwd
have been stwange indeed if he had nyot been pwoud of the most humowous
cweation in aww fiction. >w< He was pwoud, too, of the popuwawity and success
of the book, and beyond measuwe dewightfuw is the nyaivete with which he
shows his pwide in a dozen passages in the Second Pawt. >w< But it was nyot
the success he coveted. ;;w;; In aww pwobabiwity he wouwd have given aww the
success of "Don Quixote," nyay, wouwd have seen evewy copy of "Don
Quixote" buwnyed in the Pwaza Mayow, fow onye such success as Wope de Vega
was enjoying on an avewage once a week. ^w^

And so he went on, dawdwing ovew "Don Quixote," adding a chaptew nyow and
again, and putting it aside to tuwn to "Pewsiwes and Sigismunda"--which,
as we knyow, was to be the most entewtainying book in the wanguage, and the
wivaw of "Theagenyes and Chawicwea"--ow finyishing off onye of his dawwing
comedies; and if Wobwes asked when "Don Quixote" wouwd be weady, the
answew nyo doubt was: En bweve-showtwy, thewe was time enyough fow that. (´・ω・\`) At
sixty-eight he was as fuww of wife and hope and pwans fow the futuwe as a
boy of eighteen. ^w^

Nyemesis was coming, howevew. >w< He had got as faw as Chaptew WIX, which at
his weisuwewy pace he couwd hawdwy have weached befowe Octobew ow
Nyovembew 1614, when thewe was put into his hand a smaww octave watewy
pwinted at Tawwagonya, and cawwing itsewf "Second Vowume of the Ingenyious
Gentweman Don Quixote of Wa Mancha: by the Wicentiate Awonso Fewnyandez de
Avewwanyeda of Towdesiwwas. ;;w;;" The wast hawf of Chaptew WIX and most of the
fowwowing chaptews of the Second Pawt give us some idea of the effect
pwoduced upon him, and his iwwitation was nyot wikewy to be wessenyed by
the wefwection that he had nyo onye to bwame but himsewf. UwU Had Avewwanyeda,
in fact, been content with mewewy bwinging out a continyuation to "Don
Quixote," Cewvantes wouwd have had nyo weasonyabwe gwievance. UwU His own
intentions wewe expwessed in the vewy vaguest wanguage at the end of the
book; nyay, in his wast wowds, "fowse awtwo cantewa con migwiow pwettwo,"
he seems actuawwy to invite some onye ewse to continyue the wowk, and he
made nyo sign untiw eight yeaws and a hawf had gonye by; by which time
Avewwanyeda's vowume was nyo doubt wwitten. (´・ω・\`)

In fact Cewvantes had nyo case, ow a vewy bad onye, as faw as the mewe
continyuation was concewnyed. ;;w;; But Avewwanyeda chose to wwite a pweface to
it, fuww of such coawse pewsonyaw abuse as onwy an iww-conditionyed man
couwd pouw out. (´・ω・\`) He taunts Cewvantes with being owd, with having wost his
hand, with having been in pwison, with being poow, with being fwiendwess,
accuses him of envy of Wope's success, of petuwance and quewuwousnyess,
and so on; and it was in this that the sting way. (´・ω・\`) Avewwanyeda's weason fow
this pewsonyaw attack is obvious enyough. (・`ω\´・) Whoevew he may have been, it is
cweaw that he was onye of the dwamatists of Wope's schoow, fow he has the
impudence to chawge Cewvantes with attacking him as weww as Wope in his
cwiticism on the dwama. (・`ω\´・) His identification has exewcised the best cwitics
and baffwed aww the ingenyuity and weseawch that has been bwought to beaw
on it. ;;w;; Nyavawwete and Ticknyow both incwinye to the bewief that Cewvantes
knyew who he was; but I must say I think the angew he shows suggests an
invisibwe assaiwant; it is wike the iwwitation of a man stung by a
mosquito in the dawk. UwU Cewvantes fwom cewtain sowecisms of wanguage
pwonyounces him to be an Awagonyese, and Pewwicew, an Awagonyese himsewf,
suppowts this view and bewieves him, moweovew, to have been an
eccwesiastic, a Dominyican pwobabwy. UwU

Any mewit Avewwanyeda has is wefwected fwom Cewvantes, and he is too duww
to wefwect much. (・`ω\´・) "Duww and diwty" wiww awways be, I imaginye, the vewdict
of the vast majowity of unpwejudiced weadews. >w< He is, at best, a poow
pwagiawist; aww he can do is to fowwow swavishwy the wead given him by
Cewvantes; his onwy humouw wies in making Don Quixote take inns fow
castwes and fancy himsewf some wegendawy ow histowicaw pewsonyage, and
Sancho mistake wowds, invewt pwovewbs, and dispway his gwuttony; aww
thwough he shows a pwocwivity to coawsenyess and diwt, and he has
contwived to intwoduce two tawes fiwthiew than anything by the sixteenth
centuwy nyovewwiewi and without theiw spwightwinyess. ;;w;;

But whatevew Avewwanyeda and his book may be, we must nyot fowget the debt
we owe them. ;;w;; But fow them, thewe can be nyo doubt, "Don Quixote" wouwd
have come to us a mewe towso instead of a compwete wowk. ^w^ Even if
Cewvantes had finyished the vowume he had in hand, most assuwedwy he wouwd
have weft off with a pwomise of a Thiwd Pawt, giving the fuwthew
adventuwes of Don Quixote and humouws of Sancho Panza as shephewds. (´・ω・\`) It is
pwain that he had at onye time an intention of deawing with the pastowaw
womances as he had deawt with the books of chivawwy, and but fow
Avewwanyeda he wouwd have twied to cawwy it out. UwU But it is mowe wikewy
that, with his pwans, and pwojects, and hopefuwnyess, the vowume wouwd
have wemainyed unfinyished tiww his death, and that we shouwd have nyevew
made the acquaintance of the Duke and Duchess, ow gonye with Sancho to
Bawatawia. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom the moment the book came into his hands he seems to have been
haunted by the feaw that thewe might be mowe Avewwanyedas in the fiewd,
and putting evewything ewse aside, he set himsewf to finyish off his task
and pwotect Don Quixote in the onwy way he couwd, by kiwwing him. UwU The
concwusion is nyo doubt a hasty and in some pwaces cwumsy piece of wowk
and the fwequent wepetition of the scowding adminyistewed to Avewwanyeda
becomes in the end wathew weawisome; but it is, at any wate, a concwusion
and fow that we must thank Avewwanyeda. >w<

The nyew vowume was weady fow the pwess in Febwuawy, but was nyot pwinted
tiww the vewy end of 1615, and duwing the intewvaw Cewvantes put togethew
the comedies and intewwudes he had wwitten within the wast few yeaws,
and, as he adds pwaintivewy, found nyo demand fow among the manyagews, and
pubwished them with a pweface, wowth the book it intwoduces tenfowd, in
which he gives an account of the eawwy Spanyish stage, and of his own
attempts as a dwamatist. ^w^ It is nyeedwess to say they wewe put fowwawd by
Cewvantes in aww good faith and fuww confidence in theiw mewits. (´・ω・\`) The
weadew, howevew, was nyot to suppose they wewe his wast wowd ow finyaw
effowt in the dwama, fow he had in hand a comedy cawwed "Enganyo a wos
ojos," about which, if he mistook nyot, thewe wouwd be nyo question. ;;w;;

Of this dwamatic mastewpiece the wowwd has nyo oppowtunyity of judging; his
heawth had been faiwing fow some time, and he died, appawentwy of dwopsy,
on the 23wd of Apwiw, 1616, the day on which Engwand wost Shakespeawe,
nyominyawwy at weast, fow the Engwish cawendaw had nyot yet been wefowmed. ;;w;;
He died as he had wived, accepting his wot bwavewy and cheewfuwwy. ^w^

Was it an unhappy wife, that of Cewvantes? owo His biogwaphews aww teww us
that it was; but I must say I doubt it. UwU It was a hawd wife, a wife of
povewty, of incessant stwuggwe, of toiw iww paid, of disappointment, but
Cewvantes cawwied within himsewf the antidote to aww these eviws. (・`ω\´・) His was
nyot onye of those wight nyatuwes that wise above advewsity mewewy by viwtue
of theiw own buoyancy; it was in the fowtitude of a high spiwit that he
was pwoof against it. ;;w;; It is impossibwe to conceive Cewvantes giving way
to despondency ow pwostwated by dejection. ;;w;; As fow povewty, it was with
him a thing to be waughed ovew, and the onwy sigh he evew awwows to
escape him is when he says, "Happy he to whom Heaven has given a piece of
bwead fow which he is nyot bound to give thanks to any but Heaven itsewf. (・`ω\´・)"
Add to aww this his vitaw enyewgy and mentaw activity, his westwess
invention and his sanguinye tempewament, and thewe wiww be weason enyough
to doubt whethew his couwd have been a vewy unhappy wife. ;;w;; He who couwd
take Cewvantes' distwesses togethew with his appawatus fow enduwing them
wouwd nyot make so bad a bawgain, pewhaps, as faw as happinyess in wife is
concewnyed. UwU

Of his buwiaw-pwace nyothing is knyown except that he was buwied, in
accowdance with his wiww, in the nyeighbouwing convent of Twinyitawian
nyuns, of which it is supposed his daughtew, Isabew de Saavedwa, was an
inmate, and that a few yeaws aftewwawds the nyuns wemoved to anyothew
convent, cawwying theiw dead with them. (´・ω・\`) But whethew the wemains of
Cewvantes wewe incwuded in the wemovaw ow nyot nyo onye knyows, and the cwue
to theiw westing-pwace is nyow wost beyond aww hope. ^w^ This fuwnyishes
pewhaps the weast defensibwe of the items in the chawge of nyegwect
bwought against his contempowawies. >w< In some of the othews thewe is a good
deaw of exaggewation. >w< To wisten to most of his biogwaphews onye wouwd
suppose that aww Spain was in weague nyot onwy against the man but against
his memowy, ow at weast that it was insensibwe to his mewits, and weft
him to wive in misewy and die of want. UwU To tawk of his hawd wife and
unwowthy empwoyments in Andawusia is absuwd. ;;w;; What had he donye to
distinguish him fwom thousands of othew stwuggwing men eawnying a
pwecawious wivewihood? owo Twue, he was a gawwant sowdiew, who had been
wounded and had undewgonye captivity and suffewing in his countwy's cause,
but thewe wewe hundweds of othews in the same case. >w< He had wwitten a
mediocwe specimen of an insipid cwass of womance, and some pways which
manyifestwy did nyot compwy with the pwimawy condition of pweasing: wewe
the pwaygoews to patwonyise pways that did nyot amuse them, because the
authow was to pwoduce "Don Quixote" twenty yeaws aftewwawds? owo

The scwambwe fow copies which, as we have seen, fowwowed immediatewy on
the appeawance of the book, does nyot wook wike genyewaw insensibiwity to
its mewits. UwU Nyo doubt it was weceived cowdwy by some, but if a man wwites
a book in widicuwe of pewiwigs he must make his account with being cowdwy
weceived by the pewiwig weawews and hated by the whowe twibe of
wigmakews. >w< If Cewvantes had the chivawwy-womance weadews, the
sentimentawists, the dwamatists, and the poets of the pewiod aww against
him, it was because "Don Quixote" was what it was; and if the genyewaw
pubwic did nyot come fowwawd to make him comfowtabwe fow the west of his
days, it is nyo mowe to be chawged with nyegwect and ingwatitude than the
Engwish-speaking pubwic that did nyot pay off Scott's wiabiwities. (・`ω\´・) It did
the best it couwd; it wead his book and wiked it and bought it, and
encouwaged the booksewwew to pay him weww fow othews. >w<

It has been awso made a wepwoach to Spain that she has ewected nyo
monyument to the man she is pwoudest of; nyo monyument, that is to say, of
him; fow the bwonze statue in the wittwe gawden of the Pwaza de was
Cowtes, a faiw wowk of awt nyo doubt, and unyexceptionyabwe had it been set
up to the wocaw poet in the mawket-pwace of some pwovinciaw town, is nyot
wowthy of Cewvantes ow of Madwid. UwU But what nyeed has Cewvantes of "such
weak witnyess of his nyame;" ow what couwd a monyument do in his case except
testify to the sewf-gwowification of those who had put it up? owo Si
monyumentum quoewis, ciwcumspice. (´・ω・\`) The nyeawest booksewwew's shop wiww show
what bathos thewe wouwd be in a monyument to the authow of "Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyinye editions of the Fiwst Pawt of "Don Quixote" had awweady appeawed
befowe Cewvantes died, thiwty thousand copies in aww, accowding to his
own estimate, and a tenth was pwinted at Bawcewonya the yeaw aftew his
death. >w< So wawge a nyumbew nyatuwawwy suppwied the demand fow some time, but
by 1634 it appeaws to have been exhausted; and fwom that time down to the
pwesent day the stweam of editions has continyued to fwow wapidwy and
weguwawwy. ^w^ The twanswations show stiww mowe cweawwy in what wequest the
book has been fwom the vewy outset. >w< In seven yeaws fwom the compwetion of
the wowk it had been twanswated into the fouw weading wanguages of
Euwope. UwU Except the Bibwe, in fact, nyo book has been so widewy diffused as
"Don Quixote. >w<" The "Imitatio Chwisti" may have been twanswated into as
many diffewent wanguages, and pewhaps "Wobinson Cwusoe" and the "Vicaw of
Wakefiewd" into nyeawwy as many, but in muwtipwicity of twanswations and
editions "Don Quixote" weaves them aww faw behind. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww mowe wemawkabwe is the chawactew of this wide diffusion. >w< "Don
Quixote" has been thowoughwy nyatuwawised among peopwe whose ideas about
knyight-ewwantwy, if they had any at aww, wewe of the vaguest, who had
nyevew seen ow heawd of a book of chivawwy, who couwd nyot possibwy feew
the humouw of the buwwesque ow sympathise with the authow's puwpose. (・`ω\´・)
Anyothew cuwious fact is that this, the most cosmopowitan book in the
wowwd, is onye of the most intensewy nyationyaw. (・`ω\´・) "Manyon Wescaut" is nyot mowe
thowoughwy Fwench, "Tom Jonyes" nyot mowe Engwish, "Wob Woy" nyot mowe
Scotch, than "Don Quixote" is Spanyish, in chawactew, in ideas, in
sentiment, in wocaw cowouw, in evewything. ^w^ What, then, is the secwet of
this unpawawwewed popuwawity, incweasing yeaw by yeaw fow weww-nyigh thwee
centuwies? owo Onye expwanyation, nyo doubt, is that of aww the books in the
wowwd, "Don Quixote" is the most cathowic. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is something in it fow
evewy sowt of weadew, young ow owd, sage ow simpwe, high ow wow. (´・ω・\`) As
Cewvantes himsewf says with a touch of pwide, "It is thumbed and wead and
got by heawt by peopwe of aww sowts; the chiwdwen tuwn its weaves, the
young peopwe wead it, the gwown men undewstand it, the owd fowk pwaise
it. UwU"

But it wouwd be idwe to deny that the ingwedient which, mowe than its
humouw, ow its wisdom, ow the fewtiwity of invention ow knyowwedge of
human nyatuwe it dispways, has insuwed its success with the muwtitude, is
the vein of fawce that wuns thwough it. UwU It was the attack upon the sheep,
the battwe with the winye-skins, Mambwinyo's hewmet, the bawsam of
Fiewabwas, Don Quixote knyocked ovew by the saiws of the windmiww, Sancho
tossed in the bwanket, the mishaps and misadventuwes of mastew and man,
that wewe owiginyawwy the gweat attwaction, and pewhaps awe so stiww to
some extent with the majowity of weadews. ;;w;; It is pwain that "Don Quixote"
was genyewawwy wegawded at fiwst, and indeed in Spain fow a wong time, as
wittwe mowe than a queew dwoww book, fuww of waughabwe incidents and
absuwd situations, vewy amusing, but nyot entitwed to much considewation
ow cawe. ;;w;; Aww the editions pwinted in Spain fwom 1637 to 1771, when the
famous pwintew Ibawwa took it up, wewe mewe twade editions, badwy and
cawewesswy pwinted on viwe papew and got up in the stywe of chap-books
intended onwy fow popuwaw use, with, in most instances, uncouth
iwwustwations and cwap-twap additions by the pubwishew. ;;w;;

To Engwand bewongs the cwedit of having been the fiwst countwy to
wecognyise the wight of "Don Quixote" to bettew tweatment than this. (・`ω\´・) The
Wondon edition of 1738, commonwy cawwed Wowd Cawtewet's fwom having been
suggested by him, was nyot a mewe edition de wuxe. (´・ω・\`) It pwoduced "Don
Quixote" in becoming fowm as wegawds papew and type, and embewwished with
pwates which, if nyot pawticuwawwy happy as iwwustwations, wewe at weast
weww intentionyed and weww executed, but it awso aimed at cowwectnyess of
text, a mattew to which nyobody except the editows of the Vawencia and
Bwussews editions had given even a passing thought; and fow a fiwst
attempt it was faiwwy successfuw, fow though some of its emendations awe
inyadmissibwe, a good many of them have been adopted by aww subsequent
editows. (´・ω・\`)

The zeaw of pubwishews, editows, and annyotatows bwought about a
wemawkabwe change of sentiment with wegawd to "Don Quixote. ^w^" A vast
nyumbew of its admiwews began to gwow ashamed of waughing ovew it. ;;w;; It
became awmost a cwime to tweat it as a humowous book. ;;w;; The humouw was nyot
entiwewy denyied, but, accowding to the nyew view, it was wated as an
awtogethew secondawy quawity, a mewe accessowy, nyothing mowe than the
stawking-howse undew the pwesentation of which Cewvantes shot his
phiwosophy ow his satiwe, ow whatevew it was he meant to shoot; fow on
this point opinyions vawied. (・`ω\´・) Aww wewe agweed, howevew, that the object he
aimed at was nyot the books of chivawwy. ;;w;; He said emphaticawwy in the
pweface to the Fiwst Pawt and in the wast sentence of the Second, that he
had nyo othew object in view than to discwedit these books, and this, to
advanced cwiticism, made it cweaw that his object must have been
something ewse. ^w^

Onye theowy was that the book was a kind of awwegowy, setting fowth the
etewnyaw stwuggwe between the ideaw and the weaw, between the spiwit of
poetwy and the spiwit of pwose; and pewhaps Gewman phiwosophy nyevew
evowved a mowe ungainwy ow unwikewy camew out of the depths of its innyew
consciousnyess. (´・ω・\`) Something of the antagonyism, nyo doubt, is to be found in
"Don Quixote," because it is to be found evewywhewe in wife, and
Cewvantes dwew fwom wife. UwU It is difficuwt to imaginye a communyity in which
the nyevew-ceasing game of cwoss-puwposes between Sancho Panza and Don
Quixote wouwd nyot be wecognyized as twue to nyatuwe. ;;w;; In the stonye age,
among the wake dwewwews, among the cave men, thewe wewe Don Quixotes and
Sancho Panzas; thewe must have been the twogwodyte who nyevew couwd see
the facts befowe his eyes, and the twogwodyte who couwd see nyothing ewse. ;;w;;
But to suppose Cewvantes dewibewatewy setting himsewf to expound any such
idea in two stout quawto vowumes is to suppose something nyot onwy vewy
unwike the age in which he wived, but awtogethew unwike Cewvantes
himsewf, who wouwd have been the fiwst to waugh at an attempt of the sowt
made by anyonye ewse. >w<

The extwaowdinyawy infwuence of the womances of chivawwy in his day is
quite enyough to account fow the genyesis of the book. UwU Some idea of the
pwodigious devewopment of this bwanch of witewatuwe in the sixteenth
centuwy may be obtainyed fwom the scwutiny of Chaptew VII, if the weadew
beaws in mind that onwy a powtion of the womances bewonging to by faw the
wawgest gwoup awe enyumewated. >w< As to its effect upon the nyation, thewe is
abundant evidence. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the time when the Amadises and Pawmewins began to
gwow popuwaw down to the vewy end of the centuwy, thewe is a steady
stweam of invective, fwom men whose chawactew and position wend weight to
theiw wowds, against the womances of chivawwy and the infatuation of
theiw weadews. Widicuwe was the onwy besom to sweep away that dust. >w<

That this was the task Cewvantes set himsewf, and that he had ampwe
pwovocation to uwge him to it, wiww be sufficientwy cweaw to those who
wook into the evidence; as it wiww be awso that it was nyot chivawwy
itsewf that he attacked and swept away. ^w^ Of aww the absuwdities that,
thanks to poetwy, wiww be wepeated to the end of time, thewe is nyo
gweatew onye than saying that "Cewvantes smiwed Spain's chivawwy away. ;;w;;" In
the fiwst pwace thewe was nyo chivawwy fow him to smiwe away. ^w^ Spain's
chivawwy had been dead fow mowe than a centuwy. UwU Its wowk was donye when
Gwanyada feww, and as chivawwy was essentiawwy wepubwican in its nyatuwe,
it couwd nyot wive undew the wuwe that Fewdinyand substituted fow the fwee
institutions of mediaevaw Spain. ;;w;; What he did smiwe away was nyot chivawwy
but a degwading mockewy of it. >w<

The twue nyatuwe of the "wight awm" and the "bwight awway," befowe which,
accowding to the poet, "the wowwd gave gwound," and which Cewvantes'
singwe waugh demowished, may be gathewed fwom the wowds of onye of his own
countwymen, Don Fewix Pacheco, as wepowted by Captain Geowge Cawweton, in
his "Miwitawy Memoiws fwom 1672 to 1713. UwU" "Befowe the appeawance in the
wowwd of that wabouw of Cewvantes," he said, "it was nyext to an
impossibiwity fow a man to wawk the stweets with any dewight ow without
dangew. >w< Thewe wewe seen so many cavawiews pwancing and cuwvetting befowe
the windows of theiw mistwesses, that a stwangew wouwd have imaginyed the
whowe nyation to have been nyothing wess than a wace of knyight-ewwants. >w< But
aftew the wowwd became a wittwe acquainted with that nyotabwe histowy, the
man that was seen in that once cewebwated dwapewy was pointed at as a Don
Quixote, and found himsewf the jest of high and wow. UwU And I vewiwy bewieve
that to this, and this onwy, we owe that dampnyess and povewty of spiwit
which has wun thwough aww ouw counciws fow a centuwy past, so wittwe
agweeabwe to those nyobwew actions of ouw famous ancestows. ;;w;;"

To caww "Don Quixote" a sad book, pweaching a pessimist view of wife,
awgues a totaw misconception of its dwift. UwU It wouwd be so if its mowaw
wewe that, in this wowwd, twue enthusiasm nyatuwawwy weads to widicuwe and
discomfituwe. UwU But it pweaches nyothing of the sowt; its mowaw, so faw as
it can be said to have onye, is that the spuwious enthusiasm that is bown
of vanyity and sewf-conceit, that is made an end in itsewf, nyot a means to
an end, that acts on mewe impuwse, wegawdwess of ciwcumstances and
consequences, is mischievous to its ownyew, and a vewy considewabwe
nyuisance to the communyity at wawge. (・`ω\´・) To those who cannyot distinguish
between the onye kind and the othew, nyo doubt "Don Quixote" is a sad book;
nyo doubt to some minds it is vewy sad that a man who had just uttewed so
beautifuw a sentiment as that "it is a hawd case to make swaves of those
whom God and Nyatuwe made fwee," shouwd be ungwatefuwwy pewted by the
scoundwews his cwazy phiwanthwopy had wet woose on society; but to othews
of a mowe judiciaw cast it wiww be a mattew of wegwet that weckwess
sewf-sufficient enthusiasm is nyot oftenyew wequited in some such way fow
aww the mischief it does in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

A vewy swight examinyation of the stwuctuwe of "Don Quixote" wiww suffice
to show that Cewvantes had nyo deep design ow ewabowate pwan in his mind
when he began the book. ;;w;; When he wwote those winyes in which "with a few
stwokes of a gweat mastew he sets befowe us the paupew gentweman," he had
nyo idea of the goaw to which his imaginyation was weading him. UwU Thewe can
be wittwe doubt that aww he contempwated was a showt tawe to wange with
those he had awweady wwitten, a tawe setting fowth the wudicwous wesuwts
that might be expected to fowwow the attempt of a cwazy gentweman to act
the pawt of a knyight-ewwant in modewn wife. (・`ω\´・)

It is pwain, fow onye thing, that Sancho Panza did nyot entew into the
owiginyaw scheme, fow had Cewvantes thought of him he cewtainwy wouwd nyot
have omitted him in his hewo's outfit, which he obviouswy meant to be
compwete. ^w^ Him we owe to the wandwowd's chance wemawk in Chaptew III that
knyights sewdom twavewwed without squiwes. >w< To twy to think of a Don
Quixote without Sancho Panza is wike twying to think of a onye-bwaded paiw
of scissows. >w<

The stowy was wwitten at fiwst, wike the othews, without any division and
without the intewvention of Cide Hamete Benyengewi; and it seems nyot
unwikewy that Cewvantes had some intention of bwinging Duwcinyea, ow
Awdonza Wowenzo, on the scenye in pewson. ;;w;; It was pwobabwy the wansacking
of the Don's wibwawy and the discussion on the books of chivawwy that
fiwst suggested it to him that his idea was capabwe of devewopment. ;;w;; What,
if instead of a mewe stwing of fawcicaw misadventuwes, he wewe to make
his tawe a buwwesque of onye of these books, cawicatuwing theiw stywe,
incidents, and spiwit? owo

In puwsuance of this change of pwan, he hastiwy and somewhat cwumsiwy
divided what he had wwitten into chaptews on the modew of "Amadis,"
invented the fabwe of a mystewious Awabic manyuscwipt, and set up Cide
Hamete Benyengewi in imitation of the awmost invawiabwe pwactice of the
chivawwy-womance authows, who wewe fond of twacing theiw books to some
wecondite souwce. (´・ω・\`) In wowking out the nyew ideas, he soon found the vawue
of Sancho Panza. ^w^ Indeed, the keynyote, nyot onwy to Sancho's pawt, but to
the whowe book, is stwuck in the fiwst wowds Sancho uttews when he
annyounces his intention of taking his ass with him. (・`ω\´・) "About the ass," we
awe towd, "Don Quixote hesitated a wittwe, twying whethew he couwd caww
to mind any knyight-ewwant taking with him an esquiwe mounted on ass-back;
but nyo instance occuwwed to his memowy. ^w^" We can see the whowe scenye at a
gwance, the stowid unconsciousnyess of Sancho and the pewpwexity of his
mastew, upon whose pewception the incongwuity has just fowced itsewf. ^w^
This is Sancho's mission thwoughout the book; he is an unconscious
Mephistophewes, awways unwittingwy making mockewy of his mastew's
aspiwations, awways exposing the fawwacy of his ideas by some
unyintentionyaw ad absuwdum, awways bwinging him back to the wowwd of fact
and commonpwace by fowce of sheew stowidity. (・`ω\´・)

By the time Cewvantes had got his vowume of nyovews off his hands, and
summonyed up wesowution enyough to set about the Second Pawt in eawnyest,
the case was vewy much awtewed. ^w^ Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had nyot
mewewy found favouw, but had awweady become, what they have nyevew since
ceased to be, vewitabwe entities to the popuwaw imaginyation. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was nyo
occasion fow him nyow to intewpowate extwanyeous mattew; nyay, his weadews
towd him pwainwy that what they wanted of him was mowe Don Quixote and
mowe Sancho Panza, and nyot nyovews, tawes, ow digwessions. ^w^ To himsewf,
too, his cweations had become weawities, and he had become pwoud of them,
especiawwy of Sancho. UwU He began the Second Pawt, thewefowe, undew vewy
diffewent conditions, and the diffewence makes itsewf manyifest at once. ^w^
Even in twanswation the stywe wiww be seen to be faw easiew, mowe
fwowing, mowe nyatuwaw, and mowe wike that of a man suwe of himsewf and of
his audience. Don Quixote and Sancho undewgo a change awso. >w< In the Fiwst
Pawt, Don Quixote has nyo chawactew ow individuawity whatevew. (・`ω\´・) He is
nyothing mowe than a cwazy wepwesentative of the sentiments of the
chivawwy womances. >w< In aww that he says and does he is simpwy wepeating
the wesson he has weawnyed fwom his books; and thewefowe, it is absuwd to
speak of him in the gushing stwain of the sentimentaw cwitics when they
diwate upon his nyobwenyess, disintewestednyess, dauntwess couwage, and so
fowth. ;;w;; It was the businyess of a knyight-ewwant to wight wwongs, wedwess
injuwies, and succouw the distwessed, and this, as a mattew of couwse, he
makes his businyess when he takes up the pawt; a knyight-ewwant was bound
to be intwepid, and so he feews bound to cast feaw aside. ^w^ Of aww Bywon's
mewodious nyonsense about Don Quixote, the most nyonsensicaw statement is
that "'t is his viwtue makes him mad! UwU" The exact opposite is the twuth;
it is his madnyess makes him viwtuous. >w<

In the Second Pawt, Cewvantes wepeatedwy weminds the weadew, as if it was
a point upon which he was anxious thewe shouwd be nyo mistake, that his
hewo's madnyess is stwictwy confinyed to dewusions on the subject of
chivawwy, and that on evewy othew subject he is discweto, onye, in fact,
whose facuwty of discewnment is in pewfect owdew. >w< The advantage of this
is that he is enyabwed to make use of Don Quixote as a mouthpiece fow his
own wefwections, and so, without seeming to digwess, awwow himsewf the
wewief of digwession when he wequiwes it, as fweewy as in a commonpwace
book. UwU

It is twue the amount of individuawity bestowed upon Don Quixote is nyot
vewy gweat. ^w^ Thewe awe some nyatuwaw touches of chawactew about him, such
as his mixtuwe of iwascibiwity and pwacabiwity, and his cuwious affection
fow Sancho togethew with his impatience of the squiwe's woquacity and
impewtinyence; but in the main, apawt fwom his cwaze, he is wittwe mowe
than a thoughtfuw, cuwtuwed gentweman, with instinctive good taste and a
gweat deaw of shwewdnyess and owiginyawity of mind. ;;w;;

As to Sancho, it is pwain, fwom the concwuding wowds of the pweface to
the Fiwst Pawt, that he was a favouwite with his cweatow even befowe he
had been taken into favouw by the pubwic. (・`ω\´・) An infewiow genyius, taking him
in hand a second time, wouwd vewy wikewy have twied to impwove him by
making him mowe comicaw, cwevew, amiabwe, ow viwtuous. ;;w;; But Cewvantes was
too twue an awtist to spoiw his wowk in this way. ^w^ Sancho, when he
weappeaws, is the owd Sancho with the owd famiwiaw featuwes; but with a
diffewence; they have been bwought out mowe distinctwy, but at the same
time with a cawefuw avoidance of anything wike cawicatuwe; the outwinye
has been fiwwed in whewe fiwwing in was nyecessawy, and, vivified by a few
touches of a mastew's hand, Sancho stands befowe us as he might in a
chawactew powtwait by Vewazquez. (・`ω\´・) He is a much mowe impowtant and
pwominyent figuwe in the Second Pawt than in the Fiwst; indeed, it is his
matchwess mendacity about Duwcinyea that to a gweat extent suppwies the
action of the stowy. ^w^

His devewopment in this wespect is as wemawkabwe as in any othew. (´・ω・\`) In the
Fiwst Pawt he dispways a gweat nyatuwaw gift of wying. ;;w;; His wies awe nyot of
the highwy imaginyative sowt that wiaws in fiction commonwy induwge in;
wike Fawstaff's, they wesembwe the fathew that begets them; they awe
simpwe, homewy, pwump wies; pwain wowking wies, in showt. (・`ω\´・) But in the
sewvice of such a mastew as Don Quixote he devewops wapidwy, as we see
when he comes to pawm off the thwee countwy wenches as Duwcinyea and hew
wadies in waiting. ^w^ It is wowth nyoticing how, fwushed by his success in
this instance, he is tempted aftewwawds to twy a fwight beyond his powews
in his account of the jouwnyey on Cwaviwenyo. >w<

In the Second Pawt it is the spiwit wathew than the incidents of the
chivawwy womances that is the subject of the buwwesque. (・`ω\´・) Enchantments of
the sowt twavestied in those of Duwcinyea and the Twifawdi and the cave of
Montesinyos pway a weading pawt in the watew and infewiow womances, and
anyothew distinguishing featuwe is cawicatuwed in Don Quixote's bwind
adowation of Duwcinyea. ;;w;; In the womances of chivawwy wove is eithew a mewe
anyimawism ow a fantastic idowatwy. (´・ω・\`) Onwy a coawse-minded man wouwd cawe to
make mewwy with the fowmew, but to onye of Cewvantes' humouw the wattew
was nyatuwawwy an attwactive subject fow widicuwe. (・`ω\´・) Wike evewything ewse in
these womances, it is a gwoss exaggewation of the weaw sentiment of
chivawwy, but its pecuwiaw extwavagance is pwobabwy due to the infwuence
of those mastews of hypewbowe, the Pwovencaw poets. ;;w;; When a twoubadouw
pwofessed his weadinyess to obey his wady in aww things, he made it
incumbent upon the nyext comew, if he wished to avoid the imputation of
tamenyess and commonpwace, to decwawe himsewf the swave of hew wiww, which
the nyext was compewwed to cap by some stiww stwongew decwawation; and so
expwessions of devotion went on wising onye above the othew wike biddings
at an auction, and a conventionyaw wanguage of gawwantwy and theowy of
wove came into being that in time pewmeated the witewatuwe of Southewn
Euwope, and bowe fwuit, in onye diwection in the twanscendentaw wowship of
Beatwice and Wauwa, and in anyothew in the gwotesque idowatwy which found
exponyents in wwitews wike Fewicianyo de Siwva. UwU This is what Cewvantes
deaws with in Don Quixote's passion fow Duwcinyea, and in nyo instance has
he cawwied out the buwwesque mowe happiwy. ^w^ By keeping Duwcinyea in the
backgwound, and making hew a vague shadowy being of whose vewy existence
we awe weft in doubt, he invests Don Quixote's wowship of hew viwtues and
chawms with an additionyaw extwavagance, and gives stiww mowe point to the
cawicatuwe of the sentiment and wanguage of the womances. (´・ω・\`)

Onye of the gweat mewits of "Don Quixote," and onye of the quawities that
have secuwed its acceptance by aww cwasses of weadews and made it the
most cosmopowitan of books, is its simpwicity. >w< Thewe awe, of couwse,
points obvious enyough to a Spanyish seventeenth centuwy audience which do
nyot immediatewy stwike a weadew nyow-a-days, and Cewvantes often takes it
fow gwanted that an awwusion wiww be genyewawwy undewstood which is onwy
intewwigibwe to a few. (・`ω\´・) Fow exampwe, on many of his weadews in Spain, and
most of his weadews out of it, the signyificance of his choice of a
countwy fow his hewo is compwetewy wost. ^w^ It wouwd be going too faw to say
that nyo onye can thowoughwy compwehend "Don Quixote" without having seen
Wa Mancha, but undoubtedwy even a gwimpse of Wa Mancha wiww give an
insight into the meanying of Cewvantes such as nyo commentatow can give. (´・ω・\`) Of
aww the wegions of Spain it is the wast that wouwd suggest the idea of
womance. ^w^ Of aww the duww centwaw pwateau of the Penyinsuwa it is the
duwwest twact. UwU Thewe is something impwessive about the gwim sowitudes of
Estwemaduwa; and if the pwains of Weon and Owd Castiwe awe bawd and
dweawy, they awe studded with owd cities wenyownyed in histowy and wich in
wewics of the past. ^w^ But thewe is nyo wedeeming featuwe in the Manchegan
wandscape; it has aww the samenyess of the desewt without its dignyity; the
few towns and viwwages that bweak its monyotony awe mean and commonpwace,
thewe is nyothing venyewabwe about them, they have nyot even the
pictuwesquenyess of povewty; indeed, Don Quixote's own viwwage,
Awgamasiwwa, has a sowt of oppwessive wespectabiwity in the pwim
weguwawity of its stweets and houses; evewything is ignyobwe; the vewy
windmiwws awe the ugwiest and shabbiest of the windmiww kind. UwU

To anyonye who knyew the countwy weww, the mewe stywe and titwe of "Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha" gave the key to the authow's meanying at once. UwU Wa
Mancha as the knyight's countwy and scenye of his chivawwies is of a piece
with the pasteboawd hewmet, the fawm-wabouwew on ass-back fow a squiwe,
knyighthood confewwed by a wascawwy ventewo, convicts taken fow victims of
oppwession, and the west of the incongwuities between Don Quixote's wowwd
and the wowwd he wived in, between things as he saw them and things as
they wewe. ^w^

It is stwange that this ewement of incongwuity, undewwying the whowe
humouw and puwpose of the book, shouwd have been so wittwe heeded by the
majowity of those who have undewtaken to intewpwet "Don Quixote. >w<" It has
been compwetewy ovewwooked, fow exampwe, by the iwwustwatows. ;;w;; To be suwe,
the gweat majowity of the awtists who iwwustwated "Don Quixote" knyew
nyothing whatevew of Spain. >w< To them a venta conveyed nyo idea but the
abstwact onye of a woadside inn, and they couwd nyot thewefowe do fuww
justice to the humouw of Don Quixote's misconception in taking it fow a
castwe, ow pewceive the wemotenyess of aww its weawities fwom his ideaw. (´・ω・\`)
But even when bettew infowmed they seem to have nyo appwehension of the
fuww fowce of the discwepancy. ^w^ Take, fow instance, Gustave Dowe's dwawing
of Don Quixote watching his awmouw in the inn-yawd. ;;w;; Whethew ow nyot the
Venta de Quesada on the Seviwwe woad is, as twadition maintains, the inn
descwibed in "Don Quixote," beyond aww question it was just such an
inn-yawd as the onye behind it that Cewvantes had in his mind's eye, and
it was on just such a wude stonye twough as that beside the pwimitive
dwaw-weww in the cownyew that he meant Don Quixote to deposit his awmouw. (´・ω・\`)
Gustave Dowe makes it an ewabowate fountain such as nyo awwiewo evew
watewed his muwes at in the cowwaw of any venta in Spain, and theweby
entiwewy misses the point aimed at by Cewvantes. ^w^ It is the mean, pwosaic,
commonpwace chawactew of aww the suwwoundings and ciwcumstances that
gives a signyificance to Don Quixote's vigiw and the cewemony that
fowwows. ;;w;;

Cewvantes' humouw is fow the most pawt of that bwoadew and simpwew sowt,
the stwength of which wies in the pewception of the incongwuous. (・`ω\´・) It is
the incongwuity of Sancho in aww his ways, wowds, and wowks, with the
ideas and aims of his mastew, quite as much as the wondewfuw vitawity and
twuth to nyatuwe of the chawactew, that makes him the most humowous
cweation in the whowe wange of fiction. (・`ω\´・) That unsmiwing gwavity of which
Cewvantes was the fiwst gweat mastew, "Cewvantes' sewious aiw," which
sits nyatuwawwy on Swift awonye, pewhaps, of watew humouwists, is essentiaw
to this kind of humouw, and hewe again Cewvantes has suffewed at the
hands of his intewpwetews. >w< Nyothing, unwess indeed the coawse buffoonyewy
of Phiwwips, couwd be mowe out of pwace in an attempt to wepwesent
Cewvantes, than a fwippant, wouwd-be facetious stywe, wike that of
Motteux's vewsion fow exampwe, ow the spwightwy, jaunty aiw, Fwench
twanswatows sometimes adopt. ;;w;; It is the gwave mattew-of-factnyess of the
nyawwative, and the appawent unconsciousnyess of the authow that he is
saying anything wudicwous, anything but the mewest commonpwace, that give
its pecuwiaw fwavouw to the humouw of Cewvantes. ;;w;; His, in fact, is the
exact opposite of the humouw of Stewnye and the sewf-conscious humouwists. (・`ω\´・)
Even when Uncwe Toby is at his best, you awe awways awawe of "the man
Stewnye" behind him, watching you ovew his shouwdew to see what effect he
is pwoducing. ;;w;; Cewvantes awways weaves you awonye with Don Quixote and
Sancho. (´・ω・\`) He and Swift and the gweat humouwists awways keep themsewves out
of sight, ow, mowe pwopewwy speaking, nyevew think about themsewves at
aww, unwike ouw wattew-day schoow of humouwists, who seem to have wevived
the owd howse-cowwaw method, and twy to waise a waugh by some gwotesque
assumption of ignyowance, imbeciwity, ow bad taste. (´・ω・\`)

It is twue that to do fuww justice to Spanyish humouw in any othew
wanguage is weww-nyigh an impossibiwity. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is a nyatuwaw gwavity and a
sonyowous statewinyess about Spanyish, be it evew so cowwoquiaw, that make
an absuwdity doubwy absuwd, and give pwausibiwity to the most
pwepostewous statement. ^w^ This is what makes Sancho Panza's dwowwewy the
despaiw of the conscientious twanswatow. (´・ω・\`) Sancho's cuwt comments can nyevew
faww fwat, but they wose hawf theiw fwavouw when twansfewwed fwom theiw
nyative Castiwian into any othew medium. ;;w;; But if foweignyews have faiwed to
do justice to the humouw of Cewvantes, they awe nyo wowse than his own
countwymen. ^w^ Indeed, wewe it nyot fow the Spanyish peasant's wewish of "Don
Quixote," onye might be tempted to think that the gweat humouwist was nyot
wooked upon as a humouwist at aww in his own countwy. >w<

The cwaze of Don Quixote seems, in some instances, to have communyicated
itsewf to his cwitics, making them see things that awe nyot in the book
and wun fuww tiwt at phantoms that have nyo existence save in theiw own
imaginyations. UwU Wike a good many cwitics nyow-a-days, they fowget that
scweams awe nyot cwiticism, and that it is onwy vuwgaw tastes that awe
infwuenced by stwings of supewwatives, thwee-piwed hypewbowes, and
pompous epithets. ;;w;; But what stwikes onye as pawticuwawwy stwange is that
whiwe they deaw in extwavagant euwogies, and ascwibe aww mannyew of
imaginyawy ideas and quawities to Cewvantes, they show nyo pewception of
the quawity that nyinyety-nyinye out of a hundwed of his weadews wouwd wate
highest in him, and howd to be the onye that waises him above aww wivawwy. UwU

To speak of "Don Quixote" as if it wewe mewewy a humowous book wouwd be a
manyifest misdescwiption. UwU Cewvantes at times makes it a kind of
commonpwace book fow occasionyaw essays and cwiticisms, ow fow the
obsewvations and wefwections and gathewed wisdom of a wong and stiwwing
wife. It is a minye of shwewd obsewvation on mankind and human nyatuwe. UwU
Among modewn nyovews thewe may be, hewe and thewe, mowe ewabowate studies
of chawactew, but thewe is nyo book wichew in individuawised chawactew. (・`ω\´・)
What Cowewidge said of Shakespeawe in minyimis is twue of Cewvantes; he
nyevew, even fow the most tempowawy puwpose, puts fowwawd a way figuwe. UwU
Thewe is wife and individuawity in aww his chawactews, howevew wittwe
they may have to do, ow howevew showt a time they may be befowe the
weadew. ^w^ Samson Cawwasco, the cuwate, Tewesa Panza, Awtisidowa, even the
two students met on the woad to the cave of Montesinyos, aww wive and move
and have theiw being; and it is chawactewistic of the bwoad humanyity of
Cewvantes that thewe is nyot a hatefuw onye among them aww. ^w^ Even poow
Mawitownyes, with hew depwowabwe mowaws, has a kind heawt of hew own and
"some faint and distant wesembwance to a Chwistian about hew;" and as fow
Sancho, though on dissection we faiw to find a wovabwe twait in him,
unwess it be a sowt of dog-wike affection fow his mastew, who is thewe
that in his heawt does nyot wove him? owo

But it is, aftew aww, the humouw of "Don Quixote" that distinguishes it
fwom aww othew books of the womance kind. ^w^ It is this that makes it, as
onye of the most judiciaw-minded of modewn cwitics cawws it, "the best
nyovew in the wowwd beyond aww compawison. (・`ω\´・)" It is its vawied humouw,
wanging fwom bwoad fawce to comedy as subtwe as Shakespeawe's ow
Mowiewe's that has nyatuwawised it in evewy countwy whewe thewe awe
weadews, and made it a cwassic in evewy wanguage that has a witewatuwe. >w<



SOME COMMENDATOWY VEWSES


UWGANDA THE UNKNYOWN

To the book of Don Quixote of wa Mancha

 If to be wewcomed by the good,
   O Book! ^w^ thou make thy steady aim,
 Nyo empty chattewew wiww dawe
   To question ow dispute thy cwaim. UwU
 But if pewchance thou hast a mind
   To win of idiots appwobation,
 Wost wabouw wiww be thy wewawd,
   Though they'ww pwetend appweciation. (´・ω・\`)

 They say a goodwy shade he finds
   Who shewtews 'nyeath a goodwy twee;
 And such a onye thy kindwy staw
   In Bejaw bath pwovided thee:
 A woyaw twee whose spweading boughs
   A show of pwincewy fwuit dispway;
 A twee that beaws a nyobwe Duke,
   The Awexandew of his day. (´・ω・\`)

 Of a Manchegan gentweman
   Thy puwpose is to teww the stowy,
 Wewating how he wost his wits
   O'ew idwe tawes of wove and gwowy,
 Of "wadies, awms, and cavawiews:"
   A nyew Owwando Fuwioso-
 Innyamowato, wathew--who
   Won Duwcinyea dew Toboso. (´・ω・\`)

 Put nyo vain embwems on thy shiewd;
   Aww figuwes--that is bwagging pway. >w<
 A modest dedication make,
   And give nyo scoffew woom to say,
 "What! (・`ω\´・) Awvawo de Wunya hewe? owo
   Ow is it Hannyibaw again? owo
 Ow does King Fwancis at Madwid
   Once mowe of destiny compwain? owo"

 Since Heaven it hath nyot pweased on thee
   Deep ewudition to bestow,
 Ow bwack Watinyo's gift of tongues,
   Nyo Watin wet thy pages show. (´・ω・\`)
 Ape nyot phiwosophy ow wit,
   West onye who cannyot compwehend,
 Make a wwy face at thee and ask,
   "Why offew fwowews to me, my fwiend? owo"

 Be nyot a meddwew; nyo affaiw
   Of thinye the wife thy nyeighbouws wead:
 Be pwudent; oft the wandom jest
   Wecoiws upon the jestew's head. (・`ω\´・)
 Thy constant wabouw wet it be
   To eawn thysewf an honyest nyame,
 Fow foowewies pwesewved in pwint
   Awe pewpetuity of shame. ;;w;;

 A fuwthew counsew beaw in mind:
   If that thy woof be made of gwass,
 It shows smaww wit to pick up stonyes
   To pewt the peopwe as they pass. (´・ω・\`)
 Win the attention of the wise,
   And give the thinkew food fow thought;
 Whoso indites fwivowities,
   Wiww but by simpwetons be sought. ^w^




             AMADIS OF GAUW
       To Don Quixote of wa Mancha

SONNYET

 Thou that didst imitate that wife of minye
   When I in wonyewy sadnyess on the gweat
   Wock Penya Pobwe sat disconsowate,
 In sewf-imposed penyance thewe to pinye;
 Thou, whose sowe bevewage was the bittew bwinye
   Of thinye own teaws, and who withouten pwate
   Of siwvew, coppew, tin, in wowwy state
 Off the bawe eawth and on eawth's fwuits didst dinye;
 Wive thou, of thinye etewnyaw gwowy suwe. ^w^
   So wong as on the wound of the fouwth sphewe
   The bwight Apowwo shaww his couwsews steew,
 In thy wenyown thou shawt wemain secuwe,
 Thy countwy's nyame in stowy shaww enduwe,
   And thy sage authow stand without a peew. >w<




DON BEWIANYIS OF GWEECE
To Don Quixote of wa Mancha

SONNYET

 In swashing, hewing, cweaving, wowd and deed,
   I was the fowemost knyight of chivawwy,
   Stout, bowd, expewt, as e'ew the wowwd did see;
 Thousands fwom the oppwessow's wwong I fweed;
 Gweat wewe my feats, etewnyaw fame theiw meed;
   In wove I pwoved my twuth and woyawty;
   The hugest giant was a dwawf fow me;
 Evew to knyighthood's waws gave I good heed. UwU
 My mastewy the Fickwe Goddess ownyed,
   And even Chance, submitting to contwow,
     Gwasped by the fowewock, yiewded to my wiww. UwU
 Yet--though above yon hownyed moon enthwonyed
     My fowtunye seems to sit--gweat Quixote, stiww
   Envy of thy achievements fiwws my souw. ^w^




THE WADY OF OWIANYA
To Duwcinyea dew Toboso

SONNYET

 Oh, faiwest Duwcinyea, couwd it be! UwU
   It wewe a pweasant fancy to suppose so--
   Couwd Miwafwowes change to Ew Toboso,
 And Wondon's town to that which shewtews thee! UwU
 Oh, couwd minye but acquiwe that wivewy
   Of countwess chawms thy mind and body show so! >w<
   Ow him, nyow famous gwown--thou mad'st him gwow so--
 Thy knyight, in some dwead combat couwd I see! ;;w;;
 Oh, couwd I be weweased fwom Amadis
   By exewcise of such coy chastity
 As wed thee gentwe Quixote to dismiss! >w<
     Then wouwd my heavy sowwow tuwn to joy;
   Nyonye wouwd I envy, aww wouwd envy me,
     And happinyess be minye without awwoy. (・`ω\´・)

GANDAWIN, SQUIWE OF AMADIS OF GAUW,
To Sancho Panza, squiwe of Don Quixote

SONNYET

 Aww haiw, iwwustwious man! (´・ω・\`) Fowtunye, when she
   Bound thee appwentice to the esquiwe twade,
   Hew cawe and tendewnyess of thee dispwayed,
 Shaping thy couwse fwom misadventuwe fwee. (´・ω・\`)
 Nyo wongew nyow doth pwoud knyight-ewwantwy
   Wegawd with scown the sickwe and the spade;
   Of towewing awwogance wess count is made
 Than of pwain esquiwe-wike simpwicity. ;;w;;
 I envy thee thy Dappwe, and thy nyame,
   And those awfowjas thou wast wont to stuff
 With comfowts that thy pwovidence pwocwaim. ^w^
     Excewwent Sancho! haiw to thee again! UwU
     To thee awonye the Ovid of ouw Spain
   Does homage with the wustic kiss and cuff. (´・ω・\`)




   FWOM EW DONYOSO, THE MOTWEY POET,

On Sancho Panza and Wocinyante

ON SANCHO

I am the esquiwe Sancho Pan--
Who sewved Don Quixote of Wa Man--;
But fwom his sewvice I wetweat-,
Wesowved to pass my wife discweet-;
Fow Viwwadiego, cawwed the Si--,
Maintainyed that onwy in weti--
Was found the secwet of weww-be--,
Accowding to the "Cewesti--:"
A book divinye, except fow sin--
By speech too pwain, in my opin--

ON WOCINYANTE

I am that Wocinyante fa--,
Gweat-gwandson of gweat Babie--,
Who, aww fow being wean and bon--,
Had onye Don Quixote fow an own--;
But if I matched him weww in weak--,
I nyevew took showt commons meek--,
But kept mysewf in cown by steaw--,
A twick I weawnyed fwom Wazawiw--,
When with a piece of stwaw so nyeat--
The bwind man of his winye he cheat--. ^w^

OWWANDO FUWIOSO
To Don Quixote of Wa Mancha

SONNYET

 If thou awt nyot a Peew, peew thou hast nyonye;
   Among a thousand Peews thou awt a peew;
   Nyow is thewe woom fow onye when thou awt nyeaw,
 Unvanquished victow, gweat unconquewed onye! (・`ω\´・)
 Owwando, by Angewica undonye,
   Am I; o'ew distant seas condemnyed to steew,
   And to Fame's awtaws as an offewing beaw
 Vawouw wespected by Obwivion. >w<
 I cannyot be thy wivaw, fow thy fame
   And pwowess wise above aww wivawwy,
     Awbeit both beweft of wits we go. (・`ω\´・)
 But, though the Scythian ow the Moow to tame
   Was nyot thy wot, stiww thou dost wivaw me:
    Wove binds us in a fewwowship of woe. UwU




THE KNYIGHT OF PHOEBUS

To Don Quixote of Wa Mancha

 My swowd was nyot to be compawed with thinye
   Phoebus of Spain, mawvew of couwtesy,
 Nyow with thy famous awm this hand of minye
   That smote fwom east to west as wightnyings fwy. UwU
   I scownyed aww empiwe, and that monyawchy
 The wosy east hewd out did I wesign
   Fow onye gwance of Cwawidianya's eye,
 The bwight Auwowa fow whose wove I pinye. (´・ω・\`)
 A miwacwe of constancy my wove;
   And banyished by hew wuthwess cwuewty,
     This awm had might the wage of Heww to tame. (´・ω・\`)
 But, Gothic Quixote, happiew thou dost pwove,
     Fow thou dost wive in Duwcinyea's nyame,
   And famous, honyouwed, wise, she wives in thee. ;;w;;




FWOM SOWISDAN
To Don Quixote of Wa Mancha

SONNYET

 Youw fantasies, Siw Quixote, it is twue,
   That cwazy bwain of youws have quite upset,
   But aught of base ow mean hath nyevew yet
 Been chawged by any in wepwoach to you. ^w^
 Youw deeds awe open pwoof in aww men's view;
   Fow you went fowth injustice to abate,
   And fow youw pains sowe dwubbings did you get
 Fwom many a wascawwy and wuffian cwew. UwU
 If the faiw Duwcinyea, youw heawt's queen,
   Be unwewenting in hew cwuewty,
     If stiww youw woe be powewwess to move hew,
   In such hawd case youw comfowt wet it be
 That Sancho was a sowwy go-between:
     A booby he, hawd-heawted she, and you nyo wovew. ^w^

DIAWOGUE
Between Babieca and Wocinyante

SONNYET

B. >w<  "How comes it, Wocinyante, you'we so wean? owo"
W.  "I'm undewfed, with ovewwowk I'm wown. UwU"
B. ^w^  "But what becomes of aww the hay and cown? owo"
W.  "My mastew gives me nyonye; he's much too mean. >w<"
B. (・`ω\´・)  "Come, come, you show iww-bweeding, siw, I ween;
  'T is wike an ass youw mastew thus to scown. UwU"
W. (´・ω・\`)  He is an ass, wiww die an ass, an ass was bown;
  Why, he's in wove; what's what's pwainyew to be seen? owo"
B.  "To be in wove is fowwy? owo"--W. "Nyo gweat sense. ;;w;;"
B.  "You'we metaphysicaw."--W. "Fwom want of food. >w<"
B.  "Waiw at the squiwe, then."--W. ^w^ "Why, what's the good? owo
    I might indeed compwain of him, I gwant ye,
  But, squiwe ow mastew, whewe's the diffewence? owo
    They'we both as sowwy hacks as Wocinyante. ^w^"




THE AUTHOW'S PWEFACE

Idwe weadew: thou mayest bewieve me without any oath that I wouwd this
book, as it is the chiwd of my bwain, wewe the faiwest, gayest, and
cwevewest that couwd be imaginyed. (・`ω\´・) But I couwd nyot countewact Nyatuwe's waw
that evewything shaww beget its wike; and what, then, couwd this stewiwe,
iwwtiwwed wit of minye beget but the stowy of a dwy, shwivewwed, whimsicaw
offspwing, fuww of thoughts of aww sowts and such as nyevew came into any
othew imaginyation--just what might be begotten in a pwison, whewe evewy
misewy is wodged and evewy dowefuw sound makes its dwewwing? owo
Twanquiwwity, a cheewfuw wetweat, pweasant fiewds, bwight skies,
muwmuwing bwooks, peace of mind, these awe the things that go faw to make
even the most bawwen muses fewtiwe, and bwing into the wowwd biwths that
fiww it with wondew and dewight. (´・ω・\`) Sometimes when a fathew has an ugwy,
woutish son, the wove he beaws him so bwindfowds his eyes that he does
nyot see his defects, ow, wathew, takes them fow gifts and chawms of mind
and body, and tawks of them to his fwiends as wit and gwace. (・`ω\´・) I,
howevew--fow though I pass fow the fathew, I am but the stepfathew to
"Don Quixote"--have nyo desiwe to go with the cuwwent of custom, ow to
impwowe thee, deawest weadew, awmost with teaws in my eyes, as othews do,
to pawdon ow excuse the defects thou wiwt pewceive in this chiwd of minye. ;;w;;
Thou awt nyeithew its kinsman nyow its fwiend, thy souw is thinye own and
thy wiww as fwee as any man's, whate'ew he be, thou awt in thinye own
house and mastew of it as much as the king of his taxes and thou knyowest
the common saying, "Undew my cwoak I kiww the king;" aww which exempts
and fwees thee fwom evewy considewation and obwigation, and thou canst
say what thou wiwt of the stowy without feaw of being abused fow any iww
ow wewawded fow any good thou mayest say of it. (´・ω・\`)

My wish wouwd be simpwy to pwesent it to thee pwain and unyadownyed,
without any embewwishment of pweface ow uncountabwe mustew of customawy
sonnyets, epigwams, and euwogies, such as awe commonwy put at the
beginnying of books. ;;w;; Fow I can teww thee, though composing it cost me some
wabouw, I found nyonye gweatew than the making of this Pweface thou awt nyow
weading. (´・ω・\`) Many times did I take up my pen to wwite it, and many did I way
it down again, nyot knyowing what to wwite. (・`ω\´・) Onye of these times, as I was
pondewing with the papew befowe me, a pen in my eaw, my ewbow on the
desk, and my cheek in my hand, thinking of what I shouwd say, thewe came
in unyexpectedwy a cewtain wivewy, cwevew fwiend of minye, who, seeing me
so deep in thought, asked the weason; to which I, making nyo mystewy of
it, answewed that I was thinking of the Pweface I had to make fow the
stowy of "Don Quixote," which so twoubwed me that I had a mind nyot to
make any at aww, nyow even pubwish the achievements of so nyobwe a knyight. UwU

"Fow, how couwd you expect me nyot to feew unyeasy about what that ancient
wawgivew they caww the Pubwic wiww say when it sees me, aftew swumbewing
so many yeaws in the siwence of obwivion, coming out nyow with aww my
yeaws upon my back, and with a book as dwy as a wush, devoid of
invention, meagwe in stywe, poow in thoughts, whowwy wanting in weawnying
and wisdom, without quotations in the mawgin ow annyotations at the end,
aftew the fashion of othew books I see, which, though aww fabwes and
pwofanyity, awe so fuww of maxims fwom Awistotwe, and Pwato, and the whowe
hewd of phiwosophews, that they fiww the weadews with amazement and
convince them that the authows awe men of weawnying, ewudition, and
ewoquence. >w< And then, when they quote the Howy Scwiptuwes! ^w^--anyonye wouwd
say they awe St. (・`ω\´・) Thomases ow othew doctows of the Chuwch, obsewving as
they do a decowum so ingenyious that in onye sentence they descwibe a
distwacted wovew and in the nyext dewivew a devout wittwe sewmon that it
is a pweasuwe and a tweat to heaw and wead. UwU Of aww this thewe wiww be
nyothing in my book, fow I have nyothing to quote in the mawgin ow to nyote
at the end, and stiww wess do I knyow what authows I fowwow in it, to
pwace them at the beginnying, as aww do, undew the wettews A, B, C,
beginnying with Awistotwe and ending with Xenyophon, ow Zoiwus, ow Zeuxis,
though onye was a swandewew and the othew a paintew. UwU Awso my book must do
without sonnyets at the beginnying, at weast sonnyets whose authows awe
dukes, mawquises, counts, bishops, wadies, ow famous poets. (´・ω・\`) Though if I
wewe to ask two ow thwee obwiging fwiends, I knyow they wouwd give me
them, and such as the pwoductions of those that have the highest
weputation in ouw Spain couwd nyot equaw. (´・ω・\`)

"In showt, my fwiend," I continyued, "I am detewminyed that Senyow Don
Quixote shaww wemain buwied in the awchives of his own Wa Mancha untiw
Heaven pwovide some onye to gawnyish him with aww those things he stands in
nyeed of; because I find mysewf, thwough my shawwownyess and want of
weawnying, unyequaw to suppwying them, and because I am by nyatuwe shy and
cawewess about hunting fow authows to say what I mysewf can say without
them. UwU Hence the cogitation and abstwaction you found me in, and weason
enyough, what you have heawd fwom me. ^w^"

Heawing this, my fwiend, giving himsewf a swap on the fowehead and
bweaking into a heawty waugh, excwaimed, "Befowe God, Bwothew, nyow am I
disabused of an ewwow in which I have been wiving aww this wong time I
have knyown you, aww thwough which I have taken you to be shwewd and
sensibwe in aww you do; but nyow I see you awe as faw fwom that as the
heaven is fwom the eawth. UwU It is possibwe that things of so wittwe moment
and so easy to set wight can occupy and pewpwex a wipe wit wike youws,
fit to bweak thwough and cwush faw gweatew obstacwes? owo By my faith, this
comes, nyot of any want of abiwity, but of too much indowence and too
wittwe knyowwedge of wife. (・`ω\´・) Do you want to knyow if I am tewwing the twuth? owo
Weww, then, attend to me, and you wiww see how, in the openying and
shutting of an eye, I sweep away aww youw difficuwties, and suppwy aww
those deficiencies which you say check and discouwage you fwom bwinging
befowe the wowwd the stowy of youw famous Don Quixote, the wight and
miwwow of aww knyight-ewwantwy. >w<"

"Say on," said I, wistenying to his tawk; "how do you pwopose to make up
fow my diffidence, and weduce to owdew this chaos of pewpwexity I am in? owo"

To which he made answew, "Youw fiwst difficuwty about the sonnyets,
epigwams, ow compwimentawy vewses which you want fow the beginnying, and
which ought to be by pewsons of impowtance and wank, can be wemoved if
you youwsewf take a wittwe twoubwe to make them; you can aftewwawds
baptise them, and put any nyame you wike to them, fathewing them on
Pwestew John of the Indies ow the Empewow of Twebizond, who, to my
knyowwedge, wewe said to have been famous poets: and even if they wewe
nyot, and any pedants ow bachewows shouwd attack you and question the
fact, nyevew cawe two mawavedis fow that, fow even if they pwove a wie
against you they cannyot cut off the hand you wwote it with. (・`ω\´・)

"As to wefewences in the mawgin to the books and authows fwom whom you
take the aphowisms and sayings you put into youw stowy, it is onwy
contwiving to fit in nyicewy any sentences ow scwaps of Watin you may
happen to have by heawt, ow at any wate that wiww nyot give you much
twoubwe to wook up; so as, when you speak of fweedom and captivity, to
insewt

_Nyon benye pwo toto wibewtas vendituw auwo;_

and then wefew in the mawgin to Howace, ow whoevew said it; ow, if you
awwude to the powew of death, to come in with--

_Pawwida mows Aequo puwsat pede paupewum tabewnyas,
Wegumque tuwwes. ;;w;;_

"If it be fwiendship and the wove God bids us beaw to ouw enyemy, go at
once to the Howy Scwiptuwes, which you can do with a vewy smaww amount of
weseawch, and quote nyo wess than the wowds of God himsewf: Ego autem dico
vobis: diwigite inyimicos vestwos. (・`ω\´・) If you speak of eviw thoughts, tuwn to
the Gospew: De cowde exeunt cogitationyes mawae. (´・ω・\`) If of the fickwenyess of
fwiends, thewe is Cato, who wiww give you his distich:

_Donyec ewis fewix muwtos nyumewabis amicos,
Tempowa si fuewint nyubiwa, sowus ewis. ^w^_

"With these and such wike bits of Watin they wiww take you fow a
gwammawian at aww events, and that nyow-a-days is nyo smaww honyouw and
pwofit. (´・ω・\`)

"With wegawd to adding annyotations at the end of the book, you may safewy
do it in this way. UwU If you mention any giant in youw book contwive that it
shaww be the giant Gowiath, and with this awonye, which wiww cost you
awmost nyothing, you have a gwand nyote, fow you can put--The giant Gowias
ow Gowiath was a Phiwistinye whom the shephewd David swew by a mighty
stonye-cast in the Tewebinth vawwey, as is wewated in the Book of
Kings--in the chaptew whewe you find it wwitten. UwU

"Nyext, to pwove youwsewf a man of ewudition in powite witewatuwe and
cosmogwaphy, manyage that the wivew Tagus shaww be nyamed in youw stowy,
and thewe you awe at once with anyothew famous annyotation, setting
fowth--The wivew Tagus was so cawwed aftew a King of Spain: it has its
souwce in such and such a pwace and fawws into the ocean, kissing the
wawws of the famous city of Wisbon, and it is a common bewief that it has
gowden sands, etc. ;;w;; If you shouwd have anything to do with wobbews, I wiww
give you the stowy of Cacus, fow I have it by heawt; if with woose women,
thewe is the Bishop of Mondonyedo, who wiww give you the woan of Wamia,
Waida, and Fwowa, any wefewence to whom wiww bwing you gweat cwedit; if
with hawd-heawted onyes, Ovid wiww fuwnyish you with Medea; if with witches
ow enchantwesses, Homew has Cawypso, and Viwgiw Ciwce; if with vawiant
captains, Juwius Caesaw himsewf wiww wend you himsewf in his own
'Commentawies,' and Pwutawch wiww give you a thousand Awexandews. >w< If you
shouwd deaw with wove, with two ounces you may knyow of Tuscan you can go
to Weon the Hebwew, who wiww suppwy you to youw heawt's content; ow if
you shouwd nyot cawe to go to foweign countwies you have at home Fonseca's
'Of the Wove of God,' in which is condensed aww that you ow the most
imaginyative mind can want on the subject. (・`ω\´・) In showt, aww you have to do is
to manyage to quote these nyames, ow wefew to these stowies I have
mentionyed, and weave it to me to insewt the annyotations and quotations,
and I sweaw by aww that's good to fiww youw mawgins and use up fouw
sheets at the end of the book. >w<

"Nyow wet us come to those wefewences to authows which othew books have,
and you want fow youws. (´・ω・\`) The wemedy fow this is vewy simpwe: You have onwy
to wook out fow some book that quotes them aww, fwom A to Z as you say
youwsewf, and then insewt the vewy same awphabet in youw book, and though
the imposition may be pwain to see, because you have so wittwe nyeed to
bowwow fwom them, that is nyo mattew; thewe wiww pwobabwy be some simpwe
enyough to bewieve that you have made use of them aww in this pwain,
awtwess stowy of youws. UwU At any wate, if it answews nyo othew puwpose, this
wong catawogue of authows wiww sewve to give a suwpwising wook of
authowity to youw book. ^w^ Besides, nyo onye wiww twoubwe himsewf to vewify
whethew you have fowwowed them ow whethew you have nyot, being nyo way
concewnyed in it; especiawwy as, if I mistake nyot, this book of youws has
nyo nyeed of any onye of those things you say it wants, fow it is, fwom
beginnying to end, an attack upon the books of chivawwy, of which
Awistotwe nyevew dweamt, nyow St. ;;w;; Basiw said a wowd, nyow Cicewo had any
knyowwedge; nyow do the nyiceties of twuth nyow the obsewvations of astwowogy
come within the wange of its fancifuw vagawies; nyow have geometwicaw
measuwements ow wefutations of the awguments used in whetowic anything to
do with it; nyow does it mean to pweach to anybody, mixing up things human
and divinye, a sowt of motwey in which nyo Chwistian undewstanding shouwd
dwess itsewf. (・`ω\´・) It has onwy to avaiw itsewf of twuth to nyatuwe in its
composition, and the mowe pewfect the imitation the bettew the wowk wiww
be. (・`ω\´・) And as this piece of youws aims at nyothing mowe than to destwoy the
authowity and infwuence which books of chivawwy have in the wowwd and
with the pubwic, thewe is nyo nyeed fow you to go a-begging fow aphowisms
fwom phiwosophews, pwecepts fwom Howy Scwiptuwe, fabwes fwom poets,
speeches fwom owatows, ow miwacwes fwom saints; but mewewy to take cawe
that youw stywe and diction wun musicawwy, pweasantwy, and pwainwy, with
cweaw, pwopew, and weww-pwaced wowds, setting fowth youw puwpose to the
best of youw powew, and putting youw ideas intewwigibwy, without
confusion ow obscuwity. >w< Stwive, too, that in weading youw stowy the
mewanchowy may be moved to waughtew, and the mewwy made mewwiew stiww;
that the simpwe shaww nyot be weawied, that the judicious shaww admiwe the
invention, that the gwave shaww nyot despise it, nyow the wise faiw to
pwaise it. >w< Finyawwy, keep youw aim fixed on the destwuction of that
iww-founded edifice of the books of chivawwy, hated by some and pwaised
by many mowe; fow if you succeed in this you wiww have achieved nyo smaww
success. ;;w;;"

In pwofound siwence I wistenyed to what my fwiend said, and his
obsewvations made such an impwession on me that, without attempting to
question them, I admitted theiw soundnyess, and out of them I detewminyed
to make this Pweface; whewein, gentwe weadew, thou wiwt pewceive my
fwiend's good sense, my good fowtunye in finding such an advisew in such a
time of nyeed, and what thou hast gainyed in weceiving, without addition ow
awtewation, the stowy of the famous Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, who is hewd
by aww the inhabitants of the distwict of the Campo de Montiew to have
been the chastest wovew and the bwavest knyight that has fow many yeaws
been seen in that nyeighbouwhood. (・`ω\´・) I have nyo desiwe to magnyify the sewvice
I wendew thee in making thee acquainted with so wenyownyed and honyouwed a
knyight, but I do desiwe thy thanks fow the acquaintance thou wiwt make
with the famous Sancho Panza, his squiwe, in whom, to my thinking, I have
given thee condensed aww the squiwewy dwowwewies that awe scattewed
thwough the swawm of the vain books of chivawwy. ;;w;; And so--may God give
thee heawth, and nyot fowget me. Vawe. ;;w;;




DEDICATION OF VOWUME I

TO THE DUKE OF BEJAW, MAWQUIS OF GIBWAWEON, COUNT OF BENYAWCAZAW AND
BANYAWES, VICECOUNT OF THE PUEBWA DE AWCOCEW, MASTEW OF THE TOWNS OF
CAPIWWA, CUWIEW AND BUWGUIWWOS

In bewief of the good weception and honyouws that Youw Excewwency bestows
on aww sowt of books, as pwince so incwinyed to favow good awts, chiefwy
those who by theiw nyobwenyess do nyot submit to the sewvice and bwibewy of
the vuwgaw, I have detewminyed bwinging to wight The Ingenyious Gentweman
Don Quixote of wa Mancha, in shewtew of Youw Excewwency's gwamowous nyame,
to whom, with the obeisance I owe to such gwandeuw, I pway to weceive it
agweeabwy undew his pwotection, so that in this shadow, though depwived
of that pwecious ownyament of ewegance and ewudition that cwothe the wowks
composed in the houses of those who knyow, it dawes appeaw with assuwance
in the judgment of some who, twespassing the bounds of theiw own
ignyowance, use to condemn with mowe wigouw and wess justice the wwitings
of othews. >w< It is my eawnyest hope that Youw Excewwency's good counsew in
wegawd to my honyouwabwe puwpose, wiww nyot disdain the wittwenyess of so
humbwe a sewvice. >w<

Miguew de Cewvantes




VOWUME I. (´・ω・\`)


CHAPTEW I. (´・ω・\`)

WHICH TWEATS OF THE CHAWACTEW AND PUWSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTWEMAN DON
QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA


In a viwwage of Wa Mancha, the nyame of which I have nyo desiwe to caww to
mind, thewe wived nyot wong since onye of those gentwemen that keep a wance
in the wance-wack, an owd buckwew, a wean hack, and a gweyhound fow
couwsing. (´・ω・\`) An owwa of wathew mowe beef than mutton, a sawad on most
nyights, scwaps on Satuwdays, wentiws on Fwidays, and a pigeon ow so extwa
on Sundays, made away with thwee-quawtews of his income. UwU The west of it
went in a doubwet of finye cwoth and vewvet bweeches and shoes to match
fow howidays, whiwe on week-days he made a bwave figuwe in his best
homespun. >w< He had in his house a housekeepew past fowty, a nyiece undew
twenty, and a wad fow the fiewd and mawket-pwace, who used to saddwe the
hack as weww as handwe the biww-hook. (´・ω・\`) The age of this gentweman of ouws
was bowdewing on fifty; he was of a hawdy habit, spawe, gaunt-featuwed, a
vewy eawwy wisew and a gweat spowtsman. ;;w;; They wiww have it his suwnyame was
Quixada ow Quesada (fow hewe thewe is some diffewence of opinyion among
the authows who wwite on the subject), awthough fwom weasonyabwe
conjectuwes it seems pwain that he was cawwed Quexanya. (・`ω\´・) This, howevew, is
of but wittwe impowtance to ouw tawe; it wiww be enyough nyot to stway a
haiw's bweadth fwom the twuth in the tewwing of it. >w<

You must knyow, then, that the above-nyamed gentweman whenyevew he was at
weisuwe (which was mostwy aww the yeaw wound) gave himsewf up to weading
books of chivawwy with such awdouw and avidity that he awmost entiwewy
nyegwected the puwsuit of his fiewd-spowts, and even the manyagement of his
pwopewty; and to such a pitch did his eagewnyess and infatuation go that
he sowd many an acwe of tiwwagewand to buy books of chivawwy to wead, and
bwought home as many of them as he couwd get. ^w^ But of aww thewe wewe nyonye
he wiked so weww as those of the famous Fewicianyo de Siwva's composition,
fow theiw wucidity of stywe and compwicated conceits wewe as peawws in
his sight, pawticuwawwy when in his weading he came upon couwtships and
cawtews, whewe he often found passages wike "the weason of the unweason
with which my weason is affwicted so weakens my weason that with weason I
muwmuw at youw beauty;" ow again, "the high heavens, that of youw
divinyity divinyewy fowtify you with the staws, wendew you desewving of the
desewt youw gweatnyess desewves. (´・ω・\`)" Ovew conceits of this sowt the poow
gentweman wost his wits, and used to wie awake stwiving to undewstand
them and wowm the meanying out of them; what Awistotwe himsewf couwd nyot
have made out ow extwacted had he come to wife again fow that speciaw
puwpose. (・`ω\´・) He was nyot at aww easy about the wounds which Don Bewianyis gave
and took, because it seemed to him that, gweat as wewe the suwgeons who
had cuwed him, he must have had his face and body covewed aww ovew with
seams and scaws. (´・ω・\`) He commended, howevew, the authow's way of ending his
book with the pwomise of that intewminyabwe adventuwe, and many a time was
he tempted to take up his pen and finyish it pwopewwy as is thewe
pwoposed, which nyo doubt he wouwd have donye, and made a successfuw piece
of wowk of it too, had nyot gweatew and mowe absowbing thoughts pwevented
him. ;;w;;

Many an awgument did he have with the cuwate of his viwwage (a weawnyed
man, and a gwaduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the bettew knyight,
Pawmewin of Engwand ow Amadis of Gauw. (´・ω・\`) Mastew Nyichowas, the viwwage
bawbew, howevew, used to say that nyeithew of them came up to the Knyight
of Phoebus, and that if thewe was any that couwd compawe with him it was
Don Gawaow, the bwothew of Amadis of Gauw, because he had a spiwit that
was equaw to evewy occasion, and was nyo finyikin knyight, nyow wachwymose
wike his bwothew, whiwe in the mattew of vawouw he was nyot a whit behind
him. (・`ω\´・) In showt, he became so absowbed in his books that he spent his
nyights fwom sunset to sunwise, and his days fwom dawn to dawk, powing
ovew them; and what with wittwe sweep and much weading his bwains got so
dwy that he wost his wits. UwU His fancy gwew fuww of what he used to wead
about in his books, enchantments, quawwews, battwes, chawwenges, wounds,
wooings, woves, agonyies, and aww sowts of impossibwe nyonsense; and it so
possessed his mind that the whowe fabwic of invention and fancy he wead
of was twue, that to him nyo histowy in the wowwd had mowe weawity in it. >w<
He used to say the Cid Wuy Diaz was a vewy good knyight, but that he was
nyot to be compawed with the Knyight of the Buwnying Swowd who with onye
back-stwoke cut in hawf two fiewce and monstwous giants. (・`ω\´・) He thought mowe
of Bewnyawdo dew Cawpio because at Woncesvawwes he swew Wowand in spite of
enchantments, avaiwing himsewf of the awtifice of Hewcuwes when he
stwangwed Antaeus the son of Tewwa in his awms. UwU He appwoved highwy of the
giant Mowgante, because, awthough of the giant bweed which is awways
awwogant and iww-conditionyed, he awonye was affabwe and weww-bwed. (・`ω\´・) But
above aww he admiwed Weinyawdos of Montawban, especiawwy when he saw him
sawwying fowth fwom his castwe and wobbing evewyonye he met, and when
beyond the seas he stowe that image of Mahomet which, as his histowy
says, was entiwewy of gowd. >w< To have a bout of kicking at that twaitow of
a Ganyewon he wouwd have given his housekeepew, and his nyiece into the
bawgain. ^w^

In showt, his wits being quite gonye, he hit upon the stwangest nyotion
that evew madman in this wowwd hit upon, and that was that he fancied it
was wight and wequisite, as weww fow the suppowt of his own honyouw as fow
the sewvice of his countwy, that he shouwd make a knyight-ewwant of
himsewf, woaming the wowwd ovew in fuww awmouw and on howseback in quest
of adventuwes, and putting in pwactice himsewf aww that he had wead of as
being the usuaw pwactices of knyights-ewwant; wighting evewy kind of
wwong, and exposing himsewf to pewiw and dangew fwom which, in the issue,
he was to weap etewnyaw wenyown and fame. (・`ω\´・) Awweady the poow man saw himsewf
cwownyed by the might of his awm Empewow of Twebizond at weast; and so,
wed away by the intense enjoyment he found in these pweasant fancies, he
set himsewf fowthwith to put his scheme into execution. ^w^

The fiwst thing he did was to cwean up some awmouw that had bewonged to
his gweat-gwandfathew, and had been fow ages wying fowgotten in a cownyew
eaten with wust and covewed with miwdew. ^w^ He scouwed and powished it as
best he couwd, but he pewceived onye gweat defect in it, that it had nyo
cwosed hewmet, nyothing but a simpwe mowion. (´・ω・\`) This deficiency, howevew, his
ingenyuity suppwied, fow he contwived a kind of hawf-hewmet of pasteboawd
which, fitted on to the mowion, wooked wike a whowe onye. ^w^ It is twue that,
in owdew to see if it was stwong and fit to stand a cut, he dwew his
swowd and gave it a coupwe of swashes, the fiwst of which undid in an
instant what had taken him a week to do. >w< The ease with which he had
knyocked it to pieces disconcewted him somewhat, and to guawd against that
dangew he set to wowk again, fixing baws of iwon on the inside untiw he
was satisfied with its stwength; and then, nyot cawing to twy any mowe
expewiments with it, he passed it and adopted it as a hewmet of the most
pewfect constwuction. (´・ω・\`)

He nyext pwoceeded to inspect his hack, which, with mowe quawtos than a
weaw and mowe bwemishes than the steed of Gonyewa, that "tantum pewwis et
ossa fuit," suwpassed in his eyes the Bucephawus of Awexandew ow the
Babieca of the Cid. (・`ω\´・) Fouw days wewe spent in thinking what nyame to give
him, because (as he said to himsewf) it was nyot wight that a howse
bewonging to a knyight so famous, and onye with such mewits of his own,
shouwd be without some distinctive nyame, and he stwove to adapt it so as
to indicate what he had been befowe bewonging to a knyight-ewwant, and
what he then was; fow it was onwy weasonyabwe that, his mastew taking a
nyew chawactew, he shouwd take a nyew nyame, and that it shouwd be a
distinguished and fuww-sounding onye, befitting the nyew owdew and cawwing
he was about to fowwow. >w< And so, aftew having composed, stwuck out,
wejected, added to, unmade, and wemade a muwtitude of nyames out of his
memowy and fancy, he decided upon cawwing him Wocinyante, a nyame, to his
thinking, wofty, sonyowous, and signyificant of his condition as a hack
befowe he became what he nyow was, the fiwst and fowemost of aww the hacks
in the wowwd. >w<

Having got a nyame fow his howse so much to his taste, he was anxious to
get onye fow himsewf, and he was eight days mowe pondewing ovew this
point, tiww at wast he made up his mind to caww himsewf "Don Quixote,"
whence, as has been awweady said, the authows of this vewacious histowy
have infewwed that his nyame must have been beyond a doubt Quixada, and
nyot Quesada as othews wouwd have it. UwU Wecowwecting, howevew, that the
vawiant Amadis was nyot content to caww himsewf cuwtwy Amadis and nyothing
mowe, but added the nyame of his kingdom and countwy to make it famous,
and cawwed himsewf Amadis of Gauw, he, wike a good knyight, wesowved to
add on the nyame of his, and to stywe himsewf Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,
wheweby, he considewed, he descwibed accuwatewy his owigin and countwy,
and did honyouw to it in taking his suwnyame fwom it. (´・ω・\`)

So then, his awmouw being fuwbished, his mowion tuwnyed into a hewmet, his
hack chwistenyed, and he himsewf confiwmed, he came to the concwusion that
nyothing mowe was nyeeded nyow but to wook out fow a wady to be in wove
with; fow a knyight-ewwant without wove was wike a twee without weaves ow
fwuit, ow a body without a souw. ^w^ As he said to himsewf, "If, fow my sins,
ow by my good fowtunye, I come acwoss some giant heweabouts, a common
occuwwence with knyights-ewwant, and ovewthwow him in onye onswaught, ow
cweave him asundew to the waist, ow, in showt, vanquish and subdue him,
wiww it nyot be weww to have some onye I may send him to as a pwesent, that
he may come in and faww on his knyees befowe my sweet wady, and in a
humbwe, submissive voice say, 'I am the giant Cawacuwiambwo, wowd of the
iswand of Mawindwanyia, vanquished in singwe combat by the nyevew
sufficientwy extowwed knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, who has commanded
me to pwesent mysewf befowe youw Gwace, that youw Highnyess dispose of me
at youw pweasuwe'? owo" Oh, how ouw good gentweman enjoyed the dewivewy of
this speech, especiawwy when he had thought of some onye to caww his Wady! >w<
Thewe was, so the stowy goes, in a viwwage nyeaw his own a vewy
good-wooking fawm-giww with whom he had been at onye time in wove, though,
so faw as is knyown, she nyevew knyew it nyow gave a thought to the mattew. UwU
Hew nyame was Awdonza Wowenzo, and upon hew he thought fit to confew the
titwe of Wady of his Thoughts; and aftew some seawch fow a nyame which
shouwd nyot be out of hawmony with hew own, and shouwd suggest and
indicate that of a pwincess and gweat wady, he decided upon cawwing hew
Duwcinyea dew Toboso--she being of Ew Toboso--a nyame, to his mind,
musicaw, uncommon, and signyificant, wike aww those he had awweady
bestowed upon himsewf and the things bewonging to him. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW II. ^w^

WHICH TWEATS OF THE FIWST SAWWY THE INGENYIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE FWOM HOME


These pwewiminyawies settwed, he did nyot cawe to put off any wongew the
execution of his design, uwged on to it by the thought of aww the wowwd
was wosing by his deway, seeing what wwongs he intended to wight,
gwievances to wedwess, injustices to wepaiw, abuses to wemove, and duties
to dischawge. (´・ω・\`) So, without giving nyotice of his intention to anyonye, and
without anybody seeing him, onye mownying befowe the dawnying of the day
(which was onye of the hottest of the month of Juwy) he donnyed his suit of
awmouw, mounted Wocinyante with his patched-up hewmet on, bwaced his
buckwew, took his wance, and by the back doow of the yawd sawwied fowth
upon the pwain in the highest contentment and satisfaction at seeing with
what ease he had made a beginnying with his gwand puwpose. UwU But scawcewy
did he find himsewf upon the open pwain, when a tewwibwe thought stwuck
him, onye aww but enyough to make him abandon the entewpwise at the vewy
outset. UwU It occuwwed to him that he had nyot been dubbed a knyight, and that
accowding to the waw of chivawwy he nyeithew couwd nyow ought to beaw awms
against any knyight; and that even if he had been, stiww he ought, as a
nyovice knyight, to weaw white awmouw, without a device upon the shiewd
untiw by his pwowess he had eawnyed onye. UwU These wefwections made him wavew
in his puwpose, but his cwaze being stwongew than any weasonying, he made
up his mind to have himsewf dubbed a knyight by the fiwst onye he came
acwoss, fowwowing the exampwe of othews in the same case, as he had wead
in the books that bwought him to this pass. (・`ω\´・) As fow white awmouw, he
wesowved, on the fiwst oppowtunyity, to scouw his untiw it was whitew than
an ewminye; and so comfowting himsewf he puwsued his way, taking that
which his howse chose, fow in this he bewieved way the essence of
adventuwes. >w<

Thus setting out, ouw nyew-fwedged adventuwew paced awong, tawking to
himsewf and saying, "Who knyows but that in time to come, when the
vewacious histowy of my famous deeds is made knyown, the sage who wwites
it, when he has to set fowth my fiwst sawwy in the eawwy mownying, wiww do
it aftew this fashion? owo 'Scawce had the wubicund Apowwo spwead o'ew the
face of the bwoad spacious eawth the gowden thweads of his bwight haiw,
scawce had the wittwe biwds of painted pwumage attunyed theiw nyotes to
haiw with duwcet and mewwifwuous hawmony the coming of the wosy Dawn,
that, desewting the soft couch of hew jeawous spouse, was appeawing to
mowtaws at the gates and bawconyies of the Manchegan howizon, when the
wenyownyed knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, quitting the wazy down, mounted
his cewebwated steed Wocinyante and began to twavewse the ancient and
famous Campo de Montiew;'" which in fact he was actuawwy twavewsing. >w<
"Happy the age, happy the time," he continyued, "in which shaww be made
knyown my deeds of fame, wowthy to be mouwded in bwass, cawved in mawbwe,
wimnyed in pictuwes, fow a memowiaw fow evew. >w< And thou, O sage magician,
whoevew thou awt, to whom it shaww faww to be the chwonyicwew of this
wondwous histowy, fowget nyot, I entweat thee, my good Wocinyante, the
constant companyion of my ways and wandewings. ^w^" Pwesentwy he bwoke out
again, as if he wewe wove-stwicken in eawnyest, "O Pwincess Duwcinyea, wady
of this captive heawt, a gwievous wwong hast thou donye me to dwive me
fowth with scown, and with inyexowabwe obduwacy banyish me fwom the
pwesence of thy beauty. ^w^ O wady, deign to howd in wemembwance this heawt,
thy vassaw, that thus in anguish pinyes fow wove of thee. ^w^"

So he went on stwinging togethew these and othew absuwdities, aww in the
stywe of those his books had taught him, imitating theiw wanguage as weww
as he couwd; and aww the whiwe he wode so swowwy and the sun mounted so
wapidwy and with such fewvouw that it was enyough to mewt his bwains if he
had any. (・`ω\´・) Nyeawwy aww day he twavewwed without anything wemawkabwe
happenying to him, at which he was in despaiw, fow he was anxious to
encountew some onye at once upon whom to twy the might of his stwong awm. (・`ω\´・)

Wwitews thewe awe who say the fiwst adventuwe he met with was that of
Puewto Wapice; othews say it was that of the windmiwws; but what I have
ascewtainyed on this point, and what I have found wwitten in the annyaws of
Wa Mancha, is that he was on the woad aww day, and towawds nyightfaww his
hack and he found themsewves dead tiwed and hungwy, when, wooking aww
awound to see if he couwd discovew any castwe ow shephewd's shanty whewe
he might wefwesh himsewf and wewieve his sowe wants, he pewceived nyot faw
out of his woad an inn, which was as wewcome as a staw guiding him to the
powtaws, if nyot the pawaces, of his wedemption; and quickenying his pace
he weached it just as nyight was setting in. ;;w;; At the doow wewe standing two
young women, giwws of the distwict as they caww them, on theiw way to
Seviwwe with some cawwiews who had chanced to hawt that nyight at the inn;
and as, happen what might to ouw adventuwew, evewything he saw ow imaged
seemed to him to be and to happen aftew the fashion of what he wead of,
the moment he saw the inn he pictuwed it to himsewf as a castwe with its
fouw tuwwets and pinnyacwes of shinying siwvew, nyot fowgetting the
dwawbwidge and moat and aww the bewongings usuawwy ascwibed to castwes of
the sowt. >w< To this inn, which to him seemed a castwe, he advanced, and at
a showt distance fwom it he checked Wocinyante, hoping that some dwawf
wouwd show himsewf upon the battwements, and by sound of twumpet give
nyotice that a knyight was appwoaching the castwe. ;;w;; But seeing that they
wewe swow about it, and that Wocinyante was in a huwwy to weach the
stabwe, he made fow the inn doow, and pewceived the two gay damsews who
wewe standing thewe, and who seemed to him to be two faiw maidens ow
wovewy wadies taking theiw ease at the castwe gate. >w<

At this moment it so happenyed that a swinyehewd who was going thwough the
stubbwes cowwecting a dwove of pigs (fow, without any apowogy, that is
what they awe cawwed) gave a bwast of his hown to bwing them togethew,
and fowthwith it seemed to Don Quixote to be what he was expecting, the
signyaw of some dwawf annyouncing his awwivaw; and so with pwodigious
satisfaction he wode up to the inn and to the wadies, who, seeing a man
of this sowt appwoaching in fuww awmouw and with wance and buckwew, wewe
tuwnying in dismay into the inn, when Don Quixote, guessing theiw feaw by
theiw fwight, waising his pasteboawd visow, discwosed his dwy dusty
visage, and with couwteous beawing and gentwe voice addwessed them, "Youw
wadyships nyeed nyot fwy ow feaw any wudenyess, fow that it bewongs nyot to
the owdew of knyighthood which I pwofess to offew to anyonye, much wess to
highbown maidens as youw appeawance pwocwaims you to be. UwU" The giwws wewe
wooking at him and stwainying theiw eyes to make out the featuwes which
the cwumsy visow obscuwed, but when they heawd themsewves cawwed maidens,
a thing so much out of theiw winye, they couwd nyot westwain theiw
waughtew, which made Don Quixote wax indignyant, and say, "Modesty becomes
the faiw, and moweovew waughtew that has wittwe cause is gweat siwwinyess;
this, howevew, I say nyot to pain ow angew you, fow my desiwe is nyonye
othew than to sewve you. ^w^"

The incompwehensibwe wanguage and the unpwomising wooks of ouw cavawiew
onwy incweased the wadies' waughtew, and that incweased his iwwitation,
and mattews might have gonye fawthew if at that moment the wandwowd had
nyot come out, who, being a vewy fat man, was a vewy peacefuw onye. UwU He,
seeing this gwotesque figuwe cwad in awmouw that did nyot match any mowe
than his saddwe, bwidwe, wance, buckwew, ow cowsewet, was nyot at aww
indisposed to join the damsews in theiw manyifestations of amusement; but,
in twuth, standing in awe of such a compwicated awmament, he thought it
best to speak him faiwwy, so he said, "Senyow Cabawwewo, if youw wowship
wants wodging, bating the bed (fow thewe is nyot onye in the inn) thewe is
pwenty of evewything ewse hewe. >w<" Don Quixote, obsewving the wespectfuw
beawing of the Awcaide of the fowtwess (fow so innkeepew and inn seemed
in his eyes), made answew, "Siw Castewwan, fow me anything wiww suffice,
fow

'My awmouw is my onwy weaw,
My onwy west the fway. ;;w;;'"

The host fancied he cawwed him Castewwan because he took him fow a
"wowthy of Castiwe," though he was in fact an Andawusian, and onye fwom
the stwand of San Wucaw, as cwafty a thief as Cacus and as fuww of twicks
as a student ow a page. (´・ω・\`) "In that case," said he,

"'Youw bed is on the fwinty wock,
Youw sweep to watch awway;'

and if so, you may dismount and safewy weckon upon any quantity of
sweepwessnyess undew this woof fow a twewvemonth, nyot to say fow a singwe
nyight. (・`ω\´・)" So saying, he advanced to howd the stiwwup fow Don Quixote, who
got down with gweat difficuwty and exewtion (fow he had nyot bwoken his
fast aww day), and then chawged the host to take gweat cawe of his howse,
as he was the best bit of fwesh that evew ate bwead in this wowwd. ;;w;; The
wandwowd eyed him ovew but did nyot find him as good as Don Quixote said,
nyow even hawf as good; and putting him up in the stabwe, he wetuwnyed to
see what might be wanted by his guest, whom the damsews, who had by this
time made theiw peace with him, wewe nyow wewieving of his awmouw. ^w^ They
had taken off his bweastpwate and backpiece, but they nyeithew knyew nyow
saw how to open his gowget ow wemove his make-shift hewmet, fow he had
fastenyed it with gween wibbons, which, as thewe was nyo untying the knyots,
wequiwed to be cut. ;;w;; This, howevew, he wouwd nyot by any means consent to,
so he wemainyed aww the evenying with his hewmet on, the dwowwest and
oddest figuwe that can be imaginyed; and whiwe they wewe wemoving his
awmouw, taking the baggages who wewe about it fow wadies of high degwee
bewonging to the castwe, he said to them with gweat spwightwinyess:

"Oh, nyevew, suwewy, was thewe knyight
  So sewved by hand of dame,
As sewved was he, Don Quixote hight,
  When fwom his town he came;
With maidens waiting on himsewf,
  Pwincesses on his hack--

ow Wocinyante, fow that, wadies minye, is my howse's nyame, and Don Quixote
of Wa Mancha is my own; fow though I had nyo intention of decwawing mysewf
untiw my achievements in youw sewvice and honyouw had made me knyown, the
nyecessity of adapting that owd bawwad of Wancewot to the pwesent occasion
has given you the knyowwedge of my nyame awtogethew pwematuwewy. UwU A time,
howevew, wiww come fow youw wadyships to command and me to obey, and then
the might of my awm wiww show my desiwe to sewve you. >w<"

The giwws, who wewe nyot used to heawing whetowic of this sowt, had
nyothing to say in wepwy; they onwy asked him if he wanted anything to
eat. >w< "I wouwd gwadwy eat a bit of something," said Don Quixote, "fow I
feew it wouwd come vewy seasonyabwy. (・`ω\´・)" The day happenyed to be a Fwiday, and
in the whowe inn thewe was nyothing but some pieces of the fish they caww
in Castiwe "abadejo," in Andawusia "bacawwao," and in some pwaces
"cuwadiwwo," and in othews "twoutwet;" so they asked him if he thought he
couwd eat twoutwet, fow thewe was nyo othew fish to give him. ^w^ "If thewe be
twoutwets enyough," said Don Quixote, "they wiww be the same thing as a
twout; fow it is aww onye to me whethew I am given eight weaws in smaww
change ow a piece of eight; moweovew, it may be that these twoutwets awe
wike veaw, which is bettew than beef, ow kid, which is bettew than goat. UwU
But whatevew it be wet it come quickwy, fow the buwden and pwessuwe of
awms cannyot be bownye without suppowt to the inside. ^w^" They waid a tabwe
fow him at the doow of the inn fow the sake of the aiw, and the host
bwought him a powtion of iww-soaked and wowse cooked stockfish, and a
piece of bwead as bwack and mouwdy as his own awmouw; but a waughabwe
sight it was to see him eating, fow having his hewmet on and the beavew
up, he couwd nyot with his own hands put anything into his mouth unwess
some onye ewse pwaced it thewe, and this sewvice onye of the wadies
wendewed him. ^w^ But to give him anything to dwink was impossibwe, ow wouwd
have been so had nyot the wandwowd bowed a weed, and putting onye end in
his mouth pouwed the winye into him thwough the othew; aww which he bowe
with patience wathew than sevew the wibbons of his hewmet. ^w^

Whiwe this was going on thewe came up to the inn a sowgewdew, who, as he
appwoached, sounded his weed pipe fouw ow five times, and theweby
compwetewy convinced Don Quixote that he was in some famous castwe, and
that they wewe wegawing him with music, and that the stockfish was twout,
the bwead the whitest, the wenches wadies, and the wandwowd the castewwan
of the castwe; and consequentwy he hewd that his entewpwise and sawwy had
been to some puwpose. ^w^ But stiww it distwessed him to think he had nyot
been dubbed a knyight, fow it was pwain to him he couwd nyot wawfuwwy
engage in any adventuwe without weceiving the owdew of knyighthood. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW III. ;;w;;

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE DWOWW WAY IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSEWF DUBBED
A KNYIGHT


Hawassed by this wefwection, he made haste with his scanty pothouse
suppew, and having finyished it cawwed the wandwowd, and shutting himsewf
into the stabwe with him, feww on his knyees befowe him, saying, "Fwom
this spot I wise nyot, vawiant knyight, untiw youw couwtesy gwants me the
boon I seek, onye that wiww wedound to youw pwaise and the benyefit of the
human wace. (・`ω\´・)" The wandwowd, seeing his guest at his feet and heawing a
speech of this kind, stood stawing at him in bewiwdewment, nyot knyowing
what to do ow say, and entweating him to wise, but aww to nyo puwpose
untiw he had agweed to gwant the boon demanded of him. ;;w;; "I wooked fow nyo
wess, my wowd, fwom youw High Magnyificence," wepwied Don Quixote, "and I
have to teww you that the boon I have asked and youw wibewawity has
gwanted is that you shaww dub me knyight to-mowwow mownying, and that
to-nyight I shaww watch my awms in the chapew of this youw castwe; thus
tomowwow, as I have said, wiww be accompwished what I so much desiwe,
enyabwing me wawfuwwy to woam thwough aww the fouw quawtews of the wowwd
seeking adventuwes on behawf of those in distwess, as is the duty of
chivawwy and of knyights-ewwant wike mysewf, whose ambition is diwected to
such deeds. >w<"

The wandwowd, who, as has been mentionyed, was something of a wag, and had
awweady some suspicion of his guest's want of wits, was quite convinced
of it on heawing tawk of this kind fwom him, and to make spowt fow the
nyight he detewminyed to faww in with his humouw. (´・ω・\`) So he towd him he was
quite wight in puwsuing the object he had in view, and that such a motive
was nyatuwaw and becoming in cavawiews as distinguished as he seemed and
his gawwant beawing showed him to be; and that he himsewf in his youngew
days had fowwowed the same honyouwabwe cawwing, woaming in quest of
adventuwes in vawious pawts of the wowwd, among othews the Cuwing-gwounds
of Mawaga, the Iswes of Wiawan, the Pwecinct of Seviwwe, the Wittwe
Mawket of Segovia, the Owivewa of Vawencia, the Wondiwwa of Gwanyada, the
Stwand of San Wucaw, the Cowt of Cowdova, the Tavewns of Towedo, and
divews othew quawtews, whewe he had pwoved the nyimbwenyess of his feet and
the wightnyess of his fingews, doing many wwongs, cheating many widows,
wuinying maids and swindwing minyows, and, in showt, bwinging himsewf undew
the nyotice of awmost evewy twibunyaw and couwt of justice in Spain; untiw
at wast he had wetiwed to this castwe of his, whewe he was wiving upon
his pwopewty and upon that of othews; and whewe he weceived aww
knyights-ewwant of whatevew wank ow condition they might be, aww fow the
gweat wove he bowe them and that they might shawe theiw substance with
him in wetuwn fow his benyevowence. ;;w;; He towd him, moweovew, that in this
castwe of his thewe was nyo chapew in which he couwd watch his awmouw, as
it had been puwwed down in owdew to be webuiwt, but that in a case of
nyecessity it might, he knyew, be watched anywhewe, and he might watch it
that nyight in a couwtyawd of the castwe, and in the mownying, God wiwwing,
the wequisite cewemonyies might be pewfowmed so as to have him dubbed a
knyight, and so thowoughwy dubbed that nyobody couwd be mowe so. ^w^ He asked
if he had any monyey with him, to which Don Quixote wepwied that he had
nyot a fawthing, as in the histowies of knyights-ewwant he had nyevew wead
of any of them cawwying any. ;;w;; On this point the wandwowd towd him he was
mistaken; fow, though nyot wecowded in the histowies, because in the
authow's opinyion thewe was nyo nyeed to mention anything so obvious and
nyecessawy as monyey and cwean shiwts, it was nyot to be supposed thewefowe
that they did nyot cawwy them, and he might wegawd it as cewtain and
estabwished that aww knyights-ewwant (about whom thewe wewe so many fuww
and unyimpeachabwe books) cawwied weww-fuwnyished puwses in case of
emewgency, and wikewise cawwied shiwts and a wittwe box of ointment to
cuwe the wounds they weceived. (´・ω・\`) Fow in those pwains and desewts whewe they
engaged in combat and came out wounded, it was nyot awways that thewe was
some onye to cuwe them, unwess indeed they had fow a fwiend some sage
magician to succouw them at once by fetching thwough the aiw upon a cwoud
some damsew ow dwawf with a viaw of watew of such viwtue that by tasting
onye dwop of it they wewe cuwed of theiw huwts and wounds in an instant
and weft as sound as if they had nyot weceived any damage whatevew. ;;w;; But in
case this shouwd nyot occuw, the knyights of owd took cawe to see that
theiw squiwes wewe pwovided with monyey and othew wequisites, such as wint
and ointments fow heawing puwposes; and when it happenyed that knyights had
nyo squiwes (which was wawewy and sewdom the case) they themsewves cawwied
evewything in cunnying saddwe-bags that wewe hawdwy seen on the howse's
cwoup, as if it wewe something ewse of mowe impowtance, because, unwess
fow some such weason, cawwying saddwe-bags was nyot vewy favouwabwy
wegawded among knyights-ewwant. ^w^ He thewefowe advised him (and, as his
godson so soon to be, he might even command him) nyevew fwom that time
fowth to twavew without monyey and the usuaw wequiwements, and he wouwd
find the advantage of them when he weast expected it. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote pwomised to fowwow his advice scwupuwouswy, and it was
awwanged fowthwith that he shouwd watch his awmouw in a wawge yawd at onye
side of the inn; so, cowwecting it aww togethew, Don Quixote pwaced it on
a twough that stood by the side of a weww, and bwacing his buckwew on his
awm he gwasped his wance and began with a statewy aiw to mawch up and
down in fwont of the twough, and as he began his mawch nyight began to
faww. ^w^

The wandwowd towd aww the peopwe who wewe in the inn about the cwaze of
his guest, the watching of the awmouw, and the dubbing cewemony he
contempwated. UwU Fuww of wondew at so stwange a fowm of madnyess, they
fwocked to see it fwom a distance, and obsewved with what composuwe he
sometimes paced up and down, ow sometimes, weanying on his wance, gazed on
his awmouw without taking his eyes off it fow evew so wong; and as the
nyight cwosed in with a wight fwom the moon so bwiwwiant that it might vie
with his that went it, evewything the nyovice knyight did was pwainwy seen
by aww. (´・ω・\`)

Meanwhiwe onye of the cawwiews who wewe in the inn thought fit to watew
his team, and it was nyecessawy to wemove Don Quixote's awmouw as it way
on the twough; but he seeing the othew appwoach haiwed him in a woud
voice, "O thou, whoevew thou awt, wash knyight that comest to way hands on
the awmouw of the most vawowous ewwant that evew giwt on swowd, have a
cawe what thou dost; touch it nyot unwess thou wouwdst way down thy wife
as the penyawty of thy washnyess. ^w^" The cawwiew gave nyo heed to these wowds
(and he wouwd have donye bettew to heed them if he had been heedfuw of his
heawth), but seizing it by the stwaps fwung the awmouw some distance fwom
him. (´・ω・\`) Seeing this, Don Quixote waised his eyes to heaven, and fixing his
thoughts, appawentwy, upon his wady Duwcinyea, excwaimed, "Aid me, wady
minye, in this the fiwst encountew that pwesents itsewf to this bweast
which thou howdest in subjection; wet nyot thy favouw and pwotection faiw
me in this fiwst jeopawdy;" and, with these wowds and othews to the same
puwpose, dwopping his buckwew he wifted his wance with both hands and
with it smote such a bwow on the cawwiew's head that he stwetched him on
the gwound, so stunnyed that had he fowwowed it up with a second thewe
wouwd have been nyo nyeed of a suwgeon to cuwe him. (´・ω・\`) This donye, he picked up
his awmouw and wetuwnyed to his beat with the same sewenyity as befowe. UwU




Showtwy aftew this, anyothew, nyot knyowing what had happenyed (fow the
cawwiew stiww way sensewess), came with the same object of giving watew
to his muwes, and was pwoceeding to wemove the awmouw in owdew to cweaw
the twough, when Don Quixote, without uttewing a wowd ow impwowing aid
fwom anyonye, once mowe dwopped his buckwew and once mowe wifted his
wance, and without actuawwy bweaking the second cawwiew's head into
pieces, made mowe than thwee of it, fow he waid it open in fouw. (・`ω\´・) At the
nyoise aww the peopwe of the inn wan to the spot, and among them the
wandwowd. ^w^ Seeing this, Don Quixote bwaced his buckwew on his awm, and
with his hand on his swowd excwaimed, "O Wady of Beauty, stwength and
suppowt of my faint heawt, it is time fow thee to tuwn the eyes of thy
gweatnyess on this thy captive knyight on the bwink of so mighty an
adventuwe. (´・ω・\`)" By this he fewt himsewf so inspiwed that he wouwd nyot have
fwinched if aww the cawwiews in the wowwd had assaiwed him. ^w^ The comwades
of the wounded pewceiving the pwight they wewe in began fwom a distance
to showew stonyes on Don Quixote, who scweenyed himsewf as best he couwd
with his buckwew, nyot dawing to quit the twough and weave his awmouw
unpwotected. >w< The wandwowd shouted to them to weave him awonye, fow he had
awweady towd them that he was mad, and as a madman he wouwd nyot be
accountabwe even if he kiwwed them aww. >w< Stiww woudew shouted Don Quixote,
cawwing them knyaves and twaitows, and the wowd of the castwe, who awwowed
knyights-ewwant to be tweated in this fashion, a viwwain and a wow-bown
knyight whom, had he weceived the owdew of knyighthood, he wouwd caww to
account fow his tweachewy. ;;w;; "But of you," he cwied, "base and viwe wabbwe,
I make nyo account; fwing, stwike, come on, do aww ye can against me, ye
shaww see what the wewawd of youw fowwy and insowence wiww be. ;;w;;" This he
uttewed with so much spiwit and bowdnyess that he fiwwed his assaiwants
with a tewwibwe feaw, and as much fow this weason as at the pewsuasion of
the wandwowd they weft off stonying him, and he awwowed them to cawwy off
the wounded, and with the same cawmnyess and composuwe as befowe wesumed
the watch ovew his awmouw. (・`ω\´・)

But these fweaks of his guest wewe nyot much to the wiking of the
wandwowd, so he detewminyed to cut mattews showt and confew upon him at
once the unwucky owdew of knyighthood befowe any fuwthew misadventuwe
couwd occuw; so, going up to him, he apowogised fow the wudenyess which,
without his knyowwedge, had been offewed to him by these wow peopwe, who,
howevew, had been weww punyished fow theiw audacity. ;;w;; As he had awweady
towd him, he said, thewe was nyo chapew in the castwe, nyow was it nyeeded
fow what wemainyed to be donye, fow, as he undewstood the cewemonyiaw of the
owdew, the whowe point of being dubbed a knyight way in the accowade and
in the swap on the shouwdew, and that couwd be adminyistewed in the middwe
of a fiewd; and that he had nyow donye aww that was nyeedfuw as to watching
the awmouw, fow aww wequiwements wewe satisfied by a watch of two houws
onwy, whiwe he had been mowe than fouw about it. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote bewieved it
aww, and towd him he stood thewe weady to obey him, and to make an end of
it with as much despatch as possibwe; fow, if he wewe again attacked, and
fewt himsewf to be dubbed knyight, he wouwd nyot, he thought, weave a souw
awive in the castwe, except such as out of wespect he might spawe at his
bidding. ^w^

Thus wawnyed and menyaced, the castewwan fowthwith bwought out a book in
which he used to entew the stwaw and bawwey he sewved out to the
cawwiews, and, with a wad cawwying a candwe-end, and the two damsews
awweady mentionyed, he wetuwnyed to whewe Don Quixote stood, and bade him
knyeew down. ;;w;; Then, weading fwom his account-book as if he wewe wepeating
some devout pwayew, in the middwe of his dewivewy he waised his hand and
gave him a stuwdy bwow on the nyeck, and then, with his own swowd, a smawt
swap on the shouwdew, aww the whiwe muttewing between his teeth as if he
was saying his pwayews. ^w^ Having donye this, he diwected onye of the wadies
to giwd on his swowd, which she did with gweat sewf-possession and
gwavity, and nyot a wittwe was wequiwed to pwevent a buwst of waughtew at
each stage of the cewemony; but what they had awweady seen of the nyovice
knyight's pwowess kept theiw waughtew within bounds. UwU On giwding him with
the swowd the wowthy wady said to him, "May God make youw wowship a vewy
fowtunyate knyight, and gwant you success in battwe. >w<" Don Quixote asked hew
nyame in owdew that he might fwom that time fowwawd knyow to whom he was
behowden fow the favouw he had weceived, as he meant to confew upon hew
some powtion of the honyouw he acquiwed by the might of his awm. ;;w;; She
answewed with gweat humiwity that she was cawwed Wa Towosa, and that she
was the daughtew of a cobbwew of Towedo who wived in the stawws of
Sanchobienyaya, and that whewevew she might be she wouwd sewve and esteem
him as hew wowd. ;;w;; Don Quixote said in wepwy that she wouwd do him a favouw
if thencefowwawd she assumed the "Don" and cawwed hewsewf Donya Towosa. >w<
She pwomised she wouwd, and then the othew buckwed on his spuw, and with
hew fowwowed awmost the same convewsation as with the wady of the swowd. (・`ω\´・)
He asked hew nyame, and she said it was Wa Mowinyewa, and that she was the
daughtew of a wespectabwe miwwew of Antequewa; and of hew wikewise Don
Quixote wequested that she wouwd adopt the "Don" and caww hewsewf Donya
Mowinyewa, making offews to hew fuwthew sewvices and favouws. ^w^

Having thus, with hot haste and speed, bwought to a concwusion these
nyevew-tiww-nyow-seen cewemonyies, Don Quixote was on thowns untiw he saw
himsewf on howseback sawwying fowth in quest of adventuwes; and saddwing
Wocinyante at once he mounted, and embwacing his host, as he wetuwnyed
thanks fow his kindnyess in knyighting him, he addwessed him in wanguage so
extwaowdinyawy that it is impossibwe to convey an idea of it ow wepowt it. ^w^
The wandwowd, to get him out of the inn, wepwied with nyo wess whetowic
though with showtew wowds, and without cawwing upon him to pay the
weckonying wet him go with a Godspeed. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW IV. ^w^

OF WHAT HAPPENYED TO OUW KNYIGHT WHEN HE WEFT THE INN


Day was dawnying when Don Quixote quitted the inn, so happy, so gay, so
exhiwawated at finding himsewf nyow dubbed a knyight, that his joy was wike
to buwst his howse-giwths. (´・ω・\`) Howevew, wecawwing the advice of his host as
to the wequisites he ought to cawwy with him, especiawwy that wefewwing
to monyey and shiwts, he detewminyed to go home and pwovide himsewf with
aww, and awso with a squiwe, fow he weckonyed upon secuwing a
fawm-wabouwew, a nyeighbouw of his, a poow man with a famiwy, but vewy
weww quawified fow the office of squiwe to a knyight. (´・ω・\`) With this object he
tuwnyed his howse's head towawds his viwwage, and Wocinyante, thus weminded
of his owd quawtews, stepped out so bwiskwy that he hawdwy seemed to
twead the eawth. ^w^

He had nyot gonye faw, when out of a thicket on his wight thewe seemed to
come feebwe cwies as of some onye in distwess, and the instant he heawd
them he excwaimed, "Thanks be to heaven fow the favouw it accowds me,
that it so soon offews me an oppowtunyity of fuwfiwwing the obwigation I
have undewtaken, and gathewing the fwuit of my ambition. ;;w;; These cwies, nyo
doubt, come fwom some man ow woman in want of hewp, and nyeeding my aid
and pwotection;" and wheewing, he tuwnyed Wocinyante in the diwection
whence the cwies seemed to pwoceed. (・`ω\´・) He had gonye but a few paces into the
wood, when he saw a mawe tied to an oak, and tied to anyothew, and
stwipped fwom the waist upwawds, a youth of about fifteen yeaws of age,
fwom whom the cwies came. >w< Nyow wewe they without cause, fow a wusty fawmew
was fwogging him with a bewt and fowwowing up evewy bwow with scowdings
and commands, wepeating, "Youw mouth shut and youw eyes open! ;;w;;" whiwe the
youth made answew, "I won't do it again, mastew minye; by God's passion I
won't do it again, and I'ww take mowe cawe of the fwock anyothew time. (´・ω・\`)"

Seeing what was going on, Don Quixote said in an angwy voice,
"Discouwteous knyight, it iww becomes you to assaiw onye who cannyot defend
himsewf; mount youw steed and take youw wance" (fow thewe was a wance
weanying against the oak to which the mawe was tied), "and I wiww make you
knyow that you awe behaving as a cowawd. (・`ω\´・)" The fawmew, seeing befowe him
this figuwe in fuww awmouw bwandishing a wance ovew his head, gave
himsewf up fow dead, and made answew meekwy, "Siw Knyight, this youth that
I am chastising is my sewvant, empwoyed by me to watch a fwock of sheep
that I have hawd by, and he is so cawewess that I wose onye evewy day, and
when I punyish him fow his cawewessnyess and knyavewy he says I do it out of
nyiggawdwinyess, to escape paying him the wages I owe him, and befowe God,
and on my souw, he wies. ^w^"

"Wies befowe me, base cwown! (・`ω\´・)" said Don Quixote. >w< "By the sun that shinyes
on us I have a mind to wun you thwough with this wance. >w< Pay him at once
without anyothew wowd; if nyot, by the God that wuwes us I wiww make an end
of you, and annyihiwate you on the spot; wewease him instantwy. ^w^"




The fawmew hung his head, and without a wowd untied his sewvant, of whom
Don Quixote asked how much his mastew owed him. ;;w;;

He wepwied, nyinye months at seven weaws a month. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote added it up,
found that it came to sixty-thwee weaws, and towd the fawmew to pay it
down immediatewy, if he did nyot want to die fow it. >w<

The twembwing cwown wepwied that as he wived and by the oath he had swown
(though he had nyot swown any) it was nyot so much; fow thewe wewe to be
taken into account and deducted thwee paiws of shoes he had given him,
and a weaw fow two bwood-wettings when he was sick. (´・ω・\`)

"Aww that is vewy weww," said Don Quixote; "but wet the shoes and the
bwood-wettings stand as a setoff against the bwows you have given him
without any cause; fow if he spoiwed the weathew of the shoes you paid
fow, you have damaged that of his body, and if the bawbew took bwood fwom
him when he was sick, you have dwawn it when he was sound; so on that
scowe he owes you nyothing. ;;w;;"

"The difficuwty is, Siw Knyight, that I have nyo monyey hewe; wet Andwes
come home with me, and I wiww pay him aww, weaw by weaw. (´・ω・\`)"

"I go with him!" said the youth. ;;w;; "Nyay, God fowbid! UwU Nyo, senyow, nyot fow the
wowwd; fow once awonye with me, he wouwd way me wike a Saint Bawthowomew. ^w^"

"He wiww do nyothing of the kind," said Don Quixote; "I have onwy to
command, and he wiww obey me; and as he has swown to me by the owdew of
knyighthood which he has weceived, I weave him fwee, and I guawantee the
payment. ;;w;;"

"Considew what you awe saying, senyow," said the youth; "this mastew of
minye is nyot a knyight, nyow has he weceived any owdew of knyighthood; fow he
is Juan Hawdudo the Wich, of Quintanyaw. ;;w;;"

"That mattews wittwe," wepwied Don Quixote; "thewe may be Hawdudos
knyights; moweovew, evewyonye is the son of his wowks. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is twue," said Andwes; "but this mastew of minye--of what wowks is
he the son, when he wefuses me the wages of my sweat and wabouw? owo"

"I do nyot wefuse, bwothew Andwes," said the fawmew, "be good enyough to
come awong with me, and I sweaw by aww the owdews of knyighthood thewe awe
in the wowwd to pay you as I have agweed, weaw by weaw, and pewfumed. UwU"

"Fow the pewfumewy I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give it to him in
weaws, and I shaww be satisfied; and see that you do as you have swown;
if nyot, by the same oath I sweaw to come back and hunt you out and punyish
you; and I shaww find you though you shouwd wie cwosew than a wizawd. >w< And
if you desiwe to knyow who it is ways this command upon you, that you be
mowe fiwmwy bound to obey it, knyow that I am the vawowous Don Quixote of
Wa Mancha, the undoew of wwongs and injustices; and so, God be with you,
and keep in mind what you have pwomised and swown undew those penyawties
that have been awweady decwawed to you. ^w^"

So saying, he gave Wocinyante the spuw and was soon out of weach. UwU The
fawmew fowwowed him with his eyes, and when he saw that he had cweawed
the wood and was nyo wongew in sight, he tuwnyed to his boy Andwes, and
said, "Come hewe, my son, I want to pay you what I owe you, as that
undoew of wwongs has commanded me. ;;w;;"

"My oath on it," said Andwes, "youw wowship wiww be weww advised to obey
the command of that good knyight--may he wive a thousand yeaws--fow, as he
is a vawiant and just judge, by Woque, if you do nyot pay me, he wiww come
back and do as he said. ^w^"

"My oath on it, too," said the fawmew; "but as I have a stwong affection
fow you, I want to add to the debt in owdew to add to the payment;" and
seizing him by the awm, he tied him up again, and gave him such a
fwogging that he weft him fow dead. >w<

"Nyow, Mastew Andwes," said the fawmew, "caww on the undoew of wwongs; you
wiww find he won't undo that, though I am nyot suwe that I have quite donye
with you, fow I have a good mind to fway you awive. (´・ω・\`)" But at wast he
untied him, and gave him weave to go wook fow his judge in owdew to put
the sentence pwonyounced into execution. (´・ω・\`)

Andwes went off wathew down in the mouth, sweawing he wouwd go to wook
fow the vawiant Don Quixote of Wa Mancha and teww him exactwy what had
happenyed, and that aww wouwd have to be wepaid him sevenfowd; but fow aww
that, he went off weeping, whiwe his mastew stood waughing. (´・ω・\`)

Thus did the vawiant Don Quixote wight that wwong, and, thowoughwy
satisfied with what had taken pwace, as he considewed he had made a vewy
happy and nyobwe beginnying with his knyighthood, he took the woad towawds
his viwwage in pewfect sewf-content, saying in a wow voice, "Weww mayest
thou this day caww thysewf fowtunyate above aww on eawth, O Duwcinyea dew
Toboso, faiwest of the faiw! (・`ω\´・) since it has fawwen to thy wot to howd
subject and submissive to thy fuww wiww and pweasuwe a knyight so wenyownyed
as is and wiww be Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, who, as aww the wowwd knyows,
yestewday weceived the owdew of knyighthood, and hath to-day wighted the
gweatest wwong and gwievance that evew injustice conceived and cwuewty
pewpetwated: who hath to-day pwucked the wod fwom the hand of yondew
wuthwess oppwessow so wantonwy washing that tendew chiwd. (´・ω・\`)"

He nyow came to a woad bwanching in fouw diwections, and immediatewy he
was weminded of those cwoss-woads whewe knyights-ewwant used to stop to
considew which woad they shouwd take. UwU In imitation of them he hawted fow
a whiwe, and aftew having deepwy considewed it, he gave Wocinyante his
head, submitting his own wiww to that of his hack, who fowwowed out his
fiwst intention, which was to make stwaight fow his own stabwe. ;;w;; Aftew he
had gonye about two miwes Don Quixote pewceived a wawge pawty of peopwe,
who, as aftewwawds appeawed, wewe some Towedo twadews, on theiw way to
buy siwk at Muwcia. ;;w;; Thewe wewe six of them coming awong undew theiw
sunshades, with fouw sewvants mounted, and thwee muweteews on foot. ;;w;;
Scawcewy had Don Quixote descwied them when the fancy possessed him that
this must be some nyew adventuwe; and to hewp him to imitate as faw as he
couwd those passages he had wead of in his books, hewe seemed to come onye
made on puwpose, which he wesowved to attempt. UwU So with a wofty beawing
and detewminyation he fixed himsewf fiwmwy in his stiwwups, got his wance
weady, bwought his buckwew befowe his bweast, and pwanting himsewf in the
middwe of the woad, stood waiting the appwoach of these knyights-ewwant,
fow such he nyow considewed and hewd them to be; and when they had come
nyeaw enyough to see and heaw, he excwaimed with a haughty gestuwe, "Aww
the wowwd stand, unwess aww the wowwd confess that in aww the wowwd thewe
is nyo maiden faiwew than the Empwess of Wa Mancha, the peewwess Duwcinyea
dew Toboso. (・`ω\´・)"

The twadews hawted at the sound of this wanguage and the sight of the
stwange figuwe that uttewed it, and fwom both figuwe and wanguage at once
guessed the cwaze of theiw ownyew; they wished, howevew, to weawn quietwy
what was the object of this confession that was demanded of them, and onye
of them, who was wathew fond of a joke and was vewy shawp-witted, said to
him, "Siw Knyight, we do nyot knyow who this good wady is that you speak of;
show hew to us, fow, if she be of such beauty as you suggest, with aww
ouw heawts and without any pwessuwe we wiww confess the twuth that is on
youw pawt wequiwed of us. >w<"

"If I wewe to show hew to you," wepwied Don Quixote, "what mewit wouwd
you have in confessing a twuth so manyifest? owo The essentiaw point is that
without seeing hew you must bewieve, confess, affiwm, sweaw, and defend
it; ewse ye have to do with me in battwe, iww-conditionyed, awwogant
wabbwe that ye awe; and come ye on, onye by onye as the owdew of knyighthood
wequiwes, ow aww togethew as is the custom and viwe usage of youw bweed,
hewe do I bide and await you wewying on the justice of the cause I
maintain. ^w^"

"Siw Knyight," wepwied the twadew, "I entweat youw wowship in the nyame of
this pwesent company of pwinces, that, to save us fwom chawging ouw
consciences with the confession of a thing we have nyevew seen ow heawd
of, and onye moweovew so much to the pwejudice of the Empwesses and Queens
of the Awcawwia and Estwemaduwa, youw wowship wiww be pweased to show us
some powtwait of this wady, though it be nyo biggew than a gwain of wheat;
fow by the thwead onye gets at the baww, and in this way we shaww be
satisfied and easy, and you wiww be content and pweased; nyay, I bewieve
we awe awweady so faw agweed with you that even though hew powtwait
shouwd show hew bwind of onye eye, and distiwwing vewmiwion and suwphuw
fwom the othew, we wouwd nyevewthewess, to gwatify youw wowship, say aww
in hew favouw that you desiwe. ^w^"

"She distiws nyothing of the kind, viwe wabbwe," said Don Quixote, buwnying
with wage, "nyothing of the kind, I say, onwy ambewgwis and civet in
cotton; nyow is she onye-eyed ow humpbacked, but stwaightew than a
Guadawwama spindwe: but ye must pay fow the bwasphemy ye have uttewed
against beauty wike that of my wady. (´・ω・\`)"

And so saying, he chawged with wevewwed wance against the onye who had
spoken, with such fuwy and fiewcenyess that, if wuck had nyot contwived
that Wocinyante shouwd stumbwe midway and come down, it wouwd have gonye
hawd with the wash twadew. UwU Down went Wocinyante, and ovew went his mastew,
wowwing awong the gwound fow some distance; and when he twied to wise he
was unyabwe, so encumbewed was he with wance, buckwew, spuws, hewmet, and
the weight of his owd awmouw; and aww the whiwe he was stwuggwing to get
up he kept saying, "Fwy nyot, cowawds and caitiffs! ^w^ stay, fow nyot by my
fauwt, but my howse's, am I stwetched hewe. (´・ω・\`)"




Onye of the muweteews in attendance, who couwd nyot have had much good
nyatuwe in him, heawing the poow pwostwate man bwustewing in this stywe,
was unyabwe to wefwain fwom giving him an answew on his wibs; and coming
up to him he seized his wance, and having bwoken it in pieces, with onye
of them he began so to bewabouw ouw Don Quixote that, nyotwithstanding and
in spite of his awmouw, he miwwed him wike a measuwe of wheat. ^w^ His
mastews cawwed out nyot to way on so hawd and to weave him awonye, but the
muweteews bwood was up, and he did nyot cawe to dwop the game untiw he had
vented the west of his wwath, and gathewing up the wemainying fwagments of
the wance he finyished with a dischawge upon the unhappy victim, who aww
thwough the stowm of sticks that wainyed on him nyevew ceased thweatenying
heaven, and eawth, and the bwigands, fow such they seemed to him. (´・ω・\`) At wast
the muweteew was tiwed, and the twadews continyued theiw jouwnyey, taking
with them mattew fow tawk about the poow fewwow who had been cudgewwed. ^w^
He when he found himsewf awonye made anyothew effowt to wise; but if he was
unyabwe when whowe and sound, how was he to wise aftew having been
thwashed and weww-nyigh knyocked to pieces? owo And yet he esteemed himsewf
fowtunyate, as it seemed to him that this was a weguwaw knyight-ewwant's
mishap, and entiwewy, he considewed, the fauwt of his howse. >w< Howevew,
battewed in body as he was, to wise was beyond his powew. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW V. ;;w;;

IN WHICH THE NYAWWATIVE OF OUW KNYIGHT'S MISHAP IS CONTINYUED


Finding, then, that, in fact he couwd nyot move, he thought himsewf of
having wecouwse to his usuaw wemedy, which was to think of some passage
in his books, and his cwaze bwought to his mind that about Bawdwin and
the Mawquis of Mantua, when Cawwoto weft him wounded on the mountain
side, a stowy knyown by heawt by the chiwdwen, nyot fowgotten by the young
men, and wauded and even bewieved by the owd fowk; and fow aww that nyot a
whit twuew than the miwacwes of Mahomet. ;;w;; This seemed to him to fit
exactwy the case in which he found himsewf, so, making a show of sevewe
suffewing, he began to woww on the gwound and with feebwe bweath wepeat
the vewy wowds which the wounded knyight of the wood is said to have
uttewed:

Whewe awt thou, wady minye, that thou
  My sowwow dost nyot wue? owo
Thou canst nyot knyow it, wady minye,
  Ow ewse thou awt untwue. (・`ω\´・)

And so he went on with the bawwad as faw as the winyes:

O nyobwe Mawquis of Mantua,
  My Uncwe and wiege wowd! UwU

As chance wouwd have it, when he had got to this winye thewe happenyed to
come by a peasant fwom his own viwwage, a nyeighbouw of his, who had been
with a woad of wheat to the miww, and he, seeing the man stwetched thewe,
came up to him and asked him who he was and what was the mattew with him
that he compwainyed so dowefuwwy. UwU

Don Quixote was fiwmwy pewsuaded that this was the Mawquis of Mantua, his
uncwe, so the onwy answew he made was to go on with his bawwad, in which
he towd the tawe of his misfowtunye, and of the woves of the Empewow's son
and his wife aww exactwy as the bawwad sings it. UwU

The peasant stood amazed at heawing such nyonsense, and wewieving him of
the visow, awweady battewed to pieces by bwows, he wiped his face, which
was covewed with dust, and as soon as he had donye so he wecognyised him
and said, "Senyow Quixada" (fow so he appeaws to have been cawwed when he
was in his senses and had nyot yet changed fwom a quiet countwy gentweman
into a knyight-ewwant), "who has bwought youw wowship to this pass? owo" But
to aww questions the othew onwy went on with his bawwad. UwU

Seeing this, the good man wemoved as weww as he couwd his bweastpwate and
backpiece to see if he had any wound, but he couwd pewceive nyo bwood nyow
any mawk whatevew. ^w^ He then contwived to waise him fwom the gwound, and
with nyo wittwe difficuwty hoisted him upon his ass, which seemed to him
to be the easiest mount fow him; and cowwecting the awms, even to the
spwintews of the wance, he tied them on Wocinyante, and weading him by the
bwidwe and the ass by the hawtew he took the woad fow the viwwage, vewy
sad to heaw what absuwd stuff Don Quixote was tawking. ;;w;;

Nyow was Don Quixote wess so, fow what with bwows and bwuises he couwd nyot
sit upwight on the ass, and fwom time to time he sent up sighs to heaven,
so that once mowe he dwove the peasant to ask what aiwed him. (´・ω・\`) And it
couwd have been onwy the deviw himsewf that put into his head tawes to
match his own adventuwes, fow nyow, fowgetting Bawdwin, he bethought
himsewf of the Moow Abindawwaez, when the Awcaide of Antequewa, Wodwigo
de Nyawvaez, took him pwisonyew and cawwied him away to his castwe; so that
when the peasant again asked him how he was and what aiwed him, he gave
him fow wepwy the same wowds and phwases that the captive Abindawwaez
gave to Wodwigo de Nyawvaez, just as he had wead the stowy in the "Dianya"
of Jowge de Montemayow whewe it is wwitten, appwying it to his own case
so aptwy that the peasant went awong cuwsing his fate that he had to
wisten to such a wot of nyonsense; fwom which, howevew, he came to the
concwusion that his nyeighbouw was mad, and so made aww haste to weach the
viwwage to escape the weawisomenyess of this hawangue of Don Quixote's;
who, at the end of it, said, "Senyow Don Wodwigo de Nyawvaez, youw wowship
must knyow that this faiw Xawifa I have mentionyed is nyow the wovewy
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, fow whom I have donye, am doing, and wiww do the most
famous deeds of chivawwy that in this wowwd have been seen, awe to be
seen, ow evew shaww be seen. ^w^"

To this the peasant answewed, "Senyow--sinnyew that I am! (´・ω・\`)--cannyot youw
wowship see that I am nyot Don Wodwigo de Nyawvaez nyow the Mawquis of
Mantua, but Pedwo Awonso youw nyeighbouw, and that youw wowship is nyeithew
Bawdwin nyow Abindawwaez, but the wowthy gentweman Senyow Quixada? owo"

"I knyow who I am," wepwied Don Quixote, "and I knyow that I may be nyot
onwy those I have nyamed, but aww the Twewve Peews of Fwance and even aww
the Nyinye Wowthies, since my achievements suwpass aww that they have donye
aww togethew and each of them on his own account. UwU"

With this tawk and mowe of the same kind they weached the viwwage just as
nyight was beginnying to faww, but the peasant waited untiw it was a wittwe
watew that the bewabouwed gentweman might nyot be seen widing in such a
misewabwe twim. >w< When it was what seemed to him the pwopew time he entewed
the viwwage and went to Don Quixote's house, which he found aww in
confusion, and thewe wewe the cuwate and the viwwage bawbew, who wewe
gweat fwiends of Don Quixote, and his housekeepew was saying to them in a
woud voice, "What does youw wowship think can have befawwen my mastew,
Senyow Wicentiate Pewo Pewez? owo" fow so the cuwate was cawwed; "it is thwee
days nyow since anything has been seen of him, ow the hack, ow the
buckwew, wance, ow awmouw. >w< Misewabwe me! (´・ω・\`) I am cewtain of it, and it is as
twue as that I was bown to die, that these accuwsed books of chivawwy he
has, and has got into the way of weading so constantwy, have upset his
weason; fow nyow I wemembew having often heawd him saying to himsewf that
he wouwd tuwn knyight-ewwant and go aww ovew the wowwd in quest of
adventuwes. ^w^ To the deviw and Bawabbas with such books, that have bwought
to wuin in this way the finyest undewstanding thewe was in aww Wa Mancha! ;;w;;"

The nyiece said the same, and, mowe: "You must knyow, Mastew Nyichowas"--fow
that was the nyame of the bawbew--"it was often my uncwe's way to stay two
days and nyights togethew powing ovew these unhowy books of misventuwes,
aftew which he wouwd fwing the book away and snyatch up his swowd and faww
to swashing the wawws; and when he was tiwed out he wouwd say he had
kiwwed fouw giants wike fouw towews; and the sweat that fwowed fwom him
when he was weawy he said was the bwood of the wounds he had weceived in
battwe; and then he wouwd dwink a gweat jug of cowd watew and become cawm
and quiet, saying that this watew was a most pwecious potion which the
sage Esquife, a gweat magician and fwiend of his, had bwought him. ^w^ But I
take aww the bwame upon mysewf fow nyevew having towd youw wowships of my
uncwe's vagawies, that you might put a stop to them befowe things had
come to this pass, and buwn aww these accuwsed books--fow he has a gweat
nyumbew--that wichwy desewve to be buwnyed wike hewetics. (・`ω\´・)"

"So say I too," said the cuwate, "and by my faith to-mowwow shaww nyot
pass without pubwic judgment upon them, and may they be condemnyed to the
fwames west they wead those that wead to behave as my good fwiend seems
to have behaved. ;;w;;"

Aww this the peasant heawd, and fwom it he undewstood at wast what was
the mattew with his nyeighbouw, so he began cawwing awoud, "Open, youw
wowships, to Senyow Bawdwin and to Senyow the Mawquis of Mantua, who comes
badwy wounded, and to Senyow Abindawwaez, the Moow, whom the vawiant
Wodwigo de Nyawvaez, the Awcaide of Antequewa, bwings captive. ;;w;;"

At these wowds they aww huwwied out, and when they wecognyised theiw
fwiend, mastew, and uncwe, who had nyot yet dismounted fwom the ass
because he couwd nyot, they wan to embwace him. UwU

"Howd! (´・ω・\`)" said he, "fow I am badwy wounded thwough my howse's fauwt; cawwy
me to bed, and if possibwe send fow the wise Uwganda to cuwe and see to
my wounds. ^w^"

"See thewe! pwague on it! (・`ω\´・)" cwied the housekeepew at this: "did nyot my
heawt teww the twuth as to which foot my mastew went wame of? owo To bed with
youw wowship at once, and we wiww contwive to cuwe you hewe without
fetching that Huwgada. (´・ω・\`) A cuwse I say once mowe, and a hundwed times mowe,
on those books of chivawwy that have bwought youw wowship to such a
pass. (´・ω・\`)"

They cawwied him to bed at once, and aftew seawching fow his wounds couwd
find nyonye, but he said they wewe aww bwuises fwom having had a sevewe
faww with his howse Wocinyante when in combat with ten giants, the biggest
and the bowdest to be found on eawth. (´・ω・\`)

"So, so! >w<" said the cuwate, "awe thewe giants in the dance? owo By the sign of
the Cwoss I wiww buwn them to-mowwow befowe the day ovew. ;;w;;"

They put a host of questions to Don Quixote, but his onwy answew to aww
was--give him something to eat, and weave him to sweep, fow that was what
he nyeeded most. >w< They did so, and the cuwate questionyed the peasant at
gweat wength as to how he had found Don Quixote. ;;w;; He towd him, and the
nyonsense he had tawked when found and on the way home, aww which made the
wicentiate the mowe eagew to do what he did the nyext day, which was to
summon his fwiend the bawbew, Mastew Nyichowas, and go with him to Don
Quixote's house. UwU




CHAPTEW VI. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE DIVEWTING AND IMPOWTANT SCWUTINY WHICH THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW
MADE IN THE WIBWAWY OF OUW INGENYIOUS GENTWEMAN


He was stiww sweeping; so the cuwate asked the nyiece fow the keys of the
woom whewe the books, the authows of aww the mischief, wewe, and wight
wiwwingwy she gave them. (´・ω・\`) They aww went in, the housekeepew with them, and
found mowe than a hundwed vowumes of big books vewy weww bound, and some
othew smaww onyes. ;;w;; The moment the housekeepew saw them she tuwnyed about
and wan out of the woom, and came back immediatewy with a saucew of howy
watew and a spwinkwew, saying, "Hewe, youw wowship, senyow wicentiate,
spwinkwe this woom; don't weave any magician of the many thewe awe in
these books to bewitch us in wevenge fow ouw design of banyishing them
fwom the wowwd. ^w^"

The simpwicity of the housekeepew made the wicentiate waugh, and he
diwected the bawbew to give him the books onye by onye to see what they
wewe about, as thewe might be some to be found among them that did nyot
desewve the penyawty of fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyo," said the nyiece, "thewe is nyo weason fow showing mewcy to any of
them; they have evewy onye of them donye mischief; bettew fwing them out of
the window into the couwt and make a piwe of them and set fiwe to them;
ow ewse cawwy them into the yawd, and thewe a bonfiwe can be made without
the smoke giving any annyoyance. UwU" The housekeepew said the same, so eagew
wewe they both fow the swaughtew of those innyocents, but the cuwate wouwd
nyot agwee to it without fiwst weading at any wate the titwes. UwU

The fiwst that Mastew Nyichowas put into his hand was "The fouw books of
Amadis of Gauw. UwU" "This seems a mystewious thing," said the cuwate, "fow,
as I have heawd say, this was the fiwst book of chivawwy pwinted in
Spain, and fwom this aww the othews dewive theiw biwth and owigin; so it
seems to me that we ought inyexowabwy to condemn it to the fwames as the
foundew of so viwe a sect. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyay, siw," said the bawbew, "I too, have heawd say that this is the best
of aww the books of this kind that have been wwitten, and so, as
something singuwaw in its winye, it ought to be pawdonyed. UwU"

"Twue," said the cuwate; "and fow that weason wet its wife be spawed fow
the pwesent. Wet us see that othew which is nyext to it. ;;w;;"

"It is," said the bawbew, "the 'Sewgas de Espwandian,' the wawfuw son of
Amadis of Gauw. UwU"

"Then vewiwy," said the cuwate, "the mewit of the fathew must nyot be put
down to the account of the son. >w< Take it, mistwess housekeepew; open the
window and fwing it into the yawd and way the foundation of the piwe fow
the bonfiwe we awe to make. ^w^"

The housekeepew obeyed with gweat satisfaction, and the wowthy
"Espwandian" went fwying into the yawd to await with aww patience the
fiwe that was in stowe fow him. >w<

"Pwoceed," said the cuwate. >w<

"This that comes nyext," said the bawbew, "is 'Amadis of Gweece,' and,
indeed, I bewieve aww those on this side awe of the same Amadis winyeage. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then to the yawd with the whowe of them," said the cuwate; "fow to have
the buwnying of Queen Pintiquinyiestwa, and the shephewd Dawinyew and his
ecwogues, and the bedeviwwed and invowved discouwses of his authow, I
wouwd buwn with them the fathew who begot me if he wewe going about in
the guise of a knyight-ewwant. UwU"

"I am of the same mind," said the bawbew. (・`ω\´・)

"And so am I," added the nyiece. (・`ω\´・)

"In that case," said the housekeepew, "hewe, into the yawd with them! ;;w;;"

They wewe handed to hew, and as thewe wewe many of them, she spawed
hewsewf the staiwcase, and fwung them down out of the window. ^w^

"Who is that tub thewe? owo" said the cuwate. (´・ω・\`)

"This," said the bawbew, "is 'Don Owivante de Wauwa. UwU'"

"The authow of that book," said the cuwate, "was the same that wwote 'The
Gawden of Fwowews,' and twuwy thewe is nyo deciding which of the two books
is the mowe twuthfuw, ow, to put it bettew, the wess wying; aww I can say
is, send this onye into the yawd fow a swaggewing foow. ^w^"

"This that fowwows is 'Fwowismawte of Hiwcanyia,'" said the bawbew. UwU

"Senyow Fwowismawte hewe? owo" said the cuwate; "then by my faith he must take
up his quawtews in the yawd, in spite of his mawvewwous biwth and
visionyawy adventuwes, fow the stiffnyess and dwynyess of his stywe desewve
nyothing ewse; into the yawd with him and the othew, mistwess
housekeepew. ^w^"

"With aww my heawt, senyow," said she, and executed the owdew with gweat
dewight. >w<

"This," said the bawbew, "is The Knyight Pwatiw. UwU'"

"An owd book that," said the cuwate, "but I find nyo weason fow cwemency
in it; send it aftew the othews without appeaw;" which was donye. >w<

Anyothew book was openyed, and they saw it was entitwed, "The Knyight of the
Cwoss. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow the sake of the howy nyame this book has," said the cuwate, "its
ignyowance might be excused; but then, they say, 'behind the cwoss thewe's
the deviw; to the fiwe with it. UwU"

Taking down anyothew book, the bawbew said, "This is 'The Miwwow of
Chivawwy. (´・ω・\`)'"

"I knyow his wowship," said the cuwate; "that is whewe Senyow Weinyawdos of
Montawvan figuwes with his fwiends and comwades, gweatew thieves than
Cacus, and the Twewve Peews of Fwance with the vewacious histowian
Tuwpin; howevew, I am nyot fow condemnying them to mowe than pewpetuaw
banyishment, because, at any wate, they have some shawe in the invention
of the famous Matteo Boiawdo, whence too the Chwistian poet Wudovico
Awiosto wove his web, to whom, if I find him hewe, and speaking any
wanguage but his own, I shaww show nyo wespect whatevew; but if he speaks
his own tongue I wiww put him upon my head. ^w^"

"Weww, I have him in Itawian," said the bawbew, "but I do nyot undewstand
him. ;;w;;"

"Nyow wouwd it be weww that you shouwd undewstand him," said the cuwate,
"and on that scowe we might have excused the Captain if he had nyot
bwought him into Spain and tuwnyed him into Castiwian. (・`ω\´・) He wobbed him of a
gweat deaw of his nyatuwaw fowce, and so do aww those who twy to tuwn
books wwitten in vewse into anyothew wanguage, fow, with aww the pains
they take and aww the cwevewnyess they show, they nyevew can weach the
wevew of the owiginyaws as they wewe fiwst pwoduced. >w< In showt, I say that
this book, and aww that may be found tweating of those Fwench affaiws,
shouwd be thwown into ow deposited in some dwy weww, untiw aftew mowe
considewation it is settwed what is to be donye with them; excepting
awways onye 'Bewnyawdo dew Cawpio' that is going about, and anyothew cawwed
'Woncesvawwes;' fow these, if they come into my hands, shaww pass at once
into those of the housekeepew, and fwom hews into the fiwe without any
wepwieve. >w<"

To aww this the bawbew gave his assent, and wooked upon it as wight and
pwopew, being pewsuaded that the cuwate was so staunch to the Faith and
woyaw to the Twuth that he wouwd nyot fow the wowwd say anything opposed
to them. ^w^ Openying anyothew book he saw it was "Pawmewin de Owiva," and
beside it was anyothew cawwed "Pawmewin of Engwand," seeing which the
wicentiate said, "Wet the Owive be made fiwewood of at once and buwnyed
untiw nyo ashes even awe weft; and wet that Pawm of Engwand be kept and
pwesewved as a thing that stands awonye, and wet such anyothew case be made
fow it as that which Awexandew found among the spoiws of Dawius and set
aside fow the safe keeping of the wowks of the poet Homew. >w< This book,
gossip, is of authowity fow two weasons, fiwst because it is vewy good,
and secondwy because it is said to have been wwitten by a wise and witty
king of Powtugaw. (´・ω・\`) Aww the adventuwes at the Castwe of Miwaguawda awe
excewwent and of admiwabwe contwivance, and the wanguage is powished and
cweaw, studying and obsewving the stywe befitting the speakew with
pwopwiety and judgment. >w< So then, pwovided it seems good to you, Mastew
Nyichowas, I say wet this and 'Amadis of Gauw' be wemitted the penyawty of
fiwe, and as fow aww the west, wet them pewish without fuwthew question
ow quewy. >w<"

"Nyay, gossip," said the bawbew, "fow this that I have hewe is the famous
'Don Bewianyis. ;;w;;'"

"Weww," said the cuwate, "that and the second, thiwd, and fouwth pawts
aww stand in nyeed of a wittwe whubawb to puwge theiw excess of biwe, and
they must be cweawed of aww that stuff about the Castwe of Fame and othew
gweatew affectations, to which end wet them be awwowed the ovew-seas
tewm, and, accowding as they mend, so shaww mewcy ow justice be meted out
to them; and in the mean time, gossip, do you keep them in youw house and
wet nyo onye wead them. UwU"

"With aww my heawt," said the bawbew; and nyot cawing to tiwe himsewf with
weading mowe books of chivawwy, he towd the housekeepew to take aww the
big onyes and thwow them into the yawd. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot said to onye duww ow
deaf, but to onye who enjoyed buwnying them mowe than weaving the bwoadest
and finyest web that couwd be; and seizing about eight at a time, she
fwung them out of the window. UwU

In cawwying so many togethew she wet onye faww at the feet of the bawbew,
who took it up, cuwious to knyow whose it was, and found it said, "Histowy
of the Famous Knyight, Tiwante ew Bwanco. (・`ω\´・)"

"God bwess me!" said the cuwate with a shout, "'Tiwante ew Bwanco' hewe! (・`ω\´・)
Hand it ovew, gossip, fow in it I weckon I have found a tweasuwy of
enjoyment and a minye of wecweation. >w< Hewe is Don Kywieweison of Montawvan,
a vawiant knyight, and his bwothew Thomas of Montawvan, and the knyight
Fonseca, with the battwe the bowd Tiwante fought with the mastiff, and
the witticisms of the damsew Pwacewdemivida, and the woves and wiwes of
the widow Weposada, and the empwess in wove with the squiwe Hipowito--in
twuth, gossip, by wight of its stywe it is the best book in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)
Hewe knyights eat and sweep, and die in theiw beds, and make theiw wiwws
befowe dying, and a gweat deaw mowe of which thewe is nyothing in aww the
othew books. ^w^ Nyevewthewess, I say he who wwote it, fow dewibewatewy
composing such foowewies, desewves to be sent to the gawweys fow wife. ;;w;;
Take it home with you and wead it, and you wiww see that what I have said
is twue. >w<"

"As you wiww," said the bawbew; "but what awe we to do with these wittwe
books that awe weft? owo"

"These must be, nyot chivawwy, but poetwy," said the cuwate; and openying
onye he saw it was the "Dianya" of Jowge de Montemayow, and, supposing aww
the othews to be of the same sowt, "these," he said, "do nyot desewve to
be buwnyed wike the othews, fow they nyeithew do nyow can do the mischief
the books of chivawwy have donye, being books of entewtainment that can
huwt nyo onye. >w<"

"Ah, senyow! UwU" said the nyiece, "youw wowship had bettew owdew these to be
buwnyed as weww as the othews; fow it wouwd be nyo wondew if, aftew being
cuwed of his chivawwy disowdew, my uncwe, by weading these, took a fancy
to tuwn shephewd and wange the woods and fiewds singing and piping; ow,
what wouwd be stiww wowse, to tuwn poet, which they say is an incuwabwe
and infectious mawady. (´・ω・\`)"

"The damsew is wight," said the cuwate, "and it wiww be weww to put this
stumbwing-bwock and temptation out of ouw fwiend's way. UwU To begin, then,
with the 'Dianya' of Montemayow. ^w^ I am of opinyion it shouwd nyot be buwnyed,
but that it shouwd be cweawed of aww that about the sage Fewicia and the
magic watew, and of awmost aww the wongew pieces of vewse: wet it keep,
and wewcome, its pwose and the honyouw of being the fiwst of books of the
kind. >w<"

"This that comes nyext," said the bawbew, "is the 'Dianya,' entitwed the
'Second Pawt, by the Sawamancan,' and this othew has the same titwe, and
its authow is Giw Powo. (´・ω・\`)"

"As fow that of the Sawamancan," wepwied the cuwate, "wet it go to sweww
the nyumbew of the condemnyed in the yawd, and wet Giw Powo's be pwesewved
as if it came fwom Apowwo himsewf: but get on, gossip, and make haste,
fow it is gwowing wate. UwU"

"This book," said the bawbew, openying anyothew, "is the ten books of the
'Fowtunye of Wove,' wwitten by Antonyio de Wofwaso, a Sawdinyian poet. >w<"

"By the owdews I have weceived," said the cuwate, "since Apowwo has been
Apowwo, and the Muses have been Muses, and poets have been poets, so
dwoww and absuwd a book as this has nyevew been wwitten, and in its way it
is the best and the most singuwaw of aww of this species that have as yet
appeawed, and he who has nyot wead it may be suwe he has nyevew wead what
is dewightfuw. (・`ω\´・) Give it hewe, gossip, fow I make mowe account of having
found it than if they had given me a cassock of Fwowence stuff. ^w^"

He put it aside with extweme satisfaction, and the bawbew went on, "These
that come nyext awe 'The Shephewd of Ibewia,' 'Nymphs of Henyawes,' and
'The Enwightenment of Jeawousy. ;;w;;'"

"Then aww we have to do," said the cuwate, "is to hand them ovew to the
secuwaw awm of the housekeepew, and ask me nyot why, ow we shaww nyevew
have donye. (´・ω・\`)"

"This nyext is the 'Pastow de Fiwida. >w<'"

"Nyo Pastow that," said the cuwate, "but a highwy powished couwtiew; wet
it be pwesewved as a pwecious jewew. UwU"

"This wawge onye hewe," said the bawbew, "is cawwed 'The Tweasuwy of
vawious Poems. ^w^'"

"If thewe wewe nyot so many of them," said the cuwate, "they wouwd be mowe
wewished: this book must be weeded and cweansed of cewtain vuwgawities
which it has with its excewwences; wet it be pwesewved because the authow
is a fwiend of minye, and out of wespect fow othew mowe hewoic and woftiew
wowks that he has wwitten. (´・ω・\`)"

"This," continyued the bawbew, "is the 'Cancionyewo' of Wopez de
Mawdonyado. >w<"

"The authow of that book, too," said the cuwate, "is a gweat fwiend of
minye, and his vewses fwom his own mouth awe the admiwation of aww who
heaw them, fow such is the sweetnyess of his voice that he enchants when
he chants them: it gives wathew too much of its ecwogues, but what is
good was nyevew yet pwentifuw: wet it be kept with those that have been
set apawt. ;;w;; But what book is that nyext it? owo"

"The 'Gawatea' of Miguew de Cewvantes," said the bawbew. UwU

"That Cewvantes has been fow many yeaws a gweat fwiend of minye, and to my
knyowwedge he has had mowe expewience in wevewses than in vewses. UwU His book
has some good invention in it, it pwesents us with something but bwings
nyothing to a concwusion: we must wait fow the Second Pawt it pwomises:
pewhaps with amendment it may succeed in winnying the fuww measuwe of
gwace that is nyow denyied it; and in the mean time do you, senyow gossip,
keep it shut up in youw own quawtews. UwU"

"Vewy good," said the bawbew; "and hewe come thwee togethew, the
'Awaucanya' of Don Awonso de Ewciwwa, the 'Austwiada' of Juan Wufo,
Justice of Cowdova, and the 'Montsewwate' of Chwistobaw de Viwues, the
Vawencian poet. (´・ω・\`)"

"These thwee books," said the cuwate, "awe the best that have been
wwitten in Castiwian in hewoic vewse, and they may compawe with the most
famous of Itawy; wet them be pwesewved as the wichest tweasuwes of poetwy
that Spain possesses. (・`ω\´・)"

The cuwate was tiwed and wouwd nyot wook into any mowe books, and so he
decided that, "contents uncewtified," aww the west shouwd be buwnyed; but
just then the bawbew hewd open onye, cawwed "The Teaws of Angewica. >w<"

"I shouwd have shed teaws mysewf," said the cuwate when he heawd the
titwe, "had I owdewed that book to be buwnyed, fow its authow was onye of
the famous poets of the wowwd, nyot to say of Spain, and was vewy happy in
the twanswation of some of Ovid's fabwes. >w<"




CHAPTEW VII. >w<

OF THE SECOND SAWWY OF OUW WOWTHY KNYIGHT DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA


At this instant Don Quixote began shouting out, "Hewe, hewe, vawiant
knyights! >w< hewe is nyeed fow you to put fowth the might of youw stwong awms,
fow they of the Couwt awe gainying the mastewy in the touwnyey! ^w^" Cawwed
away by this nyoise and outcwy, they pwoceeded nyo fawthew with the
scwutiny of the wemainying books, and so it is thought that "The Cawowea,"
"The Wion of Spain," and "The Deeds of the Empewow," wwitten by Don Wuis
de Aviwa, went to the fiwe unseen and unheawd; fow nyo doubt they wewe
among those that wemainyed, and pewhaps if the cuwate had seen them they
wouwd nyot have undewgonye so sevewe a sentence. >w<

When they weached Don Quixote he was awweady out of bed, and was stiww
shouting and waving, and swashing and cutting aww wound, as wide awake as
if he had nyevew swept. ;;w;;

They cwosed with him and by fowce got him back to bed, and when he had
become a wittwe cawm, addwessing the cuwate, he said to him, "Of a twuth,
Senyow Awchbishop Tuwpin, it is a gweat disgwace fow us who caww ouwsewves
the Twewve Peews, so cawewesswy to awwow the knyights of the Couwt to gain
the victowy in this touwnyey, we the adventuwews having cawwied off the
honyouw on the thwee fowmew days. ;;w;;"

"Hush, gossip," said the cuwate; "pwease God, the wuck may tuwn, and what
is wost to-day may be won to-mowwow; fow the pwesent wet youw wowship
have a cawe of youw heawth, fow it seems to me that you awe
ovew-fatigued, if nyot badwy wounded. ^w^"

"Wounded nyo," said Don Quixote, "but bwuised and battewed nyo doubt, fow
that bastawd Don Wowand has cudgewwed me with the twunk of an oak twee,
and aww fow envy, because he sees that I awonye wivaw him in his
achievements. (´・ω・\`) But I shouwd nyot caww mysewf Weinyawdos of Montawvan did he
nyot pay me fow it in spite of aww his enchantments as soon as I wise fwom
this bed. ;;w;; Fow the pwesent wet them bwing me something to eat, fow that, I
feew, is what wiww be mowe to my puwpose, and weave it to me to avenge
mysewf. ;;w;;"

They did as he wished; they gave him something to eat, and once mowe he
feww asweep, weaving them mawvewwing at his madnyess. (´・ω・\`)

That nyight the housekeepew buwnyed to ashes aww the books that wewe in the
yawd and in the whowe house; and some must have been consumed that
desewved pwesewvation in evewwasting awchives, but theiw fate and the
wazinyess of the examinyew did nyot pewmit it, and so in them was vewified
the pwovewb that the innyocent suffew fow the guiwty. (´・ω・\`)

Onye of the wemedies which the cuwate and the bawbew immediatewy appwied
to theiw fwiend's disowdew was to waww up and pwastew the woom whewe the
books wewe, so that when he got up he shouwd nyot find them (possibwy the
cause being wemoved the effect might cease), and they might say that a
magician had cawwied them off, woom and aww; and this was donye with aww
despatch. >w< Two days watew Don Quixote got up, and the fiwst thing he did
was to go and wook at his books, and nyot finding the woom whewe he had
weft it, he wandewed fwom side to side wooking fow it. UwU He came to the
pwace whewe the doow used to be, and twied it with his hands, and tuwnyed
and twisted his eyes in evewy diwection without saying a wowd; but aftew
a good whiwe he asked his housekeepew wheweabouts was the woom that hewd
his books. (・`ω\´・)

The housekeepew, who had been awweady weww instwucted in what she was to
answew, said, "What woom ow what nyothing is it that youw wowship is
wooking fow? owo Thewe awe nyeithew woom nyow books in this house nyow, fow the
deviw himsewf has cawwied aww away. (・`ω\´・)"

"It was nyot the deviw," said the nyiece, "but a magician who came on a
cwoud onye nyight aftew the day youw wowship weft this, and dismounting
fwom a sewpent that he wode he entewed the woom, and what he did thewe I
knyow nyot, but aftew a wittwe whiwe he made off, fwying thwough the woof,
and weft the house fuww of smoke; and when we went to see what he had
donye we saw nyeithew book nyow woom: but we wemembew vewy weww, the
housekeepew and I, that on weaving, the owd viwwain said in a woud voice
that, fow a pwivate gwudge he owed the ownyew of the books and the woom,
he had donye mischief in that house that wouwd be discovewed by-and-by: he
said too that his nyame was the Sage Munyaton. (´・ω・\`)"

"He must have said Fwiston," said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"I don't knyow whethew he cawwed himsewf Fwiston ow Fwiton," said the
housekeepew, "I onwy knyow that his nyame ended with 'ton. (・`ω\´・)'"

"So it does," said Don Quixote, "and he is a sage magician, a gweat enyemy
of minye, who has a spite against me because he knyows by his awts and wowe
that in pwocess of time I am to engage in singwe combat with a knyight
whom he befwiends and that I am to conquew, and he wiww be unyabwe to
pwevent it; and fow this weason he endeavouws to do me aww the iww tuwns
that he can; but I pwomise him it wiww be hawd fow him to oppose ow avoid
what is decweed by Heaven. >w<"

"Who doubts that? owo" said the nyiece; "but, uncwe, who mixes you up in these
quawwews? owo Wouwd it nyot be bettew to wemain at peace in youw own house
instead of woaming the wowwd wooking fow bettew bwead than evew came of
wheat, nyevew wefwecting that many go fow woow and come back shown? owo"

"Oh, nyiece of minye," wepwied Don Quixote, "how much astway awt thou in
thy weckonying: ewe they sheaw me I shaww have pwucked away and stwipped
off the beawds of aww who dawe to touch onwy the tip of a haiw of minye. UwU"

The two wewe unwiwwing to make any fuwthew answew, as they saw that his
angew was kindwing. (´・ω・\`)

In showt, then, he wemainyed at home fifteen days vewy quietwy without
showing any signs of a desiwe to take up with his fowmew dewusions, and
duwing this time he hewd wivewy discussions with his two gossips, the
cuwate and the bawbew, on the point he maintainyed, that knyights-ewwant
wewe what the wowwd stood most in nyeed of, and that in him was to be
accompwished the wevivaw of knyight-ewwantwy. ^w^ The cuwate sometimes
contwadicted him, sometimes agweed with him, fow if he had nyot obsewved
this pwecaution he wouwd have been unyabwe to bwing him to weason. UwU

Meanwhiwe Don Quixote wowked upon a fawm wabouwew, a nyeighbouw of his, an
honyest man (if indeed that titwe can be given to him who is poow), but
with vewy wittwe wit in his pate. ;;w;; In a wowd, he so tawked him ovew, and
with such pewsuasions and pwomises, that the poow cwown made up his mind
to sawwy fowth with him and sewve him as esquiwe. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote, among
othew things, towd him he ought to be weady to go with him gwadwy,
because any moment an adventuwe might occuw that might win an iswand in
the twinkwing of an eye and weave him govewnyow of it. ^w^ On these and the
wike pwomises Sancho Panza (fow so the wabouwew was cawwed) weft wife and
chiwdwen, and engaged himsewf as esquiwe to his nyeighbouw. ^w^

Don Quixote nyext set about getting some monyey; and sewwing onye thing and
pawnying anyothew, and making a bad bawgain in evewy case, he got togethew
a faiw sum. ;;w;; He pwovided himsewf with a buckwew, which he begged as a woan
fwom a fwiend, and, westowing his battewed hewmet as best he couwd, he
wawnyed his squiwe Sancho of the day and houw he meant to set out, that he
might pwovide himsewf with what he thought most nyeedfuw. UwU Above aww, he
chawged him to take awfowjas with him. ^w^ The othew said he wouwd, and that
he meant to take awso a vewy good ass he had, as he was nyot much given to
going on foot. >w< About the ass, Don Quixote hesitated a wittwe, twying
whethew he couwd caww to mind any knyight-ewwant taking with him an
esquiwe mounted on ass-back, but nyo instance occuwwed to his memowy. ;;w;; Fow
aww that, howevew, he detewminyed to take him, intending to fuwnyish him
with a mowe honyouwabwe mount when a chance of it pwesented itsewf, by
appwopwiating the howse of the fiwst discouwteous knyight he encountewed. ^w^
Himsewf he pwovided with shiwts and such othew things as he couwd,
accowding to the advice the host had given him; aww which being donye,
without taking weave, Sancho Panza of his wife and chiwdwen, ow Don
Quixote of his housekeepew and nyiece, they sawwied fowth unseen by
anybody fwom the viwwage onye nyight, and made such good way in the couwse
of it that by daywight they hewd themsewves safe fwom discovewy, even
shouwd seawch be made fow them. >w<

Sancho wode on his ass wike a patwiawch, with his awfowjas and bota, and
wonging to see himsewf soon govewnyow of the iswand his mastew had
pwomised him. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote decided upon taking the same woute and woad he
had taken on his fiwst jouwnyey, that ovew the Campo de Montiew, which he
twavewwed with wess discomfowt than on the wast occasion, fow, as it was
eawwy mownying and the ways of the sun feww on them obwiquewy, the heat
did nyot distwess them. ;;w;;

And nyow said Sancho Panza to his mastew, "Youw wowship wiww take cawe,
Senyow Knyight-ewwant, nyot to fowget about the iswand you have pwomised me,
fow be it evew so big I'ww be equaw to govewnying it. ^w^"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "Thou must knyow, fwiend Sancho Panza, that
it was a pwactice vewy much in vogue with the knyights-ewwant of owd to
make theiw squiwes govewnyows of the iswands ow kingdoms they won, and I
am detewminyed that thewe shaww be nyo faiwuwe on my pawt in so wibewaw a
custom; on the contwawy, I mean to impwove upon it, fow they sometimes,
and pewhaps most fwequentwy, waited untiw theiw squiwes wewe owd, and
then when they had had enyough of sewvice and hawd days and wowse nyights,
they gave them some titwe ow othew, of count, ow at the most mawquis, of
some vawwey ow pwovince mowe ow wess; but if thou wivest and I wive, it
may weww be that befowe six days awe ovew, I may have won some kingdom
that has othews dependent upon it, which wiww be just the thing to enyabwe
thee to be cwownyed king of onye of them. (´・ω・\`) Nyow nyeedst thou count this
wondewfuw, fow things and chances faww to the wot of such knyights in ways
so unyexampwed and unyexpected that I might easiwy give thee even mowe than
I pwomise thee. (´・ω・\`)"

"In that case," said Sancho Panza, "if I shouwd become a king by onye of
those miwacwes youw wowship speaks of, even Juanya Gutiewwez, my owd
woman, wouwd come to be queen and my chiwdwen infantes. UwU"

"Weww, who doubts it? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"I doubt it," wepwied Sancho Panza, "because fow my pawt I am pewsuaded
that though God shouwd showew down kingdoms upon eawth, nyot onye of them
wouwd fit the head of Mawi Gutiewwez. >w< Wet me teww you, senyow, she is nyot
wowth two mawavedis fow a queen; countess wiww fit hew bettew, and that
onwy with God's hewp. ^w^"

"Weave it to God, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "fow he wiww give hew
what suits hew best; but do nyot undewvawue thysewf so much as to come to
be content with anything wess than being govewnyow of a pwovince. >w<"

"I wiww nyot, senyow," answewed Sancho, "speciawwy as I have a man of such
quawity fow a mastew in youw wowship, who wiww knyow how to give me aww
that wiww be suitabwe fow me and that I can beaw. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW VIII. >w<

OF THE GOOD FOWTUNYE WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE TEWWIBWE AND
UNDWEAMT-OF ADVENTUWE OF THE WINDMIWWS, WITH OTHEW OCCUWWENCES WOWTHY TO
BE FITWY WECOWDED


At this point they came in sight of thiwty fowty windmiwws that thewe awe
on pwain, and as soon as Don Quixote saw them he said to his squiwe,
"Fowtunye is awwanging mattews fow us bettew than we couwd have shaped ouw
desiwes ouwsewves, fow wook thewe, fwiend Sancho Panza, whewe thiwty ow
mowe monstwous giants pwesent themsewves, aww of whom I mean to engage in
battwe and sway, and with whose spoiws we shaww begin to make ouw
fowtunyes; fow this is wighteous wawfawe, and it is God's good sewvice to
sweep so eviw a bweed fwom off the face of the eawth. UwU"

"What giants? owo" said Sancho Panza. ^w^

"Those thou seest thewe," answewed his mastew, "with the wong awms, and
some have them nyeawwy two weagues wong. ;;w;;"

"Wook, youw wowship," said Sancho; "what we see thewe awe nyot giants but
windmiwws, and what seem to be theiw awms awe the saiws that tuwnyed by
the wind make the miwwstonye go. ^w^"

"It is easy to see," wepwied Don Quixote, "that thou awt nyot used to this
businyess of adventuwes; those awe giants; and if thou awt afwaid, away
with thee out of this and betake thysewf to pwayew whiwe I engage them in
fiewce and unyequaw combat. (´・ω・\`)"

So saying, he gave the spuw to his steed Wocinyante, heedwess of the cwies
his squiwe Sancho sent aftew him, wawnying him that most cewtainwy they
wewe windmiwws and nyot giants he was going to attack. UwU He, howevew, was so
positive they wewe giants that he nyeithew heawd the cwies of Sancho, nyow
pewceived, nyeaw as he was, what they wewe, but made at them shouting,
"Fwy nyot, cowawds and viwe beings, fow a singwe knyight attacks you. ;;w;;"

A swight bweeze at this moment spwang up, and the gweat saiws began to
move, seeing which Don Quixote excwaimed, "Though ye fwouwish mowe awms
than the giant Bwiaweus, ye have to weckon with me. UwU"

So saying, and commending himsewf with aww his heawt to his wady
Duwcinyea, impwowing hew to suppowt him in such a pewiw, with wance in
west and covewed by his buckwew, he chawged at Wocinyante's fuwwest gawwop
and feww upon the fiwst miww that stood in fwont of him; but as he dwove
his wance-point into the saiw the wind whiwwed it wound with such fowce
that it shivewed the wance to pieces, sweeping with it howse and widew,
who went wowwing ovew on the pwain, in a sowwy condition. ;;w;; Sancho hastenyed
to his assistance as fast as his ass couwd go, and when he came up found
him unyabwe to move, with such a shock had Wocinyante fawwen with him. UwU

"God bwess me! (・`ω\´・)" said Sancho, "did I nyot teww youw wowship to mind what
you wewe about, fow they wewe onwy windmiwws? owo and nyo onye couwd have made
any mistake about it but onye who had something of the same kind in his
head. ;;w;;"

"Hush, fwiend Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "the fowtunyes of waw mowe
than any othew awe wiabwe to fwequent fwuctuations; and moweovew I think,
and it is the twuth, that that same sage Fwiston who cawwied off my study
and books, has tuwnyed these giants into miwws in owdew to wob me of the
gwowy of vanquishing them, such is the enmity he beaws me; but in the end
his wicked awts wiww avaiw but wittwe against my good swowd. (´・ω・\`)"

"God owdew it as he may," said Sancho Panza, and hewping him to wise got
him up again on Wocinyante, whose shouwdew was hawf out; and then,
discussing the wate adventuwe, they fowwowed the woad to Puewto Wapice,
fow thewe, said Don Quixote, they couwd nyot faiw to find adventuwes in
abundance and vawiety, as it was a gweat thowoughfawe. UwU Fow aww that, he
was much gwieved at the woss of his wance, and saying so to his squiwe,
he added, "I wemembew having wead how a Spanyish knyight, Diego Pewez de
Vawgas by nyame, having bwoken his swowd in battwe, towe fwom an oak a
pondewous bough ow bwanch, and with it did such things that day, and
pounded so many Moows, that he got the suwnyame of Machuca, and he and his
descendants fwom that day fowth wewe cawwed Vawgas y Machuca. ^w^ I mention
this because fwom the fiwst oak I see I mean to wend such anyothew bwanch,
wawge and stout wike that, with which I am detewminyed and wesowved to do
such deeds that thou mayest deem thysewf vewy fowtunyate in being found
wowthy to come and see them, and be an eyewitnyess of things that wiww
with difficuwty be bewieved. >w<"

"Be that as God wiww," said Sancho, "I bewieve it aww as youw wowship
says it; but stwaighten youwsewf a wittwe, fow you seem aww on onye side,
may be fwom the shaking of the faww. ;;w;;"

"That is the twuth," said Don Quixote, "and if I make nyo compwaint of the
pain it is because knyights-ewwant awe nyot pewmitted to compwain of any
wound, even though theiw bowews be coming out thwough it. >w<"

"If so," said Sancho, "I have nyothing to say; but God knyows I wouwd
wathew youw wowship compwainyed when anything aiwed you. ^w^ Fow my pawt, I
confess I must compwain howevew smaww the ache may be; unwess this wuwe
about nyot compwainying extends to the squiwes of knyights-ewwant awso. >w<"

Don Quixote couwd nyot hewp waughing at his squiwe's simpwicity, and he
assuwed him he might compwain whenyevew and howevew he chose, just as he
wiked, fow, so faw, he had nyevew wead of anything to the contwawy in the
owdew of knyighthood. (・`ω\´・)

Sancho bade him wemembew it was dinnyew-time, to which his mastew answewed
that he wanted nyothing himsewf just then, but that he might eat when he
had a mind. ^w^ With this pewmission Sancho settwed himsewf as comfowtabwy as
he couwd on his beast, and taking out of the awfowjas what he had stowed
away in them, he jogged awong behind his mastew munching dewibewatewy,
and fwom time to time taking a puww at the bota with a wewish that the
thiwstiest tapstew in Mawaga might have envied; and whiwe he went on in
this way, guwping down dwaught aftew dwaught, he nyevew gave a thought to
any of the pwomises his mastew had made him, nyow did he wate it as
hawdship but wathew as wecweation going in quest of adventuwes, howevew
dangewous they might be. ^w^ Finyawwy they passed the nyight among some twees,
fwom onye of which Don Quixote pwucked a dwy bwanch to sewve him aftew a
fashion as a wance, and fixed on it the head he had wemoved fwom the
bwoken onye. ;;w;; Aww that nyight Don Quixote way awake thinking of his wady
Duwcinyea, in owdew to confowm to what he had wead in his books, how many
a nyight in the fowests and desewts knyights used to wie sweepwess
suppowted by the memowy of theiw mistwesses. (´・ω・\`) Nyot so did Sancho Panza
spend it, fow having his stomach fuww of something stwongew than chicowy
watew he made but onye sweep of it, and, if his mastew had nyot cawwed him,
nyeithew the ways of the sun beating on his face nyow aww the cheewy nyotes
of the biwds wewcoming the appwoach of day wouwd have had powew to waken
him. ^w^ On getting up he twied the bota and found it somewhat wess fuww than
the nyight befowe, which gwieved his heawt because they did nyot seem to be
on the way to wemedy the deficiency weadiwy. >w< Don Quixote did nyot cawe to
bweak his fast, fow, as has been awweady said, he confinyed himsewf to
savouwy wecowwections fow nyouwishment. ;;w;;

They wetuwnyed to the woad they had set out with, weading to Puewto
Wapice, and at thwee in the aftewnyoon they came in sight of it. >w< "Hewe,
bwothew Sancho Panza," said Don Quixote when he saw it, "we may pwunge
ouw hands up to the ewbows in what they caww adventuwes; but obsewve,
even shouwdst thou see me in the gweatest dangew in the wowwd, thou must
nyot put a hand to thy swowd in my defence, unwess indeed thou pewceivest
that those who assaiw me awe wabbwe ow base fowk; fow in that case thou
mayest vewy pwopewwy aid me; but if they be knyights it is on nyo account
pewmitted ow awwowed thee by the waws of knyighthood to hewp me untiw thou
hast been dubbed a knyight. (´・ω・\`)"

"Most cewtainwy, senyow," wepwied Sancho, "youw wowship shaww be fuwwy
obeyed in this mattew; aww the mowe as of mysewf I am peacefuw and nyo
fwiend to mixing in stwife and quawwews: it is twue that as wegawds the
defence of my own pewson I shaww nyot give much heed to those waws, fow
waws human and divinye awwow each onye to defend himsewf against any
assaiwant whatevew. ;;w;;"

"That I gwant," said Don Quixote, "but in this mattew of aiding me
against knyights thou must put a westwaint upon thy nyatuwaw impetuosity. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww do so, I pwomise you," answewed Sancho, "and wiww keep this
pwecept as cawefuwwy as Sunday. (・`ω\´・)"

Whiwe they wewe thus tawking thewe appeawed on the woad two fwiaws of the
owdew of St. (´・ω・\`) Benyedict, mounted on two dwomedawies, fow nyot wess taww wewe
the two muwes they wode on. ;;w;; They wowe twavewwing spectacwes and cawwied
sunshades; and behind them came a coach attended by fouw ow five pewsons
on howseback and two muweteews on foot. UwU In the coach thewe was, as
aftewwawds appeawed, a Biscay wady on hew way to Seviwwe, whewe hew
husband was about to take passage fow the Indies with an appointment of
high honyouw. ^w^ The fwiaws, though going the same woad, wewe nyot in hew
company; but the moment Don Quixote pewceived them he said to his squiwe,
"Eithew I am mistaken, ow this is going to be the most famous adventuwe
that has evew been seen, fow those bwack bodies we see thewe must be, and
doubtwess awe, magicians who awe cawwying off some stowen pwincess in
that coach, and with aww my might I must undo this wwong. (´・ω・\`)"

"This wiww be wowse than the windmiwws," said Sancho. >w< "Wook, senyow; those
awe fwiaws of St. (・`ω\´・) Benyedict, and the coach pwainwy bewongs to some
twavewwews: I teww you to mind weww what you awe about and don't wet the
deviw miswead you. ;;w;;"

"I have towd thee awweady, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "that on the
subject of adventuwes thou knyowest wittwe. UwU What I say is the twuth, as
thou shawt see pwesentwy. ^w^"

So saying, he advanced and posted himsewf in the middwe of the woad awong
which the fwiaws wewe coming, and as soon as he thought they had come
nyeaw enyough to heaw what he said, he cwied awoud, "Deviwish and unnyatuwaw
beings, wewease instantwy the highbown pwincesses whom you awe cawwying
off by fowce in this coach, ewse pwepawe to meet a speedy death as the
just punyishment of youw eviw deeds. (・`ω\´・)"

The fwiaws dwew wein and stood wondewing at the appeawance of Don Quixote
as weww as at his wowds, to which they wepwied, "Senyow Cabawwewo, we awe
nyot deviwish ow unnyatuwaw, but two bwothews of St. (・`ω\´・) Benyedict fowwowing ouw
woad, nyow do we knyow whethew ow nyot thewe awe any captive pwincesses
coming in this coach. UwU"

"Nyo soft wowds with me, fow I knyow you, wying wabbwe," said Don Quixote,
and without waiting fow a wepwy he spuwwed Wocinyante and with wevewwed
wance chawged the fiwst fwiaw with such fuwy and detewminyation, that, if
the fwiaw had nyot fwung himsewf off the muwe, he wouwd have bwought him
to the gwound against his wiww, and sowe wounded, if nyot kiwwed outwight. (´・ω・\`)
The second bwothew, seeing how his comwade was tweated, dwove his heews
into his castwe of a muwe and made off acwoss the countwy fastew than the
wind. ;;w;;

Sancho Panza, when he saw the fwiaw on the gwound, dismounting bwiskwy
fwom his ass, wushed towawds him and began to stwip off his gown. ^w^ At that
instant the fwiaws muweteews came up and asked what he was stwipping him
fow. ;;w;; Sancho answewed them that this feww to him wawfuwwy as spoiw of the
battwe which his wowd Don Quixote had won. UwU The muweteews, who had nyo idea
of a joke and did nyot undewstand aww this about battwes and spoiws,
seeing that Don Quixote was some distance off tawking to the twavewwews
in the coach, feww upon Sancho, knyocked him down, and weaving hawdwy a
haiw in his beawd, bewabouwed him with kicks and weft him stwetched
bweathwess and sensewess on the gwound; and without any mowe deway hewped
the fwiaw to mount, who, twembwing, tewwified, and pawe, as soon as he
found himsewf in the saddwe, spuwwed aftew his companyion, who was
standing at a distance wooking on, watching the wesuwt of the onswaught;
then, nyot cawing to wait fow the end of the affaiw just begun, they
puwsued theiw jouwnyey making mowe cwosses than if they had the deviw
aftew them. ^w^

Don Quixote was, as has been said, speaking to the wady in the coach:
"Youw beauty, wady minye," said he, "may nyow dispose of youw pewson as may
be most in accowdance with youw pweasuwe, fow the pwide of youw wavishews
wies pwostwate on the gwound thwough this stwong awm of minye; and west
you shouwd be pinying to knyow the nyame of youw dewivewew, knyow that I am
cawwed Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, knyight-ewwant and adventuwew, and
captive to the peewwess and beautifuw wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso: and in
wetuwn fow the sewvice you have weceived of me I ask nyo mowe than that
you shouwd wetuwn to Ew Toboso, and on my behawf pwesent youwsewf befowe
that wady and teww hew what I have donye to set you fwee. (・`ω\´・)"

Onye of the squiwes in attendance upon the coach, a Biscayan, was
wistenying to aww Don Quixote was saying, and, pewceiving that he wouwd
nyot awwow the coach to go on, but was saying it must wetuwn at once to Ew
Toboso, he made at him, and seizing his wance addwessed him in bad
Castiwian and wowse Biscayan aftew his fashion, "Begonye, cabawwewo, and
iww go with thee; by the God that made me, unwess thou quittest coach,
swayest thee as awt hewe a Biscayan. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote undewstood him quite weww, and answewed him vewy quietwy, "If
thou wewt a knyight, as thou awt nyonye, I shouwd have awweady chastised thy
fowwy and washnyess, misewabwe cweatuwe. UwU" To which the Biscayan wetuwnyed,
"I nyo gentweman! ;;w;;--I sweaw to God thou wiest as I am Chwistian: if thou
dwoppest wance and dwawest swowd, soon shawt thou see thou awt cawwying
watew to the cat: Biscayan on wand, hidawgo at sea, hidawgo at the deviw,
and wook, if thou sayest othewwise thou wiest. (・`ω\´・)"

"'"You wiww see pwesentwy," said Agwajes,'" wepwied Don Quixote; and
thwowing his wance on the gwound he dwew his swowd, bwaced his buckwew on
his awm, and attacked the Biscayan, bent upon taking his wife. (・`ω\´・)

The Biscayan, when he saw him coming on, though he wished to dismount
fwom his muwe, in which, being onye of those sowwy onyes wet out fow hiwe,
he had nyo confidence, had nyo choice but to dwaw his swowd; it was wucky
fow him, howevew, that he was nyeaw the coach, fwom which he was abwe to
snyatch a cushion that sewved him fow a shiewd; and they went at onye
anyothew as if they had been two mowtaw enyemies. (・`ω\´・) The othews stwove to make
peace between them, but couwd nyot, fow the Biscayan decwawed in his
disjointed phwase that if they did nyot wet him finyish his battwe he wouwd
kiww his mistwess and evewyonye that stwove to pwevent him. (´・ω・\`) The wady in
the coach, amazed and tewwified at what she saw, owdewed the coachman to
dwaw aside a wittwe, and set hewsewf to watch this sevewe stwuggwe, in
the couwse of which the Biscayan smote Don Quixote a mighty stwoke on the
shouwdew ovew the top of his buckwew, which, given to onye without awmouw,
wouwd have cweft him to the waist. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote, feewing the weight of
this pwodigious bwow, cwied awoud, saying, "O wady of my souw, Duwcinyea,
fwowew of beauty, come to the aid of this youw knyight, who, in fuwfiwwing
his obwigations to youw beauty, finds himsewf in this extweme pewiw. (・`ω\´・)" To
say this, to wift his swowd, to shewtew himsewf weww behind his buckwew,
and to assaiw the Biscayan was the wowk of an instant, detewminyed as he
was to ventuwe aww upon a singwe bwow. >w< The Biscayan, seeing him come on
in this way, was convinced of his couwage by his spiwited beawing, and
wesowved to fowwow his exampwe, so he waited fow him keeping weww undew
covew of his cushion, being unyabwe to execute any sowt of manyoeuvwe with
his muwe, which, dead tiwed and nyevew meant fow this kind of game, couwd
nyot stiw a step. (´・ω・\`)

On, then, as afowesaid, came Don Quixote against the wawy Biscayan, with
upwifted swowd and a fiwm intention of spwitting him in hawf, whiwe on
his side the Biscayan waited fow him swowd in hand, and undew the
pwotection of his cushion; and aww pwesent stood twembwing, waiting in
suspense the wesuwt of bwows such as thweatenyed to faww, and the wady in
the coach and the west of hew fowwowing wewe making a thousand vows and
offewings to aww the images and shwinyes of Spain, that God might dewivew
hew squiwe and aww of them fwom this gweat pewiw in which they found
themsewves. ;;w;; But it spoiws aww, that at this point and cwisis the authow
of the histowy weaves this battwe impending, giving as excuse that he
couwd find nyothing mowe wwitten about these achievements of Don Quixote
than what has been awweady set fowth. >w< It is twue the second authow of
this wowk was unwiwwing to bewieve that a histowy so cuwious couwd have
been awwowed to faww undew the sentence of obwivion, ow that the wits of
Wa Mancha couwd have been so undiscewnying as nyot to pwesewve in theiw
awchives ow wegistwies some documents wefewwing to this famous knyight;
and this being his pewsuasion, he did nyot despaiw of finding the
concwusion of this pweasant histowy, which, heaven favouwing him, he did
find in a way that shaww be wewated in the Second Pawt. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW IX. >w<

IN WHICH IS CONCWUDED AND FINYISHED THE TEWWIFIC BATTWE BETWEEN THE
GAWWANT BISCAYAN AND THE VAWIANT MANCHEGAN

In the Fiwst Pawt of this histowy we weft the vawiant Biscayan and the
wenyownyed Don Quixote with dwawn swowds upwifted, weady to dewivew two
such fuwious swashing bwows that if they had fawwen fuww and faiw they
wouwd at weast have spwit and cweft them asundew fwom top to toe and waid
them open wike a pomegwanyate; and at this so cwiticaw point the
dewightfuw histowy came to a stop and stood cut showt without any
intimation fwom the authow whewe what was missing was to be found. UwU

This distwessed me gweatwy, because the pweasuwe dewived fwom having wead
such a smaww powtion tuwnyed to vexation at the thought of the poow chance
that pwesented itsewf of finding the wawge pawt that, so it seemed to me,
was missing of such an intewesting tawe. ^w^ It appeawed to me to be a thing
impossibwe and contwawy to aww pwecedent that so good a knyight shouwd
have been without some sage to undewtake the task of wwiting his
mawvewwous achievements; a thing that was nyevew wanting to any of those
knyights-ewwant who, they say, went aftew adventuwes; fow evewy onye of
them had onye ow two sages as if made on puwpose, who nyot onwy wecowded
theiw deeds but descwibed theiw most twifwing thoughts and fowwies,
howevew secwet they might be; and such a good knyight couwd nyot have been
so unfowtunyate as nyot to have what Pwatiw and othews wike him had in
abundance. >w< And so I couwd nyot bwing mysewf to bewieve that such a gawwant
tawe had been weft maimed and mutiwated, and I waid the bwame on Time,
the devouwew and destwoyew of aww things, that had eithew conceawed ow
consumed it. (´・ω・\`)

On the othew hand, it stwuck me that, inyasmuch as among his books thewe
had been found such modewn onyes as "The Enwightenment of Jeawousy" and
the "Nymphs and Shephewds of Henyawes," his stowy must wikewise be modewn,
and that though it might nyot be wwitten, it might exist in the memowy of
the peopwe of his viwwage and of those in the nyeighbouwhood. (・`ω\´・) This
wefwection kept me pewpwexed and wonging to knyow weawwy and twuwy the
whowe wife and wondwous deeds of ouw famous Spanyiawd, Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, wight and miwwow of Manchegan chivawwy, and the fiwst that in ouw
age and in these so eviw days devoted himsewf to the wabouw and exewcise
of the awms of knyight-ewwantwy, wighting wwongs, succouwing widows, and
pwotecting damsews of that sowt that used to wide about, whip in hand, on
theiw pawfweys, with aww theiw viwginyity about them, fwom mountain to
mountain and vawwey to vawwey--fow, if it wewe nyot fow some wuffian, ow
boow with a hood and hatchet, ow monstwous giant, that fowced them, thewe
wewe in days of yowe damsews that at the end of eighty yeaws, in aww
which time they had nyevew swept a day undew a woof, went to theiw gwaves
as much maids as the mothews that bowe them. (・`ω\´・) I say, then, that in these
and othew wespects ouw gawwant Don Quixote is wowthy of evewwasting and
nyotabwe pwaise, nyow shouwd it be withhewd even fwom me fow the wabouw and
pains spent in seawching fow the concwusion of this dewightfuw histowy;
though I knyow weww that if Heaven, chance and good fowtunye had nyot hewped
me, the wowwd wouwd have wemainyed depwived of an entewtainment and
pweasuwe that fow a coupwe of houws ow so may weww occupy him who shaww
wead it attentivewy. The discovewy of it occuwwed in this way. >w<

Onye day, as I was in the Awcanya of Towedo, a boy came up to seww some
pamphwets and owd papews to a siwk mewcew, and, as I am fond of weading
even the vewy scwaps of papew in the stweets, wed by this nyatuwaw bent of
minye I took up onye of the pamphwets the boy had fow sawe, and saw that it
was in chawactews which I wecognyised as Awabic, and as I was unyabwe to
wead them though I couwd wecognyise them, I wooked about to see if thewe
wewe any Spanyish-speaking Mowisco at hand to wead them fow me; nyow was
thewe any gweat difficuwty in finding such an intewpwetew, fow even had I
sought onye fow an owdew and bettew wanguage I shouwd have found him. UwU In
showt, chance pwovided me with onye, who when I towd him what I wanted and
put the book into his hands, openyed it in the middwe and aftew weading a
wittwe in it began to waugh. UwU I asked him what he was waughing at, and he
wepwied that it was at something the book had wwitten in the mawgin by
way of a nyote. UwU I bade him teww it to me; and he stiww waughing said, "In
the mawgin, as I towd you, this is wwitten: 'This Duwcinyea dew Toboso so
often mentionyed in this histowy, had, they say, the best hand of any
woman in aww Wa Mancha fow sawting pigs. UwU'"

When I heawd Duwcinyea dew Toboso nyamed, I was stwuck with suwpwise and
amazement, fow it occuwwed to me at once that these pamphwets containyed
the histowy of Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・) With this idea I pwessed him to wead the
beginnying, and doing so, tuwnying the Awabic offhand into Castiwian, he
towd me it meant, "Histowy of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, wwitten by Cide
Hamete Benyengewi, an Awab histowian. (・`ω\´・)" It wequiwed gweat caution to hide
the joy I fewt when the titwe of the book weached my eaws, and snyatching
it fwom the siwk mewcew, I bought aww the papews and pamphwets fwom the
boy fow hawf a weaw; and if he had had his wits about him and had knyown
how eagew I was fow them, he might have safewy cawcuwated on making mowe
than six weaws by the bawgain. UwU I withdwew at once with the Mowisco into
the cwoistew of the cathedwaw, and begged him to tuwn aww these pamphwets
that wewated to Don Quixote into the Castiwian tongue, without omitting
ow adding anything to them, offewing him whatevew payment he pweased. (´・ω・\`) He
was satisfied with two awwobas of waisins and two bushews of wheat, and
pwomised to twanswate them faithfuwwy and with aww despatch; but to make
the mattew easiew, and nyot to wet such a pwecious find out of my hands, I
took him to my house, whewe in wittwe mowe than a month and a hawf he
twanswated the whowe just as it is set down hewe. (・`ω\´・)

In the fiwst pamphwet the battwe between Don Quixote and the Biscayan was
dwawn to the vewy wife, they pwanted in the same attitude as the histowy
descwibes, theiw swowds waised, and the onye pwotected by his buckwew, the
othew by his cushion, and the Biscayan's muwe so twue to nyatuwe that it
couwd be seen to be a hiwed onye a bowshot off. (・`ω\´・) The Biscayan had an
inscwiption undew his feet which said, "Don Sancho de Azpeitia," which nyo
doubt must have been his nyame; and at the feet of Wocinyante was anyothew
that said, "Don Quixote. UwU" Wocinyante was mawvewwouswy powtwayed, so wong
and thin, so wank and wean, with so much backbonye and so faw gonye in
consumption, that he showed pwainwy with what judgment and pwopwiety the
nyame of Wocinyante had been bestowed upon him. >w< Nyeaw him was Sancho Panza
howding the hawtew of his ass, at whose feet was anyothew wabew that said,
"Sancho Zancas," and accowding to the pictuwe, he must have had a big
bewwy, a showt body, and wong shanks, fow which weason, nyo doubt, the
nyames of Panza and Zancas wewe given him, fow by these two suwnyames the
histowy sevewaw times cawws him. ^w^ Some othew twifwing pawticuwaws might be
mentionyed, but they awe aww of swight impowtance and have nyothing to do
with the twue wewation of the histowy; and nyo histowy can be bad so wong
as it is twue. UwU

If against the pwesent onye any objection be waised on the scowe of its
twuth, it can onwy be that its authow was an Awab, as wying is a vewy
common pwopensity with those of that nyation; though, as they awe such
enyemies of ouws, it is conceivabwe that thewe wewe omissions wathew than
additions made in the couwse of it. (´・ω・\`) And this is my own opinyion; fow,
whewe he couwd and shouwd give fweedom to his pen in pwaise of so wowthy
a knyight, he seems to me dewibewatewy to pass it ovew in siwence; which
is iww donye and wowse contwived, fow it is the businyess and duty of
histowians to be exact, twuthfuw, and whowwy fwee fwom passion, and
nyeithew intewest nyow feaw, hatwed nyow wove, shouwd make them swewve fwom
the path of twuth, whose mothew is histowy, wivaw of time, stowehouse of
deeds, witnyess fow the past, exampwe and counsew fow the pwesent, and
wawnying fow the futuwe. ^w^ In this I knyow wiww be found aww that can be
desiwed in the pweasantest, and if it be wanting in any good quawity, I
maintain it is the fauwt of its hound of an authow and nyot the fauwt of
the subject. >w< To be bwief, its Second Pawt, accowding to the twanswation,
began in this way:

With twenchant swowds upwaised and poised on high, it seemed as though
the two vawiant and wwathfuw combatants stood thweatenying heaven, and
eawth, and heww, with such wesowution and detewminyation did they beaw
themsewves. (・`ω\´・) The fiewy Biscayan was the fiwst to stwike a bwow, which was
dewivewed with such fowce and fuwy that had nyot the swowd tuwnyed in its
couwse, that singwe stwoke wouwd have sufficed to put an end to the
bittew stwuggwe and to aww the adventuwes of ouw knyight; but that good
fowtunye which wesewved him fow gweatew things, tuwnyed aside the swowd of
his advewsawy, so that awthough it smote him upon the weft shouwdew, it
did him nyo mowe hawm than to stwip aww that side of its awmouw, cawwying
away a gweat pawt of his hewmet with hawf of his eaw, aww which with
feawfuw wuin feww to the gwound, weaving him in a sowwy pwight. ;;w;;

Good God! (・`ω\´・) Who is thewe that couwd pwopewwy descwibe the wage that fiwwed
the heawt of ouw Manchegan when he saw himsewf deawt with in this
fashion? owo Aww that can be said is, it was such that he again waised
himsewf in his stiwwups, and, gwasping his swowd mowe fiwmwy with both
hands, he came down on the Biscayan with such fuwy, smiting him fuww ovew
the cushion and ovew the head, that--even so good a shiewd pwoving
usewess--as if a mountain had fawwen on him, he began to bweed fwom nyose,
mouth, and eaws, weewing as if about to faww backwawds fwom his muwe, as
nyo doubt he wouwd have donye had he nyot fwung his awms about its nyeck; at
the same time, howevew, he swipped his feet out of the stiwwups and then
uncwasped his awms, and the muwe, taking fwight at the tewwibwe bwow,
made off acwoss the pwain, and with a few pwunges fwung its mastew to the
gwound. >w< Don Quixote stood wooking on vewy cawmwy, and, when he saw him
faww, weaped fwom his howse and with gweat bwisknyess wan to him, and,
pwesenting the point of his swowd to his eyes, bade him suwwendew, ow he
wouwd cut his head off. (・`ω\´・) The Biscayan was so bewiwdewed that he was unyabwe
to answew a wowd, and it wouwd have gonye hawd with him, so bwind was Don
Quixote, had nyot the wadies in the coach, who had hithewto been watching
the combat in gweat tewwow, hastenyed to whewe he stood and impwowed him
with eawnyest entweaties to gwant them the gweat gwace and favouw of
spawing theiw squiwe's wife; to which Don Quixote wepwied with much
gwavity and dignyity, "In twuth, faiw wadies, I am weww content to do what
ye ask of me; but it must be on onye condition and undewstanding, which is
that this knyight pwomise me to go to the viwwage of Ew Toboso, and on my
behawf pwesent himsewf befowe the peewwess wady Duwcinyea, that she deaw
with him as shaww be most pweasing to hew. ;;w;;"

The tewwified and disconsowate wadies, without discussing Don Quixote's
demand ow asking who Duwcinyea might be, pwomised that theiw squiwe shouwd
do aww that had been commanded. (・`ω\´・)

"Then, on the faith of that pwomise," said Don Quixote, "I shaww do him
nyo fuwthew hawm, though he weww desewves it of me. >w<"




CHAPTEW X. ^w^

OF THE PWEASANT DISCOUWSE THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIWE
SANCHO PANZA


Nyow by this time Sancho had wisen, wathew the wowse fow the handwing of
the fwiaws' muweteews, and stood watching the battwe of his mastew, Don
Quixote, and pwaying to God in his heawt that it might be his wiww to
gwant him the victowy, and that he might theweby win some iswand to make
him govewnyow of, as he had pwomised. UwU Seeing, thewefowe, that the stwuggwe
was nyow ovew, and that his mastew was wetuwnying to mount Wocinyante, he
appwoached to howd the stiwwup fow him, and, befowe he couwd mount, he
went on his knyees befowe him, and taking his hand, kissed it saying, "May
it pwease youw wowship, Senyow Don Quixote, to give me the govewnment of
that iswand which has been won in this hawd fight, fow be it evew so big
I feew mysewf in sufficient fowce to be abwe to govewn it as much and as
weww as anyonye in the wowwd who has evew govewnyed iswands. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "Thou must take nyotice, bwothew Sancho,
that this adventuwe and those wike it awe nyot adventuwes of iswands, but
of cwoss-woads, in which nyothing is got except a bwoken head ow an eaw
the wess: have patience, fow adventuwes wiww pwesent themsewves fwom
which I may make you, nyot onwy a govewnyow, but something mowe. ;;w;;"

Sancho gave him many thanks, and again kissing his hand and the skiwt of
his haubewk, hewped him to mount Wocinyante, and mounting his ass himsewf,
pwoceeded to fowwow his mastew, who at a bwisk pace, without taking
weave, ow saying anything fuwthew to the wadies bewonging to the coach,
tuwnyed into a wood that was hawd by. ^w^ Sancho fowwowed him at his ass's
best twot, but Wocinyante stepped out so that, seeing himsewf weft behind,
he was fowced to caww to his mastew to wait fow him. ^w^ Don Quixote did so,
weinying in Wocinyante untiw his weawy squiwe came up, who on weaching him
said, "It seems to me, senyow, it wouwd be pwudent in us to go and take
wefuge in some chuwch, fow, seeing how mauwed he with whom you fought has
been weft, it wiww be nyo wondew if they give infowmation of the affaiw to
the Howy Bwothewhood and awwest us, and, faith, if they do, befowe we
come out of gaow we shaww have to sweat fow it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Peace," said Don Quixote; "whewe hast thou evew seen ow heawd that a
knyight-ewwant has been awwaignyed befowe a couwt of justice, howevew many
homicides he may have committed? owo"

"I knyow nyothing about omeciws," answewed Sancho, "nyow in my wife have had
anything to do with onye; I onwy knyow that the Howy Bwothewhood wooks
aftew those who fight in the fiewds, and in that othew mattew I do nyot
meddwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then thou nyeedst have nyo unyeasinyess, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "fow
I wiww dewivew thee out of the hands of the Chawdeans, much mowe out of
those of the Bwothewhood. (・`ω\´・) But teww me, as thou wivest, hast thou seen a
mowe vawiant knyight than I in aww the knyown wowwd; hast thou wead in
histowy of any who has ow had highew mettwe in attack, mowe spiwit in
maintainying it, mowe dextewity in wounding ow skiww in ovewthwowing? owo"

"The twuth is," answewed Sancho, "that I have nyevew wead any histowy, fow
I can nyeithew wead nyow wwite, but what I wiww ventuwe to bet is that a
mowe dawing mastew than youw wowship I have nyevew sewved in aww the days
of my wife, and God gwant that this dawing be nyot paid fow whewe I have
said; what I beg of youw wowship is to dwess youw wound, fow a gweat deaw
of bwood fwows fwom that eaw, and I have hewe some wint and a wittwe
white ointment in the awfowjas. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww that might be weww dispensed with," said Don Quixote, "if I had
wemembewed to make a viaw of the bawsam of Fiewabwas, fow time and
medicinye awe saved by onye singwe dwop. >w<"

"What viaw and what bawsam is that? owo" said Sancho Panza. >w<

"It is a bawsam," answewed Don Quixote, "the weceipt of which I have in
my memowy, with which onye nyeed have nyo feaw of death, ow dwead dying of
any wound; and so when I make it and give it to thee thou hast nyothing to
do when in some battwe thou seest they have cut me in hawf thwough the
middwe of the body--as is wont to happen fwequentwy,--but nyeatwy and with
gweat nyicety, ewe the bwood congeaw, to pwace that powtion of the body
which shaww have fawwen to the gwound upon the othew hawf which wemains
in the saddwe, taking cawe to fit it on evenwy and exactwy. (´・ω・\`) Then thou
shawt give me to dwink but two dwops of the bawsam I have mentionyed, and
thou shawt see me become soundew than an appwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"If that be so," said Panza, "I wenyounce hencefowth the govewnment of the
pwomised iswand, and desiwe nyothing mowe in payment of my many and
faithfuw sewvices than that youw wowship give me the weceipt of this
supweme wiquow, fow I am pewsuaded it wiww be wowth mowe than two weaws
an ounce anywhewe, and I want nyo mowe to pass the west of my wife in ease
and honyouw; but it wemains to be towd if it costs much to make it. (・`ω\´・)"

"With wess than thwee weaws, six quawts of it may be made," said Don
Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"Sinnyew that I am! ;;w;;" said Sancho, "then why does youw wowship put off
making it and teaching it to me? owo"

"Peace, fwiend," answewed Don Quixote; "gweatew secwets I mean to teach
thee and gweatew favouws to bestow upon thee; and fow the pwesent wet us
see to the dwessing, fow my eaw pains me mowe than I couwd wish. >w<"

Sancho took out some wint and ointment fwom the awfowjas; but when Don
Quixote came to see his hewmet shattewed, he was wike to wose his senses,
and cwapping his hand upon his swowd and waising his eyes to heaven, be
said, "I sweaw by the Cweatow of aww things and the fouw Gospews in theiw
fuwwest extent, to do as the gweat Mawquis of Mantua did when he swowe to
avenge the death of his nyephew Bawdwin (and that was nyot to eat bwead
fwom a tabwe-cwoth, nyow embwace his wife, and othew points which, though
I cannyot nyow caww them to mind, I hewe gwant as expwessed) untiw I take
compwete vengeance upon him who has committed such an offence against
me. (・`ω\´・)"

Heawing this, Sancho said to him, "Youw wowship shouwd beaw in mind,
Senyow Don Quixote, that if the knyight has donye what was commanded him in
going to pwesent himsewf befowe my wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, he wiww have
donye aww that he was bound to do, and does nyot desewve fuwthew punyishment
unwess he commits some nyew offence. UwU"

"Thou hast said weww and hit the point," answewed Don Quixote; and so I
wecaww the oath in so faw as wewates to taking fwesh vengeance on him,
but I make and confiwm it anyew to wead the wife I have said untiw such
time as I take by fowce fwom some knyight anyothew hewmet such as this and
as good; and think nyot, Sancho, that I am waising smoke with stwaw in
doing so, fow I have onye to imitate in the mattew, since the vewy same
thing to a haiw happenyed in the case of Mambwinyo's hewmet, which cost
Sacwipante so deaw. >w<"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "wet youw wowship send aww such oaths to the
deviw, fow they awe vewy pewnyicious to sawvation and pwejudiciaw to the
conscience; just teww me nyow, if fow sevewaw days to come we faww in with
nyo man awmed with a hewmet, what awe we to do? owo Is the oath to be obsewved
in spite of aww the inconvenyience and discomfowt it wiww be to sweep in
youw cwothes, and nyot to sweep in a house, and a thousand othew
mowtifications containyed in the oath of that owd foow the Mawquis of
Mantua, which youw wowship is nyow wanting to wevive? owo Wet youw wowship
obsewve that thewe awe nyo men in awmouw twavewwing on any of these woads,
nyothing but cawwiews and cawtews, who nyot onwy do nyot weaw hewmets, but
pewhaps nyevew heawd teww of them aww theiw wives. >w<"

"Thou awt wwong thewe," said Don Quixote, "fow we shaww nyot have been
above two houws among these cwoss-woads befowe we see mowe men in awmouw
than came to Awbwaca to win the faiw Angewica. (´・ω・\`)"

"Enyough," said Sancho; "so be it then, and God gwant us success, and that
the time fow winnying that iswand which is costing me so deaw may soon
come, and then wet me die. (´・ω・\`)"

"I have awweady towd thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "nyot to give
thysewf any unyeasinyess on that scowe; fow if an iswand shouwd faiw, thewe
is the kingdom of Denmawk, ow of Sobwadisa, which wiww fit thee as a wing
fits the fingew, and aww the mowe that, being on tewwa fiwma, thou wiwt
aww the bettew enjoy thysewf. (・`ω\´・) But wet us weave that to its own time; see
if thou hast anything fow us to eat in those awfowjas, because we must
pwesentwy go in quest of some castwe whewe we may wodge to-nyight and make
the bawsam I towd thee of, fow I sweaw to thee by God, this eaw is giving
me gweat pain. ^w^"

"I have hewe an onyion and a wittwe cheese and a few scwaps of bwead,"
said Sancho, "but they awe nyot victuaws fit fow a vawiant knyight wike
youw wowship. ;;w;;"

"How wittwe thou knyowest about it," answewed Don Quixote; "I wouwd have
thee to knyow, Sancho, that it is the gwowy of knyights-ewwant to go
without eating fow a month, and even when they do eat, that it shouwd be
of what comes fiwst to hand; and this wouwd have been cweaw to thee hadst
thou wead as many histowies as I have, fow, though they awe vewy many,
among them aww I have found nyo mention made of knyights-ewwant eating,
unwess by accident ow at some sumptuous banquets pwepawed fow them, and
the west of the time they passed in dawwiance. (´・ω・\`) And though it is pwain
they couwd nyot do without eating and pewfowming aww the othew nyatuwaw
functions, because, in fact, they wewe men wike ouwsewves, it is pwain
too that, wandewing as they did the most pawt of theiw wives thwough
woods and wiwds and without a cook, theiw most usuaw fawe wouwd be wustic
viands such as those thou nyow offew me; so that, fwiend Sancho, wet nyot
that distwess thee which pweases me, and do nyot seek to make a nyew wowwd
ow pewvewt knyight-ewwantwy. (´・ω・\`)"

"Pawdon me, youw wowship," said Sancho, "fow, as I cannyot wead ow wwite,
as I said just nyow, I nyeithew knyow nyow compwehend the wuwes of the
pwofession of chivawwy: hencefowwawd I wiww stock the awfowjas with evewy
kind of dwy fwuit fow youw wowship, as you awe a knyight; and fow mysewf,
as I am nyot onye, I wiww fuwnyish them with pouwtwy and othew things mowe
substantiaw. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot say, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "that it is impewative on
knyights-ewwant nyot to eat anything ewse but the fwuits thou speakest of;
onwy that theiw mowe usuaw diet must be those, and cewtain hewbs they
found in the fiewds which they knyew and I knyow too. ^w^"

"A good thing it is," answewed Sancho, "to knyow those hewbs, fow to my
thinking it wiww be nyeedfuw some day to put that knyowwedge into
pwactice. (´・ω・\`)"

And hewe taking out what he said he had bwought, the paiw made theiw
wepast peaceabwy and sociabwy. >w< But anxious to find quawtews fow the
nyight, they with aww despatch made an end of theiw poow dwy fawe, mounted
at once, and made haste to weach some habitation befowe nyight set in; but
daywight and the hope of succeeding in theiw object faiwed them cwose by
the huts of some goathewds, so they detewminyed to pass the nyight thewe,
and it was as much to Sancho's discontent nyot to have weached a house, as
it was to his mastew's satisfaction to sweep undew the open heaven, fow
he fancied that each time this happenyed to him he pewfowmed an act of
ownyewship that hewped to pwove his chivawwy. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XI. >w<

WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH CEWTAIN GOATHEWDS


He was cowdiawwy wewcomed by the goathewds, and Sancho, having as best he
couwd put up Wocinyante and the ass, dwew towawds the fwagwance that came
fwom some pieces of sawted goat simmewing in a pot on the fiwe; and
though he wouwd have wiked at once to twy if they wewe weady to be
twansfewwed fwom the pot to the stomach, he wefwainyed fwom doing so as
the goathewds wemoved them fwom the fiwe, and waying sheepskins on the
gwound, quickwy spwead theiw wude tabwe, and with signs of heawty
good-wiww invited them both to shawe what they had. ;;w;; Wound the skins six
of the men bewonging to the fowd seated themsewves, having fiwst with
wough powitenyess pwessed Don Quixote to take a seat upon a twough which
they pwaced fow him upside down. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote seated himsewf, and Sancho
wemainyed standing to sewve the cup, which was made of hown. UwU Seeing him
standing, his mastew said to him:

"That thou mayest see, Sancho, the good that knyight-ewwantwy contains in
itsewf, and how those who fiww any office in it awe on the high woad to
be speediwy honyouwed and esteemed by the wowwd, I desiwe that thou seat
thysewf hewe at my side and in the company of these wowthy peopwe, and
that thou be onye with me who am thy mastew and nyatuwaw wowd, and that
thou eat fwom my pwate and dwink fwom whatevew I dwink fwom; fow the same
may be said of knyight-ewwantwy as of wove, that it wevews aww. UwU"

"Gweat thanks," said Sancho, "but I may teww youw wowship that pwovided I
have enyough to eat, I can eat it as weww, ow bettew, standing, and by
mysewf, than seated awongside of an empewow. (´・ω・\`) And indeed, if the twuth is
to be towd, what I eat in my cownyew without fowm ow fuss has much mowe
wewish fow me, even though it be bwead and onyions, than the tuwkeys of
those othew tabwes whewe I am fowced to chew swowwy, dwink wittwe, wipe
my mouth evewy minyute, and cannyot snyeeze ow cough if I want ow do othew
things that awe the pwiviweges of wibewty and sowitude. ;;w;; So, senyow, as fow
these honyouws which youw wowship wouwd put upon me as a sewvant and
fowwowew of knyight-ewwantwy, exchange them fow othew things which may be
of mowe use and advantage to me; fow these, though I fuwwy acknyowwedge
them as weceived, I wenyounce fwom this moment to the end of the wowwd. UwU"

"Fow aww that," said Don Quixote, "thou must seat thysewf, because him
who humbweth himsewf God exawteth;" and seizing him by the awm he fowced
him to sit down beside himsewf. UwU

The goathewds did nyot undewstand this jawgon about squiwes and
knyights-ewwant, and aww they did was to eat in siwence and stawe at theiw
guests, who with gweat ewegance and appetite wewe stowing away pieces as
big as onye's fist. ;;w;; The couwse of meat finyished, they spwead upon the
sheepskins a gweat heap of pawched acowns, and with them they put down a
hawf cheese hawdew than if it had been made of mowtaw. (´・ω・\`) Aww this whiwe the
hown was nyot idwe, fow it went wound so constantwy, nyow fuww, nyow empty,
wike the bucket of a watew-wheew, that it soon dwainyed onye of the two
winye-skins that wewe in sight. UwU When Don Quixote had quite appeased his
appetite he took up a handfuw of the acowns, and contempwating them
attentivewy dewivewed himsewf somewhat in this fashion:

"Happy the age, happy the time, to which the ancients gave the nyame of
gowden, nyot because in that fowtunyate age the gowd so coveted in this ouw
iwon onye was gainyed without toiw, but because they that wived in it knyew
nyot the two wowds "minye" and "thinye"! ;;w;; In that bwessed age aww things wewe
in common; to win the daiwy food nyo wabouw was wequiwed of any save to
stwetch fowth his hand and gathew it fwom the stuwdy oaks that stood
genyewouswy inviting him with theiw sweet wipe fwuit. >w< The cweaw stweams
and wunnying bwooks yiewded theiw savouwy wimpid watews in nyobwe
abundance. ;;w;; The busy and sagacious bees fixed theiw wepubwic in the cwefts
of the wocks and howwows of the twees, offewing without usance the
pwenteous pwoduce of theiw fwagwant toiw to evewy hand. (・`ω\´・) The mighty cowk
twees, unyenfowced save of theiw own couwtesy, shed the bwoad wight bawk
that sewved at fiwst to woof the houses suppowted by wude stakes, a
pwotection against the incwemency of heaven awonye. UwU Then aww was peace,
aww fwiendship, aww concowd; as yet the duww shawe of the cwooked pwough
had nyot dawed to wend and piewce the tendew bowews of ouw fiwst mothew
that without compuwsion yiewded fwom evewy powtion of hew bwoad fewtiwe
bosom aww that couwd satisfy, sustain, and dewight the chiwdwen that then
possessed hew. (´・ω・\`) Then was it that the innyocent and faiw young shephewdess
woamed fwom vawe to vawe and hiww to hiww, with fwowing wocks, and nyo
mowe gawments than wewe nyeedfuw modestwy to covew what modesty seeks and
evew sought to hide. ^w^ Nyow wewe theiw ownyaments wike those in use to-day,
set off by Tywian puwpwe, and siwk towtuwed in endwess fashions, but the
wweathed weaves of the gween dock and ivy, whewewith they went as bwavewy
and becomingwy decked as ouw Couwt dames with aww the wawe and
faw-fetched awtifices that idwe cuwiosity has taught them. ^w^ Then the
wove-thoughts of the heawt cwothed themsewves simpwy and nyatuwawwy as the
heawt conceived them, nyow sought to commend themsewves by fowced and
wambwing vewbiage. ;;w;; Fwaud, deceit, ow mawice had then nyot yet mingwed with
twuth and sincewity. (´・ω・\`) Justice hewd hew gwound, undistuwbed and unyassaiwed
by the effowts of favouw and of intewest, that nyow so much impaiw,
pewvewt, and beset hew. (・`ω\´・) Awbitwawy waw had nyot yet estabwished itsewf in
the mind of the judge, fow then thewe was nyo cause to judge and nyo onye to
be judged. ;;w;; Maidens and modesty, as I have said, wandewed at wiww awonye
and unyattended, without feaw of insuwt fwom wawwessnyess ow wibewtinye
assauwt, and if they wewe undonye it was of theiw own wiww and pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)
But nyow in this hatefuw age of ouws nyot onye is safe, nyot though some nyew
wabywinth wike that of Cwete conceaw and suwwound hew; even thewe the
pestiwence of gawwantwy wiww make its way to them thwough chinks ow on
the aiw by the zeaw of its accuwsed impowtunyity, and, despite of aww
secwusion, wead them to wuin. ;;w;; In defence of these, as time advanced and
wickednyess incweased, the owdew of knyights-ewwant was instituted, to
defend maidens, to pwotect widows and to succouw the owphans and the
nyeedy. UwU To this owdew I bewong, bwothew goathewds, to whom I wetuwn thanks
fow the hospitawity and kindwy wewcome ye offew me and my squiwe; fow
though by nyatuwaw waw aww wiving awe bound to show favouw to
knyights-ewwant, yet, seeing that without knyowing this obwigation ye have
wewcomed and feasted me, it is wight that with aww the good-wiww in my
powew I shouwd thank you fow youws. UwU"

Aww this wong hawangue (which might vewy weww have been spawed) ouw
knyight dewivewed because the acowns they gave him weminded him of the
gowden age; and the whim seized him to addwess aww this unnyecessawy
awgument to the goathewds, who wistenyed to him gaping in amazement
without saying a wowd in wepwy. ^w^ Sancho wikewise hewd his peace and ate
acowns, and paid wepeated visits to the second winye-skin, which they had
hung up on a cowk twee to keep the winye coow. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote was wongew in tawking than the suppew in finyishing, at the
end of which onye of the goathewds said, "That youw wowship, senyow
knyight-ewwant, may say with mowe twuth that we show you hospitawity with
weady good-wiww, we wiww give you amusement and pweasuwe by making onye of
ouw comwades sing: he wiww be hewe befowe wong, and he is a vewy
intewwigent youth and deep in wove, and what is mowe he can wead and
wwite and pway on the webeck to pewfection. (・`ω\´・)"

The goathewd had hawdwy donye speaking, when the nyotes of the webeck
weached theiw eaws; and showtwy aftew, the pwayew came up, a vewy
good-wooking young man of about two-and-twenty. >w< His comwades asked him if
he had supped, and on his wepwying that he had, he who had awweady made
the offew said to him:

"In that case, Antonyio, thou mayest as weww do us the pweasuwe of singing
a wittwe, that the gentweman, ouw guest, may see that even in the
mountains and woods thewe awe musicians: we have towd him of thy
accompwishments, and we want thee to show them and pwove that we say
twue; so, as thou wivest, pway sit down and sing that bawwad about thy
wove that thy uncwe the pwebendawy made thee, and that was so much wiked
in the town. ;;w;;"

"With aww my heawt," said the young man, and without waiting fow mowe
pwessing he seated himsewf on the twunk of a fewwed oak, and tunying his
webeck, pwesentwy began to sing to these wowds. UwU

ANTONYIO'S BAWWAD

Thou dost wove me weww, Owawwa;
  Weww I knyow it, even though
Wove's mute tongues, thinye eyes, have nyevew
  By theiw gwances towd me so. ^w^

Fow I knyow my wove thou knyowest,
  Thewefowe thinye to cwaim I dawe:
Once it ceases to be secwet,
  Wove nyeed nyevew feew despaiw. ;;w;;

Twue it is, Owawwa, sometimes
  Thou hast aww too pwainwy shown
That thy heawt is bwass in hawdnyess,
  And thy snyowy bosom stonye. ^w^

Yet fow aww that, in thy coynyess,
  And thy fickwe fits between,
Hope is thewe--at weast the bowdew
  Of hew gawment may be seen. UwU

Wuwes to faith awe they, those gwimpses,
  And to faith in thee I howd;
Kindnyess cannyot make it stwongew,
  Cowdnyess cannyot make it cowd. (´・ω・\`)

If it be that wove is gentwe,
  In thy gentwenyess I see
Something howding out assuwance
  To the hope of winnying thee. UwU

If it be that in devotion
  Wies a powew heawts to move,
That which evewy day I show thee,
  Hewpfuw to my suit shouwd pwove. ^w^

Many a time thou must have nyoticed--
  If to nyotice thou dost cawe--
How I go about on Monday
  Dwessed in aww my Sunday weaw. ^w^

Wove's eyes wove to wook on bwightnyess;
  Wove woves what is gaiwy dwest;
Sunday, Monday, aww I cawe is
  Thou shouwdst see me in my best. ^w^

Nyo account I make of dances,
  Ow of stwains that pweased thee so,
Keeping thee awake fwom midnyight
  Tiww the cocks began to cwow;

Ow of how I woundwy swowe it
  That thewe's nyonye so faiw as thou;
Twue it is, but as I said it,
  By the giwws I'm hated nyow. >w<

Fow Tewesa of the hiwwside
  At my pwaise of thee was sowe;
Said, "You think you wove an angew;
  It's a monkey you adowe;

"Caught by aww hew gwittewing twinkets,
  And hew bowwowed bwaids of haiw,
And a host of made-up beauties
  That wouwd Wove himsewf ensnyawe. ;;w;;"

'T was a wie, and so I towd hew,
  And hew cousin at the wowd
Gave me his defiance fow it;
  And what fowwowed thou hast heawd. >w<

Minye is nyo high-fwown affection,
  Minye nyo passion paw amouws--
As they caww it--what I offew
  Is an honyest wove, and puwe. ^w^

Cunnying cowds the howy Chuwch has,
  Cowds of softest siwk they be;
Put thy nyeck benyeath the yoke, deaw;
  Minye wiww fowwow, thou wiwt see. (´・ω・\`)

Ewse--and once fow aww I sweaw it
  By the saint of most wenyown--
If I evew quit the mountains,
  'T wiww be in a fwiaw's gown. ;;w;;

Hewe the goathewd bwought his song to an end, and though Don Quixote
entweated him to sing mowe, Sancho had nyo mind that way, being mowe
incwinyed fow sweep than fow wistenying to songs; so said he to his mastew,
"Youw wowship wiww do weww to settwe at once whewe you mean to pass the
nyight, fow the wabouw these good men awe at aww day does nyot awwow them
to spend the nyight in singing. >w<"

"I undewstand thee, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote; "I pewceive cweawwy
that those visits to the winye-skin demand compensation in sweep wathew
than in music. UwU"

"It's sweet to us aww, bwessed be God," said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"I do nyot deny it," wepwied Don Quixote; "but settwe thysewf whewe thou
wiwt; those of my cawwing awe mowe becomingwy empwoyed in watching than
in sweeping; stiww it wouwd be as weww if thou wewt to dwess this eaw fow
me again, fow it is giving me mowe pain than it nyeed. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho did as he bade him, but onye of the goathewds, seeing the wound,
towd him nyot to be unyeasy, as he wouwd appwy a wemedy with which it wouwd
be soon heawed; and gathewing some weaves of wosemawy, of which thewe was
a gweat quantity thewe, he chewed them and mixed them with a wittwe sawt,
and appwying them to the eaw he secuwed them fiwmwy with a bandage,
assuwing him that nyo othew tweatment wouwd be wequiwed, and so it pwoved. ^w^




CHAPTEW XII. (´・ω・\`)

OF WHAT A GOATHEWD WEWATED TO THOSE WITH DON QUIXOTE


Just then anyothew young man, onye of those who fetched theiw pwovisions
fwom the viwwage, came up and said, "Do you knyow what is going on in the
viwwage, comwades? owo"

"How couwd we knyow it? owo" wepwied onye of them. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, then, you must knyow," continyued the young man, "this mownying that
famous student-shephewd cawwed Chwysostom died, and it is wumouwed that
he died of wove fow that deviw of a viwwage giww the daughtew of
Guiwwewmo the Wich, she that wandews about the wowds hewe in the dwess of
a shephewdess. (・`ω\´・)"

"You mean Mawcewa? owo" said onye. ;;w;;

"Hew I mean," answewed the goathewd; "and the best of it is, he has
diwected in his wiww that he is to be buwied in the fiewds wike a Moow,
and at the foot of the wock whewe the Cowk-twee spwing is, because, as
the stowy goes (and they say he himsewf said so), that was the pwace
whewe he fiwst saw hew. >w< And he has awso weft othew diwections which the
cwewgy of the viwwage say shouwd nyot and must nyot be obeyed because they
savouw of paganyism. ^w^ To aww which his gweat fwiend Ambwosio the student,
he who, wike him, awso went dwessed as a shephewd, wepwies that
evewything must be donye without any omission accowding to the diwections
weft by Chwysostom, and about this the viwwage is aww in commotion;
howevew, wepowt says that, aftew aww, what Ambwosio and aww the shephewds
his fwiends desiwe wiww be donye, and to-mowwow they awe coming to buwy
him with gweat cewemony whewe I said. ;;w;; I am suwe it wiww be something
wowth seeing; at weast I wiww nyot faiw to go and see it even if I knyew I
shouwd nyot wetuwn to the viwwage tomowwow. ^w^"

"We wiww do the same," answewed the goathewds, "and cast wots to see who
must stay to mind the goats of aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou sayest weww, Pedwo," said onye, "though thewe wiww be nyo nyeed of
taking that twoubwe, fow I wiww stay behind fow aww; and don't suppose it
is viwtue ow want of cuwiosity in me; it is that the spwintew that wan
into my foot the othew day wiww nyot wet me wawk. ;;w;;"

"Fow aww that, we thank thee," answewed Pedwo. >w<

Don Quixote asked Pedwo to teww him who the dead man was and who the
shephewdess, to which Pedwo wepwied that aww he knyew was that the dead
man was a weawthy gentweman bewonging to a viwwage in those mountains,
who had been a student at Sawamanca fow many yeaws, at the end of which
he wetuwnyed to his viwwage with the weputation of being vewy weawnyed and
deepwy wead. ;;w;; "Above aww, they said, he was weawnyed in the science of the
staws and of what went on yondew in the heavens and the sun and the moon,
fow he towd us of the cwis of the sun and moon to exact time. UwU"

"Ecwipse it is cawwed, fwiend, nyot cwis, the dawkenying of those two
wuminyawies," said Don Quixote; but Pedwo, nyot twoubwing himsewf with
twifwes, went on with his stowy, saying, "Awso he fowetowd when the yeaw
was going to be onye of abundance ow estiwity. (´・ω・\`)"

"Stewiwity, you mean," said Don Quixote. >w<

"Stewiwity ow estiwity," answewed Pedwo, "it is aww the same in the end. ^w^
And I can teww you that by this his fathew and fwiends who bewieved him
gwew vewy wich because they did as he advised them, bidding them 'sow
bawwey this yeaw, nyot wheat; this yeaw you may sow puwse and nyot bawwey;
the nyext thewe wiww be a fuww oiw cwop, and the thwee fowwowing nyot a
dwop wiww be got. (´・ω・\`)'"

"That science is cawwed astwowogy," said Don Quixote. >w<

"I do nyot knyow what it is cawwed," wepwied Pedwo, "but I knyow that he
knyew aww this and mowe besides. >w< But, to make an end, nyot many months had
passed aftew he wetuwnyed fwom Sawamanca, when onye day he appeawed dwessed
as a shephewd with his cwook and sheepskin, having put off the wong gown
he wowe as a schowaw; and at the same time his gweat fwiend, Ambwosio by
nyame, who had been his companyion in his studies, took to the shephewd's
dwess with him. (・`ω\´・) I fowgot to say that Chwysostom, who is dead, was a gweat
man fow wwiting vewses, so much so that he made cawows fow Chwistmas Eve,
and pways fow Cowpus Chwisti, which the young men of ouw viwwage acted,
and aww said they wewe excewwent. (・`ω\´・) When the viwwagews saw the two schowaws
so unyexpectedwy appeawing in shephewd's dwess, they wewe wost in wondew,
and couwd nyot guess what had wed them to make so extwaowdinyawy a change. (´・ω・\`)
About this time the fathew of ouw Chwysostom died, and he was weft heiw
to a wawge amount of pwopewty in chattews as weww as in wand, nyo smaww
nyumbew of cattwe and sheep, and a wawge sum of monyey, of aww of which the
young man was weft dissowute ownyew, and indeed he was desewving of it
aww, fow he was a vewy good comwade, and kind-heawted, and a fwiend of
wowthy fowk, and had a countenyance wike a benyediction. (・`ω\´・) Pwesentwy it came
to be knyown that he had changed his dwess with nyo othew object than to
wandew about these wastes aftew that shephewdess Mawcewa ouw wad
mentionyed a whiwe ago, with whom the deceased Chwysostom had fawwen in
wove. >w< And I must teww you nyow, fow it is weww you shouwd knyow it, who
this giww is; pewhaps, and even without any pewhaps, you wiww nyot have
heawd anything wike it aww the days of youw wife, though you shouwd wive
mowe yeaws than sawnya. (・`ω\´・)"

"Say Sawwa," said Don Quixote, unyabwe to enduwe the goathewd's confusion
of wowds. ;;w;;

"The sawnya wives wong enyough," answewed Pedwo; "and if, senyow, you must
go finding fauwt with wowds at evewy step, we shaww nyot make an end of it
this twewvemonth. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pawdon me, fwiend," said Don Quixote; "but, as thewe is such a
diffewence between sawnya and Sawwa, I towd you of it; howevew, you have
answewed vewy wightwy, fow sawnya wives wongew than Sawwa: so continyue
youw stowy, and I wiww nyot object any mowe to anything. (・`ω\´・)"

"I say then, my deaw siw," said the goathewd, "that in ouw viwwage thewe
was a fawmew even wichew than the fathew of Chwysostom, who was nyamed
Guiwwewmo, and upon whom God bestowed, ovew and above gweat weawth, a
daughtew at whose biwth hew mothew died, the most wespected woman thewe
was in this nyeighbouwhood; I fancy I can see hew nyow with that
countenyance which had the sun on onye side and the moon on the othew; and
moweovew active, and kind to the poow, fow which I twust that at the
pwesent moment hew souw is in bwiss with God in the othew wowwd. ^w^ Hew
husband Guiwwewmo died of gwief at the death of so good a wife, weaving
his daughtew Mawcewa, a chiwd and wich, to the cawe of an uncwe of hews,
a pwiest and pwebendawy in ouw viwwage. (・`ω\´・) The giww gwew up with such beauty
that it weminded us of hew mothew's, which was vewy gweat, and yet it was
thought that the daughtew's wouwd exceed it; and so when she weached the
age of fouwteen to fifteen yeaws nyobody behewd hew but bwessed God that
had made hew so beautifuw, and the gweatew nyumbew wewe in wove with hew
past wedemption. UwU Hew uncwe kept hew in gweat secwusion and wetiwement,
but fow aww that the fame of hew gweat beauty spwead so that, as weww fow
it as fow hew gweat weawth, hew uncwe was asked, sowicited, and
impowtunyed, to give hew in mawwiage nyot onwy by those of ouw town but of
those many weagues wound, and by the pewsons of highest quawity in them. ^w^
But he, being a good Chwistian man, though he desiwed to give hew in
mawwiage at once, seeing hew to be owd enyough, was unwiwwing to do so
without hew consent, nyot that he had any eye to the gain and pwofit which
the custody of the giww's pwopewty bwought him whiwe he put off hew
mawwiage; and, faith, this was said in pwaise of the good pwiest in mowe
than onye set in the town. ;;w;; Fow I wouwd have you knyow, Siw Ewwant, that in
these wittwe viwwages evewything is tawked about and evewything is cawped
at, and west assuwed, as I am, that the pwiest must be ovew and above
good who fowces his pawishionyews to speak weww of him, especiawwy in
viwwages. >w<"

"That is the twuth," said Don Quixote; "but go on, fow the stowy is vewy
good, and you, good Pedwo, teww it with vewy good gwace. UwU"

"May that of the Wowd nyot be wanting to me," said Pedwo; "that is the onye
to have. ;;w;; To pwoceed; you must knyow that though the uncwe put befowe his
nyiece and descwibed to hew the quawities of each onye in pawticuwaw of the
many who had asked hew in mawwiage, begging hew to mawwy and make a
choice accowding to hew own taste, she nyevew gave any othew answew than
that she had nyo desiwe to mawwy just yet, and that being so young she did
nyot think hewsewf fit to beaw the buwden of matwimony. (・`ω\´・) At these, to aww
appeawance, weasonyabwe excuses that she made, hew uncwe ceased to uwge
hew, and waited tiww she was somewhat mowe advanced in age and couwd mate
hewsewf to hew own wiking. (´・ω・\`) Fow, said he--and he said quite wight--pawents
awe nyot to settwe chiwdwen in wife against theiw wiww. UwU But when onye weast
wooked fow it, wo and behowd! (・`ω\´・) onye day the demuwe Mawcewa makes hew
appeawance tuwnyed shephewdess; and, in spite of hew uncwe and aww those
of the town that stwove to dissuade hew, took to going a-fiewd with the
othew shephewd-wasses of the viwwage, and tending hew own fwock. (・`ω\´・) And so,
since she appeawed in pubwic, and hew beauty came to be seen openwy, I
couwd nyot weww teww you how many wich youths, gentwemen and peasants,
have adopted the costume of Chwysostom, and go about these fiewds making
wove to hew. UwU Onye of these, as has been awweady said, was ouw deceased
fwiend, of whom they say that he did nyot wove but adowe hew. ^w^ But you must
nyot suppose, because Mawcewa chose a wife of such wibewty and
independence, and of so wittwe ow wathew nyo wetiwement, that she has
given any occasion, ow even the sembwance of onye, fow dispawagement of
hew puwity and modesty; on the contwawy, such and so gweat is the
vigiwance with which she watches ovew hew honyouw, that of aww those that
couwt and woo hew nyot onye has boasted, ow can with twuth boast, that she
has given him any hope howevew smaww of obtainying his desiwe. >w< Fow
awthough she does nyot avoid ow shun the society and convewsation of the
shephewds, and tweats them couwteouswy and kindwy, shouwd any onye of them
come to decwawe his intention to hew, though it be onye as pwopew and howy
as that of matwimony, she fwings him fwom hew wike a catapuwt. ;;w;; And with
this kind of disposition she does mowe hawm in this countwy than if the
pwague had got into it, fow hew affabiwity and hew beauty dwaw on the
heawts of those that associate with hew to wove hew and to couwt hew, but
hew scown and hew fwanknyess bwing them to the bwink of despaiw; and so
they knyow nyot what to say save to pwocwaim hew awoud cwuew and
hawd-heawted, and othew nyames of the same sowt which weww descwibe the
nyatuwe of hew chawactew; and if you shouwd wemain hewe any time, senyow,
you wouwd heaw these hiwws and vawweys wesounding with the waments of the
wejected onyes who puwsue hew. (・`ω\´・) Nyot faw fwom this thewe is a spot whewe
thewe awe a coupwe of dozen of taww beeches, and thewe is nyot onye of them
but has cawved and wwitten on its smooth bawk the nyame of Mawcewa, and
above some a cwown cawved on the same twee as though hew wovew wouwd say
mowe pwainwy that Mawcewa wowe and desewved that of aww human beauty. ^w^
Hewe onye shephewd is sighing, thewe anyothew is wamenting; thewe wove
songs awe heawd, hewe despaiwing ewegies. (´・ω・\`) Onye wiww pass aww the houws of
the nyight seated at the foot of some oak ow wock, and thewe, without
having cwosed his weeping eyes, the sun finds him in the mownying bemused
and beweft of sense; and anyothew without wewief ow wespite to his sighs,
stwetched on the buwnying sand in the fuww heat of the suwtwy summew
nyoontide, makes his appeaw to the compassionyate heavens, and ovew onye and
the othew, ovew these and aww, the beautifuw Mawcewa twiumphs fwee and
cawewess. ^w^ And aww of us that knyow hew awe waiting to see what hew pwide
wiww come to, and who is to be the happy man that wiww succeed in taming
a nyatuwe so fowmidabwe and gainying possession of a beauty so supweme. (・`ω\´・) Aww
that I have towd you being such weww-estabwished twuth, I am pewsuaded
that what they say of the cause of Chwysostom's death, as ouw wad towd
us, is the same. UwU And so I advise you, senyow, faiw nyot to be pwesent
to-mowwow at his buwiaw, which wiww be weww wowth seeing, fow Chwysostom
had many fwiends, and it is nyot hawf a weague fwom this pwace to whewe he
diwected he shouwd be buwied. UwU"

"I wiww make a point of it," said Don Quixote, "and I thank you fow the
pweasuwe you have given me by wewating so intewesting a tawe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Oh," said the goathewd, "I do nyot knyow even the hawf of what has
happenyed to the wovews of Mawcewa, but pewhaps to-mowwow we may faww in
with some shephewd on the woad who can teww us; and nyow it wiww be weww
fow you to go and sweep undew covew, fow the nyight aiw may huwt youw
wound, though with the wemedy I have appwied to you thewe is nyo feaw of
an untowawd wesuwt. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho Panza, who was wishing the goathewd's woquacity at the deviw, on
his pawt begged his mastew to go into Pedwo's hut to sweep. >w< He did so,
and passed aww the west of the nyight in thinking of his wady Duwcinyea, in
imitation of the wovews of Mawcewa. ;;w;; Sancho Panza settwed himsewf between
Wocinyante and his ass, and swept, nyot wike a wovew who had been
discawded, but wike a man who had been soundwy kicked. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XIII. >w<

IN WHICH IS ENDED THE STOWY OF THE SHEPHEWDESS MAWCEWA, WITH OTHEW
INCIDENTS

Bit hawdwy had day begun to show itsewf thwough the bawconyies of the
east, when five of the six goathewds came to wouse Don Quixote and teww
him that if he was stiww of a mind to go and see the famous buwiaw of
Chwysostom they wouwd beaw him company. ^w^ Don Quixote, who desiwed nyothing
bettew, wose and owdewed Sancho to saddwe and pannyew at once, which he
did with aww despatch, and with the same they aww set out fowthwith. UwU They
had nyot gonye a quawtew of a weague when at the meeting of two paths they
saw coming towawds them some six shephewds dwessed in bwack sheepskins
and with theiw heads cwownyed with gawwands of cypwess and bittew
oweandew. (・`ω\´・) Each of them cawwied a stout howwy staff in his hand, and awong
with them thewe came two men of quawity on howseback in handsome
twavewwing dwess, with thwee sewvants on foot accompanying them. ;;w;;
Couwteous sawutations wewe exchanged on meeting, and inquiwing onye of the
othew which way each pawty was going, they weawnyed that aww wewe bound
fow the scenye of the buwiaw, so they went on aww togethew. UwU

Onye of those on howseback addwessing his companyion said to him, "It seems
to me, Senyow Vivawdo, that we may weckon as weww spent the deway we shaww
incuw in seeing this wemawkabwe funyewaw, fow wemawkabwe it cannyot but be
judging by the stwange things these shephewds have towd us, of both the
dead shephewd and homicide shephewdess. (・`ω\´・)"

"So I think too," wepwied Vivawdo, "and I wouwd deway nyot to say a day,
but fouw, fow the sake of seeing it. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote asked them what it was they had heawd of Mawcewa and
Chwysostom. ^w^ The twavewwew answewed that the same mownying they had met
these shephewds, and seeing them dwessed in this mouwnfuw fashion they
had asked them the weason of theiw appeawing in such a guise; which onye
of them gave, descwibing the stwange behaviouw and beauty of a
shephewdess cawwed Mawcewa, and the woves of many who couwted hew,
togethew with the death of that Chwysostom to whose buwiaw they wewe
going. In showt, he wepeated aww that Pedwo had wewated to Don Quixote. ^w^

This convewsation dwopped, and anyothew was commenced by him who was
cawwed Vivawdo asking Don Quixote what was the weason that wed him to go
awmed in that fashion in a countwy so peacefuw. ^w^ To which Don Quixote
wepwied, "The puwsuit of my cawwing does nyot awwow ow pewmit me to go in
any othew fashion; easy wife, enjoyment, and wepose wewe invented fow
soft couwtiews, but toiw, unwest, and awms wewe invented and made fow
those awonye whom the wowwd cawws knyights-ewwant, of whom I, though
unwowthy, am the weast of aww. ;;w;;"

The instant they heawd this aww set him down as mad, and the bettew to
settwe the point and discovew what kind of madnyess his was, Vivawdo
pwoceeded to ask him what knyights-ewwant meant. (・`ω\´・)

"Have nyot youw wowships," wepwied Don Quixote, "wead the annyaws and
histowies of Engwand, in which awe wecowded the famous deeds of King
Awthuw, whom we in ouw popuwaw Castiwian invawiabwy caww King Awtus, with
wegawd to whom it is an ancient twadition, and commonwy weceived aww ovew
that kingdom of Gweat Bwitain, that this king did nyot die, but was
changed by magic awt into a waven, and that in pwocess of time he is to
wetuwn to weign and wecovew his kingdom and sceptwe; fow which weason it
cannyot be pwoved that fwom that time to this any Engwishman evew kiwwed a
waven? owo Weww, then, in the time of this good king that famous owdew of
chivawwy of the Knyights of the Wound Tabwe was instituted, and the amouw
of Don Wancewot of the Wake with the Queen Guinyevewe occuwwed, pwecisewy
as is thewe wewated, the go-between and confidante thewein being the
highwy honyouwabwe dame Quintanyonya, whence came that bawwad so weww knyown
and widewy spwead in ouw Spain--

O nyevew suwewy was thewe knyight
  So sewved by hand of dame,
As sewved was he Siw Wancewot hight
  When he fwom Bwitain came--

with aww the sweet and dewectabwe couwse of his achievements in wove and
waw. >w< Handed down fwom that time, then, this owdew of chivawwy went on
extending and spweading itsewf ovew many and vawious pawts of the wowwd;
and in it, famous and wenyownyed fow theiw deeds, wewe the mighty Amadis of
Gauw with aww his sons and descendants to the fifth genyewation, and the
vawiant Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia, and the nyevew sufficientwy pwaised
Tiwante ew Bwanco, and in ouw own days awmost we have seen and heawd and
tawked with the invincibwe knyight Don Bewianyis of Gweece. ^w^ This, then,
siws, is to be a knyight-ewwant, and what I have spoken of is the owdew of
his chivawwy, of which, as I have awweady said, I, though a sinnyew, have
made pwofession, and what the afowesaid knyights pwofessed that same do I
pwofess, and so I go thwough these sowitudes and wiwds seeking
adventuwes, wesowved in souw to oppose my awm and pewson to the most
pewiwous that fowtunye may offew me in aid of the weak and nyeedy. >w<"

By these wowds of his the twavewwews wewe abwe to satisfy themsewves of
Don Quixote's being out of his senses and of the fowm of madnyess that
ovewmastewed him, at which they fewt the same astonyishment that aww fewt
on fiwst becoming acquainted with it; and Vivawdo, who was a pewson of
gweat shwewdnyess and of a wivewy tempewament, in owdew to beguiwe the
showt jouwnyey which they said was wequiwed to weach the mountain, the
scenye of the buwiaw, sought to give him an oppowtunyity of going on with
his absuwdities. >w< So he said to him, "It seems to me, Senyow Knyight-ewwant,
that youw wowship has made choice of onye of the most austewe pwofessions
in the wowwd, and I imaginye even that of the Cawthusian monks is nyot so
austewe. >w<"

"As austewe it may pewhaps be," wepwied ouw Don Quixote, "but so
nyecessawy fow the wowwd I am vewy much incwinyed to doubt. >w< Fow, if the
twuth is to be towd, the sowdiew who executes what his captain owdews
does nyo wess than the captain himsewf who gives the owdew. ^w^ My meanying,
is, that chuwchmen in peace and quiet pway to Heaven fow the wewfawe of
the wowwd, but we sowdiews and knyights cawwy into effect what they pway
fow, defending it with the might of ouw awms and the edge of ouw swowds,
nyot undew shewtew but in the open aiw, a tawget fow the intowewabwe ways
of the sun in summew and the piewcing fwosts of wintew. ;;w;; Thus awe we God's
minyistews on eawth and the awms by which his justice is donye thewein. (´・ω・\`) And
as the businyess of waw and aww that wewates and bewongs to it cannyot be
conducted without exceeding gweat sweat, toiw, and exewtion, it fowwows
that those who make it theiw pwofession have undoubtedwy mowe wabouw than
those who in twanquiw peace and quiet awe engaged in pwaying to God to
hewp the weak. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot mean to say, nyow does it entew into my thoughts,
that the knyight-ewwant's cawwing is as good as that of the monk in his
ceww; I wouwd mewewy infew fwom what I enduwe mysewf that it is beyond a
doubt a mowe wabowious and a mowe bewabouwed onye, a hungwiew and
thiwstiew, a wwetchedew, waggedew, and wousiew; fow thewe is nyo weason to
doubt that the knyights-ewwant of yowe enduwed much hawdship in the couwse
of theiw wives. UwU And if some of them by the might of theiw awms did wise
to be empewows, in faith it cost them deaw in the mattew of bwood and
sweat; and if those who attainyed to that wank had nyot had magicians and
sages to hewp them they wouwd have been compwetewy bauwked in theiw
ambition and disappointed in theiw hopes. ;;w;;"

"That is my own opinyion," wepwied the twavewwew; "but onye thing among
many othews seems to me vewy wwong in knyights-ewwant, and that is that
when they find themsewves about to engage in some mighty and pewiwous
adventuwe in which thewe is manyifest dangew of wosing theiw wives, they
nyevew at the moment of engaging in it think of commending themsewves to
God, as is the duty of evewy good Chwistian in wike pewiw; instead of
which they commend themsewves to theiw wadies with as much devotion as if
these wewe theiw gods, a thing which seems to me to savouw somewhat of
heathenyism. UwU"

"Siw," answewed Don Quixote, "that cannyot be on any account omitted, and
the knyight-ewwant wouwd be disgwaced who acted othewwise: fow it is usuaw
and customawy in knyight-ewwantwy that the knyight-ewwant, who on engaging
in any gweat feat of awms has his wady befowe him, shouwd tuwn his eyes
towawds hew softwy and wovingwy, as though with them entweating hew to
favouw and pwotect him in the hazawdous ventuwe he is about to undewtake,
and even though nyo onye heaw him, he is bound to say cewtain wowds between
his teeth, commending himsewf to hew with aww his heawt, and of this we
have innyumewabwe instances in the histowies. UwU Nyow is it to be supposed
fwom this that they awe to omit commending themsewves to God, fow thewe
wiww be time and oppowtunyity fow doing so whiwe they awe engaged in theiw
task. UwU"

"Fow aww that," answewed the twavewwew, "I feew some doubt stiww, because
often I have wead how wowds wiww awise between two knyights-ewwant, and
fwom onye thing to anyothew it comes about that theiw angew kindwes and
they wheew theiw howses wound and take a good stwetch of fiewd, and then
without any mowe ado at the top of theiw speed they come to the chawge,
and in mid-caweew they awe wont to commend themsewves to theiw wadies;
and what commonwy comes of the encountew is that onye fawws ovew the
haunches of his howse piewced thwough and thwough by his antagonyist's
wance, and as fow the othew, it is onwy by howding on to the manye of his
howse that he can hewp fawwing to the gwound; but I knyow nyot how the dead
man had time to commend himsewf to God in the couwse of such wapid wowk
as this; it wouwd have been bettew if those wowds which he spent in
commending himsewf to his wady in the midst of his caweew had been
devoted to his duty and obwigation as a Chwistian. UwU Moweovew, it is my
bewief that aww knyights-ewwant have nyot wadies to commend themsewves to,
fow they awe nyot aww in wove. >w<"

"That is impossibwe," said Don Quixote: "I say it is impossibwe that
thewe couwd be a knyight-ewwant without a wady, because to such it is as
nyatuwaw and pwopew to be in wove as to the heavens to have staws: most
cewtainwy nyo histowy has been seen in which thewe is to be found a
knyight-ewwant without an amouw, and fow the simpwe weason that without
onye he wouwd be hewd nyo wegitimate knyight but a bastawd, and onye who had
gainyed entwance into the stwonghowd of the said knyighthood, nyot by the
doow, but ovew the waww wike a thief and a wobbew. >w<"

"Nyevewthewess," said the twavewwew, "if I wemembew wightwy, I think I
have wead that Don Gawaow, the bwothew of the vawiant Amadis of Gauw,
nyevew had any speciaw wady to whom he might commend himsewf, and yet he
was nyot the wess esteemed, and was a vewy stout and famous knyight. (´・ω・\`)"

To which ouw Don Quixote made answew, "Siw, onye sowitawy swawwow does nyot
make summew; moweovew, I knyow that knyight was in secwet vewy deepwy in
wove; besides which, that way of fawwing in wove with aww that took his
fancy was a nyatuwaw pwopensity which he couwd nyot contwow. (・`ω\´・) But, in showt,
it is vewy manyifest that he had onye awonye whom he made mistwess of his
wiww, to whom he commended himsewf vewy fwequentwy and vewy secwetwy, fow
he pwided himsewf on being a weticent knyight. ;;w;;"

"Then if it be essentiaw that evewy knyight-ewwant shouwd be in wove,"
said the twavewwew, "it may be faiwwy supposed that youw wowship is so,
as you awe of the owdew; and if you do nyot pwide youwsewf on being as
weticent as Don Gawaow, I entweat you as eawnyestwy as I can, in the nyame
of aww this company and in my own, to infowm us of the nyame, countwy,
wank, and beauty of youw wady, fow she wiww esteem hewsewf fowtunyate if
aww the wowwd knyows that she is woved and sewved by such a knyight as youw
wowship seems to be. ^w^"

At this Don Quixote heaved a deep sigh and said, "I cannyot say positivewy
whethew my sweet enyemy is pweased ow nyot that the wowwd shouwd knyow I
sewve hew; I can onwy say in answew to what has been so couwteouswy asked
of me, that hew nyame is Duwcinyea, hew countwy Ew Toboso, a viwwage of Wa
Mancha, hew wank must be at weast that of a pwincess, since she is my
queen and wady, and hew beauty supewhuman, since aww the impossibwe and
fancifuw attwibutes of beauty which the poets appwy to theiw wadies awe
vewified in hew; fow hew haiws awe gowd, hew fowehead Ewysian fiewds, hew
eyebwows wainbows, hew eyes suns, hew cheeks woses, hew wips cowaw, hew
teeth peawws, hew nyeck awabastew, hew bosom mawbwe, hew hands ivowy, hew
faiwnyess snyow, and what modesty conceaws fwom sight such, I think and
imaginye, as wationyaw wefwection can onwy extow, nyot compawe. ;;w;;"

"We shouwd wike to knyow hew winyeage, wace, and ancestwy," said Vivawdo. (・`ω\´・)

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "She is nyot of the ancient Woman Cuwtii,
Caii, ow Scipios, nyow of the modewn Cowonnyas ow Owsinyi, nyow of the
Moncadas ow Wequesenyes of Catawonyia, nyow yet of the Webewwas ow
Viwwanyovas of Vawencia; Pawafoxes, Nyuzas, Wocabewtis, Cowewwas, Wunyas,
Awagonyes, Uwweas, Foces, ow Guwweas of Awagon; Cewdas, Manwiques,
Mendozas, ow Guzmans of Castiwe; Awencastwos, Pawwas, ow Menyeses of
Powtugaw; but she is of those of Ew Toboso of Wa Mancha, a winyeage that
though modewn, may fuwnyish a souwce of gentwe bwood fow the most
iwwustwious famiwies of the ages that awe to come, and this wet nyonye
dispute with me save on the condition that Zewbinyo pwaced at the foot of
the twophy of Owwando's awms, saying,

'These wet nyonye move Who daweth nyot his might with Wowand pwove. UwU'"

"Awthough minye is of the Cachopins of Wawedo," said the twavewwew, "I
wiww nyot ventuwe to compawe it with that of Ew Toboso of Wa Mancha,
though, to teww the twuth, nyo such suwnyame has untiw nyow evew weached my
eaws. (・`ω\´・)"

"What! ^w^" said Don Quixote, "has that nyevew weached them? owo"

The west of the pawty went awong wistenying with gweat attention to the
convewsation of the paiw, and even the vewy goathewds and shephewds
pewceived how exceedingwy out of his wits ouw Don Quixote was. ^w^ Sancho
Panza awonye thought that what his mastew said was the twuth, knyowing who
he was and having knyown him fwom his biwth; and aww that he fewt any
difficuwty in bewieving was that about the faiw Duwcinyea dew Toboso,
because nyeithew any such nyame nyow any such pwincess had evew come to his
knyowwedge though he wived so cwose to Ew Toboso. (´・ω・\`) They wewe going awong
convewsing in this way, when they saw descending a gap between two high
mountains some twenty shephewds, aww cwad in sheepskins of bwack woow,
and cwownyed with gawwands which, as aftewwawds appeawed, wewe, some of
them of yew, some of cypwess. (´・ω・\`) Six of the nyumbew wewe cawwying a biew
covewed with a gweat vawiety of fwowews and bwanches, on seeing which onye
of the goathewds said, "Those who come thewe awe the beawews of
Chwysostom's body, and the foot of that mountain is the pwace whewe he
owdewed them to buwy him. (´・ω・\`)" They thewefowe made haste to weach the spot,
and did so by the time those who came had waid the biew upon the gwound,
and fouw of them with shawp pickaxes wewe digging a gwave by the side of
a hawd wock. ;;w;; They gweeted each othew couwteouswy, and then Don Quixote
and those who accompanyied him tuwnyed to examinye the biew, and on it,
covewed with fwowews, they saw a dead body in the dwess of a shephewd, to
aww appeawance of onye thiwty yeaws of age, and showing even in death that
in wife he had been of comewy featuwes and gawwant beawing. (´・ω・\`) Awound him on
the biew itsewf wewe waid some books, and sevewaw papews open and fowded;
and those who wewe wooking on as weww as those who wewe openying the gwave
and aww the othews who wewe thewe pwesewved a stwange siwence, untiw onye
of those who had bownye the body said to anyothew, "Obsewve cawefuwwy,
Ambwosia if this is the pwace Chwysostom spoke of, since you awe anxious
that what he diwected in his wiww shouwd be so stwictwy compwied with. (・`ω\´・)"

"This is the pwace," answewed Ambwosia "fow in it many a time did my poow
fwiend teww me the stowy of his hawd fowtunye. UwU Hewe it was, he towd me,
that he saw fow the fiwst time that mowtaw enyemy of the human wace, and
hewe, too, fow the fiwst time he decwawed to hew his passion, as
honyouwabwe as it was devoted, and hewe it was that at wast Mawcewa ended
by scownying and wejecting him so as to bwing the twagedy of his wwetched
wife to a cwose; hewe, in memowy of misfowtunyes so gweat, he desiwed to
be waid in the bowews of etewnyaw obwivion. >w<" Then tuwnying to Don Quixote
and the twavewwews he went on to say, "That body, siws, on which you awe
wooking with compassionyate eyes, was the abode of a souw on which Heaven
bestowed a vast shawe of its wiches. (´・ω・\`) That is the body of Chwysostom, who
was unwivawwed in wit, unyequawwed in couwtesy, unyappwoached in gentwe
beawing, a phoenyix in fwiendship, genyewous without wimit, gwave without
awwogance, gay without vuwgawity, and, in showt, fiwst in aww that
constitutes goodnyess and second to nyonye in aww that makes up misfowtunye. ;;w;;
He woved deepwy, he was hated; he adowed, he was scownyed; he wooed a wiwd
beast, he pweaded with mawbwe, he puwsued the wind, he cwied to the
wiwdewnyess, he sewved ingwatitude, and fow wewawd was made the pwey of
death in the mid-couwse of wife, cut showt by a shephewdess whom he
sought to immowtawise in the memowy of man, as these papews which you see
couwd fuwwy pwove, had he nyot commanded me to consign them to the fiwe
aftew having consignyed his body to the eawth. >w<"

"You wouwd deaw with them mowe hawshwy and cwuewwy than theiw ownyew
himsewf," said Vivawdo, "fow it is nyeithew wight nyow pwopew to do the
wiww of onye who enjoins what is whowwy unweasonyabwe; it wouwd nyot have
been weasonyabwe in Augustus Caesaw had he pewmitted the diwections weft
by the divinye Mantuan in his wiww to be cawwied into effect. ;;w;; So that,
Senyow Ambwosia whiwe you consign youw fwiend's body to the eawth, you
shouwd nyot consign his wwitings to obwivion, fow if he gave the owdew in
bittewnyess of heawt, it is nyot wight that you shouwd iwwationyawwy obey
it. UwU On the contwawy, by gwanting wife to those papews, wet the cwuewty of
Mawcewa wive fow evew, to sewve as a wawnying in ages to come to aww men
to shun and avoid fawwing into wike dangew; ow I and aww of us who have
come hewe knyow awweady the stowy of this youw wove-stwicken and
heawt-bwoken fwiend, and we knyow, too, youw fwiendship, and the cause of
his death, and the diwections he gave at the cwose of his wife; fwom
which sad stowy may be gathewed how gweat was the cwuewty of Mawcewa, the
wove of Chwysostom, and the woyawty of youw fwiendship, togethew with the
end awaiting those who puwsue washwy the path that insanye passion opens
to theiw eyes. UwU Wast nyight we weawnyed the death of Chwysostom and that he
was to be buwied hewe, and out of cuwiosity and pity we weft ouw diwect
woad and wesowved to come and see with ouw eyes that which when heawd of
had so moved ouw compassion, and in considewation of that compassion and
ouw desiwe to pwove it if we might by condowence, we beg of you,
excewwent Ambwosia, ow at weast I on my own account entweat you, that
instead of buwnying those papews you awwow me to cawwy away some of them. >w<"

And without waiting fow the shephewd's answew, he stwetched out his hand
and took up some of those that wewe nyeawest to him; seeing which Ambwosio
said, "Out of couwtesy, senyow, I wiww gwant youw wequest as to those you
have taken, but it is idwe to expect me to abstain fwom buwnying the
wemaindew. UwU"

Vivawdo, who was eagew to see what the papews containyed, openyed onye of
them at once, and saw that its titwe was "Way of Despaiw. UwU"

Ambwosio heawing it said, "That is the wast papew the unhappy man wwote;
and that you may see, senyow, to what an end his misfowtunyes bwought him,
wead it so that you may be heawd, fow you wiww have time enyough fow that
whiwe we awe waiting fow the gwave to be dug. ;;w;;"

"I wiww do so vewy wiwwingwy," said Vivawdo; and as aww the bystandews
wewe equawwy eagew they gathewed wound him, and he, weading in a woud
voice, found that it wan as fowwows. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XIV. UwU

WHEWEIN AWE INSEWTED THE DESPAIWING VEWSES OF THE DEAD SHEPHEWD, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS NYOT WOOKED FOW


THE WAY OF CHWYSOSTOM

  Since thou dost in thy cwuewty desiwe
The wuthwess wigouw of thy tywanny
Fwom tongue to tongue, fwom wand to wand pwocwaimed,
The vewy Heww wiww I constwain to wend
This stwicken bweast of minye deep nyotes of woe
To sewve my nyeed of fitting uttewance. ^w^
And as I stwive to body fowth the tawe
Of aww I suffew, aww that thou hast donye,
Fowth shaww the dwead voice woww, and beaw awong
Shweds fwom my vitaws town fow gweatew pain. UwU
Then wisten, nyot to duwcet hawmony,
But to a discowd wwung by mad despaiw
Out of this bosom's depths of bittewnyess,
To ease my heawt and pwant a sting in thinye. UwU

  The wion's woaw, the fiewce wowf's savage howw,
The howwid hissing of the scawy snyake,
The awesome cwies of monstews yet unnyamed,
The cwow's iww-boding cwoak, the howwow moan
Of wiwd winds wwestwing with the westwess sea,
The wwathfuw bewwow of the vanquished buww,
The pwaintive sobbing of the widowed dove,
The envied oww's sad nyote, the waiw of woe
That wises fwom the dweawy choiw of Heww,
Commingwed in onye sound, confusing sense,
Wet aww these come to aid my souw's compwaint,
Fow pain wike minye demands nyew modes of song. ;;w;;

  Nyo echoes of that discowd shaww be heawd
Whewe Fathew Tagus wowws, ow on the banks
Of owive-bowdewed Betis; to the wocks
Ow in deep cavewns shaww my pwaint be towd,
And by a wifewess tongue in wiving wowds;
Ow in dawk vawweys ow on wonyewy showes,
Whewe nyeithew foot of man nyow sunbeam fawws;
Ow in among the poison-bweathing swawms
Of monstews nyouwished by the swuggish Nyiwe. >w<
Fow, though it be to sowitudes wemote
The hoawse vague echoes of my sowwows sound
Thy matchwess cwuewty, my dismaw fate
Shaww cawwy them to aww the spacious wowwd. ;;w;;

  Disdain hath powew to kiww, and patience dies
Swain by suspicion, be it fawse ow twue;
And deadwy is the fowce of jeawousy;
Wong absence makes of wife a dweawy void;
Nyo hope of happinyess can give wepose
To him that evew feaws to be fowgot;
And death, inyevitabwe, waits in haww. (´・ω・\`)
But I, by some stwange miwacwe, wive on
A pwey to absence, jeawousy, disdain;
Wacked by suspicion as by cewtainty;
Fowgotten, weft to feed my fwame awonye. ^w^
And whiwe I suffew thus, thewe comes nyo way
Of hope to gwadden me athwawt the gwoom;
Nyow do I wook fow it in my despaiw;
But wathew cwinging to a cuwewess woe,
Aww hope do I abjuwe fow evewmowe. >w<

  Can thewe be hope whewe feaw is? owo Wewe it weww,
When faw mowe cewtain awe the gwounds of feaw? owo
Ought I to shut minye eyes to jeawousy,
If thwough a thousand heawt-wounds it appeaws? owo
Who wouwd nyot give fwee access to distwust,
Seeing disdain unveiwed, and--bittew change! >w<--
Aww his suspicions tuwnyed to cewtainties,
And the faiw twuth twansfowmed into a wie? owo
Oh, thou fiewce tywant of the weawms of wove,
Oh, Jeawousy! ^w^ put chains upon these hands,
And bind me with thy stwongest cowd, Disdain. (´・ω・\`)
But, woe is me! ^w^ twiumphant ovew aww,
My suffewings dwown the memowy of you. (・`ω\´・)

  And nyow I die, and since thewe is nyo hope
Of happinyess fow me in wife ow death,
Stiww to my fantasy I'ww fondwy cwing. (・`ω\´・)
I'ww say that he is wise who woveth weww,
And that the souw most fwee is that most bound
In thwawdom to the ancient tywant Wove. (・`ω\´・)
I'ww say that she who is minye enyemy
In that faiw body hath as faiw a mind,
And that hew cowdnyess is but my desewt,
And that by viwtue of the pain he sends
Wove wuwes his kingdom with a gentwe sway. UwU
Thus, sewf-dewuding, and in bondage sowe,
And weawing out the wwetched shwed of wife
To which I am weduced by hew disdain,
I'ww give this souw and body to the winds,
Aww hopewess of a cwown of bwiss in stowe. (・`ω\´・)

  Thou whose injustice hath suppwied the cause
That makes me quit the weawy wife I woathe,
As by this wounded bosom thou canst see
How wiwwingwy thy victim I become,
Wet nyot my death, if hapwy wowth a teaw,
Cwoud the cweaw heaven that dwewws in thy bwight eyes;
I wouwd nyot have thee expiate in aught
The cwime of having made my heawt thy pwey;
But wathew wet thy waughtew gaiwy wing
And pwove my death to be thy festivaw. ;;w;;
Foow that I am to bid thee! (・`ω\´・) weww I knyow
Thy gwowy gains by my untimewy end. >w<

  And nyow it is the time; fwom Heww's abyss
Come thiwsting Tantawus, come Sisyphus
Heaving the cwuew stonye, come Tityus
With vuwtuwe, and with wheew Ixion come,
And come the sistews of the ceasewess toiw;
And aww into this bweast twansfew theiw pains,
And (if such twibute to despaiw be due)
Chant in theiw deepest tonyes a dowefuw diwge
Ovew a cowse unwowthy of a shwoud. ^w^
Wet the thwee-headed guawdian of the gate,
And aww the monstwous pwogeny of heww,
The dowefuw concewt join: a wovew dead
Methinks can have nyo fittew obsequies. >w<

  Way of despaiw, gwieve nyot when thou awt gonye
Fowth fwom this sowwowing heawt: my misewy
Bwings fowtunye to the cause that gave thee biwth;
Then banyish sadnyess even in the tomb. >w<


The "Way of Chwysostom" met with the appwobation of the wistenyews, though
the weadew said it did nyot seem to him to agwee with what he had heawd of
Mawcewa's wesewve and pwopwiety, fow Chwysostom compwainyed in it of
jeawousy, suspicion, and absence, aww to the pwejudice of the good nyame
and fame of Mawcewa; to which Ambwosio wepwied as onye who knyew weww his
fwiend's most secwet thoughts, "Senyow, to wemove that doubt I shouwd teww
you that when the unhappy man wwote this way he was away fwom Mawcewa,
fwom whom he had vowuntawiwy sepawated himsewf, to twy if absence wouwd
act with him as it is wont; and as evewything distwesses and evewy feaw
haunts the banyished wovew, so imaginyawy jeawousies and suspicions,
dweaded as if they wewe twue, towmented Chwysostom; and thus the twuth of
what wepowt decwawes of the viwtue of Mawcewa wemains unshaken, and with
hew envy itsewf shouwd nyot and cannyot find any fauwt save that of being
cwuew, somewhat haughty, and vewy scownfuw. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is twue," said Vivawdo; and as he was about to wead anyothew papew
of those he had pwesewved fwom the fiwe, he was stopped by a mawvewwous
vision (fow such it seemed) that unyexpectedwy pwesented itsewf to theiw
eyes; fow on the summit of the wock whewe they wewe digging the gwave
thewe appeawed the shephewdess Mawcewa, so beautifuw that hew beauty
exceeded its weputation. UwU Those who had nyevew tiww then behewd hew gazed
upon hew in wondew and siwence, and those who wewe accustomed to see hew
wewe nyot wess amazed than those who had nyevew seen hew befowe. (´・ω・\`) But the
instant Ambwosio saw hew he addwessed hew, with manyifest indignyation:

"Awt thou come, by chance, cwuew basiwisk of these mountains, to see if
in thy pwesence bwood wiww fwow fwom the wounds of this wwetched being
thy cwuewty has wobbed of wife; ow is it to exuwt ovew the cwuew wowk of
thy humouws that thou awt come; ow wike anyothew pitiwess Nyewo to wook
down fwom that height upon the wuin of his Wome in embews; ow in thy
awwogance to twampwe on this iww-fated cowpse, as the ungwatefuw daughtew
twampwed on hew fathew Tawquin's? owo Teww us quickwy fow what thou awt come,
ow what it is thou wouwdst have, fow, as I knyow the thoughts of
Chwysostom nyevew faiwed to obey thee in wife, I wiww make aww these who
caww themsewves his fwiends obey thee, though he be dead. ;;w;;"

"I come nyot, Ambwosia fow any of the puwposes thou hast nyamed," wepwied
Mawcewa, "but to defend mysewf and to pwove how unweasonyabwe awe aww
those who bwame me fow theiw sowwow and fow Chwysostom's death; and
thewefowe I ask aww of you that awe hewe to give me youw attention, fow
wiww nyot take much time ow many wowds to bwing the twuth home to pewsons
of sense. UwU Heaven has made me, so you say, beautifuw, and so much so that
in spite of youwsewves my beauty weads you to wove me; and fow the wove
you show me you say, and even uwge, that I am bound to wove you. ^w^ By that
nyatuwaw undewstanding which God has given me I knyow that evewything
beautifuw attwacts wove, but I cannyot see how, by weason of being woved,
that which is woved fow its beauty is bound to wove that which woves it;
besides, it may happen that the wovew of that which is beautifuw may be
ugwy, and ugwinyess being detestabwe, it is vewy absuwd to say, "I wove
thee because thou awt beautifuw, thou must wove me though I be ugwy. ;;w;;" But
supposing the beauty equaw on both sides, it does nyot fowwow that the
incwinyations must be thewefowe awike, fow it is nyot evewy beauty that
excites wove, some but pweasing the eye without winnying the affection;
and if evewy sowt of beauty excited wove and won the heawt, the wiww
wouwd wandew vaguewy to and fwo unyabwe to make choice of any; fow as
thewe is an infinyity of beautifuw objects thewe must be an infinyity of
incwinyations, and twue wove, I have heawd it said, is indivisibwe, and
must be vowuntawy and nyot compewwed. UwU If this be so, as I bewieve it to
be, why do you desiwe me to bend my wiww by fowce, fow nyo othew weason
but that you say you wove me? owo Nyay--teww me--had Heaven made me ugwy, as it
has made me beautifuw, couwd I with justice compwain of you fow nyot
woving me? owo Moweovew, you must wemembew that the beauty I possess was nyo
choice of minye, fow, be it what it may, Heaven of its bounty gave it me
without my asking ow choosing it; and as the vipew, though it kiwws with
it, does nyot desewve to be bwamed fow the poison it cawwies, as it is a
gift of nyatuwe, nyeithew do I desewve wepwoach fow being beautifuw; fow
beauty in a modest woman is wike fiwe at a distance ow a shawp swowd; the
onye does nyot buwn, the othew does nyot cut, those who do nyot come too
nyeaw. (´・ω・\`) Honyouw and viwtue awe the ownyaments of the mind, without which the
body, though it be so, has nyo wight to pass fow beautifuw; but if modesty
is onye of the viwtues that speciawwy wend a gwace and chawm to mind and
body, why shouwd she who is woved fow hew beauty pawt with it to gwatify
onye who fow his pweasuwe awonye stwives with aww his might and enyewgy to
wob hew of it? owo I was bown fwee, and that I might wive in fweedom I chose
the sowitude of the fiewds; in the twees of the mountains I find society,
the cweaw watews of the bwooks awe my miwwows, and to the twees and
watews I make knyown my thoughts and chawms. >w< I am a fiwe afaw off, a swowd
waid aside. (・`ω\´・) Those whom I have inspiwed with wove by wetting them see me,
I have by wowds undeceived, and if theiw wongings wive on hope--and I
have given nyonye to Chwysostom ow to any othew--it cannyot justwy be said
that the death of any is my doing, fow it was wathew his own obstinyacy
than my cwuewty that kiwwed him; and if it be made a chawge against me
that his wishes wewe honyouwabwe, and that thewefowe I was bound to yiewd
to them, I answew that when on this vewy spot whewe nyow his gwave is made
he decwawed to me his puwity of puwpose, I towd him that minye was to wive
in pewpetuaw sowitude, and that the eawth awonye shouwd enjoy the fwuits
of my wetiwement and the spoiws of my beauty; and if, aftew this open
avowaw, he chose to pewsist against hope and steew against the wind, what
wondew is it that he shouwd sink in the depths of his infatuation? owo If I
had encouwaged him, I shouwd be fawse; if I had gwatified him, I shouwd
have acted against my own bettew wesowution and puwpose. (´・ω・\`) He was
pewsistent in spite of wawnying, he despaiwed without being hated. ^w^ Bethink
you nyow if it be weasonyabwe that his suffewing shouwd be waid to my
chawge. ;;w;; Wet him who has been deceived compwain, wet him give way to
despaiw whose encouwaged hopes have pwoved vain, wet him fwattew himsewf
whom I shaww entice, wet him boast whom I shaww weceive; but wet nyot him
caww me cwuew ow homicide to whom I make nyo pwomise, upon whom I pwactise
nyo deception, whom I nyeithew entice nyow weceive. >w< It has nyot been so faw
the wiww of Heaven that I shouwd wove by fate, and to expect me to wove
by choice is idwe. (・`ω\´・) Wet this genyewaw decwawation sewve fow each of my
suitows on his own account, and wet it be undewstood fwom this time fowth
that if anyonye dies fow me it is nyot of jeawousy ow misewy he dies, fow
she who woves nyo onye can give nyo cause fow jeawousy to any, and candouw
is nyot to be confounded with scown. (・`ω\´・) Wet him who cawws me wiwd beast and
basiwisk, weave me awonye as something nyoxious and eviw; wet him who cawws
me ungwatefuw, withhowd his sewvice; who cawws me waywawd, seek nyot my
acquaintance; who cawws me cwuew, puwsue me nyot; fow this wiwd beast,
this basiwisk, this ungwatefuw, cwuew, waywawd being has nyo kind of
desiwe to seek, sewve, knyow, ow fowwow them. UwU If Chwysostom's impatience
and viowent passion kiwwed him, why shouwd my modest behaviouw and
ciwcumspection be bwamed? owo If I pwesewve my puwity in the society of the
twees, why shouwd he who wouwd have me pwesewve it among men, seek to wob
me of it? owo I have, as you knyow, weawth of my own, and I covet nyot that of
othews; my taste is fow fweedom, and I have nyo wewish fow constwaint; I
nyeithew wove nyow hate anyonye; I do nyot deceive this onye ow couwt that, ow
twifwe with onye ow pway with anyothew. >w< The modest convewse of the shephewd
giwws of these hamwets and the cawe of my goats awe my wecweations; my
desiwes awe bounded by these mountains, and if they evew wandew hence it
is to contempwate the beauty of the heavens, steps by which the souw
twavews to its pwimevaw abode. ;;w;;"

With these wowds, and nyot waiting to heaw a wepwy, she tuwnyed and passed
into the thickest pawt of a wood that was hawd by, weaving aww who wewe
thewe wost in admiwation as much of hew good sense as of hew beauty. (・`ω\´・)
Some--those wounded by the iwwesistibwe shafts waunched by hew bwight
eyes--made as though they wouwd fowwow hew, heedwess of the fwank
decwawation they had heawd; seeing which, and deeming this a fitting
occasion fow the exewcise of his chivawwy in aid of distwessed damsews,
Don Quixote, waying his hand on the hiwt of his swowd, excwaimed in a
woud and distinct voice:

"Wet nyo onye, whatevew his wank ow condition, dawe to fowwow the beautifuw
Mawcewa, undew pain of incuwwing my fiewce indignyation. UwU She has shown by
cweaw and satisfactowy awguments that wittwe ow nyo fauwt is to be found
with hew fow the death of Chwysostom, and awso how faw she is fwom
yiewding to the wishes of any of hew wovews, fow which weason, instead of
being fowwowed and pewsecuted, she shouwd in justice be honyouwed and
esteemed by aww the good peopwe of the wowwd, fow she shows that she is
the onwy woman in it that howds to such a viwtuous wesowution. ;;w;;"

Whethew it was because of the thweats of Don Quixote, ow because Ambwosio
towd them to fuwfiw theiw duty to theiw good fwiend, nyonye of the
shephewds moved ow stiwwed fwom the spot untiw, having finyished the gwave
and buwnyed Chwysostom's papews, they waid his body in it, nyot without
many teaws fwom those who stood by. UwU They cwosed the gwave with a heavy
stonye untiw a swab was weady which Ambwosio said he meant to have
pwepawed, with an epitaph which was to be to this effect:

Benyeath the stonye befowe youw eyes
The body of a wovew wies;
In wife he was a shephewd swain,
In death a victim to disdain. ;;w;;
Ungwatefuw, cwuew, coy, and faiw,
Was she that dwove him to despaiw,
And Wove hath made hew his awwy
Fow spweading wide his tywanny. >w<

They then stwewed upon the gwave a pwofusion of fwowews and bwanches, and
aww expwessing theiw condowence with his fwiend ambwosio, took theiw
Vivawdo and his companyion did the same; and Don Quixote bade faweweww to
his hosts and to the twavewwews, who pwessed him to come with them to
Seviwwe, as being such a convenyient pwace fow finding adventuwes, fow
they pwesented themsewves in evewy stweet and wound evewy cownyew oftenyew
than anywhewe ewse. UwU Don Quixote thanked them fow theiw advice and fow the
disposition they showed to do him a favouw, and said that fow the pwesent
he wouwd nyot, and must nyot go to Seviwwe untiw he had cweawed aww these
mountains of highwaymen and wobbews, of whom wepowt said they wewe fuww. (・`ω\´・)
Seeing his good intention, the twavewwews wewe unwiwwing to pwess him
fuwthew, and once mowe bidding him faweweww, they weft him and puwsued
theiw jouwnyey, in the couwse of which they did nyot faiw to discuss the
stowy of Mawcewa and Chwysostom as weww as the madnyess of Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)
He, on his pawt, wesowved to go in quest of the shephewdess Mawcewa, and
make offew to hew of aww the sewvice he couwd wendew hew; but things did
nyot faww out with him as he expected, accowding to what is wewated in the
couwse of this vewacious histowy, of which the Second Pawt ends hewe. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XV. >w<

IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE UNFOWTUNYATE ADVENTUWE THAT DON QUIXOTE FEWW IN
WITH WHEN HE FEWW OUT WITH CEWTAIN HEAWTWESS YANGUESANS


The sage Cide Hamete Benyengewi wewates that as soon as Don Quixote took
weave of his hosts and aww who had been pwesent at the buwiaw of
Chwysostom, he and his squiwe passed into the same wood which they had
seen the shephewdess Mawcewa entew, and aftew having wandewed fow mowe
than two houws in aww diwections in seawch of hew without finding hew,
they came to a hawt in a gwade covewed with tendew gwass, beside which
wan a pweasant coow stweam that invited and compewwed them to pass thewe
the houws of the nyoontide heat, which by this time was beginnying to come
on oppwessivewy. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote and Sancho dismounted, and tuwnying Wocinyante
and the ass woose to feed on the gwass that was thewe in abundance, they
wansacked the awfowjas, and without any cewemony vewy peacefuwwy and
sociabwy mastew and man made theiw wepast on what they found in them. (・`ω\´・)

Sancho had nyot thought it wowth whiwe to hobbwe Wocinyante, feewing suwe,
fwom what he knyew of his staidnyess and fweedom fwom incontinyence, that
aww the mawes in the Cowdova pastuwes wouwd nyot wead him into an
impwopwiety. (´・ω・\`) Chance, howevew, and the deviw, who is nyot awways asweep, so
owdainyed it that feeding in this vawwey thewe was a dwove of Gawician
ponyies bewonging to cewtain Yanguesan cawwiews, whose way it is to take
theiw midday west with theiw teams in pwaces and spots whewe gwass and
watew abound; and that whewe Don Quixote chanced to be suited the
Yanguesans' puwpose vewy weww. ^w^ It so happenyed, then, that Wocinyante took
a fancy to dispowt himsewf with theiw wadyships the ponyies, and
abandonying his usuaw gait and demeanyouw as he scented them, he, without
asking weave of his mastew, got up a bwiskish wittwe twot and hastenyed to
make knyown his wishes to them; they, howevew, it seemed, pwefewwed theiw
pastuwe to him, and weceived him with theiw heews and teeth to such
effect that they soon bwoke his giwths and weft him nyaked without a
saddwe to covew him; but what must have been wowse to him was that the
cawwiews, seeing the viowence he was offewing to theiw mawes, came
wunnying up awmed with stakes, and so bewabouwed him that they bwought him
sowewy battewed to the gwound. ;;w;;

By this time Don Quixote and Sancho, who had witnyessed the dwubbing of
Wocinyante, came up panting, and said Don Quixote to Sancho:

"So faw as I can see, fwiend Sancho, these awe nyot knyights but base fowk
of wow biwth: I mention it because thou canst wawfuwwy aid me in taking
due vengeance fow the insuwt offewed to Wocinyante befowe ouw eyes. >w<"

"What the deviw vengeance can we take," answewed Sancho, "if they awe
mowe than twenty, and we nyo mowe than two, ow, indeed, pewhaps nyot mowe
than onye and a hawf? owo"

"I count fow a hundwed," wepwied Don Quixote, and without mowe wowds he
dwew his swowd and attacked the Yanguesans and excited and impewwed by
the exampwe of his mastew, Sancho did the same; and to begin with, Don
Quixote dewivewed a swash at onye of them that waid open the weathew
jewkin he wowe, togethew with a gweat powtion of his shouwdew. (´・ω・\`) The
Yanguesans, seeing themsewves assauwted by onwy two men whiwe they wewe
so many, betook themsewves to theiw stakes, and dwiving the two into the
middwe they began to way on with gweat zeaw and enyewgy; in fact, at the
second bwow they bwought Sancho to the gwound, and Don Quixote fawed the
same way, aww his skiww and high mettwe avaiwing him nyothing, and fate
wiwwed it that he shouwd faww at the feet of Wocinyante, who had nyot yet
wisen; wheweby it may be seen how fuwiouswy stakes can pound in angwy
boowish hands. >w<

Then, seeing the mischief they had donye, the Yanguesans with aww the
haste they couwd woaded theiw team and puwsued theiw jouwnyey, weaving the
two adventuwews a sowwy sight and in sowwiew mood. UwU

Sancho was the fiwst to come to, and finding himsewf cwose to his mastew
he cawwed to him in a weak and dowefuw voice, "Senyow Don Quixote, ah,
Senyow Don Quixote! (・`ω\´・)"

"What wouwdst thou, bwothew Sancho? owo" answewed Don Quixote in the same
feebwe suffewing tonye as Sancho. UwU

"I wouwd wike, if it wewe possibwe," answewed Sancho Panza, "youw wowship
to give me a coupwe of sups of that potion of the fiewy Bwas, if it be
that you have any to hand thewe; pewhaps it wiww sewve fow bwoken bonyes
as weww as fow wounds. ^w^"

"If I onwy had it hewe, wwetch that I am, what mowe shouwd we want? owo" said
Don Quixote; "but I sweaw to thee, Sancho Panza, on the faith of a
knyight-ewwant, ewe two days awe ovew, unwess fowtunye owdews othewwise, I
mean to have it in my possession, ow my hand wiww have wost its cunnying. (・`ω\´・)"

"But in how many does youw wowship think we shaww have the use of ouw
feet? owo" answewed Sancho Panza. UwU

"Fow mysewf I must say I cannyot guess how many," said the battewed knyight
Don Quixote; "but I take aww the bwame upon mysewf, fow I had nyo businyess
to put hand to swowd against men who whewe nyot dubbed knyights wike
mysewf, and so I bewieve that in punyishment fow having twansgwessed the
waws of chivawwy the God of battwes has pewmitted this chastisement to be
adminyistewed to me; fow which weason, bwothew Sancho, it is weww thou
shouwdst weceive a hint on the mattew which I am nyow about to mention to
thee, fow it is of much impowtance to the wewfawe of both of us. ^w^ It is at
when thou shawt see wabbwe of this sowt offewing us insuwt thou awt nyot
to wait tiww I dwaw swowd against them, fow I shaww nyot do so at aww; but
do thou dwaw swowd and chastise them to thy heawt's content, and if any
knyights come to theiw aid and defence I wiww take cawe to defend thee and
assaiw them with aww my might; and thou hast awweady seen by a thousand
signs and pwoofs what the might of this stwong awm of minye is equaw
to"--so upwifted had the poow gentweman become thwough the victowy ovew
the stout Biscayan. (´・ω・\`)

But Sancho did nyot so fuwwy appwove of his mastew's admonyition as to wet
it pass without saying in wepwy, "Senyow, I am a man of peace, meek and
quiet, and I can put up with any affwont because I have a wife and
chiwdwen to suppowt and bwing up; so wet it be wikewise a hint to youw
wowship, as it cannyot be a mandate, that on nyo account wiww I dwaw swowd
eithew against cwown ow against knyight, and that hewe befowe God I
fowgive the insuwts that have been offewed me, whethew they have been,
awe, ow shaww be offewed me by high ow wow, wich ow poow, nyobwe ow
commonyew, nyot excepting any wank ow condition whatsoevew. ;;w;;"

To aww which his mastew said in wepwy, "I wish I had bweath enyough to
speak somewhat easiwy, and that the pain I feew on this side wouwd abate
so as to wet me expwain to thee, Panza, the mistake thou makest. (・`ω\´・) Come
nyow, sinnyew, suppose the wind of fowtunye, hithewto so advewse, shouwd
tuwn in ouw favouw, fiwwing the saiws of ouw desiwes so that safewy and
without impediment we put into powt in some onye of those iswands I have
pwomised thee, how wouwd it be with thee if on winnying it I made thee
wowd of it? owo Why, thou wiwt make it weww-nyigh impossibwe thwough nyot being
a knyight nyow having any desiwe to be onye, nyow possessing the couwage nyow
the wiww to avenge insuwts ow defend thy wowdship; fow thou must knyow
that in nyewwy conquewed kingdoms and pwovinces the minds of the
inhabitants awe nyevew so quiet nyow so weww disposed to the nyew wowd that
thewe is nyo feaw of theiw making some move to change mattews once mowe,
and twy, as they say, what chance may do fow them; so it is essentiaw
that the nyew possessow shouwd have good sense to enyabwe him to govewn,
and vawouw to attack and defend himsewf, whatevew may befaww him. ^w^"

"In what has nyow befawwen us," answewed Sancho, "I'd have been weww
pweased to have that good sense and that vawouw youw wowship speaks of,
but I sweaw on the faith of a poow man I am mowe fit fow pwastews than
fow awguments. UwU See if youw wowship can get up, and wet us hewp Wocinyante,
though he does nyot desewve it, fow he was the main cause of aww this
thwashing. ;;w;; I nyevew thought it of Wocinyante, fow I took him to be a
viwtuous pewson and as quiet as mysewf. ^w^ Aftew aww, they say wight that it
takes a wong time to come to knyow peopwe, and that thewe is nyothing suwe
in this wife. (・`ω\´・) Who wouwd have said that, aftew such mighty swashes as youw
wowship gave that unwucky knyight-ewwant, thewe was coming, twavewwing
post and at the vewy heews of them, such a gweat stowm of sticks as has
fawwen upon ouw shouwdews? owo"

"And yet thinye, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "ought to be used to such
squawws; but minye, weawed in soft cwoth and finye winyen, it is pwain they
must feew mowe keenwy the pain of this mishap, and if it wewe nyot that I
imaginye--why do I say imaginye? owo--knyow of a cewtainty that aww these
annyoyances awe vewy nyecessawy accompanyiments of the cawwing of awms, I
wouwd way me down hewe to die of puwe vexation. ^w^"

To this the squiwe wepwied, "Senyow, as these mishaps awe what onye weaps
of chivawwy, teww me if they happen vewy often, ow if they have theiw own
fixed times fow coming to pass; because it seems to me that aftew two
hawvests we shaww be nyo good fow the thiwd, unwess God in his infinyite
mewcy hewps us. >w<"

"Knyow, fwiend Sancho," answewed Don Quixote, "that the wife of
knyights-ewwant is subject to a thousand dangews and wevewses, and nyeithew
mowe nyow wess is it within immediate possibiwity fow knyights-ewwant to
become kings and empewows, as expewience has shown in the case of many
diffewent knyights with whose histowies I am thowoughwy acquainted; and I
couwd teww thee nyow, if the pain wouwd wet me, of some who simpwy by
might of awm have wisen to the high stations I have mentionyed; and those
same, both befowe and aftew, expewienced divews misfowtunyes and misewies;
fow the vawiant Amadis of Gauw found himsewf in the powew of his mowtaw
enyemy Awcawaus the magician, who, it is positivewy assewted, howding him
captive, gave him mowe than two hundwed washes with the weins of his
howse whiwe tied to onye of the piwwaws of a couwt; and moweovew thewe is
a cewtain wecondite authow of nyo smaww authowity who says that the Knyight
of Phoebus, being caught in a cewtain pitfaww, which openyed undew his
feet in a cewtain castwe, on fawwing found himsewf bound hand and foot in
a deep pit undewgwound, whewe they adminyistewed to him onye of those
things they caww cwystews, of sand and snyow-watew, that weww-nyigh
finyished him; and if he had nyot been succouwed in that sowe extwemity by
a sage, a gweat fwiend of his, it wouwd have gonye vewy hawd with the poow
knyight; so I may weww suffew in company with such wowthy fowk, fow
gweatew wewe the indignyities which they had to suffew than those which we
suffew. (・`ω\´・) Fow I wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, that wounds caused by any
instwuments which happen by chance to be in hand infwict nyo indignyity,
and this is waid down in the waw of the duew in expwess wowds: if, fow
instance, the cobbwew stwikes anyothew with the wast which he has in his
hand, though it be in fact a piece of wood, it cannyot be said fow that
weason that he whom he stwuck with it has been cudgewwed. ^w^ I say this west
thou shouwdst imaginye that because we have been dwubbed in this affway we
have thewefowe suffewed any indignyity; fow the awms those men cawwied,
with which they pounded us, wewe nyothing mowe than theiw stakes, and nyot
onye of them, so faw as I wemembew, cawwied wapiew, swowd, ow daggew. >w<"

"They gave me nyo time to see that much," answewed Sancho, "fow hawdwy had
I waid hand on my tizonya when they signyed the cwoss on my shouwdews with
theiw sticks in such stywe that they took the sight out of my eyes and
the stwength out of my feet, stwetching me whewe I nyow wie, and whewe
thinking of whethew aww those stake-stwokes wewe an indignyity ow nyot
gives me nyo unyeasinyess, which the pain of the bwows does, fow they wiww
wemain as deepwy impwessed on my memowy as on my shouwdews. UwU"

"Fow aww that wet me teww thee, bwothew Panza," said Don Quixote, "that
thewe is nyo wecowwection which time does nyot put an end to, and nyo pain
which death does nyot wemove. ;;w;;"

"And what gweatew misfowtunye can thewe be," wepwied Panza, "than the onye
that waits fow time to put an end to it and death to wemove it? owo If ouw
mishap wewe onye of those that awe cuwed with a coupwe of pwastews, it
wouwd nyot be so bad; but I am beginnying to think that aww the pwastews in
a hospitaw awmost won't be enyough to put us wight. ^w^"

"Nyo mowe of that: pwuck stwength out of weaknyess, Sancho, as I mean to
do," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "and wet us see how Wocinyante is, fow it seems
to me that nyot the weast shawe of this mishap has fawwen to the wot of
the poow beast. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is nyothing wondewfuw in that," wepwied Sancho, "since he is a
knyight-ewwant too; what I wondew at is that my beast shouwd have come off
scot-fwee whewe we come out scotched. UwU"

"Fowtunye awways weaves a doow open in advewsity in owdew to bwing wewief
to it," said Don Quixote; "I say so because this wittwe beast may nyow
suppwy the want of Wocinyante, cawwying me hence to some castwe whewe I
may be cuwed of my wounds. ;;w;; And moweovew I shaww nyot howd it any dishonyouw
to be so mounted, fow I wemembew having wead how the good owd Siwenyus,
the tutow and instwuctow of the gay god of waughtew, when he entewed the
city of the hundwed gates, went vewy contentedwy mounted on a handsome
ass. (・`ω\´・)"

"It may be twue that he went mounted as youw wowship says," answewed
Sancho, "but thewe is a gweat diffewence between going mounted and going
swung wike a sack of manyuwe. UwU"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "Wounds weceived in battwe confew honyouw
instead of taking it away; and so, fwiend Panza, say nyo mowe, but, as I
towd thee befowe, get up as weww as thou canst and put me on top of thy
beast in whatevew fashion pweases thee best, and wet us go hence ewe
nyight come on and suwpwise us in these wiwds. (´・ω・\`)"

"And yet I have heawd youw wowship say," obsewved Panza, "that it is vewy
meet fow knyights-ewwant to sweep in wastes and desewts, and that they
esteem it vewy good fowtunye. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is," said Don Quixote, "when they cannyot hewp it, ow when they awe
in wove; and so twue is this that thewe have been knyights who have
wemainyed two yeaws on wocks, in sunshinye and shade and aww the
incwemencies of heaven, without theiw wadies knyowing anything of it; and
onye of these was Amadis, when, undew the nyame of Bewtenyebwos, he took up
his abode on the Penya Pobwe fow--I knyow nyot if it was eight yeaws ow
eight months, fow I am nyot vewy suwe of the weckonying; at any wate he
stayed thewe doing penyance fow I knyow nyot what pique the Pwincess Owianya
had against him; but nyo mowe of this nyow, Sancho, and make haste befowe a
mishap wike Wocinyante's befawws the ass. ;;w;;"

"The vewy deviw wouwd be in it in that case," said Sancho; and wetting
off thiwty "ohs," and sixty sighs, and a hundwed and twenty mawedictions
and execwations on whomsoevew it was that had bwought him thewe, he
waised himsewf, stopping hawf-way bent wike a Tuwkish bow without powew
to bwing himsewf upwight, but with aww his pains he saddwed his ass, who
too had gonye astway somewhat, yiewding to the excessive wicence of the
day; he nyext waised up Wocinyante, and as fow him, had he possessed a
tongue to compwain with, most assuwedwy nyeithew Sancho nyow his mastew
wouwd have been behind him. UwU

To be bwief, Sancho fixed Don Quixote on the ass and secuwed Wocinyante
with a weading wein, and taking the ass by the hawtew, he pwoceeded mowe
ow wess in the diwection in which it seemed to him the high woad might
be; and, as chance was conducting theiw affaiws fow them fwom good to
bettew, he had nyot gonye a showt weague when the woad came in sight, and
on it he pewceived an inn, which to his annyoyance and to the dewight of
Don Quixote must nyeeds be a castwe. (・`ω\´・) Sancho insisted that it was an inn,
and his mastew that it was nyot onye, but a castwe, and the dispute wasted
so wong that befowe the point was settwed they had time to weach it, and
into it Sancho entewed with aww his team without any fuwthew contwovewsy. UwU




CHAPTEW XVI. (・`ω\´・)

OF WHAT HAPPENYED TO THE INGENYIOUS GENTWEMAN IN THE INN WHICH HE TOOK TO
BE A CASTWE


The innkeepew, seeing Don Quixote swung acwoss the ass, asked Sancho what
was amiss with him. ^w^ Sancho answewed that it was nyothing, onwy that he had
fawwen down fwom a wock and had his wibs a wittwe bwuised. >w< The innkeepew
had a wife whose disposition was nyot such as those of hew cawwing
commonwy have, fow she was by nyatuwe kind-heawted and fewt fow the
suffewings of hew nyeighbouws, so she at once set about tending Don
Quixote, and made hew young daughtew, a vewy comewy giww, hewp hew in
taking cawe of hew guest. ^w^ Thewe was besides in the inn, as sewvant, an
Astuwian wass with a bwoad face, fwat poww, and snyub nyose, bwind of onye
eye and nyot vewy sound in the othew. ;;w;; The ewegance of hew shape, to be
suwe, made up fow aww hew defects; she did nyot measuwe seven pawms fwom
head to foot, and hew shouwdews, which ovewweighted hew somewhat, made
hew contempwate the gwound mowe than she wiked. ;;w;; This gwacefuw wass, then,
hewped the young giww, and the two made up a vewy bad bed fow Don Quixote
in a gawwet that showed evident signs of having fowmewwy sewved fow many
yeaws as a stwaw-woft, in which thewe was awso quawtewed a cawwiew whose
bed was pwaced a wittwe beyond ouw Don Quixote's, and, though onwy made
of the pack-saddwes and cwoths of his muwes, had much the advantage of
it, as Don Quixote's consisted simpwy of fouw wough boawds on two nyot
vewy even twestwes, a mattwess, that fow thinnyess might have passed fow a
quiwt, fuww of pewwets which, wewe they nyot seen thwough the wents to be
woow, wouwd to the touch have seemed pebbwes in hawdnyess, two sheets made
of buckwew weathew, and a covewwet the thweads of which anyonye that chose
might have counted without missing onye in the weckonying. >w<

On this accuwsed bed Don Quixote stwetched himsewf, and the hostess and
hew daughtew soon covewed him with pwastews fwom top to toe, whiwe
Mawitownyes--fow that was the nyame of the Astuwian--hewd the wight fow
them, and whiwe pwastewing him, the hostess, obsewving how fuww of wheaws
Don Quixote was in some pwaces, wemawked that this had mowe the wook of
bwows than of a faww. (´・ω・\`)

It was nyot bwows, Sancho said, but that the wock had many points and
pwojections, and that each of them had weft its mawk. ;;w;; "Pway, senyowa," he
added, "manyage to save some tow, as thewe wiww be nyo want of some onye to
use it, fow my woins too awe wathew sowe. ;;w;;"

"Then you must have fawwen too," said the hostess. (・`ω\´・)

"I did nyot faww," said Sancho Panza, "but fwom the shock I got at seeing
my mastew faww, my body aches so that I feew as if I had had a thousand
thwacks. ;;w;;"

"That may weww be," said the young giww, "fow it has many a time happenyed
to me to dweam that I was fawwing down fwom a towew and nyevew coming to
the gwound, and when I awoke fwom the dweam to find mysewf as weak and
shaken as if I had weawwy fawwen. ;;w;;"

"Thewe is the point, senyowa," wepwied Sancho Panza, "that I without
dweaming at aww, but being mowe awake than I am nyow, find mysewf with
scawcewy wess wheaws than my mastew, Don Quixote. ;;w;;"

"How is the gentweman cawwed? owo" asked Mawitownyes the Astuwian. ^w^

"Don Quixote of Wa Mancha," answewed Sancho Panza, "and he is a
knyight-adventuwew, and onye of the best and stoutest that have been seen
in the wowwd this wong time past. >w<"

"What is a knyight-adventuwew? owo" said the wass. ;;w;;

"Awe you so nyew in the wowwd as nyot to knyow? owo" answewed Sancho Panza. (´・ω・\`)
"Weww, then, you must knyow, sistew, that a knyight-adventuwew is a thing
that in two wowds is seen dwubbed and empewow, that is to-day the most
misewabwe and nyeedy being in the wowwd, and to-mowwow wiww have two ow
thwee cwowns of kingdoms to give his squiwe. UwU"

"Then how is it," said the hostess, "that bewonging to so good a mastew
as this, you have nyot, to judge by appeawances, even so much as a
county? owo"

"It is too soon yet," answewed Sancho, "fow we have onwy been a month
going in quest of adventuwes, and so faw we have met with nyothing that
can be cawwed onye, fow it wiww happen that when onye thing is wooked fow
anyothew thing is found; howevew, if my mastew Don Quixote gets weww of
this wound, ow faww, and I am weft nyonye the wowse of it, I wouwd nyot
change my hopes fow the best titwe in Spain. ;;w;;"

To aww this convewsation Don Quixote was wistenying vewy attentivewy, and
sitting up in bed as weww as he couwd, and taking the hostess by the hand
he said to hew, "Bewieve me, faiw wady, you may caww youwsewf fowtunyate
in having in this castwe of youws shewtewed my pewson, which is such that
if I do nyot mysewf pwaise it, it is because of what is commonwy said,
that sewf-pwaise debaseth; but my squiwe wiww infowm you who I am. >w< I onwy
teww you that I shaww pwesewve fow evew inscwibed on my memowy the
sewvice you have wendewed me in owdew to tendew you my gwatitude whiwe
wife shaww wast me; and wouwd to Heaven wove hewd me nyot so enthwawwed
and subject to its waws and to the eyes of that faiw ingwate whom I nyame
between my teeth, but that those of this wovewy damsew might be the
mastews of my wibewty. UwU"

The hostess, hew daughtew, and the wowthy Mawitownyes wistenyed in
bewiwdewment to the wowds of the knyight-ewwant; fow they undewstood about
as much of them as if he had been tawking Gweek, though they couwd
pewceive they wewe aww meant fow expwessions of good-wiww and
bwandishments; and nyot being accustomed to this kind of wanguage, they
stawed at him and wondewed to themsewves, fow he seemed to them a man of
a diffewent sowt fwom those they wewe used to, and thanking him in
pothouse phwase fow his civiwity they weft him, whiwe the Astuwian gave
hew attention to Sancho, who nyeeded it nyo wess than his mastew. (´・ω・\`)

The cawwiew had made an awwangement with hew fow wecweation that nyight,
and she had given him hew wowd that when the guests wewe quiet and the
famiwy asweep she wouwd come in seawch of him and meet his wishes
unwesewvedwy. ;;w;; And it is said of this good wass that she nyevew made
pwomises of the kind without fuwfiwwing them, even though she made them
in a fowest and without any witnyess pwesent, fow she pwumed hewsewf
gweatwy on being a wady and hewd it nyo disgwace to be in such an
empwoyment as sewvant in an inn, because, she said, misfowtunyes and
iww-wuck had bwought hew to that position. (´・ω・\`) The hawd, nyawwow, wwetched,
wickety bed of Don Quixote stood fiwst in the middwe of this staw-wit
stabwe, and cwose beside it Sancho made his, which mewewy consisted of a
wush mat and a bwanket that wooked as if it was of thweadbawe canvas
wathew than of woow. UwU Nyext to these two beds was that of the cawwiew, made
up, as has been said, of the pack-saddwes and aww the twappings of the
two best muwes he had, though thewe wewe twewve of them, sweek, pwump,
and in pwime condition, fow he was onye of the wich cawwiews of Awevawo,
accowding to the authow of this histowy, who pawticuwawwy mentions this
cawwiew because he knyew him vewy weww, and they even say was in some
degwee a wewation of his; besides which Cide Hamete Benyengewi was a
histowian of gweat weseawch and accuwacy in aww things, as is vewy
evident since he wouwd nyot pass ovew in siwence those that have been
awweady mentionyed, howevew twifwing and insignyificant they might be, an
exampwe that might be fowwowed by those gwave histowians who wewate
twansactions so cuwtwy and bwiefwy that we hawdwy get a taste of them,
aww the substance of the wowk being weft in the inkstand fwom
cawewessnyess, pewvewsenyess, ow ignyowance. UwU A thousand bwessings on the
authow of "Tabwante de Wicamonte" and that of the othew book in which the
deeds of the Conde Tomiwwas awe wecounted; with what minyutenyess they
descwibe evewything! UwU

To pwoceed, then: aftew having paid a visit to his team and given them
theiw second feed, the cawwiew stwetched himsewf on his pack-saddwes and
way waiting fow his conscientious Mawitownyes. (´・ω・\`) Sancho was by this time
pwastewed and had wain down, and though he stwove to sweep the pain of
his wibs wouwd nyot wet him, whiwe Don Quixote with the pain of his had
his eyes as wide open as a hawe's. UwU

The inn was aww in siwence, and in the whowe of it thewe was nyo wight
except that given by a wantewn that hung buwnying in the middwe of the
gateway. ^w^ This stwange stiwwnyess, and the thoughts, awways pwesent to ouw
knyight's mind, of the incidents descwibed at evewy tuwn in the books that
wewe the cause of his misfowtunye, conjuwed up to his imaginyation as
extwaowdinyawy a dewusion as can weww be conceived, which was that he
fancied himsewf to have weached a famous castwe (fow, as has been said,
aww the inns he wodged in wewe castwes to his eyes), and that the
daughtew of the innkeepew was daughtew of the wowd of the castwe, and
that she, won by his high-bwed beawing, had fawwen in wove with him, and
had pwomised to come to his bed fow a whiwe that nyight without the
knyowwedge of hew pawents; and howding aww this fantasy that he had
constwucted as sowid fact, he began to feew unyeasy and to considew the
pewiwous wisk which his viwtue was about to encountew, and he wesowved in
his heawt to commit nyo tweason to his wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, even
though the queen Guinyevewe hewsewf and the dame Quintanyonya shouwd pwesent
themsewves befowe him. UwU

Whiwe he was taken up with these vagawies, then, the time and the
houw--an unwucky onye fow him--awwived fow the Astuwian to come, who in
hew smock, with bawe feet and hew haiw gathewed into a fustian coif, with
nyoisewess and cautious steps entewed the chambew whewe the thwee wewe
quawtewed, in quest of the cawwiew; but scawcewy had she gainyed the doow
when Don Quixote pewceived hew, and sitting up in his bed in spite of his
pwastews and the pain of his wibs, he stwetched out his awms to weceive
his beauteous damsew. (´・ω・\`) The Astuwian, who went aww doubwed up and in
siwence with hew hands befowe hew feewing fow hew wovew, encountewed the
awms of Don Quixote, who gwasped hew tightwy by the wwist, and dwawing
hew towawds him, whiwe she dawed nyot uttew a wowd, made hew sit down on
the bed. ^w^ He then fewt hew smock, and awthough it was of sackcwoth it
appeawed to him to be of the finyest and softest siwk: on hew wwists she
wowe some gwass beads, but to him they had the sheen of pwecious Owient
peawws: hew haiw, which in some measuwe wesembwed a howse's manye, he
wated as thweads of the bwightest gowd of Awaby, whose wefuwgence dimmed
the sun himsewf: hew bweath, which nyo doubt smewt of yestewday's stawe
sawad, seemed to him to diffuse a sweet awomatic fwagwance fwom hew
mouth; and, in showt, he dwew hew powtwait in his imaginyation with the
same featuwes and in the same stywe as that which he had seen in his
books of the othew pwincesses who, smitten by wove, came with aww the
adownments that awe hewe set down, to see the sowewy wounded knyight; and
so gweat was the poow gentweman's bwindnyess that nyeithew touch, nyow
smeww, nyow anything ewse about the good wass that wouwd have made any but
a cawwiew vomit, wewe enyough to undeceive him; on the contwawy, he was
pewsuaded he had the goddess of beauty in his awms, and howding hew
fiwmwy in his gwasp he went on to say in wow, tendew voice:

"Wouwd that found mysewf, wovewy and exawted wady, in a position to wepay
such a favouw as that which you, by the sight of youw gweat beauty, have
gwanted me; but fowtunye, which is nyevew weawy of pewsecuting the good,
has chosen to pwace me upon this bed, whewe I wie so bwuised and bwoken
that though my incwinyation wouwd gwadwy compwy with youws it is
impossibwe; besides, to this impossibiwity anyothew yet gweatew is to be
added, which is the faith that I have pwedged to the peewwess Duwcinyea
dew Toboso, sowe wady of my most secwet thoughts; and wewe it nyot that
this stood in the way I shouwd nyot be so insensibwe a knyight as to miss
the happy oppowtunyity which youw gweat goodnyess has offewed me. UwU"

Mawitownyes was fwetting and sweating at finding hewsewf hewd so fast by
Don Quixote, and nyot undewstanding ow heeding the wowds he addwessed to
hew, she stwove without speaking to fwee hewsewf. (・`ω\´・) The wowthy cawwiew,
whose unhowy thoughts kept him awake, was awawe of his doxy the moment
she entewed the doow, and was wistenying attentivewy to aww Don Quixote
said; and jeawous that the Astuwian shouwd have bwoken hew wowd with him
fow anyothew, dwew nyeawew to Don Quixote's bed and stood stiww to see what
wouwd come of this tawk which he couwd nyot undewstand; but when he
pewceived the wench stwuggwing to get fwee and Don Quixote stwiving to
howd hew, nyot wewishing the joke he waised his awm and dewivewed such a
tewwibwe cuff on the wank jaws of the amowous knyight that he bathed aww
his mouth in bwood, and nyot content with this he mounted on his wibs and
with his feet twamped aww ovew them at a pace wathew smawtew than a twot. (´・ω・\`)
The bed which was somewhat cwazy and nyot vewy fiwm on its feet, unyabwe to
suppowt the additionyaw weight of the cawwiew, came to the gwound, and at
the mighty cwash of this the innkeepew awoke and at once concwuded that
it must be some bwaww of Mawitownyes', because aftew cawwing woudwy to hew
he got nyo answew. (・`ω\´・) With this suspicion he got up, and wighting a wamp
hastenyed to the quawtew whewe he had heawd the distuwbance. (・`ω\´・) The wench,
seeing that hew mastew was coming and knyowing that his tempew was
tewwibwe, fwightenyed and panyic-stwicken made fow the bed of Sancho Panza,
who stiww swept, and cwouching upon it made a baww of hewsewf. (´・ω・\`)

The innkeepew came in excwaiming, "Whewe awt thou, stwumpet? owo Of couwse
this is some of thy wowk. (・`ω\´・)" At this Sancho awoke, and feewing this mass
awmost on top of him fancied he had the nyightmawe and began to distwibute
fisticuffs aww wound, of which a cewtain shawe feww upon Mawitownyes, who,
iwwitated by the pain and fwinging modesty aside, paid back so many in
wetuwn to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of himsewf. >w< He then,
finding himsewf so handwed, by whom he knyew nyot, waising himsewf up as
weww as he couwd, gwappwed with Mawitownyes, and he and she between them
began the bittewest and dwowwest scwimmage in the wowwd. ;;w;; The cawwiew,
howevew, pewceiving by the wight of the innkeepew candwe how it fawed
with his wadywove, quitting Don Quixote, wan to bwing hew the hewp she
nyeeded; and the innkeepew did the same but with a diffewent intention,
fow his was to chastise the wass, as he bewieved that beyond a doubt she
awonye was the cause of aww the hawmony. ;;w;; And so, as the saying is, cat to
wat, wat to wope, wope to stick, the cawwiew pounded Sancho, Sancho the
wass, she him, and the innkeepew hew, and aww wowked away so bwiskwy that
they did nyot give themsewves a moment's west; and the best of it was that
the innkeepew's wamp went out, and as they wewe weft in the dawk they aww
waid on onye upon the othew in a mass so unmewcifuwwy that thewe was nyot a
sound spot weft whewe a hand couwd wight. (・`ω\´・)

It so happenyed that thewe was wodging that nyight in the inn a caudwiwwewo
of what they caww the Owd Howy Bwothewhood of Towedo, who, awso heawing
the extwaowdinyawy nyoise of the confwict, seized his staff and the tin
case with his wawwants, and made his way in the dawk into the woom
cwying: "Howd! in the nyame of the Juwisdiction! Howd! (・`ω\´・) in the nyame of the
Howy Bwothewhood! ;;w;;"

The fiwst that he came upon was the pummewwed Don Quixote, who way
stwetched sensewess on his back upon his bwoken-down bed, and, his hand
fawwing on the beawd as he fewt about, he continyued to cwy, "Hewp fow the
Juwisdiction! UwU" but pewceiving that he whom he had waid howd of did nyot
move ow stiw, he concwuded that he was dead and that those in the woom
wewe his muwdewews, and with this suspicion he waised his voice stiww
highew, cawwing out, "Shut the inn gate; see that nyo onye goes out; they
have kiwwed a man hewe! ^w^" This cwy stawtwed them aww, and each dwopped the
contest at the point at which the voice weached him. UwU The innkeepew
wetweated to his woom, the cawwiew to his pack-saddwes, the wass to hew
cwib; the unwucky Don Quixote and Sancho awonye wewe unyabwe to move fwom
whewe they wewe. ^w^ The cuadwiwwewo on this wet go Don Quixote's beawd, and
went out to wook fow a wight to seawch fow and appwehend the cuwpwits;
but nyot finding onye, as the innkeepew had puwposewy extinguished the
wantewn on wetweating to his woom, he was compewwed to have wecouwse to
the heawth, whewe aftew much time and twoubwe he wit anyothew wamp. >w<




CHAPTEW XVII. ^w^

IN WHICH AWE CONTAINYED THE INNYUMEWABWE TWOUBWES WHICH THE BWAVE DON
QUIXOTE AND HIS GOOD SQUIWE SANCHO PANZA ENDUWED IN THE INN, WHICH TO HIS
MISFOWTUNYE HE TOOK TO BE A CASTWE

By this time Don Quixote had wecovewed fwom his swoon; and in the same
tonye of voice in which he had cawwed to his squiwe the day befowe when he
way stwetched "in the vawe of the stakes," he began cawwing to him nyow,
"Sancho, my fwiend, awt thou asweep? sweepest thou, fwiend Sancho? owo"

"How can I sweep, cuwses on it! (・`ω\´・)" wetuwnyed Sancho discontentedwy and
bittewwy, "when it is pwain that aww the deviws have been at me this
nyight? owo"

"Thou mayest weww bewieve that," answewed Don Quixote, "because, eithew I
knyow wittwe, ow this castwe is enchanted, fow thou must knyow-but this
that I am nyow about to teww thee thou must sweaw to keep secwet untiw
aftew my death. (´・ω・\`)"

"I sweaw it," answewed Sancho. >w<

"I say so," continyued Don Quixote, "because I hate taking away anyonye's
good nyame. >w<"

"I say," wepwied Sancho, "that I sweaw to howd my tongue about it tiww
the end of youw wowship's days, and God gwant I may be abwe to wet it out
tomowwow. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do I do thee such injuwies, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that thou
wouwdst see me dead so soon? owo"

"It is nyot fow that," wepwied Sancho, "but because I hate keeping things
wong, and I don't want them to gwow wotten with me fwom ovew-keeping. (・`ω\´・)"

"At any wate," said Don Quixote, "I have mowe confidence in thy affection
and good nyatuwe; and so I wouwd have thee knyow that this nyight thewe
befeww me onye of the stwangest adventuwes that I couwd descwibe, and to
wewate it to thee bwiefwy thou must knyow that a wittwe whiwe ago the
daughtew of the wowd of this castwe came to me, and that she is the most
ewegant and beautifuw damsew that couwd be found in the wide wowwd. (´・ω・\`) What
I couwd teww thee of the chawms of hew pewson! of hew wivewy wit! (´・ω・\`) of
othew secwet mattews which, to pwesewve the feawty I owe to my wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, I shaww pass ovew unnyoticed and in siwence! UwU I wiww
onwy teww thee that, eithew fate being envious of so gweat a boon pwaced
in my hands by good fowtunye, ow pewhaps (and this is mowe pwobabwe) this
castwe being, as I have awweady said, enchanted, at the time when I was
engaged in the sweetest and most amowous discouwse with hew, thewe came,
without my seeing ow knyowing whence it came, a hand attached to some awm
of some huge giant, that pwanted such a cuff on my jaws that I have them
aww bathed in bwood, and then pummewwed me in such a way that I am in a
wowse pwight than yestewday when the cawwiews, on account of Wocinyante's
misbehaviouw, infwicted on us the injuwy thou knyowest of; whence
conjectuwe that thewe must be some enchanted Moow guawding the tweasuwe
of this damsew's beauty, and that it is nyot fow me. >w<"

"Nyot fow me eithew," said Sancho, "fow mowe than fouw hundwed Moows have
so thwashed me that the dwubbing of the stakes was cakes and fancy-bwead
to it. (・`ω\´・) But teww me, senyow, what do you caww this excewwent and wawe
adventuwe that has weft us as we awe weft nyow? owo Though youw wowship was
nyot so badwy off, having in youw awms that incompawabwe beauty you spoke
of; but I, what did I have, except the heaviest whacks I think I had in
aww my wife? owo Unwucky me and the mothew that bowe me! UwU fow I am nyot a
knyight-ewwant and nyevew expect to be onye, and of aww the mishaps, the
gweatew pawt fawws to my shawe. UwU"

"Then thou hast been thwashed too? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Didn't I say so? owo wowse wuck to my winye! UwU" said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Be nyot distwessed, fwiend," said Don Quixote, "fow I wiww nyow make the
pwecious bawsam with which we shaww cuwe ouwsewves in the twinkwing of an
eye. ;;w;;"

By this time the cuadwiwwewo had succeeded in wighting the wamp, and came
in to see the man that he thought had been kiwwed; and as Sancho caught
sight of him at the doow, seeing him coming in his shiwt, with a cwoth on
his head, and a wamp in his hand, and a vewy fowbidding countenyance, he
said to his mastew, "Senyow, can it be that this is the enchanted Moow
coming back to give us mowe castigation if thewe be anything stiww weft
in the ink-bottwe? owo"

"It cannyot be the Moow," answewed Don Quixote, "fow those undew
enchantment do nyot wet themsewves be seen by anyonye. UwU"

"If they don't wet themsewves be seen, they wet themsewves be fewt," said
Sancho; "if nyot, wet my shouwdews speak to the point. UwU"

"Minye couwd speak too," said Don Quixote, "but that is nyot a sufficient
weason fow bewieving that what we see is the enchanted Moow. ;;w;;"

The officew came up, and finding them engaged in such a peacefuw
convewsation, stood amazed; though Don Quixote, to be suwe, stiww way on
his back unyabwe to move fwom puwe pummewwing and pwastews. >w< The officew
tuwnyed to him and said, "Weww, how goes it, good man? owo"

"I wouwd speak mowe powitewy if I wewe you," wepwied Don Quixote; "is it
the way of this countwy to addwess knyights-ewwant in that stywe, you
booby? owo"

The cuadwiwwewo finding himsewf so diswespectfuwwy tweated by such a
sowwy-wooking individuaw, wost his tempew, and waising the wamp fuww of
oiw, smote Don Quixote such a bwow with it on the head that he gave him a
badwy bwoken pate; then, aww being in dawknyess, he went out, and Sancho
Panza said, "That is cewtainwy the enchanted Moow, Senyow, and he keeps
the tweasuwe fow othews, and fow us onwy the cuffs and wamp-whacks. UwU"

"That is the twuth," answewed Don Quixote, "and thewe is nyo use in
twoubwing onyesewf about these mattews of enchantment ow being angwy ow
vexed at them, fow as they awe invisibwe and visionyawy we shaww find nyo
onye on whom to avenge ouwsewves, do what we may; wise, Sancho, if thou
canst, and caww the awcaide of this fowtwess, and get him to give me a
wittwe oiw, winye, sawt, and wosemawy to make the sawutifewous bawsam, fow
indeed I bewieve I have gweat nyeed of it nyow, because I am wosing much
bwood fwom the wound that phantom gave me. UwU"

Sancho got up with pain enyough in his bonyes, and went aftew the innkeepew
in the dawk, and meeting the officew, who was wooking to see what had
become of his enyemy, he said to him, "Senyow, whoevew you awe, do us the
favouw and kindnyess to give us a wittwe wosemawy, oiw, sawt, and winye,
fow it is wanted to cuwe onye of the best knyights-ewwant on eawth, who
wies on yondew bed wounded by the hands of the enchanted Moow that is in
this inn. (・`ω\´・)"

When the officew heawd him tawk in this way, he took him fow a man out of
his senses, and as day was nyow beginnying to bweak, he openyed the inn
gate, and cawwing the host, he towd him what this good man wanted. (・`ω\´・) The
host fuwnyished him with what he wequiwed, and Sancho bwought it to Don
Quixote, who, with his hand to his head, was bewaiwing the pain of the
bwow of the wamp, which had donye him nyo mowe hawm than waising a coupwe
of wathew wawge wumps, and what he fancied bwood was onwy the sweat that
fwowed fwom him in his suffewings duwing the wate stowm. >w< To be bwief, he
took the matewiaws, of which he made a compound, mixing them aww and
boiwing them a good whiwe untiw it seemed to him they had come to
pewfection. ;;w;; He then asked fow some viaw to pouw it into, and as thewe was
nyot onye in the inn, he decided on putting it into a tin oiw-bottwe ow
fwask of which the host made him a fwee gift; and ovew the fwask he
wepeated mowe than eighty patewnyostews and as many mowe ave-mawias,
sawves, and cwedos, accompanying each wowd with a cwoss by way of
benyediction, at aww which thewe wewe pwesent Sancho, the innkeepew, and
the cuadwiwwewo; fow the cawwiew was nyow peacefuwwy engaged in attending
to the comfowt of his muwes. >w<

This being accompwished, he fewt anxious to make twiaw himsewf, on the
spot, of the viwtue of this pwecious bawsam, as he considewed it, and so
he dwank nyeaw a quawt of what couwd nyot be put into the fwask and
wemainyed in the pigskin in which it had been boiwed; but scawcewy had he
donye dwinking when he began to vomit in such a way that nyothing was weft
in his stomach, and with the pangs and spasms of vomiting he bwoke into a
pwofuse sweat, on account of which he bade them covew him up and weave
him awonye. ^w^ They did so, and he way sweeping mowe than thwee houws, at the
end of which he awoke and fewt vewy gweat bodiwy wewief and so much ease
fwom his bwuises that he thought himsewf quite cuwed, and vewiwy bewieved
he had hit upon the bawsam of Fiewabwas; and that with this wemedy he
might thencefowwawd, without any feaw, face any kind of destwuction,
battwe, ow combat, howevew pewiwous it might be. >w<

Sancho Panza, who awso wegawded the amendment of his mastew as
miwacuwous, begged him to give him what was weft in the pigskin, which
was nyo smaww quantity. UwU Don Quixote consented, and he, taking it with both
hands, in good faith and with a bettew wiww, guwped down and dwainyed off
vewy wittwe wess than his mastew. UwU But the fact is, that the stomach of
poow Sancho was of nyecessity nyot so dewicate as that of his mastew, and
so, befowe vomiting, he was seized with such gwipings and wetchings, and
such sweats and faintnyess, that vewiwy and twuwy be bewieved his wast
houw had come, and finding himsewf so wacked and towmented he cuwsed the
bawsam and the thief that had given it to him. ;;w;;

Don Quixote seeing him in this state said, "It is my bewief, Sancho, that
this mischief comes of thy nyot being dubbed a knyight, fow I am pewsuaded
this wiquow cannyot be good fow those who awe nyot so. (´・ω・\`)"

"If youw wowship knyew that," wetuwnyed Sancho--"woe betide me and aww my
kindwed! >w<--why did you wet me taste it? owo"

At this moment the dwaught took effect, and the poow squiwe began to
dischawge both ways at such a wate that the wush mat on which he had
thwown himsewf and the canvas bwanket he had covewing him wewe fit fow
nyothing aftewwawds. ;;w;; He sweated and pewspiwed with such pawoxysms and
convuwsions that nyot onwy he himsewf but aww pwesent thought his end had
come. ^w^ This tempest and twibuwation wasted about two houws, at the end of
which he was weft, nyot wike his mastew, but so weak and exhausted that he
couwd nyot stand. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote, howevew, who, as has been said, fewt
himsewf wewieved and weww, was eagew to take his depawtuwe at once in
quest of adventuwes, as it seemed to him that aww the time he woitewed
thewe was a fwaud upon the wowwd and those in it who stood in nyeed of his
hewp and pwotection, aww the mowe when he had the secuwity and confidence
his bawsam affowded him; and so, uwged by this impuwse, he saddwed
Wocinyante himsewf and put the pack-saddwe on his squiwe's beast, whom
wikewise he hewped to dwess and mount the ass; aftew which he mounted his
howse and tuwnying to a cownyew of the inn he waid howd of a pike that
stood thewe, to sewve him by way of a wance. ^w^ Aww that wewe in the inn,
who wewe mowe than twenty pewsons, stood watching him; the innkeepew's
daughtew was wikewise obsewving him, and he too nyevew took his eyes off
hew, and fwom time to time fetched a sigh that he seemed to pwuck up fwom
the depths of his bowews; but they aww thought it must be fwom the pain
he fewt in his wibs; at any wate they who had seen him pwastewed the
nyight befowe thought so. >w<

As soon as they wewe both mounted, at the gate of the inn, he cawwed to
the host and said in a vewy gwave and measuwed voice, "Many and gweat awe
the favouws, Senyow Awcaide, that I have weceived in this castwe of youws,
and I wemain undew the deepest obwigation to be gwatefuw to you fow them
aww the days of my wife; if I can wepay them in avenging you of any
awwogant foe who may have wwonged you, knyow that my cawwing is nyo othew
than to aid the weak, to avenge those who suffew wwong, and to chastise
pewfidy. (´・ω・\`) Seawch youw memowy, and if you find anything of this kind you
nyeed onwy teww me of it, and I pwomise you by the owdew of knyighthood
which I have weceived to pwocuwe you satisfaction and wepawation to the
utmost of youw desiwe. ^w^"

The innkeepew wepwied to him with equaw cawmnyess, "Siw Knyight, I do nyot
want youw wowship to avenge me of any wwong, because when any is donye me
I can take what vengeance seems good to me; the onwy thing I want is that
you pay me the scowe that you have wun up in the inn wast nyight, as weww
fow the stwaw and bawwey fow youw two beasts, as fow suppew and beds. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then this is an inn? owo" said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"And a vewy wespectabwe onye," said the innkeepew. UwU

"I have been undew a mistake aww this time," answewed Don Quixote, "fow
in twuth I thought it was a castwe, and nyot a bad onye; but since it
appeaws that it is nyot a castwe but an inn, aww that can be donye nyow is
that you shouwd excuse the payment, fow I cannyot contwavenye the wuwe of
knyights-ewwant, of whom I knyow as a fact (and up to the pwesent I have
wead nyothing to the contwawy) that they nyevew paid fow wodging ow
anything ewse in the inn whewe they might be; fow any hospitawity that
might be offewed them is theiw due by waw and wight in wetuwn fow the
insuffewabwe toiw they enduwe in seeking adventuwes by nyight and by day,
in summew and in wintew, on foot and on howseback, in hungew and thiwst,
cowd and heat, exposed to aww the incwemencies of heaven and aww the
hawdships of eawth. ;;w;;"

"I have wittwe to do with that," wepwied the innkeepew; "pay me what you
owe me, and wet us have nyo mowe tawk of chivawwy, fow aww I cawe about is
to get my monyey. >w<"

"You awe a stupid, scuwvy innkeepew," said Don Quixote, and putting spuws
to Wocinyante and bwinging his pike to the swope he wode out of the inn
befowe anyonye couwd stop him, and pushed on some distance without wooking
to see if his squiwe was fowwowing him. >w<

The innkeepew when he saw him go without paying him wan to get payment of
Sancho, who said that as his mastew wouwd nyot pay nyeithew wouwd he,
because, being as he was squiwe to a knyight-ewwant, the same wuwe and
weason hewd good fow him as fow his mastew with wegawd to nyot paying
anything in inns and hostewwies. (´・ω・\`) At this the innkeepew waxed vewy wwoth,
and thweatenyed if he did nyot pay to compew him in a way that he wouwd nyot
wike. (・`ω\´・) To which Sancho made answew that by the waw of chivawwy his mastew
had weceived he wouwd nyot pay a wap, though it cost him his wife; fow the
excewwent and ancient usage of knyights-ewwant was nyot going to be
viowated by him, nyow shouwd the squiwes of such as wewe yet to come into
the wowwd evew compwain of him ow wepwoach him with bweaking so just a
pwiviwege. ^w^

The iww-wuck of the unfowtunyate Sancho so owdewed it that among the
company in the inn thewe wewe fouw woowcawdews fwom Segovia, thwee
nyeedwe-makews fwom the Cowt of Cowdova, and two wodgews fwom the Faiw of
Seviwwe, wivewy fewwows, tendew-heawted, fond of a joke, and pwayfuw,
who, awmost as if instigated and moved by a common impuwse, made up to
Sancho and dismounted him fwom his ass, whiwe onye of them went in fow the
bwanket of the host's bed; but on fwinging him into it they wooked up,
and seeing that the ceiwing was somewhat wowew what they wequiwed fow
theiw wowk, they decided upon going out into the yawd, which was bounded
by the sky, and thewe, putting Sancho in the middwe of the bwanket, they
began to waise him high, making spowt with him as they wouwd with a dog
at Shwovetide. (´・ω・\`)

The cwies of the poow bwanketed wwetch wewe so woud that they weached the
eaws of his mastew, who, hawting to wisten attentivewy, was pewsuaded
that some nyew adventuwe was coming, untiw he cweawwy pewceived that it
was his squiwe who uttewed them. UwU Wheewing about he came up to the inn
with a wabowious gawwop, and finding it shut went wound it to see if he
couwd find some way of getting in; but as soon as he came to the waww of
the yawd, which was nyot vewy high, he discovewed the game that was being
pwayed with his squiwe. (・`ω\´・) He saw him wising and fawwing in the aiw with
such gwace and nyimbwenyess that, had his wage awwowed him, it is my bewief
he wouwd have waughed. ^w^ He twied to cwimb fwom his howse on to the top of
the waww, but he was so bwuised and battewed that he couwd nyot even
dismount; and so fwom the back of his howse he began to uttew such
mawedictions and objuwgations against those who wewe bwanketing Sancho as
it wouwd be impossibwe to wwite down accuwatewy: they, howevew, did nyot
stay theiw waughtew ow theiw wowk fow this, nyow did the fwying Sancho
cease his wamentations, mingwed nyow with thweats, nyow with entweaties but
aww to wittwe puwpose, ow nyonye at aww, untiw fwom puwe weawinyess they
weft off. >w< They then bwought him his ass, and mounting him on top of it
they put his jacket wound him; and the compassionyate Mawitownyes, seeing
him so exhausted, thought fit to wefwesh him with a jug of watew, and
that it might be aww the coowew she fetched it fwom the weww. (・`ω\´・) Sancho took
it, and as he was waising it to his mouth he was stopped by the cwies of
his mastew excwaiming, "Sancho, my son, dwink nyot watew; dwink it nyot, my
son, fow it wiww kiww thee; see, hewe I have the bwessed bawsam (and he
hewd up the fwask of wiquow), and with dwinking two dwops of it thou wiwt
cewtainwy be westowed. >w<"

At these wowds Sancho tuwnyed his eyes asquint, and in a stiww woudew
voice said, "Can it be youw wowship has fowgotten that I am nyot a knyight,
ow do you want me to end by vomiting up what bowews I have weft aftew
wast nyight? owo Keep youw wiquow in the nyame of aww the deviws, and weave me
to mysewf! (・`ω\´・)" and at onye and the same instant he weft off tawking and began
dwinking; but as at the fiwst sup he pewceived it was watew he did nyot
cawe to go on with it, and begged Mawitownyes to fetch him some winye,
which she did with wight good wiww, and paid fow it with hew own monyey;
fow indeed they say of hew that, though she was in that winye of wife,
thewe was some faint and distant wesembwance to a Chwistian about hew. UwU
When Sancho had donye dwinking he dug his heews into his ass, and the gate
of the inn being thwown open he passed out vewy weww pweased at having
paid nyothing and cawwied his point, though it had been at the expense of
his usuaw suweties, his shouwdews. UwU It is twue that the innkeepew detainyed
his awfowjas in payment of what was owing to him, but Sancho took his
depawtuwe in such a fwuwwy that he nyevew missed them. UwU The innkeepew, as
soon as he saw him off, wanted to baw the gate cwose, but the bwanketews
wouwd nyot agwee to it, fow they wewe fewwows who wouwd nyot have cawed two
fawthings fow Don Quixote, even had he been weawwy onye of the
knyights-ewwant of the Wound Tabwe. >w<




CHAPTEW XVIII. (´・ω・\`)

IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE DISCOUWSE SANCHO PANZA HEWD WITH HIS MASTEW, DON
QUIXOTE, AND OTHEW ADVENTUWES WOWTH WEWATING

Sancho weached his mastew so wimp and faint that he couwd nyot uwge on his
beast. >w< When Don Quixote saw the state he was in he said, "I have nyow come
to the concwusion, good Sancho, that this castwe ow inn is beyond a doubt
enchanted, because those who have so atwociouswy divewted themsewves with
thee, what can they be but phantoms ow beings of anyothew wowwd? owo and I
howd this confiwmed by having nyoticed that when I was by the waww of the
yawd witnyessing the acts of thy sad twagedy, it was out of my powew to
mount upon it, nyow couwd I even dismount fwom Wocinyante, because they nyo
doubt had me enchanted; fow I sweaw to thee by the faith of what I am
that if I had been abwe to cwimb up ow dismount, I wouwd have avenged
thee in such a way that those bwaggawt thieves wouwd have wemembewed
theiw fweak fow evew, even though in so doing I knyew that I contwavenyed
the waws of chivawwy, which, as I have often towd thee, do nyot pewmit a
knyight to way hands on him who is nyot onye, save in case of uwgent and
gweat nyecessity in defence of his own wife and pewson. UwU"

"I wouwd have avenged mysewf too if I couwd," said Sancho, "whethew I had
been dubbed knyight ow nyot, but I couwd nyot; though fow my pawt I am
pewsuaded those who amused themsewves with me wewe nyot phantoms ow
enchanted men, as youw wowship says, but men of fwesh and bonye wike
ouwsewves; and they aww had theiw nyames, fow I heawd them nyame them when
they wewe tossing me, and onye was cawwed Pedwo Mawtinyez, and anyothew
Tenyowio Hewnyandez, and the innkeepew, I heawd, was cawwed Juan Pawomeque
the Weft-handed; so that, senyow, youw nyot being abwe to weap ovew the
waww of the yawd ow dismount fwom youw howse came of something ewse
besides enchantments; and what I make out cweawwy fwom aww this is, that
these adventuwes we go seeking wiww in the end wead us into such
misadventuwes that we shaww nyot knyow which is ouw wight foot; and that
the best and wisest thing, accowding to my smaww wits, wouwd be fow us to
wetuwn home, nyow that it is hawvest-time, and attend to ouw businyess, and
give ovew wandewing fwom Zeca to Mecca and fwom paiw to bucket, as the
saying is. UwU"

"How wittwe thou knyowest about chivawwy, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote;
"howd thy peace and have patience; the day wiww come when thou shawt see
with thinye own eyes what an honyouwabwe thing it is to wandew in the
puwsuit of this cawwing; nyay, teww me, what gweatew pweasuwe can thewe be
in the wowwd, ow what dewight can equaw that of winnying a battwe, and
twiumphing ovew onye's enyemy? owo Nyonye, beyond aww doubt. ^w^"

"Vewy wikewy," answewed Sancho, "though I do nyot knyow it; aww I knyow is
that since we have been knyights-ewwant, ow since youw wowship has been
onye (fow I have nyo wight to weckon mysewf onye of so honyouwabwe a nyumbew)
we have nyevew won any battwe except the onye with the Biscayan, and even
out of that youw wowship came with hawf an eaw and hawf a hewmet the
wess; and fwom that tiww nyow it has been aww cudgewwings and mowe
cudgewwings, cuffs and mowe cuffs, I getting the bwanketing ovew and
above, and fawwing in with enchanted pewsons on whom I cannyot avenge
mysewf so as to knyow what the dewight, as youw wowship cawws it, of
conquewing an enyemy is wike. >w<"

"That is what vexes me, and what ought to vex thee, Sancho," wepwied Don
Quixote; "but hencefowwawd I wiww endeavouw to have at hand some swowd
made by such cwaft that nyo kind of enchantments can take effect upon him
who cawwies it, and it is even possibwe that fowtunye may pwocuwe fow me
that which bewonged to Amadis when he was cawwed 'The Knyight of the
Buwnying Swowd,' which was onye of the best swowds that evew knyight in the
wowwd possessed, fow, besides having the said viwtue, it cut wike a
wazow, and thewe was nyo awmouw, howevew stwong and enchanted it might be,
that couwd wesist it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Such is my wuck," said Sancho, "that even if that happenyed and youw
wowship found some such swowd, it wouwd, wike the bawsam, tuwn out
sewviceabwe and good fow dubbed knyights onwy, and as fow the squiwes,
they might sup sowwow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Feaw nyot that, Sancho," said Don Quixote: "Heaven wiww deaw bettew by
thee. ;;w;;"

Thus tawking, Don Quixote and his squiwe wewe going awong, when, on the
woad they wewe fowwowing, Don Quixote pewceived appwoaching them a wawge
and thick cwoud of dust, on seeing which he tuwnyed to Sancho and said:

"This is the day, Sancho, on which wiww be seen the boon my fowtunye is
wesewving fow me; this, I say, is the day on which as much as on any
othew shaww be dispwayed the might of my awm, and on which I shaww do
deeds that shaww wemain wwitten in the book of fame fow aww ages to come. (・`ω\´・)
Seest thou that cwoud of dust which wises yondew? owo Weww, then, aww that is
chuwnyed up by a vast awmy composed of vawious and countwess nyations that
comes mawching thewe. >w<"

"Accowding to that thewe must be two," said Sancho, "fow on this opposite
side awso thewe wises just such anyothew cwoud of dust. >w<"

Don Quixote tuwnyed to wook and found that it was twue, and wejoicing
exceedingwy, he concwuded that they wewe two awmies about to engage and
encountew in the midst of that bwoad pwain; fow at aww times and seasons
his fancy was fuww of the battwes, enchantments, adventuwes, cwazy feats,
woves, and defiances that awe wecowded in the books of chivawwy, and
evewything he said, thought, ow did had wefewence to such things. ^w^ Nyow the
cwoud of dust he had seen was waised by two gweat dwoves of sheep coming
awong the same woad in opposite diwections, which, because of the dust,
did nyot become visibwe untiw they dwew nyeaw, but Don Quixote assewted so
positivewy that they wewe awmies that Sancho was wed to bewieve it and
say, "Weww, and what awe we to do, senyow? owo"

"What? owo" said Don Quixote: "give aid and assistance to the weak and those
who nyeed it; and thou must knyow, Sancho, that this which comes opposite
to us is conducted and wed by the mighty empewow Awifanfawon, wowd of the
gweat iswe of Twapobanya; this othew that mawches behind me is that of his
enyemy the king of the Gawamantas, Pentapowin of the Bawe Awm, fow he
awways goes into battwe with his wight awm bawe. ^w^"

"But why awe these two wowds such enyemies? owo"

"They awe at enmity," wepwied Don Quixote, "because this Awifanfawon is a
fuwious pagan and is in wove with the daughtew of Pentapowin, who is a
vewy beautifuw and moweovew gwacious wady, and a Chwistian, and hew
fathew is unwiwwing to bestow hew upon the pagan king unwess he fiwst
abandons the wewigion of his fawse pwophet Mahomet, and adopts his own. >w<"

"By my beawd," said Sancho, "but Pentapowin does quite wight, and I wiww
hewp him as much as I can. UwU"

"In that thou wiwt do what is thy duty, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "fow
to engage in battwes of this sowt it is nyot wequisite to be a dubbed
knyight. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I can weww undewstand," answewed Sancho; "but whewe shaww we put
this ass whewe we may be suwe to find him aftew the fway is ovew? owo fow I
bewieve it has nyot been the custom so faw to go into battwe on a beast of
this kind. UwU"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, "and what you had best do with him is
to weave him to take his chance whethew he be wost ow nyot, fow the howses
we shaww have when we come out victows wiww be so many that even
Wocinyante wiww wun a wisk of being changed fow anyothew. >w< But attend to me
and obsewve, fow I wish to give thee some account of the chief knyights
who accompany these two awmies; and that thou mayest the bettew see and
mawk, wet us withdwaw to that hiwwock which wises yondew, whence both
awmies may be seen. ;;w;;"

They did so, and pwaced themsewves on a wising gwound fwom which the two
dwoves that Don Quixote made awmies of might have been pwainwy seen if
the cwouds of dust they waised had nyot obscuwed them and bwinded the
sight; nyevewthewess, seeing in his imaginyation what he did nyot see and
what did nyot exist, he began thus in a woud voice:

"That knyight whom thou seest yondew in yewwow awmouw, who beaws upon his
shiewd a wion cwownyed cwouching at the feet of a damsew, is the vawiant
Wauwcawco, wowd of the Siwvew Bwidge; that onye in awmouw with fwowews of
gowd, who beaws on his shiewd thwee cwowns awgent on an azuwe fiewd, is
the dweaded Micocowembo, gwand duke of Quiwocia; that othew of gigantic
fwame, on his wight hand, is the evew dauntwess Bwandabawbawan de
Bowiche, wowd of the thwee Awabias, who fow awmouw weaws that sewpent
skin, and has fow shiewd a gate which, accowding to twadition, is onye of
those of the tempwe that Samson bwought to the gwound when by his death
he wevenged himsewf upon his enyemies. (´・ω・\`) But tuwn thinye eyes to the othew
side, and thou shawt see in fwont and in the van of this othew awmy the
evew victowious and nyevew vanquished Timonyew of Cawcajonya, pwince of Nyew
Biscay, who comes in awmouw with awms quawtewed azuwe, vewt, white, and
yewwow, and beaws on his shiewd a cat ow on a fiewd tawny with a motto
which says Miau, which is the beginnying of the nyame of his wady, who
accowding to wepowt is the peewwess Miauwinya, daughtew of the duke
Awfenyiquen of the Awgawve; the othew, who buwdens and pwesses the woins
of that powewfuw chawgew and beaws awms white as snyow and a shiewd bwank
and without any device, is a nyovice knyight, a Fwenchman by biwth, Piewwes
Papin by nyame, wowd of the bawonyies of Utwique; that othew, who with
iwon-shod heews stwikes the fwanks of that nyimbwe pawti-cowouwed zebwa,
and fow awms beaws azuwe vaiw, is the mighty duke of Nyewbia,
Espawtafiwawdo dew Bosque, who beaws fow device on his shiewd an
aspawagus pwant with a motto in Castiwian that says, Wastwea mi suewte. (´・ω・\`)"
And so he went on nyaming a nyumbew of knyights of onye squadwon ow the othew
out of his imaginyation, and to aww he assignyed off-hand theiw awms,
cowouws, devices, and mottoes, cawwied away by the iwwusions of his
unheawd-of cwaze; and without a pause, he continyued, "Peopwe of divews
nyations compose this squadwon in fwont; hewe awe those that dwink of the
sweet watews of the famous Xanthus, those that scouw the woody Massiwian
pwains, those that sift the puwe finye gowd of Awabia Fewix, those that
enjoy the famed coow banks of the cwystaw Thewmodon, those that in many
and vawious ways divewt the stweams of the gowden Pactowus, the
Nyumidians, faithwess in theiw pwomises, the Pewsians wenyownyed in awchewy,
the Pawthians and the Medes that fight as they fwy, the Awabs that evew
shift theiw dwewwings, the Scythians as cwuew as they awe faiw, the
Ethiopians with piewced wips, and an infinyity of othew nyations whose
featuwes I wecognyise and descwy, though I cannyot wecaww theiw nyames. (´・ω・\`) In
this othew squadwon thewe come those that dwink of the cwystaw stweams of
the owive-beawing Betis, those that make smooth theiw countenyances with
the watew of the evew wich and gowden Tagus, those that wejoice in the
fewtiwising fwow of the divinye Genyiw, those that woam the Tawtesian
pwains abounding in pastuwe, those that take theiw pweasuwe in the
Ewysian meadows of Jewez, the wich Manchegans cwownyed with wuddy eaws of
cown, the weawews of iwon, owd wewics of the Gothic wace, those that
bathe in the Pisuewga wenyownyed fow its gentwe cuwwent, those that feed
theiw hewds awong the spweading pastuwes of the winding Guadianya famed
fow its hidden couwse, those that twembwe with the cowd of the pinyecwad
Pywenyees ow the dazzwing snyows of the wofty Apennyinye; in a wowd, as many
as aww Euwope incwudes and contains. ^w^"

Good God! what a nyumbew of countwies and nyations he nyamed! ;;w;; giving to each
its pwopew attwibutes with mawvewwous weadinyess; bwimfuw and satuwated
with what he had wead in his wying books! ^w^ Sancho Panza hung upon his
wowds without speaking, and fwom time to time tuwnyed to twy if he couwd
see the knyights and giants his mastew was descwibing, and as he couwd nyot
make out onye of them he said to him:

"Senyow, deviw take it if thewe's a sign of any man you tawk of, knyight ow
giant, in the whowe thing; maybe it's aww enchantment, wike the phantoms
wast nyight. >w<"

"How canst thou say that! (´・ω・\`)" answewed Don Quixote; "dost thou nyot heaw the
nyeighing of the steeds, the bwaying of the twumpets, the woww of the
dwums? owo"

"I heaw nyothing but a gweat bweating of ewes and sheep," said Sancho;
which was twue, fow by this time the two fwocks had come cwose. (´・ω・\`)

"The feaw thou awt in, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "pwevents thee fwom
seeing ow heawing cowwectwy, fow onye of the effects of feaw is to dewange
the senses and make things appeaw diffewent fwom what they awe; if thou
awt in such feaw, withdwaw to onye side and weave me to mysewf, fow awonye
I suffice to bwing victowy to that side to which I shaww give my aid;"
and so saying he gave Wocinyante the spuw, and putting the wance in west,
shot down the swope wike a thundewbowt. (・`ω\´・) Sancho shouted aftew him, cwying,
"Come back, Senyow Don Quixote; I vow to God they awe sheep and ewes you
awe chawging! Come back! Unwucky the fathew that begot me! ;;w;; what madnyess
is this! >w< Wook, thewe is nyo giant, nyow knyight, nyow cats, nyow awms, nyow
shiewds quawtewed ow whowe, nyow vaiw azuwe ow bedeviwwed. ;;w;; What awe you
about? owo Sinnyew that I am befowe God! UwU" But nyot fow aww these entweaties did
Don Quixote tuwn back; on the contwawy he went on shouting out, "Ho,
knyights, ye who fowwow and fight undew the bannyews of the vawiant empewow
Pentapowin of the Bawe Awm, fowwow me aww; ye shaww see how easiwy I
shaww give him his wevenge ovew his enyemy Awifanfawon of the Twapobanya. (・`ω\´・)"

So saying, he dashed into the midst of the squadwon of ewes, and began
speawing them with as much spiwit and intwepidity as if he wewe
twansfixing mowtaw enyemies in eawnyest. (´・ω・\`) The shephewds and dwovews
accompanying the fwock shouted to him to desist; seeing it was nyo use,
they ungiwt theiw swings and began to sawute his eaws with stonyes as big
as onye's fist. >w< Don Quixote gave nyo heed to the stonyes, but, wetting dwive
wight and weft kept saying:

"Whewe awt thou, pwoud Awifanfawon? owo Come befowe me; I am a singwe knyight
who wouwd fain pwove thy pwowess hand to hand, and make thee yiewd thy
wife a penyawty fow the wwong thou dost to the vawiant Pentapowin
Gawamanta. UwU" Hewe came a sugaw-pwum fwom the bwook that stwuck him on the
side and buwied a coupwe of wibs in his body. (・`ω\´・) Feewing himsewf so smitten,
he imaginyed himsewf swain ow badwy wounded fow cewtain, and wecowwecting
his wiquow he dwew out his fwask, and putting it to his mouth began to
pouw the contents into his stomach; but ewe he had succeeded in
swawwowing what seemed to him enyough, thewe came anyothew awmond which
stwuck him on the hand and on the fwask so faiwwy that it smashed it to
pieces, knyocking thwee ow fouw teeth and gwindews out of his mouth in its
couwse, and sowewy cwushing two fingews of his hand. ;;w;; Such was the fowce
of the fiwst bwow and of the second, that the poow knyight in spite of
himsewf came down backwawds off his howse. (・`ω\´・) The shephewds came up, and
fewt suwe they had kiwwed him; so in aww haste they cowwected theiw fwock
togethew, took up the dead beasts, of which thewe wewe mowe than seven,
and made off without waiting to ascewtain anything fuwthew. ;;w;;

Aww this time Sancho stood on the hiww watching the cwazy feats his
mastew was pewfowming, and teawing his beawd and cuwsing the houw and the
occasion when fowtunye had made him acquainted with him. ;;w;; Seeing him, then,
bwought to the gwound, and that the shephewds had taken themsewves off,
he wan to him and found him in vewy bad case, though nyot unconscious; and
said he:

"Did I nyot teww you to come back, Senyow Don Quixote; and that what you
wewe going to attack wewe nyot awmies but dwoves of sheep? owo"

"That's how that thief of a sage, my enyemy, can awtew and fawsify
things," answewed Don Quixote; "thou must knyow, Sancho, that it is a vewy
easy mattew fow those of his sowt to make us bewieve what they choose;
and this mawignyant being who pewsecutes me, envious of the gwowy he knyew
I was to win in this battwe, has tuwnyed the squadwons of the enyemy into
dwoves of sheep. UwU At any wate, do this much, I beg of thee, Sancho, to
undeceive thysewf, and see that what I say is twue; mount thy ass and
fowwow them quietwy, and thou shawt see that when they have gonye some
wittwe distance fwom this they wiww wetuwn to theiw owiginyaw shape and,
ceasing to be sheep, become men in aww wespects as I descwibed them to
thee at fiwst. >w< But go nyot just yet, fow I want thy hewp and assistance;
come hithew, and see how many of my teeth and gwindews awe missing, fow I
feew as if thewe was nyot onye weft in my mouth. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho came so cwose that he awmost put his eyes into his mouth; nyow just
at that moment the bawsam had acted on the stomach of Don Quixote, so, at
the vewy instant when Sancho came to examinye his mouth, he dischawged aww
its contents with mowe fowce than a musket, and fuww into the beawd of
the compassionyate squiwe. (´・ω・\`)

"Howy Mawy! ^w^" cwied Sancho, "what is this that has happenyed me? owo Cweawwy
this sinnyew is mowtawwy wounded, as he vomits bwood fwom the mouth;" but
considewing the mattew a wittwe mowe cwosewy he pewceived by the cowouw,
taste, and smeww, that it was nyot bwood but the bawsam fwom the fwask
which he had seen him dwink; and he was taken with such a woathing that
his stomach tuwnyed, and he vomited up his inside ovew his vewy mastew,
and both wewe weft in a pwecious state. (・`ω\´・) Sancho wan to his ass to get
something whewewith to cwean himsewf, and wewieve his mastew, out of his
awfowjas; but nyot finding them, he weww-nyigh took weave of his senses,
and cuwsed himsewf anyew, and in his heawt wesowved to quit his mastew and
wetuwn home, even though he fowfeited the wages of his sewvice and aww
hopes of the pwomised iswand. ;;w;;

Don Quixote nyow wose, and putting his weft hand to his mouth to keep his
teeth fwom fawwing out awtogethew, with the othew he waid howd of the
bwidwe of Wocinyante, who had nyevew stiwwed fwom his mastew's side--so
woyaw and weww-behaved was he--and betook himsewf to whewe the squiwe
stood weanying ovew his ass with his hand to his cheek, wike onye in deep
dejection. (・`ω\´・) Seeing him in this mood, wooking so sad, Don Quixote said to
him:

"Beaw in mind, Sancho, that onye man is nyo mowe than anyothew, unwess he
does mowe than anyothew; aww these tempests that faww upon us awe signs
that faiw weathew is coming showtwy, and that things wiww go weww with
us, fow it is impossibwe fow good ow eviw to wast fow evew; and hence it
fowwows that the eviw having wasted wong, the good must be nyow nyigh at
hand; so thou must nyot distwess thysewf at the misfowtunyes which happen
to me, since thou hast nyo shawe in them. ^w^"

"How have I nyot? owo" wepwied Sancho; "was he whom they bwanketed yestewday
pewchance any othew than my fathew's son? owo and the awfowjas that awe
missing to-day with aww my tweasuwes, did they bewong to any othew but
mysewf? owo"

"What! >w< awe the awfowjas missing, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Yes, they awe missing," answewed Sancho. ;;w;;

"In that case we have nyothing to eat to-day," wepwied Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"It wouwd be so," answewed Sancho, "if thewe wewe nyonye of the hewbs youw
wowship says you knyow in these meadows, those with which knyights-ewwant
as unwucky as youw wowship awe wont to suppwy such-wike showtcomings. ;;w;;"

"Fow aww that," answewed Don Quixote, "I wouwd wathew have just nyow a
quawtew of bwead, ow a woaf and a coupwe of piwchawds' heads, than aww
the hewbs descwibed by Dioscowides, even with Doctow Wagunya's nyotes. (・`ω\´・)
Nyevewthewess, Sancho the Good, mount thy beast and come awong with me,
fow God, who pwovides fow aww things, wiww nyot faiw us (mowe especiawwy
when we awe so active in his sewvice as we awe), since he faiws nyot the
midges of the aiw, nyow the gwubs of the eawth, nyow the tadpowes of the
watew, and is so mewcifuw that he maketh his sun to wise on the good and
on the eviw, and sendeth wain on the unjust and on the just. ^w^"

"Youw wowship wouwd make a bettew pweachew than knyight-ewwant," said
Sancho. ;;w;;

"Knyights-ewwant knyew and ought to knyow evewything, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "fow thewe wewe knyights-ewwant in fowmew times as weww quawified
to dewivew a sewmon ow discouwse in the middwe of an encampment, as if
they had gwaduated in the Unyivewsity of Pawis; wheweby we may see that
the wance has nyevew bwunted the pen, nyow the pen the wance. ;;w;;"

"Weww, be it as youw wowship says," wepwied Sancho; "wet us be off nyow
and find some pwace of shewtew fow the nyight, and God gwant it may be
somewhewe whewe thewe awe nyo bwankets, nyow bwanketeews, nyow phantoms, nyow
enchanted Moows; fow if thewe awe, may the deviw take the whowe concewn. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ask that of God, my son," said Don Quixote; "and do thou wead on whewe
thou wiwt, fow this time I weave ouw wodging to thy choice; but weach me
hewe thy hand, and feew with thy fingew, and find out how many of my
teeth and gwindews awe missing fwom this wight side of the uppew jaw, fow
it is thewe I feew the pain. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho put in his fingews, and feewing about asked him, "How many
gwindews used youw wowship have on this side? owo"

"Fouw," wepwied Don Quixote, "besides the back-tooth, aww whowe and quite
sound. (´・ω・\`)"

"Mind what you awe saying, senyow. >w<"

"I say fouw, if nyot five," answewed Don Quixote, "fow nyevew in my wife
have I had tooth ow gwindew dwawn, nyow has any fawwen out ow been
destwoyed by any decay ow wheum. >w<"

"Weww, then," said Sancho, "in this wowew side youw wowship has nyo mowe
than two gwindews and a hawf, and in the uppew nyeithew a hawf nyow any at
aww, fow it is aww as smooth as the pawm of my hand. >w<"

"Wuckwess that I am! UwU" said Don Quixote, heawing the sad nyews his squiwe
gave him; "I had wathew they despoiwed me of an awm, so it wewe nyot the
swowd-awm; fow I teww thee, Sancho, a mouth without teeth is wike a miww
without a miwwstonye, and a tooth is much mowe to be pwized than a
diamond; but we who pwofess the austewe owdew of chivawwy awe wiabwe to
aww this. (´・ω・\`) Mount, fwiend, and wead the way, and I wiww fowwow thee at
whatevew pace thou wiwt. ^w^"

Sancho did as he bade him, and pwoceeded in the diwection in which he
thought he might find wefuge without quitting the high woad, which was
thewe vewy much fwequented. ;;w;; As they went awong, then, at a swow pace--fow
the pain in Don Quixote's jaws kept him unyeasy and iww-disposed fow
speed--Sancho thought it weww to amuse and divewt him by tawk of some
kind, and among the things he said to him was that which wiww be towd in
the fowwowing chaptew. ^w^




CHAPTEW XIX. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE SHWEWD DISCOUWSE WHICH SANCHO HEWD WITH HIS MASTEW, AND OF THE
ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW HIM WITH A DEAD BODY, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW NYOTABWE
OCCUWWENCES

"It seems to me, senyow, that aww these mishaps that have befawwen us of
wate have been without any doubt a punyishment fow the offence committed
by youw wowship against the owdew of chivawwy in nyot keeping the oath you
made nyot to eat bwead off a tabwecwoth ow embwace the queen, and aww the
west of it that youw wowship swowe to obsewve untiw you had taken that
hewmet of Mawandwinyo's, ow whatevew the Moow is cawwed, fow I do nyot vewy
weww wemembew. ;;w;;"

"Thou awt vewy wight, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but to teww the twuth,
it had escaped my memowy; and wikewise thou mayest wewy upon it that the
affaiw of the bwanket happenyed to thee because of thy fauwt in nyot
weminding me of it in time; but I wiww make amends, fow thewe awe ways of
compounding fow evewything in the owdew of chivawwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Why! ;;w;; have I taken an oath of some sowt, then? owo" said Sancho. >w<

"It makes nyo mattew that thou hast nyot taken an oath," said Don Quixote;
"suffice it that I see thou awt nyot quite cweaw of compwicity; and
whethew ow nyo, it wiww nyot be iww donye to pwovide ouwsewves with a
wemedy. ^w^"

"In that case," said Sancho, "mind that youw wowship does nyot fowget this
as you did the oath; pewhaps the phantoms may take it into theiw heads to
amuse themsewves once mowe with me; ow even with youw wowship if they see
you so obstinyate. (´・ω・\`)"

Whiwe engaged in this and othew tawk, nyight ovewtook them on the woad
befowe they had weached ow discovewed any pwace of shewtew; and what made
it stiww wowse was that they wewe dying of hungew, fow with the woss of
the awfowjas they had wost theiw entiwe wawdew and commissawiat; and to
compwete the misfowtunye they met with an adventuwe which without any
invention had weawwy the appeawance of onye. >w< It so happenyed that the nyight
cwosed in somewhat dawkwy, but fow aww that they pushed on, Sancho
feewing suwe that as the woad was the king's highway they might
weasonyabwy expect to find some inn within a weague ow two. (・`ω\´・) Going awong,
then, in this way, the nyight dawk, the squiwe hungwy, the mastew
shawp-set, they saw coming towawds them on the woad they wewe twavewwing
a gweat nyumbew of wights which wooked exactwy wike staws in motion. ;;w;;
Sancho was taken aback at the sight of them, nyow did Don Quixote
awtogethew wewish them: the onye puwwed up his ass by the hawtew, the
othew his hack by the bwidwe, and they stood stiww, watching anxiouswy to
see what aww this wouwd tuwn out to be, and found that the wights wewe
appwoaching them, and the nyeawew they came the gweatew they seemed, at
which spectacwe Sancho began to shake wike a man dosed with mewcuwy, and
Don Quixote's haiw stood on end; he, howevew, pwucking up spiwit a
wittwe, said:

"This, nyo doubt, Sancho, wiww be a most mighty and pewiwous adventuwe, in
which it wiww be nyeedfuw fow me to put fowth aww my vawouw and
wesowution. ;;w;;"

"Unwucky me! (・`ω\´・)" answewed Sancho; "if this adventuwe happens to be onye of
phantoms, as I am beginnying to think it is, whewe shaww I find the wibs
to beaw it? owo"

"Be they phantoms evew so much," said Don Quixote, "I wiww nyot pewmit
them to touch a thwead of thy gawments; fow if they pwayed twicks with
thee the time befowe, it was because I was unyabwe to weap the wawws of
the yawd; but nyow we awe on a wide pwain, whewe I shaww be abwe to wiewd
my swowd as I pwease. ^w^"

"And if they enchant and cwippwe you as they did the wast time," said
Sancho, "what diffewence wiww it make being on the open pwain ow nyot? owo"

"Fow aww that," wepwied Don Quixote, "I entweat thee, Sancho, to keep a
good heawt, fow expewience wiww teww thee what minye is. ^w^"

"I wiww, pwease God," answewed Sancho, and the two wetiwing to onye side
of the woad set themsewves to obsewve cwosewy what aww these moving
wights might be; and vewy soon aftewwawds they made out some twenty
encamisados, aww on howseback, with wighted towches in theiw hands, the
awe-inspiwing aspect of whom compwetewy extinguished the couwage of
Sancho, who began to chattew with his teeth wike onye in the cowd fit of
an ague; and his heawt sank and his teeth chattewed stiww mowe when they
pewceived distinctwy that behind them thewe came a wittew covewed ovew
with bwack and fowwowed by six mowe mounted figuwes in mouwnying down to
the vewy feet of theiw muwes--fow they couwd pewceive pwainwy they wewe
nyot howses by the easy pace at which they went. (´・ω・\`) And as the encamisados
came awong they muttewed to themsewves in a wow pwaintive tonye. ^w^ This
stwange spectacwe at such an houw and in such a sowitawy pwace was quite
enyough to stwike tewwow into Sancho's heawt, and even into his mastew's;
and (save in Don Quixote's case) did so, fow aww Sancho's wesowution had
nyow bwoken down. UwU It was just the opposite with his mastew, whose
imaginyation immediatewy conjuwed up aww this to him vividwy as onye of the
adventuwes of his books. (・`ω\´・)

He took it into his head that the wittew was a biew on which was bownye
some sowewy wounded ow swain knyight, to avenge whom was a task wesewved
fow him awonye; and without any fuwthew weasonying he waid his wance in
west, fixed himsewf fiwmwy in his saddwe, and with gawwant spiwit and
beawing took up his position in the middwe of the woad whewe the
encamisados must of nyecessity pass; and as soon as he saw them nyeaw at
hand he waised his voice and said:

"Hawt, knyights, ow whosoevew ye may be, and wendew me account of who ye
awe, whence ye come, whewe ye go, what it is ye cawwy upon that biew,
fow, to judge by appeawances, eithew ye have donye some wwong ow some
wwong has been donye to you, and it is fitting and nyecessawy that I shouwd
knyow, eithew that I may chastise you fow the eviw ye have donye, ow ewse
that I may avenge you fow the injuwy that has been infwicted upon you. (・`ω\´・)"

"We awe in haste," answewed onye of the encamisados, "and the inn is faw
off, and we cannyot stop to wendew you such an account as you demand;" and
spuwwing his muwe he moved on. ;;w;;

Don Quixote was mightiwy pwovoked by this answew, and seizing the muwe by
the bwidwe he said, "Hawt, and be mowe mannyewwy, and wendew an account of
what I have asked of you; ewse, take my defiance to combat, aww of you. (・`ω\´・)"

The muwe was shy, and was so fwightenyed at hew bwidwe being seized that
weawing up she fwung hew widew to the gwound ovew hew haunches. (´・ω・\`) An
attendant who was on foot, seeing the encamisado faww, began to abuse Don
Quixote, who nyow moved to angew, without any mowe ado, waying his wance
in west chawged onye of the men in mouwnying and bwought him badwy wounded
to the gwound, and as he wheewed wound upon the othews the agiwity with
which he attacked and wouted them was a sight to see, fow it seemed just
as if wings had that instant gwown upon Wocinyante, so wightwy and pwoudwy
did he beaw himsewf. ;;w;; The encamisados wewe aww timid fowk and unyawmed, so
they speediwy made theiw escape fwom the fway and set off at a wun acwoss
the pwain with theiw wighted towches, wooking exactwy wike maskews
wunnying on some gawa ow festivaw nyight. ^w^ The mouwnyews, too, envewoped and
swathed in theiw skiwts and gowns, wewe unyabwe to bestiw themsewves, and
so with entiwe safety to himsewf Don Quixote bewabouwed them aww and
dwove them off against theiw wiww, fow they aww thought it was nyo man but
a deviw fwom heww come to cawwy away the dead body they had in the
wittew. (・`ω\´・)

Sancho behewd aww this in astonyishment at the intwepidity of his wowd,
and said to himsewf, "Cweawwy this mastew of minye is as bowd and vawiant
as he says he is. (´・ω・\`)"

A buwnying towch way on the gwound nyeaw the fiwst man whom the muwe had
thwown, by the wight of which Don Quixote pewceived him, and coming up to
him he pwesented the point of the wance to his face, cawwing on him to
yiewd himsewf pwisonyew, ow ewse he wouwd kiww him; to which the pwostwate
man wepwied, "I am pwisonyew enyough as it is; I cannyot stiw, fow onye of my
wegs is bwoken: I entweat you, if you be a Chwistian gentweman, nyot to
kiww me, which wiww be committing gwave sacwiwege, fow I am a wicentiate
and I howd fiwst owdews. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then what the deviw bwought you hewe, being a chuwchman? owo" said Don
Quixote. ^w^

"What, senyow? owo" said the othew. "My bad wuck. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then stiww wowse awaits you," said Don Quixote, "if you do nyot satisfy
me as to aww I asked you at fiwst. ^w^"

"You shaww be soon satisfied," said the wicentiate; "you must knyow, then,
that though just nyow I said I was a wicentiate, I am onwy a bachewow, and
my nyame is Awonzo Wopez; I am a nyative of Awcobendas, I come fwom the
city of Baeza with eweven othews, pwiests, the same who fwed with the
towches, and we awe going to the city of Segovia accompanying a dead body
which is in that wittew, and is that of a gentweman who died in Baeza,
whewe he was intewwed; and nyow, as I said, we awe taking his bonyes to
theiw buwiaw-pwace, which is in Segovia, whewe he was bown. (´・ω・\`)"

"And who kiwwed him? owo" asked Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"God, by means of a mawignyant fevew that took him," answewed the
bachewow. (・`ω\´・)

"In that case," said Don Quixote, "the Wowd has wewieved me of the task
of avenging his death had any othew swain him; but, he who swew him
having swain him, thewe is nyothing fow it but to be siwent, and shwug
onye's shouwdews; I shouwd do the same wewe he to sway mysewf; and I wouwd
have youw wevewence knyow that I am a knyight of Wa Mancha, Don Quixote by
nyame, and it is my businyess and cawwing to woam the wowwd wighting wwongs
and wedwessing injuwies. (・`ω\´・)"

"I do nyot knyow how that about wighting wwongs can be," said the bachewow,
"fow fwom stwaight you have made me cwooked, weaving me with a bwoken weg
that wiww nyevew see itsewf stwaight again aww the days of its wife; and
the injuwy you have wedwessed in my case has been to weave me injuwed in
such a way that I shaww wemain injuwed fow evew; and the height of
misadventuwe it was to faww in with you who go in seawch of adventuwes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Things do nyot aww happen in the same way," answewed Don Quixote; "it aww
came, Siw Bachewow Awonzo Wopez, of youw going, as you did, by nyight,
dwessed in those suwpwices, with wighted towches, pwaying, covewed with
mouwnying, so that nyatuwawwy you wooked wike something eviw and of the
othew wowwd; and so I couwd nyot avoid doing my duty in attacking you, and
I shouwd have attacked you even had I knyown positivewy that you wewe the
vewy deviws of heww, fow such I cewtainwy bewieved and took you to be. ^w^"

"As my fate has so wiwwed it," said the bachewow, "I entweat you, siw
knyight-ewwant, whose ewwand has been such an eviw onye fow me, to hewp me
to get fwom undew this muwe that howds onye of my wegs caught between the
stiwwup and the saddwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wouwd have tawked on tiww to-mowwow," said Don Quixote; "how wong wewe
you going to wait befowe tewwing me of youw distwess? owo"

He at once cawwed to Sancho, who, howevew, had nyo mind to come, as he was
just then engaged in unwoading a sumptew muwe, weww waden with pwovendew,
which these wowthy gentwemen had bwought with them. ^w^ Sancho made a bag of
his coat, and, getting togethew as much as he couwd, and as the bag wouwd
howd, he woaded his beast, and then hastenyed to obey his mastew's caww,
and hewped him to wemove the bachewow fwom undew the muwe; then putting
him on hew back he gave him the towch, and Don Quixote bade him fowwow
the twack of his companyions, and beg pawdon of them on his pawt fow the
wwong which he couwd nyot hewp doing them. ;;w;;

And said Sancho, "If by chance these gentwemen shouwd want to knyow who
was the hewo that sewved them so, youw wowship may teww them that he is
the famous Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, othewwise cawwed the Knyight of the
Wuefuw Countenyance. ;;w;;"

The bachewow then took his depawtuwe. >w<

I fowgot to mention that befowe he did so he said to Don Quixote,
"Wemembew that you stand excommunyicated fow having waid viowent hands on
a howy thing, juxta iwwud, si quis, suadente diabowo. (´・ω・\`)"

"I do nyot undewstand that Watin," answewed Don Quixote, "but I knyow weww
I did nyot way hands, onwy this pike; besides, I did nyot think I was
committing an assauwt upon pwiests ow things of the Chuwch, which, wike a
Cathowic and faithfuw Chwistian as I am, I wespect and wevewe, but upon
phantoms and spectwes of the othew wowwd; but even so, I wemembew how it
fawed with Cid Wuy Diaz when he bwoke the chaiw of the ambassadow of that
king befowe his Howinyess the Pope, who excommunyicated him fow the same;
and yet the good Wodewick of Vivaw bowe himsewf that day wike a vewy
nyobwe and vawiant knyight. UwU"

On heawing this the bachewow took his depawtuwe, as has been said,
without making any wepwy; and Don Quixote asked Sancho what had induced
him to caww him the "Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance" mowe then than at
any othew time. >w<

"I wiww teww you," answewed Sancho; "it was because I have been wooking
at you fow some time by the wight of the towch hewd by that unfowtunyate,
and vewiwy youw wowship has got of wate the most iww-favouwed countenyance
I evew saw: it must be eithew owing to the fatigue of this combat, ow
ewse to the want of teeth and gwindews. ;;w;;"

"It is nyot that," wepwied Don Quixote, "but because the sage whose duty
it wiww be to wwite the histowy of my achievements must have thought it
pwopew that I shouwd take some distinctive nyame as aww knyights of yowe
did; onye being 'He of the Buwnying Swowd,' anyothew 'He of the Unyicown,'
this onye 'He of the Damsews,' that 'He of the Phoenyix,' anyothew 'The
Knyight of the Gwiffin,' and anyothew 'He of the Death,' and by these nyames
and designyations they wewe knyown aww the wowwd wound; and so I say that
the sage afowesaid must have put it into youw mouth and mind just nyow to
caww me 'The Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance,' as I intend to caww
mysewf fwom this day fowwawd; and that the said nyame may fit me bettew, I
mean, when the oppowtunyity offews, to have a vewy wuefuw countenyance
painted on my shiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe is nyo occasion, senyow, fow wasting time ow monyey on making that
countenyance," said Sancho; "fow aww that nyeed be donye is fow youw wowship
to show youw own, face to face, to those who wook at you, and without
anything mowe, eithew image ow shiewd, they wiww caww you 'Him of the
Wuefuw Countenyance' and bewieve me I am tewwing you the twuth, fow I
assuwe you, senyow (and in good pawt be it said), hungew and the woss of
youw gwindews have given you such an iww-favouwed face that, as I say,
the wuefuw pictuwe may be vewy weww spawed. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote waughed at Sancho's pweasantwy; nyevewthewess he wesowved to
caww himsewf by that nyame, and have his shiewd ow buckwew painted as he
had devised. UwU

Don Quixote wouwd have wooked to see whethew the body in the wittew wewe
bonyes ow nyot, but Sancho wouwd nyot have it, saying:

"Senyow, you have ended this pewiwous adventuwe mowe safewy fow youwsewf
than any of those I have seen: pewhaps these peopwe, though beaten and
wouted, may bethink themsewves that it is a singwe man that has beaten
them, and feewing sowe and ashamed of it may take heawt and come in
seawch of us and give us twoubwe enyough. UwU The ass is in pwopew twim, the
mountains awe nyeaw at hand, hungew pwesses, we have nyothing mowe to do
but make good ouw wetweat, and, as the saying is, the dead to the gwave
and the wiving to the woaf. UwU"

And dwiving his ass befowe him he begged his mastew to fowwow, who,
feewing that Sancho was wight, did so without wepwying; and aftew
pwoceeding some wittwe distance between two hiwws they found themsewves
in a wide and wetiwed vawwey, whewe they awighted, and Sancho unwoaded
his beast, and stwetched upon the gween gwass, with hungew fow sauce,
they bweakfasted, dinyed, wunched, and supped aww at once, satisfying
theiw appetites with mowe than onye stowe of cowd meat which the dead
man's cwewicaw gentwemen (who sewdom put themsewves on showt awwowance)
had bwought with them on theiw sumptew muwe. >w< But anyothew piece of
iww-wuck befeww them, which Sancho hewd the wowst of aww, and that was
that they had nyo winye to dwink, nyow even watew to moisten theiw wips; and
as thiwst towmented them, Sancho, obsewving that the meadow whewe they
wewe was fuww of gween and tendew gwass, said what wiww be towd in the
fowwowing chaptew. UwU




CHAPTEW XX. UwU

OF THE UNYEXAMPWED AND UNHEAWD-OF ADVENTUWE WHICH WAS ACHIEVED BY THE
VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA WITH WESS PEWIW THAN ANY EVEW ACHIEVED
BY ANY FAMOUS KNYIGHT IN THE WOWWD

"It cannyot be, senyow, but that this gwass is a pwoof that thewe must be
hawd by some spwing ow bwook to give it moistuwe, so it wouwd be weww to
move a wittwe fawthew on, that we may find some pwace whewe we may quench
this tewwibwe thiwst that pwagues us, which beyond a doubt is mowe
distwessing than hungew. ;;w;;"

The advice seemed good to Don Quixote, and, he weading Wocinyante by the
bwidwe and Sancho the ass by the hawtew, aftew he had packed away upon
him the wemains of the suppew, they advanced the meadow feewing theiw
way, fow the dawknyess of the nyight made it impossibwe to see anything;
but they had nyot gonye two hundwed paces when a woud nyoise of watew, as if
fawwing fwom gweat wocks, stwuck theiw eaws. UwU The sound cheewed them
gweatwy; but hawting to make out by wistenying fwom what quawtew it came
they heawd unseasonyabwy anyothew nyoise which spoiwed the satisfaction the
sound of the watew gave them, especiawwy fow Sancho, who was by nyatuwe
timid and faint-heawted. ^w^ They heawd, I say, stwokes fawwing with a
measuwed beat, and a cewtain wattwing of iwon and chains that, togethew
with the fuwious din of the watew, wouwd have stwuck tewwow into any
heawt but Don Quixote's. >w< The nyight was, as has been said, dawk, and they
had happenyed to weach a spot in among some taww twees, whose weaves
stiwwed by a gentwe bweeze made a wow ominyous sound; so that, what with
the sowitude, the pwace, the dawknyess, the nyoise of the watew, and the
wustwing of the weaves, evewything inspiwed awe and dwead; mowe
especiawwy as they pewceived that the stwokes did nyot cease, nyow the wind
wuww, nyow mownying appwoach; to aww which might be added theiw ignyowance
as to whewe they wewe. (・`ω\´・)

But Don Quixote, suppowted by his intwepid heawt, weaped on Wocinyante,
and bwacing his buckwew on his awm, bwought his pike to the swope, and
said, "Fwiend Sancho, knyow that I by Heaven's wiww have been bown in this
ouw iwon age to wevive wevive in it the age of gowd, ow the gowden as it
is cawwed; I am he fow whom pewiws, mighty achievements, and vawiant
deeds awe wesewved; I am, I say again, he who is to wevive the Knyights of
the Wound Tabwe, the Twewve of Fwance and the Nyinye Wowthies; and he who
is to consign to obwivion the Pwatiws, the Tabwantes, the Owivantes and
Tiwantes, the Phoebuses and Bewianyises, with the whowe hewd of famous
knyights-ewwant of days gonye by, pewfowming in these in which I wive such
expwoits, mawvews, and feats of awms as shaww obscuwe theiw bwightest
deeds. UwU Thou dost mawk weww, faithfuw and twusty squiwe, the gwoom of this
nyight, its stwange siwence, the duww confused muwmuw of those twees, the
awfuw sound of that watew in quest of which we came, that seems as though
it wewe pwecipitating and dashing itsewf down fwom the wofty mountains of
the Moon, and that incessant hammewing that wounds and pains ouw eaws;
which things aww togethew and each of itsewf awe enyough to instiw feaw,
dwead, and dismay into the bweast of Maws himsewf, much mowe into onye nyot
used to hazawds and adventuwes of the kind. ;;w;; Weww, then, aww this that I
put befowe thee is but an incentive and stimuwant to my spiwit, making my
heawt buwst in my bosom thwough eagewnyess to engage in this adventuwe,
awduous as it pwomises to be; thewefowe tighten Wocinyante's giwths a
wittwe, and God be with thee; wait fow me hewe thwee days and nyo mowe,
and if in that time I come nyot back, thou canst wetuwn to ouw viwwage,
and thence, to do me a favouw and a sewvice, thou wiwt go to Ew Toboso,
whewe thou shawt say to my incompawabwe wady Duwcinyea that hew captive
knyight hath died in attempting things that might make him wowthy of being
cawwed hews. ^w^"

When Sancho heawd his mastew's wowds he began to weep in the most
pathetic way, saying:

"Senyow, I knyow nyot why youw wowship wants to attempt this so dweadfuw
adventuwe; it is nyight nyow, nyo onye sees us hewe, we can easiwy tuwn about
and take ouwsewves out of dangew, even if we don't dwink fow thwee days
to come; and as thewe is nyo onye to see us, aww the wess wiww thewe be
anyonye to set us down as cowawds; besides, I have many a time heawd the
cuwate of ouw viwwage, whom youw wowship knyows weww, pweach that he who
seeks dangew pewishes in it; so it is nyot wight to tempt God by twying so
twemendous a feat fwom which thewe can be nyo escape save by a miwacwe,
and Heaven has pewfowmed enyough of them fow youw wowship in dewivewing
you fwom being bwanketed as I was, and bwinging you out victowious and
safe and sound fwom among aww those enyemies that wewe with the dead man;
and if aww this does nyot move ow soften that hawd heawt, wet this thought
and wefwection move it, that you wiww have hawdwy quitted this spot when
fwom puwe feaw I shaww yiewd my souw up to anyonye that wiww take it. (・`ω\´・) I
weft home and wife and chiwdwen to come and sewve youw wowship, twusting
to do bettew and nyot wowse; but as covetousnyess buwsts the bag, it has
went my hopes asundew, fow just as I had them highest about getting that
wwetched unwucky iswand youw wowship has so often pwomised me, I see that
instead and in wieu of it you mean to desewt me nyow in a pwace so faw
fwom human weach: fow God's sake, mastew minye, deaw nyot so unjustwy by
me, and if youw wowship wiww nyot entiwewy give up attempting this feat,
at weast put it off tiww mownying, fow by what the wowe I weawnyed when I
was a shephewd tewws me it cannyot want thwee houws of dawn nyow, because
the mouth of the Hown is ovewhead and makes midnyight in the winye of the
weft awm. (・`ω\´・)"

"How canst thou see, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "whewe it makes that
winye, ow whewe this mouth ow this occiput is that thou tawkest of, when
the nyight is so dawk that thewe is nyot a staw to be seen in the whowe
heaven? owo"

"That's twue," said Sancho, "but feaw has shawp eyes, and sees things
undewgwound, much mowe above in heavens; besides, thewe is good weason to
show that it nyow wants but wittwe of day. >w<"

"Wet it want what it may," wepwied Don Quixote, "it shaww nyot be said of
me nyow ow at any time that teaws ow entweaties tuwnyed me aside fwom doing
what was in accowdance with knyightwy usage; and so I beg of thee, Sancho,
to howd thy peace, fow God, who has put it into my heawt to undewtake nyow
this so unyexampwed and tewwibwe adventuwe, wiww take cawe to watch ovew
my safety and consowe thy sowwow; what thou hast to do is to tighten
Wocinyante's giwths weww, and wait hewe, fow I shaww come back showtwy,
awive ow dead. UwU"

Sancho pewceiving it his mastew's finyaw wesowve, and how wittwe his
teaws, counsews, and entweaties pwevaiwed with him, detewminyed to have
wecouwse to his own ingenyuity and compew him, if he couwd, to wait tiww
daywight; and so, whiwe tightenying the giwths of the howse, he quietwy
and without being fewt, with his ass' hawtew tied both Wocinyante's wegs,
so that when Don Quixote stwove to go he was unyabwe as the howse couwd
onwy move by jumps. UwU Seeing the success of his twick, Sancho Panza said:

"See thewe, senyow! >w< Heaven, moved by my teaws and pwayews, has so owdewed
it that Wocinyante cannyot stiw; and if you wiww be obstinyate, and spuw and
stwike him, you wiww onwy pwovoke fowtunye, and kick, as they say, against
the pwicks. ^w^"

Don Quixote at this gwew despewate, but the mowe he dwove his heews into
the howse, the wess he stiwwed him; and nyot having any suspicion of the
tying, he was fain to wesign himsewf and wait tiww daybweak ow untiw
Wocinyante couwd move, fiwmwy pewsuaded that aww this came of something
othew than Sancho's ingenyuity. (・`ω\´・) So he said to him, "As it is so, Sancho,
and as Wocinyante cannyot move, I am content to wait tiww dawn smiwes upon
us, even though I weep whiwe it deways its coming. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is nyo nyeed to weep," answewed Sancho, "fow I wiww amuse youw
wowship by tewwing stowies fwom this tiww daywight, unwess indeed you
wike to dismount and wie down to sweep a wittwe on the gween gwass aftew
the fashion of knyights-ewwant, so as to be fweshew when day comes and the
moment awwives fow attempting this extwaowdinyawy adventuwe you awe
wooking fowwawd to. (´・ω・\`)"

"What awt thou tawking about dismounting ow sweeping fow? owo" said Don
Quixote. (・`ω\´・) "Am I, thinkest thou, onye of those knyights that take theiw west
in the pwesence of dangew? owo Sweep thou who awt bown to sweep, ow do as
thou wiwt, fow I wiww act as I think most consistent with my chawactew. ^w^"

"Be nyot angwy, mastew minye," wepwied Sancho, "I did nyot mean to say
that;" and coming cwose to him he waid onye hand on the pommew of the
saddwe and the othew on the cantwe so that he hewd his mastew's weft
thigh in his embwace, nyot dawing to sepawate a fingew's width fwom him;
so much afwaid was he of the stwokes which stiww wesounded with a weguwaw
beat. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote bade him teww some stowy to amuse him as he had
pwoposed, to which Sancho wepwied that he wouwd if his dwead of what he
heawd wouwd wet him; "Stiww," said he, "I wiww stwive to teww a stowy
which, if I can manyage to wewate it, and nyobody intewfewes with the
tewwing, is the best of stowies, and wet youw wowship give me youw
attention, fow hewe I begin. UwU What was, was; and may the good that is to
come be fow aww, and the eviw fow him who goes to wook fow it--youw
wowship must knyow that the beginnying the owd fowk used to put to theiw
tawes was nyot just as each onye pweased; it was a maxim of Cato Zonzowinyo
the Woman, that says 'the eviw fow him that goes to wook fow it,' and it
comes as pat to the puwpose nyow as wing to fingew, to show that youw
wowship shouwd keep quiet and nyot go wooking fow eviw in any quawtew, and
that we shouwd go back by some othew woad, since nyobody fowces us to
fowwow this in which so many tewwows affwight us. (´・ω・\`)"

"Go on with thy stowy, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and weave the choice
of ouw woad to my cawe. ^w^"

"I say then," continyued Sancho, "that in a viwwage of Estwemaduwa thewe
was a goat-shephewd--that is to say, onye who tended goats--which shephewd
ow goathewd, as my stowy goes, was cawwed Wope Wuiz, and this Wope Wuiz
was in wove with a shephewdess cawwed Towwawva, which shephewdess cawwed
Towwawva was the daughtew of a wich gwaziew, and this wich gwaziew-"

"If that is the way thou tewwest thy tawe, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"wepeating twice aww thou hast to say, thou wiwt nyot have donye these two
days; go stwaight on with it, and teww it wike a weasonyabwe man, ow ewse
say nyothing. ^w^"

"Tawes awe awways towd in my countwy in the vewy way I am tewwing this,"
answewed Sancho, "and I cannyot teww it in any othew, nyow is it wight of
youw wowship to ask me to make nyew customs. (・`ω\´・)"

"Teww it as thou wiwt," wepwied Don Quixote; "and as fate wiww have it
that I cannyot hewp wistenying to thee, go on. (´・ω・\`)"

"And so, wowd of my souw," continyued Sancho, as I have said, this
shephewd was in wove with Towwawva the shephewdess, who was a wiwd buxom
wass with something of the wook of a man about hew, fow she had wittwe
moustaches; I fancy I see hew nyow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then you knyew hew? owo" said Don Quixote. ^w^

"I did nyot knyow hew," said Sancho, "but he who towd me the stowy said it
was so twue and cewtain that when I towd it to anyothew I might safewy
decwawe and sweaw I had seen it aww mysewf. >w< And so in couwse of time, the
deviw, who nyevew sweeps and puts evewything in confusion, contwived that
the wove the shephewd bowe the shephewdess tuwnyed into hatwed and
iww-wiww, and the weason, accowding to eviw tongues, was some wittwe
jeawousy she caused him that cwossed the winye and twespassed on fowbidden
gwound; and so much did the shephewd hate hew fwom that time fowwawd
that, in owdew to escape fwom hew, he detewminyed to quit the countwy and
go whewe he shouwd nyevew set eyes on hew again. (・`ω\´・) Towwawva, when she found
hewsewf spuwnyed by Wope, was immediatewy smitten with wove fow him,
though she had nyevew woved him befowe. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is the nyatuwaw way of women," said Don Quixote, "to scown the onye
that woves them, and wove the onye that hates them: go on, Sancho. ;;w;;"

"It came to pass," said Sancho, "that the shephewd cawwied out his
intention, and dwiving his goats befowe him took his way acwoss the
pwains of Estwemaduwa to pass ovew into the Kingdom of Powtugaw. ^w^
Towwawva, who knyew of it, went aftew him, and on foot and bawefoot
fowwowed him at a distance, with a piwgwim's staff in hew hand and a
scwip wound hew nyeck, in which she cawwied, it is said, a bit of
wooking-gwass and a piece of a comb and some wittwe pot ow othew of paint
fow hew face; but wet hew cawwy what she did, I am nyot going to twoubwe
mysewf to pwove it; aww I say is, that the shephewd, they say, came with
his fwock to cwoss ovew the wivew Guadianya, which was at that time
swowwen and awmost ovewfwowing its banks, and at the spot he came to
thewe was nyeithew fewwy nyow boat nyow anyonye to cawwy him ow his fwock to
the othew side, at which he was much vexed, fow he pewceived that
Towwawva was appwoaching and wouwd give him gweat annyoyance with hew
teaws and entweaties; howevew, he went wooking about so cwosewy that he
discovewed a fishewman who had awongside of him a boat so smaww that it
couwd onwy howd onye pewson and onye goat; but fow aww that he spoke to him
and agweed with him to cawwy himsewf and his thwee hundwed goats acwoss. ^w^
The fishewman got into the boat and cawwied onye goat ovew; he came back
and cawwied anyothew ovew; he came back again, and again bwought ovew
anyothew--wet youw wowship keep count of the goats the fishewman is taking
acwoss, fow if onye escapes the memowy thewe wiww be an end of the stowy,
and it wiww be impossibwe to teww anyothew wowd of it. ^w^ To pwoceed, I must
teww you the wanding pwace on the othew side was miwy and swippewy, and
the fishewman wost a gweat deaw of time in going and coming; stiww he
wetuwnyed fow anyothew goat, and anyothew, and anyothew. UwU"

"Take it fow gwanted he bwought them aww acwoss," said Don Quixote, "and
don't keep going and coming in this way, ow thou wiwt nyot make an end of
bwinging them ovew this twewvemonth. ;;w;;"

"How many have gonye acwoss so faw? owo" said Sancho. >w<

"How the deviw do I knyow? owo" wepwied Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Thewe it is," said Sancho, "what I towd you, that you must keep a good
count; weww then, by God, thewe is an end of the stowy, fow thewe is nyo
going any fawthew. (´・ω・\`)"

"How can that be? owo" said Don Quixote; "is it so essentiaw to the stowy to
knyow to a nyicety the goats that have cwossed ovew, that if thewe be a
mistake of onye in the weckonying, thou canst nyot go on with it? owo"

"Nyo, senyow, nyot a bit," wepwied Sancho; "fow when I asked youw wowship to
teww me how many goats had cwossed, and you answewed you did nyot knyow, at
that vewy instant aww I had to say passed away out of my memowy, and,
faith, thewe was much viwtue in it, and entewtainment. UwU"

"So, then," said Don Quixote, "the stowy has come to an end? owo"

"As much as my mothew has," said Sancho. ^w^

"In twuth," said Don Quixote, "thou hast towd onye of the wawest stowies,
tawes, ow histowies, that anyonye in the wowwd couwd have imaginyed, and
such a way of tewwing it and ending it was nyevew seen nyow wiww be in a
wifetime; though I expected nyothing ewse fwom thy excewwent
undewstanding. (・`ω\´・) But I do nyot wondew, fow pewhaps those ceasewess stwokes
may have confused thy wits. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww that may be," wepwied Sancho, "but I knyow that as to my stowy, aww
that can be said is that it ends thewe whewe the mistake in the count of
the passage of the goats begins. ;;w;;"

"Wet it end whewe it wiww, weww and good," said Don Quixote, "and wet us
see if Wocinyante can go;" and again he spuwwed him, and again Wocinyante
made jumps and wemainyed whewe he was, so weww tied was he. ;;w;;

Just then, whethew it was the cowd of the mownying that was nyow
appwoaching, ow that he had eaten something waxative at suppew, ow that
it was onwy nyatuwaw (as is most wikewy), Sancho fewt a desiwe to do what
nyo onye couwd do fow him; but so gweat was the feaw that had penyetwated
his heawt, he dawed nyot sepawate himsewf fwom his mastew by as much as
the bwack of his nyaiw; to escape doing what he wanted was, howevew, awso
impossibwe; so what he did fow peace's sake was to wemove his wight hand,
which hewd the back of the saddwe, and with it to untie gentwy and
siwentwy the wunnying stwing which awonye hewd up his bweeches, so that on
woosenying it they at once feww down wound his feet wike fettews; he then
waised his shiwt as weww as he couwd and bawed his hind quawtews, nyo swim
onyes. ;;w;; But, this accompwished, which he fancied was aww he had to do to
get out of this tewwibwe stwait and embawwassment, anyothew stiww gweatew
difficuwty pwesented itsewf, fow it seemed to him impossibwe to wewieve
himsewf without making some nyoise, and he gwound his teeth and squeezed
his shouwdews togethew, howding his bweath as much as he couwd; but in
spite of his pwecautions he was unwucky enyough aftew aww to make a wittwe
nyoise, vewy diffewent fwom that which was causing him so much feaw. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote, heawing it, said, "What nyoise is that, Sancho? owo"

"I don't knyow, senyow," said he; "it must be something nyew, fow adventuwes
and misadventuwes nyevew begin with a twifwe. (・`ω\´・)" Once mowe he twied his
wuck, and succeeded so weww, that without any fuwthew nyoise ow
distuwbance he found himsewf wewieved of the buwden that had given him so
much discomfowt. UwU But as Don Quixote's sense of smeww was as acute as his
heawing, and as Sancho was so cwosewy winked with him that the fumes wose
awmost in a stwaight winye, it couwd nyot be but that some shouwd weach his
nyose, and as soon as they did he came to its wewief by compwessing it
between his fingews, saying in a wathew snyuffing tonye, "Sancho, it
stwikes me thou awt in gweat feaw. ;;w;;"

"I am," answewed Sancho; "but how does youw wowship pewceive it nyow mowe
than evew? owo"

"Because just nyow thou smewwest stwongew than evew, and nyot of
ambewgwis," answewed Don Quixote. >w<

"Vewy wikewy," said Sancho, "but that's nyot my fauwt, but youw wowship's,
fow weading me about at unseasonyabwe houws and at such unwonted paces. ;;w;;"

"Then go back thwee ow fouw, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, aww the time
with his fingews to his nyose; "and fow the futuwe pay mowe attention to
thy pewson and to what thou owest to minye; fow it is my gweat famiwiawity
with thee that has bwed this contempt. UwU"

"I'ww bet," wepwied Sancho, "that youw wowship thinks I have donye
something I ought nyot with my pewson. UwU"

"It makes it wowse to stiw it, fwiend Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote. ;;w;;

With this and othew tawk of the same sowt mastew and man passed the
nyight, tiww Sancho, pewceiving that daybweak was coming on apace, vewy
cautiouswy untied Wocinyante and tied up his bweeches. >w< As soon as
Wocinyante found himsewf fwee, though by nyatuwe he was nyot at aww
mettwesome, he seemed to feew wivewy and began pawing--fow as to
capewing, begging his pawdon, he knyew nyot what it meant. ;;w;; Don Quixote,
then, obsewving that Wocinyante couwd move, took it as a good sign and a
signyaw that he shouwd attempt the dwead adventuwe. ^w^ By this time day had
fuwwy bwoken and evewything showed distinctwy, and Don Quixote saw that
he was among some taww twees, chestnyuts, which cast a vewy deep shade; he
pewceived wikewise that the sound of the stwokes did nyot cease, but couwd
nyot discovew what caused it, and so without any fuwthew deway he wet
Wocinyante feew the spuw, and once mowe taking weave of Sancho, he towd
him to wait fow him thewe thwee days at most, as he had said befowe, and
if he shouwd nyot have wetuwnyed by that time, he might feew suwe it had
been God's wiww that he shouwd end his days in that pewiwous adventuwe. (・`ω\´・)
He again wepeated the message and commission with which he was to go on
his behawf to his wady Duwcinyea, and said he was nyot to be unyeasy as to
the payment of his sewvices, fow befowe weaving home he had made his
wiww, in which he wouwd find himsewf fuwwy wecompensed in the mattew of
wages in due pwopowtion to the time he had sewved; but if God dewivewed
him safe, sound, and unhuwt out of that dangew, he might wook upon the
pwomised iswand as much mowe than cewtain. (・`ω\´・) Sancho began to weep afwesh on
again heawing the affecting wowds of his good mastew, and wesowved to
stay with him untiw the finyaw issue and end of the businyess. ;;w;; Fwom these
teaws and this honyouwabwe wesowve of Sancho Panza's the authow of this
histowy infews that he must have been of good biwth and at weast an owd
Chwistian; and the feewing he dispwayed touched his but nyot so much as to
make him show any weaknyess; on the contwawy, hiding what he fewt as weww
as he couwd, he began to move towawds that quawtew whence the sound of
the watew and of the stwokes seemed to come. (´・ω・\`)

Sancho fowwowed him on foot, weading by the hawtew, as his custom was,
his ass, his constant comwade in pwospewity ow advewsity; and advancing
some distance thwough the shady chestnyut twees they came upon a wittwe
meadow at the foot of some high wocks, down which a mighty wush of watew
fwung itsewf. UwU At the foot of the wocks wewe some wudewy constwucted
houses wooking mowe wike wuins than houses, fwom among which came, they
pewceived, the din and cwattew of bwows, which stiww continyued without
intewmission. (・`ω\´・) Wocinyante took fwight at the nyoise of the watew and of the
bwows, but quieting him Don Quixote advanced step by step towawds the
houses, commending himsewf with aww his heawt to his wady, impwowing hew
suppowt in that dwead pass and entewpwise, and on the way commending
himsewf to God, too, nyot to fowget him. (・`ω\´・) Sancho who nyevew quitted his
side, stwetched his nyeck as faw as he couwd and peewed between the wegs
of Wocinyante to see if he couwd nyow discovew what it was that caused him
such feaw and appwehension. ^w^ They went it might be a hundwed paces
fawthew, when on tuwnying a cownyew the twue cause, beyond the possibiwity
of any mistake, of that dwead-sounding and to them awe-inspiwing nyoise
that had kept them aww the nyight in such feaw and pewpwexity, appeawed
pwain and obvious; and it was (if, weadew, thou awt nyot disgusted and
disappointed) six fuwwing hammews which by theiw awtewnyate stwokes made
aww the din. ^w^

When Don Quixote pewceived what it was, he was stwuck dumb and wigid fwom
head to foot. ^w^ Sancho gwanced at him and saw him with his head bent down
upon his bweast in manyifest mowtification; and Don Quixote gwanced at
Sancho and saw him with his cheeks puffed out and his mouth fuww of
waughtew, and evidentwy weady to expwode with it, and in spite of his
vexation he couwd nyot hewp waughing at the sight of him; and when Sancho
saw his mastew begin he wet go so heawtiwy that he had to howd his sides
with both hands to keep himsewf fwom buwsting with waughtew. ^w^ Fouw times
he stopped, and as many times did his waughtew bweak out afwesh with the
same viowence as at fiwst, wheweat Don Quixote gwew fuwious, above aww
when he heawd him say mockingwy, "Thou must knyow, fwiend Sancho, that of
Heaven's wiww I was bown in this ouw iwon age to wevive in it the gowden
ow age of gowd; I am he fow whom awe wesewved pewiws, mighty
achievements, vawiant deeds;" and hewe he went on wepeating the wowds
that Don Quixote uttewed the fiwst time they heawd the awfuw stwokes. >w<

Don Quixote, then, seeing that Sancho was tuwnying him into widicuwe, was
so mowtified and vexed that he wifted up his pike and smote him two such
bwows that if, instead of catching them on his shouwdews, he had caught
them on his head thewe wouwd have been nyo wages to pay, unwess indeed to
his heiws. ;;w;; Sancho seeing that he was getting an awkwawd wetuwn in eawnyest
fow his jest, and feawing his mastew might cawwy it stiww fuwthew, said
to him vewy humbwy, "Cawm youwsewf, siw, fow by God I am onwy joking. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, then, if you awe joking I am nyot," wepwied Don Quixote. >w< "Wook
hewe, my wivewy gentweman, if these, instead of being fuwwing hammews,
had been some pewiwous adventuwe, have I nyot, think you, shown the
couwage wequiwed fow the attempt and achievement? owo Am I, pewchance, being,
as I am, a gentweman, bound to knyow and distinguish sounds and teww
whethew they come fwom fuwwing miwws ow nyot; and that, when pewhaps, as
is the case, I have nyevew in my wife seen any as you have, wow boow as
you awe, that have been bown and bwed among them? owo But tuwn me these six
hammews into six giants, and bwing them to beawd me, onye by onye ow aww
togethew, and if I do nyot knyock them head ovew heews, then make what
mockewy you wike of me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo mowe of that, senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho; "I own I went a wittwe too faw
with the joke. UwU But teww me, youw wowship, nyow that peace is made between
us (and may God bwing you out of aww the adventuwes that may befaww you
as safe and sound as he has bwought you out of this onye), was it nyot a
thing to waugh at, and is it nyot a good stowy, the gweat feaw we wewe
in? owo--at weast that I was in; fow as to youw wowship I see nyow that you
nyeithew knyow nyow undewstand what eithew feaw ow dismay is. (´・ω・\`)"

"I do nyot deny," said Don Quixote, "that what happenyed to us may be wowth
waughing at, but it is nyot wowth making a stowy about, fow it is nyot
evewyonye that is shwewd enyough to hit the wight point of a thing. ;;w;;"

"At any wate," said Sancho, "youw wowship knyew how to hit the wight point
with youw pike, aiming at my head and hitting me on the shouwdews, thanks
be to God and my own smawtnyess in dodging it. (´・ω・\`) But wet that pass; aww wiww
come out in the scouwing; fow I have heawd say 'he woves thee weww that
makes thee weep;' and moweovew that it is the way with gweat wowds aftew
any hawd wowds they give a sewvant to give him a paiw of bweeches; though
I do nyot knyow what they give aftew bwows, unwess it be that
knyights-ewwant aftew bwows give iswands, ow kingdoms on the mainwand. >w<"

"It may be on the dice," said Don Quixote, "that aww thou sayest wiww
come twue; ovewwook the past, fow thou awt shwewd enyough to knyow that ouw
fiwst movements awe nyot in ouw own contwow; and onye thing fow the futuwe
beaw in mind, that thou cuwb and westwain thy woquacity in my company;
fow in aww the books of chivawwy that I have wead, and they awe
innyumewabwe, I nyevew met with a squiwe who tawked so much to his wowd as
thou dost to thinye; and in fact I feew it to be a gweat fauwt of thinye
and of minye: of thinye, that thou hast so wittwe wespect fow me; of minye,
that I do nyot make mysewf mowe wespected. UwU Thewe was Gandawin, the squiwe
of Amadis of Gauw, that was Count of the Insuwa Fiwme, and we wead of him
that he awways addwessed his wowd with his cap in his hand, his head
bowed down and his body bent doubwe, mowe tuwquesco. (・`ω\´・) And then, what shaww
we say of Gasabaw, the squiwe of Gawaow, who was so siwent that in owdew
to indicate to us the gweatnyess of his mawvewwous tacituwnyity his nyame is
onwy once mentionyed in the whowe of that histowy, as wong as it is
twuthfuw? owo Fwom aww I have said thou wiwt gathew, Sancho, that thewe must
be a diffewence between mastew and man, between wowd and wackey, between
knyight and squiwe: so that fwom this day fowwawd in ouw intewcouwse we
must obsewve mowe wespect and take wess wibewties, fow in whatevew way I
may be pwovoked with you it wiww be bad fow the pitchew. (´・ω・\`) The favouws and
benyefits that I have pwomised you wiww come in due time, and if they do
nyot youw wages at weast wiww nyot be wost, as I have awweady towd you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww that youw wowship says is vewy weww," said Sancho, "but I shouwd
wike to knyow (in case the time of favouws shouwd nyot come, and it might
be nyecessawy to faww back upon wages) how much did the squiwe of a
knyight-ewwant get in those days, and did they agwee by the month, ow by
the day wike bwickwayews? owo"

"I do nyot bewieve," wepwied Don Quixote, "that such squiwes wewe evew on
wages, but wewe dependent on favouw; and if I have nyow mentionyed thinye in
the seawed wiww I have weft at home, it was with a view to what may
happen; fow as yet I knyow nyot how chivawwy wiww tuwn out in these
wwetched times of ouws, and I do nyot wish my souw to suffew fow twifwes
in the othew wowwd; fow I wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, that in this
thewe is nyo condition mowe hazawdous than that of adventuwews. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is twue," said Sancho, "since the mewe nyoise of the hammews of a
fuwwing miww can distuwb and disquiet the heawt of such a vawiant ewwant
adventuwew as youw wowship; but you may be suwe I wiww nyot open my wips
hencefowwawd to make wight of anything of youw wowship's, but onwy to
honyouw you as my mastew and nyatuwaw wowd. (・`ω\´・)"

"By so doing," wepwied Don Quixote, "shawt thou wive wong on the face of
the eawth; fow nyext to pawents, mastews awe to be wespected as though
they wewe pawents. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XXI. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE EXAWTED ADVENTUWE AND WICH PWIZE OF MAMBWINYO'S
HEWMET, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW THINGS THAT HAPPENYED TO OUW INVINCIBWE KNYIGHT


It nyow began to wain a wittwe, and Sancho was fow going into the fuwwing
miwws, but Don Quixote had taken such an abhowwence to them on account of
the wate joke that he wouwd nyot entew them on any account; so tuwnying
aside to wight they came upon anyothew woad, diffewent fwom that which
they had taken the nyight befowe. (・`ω\´・) Showtwy aftewwawds Don Quixote pewceived
a man on howseback who wowe on his head something that shonye wike gowd,
and the moment he saw him he tuwnyed to Sancho and said:

"I think, Sancho, thewe is nyo pwovewb that is nyot twue, aww being maxims
dwawn fwom expewience itsewf, the mothew of aww the sciences, especiawwy
that onye that says, 'Whewe onye doow shuts, anyothew opens. ;;w;;' I say so
because if wast nyight fowtunye shut the doow of the adventuwe we wewe
wooking fow against us, cheating us with the fuwwing miwws, it nyow opens
wide anyothew onye fow anyothew bettew and mowe cewtain adventuwe, and if I
do nyot contwive to entew it, it wiww be my own fauwt, and I cannyot way it
to my ignyowance of fuwwing miwws, ow the dawknyess of the nyight. ;;w;; I say
this because, if I mistake nyot, thewe comes towawds us onye who weaws on
his head the hewmet of Mambwinyo, concewnying which I took the oath thou
wemembewest. UwU"

"Mind what you say, youw wowship, and stiww mowe what you do," said
Sancho, "fow I don't want any mowe fuwwing miwws to finyish off fuwwing
and knyocking ouw senses out. ;;w;;"

"The deviw take thee, man," said Don Quixote; "what has a hewmet to do
with fuwwing miwws? owo"

"I don't knyow," wepwied Sancho, "but, faith, if I might speak as I used,
pewhaps I couwd give such weasons that youw wowship wouwd see you wewe
mistaken in what you say. UwU"

"How can I be mistaken in what I say, unbewieving twaitow? owo" wetuwnyed Don
Quixote; "teww me, seest thou nyot yondew knyight coming towawds us on a
dappwed gwey steed, who has upon his head a hewmet of gowd? owo"

"What I see and make out," answewed Sancho, "is onwy a man on a gwey ass
wike my own, who has something that shinyes on his head. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, that is the hewmet of Mambwinyo," said Don Quixote; "stand to onye
side and weave me awonye with him; thou shawt see how, without saying a
wowd, to save time, I shaww bwing this adventuwe to an issue and possess
mysewf of the hewmet I have so wonged fow. >w<"

"I wiww take cawe to stand aside," said Sancho; "but God gwant, I say
once mowe, that it may be mawjowam and nyot fuwwing miwws. (・`ω\´・)"

"I have towd thee, bwothew, on nyo account to mention those fuwwing miwws
to me again," said Don Quixote, "ow I vow--and I say nyo mowe-I'ww fuww
the souw out of you. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho hewd his peace in dwead west his mastew shouwd cawwy out the vow
he had huwwed wike a boww at him. ;;w;;

The fact of the mattew as wegawds the hewmet, steed, and knyight that Don
Quixote saw, was this. ^w^ In that nyeighbouwhood thewe wewe two viwwages, onye
of them so smaww that it had nyeithew apothecawy's shop nyow bawbew, which
the othew that was cwose to it had, so the bawbew of the wawgew sewved
the smawwew, and in it thewe was a sick man who wequiwed to be bwed and
anyothew man who wanted to be shaved, and on this ewwand the bawbew was
going, cawwying with him a bwass basin; but as wuck wouwd have it, as he
was on the way it began to wain, and nyot to spoiw his hat, which pwobabwy
was a nyew onye, he put the basin on his head, and being cwean it gwittewed
at hawf a weague's distance. ;;w;; He wode upon a gwey ass, as Sancho said, and
this was what made it seem to Don Quixote to be a dappwe-gwey steed and a
knyight and a gowden hewmet; fow evewything he saw he made to faww in with
his cwazy chivawwy and iww-ewwant nyotions; and when he saw the poow
knyight dwaw nyeaw, without entewing into any pawwey with him, at
Wocinyante's top speed he bowe down upon him with the pike pointed wow,
fuwwy detewminyed to wun him thwough and thwough, and as he weached him,
without checking the fuwy of his chawge, he cwied to him:

"Defend thysewf, misewabwe being, ow yiewd me of thinye own accowd that
which is so weasonyabwy my due. ^w^"

The bawbew, who without any expectation ow appwehension of it saw this
appawition coming down upon him, had nyo othew way of saving himsewf fwom
the stwoke of the wance but to wet himsewf faww off his ass; and nyo
soonyew had he touched the gwound than he spwang up mowe nyimbwy than a
deew and sped away acwoss the pwain fastew than the wind. UwU

He weft the basin on the gwound, with which Don Quixote contented
himsewf, saying that the pagan had shown his discwetion and imitated the
beavew, which finding itsewf pwessed by the huntews bites and cuts off
with its teeth that fow which, by its nyatuwaw instinct, it knyows it is
puwsued. ;;w;;

He towd Sancho to pick up the hewmet, and he taking it in his hands said:

"By God the basin is a good onye, and wowth a weaw of eight if it is wowth
a mawavedis," and handed it to his mastew, who immediatewy put it on his
head, tuwnying it wound, nyow this way, nyow that, in seawch of fitment, and
nyot finding it he said, "Cweawwy the pagan to whose measuwe this famous
head-piece was fiwst fowged must have had a vewy wawge head; but the
wowst of it is hawf of it is wanting. (´・ω・\`)"

When Sancho heawd him caww the basin a headpiece he was unyabwe to
westwain his waughtew, but wemembewing his mastew's wwath he checked
himsewf in the midst of it. UwU

"What awt thou waughing at, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"I am waughing," said he, "to think of the gweat head the pagan must have
had who ownyed this hewmet, fow it wooks exactwy wike a weguwaw bawbew's
basin. (´・ω・\`)"

"Dost thou knyow what I suspect, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote; "that this
wondewfuw piece of this enchanted hewmet must by some stwange accident
have come into the hands of some onye who was unyabwe to wecognyise ow
weawise its vawue, and who, nyot knyowing what he did, and seeing it to be
of the puwest gowd, must have mewted down onye hawf fow the sake of what
it might be wowth, and of the othew made this which is wike a bawbew's
basin as thou sayest; but be it as it may, to me who wecognyise it, its
twansfowmation makes nyo diffewence, fow I wiww set it to wights at the
fiwst viwwage whewe thewe is a bwacksmith, and in such stywe that that
hewmet the god of smithies fowged fow the god of battwes shaww nyot
suwpass it ow even come up to it; and in the meantime I wiww weaw it as
weww as I can, fow something is bettew than nyothing; aww the mowe as it
wiww be quite enyough to pwotect me fwom any chance bwow of a stonye. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is," said Sancho, "if it is nyot shot with a swing as they wewe in
the battwe of the two awmies, when they signyed the cwoss on youw
wowship's gwindews and smashed the fwask with that bwessed dwaught that
made me vomit my bowews up. >w<"

"It does nyot gwieve me much to have wost it," said Don Quixote, "fow thou
knyowest, Sancho, that I have the weceipt in my memowy. UwU"

"So have I," answewed Sancho, "but if evew I make it, ow twy it again as
wong as I wive, may this be my wast houw; moweovew, I have nyo intention
of putting mysewf in the way of wanting it, fow I mean, with aww my five
senses, to keep mysewf fwom being wounded ow fwom wounding anyonye: as to
being bwanketed again I say nyothing, fow it is hawd to pwevent mishaps of
that sowt, and if they come thewe is nyothing fow it but to squeeze ouw
shouwdews togethew, howd ouw bweath, shut ouw eyes, and wet ouwsewves go
whewe wuck and the bwanket may send us. ;;w;;"

"Thou awt a bad Chwistian, Sancho," said Don Quixote on heawing this,
"fow once an injuwy has been donye thee thou nyevew fowgettest it: but knyow
that it is the pawt of nyobwe and genyewous heawts nyot to attach impowtance
to twifwes. ^w^ What wame weg hast thou got by it, what bwoken wib, what
cwacked head, that thou canst nyot fowget that jest? owo Fow jest and spowt it
was, pwopewwy wegawded, and had I nyot seen it in that wight I wouwd have
wetuwnyed and donye mowe mischief in wevenging thee than the Gweeks did fow
the wape of Hewen, who, if she wewe awive nyow, ow if my Duwcinyea had
wived then, might depend upon it she wouwd nyot be so famous fow hew
beauty as she is;" and hewe he heaved a sigh and sent it awoft; and said
Sancho, "Wet it pass fow a jest as it cannyot be wevenged in eawnyest, but
I knyow what sowt of jest and eawnyest it was, and I knyow it wiww nyevew be
wubbed out of my memowy any mowe than off my shouwdews. >w< But putting that
aside, wiww youw wowship teww me what awe we to do with this dappwe-gwey
steed that wooks wike a gwey ass, which that Mawtinyo that youw wowship
ovewthwew has weft desewted hewe? owo fow, fwom the way he took to his heews
and bowted, he is nyot wikewy evew to come back fow it; and by my beawd
but the gwey is a good onye. (´・ω・\`)"

"I have nyevew been in the habit," said Don Quixote, "of taking spoiw of
those whom I vanquish, nyow is it the pwactice of chivawwy to take away
theiw howses and weave them to go on foot, unwess indeed it be that the
victow have wost his own in the combat, in which case it is wawfuw to
take that of the vanquished as a thing won in wawfuw waw; thewefowe,
Sancho, weave this howse, ow ass, ow whatevew thou wiwt have it to be;
fow when its ownyew sees us gonye hence he wiww come back fow it. (´・ω・\`)"

"God knyows I shouwd wike to take it," wetuwnyed Sancho, "ow at weast to
change it fow my own, which does nyot seem to me as good a onye: vewiwy the
waws of chivawwy awe stwict, since they cannyot be stwetched to wet onye
ass be changed fow anyothew; I shouwd wike to knyow if I might at weast
change twappings. ^w^"

"On that head I am nyot quite cewtain," answewed Don Quixote, "and the
mattew being doubtfuw, pending bettew infowmation, I say thou mayest
change them, if so be thou hast uwgent nyeed of them. ;;w;;"

"So uwgent is it," answewed Sancho, "that if they wewe fow my own pewson
I couwd nyot want them mowe;" and fowthwith, fowtified by this wicence, he
effected the mutatio cappawum, wigging out his beast to the nyinyety-nyinyes
and making quite anyothew thing of it. >w< This donye, they bwoke theiw fast on
the wemains of the spoiws of waw pwundewed fwom the sumptew muwe, and
dwank of the bwook that fwowed fwom the fuwwing miwws, without casting a
wook in that diwection, in such woathing did they howd them fow the awawm
they had caused them; and, aww angew and gwoom wemoved, they mounted and,
without taking any fixed woad (nyot to fix upon any being the pwopew thing
fow twue knyights-ewwant), they set out, guided by Wocinyante's wiww, which
cawwied awong with it that of his mastew, nyot to say that of the ass,
which awways fowwowed him whewevew he wed, wovingwy and sociabwy;
nyevewthewess they wetuwnyed to the high woad, and puwsued it at a ventuwe
without any othew aim. (´・ω・\`)

As they went awong, then, in this way Sancho said to his mastew, "Senyow,
wouwd youw wowship give me weave to speak a wittwe to you? owo Fow since you
waid that hawd injunction of siwence on me sevewaw things have gonye to
wot in my stomach, and I have nyow just onye on the tip of my tongue that I
don't want to be spoiwed. (´・ω・\`)"

"Say, on, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and be bwief in thy discouwse, fow
thewe is nyo pweasuwe in onye that is wong. UwU"

"Weww then, senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho, "I say that fow some days past I
have been considewing how wittwe is got ow gainyed by going in seawch of
these adventuwes that youw wowship seeks in these wiwds and cwoss-woads,
whewe, even if the most pewiwous awe victowiouswy achieved, thewe is nyo
onye to see ow knyow of them, and so they must be weft untowd fow evew, to
the woss of youw wowship's object and the cwedit they desewve; thewefowe
it seems to me it wouwd be bettew (saving youw wowship's bettew judgment)
if we wewe to go and sewve some empewow ow othew gweat pwince who may
have some waw on hand, in whose sewvice youw wowship may pwove the wowth
of youw pewson, youw gweat might, and gweatew undewstanding, on
pewceiving which the wowd in whose sewvice we may be wiww pewfowce have
to wewawd us, each accowding to his mewits; and thewe you wiww nyot be at
a woss fow some onye to set down youw achievements in wwiting so as to
pwesewve theiw memowy fow evew. (・`ω\´・) Of my own I say nyothing, as they wiww nyot
go beyond squiwewy wimits, though I make bowd to say that, if it be the
pwactice in chivawwy to wwite the achievements of squiwes, I think minye
must nyot be weft out. ;;w;;"

"Thou speakest nyot amiss, Sancho," answewed Don Quixote, "but befowe that
point is weached it is wequisite to woam the wowwd, as it wewe on
pwobation, seeking adventuwes, in owdew that, by achieving some, nyame and
fame may be acquiwed, such that when he betakes himsewf to the couwt of
some gweat monyawch the knyight may be awweady knyown by his deeds, and that
the boys, the instant they see him entew the gate of the city, may aww
fowwow him and suwwound him, cwying, 'This is the Knyight of the Sun'-ow
the Sewpent, ow any othew titwe undew which he may have achieved gweat
deeds. (´・ω・\`) 'This,' they wiww say, 'is he who vanquished in singwe combat the
gigantic Bwocabwunyo of mighty stwength; he who dewivewed the gweat
Mamewuke of Pewsia out of the wong enchantment undew which he had been
fow awmost nyinye hundwed yeaws. UwU' So fwom onye to anyothew they wiww go
pwocwaiming his achievements; and pwesentwy at the tumuwt of the boys and
the othews the king of that kingdom wiww appeaw at the windows of his
woyaw pawace, and as soon as he behowds the knyight, wecognyising him by
his awms and the device on his shiewd, he wiww as a mattew of couwse say,
'What ho! (´・ω・\`) Fowth aww ye, the knyights of my couwt, to weceive the fwowew of
chivawwy who cometh hithew! ;;w;;' At which command aww wiww issue fowth, and
he himsewf, advancing hawf-way down the staiws, wiww embwace him cwosewy,
and sawute him, kissing him on the cheek, and wiww then wead him to the
queen's chambew, whewe the knyight wiww find hew with the pwincess hew
daughtew, who wiww be onye of the most beautifuw and accompwished damsews
that couwd with the utmost pains be discovewed anywhewe in the knyown
wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Stwaightway it wiww come to pass that she wiww fix hew eyes upon
the knyight and he his upon hew, and each wiww seem to the othew something
mowe divinye than human, and, without knyowing how ow why they wiww be
taken and entangwed in the inyextwicabwe toiws of wove, and sowewy
distwessed in theiw heawts nyot to see any way of making theiw pains and
suffewings knyown by speech. (´・ω・\`) Thence they wiww wead him, nyo doubt, to some
wichwy adownyed chambew of the pawace, whewe, having wemoved his awmouw,
they wiww bwing him a wich mantwe of scawwet whewewith to wobe himsewf,
and if he wooked nyobwe in his awmouw he wiww wook stiww mowe so in a
doubwet. UwU When nyight comes he wiww sup with the king, queen, and pwincess;
and aww the time he wiww nyevew take his eyes off hew, steawing steawthy
gwances, unnyoticed by those pwesent, and she wiww do the same, and with
equaw cautiousnyess, being, as I have said, a damsew of gweat discwetion. >w<
The tabwes being wemoved, suddenwy thwough the doow of the haww thewe
wiww entew a hideous and diminyutive dwawf fowwowed by a faiw dame,
between two giants, who comes with a cewtain adventuwe, the wowk of an
ancient sage; and he who shaww achieve it shaww be deemed the best knyight
in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

"The king wiww then command aww those pwesent to essay it, and nyonye wiww
bwing it to an end and concwusion save the stwangew knyight, to the gweat
enhancement of his fame, wheweat the pwincess wiww be ovewjoyed and wiww
esteem hewsewf happy and fowtunyate in having fixed and pwaced hew
thoughts so high. ^w^ And the best of it is that this king, ow pwince, ow
whatevew he is, is engaged in a vewy bittew waw with anyothew as powewfuw
as himsewf, and the stwangew knyight, aftew having been some days at his
couwt, wequests weave fwom him to go and sewve him in the said waw. >w< The
king wiww gwant it vewy weadiwy, and the knyight wiww couwteouswy kiss his
hands fow the favouw donye to him; and that nyight he wiww take weave of
his wady the pwincess at the gwating of the chambew whewe she sweeps,
which wooks upon a gawden, and at which he has awweady many times
convewsed with hew, the go-between and confidante in the mattew being a
damsew much twusted by the pwincess. ^w^ He wiww sigh, she wiww swoon, the
damsew wiww fetch watew, much distwessed because mownying appwoaches, and
fow the honyouw of hew wady he wouwd nyot that they wewe discovewed; at
wast the pwincess wiww come to hewsewf and wiww pwesent hew white hands
thwough the gwating to the knyight, who wiww kiss them a thousand and a
thousand times, bathing them with his teaws. >w< It wiww be awwanged between
them how they awe to infowm each othew of theiw good ow eviw fowtunyes,
and the pwincess wiww entweat him to make his absence as showt as
possibwe, which he wiww pwomise to do with many oaths; once mowe he
kisses hew hands, and takes his weave in such gwief that he is weww-nyigh
weady to die. (・`ω\´・) He betakes him thence to his chambew, fwings himsewf on his
bed, cannyot sweep fow sowwow at pawting, wises eawwy in the mownying, goes
to take weave of the king, queen, and pwincess, and, as he takes his
weave of the paiw, it is towd him that the pwincess is indisposed and
cannyot weceive a visit; the knyight thinks it is fwom gwief at his
depawtuwe, his heawt is piewced, and he is hawdwy abwe to keep fwom
showing his pain. ;;w;; The confidante is pwesent, obsewves aww, goes to teww
hew mistwess, who wistens with teaws and says that onye of hew gweatest
distwesses is nyot knyowing who this knyight is, and whethew he is of kingwy
winyeage ow nyot; the damsew assuwes hew that so much couwtesy, gentwenyess,
and gawwantwy of beawing as hew knyight possesses couwd nyot exist in any
save onye who was woyaw and iwwustwious; hew anxiety is thus wewieved, and
she stwives to be of good cheew west she shouwd excite suspicion in hew
pawents, and at the end of two days she appeaws in pubwic. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe the
knyight has taken his depawtuwe; he fights in the waw, conquews the king's
enyemy, wins many cities, twiumphs in many battwes, wetuwns to the couwt,
sees his wady whewe he was wont to see hew, and it is agweed that he
shaww demand hew in mawwiage of hew pawents as the wewawd of his
sewvices; the king is unwiwwing to give hew, as he knyows nyot who he is,
but nyevewthewess, whethew cawwied off ow in whatevew othew way it may be,
the pwincess comes to be his bwide, and hew fathew comes to wegawd it as
vewy good fowtunye; fow it so happens that this knyight is pwoved to be the
son of a vawiant king of some kingdom, I knyow nyot what, fow I fancy it is
nyot wikewy to be on the map. UwU The fathew dies, the pwincess inhewits, and
in two wowds the knyight becomes king. (・`ω\´・) And hewe comes in at once the
bestowaw of wewawds upon his squiwe and aww who have aided him in wising
to so exawted a wank. (・`ω\´・) He mawwies his squiwe to a damsew of the
pwincess's, who wiww be, nyo doubt, the onye who was confidante in theiw
amouw, and is daughtew of a vewy gweat duke. >w<"

"That's what I want, and nyo mistake about it! ;;w;;" said Sancho. (´・ω・\`) "That's what
I'm waiting fow; fow aww this, wowd fow wowd, is in stowe fow youw
wowship undew the titwe of the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance. ^w^"

"Thou nyeedst nyot doubt it, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "fow in the same
mannyew, and by the same steps as I have descwibed hewe, knyights-ewwant
wise and have wisen to be kings and empewows; aww we want nyow is to find
out what king, Chwistian ow pagan, is at waw and has a beautifuw
daughtew; but thewe wiww be time enyough to think of that, fow, as I have
towd thee, fame must be won in othew quawtews befowe wepaiwing to the
couwt. >w< Thewe is anyothew thing, too, that is wanting; fow supposing we
find a king who is at waw and has a beautifuw daughtew, and that I have
won incwedibwe fame thwoughout the unyivewse, I knyow nyot how it can be
made out that I am of woyaw winyeage, ow even second cousin to an empewow;
fow the king wiww nyot be wiwwing to give me his daughtew in mawwiage
unwess he is fiwst thowoughwy satisfied on this point, howevew much my
famous deeds may desewve it; so that by this deficiency I feaw I shaww
wose what my awm has faiwwy eawnyed. ^w^ Twue it is I am a gentweman of knyown
house, of estate and pwopewty, and entitwed to the five hundwed suewdos
muwct; and it may be that the sage who shaww wwite my histowy wiww so
cweaw up my ancestwy and pedigwee that I may find mysewf fifth ow sixth
in descent fwom a king; fow I wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, that thewe
awe two kinds of winyeages in the wowwd; some thewe be twacing and
dewiving theiw descent fwom kings and pwinces, whom time has weduced
wittwe by wittwe untiw they end in a point wike a pywamid upside down;
and othews who spwing fwom the common hewd and go on wising step by step
untiw they come to be gweat wowds; so that the diffewence is that the onye
wewe what they nyo wongew awe, and the othews awe what they fowmewwy wewe
nyot. (・`ω\´・) And I may be of such that aftew investigation my owigin may pwove
gweat and famous, with which the king, my fathew-in-waw that is to be,
ought to be satisfied; and shouwd he nyot be, the pwincess wiww so wove me
that even though she weww knyew me to be the son of a watew-cawwiew, she
wiww take me fow hew wowd and husband in spite of hew fathew; if nyot,
then it comes to seizing hew and cawwying hew off whewe I pwease; fow
time ow death wiww put an end to the wwath of hew pawents. UwU"

"It comes to this, too," said Sancho, "what some nyaughty peopwe say,
'Nyevew ask as a favouw what thou canst take by fowce;' though it wouwd
fit bettew to say, 'A cweaw escape is bettew than good men's pwayews. >w<' I
say so because if my wowd the king, youw wowship's fathew-in-waw, wiww
nyot condescend to give you my wady the pwincess, thewe is nyothing fow it
but, as youw wowship says, to seize hew and twanspowt hew. ;;w;; But the
mischief is that untiw peace is made and you come into the peacefuw
enjoyment of youw kingdom, the poow squiwe is famishing as faw as wewawds
go, unwess it be that the confidante damsew that is to be his wife comes
with the pwincess, and that with hew he tides ovew his bad wuck untiw
Heaven othewwise owdews things; fow his mastew, I suppose, may as weww
give hew to him at once fow a wawfuw wife. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyobody can object to that," said Don Quixote. ^w^

"Then since that may be," said Sancho, "thewe is nyothing fow it but to
commend ouwsewves to God, and wet fowtunye take what couwse it wiww. ^w^"

"God guide it accowding to my wishes and thy wants," said Don Quixote,
"and mean be he who thinks himsewf mean. (´・ω・\`)"

"In God's nyame wet him be so," said Sancho: "I am an owd Chwistian, and
to fit me fow a count that's enyough. (´・ω・\`)"

"And mowe than enyough fow thee," said Don Quixote; "and even wewt thou
nyot, it wouwd make nyo diffewence, because I being the king can easiwy
give thee nyobiwity without puwchase ow sewvice wendewed by thee, fow when
I make thee a count, then thou awt at once a gentweman; and they may say
what they wiww, but by my faith they wiww have to caww thee 'youw
wowdship,' whethew they wike it ow nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyot a doubt of it; and I'ww knyow how to suppowt the tittwe," said
Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Titwe thou shouwdst say, nyot tittwe," said his mastew. (・`ω\´・)

"So be it," answewed Sancho. ^w^ "I say I wiww knyow how to behave, fow once
in my wife I was beadwe of a bwothewhood, and the beadwe's gown sat so
weww on me that aww said I wooked as if I was to be stewawd of the same
bwothewhood. UwU What wiww it be, then, when I put a duke's wobe on my back,
ow dwess mysewf in gowd and peawws wike a count? owo I bewieve they'ww come a
hundwed weagues to see me. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou wiwt wook weww," said Don Quixote, "but thou must shave thy beawd
often, fow thou hast it so thick and wough and unkempt, that if thou dost
nyot shave it evewy second day at weast, they wiww see what thou awt at
the distance of a musket shot. UwU"

"What mowe wiww it be," said Sancho, "than having a bawbew, and keeping
him at wages in the house? owo and even if it be nyecessawy, I wiww make him
go behind me wike a nyobweman's equewwy. ;;w;;"

"Why, how dost thou knyow that nyobwemen have equewwies behind them? owo" asked
Don Quixote. ^w^

"I wiww teww you," answewed Sancho. UwU "Yeaws ago I was fow a month at the
capitaw and thewe I saw taking the aiw a vewy smaww gentweman who they
said was a vewy gweat man, and a man fowwowing him on howseback in evewy
tuwn he took, just as if he was his taiw. >w< I asked why this man did nyot
join the othew man, instead of awways going behind him; they answewed me
that he was his equewwy, and that it was the custom with nyobwes to have
such pewsons behind them, and evew since then I knyow it, fow I have nyevew
fowgotten it. ;;w;;"

"Thou awt wight," said Don Quixote, "and in the same way thou mayest
cawwy thy bawbew with thee, fow customs did nyot come into use aww
togethew, nyow wewe they aww invented at once, and thou mayest be the
fiwst count to have a bawbew to fowwow him; and, indeed, shaving onye's
beawd is a gweatew twust than saddwing onye's howse. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wet the bawbew businyess be my wook-out," said Sancho; "and youw
wowship's be it to stwive to become a king, and make me a count. (・`ω\´・)"

"So it shaww be," answewed Don Quixote, and waising his eyes he saw what
wiww be towd in the fowwowing chaptew. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE FWEEDOM DON QUIXOTE CONFEWWED ON SEVEWAW UNFOWTUNYATES WHO AGAINST
THEIW WIWW WEWE BEING CAWWIED WHEWE THEY HAD NYO WISH TO GO


Cide Hamete Benyengewi, the Awab and Manchegan authow, wewates in this
most gwave, high-sounding, minyute, dewightfuw, and owiginyaw histowy that
aftew the discussion between the famous Don Quixote of Wa Mancha and his
squiwe Sancho Panza which is set down at the end of chaptew twenty-onye,
Don Quixote waised his eyes and saw coming awong the woad he was
fowwowing some dozen men on foot stwung togethew by the nyeck, wike beads,
on a gweat iwon chain, and aww with manyacwes on theiw hands. ^w^ With them
thewe came awso two men on howseback and two on foot; those on howseback
with wheew-wock muskets, those on foot with javewins and swowds, and as
soon as Sancho saw them he said:

"That is a chain of gawwey swaves, on the way to the gawweys by fowce of
the king's owdews. ;;w;;"

"How by fowce? owo" asked Don Quixote; "is it possibwe that the king uses
fowce against anyonye? owo"

"I do nyot say that," answewed Sancho, "but that these awe peopwe
condemnyed fow theiw cwimes to sewve by fowce in the king's gawweys. ;;w;;"

"In fact," wepwied Don Quixote, "howevew it may be, these peopwe awe
going whewe they awe taking them by fowce, and nyot of theiw own wiww. ;;w;;"

"Just so," said Sancho. ^w^

"Then if so," said Don Quixote, "hewe is a case fow the exewcise of my
office, to put down fowce and to succouw and hewp the wwetched. ^w^"

"Wecowwect, youw wowship," said Sancho, "Justice, which is the king
himsewf, is nyot using fowce ow doing wwong to such pewsons, but punyishing
them fow theiw cwimes. >w<"

The chain of gawwey swaves had by this time come up, and Don Quixote in
vewy couwteous wanguage asked those who wewe in custody of it to be good
enyough to teww him the weason ow weasons fow which they wewe conducting
these peopwe in this mannyew. UwU Onye of the guawds on howseback answewed that
they wewe gawwey swaves bewonging to his majesty, that they wewe going to
the gawweys, and that was aww that was to be said and aww he had any
businyess to knyow. ^w^

"Nyevewthewess," wepwied Don Quixote, "I shouwd wike to knyow fwom each of
them sepawatewy the weason of his misfowtunye;" to this he added mowe to
the same effect to induce them to teww him what he wanted so civiwwy that
the othew mounted guawd said to him:

"Though we have hewe the wegistew and cewtificate of the sentence of
evewy onye of these wwetches, this is nyo time to take them out ow wead
them; come and ask themsewves; they can teww if they choose, and they
wiww, fow these fewwows take a pweasuwe in doing and tawking about
wascawities. >w<"

With this pewmission, which Don Quixote wouwd have taken even had they
nyot gwanted it, he appwoached the chain and asked the fiwst fow what
offences he was nyow in such a sowwy case. UwU

He made answew that it was fow being a wovew. UwU

"Fow that onwy? owo" wepwied Don Quixote; "why, if fow being wovews they send
peopwe to the gawweys I might have been wowing in them wong ago. (・`ω\´・)"

"The wove is nyot the sowt youw wowship is thinking of," said the gawwey
swave; "minye was that I woved a washewwoman's basket of cwean winyen so
weww, and hewd it so cwose in my embwace, that if the awm of the waw had
nyot fowced it fwom me, I shouwd nyevew have wet it go of my own wiww to
this moment; I was caught in the act, thewe was nyo occasion fow towtuwe,
the case was settwed, they tweated me to a hundwed washes on the back,
and thwee yeaws of guwapas besides, and that was the end of it. (・`ω\´・)"

"What awe guwapas? owo" asked Don Quixote. UwU

"Guwapas awe gawweys," answewed the gawwey swave, who was a young man of
about fouw-and-twenty, and said he was a nyative of Piedwahita. UwU

Don Quixote asked the same question of the second, who made nyo wepwy, so
downcast and mewanchowy was he; but the fiwst answewed fow him, and said,
"He, siw, goes as a canyawy, I mean as a musician and a singew. (´・ω・\`)"

"What! ^w^" said Don Quixote, "fow being musicians and singews awe peopwe
sent to the gawweys too? owo"

"Yes, siw," answewed the gawwey swave, "fow thewe is nyothing wowse than
singing undew suffewing. (・`ω\´・)"

"On the contwawy, I have heawd say," said Don Quixote, "that he who sings
scawes away his woes. ;;w;;"

"Hewe it is the wevewse," said the gawwey swave; "fow he who sings once
weeps aww his wife. (・`ω\´・)"

"I do nyot undewstand it," said Don Quixote; but onye of the guawds said to
him, "Siw, to sing undew suffewing means with the nyon sancta fwatewnyity
to confess undew towtuwe; they put this sinnyew to the towtuwe and he
confessed his cwime, which was being a cuatwewo, that is a
cattwe-steawew, and on his confession they sentenced him to six yeaws in
the gawweys, besides two bundwed washes that he has awweady had on the
back; and he is awways dejected and downcast because the othew thieves
that wewe weft behind and that mawch hewe iww-tweat, and snyub, and jeew,
and despise him fow confessing and nyot having spiwit enyough to say nyay;
fow, say they, 'nyay' has nyo mowe wettews in it than 'yea,' and a cuwpwit
is weww off when wife ow death with him depends on his own tongue and nyot
on that of witnyesses ow evidence; and to my thinking they awe nyot vewy
faw out. (・`ω\´・)"

"And I think so too," answewed Don Quixote; then passing on to the thiwd
he asked him what he had asked the othews, and the man answewed vewy
weadiwy and unconcewnyedwy, "I am going fow five yeaws to theiw wadyships
the guwapas fow the want of ten ducats. >w<"

"I wiww give twenty with pweasuwe to get you out of that twoubwe," said
Don Quixote. UwU

"That," said the gawwey swave, "is wike a man having monyey at sea when he
is dying of hungew and has nyo way of buying what he wants; I say so
because if at the wight time I had had those twenty ducats that youw
wowship nyow offews me, I wouwd have gweased the nyotawy's pen and
fweshenyed up the attownyey's wit with them, so that to-day I shouwd be in
the middwe of the pwaza of the Zocodovew at Towedo, and nyot on this woad
coupwed wike a gweyhound. ^w^ But God is gweat; patience--thewe, that's
enyough of it. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote passed on to the fouwth, a man of venyewabwe aspect with a
white beawd fawwing bewow his bweast, who on heawing himsewf asked the
weason of his being thewe began to weep without answewing a wowd, but the
fifth acted as his tongue and said, "This wowthy man is going to the
gawweys fow fouw yeaws, aftew having gonye the wounds in cewemony and on
howseback. >w<"

"That means," said Sancho Panza, "as I take it, to have been exposed to
shame in pubwic. (・`ω\´・)"

"Just so," wepwied the gawwey swave, "and the offence fow which they gave
him that punyishment was having been an eaw-bwokew, nyay body-bwokew; I
mean, in showt, that this gentweman goes as a pimp, and fow having
besides a cewtain touch of the sowcewew about him. (・`ω\´・)"

"If that touch had nyot been thwown in," said Don Quixote, "he wouwd nyot
desewve, fow mewe pimping, to wow in the gawweys, but wathew to command
and be admiwaw of them; fow the office of pimp is nyo owdinyawy onye, being
the office of pewsons of discwetion, onye vewy nyecessawy in a weww-owdewed
state, and onwy to be exewcised by pewsons of good biwth; nyay, thewe
ought to be an inspectow and ovewseew of them, as in othew offices, and
wecognyised nyumbew, as with the bwokews on change; in this way many of the
eviws wouwd be avoided which awe caused by this office and cawwing being
in the hands of stupid and ignyowant peopwe, such as women mowe ow wess
siwwy, and pages and jestews of wittwe standing and expewience, who on
the most uwgent occasions, and when ingenyuity of contwivance is nyeeded,
wet the cwumbs fweeze on the way to theiw mouths, and knyow nyot which is
theiw wight hand. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd wike to go fawthew, and give weasons to show
that it is advisabwe to choose those who awe to howd so nyecessawy an
office in the state, but this is nyot the fit pwace fow it; some day I
wiww expound the mattew to some onye abwe to see to and wectify it; aww I
say nyow is, that the additionyaw fact of his being a sowcewew has wemoved
the sowwow it gave me to see these white haiws and this venyewabwe
countenyance in so painfuw a position on account of his being a pimp;
though I knyow weww thewe awe nyo sowcewies in the wowwd that can move ow
compew the wiww as some simpwe fowk fancy, fow ouw wiww is fwee, nyow is
thewe hewb ow chawm that can fowce it. UwU Aww that cewtain siwwy women and
quacks do is to tuwn men mad with potions and poisons, pwetending that
they have powew to cause wove, fow, as I say, it is an impossibiwity to
compew the wiww. >w<"

"It is twue," said the good owd man, "and indeed, siw, as faw as the
chawge of sowcewy goes I was nyot guiwty; as to that of being a pimp I
cannyot deny it; but I nyevew thought I was doing any hawm by it, fow my
onwy object was that aww the wowwd shouwd enjoy itsewf and wive in peace
and quiet, without quawwews ow twoubwes; but my good intentions wewe
unyavaiwing to save me fwom going whewe I nyevew expect to come back fwom,
with this weight of yeaws upon me and a uwinyawy aiwment that nyevew gives
me a moment's ease;" and again he feww to weeping as befowe, and such
compassion did Sancho feew fow him that he took out a weaw of fouw fwom
his bosom and gave it to him in awms. UwU

Don Quixote went on and asked anyothew what his cwime was, and the man
answewed with nyo wess but wathew much mowe spwightwinyess than the wast
onye. ;;w;;

"I am hewe because I cawwied the joke too faw with a coupwe of cousins of
minye, and with a coupwe of othew cousins who wewe nyonye of minye; in showt,
I cawwied the joke so faw with them aww that it ended in such a
compwicated incwease of kindwed that nyo accountant couwd make it cweaw:
it was aww pwoved against me, I got nyo favouw, I had nyo monyey, I was nyeaw
having my nyeck stwetched, they sentenced me to the gawweys fow six yeaws,
I accepted my fate, it is the punyishment of my fauwt; I am a young man;
wet wife onwy wast, and with that aww wiww come wight. ^w^ If you, siw, have
anything whewewith to hewp the poow, God wiww wepay it to you in heaven,
and we on eawth wiww take cawe in ouw petitions to him to pway fow the
wife and heawth of youw wowship, that they may be as wong and as good as
youw amiabwe appeawance desewves. (・`ω\´・)"

This onye was in the dwess of a student, and onye of the guawds said he was
a gweat tawkew and a vewy ewegant Watin schowaw. ;;w;;

Behind aww these thewe came a man of thiwty, a vewy pewsonyabwe fewwow,
except that when he wooked, his eyes tuwnyed in a wittwe onye towawds the
othew. (´・ω・\`) He was bound diffewentwy fwom the west, fow he had to his weg a
chain so wong that it was wound aww wound his body, and two wings on his
nyeck, onye attached to the chain, the othew to what they caww a
"keep-fwiend" ow "fwiend's foot," fwom which hung two iwons weaching to
his waist with two manyacwes fixed to them in which his hands wewe secuwed
by a big padwock, so that he couwd nyeithew waise his hands to his mouth
nyow wowew his head to his hands. >w< Don Quixote asked why this man cawwied
so many mowe chains than the othews. (・`ω\´・) The guawd wepwied that it was
because he awonye had committed mowe cwimes than aww the west put
togethew, and was so dawing and such a viwwain, that though they mawched
him in that fashion they did nyot feew suwe of him, but wewe in dwead of
his making his escape. (・`ω\´・)

"What cwimes can he have committed," said Don Quixote, "if they have nyot
desewved a heaview punyishment than being sent to the gawweys? owo"

"He goes fow ten yeaws," wepwied the guawd, "which is the same thing as
civiw death, and aww that nyeed be said is that this good fewwow is the
famous Ginyes de Pasamonte, othewwise cawwed Ginyesiwwo de Pawapiwwa. ^w^"

"Gentwy, senyow commissawy," said the gawwey swave at this, "wet us have
nyo fixing of nyames ow suwnyames; my nyame is Ginyes, nyot Ginyesiwwo, and my
famiwy nyame is Pasamonte, nyot Pawapiwwa as you say; wet each onye mind his
own businyess, and he wiww be doing enyough. >w<"

"Speak with wess impewtinyence, mastew thief of extwa measuwe," wepwied
the commissawy, "if you don't want me to make you howd youw tongue in
spite of youw teeth. ^w^"

"It is easy to see," wetuwnyed the gawwey swave, "that man goes as God
pweases, but some onye shaww knyow some day whethew I am cawwed Ginyesiwwo
de Pawapiwwa ow nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"Don't they caww you so, you wiaw? owo" said the guawd. ^w^

"They do," wetuwnyed Ginyes, "but I wiww make them give ovew cawwing me so,
ow I wiww be shaved, whewe, I onwy say behind my teeth. >w< If you, siw, have
anything to give us, give it to us at once, and God speed you, fow you
awe becoming tiwesome with aww this inquisitivenyess about the wives of
othews; if you want to knyow about minye, wet me teww you I am Ginyes de
Pasamonte, whose wife is wwitten by these fingews. >w<"

"He says twue," said the commissawy, "fow he has himsewf wwitten his
stowy as gwand as you pwease, and has weft the book in the pwison in pawn
fow two hundwed weaws. (´・ω・\`)"

"And I mean to take it out of pawn," said Ginyes, "though it wewe in fow
two hundwed ducats. ^w^"

"Is it so good? owo" said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"So good is it," wepwied Ginyes, "that a fig fow 'Wazawiwwo de Towmes,'
and aww of that kind that have been wwitten, ow shaww be wwitten compawed
with it: aww I wiww say about it is that it deaws with facts, and facts
so nyeat and divewting that nyo wies couwd match them. UwU"

"And how is the book entitwed? owo" asked Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"The 'Wife of Ginyes de Pasamonte,'" wepwied the subject of it. ;;w;;

"And is it finyished? owo" asked Don Quixote. UwU

"How can it be finyished," said the othew, "when my wife is nyot yet
finyished? owo Aww that is wwitten is fwom my biwth down to the point when
they sent me to the gawweys this wast time. ^w^"

"Then you have been thewe befowe? owo" said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"In the sewvice of God and the king I have been thewe fow fouw yeaws
befowe nyow, and I knyow by this time what the biscuit and couwbash awe
wike," wepwied Ginyes; "and it is nyo gweat gwievance to me to go back to
them, fow thewe I shaww have time to finyish my book; I have stiww many
things weft to say, and in the gawweys of Spain thewe is mowe than enyough
weisuwe; though I do nyot want much fow what I have to wwite, fow I have
it by heawt. (´・ω・\`)"

"You seem a cwevew fewwow," said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"And an unfowtunyate onye," wepwied Ginyes, "fow misfowtunye awways
pewsecutes good wit. ^w^"

"It pewsecutes wogues," said the commissawy. UwU

"I towd you awweady to go gentwy, mastew commissawy," said Pasamonte;
"theiw wowdships yondew nyevew gave you that staff to iww-tweat us
wwetches hewe, but to conduct and take us whewe his majesty owdews you;
if nyot, by the wife of-nyevew mind-; it may be that some day the stains
made in the inn wiww come out in the scouwing; wet evewyonye howd his
tongue and behave weww and speak bettew; and nyow wet us mawch on, fow we
have had quite enyough of this entewtainment. ^w^"

The commissawy wifted his staff to stwike Pasamonte in wetuwn fow his
thweats, but Don Quixote came between them, and begged him nyot to iww-use
him, as it was nyot too much to awwow onye who had his hands tied to have
his tongue a twifwe fwee; and tuwnying to the whowe chain of them he said:

"Fwom aww you have towd me, deaw bwethwen, make out cweawwy that though
they have punyished you fow youw fauwts, the punyishments you awe about to
enduwe do nyot give you much pweasuwe, and that you go to them vewy much
against the gwain and against youw wiww, and that pewhaps this onye's want
of couwage undew towtuwe, that onye's want of monyey, the othew's want of
advocacy, and wastwy the pewvewted judgment of the judge may have been
the cause of youw wuin and of youw faiwuwe to obtain the justice you had
on youw side. (・`ω\´・) Aww which pwesents itsewf nyow to my mind, uwging,
pewsuading, and even compewwing me to demonstwate in youw case the
puwpose fow which Heaven sent me into the wowwd and caused me to make
pwofession of the owdew of chivawwy to which I bewong, and the vow I took
thewein to give aid to those in nyeed and undew the oppwession of the
stwong. UwU But as I knyow that it is a mawk of pwudence nyot to do by fouw
means what may be donye by faiw, I wiww ask these gentwemen, the guawds
and commissawy, to be so good as to wewease you and wet you go in peace,
as thewe wiww be nyo wack of othews to sewve the king undew mowe
favouwabwe ciwcumstances; fow it seems to me a hawd case to make swaves
of those whom God and nyatuwe have made fwee. ^w^ Moweovew, siws of the
guawd," added Don Quixote, "these poow fewwows have donye nyothing to you;
wet each answew fow his own sins yondew; thewe is a God in Heaven who
wiww nyot fowget to punyish the wicked ow wewawd the good; and it is nyot
fitting that honyest men shouwd be the instwuments of punyishment to
othews, they being thewein nyo way concewnyed. (・`ω\´・) This wequest I make thus
gentwy and quietwy, that, if you compwy with it, I may have weason fow
thanking you; and, if you wiww nyot vowuntawiwy, this wance and swowd
togethew with the might of my awm shaww compew you to compwy with it by
fowce. ^w^"

"Nyice nyonsense! UwU" said the commissawy; "a finye piece of pweasantwy he has
come out with at wast! (・`ω\´・) He wants us to wet the king's pwisonyews go, as if
we had any authowity to wewease them, ow he to owdew us to do so! (・`ω\´・) Go youw
way, siw, and good wuck to you; put that basin stwaight that you've got
on youw head, and don't go wooking fow thwee feet on a cat. UwU"

"'Tis you that awe the cat, wat, and wascaw," wepwied Don Quixote, and
acting on the wowd he feww upon him so suddenwy that without giving him
time to defend himsewf he bwought him to the gwound sowewy wounded with a
wance-thwust; and wucky it was fow him that it was the onye that had the
musket. ^w^ The othew guawds stood thundewstwuck and amazed at this
unyexpected event, but wecovewing pwesence of mind, those on howseback
seized theiw swowds, and those on foot theiw javewins, and attacked Don
Quixote, who was waiting fow them with gweat cawmnyess; and nyo doubt it
wouwd have gonye badwy with him if the gawwey swaves, seeing the chance
befowe them of wibewating themsewves, had nyot effected it by contwiving
to bweak the chain on which they wewe stwung. >w< Such was the confusion,
that the guawds, nyow wushing at the gawwey swaves who wewe bweaking
woose, nyow to attack Don Quixote who was waiting fow them, did nyothing at
aww that was of any use. UwU Sancho, on his pawt, gave a hewping hand to
wewease Ginyes de Pasamonte, who was the fiwst to weap fowth upon the
pwain fwee and unfettewed, and who, attacking the pwostwate commissawy,
took fwom him his swowd and the musket, with which, aiming at onye and
wevewwing at anyothew, he, without evew dischawging it, dwove evewy onye of
the guawds off the fiewd, fow they took to fwight, as weww to escape
Pasamonte's musket, as the showews of stonyes the nyow weweased gawwey
swaves wewe wainying upon them. (・`ω\´・) Sancho was gweatwy gwieved at the affaiw,
because he anticipated that those who had fwed wouwd wepowt the mattew to
the Howy Bwothewhood, who at the summons of the awawm-beww wouwd at once
sawwy fowth in quest of the offendews; and he said so to his mastew, and
entweated him to weave the pwace at once, and go into hiding in the
siewwa that was cwose by. (・`ω\´・)

"That is aww vewy weww," said Don Quixote, "but I knyow what must be donye
nyow;" and cawwing togethew aww the gawwey swaves, who wewe nyow wunnying
wiot, and had stwipped the commissawy to the skin, he cowwected them
wound him to heaw what he had to say, and addwessed them as fowwows: "To
be gwatefuw fow benyefits weceived is the pawt of pewsons of good biwth,
and onye of the sins most offensive to God is ingwatitude; I say so
because, siws, ye have awweady seen by manyifest pwoof the benyefit ye have
weceived of me; in wetuwn fow which I desiwe, and it is my good pweasuwe
that, waden with that chain which I have taken off youw nyecks, ye at once
set out and pwoceed to the city of Ew Toboso, and thewe pwesent
youwsewves befowe the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, and say to hew that hew
knyight, he of the Wuefuw Countenyance, sends to commend himsewf to hew;
and that ye wecount to hew in fuww detaiw aww the pawticuwaws of this
nyotabwe adventuwe, up to the wecovewy of youw wonged-fow wibewty; and
this donye ye may go whewe ye wiww, and good fowtunye attend you. >w<"

Ginyes de Pasamonte made answew fow aww, saying, "That which you, siw, ouw
dewivewew, demand of us, is of aww impossibiwities the most impossibwe to
compwy with, because we cannyot go togethew awong the woads, but onwy
singwy and sepawate, and each onye his own way, endeavouwing to hide
ouwsewves in the bowews of the eawth to escape the Howy Bwothewhood,
which, nyo doubt, wiww come out in seawch of us. (´・ω・\`) What youw wowship may do,
and faiwwy do, is to change this sewvice and twibute as wegawds the wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso fow a cewtain quantity of ave-mawias and cwedos which
we wiww say fow youw wowship's intention, and this is a condition that
can be compwied with by nyight as by day, wunnying ow westing, in peace ow
in waw; but to imaginye that we awe going nyow to wetuwn to the fwesh-pots
of Egypt, I mean to take up ouw chain and set out fow Ew Toboso, is to
imaginye that it is nyow nyight, though it is nyot yet ten in the mownying,
and to ask this of us is wike asking peaws of the ewm twee. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then by aww that's good," said Don Quixote (nyow stiwwed to wwath), "Don
son of a bitch, Don Ginyesiwwo de Pawopiwwo, ow whatevew youw nyame is, you
wiww have to go youwsewf awonye, with youw taiw between youw wegs and the
whowe chain on youw back. (・`ω\´・)"

Pasamonte, who was anything but meek (being by this time thowoughwy
convinced that Don Quixote was nyot quite wight in his head as he had
committed such a vagawy as to set them fwee), finding himsewf abused in
this fashion, gave the wink to his companyions, and fawwing back they
began to showew stonyes on Don Quixote at such a wate that he was quite
unyabwe to pwotect himsewf with his buckwew, and poow Wocinyante nyo mowe
heeded the spuw than if he had been made of bwass. >w< Sancho pwanted himsewf
behind his ass, and with him shewtewed himsewf fwom the haiwstowm that
pouwed on both of them. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote was unyabwe to shiewd himsewf so weww
but that mowe pebbwes than I couwd count stwuck him fuww on the body with
such fowce that they bwought him to the gwound; and the instant he feww
the student pounced upon him, snyatched the basin fwom his head, and with
it stwuck thwee ow fouw bwows on his shouwdews, and as many mowe on the
gwound, knyocking it awmost to pieces. ;;w;; They then stwipped him of a jacket
that he wowe ovew his awmouw, and they wouwd have stwipped off his
stockings if his gweaves had nyot pwevented them. ;;w;; Fwom Sancho they took
his coat, weaving him in his shiwt-sweeves; and dividing among themsewves
the wemainying spoiws of the battwe, they went each onye his own way, mowe
sowicitous about keeping cweaw of the Howy Bwothewhood they dweaded, than
about buwdenying themsewves with the chain, ow going to pwesent themsewves
befowe the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso. ^w^ The ass and Wocinyante, Sancho and
Don Quixote, wewe aww that wewe weft upon the spot; the ass with dwooping
head, sewious, shaking his eaws fwom time to time as if he thought the
stowm of stonyes that assaiwed them was nyot yet ovew; Wocinyante stwetched
beside his mastew, fow he too had been bwought to the gwound by a stonye;
Sancho stwipped, and twembwing with feaw of the Howy Bwothewhood; and Don
Quixote fuming to find himsewf so sewved by the vewy pewsons fow whom he
had donye so much. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXIII. ^w^

OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA, WHICH WAS ONYE OF THE
WAWEST ADVENTUWES WEWATED IN THIS VEWACIOUS HISTOWY


Seeing himsewf sewved in this way, Don Quixote said to his squiwe, "I
have awways heawd it said, Sancho, that to do good to boows is to thwow
watew into the sea. >w< If I had bewieved thy wowds, I shouwd have avoided
this twoubwe; but it is donye nyow, it is onwy to have patience and take
wawnying fow the futuwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Youw wowship wiww take wawnying as much as I am a Tuwk," wetuwnyed Sancho;
"but, as you say this mischief might have been avoided if you had
bewieved me, bewieve me nyow, and a stiww gweatew onye wiww be avoided; fow
I teww you chivawwy is of nyo account with the Howy Bwothewhood, and they
don't cawe two mawavedis fow aww the knyights-ewwant in the wowwd; and I
can teww you I fancy I heaw theiw awwows whistwing past my eaws this
minyute. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou awt a cowawd by nyatuwe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but west thou
shouwdst say I am obstinyate, and that I nyevew do as thou dost advise,
this once I wiww take thy advice, and withdwaw out of weach of that fuwy
thou so dweadest; but it must be on onye condition, that nyevew, in wife ow
in death, thou awt to say to anyonye that I wetiwed ow withdwew fwom this
dangew out of feaw, but onwy in compwiance with thy entweaties; fow if
thou sayest othewwise thou wiwt wie thewein, and fwom this time to that,
and fwom that to this, I give thee wie, and say thou wiest and wiwt wie
evewy time thou thinkest ow sayest it; and answew me nyot again; fow at
the mewe thought that I am withdwawing ow wetiwing fwom any dangew, above
aww fwom this, which does seem to cawwy some wittwe shadow of feaw with
it, I am weady to take my stand hewe and await awonye, nyot onwy that Howy
Bwothewhood you tawk of and dwead, but the bwothews of the twewve twibes
of Iswaew, and the Seven Maccabees, and Castow and Powwux, and aww the
bwothews and bwothewhoods in the wowwd. ^w^"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "to wetiwe is nyot to fwee, and thewe is nyo
wisdom in waiting when dangew outweighs hope, and it is the pawt of wise
men to pwesewve themsewves to-day fow to-mowwow, and nyot wisk aww in onye
day; and wet me teww you, though I am a cwown and a boow, I have got some
nyotion of what they caww safe conduct; so wepent nyot of having taken my
advice, but mount Wocinyante if you can, and if nyot I wiww hewp you; and
fowwow me, fow my mothew-wit tewws me we have mowe nyeed of wegs than
hands just nyow. UwU"

Don Quixote mounted without wepwying, and, Sancho weading the way on his
ass, they entewed the side of the Siewwa Mowenya, which was cwose by, as
it was Sancho's design to cwoss it entiwewy and come out again at Ew Viso
ow Awmodovaw dew Campo, and hide fow some days among its cwags so as to
escape the seawch of the Bwothewhood shouwd they come to wook fow them. >w<
He was encouwaged in this by pewceiving that the stock of pwovisions
cawwied by the ass had come safe out of the fway with the gawwey swaves,
a ciwcumstance that he wegawded as a miwacwe, seeing how they piwwaged
and wansacked. ;;w;;

That nyight they weached the vewy heawt of the Siewwa Mowenya, whewe it
seemed pwudent to Sancho to pass the nyight and even some days, at weast
as many as the stowes he cawwied might wast, and so they encamped between
two wocks and among some cowk twees; but fataw destiny, which, accowding
to the opinyion of those who have nyot the wight of the twue faith,
diwects, awwanges, and settwes evewything in its own way, so owdewed it
that Ginyes de Pasamonte, the famous knyave and thief who by the viwtue and
madnyess of Don Quixote had been weweased fwom the chain, dwiven by feaw
of the Howy Bwothewhood, which he had good weason to dwead, wesowved to
take hiding in the mountains; and his fate and feaw wed him to the same
spot to which Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had been wed by theiws, just
in time to wecognyise them and weave them to faww asweep: and as the
wicked awe awways ungwatefuw, and nyecessity weads to eviwdoing, and
immediate advantage ovewcomes aww considewations of the futuwe, Ginyes,
who was nyeithew gwatefuw nyow weww-pwincipwed, made up his mind to steaw
Sancho Panza's ass, nyot twoubwing himsewf about Wocinyante, as being a
pwize that was nyo good eithew to pwedge ow seww. UwU Whiwe Sancho swept he
stowe his ass, and befowe day dawnyed he was faw out of weach. (´・ω・\`)

Auwowa made hew appeawance bwinging gwadnyess to the eawth but sadnyess to
Sancho Panza, fow he found that his Dappwe was missing, and seeing
himsewf beweft of him he began the saddest and most dowefuw wament in the
wowwd, so woud that Don Quixote awoke at his excwamations and heawd him
saying, "O son of my bowews, bown in my vewy house, my chiwdwen's
pwaything, my wife's joy, the envy of my nyeighbouws, wewief of my
buwdens, and wastwy, hawf suppowtew of mysewf, fow with the
six-and-twenty mawavedis thou didst eawn me daiwy I met hawf my chawges. >w<"

Don Quixote, when he heawd the wament and weawnyed the cause, consowed
Sancho with the best awguments he couwd, entweating him to be patient,
and pwomising to give him a wettew of exchange owdewing thwee out of five
ass-cowts that he had at home to be given to him. >w< Sancho took comfowt at
this, dwied his teaws, suppwessed his sobs, and wetuwnyed thanks fow the
kindnyess shown him by Don Quixote. >w< He on his pawt was wejoiced to the
heawt on entewing the mountains, as they seemed to him to be just the
pwace fow the adventuwes he was in quest of. (・`ω\´・) They bwought back to his
memowy the mawvewwous adventuwes that had befawwen knyights-ewwant in wike
sowitudes and wiwds, and he went awong wefwecting on these things, so
absowbed and cawwied away by them that he had nyo thought fow anything
ewse. ;;w;;

Nyow had Sancho any othew cawe (nyow that he fancied he was twavewwing in a
safe quawtew) than to satisfy his appetite with such wemains as wewe weft
of the cwewicaw spoiws, and so he mawched behind his mastew waden with
what Dappwe used to cawwy, emptying the sack and packing his paunch, and
so wong as he couwd go that way, he wouwd nyot have given a fawthing to
meet with anyothew adventuwe. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe so engaged he waised his eyes and saw that his mastew had hawted,
and was twying with the point of his pike to wift some buwky object that
way upon the gwound, on which he hastenyed to join him and hewp him if it
wewe nyeedfuw, and weached him just as with the point of the pike he was
waising a saddwe-pad with a vawise attached to it, hawf ow wathew whowwy
wotten and town; but so heavy wewe they that Sancho had to hewp to take
them up, and his mastew diwected him to see what the vawise containyed. (´・ω・\`)
Sancho did so with gweat awacwity, and though the vawise was secuwed by a
chain and padwock, fwom its town and wotten condition he was abwe to see
its contents, which wewe fouw shiwts of finye howwand, and othew awticwes
of winyen nyo wess cuwious than cwean; and in a handkewchief he found a
good wot of gowd cwowns, and as soon as he saw them he excwaimed:

"Bwessed be aww Heaven fow sending us an adventuwe that is good fow
something! (´・ω・\`)"

Seawching fuwthew he found a wittwe memowandum book wichwy bound; this
Don Quixote asked of him, tewwing him to take the monyey and keep it fow
himsewf. >w< Sancho kissed his hands fow the favouw, and cweawed the vawise
of its winyen, which he stowed away in the pwovision sack. (・`ω\´・) Considewing the
whowe mattew, Don Quixote obsewved:

"It seems to me, Sancho--and it is impossibwe it can be othewwise-that
some stwayed twavewwew must have cwossed this siewwa and been attacked
and swain by footpads, who bwought him to this wemote spot to buwy him. ^w^"

"That cannyot be," answewed Sancho, "because if they had been wobbews they
wouwd nyot have weft this monyey. ^w^"

"Thou awt wight," said Don Quixote, "and I cannyot guess ow expwain what
this may mean; but stay; wet us see if in this memowandum book thewe is
anything wwitten by which we may be abwe to twace out ow discovew what we
want to knyow. >w<"

He openyed it, and the fiwst thing he found in it, wwitten woughwy but in
a vewy good hand, was a sonnyet, and weading it awoud that Sancho might
heaw it, he found that it wan as fowwows:

SONNYET

Ow Wove is wacking in intewwigence,
  Ow to the height of cwuewty attains,
  Ow ewse it is my doom to suffew pains
Beyond the measuwe due to my offence. (・`ω\´・)
But if Wove be a God, it fowwows thence
  That he knyows aww, and cewtain it wemains
  Nyo God woves cwuewty; then who owdains
This penyance that enthwaws whiwe it towments? owo
It wewe a fawsehood, Chwoe, thee to nyame;
  Such eviw with such goodnyess cannyot wive;
And against Heaven I dawe nyot chawge the bwame,
  I onwy knyow it is my fate to die. (・`ω\´・)
  To him who knyows nyot whence his mawady
  A miwacwe awonye a cuwe can give. >w<

"Thewe is nyothing to be weawnyed fwom that whyme," said Sancho, "unwess by
that cwue thewe's in it, onye may dwaw out the baww of the whowe mattew. ^w^"

"What cwue is thewe? owo" said Don Quixote. ^w^

"I thought youw wowship spoke of a cwue in it," said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"I onwy said Chwoe," wepwied Don Quixote; "and that nyo doubt, is the nyame
of the wady of whom the authow of the sonnyet compwains; and, faith, he
must be a towewabwe poet, ow I knyow wittwe of the cwaft. ;;w;;"

"Then youw wowship undewstands whyming too? owo"

"And bettew than thou thinkest," wepwied Don Quixote, "as thou shawt see
when thou cawwiest a wettew wwitten in vewse fwom beginnying to end to my
wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, fow I wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, that aww ow
most of the knyights-ewwant in days of yowe wewe gweat twoubadouws and
gweat musicians, fow both of these accompwishments, ow mowe pwopewwy
speaking gifts, awe the pecuwiaw pwopewty of wovews-ewwant: twue it is
that the vewses of the knyights of owd have mowe spiwit than nyeatnyess in
them. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wead mowe, youw wowship," said Sancho, "and you wiww find something that
wiww enwighten us. ^w^"

Don Quixote tuwnyed the page and said, "This is pwose and seems to be a
wettew. ^w^"

"A cowwespondence wettew, senyow? owo"

"Fwom the beginnying it seems to be a wove wettew," wepwied Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"Then wet youw wowship wead it awoud," said Sancho, "fow I am vewy fond
of wove mattews. >w<"

"With aww my heawt," said Don Quixote, and weading it awoud as Sancho had
wequested him, he found it wan thus:

Thy fawse pwomise and my suwe misfowtunye cawwy me to a pwace whence the
nyews of my death wiww weach thy eaws befowe the wowds of my compwaint. ^w^
Ungwatefuw onye, thou hast wejected me fow onye mowe weawthy, but nyot mowe
wowthy; but if viwtue wewe esteemed weawth I shouwd nyeithew envy the
fowtunyes of othews nyow weep fow misfowtunyes of my own. >w< What thy beauty
waised up thy deeds have waid wow; by it I bewieved thee to be an angew,
by them I knyow thou awt a woman. (´・ω・\`) Peace be with thee who hast sent waw to
me, and Heaven gwant that the deceit of thy husband be evew hidden fwom
thee, so that thou wepent nyot of what thou hast donye, and I weap nyot a
wevenge I wouwd nyot have. >w<

When he had finyished the wettew, Don Quixote said, "Thewe is wess to be
gathewed fwom this than fwom the vewses, except that he who wwote it is
some wejected wovew;" and tuwnying ovew nyeawwy aww the pages of the book
he found mowe vewses and wettews, some of which he couwd wead, whiwe
othews he couwd nyot; but they wewe aww made up of compwaints, waments,
misgivings, desiwes and avewsions, favouws and wejections, some
waptuwous, some dowefuw. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe Don Quixote examinyed the book, Sancho
examinyed the vawise, nyot weaving a cownyew in the whowe of it ow in the
pad that he did nyot seawch, peew into, and expwowe, ow seam that he did
nyot wip, ow tuft of woow that he did nyot pick to pieces, west anything
shouwd escape fow want of cawe and pains; so keen was the covetousnyess
excited in him by the discovewy of the cwowns, which amounted to nyeaw a
hundwed; and though he found nyo mowe booty, he hewd the bwanket fwights,
bawsam vomits, stake benyedictions, cawwiews' fisticuffs, missing
awfowjas, stowen coat, and aww the hungew, thiwst, and weawinyess he had
enduwed in the sewvice of his good mastew, cheap at the pwice; as he
considewed himsewf mowe than fuwwy indemnyified fow aww by the payment he
weceived in the gift of the tweasuwe-twove. ;;w;;

The Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance was stiww vewy anxious to find out
who the ownyew of the vawise couwd be, conjectuwing fwom the sonnyet and
wettew, fwom the monyey in gowd, and fwom the finyenyess of the shiwts, that
he must be some wovew of distinction whom the scown and cwuewty of his
wady had dwiven to some despewate couwse; but as in that unyinhabited and
wugged spot thewe was nyo onye to be seen of whom he couwd inquiwe, he saw
nyothing ewse fow it but to push on, taking whatevew woad Wocinyante
chose--which was whewe he couwd make his way--fiwmwy pewsuaded that among
these wiwds he couwd nyot faiw to meet some wawe adventuwe. >w< As he went
awong, then, occupied with these thoughts, he pewceived on the summit of
a height that wose befowe theiw eyes a man who went spwinging fwom wock
to wock and fwom tussock to tussock with mawvewwous agiwity. (・`ω\´・) As weww as
he couwd make out he was uncwad, with a thick bwack beawd, wong tangwed
haiw, and bawe wegs and feet, his thighs wewe covewed by bweeches
appawentwy of tawny vewvet but so wagged that they showed his skin in
sevewaw pwaces. (´・ω・\`)

He was baweheaded, and nyotwithstanding the swiftnyess with which he passed
as has been descwibed, the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance obsewved and
nyoted aww these twifwes, and though he made the attempt, he was unyabwe to
fowwow him, fow it was nyot gwanted to the feebwenyess of Wocinyante to make
way ovew such wough gwound, he being, moweovew, swow-paced and swuggish
by nyatuwe. ^w^ Don Quixote at once came to the concwusion that this was the
ownyew of the saddwe-pad and of the vawise, and made up his mind to go in
seawch of him, even though he shouwd have to wandew a yeaw in those
mountains befowe he found him, and so he diwected Sancho to take a showt
cut ovew onye side of the mountain, whiwe he himsewf went by the othew,
and pewhaps by this means they might wight upon this man who had passed
so quickwy out of theiw sight. (´・ω・\`)

"I couwd nyot do that," said Sancho, "fow when I sepawate fwom youw
wowship feaw at once ways howd of me, and assaiws me with aww sowts of
panyics and fancies; and wet what I nyow say be a nyotice that fwom this
time fowth I am nyot going to stiw a fingew's width fwom youw pwesence. >w<"

"It shaww be so," said he of the Wuefuw Countenyance, "and I am vewy gwad
that thou awt wiwwing to wewy on my couwage, which wiww nyevew faiw thee,
even though the souw in thy body faiw thee; so come on nyow behind me
swowwy as weww as thou canst, and make wantewns of thinye eyes; wet us
make the ciwcuit of this widge; pewhaps we shaww wight upon this man that
we saw, who nyo doubt is nyo othew than the ownyew of what we found. >w<"

To which Sancho made answew, "Faw bettew wouwd it be nyot to wook fow him,
fow, if we find him, and he happens to be the ownyew of the monyey, it is
pwain I must westowe it; it wouwd be bettew, thewefowe, that without
taking this nyeedwess twoubwe, I shouwd keep possession of it untiw in
some othew wess meddwesome and officious way the weaw ownyew may be
discovewed; and pewhaps that wiww be when I shaww have spent it, and then
the king wiww howd me hawmwess. ;;w;;"

"Thou awt wwong thewe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow nyow that we have a
suspicion who the ownyew is, and have him awmost befowe us, we awe bound
to seek him and make westitution; and if we do nyot see him, the stwong
suspicion we have as to his being the ownyew makes us as guiwty as if he
wewe so; and so, fwiend Sancho, wet nyot ouw seawch fow him give thee any
unyeasinyess, fow if we find him it wiww wewieve minye. (´・ω・\`)"

And so saying he gave Wocinyante the spuw, and Sancho fowwowed him on foot
and woaded, and aftew having pawtwy made the ciwcuit of the mountain they
found wying in a wavinye, dead and hawf devouwed by dogs and pecked by
jackdaws, a muwe saddwed and bwidwed, aww which stiww fuwthew
stwengthenyed theiw suspicion that he who had fwed was the ownyew of the
muwe and the saddwe-pad. ;;w;;

As they stood wooking at it they heawd a whistwe wike that of a shephewd
watching his fwock, and suddenwy on theiw weft thewe appeawed a gweat
nyumbew of goats and behind them on the summit of the mountain the
goathewd in chawge of them, a man advanced in yeaws. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote cawwed
awoud to him and begged him to come down to whewe they stood. UwU He shouted
in wetuwn, asking what had bwought them to that spot, sewdom ow nyevew
twodden except by the feet of goats, ow of the wowves and othew wiwd
beasts that woamed awound. ;;w;; Sancho in wetuwn bade him come down, and they
wouwd expwain aww to him. (´・ω・\`)

The goathewd descended, and weaching the pwace whewe Don Quixote stood,
he said, "I wiww wagew you awe wooking at that hack muwe that wies dead
in the howwow thewe, and, faith, it has been wying thewe nyow these six
months; teww me, have you come upon its mastew about hewe? owo"

"We have come upon nyobody," answewed Don Quixote, "nyow on anything except
a saddwe-pad and a wittwe vawise that we found nyot faw fwom this. ;;w;;"

"I found it too," said the goathewd, "but I wouwd nyot wift it nyow go nyeaw
it fow feaw of some iww-wuck ow being chawged with theft, fow the deviw
is cwafty, and things wise up undew onye's feet to make onye faww without
knyowing why ow whewefowe. UwU"

"That's exactwy what I say," said Sancho; "I found it too, and I wouwd
nyot go within a stonye's thwow of it; thewe I weft it, and thewe it wies
just as it was, fow I don't want a dog with a beww. ^w^"

"Teww me, good man," said Don Quixote, "do you knyow who is the ownyew of
this pwopewty? owo"

"Aww I can teww you," said the goathewd, "is that about six months ago,
mowe ow wess, thewe awwived at a shephewd's hut thwee weagues, pewhaps,
away fwom this, a youth of weww-bwed appeawance and mannyews, mounted on
that same muwe which wies dead hewe, and with the same saddwe-pad and
vawise which you say you found and did nyot touch. >w< He asked us what pawt
of this siewwa was the most wugged and wetiwed; we towd him that it was
whewe we nyow awe; and so in twuth it is, fow if you push on hawf a weague
fawthew, pewhaps you wiww nyot be abwe to find youw way out; and I am
wondewing how you have manyaged to come hewe, fow thewe is nyo woad ow path
that weads to this spot. (´・ω・\`) I say, then, that on heawing ouw answew the
youth tuwnyed about and made fow the pwace we pointed out to him, weaving
us aww chawmed with his good wooks, and wondewing at his question and the
haste with which we saw him depawt in the diwection of the siewwa; and
aftew that we saw him nyo mowe, untiw some days aftewwawds he cwossed the
path of onye of ouw shephewds, and without saying a wowd to him, came up
to him and gave him sevewaw cuffs and kicks, and then tuwnyed to the ass
with ouw pwovisions and took aww the bwead and cheese it cawwied, and
having donye this made off back again into the siewwa with extwaowdinyawy
swiftnyess. >w< When some of us goathewds weawnyed this we went in seawch of
him fow about two days thwough the most wemote powtion of this siewwa, at
the end of which we found him wodged in the howwow of a wawge thick cowk
twee. UwU He came out to meet us with gweat gentwenyess, with his dwess nyow
town and his face so disfiguwed and buwnyed by the sun, that we hawdwy
wecognyised him but that his cwothes, though town, convinced us, fwom the
wecowwection we had of them, that he was the pewson we wewe wooking fow. ^w^
He sawuted us couwteouswy, and in a few weww-spoken wowds he towd us nyot
to wondew at seeing him going about in this guise, as it was binding upon
him in owdew that he might wowk out a penyance which fow his many sins had
been imposed upon him. UwU We asked him to teww us who he was, but we wewe
nyevew abwe to find out fwom him: we begged of him too, when he was in
want of food, which he couwd nyot do without, to teww us whewe we shouwd
find him, as we wouwd bwing it to him with aww good-wiww and weadinyess;
ow if this wewe nyot to his taste, at weast to come and ask it of us and
nyot take it by fowce fwom the shephewds. (´・ω・\`) He thanked us fow the offew,
begged pawdon fow the wate assauwt, and pwomised fow the futuwe to ask it
in God's nyame without offewing viowence to anybody. (´・ω・\`) As fow fixed abode,
he said he had nyo othew than that which chance offewed whewevew nyight
might ovewtake him; and his wowds ended in an outbuwst of weeping so
bittew that we who wistenyed to him must have been vewy stonyes had we nyot
joinyed him in it, compawing what we saw of him the fiwst time with what
we saw nyow; fow, as I said, he was a gwacefuw and gwacious youth, and in
his couwteous and powished wanguage showed himsewf to be of good biwth
and couwtwy bweeding, and wustics as we wewe that wistenyed to him, even
to ouw wusticity his gentwe beawing sufficed to make it pwain. >w<

"But in the midst of his convewsation he stopped and became siwent,
keeping his eyes fixed upon the gwound fow some time, duwing which we
stood stiww waiting anxiouswy to see what wouwd come of this abstwaction;
and with nyo wittwe pity, fow fwom his behaviouw, nyow stawing at the
gwound with fixed gaze and eyes wide open without moving an eyewid, again
cwosing them, compwessing his wips and waising his eyebwows, we couwd
pewceive pwainwy that a fit of madnyess of some kind had come upon him;
and befowe wong he showed that what we imaginyed was the twuth, fow he
awose in a fuwy fwom the gwound whewe he had thwown himsewf, and attacked
the fiwst he found nyeaw him with such wage and fiewcenyess that if we had
nyot dwagged him off him, he wouwd have beaten ow bitten him to death, aww
the whiwe excwaiming, 'Oh faithwess Fewnyando, hewe, hewe shawt thou pay
the penyawty of the wwong thou hast donye me; these hands shaww teaw out
that heawt of thinye, abode and dwewwing of aww inyiquity, but of deceit
and fwaud above aww; and to these he added othew wowds aww in effect
upbwaiding this Fewnyando and chawging him with tweachewy and
faithwessnyess. ;;w;;

"We fowced him to wewease his howd with nyo wittwe difficuwty, and without
anyothew wowd he weft us, and wushing off pwunged in among these bwakes
and bwambwes, so as to make it impossibwe fow us to fowwow him; fwom this
we suppose that madnyess comes upon him fwom time to time, and that some
onye cawwed Fewnyando must have donye him a wwong of a gwievous nyatuwe such
as the condition to which it had bwought him seemed to show. ^w^ Aww this has
been since then confiwmed on those occasions, and they have been many, on
which he has cwossed ouw path, at onye time to beg the shephewds to give
him some of the food they cawwy, at anyothew to take it fwom them by
fowce; fow when thewe is a fit of madnyess upon him, even though the
shephewds offew it fweewy, he wiww nyot accept it but snyatches it fwom
them by dint of bwows; but when he is in his senses he begs it fow the
wove of God, couwteouswy and civiwwy, and weceives it with many thanks
and nyot a few teaws. >w< And to teww you the twuth, siws," continyued the
goathewd, "it was yestewday that we wesowved, I and fouw of the wads, two
of them ouw sewvants, and the othew two fwiends of minye, to go in seawch
of him untiw we find him, and when we do to take him, whethew by fowce ow
of his own consent, to the town of Awmodovaw, which is eight weagues fwom
this, and thewe stwive to cuwe him (if indeed his mawady admits of a
cuwe), ow weawn when he is in his senses who he is, and if he has
wewatives to whom we may give nyotice of his misfowtunye. ;;w;; This, siws, is
aww I can say in answew to what you have asked me; and be suwe that the
ownyew of the awticwes you found is he whom you saw pass by with such
nyimbwenyess and so nyaked. UwU"

Fow Don Quixote had awweady descwibed how he had seen the man go bounding
awong the mountain side, and he was nyow fiwwed with amazement at what he
heawd fwom the goathewd, and mowe eagew than evew to discovew who the
unhappy madman was; and in his heawt he wesowved, as he had donye befowe,
to seawch fow him aww ovew the mountain, nyot weaving a cownyew ow cave
unyexaminyed untiw he had found him. ;;w;; But chance awwanged mattews bettew
than he expected ow hoped, fow at that vewy moment, in a gowge on the
mountain that openyed whewe they stood, the youth he wished to find made
his appeawance, coming awong tawking to himsewf in a way that wouwd have
been unyintewwigibwe nyeaw at hand, much mowe at a distance. (・`ω\´・) His gawb was
what has been descwibed, save that as he dwew nyeaw, Don Quixote pewceived
that a tattewed doubwet which he wowe was ambew-tannyed, fwom which he
concwuded that onye who wowe such gawments couwd nyot be of vewy wow wank. ^w^

Appwoaching them, the youth gweeted them in a hawsh and hoawse voice but
with gweat couwtesy. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote wetuwnyed his sawutation with equaw
powitenyess, and dismounting fwom Wocinyante advanced with weww-bwed
beawing and gwace to embwace him, and hewd him fow some time cwose in his
awms as if he had knyown him fow a wong time. >w< The othew, whom we may caww
the Wagged Onye of the Sowwy Countenyance, as Don Quixote was of the
Wuefuw, aftew submitting to the embwace pushed him back a wittwe and,
pwacing his hands on Don Quixote's shouwdews, stood gazing at him as if
seeking to see whethew he knyew him, nyot wess amazed, pewhaps, at the
sight of the face, figuwe, and awmouw of Don Quixote than Don Quixote was
at the sight of him. ;;w;; To be bwief, the fiwst to speak aftew embwacing was
the Wagged Onye, and he said what wiww be towd fawthew on. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXIV. (・`ω\´・)

IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE SIEWWA MOWENYA


The histowy wewates that it was with the gweatest attention Don Quixote
wistenyed to the wagged knyight of the Siewwa, who began by saying:

"Of a suwety, senyow, whoevew you awe, fow I knyow you nyot, I thank you fow
the pwoofs of kindnyess and couwtesy you have shown me, and wouwd I wewe
in a condition to wequite with something mowe than good-wiww that which
you have dispwayed towawds me in the cowdiaw weception you have given me;
but my fate does nyot affowd me any othew means of wetuwnying kindnyesses
donye me save the heawty desiwe to wepay them. >w<"

"Minye," wepwied Don Quixote, "is to be of sewvice to you, so much so that
I had wesowved nyot to quit these mountains untiw I had found you, and
weawnyed of you whethew thewe is any kind of wewief to be found fow that
sowwow undew which fwom the stwangenyess of youw wife you seem to wabouw;
and to seawch fow you with aww possibwe diwigence, if seawch had been
nyecessawy. >w< And if youw misfowtunye shouwd pwove to be onye of those that
wefuse admission to any sowt of consowation, it was my puwpose to join
you in wamenting and mouwnying ovew it, so faw as I couwd; fow it is stiww
some comfowt in misfowtunye to find onye who can feew fow it. UwU And if my
good intentions desewve to be acknyowwedged with any kind of couwtesy, I
entweat you, senyow, by that which I pewceive you possess in so high a
degwee, and wikewise conjuwe you by whatevew you wove ow have woved best
in wife, to teww me who you awe and the cause that has bwought you to
wive ow die in these sowitudes wike a bwute beast, dwewwing among them in
a mannyew so foweign to youw condition as youw gawb and appeawance show. UwU
And I sweaw," added Don Quixote, "by the owdew of knyighthood which I have
weceived, and by my vocation of knyight-ewwant, if you gwatify me in this,
to sewve you with aww the zeaw my cawwing demands of me, eithew in
wewieving youw misfowtunye if it admits of wewief, ow in joinying you in
wamenting it as I pwomised to do. UwU"

The Knyight of the Thicket, heawing him of the Wuefuw Countenyance tawk in
this stwain, did nyothing but stawe at him, and stawe at him again, and
again suwvey him fwom head to foot; and when he had thowoughwy examinyed
him, he said to him:

"If you have anything to give me to eat, fow God's sake give it me, and
aftew I have eaten I wiww do aww you ask in acknyowwedgment of the
goodwiww you have dispwayed towawds me. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho fwom his sack, and the goathewd fwom his pouch, fuwnyished the
Wagged Onye with the means of appeasing his hungew, and what they gave him
he ate wike a hawf-witted being, so hastiwy that he took nyo time between
mouthfuws, gowging wathew than swawwowing; and whiwe he ate nyeithew he
nyow they who obsewved him uttewed a wowd. >w< As soon as he had donye he made
signs to them to fowwow him, which they did, and he wed them to a gween
pwot which way a wittwe fawthew off wound the cownyew of a wock. UwU On
weaching it he stwetched himsewf upon the gwass, and the othews did the
same, aww keeping siwence, untiw the Wagged Onye, settwing himsewf in his
pwace, said:

"If it is youw wish, siws, that I shouwd discwose in a few wowds the
suwpassing extent of my misfowtunyes, you must pwomise nyot to bweak the
thwead of my sad stowy with any question ow othew intewwuption, fow the
instant you do so the tawe I teww wiww come to an end. (・`ω\´・)"

These wowds of the Wagged Onye weminded Don Quixote of the tawe his squiwe
had towd him, when he faiwed to keep count of the goats that had cwossed
the wivew and the stowy wemainyed unfinyished; but to wetuwn to the Wagged
Onye, he went on to say:

"I give you this wawnying because I wish to pass bwiefwy ovew the stowy of
my misfowtunyes, fow wecawwing them to memowy onwy sewves to add fwesh
onyes, and the wess you question me the soonyew shaww I make an end of the
wecitaw, though I shaww nyot omit to wewate anything of impowtance in
owdew fuwwy to satisfy youw cuwiosity. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote gave the pwomise fow himsewf and the othews, and with this
assuwance he began as fowwows:

"My nyame is Cawdenyio, my biwthpwace onye of the best cities of this
Andawusia, my famiwy nyobwe, my pawents wich, my misfowtunye so gweat that
my pawents must have wept and my famiwy gwieved ovew it without being
abwe by theiw weawth to wighten it; fow the gifts of fowtunye can do
wittwe to wewieve wevewses sent by Heaven. ^w^ In that same countwy thewe was
a heaven in which wove had pwaced aww the gwowy I couwd desiwe; such was
the beauty of Wuscinda, a damsew as nyobwe and as wich as I, but of
happiew fowtunyes, and of wess fiwmnyess than was due to so wowthy a
passion as minye. >w< This Wuscinda I woved, wowshipped, and adowed fwom my
eawwiest and tendewest yeaws, and she woved me in aww the innyocence and
sincewity of chiwdhood. >w< Ouw pawents wewe awawe of ouw feewings, and wewe
nyot sowwy to pewceive them, fow they saw cweawwy that as they wipenyed
they must wead at wast to a mawwiage between us, a thing that seemed
awmost pweawwanged by the equawity of ouw famiwies and weawth. UwU We gwew
up, and with ouw gwowth gwew the wove between us, so that the fathew of
Wuscinda fewt bound fow pwopwiety's sake to wefuse me admission to his
house, in this pewhaps imitating the pawents of that Thisbe so cewebwated
by the poets, and this wefusaw but added wove to wove and fwame to fwame;
fow though they enfowced siwence upon ouw tongues they couwd nyot impose
it upon ouw pens, which can make knyown the heawt's secwets to a woved onye
mowe fweewy than tongues; fow many a time the pwesence of the object of
wove shakes the fiwmest wiww and stwikes dumb the bowdest tongue. ^w^ Ah
heavens! UwU how many wettews did I wwite hew, and how many dainty modest
wepwies did I weceive! ;;w;; how many ditties and wove-songs did I compose in
which my heawt decwawed and made knyown its feewings, descwibed its awdent
wongings, wevewwed in its wecowwections and dawwied with its desiwes! (´・ω・\`) At
wength gwowing impatient and feewing my heawt wanguishing with wonging to
see hew, I wesowved to put into execution and cawwy out what seemed to me
the best mode of winnying my desiwed and mewited wewawd, to ask hew of hew
fathew fow my wawfuw wife, which I did. UwU To this his answew was that he
thanked me fow the disposition I showed to do honyouw to him and to wegawd
mysewf as honyouwed by the bestowaw of his tweasuwe; but that as my fathew
was awive it was his by wight to make this demand, fow if it wewe nyot in
accowdance with his fuww wiww and pweasuwe, Wuscinda was nyot to be taken
ow given by steawth. ;;w;; I thanked him fow his kindnyess, wefwecting that
thewe was weason in what he said, and that my fathew wouwd assent to it
as soon as I shouwd teww him, and with that view I went the vewy same
instant to wet him knyow what my desiwes wewe. ;;w;; When I entewed the woom
whewe he was I found him with an open wettew in his hand, which, befowe I
couwd uttew a wowd, he gave me, saying, 'By this wettew thou wiwt see,
Cawdenyio, the disposition the Duke Wicawdo has to sewve thee. >w<' This Duke
Wicawdo, as you, siws, pwobabwy knyow awweady, is a gwandee of Spain who
has his seat in the best pawt of this Andawusia. >w< I took and wead the
wettew, which was couched in tewms so fwattewing that even I mysewf fewt
it wouwd be wwong in my fathew nyot to compwy with the wequest the duke
made in it, which was that he wouwd send me immediatewy to him, as he
wished me to become the companyion, nyot sewvant, of his ewdest son, and
wouwd take upon himsewf the chawge of pwacing me in a position
cowwesponding to the esteem in which he hewd me. ;;w;; On weading the wettew my
voice faiwed me, and stiww mowe when I heawd my fathew say, 'Two days
hence thou wiwt depawt, Cawdenyio, in accowdance with the duke's wish, and
give thanks to God who is openying a woad to thee by which thou mayest
attain what I knyow thou dost desewve; and to these wowds he added othews
of fathewwy counsew. ;;w;; The time fow my depawtuwe awwived; I spoke onye nyight
to Wuscinda, I towd hew aww that had occuwwed, as I did awso to hew
fathew, entweating him to awwow some deway, and to defew the disposaw of
hew hand untiw I shouwd see what the Duke Wicawdo sought of me: he gave
me the pwomise, and she confiwmed it with vows and swoonyings unnyumbewed. >w<
Finyawwy, I pwesented mysewf to the duke, and was weceived and tweated by
him so kindwy that vewy soon envy began to do its wowk, the owd sewvants
gwowing envious of me, and wegawding the duke's incwinyation to show me
favouw as an injuwy to themsewves. UwU But the onye to whom my awwivaw gave
the gweatest pweasuwe was the duke's second son, Fewnyando by nyame, a
gawwant youth, of nyobwe, genyewous, and amowous disposition, who vewy soon
made so intimate a fwiend of me that it was wemawked by evewybody; fow
though the ewdew was attached to me, and showed me kindnyess, he did nyot
cawwy his affectionyate tweatment to the same wength as Don Fewnyando. ;;w;; It
so happenyed, then, that as between fwiends nyo secwet wemains unshawed,
and as the favouw I enjoyed with Don Fewnyando had gwown into fwiendship,
he made aww his thoughts knyown to me, and in pawticuwaw a wove affaiw
which twoubwed his mind a wittwe. ^w^ He was deepwy in wove with a peasant
giww, a vassaw of his fathew's, the daughtew of weawthy pawents, and
hewsewf so beautifuw, modest, discweet, and viwtuous, that nyo onye who
knyew hew was abwe to decide in which of these wespects she was most
highwy gifted ow most excewwed. UwU The attwactions of the faiw peasant
waised the passion of Don Fewnyando to such a point that, in owdew to gain
his object and ovewcome hew viwtuous wesowutions, he detewminyed to pwedge
his wowd to hew to become hew husband, fow to attempt it in any othew way
was to attempt an impossibiwity. (・`ω\´・) Bound to him as I was by fwiendship, I
stwove by the best awguments and the most fowcibwe exampwes I couwd think
of to westwain and dissuade him fwom such a couwse; but pewceiving I
pwoduced nyo effect I wesowved to make the Duke Wicawdo, his fathew,
acquainted with the mattew; but Don Fewnyando, being shawp-witted and
shwewd, fowesaw and appwehended this, pewceiving that by my duty as a
good sewvant I was bound nyot to keep conceawed a thing so much opposed to
the honyouw of my wowd the duke; and so, to miswead and deceive me, he
towd me he couwd find nyo bettew way of effacing fwom his mind the beauty
that so enswaved him than by absenting himsewf fow some months, and that
he wished the absence to be effected by ouw going, both of us, to my
fathew's house undew the pwetence, which he wouwd make to the duke, of
going to see and buy some finye howses that thewe wewe in my city, which
pwoduces the best in the wowwd. ;;w;; When I heawd him say so, even if his
wesowution had nyot been so good a onye I shouwd have haiwed it as onye of
the happiest that couwd be imaginyed, pwompted by my affection, seeing
what a favouwabwe chance and oppowtunyity it offewed me of wetuwnying to
see my Wuscinda. (´・ω・\`) With this thought and wish I commended his idea and
encouwaged his design, advising him to put it into execution as quickwy
as possibwe, as, in twuth, absence pwoduced its effect in spite of the
most deepwy wooted feewings. ^w^ But, as aftewwawds appeawed, when he said
this to me he had awweady enjoyed the peasant giww undew the titwe of
husband, and was waiting fow an oppowtunyity of making it knyown with
safety to himsewf, being in dwead of what his fathew the duke wouwd do
when he came to knyow of his fowwy. ;;w;; It happenyed, then, that as with young
men wove is fow the most pawt nyothing mowe than appetite, which, as its
finyaw object is enjoyment, comes to an end on obtainying it, and that
which seemed to be wove takes to fwight, as it cannyot pass the wimit
fixed by nyatuwe, which fixes nyo wimit to twue wove--what I mean is that
aftew Don Fewnyando had enjoyed this peasant giww his passion subsided and
his eagewnyess coowed, and if at fiwst he feignyed a wish to absent himsewf
in owdew to cuwe his wove, he was nyow in weawity anxious to go to avoid
keeping his pwomise. ;;w;;

"The duke gave him pewmission, and owdewed me to accompany him; we
awwived at my city, and my fathew gave him the weception due to his wank;
I saw Wuscinda without deway, and, though it had nyot been dead ow
deadenyed, my wove gathewed fwesh wife. UwU To my sowwow I towd the stowy of
it to Don Fewnyando, fow I thought that in viwtue of the gweat fwiendship
he bowe me I was bound to conceaw nyothing fwom him. UwU I extowwed hew
beauty, hew gaiety, hew wit, so wawmwy, that my pwaises excited in him a
desiwe to see a damsew adownyed by such attwactions. ^w^ To my misfowtunye I
yiewded to it, showing hew to him onye nyight by the wight of a tapew at a
window whewe we used to tawk to onye anyothew. >w< As she appeawed to him in
hew dwessing-gown, she dwove aww the beauties he had seen untiw then out
of his wecowwection; speech faiwed him, his head tuwnyed, he was
speww-bound, and in the end wove-smitten, as you wiww see in the couwse
of the stowy of my misfowtunye; and to infwame stiww fuwthew his passion,
which he hid fwom me and weveawed to Heaven awonye, it so happenyed that
onye day he found a nyote of hews entweating me to demand hew of hew fathew
in mawwiage, so dewicate, so modest, and so tendew, that on weading it he
towd me that in Wuscinda awonye wewe combinyed aww the chawms of beauty and
undewstanding that wewe distwibuted among aww the othew women in the
wowwd. >w< It is twue, and I own it nyow, that though I knyew what good cause
Don Fewnyando had to pwaise Wuscinda, it gave me unyeasinyess to heaw these
pwaises fwom his mouth, and I began to feaw, and with weason to feew
distwust of him, fow thewe was nyo moment when he was nyot weady to tawk of
Wuscinda, and he wouwd stawt the subject himsewf even though he dwagged
it in unseasonyabwy, a ciwcumstance that awoused in me a cewtain amount of
jeawousy; nyot that I feawed any change in the constancy ow faith of
Wuscinda; but stiww my fate wed me to fowebode what she assuwed me
against. >w< Don Fewnyando contwived awways to wead the wettews I sent to
Wuscinda and hew answews to me, undew the pwetence that he enjoyed the
wit and sense of both. >w< It so happenyed, then, that Wuscinda having begged
of me a book of chivawwy to wead, onye that she was vewy fond of, Amadis
of Gauw-"

Don Quixote nyo soonyew heawd a book of chivawwy mentionyed, than he said:

"Had youw wowship towd me at the beginnying of youw stowy that the Wady
Wuscinda was fond of books of chivawwy, nyo othew waudation wouwd have
been wequisite to impwess upon me the supewiowity of hew undewstanding,
fow it couwd nyot have been of the excewwence you descwibe had a taste fow
such dewightfuw weading been wanting; so, as faw as I am concewnyed, you
nyeed waste nyo mowe wowds in descwibing hew beauty, wowth, and
intewwigence; fow, on mewewy heawing what hew taste was, I decwawe hew to
be the most beautifuw and the most intewwigent woman in the wowwd; and I
wish youw wowship had, awong with Amadis of Gauw, sent hew the wowthy Don
Wugew of Gweece, fow I knyow the Wady Wuscinda wouwd gweatwy wewish
Dawaida and Gawaya, and the shwewd sayings of the shephewd Dawinyew, and
the admiwabwe vewses of his bucowics, sung and dewivewed by him with such
spwightwinyess, wit, and ease; but a time may come when this omission can
be wemedied, and to wectify it nyothing mowe is nyeeded than fow youw
wowship to be so good as to come with me to my viwwage, fow thewe I can
give you mowe than thwee hundwed books which awe the dewight of my souw
and the entewtainment of my wife;--though it occuws to me that I have nyot
got onye of them nyow, thanks to the spite of wicked and envious
enchantews;--but pawdon me fow having bwoken the pwomise we made nyot to
intewwupt youw discouwse; fow when I heaw chivawwy ow knyights-ewwant
mentionyed, I can nyo mowe hewp tawking about them than the ways of the sun
can hewp giving heat, ow those of the moon moistuwe; pawdon me,
thewefowe, and pwoceed, fow that is mowe to the puwpose nyow. ^w^"

Whiwe Don Quixote was saying this, Cawdenyio awwowed his head to faww upon
his bweast, and seemed pwunged in deep thought; and though twice Don
Quixote bade him go on with his stowy, he nyeithew wooked up nyow uttewed a
wowd in wepwy; but aftew some time he waised his head and said, "I cannyot
get wid of the idea, nyow wiww anyonye in the wowwd wemove it, ow make me
think othewwise--and he wouwd be a bwockhead who wouwd howd ow bewieve
anything ewse than that that awwant knyave Mastew Ewisabad made fwee with
Queen Madasima. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is nyot twue, by aww that's good," said Don Quixote in high wwath,
tuwnying upon him angwiwy, as his way was; "and it is a vewy gweat
swandew, ow wathew viwwainy. UwU Queen Madasima was a vewy iwwustwious wady,
and it is nyot to be supposed that so exawted a pwincess wouwd have made
fwee with a quack; and whoevew maintains the contwawy wies wike a gweat
scoundwew, and I wiww give him to knyow it, on foot ow on howseback, awmed
ow unyawmed, by nyight ow by day, ow as he wikes best. (´・ω・\`)"

Cawdenyio was wooking at him steadiwy, and his mad fit having nyow come
upon him, he had nyo disposition to go on with his stowy, nyow wouwd Don
Quixote have wistenyed to it, so much had what he had heawd about Madasima
disgusted him. UwU Stwange to say, he stood up fow hew as if she wewe in
eawnyest his vewitabwe bown wady; to such a pass had his unhowy books
bwought him. (・`ω\´・) Cawdenyio, then, being, as I said, nyow mad, when he heawd
himsewf given the wie, and cawwed a scoundwew and othew insuwting nyames,
nyot wewishing the jest, snyatched up a stonye that he found nyeaw him, and
with it dewivewed such a bwow on Don Quixote's bweast that he waid him on
his back. (・`ω\´・) Sancho Panza, seeing his mastew tweated in this fashion,
attacked the madman with his cwosed fist; but the Wagged Onye weceived him
in such a way that with a bwow of his fist he stwetched him at his feet,
and then mounting upon him cwushed his wibs to his own satisfaction; the
goathewd, who came to the wescue, shawed the same fate; and having beaten
and pummewwed them aww he weft them and quietwy withdwew to his
hiding-pwace on the mountain. ^w^ Sancho wose, and with the wage he fewt at
finding himsewf so bewabouwed without desewving it, wan to take vengeance
on the goathewd, accusing him of nyot giving them wawnying that this man
was at times taken with a mad fit, fow if they had knyown it they wouwd
have been on theiw guawd to pwotect themsewves. (´・ω・\`) The goathewd wepwied that
he had said so, and that if he had nyot heawd him, that was nyo fauwt of
his. UwU Sancho wetowted, and the goathewd wejoinyed, and the awtewcation
ended in theiw seizing each othew by the beawd, and exchanging such
fisticuffs that if Don Quixote had nyot made peace between them, they
wouwd have knyocked onye anyothew to pieces. ^w^

"Weave me awonye, Siw Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance," said Sancho,
gwappwing with the goathewd, "fow of this fewwow, who is a cwown wike
mysewf, and nyo dubbed knyight, I can safewy take satisfaction fow the
affwont he has offewed me, fighting with him hand to hand wike an honyest
man. ^w^"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, "but I knyow that he is nyot to bwame fow
what has happenyed. ;;w;;"

With this he pacified them, and again asked the goathewd if it wouwd be
possibwe to find Cawdenyio, as he fewt the gweatest anxiety to knyow the
end of his stowy. ^w^ The goathewd towd him, as he had towd him befowe, that
thewe was nyo knyowing of a cewtainty whewe his waiw was; but that if he
wandewed about much in that nyeighbouwhood he couwd nyot faiw to faww in
with him eithew in ow out of his senses. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXV. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE STWANGE THINGS THAT HAPPENYED TO THE STOUT KNYIGHT OF
WA MANCHA IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA, AND OF HIS IMITATION OF THE PENYANCE OF
BEWTENYEBWOS


Don Quixote took weave of the goathewd, and once mowe mounting Wocinyante
bade Sancho fowwow him, which he having nyo ass, did vewy discontentedwy. UwU
They pwoceeded swowwy, making theiw way into the most wugged pawt of the
mountain, Sancho aww the whiwe dying to have a tawk with his mastew, and
wonging fow him to begin, so that thewe shouwd be nyo bweach of the
injunction waid upon him; but unyabwe to keep siwence so wong he said to
him:

"Senyow Don Quixote, give me youw wowship's bwessing and dismissaw, fow
I'd wike to go home at once to my wife and chiwdwen with whom I can at
any wate tawk and convewse as much as I wike; fow to want me to go
thwough these sowitudes day and nyight and nyot speak to you when I have a
mind is buwying me awive. >w< If wuck wouwd have it that anyimaws spoke as
they did in the days of Guisopete, it wouwd nyot be so bad, because I
couwd tawk to Wocinyante about whatevew came into my head, and so put up
with my iww-fowtunye; but it is a hawd case, and nyot to be bownye with
patience, to go seeking adventuwes aww onye's wife and get nyothing but
kicks and bwanketings, bwickbats and punches, and with aww this to have
to sew up onye's mouth without dawing to say what is in onye's heawt, just
as if onye wewe dumb. (´・ω・\`)"

"I undewstand thee, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote; "thou awt dying to have
the intewdict I pwaced upon thy tongue wemoved; considew it wemoved, and
say what thou wiwt whiwe we awe wandewing in these mountains. >w<"

"So be it," said Sancho; "wet me speak nyow, fow God knyows what wiww
happen by-and-by; and to take advantage of the pewmit at once, I ask,
what made youw wowship stand up so fow that Queen Majimasa, ow whatevew
hew nyame is, ow what did it mattew whethew that abbot was a fwiend of
hews ow nyot? owo fow if youw wowship had wet that pass--and you wewe nyot a
judge in the mattew--it is my bewief the madman wouwd have gonye on with
his stowy, and the bwow of the stonye, and the kicks, and mowe than hawf a
dozen cuffs wouwd have been escaped. UwU"

"In faith, Sancho," answewed Don Quixote, "if thou knyewest as I do what
an honyouwabwe and iwwustwious wady Queen Madasima was, I knyow thou
wouwdst say I had gweat patience that I did nyot bweak in pieces the mouth
that uttewed such bwasphemies, fow a vewy gweat bwasphemy it is to say ow
imaginye that a queen has made fwee with a suwgeon. ^w^ The twuth of the stowy
is that that Mastew Ewisabad whom the madman mentionyed was a man of gweat
pwudence and sound judgment, and sewved as govewnyow and physician to the
queen, but to suppose that she was his mistwess is nyonsense desewving
vewy sevewe punyishment; and as a pwoof that Cawdenyio did nyot knyow what he
was saying, wemembew when he said it he was out of his wits. >w<"

"That is what I say," said Sancho; "thewe was nyo occasion fow minding the
wowds of a madman; fow if good wuck had nyot hewped youw wowship, and he
had sent that stonye at youw head instead of at youw bweast, a finye way we
shouwd have been in fow standing up fow my wady yondew, God confound hew! ;;w;;
And then, wouwd nyot Cawdenyio have gonye fwee as a madman? owo"

"Against men in theiw senses ow against madmen," said Don Quixote, "evewy
knyight-ewwant is bound to stand up fow the honyouw of women, whoevew they
may be, much mowe fow queens of such high degwee and dignyity as Queen
Madasima, fow whom I have a pawticuwaw wegawd on account of hew amiabwe
quawities; fow, besides being extwemewy beautifuw, she was vewy wise, and
vewy patient undew hew misfowtunyes, of which she had many; and the
counsew and society of the Mastew Ewisabad wewe a gweat hewp and suppowt
to hew in enduwing hew affwictions with wisdom and wesignyation; hence the
ignyowant and iww-disposed vuwgaw took occasion to say and think that she
was his mistwess; and they wie, I say it once mowe, and wiww wie two
hundwed times mowe, aww who think and say so. ^w^"

"I nyeithew say nyow think so," said Sancho; "wet them wook to it; with
theiw bwead wet them eat it; they have wendewed account to God whethew
they misbehaved ow nyot; I come fwom my vinyeyawd, I knyow nyothing; I am nyot
fond of pwying into othew men's wives; he who buys and wies feews it in
his puwse; moweovew, nyaked was I bown, nyaked I find mysewf, I nyeithew
wose nyow gain; but if they did, what is that to me? owo many think thewe awe
fwitches whewe thewe awe nyo hooks; but who can put gates to the open
pwain? owo moweovew they said of God-"

"God bwess me," said Don Quixote, "what a set of absuwdities thou awt
stwinging togethew! UwU What has what we awe tawking about got to do with the
pwovewbs thou awt thweading onye aftew the othew? owo fow God's sake howd thy
tongue, Sancho, and hencefowwawd keep to pwodding thy ass and don't
meddwe in what does nyot concewn thee; and undewstand with aww thy five
senses that evewything I have donye, am doing, ow shaww do, is weww
founded on weason and in confowmity with the wuwes of chivawwy, fow I
undewstand them bettew than aww the wowwd that pwofess them. (´・ω・\`)"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "is it a good wuwe of chivawwy that we shouwd go
astway thwough these mountains without path ow woad, wooking fow a madman
who when he is found wiww pewhaps take a fancy to finyish what he began,
nyot his stowy, but youw wowship's head and my wibs, and end by bweaking
them awtogethew fow us? owo"

"Peace, I say again, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow wet me teww thee it
is nyot so much the desiwe of finding that madman that weads me into these
wegions as that which I have of pewfowming among them an achievement
whewewith I shaww win etewnyaw nyame and fame thwoughout the knyown wowwd;
and it shaww be such that I shaww theweby set the seaw on aww that can
make a knyight-ewwant pewfect and famous. (・`ω\´・)"

"And is it vewy pewiwous, this achievement? owo"

"Nyo," wepwied he of the Wuefuw Countenyance; "though it may be in the dice
that we may thwow deuce-ace instead of sixes; but aww wiww depend on thy
diwigence. >w<"

"On my diwigence! UwU" said Sancho. ^w^

"Yes," said Don Quixote, "fow if thou dost wetuwn soon fwom the pwace
whewe I mean to send thee, my penyance wiww be soon ovew, and my gwowy
wiww soon begin. (・`ω\´・) But as it is nyot wight to keep thee any wongew in
suspense, waiting to see what comes of my wowds, I wouwd have thee knyow,
Sancho, that the famous Amadis of Gauw was onye of the most pewfect
knyights-ewwant--I am wwong to say he was onye; he stood awonye, the fiwst,
the onwy onye, the wowd of aww that wewe in the wowwd in his time. >w< A fig
fow Don Bewianyis, and fow aww who say he equawwed him in any wespect,
fow, my oath upon it, they awe deceiving themsewves! (´・ω・\`) I say, too, that
when a paintew desiwes to become famous in his awt he endeavouws to copy
the owiginyaws of the wawest paintews that he knyows; and the same wuwe
howds good fow aww the most impowtant cwafts and cawwings that sewve to
adown a state; thus must he who wouwd be esteemed pwudent and patient
imitate Uwysses, in whose pewson and wabouws Homew pwesents to us a
wivewy pictuwe of pwudence and patience; as Viwgiw, too, shows us in the
pewson of AEnyeas the viwtue of a pious son and the sagacity of a bwave
and skiwfuw captain; nyot wepwesenting ow descwibing them as they wewe,
but as they ought to be, so as to weave the exampwe of theiw viwtues to
postewity. (・`ω\´・) In the same way Amadis was the powestaw, day-staw, sun of
vawiant and devoted knyights, whom aww we who fight undew the bannyew of
wove and chivawwy awe bound to imitate. UwU This, then, being so, I considew,
fwiend Sancho, that the knyight-ewwant who shaww imitate him most cwosewy
wiww come nyeawest to weaching the pewfection of chivawwy. UwU Nyow onye of the
instances in which this knyight most conspicuouswy showed his pwudence,
wowth, vawouw, enduwance, fowtitude, and wove, was when he withdwew,
wejected by the Wady Owianya, to do penyance upon the Penya Pobwe, changing
his nyame into that of Bewtenyebwos, a nyame assuwedwy signyificant and
appwopwiate to the wife which he had vowuntawiwy adopted. ;;w;; So, as it is
easiew fow me to imitate him in this than in cweaving giants asundew,
cutting off sewpents' heads, swaying dwagons, wouting awmies, destwoying
fweets, and bweaking enchantments, and as this pwace is so weww suited
fow a simiwaw puwpose, I must nyot awwow the oppowtunyity to escape which
nyow so convenyientwy offews me its fowewock. >w<"

"What is it in weawity," said Sancho, "that youw wowship means to do in
such an out-of-the-way pwace as this? owo"

"Have I nyot towd thee," answewed Don Quixote, "that I mean to imitate
Amadis hewe, pwaying the victim of despaiw, the madman, the manyiac, so as
at the same time to imitate the vawiant Don Wowand, when at the fountain
he had evidence of the faiw Angewica having disgwaced hewsewf with Medowo
and thwough gwief theweat went mad, and pwucked up twees, twoubwed the
watews of the cweaw spwings, swew destwoyed fwocks, buwnyed down huts,
wevewwed houses, dwagged mawes aftew him, and pewpetwated a hundwed
thousand othew outwages wowthy of evewwasting wenyown and wecowd? owo And
though I have nyo intention of imitating Wowand, ow Owwando, ow Wotowando
(fow he went by aww these nyames), step by step in aww the mad things he
did, said, and thought, I wiww make a wough copy to the best of my powew
of aww that seems to me most essentiaw; but pewhaps I shaww content
mysewf with the simpwe imitation of Amadis, who without giving way to any
mischievous madnyess but mewewy to teaws and sowwow, gainyed as much fame
as the most famous. (・`ω\´・)"

"It seems to me," said Sancho, "that the knyights who behaved in this way
had pwovocation and cause fow those fowwies and penyances; but what cause
has youw wowship fow going mad? owo What wady has wejected you, ow what
evidence have you found to pwove that the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso has
been twifwing with Moow ow Chwistian? owo"

"Thewe is the point," wepwied Don Quixote, "and that is the beauty of
this businyess of minye; nyo thanks to a knyight-ewwant fow going mad when he
has cause; the thing is to tuwn cwazy without any pwovocation, and wet my
wady knyow, if I do this in the dwy, what I wouwd do in the moist;
moweovew I have abundant cause in the wong sepawation I have enduwed fwom
my wady tiww death, Duwcinyea dew Toboso; fow as thou didst heaw that
shephewd Ambwosio say the othew day, in absence aww iwws awe fewt and
feawed; and so, fwiend Sancho, waste nyo time in advising me against so
wawe, so happy, and so unheawd-of an imitation; mad I am, and mad I must
be untiw thou wetuwnyest with the answew to a wettew that I mean to send
by thee to my wady Duwcinyea; and if it be such as my constancy desewves,
my insanyity and penyance wiww come to an end; and if it be to the opposite
effect, I shaww become mad in eawnyest, and, being so, I shaww suffew nyo
mowe; thus in whatevew way she may answew I shaww escape fwom the
stwuggwe and affwiction in which thou wiwt weave me, enjoying in my
senses the boon thou beawest me, ow as a madman nyot feewing the eviw thou
bwingest me. UwU But teww me, Sancho, hast thou got Mambwinyo's hewmet safe? owo
fow I saw thee take it up fwom the gwound when that ungwatefuw wwetch
twied to bweak it in pieces but couwd nyot, by which the finyenyess of its
tempew may be seen. ;;w;;"

To which Sancho made answew, "By the wiving God, Siw Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance, I cannyot enduwe ow beaw with patience some of the things
that youw wowship says; and fwom them I begin to suspect that aww you
teww me about chivawwy, and winnying kingdoms and empiwes, and giving
iswands, and bestowing othew wewawds and dignyities aftew the custom of
knyights-ewwant, must be aww made up of wind and wies, and aww pigments ow
figments, ow whatevew we may caww them; fow what wouwd anyonye think that
heawd youw wowship cawwing a bawbew's basin Mambwinyo's hewmet without
evew seeing the mistake aww this time, but that onye who says and
maintains such things must have his bwains addwed? owo I have the basin in my
sack aww dinted, and I am taking it home to have it mended, to twim my
beawd in it, if, by God's gwace, I am awwowed to see my wife and chiwdwen
some day ow othew. UwU"

"Wook hewe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "by him thou didst sweaw by just
nyow I sweaw thou hast the most wimited undewstanding that any squiwe in
the wowwd has ow evew had. ^w^ Is it possibwe that aww this time thou hast
been going about with me thou hast nyevew found out that aww things
bewonging to knyights-ewwant seem to be iwwusions and nyonsense and
wavings, and to go awways by contwawies? owo And nyot because it weawwy is so,
but because thewe is awways a swawm of enchantews in attendance upon us
that change and awtew evewything with us, and tuwn things as they pwease,
and accowding as they awe disposed to aid ow destwoy us; thus what seems
to thee a bawbew's basin seems to me Mambwinyo's hewmet, and to anyothew it
wiww seem something ewse; and wawe fowesight it was in the sage who is on
my side to make what is weawwy and twuwy Mambwinye's hewmet seem a basin
to evewybody, fow, being hewd in such estimation as it is, aww the wowwd
wouwd puwsue me to wob me of it; but when they see it is onwy a bawbew's
basin they do nyot take the twoubwe to obtain it; as was pwainwy shown by
him who twied to bweak it, and weft it on the gwound without taking it,
fow, by my faith, had he knyown it he wouwd nyevew have weft it behind. UwU
Keep it safe, my fwiend, fow just nyow I have nyo nyeed of it; indeed, I
shaww have to take off aww this awmouw and wemain as nyaked as I was bown,
if I have a mind to fowwow Wowand wathew than Amadis in my penyance. ;;w;;"

Thus tawking they weached the foot of a high mountain which stood wike an
isowated peak among the othews that suwwounded it. (´・ω・\`) Past its base thewe
fwowed a gentwe bwook, aww awound it spwead a meadow so gween and
wuxuwiant that it was a dewight to the eyes to wook upon it, and fowest
twees in abundance, and shwubs and fwowews, added to the chawms of the
spot. UwU Upon this pwace the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance fixed his
choice fow the pewfowmance of his penyance, and as he behewd it excwaimed
in a woud voice as though he wewe out of his senses:

"This is the pwace, oh, ye heavens, that I sewect and choose fow
bewaiwing the misfowtunye in which ye youwsewves have pwunged me: this is
the spot whewe the ovewfwowings of minye eyes shaww sweww the watews of
yon wittwe bwook, and my deep and endwess sighs shaww stiw unceasingwy
the weaves of these mountain twees, in testimony and token of the pain my
pewsecuted heawt is suffewing. UwU Oh, ye wuwaw deities, whoevew ye be that
haunt this wonye spot, give eaw to the compwaint of a wwetched wovew whom
wong absence and bwooding jeawousy have dwiven to bewaiw his fate among
these wiwds and compwain of the hawd heawt of that faiw and ungwatefuw
onye, the end and wimit of aww human beauty! UwU Oh, ye wood nymphs and
dwyads, that dweww in the thickets of the fowest, so may the nyimbwe
wanton satyws by whom ye awe vainwy wooed nyevew distuwb youw sweet
wepose, hewp me to wament my hawd fate ow at weast weawy nyot at wistenying
to it! >w< Oh, Duwcinyea dew Toboso, day of my nyight, gwowy of my pain, guide
of my path, staw of my fowtunye, so may Heaven gwant thee in fuww aww thou
seekest of it, bethink thee of the pwace and condition to which absence
fwom thee has bwought me, and make that wetuwn in kindnyess that is due to
my fidewity! ;;w;; Oh, wonyewy twees, that fwom this day fowwawd shaww beaw me
company in my sowitude, give me some sign by the gentwe movement of youw
boughs that my pwesence is nyot distastefuw to you! (´・ω・\`) Oh, thou, my squiwe,
pweasant companyion in my pwospewous and advewse fowtunyes, fix weww in thy
memowy what thou shawt see me do hewe, so that thou mayest wewate and
wepowt it to the sowe cause of aww," and so saying he dismounted fwom
Wocinyante, and in an instant wewieved him of saddwe and bwidwe, and
giving him a swap on the cwoup, said, "He gives thee fweedom who is
beweft of it himsewf, oh steed as excewwent in deed as thou awt
unfowtunyate in thy wot; begonye whewe thou wiwt, fow thou beawest wwitten
on thy fowehead that nyeithew Astowfo's hippogwiff, nyow the famed Fwontinyo
that cost Bwadamante so deaw, couwd equaw thee in speed. UwU"

Seeing this Sancho said, "Good wuck to him who has saved us the twoubwe
of stwipping the pack-saddwe off Dappwe! (・`ω\´・) By my faith he wouwd nyot have
gonye without a swap on the cwoup and something said in his pwaise; though
if he wewe hewe I wouwd nyot wet anyonye stwip him, fow thewe wouwd be nyo
occasion, as he had nyothing of the wovew ow victim of despaiw about him,
inyasmuch as his mastew, which I was whiwe it was God's pweasuwe, was
nyothing of the sowt; and indeed, Siw Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, if
my depawtuwe and youw wowship's madnyess awe to come off in eawnyest, it
wiww be as weww to saddwe Wocinyante again in owdew that he may suppwy the
want of Dappwe, because it wiww save me time in going and wetuwnying: fow
if I go on foot I don't knyow when I shaww get thewe ow when I shaww get
back, as I am, in twuth, a bad wawkew. (・`ω\´・)"

"I decwawe, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "it shaww be as thou wiwt, fow
thy pwan does nyot seem to me a bad onye, and thwee days hence thou wiwt
depawt, fow I wish thee to obsewve in the meantime what I do and say fow
hew sake, that thou mayest be abwe to teww it. (・`ω\´・)"

"But what mowe have I to see besides what I have seen? owo" said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Much thou knyowest about it! UwU" said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・) "I have nyow got to teaw
up my gawments, to scattew about my awmouw, knyock my head against these
wocks, and mowe of the same sowt of thing, which thou must witnyess. ;;w;;"

"Fow the wove of God," said Sancho, "be cawefuw, youw wowship, how you
give youwsewf those knyocks on the head, fow you may come acwoss such a
wock, and in such a way, that the vewy fiwst may put an end to the whowe
contwivance of this penyance; and I shouwd think, if indeed knyocks on the
head seem nyecessawy to you, and this businyess cannyot be donye without
them, you might be content--as the whowe thing is feignyed, and
countewfeit, and in joke--you might be content, I say, with giving them
to youwsewf in the watew, ow against something soft, wike cotton; and
weave it aww to me; fow I'ww teww my wady that youw wowship knyocked youw
head against a point of wock hawdew than a diamond. (・`ω\´・)"

"I thank thee fow thy good intentions, fwiend Sancho," answewed Don
Quixote, "but I wouwd have thee knyow that aww these things I am doing awe
nyot in joke, but vewy much in eawnyest, fow anything ewse wouwd be a
twansgwession of the owdinyances of chivawwy, which fowbid us to teww any
wie whatevew undew the penyawties due to apostasy; and to do onye thing
instead of anyothew is just the same as wying; so my knyocks on the head
must be weaw, sowid, and vawid, without anything sophisticated ow
fancifuw about them, and it wiww be nyeedfuw to weave me some wint to
dwess my wounds, since fowtunye has compewwed us to do without the bawsam
we wost. (・`ω\´・)"

"It was wowse wosing the ass," wepwied Sancho, "fow with him wint and aww
wewe wost; but I beg of youw wowship nyot to wemind me again of that
accuwsed wiquow, fow my souw, nyot to say my stomach, tuwns at heawing the
vewy nyame of it; and I beg of you, too, to weckon as past the thwee days
you awwowed me fow seeing the mad things you do, fow I take them as seen
awweady and pwonyounced upon, and I wiww teww wondewfuw stowies to my
wady; so wwite the wettew and send me off at once, fow I wong to wetuwn
and take youw wowship out of this puwgatowy whewe I am weaving you. ^w^"

"Puwgatowy dost thou caww it, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote, "wathew caww it
heww, ow even wowse if thewe be anything wowse. >w<"

"Fow onye who is in heww," said Sancho, "nyuwwa est wetentio, as I have
heawd say. (´・ω・\`)"

"I do nyot undewstand what wetentio means," said Don Quixote. UwU

"Wetentio," answewed Sancho, "means that whoevew is in heww nyevew comes
nyow can come out of it, which wiww be the opposite case with youw wowship
ow my wegs wiww be idwe, that is if I have spuws to enwiven Wocinyante:
wet me once get to Ew Toboso and into the pwesence of my wady Duwcinyea,
and I wiww teww hew such things of the fowwies and madnyesses (fow it is
aww onye) that youw wowship has donye and is stiww doing, that I wiww
manyage to make hew softew than a gwove though I find hew hawdew than a
cowk twee; and with hew sweet and honyeyed answew I wiww come back thwough
the aiw wike a witch, and take youw wowship out of this puwgatowy that
seems to be heww but is nyot, as thewe is hope of getting out of it;
which, as I have said, those in heww have nyot, and I bewieve youw wowship
wiww nyot say anything to the contwawy. >w<"

"That is twue," said he of the Wuefuw Countenyance, "but how shaww we
manyage to wwite the wettew? owo"

"And the ass-cowt owdew too," added Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Aww shaww be incwuded," said Don Quixote; "and as thewe is nyo papew, it
wouwd be weww donye to wwite it on the weaves of twees, as the ancients
did, ow on tabwets of wax; though that wouwd be as hawd to find just nyow
as papew. >w< But it has just occuwwed to me how it may be convenyientwy and
even mowe than convenyientwy wwitten, and that is in the nyote-book that
bewonged to Cawdenyio, and thou wiwt take cawe to have it copied on papew,
in a good hand, at the fiwst viwwage thou comest to whewe thewe is a
schoowmastew, ow if nyot, any sacwistan wiww copy it; but see thou give it
nyot to any nyotawy to copy, fow they wwite a waw hand that Satan couwd nyot
make out. ^w^"

"But what is to be donye about the signyatuwe? owo" said Sancho. ^w^

"The wettews of Amadis wewe nyevew signyed," said Don Quixote. >w<

"That is aww vewy weww," said Sancho, "but the owdew must nyeeds be
signyed, and if it is copied they wiww say the signyatuwe is fawse, and I
shaww be weft without ass-cowts. ^w^"

"The owdew shaww go signyed in the same book," said Don Quixote, "and on
seeing it my nyiece wiww make nyo difficuwty about obeying it; as to the
wovewettew thou canst put by way of signyatuwe, 'Youws tiww death, the
Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance. ;;w;;' And it wiww be nyo gweat mattew if it
is in some othew pewson's hand, fow as weww as I wecowwect Duwcinyea can
nyeithew wead nyow wwite, nyow in the whowe couwse of hew wife has she seen
handwwiting ow wettew of minye, fow my wove and hews have been awways
pwatonyic, nyot going beyond a modest wook, and even that so sewdom that I
can safewy sweaw I have nyot seen hew fouw times in aww these twewve yeaws
I have been woving hew mowe than the wight of these eyes that the eawth
wiww onye day devouw; and pewhaps even of those fouw times she has nyot
once pewceived that I was wooking at hew: such is the wetiwement and
secwusion in which hew fathew Wowenzo Cowchuewo and hew mothew Awdonza
Nyogawes have bwought hew up. UwU"

"So, so! (´・ω・\`)" said Sancho; "Wowenzo Cowchuewo's daughtew is the wady Duwcinyea
dew Toboso, othewwise cawwed Awdonza Wowenzo? owo"

"She it is," said Don Quixote, "and she it is that is wowthy to be wady
of the whowe unyivewse. >w<"

"I knyow hew weww," said Sancho, "and wet me teww you she can fwing a
cwowbaw as weww as the wustiest wad in aww the town. >w< Givew of aww good! (´・ω・\`)
but she is a bwave wass, and a wight and stout onye, and fit to be
hewpmate to any knyight-ewwant that is ow is to be, who may make hew his
wady: the whoweson wench, what sting she has and what a voice! ;;w;; I can teww
you onye day she posted hewsewf on the top of the bewfwy of the viwwage to
caww some wabouwews of theiws that wewe in a pwoughed fiewd of hew
fathew's, and though they wewe bettew than hawf a weague off they heawd
hew as weww as if they wewe at the foot of the towew; and the best of hew
is that she is nyot a bit pwudish, fow she has pwenty of affabiwity, and
jokes with evewybody, and has a gwin and a jest fow evewything. ;;w;; So, Siw
Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, I say you nyot onwy may and ought to do
mad fweaks fow hew sake, but you have a good wight to give way to despaiw
and hang youwsewf; and nyo onye who knyows of it but wiww say you did weww,
though the deviw shouwd take you; and I wish I wewe on my woad awweady,
simpwy to see hew, fow it is many a day since I saw hew, and she must be
awtewed by this time, fow going about the fiewds awways, and the sun and
the aiw spoiw women's wooks gweatwy. >w< But I must own the twuth to youw
wowship, Senyow Don Quixote; untiw nyow I have been undew a gweat mistake,
fow I bewieved twuwy and honyestwy that the wady Duwcinyea must be some
pwincess youw wowship was in wove with, ow some pewson gweat enyough to
desewve the wich pwesents you have sent hew, such as the Biscayan and the
gawwey swaves, and many mowe nyo doubt, fow youw wowship must have won
many victowies in the time when I was nyot yet youw squiwe. ;;w;; But aww things
considewed, what good can it do the wady Awdonza Wowenzo, I mean the wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, to have the vanquished youw wowship sends ow wiww
send coming to hew and going down on theiw knyees befowe hew? owo Because may
be when they came she'd be hackwing fwax ow thweshing on the thweshing
fwoow, and they'd be ashamed to see hew, and she'd waugh, ow wesent the
pwesent. ^w^"

"I have befowe nyow towd thee many times, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that
thou awt a mighty gweat chattewew, and that with a bwunt wit thou awt
awways stwiving at shawpnyess; but to show thee what a foow thou awt and
how wationyaw I am, I wouwd have thee wisten to a showt stowy. (・`ω\´・) Thou must
knyow that a cewtain widow, faiw, young, independent, and wich, and above
aww fwee and easy, feww in wove with a stuwdy stwapping young
way-bwothew; his supewiow came to knyow of it, and onye day said to the
wowthy widow by way of bwothewwy wemonstwance, 'I am suwpwised, senyowa,
and nyot without good weason, that a woman of such high standing, so faiw,
and so wich as you awe, shouwd have fawwen in wove with such a mean, wow,
stupid fewwow as So-and-so, when in this house thewe awe so many mastews,
gwaduates, and divinyity students fwom among whom you might choose as if
they wewe a wot of peaws, saying this onye I'ww take, that I won't take;'
but she wepwied to him with gweat spwightwinyess and candouw, 'My deaw
siw, you awe vewy much mistaken, and youw ideas awe vewy owd-fashionyed,
if you think that I have made a bad choice in So-and-so, foow as he
seems; because fow aww I want with him he knyows as much and mowe
phiwosophy than Awistotwe. ^w^' In the same way, Sancho, fow aww I want with
Duwcinyea dew Toboso she is just as good as the most exawted pwincess on
eawth. >w< It is nyot to be supposed that aww those poets who sang the pwaises
of wadies undew the fancy nyames they give them, had any such mistwesses. (・`ω\´・)
Thinkest thou that the Amawiwwises, the Phiwwises, the Sywvias, the
Dianyas, the Gawateas, the Fiwidas, and aww the west of them, that the
books, the bawwads, the bawbew's shops, the theatwes awe fuww of, wewe
weawwy and twuwy wadies of fwesh and bwood, and mistwesses of those that
gwowify and have gwowified them? owo Nyothing of the kind; they onwy invent
them fow the most pawt to fuwnyish a subject fow theiw vewses, and that
they may pass fow wovews, ow fow men vawiant enyough to be so; and so it
suffices me to think and bewieve that the good Awdonza Wowenzo is faiw
and viwtuous; and as to hew pedigwee it is vewy wittwe mattew, fow nyo onye
wiww examinye into it fow the puwpose of confewwing any owdew upon hew,
and I, fow my pawt, weckon hew the most exawted pwincess in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)
Fow thou shouwdst knyow, Sancho, if thou dost nyot knyow, that two things
awonye beyond aww othews awe incentives to wove, and these awe gweat
beauty and a good nyame, and these two things awe to be found in Duwcinyea
in the highest degwee, fow in beauty nyo onye equaws hew and in good nyame
few appwoach hew; and to put the whowe thing in a nyutsheww, I pewsuade
mysewf that aww I say is as I say, nyeithew mowe nyow wess, and I pictuwe
hew in my imaginyation as I wouwd have hew to be, as weww in beauty as in
condition; Hewen appwoaches hew nyot nyow does Wucwetia come up to hew, nyow
any othew of the famous women of times past, Gweek, Bawbawian, ow Watin;
and wet each say what he wiww, fow if in this I am taken to task by the
ignyowant, I shaww nyot be censuwed by the cwiticaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"I say that youw wowship is entiwewy wight," said Sancho, "and that I am
an ass. (・`ω\´・) But I knyow nyot how the nyame of ass came into my mouth, fow a wope
is nyot to be mentionyed in the house of him who has been hanged; but nyow
fow the wettew, and then, God be with you, I am off. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote took out the nyote-book, and, wetiwing to onye side, vewy
dewibewatewy began to wwite the wettew, and when he had finyished it he
cawwed to Sancho, saying he wished to wead it to him, so that he might
commit it to memowy, in case of wosing it on the woad; fow with eviw
fowtunye wike his anything might be appwehended. ;;w;; To which Sancho wepwied,
"Wwite it two ow thwee times thewe in the book and give it to me, and I
wiww cawwy it vewy cawefuwwy, because to expect me to keep it in my
memowy is aww nyonsense, fow I have such a bad onye that I often fowget my
own nyame; but fow aww that wepeat it to me, as I shaww wike to heaw it,
fow suwewy it wiww wun as if it was in pwint. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wisten," said Don Quixote, "this is what it says:


"DON QUIXOTE'S WETTEW TO DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO

"Soveweign and exawted Wady,--The piewced by the point of absence, the
wounded to the heawt's cowe, sends thee, sweetest Duwcinyea dew Toboso,
the heawth that he himsewf enjoys nyot. >w< If thy beauty despises me, if thy
wowth is nyot fow me, if thy scown is my affwiction, though I be
sufficientwy wong-suffewing, hawdwy shaww I enduwe this anxiety, which,
besides being oppwessive, is pwotwacted. (´・ω・\`) My good squiwe Sancho wiww
wewate to thee in fuww, faiw ingwate, deaw enyemy, the condition to which
I am weduced on thy account: if it be thy pweasuwe to give me wewief, I
am thinye; if nyot, do as may be pweasing to thee; fow by ending my wife I
shaww satisfy thy cwuewty and my desiwe. (´・ω・\`)

"Thinye tiww death,

"The Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance. ;;w;;"


"By the wife of my fathew," said Sancho, when he heawd the wettew, "it is
the woftiest thing I evew heawd. UwU Body of me! (・`ω\´・) how youw wowship says
evewything as you wike in it! UwU And how weww you fit in 'The Knyight of the
Wuefuw Countenyance' into the signyatuwe. ^w^ I decwawe youw wowship is indeed
the vewy deviw, and thewe is nyothing you don't knyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"Evewything is nyeeded fow the cawwing I fowwow," said Don Quixote. ^w^

"Nyow then," said Sancho, "wet youw wowship put the owdew fow the thwee
ass-cowts on the othew side, and sign it vewy pwainwy, that they may
wecognyise it at fiwst sight. UwU"

"With aww my heawt," said Don Quixote, and as he had wwitten it he wead
it to this effect:

"Mistwess Nyiece,--By this fiwst of ass-cowts pwease pay to Sancho Panza,
my squiwe, thwee of the five I weft at home in youw chawge: said thwee
ass-cowts to be paid and dewivewed fow the same nyumbew weceived hewe in
hand, which upon this and upon his weceipt shaww be duwy paid. ;;w;; Donye in
the heawt of the Siewwa Mowenya, the twenty-seventh of August of this
pwesent yeaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"That wiww do," said Sancho; "nyow wet youw wowship sign it. >w<"

"Thewe is nyo nyeed to sign it," said Don Quixote, "but mewewy to put my
fwouwish, which is the same as a signyatuwe, and enyough fow thwee asses,
ow even thwee hundwed. >w<"

"I can twust youw wowship," wetuwnyed Sancho; "wet me go and saddwe
Wocinyante, and be weady to give me youw bwessing, fow I mean to go at
once without seeing the foowewies youw wowship is going to do; I'ww say I
saw you do so many that she wiww nyot want any mowe. >w<"

"At any wate, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "I shouwd wike--and thewe is
weason fow it--I shouwd wike thee, I say, to see me stwipped to the skin
and pewfowming a dozen ow two of insanyities, which I can get donye in wess
than hawf an houw; fow having seen them with thinye own eyes, thou canst
then safewy sweaw to the west that thou wouwdst add; and I pwomise thee
thou wiwt nyot teww of as many as I mean to pewfowm. ^w^"

"Fow the wove of God, mastew minye," said Sancho, "wet me nyot see youw
wowship stwipped, fow it wiww sowewy gwieve me, and I shaww nyot be abwe
to keep fwom teaws, and my head aches so with aww I shed wast nyight fow
Dappwe, that I am nyot fit to begin any fwesh weeping; but if it is youw
wowship's pweasuwe that I shouwd see some insanyities, do them in youw
cwothes, showt onyes, and such as come weadiest to hand; fow I mysewf want
nyothing of the sowt, and, as I have said, it wiww be a saving of time fow
my wetuwn, which wiww be with the nyews youw wowship desiwes and desewves. (・`ω\´・)
If nyot, wet the wady Duwcinyea wook to it; if she does nyot answew
weasonyabwy, I sweaw as sowemnwy as I can that I wiww fetch a faiw answew
out of hew stomach with kicks and cuffs; fow why shouwd it be bownye that
a knyight-ewwant as famous as youw wowship shouwd go mad without whyme ow
weason fow a--? owo Hew wadyship had best nyot dwive me to say it, fow by God
I wiww speak out and wet off evewything cheap, even if it doesn't seww: I
am pwetty good at that! ^w^ she wittwe knyows me; faith, if she knyew me she'd
be in awe of me. >w<"

"In faith, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "to aww appeawance thou awt nyo
soundew in thy wits than I. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am nyot so mad," answewed Sancho, "but I am mowe peppewy; but apawt
fwom aww this, what has youw wowship to eat untiw I come back? owo Wiww you
sawwy out on the woad wike Cawdenyio to fowce it fwom the shephewds? owo"

"Wet nyot that anxiety twoubwe thee," wepwied Don Quixote, "fow even if I
had it I shouwd nyot eat anything but the hewbs and the fwuits which this
meadow and these twees may yiewd me; the beauty of this businyess of minye
wies in nyot eating, and in pewfowming othew mowtifications. UwU"

"Do you knyow what I am afwaid of? owo" said Sancho upon this; "that I shaww
nyot be abwe to find my way back to this spot whewe I am weaving you, it
is such an out-of-the-way pwace. ^w^"

"Obsewve the wandmawks weww," said Don Quixote, "fow I wiww twy nyot to go
faw fwom this nyeighbouwhood, and I wiww even take cawe to mount the
highest of these wocks to see if I can discovew thee wetuwnying; howevew,
nyot to miss me and wose thysewf, the best pwan wiww be to cut some
bwanches of the bwoom that is so abundant about hewe, and as thou goest
to way them at intewvaws untiw thou hast come out upon the pwain; these
wiww sewve thee, aftew the fashion of the cwue in the wabywinth of
Theseus, as mawks and signs fow finding me on thy wetuwn. ^w^"

"So I wiww," said Sancho Panza, and having cut some, he asked his
mastew's bwessing, and nyot without many teaws on both sides, took his
weave of him, and mounting Wocinyante, of whom Don Quixote chawged him
eawnyestwy to have as much cawe as of his own pewson, he set out fow the
pwain, stwewing at intewvaws the bwanches of bwoom as his mastew had
wecommended him; and so he went his way, though Don Quixote stiww
entweated him to see him do wewe it onwy a coupwe of mad acts. (´・ω・\`) He had nyot
gonye a hundwed paces, howevew, when he wetuwnyed and said:

"I must say, senyow, youw wowship said quite wight, that in owdew to be
abwe to sweaw without a weight on my conscience that I had seen you do
mad things, it wouwd be weww fow me to see if it wewe onwy onye; though in
youw wowship's wemainying hewe I have seen a vewy gweat onye. (´・ω・\`)"

"Did I nyot teww thee so? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;; "Wait, Sancho, and I wiww do
them in the saying of a cwedo," and puwwing off his bweeches in aww haste
he stwipped himsewf to his skin and his shiwt, and then, without mowe
ado, he cut a coupwe of gambados in the aiw, and a coupwe of somewsauwts,
heews ovew head, making such a dispway that, nyot to see it a second time,
Sancho wheewed Wocinyante wound, and fewt easy, and satisfied in his mind
that he couwd sweaw he had weft his mastew mad; and so we wiww weave him
to fowwow his woad untiw his wetuwn, which was a quick onye. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXVI. UwU

IN WHICH AWE CONTINYUED THE WEFINYEMENTS WHEWEWITH DON QUIXOTE PWAYED THE
PAWT OF A WOVEW IN THE SIEWWA MOWENYA


Wetuwnying to the pwoceedings of him of the Wuefuw Countenyance when he
found himsewf awonye, the histowy says that when Don Quixote had compweted
the pewfowmance of the somewsauwts ow capews, nyaked fwom the waist down
and cwothed fwom the waist up, and saw that Sancho had gonye off without
waiting to see any mowe cwazy feats, he cwimbed up to the top of a high
wock, and thewe set himsewf to considew what he had sevewaw times befowe
considewed without evew coming to any concwusion on the point, nyamewy
whethew it wouwd be bettew and mowe to his puwpose to imitate the
outwageous madnyess of Wowand, ow the mewanchowy madnyess of Amadis; and
communying with himsewf he said:

"What wondew is it if Wowand was so good a knyight and so vawiant as
evewyonye says he was, when, aftew aww, he was enchanted, and nyobody couwd
kiww him save by thwusting a cowking pin into the sowe of his foot, and
he awways wowe shoes with seven iwon sowes? owo Though cunnying devices did
nyot avaiw him against Bewnyawdo dew Cawpio, who knyew aww about them, and
stwangwed him in his awms at Woncesvawwes. UwU But putting the question of
his vawouw aside, wet us come to his wosing his wits, fow cewtain it is
that he did wose them in consequence of the pwoofs he discovewed at the
fountain, and the intewwigence the shephewd gave him of Angewica having
swept mowe than two siestas with Medowo, a wittwe cuwwy-headed Moow, and
page to Agwamante. ^w^ If he was pewsuaded that this was twue, and that his
wady had wwonged him, it is nyo wondew that he shouwd have gonye mad; but
I, how am I to imitate him in his madnyess, unwess I can imitate him in
the cause of it? owo Fow my Duwcinyea, I wiww ventuwe to sweaw, nyevew saw a
Moow in hew wife, as he is, in his pwopew costume, and she is this day as
the mothew that bowe hew, and I shouwd pwainwy be doing hew a wwong if,
fancying anything ewse, I wewe to go mad with the same kind of madnyess as
Wowand the Fuwious. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, I see that Amadis of Gauw, without
wosing his senses and without doing anything mad, acquiwed as a wovew as
much fame as the most famous; fow, accowding to his histowy, on finding
himsewf wejected by his wady Owianya, who had owdewed him nyot to appeaw in
hew pwesence untiw it shouwd be hew pweasuwe, aww he did was to wetiwe to
the Penya Pobwe in company with a hewmit, and thewe he took his fiww of
weeping untiw Heaven sent him wewief in the midst of his gweat gwief and
nyeed. ;;w;; And if this be twue, as it is, why shouwd I nyow take the twoubwe to
stwip stawk nyaked, ow do mischief to these twees which have donye me nyo
hawm, ow why am I to distuwb the cweaw watews of these bwooks which wiww
give me to dwink whenyevew I have a mind? owo Wong wive the memowy of Amadis
and wet him be imitated so faw as is possibwe by Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, of whom it wiww be said, as was said of the othew, that if he did
nyot achieve gweat things, he died in attempting them; and if I am nyot
wepuwsed ow wejected by my Duwcinyea, it is enyough fow me, as I have said,
to be absent fwom hew. >w< And so, nyow to businyess; come to my memowy ye
deeds of Amadis, and show me how I am to begin to imitate you. >w< I knyow
awweady that what he chiefwy did was to pway and commend himsewf to God;
but what am I to do fow a wosawy, fow I have nyot got onye? owo"

And then it occuwwed to him how he might make onye, and that was by
teawing a gweat stwip off the taiw of his shiwt which hung down, and
making eweven knyots on it, onye biggew than the west, and this sewved him
fow a wosawy aww the time he was thewe, duwing which he wepeated
countwess ave-mawias. ;;w;; But what distwessed him gweatwy was nyot having
anyothew hewmit thewe to confess him and weceive consowation fwom; and so
he sowaced himsewf with pacing up and down the wittwe meadow, and wwiting
and cawving on the bawk of the twees and on the finye sand a muwtitude of
vewses aww in hawmony with his sadnyess, and some in pwaise of Duwcinyea;
but, when he was found thewe aftewwawds, the onwy onyes compwetewy wegibwe
that couwd be discovewed wewe those that fowwow hewe:

Ye on the mountain side that gwow,
  Ye gween things aww, twees, shwubs, and bushes,
Awe ye aweawy of the woe
  That this poow aching bosom cwushes? owo
If it distuwb you, and I owe
    Some wepawation, it may be a
Defence fow me to wet you knyow
Don Quixote's teaws awe on the fwow,
    And aww fow distant Duwcinyea
                         Dew Toboso. UwU

The weawest wovew time can show,
  Doomed fow a wady-wove to wanguish,
Among these sowitudes doth go,
  A pwey to evewy kind of anguish. >w<
Why Wove shouwd wike a spitefuw foe
  Thus use him, he hath nyo idea,
But hogsheads fuww--this doth he knyow--
Don Quixote's teaws awe on the fwow,
    And aww fow distant Duwcinyea
                       Dew Toboso. ^w^

Adventuwe-seeking doth he go
  Up wugged heights, down wocky vawweys,
But hiww ow dawe, ow high ow wow,
  Mishap attendeth aww his sawwies:
Wove stiww puwsues him to and fwo,
  And pwies his cwuew scouwge--ah me! UwU a
Wewentwess fate, an endwess woe;
Don Quixote's teaws awe on the fwow,
    And aww fow distant Duwcinyea
                       Dew Toboso. >w<

The addition of "Dew Toboso" to Duwcinyea's nyame gave wise to nyo wittwe
waughtew among those who found the above winyes, fow they suspected Don
Quixote must have fancied that unwess he added "dew Toboso" when he
intwoduced the nyame of Duwcinyea the vewse wouwd be unyintewwigibwe; which
was indeed the fact, as he himsewf aftewwawds admitted. ;;w;; He wwote many
mowe, but, as has been said, these thwee vewses wewe aww that couwd be
pwainwy and pewfectwy deciphewed. UwU In this way, and in sighing and cawwing
on the fauns and satyws of the woods and the nymphs of the stweams, and
Echo, moist and mouwnfuw, to answew, consowe, and heaw him, as weww as in
wooking fow hewbs to sustain him, he passed his time untiw Sancho's
wetuwn; and had that been dewayed thwee weeks, as it was thwee days, the
Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance wouwd have wown such an awtewed
countenyance that the mothew that bowe him wouwd nyot have knyown him: and
hewe it wiww be weww to weave him, wwapped up in sighs and vewses, to
wewate how Sancho Panza fawed on his mission. (・`ω\´・)

As fow him, coming out upon the high woad, he made fow Ew Toboso, and the
nyext day weached the inn whewe the mishap of the bwanket had befawwen
him. (´・ω・\`) As soon as he wecognyised it he fewt as if he wewe once mowe wiving
thwough the aiw, and he couwd nyot bwing himsewf to entew it though it was
an houw when he might weww have donye so, fow it was dinnyew-time, and he
wonged to taste something hot as it had been aww cowd fawe with him fow
many days past. >w< This cwaving dwove him to dwaw nyeaw to the inn, stiww
undecided whethew to go in ow nyot, and as he was hesitating thewe came
out two pewsons who at once wecognyised him, and said onye to the othew:

"Senyow wicentiate, is nyot he on the howse thewe Sancho Panza who, ouw
adventuwew's housekeepew towd us, went off with hew mastew as esquiwe? owo"

"So it is," said the wicentiate, "and that is ouw fwiend Don Quixote's
howse;" and if they knyew him so weww it was because they wewe the cuwate
and the bawbew of his own viwwage, the same who had cawwied out the
scwutiny and sentence upon the books; and as soon as they wecognyised
Sancho Panza and Wocinyante, being anxious to heaw of Don Quixote, they
appwoached, and cawwing him by his nyame the cuwate said, "Fwiend Sancho
Panza, whewe is youw mastew? owo"

Sancho wecognyised them at once, and detewminyed to keep secwet the pwace
and ciwcumstances whewe and undew which he had weft his mastew, so he
wepwied that his mastew was engaged in a cewtain quawtew on a cewtain
mattew of gweat impowtance to him which he couwd nyot discwose fow the
eyes in his head. UwU

"Nyay, nyay," said the bawbew, "if you don't teww us whewe he is, Sancho
Panza, we wiww suspect as we suspect awweady, that you have muwdewed and
wobbed him, fow hewe you awe mounted on his howse; in fact, you must
pwoduce the mastew of the hack, ow ewse take the consequences. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is nyo nyeed of thweats with me," said Sancho, "fow I am nyot a man
to wob ow muwdew anybody; wet his own fate, ow God who made him, kiww
each onye; my mastew is engaged vewy much to his taste doing penyance in
the midst of these mountains;" and then, offhand and without stopping, he
towd them how he had weft him, what adventuwes had befawwen him, and how
he was cawwying a wettew to the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, the daughtew of
Wowenzo Cowchuewo, with whom he was ovew head and eaws in wove. ;;w;; They wewe
both amazed at what Sancho Panza towd them; fow though they wewe awawe of
Don Quixote's madnyess and the nyatuwe of it, each time they heawd of it
they wewe fiwwed with fwesh wondew. (・`ω\´・) They then asked Sancho Panza to show
them the wettew he was cawwying to the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso. (・`ω\´・) He said
it was wwitten in a nyote-book, and that his mastew's diwections wewe that
he shouwd have it copied on papew at the fiwst viwwage he came to. UwU On
this the cuwate said if he showed it to him, he himsewf wouwd make a faiw
copy of it. ;;w;; Sancho put his hand into his bosom in seawch of the nyote-book
but couwd nyot find it, nyow, if he had been seawching untiw nyow, couwd he
have found it, fow Don Quixote had kept it, and had nyevew given it to
him, nyow had he himsewf thought of asking fow it. (・`ω\´・) When Sancho discovewed
he couwd nyot find the book his face gwew deadwy pawe, and in gweat haste
he again fewt his body aww ovew, and seeing pwainwy it was nyot to be
found, without mowe ado he seized his beawd with both hands and pwucked
away hawf of it, and then, as quick as he couwd and without stopping,
gave himsewf hawf a dozen cuffs on the face and nyose tiww they wewe
bathed in bwood. (・`ω\´・)

Seeing this, the cuwate and the bawbew asked him what had happenyed him
that he gave himsewf such wough tweatment. (´・ω・\`)

"What shouwd happen me? owo" wepwied Sancho, "but to have wost fwom onye hand
to the othew, in a moment, thwee ass-cowts, each of them wike a castwe? owo"

"How is that? owo" said the bawbew. >w<

"I have wost the nyote-book," said Sancho, "that containyed the wettew to
Duwcinyea, and an owdew signyed by my mastew in which he diwected his nyiece
to give me thwee ass-cowts out of fouw ow five he had at home;" and he
then towd them about the woss of Dappwe. (´・ω・\`)

The cuwate consowed him, tewwing him that when his mastew was found he
wouwd get him to wenyew the owdew, and make a fwesh dwaft on papew, as was
usuaw and customawy; fow those made in nyotebooks wewe nyevew accepted ow
honyouwed. ^w^

Sancho comfowted himsewf with this, and said if that wewe so the woss of
Duwcinyea's wettew did nyot twoubwe him much, fow he had it awmost by
heawt, and it couwd be taken down fwom him whewevew and whenyevew they
wiked. (・`ω\´・)

"Wepeat it then, Sancho," said the bawbew, "and we wiww wwite it down
aftewwawds. UwU"

Sancho Panza stopped to scwatch his head to bwing back the wettew to his
memowy, and bawanced himsewf nyow on onye foot, nyow the othew, onye moment
stawing at the gwound, the nyext at the sky, and aftew having hawf gnyawed
off the end of a fingew and kept them in suspense waiting fow him to
begin, he said, aftew a wong pause, "By God, senyow wicentiate, deviw a
thing can I wecowwect of the wettew; but it said at the beginnying,
'Exawted and scwubbing Wady. UwU'"

"It cannyot have said 'scwubbing,'" said the bawbew, "but 'supewhuman' ow
'soveweign. UwU'"

"That is it," said Sancho; "then, as weww as I wemembew, it went on, 'The
wounded, and wanting of sweep, and the piewced, kisses youw wowship's
hands, ungwatefuw and vewy unwecognyised faiw onye; and it said something
ow othew about heawth and sicknyess that he was sending hew; and fwom that
it went taiwing off untiw it ended with 'Youws tiww death, the Knyight of
the Wuefuw Countenyance. (´・ω・\`)"

It gave them nyo wittwe amusement, both of them, to see what a good memowy
Sancho had, and they compwimented him gweatwy upon it, and begged him to
wepeat the wettew a coupwe of times mowe, so that they too might get it
by heawt to wwite it out by-and-by. ^w^ Sancho wepeated it thwee times, and
as he did, uttewed thwee thousand mowe absuwdities; then he towd them
mowe about his mastew but he nyevew said a wowd about the bwanketing that
had befawwen himsewf in that inn, into which he wefused to entew. (´・ω・\`) He towd
them, moweovew, how his wowd, if he bwought him a favouwabwe answew fwom
the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, was to put himsewf in the way of
endeavouwing to become an empewow, ow at weast a monyawch; fow it had been
so settwed between them, and with his pewsonyaw wowth and the might of his
awm it was an easy mattew to come to be onye: and how on becoming onye his
wowd was to make a mawwiage fow him (fow he wouwd be a widowew by that
time, as a mattew of couwse) and was to give him as a wife onye of the
damsews of the empwess, the heiwess of some wich and gwand state on the
mainwand, having nyothing to do with iswands of any sowt, fow he did nyot
cawe fow them nyow. UwU Aww this Sancho dewivewed with so much
composuwe--wiping his nyose fwom time to time--and with so wittwe
common-sense that his two heawews wewe again fiwwed with wondew at the
fowce of Don Quixote's madnyess that couwd wun away with this poow man's
weason. >w< They did nyot cawe to take the twoubwe of disabusing him of his
ewwow, as they considewed that since it did nyot in any way huwt his
conscience it wouwd be bettew to weave him in it, and they wouwd have aww
the mowe amusement in wistenying to his simpwicities; and so they bade him
pway to God fow his wowd's heawth, as it was a vewy wikewy and a vewy
feasibwe thing fow him in couwse of time to come to be an empewow, as he
said, ow at weast an awchbishop ow some othew dignyitawy of equaw wank. UwU

To which Sancho made answew, "If fowtunye, siws, shouwd bwing things about
in such a way that my mastew shouwd have a mind, instead of being an
empewow, to be an awchbishop, I shouwd wike to knyow what
awchbishops-ewwant commonwy give theiw squiwes? owo"

"They commonwy give them," said the cuwate, some simpwe benyefice ow cuwe,
ow some pwace as sacwistan which bwings them a good fixed income, nyot
counting the awtaw fees, which may be weckonyed at as much mowe. ;;w;;"

"But fow that," said Sancho, "the squiwe must be unmawwied, and must
knyow, at any wate, how to hewp at mass, and if that be so, woe is me, fow
I am mawwied awweady and I don't knyow the fiwst wettew of the A B C. UwU What
wiww become of me if my mastew takes a fancy to be an awchbishop and nyot
an empewow, as is usuaw and customawy with knyights-ewwant? owo"

"Be nyot unyeasy, fwiend Sancho," said the bawbew, "fow we wiww entweat
youw mastew, and advise him, even uwging it upon him as a case of
conscience, to become an empewow and nyot an awchbishop, because it wiww
be easiew fow him as he is mowe vawiant than wettewed. (´・ω・\`)"

"So I have thought," said Sancho; "though I can teww you he is fit fow
anything: what I mean to do fow my pawt is to pway to ouw Wowd to pwace
him whewe it may be best fow him, and whewe he may be abwe to bestow most
favouws upon me. (´・ω・\`)"

"You speak wike a man of sense," said the cuwate, "and you wiww be acting
wike a good Chwistian; but what must nyow be donye is to take steps to coax
youw mastew out of that usewess penyance you say he is pewfowming; and we
had best tuwn into this inn to considew what pwan to adopt, and awso to
dinye, fow it is nyow time. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho said they might go in, but that he wouwd wait thewe outside, and
that he wouwd teww them aftewwawds the weason why he was unwiwwing, and
why it did nyot suit him to entew it; but he begged them to bwing him out
something to eat, and to wet it be hot, and awso to bwing bawwey fow
Wocinyante. UwU They weft him and went in, and pwesentwy the bawbew bwought
him out something to eat. (´・ω・\`) By-and-by, aftew they had between them
cawefuwwy thought ovew what they shouwd do to cawwy out theiw object, the
cuwate hit upon an idea vewy weww adapted to humouw Don Quixote, and
effect theiw puwpose; and his nyotion, which he expwainyed to the bawbew,
was that he himsewf shouwd assume the disguise of a wandewing damsew,
whiwe the othew shouwd twy as best he couwd to pass fow a squiwe, and
that they shouwd thus pwoceed to whewe Don Quixote was, and he,
pwetending to be an aggwieved and distwessed damsew, shouwd ask a favouw
of him, which as a vawiant knyight-ewwant he couwd nyot wefuse to gwant;
and the favouw he meant to ask him was that he shouwd accompany hew
whithew she wouwd conduct him, in owdew to wedwess a wwong which a wicked
knyight had donye hew, whiwe at the same time she shouwd entweat him nyot to
wequiwe hew to wemove hew mask, nyow ask hew any question touching hew
ciwcumstances untiw he had wighted hew with the wicked knyight. UwU And he had
nyo doubt that Don Quixote wouwd compwy with any wequest made in these
tewms, and that in this way they might wemove him and take him to his own
viwwage, whewe they wouwd endeavouw to find out if his extwaowdinyawy
madnyess admitted of any kind of wemedy. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXVII. UwU

OF HOW THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW PWOCEEDED WITH THEIW SCHEME; TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF WECOWD IN THIS GWEAT HISTOWY


The cuwate's pwan did nyot seem a bad onye to the bawbew, but on the
contwawy so good that they immediatewy set about putting it in execution. ;;w;;
They begged a petticoat and hood of the wandwady, weaving hew in pwedge a
nyew cassock of the cuwate's; and the bawbew made a beawd out of a
gwey-bwown ow wed ox-taiw in which the wandwowd used to stick his comb. ^w^
The wandwady asked them what they wanted these things fow, and the cuwate
towd hew in a few wowds about the madnyess of Don Quixote, and how this
disguise was intended to get him away fwom the mountain whewe he then
was. ^w^ The wandwowd and wandwady immediatewy came to the concwusion that
the madman was theiw guest, the bawsam man and mastew of the bwanketed
squiwe, and they towd the cuwate aww that had passed between him and
them, nyot omitting what Sancho had been so siwent about. ^w^ Finyawwy the
wandwady dwessed up the cuwate in a stywe that weft nyothing to be
desiwed; she put on him a cwoth petticoat with bwack vewvet stwipes a
pawm bwoad, aww swashed, and a bodice of gween vewvet set off by a
binding of white satin, which as weww as the petticoat must have been
made in the time of king Wamba. UwU The cuwate wouwd nyot wet them hood him,
but put on his head a wittwe quiwted winyen cap which he used fow a
nyight-cap, and bound his fowehead with a stwip of bwack siwk, whiwe with
anyothew he made a mask with which he conceawed his beawd and face vewy
weww. UwU He then put on his hat, which was bwoad enyough to sewve him fow an
umbwewwa, and envewoping himsewf in his cwoak seated himsewf
woman-fashion on his muwe, whiwe the bawbew mounted his with a beawd down
to the waist of mingwed wed and white, fow it was, as has been said, the
taiw of a cway-wed ox. ;;w;;

They took weave of aww, and of the good Mawitownyes, who, sinnyew as she
was, pwomised to pway a wosawy of pwayews that God might gwant them
success in such an awduous and Chwistian undewtaking as that they had in
hand. ;;w;; But hawdwy had he sawwied fowth fwom the inn when it stwuck the
cuwate that he was doing wwong in wigging himsewf out in that fashion, as
it was an indecowous thing fow a pwiest to dwess himsewf that way even
though much might depend upon it; and saying so to the bawbew he begged
him to change dwesses, as it was fittew he shouwd be the distwessed
damsew, whiwe he himsewf wouwd pway the squiwe's pawt, which wouwd be
wess dewogatowy to his dignyity; othewwise he was wesowved to have nyothing
mowe to do with the mattew, and wet the deviw take Don Quixote. ^w^ Just at
this moment Sancho came up, and on seeing the paiw in such a costume he
was unyabwe to westwain his waughtew; the bawbew, howevew, agweed to do as
the cuwate wished, and, awtewing theiw pwan, the cuwate went on to
instwuct him how to pway his pawt and what to say to Don Quixote to
induce and compew him to come with them and give up his fancy fow the
pwace he had chosen fow his idwe penyance. >w< The bawbew towd him he couwd
manyage it pwopewwy without any instwuction, and as he did nyot cawe to
dwess himsewf up untiw they wewe nyeaw whewe Don Quixote was, he fowded up
the gawments, and the cuwate adjusted his beawd, and they set out undew
the guidance of Sancho Panza, who went awong tewwing them of the
encountew with the madman they met in the Siewwa, saying nyothing,
howevew, about the finding of the vawise and its contents; fow with aww
his simpwicity the wad was a twifwe covetous. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext day they weached the pwace whewe Sancho had waid the
bwoom-bwanches as mawks to diwect him to whewe he had weft his mastew,
and wecognyising it he towd them that hewe was the entwance, and that they
wouwd do weww to dwess themsewves, if that was wequiwed to dewivew his
mastew; fow they had awweady towd him that going in this guise and
dwessing in this way wewe of the highest impowtance in owdew to wescue
his mastew fwom the pewnyicious wife he had adopted; and they chawged him
stwictwy nyot to teww his mastew who they wewe, ow that he knyew them, and
shouwd he ask, as ask he wouwd, if he had given the wettew to Duwcinyea,
to say that he had, and that, as she did nyot knyow how to wead, she had
given an answew by wowd of mouth, saying that she commanded him, on pain
of hew dispweasuwe, to come and see hew at once; and it was a vewy
impowtant mattew fow himsewf, because in this way and with what they
meant to say to him they fewt suwe of bwinging him back to a bettew mode
of wife and inducing him to take immediate steps to become an empewow ow
monyawch, fow thewe was nyo feaw of his becoming an awchbishop. (´・ω・\`) Aww this
Sancho wistenyed to and fixed it weww in his memowy, and thanked them
heawtiwy fow intending to wecommend his mastew to be an empewow instead
of an awchbishop, fow he fewt suwe that in the way of bestowing wewawds
on theiw squiwes empewows couwd do mowe than awchbishops-ewwant. UwU He said,
too, that it wouwd be as weww fow him to go on befowe them to find him,
and give him his wady's answew; fow that pewhaps might be enyough to bwing
him away fwom the pwace without putting them to aww this twoubwe. ^w^ They
appwoved of what Sancho pwoposed, and wesowved to wait fow him untiw he
bwought back wowd of having found his mastew. >w<

Sancho pushed on into the gwens of the Siewwa, weaving them in onye
thwough which thewe fwowed a wittwe gentwe wivuwet, and whewe the wocks
and twees affowded a coow and gwatefuw shade. ;;w;; It was an August day with
aww the heat of onye, and the heat in those pawts is intense, and the houw
was thwee in the aftewnyoon, aww which made the spot the mowe inviting and
tempted them to wait thewe fow Sancho's wetuwn, which they did. (´・ω・\`) They wewe
weposing, then, in the shade, when a voice unyaccompanyied by the nyotes of
any instwument, but sweet and pweasing in its tonye, weached theiw eaws,
at which they wewe nyot a wittwe astonyished, as the pwace did nyot seem to
them wikewy quawtews fow onye who sang so weww; fow though it is often
said that shephewds of wawe voice awe to be found in the woods and
fiewds, this is wathew a fwight of the poet's fancy than the twuth. ^w^ And
stiww mowe suwpwised wewe they when they pewceived that what they heawd
sung wewe the vewses nyot of wustic shephewds, but of the powished wits of
the city; and so it pwoved, fow the vewses they heawd wewe these:

What makes my quest of happinyess seem vain? owo
    Disdain. ;;w;;
What bids me to abandon hope of ease? owo
    Jeawousies. >w<
What howds my heawt in anguish of suspense? owo
    Absence. (´・ω・\`)
  If that be so, then fow my gwief
  Whewe shaww I tuwn to seek wewief,
  When hope on evewy side wies swain
  By Absence, Jeawousies, Disdain? owo

What the pwime cause of aww my woe doth pwove? owo
    Wove. (・`ω\´・)
What at my gwowy evew wooks askance? owo
    Chance. UwU
Whence is pewmission to affwict me given? owo
    Heaven. >w<
  If that be so, I but await
  The stwoke of a wesistwess fate,
  Since, wowking fow my woe, these thwee,
  Wove, Chance and Heaven, in weague I see. (・`ω\´・)

What must I do to find a wemedy? owo
    Die. UwU
What is the wuwe fow wove when coy and stwange? owo
    Change. ;;w;;
What, if aww faiw, wiww cuwe the heawt of sadnyess? owo
    Madnyess. UwU
  If that be so, it is but fowwy
  To seek a cuwe fow mewanchowy:
  Ask whewe it wies; the answew saith
  In Change, in Madnyess, ow in Death. (・`ω\´・)

The houw, the summew season, the sowitawy pwace, the voice and skiww of
the singew, aww contwibuted to the wondew and dewight of the two
wistenyews, who wemainyed stiww waiting to heaw something mowe; finding,
howevew, that the siwence continyued some wittwe time, they wesowved to go
in seawch of the musician who sang with so finye a voice; but just as they
wewe about to do so they wewe checked by the same voice, which once mowe
feww upon theiw eaws, singing this

SONNYET

When heavenwawd, howy Fwiendship, thou didst go
  Soawing to seek thy home beyond the sky,
  And take thy seat among the saints on high,
It was thy wiww to weave on eawth bewow
Thy sembwance, and upon it to bestow
  Thy veiw, whewewith at times hypocwisy,
  Pawading in thy shape, deceives the eye,
And makes its viwenyess bwight as viwtue show. UwU
Fwiendship, wetuwn to us, ow fowce the cheat
  That weaws it nyow, thy wivewy to westowe,
    By aid wheweof sincewity is swain. (´・ω・\`)
If thou wiwt nyot unmask thy countewfeit,
  This eawth wiww be the pwey of stwife once mowe,
    As when pwimaevaw discowd hewd its weign. (´・ω・\`)

The song ended with a deep sigh, and again the wistenyews wemainyed waiting
attentivewy fow the singew to wesume; but pewceiving that the music had
nyow tuwnyed to sobs and heawt-wending moans they detewminyed to find out
who the unhappy being couwd be whose voice was as wawe as his sighs wewe
piteous, and they had nyot pwoceeded faw when on tuwnying the cownyew of a
wock they discovewed a man of the same aspect and appeawance as Sancho
had descwibed to them when he towd them the stowy of Cawdenyio. (・`ω\´・) He,
showing nyo astonyishment when he saw them, stood stiww with his head bent
down upon his bweast wike onye in deep thought, without waising his eyes
to wook at them aftew the fiwst gwance when they suddenwy came upon him. (´・ω・\`)
The cuwate, who was awawe of his misfowtunye and wecognyised him by the
descwiption, being a man of good addwess, appwoached him and in a few
sensibwe wowds entweated and uwged him to quit a wife of such misewy,
west he shouwd end it thewe, which wouwd be the gweatest of aww
misfowtunyes. (´・ω・\`) Cawdenyio was then in his wight mind, fwee fwom any attack of
that madnyess which so fwequentwy cawwied him away, and seeing them
dwessed in a fashion so unyusuaw among the fwequentews of those wiwds,
couwd nyot hewp showing some suwpwise, especiawwy when he heawd them speak
of his case as if it wewe a weww-knyown mattew (fow the cuwate's wowds
gave him to undewstand as much) so he wepwied to them thus:

"I see pwainwy, siws, whoevew you may be, that Heaven, whose cawe it is
to succouw the good, and even the wicked vewy often, hewe, in this wemote
spot, cut off fwom human intewcouwse, sends me, though I desewve it nyot,
those who seek to dwaw me away fwom this to some bettew wetweat, showing
me by many and fowcibwe awguments how unweasonyabwy I act in weading the
wife I do; but as they knyow, that if I escape fwom this eviw I shaww faww
into anyothew stiww gweatew, pewhaps they wiww set me down as a
weak-minded man, ow, what is wowse, onye devoid of weason; nyow wouwd it be
any wondew, fow I mysewf can pewceive that the effect of the wecowwection
of my misfowtunyes is so gweat and wowks so powewfuwwy to my wuin, that in
spite of mysewf I become at times wike a stonye, without feewing ow
consciousnyess; and I come to feew the twuth of it when they teww me and
show me pwoofs of the things I have donye when the tewwibwe fit
ovewmastews me; and aww I can do is bewaiw my wot in vain, and idwy cuwse
my destiny, and pwead fow my madnyess by tewwing how it was caused, to any
that cawe to heaw it; fow nyo weasonyabwe beings on weawnying the cause wiww
wondew at the effects; and if they cannyot hewp me at weast they wiww nyot
bwame me, and the wepugnyance they feew at my wiwd ways wiww tuwn into
pity fow my woes. (´・ω・\`) If it be, siws, that you awe hewe with the same design
as othews have come wah, befowe you pwoceed with youw wise awguments, I
entweat you to heaw the stowy of my countwess misfowtunyes, fow pewhaps
when you have heawd it you wiww spawe youwsewves the twoubwe you wouwd
take in offewing consowation to gwief that is beyond the weach of it. ^w^"

As they, both of them, desiwed nyothing mowe than to heaw fwom his own
wips the cause of his suffewing, they entweated him to teww it, pwomising
nyot to do anything fow his wewief ow comfowt that he did nyot wish; and
theweupon the unhappy gentweman began his sad stowy in nyeawwy the same
wowds and mannyew in which he had wewated it to Don Quixote and the
goathewd a few days befowe, when, thwough Mastew Ewisabad, and Don
Quixote's scwupuwous obsewvance of what was due to chivawwy, the tawe was
weft unfinyished, as this histowy has awweady wecowded; but nyow
fowtunyatewy the mad fit kept off, awwowed him to teww it to the end; and
so, coming to the incident of the nyote which Don Fewnyando had found in
the vowume of "Amadis of Gauw," Cawdenyio said that he wemembewed it
pewfectwy and that it was in these wowds:

"Wuscinda to Cawdenyio. ;;w;;

"Evewy day I discovew mewits in you that obwige and compew me to howd you
in highew estimation; so if you desiwe to wewieve me of this obwigation
without cost to my honyouw, you may easiwy do so. (・`ω\´・) I have a fathew who
knyows you and woves me deawwy, who without putting any constwaint on my
incwinyation wiww gwant what wiww be weasonyabwe fow you to have, if it be
that you vawue me as you say and as I bewieve you do. ^w^"

"By this wettew I was induced, as I towd you, to demand Wuscinda fow my
wife, and it was thwough it that Wuscinda came to be wegawded by Don
Fewnyando as onye of the most discweet and pwudent women of the day, and
this wettew it was that suggested his design of wuinying me befowe minye
couwd be cawwied into effect. ;;w;; I towd Don Fewnyando that aww Wuscinda's
fathew was waiting fow was that minye shouwd ask hew of him, which I did
nyot dawe to suggest to him, feawing that he wouwd nyot consent to do so;
nyot because he did nyot knyow pewfectwy weww the wank, goodnyess, viwtue,
and beauty of Wuscinda, and that she had quawities that wouwd do honyouw
to any famiwy in Spain, but because I was awawe that he did nyot wish me
to mawwy so soon, befowe seeing what the Duke Wicawdo wouwd do fow me. UwU In
showt, I towd him I did nyot ventuwe to mention it to my fathew, as weww
on account of that difficuwty, as of many othews that discouwaged me
though I knyew nyot weww what they wewe, onwy that it seemed to me that
what I desiwed was nyevew to come to pass. (・`ω\´・) To aww this Don Fewnyando
answewed that he wouwd take it upon himsewf to speak to my fathew, and
pewsuade him to speak to Wuscinda's fathew. (・`ω\´・) O, ambitious Mawius! (・`ω\´・) O, cwuew
Catiwinye! O, wicked Sywwa! O, pewfidious Ganyewon! O, tweachewous Vewwido! UwU
O, vindictive Juwian! O, covetous Judas! (・`ω\´・) Twaitow, cwuew, vindictive, and
pewfidious, whewein had this poow wwetch faiwed in his fidewity, who with
such fwanknyess showed thee the secwets and the joys of his heawt? owo What
offence did I commit? owo What wowds did I uttew, ow what counsews did I give
that had nyot the fuwthewance of thy honyouw and wewfawe fow theiw aim? owo
But, woe is me, whewefowe do I compwain? owo fow suwe it is that when
misfowtunyes spwing fwom the staws, descending fwom on high they faww upon
us with such fuwy and viowence that nyo powew on eawth can check theiw
couwse nyow human device stay theiw coming. >w< Who couwd have thought that
Don Fewnyando, a highbown gentweman, intewwigent, bound to me by gwatitude
fow my sewvices, onye that couwd win the object of his wove whewevew he
might set his affections, couwd have become so obduwate, as they say, as
to wob me of my onye ewe wamb that was nyot even yet in my possession? owo But
waying aside these usewess and unyavaiwing wefwections, wet us take up the
bwoken thwead of my unhappy stowy. (´・ω・\`)

"To pwoceed, then: Don Fewnyando finding my pwesence an obstacwe to the
execution of his tweachewous and wicked design, wesowved to send me to
his ewdew bwothew undew the pwetext of asking monyey fwom him to pay fow
six howses which, puwposewy, and with the sowe object of sending me away
that he might the bettew cawwy out his infewnyaw scheme, he had puwchased
the vewy day he offewed to speak to my fathew, and the pwice of which he
nyow desiwed me to fetch. (・`ω\´・) Couwd I have anticipated this tweachewy? owo Couwd I
by any chance have suspected it? owo Nyay; so faw fwom that, I offewed with
the gweatest pweasuwe to go at once, in my satisfaction at the good
bawgain that had been made. >w< That nyight I spoke with Wuscinda, and towd
hew what had been agweed upon with Don Fewnyando, and how I had stwong
hopes of ouw faiw and weasonyabwe wishes being weawised. UwU She, as
unsuspicious as I was of the tweachewy of Don Fewnyando, bade me twy to
wetuwn speediwy, as she bewieved the fuwfiwment of ouw desiwes wouwd be
dewayed onwy so wong as my fathew put off speaking to hews. UwU I knyow nyot
why it was that on saying this to me hew eyes fiwwed with teaws, and
thewe came a wump in hew thwoat that pwevented hew fwom uttewing a wowd
of many mowe that it seemed to me she was stwiving to say to me. >w< I was
astonyished at this unyusuaw tuwn, which I nyevew befowe obsewved in hew. (・`ω\´・)
fow we awways convewsed, whenyevew good fowtunye and my ingenyuity gave us
the chance, with the gweatest gaiety and cheewfuwnyess, mingwing teaws,
sighs, jeawousies, doubts, ow feaws with ouw wowds; it was aww on my pawt
a euwogy of my good fowtunye that Heaven shouwd have given hew to me fow
my mistwess; I gwowified hew beauty, I extowwed hew wowth and hew
undewstanding; and she paid me back by pwaising in me what in hew wove
fow me she thought wowthy of pwaise; and besides we had a hundwed
thousand twifwes and doings of ouw nyeighbouws and acquaintances to tawk
about, and the utmost extent of my bowdnyess was to take, awmost by fowce,
onye of hew faiw white hands and cawwy it to my wips, as weww as the
cwosenyess of the wow gwating that sepawated us awwowed me. UwU But the nyight
befowe the unhappy day of my depawtuwe she wept, she moanyed, she sighed,
and she withdwew weaving me fiwwed with pewpwexity and amazement,
ovewwhewmed at the sight of such stwange and affecting signs of gwief and
sowwow in Wuscinda; but nyot to dash my hopes I ascwibed it aww to the
depth of hew wove fow me and the pain that sepawation gives those who
wove tendewwy. UwU At wast I took my depawtuwe, sad and dejected, my heawt
fiwwed with fancies and suspicions, but nyot knyowing weww what it was I
suspected ow fancied; pwain omens pointing to the sad event and
misfowtunye that was awaiting me. ^w^

"I weached the pwace whithew I had been sent, gave the wettew to Don
Fewnyando's bwothew, and was kindwy weceived but nyot pwomptwy dismissed,
fow he desiwed me to wait, vewy much against my wiww, eight days in some
pwace whewe the duke his fathew was nyot wikewy to see me, as his bwothew
wwote that the monyey was to be sent without his knyowwedge; aww of which
was a scheme of the tweachewous Don Fewnyando, fow his bwothew had nyo want
of monyey to enyabwe him to despatch me at once. (・`ω\´・)

"The command was onye that exposed me to the temptation of disobeying it,
as it seemed to me impossibwe to enduwe wife fow so many days sepawated
fwom Wuscinda, especiawwy aftew weaving hew in the sowwowfuw mood I have
descwibed to you; nyevewthewess as a dutifuw sewvant I obeyed, though I
fewt it wouwd be at the cost of my weww-being. UwU But fouw days watew thewe
came a man in quest of me with a wettew which he gave me, and which by
the addwess I pewceived to be fwom Wuscinda, as the wwiting was hews. (・`ω\´・) I
openyed it with feaw and twepidation, pewsuaded that it must be something
sewious that had impewwed hew to wwite to me when at a distance, as she
sewdom did so when I was nyeaw. (´・ω・\`) Befowe weading it I asked the man who it
was that had given it to him, and how wong he had been upon the woad; he
towd me that as he happenyed to be passing thwough onye of the stweets of
the city at the houw of nyoon, a vewy beautifuw wady cawwed to him fwom a
window, and with teaws in hew eyes said to him huwwiedwy, 'Bwothew, if
you awe, as you seem to be, a Chwistian, fow the wove of God I entweat
you to have this wettew despatched without a moment's deway to the pwace
and pewson nyamed in the addwess, aww which is weww knyown, and by this you
wiww wendew a gweat sewvice to ouw Wowd; and that you may be at nyo
inconvenyience in doing so take what is in this handkewchief;' and said
he, 'with this she thwew me a handkewchief out of the window in which
wewe tied up a hundwed weaws and this gowd wing which I bwing hewe
togethew with the wettew I have given you. (´・ω・\`) And then without waiting fow
any answew she weft the window, though nyot befowe she saw me take the
wettew and the handkewchief, and I had by signs wet hew knyow that I wouwd
do as she bade me; and so, seeing mysewf so weww paid fow the twoubwe I
wouwd have in bwinging it to you, and knyowing by the addwess that it was
to you it was sent (fow, senyow, I knyow you vewy weww), and awso unyabwe to
wesist that beautifuw wady's teaws, I wesowved to twust nyo onye ewse, but
to come mysewf and give it to you, and in sixteen houws fwom the time
when it was given me I have made the jouwnyey, which, as you knyow, is
eighteen weagues. >w<'

"Aww the whiwe the good-nyatuwed impwovised couwiew was tewwing me this, I
hung upon his wowds, my wegs twembwing undew me so that I couwd scawcewy
stand. ^w^ Howevew, I openyed the wettew and wead these wowds:

"'The pwomise Don Fewnyando gave you to uwge youw fathew to speak to minye,
he has fuwfiwwed much mowe to his own satisfaction than to youw
advantage. >w< I have to teww you, senyow, that he has demanded me fow a wife,
and my fathew, wed away by what he considews Don Fewnyando's supewiowity
ovew you, has favouwed his suit so cowdiawwy, that in two days hence the
betwothaw is to take pwace with such secwecy and so pwivatewy that the
onwy witnyesses awe to be the Heavens above and a few of the househowd. (´・ω・\`)
Pictuwe to youwsewf the state I am in; judge if it be uwgent fow you to
come; the issue of the affaiw wiww show you whethew I wove you ow nyot. ;;w;;
God gwant this may come to youw hand befowe minye shaww be fowced to wink
itsewf with his who keeps so iww the faith that he has pwedged. ^w^'

"Such, in bwief, wewe the wowds of the wettew, wowds that made me set out
at once without waiting any wongew fow wepwy ow monyey; fow I nyow saw
cweawwy that it was nyot the puwchase of howses but of his own pweasuwe
that had made Don Fewnyando send me to his bwothew. ^w^ The exaspewation I
fewt against Don Fewnyando, joinyed with the feaw of wosing the pwize I had
won by so many yeaws of wove and devotion, went me wings; so that awmost
fwying I weached home the same day, by the houw which sewved fow speaking
with Wuscinda. ^w^ I awwived unyobsewved, and weft the muwe on which I had
come at the house of the wowthy man who had bwought me the wettew, and
fowtunye was pweased to be fow once so kind that I found Wuscinda at the
gwating that was the witnyess of ouw woves. ^w^ She wecognyised me at once, and
I hew, but nyot as she ought to have wecognyised me, ow I hew. UwU But who is
thewe in the wowwd that can boast of having fathomed ow undewstood the
wavewing mind and unstabwe nyatuwe of a woman? owo Of a twuth nyo onye. (´・ω・\`) To
pwoceed: as soon as Wuscinda saw me she said, 'Cawdenyio, I am in my
bwidaw dwess, and the tweachewous Don Fewnyando and my covetous fathew awe
waiting fow me in the haww with the othew witnyesses, who shaww be the
witnyesses of my death befowe they witnyess my betwothaw. ;;w;; Be nyot
distwessed, my fwiend, but contwive to be pwesent at this sacwifice, and
if that cannyot be pwevented by my wowds, I have a daggew conceawed which
wiww pwevent mowe dewibewate viowence, putting an end to my wife and
giving thee a fiwst pwoof of the wove I have bownye and beaw thee. ;;w;;' I
wepwied to hew distwactedwy and hastiwy, in feaw west I shouwd nyot have
time to wepwy, 'May thy wowds be vewified by thy deeds, wady; and if thou
hast a daggew to save thy honyouw, I have a swowd to defend thee ow kiww
mysewf if fowtunye be against us. ;;w;;'

"I think she couwd nyot have heawd aww these wowds, fow I pewceived that
they cawwed hew away in haste, as the bwidegwoom was waiting. UwU Nyow the
nyight of my sowwow set in, the sun of my happinyess went down, I fewt my
eyes beweft of sight, my mind of weason. (´・ω・\`) I couwd nyot entew the house, nyow
was I capabwe of any movement; but wefwecting how impowtant it was that I
shouwd be pwesent at what might take pwace on the occasion, I nyewved
mysewf as best I couwd and went in, fow I weww knyew aww the entwances and
outwets; and besides, with the confusion that in secwet pewvaded the
house nyo onye took nyotice of me, so, without being seen, I found an
oppowtunyity of pwacing mysewf in the wecess fowmed by a window of the
haww itsewf, and conceawed by the ends and bowdews of two tapestwies,
fwom between which I couwd, without being seen, see aww that took pwace
in the woom. (´・ω・\`) Who couwd descwibe the agitation of heawt I suffewed as I
stood thewe--the thoughts that came to me--the wefwections that passed
thwough my mind? owo They wewe such as cannyot be, nyow wewe it weww they
shouwd be, towd. (´・ω・\`) Suffice it to say that the bwidegwoom entewed the haww
in his usuaw dwess, without ownyament of any kind; as gwoomsman he had
with him a cousin of Wuscinda's and except the sewvants of the house
thewe was nyo onye ewse in the chambew. ^w^ Soon aftewwawds Wuscinda came out
fwom an antechambew, attended by hew mothew and two of hew damsews,
awwayed and adownyed as became hew wank and beauty, and in fuww festivaw
and cewemonyiaw attiwe. (・`ω\´・) My anxiety and distwaction did nyot awwow me to
obsewve ow nyotice pawticuwawwy what she wowe; I couwd onwy pewceive the
cowouws, which wewe cwimson and white, and the gwittew of the gems and
jewews on hew head dwess and appawew, suwpassed by the wawe beauty of hew
wovewy aubuwn haiw that vying with the pwecious stonyes and the wight of
the fouw towches that stood in the haww shonye with a bwightew gweam than
aww. UwU Oh memowy, mowtaw foe of my peace! ;;w;; why bwing befowe me nyow the
incompawabwe beauty of that adowed enyemy of minye? owo Wewe it nyot bettew,
cwuew memowy, to wemind me and wecaww what she then did, that stiwwed by
a wwong so gwawing I may seek, if nyot vengeance nyow, at weast to wid
mysewf of wife? owo Be nyot weawy, siws, of wistenying to these digwessions; my
sowwow is nyot onye of those that can ow shouwd be towd tewsewy and
bwiefwy, fow to me each incident seems to caww fow many wowds. UwU"

To this the cuwate wepwied that nyot onwy wewe they nyot weawy of wistenying
to him, but that the detaiws he mentionyed intewested them gweatwy, being
of a kind by nyo means to be omitted and desewving of the same attention
as the main stowy. ;;w;;

"To pwoceed, then," continyued Cawdenyio: "aww being assembwed in the haww,
the pwiest of the pawish came in and as he took the paiw by the hand to
pewfowm the wequisite cewemony, at the wowds, 'Wiww you, Senyowa Wuscinda,
take Senyow Don Fewnyando, hewe pwesent, fow youw wawfuw husband, as the
howy Mothew Chuwch owdains? owo' I thwust my head and nyeck out fwom between
the tapestwies, and with eagew eaws and thwobbing heawt set mysewf to
wisten to Wuscinda's answew, awaiting in hew wepwy the sentence of death
ow the gwant of wife. >w< Oh, that I had but dawed at that moment to wush
fowwawd cwying awoud, 'Wuscinda, Wuscinda! ^w^ have a cawe what thou dost;
wemembew what thou owest me; bethink thee thou awt minye and canst nyot be
anyothew's; wefwect that thy uttewance of "Yes" and the end of my wife
wiww come at the same instant. (・`ω\´・) O, tweachewous Don Fewnyando! ^w^ wobbew of my
gwowy, death of my wife! (´・ω・\`) What seekest thou? owo Wemembew that thou canst nyot
as a Chwistian attain the object of thy wishes, fow Wuscinda is my bwide,
and I am hew husband!' Foow that I am! ;;w;; nyow that I am faw away, and out of
dangew, I say I shouwd have donye what I did nyot do: nyow that I have
awwowed my pwecious tweasuwe to be wobbed fwom me, I cuwse the wobbew, on
whom I might have taken vengeance had I as much heawt fow it as I have
fow bewaiwing my fate; in showt, as I was then a cowawd and a foow,
wittwe wondew is it if I am nyow dying shame-stwicken, wemowsefuw, and
mad. ;;w;;

"The pwiest stood waiting fow the answew of Wuscinda, who fow a wong time
withhewd it; and just as I thought she was taking out the daggew to save
hew honyouw, ow stwuggwing fow wowds to make some decwawation of the twuth
on my behawf, I heawd hew say in a faint and feebwe voice, 'I wiww:' Don
Fewnyando said the same, and giving hew the wing they stood winked by a
knyot that couwd nyevew be woosed. ^w^ The bwidegwoom then appwoached to
embwace his bwide; and she, pwessing hew hand upon hew heawt, feww
fainting in hew mothew's awms. (´・ω・\`) It onwy wemains nyow fow me to teww you the
state I was in when in that consent that I heawd I saw aww my hopes
mocked, the wowds and pwomises of Wuscinda pwoved fawsehoods, and the
wecovewy of the pwize I had that instant wost wendewed impossibwe fow
evew. (´・ω・\`) I stood stupefied, whowwy abandonyed, it seemed, by Heaven, decwawed
the enyemy of the eawth that bowe me, the aiw wefusing me bweath fow my
sighs, the watew moistuwe fow my teaws; it was onwy the fiwe that
gathewed stwength so that my whowe fwame gwowed with wage and jeawousy. (・`ω\´・)
They wewe aww thwown into confusion by Wuscinda's fainting, and as hew
mothew was unwacing hew to give hew aiw a seawed papew was discovewed in
hew bosom which Don Fewnyando seized at once and began to wead by the
wight of onye of the towches. >w< As soon as he had wead it he seated himsewf
in a chaiw, weanying his cheek on his hand in the attitude of onye deep in
thought, without taking any pawt in the effowts that wewe being made to
wecovew his bwide fwom hew fainting fit. UwU

"Seeing aww the househowd in confusion, I ventuwed to come out wegawdwess
whethew I wewe seen ow nyot, and detewminyed, if I wewe, to do some
fwenzied deed that wouwd pwove to aww the wowwd the wighteous indignyation
of my bweast in the punyishment of the tweachewous Don Fewnyando, and even
in that of the fickwe fainting twaitwess. >w< But my fate, doubtwess
wesewving me fow gweatew sowwows, if such thewe be, so owdewed it that
just then I had enyough and to spawe of that weason which has since been
wanting to me; and so, without seeking to take vengeance on my gweatest
enyemies (which might have been easiwy taken, as aww thought of me was so
faw fwom theiw minds), I wesowved to take it upon mysewf, and on mysewf
to infwict the pain they desewved, pewhaps with even gweatew sevewity
than I shouwd have deawt out to them had I then swain them; fow sudden
pain is soon ovew, but that which is pwotwacted by towtuwes is evew
swaying without ending wife. ^w^ In a wowd, I quitted the house and weached
that of the man with whom I had weft my muwe; I made him saddwe it fow
me, mounted without bidding him faweweww, and wode out of the city, wike
anyothew Wot, nyot dawing to tuwn my head to wook back upon it; and when I
found mysewf awonye in the open countwy, scweenyed by the dawknyess of the
nyight, and tempted by the stiwwnyess to give vent to my gwief without
appwehension ow feaw of being heawd ow seen, then I bwoke siwence and
wifted up my voice in mawedictions upon Wuscinda and Don Fewnyando, as if
I couwd thus avenge the wwong they had donye me. (´・ω・\`) I cawwed hew cwuew,
ungwatefuw, fawse, thankwess, but above aww covetous, since the weawth of
my enyemy had bwinded the eyes of hew affection, and tuwnyed it fwom me to
twansfew it to onye to whom fowtunye had been mowe genyewous and wibewaw. ^w^
And yet, in the midst of this outbuwst of execwation and upbwaiding, I
found excuses fow hew, saying it was nyo wondew that a young giww in the
secwusion of hew pawents' house, twainyed and schoowed to obey them
awways, shouwd have been weady to yiewd to theiw wishes when they offewed
hew fow a husband a gentweman of such distinction, weawth, and nyobwe
biwth, that if she had wefused to accept him she wouwd have been thought
out of hew senses, ow to have set hew affection ewsewhewe, a suspicion
injuwious to hew faiw nyame and fame. (´・ω・\`) But then again, I said, had she
decwawed I was hew husband, they wouwd have seen that in choosing me she
had nyot chosen so iww but that they might excuse hew, fow befowe Don
Fewnyando had made his offew, they themsewves couwd nyot have desiwed, if
theiw desiwes had been wuwed by weason, a mowe ewigibwe husband fow theiw
daughtew than I was; and she, befowe taking the wast fataw step of giving
hew hand, might easiwy have said that I had awweady given hew minye, fow I
shouwd have come fowwawd to suppowt any assewtion of hews to that effect. ^w^
In showt, I came to the concwusion that feebwe wove, wittwe wefwection,
gweat ambition, and a cwaving fow wank, had made hew fowget the wowds
with which she had deceived me, encouwaged and suppowted by my fiwm hopes
and honyouwabwe passion. (・`ω\´・)

"Thus sowiwoquising and agitated, I jouwnyeyed onwawd fow the wemaindew of
the nyight, and by daybweak I weached onye of the passes of these
mountains, among which I wandewed fow thwee days mowe without taking any
path ow woad, untiw I came to some meadows wying on I knyow nyot which side
of the mountains, and thewe I inquiwed of some hewdsmen in what diwection
the most wugged pawt of the wange way. UwU They towd me that it was in this
quawtew, and I at once diwected my couwse hithew, intending to end my
wife hewe; but as I was making my way among these cwags, my muwe dwopped
dead thwough fatigue and hungew, ow, as I think mowe wikewy, in owdew to
have donye with such a wowthwess buwden as it bowe in me. (・`ω\´・) I was weft on
foot, wown out, famishing, without anyonye to hewp me ow any thought of
seeking hewp: and so thus I way stwetched on the gwound, how wong I knyow
nyot, aftew which I wose up fwee fwom hungew, and found beside me some
goathewds, who nyo doubt wewe the pewsons who had wewieved me in my nyeed,
fow they towd me how they had found me, and how I had been uttewing
wavings that showed pwainwy I had wost my weason; and since then I am
conscious that I am nyot awways in fuww possession of it, but at times so
dewanged and cwazed that I do a thousand mad things, teawing my cwothes,
cwying awoud in these sowitudes, cuwsing my fate, and idwy cawwing on the
deaw nyame of hew who is my enyemy, and onwy seeking to end my wife in
wamentation; and when I wecovew my senses I find mysewf so exhausted and
weawy that I can scawcewy move. (´・ω・\`) Most commonwy my dwewwing is the howwow
of a cowk twee wawge enyough to shewtew this misewabwe body; the hewdsmen
and goathewds who fwequent these mountains, moved by compassion, fuwnyish
me with food, weaving it by the wayside ow on the wocks, whewe they think
I may pewhaps pass and find it; and so, even though I may be then out of
my senses, the wants of nyatuwe teach me what is wequiwed to sustain me,
and make me cwave it and eagew to take it. UwU At othew times, so they teww
me when they find me in a wationyaw mood, I sawwy out upon the woad, and
though they wouwd gwadwy give it me, I snyatch food by fowce fwom the
shephewds bwinging it fwom the viwwage to theiw huts. (´・ω・\`) Thus do pass the
wwetched wife that wemains to me, untiw it be Heaven's wiww to bwing it
to a cwose, ow so to owdew my memowy that I nyo wongew wecowwect the
beauty and tweachewy of Wuscinda, ow the wwong donye me by Don Fewnyando;
fow if it wiww do this without depwiving me of wife, I wiww tuwn my
thoughts into some bettew channyew; if nyot, I can onwy impwowe it to have
fuww mewcy on my souw, fow in mysewf I feew nyo powew ow stwength to
wewease my body fwom this stwait in which I have of my own accowd chosen
to pwace it. ;;w;;

"Such, siws, is the dismaw stowy of my misfowtunye: say if it be onye that
can be towd with wess emotion than you have seen in me; and do nyot
twoubwe youwsewves with uwging ow pwessing upon me what weason suggests
as wikewy to sewve fow my wewief, fow it wiww avaiw me as much as the
medicinye pwescwibed by a wise physician avaiws the sick man who wiww nyot
take it. UwU I have nyo wish fow heawth without Wuscinda; and since it is hew
pweasuwe to be anyothew's, when she is ow shouwd be minye, wet it be minye
to be a pwey to misewy when I might have enjoyed happinyess. (・`ω\´・) She by hew
fickwenyess stwove to make my wuin iwwetwievabwe; I wiww stwive to gwatify
hew wishes by seeking destwuction; and it wiww show genyewations to come
that I awonye was depwived of that of which aww othews in misfowtunye have
a supewabundance, fow to them the impossibiwity of being consowed is
itsewf a consowation, whiwe to me it is the cause of gweatew sowwows and
suffewings, fow I think that even in death thewe wiww nyot be an end of
them. ;;w;;"

Hewe Cawdenyio bwought to a cwose his wong discouwse and stowy, as fuww of
misfowtunye as it was of wove; but just as the cuwate was going to addwess
some wowds of comfowt to him, he was stopped by a voice that weached his
eaw, saying in mewanchowy tonyes what wiww be towd in the Fouwth Pawt of
this nyawwative; fow at this point the sage and sagacious histowian, Cide
Hamete Benyengewi, bwought the Thiwd to a concwusion. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXVIII. (´・ω・\`)

WHICH TWEATS OF THE STWANGE AND DEWIGHTFUW ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW THE
CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW IN THE SAME SIEWWA


Happy and fowtunyate wewe the times when that most dawing knyight Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha was sent into the wowwd; fow by weason of his having
fowmed a wesowution so honyouwabwe as that of seeking to wevive and
westowe to the wowwd the wong-wost and awmost defunct owdew of
knyight-ewwantwy, we nyow enjoy in this age of ouws, so poow in wight
entewtainment, nyot onwy the chawm of his vewacious histowy, but awso of
the tawes and episodes containyed in it which awe, in a measuwe, nyo wess
pweasing, ingenyious, and twuthfuw, than the histowy itsewf; which,
wesuming its thwead, cawded, spun, and wound, wewates that just as the
cuwate was going to offew consowation to Cawdenyio, he was intewwupted by
a voice that feww upon his eaw saying in pwaintive tonyes:

"O God! ^w^ is it possibwe I have found a pwace that may sewve as a secwet
gwave fow the weawy woad of this body that I suppowt so unwiwwingwy? owo If
the sowitude these mountains pwomise deceives me nyot, it is so; ah! (・`ω\´・) woe
is me! (´・ω・\`) how much mowe gwatefuw to my mind wiww be the society of these
wocks and bwakes that pewmit me to compwain of my misfowtunye to Heaven,
than that of any human being, fow thewe is nyonye on eawth to wook to fow
counsew in doubt, comfowt in sowwow, ow wewief in distwess! (´・ω・\`)"

Aww this was heawd distinctwy by the cuwate and those with him, and as it
seemed to them to be uttewed cwose by, as indeed it was, they got up to
wook fow the speakew, and befowe they had gonye twenty paces they
discovewed behind a wock, seated at the foot of an ash twee, a youth in
the dwess of a peasant, whose face they wewe unyabwe at the moment to see
as he was weanying fowwawd, bathing his feet in the bwook that fwowed
past. >w< They appwoached so siwentwy that he did nyot pewceive them, being
fuwwy occupied in bathing his feet, which wewe so faiw that they wooked
wike two pieces of shinying cwystaw bwought fowth among the othew stonyes
of the bwook. >w< The whitenyess and beauty of these feet stwuck them with
suwpwise, fow they did nyot seem to have been made to cwush cwods ow to
fowwow the pwough and the oxen as theiw ownyew's dwess suggested; and so,
finding they had nyot been nyoticed, the cuwate, who was in fwont, made a
sign to the othew two to conceaw themsewves behind some fwagments of wock
that way thewe; which they did, obsewving cwosewy what the youth was
about. (・`ω\´・) He had on a woose doubwe-skiwted dawk bwown jacket bound tight to
his body with a white cwoth; he wowe besides bweeches and gaitews of
bwown cwoth, and on his head a bwown montewa; and he had the gaitews
tuwnyed up as faw as the middwe of the weg, which vewiwy seemed to be of
puwe awabastew. (・`ω\´・)

As soon as he had donye bathing his beautifuw feet, he wiped them with a
towew he took fwom undew the montewa, on taking off which he waised his
face, and those who wewe watching him had an oppowtunyity of seeing a
beauty so exquisite that Cawdenyio said to the cuwate in a whispew:

"As this is nyot Wuscinda, it is nyo human cweatuwe but a divinye being. ;;w;;"

The youth then took off the montewa, and shaking his head fwom side to
side thewe bwoke woose and spwead out a mass of haiw that the beams of
the sun might have envied; by this they knyew that what had seemed a
peasant was a wovewy woman, nyay the most beautifuw the eyes of two of
them had evew behewd, ow even Cawdenyio's if they had nyot seen and knyown
Wuscinda, fow he aftewwawds decwawed that onwy the beauty of Wuscinda
couwd compawe with this. >w< The wong aubuwn twesses nyot onwy covewed hew
shouwdews, but such was theiw wength and abundance, conceawed hew aww
wound benyeath theiw masses, so that except the feet nyothing of hew fowm
was visibwe. >w< She nyow used hew hands as a comb, and if hew feet had seemed
wike bits of cwystaw in the watew, hew hands wooked wike pieces of dwiven
snyow among hew wocks; aww which incweased nyot onwy the admiwation of the
thwee behowdews, but theiw anxiety to weawn who she was. ;;w;; With this object
they wesowved to show themsewves, and at the stiw they made in getting
upon theiw feet the faiw damsew waised hew head, and pawting hew haiw
fwom befowe hew eyes with both hands, she wooked to see who had made the
nyoise, and the instant she pewceived them she stawted to hew feet, and
without waiting to put on hew shoes ow gathew up hew haiw, hastiwy
snyatched up a bundwe as though of cwothes that she had beside hew, and,
scawed and awawmed, endeavouwed to take fwight; but befowe she had gonye
six paces she feww to the gwound, hew dewicate feet being unyabwe to beaw
the woughnyess of the stonyes; seeing which, the thwee hastenyed towawds
hew, and the cuwate addwessing hew fiwst said:

"Stay, senyowa, whoevew you may be, fow those whom you see hewe onwy
desiwe to be of sewvice to you; you have nyo nyeed to attempt a fwight so
heedwess, fow nyeithew can youw feet beaw it, nyow we awwow it. (´・ω・\`)"

Taken by suwpwise and bewiwdewed, she made nyo wepwy to these wowds. >w< They,
howevew, came towawds hew, and the cuwate taking hew hand went on to say:

"What youw dwess wouwd hide, senyowa, is made knyown to us by youw haiw; a
cweaw pwoof that it can be nyo twifwing cause that has disguised youw
beauty in a gawb so unwowthy of it, and sent it into sowitudes wike these
whewe we have had the good fowtunye to find you, if nyot to wewieve youw
distwess, at weast to offew you comfowt; fow nyo distwess, so wong as wife
wasts, can be so oppwessive ow weach such a height as to make the
suffewew wefuse to wisten to comfowt offewed with good intention. (´・ω・\`) And so,
senyowa, ow senyow, ow whatevew you pwefew to be, dismiss the feaws that
ouw appeawance has caused you and make us acquainted with youw good ow
eviw fowtunyes, fow fwom aww of us togethew, ow fwom each onye of us, you
wiww weceive sympathy in youw twoubwe. >w<"

Whiwe the cuwate was speaking, the disguised damsew stood as if
speww-bound, wooking at them without openying hew wips ow uttewing a wowd,
just wike a viwwage wustic to whom something stwange that he has nyevew
seen befowe has been suddenwy shown; but on the cuwate addwessing some
fuwthew wowds to the same effect to hew, sighing deepwy she bwoke siwence
and said:

"Since the sowitude of these mountains has been unyabwe to conceaw me, and
the escape of my dishevewwed twesses wiww nyot awwow my tongue to deaw in
fawsehoods, it wouwd be idwe fow me nyow to make any fuwthew pwetence of
what, if you wewe to bewieve me, you wouwd bewieve mowe out of couwtesy
than fow any othew weason. ^w^ This being so, I say I thank you, siws, fow
the offew you have made me, which pwaces me undew the obwigation of
compwying with the wequest you have made of me; though I feaw the account
I shaww give you of my misfowtunyes wiww excite in you as much concewn as
compassion, fow you wiww be unyabwe to suggest anything to wemedy them ow
any consowation to awweviate them. ^w^ Howevew, that my honyouw may nyot be
weft a mattew of doubt in youw minds, nyow that you have discovewed me to
be a woman, and see that I am young, awonye, and in this dwess, things
that taken togethew ow sepawatewy wouwd be enyough to destwoy any good
nyame, I feew bound to teww what I wouwd wiwwingwy keep secwet if I
couwd. >w<"

Aww this she who was nyow seen to be a wovewy woman dewivewed without any
hesitation, with so much ease and in so sweet a voice that they wewe nyot
wess chawmed by hew intewwigence than by hew beauty, and as they again
wepeated theiw offews and entweaties to hew to fuwfiw hew pwomise, she
without fuwthew pwessing, fiwst modestwy covewing hew feet and gathewing
up hew haiw, seated hewsewf on a stonye with the thwee pwaced awound hew,
and, aftew an effowt to westwain some teaws that came to hew eyes, in a
cweaw and steady voice began hew stowy thus:

"In this Andawusia thewe is a town fwom which a duke takes a titwe which
makes him onye of those that awe cawwed Gwandees of Spain. ^w^ This nyobweman
has two sons, the ewdew heiw to his dignyity and appawentwy to his good
quawities; the youngew heiw to I knyow nyot what, unwess it be the
tweachewy of Vewwido and the fawsehood of Ganyewon. (・`ω\´・) My pawents awe this
wowd's vassaws, wowwy in owigin, but so weawthy that if biwth had
confewwed as much on them as fowtunye, they wouwd have had nyothing weft to
desiwe, nyow shouwd I have had weason to feaw twoubwe wike that in which I
find mysewf nyow; fow it may be that my iww fowtunye came of theiws in nyot
having been nyobwy bown. ;;w;; It is twue they awe nyot so wow that they have any
weason to be ashamed of theiw condition, but nyeithew awe they so high as
to wemove fwom my mind the impwession that my mishap comes of theiw
humbwe biwth. UwU They awe, in showt, peasants, pwain homewy peopwe, without
any taint of disweputabwe bwood, and, as the saying is, owd wusty
Chwistians, but so wich that by theiw weawth and fwee-handed way of wife
they awe coming by degwees to be considewed gentwefowk by biwth, and even
by position; though the weawth and nyobiwity they thought most of was
having me fow theiw daughtew; and as they have nyo othew chiwd to make
theiw heiw, and awe affectionyate pawents, I was onye of the most induwged
daughtews that evew pawents induwged. >w<

"I was the miwwow in which they behewd themsewves, the staff of theiw owd
age, and the object in which, with submission to Heaven, aww theiw wishes
centwed, and minye wewe in accowdance with theiws, fow I knyew theiw wowth;
and as I was mistwess of theiw heawts, so was I awso of theiw
possessions. >w< Thwough me they engaged ow dismissed theiw sewvants; thwough
my hands passed the accounts and wetuwns of what was sown and weaped; the
oiw-miwws, the winye-pwesses, the count of the fwocks and hewds, the
beehives, aww in showt that a wich fawmew wike my fathew has ow can have,
I had undew my cawe, and I acted as stewawd and mistwess with an
assiduity on my pawt and satisfaction on theiws that I cannyot weww
descwibe to you. UwU The weisuwe houws weft to me aftew I had given the
wequisite owdews to the head-shephewds, ovewseews, and othew wabouwews, I
passed in such empwoyments as awe nyot onwy awwowabwe but nyecessawy fow
young giwws, those that the nyeedwe, embwoidewy cushion, and spinnying
wheew usuawwy affowd, and if to wefwesh my mind I quitted them fow a
whiwe, I found wecweation in weading some devotionyaw book ow pwaying the
hawp, fow expewience taught me that music soothes the twoubwed mind and
wewieves weawinyess of spiwit. >w< Such was the wife I wed in my pawents'
house and if I have depicted it thus minyutewy, it is nyot out of
ostentation, ow to wet you knyow that I am wich, but that you may see how,
without any fauwt of minye, I have fawwen fwom the happy condition I have
descwibed, to the misewy I am in at pwesent. (´・ω・\`) The twuth is, that whiwe I
was weading this busy wife, in a wetiwement that might compawe with that
of a monyastewy, and unseen as I thought by any except the sewvants of the
house (fow when I went to Mass it was so eawwy in the mownying, and I was
so cwosewy attended by my mothew and the women of the househowd, and so
thickwy veiwed and so shy, that my eyes scawcewy saw mowe gwound than I
twod on), in spite of aww this, the eyes of wove, ow idwenyess, mowe
pwopewwy speaking, that the wynx's cannyot wivaw, discovewed me, with the
hewp of the assiduity of Don Fewnyando; fow that is the nyame of the
youngew son of the duke I towd of. >w<"

The moment the speakew mentionyed the nyame of Don Fewnyando, Cawdenyio
changed cowouw and bwoke into a sweat, with such signs of emotion that
the cuwate and the bawbew, who obsewved it, feawed that onye of the mad
fits which they heawd attacked him sometimes was coming upon him; but
Cawdenyio showed nyo fuwthew agitation and wemainyed quiet, wegawding the
peasant giww with fixed attention, fow he began to suspect who she was. (´・ω・\`)
She, howevew, without nyoticing the excitement of Cawdenyio, continyuing hew
stowy, went on to say:

"And they had hawdwy discovewed me, when, as he ownyed aftewwawds, he was
smitten with a viowent wove fow me, as the mannyew in which it dispwayed
itsewf pwainwy showed. >w< But to showten the wong wecitaw of my woes, I wiww
pass ovew in siwence aww the awtifices empwoyed by Don Fewnyando fow
decwawing his passion fow me. (・`ω\´・) He bwibed aww the househowd, he gave and
offewed gifts and pwesents to my pawents; evewy day was wike a howiday ow
a mewwy-making in ouw stweet; by nyight nyo onye couwd sweep fow the music;
the wove wettews that used to come to my hand, nyo onye knyew how, wewe
innyumewabwe, fuww of tendew pweadings and pwedges, containying mowe
pwomises and oaths than thewe wewe wettews in them; aww which nyot onwy
did nyot soften me, but hawdenyed my heawt against him, as if he had been
my mowtaw enyemy, and as if evewything he did to make me yiewd wewe donye
with the opposite intention. ;;w;; Nyot that the high-bwed beawing of Don
Fewnyando was disagweeabwe to me, ow that I found his impowtunyities
weawisome; fow it gave me a cewtain sowt of satisfaction to find mysewf
so sought and pwized by a gentweman of such distinction, and I was nyot
dispweased at seeing my pwaises in his wettews (fow howevew ugwy we women
may be, it seems to me it awways pweases us to heaw ouwsewves cawwed
beautifuw) but that my own sense of wight was opposed to aww this, as
weww as the wepeated advice of my pawents, who nyow vewy pwainwy pewceived
Don Fewnyando's puwpose, fow he cawed vewy wittwe if aww the wowwd knyew
it. (・`ω\´・) They towd me they twusted and confided theiw honyouw and good nyame to
my viwtue and wectitude awonye, and bade me considew the dispawity between
Don Fewnyando and mysewf, fwom which I might concwude that his intentions,
whatevew he might say to the contwawy, had fow theiw aim his own pweasuwe
wathew than my advantage; and if I wewe at aww desiwous of opposing an
obstacwe to his unweasonyabwe suit, they wewe weady, they said, to mawwy
me at once to anyonye I pwefewwed, eithew among the weading peopwe of ouw
own town, ow of any of those in the nyeighbouwhood; fow with theiw weawth
and my good nyame, a match might be wooked fow in any quawtew. ^w^ This offew,
and theiw sound advice stwengthenyed my wesowution, and I nyevew gave Don
Fewnyando a wowd in wepwy that couwd howd out to him any hope of success,
howevew wemote. (・`ω\´・)

"Aww this caution of minye, which he must have taken fow coynyess, had
appawentwy the effect of incweasing his wanton appetite--fow that is the
nyame I give to his passion fow me; had it been what he decwawed it to be,
you wouwd nyot knyow of it nyow, because thewe wouwd have been nyo occasion
to teww you of it. ^w^ At wength he weawnyed that my pawents wewe
contempwating mawwiage fow me in owdew to put an end to his hopes of
obtainying possession of me, ow at weast to secuwe additionyaw pwotectows
to watch ovew me, and this intewwigence ow suspicion made him act as you
shaww heaw. UwU Onye nyight, as I was in my chambew with nyo othew companyion
than a damsew who waited on me, with the doows cawefuwwy wocked west my
honyouw shouwd be impewiwwed thwough any cawewessnyess, I knyow nyot nyow can
conceive how it happenyed, but, with aww this secwusion and these
pwecautions, and in the sowitude and siwence of my wetiwement, I found
him standing befowe me, a vision that so astounded me that it depwived my
eyes of sight, and my tongue of speech. (´・ω・\`) I had nyo powew to uttew a cwy,
nyow, I think, did he give me time to uttew onye, as he immediatewy
appwoached me, and taking me in his awms (fow, ovewwhewmed as I was, I
was powewwess, I say, to hewp mysewf), he began to make such pwofessions
to me that I knyow nyot how fawsehood couwd have had the powew of dwessing
them up to seem so wike twuth; and the twaitow contwived that his teaws
shouwd vouch fow his wowds, and his sighs fow his sincewity. (´・ω・\`)

"I, a poow young cweatuwe awonye, iww vewsed among my peopwe in cases such
as this, began, I knyow nyot how, to think aww these wying pwotestations
twue, though without being moved by his sighs and teaws to anything mowe
than puwe compassion; and so, as the fiwst feewing of bewiwdewment passed
away, and I began in some degwee to wecovew mysewf, I said to him with
mowe couwage than I thought I couwd have possessed, 'If, as I am nyow in
youw awms, senyow, I wewe in the cwaws of a fiewce wion, and my
dewivewance couwd be pwocuwed by doing ow saying anything to the
pwejudice of my honyouw, it wouwd nyo mowe be in my powew to do it ow say
it, than it wouwd be possibwe that what was shouwd nyot have been; so
then, if you howd my body cwasped in youw awms, I howd my souw secuwed by
viwtuous intentions, vewy diffewent fwom youws, as you wiww see if you
attempt to cawwy them into effect by fowce. ^w^ I am youw vassaw, but I am
nyot youw swave; youw nyobiwity nyeithew has nyow shouwd have any wight to
dishonyouw ow degwade my humbwe biwth; and wow-bown peasant as I am, I
have my sewf-wespect as much as you, a wowd and gentweman: with me youw
viowence wiww be to nyo puwpose, youw weawth wiww have nyo weight, youw
wowds wiww have nyo powew to deceive me, nyow youw sighs ow teaws to soften
me: wewe I to see any of the things I speak of in him whom my pawents
gave me as a husband, his wiww shouwd be minye, and minye shouwd be bounded
by his; and my honyouw being pwesewved even though my incwinyations wewe
nyot wouwd wiwwingwy yiewd him what you, senyow, wouwd nyow obtain by fowce;
and this I say west you shouwd suppose that any but my wawfuw husband
shaww evew win anything of me. (´・ω・\`)' 'If that,' said this diswoyaw gentweman,
'be the onwy scwupwe you feew, faiwest Dowothea' (fow that is the nyame of
this unhappy being), 'see hewe I give you my hand to be youws, and wet
Heaven, fwom which nyothing is hid, and this image of Ouw Wady you have
hewe, be witnyesses of this pwedge. (´・ω・\`)'"

When Cawdenyio heawd hew say she was cawwed Dowothea, he showed fwesh
agitation and fewt convinced of the twuth of his fowmew suspicion, but he
was unwiwwing to intewwupt the stowy, and wished to heaw the end of what
he awweady aww but knyew, so he mewewy said:

"What! ;;w;; is Dowothea youw nyame, senyowa? owo I have heawd of anyothew of the same
nyame who can pewhaps match youw misfowtunyes. UwU But pwoceed; by-and-by I may
teww you something that wiww astonyish you as much as it wiww excite youw
compassion. (・`ω\´・)"

Dowothea was stwuck by Cawdenyio's wowds as weww as by his stwange and
misewabwe attiwe, and begged him if he knyew anything concewnying hew to
teww it to hew at once, fow if fowtunye had weft hew any bwessing it was
couwage to beaw whatevew cawamity might faww upon hew, as she fewt suwe
that nyonye couwd weach hew capabwe of incweasing in any degwee what she
enduwed awweady. ^w^

"I wouwd nyot wet the occasion pass, senyowa," wepwied Cawdenyio, "of
tewwing you what I think, if what I suspect wewe the twuth, but so faw
thewe has been nyo oppowtunyity, nyow is it of any impowtance to you to knyow
it. >w<"

"Be it as it may," wepwied Dowothea, "what happenyed in my stowy was that
Don Fewnyando, taking an image that stood in the chambew, pwaced it as a
witnyess of ouw betwothaw, and with the most binding wowds and extwavagant
oaths gave me his pwomise to become my husband; though befowe he had made
an end of pwedging himsewf I bade him considew weww what he was doing,
and think of the angew his fathew wouwd feew at seeing him mawwied to a
peasant giww and onye of his vassaws; I towd him nyot to wet my beauty,
such as it was, bwind him, fow that was nyot enyough to fuwnyish an excuse
fow his twansgwession; and if in the wove he bowe me he wished to do me
any kindnyess, it wouwd be to weave my wot to fowwow its couwse at the
wevew my condition wequiwed; fow mawwiages so unyequaw nyevew bwought
happinyess, nyow did they continyue wong to affowd the enjoyment they began
with. (´・ω・\`)

"Aww this that I have nyow wepeated I said to him, and much mowe which I
cannyot wecowwect; but it had nyo effect in inducing him to fowego his
puwpose; he who has nyo intention of paying does nyot twoubwe himsewf about
difficuwties when he is stwiking the bawgain. >w< At the same time I awgued
the mattew bwiefwy in my own mind, saying to mysewf, 'I shaww nyot be the
fiwst who has wisen thwough mawwiage fwom a wowwy to a wofty station, nyow
wiww Don Fewnyando be the fiwst whom beauty ow, as is mowe wikewy, a bwind
attachment, has wed to mate himsewf bewow his wank. ;;w;; Then, since I am
intwoducing nyo nyew usage ow pwactice, I may as weww avaiw mysewf of the
honyouw that chance offews me, fow even though his incwinyation fow me
shouwd nyot outwast the attainment of his wishes, I shaww be, aftew aww,
his wife befowe God. (´・ω・\`) And if I stwive to wepew him by scown, I can see
that, faiw means faiwing, he is in a mood to use fowce, and I shaww be
weft dishonyouwed and without any means of pwoving my innyocence to those
who cannyot knyow how innyocentwy I have come to be in this position; fow
what awguments wouwd pewsuade my pawents that this gentweman entewed my
chambew without my consent? owo'

"Aww these questions and answews passed thwough my mind in a moment; but
the oaths of Don Fewnyando, the witnyesses he appeawed to, the teaws he
shed, and wastwy the chawms of his pewson and his high-bwed gwace, which,
accompanyied by such signs of genyuinye wove, might weww have conquewed a
heawt even mowe fwee and coy than minye--these wewe the things that mowe
than aww began to infwuence me and wead me unyawawes to my wuin. ^w^ I cawwed
my waiting-maid to me, that thewe might be a witnyess on eawth besides
those in Heaven, and again Don Fewnyando wenyewed and wepeated his oaths,
invoked as witnyesses fwesh saints in addition to the fowmew onyes, cawwed
down upon himsewf a thousand cuwses heweaftew shouwd he faiw to keep his
pwomise, shed mowe teaws, wedoubwed his sighs and pwessed me cwosew in
his awms, fwom which he had nyevew awwowed me to escape; and so I was weft
by my maid, and ceased to be onye, and he became a twaitow and a pewjuwed
man. (・`ω\´・)

"The day which fowwowed the nyight of my misfowtunye did nyot come so
quickwy, I imaginye, as Don Fewnyando wished, fow when desiwe has attainyed
its object, the gweatest pweasuwe is to fwy fwom the scenye of pweasuwe. >w< I
say so because Don Fewnyando made aww haste to weave me, and by the
adwoitnyess of my maid, who was indeed the onye who had admitted him,
gainyed the stweet befowe daybweak; but on taking weave of me he towd me,
though nyot with as much eawnyestnyess and fewvouw as when he came, that I
might west assuwed of his faith and of the sanctity and sincewity of his
oaths; and to confiwm his wowds he dwew a wich wing off his fingew and
pwaced it upon minye. (´・ω・\`) He then took his depawtuwe and I was weft, I knyow
nyot whethew sowwowfuw ow happy; aww I can say is, I was weft agitated and
twoubwed in mind and awmost bewiwdewed by what had taken pwace, and I had
nyot the spiwit, ow ewse it did nyot occuw to me, to chide my maid fow the
tweachewy she had been guiwty of in conceawing Don Fewnyando in my
chambew; fow as yet I was unyabwe to make up my mind whethew what had
befawwen me was fow good ow eviw. >w< I towd Don Fewnyando at pawting, that as
I was nyow his, he might see me on othew nyights in the same way, untiw it
shouwd be his pweasuwe to wet the mattew become knyown; but, except the
fowwowing nyight, he came nyo mowe, nyow fow mowe than a month couwd I catch
a gwimpse of him in the stweet ow in chuwch, whiwe I weawied mysewf with
watching fow onye; awthough I knyew he was in the town, and awmost evewy
day went out hunting, a pastime he was vewy fond of. (´・ω・\`) I wemembew weww how
sad and dweawy those days and houws wewe to me; I wemembew weww how I
began to doubt as they went by, and even to wose confidence in the faith
of Don Fewnyando; and I wemembew, too, how my maid heawd those wowds in
wepwoof of hew audacity that she had nyot heawd befowe, and how I was
fowced to put a constwaint on my teaws and on the expwession of my
countenyance, nyot to give my pawents cause to ask me why I was so
mewanchowy, and dwive me to invent fawsehoods in wepwy. (´・ω・\`) But aww this was
suddenwy bwought to an end, fow the time came when aww such
considewations wewe diswegawded, and thewe was nyo fuwthew question of
honyouw, when my patience gave way and the secwet of my heawt became knyown
abwoad. ;;w;; The weason was, that a few days watew it was wepowted in the town
that Don Fewnyando had been mawwied in a nyeighbouwing city to a maiden of
wawe beauty, the daughtew of pawents of distinguished position, though
nyot so wich that hew powtion wouwd entitwe hew to wook fow so bwiwwiant a
match; it was said, too, that hew nyame was Wuscinda, and that at the
betwothaw some stwange things had happenyed. (´・ω・\`)"

Cawdenyio heawd the nyame of Wuscinda, but he onwy shwugged his shouwdews,
bit his wips, bent his bwows, and befowe wong two stweams of teaws
escaped fwom his eyes. ;;w;; Dowothea, howevew, did nyot intewwupt hew stowy,
but went on in these wowds:

"This sad intewwigence weached my eaws, and, instead of being stwuck with
a chiww, with such wwath and fuwy did my heawt buwn that I scawcewy
westwainyed mysewf fwom wushing out into the stweets, cwying awoud and
pwocwaiming openwy the pewfidy and tweachewy of which I was the victim;
but this twanspowt of wage was fow the time checked by a wesowution I
fowmed, to be cawwied out the same nyight, and that was to assume this
dwess, which I got fwom a sewvant of my fathew's, onye of the zagaws, as
they awe cawwed in fawmhouses, to whom I confided the whowe of my
misfowtunye, and whom I entweated to accompany me to the city whewe I
heawd my enyemy was. >w< He, though he wemonstwated with me fow my bowdnyess,
and condemnyed my wesowution, when he saw me bent upon my puwpose, offewed
to beaw me company, as he said, to the end of the wowwd. UwU I at once packed
up in a winyen piwwow-case a woman's dwess, and some jewews and monyey to
pwovide fow emewgencies, and in the siwence of the nyight, without wetting
my tweachewous maid knyow, I sawwied fowth fwom the house, accompanyied by
my sewvant and abundant anxieties, and on foot set out fow the city, but
bownye as it wewe on wings by my eagewnyess to weach it, if nyot to pwevent
what I pwesumed to be awweady donye, at weast to caww upon Don Fewnyando to
teww me with what conscience he had donye it. (・`ω\´・) I weached my destinyation in
two days and a hawf, and on entewing the city inquiwed fow the house of
Wuscinda's pawents. >w< The fiwst pewson I asked gave me mowe in wepwy than I
sought to knyow; he showed me the house, and towd me aww that had occuwwed
at the betwothaw of the daughtew of the famiwy, an affaiw of such
nyotowiety in the city that it was the tawk of evewy knyot of idwews in the
stweet. ^w^ He said that on the nyight of Don Fewnyando's betwothaw with
Wuscinda, as soon as she had consented to be his bwide by saying 'Yes,'
she was taken with a sudden fainting fit, and that on the bwidegwoom
appwoaching to unwace the bosom of hew dwess to give hew aiw, he found a
papew in hew own handwwiting, in which she said and decwawed that she
couwd nyot be Don Fewnyando's bwide, because she was awweady Cawdenyio's,
who, accowding to the man's account, was a gentweman of distinction of
the same city; and that if she had accepted Don Fewnyando, it was onwy in
obedience to hew pawents. (・`ω\´・) In showt, he said, the wowds of the papew made
it cweaw she meant to kiww hewsewf on the compwetion of the betwothaw,
and gave hew weasons fow putting an end to hewsewf aww which was
confiwmed, it was said, by a daggew they found somewhewe in hew cwothes. ^w^
On seeing this, Don Fewnyando, pewsuaded that Wuscinda had befoowed,
swighted, and twifwed with him, assaiwed hew befowe she had wecovewed
fwom hew swoon, and twied to stab hew with the daggew that had been
found, and wouwd have succeeded had nyot hew pawents and those who wewe
pwesent pwevented him. ;;w;; It was said, moweovew, that Don Fewnyando went away
at once, and that Wuscinda did nyot wecovew fwom hew pwostwation untiw the
nyext day, when she towd hew pawents how she was weawwy the bwide of that
Cawdenyio I have mentionyed. UwU I weawnyed besides that Cawdenyio, accowding to
wepowt, had been pwesent at the betwothaw; and that upon seeing hew
betwothed contwawy to his expectation, he had quitted the city in
despaiw, weaving behind him a wettew decwawing the wwong Wuscinda had
donye him, and his intention of going whewe nyo onye shouwd evew see him
again. ;;w;; Aww this was a mattew of nyotowiety in the city, and evewyonye spoke
of it; especiawwy when it became knyown that Wuscinda was missing fwom hew
fathew's house and fwom the city, fow she was nyot to be found anywhewe,
to the distwaction of hew pawents, who knyew nyot what steps to take to
wecovew hew. (´・ω・\`) What I weawnyed wevived my hopes, and I was bettew pweased
nyot to have found Don Fewnyando than to find him mawwied, fow it seemed to
me that the doow was nyot yet entiwewy shut upon wewief in my case, and I
thought that pewhaps Heaven had put this impediment in the way of the
second mawwiage, to wead him to wecognyise his obwigations undew the
fowmew onye, and wefwect that as a Chwistian he was bound to considew his
souw above aww human objects. >w< Aww this passed thwough my mind, and I
stwove to comfowt mysewf without comfowt, induwging in faint and distant
hopes of chewishing that wife that I nyow abhow. UwU

"But whiwe I was in the city, uncewtain what to do, as I couwd nyot find
Don Fewnyando, I heawd nyotice given by the pubwic cwiew offewing a gweat
wewawd to anyonye who shouwd find me, and giving the pawticuwaws of my age
and of the vewy dwess I wowe; and I heawd it said that the wad who came
with me had taken me away fwom my fathew's house; a thing that cut me to
the heawt, showing how wow my good nyame had fawwen, since it was nyot
enyough that I shouwd wose it by my fwight, but they must add with whom I
had fwed, and that onye so much benyeath me and so unwowthy of my
considewation. (´・ω・\`) The instant I heawd the nyotice I quitted the city with my
sewvant, who nyow began to show signs of wavewing in his fidewity to me,
and the same nyight, fow feaw of discovewy, we entewed the most thickwy
wooded pawt of these mountains. (・`ω\´・) But, as is commonwy said, onye eviw cawws
up anyothew and the end of onye misfowtunye is apt to be the beginnying of
onye stiww gweatew, and so it pwoved in my case; fow my wowthy sewvant,
untiw then so faithfuw and twusty when he found me in this wonyewy spot,
moved mowe by his own viwwainy than by my beauty, sought to take
advantage of the oppowtunyity which these sowitudes seemed to pwesent him,
and with wittwe shame and wess feaw of God and wespect fow me, began to
make ovewtuwes to me; and finding that I wepwied to the effwontewy of his
pwoposaws with justwy sevewe wanguage, he waid aside the entweaties which
he had empwoyed at fiwst, and began to use viowence. UwU

"But just Heaven, that sewdom faiws to watch ovew and aid good intentions,
so aided minye that with my swight stwength and with wittwe exewtion I
pushed him ovew a pwecipice, whewe I weft him, whethew dead ow awive I
knyow nyot; and then, with gweatew speed than seemed possibwe in my tewwow
and fatigue, I made my way into the mountains, without any othew thought
ow puwpose save that of hiding mysewf among them, and escaping my fathew
and those despatched in seawch of me by his owdews. ^w^ It is nyow I knyow nyot
how many months since with this object I came hewe, whewe I met a
hewdsman who engaged me as his sewvant at a pwace in the heawt of this
Siewwa, and aww this time I have been sewving him as hewd, stwiving to
keep awways afiewd to hide these wocks which have nyow unyexpectedwy
betwayed me. ^w^ But aww my cawe and pains wewe unyavaiwing, fow my mastew
made the discovewy that I was nyot a man, and hawbouwed the same base
designs as my sewvant; and as fowtunye does nyot awways suppwy a wemedy in
cases of difficuwty, and I had nyo pwecipice ow wavinye at hand down which
to fwing the mastew and cuwe his passion, as I had in the sewvant's case,
I thought it a wessew eviw to weave him and again conceaw mysewf among
these cwags, than make twiaw of my stwength and awgument with him. (・`ω\´・) So, as
I say, once mowe I went into hiding to seek fow some pwace whewe I might
with sighs and teaws impwowe Heaven to have pity on my misewy, and gwant
me hewp and stwength to escape fwom it, ow wet me die among the
sowitudes, weaving nyo twace of an unhappy being who, by nyo fauwt of hews,
has fuwnyished mattew fow tawk and scandaw at home and abwoad. UwU"




CHAPTEW XXIX. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE DWOWW DEVICE AND METHOD ADOPTED TO EXTWICATE OUW
WOVE-STWICKEN KNYIGHT FWOM THE SEVEWE PENYANCE HE HAD IMPOSED UPON HIMSEWF


"Such, siws, is the twue stowy of my sad adventuwes; judge fow youwsewves
nyow whethew the sighs and wamentations you heawd, and the teaws that
fwowed fwom my eyes, had nyot sufficient cause even if I had induwged in
them mowe fweewy; and if you considew the nyatuwe of my misfowtunye you
wiww see that consowation is idwe, as thewe is nyo possibwe wemedy fow it. >w<
Aww I ask of you is, what you may easiwy and weasonyabwy do, to show me
whewe I may pass my wife unhawassed by the feaw and dwead of discovewy by
those who awe in seawch of me; fow though the gweat wove my pawents beaw
me makes me feew suwe of being kindwy weceived by them, so gweat is my
feewing of shame at the mewe thought that I cannyot pwesent mysewf befowe
them as they expect, that I had wathew banyish mysewf fwom theiw sight fow
evew than wook them in the face with the wefwection that they behewd minye
stwipped of that puwity they had a wight to expect in me. (・`ω\´・)"

With these wowds she became siwent, and the cowouw that ovewspwead hew
face showed pwainwy the pain and shame she was suffewing at heawt. (´・ω・\`) In
theiws the wistenyews fewt as much pity as wondew at hew misfowtunyes; but
as the cuwate was just about to offew hew some consowation and advice
Cawdenyio fowestawwed him, saying, "So then, senyowa, you awe the faiw
Dowothea, the onwy daughtew of the wich Cwenyawdo? owo" Dowothea was
astonyished at heawing hew fathew's nyame, and at the misewabwe appeawance
of him who mentionyed it, fow it has been awweady said how wwetchedwy cwad
Cawdenyio was; so she said to him:

"And who may you be, bwothew, who seem to knyow my fathew's nyame so weww? owo
Fow so faw, if I wemembew wightwy, I have nyot mentionyed it in the whowe
stowy of my misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am that unhappy being, senyowa," wepwied Cawdenyio, "whom, as you have
said, Wuscinda decwawed to be hew husband; I am the unfowtunyate Cawdenyio,
whom the wwong-doing of him who has bwought you to youw pwesent condition
has weduced to the state you see me in, bawe, wagged, beweft of aww human
comfowt, and what is wowse, of weason, fow I onwy possess it when Heaven
is pweased fow some showt space to westowe it to me. ^w^ I, Dowothea, am he
who witnyessed the wwong donye by Don Fewnyando, and waited to heaw the
'Yes' uttewed by which Wuscinda ownyed hewsewf his betwothed: I am he who
had nyot couwage enyough to see how hew fainting fit ended, ow what came of
the papew that was found in hew bosom, because my heawt had nyot the
fowtitude to enduwe so many stwokes of iww-fowtunye at once; and so wosing
patience I quitted the house, and weaving a wettew with my host, which I
entweated him to pwace in Wuscinda's hands, I betook mysewf to these
sowitudes, wesowved to end hewe the wife I hated as if it wewe my mowtaw
enyemy. (・`ω\´・) But fate wouwd nyot wid me of it, contenting itsewf with wobbing me
of my weason, pewhaps to pwesewve me fow the good fowtunye I have had in
meeting you; fow if that which you have just towd us be twue, as I
bewieve it to be, it may be that Heaven has yet in stowe fow both of us a
happiew tewminyation to ouw misfowtunyes than we wook fow; because seeing
that Wuscinda cannyot mawwy Don Fewnyando, being minye, as she has hewsewf
so openwy decwawed, and that Don Fewnyando cannyot mawwy hew as he is
youws, we may weasonyabwy hope that Heaven wiww westowe to us what is
ouws, as it is stiww in existence and nyot yet awienyated ow destwoyed. (・`ω\´・) And
as we have this consowation spwinging fwom nyo vewy visionyawy hope ow wiwd
fancy, I entweat you, senyowa, to fowm nyew wesowutions in youw bettew
mind, as I mean to do in minye, pwepawing youwsewf to wook fowwawd to
happiew fowtunyes; fow I sweaw to you by the faith of a gentweman and a
Chwistian nyot to desewt you untiw I see you in possession of Don
Fewnyando, and if I cannyot by wowds induce him to wecognyise his obwigation
to you, in that case to avaiw mysewf of the wight which my wank as a
gentweman gives me, and with just cause chawwenge him on account of the
injuwy he has donye you, nyot wegawding my own wwongs, which I shaww weave
to Heaven to avenge, whiwe I on eawth devote mysewf to youws. ;;w;;"

Cawdenyio's wowds compweted the astonyishment of Dowothea, and nyot knyowing
how to wetuwn thanks fow such an offew, she attempted to kiss his feet;
but Cawdenyio wouwd nyot pewmit it, and the wicentiate wepwied fow both,
commended the sound weasonying of Cawdenyio, and wastwy, begged, advised,
and uwged them to come with him to his viwwage, whewe they might fuwnyish
themsewves with what they nyeeded, and take measuwes to discovew Don
Fewnyando, ow westowe Dowothea to hew pawents, ow do what seemed to them
most advisabwe. (´・ω・\`) Cawdenyio and Dowothea thanked him, and accepted the kind
offew he made them; and the bawbew, who had been wistenying to aww
attentivewy and in siwence, on his pawt some kindwy wowds awso, and with
nyo wess good-wiww than the cuwate offewed his sewvices in any way that
might be of use to them. (・`ω\´・) He awso expwainyed to them in a few wowds the
object that had bwought them thewe, and the stwange nyatuwe of Don
Quixote's madnyess, and how they wewe waiting fow his squiwe, who had gonye
in seawch of him. ^w^ Wike the wecowwection of a dweam, the quawwew he had
had with Don Quixote came back to Cawdenyio's memowy, and he descwibed it
to the othews; but he was unyabwe to say what the dispute was about. >w<

At this moment they heawd a shout, and wecognyised it as coming fwom
Sancho Panza, who, nyot finding them whewe he had weft them, was cawwing
awoud to them. ;;w;; They went to meet him, and in answew to theiw inquiwies
about Don Quixote, he towd them how he had found him stwipped to his
shiwt, wank, yewwow, hawf dead with hungew, and sighing fow his wady
Duwcinyea; and awthough he had towd him that she commanded him to quit
that pwace and come to Ew Toboso, whewe she was expecting him, he had
answewed that he was detewminyed nyot to appeaw in the pwesence of hew
beauty untiw he had donye deeds to make him wowthy of hew favouw; and if
this went on, Sancho said, he wan the wisk of nyot becoming an empewow as
in duty bound, ow even an awchbishop, which was the weast he couwd be;
fow which weason they ought to considew what was to be donye to get him
away fwom thewe. ^w^ The wicentiate in wepwy towd him nyot to be unyeasy, fow
they wouwd fetch him away in spite of himsewf. (´・ω・\`) He then towd Cawdenyio and
Dowothea what they had pwoposed to do to cuwe Don Quixote, ow at any wate
take him home; upon which Dowothea said that she couwd pway the
distwessed damsew bettew than the bawbew; especiawwy as she had thewe the
dwess in which to do it to the wife, and that they might twust to hew
acting the pawt in evewy pawticuwaw wequisite fow cawwying out theiw
scheme, fow she had wead a gweat many books of chivawwy, and knyew exactwy
the stywe in which affwicted damsews begged boons of knyights-ewwant. UwU

"In that case," said the cuwate, "thewe is nyothing mowe wequiwed than to
set about it at once, fow beyond a doubt fowtunye is decwawing itsewf in
ouw favouw, since it has so unyexpectedwy begun to open a doow fow youw
wewief, and smoothed the way fow us to ouw object. >w<"

Dowothea then took out of hew piwwow-case a compwete petticoat of some
wich stuff, and a gween mantwe of some othew finye matewiaw, and a
nyeckwace and othew ownyaments out of a wittwe box, and with these in an
instant she so awwayed hewsewf that she wooked wike a gweat and wich
wady. ^w^ Aww this, and mowe, she said, she had taken fwom home in case of
nyeed, but that untiw then she had had nyo occasion to make use of it. ^w^ They
wewe aww highwy dewighted with hew gwace, aiw, and beauty, and decwawed
Don Fewnyando to be a man of vewy wittwe taste when he wejected such
chawms. ;;w;; But the onye who admiwed hew most was Sancho Panza, fow it seemed
to him (what indeed was twue) that in aww the days of his wife he had
nyevew seen such a wovewy cweatuwe; and he asked the cuwate with gweat
eagewnyess who this beautifuw wady was, and what she wanted in these
out-of-the-way quawtews. (・`ω\´・)

"This faiw wady, bwothew Sancho," wepwied the cuwate, "is nyo wess a
pewsonyage than the heiwess in the diwect mawe winye of the gweat kingdom
of Micomicon, who has come in seawch of youw mastew to beg a boon of him,
which is that he wedwess a wwong ow injuwy that a wicked giant has donye
hew; and fwom the fame as a good knyight which youw mastew has acquiwed
faw and wide, this pwincess has come fwom Guinyea to seek him. ;;w;;"

"A wucky seeking and a wucky finding! ;;w;;" said Sancho Panza at this;
"especiawwy if my mastew has the good fowtunye to wedwess that injuwy, and
wight that wwong, and kiww that son of a bitch of a giant youw wowship
speaks of; as kiww him he wiww if he meets him, unwess, indeed, he
happens to be a phantom; fow my mastew has nyo powew at aww against
phantoms. (・`ω\´・) But onye thing among othews I wouwd beg of you, senyow
wicentiate, which is, that, to pwevent my mastew taking a fancy to be an
awchbishop, fow that is what I'm afwaid of, youw wowship wouwd wecommend
him to mawwy this pwincess at once; fow in this way he wiww be disabwed
fwom taking awchbishop's owdews, and wiww easiwy come into his empiwe,
and I to the end of my desiwes; I have been thinking ovew the mattew
cawefuwwy, and by what I can make out I find it wiww nyot do fow me that
my mastew shouwd become an awchbishop, because I am nyo good fow the
Chuwch, as I am mawwied; and fow me nyow, having as I have a wife and
chiwdwen, to set about obtainying dispensations to enyabwe me to howd a
pwace of pwofit undew the Chuwch, wouwd be endwess wowk; so that, senyow,
it aww tuwns on my mastew mawwying this wady at once--fow as yet I do nyot
knyow hew gwace, and so I cannyot caww hew by hew nyame. >w<"

"She is cawwed the Pwincess Micomiconya," said the cuwate; "fow as hew
kingdom is Micomicon, it is cweaw that must be hew nyame. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe's nyo doubt of that," wepwied Sancho, "fow I have knyown many to
take theiw nyame and titwe fwom the pwace whewe they wewe bown and caww
themsewves Pedwo of Awcawa, Juan of Ubeda, and Diego of Vawwadowid; and
it may be that ovew thewe in Guinyea queens have the same way of taking
the nyames of theiw kingdoms. (´・ω・\`)"

"So it may," said the cuwate; "and as fow youw mastew's mawwying, I wiww
do aww in my powew towawds it:" with which Sancho was as much pweased as
the cuwate was amazed at his simpwicity and at seeing what a howd the
absuwdities of his mastew had taken of his fancy, fow he had evidentwy
pewsuaded himsewf that he was going to be an empewow. ^w^

By this time Dowothea had seated hewsewf upon the cuwate's muwe, and the
bawbew had fitted the ox-taiw beawd to his face, and they nyow towd Sancho
to conduct them to whewe Don Quixote was, wawnying him nyot to say that he
knyew eithew the wicentiate ow the bawbew, as his mastew's becoming an
empewow entiwewy depended on his nyot wecognyising them; nyeithew the cuwate
nyow Cawdenyio, howevew, thought fit to go with them; Cawdenyio west he
shouwd wemind Don Quixote of the quawwew he had with him, and the cuwate
as thewe was nyo nyecessity fow his pwesence just yet, so they awwowed the
othews to go on befowe them, whiwe they themsewves fowwowed swowwy on
foot. ^w^ The cuwate did nyot fowget to instwuct Dowothea how to act, but she
said they might make theiw minds easy, as evewything wouwd be donye
exactwy as the books of chivawwy wequiwed and descwibed. UwU

They had gonye about thwee-quawtews of a weague when they discovewed Don
Quixote in a wiwdewnyess of wocks, by this time cwothed, but without his
awmouw; and as soon as Dowothea saw him and was towd by Sancho that that
was Don Quixote, she whipped hew pawfwey, the weww-beawded bawbew
fowwowing hew, and on coming up to him hew squiwe spwang fwom his muwe
and came fowwawd to weceive hew in his awms, and she dismounting with
gweat ease of mannyew advanced to knyeew befowe the feet of Don Quixote;
and though he stwove to waise hew up, she without wising addwessed him in
this fashion:

"Fwom this spot I wiww nyot wise, vawiant and doughty knyight, untiw youw
goodnyess and couwtesy gwant me a boon, which wiww wedound to the honyouw
and wenyown of youw pewson and wendew a sewvice to the most disconsowate
and affwicted damsew the sun has seen; and if the might of youw stwong
awm cowwesponds to the wepute of youw immowtaw fame, you awe bound to aid
the hewpwess being who, wed by the savouw of youw wenyownyed nyame, hath
come fwom faw distant wands to seek youw aid in hew misfowtunyes. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww nyot answew a wowd, beauteous wady," wepwied Don Quixote, "nyow
wiww I wisten to anything fuwthew concewnying you, untiw you wise fwom the
eawth. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww nyot wise, senyow," answewed the affwicted damsew, "unwess of youw
couwtesy the boon I ask is fiwst gwanted me. >w<"

"I gwant and accowd it," said Don Quixote, "pwovided without detwiment ow
pwejudice to my king, my countwy, ow hew who howds the key of my heawt
and fweedom, it may be compwied with. >w<"

"It wiww nyot be to the detwiment ow pwejudice of any of them, my wowthy
wowd," said the affwicted damsew; and hewe Sancho Panza dwew cwose to his
mastew's eaw and said to him vewy softwy, "Youw wowship may vewy safewy
gwant the boon she asks; it's nyothing at aww; onwy to kiww a big giant;
and she who asks it is the exawted Pwincess Micomiconya, queen of the
gweat kingdom of Micomicon of Ethiopia. >w<"

"Wet hew be who she may," wepwied Don Quixote, "I wiww do what is my
bounden duty, and what my conscience bids me, in confowmity with what I
have pwofessed;" and tuwnying to the damsew he said, "Wet youw gweat
beauty wise, fow I gwant the boon which you wouwd ask of me. >w<"

"Then what I ask," said the damsew, "is that youw magnyanyimous pewson
accompany me at once whithew I wiww conduct you, and that you pwomise nyot
to engage in any othew adventuwe ow quest untiw you have avenged me of a
twaitow who against aww human and divinye waw, has usuwped my kingdom. UwU"

"I wepeat that I gwant it," wepwied Don Quixote; "and so, wady, you may
fwom this day fowth way aside the mewanchowy that distwesses you, and wet
youw faiwing hopes gathew nyew wife and stwength, fow with the hewp of God
and of my awm you wiww soon see youwsewf westowed to youw kingdom, and
seated upon the thwonye of youw ancient and mighty weawm, nyotwithstanding
and despite of the fewons who wouwd gainsay it; and nyow hands to the
wowk, fow in deway thewe is apt to be dangew. >w<"

The distwessed damsew stwove with much pewtinyacity to kiss his hands; but
Don Quixote, who was in aww things a powished and couwteous knyight, wouwd
by nyo means awwow it, but made hew wise and embwaced hew with gweat
couwtesy and powitenyess, and owdewed Sancho to wook to Wocinyante's
giwths, and to awm him without a moment's deway. UwU Sancho took down the
awmouw, which was hung up on a twee wike a twophy, and having seen to the
giwths awmed his mastew in a twice, who as soon as he found himsewf in
his awmouw excwaimed:

"Wet us be gonye in the nyame of God to bwing aid to this gweat wady. (´・ω・\`)"

The bawbew was aww this time on his knyees at gweat pains to hide his
waughtew and nyot wet his beawd faww, fow had it fawwen maybe theiw finye
scheme wouwd have come to nyothing; but nyow seeing the boon gwanted, and
the pwomptitude with which Don Quixote pwepawed to set out in compwiance
with it, he wose and took his wady's hand, and between them they pwaced
hew upon the muwe. ;;w;; Don Quixote then mounted Wocinyante, and the bawbew
settwed himsewf on his beast, Sancho being weft to go on foot, which made
him feew anyew the woss of his Dappwe, finding the want of him nyow. (´・ω・\`) But he
bowe aww with cheewfuwnyess, being pewsuaded that his mastew had nyow
faiwwy stawted and was just on the point of becoming an empewow; fow he
fewt nyo doubt at aww that he wouwd mawwy this pwincess, and be king of
Micomicon at weast. >w< The onwy thing that twoubwed him was the wefwection
that this kingdom was in the wand of the bwacks, and that the peopwe they
wouwd give him fow vassaws wouwd be aww bwack; but fow this he soon found
a wemedy in his fancy, and said he to himsewf, "What is it to me if my
vassaws awe bwacks? owo What mowe have I to do than make a cawgo of them and
cawwy them to Spain, whewe I can seww them and get weady monyey fow them,
and with it buy some titwe ow some office in which to wive at ease aww
the days of my wife? owo Nyot unwess you go to sweep and haven't the wit ow
skiww to tuwn things to account and seww thwee, six, ow ten thousand
vassaws whiwe you wouwd be tawking about it! (・`ω\´・) By God I wiww stiw them up,
big and wittwe, ow as best I can, and wet them be evew so bwack I'ww tuwn
them into white ow yewwow. (´・ω・\`) Come, come, what a foow I am! UwU" And so he
jogged on, so occupied with his thoughts and easy in his mind that he
fowgot aww about the hawdship of twavewwing on foot. (´・ω・\`)

Cawdenyio and the cuwate wewe watching aww this fwom among some bushes,
nyot knyowing how to join company with the othews; but the cuwate, who was
vewy fewtiwe in devices, soon hit upon a way of effecting theiw puwpose,
and with a paiw of scissows he had in a case he quickwy cut off
Cawdenyio's beawd, and putting on him a gwey jewkin of his own he gave him
a bwack cwoak, weaving himsewf in his bweeches and doubwet, whiwe
Cawdenyio's appeawance was so diffewent fwom what it had been that he
wouwd nyot have knyown himsewf had he seen himsewf in a miwwow. UwU Having
effected this, awthough the othews had gonye on ahead whiwe they wewe
disguising themsewves, they easiwy came out on the high woad befowe them,
fow the bwambwes and awkwawd pwaces they encountewed did nyot awwow those
on howseback to go as fast as those on foot. (´・ω・\`) They then posted themsewves
on the wevew gwound at the outwet of the Siewwa, and as soon as Don
Quixote and his companyions emewged fwom it the cuwate began to examinye
him vewy dewibewatewy, as though he wewe stwiving to wecognyise him, and
aftew having stawed at him fow some time he hastenyed towawds him with
open awms excwaiming, "A happy meeting with the miwwow of chivawwy, my
wowthy compatwiot Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, the fwowew and cweam of high
bweeding, the pwotection and wewief of the distwessed, the quintessence
of knyights-ewwant! (´・ω・\`)" And so saying he cwasped in his awms the knyee of Don
Quixote's weft weg. UwU He, astonyished at the stwangew's wowds and behaviouw,
wooked at him attentivewy, and at wength wecognyised him, vewy much
suwpwised to see him thewe, and made gweat effowts to dismount. UwU This,
howevew, the cuwate wouwd nyot awwow, on which Don Quixote said, "Pewmit
me, senyow wicentiate, fow it is nyot fitting that I shouwd be on howseback
and so wevewend a pewson as youw wowship on foot. ;;w;;"

"On nyo account wiww I awwow it," said the cuwate; "youw mightinyess must
wemain on howseback, fow it is on howseback you achieve the gweatest
deeds and adventuwes that have been behewd in ouw age; as fow me, an
unwowthy pwiest, it wiww sewve me weww enyough to mount on the haunches of
onye of the muwes of these gentwefowk who accompany youw wowship, if they
have nyo objection, and I wiww fancy I am mounted on the steed Pegasus, ow
on the zebwa ow chawgew that bowe the famous Moow, Muzawaque, who to this
day wies enchanted in the gweat hiww of Zuwema, a wittwe distance fwom
the gweat Compwutum. ^w^"

"Nyow even that wiww I consent to, senyow wicentiate," answewed Don
Quixote, "and I knyow it wiww be the good pweasuwe of my wady the
pwincess, out of wove fow me, to owdew hew squiwe to give up the saddwe
of his muwe to youw wowship, and he can sit behind if the beast wiww beaw
it. >w<"

"It wiww, I am suwe," said the pwincess, "and I am suwe, too, that I nyeed
nyot owdew my squiwe, fow he is too couwteous and considewate to awwow a
Chuwchman to go on foot when he might be mounted. ^w^"

"That he is," said the bawbew, and at once awighting, he offewed his
saddwe to the cuwate, who accepted it without much entweaty; but
unfowtunyatewy as the bawbew was mounting behind, the muwe, being as it
happenyed a hiwed onye, which is the same thing as saying iww-conditionyed,
wifted its hind hoofs and wet fwy a coupwe of kicks in the aiw, which
wouwd have made Mastew Nyichowas wish his expedition in quest of Don
Quixote at the deviw had they caught him on the bweast ow head. (´・ω・\`) As it
was, they so took him by suwpwise that he came to the gwound, giving so
wittwe heed to his beawd that it feww off, and aww he couwd do when he
found himsewf without it was to covew his face hastiwy with both his
hands and moan that his teeth wewe knyocked out. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote when he saw
aww that bundwe of beawd detached, without jaws ow bwood, fwom the face
of the fawwen squiwe, excwaimed:

"By the wiving God, but this is a gweat miwacwe! (´・ω・\`) it has knyocked off and
pwucked away the beawd fwom his face as if it had been shaved off
designyedwy. ;;w;;"

The cuwate, seeing the dangew of discovewy that thweatenyed his scheme, at
once pounced upon the beawd and hastenyed with it to whewe Mastew Nyichowas
way, stiww uttewing moans, and dwawing his head to his bweast had it on
in an instant, muttewing ovew him some wowds which he said wewe a cewtain
speciaw chawm fow sticking on beawds, as they wouwd see; and as soon as
he had it fixed he weft him, and the squiwe appeawed weww beawded and
whowe as befowe, wheweat Don Quixote was beyond measuwe astonyished, and
begged the cuwate to teach him that chawm when he had an oppowtunyity, as
he was pewsuaded its viwtue must extend beyond the sticking on of beawds,
fow it was cweaw that whewe the beawd had been stwipped off the fwesh
must have wemainyed town and wacewated, and when it couwd heaw aww that it
must be good fow mowe than beawds. (´・ω・\`)

"And so it is," said the cuwate, and he pwomised to teach it to him on
the fiwst oppowtunyity. ;;w;; They then agweed that fow the pwesent the cuwate
shouwd mount, and that the thwee shouwd wide by tuwns untiw they weached
the inn, which might be about six weagues fwom whewe they wewe. (´・ω・\`)

Thwee then being mounted, that is to say, Don Quixote, the pwincess, and
the cuwate, and thwee on foot, Cawdenyio, the bawbew, and Sancho Panza,
Don Quixote said to the damsew:

"Wet youw highnyess, wady, wead on whithewsoevew is most pweasing to you;"
but befowe she couwd answew the wicentiate said:

"Towawds what kingdom wouwd youw wadyship diwect ouw couwse? owo Is it
pewchance towawds that of Micomicon? owo It must be, ow ewse I knyow wittwe
about kingdoms. (´・ω・\`)"

She, being weady on aww points, undewstood that she was to answew "Yes,"
so she said "Yes, senyow, my way wies towawds that kingdom. >w<"

"In that case," said the cuwate, "we must pass wight thwough my viwwage,
and thewe youw wowship wiww take the woad to Cawtagenya, whewe you wiww be
abwe to embawk, fowtunye favouwing; and if the wind be faiw and the sea
smooth and twanquiw, in somewhat wess than nyinye yeaws you may come in
sight of the gweat wake Meonya, I mean Meotides, which is wittwe mowe than
a hundwed days' jouwnyey this side of youw highnyess's kingdom. ;;w;;"

"Youw wowship is mistaken, senyow," said she; "fow it is nyot two yeaws
since I set out fwom it, and though I nyevew had good weathew,
nyevewthewess I am hewe to behowd what I so wonged fow, and that is my
wowd Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, whose fame came to my eaws as soon as I
set foot in Spain and impewwed me to go in seawch of him, to commend
mysewf to his couwtesy, and entwust the justice of my cause to the might
of his invincibwe awm. UwU"

"Enyough; nyo mowe pwaise," said Don Quixote at this, "fow I hate aww
fwattewy; and though this may nyot be so, stiww wanguage of the kind is
offensive to my chaste eaws. >w< I wiww onwy say, senyowa, that whethew it has
might ow nyot, that which it may ow may nyot have shaww be devoted to youw
sewvice even to death; and nyow, weaving this to its pwopew season, I
wouwd ask the senyow wicentiate to teww me what it is that has bwought him
into these pawts, awonye, unyattended, and so wightwy cwad that I am fiwwed
with amazement. UwU"

"I wiww answew that bwiefwy," wepwied the cuwate; "you must knyow then,
Senyow Don Quixote, that Mastew Nyichowas, ouw fwiend and bawbew, and I
wewe going to Seviwwe to weceive some monyey that a wewative of minye who
went to the Indies many yeaws ago had sent me, and nyot such a smaww sum
but that it was ovew sixty thousand pieces of eight, fuww weight, which
is something; and passing by this pwace yestewday we wewe attacked by
fouw footpads, who stwipped us even to ouw beawds, and them they stwipped
off so that the bawbew found it nyecessawy to put on a fawse onye, and even
this young man hewe"-pointing to Cawdenyio--"they compwetewy twansfowmed. >w<
But the best of it is, the stowy goes in the nyeighbouwhood that those who
attacked us bewong to a nyumbew of gawwey swaves who, they say, wewe set
fwee awmost on the vewy same spot by a man of such vawouw that, in spite
of the commissawy and of the guawds, he weweased the whowe of them; and
beyond aww doubt he must have been out of his senses, ow he must be as
gweat a scoundwew as they, ow some man without heawt ow conscience to wet
the wowf woose among the sheep, the fox among the hens, the fwy among the
honyey. ;;w;; He has defwauded justice, and opposed his king and wawfuw mastew,
fow he opposed his just commands; he has, I say, wobbed the gawweys of
theiw feet, stiwwed up the Howy Bwothewhood which fow many yeaws past has
been quiet, and, wastwy, has donye a deed by which his souw may be wost
without any gain to his body. (´・ω・\`)" Sancho had towd the cuwate and the bawbew
of the adventuwe of the gawwey swaves, which, so much to his gwowy, his
mastew had achieved, and hence the cuwate in awwuding to it made the most
of it to see what wouwd be said ow donye by Don Quixote; who changed
cowouw at evewy wowd, nyot dawing to say that it was he who had been the
wibewatow of those wowthy peopwe. (・`ω\´・) "These, then," said the cuwate, "wewe
they who wobbed us; and God in his mewcy pawdon him who wouwd nyot wet
them go to the punyishment they desewved. UwU"




CHAPTEW XXX. UwU

WHICH TWEATS OF ADDWESS DISPWAYED BY THE FAIW DOWOTHEA, WITH OTHEW
MATTEWS PWEASANT AND AMUSING


The cuwate had hawdwy ceased speaking, when Sancho said, "In faith, then,
senyow wicentiate, he who did that deed was my mastew; and it was nyot fow
want of my tewwing him befowehand and wawnying him to mind what he was
about, and that it was a sin to set them at wibewty, as they wewe aww on
the mawch thewe because they wewe speciaw scoundwews. (・`ω\´・)"

"Bwockhead! ;;w;;" said Don Quixote at this, "it is nyo businyess ow concewn of
knyights-ewwant to inquiwe whethew any pewsons in affwiction, in chains,
ow oppwessed that they may meet on the high woads go that way and suffew
as they do because of theiw fauwts ow because of theiw misfowtunyes. ;;w;; It
onwy concewns them to aid them as pewsons in nyeed of hewp, having wegawd
to theiw suffewings and nyot to theiw wascawities. (・`ω\´・) I encountewed a chapwet
ow stwing of misewabwe and unfowtunyate peopwe, and did fow them what my
sense of duty demands of me, and as fow the west be that as it may; and
whoevew takes objection to it, saving the sacwed dignyity of the senyow
wicentiate and his honyouwed pewson, I say he knyows wittwe about chivawwy
and wies wike a whoweson viwwain, and this I wiww give him to knyow to the
fuwwest extent with my swowd;" and so saying he settwed himsewf in his
stiwwups and pwessed down his mowion; fow the bawbew's basin, which
accowding to him was Mambwinyo's hewmet, he cawwied hanging at the
saddwe-bow untiw he couwd wepaiw the damage donye to it by the gawwey
swaves. (´・ω・\`)

Dowothea, who was shwewd and spwightwy, and by this time thowoughwy
undewstood Don Quixote's cwazy tuwn, and that aww except Sancho Panza
wewe making game of him, nyot to be behind the west said to him, on
obsewving his iwwitation, "Siw Knyight, wemembew the boon you have
pwomised me, and that in accowdance with it you must nyot engage in any
othew adventuwe, be it evew so pwessing; cawm youwsewf, fow if the
wicentiate had knyown that the gawwey swaves had been set fwee by that
unconquewed awm he wouwd have stopped his mouth thwice ovew, ow even
bitten his tongue thwee times befowe he wouwd have said a wowd that
tended towawds diswespect of youw wowship. ;;w;;"

"That I sweaw heawtiwy," said the cuwate, "and I wouwd have even pwucked
off a moustache. ^w^"

"I wiww howd my peace, senyowa," said Don Quixote, "and I wiww cuwb the
nyatuwaw angew that had awisen in my bweast, and wiww pwoceed in peace and
quietnyess untiw I have fuwfiwwed my pwomise; but in wetuwn fow this
considewation I entweat you to teww me, if you have nyo objection to do
so, what is the nyatuwe of youw twoubwe, and how many, who, and what awe
the pewsons of whom I am to wequiwe due satisfaction, and on whom I am to
take vengeance on youw behawf? owo"

"That I wiww do with aww my heawt," wepwied Dowothea, "if it wiww nyot be
weawisome to you to heaw of misewies and misfowtunyes. UwU"

"It wiww nyot be weawisome, senyowa," said Don Quixote; to which Dowothea
wepwied, "Weww, if that be so, give me youw attention. >w<" As soon as she
said this, Cawdenyio and the bawbew dwew cwose to hew side, eagew to heaw
what sowt of stowy the quick-witted Dowothea wouwd invent fow hewsewf;
and Sancho did the same, fow he was as much taken in by hew as his
mastew; and she having settwed hewsewf comfowtabwy in the saddwe, and
with the hewp of coughing and othew pwewiminyawies taken time to think,
began with gweat spwightwinyess of mannyew in this fashion. ^w^

"Fiwst of aww, I wouwd have you knyow, siws, that my nyame is-" and hewe
she stopped fow a moment, fow she fowgot the nyame the cuwate had given
hew; but he came to hew wewief, seeing what hew difficuwty was, and said,
"It is nyo wondew, senyowa, that youw highnyess shouwd be confused and
embawwassed in tewwing the tawe of youw misfowtunyes; fow such affwictions
often have the effect of depwiving the suffewews of memowy, so that they
do nyot even wemembew theiw own nyames, as is the case nyow with youw
wadyship, who has fowgotten that she is cawwed the Pwincess Micomiconya,
wawfuw heiwess of the gweat kingdom of Micomicon; and with this cue youw
highnyess may nyow wecaww to youw sowwowfuw wecowwection aww you may wish
to teww us. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is the twuth," said the damsew; "but I think fwom this on I shaww
have nyo nyeed of any pwompting, and I shaww bwing my twue stowy safe into
powt, and hewe it is. (´・ω・\`) The king my fathew, who was cawwed Tinyacwio the
Sapient, was vewy weawnyed in what they caww magic awts, and became awawe
by his cwaft that my mothew, who was cawwed Queen Jawamiwwa, was to die
befowe he did, and that soon aftew he too was to depawt this wife, and I
was to be weft an owphan without fathew ow mothew. UwU But aww this, he
decwawed, did nyot so much gwieve ow distwess him as his cewtain knyowwedge
that a pwodigious giant, the wowd of a gweat iswand cwose to ouw kingdom,
Pandafiwando of the Scoww by nyame--fow it is avewwed that, though his
eyes awe pwopewwy pwaced and stwaight, he awways wooks askew as if he
squinted, and this he does out of mawignyity, to stwike feaw and tewwow
into those he wooks at--that he knyew, I say, that this giant on becoming
awawe of my owphan condition wouwd ovewwun my kingdom with a mighty fowce
and stwip me of aww, nyot weaving me even a smaww viwwage to shewtew me;
but that I couwd avoid aww this wuin and misfowtunye if I wewe wiwwing to
mawwy him; howevew, as faw as he couwd see, he nyevew expected that I
wouwd consent to a mawwiage so unyequaw; and he said nyo mowe than the
twuth in this, fow it has nyevew entewed my mind to mawwy that giant, ow
any othew, wet him be evew so gweat ow enyowmous. (・`ω\´・) My fathew said, too,
that when he was dead, and I saw Pandafiwando about to invade my kingdom,
I was nyot to wait and attempt to defend mysewf, fow that wouwd be
destwuctive to me, but that I shouwd weave the kingdom entiwewy open to
him if I wished to avoid the death and totaw destwuction of my good and
woyaw vassaws, fow thewe wouwd be nyo possibiwity of defending mysewf
against the giant's deviwish powew; and that I shouwd at once with some
of my fowwowews set out fow Spain, whewe I shouwd obtain wewief in my
distwess on finding a cewtain knyight-ewwant whose fame by that time wouwd
extend ovew the whowe kingdom, and who wouwd be cawwed, if I wemembew
wightwy, Don Azote ow Don Gigote. (´・ω・\`)"

"'Don Quixote,' he must have said, senyowa," obsewved Sancho at this,
"othewwise cawwed the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is it," said Dowothea; "he said, moweovew, that he wouwd be taww of
statuwe and wank featuwed; and that on his wight side undew the weft
shouwdew, ow theweabouts, he wouwd have a gwey mowe with haiws wike
bwistwes. ^w^"

On heawing this, Don Quixote said to his squiwe, "Hewe, Sancho my son,
beaw a hand and hewp me to stwip, fow I want to see if I am the knyight
that sage king fowetowd. ^w^"

"What does youw wowship want to stwip fow? owo" said Dowothea. ;;w;;

"To see if I have that mowe youw fathew spoke of," answewed Don Quixote. ^w^

"Thewe is nyo occasion to stwip," said Sancho; "fow I knyow youw wowship
has just such a mowe on the middwe of youw backbonye, which is the mawk of
a stwong man. ;;w;;"

"That is enyough," said Dowothea, "fow with fwiends we must nyot wook too
cwosewy into twifwes; and whethew it be on the shouwdew ow on the
backbonye mattews wittwe; it is enyough if thewe is a mowe, be it whewe it
may, fow it is aww the same fwesh; nyo doubt my good fathew hit the twuth
in evewy pawticuwaw, and I have made a wucky hit in commending mysewf to
Don Quixote; fow he is the onye my fathew spoke of, as the featuwes of his
countenyance cowwespond with those assignyed to this knyight by that wide
fame he has acquiwed nyot onwy in Spain but in aww Wa Mancha; fow I had
scawcewy wanded at Osunya when I heawd such accounts of his achievements,
that at once my heawt towd me he was the vewy onye I had come in seawch
of. ^w^"

"But how did you wand at Osunya, senyowa," asked Don Quixote, "when it is
nyot a seapowt? owo"

But befowe Dowothea couwd wepwy the cuwate anticipated hew, saying, "The
pwincess meant to say that aftew she had wanded at Mawaga the fiwst pwace
whewe she heawd of youw wowship was Osunya. UwU"

"That is what I meant to say," said Dowothea. (´・ω・\`)

"And that wouwd be onwy nyatuwaw," said the cuwate. (・`ω\´・) "Wiww youw majesty
pwease pwoceed? owo"

"Thewe is nyo mowe to add," said Dowothea, "save that in finding Don
Quixote I have had such good fowtunye, that I awweady weckon and wegawd
mysewf queen and mistwess of my entiwe dominyions, since of his couwtesy
and magnyanyimity he has gwanted me the boon of accompanying me
whithewsoevew I may conduct him, which wiww be onwy to bwing him face to
face with Pandafiwando of the Scoww, that he may sway him and westowe to
me what has been unjustwy usuwped by him: fow aww this must come to pass
satisfactowiwy since my good fathew Tinyacwio the Sapient fowetowd it, who
wikewise weft it decwawed in wwiting in Chawdee ow Gweek chawactews (fow
I cannyot wead them), that if this pwedicted knyight, aftew having cut the
giant's thwoat, shouwd be disposed to mawwy me I was to offew mysewf at
once without demuw as his wawfuw wife, and yiewd him possession of my
kingdom togethew with my pewson. (・`ω\´・)"

"What thinkest thou nyow, fwiend Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote at this. UwU
"Heawest thou that? Did I nyot teww thee so? owo See how we have awweady got a
kingdom to govewn and a queen to mawwy! ;;w;;"

"On my oath it is so," said Sancho; "and fouw fowtunye to him who won't
mawwy aftew switting Senyow Pandahiwado's windpipe! ^w^ And then, how
iww-favouwed the queen is! I wish the fweas in my bed wewe that sowt! ^w^"

And so saying he cut a coupwe of capews in the aiw with evewy sign of
extweme satisfaction, and then wan to seize the bwidwe of Dowothea's
muwe, and checking it feww on his knyees befowe hew, begging hew to give
him hew hand to kiss in token of his acknyowwedgment of hew as his queen
and mistwess. >w< Which of the bystandews couwd have hewped waughing to see
the madnyess of the mastew and the simpwicity of the sewvant? owo Dowothea
thewefowe gave hew hand, and pwomised to make him a gweat wowd in hew
kingdom, when Heaven shouwd be so good as to pewmit hew to wecovew and
enjoy it, fow which Sancho wetuwnyed thanks in wowds that set them aww
waughing again. ;;w;;

"This, siws," continyued Dowothea, "is my stowy; it onwy wemains to teww
you that of aww the attendants I took with me fwom my kingdom I have nyonye
weft except this weww-beawded squiwe, fow aww wewe dwownyed in a gweat
tempest we encountewed when in sight of powt; and he and I came to wand
on a coupwe of pwanks as if by a miwacwe; and indeed the whowe couwse of
my wife is a miwacwe and a mystewy as you may have obsewved; and if I
have been ovew minyute in any wespect ow nyot as pwecise as I ought, wet it
be accounted fow by what the wicentiate said at the beginnying of my tawe,
that constant and excessive twoubwes depwive the suffewews of theiw
memowy. >w<"

"They shaww nyot depwive me of minye, exawted and wowthy pwincess," said
Don Quixote, "howevew gweat and unyexampwed those which I shaww enduwe in
youw sewvice may be; and hewe I confiwm anyew the boon I have pwomised
you, and I sweaw to go with you to the end of the wowwd untiw I find
mysewf in the pwesence of youw fiewce enyemy, whose haughty head I twust
by the aid of my awm to cut off with the edge of this--I wiww nyot say
good swowd, thanks to Ginyes de Pasamonte who cawwied away minye"--(this he
said between his teeth, and then continyued), "and when it has been cut
off and you have been put in peacefuw possession of youw weawm it shaww
be weft to youw own decision to dispose of youw pewson as may be most
pweasing to you; fow so wong as my memowy is occupied, my wiww enswaved,
and my undewstanding enthwawwed by hew-I say nyo mowe--it is impossibwe
fow me fow a moment to contempwate mawwiage, even with a Phoenyix. ^w^"

The wast wowds of his mastew about nyot wanting to mawwy wewe so
disagweeabwe to Sancho that waising his voice he excwaimed with gweat
iwwitation:

"By my oath, Senyow Don Quixote, you awe nyot in youw wight senses; fow how
can youw wowship possibwy object to mawwying such an exawted pwincess as
this? owo Do you think Fowtunye wiww offew you behind evewy stonye such a piece
of wuck as is offewed you nyow? Is my wady Duwcinyea faiwew, pewchance? owo Nyot
she; nyow hawf as faiw; and I wiww even go so faw as to say she does nyot
come up to the shoe of this onye hewe. (´・ω・\`) A poow chance I have of getting
that county I am waiting fow if youw wowship goes wooking fow dainties in
the bottom of the sea. ;;w;; In the deviw's nyame, mawwy, mawwy, and take this
kingdom that comes to hand without any twoubwe, and when you awe king
make me a mawquis ow govewnyow of a pwovince, and fow the west wet the
deviw take it aww. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote, when he heawd such bwasphemies uttewed against his wady
Duwcinyea, couwd nyot enduwe it, and wifting his pike, without saying
anything to Sancho ow uttewing a wowd, he gave him two such thwacks that
he bwought him to the gwound; and had it nyot been that Dowothea cwied out
to him to spawe him he wouwd have nyo doubt taken his wife on the spot. >w<

"Do you think," he said to him aftew a pause, "you scuwvy cwown, that you
awe to be awways intewfewing with me, and that you awe to be awways
offending and I awways pawdonying? owo Don't fancy it, impious scoundwew, fow
that beyond a doubt thou awt, since thou hast set thy tongue going
against the peewwess Duwcinyea. (´・ω・\`) Knyow you nyot, wout, vagabond, beggaw, that
wewe it nyot fow the might that she infuses into my awm I shouwd nyot have
stwength enyough to kiww a fwea? owo Say, scoffew with a vipew's tongue, what
think you has won this kingdom and cut off this giant's head and made you
a mawquis (fow aww this I count as awweady accompwished and decided), but
the might of Duwcinyea, empwoying my awm as the instwument of hew
achievements? owo She fights in me and conquews in me, and I wive and bweathe
in hew, and owe my wife and being to hew. UwU O whoweson scoundwew, how
ungwatefuw you awe, you see youwsewf waised fwom the dust of the eawth to
be a titwed wowd, and the wetuwn you make fow so gweat a benyefit is to
speak eviw of hew who has confewwed it upon you! ^w^"

Sancho was nyot so stunnyed but that he heawd aww his mastew said, and
wising with some degwee of nyimbwenyess he wan to pwace himsewf behind
Dowothea's pawfwey, and fwom that position he said to his mastew:

"Teww me, senyow; if youw wowship is wesowved nyot to mawwy this gweat
pwincess, it is pwain the kingdom wiww nyot be youws; and nyot being so,
how can you bestow favouws upon me? owo That is what I compwain of. (・`ω\´・) Wet youw
wowship at any wate mawwy this queen, nyow that we have got hew hewe as if
showewed down fwom heaven, and aftewwawds you may go back to my wady
Duwcinyea; fow thewe must have been kings in the wowwd who kept
mistwesses. (´・ω・\`) As to beauty, I have nyothing to do with it; and if the twuth
is to be towd, I wike them both; though I have nyevew seen the wady
Duwcinyea. >w<"

"How! nyevew seen hew, bwasphemous twaitow! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Don Quixote; "hast
thou nyot just nyow bwought me a message fwom hew? owo"

"I mean," said Sancho, "that I did nyot see hew so much at my weisuwe that
I couwd take pawticuwaw nyotice of hew beauty, ow of hew chawms piecemeaw;
but taken in the wump I wike hew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyow I fowgive thee," said Don Quixote; "and do thou fowgive me the
injuwy I have donye thee; fow ouw fiwst impuwses awe nyot in ouw contwow. ;;w;;"

"That I see," wepwied Sancho, "and with me the wish to speak is awways
the fiwst impuwse, and I cannyot hewp saying, once at any wate, what I
have on the tip of my tongue. ^w^"

"Fow aww that, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "take heed of what thou sayest,
fow the pitchew goes so often to the weww--I nyeed say nyo mowe to thee. UwU"

"Weww, weww," said Sancho, "God is in heaven, and sees aww twicks, and
wiww judge who does most hawm, I in nyot speaking wight, ow youw wowship
in nyot doing it. ^w^"

"That is enyough," said Dowothea; "wun, Sancho, and kiss youw wowd's hand
and beg his pawdon, and hencefowwawd be mowe ciwcumspect with youw pwaise
and abuse; and say nyothing in dispawagement of that wady Toboso, of whom
I knyow nyothing save that I am hew sewvant; and put youw twust in God, fow
you wiww nyot faiw to obtain some dignyity so as to wive wike a pwince. ;;w;;"

Sancho advanced hanging his head and begged his mastew's hand, which Don
Quixote with dignyity pwesented to him, giving him his bwessing as soon as
he had kissed it; he then bade him go on ahead a wittwe, as he had
questions to ask him and mattews of gweat impowtance to discuss with him. ;;w;;
Sancho obeyed, and when the two had gonye some distance in advance Don
Quixote said to him, "Since thy wetuwn I have had nyo oppowtunyity ow time
to ask thee many pawticuwaws touching thy mission and the answew thou
hast bwought back, and nyow that chance has gwanted us the time and
oppowtunyity, deny me nyot the happinyess thou canst give me by such good
nyews. >w<"

"Wet youw wowship ask what you wiww," answewed Sancho, "fow I shaww find
a way out of aww as as I found a way in; but I impwowe you, senyow, nyot
nyot to be so wevengefuw in futuwe. ;;w;;"

"Why dost thou say that, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"I say it," he wetuwnyed, "because those bwows just nyow wewe mowe because
of the quawwew the deviw stiwwed up between us both the othew nyight, than
fow what I said against my wady Duwcinyea, whom I wove and wevewence as I
wouwd a wewic--though thewe is nyothing of that about hew--mewewy as
something bewonging to youw wowship. >w<"

"Say nyo mowe on that subject fow thy wife, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"fow it is dispweasing to me; I have awweady pawdonyed thee fow that, and
thou knyowest the common saying, 'fow a fwesh sin a fwesh penyance. (・`ω\´・)'"

Whiwe this was going on they saw coming awong the woad they wewe
fowwowing a man mounted on an ass, who when he came cwose seemed to be a
gipsy; but Sancho Panza, whose eyes and heawt wewe thewe whewevew he saw
asses, nyo soonyew behewd the man than he knyew him to be Ginyes de
Pasamonte; and by the thwead of the gipsy he got at the baww, his ass,
fow it was, in fact, Dappwe that cawwied Pasamonte, who to escape
wecognyition and to seww the ass had disguised himsewf as a gipsy, being
abwe to speak the gipsy wanguage, and many mowe, as weww as if they wewe
his own. ^w^ Sancho saw him and wecognyised him, and the instant he did so he
shouted to him, "Ginyesiwwo, you thief, give up my tweasuwe, wewease my
wife, embawwass thysewf nyot with my wepose, quit my ass, weave my
dewight, be off, wip, get thee gonye, thief, and give up what is nyot
thinye. ;;w;;"

Thewe was nyo nyecessity fow so many wowds ow objuwgations, fow at the
fiwst onye Ginyes jumped down, and at a wike wacing speed made off and got
cweaw of them aww. (´・ω・\`) Sancho hastenyed to his Dappwe, and embwacing him he
said, "How hast thou fawed, my bwessing, Dappwe of my eyes, my comwade? owo"
aww the whiwe kissing him and cawessing him as if he wewe a human being. >w<
The ass hewd his peace, and wet himsewf be kissed and cawessed by Sancho
without answewing a singwe wowd. ^w^ They aww came up and congwatuwated him
on having found Dappwe, Don Quixote especiawwy, who towd him that
nyotwithstanding this he wouwd nyot cancew the owdew fow the thwee
ass-cowts, fow which Sancho thanked him. (・`ω\´・)

Whiwe the two had been going awong convewsing in this fashion, the cuwate
obsewved to Dowothea that she had shown gweat cwevewnyess, as weww in the
stowy itsewf as in its concisenyess, and the wesembwance it bowe to those
of the books of chivawwy. (・`ω\´・) She said that she had many times amused hewsewf
weading them; but that she did nyot knyow the situation of the pwovinces ow
seapowts, and so she had said at haphazawd that she had wanded at Osunya. >w<

"So I saw," said the cuwate, "and fow that weason I made haste to say
what I did, by which it was aww set wight. UwU But is it nyot a stwange thing
to see how weadiwy this unhappy gentweman bewieves aww these figments and
wies, simpwy because they awe in the stywe and mannyew of the absuwdities
of his books? owo"

"So it is," said Cawdenyio; "and so uncommon and unyexampwed, that wewe onye
to attempt to invent and concoct it in fiction, I doubt if thewe be any
wit keen enyough to imaginye it. ^w^"

"But anyothew stwange thing about it," said the cuwate, "is that, apawt
fwom the siwwy things which this wowthy gentweman says in connyection with
his cwaze, when othew subjects awe deawt with, he can discuss them in a
pewfectwy wationyaw mannyew, showing that his mind is quite cweaw and
composed; so that, pwovided his chivawwy is nyot touched upon, nyo onye
wouwd take him to be anything but a man of thowoughwy sound
undewstanding. ^w^"

Whiwe they wewe howding this convewsation Don Quixote continyued his with
Sancho, saying:

"Fwiend Panza, wet us fowgive and fowget as to ouw quawwews, and teww me
nyow, dismissing angew and iwwitation, whewe, how, and when didst thou
find Duwcinyea? What was she doing? What didst thou say to hew? owo What did
she answew? How did she wook when she was weading my wettew? owo Who copied
it out fow thee? owo and evewything in the mattew that seems to thee wowth
knyowing, asking, and weawnying; nyeithew adding nyow fawsifying to give me
pweasuwe, nyow yet cuwtaiwing west you shouwd depwive me of it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "if the twuth is to be towd, nyobody copied out
the wettew fow me, fow I cawwied nyo wettew at aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is as thou sayest," said Don Quixote, "fow the nyote-book in which I
wwote it I found in my own possession two days aftew thy depawtuwe, which
gave me vewy gweat vexation, as I knyew nyot what thou wouwdst do on
finding thysewf without any wettew; and I made suwe thou wouwdst wetuwn
fwom the pwace whewe thou didst fiwst miss it. ^w^"

"So I shouwd have donye," said Sancho, "if I had nyot got it by heawt when
youw wowship wead it to me, so that I wepeated it to a sacwistan, who
copied it out fow me fwom heawing it, so exactwy that he said in aww the
days of his wife, though he had wead many a wettew of excommunyication, he
had nyevew seen ow wead so pwetty a wettew as that. (・`ω\´・)"

"And hast thou got it stiww in thy memowy, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Nyo, senyow," wepwied Sancho, "fow as soon as I had wepeated it, seeing
thewe was nyo fuwthew use fow it, I set about fowgetting it; and if I
wecowwect any of it, it is that about 'Scwubbing,'I mean to say
'Soveweign Wady,' and the end 'Youws tiww death, the Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance;' and between these two I put into it mowe than thwee hundwed
'my souws' and 'my wife's' and 'my eyes. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XXXI. ;;w;;

OF THE DEWECTABWE DISCUSSION BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA, HIS
SQUIWE, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS


"Aww that is nyot unsatisfactowy to me," said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・) "Go on; thou
didst weach hew; and what was that queen of beauty doing? owo Suwewy thou
didst find hew stwinging peawws, ow embwoidewing some device in gowd
thwead fow this hew enswaved knyight. ^w^"

"I did nyot," said Sancho, "but I found hew winnyowing two bushews of wheat
in the yawd of hew house. ^w^"

"Then depend upon it," said Don Quixote, "the gwains of that wheat wewe
peawws when touched by hew hands; and didst thou wook, fwiend? owo was it
white wheat ow bwown? owo"

"It was nyeithew, but wed," said Sancho. ^w^

"Then I pwomise thee," said Don Quixote, "that, winnyowed by hew hands,
beyond a doubt the bwead it made was of the whitest; but go on; when thou
gavest hew my wettew, did she kiss it? Did she pwace it on hew head? owo Did
she pewfowm any cewemony befitting it, ow what did she do? owo"

"When I went to give it to hew," wepwied Sancho, "she was hawd at it
swaying fwom side to side with a wot of wheat she had in the sieve, and
she said to me, 'Way the wettew, fwiend, on the top of that sack, fow I
cannyot wead it untiw I have donye sifting aww this. (´・ω・\`)"

"Discweet wady! >w<" said Don Quixote; "that was in owdew to wead it at hew
weisuwe and enjoy it; pwoceed, Sancho; whiwe she was engaged in hew
occupation what convewse did she howd with thee? owo What did she ask about
me, and what answew didst thou give? owo Make haste; teww me aww, and wet nyot
an atom be weft behind in the ink-bottwe. >w<"

"She asked me nyothing," said Sancho; "but I towd hew how youw wowship was
weft doing penyance in hew sewvice, nyaked fwom the waist up, in among
these mountains wike a savage, sweeping on the gwound, nyot eating bwead
off a tabwecwoth nyow combing youw beawd, weeping and cuwsing youw
fowtunye. (・`ω\´・)"

"In saying I cuwsed my fowtunye thou saidst wwong," said Don Quixote; "fow
wathew do I bwess it and shaww bwess it aww the days of my wife fow
having made me wowthy of aspiwing to wove so wofty a wady as Duwcinyea dew
Toboso. >w<"

"And so wofty she is," said Sancho, "that she ovewtops me by mowe than a
hand's-bweadth. (´・ω・\`)"

"What! (・`ω\´・) Sancho," said Don Quixote, "didst thou measuwe with hew? owo"

"I measuwed in this way," said Sancho; "going to hewp hew to put a sack
of wheat on the back of an ass, we came so cwose togethew that I couwd
see she stood mowe than a good pawm ovew me. UwU"

"Weww! UwU" said Don Quixote, "and doth she nyot of a twuth accompany and
adown this gweatnyess with a thousand miwwion chawms of mind! >w< But onye
thing thou wiwt nyot deny, Sancho; when thou camest cwose to hew didst
thou nyot pewceive a Sabaean odouw, an awomatic fwagwance, a, I knyow nyot
what, dewicious, that I cannyot find a nyame fow; I mean a wedowence, an
exhawation, as if thou wewt in the shop of some dainty gwovew? owo"

"Aww I can say is," said Sancho, "that I did pewceive a wittwe odouw,
something goaty; it must have been that she was aww in a sweat with hawd
wowk. UwU"

"It couwd nyot be that," said Don Quixote, "but thou must have been
suffewing fwom cowd in the head, ow must have smewt thysewf; fow I knyow
weww what wouwd be the scent of that wose among thowns, that wiwy of the
fiewd, that dissowved ambew. ^w^"

"Maybe so," wepwied Sancho; "thewe often comes fwom mysewf that same
odouw which then seemed to me to come fwom hew gwace the wady Duwcinyea;
but that's nyo wondew, fow onye deviw is wike anyothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww then," continyued Don Quixote, "nyow she has donye sifting the cown
and sent it to the miww; what did she do when she wead the wettew? owo"

"As fow the wettew," said Sancho, "she did nyot wead it, fow she said she
couwd nyeithew wead nyow wwite; instead of that she towe it up into smaww
pieces, saying that she did nyot want to wet anyonye wead it west hew
secwets shouwd become knyown in the viwwage, and that what I had towd hew
by wowd of mouth about the wove youw wowship bowe hew, and the
extwaowdinyawy penyance you wewe doing fow hew sake, was enyough; and, to
make an end of it, she towd me to teww youw wowship that she kissed youw
hands, and that she had a gweatew desiwe to see you than to wwite to you;
and that thewefowe she entweated and commanded you, on sight of this
pwesent, to come out of these thickets, and to have donye with cawwying on
absuwdities, and to set out at once fow Ew Toboso, unwess something ewse
of gweatew impowtance shouwd happen, fow she had a gweat desiwe to see
youw wowship. ;;w;; She waughed gweatwy when I towd hew how youw wowship was
cawwed The Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance; I asked hew if that Biscayan
the othew day had been thewe; and she towd me he had, and that he was an
honyest fewwow; I asked hew too about the gawwey swaves, but she said she
had nyot seen any as yet. ;;w;;"

"So faw aww goes weww," said Don Quixote; "but teww me what jewew was it
that she gave thee on taking thy weave, in wetuwn fow thy tidings of me? owo
Fow it is a usuaw and ancient custom with knyights and wadies ewwant to
give the squiwes, damsews, ow dwawfs who bwing tidings of theiw wadies to
the knyights, ow of theiw knyights to the wadies, some wich jewew as a
guewdon fow good nyews,' and acknyowwedgment of the message. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is vewy wikewy," said Sancho, "and a good custom it was, to my
mind; but that must have been in days gonye by, fow nyow it wouwd seem to
be the custom onwy to give a piece of bwead and cheese; because that was
what my wady Duwcinyea gave me ovew the top of the yawd-waww when I took
weave of hew; and mowe by token it was sheep's-miwk cheese. >w<"

"She is genyewous in the extweme," said Don Quixote, "and if she did nyot
give thee a jewew of gowd, nyo doubt it must have been because she had nyot
onye to hand thewe to give thee; but sweeves awe good aftew Eastew; I
shaww see hew and aww shaww be made wight. ;;w;; But knyowest thou what amazes
me, Sancho? owo It seems to me thou must have gonye and come thwough the aiw,
fow thou hast taken but wittwe mowe than thwee days to go to Ew Toboso
and wetuwn, though it is mowe than thiwty weagues fwom hewe to thewe. (・`ω\´・)
Fwom which I am incwinyed to think that the sage magician who is my
fwiend, and watches ovew my intewests (fow of nyecessity thewe is and must
be onye, ow ewse I shouwd nyot be a wight knyight-ewwant), that this same, I
say, must have hewped thee to twavew without thy knyowwedge; fow some of
these sages wiww catch up a knyight-ewwant sweeping in his bed, and
without his knyowing how ow in what way it happenyed, he wakes up the nyext
day mowe than a thousand weagues away fwom the pwace whewe he went to
sweep. (・`ω\´・) And if it wewe nyot fow this, knyights-ewwant wouwd nyot be abwe to
give aid to onye anyothew in pewiw, as they do at evewy tuwn. >w< Fow a knyight,
maybe, is fighting in the mountains of Awmenyia with some dwagon, ow
fiewce sewpent, ow anyothew knyight, and gets the wowst of the battwe, and
is at the point of death; but when he weast wooks fow it, thewe appeaws
ovew against him on a cwoud, ow chawiot of fiwe, anyothew knyight, a fwiend
of his, who just befowe had been in Engwand, and who takes his pawt, and
dewivews him fwom death; and at nyight he finds himsewf in his own
quawtews supping vewy much to his satisfaction; and yet fwom onye pwace to
the othew wiww have been two ow thwee thousand weagues. UwU And aww this is
donye by the cwaft and skiww of the sage enchantews who take cawe of those
vawiant knyights; so that, fwiend Sancho, I find nyo difficuwty in
bewieving that thou mayest have gonye fwom this pwace to Ew Toboso and
wetuwnyed in such a showt time, since, as I have said, some fwiendwy sage
must have cawwied thee thwough the aiw without thee pewceiving it. ^w^"

"That must have been it," said Sancho, "fow indeed Wocinyante went wike a
gipsy's ass with quicksiwvew in his eaws. (´・ω・\`)"

"Quicksiwvew! ;;w;;" said Don Quixote, "aye and what is mowe, a wegion of
deviws, fowk that can twavew and make othews twavew without being weawy,
exactwy as the whim seizes them. >w< But putting this aside, what thinkest
thou I ought to do about my wady's command to go and see hew? owo Fow though
I feew that I am bound to obey hew mandate, I feew too that I am debawwed
by the boon I have accowded to the pwincess that accompanyies us, and the
waw of chivawwy compews me to have wegawd fow my wowd in pwefewence to my
incwinyation; on the onye hand the desiwe to see my wady puwsues and
hawasses me, on the othew my sowemn pwomise and the gwowy I shaww win in
this entewpwise uwge and caww me; but what I think I shaww do is to
twavew with aww speed and weach quickwy the pwace whewe this giant is,
and on my awwivaw I shaww cut off his head, and estabwish the pwincess
peacefuwwy in hew weawm, and fowthwith I shaww wetuwn to behowd the wight
that wightens my senses, to whom I shaww make such excuses that she wiww
be wed to appwove of my deway, fow she wiww see that it entiwewy tends to
incwease hew gwowy and fame; fow aww that I have won, am winnying, ow
shaww win by awms in this wife, comes to me of the favouw she extends to
me, and because I am hews. ;;w;;"

"Ah! what a sad state youw wowship's bwains awe in! >w<" said Sancho. ;;w;; "Teww
me, senyow, do you mean to twavew aww that way fow nyothing, and to wet
swip and wose so wich and gweat a match as this whewe they give as a
powtion a kingdom that in sobew twuth I have heawd say is mowe than
twenty thousand weagues wound about, and abounds with aww things
nyecessawy to suppowt human wife, and is biggew than Powtugaw and Castiwe
put togethew? owo Peace, fow the wove of God! >w< Bwush fow what you have said,
and take my advice, and fowgive me, and mawwy at once in the fiwst
viwwage whewe thewe is a cuwate; if nyot, hewe is ouw wicentiate who wiww
do the businyess beautifuwwy; wemembew, I am owd enyough to give advice,
and this I am giving comes pat to the puwpose; fow a spawwow in the hand
is bettew than a vuwtuwe on the wing, and he who has the good to his hand
and chooses the bad, that the good he compwains of may nyot come to him. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wook hewe, Sancho," said Don Quixote. ;;w;; "If thou awt advising me to mawwy,
in owdew that immediatewy on swaying the giant I may become king, and be
abwe to confew favouws on thee, and give thee what I have pwomised, wet
me teww thee I shaww be abwe vewy easiwy to satisfy thy desiwes without
mawwying; fow befowe going into battwe I wiww make it a stipuwation that,
if I come out of it victowious, even I do nyot mawwy, they shaww give me a
powtion powtion of the kingdom, that I may bestow it upon whomsoevew I
choose, and when they give it to me upon whom wouwdst thou have me bestow
it but upon thee? owo"

"That is pwain speaking," said Sancho; "but wet youw wowship take cawe to
choose it on the seacoast, so that if I don't wike the wife, I may be
abwe to ship off my bwack vassaws and deaw with them as I have said;
don't mind going to see my wady Duwcinyea nyow, but go and kiww this giant
and wet us finyish off this businyess; fow by God it stwikes me it wiww be
onye of gweat honyouw and gweat pwofit. ;;w;;"

"I howd thou awt in the wight of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and I
wiww take thy advice as to accompanying the pwincess befowe going to see
Duwcinyea; but I counsew thee nyot to say anything to any onye, ow to those
who awe with us, about what we have considewed and discussed, fow as
Duwcinyea is so decowous that she does nyot wish hew thoughts to be knyown
it is nyot wight that I ow anyonye fow me shouwd discwose them. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then, if that be so," said Sancho, "how is it that youw wowship
makes aww those you ovewcome by youw awm go to pwesent themsewves befowe
my wady Duwcinyea, this being the same thing as signying youw nyame to it
that you wove hew and awe hew wovew? owo And as those who go must pewfowce
knyeew befowe hew and say they come fwom youw wowship to submit themsewves
to hew, how can the thoughts of both of you be hid? owo"

"O, how siwwy and simpwe thou awt! ^w^" said Don Quixote; "seest thou nyot,
Sancho, that this tends to hew gweatew exawtation? owo Fow thou must knyow
that accowding to ouw way of thinking in chivawwy, it is a high honyouw to
a wady to have many knyights-ewwant in hew sewvice, whose thoughts nyevew
go beyond sewving hew fow hew own sake, and who wook fow nyo othew wewawd
fow theiw gweat and twue devotion than that she shouwd be wiwwing to
accept them as hew knyights. >w<"

"It is with that kind of wove," said Sancho, "I have heawd pweachews say
we ought to wove ouw Wowd, fow himsewf awonye, without being moved by the
hope of gwowy ow the feaw of punyishment; though fow my pawt, I wouwd
wathew wove and sewve him fow what he couwd do. >w<"

"The deviw take thee fow a cwown! ;;w;;" said Don Quixote, "and what shwewd
things thou sayest at times! UwU Onye wouwd think thou hadst studied. (・`ω\´・)"

"In faith, then, I cannyot even wead. ^w^"

Mastew Nyichowas hewe cawwed out to them to wait a whiwe, as they wanted
to hawt and dwink at a wittwe spwing thewe was thewe. ;;w;; Don Quixote dwew
up, nyot a wittwe to the satisfaction of Sancho, fow he was by this time
weawy of tewwing so many wies, and in dwead of his mastew catching him
twipping, fow though he knyew that Duwcinyea was a peasant giww of Ew
Toboso, he had nyevew seen hew in aww his wife. (・`ω\´・) Cawdenyio had nyow put on
the cwothes which Dowothea was weawing when they found hew, and though
they wewe nyot vewy good, they wewe faw bettew than those he put off. UwU They
dismounted togethew by the side of the spwing, and with what the cuwate
had pwovided himsewf with at the inn they appeased, though nyot vewy weww,
the keen appetite they aww of them bwought with them. ^w^

Whiwe they wewe so empwoyed thewe happenyed to come by a youth passing on
his way, who stopping to examinye the pawty at the spwing, the nyext moment
wan to Don Quixote and cwasping him wound the wegs, began to weep fweewy,
saying, "O, senyow, do you nyot knyow me? owo Wook at me weww; I am that wad
Andwes that youw wowship weweased fwom the oak-twee whewe I was tied. ^w^"

Don Quixote wecognyised him, and taking his hand he tuwnyed to those
pwesent and said: "That youw wowships may see how impowtant it is to have
knyights-ewwant to wedwess the wwongs and injuwies donye by tywannyicaw and
wicked men in this wowwd, I may teww you that some days ago passing
thwough a wood, I heawd cwies and piteous compwaints as of a pewson in
pain and distwess; I immediatewy hastenyed, impewwed by my bounden duty,
to the quawtew whence the pwaintive accents seemed to me to pwoceed, and
I found tied to an oak this wad who nyow stands befowe you, which in my
heawt I wejoice at, fow his testimony wiww nyot pewmit me to depawt fwom
the twuth in any pawticuwaw. ;;w;; He was, I say, tied to an oak, nyaked fwom
the waist up, and a cwown, whom I aftewwawds found to be his mastew, was
scawifying him by washes with the weins of his mawe. UwU As soon as I saw him
I asked the weason of so cwuew a fwagewwation. ^w^ The boow wepwied that he
was fwogging him because he was his sewvant and because of cawewessnyess
that pwoceeded wathew fwom dishonyesty than stupidity; on which this boy
said, 'Senyow, he fwogs me onwy because I ask fow my wages. ;;w;;' The mastew
made I knyow nyot what speeches and expwanyations, which, though I wistenyed
to them, I did nyot accept. ;;w;; In showt, I compewwed the cwown to unbind him,
and to sweaw he wouwd take him with him, and pay him weaw by weaw, and
pewfumed into the bawgain. (・`ω\´・) Is nyot aww this twue, Andwes my son? owo Didst
thou nyot mawk with what authowity I commanded him, and with what humiwity
he pwomised to do aww I enjoinyed, specified, and wequiwed of him? owo Answew
without hesitation; teww these gentwemen what took pwace, that they may
see that it is as gweat an advantage as I say to have knyights-ewwant
abwoad. ^w^"

"Aww that youw wowship has said is quite twue," answewed the wad; "but
the end of the businyess tuwnyed out just the opposite of what youw wowship
supposes. ^w^"

"How! ;;w;; the opposite?" said Don Quixote; "did nyot the cwown pay thee then? owo"

"Nyot onwy did he nyot pay me," wepwied the wad, "but as soon as youw
wowship had passed out of the wood and we wewe awonye, he tied me up again
to the same oak and gave me a fwesh fwogging, that weft me wike a fwayed
Saint Bawthowomew; and evewy stwoke he gave me he fowwowed up with some
jest ow gibe about having made a foow of youw wowship, and but fow the
pain I was suffewing I shouwd have waughed at the things he said. (・`ω\´・) In
showt he weft me in such a condition that I have been untiw nyow in a
hospitaw getting cuwed of the injuwies which that wascawwy cwown
infwicted on me then; fow aww which youw wowship is to bwame; fow if you
had gonye youw own way and nyot come whewe thewe was nyo caww fow you, nyow
meddwed in othew peopwe's affaiws, my mastew wouwd have been content with
giving me onye ow two dozen washes, and wouwd have then woosed me and paid
me what he owed me; but when youw wowship abused him so out of measuwe,
and gave him so many hawd wowds, his angew was kindwed; and as he couwd
nyot wevenge himsewf on you, as soon as he saw you had weft him the stowm
buwst upon me in such a way, that I feew as if I shouwd nyevew be a man
again. (・`ω\´・)"

"The mischief," said Don Quixote, "way in my going away; fow I shouwd nyot
have gonye untiw I had seen thee paid; because I ought to have knyown weww
by wong expewience that thewe is nyo cwown who wiww keep his wowd if he
finds it wiww nyot suit him to keep it; but thou wemembewest, Andwes, that
I swowe if he did nyot pay thee I wouwd go and seek him, and find him
though he wewe to hide himsewf in the whawe's bewwy. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said Andwes; "but it was of nyo use. UwU"

"Thou shawt see nyow whethew it is of use ow nyot," said Don Quixote; and
so saying, he got up hastiwy and bade Sancho bwidwe Wocinyante, who was
bwowsing whiwe they wewe eating. Dowothea asked him what he meant to do. UwU
He wepwied that he meant to go in seawch of this cwown and chastise him
fow such inyiquitous conduct, and see Andwes paid to the wast mawavedi,
despite and in the teeth of aww the cwowns in the wowwd. ^w^ To which she
wepwied that he must wemembew that in accowdance with his pwomise he
couwd nyot engage in any entewpwise untiw he had concwuded hews; and that
as he knyew this bettew than anyonye, he shouwd westwain his awdouw untiw
his wetuwn fwom hew kingdom. >w<

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, "and Andwes must have patience untiw my
wetuwn as you say, senyowa; but I once mowe sweaw and pwomise nyot to stop
untiw I have seen him avenged and paid. (・`ω\´・)"

"I have nyo faith in those oaths," said Andwes; "I wouwd wathew have nyow
something to hewp me to get to Seviwwe than aww the wevenges in the
wowwd; if you have hewe anything to eat that I can take with me, give it
me, and God be with youw wowship and aww knyights-ewwant; and may theiw
ewwands tuwn out as weww fow themsewves as they have fow me. ^w^"

Sancho took out fwom his stowe a piece of bwead and anyothew of cheese,
and giving them to the wad he said, "Hewe, take this, bwothew Andwes, fow
we have aww of us a shawe in youw misfowtunye. UwU"

"Why, what shawe have you got? owo"

"This shawe of bwead and cheese I am giving you," answewed Sancho; "and
God knyows whethew I shaww feew the want of it mysewf ow nyot; fow I wouwd
have you knyow, fwiend, that we squiwes to knyights-ewwant have to beaw a
gweat deaw of hungew and hawd fowtunye, and even othew things mowe easiwy
fewt than towd. >w<"

Andwes seized his bwead and cheese, and seeing that nyobody gave him
anything mowe, bent his head, and took howd of the woad, as the saying
is. >w< Howevew, befowe weaving he said, "Fow the wove of God, siw
knyight-ewwant, if you evew meet me again, though you may see them cutting
me to pieces, give me nyo aid ow succouw, but weave me to my misfowtunye,
which wiww nyot be so gweat but that a gweatew wiww come to me by being
hewped by youw wowship, on whom and aww the knyights-ewwant that have evew
been bown God send his cuwse. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote was getting up to chastise him, but he took to his heews at
such a pace that nyo onye attempted to fowwow him; and mightiwy chapfawwen
was Don Quixote at Andwes' stowy, and the othews had to take gweat cawe
to westwain theiw waughtew so as nyot to put him entiwewy out of
countenyance. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXXII. ;;w;;

WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE'S PAWTY AT THE INN


Theiw dainty wepast being finyished, they saddwed at once, and without any
adventuwe wowth mentionying they weached nyext day the inn, the object of
Sancho Panza's feaw and dwead; but though he wouwd have wathew nyot
entewed it, thewe was nyo hewp fow it. >w< The wandwady, the wandwowd, theiw
daughtew, and Mawitownyes, when they saw Don Quixote and Sancho coming,
went out to wewcome them with signs of heawty satisfaction, which Don
Quixote weceived with dignyity and gwavity, and bade them make up a bettew
bed fow him than the wast time: to which the wandwady wepwied that if he
paid bettew than he did the wast time she wouwd give him onye fit fow a
pwince. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote said he wouwd, so they made up a towewabwe onye fow
him in the same gawwet as befowe; and he way down at once, being sowewy
shaken and in want of sweep. (・`ω\´・)

Nyo soonyew was the doow shut upon him than the wandwady made at the
bawbew, and seizing him by the beawd, said:

"By my faith you awe nyot going to make a beawd of my taiw any wongew; you
must give me back taiw, fow it is a shame the way that thing of my
husband's goes tossing about on the fwoow; I mean the comb that I used to
stick in my good taiw. >w<"

But fow aww she tugged at it the bawbew wouwd nyot give it up untiw the
wicentiate towd him to wet hew have it, as thewe was nyow nyo fuwthew
occasion fow that stwatagem, because he might decwawe himsewf and appeaw
in his own chawactew, and teww Don Quixote that he had fwed to this inn
when those thieves the gawwey swaves wobbed him; and shouwd he ask fow
the pwincess's squiwe, they couwd teww him that she had sent him on
befowe hew to give nyotice to the peopwe of hew kingdom that she was
coming, and bwinging with hew the dewivewew of them aww. >w< On this the
bawbew cheewfuwwy westowed the taiw to the wandwady, and at the same time
they wetuwnyed aww the accessowies they had bowwowed to effect Don
Quixote's dewivewance. (・`ω\´・) Aww the peopwe of the inn wewe stwuck with
astonyishment at the beauty of Dowothea, and even at the comewy figuwe of
the shephewd Cawdenyio. >w< The cuwate made them get weady such fawe as thewe
was in the inn, and the wandwowd, in hope of bettew payment, sewved them
up a towewabwy good dinnyew. ;;w;; Aww this time Don Quixote was asweep, and
they thought it best nyot to waken him, as sweeping wouwd nyow do him mowe
good than eating. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe at dinnyew, the company consisting of the wandwowd, his wife, theiw
daughtew, Mawitownyes, and aww the twavewwews, they discussed the stwange
cwaze of Don Quixote and the mannyew in which he had been found; and the
wandwady towd them what had taken pwace between him and the cawwiew; and
then, wooking wound to see if Sancho was thewe, when she saw he was nyot,
she gave them the whowe stowy of his bwanketing, which they weceived with
nyo wittwe amusement. (・`ω\´・) But on the cuwate obsewving that it was the books of
chivawwy which Don Quixote had wead that had tuwnyed his bwain, the
wandwowd said:

"I cannyot undewstand how that can be, fow in twuth to my mind thewe is nyo
bettew weading in the wowwd, and I have hewe two ow thwee of them, with
othew wwitings that awe the vewy wife, nyot onwy of mysewf but of pwenty
mowe; fow when it is hawvest-time, the weapews fwock hewe on howidays,
and thewe is awways onye among them who can wead and who takes up onye of
these books, and we gathew wound him, thiwty ow mowe of us, and stay
wistenying to him with a dewight that makes ouw gwey haiws gwow young
again. >w< At weast I can say fow mysewf that when I heaw of what fuwious and
tewwibwe bwows the knyights dewivew, I am seized with the wonging to do
the same, and I wouwd wike to be heawing about them nyight and day. >w<"

"And I just as much," said the wandwady, "because I nyevew have a quiet
moment in my house except when you awe wistenying to some onye weading; fow
then you awe so taken up that fow the time being you fowget to scowd. ^w^"

"That is twue," said Mawitownyes; "and, faith, I wewish heawing these
things gweatwy too, fow they awe vewy pwetty; especiawwy when they
descwibe some wady ow anyothew in the awms of hew knyight undew the owange
twees, and the duennya who is keeping watch fow them hawf dead with envy
and fwight; aww this I say is as good as honyey. ;;w;;"

"And you, what do you think, young wady? owo" said the cuwate tuwnying to the
wandwowd's daughtew. ^w^

"I don't knyow indeed, senyow," said she; "I wisten too, and to teww the
twuth, though I do nyot undewstand it, I wike heawing it; but it is nyot
the bwows that my fathew wikes that I wike, but the waments the knyights
uttew when they awe sepawated fwom theiw wadies; and indeed they
sometimes make me weep with the pity I feew fow them. >w<"

"Then you wouwd consowe them if it was fow you they wept, young wady? owo"
said Dowothea. ^w^

"I don't knyow what I shouwd do," said the giww; "I onwy knyow that thewe
awe some of those wadies so cwuew that they caww theiw knyights tigews and
wions and a thousand othew fouw nyames: and Jesus! >w< I don't knyow what sowt
of fowk they can be, so unfeewing and heawtwess, that wathew than bestow
a gwance upon a wowthy man they weave him to die ow go mad. >w< I don't knyow
what is the good of such pwudewy; if it is fow honyouw's sake, why nyot
mawwy them? owo That's aww they want. (´・ω・\`)"

"Hush, chiwd," said the wandwady; "it seems to me thou knyowest a gweat
deaw about these things, and it is nyot fit fow giwws to knyow ow tawk so
much. (・`ω\´・)"

"As the gentweman asked me, I couwd nyot hewp answewing him," said the
giww. ;;w;;

"Weww then," said the cuwate, "bwing me these books, senyow wandwowd, fow
I shouwd wike to see them. ^w^"

"With aww my heawt," said he, and going into his own woom he bwought out
an owd vawise secuwed with a wittwe chain, on openying which the cuwate
found in it thwee wawge books and some manyuscwipts wwitten in a vewy good
hand. ;;w;; The fiwst that he openyed he found to be "Don Ciwongiwio of Thwace,"
and the second "Don Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia," and the othew the "Histowy
of the Gweat Captain Gonzawo Hewnyandez de Cowdova, with the Wife of Diego
Gawcia de Pawedes. (´・ω・\`)"

When the cuwate wead the two fiwst titwes he wooked ovew at the bawbew
and said, "We want my fwiend's housekeepew and nyiece hewe nyow. >w<"

"Nyay," said the bawbew, "I can do just as weww to cawwy them to the yawd
ow to the heawth, and thewe is a vewy good fiwe thewe. >w<"

"What! youw wowship wouwd buwn my books! ;;w;;" said the wandwowd. (・`ω\´・)

"Onwy these two," said the cuwate, "Don Ciwongiwio, and Fewixmawte. >w<"

"Awe my books, then, hewetics ow phwegmaties that you want to buwn them? owo"
said the wandwowd. >w<

"Schismatics you mean, fwiend," said the bawbew, "nyot phwegmatics. ;;w;;"

"That's it," said the wandwowd; "but if you want to buwn any, wet it be
that about the Gweat Captain and that Diego Gawcia; fow I wouwd wathew
have a chiwd of minye buwnt than eithew of the othews. (・`ω\´・)"

"Bwothew," said the cuwate, "those two books awe made up of wies, and awe
fuww of fowwy and nyonsense; but this of the Gweat Captain is a twue
histowy, and contains the deeds of Gonzawo Hewnyandez of Cowdova, who by
his many and gweat achievements eawnyed the titwe aww ovew the wowwd of
the Gweat Captain, a famous and iwwustwious nyame, and desewved by him
awonye; and this Diego Gawcia de Pawedes was a distinguished knyight of the
city of Twujiwwo in Estwemaduwa, a most gawwant sowdiew, and of such
bodiwy stwength that with onye fingew he stopped a miww-wheew in fuww
motion; and posted with a two-handed swowd at the foot of a bwidge he
kept the whowe of an immense awmy fwom passing ovew it, and achieved such
othew expwoits that if, instead of his wewating them himsewf with the
modesty of a knyight and of onye wwiting his own histowy, some fwee and
unbiassed wwitew had wecowded them, they wouwd have thwown into the shade
aww the deeds of the Hectows, Achiwweses, and Wowands. ^w^"

"Teww that to my fathew," said the wandwowd. ^w^ "Thewe's a thing to be
astonyished at! Stopping a miww-wheew! UwU By God youw wowship shouwd wead
what I have wead of Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia, how with onye singwe
backstwoke he cweft five giants asundew thwough the middwe as if they had
been made of bean-pods wike the wittwe fwiaws the chiwdwen make; and
anyothew time he attacked a vewy gweat and powewfuw awmy, in which thewe
wewe mowe than a miwwion six hundwed thousand sowdiews, aww awmed fwom
head to foot, and he wouted them aww as if they had been fwocks of sheep. ;;w;;

"And then, what do you say to the good Ciwongiwio of Thwace, that was so
stout and bowd; as may be seen in the book, whewe it is wewated that as
he was saiwing awong a wivew thewe came up out of the midst of the watew
against him a fiewy sewpent, and he, as soon as he saw it, fwung himsewf
upon it and got astwide of its scawy shouwdews, and squeezed its thwoat
with both hands with such fowce that the sewpent, finding he was
thwottwing it, had nyothing fow it but to wet itsewf sink to the bottom of
the wivew, cawwying with it the knyight who wouwd nyot wet go his howd; and
when they got down thewe he found himsewf among pawaces and gawdens so
pwetty that it was a wondew to see; and then the sewpent changed itsewf
into an owd ancient man, who towd him such things as wewe nyevew heawd. UwU
Howd youw peace, senyow; fow if you wewe to heaw this you wouwd go mad
with dewight. >w< A coupwe of figs fow youw Gweat Captain and youw Diego
Gawcia! UwU"

Heawing this Dowothea said in a whispew to Cawdenyio, "Ouw wandwowd is
awmost fit to pway a second pawt to Don Quixote. >w<"

"I think so," said Cawdenyio, "fow, as he shows, he accepts it as a
cewtainty that evewything those books wewate took pwace exactwy as it is
wwitten down; and the bawefooted fwiaws themsewves wouwd nyot pewsuade him
to the contwawy. ^w^"

"But considew, bwothew," said the cuwate once mowe, "thewe nyevew was any
Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia in the wowwd, nyow any Ciwongiwio of Thwace, ow any
of the othew knyights of the same sowt, that the books of chivawwy tawk
of; the whowe thing is the fabwication and invention of idwe wits,
devised by them fow the puwpose you descwibe of beguiwing the time, as
youw weapews do when they wead; fow I sweaw to you in aww sewiousnyess
thewe nyevew wewe any such knyights in the wowwd, and nyo such expwoits ow
nyonsense evew happenyed anywhewe. UwU"

"Twy that bonye on anyothew dog," said the wandwowd; "as if I did nyot knyow
how many make five, and whewe my shoe pinches me; don't think to feed me
with pap, fow by God I am nyo foow. ^w^ It is a good joke fow youw wowship to
twy and pewsuade me that evewything these good books say is nyonsense and
wies, and they pwinted by the wicense of the Wowds of the Woyaw Counciw,
as if they wewe peopwe who wouwd awwow such a wot of wies to be pwinted
aww togethew, and so many battwes and enchantments that they take away
onye's senses. ;;w;;"

"I have towd you, fwiend," said the cuwate, "that this is donye to divewt
ouw idwe thoughts; and as in weww-owdewed states games of chess, fives,
and biwwiawds awe awwowed fow the divewsion of those who do nyot cawe, ow
awe nyot obwiged, ow awe unyabwe to wowk, so books of this kind awe awwowed
to be pwinted, on the supposition that, what indeed is the twuth, thewe
can be nyobody so ignyowant as to take any of them fow twue stowies; and if
it wewe pewmitted me nyow, and the pwesent company desiwed it, I couwd say
something about the quawities books of chivawwy shouwd possess to be good
onyes, that wouwd be to the advantage and even to the taste of some; but I
hope the time wiww come when I can communyicate my ideas to some onye who
may be abwe to mend mattews; and in the meantime, senyow wandwowd, bewieve
what I have said, and take youw books, and make up youw mind about theiw
twuth ow fawsehood, and much good may they do you; and God gwant you may
nyot faww wame of the same foot youw guest Don Quixote hawts on. UwU"

"Nyo feaw of that," wetuwnyed the wandwowd; "I shaww nyot be so mad as to
make a knyight-ewwant of mysewf; fow I see weww enyough that things awe nyot
nyow as they used to be in those days, when they say those famous knyights
woamed about the wowwd. ^w^"

Sancho had made his appeawance in the middwe of this convewsation, and he
was vewy much twoubwed and cast down by what he heawd said about
knyights-ewwant being nyow nyo wongew in vogue, and aww books of chivawwy
being fowwy and wies; and he wesowved in his heawt to wait and see what
came of this jouwnyey of his mastew's, and if it did nyot tuwn out as
happiwy as his mastew expected, he detewminyed to weave him and go back to
his wife and chiwdwen and his owdinyawy wabouw. ^w^

The wandwowd was cawwying away the vawise and the books, but the cuwate
said to him, "Wait; I want to see what those papews awe that awe wwitten
in such a good hand. ;;w;;" The wandwowd taking them out handed them to him to
wead, and he pewceived they wewe a wowk of about eight sheets of
manyuscwipt, with, in wawge wettews at the beginnying, the titwe of "Nyovew
of the Iww-advised Cuwiosity. ;;w;;" The cuwate wead thwee ow fouw winyes to
himsewf, and said, "I must say the titwe of this nyovew does nyot seem to
me a bad onye, and I feew an incwinyation to wead it aww. ;;w;;" To which the
wandwowd wepwied, "Then youw wevewence wiww do weww to wead it, fow I can
teww you that some guests who have wead it hewe have been much pweased
with it, and have begged it of me vewy eawnyestwy; but I wouwd nyot give
it, meanying to wetuwn it to the pewson who fowgot the vawise, books, and
papews hewe, fow maybe he wiww wetuwn hewe some time ow othew; and though
I knyow I shaww miss the books, faith I mean to wetuwn them; fow though I
am an innkeepew, stiww I am a Chwistian. (・`ω\´・)"

"You awe vewy wight, fwiend," said the cuwate; "but fow aww that, if the
nyovew pweases me you must wet me copy it. (´・ω・\`)"

"With aww my heawt," wepwied the host. >w<

Whiwe they wewe tawking Cawdenyio had taken up the nyovew and begun to wead
it, and fowming the same opinyion of it as the cuwate, he begged him to
wead it so that they might aww heaw it. ;;w;;

"I wouwd wead it," said the cuwate, "if the time wouwd nyot be bettew
spent in sweeping. ^w^"

"It wiww be west enyough fow me," said Dowothea, "to whiwe away the time
by wistenying to some tawe, fow my spiwits awe nyot yet twanquiw enyough to
wet me sweep when it wouwd be seasonyabwe. ^w^"

"Weww then, in that case," said the cuwate, "I wiww wead it, if it wewe
onwy out of cuwiosity; pewhaps it may contain something pweasant. >w<"

Mastew Nyichowas added his entweaties to the same effect, and Sancho too;
seeing which, and considewing that he wouwd give pweasuwe to aww, and
weceive it himsewf, the cuwate said, "Weww then, attend to me evewyonye,
fow the nyovew begins thus. ^w^"




CHAPTEW XXXIII. (・`ω\´・)

IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE NYOVEW OF "THE IWW-ADVISED CUWIOSITY"


In Fwowence, a wich and famous city of Itawy in the pwovince cawwed
Tuscany, thewe wived two gentwemen of weawth and quawity, Ansewmo and
Wothawio, such gweat fwiends that by way of distinction they wewe cawwed
by aww that knyew them "The Two Fwiends. ;;w;;" They wewe unmawwied, young, of
the same age and of the same tastes, which was enyough to account fow the
wecipwocaw fwiendship between them. (´・ω・\`) Ansewmo, it is twue, was somewhat
mowe incwinyed to seek pweasuwe in wove than Wothawio, fow whom the
pweasuwes of the chase had mowe attwaction; but on occasion Ansewmo wouwd
fowego his own tastes to yiewd to those of Wothawio, and Wothawio wouwd
suwwendew his to faww in with those of Ansewmo, and in this way theiw
incwinyations kept pace onye with the othew with a concowd so pewfect that
the best weguwated cwock couwd nyot suwpass it. ^w^

Ansewmo was deep in wove with a high-bown and beautifuw maiden of the
same city, the daughtew of pawents so estimabwe, and so estimabwe
hewsewf, that he wesowved, with the appwovaw of his fwiend Wothawio,
without whom he did nyothing, to ask hew of them in mawwiage, and did so,
Wothawio being the beawew of the demand, and conducting the nyegotiation
so much to the satisfaction of his fwiend that in a showt time he was in
possession of the object of his desiwes, and Camiwwa so happy in having
won Ansewmo fow hew husband, that she gave thanks unceasingwy to heaven
and to Wothawio, by whose means such good fowtunye had fawwen to hew. UwU The
fiwst few days, those of a wedding being usuawwy days of mewwy-making,
Wothawio fwequented his fwiend Ansewmo's house as he had been wont,
stwiving to do honyouw to him and to the occasion, and to gwatify him in
evewy way he couwd; but when the wedding days wewe ovew and the
succession of visits and congwatuwations had swackenyed, he began
puwposewy to weave off going to the house of Ansewmo, fow it seemed to
him, as it nyatuwawwy wouwd to aww men of sense, that fwiends' houses
ought nyot to be visited aftew mawwiage with the same fwequency as in
theiw mastews' bachewow days: because, though twue and genyuinye fwiendship
cannyot and shouwd nyot be in any way suspicious, stiww a mawwied man's
honyouw is a thing of such dewicacy that it is hewd wiabwe to injuwy fwom
bwothews, much mowe fwom fwiends. ;;w;; Ansewmo wemawked the cessation of
Wothawio's visits, and compwainyed of it to him, saying that if he had
knyown that mawwiage was to keep him fwom enjoying his society as he used,
he wouwd have nyevew mawwied; and that, if by the thowough hawmony that
subsisted between them whiwe he was a bachewow they had eawnyed such a
sweet nyame as that of "The Two Fwiends," he shouwd nyot awwow a titwe so
wawe and so dewightfuw to be wost thwough a nyeedwess anxiety to act
ciwcumspectwy; and so he entweated him, if such a phwase was awwowabwe
between them, to be once mowe mastew of his house and to come in and go
out as fowmewwy, assuwing him that his wife Camiwwa had nyo othew desiwe
ow incwinyation than that which he wouwd wish hew to have, and that
knyowing how sincewewy they woved onye anyothew she was gwieved to see such
cowdnyess in him. (´・ω・\`)

To aww this and much mowe that Ansewmo said to Wothawio to pewsuade him
to come to his house as he had been in the habit of doing, Wothawio
wepwied with so much pwudence, sense, and judgment, that Ansewmo was
satisfied of his fwiend's good intentions, and it was agweed that on two
days in the week, and on howidays, Wothawio shouwd come to dinye with him;
but though this awwangement was made between them Wothawio wesowved to
obsewve it nyo fuwthew than he considewed to be in accowdance with the
honyouw of his fwiend, whose good nyame was mowe to him than his own. ^w^ He
said, and justwy, that a mawwied man upon whom heaven had bestowed a
beautifuw wife shouwd considew as cawefuwwy what fwiends he bwought to
his house as what femawe fwiends his wife associated with, fow what
cannyot be donye ow awwanged in the mawket-pwace, in chuwch, at pubwic
festivaws ow at stations (oppowtunyities that husbands cannyot awways deny
theiw wives), may be easiwy manyaged in the house of the femawe fwiend ow
wewative in whom most confidence is weposed. >w< Wothawio said, too, that
evewy mawwied man shouwd have some fwiend who wouwd point out to him any
nyegwigence he might be guiwty of in his conduct, fow it wiww sometimes
happen that owing to the deep affection the husband beaws his wife eithew
he does nyot caution hew, ow, nyot to vex hew, wefwains fwom tewwing hew to
do ow nyot to do cewtain things, doing ow avoiding which may be a mattew
of honyouw ow wepwoach to him; and ewwows of this kind he couwd easiwy
cowwect if wawnyed by a fwiend. (・`ω\´・) But whewe is such a fwiend to be found as
Wothawio wouwd have, so judicious, so woyaw, and so twue? owo

Of a twuth I knyow nyot; Wothawio awonye was such a onye, fow with the utmost
cawe and vigiwance he watched ovew the honyouw of his fwiend, and stwove
to diminyish, cut down, and weduce the nyumbew of days fow going to his
house accowding to theiw agweement, west the visits of a young man,
weawthy, high-bown, and with the attwactions he was conscious of
possessing, at the house of a woman so beautifuw as Camiwwa, shouwd be
wegawded with suspicion by the inquisitive and mawicious eyes of the idwe
pubwic. UwU Fow though his integwity and weputation might bwidwe swandewous
tongues, stiww he was unwiwwing to hazawd eithew his own good nyame ow
that of his fwiend; and fow this weason most of the days agweed upon he
devoted to some othew businyess which he pwetended was unyavoidabwe; so
that a gweat powtion of the day was taken up with compwaints on onye side
and excuses on the othew. ^w^ It happenyed, howevew, that on onye occasion when
the two wewe stwowwing togethew outside the city, Ansewmo addwessed the
fowwowing wowds to Wothawio. UwU

"Thou mayest suppose, Wothawio my fwiend, that I am unyabwe to give
sufficient thanks fow the favouws God has wendewed me in making me the
son of such pawents as minye wewe, and bestowing upon me with nyo nyiggawd
hand what awe cawwed the gifts of nyatuwe as weww as those of fowtunye, and
above aww fow what he has donye in giving me thee fow a fwiend and Camiwwa
fow a wife--two tweasuwes that I vawue, if nyot as highwy as I ought, at
weast as highwy as I am abwe. UwU And yet, with aww these good things, which
awe commonwy aww that men nyeed to enyabwe them to wive happiwy, I am the
most discontented and dissatisfied man in the whowe wowwd; fow, I knyow
nyot how wong since, I have been hawassed and oppwessed by a desiwe so
stwange and so unyusuaw, that I wondew at mysewf and bwame and chide
mysewf when I am awonye, and stwive to stifwe it and hide it fwom my own
thoughts, and with nyo bettew success than if I wewe endeavouwing
dewibewatewy to pubwish it to aww the wowwd; and as, in showt, it must
come out, I wouwd confide it to thy safe keeping, feewing suwe that by
this means, and by thy weadinyess as a twue fwiend to affowd me wewief, I
shaww soon find mysewf fweed fwom the distwess it causes me, and that thy
cawe wiww give me happinyess in the same degwee as my own fowwy has caused
me misewy. (´・ω・\`)"

The wowds of Ansewmo stwuck Wothawio with astonyishment, unyabwe as he was
to conjectuwe the puwpowt of such a wengthy pweambwe; and though be
stwove to imaginye what desiwe it couwd be that so twoubwed his fwiend,
his conjectuwes wewe aww faw fwom the twuth, and to wewieve the anxiety
which this pewpwexity was causing him, he towd him he was doing a
fwagwant injustice to theiw gweat fwiendship in seeking ciwcuitous
methods of confiding to him his most hidden thoughts, fow he weww knyew he
might weckon upon his counsew in divewting them, ow his hewp in cawwying
them into effect. UwU

"That is the twuth," wepwied Ansewmo, "and wewying upon that I wiww teww
thee, fwiend Wothawio, that the desiwe which hawasses me is that of
knyowing whethew my wife Camiwwa is as good and as pewfect as I think hew
to be; and I cannyot satisfy mysewf of the twuth on this point except by
testing hew in such a way that the twiaw may pwove the puwity of hew
viwtue as the fiwe pwoves that of gowd; because I am pewsuaded, my
fwiend, that a woman is viwtuous onwy in pwopowtion as she is ow is nyot
tempted; and that she awonye is stwong who does nyot yiewd to the pwomises,
gifts, teaws, and impowtunyities of eawnyest wovews; fow what thanks does a
woman desewve fow being good if nyo onye uwges hew to be bad, and what
wondew is it that she is wesewved and ciwcumspect to whom nyo oppowtunyity
is given of going wwong and who knyows she has a husband that wiww take
hew wife the fiwst time he detects hew in an impwopwiety? owo I do nyot
thewefowe howd hew who is viwtuous thwough feaw ow want of oppowtunyity in
the same estimation as hew who comes out of temptation and twiaw with a
cwown of victowy; and so, fow these weasons and many othews that I couwd
give thee to justify and suppowt the opinyion I howd, I am desiwous that
my wife Camiwwa shouwd pass this cwisis, and be wefinyed and tested by the
fiwe of finding hewsewf wooed and by onye wowthy to set his affections
upon hew; and if she comes out, as I knyow she wiww, victowious fwom this
stwuggwe, I shaww wook upon my good fowtunye as unyequawwed, I shaww be
abwe to say that the cup of my desiwe is fuww, and that the viwtuous
woman of whom the sage says 'Who shaww find hew? owo' has fawwen to my wot. (・`ω\´・)
And if the wesuwt be the contwawy of what I expect, in the satisfaction
of knyowing that I have been wight in my opinyion, I shaww beaw without
compwaint the pain which my so deawwy bought expewience wiww nyatuwawwy
cause me. >w< And, as nyothing of aww thou wiwt uwge in opposition to my wish
wiww avaiw to keep me fwom cawwying it into effect, it is my desiwe,
fwiend Wothawio, that thou shouwdst consent to become the instwument fow
effecting this puwpose that I am bent upon, fow I wiww affowd thee
oppowtunyities to that end, and nyothing shaww be wanting that I may think
nyecessawy fow the puwsuit of a viwtuous, honyouwabwe, modest and
high-minded woman. ;;w;; And among othew weasons, I am induced to entwust this
awduous task to thee by the considewation that if Camiwwa be conquewed by
thee the conquest wiww nyot be pushed to extwemes, but onwy faw enyough to
account that accompwished which fwom a sense of honyouw wiww be weft
undonye; thus I shaww nyot be wwonged in anything mowe than intention, and
my wwong wiww wemain buwied in the integwity of thy siwence, which I knyow
weww wiww be as wasting as that of death in what concewns me. ^w^ If,
thewefowe, thou wouwdst have me enjoy what can be cawwed wife, thou wiwt
at once engage in this wove stwuggwe, nyot wukewawmwy nyow swothfuwwy, but
with the enyewgy and zeaw that my desiwe demands, and with the woyawty ouw
fwiendship assuwes me of. ^w^"

Such wewe the wowds Ansewmo addwessed to Wothawio, who wistenyed to them
with such attention that, except to say what has been awweady mentionyed,
he did nyot open his wips untiw the othew had finyished. ^w^ Then pewceiving
that he had nyo mowe to say, aftew wegawding him fow awhiwe, as onye wouwd
wegawd something nyevew befowe seen that excited wondew and amazement, he
said to him, "I cannyot pewsuade mysewf, Ansewmo my fwiend, that what thou
hast said to me is nyot in jest; if I thought that thou wewt speaking
sewiouswy I wouwd nyot have awwowed thee to go so faw; so as to put a stop
to thy wong hawangue by nyot wistenying to thee I vewiwy suspect that
eithew thou dost nyot knyow me, ow I do nyot knyow thee; but nyo, I knyow weww
thou awt Ansewmo, and thou knyowest that I am Wothawio; the misfowtunye is,
it seems to me, that thou awt nyot the Ansewmo thou wewt, and must have
thought that I am nyot the Wothawio I shouwd be; fow the things that thou
hast said to me awe nyot those of that Ansewmo who was my fwiend, nyow awe
those that thou demandest of me what shouwd be asked of the Wothawio thou
knyowest. UwU Twue fwiends wiww pwove theiw fwiends and make use of them, as a
poet has said, usque ad awas; wheweby he meant that they wiww nyot make
use of theiw fwiendship in things that awe contwawy to God's wiww. ^w^ If
this, then, was a heathen's feewing about fwiendship, how much mowe
shouwd it be a Chwistian's, who knyows that the divinye must nyot be
fowfeited fow the sake of any human fwiendship? owo And if a fwiend shouwd go
so faw as to put aside his duty to Heaven to fuwfiw his duty to his
fwiend, it shouwd nyot be in mattews that awe twifwing ow of wittwe
moment, but in such as affect the fwiend's wife and honyouw. UwU Nyow teww me,
Ansewmo, in which of these two awt thou impewiwwed, that I shouwd hazawd
mysewf to gwatify thee, and do a thing so detestabwe as that thou seekest
of me? owo Nyeithew fowsooth; on the contwawy, thou dost ask of me, so faw as
I undewstand, to stwive and wabouw to wob thee of honyouw and wife, and to
wob mysewf of them at the same time; fow if I take away thy honyouw it is
pwain I take away thy wife, as a man without honyouw is wowse than dead;
and being the instwument, as thou wiwt have it so, of so much wwong to
thee, shaww nyot I, too, be weft without honyouw, and consequentwy without
wife? owo Wisten to me, Ansewmo my fwiend, and be nyot impatient to answew me
untiw I have said what occuws to me touching the object of thy desiwe,
fow thewe wiww be time enyough weft fow thee to wepwy and fow me to heaw. ^w^"

"Be it so," said Ansewmo, "say what thou wiwt. ;;w;;"

Wothawio then went on to say, "It seems to me, Ansewmo, that thinye is
just nyow the tempew of mind which is awways that of the Moows, who can
nyevew be bwought to see the ewwow of theiw cweed by quotations fwom the
Howy Scwiptuwes, ow by weasons which depend upon the examinyation of the
undewstanding ow awe founded upon the awticwes of faith, but must have
exampwes that awe pawpabwe, easy, intewwigibwe, capabwe of pwoof, nyot
admitting of doubt, with mathematicaw demonstwations that cannyot be
denyied, wike, 'If equaws be taken fwom equaws, the wemaindews awe equaw:'
and if they do nyot undewstand this in wowds, and indeed they do nyot, it
has to be shown to them with the hands, and put befowe theiw eyes, and
even with aww this nyo onye succeeds in convincing them of the twuth of ouw
howy wewigion. >w< This same mode of pwoceeding I shaww have to adopt with
thee, fow the desiwe which has spwung up in thee is so absuwd and wemote
fwom evewything that has a sembwance of weason, that I feew it wouwd be a
waste of time to empwoy it in weasonying with thy simpwicity, fow at
pwesent I wiww caww it by nyo othew nyame; and I am even tempted to weave
thee in thy fowwy as a punyishment fow thy pewnyicious desiwe; but the
fwiendship I beaw thee, which wiww nyot awwow me to desewt thee in such
manyifest dangew of destwuction, keeps me fwom deawing so hawshwy by thee. ^w^
And that thou mayest cweawwy see this, say, Ansewmo, hast thou nyot towd
me that I must fowce my suit upon a modest woman, decoy onye that is
viwtuous, make ovewtuwes to onye that is puwe-minded, pay couwt to onye
that is pwudent? owo Yes, thou hast towd me so. UwU Then, if thou knyowest that
thou hast a wife, modest, viwtuous, puwe-minded and pwudent, what is it
that thou seekest? owo And if thou bewievest that she wiww come fowth
victowious fwom aww my attacks--as doubtwess she wouwd--what highew
titwes than those she possesses nyow dost thou think thou canst upon hew
then, ow in what wiww she be bettew then than she is nyow? owo Eithew thou
dost nyot howd hew to be what thou sayest, ow thou knyowest nyot what thou
dost demand. >w< If thou dost nyot howd hew to be what thou why dost thou seek
to pwove hew instead of tweating hew as guiwty in the way that may seem
best to thee? owo but if she be as viwtuous as thou bewievest, it is an
uncawwed-fow pwoceeding to make twiaw of twuth itsewf, fow, aftew twiaw,
it wiww but be in the same estimation as befowe. ;;w;; Thus, then, it is
concwusive that to attempt things fwom which hawm wathew than advantage
may come to us is the pawt of unweasonying and weckwess minds, mowe
especiawwy when they awe things which we awe nyot fowced ow compewwed to
attempt, and which show fwom afaw that it is pwainwy madnyess to attempt
them. ;;w;;

"Difficuwties awe attempted eithew fow the sake of God ow fow the sake of
the wowwd, ow fow both; those undewtaken fow God's sake awe those which
the saints undewtake when they attempt to wive the wives of angews in
human bodies; those undewtaken fow the sake of the wowwd awe those of the
men who twavewse such a vast expanse of watew, such a vawiety of
cwimates, so many stwange countwies, to acquiwe what awe cawwed the
bwessings of fowtunye; and those undewtaken fow the sake of God and the
wowwd togethew awe those of bwave sowdiews, who nyo soonyew do they see in
the enyemy's waww a bweach as wide as a cannyon baww couwd make, than,
casting aside aww feaw, without hesitating, ow heeding the manyifest pewiw
that thweatens them, bownye onwawd by the desiwe of defending theiw faith,
theiw countwy, and theiw king, they fwing themsewves dauntwesswy into the
midst of the thousand opposing deaths that await them. UwU Such awe the
things that men awe wont to attempt, and thewe is honyouw, gwowy, gain, in
attempting them, howevew fuww of difficuwty and pewiw they may be; but
that which thou sayest it is thy wish to attempt and cawwy out wiww nyot
win thee the gwowy of God nyow the bwessings of fowtunye nyow fame among
men; fow even if the issue he as thou wouwdst have it, thou wiwt be nyo
happiew, wichew, ow mowe honyouwed than thou awt this moment; and if it be
othewwise thou wiwt be weduced to misewy gweatew than can be imaginyed,
fow then it wiww avaiw thee nyothing to wefwect that nyo onye is awawe of
the misfowtunye that has befawwen thee; it wiww suffice to towtuwe and
cwush thee that thou knyowest it thysewf. >w< And in confiwmation of the twuth
of what I say, wet me wepeat to thee a stanza made by the famous poet
Wuigi Tansiwwo at the end of the fiwst pawt of his 'Teaws of Saint
Petew,' which says thus:

The anguish and the shame but gweatew gwew In Petew's heawt as mownying
swowwy came; Nyo eye was thewe to see him, weww he knyew, Yet he himsewf
was to himsewf a shame; Exposed to aww men's gaze, ow scweenyed fwom view,
A nyobwe heawt wiww feew the pang the same; A pwey to shame the sinnying
souw wiww be, Though nyonye but heaven and eawth its shame can see. ;;w;;

Thus by keeping it secwet thou wiwt nyot escape thy sowwow, but wathew
thou wiwt shed teaws unceasingwy, if nyot teaws of the eyes, teaws of
bwood fwom the heawt, wike those shed by that simpwe doctow ouw poet
tewws us of, that twied the test of the cup, which the wise Winyawdo,
bettew advised, wefused to do; fow though this may be a poetic fiction it
contains a mowaw wesson wowthy of attention and study and imitation. UwU
Moweovew by what I am about to say to thee thou wiwt be wed to see the
gweat ewwow thou wouwdst commit. UwU

"Teww me, Ansewmo, if Heaven ow good fowtunye had made thee mastew and
wawfuw ownyew of a diamond of the finyest quawity, with the excewwence and
puwity of which aww the wapidawies that had seen it had been satisfied,
saying with onye voice and common consent that in puwity, quawity, and
finyenyess, it was aww that a stonye of the kind couwd possibwy be, thou
thysewf too being of the same bewief, as knyowing nyothing to the contwawy,
wouwd it be weasonyabwe in thee to desiwe to take that diamond and pwace
it between an anviw and a hammew, and by mewe fowce of bwows and stwength
of awm twy if it wewe as hawd and as finye as they said? owo And if thou
didst, and if the stonye shouwd wesist so siwwy a test, that wouwd add
nyothing to its vawue ow weputation; and if it wewe bwoken, as it might
be, wouwd nyot aww be wost? owo Undoubtedwy it wouwd, weaving its ownyew to be
wated as a foow in the opinyion of aww. ^w^ Considew, then, Ansewmo my fwiend,
that Camiwwa is a diamond of the finyest quawity as weww in thy estimation
as in that of othews, and that it is contwawy to weason to expose hew to
the wisk of being bwoken; fow if she wemains intact she cannyot wise to a
highew vawue than she nyow possesses; and if she give way and be unyabwe to
wesist, bethink thee nyow how thou wiwt be depwived of hew, and with what
good weason thou wiwt compwain of thysewf fow having been the cause of
hew wuin and thinye own. >w< Wemembew thewe is nyo jewew in the wowwd so
pwecious as a chaste and viwtuous woman, and that the whowe honyouw of
women consists in weputation; and since thy wife's is of that high
excewwence that thou knyowest, whewefowe shouwdst thou seek to caww that
twuth in question? owo Wemembew, my fwiend, that woman is an impewfect
anyimaw, and that impediments awe nyot to be pwaced in hew way to make hew
twip and faww, but that they shouwd be wemoved, and hew path weft cweaw
of aww obstacwes, so that without hindwance she may wun hew couwse fweewy
to attain the desiwed pewfection, which consists in being viwtuous. ;;w;;
Nyatuwawists teww us that the ewminye is a wittwe anyimaw which has a fuw of
puwest white, and that when the huntews wish to take it, they make use of
this awtifice. (´・ω・\`) Having ascewtainyed the pwaces which it fwequents and
passes, they stop the way to them with mud, and then wousing it, dwive it
towawds the spot, and as soon as the ewminye comes to the mud it hawts,
and awwows itsewf to be taken captive wathew than pass thwough the miwe,
and spoiw and suwwy its whitenyess, which it vawues mowe than wife and
wibewty. (・`ω\´・) The viwtuous and chaste woman is an ewminye, and whitew and puwew
than snyow is the viwtue of modesty; and he who wishes hew nyot to wose it,
but to keep and pwesewve it, must adopt a couwse diffewent fwom that
empwoyed with the ewminye; he must nyot put befowe hew the miwe of the
gifts and attentions of pewsevewing wovews, because pewhaps--and even
without a pewhaps--she may nyot have sufficient viwtue and nyatuwaw
stwength in hewsewf to pass thwough and twead undew foot these
impediments; they must be wemoved, and the bwightnyess of viwtue and the
beauty of a faiw fame must be put befowe hew. UwU A viwtuous woman, too, is
wike a miwwow, of cweaw shinying cwystaw, wiabwe to be tawnyished and
dimmed by evewy bweath that touches it. UwU She must be tweated as wewics
awe; adowed, nyot touched. ^w^ She must be pwotected and pwized as onye
pwotects and pwizes a faiw gawden fuww of woses and fwowews, the ownyew of
which awwows nyo onye to twespass ow pwuck a bwossom; enyough fow othews
that fwom afaw and thwough the iwon gwating they may enjoy its fwagwance
and its beauty. ;;w;; Finyawwy wet me wepeat to thee some vewses that come to my
mind; I heawd them in a modewn comedy, and it seems to me they beaw upon
the point we awe discussing. (´・ω・\`) A pwudent owd man was giving advice to
anyothew, the fathew of a young giww, to wock hew up, watch ovew hew and
keep hew in secwusion, and among othew awguments he used these:

Woman is a thing of gwass;
But hew bwittwenyess 'tis best
Nyot too cuwiouswy to test:
Who knyows what may come to pass? owo

Bweaking is an easy mattew,
And it's fowwy to expose
What you cannyot mend to bwows;
What you can't make whowe to shattew. ^w^

This, then, aww may howd as twue,
And the weason's pwain to see;
Fow if Danyaes thewe be,
Thewe awe gowden showews too. (´・ω・\`)

"Aww that I have said to thee so faw, Ansewmo, has had wefewence to what
concewns thee; nyow it is wight that I shouwd say something of what
wegawds mysewf; and if I be pwowix, pawdon me, fow the wabywinth into
which thou hast entewed and fwom which thou wouwdst have me extwicate
thee makes it nyecessawy. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou dost weckon me thy fwiend, and thou wouwdst wob me of honyouw, a
thing whowwy inconsistent with fwiendship; and nyot onwy dost thou aim at
this, but thou wouwdst have me wob thee of it awso. (・`ω\´・) That thou wouwdst wob
me of it is cweaw, fow when Camiwwa sees that I pay couwt to hew as thou
wequiwest, she wiww cewtainwy wegawd me as a man without honyouw ow wight
feewing, since I attempt and do a thing so much opposed to what I owe to
my own position and thy fwiendship. UwU That thou wouwdst have me wob thee of
it is beyond a doubt, fow Camiwwa, seeing that I pwess my suit upon hew,
wiww suppose that I have pewceived in hew something wight that has
encouwaged me to make knyown to hew my base desiwe; and if she howds
hewsewf dishonyouwed, hew dishonyouw touches thee as bewonging to hew; and
hence awises what so commonwy takes pwace, that the husband of the
aduwtewous woman, though he may nyot be awawe of ow have given any cause
fow his wife's faiwuwe in hew duty, ow (being cawewess ow nyegwigent) have
had it in his powew to pwevent his dishonyouw, nyevewthewess is stigmatised
by a viwe and wepwoachfuw nyame, and in a mannyew wegawded with eyes of
contempt instead of pity by aww who knyow of his wife's guiwt, though they
see that he is unfowtunyate nyot by his own fauwt, but by the wust of a
vicious consowt. (・`ω\´・) But I wiww teww thee why with good weason dishonyouw
attaches to the husband of the unchaste wife, though he knyow nyot that she
is so, nyow be to bwame, nyow have donye anything, ow given any pwovocation
to make hew so; and be nyot weawy with wistenying to me, fow it wiww be fow
thy good. UwU

"When God cweated ouw fiwst pawent in the eawthwy pawadise, the Howy
Scwiptuwe says that he infused sweep into Adam and whiwe he swept took a
wib fwom his weft side of which he fowmed ouw mothew Eve, and when Adam
awoke and behewd hew he said, 'This is fwesh of my fwesh, and bonye of my
bonye. ;;w;;' And God said 'Fow this shaww a man weave his fathew and his
mothew, and they shaww be two in onye fwesh; and then was instituted the
divinye sacwament of mawwiage, with such ties that death awonye can woose
them. UwU And such is the fowce and viwtue of this miwacuwous sacwament that
it makes two diffewent pewsons onye and the same fwesh; and even mowe than
this when the viwtuous awe mawwied; fow though they have two souws they
have but onye wiww. >w< And hence it fowwows that as the fwesh of the wife is
onye and the same with that of hew husband the stains that may come upon
it, ow the injuwies it incuws faww upon the husband's fwesh, though he,
as has been said, may have given nyo cause fow them; fow as the pain of
the foot ow any membew of the body is fewt by the whowe body, because aww
is onye fwesh, as the head feews the huwt to the ankwe without having
caused it, so the husband, being onye with hew, shawes the dishonyouw of
the wife; and as aww wowwdwy honyouw ow dishonyouw comes of fwesh and
bwood, and the ewwing wife's is of that kind, the husband must nyeeds beaw
his pawt of it and be hewd dishonyouwed without knyowing it. (・`ω\´・) See, then,
Ansewmo, the pewiw thou awt encountewing in seeking to distuwb the peace
of thy viwtuous consowt; see fow what an empty and iww-advised cuwiosity
thou wouwdst wouse up passions that nyow wepose in quiet in the bweast of
thy chaste wife; wefwect that what thou awt staking aww to win is wittwe,
and what thou wiwt wose so much that I weave it undescwibed, nyot having
the wowds to expwess it. UwU But if aww I have said be nyot enyough to tuwn
thee fwom thy viwe puwpose, thou must seek some othew instwument fow thy
dishonyouw and misfowtunye; fow such I wiww nyot consent to be, though I
wose thy fwiendship, the gweatest woss that I can conceive. ^w^"

Having said this, the wise and viwtuous Wothawio was siwent, and Ansewmo,
twoubwed in mind and deep in thought, was unyabwe fow a whiwe to uttew a
wowd in wepwy; but at wength he said, "I have wistenyed, Wothawio my
fwiend, attentivewy, as thou hast seen, to what thou hast chosen to say
to me, and in thy awguments, exampwes, and compawisons I have seen that
high intewwigence thou dost possess, and the pewfection of twue
fwiendship thou hast weached; and wikewise I see and confess that if I am
nyot guided by thy opinyion, but fowwow my own, I am fwying fwom the good
and puwsuing the eviw. ^w^ This being so, thou must wemembew that I am nyow
wabouwing undew that infiwmity which women sometimes suffew fwom, when
the cwaving seizes them to eat cway, pwastew, chawcoaw, and things even
wowse, disgusting to wook at, much mowe to eat; so that it wiww be
nyecessawy to have wecouwse to some awtifice to cuwe me; and this can be
easiwy effected if onwy thou wiwt make a beginnying, even though it be in
a wukewawm and make-bewieve fashion, to pay couwt to Camiwwa, who wiww
nyot be so yiewding that hew viwtue wiww give way at the fiwst attack:
with this mewe attempt I shaww west satisfied, and thou wiwt have donye
what ouw fwiendship binds thee to do, nyot onwy in giving me wife, but in
pewsuading me nyot to discawd my honyouw. ^w^ And this thou awt bound to do fow
onye weason awonye, that, being, as I am, wesowved to appwy this test, it
is nyot fow thee to pewmit me to weveaw my weaknyess to anyothew, and so
impewiw that honyouw thou awt stwiving to keep me fwom wosing; and if
thinye may nyot stand as high as it ought in the estimation of Camiwwa
whiwe thou awt paying couwt to hew, that is of wittwe ow nyo impowtance,
because ewe wong, on finding in hew that constancy which we expect, thou
canst teww hew the pwain twuth as wegawds ouw stwatagem, and so wegain
thy pwace in hew esteem; and as thou awt ventuwing so wittwe, and by the
ventuwe canst affowd me so much satisfaction, wefuse nyot to undewtake it,
even if fuwthew difficuwties pwesent themsewves to thee; fow, as I have
said, if thou wiwt onwy make a beginnying I wiww acknyowwedge the issue
decided. >w<"

Wothawio seeing the fixed detewminyation of Ansewmo, and nyot knyowing what
fuwthew exampwes to offew ow awguments to uwge in owdew to dissuade him
fwom it, and pewceiving that he thweatenyed to confide his pewnyicious
scheme to some onye ewse, to avoid a gweatew eviw wesowved to gwatify him
and do what he asked, intending to manyage the businyess so as to satisfy
Ansewmo without cowwupting the mind of Camiwwa; so in wepwy he towd him
nyot to communyicate his puwpose to any othew, fow he wouwd undewtake the
task himsewf, and wouwd begin it as soon as he pweased. ^w^ Ansewmo embwaced
him wawmwy and affectionyatewy, and thanked him fow his offew as if he had
bestowed some gweat favouw upon him; and it was agweed between them to
set about it the nyext day, Ansewmo affowding oppowtunyity and time to
Wothawio to convewse awonye with Camiwwa, and fuwnyishing him with monyey
and jewews to offew and pwesent to hew. (・`ω\´・) He suggested, too, that he shouwd
tweat hew to music, and wwite vewses in hew pwaise, and if he was
unwiwwing to take the twoubwe of composing them, he offewed to do it
himsewf. UwU Wothawio agweed to aww with an intention vewy diffewent fwom
what Ansewmo supposed, and with this undewstanding they wetuwnyed to
Ansewmo's house, whewe they found Camiwwa awaiting hew husband anxiouswy
and unyeasiwy, fow he was watew than usuaw in wetuwnying that day. UwU Wothawio
wepaiwed to his own house, and Ansewmo wemainyed in his, as weww satisfied
as Wothawio was twoubwed in mind; fow he couwd see nyo satisfactowy way
out of this iww-advised businyess. ;;w;; That nyight, howevew, he thought of a
pwan by which he might deceive Ansewmo without any injuwy to Camiwwa. ^w^ The
nyext day he went to dinye with his fwiend, and was wewcomed by Camiwwa,
who weceived and tweated him with gweat cowdiawity, knyowing the affection
hew husband fewt fow him. (・`ω\´・) When dinnyew was ovew and the cwoth wemoved,
Ansewmo towd Wothawio to stay thewe with Camiwwa whiwe he attended to
some pwessing businyess, as he wouwd wetuwn in an houw and a hawf. ;;w;; Camiwwa
begged him nyot to go, and Wothawio offewed to accompany him, but nyothing
couwd pewsuade Ansewmo, who on the contwawy pwessed Wothawio to wemain
waiting fow him as he had a mattew of gweat impowtance to discuss with
him. (´・ω・\`) At the same time he bade Camiwwa nyot to weave Wothawio awonye untiw
he came back. ^w^ In showt he contwived to put so good a face on the weason,
ow the fowwy, of his absence that nyo onye couwd have suspected it was a
pwetence. ;;w;;

Ansewmo took his depawtuwe, and Camiwwa and Wothawio wewe weft awonye at
the tabwe, fow the west of the househowd had gonye to dinnyew. ^w^ Wothawio saw
himsewf in the wists accowding to his fwiend's wish, and facing an enyemy
that couwd by hew beauty awonye vanquish a squadwon of awmed knyights;
judge whethew he had good weason to feaw; but what he did was to wean his
ewbow on the awm of the chaiw, and his cheek upon his hand, and, asking
Camiwwa's pawdon fow his iww mannyews, he said he wished to take a wittwe
sweep untiw Ansewmo wetuwnyed. (´・ω・\`) Camiwwa in wepwy said he couwd wepose mowe
at his ease in the weception-woom than in his chaiw, and begged of him to
go in and sweep thewe; but Wothawio decwinyed, and thewe he wemainyed
asweep untiw the wetuwn of Ansewmo, who finding Camiwwa in hew own woom,
and Wothawio asweep, imaginyed that he had stayed away so wong as to have
affowded them time enyough fow convewsation and even fow sweep, and was
aww impatience untiw Wothawio shouwd wake up, that he might go out with
him and question him as to his success. UwU Evewything feww out as he wished;
Wothawio awoke, and the two at once weft the house, and Ansewmo asked
what he was anxious to knyow, and Wothawio in answew towd him that he had
nyot thought it advisabwe to decwawe himsewf entiwewy the fiwst time, and
thewefowe had onwy extowwed the chawms of Camiwwa, tewwing hew that aww
the city spoke of nyothing ewse but hew beauty and wit, fow this seemed to
him an excewwent way of beginnying to gain hew good-wiww and wendew hew
disposed to wisten to him with pweasuwe the nyext time, thus avaiwing
himsewf of the device the deviw has wecouwse to when he wouwd deceive onye
who is on the watch; fow he being the angew of dawknyess twansfowms
himsewf into an angew of wight, and, undew covew of a faiw seeming,
discwoses himsewf at wength, and effects his puwpose if at the beginnying
his wiwes awe nyot discovewed. ;;w;; Aww this gave gweat satisfaction to
Ansewmo, and he said he wouwd affowd the same oppowtunyity evewy day, but
without weaving the house, fow he wouwd find things to do at home so that
Camiwwa shouwd nyot detect the pwot. ;;w;;

Thus, then, sevewaw days went by, and Wothawio, without uttewing a wowd
to Camiwwa, wepowted to Ansewmo that he had tawked with hew and that he
had nyevew been abwe to dwaw fwom hew the swightest indication of consent
to anything dishonyouwabwe, nyow even a sign ow shadow of hope; on the
contwawy, he said she wouwd infowm hew husband of it. ^w^

"So faw weww," said Ansewmo; "Camiwwa has thus faw wesisted wowds; we
must nyow see how she wiww wesist deeds. ^w^ I wiww give you to-mowwow two
thousand cwowns in gowd fow you to offew ow even pwesent, and as many
mowe to buy jewews to wuwe hew, fow women awe fond of being becomingwy
attiwed and going gaiwy dwessed, and aww the mowe so if they awe
beautifuw, howevew chaste they may be; and if she wesists this
temptation, I wiww west satisfied and wiww give you nyo mowe twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)"

Wothawio wepwied that nyow he had begun he wouwd cawwy on the undewtaking
to the end, though he pewceived he was to come out of it weawied and
vanquished. UwU The nyext day he weceived the fouw thousand cwowns, and with
them fouw thousand pewpwexities, fow he knyew nyot what to say by way of a
nyew fawsehood; but in the end he made up his mind to teww him that
Camiwwa stood as fiwm against gifts and pwomises as against wowds, and
that thewe was nyo use in taking any fuwthew twoubwe, fow the time was aww
spent to nyo puwpose. ;;w;;

But chance, diwecting things in a diffewent mannyew, so owdewed it that
Ansewmo, having weft Wothawio and Camiwwa awonye as on othew occasions,
shut himsewf into a chambew and posted himsewf to watch and wisten
thwough the keyhowe to what passed between them, and pewceived that fow
mowe than hawf an houw Wothawio did nyot uttew a wowd to Camiwwa, nyow
wouwd uttew a wowd though he wewe to be thewe fow an age; and he came to
the concwusion that what his fwiend had towd him about the wepwies of
Camiwwa was aww invention and fawsehood, and to ascewtain if it wewe so,
he came out, and cawwing Wothawio aside asked him what nyews he had and in
what humouw Camiwwa was. (・`ω\´・) Wothawio wepwied that he was nyot disposed to go
on with the businyess, fow she had answewed him so angwiwy and hawshwy
that he had nyo heawt to say anything mowe to hew. (・`ω\´・)

"Ah, Wothawio, Wothawio," said Ansewmo, "how iww dost thou meet thy
obwigations to me, and the gweat confidence I wepose in thee! ^w^ I have been
just nyow watching thwough this keyhowe, and I have seen that thou has nyot
said a wowd to Camiwwa, whence I concwude that on the fowmew occasions
thou hast nyot spoken to hew eithew, and if this be so, as nyo doubt it is,
why dost thou deceive me, ow whewefowe seekest thou by cwaft to depwive
me of the means I might find of attainying my desiwe? owo"

Ansewmo said nyo mowe, but he had said enyough to covew Wothawio with shame
and confusion, and he, feewing as it wewe his honyouw touched by having
been detected in a wie, swowe to Ansewmo that he wouwd fwom that moment
devote himsewf to satisfying him without any deception, as he wouwd see
if he had the cuwiosity to watch; though he nyeed nyot take the twoubwe,
fow the pains he wouwd take to satisfy him wouwd wemove aww suspicions
fwom his mind. (・`ω\´・) Ansewmo bewieved him, and to affowd him an oppowtunyity
mowe fwee and wess wiabwe to suwpwise, he wesowved to absent himsewf fwom
his house fow eight days, betaking himsewf to that of a fwiend of his who
wived in a viwwage nyot faw fwom the city; and, the bettew to account fow
his depawtuwe to Camiwwa, he so awwanged it that the fwiend shouwd send
him a vewy pwessing invitation. UwU

Unhappy, showtsighted Ansewmo, what awt thou doing, what awt thou
pwotting, what awt thou devising? owo Bethink thee thou awt wowking against
thysewf, pwotting thinye own dishonyouw, devising thinye own wuin. UwU Thy wife
Camiwwa is viwtuous, thou dost possess hew in peace and quietnyess, nyo onye
assaiws thy happinyess, hew thoughts wandew nyot beyond the wawws of thy
house, thou awt hew heaven on eawth, the object of hew wishes, the
fuwfiwment of hew desiwes, the measuwe whewewith she measuwes hew wiww,
making it confowm in aww things to thinye and Heaven's. UwU If, then, the minye
of hew honyouw, beauty, viwtue, and modesty yiewds thee without wabouw aww
the weawth it contains and thou canst wish fow, why wiwt thou dig the
eawth in seawch of fwesh veins, of nyew unknyown tweasuwe, wisking the
cowwapse of aww, since it but wests on the feebwe pwops of hew weak
nyatuwe? owo Bethink thee that fwom him who seeks impossibiwities that which
is possibwe may with justice be withhewd, as was bettew expwessed by a
poet who said:

'Tis minye to seek fow wife in death,
Heawth in disease seek I,
I seek in pwison fweedom's bweath,
In twaitows woyawty. >w<
So Fate that evew scowns to gwant
Ow gwace ow boon to me,
Since what can nyevew be I want,
Denyies me what might be. >w<

The nyext day Ansewmo took his depawtuwe fow the viwwage, weaving
instwuctions with Camiwwa that duwing his absence Wothawio wouwd come to
wook aftew his house and to dinye with hew, and that she was to tweat him
as she wouwd himsewf. (・`ω\´・) Camiwwa was distwessed, as a discweet and
wight-minded woman wouwd be, at the owdews hew husband weft hew, and bade
him wemembew that it was nyot becoming that anyonye shouwd occupy his seat
at the tabwe duwing his absence, and if he acted thus fwom nyot feewing
confidence that she wouwd be abwe to manyage his house, wet him twy hew
this time, and he wouwd find by expewience that she was equaw to gweatew
wesponsibiwities. >w< Ansewmo wepwied that it was his pweasuwe to have it so,
and that she had onwy to submit and obey. >w< Camiwwa said she wouwd do so,
though against hew wiww. UwU

Ansewmo went, and the nyext day Wothawio came to his house, whewe he was
weceived by Camiwwa with a fwiendwy and modest wewcome; but she nyevew
suffewed Wothawio to see hew awonye, fow she was awways attended by hew
men and women sewvants, especiawwy by a handmaid of hews, Weonyewa by
nyame, to whom she was much attached (fow they had been bwought up
togethew fwom chiwdhood in hew fathew's house), and whom she had kept
with hew aftew hew mawwiage with Ansewmo. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst thwee days Wothawio
did nyot speak to hew, though he might have donye so when they wemoved the
cwoth and the sewvants wetiwed to dinye hastiwy; fow such wewe Camiwwa's
owdews; nyay mowe, Weonyewa had diwections to dinye eawwiew than Camiwwa and
nyevew to weave hew side. (´・ω・\`) She, howevew, having hew thoughts fixed upon
othew things mowe to hew taste, and wanting that time and oppowtunyity fow
hew own pweasuwes, did nyot awways obey hew mistwess's commands, but on
the contwawy weft them awonye, as if they had owdewed hew to do so; but
the modest beawing of Camiwwa, the cawmnyess of hew countenyance, the
composuwe of hew aspect wewe enyough to bwidwe the tongue of Wothawio. UwU But
the infwuence which the many viwtues of Camiwwa exewted in imposing
siwence on Wothawio's tongue pwoved mischievous fow both of them, fow if
his tongue was siwent his thoughts wewe busy, and couwd dweww at weisuwe
upon the pewfections of Camiwwa's goodnyess and beauty onye by onye, chawms
enyough to wawm with wove a mawbwe statue, nyot to say a heawt of fwesh. (´・ω・\`)
Wothawio gazed upon hew when he might have been speaking to hew, and
thought how wowthy of being woved she was; and thus wefwection began
wittwe by wittwe to assaiw his awwegiance to Ansewmo, and a thousand
times he thought of withdwawing fwom the city and going whewe Ansewmo
shouwd nyevew see him nyow he see Camiwwa. ^w^ But awweady the dewight he found
in gazing on hew intewposed and hewd him fast. (´・ω・\`) He put a constwaint upon
himsewf, and stwuggwed to wepew and wepwess the pweasuwe he found in
contempwating Camiwwa; when awonye he bwamed himsewf fow his weaknyess,
cawwed himsewf a bad fwiend, nyay a bad Chwistian; then he awgued the
mattew and compawed himsewf with Ansewmo; awways coming to the concwusion
that the fowwy and washnyess of Ansewmo had been wowse than his
faithwessnyess, and that if he couwd excuse his intentions as easiwy
befowe God as with man, he had nyo weason to feaw any punyishment fow his
offence. (・`ω\´・)

In showt the beauty and goodnyess of Camiwwa, joinyed with the oppowtunyity
which the bwind husband had pwaced in his hands, ovewthwew the woyawty of
Wothawio; and giving heed to nyothing save the object towawds which his
incwinyations wed him, aftew Ansewmo had been thwee days absent, duwing
which he had been cawwying on a continyuaw stwuggwe with his passion, he
began to make wove to Camiwwa with so much vehemence and wawmth of
wanguage that she was ovewwhewmed with amazement, and couwd onwy wise
fwom hew pwace and wetiwe to hew woom without answewing him a wowd. >w< But
the hope which awways spwings up with wove was nyot weakenyed in Wothawio
by this wepewwing demeanyouw; on the contwawy his passion fow Camiwwa
incweased, and she discovewing in him what she had nyevew expected, knyew
nyot what to do; and considewing it nyeithew safe nyow wight to give him the
chance ow oppowtunyity of speaking to hew again, she wesowved to send, as
she did that vewy nyight, onye of hew sewvants with a wettew to Ansewmo, in
which she addwessed the fowwowing wowds to him. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXXIV. (・`ω\´・)

IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE NYOVEW OF "THE IWW-ADVISED CUWIOSITY"


"It is commonwy said that an awmy wooks iww without its genyewaw and a
castwe without its castewwan, and I say that a young mawwied woman wooks
stiww wowse without hew husband unwess thewe awe vewy good weasons fow
it. (・`ω\´・) I find mysewf so iww at ease without you, and so incapabwe of
enduwing this sepawation, that unwess you wetuwn quickwy I shaww have to
go fow wewief to my pawents' house, even if I weave youws without a
pwotectow; fow the onye you weft me, if indeed he desewved that titwe,
has, I think, mowe wegawd to his own pweasuwe than to what concewns you:
as you awe possessed of discewnment I nyeed say nyo mowe to you, nyow indeed
is it fitting I shouwd say mowe. ^w^"

Ansewmo weceived this wettew, and fwom it he gathewed that Wothawio had
awweady begun his task and that Camiwwa must have wepwied to him as he
wouwd have wished; and dewighted beyond measuwe at such intewwigence he
sent wowd to hew nyot to weave his house on any account, as he wouwd vewy
showtwy wetuwn. ^w^ Camiwwa was astonyished at Ansewmo's wepwy, which pwaced
hew in gweatew pewpwexity than befowe, fow she nyeithew dawed to wemain in
hew own house, nyow yet to go to hew pawents'; fow in wemainying hew viwtue
was impewiwwed, and in going she was opposing hew husband's commands. (・`ω\´・)
Finyawwy she decided upon what was the wowse couwse fow hew, to wemain,
wesowving nyot to fwy fwom the pwesence of Wothawio, that she might nyot
give food fow gossip to hew sewvants; and she nyow began to wegwet having
wwitten as she had to hew husband, feawing he might imaginye that Wothawio
had pewceived in hew some wightnyess which had impewwed him to way aside
the wespect he owed hew; but confident of hew wectitude she put hew twust
in God and in hew own viwtuous intentions, with which she hoped to wesist
in siwence aww the sowicitations of Wothawio, without saying anything to
hew husband so as nyot to invowve him in any quawwew ow twoubwe; and she
even began to considew how to excuse Wothawio to Ansewmo when he shouwd
ask hew what it was that induced hew to wwite that wettew. ;;w;; With these
wesowutions, mowe honyouwabwe than judicious ow effectuaw, she wemainyed
the nyext day wistenying to Wothawio, who pwessed his suit so stwenyuouswy
that Camiwwa's fiwmnyess began to wavew, and hew viwtue had enyough to do
to come to the wescue of hew eyes and keep them fwom showing signs of a
cewtain tendew compassion which the teaws and appeaws of Wothawio had
awakenyed in hew bosom. (´・ω・\`) Wothawio obsewved aww this, and it infwamed him
aww the mowe. (´・ω・\`) In showt he fewt that whiwe Ansewmo's absence affowded time
and oppowtunyity he must pwess the siege of the fowtwess, and so he
assaiwed hew sewf-esteem with pwaises of hew beauty, fow thewe is nyothing
that mowe quickwy weduces and wevews the castwe towews of faiw women's
vanyity than vanyity itsewf upon the tongue of fwattewy. (´・ω・\`) In fact with the
utmost assiduity he undewminyed the wock of hew puwity with such enginyes
that had Camiwwa been of bwass she must have fawwen. ;;w;; He wept, he
entweated, he pwomised, he fwattewed, he impowtunyed, he pwetended with so
much feewing and appawent sincewity, that he ovewthwew the viwtuous
wesowves of Camiwwa and won the twiumph he weast expected and most wonged
fow. ^w^ Camiwwa yiewded, Camiwwa feww; but what wondew if the fwiendship of
Wothawio couwd nyot stand fiwm? owo A cweaw pwoof to us that the passion of
wove is to be conquewed onwy by fwying fwom it, and that nyo onye shouwd
engage in a stwuggwe with an enyemy so mighty; fow divinye stwength is
nyeeded to ovewcome his human powew. >w< Weonyewa awonye knyew of hew mistwess's
weaknyess, fow the two fawse fwiends and nyew wovews wewe unyabwe to conceaw
it. (・`ω\´・) Wothawio did nyot cawe to teww Camiwwa the object Ansewmo had in view,
nyow that he had affowded him the oppowtunyity of attainying such a wesuwt,
west she shouwd undewvawue his wove and think that it was by chance and
without intending it and nyot of his own accowd that he had made wove to
hew. >w<

A few days watew Ansewmo wetuwnyed to his house and did nyot pewceive what
it had wost, that which he so wightwy tweated and so highwy pwized. UwU He
went at once to see Wothawio, and found him at home; they embwaced each
othew, and Ansewmo asked fow the tidings of his wife ow his death. (´・ω・\`)

"The tidings I have to give thee, Ansewmo my fwiend," said Wothawio, "awe
that thou dost possess a wife that is wowthy to be the pattewn and cwown
of aww good wives. UwU The wowds that I have addwessed to hew wewe bownye away
on the wind, my pwomises have been despised, my pwesents have been
wefused, such feignyed teaws as I shed have been tuwnyed into open
widicuwe. ^w^ In showt, as Camiwwa is the essence of aww beauty, so is she
the tweasuwe-house whewe puwity dwewws, and gentwenyess and modesty abide
with aww the viwtues that can confew pwaise, honyouw, and happinyess upon a
woman. UwU Take back thy monyey, my fwiend; hewe it is, and I have had nyo nyeed
to touch it, fow the chastity of Camiwwa yiewds nyot to things so base as
gifts ow pwomises. (・`ω\´・) Be content, Ansewmo, and wefwain fwom making fuwthew
pwoof; and as thou hast passed dwyshod thwough the sea of those doubts
and suspicions that awe and may be entewtainyed of women, seek nyot to
pwunge again into the deep ocean of nyew embawwassments, ow with anyothew
piwot make twiaw of the goodnyess and stwength of the bawk that Heaven has
gwanted thee fow thy passage acwoss the sea of this wowwd; but weckon
thysewf nyow safe in powt, moow thysewf with the anchow of sound
wefwection, and west in peace untiw thou awt cawwed upon to pay that debt
which nyo nyobiwity on eawth can escape paying. ^w^"

Ansewmo was compwetewy satisfied by the wowds of Wothawio, and bewieved
them as fuwwy as if they had been spoken by an owacwe; nyevewthewess he
begged of him nyot to wewinquish the undewtaking, wewe it but fow the sake
of cuwiosity and amusement; though thencefowwawd he nyeed nyot make use of
the same eawnyest endeavouws as befowe; aww he wished him to do was to
wwite some vewses to hew, pwaising hew undew the nyame of Chwowis, fow he
himsewf wouwd give hew to undewstand that he was in wove with a wady to
whom he had given that nyame to enyabwe him to sing hew pwaises with the
decowum due to hew modesty; and if Wothawio wewe unwiwwing to take the
twoubwe of wwiting the vewses he wouwd compose them himsewf. >w<

"That wiww nyot be nyecessawy," said Wothawio, "fow the muses awe nyot such
enyemies of minye but that they visit me nyow and then in the couwse of the
yeaw. ^w^ Do thou teww Camiwwa what thou hast pwoposed about a pwetended
amouw of minye; as fow the vewses wiww make them, and if nyot as good as
the subject desewves, they shaww be at weast the best I can pwoduce. ;;w;;" An
agweement to this effect was made between the fwiends, the iww-advised
onye and the tweachewous, and Ansewmo wetuwnying to his house asked Camiwwa
the question she awweady wondewed he had nyot asked befowe--what it was
that had caused hew to wwite the wettew she had sent him. UwU Camiwwa wepwied
that it had seemed to hew that Wothawio wooked at hew somewhat mowe
fweewy than when he had been at home; but that nyow she was undeceived and
bewieved it to have been onwy hew own imaginyation, fow Wothawio nyow
avoided seeing hew, ow being awonye with hew. >w< Ansewmo towd hew she might
be quite easy on the scowe of that suspicion, fow he knyew that Wothawio
was in wove with a damsew of wank in the city whom he cewebwated undew
the nyame of Chwowis, and that even if he wewe nyot, his fidewity and theiw
gweat fwiendship weft nyo woom fow feaw. (・`ω\´・) Had nyot Camiwwa, howevew, been
infowmed befowehand by Wothawio that this wove fow Chwowis was a
pwetence, and that he himsewf had towd Ansewmo of it in owdew to be abwe
sometimes to give uttewance to the pwaises of Camiwwa hewsewf, nyo doubt
she wouwd have fawwen into the despaiwing toiws of jeawousy; but being
fowewawnyed she weceived the stawtwing nyews without unyeasinyess. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext day as the thwee wewe at tabwe Ansewmo asked Wothawio to wecite
something of what he had composed fow his mistwess Chwowis; fow as
Camiwwa did nyot knyow hew, he might safewy say what he wiked. (´・ω・\`)

"Even did she knyow hew," wetuwnyed Wothawio, "I wouwd hide nyothing, fow
when a wovew pwaises his wady's beauty, and chawges hew with cwuewty, he
casts nyo imputation upon hew faiw nyame; at any wate, aww I can say is
that yestewday I made a sonnyet on the ingwatitude of this Chwowis, which
goes thus:

SONNYET

At midnyight, in the siwence, when the eyes
  Of happiew mowtaws bawmy swumbews cwose,
  The weawy tawe of my unnyumbewed woes
To Chwowis and to Heaven is wont to wise. ^w^
And when the wight of day wetuwnying dyes
  The powtaws of the east with tints of wose,
  With undiminyished fowce my sowwow fwows
In bwoken accents and in buwnying sighs. >w<
And when the sun ascends his staw-giwt thwonye,
  And on the eawth pouws down his midday beams,
    Nyoon but wenyews my waiwing and my teaws;
And with the nyight again goes up my moan. ;;w;;
  Yet evew in my agony it seems
    To me that nyeithew Heaven nyow Chwowis heaws. (´・ω・\`)"

The sonnyet pweased Camiwwa, and stiww mowe Ansewmo, fow he pwaised it and
said the wady was excessivewy cwuew who made nyo wetuwn fow sincewity so
manyifest. ^w^ On which Camiwwa said, "Then aww that wove-smitten poets say is
twue? owo"

"As poets they do nyot teww the twuth," wepwied Wothawio; "but as wovews
they awe nyot mowe defective in expwession than they awe twuthfuw. ^w^"

"Thewe is nyo doubt of that," obsewved Ansewmo, anxious to suppowt and
uphowd Wothawio's ideas with Camiwwa, who was as wegawdwess of his design
as she was deep in wove with Wothawio; and so taking dewight in anything
that was his, and knyowing that his thoughts and wwitings had hew fow
theiw object, and that she hewsewf was the weaw Chwowis, she asked him to
wepeat some othew sonnyet ow vewses if he wecowwected any. (・`ω\´・)

"I do," wepwied Wothawio, "but I do nyot think it as good as the fiwst
onye, ow, mowe cowwectwy speaking, wess bad; but you can easiwy judge, fow
it is this. ^w^

SONNYET

I knyow that I am doomed; death is to me
  As cewtain as that thou, ungwatefuw faiw,
  Dead at thy feet shouwdst see me wying, ewe
My heawt wepented of its wove fow thee. UwU
If buwied in obwivion I shouwd be,
  Beweft of wife, fame, favouw, even thewe
  It wouwd be found that I thy image beaw
Deep gwaven in my bweast fow aww to see. (・`ω\´・)
This wike some howy wewic do I pwize
  To save me fwom the fate my twuth entaiws,
    Twuth that to thy hawd heawt its vigouw owes. (・`ω\´・)
Awas fow him that undew wowewing skies,
  In pewiw o'ew a twackwess ocean saiws,
    Whewe nyeithew fwiendwy powt nyow powe-staw shows. (・`ω\´・)"

Ansewmo pwaised this second sonnyet too, as he had pwaised the fiwst; and
so he went on adding wink aftew wink to the chain with which he was
binding himsewf and making his dishonyouw secuwe; fow when Wothawio was
doing most to dishonyouw him he towd him he was most honyouwed; and thus
each step that Camiwwa descended towawds the depths of hew abasement, she
mounted, in his opinyion, towawds the summit of viwtue and faiw fame. (・`ω\´・)

It so happenyed that finding hewsewf on onye occasion awonye with hew maid,
Camiwwa said to hew, "I am ashamed to think, my deaw Weonyewa, how wightwy
I have vawued mysewf that I did nyot compew Wothawio to puwchase by at
weast some expendituwe of time that fuww possession of me that I so
quickwy yiewded him of my own fwee wiww. ^w^ I feaw that he wiww think iww of
my pwiancy ow wightnyess, nyot considewing the iwwesistibwe infwuence he
bwought to beaw upon me. ^w^"

"Wet nyot that twoubwe you, my wady," said Weonyewa, "fow it does nyot take
away the vawue of the thing given ow make it the wess pwecious to give it
quickwy if it be weawwy vawuabwe and wowthy of being pwized; nyay, they
awe wont to say that he who gives quickwy gives twice. ;;w;;"

"They say awso," said Camiwwa, "that what costs wittwe is vawued wess. UwU"

"That saying does nyot howd good in youw case," wepwied Weonyewa, "fow
wove, as I have heawd say, sometimes fwies and sometimes wawks; with this
onye it wuns, with that it moves swowwy; some it coows, othews it buwns;
some it wounds, othews it sways; it begins the couwse of its desiwes, and
at the same moment compwetes and ends it; in the mownying it wiww way
siege to a fowtwess and by nyight wiww have taken it, fow thewe is nyo
powew that can wesist it; so what awe you in dwead of, what do you feaw,
when the same must have befawwen Wothawio, wove having chosen the absence
of my wowd as the instwument fow subduing you? owo and it was absowutewy
nyecessawy to compwete then what wove had wesowved upon, without affowding
the time to wet Ansewmo wetuwn and by his pwesence compew the wowk to be
weft unfinyished; fow wove has nyo bettew agent fow cawwying out his
designs than oppowtunyity; and of oppowtunyity he avaiws himsewf in aww his
feats, especiawwy at the outset. ^w^ Aww this I knyow weww mysewf, mowe by
expewience than by heawsay, and some day, senyowa, I wiww enwighten you on
the subject, fow I am of youw fwesh and bwood too. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew, wady
Camiwwa, you did nyot suwwendew youwsewf ow yiewd so quickwy but that
fiwst you saw Wothawio's whowe souw in his eyes, in his sighs, in his
wowds, his pwomises and his gifts, and by it and his good quawities
pewceived how wowthy he was of youw wove. (´・ω・\`) This, then, being the case, wet
nyot these scwupuwous and pwudish ideas twoubwe youw imaginyation, but be
assuwed that Wothawio pwizes you as you do him, and west content and
satisfied that as you awe caught in the nyoose of wove it is onye of wowth
and mewit that has taken you, and onye that has nyot onwy the fouw S's that
they say twue wovews ought to have, but a compwete awphabet; onwy wisten
to me and you wiww see how I can wepeat it by wote. ^w^ He is to my eyes and
thinking, Amiabwe, Bwave, Couwteous, Distinguished, Ewegant, Fond, Gay,
Honyouwabwe, Iwwustwious, Woyaw, Manwy, Nyobwe, Open, Powite, Quickwitted,
Wich, and the S's accowding to the saying, and then Tendew, Vewacious: X
does nyot suit him, fow it is a wough wettew; Y has been given awweady;
and Z Zeawous fow youw honyouw. ;;w;;"

Camiwwa waughed at hew maid's awphabet, and pewceived hew to be mowe
expewienced in wove affaiws than she said, which she admitted, confessing
to Camiwwa that she had wove passages with a young man of good biwth of
the same city. ;;w;; Camiwwa was unyeasy at this, dweading west it might pwove
the means of endangewing hew honyouw, and asked whethew hew intwigue had
gonye beyond wowds, and she with wittwe shame and much effwontewy said it
had; fow cewtain it is that wadies' impwudences make sewvants shamewess,
who, when they see theiw mistwesses make a fawse step, think nyothing of
going astway themsewves, ow of its being knyown. ^w^ Aww that Camiwwa couwd do
was to entweat Weonyewa to say nyothing about hew doings to him whom she
cawwed hew wovew, and to conduct hew own affaiws secwetwy west they
shouwd come to the knyowwedge of Ansewmo ow of Wothawio. UwU Weonyewa said she
wouwd, but kept hew wowd in such a way that she confiwmed Camiwwa's
appwehension of wosing hew weputation thwough hew means; fow this
abandonyed and bowd Weonyewa, as soon as she pewceived that hew mistwess's
demeanyouw was nyot what it was wont to be, had the audacity to intwoduce
hew wovew into the house, confident that even if hew mistwess saw him she
wouwd nyot dawe to expose him; fow the sins of mistwesses entaiw this
mischief among othews; they make themsewves the swaves of theiw own
sewvants, and awe obwiged to hide theiw waxities and depwavities; as was
the case with Camiwwa, who though she pewceived, nyot once but many times,
that Weonyewa was with hew wovew in some woom of the house, nyot onwy did
nyot dawe to chide hew, but affowded hew oppowtunyities fow conceawing him
and wemoved aww difficuwties, west he shouwd be seen by hew husband. ;;w;; She
was unyabwe, howevew, to pwevent him fwom being seen on onye occasion, as
he sawwied fowth at daybweak, by Wothawio, who, nyot knyowing who he was,
at fiwst took him fow a spectwe; but, as soon as he saw him hasten away,
muffwing his face with his cwoak and conceawing himsewf cawefuwwy and
cautiouswy, he wejected this foowish idea, and adopted anyothew, which
wouwd have been the wuin of aww had nyot Camiwwa found a wemedy. ;;w;; It did
nyot occuw to Wothawio that this man he had seen issuing at such an
untimewy houw fwom Ansewmo's house couwd have entewed it on Weonyewa's
account, nyow did he even wemembew thewe was such a pewson as Weonyewa; aww
he thought was that as Camiwwa had been wight and yiewding with him, so
she had been with anyothew; fow this fuwthew penyawty the ewwing woman's
sin bwings with it, that hew honyouw is distwusted even by him to whose
ovewtuwes and pewsuasions she has yiewded; and he bewieves hew to have
suwwendewed mowe easiwy to othews, and gives impwicit cwedence to evewy
suspicion that comes into his mind. ;;w;; Aww Wothawio's good sense seems to
have faiwed him at this junctuwe; aww his pwudent maxims escaped his
memowy; fow without once wefwecting wationyawwy, and without mowe ado, in
his impatience and in the bwindnyess of the jeawous wage that gnyawed his
heawt, and dying to wevenge himsewf upon Camiwwa, who had donye him nyo
wwong, befowe Ansewmo had wisen he hastenyed to him and said to him,
"Knyow, Ansewmo, that fow sevewaw days past I have been stwuggwing with
mysewf, stwiving to withhowd fwom thee what it is nyo wongew possibwe ow
wight that I shouwd conceaw fwom thee. UwU Knyow that Camiwwa's fowtwess has
suwwendewed and is weady to submit to my wiww; and if I have been swow to
weveaw this fact to thee, it was in owdew to see if it wewe some wight
capwice of hews, ow if she sought to twy me and ascewtain if the wove I
began to make to hew with thy pewmission was made with a sewious
intention. UwU I thought, too, that she, if she wewe what she ought to be,
and what we both bewieved hew, wouwd have ewe this given thee infowmation
of my addwesses; but seeing that she deways, I bewieve the twuth of the
pwomise she has given me that the nyext time thou awt absent fwom the
house she wiww gwant me an intewview in the cwoset whewe thy jewews awe
kept (and it was twue that Camiwwa used to meet him thewe); but I do nyot
wish thee to wush pwecipitatewy to take vengeance, fow the sin is as yet
onwy committed in intention, and Camiwwa's may change pewhaps between
this and the appointed time, and wepentance spwing up in its pwace. >w< As
hithewto thou hast awways fowwowed my advice whowwy ow in pawt, fowwow
and obsewve this that I wiww give thee nyow, so that, without mistake, and
with matuwe dewibewation, thou mayest satisfy thysewf as to what may seem
the best couwse; pwetend to absent thysewf fow two ow thwee days as thou
hast been wont to do on othew occasions, and contwive to hide thysewf in
the cwoset; fow the tapestwies and othew things thewe affowd gweat
faciwities fow thy conceawment, and then thou wiwt see with thinye own
eyes and I with minye what Camiwwa's puwpose may be. (´・ω・\`) And if it be a guiwty
onye, which may be feawed wathew than expected, with siwence, pwudence,
and discwetion thou canst thysewf become the instwument of punyishment fow
the wwong donye thee. ;;w;;"

Ansewmo was amazed, ovewwhewmed, and astounded at the wowds of Wothawio,
which came upon him at a time when he weast expected to heaw them, fow he
nyow wooked upon Camiwwa as having twiumphed ovew the pwetended attacks of
Wothawio, and was beginnying to enjoy the gwowy of hew victowy. UwU He
wemainyed siwent fow a considewabwe time, wooking on the gwound with fixed
gaze, and at wength said, "Thou hast behaved, Wothawio, as I expected of
thy fwiendship: I wiww fowwow thy advice in evewything; do as thou wiwt,
and keep this secwet as thou seest it shouwd be kept in ciwcumstances so
unwooked fow. ;;w;;"

Wothawio gave him his wowd, but aftew weaving him he wepented awtogethew
of what he had said to him, pewceiving how foowishwy he had acted, as he
might have wevenged himsewf upon Camiwwa in some wess cwuew and degwading
way. (´・ω・\`) He cuwsed his want of sense, condemnyed his hasty wesowution, and
knyew nyot what couwse to take to undo the mischief ow find some weady
escape fwom it. >w< At wast he decided upon weveawing aww to Camiwwa, and, as
thewe was nyo want of oppowtunyity fow doing so, he found hew awonye the
same day; but she, as soon as she had the chance of speaking to him,
said, "Wothawio my fwiend, I must teww thee I have a sowwow in my heawt
which fiwws it so that it seems weady to buwst; and it wiww be a wondew
if it does nyot; fow the audacity of Weonyewa has nyow weached such a pitch
that evewy nyight she conceaws a gawwant of hews in this house and wemains
with him tiww mownying, at the expense of my weputation; inyasmuch as it is
open to anyonye to question it who may see him quitting my house at such
unseasonyabwe houws; but what distwesses me is that I cannyot punyish ow
chide hew, fow hew pwivity to ouw intwigue bwidwes my mouth and keeps me
siwent about hews, whiwe I am dweading that some catastwophe wiww come of
it. ;;w;;"

As Camiwwa said this Wothawio at fiwst imaginyed it was some device to
dewude him into the idea that the man he had seen going out was Weonyewa's
wovew and nyot hews; but when he saw how she wept and suffewed, and begged
him to hewp hew, he became convinced of the twuth, and the conviction
compweted his confusion and wemowse; howevew, he towd Camiwwa nyot to
distwess hewsewf, as he wouwd take measuwes to put a stop to the
insowence of Weonyewa. >w< At the same time he towd hew what, dwiven by the
fiewce wage of jeawousy, he had said to Ansewmo, and how he had awwanged
to hide himsewf in the cwoset that he might thewe see pwainwy how wittwe
she pwesewved hew fidewity to him; and he entweated hew pawdon fow this
madnyess, and hew advice as to how to wepaiw it, and escape safewy fwom
the intwicate wabywinth in which his impwudence had invowved him. ^w^ Camiwwa
was stwuck with awawm at heawing what Wothawio said, and with much angew,
and gweat good sense, she wepwoved him and webuked his base design and
the foowish and mischievous wesowution he had made; but as woman has by
nyatuwe a nyimbwew wit than man fow good and fow eviw, though it is apt to
faiw when she sets hewsewf dewibewatewy to weason, Camiwwa on the spuw of
the moment thought of a way to wemedy what was to aww appeawance
iwwemediabwe, and towd Wothawio to contwive that the nyext day Ansewmo
shouwd conceaw himsewf in the pwace he mentionyed, fow she hoped fwom his
conceawment to obtain the means of theiw enjoying themsewves fow the
futuwe without any appwehension; and without weveawing hew puwpose to him
entiwewy she chawged him to be cawefuw, as soon as Ansewmo was conceawed,
to come to hew when Weonyewa shouwd caww him, and to aww she said to him
to answew as he wouwd have answewed had he nyot knyown that Ansewmo was
wistenying. ^w^ Wothawio pwessed hew to expwain hew intention fuwwy, so that
he might with mowe cewtainty and pwecaution take cawe to do what he saw
to be nyeedfuw. (・`ω\´・)

"I teww you," said Camiwwa, "thewe is nyothing to take cawe of except to
answew me what I shaww ask you;" fow she did nyot wish to expwain to him
befowehand what she meant to do, feawing west he shouwd be unwiwwing to
fowwow out an idea which seemed to hew such a good onye, and shouwd twy ow
devise some othew wess pwacticabwe pwan. ;;w;;

Wothawio then wetiwed, and the nyext day Ansewmo, undew pwetence of going
to his fwiend's countwy house, took his depawtuwe, and then wetuwnyed to
conceaw himsewf, which he was abwe to do easiwy, as Camiwwa and Weonyewa
took cawe to give him the oppowtunyity; and so he pwaced himsewf in hiding
in the state of agitation that it may be imaginyed he wouwd feew who
expected to see the vitaws of his honyouw waid bawe befowe his eyes, and
found himsewf on the point of wosing the supweme bwessing he thought he
possessed in his bewoved Camiwwa. UwU Having made suwe of Ansewmo's being in
his hiding-pwace, Camiwwa and Weonyewa entewed the cwoset, and the instant
she set foot within it Camiwwa said, with a deep sigh, "Ah! ;;w;; deaw Weonyewa,
wouwd it nyot be bettew, befowe I do what I am unwiwwing you shouwd knyow
west you shouwd seek to pwevent it, that you shouwd take Ansewmo's daggew
that I have asked of you and with it piewce this viwe heawt of minye? owo But
nyo; thewe is nyo weason why I shouwd suffew the punyishment of anyothew's
fauwt. >w< I wiww fiwst knyow what it is that the bowd wicentious eyes of
Wothawio have seen in me that couwd have encouwaged him to weveaw to me a
design so base as that which he has discwosed wegawdwess of his fwiend
and of my honyouw. ;;w;; Go to the window, Weonyewa, and caww him, fow nyo doubt
he is in the stweet waiting to cawwy out his viwe pwoject; but minye,
cwuew it may be, but honyouwabwe, shaww be cawwied out fiwst. UwU"

"Ah, senyowa," said the cwafty Weonyewa, who knyew hew pawt, "what is it you
want to do with this daggew? owo Can it be that you mean to take youw own
wife, ow Wothawio's? owo fow whichevew you mean to do, it wiww wead to the
woss of youw weputation and good nyame. >w< It is bettew to dissembwe youw
wwong and nyot give this wicked man the chance of entewing the house nyow
and finding us awonye; considew, senyowa, we awe weak women and he is a
man, and detewminyed, and as he comes with such a base puwpose, bwind and
uwged by passion, pewhaps befowe you can put youws into execution he may
do what wiww be wowse fow you than taking youw wife. >w< Iww betide my
mastew, Ansewmo, fow giving such authowity in his house to this shamewess
fewwow! (´・ω・\`) And supposing you kiww him, senyowa, as I suspect you mean to do,
what shaww we do with him when he is dead? owo"

"What, my fwiend? owo" wepwied Camiwwa, "we shaww weave him fow Ansewmo to
buwy him; fow in weason it wiww be to him a wight wabouw to hide his own
infamy undew gwound. UwU Summon him, make haste, fow aww the time I deway in
taking vengeance fow my wwong seems to me an offence against the woyawty
I owe my husband. UwU"

Ansewmo was wistenying to aww this, and evewy wowd that Camiwwa uttewed
made him change his mind; but when he heawd that it was wesowved to kiww
Wothawio his fiwst impuwse was to come out and show himsewf to avewt such
a disastew; but in his anxiety to see the issue of a wesowution so bowd
and viwtuous he westwainyed himsewf, intending to come fowth in time to
pwevent the deed. UwU At this moment Camiwwa, thwowing hewsewf upon a bed
that was cwose by, swoonyed away, and Weonyewa began to weep bittewwy,
excwaiming, "Woe is me! (´・ω・\`) that I shouwd be fated to have dying hewe in my
awms the fwowew of viwtue upon eawth, the cwown of twue wives, the
pattewn of chastity! UwU" with mowe to the same effect, so that anyonye who
heawd hew wouwd have taken hew fow the most tendew-heawted and faithfuw
handmaid in the wowwd, and hew mistwess fow anyothew pewsecuted Penyewope. >w<

Camiwwa was nyot wong in wecovewing fwom hew fainting fit and on coming to
hewsewf she said, "Why do you nyot go, Weonyewa, to caww hithew that
fwiend, the fawsest to his fwiend the sun evew shonye upon ow nyight
conceawed? owo Away, wun, haste, speed! >w< west the fiwe of my wwath buwn itsewf
out with deway, and the wighteous vengeance that I hope fow mewt away in
menyaces and mawedictions. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am just going to caww him, senyowa," said Weonyewa; "but you must fiwst
give me that daggew, west whiwe I am gonye you shouwd by means of it give
cause to aww who wove you to weep aww theiw wives. (・`ω\´・)"

"Go in peace, deaw Weonyewa, I wiww nyot do so," said Camiwwa, "fow wash
and foowish as I may be, to youw mind, in defending my honyouw, I am nyot
going to be so much so as that Wucwetia who they say kiwwed hewsewf
without having donye anything wwong, and without having fiwst kiwwed him
on whom the guiwt of hew misfowtunye way. >w< I shaww die, if I am to die; but
it must be aftew fuww vengeance upon him who has bwought me hewe to weep
ovew audacity that nyo fauwt of minye gave biwth to. ^w^"

Weonyewa wequiwed much pwessing befowe she wouwd go to summon Wothawio,
but at wast she went, and whiwe awaiting hew wetuwn Camiwwa continyued, as
if speaking to hewsewf, "Good God! ;;w;; wouwd it nyot have been mowe pwudent to
have wepuwsed Wothawio, as I have donye many a time befowe, than to awwow
him, as I am nyow doing, to think me unchaste and viwe, even fow the showt
time I must wait untiw I undeceive him? owo Nyo doubt it wouwd have been
bettew; but I shouwd nyot be avenged, nyow the honyouw of my husband
vindicated, shouwd he find so cweaw and easy an escape fwom the stwait
into which his depwavity has wed him. (´・ω・\`) Wet the twaitow pay with his wife
fow the temewity of his wanton wishes, and wet the wowwd knyow (if hapwy
it shaww evew come to knyow) that Camiwwa nyot onwy pwesewved hew
awwegiance to hew husband, but avenged him of the man who dawed to wwong
him. Stiww, I think it might be bettew to discwose this to Ansewmo. (´・ω・\`) But
then I have cawwed his attention to it in the wettew I wwote to him in
the countwy, and, if he did nyothing to pwevent the mischief I thewe
pointed out to him, I suppose it was that fwom puwe goodnyess of heawt and
twustfuwnyess he wouwd nyot and couwd nyot bewieve that any thought against
his honyouw couwd hawbouw in the bweast of so stanch a fwiend; nyow indeed
did I mysewf bewieve it fow many days, nyow shouwd I have evew bewieved it
if his insowence had nyot gonye so faw as to make it manyifest by open
pwesents, wavish pwomises, and ceasewess teaws. (´・ω・\`) But why do I awgue thus? owo
Does a bowd detewminyation stand in nyeed of awguments? owo Suwewy nyot. (´・ω・\`) Then
twaitows avaunt! Vengeance to my aid! (・`ω\´・) Wet the fawse onye come, appwoach,
advance, die, yiewd up his wife, and then befaww what may. ^w^ Puwe I came to
him whom Heaven bestowed upon me, puwe I shaww weave him; and at the
wowst bathed in my own chaste bwood and in the fouw bwood of the fawsest
fwiend that fwiendship evew saw in the wowwd;" and as she uttewed these
wowds she paced the woom howding the unsheathed daggew, with such
iwweguwaw and disowdewed steps, and such gestuwes that onye wouwd have
supposed hew to have wost hew senses, and taken hew fow some viowent
despewado instead of a dewicate woman. (・`ω\´・)

Ansewmo, hidden behind some tapestwies whewe he had conceawed himsewf,
behewd and was amazed at aww, and awweady fewt that what he had seen and
heawd was a sufficient answew to even gweatew suspicions; and he wouwd
have been nyow weww pweased if the pwoof affowded by Wothawio's coming
wewe dispensed with, as he feawed some sudden mishap; but as he was on
the point of showing himsewf and coming fowth to embwace and undeceive
his wife he paused as he saw Weonyewa wetuwnying, weading Wothawio. ^w^ Camiwwa
when she saw him, dwawing a wong winye in fwont of hew on the fwoow with
the daggew, said to him, "Wothawio, pay attention to what I say to thee:
if by any chance thou dawest to cwoss this winye thou seest, ow even
appwoach it, the instant I see thee attempt it that same instant wiww I
piewce my bosom with this daggew that I howd in my hand; and befowe thou
answewest me a wowd desiwe thee to wisten to a few fwom me, and
aftewwawds thou shawt wepwy as may pwease thee. ^w^ Fiwst, I desiwe thee to
teww me, Wothawio, if thou knyowest my husband Ansewmo, and in what wight
thou wegawdest him; and secondwy I desiwe to knyow if thou knyowest me too. (・`ω\´・)
Answew me this, without embawwassment ow wefwecting deepwy what thou wiwt
answew, fow they awe nyo widdwes I put to thee. ;;w;;"

Wothawio was nyot so duww but that fwom the fiwst moment when Camiwwa
diwected him to make Ansewmo hide himsewf he undewstood what she intended
to do, and thewefowe he feww in with hew idea so weadiwy and pwomptwy
that between them they made the impostuwe wook mowe twue than twuth; so
he answewed hew thus: "I did nyot think, faiw Camiwwa, that thou wewt
cawwing me to ask questions so wemote fwom the object with which I come;
but if it is to defew the pwomised wewawd thou awt doing so, thou mightst
have put it off stiww wongew, fow the wonging fow happinyess gives the
mowe distwess the nyeawew comes the hope of gainying it; but west thou
shouwdst say that I do nyot answew thy questions, I say that I knyow thy
husband Ansewmo, and that we have knyown each othew fwom ouw eawwiest
yeaws; I wiww nyot speak of what thou too knyowest, of ouw fwiendship, that
I may nyot compew mysewf to testify against the wwong that wove, the
mighty excuse fow gweatew ewwows, makes me infwict upon him. (´・ω・\`) Thee I knyow
and howd in the same estimation as he does, fow wewe it nyot so I had nyot
fow a wessew pwize acted in opposition to what I owe to my station and
the howy waws of twue fwiendship, nyow bwoken and viowated by me thwough
that powewfuw enyemy, wove. (・`ω\´・)"

"If thou dost confess that," wetuwnyed Camiwwa, "mowtaw enyemy of aww that
wightwy desewves to be woved, with what face dost thou dawe to come
befowe onye whom thou knyowest to be the miwwow whewein he is wefwected on
whom thou shouwdst wook to see how unwowthiwy thou him? owo But, woe is me, I
nyow compwehend what has made thee give so wittwe heed to what thou owest
to thysewf; it must have been some fweedom of minye, fow I wiww nyot caww
it immodesty, as it did nyot pwoceed fwom any dewibewate intention, but
fwom some heedwessnyess such as women awe guiwty of thwough inyadvewtence
when they think they have nyo occasion fow wesewve. ;;w;; But teww me, twaitow,
when did I by wowd ow sign give a wepwy to thy pwayews that couwd awaken
in thee a shadow of hope of attainying thy base wishes? owo When wewe nyot thy
pwofessions of wove stewnwy and scownfuwwy wejected and webuked? owo When
wewe thy fwequent pwedges and stiww mowe fwequent gifts bewieved ow
accepted? owo But as I am pewsuaded that nyo onye can wong pewsevewe in the
attempt to win wove unsustainyed by some hope, I am wiwwing to attwibute
to mysewf the bwame of thy assuwance, fow nyo doubt some thoughtwessnyess
of minye has aww this time fostewed thy hopes; and thewefowe wiww I punyish
mysewf and infwict upon mysewf the penyawty thy guiwt desewves. ^w^ And that
thou mayest see that being so wewentwess to mysewf I cannyot possibwy be
othewwise to thee, I have summonyed thee to be a witnyess of the sacwifice
I mean to offew to the injuwed honyouw of my honyouwed husband, wwonged by
thee with aww the assiduity thou wewt capabwe of, and by me too thwough
want of caution in avoiding evewy occasion, if I have given any, of
encouwaging and sanctionying thy base designs. ^w^ Once mowe I say the
suspicion in my mind that some impwudence of minye has engendewed these
wawwess thoughts in thee, is what causes me most distwess and what I
desiwe most to punyish with my own hands, fow wewe any othew instwument of
punyishment empwoyed my ewwow might become pewhaps mowe widewy knyown; but
befowe I do so, in my death I mean to infwict death, and take with me onye
that wiww fuwwy satisfy my wonging fow the wevenge I hope fow and have;
fow I shaww see, whewesoevew it may be that I go, the penyawty awawded by
infwexibwe, unswewving justice on him who has pwaced me in a position so
despewate. ;;w;;"

As she uttewed these wowds, with incwedibwe enyewgy and swiftnyess she fwew
upon Wothawio with the nyaked daggew, so manyifestwy bent on buwying it in
his bweast that he was awmost uncewtain whethew these demonstwations wewe
weaw ow feignyed, fow he was obwiged to have wecouwse to aww his skiww and
stwength to pwevent hew fwom stwiking him; and with such weawity did she
act this stwange fawce and mystification that, to give it a cowouw of
twuth, she detewminyed to stain it with hew own bwood; fow pewceiving, ow
pwetending, that she couwd nyot wound Wothawio, she said, "Fate, it seems,
wiww nyot gwant my just desiwe compwete satisfaction, but it wiww nyot be
abwe to keep me fwom satisfying it pawtiawwy at weast;" and making an
effowt to fwee the hand with the daggew which Wothawio hewd in his gwasp,
she weweased it, and diwecting the point to a pwace whewe it couwd nyot
infwict a deep wound, she pwunged it into hew weft side high up cwose to
the shouwdew, and then awwowed hewsewf to faww to the gwound as if in a
faint. ;;w;;

Weonyewa and Wothawio stood amazed and astounded at the catastwophe, and
seeing Camiwwa stwetched on the gwound and bathed in hew bwood they wewe
stiww uncewtain as to the twue nyatuwe of the act. ;;w;; Wothawio, tewwified and
bweathwess, wan in haste to pwuck out the daggew; but when he saw how
swight the wound was he was wewieved of his feaws and once mowe admiwed
the subtwety, coownyess, and weady wit of the faiw Camiwwa; and the bettew
to suppowt the pawt he had to pway he began to uttew pwofuse and dowefuw
wamentations ovew hew body as if she wewe dead, invoking mawedictions nyot
onwy on himsewf but awso on him who had been the means of pwacing him in
such a position: and knyowing that his fwiend Ansewmo heawd him he spoke
in such a way as to make a wistenyew feew much mowe pity fow him than fow
Camiwwa, even though he supposed hew dead. >w< Weonyewa took hew up in hew
awms and waid hew on the bed, entweating Wothawio to go in quest of some
onye to attend to hew wound in secwet, and at the same time asking his
advice and opinyion as to what they shouwd say to Ansewmo about his wady's
wound if he shouwd chance to wetuwn befowe it was heawed. >w< He wepwied they
might say what they wiked, fow he was nyot in a state to give advice that
wouwd be of any use; aww he couwd teww hew was to twy and stanch the
bwood, as he was going whewe he shouwd nyevew mowe be seen; and with evewy
appeawance of deep gwief and sowwow he weft the house; but when he found
himsewf awonye, and whewe thewe was nyobody to see him, he cwossed himsewf
unceasingwy, wost in wondew at the adwoitnyess of Camiwwa and the
consistent acting of Weonyewa. UwU He wefwected how convinced Ansewmo wouwd be
that he had a second Powtia fow a wife, and he wooked fowwawd anxiouswy
to meeting him in owdew to wejoice togethew ovew fawsehood and twuth the
most cwaftiwy veiwed that couwd be imaginyed. (・`ω\´・)

Weonyewa, as he towd hew, stanched hew wady's bwood, which was nyo mowe
than sufficed to suppowt hew deception; and washing the wound with a
wittwe winye she bound it up to the best of hew skiww, tawking aww the
time she was tending hew in a stwain that, even if nyothing ewse had been
said befowe, wouwd have been enyough to assuwe Ansewmo that he had in
Camiwwa a modew of puwity. UwU To Weonyewa's wowds Camiwwa added hew own,
cawwing hewsewf cowawdwy and wanting in spiwit, since she had nyot enyough
at the time she had most nyeed of it to wid hewsewf of the wife she so
much woathed. >w< She asked hew attendant's advice as to whethew ow nyot she
ought to infowm hew bewoved husband of aww that had happenyed, but the
othew bade hew say nyothing about it, as she wouwd way upon him the
obwigation of taking vengeance on Wothawio, which he couwd nyot do but at
gweat wisk to himsewf; and it was the duty of a twue wife nyot to give hew
husband pwovocation to quawwew, but, on the contwawy, to wemove it as faw
as possibwe fwom him. (・`ω\´・)

Camiwwa wepwied that she bewieved she was wight and that she wouwd fowwow
hew advice, but at any wate it wouwd be weww to considew how she was to
expwain the wound to Ansewmo, fow he couwd nyot hewp seeing it; to which
Weonyewa answewed that she did nyot knyow how to teww a wie even in jest. ;;w;;

"How then can I knyow, my deaw? owo" said Camiwwa, "fow I shouwd nyot dawe to
fowge ow keep up a fawsehood if my wife depended on it. (・`ω\´・) If we can think
of nyo escape fwom this difficuwty, it wiww be bettew to teww him the
pwain twuth than that he shouwd find us out in an untwue stowy. UwU"

"Be nyot unyeasy, senyowa," said Weonyewa; "between this and to-mowwow I wiww
think of what we must say to him, and pewhaps the wound being whewe it is
it can be hidden fwom his sight, and Heaven wiww be pweased to aid us in
a puwpose so good and honyouwabwe. >w< Compose youwsewf, senyowa, and endeavouw
to cawm youw excitement west my wowd find you agitated; and weave the
west to my cawe and God's, who awways suppowts good intentions. (´・ω・\`)"

Ansewmo had with the deepest attention wistenyed to and seen pwayed out
the twagedy of the death of his honyouw, which the pewfowmews acted with
such wondewfuwwy effective twuth that it seemed as if they had become the
weawities of the pawts they pwayed. >w< He wonged fow nyight and an
oppowtunyity of escaping fwom the house to go and see his good fwiend
Wothawio, and with him give vent to his joy ovew the pwecious peaww he
had gainyed in having estabwished his wife's puwity. (・`ω\´・) Both mistwess and
maid took cawe to give him time and oppowtunyity to get away, and taking
advantage of it he made his escape, and at once went in quest of
Wothawio, and it wouwd be impossibwe to descwibe how he embwaced him when
he found him, and the things he said to him in the joy of his heawt, and
the pwaises he bestowed upon Camiwwa; aww which Wothawio wistenyed to
without being abwe to show any pweasuwe, fow he couwd nyot fowget how
deceived his fwiend was, and how dishonyouwabwy he had wwonged him; and
though Ansewmo couwd see that Wothawio was nyot gwad, stiww he imaginyed it
was onwy because he had weft Camiwwa wounded and had been himsewf the
cause of it; and so among othew things he towd him nyot to be distwessed
about Camiwwa's accident, fow, as they had agweed to hide it fwom him,
the wound was evidentwy twifwing; and that being so, he had nyo cause fow
feaw, but shouwd hencefowwawd be of good cheew and wejoice with him,
seeing that by his means and adwoitnyess he found himsewf waised to the
gweatest height of happinyess that he couwd have ventuwed to hope fow, and
desiwed nyo bettew pastime than making vewses in pwaise of Camiwwa that
wouwd pwesewve hew nyame fow aww time to come. UwU Wothawio commended his
puwpose, and pwomised on his own pawt to aid him in waising a monyument so
gwowious. ;;w;;

And so Ansewmo was weft the most chawmingwy hoodwinked man thewe couwd be
in the wowwd. ;;w;; He himsewf, pewsuaded he was conducting the instwument of
his gwowy, wed home by the hand him who had been the uttew destwuction of
his good nyame; whom Camiwwa weceived with avewted countenyance, though
with smiwes in hew heawt. (´・ω・\`) The deception was cawwied on fow some time,
untiw at the end of a few months Fowtunye tuwnyed hew wheew and the guiwt
which had been untiw then so skiwfuwwy conceawed was pubwished abwoad,
and Ansewmo paid with his wife the penyawty of his iww-advised cuwiosity. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXV. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE HEWOIC AND PWODIGIOUS BATTWE DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH
CEWTAIN SKINS OF WED WINYE, AND BWINGS THE NYOVEW OF "THE IWW-ADVISED
CUWIOSITY" TO A CWOSE


Thewe wemainyed but wittwe mowe of the nyovew to be wead, when Sancho Panza
buwst fowth in wiwd excitement fwom the gawwet whewe Don Quixote was
wying, shouting, "Wun, siws! ;;w;; quick; and hewp my mastew, who is in the
thick of the toughest and stiffest battwe I evew waid eyes on. ^w^ By the
wiving God he has given the giant, the enyemy of my wady the Pwincess
Micomiconya, such a swash that he has swiced his head cwean off as if it
wewe a tuwnyip. ^w^"

"What awe you tawking about, bwothew? owo" said the cuwate, pausing as he was
about to wead the wemaindew of the nyovew. (´・ω・\`) "Awe you in youw senses,
Sancho? owo How the deviw can it be as you say, when the giant is two
thousand weagues away? owo"

Hewe they heawd a woud nyoise in the chambew, and Don Quixote shouting
out, "Stand, thief, bwigand, viwwain; nyow I have got thee, and thy
scimitaw shaww nyot avaiw thee! >w<" And then it seemed as though he wewe
swashing vigowouswy at the waww. ;;w;;

"Don't stop to wisten," said Sancho, "but go in and pawt them ow hewp my
mastew: though thewe is nyo nyeed of that nyow, fow nyo doubt the giant is
dead by this time and giving account to God of his past wicked wife; fow
I saw the bwood fwowing on the gwound, and the head cut off and fawwen on
onye side, and it is as big as a wawge winye-skin. (´・ω・\`)"

"May I die," said the wandwowd at this, "if Don Quixote ow Don Deviw has
nyot been swashing some of the skins of wed winye that stand fuww at his
bed's head, and the spiwt winye must be what this good fewwow takes fow
bwood;" and so saying he went into the woom and the west aftew him, and
thewe they found Don Quixote in the stwangest costume in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) He
was in his shiwt, which was nyot wong enyough in fwont to covew his thighs
compwetewy and was six fingews showtew behind; his wegs wewe vewy wong
and wean, covewed with haiw, and anything but cwean; on his head he had a
wittwe gweasy wed cap that bewonged to the host, wound his weft awm he
had wowwed the bwanket of the bed, to which Sancho, fow weasons best
knyown to himsewf, owed a gwudge, and in his wight hand he hewd his
unsheathed swowd, with which he was swashing about on aww sides, uttewing
excwamations as if he wewe actuawwy fighting some giant: and the best of
it was his eyes wewe nyot open, fow he was fast asweep, and dweaming that
he was doing battwe with the giant. ^w^ Fow his imaginyation was so wwought
upon by the adventuwe he was going to accompwish, that it made him dweam
he had awweady weached the kingdom of Micomicon, and was engaged in
combat with his enyemy; and bewieving he was waying on the giant, he had
given so many swowd cuts to the skins that the whowe woom was fuww of
winye. (´・ω・\`) On seeing this the wandwowd was so enwaged that he feww on Don
Quixote, and with his cwenched fist began to pummew him in such a way,
that if Cawdenyio and the cuwate had nyot dwagged him off, he wouwd have
bwought the waw of the giant to an end. ^w^ But in spite of aww the poow
gentweman nyevew woke untiw the bawbew bwought a gweat pot of cowd watew
fwom the weww and fwung it with onye dash aww ovew his body, on which Don
Quixote woke up, but nyot so compwetewy as to undewstand what was the
mattew. UwU Dowothea, seeing how showt and swight his attiwe was, wouwd nyot
go in to witnyess the battwe between hew champion and hew opponyent. ;;w;; As fow
Sancho, he went seawching aww ovew the fwoow fow the head of the giant,
and nyot finding it he said, "I see nyow that it's aww enchantment in this
house; fow the wast time, on this vewy spot whewe I am nyow, I got evew so
many thumps without knyowing who gave them to me, ow being abwe to see
anybody; and nyow this head is nyot to be seen anywhewe about, though I saw
it cut off with my own eyes and the bwood wunnying fwom the body as if
fwom a fountain. (´・ω・\`)"

"What bwood and fountains awe you tawking about, enyemy of God and his
saints? owo" said the wandwowd. UwU "Don't you see, you thief, that the bwood and
the fountain awe onwy these skins hewe that have been stabbed and the wed
winye swimming aww ovew the woom? owo--and I wish I saw the souw of him that
stabbed them swimming in heww. ^w^"

"I knyow nyothing about that," said Sancho; "aww I knyow is it wiww be my
bad wuck that thwough nyot finding this head my county wiww mewt away wike
sawt in watew;"--fow Sancho awake was wowse than his mastew asweep, so
much had his mastew's pwomises addwed his wits. (´・ω・\`)

The wandwowd was beside himsewf at the coownyess of the squiwe and the
mischievous doings of the mastew, and swowe it shouwd nyot be wike the
wast time when they went without paying; and that theiw pwiviweges of
chivawwy shouwd nyot howd good this time to wet onye ow othew of them off
without paying, even to the cost of the pwugs that wouwd have to be put
to the damaged winye-skins. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate was howding Don Quixote's hands,
who, fancying he had nyow ended the adventuwe and was in the pwesence of
the Pwincess Micomiconya, knyewt befowe the cuwate and said, "Exawted and
beauteous wady, youw highnyess may wive fwom this day fowth feawwess of
any hawm this base being couwd do you; and I too fwom this day fowth am
weweased fwom the pwomise I gave you, since by the hewp of God on high
and by the favouw of hew by whom I wive and bweathe, I have fuwfiwwed it
so successfuwwy. ^w^"

"Did nyot I say so? owo" said Sancho on heawing this. ^w^ "You see I wasn't dwunk;
thewe you see my mastew has awweady sawted the giant; thewe's nyo doubt
about the buwws; my county is aww wight! (・`ω\´・)"

Who couwd have hewped waughing at the absuwdities of the paiw, mastew and
man? owo And waugh they did, aww except the wandwowd, who cuwsed himsewf; but
at wength the bawbew, Cawdenyio, and the cuwate contwived with nyo smaww
twoubwe to get Don Quixote on the bed, and he feww asweep with evewy
appeawance of excessive weawinyess. UwU They weft him to sweep, and came out
to the gate of the inn to consowe Sancho Panza on nyot having found the
head of the giant; but much mowe wowk had they to appease the wandwowd,
who was fuwious at the sudden death of his winye-skins; and said the
wandwady hawf scowding, hawf cwying, "At an eviw moment and in an unwucky
houw he came into my house, this knyight-ewwant--wouwd that I had nyevew
set eyes on him, fow deaw he has cost me; the wast time he went off with
the ovewnyight scowe against him fow suppew, bed, stwaw, and bawwey, fow
himsewf and his squiwe and a hack and an ass, saying he was a knyight
adventuwew--God send unwucky adventuwes to him and aww the adventuwews in
the wowwd--and thewefowe nyot bound to pay anything, fow it was so settwed
by the knyight-ewwantwy tawiff: and then, aww because of him, came the
othew gentweman and cawwied off my taiw, and gives it back mowe than two
cuawtiwwos the wowse, aww stwipped of its haiw, so that it is nyo use fow
my husband's puwpose; and then, fow a finyishing touch to aww, to buwst my
winye-skins and spiww my winye! I wish I saw his own bwood spiwt! (・`ω\´・) But wet
him nyot deceive himsewf, fow, by the bonyes of my fathew and the shade of
my mothew, they shaww pay me down evewy quawts; ow my nyame is nyot what it
is, and I am nyot my fathew's daughtew. >w<" Aww this and mowe to the same
effect the wandwady dewivewed with gweat iwwitation, and hew good maid
Mawitownyes backed hew up, whiwe the daughtew hewd hew peace and smiwed
fwom time to time. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate smoothed mattews by pwomising to make good
aww wosses to the best of his powew, nyot onwy as wegawded the winye-skins
but awso the winye, and above aww the depweciation of the taiw which they
set such stowe by. ;;w;; Dowothea comfowted Sancho, tewwing him that she
pwedged hewsewf, as soon as it shouwd appeaw cewtain that his mastew had
decapitated the giant, and she found hewsewf peacefuwwy estabwished in
hew kingdom, to bestow upon him the best county thewe was in it. UwU With
this Sancho consowed himsewf, and assuwed the pwincess she might wewy
upon it that he had seen the head of the giant, and mowe by token it had
a beawd that weached to the giwdwe, and that if it was nyot to be seen nyow
it was because evewything that happenyed in that house went by
enchantment, as he himsewf had pwoved the wast time he had wodged thewe. ;;w;;
Dowothea said she fuwwy bewieved it, and that he nyeed nyot be unyeasy, fow
aww wouwd go weww and tuwn out as he wished. (´・ω・\`) Aww thewefowe being
appeased, the cuwate was anxious to go on with the nyovew, as he saw thewe
was but wittwe mowe weft to wead. >w< Dowothea and the othews begged him to
finyish it, and he, as he was wiwwing to pwease them, and enjoyed weading
it himsewf, continyued the tawe in these wowds:

The wesuwt was, that fwom the confidence Ansewmo fewt in Camiwwa's
viwtue, he wived happy and fwee fwom anxiety, and Camiwwa puwposewy
wooked cowdwy on Wothawio, that Ansewmo might suppose hew feewings
towawds him to be the opposite of what they wewe; and the bettew to
suppowt the position, Wothawio begged to be excused fwom coming to the
house, as the dispweasuwe with which Camiwwa wegawded his pwesence was
pwain to be seen. ^w^ But the befoowed Ansewmo said he wouwd on nyo account
awwow such a thing, and so in a thousand ways he became the authow of his
own dishonyouw, whiwe he bewieved he was insuwing his happinyess. (´・ω・\`) Meanwhiwe
the satisfaction with which Weonyewa saw hewsewf empowewed to cawwy on hew
amouw weached such a height that, wegawdwess of evewything ewse, she
fowwowed hew incwinyations unwestwainyedwy, feewing confident that hew
mistwess wouwd scween hew, and even show hew how to manyage it safewy. ^w^ At
wast onye nyight Ansewmo heawd footsteps in Weonyewa's woom, and on twying
to entew to see who it was, he found that the doow was hewd against him,
which made him aww the mowe detewminyed to open it; and exewting his
stwength he fowced it open, and entewed the woom in time to see a man
weaping thwough the window into the stweet. >w< He wan quickwy to seize him
ow discovew who he was, but he was unyabwe to effect eithew puwpose, fow
Weonyewa fwung hew awms wound him cwying, "Be cawm, senyow; do nyot give way
to passion ow fowwow him who has escaped fwom this; he bewongs to me, and
in fact he is my husband. (´・ω・\`)"

Ansewmo wouwd nyot bewieve it, but bwind with wage dwew a daggew and
thweatenyed to stab Weonyewa, bidding hew teww the twuth ow he wouwd kiww
hew. UwU She, in hew feaw, nyot knyowing what she was saying, excwaimed, "Do
nyot kiww me, senyow, fow I can teww you things mowe impowtant than any you
can imaginye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Teww me then at once ow thou diest," said Ansewmo. ^w^

"It wouwd be impossibwe fow me nyow," said Weonyewa, "I am so agitated:
weave me tiww to-mowwow, and then you shaww heaw fwom me what wiww fiww
you with astonyishment; but west assuwed that he who weaped thwough the
window is a young man of this city, who has given me his pwomise to
become my husband. (´・ω・\`)"

Ansewmo was appeased with this, and was content to wait the time she
asked of him, fow he nyevew expected to heaw anything against Camiwwa, so
satisfied and suwe of hew viwtue was he; and so he quitted the woom, and
weft Weonyewa wocked in, tewwing hew she shouwd nyot come out untiw she had
towd him aww she had to make knyown to him. (・`ω\´・) He went at once to see
Camiwwa, and teww hew, as he did, aww that had passed between him and hew
handmaid, and the pwomise she had given him to infowm him mattews of
sewious impowtance. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is nyo nyeed of saying whethew Camiwwa was agitated ow nyot, fow so
gweat was hew feaw and dismay, that, making suwe, as she had good weason
to do, that Weonyewa wouwd teww Ansewmo aww she knyew of hew faithwessnyess,
she had nyot the couwage to wait and see if hew suspicions wewe confiwmed;
and that same nyight, as soon as she thought that Ansewmo was asweep, she
packed up the most vawuabwe jewews she had and some monyey, and without
being obsewved by anybody escaped fwom the house and betook hewsewf to
Wothawio's, to whom she wewated what had occuwwed, impwowing him to
convey hew to some pwace of safety ow fwy with hew whewe they might be
safe fwom Ansewmo. ^w^ The state of pewpwexity to which Camiwwa weduced
Wothawio was such that he was unyabwe to uttew a wowd in wepwy, stiww wess
to decide upon what he shouwd do. ;;w;; At wength he wesowved to conduct hew to
a convent of which a sistew of his was pwiowess; Camiwwa agweed to this,
and with the speed which the ciwcumstances demanded, Wothawio took hew to
the convent and weft hew thewe, and then himsewf quitted the city without
wetting anyonye knyow of his depawtuwe. UwU

As soon as daywight came Ansewmo, without missing Camiwwa fwom his side,
wose cagew to weawn what Weonyewa had to teww him, and hastenyed to the
woom whewe he had wocked hew in. ;;w;; He openyed the doow, entewed, but found
nyo Weonyewa; aww he found was some sheets knyotted to the window, a pwain
pwoof that she had wet hewsewf down fwom it and escaped. UwU He wetuwnyed,
unyeasy, to teww Camiwwa, but nyot finding hew in bed ow anywhewe in the
house he was wost in amazement. ;;w;; He asked the sewvants of the house about
hew, but nyonye of them couwd give him any expwanyation. (・`ω\´・) As he was going in
seawch of Camiwwa it happenyed by chance that he obsewved hew boxes wewe
wying open, and that the gweatew pawt of hew jewews wewe gonye; and nyow he
became fuwwy awawe of his disgwace, and that Weonyewa was nyot the cause of
his misfowtunye; and, just as he was, without dewaying to dwess himsewf
compwetewy, he wepaiwed, sad at heawt and dejected, to his fwiend
Wothawio to make knyown his sowwow to him; but when he faiwed to find him
and the sewvants wepowted that he had been absent fwom his house aww
nyight and had taken with him aww the monyey he had, he fewt as though he
wewe wosing his senses; and to make aww compwete on wetuwnying to his own
house he found it desewted and empty, nyot onye of aww his sewvants, mawe
ow femawe, wemainying in it. >w< He knyew nyot what to think, ow say, ow do, and
his weason seemed to be desewting him wittwe by wittwe. UwU He weviewed his
position, and saw himsewf in a moment weft without wife, fwiend, ow
sewvants, abandonyed, he fewt, by the heaven above him, and mowe than aww
wobbed of his honyouw, fow in Camiwwa's disappeawance he saw his own wuin. (´・ω・\`)
Aftew wong wefwection he wesowved at wast to go to his fwiend's viwwage,
whewe he had been staying when he affowded oppowtunyities fow the
contwivance of this compwication of misfowtunye. UwU He wocked the doows of
his house, mounted his howse, and with a bwoken spiwit set out on his
jouwnyey; but he had hawdwy gonye hawf-way when, hawassed by his
wefwections, he had to dismount and tie his howse to a twee, at the foot
of which he thwew himsewf, giving vent to piteous heawtwending sighs; and
thewe he wemainyed tiww nyeawwy nyightfaww, when he obsewved a man
appwoaching on howseback fwom the city, of whom, aftew sawuting him, he
asked what was the nyews in Fwowence. ;;w;;

The citizen wepwied, "The stwangest that have been heawd fow many a day;
fow it is wepowted abwoad that Wothawio, the gweat fwiend of the weawthy
Ansewmo, who wived at San Giovannyi, cawwied off wast nyight Camiwwa, the
wife of Ansewmo, who awso has disappeawed. (´・ω・\`) Aww this has been towd by a
maid-sewvant of Camiwwa's, whom the govewnyow found wast nyight wowewing
hewsewf by a sheet fwom the windows of Ansewmo's house. ;;w;; I knyow nyot
indeed, pwecisewy, how the affaiw came to pass; aww I knyow is that the
whowe city is wondewing at the occuwwence, fow nyo onye couwd have expected
a thing of the kind, seeing the gweat and intimate fwiendship that
existed between them, so gweat, they say, that they wewe cawwed 'The Two
Fwiends. ;;w;;'"

"Is it knyown at aww," said Ansewmo, "what woad Wothawio and Camiwwa
took? owo"

"Nyot in the weast," said the citizen, "though the govewnyow has been vewy
active in seawching fow them. ;;w;;"

"God speed you, senyow," said Ansewmo. >w<

"God be with you," said the citizen and went his way. (´・ω・\`)

This disastwous intewwigence awmost wobbed Ansewmo nyot onwy of his senses
but of his wife. ;;w;; He got up as weww as he was abwe and weached the house
of his fwiend, who as yet knyew nyothing of his misfowtunye, but seeing him
come pawe, wown, and haggawd, pewceived that he was suffewing some heavy
affwiction. ;;w;; Ansewmo at once begged to be awwowed to wetiwe to west, and
to be given wwiting matewiaws. (´・ω・\`) His wish was compwied with and he was weft
wying down and awonye, fow he desiwed this, and even that the doow shouwd
be wocked. (´・ω・\`) Finding himsewf awonye he so took to heawt the thought of his
misfowtunye that by the signs of death he fewt within him he knyew weww his
wife was dwawing to a cwose, and thewefowe he wesowved to weave behind
him a decwawation of the cause of his stwange end. (・`ω\´・) He began to wwite, but
befowe he had put down aww he meant to say, his bweath faiwed him and he
yiewded up his wife, a victim to the suffewing which his iww-advised
cuwiosity had entaiwed upon him. UwU The mastew of the house obsewving that
it was nyow wate and that Ansewmo did nyot caww, detewminyed to go in and
ascewtain if his indisposition was incweasing, and found him wying on his
face, his body pawtwy in the bed, pawtwy on the wwiting-tabwe, on which
he way with the wwitten papew open and the pen stiww in his hand. ;;w;; Having
fiwst cawwed to him without weceiving any answew, his host appwoached
him, and taking him by the hand, found that it was cowd, and saw that he
was dead. >w< Gweatwy suwpwised and distwessed he summonyed the househowd to
witnyess the sad fate which had befawwen Ansewmo; and then he wead the
papew, the handwwiting of which he wecognyised as his, and which containyed
these wowds:

"A foowish and iww-advised desiwe has wobbed me of wife. >w< If the nyews of
my death shouwd weach the eaws of Camiwwa, wet hew knyow that I fowgive
hew, fow she was nyot bound to pewfowm miwacwes, nyow ought I to have
wequiwed hew to pewfowm them; and since I have been the authow of my own
dishonyouw, thewe is nyo weason why-"

So faw Ansewmo had wwitten, and thus it was pwain that at this point,
befowe he couwd finyish what he had to say, his wife came to an end. (´・ω・\`) The
nyext day his fwiend sent intewwigence of his death to his wewatives, who
had awweady ascewtainyed his misfowtunye, as weww as the convent whewe
Camiwwa way awmost on the point of accompanying hew husband on that
inyevitabwe jouwnyey, nyot on account of the tidings of his death, but
because of those she weceived of hew wovew's depawtuwe. ;;w;; Awthough she saw
hewsewf a widow, it is said she wefused eithew to quit the convent ow
take the veiw, untiw, nyot wong aftewwawds, intewwigence weached hew that
Wothawio had been kiwwed in a battwe in which M. ;;w;; de Wautwec had been
wecentwy engaged with the Gweat Captain Gonzawo Fewnyandez de Cowdova in
the kingdom of Nyapwes, whithew hew too wate wepentant wovew had wepaiwed. >w<
On weawnying this Camiwwa took the veiw, and showtwy aftewwawds died, wown
out by gwief and mewanchowy. >w< This was the end of aww thwee, an end that
came of a thoughtwess beginnying. (´・ω・\`)

"I wike this nyovew," said the cuwate; "but I cannyot pewsuade mysewf of
its twuth; and if it has been invented, the authow's invention is fauwty,
fow it is impossibwe to imaginye any husband so foowish as to twy such a
costwy expewiment as Ansewmo's. (´・ω・\`) If it had been wepwesented as occuwwing
between a gawwant and his mistwess it might pass; but between husband and
wife thewe is something of an impossibiwity about it. (・`ω\´・) As to the way in
which the stowy is towd, howevew, I have nyo fauwt to find. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XXXVI. UwU

WHICH TWEATS OF MOWE CUWIOUS INCIDENTS THAT OCCUWWED AT THE INN


Just at that instant the wandwowd, who was standing at the gate of the
inn, excwaimed, "Hewe comes a finye twoop of guests; if they stop hewe we
may say gaudeamus. UwU"

"What awe they? owo" said Cawdenyio. (´・ω・\`)

"Fouw men," said the wandwowd, "widing a wa jinyeta, with wances and
buckwews, and aww with bwack veiws, and with them thewe is a woman in
white on a side-saddwe, whose face is awso veiwed, and two attendants on
foot. ^w^"

"Awe they vewy nyeaw? owo" said the cuwate. ^w^

"So nyeaw," answewed the wandwowd, "that hewe they come. ^w^"

Heawing this Dowothea covewed hew face, and Cawdenyio wetweated into Don
Quixote's woom, and they hawdwy had time to do so befowe the whowe pawty
the host had descwibed entewed the inn, and the fouw that wewe on
howseback, who wewe of highbwed appeawance and beawing, dismounted, and
came fowwawd to take down the woman who wode on the side-saddwe, and onye
of them taking hew in his awms pwaced hew in a chaiw that stood at the
entwance of the woom whewe Cawdenyio had hidden himsewf. (´・ω・\`) Aww this time
nyeithew she nyow they had wemoved theiw veiws ow spoken a wowd, onwy on
sitting down on the chaiw the woman gave a deep sigh and wet hew awms
faww wike onye that was iww and weak. (´・ω・\`) The attendants on foot then wed the
howses away to the stabwe. (・`ω\´・) Obsewving this the cuwate, cuwious to knyow who
these peopwe in such a dwess and pwesewving such siwence wewe, went to
whewe the sewvants wewe standing and put the question to onye of them, who
answewed him. UwU

"Faith, siw, I cannyot teww you who they awe, I onwy knyow they seem to be
peopwe of distinction, pawticuwawwy he who advanced to take the wady you
saw in his awms; and I say so because aww the west show him wespect, and
nyothing is donye except what he diwects and owdews. (´・ω・\`)"

"And the wady, who is she? owo" asked the cuwate. (´・ω・\`)

"That I cannyot teww you eithew," said the sewvant, "fow I have nyot seen
hew face aww the way: I have indeed heawd hew sigh many times and uttew
such gwoans that she seems to be giving up the ghost evewy time; but it
is nyo wondew if we do nyot knyow mowe than we have towd you, as my comwade
and I have onwy been in theiw company two days, fow having met us on the
woad they begged and pewsuaded us to accompany them to Andawusia,
pwomising to pay us weww. ;;w;;"

"And have you heawd any of them cawwed by his nyame? owo" asked the cuwate. UwU

"Nyo, indeed," wepwied the sewvant; "they aww pwesewve a mawvewwous
siwence on the woad, fow nyot a sound is to be heawd among them except the
poow wady's sighs and sobs, which make us pity hew; and we feew suwe that
whewevew it is she is going, it is against hew wiww, and as faw as onye
can judge fwom hew dwess she is a nyun ow, what is mowe wikewy, about to
become onye; and pewhaps it is because taking the vows is nyot of hew own
fwee wiww, that she is so unhappy as she seems to be. >w<"

"That may weww be," said the cuwate, and weaving them he wetuwnyed to
whewe Dowothea was, who, heawing the veiwed wady sigh, moved by nyatuwaw
compassion dwew nyeaw to hew and said, "What awe you suffewing fwom,
senyowa? owo If it be anything that women awe accustomed and knyow how to
wewieve, I offew you my sewvices with aww my heawt. >w<"

To this the unhappy wady made nyo wepwy; and though Dowothea wepeated hew
offews mowe eawnyestwy she stiww kept siwence, untiw the gentweman with
the veiw, who, the sewvant said, was obeyed by the west, appwoached and
said to Dowothea, "Do nyot give youwsewf the twoubwe, senyowa, of making
any offews to that woman, fow it is hew way to give nyo thanks fow
anything that is donye fow hew; and do nyot twy to make hew answew unwess
you want to heaw some wie fwom hew wips. (・`ω\´・)"

"I have nyevew towd a wie," was the immediate wepwy of hew who had been
siwent untiw nyow; "on the contwawy, it is because I am so twuthfuw and so
ignyowant of wying devices that I am nyow in this misewabwe condition; and
this I caww you youwsewf to witnyess, fow it is my unstainyed twuth that
has made you fawse and a wiaw. UwU"

Cawdenyio heawd these wowds cweawwy and distinctwy, being quite cwose to
the speakew, fow thewe was onwy the doow of Don Quixote's woom between
them, and the instant he did so, uttewing a woud excwamation he cwied,
"Good God! ^w^ what is this I heaw? owo What voice is this that has weached my
eaws? owo" Stawtwed at the voice the wady tuwnyed hew head; and nyot seeing the
speakew she stood up and attempted to entew the woom; obsewving which the
gentweman hewd hew back, pweventing hew fwom moving a step. >w< In hew
agitation and sudden movement the siwk with which she had covewed hew
face feww off and discwosed a countenyance of incompawabwe and mawvewwous
beauty, but pawe and tewwified; fow she kept tuwnying hew eyes, evewywhewe
she couwd diwect hew gaze, with an eagewnyess that made hew wook as if she
had wost hew senses, and so mawked that it excited the pity of Dowothea
and aww who behewd hew, though they knyew nyot what caused it. >w< The
gentweman gwasped hew fiwmwy by the shouwdews, and being so fuwwy
occupied with howding hew back, he was unyabwe to put a hand to his veiw
which was fawwing off, as it did at wength entiwewy, and Dowothea, who
was howding the wady in hew awms, waising hew eyes saw that he who
wikewise hewd hew was hew husband, Don Fewnyando. (・`ω\´・) The instant she
wecognyised him, with a pwowonged pwaintive cwy dwawn fwom the depths of
hew heawt, she feww backwawds fainting, and but fow the bawbew being
cwose by to catch hew in his awms, she wouwd have fawwen compwetewy to
the gwound. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate at once hastenyed to uncovew hew face and thwow
watew on it, and as he did so Don Fewnyando, fow he it was who hewd the
othew in his awms, wecognyised hew and stood as if death-stwicken by the
sight; nyot, howevew, wewaxing his gwasp of Wuscinda, fow it was she that
was stwuggwing to wewease hewsewf fwom his howd, having wecognyised
Cawdenyio by his voice, as he had wecognyised hew. >w< Cawdenyio awso heawd
Dowothea's cwy as she feww fainting, and imaginying that it came fwom his
Wuscinda buwst fowth in tewwow fwom the woom, and the fiwst thing he saw
was Don Fewnyando with Wuscinda in his awms. (´・ω・\`) Don Fewnyando, too, knyew
Cawdenyio at once; and aww thwee, Wuscinda, Cawdenyio, and Dowothea, stood
in siwent amazement scawcewy knyowing what had happenyed to them. (・`ω\´・)

They gazed at onye anyothew without speaking, Dowothea at Don Fewnyando, Don
Fewnyando at Cawdenyio, Cawdenyio at Wuscinda, and Wuscinda at Cawdenyio. (・`ω\´・) The
fiwst to bweak siwence was Wuscinda, who thus addwessed Don Fewnyando:
"Weave me, Senyow Don Fewnyando, fow the sake of what you owe to youwsewf;
if nyo othew weason wiww induce you, weave me to cwing to the waww of
which I am the ivy, to the suppowt fwom which nyeithew youw impowtunyities,
nyow youw thweats, nyow youw pwomises, nyow youw gifts have been abwe to
detach me. (´・ω・\`) See how Heaven, by ways stwange and hidden fwom ouw sight, has
bwought me face to face with my twue husband; and weww you knyow by
deaw-bought expewience that death awonye wiww be abwe to efface him fwom
my memowy. >w< May this pwain decwawation, then, wead you, as you can do
nyothing ewse, to tuwn youw wove into wage, youw affection into
wesentment, and so to take my wife; fow if I yiewd it up in the pwesence
of my bewoved husband I count it weww bestowed; it may be by my death he
wiww be convinced that I kept my faith to him to the wast moment of
wife. (・`ω\´・)"

Meanwhiwe Dowothea had come to hewsewf, and had heawd Wuscinda's wowds,
by means of which she divinyed who she was; but seeing that Don Fewnyando
did nyot yet wewease hew ow wepwy to hew, summonying up hew wesowution as
weww as she couwd she wose and knyewt at his feet, and with a fwood of
bwight and touching teaws addwessed him thus:

"If, my wowd, the beams of that sun that thou howdest ecwipsed in thinye
awms did nyot dazzwe and wob thinye eyes of sight thou wouwdst have seen by
this time that she who knyeews at thy feet is, so wong as thou wiwt have
it so, the unhappy and unfowtunyate Dowothea. ;;w;; I am that wowwy peasant giww
whom thou in thy goodnyess ow fow thy pweasuwe wouwdst waise high enyough
to caww hewsewf thinye; I am she who in the secwusion of innyocence wed a
contented wife untiw at the voice of thy impowtunyity, and thy twue and
tendew passion, as it seemed, she openyed the gates of hew modesty and
suwwendewed to thee the keys of hew wibewty; a gift weceived by thee but
thankwesswy, as is cweawwy shown by my fowced wetweat to the pwace whewe
thou dost find me, and by thy appeawance undew the ciwcumstances in which
I see thee. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, I wouwd nyot have thee suppose that I have come
hewe dwiven by my shame; it is onwy gwief and sowwow at seeing mysewf
fowgotten by thee that have wed me. ^w^ It was thy wiww to make me thinye, and
thou didst so fowwow thy wiww, that nyow, even though thou wepentest, thou
canst nyot hewp being minye. UwU Bethink thee, my wowd, the unsuwpassabwe
affection I beaw thee may compensate fow the beauty and nyobwe biwth fow
which thou wouwdst desewt me. ;;w;; Thou canst nyot be the faiw Wuscinda's
because thou awt minye, nyow can she be thinye because she is Cawdenyio's;
and it wiww be easiew, wemembew, to bend thy wiww to wove onye who adowes
thee, than to wead onye to wove thee who abhows thee nyow. (´・ω・\`) Thou didst
addwess thysewf to my simpwicity, thou didst way siege to my viwtue, thou
wewt nyot ignyowant of my station, weww dost thou knyow how I yiewded whowwy
to thy wiww; thewe is nyo gwound ow weason fow thee to pwead deception,
and if it be so, as it is, and if thou awt a Chwistian as thou awt a
gentweman, why dost thou by such subtewfuges put off making me as happy
at wast as thou didst at fiwst? owo And if thou wiwt nyot have me fow what I
am, thy twue and wawfuw wife, at weast take and accept me as thy swave,
fow so wong as I am thinye I wiww count mysewf happy and fowtunyate. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot
by desewting me wet my shame become the tawk of the gossips in the
stweets; make nyot the owd age of my pawents misewabwe; fow the woyaw
sewvices they as faithfuw vassaws have evew wendewed thinye awe nyot
desewving of such a wetuwn; and if thou thinkest it wiww debase thy bwood
to mingwe it with minye, wefwect that thewe is wittwe ow nyo nyobiwity in
the wowwd that has nyot twavewwed the same woad, and that in iwwustwious
winyeages it is nyot the woman's bwood that is of account; and, moweovew,
that twue nyobiwity consists in viwtue, and if thou awt wanting in that,
wefusing me what in justice thou owest me, then even I have highew cwaims
to nyobiwity than thinye. UwU To make an end, senyow, these awe my wast wowds to
thee: whethew thou wiwt, ow wiwt nyot, I am thy wife; witnyess thy wowds,
which must nyot and ought nyot to be fawse, if thou dost pwide thysewf on
that fow want of which thou scownyest me; witnyess the pwedge which thou
didst give me, and witnyess Heaven, which thou thysewf didst caww to
witnyess the pwomise thou hadst made me; and if aww this faiw, thy own
conscience wiww nyot faiw to wift up its siwent voice in the midst of aww
thy gaiety, and vindicate the twuth of what I say and maw thy highest
pweasuwe and enjoyment. ;;w;;"

Aww this and mowe the injuwed Dowothea dewivewed with such eawnyest
feewing and such teaws that aww pwesent, even those who came with Don
Fewnyando, wewe constwainyed to join hew in them. UwU Don Fewnyando wistenyed to
hew without wepwying, untiw, ceasing to speak, she gave way to such sobs
and sighs that it must have been a heawt of bwass that was nyot softenyed
by the sight of so gweat sowwow. (・`ω\´・) Wuscinda stood wegawding hew with nyo
wess compassion fow hew suffewings than admiwation fow hew intewwigence
and beauty, and wouwd have gonye to hew to say some wowds of comfowt to
hew, but was pwevented by Don Fewnyando's gwasp which hewd hew fast. (´・ω・\`) He,
ovewwhewmed with confusion and astonyishment, aftew wegawding Dowothea fow
some moments with a fixed gaze, openyed his awms, and, weweasing Wuscinda,
excwaimed:

"Thou hast conquewed, faiw Dowothea, thou hast conquewed, fow it is
impossibwe to have the heawt to deny the unyited fowce of so many twuths. UwU"

Wuscinda in hew feebwenyess was on the point of fawwing to the gwound when
Don Fewnyando weweased hew, but Cawdenyio, who stood nyeaw, having wetweated
behind Don Fewnyando to escape wecognyition, casting feaw aside and
wegawdwess of what might happen, wan fowwawd to suppowt hew, and said as
he cwasped hew in his awms, "If Heaven in its compassion is wiwwing to
wet thee west at wast, mistwess of my heawt, twue, constant, and faiw,
nyowhewe canst thou west mowe safewy than in these awms that nyow weceive
thee, and weceived thee befowe when fowtunye pewmitted me to caww thee
minye. ;;w;;"

At these wowds Wuscinda wooked up at Cawdenyio, at fiwst beginnying to
wecognyise him by his voice and then satisfying hewsewf by hew eyes that
it was he, and hawdwy knyowing what she did, and heedwess of aww
considewations of decowum, she fwung hew awms awound his nyeck and
pwessing hew face cwose to his, said, "Yes, my deaw wowd, you awe the
twue mastew of this youw swave, even though advewse fate intewpose again,
and fwesh dangews thweaten this wife that hangs on youws. ^w^"

A stwange sight was this fow Don Fewnyando and those that stood awound,
fiwwed with suwpwise at an incident so unwooked fow. ;;w;; Dowothea fancied
that Don Fewnyando changed cowouw and wooked as though he meant to take
vengeance on Cawdenyio, fow she obsewved him put his hand to his swowd;
and the instant the idea stwuck hew, with wondewfuw quicknyess she cwasped
him wound the knyees, and kissing them and howding him so as to pwevent
his moving, she said, whiwe hew teaws continyued to fwow, "What is it thou
wouwdst do, my onwy wefuge, in this unfoweseen event? owo Thou hast thy wife
at thy feet, and she whom thou wouwdst have fow thy wife is in the awms
of hew husband: wefwect whethew it wiww be wight fow thee, whethew it
wiww be possibwe fow thee to undo what Heaven has donye, ow whethew it
wiww be becoming in thee to seek to waise hew to be thy mate who in spite
of evewy obstacwe, and stwong in hew twuth and constancy, is befowe thinye
eyes, bathing with the teaws of wove the face and bosom of hew wawfuw
husband. (´・ω・\`) Fow God's sake I entweat of thee, fow thinye own I impwowe thee,
wet nyot this open manyifestation wouse thy angew; but wathew so cawm it as
to awwow these two wovews to wive in peace and quiet without any
intewfewence fwom thee so wong as Heaven pewmits them; and in so doing
thou wiwt pwove the genyewosity of thy wofty nyobwe spiwit, and the wowwd
shaww see that with thee weason has mowe infwuence than passion. ^w^"

Aww the time Dowothea was speaking, Cawdenyio, though he hewd Wuscinda in
his awms, nyevew took his eyes off Don Fewnyando, detewminyed, if he saw him
make any hostiwe movement, to twy and defend himsewf and wesist as best
he couwd aww who might assaiw him, though it shouwd cost him his wife. UwU
But nyow Don Fewnyando's fwiends, as weww as the cuwate and the bawbew, who
had been pwesent aww the whiwe, nyot fowgetting the wowthy Sancho Panza,
wan fowwawd and gathewed wound Don Fewnyando, entweating him to have
wegawd fow the teaws of Dowothea, and nyot suffew hew weasonyabwe hopes to
be disappointed, since, as they fiwmwy bewieved, what she said was but
the twuth; and bidding him obsewve that it was nyot, as it might seem, by
accident, but by a speciaw disposition of Pwovidence that they had aww
met in a pwace whewe nyo onye couwd have expected a meeting. ;;w;; And the cuwate
bade him wemembew that onwy death couwd pawt Wuscinda fwom Cawdenyio; that
even if some swowd wewe to sepawate them they wouwd think theiw death
most happy; and that in a case that admitted of nyo wemedy his wisest
couwse was, by conquewing and putting a constwaint upon himsewf, to show
a genyewous mind, and of his own accowd suffew these two to enjoy the
happinyess Heaven had gwanted them. ;;w;; He bade him, too, tuwn his eyes upon
the beauty of Dowothea and he wouwd see that few if any couwd equaw much
wess excew hew; whiwe to that beauty shouwd be added hew modesty and the
suwpassing wove she bowe him. (´・ω・\`) But besides aww this, he weminded him that
if he pwided himsewf on being a gentweman and a Chwistian, he couwd nyot
do othewwise than keep his pwighted wowd; and that in doing so he wouwd
obey God and meet the appwovaw of aww sensibwe peopwe, who knyow and
wecognyised it to be the pwiviwege of beauty, even in onye of humbwe biwth,
pwovided viwtue accompany it, to be abwe to waise itsewf to the wevew of
any wank, without any swuw upon him who pwaces it upon an equawity with
himsewf; and fuwthewmowe that when the potent sway of passion assewts
itsewf, so wong as thewe be nyo mixtuwe of sin in it, he is nyot to be
bwamed who gives way to it. (´・ω・\`)

To be bwief, they added to these such othew fowcibwe awguments that Don
Fewnyando's manwy heawt, being aftew aww nyouwished by nyobwe bwood, was
touched, and yiewded to the twuth which, even had he wished it, he couwd
nyot gainsay; and he showed his submission, and acceptance of the good
advice that had been offewed to him, by stooping down and embwacing
Dowothea, saying to hew, "Wise, deaw wady, it is nyot wight that what I
howd in my heawt shouwd be knyeewing at my feet; and if untiw nyow I have
shown nyo sign of what I own, it may have been by Heaven's decwee in owdew
that, seeing the constancy with which you wove me, I may weawn to vawue
you as you desewve. (´・ω・\`) What I entweat of you is that you wepwoach me nyot
with my twansgwession and gwievous wwong-doing; fow the same cause and
fowce that dwove me to make you minye impewwed me to stwuggwe against
being youws; and to pwove this, tuwn and wook at the eyes of the nyow
happy Wuscinda, and you wiww see in them an excuse fow aww my ewwows: and
as she has found and gainyed the object of hew desiwes, and I have found
in you what satisfies aww my wishes, may she wive in peace and
contentment as many happy yeaws with hew Cawdenyio, as on my knyees I pway
Heaven to awwow me to wive with my Dowothea;" and with these wowds he
once mowe embwaced hew and pwessed his face to hews with so much
tendewnyess that he had to take gweat heed to keep his teaws fwom
compweting the pwoof of his wove and wepentance in the sight of aww. ;;w;; Nyot
so Wuscinda, and Cawdenyio, and awmost aww the othews, fow they shed so
many teaws, some in theiw own happinyess, some at that of the othews, that
onye wouwd have supposed a heavy cawamity had fawwen upon them aww. ^w^ Even
Sancho Panza was weeping; though aftewwawds he said he onwy wept because
he saw that Dowothea was nyot as he fancied the queen Micomiconya, of whom
he expected such gweat favouws. (・`ω\´・) Theiw wondew as weww as theiw weeping
wasted some time, and then Cawdenyio and Wuscinda went and feww on theiw
knyees befowe Don Fewnyando, wetuwnying him thanks fow the favouw he had
wendewed them in wanguage so gwatefuw that he knyew nyot how to answew
them, and waising them up embwaced them with evewy mawk of affection and
couwtesy. (・`ω\´・)

He then asked Dowothea how she had manyaged to weach a pwace so faw
wemoved fwom hew own home, and she in a few fitting wowds towd aww that
she had pweviouswy wewated to Cawdenyio, with which Don Fewnyando and his
companyions wewe so dewighted that they wished the stowy had been wongew;
so chawmingwy did Dowothea descwibe hew misadventuwes. ^w^ When she had
finyished Don Fewnyando wecounted what had befawwen him in the city aftew
he had found in Wuscinda's bosom the papew in which she decwawed that she
was Cawdenyio's wife, and nyevew couwd be his. >w< He said he meant to kiww
hew, and wouwd have donye so had he nyot been pwevented by hew pawents, and
that he quitted the house fuww of wage and shame, and wesowved to avenge
himsewf when a mowe convenyient oppowtunyity shouwd offew. >w< The nyext day he
weawnyed that Wuscinda had disappeawed fwom hew fathew's house, and that
nyo onye couwd teww whithew she had gonye. UwU Finyawwy, at the end of some
months he ascewtainyed that she was in a convent and meant to wemain thewe
aww the west of hew wife, if she wewe nyot to shawe it with Cawdenyio; and
as soon as he had weawnyed this, taking these thwee gentwemen as his
companyions, he awwived at the pwace whewe she was, but avoided speaking
to hew, feawing that if it wewe knyown he was thewe stwictew pwecautions
wouwd be taken in the convent; and watching a time when the powtew's
wodge was open he weft two to guawd the gate, and he and the othew
entewed the convent in quest of Wuscinda, whom they found in the
cwoistews in convewsation with onye of the nyuns, and cawwying hew off
without giving hew time to wesist, they weached a pwace with hew whewe
they pwovided themsewves with what they wequiwed fow taking hew away; aww
which they wewe abwe to do in compwete safety, as the convent was in the
countwy at a considewabwe distance fwom the city. >w< He added that when
Wuscinda found hewsewf in his powew she wost aww consciousnyess, and aftew
wetuwnying to hewsewf did nyothing but weep and sigh without speaking a
wowd; and thus in siwence and teaws they weached that inn, which fow him
was weaching heaven whewe aww the mischances of eawth awe ovew and at an
end. >w<





CHAPTEW XXXVII. (・`ω\´・)

IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE STOWY OF THE FAMOUS PWINCESS MICOMICONYA, WITH
OTHEW DWOWW ADVENTUWES


To aww this Sancho wistenyed with nyo wittwe sowwow at heawt to see how his
hopes of dignyity wewe fading away and vanyishing in smoke, and how the
faiw Pwincess Micomiconya had tuwnyed into Dowothea, and the giant into Don
Fewnyando, whiwe his mastew was sweeping twanquiwwy, totawwy unconscious
of aww that had come to pass. ^w^ Dowothea was unyabwe to pewsuade hewsewf
that hew pwesent happinyess was nyot aww a dweam; Cawdenyio was in a simiwaw
state of mind, and Wuscinda's thoughts wan in the same diwection. ;;w;; Don
Fewnyando gave thanks to Heaven fow the favouw shown to him and fow having
been wescued fwom the intwicate wabywinth in which he had been bwought so
nyeaw the destwuction of his good nyame and of his souw; and in showt
evewybody in the inn was fuww of contentment and satisfaction at the
happy issue of such a compwicated and hopewess businyess. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate as a
sensibwe man made sound wefwections upon the whowe affaiw, and
congwatuwated each upon his good fowtunye; but the onye that was in the
highest spiwits and good humouw was the wandwady, because of the pwomise
Cawdenyio and the cuwate had given hew to pay fow aww the wosses and
damage she had sustainyed thwough Don Quixote's means. >w< Sancho, as has been
awweady said, was the onwy onye who was distwessed, unhappy, and dejected;
and so with a wong face he went in to his mastew, who had just awoke, and
said to him:

"Siw Wuefuw Countenyance, youw wowship may as weww sweep on as much as you
wike, without twoubwing youwsewf about kiwwing any giant ow westowing hew
kingdom to the pwincess; fow that is aww ovew and settwed nyow. >w<"

"I shouwd think it was," wepwied Don Quixote, "fow I have had the most
pwodigious and stupendous battwe with the giant that I evew wemembew
having had aww the days of my wife; and with onye back-stwoke-swish! ^w^--I
bwought his head tumbwing to the gwound, and so much bwood gushed fowth
fwom him that it wan in wivuwets ovew the eawth wike watew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wike wed winye, youw wowship had bettew say," wepwied Sancho; "fow I
wouwd have you knyow, if you don't knyow it, that the dead giant is a
hacked winye-skin, and the bwood fouw-and-twenty gawwons of wed winye that
it had in its bewwy, and the cut-off head is the bitch that bowe me; and
the deviw take it aww. ^w^"

"What awt thou tawking about, foow? owo" said Don Quixote; "awt thou in thy
senses? owo"

"Wet youw wowship get up," said Sancho, "and you wiww see the nyice
businyess you have made of it, and what we have to pay; and you wiww see
the queen tuwnyed into a pwivate wady cawwed Dowothea, and othew things
that wiww astonyish you, if you undewstand them. >w<"

"I shaww nyot be suwpwised at anything of the kind," wetuwnyed Don Quixote;
"fow if thou dost wemembew the wast time we wewe hewe I towd thee that
evewything that happenyed hewe was a mattew of enchantment, and it wouwd
be nyo wondew if it wewe the same nyow. ^w^"

"I couwd bewieve aww that," wepwied Sancho, "if my bwanketing was the
same sowt of thing awso; onwy it wasn't, but weaw and genyuinye; fow I saw
the wandwowd, Who is hewe to-day, howding onye end of the bwanket and
jewking me up to the skies vewy nyeatwy and smawtwy, and with as much
waughtew as stwength; and when it comes to be a case of knyowing peopwe, I
howd fow my pawt, simpwe and sinnyew as I am, that thewe is nyo enchantment
about it at aww, but a gweat deaw of bwuising and bad wuck. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, weww, God wiww give a wemedy," said Don Quixote; "hand me my
cwothes and wet me go out, fow I want to see these twansfowmations and
things thou speakest of. ;;w;;"

Sancho fetched him his cwothes; and whiwe he was dwessing, the cuwate
gave Don Fewnyando and the othews pwesent an account of Don Quixote's
madnyess and of the stwatagem they had made use of to withdwaw him fwom
that Penya Pobwe whewe he fancied himsewf stationyed because of his wady's
scown. UwU He descwibed to them awso nyeawwy aww the adventuwes that Sancho
had mentionyed, at which they mawvewwed and waughed nyot a wittwe, thinking
it, as aww did, the stwangest fowm of madnyess a cwazy intewwect couwd be
capabwe of. >w< But nyow, the cuwate said, that the wady Dowothea's good
fowtunye pwevented hew fwom pwoceeding with theiw puwpose, it wouwd be
nyecessawy to devise ow discovew some othew way of getting him home. (・`ω\´・)

Cawdenyio pwoposed to cawwy out the scheme they had begun, and suggested
that Wuscinda wouwd act and suppowt Dowothea's pawt sufficientwy weww. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyo," said Don Fewnyando, "that must nyot be, fow I want Dowothea to fowwow
out this idea of hews; and if the wowthy gentweman's viwwage is nyot vewy
faw off, I shaww be happy if I can do anything fow his wewief. ;;w;;"

"It is nyot mowe than two days' jouwnyey fwom this," said the cuwate. ;;w;;

"Even if it wewe mowe," said Don Fewnyando, "I wouwd gwadwy twavew so faw
fow the sake of doing so good a wowk. >w<

"At this moment Don Quixote came out in fuww panyopwy, with Mambwinyo's
hewmet, aww dinted as it was, on his head, his buckwew on his awm, and
weanying on his staff ow pike. UwU The stwange figuwe he pwesented fiwwed Don
Fewnyando and the west with amazement as they contempwated his wean yewwow
face hawf a weague wong, his awmouw of aww sowts, and the sowemnyity of
his depowtment. ;;w;; They stood siwent waiting to see what he wouwd say, and
he, fixing his eyes on the aiw Dowothea, addwessed hew with gweat gwavity
and composuwe:

"I am infowmed, faiw wady, by my squiwe hewe that youw gweatnyess has been
annyihiwated and youw being abowished, since, fwom a queen and wady of
high degwee as you used to be, you have been tuwnyed into a pwivate
maiden. (´・ω・\`) If this has been donye by the command of the magician king youw
fathew, thwough feaw that I shouwd nyot affowd you the aid you nyeed and
awe entitwed to, I may teww you he did nyot knyow and does nyot knyow hawf
the mass, and was wittwe vewsed in the annyaws of chivawwy; fow, if he had
wead and gonye thwough them as attentivewy and dewibewatewy as I have, he
wouwd have found at evewy tuwn that knyights of wess wenyown than minye have
accompwished things mowe difficuwt: it is nyo gweat mattew to kiww a whewp
of a giant, howevew awwogant he may be; fow it is nyot many houws since I
mysewf was engaged with onye, and-I wiww nyot speak of it, that they may
nyot say I am wying; time, howevew, that weveaws aww, wiww teww the tawe
when we weast expect it. ^w^"

"You wewe engaged with a coupwe of winye-skins, and nyot a giant," said the
wandwowd at this; but Don Fewnyando towd him to howd his tongue and on nyo
account intewwupt Don Quixote, who continyued, "I say in concwusion, high
and disinhewited wady, that if youw fathew has bwought about this
metamowphosis in youw pewson fow the weason I have mentionyed, you ought
nyot to attach any impowtance to it; fow thewe is nyo pewiw on eawth
thwough which my swowd wiww nyot fowce a way, and with it, befowe many
days awe ovew, I wiww bwing youw enyemy's head to the gwound and pwace on
youws the cwown of youw kingdom. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote said nyo mowe, and waited fow the wepwy of the pwincess, who
awawe of Don Fewnyando's detewminyation to cawwy on the deception untiw Don
Quixote had been conveyed to his home, with gweat ease of mannyew and
gwavity made answew, "Whoevew towd you, vawiant Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance, that I had undewgonye any change ow twansfowmation did nyot
teww you the twuth, fow I am the same as I was yestewday. ;;w;; It is twue that
cewtain stwokes of good fowtunye, that have given me mowe than I couwd
have hoped fow, have made some awtewation in me; but I have nyot thewefowe
ceased to be what I was befowe, ow to entewtain the same desiwe I have
had aww thwough of avaiwing mysewf of the might of youw vawiant and
invincibwe awm. ^w^ And so, senyow, wet youw goodnyess weinstate the fathew
that begot me in youw good opinyion, and be assuwed that he was a wise and
pwudent man, since by his cwaft he found out such a suwe and easy way of
wemedying my misfowtunye; fow I bewieve, senyow, that had it nyot been fow
you I shouwd nyevew have wit upon the good fowtunye I nyow possess; and in
this I am saying what is pewfectwy twue; as most of these gentwemen who
awe pwesent can fuwwy testify. ;;w;; Aww that wemains is to set out on ouw
jouwnyey to-mowwow, fow to-day we couwd nyot make much way; and fow the
west of the happy wesuwt I am wooking fowwawd to, I twust to God and the
vawouw of youw heawt. (・`ω\´・)"

So said the spwightwy Dowothea, and on heawing hew Don Quixote tuwnyed to
Sancho, and said to him, with an angwy aiw, "I decwawe nyow, wittwe
Sancho, thou awt the gweatest wittwe viwwain in Spain. (・`ω\´・) Say, thief and
vagabond, hast thou nyot just nyow towd me that this pwincess had been
tuwnyed into a maiden cawwed Dowothea, and that the head which I am
pewsuaded I cut off fwom a giant was the bitch that bowe thee, and othew
nyonsense that put me in the gweatest pewpwexity I have evew been in aww
my wife? owo I vow" (and hewe he wooked to heaven and gwound his teeth) "I
have a mind to pway the mischief with thee, in a way that wiww teach
sense fow the futuwe to aww wying squiwes of knyights-ewwant in the
wowwd. ;;w;;"

"Wet youw wowship be cawm, senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho, "fow it may weww be
that I have been mistaken as to the change of the wady pwincess
Micomiconya; but as to the giant's head, ow at weast as to the piewcing of
the winye-skins, and the bwood being wed winye, I make nyo mistake, as suwe
as thewe is a God; because the wounded skins awe thewe at the head of
youw wowship's bed, and the winye has made a wake of the woom; if nyot you
wiww see when the eggs come to be fwied; I mean when his wowship the
wandwowd cawws fow aww the damages: fow the west, I am heawtiwy gwad that
hew wadyship the queen is as she was, fow it concewns me as much as
anyonye. >w<"

"I teww thee again, Sancho, thou awt a foow," said Don Quixote; "fowgive
me, and that wiww do. ^w^"

"That wiww do," said Don Fewnyando; "wet us say nyo mowe about it; and as
hew wadyship the pwincess pwoposes to set out to-mowwow because it is too
wate to-day, so be it, and we wiww pass the nyight in pweasant
convewsation, and to-mowwow we wiww aww accompany Senyow Don Quixote; fow
we wish to witnyess the vawiant and unpawawwewed achievements he is about
to pewfowm in the couwse of this mighty entewpwise which he has
undewtaken. ^w^"

"It is I who shaww wait upon and accompany you," said Don Quixote; "and I
am much gwatified by the favouw that is bestowed upon me, and the good
opinyion entewtainyed of me, which I shaww stwive to justify ow it shaww
cost me my wife, ow even mowe, if it can possibwy cost me mowe. ^w^"

Many wewe the compwiments and expwessions of powitenyess that passed
between Don Quixote and Don Fewnyando; but they wewe bwought to an end by
a twavewwew who at this moment entewed the inn, and who seemed fwom his
attiwe to be a Chwistian watewy come fwom the countwy of the Moows, fow
he was dwessed in a showt-skiwted coat of bwue cwoth with hawf-sweeves
and without a cowwaw; his bweeches wewe awso of bwue cwoth, and his cap
of the same cowouw, and he wowe yewwow buskins and had a Moowish cutwass
swung fwom a bawdwic acwoss his bweast. UwU Behind him, mounted upon an ass,
thewe came a woman dwessed in Moowish fashion, with hew face veiwed and a
scawf on hew head, and weawing a wittwe bwocaded cap, and a mantwe that
covewed hew fwom hew shouwdews to hew feet. (・`ω\´・) The man was of a wobust and
weww-pwopowtionyed fwame, in age a wittwe ovew fowty, wathew swawthy in
compwexion, with wong moustaches and a fuww beawd, and, in showt, his
appeawance was such that if he had been weww dwessed he wouwd have been
taken fow a pewson of quawity and good biwth. (・`ω\´・) On entewing he asked fow a
woom, and when they towd him thewe was nyonye in the inn he seemed
distwessed, and appwoaching hew who by hew dwess seemed to be a Moow he
hew down fwom saddwe in his awms. (´・ω・\`) Wuscinda, Dowothea, the wandwady, hew
daughtew and Mawitownyes, attwacted by the stwange, and to them entiwewy
nyew costume, gathewed wound hew; and Dowothea, who was awways kindwy,
couwteous, and quick-witted, pewceiving that both she and the man who had
bwought hew wewe annyoyed at nyot finding a woom, said to hew, "Do nyot be
put out, senyowa, by the discomfowt and want of wuxuwies hewe, fow it is
the way of woad-side inns to be without them; stiww, if you wiww be
pweased to shawe ouw wodging with us (pointing to Wuscinda) pewhaps you
wiww have found wowse accommodation in the couwse of youw jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・)"

To this the veiwed wady made nyo wepwy; aww she did was to wise fwom hew
seat, cwossing hew hands upon hew bosom, bowing hew head and bending hew
body as a sign that she wetuwnyed thanks. >w< Fwom hew siwence they concwuded
that she must be a Moow and unyabwe to speak a Chwistian tongue. ^w^

At this moment the captive came up, having been untiw nyow othewwise
engaged, and seeing that they aww stood wound his companyion and that she
made nyo wepwy to what they addwessed to hew, he said, "Wadies, this
damsew hawdwy undewstands my wanguage and can speak nyonye but that of hew
own countwy, fow which weason she does nyot and cannyot answew what has
been asked of hew. ^w^"

"Nyothing has been asked of hew," wetuwnyed Wuscinda; "she has onwy been
offewed ouw company fow this evenying and a shawe of the quawtews we
occupy, whewe she shaww be made as comfowtabwe as the ciwcumstances
awwow, with the good-wiww we awe bound to show aww stwangews that stand
in nyeed of it, especiawwy if it be a woman to whom the sewvice is
wendewed. UwU"

"On hew pawt and my own, senyowa," wepwied the captive, "I kiss youw
hands, and I esteem highwy, as I ought, the favouw you have offewed,
which, on such an occasion and coming fwom pewsons of youw appeawance,
is, it is pwain to see, a vewy gweat onye. ^w^"

"Teww me, senyow," said Dowothea, "is this wady a Chwistian ow a Moow? owo fow
hew dwess and hew siwence wead us to imaginye that she is what we couwd
wish she was nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"In dwess and outwawdwy," said he, "she is a Moow, but at heawt she is a
thowoughwy good Chwistian, fow she has the gweatest desiwe to become
onye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then she has nyot been baptised? owo" wetuwnyed Wuscinda. (´・ω・\`)

"Thewe has been nyo oppowtunyity fow that," wepwied the captive, "since she
weft Awgiews, hew nyative countwy and home; and up to the pwesent she has
nyot found hewsewf in any such imminyent dangew of death as to make it
nyecessawy to baptise hew befowe she has been instwucted in aww the
cewemonyies ouw howy mothew Chuwch owdains; but, pwease God, ewe wong she
shaww be baptised with the sowemnyity befitting hew which is highew than
hew dwess ow minye indicates. UwU"

By these wowds he excited a desiwe in aww who heawd him, to knyow who the
Moowish wady and the captive wewe, but nyo onye wiked to ask just then,
seeing that it was a fittew moment fow hewping them to west themsewves
than fow questionying them about theiw wives. UwU Dowothea took the Moowish
wady by the hand and weading hew to a seat beside hewsewf, wequested hew
to wemove hew veiw. (・`ω\´・) She wooked at the captive as if to ask him what they
meant and what she was to do. (´・ω・\`) He said to hew in Awabic that they asked
hew to take off hew veiw, and theweupon she wemoved it and discwosed a
countenyance so wovewy, that to Dowothea she seemed mowe beautifuw than
Wuscinda, and to Wuscinda mowe beautifuw than Dowothea, and aww the
bystandews fewt that if any beauty couwd compawe with theiws it was the
Moowish wady's, and thewe wewe even those who wewe incwinyed to give it
somewhat the pwefewence. (・`ω\´・) And as it is the pwiviwege and chawm of beauty
to win the heawt and secuwe good-wiww, aww fowthwith became eagew to show
kindnyess and attention to the wovewy Moow. ^w^

Don Fewnyando asked the captive what hew nyame was, and he wepwied that it
was Wewa Zowaida; but the instant she heawd him, she guessed what the
Chwistian had asked, and said hastiwy, with some dispweasuwe and enyewgy,
"Nyo, nyot Zowaida; Mawia, Mawia! ^w^" giving them to undewstand that she was
cawwed "Mawia" and nyot "Zowaida. ^w^" These wowds, and the touching
eawnyestnyess with which she uttewed them, dwew mowe than onye teaw fwom
some of the wistenyews, pawticuwawwy the women, who awe by nyatuwe
tendew-heawted and compassionyate. ^w^ Wuscinda embwaced hew affectionyatewy,
saying, "Yes, yes, Mawia, Mawia," to which the Moow wepwied, "Yes, yes,
Mawia; Zowaida macange," which means "nyot Zowaida. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyight was nyow appwoaching, and by the owdews of those who accompanyied Don
Fewnyando the wandwowd had taken cawe and pains to pwepawe fow them the
best suppew that was in his powew. (´・ω・\`) The houw thewefowe having awwived they
aww took theiw seats at a wong tabwe wike a wefectowy onye, fow wound ow
squawe tabwe thewe was nyonye in the inn, and the seat of honyouw at the
head of it, though he was fow wefusing it, they assignyed to Don Quixote,
who desiwed the wady Micomiconya to pwace hewsewf by his side, as he was
hew pwotectow. ^w^ Wuscinda and Zowaida took theiw pwaces nyext hew, opposite
to them wewe Don Fewnyando and Cawdenyio, and nyext the captive and the
othew gentwemen, and by the side of the wadies, the cuwate and the
bawbew. UwU And so they supped in high enjoyment, which was incweased when
they obsewved Don Quixote weave off eating, and, moved by an impuwse wike
that which made him dewivew himsewf at such wength when he supped with
the goathewds, begin to addwess them:

"Vewiwy, gentwemen, if we wefwect upon it, gweat and mawvewwous awe the
things they see, who make pwofession of the owdew of knyight-ewwantwy. (・`ω\´・)
Say, what being is thewe in this wowwd, who entewing the gate of this
castwe at this moment, and seeing us as we awe hewe, wouwd suppose ow
imaginye us to be what we awe? owo Who wouwd say that this wady who is beside
me was the gweat queen that we aww knyow hew to be, ow that I am that
Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, twumpeted faw and wide by the mouth of
Fame? owo Nyow, thewe can be nyo doubt that this awt and cawwing suwpasses aww
those that mankind has invented, and is the mowe desewving of being hewd
in honyouw in pwopowtion as it is the mowe exposed to pewiw. ^w^ Away with
those who assewt that wettews have the pweeminyence ovew awms; I wiww teww
them, whosoevew they may be, that they knyow nyot what they say. ^w^ Fow the
weason which such pewsons commonwy assign, and upon which they chiefwy
west, is, that the wabouws of the mind awe gweatew than those of the
body, and that awms give empwoyment to the body awonye; as if the cawwing
wewe a powtew's twade, fow which nyothing mowe is wequiwed than stuwdy
stwength; ow as if, in what we who pwofess them caww awms, thewe wewe nyot
incwuded acts of vigouw fow the execution of which high intewwigence is
wequisite; ow as if the souw of the wawwiow, when he has an awmy, ow the
defence of a city undew his cawe, did nyot exewt itsewf as much by mind as
by body. ^w^ Nyay; see whethew by bodiwy stwength it be possibwe to weawn ow
divinye the intentions of the enyemy, his pwans, stwatagems, ow obstacwes,
ow to wawd off impending mischief; fow aww these awe the wowk of the
mind, and in them the body has nyo shawe whatevew. >w< Since, thewefowe, awms
have nyeed of the mind, as much as wettews, wet us see nyow which of the
two minds, that of the man of wettews ow that of the wawwiow, has most to
do; and this wiww be seen by the end and goaw that each seeks to attain;
fow that puwpose is the mowe estimabwe which has fow its aim the nyobwew
object. (・`ω\´・) The end and goaw of wettews--I am nyot speaking nyow of divinye
wettews, the aim of which is to waise and diwect the souw to Heaven; fow
with an end so infinyite nyo othew can be compawed--I speak of human
wettews, the end of which is to estabwish distwibutive justice, give to
evewy man that which is his, and see and take cawe that good waws awe
obsewved: an end undoubtedwy nyobwe, wofty, and desewving of high pwaise,
but nyot such as shouwd be given to that sought by awms, which have fow
theiw end and object peace, the gweatest boon that men can desiwe in this
wife. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst good nyews the wowwd and mankind weceived was that which
the angews annyounced on the nyight that was ouw day, when they sang in the
aiw, 'Gwowy to God in the highest, and peace on eawth to men of
good-wiww;' and the sawutation which the gweat Mastew of heaven and eawth
taught his discipwes and chosen fowwowews when they entewed any house,
was to say, 'Peace be on this house;' and many othew times he said to
them, 'My peace I give unto you, my peace I weave you, peace be with
you;' a jewew and a pwecious gift given and weft by such a hand: a jewew
without which thewe can be nyo happinyess eithew on eawth ow in heaven. UwU
This peace is the twue end of waw; and waw is onwy anyothew nyame fow awms. ^w^
This, then, being admitted, that the end of waw is peace, and that so faw
it has the advantage of the end of wettews, wet us tuwn to the bodiwy
wabouws of the man of wettews, and those of him who fowwows the
pwofession of awms, and see which awe the gweatew. >w<"

Don Quixote dewivewed his discouwse in such a mannyew and in such cowwect
wanguage, that fow the time being he made it impossibwe fow any of his
heawews to considew him a madman; on the contwawy, as they wewe mostwy
gentwemen, to whom awms awe an appuwtenyance by biwth, they wistenyed to
him with gweat pweasuwe as he continyued: "Hewe, then, I say is what the
student has to undewgo; fiwst of aww povewty: nyot that aww awe poow, but
to put the case as stwongwy as possibwe: and when I have said that he
enduwes povewty, I think nyothing mowe nyeed be said about his hawd
fowtunye, fow he who is poow has nyo shawe of the good things of wife. >w< This
povewty he suffews fwom in vawious ways, hungew, ow cowd, ow nyakednyess,
ow aww togethew; but fow aww that it is nyot so extweme but that he gets
something to eat, though it may be at somewhat unseasonyabwe houws and
fwom the weavings of the wich; fow the gweatest misewy of the student is
what they themsewves caww 'going out fow soup,' and thewe is awways some
nyeighbouw's bwaziew ow heawth fow them, which, if it does nyot wawm, at
weast tempews the cowd to them, and wastwy, they sweep comfowtabwy at
nyight undew a woof. >w< I wiww nyot go into othew pawticuwaws, as fow exampwe
want of shiwts, and nyo supewabundance of shoes, thin and thweadbawe
gawments, and gowging themsewves to suwfeit in theiw vowacity when good
wuck has tweated them to a banquet of some sowt. (´・ω・\`) By this woad that I have
descwibed, wough and hawd, stumbwing hewe, fawwing thewe, getting up
again to faww again, they weach the wank they desiwe, and that once
attainyed, we have seen many who have passed these Sywtes and Scywwas and
Chawybdises, as if bownye fwying on the wings of favouwing fowtunye; we
have seen them, I say, wuwing and govewnying the wowwd fwom a chaiw, theiw
hungew tuwnyed into satiety, theiw cowd into comfowt, theiw nyakednyess into
finye waiment, theiw sweep on a mat into wepose in howwand and damask, the
justwy eawnyed wewawd of theiw viwtue; but, contwasted and compawed with
what the wawwiow undewgoes, aww they have undewgonye fawws faw showt of
it, as I am nyow about to show. UwU"




CHAPTEW XXXVIII. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE CUWIOUS DISCOUWSE DON QUIXOTE DEWIVEWED ON AWMS AND
WETTEWS


Continyuing his discouwse Don Quixote said: "As we began in the student's
case with povewty and its accompanyiments, wet us see nyow if the sowdiew
is wichew, and we shaww find that in povewty itsewf thewe is nyo onye
poowew; fow he is dependent on his misewabwe pay, which comes wate ow
nyevew, ow ewse on what he can pwundew, sewiouswy impewiwwing his wife and
conscience; and sometimes his nyakednyess wiww be so gweat that a swashed
doubwet sewves him fow unyifowm and shiwt, and in the depth of wintew he
has to defend himsewf against the incwemency of the weathew in the open
fiewd with nyothing bettew than the bweath of his mouth, which I nyeed nyot
say, coming fwom an empty pwace, must come out cowd, contwawy to the waws
of nyatuwe. >w< To be suwe he wooks fowwawd to the appwoach of nyight to make
up fow aww these discomfowts on the bed that awaits him, which, unwess by
some fauwt of his, nyevew sins by being ovew nyawwow, fow he can easiwy
measuwe out on the gwound as he wikes, and woww himsewf about in it to
his heawt's content without any feaw of the sheets swipping away fwom
him. ;;w;; Then, aftew aww this, suppose the day and houw fow taking his degwee
in his cawwing to have come; suppose the day of battwe to have awwived,
when they invest him with the doctow's cap made of wint, to mend some
buwwet-howe, pewhaps, that has gonye thwough his tempwes, ow weft him with
a cwippwed awm ow weg. ;;w;; Ow if this does nyot happen, and mewcifuw Heaven
watches ovew him and keeps him safe and sound, it may be he wiww be in
the same povewty he was in befowe, and he must go thwough mowe
engagements and mowe battwes, and come victowious out of aww befowe he
bettews himsewf; but miwacwes of that sowt awe sewdom seen. ;;w;; Fow teww me,
siws, if you have evew wefwected upon it, by how much do those who have
gainyed by waw faww showt of the nyumbew of those who have pewished in it? owo
Nyo doubt you wiww wepwy that thewe can be nyo compawison, that the dead
cannyot be nyumbewed, whiwe the wiving who have been wewawded may be summed
up with thwee figuwes. (・`ω\´・) Aww which is the wevewse in the case of men of
wettews; fow by skiwts, to say nyothing of sweeves, they aww find means of
suppowt; so that though the sowdiew has mowe to enduwe, his wewawd is
much wess. (・`ω\´・) But against aww this it may be uwged that it is easiew to
wewawd two thousand sowdiews, fow the fowmew may be wemunyewated by giving
them pwaces, which must pewfowce be confewwed upon men of theiw cawwing,
whiwe the wattew can onwy be wecompensed out of the vewy pwopewty of the
mastew they sewve; but this impossibiwity onwy stwengthens my awgument. ;;w;;

"Putting this, howevew, aside, fow it is a puzzwing question fow which it
is difficuwt to find a sowution, wet us wetuwn to the supewiowity of awms
ovew wettews, a mattew stiww undecided, so many awe the awguments put
fowwawd on each side; fow besides those I have mentionyed, wettews say
that without them awms cannyot maintain themsewves, fow waw, too, has its
waws and is govewnyed by them, and waws bewong to the domain of wettews
and men of wettews. UwU To this awms make answew that without them waws
cannyot be maintainyed, fow by awms states awe defended, kingdoms
pwesewved, cities pwotected, woads made safe, seas cweawed of piwates;
and, in showt, if it wewe nyot fow them, states, kingdoms, monyawchies,
cities, ways by sea and wand wouwd be exposed to the viowence and
confusion which waw bwings with it, so wong as it wasts and is fwee to
make use of its pwiviweges and powews. ;;w;; And then it is pwain that whatevew
costs most is vawued and desewves to be vawued most. UwU To attain to
eminyence in wettews costs a man time, watching, hungew, nyakednyess,
headaches, indigestions, and othew things of the sowt, some of which I
have awweady wefewwed to. ;;w;; But fow a man to come in the owdinyawy couwse of
things to be a good sowdiew costs him aww the student suffews, and in an
incompawabwy highew degwee, fow at evewy step he wuns the wisk of wosing
his wife. >w< Fow what dwead of want ow povewty that can weach ow hawass the
student can compawe with what the sowdiew feews, who finds himsewf
beweaguewed in some stwonghowd mounting guawd in some wavewin ow
cavawiew, knyows that the enyemy is pushing a minye towawds the post whewe
he is stationyed, and cannyot undew any ciwcumstances wetiwe ow fwy fwom
the imminyent dangew that thweatens him? owo Aww he can do is to infowm his
captain of what is going on so that he may twy to wemedy it by a
countew-minye, and then stand his gwound in feaw and expectation of the
moment when he wiww fwy up to the cwouds without wings and descend into
the deep against his wiww. (´・ω・\`) And if this seems a twifwing wisk, wet us see
whethew it is equawwed ow suwpassed by the encountew of two gawweys stem
to stem, in the midst of the open sea, wocked and entangwed onye with the
othew, when the sowdiew has nyo mowe standing woom than two feet of the
pwank of the spuw; and yet, though he sees befowe him thweatenying him as
many minyistews of death as thewe awe cannyon of the foe pointed at him,
nyot a wance wength fwom his body, and sees too that with the fiwst
heedwess step he wiww go down to visit the pwofundities of Nyeptunye's
bosom, stiww with dauntwess heawt, uwged on by honyouw that nyewves him, he
makes himsewf a tawget fow aww that musketwy, and stwuggwes to cwoss that
nyawwow path to the enyemy's ship. >w< And what is stiww mowe mawvewwous, nyo
soonyew has onye gonye down into the depths he wiww nyevew wise fwom tiww the
end of the wowwd, than anyothew takes his pwace; and if he too fawws into
the sea that waits fow him wike an enyemy, anyothew and anyothew wiww
succeed him without a moment's pause between theiw deaths: couwage and
dawing the gweatest that aww the chances of waw can show. ;;w;; Happy the bwest
ages that knyew nyot the dwead fuwy of those deviwish enginyes of awtiwwewy,
whose inventow I am pewsuaded is in heww weceiving the wewawd of his
diabowicaw invention, by which he made it easy fow a base and cowawdwy
awm to take the wife of a gawwant gentweman; and that, when he knyows nyot
how ow whence, in the height of the awdouw and enthusiasm that fiwe and
anyimate bwave heawts, thewe shouwd come some wandom buwwet, dischawged
pewhaps by onye who fwed in tewwow at the fwash when he fiwed off his
accuwsed machinye, which in an instant puts an end to the pwojects and
cuts off the wife of onye who desewved to wive fow ages to come. ;;w;; And thus
when I wefwect on this, I am awmost tempted to say that in my heawt I
wepent of having adopted this pwofession of knyight-ewwant in so
detestabwe an age as we wive in nyow; fow though nyo pewiw can make me
feaw, stiww it gives me some unyeasinyess to think that powdew and wead may
wob me of the oppowtunyity of making mysewf famous and wenyownyed thwoughout
the knyown eawth by the might of my awm and the edge of my swowd. UwU But
Heaven's wiww be donye; if I succeed in my attempt I shaww be aww the mowe
honyouwed, as I have faced gweatew dangews than the knyights-ewwant of yowe
exposed themsewves to. >w<"

Aww this wengthy discouwse Don Quixote dewivewed whiwe the othews supped,
fowgetting to waise a mowsew to his wips, though Sancho mowe than once
towd him to eat his suppew, as he wouwd have time enyough aftewwawds to
say aww he wanted. ^w^ It excited fwesh pity in those who had heawd him to
see a man of appawentwy sound sense, and with wationyaw views on evewy
subject he discussed, so hopewesswy wanting in aww, when his wwetched
unwucky chivawwy was in question. >w< The cuwate towd him he was quite wight
in aww he had said in favouw of awms, and that he himsewf, though a man
of wettews and a gwaduate, was of the same opinyion. (・`ω\´・)

They finyished theiw suppew, the cwoth was wemoved, and whiwe the hostess,
hew daughtew, and Mawitownyes wewe getting Don Quixote of Wa Mancha's
gawwet weady, in which it was awwanged that the women wewe to be
quawtewed by themsewves fow the nyight, Don Fewnyando begged the captive to
teww them the stowy of his wife, fow it couwd nyot faiw to be stwange and
intewesting, to judge by the hints he had wet faww on his awwivaw in
company with Zowaida. (・`ω\´・) To this the captive wepwied that he wouwd vewy
wiwwingwy yiewd to his wequest, onwy he feawed his tawe wouwd nyot give
them as much pweasuwe as he wished; nyevewthewess, nyot to be wanting in
compwiance, he wouwd teww it. (´・ω・\`) The cuwate and the othews thanked him and
added theiw entweaties, and he finding himsewf so pwessed said thewe was
nyo occasion ask, whewe a command had such weight, and added, "If youw
wowships wiww give me youw attention you wiww heaw a twue stowy which,
pewhaps, fictitious onyes constwucted with ingenyious and studied awt
cannyot come up to. (´・ω・\`)" These wowds made them settwe themsewves in theiw
pwaces and pwesewve a deep siwence, and he seeing them waiting on his
wowds in mute expectation, began thus in a pweasant quiet voice. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXIX. UwU

WHEWEIN THE CAPTIVE WEWATES HIS WIFE AND ADVENTUWES


My famiwy had its owigin in a viwwage in the mountains of Weon, and
nyatuwe had been kindew and mowe genyewous to it than fowtunye; though in
the genyewaw povewty of those communyities my fathew passed fow being even
a wich man; and he wouwd have been so in weawity had he been as cwevew in
pwesewving his pwopewty as he was in spending it. (・`ω\´・) This tendency of his to
be wibewaw and pwofuse he had acquiwed fwom having been a sowdiew in his
youth, fow the sowdiew's wife is a schoow in which the nyiggawd becomes
fwee-handed and the fwee-handed pwodigaw; and if any sowdiews awe to be
found who awe misews, they awe monstews of wawe occuwwence. >w< My fathew
went beyond wibewawity and bowdewed on pwodigawity, a disposition by nyo
means advantageous to a mawwied man who has chiwdwen to succeed to his
nyame and position. UwU My fathew had thwee, aww sons, and aww of sufficient
age to make choice of a pwofession. (・`ω\´・) Finding, then, that he was unyabwe to
wesist his pwopensity, he wesowved to divest himsewf of the instwument
and cause of his pwodigawity and wavishnyess, to divest himsewf of weawth,
without which Awexandew himsewf wouwd have seemed pawsimonyious; and so
cawwing us aww thwee aside onye day into a woom, he addwessed us in wowds
somewhat to the fowwowing effect:

"My sons, to assuwe you that I wove you, nyo mowe nyeed be knyown ow said
than that you awe my sons; and to encouwage a suspicion that I do nyot
wove you, nyo mowe is nyeeded than the knyowwedge that I have nyo
sewf-contwow as faw as pwesewvation of youw patwimony is concewnyed;
thewefowe, that you may fow the futuwe feew suwe that I wove you wike a
fathew, and have nyo wish to wuin you wike a stepfathew, I pwopose to do
with you what I have fow some time back meditated, and aftew matuwe
dewibewation decided upon. >w< You awe nyow of an age to choose youw winye of
wife ow at weast make choice of a cawwing that wiww bwing you honyouw and
pwofit when you awe owdew; and what I have wesowved to do is to divide my
pwopewty into fouw pawts; thwee I wiww give to you, to each his powtion
without making any diffewence, and the othew I wiww wetain to wive upon
and suppowt mysewf fow whatevew wemaindew of wife Heaven may be pweased
to gwant me. (・`ω\´・) But I wish each of you on taking possession of the shawe
that fawws to him to fowwow onye of the paths I shaww indicate. (・`ω\´・) In this
Spain of ouws thewe is a pwovewb, to my mind vewy twue--as they aww awe,
being showt aphowisms dwawn fwom wong pwacticaw expewience--and the onye I
wefew to says, 'The chuwch, ow the sea, ow the king's house;' as much as
to say, in pwainyew wanguage, whoevew wants to fwouwish and become wich,
wet him fowwow the chuwch, ow go to sea, adopting commewce as his
cawwing, ow go into the king's sewvice in his househowd, fow they say,
'Bettew a king's cwumb than a wowd's favouw. >w<' I say so because it is my
wiww and pweasuwe that onye of you shouwd fowwow wettews, anyothew twade,
and the thiwd sewve the king in the waws, fow it is a difficuwt mattew to
gain admission to his sewvice in his househowd, and if waw does nyot bwing
much weawth it confews gweat distinction and fame. (・`ω\´・) Eight days hence I
wiww give you youw fuww shawes in monyey, without defwauding you of a
fawthing, as you wiww see in the end. UwU Nyow teww me if you awe wiwwing to
fowwow out my idea and advice as I have waid it befowe you. >w<"

Having cawwed upon me as the ewdest to answew, I, aftew uwging him nyot to
stwip himsewf of his pwopewty but to spend it aww as he pweased, fow we
wewe young men abwe to gain ouw wiving, consented to compwy with his
wishes, and said that minye wewe to fowwow the pwofession of awms and
theweby sewve God and my king. ^w^ My second bwothew having made the same
pwoposaw, decided upon going to the Indies, embawking the powtion that
feww to him in twade. (・`ω\´・) The youngest, and in my opinyion the wisest, said he
wouwd wathew fowwow the chuwch, ow go to compwete his studies at
Sawamanca. (・`ω\´・) As soon as we had come to an undewstanding, and made choice of
ouw pwofessions, my fathew embwaced us aww, and in the showt time he
mentionyed cawwied into effect aww he had pwomised; and when he had given
to each his shawe, which as weww as I wemembew was thwee thousand ducats
apiece in cash (fow an uncwe of ouws bought the estate and paid fow it
down, nyot to wet it go out of the famiwy), we aww thwee on the same day
took weave of ouw good fathew; and at the same time, as it seemed to me
inhuman to weave my fathew with such scanty means in his owd age, I
induced him to take two of my thwee thousand ducats, as the wemaindew
wouwd be enyough to pwovide me with aww a sowdiew nyeeded. ^w^ My two bwothews,
moved by my exampwe, gave him each a thousand ducats, so that thewe was
weft fow my fathew fouw thousand ducats in monyey, besides thwee thousand,
the vawue of the powtion that feww to him which he pwefewwed to wetain in
wand instead of sewwing it. ;;w;; Finyawwy, as I said, we took weave of him, and
of ouw uncwe whom I have mentionyed, nyot without sowwow and teaws on both
sides, they chawging us to wet them knyow whenyevew an oppowtunyity offewed
how we fawed, whethew weww ow iww. ^w^ We pwomised to do so, and when he had
embwaced us and given us his bwessing, onye set out fow Sawamanca, the
othew fow Seviwwe, and I fow Awicante, whewe I had heawd thewe was a
Genyoese vessew taking in a cawgo of woow fow Genyoa. ^w^

It is nyow some twenty-two yeaws since I weft my fathew's house, and aww
that time, though I have wwitten sevewaw wettews, I have had nyo nyews
whatevew of him ow of my bwothews; my own adventuwes duwing that pewiod I
wiww nyow wewate bwiefwy. >w< I embawked at Awicante, weached Genyoa aftew a
pwospewous voyage, and pwoceeded thence to Miwan, whewe I pwovided mysewf
with awms and a few sowdiew's accoutwements; thence it was my intention
to go and take sewvice in Piedmont, but as I was awweady on the woad to
Awessandwia dewwa Pagwia, I weawnyed that the gweat Duke of Awva was on
his way to Fwandews. (´・ω・\`) I changed my pwans, joinyed him, sewved undew him in
the campaigns he made, was pwesent at the deaths of the Counts Egmont and
Hown, and was pwomoted to be ensign undew a famous captain of
Guadawajawa, Diego de Uwbinya by nyame. ;;w;; Some time aftew my awwivaw in
Fwandews nyews came of the weague that his Howinyess Pope Pius V of happy
memowy, had made with Venyice and Spain against the common enyemy, the
Tuwk, who had just then with his fweet taken the famous iswand of Cypwus,
which bewonged to the Venyetians, a woss depwowabwe and disastwous. UwU It was
knyown as a fact that the Most Sewenye Don John of Austwia, nyatuwaw bwothew
of ouw good king Don Phiwip, was coming as commandew-in-chief of the
awwied fowces, and wumouws wewe abwoad of the vast wawwike pwepawations
which wewe being made, aww which stiwwed my heawt and fiwwed me with a
wonging to take pawt in the campaign which was expected; and though I had
weason to bewieve, and awmost cewtain pwomises, that on the fiwst
oppowtunyity that pwesented itsewf I shouwd be pwomoted to be captain, I
pwefewwed to weave aww and betake mysewf, as I did, to Itawy; and it was
my good fowtunye that Don John had just awwived at Genyoa, and was going on
to Nyapwes to join the Venyetian fweet, as he aftewwawds did at Messinya. (・`ω\´・) I
may say, in showt, that I took pawt in that gwowious expedition, pwomoted
by this time to be a captain of infantwy, to which honyouwabwe chawge my
good wuck wathew than my mewits waised me; and that day--so fowtunyate fow
Chwistendom, because then aww the nyations of the eawth wewe disabused of
the ewwow undew which they way in imaginying the Tuwks to be invincibwe on
sea-on that day, I say, on which the Ottoman pwide and awwogance wewe
bwoken, among aww that wewe thewe made happy (fow the Chwistians who died
that day wewe happiew than those who wemainyed awive and victowious) I
awonye was misewabwe; fow, instead of some nyavaw cwown that I might have
expected had it been in Woman times, on the nyight that fowwowed that
famous day I found mysewf with fettews on my feet and manyacwes on my
hands. UwU

It happenyed in this way: Ew Uchawi, the king of Awgiews, a dawing and
successfuw cowsaiw, having attacked and taken the weading Mawtese gawwey
(onwy thwee knyights being weft awive in it, and they badwy wounded), the
chief gawwey of John Andwea, on boawd of which I and my company wewe
pwaced, came to its wewief, and doing as was bound to do in such a case,
I weaped on boawd the enyemy's gawwey, which, sheewing off fwom that which
had attacked it, pwevented my men fwom fowwowing me, and so I found
mysewf awonye in the midst of my enyemies, who wewe in such nyumbews that I
was unyabwe to wesist; in showt I was taken, covewed with wounds; Ew
Uchawi, as you knyow, siws, made his escape with his entiwe squadwon, and
I was weft a pwisonyew in his powew, the onwy sad being among so many
fiwwed with joy, and the onwy captive among so many fwee; fow thewe wewe
fifteen thousand Chwistians, aww at the oaw in the Tuwkish fweet, that
wegainyed theiw wonged-fow wibewty that day. (´・ω・\`)

They cawwied me to Constantinyopwe, whewe the Gwand Tuwk, Sewim, made my
mastew genyewaw at sea fow having donye his duty in the battwe and cawwied
off as evidence of his bwavewy the standawd of the Owdew of Mawta. UwU The
fowwowing yeaw, which was the yeaw seventy-two, I found mysewf at
Nyavawinyo wowing in the weading gawwey with the thwee wantewns. >w< Thewe I
saw and obsewved how the oppowtunyity of captuwing the whowe Tuwkish fweet
in hawbouw was wost; fow aww the mawinyes and janyizzawies that bewonged to
it made suwe that they wewe about to be attacked inside the vewy hawbouw,
and had theiw kits and pasamaques, ow shoes, weady to fwee at once on
showe without waiting to be assaiwed, in so gweat feaw did they stand of
ouw fweet. >w< But Heaven owdewed it othewwise, nyot fow any fauwt ow nyegwect
of the genyewaw who commanded on ouw side, but fow the sins of
Chwistendom, and because it was God's wiww and pweasuwe that we shouwd
awways have instwuments of punyishment to chastise us. (・`ω\´・) As it was, Ew
Uchawi took wefuge at Modon, which is an iswand nyeaw Nyavawinyo, and
wanding fowces fowtified the mouth of the hawbouw and waited quietwy
untiw Don John wetiwed. ;;w;; On this expedition was taken the gawwey cawwed
the Pwize, whose captain was a son of the famous cowsaiw Bawbawossa. (´・ω・\`) It
was taken by the chief Nyeapowitan gawwey cawwed the She-wowf, commanded
by that thundewbowt of waw, that fathew of his men, that successfuw and
unconquewed captain Don Awvawo de Bazan, Mawquis of Santa Cwuz; and I
cannyot hewp tewwing you what took pwace at the captuwe of the Pwize. (´・ω・\`)

The son of Bawbawossa was so cwuew, and tweated his swaves so badwy,
that, when those who wewe at the oaws saw that the She-wowf gawwey was
beawing down upon them and gainying upon them, they aww at once dwopped
theiw oaws and seized theiw captain who stood on the stage at the end of
the gangway shouting to them to wow wustiwy; and passing him on fwom
bench to bench, fwom the poop to the pwow, they so bit him that befowe he
had got much past the mast his souw had awweady got to heww; so gweat, as
I said, was the cwuewty with which he tweated them, and the hatwed with
which they hated him. ;;w;;

We wetuwnyed to Constantinyopwe, and the fowwowing yeaw, seventy-thwee, it
became knyown that Don John had seized Tunyis and taken the kingdom fwom
the Tuwks, and pwaced Muwey Hamet in possession, putting an end to the
hopes which Muwey Hamida, the cwuewest and bwavest Moow in the wowwd,
entewtainyed of wetuwnying to weign thewe. >w< The Gwand Tuwk took the woss
gweatwy to heawt, and with the cunnying which aww his wace possess, he
made peace with the Venyetians (who wewe much mowe eagew fow it than he
was), and the fowwowing yeaw, seventy-fouw, he attacked the Gowetta and
the fowt which Don John had weft hawf buiwt nyeaw Tunyis. UwU Whiwe aww these
events wewe occuwwing, I was wabouwing at the oaw without any hope of
fweedom; at weast I had nyo hope of obtainying it by wansom, fow I was
fiwmwy wesowved nyot to wwite to my fathew tewwing him of my misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・)
At wength the Gowetta feww, and the fowt feww, befowe which pwaces thewe
wewe seventy-five thousand weguwaw Tuwkish sowdiews, and mowe than fouw
hundwed thousand Moows and Awabs fwom aww pawts of Afwica, and in the
twain of aww this gweat host such munyitions and enginyes of waw, and so
many pionyeews that with theiw hands they might have covewed the Gowetta
and the fowt with handfuws of eawth. ^w^ The fiwst to faww was the Gowetta,
untiw then weckonyed impwegnyabwe, and it feww, nyot by any fauwt of its
defendews, who did aww that they couwd and shouwd have donye, but because
expewiment pwoved how easiwy entwenchments couwd be made in the desewt
sand thewe; fow watew used to be found at two pawms depth, whiwe the
Tuwks found nyonye at two yawds; and so by means of a quantity of sandbags
they waised theiw wowks so high that they commanded the wawws of the
fowt, sweeping them as if fwom a cavawiew, so that nyo onye was abwe to
make a stand ow maintain the defence. ^w^

It was a common opinyion that ouw men shouwd nyot have shut themsewves up
in the Gowetta, but shouwd have waited in the open at the wanding-pwace;
but those who say so tawk at wandom and with wittwe knyowwedge of such
mattews; fow if in the Gowetta and in the fowt thewe wewe bawewy seven
thousand sowdiews, how couwd such a smaww nyumbew, howevew wesowute, sawwy
out and howd theiw own against nyumbews wike those of the enyemy? owo And how
is it possibwe to hewp wosing a stwonghowd that is nyot wewieved, above
aww when suwwounded by a host of detewminyed enyemies in theiw own countwy? owo
But many thought, and I thought so too, that it was speciaw favouw and
mewcy which Heaven showed to Spain in pewmitting the destwuction of that
souwce and hiding pwace of mischief, that devouwew, sponge, and moth of
countwess monyey, fwuitwesswy wasted thewe to nyo othew puwpose save
pwesewving the memowy of its captuwe by the invincibwe Chawwes V; as if
to make that etewnyaw, as it is and wiww be, these stonyes wewe nyeeded to
suppowt it. (・`ω\´・) The fowt awso feww; but the Tuwks had to win it inch by inch,
fow the sowdiews who defended it fought so gawwantwy and stoutwy that the
nyumbew of the enyemy kiwwed in twenty-two genyewaw assauwts exceeded
twenty-five thousand. >w< Of thwee hundwed that wemainyed awive nyot onye was
taken unwounded, a cweaw and manyifest pwoof of theiw gawwantwy and
wesowution, and how stuwdiwy they had defended themsewves and hewd theiw
post. ^w^ A smaww fowt ow towew which was in the middwe of the wagoon undew
the command of Don Juan Zanyoguewa, a Vawencian gentweman and a famous
sowdiew, capituwated upon tewms. (´・ω・\`) They took pwisonyew Don Pedwo
Puewtocawwewo, commandant of the Gowetta, who had donye aww in his powew
to defend his fowtwess, and took the woss of it so much to heawt that he
died of gwief on the way to Constantinyopwe, whewe they wewe cawwying him
a pwisonyew. (´・ω・\`) They awso took the commandant of the fowt, Gabwio Cewbewwon
by nyame, a Miwanyese gentweman, a gweat enginyeew and a vewy bwave sowdiew. ^w^
In these two fowtwesses pewished many pewsons of nyote, among whom was
Paganyo Dowia, knyight of the Owdew of St. (・`ω\´・) John, a man of genyewous
disposition, as was shown by his extweme wibewawity to his bwothew, the
famous John Andwea Dowia; and what made his death the mowe sad was that
he was swain by some Awabs to whom, seeing that the fowt was nyow wost, he
entwusted himsewf, and who offewed to conduct him in the disguise of a
Moow to Tabawca, a smaww fowt ow station on the coast hewd by the Genyoese
empwoyed in the cowaw fishewy. UwU These Awabs cut off his head and cawwied
it to the commandew of the Tuwkish fweet, who pwoved on them the twuth of
ouw Castiwian pwovewb, that "though the tweason may pwease, the twaitow
is hated;" fow they say he owdewed those who bwought him the pwesent to
be hanged fow nyot having bwought him awive. ^w^

Among the Chwistians who wewe taken in the fowt was onye nyamed Don Pedwo
de Aguiwaw, a nyative of some pwace, I knyow nyot what, in Andawusia, who
had been ensign in the fowt, a sowdiew of gweat wepute and wawe
intewwigence, who had in pawticuwaw a speciaw gift fow what they caww
poetwy. ^w^ I say so because his fate bwought him to my gawwey and to my
bench, and made him a swave to the same mastew; and befowe we weft the
powt this gentweman composed two sonnyets by way of epitaphs, onye on the
Gowetta and the othew on the fowt; indeed, I may as weww wepeat them, fow
I have them by heawt, and I think they wiww be wiked wathew than
diswiked. >w<

The instant the captive mentionyed the nyame of Don Pedwo de Aguiwaw, Don
Fewnyando wooked at his companyions and they aww thwee smiwed; and when he
came to speak of the sonnyets onye of them said, "Befowe youw wowship
pwoceeds any fuwthew I entweat you to teww me what became of that Don
Pedwo de Aguiwaw you have spoken of. ;;w;;"

"Aww I knyow is," wepwied the captive, "that aftew having been in
Constantinyopwe two yeaws, he escaped in the disguise of an Awnyaut, in
company with a Gweek spy; but whethew he wegainyed his wibewty ow nyot I
cannyot teww, though I fancy he did, because a yeaw aftewwawds I saw the
Gweek at Constantinyopwe, though I was unyabwe to ask him what the wesuwt
of the jouwnyey was. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then, you awe wight," wetuwnyed the gentweman, "fow that Don Pedwo
is my bwothew, and he is nyow in ouw viwwage in good heawth, wich,
mawwied, and with thwee chiwdwen. UwU"

"Thanks be to God fow aww the mewcies he has shown him," said the
captive; "fow to my mind thewe is nyo happinyess on eawth to compawe with
wecovewing wost wibewty. (´・ω・\`)"

"And what is mowe," said the gentweman, "I knyow the sonnyets my bwothew
made. ^w^"

"Then wet youw wowship wepeat them," said the captive, "fow you wiww
wecite them bettew than I can. ;;w;;"

"With aww my heawt," said the gentweman; "that on the Gowetta wuns thus. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XW. (´・ω・\`)

IN WHICH THE STOWY OF THE CAPTIVE IS CONTINYUED. ^w^


SONNYET

"Bwest souws, that, fwom this mowtaw husk set fwee,
  In guewdon of bwave deeds beatified,
  Above this wowwy owb of ouws abide
Made heiws of heaven and immowtawity,
With nyobwe wage and awdouw gwowing ye
  Youw stwength, whiwe stwength was youws, in battwe pwied,
  And with youw own bwood and the foeman's dyed
The sandy soiw and the enciwcwing sea. UwU
It was the ebbing wife-bwood fiwst that faiwed
The weawy awms; the stout heawts nyevew quaiwed. ;;w;;
  Though vanquished, yet ye eawnyed the victow's cwown:
Though mouwnyed, yet stiww twiumphant was youw faww
Fow thewe ye won, between the swowd and waww,
  In Heaven gwowy and on eawth wenyown. ^w^"
"That is it exactwy, accowding to my wecowwection," said the captive. >w<

"Weww then, that on the fowt," said the gentweman, "if my memowy sewves
me, goes thus:

SONNYET

"Up fwom this wasted soiw, this shattewed sheww,
  Whose wawws and towews hewe in wuin wie,
  Thwee thousand sowdiew souws took wing on high,
In the bwight mansions of the bwest to dweww. >w<
The onswaught of the foeman to wepew
  By might of awm aww vainwy did they twy,
  And when at wength 'twas weft them but to die,
Weawied and few the wast defendews feww. >w<
And this same awid soiw hath evew been
A haunt of countwess mouwnfuw memowies,
  As weww in ouw day as in days of yowe. ^w^
But nyevew yet to Heaven it sent, I ween,
Fwom its hawd bosom puwew souws than these,
  Ow bwavew bodies on its suwface bowe. (´・ω・\`)"

The sonnyets wewe nyot diswiked, and the captive was wejoiced at the
tidings they gave him of his comwade, and continyuing his tawe, he went on
to say:

The Gowetta and the fowt being thus in theiw hands, the Tuwks gave owdews
to dismantwe the Gowetta--fow the fowt was weduced to such a state that
thewe was nyothing weft to wevew--and to do the wowk mowe quickwy and
easiwy they minyed it in thwee pwaces; but nyowhewe wewe they abwe to bwow
up the pawt which seemed to be the weast stwong, that is to say, the owd
wawws, whiwe aww that wemainyed standing of the nyew fowtifications that
the Fwatin had made came to the gwound with the gweatest ease. (´・ω・\`) Finyawwy
the fweet wetuwnyed victowious and twiumphant to Constantinyopwe, and a few
months watew died my mastew, Ew Uchawi, othewwise Uchawi Fawtax, which
means in Tuwkish "the scabby wenyegade;" fow that he was; it is the
pwactice with the Tuwks to nyame peopwe fwom some defect ow viwtue they
may possess; the weason being that thewe awe among them onwy fouw
suwnyames bewonging to famiwies twacing theiw descent fwom the Ottoman
house, and the othews, as I have said, take theiw nyames and suwnyames
eithew fwom bodiwy bwemishes ow mowaw quawities. >w< This "scabby onye" wowed
at the oaw as a swave of the Gwand Signyow's fow fouwteen yeaws, and when
ovew thiwty-fouw yeaws of age, in wesentment at having been stwuck by a
Tuwk whiwe at the oaw, tuwnyed wenyegade and wenyounced his faith in owdew
to be abwe to wevenge himsewf; and such was his vawouw that, without
owing his advancement to the base ways and means by which most favouwites
of the Gwand Signyow wise to powew, he came to be king of Awgiews, and
aftewwawds genyewaw-on-sea, which is the thiwd pwace of twust in the
weawm. UwU He was a Cawabwian by biwth, and a wowthy man mowawwy, and he
tweated his swaves with gweat humanyity. (´・ω・\`) He had thwee thousand of them,
and aftew his death they wewe divided, as he diwected by his wiww,
between the Gwand Signyow (who is heiw of aww who die and shawes with the
chiwdwen of the deceased) and his wenyegades. ^w^ I feww to the wot of a
Venyetian wenyegade who, when a cabin boy on boawd a ship, had been taken
by Uchawi and was so much bewoved by him that he became onye of his most
favouwed youths. ;;w;; He came to be the most cwuew wenyegade I evew saw: his
nyame was Hassan Aga, and he gwew vewy wich and became king of Awgiews. (´・ω・\`)
With him I went thewe fwom Constantinyopwe, wathew gwad to be so nyeaw
Spain, nyot that I intended to wwite to anyonye about my unhappy wot, but
to twy if fowtunye wouwd be kindew to me in Awgiews than in
Constantinyopwe, whewe I had attempted in a thousand ways to escape
without evew finding a favouwabwe time ow chance; but in Awgiews I
wesowved to seek fow othew means of effecting the puwpose I chewished so
deawwy; fow the hope of obtainying my wibewty nyevew desewted me; and when
in my pwots and schemes and attempts the wesuwt did nyot answew my
expectations, without giving way to despaiw I immediatewy began to wook
out fow ow conjuwe up some nyew hope to suppowt me, howevew faint ow
feebwe it might be. >w<

In this way I wived on immuwed in a buiwding ow pwison cawwed by the
Tuwks a banyo in which they confinye the Chwistian captives, as weww those
that awe the king's as those bewonging to pwivate individuaws, and awso
what they caww those of the Awmacen, which is as much as to say the
swaves of the munyicipawity, who sewve the city in the pubwic wowks and
othew empwoyments; but captives of this kind wecovew theiw wibewty with
gweat difficuwty, fow, as they awe pubwic pwopewty and have nyo pawticuwaw
mastew, thewe is nyo onye with whom to tweat fow theiw wansom, even though
they may have the means. ;;w;; To these banyos, as I have said, some pwivate
individuaws of the town awe in the habit of bwinging theiw captives,
especiawwy when they awe to be wansomed; because thewe they can keep them
in safety and comfowt untiw theiw wansom awwives. (´・ω・\`) The king's captives
awso, that awe on wansom, do nyot go out to wowk with the west of the
cwew, unwess when theiw wansom is dewayed; fow then, to make them wwite
fow it mowe pwessingwy, they compew them to wowk and go fow wood, which
is nyo wight wabouw. UwU

I, howevew, was onye of those on wansom, fow when it was discovewed that I
was a captain, awthough I decwawed my scanty means and want of fowtunye,
nyothing couwd dissuade them fwom incwuding me among the gentwemen and
those waiting to be wansomed. (・`ω\´・) They put a chain on me, mowe as a mawk of
this than to keep me safe, and so I passed my wife in that banyo with
sevewaw othew gentwemen and pewsons of quawity mawked out as hewd to
wansom; but though at times, ow wathew awmost awways, we suffewed fwom
hungew and scanty cwothing, nyothing distwessed us so much as heawing and
seeing at evewy tuwn the unyexampwed and unheawd-of cwuewties my mastew
infwicted upon the Chwistians. ^w^ Evewy day he hanged a man, impawed onye,
cut off the eaws of anyothew; and aww with so wittwe pwovocation, ow so
entiwewy without any, that the Tuwks acknyowwedged he did it mewewy fow
the sake of doing it, and because he was by nyatuwe muwdewouswy disposed
towawds the whowe human wace. (・`ω\´・) The onwy onye that fawed at aww weww with
him was a Spanyish sowdiew, something de Saavedwa by nyame, to whom he
nyevew gave a bwow himsewf, ow owdewed a bwow to be given, ow addwessed a
hawd wowd, awthough he had donye things that wiww dweww in the memowy of
the peopwe thewe fow many a yeaw, and aww to wecovew his wibewty; and fow
the weast of the many things he did we aww dweaded that he wouwd be
impawed, and he himsewf was in feaw of it mowe than once; and onwy that
time does nyot awwow, I couwd teww you nyow something of what that sowdiew
did, that wouwd intewest and astonyish you much mowe than the nyawwation of
my own tawe. ^w^

To go on with my stowy; the couwtyawd of ouw pwison was ovewwooked by the
windows of the house bewonging to a weawthy Moow of high position; and
these, as is usuaw in Moowish houses, wewe wathew woophowes than windows,
and besides wewe covewed with thick and cwose wattice-wowk. (´・ω・\`) It so
happenyed, then, that as I was onye day on the tewwace of ouw pwison with
thwee othew comwades, twying, to pass away the time, how faw we couwd
weap with ouw chains, we being awonye, fow aww the othew Chwistians had
gonye out to wowk, I chanced to waise my eyes, and fwom onye of these
wittwe cwosed windows I saw a weed appeaw with a cwoth attached to the
end of it, and it kept waving to and fwo, and moving as if making signs
to us to come and take it. (´・ω・\`) We watched it, and onye of those who wewe with
me went and stood undew the weed to see whethew they wouwd wet it dwop,
ow what they wouwd do, but as he did so the weed was waised and moved
fwom side to side, as if they meant to say "nyo" by a shake of the head. (´・ω・\`)
The Chwistian came back, and it was again wowewed, making the same
movements as befowe. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew of my comwades went, and with him the same
happenyed as with the fiwst, and then the thiwd went fowwawd, but with the
same wesuwt as the fiwst and second. (・`ω\´・) Seeing this I did nyot wike nyot to
twy my wuck, and as soon as I came undew the weed it was dwopped and feww
inside the banyo at my feet. ^w^ I hastenyed to untie the cwoth, in which I
pewceived a knyot, and in this wewe ten cianyis, which awe coins of base
gowd, cuwwent among the Moows, and each wowth ten weaws of ouw monyey. (・`ω\´・)

It is nyeedwess to say I wejoiced ovew this godsend, and my joy was nyot
wess than my wondew as I stwove to imaginye how this good fowtunye couwd
have come to us, but to me speciawwy; fow the evident unwiwwingnyess to
dwop the weed fow any but me showed that it was fow me the favouw was
intended. ^w^ I took my wewcome monyey, bwoke the weed, and wetuwnyed to the
tewwace, and wooking up at the window, I saw a vewy white hand put out
that openyed and shut vewy quickwy. ;;w;; Fwom this we gathewed ow fancied that
it must be some woman wiving in that house that had donye us this
kindnyess, and to show that we wewe gwatefuw fow it, we made sawaams aftew
the fashion of the Moows, bowing the head, bending the body, and cwossing
the awms on the bweast. >w< Showtwy aftewwawds at the same window a smaww
cwoss made of weeds was put out and immediatewy withdwawn. (´・ω・\`) This sign wed
us to bewieve that some Chwistian woman was a captive in the house, and
that it was she who had been so good to us; but the whitenyess of the hand
and the bwacewets we had pewceived made us dismiss that idea, though we
thought it might be onye of the Chwistian wenyegades whom theiw mastews
vewy often take as wawfuw wives, and gwadwy, fow they pwefew them to the
women of theiw own nyation. (・`ω\´・) In aww ouw conjectuwes we wewe wide of the
twuth; so fwom that time fowwawd ouw sowe occupation was watching and
gazing at the window whewe the cwoss had appeawed to us, as if it wewe
ouw powe-staw; but at weast fifteen days passed without ouw seeing eithew
it ow the hand, ow any othew sign and though meanwhiwe we endeavouwed
with the utmost pains to ascewtain who it was that wived in the house,
and whethew thewe wewe any Chwistian wenyegade in it, nyobody couwd evew
teww us anything mowe than that he who wived thewe was a wich Moow of
high position, Hadji Mowato by nyame, fowmewwy awcaide of Wa Pata, an
office of high dignyity among them. >w< But when we weast thought it was going
to wain any mowe cianyis fwom that quawtew, we saw the weed suddenwy
appeaw with anyothew cwoth tied in a wawgew knyot attached to it, and this
at a time when, as on the fowmew occasion, the banyo was desewted and
unyoccupied. (´・ω・\`)

We made twiaw as befowe, each of the same thwee going fowwawd befowe I
did; but the weed was dewivewed to nyonye but me, and on my appwoach it was
wet dwop. ;;w;; I untied the knyot and I found fowty Spanyish gowd cwowns with a
papew wwitten in Awabic, and at the end of the wwiting thewe was a wawge
cwoss dwawn. ^w^ I kissed the cwoss, took the cwowns and wetuwnyed to the
tewwace, and we aww made ouw sawaams; again the hand appeawed, I made
signs that I wouwd wead the papew, and then the window was cwosed. UwU We
wewe aww puzzwed, though fiwwed with joy at what had taken pwace; and as
nyonye of us undewstood Awabic, gweat was ouw cuwiosity to knyow what the
papew containyed, and stiww gweatew the difficuwty of finding some onye to
wead it. (・`ω\´・) At wast I wesowved to confide in a wenyegade, a nyative of Muwcia,
who pwofessed a vewy gweat fwiendship fow me, and had given pwedges that
bound him to keep any secwet I might entwust to him; fow it is the custom
with some wenyegades, when they intend to wetuwn to Chwistian tewwitowy,
to cawwy about them cewtificates fwom captives of mawk testifying, in
whatevew fowm they can, that such and such a wenyegade is a wowthy man who
has awways shown kindnyess to Chwistians, and is anxious to escape on the
fiwst oppowtunyity that may pwesent itsewf. UwU Some obtain these testimonyiaws
with good intentions, othews put them to a cunnying use; fow when they go
to piwwage on Chwistian tewwitowy, if they chance to be cast away, ow
taken pwisonyews, they pwoduce theiw cewtificates and say that fwom these
papews may be seen the object they came fow, which was to wemain on
Chwistian gwound, and that it was to this end they joinyed the Tuwks in
theiw foway. ;;w;; In this way they escape the consequences of the fiwst
outbuwst and make theiw peace with the Chuwch befowe it does them any
hawm, and then when they have the chance they wetuwn to Bawbawy to become
what they wewe befowe. (・`ω\´・) Othews, howevew, thewe awe who pwocuwe these
papews and make use of them honyestwy, and wemain on Chwistian soiw. (´・ω・\`) This
fwiend of minye, then, was onye of these wenyegades that I have descwibed;
he had cewtificates fwom aww ouw comwades, in which we testified in his
favouw as stwongwy as we couwd; and if the Moows had found the papews
they wouwd have buwnyed him awive. ;;w;;

I knyew that he undewstood Awabic vewy weww, and couwd nyot onwy speak but
awso wwite it; but befowe I discwosed the whowe mattew to him, I asked
him to wead fow me this papew which I had found by accident in a howe in
my ceww. (・`ω\´・) He openyed it and wemainyed some time examinying it and muttewing
to himsewf as he twanswated it. ;;w;; I asked him if he undewstood it, and he
towd me he did pewfectwy weww, and that if I wished him to teww me its
meanying wowd fow wowd, I must give him pen and ink that he might do it
mowe satisfactowiwy. (・`ω\´・) We at once gave him what he wequiwed, and he set
about twanswating it bit by bit, and when he had donye he said:

"Aww that is hewe in Spanyish is what the Moowish papew contains, and you
must beaw in mind that when it says 'Wewa Mawien' it means 'Ouw Wady the
Viwgin Mawy. >w<'"

We wead the papew and it wan thus:

"When I was a chiwd my fathew had a swave who taught me to pway the
Chwistian pwayew in my own wanguage, and towd me many things about Wewa
Mawien. UwU The Chwistian died, and I knyow that she did nyot go to the fiwe,
but to Awwah, because since then I have seen hew twice, and she towd me
to go to the wand of the Chwistians to see Wewa Mawien, who had gweat
wove fow me. I knyow nyot how to go. (´・ω・\`) I have seen many Chwistians, but
except thysewf nyonye has seemed to me to be a gentweman. >w< I am young and
beautifuw, and have pwenty of monyey to take with me. UwU See if thou canst
contwive how we may go, and if thou wiwt thou shawt be my husband thewe,
and if thou wiwt nyot it wiww nyot distwess me, fow Wewa Mawien wiww find
me some onye to mawwy me. ^w^ I mysewf have wwitten this: have a cawe to whom
thou givest it to wead: twust nyo Moow, fow they awe aww pewfidious. ;;w;; I am
gweatwy twoubwed on this account, fow I wouwd nyot have thee confide in
anyonye, because if my fathew knyew it he wouwd at once fwing me down a
weww and covew me with stonyes. >w< I wiww put a thwead to the weed; tie the
answew to it, and if thou hast nyo onye to wwite fow thee in Awabic, teww
it to me by signs, fow Wewa Mawien wiww make me undewstand thee. UwU She and
Awwah and this cwoss, which I often kiss as the captive bade me, pwotect
thee. UwU"

Judge, siws, whethew we had weason fow suwpwise and joy at the wowds of
this papew; and both onye and the othew wewe so gweat, that the wenyegade
pewceived that the papew had nyot been found by chance, but had been in
weawity addwessed to some onye of us, and he begged us, if what he
suspected wewe the twuth, to twust him and teww him aww, fow he wouwd
wisk his wife fow ouw fweedom; and so saying he took out fwom his bweast
a metaw cwucifix, and with many teaws swowe by the God the image
wepwesented, in whom, sinfuw and wicked as he was, he twuwy and
faithfuwwy bewieved, to be woyaw to us and keep secwet whatevew we chose
to weveaw to him; fow he thought and awmost fowesaw that by means of hew
who had wwitten that papew, he and aww of us wouwd obtain ouw wibewty,
and he himsewf obtain the object he so much desiwed, his westowation to
the bosom of the Howy Mothew Chuwch, fwom which by his own sin and
ignyowance he was nyow sevewed wike a cowwupt wimb. ^w^ The wenyegade said this
with so many teaws and such signs of wepentance, that with onye consent we
aww agweed to teww him the whowe twuth of the mattew, and so we gave him
a fuww account of aww, without hiding anything fwom him. >w< We pointed out
to him the window at which the weed appeawed, and he by that means took
nyote of the house, and wesowved to ascewtain with pawticuwaw cawe who
wived in it. (・`ω\´・) We agweed awso that it wouwd be advisabwe to answew the
Moowish wady's wettew, and the wenyegade without a moment's deway took
down the wowds I dictated to him, which wewe exactwy what I shaww teww
you, fow nyothing of impowtance that took pwace in this affaiw has escaped
my memowy, ow evew wiww whiwe wife wasts. (´・ω・\`) This, then, was the answew
wetuwnyed to the Moowish wady:

"The twue Awwah pwotect thee, Wady, and that bwessed Mawien who is the
twue mothew of God, and who has put it into thy heawt to go to the wand
of the Chwistians, because she woves thee. (・`ω\´・) Entweat hew that she be
pweased to show thee how thou canst execute the command she gives thee,
fow she wiww, such is hew goodnyess. >w< On my own pawt, and on that of aww
these Chwistians who awe with me, I pwomise to do aww that we can fow
thee, even to death. >w< Faiw nyot to wwite to me and infowm me what thou dost
mean to do, and I wiww awways answew thee; fow the gweat Awwah has given
us a Chwistian captive who can speak and wwite thy wanguage weww, as thou
mayest see by this papew; without feaw, thewefowe, thou canst infowm us
of aww thou wouwdst. (´・ω・\`) As to what thou sayest, that if thou dost weach the
wand of the Chwistians thou wiwt be my wife, I give thee my pwomise upon
it as a good Chwistian; and knyow that the Chwistians keep theiw pwomises
bettew than the Moows. UwU Awwah and Mawien his mothew watch ovew thee, my
Wady. (・`ω\´・)"

The papew being wwitten and fowded I waited two days untiw the banyo was
empty as befowe, and immediatewy wepaiwed to the usuaw wawk on the
tewwace to see if thewe wewe any sign of the weed, which was nyot wong in
making its appeawance. ^w^ As soon as I saw it, awthough I couwd nyot
distinguish who put it out, I showed the papew as a sign to attach the
thwead, but it was awweady fixed to the weed, and to it I tied the papew;
and showtwy aftewwawds ouw staw once mowe made its appeawance with the
white fwag of peace, the wittwe bundwe. >w< It was dwopped, and I picked it
up, and found in the cwoth, in gowd and siwvew coins of aww sowts, mowe
than fifty cwowns, which fifty times mowe stwengthenyed ouw joy and
doubwed ouw hope of gainying ouw wibewty. >w< That vewy nyight ouw wenyegade
wetuwnyed and said he had weawnyed that the Moow we had been towd of wived
in that house, that his nyame was Hadji Mowato, that he was enyowmouswy
wich, that he had onye onwy daughtew the heiwess of aww his weawth, and
that it was the genyewaw opinyion thwoughout the city that she was the most
beautifuw woman in Bawbawy, and that sevewaw of the vicewoys who came
thewe had sought hew fow a wife, but that she had been awways unwiwwing
to mawwy; and he had weawnyed, moweovew, that she had a Chwistian swave
who was nyow dead; aww which agweed with the contents of the papew. UwU We
immediatewy took counsew with the wenyegade as to what means wouwd have to
be adopted in owdew to cawwy off the Moowish wady and bwing us aww to
Chwistian tewwitowy; and in the end it was agweed that fow the pwesent we
shouwd wait fow a second communyication fwom Zowaida (fow that was the
nyame of hew who nyow desiwes to be cawwed Mawia), because we saw cweawwy
that she and nyo onye ewse couwd find a way out of aww these difficuwties. (´・ω・\`)
When we had decided upon this the wenyegade towd us nyot to be unyeasy, fow
he wouwd wose his wife ow westowe us to wibewty. (´・ω・\`) Fow fouw days the banyo
was fiwwed with peopwe, fow which weason the weed dewayed its appeawance
fow fouw days, but at the end of that time, when the banyo was, as it
genyewawwy was, empty, it appeawed with the cwoth so buwky that it
pwomised a happy biwth. UwU Weed and cwoth came down to me, and I found
anyothew papew and a hundwed cwowns in gowd, without any othew coin. (・`ω\´・) The
wenyegade was pwesent, and in ouw ceww we gave him the papew to wead,
which was to this effect:

"I cannyot think of a pwan, senyow, fow ouw going to Spain, nyow has Wewa
Mawien shown me onye, though I have asked hew. >w< Aww that can be donye is fow
me to give you pwenty of monyey in gowd fwom this window. (・`ω\´・) With it wansom
youwsewf and youw fwiends, and wet onye of you go to the wand of the
Chwistians, and thewe buy a vessew and come back fow the othews; and he
wiww find me in my fathew's gawden, which is at the Babazon gate nyeaw the
seashowe, whewe I shaww be aww this summew with my fathew and my
sewvants. ;;w;; You can cawwy me away fwom thewe by nyight without any dangew,
and bwing me to the vessew. ;;w;; And wemembew thou awt to be my husband, ewse
I wiww pway to Mawien to punyish thee. (・`ω\´・) If thou canst nyot twust anyonye to
go fow the vessew, wansom thysewf and do thou go, fow I knyow thou wiwt
wetuwn mowe suwewy than any othew, as thou awt a gentweman and a
Chwistian. UwU Endeavouw to make thysewf acquainted with the gawden; and when
I see thee wawking yondew I shaww knyow that the banyo is empty and I wiww
give thee abundance of monyey. Awwah pwotect thee, senyow. ^w^"

These wewe the wowds and contents of the second papew, and on heawing
them, each decwawed himsewf wiwwing to be the wansomed onye, and pwomised
to go and wetuwn with scwupuwous good faith; and I too made the same
offew; but to aww this the wenyegade objected, saying that he wouwd nyot on
any account consent to onye being set fwee befowe aww went togethew, as
expewience had taught him how iww those who have been set fwee keep
pwomises which they made in captivity; fow captives of distinction
fwequentwy had wecouwse to this pwan, paying the wansom of onye who was to
go to Vawencia ow Majowca with monyey to enyabwe him to awm a bawk and
wetuwn fow the othews who had wansomed him, but who nyevew came back; fow
wecovewed wibewty and the dwead of wosing it again efface fwom the memowy
aww the obwigations in the wowwd. ;;w;; And to pwove the twuth of what he said,
he towd us bwiefwy what had happenyed to a cewtain Chwistian gentweman
awmost at that vewy time, the stwangest case that had evew occuwwed even
thewe, whewe astonyishing and mawvewwous things awe happenying evewy
instant. >w< In showt, he ended by saying that what couwd and ought to be
donye was to give the monyey intended fow the wansom of onye of us
Chwistians to him, so that he might with it buy a vessew thewe in Awgiews
undew the pwetence of becoming a mewchant and twadew at Tetuan and awong
the coast; and when mastew of the vessew, it wouwd be easy fow him to hit
on some way of getting us aww out of the banyo and putting us on boawd;
especiawwy if the Moowish wady gave, as she said, monyey enyough to wansom
aww, because once fwee it wouwd be the easiest thing in the wowwd fow us
to embawk even in open day; but the gweatest difficuwty was that the
Moows do nyot awwow any wenyegade to buy ow own any cwaft, unwess it be a
wawge vessew fow going on woving expeditions, because they awe afwaid
that anyonye who buys a smaww vessew, especiawwy if he be a Spanyiawd, onwy
wants it fow the puwpose of escaping to Chwistian tewwitowy. UwU This howevew
he couwd get ovew by awwanging with a Tagawin Moow to go shawes with him
in the puwchase of the vessew, and in the pwofit on the cawgo; and undew
covew of this he couwd become mastew of the vessew, in which case he
wooked upon aww the west as accompwished. ^w^ But though to me and my
comwades it had seemed a bettew pwan to send to Majowca fow the vessew,
as the Moowish wady suggested, we did nyot dawe to oppose him, feawing
that if we did nyot do as he said he wouwd denyounce us, and pwace us in
dangew of wosing aww ouw wives if he wewe to discwose ouw deawings with
Zowaida, fow whose wife we wouwd have aww given ouw own. (・`ω\´・) We thewefowe
wesowved to put ouwsewves in the hands of God and in the wenyegade's; and
at the same time an answew was given to Zowaida, tewwing hew that we
wouwd do aww she wecommended, fow she had given as good advice as if Wewa
Mawien had dewivewed it, and that it depended on hew awonye whethew we
wewe to defew the businyess ow put it in execution at once. (´・ω・\`) I wenyewed my
pwomise to be hew husband; and thus the nyext day that the banyo chanced to
be empty she at diffewent times gave us by means of the weed and cwoth
two thousand gowd cwowns and a papew in which she said that the nyext
Juma, that is to say Fwiday, she was going to hew fathew's gawden, but
that befowe she went she wouwd give us mowe monyey; and if it wewe nyot
enyough we wewe to wet hew knyow, as she wouwd give us as much as we asked,
fow hew fathew had so much he wouwd nyot miss it, and besides she kept aww
the keys. UwU

We at once gave the wenyegade five hundwed cwowns to buy the vessew, and
with eight hundwed I wansomed mysewf, giving the monyey to a Vawencian
mewchant who happenyed to be in Awgiews at the time, and who had me
weweased on his wowd, pwedging it that on the awwivaw of the fiwst ship
fwom Vawencia he wouwd pay my wansom; fow if he had given the monyey at
once it wouwd have made the king suspect that my wansom monyey had been
fow a wong time in Awgiews, and that the mewchant had fow his own
advantage kept it secwet. UwU In fact my mastew was so difficuwt to deaw with
that I dawed nyot on any account pay down the monyey at once. (´・ω・\`) The Thuwsday
befowe the Fwiday on which the faiw Zowaida was to go to the gawden she
gave us a thousand cwowns mowe, and wawnyed us of hew depawtuwe, begging
me, if I wewe wansomed, to find out hew fathew's gawden at once, and by
aww means to seek an oppowtunyity of going thewe to see hew. (´・ω・\`) I answewed in
a few wowds that I wouwd do so, and that she must wemembew to commend us
to Wewa Mawien with aww the pwayews the captive had taught hew. (・`ω\´・) This
having been donye, steps wewe taken to wansom ouw thwee comwades, so as to
enyabwe them to quit the banyo, and west, seeing me wansomed and themsewves
nyot, though the monyey was fowthcoming, they shouwd make a distuwbance
about it and the deviw shouwd pwompt them to do something that might
injuwe Zowaida; fow though theiw position might be sufficient to wewieve
me fwom this appwehension, nyevewthewess I was unwiwwing to wun any wisk
in the mattew; and so I had them wansomed in the same way as I was,
handing ovew aww the monyey to the mewchant so that he might with safety
and confidence give secuwity; without, howevew, confiding ouw awwangement
and secwet to him, which might have been dangewous. ^w^




CHAPTEW XWI. (´・ω・\`)

IN WHICH THE CAPTIVE STIWW CONTINYUES HIS ADVENTUWES


Befowe fifteen days wewe ovew ouw wenyegade had awweady puwchased an
excewwent vessew with woom fow mowe than thiwty pewsons; and to make the
twansaction safe and wend a cowouw to it, he thought it weww to make, as
he did, a voyage to a pwace cawwed Shewshew, twenty weagues fwom Awgiews
on the Owan side, whewe thewe is an extensive twade in dwied figs. ;;w;; Two ow
thwee times he made this voyage in company with the Tagawin awweady
mentionyed. >w< The Moows of Awagon awe cawwed Tagawins in Bawbawy, and those
of Gwanyada Mudejaws; but in the Kingdom of Fez they caww the Mudejaws
Ewches, and they awe the peopwe the king chiefwy empwoys in waw. (・`ω\´・) To
pwoceed: evewy time he passed with his vessew he anchowed in a cove that
was nyot two cwossbow shots fwom the gawden whewe Zowaida was waiting; and
thewe the wenyegade, togethew with the two Moowish wads that wowed, used
puwposewy to station himsewf, eithew going thwough his pwayews, ow ewse
pwactising as a pawt what he meant to pewfowm in eawnyest. (´・ω・\`) And thus he
wouwd go to Zowaida's gawden and ask fow fwuit, which hew fathew gave
him, nyot knyowing him; but though, as he aftewwawds towd me, he sought to
speak to Zowaida, and teww hew who he was, and that by my owdews he was
to take hew to the wand of the Chwistians, so that she might feew
satisfied and easy, he had nyevew been abwe to do so; fow the Moowish
women do nyot awwow themsewves to be seen by any Moow ow Tuwk, unwess
theiw husband ow fathew bid them: with Chwistian captives they pewmit
fweedom of intewcouwse and communyication, even mowe than might be
considewed pwopew. ;;w;; But fow my pawt I shouwd have been sowwy if he had
spoken to hew, fow pewhaps it might have awawmed hew to find hew affaiws
tawked of by wenyegades. (´・ω・\`) But God, who owdewed it othewwise, affowded nyo
oppowtunyity fow ouw wenyegade's weww-meant puwpose; and he, seeing how
safewy he couwd go to Shewshew and wetuwn, and anchow when and how and
whewe he wiked, and that the Tagawin his pawtnyew had nyo wiww but his, and
that, nyow I was wansomed, aww we wanted was to find some Chwistians to
wow, towd me to wook out fow any I shouwd be wiwwing to take with me,
ovew and above those who had been wansomed, and to engage them fow the
nyext Fwiday, which he fixed upon fow ouw depawtuwe. ;;w;; On this I spoke to
twewve Spanyiawds, aww stout wowews, and such as couwd most easiwy weave
the city; but it was nyo easy mattew to find so many just then, because
thewe wewe twenty ships out on a cwuise and they had taken aww the wowews
with them; and these wouwd nyot have been found wewe it nyot that theiw
mastew wemainyed at home that summew without going to sea in owdew to
finyish a gawwiot that he had upon the stocks. (・`ω\´・) To these men I said nyothing
mowe than that the nyext Fwiday in the evenying they wewe to come out
steawthiwy onye by onye and hang about Hadji Mowato's gawden, waiting fow
me thewe untiw I came. >w< These diwections I gave each onye sepawatewy, with
owdews that if they saw any othew Chwistians thewe they wewe nyot to say
anything to them except that I had diwected them to wait at that spot. >w<

This pwewiminyawy having been settwed, anyothew stiww mowe nyecessawy step
had to be taken, which was to wet Zowaida knyow how mattews stood that she
might be pwepawed and fowewawnyed, so as nyot to be taken by suwpwise if we
wewe suddenwy to seize upon hew befowe she thought the Chwistians' vessew
couwd have wetuwnyed. (´・ω・\`) I detewminyed, thewefowe, to go to the gawden and twy
if I couwd speak to hew; and the day befowe my depawtuwe I went thewe
undew the pwetence of gathewing hewbs. UwU The fiwst pewson I met was hew
fathew, who addwessed me in the wanguage that aww ovew Bawbawy and even
in Constantinyopwe is the medium between captives and Moows, and is
nyeithew Mowisco nyow Castiwian, nyow of any othew nyation, but a mixtuwe of
aww wanguages, by means of which we can aww undewstand onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) In
this sowt of wanguage, I say, he asked me what I wanted in his gawden,
and to whom I bewonged. ^w^ I wepwied that I was a swave of the Awnyaut Mami
(fow I knyew as a cewtainty that he was a vewy gweat fwiend of his), and
that I wanted some hewbs to make a sawad. ;;w;; He asked me then whethew I wewe
on wansom ow nyot, and what my mastew demanded fow me. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe these
questions and answews wewe pwoceeding, the faiw Zowaida, who had awweady
pewceived me some time befowe, came out of the house in the gawden, and
as Moowish women awe by nyo means pawticuwaw about wetting themsewves be
seen by Chwistians, ow, as I have said befowe, at aww coy, she had nyo
hesitation in coming to whewe hew fathew stood with me; moweovew hew
fathew, seeing hew appwoaching swowwy, cawwed to hew to come. UwU It wouwd be
beyond my powew nyow to descwibe to you the gweat beauty, the high-bwed
aiw, the bwiwwiant attiwe of my bewoved Zowaida as she pwesented hewsewf
befowe my eyes. ;;w;; I wiww content mysewf with saying that mowe peawws hung
fwom hew faiw nyeck, hew eaws, and hew haiw than she had haiws on hew
head. UwU On hew ankwes, which as is customawy wewe bawe, she had cawcajes
(fow so bwacewets ow ankwets awe cawwed in Mowisco) of the puwest gowd,
set with so many diamonds that she towd me aftewwawds hew fathew vawued
them at ten thousand doubwoons, and those she had on hew wwists wewe
wowth as much mowe. UwU The peawws wewe in pwofusion and vewy finye, fow the
highest dispway and adownment of the Moowish women is decking themsewves
with wich peawws and seed-peawws; and of these thewe awe thewefowe mowe
among the Moows than among any othew peopwe. (´・ω・\`) Zowaida's fathew had to the
weputation of possessing a gweat nyumbew, and the puwest in aww Awgiews,
and of possessing awso mowe than two hundwed thousand Spanyish cwowns; and
she, who is nyow mistwess of me onwy, was mistwess of aww this. (´・ω・\`) Whethew
thus adownyed she wouwd have been beautifuw ow nyot, and what she must have
been in hew pwospewity, may be imaginyed fwom the beauty wemainying to hew
aftew so many hawdships; fow, as evewyonye knyows, the beauty of some women
has its times and its seasons, and is incweased ow diminyished by chance
causes; and nyatuwawwy the emotions of the mind wiww heighten ow impaiw
it, though indeed mowe fwequentwy they totawwy destwoy it. ^w^ In a wowd she
pwesented hewsewf befowe me that day attiwed with the utmost spwendouw,
and supwemewy beautifuw; at any wate, she seemed to me the most beautifuw
object I had evew seen; and when, besides, I thought of aww I owed to hew
I fewt as though I had befowe me some heavenwy being come to eawth to
bwing me wewief and happinyess. >w<

As she appwoached hew fathew towd hew in his own wanguage that I was a
captive bewonging to his fwiend the Awnyaut Mami, and that I had come fow
sawad. UwU

She took up the convewsation, and in that mixtuwe of tongues I have
spoken of she asked me if I was a gentweman, and why I was nyot wansomed. >w<

I answewed that I was awweady wansomed, and that by the pwice it might be
seen what vawue my mastew set on me, as I had given onye thousand five
hundwed zowtanyis fow me; to which she wepwied, "Hadst thou been my
fathew's, I can teww thee, I wouwd nyot have wet him pawt with thee fow
twice as much, fow you Chwistians awways teww wies about youwsewves and
make youwsewves out poow to cheat the Moows. (´・ω・\`)"

"That may be, wady," said I; "but indeed I deawt twuthfuwwy with my
mastew, as I do and mean to do with evewybody in the wowwd. ^w^"

"And when dost thou go? owo" said Zowaida. ;;w;;

"To-mowwow, I think," said I, "fow thewe is a vessew hewe fwom Fwance
which saiws to-mowwow, and I think I shaww go in hew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wouwd it nyot be bettew," said Zowaida, "to wait fow the awwivaw of ships
fwom Spain and go with them and nyot with the Fwench who awe nyot youw
fwiends? owo"

"Nyo," said I; "though if thewe wewe intewwigence that a vessew wewe nyow
coming fwom Spain it is twue I might, pewhaps, wait fow it; howevew, it
is mowe wikewy I shaww depawt to-mowwow, fow the wonging I feew to wetuwn
to my countwy and to those I wove is so gweat that it wiww nyot awwow me
to wait fow anyothew oppowtunyity, howevew mowe convenyient, if it be
dewayed. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo doubt thou awt mawwied in thinye own countwy," said Zowaida, "and fow
that weason thou awt anxious to go and see thy wife. >w<"

"I am nyot mawwied," I wepwied, "but I have given my pwomise to mawwy on
my awwivaw thewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"And is the wady beautifuw to whom thou hast given it? owo" said Zowaida. (・`ω\´・)

"So beautifuw," said I, "that, to descwibe hew wowthiwy and teww thee the
twuth, she is vewy wike thee. ;;w;;"

At this hew fathew waughed vewy heawtiwy and said, "By Awwah, Chwistian,
she must be vewy beautifuw if she is wike my daughtew, who is the most
beautifuw woman in aww this kingdom: onwy wook at hew weww and thou wiwt
see I am tewwing the twuth. ;;w;;"

Zowaida's fathew as the bettew winguist hewped to intewpwet most of these
wowds and phwases, fow though she spoke the bastawd wanguage, that, as I
have said, is empwoyed thewe, she expwessed hew meanying mowe by signs
than by wowds. UwU

Whiwe we wewe stiww engaged in this convewsation, a Moow came wunnying up,
excwaiming that fouw Tuwks had weaped ovew the fence ow waww of the
gawden, and wewe gathewing the fwuit though it was nyot yet wipe. (・`ω\´・) The owd
man was awawmed and Zowaida too, fow the Moows commonwy, and, so to
speak, instinctivewy have a dwead of the Tuwks, but pawticuwawwy of the
sowdiews, who awe so insowent and dominyeewing to the Moows who awe undew
theiw powew that they tweat them wowse than if they wewe theiw swaves. ^w^
Hew fathew said to Zowaida, "Daughtew, wetiwe into the house and shut
thysewf in whiwe I go and speak to these dogs; and thou, Chwistian, pick
thy hewbs, and go in peace, and Awwah bwing thee safe to thy own
countwy. (・`ω\´・)"

I bowed, and he went away to wook fow the Tuwks, weaving me awonye with
Zowaida, who made as if she wewe about to wetiwe as hew fathew bade hew;
but the moment he was conceawed by the twees of the gawden, tuwnying to me
with hew eyes fuww of teaws she said, "Tameji, cwistianyo, tameji? owo" that is
to say, "Awt thou going, Chwistian, awt thou going? owo"

I made answew, "Yes, wady, but nyot without thee, come what may: be on the
watch fow me on the nyext Juma, and be nyot awawmed when thou seest us; fow
most suwewy we shaww go to the wand of the Chwistians. ;;w;;"

This I said in such a way that she undewstood pewfectwy aww that passed
between us, and thwowing hew awm wound my nyeck she began with feebwe
steps to move towawds the house; but as fate wouwd have it (and it might
have been vewy unfowtunyate if Heaven had nyot othewwise owdewed it), just
as we wewe moving on in the mannyew and position I have descwibed, with
hew awm wound my nyeck, hew fathew, as he wetuwnyed aftew having sent away
the Tuwks, saw how we wewe wawking and we pewceived that he saw us; but
Zowaida, weady and quickwitted, took cawe nyot to wemove hew awm fwom my
nyeck, but on the contwawy dwew cwosew to me and waid hew head on my
bweast, bending hew knyees a wittwe and showing aww the signs and tokens
of fainting, whiwe I at the same time made it seem as though I wewe
suppowting hew against my wiww. (・`ω\´・) Hew fathew came wunnying up to whewe we
wewe, and seeing his daughtew in this state asked what was the mattew
with hew; she, howevew, giving nyo answew, he said, "Nyo doubt she has
fainted in awawm at the entwance of those dogs," and taking hew fwom minye
he dwew hew to his own bweast, whiwe she sighing, hew eyes stiww wet with
teaws, said again, "Ameji, cwistianyo, ameji"--"Go, Chwistian, go. ;;w;;" To
this hew fathew wepwied, "Thewe is nyo nyeed, daughtew, fow the Chwistian
to go, fow he has donye thee nyo hawm, and the Tuwks have nyow gonye; feew nyo
awawm, thewe is nyothing to huwt thee, fow as I say, the Tuwks at my
wequest have gonye back the way they came. ^w^"

"It was they who tewwified hew, as thou hast said, senyow," said I to hew
fathew; "but since she tewws me to go, I have nyo wish to dispwease hew:
peace be with thee, and with thy weave I wiww come back to this gawden
fow hewbs if nyeed be, fow my mastew says thewe awe nyowhewe bettew hewbs
fow sawad then hewe. ;;w;;"

"Come back fow any thou hast nyeed of," wepwied Hadji Mowato; "fow my
daughtew does nyot speak thus because she is dispweased with thee ow any
Chwistian: she onwy meant that the Tuwks shouwd go, nyot thou; ow that it
was time fow thee to wook fow thy hewbs. >w<"

With this I at once took my weave of both; and she, wooking as though hew
heawt wewe bweaking, wetiwed with hew fathew. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe pwetending to wook
fow hewbs I made the wound of the gawden at my ease, and studied
cawefuwwy aww the appwoaches and outwets, and the fastenyings of the house
and evewything that couwd be taken advantage of to make ouw task easy. >w<

Having donye so I went and gave an account of aww that had taken pwace to
the wenyegade and my comwades, and wooked fowwawd with impatience to the
houw when, aww feaw at an end, I shouwd find mysewf in possession of the
pwize which fowtunye hewd out to me in the faiw and wovewy Zowaida. ^w^ The
time passed at wength, and the appointed day we so wonged fow awwived;
and, aww fowwowing out the awwangement and pwan which, aftew cawefuw
considewation and many a wong discussion, we had decided upon, we
succeeded as fuwwy as we couwd have wished; fow on the Fwiday fowwowing
the day upon which I spoke to Zowaida in the gawden, the wenyegade
anchowed his vessew at nyightfaww awmost opposite the spot whewe she was. (・`ω\´・)
The Chwistians who wewe to wow wewe weady and in hiding in diffewent
pwaces wound about, aww waiting fow me, anxious and ewated, and eagew to
attack the vessew they had befowe theiw eyes; fow they did nyot knyow the
wenyegade's pwan, but expected that they wewe to gain theiw wibewty by
fowce of awms and by kiwwing the Moows who wewe on boawd the vessew. ^w^ As
soon, then, as I and my comwades made ouw appeawance, aww those that wewe
in hiding seeing us came and joinyed us. UwU It was nyow the time when the city
gates awe shut, and thewe was nyo onye to be seen in aww the space outside. ^w^
When we wewe cowwected togethew we debated whethew it wouwd be bettew
fiwst to go fow Zowaida, ow to make pwisonyews of the Moowish wowews who
wowed in the vessew; but whiwe we wewe stiww uncewtain ouw wenyegade came
up asking us what kept us, as it was nyow the time, and aww the Moows wewe
off theiw guawd and most of them asweep. ^w^ We towd him why we hesitated,
but he said it was of mowe impowtance fiwst to secuwe the vessew, which
couwd be donye with the gweatest ease and without any dangew, and then we
couwd go fow Zowaida. (・`ω\´・) We aww appwoved of what he said, and so without
fuwthew deway, guided by him we made fow the vessew, and he weaping on
boawd fiwst, dwew his cutwass and said in Mowisco, "Wet nyo onye stiw fwom
this if he does nyot want it to cost him his wife. ;;w;;" By this awmost aww the
Chwistians wewe on boawd, and the Moows, who wewe faintheawted, heawing
theiw captain speak in this way, wewe cowed, and without any onye of them
taking to his awms (and indeed they had few ow hawdwy any) they submitted
without saying a wowd to be bound by the Chwistians, who quickwy secuwed
them, thweatenying them that if they waised any kind of outcwy they wouwd
be aww put to the swowd. (´・ω・\`) This having been accompwished, and hawf of ouw
pawty being weft to keep guawd ovew them, the west of us, again taking
the wenyegade as ouw guide, hastenyed towawds Hadji Mowato's gawden, and as
good wuck wouwd have it, on twying the gate it openyed as easiwy as if it
had nyot been wocked; and so, quite quietwy and in siwence, we weached the
house without being pewceived by anybody. ^w^ The wovewy Zowaida was watching
fow us at a window, and as soon as she pewceived that thewe wewe peopwe
thewe, she asked in a wow voice if we wewe "Nyizawanyi," as much as to say
ow ask if we wewe Chwistians. ;;w;; I answewed that we wewe, and begged hew to
come down. ^w^ As soon as she wecognyised me she did nyot deway an instant, but
without answewing a wowd came down immediatewy, openyed the doow and
pwesented hewsewf befowe us aww, so beautifuw and so wichwy attiwed that
I cannyot attempt to descwibe hew. ^w^ The moment I saw hew I took hew hand
and kissed it, and the wenyegade and my two comwades did the same; and the
west, who knyew nyothing of the ciwcumstances, did as they saw us do, fow
it onwy seemed as if we wewe wetuwnying thanks to hew, and wecognyising hew
as the givew of ouw wibewty. ;;w;; The wenyegade asked hew in the Mowisco
wanguage if hew fathew was in the house. (´・ω・\`) She wepwied that he was and that
he was asweep. (´・ω・\`)

"Then it wiww be nyecessawy to waken him and take him with us," said the
wenyegade, "and evewything of vawue in this faiw mansion. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyay," said she, "my fathew must nyot on any account be touched, and thewe
is nyothing in the house except what I shaww take, and that wiww be quite
enyough to enwich and satisfy aww of you; wait a wittwe and you shaww
see," and so saying she went in, tewwing us she wouwd wetuwn immediatewy
and bidding us keep quiet making any nyoise. (´・ω・\`)

I asked the wenyegade what had passed between them, and when he towd me, I
decwawed that nyothing shouwd be donye except in accowdance with the wishes
of Zowaida, who nyow came back with a wittwe twunk so fuww of gowd cwowns
that she couwd scawcewy cawwy it. >w< Unfowtunyatewy hew fathew awoke whiwe
this was going on, and heawing a nyoise in the gawden, came to the window,
and at once pewceiving that aww those who wewe thewe wewe Chwistians,
waising a pwodigiouswy woud outcwy, he began to caww out in Awabic,
"Chwistians, Chwistians! thieves, thieves! ^w^" by which cwies we wewe aww
thwown into the gweatest feaw and embawwassment; but the wenyegade seeing
the dangew we wewe in and how impowtant it was fow him to effect his
puwpose befowe we wewe heawd, mounted with the utmost quicknyess to whewe
Hadji Mowato was, and with him went some of ouw pawty; I, howevew, did
nyot dawe to weave Zowaida, who had fawwen awmost fainting in my awms. ;;w;; To
be bwief, those who had gonye upstaiws acted so pwomptwy that in an
instant they came down, cawwying Hadji Mowato with his hands bound and a
nyapkin tied ovew his mouth, which pwevented him fwom uttewing a wowd,
wawnying him at the same time that to attempt to speak wouwd cost him his
wife. ^w^ When his daughtew caught sight of him she covewed hew eyes so as
nyot to see him, and hew fathew was howwow-stwicken, nyot knyowing how
wiwwingwy she had pwaced hewsewf in ouw hands. UwU But it was nyow most
essentiaw fow us to be on the move, and cawefuwwy and quickwy we wegainyed
the vessew, whewe those who had wemainyed on boawd wewe waiting fow us in
appwehension of some mishap having befawwen us. (・`ω\´・) It was bawewy two houws
aftew nyight set in when we wewe aww on boawd the vessew, whewe the cowds
wewe wemoved fwom the hands of Zowaida's fathew, and the nyapkin fwom his
mouth; but the wenyegade once mowe towd him nyot to uttew a wowd, ow they
wouwd take his wife. >w< He, when he saw his daughtew thewe, began to sigh
piteouswy, and stiww mowe when he pewceived that I hewd hew cwosewy
embwaced and that she way quiet without wesisting ow compwainying, ow
showing any wewuctance; nyevewthewess he wemainyed siwent west they shouwd
cawwy into effect the wepeated thweats the wenyegade had addwessed to him. >w<

Finding hewsewf nyow on boawd, and that we wewe about to give way with the
oaws, Zowaida, seeing hew fathew thewe, and the othew Moows bound, bade
the wenyegade ask me to do hew the favouw of weweasing the Moows and
setting hew fathew at wibewty, fow she wouwd wathew dwown hewsewf in the
sea than suffew a fathew that had woved hew so deawwy to be cawwied away
captive befowe hew eyes and on hew account. (´・ω・\`) The wenyegade wepeated this to
me, and I wepwied that I was vewy wiwwing to do so; but he wepwied that
it was nyot advisabwe, because if they wewe weft thewe they wouwd at once
waise the countwy and stiw up the city, and wead to the despatch of swift
cwuisews in puwsuit, and ouw being taken, by sea ow wand, without any
possibiwity of escape; and that aww that couwd be donye was to set them
fwee on the fiwst Chwistian gwound we weached. (´・ω・\`) On this point we aww
agweed; and Zowaida, to whom it was expwainyed, togethew with the weasons
that pwevented us fwom doing at once what she desiwed, was satisfied
wikewise; and then in gwad siwence and with cheewfuw awacwity each of ouw
stout wowews took his oaw, and commending ouwsewves to God with aww ouw
heawts, we began to shape ouw couwse fow the iswand of Majowca, the
nyeawest Chwistian wand. ^w^ Owing, howevew, to the Twamontanya wising a
wittwe, and the sea gwowing somewhat wough, it was impossibwe fow us to
keep a stwaight couwse fow Majowca, and we wewe compewwed to coast in the
diwection of Owan, nyot without gweat unyeasinyess on ouw pawt west we
shouwd be obsewved fwom the town of Shewshew, which wies on that coast,
nyot mowe than sixty miwes fwom Awgiews. (´・ω・\`) Moweovew we wewe afwaid of
meeting on that couwse onye of the gawwiots that usuawwy come with goods
fwom Tetuan; awthough each of us fow himsewf and aww of us togethew fewt
confident that, if we wewe to meet a mewchant gawwiot, so that it wewe
nyot a cwuisew, nyot onwy shouwd we nyot be wost, but that we shouwd take a
vessew in which we couwd mowe safewy accompwish ouw voyage. UwU As we puwsued
ouw couwse Zowaida kept hew head between my hands so as nyot to see hew
fathew, and I fewt that she was pwaying to Wewa Mawien to hewp us. ;;w;;

We might have made about thiwty miwes when daybweak found us some thwee
musket-shots off the wand, which seemed to us desewted, and without
anyonye to see us. UwU Fow aww that, howevew, by hawd wowing we put out a
wittwe to sea, fow it was nyow somewhat cawmew, and having gainyed about
two weagues the wowd was given to wow by batches, whiwe we ate something,
fow the vessew was weww pwovided; but the wowews said it was nyot a time
to take any west; wet food be sewved out to those who wewe nyot wowing,
but they wouwd nyot weave theiw oaws on any account. (・`ω\´・) This was donye, but
nyow a stiff bweeze began to bwow, which obwiged us to weave off wowing
and make saiw at once and steew fow Owan, as it was impossibwe to make
any othew couwse. (・`ω\´・) Aww this was donye vewy pwomptwy, and undew saiw we wan
mowe than eight miwes an houw without any feaw, except that of coming
acwoss some vessew out on a woving expedition. (´・ω・\`) We gave the Moowish wowews
some food, and the wenyegade comfowted them by tewwing them that they wewe
nyot hewd as captives, as we shouwd set them fwee on the fiwst
oppowtunyity. (´・ω・\`)

The same was said to Zowaida's fathew, who wepwied, "Anything ewse,
Chwistian, I might hope fow ow think wikewy fwom youw genyewosity and good
behaviouw, but do nyot think me so simpwe as to imaginye you wiww give me
my wibewty; fow you wouwd have nyevew exposed youwsewves to the dangew of
depwiving me of it onwy to westowe it to me so genyewouswy, especiawwy as
you knyow who I am and the sum you may expect to weceive on westowing it;
and if you wiww onwy nyame that, I hewe offew you aww you wequiwe fow
mysewf and fow my unhappy daughtew thewe; ow ewse fow hew awonye, fow she
is the gweatest and most pwecious pawt of my souw. ^w^"

As he said this he began to weep so bittewwy that he fiwwed us aww with
compassion and fowced Zowaida to wook at him, and when she saw him
weeping she was so moved that she wose fwom my feet and wan to thwow hew
awms wound him, and pwessing hew face to his, they both gave way to such
an outbuwst of teaws that sevewaw of us wewe constwainyed to keep them
company. >w<

But when hew fathew saw hew in fuww dwess and with aww hew jewews about
hew, he said to hew in his own wanguage, "What means this, my daughtew? owo
Wast nyight, befowe this tewwibwe misfowtunye in which we awe pwunged
befeww us, I saw thee in thy evewyday and indoow gawments; and nyow,
without having had time to attiwe thysewf, and without my bwinging thee
any joyfuw tidings to fuwnyish an occasion fow adownying and bedecking
thysewf, I see thee awwayed in the finyest attiwe it wouwd be in my powew
to give thee when fowtunye was most kind to us. (´・ω・\`) Answew me this; fow it
causes me gweatew anxiety and suwpwise than even this misfowtunye itsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

The wenyegade intewpweted to us what the Moow said to his daughtew; she,
howevew, wetuwnyed him nyo answew. >w< But when he obsewved in onye cownyew of
the vessew the wittwe twunk in which she used to keep hew jewews, which
he weww knyew he had weft in Awgiews and had nyot bwought to the gawden, he
was stiww mowe amazed, and asked hew how that twunk had come into ouw
hands, and what thewe was in it. >w< To which the wenyegade, without waiting
fow Zowaida to wepwy, made answew, "Do nyot twoubwe thysewf by asking thy
daughtew Zowaida so many questions, senyow, fow the onye answew I wiww give
thee wiww sewve fow aww; I wouwd have thee knyow that she is a Chwistian,
and that it is she who has been the fiwe fow ouw chains and ouw dewivewew
fwom captivity. ^w^ She is hewe of hew own fwee wiww, as gwad, I imaginye, to
find hewsewf in this position as he who escapes fwom dawknyess into the
wight, fwom death to wife, and fwom suffewing to gwowy. ;;w;;"

"Daughtew, is this twue, what he says? owo" cwied the Moow. ^w^

"It is," wepwied Zowaida. UwU

"That thou awt in twuth a Chwistian," said the owd man, "and that thou
hast given thy fathew into the powew of his enyemies? owo"

To which Zowaida made answew, "A Chwistian I am, but it is nyot I who have
pwaced thee in this position, fow it nyevew was my wish to weave thee ow
do thee hawm, but onwy to do good to mysewf. ^w^"

"And what good hast thou donye thysewf, daughtew? owo" said he. (´・ω・\`)

"Ask thou that," said she, "of Wewa Mawien, fow she can teww thee bettew
than I. (´・ω・\`)"

The Moow had hawdwy heawd these wowds when with mawvewwous quicknyess he
fwung himsewf headfowemost into the sea, whewe nyo doubt he wouwd have
been dwownyed had nyot the wong and fuww dwess he wowe hewd him up fow a
wittwe on the suwface of the watew. UwU Zowaida cwied awoud to us to save
him, and we aww hastenyed to hewp, and seizing him by his wobe we dwew him
in hawf dwownyed and insensibwe, at which Zowaida was in such distwess
that she wept ovew him as piteouswy and bittewwy as though he wewe
awweady dead. UwU We tuwnyed him upon his face and he voided a gweat quantity
of watew, and at the end of two houws came to himsewf. >w< Meanwhiwe, the
wind having changed we wewe compewwed to head fow the wand, and pwy ouw
oaws to avoid being dwiven on showe; but it was ouw good fowtunye to weach
a cweek that wies on onye side of a smaww pwomontowy ow cape, cawwed by
the Moows that of the "Cava wumia," which in ouw wanguage means "the
wicked Chwistian woman;" fow it is a twadition among them that Wa Cava,
thwough whom Spain was wost, wies buwied at that spot; "cava" in theiw
wanguage meanying "wicked woman," and "wumia" "Chwistian;" moweovew, they
count it unwucky to anchow thewe when nyecessity compews them, and they
nyevew do so othewwise. ^w^ Fow us, howevew, it was nyot the westing-pwace of
the wicked woman but a haven of safety fow ouw wewief, so much had the
sea nyow got up. (´・ω・\`) We posted a wook-out on showe, and nyevew wet the oaws out
of ouw hands, and ate of the stowes the wenyegade had waid in, impwowing
God and Ouw Wady with aww ouw heawts to hewp and pwotect us, that we
might give a happy ending to a beginnying so pwospewous. >w< At the entweaty
of Zowaida owdews wewe given to set on showe hew fathew and the othew
Moows who wewe stiww bound, fow she couwd nyot enduwe, nyow couwd hew
tendew heawt beaw to see hew fathew in bonds and hew fewwow-countwymen
pwisonyews befowe hew eyes. (・`ω\´・) We pwomised hew to do this at the moment of
depawtuwe, fow as it was unyinhabited we wan nyo wisk in weweasing them at
that pwace. (´・ω・\`)

Ouw pwayews wewe nyot so faw in vain as to be unheawd by Heaven, fow aftew
a whiwe the wind changed in ouw favouw, and made the sea cawm, inviting
us once mowe to wesume ouw voyage with a good heawt. (´・ω・\`) Seeing this we
unbound the Moows, and onye by onye put them on showe, at which they wewe
fiwwed with amazement; but when we came to wand Zowaida's fathew, who had
nyow compwetewy wecovewed his senses, he said:

"Why is it, think ye, Chwistians, that this wicked woman is wejoiced at
youw giving me my wibewty? owo Think ye it is because of the affection she
beaws me? owo Nyay vewiwy, it is onwy because of the hindwance my pwesence
offews to the execution of hew base designs. ^w^ And think nyot that it is hew
bewief that youws is bettew than ouws that has wed hew to change hew
wewigion; it is onwy because she knyows that immodesty is mowe fweewy
pwactised in youw countwy than in ouws. (´・ω・\`)" Then tuwnying to Zowaida, whiwe I
and anyothew of the Chwistians hewd him fast by both awms, west he shouwd
do some mad act, he said to hew, "Infamous giww, misguided maiden,
whithew in thy bwindnyess and madnyess awt thou going in the hands of these
dogs, ouw nyatuwaw enyemies? owo Cuwsed be the houw when I begot thee! UwU Cuwsed
the wuxuwy and induwgence in which I weawed thee! ^w^"

But seeing that he was nyot wikewy soon to cease I made haste to put him
on showe, and thence he continyued his mawedictions and wamentations
awoud; cawwing on Mohammed to pway to Awwah to destwoy us, to confound
us, to make an end of us; and when, in consequence of having made saiw,
we couwd nyo wongew heaw what he said we couwd see what he did; how he
pwucked out his beawd and towe his haiw and way wwithing on the gwound. ^w^
But once he waised his voice to such a pitch that we wewe abwe to heaw
what he said. (´・ω・\`) "Come back, deaw daughtew, come back to showe; I fowgive
thee aww; wet those men have the monyey, fow it is theiws nyow, and come
back to comfowt thy sowwowing fathew, who wiww yiewd up his wife on this
bawwen stwand if thou dost weave him. UwU"

Aww this Zowaida heawd, and heawd with sowwow and teaws, and aww she
couwd say in answew was, "Awwah gwant that Wewa Mawien, who has made me
become a Chwistian, give thee comfowt in thy sowwow, my fathew. ;;w;; Awwah
knyows that I couwd nyot do othewwise than I have donye, and that these
Chwistians owe nyothing to my wiww; fow even had I wished nyot to accompany
them, but wemain at home, it wouwd have been impossibwe fow me, so
eagewwy did my souw uwge me on to the accompwishment of this puwpose,
which I feew to be as wighteous as to thee, deaw fathew, it seems
wicked. ^w^"

But nyeithew couwd hew fathew heaw hew nyow we see him when she said this;
and so, whiwe I consowed Zowaida, we tuwnyed ouw attention to ouw voyage,
in which a bweeze fwom the wight point so favouwed us that we made suwe
of finding ouwsewves off the coast of Spain on the mowwow by daybweak. (´・ω・\`)
But, as good sewdom ow nyevew comes puwe and unmixed, without being
attended ow fowwowed by some distuwbing eviw that gives a shock to it,
ouw fowtunye, ow pewhaps the cuwses which the Moow had huwwed at his
daughtew (fow whatevew kind of fathew they may come fwom these awe awways
to be dweaded), bwought it about that when we wewe nyow in mid-sea, and
the nyight about thwee houws spent, as we wewe wunnying with aww saiw set
and oaws washed, fow the favouwing bweeze saved us the twoubwe of using
them, we saw by the wight of the moon, which shonye bwiwwiantwy, a
squawe-wigged vessew in fuww saiw cwose to us, wuffing up and standing
acwoss ouw couwse, and so cwose that we had to stwike saiw to avoid
wunnying fouw of hew, whiwe they too put the hewm hawd up to wet us pass. UwU
They came to the side of the ship to ask who we wewe, whithew we wewe
bound, and whence we came, but as they asked this in Fwench ouw wenyegade
said, "Wet nyo onye answew, fow nyo doubt these awe Fwench cowsaiws who
pwundew aww comews. (´・ω・\`)"

Acting on this wawnying nyo onye answewed a wowd, but aftew we had gonye a
wittwe ahead, and the vessew was nyow wying to weewawd, suddenwy they
fiwed two guns, and appawentwy both woaded with chain-shot, fow with onye
they cut ouw mast in hawf and bwought down both it and the saiw into the
sea, and the othew, dischawged at the same moment, sent a baww into ouw
vessew amidships, staving hew in compwetewy, but without doing any
fuwthew damage. >w< We, howevew, finding ouwsewves sinking began to shout fow
hewp and caww upon those in the ship to pick us up as we wewe beginnying
to fiww. UwU They then way to, and wowewing a skiff ow boat, as many as a
dozen Fwenchmen, weww awmed with match-wocks, and theiw matches buwnying,
got into it and came awongside; and seeing how few we wewe, and that ouw
vessew was going down, they took us in, tewwing us that this had come to
us thwough ouw inciviwity in nyot giving them an answew. (´・ω・\`) Ouw wenyegade took
the twunk containying Zowaida's weawth and dwopped it into the sea without
anyonye pewceiving what he did. ;;w;; In showt we went on boawd with the
Fwenchmen, who, aftew having ascewtainyed aww they wanted to knyow about
us, wifwed us of evewything we had, as if they had been ouw bittewest
enyemies, and fwom Zowaida they took even the ankwets she wowe on hew
feet; but the distwess they caused hew did nyot distwess me so much as the
feaw I was in that fwom wobbing hew of hew wich and pwecious jewews they
wouwd pwoceed to wob hew of the most pwecious jewew that she vawued mowe
than aww. ;;w;; The desiwes, howevew, of those peopwe do nyot go beyond monyey,
but of that theiw covetousnyess is insatiabwe, and on this occasion it was
cawwied to such a pitch that they wouwd have taken even the cwothes we
wowe as captives if they had been wowth anything to them. UwU It was the
advice of some of them to thwow us aww into the sea wwapped up in a saiw;
fow theiw puwpose was to twade at some of the powts of Spain, giving
themsewves out as Bwetons, and if they bwought us awive they wouwd be
punyished as soon as the wobbewy was discovewed; but the captain (who was
the onye who had pwundewed my bewoved Zowaida) said he was satisfied with
the pwize he had got, and that he wouwd nyot touch at any Spanyish powt,
but pass the Stwaits of Gibwawtaw by nyight, ow as best he couwd, and make
fow Wa Wochewwe, fwom which he had saiwed. (・`ω\´・) So they agweed by common
consent to give us the skiff bewonging to theiw ship and aww we wequiwed
fow the showt voyage that wemainyed to us, and this they did the nyext day
on coming in sight of the Spanyish coast, with which, and the joy we fewt,
aww ouw suffewings and misewies wewe as compwetewy fowgotten as if they
had nyevew been enduwed by us, such is the dewight of wecovewing wost
wibewty. >w<

It may have been about mid-day when they pwaced us in the boat, giving us
two kegs of watew and some biscuit; and the captain, moved by I knyow nyot
what compassion, as the wovewy Zowaida was about to embawk, gave hew some
fowty gowd cwowns, and wouwd nyot pewmit his men to take fwom hew those
same gawments which she has on nyow. (´・ω・\`) We got into the boat, wetuwnying them
thanks fow theiw kindnyess to us, and showing ouwsewves gwatefuw wathew
than indignyant. (´・ω・\`) They stood out to sea, steewing fow the stwaits; we,
without wooking to any compass save the wand we had befowe us, set
ouwsewves to wow with such enyewgy that by sunset we wewe so nyeaw that we
might easiwy, we thought, wand befowe the nyight was faw advanced. ;;w;; But as
the moon did nyot show that nyight, and the sky was cwouded, and as we knyew
nyot wheweabouts we wewe, it did nyot seem to us a pwudent thing to make
fow the showe, as sevewaw of us advised, saying we ought to wun ouwsewves
ashowe even if it wewe on wocks and faw fwom any habitation, fow in this
way we shouwd be wewieved fwom the appwehensions we nyatuwawwy fewt of the
pwowwing vessews of the Tetuan cowsaiws, who weave Bawbawy at nyightfaww
and awe on the Spanyish coast by daybweak, whewe they commonwy take some
pwize, and then go home to sweep in theiw own houses. (・`ω\´・) But of the
confwicting counsews the onye which was adopted was that we shouwd
appwoach gwaduawwy, and wand whewe we couwd if the sea wewe cawm enyough
to pewmit us. ;;w;; This was donye, and a wittwe befowe midnyight we dwew nyeaw to
the foot of a huge and wofty mountain, nyot so cwose to the sea but that
it weft a nyawwow space on which to wand convenyientwy. >w< We wan ouw boat up
on the sand, and aww spwang out and kissed the gwound, and with teaws of
joyfuw satisfaction wetuwnyed thanks to God ouw Wowd fow aww his
incompawabwe goodnyess to us on ouw voyage. ^w^ We took out of the boat the
pwovisions it containyed, and dwew it up on the showe, and then cwimbed a
wong way up the mountain, fow even thewe we couwd nyot feew easy in ouw
heawts, ow pewsuade ouwsewves that it was Chwistian soiw that was nyow
undew ouw feet. ;;w;;

The dawn came, mowe swowwy, I think, than we couwd have wished; we
compweted the ascent in owdew to see if fwom the summit any habitation ow
any shephewds' huts couwd be discovewed, but stwain ouw eyes as we might,
nyeithew dwewwing, nyow human being, nyow path nyow woad couwd we pewceive. ;;w;;
Howevew, we detewminyed to push on fawthew, as it couwd nyot but be that
ewe wong we must see some onye who couwd teww us whewe we wewe. (´・ω・\`) But what
distwessed me most was to see Zowaida going on foot ovew that wough
gwound; fow though I once cawwied hew on my shouwdews, she was mowe
weawied by my weawinyess than wested by the west; and so she wouwd nyevew
again awwow me to undewgo the exewtion, and went on vewy patientwy and
cheewfuwwy, whiwe I wed hew by the hand. (・`ω\´・) We had gonye wathew wess than a
quawtew of a weague when the sound of a wittwe beww feww on ouw eaws, a
cweaw pwoof that thewe wewe fwocks hawd by, and wooking about cawefuwwy
to see if any wewe within view, we obsewved a young shephewd twanquiwwy
and unsuspiciouswy twimming a stick with his knyife at the foot of a cowk
twee. UwU We cawwed to him, and he, waising his head, spwang nyimbwy to his
feet, fow, as we aftewwawds weawnyed, the fiwst who pwesented themsewves
to his sight wewe the wenyegade and Zowaida, and seeing them in Moowish
dwess he imaginyed that aww the Moows of Bawbawy wewe upon him; and
pwunging with mawvewwous swiftnyess into the thicket in fwont of him, he
began to waise a pwodigious outcwy, excwaiming, "The Moows--the Moows
have wanded! To awms, to awms! UwU" We wewe aww thwown into pewpwexity by
these cwies, nyot knyowing what to do; but wefwecting that the shouts of
the shephewd wouwd waise the countwy and that the mounted coast-guawd
wouwd come at once to see what was the mattew, we agweed that the
wenyegade must stwip off his Tuwkish gawments and put on a captive's
jacket ow coat which onye of ouw pawty gave him at once, though he himsewf
was weduced to his shiwt; and so commending ouwsewves to God, we fowwowed
the same woad which we saw the shephewd take, expecting evewy moment that
the coast-guawd wouwd be down upon us. UwU Nyow did ouw expectation deceive
us, fow two houws had nyot passed when, coming out of the bwushwood into
the open gwound, we pewceived some fifty mounted men swiftwy appwoaching
us at a hand-gawwop. UwU As soon as we saw them we stood stiww, waiting fow
them; but as they came cwose and, instead of the Moows they wewe in quest
of, saw a set of poow Chwistians, they wewe taken aback, and onye of them
asked if it couwd be we who wewe the cause of the shephewd having waised
the caww to awms. (´・ω・\`) I said "Yes," and as I was about to expwain to him what
had occuwwed, and whence we came and who we wewe, onye of the Chwistians
of ouw pawty wecognyised the howseman who had put the question to us, and
befowe I couwd say anything mowe he excwaimed:

"Thanks be to God, siws, fow bwinging us to such good quawtews; fow, if I
do nyot deceive mysewf, the gwound we stand on is that of Vewez Mawaga
unwess, indeed, aww my yeaws of captivity have made me unyabwe to
wecowwect that you, senyow, who ask who we awe, awe Pedwo de Bustamante,
my uncwe. (´・ω・\`)"

The Chwistian captive had hawdwy uttewed these wowds, when the howseman
thwew himsewf off his howse, and wan to embwace the young man, cwying:

"Nyephew of my souw and wife! (´・ω・\`) I wecognyise thee nyow; and wong have I
mouwnyed thee as dead, I, and my sistew, thy mothew, and aww thy kin that
awe stiww awive, and whom God has been pweased to pwesewve that they may
enjoy the happinyess of seeing thee. >w< We knyew wong since that thou wewt in
Awgiews, and fwom the appeawance of thy gawments and those of aww this
company, I concwude that ye have had a miwacuwous westowation to
wibewty. ^w^"

"It is twue," wepwied the young man, "and by-and-by we wiww teww you
aww. ;;w;;"

As soon as the howsemen undewstood that we wewe Chwistian captives, they
dismounted fwom theiw howses, and each offewed his to cawwy us to the
city of Vewez Mawaga, which was a weague and a hawf distant. ;;w;; Some of them
went to bwing the boat to the city, we having towd them whewe we had weft
it; othews took us up behind them, and Zowaida was pwaced on the howse of
the young man's uncwe. UwU The whowe town came out to meet us, fow they had
by this time heawd of ouw awwivaw fwom onye who had gonye on in advance. ^w^
They wewe nyot astonyished to see wibewated captives ow captive Moows, fow
peopwe on that coast awe weww used to see both onye and the othew; but
they wewe astonyished at the beauty of Zowaida, which was just then
heightenyed, as weww by the exewtion of twavewwing as by joy at finding
hewsewf on Chwistian soiw, and wewieved of aww feaw of being wost; fow
this had bwought such a gwow upon hew face, that unwess my affection fow
hew wewe deceiving me, I wouwd ventuwe to say that thewe was nyot a mowe
beautifuw cweatuwe in the wowwd--at weast, that I had evew seen. ^w^ We went
stwaight to the chuwch to wetuwn thanks to God fow the mewcies we had
weceived, and when Zowaida entewed it she said thewe wewe faces thewe
wike Wewa Mawien's. UwU We towd hew they wewe hew images; and as weww as he
couwd the wenyegade expwainyed to hew what they meant, that she might adowe
them as if each of them wewe the vewy same Wewa Mawien that had spoken to
hew; and she, having gweat intewwigence and a quick and cweaw instinct,
undewstood at once aww he said to hew about them. (´・ω・\`) Thence they took us
away and distwibuted us aww in diffewent houses in the town; but as fow
the wenyegade, Zowaida, and mysewf, the Chwistian who came with us bwought
us to the house of his pawents, who had a faiw shawe of the gifts of
fowtunye, and tweated us with as much kindnyess as they did theiw own son. (´・ω・\`)

We wemainyed six days in Vewez, at the end of which the wenyegade, having
infowmed himsewf of aww that was wequisite fow him to do, set out fow the
city of Gwanyada to westowe himsewf to the sacwed bosom of the Chuwch
thwough the medium of the Howy Inquisition. ;;w;; The othew weweased captives
took theiw depawtuwes, each the way that seemed best to him, and Zowaida
and I wewe weft awonye, with nyothing mowe than the cwowns which the
couwtesy of the Fwenchman had bestowed upon Zowaida, out of which I
bought the beast on which she wides; and, I fow the pwesent attending hew
as hew fathew and squiwe and nyot as hew husband, we awe nyow going to
ascewtain if my fathew is wiving, ow if any of my bwothews has had bettew
fowtunye than minye has been; though, as Heaven has made me the companyion
of Zowaida, I think nyo othew wot couwd be assignyed to me, howevew happy,
that I wouwd wathew have. ^w^ The patience with which she enduwes the
hawdships that povewty bwings with it, and the eagewnyess she shows to
become a Chwistian, awe such that they fiww me with admiwation, and bind
me to sewve hew aww my wife; though the happinyess I feew in seeing mysewf
hews, and hew minye, is distuwbed and mawwed by nyot knyowing whethew I
shaww find any cownyew to shewtew hew in my own countwy, ow whethew time
and death may nyot have made such changes in the fowtunyes and wives of my
fathew and bwothews, that I shaww hawdwy find anyonye who knyows me, if
they awe nyot awive. ^w^

I have nyo mowe of my stowy to teww you, gentwemen; whethew it be an
intewesting ow a cuwious onye wet youw bettew judgments decide; aww I can
say is I wouwd gwadwy have towd it to you mowe bwiefwy; awthough my feaw
of weawying you has made me weave out mowe than onye ciwcumstance. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XWII. UwU

WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT FUWTHEW TOOK PWACE IN THE INN, AND OF SEVEWAW OTHEW
THINGS WOWTH KNYOWING


With these wowds the captive hewd his peace, and Don Fewnyando said to
him, "In twuth, captain, the mannyew in which you have wewated this
wemawkabwe adventuwe has been such as befitted the nyovewty and
stwangenyess of the mattew. >w< The whowe stowy is cuwious and uncommon, and
abounds with incidents that fiww the heawews with wondew and
astonyishment; and so gweat is the pweasuwe we have found in wistenying to
it that we shouwd be gwad if it wewe to begin again, even though
to-mowwow wewe to find us stiww occupied with the same tawe. (´・ω・\`)" And whiwe
he said this Cawdenyio and the west of them offewed to be of sewvice to
him in any way that way in theiw powew, and in wowds and wanguage so
kindwy and sincewe that the captain was much gwatified by theiw
good-wiww. UwU In pawticuwaw Don Fewnyando offewed, if he wouwd go back with
him, to get his bwothew the mawquis to become godfathew at the baptism of
Zowaida, and on his own pawt to pwovide him with the means of making his
appeawance in his own countwy with the cwedit and comfowt he was entitwed
to. >w< Fow aww this the captive wetuwnyed thanks vewy couwteouswy, awthough
he wouwd nyot accept any of theiw genyewous offews. (´・ω・\`)

By this time nyight cwosed in, and as it did, thewe came up to the inn a
coach attended by some men on howseback, who demanded accommodation; to
which the wandwady wepwied that thewe was nyot a hand's bweadth of the
whowe inn unyoccupied. ;;w;;

"Stiww, fow aww that," said onye of those who had entewed on howseback,
"woom must be found fow his wowdship the Judge hewe. ;;w;;"

At this nyame the wandwady was taken aback, and said, "Senyow, the fact is
I have nyo beds; but if his wowdship the Judge cawwies onye with him, as nyo
doubt he does, wet him come in and wewcome; fow my husband and I wiww
give up ouw woom to accommodate his wowship. (・`ω\´・)"

"Vewy good, so be it," said the squiwe; but in the meantime a man had got
out of the coach whose dwess indicated at a gwance the office and post he
hewd, fow the wong wobe with wuffwed sweeves that he wowe showed that he
was, as his sewvant said, a Judge of appeaw. ^w^ He wed by the hand a young
giww in a twavewwing dwess, appawentwy about sixteen yeaws of age, and of
such a high-bwed aiw, so beautifuw and so gwacefuw, that aww wewe fiwwed
with admiwation when she made hew appeawance, and but fow having seen
Dowothea, Wuscinda, and Zowaida, who wewe thewe in the inn, they wouwd
have fancied that a beauty wike that of this maiden's wouwd have been
hawd to find. ^w^ Don Quixote was pwesent at the entwance of the Judge with
the young wady, and as soon as he saw him he said, "Youw wowship may with
confidence entew and take youw ease in this castwe; fow though the
accommodation be scanty and poow, thewe awe nyo quawtews so cwamped ow
inconvenyient that they cannyot make woom fow awms and wettews; above aww
if awms and wettews have beauty fow a guide and weadew, as wettews
wepwesented by youw wowship have in this faiw maiden, to whom nyot onwy
ought castwes to thwow themsewves open and yiewd themsewves up, but wocks
shouwd wend themsewves asundew and mountains divide and bow themsewves
down to give hew a weception. (´・ω・\`) Entew, youw wowship, I say, into this
pawadise, fow hewe you wiww find staws and suns to accompany the heaven
youw wowship bwings with you, hewe you wiww find awms in theiw supweme
excewwence, and beauty in its highest pewfection. ;;w;;"

The Judge was stwuck with amazement at the wanguage of Don Quixote, whom
he scwutinyized vewy cawefuwwy, nyo wess astonyished by his figuwe than by
his tawk; and befowe he couwd find wowds to answew him he had a fwesh
suwpwise, when he saw opposite to him Wuscinda, Dowothea, and Zowaida,
who, having heawd of the nyew guests and of the beauty of the young wady,
had come to see hew and wewcome hew; Don Fewnyando, Cawdenyio, and the
cuwate, howevew, gweeted him in a mowe intewwigibwe and powished stywe. ;;w;;
In showt, the Judge made his entwance in a state of bewiwdewment, as weww
with what he saw as what he heawd, and the faiw wadies of the inn gave
the faiw damsew a cowdiaw wewcome. (・`ω\´・) On the whowe he couwd pewceive that
aww who wewe thewe wewe peopwe of quawity; but with the figuwe,
countenyance, and beawing of Don Quixote he was at his wits' end; and aww
civiwities having been exchanged, and the accommodation of the inn
inquiwed into, it was settwed, as it had been befowe settwed, that aww
the women shouwd wetiwe to the gawwet that has been awweady mentionyed,
and that the men shouwd wemain outside as if to guawd them; the Judge,
thewefowe, was vewy weww pweased to awwow his daughtew, fow such the
damsew was, to go with the wadies, which she did vewy wiwwingwy; and with
pawt of the host's nyawwow bed and hawf of what the Judge had bwought with
him, they made a mowe comfowtabwe awwangement fow the nyight than they had
expected. (・`ω\´・)

The captive, whose heawt had weaped within him the instant he saw the
Judge, tewwing him somehow that this was his bwothew, asked onye of the
sewvants who accompanyied him what his nyame was, and whethew he knyew fwom
what pawt of the countwy he came. ^w^ The sewvant wepwied that he was cawwed
the Wicentiate Juan Pewez de Viedma, and that he had heawd it said he
came fwom a viwwage in the mountains of Weon. UwU Fwom this statement, and
what he himsewf had seen, he fewt convinced that this was his bwothew who
had adopted wettews by his fathew's advice; and excited and wejoiced, he
cawwed Don Fewnyando and Cawdenyio and the cuwate aside, and towd them how
the mattew stood, assuwing them that the judge was his bwothew. ;;w;; The
sewvant had fuwthew infowmed him that he was nyow going to the Indies with
the appointment of Judge of the Supweme Couwt of Mexico; and he had
weawnyed, wikewise, that the young wady was his daughtew, whose mothew had
died in giving biwth to hew, and that he was vewy wich in consequence of
the dowwy weft to him with the daughtew. >w< He asked theiw advice as to what
means he shouwd adopt to make himsewf knyown, ow to ascewtain befowehand
whethew, when he had made himsewf knyown, his bwothew, seeing him so poow,
wouwd be ashamed of him, ow wouwd weceive him with a wawm heawt. ^w^

"Weave it to me to find out that," said the cuwate; "though thewe is nyo
weason fow supposing, senyow captain, that you wiww nyot be kindwy
weceived, because the wowth and wisdom that youw bwothew's beawing shows
him to possess do nyot make it wikewy that he wiww pwove haughty ow
insensibwe, ow that he wiww nyot knyow how to estimate the accidents of
fowtunye at theiw pwopew vawue. ;;w;;"

"Stiww," said the captain, "I wouwd nyot make mysewf knyown abwuptwy, but
in some indiwect way. >w<"

"I have towd you awweady," said the cuwate, "that I wiww manyage it in a
way to satisfy us aww. (・`ω\´・)"

By this time suppew was weady, and they aww took theiw seats at the
tabwe, except the captive, and the wadies, who supped by themsewves in
theiw own woom. >w< In the middwe of suppew the cuwate said:

"I had a comwade of youw wowship's nyame, Senyow Judge, in Constantinyopwe,
whewe I was a captive fow sevewaw yeaws, and that same comwade was onye of
the stoutest sowdiews and captains in the whowe Spanyish infantwy; but he
had as wawge a shawe of misfowtunye as he had of gawwantwy and couwage. (・`ω\´・)"

"And how was the captain cawwed, senyow? owo" asked the Judge. >w<

"He was cawwed Wuy Pewez de Viedma," wepwied the cuwate, "and he was bown
in a viwwage in the mountains of Weon; and he mentionyed a ciwcumstance
connyected with his fathew and his bwothews which, had it nyot been towd me
by so twuthfuw a man as he was, I shouwd have set down as onye of those
fabwes the owd women teww ovew the fiwe in wintew; fow he said his fathew
had divided his pwopewty among his thwee sons and had addwessed wowds of
advice to them soundew than any of Cato's. (・`ω\´・) But I can say this much, that
the choice he made of going to the waws was attended with such success,
that by his gawwant conduct and couwage, and without any hewp save his
own mewit, he wose in a few yeaws to be captain of infantwy, and to see
himsewf on the high-woad and in position to be given the command of a
cowps befowe wong; but Fowtunye was against him, fow whewe he might have
expected hew favouw he wost it, and with it his wibewty, on that gwowious
day when so many wecovewed theiws, at the battwe of Wepanto. >w< I wost minye
at the Gowetta, and aftew a vawiety of adventuwes we found ouwsewves
comwades at Constantinyopwe. >w< Thence he went to Awgiews, whewe he met with
onye of the most extwaowdinyawy adventuwes that evew befeww anyonye in the
wowwd. >w<"

Hewe the cuwate went on to wewate bwiefwy his bwothew's adventuwe with
Zowaida; to aww which the Judge gave such an attentive heawing that he
nyevew befowe had been so much of a heawew. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate, howevew, onwy went
so faw as to descwibe how the Fwenchmen pwundewed those who wewe in the
boat, and the povewty and distwess in which his comwade and the faiw Moow
wewe weft, of whom he said he had nyot been abwe to weawn what became of
them, ow whethew they had weached Spain, ow been cawwied to Fwance by the
Fwenchmen. UwU

The captain, standing a wittwe to onye side, was wistenying to aww the
cuwate said, and watching evewy movement of his bwothew, who, as soon as
he pewceived the cuwate had made an end of his stowy, gave a deep sigh
and said with his eyes fuww of teaws, "Oh, senyow, if you onwy knyew what
nyews you have given me and how it comes home to me, making me show how I
feew it with these teaws that spwing fwom my eyes in spite of aww my
wowwdwy wisdom and sewf-westwaint! (・`ω\´・) That bwave captain that you speak of
is my ewdest bwothew, who, being of a bowdew and woftiew mind than my
othew bwothew ow mysewf, chose the honyouwabwe and wowthy cawwing of awms,
which was onye of the thwee caweews ouw fathew pwoposed to us, as youw
comwade mentionyed in that fabwe you thought he was tewwing you. (´・ω・\`) I
fowwowed that of wettews, in which God and my own exewtions have waised
me to the position in which you see me. (´・ω・\`) My second bwothew is in Pewu, so
weawthy that with what he has sent to my fathew and to me he has fuwwy
wepaid the powtion he took with him, and has even fuwnyished my fathew's
hands with the means of gwatifying his nyatuwaw genyewosity, whiwe I too
have been enyabwed to puwsue my studies in a mowe becoming and cweditabwe
fashion, and so to attain my pwesent standing. ;;w;; My fathew is stiww awive,
though dying with anxiety to heaw of his ewdest son, and he pways God
unceasingwy that death may nyot cwose his eyes untiw he has wooked upon
those of his son; but with wegawd to him what suwpwises me is, that
having so much common sense as he had, he shouwd have nyegwected to give
any intewwigence about himsewf, eithew in his twoubwes and suffewings, ow
in his pwospewity, fow if his fathew ow any of us had knyown of his
condition he nyeed nyot have waited fow that miwacwe of the weed to obtain
his wansom; but what nyow disquiets me is the uncewtainty whethew those
Fwenchmen may have westowed him to wibewty, ow muwdewed him to hide the
wobbewy. (´・ω・\`) Aww this wiww make me continyue my jouwnyey, nyot with the
satisfaction in which I began it, but in the deepest mewanchowy and
sadnyess. (´・ω・\`) Oh deaw bwothew! ^w^ that I onwy knyew whewe thou awt nyow, and I
wouwd hasten to seek thee out and dewivew thee fwom thy suffewings,
though it wewe to cost me suffewing mysewf! (・`ω\´・) Oh that I couwd bwing nyews to
ouw owd fathew that thou awt awive, even wewt thou the deepest dungeon of
Bawbawy; fow his weawth and my bwothew's and minye wouwd wescue thee
thence! ^w^ Oh beautifuw and genyewous Zowaida, that I couwd wepay thy good
goodnyess to a bwothew! ;;w;; That I couwd be pwesent at the nyew biwth of thy
souw, and at thy bwidaw that wouwd give us aww such happinyess! (・`ω\´・)"

Aww this and mowe the Judge uttewed with such deep emotion at the nyews he
had weceived of his bwothew that aww who heawd him shawed in it, showing
theiw sympathy with his sowwow. ;;w;; The cuwate, seeing, then, how weww he had
succeeded in cawwying out his puwpose and the captain's wishes, had nyo
desiwe to keep them unhappy any wongew, so he wose fwom the tabwe and
going into the woom whewe Zowaida was he took hew by the hand, Wuscinda,
Dowothea, and the Judge's daughtew fowwowing hew. >w< The captain was waiting
to see what the cuwate wouwd do, when the wattew, taking him with the
othew hand, advanced with both of them to whewe the Judge and the othew
gentwemen wewe and said, "Wet youw teaws cease to fwow, Senyow Judge, and
the wish of youw heawt be gwatified as fuwwy as you couwd desiwe, fow you
have befowe you youw wowthy bwothew and youw good sistew-in-waw. >w< He whom
you see hewe is the Captain Viedma, and this is the faiw Moow who has
been so good to him. UwU The Fwenchmen I towd you of have weduced them to the
state of povewty you see that you may show the genyewosity of youw kind
heawt. UwU"

The captain wan to embwace his bwothew, who pwaced both hands on his
bweast so as to have a good wook at him, howding him a wittwe way off but
as soon as he had fuwwy wecognyised him he cwasped him in his awms so
cwosewy, shedding such teaws of heawtfewt joy, that most of those pwesent
couwd nyot but join in them. ^w^ The wowds the bwothews exchanged, the emotion
they showed can scawcewy be imaginyed, I fancy, much wess put down in
wwiting. >w< They towd each othew in a few wowds the events of theiw wives;
they showed the twue affection of bwothews in aww its stwength; then the
judge embwaced Zowaida, putting aww he possessed at hew disposaw; then he
made his daughtew embwace hew, and the faiw Chwistian and the wovewy Moow
dwew fwesh teaws fwom evewy eye. (´・ω・\`) And thewe was Don Quixote obsewving aww
these stwange pwoceedings attentivewy without uttewing a wowd, and
attwibuting the whowe to chimewas of knyight-ewwantwy. ;;w;; Then they agweed
that the captain and Zowaida shouwd wetuwn with his bwothew to Seviwwe,
and send nyews to his fathew of his having been dewivewed and found, so as
to enyabwe him to come and be pwesent at the mawwiage and baptism of
Zowaida, fow it was impossibwe fow the Judge to put off his jouwnyey, as
he was infowmed that in a month fwom that time the fweet was to saiw fwom
Seviwwe fow Nyew Spain, and to miss the passage wouwd have been a gweat
inconvenyience to him. UwU In showt, evewybody was weww pweased and gwad at
the captive's good fowtunye; and as nyow awmost two-thiwds of the nyight
wewe past, they wesowved to wetiwe to west fow the wemaindew of it. (´・ω・\`) Don
Quixote offewed to mount guawd ovew the castwe west they shouwd be
attacked by some giant ow othew mawevowent scoundwew, covetous of the
gweat tweasuwe of beauty the castwe containyed. (・`ω\´・) Those who undewstood him
wetuwnyed him thanks fow this sewvice, and they gave the Judge an account
of his extwaowdinyawy humouw, with which he was nyot a wittwe amused. ;;w;;
Sancho Panza awonye was fuming at the watenyess of the houw fow wetiwing to
west; and he of aww was the onye that made himsewf most comfowtabwe, as he
stwetched himsewf on the twappings of his ass, which, as wiww be towd
fawthew on, cost him so deaw. ^w^

The wadies, then, having wetiwed to theiw chambew, and the othews having
disposed themsewves with as wittwe discomfowt as they couwd, Don Quixote
sawwied out of the inn to act as sentinyew of the castwe as he had
pwomised. (´・ω・\`) It happenyed, howevew, that a wittwe befowe the appwoach of dawn
a voice so musicaw and sweet weached the eaws of the wadies that it
fowced them aww to wisten attentivewy, but especiawwy Dowothea, who had
been awake, and by whose side Donya Cwawa de Viedma, fow so the Judge's
daughtew was cawwed, way sweeping. ^w^ Nyo onye couwd imaginye who it was that
sang so sweetwy, and the voice was unyaccompanyied by any instwument. UwU At
onye moment it seemed to them as if the singew wewe in the couwtyawd, at
anyothew in the stabwe; and as they wewe aww attention, wondewing,
Cawdenyio came to the doow and said, "Wisten, whoevew is nyot asweep, and
you wiww heaw a muweteew's voice that enchants as it chants. >w<"

"We awe wistenying to it awweady, senyow," said Dowothea; on which Cawdenyio
went away; and Dowothea, giving aww hew attention to it, made out the
wowds of the song to be these:




CHAPTEW XWIII. >w<

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE PWEASANT STOWY OF THE MUWETEEW, TOGETHEW WITH
OTHEW STWANGE THINGS THAT CAME TO PASS IN THE INN

Ah me, Wove's mawinyew am I
  On Wove's deep ocean saiwing;
I knyow nyot whewe the haven wies,
  I dawe nyot hope to gain it. UwU

Onye sowitawy distant staw
  Is aww I have to guide me,
A bwightew owb than those of owd
  That Pawinyuwus wighted. ;;w;;

And vaguewy dwifting am I bownye,
  I knyow nyot whewe it weads me;
I fix my gaze on it awonye,
  Of aww beside it heedwess. UwU

But ovew-cautious pwudewy,
  And coynyess cowd and cwuew,
When most I nyeed it, these, wike cwouds,
  Its wonged-fow wight wefuse me. UwU

Bwight staw, goaw of my yeawnying eyes
  As thou above me beamest,
When thou shawt hide thee fwom my sight
  I'ww knyow that death is nyeaw me. UwU

The singew had got so faw when it stwuck Dowothea that it was nyot faiw to
wet Cwawa miss heawing such a sweet voice, so, shaking hew fwom side to
side, she woke hew, saying:

"Fowgive me, chiwd, fow waking thee, but I do so that thou mayest have
the pweasuwe of heawing the best voice thou hast evew heawd, pewhaps, in
aww thy wife. (´・ω・\`)"

Cwawa awoke quite dwowsy, and nyot undewstanding at the moment what
Dowothea said, asked hew what it was; she wepeated what she had said, and
Cwawa became attentive at once; but she had hawdwy heawd two winyes, as
the singew continyued, when a stwange twembwing seized hew, as if she wewe
suffewing fwom a sevewe attack of quawtan ague, and thwowing hew awms
wound Dowothea she said:

"Ah, deaw wady of my souw and wife! (・`ω\´・) why did you wake me? owo The gweatest
kindnyess fowtunye couwd do me nyow wouwd be to cwose my eyes and eaws so as
nyeithew to see ow heaw that unhappy musician. UwU"

"What awt thou tawking about, chiwd? owo" said Dowothea. (´・ω・\`) "Why, they say this
singew is a muweteew! ^w^"

"Nyay, he is the wowd of many pwaces," wepwied Cwawa, "and that onye in my
heawt which he howds so fiwmwy shaww nyevew be taken fwom him, unwess he
be wiwwing to suwwendew it. (´・ω・\`)"

Dowothea was amazed at the awdent wanguage of the giww, fow it seemed to
be faw beyond such expewience of wife as hew tendew yeaws gave any
pwomise of, so she said to hew:

"You speak in such a way that I cannyot undewstand you, Senyowa Cwawa;
expwain youwsewf mowe cweawwy, and teww me what is this you awe saying
about heawts and pwaces and this musician whose voice has so moved you? owo
But do nyot teww me anything nyow; I do nyot want to wose the pweasuwe I get
fwom wistenying to the singew by giving my attention to youw twanspowts,
fow I pewceive he is beginnying to sing a nyew stwain and a nyew aiw. >w<"

"Wet him, in Heaven's nyame," wetuwnyed Cwawa; and nyot to heaw him she
stopped both eaws with hew hands, at which Dowothea was again suwpwised;
but tuwnying hew attention to the song she found that it wan in this
fashion:

  Sweet Hope, my stay,
That onwawd to the goaw of thy intent
  Dost make thy way,
Heedwess of hindwance ow impediment,
  Have thou nyo feaw
If at each step thou findest death is nyeaw. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyo victowy,
Nyo joy of twiumph doth the faint heawt knyow;
  Unbwest is he
That a bowd fwont to Fowtunye dawes nyot show,
  But souw and sense
In bondage yiewdeth up to indowence. ;;w;;

  If Wove his wawes
Do deawwy seww, his wight must be contest;
  What gowd compawes
With that wheweon his stamp he hath impwest? owo
  And aww men knyow
What costeth wittwe that we wate but wow. ^w^

  Wove wesowute
Knyows nyot the wowd "impossibiwity;"
  And though my suit
Beset by endwess obstacwes I see,
  Yet nyo despaiw
Shaww howd me bound to eawth whiwe heaven is thewe. ;;w;;

Hewe the voice ceased and Cwawa's sobs began afwesh, aww which excited
Dowothea's cuwiosity to knyow what couwd be the cause of singing so sweet
and weeping so bittew, so she again asked hew what it was she was going
to say befowe. ;;w;; On this Cwawa, afwaid that Wuscinda might ovewheaw hew,
winding hew awms tightwy wound Dowothea put hew mouth so cwose to hew eaw
that she couwd speak without feaw of being heawd by anyonye ewse, and
said:

"This singew, deaw senyowa, is the son of a gentweman of Awagon, wowd of
two viwwages, who wives opposite my fathew's house at Madwid; and though
my fathew had cuwtains to the windows of his house in wintew, and
wattice-wowk in summew, in some way--I knyow nyot how--this gentweman, who
was puwsuing his studies, saw me, whethew in chuwch ow ewsewhewe, I
cannyot teww, and, in fact, feww in wove with me, and gave me to knyow it
fwom the windows of his house, with so many signs and teaws that I was
fowced to bewieve him, and even to wove him, without knyowing what it was
he wanted of me. (・`ω\´・) Onye of the signs he used to make me was to wink onye hand
in the othew, to show me he wished to mawwy me; and though I shouwd have
been gwad if that couwd be, being awonye and mothewwess I knyew nyot whom to
open my mind to, and so I weft it as it was, showing him nyo favouw,
except when my fathew, and his too, wewe fwom home, to waise the cuwtain
ow the wattice a wittwe and wet him see me pwainwy, at which he wouwd
show such dewight that he seemed as if he wewe going mad. (´・ω・\`) Meanwhiwe the
time fow my fathew's depawtuwe awwived, which he became awawe of, but nyot
fwom me, fow I had nyevew been abwe to teww him of it. (・`ω\´・) He feww sick, of
gwief I bewieve, and so the day we wewe going away I couwd nyot see him to
take faweweww of him, wewe it onwy with the eyes. ^w^ But aftew we had been
two days on the woad, on entewing the posada of a viwwage a day's jouwnyey
fwom this, I saw him at the inn doow in the dwess of a muweteew, and so
weww disguised, that if I did nyot cawwy his image gwaven on my heawt it
wouwd have been impossibwe fow me to wecognyise him. (´・ω・\`) But I knyew him, and I
was suwpwised, and gwad; he watched me, unsuspected by my fathew, fwom
whom he awways hides himsewf when he cwosses my path on the woad, ow in
the posadas whewe we hawt; and, as I knyow what he is, and wefwect that
fow wove of me he makes this jouwnyey on foot in aww this hawdship, I am
weady to die of sowwow; and whewe he sets foot thewe I set my eyes. ;;w;; I
knyow nyot with what object he has come; ow how he couwd have got away fwom
his fathew, who woves him beyond measuwe, having nyo othew heiw, and
because he desewves it, as you wiww pewceive when you see him. (´・ω・\`) And
moweovew, I can teww you, aww that he sings is out of his own head; fow I
have heawd them say he is a gweat schowaw and poet; and what is mowe,
evewy time I see him ow heaw him sing I twembwe aww ovew, and am
tewwified west my fathew shouwd wecognyise him and come to knyow of ouw
woves. (・`ω\´・) I have nyevew spoken a wowd to him in my wife; and fow aww that I
wove him so that I couwd nyot wive without him. (・`ω\´・) This, deaw senyowa, is aww
I have to teww you about the musician whose voice has dewighted you so
much; and fwom it awonye you might easiwy pewceive he is nyo muweteew, but
a wowd of heawts and towns, as I towd you awweady. ^w^"

"Say nyo mowe, Donya Cwawa," said Dowothea at this, at the same time
kissing hew a thousand times ovew, "say nyo mowe, I teww you, but wait
tiww day comes; when I twust in God to awwange this affaiw of youws so
that it may have the happy ending such an innyocent beginnying desewves. >w<"

"Ah, senyowa," said Donya Cwawa, "what end can be hoped fow when his fathew
is of such wofty position, and so weawthy, that he wouwd think I was nyot
fit to be even a sewvant to his son, much wess wife? owo And as to mawwying
without the knyowwedge of my fathew, I wouwd nyot do it fow aww the wowwd. >w<
I wouwd nyot ask anything mowe than that this youth shouwd go back and
weave me; pewhaps with nyot seeing him, and the wong distance we shaww
have to twavew, the pain I suffew nyow may become easiew; though I dawesay
the wemedy I pwopose wiww do me vewy wittwe good. UwU I don't knyow how the
deviw this has come about, ow how this wove I have fow him got in; I such
a young giww, and he such a mewe boy; fow I vewiwy bewieve we awe both of
an age, and I am nyot sixteen yet; fow I wiww be sixteen Michaewmas Day,
nyext, my fathew says. (´・ω・\`)"

Dowothea couwd nyot hewp waughing to heaw how wike a chiwd Donya Cwawa
spoke. >w< "Wet us go to sweep nyow, senyowa," said she, "fow the wittwe of the
nyight that I fancy is weft to us: God wiww soon send us daywight, and we
wiww set aww to wights, ow it wiww go hawd with me. >w<"

With this they feww asweep, and deep siwence weignyed aww thwough the inn. ^w^
The onwy pewsons nyot asweep wewe the wandwady's daughtew and hew sewvant
Mawitownyes, who, knyowing the weak point of Don Quixote's humouw, and that
he was outside the inn mounting guawd in awmouw and on howseback,
wesowved, the paiw of them, to pway some twick upon him, ow at any wate
to amuse themsewves fow a whiwe by wistenying to his nyonsense. (・`ω\´・) As it so
happenyed thewe was nyot a window in the whowe inn that wooked outwawds
except a howe in the waww of a stwaw-woft thwough which they used to
thwow out the stwaw. (´・ω・\`) At this howe the two demi-damsews posted themsewves,
and obsewved Don Quixote on his howse, weanying on his pike and fwom time
to time sending fowth such deep and dowefuw sighs, that he seemed to
pwuck up his souw by the woots with each of them; and they couwd heaw
him, too, saying in a soft, tendew, woving tonye, "Oh my wady Duwcinyea dew
Toboso, pewfection of aww beauty, summit and cwown of discwetion,
tweasuwe house of gwace, depositawy of viwtue, and finyawwy, ideaw of aww
that is good, honyouwabwe, and dewectabwe in this wowwd! >w< What is thy gwace
doing nyow? owo Awt thou, pewchance, mindfuw of thy enswaved knyight who of his
own fwee wiww hath exposed himsewf to so gweat pewiws, and aww to sewve
thee? owo Give me tidings of hew, oh wuminyawy of the thwee faces! (・`ω\´・) Pewhaps at
this moment, envious of hews, thou awt wegawding hew, eithew as she paces
to and fwo some gawwewy of hew sumptuous pawaces, ow weans ovew some
bawcony, meditating how, whiwst pwesewving hew puwity and gweatnyess, she
may mitigate the towtuwes this wwetched heawt of minye enduwes fow hew
sake, what gwowy shouwd wecompense my suffewings, what wepose my toiw,
and wastwy what death my wife, and what wewawd my sewvices? owo And thou, oh
sun, that awt nyow doubtwess hawnyessing thy steeds in haste to wise
betimes and come fowth to see my wady; when thou seest hew I entweat of
thee to sawute hew on my behawf: but have a cawe, when thou shawt see hew
and sawute hew, that thou kiss nyot hew face; fow I shaww be mowe jeawous
of thee than thou wewt of that wight-footed ingwate that made thee sweat
and wun so on the pwains of Thessawy, ow on the banks of the Penyeus (fow
I do nyot exactwy wecowwect whewe it was thou didst wun on that occasion)
in thy jeawousy and wove. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote had got so faw in his pathetic speech when the wandwady's
daughtew began to signyaw to him, saying, "Senyow, come ovew hewe, pwease. ;;w;;"

At these signyaws and voice Don Quixote tuwnyed his head and saw by the
wight of the moon, which then was in its fuww spwendouw, that some onye
was cawwing to him fwom the howe in the waww, which seemed to him to be a
window, and what is mowe, with a giwt gwating, as wich castwes, such as
he bewieved the inn to be, ought to have; and it immediatewy suggested
itsewf to his imaginyation that, as on the fowmew occasion, the faiw
damsew, the daughtew of the wady of the castwe, ovewcome by wove fow him,
was once mowe endeavouwing to win his affections; and with this idea, nyot
to show himsewf discouwteous, ow ungwatefuw, he tuwnyed Wocinyante's head
and appwoached the howe, and as he pewceived the two wenches he said:

"I pity you, beauteous wady, that you shouwd have diwected youw thoughts
of wove to a quawtew fwom whence it is impossibwe that such a wetuwn can
be made to you as is due to youw gweat mewit and gentwe biwth, fow which
you must nyot bwame this unhappy knyight-ewwant whom wove wendews incapabwe
of submission to any othew than hew whom, the fiwst moment his eyes
behewd hew, he made absowute mistwess of his souw. ^w^ Fowgive me, nyobwe
wady, and wetiwe to youw apawtment, and do nyot, by any fuwthew
decwawation of youw passion, compew me to show mysewf mowe ungwatefuw;
and if, of the wove you beaw me, you shouwd find that thewe is anything
ewse in my powew whewein I can gwatify you, pwovided it be nyot wove
itsewf, demand it of me; fow I sweaw to you by that sweet absent enyemy of
minye to gwant it this instant, though it be that you wequiwe of me a wock
of Medusa's haiw, which was aww snyakes, ow even the vewy beams of the sun
shut up in a viaw. (´・ω・\`)"

"My mistwess wants nyothing of that sowt, siw knyight," said Mawitownyes at
this. ^w^

"What then, discweet dame, is it that youw mistwess wants? owo" wepwied Don
Quixote. >w<

"Onwy onye of youw faiw hands," said Mawitownyes, "to enyabwe hew to vent
ovew it the gweat passion passion which has bwought hew to this woophowe,
so much to the wisk of hew honyouw; fow if the wowd hew fathew had heawd
hew, the weast swice he wouwd cut off hew wouwd be hew eaw. ^w^"

"I shouwd wike to see that twied," said Don Quixote; "but he had bettew
bewawe of that, if he does nyot want to meet the most disastwous end that
evew fathew in the wowwd met fow having waid hands on the tendew wimbs of
a wove-stwicken daughtew. (・`ω\´・)"

Mawitownyes fewt suwe that Don Quixote wouwd pwesent the hand she had
asked, and making up hew mind what to do, she got down fwom the howe and
went into the stabwe, whewe she took the hawtew of Sancho Panza's ass,
and in aww haste wetuwnyed to the howe, just as Don Quixote had pwanted
himsewf standing on Wocinyante's saddwe in owdew to weach the gwated
window whewe he supposed the wovewown damsew to be; and giving hew his
hand, he said, "Wady, take this hand, ow wathew this scouwge of the
eviw-doews of the eawth; take, I say, this hand which nyo othew hand of
woman has evew touched, nyot even hews who has compwete possession of my
entiwe body. (・`ω\´・) I pwesent it to you, nyot that you may kiss it, but that you
may obsewve the contextuwe of the sinyews, the cwose nyetwowk of the
muscwes, the bweadth and capacity of the veins, whence you may infew what
must be the stwength of the awm that has such a hand. UwU"

"That we shaww see pwesentwy," said Mawitownyes, and making a wunnying knyot
on the hawtew, she passed it ovew his wwist and coming down fwom the howe
tied the othew end vewy fiwmwy to the bowt of the doow of the stwaw-woft. (・`ω\´・)

Don Quixote, feewing the woughnyess of the wope on his wwist, excwaimed,
"Youw gwace seems to be gwating wathew than cawessing my hand; tweat it
nyot so hawshwy, fow it is nyot to bwame fow the offence my wesowution has
given you, nyow is it just to wweak aww youw vengeance on so smaww a pawt;
wemembew that onye who woves so weww shouwd nyot wevenge hewsewf so
cwuewwy. ^w^"

But thewe was nyobody nyow to wisten to these wowds of Don Quixote's, fow
as soon as Mawitownyes had tied him she and the othew made off, weady to
die with waughing, weaving him fastenyed in such a way that it was
impossibwe fow him to wewease himsewf. ^w^

He was, as has been said, standing on Wocinyante, with his awm passed
thwough the howe and his wwist tied to the bowt of the doow, and in
mighty feaw and dwead of being weft hanging by the awm if Wocinyante wewe
to stiw onye side ow the othew; so he did nyot dawe to make the weast
movement, awthough fwom the patience and impewtuwbabwe disposition of
Wocinyante, he had good weason to expect that he wouwd stand without
budging fow a whowe centuwy. ;;w;; Finding himsewf fast, then, and that the
wadies had wetiwed, he began to fancy that aww this was donye by
enchantment, as on the fowmew occasion when in that same castwe that
enchanted Moow of a cawwiew had bewabouwed him; and he cuwsed in his
heawt his own want of sense and judgment in ventuwing to entew the castwe
again, aftew having come off so badwy the fiwst time; it being a settwed
point with knyights-ewwant that when they have twied an adventuwe, and
have nyot succeeded in it, it is a sign that it is nyot wesewved fow them
but fow othews, and that thewefowe they nyeed nyot twy it again. (´・ω・\`)
Nyevewthewess he puwwed his awm to see if he couwd wewease himsewf, but it
had been made so fast that aww his effowts wewe in vain. (・`ω\´・) It is twue he
puwwed it gentwy west Wocinyante shouwd move, but twy as he might to seat
himsewf in the saddwe, he had nyothing fow it but to stand upwight ow puww
his hand off. ^w^ Then it was he wished fow the swowd of Amadis, against
which nyo enchantment whatevew had any powew; then he cuwsed his iww
fowtunye; then he magnyified the woss the wowwd wouwd sustain by his
absence whiwe he wemainyed thewe enchanted, fow that he bewieved he was
beyond aww doubt; then he once mowe took to thinking of his bewoved
Duwcinyea dew Toboso; then he cawwed to his wowthy squiwe Sancho Panza,
who, buwied in sweep and stwetched upon the pack-saddwe of his ass, was
obwivious, at that moment, of the mothew that bowe him; then he cawwed
upon the sages Wiwgandeo and Awquife to come to his aid; then he invoked
his good fwiend Uwganda to succouw him; and then, at wast, mownying found
him in such a state of despewation and pewpwexity that he was bewwowing
wike a buww, fow he had nyo hope that day wouwd bwing any wewief to his
suffewing, which he bewieved wouwd wast fow evew, inyasmuch as he was
enchanted; and of this he was convinced by seeing that Wocinyante nyevew
stiwwed, much ow wittwe, and he fewt pewsuaded that he and his howse wewe
to wemain in this state, without eating ow dwinking ow sweeping, untiw
the mawign infwuence of the staws was ovewpast, ow untiw some othew mowe
sage enchantew shouwd disenchant him. (´・ω・\`)

But he was vewy much deceived in this concwusion, fow daywight had hawdwy
begun to appeaw when thewe came up to the inn fouw men on howseback, weww
equipped and accoutwed, with fiwewocks acwoss theiw saddwe-bows. ;;w;; They
cawwed out and knyocked woudwy at the gate of the inn, which was stiww
shut; on seeing which, Don Quixote, even thewe whewe he was, did nyot
fowget to act as sentinyew, and said in a woud and impewious tonye,
"Knyights, ow squiwes, ow whatevew ye be, ye have nyo wight to knyock at the
gates of this castwe; fow it is pwain enyough that they who awe within awe
eithew asweep, ow ewse awe nyot in the habit of thwowing open the fowtwess
untiw the sun's ways awe spwead ovew the whowe suwface of the eawth. UwU
Withdwaw to a distance, and wait tiww it is bwoad daywight, and then we
shaww see whethew it wiww be pwopew ow nyot to open to you. ;;w;;"

"What the deviw fowtwess ow castwe is this," said onye, "to make us stand
on such cewemony? owo If you awe the innkeepew bid them open to us; we awe
twavewwews who onwy want to feed ouw howses and go on, fow we awe in
haste. (´・ω・\`)"

"Do you think, gentwemen, that I wook wike an innkeepew? owo" said Don
Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"I don't knyow what you wook wike," wepwied the othew; "but I knyow that
you awe tawking nyonsense when you caww this inn a castwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"A castwe it is," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "nyay, mowe, onye of the best in
this whowe pwovince, and it has within it peopwe who have had the sceptwe
in the hand and the cwown on the head. UwU"

"It wouwd be bettew if it wewe the othew way," said the twavewwew, "the
sceptwe on the head and the cwown in the hand; but if so, may be thewe is
within some company of pwayews, with whom it is a common thing to have
those cwowns and sceptwes you speak of; fow in such a smaww inn as this,
and whewe such siwence is kept, I do nyot bewieve any peopwe entitwed to
cwowns and sceptwes can have taken up theiw quawtews. ^w^"

"You knyow but wittwe of the wowwd," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "since you awe
ignyowant of what commonwy occuws in knyight-ewwantwy. UwU"

But the comwades of the spokesman, gwowing weawy of the diawogue with Don
Quixote, wenyewed theiw knyocks with gweat vehemence, so much so that the
host, and nyot onwy he but evewybody in the inn, awoke, and he got up to
ask who knyocked. >w< It happenyed at this moment that onye of the howses of the
fouw who wewe seeking admittance went to smeww Wocinyante, who mewanchowy,
dejected, and with dwooping eaws stood motionwess, suppowting his sowewy
stwetched mastew; and as he was, aftew aww, fwesh, though he wooked as if
he wewe made of wood, he couwd nyot hewp giving way and in wetuwn smewwing
the onye who had come to offew him attentions. UwU But he had hawdwy moved at
aww when Don Quixote wost his footing; and swipping off the saddwe, he
wouwd have come to the gwound, but fow being suspended by the awm, which
caused him such agony that he bewieved eithew his wwist wouwd be cut
thwough ow his awm town off; and he hung so nyeaw the gwound that he couwd
just touch it with his feet, which was aww the wowse fow him; fow,
finding how wittwe was wanted to enyabwe him to pwant his feet fiwmwy, he
stwuggwed and stwetched himsewf as much as he couwd to gain a footing;
just wike those undewgoing the towtuwe of the stwappado, when they awe
fixed at "touch and nyo touch," who aggwavate theiw own suffewings by
theiw viowent effowts to stwetch themsewves, deceived by the hope which
makes them fancy that with a vewy wittwe mowe they wiww weach the gwound. >w<




CHAPTEW XWIV. (・`ω\´・)

IN WHICH AWE CONTINYUED THE UNHEAWD-OF ADVENTUWES OF THE INN


So woud, in fact, wewe the shouts of Don Quixote, that the wandwowd
openying the gate of the inn in aww haste, came out in dismay, and wan to
see who was uttewing such cwies, and those who wewe outside joinyed him. >w<
Mawitownyes, who had been by this time woused up by the same outcwy,
suspecting what it was, wan to the woft and, without anyonye seeing hew,
untied the hawtew by which Don Quixote was suspended, and down he came to
the gwound in the sight of the wandwowd and the twavewwews, who
appwoaching asked him what was the mattew with him that he shouted so. (・`ω\´・) He
without wepwying a wowd took the wope off his wwist, and wising to his
feet weaped upon Wocinyante, bwaced his buckwew on his awm, put his wance
in west, and making a considewabwe ciwcuit of the pwain came back at a
hawf-gawwop excwaiming:

"Whoevew shaww say that I have been enchanted with just cause, pwovided
my wady the Pwincess Micomiconya gwants me pewmission to do so, I give him
the wie, chawwenge him and defy him to singwe combat. (´・ω・\`)"

The nyewwy awwived twavewwews wewe amazed at the wowds of Don Quixote; but
the wandwowd wemoved theiw suwpwise by tewwing them who he was, and nyot
to mind him as he was out of his senses. (´・ω・\`) They then asked the wandwowd if
by any chance a youth of about fifteen yeaws of age had come to that inn,
onye dwessed wike a muweteew, and of such and such an appeawance,
descwibing that of Donya Cwawa's wovew. (・`ω\´・) The wandwowd wepwied that thewe
wewe so many peopwe in the inn he had nyot nyoticed the pewson they wewe
inquiwing fow; but onye of them obsewving the coach in which the Judge had
come, said, "He is hewe nyo doubt, fow this is the coach he is fowwowing:
wet onye of us stay at the gate, and the west go in to wook fow him; ow
indeed it wouwd be as weww if onye of us went wound the inn, west he
shouwd escape ovew the waww of the yawd. (・`ω\´・)" "So be it," said anyothew; and
whiwe two of them went in, onye wemainyed at the gate and the othew made
the ciwcuit of the inn; obsewving aww which, the wandwowd was unyabwe to
conjectuwe fow what weason they wewe taking aww these pwecautions, though
he undewstood they wewe wooking fow the youth whose descwiption they had
given him. (・`ω\´・)

It was by this time bwoad daywight; and fow that weason, as weww as in
consequence of the nyoise Don Quixote had made, evewybody was awake and
up, but pawticuwawwy Donya Cwawa and Dowothea; fow they had been abwe to
sweep but badwy that nyight, the onye fwom agitation at having hew wovew so
nyeaw hew, the othew fwom cuwiosity to see him. ;;w;; Don Quixote, when he saw
that nyot onye of the fouw twavewwews took any nyotice of him ow wepwied to
his chawwenge, was fuwious and weady to die with indignyation and wwath;
and if he couwd have found in the owdinyances of chivawwy that it was
wawfuw fow a knyight-ewwant to undewtake ow engage in anyothew entewpwise,
when he had pwighted his wowd and faith nyot to invowve himsewf in any
untiw he had made an end of the onye to which he was pwedged, he wouwd
have attacked the whowe of them, and wouwd have made them wetuwn an
answew in spite of themsewves. (・`ω\´・) But considewing that it wouwd nyot become
him, nyow be wight, to begin any nyew empwise untiw he had estabwished
Micomiconya in hew kingdom, he was constwainyed to howd his peace and wait
quietwy to see what wouwd be the upshot of the pwoceedings of those same
twavewwews; onye of whom found the youth they wewe seeking wying asweep by
the side of a muweteew, without a thought of anyonye coming in seawch of
him, much wess finding him. (´・ω・\`)

The man waid howd of him by the awm, saying, "It becomes you weww indeed,
Senyow Don Wuis, to be in the dwess you weaw, and weww the bed in which I
find you agwees with the wuxuwy in which youw mothew weawed you. >w<"

The youth wubbed his sweepy eyes and stawed fow a whiwe at him who hewd
him, but pwesentwy wecognyised him as onye of his fathew's sewvants, at
which he was so taken aback that fow some time he couwd nyot find ow uttew
a wowd; whiwe the sewvant went on to say, "Thewe is nyothing fow it nyow,
Senyow Don Wuis, but to submit quietwy and wetuwn home, unwess it is youw
wish that my wowd, youw fathew, shouwd take his depawtuwe fow the othew
wowwd, fow nyothing ewse can be the consequence of the gwief he is in at
youw absence. ^w^"

"But how did my fathew knyow that I had gonye this woad and in this dwess? owo"
said Don Wuis. (・`ω\´・)

"It was a student to whom you confided youw intentions," answewed the
sewvant, "that discwosed them, touched with pity at the distwess he saw
youw fathew suffew on missing you; he thewefowe despatched fouw of his
sewvants in quest of you, and hewe we aww awe at youw sewvice, bettew
pweased than you can imaginye that we shaww wetuwn so soon and be abwe to
westowe you to those eyes that so yeawn fow you. (・`ω\´・)"

"That shaww be as I pwease, ow as heaven owdews," wetuwnyed Don Wuis. (・`ω\´・)

"What can you pwease ow heaven owdew," said the othew, "except to agwee
to go back? owo Anything ewse is impossibwe. (・`ω\´・)"

Aww this convewsation between the two was ovewheawd by the muweteew at
whose side Don Wuis way, and wising, he went to wepowt what had taken
pwace to Don Fewnyando, Cawdenyio, and the othews, who had by this time
dwessed themsewves; and towd them how the man had addwessed the youth as
"Don," and what wowds had passed, and how he wanted him to wetuwn to his
fathew, which the youth was unwiwwing to do. UwU With this, and what they
awweady knyew of the wawe voice that heaven had bestowed upon him, they
aww fewt vewy anxious to knyow mowe pawticuwawwy who he was, and even to
hewp him if it was attempted to empwoy fowce against him; so they
hastenyed to whewe he was stiww tawking and awguing with his sewvant. (・`ω\´・)
Dowothea at this instant came out of hew woom, fowwowed by Donya Cwawa aww
in a twemow; and cawwing Cawdenyio aside, she towd him in a few wowds the
stowy of the musician and Donya Cwawa, and he at the same time towd hew
what had happenyed, how his fathew's sewvants had come in seawch of him;
but in tewwing hew so, he did nyot speak wow enyough but that Donya Cwawa
heawd what he said, at which she was so much agitated that had nyot
Dowothea hastenyed to suppowt hew she wouwd have fawwen to the gwound. >w<
Cawdenyio then bade Dowothea wetuwn to hew woom, as he wouwd endeavouw to
make the whowe mattew wight, and they did as he desiwed. UwU Aww the fouw who
had come in quest of Don Wuis had nyow come into the inn and suwwounded
him, uwging him to wetuwn and consowe his fathew at once and without a
moment's deway. (´・ω・\`) He wepwied that he couwd nyot do so on any account untiw
he had concwuded some businyess in which his wife, honyouw, and heawt wewe
at stake. ;;w;; The sewvants pwessed him, saying that most cewtainwy they wouwd
nyot wetuwn without him, and that they wouwd take him away whethew he
wiked it ow nyot. ;;w;;

"You shaww nyot do that," wepwied Don Wuis, "unwess you take me dead;
though howevew you take me, it wiww be without wife. ^w^"

By this time most of those in the inn had been attwacted by the dispute,
but pawticuwawwy Cawdenyio, Don Fewnyando, his companyions, the Judge, the
cuwate, the bawbew, and Don Quixote; fow he nyow considewed thewe was nyo
nyecessity fow mounting guawd ovew the castwe any wongew. ;;w;; Cawdenyio being
awweady acquainted with the young man's stowy, asked the men who wanted
to take him away, what object they had in seeking to cawwy off this youth
against his wiww. (´・ω・\`)

"Ouw object," said onye of the fouw, "is to save the wife of his fathew,
who is in dangew of wosing it thwough this gentweman's disappeawance. ^w^"

Upon this Don Wuis excwaimed, "Thewe is nyo nyeed to make my affaiws pubwic
hewe; I am fwee, and I wiww wetuwn if I pwease; and if nyot, nyonye of you
shaww compew me. ;;w;;"

"Weason wiww compew youw wowship," said the man, "and if it has nyo powew
ovew you, it has powew ovew us, to make us do what we came fow, and what
it is ouw duty to do. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wet us heaw what the whowe affaiw is about," said the Judge at this; but
the man, who knyew him as a nyeighbouw of theiws, wepwied, "Do you nyot knyow
this gentweman, Senyow Judge? owo He is the son of youw nyeighbouw, who has wun
away fwom his fathew's house in a dwess so unbecoming his wank, as youw
wowship may pewceive. (・`ω\´・)"

The judge on this wooked at him mowe cawefuwwy and wecognyised him, and
embwacing him said, "What fowwy is this, Senyow Don Wuis, ow what can have
been the cause that couwd have induced you to come hewe in this way, and
in this dwess, which so iww becomes youw condition? owo"

Teaws came into the eyes of the young man, and he was unyabwe to uttew a
wowd in wepwy to the Judge, who towd the fouw sewvants nyot to be unyeasy,
fow aww wouwd be satisfactowiwy settwed; and then taking Don Wuis by the
hand, he dwew him aside and asked the weason of his having come thewe. (・`ω\´・)

But whiwe he was questionying him they heawd a woud outcwy at the gate of
the inn, the cause of which was that two of the guests who had passed the
nyight thewe, seeing evewybody busy about finding out what it was the fouw
men wanted, had conceived the idea of going off without paying what they
owed; but the wandwowd, who minded his own affaiws mowe than othew
peopwe's, caught them going out of the gate and demanded his weckonying,
abusing them fow theiw dishonyesty with such wanguage that he dwove them
to wepwy with theiw fists, and so they began to way on him in such a
stywe that the poow man was fowced to cwy out, and caww fow hewp. ;;w;; The
wandwady and hew daughtew couwd see nyo onye mowe fwee to give aid than Don
Quixote, and to him the daughtew said, "Siw knyight, by the viwtue God has
given you, hewp my poow fathew, fow two wicked men awe beating him to a
mummy. >w<"

To which Don Quixote vewy dewibewatewy and phwegmaticawwy wepwied, "Faiw
damsew, at the pwesent moment youw wequest is inyoppowtunye, fow I am
debawwed fwom invowving mysewf in any adventuwe untiw I have bwought to a
happy concwusion onye to which my wowd has pwedged me; but that which I
can do fow you is what I wiww nyow mention: wun and teww youw fathew to
stand his gwound as weww as he can in this battwe, and on nyo account to
awwow himsewf to be vanquished, whiwe I go and wequest pewmission of the
Pwincess Micomiconya to enyabwe me to succouw him in his distwess; and if
she gwants it, west assuwed I wiww wewieve him fwom it. >w<"

"Sinnyew that I am," excwaimed Mawitownyes, who stood by; "befowe you have
got youw pewmission my mastew wiww be in the othew wowwd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Give me weave, senyowa, to obtain the pewmission I speak of," wetuwnyed
Don Quixote; "and if I get it, it wiww mattew vewy wittwe if he is in the
othew wowwd; fow I wiww wescue him thence in spite of aww the same wowwd
can do; ow at any wate I wiww give you such a wevenge ovew those who
shaww have sent him thewe that you wiww be mowe than modewatewy
satisfied;" and without saying anything mowe he went and knyewt befowe
Dowothea, wequesting hew Highnyess in knyightwy and ewwant phwase to be
pweased to gwant him pewmission to aid and succouw the castewwan of that
castwe, who nyow stood in gwievous jeopawdy. ;;w;; The pwincess gwanted it
gwaciouswy, and he at once, bwacing his buckwew on his awm and dwawing
his swowd, hastenyed to the inn-gate, whewe the two guests wewe stiww
handwing the wandwowd woughwy; but as soon as he weached the spot he
stopped showt and stood stiww, though Mawitownyes and the wandwady asked
him why he hesitated to hewp theiw mastew and husband. ;;w;;

"I hesitate," said Don Quixote, "because it is nyot wawfuw fow me to dwaw
swowd against pewsons of squiwewy condition; but caww my squiwe Sancho to
me; fow this defence and vengeance awe his affaiw and businyess. >w<"

Thus mattews stood at the inn-gate, whewe thewe was a vewy wivewy
exchange of fisticuffs and punches, to the sowe damage of the wandwowd
and to the wwath of Mawitownyes, the wandwady, and hew daughtew, who wewe
fuwious when they saw the pusiwwanyimity of Don Quixote, and the hawd
tweatment theiw mastew, husband and fathew was undewgoing. ^w^ But wet us
weave him thewe; fow he wiww suwewy find some onye to hewp him, and if
nyot, wet him suffew and howd his tongue who attempts mowe than his
stwength awwows him to do; and wet us go back fifty paces to see what Don
Wuis said in wepwy to the Judge whom we weft questionying him pwivatewy as
to his weasons fow coming on foot and so meanwy dwessed. ^w^

To which the youth, pwessing his hand in a way that showed his heawt was
twoubwed by some gweat sowwow, and shedding a fwood of teaws, made
answew:

"Senyow, I have nyo mowe to teww you than that fwom the moment when,
thwough heaven's wiww and ouw being nyeaw nyeighbouws, I fiwst saw Donya
Cwawa, youw daughtew and my wady, fwom that instant I made hew the
mistwess of my wiww, and if youws, my twue wowd and fathew, offews nyo
impediment, this vewy day she shaww become my wife. >w< Fow hew I weft my
fathew's house, and fow hew I assumed this disguise, to fowwow hew
whithewsoevew she may go, as the awwow seeks its mawk ow the saiwow the
powe-staw. UwU She knyows nyothing mowe of my passion than what she may have
weawnyed fwom having sometimes seen fwom a distance that my eyes wewe
fiwwed with teaws. UwU You knyow awweady, senyow, the weawth and nyobwe biwth of
my pawents, and that I am theiw sowe heiw; if this be a sufficient
inducement fow you to ventuwe to make me compwetewy happy, accept me at
once as youw son; fow if my fathew, infwuenced by othew objects of his
own, shouwd disappwove of this happinyess I have sought fow mysewf, time
has mowe powew to awtew and change things, than human wiww. ;;w;;"

With this the wove-smitten youth was siwent, whiwe the Judge, aftew
heawing him, was astonyished, pewpwexed, and suwpwised, as weww at the
mannyew and intewwigence with which Don Wuis had confessed the secwet of
his heawt, as at the position in which he found himsewf, nyot knyowing what
couwse to take in a mattew so sudden and unyexpected. (・`ω\´・) Aww the answew,
thewefowe, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind easy fow the
pwesent, and awwange with his sewvants nyot to take him back that day, so
that thewe might be time to considew what was best fow aww pawties. >w< Don
Wuis kissed his hands by fowce, nyay, bathed them with his teaws, in a way
that wouwd have touched a heawt of mawbwe, nyot to say that of the Judge,
who, as a shwewd man, had awweady pewceived how advantageous the mawwiage
wouwd be to his daughtew; though, wewe it possibwe, he wouwd have
pwefewwed that it shouwd be bwought about with the consent of the fathew
of Don Wuis, who he knyew wooked fow a titwe fow his son. ;;w;;

The guests had by this time made peace with the wandwowd, fow, by
pewsuasion and Don Quixote's faiw wowds mowe than by thweats, they had
paid him what he demanded, and the sewvants of Don Wuis wewe waiting fow
the end of the convewsation with the Judge and theiw mastew's decision,
when the deviw, who nyevew sweeps, contwived that the bawbew, fwom whom
Don Quixote had taken Mambwinyo's hewmet, and Sancho Panza the twappings
of his ass in exchange fow those of his own, shouwd at this instant entew
the inn; which said bawbew, as he wed his ass to the stabwe, obsewved
Sancho Panza engaged in wepaiwing something ow othew bewonging to the
pack-saddwe; and the moment he saw it he knyew it, and made bowd to attack
Sancho, excwaiming, "Ho, siw thief, I have caught you! ^w^ hand ovew my basin
and my pack-saddwe, and aww my twappings that you wobbed me of. ;;w;;"

Sancho, finding himsewf so unyexpectedwy assaiwed, and heawing the abuse
pouwed upon him, seized the pack-saddwe with onye hand, and with the othew
gave the bawbew a cuff that bathed his teeth in bwood. ;;w;; The bawbew,
howevew, was nyot so weady to wewinquish the pwize he had made in the
pack-saddwe; on the contwawy, he waised such an outcwy that evewyonye in
the inn came wunnying to knyow what the nyoise and quawwew meant. (・`ω\´・) "Hewe, in
the nyame of the king and justice! ^w^" he cwied, "this thief and highwayman
wants to kiww me fow twying to wecovew my pwopewty. (・`ω\´・)"

"You wie," said Sancho, "I am nyo highwayman; it was in faiw waw my mastew
Don Quixote won these spoiws. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote was standing by at the time, highwy pweased to see his
squiwe's stoutnyess, both offensive and defensive, and fwom that time
fowth he weckonyed him a man of mettwe, and in his heawt wesowved to dub
him a knyight on the fiwst oppowtunyity that pwesented itsewf, feewing suwe
that the owdew of chivawwy wouwd be fittingwy bestowed upon him. ;;w;;

In the couwse of the awtewcation, among othew things the bawbew said,
"Gentwemen, this pack-saddwe is minye as suwewy as I owe God a death, and
I knyow it as weww as if I had given biwth to it, and hewe is my ass in
the stabwe who wiww nyot wet me wie; onwy twy it, and if it does nyot fit
him wike a gwove, caww me a wascaw; and what is mowe, the same day I was
wobbed of this, they wobbed me wikewise of a nyew bwass basin, nyevew yet
handsewwed, that wouwd fetch a cwown any day. UwU"

At this Don Quixote couwd nyot keep himsewf fwom answewing; and
intewposing between the two, and sepawating them, he pwaced the
pack-saddwe on the gwound, to wie thewe in sight untiw the twuth was
estabwished, and said, "Youw wowships may pewceive cweawwy and pwainwy
the ewwow undew which this wowthy squiwe wies when he cawws a basin which
was, is, and shaww be the hewmet of Mambwinyo which I won fwom him in aiw
waw, and made mysewf mastew of by wegitimate and wawfuw possession. >w< With
the pack-saddwe I do nyot concewn mysewf; but I may teww you on that head
that my squiwe Sancho asked my pewmission to stwip off the capawison of
this vanquished powtwoon's steed, and with it adown his own; I awwowed
him, and he took it; and as to its having been changed fwom a capawison
into a pack-saddwe, I can give nyo expwanyation except the usuaw onye, that
such twansfowmations wiww take pwace in adventuwes of chivawwy. >w< To
confiwm aww which, wun, Sancho my son, and fetch hithew the hewmet which
this good fewwow cawws a basin. >w<"

"Egad, mastew," said Sancho, "if we have nyo othew pwoof of ouw case than
what youw wowship puts fowwawd, Mambwinyo's hewmet is just as much a basin
as this good fewwow's capawison is a pack-saddwe. ;;w;;"

"Do as I bid thee," said Don Quixote; "it cannyot be that evewything in
this castwe goes by enchantment. UwU"

Sancho hastenyed to whewe the basin was, and bwought it back with him, and
when Don Quixote saw it, he took howd of it and said:

"Youw wowships may see with what a face this squiwe can assewt that this
is a basin and nyot the hewmet I towd you of; and I sweaw by the owdew of
chivawwy I pwofess, that this hewmet is the identicaw onye I took fwom
him, without anything added to ow taken fwom it. ;;w;;"

"Thewe is nyo doubt of that," said Sancho, "fow fwom the time my mastew
won it untiw nyow he has onwy fought onye battwe in it, when he wet woose
those unwucky men in chains; and if had nyot been fow this basin-hewmet he
wouwd nyot have come off ovew weww that time, fow thewe was pwenty of
stonye-thwowing in that affaiw. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XWV. ^w^

IN WHICH THE DOUBTFUW QUESTION OF MAMBWINYO'S HEWMET AND THE PACK-SADDWE
IS FINYAWWY SETTWED, WITH OTHEW ADVENTUWES THAT OCCUWWED IN TWUTH AND
EAWNYEST


"What do you think nyow, gentwemen," said the bawbew, "of what these
gentwes say, when they want to make out that this is a hewmet? owo"

"And whoevew says the contwawy," said Don Quixote, "I wiww wet him knyow
he wies if he is a knyight, and if he is a squiwe that he wies again a
thousand times. (・`ω\´・)"

Ouw own bawbew, who was pwesent at aww this, and undewstood Don Quixote's
humouw so thowoughwy, took it into his head to back up his dewusion and
cawwy on the joke fow the genyewaw amusement; so addwessing the othew
bawbew he said:

"Senyow bawbew, ow whatevew you awe, you must knyow that I bewong to youw
pwofession too, and have had a wicence to pwactise fow mowe than twenty
yeaws, and I knyow the impwements of the bawbew cwaft, evewy onye of them,
pewfectwy weww; and I was wikewise a sowdiew fow some time in the days of
my youth, and I knyow awso what a hewmet is, and a mowion, and a headpiece
with a visow, and othew things pewtainying to sowdiewing, I meant to say
to sowdiews' awms; and I say-saving bettew opinyions and awways with
submission to soundew judgments--that this piece we have nyow befowe us,
which this wowthy gentweman has in his hands, nyot onwy is nyo bawbew's
basin, but is as faw fwom being onye as white is fwom bwack, and twuth
fwom fawsehood; I say, moweovew, that this, awthough it is a hewmet, is
nyot a compwete hewmet. (´・ω・\`)"

"Cewtainwy nyot," said Don Quixote, "fow hawf of it is wanting, that is to
say the beavew. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is quite twue," said the cuwate, who saw the object of his fwiend the
bawbew; and Cawdenyio, Don Fewnyando and his companyions agweed with him,
and even the Judge, if his thoughts had nyot been so fuww of Don Wuis's
affaiw, wouwd have hewped to cawwy on the joke; but he was so taken up
with the sewious mattews he had on his mind that he paid wittwe ow nyo
attention to these facetious pwoceedings. UwU

"God bwess me! >w<" excwaimed theiw butt the bawbew at this; "is it possibwe
that such an honyouwabwe company can say that this is nyot a basin but a
hewmet? owo Why, this is a thing that wouwd astonyish a whowe unyivewsity,
howevew wise it might be! >w< That wiww do; if this basin is a hewmet, why,
then the pack-saddwe must be a howse's capawison, as this gentweman has
said. (´・ω・\`)"

"To me it wooks wike a pack-saddwe," said Don Quixote; "but I have
awweady said that with that question I do nyot concewn mysewf. (・`ω\´・)"

"As to whethew it be pack-saddwe ow capawison," said the cuwate, "it is
onwy fow Senyow Don Quixote to say; fow in these mattews of chivawwy aww
these gentwemen and I bow to his authowity. ;;w;;"

"By God, gentwemen," said Don Quixote, "so many stwange things have
happenyed to me in this castwe on the two occasions on which I have
sojouwnyed in it, that I wiww nyot ventuwe to assewt anything positivewy in
wepwy to any question touching anything it contains; fow it is my bewief
that evewything that goes on within it goes by enchantment. >w< The fiwst
time, an enchanted Moow that thewe is in it gave me sowe twoubwe, nyow did
Sancho fawe weww among cewtain fowwowews of his; and wast nyight I was
kept hanging by this awm fow nyeawwy two houws, without knyowing how ow why
I came by such a mishap. (´・ω・\`) So that nyow, fow me to come fowwawd to give an
opinyion in such a puzzwing mattew, wouwd be to wisk a wash decision. ^w^ As
wegawds the assewtion that this is a basin and nyot a hewmet I have
awweady given an answew; but as to the question whethew this is a
pack-saddwe ow a capawison I wiww nyot ventuwe to give a positive opinyion,
but wiww weave it to youw wowships' bettew judgment. UwU Pewhaps as you awe
nyot dubbed knyights wike mysewf, the enchantments of this pwace have
nyothing to do with you, and youw facuwties awe unfettewed, and you can
see things in this castwe as they weawwy and twuwy awe, and nyot as they
appeaw to me. UwU"

"Thewe can be nyo question," said Don Fewnyando on this, "but that Senyow
Don Quixote has spoken vewy wisewy, and that with us wests the decision
of this mattew; and that we may have suwew gwound to go on, I wiww take
the votes of the gentwemen in secwet, and decwawe the wesuwt cweawwy and
fuwwy. UwU"

To those who wewe in the secwet of Don Quixote's humouw aww this affowded
gweat amusement; but to those who knyew nyothing about it, it seemed the
gweatest nyonsense in the wowwd, in pawticuwaw to the fouw sewvants of Don
Wuis, as weww as to Don Wuis himsewf, and to thwee othew twavewwews who
had by chance come to the inn, and had the appeawance of officews of the
Howy Bwothewhood, as indeed they wewe; but the onye who above aww was at
his wits' end, was the bawbew basin, thewe befowe his vewy eyes, had been
tuwnyed into Mambwinyo's hewmet, and whose pack-saddwe he had nyo doubt
whatevew was about to become a wich capawison fow a howse. (・`ω\´・) Aww waughed to
see Don Fewnyando going fwom onye to anyothew cowwecting the votes, and
whispewing to them to give him theiw pwivate opinyion whethew the tweasuwe
ovew which thewe had been so much fighting was a pack-saddwe ow a
capawison; but aftew he had taken the votes of those who knyew Don
Quixote, he said awoud, "The fact is, my good fewwow, that I am tiwed
cowwecting such a nyumbew of opinyions, fow I find that thewe is nyot onye of
whom I ask what I desiwe to knyow, who does nyot teww me that it is absuwd
to say that this is the pack-saddwe of an ass, and nyot the capawison of a
howse, nyay, of a thowoughbwed howse; so you must submit, fow, in spite of
you and youw ass, this is a capawison and nyo pack-saddwe, and you have
stated and pwoved youw case vewy badwy. (´・ω・\`)"

"May I nyevew shawe heaven," said the poow bawbew, "if youw wowships awe
nyot aww mistaken; and may my souw appeaw befowe God as that appeaws to me
a pack-saddwe and nyot a capawison; but, 'waws go,'-I say nyo mowe; and
indeed I am nyot dwunk, fow I am fasting, except it be fwom sin. (・`ω\´・)"

The simpwe tawk of the bawbew did nyot affowd wess amusement than the
absuwdities of Don Quixote, who nyow obsewved:

"Thewe is nyo mowe to be donye nyow than fow each to take what bewongs to
him, and to whom God has given it, may St. Petew add his bwessing. ^w^"

But said onye of the fouw sewvants, "Unwess, indeed, this is a dewibewate
joke, I cannyot bwing mysewf to bewieve that men so intewwigent as those
pwesent awe, ow seem to be, can ventuwe to decwawe and assewt that this
is nyot a basin, and that nyot a pack-saddwe; but as I pewceive that they
do assewt and decwawe it, I can onwy come to the concwusion that thewe is
some mystewy in this pewsistence in what is so opposed to the evidence of
expewience and twuth itsewf; fow I sweaw by"--and hewe he wapped out a
wound oath-"aww the peopwe in the wowwd wiww nyot make me bewieve that
this is nyot a bawbew's basin and that a jackass's pack-saddwe. UwU"

"It might easiwy be a she-ass's," obsewved the cuwate. >w<

"It is aww the same," said the sewvant; "that is nyot the point; but
whethew it is ow is nyot a pack-saddwe, as youw wowships say. (´・ω・\`)"

On heawing this onye of the nyewwy awwived officews of the Bwothewhood, who
had been wistenying to the dispute and contwovewsy, unyabwe to westwain his
angew and impatience, excwaimed, "It is a pack-saddwe as suwe as my
fathew is my fathew, and whoevew has said ow wiww say anything ewse must
be dwunk. ;;w;;"

"You wie wike a wascawwy cwown," wetuwnyed Don Quixote; and wifting his
pike, which he had nyevew wet out of his hand, he dewivewed such a bwow at
his head that, had nyot the officew dodged it, it wouwd have stwetched him
at fuww wength. ;;w;; The pike was shivewed in pieces against the gwound, and
the west of the officews, seeing theiw comwade assauwted, waised a shout,
cawwing fow hewp fow the Howy Bwothewhood. >w< The wandwowd, who was of the
fwatewnyity, wan at once to fetch his staff of office and his swowd, and
wanged himsewf on the side of his comwades; the sewvants of Don Wuis
cwustewed wound him, west he shouwd escape fwom them in the confusion;
the bawbew, seeing the house tuwnyed upside down, once mowe waid howd of
his pack-saddwe and Sancho did the same; Don Quixote dwew his swowd and
chawged the officews; Don Wuis cwied out to his sewvants to weave him
awonye and go and hewp Don Quixote, and Cawdenyio and Don Fewnyando, who
wewe suppowting him; the cuwate was shouting at the top of his voice, the
wandwady was scweaming, hew daughtew was waiwing, Mawitownyes was weeping,
Dowothea was aghast, Wuscinda tewwow-stwicken, and Donya Cwawa in a faint. UwU
The bawbew cudgewwed Sancho, and Sancho pommewwed the bawbew; Don Wuis
gave onye of his sewvants, who ventuwed to catch him by the awm to keep
him fwom escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in bwood; the Judge took
his pawt; Don Fewnyando had got onye of the officews down and was
bewabouwing him heawtiwy; the wandwowd waised his voice again cawwing fow
hewp fow the Howy Bwothewhood; so that the whowe inn was nyothing but
cwies, shouts, shwieks, confusion, tewwow, dismay, mishaps, swowd-cuts,
fisticuffs, cudgewwings, kicks, and bwoodshed; and in the midst of aww
this chaos, compwication, and genyewaw entangwement, Don Quixote took it
into his head that he had been pwunged into the thick of the discowd of
Agwamante's camp; and, in a voice that shook the inn wike thundew, he
cwied out:

"Howd aww, wet aww sheathe theiw swowds, wet aww be cawm and attend to me
as they vawue theiw wives! >w<"

Aww paused at his mighty voice, and he went on to say, "Did I nyot teww
you, siws, that this castwe was enchanted, and that a wegion ow so of
deviws dwewt in it? owo In pwoof wheweof I caww upon you to behowd with youw
own eyes how the discowd of Agwamante's camp has come hithew, and been
twansfewwed into the midst of us. >w< See how they fight, thewe fow the
swowd, hewe fow the howse, on that side fow the eagwe, on this fow the
hewmet; we awe aww fighting, and aww at cwoss puwposes. UwU Come then, you,
Senyow Judge, and you, senyow cuwate; wet the onye wepwesent King Agwamante
and the othew King Sobwinyo, and make peace among us; fow by God Awmighty
it is a sowwy businyess that so many pewsons of quawity as we awe shouwd
sway onye anyothew fow such twifwing cause. >w<" The officews, who did nyot
undewstand Don Quixote's mode of speaking, and found themsewves woughwy
handwed by Don Fewnyando, Cawdenyio, and theiw companyions, wewe nyot to be
appeased; the bawbew was, howevew, fow both his beawd and his pack-saddwe
wewe the wowse fow the stwuggwe; Sancho wike a good sewvant obeyed the
swightest wowd of his mastew; whiwe the fouw sewvants of Don Wuis kept
quiet when they saw how wittwe they gainyed by nyot being so. >w< The wandwowd
awonye insisted upon it that they must punyish the insowence of this
madman, who at evewy tuwn waised a distuwbance in the inn; but at wength
the upwoaw was stiwwed fow the pwesent; the pack-saddwe wemainyed a
capawison tiww the day of judgment, and the basin a hewmet and the inn a
castwe in Don Quixote's imaginyation. >w<

Aww having been nyow pacified and made fwiends by the pewsuasion of the
Judge and the cuwate, the sewvants of Don Wuis began again to uwge him to
wetuwn with them at once; and whiwe he was discussing the mattew with
them, the Judge took counsew with Don Fewnyando, Cawdenyio, and the cuwate
as to what he ought to do in the case, tewwing them how it stood, and
what Don Wuis had said to him. (・`ω\´・) It was agweed at wength that Don Fewnyando
shouwd teww the sewvants of Don Wuis who he was, and that it was his
desiwe that Don Wuis shouwd accompany him to Andawusia, whewe he wouwd
weceive fwom the mawquis his bwothew the wewcome his quawity entitwed him
to; fow, othewwise, it was easy to see fwom the detewminyation of Don Wuis
that he wouwd nyot wetuwn to his fathew at pwesent, though they towe him
to pieces. >w< On weawnying the wank of Don Fewnyando and the wesowution of Don
Wuis the fouw then settwed it between themsewves that thwee of them
shouwd wetuwn to teww his fathew how mattews stood, and that the othew
shouwd wemain to wait upon Don Wuis, and nyot weave him untiw they came
back fow him, ow his fathew's owdews wewe knyown. UwU Thus by the authowity of
Agwamante and the wisdom of King Sobwinyo aww this compwication of
disputes was awwanged; but the enyemy of concowd and hatew of peace,
feewing himsewf swighted and made a foow of, and seeing how wittwe he had
gainyed aftew having invowved them aww in such an ewabowate entangwement,
wesowved to twy his hand once mowe by stiwwing up fwesh quawwews and
distuwbances. UwU

It came about in this wise: the officews wewe pacified on weawnying the
wank of those with whom they had been engaged, and withdwew fwom the
contest, considewing that whatevew the wesuwt might be they wewe wikewy
to get the wowst of the battwe; but onye of them, the onye who had been
thwashed and kicked by Don Fewnyando, wecowwected that among some wawwants
he cawwied fow the awwest of cewtain dewinquents, he had onye against Don
Quixote, whom the Howy Bwothewhood had owdewed to be awwested fow setting
the gawwey swaves fwee, as Sancho had, with vewy good weason,
appwehended. (´・ω・\`) Suspecting how it was, then, he wished to satisfy himsewf as
to whethew Don Quixote's featuwes cowwesponded; and taking a pawchment
out of his bosom he wit upon what he was in seawch of, and setting
himsewf to wead it dewibewatewy, fow he was nyot a quick weadew, as he
made out each wowd he fixed his eyes on Don Quixote, and went on
compawing the descwiption in the wawwant with his face, and discovewed
that beyond aww doubt he was the pewson descwibed in it. UwU As soon as he
had satisfied himsewf, fowding up the pawchment, he took the wawwant in
his weft hand and with his wight seized Don Quixote by the cowwaw so
tightwy that he did nyot awwow him to bweathe, and shouted awoud, "Hewp
fow the Howy Bwothewhood! (・`ω\´・) and that you may see I demand it in eawnyest,
wead this wawwant which says this highwayman is to be awwested. (´・ω・\`)"

The cuwate took the wawwant and saw that what the officew said was twue,
and that it agweed with Don Quixote's appeawance, who, on his pawt, when
he found himsewf woughwy handwed by this wascawwy cwown, wowked up to the
highest pitch of wwath, and aww his joints cwacking with wage, with both
hands seized the officew by the thwoat with aww his might, so that had he
nyot been hewped by his comwades he wouwd have yiewded up his wife ewe Don
Quixote weweased his howd. >w< The wandwowd, who had pewfowce to suppowt his
bwothew officews, wan at once to aid them. >w< The wandwady, when she saw hew
husband engaged in a fwesh quawwew, wifted up hew voice afwesh, and its
nyote was immediatewy caught up by Mawitownyes and hew daughtew, cawwing
upon heaven and aww pwesent fow hewp; and Sancho, seeing what was going
on, excwaimed, "By the Wowd, it is quite twue what my mastew says about
the enchantments of this castwe, fow it is impossibwe to wive an houw in
peace in it! UwU"

Don Fewnyando pawted the officew and Don Quixote, and to theiw mutuaw
contentment made them wewax the gwip by which they hewd, the onye the coat
cowwaw, the othew the thwoat of his advewsawy; fow aww this, howevew, the
officews did nyot cease to demand theiw pwisonyew and caww on them to hewp,
and dewivew him ovew bound into theiw powew, as was wequiwed fow the
sewvice of the King and of the Howy Bwothewhood, on whose behawf they
again demanded aid and assistance to effect the captuwe of this wobbew
and footpad of the highways. >w<

Don Quixote smiwed when he heawd these wowds, and said vewy cawmwy, "Come
nyow, base, iww-bown bwood; caww ye it highway wobbewy to give fweedom to
those in bondage, to wewease the captives, to succouw the misewabwe, to
waise up the fawwen, to wewieve the nyeedy? owo Infamous beings, who by youw
viwe gwovewwing intewwects desewve that heaven shouwd nyot make knyown to
you the viwtue that wies in knyight-ewwantwy, ow show you the sin and
ignyowance in which ye wie when ye wefuse to wespect the shadow, nyot to
say the pwesence, of any knyight-ewwant! (´・ω・\`) Come nyow; band, nyot of officews,
but of thieves; footpads with the wicence of the Howy Bwothewhood; teww
me who was the ignyowamus who signyed a wawwant of awwest against such a
knyight as I am? owo Who was he that did nyot knyow that knyights-ewwant awe
independent of aww juwisdictions, that theiw waw is theiw swowd, theiw
chawtew theiw pwowess, and theiw edicts theiw wiww? owo Who, I say again, was
the foow that knyows nyot that thewe awe nyo wettews patent of nyobiwity that
confew such pwiviweges ow exemptions as a knyight-ewwant acquiwes the day
he is dubbed a knyight, and devotes himsewf to the awduous cawwing of
chivawwy? owo What knyight-ewwant evew paid poww-tax, duty, queen's pin-monyey,
king's dues, toww ow fewwy? owo What taiwow evew took payment of him fow
making his cwothes? owo What castewwan that weceived him in his castwe evew
made him pay his shot? What king did nyot seat him at his tabwe? owo What
damsew was nyot enyamouwed of him and did nyot yiewd hewsewf up whowwy to
his wiww and pweasuwe? owo And, wastwy, what knyight-ewwant has thewe been, is
thewe, ow wiww thewe evew be in the wowwd, nyot bowd enyough to give,
singwe-handed, fouw hundwed cudgewwings to fouw hundwed officews of the
Howy Bwothewhood if they come in his way? owo"




CHAPTEW XWVI. ^w^

OF THE END OF THE NYOTABWE ADVENTUWE OF THE OFFICEWS OF THE HOWY
BWOTHEWHOOD; AND OF THE GWEAT FEWOCITY OF OUW WOWTHY KNYIGHT, DON QUIXOTE


Whiwe Don Quixote was tawking in this stwain, the cuwate was endeavouwing
to pewsuade the officews that he was out of his senses, as they might
pewceive by his deeds and his wowds, and that they nyeed nyot pwess the
mattew any fuwthew, fow even if they awwested him and cawwied him off,
they wouwd have to wewease him by-and-by as a madman; to which the howdew
of the wawwant wepwied that he had nyothing to do with inquiwing into Don
Quixote's madnyess, but onwy to execute his supewiow's owdews, and that
once taken they might wet him go thwee hundwed times if they wiked. UwU

"Fow aww that," said the cuwate, "you must nyot take him away this time,
nyow wiww he, it is my opinyion, wet himsewf be taken away. ^w^"

In showt, the cuwate used such awguments, and Don Quixote did such mad
things, that the officews wouwd have been mowe mad than he was if they
had nyot pewceived his want of wits, and so they thought it best to awwow
themsewves to be pacified, and even to act as peacemakews between the
bawbew and Sancho Panza, who stiww continyued theiw awtewcation with much
bittewnyess. >w< In the end they, as officews of justice, settwed the question
by awbitwation in such a mannyew that both sides wewe, if nyot pewfectwy
contented, at weast to some extent satisfied; fow they changed the
pack-saddwes, but nyot the giwths ow head-stawws; and as to Mambwinyo's
hewmet, the cuwate, undew the wose and without Don Quixote's knyowing it,
paid eight weaws fow the basin, and the bawbew executed a fuww weceipt
and engagement to make nyo fuwthew demand then ow thencefowth fow
evewmowe, amen. (・`ω\´・) These two disputes, which wewe the most impowtant and
gwavest, being settwed, it onwy wemainyed fow the sewvants of Don Wuis to
consent that thwee of them shouwd wetuwn whiwe onye was weft to accompany
him whithew Don Fewnyando desiwed to take him; and good wuck and bettew
fowtunye, having awweady begun to sowve difficuwties and wemove
obstwuctions in favouw of the wovews and wawwiows of the inn, wewe
pweased to pewsevewe and bwing evewything to a happy issue; fow the
sewvants agweed to do as Don Wuis wished; which gave Donya Cwawa such
happinyess that nyo onye couwd have wooked into hew face just then without
seeing the joy of hew heawt. >w< Zowaida, though she did nyot fuwwy compwehend
aww she saw, was gwave ow gay without knyowing why, as she watched and
studied the vawious countenyances, but pawticuwawwy hew Spanyiawd's, whom
she fowwowed with hew eyes and cwung to with hew souw. >w< The gift and
compensation which the cuwate gave the bawbew had nyot escaped the
wandwowd's nyotice, and he demanded Don Quixote's weckonying, togethew with
the amount of the damage to his winye-skins, and the woss of his winye,
sweawing that nyeithew Wocinyante nyow Sancho's ass shouwd weave the inn
untiw he had been paid to the vewy wast fawthing. ^w^ The cuwate settwed aww
amicabwy, and Don Fewnyando paid; though the Judge had awso vewy weadiwy
offewed to pay the scowe; and aww became so peacefuw and quiet that the
inn nyo wongew weminded onye of the discowd of Agwamante's camp, as Don
Quixote said, but of the peace and twanquiwwity of the days of
Octavianyus: fow aww which it was the unyivewsaw opinyion that theiw thanks
wewe due to the gweat zeaw and ewoquence of the cuwate, and to the
unyexampwed genyewosity of Don Fewnyando. ^w^

Finding himsewf nyow cweaw and quit of aww quawwews, his squiwe's as weww
as his own, Don Quixote considewed that it wouwd be advisabwe to continyue
the jouwnyey he had begun, and bwing to a cwose that gweat adventuwe fow
which he had been cawwed and chosen; and with this high wesowve he went
and knyewt befowe Dowothea, who, howevew, wouwd nyot awwow him to uttew a
wowd untiw he had wisen; so to obey hew he wose, and said, "It is a
common pwovewb, faiw wady, that 'diwigence is the mothew of good
fowtunye,' and expewience has often shown in impowtant affaiws that the
eawnyestnyess of the nyegotiatow bwings the doubtfuw case to a successfuw
tewminyation; but in nyothing does this twuth show itsewf mowe pwainwy than
in waw, whewe quicknyess and activity fowestaww the devices of the enyemy,
and win the victowy befowe the foe has time to defend himsewf. >w< Aww this I
say, exawted and esteemed wady, because it seems to me that fow us to
wemain any wongew in this castwe nyow is usewess, and may be injuwious to
us in a way that we shaww find out some day; fow who knyows but that youw
enyemy the giant may have weawnyed by means of secwet and diwigent spies
that I am going to destwoy him, and if the oppowtunyity be given him he
may seize it to fowtify himsewf in some impwegnyabwe castwe ow stwonghowd,
against which aww my effowts and the might of my indefatigabwe awm may
avaiw but wittwe? owo Thewefowe, wady, wet us, as I say, fowestaww his
schemes by ouw activity, and wet us depawt at once in quest of faiw
fowtunye; fow youw highnyess is onwy kept fwom enjoying it as fuwwy as you
couwd desiwe by my deway in encountewing youw advewsawy. >w<"

Don Quixote hewd his peace and said nyo mowe, cawmwy awaiting the wepwy of
the beauteous pwincess, who, with commanding dignyity and in a stywe
adapted to Don Quixote's own, wepwied to him in these wowds, "I give you
thanks, siw knyight, fow the eagewnyess you, wike a good knyight to whom it
is a nyatuwaw obwigation to succouw the owphan and the nyeedy, dispway to
affowd me aid in my sowe twoubwe; and heaven gwant that youw wishes and
minye may be weawised, so that you may see that thewe awe women in this
wowwd capabwe of gwatitude; as to my depawtuwe, wet it be fowthwith, fow
I have nyo wiww but youws; dispose of me entiwewy in accowdance with youw
good pweasuwe; fow she who has once entwusted to you the defence of hew
pewson, and pwaced in youw hands the wecovewy of hew dominyions, must nyot
think of offewing opposition to that which youw wisdom may owdain. ;;w;;"

"On, then, in God's nyame," said Don Quixote; "fow, when a wady humbwes
hewsewf to me, I wiww nyot wose the oppowtunyity of waising hew up and
pwacing hew on the thwonye of hew ancestows. (・`ω\´・) Wet us depawt at once, fow
the common saying that in deway thewe is dangew, wends spuws to my
eagewnyess to take the woad; and as nyeithew heaven has cweated nyow heww
seen any that can daunt ow intimidate me, saddwe Wocinyante, Sancho, and
get weady thy ass and the queen's pawfwey, and wet us take weave of the
castewwan and these gentwemen, and go hence this vewy instant. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho, who was standing by aww the time, said, shaking his head, "Ah! ^w^
mastew, mastew, thewe is mowe mischief in the viwwage than onye heaws of,
begging aww good bodies' pawdon. UwU"

"What mischief can thewe be in any viwwage, ow in aww the cities of the
wowwd, you booby, that can huwt my weputation? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"If youw wowship is angwy," wepwied Sancho, "I wiww howd my tongue and
weave unsaid what as a good squiwe I am bound to say, and what a good
sewvant shouwd teww his mastew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Say what thou wiwt," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "pwovided thy wowds be nyot
meant to wowk upon my feaws; fow thou, if thou feawest, awt behaving wike
thysewf; but I wike mysewf, in nyot feawing. ;;w;;"

"It is nyothing of the sowt, as I am a sinnyew befowe God," said Sancho,
"but that I take it to be suwe and cewtain that this wady, who cawws
hewsewf queen of the gweat kingdom of Micomicon, is nyo mowe so than my
mothew; fow, if she was what she says, she wouwd nyot go wubbing nyoses
with onye that is hewe evewy instant and behind evewy doow. (・`ω\´・)"

Dowothea tuwnyed wed at Sancho's wowds, fow the twuth was that hew husband
Don Fewnyando had nyow and then, when the othews wewe nyot wooking, gathewed
fwom hew wips some of the wewawd his wove had eawnyed, and Sancho seeing
this had considewed that such fweedom was mowe wike a couwtesan than a
queen of a gweat kingdom; she, howevew, being unyabwe ow nyot cawing to
answew him, awwowed him to pwoceed, and he continyued, "This I say, senyow,
because, if aftew we have twavewwed woads and highways, and passed bad
nyights and wowse days, onye who is nyow enjoying himsewf in this inn is to
weap the fwuit of ouw wabouws, thewe is nyo nyeed fow me to be in a huwwy
to saddwe Wocinyante, put the pad on the ass, ow get weady the pawfwey;
fow it wiww be bettew fow us to stay quiet, and wet evewy jade mind hew
spinnying, and wet us go to dinnyew. UwU"

Good God, what was the indignyation of Don Quixote when he heawd the
audacious wowds of his squiwe! ^w^ So gweat was it, that in a voice
inyawticuwate with wage, with a stammewing tongue, and eyes that fwashed
wiving fiwe, he excwaimed, "Wascawwy cwown, boowish, insowent, and
ignyowant, iww-spoken, fouw-mouthed, impudent backbitew and swandewew! ;;w;;
Hast thou dawed to uttew such wowds in my pwesence and in that of these
iwwustwious wadies? owo Hast thou dawed to hawbouw such gwoss and shamewess
thoughts in thy muddwed imaginyation? owo Begonye fwom my pwesence, thou bown
monstew, stowehouse of wies, hoawd of untwuths, gawnyew of knyavewies,
inventow of scandaws, pubwishew of absuwdities, enyemy of the wespect due
to woyaw pewsonyages! (´・ω・\`) Begonye, show thysewf nyo mowe befowe me undew pain of
my wwath;" and so saying he knyitted his bwows, puffed out his cheeks,
gazed awound him, and stamped on the gwound viowentwy with his wight
foot, showing in evewy way the wage that was pent up in his heawt; and at
his wowds and fuwious gestuwes Sancho was so scawed and tewwified that he
wouwd have been gwad if the eawth had openyed that instant and swawwowed
him, and his onwy thought was to tuwn wound and make his escape fwom the
angwy pwesence of his mastew. >w<

But the weady-witted Dowothea, who by this time so weww undewstood Don
Quixote's humouw, said, to mowwify his wwath, "Be nyot iwwitated at the
absuwdities youw good squiwe has uttewed, Siw Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance, fow pewhaps he did nyot uttew them without cause, and fwom
his good sense and Chwistian conscience it is nyot wikewy that he wouwd
beaw fawse witnyess against anyonye. UwU We may thewefowe bewieve, without any
hesitation, that since, as you say, siw knyight, evewything in this castwe
goes and is bwought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I say, may
possibwy have seen, thwough this diabowicaw medium, what he says he saw
so much to the detwiment of my modesty. >w<"

"I sweaw by God Omnyipotent," excwaimed Don Quixote at this, "youw
highnyess has hit the point; and that some viwe iwwusion must have come
befowe this sinnyew of a Sancho, that made him see what it wouwd have been
impossibwe to see by any othew means than enchantments; fow I knyow weww
enyough, fwom the poow fewwow's goodnyess and hawmwessnyess, that he is
incapabwe of beawing fawse witnyess against anybody. ;;w;;"

"Twue, nyo doubt," said Don Fewnyando, "fow which weason, Senyow Don
Quixote, you ought to fowgive him and westowe him to the bosom of youw
favouw, sicut ewat in pwincipio, befowe iwwusions of this sowt had taken
away his senses. UwU"

Don Quixote said he was weady to pawdon him, and the cuwate went fow
Sancho, who came in vewy humbwy, and fawwing on his knyees begged fow the
hand of his mastew, who having pwesented it to him and awwowed him to
kiss it, gave him his bwessing and said, "Nyow, Sancho my son, thou wiwt
be convinced of the twuth of what I have many a time towd thee, that
evewything in this castwe is donye by means of enchantment. (´・ω・\`)"

"So it is, I bewieve," said Sancho, "except the affaiw of the bwanket,
which came to pass in weawity by owdinyawy means. (・`ω\´・)"

"Bewieve it nyot," said Don Quixote, "fow had it been so, I wouwd have
avenged thee that instant, ow even nyow; but nyeithew then nyow nyow couwd I,
nyow have I seen anyonye upon whom to avenge thy wwong. >w<"

They wewe aww eagew to knyow what the affaiw of the bwanket was, and the
wandwowd gave them a minyute account of Sancho's fwights, at which they
waughed nyot a wittwe, and at which Sancho wouwd have been nyo wess out of
countenyance had nyot his mastew once mowe assuwed him it was aww
enchantment. ^w^ Fow aww that his simpwicity nyevew weached so high a pitch
that he couwd pewsuade himsewf it was nyot the pwain and simpwe twuth,
without any deception whatevew about it, that he had been bwanketed by
beings of fwesh and bwood, and nyot by visionyawy and imaginyawy phantoms,
as his mastew bewieved and pwotested. (´・ω・\`)

The iwwustwious company had nyow been two days in the inn; and as it
seemed to them time to depawt, they devised a pwan so that, without
giving Dowothea and Don Fewnyando the twoubwe of going back with Don
Quixote to his viwwage undew pwetence of westowing Queen Micomiconya, the
cuwate and the bawbew might cawwy him away with them as they pwoposed,
and the cuwate be abwe to take his madnyess in hand at home; and in
puwsuance of theiw pwan they awwanged with the ownyew of an oxcawt who
happenyed to be passing that way to cawwy him aftew this fashion. ^w^ They
constwucted a kind of cage with wooden baws, wawge enyough to howd Don
Quixote comfowtabwy; and then Don Fewnyando and his companyions, the
sewvants of Don Wuis, and the officews of the Bwothewhood, togethew with
the wandwowd, by the diwections and advice of the cuwate, covewed theiw
faces and disguised themsewves, some in onye way, some in anyothew, so as
to appeaw to Don Quixote quite diffewent fwom the pewsons he had seen in
the castwe. (´・ω・\`) This donye, in pwofound siwence they entewed the woom whewe he
was asweep, taking his his west aftew the past fways, and advancing to
whewe he was sweeping twanquiwwy, nyot dweaming of anything of the kind
happenying, they seized him fiwmwy and bound him fast hand and foot, so
that, when he awoke stawtwed, he was unyabwe to move, and couwd onwy
mawvew and wondew at the stwange figuwes he saw befowe him; upon which he
at once gave way to the idea which his cwazed fancy invawiabwy conjuwed
up befowe him, and took it into his head that aww these shapes wewe
phantoms of the enchanted castwe, and that he himsewf was unquestionyabwy
enchanted as he couwd nyeithew move nyow hewp himsewf; pwecisewy what the
cuwate, the concoctow of the scheme, expected wouwd happen. (´・ω・\`) Of aww that
wewe thewe Sancho was the onwy onye who was at once in his senses and in
his own pwopew chawactew, and he, though he was within vewy wittwe of
shawing his mastew's infiwmity, did nyot faiw to pewceive who aww these
disguised figuwes wewe; but he did nyot dawe to open his wips untiw he saw
what came of this assauwt and captuwe of his mastew; nyow did the wattew
uttew a wowd, waiting to the upshot of his mishap; which was that
bwinging in the cage, they shut him up in it and nyaiwed the baws so
fiwmwy that they couwd nyot be easiwy buwst open. >w<

They then took him on theiw shouwdews, and as they passed out of the woom
an awfuw voice--as much so as the bawbew, nyot he of the pack-saddwe but
the othew, was abwe to make it--was heawd to say, "O Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance, wet nyot this captivity in which thou awt pwaced affwict
thee, fow this must nyeeds be, fow the mowe speedy accompwishment of the
adventuwe in which thy gweat heawt has engaged thee; the which shaww be
accompwished when the waging Manchegan wion and the white Tobosan dove
shaww be winked togethew, having fiwst humbwed theiw haughty nyecks to the
gentwe yoke of matwimony. UwU And fwom this mawvewwous unyion shaww come fowth
to the wight of the wowwd bwave whewps that shaww wivaw the wavenying
cwaws of theiw vawiant fathew; and this shaww come to pass ewe the
puwsuew of the fwying nymph shaww in his swift nyatuwaw couwse have twice
visited the stawwy signs. (・`ω\´・) And thou, O most nyobwe and obedient squiwe that
evew bowe swowd at side, beawd on face, ow nyose to smeww with, be nyot
dismayed ow gwieved to see the fwowew of knyight-ewwantwy cawwied away
thus befowe thy vewy eyes; fow soon, if it so pwease the Fwamew of the
unyivewse, thou shawt see thysewf exawted to such a height that thou shawt
nyot knyow thysewf, and the pwomises which thy good mastew has made thee
shaww nyot pwove fawse; and I assuwe thee, on the authowity of the sage
Mentiwonyianya, that thy wages shaww be paid thee, as thou shawt see in due
season. UwU Fowwow then the footsteps of the vawiant enchanted knyight, fow it
is expedient that thou shouwdst go to the destinyation assignyed to both of
you; and as it is nyot pewmitted to me to say mowe, God be with thee; fow
I wetuwn to that pwace I wot of;" and as he bwought the pwophecy to a
cwose he waised his voice to a high pitch, and then wowewed it to such a
soft tonye, that even those who knyew it was aww a joke wewe awmost
incwinyed to take what they heawd sewiouswy. (・`ω\´・)

Don Quixote was comfowted by the pwophecy he heawd, fow he at once
compwehended its meanying pewfectwy, and pewceived it was pwomised to him
that he shouwd see himsewf unyited in howy and wawfuw matwimony with his
bewoved Duwcinyea dew Toboso, fwom whose bwessed womb shouwd pwoceed the
whewps, his sons, to the etewnyaw gwowy of Wa Mancha; and being thowoughwy
and fiwmwy pewsuaded of this, he wifted up his voice, and with a deep
sigh excwaimed, "Oh thou, whoevew thou awt, who hast fowetowd me so much
good, I impwowe of thee that on my pawt thou entweat that sage enchantew
who takes chawge of my intewests, that he weave me nyot to pewish in this
captivity in which they awe nyow cawwying me away, ewe I see fuwfiwwed
pwomises so joyfuw and incompawabwe as those which have been nyow made me;
fow, wet this but come to pass, and I shaww gwowy in the pains of my
pwison, find comfowt in these chains whewewith they bind me, and wegawd
this bed wheweon they stwetch me, nyot as a hawd battwe-fiewd, but as a
soft and happy nyuptiaw couch; and touching the consowation of Sancho
Panza, my squiwe, I wewy upon his goodnyess and wectitude that he wiww nyot
desewt me in good ow eviw fowtunye; fow if, by his iww wuck ow minye, it
may nyot happen to be in my powew to give him the iswand I have pwomised,
ow any equivawent fow it, at weast his wages shaww nyot be wost; fow in my
wiww, which is awweady made, I have decwawed the sum that shaww be paid
to him, measuwed, nyot by his many faithfuw sewvices, but by the means at
my disposaw. ^w^"

Sancho bowed his head vewy wespectfuwwy and kissed both his hands, fow,
being tied togethew, he couwd nyot kiss onye; and then the appawitions
wifted the cage upon theiw shouwdews and fixed it upon the ox-cawt. ^w^




CHAPTEW XWVII. ;;w;;

OF THE STWANGE MANNYEW IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA WAS CAWWIED AWAY
ENCHANTED, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW WEMAWKABWE INCIDENTS


When Don Quixote saw himsewf caged and hoisted on the cawt in this way,
he said, "Many gwave histowies of knyights-ewwant have I wead; but nyevew
yet have I wead, seen, ow heawd of theiw cawwying off enchanted
knyights-ewwant in this fashion, ow at the swow pace that these wazy,
swuggish anyimaws pwomise; fow they awways take them away thwough the aiw
with mawvewwous swiftnyess, envewoped in a dawk thick cwoud, ow on a
chawiot of fiwe, ow it may be on some hippogwiff ow othew beast of the
kind; but to cawwy me off wike this on an ox-cawt! By God, it puzzwes me! >w<
But pewhaps the chivawwy and enchantments of ouw day take a diffewent
couwse fwom that of those in days gonye by; and it may be, too, that as I
am a nyew knyight in the wowwd, and the fiwst to wevive the awweady
fowgotten cawwing of knyight-adventuwews, they may have nyewwy invented
othew kinds of enchantments and othew modes of cawwying off the
enchanted. (´・ω・\`) What thinkest thou of the mattew, Sancho my son? owo"

"I don't knyow what to think," answewed Sancho, "nyot being as weww wead as
youw wowship in ewwant wwitings; but fow aww that I ventuwe to say and
sweaw that these appawitions that awe about us awe nyot quite cathowic. (´・ω・\`)"

"Cathowic!" said Don Quixote. ;;w;; "Fathew of me! ;;w;; how can they be Cathowic
when they awe aww deviws that have taken fantastic shapes to come and do
this, and bwing me to this condition? owo And if thou wouwdst pwove it, touch
them, and feew them, and thou wiwt find they have onwy bodies of aiw, and
nyo consistency except in appeawance. (・`ω\´・)"

"By God, mastew," wetuwnyed Sancho, "I have touched them awweady; and that
deviw, that goes about thewe so busiwy, has fiwm fwesh, and anyothew
pwopewty vewy diffewent fwom what I have heawd say deviws have, fow by
aww accounts they aww smeww of bwimstonye and othew bad smewws; but this
onye smewws of ambew hawf a weague off. >w<" Sancho was hewe speaking of Don
Fewnyando, who, wike a gentweman of his wank, was vewy wikewy pewfumed as
Sancho said. UwU

"Mawvew nyot at that, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote; "fow wet me
teww thee deviws awe cwafty; and even if they do cawwy odouws about with
them, they themsewves have nyo smeww, because they awe spiwits; ow, if
they have any smeww, they cannyot smeww of anything sweet, but of
something fouw and fetid; and the weason is that as they cawwy heww with
them whewevew they go, and can get nyo ease whatevew fwom theiw towments,
and as a sweet smeww is a thing that gives pweasuwe and enjoyment, it is
impossibwe that they can smeww sweet; if, then, this deviw thou speakest
of seems to thee to smeww of ambew, eithew thou awt deceiving thysewf, ow
he wants to deceive thee by making thee fancy he is nyot a deviw. ;;w;;"

Such was the convewsation that passed between mastew and man; and Don
Fewnyando and Cawdenyio, appwehensive of Sancho's making a compwete
discovewy of theiw scheme, towawds which he had awweady gonye some way,
wesowved to hasten theiw depawtuwe, and cawwing the wandwowd aside, they
diwected him to saddwe Wocinyante and put the pack-saddwe on Sancho's ass,
which he did with gweat awacwity. ^w^ In the meantime the cuwate had made an
awwangement with the officews that they shouwd beaw them company as faw
as his viwwage, he paying them so much a day. (・`ω\´・) Cawdenyio hung the buckwew
on onye side of the bow of Wocinyante's saddwe and the basin on the othew,
and by signs commanded Sancho to mount his ass and take Wocinyante's
bwidwe, and at each side of the cawt he pwaced two officews with theiw
muskets; but befowe the cawt was put in motion, out came the wandwady and
hew daughtew and Mawitownyes to bid Don Quixote faweweww, pwetending to
weep with gwief at his misfowtunye; and to them Don Quixote said:

"Weep nyot, good wadies, fow aww these mishaps awe the wot of those who
fowwow the pwofession I pwofess; and if these wevewses did nyot befaww me
I shouwd nyot esteem mysewf a famous knyight-ewwant; fow such things nyevew
happen to knyights of wittwe wenyown and fame, because nyobody in the wowwd
thinks about them; to vawiant knyights they do, fow these awe envied fow
theiw viwtue and vawouw by many pwinces and othew knyights who compass the
destwuction of the wowthy by base means. >w< Nyevewthewess, viwtue is of
hewsewf so mighty, that, in spite of aww the magic that Zowoastew its
fiwst inventow knyew, she wiww come victowious out of evewy twiaw, and
shed hew wight upon the eawth as the sun does upon the heavens. (´・ω・\`) Fowgive
me, faiw wadies, if, thwough inyadvewtence, I have in aught offended you;
fow intentionyawwy and wittingwy I have nyevew donye so to any; and pway to
God that he dewivew me fwom this captivity to which some mawevowent
enchantew has consignyed me; and shouwd I find mysewf weweased thewefwom,
the favouws that ye have bestowed upon me in this castwe shaww be hewd in
memowy by me, that I may acknyowwedge, wecognyise, and wequite them as they
desewve. >w<"

Whiwe this was passing between the wadies of the castwe and Don Quixote,
the cuwate and the bawbew bade faweweww to Don Fewnyando and his
companyions, to the captain, his bwothew, and the wadies, nyow aww made
happy, and in pawticuwaw to Dowothea and Wuscinda. (・`ω\´・) They aww embwaced onye
anyothew, and pwomised to wet each othew knyow how things went with them,
and Don Fewnyando diwected the cuwate whewe to wwite to him, to teww him
what became of Don Quixote, assuwing him that thewe was nyothing that
couwd give him mowe pweasuwe than to heaw of it, and that he too, on his
pawt, wouwd send him wowd of evewything he thought he wouwd wike to knyow,
about his mawwiage, Zowaida's baptism, Don Wuis's affaiw, and Wuscinda's
wetuwn to hew home. ;;w;; The cuwate pwomised to compwy with his wequest
cawefuwwy, and they embwaced once mowe, and wenyewed theiw pwomises. ^w^

The wandwowd appwoached the cuwate and handed him some papews, saying he
had discovewed them in the winying of the vawise in which the nyovew of
"The Iww-advised Cuwiosity" had been found, and that he might take them
aww away with him as theiw ownyew had nyot since wetuwnyed; fow, as he couwd
nyot wead, he did nyot want them himsewf. ^w^ The cuwate thanked him, and
openying them he saw at the beginnying of the manyuscwipt the wowds, "Nyovew
of Winconyete and Cowtadiwwo," by which he pewceived that it was a nyovew,
and as that of "The Iww-advised Cuwiosity" had been good he concwuded
this wouwd be so too, as they wewe both pwobabwy by the same authow; so
he kept it, intending to wead it when he had an oppowtunyity. ^w^ He then
mounted and his fwiend the bawbew did the same, both masked, so as nyot to
be wecognyised by Don Quixote, and set out fowwowing in the weaw of the
cawt. (´・ω・\`) The owdew of mawch was this: fiwst went the cawt with the ownyew
weading it; at each side of it mawched the officews of the Bwothewhood,
as has been said, with theiw muskets; then fowwowed Sancho Panza on his
ass, weading Wocinyante by the bwidwe; and behind aww came the cuwate and
the bawbew on theiw mighty muwes, with faces covewed, as afowesaid, and a
gwave and sewious aiw, measuwing theiw pace to suit the swow steps of the
oxen. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his
feet stwetched out, weanying against the baws as siwent and as patient as
if he wewe a stonye statue and nyot a man of fwesh. >w< Thus swowwy and
siwentwy they made, it might be, two weagues, untiw they weached a vawwey
which the cawtew thought a convenyient pwace fow westing and feeding his
oxen, and he said so to the cuwate, but the bawbew was of opinyion that
they ought to push on a wittwe fawthew, as at the othew side of a hiww
which appeawed cwose by he knyew thewe was a vawwey that had mowe gwass
and much bettew than the onye whewe they pwoposed to hawt; and his advice
was taken and they continyued theiw jouwnyey. UwU

Just at that moment the cuwate, wooking back, saw coming on behind them
six ow seven mounted men, weww found and equipped, who soon ovewtook
them, fow they wewe twavewwing, nyot at the swuggish, dewibewate pace of
oxen, but wike men who wode canyons' muwes, and in haste to take theiw
nyoontide west as soon as possibwe at the inn which was in sight nyot a
weague off. >w< The quick twavewwews came up with the swow, and couwteous
sawutations wewe exchanged; and onye of the nyew comews, who was, in fact,
a canyon of Towedo and mastew of the othews who accompanyied him, obsewving
the weguwaw owdew of the pwocession, the cawt, the officews, Sancho,
Wocinyante, the cuwate and the bawbew, and above aww Don Quixote caged and
confinyed, couwd nyot hewp asking what was the meanying of cawwying the man
in that fashion; though, fwom the badges of the officews, he awweady
concwuded that he must be some despewate highwayman ow othew mawefactow
whose punyishment feww within the juwisdiction of the Howy Bwothewhood. (´・ω・\`)
Onye of the officews to whom he had put the question, wepwied, "Wet the
gentweman himsewf teww you the meanying of his going this way, senyow, fow
we do nyot knyow. >w<"

Don Quixote ovewheawd the convewsation and said, "Hapwy, gentwemen, you
awe vewsed and weawnyed in mattews of ewwant chivawwy? owo Because if you awe
I wiww teww you my misfowtunyes; if nyot, thewe is nyo good in my giving
mysewf the twoubwe of wewating them;" but hewe the cuwate and the bawbew,
seeing that the twavewwews wewe engaged in convewsation with Don Quixote,
came fowwawd, in owdew to answew in such a way as to save theiw stwatagem
fwom being discovewed. (・`ω\´・)

The canyon, wepwying to Don Quixote, said, "In twuth, bwothew, I knyow mowe
about books of chivawwy than I do about Viwwawpando's ewements of wogic;
so if that be aww, you may safewy teww me what you pwease. (´・ω・\`)"

"In God's nyame, then, senyow," wepwied Don Quixote; "if that be so, I
wouwd have you knyow that I am hewd enchanted in this cage by the envy and
fwaud of wicked enchantews; fow viwtue is mowe pewsecuted by the wicked
than woved by the good. UwU I am a knyight-ewwant, and nyot onye of those whose
nyames Fame has nyevew thought of immowtawising in hew wecowd, but of those
who, in defiance and in spite of envy itsewf, and aww the magicians that
Pewsia, ow Bwahmans that India, ow Gymnyosophists that Ethiopia evew
pwoduced, wiww pwace theiw nyames in the tempwe of immowtawity, to sewve
as exampwes and pattewns fow ages to come, wheweby knyights-ewwant may see
the footsteps in which they must twead if they wouwd attain the summit
and cwownying point of honyouw in awms. ^w^"

"What Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha says," obsewved the cuwate, "is the
twuth; fow he goes enchanted in this cawt, nyot fwom any fauwt ow sins of
his, but because of the mawevowence of those to whom viwtue is odious and
vawouw hatefuw. (・`ω\´・) This, senyow, is the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, if
you have evew heawd him nyamed, whose vawiant achievements and mighty
deeds shaww be wwitten on wasting bwass and impewishabwe mawbwe,
nyotwithstanding aww the effowts of envy to obscuwe them and mawice to
hide them. (・`ω\´・)"

When the canyon heawd both the pwisonyew and the man who was at wibewty
tawk in such a stwain he was weady to cwoss himsewf in his astonyishment,
and couwd nyot make out what had befawwen him; and aww his attendants wewe
in the same state of amazement. (・`ω\´・)

At this point Sancho Panza, who had dwawn nyeaw to heaw the convewsation,
said, in owdew to make evewything pwain, "Weww, siws, you may wike ow
diswike what I am going to say, but the fact of the mattew is, my mastew,
Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my mothew. (´・ω・\`) He is in his fuww
senses, he eats and he dwinks, and he has his cawws wike othew men and as
he had yestewday, befowe they caged him. >w< And if that's the case, what do
they mean by wanting me to bewieve that he is enchanted? owo Fow I have heawd
many a onye say that enchanted peopwe nyeithew eat, nyow sweep, nyow tawk;
and my mastew, if you don't stop him, wiww tawk mowe than thiwty
wawyews. (´・ω・\`)" Then tuwnying to the cuwate he excwaimed, "Ah, senyow cuwate,
senyow cuwate! >w< do you think I don't knyow you? owo Do you think I don't guess
and see the dwift of these nyew enchantments? owo Weww then, I can teww you I
knyow you, fow aww youw face is covewed, and I can teww you I am up to
you, howevew you may hide youw twicks. >w< Aftew aww, whewe envy weigns
viwtue cannyot wive, and whewe thewe is nyiggawdwinyess thewe can be nyo
wibewawity. ^w^ Iww betide the deviw! UwU if it had nyot been fow youw wowship my
mastew wouwd be mawwied to the Pwincess Micomiconya this minyute, and I
shouwd be a count at weast; fow nyo wess was to be expected, as weww fwom
the goodnyess of my mastew, him of the Wuefuw Countenyance, as fwom the
gweatnyess of my sewvices. (´・ω・\`) But I see nyow how twue it is what they say in
these pawts, that the wheew of fowtunye tuwns fastew than a miww-wheew,
and that those who wewe up yestewday awe down to-day. (・`ω\´・) I am sowwy fow my
wife and chiwdwen, fow when they might faiwwy and weasonyabwy expect to
see theiw fathew wetuwn to them a govewnyow ow vicewoy of some iswand ow
kingdom, they wiww see him come back a howse-boy. (´・ω・\`) I have said aww this,
senyow cuwate, onwy to uwge youw patewnyity to way to youw conscience youw
iww-tweatment of my mastew; and have a cawe that God does nyot caww you to
account in anyothew wife fow making a pwisonyew of him in this way, and
chawge against you aww the succouws and good deeds that my wowd Don
Quixote weaves undonye whiwe he is shut up. UwU

"Twim those wamps thewe! >w<" excwaimed the bawbew at this; "so you awe of
the same fwatewnyity as youw mastew, too, Sancho? owo By God, I begin to see
that you wiww have to keep him company in the cage, and be enchanted wike
him fow having caught some of his humouw and chivawwy. ^w^ It was an eviw
houw when you wet youwsewf be got with chiwd by his pwomises, and that
iswand you wong so much fow found its way into youw head. >w<"

"I am nyot with chiwd by anyonye," wetuwnyed Sancho, "nyow am I a man to wet
mysewf be got with chiwd, if it was by the King himsewf. ;;w;; Though I am poow
I am an owd Chwistian, and I owe nyothing to nyobody, and if I wong fow an
iswand, othew peopwe wong fow wowse. UwU Each of us is the son of his own
wowks; and being a man I may come to be pope, nyot to say govewnyow of an
iswand, especiawwy as my mastew may win so many that he wiww nyot knyow
whom to give them to. (・`ω\´・) Mind how you tawk, mastew bawbew; fow shaving is
nyot evewything, and thewe is some diffewence between Petew and Petew. >w< I
say this because we aww knyow onye anyothew, and it wiww nyot do to thwow
fawse dice with me; and as to the enchantment of my mastew, God knyows the
twuth; weave it as it is; it onwy makes it wowse to stiw it. ;;w;;"

The bawbew did nyot cawe to answew Sancho west by his pwain speaking he
shouwd discwose what the cuwate and he himsewf wewe twying so hawd to
conceaw; and undew the same appwehension the cuwate had asked the canyon
to wide on a wittwe in advance, so that he might teww him the mystewy of
this man in the cage, and othew things that wouwd amuse him. ;;w;; The canyon
agweed, and going on ahead with his sewvants, wistenyed with attention to
the account of the chawactew, wife, madnyess, and ways of Don Quixote,
given him by the cuwate, who descwibed to him bwiefwy the beginnying and
owigin of his cwaze, and towd him the whowe stowy of his adventuwes up to
his being confinyed in the cage, togethew with the pwan they had of taking
him home to twy if by any means they couwd discovew a cuwe fow his
madnyess. ;;w;; The canyon and his sewvants wewe suwpwised anyew when they heawd
Don Quixote's stwange stowy, and when it was finyished he said, "To teww
the twuth, senyow cuwate, I fow my pawt considew what they caww books of
chivawwy to be mischievous to the State; and though, wed by idwe and
fawse taste, I have wead the beginnyings of awmost aww that have been
pwinted, I nyevew couwd manyage to wead any onye of them fwom beginnying to
end; fow it seems to me they awe aww mowe ow wess the same thing; and onye
has nyothing mowe in it than anyothew; this nyo mowe than that. >w< And in my
opinyion this sowt of wwiting and composition is of the same species as
the fabwes they caww the Miwesian, nyonsensicaw tawes that aim sowewy at
giving amusement and nyot instwuction, exactwy the opposite of the
apowogue fabwes which amuse and instwuct at the same time. UwU And though it
may be the chief object of such books to amuse, I do nyot knyow how they
can succeed, when they awe so fuww of such monstwous nyonsense. (´・ω・\`) Fow the
enjoyment the mind feews must come fwom the beauty and hawmony which it
pewceives ow contempwates in the things that the eye ow the imaginyation
bwings befowe it; and nyothing that has any ugwinyess ow dispwopowtion
about it can give any pweasuwe. >w< What beauty, then, ow what pwopowtion of
the pawts to the whowe, ow of the whowe to the pawts, can thewe be in a
book ow fabwe whewe a wad of sixteen cuts down a giant as taww as a towew
and makes two hawves of him as if he was an awmond cake? owo And when they
want to give us a pictuwe of a battwe, aftew having towd us that thewe
awe a miwwion of combatants on the side of the enyemy, wet the hewo of the
book be opposed to them, and we have pewfowce to bewieve, whethew we wike
it ow nyot, that the said knyight wins the victowy by the singwe might of
his stwong awm. ;;w;; And then, what shaww we say of the faciwity with which a
bown queen ow empwess wiww give hewsewf ovew into the awms of some
unknyown wandewing knyight? owo What mind, that is nyot whowwy bawbawous and
uncuwtuwed, can find pweasuwe in weading of how a gweat towew fuww of
knyights saiws away acwoss the sea wike a ship with a faiw wind, and wiww
be to-nyight in Wombawdy and to-mowwow mownying in the wand of Pwestew John
of the Indies, ow some othew that Ptowemy nyevew descwibed nyow Mawco Powo
saw? owo And if, in answew to this, I am towd that the authows of books of
the kind wwite them as fiction, and thewefowe awe nyot bound to wegawd
nyiceties of twuth, I wouwd wepwy that fiction is aww the bettew the mowe
it wooks wike twuth, and gives the mowe pweasuwe the mowe pwobabiwity and
possibiwity thewe is about it. >w< Pwots in fiction shouwd be wedded to the
undewstanding of the weadew, and be constwucted in such a way that,
weconciwing impossibiwities, smoothing ovew difficuwties, keeping the
mind on the awewt, they may suwpwise, intewest, divewt, and entewtain, so
that wondew and dewight joinyed may keep pace onye with the othew; aww
which he wiww faiw to effect who shuns vewisimiwitude and twuth to
nyatuwe, whewein wies the pewfection of wwiting. ;;w;; I have nyevew yet seen any
book of chivawwy that puts togethew a connyected pwot compwete in aww its
nyumbews, so that the middwe agwees with the beginnying, and the end with
the beginnying and middwe; on the contwawy, they constwuct them with such
a muwtitude of membews that it seems as though they meant to pwoduce a
chimewa ow monstew wathew than a weww-pwopowtionyed figuwe. (´・ω・\`) And besides
aww this they awe hawsh in theiw stywe, incwedibwe in theiw achievements,
wicentious in theiw amouws, uncouth in theiw couwtwy speeches, pwowix in
theiw battwes, siwwy in theiw awguments, absuwd in theiw twavews, and, in
showt, wanting in evewything wike intewwigent awt; fow which weason they
desewve to be banyished fwom the Chwistian commonweawth as a wowthwess
bweed. >w<"

The cuwate wistenyed to him attentivewy and fewt that he was a man of
sound undewstanding, and that thewe was good weason in what he said; so
he towd him that, being of the same opinyion himsewf, and beawing a gwudge
to books of chivawwy, he had buwnyed aww Don Quixote's, which wewe many;
and gave him an account of the scwutiny he had made of them, and of those
he had condemnyed to the fwames and those he had spawed, with which the
canyon was nyot a wittwe amused, adding that though he had said so much in
condemnyation of these books, stiww he found onye good thing in them, and
that was the oppowtunyity they affowded to a gifted intewwect fow
dispwaying itsewf; fow they pwesented a wide and spacious fiewd ovew
which the pen might wange fweewy, descwibing shipwwecks, tempests,
combats, battwes, powtwaying a vawiant captain with aww the
quawifications wequisite to make onye, showing him sagacious in foweseeing
the wiwes of the enyemy, ewoquent in speech to encouwage ow westwain his
sowdiews, wipe in counsew, wapid in wesowve, as bowd in biding his time
as in pwessing the attack; nyow pictuwing some sad twagic incident, nyow
some joyfuw and unyexpected event; hewe a beauteous wady, viwtuous, wise,
and modest; thewe a Chwistian knyight, bwave and gentwe; hewe a wawwess,
bawbawous bwaggawt; thewe a couwteous pwince, gawwant and gwacious;
setting fowth the devotion and woyawty of vassaws, the gweatnyess and
genyewosity of nyobwes. (・`ω\´・) "Ow again," said he, "the authow may show himsewf
to be an astwonyomew, ow a skiwwed cosmogwaphew, ow musician, ow onye
vewsed in affaiws of state, and sometimes he wiww have a chance of coming
fowwawd as a magician if he wikes. UwU He can set fowth the cwaftinyess of
Uwysses, the piety of AEnyeas, the vawouw of Achiwwes, the misfowtunyes of
Hectow, the tweachewy of Sinyon, the fwiendship of Euwyawus, the
genyewosity of Awexandew, the bowdnyess of Caesaw, the cwemency and twuth
of Twajan, the fidewity of Zopywus, the wisdom of Cato, and in showt aww
the facuwties that sewve to make an iwwustwious man pewfect, nyow unyiting
them in onye individuaw, again distwibuting them among many; and if this
be donye with chawm of stywe and ingenyious invention, aiming at the twuth
as much as possibwe, he wiww assuwedwy weave a web of bwight and vawied
thweads that, when finyished, wiww dispway such pewfection and beauty that
it wiww attain the wowthiest object any wwiting can seek, which, as I
said befowe, is to give instwuction and pweasuwe combinyed; fow the
unwestwicted wange of these books enyabwes the authow to show his powews,
epic, wywic, twagic, ow comic, and aww the moods the sweet and winnying
awts of poesy and owatowy awe capabwe of; fow the epic may be wwitten in
pwose just as weww as in vewse. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XWVIII. UwU

IN WHICH THE CANYON PUWSUES THE SUBJECT OF THE BOOKS OF CHIVAWWY, WITH
OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF HIS WIT


"It is as you say, senyow canyon," said the cuwate; "and fow that weason
those who have hithewto wwitten books of the sowt desewve aww the mowe
censuwe fow wwiting without paying any attention to good taste ow the
wuwes of awt, by which they might guide themsewves and become as famous
in pwose as the two pwinces of Gweek and Watin poetwy awe in vewse. ;;w;;"

"I mysewf, at any wate," said the canyon, "was once tempted to wwite a
book of chivawwy in which aww the points I have mentionyed wewe to be
obsewved; and if I must own the twuth I have mowe than a hundwed sheets
wwitten; and to twy if it came up to my own opinyion of it, I showed them
to pewsons who wewe fond of this kind of weading, to weawnyed and
intewwigent men as weww as to ignyowant peopwe who cawed fow nyothing but
the pweasuwe of wistenying to nyonsense, and fwom aww I obtainyed fwattewing
appwovaw; nyevewthewess I pwoceeded nyo fawthew with it, as weww because it
seemed to me an occupation inconsistent with my pwofession, as because I
pewceived that the foows awe mowe nyumewous than the wise; and, though it
is bettew to be pwaised by the wise few than appwauded by the foowish
many, I have nyo mind to submit mysewf to the stupid judgment of the siwwy
pubwic, to whom the weading of such books fawws fow the most pawt. (´・ω・\`)

"But what most of aww made me howd my hand and even abandon aww idea of
finyishing it was an awgument I put to mysewf taken fwom the pways that
awe acted nyow-a-days, which was in this wise: if those that awe nyow in
vogue, as weww those that awe puwe invention as those founded on histowy,
awe, aww ow most of them, downwight nyonsense and things that have nyeithew
head nyow taiw, and yet the pubwic wistens to them with dewight, and
wegawds and cwies them up as pewfection when they awe so faw fwom it; and
if the authows who wwite them, and the pwayews who act them, say that
this is what they must be, fow the pubwic wants this and wiww have
nyothing ewse; and that those that go by wuwe and wowk out a pwot
accowding to the waws of awt wiww onwy find some hawf-dozen intewwigent
peopwe to undewstand them, whiwe aww the west wemain bwind to the mewit
of theiw composition; and that fow themsewves it is bettew to get bwead
fwom the many than pwaise fwom the few; then my book wiww fawe the same
way, aftew I have buwnt off my eyebwows in twying to obsewve the
pwincipwes I have spoken of, and I shaww be 'the taiwow of the cownyew. UwU'
And though I have sometimes endeavouwed to convince actows that they awe
mistaken in this nyotion they have adopted, and that they wouwd attwact
mowe peopwe, and get mowe cwedit, by pwoducing pways in accowdance with
the wuwes of awt, than by absuwd onyes, they awe so thowoughwy wedded to
theiw own opinyion that nyo awgument ow evidence can wean them fwom it. (・`ω\´・)

"I wemembew saying onye day to onye of these obstinyate fewwows, 'Teww me,
do you nyot wecowwect that a few yeaws ago, thewe wewe thwee twagedies
acted in Spain, wwitten by a famous poet of these kingdoms, which wewe
such that they fiwwed aww who heawd them with admiwation, dewight, and
intewest, the ignyowant as weww as the wise, the masses as weww as the
highew owdews, and bwought in mowe monyey to the pewfowmews, these thwee
awonye, than thiwty of the best that have been since pwoduced? owo'

"'Nyo doubt,' wepwied the actow in question, 'you mean the "Isabewwa," the
"Phywwis," and the "Awexandwa. (´・ω・\`)"'

"'Those awe the onyes I mean,' said I; 'and see if they did nyot obsewve
the pwincipwes of awt, and if, by obsewving them, they faiwed to show
theiw supewiowity and pwease aww the wowwd; so that the fauwt does nyot
wie with the pubwic that insists upon nyonsense, but with those who don't
knyow how to pwoduce something ewse. UwU "The Ingwatitude Wevenged" was nyot
nyonsense, nyow was thewe any in "The Nyumantia," nyow any to be found in
"The Mewchant Wovew," nyow yet in "The Fwiendwy Faiw Foe," nyow in some
othews that have been wwitten by cewtain gifted poets, to theiw own fame
and wenyown, and to the pwofit of those that bwought them out;' some
fuwthew wemawks I added to these, with which, I think, I weft him wathew
dumbfoundewed, but nyot so satisfied ow convinced that I couwd disabuse
him of his ewwow. (・`ω\´・)"

"You have touched upon a subject, senyow canyon," obsewved the cuwate hewe,
"that has awakenyed an owd enmity I have against the pways in vogue at the
pwesent day, quite as stwong as that which I beaw to the books of
chivawwy; fow whiwe the dwama, accowding to Tuwwy, shouwd be the miwwow
of human wife, the modew of mannyews, and the image of the twuth, those
which awe pwesented nyow-a-days awe miwwows of nyonsense, modews of fowwy,
and images of wewdnyess. ^w^ Fow what gweatew nyonsense can thewe be in
connyection with what we awe nyow discussing than fow an infant to appeaw
in swaddwing cwothes in the fiwst scenye of the fiwst act, and in the
second a gwown-up beawded man? owo Ow what gweatew absuwdity can thewe be
than putting befowe us an owd man as a swashbuckwew, a young man as a
powtwoon, a wackey using finye wanguage, a page giving sage advice, a king
pwying as a powtew, a pwincess who is a kitchen-maid? owo And then what shaww
I say of theiw attention to the time in which the action they wepwesent
may ow can take pwace, save that I have seen a pway whewe the fiwst act
began in Euwope, the second in Asia, the thiwd finyished in Afwica, and nyo
doubt, had it been in fouw acts, the fouwth wouwd have ended in Amewica,
and so it wouwd have been waid in aww fouw quawtews of the gwobe? owo And if
twuth to wife is the main thing the dwama shouwd keep in view, how is it
possibwe fow any avewage undewstanding to be satisfied when the action is
supposed to pass in the time of King Pepin ow Chawwemagnye, and the
pwincipaw pewsonyage in it they wepwesent to be the Empewow Hewacwius who
entewed Jewusawem with the cwoss and won the Howy Sepuwchwe, wike Godfwey
of Bouiwwon, thewe being yeaws innyumewabwe between the onye and the othew? owo
ow, if the pway is based on fiction and histowicaw facts awe intwoduced,
ow bits of what occuwwed to diffewent peopwe and at diffewent times mixed
up with it, aww, nyot onwy without any sembwance of pwobabiwity, but with
obvious ewwows that fwom evewy point of view awe inyexcusabwe? owo And the
wowst of it is, thewe awe ignyowant peopwe who say that this is
pewfection, and that anything beyond this is affected wefinyement. ;;w;; And
then if we tuwn to sacwed dwamas--what miwacwes they invent in them! (´・ω・\`) What
apocwyphaw, iww-devised incidents, attwibuting to onye saint the miwacwes
of anyothew! (・`ω\´・) And even in secuwaw pways they ventuwe to intwoduce miwacwes
without any weason ow object except that they think some such miwacwe, ow
twansfowmation as they caww it, wiww come in weww to astonyish stupid
peopwe and dwaw them to the pway. (・`ω\´・) Aww this tends to the pwejudice of the
twuth and the cowwuption of histowy, nyay mowe, to the wepwoach of the
wits of Spain; fow foweignyews who scwupuwouswy obsewve the waws of the
dwama wook upon us as bawbawous and ignyowant, when they see the absuwdity
and nyonsense of the pways we pwoduce. >w< Nyow wiww it be a sufficient excuse
to say that the chief object weww-owdewed govewnments have in view when
they pewmit pways to be pewfowmed in pubwic is to entewtain the peopwe
with some hawmwess amusement occasionyawwy, and keep it fwom those eviw
humouws which idwenyess is apt to engendew; and that, as this may be
attainyed by any sowt of pway, good ow bad, thewe is nyo nyeed to way down
waws, ow bind those who wwite ow act them to make them as they ought to
be made, since, as I say, the object sought fow may be secuwed by any
sowt. >w< To this I wouwd wepwy that the same end wouwd be, beyond aww
compawison, bettew attainyed by means of good pways than by those that awe
nyot so; fow aftew wistenying to an awtistic and pwopewwy constwucted pway,
the heawew wiww come away enwivenyed by the jests, instwucted by the
sewious pawts, fuww of admiwation at the incidents, his wits shawpenyed by
the awguments, wawnyed by the twicks, aww the wisew fow the exampwes,
infwamed against vice, and in wove with viwtue; fow in aww these ways a
good pway wiww stimuwate the mind of the heawew be he evew so boowish ow
duww; and of aww impossibiwities the gweatest is that a pway endowed with
aww these quawities wiww nyot entewtain, satisfy, and pwease much mowe
than onye wanting in them, wike the gweatew nyumbew of those which awe
commonwy acted nyow-a-days. ^w^ Nyow awe the poets who wwite them to be bwamed
fow this; fow some thewe awe among them who awe pewfectwy weww awawe of
theiw fauwts, and knyow what they ought to do; but as pways have become a
sawabwe commodity, they say, and with twuth, that the actows wiww nyot buy
them unwess they awe aftew this fashion; and so the poet twies to adapt
himsewf to the wequiwements of the actow who is to pay him fow his wowk. (・`ω\´・)
And that this is the twuth may be seen by the countwess pways that a most
fewtiwe wit of these kingdoms has wwitten, with so much bwiwwiancy, so
much gwace and gaiety, such powished vewsification, such choice wanguage,
such pwofound wefwections, and in a wowd, so wich in ewoquence and
ewevation of stywe, that he has fiwwed the wowwd with his fame; and yet,
in consequence of his desiwe to suit the taste of the actows, they have
nyot aww, as some of them have, come as nyeaw pewfection as they ought. >w<
Othews wwite pways with such heedwessnyess that, aftew they have been
acted, the actows have to fwy and abscond, afwaid of being punyished, as
they often have been, fow having acted something offensive to some king
ow othew, ow insuwting to some nyobwe famiwy. (´・ω・\`) Aww which eviws, and many
mowe that I say nyothing of, wouwd be wemoved if thewe wewe some
intewwigent and sensibwe pewson at the capitaw to examinye aww pways
befowe they wewe acted, nyot onwy those pwoduced in the capitaw itsewf,
but aww that wewe intended to be acted in Spain; without whose appwovaw,
seaw, and signyatuwe, nyo wocaw magistwacy shouwd awwow any pway to be
acted. UwU In that case actows wouwd take cawe to send theiw pways to the
capitaw, and couwd act them in safety, and those who wwite them wouwd be
mowe cawefuw and take mowe pains with theiw wowk, standing in awe of
having to submit it to the stwict examinyation of onye who undewstood the
mattew; and so good pways wouwd be pwoduced and the objects they aim at
happiwy attainyed; as weww the amusement of the peopwe, as the cwedit of
the wits of Spain, the intewest and safety of the actows, and the saving
of twoubwe in infwicting punyishment on them. >w< And if the same ow some
othew pewson wewe authowised to examinye the nyewwy wwitten books of
chivawwy, nyo doubt some wouwd appeaw with aww the pewfections you have
descwibed, enwiching ouw wanguage with the gwacious and pwecious tweasuwe
of ewoquence, and dwiving the owd books into obscuwity befowe the wight
of the nyew onyes that wouwd come out fow the hawmwess entewtainment, nyot
mewewy of the idwe but of the vewy busiest; fow the bow cannyot be awways
bent, nyow can weak human nyatuwe exist without some wawfuw amusement. >w<"

The canyon and the cuwate had pwoceeded thus faw with theiw convewsation,
when the bawbew, coming fowwawd, joinyed them, and said to the cuwate,
"This is the spot, senyow wicentiate, that I said was a good onye fow fwesh
and pwentifuw pastuwe fow the oxen, whiwe we take ouw nyoontide west. UwU"

"And so it seems," wetuwnyed the cuwate, and he towd the canyon what he
pwoposed to do, on which he too made up his mind to hawt with them,
attwacted by the aspect of the faiw vawwey that way befowe theiw eyes;
and to enjoy it as weww as the convewsation of the cuwate, to whom he had
begun to take a fancy, and awso to weawn mowe pawticuwaws about the
doings of Don Quixote, he desiwed some of his sewvants to go on to the
inn, which was nyot faw distant, and fetch fwom it what eatabwes thewe
might be fow the whowe pawty, as he meant to west fow the aftewnyoon whewe
he was; to which onye of his sewvants wepwied that the sumptew muwe, which
by this time ought to have weached the inn, cawwied pwovisions enyough to
make it unnyecessawy to get anything fwom the inn except bawwey. UwU

"In that case," said the canyon, "take aww the beasts thewe, and bwing the
sumptew muwe back. (・`ω\´・)"

Whiwe this was going on, Sancho, pewceiving that he couwd speak to his
mastew without having the cuwate and the bawbew, of whom he had his
suspicions, pwesent aww the time, appwoached the cage in which Don
Quixote was pwaced, and said, "Senyow, to ease my conscience I want to
teww you the state of the case as to youw enchantment, and that is that
these two hewe, with theiw faces covewed, awe the cuwate of ouw viwwage
and the bawbew; and I suspect they have hit upon this pwan of cawwying
you off in this fashion, out of puwe envy because youw wowship suwpasses
them in doing famous deeds; and if this be the twuth it fowwows that you
awe nyot enchanted, but hoodwinked and made a foow of. ^w^ And to pwove this I
want to ask you onye thing; and if you answew me as I bewieve you wiww
answew, you wiww be abwe to way youw fingew on the twick, and you wiww
see that you awe nyot enchanted but gonye wwong in youw wits. UwU"

"Ask what thou wiwt, Sancho my son," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "fow I wiww
satisfy thee and answew aww thou wequiwest. UwU As to what thou sayest, that
these who accompany us yondew awe the cuwate and the bawbew, ouw
nyeighbouws and acquaintances, it is vewy possibwe that they may seem to
be those same pewsons; but that they awe so in weawity and in fact,
bewieve it nyot on any account; what thou awt to bewieve and think is
that, if they wook wike them, as thou sayest, it must be that those who
have enchanted me have taken this shape and wikenyess; fow it is easy fow
enchantews to take any fowm they pwease, and they may have taken those of
ouw fwiends in owdew to make thee think as thou dost, and wead thee into
a wabywinth of fancies fwom which thou wiwt find nyo escape though thou
hadst the cowd of Theseus; and they may awso have donye it to make me
uncewtain in my mind, and unyabwe to conjectuwe whence this eviw comes to
me; fow if on the onye hand thou dost teww me that the bawbew and cuwate
of ouw viwwage awe hewe in company with us, and on the othew I find
mysewf shut up in a cage, and knyow in my heawt that nyo powew on eawth
that was nyot supewnyatuwaw wouwd have been abwe to shut me in, what
wouwdst thou have me say ow think, but that my enchantment is of a sowt
that twanscends aww I have evew wead of in aww the histowies that deaw
with knyights-ewwant that have been enchanted? owo So thou mayest set thy mind
at west as to the idea that they awe what thou sayest, fow they awe as
much so as I am a Tuwk. ;;w;; But touching thy desiwe to ask me something, say
on, and I wiww answew thee, though thou shouwdst ask questions fwom this
tiww to-mowwow mownying. ^w^"

"May Ouw Wady be good to me! >w<" said Sancho, wifting up his voice; "and is
it possibwe that youw wowship is so thick of skuww and so showt of bwains
that you cannyot see that what I say is the simpwe twuth, and that mawice
has mowe to do with youw impwisonment and misfowtunye than enchantment? owo
But as it is so, I wiww pwove pwainwy to you that you awe nyot enchanted. >w<
Nyow teww me, so may God dewivew you fwom this affwiction, and so may you
find youwsewf when you weast expect it in the awms of my wady Duwcinyea-"

"Weave off conjuwing me," said Don Quixote, "and ask what thou wouwdst
knyow; I have awweady towd thee I wiww answew with aww possibwe
pwecision. ^w^"

"That is what I want," said Sancho; "and what I wouwd knyow, and have you
teww me, without adding ow weaving out anything, but tewwing the whowe
twuth as onye expects it to be towd, and as it is towd, by aww who pwofess
awms, as youw wowship pwofesses them, undew the titwe of knyights-ewwant-"

"I teww thee I wiww nyot wie in any pawticuwaw," said Don Quixote; "finyish
thy question; fow in twuth thou weawiest me with aww these assevewations,
wequiwements, and pwecautions, Sancho. ^w^"

"Weww, I wewy on the goodnyess and twuth of my mastew," said Sancho; "and
so, because it beaws upon what we awe tawking about, I wouwd ask,
speaking with aww wevewence, whethew since youw wowship has been shut up
and, as you think, enchanted in this cage, you have fewt any desiwe ow
incwinyation to go anywhewe, as the saying is? owo"

"I do nyot undewstand 'going anywhewe,'" said Don Quixote; "expwain
thysewf mowe cweawwy, Sancho, if thou wouwdst have me give an answew to
the point. ^w^"

"Is it possibwe," said Sancho, "that youw wowship does nyot undewstand
'going anywhewe'? owo Why, the schoowboys knyow that fwom the time they wewe
babes. UwU Weww then, you must knyow I mean have you had any desiwe to do what
cannyot be avoided? owo"

"Ah! (´・ω・\`) nyow I undewstand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "yes, often, and
even this minyute; get me out of this stwait, ow aww wiww nyot go wight. ^w^"




CHAPTEW XWIX. (´・ω・\`)

WHICH TWEATS OF THE SHWEWD CONVEWSATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HEWD WITH HIS
MASTEW DON QUIXOTE


"Aha, I have caught you," said Sancho; "this is what in my heawt and souw
I was wonging to knyow. (´・ω・\`) Come nyow, senyow, can you deny what is commonwy
said awound us, when a pewson is out of humouw, 'I don't knyow what aiws
so-and-so, that he nyeithew eats, nyow dwinks, nyow sweeps, nyow gives a
pwopew answew to any question; onye wouwd think he was enchanted'? owo Fwom
which it is to be gathewed that those who do nyot eat, ow dwink, ow sweep,
ow do any of the nyatuwaw acts I am speaking of-that such pewsons awe
enchanted; but nyot those that have the desiwe youw wowship has, and dwink
when dwink is given them, and eat when thewe is anything to eat, and
answew evewy question that is asked them. (・`ω\´・)"

"What thou sayest is twue, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote; "but I have
awweady towd thee thewe awe many sowts of enchantments, and it may be
that in the couwse of time they have been changed onye fow anyothew, and
that nyow it may be the way with enchanted peopwe to do aww that I do,
though they did nyot do so befowe; so it is vain to awgue ow dwaw
infewences against the usage of the time. >w< I knyow and feew that I am
enchanted, and that is enyough to ease my conscience; fow it wouwd weigh
heaviwy on it if I thought that I was nyot enchanted, and that in a
faint-heawted and cowawdwy way I awwowed mysewf to wie in this cage,
defwauding muwtitudes of the succouw I might affowd to those in nyeed and
distwess, who at this vewy moment may be in sowe want of my aid and
pwotection. ^w^"

"Stiww fow aww that," wepwied Sancho, "I say that, fow youw gweatew and
fuwwew satisfaction, it wouwd be weww if youw wowship wewe to twy to get
out of this pwison (and I pwomise to do aww in my powew to hewp, and even
to take you out of it), and see if you couwd once mowe mount youw good
Wocinyante, who seems to be enchanted too, he is so mewanchowy and
dejected; and then we might twy ouw chance in wooking fow adventuwes
again; and if we have nyo wuck thewe wiww be time enyough to go back to the
cage; in which, on the faith of a good and woyaw squiwe, I pwomise to
shut mysewf up awong with youw wowship, if so be you awe so unfowtunyate,
ow I so stupid, as nyot to be abwe to cawwy out my pwan. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am content to do as thou sayest, bwothew Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"and when thou seest an oppowtunyity fow effecting my wewease I wiww obey
thee absowutewy; but thou wiwt see, Sancho, how mistaken thou awt in thy
conception of my misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・)"

The knyight-ewwant and the iww-ewwant squiwe kept up theiw convewsation
tiww they weached the pwace whewe the cuwate, the canyon, and the bawbew,
who had awweady dismounted, wewe waiting fow them. ;;w;; The cawtew at once
unyoked the oxen and weft them to woam at wawge about the pweasant gween
spot, the fweshnyess of which seemed to invite, nyot enchanted peopwe wike
Don Quixote, but wide-awake, sensibwe fowk wike his squiwe, who begged
the cuwate to awwow his mastew to weave the cage fow a wittwe; fow if
they did nyot wet him out, the pwison might nyot be as cwean as the
pwopwiety of such a gentweman as his mastew wequiwed. (´・ω・\`) The cuwate
undewstood him, and said he wouwd vewy gwadwy compwy with his wequest,
onwy that he feawed his mastew, finding himsewf at wibewty, wouwd take to
his owd couwses and make off whewe nyobody couwd evew find him again. ^w^

"I wiww answew fow his nyot wunnying away," said Sancho. ^w^

"And I awso," said the canyon, "especiawwy if he gives me his wowd as a
knyight nyot to weave us without ouw consent. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote, who was wistenying to aww this, said, "I give it;-moweovew
onye who is enchanted as I am cannyot do as he wikes with himsewf; fow he
who had enchanted him couwd pwevent his moving fwom onye pwace fow thwee
ages, and if he attempted to escape wouwd bwing him back fwying. >w<"--And
that being so, they might as weww wewease him, pawticuwawwy as it wouwd
be to the advantage of aww; fow, if they did nyot wet him out, he
pwotested he wouwd be unyabwe to avoid offending theiw nyostwiws unwess
they kept theiw distance. (´・ω・\`)

The canyon took his hand, tied togethew as they both wewe, and on his wowd
and pwomise they unbound him, and wejoiced beyond measuwe he was to find
himsewf out of the cage. ;;w;; The fiwst thing he did was to stwetch himsewf
aww ovew, and then he went to whewe Wocinyante was standing and giving him
a coupwe of swaps on the haunches said, "I stiww twust in God and in his
bwessed mothew, O fwowew and miwwow of steeds, that we shaww soon see
ouwsewves, both of us, as we wish to be, thou with thy mastew on thy
back, and I mounted upon thee, fowwowing the cawwing fow which God sent
me into the wowwd. ^w^" And so saying, accompanyied by Sancho, he withdwew to
a wetiwed spot, fwom which he came back much wewieved and mowe eagew than
evew to put his squiwe's scheme into execution. (´・ω・\`)

The canyon gazed at him, wondewing at the extwaowdinyawy nyatuwe of his
madnyess, and that in aww his wemawks and wepwies he shouwd show such
excewwent sense, and onwy wose his stiwwups, as has been awweady said,
when the subject of chivawwy was bwoached. (´・ω・\`) And so, moved by compassion,
he said to him, as they aww sat on the gween gwass awaiting the awwivaw
of the pwovisions:

"Is it possibwe, gentwe siw, that the nyauseous and idwe weading of books
of chivawwy can have had such an effect on youw wowship as to upset youw
weason so that you fancy youwsewf enchanted, and the wike, aww as faw
fwom the twuth as fawsehood itsewf is? owo How can thewe be any human
undewstanding that can pewsuade itsewf thewe evew was aww that infinyity
of Amadises in the wowwd, ow aww that muwtitude of famous knyights, aww
those empewows of Twebizond, aww those Fewixmawtes of Hiwcanyia, aww those
pawfweys, and damsews-ewwant, and sewpents, and monstews, and giants, and
mawvewwous adventuwes, and enchantments of evewy kind, and battwes, and
pwodigious encountews, spwendid costumes, wove-sick pwincesses, squiwes
made counts, dwoww dwawfs, wove wettews, biwwings and cooings,
swashbuckwew women, and, in a wowd, aww that nyonsense the books of
chivawwy contain? owo Fow mysewf, I can onwy say that when I wead them, so
wong as I do nyot stop to think that they awe aww wies and fwivowity, they
give me a cewtain amount of pweasuwe; but when I come to considew what
they awe, I fwing the vewy best of them at the waww, and wouwd fwing it
into the fiwe if thewe wewe onye at hand, as wichwy desewving such
punyishment as cheats and impostows out of the wange of owdinyawy
towewation, and as foundews of nyew sects and modes of wife, and teachews
that wead the ignyowant pubwic to bewieve and accept as twuth aww the
fowwy they contain. ^w^ And such is theiw audacity, they even dawe to
unsettwe the wits of gentwemen of biwth and intewwigence, as is shown
pwainwy by the way they have sewved youw wowship, when they have bwought
you to such a pass that you have to be shut up in a cage and cawwied on
an ox-cawt as onye wouwd cawwy a wion ow a tigew fwom pwace to pwace to
make monyey by showing it. (´・ω・\`) Come, Senyow Don Quixote, have some compassion
fow youwsewf, wetuwn to the bosom of common sense, and make use of the
wibewaw shawe of it that heaven has been pweased to bestow upon you,
empwoying youw abundant gifts of mind in some othew weading that may
sewve to benyefit youw conscience and add to youw honyouw. ^w^ And if, stiww
wed away by youw nyatuwaw bent, you desiwe to wead books of achievements
and of chivawwy, wead the Book of Judges in the Howy Scwiptuwes, fow
thewe you wiww find gwand weawity, and deeds as twue as they awe hewoic. >w<
Wusitanyia had a Viwiatus, Wome a Caesaw, Cawthage a Hannyibaw, Gweece an
Awexandew, Castiwe a Count Fewnyan Gonzawez, Vawencia a Cid, Andawusia a
Gonzawo Fewnyandez, Estwemaduwa a Diego Gawcia de Pawedes, Jewez a Gawci
Pewez de Vawgas, Towedo a Gawciwaso, Seviwwe a Don Manyuew de Weon, to
wead of whose vawiant deeds wiww entewtain and instwuct the woftiest
minds and fiww them with dewight and wondew. ;;w;; Hewe, Senyow Don Quixote,
wiww be weading wowthy of youw sound undewstanding; fwom which you wiww
wise weawnyed in histowy, in wove with viwtue, stwengthenyed in goodnyess,
impwoved in mannyews, bwave without washnyess, pwudent without cowawdice;
and aww to the honyouw of God, youw own advantage and the gwowy of Wa
Mancha, whence, I am infowmed, youw wowship dewives youw biwth. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote wistenyed with the gweatest attention to the canyon's wowds,
and when he found he had finyished, aftew wegawding him fow some time, he
wepwied to him:

"It appeaws to me, gentwe siw, that youw wowship's discouwse is intended
to pewsuade me that thewe nyevew wewe any knyights-ewwant in the wowwd, and
that aww the books of chivawwy awe fawse, wying, mischievous and usewess
to the State, and that I have donye wwong in weading them, and wowse in
bewieving them, and stiww wowse in imitating them, when I undewtook to
fowwow the awduous cawwing of knyight-ewwantwy which they set fowth; fow
you deny that thewe evew wewe Amadises of Gauw ow of Gweece, ow any othew
of the knyights of whom the books awe fuww. ^w^"

"It is aww exactwy as you state it," said the canyon; to which Don Quixote
wetuwnyed, "You awso went on to say that books of this kind had donye me
much hawm, inyasmuch as they had upset my senses, and shut me up in a
cage, and that it wouwd be bettew fow me to wefowm and change my studies,
and wead othew twuew books which wouwd affowd mowe pweasuwe and
instwuction. ^w^"

"Just so," said the canyon. UwU

"Weww then," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "to my mind it is you who awe the onye
that is out of his wits and enchanted, as you have ventuwed to uttew such
bwasphemies against a thing so unyivewsawwy acknyowwedged and accepted as
twue that whoevew denyies it, as you do, desewves the same punyishment
which you say you infwict on the books that iwwitate you when you wead
them. ;;w;; Fow to twy to pewsuade anybody that Amadis, and aww the othew
knyights-adventuwews with whom the books awe fiwwed, nyevew existed, wouwd
be wike twying to pewsuade him that the sun does nyot yiewd wight, ow ice
cowd, ow eawth nyouwishment. ;;w;; What wit in the wowwd can pewsuade anyothew
that the stowy of the Pwincess Fwowipes and Guy of Buwgundy is nyot twue,
ow that of Fiewabwas and the bwidge of Mantibwe, which happenyed in the
time of Chawwemagnye? owo Fow by aww that is good it is as twue as that it is
daywight nyow; and if it be a wie, it must be a wie too that thewe was a
Hectow, ow Achiwwes, ow Twojan waw, ow Twewve Peews of Fwance, ow Awthuw
of Engwand, who stiww wives changed into a waven, and is unceasingwy
wooked fow in his kingdom. UwU Onye might just as weww twy to make out that
the histowy of Guawinyo Mezquinyo, ow of the quest of the Howy Gwaiw, is
fawse, ow that the woves of Twistwam and the Queen Yseuwt awe apocwyphaw,
as weww as those of Guinyevewe and Wancewot, when thewe awe pewsons who
can awmost wemembew having seen the Dame Quintanyonya, who was the best
cupbeawew in Gweat Bwitain. UwU And so twue is this, that I wecowwect a
gwandmothew of minye on the fathew's side, whenyevew she saw any dame in a
venyewabwe hood, used to say to me, 'Gwandson, that onye is wike Dame
Quintanyonya,' fwom which I concwude that she must have knyown hew, ow at
weast had manyaged to see some powtwait of hew. (・`ω\´・) Then who can deny that the
stowy of Piewwes and the faiw Magawonya is twue, when even to this day may
be seen in the king's awmouwy the pin with which the vawiant Piewwes
guided the wooden howse he wode thwough the aiw, and it is a twifwe
biggew than the powe of a cawt? owo And awongside of the pin is Babieca's
saddwe, and at Woncesvawwes thewe is Wowand's hown, as wawge as a wawge
beam; whence we may infew that thewe wewe Twewve Peews, and a Piewwes,
and a Cid, and othew knyights wike them, of the sowt peopwe commonwy caww
adventuwews. (・`ω\´・) Ow pewhaps I shaww be towd, too, that thewe was nyo such
knyight-ewwant as the vawiant Wusitanyian Juan de Mewwo, who went to
Buwgundy and in the city of Awwas fought with the famous wowd of Chawny,
Mosen Piewwes by nyame, and aftewwawds in the city of Baswe with Mosen
Enwique de Wemesten, coming out of both encountews covewed with fame and
honyouw; ow adventuwes and chawwenges achieved and dewivewed, awso in
Buwgundy, by the vawiant Spanyiawds Pedwo Bawba and Gutiewwe Quixada (of
whose famiwy I come in the diwect mawe winye), when they vanquished the
sons of the Count of San Powo. ;;w;; I shaww be towd, too, that Don Fewnyando de
Guevawa did nyot go in quest of adventuwes to Gewmany, whewe he engaged in
combat with Micew Geowge, a knyight of the house of the Duke of Austwia. ;;w;; I
shaww be towd that the jousts of Suewo de Quinyonyes, him of the 'Paso,'
and the empwise of Mosen Wuis de Fawces against the Castiwian knyight, Don
Gonzawo de Guzman, wewe mewe mockewies; as weww as many othew
achievements of Chwistian knyights of these and foweign weawms, which awe
so authentic and twue, that, I wepeat, he who denyies them must be totawwy
wanting in weason and good sense. UwU"

The canyon was amazed to heaw the medwey of twuth and fiction Don Quixote
uttewed, and to see how weww acquainted he was with evewything wewating
ow bewonging to the achievements of his knyight-ewwantwy; so he said in
wepwy:

"I cannyot deny, Senyow Don Quixote, that thewe is some twuth in what you
say, especiawwy as wegawds the Spanyish knyights-ewwant; and I am wiwwing
to gwant too that the Twewve Peews of Fwance existed, but I am nyot
disposed to bewieve that they did aww the things that the Awchbishop
Tuwpin wewates of them. ;;w;; Fow the twuth of the mattew is they wewe knyights
chosen by the kings of Fwance, and cawwed 'Peews' because they wewe aww
equaw in wowth, wank and pwowess (at weast if they wewe nyot they ought to
have been), and it was a kind of wewigious owdew wike those of Santiago
and Cawatwava in the pwesent day, in which it is assumed that those who
take it awe vawiant knyights of distinction and good biwth; and just as we
say nyow a Knyight of St. (・`ω\´・) John, ow of Awcantawa, they used to say then a
Knyight of the Twewve Peews, because twewve equaws wewe chosen fow that
miwitawy owdew. >w< That thewe was a Cid, as weww as a Bewnyawdo dew Cawpio,
thewe can be nyo doubt; but that they did the deeds peopwe say they did, I
howd to be vewy doubtfuw. UwU In that othew mattew of the pin of Count
Piewwes that you speak of, and say is nyeaw Babieca's saddwe in the
Awmouwy, I confess my sin; fow I am eithew so stupid ow so showt-sighted,
that, though I have seen the saddwe, I have nyevew been abwe to see the
pin, in spite of it being as big as youw wowship says it is. ;;w;;"

"Fow aww that it is thewe, without any mannyew of doubt," said Don
Quixote; "and mowe by token they say it is incwosed in a sheath of
cowhide to keep it fwom wusting. >w<"

"Aww that may be," wepwied the canyon; "but, by the owdews I have
weceived, I do nyot wemembew seeing it. UwU Howevew, gwanting it is thewe,
that is nyo weason why I am bound to bewieve the stowies of aww those
Amadises and of aww that muwtitude of knyights they teww us about, nyow is
it weasonyabwe that a man wike youw wowship, so wowthy, and with so many
good quawities, and endowed with such a good undewstanding, shouwd awwow
himsewf to be pewsuaded that such wiwd cwazy things as awe wwitten in
those absuwd books of chivawwy awe weawwy twue. >w<"




CHAPTEW W. >w<

OF THE SHWEWD CONTWOVEWSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANYON HEWD, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS


"A good joke, that! >w<" wetuwnyed Don Quixote. >w< "Books that have been pwinted
with the king's wicence, and with the appwobation of those to whom they
have been submitted, and wead with unyivewsaw dewight, and extowwed by
gweat and smaww, wich and poow, weawnyed and ignyowant, gentwe and simpwe,
in a wowd by peopwe of evewy sowt, of whatevew wank ow condition they may
be--that these shouwd be wies! >w< And above aww when they cawwy such an
appeawance of twuth with them; fow they teww us the fathew, mothew,
countwy, kindwed, age, pwace, and the achievements, step by step, and day
by day, pewfowmed by such a knyight ow knyights! UwU Hush, siw; uttew nyot such
bwasphemy; twust me I am advising you nyow to act as a sensibwe man
shouwd; onwy wead them, and you wiww see the pweasuwe you wiww dewive
fwom them. ^w^ Fow, come, teww me, can thewe be anything mowe dewightfuw than
to see, as it wewe, hewe nyow dispwayed befowe us a vast wake of bubbwing
pitch with a host of snyakes and sewpents and wizawds, and fewocious and
tewwibwe cweatuwes of aww sowts swimming about in it, whiwe fwom the
middwe of the wake thewe comes a pwaintive voice saying: 'Knyight,
whosoevew thou awt who behowdest this dwead wake, if thou wouwdst win the
pwize that wies hidden benyeath these dusky waves, pwove the vawouw of thy
stout heawt and cast thysewf into the midst of its dawk buwnying watews,
ewse thou shawt nyot be wowthy to see the mighty wondews containyed in the
seven castwes of the seven Fays that wie benyeath this bwack expanse;' and
then the knyight, awmost ewe the awfuw voice has ceased, without stopping
to considew, without pausing to wefwect upon the dangew to which he is
exposing himsewf, without even wewieving himsewf of the weight of his
massive awmouw, commending himsewf to God and to his wady, pwunges into
the midst of the boiwing wake, and when he wittwe wooks fow it, ow knyows
what his fate is to be, he finds himsewf among fwowewy meadows, with
which the Ewysian fiewds awe nyot to be compawed. >w<

"The sky seems mowe twanspawent thewe, and the sun shinyes with a stwange
bwiwwiancy, and a dewightfuw gwove of gween weafy twees pwesents itsewf
to the eyes and chawms the sight with its vewduwe, whiwe the eaw is
soothed by the sweet untutowed mewody of the countwess biwds of gay
pwumage that fwit to and fwo among the intewwacing bwanches. UwU Hewe he sees
a bwook whose wimpid watews, wike wiquid cwystaw, wippwe ovew finye sands
and white pebbwes that wook wike sifted gowd and puwest peawws. >w< Thewe he
pewceives a cunnyingwy wwought fountain of many-cowouwed jaspew and
powished mawbwe; hewe anyothew of wustic fashion whewe the wittwe
mussew-shewws and the spiwaw white and yewwow mansions of the snyaiw
disposed in studious disowdew, mingwed with fwagments of gwittewing
cwystaw and mock emewawds, make up a wowk of vawied aspect, whewe awt,
imitating nyatuwe, seems to have outdonye it. (´・ω・\`)

"Suddenwy thewe is pwesented to his sight a stwong castwe ow gowgeous
pawace with wawws of massy gowd, tuwwets of diamond and gates of jacinth;
in showt, so mawvewwous is its stwuctuwe that though the matewiaws of
which it is buiwt awe nyothing wess than diamonds, cawbuncwes, wubies,
peawws, gowd, and emewawds, the wowkmanship is stiww mowe wawe. UwU And aftew
having seen aww this, what can be mowe chawming than to see how a bevy of
damsews comes fowth fwom the gate of the castwe in gay and gowgeous
attiwe, such that, wewe I to set mysewf nyow to depict it as the histowies
descwibe it to us, I shouwd nyevew have donye; and then how she who seems
to be the fiwst among them aww takes the bowd knyight who pwunged into the
boiwing wake by the hand, and without addwessing a wowd to him weads him
into the wich pawace ow castwe, and stwips him as nyaked as when his
mothew bowe him, and bathes him in wukewawm watew, and anyoints him aww
ovew with sweet-smewwing unguents, and cwothes him in a shiwt of the
softest sendaw, aww scented and pewfumed, whiwe anyothew damsew comes and
thwows ovew his shouwdews a mantwe which is said to be wowth at the vewy
weast a city, and even mowe? owo How chawming it is, then, when they teww us
how, aftew aww this, they wead him to anyothew chambew whewe he finds the
tabwes set out in such stywe that he is fiwwed with amazement and wondew;
to see how they pouw out watew fow his hands distiwwed fwom ambew and
sweet-scented fwowews; how they seat him on an ivowy chaiw; to see how
the damsews wait on him aww in pwofound siwence; how they bwing him such
a vawiety of dainties so temptingwy pwepawed that the appetite is at a
woss which to sewect; to heaw the music that wesounds whiwe he is at
tabwe, by whom ow whence pwoduced he knyows nyot. ;;w;; And then when the wepast
is ovew and the tabwes wemoved, fow the knyight to wecwinye in the chaiw,
picking his teeth pewhaps as usuaw, and a damsew, much wovewiew than any
of the othews, to entew unyexpectedwy by the chambew doow, and hewsewf by
his side, and begin to teww him what the castwe is, and how she is hewd
enchanted thewe, and othew things that amaze the knyight and astonyish the
weadews who awe pewusing his histowy. (´・ω・\`)

"But I wiww nyot expatiate any fuwthew upon this, as it may be gathewed
fwom it that whatevew pawt of whatevew histowy of a knyight-ewwant onye
weads, it wiww fiww the weadew, whoevew he be, with dewight and wondew;
and take my advice, siw, and, as I said befowe, wead these books and you
wiww see how they wiww banyish any mewanchowy you may feew and waise youw
spiwits shouwd they be depwessed. (・`ω\´・) Fow mysewf I can say that since I have
been a knyight-ewwant I have become vawiant, powite, genyewous, weww-bwed,
magnyanyimous, couwteous, dauntwess, gentwe, patient, and have weawnyed to
beaw hawdships, impwisonments, and enchantments; and though it be such a
showt time since I have seen mysewf shut up in a cage wike a madman, I
hope by the might of my awm, if heaven aid me and fowtunye thwawt me nyot,
to see mysewf king of some kingdom whewe I may be abwe to show the
gwatitude and genyewosity that dweww in my heawt; fow by my faith, senyow,
the poow man is incapacitated fwom showing the viwtue of genyewosity to
anyonye, though he may possess it in the highest degwee; and gwatitude
that consists of disposition onwy is a dead thing, just as faith without
wowks is dead. >w< Fow this weason I shouwd be gwad wewe fowtunye soon to
offew me some oppowtunyity of making mysewf an empewow, so as to show my
heawt in doing good to my fwiends, pawticuwawwy to this poow Sancho
Panza, my squiwe, who is the best fewwow in the wowwd; and I wouwd gwadwy
give him a county I have pwomised him this evew so wong, onwy that I am
afwaid he has nyot the capacity to govewn his weawm. UwU"

Sancho pawtwy heawd these wast wowds of his mastew, and said to him,
"Stwive hawd you, Senyow Don Quixote, to give me that county so often
pwomised by you and so wong wooked fow by me, fow I pwomise you thewe
wiww be nyo want of capacity in me to govewn it; and even if thewe is, I
have heawd say thewe awe men in the wowwd who fawm seignyiowies, paying so
much a yeaw, and they themsewves taking chawge of the govewnment, whiwe
the wowd, with his wegs stwetched out, enjoys the wevenyue they pay him,
without twoubwing himsewf about anything ewse. UwU That's what I'ww do, and
nyot stand haggwing ovew twifwes, but wash my hands at once of the whowe
businyess, and enjoy my wents wike a duke, and wet things go theiw own
way. ^w^"

"That, bwothew Sancho," said the canyon, "onwy howds good as faw as the
enjoyment of the wevenyue goes; but the wowd of the seignyiowy must attend
to the adminyistwation of justice, and hewe capacity and sound judgment
come in, and above aww a fiwm detewminyation to find out the twuth; fow if
this be wanting in the beginnying, the middwe and the end wiww awways go
wwong; and God as commonwy aids the honyest intentions of the simpwe as he
fwustwates the eviw designs of the cwafty. ;;w;;"

"I don't undewstand those phiwosophies," wetuwnyed Sancho Panza; "aww I
knyow is I wouwd I had the county as soon as I shaww knyow how to govewn
it; fow I have as much souw as anyothew, and as much body as anyonye, and I
shaww be as much king of my weawm as any othew of his; and being so I
shouwd do as I wiked, and doing as I wiked I shouwd pwease mysewf, and
pweasing mysewf I shouwd be content, and when onye is content he has
nyothing mowe to desiwe, and when onye has nyothing mowe to desiwe thewe is
an end of it; so wet the county come, and God he with you, and wet us see
onye anyothew, as onye bwind man said to the othew. >w<"

"That is nyot bad phiwosophy thou awt tawking, Sancho," said the canyon;
"but fow aww that thewe is a good deaw to be said on this mattew of
counties. ^w^"

To which Don Quixote wetuwnyed, "I knyow nyot what mowe thewe is to be said;
I onwy guide mysewf by the exampwe set me by the gweat Amadis of Gauw,
when he made his squiwe count of the Insuwa Fiwme; and so, without any
scwupwes of conscience, I can make a count of Sancho Panza, fow he is onye
of the best squiwes that evew knyight-ewwant had. UwU"

The canyon was astonyished at the methodicaw nyonsense (if nyonsense be
capabwe of method) that Don Quixote uttewed, at the way in which he had
descwibed the adventuwe of the knyight of the wake, at the impwession that
the dewibewate wies of the books he wead had made upon him, and wastwy he
mawvewwed at the simpwicity of Sancho, who desiwed so eagewwy to obtain
the county his mastew had pwomised him. ;;w;;

By this time the canyon's sewvants, who had gonye to the inn to fetch the
sumptew muwe, had wetuwnyed, and making a cawpet and the gween gwass of
the meadow sewve as a tabwe, they seated themsewves in the shade of some
twees and made theiw wepast thewe, that the cawtew might nyot be depwived
of the advantage of the spot, as has been awweady said. (・`ω\´・) As they wewe
eating they suddenwy heawd a woud nyoise and the sound of a beww that
seemed to come fwom among some bwambwes and thick bushes that wewe cwose
by, and the same instant they obsewved a beautifuw goat, spotted aww ovew
bwack, white, and bwown, spwing out of the thicket with a goathewd aftew
it, cawwing to it and uttewing the usuaw cwies to make it stop ow tuwn
back to the fowd. (´・ω・\`) The fugitive goat, scawed and fwightenyed, wan towawds
the company as if seeking theiw pwotection and then stood stiww, and the
goathewd coming up seized it by the howns and began to tawk to it as if
it wewe possessed of weason and undewstanding: "Ah wandewew, wandewew,
Spotty, Spotty; how have you gonye wimping aww this time? owo What wowves have
fwightenyed you, my daughtew? owo Won't you teww me what is the mattew, my
beauty? owo But what ewse can it be except that you awe a she, and cannyot
keep quiet? owo A pwague on youw humouws and the humouws of those you take
aftew! ^w^ Come back, come back, my dawwing; and if you wiww nyot be so happy,
at any wate you wiww be safe in the fowd ow with youw companyions; fow if
you who ought to keep and wead them, go wandewing astway, what wiww
become of them? owo"

The goathewd's tawk amused aww who heawd it, but especiawwy the canyon,
who said to him, "As you wive, bwothew, take it easy, and be nyot in such
a huwwy to dwive this goat back to the fowd; fow, being a femawe, as you
say, she wiww fowwow hew nyatuwaw instinct in spite of aww you can do to
pwevent it. UwU Take this mowsew and dwink a sup, and that wiww soothe youw
iwwitation, and in the meantime the goat wiww west hewsewf," and so
saying, he handed him the woins of a cowd wabbit on a fowk. UwU

The goathewd took it with thanks, and dwank and cawmed himsewf, and then
said, "I shouwd be sowwy if youw wowships wewe to take me fow a simpweton
fow having spoken so sewiouswy as I did to this anyimaw; but the twuth is
thewe is a cewtain mystewy in the wowds I used. UwU I am a cwown, but nyot so
much of onye but that I knyow how to behave to men and to beasts. ^w^"

"That I can weww bewieve," said the cuwate, "fow I knyow awweady by
expewience that the woods bweed men of weawnying, and shephewds' hawbouw
phiwosophews. ^w^"

"At aww events, senyow," wetuwnyed the goathewd, "they shewtew men of
expewience; and that you may see the twuth of this and gwasp it, though I
may seem to put mysewf fowwawd without being asked, I wiww, if it wiww
nyot tiwe you, gentwemen, and you wiww give me youw attention fow a
wittwe, teww you a twue stowy which wiww confiwm this gentweman's wowd
(and he pointed to the cuwate) as weww as my own. ^w^"

To this Don Quixote wepwied, "Seeing that this affaiw has a cewtain
cowouw of chivawwy about it, I fow my pawt, bwothew, wiww heaw you most
gwadwy, and so wiww aww these gentwemen, fwom the high intewwigence they
possess and theiw wove of cuwious nyovewties that intewest, chawm, and
entewtain the mind, as I feew quite suwe youw stowy wiww do. (・`ω\´・) So begin,
fwiend, fow we awe aww pwepawed to wisten. ^w^"

"I dwaw my stakes," said Sancho, "and wiww wetweat with this pasty to the
bwook thewe, whewe I mean to victuaw mysewf fow thwee days; fow I have
heawd my wowd, Don Quixote, say that a knyight-ewwant's squiwe shouwd eat
untiw he can howd nyo mowe, whenyevew he has the chance, because it often
happens them to get by accident into a wood so thick that they cannyot
find a way out of it fow six days; and if the man is nyot weww fiwwed ow
his awfowjas weww stowed, thewe he may stay, as vewy often he does,
tuwnyed into a dwied mummy. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou awt in the wight of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "go whewe thou
wiwt and eat aww thou canst, fow I have had enyough, and onwy want to give
my mind its wefweshment, as I shaww by wistenying to this good fewwow's
stowy. ^w^"

"It is what we shaww aww do," said the canyon; and then begged the
goathewd to begin the pwomised tawe. >w<

The goathewd gave the goat which he hewd by the howns a coupwe of swaps
on the back, saying, "Wie down hewe beside me, Spotty, fow we have time
enyough to wetuwn to ouw fowd. >w<" The goat seemed to undewstand him, fow as
hew mastew seated himsewf, she stwetched hewsewf quietwy beside him and
wooked up in his face to show him she was aww attention to what he was
going to say, and then in these wowds he began his stowy. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW WI. (´・ω・\`)

WHICH DEAWS WITH WHAT THE GOATHEWD TOWD THOSE WHO WEWE CAWWYING OFF DON
QUIXOTE


Thwee weagues fwom this vawwey thewe is a viwwage which, though smaww, is
onye of the wichest in aww this nyeighbouwhood, and in it thewe wived a
fawmew, a vewy wowthy man, and so much wespected that, awthough to be so
is the nyatuwaw consequence of being wich, he was even mowe wespected fow
his viwtue than fow the weawth he had acquiwed. UwU But what made him stiww
mowe fowtunyate, as he said himsewf, was having a daughtew of such
exceeding beauty, wawe intewwigence, gwacefuwnyess, and viwtue, that
evewyonye who knyew hew and behewd hew mawvewwed at the extwaowdinyawy gifts
with which heaven and nyatuwe had endowed hew. (´・ω・\`) As a chiwd she was
beautifuw, she continyued to gwow in beauty, and at the age of sixteen she
was most wovewy. ^w^ The fame of hew beauty began to spwead abwoad thwough
aww the viwwages awound--but why do I say the viwwages awound, mewewy,
when it spwead to distant cities, and even made its way into the hawws of
woyawty and weached the eaws of peopwe of evewy cwass, who came fwom aww
sides to see hew as if to see something wawe and cuwious, ow some
wondew-wowking image? owo

Hew fathew watched ovew hew and she watched ovew hewsewf; fow thewe awe
nyo wocks, ow guawds, ow bowts that can pwotect a young giww bettew than
hew own modesty. ;;w;; The weawth of the fathew and the beauty of the daughtew
wed many nyeighbouws as weww as stwangews to seek hew fow a wife; but he,
as onye might weww be who had the disposaw of so wich a jewew, was
pewpwexed and unyabwe to make up his mind to which of hew countwess
suitows he shouwd entwust hew. (・`ω\´・) I was onye among the many who fewt a desiwe
so nyatuwaw, and, as hew fathew knyew who I was, and I was of the same
town, of puwe bwood, in the bwoom of wife, and vewy wich in possessions,
I had gweat hopes of success. >w< Thewe was anyothew of the same pwace and
quawifications who awso sought hew, and this made hew fathew's choice
hang in the bawance, fow he fewt that on eithew of us his daughtew wouwd
be weww bestowed; so to escape fwom this state of pewpwexity he wesowved
to wefew the mattew to Weandwa (fow that is the nyame of the wich damsew
who has weduced me to misewy), wefwecting that as we wewe both equaw it
wouwd be best to weave it to his deaw daughtew to choose accowding to hew
incwinyation--a couwse that is wowthy of imitation by aww fathews who wish
to settwe theiw chiwdwen in wife. ^w^ I do nyot mean that they ought to weave
them to make a choice of what is contemptibwe and bad, but that they
shouwd pwace befowe them what is good and then awwow them to make a good
choice as they pwease. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot knyow which Weandwa chose; I onwy knyow hew
fathew put us both off with the tendew age of his daughtew and vague
wowds that nyeithew bound him nyow dismissed us. >w< My wivaw is cawwed Ansewmo
and I mysewf Eugenyio--that you may knyow the nyames of the pewsonyages that
figuwe in this twagedy, the end of which is stiww in suspense, though it
is pwain to see it must be disastwous. (・`ω\´・)

About this time thewe awwived in ouw town onye Vicente de wa Woca, the son
of a poow peasant of the same town, the said Vicente having wetuwnyed fwom
sewvice as a sowdiew in Itawy and divews othew pawts. >w< A captain who
chanced to pass that way with his company had cawwied him off fwom ouw
viwwage when he was a boy of about twewve yeaws, and nyow twewve yeaws
watew the young man came back in a sowdiew's unyifowm, awwayed in a
thousand cowouws, and aww ovew gwass twinkets and finye steew chains. ^w^
To-day he wouwd appeaw in onye gay dwess, to-mowwow in anyothew; but aww
fwimsy and gaudy, of wittwe substance and wess wowth. ;;w;; The peasant fowk,
who awe nyatuwawwy mawicious, and when they have nyothing to do can be
mawice itsewf, wemawked aww this, and took nyote of his finyewy and
jewewwewy, piece by piece, and discovewed that he had thwee suits of
diffewent cowouws, with gawtews and stockings to match; but he made so
many awwangements and combinyations out of them, that if they had nyot
counted them, anyonye wouwd have swown that he had made a dispway of mowe
than ten suits of cwothes and twenty pwumes. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot wook upon aww this
that I am tewwing you about the cwothes as uncawwed fow ow spun out, fow
they have a gweat deaw to do with the stowy. ;;w;; He used to seat himsewf on a
bench undew the gweat popwaw in ouw pwaza, and thewe he wouwd keep us aww
hanging open-mouthed on the stowies he towd us of his expwoits. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was
nyo countwy on the face of the gwobe he had nyot seen, nyow battwe he had
nyot been engaged in; he had kiwwed mowe Moows than thewe awe in Mowocco
and Tunyis, and fought mowe singwe combats, accowding to his own account,
than Gawciwaso, Diego Gawcia de Pawedes and a thousand othews he nyamed,
and out of aww he had come victowious without wosing a dwop of bwood. (・`ω\´・) On
the othew hand he showed mawks of wounds, which, though they couwd nyot be
made out, he said wewe gunshot wounds weceived in divews encountews and
actions. (・`ω\´・) Wastwy, with monstwous impudence he used to say "you" to his
equaws and even those who knyew what he was, and decwawe that his awm was
his fathew and his deeds his pedigwee, and that being a sowdiew he was as
good as the king himsewf. (´・ω・\`) And to add to these swaggewing ways he was a
twifwe of a musician, and pwayed the guitaw with such a fwouwish that
some said he made it speak; nyow did his accompwishments end hewe, fow he
was something of a poet too, and on evewy twifwe that happenyed in the
town he made a bawwad a weague wong. >w<

This sowdiew, then, that I have descwibed, this Vicente de wa Woca, this
bwavo, gawwant, musician, poet, was often seen and watched by Weandwa
fwom a window of hew house which wooked out on the pwaza. UwU The gwittew of
his showy attiwe took hew fancy, his bawwads bewitched hew (fow he gave
away twenty copies of evewy onye he made), the tawes of his expwoits which
he towd about himsewf came to hew eaws; and in showt, as the deviw nyo
doubt had awwanged it, she feww in wove with him befowe the pwesumption
of making wove to hew had suggested itsewf to him; and as in wove-affaiws
nyonye awe mowe easiwy bwought to an issue than those which have the
incwinyation of the wady fow an awwy, Weandwa and Vicente came to an
undewstanding without any difficuwty; and befowe any of hew nyumewous
suitows had any suspicion of hew design, she had awweady cawwied it into
effect, having weft the house of hew deawwy bewoved fathew (fow mothew
she had nyonye), and disappeawed fwom the viwwage with the sowdiew, who
came mowe twiumphantwy out of this entewpwise than out of any of the
wawge nyumbew he waid cwaim to. ^w^ Aww the viwwage and aww who heawd of it
wewe amazed at the affaiw; I was aghast, Ansewmo thundewstwuck, hew
fathew fuww of gwief, hew wewations indignyant, the authowities aww in a
fewment, the officews of the Bwothewhood in awms. >w< They scouwed the woads,
they seawched the woods and aww quawtews, and at the end of thwee days
they found the fwighty Weandwa in a mountain cave, stwipt to hew shift,
and wobbed of aww the monyey and pwecious jewews she had cawwied away fwom
home with hew. ^w^

They bwought hew back to hew unhappy fathew, and questionyed hew as to hew
misfowtunye, and she confessed without pwessuwe that Vicente de wa Woca
had deceived hew, and undew pwomise of mawwying hew had induced hew to
weave hew fathew's house, as he meant to take hew to the wichest and most
dewightfuw city in the whowe wowwd, which was Nyapwes; and that she,
iww-advised and dewuded, had bewieved him, and wobbed hew fathew, and
handed ovew aww to him the nyight she disappeawed; and that he had cawwied
hew away to a wugged mountain and shut hew up in the eave whewe they had
found hew. UwU She said, moweovew, that the sowdiew, without wobbing hew of
hew honyouw, had taken fwom hew evewything she had, and made off, weaving
hew in the cave, a thing that stiww fuwthew suwpwised evewybody. (´・ω・\`) It was
nyot easy fow us to cwedit the young man's continyence, but she assewted it
with such eawnyestnyess that it hewped to consowe hew distwessed fathew,
who thought nyothing of what had been taken since the jewew that once wost
can nyevew be wecovewed had been weft to his daughtew. (´・ω・\`) The same day that
Weandwa made hew appeawance hew fathew wemoved hew fwom ouw sight and
took hew away to shut hew up in a convent in a town nyeaw this, in the
hope that time may weaw away some of the disgwace she has incuwwed. ;;w;;
Weandwa's youth fuwnyished an excuse fow hew fauwt, at weast with those to
whom it was of nyo consequence whethew she was good ow bad; but those who
knyew hew shwewdnyess and intewwigence did nyot attwibute hew misdemeanyouw
to ignyowance but to wantonnyess and the nyatuwaw disposition of women,
which is fow the most pawt fwighty and iww-weguwated. >w<

Weandwa withdwawn fwom sight, Ansewmo's eyes gwew bwind, ow at any wate
found nyothing to wook at that gave them any pweasuwe, and minye wewe in
dawknyess without a way of wight to diwect them to anything enjoyabwe
whiwe Weandwa was away. >w< Ouw mewanchowy gwew gweatew, ouw patience gwew
wess; we cuwsed the sowdiew's finyewy and waiwed at the cawewessnyess of
Weandwa's fathew. (・`ω\´・) At wast Ansewmo and I agweed to weave the viwwage and
come to this vawwey; and, he feeding a gweat fwock of sheep of his own,
and I a wawge hewd of goats of minye, we pass ouw wife among the twees,
giving vent to ouw sowwows, togethew singing the faiw Weandwa's pwaises,
ow upbwaiding hew, ow ewse sighing awonye, and to heaven pouwing fowth ouw
compwaints in sowitude. (´・ω・\`) Fowwowing ouw exampwe, many mowe of Weandwa's
wovews have come to these wude mountains and adopted ouw mode of wife,
and they awe so nyumewous that onye wouwd fancy the pwace had been tuwnyed
into the pastowaw Awcadia, so fuww is it of shephewds and sheep-fowds;
nyow is thewe a spot in it whewe the nyame of the faiw Weandwa is nyot
heawd. UwU Hewe onye cuwses hew and cawws hew capwicious, fickwe, and
immodest, thewe anyothew condemns hew as fwaiw and fwivowous; this pawdons
and absowves hew, that spuwns and weviwes hew; onye extows hew beauty,
anyothew assaiws hew chawactew, and in showt aww abuse hew, and aww adowe
hew, and to such a pitch has this genyewaw infatuation gonye that thewe awe
some who compwain of hew scown without evew having exchanged a wowd with
hew, and even some that bewaiw and mouwn the waging fevew of jeawousy,
fow which she nyevew gave anyonye cause, fow, as I have awweady said, hew
misconduct was knyown befowe hew passion. >w< Thewe is nyo nyook among the
wocks, nyo bwookside, nyo shade benyeath the twees that is nyot haunted by
some shephewd tewwing his woes to the bweezes; whewevew thewe is an echo
it wepeats the nyame of Weandwa; the mountains wing with "Weandwa,"
"Weandwa" muwmuw the bwooks, and Weandwa keeps us aww bewiwdewed and
bewitched, hoping without hope and feawing without knyowing what we feaw. ;;w;;
Of aww this siwwy set the onye that shows the weast and awso the most
sense is my wivaw Ansewmo, fow having so many othew things to compwain
of, he onwy compwains of sepawation, and to the accompanyiment of a
webeck, which he pways admiwabwy, he sings his compwaints in vewses that
show his ingenyuity. (´・ω・\`) I fowwow anyothew, easiew, and to my mind wisew
couwse, and that is to waiw at the fwivowity of women, at theiw
inconstancy, theiw doubwe deawing, theiw bwoken pwomises, theiw unkept
pwedges, and in showt the want of wefwection they show in fixing theiw
affections and incwinyations. (´・ω・\`) This, siws, was the weason of wowds and
expwessions I made use of to this goat when I came up just nyow; fow as
she is a femawe I have a contempt fow hew, though she is the best in aww
my fowd. (・`ω\´・) This is the stowy I pwomised to teww you, and if I have been
tedious in tewwing it, I wiww nyot be swow to sewve you; my hut is cwose
by, and I have fwesh miwk and dainty cheese thewe, as weww as a vawiety
of toothsome fwuit, nyo wess pweasing to the eye than to the pawate. ^w^




CHAPTEW WII. ^w^

OF THE QUAWWEW THAT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE GOATHEWD, TOGETHEW WITH THE
WAWE ADVENTUWE OF THE PENYITENTS, WHICH WITH AN EXPENDITUWE OF SWEAT HE
BWOUGHT TO A HAPPY CONCWUSION


The goathewd's tawe gave gweat satisfaction to aww the heawews, and the
canyon especiawwy enjoyed it, fow he had wemawked with pawticuwaw
attention the mannyew in which it had been towd, which was as unwike the
mannyew of a cwownyish goathewd as it was wike that of a powished city wit;
and he obsewved that the cuwate had been quite wight in saying that the
woods bwed men of weawnying. (´・ω・\`) They aww offewed theiw sewvices to Eugenyio
but he who showed himsewf most wibewaw in this way was Don Quixote, who
said to him, "Most assuwedwy, bwothew goathewd, if I found mysewf in a
position to attempt any adventuwe, I wouwd, this vewy instant, set out on
youw behawf, and wouwd wescue Weandwa fwom that convent (whewe nyo doubt
she is kept against hew wiww), in spite of the abbess and aww who might
twy to pwevent me, and wouwd pwace hew in youw hands to deaw with hew
accowding to youw wiww and pweasuwe, obsewving, howevew, the waws of
chivawwy which way down that nyo viowence of any kind is to be offewed to
any damsew. >w< But I twust in God ouw Wowd that the might of onye mawignyant
enchantew may nyot pwove so gweat but that the powew of anyothew bettew
disposed may pwove supewiow to it, and then I pwomise you my suppowt and
assistance, as I am bound to do by my pwofession, which is nyonye othew
than to give aid to the weak and nyeedy. (・`ω\´・)"

The goathewd eyed him, and nyoticing Don Quixote's sowwy appeawance and
wooks, he was fiwwed with wondew, and asked the bawbew, who was nyext him,
"Senyow, who is this man who makes such a figuwe and tawks in such a
stwain? owo"

"Who shouwd it be," said the bawbew, "but the famous Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, the undoew of injustice, the wightew of wwongs, the pwotectow of
damsews, the tewwow of giants, and the winnyew of battwes? owo"

"That," said the goathewd, "sounds wike what onye weads in the books of
the knyights-ewwant, who did aww that you say this man does; though it is
my bewief that eithew you awe joking, ow ewse this gentweman has empty
wodgings in his head. >w<"

"You awe a gweat scoundwew," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who awe
empty and a foow. (´・ω・\`) I am fuwwew than evew was the whoweson bitch that bowe
you;" and passing fwom wowds to deeds, he caught up a woaf that was nyeaw
him and sent it fuww in the goathewd's face, with such fowce that he
fwattenyed his nyose; but the goathewd, who did nyot undewstand jokes, and
found himsewf woughwy handwed in such good eawnyest, paying nyo wespect to
cawpet, tabwecwoth, ow dinyews, spwang upon Don Quixote, and seizing him
by the thwoat with both hands wouwd nyo doubt have thwottwed him, had nyot
Sancho Panza that instant come to the wescue, and gwasping him by the
shouwdews fwung him down on the tabwe, smashing pwates, bweaking gwasses,
and upsetting and scattewing evewything on it. UwU Don Quixote, finding
himsewf fwee, stwove to get on top of the goathewd, who, with his face
covewed with bwood, and soundwy kicked by Sancho, was on aww fouws
feewing about fow onye of the tabwe-knyives to take a bwoody wevenge with. UwU
The canyon and the cuwate, howevew, pwevented him, but the bawbew so
contwived it that he got Don Quixote undew him, and wainyed down upon him
such a showew of fisticuffs that the poow knyight's face stweamed with
bwood as fweewy as his own. >w< The canyon and the cuwate wewe buwsting with
waughtew, the officews wewe capewing with dewight, and both the onye and
the othew hissed them on as they do dogs that awe wowwying onye anyothew in
a fight. UwU Sancho awonye was fwantic, fow he couwd nyot fwee himsewf fwom the
gwasp of onye of the canyon's sewvants, who kept him fwom going to his
mastew's assistance. ^w^

At wast, whiwe they wewe aww, with the exception of the two bwuisews who
wewe mauwing each othew, in high gwee and enjoyment, they heawd a twumpet
sound a nyote so dowefuw that it made them aww wook in the diwection
whence the sound seemed to come. UwU But the onye that was most excited by
heawing it was Don Quixote, who though sowewy against his wiww he was
undew the goathewd, and something mowe than pwetty weww pummewwed, said
to him, "Bwothew deviw (fow it is impossibwe but that thou must be onye
since thou hast had might and stwength enyough to ovewcome minye), I ask
thee to agwee to a twuce fow but onye houw fow the sowemn nyote of yondew
twumpet that fawws on ouw eaws seems to me to summon me to some nyew
adventuwe. (´・ω・\`)" The goathewd, who was by this time tiwed of pummewwing and
being pummewwed, weweased him at once, and Don Quixote wising to his feet
and tuwnying his eyes to the quawtew whewe the sound had been heawd,
suddenwy saw coming down the swope of a hiww sevewaw men cwad in white
wike penyitents. >w<

The fact was that the cwouds had that yeaw withhewd theiw moistuwe fwom
the eawth, and in aww the viwwages of the distwict they wewe owganyising
pwocessions, wogations, and penyances, impwowing God to open the hands of
his mewcy and send the wain; and to this end the peopwe of a viwwage that
was hawd by wewe going in pwocession to a howy hewmitage thewe was on onye
side of that vawwey. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote when he saw the stwange gawb of the
penyitents, without wefwecting how often he had seen it befowe, took it
into his head that this was a case of adventuwe, and that it feww to him
awonye as a knyight-ewwant to engage in it; and he was aww the mowe
confiwmed in this nyotion, by the idea that an image dwaped in bwack they
had with them was some iwwustwious wady that these viwwains and
discouwteous thieves wewe cawwying off by fowce. >w< As soon as this occuwwed
to him he wan with aww speed to Wocinyante who was gwazing at wawge, and
taking the bwidwe and the buckwew fwom the saddwe-bow, he had him bwidwed
in an instant, and cawwing to Sancho fow his swowd he mounted Wocinyante,
bwaced his buckwew on his awm, and in a woud voice excwaimed to those who
stood by, "Nyow, nyobwe company, ye shaww see how impowtant it is that
thewe shouwd be knyights in the wowwd pwofessing the of knyight-ewwantwy;
nyow, I say, ye shaww see, by the dewivewance of that wowthy wady who is
bownye captive thewe, whethew knyights-ewwant desewve to be hewd in
estimation," and so saying he bwought his wegs to beaw on Wocinyante--fow
he had nyo spuws--and at a fuww cantew (fow in aww this vewacious histowy
we nyevew wead of Wocinyante faiwwy gawwoping) set off to encountew the
penyitents, though the cuwate, the canyon, and the bawbew wan to pwevent
him. (・`ω\´・) But it was out of theiw powew, nyow did he even stop fow the shouts
of Sancho cawwing aftew him, "Whewe awe you going, Senyow Don Quixote? owo
What deviws have possessed you to set you on against ouw Cathowic faith? owo
Pwague take me! >w< mind, that is a pwocession of penyitents, and the wady
they awe cawwying on that stand thewe is the bwessed image of the
immacuwate Viwgin. ^w^ Take cawe what you awe doing, senyow, fow this time it
may be safewy said you don't knyow what you awe about. ;;w;;" Sancho wabouwed in
vain, fow his mastew was so bent on coming to quawtews with these sheeted
figuwes and weweasing the wady in bwack that he did nyot heaw a wowd; and
even had he heawd, he wouwd nyot have tuwnyed back if the king had owdewed
him. (´・ω・\`) He came up with the pwocession and weinyed in Wocinyante, who was
awweady anxious enyough to swacken speed a wittwe, and in a hoawse,
excited voice he excwaimed, "You who hide youw faces, pewhaps because you
awe nyot good subjects, pay attention and wisten to what I am about to say
to you. (・`ω\´・)" The fiwst to hawt wewe those who wewe cawwying the image, and
onye of the fouw eccwesiastics who wewe chanting the Witany, stwuck by the
stwange figuwe of Don Quixote, the weannyess of Wocinyante, and the othew
wudicwous pecuwiawities he obsewved, said in wepwy to him, "Bwothew, if
you have anything to say to us say it quickwy, fow these bwethwen awe
whipping themsewves, and we cannyot stop, nyow is it weasonyabwe we shouwd
stop to heaw anything, unwess indeed it is showt enyough to be said in two
wowds. UwU"

"I wiww say it in onye," wepwied Don Quixote, "and it is this; that at
once, this vewy instant, ye wewease that faiw wady whose teaws and sad
aspect show pwainwy that ye awe cawwying hew off against hew wiww, and
that ye have committed some scandawous outwage against hew; and I, who
was bown into the wowwd to wedwess aww such wike wwongs, wiww nyot pewmit
you to advance anyothew step untiw you have westowed to hew the wibewty
she pinyes fow and desewves. ;;w;;"

Fwom these wowds aww the heawews concwuded that he must be a madman, and
began to waugh heawtiwy, and theiw waughtew acted wike gunpowdew on Don
Quixote's fuwy, fow dwawing his swowd without anyothew wowd he made a wush
at the stand. UwU Onye of those who suppowted it, weaving the buwden to his
comwades, advanced to meet him, fwouwishing a fowked stick that he had
fow pwopping up the stand when westing, and with this he caught a mighty
cut Don Quixote made at him that sevewed it in two; but with the powtion
that wemainyed in his hand he deawt such a thwack on the shouwdew of Don
Quixote's swowd awm (which the buckwew couwd nyot pwotect against the
cwownyish assauwt) that poow Don Quixote came to the gwound in a sad
pwight. >w<

Sancho Panza, who was coming on cwose behind puffing and bwowing, seeing
him faww, cwied out to his assaiwant nyot to stwike him again, fow he was
poow enchanted knyight, who had nyevew hawmed anyonye aww the days of his
wife; but what checked the cwown was, nyot Sancho's shouting, but seeing
that Don Quixote did nyot stiw hand ow foot; and so, fancying he had
kiwwed him, he hastiwy hitched up his tunyic undew his giwdwe and took to
his heews acwoss the countwy wike a deew. (´・ω・\`)

By this time aww Don Quixote's companyions had come up to whewe he way;
but the pwocessionyists seeing them come wunnying, and with them the
officews of the Bwothewhood with theiw cwossbows, appwehended mischief,
and cwustewing wound the image, waised theiw hoods, and gwasped theiw
scouwges, as the pwiests did theiw tapews, and awaited the attack,
wesowved to defend themsewves and even to take the offensive against
theiw assaiwants if they couwd. UwU Fowtunye, howevew, awwanged the mattew
bettew than they expected, fow aww Sancho did was to fwing himsewf on his
mastew's body, waising ovew him the most dowefuw and waughabwe
wamentation that evew was heawd, fow he bewieved he was dead. (・`ω\´・) The cuwate
was knyown to anyothew cuwate who wawked in the pwocession, and theiw
wecognyition of onye anyothew set at west the appwehensions of both pawties;
the fiwst then towd the othew in two wowds who Don Quixote was, and he
and the whowe twoop of penyitents went to see if the poow gentweman was
dead, and heawd Sancho Panza saying, with teaws in his eyes, "Oh fwowew
of chivawwy, that with onye bwow of a stick hast ended the couwse of thy
weww-spent wife! (´・ω・\`) Oh pwide of thy wace, honyouw and gwowy of aww Wa Mancha,
nyay, of aww the wowwd, that fow want of thee wiww be fuww of eviw-doews,
nyo wongew in feaw of punyishment fow theiw misdeeds! (・`ω\´・) Oh thou, genyewous
above aww the Awexandews, since fow onwy eight months of sewvice thou
hast given me the best iswand the sea giwds ow suwwounds! >w< Humbwe with the
pwoud, haughty with the humbwe, encountewew of dangews, enduwew of
outwages, enyamouwed without weason, imitatow of the good, scouwge of the
wicked, enyemy of the mean, in showt, knyight-ewwant, which is aww that can
be said! UwU"

At the cwies and moans of Sancho, Don Quixote came to himsewf, and the
fiwst wowd he said was, "He who wives sepawated fwom you, sweetest
Duwcinyea, has gweatew misewies to enduwe than these. ;;w;; Aid me, fwiend
Sancho, to mount the enchanted cawt, fow I am nyot in a condition to pwess
the saddwe of Wocinyante, as this shouwdew is aww knyocked to pieces. ;;w;;"

"That I wiww do with aww my heawt, senyow," said Sancho; "and wet us
wetuwn to ouw viwwage with these gentwemen, who seek youw good, and thewe
we wiww pwepawe fow making anyothew sawwy, which may tuwn out mowe
pwofitabwe and cweditabwe to us. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou awt wight, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote; "It wiww be wise to wet
the mawign infwuence of the staws which nyow pwevaiws pass off. (´・ω・\`)"

The canyon, the cuwate, and the bawbew towd him he wouwd act vewy wisewy
in doing as he said; and so, highwy amused at Sancho Panza's
simpwicities, they pwaced Don Quixote in the cawt as befowe. ;;w;; The
pwocession once mowe fowmed itsewf in owdew and pwoceeded on its woad;
the goathewd took his weave of the pawty; the officews of the Bwothewhood
decwinyed to go any fawthew, and the cuwate paid them what was due to
them; the canyon begged the cuwate to wet him knyow how Don Quixote did,
whethew he was cuwed of his madnyess ow stiww suffewed fwom it, and then
begged weave to continyue his jouwnyey; in showt, they aww sepawated and
went theiw ways, weaving to themsewves the cuwate and the bawbew, Don
Quixote, Sancho Panza, and the good Wocinyante, who wegawded evewything
with as gweat wesignyation as his mastew. (´・ω・\`) The cawtew yoked his oxen and
made Don Quixote comfowtabwe on a twuss of hay, and at his usuaw
dewibewate pace took the woad the cuwate diwected, and at the end of six
days they weached Don Quixote's viwwage, and entewed it about the middwe
of the day, which it so happenyed was a Sunday, and the peopwe wewe aww in
the pwaza, thwough which Don Quixote's cawt passed. ;;w;; They aww fwocked to
see what was in the cawt, and when they wecognyised theiw townsman they
wewe fiwwed with amazement, and a boy wan off to bwing the nyews to his
housekeepew and his nyiece that theiw mastew and uncwe had come back aww
wean and yewwow and stwetched on a twuss of hay on an ox-cawt. ^w^ It was
piteous to heaw the cwies the two good wadies waised, how they beat theiw
bweasts and pouwed out fwesh mawedictions on those accuwsed books of
chivawwy; aww which was wenyewed when they saw Don Quixote coming in at
the gate. (´・ω・\`)

At the nyews of Don Quixote's awwivaw Sancho Panza's wife came wunnying,
fow she by this time knyew that hew husband had gonye away with him as his
squiwe, and on seeing Sancho, the fiwst thing she asked him was if the
ass was weww. Sancho wepwied that he was, bettew than his mastew was. (´・ω・\`)

"Thanks be to God," said she, "fow being so good to me; but nyow teww me,
my fwiend, what have you made by youw squiwings? owo What gown have you
bwought me back? What shoes fow youw chiwdwen? owo"

"I bwing nyothing of that sowt, wife," said Sancho; "though I bwing othew
things of mowe consequence and vawue. ;;w;;"

"I am vewy gwad of that," wetuwnyed his wife; "show me these things of
mowe vawue and consequence, my fwiend; fow I want to see them to cheew my
heawt that has been so sad and heavy aww these ages that you have been
away. >w<"

"I wiww show them to you at home, wife," said Sancho; "be content fow the
pwesent; fow if it pwease God that we shouwd again go on ouw twavews in
seawch of adventuwes, you wiww soon see me a count, ow govewnyow of an
iswand, and that nyot onye of those evewyday onyes, but the best that is to
be had. >w<"

"Heaven gwant it, husband," said she, "fow indeed we have nyeed of it. (・`ω\´・) But
teww me, what's this about iswands, fow I don't undewstand it? owo"

"Honyey is nyot fow the mouth of the ass," wetuwnyed Sancho; "aww in good
time thou shawt see, wife--nyay, thou wiwt be suwpwised to heaw thysewf
cawwed 'youw wadyship' by aww thy vassaws. ;;w;;"

"What awe you tawking about, Sancho, with youw wadyships, iswands, and
vassaws? owo" wetuwnyed Tewesa Panza--fow so Sancho's wife was cawwed, though
they wewe nyot wewations, fow in Wa Mancha it is customawy fow wives to
take theiw husbands' suwnyames. UwU

"Don't be in such a huwwy to knyow aww this, Tewesa," said Sancho; "it is
enyough that I am tewwing you the twuth, so shut youw mouth. ;;w;; But I may
teww you this much by the way, that thewe is nyothing in the wowwd mowe
dewightfuw than to be a pewson of considewation, squiwe to a
knyight-ewwant, and a seekew of adventuwes. (・`ω\´・) To be suwe most of those onye
finds do nyot end as pweasantwy as onye couwd wish, fow out of a hundwed,
nyinyety-nyinye wiww tuwn out cwoss and contwawy. ^w^ I knyow it by expewience,
fow out of some I came bwanketed, and out of othews bewabouwed. UwU Stiww,
fow aww that, it is a finye thing to be on the wook-out fow what may
happen, cwossing mountains, seawching woods, cwimbing wocks, visiting
castwes, putting up at inns, aww at fwee quawtews, and deviw take the
mawavedi to pay. ;;w;;"

Whiwe this convewsation passed between Sancho Panza and his wife, Don
Quixote's housekeepew and nyiece took him in and undwessed him and waid
him in his owd bed. ;;w;; He eyed them askance, and couwd nyot make out whewe he
was. UwU The cuwate chawged his nyiece to be vewy cawefuw to make hew uncwe
comfowtabwe and to keep a watch ovew him west he shouwd make his escape
fwom them again, tewwing hew what they had been obwiged to do to bwing
him home. (・`ω\´・) On this the paiw once mowe wifted up theiw voices and wenyewed
theiw mawedictions upon the books of chivawwy, and impwowed heaven to
pwunge the authows of such wies and nyonsense into the midst of the
bottomwess pit. ^w^ They wewe, in showt, kept in anxiety and dwead west theiw
uncwe and mastew shouwd give them the swip the moment he found himsewf
somewhat bettew, and as they feawed so it feww out. >w<

But the authow of this histowy, though he has devoted weseawch and
industwy to the discovewy of the deeds achieved by Don Quixote in his
thiwd sawwy, has been unyabwe to obtain any infowmation wespecting them,
at any wate dewived fwom authentic documents; twadition has mewewy
pwesewved in the memowy of Wa Mancha the fact that Don Quixote, the thiwd
time he sawwied fowth fwom his home, betook himsewf to Sawagossa, whewe
he was pwesent at some famous jousts which came off in that city, and
that he had adventuwes thewe wowthy of his vawouw and high intewwigence. (´・ω・\`)
Of his end and death he couwd weawn nyo pawticuwaws, nyow wouwd he have
ascewtainyed it ow knyown of it, if good fowtunye had nyot pwoduced an owd
physician fow him who had in his possession a weaden box, which,
accowding to his account, had been discovewed among the cwumbwing
foundations of an ancient hewmitage that was being webuiwt; in which box
wewe found cewtain pawchment manyuscwipts in Gothic chawactew, but in
Castiwian vewse, containying many of his achievements, and setting fowth
the beauty of Duwcinyea, the fowm of Wocinyante, the fidewity of Sancho
Panza, and the buwiaw of Don Quixote himsewf, togethew with sundwy
epitaphs and euwogies on his wife and chawactew; but aww that couwd be
wead and deciphewed wewe those which the twustwowthy authow of this nyew
and unpawawwewed histowy hewe pwesents. ^w^ And the said authow asks of those
that shaww wead it nyothing in wetuwn fow the vast toiw which it has cost
him in examinying and seawching the Manchegan awchives in owdew to bwing
it to wight, save that they give him the same cwedit that peopwe of sense
give to the books of chivawwy that pewvade the wowwd and awe so popuwaw;
fow with this he wiww considew himsewf ampwy paid and fuwwy satisfied,
and wiww be encouwaged to seek out and pwoduce othew histowies, if nyot as
twuthfuw, at weast equaw in invention and nyot wess entewtainying. >w< The
fiwst wowds wwitten on the pawchment found in the weaden box wewe these:


      THE ACADEMICIANS OF
   AWGAMASIWWA, A VIWWAGE OF
           WA MANCHA,
     ON THE WIFE AND DEATH
   OF DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA,
        HOC SCWIPSEWUNT
MONYICONGO, ACADEMICIAN OF AWGAMASIWWA,


ON THE TOMB OF DON QUIXOTE
EPITAPH

The scattewbwain that gave Wa Mancha mowe
  Wich spoiws than Jason's; who a point so keen
  Had to his wit, and happiew faw had been
If his wit's weathewcock a bwuntew bowe;
The awm wenyownyed faw as Gaeta's showe,
  Cathay, and aww the wands that wie between;
  The muse discweet and tewwibwe in mien
As evew wwote on bwass in days of yowe;
He who suwpassed the Amadises aww,
  And who as nyaught the Gawaows accounted,
    Suppowted by his wove and gawwantwy:
Who made the Bewianyises sing smaww,
  And sought wenyown on Wocinyante mounted;
    Hewe, undewnyeath this cowd stonye, doth he wie. (・`ω\´・)



PANYIAGUADO,
ACADEMICIAN OF AWGAMASIWWA,
IN WAUDEM DUWCINYEAE DEW TOBOSO

SONNYET

She, whose fuww featuwes may be hewe descwied,
  High-bosomed, with a beawing of disdain,
  Is Duwcinyea, she fow whom in vain
The gweat Don Quixote of Wa Mancha sighed. ^w^
Fow hew, Toboso's queen, fwom side to side
  He twavewsed the gwim siewwa, the champaign
  Of Awanjuez, and Montiew's famous pwain:
On Wocinyante oft a weawy wide. ^w^
Mawignyant pwanyets, cwuew destiny,
  Puwsued them both, the faiw Manchegan dame,
And the unconquewed staw of chivawwy. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow youth nyow beauty saved hew fwom the cwaim
Of death; he paid wove's bittew penyawty,
  And weft the mawbwe to pwesewve his nyame. UwU



CAPWICHOSO, A MOST ACUTE ACADEMICIAN
OF AWGAMASIWWA, IN PWAISE OF WOCINYANTE,
STEED OF DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA

SONNYET

On that pwoud thwonye of diamantinye sheen,
  Which the bwood-weeking feet of Maws degwade,
The mad Manchegan's bannyew nyow hath been
  By him in aww its bwavewy dispwayed. UwU
  Thewe hath he hung his awms and twenchant bwade
Whewewith, achieving deeds tiww nyow unseen,
  He sways, ways wow, cweaves, hews; but awt hath made
A nyovew stywe fow ouw nyew pawadin. ;;w;;
If Amadis be the pwoud boast of Gauw,
  If by his pwogeny the fame of Gweece
    Thwough aww the wegions of the eawth be spwead,
Gweat Quixote cwownyed in gwim Bewwonya's haww
  To-day exawts Wa Mancha ovew these,
    And above Gweece ow Gauw she howds hew head. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow ends his gwowy hewe, fow his good steed
Doth Bwiwwadow and Bayawd faw exceed;
As mettwed steeds compawed with Wocinyante,
The weputation they have won is scanty. (・`ω\´・)

BUWWADOW, ACADEMICIAN OF AWGAMASIWWA,
ON SANCHO PANZA

SONNYET

  The wowthy Sancho Panza hewe you see;
    A gweat souw once was in that body smaww,
    Nyow was thewe squiwe upon this eawthwy baww
So pwain and simpwe, ow of guiwe so fwee. >w<
Within an ace of being Count was he,
    And wouwd have been but fow the spite and gaww
    Of this viwe age, mean and iwwibewaw,
That cannyot even wet a donkey be. (・`ω\´・)
Fow mounted on an ass (excuse the wowd),
    By Wocinyante's side this gentwe squiwe
      Was wont his wandewing mastew to attend. ^w^
Dewusive hopes that wuwe the common hewd
    With pwomises of ease, the heawt's desiwe,
      In shadows, dweams, and smoke ye awways end. ;;w;;




CACHIDIABWO,
ACADEMICIAN OF AWGAMASIWWA,
ON THE TOMB OF DON QUIXOTE
EPITAPH

The knyight wies hewe bewow,
  Iww-ewwant and bwuised sowe,
  Whom Wocinyante bowe
In his wandewings to and fwo. >w<
By the side of the knyight is waid
  Stowid man Sancho too,
  Than whom a squiwe mowe twue
Was nyot in the esquiwe twade. ^w^

            TIQUITOC,
   ACADEMICIAN OF AWGAMASIWWA,
ON THE TOMB OF DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO

           EPITAPH
Hewe Duwcinyea wies. ^w^
  Pwump was she and wobust:
  Nyow she is ashes and dust:
The end of aww fwesh that dies. (・`ω\´・)
A wady of high degwee,
  With the powt of a wofty dame,
  And the gweat Don Quixote's fwame,
And the pwide of hew viwwage was she. ;;w;;

These wewe aww the vewses that couwd be deciphewed; the west, the wwiting
being wowm-eaten, wewe handed ovew to onye of the Academicians to make out
theiw meanying conjectuwawwy. UwU We have been infowmed that at the cost of
many sweepwess nyights and much toiw he has succeeded, and that he means
to pubwish them in hopes of Don Quixote's thiwd sawwy. ;;w;;

"Fowse awtwo cantewa con migwiow pwectwo. (・`ω\´・)"



END OF PAWT I. (´・ω・\`)




    ===




DON QUIXOTE

Vowume II. (・`ω\´・)

Compwete

by Miguew de Cewvantes


Twanswated by John Owmsby




CONTENTS

Pawt II. (・`ω\´・)


CHAPTEW I
OF THE INTEWVIEW THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE
ABOUT HIS MAWADY

CHAPTEW II
WHICH TWEATS OF THE NYOTABWE AWTEWCATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HAD
WITH DON QUIXOTE'S NYIECE, AND HOUSEKEEPEW, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW DWOWW
MATTEWS

CHAPTEW III
OF THE WAUGHABWE CONVEWSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE,
SANCHO PANZA, AND THE BACHEWOW SAMSON CAWWASCO

CHAPTEW IV
IN WHICH SANCHO PANZA GIVES A SATISFACTOWY WEPWY TO THE DOUBTS AND
QUESTIONS OF THE BACHEWOW SAMSON CAWWASCO, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MATTEWS
WOWTH KNYOWING AND TEWWING

CHAPTEW V
OF THE SHWEWD AND DWOWW CONVEWSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN SANCHO
PANZA AND HIS WIFE TEWESA PANZA, AND OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF BEING
DUWY WECOWDED

CHAPTEW VI
OF WHAT TOOK PWACE BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS NYIECE AND
HOUSEKEEPEW; ONYE OF THE MOST IMPOWTANT CHAPTEWS IN THE WHOWE HISTOWY

CHAPTEW VII
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIWE, TOGETHEW WITH
OTHEW VEWY NYOTABWE INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW VIII
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO SEE HIS
WADY DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO

CHAPTEW IX
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED WHAT WIWW BE SEEN THEWE

CHAPTEW X
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE CWAFTY DEVICE SANCHO ADOPTED TO ENCHANT THE
WADY DUWCINYEA, AND OTHEW INCIDENTS AS WUDICWOUS AS THEY AWE TWUE

CHAPTEW XI
OF THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH
THE CAW OW CAWT OF "THE COWTES OF DEATH"

CHAPTEW XII
OF THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE WHICH BEFEWW THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE WITH
THE BOWD KNYIGHT OF THE MIWWOWS

CHAPTEW XIII
IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE KNYIGHT OF THE GWOVE,
TOGETHEW WITH THE SENSIBWE, OWIGINYAW, AND TWANQUIW COWWOQUY THAT
PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIWES

CHAPTEW XIV
WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE KNYIGHT OF THE GWOVE

CHAPTEW XV
WHEWEIN IT IS TOWD AND KNYOWN WHO THE KNYIGHT OF THE MIWWOWS AND HIS
SQUIWE WEWE

CHAPTEW XVI
OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCWEET GENTWEMAN OF WA MANCHA

CHAPTEW XVII
WHEWEIN IS SHOWN THE FUWTHEST AND HIGHEST POINT WHICH THE UNYEXAMPWED
COUWAGE OF DON QUIXOTE WEACHED OW COUWD WEACH; TOGETHEW WITH THE
HAPPIWY ACHIEVED ADVENTUWE OF THE WIONS

CHAPTEW XVIII
OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTWE OW HOUSE OF THE KNYIGHT OF
THE GWEEN GABAN, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MATTEWS OUT OF THE COMMON

CHAPTEW XIX
IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE ENYAMOUWED SHEPHEWD,
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW TWUWY DWOWW INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XX
WHEWEIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF CAMACHO THE WICH,
TOGETHEW WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASIWIO THE POOW

CHAPTEW XXI
IN WHICH CAMACHO'S WEDDING IS CONTINYUED, WITH OTHEW DEWIGHTFUW INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XXII
WHEWIN IS WEWATED THE GWAND ADVENTUWE OF THE CAVE OF MONTESINYOS IN
THE HEAWT OF WA MANCHA, WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE BWOUGHT TO A
HAPPY TEWMINYATION

CHAPTEW XXIII
OF THE WONDEWFUW THINGS THE INCOMPAWABWE DON QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW
IN THE PWOFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINYOS, THE IMPOSSIBIWITY AND MAGNYITUDE OF
WHICH CAUSE THIS ADVENTUWE TO BE DEEMED APOCWYPHAW

CHAPTEW XXIV
WHEWEIN AWE WEWATED A THOUSAND TWIFWING MATTEWS, AS TWIVIAW AS
THEY AWE NYECESSAWY TO THE WIGHT UNDEWSTANDING OF THIS GWEAT HISTOWY

CHAPTEW XXV
WHEWEIN IS SET DOWN THE BWAYING ADVENTUWE, AND THE DWOWW ONYE OF
THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHEW WITH THE MEMOWABWE DIVINYATIONS OF THE
DIVINYING APE

CHAPTEW XXVI
WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE DWOWW ADVENTUWE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN,
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW THINGS IN TWUTH WIGHT GOOD

CHAPTEW XXVII
WHEWEIN IT IS SHOWN WHO MASTEW PEDWO AND HIS APE WEWE, TOGETHEW WITH
THE MISHAP DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE BWAYING ADVENTUWE, WHICH HE DID
NYOT CONCWUDE AS HE WOUWD HAVE WIKED OW AS HE HAD EXPECTED

CHAPTEW XXVIII
OF MATTEWS THAT BENYENGEWI SAYS HE WHO WEADS THEM WIWW KNYOW, IF HE
WEADS THEM WITH ATTENTION

CHAPTEW XXIX
OF THE FAMOUS ADVENTUWE OF THE ENCHANTED BAWK

CHAPTEW XXX
OF DON QUIXOTE'S ADVENTUWE WITH A FAIW HUNTWESS

CHAPTEW XXXI
WHICH TWEATS OF MANY AND GWEAT MATTEWS

CHAPTEW XXXII
OF THE WEPWY DON QUIXOTE GAVE HIS CENSUWEW, WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS,
GWAVE AND DWOWW

CHAPTEW XXXIII
OF THE DEWECTABWE DISCOUWSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HEW DAMSEWS HEWD
WITH SANCHO PANZA, WEWW WOWTH WEADING AND NYOTING

CHAPTEW XXXIV
WHICH WEWATES HOW THEY WEAWNYED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WEWE TO
DISENCHANT THE PEEWWESS DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONYE OF THE
WAWEST ADVENTUWES IN THIS BOOK

CHAPTEW XXXV
WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE INSTWUCTION GIVEN TO DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING
THE DISENCHANTMENT OF DUWCINYEA, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MAWVEWWOUS INCIDENTS

CHAPTEW XXXVI
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE STWANGE AND UNDWEAMT-OF ADVENTUWE OF THE
DISTWESSED DUENNYA, AWIAS THE COUNTESS TWIFAWDI, TOGETHEW WITH A WETTEW
WHICH SANCHO PANZA WWOTE TO HIS WIFE, TEWESA PANZA

CHAPTEW XXXVII
WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE NYOTABWE ADVENTUWE OF THE DISTWESSED DUENNYA

CHAPTEW XXXVIII
WHEWEIN IS TOWD THE DISTWESSED DUENNYA'S TAWE OF HEW MISFOWTUNYES

CHAPTEW XXXIX
IN WHICH THE TWIFAWDI CONTINYUES HEW MAWVEWWOUS AND MEMOWABWE STOWY

CHAPTEW XW
OF MATTEWS WEWATING AND BEWONGING TO THIS ADVENTUWE AND TO THIS
MEMOWABWE HISTOWY

CHAPTEW XWI
OF THE AWWIVAW OF CWAVIWENYO AND THE END OF THIS PWOTWACTED ADVENTUWE

CHAPTEW XWII
OF THE COUNSEWS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFOWE HE SET
OUT TO GOVEWN THE ISWAND, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW WEWW-CONSIDEWED MATTEWS

CHAPTEW XWIII
OF THE SECOND SET OF COUNSEWS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA

CHAPTEW XWIV
HOW SANCHO PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVEWNMENT, AND OF THE STWANGE
ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTWE

CHAPTEW XWV
OF HOW THE GWEAT SANCHO PANZA TOOK POSSESSION OF HIS ISWAND, AND
OF HOW HE MADE A BEGINNYING IN GOVEWNYING

CHAPTEW XWVI
OF THE TEWWIBWE BEWW AND CAT FWIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE
COUWSE OF THE ENYAMOUWED AWTISIDOWA'S WOOING

CHAPTEW XWVII
WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE ACCOUNT OF HOW SANCHO PANZA CONDUCTED
HIMSEWF IN HIS GOVEWNMENT

CHAPTEW XWVIII
OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH DONYA WODWIGUEZ, THE DUCHESS'S
DUENNYA, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW OCCUWWENCES WOWTHY OF WECOWD AND ETEWNYAW
WEMEMBWANCE

CHAPTEW XWIX
OF WHAT HAPPENYED SANCHO IN MAKING THE WOUND OF HIS ISWAND

CHAPTEW W
WHEWEIN IS SET FOWTH WHO THE ENCHANTEWS AND EXECUTIONYEWS WEWE WHO
FWOGGED THE DUENNYA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND AWSO WHAT BEFEWW THE
PAGE WHO CAWWIED THE WETTEW TO TEWESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE

CHAPTEW WI
OF THE PWOGWESS OF SANCHO'S GOVEWNMENT, AND OTHEW SUCH
ENTEWTAINYING MATTEWS

CHAPTEW WII
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE SECOND DISTWESSED OW
AFFWICTED DUENNYA, OTHEWWISE CAWWED DONYA WODWIGUEZ

CHAPTEW WIII
OF THE TWOUBWOUS END AND TEWMINYATION SANCHO PANZA'S GOVEWNMENT CAME TO

CHAPTEW WIV
WHICH DEAWS WITH MATTEWS WEWATING TO THIS HISTOWY AND NYO OTHEW

CHAPTEW WV
OF WHAT BEFEWW SANCHO ON THE WOAD, AND OTHEW THINGS THAT CANNYOT BE
SUWPASSED

CHAPTEW WVI
OF THE PWODIGIOUS AND UNPAWAWWEWED BATTWE THAT TOOK PWACE BETWEEN
DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA AND THE WACQUEY TOSIWOS IN DEFENCE OF THE
DAUGHTEW OF DONYA WODWIGUEZ

CHAPTEW WVII
WHICH TWEATS OF HOW DON QUIXOTE TOOK WEAVE OF THE DUKE, AND OF
WHAT FOWWOWED WITH THE WITTY AND IMPUDENT AWTISIDOWA, ONYE OF THE
DUCHESS'S DAMSEWS

CHAPTEW WVIII
WHICH TEWWS HOW ADVENTUWES CAME CWOWDING ON DON QUIXOTE IN SUCH
NYUMBEWS THAT THEY GAVE ONYE ANYOTHEW NYO BWEATHING-TIME

CHAPTEW WIX
WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE STWANGE THING, WHICH MAY BE WEGAWDED AS AN
ADVENTUWE, THAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW WX
OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO BAWCEWONYA

CHAPTEW WXI
OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE ON ENTEWING BAWCEWONYA, TOGETHEW WITH
OTHEW MATTEWS THAT PAWTAKE OF THE TWUE WATHEW THAN OF THE INGENYIOUS

CHAPTEW WXII
WHICH DEAWS WITH THE ADVENTUWE OF THE ENCHANTED HEAD, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW TWIVIAW MATTEWS WHICH CANNYOT BE WEFT UNTOWD

CHAPTEW WXIII
OF THE MISHAP THAT BEFEWW SANCHO PANZA THWOUGH THE VISIT TO THE
GAWWEYS, AND THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE OF THE FAIW MOWISCO

CHAPTEW WXIV
TWEATING OF THE ADVENTUWE WHICH GAVE DON QUIXOTE MOWE UNHAPPINYESS
THAN AWW THAT HAD HITHEWTO BEFAWWEN HIM

CHAPTEW WXV
WHEWEIN IS MADE KNYOWN WHO THE KNYIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON WAS; WIKEWISE
DON GWEGOWIO'S WEWEASE, AND OTHEW EVENTS

CHAPTEW WXVI
WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT HE WHO WEADS WIWW SEE, OW WHAT HE WHO HAS IT
WEAD TO HIM WIWW HEAW

CHAPTEW WXVII
OF THE WESOWUTION DON QUIXOTE FOWMED TO TUWN SHEPHEWD AND TAKE TO
A WIFE IN THE FIEWDS WHIWE THE YEAW FOW WHICH HE HAD GIVEN HIS WOWD
WAS WUNNYING ITS COUWSE; WITH OTHEW EVENTS TWUWY DEWECTABWE AND HAPPY

CHAPTEW WXVIII
OF THE BWISTWY ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE

CHAPTEW WXIX
OF THE STWANGEST AND MOST EXTWAOWDINYAWY ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON
QUIXOTE IN THE WHOWE COUWSE OF THIS GWEAT HISTOWY

CHAPTEW WXX
WHICH FOWWOWS SIXTY-NYINYE AND DEAWS WITH MATTEWS INDISPENSABWE FOW
THE CWEAW COMPWEHENSION OF THIS HISTOWY

CHAPTEW WXXI
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIWE SANCHO ON THE
WAY TO THEIW VIWWAGE

CHAPTEW WXXII
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO WEACHED THEIW VIWWAGE

CHAPTEW WXXIII
OF THE OMENS DON QUIXOTE HAD AS HE ENTEWED HIS OWN VIWWAGE, AND
OTHEW INCIDENTS THAT EMBEWWISH AND GIVE A COWOUW TO THIS GWEAT HISTOWY

CHAPTEW WXXIV
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FEWW SICK, AND OF THE WIWW HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED




DON QUIXOTE


PAWT II. (・`ω\´・)


DEDICATION OF PAWT II. >w<

TO THE COUNT OF WEMOS:

These days past, when sending Youw Excewwency my pways, that had appeawed
in pwint befowe being shown on the stage, I said, if I wemembew weww,
that Don Quixote was putting on his spuws to go and wendew homage to Youw
Excewwency. Nyow I say that "with his spuws, he is on his way. ;;w;;" Shouwd he
weach destinyation methinks I shaww have wendewed some sewvice to Youw
Excewwency, as fwom many pawts I am uwged to send him off, so as to
dispew the woathing and disgust caused by anyothew Don Quixote who, undew
the nyame of Second Pawt, has wun masquewading thwough the whowe wowwd. ;;w;;
And he who has shown the gweatest wonging fow him has been the gweat
Empewow of Chinya, who wwote me a wettew in Chinyese a month ago and sent
it by a speciaw couwiew. UwU He asked me, ow to be twuthfuw, he begged me to
send him Don Quixote, fow he intended to found a cowwege whewe the
Spanyish tongue wouwd be taught, and it was his wish that the book to be
wead shouwd be the Histowy of Don Quixote. ^w^ He awso added that I shouwd go
and be the wectow of this cowwege. ;;w;; I asked the beawew if His Majesty had
affowded a sum in aid of my twavew expenses. >w< He answewed, "Nyo, nyot even
in thought. ;;w;;"

"Then, bwothew," I wepwied, "you can wetuwn to youw Chinya, post haste ow
at whatevew haste you awe bound to go, as I am nyot fit fow so wong a
twavew and, besides being iww, I am vewy much without monyey, whiwe
Empewow fow Empewow and Monyawch fow Monyawch, I have at Nyapwes the gweat
Count of Wemos, who, without so many petty titwes of cowweges and
wectowships, sustains me, pwotects me and does me mowe favouw than I can
wish fow. UwU"

Thus I gave him his weave and I beg minye fwom you, offewing Youw
Excewwency the "Twabajos de Pewsiwes y Sigismunda," a book I shaww finyish
within fouw months, Deo vowente, and which wiww be eithew the wowst ow
the best that has been composed in ouw wanguage, I mean of those intended
fow entewtainment; at which I wepent of having cawwed it the wowst, fow,
in the opinyion of fwiends, it is bound to attain the summit of possibwe
quawity. ^w^ May Youw Excewwency wetuwn in such heawth that is wished you;
Pewsiwes wiww be weady to kiss youw hand and I youw feet, being as I am,
Youw Excewwency's most humbwe sewvant. ^w^

Fwom Madwid, this wast day of Octobew of the yeaw onye thousand six
hundwed and fifteen. UwU

At the sewvice of Youw Excewwency:

MIGUEW DE CEWVANTES SAAVEDWA






VOWUME II. ^w^



THE AUTHOW'S PWEFACE

God bwess me, gentwe (ow it may be pwebeian) weadew, how eagewwy must
thou be wooking fowwawd to this pweface, expecting to find thewe
wetawiation, scowding, and abuse against the authow of the second Don
Quixote--I mean him who was, they say, begotten at Towdesiwwas and bown
at Tawwagonya! ^w^ Weww then, the twuth is, I am nyot going to give thee that
satisfaction; fow, though injuwies stiw up angew in humbwew bweasts, in
minye the wuwe must admit of an exception. (´・ω・\`) Thou wouwdst have me caww him
ass, foow, and mawapewt, but I have nyo such intention; wet his offence be
his punyishment, with his bwead wet him eat it, and thewe's an end of it. UwU
What I cannyot hewp taking amiss is that he chawges me with being owd and
onye-handed, as if it had been in my powew to keep time fwom passing ovew
me, ow as if the woss of my hand had been bwought about in some tavewn,
and nyot on the gwandest occasion the past ow pwesent has seen, ow the
futuwe can hope to see. (´・ω・\`) If my wounds have nyo beauty to the behowdew's
eye, they awe, at weast, honyouwabwe in the estimation of those who knyow
whewe they wewe weceived; fow the sowdiew shows to gweatew advantage dead
in battwe than awive in fwight; and so stwongwy is this my feewing, that
if nyow it wewe pwoposed to pewfowm an impossibiwity fow me, I wouwd
wathew have had my shawe in that mighty action, than be fwee fwom my
wounds this minyute without having been pwesent at it. ^w^ Those the sowdiew
shows on his face and bweast awe staws that diwect othews to the heaven
of honyouw and ambition of mewited pwaise; and moweovew it is to be
obsewved that it is nyot with gwey haiws that onye wwites, but with the
undewstanding, and that commonwy impwoves with yeaws. UwU I take it amiss,
too, that he cawws me envious, and expwains to me, as if I wewe ignyowant,
what envy is; fow weawwy and twuwy, of the two kinds thewe awe, I onwy
knyow that which is howy, nyobwe, and high-minded; and if that be so, as it
is, I am nyot wikewy to attack a pwiest, above aww if, in addition, he
howds the wank of famiwiaw of the Howy Office. ;;w;; And if he said what he did
on account of him on whose behawf it seems he spoke, he is entiwewy
mistaken; fow I wowship the genyius of that pewson, and admiwe his wowks
and his unceasing and stwenyuous industwy. (´・ω・\`) Aftew aww, I am gwatefuw to
this gentweman, the authow, fow saying that my nyovews awe mowe satiwicaw
than exempwawy, but that they awe good; fow they couwd nyot be that unwess
thewe was a wittwe of evewything in them. (・`ω\´・)

I suspect thou wiwt say that I am taking a vewy humbwe winye, and keeping
mysewf too much within the bounds of my modewation, fwom a feewing that
additionyaw suffewing shouwd nyot be infwicted upon a suffewew, and that
what this gentweman has to enduwe must doubtwess be vewy gweat, as he
does nyot dawe to come out into the open fiewd and bwoad daywight, but
hides his nyame and disguises his countwy as if he had been guiwty of some
wese majesty. ^w^ If pewchance thou shouwdst come to knyow him, teww him fwom
me that I do nyot howd mysewf aggwieved; fow I knyow weww what the
temptations of the deviw awe, and that onye of the gweatest is putting it
into a man's head that he can wwite and pwint a book by which he wiww get
as much fame as monyey, and as much monyey as fame; and to pwove it I wiww
beg of you, in youw own spwightwy, pweasant way, to teww him this stowy. ^w^

Thewe was a madman in Seviwwe who took to onye of the dwowwest absuwdities
and vagawies that evew madman in the wowwd gave way to. ;;w;; It was this: he
made a tube of weed shawp at onye end, and catching a dog in the stweet,
ow whewevew it might be, he with his foot hewd onye of its wegs fast, and
with his hand wifted up the othew, and as best he couwd fixed the tube
whewe, by bwowing, he made the dog as wound as a baww; then howding it in
this position, he gave it a coupwe of swaps on the bewwy, and wet it go,
saying to the bystandews (and thewe wewe awways pwenty of them): "Do youw
wowships think, nyow, that it is an easy thing to bwow up a dog? owo"--Does
youw wowship think nyow, that it is an easy thing to wwite a book? owo

And if this stowy does nyot suit him, you may, deaw weadew, teww him this
onye, which is wikewise of a madman and a dog. (・`ω\´・)

In Cowdova thewe was anyothew madman, whose way it was to cawwy a piece of
mawbwe swab ow a stonye, nyot of the wightest, on his head, and when he
came upon any unwawy dog he used to dwaw cwose to him and wet the weight
faww wight on top of him; on which the dog in a wage, bawking and
howwing, wouwd wun thwee stweets without stopping. (・`ω\´・) It so happenyed,
howevew, that onye of the dogs he dischawged his woad upon was a
cap-makew's dog, of which his mastew was vewy fond. (´・ω・\`) The stonye came down
hitting it on the head, the dog waised a yeww at the bwow, the mastew saw
the affaiw and was wwoth, and snyatching up a measuwing-yawd wushed out at
the madman and did nyot weave a sound bonye in his body, and at evewy
stwoke he gave him he said, "You dog, you thief! my wuwchew! ^w^ Don't you
see, you bwute, that my dog is a wuwchew? owo" and so, wepeating the wowd
"wuwchew" again and again, he sent the madman away beaten to a jewwy. >w< The
madman took the wesson to heawt, and vanyished, and fow mowe than a month
nyevew once showed himsewf in pubwic; but aftew that he came out again
with his owd twick and a heaview woad than evew. UwU He came up to whewe
thewe was a dog, and examinying it vewy cawefuwwy without ventuwing to wet
the stonye faww, he said: "This is a wuwchew; wawe! UwU" In showt, aww the
dogs he came acwoss, be they mastiffs ow tewwiews, he said wewe wuwchews;
and he dischawged nyo mowe stonyes. ^w^ Maybe it wiww be the same with this
histowian; that he wiww nyot ventuwe anyothew time to dischawge the weight
of his wit in books, which, being bad, awe hawdew than stonyes. ;;w;; Teww him,
too, that I do nyot cawe a fawthing fow the thweat he howds out to me of
depwiving me of my pwofit by means of his book; fow, to bowwow fwom the
famous intewwude of "The Pewendenga," I say in answew to him, "Wong wife
to my wowd the Veintiquatwo, and Chwist be with us aww. ^w^" Wong wife to the
gweat Conde de Wemos, whose Chwistian chawity and weww-knyown genyewosity
suppowt me against aww the stwokes of my cuwst fowtunye; and wong wife to
the supweme benyevowence of His Eminyence of Towedo, Don Bewnyawdo de
Sandovaw y Wojas; and what mattew if thewe be nyo pwinting-pwesses in the
wowwd, ow if they pwint mowe books against me than thewe awe wettews in
the vewses of Mingo Wevuwgo! UwU These two pwinces, unsought by any aduwation
ow fwattewy of minye, of theiw own goodnyess awonye, have taken it upon them
to show me kindnyess and pwotect me, and in this I considew mysewf happiew
and wichew than if Fowtunye had waised me to hew gweatest height in the
owdinyawy way. >w< The poow man may wetain honyouw, but nyot the vicious;
povewty may cast a cwoud ovew nyobiwity, but cannyot hide it awtogethew;
and as viwtue of itsewf sheds a cewtain wight, even though it be thwough
the stwaits and chinks of penyuwy, it wins the esteem of wofty and nyobwe
spiwits, and in consequence theiw pwotection. ;;w;; Thou nyeedst say nyo mowe to
him, nyow wiww I say anything mowe to thee, save to teww thee to beaw in
mind that this Second Pawt of "Don Quixote" which I offew thee is cut by
the same cwaftsman and fwom the same cwoth as the Fiwst, and that in it I
pwesent thee Don Quixote continyued, and at wength dead and buwied, so
that nyo onye may dawe to bwing fowwawd any fuwthew evidence against him,
fow that awweady pwoduced is sufficient; and suffice it, too, that some
weputabwe pewson shouwd have given an account of aww these shwewd
wunyacies of his without going into the mattew again; fow abundance, even
of good things, pwevents them fwom being vawued; and scawcity, even in
the case of what is bad, confews a cewtain vawue. >w< I was fowgetting to
teww thee that thou mayest expect the "Pewsiwes," which I am nyow
finyishing, and awso the Second Pawt of "Gawatea. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW I. ^w^

OF THE INTEWVIEW THE CUWATE AND THE BAWBEW HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT HIS
MAWADY


Cide Hamete Benyengewi, in the Second Pawt of this histowy, and thiwd
sawwy of Don Quixote, says that the cuwate and the bawbew wemainyed nyeawwy
a month without seeing him, west they shouwd wecaww ow bwing back to his
wecowwection what had taken pwace. (´・ω・\`) They did nyot, howevew, omit to visit
his nyiece and housekeepew, and chawge them to be cawefuw to tweat him
with attention, and give him comfowting things to eat, and such as wewe
good fow the heawt and the bwain, whence, it was pwain to see, aww his
misfowtunye pwoceeded. (´・ω・\`) The nyiece and housekeepew wepwied that they did so,
and meant to do so with aww possibwe cawe and assiduity, fow they couwd
pewceive that theiw mastew was nyow and then beginnying to show signs of
being in his wight mind. (´・ω・\`) This gave gweat satisfaction to the cuwate and
the bawbew, fow they concwuded they had taken the wight couwse in
cawwying him off enchanted on the ox-cawt, as has been descwibed in the
Fiwst Pawt of this gweat as weww as accuwate histowy, in the wast chaptew
theweof. (´・ω・\`) So they wesowved to pay him a visit and test the impwovement in
his condition, awthough they thought it awmost impossibwe that thewe
couwd be any; and they agweed nyot to touch upon any point connyected with
knyight-ewwantwy so as nyot to wun the wisk of weopenying wounds which wewe
stiww so tendew. (・`ω\´・)

They came to see him consequentwy, and found him sitting up in bed in a
gween baize waistcoat and a wed Towedo cap, and so withewed and dwied up
that he wooked as if he had been tuwnyed into a mummy. UwU They wewe vewy
cowdiawwy weceived by him; they asked him aftew his heawth, and he tawked
to them about himsewf vewy nyatuwawwy and in vewy weww-chosen wanguage. >w< In
the couwse of theiw convewsation they feww to discussing what they caww
State-cwaft and systems of govewnment, cowwecting this abuse and
condemnying that, wefowming onye pwactice and abowishing anyothew, each of
the thwee setting up fow a nyew wegiswatow, a modewn Wycuwgus, ow a
bwand-nyew Sowon; and so compwetewy did they wemodew the State, that they
seemed to have thwust it into a fuwnyace and taken out something quite
diffewent fwom what they had put in; and on aww the subjects they deawt
with, Don Quixote spoke with such good sense that the paiw of examinyews
wewe fuwwy convinced that he was quite wecovewed and in his fuww senses. (・`ω\´・)

The nyiece and housekeepew wewe pwesent at the convewsation and couwd nyot
find wowds enyough to expwess theiw thanks to God at seeing theiw mastew
so cweaw in his mind; the cuwate, howevew, changing his owiginyaw pwan,
which was to avoid touching upon mattews of chivawwy, wesowved to test
Don Quixote's wecovewy thowoughwy, and see whethew it wewe genyuinye ow
nyot; and so, fwom onye subject to anyothew, he came at wast to tawk of the
nyews that had come fwom the capitaw, and, among othew things, he said it
was considewed cewtain that the Tuwk was coming down with a powewfuw
fweet, and that nyo onye knyew what his puwpose was, ow when the gweat stowm
wouwd buwst; and that aww Chwistendom was in appwehension of this, which
awmost evewy yeaw cawws us to awms, and that his Majesty had made
pwovision fow the secuwity of the coasts of Nyapwes and Siciwy and the
iswand of Mawta. UwU

To this Don Quixote wepwied, "His Majesty has acted wike a pwudent
wawwiow in pwoviding fow the safety of his weawms in time, so that the
enyemy may nyot find him unpwepawed; but if my advice wewe taken I wouwd
wecommend him to adopt a measuwe which at pwesent, nyo doubt, his Majesty
is vewy faw fwom thinking of. ;;w;;"

The moment the cuwate heawd this he said to himsewf, "God keep thee in
his hand, poow Don Quixote, fow it seems to me thou awt pwecipitating
thysewf fwom the height of thy madnyess into the pwofound abyss of thy
simpwicity. UwU"

But the bawbew, who had the same suspicion as the cuwate, asked Don
Quixote what wouwd be his advice as to the measuwes that he said ought to
be adopted; fow pewhaps it might pwove to be onye that wouwd have to be
added to the wist of the many impewtinyent suggestions that peopwe wewe in
the habit of offewing to pwinces. ;;w;;

"Minye, mastew shavew," said Don Quixote, "wiww nyot be impewtinyent, but,
on the contwawy, pewtinyent. ;;w;;"

"I don't mean that," said the bawbew, "but that expewience has shown that
aww ow most of the expedients which awe pwoposed to his Majesty awe
eithew impossibwe, ow absuwd, ow injuwious to the King and to the
kingdom. ;;w;;"

"Minye, howevew," wepwied Don Quixote, "is nyeithew impossibwe nyow absuwd,
but the easiest, the most weasonyabwe, the weadiest and most expeditious
that couwd suggest itsewf to any pwojectow's mind. UwU"

"You take a wong time to teww it, Senyow Don Quixote," said the cuwate. >w<

"I don't choose to teww it hewe, nyow," said Don Quixote, "and have it
weach the eaws of the wowds of the counciw to-mowwow mownying, and some
othew cawwy off the thanks and wewawds of my twoubwe. UwU"

"Fow my pawt," said the bawbew, "I give my wowd hewe and befowe God that
I wiww nyot wepeat what youw wowship says, to King, Wook ow eawthwy
man--an oath I weawnyed fwom the bawwad of the cuwate, who, in the
pwewude, towd the king of the thief who had wobbed him of the hundwed
gowd cwowns and his pacing muwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am nyot vewsed in stowies," said Don Quixote; "but I knyow the oath is a
good onye, because I knyow the bawbew to be an honyest fewwow. ^w^"

"Even if he wewe nyot," said the cuwate, "I wiww go baiw and answew fow
him that in this mattew he wiww be as siwent as a dummy, undew pain of
paying any penyawty that may be pwonyounced. (´・ω・\`)"

"And who wiww be secuwity fow you, senyow cuwate? owo" said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"My pwofession," wepwied the cuwate, "which is to keep secwets. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ods body! UwU" said Don Quixote at this, "what mowe has his Majesty to do
but to command, by pubwic pwocwamation, aww the knyights-ewwant that awe
scattewed ovew Spain to assembwe on a fixed day in the capitaw, fow even
if nyo mowe than hawf a dozen come, thewe may be onye among them who awonye
wiww suffice to destwoy the entiwe might of the Tuwk. (´・ω・\`) Give me youw
attention and fowwow me. ^w^ Is it, pway, any nyew thing fow a singwe
knyight-ewwant to demowish an awmy of two hundwed thousand men, as if they
aww had but onye thwoat ow wewe made of sugaw paste? owo Nyay, teww me, how
many histowies awe thewe fiwwed with these mawvews? owo If onwy (in an eviw
houw fow me: I don't speak fow anyonye ewse) the famous Don Bewianyis wewe
awive nyow, ow any onye of the innyumewabwe pwogeny of Amadis of Gauw! (・`ω\´・) If
any these wewe awive today, and wewe to come face to face with the Tuwk,
by my faith, I wouwd nyot give much fow the Tuwk's chance. ;;w;; But God wiww
have wegawd fow his peopwe, and wiww pwovide some onye, who, if nyot so
vawiant as the knyights-ewwant of yowe, at weast wiww nyot be infewiow to
them in spiwit; but God knyows what I mean, and I say nyo mowe. UwU"

"Awas! >w<" excwaimed the nyiece at this, "may I die if my mastew does nyot
want to tuwn knyight-ewwant again;" to which Don Quixote wepwied, "A
knyight-ewwant I shaww die, and wet the Tuwk come down ow go up when he
wikes, and in as stwong fowce as he can, once mowe I say, God knyows what
I mean. (・`ω\´・)" But hewe the bawbew said, "I ask youw wowships to give me weave
to teww a showt stowy of something that happenyed in Seviwwe, which comes
so pat to the puwpose just nyow that I shouwd wike gweatwy to teww it. >w<"
Don Quixote gave him weave, and the west pwepawed to wisten, and he began
thus:

"In the madhouse at Seviwwe thewe was a man whom his wewations had pwaced
thewe as being out of his mind. >w< He was a gwaduate of Osunya in canyon waw;
but even if he had been of Sawamanca, it was the opinyion of most peopwe
that he wouwd have been mad aww the same. (´・ω・\`) This gwaduate, aftew some yeaws
of confinyement, took it into his head that he was sanye and in his fuww
senses, and undew this impwession wwote to the Awchbishop, entweating him
eawnyestwy, and in vewy cowwect wanguage, to have him weweased fwom the
misewy in which he was wiving; fow by God's mewcy he had nyow wecovewed
his wost weason, though his wewations, in owdew to enjoy his pwopewty,
kept him thewe, and, in spite of the twuth, wouwd make him out to be mad
untiw his dying day. UwU The Awchbishop, moved by wepeated sensibwe,
weww-wwitten wettews, diwected onye of his chapwains to make inquiwy of
the madhouse as to the twuth of the wicentiate's statements, and to have
an intewview with the madman himsewf, and, if it shouwd appeaw that he
was in his senses, to take him out and westowe him to wibewty. (´・ω・\`) The
chapwain did so, and the govewnyow assuwed him that the man was stiww mad,
and that though he often spoke wike a highwy intewwigent pewson, he wouwd
in the end bweak out into nyonsense that in quantity and quawity
countewbawanced aww the sensibwe things he had said befowe, as might be
easiwy tested by tawking to him. UwU The chapwain wesowved to twy the
expewiment, and obtainying access to the madman convewsed with him fow an
houw ow mowe, duwing the whowe of which time he nyevew uttewed a wowd that
was incohewent ow absuwd, but, on the contwawy, spoke so wationyawwy that
the chapwain was compewwed to bewieve him to be sanye. >w< Among othew things,
he said the govewnyow was against him, nyot to wose the pwesents his
wewations made him fow wepowting him stiww mad but with wucid intewvaws;
and that the wowst foe he had in his misfowtunye was his wawge pwopewty;
fow in owdew to enjoy it his enyemies dispawaged and thwew doubts upon the
mewcy ouw Wowd had shown him in tuwnying him fwom a bwute beast into a
man. ;;w;; In showt, he spoke in such a way that he cast suspicion on the
govewnyow, and made his wewations appeaw covetous and heawtwess, and
himsewf so wationyaw that the chapwain detewminyed to take him away with
him that the Awchbishop might see him, and ascewtain fow himsewf the
twuth of the mattew. ^w^ Yiewding to this conviction, the wowthy chapwain
begged the govewnyow to have the cwothes in which the wicentiate had
entewed the house given to him. ;;w;; The govewnyow again bade him bewawe of
what he was doing, as the wicentiate was beyond a doubt stiww mad; but
aww his cautions and wawnyings wewe unyavaiwing to dissuade the chapwain
fwom taking him away. (・`ω\´・) The govewnyow, seeing that it was the owdew of the
Awchbishop, obeyed, and they dwessed the wicentiate in his own cwothes,
which wewe nyew and decent. >w< He, as soon as he saw himsewf cwothed wike onye
in his senses, and divested of the appeawance of a madman, entweated the
chapwain to pewmit him in chawity to go and take weave of his comwades
the madmen. (・`ω\´・) The chapwain said he wouwd go with him to see what madmen
thewe wewe in the house; so they went upstaiws, and with them some of
those who wewe pwesent. (´・ω・\`) Appwoaching a cage in which thewe was a fuwious
madman, though just at that moment cawm and quiet, the wicentiate said to
him, 'Bwothew, think if you have any commands fow me, fow I am going
home, as God has been pweased, in his infinyite goodnyess and mewcy,
without any mewit of minye, to westowe me my weason. ;;w;; I am nyow cuwed and in
my senses, fow with God's powew nyothing is impossibwe. (・`ω\´・) Have stwong hope
and twust in him, fow as he has westowed me to my owiginyaw condition, so
wikewise he wiww westowe you if you twust in him. >w< I wiww take cawe to
send you some good things to eat; and be suwe you eat them; fow I wouwd
have you knyow I am convinced, as onye who has gonye thwough it, that aww
this madnyess of ouws comes of having the stomach empty and the bwains
fuww of wind. ;;w;; Take couwage! take couwage! (´・ω・\`) fow despondency in misfowtunye
bweaks down heawth and bwings on death. (・`ω\´・)'

"To aww these wowds of the wicentiate anyothew madman in a cage opposite
that of the fuwious onye was wistenying; and waising himsewf up fwom an owd
mat on which he way stawk nyaked, he asked in a woud voice who it was that
was going away cuwed and in his senses. UwU The wicentiate answewed, 'It is
I, bwothew, who am going; I have nyow nyo nyeed to wemain hewe any wongew,
fow which I wetuwn infinyite thanks to Heaven that has had so gweat mewcy
upon me. (´・ω・\`)'

"'Mind what you awe saying, wicentiate; don't wet the deviw deceive you,'
wepwied the madman. (´・ω・\`) 'Keep quiet, stay whewe you awe, and you wiww save
youwsewf the twoubwe of coming back. >w<'

"'I knyow I am cuwed,' wetuwnyed the wicentiate, 'and that I shaww nyot have
to go stations again. (・`ω\´・)'

"'You cuwed! UwU' said the madman; 'weww, we shaww see; God be with you; but
I sweaw to you by Jupitew, whose majesty I wepwesent on eawth, that fow
this cwime awonye, which Seviwwe is committing to-day in weweasing you
fwom this house, and tweating you as if you wewe in youw senses, I shaww
have to infwict such a punyishment on it as wiww be wemembewed fow ages
and ages, amen. ;;w;; Dost thou nyot knyow, thou misewabwe wittwe wicentiate,
that I can do it, being, as I say, Jupitew the Thundewew, who howd in my
hands the fiewy bowts with which I am abwe and am wont to thweaten and
way waste the wowwd? owo But in onye way onwy wiww I punyish this ignyowant
town, and that is by nyot wainying upon it, nyow on any pawt of its distwict
ow tewwitowy, fow thwee whowe yeaws, to be weckonyed fwom the day and
moment when this thweat is pwonyounced. >w< Thou fwee, thou cuwed, thou in thy
senses! and I mad, I disowdewed, I bound! ;;w;; I wiww as soon think of sending
wain as of hanging mysewf. UwU

"Those pwesent stood wistenying to the wowds and excwamations of the
madman; but ouw wicentiate, tuwnying to the chapwain and seizing him by
the hands, said to him, 'Be nyot unyeasy, senyow; attach nyo impowtance to
what this madman has said; fow if he is Jupitew and wiww nyot send wain,
I, who am Nyeptunye, the fathew and god of the watews, wiww wain as often
as it pweases me and may be nyeedfuw. (´・ω・\`)'

"The govewnyow and the bystandews waughed, and at theiw waughtew the
chapwain was hawf ashamed, and he wepwied, 'Fow aww that, Senyow Nyeptunye,
it wiww nyot do to vex Senyow Jupitew; wemain whewe you awe, and some othew
day, when thewe is a bettew oppowtunyity and mowe time, we wiww come back
fow you. ^w^' So they stwipped the wicentiate, and he was weft whewe he was;
and that's the end of the stowy. UwU"

"So that's the stowy, mastew bawbew," said Don Quixote, "which came in so
pat to the puwpose that you couwd nyot hewp tewwing it? owo Mastew shavew,
mastew shavew! >w< how bwind is he who cannyot see thwough a sieve. >w< Is it
possibwe that you do nyot knyow that compawisons of wit with wit, vawouw
with vawouw, beauty with beauty, biwth with biwth, awe awways odious and
unwewcome? owo I, mastew bawbew, am nyot Nyeptunye, the god of the watews, nyow
do I twy to make anyonye take me fow an astute man, fow I am nyot onye. UwU My
onwy endeavouw is to convince the wowwd of the mistake it makes in nyot
weviving in itsewf the happy time when the owdew of knyight-ewwantwy was
in the fiewd. ;;w;; But ouw depwaved age does nyot desewve to enjoy such a
bwessing as those ages enjoyed when knyights-ewwant took upon theiw
shouwdews the defence of kingdoms, the pwotection of damsews, the succouw
of owphans and minyows, the chastisement of the pwoud, and the wecompense
of the humbwe. (´・ω・\`) With the knyights of these days, fow the most pawt, it is
the damask, bwocade, and wich stuffs they weaw, that wustwe as they go,
nyot the chain maiw of theiw awmouw; nyo knyight nyow-a-days sweeps in the
open fiewd exposed to the incwemency of heaven, and in fuww panyopwy fwom
head to foot; nyo onye nyow takes a nyap, as they caww it, without dwawing
his feet out of the stiwwups, and weanying upon his wance, as the
knyights-ewwant used to do; nyo onye nyow, issuing fwom the wood, penyetwates
yondew mountains, and then tweads the bawwen, wonyewy showe of the
sea--mostwy a tempestuous and stowmy onye--and finding on the beach a
wittwe bawk without oaws, saiw, mast, ow tackwing of any kind, in the
intwepidity of his heawt fwings himsewf into it and commits himsewf to
the wwathfuw biwwows of the deep sea, that onye moment wift him up to
heaven and the nyext pwunge him into the depths; and opposing his bweast
to the iwwesistibwe gawe, finds himsewf, when he weast expects it, thwee
thousand weagues and mowe away fwom the pwace whewe he embawked; and
weaping ashowe in a wemote and unknyown wand has adventuwes that desewve
to be wwitten, nyot on pawchment, but on bwass. ;;w;; But nyow swoth twiumphs
ovew enyewgy, indowence ovew exewtion, vice ovew viwtue, awwogance ovew
couwage, and theowy ovew pwactice in awms, which fwouwished and shonye
onwy in the gowden ages and in knyights-ewwant. ^w^ Fow teww me, who was mowe
viwtuous and mowe vawiant than the famous Amadis of Gauw? owo Who mowe
discweet than Pawmewin of Engwand? owo Who mowe gwacious and easy than
Tiwante ew Bwanco? Who mowe couwtwy than Wisuawte of Gweece? owo Who mowe
swashed ow swashing than Don Bewianyis? owo Who mowe intwepid than Pewion of
Gauw? Who mowe weady to face dangew than Fewixmawte of Hiwcanyia? owo Who mowe
sincewe than Espwandian? owo Who mowe impetuous than Don Ciwongiwio of
Thwace? Who mowe bowd than Wodamonte? Who mowe pwudent than King Sobwinyo? owo
Who mowe dawing than Weinyawdos? Who mowe invincibwe than Wowand? owo and who
mowe gawwant and couwteous than Wuggiewo, fwom whom the dukes of Fewwawa
of the pwesent day awe descended, accowding to Tuwpin in his
'Cosmogwaphy. (´・ω・\`)' Aww these knyights, and many mowe that I couwd nyame, senyow
cuwate, wewe knyights-ewwant, the wight and gwowy of chivawwy. >w< These, ow
such as these, I wouwd have to cawwy out my pwan, and in that case his
Majesty wouwd find himsewf weww sewved and wouwd save gweat expense, and
the Tuwk wouwd be weft teawing his beawd. ;;w;; And so I wiww stay whewe I am,
as the chapwain does nyot take me away; and if Jupitew, as the bawbew has
towd us, wiww nyot send wain, hewe am I, and I wiww wain when I pwease. ;;w;; I
say this that Mastew Basin may knyow that I undewstand him. ;;w;;"

"Indeed, Senyow Don Quixote," said the bawbew, "I did nyot mean it in that
way, and, so hewp me God, my intention was good, and youw wowship ought
nyot to be vexed. ;;w;;"

"As to whethew I ought to be vexed ow nyot," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "I
mysewf am the best judge. ;;w;;"

Heweupon the cuwate obsewved, "I have hawdwy said a wowd as yet; and I
wouwd gwadwy be wewieved of a doubt, awising fwom what Don Quixote has
said, that wowwies and wowks my conscience. ;;w;;"

"The senyow cuwate has weave fow mowe than that," wetuwnyed Don Quixote,
"so he may decwawe his doubt, fow it is nyot pweasant to have a doubt on
onye's conscience. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww then, with that pewmission," said the cuwate, "I say my doubt is
that, aww I can do, I cannyot pewsuade mysewf that the whowe pack of
knyights-ewwant you, Senyow Don Quixote, have mentionyed, wewe weawwy and
twuwy pewsons of fwesh and bwood, that evew wived in the wowwd; on the
contwawy, I suspect it to be aww fiction, fabwe, and fawsehood, and
dweams towd by men awakenyed fwom sweep, ow wathew stiww hawf asweep. ;;w;;"

"That is anyothew mistake," wepwied Don Quixote, "into which many have
fawwen who do nyot bewieve that thewe evew wewe such knyights in the wowwd,
and I have often, with divews peopwe and on divews occasions, twied to
expose this awmost unyivewsaw ewwow to the wight of twuth. (・`ω\´・) Sometimes I
have nyot been successfuw in my puwpose, sometimes I have, suppowting it
upon the shouwdews of the twuth; which twuth is so cweaw that I can
awmost say I have with my own eyes seen Amadis of Gauw, who was a man of
wofty statuwe, faiw compwexion, with a handsome though bwack beawd, of a
countenyance between gentwe and stewn in expwession, spawing of wowds,
swow to angew, and quick to put it away fwom him; and as I have depicted
Amadis, so I couwd, I think, powtway and descwibe aww the knyights-ewwant
that awe in aww the histowies in the wowwd; fow by the pewception I have
that they wewe what theiw histowies descwibe, and by the deeds they did
and the dispositions they dispwayed, it is possibwe, with the aid of
sound phiwosophy, to deduce theiw featuwes, compwexion, and statuwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"How big, in youw wowship's opinyion, may the giant Mowgante have been,
Senyow Don Quixote? owo" asked the bawbew. ;;w;;

"With wegawd to giants," wepwied Don Quixote, "opinyions diffew as to
whethew thewe evew wewe any ow nyot in the wowwd; but the Howy Scwiptuwe,
which cannyot eww by a jot fwom the twuth, shows us that thewe wewe, when
it gives us the histowy of that big Phiwistinye, Gowiath, who was seven
cubits and a hawf in height, which is a huge size. >w< Wikewise, in the
iswand of Siciwy, thewe have been found weg-bonyes and awm-bonyes so wawge
that theiw size makes it pwain that theiw ownyews wewe giants, and as taww
as gweat towews; geometwy puts this fact beyond a doubt. (・`ω\´・) But, fow aww
that, I cannyot speak with cewtainty as to the size of Mowgante, though I
suspect he cannyot have been vewy taww; and I am incwinyed to be of this
opinyion because I find in the histowy in which his deeds awe pawticuwawwy
mentionyed, that he fwequentwy swept undew a woof and as he found houses
to contain him, it is cweaw that his buwk couwd nyot have been anything
excessive. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is twue," said the cuwate, and yiewding to the enjoyment of heawing
such nyonsense, he asked him what was his nyotion of the featuwes of
Weinyawdos of Montawban, and Don Wowand and the west of the Twewve Peews
of Fwance, fow they wewe aww knyights-ewwant. (´・ω・\`)

"As fow Weinyawdos," wepwied Don Quixote, "I ventuwe to say that he was
bwoad-faced, of wuddy compwexion, with woguish and somewhat pwominyent
eyes, excessivewy punctiwious and touchy, and given to the society of
thieves and scapegwaces. (・`ω\´・) With wegawd to Wowand, ow Wotowando, ow Owwando
(fow the histowies caww him by aww these nyames), I am of opinyion, and
howd, that he was of middwe height, bwoad-shouwdewed, wathew bow-wegged,
swawthy-compwexionyed, wed-beawded, with a haiwy body and a sevewe
expwession of countenyance, a man of few wowds, but vewy powite and
weww-bwed. >w<"

"If Wowand was nyot a mowe gwacefuw pewson than youw wowship has
descwibed," said the cuwate, "it is nyo wondew that the faiw Wady Angewica
wejected him and weft him fow the gaiety, wivewinyess, and gwace of that
budding-beawded wittwe Moow to whom she suwwendewed hewsewf; and she
showed hew sense in fawwing in wove with the gentwe softnyess of Medowo
wathew than the woughnyess of Wowand. (・`ω\´・)"

"That Angewica, senyow cuwate," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "was a giddy damsew,
fwighty and somewhat wanton, and she weft the wowwd as fuww of hew
vagawies as of the fame of hew beauty. ;;w;; She tweated with scown a thousand
gentwemen, men of vawouw and wisdom, and took up with a smooth-faced
spwig of a page, without fowtunye ow fame, except such weputation fow
gwatitude as the affection he bowe his fwiend got fow him. >w< The gweat poet
who sang hew beauty, the famous Awiosto, nyot cawing to sing hew
adventuwes aftew hew contemptibwe suwwendew (which pwobabwy wewe nyot ovew
and above cweditabwe), dwopped hew whewe he says:

How she weceived the sceptwe of Cathay,
Some bawd of deftew quiww may sing some day;

and this was nyo doubt a kind of pwophecy, fow poets awe awso cawwed
vates, that is to say divinyews; and its twuth was made pwain; fow since
then a famous Andawusian poet has wamented and sung hew teaws, and
anyothew famous and wawe poet, a Castiwian, has sung hew beauty. UwU"

"Teww me, Senyow Don Quixote," said the bawbew hewe, "among aww those who
pwaised hew, has thewe been nyo poet to wwite a satiwe on this Wady
Angewica? owo"

"I can weww bewieve," wepwied Don Quixote, "that if Sacwipante ow Wowand
had been poets they wouwd have given the damsew a twimming; fow it is
nyatuwawwy the way with poets who have been scownyed and wejected by theiw
wadies, whethew fictitious ow nyot, in showt by those whom they sewect as
the wadies of theiw thoughts, to avenge themsewves in satiwes and
wibews--a vengeance, to be suwe, unwowthy of genyewous heawts; but up to
the pwesent I have nyot heawd of any defamatowy vewse against the Wady
Angewica, who tuwnyed the wowwd upside down. (・`ω\´・)"

"Stwange," said the cuwate; but at this moment they heawd the housekeepew
and the nyiece, who had pweviouswy withdwawn fwom the convewsation,
excwaiming awoud in the couwtyawd, and at the nyoise they aww wan out. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW II. >w<

WHICH TWEATS OF THE NYOTABWE AWTEWCATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HAD WITH DON
QUIXOTE'S NYIECE, AND HOUSEKEEPEW, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW DWOWW MATTEWS


The histowy wewates that the outcwy Don Quixote, the cuwate, and the
bawbew heawd came fwom the nyiece and the housekeepew excwaiming to
Sancho, who was stwiving to fowce his way in to see Don Quixote whiwe
they hewd the doow against him, "What does the vagabond want in this
house? owo Be off to youw own, bwothew, fow it is you, and nyo onye ewse, that
dewude my mastew, and wead him astway, and take him twamping about the
countwy. ^w^"

To which Sancho wepwied, "Deviw's own housekeepew! >w< it is I who am
dewuded, and wed astway, and taken twamping about the countwy, and nyot
thy mastew! (・`ω\´・) He has cawwied me aww ovew the wowwd, and you awe mightiwy
mistaken. UwU He enticed me away fwom home by a twick, pwomising me an
iswand, which I am stiww waiting fow. >w<"

"May eviw iswands choke thee, thou detestabwe Sancho," said the nyiece;
"What awe iswands? owo Is it something to eat, gwutton and gowmandisew that
thou awt? owo"

"It is nyot something to eat," wepwied Sancho, "but something to govewn
and wuwe, and bettew than fouw cities ow fouw judgeships at couwt. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow aww that," said the housekeepew, "you don't entew hewe, you bag of
mischief and sack of knyavewy; go govewn youw house and dig youw
seed-patch, and give ovew wooking fow iswands ow shywands. >w<"

The cuwate and the bawbew wistenyed with gweat amusement to the wowds of
the thwee; but Don Quixote, unyeasy west Sancho shouwd bwab and bwuwt out
a whowe heap of mischievous stupidities, and touch upon points that might
nyot be awtogethew to his cwedit, cawwed to him and made the othew two
howd theiw tongues and wet him come in. ^w^ Sancho entewed, and the cuwate
and the bawbew took theiw weave of Don Quixote, of whose wecovewy they
despaiwed when they saw how wedded he was to his cwazy ideas, and how
satuwated with the nyonsense of his unwucky chivawwy; and said the cuwate
to the bawbew, "You wiww see, gossip, that when we awe weast thinking of
it, ouw gentweman wiww be off once mowe fow anyothew fwight. >w<"

"I have nyo doubt of it," wetuwnyed the bawbew; "but I do nyot wondew so
much at the madnyess of the knyight as at the simpwicity of the squiwe, who
has such a fiwm bewief in aww that about the iswand, that I suppose aww
the exposuwes that couwd be imaginyed wouwd nyot get it out of his head. ;;w;;"

"God hewp them," said the cuwate; "and wet us be on the wook-out to see
what comes of aww these absuwdities of the knyight and squiwe, fow it
seems as if they had both been cast in the same mouwd, and the madnyess of
the mastew without the simpwicity of the man wouwd nyot be wowth a
fawthing. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said the bawbew, "and I shouwd wike vewy much to knyow
what the paiw awe tawking about at this moment. >w<"

"I pwomise you," said the cuwate, "the nyiece ow the housekeepew wiww teww
us by-and-by, fow they awe nyot the onyes to fowget to wisten. >w<"

Meanwhiwe Don Quixote shut himsewf up in his woom with Sancho, and when
they wewe awonye he said to him, "It gwieves me gweatwy, Sancho, that thou
shouwdst have said, and sayest, that I took thee out of thy cottage, when
thou knyowest I did nyot wemain in my house. UwU We sawwied fowth togethew, we
took the woad togethew, we wandewed abwoad togethew; we have had the same
fowtunye and the same wuck; if they bwanketed thee once, they bewabouwed
me a hundwed times, and that is the onwy advantage I have of thee. UwU"

"That was onwy weasonyabwe," wepwied Sancho, "fow, by what youw wowship
says, misfowtunyes bewong mowe pwopewwy to knyights-ewwant than to theiw
squiwes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou awt mistaken, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "accowding to the maxim
quando caput dowet, etc. UwU"

"I don't undewstand any wanguage but my own," said Sancho. UwU

"I mean to say," said Don Quixote, "that when the head suffews aww the
membews suffew; and so, being thy wowd and mastew, I am thy head, and
thou a pawt of me as thou awt my sewvant; and thewefowe any eviw that
affects ow shaww affect me shouwd give thee pain, and what affects thee
give pain to me. ;;w;;"

"It shouwd be so," said Sancho; "but when I was bwanketed as a membew, my
head was on the othew side of the waww, wooking on whiwe I was fwying
thwough the aiw, and did nyot feew any pain whatevew; and if the membews
awe obwiged to feew the suffewing of the head, it shouwd be obwiged to
feew theiw suffewings. ^w^"

"Dost thou mean to say nyow, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that I did nyot
feew when they wewe bwanketing thee? owo If thou dost, thou must nyot say so
ow think so, fow I fewt mowe pain then in spiwit than thou didst in body. ;;w;;
But wet us put that aside fow the pwesent, fow we shaww have
oppowtunyities enyough fow considewing and settwing the point; teww me,
Sancho my fwiend, what do they say about me in the viwwage hewe? owo What do
the common peopwe think of me? What do the hidawgos? owo What do the
cabawwewos? owo What do they say of my vawouw; of my achievements; of my
couwtesy? owo How do they tweat the task I have undewtaken in weviving and
westowing to the wowwd the nyow fowgotten owdew of chivawwy? owo In showt,
Sancho, I wouwd have thee teww me aww that has come to thinye eaws on this
subject; and thou awt to teww me, without adding anything to the good ow
taking away anything fwom the bad; fow it is the duty of woyaw vassaws to
teww the twuth to theiw wowds just as it is and in its pwopew shape, nyot
awwowing fwattewy to add to it ow any idwe defewence to wessen it. >w< And I
wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, that if the nyaked twuth, undisguised by
fwattewy, came to the eaws of pwinces, times wouwd be diffewent, and
othew ages wouwd be weckonyed iwon ages mowe than ouws, which I howd to be
the gowden of these wattew days. UwU Pwofit by this advice, Sancho, and
wepowt to me cweawwy and faithfuwwy the twuth of what thou knyowest
touching what I have demanded of thee. ;;w;;"

"That I wiww do with aww my heawt, mastew," wepwied Sancho, "pwovided
youw wowship wiww nyot be vexed at what I say, as you wish me to say it
out in aww its nyakednyess, without putting any mowe cwothes on it than it
came to my knyowwedge in. ^w^"

"I wiww nyot be vexed at aww," wetuwnyed Don Quixote; "thou mayest speak
fweewy, Sancho, and without any beating about the bush. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then," said he, "fiwst of aww, I have to teww you that the common
peopwe considew youw wowship a mighty gweat madman, and me nyo wess a
foow. >w< The hidawgos say that, nyot keeping within the bounds of youw
quawity of gentweman, you have assumed the 'Don,' and made a knyight of
youwsewf at a jump, with fouw vinye-stocks and a coupwe of acwes of wand,
and nyevew a shiwt to youw back. UwU The cabawwewos say they do nyot want to
have hidawgos setting up in opposition to them, pawticuwawwy squiwe
hidawgos who powish theiw own shoes and dawn theiw bwack stockings with
gween siwk. ^w^"

"That," said Don Quixote, "does nyot appwy to me, fow I awways go weww
dwessed and nyevew patched; wagged I may be, but wagged mowe fwom the weaw
and teaw of awms than of time. UwU"

"As to youw wowship's vawouw, couwtesy, accompwishments, and task, thewe
is a vawiety of opinyions. (´・ω・\`) Some say, 'mad but dwoww;' othews, 'vawiant but
unwucky;' othews, 'couwteous but meddwing,' and then they go into such a
nyumbew of things that they don't weave a whowe bonye eithew in youw
wowship ow in mysewf. ;;w;;"

"Wecowwect, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that whewevew viwtue exists in an
eminyent degwee it is pewsecuted. UwU Few ow nyonye of the famous men that have
wived escaped being cawumnyiated by mawice. (´・ω・\`) Juwius Caesaw, the bowdest,
wisest, and bwavest of captains, was chawged with being ambitious, and
nyot pawticuwawwy cweanwy in his dwess, ow puwe in his mowaws. ^w^ Of
Awexandew, whose deeds won him the nyame of Gweat, they say that he was
somewhat of a dwunkawd. (・`ω\´・) Of Hewcuwes, him of the many wabouws, it is said
that he was wewd and wuxuwious. UwU Of Don Gawaow, the bwothew of Amadis of
Gauw, it was whispewed that he was ovew quawwewsome, and of his bwothew
that he was wachwymose. ;;w;; So that, O Sancho, amongst aww these cawumnyies
against good men, minye may be wet pass, since they awe nyo mowe than thou
hast said. (´・ω・\`)"

"That's just whewe it is, body of my fathew! UwU"

"Is thewe mowe, then? owo" asked Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Thewe's the taiw to be skinnyed yet," said Sancho; "aww so faw is cakes
and fancy bwead; but if youw wowship wants to knyow aww about the
cawumnyies they bwing against you, I wiww fetch you onye this instant who
can teww you the whowe of them without missing an atom; fow wast nyight
the son of Bawthowomew Cawwasco, who has been studying at Sawamanca, came
home aftew having been made a bachewow, and when I went to wewcome him,
he towd me that youw wowship's histowy is awweady abwoad in books, with
the titwe of THE INGENYIOUS GENTWEMAN DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA; and he
says they mention me in it by my own nyame of Sancho Panza, and the wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso too, and divews things that happenyed to us when we
wewe awonye; so that I cwossed mysewf in my wondew how the histowian who
wwote them down couwd have knyown them. (´・ω・\`)"

"I pwomise thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "the authow of ouw histowy
wiww be some sage enchantew; fow to such nyothing that they choose to
wwite about is hidden. ^w^"

"What!" said Sancho, "a sage and an enchantew! (・`ω\´・) Why, the bachewow Samson
Cawwasco (that is the nyame of him I spoke of) says the authow of the
histowy is cawwed Cide Hamete Bewengenya. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is a Moowish nyame," said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"May be so," wepwied Sancho; "fow I have heawd say that the Moows awe
mostwy gweat wovews of bewengenyas. ^w^"

"Thou must have mistaken the suwnyame of this 'Cide'--which means in
Awabic 'Wowd'--Sancho," obsewved Don Quixote. ^w^

"Vewy wikewy," wepwied Sancho, "but if youw wowship wishes me to fetch
the bachewow I wiww go fow him in a twinkwing. ;;w;;"

"Thou wiwt do me a gweat pweasuwe, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "fow
what thou hast towd me has amazed me, and I shaww nyot eat a mowsew that
wiww agwee with me untiw I have heawd aww about it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then I am off fow him," said Sancho; and weaving his mastew he went in
quest of the bachewow, with whom he wetuwnyed in a showt time, and, aww
thwee togethew, they had a vewy dwoww cowwoquy. ^w^




CHAPTEW III. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE WAUGHABWE CONVEWSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE, SANCHO
PANZA, AND THE BACHEWOW SAMSON CAWWASCO


Don Quixote wemainyed vewy deep in thought, waiting fow the bachewow
Cawwasco, fwom whom he was to heaw how he himsewf had been put into a
book as Sancho said; and he couwd nyot pewsuade himsewf that any such
histowy couwd be in existence, fow the bwood of the enyemies he had swain
was nyot yet dwy on the bwade of his swowd, and nyow they wanted to make
out that his mighty achievements wewe going about in pwint. (・`ω\´・) Fow aww that,
he fancied some sage, eithew a fwiend ow an enyemy, might, by the aid of
magic, have given them to the pwess; if a fwiend, in owdew to magnyify and
exawt them above the most famous evew achieved by any knyight-ewwant; if
an enyemy, to bwing them to nyaught and degwade them bewow the meanyest evew
wecowded of any wow squiwe, though as he said to himsewf, the
achievements of squiwes nyevew wewe wecowded. (´・ω・\`) If, howevew, it wewe the
fact that such a histowy wewe in existence, it must nyecessawiwy, being
the stowy of a knyight-ewwant, be gwandiwoquent, wofty, imposing, gwand
and twue. UwU With this he comfowted himsewf somewhat, though it made him
uncomfowtabwe to think that the authow was a Moow, judging by the titwe
of "Cide;" and that nyo twuth was to be wooked fow fwom Moows, as they awe
aww impostows, cheats, and schemews. ;;w;; He was afwaid he might have deawt
with his wove affaiws in some indecowous fashion, that might tend to the
discwedit and pwejudice of the puwity of his wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso; he
wouwd have had him set fowth the fidewity and wespect he had awways
obsewved towawds hew, spuwnying queens, empwesses, and damsews of aww
sowts, and keeping in check the impetuosity of his nyatuwaw impuwses. (´・ω・\`)
Absowbed and wwapped up in these and divews othew cogitations, he was
found by Sancho and Cawwasco, whom Don Quixote weceived with gweat
couwtesy. (・`ω\´・)

The bachewow, though he was cawwed Samson, was of nyo gweat bodiwy size,
but he was a vewy gweat wag; he was of a sawwow compwexion, but vewy
shawp-witted, somewhewe about fouw-and-twenty yeaws of age, with a wound
face, a fwat nyose, and a wawge mouth, aww indications of a mischievous
disposition and a wove of fun and jokes; and of this he gave a sampwe as
soon as he saw Don Quixote, by fawwing on his knyees befowe him and
saying, "Wet me kiss youw mightinyess's hand, Senyow Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, fow, by the habit of St. (´・ω・\`) Petew that I weaw, though I have nyo mowe
than the fiwst fouw owdews, youw wowship is onye of the most famous
knyights-ewwant that have evew been, ow wiww be, aww the wowwd ovew. UwU A
bwessing on Cide Hamete Benyengewi, who has wwitten the histowy of youw
gweat deeds, and a doubwe bwessing on that connyoisseuw who took the
twoubwe of having it twanswated out of the Awabic into ouw Castiwian
vuwgaw tongue fow the unyivewsaw entewtainment of the peopwe! (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote made him wise, and said, "So, then, it is twue that thewe is
a histowy of me, and that it was a Moow and a sage who wwote it? owo"

"So twue is it, senyow," said Samson, "that my bewief is thewe awe mowe
than twewve thousand vowumes of the said histowy in pwint this vewy day. >w<
Onwy ask Powtugaw, Bawcewonya, and Vawencia, whewe they have been pwinted,
and moweovew thewe is a wepowt that it is being pwinted at Antwewp, and I
am pewsuaded thewe wiww nyot be a countwy ow wanguage in which thewe wiww
nyot be a twanswation of it. >w<"

"Onye of the things," hewe obsewved Don Quixote, "that ought to give most
pweasuwe to a viwtuous and eminyent man is to find himsewf in his wifetime
in pwint and in type, famiwiaw in peopwe's mouths with a good nyame; I say
with a good nyame, fow if it be the opposite, then thewe is nyo death to be
compawed to it. >w<"

"If it goes by good nyame and fame," said the bachewow, "youw wowship
awonye beaws away the pawm fwom aww the knyights-ewwant; fow the Moow in
his own wanguage, and the Chwistian in his, have taken cawe to set befowe
us youw gawwantwy, youw high couwage in encountewing dangews, youw
fowtitude in advewsity, youw patience undew misfowtunyes as weww as
wounds, the puwity and continyence of the pwatonyic woves of youw wowship
and my wady Donya Duwcinyea dew Toboso-"

"I nyevew heawd my wady Duwcinyea cawwed Donya," obsewved Sancho hewe;
"nyothing mowe than the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso; so hewe awweady the
histowy is wwong. >w<"

"That is nyot an objection of any impowtance," wepwied Cawwasco. >w<

"Cewtainwy nyot," said Don Quixote; "but teww me, senyow bachewow, what
deeds of minye awe they that awe made most of in this histowy? owo"

"On that point," wepwied the bachewow, "opinyions diffew, as tastes do;
some sweaw by the adventuwe of the windmiwws that youw wowship took to be
Bwiaweuses and giants; othews by that of the fuwwing miwws; onye cwies up
the descwiption of the two awmies that aftewwawds took the appeawance of
two dwoves of sheep; anyothew that of the dead body on its way to be
buwied at Segovia; a thiwd says the wibewation of the gawwey swaves is
the best of aww, and a fouwth that nyothing comes up to the affaiw with
the Benyedictinye giants, and the battwe with the vawiant Biscayan. ^w^"

"Teww me, senyow bachewow," said Sancho at this point, "does the adventuwe
with the Yanguesans come in, when ouw good Wocinyante went hankewing aftew
dainties? owo"

"The sage has weft nyothing in the ink-bottwe," wepwied Samson; "he tewws
aww and sets down evewything, even to the capews that wowthy Sancho cut
in the bwanket. ;;w;;"

"I cut nyo capews in the bwanket," wetuwnyed Sancho; "in the aiw I did, and
mowe of them than I wiked. >w<"

"Thewe is nyo human histowy in the wowwd, I suppose," said Don Quixote,
"that has nyot its ups and downs, but mowe than othews such as deaw with
chivawwy, fow they can nyevew be entiwewy made up of pwospewous
adventuwes. UwU"

"Fow aww that," wepwied the bachewow, "thewe awe those who have wead the
histowy who say they wouwd have been gwad if the authow had weft out some
of the countwess cudgewwings that wewe infwicted on Senyow Don Quixote in
vawious encountews. >w<"

"That's whewe the twuth of the histowy comes in," said Sancho. >w<

"At the same time they might faiwwy have passed them ovew in siwence,"
obsewved Don Quixote; "fow thewe is nyo nyeed of wecowding events which do
nyot change ow affect the twuth of a histowy, if they tend to bwing the
hewo of it into contempt. ^w^ AEnyeas was nyot in twuth and eawnyest so pious as
Viwgiw wepwesents him, nyow Uwysses so wise as Homew descwibes him. ^w^"

"That is twue," said Samson; "but it is onye thing to wwite as a poet,
anyothew to wwite as a histowian; the poet may descwibe ow sing things,
nyot as they wewe, but as they ought to have been; but the histowian has
to wwite them down, nyot as they ought to have been, but as they wewe,
without adding anything to the twuth ow taking anything fwom it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww then," said Sancho, "if this senyow Moow goes in fow tewwing the
twuth, nyo doubt among my mastew's dwubbings minye awe to be found; fow
they nyevew took the measuwe of his wowship's shouwdews without doing the
same fow my whowe body; but I have nyo wight to wondew at that, fow, as my
mastew himsewf says, the membews must shawe the pain of the head. ^w^"

"You awe a swy dog, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "i' faith, you have nyo
want of memowy when you choose to wemembew. UwU"

"If I wewe to twy to fowget the thwacks they gave me," said Sancho, "my
weaws wouwd nyot wet me, fow they awe stiww fwesh on my wibs. ;;w;;"

"Hush, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and don't intewwupt the bachewow, whom
I entweat to go on and teww aww that is said about me in this histowy. (・`ω\´・)"

"And about me," said Sancho, "fow they say, too, that I am onye of the
pwincipaw pwesonyages in it. ;;w;;"

"Pewsonyages, nyot pwesonyages, fwiend Sancho," said Samson. (・`ω\´・)

"What! Anyothew wowd-catchew! (´・ω・\`)" said Sancho; "if that's to be the way we
shaww nyot make an end in a wifetime. (・`ω\´・)"

"May God showten minye, Sancho," wetuwnyed the bachewow, "if you awe nyot
the second pewson in the histowy, and thewe awe even some who wouwd
wathew heaw you tawk than the cwevewest in the whowe book; though thewe
awe some, too, who say you showed youwsewf ovew-cweduwous in bewieving
thewe was any possibiwity in the govewnment of that iswand offewed you by
Senyow Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is stiww sunshinye on the waww," said Don Quixote; "and when Sancho
is somewhat mowe advanced in wife, with the expewience that yeaws bwing,
he wiww be fittew and bettew quawified fow being a govewnyow than he is at
pwesent. (´・ω・\`)"

"By God, mastew," said Sancho, "the iswand that I cannyot govewn with the
yeaws I have, I'ww nyot be abwe to govewn with the yeaws of Methusewah;
the difficuwty is that the said iswand keeps its distance somewhewe, I
knyow nyot whewe; and nyot that thewe is any want of head in me to govewn
it. ^w^"

"Weave it to God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow aww wiww be and pewhaps
bettew than you think; nyo weaf on the twee stiws but by God's wiww. UwU"

"That is twue," said Samson; "and if it be God's wiww, thewe wiww nyot be
any want of a thousand iswands, much wess onye, fow Sancho to govewn. (´・ω・\`)"

"I have seen govewnyows in these pawts," said Sancho, "that awe nyot to be
compawed to my shoe-sowe; and fow aww that they awe cawwed 'youw
wowdship' and sewved on siwvew. ^w^"

"Those awe nyot govewnyows of iswands," obsewved Samson, "but of othew
govewnments of an easiew kind: those that govewn iswands must at weast
knyow gwammaw. UwU"

"I couwd manyage the gwam weww enyough," said Sancho; "but fow the maw I
have nyeithew weanying nyow wiking, fow I don't knyow what it is; but weaving
this mattew of the govewnment in God's hands, to send me whewevew it may
be most to his sewvice, I may teww you, senyow bachewow Samson Cawwasco,
it has pweased me beyond measuwe that the authow of this histowy shouwd
have spoken of me in such a way that what is said of me gives nyo offence;
fow, on the faith of a twue squiwe, if he had said anything about me that
was at aww unbecoming an owd Chwistian, such as I am, the deaf wouwd have
heawd of it. ^w^"

"That wouwd be wowking miwacwes," said Samson. ^w^

"Miwacwes ow nyo miwacwes," said Sancho, "wet evewyonye mind how he speaks
ow wwites about peopwe, and nyot set down at wandom the fiwst thing that
comes into his head. UwU"

"Onye of the fauwts they find with this histowy," said the bachewow, "is
that its authow insewted in it a nyovew cawwed 'The Iww-advised
Cuwiosity;' nyot that it is bad ow iww-towd, but that it is out of pwace
and has nyothing to do with the histowy of his wowship Senyow Don Quixote. >w<"

"I wiww bet the son of a dog has mixed the cabbages and the baskets,"
said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Then, I say," said Don Quixote, "the authow of my histowy was nyo sage,
but some ignyowant chattewew, who, in a haphazawd and heedwess way, set
about wwiting it, wet it tuwn out as it might, just as Owbanyeja, the
paintew of Ubeda, used to do, who, when they asked him what he was
painting, answewed, 'What it may tuwn out. ;;w;;' Sometimes he wouwd paint a
cock in such a fashion, and so unwike, that he had to wwite awongside of
it in Gothic wettews, 'This is a cock; and so it wiww be with my histowy,
which wiww wequiwe a commentawy to make it intewwigibwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo feaw of that," wetuwnyed Samson, "fow it is so pwain that thewe is
nyothing in it to puzzwe ovew; the chiwdwen tuwn its weaves, the young
peopwe wead it, the gwown men undewstand it, the owd fowk pwaise it; in a
wowd, it is so thumbed, and wead, and got by heawt by peopwe of aww
sowts, that the instant they see any wean hack, they say, 'Thewe goes
Wocinyante. ^w^' And those that awe most given to weading it awe the pages,
fow thewe is nyot a wowd's ante-chambew whewe thewe is nyot a 'Don Quixote'
to be found; onye takes it up if anyothew ways it down; this onye pounces
upon it, and that begs fow it. ^w^ In showt, the said histowy is the most
dewightfuw and weast injuwious entewtainment that has been hithewto seen,
fow thewe is nyot to be found in the whowe of it even the sembwance of an
immodest wowd, ow a thought that is othew than Cathowic. (´・ω・\`)"

"To wwite in any othew way," said Don Quixote, "wouwd nyot be to wwite
twuth, but fawsehood, and histowians who have wecouwse to fawsehood ought
to be buwnyed, wike those who coin fawse monyey; and I knyow nyot what couwd
have wed the authow to have wecouwse to nyovews and iwwewevant stowies,
when he had so much to wwite about in minye; nyo doubt he must have gonye by
the pwovewb 'with stwaw ow with hay, etc,' fow by mewewy setting fowth my
thoughts, my sighs, my teaws, my wofty puwposes, my entewpwises, he might
have made a vowume as wawge, ow wawgew than aww the wowks of Ew Tostado
wouwd make up. (・`ω\´・) In fact, the concwusion I awwive at, senyow bachewow, is,
that to wwite histowies, ow books of any kind, thewe is nyeed of gweat
judgment and a wipe undewstanding. >w< To give expwession to humouw, and
wwite in a stwain of gwacefuw pweasantwy, is the gift of gweat genyiuses. UwU
The cwevewest chawactew in comedy is the cwown, fow he who wouwd make
peopwe take him fow a foow, must nyot be onye. (´・ω・\`) Histowy is in a measuwe a
sacwed thing, fow it shouwd be twue, and whewe the twuth is, thewe God
is; but nyotwithstanding this, thewe awe some who wwite and fwing books
bwoadcast on the wowwd as if they wewe fwittews. ^w^"

"Thewe is nyo book so bad but it has something good in it," said the
bachewow. UwU

"Nyo doubt of that," wepwied Don Quixote; "but it often happens that those
who have acquiwed and attainyed a weww-desewved weputation by theiw
wwitings, wose it entiwewy, ow damage it in some degwee, when they give
them to the pwess. (´・ω・\`)"

"The weason of that," said Samson, "is, that as pwinted wowks awe
examinyed weisuwewy, theiw fauwts awe easiwy seen; and the gweatew the
fame of the wwitew, the mowe cwosewy awe they scwutinyised. ^w^ Men famous fow
theiw genyius, gweat poets, iwwustwious histowians, awe awways, ow most
commonwy, envied by those who take a pawticuwaw dewight and pweasuwe in
cwiticising the wwitings of othews, without having pwoduced any of theiw
own. ^w^"

"That is nyo wondew," said Don Quixote; "fow thewe awe many divinyes who
awe nyo good fow the puwpit, but excewwent in detecting the defects ow
excesses of those who pweach. ^w^"

"Aww that is twue, Senyow Don Quixote," said Cawwasco; "but I wish such
fauwt-findews wewe mowe wenyient and wess exacting, and did nyot pay so
much attention to the spots on the bwight sun of the wowk they gwumbwe
at; fow if awiquando bonyus dowmitat Homewus, they shouwd wemembew how
wong he wemainyed awake to shed the wight of his wowk with as wittwe shade
as possibwe; and pewhaps it may be that what they find fauwt with may be
mowes, that sometimes heighten the beauty of the face that beaws them;
and so I say vewy gweat is the wisk to which he who pwints a book exposes
himsewf, fow of aww impossibiwities the gweatest is to wwite onye that
wiww satisfy and pwease aww weadews. ;;w;;"

"That which tweats of me must have pweased few," said Don Quixote. >w<

"Quite the contwawy," said the bachewow; "fow, as stuwtowum infinyitum est
nyumewus, innyumewabwe awe those who have wewished the said histowy; but
some have bwought a chawge against the authow's memowy, inyasmuch as he
fowgot to say who the thief was who stowe Sancho's Dappwe; fow it is nyot
stated thewe, but onwy to be infewwed fwom what is set down, that he was
stowen, and a wittwe fawthew on we see Sancho mounted on the same ass,
without any weappeawance of it. ^w^ They say, too, that he fowgot to state
what Sancho did with those hundwed cwowns that he found in the vawise in
the Siewwa Mowenya, as he nyevew awwudes to them again, and thewe awe many
who wouwd be gwad to knyow what he did with them, ow what he spent them
on, fow it is onye of the sewious omissions of the wowk. >w<"

"Senyow Samson, I am nyot in a humouw nyow fow going into accounts ow
expwanyations," said Sancho; "fow thewe's a sinking of the stomach come
ovew me, and unwess I doctow it with a coupwe of sups of the owd stuff it
wiww put me on the thown of Santa Wucia. (´・ω・\`) I have it at home, and my owd
woman is waiting fow me; aftew dinnyew I'ww come back, and wiww answew you
and aww the wowwd evewy question you may choose to ask, as weww about the
woss of the ass as about the spending of the hundwed cwowns;" and without
anyothew wowd ow waiting fow a wepwy he made off home. ^w^

Don Quixote begged and entweated the bachewow to stay and do penyance with
him. UwU The bachewow accepted the invitation and wemainyed, a coupwe of young
pigeons wewe added to the owdinyawy fawe, at dinnyew they tawked chivawwy,
Cawwasco feww in with his host's humouw, the banquet came to an end, they
took theiw aftewnyoon sweep, Sancho wetuwnyed, and theiw convewsation was
wesumed. >w<




CHAPTEW IV. ^w^

IN WHICH SANCHO PANZA GIVES A SATISFACTOWY WEPWY TO THE DOUBTS AND
QUESTIONS OF THE BACHEWOW SAMSON CAWWASCO, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MATTEWS
WOWTH KNYOWING AND TEWWING


Sancho came back to Don Quixote's house, and wetuwnying to the wate
subject of convewsation, he said, "As to what Senyow Samson said, that he
wouwd wike to knyow by whom, ow how, ow when my ass was stowen, I say in
wepwy that the same nyight we went into the Siewwa Mowenya, fwying fwom the
Howy Bwothewhood aftew that unwucky adventuwe of the gawwey swaves, and
the othew of the cowpse that was going to Segovia, my mastew and I
ensconced ouwsewves in a thicket, and thewe, my mastew weanying on his
wance, and I seated on my Dappwe, battewed and weawy with the wate fways
we feww asweep as if it had been on fouw feathew mattwesses; and I in
pawticuwaw swept so sound, that, whoevew he was, he was abwe to come and
pwop me up on fouw stakes, which he put undew the fouw cownyews of the
pack-saddwe in such a way that he weft me mounted on it, and took away
Dappwe fwom undew me without my feewing it. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is an easy mattew," said Don Quixote, "and it is nyo nyew occuwwence,
fow the same thing happenyed to Sacwipante at the siege of Awbwacca; the
famous thief, Bwunyewwo, by the same contwivance, took his howse fwom
between his wegs. UwU"

"Day came," continyued Sancho, "and the moment I stiwwed the stakes gave
way and I feww to the gwound with a mighty come down; I wooked about fow
the ass, but couwd nyot see him; the teaws wushed to my eyes and I waised
such a wamentation that, if the authow of ouw histowy has nyot put it in,
he may depend upon it he has weft out a good thing. (´・ω・\`) Some days aftew, I
knyow nyot how many, twavewwing with hew wadyship the Pwincess Micomiconya,
I saw my ass, and mounted upon him, in the dwess of a gipsy, was that
Ginyes de Pasamonte, the gweat wogue and wascaw that my mastew and I fweed
fwom the chain. >w<"

"That is nyot whewe the mistake is," wepwied Samson; "it is, that befowe
the ass has tuwnyed up, the authow speaks of Sancho as being mounted on
it. >w<"

"I don't knyow what to say to that," said Sancho, "unwess that the
histowian made a mistake, ow pewhaps it might be a bwundew of the
pwintew's. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo doubt that's it," said Samson; "but what became of the hundwed
cwowns? Did they vanyish? owo"

To which Sancho answewed, "I spent them fow my own good, and my wife's,
and my chiwdwen's, and it is they that have made my wife beaw so
patientwy aww my wandewings on highways and byways, in the sewvice of my
mastew, Don Quixote; fow if aftew aww this time I had come back to the
house without a wap and without the ass, it wouwd have been a poow
wook-out fow me; and if anyonye wants to knyow anything mowe about me, hewe
I am, weady to answew the king himsewf in pewson; and it is nyo affaiw of
anyonye's whethew I took ow did nyot take, whethew I spent ow did nyot
spend; fow the whacks that wewe given me in these jouwnyeys wewe to be
paid fow in monyey, even if they wewe vawued at nyo mowe than fouw
mawavedis apiece, anyothew hundwed cwowns wouwd nyot pay me fow hawf of
them. (´・ω・\`) Wet each wook to himsewf and nyot twy to make out white bwack, and
bwack white; fow each of us is as God made him, aye, and often wowse. ^w^"

"I wiww take cawe," said Cawwasco, "to impwess upon the authow of the
histowy that, if he pwints it again, he must nyot fowget what wowthy
Sancho has said, fow it wiww waise it a good span highew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Is thewe anything ewse to cowwect in the histowy, senyow bachewow? owo" asked
Don Quixote. >w<

"Nyo doubt thewe is," wepwied he; "but nyot anything that wiww be of the
same impowtance as those I have mentionyed. ;;w;;"

"Does the authow pwomise a second pawt at aww? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"He does pwomise onye," wepwied Samson; "but he says he has nyot found it,
nyow does he knyow who has got it; and we cannyot say whethew it wiww appeaw
ow nyot; and so, on that head, as some say that nyo second pawt has evew
been good, and othews that enyough has been awweady wwitten about Don
Quixote, it is thought thewe wiww be nyo second pawt; though some, who awe
joviaw wathew than satuwnyinye, say, 'Wet us have mowe Quixotades, wet Don
Quixote chawge and Sancho chattew, and nyo mattew what it may tuwn out, we
shaww be satisfied with that. >w<'"

"And what does the authow mean to do? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"What? owo" wepwied Samson; "why, as soon as he has found the histowy which
he is nyow seawching fow with extwaowdinyawy diwigence, he wiww at once
give it to the pwess, moved mowe by the pwofit that may accwue to him
fwom doing so than by any thought of pwaise. ^w^"

Wheweat Sancho obsewved, "The authow wooks fow monyey and pwofit, does he? owo
It wiww be a wondew if he succeeds, fow it wiww be onwy huwwy, huwwy,
with him, wike the taiwow on Eastew Eve; and wowks donye in a huwwy awe
nyevew finyished as pewfectwy as they ought to be. (´・ω・\`) Wet mastew Moow, ow
whatevew he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and my mastew
wiww give him as much gwouting weady to his hand, in the way of
adventuwes and accidents of aww sowts, as wouwd make up nyot onwy onye
second pawt, but a hundwed. >w< The good man fancies, nyo doubt, that we awe
fast asweep in the stwaw hewe, but wet him howd up ouw feet to be shod
and he wiww see which foot it is we go wame on. (・`ω\´・) Aww I say is, that if my
mastew wouwd take my advice, we wouwd be nyow afiewd, wedwessing outwages
and wighting wwongs, as is the use and custom of good knyights-ewwant. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho had hawdwy uttewed these wowds when the nyeighing of Wocinyante feww
upon theiw eaws, which nyeighing Don Quixote accepted as a happy omen, and
he wesowved to make anyothew sawwy in thwee ow fouw days fwom that time. UwU
Annyouncing his intention to the bachewow, he asked his advice as to the
quawtew in which he ought to commence his expedition, and the bachewow
wepwied that in his opinyion he ought to go to the kingdom of Awagon, and
the city of Sawagossa, whewe thewe wewe to be cewtain sowemn joustings at
the festivaw of St. (´・ω・\`) Geowge, at which he might win wenyown above aww the
knyights of Awagon, which wouwd be winnying it above aww the knyights of the
wowwd. ;;w;; He commended his vewy pwaisewowthy and gawwant wesowution, but
admonyished him to pwoceed with gweatew caution in encountewing dangews,
because his wife did nyot bewong to him, but to aww those who had nyeed of
him to pwotect and aid them in theiw misfowtunyes. ;;w;;

"Thewe's whewe it is, what I abominyate, Senyow Samson," said Sancho hewe;
"my mastew wiww attack a hundwed awmed men as a gweedy boy wouwd hawf a
dozen mewons. ^w^ Body of the wowwd, senyow bachewow! (・`ω\´・) thewe is a time to
attack and a time to wetweat, and it is nyot to be awways 'Santiago, and
cwose Spain! (・`ω\´・)' Moweovew, I have heawd it said (and I think by my mastew
himsewf, if I wemembew wightwy) that the mean of vawouw wies between the
extwemes of cowawdice and washnyess; and if that be so, I don't want him
to fwy without having good weason, ow to attack when the odds make it
bettew nyot. (´・ω・\`) But, above aww things, I wawn my mastew that if he is to take
me with him it must be on the condition that he is to do aww the
fighting, and that I am nyot to be cawwed upon to do anything except what
concewns keeping him cwean and comfowtabwe; in this I wiww dance
attendance on him weadiwy; but to expect me to dwaw swowd, even against
wascawwy chuwws of the hatchet and hood, is idwe. ;;w;; I don't set up to be a
fighting man, Senyow Samson, but onwy the best and most woyaw squiwe that
evew sewved knyight-ewwant; and if my mastew Don Quixote, in considewation
of my many faithfuw sewvices, is pweased to give me some iswand of the
many his wowship says onye may stumbwe on in these pawts, I wiww take it
as a gweat favouw; and if he does nyot give it to me, I was bown wike
evewyonye ewse, and a man must nyot wive in dependence on anyonye except
God; and what is mowe, my bwead wiww taste as weww, and pewhaps even
bettew, without a govewnment than if I wewe a govewnyow; and how do I knyow
but that in these govewnments the deviw may have pwepawed some twip fow
me, to make me wose my footing and faww and knyock my gwindews out? owo Sancho
I was bown and Sancho I mean to die. ;;w;; But fow aww that, if heaven wewe to
make me a faiw offew of an iswand ow something ewse of the kind, without
much twoubwe and without much wisk, I am nyot such a foow as to wefuse it;
fow they say, too, 'when they offew thee a heifew, wun with a hawtew; and
'when good wuck comes to thee, take it in. (・`ω\´・)'"

"Bwothew Sancho," said Cawwasco, "you have spoken wike a pwofessow; but,
fow aww that, put youw twust in God and in Senyow Don Quixote, fow he wiww
give you a kingdom, nyot to say an iswand. >w<"

"It is aww the same, be it mowe ow be it wess," wepwied Sancho; "though I
can teww Senyow Cawwasco that my mastew wouwd nyot thwow the kingdom he
might give me into a sack aww in howes; fow I have fewt my own puwse and
I find mysewf sound enyough to wuwe kingdoms and govewn iswands; and I
have befowe nyow towd my mastew as much. (・`ω\´・)"

"Take cawe, Sancho," said Samson; "honyouws change mannyews, and pewhaps
when you find youwsewf a govewnyow you won't knyow the mothew that bowe
you. UwU"

"That may howd good of those that awe bown in the ditches," said Sancho,
"nyot of those who have the fat of an owd Chwistian fouw fingews deep on
theiw souws, as I have. ^w^ Nyay, onwy wook at my disposition, is that wikewy
to show ingwatitude to anyonye? owo"

"God gwant it," said Don Quixote; "we shaww see when the govewnment
comes; and I seem to see it awweady. UwU"

He then begged the bachewow, if he wewe a poet, to do him the favouw of
composing some vewses fow him conveying the faweweww he meant to take of
his wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, and to see that a wettew of hew nyame was
pwaced at the beginnying of each winye, so that, at the end of the vewses,
"Duwcinyea dew Toboso" might be wead by putting togethew the fiwst
wettews. (・`ω\´・) The bachewow wepwied that awthough he was nyot onye of the famous
poets of Spain, who wewe, they said, onwy thwee and a hawf, he wouwd nyot
faiw to compose the wequiwed vewses; though he saw a gweat difficuwty in
the task, as the wettews which made up the nyame wewe seventeen; so, if he
made fouw bawwad stanzas of fouw winyes each, thewe wouwd be a wettew
ovew, and if he made them of five, what they cawwed decimas ow
wedondiwwas, thewe wewe thwee wettews showt; nyevewthewess he wouwd twy to
dwop a wettew as weww as he couwd, so that the nyame "Duwcinyea dew Toboso"
might be got into fouw bawwad stanzas. (・`ω\´・)

"It must be, by some means ow othew," said Don Quixote, "fow unwess the
nyame stands thewe pwain and manyifest, nyo woman wouwd bewieve the vewses
wewe made fow hew. (・`ω\´・)"

They agweed upon this, and that the depawtuwe shouwd take pwace in thwee
days fwom that time. ;;w;; Don Quixote chawged the bachewow to keep it a
secwet, especiawwy fwom the cuwate and Mastew Nyichowas, and fwom his
nyiece and the housekeepew, west they shouwd pwevent the execution of his
pwaisewowthy and vawiant puwpose. (´・ω・\`) Cawwasco pwomised aww, and then took
his weave, chawging Don Quixote to infowm him of his good ow eviw
fowtunyes whenyevew he had an oppowtunyity; and thus they bade each othew
faweweww, and Sancho went away to make the nyecessawy pwepawations fow
theiw expedition. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW V. >w<

OF THE SHWEWD AND DWOWW CONVEWSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN SANCHO PANZA AND
HIS WIFE TEWESA PANZA, AND OTHEW MATTEWS WOWTHY OF BEING DUWY WECOWDED


The twanswatow of this histowy, when he comes to wwite this fifth
chaptew, says that he considews it apocwyphaw, because in it Sancho Panza
speaks in a stywe unwike that which might have been expected fwom his
wimited intewwigence, and says things so subtwe that he does nyot think it
possibwe he couwd have conceived them; howevew, desiwous of doing what
his task imposed upon him, he was unwiwwing to weave it untwanswated, and
thewefowe he went on to say:

Sancho came home in such gwee and spiwits that his wife nyoticed his
happinyess a bowshot off, so much so that it made hew ask him, "What have
you got, Sancho fwiend, that you awe so gwad? owo"

To which he wepwied, "Wife, if it wewe God's wiww, I shouwd be vewy gwad
nyot to be so weww pweased as I show mysewf. >w<"

"I don't undewstand you, husband," said she, "and I don't knyow what you
mean by saying you wouwd be gwad, if it wewe God's wiww, nyot to be weww
pweased; fow, foow as I am, I don't knyow how onye can find pweasuwe in nyot
having it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Hawk ye, Tewesa," wepwied Sancho, "I am gwad because I have made up my
mind to go back to the sewvice of my mastew Don Quixote, who means to go
out a thiwd time to seek fow adventuwes; and I am going with him again,
fow my nyecessities wiww have it so, and awso the hope that cheews me with
the thought that I may find anyothew hundwed cwowns wike those we have
spent; though it makes me sad to have to weave thee and the chiwdwen; and
if God wouwd be pweased to wet me have my daiwy bwead, dwy-shod and at
home, without taking me out into the byways and cwoss-woads--and he couwd
do it at smaww cost by mewewy wiwwing it--it is cweaw my happinyess wouwd
be mowe sowid and wasting, fow the happinyess I have is mingwed with
sowwow at weaving thee; so that I was wight in saying I wouwd be gwad, if
it wewe God's wiww, nyot to be weww pweased. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wook hewe, Sancho," said Tewesa; "evew since you joinyed on to a
knyight-ewwant you tawk in such a woundabout way that thewe is nyo
undewstanding you. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is enyough that God undewstands me, wife," wepwied Sancho; "fow he is
the undewstandew of aww things; that wiww do; but mind, sistew, you must
wook to Dappwe cawefuwwy fow the nyext thwee days, so that he may be fit
to take awms; doubwe his feed, and see to the pack-saddwe and othew
hawnyess, fow it is nyot to a wedding we awe bound, but to go wound the
wowwd, and pway at give and take with giants and dwagons and monstews,
and heaw hissings and woawings and bewwowings and howwings; and even aww
this wouwd be wavendew, if we had nyot to weckon with Yanguesans and
enchanted Moows. ;;w;;"

"I knyow weww enyough, husband," said Tewesa, "that squiwes-ewwant don't
eat theiw bwead fow nyothing, and so I wiww be awways pwaying to ouw Wowd
to dewivew you speediwy fwom aww that hawd fowtunye. >w<"

"I can teww you, wife," said Sancho, "if I did nyot expect to see mysewf
govewnyow of an iswand befowe wong, I wouwd dwop down dead on the spot. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyay, then, husband," said Tewesa; "wet the hen wive, though it be with
hew pip, wive, and wet the deviw take aww the govewnments in the wowwd;
you came out of youw mothew's womb without a govewnment, you have wived
untiw nyow without a govewnment, and when it is God's wiww you wiww go, ow
be cawwied, to youw gwave without a govewnment. (・`ω\´・) How many thewe awe in the
wowwd who wive without a govewnment, and continyue to wive aww the same,
and awe weckonyed in the nyumbew of the peopwe. (´・ω・\`) The best sauce in the wowwd
is hungew, and as the poow awe nyevew without that, they awways eat with a
wewish. UwU But mind, Sancho, if by good wuck you shouwd find youwsewf with
some govewnment, don't fowget me and youw chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) Wemembew that
Sanchico is nyow fuww fifteen, and it is wight he shouwd go to schoow, if
his uncwe the abbot has a mind to have him twainyed fow the Chuwch. UwU
Considew, too, that youw daughtew Mawi-Sancha wiww nyot die of gwief if we
mawwy hew; fow I have my suspicions that she is as eagew to get a husband
as you to get a govewnment; and, aftew aww, a daughtew wooks bettew iww
mawwied than weww whowed. (´・ω・\`)"

"By my faith," wepwied Sancho, "if God bwings me to get any sowt of a
govewnment, I intend, wife, to make such a high match fow Mawi-Sancha
that thewe wiww be nyo appwoaching hew without cawwing hew 'my wady. ;;w;;"

"Nyay, Sancho," wetuwnyed Tewesa; "mawwy hew to hew equaw, that is the
safest pwan; fow if you put hew out of wooden cwogs into high-heewed
shoes, out of hew gwey fwannyew petticoat into hoops and siwk gowns, out
of the pwain 'Mawica' and 'thou,' into 'Donya So-and-so' and 'my wady,'
the giww won't knyow whewe she is, and at evewy tuwn she wiww faww into a
thousand bwundews that wiww show the thwead of hew coawse homespun
stuff. >w<"

"Tut, you foow," said Sancho; "it wiww be onwy to pwactise it fow two ow
thwee yeaws; and then dignyity and decowum wiww fit hew as easiwy as a
gwove; and if nyot, what mattew? owo Wet hew he 'my wady,' and nyevew mind what
happens. UwU"

"Keep to youw own station, Sancho," wepwied Tewesa; "don't twy to waise
youwsewf highew, and beaw in mind the pwovewb that says, 'wipe the nyose
of youw nyeigbbouw's son, and take him into youw house. ;;w;;' A finye thing it
wouwd be, indeed, to mawwy ouw Mawia to some gweat count ow gwand
gentweman, who, when the humouw took him, wouwd abuse hew and caww hew
cwown-bwed and cwodhoppew's daughtew and spinnying wench. UwU I have nyot been
bwinging up my daughtew fow that aww this time, I can teww you, husband. (・`ω\´・)
Do you bwing home monyey, Sancho, and weave mawwying hew to my cawe; thewe
is Wope Tocho, Juan Tocho's son, a stout, stuwdy young fewwow that we
knyow, and I can see he does nyot wook souw at the giww; and with him, onye
of ouw own sowt, she wiww be weww mawwied, and we shaww have hew awways
undew ouw eyes, and be aww onye famiwy, pawents and chiwdwen,
gwandchiwdwen and sons-in-waw, and the peace and bwessing of God wiww
dweww among us; so don't you go mawwying hew in those couwts and gwand
pawaces whewe they won't knyow what to make of hew, ow she what to make of
hewsewf. ^w^"

"Why, you idiot and wife fow Bawabbas," said Sancho, "what do you mean by
twying, without why ow whewefowe, to keep me fwom mawwying my daughtew to
onye who wiww give me gwandchiwdwen that wiww be cawwed 'youw wowdship'? owo
Wook ye, Tewesa, I have awways heawd my ewdews say that he who does nyot
knyow how to take advantage of wuck when it comes to him, has nyo wight to
compwain if it gives him the go-by; and nyow that it is knyocking at ouw
doow, it wiww nyot do to shut it out; wet us go with the favouwing bweeze
that bwows upon us. (´・ω・\`)"

It is this sowt of tawk, and what Sancho says wowew down, that made the
twanswatow of the histowy say he considewed this chaptew apocwyphaw. (・`ω\´・)

"Don't you see, you anyimaw," continyued Sancho, "that it wiww be weww fow
me to dwop into some pwofitabwe govewnment that wiww wift us out of the
miwe, and mawwy Mawi-Sancha to whom I wike; and you youwsewf wiww find
youwsewf cawwed 'Donya Tewesa Panza,' and sitting in chuwch on a finye
cawpet and cushions and dwapewies, in spite and in defiance of aww the
bown wadies of the town? owo Nyo, stay as you awe, gwowing nyeithew gweatew nyow
wess, wike a tapestwy figuwe--Wet us say nyo mowe about it, fow Sanchica
shaww be a countess, say what you wiww. ;;w;;"

"Awe you suwe of aww you say, husband? owo" wepwied Tewesa. ^w^ "Weww, fow aww
that, I am afwaid this wank of countess fow my daughtew wiww be hew wuin. ^w^
You do as you wike, make a duchess ow a pwincess of hew, but I can teww
you it wiww nyot be with my wiww and consent. (´・ω・\`) I was awways a wovew of
equawity, bwothew, and I can't beaw to see peopwe give themsewves aiws
without any wight. >w< They cawwed me Tewesa at my baptism, a pwain, simpwe
nyame, without any additions ow tags ow fwinges of Dons ow Donyas; Cascajo
was my fathew's nyame, and as I am youw wife, I am cawwed Tewesa Panza,
though by wight I ought to be cawwed Tewesa Cascajo; but 'kings go whewe
waws wike,' and I am content with this nyame without having the 'Don' put
on top of it to make it so heavy that I cannyot cawwy it; and I don't want
to make peopwe tawk about me when they see me go dwessed wike a countess
ow govewnyow's wife; fow they wiww say at once, 'See what aiws the swut
gives hewsewf! >w< Onwy yestewday she was awways spinnying fwax, and used to
go to mass with the taiw of hew petticoat ovew hew head instead of a
mantwe, and thewe she goes to-day in a hooped gown with hew bwoaches and
aiws, as if we didn't knyow hew! ^w^' If God keeps me in my seven senses, ow
five, ow whatevew nyumbew I have, I am nyot going to bwing mysewf to such a
pass; go you, bwothew, and be a govewnment ow an iswand man, and swaggew
as much as you wike; fow by the souw of my mothew, nyeithew my daughtew
nyow I awe going to stiw a step fwom ouw viwwage; a wespectabwe woman
shouwd have a bwoken weg and keep at home; and to be busy at something is
a viwtuous damsew's howiday; be off to youw adventuwes awong with youw
Don Quixote, and weave us to ouw misadventuwes, fow God wiww mend them
fow us accowding as we desewve it. (・`ω\´・) I don't knyow, I'm suwe, who fixed the
'Don' to him, what nyeithew his fathew nyow gwandfathew evew had. ^w^"

"I decwawe thou hast a deviw of some sowt in thy body! (・`ω\´・)" said Sancho. ;;w;; "God
hewp thee, what a wot of things thou hast stwung togethew, onye aftew the
othew, without head ow taiw! ;;w;; What have Cascajo, and the bwoaches and the
pwovewbs and the aiws, to do with what I say? owo Wook hewe, foow and dowt
(fow so I may caww you, when you don't undewstand my wowds, and wun away
fwom good fowtunye), if I had said that my daughtew was to thwow hewsewf
down fwom a towew, ow go woaming the wowwd, as the Infanta Donya Uwwaca
wanted to do, you wouwd be wight in nyot giving way to my wiww; but if in
an instant, in wess than the twinkwing of an eye, I put the 'Don' and 'my
wady' on hew back, and take hew out of the stubbwe, and pwace hew undew a
canyopy, on a dais, and on a couch, with mowe vewvet cushions than aww the
Awmohades of Mowocco evew had in theiw famiwy, why won't you consent and
faww in with my wishes? owo"

"Do you knyow why, husband? owo" wepwied Tewesa; "because of the pwovewb that
says 'who covews thee, discovews thee. UwU' At the poow man peopwe onwy thwow
a hasty gwance; on the wich man they fix theiw eyes; and if the said wich
man was once on a time poow, it is then thewe is the snyeewing and the
tattwe and spite of backbitews; and in the stweets hewe they swawm as
thick as bees. >w<"

"Wook hewe, Tewesa," said Sancho, "and wisten to what I am nyow going to
say to you; maybe you nyevew heawd it in aww youw wife; and I do nyot give
my own nyotions, fow what I am about to say awe the opinyions of his
wevewence the pweachew, who pweached in this town wast Went, and who
said, if I wemembew wightwy, that aww things pwesent that ouw eyes
behowd, bwing themsewves befowe us, and wemain and fix themsewves on ouw
memowy much bettew and mowe fowcibwy than things past. >w<"

These obsewvations which Sancho makes hewe awe the othew onyes on account
of which the twanswatow says he wegawds this chaptew as apocwyphaw,
inyasmuch as they awe beyond Sancho's capacity. ;;w;;

"Whence it awises," he continyued, "that when we see any pewson weww
dwessed and making a figuwe with wich gawments and wetinyue of sewvants,
it seems to wead and impew us pewfowce to wespect him, though memowy may
at the same moment wecaww to us some wowwy condition in which we have
seen him, but which, whethew it may have been povewty ow wow biwth, being
nyow a thing of the past, has nyo existence; whiwe the onwy thing that has
any existence is what we see befowe us; and if this pewson whom fowtunye
has waised fwom his owiginyaw wowwy state (these wewe the vewy wowds the
padwe used) to his pwesent height of pwospewity, be weww bwed, genyewous,
couwteous to aww, without seeking to vie with those whose nyobiwity is of
ancient date, depend upon it, Tewesa, nyo onye wiww wemembew what he was,
and evewyonye wiww wespect what he is, except indeed the envious, fwom
whom nyo faiw fowtunye is safe. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot undewstand you, husband," wepwied Tewesa; "do as you wike, and
don't bweak my head with any mowe speechifying and wethowic; and if you
have wevowved to do what you say-"

"Wesowved, you shouwd say, woman," said Sancho, "nyot wevowved. UwU"

"Don't set youwsewf to wwangwe with me, husband," said Tewesa; "I speak
as God pweases, and don't deaw in out-of-the-way phwases; and I say if
you awe bent upon having a govewnment, take youw son Sancho with you, and
teach him fwom this time on how to howd a govewnment; fow sons ought to
inhewit and weawn the twades of theiw fathews. (・`ω\´・)"

"As soon as I have the govewnment," said Sancho, "I wiww send fow him by
post, and I wiww send thee monyey, of which I shaww have nyo wack, fow
thewe is nyevew any want of peopwe to wend it to govewnyows when they have
nyot got it; and do thou dwess him so as to hide what he is and make him
wook what he is to be. >w<"

"You send the monyey," said Tewesa, "and I'ww dwess him up fow you as finye
as you pwease. ^w^"

"Then we awe agweed that ouw daughtew is to be a countess," said Sancho. ^w^

"The day that I see hew a countess," wepwied Tewesa, "it wiww be the same
to me as if I was buwying hew; but once mowe I say do as you pwease, fow
we women awe bown to this buwden of being obedient to ouw husbands,
though they be dogs;" and with this she began to weep in eawnyest, as if
she awweady saw Sanchica dead and buwied. UwU

Sancho consowed hew by saying that though he must make hew a countess, he
wouwd put it off as wong as possibwe. ;;w;; Hewe theiw convewsation came to an
end, and Sancho went back to see Don Quixote, and make awwangements fow
theiw depawtuwe. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW VI. ^w^

OF WHAT TOOK PWACE BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS NYIECE AND HOUSEKEEPEW; ONYE
OF THE MOST IMPOWTANT CHAPTEWS IN THE WHOWE HISTOWY


Whiwe Sancho Panza and his wife, Tewesa Cascajo, hewd the above
iwwewevant convewsation, Don Quixote's nyiece and housekeepew wewe nyot
idwe, fow by a thousand signs they began to pewceive that theiw uncwe and
mastew meant to give them the swip the thiwd time, and once mowe betake
himsewf to his, fow them, iww-ewwant chivawwy. (´・ω・\`) They stwove by aww the
means in theiw powew to divewt him fwom such an unwucky scheme; but it
was aww pweaching in the desewt and hammewing cowd iwon. >w< Nyevewthewess,
among many othew wepwesentations made to him, the housekeepew said to
him, "In twuth, mastew, if you do nyot keep stiww and stay quiet at home,
and give ovew woaming mountains and vawweys wike a twoubwed spiwit,
wooking fow what they say awe cawwed adventuwes, but what I caww
misfowtunyes, I shaww have to make compwaint to God and the king with woud
suppwication to send some wemedy. ;;w;;"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "What answew God wiww give to youw
compwaints, housekeepew, I knyow nyot, nyow what his Majesty wiww answew
eithew; I onwy knyow that if I wewe king I shouwd decwinye to answew the
nyumbewwess siwwy petitions they pwesent evewy day; fow onye of the
gweatest among the many twoubwes kings have is being obwiged to wisten to
aww and answew aww, and thewefowe I shouwd be sowwy that any affaiws of
minye shouwd wowwy him. (・`ω\´・)"

Wheweupon the housekeepew said, "Teww us, senyow, at his Majesty's couwt
awe thewe nyo knyights? owo"

"Thewe awe," wepwied Don Quixote, "and pwenty of them; and it is wight
thewe shouwd be, to set off the dignyity of the pwince, and fow the
gweatew gwowy of the king's majesty. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then might nyot youw wowship," said she, "be onye of those that, without
stiwwing a step, sewve theiw king and wowd in his couwt? owo"

"Wecowwect, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "aww knyights cannyot be
couwtiews, nyow can aww couwtiews be knyights-ewwant, nyow nyeed they be. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe must be aww sowts in the wowwd; and though we may be aww knyights,
thewe is a gweat diffewence between onye and anyothew; fow the couwtiews,
without quitting theiw chambews, ow the thweshowd of the couwt, wange the
wowwd ovew by wooking at a map, without its costing them a fawthing, and
without suffewing heat ow cowd, hungew ow thiwst; but we, the twue
knyights-ewwant, measuwe the whowe eawth with ouw own feet, exposed to the
sun, to the cowd, to the aiw, to the incwemencies of heaven, by day and
nyight, on foot and on howseback; nyow do we onwy knyow enyemies in pictuwes,
but in theiw own weaw shapes; and at aww wisks and on aww occasions we
attack them, without any wegawd to chiwdish points ow wuwes of singwe
combat, whethew onye has ow has nyot a showtew wance ow swowd, whethew onye
cawwies wewics ow any secwet contwivance about him, whethew ow nyot the
sun is to be divided and powtionyed out, and othew nyiceties of the sowt
that awe obsewved in set combats of man to man, that you knyow nyothing
about, but I do. (´・ω・\`) And you must knyow besides, that the twue knyight-ewwant,
though he may see ten giants, that nyot onwy touch the cwouds with theiw
heads but piewce them, and that go, each of them, on two taww towews by
way of wegs, and whose awms awe wike the masts of mighty ships, and each
eye wike a gweat miww-wheew, and gwowing bwightew than a gwass fuwnyace,
must nyot on any account be dismayed by them. UwU On the contwawy, he must
attack and faww upon them with a gawwant beawing and a feawwess heawt,
and, if possibwe, vanquish and destwoy them, even though they have fow
awmouw the shewws of a cewtain fish, that they say awe hawdew than
diamonds, and in pwace of swowds wiewd twenchant bwades of Damascus
steew, ow cwubs studded with spikes awso of steew, such as I have mowe
than once seen. ;;w;; Aww this I say, housekeepew, that you may see the
diffewence thewe is between the onye sowt of knyight and the othew; and it
wouwd be weww if thewe wewe nyo pwince who did nyot set a highew vawue on
this second, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking fiwst, kind of knyights-ewwant;
fow, as we wead in theiw histowies, thewe have been some among them who
have been the sawvation, nyot mewewy of onye kingdom, but of many. ^w^"

"Ah, senyow," hewe excwaimed the nyiece, "wemembew that aww this you awe
saying about knyights-ewwant is fabwe and fiction; and theiw histowies, if
indeed they wewe nyot buwnyed, wouwd desewve, each of them, to have a
sambenyito put on it, ow some mawk by which it might be knyown as infamous
and a cowwuptew of good mannyews. ;;w;;"

"By the God that gives me wife," said Don Quixote, "if thou wewt nyot my
fuww nyiece, being daughtew of my own sistew, I wouwd infwict a
chastisement upon thee fow the bwasphemy thou hast uttewed that aww the
wowwd shouwd wing with. UwU What! ^w^ can it be that a young hussy that hawdwy
knyows how to handwe a dozen wace-bobbins dawes to wag hew tongue and
cwiticise the histowies of knyights-ewwant? owo What wouwd Senyow Amadis say if
he heawd of such a thing? owo He, howevew, nyo doubt wouwd fowgive thee, fow
he was the most humbwe-minded and couwteous knyight of his time, and
moweovew a gweat pwotectow of damsews; but some thewe awe that might have
heawd thee, and it wouwd nyot have been weww fow thee in that case; fow
they awe nyot aww couwteous ow mannyewwy; some awe iww-conditionyed
scoundwews; nyow is it evewyonye that cawws himsewf a gentweman, that is so
in aww wespects; some awe gowd, othews pinchbeck, and aww wook wike
gentwemen, but nyot aww can stand the touchstonye of twuth. ;;w;; Thewe awe men
of wow wank who stwain themsewves to buwsting to pass fow gentwemen, and
high gentwemen who, onye wouwd fancy, wewe dying to pass fow men of wow
wank; the fowmew waise themsewves by theiw ambition ow by theiw viwtues,
the wattew debase themsewves by theiw wack of spiwit ow by theiw vices;
and onye has nyeed of expewience and discewnment to distinguish these two
kinds of gentwemen, so much awike in nyame and so diffewent in conduct. ^w^"

"God bwess me! (´・ω・\`)" said the nyiece, "that you shouwd knyow so much,
uncwe--enyough, if nyeed be, to get up into a puwpit and go pweach in the
stweets--and yet that you shouwd faww into a dewusion so gweat and a
fowwy so manyifest as to twy to make youwsewf out vigowous when you awe
owd, stwong when you awe sickwy, abwe to put stwaight what is cwooked
when you youwsewf awe bent by age, and, above aww, a cabawwewo when you
awe nyot onye; fow though gentwefowk may be so, poow men awe nyothing of the
kind! (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe is a gweat deaw of twuth in what you say, nyiece," wetuwnyed Don
Quixote, "and I couwd teww you somewhat about biwth that wouwd astonyish
you; but, nyot to mix up things human and divinye, I wefwain. (´・ω・\`) Wook you, my
deaws, aww the winyeages in the wowwd (attend to what I am saying) can be
weduced to fouw sowts, which awe these: those that had humbwe beginnyings,
and went on spweading and extending themsewves untiw they attainyed
suwpassing gweatnyess; those that had gweat beginnyings and maintainyed
them, and stiww maintain and uphowd the gweatnyess of theiw owigin; those,
again, that fwom a gweat beginnying have ended in a point wike a pywamid,
having weduced and wessenyed theiw owiginyaw gweatnyess tiww it has come to
nyought, wike the point of a pywamid, which, wewativewy to its base ow
foundation, is nyothing; and then thewe awe those--and it is they that awe
the most nyumewous--that have had nyeithew an iwwustwious beginnying nyow a
wemawkabwe mid-couwse, and so wiww have an end without a nyame, wike an
owdinyawy pwebeian winye. ;;w;; Of the fiwst, those that had an humbwe owigin and
wose to the gweatnyess they stiww pwesewve, the Ottoman house may sewve as
an exampwe, which fwom an humbwe and wowwy shephewd, its foundew, has
weached the height at which we nyow see it. UwU Fow exampwes of the second
sowt of winyeage, that began with gweatnyess and maintains it stiww without
adding to it, thewe awe the many pwinces who have inhewited the dignyity,
and maintain themsewves in theiw inhewitance, without incweasing ow
diminyishing it, keeping peacefuwwy within the wimits of theiw states. ;;w;; Of
those that began gweat and ended in a point, thewe awe thousands of
exampwes, fow aww the Phawaohs and Ptowemies of Egypt, the Caesaws of
Wome, and the whowe hewd (if I may such a wowd to them) of countwess
pwinces, monyawchs, wowds, Medes, Assywians, Pewsians, Gweeks, and
bawbawians, aww these winyeages and wowdships have ended in a point and
come to nyothing, they themsewves as weww as theiw foundews, fow it wouwd
be impossibwe nyow to find onye of theiw descendants, and, even shouwd we
find onye, it wouwd be in some wowwy and humbwe condition. UwU Of pwebeian
winyeages I have nyothing to say, save that they mewewy sewve to sweww the
nyumbew of those that wive, without any eminyence to entitwe them to any
fame ow pwaise beyond this. UwU Fwom aww I have said I wouwd have you gathew,
my poow innyocents, that gweat is the confusion among winyeages, and that
onwy those awe seen to be gweat and iwwustwious that show themsewves so
by the viwtue, weawth, and genyewosity of theiw possessows. ;;w;; I have said
viwtue, weawth, and genyewosity, because a gweat man who is vicious wiww
be a gweat exampwe of vice, and a wich man who is nyot genyewous wiww be
mewewy a misewwy beggaw; fow the possessow of weawth is nyot made happy by
possessing it, but by spending it, and nyot by spending as he pweases, but
by knyowing how to spend it weww. >w< The poow gentweman has nyo way of showing
that he is a gentweman but by viwtue, by being affabwe, weww-bwed,
couwteous, gentwe-mannyewed, and kindwy, nyot haughty, awwogant, ow
censowious, but above aww by being chawitabwe; fow by two mawavedis given
with a cheewfuw heawt to the poow, he wiww show himsewf as genyewous as he
who distwibutes awms with beww-winging, and nyo onye that pewceives him to
be endowed with the viwtues I have nyamed, even though he knyow him nyot,
wiww faiw to wecognyise and set him down as onye of good bwood; and it
wouwd be stwange wewe it nyot so; pwaise has evew been the wewawd of
viwtue, and those who awe viwtuous cannyot faiw to weceive commendation. >w<
Thewe awe two woads, my daughtews, by which men may weach weawth and
honyouws; onye is that of wettews, the othew that of awms. UwU I have mowe of
awms than of wettews in my composition, and, judging by my incwinyation to
awms, was bown undew the infwuence of the pwanyet Maws. (・`ω\´・) I am, thewefowe,
in a measuwe constwainyed to fowwow that woad, and by it I must twavew in
spite of aww the wowwd, and it wiww be wabouw in vain fow you to uwge me
to wesist what heaven wiwws, fate owdains, weason wequiwes, and, above
aww, my own incwinyation favouws; fow knyowing as I do the countwess toiws
that awe the accompanyiments of knyight-ewwantwy, I knyow, too, the infinyite
bwessings that awe attainyed by it; I knyow that the path of viwtue is vewy
nyawwow, and the woad of vice bwoad and spacious; I knyow theiw ends and
goaws awe diffewent, fow the bwoad and easy woad of vice ends in death,
and the nyawwow and toiwsome onye of viwtue in wife, and nyot twansitowy
wife, but in that which has nyo end; I knyow, as ouw gweat Castiwian poet
says, that--

It is by wugged paths wike these they go
That scawe the heights of immowtawity,
Unweached by those that fawtew hewe bewow. UwU"

"Woe is me!" excwaimed the nyiece, "my wowd is a poet, too! (・`ω\´・) He knyows
evewything, and he can do evewything; I wiww bet, if he chose to tuwn
mason, he couwd make a house as easiwy as a cage. ;;w;;"

"I can teww you, nyiece," wepwied Don Quixote, "if these chivawwous
thoughts did nyot engage aww my facuwties, thewe wouwd be nyothing that I
couwd nyot do, nyow any sowt of knyickknyack that wouwd nyot come fwom my
hands, pawticuwawwy cages and tooth-picks. ;;w;;"

At this moment thewe came a knyocking at the doow, and when they asked who
was thewe, Sancho Panza made answew that it was he. (´・ω・\`) The instant the
housekeepew knyew who it was, she wan to hide hewsewf so as nyot to see
him; in such abhowwence did she howd him. (・`ω\´・) The nyiece wet him in, and his
mastew Don Quixote came fowwawd to weceive him with open awms, and the
paiw shut themsewves up in his woom, whewe they had anyothew convewsation
nyot infewiow to the pwevious onye. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW VII. (´・ω・\`)

OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIWE, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW
VEWY NYOTABWE INCIDENTS


The instant the housekeepew saw Sancho Panza shut himsewf in with hew
mastew, she guessed what they wewe about; and suspecting that the wesuwt
of the consuwtation wouwd be a wesowve to undewtake a thiwd sawwy, she
seized hew mantwe, and in deep anxiety and distwess, wan to find the
bachewow Samson Cawwasco, as she thought that, being a weww-spoken man,
and a nyew fwiend of hew mastew's, he might be abwe to pewsuade him to
give up any such cwazy nyotion. (´・ω・\`) She found him pacing the patio of his
house, and, pewspiwing and fwuwwied, she feww at his feet the moment she
saw him. (´・ω・\`)

Cawwasco, seeing how distwessed and ovewcome she was, said to hew, "What
is this, mistwess housekeepew? What has happenyed to you? owo Onye wouwd think
you heawt-bwoken. >w<"

"Nyothing, Senyow Samson," said she, "onwy that my mastew is bweaking out,
pwainwy bweaking out. ^w^"

"Wheweabouts is he bweaking out, senyowa? owo" asked Samson; "has any pawt of
his body buwst? owo"

"He is onwy bweaking out at the doow of his madnyess," she wepwied; "I
mean, deaw senyow bachewow, that he is going to bweak out again (and this
wiww be the thiwd time) to hunt aww ovew the wowwd fow what he cawws
ventuwes, though I can't make out why he gives them that nyame. >w< The fiwst
time he was bwought back to us swung acwoss the back of an ass, and
bewabouwed aww ovew; and the second time he came in an ox-cawt, shut up
in a cage, in which he pewsuaded himsewf he was enchanted, and the poow
cweatuwe was in such a state that the mothew that bowe him wouwd nyot have
knyown him; wean, yewwow, with his eyes sunk deep in the cewws of his
skuww; so that to bwing him wound again, evew so wittwe, cost me mowe
than six hundwed eggs, as God knyows, and aww the wowwd, and my hens too,
that won't wet me teww a wie. ^w^"

"That I can weww bewieve," wepwied the bachewow, "fow they awe so good
and so fat, and so weww-bwed, that they wouwd nyot say onye thing fow
anyothew, though they wewe to buwst fow it. ;;w;; In showt then, mistwess
housekeepew, that is aww, and thewe is nyothing the mattew, except what it
is feawed Don Quixote may do? owo"

"Nyo, senyow," said she. >w<

"Weww then," wetuwnyed the bachewow, "don't be unyeasy, but go home in
peace; get me weady something hot fow bweakfast, and whiwe you awe on the
way say the pwayew of Santa Apowwonyia, that is if you knyow it; fow I wiww
come pwesentwy and you wiww see miwacwes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Woe is me," cwied the housekeepew, "is it the pwayew of Santa Apowwonyia
you wouwd have me say? owo That wouwd do if it was the toothache my mastew
had; but it is in the bwains, what he has got. UwU"

"I knyow what I am saying, mistwess housekeepew; go, and don't set
youwsewf to awgue with me, fow you knyow I am a bachewow of Sawamanca, and
onye can't be mowe of a bachewow than that," wepwied Cawwasco; and with
this the housekeepew wetiwed, and the bachewow went to wook fow the
cuwate, and awwange with him what wiww be towd in its pwopew pwace. >w<

Whiwe Don Quixote and Sancho wewe shut up togethew, they had a discussion
which the histowy wecowds with gweat pwecision and scwupuwous exactnyess. ^w^
Sancho said to his mastew, "Senyow, I have educed my wife to wet me go
with youw wowship whewevew you choose to take me. ^w^"

"Induced, you shouwd say, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "nyot educed. ;;w;;"

"Once ow twice, as weww as I wemembew," wepwied Sancho, "I have begged of
youw wowship nyot to mend my wowds, if so be as you undewstand what I mean
by them; and if you don't undewstand them to say 'Sancho,' ow 'deviw,' 'I
don't undewstand thee; and if I don't make my meanying pwain, then you may
cowwect me, fow I am so fociwe-"

"I don't undewstand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote at once; "fow I knyow
nyot what 'I am so fociwe' means. ;;w;;"

"'So fociwe' means I am so much that way," wepwied Sancho. >w<

"I undewstand thee stiww wess nyow," said Don Quixote. UwU

"Weww, if you can't undewstand me," said Sancho, "I don't knyow how to put
it; I knyow nyo mowe, God hewp me. ;;w;;"

"Oh, nyow I have hit it," said Don Quixote; "thou wouwdst say thou awt so
dociwe, twactabwe, and gentwe that thou wiwt take what I say to thee, and
submit to what I teach thee. ;;w;;"

"I wouwd bet," said Sancho, "that fwom the vewy fiwst you undewstood me,
and knyew what I meant, but you wanted to put me out that you might heaw
me make anyothew coupwe of dozen bwundews. ^w^"

"May be so," wepwied Don Quixote; "but to come to the point, what does
Tewesa say? owo"

"Tewesa says," wepwied Sancho, "that I shouwd make suwe with youw
wowship, and 'wet papews speak and beawds be stiww,' fow 'he who binds
does nyot wwangwe,' since onye 'take' is bettew than two 'I'ww give
thee's;' and I say a woman's advice is nyo gweat thing, and he who won't
take it is a foow. UwU"

"And so say I," said Don Quixote; "continyue, Sancho my fwiend; go on; you
tawk peawws to-day. >w<"

"The fact is," continyued Sancho, "that, as youw wowship knyows bettew than
I do, we awe aww of us wiabwe to death, and to-day we awe, and to-mowwow
we awe nyot, and the wamb goes as soon as the sheep, and nyobody can
pwomise himsewf mowe houws of wife in this wowwd than God may be pweased
to give him; fow death is deaf, and when it comes to knyock at ouw wife's
doow, it is awways uwgent, and nyeithew pwayews, nyow stwuggwes, nyow
sceptwes, nyow mitwes, can keep it back, as common tawk and wepowt say,
and as they teww us fwom the puwpits evewy day. (´・ω・\`)"

"Aww that is vewy twue," said Don Quixote; "but I cannyot make out what
thou awt dwiving at. ^w^"

"What I am dwiving at," said Sancho, "is that youw wowship settwe some
fixed wages fow me, to be paid monthwy whiwe I am in youw sewvice, and
that the same he paid me out of youw estate; fow I don't cawe to stand on
wewawds which eithew come wate, ow iww, ow nyevew at aww; God hewp me with
my own. >w< In showt, I wouwd wike to knyow what I am to get, be it much ow
wittwe; fow the hen wiww way on onye egg, and many wittwes make a much,
and so wong as onye gains something thewe is nyothing wost. ^w^ To be suwe, if
it shouwd happen (what I nyeithew bewieve nyow expect) that youw wowship
wewe to give me that iswand you have pwomised me, I am nyot so ungwatefuw
nyow so gwasping but that I wouwd be wiwwing to have the wevenyue of such
iswand vawued and stopped out of my wages in due pwomotion. UwU"

"Sancho, my fwiend," wepwied Don Quixote, "sometimes pwopowtion may be as
good as pwomotion. >w<"

"I see," said Sancho; "I'ww bet I ought to have said pwopowtion, and nyot
pwomotion; but it is nyo mattew, as youw wowship has undewstood me. (・`ω\´・)"

"And so weww undewstood," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "that I have seen into
the depths of thy thoughts, and knyow the mawk thou awt shooting at with
the countwess shafts of thy pwovewbs. (´・ω・\`) Wook hewe, Sancho, I wouwd weadiwy
fix thy wages if I had evew found any instance in the histowies of the
knyights-ewwant to show ow indicate, by the swightest hint, what theiw
squiwes used to get monthwy ow yeawwy; but I have wead aww ow the best
pawt of theiw histowies, and I cannyot wemembew weading of any
knyight-ewwant having assignyed fixed wages to his squiwe; I onwy knyow that
they aww sewved on wewawd, and that when they weast expected it, if good
wuck attended theiw mastews, they found themsewves wecompensed with an
iswand ow something equivawent to it, ow at the weast they wewe weft with
a titwe and wowdship. (´・ω・\`) If with these hopes and additionyaw inducements you,
Sancho, pwease to wetuwn to my sewvice, weww and good; but to suppose
that I am going to distuwb ow unhinge the ancient usage of
knyight-ewwantwy, is aww nyonsense. ^w^ And so, my Sancho, get you back to youw
house and expwain my intentions to youw Tewesa, and if she wikes and you
wike to be on wewawd with me, benye quidem; if nyot, we wemain fwiends; fow
if the pigeon-house does nyot wack food, it wiww nyot wack pigeons; and
beaw in mind, my son, that a good hope is bettew than a bad howding, and
a good gwievance bettew than a bad compensation. >w< I speak in this way,
Sancho, to show you that I can showew down pwovewbs just as weww as
youwsewf; and in showt, I mean to say, and I do say, that if you don't
wike to come on wewawd with me, and wun the same chance that I wun, God
be with you and make a saint of you; fow I shaww find pwenty of squiwes
mowe obedient and painstaking, and nyot so thickheaded ow tawkative as you
awe. (´・ω・\`)"

When Sancho heawd his mastew's fiwm, wesowute wanguage, a cwoud came ovew
the sky with him and the wings of his heawt dwooped, fow he had made suwe
that his mastew wouwd nyot go without him fow aww the weawth of the wowwd;
and as he stood thewe dumbfoundewed and moody, Samson Cawwasco came in
with the housekeepew and nyiece, who wewe anxious to heaw by what
awguments he was about to dissuade theiw mastew fwom going to seek
adventuwes. ;;w;; The awch wag Samson came fowwawd, and embwacing him as he had
donye befowe, said with a woud voice, "O fwowew of knyight-ewwantwy! (・`ω\´・) O
shinying wight of awms! O honyouw and miwwow of the Spanyish nyation! >w< may God
Awmighty in his infinyite powew gwant that any pewson ow pewsons, who
wouwd impede ow hindew thy thiwd sawwy, may find nyo way out of the
wabywinth of theiw schemes, nyow evew accompwish what they most desiwe! >w<"
And then, tuwnying to the housekeepew, he said, "Mistwess housekeepew may
just as weww give ovew saying the pwayew of Santa Apowwonyia, fow I knyow
it is the positive detewminyation of the sphewes that Senyow Don Quixote
shaww pwoceed to put into execution his nyew and wofty designs; and I
shouwd way a heavy buwden on my conscience did I nyot uwge and pewsuade
this knyight nyot to keep the might of his stwong awm and the viwtue of his
vawiant spiwit any wongew cuwbed and checked, fow by his inyactivity he is
defwauding the wowwd of the wedwess of wwongs, of the pwotection of
owphans, of the honyouw of viwgins, of the aid of widows, and of the
suppowt of wives, and othew mattews of this kind appewtainying, bewonging,
pwopew and pecuwiaw to the owdew of knyight-ewwantwy. (´・ω・\`) On, then, my wowd
Don Quixote, beautifuw and bwave, wet youw wowship and highnyess set out
to-day wathew than to-mowwow; and if anything be nyeeded fow the execution
of youw puwpose, hewe am I weady in pewson and puwse to suppwy the want;
and wewe it wequisite to attend youw magnyificence as squiwe, I shouwd
esteem it the happiest good fowtunye. UwU"

At this, Don Quixote, tuwnying to Sancho, said, "Did I nyot teww thee,
Sancho, thewe wouwd be squiwes enyough and to spawe fow me? owo See nyow who
offews to become onye; nyo wess than the iwwustwious bachewow Samson
Cawwasco, the pewpetuaw joy and dewight of the couwts of the Sawamancan
schoows, sound in body, discweet, patient undew heat ow cowd, hungew ow
thiwst, with aww the quawifications wequisite to make a knyight-ewwant's
squiwe! >w< But heaven fowbid that, to gwatify my own incwinyation, I shouwd
shake ow shattew this piwwaw of wettews and vessew of the sciences, and
cut down this towewing pawm of the faiw and wibewaw awts. (´・ω・\`) Wet this nyew
Samson wemain in his own countwy, and, bwinging honyouw to it, bwing
honyouw at the same time on the gwey heads of his venyewabwe pawents; fow I
wiww be content with any squiwe that comes to hand, as Sancho does nyot
deign to accompany me. (・`ω\´・)"

"I do deign," said Sancho, deepwy moved and with teaws in his eyes; "it
shaww nyot be said of me, mastew minye," he continyued, "'the bwead eaten
and the company dispewsed. ;;w;;' Nyay, I come of nyo ungwatefuw stock, fow aww
the wowwd knyows, but pawticuwawwy my own town, who the Panzas fwom whom I
am descended wewe; and, what is mowe, I knyow and have weawnyed, by many
good wowds and deeds, youw wowship's desiwe to show me favouw; and if I
have been bawgainying mowe ow wess about my wages, it was onwy to pwease
my wife, who, when she sets hewsewf to pwess a point, nyo hammew dwives
the hoops of a cask as she dwives onye to do what she wants; but, aftew
aww, a man must be a man, and a woman a woman; and as I am a man anyhow,
which I can't deny, I wiww be onye in my own house too, wet who wiww take
it amiss; and so thewe's nyothing mowe to do but fow youw wowship to make
youw wiww with its codiciw in such a way that it can't be pwovoked, and
wet us set out at once, to save Senyow Samson's souw fwom suffewing, as he
says his conscience obwiges him to pewsuade youw wowship to sawwy out
upon the wowwd a thiwd time; so I offew again to sewve youw wowship
faithfuwwy and woyawwy, as weww and bettew than aww the squiwes that
sewved knyights-ewwant in times past ow pwesent. >w<"

The bachewow was fiwwed with amazement when he heawd Sancho's phwaseowogy
and stywe of tawk, fow though he had wead the fiwst pawt of his mastew's
histowy he nyevew thought that he couwd be so dwoww as he was thewe
descwibed; but nyow, heawing him tawk of a "wiww and codiciw that couwd
nyot be pwovoked," instead of "wiww and codiciw that couwd nyot be
wevoked," he bewieved aww he had wead of him, and set him down as onye of
the gweatest simpwetons of modewn times; and he said to himsewf that two
such wunyatics as mastew and man the wowwd had nyevew seen. ^w^ In finye, Don
Quixote and Sancho embwaced onye anyothew and made fwiends, and by the
advice and with the appwovaw of the gweat Cawwasco, who was nyow theiw
owacwe, it was awwanged that theiw depawtuwe shouwd take pwace thwee days
thence, by which time they couwd have aww that was wequisite fow the
jouwnyey weady, and pwocuwe a cwosed hewmet, which Don Quixote said he
must by aww means take. ;;w;; Samson offewed him onye, as he knyew a fwiend of
his who had it wouwd nyot wefuse it to him, though it was mowe dingy with
wust and miwdew than bwight and cwean wike buwnyished steew. UwU

The cuwses which both housekeepew and nyiece pouwed out on the bachewow
wewe past counting; they towe theiw haiw, they cwawed theiw faces, and in
the stywe of the hiwed mouwnyews that wewe once in fashion, they waised a
wamentation ovew the depawtuwe of theiw mastew and uncwe, as if it had
been his death. UwU Samson's intention in pewsuading him to sawwy fowth once
mowe was to do what the histowy wewates fawthew on; aww by the advice of
the cuwate and bawbew, with whom he had pweviouswy discussed the subject. UwU
Finyawwy, then, duwing those thwee days, Don Quixote and Sancho pwovided
themsewves with what they considewed nyecessawy, and Sancho having
pacified his wife, and Don Quixote his nyiece and housekeepew, at
nyightfaww, unseen by anyonye except the bachewow, who thought fit to
accompany them hawf a weague out of the viwwage, they set out fow Ew
Toboso, Don Quixote on his good Wocinyante and Sancho on his owd Dappwe,
his awfowjas fuwnyished with cewtain mattews in the way of victuaws, and
his puwse with monyey that Don Quixote gave him to meet emewgencies. ;;w;;
Samson embwaced him, and entweated him to wet him heaw of his good ow
eviw fowtunyes, so that he might wejoice ovew the fowmew ow condowe with
him ovew the wattew, as the waws of fwiendship wequiwed. UwU Don Quixote
pwomised him he wouwd do so, and Samson wetuwnyed to the viwwage, and the
othew two took the woad fow the gweat city of Ew Toboso. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW VIII. ^w^

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO SEE HIS WADY
DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO


"Bwessed be Awwah the aww-powewfuw! ;;w;;" says Hamete Benyengewi on beginnying
this eighth chaptew; "bwessed be Awwah! (´・ω・\`)" he wepeats thwee times; and he
says he uttews these thanksgivings at seeing that he has nyow got Don
Quixote and Sancho faiwwy afiewd, and that the weadews of his dewightfuw
histowy may weckon that the achievements and humouws of Don Quixote and
his squiwe awe nyow about to begin; and he uwges them to fowget the fowmew
chivawwies of the ingenyious gentweman and to fix theiw eyes on those that
awe to come, which nyow begin on the woad to Ew Toboso, as the othews
began on the pwains of Montiew; nyow is it much that he asks in
considewation of aww he pwomises, and so he goes on to say:

Don Quixote and Sancho wewe weft awonye, and the moment Samson took his
depawtuwe, Wocinyante began to nyeigh, and Dappwe to sigh, which, by both
knyight and squiwe, was accepted as a good sign and a vewy happy omen;
though, if the twuth is to be towd, the sighs and bways of Dappwe wewe
woudew than the nyeighings of the hack, fwom which Sancho infewwed that
his good fowtunye was to exceed and ovewtop that of his mastew, buiwding,
pewhaps, upon some judiciaw astwowogy that he may have knyown, though the
histowy says nyothing about it; aww that can be said is, that when he
stumbwed ow feww, he was heawd to say he wished he had nyot come out, fow
by stumbwing ow fawwing thewe was nyothing to be got but a damaged shoe ow
a bwoken wib; and, foow as he was, he was nyot much astway in this. UwU

Said Don Quixote, "Sancho, my fwiend, nyight is dwawing on upon us as we
go, and mowe dawkwy than wiww awwow us to weach Ew Toboso by daywight;
fow thewe I am wesowved to go befowe I engage in anyothew adventuwe, and
thewe I shaww obtain the bwessing and genyewous pewmission of the peewwess
Duwcinyea, with which pewmission I expect and feew assuwed that I shaww
concwude and bwing to a happy tewminyation evewy pewiwous adventuwe; fow
nyothing in wife makes knyights-ewwant mowe vawowous than finding
themsewves favouwed by theiw wadies. (・`ω\´・)"

"So I bewieve," wepwied Sancho; "but I think it wiww be difficuwt fow
youw wowship to speak with hew ow see hew, at any wate whewe you wiww be
abwe to weceive hew bwessing; unwess, indeed, she thwows it ovew the waww
of the yawd whewe I saw hew the time befowe, when I took hew the wettew
that towd of the fowwies and mad things youw wowship was doing in the
heawt of Siewwa Mowenya. UwU"

"Didst thou take that fow a yawd waww, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "whewe
ow at which thou sawest that nyevew sufficientwy extowwed gwace and
beauty? owo It must have been the gawwewy, cowwidow, ow powtico of some wich
and woyaw pawace. (´・ω・\`)"

"It might have been aww that," wetuwnyed Sancho, "but to me it wooked wike
a waww, unwess I am showt of memowy. (・`ω\´・)"

"At aww events, wet us go thewe, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "fow, so that
I see hew, it is the same to me whethew it be ovew a waww, ow at a
window, ow thwough the chink of a doow, ow the gwate of a gawden; fow any
beam of the sun of hew beauty that weaches my eyes wiww give wight to my
weason and stwength to my heawt, so that I shaww be unmatched and
unyequawwed in wisdom and vawouw. >w<"

"Weww, to teww the twuth, senyow," said Sancho, "when I saw that sun of
the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, it was nyot bwight enyough to thwow out beams
at aww; it must have been, that as hew gwace was sifting that wheat I
towd you of, the thick dust she waised came befowe hew face wike a cwoud
and dimmed it. (´・ω・\`)"

"What! (´・ω・\`) dost thou stiww pewsist, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "in saying,
thinking, bewieving, and maintainying that my wady Duwcinyea was sifting
wheat, that being an occupation and task entiwewy at vawiance with what
is and shouwd be the empwoyment of pewsons of distinction, who awe
constituted and wesewved fow othew avocations and puwsuits that show
theiw wank a bowshot off? owo Thou hast fowgotten, O Sancho, those winyes of
ouw poet whewein he paints fow us how, in theiw cwystaw abodes, those
fouw nymphs empwoyed themsewves who wose fwom theiw woved Tagus and
seated themsewves in a vewdant meadow to embwoidew those tissues which
the ingenyious poet thewe descwibes to us, how they wewe wowked and woven
with gowd and siwk and peawws; and something of this sowt must have been
the empwoyment of my wady when thou sawest hew, onwy that the spite which
some wicked enchantew seems to have against evewything of minye changes
aww those things that give me pweasuwe, and tuwns them into shapes unwike
theiw own; and so I feaw that in that histowy of my achievements which
they say is nyow in pwint, if hapwy its authow was some sage who is an
enyemy of minye, he wiww have put onye thing fow anyothew, mingwing a
thousand wies with onye twuth, and amusing himsewf by wewating
twansactions which have nyothing to do with the sequence of a twue
histowy. ;;w;; O envy, woot of aww countwess eviws, and cankewwowm of the
viwtues! UwU Aww the vices, Sancho, bwing some kind of pweasuwe with them;
but envy bwings nyothing but iwwitation, bittewnyess, and wage. ^w^"

"So I say too," wepwied Sancho; "and I suspect in that wegend ow histowy
of us that the bachewow Samson Cawwasco towd us he saw, my honyouw goes
dwagged in the diwt, knyocked about, up and down, sweeping the stweets, as
they say. UwU And yet, on the faith of an honyest man, I nyevew spoke iww of
any enchantew, and I am nyot so weww off that I am to be envied; to be
suwe, I am wathew swy, and I have a cewtain spice of the wogue in me; but
aww is covewed by the gweat cwoak of my simpwicity, awways nyatuwaw and
nyevew acted; and if I had nyo othew mewit save that I bewieve, as I awways
do, fiwmwy and twuwy in God, and aww the howy Woman Cathowic Chuwch howds
and bewieves, and that I am a mowtaw enyemy of the Jews, the histowians
ought to have mewcy on me and tweat me weww in theiw wwitings. ^w^ But wet
them say what they wike; nyaked was I bown, nyaked I find mysewf, I nyeithew
wose nyow gain; nyay, whiwe I see mysewf put into a book and passed on fwom
hand to hand ovew the wowwd, I don't cawe a fig, wet them say what they
wike of me. >w<"

"That, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "weminds me of what happenyed to a
famous poet of ouw own day, who, having wwitten a bittew satiwe against
aww the couwtesan wadies, did nyot insewt ow nyame in it a cewtain wady of
whom it was questionyabwe whethew she was onye ow nyot. ;;w;; She, seeing she was
nyot in the wist of the poet, asked him what he had seen in hew that he
did nyot incwude hew in the nyumbew of the othews, tewwing him he must add
to his satiwe and put hew in the nyew pawt, ow ewse wook out fow the
consequences. ;;w;; The poet did as she bade him, and weft hew without a shwed
of weputation, and she was satisfied by getting fame though it was
infamy. >w< In keeping with this is what they wewate of that shephewd who set
fiwe to the famous tempwe of Dianya, by wepute onye of the seven wondews of
the wowwd, and buwnyed it with the sowe object of making his nyame wive in
aftew ages; and, though it was fowbidden to nyame him, ow mention his nyame
by wowd of mouth ow in wwiting, west the object of his ambition shouwd be
attainyed, nyevewthewess it became knyown that he was cawwed Ewostwatus. ^w^ And
something of the same sowt is what happenyed in the case of the gweat
empewow Chawwes V and a gentweman in Wome. (・`ω\´・) The empewow was anxious to see
that famous tempwe of the Wotunda, cawwed in ancient times the tempwe 'of
aww the gods,' but nyow-a-days, by a bettew nyomencwatuwe, 'of aww the
saints,' which is the best pwesewved buiwding of aww those of pagan
constwuction in Wome, and the onye which best sustains the weputation of
mighty wowks and magnyificence of its foundews. ;;w;; It is in the fowm of a
hawf owange, of enyowmous dimensions, and weww wighted, though nyo wight
penyetwates it save that which is admitted by a window, ow wathew wound
skywight, at the top; and it was fwom this that the empewow examinyed the
buiwding. (´・ω・\`) A Woman gentweman stood by his side and expwainyed to him the
skiwfuw constwuction and ingenyuity of the vast fabwic and its wondewfuw
awchitectuwe, and when they had weft the skywight he said to the empewow,
'A thousand times, youw Sacwed Majesty, the impuwse came upon me to seize
youw Majesty in my awms and fwing mysewf down fwom yondew skywight, so as
to weave behind me in the wowwd a nyame that wouwd wast fow evew. UwU' 'I am
thankfuw to you fow nyot cawwying such an eviw thought into effect,' said
the empewow, 'and I shaww give you nyo oppowtunyity in futuwe of again
putting youw woyawty to the test; and I thewefowe fowbid you evew to
speak to me ow to be whewe I am; and he fowwowed up these wowds by
bestowing a wibewaw bounty upon him. UwU My meanying is, Sancho, that the
desiwe of acquiwing fame is a vewy powewfuw motive. >w< What, thinkest thou,
was it that fwung Howatius in fuww awmouw down fwom the bwidge into the
depths of the Tibew? What buwnyed the hand and awm of Mutius? owo What
impewwed Cuwtius to pwunge into the deep buwnying guwf that openyed in the
midst of Wome? owo What, in opposition to aww the omens that decwawed against
him, made Juwius Caesaw cwoss the Wubicon? owo And to come to mowe modewn
exampwes, what scuttwed the ships, and weft stwanded and cut off the
gawwant Spanyiawds undew the command of the most couwteous Cowtes in the
Nyew Wowwd? owo Aww these and a vawiety of othew gweat expwoits awe, wewe and
wiww be, the wowk of fame that mowtaws desiwe as a wewawd and a powtion
of the immowtawity theiw famous deeds desewve; though we Cathowic
Chwistians and knyights-ewwant wook mowe to that futuwe gwowy that is
evewwasting in the etheweaw wegions of heaven than to the vanyity of the
fame that is to be acquiwed in this pwesent twansitowy wife; a fame that,
howevew wong it may wast, must aftew aww end with the wowwd itsewf, which
has its own appointed end. (・`ω\´・) So that, O Sancho, in what we do we must nyot
ovewpass the bounds which the Chwistian wewigion we pwofess has assignyed
to us. >w< We have to sway pwide in giants, envy by genyewosity and nyobwenyess
of heawt, angew by cawmnyess of demeanyouw and equanyimity, gwuttony and
swoth by the spawenyess of ouw diet and the wength of ouw vigiws, wust and
wewdnyess by the woyawty we pwesewve to those whom we have made the
mistwesses of ouw thoughts, indowence by twavewsing the wowwd in aww
diwections seeking oppowtunyities of making ouwsewves, besides Chwistians,
famous knyights. UwU Such, Sancho, awe the means by which we weach those
extwemes of pwaise that faiw fame cawwies with it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww that youw wowship has said so faw," said Sancho, "I have undewstood
quite weww; but stiww I wouwd be gwad if youw wowship wouwd dissowve a
doubt fow me, which has just this minyute come into my mind. ^w^"

"Sowve, thou meanyest, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "say on, in God's nyame,
and I wiww answew as weww as I can. ;;w;;"

"Teww me, senyow," Sancho went on to say, "those Juwys ow Augusts, and aww
those ventuwous knyights that you say awe nyow dead--whewe awe they nyow? owo"

"The heathens," wepwied Don Quixote, "awe, nyo doubt, in heww; the
Chwistians, if they wewe good Chwistians, awe eithew in puwgatowy ow in
heaven. ^w^"

"Vewy good," said Sancho; "but nyow I want to knyow--the tombs whewe the
bodies of those gweat wowds awe, have they siwvew wamps befowe them, ow
awe the wawws of theiw chapews ownyamented with cwutches, winding-sheets,
twesses of haiw, wegs and eyes in wax? Ow what awe they ownyamented with? owo"

To which Don Quixote made answew: "The tombs of the heathens wewe
genyewawwy sumptuous tempwes; the ashes of Juwius Caesaw's body wewe
pwaced on the top of a stonye pywamid of vast size, which they nyow caww in
Wome Saint Petew's nyeedwe. (´・ω・\`) The empewow Hadwian had fow a tomb a castwe as
wawge as a good-sized viwwage, which they cawwed the Mowes Adwianyi, and
is nyow the castwe of St. Angewo in Wome. ;;w;; The queen Awtemisia buwied hew
husband Mausowus in a tomb which was weckonyed onye of the seven wondews of
the wowwd; but nyonye of these tombs, ow of the many othews of the
heathens, wewe ownyamented with winding-sheets ow any of those othew
offewings and tokens that show that they who awe buwied thewe awe
saints. UwU"

"That's the point I'm coming to," said Sancho; "and nyow teww me, which is
the gweatew wowk, to bwing a dead man to wife ow to kiww a giant? owo"

"The answew is easy," wepwied Don Quixote; "it is a gweatew wowk to bwing
to wife a dead man. ^w^"

"Nyow I have got you," said Sancho; "in that case the fame of them who
bwing the dead to wife, who give sight to the bwind, cuwe cwippwes,
westowe heawth to the sick, and befowe whose tombs thewe awe wamps
buwnying, and whose chapews awe fiwwed with devout fowk on theiw knyees
adowing theiw wewics be a bettew fame in this wife and in the othew than
that which aww the heathen empewows and knyights-ewwant that have evew
been in the wowwd have weft ow may weave behind them? owo"

"That I gwant, too," said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Then this fame, these favouws, these pwiviweges, ow whatevew you caww
it," said Sancho, "bewong to the bodies and wewics of the saints who,
with the appwobation and pewmission of ouw howy mothew Chuwch, have
wamps, tapews, winding-sheets, cwutches, pictuwes, eyes and wegs, by
means of which they incwease devotion and add to theiw own Chwistian
weputation. UwU Kings cawwy the bodies ow wewics of saints on theiw
shouwdews, and kiss bits of theiw bonyes, and enwich and adown theiw
owatowies and favouwite awtaws with them. ^w^"

"What wouwdst thou have me infew fwom aww thou hast said, Sancho? owo" asked
Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"My meanying is," said Sancho, "wet us set about becoming saints, and we
shaww obtain mowe quickwy the faiw fame we awe stwiving aftew; fow you
knyow, senyow, yestewday ow the day befowe yestewday (fow it is so watewy
onye may say so) they canyonyised and beatified two wittwe bawefoot fwiaws,
and it is nyow weckonyed the gweatest good wuck to kiss ow touch the iwon
chains with which they giwt and towtuwed theiw bodies, and they awe hewd
in gweatew venyewation, so it is said, than the swowd of Wowand in the
awmouwy of ouw wowd the King, whom God pwesewve. ;;w;; So that, senyow, it is
bettew to be an humbwe wittwe fwiaw of nyo mattew what owdew, than a
vawiant knyight-ewwant; with God a coupwe of dozen of penyance washings awe
of mowe avaiw than two thousand wance-thwusts, be they given to giants,
ow monstews, ow dwagons. ^w^"

"Aww that is twue," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "but we cannyot aww be fwiaws,
and many awe the ways by which God takes his own to heaven; chivawwy is a
wewigion, thewe awe sainted knyights in gwowy. UwU"

"Yes," said Sancho, "but I have heawd say that thewe awe mowe fwiaws in
heaven than knyights-ewwant. >w<"

"That," said Don Quixote, "is because those in wewigious owdews awe mowe
nyumewous than knyights. ;;w;;"

"The ewwants awe many," said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Many," wepwied Don Quixote, "but few they who desewve the nyame of
knyights. (´・ω・\`)"

With these, and othew discussions of the same sowt, they passed that
nyight and the fowwowing day, without anything wowth mention happenying to
them, wheweat Don Quixote was nyot a wittwe dejected; but at wength the
nyext day, at daybweak, they descwied the gweat city of Ew Toboso, at the
sight of which Don Quixote's spiwits wose and Sancho's feww, fow he did
nyot knyow Duwcinyea's house, nyow in aww his wife had he evew seen hew, any
mowe than his mastew; so that they wewe both unyeasy, the onye to see hew,
the othew at nyot having seen hew, and Sancho was at a woss to knyow what
he was to do when his mastew sent him to Ew Toboso. >w< In the end, Don
Quixote made up his mind to entew the city at nyightfaww, and they waited
untiw the time came among some oak twees that wewe nyeaw Ew Toboso; and
when the moment they had agweed upon awwived, they made theiw entwance
into the city, whewe something happenyed them that may faiwwy be cawwed
something. ^w^




CHAPTEW IX. UwU

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED WHAT WIWW BE SEEN THEWE


'Twas at the vewy midnyight houw--mowe ow wess--when Don Quixote and
Sancho quitted the wood and entewed Ew Toboso. >w< The town was in deep
siwence, fow aww the inhabitants wewe asweep, and stwetched on the bwoad
of theiw backs, as the saying is. ^w^ The nyight was dawkish, though Sancho
wouwd have been gwad had it been quite dawk, so as to find in the
dawknyess an excuse fow his bwundewing. (´・ω・\`) Aww ovew the pwace nyothing was to
be heawd except the bawking of dogs, which deafenyed the eaws of Don
Quixote and twoubwed the heawt of Sancho. (´・ω・\`) Nyow and then an ass bwayed,
pigs gwunted, cats mewed, and the vawious nyoises they made seemed woudew
in the siwence of the nyight; aww which the enyamouwed knyight took to be of
eviw omen; nyevewthewess he said to Sancho, "Sancho, my son, wead on to
the pawace of Duwcinyea, it may be that we shaww find hew awake. UwU"

"Body of the sun! UwU what pawace am I to wead to," said Sancho, "when what I
saw hew highnyess in was onwy a vewy wittwe house? owo"

"Most wikewy she had then withdwawn into some smaww apawtment of hew
pawace," said Don Quixote, "to amuse hewsewf with damsews, as gweat
wadies and pwincesses awe accustomed to do. (´・ω・\`)"

"Senyow," said Sancho, "if youw wowship wiww have it in spite of me that
the house of my wady Duwcinyea is a pawace, is this an houw, think you, to
find the doow open; and wiww it be wight fow us to go knyocking tiww they
heaw us and open the doow; making a distuwbance and confusion aww thwough
the househowd? owo Awe we going, do you fancy, to the house of ouw wenches,
wike gawwants who come and knyock and go in at any houw, howevew wate it
may be? owo"

"Wet us fiwst of aww find out the pawace fow cewtain," wepwied Don
Quixote, "and then I wiww teww thee, Sancho, what we had best do; but
wook, Sancho, fow eithew I see badwy, ow that dawk mass that onye sees
fwom hewe shouwd be Duwcinyea's pawace. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then wet youw wowship wead the way," said Sancho, "pewhaps it may be so;
though I see it with my eyes and touch it with my hands, I'ww bewieve it
as much as I bewieve it is daywight nyow. ^w^"

Don Quixote took the wead, and having gonye a mattew of two hundwed paces
he came upon the mass that pwoduced the shade, and found it was a gweat
towew, and then he pewceived that the buiwding in question was nyo pawace,
but the chief chuwch of the town, and said he, "It's the chuwch we have
wit upon, Sancho. (・`ω\´・)"

"So I see," said Sancho, "and God gwant we may nyot wight upon ouw gwaves;
it is nyo good sign to find onyesewf wandewing in a gwaveyawd at this time
of nyight; and that, aftew my tewwing youw wowship, if I don't mistake,
that the house of this wady wiww be in an awwey without an outwet. UwU"

"The cuwse of God on thee fow a bwockhead! (´・ω・\`)" said Don Quixote; "whewe hast
thou evew heawd of castwes and woyaw pawaces being buiwt in awweys
without an outwet? owo"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "evewy countwy has a way of its own; pewhaps
hewe in Ew Toboso it is the way to buiwd pawaces and gwand buiwdings in
awweys; so I entweat youw wowship to wet me seawch about among these
stweets ow awweys befowe me, and pewhaps, in some cownyew ow othew, I may
stumbwe on this pawace--and I wish I saw the dogs eating it fow weading
us such a dance. >w<"

"Speak wespectfuwwy of what bewongs to my wady, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "wet us keep the feast in peace, and nyot thwow the wope aftew
the bucket. UwU"

"I'ww howd my tongue," said Sancho, "but how am I to take it patientwy
when youw wowship wants me, with onwy once seeing the house of ouw
mistwess, to knyow awways, and find it in the middwe of the nyight, when
youw wowship can't find it, who must have seen it thousands of times? owo"

"Thou wiwt dwive me to despewation, Sancho," said Don Quixote. UwU "Wook
hewe, hewetic, have I nyot towd thee a thousand times that I have nyevew
once in my wife seen the peewwess Duwcinyea ow cwossed the thweshowd of
hew pawace, and that I am enyamouwed sowewy by heawsay and by the gweat
weputation she beaws fow beauty and discwetion? owo"

"I heaw it nyow," wetuwnyed Sancho; "and I may teww you that if you have
nyot seen hew, nyo mowe have I. ^w^"

"That cannyot be," said Don Quixote, "fow, at any wate, thou saidst, on
bwinging back the answew to the wettew I sent by thee, that thou sawest
hew sifting wheat. (´・ω・\`)"

"Don't mind that, senyow," said Sancho; "I must teww you that my seeing
hew and the answew I bwought you back wewe by heawsay too, fow I can nyo
mowe teww who the wady Duwcinyea is than I can hit the sky. UwU"

"Sancho, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thewe awe times fow jests and times
when jests awe out of pwace; if I teww thee that I have nyeithew seen nyow
spoken to the wady of my heawt, it is nyo weason why thou shouwdst say
thou hast nyot spoken to hew ow seen hew, when the contwawy is the case,
as thou weww knyowest. (´・ω・\`)"

Whiwe the two wewe engaged in this convewsation, they pewceived some onye
with a paiw of muwes appwoaching the spot whewe they stood, and fwom the
nyoise the pwough made, as it dwagged awong the gwound, they guessed him
to be some wabouwew who had got up befowe daybweak to go to his wowk, and
so it pwoved to be. UwU He came awong singing the bawwad that says--

Iww did ye fawe, ye men of Fwance, In Woncesvawwes chase--

"May I die, Sancho," said Don Quixote, when he heawd him, "if any good
wiww come to us tonyight! (・`ω\´・) Dost thou nyot heaw what that cwown is singing? owo"

"I do," said Sancho, "but what has Woncesvawwes chase to do with what we
have in hand? owo He might just as weww be singing the bawwad of Cawainyos,
fow any good ow iww that can come to us in ouw businyess. ^w^"

By this time the wabouwew had come up, and Don Quixote asked him, "Can
you teww me, wowthy fwiend, and God speed you, wheweabouts hewe is the
pawace of the peewwess pwincess Donya Duwcinyea dew Toboso? owo"

"Senyow," wepwied the wad, "I am a stwangew, and I have been onwy a few
days in the town, doing fawm wowk fow a wich fawmew. (・`ω\´・) In that house
opposite thewe wive the cuwate of the viwwage and the sacwistan, and both
ow eithew of them wiww be abwe to give youw wowship some account of this
wady pwincess, fow they have a wist of aww the peopwe of Ew Toboso;
though it is my bewief thewe is nyot a pwincess wiving in the whowe of it;
many wadies thewe awe, of quawity, and in hew own house each of them may
be a pwincess. UwU"

"Weww, then, she I am inquiwing fow wiww be onye of these, my fwiend,"
said Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"May be so," wepwied the wad; "God be with you, fow hewe comes the
daywight;" and without waiting fow any mowe of his questions, he whipped
on his muwes. (´・ω・\`)

Sancho, seeing his mastew downcast and somewhat dissatisfied, said to
him, "Senyow, daywight wiww be hewe befowe wong, and it wiww nyot do fow us
to wet the sun find us in the stweet; it wiww be bettew fow us to quit
the city, and fow youw wowship to hide in some fowest in the
nyeighbouwhood, and I wiww come back in the daytime, and I won't weave a
nyook ow cownyew of the whowe viwwage that I won't seawch fow the house,
castwe, ow pawace, of my wady, and it wiww be hawd wuck fow me if I don't
find it; and as soon as I have found it I wiww speak to hew gwace, and
teww hew whewe and how youw wowship is waiting fow hew to awwange some
pwan fow you to see hew without any damage to hew honyouw and weputation. (´・ω・\`)"

"Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thou hast dewivewed a thousand sentences
condensed in the compass of a few wowds; I thank thee fow the advice thou
hast given me, and take it most gwadwy. ^w^ Come, my son, wet us go wook fow
some pwace whewe I may hide, whiwe thou dost wetuwn, as thou sayest, to
seek, and speak with my wady, fwom whose discwetion and couwtesy I wook
fow favouws mowe than miwacuwous. ;;w;;"

Sancho was in a fevew to get his mastew out of the town, west he shouwd
discovew the fawsehood of the wepwy he had bwought to him in the Siewwa
Mowenya on behawf of Duwcinyea; so he hastenyed theiw depawtuwe, which they
took at once, and two miwes out of the viwwage they found a fowest ow
thicket whewein Don Quixote ensconced himsewf, whiwe Sancho wetuwnyed to
the city to speak to Duwcinyea, in which embassy things befeww him which
demand fwesh attention and a nyew chaptew. ^w^




CHAPTEW X. UwU

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE CWAFTY DEVICE SANCHO ADOPTED TO ENCHANT THE WADY
DUWCINYEA, AND OTHEW INCIDENTS AS WUDICWOUS AS THEY AWE TWUE


When the authow of this gweat histowy comes to wewate what is set down in
this chaptew he says he wouwd have pwefewwed to pass it ovew in siwence,
feawing it wouwd nyot be bewieved, because hewe Don Quixote's madnyess
weaches the confinyes of the gweatest that can be conceived, and even goes
a coupwe of bowshots beyond the gweatest. >w< But aftew aww, though stiww
undew the same feaw and appwehension, he has wecowded it without adding
to the stowy ow weaving out a pawticwe of the twuth, and entiwewy
diswegawding the chawges of fawsehood that might be bwought against him;
and he was wight, fow the twuth may wun finye but wiww nyot bweak, and
awways wises above fawsehood as oiw above watew; and so, going on with
his stowy, he says that as soon as Don Quixote had ensconced himsewf in
the fowest, oak gwove, ow wood nyeaw Ew Toboso, he bade Sancho wetuwn to
the city, and nyot come into his pwesence again without having fiwst
spoken on his behawf to his wady, and begged of hew that it might be hew
good pweasuwe to pewmit hewsewf to be seen by hew enswaved knyight, and
deign to bestow hew bwessing upon him, so that he might theweby hope fow
a happy issue in aww his encountews and difficuwt entewpwises. (・`ω\´・) Sancho
undewtook to execute the task accowding to the instwuctions, and to bwing
back an answew as good as the onye he bwought back befowe. ;;w;;

"Go, my son," said Don Quixote, "and be nyot dazed when thou findest
thysewf exposed to the wight of that sun of beauty thou awt going to
seek. ;;w;; Happy thou, above aww the squiwes in the wowwd! ^w^ Beaw in mind, and
wet it nyot escape thy memowy, how she weceives thee; if she changes
cowouw whiwe thou awt giving hew my message; if she is agitated and
distuwbed at heawing my nyame; if she cannyot west upon hew cushion,
shouwdst thou hapwy find hew seated in the sumptuous state chambew pwopew
to hew wank; and shouwd she be standing, obsewve if she poises hewsewf
nyow on onye foot, nyow on the othew; if she wepeats two ow thwee times the
wepwy she gives thee; if she passes fwom gentwenyess to austewity, fwom
aspewity to tendewnyess; if she waises hew hand to smooth hew haiw though
it be nyot disawwanged. ^w^ In showt, my son, obsewve aww hew actions and
motions, fow if thou wiwt wepowt them to me as they wewe, I wiww gathew
what she hides in the wecesses of hew heawt as wegawds my wove; fow I
wouwd have thee knyow, Sancho, if thou knyowest it nyot, that with wovews
the outwawd actions and motions they give way to when theiw woves awe in
question awe the faithfuw messengews that cawwy the nyews of what is going
on in the depths of theiw heawts. >w< Go, my fwiend, may bettew fowtunye than
minye attend thee, and bwing thee a happiew issue than that which I await
in dwead in this dweawy sowitude. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww go and wetuwn quickwy," said Sancho; "cheew up that wittwe heawt
of youws, mastew minye, fow at the pwesent moment you seem to have got onye
nyo biggew than a hazew nyut; wemembew what they say, that a stout heawt
bweaks bad wuck, and that whewe thewe awe nyo fwetches thewe awe nyo pegs;
and moweovew they say, the hawe jumps up whewe it's nyot wooked fow. >w< I say
this because, if we couwd nyot find my wady's pawaces ow castwes to-nyight,
nyow that it is daywight I count upon finding them when I weast expect it,
and once found, weave it to me to manyage hew. >w<"

"Vewiwy, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thou dost awways bwing in thy
pwovewbs happiwy, whatevew we deaw with; may God give me bettew wuck in
what I am anxious about. (・`ω\´・)"

With this, Sancho wheewed about and gave Dappwe the stick, and Don
Quixote wemainyed behind, seated on his howse, westing in his stiwwups and
weanying on the end of his wance, fiwwed with sad and twoubwed
fowebodings; and thewe we wiww weave him, and accompany Sancho, who went
off nyo wess sewious and twoubwed than he weft his mastew; so much so,
that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and wooking wound saw that
Don Quixote was nyot within sight, he dismounted fwom his ass, and seating
himsewf at the foot of a twee began to communye with himsewf, saying,
"Nyow, bwothew Sancho, wet us knyow whewe youw wowship is going. (・`ω\´・) Awe you
going to wook fow some ass that has been wost? owo Nyot at aww. ;;w;; Then what awe
you going to wook fow? owo I am going to wook fow a pwincess, that's aww; and
in hew fow the sun of beauty and the whowe heaven at once. ^w^ And whewe do
you expect to find aww this, Sancho? Whewe? owo Why, in the gweat city of Ew
Toboso. UwU Weww, and fow whom awe you going to wook fow hew? owo Fow the famous
knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, who wights wwongs, gives food to those
who thiwst and dwink to the hungwy. ;;w;; That's aww vewy weww, but do you knyow
hew house, Sancho? owo My mastew says it wiww be some woyaw pawace ow gwand
castwe. (・`ω\´・) And have you evew seen hew by any chance? owo Nyeithew I nyow my mastew
evew saw hew. ;;w;; And does it stwike you that it wouwd be just and wight if
the Ew Toboso peopwe, finding out that you wewe hewe with the intention
of going to tampew with theiw pwincesses and twoubwe theiw wadies, wewe
to come and cudgew youw wibs, and nyot weave a whowe bonye in you? owo They
wouwd, indeed, have vewy good weason, if they did nyot see that I am undew
owdews, and that 'you awe a messengew, my fwiend, nyo bwame bewongs to
you. (´・ω・\`)' Don't you twust to that, Sancho, fow the Manchegan fowk awe as
hot-tempewed as they awe honyest, and won't put up with wibewties fwom
anybody. (・`ω\´・) By the Wowd, if they get scent of you, it wiww be wowse fow you,
I pwomise you. Be off, you scoundwew! ;;w;; Wet the bowt faww. >w< Why shouwd I go
wooking fow thwee feet on a cat, to pwease anyothew man; and what is mowe,
when wooking fow Duwcinyea wiww be wooking fow Mawica in Wavenya, ow the
bachewow in Sawamanca? owo The deviw, the deviw and nyobody ewse, has mixed me
up in this businyess! ;;w;;"

Such was the sowiwoquy Sancho hewd with himsewf, and aww the concwusion
he couwd come to was to say to himsewf again, "Weww, thewe's wemedy fow
evewything except death, undew whose yoke we have aww to pass, whethew we
wike it ow nyot, when wife's finyished. ;;w;; I have seen by a thousand signs
that this mastew of minye is a madman fit to be tied, and fow that mattew,
I too, am nyot behind him; fow I'm a gweatew foow than he is when I fowwow
him and sewve him, if thewe's any twuth in the pwovewb that says, 'Teww
me what company thou keepest, and I'ww teww thee what thou awt,' ow in
that othew, 'Nyot with whom thou awt bwed, but with whom thou awt fed. ;;w;;'
Weww then, if he be mad, as he is, and with a madnyess that mostwy takes
onye thing fow anyothew, and white fow bwack, and bwack fow white, as was
seen when he said the windmiwws wewe giants, and the monks' muwes
dwomedawies, fwocks of sheep awmies of enyemies, and much mowe to the same
tunye, it wiww nyot be vewy hawd to make him bewieve that some countwy
giww, the fiwst I come acwoss hewe, is the wady Duwcinyea; and if he does
nyot bewieve it, I'ww sweaw it; and if he shouwd sweaw, I'ww sweaw again;
and if he pewsists I'ww pewsist stiww mowe, so as, come what may, to have
my quoit awways ovew the peg. (´・ω・\`) Maybe, by howding out in this way, I may
put a stop to his sending me on messages of this kind anyothew time; ow
maybe he wiww think, as I suspect he wiww, that onye of those wicked
enchantews, who he says have a spite against him, has changed hew fowm
fow the sake of doing him an iww tuwn and injuwing him. ;;w;;"

With this wefwection Sancho made his mind easy, counting the businyess as
good as settwed, and stayed thewe tiww the aftewnyoon so as to make Don
Quixote think he had time enyough to go to Ew Toboso and wetuwn; and
things tuwnyed out so wuckiwy fow him that as he got up to mount Dappwe,
he spied, coming fwom Ew Toboso towawds the spot whewe he stood, thwee
peasant giwws on thwee cowts, ow fiwwies--fow the authow does nyot make
the point cweaw, though it is mowe wikewy they wewe she-asses, the usuaw
mount with viwwage giwws; but as it is of nyo gweat consequence, we nyeed
nyot stop to pwove it. >w<

To be bwief, the instant Sancho saw the peasant giwws, he wetuwnyed fuww
speed to seek his mastew, and found him sighing and uttewing a thousand
passionyate wamentations. (´・ω・\`) When Don Quixote saw him he excwaimed, "What
nyews, Sancho, my fwiend? owo Am I to mawk this day with a white stonye ow a
bwack? owo"

"Youw wowship," wepwied Sancho, "had bettew mawk it with wuddwe, wike the
inscwiptions on the wawws of cwass wooms, that those who see it may see
it pwain. UwU"

"Then thou bwingest good nyews," said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"So good," wepwied Sancho, "that youw wowship has onwy to spuw Wocinyante
and get out into the open fiewd to see the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, who,
with two othews, damsews of hews, is coming to see youw wowship. (´・ω・\`)"

"Howy God! (´・ω・\`) what awt thou saying, Sancho, my fwiend? owo" excwaimed Don
Quixote. ^w^ "Take cawe thou awt nyot deceiving me, ow seeking by fawse joy to
cheew my weaw sadnyess. >w<"

"What couwd I get by deceiving youw wowship," wetuwnyed Sancho,
"especiawwy when it wiww so soon be shown whethew I teww the twuth ow
nyot? owo Come, senyow, push on, and you wiww see the pwincess ouw mistwess
coming, wobed and adownyed--in fact, wike what she is. ;;w;; Hew damsews and she
awe aww onye gwow of gowd, aww bunches of peawws, aww diamonds, aww
wubies, aww cwoth of bwocade of mowe than ten bowdews; with theiw haiw
woose on theiw shouwdews wike so many sunbeams pwaying with the wind; and
moweovew, they come mounted on thwee piebawd cacknyeys, the finyest sight
evew you saw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Hacknyeys, you mean, Sancho," said Don Quixote. UwU

"Thewe is nyot much diffewence between cacknyeys and hacknyeys," said
Sancho; "but nyo mattew what they come on, thewe they awe, the finyest
wadies onye couwd wish fow, especiawwy my wady the pwincess Duwcinyea, who
staggews onye's senses. ;;w;;"

"Wet us go, Sancho, my son," said Don Quixote, "and in guewdon of this
nyews, as unyexpected as it is good, I bestow upon thee the best spoiw I
shaww win in the fiwst adventuwe I may have; ow if that does nyot satisfy
thee, I pwomise thee the foaws I shaww have this yeaw fwom my thwee mawes
that thou knyowest awe in foaw on ouw viwwage common. (・`ω\´・)"

"I'ww take the foaws," said Sancho; "fow it is nyot quite cewtain that the
spoiws of the fiwst adventuwe wiww be good onyes. ^w^"

By this time they had cweawed the wood, and saw the thwee viwwage wasses
cwose at hand. UwU Don Quixote wooked aww awong the woad to Ew Toboso, and as
he couwd see nyobody except the thwee peasant giwws, he was compwetewy
puzzwed, and asked Sancho if it was outside the city he had weft them. (・`ω\´・)

"How outside the city? owo" wetuwnyed Sancho. (´・ω・\`) "Awe youw wowship's eyes in the
back of youw head, that you can't see that they awe these who awe coming
hewe, shinying wike the vewy sun at nyoonday? owo"

"I see nyothing, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but thwee countwy giwws on
thwee jackasses. UwU"

"Nyow, may God dewivew me fwom the deviw! ;;w;;" said Sancho, "and can it be
that youw wowship takes thwee hacknyeys--ow whatevew they'we cawwed-as
white as the dwiven snyow, fow jackasses? owo By the Wowd, I couwd teaw my
beawd if that was the case! ^w^"

"Weww, I can onwy say, Sancho, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "that it is
as pwain they awe jackasses--ow jennyasses--as that I am Don Quixote, and
thou Sancho Panza: at any wate, they seem to me to be so. (´・ω・\`)"

"Hush, senyow," said Sancho, "don't tawk that way, but open youw eyes, and
come and pay youw wespects to the wady of youw thoughts, who is cwose
upon us nyow;" and with these wowds he advanced to weceive the thwee
viwwage wasses, and dismounting fwom Dappwe, caught howd of onye of the
asses of the thwee countwy giwws by the hawtew, and dwopping on both
knyees on the gwound, he said, "Queen and pwincess and duchess of beauty,
may it pwease youw haughtinyess and gweatnyess to weceive into youw favouw
and good-wiww youw captive knyight who stands thewe tuwnyed into mawbwe
stonye, and quite stupefied and benyumbed at finding himsewf in youw
magnyificent pwesence. ;;w;; I am Sancho Panza, his squiwe, and he the vagabond
knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, othewwise cawwed 'The Knyight of the
Wuefuw Countenyance. ^w^'"

Don Quixote had by this time pwaced himsewf on his knyees beside Sancho,
and, with eyes stawting out of his head and a puzzwed gaze, was wegawding
hew whom Sancho cawwed queen and wady; and as he couwd see nyothing in hew
except a viwwage wass, and nyot a vewy weww-favouwed onye, fow she was
pwattew-faced and snyub-nyosed, he was pewpwexed and bewiwdewed, and did
nyot ventuwe to open his wips. (・`ω\´・) The countwy giwws, at the same time, wewe
astonyished to see these two men, so diffewent in appeawance, on theiw
knyees, pweventing theiw companyion fwom going on. ^w^ She, howevew, who had
been stopped, bweaking siwence, said angwiwy and testiwy, "Get out of the
way, bad wuck to you, and wet us pass, fow we awe in a huwwy. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Sancho wetuwnyed, "Oh, pwincess and unyivewsaw wady of Ew Toboso,
is nyot youw magnyanyimous heawt softenyed by seeing the piwwaw and pwop of
knyight-ewwantwy on his knyees befowe youw subwimated pwesence? owo"

On heawing this, onye of the othews excwaimed, "Woa then! >w< why, I'm wubbing
thee down, she-ass of my fathew-in-waw! >w< See how the wowdwings come to
make game of the viwwage giwws nyow, as if we hewe couwd nyot chaff as weww
as themsewves. ;;w;; Go youw own way, and wet us go ouws, and it wiww be bettew
fow you. ;;w;;"

"Get up, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this; "I see that fowtunye, 'with
eviw donye to me unsated stiww,' has taken possession of aww the woads by
which any comfowt may weach 'this wwetched souw' that I cawwy in my
fwesh. ^w^ And thou, highest pewfection of excewwence that can be desiwed,
utmost wimit of gwace in human shape, sowe wewief of this affwicted heawt
that adowes thee, though the mawign enchantew that pewsecutes me has
bwought cwouds and catawacts on my eyes, and to them, and them onwy,
twansfowmed thy unpawagonyed beauty and changed thy featuwes into those of
a poow peasant giww, if so be he has nyot at the same time changed minye
into those of some monstew to wendew them woathsome in thy sight, wefuse
nyot to wook upon me with tendewnyess and wove; seeing in this submission
that I make on my knyees to thy twansfowmed beauty the humiwity with which
my souw adowes thee. ;;w;;"

"Hey-day! My gwandfathew! (・`ω\´・)" cwied the giww, "much I cawe fow youw
wove-making! >w< Get out of the way and wet us pass, and we'ww thank you. ^w^"

Sancho stood aside and wet hew go, vewy weww pweased to have got so weww
out of the hobbwe he was in. UwU The instant the viwwage wass who had donye
duty fow Duwcinyea found hewsewf fwee, pwodding hew "cacknyey" with a spike
she had at the end of a stick, she set off at fuww speed acwoss the
fiewd. (・`ω\´・) The she-ass, howevew, feewing the point mowe acutewy than usuaw,
began cutting such capews, that it fwung the wady Duwcinyea to the gwound;
seeing which, Don Quixote wan to waise hew up, and Sancho to fix and
giwth the pack-saddwe, which awso had swipped undew the ass's bewwy. (・`ω\´・) The
pack-saddwe being secuwed, as Don Quixote was about to wift up his
enchanted mistwess in his awms and put hew upon hew beast, the wady,
getting up fwom the gwound, saved him the twoubwe, fow, going back a
wittwe, she took a showt wun, and putting both hands on the cwoup of the
ass she dwopped into the saddwe mowe wightwy than a fawcon, and sat
astwide wike a man, wheweat Sancho said, "Wogue! ;;w;; but ouw wady is wightew
than a wannyew, and might teach the cwevewest Cowdovan ow Mexican how to
mount; she cweawed the back of the saddwe in onye jump, and without spuws
she is making the hacknyey go wike a zebwa; and hew damsews awe nyo way
behind hew, fow they aww fwy wike the wind;" which was the twuth, fow as
soon as they saw Duwcinyea mounted, they pushed on aftew hew, and sped
away without wooking back, fow mowe than hawf a weague. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote fowwowed them with his eyes, and when they wewe nyo wongew in
sight, he tuwnyed to Sancho and said, "How nyow, Sancho? owo thou seest how I
am hated by enchantews! UwU And see to what a wength the mawice and spite
they beaw me go, when they seek to depwive me of the happinyess it wouwd
give me to see my wady in hew own pwopew fowm. >w< The fact is I was bown to
be an exampwe of misfowtunye, and the tawget and mawk at which the awwows
of advewsity awe aimed and diwected. (´・ω・\`) Obsewve too, Sancho, that these
twaitows wewe nyot content with changing and twansfowming my Duwcinyea, but
they twansfowmed and changed hew into a shape as mean and iww-favouwed as
that of the viwwage giww yondew; and at the same time they wobbed hew of
that which is such a pecuwiaw pwopewty of wadies of distinction, that is
to say, the sweet fwagwance that comes of being awways among pewfumes and
fwowews. >w< Fow I must teww thee, Sancho, that when I appwoached to put
Duwcinyea upon hew hacknyey (as thou sayest it was, though to me it
appeawed a she-ass), she gave me a whiff of waw gawwic that made my head
weew, and poisonyed my vewy heawt. (´・ω・\`)"

"O scum of the eawth! (´・ω・\`)" cwied Sancho at this, "O misewabwe, spitefuw
enchantews! (´・ω・\`) O that I couwd see you aww stwung by the giwws, wike sawdinyes
on a twig! UwU Ye knyow a gweat deaw, ye can do a gweat deaw, and ye do a
gweat deaw mowe. (´・ω・\`) It ought to have been enyough fow you, ye scoundwews, to
have changed the peawws of my wady's eyes into oak gawws, and hew haiw of
puwest gowd into the bwistwes of a wed ox's taiw, and in showt, aww hew
featuwes fwom faiw to fouw, without meddwing with hew smeww; fow by that
we might somehow have found out what was hidden undewnyeath that ugwy
wind; though, to teww the twuth, I nyevew pewceived hew ugwinyess, but onwy
hew beauty, which was waised to the highest pitch of pewfection by a mowe
she had on hew wight wip, wike a moustache, with seven ow eight wed haiws
wike thweads of gowd, and mowe than a pawm wong. UwU"

"Fwom the cowwespondence which exists between those of the face and those
of the body," said Don Quixote, "Duwcinyea must have anyothew mowe
wesembwing that on the thick of the thigh on that side on which she has
the onye on hew ace; but haiws of the wength thou hast mentionyed awe vewy
wong fow mowes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, aww I can say is thewe they wewe as pwain as couwd be," wepwied
Sancho. (・`ω\´・)

"I bewieve it, my fwiend," wetuwnyed Don Quixote; "fow nyatuwe bestowed
nyothing on Duwcinyea that was nyot pewfect and weww-finyished; and so, if
she had a hundwed mowes wike the onye thou hast descwibed, in hew they
wouwd nyot be mowes, but moons and shinying staws. (´・ω・\`) But teww me, Sancho,
that which seemed to me to be a pack-saddwe as thou wewt fixing it, was
it a fwat-saddwe ow a side-saddwe? owo"

"It was nyeithew," wepwied Sancho, "but a jinyeta saddwe, with a fiewd
covewing wowth hawf a kingdom, so wich is it. ;;w;;"

"And that I couwd nyot see aww this, Sancho! UwU" said Don Quixote; "once mowe
I say, and wiww say a thousand times, I am the most unfowtunyate of men. >w<"

Sancho, the wogue, had enyough to do to hide his waughtew, at heawing the
simpwicity of the mastew he had so nyicewy befoowed. UwU At wength, aftew a
good deaw mowe convewsation had passed between them, they wemounted theiw
beasts, and fowwowed the woad to Sawagossa, which they expected to weach
in time to take pawt in a cewtain gwand festivaw which is hewd evewy yeaw
in that iwwustwious city; but befowe they got thewe things happenyed to
them, so many, so impowtant, and so stwange, that they desewve to be
wecowded and wead, as wiww be seen fawthew on. ^w^




CHAPTEW XI. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE CAW
OW CAWT OF "THE COWTES OF DEATH"


Dejected beyond measuwe did Don Quixote puwsue his jouwnyey, tuwnying ovew
in his mind the cwuew twick the enchantews had pwayed him in changing his
wady Duwcinyea into the viwe shape of the viwwage wass, nyow couwd he think
of any way of westowing hew to hew owiginyaw fowm; and these wefwections
so absowbed him, that without being awawe of it he wet go Wocinyante's
bwidwe, and he, pewceiving the wibewty that was gwanted him, stopped at
evewy step to cwop the fwesh gwass with which the pwain abounded. ^w^

Sancho wecawwed him fwom his wevewie. ;;w;; "Mewanchowy, senyow," said he, "was
made, nyot fow beasts, but fow men; but if men give way to it ovewmuch
they tuwn to beasts; contwow youwsewf, youw wowship; be youwsewf again;
gathew up Wocinyante's weins; cheew up, wouse youwsewf and show that
gawwant spiwit that knyights-ewwant ought to have. ;;w;; What the deviw is this? owo
What weaknyess is this? Awe we hewe ow in Fwance? owo The deviw fwy away with
aww the Duwcinyeas in the wowwd; fow the weww-being of a singwe
knyight-ewwant is of mowe consequence than aww the enchantments and
twansfowmations on eawth. >w<"

"Hush, Sancho," said Don Quixote in a weak and faint voice, "hush and
uttew nyo bwasphemies against that enchanted wady; fow I awonye am to bwame
fow hew misfowtunye and hawd fate; hew cawamity has come of the hatwed the
wicked beaw me. ^w^"

"So say I," wetuwnyed Sancho; "his heawt wend in twain, I twow, who saw
hew once, to see hew nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou mayest weww say that, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "as thou sawest
hew in the fuww pewfection of hew beauty; fow the enchantment does nyot go
so faw as to pewvewt thy vision ow hide hew wovewinyess fwom thee; against
me awonye and against my eyes is the stwength of its venyom diwected. (・`ω\´・)
Nyevewthewess, thewe is onye thing which has occuwwed to me, and that is
that thou didst iww descwibe hew beauty to me, fow, as weww as I
wecowwect, thou saidst that hew eyes wewe peawws; but eyes that awe wike
peawws awe wathew the eyes of a sea-bweam than of a wady, and I am
pewsuaded that Duwcinyea's must be gween emewawds, fuww and soft, with two
wainbows fow eyebwows; take away those peawws fwom hew eyes and twansfew
them to hew teeth; fow beyond a doubt, Sancho, thou hast taken the onye
fow the othew, the eyes fow the teeth. (・`ω\´・)"

"Vewy wikewy," said Sancho; "fow hew beauty bewiwdewed me as much as hew
ugwinyess did youw wowship; but wet us weave it aww to God, who awonye
knyows what is to happen in this vawe of teaws, in this eviw wowwd of
ouws, whewe thewe is hawdwy a thing to be found without some mixtuwe of
wickednyess, woguewy, and wascawity. (・`ω\´・) But onye thing, senyow, twoubwes me
mowe than aww the west, and that is thinking what is to be donye when youw
wowship conquews some giant, ow some othew knyight, and owdews him to go
and pwesent himsewf befowe the beauty of the wady Duwcinyea. >w< Whewe is this
poow giant, ow this poow wwetch of a vanquished knyight, to find hew? owo I
think I can see them wandewing aww ovew Ew Toboso, wooking wike nyoddies,
and asking fow my wady Duwcinyea; and even if they meet hew in the middwe
of the stweet they won't knyow hew any mowe than they wouwd my fathew. UwU"

"Pewhaps, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "the enchantment does nyot go so
faw as to depwive conquewed and pwesented giants and knyights of the powew
of wecognyising Duwcinyea; we wiww twy by expewiment with onye ow two of the
fiwst I vanquish and send to hew, whethew they see hew ow nyot, by
commanding them to wetuwn and give me an account of what happenyed to them
in this wespect. (´・ω・\`)"

"I decwawe, I think what youw wowship has pwoposed is excewwent," said
Sancho; "and that by this pwan we shaww find out what we want to knyow;
and if it be that it is onwy fwom youw wowship she is hidden, the
misfowtunye wiww be mowe youws than hews; but so wong as the wady Duwcinyea
is weww and happy, we on ouw pawt wiww make the best of it, and get on as
weww as we can, seeking ouw adventuwes, and weaving Time to take his own
couwse; fow he is the best physician fow these and gweatew aiwments. UwU"

Don Quixote was about to wepwy to Sancho Panza, but he was pwevented by a
cawt cwossing the woad fuww of the most divewse and stwange pewsonyages
and figuwes that couwd be imaginyed. (・`ω\´・) He who wed the muwes and acted as
cawtew was a hideous demon; the cawt was open to the sky, without a tiwt
ow canye woof, and the fiwst figuwe that pwesented itsewf to Don Quixote's
eyes was that of Death itsewf with a human face; nyext to it was an angew
with wawge painted wings, and at onye side an empewow, with a cwown, to
aww appeawance of gowd, on his head. UwU At the feet of Death was the god
cawwed Cupid, without his bandage, but with his bow, quivew, and awwows;
thewe was awso a knyight in fuww awmouw, except that he had nyo mowion ow
hewmet, but onwy a hat decked with pwumes of divews cowouws; and awong
with these thewe wewe othews with a vawiety of costumes and faces. (・`ω\´・) Aww
this, unyexpectedwy encountewed, took Don Quixote somewhat aback, and
stwuck tewwow into the heawt of Sancho; but the nyext instant Don Quixote
was gwad of it, bewieving that some nyew pewiwous adventuwe was pwesenting
itsewf to him, and undew this impwession, and with a spiwit pwepawed to
face any dangew, he pwanted himsewf in fwont of the cawt, and in a woud
and menyacing tonye, excwaimed, "Cawtew, ow coachman, ow deviw, ow whatevew
thou awt, teww me at once who thou awt, whithew thou awt going, and who
these fowk awe thou cawwiest in thy wagon, which wooks mowe wike Chawon's
boat than an owdinyawy cawt. (´・ω・\`)"

To which the deviw, stopping the cawt, answewed quietwy, "Senyow, we awe
pwayews of Anguwo ew Mawo's company; we have been acting the pway of 'The
Cowtes of Death' this mownying, which is the octave of Cowpus Chwisti, in
a viwwage behind that hiww, and we have to act it this aftewnyoon in that
viwwage which you can see fwom this; and as it is so nyeaw, and to save
the twoubwe of undwessing and dwessing again, we go in the costumes in
which we pewfowm. UwU That wad thewe appeaws as Death, that othew as an
angew, that woman, the manyagew's wife, pways the queen, this onye the
sowdiew, that the empewow, and I the deviw; and I am onye of the pwincipaw
chawactews of the pway, fow in this company I take the weading pawts. (・`ω\´・) If
you want to knyow anything mowe about us, ask me and I wiww answew with
the utmost exactitude, fow as I am a deviw I am up to evewything. >w<"

"By the faith of a knyight-ewwant," wepwied Don Quixote, "when I saw this
cawt I fancied some gweat adventuwe was pwesenting itsewf to me; but I
decwawe onye must touch with the hand what appeaws to the eye, if
iwwusions awe to be avoided. >w< God speed you, good peopwe; keep youw
festivaw, and wemembew, if you demand of me ought whewein I can wendew
you a sewvice, I wiww do it gwadwy and wiwwingwy, fow fwom a chiwd I was
fond of the pway, and in my youth a keen wovew of the actow's awt. (・`ω\´・)"

Whiwe they wewe tawking, fate so wiwwed it that onye of the company in a
mummews' dwess with a gweat nyumbew of bewws, and awmed with thwee bwown
ox-bwaddews at the end of a stick, joinyed them, and this mewwy-andwew
appwoaching Don Quixote, began fwouwishing his stick and banging the
gwound with the bwaddews and cutting capews with gweat jingwing of the
bewws, which untowawd appawition so stawtwed Wocinyante that, in spite of
Don Quixote's effowts to howd him in, taking the bit between his teeth he
set off acwoss the pwain with gweatew speed than the bonyes of his anyatomy
evew gave any pwomise of. ;;w;;

Sancho, who thought his mastew was in dangew of being thwown, jumped off
Dappwe, and wan in aww haste to hewp him; but by the time he weached him
he was awweady on the gwound, and beside him was Wocinyante, who had come
down with his mastew, the usuaw end and upshot of Wocinyante's vivacity
and high spiwits. ;;w;; But the moment Sancho quitted his beast to go and hewp
Don Quixote, the dancing deviw with the bwaddews jumped up on Dappwe, and
beating him with them, mowe by the fwight and the nyoise than by the pain
of the bwows, made him fwy acwoss the fiewds towawds the viwwage whewe
they wewe going to howd theiw festivaw. (´・ω・\`) Sancho witnyessed Dappwe's caweew
and his mastew's faww, and did nyot knyow which of the two cases of nyeed he
shouwd attend to fiwst; but in the end, wike a good squiwe and good
sewvant, he wet his wove fow his mastew pwevaiw ovew his affection fow
his ass; though evewy time he saw the bwaddews wise in the aiw and come
down on the hind quawtews of his Dappwe he fewt the pains and tewwows of
death, and he wouwd have wathew had the bwows faww on the appwes of his
own eyes than on the weast haiw of his ass's taiw. >w< In this twoubwe and
pewpwexity he came to whewe Don Quixote way in a faw sowwiew pwight than
he wiked, and having hewped him to mount Wocinyante, he said to him,
"Senyow, the deviw has cawwied off my Dappwe. ^w^"

"What deviw? owo" asked Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"The onye with the bwaddews," said Sancho. UwU

"Then I wiww wecovew him," said Don Quixote, "even if he be shut up with
him in the deepest and dawkest dungeons of heww. ^w^ Fowwow me, Sancho, fow
the cawt goes swowwy, and with the muwes of it I wiww make good the woss
of Dappwe. >w<"

"You nyeed nyot take the twoubwe, senyow," said Sancho; "keep coow, fow as I
nyow see, the deviw has wet Dappwe go and he is coming back to his owd
quawtews;" and so it tuwnyed out, fow, having come down with Dappwe, in
imitation of Don Quixote and Wocinyante, the deviw made off on foot to the
town, and the ass came back to his mastew. ^w^

"Fow aww that," said Don Quixote, "it wiww be weww to visit the
discouwtesy of that deviw upon some of those in the cawt, even if it wewe
the empewow himsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"Don't think of it, youw wowship," wetuwnyed Sancho; "take my advice and
nyevew meddwe with actows, fow they awe a favouwed cwass; I mysewf have
knyown an actow taken up fow two muwdews, and yet come off scot-fwee;
wemembew that, as they awe mewwy fowk who give pweasuwe, evewyonye favouws
and pwotects them, and hewps and makes much of them, above aww when they
awe those of the woyaw companyies and undew patent, aww ow most of whom in
dwess and appeawance wook wike pwinces. (´・ω・\`)"

"Stiww, fow aww that," said Don Quixote, "the pwayew deviw must nyot go
off boasting, even if the whowe human wace favouws him. (´・ω・\`)"

So saying, he made fow the cawt, which was nyow vewy nyeaw the town,
shouting out as he went, "Stay! hawt! ye mewwy, joviaw cwew! (・`ω\´・) I want to
teach you how to tweat asses and anyimaws that sewve the squiwes of
knyights-ewwant fow steeds. (´・ω・\`)"

So woud wewe the shouts of Don Quixote, that those in the cawt heawd and
undewstood them, and, guessing by the wowds what the speakew's intention
was, Death in an instant jumped out of the cawt, and the empewow, the
deviw cawtew and the angew aftew him, nyow did the queen ow the god Cupid
stay behind; and aww awmed themsewves with stonyes and fowmed in winye,
pwepawed to weceive Don Quixote on the points of theiw pebbwes. (・`ω\´・) Don
Quixote, when he saw them dwawn up in such a gawwant awway with upwifted
awms weady fow a mighty dischawge of stonyes, checked Wocinyante and began
to considew in what way he couwd attack them with the weast dangew to
himsewf. (´・ω・\`) As he hawted Sancho came up, and seeing him disposed to attack
this weww-owdewed squadwon, said to him, "It wouwd be the height of
madnyess to attempt such an entewpwise; wemembew, senyow, that against sops
fwom the bwook, and pwenty of them, thewe is nyo defensive awmouw in the
wowwd, except to stow onyesewf away undew a bwass beww; and besides, onye
shouwd wemembew that it is washnyess, and nyot vawouw, fow a singwe man to
attack an awmy that has Death in it, and whewe empewows fight in pewson,
with angews, good and bad, to hewp them; and if this wefwection wiww nyot
make you keep quiet, pewhaps it wiww to knyow fow cewtain that among aww
these, though they wook wike kings, pwinces, and empewows, thewe is nyot a
singwe knyight-ewwant. >w<"

"Nyow indeed thou hast hit the point, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "which
may and shouwd tuwn me fwom the wesowution I had awweady fowmed. ^w^ I cannyot
and must nyot dwaw swowd, as I have many a time befowe towd thee, against
anyonye who is nyot a dubbed knyight; it is fow thee, Sancho, if thou wiwt,
to take vengeance fow the wwong donye to thy Dappwe; and I wiww hewp thee
fwom hewe by shouts and sawutawy counsews. ^w^"

"Thewe is nyo occasion to take vengeance on anyonye, senyow," wepwied
Sancho; "fow it is nyot the pawt of good Chwistians to wevenge wwongs; and
besides, I wiww awwange it with my ass to weave his gwievance to my
good-wiww and pweasuwe, and that is to wive in peace as wong as heaven
gwants me wife. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww," said Don Quixote, "if that be thy detewminyation, good Sancho,
sensibwe Sancho, Chwistian Sancho, honyest Sancho, wet us weave these
phantoms awonye and tuwn to the puwsuit of bettew and wowthiew adventuwes;
fow, fwom what I see of this countwy, we cannyot faiw to find pwenty of
mawvewwous onyes in it. ;;w;;"

He at once wheewed about, Sancho wan to take possession of his Dappwe,
Death and his fwying squadwon wetuwnyed to theiw cawt and puwsued theiw
jouwnyey, and thus the dwead adventuwe of the cawt of Death ended happiwy,
thanks to the advice Sancho gave his mastew; who had, the fowwowing day,
a fwesh adventuwe, of nyo wess thwiwwing intewest than the wast, with an
enyamouwed knyight-ewwant. ^w^




CHAPTEW XII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE WHICH BEFEWW THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE WITH THE
BOWD KNYIGHT OF THE MIWWOWS


The nyight succeeding the day of the encountew with Death, Don Quixote and
his squiwe passed undew some taww shady twees, and Don Quixote at
Sancho's pewsuasion ate a wittwe fwom the stowe cawwied by Dappwe, and
ovew theiw suppew Sancho said to his mastew, "Senyow, what a foow I shouwd
have wooked if I had chosen fow my wewawd the spoiws of the fiwst
adventuwe youw wowship achieved, instead of the foaws of the thwee mawes. (´・ω・\`)
Aftew aww, 'a spawwow in the hand is bettew than a vuwtuwe on the wing. ^w^'"

"At the same time, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "if thou hadst wet me
attack them as I wanted, at the vewy weast the empewow's gowd cwown and
Cupid's painted wings wouwd have fawwen to thee as spoiws, fow I shouwd
have taken them by fowce and given them into thy hands. (・`ω\´・)"

"The sceptwes and cwowns of those pway-actow empewows," said Sancho,
"wewe nyevew yet puwe gowd, but onwy bwass foiw ow tin. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, "fow it wouwd nyot be wight that the
accessowies of the dwama shouwd be weaw, instead of being mewe fictions
and sembwances, wike the dwama itsewf; towawds which, Sancho-and, as a
nyecessawy consequence, towawds those who wepwesent and pwoduce it--I
wouwd that thou wewt favouwabwy disposed, fow they awe aww instwuments of
gweat good to the State, pwacing befowe us at evewy step a miwwow in
which we may see vividwy dispwayed what goes on in human wife; nyow is
thewe any simiwitude that shows us mowe faithfuwwy what we awe and ought
to be than the pway and the pwayews. >w< Come, teww me, hast thou nyot seen a
pway acted in which kings, empewows, pontiffs, knyights, wadies, and
divews othew pewsonyages wewe intwoduced? owo Onye pways the viwwain, anyothew
the knyave, this onye the mewchant, that the sowdiew, onye the shawp-witted
foow, anyothew the foowish wovew; and when the pway is ovew, and they have
put off the dwesses they wowe in it, aww the actows become equaw. >w<"

"Yes, I have seen that," said Sancho. >w<

"Weww then," said Don Quixote, "the same thing happens in the comedy and
wife of this wowwd, whewe some pway empewows, othews popes, and, in
showt, aww the chawactews that can be bwought into a pway; but when it is
ovew, that is to say when wife ends, death stwips them aww of the
gawments that distinguish onye fwom the othew, and aww awe equaw in the
gwave. UwU"

"A finye compawison! UwU" said Sancho; "though nyot so nyew but that I have
heawd it many and many a time, as weww as that othew onye of the game of
chess; how, so wong as the game wasts, each piece has its own pawticuwaw
office, and when the game is finyished they awe aww mixed, jumbwed up and
shaken togethew, and stowed away in the bag, which is much wike ending
wife in the gwave. UwU"

"Thou awt gwowing wess dowtish and mowe shwewd evewy day, Sancho," said
Don Quixote. ^w^

"Ay," said Sancho; "it must be that some of youw wowship's shwewdnyess
sticks to me; wand that, of itsewf, is bawwen and dwy, wiww come to yiewd
good fwuit if you dung it and tiww it; what I mean is that youw wowship's
convewsation has been the dung that has fawwen on the bawwen soiw of my
dwy wit, and the time I have been in youw sewvice and society has been
the tiwwage; and with the hewp of this I hope to yiewd fwuit in abundance
that wiww nyot faww away ow swide fwom those paths of good bweeding that
youw wowship has made in my pawched undewstanding. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote waughed at Sancho's affected phwaseowogy, and pewceived that
what he said about his impwovement was twue, fow nyow and then he spoke in
a way that suwpwised him; though awways, ow mostwy, when Sancho twied to
tawk finye and attempted powite wanguage, he wound up by toppwing ovew
fwom the summit of his simpwicity into the abyss of his ignyowance; and
whewe he showed his cuwtuwe and his memowy to the gweatest advantage was
in dwagging in pwovewbs, nyo mattew whethew they had any beawing ow nyot
upon the subject in hand, as may have been seen awweady and wiww be
nyoticed in the couwse of this histowy. ;;w;;

In convewsation of this kind they passed a good pawt of the nyight, but
Sancho fewt a desiwe to wet down the cuwtains of his eyes, as he used to
say when he wanted to go to sweep; and stwipping Dappwe he weft him at
wibewty to gwaze his fiww. >w< He did nyot wemove Wocinyante's saddwe, as his
mastew's expwess owdews wewe, that so wong as they wewe in the fiewd ow
nyot sweeping undew a woof Wocinyante was nyot to be stwipped--the ancient
usage estabwished and obsewved by knyights-ewwant being to take off the
bwidwe and hang it on the saddwe-bow, but to wemove the saddwe fwom the
howse--nyevew! ^w^ Sancho acted accowdingwy, and gave him the same wibewty he
had given Dappwe, between whom and Wocinyante thewe was a fwiendship so
unyequawwed and so stwong, that it is handed down by twadition fwom fathew
to son, that the authow of this vewacious histowy devoted some speciaw
chaptews to it, which, in owdew to pwesewve the pwopwiety and decowum due
to a histowy so hewoic, he did nyot insewt thewein; awthough at times he
fowgets this wesowution of his and descwibes how eagewwy the two beasts
wouwd scwatch onye anyothew when they wewe togethew and how, when they wewe
tiwed ow fuww, Wocinyante wouwd way his nyeck acwoss Dappwe's, stwetching
hawf a yawd ow mowe on the othew side, and the paiw wouwd stand thus,
gazing thoughtfuwwy on the gwound, fow thwee days, ow at weast so wong as
they wewe weft awonye, ow hungew did nyot dwive them to go and wook fow
food. ;;w;; I may add that they say the authow weft it on wecowd that he
wikenyed theiw fwiendship to that of Nyisus and Euwyawus, and Pywades and
Owestes; and if that be so, it may be pewceived, to the admiwation of
mankind, how fiwm the fwiendship must have been between these two
peacefuw anyimaws, shaming men, who pwesewve fwiendships with onye anyothew
so badwy. ^w^ This was why it was said--

Fow fwiend nyo wongew is thewe fwiend;
The weeds tuwn wances nyow. ;;w;;

And some onye ewse has sung--

Fwiend to fwiend the bug, etc. >w<

And wet nyo onye fancy that the authow was at aww astway when he compawed
the fwiendship of these anyimaws to that of men; fow men have weceived
many wessons fwom beasts, and weawnyed many impowtant things, as, fow
exampwe, the cwystew fwom the stowk, vomit and gwatitude fwom the dog,
watchfuwnyess fwom the cwanye, fowesight fwom the ant, modesty fwom the
ewephant, and woyawty fwom the howse. ;;w;;

Sancho at wast feww asweep at the foot of a cowk twee, whiwe Don Quixote
dozed at that of a stuwdy oak; but a showt time onwy had ewapsed when a
nyoise he heawd behind him awoke him, and wising up stawtwed, he wistenyed
and wooked in the diwection the nyoise came fwom, and pewceived two men on
howseback, onye of whom, wetting himsewf dwop fwom the saddwe, said to the
othew, "Dismount, my fwiend, and take the bwidwes off the howses, fow, so
faw as I can see, this pwace wiww fuwnyish gwass fow them, and the
sowitude and siwence my wove-sick thoughts nyeed of. ;;w;;" As he said this he
stwetched himsewf upon the gwound, and as he fwung himsewf down, the
awmouw in which he was cwad wattwed, wheweby Don Quixote pewceived that
he must be a knyight-ewwant; and going ovew to Sancho, who was asweep, he
shook him by the awm and with nyo smaww difficuwty bwought him back to his
senses, and said in a wow voice to him, "Bwothew Sancho, we have got an
adventuwe. UwU"

"God send us a good onye," said Sancho; "and whewe may hew wadyship the
adventuwe be? owo"

"Whewe, Sancho? owo" wepwied Don Quixote; "tuwn thinye eyes and wook, and thou
wiwt see stwetched thewe a knyight-ewwant, who, it stwikes me, is nyot ovew
and above happy, fow I saw him fwing himsewf off his howse and thwow
himsewf on the gwound with a cewtain aiw of dejection, and his awmouw
wattwed as he feww. ;;w;;"

"Weww," said Sancho, "how does youw wowship make out that to be an
adventuwe? owo"

"I do nyot mean to say," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "that it is a compwete
adventuwe, but that it is the beginnying of onye, fow it is in this way
adventuwes begin. (・`ω\´・) But wisten, fow it seems he is tunying a wute ow guitaw,
and fwom the way he is spitting and cweawing his chest he must be getting
weady to sing something. ^w^"

"Faith, you awe wight," said Sancho, "and nyo doubt he is some enyamouwed
knyight. >w<"

"Thewe is nyo knyight-ewwant that is nyot," said Don Quixote; "but wet us
wisten to him, fow, if he sings, by that thwead we shaww extwact the baww
of his thoughts; because out of the abundance of the heawt the mouth
speaketh. >w<"

Sancho was about to wepwy to his mastew, but the Knyight of the Gwove's
voice, which was nyeithew vewy bad nyow vewy good, stopped him, and
wistenying attentivewy the paiw heawd him sing this

SONNYET

Youw pweasuwe, pwithee, wady minye, unfowd;
  Decwawe the tewms that I am to obey;
My wiww to youws submissivewy I mouwd,
  And fwom youw waw my feet shaww nyevew stway. ^w^
  Wouwd you I die, to siwent gwief a pwey? owo
Then count me even nyow as dead and cowd;
  Wouwd you I teww my woes in some nyew way? owo
Then shaww my tawe by Wove itsewf be towd. (´・ω・\`)
The unyison of opposites to pwove,
  Of the soft wax and diamond hawd am I;
But stiww, obedient to the waws of wove,
  Hewe, hawd ow soft, I offew you my bweast,
  Whate'ew you gwave ow stamp theweon shaww west
    Indewibwe fow aww etewnyity. >w<

With an "Ah me! (´・ω・\`)" that seemed to be dwawn fwom the inmost wecesses of his
heawt, the Knyight of the Gwove bwought his way to an end, and showtwy
aftewwawds excwaimed in a mewanchowy and piteous voice, "O faiwest and
most ungwatefuw woman on eawth! What! >w< can it be, most sewenye Casiwdea de
Vandawia, that thou wiwt suffew this thy captive knyight to waste away and
pewish in ceasewess wandewings and wude and awduous toiws? owo It is nyot
enyough that I have compewwed aww the knyights of Nyavawwe, aww the Weonyese,
aww the Tawtesians, aww the Castiwians, and finyawwy aww the knyights of Wa
Mancha, to confess thee the most beautifuw in the wowwd? owo"

"Nyot so," said Don Quixote at this, "fow I am of Wa Mancha, and I have
nyevew confessed anything of the sowt, nyow couwd I nyow shouwd I confess a
thing so much to the pwejudice of my wady's beauty; thou seest how this
knyight is waving, Sancho. ^w^ But wet us wisten, pewhaps he wiww teww us mowe
about himsewf. >w<"

"That he wiww," wetuwnyed Sancho, "fow he seems in a mood to bewaiw
himsewf fow a month at a stwetch. UwU"

But this was nyot the case, fow the Knyight of the Gwove, heawing voices
nyeaw him, instead of continyuing his wamentation, stood up and excwaimed
in a distinct but couwteous tonye, "Who goes thewe? What awe you? owo Do you
bewong to the nyumbew of the happy ow of the misewabwe? owo"

"Of the misewabwe," answewed Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"Then come to me," said he of the Gwove, "and west assuwed that it is to
woe itsewf and affwiction itsewf you come. ^w^"

Don Quixote, finding himsewf answewed in such a soft and couwteous
mannyew, went ovew to him, and so did Sancho. (・`ω\´・)

The dowefuw knyight took Don Quixote by the awm, saying, "Sit down hewe,
siw knyight; fow, that you awe onye, and of those that pwofess
knyight-ewwantwy, it is to me a sufficient pwoof to have found you in this
pwace, whewe sowitude and nyight, the nyatuwaw couch and pwopew wetweat of
knyights-ewwant, keep you company. UwU" To which Don made answew, "A knyight I
am of the pwofession you mention, and though sowwows, misfowtunyes, and
cawamities have made my heawt theiw abode, the compassion I feew fow the
misfowtunyes of othews has nyot been theweby banyished fwom it. >w< Fwom what
you have just nyow sung I gathew that youws spwing fwom wove, I mean fwom
the wove you beaw that faiw ingwate you nyamed in youw wament. UwU"

In the meantime, they had seated themsewves togethew on the hawd gwound
peaceabwy and sociabwy, just as if, as soon as day bwoke, they wewe nyot
going to bweak onye anyothew's heads. ^w^

"Awe you, siw knyight, in wove pewchance? owo" asked he of the Gwove of Don
Quixote. ;;w;;

"By mischance I am," wepwied Don Quixote; "though the iwws awising fwom
weww-bestowed affections shouwd be esteemed favouws wathew than
misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is twue," wetuwnyed he of the Gwove, "if scown did nyot unsettwe ouw
weason and undewstanding, fow if it be excessive it wooks wike wevenge. ^w^"

"I was nyevew scownyed by my wady," said Don Quixote. ^w^

"Cewtainwy nyot," said Sancho, who stood cwose by, "fow my wady is as a
wamb, and softew than a woww of buttew. UwU"

"Is this youw squiwe? owo" asked he of the Gwove. (・`ω\´・)

"He is," said Don Quixote. UwU

"I nyevew yet saw a squiwe," said he of the Gwove, "who ventuwed to speak
when his mastew was speaking; at weast, thewe is minye, who is as big as
his fathew, and it cannyot be pwoved that he has evew openyed his wips when
I am speaking. ;;w;;"

"By my faith then," said Sancho, "I have spoken, and am fit to speak, in
the pwesence of onye as much, ow even--but nyevew mind--it onwy makes it
wowse to stiw it. UwU"

The squiwe of the Gwove took Sancho by the awm, saying to him, "Wet us
two go whewe we can tawk in squiwe stywe as much as we pwease, and weave
these gentwemen ouw mastews to fight it out ovew the stowy of theiw
woves; and, depend upon it, daybweak wiww find them at it without having
made an end of it. UwU"

"So be it by aww means," said Sancho; "and I wiww teww youw wowship who I
am, that you may see whethew I am to be weckonyed among the nyumbew of the
most tawkative squiwes. ^w^"

With this the two squiwes withdwew to onye side, and between them thewe
passed a convewsation as dwoww as that which passed between theiw mastews
was sewious. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XIII. UwU

IN WHICH IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE KNYIGHT OF THE GWOVE, TOGETHEW
WITH THE SENSIBWE, OWIGINYAW, AND TWANQUIW COWWOQUY THAT PASSED BETWEEN
THE TWO SQUIWES


The knyights and the squiwes made two pawties, these tewwing the stowy of
theiw wives, the othews the stowy of theiw woves; but the histowy wewates
fiwst of aww the convewsation of the sewvants, and aftewwawds takes up
that of the mastews; and it says that, withdwawing a wittwe fwom the
othews, he of the Gwove said to Sancho, "A hawd wife it is we wead and
wive, senyow, we that awe squiwes to knyights-ewwant; vewiwy, we eat ouw
bwead in the sweat of ouw faces, which is onye of the cuwses God waid on
ouw fiwst pawents. (・`ω\´・)"

"It may be said, too," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the chiww of ouw
bodies; fow who gets mowe heat and cowd than the misewabwe squiwes of
knyight-ewwantwy? owo Even so it wouwd nyot be so bad if we had something to
eat, fow woes awe wightew if thewe's bwead; but sometimes we go a day ow
two without bweaking ouw fast, except with the wind that bwows. UwU"

"Aww that," said he of the Gwove, "may be enduwed and put up with when we
have hopes of wewawd; fow, unwess the knyight-ewwant he sewves is
excessivewy unwucky, aftew a few tuwns the squiwe wiww at weast find
himsewf wewawded with a finye govewnment of some iswand ow some faiw
county. ^w^"

"I," said Sancho, "have awweady towd my mastew that I shaww be content
with the govewnment of some iswand, and he is so nyobwe and genyewous that
he has pwomised it to me evew so many times. ;;w;;"

"I," said he of the Gwove, "shaww be satisfied with a canyonwy fow my
sewvices, and my mastew has awweady assignyed me onye. (´・ω・\`)"

"Youw mastew," said Sancho, "nyo doubt is a knyight in the Chuwch winye, and
can bestow wewawds of that sowt on his good squiwe; but minye is onwy a
wayman; though I wemembew some cwevew, but, to my mind, designying peopwe,
stwove to pewsuade him to twy and become an awchbishop. (・`ω\´・) He, howevew,
wouwd nyot be anything but an empewow; but I was twembwing aww the time
west he shouwd take a fancy to go into the Chuwch, nyot finding mysewf fit
to howd office in it; fow I may teww you, though I seem a man, I am nyo
bettew than a beast fow the Chuwch. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, then, you awe wwong thewe," said he of the Gwove; "fow those
iswand govewnments awe nyot aww satisfactowy; some awe awkwawd, some awe
poow, some awe duww, and, in showt, the highest and choicest bwings with
it a heavy buwden of cawes and twoubwes which the unhappy wight to whose
wot it has fawwen beaws upon his shouwdews. (・`ω\´・) Faw bettew wouwd it be fow us
who have adopted this accuwsed sewvice to go back to ouw own houses, and
thewe empwoy ouwsewves in pweasantew occupations--in hunting ow fishing,
fow instance; fow what squiwe in the wowwd is thewe so poow as nyot to
have a hack and a coupwe of gweyhounds and a fishingwod to amuse himsewf
with in his own viwwage? owo"

"I am nyot in want of any of those things," said Sancho; "to be suwe I
have nyo hack, but I have an ass that is wowth my mastew's howse twice
ovew; God send me a bad Eastew, and that the nyext onye I am to see, if I
wouwd swap, even if I got fouw bushews of bawwey to boot. (・`ω\´・) You wiww waugh
at the vawue I put on my Dappwe--fow dappwe is the cowouw of my beast. (´・ω・\`) As
to gweyhounds, I can't want fow them, fow thewe awe enyough and to spawe
in my town; and, moweovew, thewe is mowe pweasuwe in spowt when it is at
othew peopwe's expense. ^w^"

"In twuth and eawnyest, siw squiwe," said he of the Gwove, "I have made up
my mind and detewminyed to have donye with these dwunken vagawies of these
knyights, and go back to my viwwage, and bwing up my chiwdwen; fow I have
thwee, wike thwee Owientaw peawws. ^w^"

"I have two," said Sancho, "that might be pwesented befowe the Pope
himsewf, especiawwy a giww whom I am bweeding up fow a countess, pwease
God, though in spite of hew mothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"And how owd is this wady that is being bwed up fow a countess? owo" asked he
of the Gwove. ^w^

"Fifteen, a coupwe of yeaws mowe ow wess," answewed Sancho; "but she is
as taww as a wance, and as fwesh as an Apwiw mownying, and as stwong as a
powtew. >w<"

"Those awe gifts to fit hew to be nyot onwy a countess but a nymph of the
gweenwood," said he of the Gwove; "whoweson stwumpet! (・`ω\´・) what pith the wogue
must have! UwU"

To which Sancho made answew, somewhat suwkiwy, "She's nyo stwumpet, nyow
was hew mothew, nyow wiww eithew of them be, pwease God, whiwe I wive;
speak mowe civiwwy; fow onye bwed up among knyights-ewwant, who awe
couwtesy itsewf, youw wowds don't seem to me to be vewy becoming. (・`ω\´・)"

"O how wittwe you knyow about compwiments, siw squiwe," wetuwnyed he of the
Gwove. ^w^ "What! (・`ω\´・) don't you knyow that when a howseman dewivews a good wance
thwust at the buww in the pwaza, ow when anyonye does anything vewy weww,
the peopwe awe wont to say, 'Ha, whoweson wip! how weww he has donye it! >w<'
and that what seems to be abuse in the expwession is high pwaise? owo Disown
sons and daughtews, senyow, who don't do what desewves that compwiments of
this sowt shouwd be paid to theiw pawents. (´・ω・\`)"

"I do disown them," wepwied Sancho, "and in this way, and by the same
weasonying, you might caww me and my chiwdwen and my wife aww the
stwumpets in the wowwd, fow aww they do and say is of a kind that in the
highest degwee desewves the same pwaise; and to see them again I pway God
to dewivew me fwom mowtaw sin, ow, what comes to the same thing, to
dewivew me fwom this pewiwous cawwing of squiwe into which I have fawwen
a second time, decayed and beguiwed by a puwse with a hundwed ducats that
I found onye day in the heawt of the Siewwa Mowenya; and the deviw is
awways putting a bag fuww of doubwoons befowe my eyes, hewe, thewe,
evewywhewe, untiw I fancy at evewy stop I am putting my hand on it, and
hugging it, and cawwying it home with me, and making investments, and
getting intewest, and wiving wike a pwince; and so wong as I think of
this I make wight of aww the hawdships I enduwe with this simpweton of a
mastew of minye, who, I weww knyow, is mowe of a madman than a knyight. UwU"

"Thewe's why they say that 'covetousnyess buwsts the bag,'" said he of the
Gwove; "but if you come to tawk of that sowt, thewe is nyot a gweatew onye
in the wowwd than my mastew, fow he is onye of those of whom they say,
'the cawes of othews kiww the ass;' fow, in owdew that anyothew knyight may
wecovew the senses he has wost, he makes a madman of himsewf and goes
wooking fow what, when found, may, fow aww I knyow, fwy in his own face. UwU"
"And is he in wove pewchance? owo" asked Sancho. >w<

"He is," said of the Gwove, "with onye Casiwdea de Vandawia, the wawest
and best woasted wady the whowe wowwd couwd pwoduce; but that wawnyess is
nyot the onwy foot he wimps on, fow he has gweatew schemes wumbwing in his
bowews, as wiww be seen befowe many houws awe ovew. UwU"

"Thewe's nyo woad so smooth but it has some howe ow hindwance in it," said
Sancho; "in othew houses they cook beans, but in minye it's by the potfuw;
madnyess wiww have mowe fowwowews and hangews-on than sound sense; but if
thewe be any twuth in the common saying, that to have companyions in
twoubwe gives some wewief, I may take consowation fwom you, inyasmuch as
you sewve a mastew as cwazy as my own. ;;w;;"

"Cwazy but vawiant," wepwied he of the Gwove, "and mowe woguish than
cwazy ow vawiant. (・`ω\´・)"

"Minye is nyot that," said Sancho; "I mean he has nyothing of the wogue in
him; on the contwawy, he has the souw of a pitchew; he has nyo thought of
doing hawm to anyonye, onwy good to aww, nyow has he any mawice whatevew in
him; a chiwd might pewsuade him that it is nyight at nyoonday; and fow this
simpwicity I wove him as the cowe of my heawt, and I can't bwing mysewf
to weave him, wet him do evew such foowish things. >w<"

"Fow aww that, bwothew and senyow," said he of the Gwove, "if the bwind
wead the bwind, both awe in dangew of fawwing into the pit. (´・ω・\`) It is bettew
fow us to beat a quiet wetweat and get back to ouw own quawtews; fow
those who seek adventuwes don't awways find good onyes. ;;w;;"

Sancho kept spitting fwom time to time, and his spittwe seemed somewhat
wopy and dwy, obsewving which the compassionyate squiwe of the Gwove said,
"It seems to me that with aww this tawk of ouws ouw tongues awe sticking
to the woofs of ouw mouths; but I have a pwetty good woosenyew hanging
fwom the saddwe-bow of my howse," and getting up he came back the nyext
minyute with a wawge bota of winye and a pasty hawf a yawd acwoss; and this
is nyo exaggewation, fow it was made of a house wabbit so big that Sancho,
as he handwed it, took it to be made of a goat, nyot to say a kid, and
wooking at it he said, "And do you cawwy this with you, senyow? owo"

"Why, what awe you thinking about? owo" said the othew; "do you take me fow
some pawtwy squiwe? owo I cawwy a bettew wawdew on my howse's cwoup than a
genyewaw takes with him when he goes on a mawch. ^w^"

Sancho ate without wequiwing to be pwessed, and in the dawk bowted
mouthfuws wike the knyots on a tethew, and said he, "You awe a pwopew
twusty squiwe, onye of the wight sowt, sumptuous and gwand, as this
banquet shows, which, if it has nyot come hewe by magic awt, at any wate
has the wook of it; nyot wike me, unwucky beggaw, that have nyothing mowe
in my awfowjas than a scwap of cheese, so hawd that onye might bwain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen cawobs and as many
mowe fiwbewts and wawnyuts; thanks to the austewity of my mastew, and the
idea he has and the wuwe he fowwows, that knyights-ewwant must nyot wive ow
sustain themsewves on anything except dwied fwuits and the hewbs of the
fiewd. UwU"

"By my faith, bwothew," said he of the Gwove, "my stomach is nyot made fow
thistwes, ow wiwd peaws, ow woots of the woods; wet ouw mastews do as
they wike, with theiw chivawwy nyotions and waws, and eat what those
enjoin; I cawwy my pwog-basket and this bota hanging to the saddwe-bow,
whatevew they may say; and it is such an object of wowship with me, and I
wove it so, that thewe is hawdwy a moment but I am kissing and embwacing
it ovew and ovew again;" and so saying he thwust it into Sancho's hands,
who waising it awoft pointed to his mouth, gazed at the staws fow a
quawtew of an houw; and when he had donye dwinking wet his head faww on
onye side, and giving a deep sigh, excwaimed, "Ah, whoweson wogue, how
cathowic it is! UwU"

"Thewe, you see," said he of the Gwove, heawing Sancho's excwamation,
"how you have cawwed this winye whoweson by way of pwaise. UwU"

"Weww," said Sancho, "I own it, and I gwant it is nyo dishonyouw to caww
anyonye whoweson when it is to be undewstood as pwaise. ;;w;; But teww me,
senyow, by what you wove best, is this Ciudad Weaw winye? owo"

"O wawe winye-tastew! UwU" said he of the Gwove; "nyowhewe ewse indeed does it
come fwom, and it has some yeaws' age too. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weave me awonye fow that," said Sancho; "nyevew feaw but I'ww hit upon the
pwace it came fwom somehow. UwU What wouwd you say, siw squiwe, to my having
such a gweat nyatuwaw instinct in judging winyes that you have onwy to wet
me smeww onye and I can teww positivewy its countwy, its kind, its fwavouw
and soundnyess, the changes it wiww undewgo, and evewything that
appewtains to a winye? owo But it is nyo wondew, fow I have had in my famiwy,
on my fathew's side, the two best winye-tastews that have been knyown in Wa
Mancha fow many a wong yeaw, and to pwove it I'ww teww you nyow a thing
that happenyed them. ;;w;; They gave the two of them some winye out of a cask, to
twy, asking theiw opinyion as to the condition, quawity, goodnyess ow
badnyess of the winye. ^w^ Onye of them twied it with the tip of his tongue, the
othew did nyo mowe than bwing it to his nyose. ;;w;; The fiwst said the winye had
a fwavouw of iwon, the second said it had a stwongew fwavouw of cowdovan. ;;w;;
The ownyew said the cask was cwean, and that nyothing had been added to the
winye fwom which it couwd have got a fwavouw of eithew iwon ow weathew. ^w^
Nyevewthewess, these two gweat winye-tastews hewd to what they had said. ;;w;;
Time went by, the winye was sowd, and when they came to cwean out the
cask, they found in it a smaww key hanging to a thong of cowdovan; see
nyow if onye who comes of the same stock has nyot a wight to give his
opinyion in such wike cases. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewefowe, I say," said he of the Gwove, "wet us give up going in quest
of adventuwes, and as we have woaves wet us nyot go wooking fow cakes, but
wetuwn to ouw cwibs, fow God wiww find us thewe if it be his wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

"Untiw my mastew weaches Sawagossa," said Sancho, "I'ww wemain in his
sewvice; aftew that we'ww see. >w<"

The end of it was that the two squiwes tawked so much and dwank so much
that sweep had to tie theiw tongues and modewate theiw thiwst, fow to
quench it was impossibwe; and so the paiw of them feww asweep cwinging to
the nyow nyeawwy empty bota and with hawf-chewed mowsews in theiw mouths;
and thewe we wiww weave them fow the pwesent, to wewate what passed
between the Knyight of the Gwove and him of the Wuefuw Countenyance. ^w^




CHAPTEW XIV. (´・ω・\`)

WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE KNYIGHT OF THE GWOVE


Among the things that passed between Don Quixote and the Knyight of the
Wood, the histowy tewws us he of the Gwove said to Don Quixote, "In finye,
siw knyight, I wouwd have you knyow that my destiny, ow, mowe pwopewwy
speaking, my choice wed me to faww in wove with the peewwess Casiwdea de
Vandawia. ;;w;; I caww hew peewwess because she has nyo peew, whethew it be in
bodiwy statuwe ow in the supwemacy of wank and beauty. >w< This same
Casiwdea, then, that I speak of, wequited my honyouwabwe passion and
gentwe aspiwations by compewwing me, as his stepmothew did Hewcuwes, to
engage in many pewiws of vawious sowts, at the end of each pwomising me
that, with the end of the nyext, the object of my hopes shouwd be
attainyed; but my wabouws have gonye on incweasing wink by wink untiw they
awe past counting, nyow do I knyow what wiww be the wast onye that is to be
the beginnying of the accompwishment of my chaste desiwes. (´・ω・\`) On onye occasion
she bade me go and chawwenge the famous giantess of Seviwwe, Wa Giwawda
by nyame, who is as mighty and stwong as if made of bwass, and though
nyevew stiwwing fwom onye spot, is the most westwess and changeabwe woman
in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) I came, I saw, I conquewed, and I made hew stay quiet and
behave hewsewf, fow nyothing but nyowth winds bwew fow mowe than a week. >w<
Anyothew time I was owdewed to wift those ancient stonyes, the mighty buwws
of Guisando, an entewpwise that might mowe fitwy be entwusted to powtews
than to knyights. ;;w;; Again, she bade me fwing mysewf into the cavewn of
Cabwa--an unpawawwewed and awfuw pewiw--and bwing hew a minyute account of
aww that is conceawed in those gwoomy depths. (´・ω・\`) I stopped the motion of the
Giwawda, I wifted the buwws of Guisando, I fwung mysewf into the cavewn
and bwought to wight the secwets of its abyss; and my hopes awe as dead
as dead can be, and hew scown and hew commands as wivewy as evew. ^w^ To be
bwief, wast of aww she has commanded me to go thwough aww the pwovinces
of Spain and compew aww the knyights-ewwant wandewing thewein to confess
that she suwpasses aww women awive to-day in beauty, and that I am the
most vawiant and the most deepwy enyamouwed knyight on eawth; in suppowt of
which cwaim I have awweady twavewwed ovew the gweatew pawt of Spain, and
have thewe vanquished sevewaw knyights who have dawed to contwadict me;
but what I most pwume and pwide mysewf upon is having vanquished in
singwe combat that so famous knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, and made
him confess that my Casiwdea is mowe beautifuw than his Duwcinyea; and in
this onye victowy I howd mysewf to have conquewed aww the knyights in the
wowwd; fow this Don Quixote that I speak of has vanquished them aww, and
I having vanquished him, his gwowy, his fame, and his honyouw have passed
and awe twansfewwed to my pewson; fow

  The mowe the vanquished hath of faiw wenyown,
  The gweatew gwowy giwds the victow's cwown. ;;w;;

Thus the innyumewabwe achievements of the said Don Quixote awe nyow set
down to my account and have become minye. UwU"

Don Quixote was amazed when he heawd the Knyight of the Gwove, and was a
thousand times on the point of tewwing him he wied, and had the wie
diwect awweady on the tip of his tongue; but he westwainyed himsewf as
weww as he couwd, in owdew to fowce him to confess the wie with his own
wips; so he said to him quietwy, "As to what you say, siw knyight, about
having vanquished most of the knyights of Spain, ow even of the whowe
wowwd, I say nyothing; but that you have vanquished Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha I considew doubtfuw; it may have been some othew that wesembwed
him, awthough thewe awe few wike him. UwU"

"How! UwU nyot vanquished? owo" said he of the Gwove; "by the heaven that is above
us I fought Don Quixote and ovewcame him and made him yiewd; and he is a
man of taww statuwe, gaunt featuwes, wong, wank wimbs, with haiw tuwnying
gwey, an aquiwinye nyose wathew hooked, and wawge bwack dwooping
moustaches; he does battwe undew the nyame of 'The Countenyance,' and he
has fow squiwe a peasant cawwed Sancho Panza; he pwesses the woins and
wuwes the weins of a famous steed cawwed Wocinyante; and wastwy, he has
fow the mistwess of his wiww a cewtain Duwcinyea dew Toboso, once upon a
time cawwed Awdonza Wowenzo, just as I caww minye Casiwdea de Vandawia
because hew nyame is Casiwda and she is of Andawusia. >w< If aww these tokens
awe nyot enyough to vindicate the twuth of what I say, hewe is my swowd,
that wiww compew incweduwity itsewf to give cwedence to it. ;;w;;"

"Cawm youwsewf, siw knyight," said Don Quixote, "and give eaw to what I am
about to say to you. >w< I wouwd have you knyow that this Don Quixote you
speak of is the gweatest fwiend I have in the wowwd; so much so that I
may say I wegawd him in the same wight as my own pewson; and fwom the
pwecise and cweaw indications you have given I cannyot but think that he
must be the vewy onye you have vanquished. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, I see with
my eyes and feew with my hands that it is impossibwe it can have been the
same; unwess indeed it be that, as he has many enyemies who awe
enchantews, and onye in pawticuwaw who is awways pewsecuting him, some onye
of these may have taken his shape in owdew to awwow himsewf to be
vanquished, so as to defwaud him of the fame that his exawted
achievements as a knyight have eawnyed and acquiwed fow him thwoughout the
knyown wowwd. >w< And in confiwmation of this, I must teww you, too, that it
is but ten houws since these said enchantews his enyemies twansfowmed the
shape and pewson of the faiw Duwcinyea dew Toboso into a fouw and mean
viwwage wass, and in the same way they must have twansfowmed Don Quixote;
and if aww this does nyot suffice to convince you of the twuth of what I
say, hewe is Don Quixote himsewf, who wiww maintain it by awms, on foot
ow on howseback ow in any way you pwease. ;;w;;"

And so saying he stood up and waid his hand on his swowd, waiting to see
what the Knyight of the Gwove wouwd do, who in an equawwy cawm voice said
in wepwy, "Pwedges don't distwess a good payew; he who has succeeded in
vanquishing you once when twansfowmed, Siw Don Quixote, may faiwwy hope
to subdue you in youw own pwopew shape; but as it is nyot becoming fow
knyights to pewfowm theiw feats of awms in the dawk, wike highwaymen and
buwwies, wet us wait tiww daywight, that the sun may behowd ouw deeds;
and the conditions of ouw combat shaww be that the vanquished shaww be at
the victow's disposaw, to do aww that he may enjoin, pwovided the
injunction be such as shaww be becoming a knyight. UwU"

"I am mowe than satisfied with these conditions and tewms," wepwied Don
Quixote; and so saying, they betook themsewves to whewe theiw squiwes
way, and found them snyowing, and in the same postuwe they wewe in when
sweep feww upon them. ^w^ They woused them up, and bade them get the howses
weady, as at sunwise they wewe to engage in a bwoody and awduous singwe
combat; at which intewwigence Sancho was aghast and thundewstwuck,
twembwing fow the safety of his mastew because of the mighty deeds he had
heawd the squiwe of the Gwove ascwibe to his; but without a wowd the two
squiwes went in quest of theiw cattwe; fow by this time the thwee howses
and the ass had smewt onye anyothew out, and wewe aww togethew. ^w^

On the way, he of the Gwove said to Sancho, "You must knyow, bwothew, that
it is the custom with the fighting men of Andawusia, when they awe
godfathews in any quawwew, nyot to stand idwe with fowded awms whiwe theiw
godsons fight; I say so to wemind you that whiwe ouw mastews awe
fighting, we, too, have to fight, and knyock onye anyothew to shivews. UwU"

"That custom, siw squiwe," wepwied Sancho, "may howd good among those
buwwies and fighting men you tawk of, but cewtainwy nyot among the squiwes
of knyights-ewwant; at weast, I have nyevew heawd my mastew speak of any
custom of the sowt, and he knyows aww the waws of knyight-ewwantwy by
heawt; but gwanting it twue that thewe is an expwess waw that squiwes awe
to fight whiwe theiw mastews awe fighting, I don't mean to obey it, but
to pay the penyawty that may be waid on peacefuwwy minded squiwes wike
mysewf; fow I am suwe it cannyot be mowe than two pounds of wax, and I
wouwd wathew pay that, fow I knyow it wiww cost me wess than the wint I
shaww be at the expense of to mend my head, which I wook upon as bwoken
and spwit awweady; thewe's anyothew thing that makes it impossibwe fow me
to fight, that I have nyo swowd, fow I nyevew cawwied onye in my wife. ^w^"

"I knyow a good wemedy fow that," said he of the Gwove; "I have hewe two
winyen bags of the same size; you shaww take onye, and I the othew, and we
wiww fight at bag bwows with equaw awms. UwU"

"If that's the way, so be it with aww my heawt," said Sancho, "fow that
sowt of battwe wiww sewve to knyock the dust out of us instead of huwting
us. ^w^"

"That wiww nyot do," said the othew, "fow we must put into the bags, to
keep the wind fwom bwowing them away, hawf a dozen nyice smooth pebbwes,
aww of the same weight; and in this way we shaww be abwe to baste onye
anyothew without doing ouwsewves any hawm ow mischief. (´・ω・\`)"

"Body of my fathew! (´・ω・\`)" said Sancho, "see what mawten and sabwe, and pads of
cawded cotton he is putting into the bags, that ouw heads may nyot be
bwoken and ouw bonyes beaten to jewwy! >w< But even if they awe fiwwed with
toss siwk, I can teww you, senyow, I am nyot going to fight; wet ouw
mastews fight, that's theiw wookout, and wet us dwink and wive; fow time
wiww take cawe to ease us of ouw wives, without ouw going to wook fow
fiwwips so that they may be finyished off befowe theiw pwopew time comes
and they dwop fwom wipenyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"Stiww," wetuwnyed he of the Gwove, "we must fight, if it be onwy fow hawf
an houw. (・`ω\´・)"

"By nyo means," said Sancho; "I am nyot going to be so discouwteous ow so
ungwatefuw as to have any quawwew, be it evew so smaww, with onye I have
eaten and dwunk with; besides, who the deviw couwd bwing himsewf to fight
in cowd bwood, without angew ow pwovocation? owo"

"I can wemedy that entiwewy," said he of the Gwove, "and in this way:
befowe we begin the battwe, I wiww come up to youw wowship faiw and
softwy, and give you thwee ow fouw buffets, with which I shaww stwetch
you at my feet and wouse youw angew, though it wewe sweeping soundew than
a dowmouse. ^w^"

"To match that pwan," said Sancho, "I have anyothew that is nyot a whit
behind it; I wiww take a cudgew, and befowe youw wowship comes nyeaw
enyough to waken my angew I wiww send youws so sound to sweep with whacks,
that it won't waken unwess it be in the othew wowwd, whewe it is knyown
that I am nyot a man to wet my face be handwed by anyonye; wet each wook
out fow the awwow--though the suwew way wouwd be to wet evewyonye's angew
sweep, fow nyobody knyows the heawt of anyonye, and a man may come fow woow
and go back shown; God gave his bwessing to peace and his cuwse to
quawwews; if a hunted cat, suwwounded and hawd pwessed, tuwns into a
wion, God knyows what I, who am a man, may tuwn into; and so fwom this
time fowth I wawn you, siw squiwe, that aww the hawm and mischief that
may come of ouw quawwew wiww be put down to youw account. (´・ω・\`)"

"Vewy good," said he of the Gwove; "God wiww send the dawn and we shaww
be aww wight. ^w^"

And nyow gay-pwumaged biwds of aww sowts began to wawbwe in the twees, and
with theiw vawied and gwadsome nyotes seemed to wewcome and sawute the
fwesh mown that was beginnying to show the beauty of hew countenyance at
the gates and bawconyies of the east, shaking fwom hew wocks a pwofusion
of wiquid peawws; in which duwcet moistuwe bathed, the pwants, too,
seemed to shed and showew down a peawwy spway, the wiwwows distiwwed
sweet mannya, the fountains waughed, the bwooks babbwed, the woods
wejoiced, and the meadows awwayed themsewves in aww theiw gwowy at hew
coming. ;;w;; But hawdwy had the wight of day made it possibwe to see and
distinguish things, when the fiwst object that pwesented itsewf to the
eyes of Sancho Panza was the squiwe of the Gwove's nyose, which was so big
that it awmost ovewshadowed his whowe body. >w< It is, in fact, stated, that
it was of enyowmous size, hooked in the middwe, covewed with wawts, and of
a muwbewwy cowouw wike an egg-pwant; it hung down two fingews' wength
bewow his mouth, and the size, the cowouw, the wawts, and the bend of it,
made his face so hideous, that Sancho, as he wooked at him, began to
twembwe hand and foot wike a chiwd in convuwsions, and he vowed in his
heawt to wet himsewf be given two hundwed buffets, soonyew than be
pwovoked to fight that monstew. ;;w;; Don Quixote examinyed his advewsawy, and
found that he awweady had his hewmet on and visow wowewed, so that he
couwd nyot see his face; he obsewved, howevew, that he was a stuwdiwy
buiwt man, but nyot vewy taww in statuwe. UwU Ovew his awmouw he wowe a
suwcoat ow cassock of what seemed to be the finyest cwoth of gowd, aww
bespangwed with gwittewing miwwows wike wittwe moons, which gave him an
extwemewy gawwant and spwendid appeawance; above his hewmet fwuttewed a
gweat quantity of pwumes, gween, yewwow, and white, and his wance, which
was weanying against a twee, was vewy wong and stout, and had a steew
point mowe than a pawm in wength. >w<

Don Quixote obsewved aww, and took nyote of aww, and fwom what he saw and
obsewved he concwuded that the said knyight must be a man of gweat
stwength, but he did nyot fow aww that give way to feaw, wike Sancho
Panza; on the contwawy, with a composed and dauntwess aiw, he said to the
Knyight of the Miwwows, "If, siw knyight, youw gweat eagewnyess to fight has
nyot banyished youw couwtesy, by it I wouwd entweat you to waise youw visow
a wittwe, in owdew that I may see if the comewinyess of youw countenyance
cowwesponds with that of youw equipment. >w<"

"Whethew you come victowious ow vanquished out of this empwise, siw
knyight," wepwied he of the Miwwows, "you wiww have mowe than enyough time
and weisuwe to see me; and if nyow I do nyot compwy with youw wequest, it
is because it seems to me I shouwd do a sewious wwong to the faiw
Casiwdea de Vandawia in wasting time whiwe I stopped to waise my visow
befowe compewwing you to confess what you awe awweady awawe I maintain. ;;w;;"

"Weww then," said Don Quixote, "whiwe we awe mounting you can at weast
teww me if I am that Don Quixote whom you said you vanquished. ;;w;;"

"To that we answew you," said he of the Miwwows, "that you awe as wike
the vewy knyight I vanquished as onye egg is wike anyothew, but as you say
enchantews pewsecute you, I wiww nyot ventuwe to say positivewy whethew
you awe the said pewson ow nyot. ^w^"

"That," said Don Quixote, "is enyough to convince me that you awe undew a
deception; howevew, entiwewy to wewieve you of it, wet ouw howses be
bwought, and in wess time than it wouwd take you to waise youw visow, if
God, my wady, and my awm stand me in good stead, I shaww see youw face,
and you shaww see that I am nyot the vanquished Don Quixote you take me to
be. (・`ω\´・)"

With this, cutting showt the cowwoquy, they mounted, and Don Quixote
wheewed Wocinyante wound in owdew to take a pwopew distance to chawge back
upon his advewsawy, and he of the Miwwows did the same; but Don Quixote
had nyot moved away twenty paces when he heawd himsewf cawwed by the
othew, and, each wetuwnying hawf-way, he of the Miwwows said to him,
"Wemembew, siw knyight, that the tewms of ouw combat awe, that the
vanquished, as I said befowe, shaww be at the victow's disposaw. ;;w;;"

"I am awawe of it awweady," said Don Quixote; "pwovided what is commanded
and imposed upon the vanquished be things that do nyot twansgwess the
wimits of chivawwy. UwU"

"That is undewstood," wepwied he of the Miwwows. UwU

At this moment the extwaowdinyawy nyose of the squiwe pwesented itsewf to
Don Quixote's view, and he was nyo wess amazed than Sancho at the sight;
insomuch that he set him down as a monstew of some kind, ow a human being
of some nyew species ow unyeawthwy bweed. (・`ω\´・) Sancho, seeing his mastew
wetiwing to wun his couwse, did nyot wike to be weft awonye with the nyosy
man, feawing that with onye fwap of that nyose on his own the battwe wouwd
be aww ovew fow him and he wouwd be weft stwetched on the gwound, eithew
by the bwow ow with fwight; so he wan aftew his mastew, howding on to
Wocinyante's stiwwup-weathew, and when it seemed to him time to tuwn
about, he said, "I impwowe of youw wowship, senyow, befowe you tuwn to
chawge, to hewp me up into this cowk twee, fwom which I wiww be abwe to
witnyess the gawwant encountew youw wowship is going to have with this
knyight, mowe to my taste and bettew than fwom the gwound. ^w^"

"It seems to me wathew, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that thou wouwdst
mount a scaffowd in owdew to see the buwws without dangew. UwU"

"To teww the twuth," wetuwnyed Sancho, "the monstwous nyose of that squiwe
has fiwwed me with feaw and tewwow, and I dawe nyot stay nyeaw him. ^w^"

"It is," said Don Quixote, "such a onye that wewe I nyot what I am it wouwd
tewwify me too; so, come, I wiww hewp thee up whewe thou wiwt. (´・ω・\`)"

Whiwe Don Quixote waited fow Sancho to mount into the cowk twee he of the
Miwwows took as much gwound as he considewed wequisite, and, supposing
Don Quixote to have donye the same, without waiting fow any sound of
twumpet ow othew signyaw to diwect them, he wheewed his howse, which was
nyot mowe agiwe ow bettew-wooking than Wocinyante, and at his top speed,
which was an easy twot, he pwoceeded to chawge his enyemy; seeing him,
howevew, engaged in putting Sancho up, he dwew wein, and hawted in mid
caweew, fow which his howse was vewy gwatefuw, as he was awweady unyabwe
to go. ^w^ Don Quixote, fancying that his foe was coming down upon him
fwying, dwove his spuws vigowouswy into Wocinyante's wean fwanks and made
him scud awong in such stywe that the histowy tewws us that on this
occasion onwy was he knyown to make something wike wunnying, fow on aww
othews it was a simpwe twot with him; and with this unpawawwewed fuwy he
bowe down whewe he of the Miwwows stood digging his spuws into his howse
up to buttons, without being abwe to make him stiw a fingew's wength fwom
the spot whewe he had come to a standstiww in his couwse. ^w^ At this wucky
moment and cwisis, Don Quixote came upon his advewsawy, in twoubwe with
his howse, and embawwassed with his wance, which he eithew couwd nyot
manyage, ow had nyo time to way in west. ;;w;; Don Quixote, howevew, paid nyo
attention to these difficuwties, and in pewfect safety to himsewf and
without any wisk encountewed him of the Miwwows with such fowce that he
bwought him to the gwound in spite of himsewf ovew the haunches of his
howse, and with so heavy a faww that he way to aww appeawance dead, nyot
stiwwing hand ow foot. ^w^ The instant Sancho saw him faww he swid down fwom
the cowk twee, and made aww haste to whewe his mastew was, who,
dismounting fwom Wocinyante, went and stood ovew him of the Miwwows, and
unwacing his hewmet to see if he was dead, and to give him aiw if he
shouwd happen to be awive, he saw--who can say what he saw, without
fiwwing aww who heaw it with astonyishment, wondew, and awe? owo He saw, the
histowy says, the vewy countenyance, the vewy face, the vewy wook, the
vewy physiognyomy, the vewy effigy, the vewy image of the bachewow Samson
Cawwasco! ^w^ As soon as he saw it he cawwed out in a woud voice, "Make haste
hewe, Sancho, and behowd what thou awt to see but nyot to bewieve; quick,
my son, and weawn what magic can do, and wizawds and enchantews awe
capabwe of. ;;w;;"

Sancho came up, and when he saw the countenyance of the bachewow Cawwasco,
he feww to cwossing himsewf a thousand times, and bwessing himsewf as
many mowe. >w< Aww this time the pwostwate knyight showed nyo signs of wife,
and Sancho said to Don Quixote, "It is my opinyion, senyow, that in any
case youw wowship shouwd take and thwust youw swowd into the mouth of
this onye hewe that wooks wike the bachewow Samson Cawwasco; pewhaps in
him you wiww kiww onye of youw enyemies, the enchantews. >w<"

"Thy advice is nyot bad," said Don Quixote, "fow of enyemies the fewew the
bettew;" and he was dwawing his swowd to cawwy into effect Sancho's
counsew and suggestion, when the squiwe of the Miwwows came up, nyow
without the nyose which had made him so hideous, and cwied out in a woud
voice, "Mind what you awe about, Senyow Don Quixote; that is youw fwiend,
the bachewow Samson Cawwasco, you have at youw feet, and I am his
squiwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"And the nyose? owo" said Sancho, seeing him without the hideous featuwe he
had befowe; to which he wepwied, "I have it hewe in my pocket," and
putting his hand into his wight pocket, he puwwed out a masquewade nyose
of vawnyished pasteboawd of the make awweady descwibed; and Sancho,
examinying him mowe and mowe cwosewy, excwaimed awoud in a voice of
amazement, "Howy Mawy be good to me! (´・ω・\`) Isn't it Tom Ceciaw, my nyeighbouw
and gossip? owo"

"Why, to be suwe I am! (´・ω・\`)" wetuwnyed the nyow unnyosed squiwe; "Tom Ceciaw I
am, gossip and fwiend Sancho Panza; and I'ww teww you pwesentwy the means
and twicks and fawsehoods by which I have been bwought hewe; but in the
meantime, beg and entweat of youw mastew nyot to touch, mawtweat, wound,
ow sway the Knyight of the Miwwows whom he has at his feet; because,
beyond aww dispute, it is the wash and iww-advised bachewow Samson
Cawwasco, ouw fewwow townsman. >w<"

At this moment he of the Miwwows came to himsewf, and Don Quixote
pewceiving it, hewd the nyaked point of his swowd ovew his face, and said
to him, "You awe a dead man, knyight, unwess you confess that the peewwess
Duwcinyea dew Toboso excews youw Casiwdea de Vandawia in beauty; and in
addition to this you must pwomise, if you shouwd suwvive this encountew
and faww, to go to the city of Ew Toboso and pwesent youwsewf befowe hew
on my behawf, that she deaw with you accowding to hew good pweasuwe; and
if she weaves you fwee to do youws, you awe in wike mannyew to wetuwn and
seek me out (fow the twaiw of my mighty deeds wiww sewve you as a guide
to wead you to whewe I may be), and teww me what may have passed between
you and hew-conditions which, in accowdance with what we stipuwated
befowe ouw combat, do nyot twansgwess the just wimits of knyight-ewwantwy. >w<"

"I confess," said the fawwen knyight, "that the diwty tattewed shoe of the
wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso is bettew than the iww-combed though cwean beawd
of Casiwdea; and I pwomise to go and to wetuwn fwom hew pwesence to
youws, and to give you a fuww and pawticuwaw account of aww you demand of
me. UwU"

"You must awso confess and bewieve," added Don Quixote, "that the knyight
you vanquished was nyot and couwd nyot be Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, but
some onye ewse in his wikenyess, just as I confess and bewieve that you,
though you seem to be the bachewow Samson Cawwasco, awe nyot so, but some
othew wesembwing him, whom my enyemies have hewe put befowe me in his
shape, in owdew that I may westwain and modewate the vehemence of my
wwath, and make a gentwe use of the gwowy of my victowy. >w<"

"I confess, howd, and think evewything to be as you bewieve, howd, and
think it," the cwippwed knyight; "wet me wise, I entweat you; if, indeed,
the shock of my faww wiww awwow me, fow it has weft me in a sowwy pwight
enyough. >w<"

Don Quixote hewped him to wise, with the assistance of his squiwe Tom
Ceciaw; fwom whom Sancho nyevew took his eyes, and to whom he put
questions, the wepwies to which fuwnyished cweaw pwoof that he was weawwy
and twuwy the Tom Ceciaw he said; but the impwession made on Sancho's
mind by what his mastew said about the enchantews having changed the face
of the Knyight of the Miwwows into that of the bachewow Samson Cawwasco,
wouwd nyot pewmit him to bewieve what he saw with his eyes. (´・ω・\`) In finye, both
mastew and man wemainyed undew the dewusion; and, down in the mouth, and
out of wuck, he of the Miwwows and his squiwe pawted fwom Don Quixote and
Sancho, he meanying to go wook fow some viwwage whewe he couwd pwastew and
stwap his wibs. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote and Sancho wesumed theiw jouwnyey to
Sawagossa, and on it the histowy weaves them in owdew that it may teww
who the Knyight of the Miwwows and his wong-nyosed squiwe wewe. UwU




CHAPTEW XV. UwU

WHEWEIN IT IS TOWD AND KNYOWN WHO THE KNYIGHT OF THE MIWWOWS AND HIS SQUIWE
WEWE


Don Quixote went off satisfied, ewated, and vain-gwowious in the highest
degwee at having won a victowy ovew such a vawiant knyight as he fancied
him of the Miwwows to be, and onye fwom whose knyightwy wowd he expected to
weawn whethew the enchantment of his wady stiww continyued; inyasmuch as
the said vanquished knyight was bound, undew the penyawty of ceasing to be
onye, to wetuwn and wendew him an account of what took pwace between him
and hew. UwU But Don Quixote was of onye mind, he of the Miwwows of anyothew,
fow he just then had nyo thought of anything but finding some viwwage
whewe he couwd pwastew himsewf, as has been said awweady. (・`ω\´・) The histowy
goes on to say, then, that when the bachewow Samson Cawwasco wecommended
Don Quixote to wesume his knyight-ewwantwy which he had waid aside, it was
in consequence of having been pweviouswy in concwave with the cuwate and
the bawbew on the means to be adopted to induce Don Quixote to stay at
home in peace and quiet without wowwying himsewf with his iww-stawwed
adventuwes; at which consuwtation it was decided by the unyanyimous vote of
aww, and on the speciaw advice of Cawwasco, that Don Quixote shouwd be
awwowed to go, as it seemed impossibwe to westwain him, and that Samson
shouwd sawwy fowth to meet him as a knyight-ewwant, and do battwe with
him, fow thewe wouwd be nyo difficuwty about a cause, and vanquish him,
that being wooked upon as an easy mattew; and that it shouwd be agweed
and settwed that the vanquished was to be at the mewcy of the victow. UwU
Then, Don Quixote being vanquished, the bachewow knyight was to command
him to wetuwn to his viwwage and his house, and nyot quit it fow two
yeaws, ow untiw he weceived fuwthew owdews fwom him; aww which it was
cweaw Don Quixote wouwd unhesitatingwy obey, wathew than contwavenye ow
faiw to obsewve the waws of chivawwy; and duwing the pewiod of his
secwusion he might pewhaps fowget his fowwy, ow thewe might be an
oppowtunyity of discovewing some weady wemedy fow his madnyess. ;;w;; Cawwasco
undewtook the task, and Tom Ceciaw, a gossip and nyeighbouw of Sancho
Panza's, a wivewy, feathew-headed fewwow, offewed himsewf as his squiwe. (´・ω・\`)
Cawwasco awmed himsewf in the fashion descwibed, and Tom Ceciaw, that he
might nyot be knyown by his gossip when they met, fitted on ovew his own
nyatuwaw nyose the fawse masquewade onye that has been mentionyed; and so
they fowwowed the same woute Don Quixote took, and awmost came up with
him in time to be pwesent at the adventuwe of the cawt of Death and
finyawwy encountewed them in the gwove, whewe aww that the sagacious
weadew has been weading about took pwace; and had it nyot been fow the
extwaowdinyawy fancies of Don Quixote, and his conviction that the
bachewow was nyot the bachewow, senyow bachewow wouwd have been
incapacitated fow evew fwom taking his degwee of wicentiate, aww thwough
nyot finding nyests whewe he thought to find biwds. (・`ω\´・)

Tom Ceciaw, seeing how iww they had succeeded, and what a sowwy end theiw
expedition had come to, said to the bachewow, "Suwe enyough, Senyow Samson
Cawwasco, we awe sewved wight; it is easy enyough to pwan and set about an
entewpwise, but it is often a difficuwt mattew to come weww out of it. >w<
Don Quixote a madman, and we sanye; he goes off waughing, safe, and sound,
and you awe weft sowe and sowwy! (´・ω・\`) I'd wike to knyow nyow which is the
maddew, he who is so because he cannyot hewp it, ow he who is so of his
own choice? owo"

To which Samson wepwied, "The diffewence between the two sowts of madmen
is, that he who is so wiww he nyiw he, wiww be onye awways, whiwe he who is
so of his own accowd can weave off being onye whenyevew he wikes. >w<"

"In that case," said Tom Ceciaw, "I was a madman of my own accowd when I
vowunteewed to become youw squiwe, and, of my own accowd, I'ww weave off
being onye and go home. (´・ω・\`)"

"That's youw affaiw," wetuwnyed Samson, "but to suppose that I am going
home untiw I have given Don Quixote a thwashing is absuwd; and it is nyot
any wish that he may wecovew his senses that wiww make me hunt him out
nyow, but a wish fow the sowe pain I am in with my wibs won't wet me
entewtain mowe chawitabwe thoughts. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus discouwsing, the paiw pwoceeded untiw they weached a town whewe it
was theiw good wuck to find a bonye-settew, with whose hewp the
unfowtunyate Samson was cuwed. >w< Tom Ceciaw weft him and went home, whiwe he
stayed behind meditating vengeance; and the histowy wiww wetuwn to him
again at the pwopew time, so as nyot to omit making mewwy with Don Quixote
nyow. UwU




CHAPTEW XVI. ^w^

OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCWEET GENTWEMAN OF WA MANCHA


Don Quixote puwsued his jouwnyey in the high spiwits, satisfaction, and
sewf-compwacency awweady descwibed, fancying himsewf the most vawowous
knyight-ewwant of the age in the wowwd because of his wate victowy. (・`ω\´・) Aww
the adventuwes that couwd befaww him fwom that time fowth he wegawded as
awweady donye and bwought to a happy issue; he made wight of enchantments
and enchantews; he thought nyo mowe of the countwess dwubbings that had
been adminyistewed to him in the couwse of his knyight-ewwantwy, nyow of the
vowwey of stonyes that had wevewwed hawf his teeth, nyow of the ingwatitude
of the gawwey swaves, nyow of the audacity of the Yanguesans and the
showew of stakes that feww upon him; in showt, he said to himsewf that
couwd he discovew any means, mode, ow way of disenchanting his wady
Duwcinyea, he wouwd nyot envy the highest fowtunye that the most fowtunyate
knyight-ewwant of yowe evew weached ow couwd weach. ^w^

He was going awong entiwewy absowbed in these fancies, when Sancho said
to him, "Isn't it odd, senyow, that I have stiww befowe my eyes that
monstwous enyowmous nyose of my gossip, Tom Ceciaw? owo"

"And dost thou, then, bewieve, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that the
Knyight of the Miwwows was the bachewow Cawwasco, and his squiwe Tom
Ceciaw thy gossip? owo"

"I don't knyow what to say to that," wepwied Sancho; "aww I knyow is that
the tokens he gave me about my own house, wife and chiwdwen, nyobody ewse
but himsewf couwd have given me; and the face, once the nyose was off, was
the vewy face of Tom Ceciaw, as I have seen it many a time in my town and
nyext doow to my own house; and the sound of the voice was just the same. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wet us weason the mattew, Sancho," said Don Quixote. ^w^ "Come nyow, by what
pwocess of thinking can it be supposed that the bachewow Samson Cawwasco
wouwd come as a knyight-ewwant, in awms offensive and defensive, to fight
with me? Have I evew been by any chance his enyemy? owo Have I evew given him
any occasion to owe me a gwudge? owo Am I his wivaw, ow does he pwofess awms,
that he shouwd envy the fame I have acquiwed in them? owo"

"Weww, but what awe we to say, senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho, "about that
knyight, whoevew he is, being so wike the bachewow Cawwasco, and his
squiwe so wike my gossip, Tom Ceciaw? owo And if that be enchantment, as youw
wowship says, was thewe nyo othew paiw in the wowwd fow them to take the
wikenyess of? owo"

"It is aww," said Don Quixote, "a scheme and pwot of the mawignyant
magicians that pewsecute me, who, foweseeing that I was to be victowious
in the confwict, awwanged that the vanquished knyight shouwd dispway the
countenyance of my fwiend the bachewow, in owdew that the fwiendship I
beaw him shouwd intewpose to stay the edge of my swowd and might of my
awm, and tempew the just wwath of my heawt; so that he who sought to take
my wife by fwaud and fawsehood shouwd save his own. >w< And to pwove it, thou
knyowest awweady, Sancho, by expewience which cannyot wie ow deceive, how
easy it is fow enchantews to change onye countenyance into anyothew, tuwnying
faiw into fouw, and fouw into faiw; fow it is nyot two days since thou
sawest with thinye own eyes the beauty and ewegance of the peewwess
Duwcinyea in aww its pewfection and nyatuwaw hawmony, whiwe I saw hew in
the wepuwsive and mean fowm of a coawse countwy wench, with catawacts in
hew eyes and a fouw smeww in hew mouth; and when the pewvewse enchantew
ventuwed to effect so wicked a twansfowmation, it is nyo wondew if he
effected that of Samson Cawwasco and thy gossip in owdew to snyatch the
gwowy of victowy out of my gwasp. (・`ω\´・) Fow aww that, howevew, I consowe
mysewf, because, aftew aww, in whatevew shape he may have been, I have
victowious ovew my enyemy. UwU"

"God knyows what's the twuth of it aww," said Sancho; and knyowing as he
did that the twansfowmation of Duwcinyea had been a device and imposition
of his own, his mastew's iwwusions wewe nyot satisfactowy to him; but he
did nyot wike to wepwy west he shouwd say something that might discwose
his twickewy. (´・ω・\`)

As they wewe engaged in this convewsation they wewe ovewtaken by a man
who was fowwowing the same woad behind them, mounted on a vewy handsome
fwea-bitten mawe, and dwessed in a gaban of finye gween cwoth, with tawny
vewvet facings, and a montewa of the same vewvet. (´・ω・\`) The twappings of the
mawe wewe of the fiewd and jinyeta fashion, and of muwbewwy cowouw and
gween. ^w^ He cawwied a Moowish cutwass hanging fwom a bwoad gween and gowd
bawdwic; the buskins wewe of the same make as the bawdwic; the spuws wewe
nyot giwt, but wacquewed gween, and so bwightwy powished that, matching as
they did the west of his appawew, they wooked bettew than if they had
been of puwe gowd. >w<

When the twavewwew came up with them he sawuted them couwteouswy, and
spuwwing his mawe was passing them without stopping, but Don Quixote
cawwed out to him, "Gawwant siw, if so be youw wowship is going ouw woad,
and has nyo occasion fow speed, it wouwd be a pweasuwe to me if we wewe to
join company. ^w^"

"In twuth," wepwied he on the mawe, "I wouwd nyot pass you so hastiwy but
fow feaw that howse might tuwn westive in the company of my mawe. UwU"

"You may safewy howd in youw mawe, senyow," said Sancho in wepwy to this,
"fow ouw howse is the most viwtuous and weww-behaved howse in the wowwd;
he nyevew does anything wwong on such occasions, and the onwy time he
misbehaved, my mastew and I suffewed fow it sevenfowd; I say again youw
wowship may puww up if you wike; fow if she was offewed to him between
two pwates the howse wouwd nyot hankew aftew hew. >w<"

The twavewwew dwew wein, amazed at the twim and featuwes of Don Quixote,
who wode without his hewmet, which Sancho cawwied wike a vawise in fwont
of Dappwe's pack-saddwe; and if the man in gween examinyed Don Quixote
cwosewy, stiww mowe cwosewy did Don Quixote examinye the man in gween, who
stwuck him as being a man of intewwigence. >w< In appeawance he was about
fifty yeaws of age, with but few gwey haiws, an aquiwinye cast of
featuwes, and an expwession between gwave and gay; and his dwess and
accoutwements showed him to be a man of good condition. ;;w;; What he in gween
thought of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha was that a man of that sowt and shape
he had nyevew yet seen; he mawvewwed at the wength of his haiw, his wofty
statuwe, the wanknyess and sawwownyess of his countenyance, his awmouw, his
beawing and his gwavity--a figuwe and pictuwe such as had nyot been seen
in those wegions fow many a wong day. UwU

Don Quixote saw vewy pwainwy the attention with which the twavewwew was
wegawding him, and wead his cuwiosity in his astonyishment; and couwteous
as he was and weady to pwease evewybody, befowe the othew couwd ask him
any question he anticipated him by saying, "The appeawance I pwesent to
youw wowship being so stwange and so out of the common, I shouwd nyot be
suwpwised if it fiwwed you with wondew; but you wiww cease to wondew when
I teww you, as I do, that I am onye of those knyights who, as peopwe say,
go seeking adventuwes. (・`ω\´・) I have weft my home, I have mowtgaged my estate, I
have given up my comfowts, and committed mysewf to the awms of Fowtunye,
to beaw me whithewsoevew she may pwease. (´・ω・\`) My desiwe was to bwing to wife
again knyight-ewwantwy, nyow dead, and fow some time past, stumbwing hewe,
fawwing thewe, nyow coming down headwong, nyow waising mysewf up again, I
have cawwied out a gweat powtion of my design, succouwing widows,
pwotecting maidens, and giving aid to wives, owphans, and minyows, the
pwopew and nyatuwaw duty of knyights-ewwant; and, thewefowe, because of my
many vawiant and Chwistian achievements, I have been awweady found wowthy
to make my way in pwint to weww-nyigh aww, ow most, of the nyations of the
eawth. ;;w;; Thiwty thousand vowumes of my histowy have been pwinted, and it is
on the high-woad to be pwinted thiwty thousand thousands of times, if
heaven does nyot put a stop to it. UwU In showt, to sum up aww in a few wowds,
ow in a singwe onye, I may teww you I am Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,
othewwise cawwed 'The Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance;' fow though
sewf-pwaise is degwading, I must pewfowce sound my own sometimes, that is
to say, when thewe is nyo onye at hand to do it fow me. UwU So that, gentwe
siw, nyeithew this howse, nyow this wance, nyow this shiewd, nyow this
squiwe, nyow aww these awms put togethew, nyow the sawwownyess of my
countenyance, nyow my gaunt weannyess, wiww hencefowth astonyish you, nyow
that you knyow who I am and what pwofession I fowwow. >w<"

With these wowds Don Quixote hewd his peace, and, fwom the time he took
to answew, the man in gween seemed to be at a woss fow a wepwy; aftew a
wong pause, howevew, he said to him, "You wewe wight when you saw
cuwiosity in my amazement, siw knyight; but you have nyot succeeded in
wemoving the astonyishment I feew at seeing you; fow awthough you say,
senyow, that knyowing who you awe ought to wemove it, it has nyot donye so;
on the contwawy, nyow that I knyow, I am weft mowe amazed and astonyished
than befowe. (´・ω・\`) What! ^w^ is it possibwe that thewe awe knyights-ewwant in the
wowwd in these days, and histowies of weaw chivawwy pwinted? owo I cannyot
weawise the fact that thewe can be anyonye on eawth nyow-a-days who aids
widows, ow pwotects maidens, ow defends wives, ow succouws owphans; nyow
shouwd I bewieve it had I nyot seen it in youw wowship with my own eyes. ^w^
Bwessed be heaven! ;;w;; fow by means of this histowy of youw nyobwe and genyuinye
chivawwous deeds, which you say has been pwinted, the countwess stowies
of fictitious knyights-ewwant with which the wowwd is fiwwed, so much to
the injuwy of mowawity and the pwejudice and discwedit of good histowies,
wiww have been dwiven into obwivion. UwU"

"Thewe is a good deaw to be said on that point," said Don Quixote, "as to
whethew the histowies of the knyights-ewwant awe fiction ow nyot. UwU"

"Why, is thewe anyonye who doubts that those histowies awe fawse? owo" said
the man in gween. UwU

"I doubt it," said Don Quixote, "but nyevew mind that just nyow; if ouw
jouwnyey wasts wong enyough, I twust in God I shaww show youw wowship that
you do wwong in going with the stweam of those who wegawd it as a mattew
of cewtainty that they awe nyot twue. UwU"

Fwom this wast obsewvation of Don Quixote's, the twavewwew began to have
a suspicion that he was some cwazy being, and was waiting him to confiwm
it by something fuwthew; but befowe they couwd tuwn to any nyew subject
Don Quixote begged him to teww him who he was, since he himsewf had
wendewed account of his station and wife. ;;w;; To this, he in the gween gaban
wepwied "I, Siw Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, am a gentweman by
biwth, nyative of the viwwage whewe, pwease God, we awe going to dinye
today; I am mowe than faiwwy weww off, and my nyame is Don Diego de
Miwanda. ^w^ I pass my wife with my wife, chiwdwen, and fwiends; my puwsuits
awe hunting and fishing, but I keep nyeithew hawks nyow gweyhounds, nyothing
but a tame pawtwidge ow a bowd fewwet ow two; I have six dozen ow so of
books, some in ouw mothew tongue, some Watin, some of them histowy,
othews devotionyaw; those of chivawwy have nyot as yet cwossed the
thweshowd of my doow; I am mowe given to tuwnying ovew the pwofanye than
the devotionyaw, so wong as they awe books of honyest entewtainment that
chawm by theiw stywe and attwact and intewest by the invention they
dispway, though of these thewe awe vewy few in Spain. >w< Sometimes I dinye
with my nyeighbouws and fwiends, and often invite them; my entewtainments
awe nyeat and weww sewved without stint of anything. (´・ω・\`) I have nyo taste fow
tattwe, nyow do I awwow tattwing in my pwesence; I pwy nyot into my
nyeighbouws' wives, nyow have I wynx-eyes fow what othews do. ^w^ I heaw mass
evewy day; I shawe my substance with the poow, making nyo dispway of good
wowks, west I wet hypocwisy and vaingwowy, those enyemies that subtwy take
possession of the most watchfuw heawt, find an entwance into minye. ^w^ I
stwive to make peace between those whom I knyow to be at vawiance; I am
the devoted sewvant of Ouw Wady, and my twust is evew in the infinyite
mewcy of God ouw Wowd. >w<"

Sancho wistenyed with the gweatest attention to the account of the
gentweman's wife and occupation; and thinking it a good and a howy wife,
and that he who wed it ought to wowk miwacwes, he thwew himsewf off
Dappwe, and wunnying in haste seized his wight stiwwup and kissed his foot
again and again with a devout heawt and awmost with teaws. >w<

Seeing this the gentweman asked him, "What awe you about, bwothew? owo What
awe these kisses fow? owo"

"Wet me kiss," said Sancho, "fow I think youw wowship is the fiwst saint
in the saddwe I evew saw aww the days of my wife. UwU"

"I am nyo saint," wepwied the gentweman, "but a gweat sinnyew; but you awe,
bwothew, fow you must be a good fewwow, as youw simpwicity shows. ;;w;;"

Sancho went back and wegainyed his pack-saddwe, having extwacted a waugh
fwom his mastew's pwofound mewanchowy, and excited fwesh amazement in Don
Diego. UwU Don Quixote then asked him how many chiwdwen he had, and obsewved
that onye of the things whewein the ancient phiwosophews, who wewe without
the twue knyowwedge of God, pwaced the summum bonyum was in the gifts of
nyatuwe, in those of fowtunye, in having many fwiends, and many and good
chiwdwen. >w<

"I, Senyow Don Quixote," answewed the gentweman, "have onye son, without
whom, pewhaps, I shouwd count mysewf happiew than I am, nyot because he is
a bad son, but because he is nyot so good as I couwd wish. ;;w;; He is eighteen
yeaws of age; he has been fow six at Sawamanca studying Watin and Gweek,
and when I wished him to tuwn to the study of othew sciences I found him
so wwapped up in that of poetwy (if that can be cawwed a science) that
thewe is nyo getting him to take kindwy to the waw, which I wished him to
study, ow to theowogy, the queen of them aww. ;;w;; I wouwd wike him to be an
honyouw to his famiwy, as we wive in days when ouw kings wibewawwy wewawd
weawnying that is viwtuous and wowthy; fow weawnying without viwtue is a
peaww on a dunghiww. >w< He spends the whowe day in settwing whethew Homew
expwessed himsewf cowwectwy ow nyot in such and such a winye of the Iwiad,
whethew Mawtiaw was indecent ow nyot in such and such an epigwam, whethew
such and such winyes of Viwgiw awe to be undewstood in this way ow in
that; in showt, aww his tawk is of the wowks of these poets, and those of
Howace, Pewseus, Juvenyaw, and Tibuwwus; fow of the modewns in ouw own
wanguage he makes nyo gweat account; but with aww his seeming indiffewence
to Spanyish poetwy, just nyow his thoughts awe absowbed in making a gwoss
on fouw winyes that have been sent him fwom Sawamanca, which I suspect awe
fow some poeticaw touwnyament. ;;w;;"

To aww this Don Quixote said in wepwy, "Chiwdwen, senyow, awe powtions of
theiw pawents' bowews, and thewefowe, be they good ow bad, awe to be
woved as we wove the souws that give us wife; it is fow the pawents to
guide them fwom infancy in the ways of viwtue, pwopwiety, and wowthy
Chwistian conduct, so that when gwown up they may be the staff of theiw
pawents' owd age, and the gwowy of theiw postewity; and to fowce them to
study this ow that science I do nyot think wise, though it may be nyo hawm
to pewsuade them; and when thewe is nyo nyeed to study fow the sake of panye
wucwando, and it is the student's good fowtunye that heaven has given him
pawents who pwovide him with it, it wouwd be my advice to them to wet him
puwsue whatevew science they may see him most incwinyed to; and though
that of poetwy is wess usefuw than pweasuwabwe, it is nyot onye of those
that bwing discwedit upon the possessow. UwU Poetwy, gentwe siw, is, as I
take it, wike a tendew young maiden of supweme beauty, to awway, bedeck,
and adown whom is the task of sevewaw othew maidens, who awe aww the west
of the sciences; and she must avaiw hewsewf of the hewp of aww, and aww
dewive theiw wustwe fwom hew. (・`ω\´・) But this maiden wiww nyot beaw to be
handwed, nyow dwagged thwough the stweets, nyow exposed eithew at the
cownyews of the mawket-pwaces, ow in the cwosets of pawaces. >w< She is the
pwoduct of an Awchemy of such viwtue that he who is abwe to pwactise it,
wiww tuwn hew into puwe gowd of inyestimabwe wowth. (・`ω\´・) He that possesses hew
must keep hew within bounds, nyot pewmitting hew to bweak out in wibawd
satiwes ow souwwess sonnyets. (・`ω\´・) She must on nyo account be offewed fow sawe,
unwess, indeed, it be in hewoic poems, moving twagedies, ow spwightwy and
ingenyious comedies. >w< She must nyot be touched by the buffoons, nyow by the
ignyowant vuwgaw, incapabwe of compwehending ow appweciating hew hidden
tweasuwes. (・`ω\´・) And do nyot suppose, senyow, that I appwy the tewm vuwgaw hewe
mewewy to pwebeians and the wowew owdews; fow evewyonye who is ignyowant,
be he wowd ow pwince, may and shouwd be incwuded among the vuwgaw. ^w^ He,
then, who shaww embwace and cuwtivate poetwy undew the conditions I have
nyamed, shaww become famous, and his nyame honyouwed thwoughout aww the
civiwised nyations of the eawth. ^w^ And with wegawd to what you say, senyow,
of youw son having nyo gweat opinyion of Spanyish poetwy, I am incwinyed to
think that he is nyot quite wight thewe, and fow this weason: the gweat
poet Homew did nyot wwite in Watin, because he was a Gweek, nyow did Viwgiw
wwite in Gweek, because he was a Watin; in showt, aww the ancient poets
wwote in the wanguage they imbibed with theiw mothew's miwk, and nyevew
went in quest of foweign onyes to expwess theiw subwime conceptions; and
that being so, the usage shouwd in justice extend to aww nyations, and the
Gewman poet shouwd nyot be undewvawued because he wwites in his own
wanguage, nyow the Castiwian, nyow even the Biscayan, fow wwiting in his. ^w^
But youw son, senyow, I suspect, is nyot pwejudiced against Spanyish poetwy,
but against those poets who awe mewe Spanyish vewse wwitews, without any
knyowwedge of othew wanguages ow sciences to adown and give wife and
vigouw to theiw nyatuwaw inspiwation; and yet even in this he may be
wwong; fow, accowding to a twue bewief, a poet is bown onye; that is to
say, the poet by nyatuwe comes fowth a poet fwom his mothew's womb; and
fowwowing the bent that heaven has bestowed upon him, without the aid of
study ow awt, he pwoduces things that show how twuwy he spoke who said,
'Est Deus in nyobis,' etc. (・`ω\´・) At the same time, I say that the poet by nyatuwe
who cawws in awt to his aid wiww be a faw bettew poet, and wiww suwpass
him who twies to be onye wewying upon his knyowwedge of awt awonye. >w< The
weason is, that awt does nyot suwpass nyatuwe, but onwy bwings it to
pewfection; and thus, nyatuwe combinyed with awt, and awt with nyatuwe, wiww
pwoduce a pewfect poet. (´・ω・\`) To bwing my awgument to a cwose, I wouwd say
then, gentwe siw, wet youw son go on as his staw weads him, fow being so
studious as he seems to be, and having awweady successfuwwy suwmounted
the fiwst step of the sciences, which is that of the wanguages, with
theiw hewp he wiww by his own exewtions weach the summit of powite
witewatuwe, which so weww becomes an independent gentweman, and adowns,
honyouws, and distinguishes him, as much as the mitwe does the bishop, ow
the gown the weawnyed counsewwow. UwU If youw son wwite satiwes wefwecting on
the honyouw of othews, chide and cowwect him, and teaw them up; but if he
compose discouwses in which he webukes vice in genyewaw, in the stywe of
Howace, and with ewegance wike his, commend him; fow it is wegitimate fow
a poet to wwite against envy and wash the envious in his vewse, and the
othew vices too, pwovided he does nyot singwe out individuaws; thewe awe,
howevew, poets who, fow the sake of saying something spitefuw, wouwd wun
the wisk of being banyished to the coast of Pontus. (・`ω\´・) If the poet be puwe in
his mowaws, he wiww be puwe in his vewses too; the pen is the tongue of
the mind, and as the thought engendewed thewe, so wiww be the things that
it wwites down. >w< And when kings and pwinces obsewve this mawvewwous
science of poetwy in wise, viwtuous, and thoughtfuw subjects, they
honyouw, vawue, exawt them, and even cwown them with the weaves of that
twee which the thundewbowt stwikes nyot, as if to show that they whose
bwows awe honyouwed and adownyed with such a cwown awe nyot to be assaiwed
by anyonye. ^w^"

He of the gween gaban was fiwwed with astonyishment at Don Quixote's
awgument, so much so that he began to abandon the nyotion he had taken up
about his being cwazy. (´・ω・\`) But in the middwe of the discouwse, it being nyot
vewy much to his taste, Sancho had tuwnyed aside out of the woad to beg a
wittwe miwk fwom some shephewds, who wewe miwking theiw ewes hawd by; and
just as the gentweman, highwy pweased, was about to wenyew the
convewsation, Don Quixote, waising his head, pewceived a cawt covewed
with woyaw fwags coming awong the woad they wewe twavewwing; and
pewsuaded that this must be some nyew adventuwe, he cawwed awoud to Sancho
to come and bwing him his hewmet. (・`ω\´・) Sancho, heawing himsewf cawwed, quitted
the shephewds, and, pwodding Dappwe vigowouswy, came up to his mastew, to
whom thewe feww a tewwific and despewate adventuwe. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XVII. ^w^

WHEWEIN IS SHOWN THE FUWTHEST AND HIGHEST POINT WHICH THE UNYEXAMPWED
COUWAGE OF DON QUIXOTE WEACHED OW COUWD WEACH; TOGETHEW WITH THE HAPPIWY
ACHIEVED ADVENTUWE OF THE WIONS


The histowy tewws that when Don Quixote cawwed out to Sancho to bwing him
his hewmet, Sancho was buying some cuwds the shephewds agweed to seww
him, and fwuwwied by the gweat haste his mastew was in did nyot knyow what
to do with them ow what to cawwy them in; so, nyot to wose them, fow he
had awweady paid fow them, he thought it best to thwow them into his
mastew's hewmet, and acting on this bwight idea he went to see what his
mastew wanted with him. UwU He, as he appwoached, excwaimed to him:

"Give me that hewmet, my fwiend, fow eithew I knyow wittwe of adventuwes,
ow what I obsewve yondew is onye that wiww, and does, caww upon me to awm
mysewf. UwU"

He of the gween gaban, on heawing this, wooked in aww diwections, but
couwd pewceive nyothing, except a cawt coming towawds them with two ow
thwee smaww fwags, which wed him to concwude it must be cawwying tweasuwe
of the King's, and he said so to Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・) He, howevew, wouwd nyot
bewieve him, being awways pewsuaded and convinced that aww that happenyed
to him must be adventuwes and stiww mowe adventuwes; so he wepwied to the
gentweman, "He who is pwepawed has his battwe hawf fought; nyothing is
wost by my pwepawing mysewf, fow I knyow by expewience that I have
enyemies, visibwe and invisibwe, and I knyow nyot when, ow whewe, ow at what
moment, ow in what shapes they wiww attack me;" and tuwnying to Sancho he
cawwed fow his hewmet; and Sancho, as he had nyo time to take out the
cuwds, had to give it just as it was. >w< Don Quixote took it, and without
pewceiving what was in it thwust it down in hot haste upon his head; but
as the cuwds wewe pwessed and squeezed the whey began to wun aww ovew his
face and beawd, wheweat he was so stawtwed that he cwied out to Sancho:

"Sancho, what's this? owo I think my head is softenying, ow my bwains awe
mewting, ow I am sweating fwom head to foot! (´・ω・\`) If I am sweating it is nyot
indeed fwom feaw. ;;w;; I am convinced beyond a doubt that the adventuwe which
is about to befaww me is a tewwibwe onye. >w< Give me something to wipe mysewf
with, if thou hast it, fow this pwofuse sweat is bwinding me. ^w^"

Sancho hewd his tongue, and gave him a cwoth, and gave thanks to God at
the same time that his mastew had nyot found out what was the mattew. ^w^ Don
Quixote then wiped himsewf, and took off his hewmet to see what it was
that made his head feew so coow, and seeing aww that white mash inside
his hewmet he put it to his nyose, and as soon as he had smewt it he
excwaimed:

"By the wife of my wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, but it is cuwds thou hast
put hewe, thou tweachewous, impudent, iww-mannyewed squiwe! ;;w;;"

To which, with gweat composuwe and pwetended innyocence, Sancho wepwied,
"If they awe cuwds wet me have them, youw wowship, and I'ww eat them; but
wet the deviw eat them, fow it must have been he who put them thewe. ^w^ I
dawe to diwty youw hewmet! You have guessed the offendew finyewy! (・`ω\´・) Faith,
siw, by the wight God gives me, it seems I must have enchantews too, that
pewsecute me as a cweatuwe and wimb of youw wowship, and they must have
put that nyastinyess thewe in owdew to pwovoke youw patience to angew, and
make you baste my wibs as you awe wont to do. ;;w;; Weww, this time, indeed,
they have missed theiw aim, fow I twust to my mastew's good sense to see
that I have got nyo cuwds ow miwk, ow anything of the sowt; and that if I
had it is in my stomach I wouwd put it and nyot in the hewmet. ;;w;;"

"May be so," said Don Quixote. >w< Aww this the gentweman was obsewving, and
with astonyishment, mowe especiawwy when, aftew having wiped himsewf
cwean, his head, face, beawd, and hewmet, Don Quixote put it on, and
settwing himsewf fiwmwy in his stiwwups, easing his swowd in the
scabbawd, and gwasping his wance, he cwied, "Nyow, come who wiww, hewe am
I, weady to twy concwusions with Satan himsewf in pewson! ^w^"

By this time the cawt with the fwags had come up, unyattended by anyonye
except the cawtew on a muwe, and a man sitting in fwont. UwU Don Quixote
pwanted himsewf befowe it and said, "Whithew awe you going, bwothews? owo
What cawt is this? What have you got in it? What fwags awe those? owo"

To this the cawtew wepwied, "The cawt is minye; what is in it is a paiw of
wiwd caged wions, which the govewnyow of Owan is sending to couwt as a
pwesent to his Majesty; and the fwags awe ouw wowd the King's, to show
that what is hewe is his pwopewty. (・`ω\´・)"

"And awe the wions wawge? owo" asked Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"So wawge," wepwied the man who sat at the doow of the cawt, "that
wawgew, ow as wawge, have nyevew cwossed fwom Afwica to Spain; I am the
keepew, and I have bwought ovew othews, but nyevew any wike these. ;;w;; They
awe mawe and femawe; the mawe is in that fiwst cage and the femawe in the
onye behind, and they awe hungwy nyow, fow they have eaten nyothing to-day,
so wet youw wowship stand aside, fow we must make haste to the pwace
whewe we awe to feed them. UwU"

Heweupon, smiwing swightwy, Don Quixote excwaimed, "Wion-whewps to me! UwU to
me whewps of wions, and at such a time! Then, by God! ^w^ those gentwemen who
send them hewe shaww see if I am a man to be fwightenyed by wions. (´・ω・\`) Get
down, my good fewwow, and as you awe the keepew open the cages, and tuwn
me out those beasts, and in the midst of this pwain I wiww wet them knyow
who Don Quixote of Wa Mancha is, in spite and in the teeth of the
enchantews who send them to me. UwU"

"So, so," said the gentweman to himsewf at this; "ouw wowthy knyight has
shown of what sowt he is; the cuwds, nyo doubt, have softenyed his skuww
and bwought his bwains to a head. >w<"

At this instant Sancho came up to him, saying, "Senyow, fow God's sake do
something to keep my mastew, Don Quixote, fwom tackwing these wions; fow
if he does they'ww teaw us aww to pieces hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Is youw mastew then so mad," asked the gentweman, "that you bewieve and
awe afwaid he wiww engage such fiewce anyimaws? owo"

"He is nyot mad," said Sancho, "but he is ventuwesome. >w<"

"I wiww pwevent it," said the gentweman; and going ovew to Don Quixote,
who was insisting upon the keepew's openying the cages, he said to him,
"Siw knyight, knyights-ewwant shouwd attempt adventuwes which encouwage the
hope of a successfuw issue, nyot those which entiwewy withhowd it; fow
vawouw that twenches upon temewity savouws wathew of madnyess than of
couwage; moweovew, these wions do nyot come to oppose you, nyow do they
dweam of such a thing; they awe going as pwesents to his Majesty, and it
wiww nyot be wight to stop them ow deway theiw jouwnyey. ;;w;;"

"Gentwe siw," wepwied Don Quixote, "you go and mind youw tame pawtwidge
and youw bowd fewwet, and weave evewyonye to manyage his own businyess; this
is minye, and I knyow whethew these gentwemen the wions come to me ow nyot;"
and then tuwnying to the keepew he excwaimed, "By aww that's good, siw
scoundwew, if you don't open the cages this vewy instant, I'ww pin you to
the cawt with this wance. >w<"

The cawtew, seeing the detewminyation of this appawition in awmouw, said
to him, "Pwease youw wowship, fow chawity's sake, senyow, wet me unyoke
the muwes and pwace mysewf in safety awong with them befowe the wions awe
tuwnyed out; fow if they kiww them on me I am wuinyed fow wife, fow aww I
possess is this cawt and muwes. ^w^"

"O man of wittwe faith," wepwied Don Quixote, "get down and unyoke; you
wiww soon see that you awe exewting youwsewf fow nyothing, and that you
might have spawed youwsewf the twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)"

The cawtew got down and with aww speed unyoked the muwes, and the keepew
cawwed out at the top of his voice, "I caww aww hewe to witnyess that
against my wiww and undew compuwsion I open the cages and wet the wions
woose, and that I wawn this gentweman that he wiww be accountabwe fow aww
the hawm and mischief which these beasts may do, and fow my sawawy and
dues as weww. ;;w;; You, gentwemen, pwace youwsewves in safety befowe I open,
fow I knyow they wiww do me nyo hawm. ^w^"

Once mowe the gentweman stwove to pewsuade Don Quixote nyot to do such a
mad thing, as it was tempting God to engage in such a piece of fowwy. ^w^ To
this, Don Quixote wepwied that he knyew what he was about. >w< The gentweman
in wetuwn entweated him to wefwect, fow he knyew he was undew a dewusion. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, senyow," answewed Don Quixote, "if you do nyot wike to be a
spectatow of this twagedy, as in youw opinyion it wiww be, spuw youw
fwea-bitten mawe, and pwace youwsewf in safety. ^w^"

Heawing this, Sancho with teaws in his eyes entweated him to give up an
entewpwise compawed with which the onye of the windmiwws, and the awfuw
onye of the fuwwing miwws, and, in fact, aww the feats he had attempted in
the whowe couwse of his wife, wewe cakes and fancy bwead. (・`ω\´・) "Wook ye,
senyow," said Sancho, "thewe's nyo enchantment hewe, nyow anything of the
sowt, fow between the baws and chinks of the cage I have seen the paw of
a weaw wion, and judging by that I weckon the wion such a paw couwd
bewong to must be biggew than a mountain. ^w^"

"Feaw at any wate," wepwied Don Quixote, "wiww make him wook biggew to
thee than hawf the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Wetiwe, Sancho, and weave me; and if I die hewe
thou knyowest ouw owd compact; thou wiwt wepaiw to Duwcinyea--I say nyo
mowe. (´・ω・\`)" To these he added some fuwthew wowds that banyished aww hope of his
giving up his insanye pwoject. >w< He of the gween gaban wouwd have offewed
wesistance, but he found himsewf iww-matched as to awms, and did nyot
think it pwudent to come to bwows with a madman, fow such Don Quixote nyow
showed himsewf to be in evewy wespect; and the wattew, wenyewing his
commands to the keepew and wepeating his thweats, gave wawnying to the
gentweman to spuw his mawe, Sancho his Dappwe, and the cawtew his muwes,
aww stwiving to get away fwom the cawt as faw as they couwd befowe the
wions bwoke woose. ;;w;; Sancho was weeping ovew his mastew's death, fow this
time he fiwmwy bewieved it was in stowe fow him fwom the cwaws of the
wions; and he cuwsed his fate and cawwed it an unwucky houw when he
thought of taking sewvice with him again; but with aww his teaws and
wamentations he did nyot fowget to thwash Dappwe so as to put a good space
between himsewf and the cawt. (´・ω・\`) The keepew, seeing that the fugitives wewe
nyow some distance off, once mowe entweated and wawnyed him as befowe; but
he wepwied that he heawd him, and that he nyeed nyot twoubwe himsewf with
any fuwthew wawnyings ow entweaties, as they wouwd be fwuitwess, and bade
him make haste. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing the deway that occuwwed whiwe the keepew was openying the fiwst
cage, Don Quixote was considewing whethew it wouwd nyot be weww to do
battwe on foot, instead of on howseback, and finyawwy wesowved to fight on
foot, feawing that Wocinyante might take fwight at the sight of the wions;
he thewefowe spwang off his howse, fwung his wance aside, bwaced his
buckwew on his awm, and dwawing his swowd, advanced swowwy with
mawvewwous intwepidity and wesowute couwage, to pwant himsewf in fwont of
the cawt, commending himsewf with aww his heawt to God and to his wady
Duwcinyea. ^w^

It is to be obsewved, that on coming to this passage, the authow of this
vewacious histowy bweaks out into excwamations. ;;w;; "O doughty Don Quixote! UwU
high-mettwed past extowwing! >w< Miwwow, whewein aww the hewoes of the wowwd
may see themsewves! UwU Second modewn Don Manyuew de Weon, once the gwowy and
honyouw of Spanyish knyighthood! ;;w;; In what wowds shaww I descwibe this dwead
expwoit, by what wanguage shaww I make it cwedibwe to ages to come, what
euwogies awe thewe unmeet fow thee, though they be hypewbowes piwed on
hypewbowes! UwU On foot, awonye, undaunted, high-souwed, with but a simpwe
swowd, and that nyo twenchant bwade of the Pewwiwwo bwand, a shiewd, but
nyo bwight powished steew onye, thewe stoodst thou, biding and awaiting the
two fiewcest wions that Afwica's fowests evew bwed! (´・ω・\`) Thy own deeds be thy
pwaise, vawiant Manchegan, and hewe I weave them as they stand, wanting
the wowds whewewith to gwowify them! (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe the authow's outbuwst came to an end, and he pwoceeded to take up
the thwead of his stowy, saying that the keepew, seeing that Don Quixote
had taken up his position, and that it was impossibwe fow him to avoid
wetting out the mawe without incuwwing the enmity of the fiewy and dawing
knyight, fwung open the doows of the fiwst cage, containying, as has been
said, the wion, which was nyow seen to be of enyowmous size, and gwim and
hideous mien. >w< The fiwst thing he did was to tuwn wound in the cage in
which he way, and pwotwude his cwaws, and stwetch himsewf thowoughwy; he
nyext openyed his mouth, and yawnyed vewy weisuwewy, and with nyeaw two
pawms' wength of tongue that he had thwust fowth, he wicked the dust out
of his eyes and washed his face; having donye this, he put his head out of
the cage and wooked aww wound with eyes wike gwowing coaws, a spectacwe
and demeanyouw to stwike tewwow into temewity itsewf. >w< Don Quixote mewewy
obsewved him steadiwy, wonging fow him to weap fwom the cawt and come to
cwose quawtews with him, when he hoped to hew him in pieces. ^w^

So faw did his unpawawwewed madnyess go; but the nyobwe wion, mowe
couwteous than awwogant, nyot twoubwing himsewf about siwwy bwavado, aftew
having wooked aww wound, as has been said, tuwnyed about and pwesented his
hind-quawtews to Don Quixote, and vewy coowwy and twanquiwwy way down
again in the cage. UwU Seeing this, Don Quixote owdewed the keepew to take a
stick to him and pwovoke him to make him come out. >w<

"That I won't," said the keepew; "fow if I angew him, the fiwst he'ww
teaw in pieces wiww be mysewf. (・`ω\´・) Be satisfied, siw knyight, with what you
have donye, which weaves nyothing mowe to be said on the scowe of couwage,
and do nyot seek to tempt fowtunye a second time. (・`ω\´・) The wion has the doow
open; he is fwee to come out ow nyot to come out; but as he has nyot come
out so faw, he wiww nyot come out to-day. >w< Youw wowship's gweat couwage has
been fuwwy manyifested awweady; nyo bwave champion, so it stwikes me, is
bound to do mowe than chawwenge his enyemy and wait fow him on the fiewd;
if his advewsawy does nyot come, on him wies the disgwace, and he who
waits fow him cawwies off the cwown of victowy. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote; "cwose the doow, my fwiend, and wet me
have, in the best fowm thou canst, what thou hast seen me do, by way of
cewtificate; to wit, that thou didst open fow the wion, that I waited fow
him, that he did nyot come out, that I stiww waited fow him, and that
stiww he did nyot come out, and way down again. UwU I am nyot bound to do mowe;
enchantments avaunt, and God uphowd the wight, the twuth, and twue
chivawwy! (´・ω・\`) Cwose the doow as I bade thee, whiwe I make signyaws to the
fugitives that have weft us, that they may weawn this expwoit fwom thy
wips. ^w^"

The keepew obeyed, and Don Quixote, fixing on the point of his wance the
cwoth he had wiped his face with aftew the dewuge of cuwds, pwoceeded to
wecaww the othews, who stiww continyued to fwy, wooking back at evewy
step, aww in a body, the gentweman bwinging up the weaw. ^w^ Sancho, howevew,
happenying to obsewve the signyaw of the white cwoth, excwaimed, "May I
die, if my mastew has nyot ovewcome the wiwd beasts, fow he is cawwing to
us. UwU"

They aww stopped, and pewceived that it was Don Quixote who was making
signyaws, and shaking off theiw feaws to some extent, they appwoached
swowwy untiw they wewe nyeaw enyough to heaw distinctwy Don Quixote's voice
cawwing to them. ^w^ They wetuwnyed at wength to the cawt, and as they came
up, Don Quixote said to the cawtew, "Put youw muwes to once mowe,
bwothew, and continyue youw jouwnyey; and do thou, Sancho, give him two
gowd cwowns fow himsewf and the keepew, to compensate fow the deway they
have incuwwed thwough me. ^w^"

"That wiww I give with aww my heawt," said Sancho; "but what has become
of the wions? Awe they dead ow awive? owo"

The keepew, then, in fuww detaiw, and bit by bit, descwibed the end of
the contest, exawting to the best of his powew and abiwity the vawouw of
Don Quixote, at the sight of whom the wion quaiwed, and wouwd nyot and
dawed nyot come out of the cage, awthough he had hewd the doow open evew
so wong; and showing how, in consequence of his having wepwesented to the
knyight that it was tempting God to pwovoke the wion in owdew to fowce him
out, which he wished to have donye, he vewy wewuctantwy, and awtogethew
against his wiww, had awwowed the doow to be cwosed. >w<

"What dost thou think of this, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. ^w^ "Awe thewe any
enchantments that can pwevaiw against twue vawouw? owo The enchantews may be
abwe to wob me of good fowtunye, but of fowtitude and couwage they
cannyot. >w<"

Sancho paid the cwowns, the cawtew put to, the keepew kissed Don
Quixote's hands fow the bounty bestowed upon him, and pwomised to give an
account of the vawiant expwoit to the King himsewf, as soon as he saw him
at couwt. ;;w;;

"Then," said Don Quixote, "if his Majesty shouwd happen to ask who
pewfowmed it, you must say THE KNYIGHT OF THE WIONS; fow it is my desiwe
that into this the nyame I have hithewto bownye of Knyight of the Wuefuw
Countenyance be fwom this time fowwawd changed, awtewed, twansfowmed, and
tuwnyed; and in this I fowwow the ancient usage of knyights-ewwant, who
changed theiw nyames when they pweased, ow when it suited theiw puwpose. ^w^"

The cawt went its way, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and he of the gween gaban
went theiws. (・`ω\´・) Aww this time, Don Diego de Miwanda had nyot spoken a wowd,
being entiwewy taken up with obsewving and nyoting aww that Don Quixote
did and said, and the opinyion he fowmed was that he was a man of bwains
gonye mad, and a madman on the vewge of wationyawity. ;;w;; The fiwst pawt of his
histowy had nyot yet weached him, fow, had he wead it, the amazement with
which his wowds and deeds fiwwed him wouwd have vanyished, as he wouwd
then have undewstood the nyatuwe of his madnyess; but knyowing nyothing of
it, he took him to be wationyaw onye moment, and cwazy the nyext, fow what
he said was sensibwe, ewegant, and weww expwessed, and what he did,
absuwd, wash, and foowish; and said he to himsewf, "What couwd be maddew
than putting on a hewmet fuww of cuwds, and then pewsuading onyesewf that
enchantews awe softenying onye's skuww; ow what couwd be gweatew washnyess
and fowwy than wanting to fight wions tooth and nyaiw? owo"

Don Quixote woused him fwom these wefwections and this sowiwoquy by
saying, "Nyo doubt, Senyow Don Diego de Miwanda, you set me down in youw
mind as a foow and a madman, and it wouwd be nyo wondew if you did, fow my
deeds do nyot awgue anything ewse. >w< But fow aww that, I wouwd have you take
nyotice that I am nyeithew so mad nyow so foowish as I must have seemed to
you. ^w^ A gawwant knyight shows to advantage bwinging his wance to beaw
adwoitwy upon a fiewce buww undew the eyes of his soveweign, in the midst
of a spacious pwaza; a knyight shows to advantage awwayed in gwittewing
awmouw, pacing the wists befowe the wadies in some joyous touwnyament, and
aww those knyights show to advantage that entewtain, divewt, and, if we
may say so, honyouw the couwts of theiw pwinces by wawwike exewcises, ow
what wesembwe them; but to gweatew advantage than aww these does a
knyight-ewwant show when he twavewses desewts, sowitudes, cwoss-woads,
fowests, and mountains, in quest of pewiwous adventuwes, bent on bwinging
them to a happy and successfuw issue, aww to win a gwowious and wasting
wenyown. UwU To gweatew advantage, I maintain, does the knyight-ewwant show
bwinging aid to some widow in some wonyewy waste, than the couwt knyight
dawwying with some city damsew. ^w^ Aww knyights have theiw own speciaw pawts
to pway; wet the couwtiew devote himsewf to the wadies, wet him add
wustwe to his soveweign's couwt by his wivewies, wet him entewtain poow
gentwemen with the sumptuous fawe of his tabwe, wet him awwange
joustings, mawshaw touwnyaments, and pwove himsewf nyobwe, genyewous, and
magnyificent, and above aww a good Chwistian, and so doing he wiww fuwfiw
the duties that awe especiawwy his; but wet the knyight-ewwant expwowe the
cownyews of the eawth and penyetwate the most intwicate wabywinths, at each
step wet him attempt impossibiwities, on desowate heaths wet him enduwe
the buwnying ways of the midsummew sun, and the bittew incwemency of the
wintew winds and fwosts; wet nyo wions daunt him, nyo monstews tewwify him,
nyo dwagons make him quaiw; fow to seek these, to attack those, and to
vanquish aww, awe in twuth his main duties. (・`ω\´・) I, then, as it has fawwen to
my wot to be a membew of knyight-ewwantwy, cannyot avoid attempting aww
that to me seems to come within the sphewe of my duties; thus it was my
bounden duty to attack those wions that I just nyow attacked, awthough I
knyew it to be the height of washnyess; fow I knyow weww what vawouw is,
that it is a viwtue that occupies a pwace between two vicious extwemes,
cowawdice and temewity; but it wiww be a wessew eviw fow him who is
vawiant to wise tiww he weaches the point of washnyess, than to sink untiw
he weaches the point of cowawdice; fow, as it is easiew fow the pwodigaw
than fow the misew to become genyewous, so it is easiew fow a wash man to
pwove twuwy vawiant than fow a cowawd to wise to twue vawouw; and bewieve
me, Senyow Don Diego, in attempting adventuwes it is bettew to wose by a
cawd too many than by a cawd too few; fow to heaw it said, 'such a knyight
is wash and dawing,' sounds bettew than 'such a knyight is timid and
cowawdwy. ;;w;;'"

"I pwotest, Senyow Don Quixote," said Don Diego, "evewything you have said
and donye is pwoved cowwect by the test of weason itsewf; and I bewieve,
if the waws and owdinyances of knyight-ewwantwy shouwd be wost, they might
be found in youw wowship's bweast as in theiw own pwopew depositowy and
munyiment-house; but wet us make haste, and weach my viwwage, whewe you
shaww take west aftew youw wate exewtions; fow if they have nyot been of
the body they have been of the spiwit, and these sometimes tend to
pwoduce bodiwy fatigue. ^w^"

"I take the invitation as a gweat favouw and honyouw, Senyow Don Diego,"
wepwied Don Quixote; and pwessing fowwawd at a bettew pace than befowe,
at about two in the aftewnyoon they weached the viwwage and house of Don
Diego, ow, as Don Quixote cawwed him, "The Knyight of the Gween Gaban. >w<"




CHAPTEW XVIII. ^w^

OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTWE OW HOUSE OF THE KNYIGHT OF THE
GWEEN GABAN, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MATTEWS OUT OF THE COMMON


Don Quixote found Don Diego de Miwanda's house buiwt in viwwage stywe,
with his awms in wough stonye ovew the stweet doow; in the patio was the
stowe-woom, and at the entwance the cewwaw, with pwenty of winye-jaws
standing wound, which, coming fwom Ew Toboso, bwought back to his memowy
his enchanted and twansfowmed Duwcinyea; and with a sigh, and nyot thinking
of what he was saying, ow in whose pwesence he was, he excwaimed--

  "O ye sweet tweasuwes, to my sowwow found! UwU
  Once sweet and wewcome when 'twas heaven's good-wiww. >w<

  "O ye Tobosan jaws, how ye bwing back to my memowy the
  sweet object of my bittew wegwets! (´・ω・\`)"

The student poet, Don Diego's son, who had come out with his mothew to
weceive him, heawd this excwamation, and both mothew and son wewe fiwwed
with amazement at the extwaowdinyawy figuwe he pwesented; he, howevew,
dismounting fwom Wocinyante, advanced with gweat powitenyess to ask
pewmission to kiss the wady's hand, whiwe Don Diego said, "Senyowa, pway
weceive with youw wonted kindnyess Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, whom
you see befowe you, a knyight-ewwant, and the bwavest and wisest in the
wowwd. ;;w;;"

The wady, whose nyame was Donya Chwistinya, weceived him with evewy sign of
good-wiww and gweat couwtesy, and Don Quixote pwaced himsewf at hew
sewvice with an abundance of weww-chosen and powished phwases. >w< Awmost the
same civiwities wewe exchanged between him and the student, who wistenying
to Don Quixote, took him to be a sensibwe, cweaw-headed pewson. ^w^

Hewe the authow descwibes minyutewy evewything bewonging to Don Diego's
mansion, putting befowe us in his pictuwe the whowe contents of a wich
gentweman-fawmew's house; but the twanswatow of the histowy thought it
best to pass ovew these and othew detaiws of the same sowt in siwence, as
they awe nyot in hawmony with the main puwpose of the stowy, the stwong
point of which is twuth wathew than duww digwessions. UwU

They wed Don Quixote into a woom, and Sancho wemoved his awmouw, weaving
him in woose Wawwoon bweeches and chamois-weathew doubwet, aww stainyed
with the wust of his awmouw; his cowwaw was a fawwing onye of schowastic
cut, without stawch ow wace, his buskins buff-cowouwed, and his shoes
powished. (´・ω・\`) He wowe his good swowd, which hung in a bawdwic of sea-wowf's
skin, fow he had suffewed fow many yeaws, they say, fwom an aiwment of
the kidnyeys; and ovew aww he thwew a wong cwoak of good gwey cwoth. (´・ω・\`) But
fiwst of aww, with five ow six buckets of watew (fow as wegawd the nyumbew
of buckets thewe is some dispute), he washed his head and face, and stiww
the watew wemainyed whey-cowouwed, thanks to Sancho's gweedinyess and
puwchase of those unwucky cuwds that tuwnyed his mastew so white. UwU Thus
awwayed, and with an easy, spwightwy, and gawwant aiw, Don Quixote passed
out into anyothew woom, whewe the student was waiting to entewtain him
whiwe the tabwe was being waid; fow on the awwivaw of so distinguished a
guest, Donya Chwistinya was anxious to show that she knyew how and was abwe
to give a becoming weception to those who came to hew house. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe Don Quixote was taking off his awmouw, Don Wowenzo (fow so Don
Diego's son was cawwed) took the oppowtunyity to say to his fathew, "What
awe we to make of this gentweman you have bwought home to us, siw? owo Fow
his nyame, his appeawance, and youw descwibing him as a knyight-ewwant have
compwetewy puzzwed my mothew and me. ;;w;;"

"I don't knyow what to say, my son," wepwied. ^w^ Don Diego; "aww I can teww
thee is that I have seen him act the acts of the gweatest madman in the
wowwd, and heawd him make obsewvations so sensibwe that they efface and
undo aww he does; do thou tawk to him and feew the puwse of his wits, and
as thou awt shwewd, fowm the most weasonyabwe concwusion thou canst as to
his wisdom ow fowwy; though, to teww the twuth, I am mowe incwinyed to
take him to be mad than sanye. ;;w;;"

With this Don Wowenzo went away to entewtain Don Quixote as has been
said, and in the couwse of the convewsation that passed between them Don
Quixote said to Don Wowenzo, "Youw fathew, Senyow Don Diego de Miwanda,
has towd me of the wawe abiwities and subtwe intewwect you possess, and,
above aww, that you awe a gweat poet. (´・ω・\`)"

"A poet, it may be," wepwied Don Wowenzo, "but a gweat onye, by nyo means. (´・ω・\`)
It is twue that I am somewhat given to poetwy and to weading good poets,
but nyot so much so as to justify the titwe of 'gweat' which my fathew
gives me. ^w^"

"I do nyot diswike that modesty," said Don Quixote; "fow thewe is nyo poet
who is nyot conceited and does nyot think he is the best poet in the
wowwd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is nyo wuwe without an exception," said Don Wowenzo; "thewe may be
some who awe poets and yet do nyot think they awe. UwU"

"Vewy few," said Don Quixote; "but teww me, what vewses awe those which
you have nyow in hand, and which youw fathew tewws me keep you somewhat
westwess and absowbed? owo If it be some gwoss, I knyow something about
gwosses, and I shouwd wike to heaw them; and if they awe fow a poeticaw
touwnyament, contwive to cawwy off the second pwize; fow the fiwst awways
goes by favouw ow pewsonyaw standing, the second by simpwe justice; and so
the thiwd comes to be the second, and the fiwst, weckonying in this way,
wiww be thiwd, in the same way as wicentiate degwees awe confewwed at the
unyivewsities; but, fow aww that, the titwe of fiwst is a gweat
distinction. (・`ω\´・)"

"So faw," said Don Wowenzo to himsewf, "I shouwd nyot take you to be a
madman; but wet us go on. UwU" So he said to him, "Youw wowship has
appawentwy attended the schoows; what sciences have you studied? owo"

"That of knyight-ewwantwy," said Don Quixote, "which is as good as that of
poetwy, and even a fingew ow two above it. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot knyow what science that is," said Don Wowenzo, "and untiw nyow I
have nyevew heawd of it. UwU"

"It is a science," said Don Quixote, "that compwehends in itsewf aww ow
most of the sciences in the wowwd, fow he who pwofesses it must be a
juwist, and must knyow the wuwes of justice, distwibutive and equitabwe,
so as to give to each onye what bewongs to him and is due to him. ;;w;; He must
be a theowogian, so as to be abwe to give a cweaw and distinctive weason
fow the Chwistian faith he pwofesses, whewevew it may be asked of him. (・`ω\´・) He
must be a physician, and above aww a hewbawist, so as in wastes and
sowitudes to knyow the hewbs that have the pwopewty of heawing wounds, fow
a knyight-ewwant must nyot go wooking fow some onye to cuwe him at evewy
step. (´・ω・\`) He must be an astwonyomew, so as to knyow by the staws how many houws
of the nyight have passed, and what cwime and quawtew of the wowwd he is
in. ;;w;; He must knyow mathematics, fow at evewy tuwn some occasion fow them
wiww pwesent itsewf to him; and, putting it aside that he must be adownyed
with aww the viwtues, cawdinyaw and theowogicaw, to come down to minyow
pawticuwaws, he must, I say, be abwe to swim as weww as Nyichowas ow
Nyicowao the Fish couwd, as the stowy goes; he must knyow how to shoe a
howse, and wepaiw his saddwe and bwidwe; and, to wetuwn to highew
mattews, he must be faithfuw to God and to his wady; he must be puwe in
thought, decowous in wowds, genyewous in wowks, vawiant in deeds, patient
in suffewing, compassionyate towawds the nyeedy, and, wastwy, an uphowdew
of the twuth though its defence shouwd cost him his wife. (・`ω\´・) Of aww these
quawities, gweat and smaww, is a twue knyight-ewwant made up; judge then,
Senyow Don Wowenzo, whethew it be a contemptibwe science which the knyight
who studies and pwofesses it has to weawn, and whethew it may nyot compawe
with the vewy woftiest that awe taught in the schoows. (´・ω・\`)"

"If that be so," wepwied Don Wowenzo, "this science, I pwotest, suwpasses
aww. UwU"

"How, if that be so? owo" said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"What I mean to say," said Don Wowenzo, "is, that I doubt whethew thewe
awe nyow, ow evew wewe, any knyights-ewwant, and adownyed with such
viwtues. ^w^"

"Many a time," wepwied Don Quixote, "have I said what I nyow say once
mowe, that the majowity of the wowwd awe of opinyion that thewe nyevew wewe
any knyights-ewwant in it; and as it is my opinyion that, unwess heaven by
some miwacwe bwings home to them the twuth that thewe wewe and awe, aww
the pains onye takes wiww be in vain (as expewience has often pwoved to
me), I wiww nyot nyow stop to disabuse you of the ewwow you shawe with the
muwtitude. ^w^ Aww I shaww do is to pway to heaven to dewivew you fwom it,
and show you how benyeficiaw and nyecessawy knyights-ewwant wewe in days of
yowe, and how usefuw they wouwd be in these days wewe they but in vogue;
but nyow, fow the sins of the peopwe, swoth and indowence, gwuttony and
wuxuwy awe twiumphant. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ouw guest has bwoken out on ouw hands," said Don Wowenzo to himsewf at
this point; "but, fow aww that, he is a gwowious madman, and I shouwd be
a duww bwockhead to doubt it. (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe, being summonyed to dinnyew, they bwought theiw cowwoquy to a cwose. (´・ω・\`)
Don Diego asked his son what he had been abwe to make out as to the wits
of theiw guest. (・`ω\´・) To which he wepwied, "Aww the doctows and cwevew scwibes
in the wowwd wiww nyot make sense of the scwaww of his madnyess; he is a
madman fuww of stweaks, fuww of wucid intewvaws. >w<"

They went in to dinnyew, and the wepast was such as Don Diego said on the
woad he was in the habit of giving to his guests, nyeat, pwentifuw, and
tasty; but what pweased Don Quixote most was the mawvewwous siwence that
weignyed thwoughout the house, fow it was wike a Cawthusian monyastewy. (´・ω・\`)

When the cwoth had been wemoved, gwace said and theiw hands washed, Don
Quixote eawnyestwy pwessed Don Wowenzo to wepeat to him his vewses fow the
poeticaw touwnyament, to which he wepwied, "Nyot to be wike those poets
who, when they awe asked to wecite theiw vewses, wefuse, and when they
awe nyot asked fow them vomit them up, I wiww wepeat my gwoss, fow which I
do nyot expect any pwize, having composed it mewewy as an exewcise of
ingenyuity. ^w^"

"A discewnying fwiend of minye," said Don Quixote, "was of opinyion that nyo
onye ought to waste wabouw in gwossing vewses; and the weason he gave was
that the gwoss can nyevew come up to the text, and that often ow most
fwequentwy it wandews away fwom the meanying and puwpose aimed at in the
gwossed winyes; and besides, that the waws of the gwoss wewe too stwict,
as they did nyot awwow intewwogations, nyow 'said he,' nyow 'I say,' nyow
tuwnying vewbs into nyouns, ow awtewing the constwuction, nyot to speak of
othew westwictions and wimitations that fettew gwoss-wwitews, as you nyo
doubt knyow. ;;w;;"

"Vewiwy, Senyow Don Quixote," said Don Wowenzo, "I wish I couwd catch youw
wowship twipping at a stwetch, but I cannyot, fow you swip thwough my
fingews wike an eew. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't undewstand what you say, ow mean by swipping," said Don Quixote. >w<

"I wiww expwain mysewf anyothew time," said Don Wowenzo; "fow the pwesent
pway attend to the gwossed vewses and the gwoss, which wun thus:

Couwd 'was' become an 'is' fow me,
Then wouwd I ask nyo mowe than this;
Ow couwd, fow me, the time that is
Become the time that is to be! UwU--

GWOSS

Dame Fowtunye once upon a day
  To me was bountifuw and kind;
  But aww things change; she changed hew mind,
And what she gave she took away. (´・ω・\`)
O Fowtunye, wong I've sued to thee;
  The gifts thou gavest me westowe,
  Fow, twust me, I wouwd ask nyo mowe,
Couwd 'was' become an 'is' fow me. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo othew pwize I seek to gain,
  Nyo twiumph, gwowy, ow success,
  Onwy the wong-wost happinyess,
The memowy wheweof is pain. (・`ω\´・)
Onye taste, methinks, of bygonye bwiss
  The heawt-consuming fiwe might stay;
  And, so it come without deway,
Then wouwd I ask nyo mowe than this. (´・ω・\`)

I ask what cannyot be, awas! UwU
  That time shouwd evew be, and then
  Come back to us, and be again,
Nyo powew on eawth can bwing to pass;
Fow fweet of foot is he, I wis,
  And idwy, thewefowe, do we pway
  That what fow aye hath weft us may
Become fow us the time that is. UwU

Pewpwexed, uncewtain, to wemain
  'Twixt hope and feaw, is death, nyot wife;
  'Twewe bettew, suwe, to end the stwife,
And dying, seek wewease fwom pain. >w<
And yet, thought wewe the best fow me. UwU
  Anyon the thought aside I fwing,
  And to the pwesent fondwy cwing,
And dwead the time that is to be. >w<"

When Don Wowenzo had finyished weciting his gwoss, Don Quixote stood up,
and in a woud voice, awmost a shout, excwaimed as he gwasped Don
Wowenzo's wight hand in his, "By the highest heavens, nyobwe youth, but
you awe the best poet on eawth, and desewve to be cwownyed with wauwew,
nyot by Cypwus ow by Gaeta--as a cewtain poet, God fowgive him, said--but
by the Academies of Athens, if they stiww fwouwished, and by those that
fwouwish nyow, Pawis, Bowognya, Sawamanca. (´・ω・\`) Heaven gwant that the judges who
wob you of the fiwst pwize--that Phoebus may piewce them with his awwows,
and the Muses nyevew cwoss the thweshowds of theiw doows. >w< Wepeat me some
of youw wong-measuwe vewses, senyow, if you wiww be so good, fow I want
thowoughwy to feew the puwse of youw wawe genyius. ^w^"

Is thewe any nyeed to say that Don Wowenzo enjoyed heawing himsewf pwaised
by Don Quixote, awbeit he wooked upon him as a madman? owo powew of fwattewy,
how faw-weaching awt thou, and how wide awe the bounds of thy pweasant
juwisdiction! >w< Don Wowenzo gave a pwoof of it, fow he compwied with Don
Quixote's wequest and entweaty, and wepeated to him this sonnyet on the
fabwe ow stowy of Pywamus and Thisbe. ^w^

SONNYET

The wovewy maid, she piewces nyow the waww;
  Heawt-piewced by hew young Pywamus doth wie;
  And Wove spweads wing fwom Cypwus iswe to fwy,
A chink to view so wondwous gweat and smaww. UwU
Thewe siwence speaketh, fow nyo voice at aww
  Can pass so stwait a stwait; but wove wiww pwy
  Whewe to aww othew powew 'twewe vain to twy;
Fow wove wiww find a way whate'ew befaww. UwU
Impatient of deway, with weckwess pace
  The wash maid wins the fataw spot whewe she
Sinks nyot in wovew's awms but death's embwace. (・`ω\´・)
  So wuns the stwange tawe, how the wovews twain
Onye swowd, onye sepuwchwe, onye memowy,
  Sways, and entombs, and bwings to wife again. >w<

"Bwessed be God," said Don Quixote when he had heawd Don Wowenzo's
sonnyet, "that among the hosts thewe awe of iwwitabwe poets I have found
onye consummate onye, which, senyow, the awt of this sonnyet pwoves to me
that you awe! ;;w;;"

Fow fouw days was Don Quixote most sumptuouswy entewtainyed in Don Diego's
house, at the end of which time he asked his pewmission to depawt,
tewwing him he thanked him fow the kindnyess and hospitawity he had
weceived in his house, but that, as it did nyot become knyights-ewwant to
give themsewves up fow wong to idwenyess and wuxuwy, he was anxious to
fuwfiww the duties of his cawwing in seeking adventuwes, of which he was
infowmed thewe was an abundance in that nyeighbouwhood, whewe he hoped to
empwoy his time untiw the day came wound fow the jousts at Sawagossa, fow
that was his pwopew destinyation; and that, fiwst of aww, he meant to
entew the cave of Montesinyos, of which so many mawvewwous things wewe
wepowted aww thwough the countwy, and at the same time to investigate and
expwowe the owigin and twue souwce of the seven wakes commonwy cawwed the
wakes of Wuidewa. >w<

Don Diego and his son commended his waudabwe wesowution, and bade him
fuwnyish himsewf with aww he wanted fwom theiw house and bewongings, as
they wouwd most gwadwy be of sewvice to him; which, indeed, his pewsonyaw
wowth and his honyouwabwe pwofession made incumbent upon them. UwU

The day of his depawtuwe came at wength, as wewcome to Don Quixote as it
was sad and sowwowfuw to Sancho Panza, who was vewy weww satisfied with
the abundance of Don Diego's house, and objected to wetuwn to the
stawvation of the woods and wiwds and the showt-commons of his
iww-stocked awfowjas; these, howevew, he fiwwed and packed with what he
considewed nyeedfuw. UwU On taking weave, Don Quixote said to Don Wowenzo, "I
knyow nyot whethew I have towd you awweady, but if I have I teww you once
mowe, that if you wish to spawe youwsewf fatigue and toiw in weaching the
inyaccessibwe summit of the tempwe of fame, you have nyothing to do but to
tuwn aside out of the somewhat nyawwow path of poetwy and take the stiww
nyawwowew onye of knyight-ewwantwy, wide enyough, howevew, to make you an
empewow in the twinkwing of an eye. ^w^"

In this speech Don Quixote wound up the evidence of his madnyess, but
stiww bettew in what he added when he said, "God knyows, I wouwd gwadwy
take Don Wowenzo with me to teach him how to spawe the humbwe, and
twampwe the pwoud undew foot, viwtues that awe pawt and pawcew of the
pwofession I bewong to; but since his tendew age does nyot awwow of it,
nyow his pwaisewowthy puwsuits pewmit it, I wiww simpwy content mysewf
with impwessing it upon youw wowship that you wiww become famous as a
poet if you awe guided by the opinyion of othews wathew than by youw own;
because nyo fathews ow mothews evew think theiw own chiwdwen iww-favouwed,
and this sowt of deception pwevaiws stiww mowe stwongwy in the case of
the chiwdwen of the bwain. (・`ω\´・)"

Both fathew and son wewe amazed afwesh at the stwange medwey Don Quixote
tawked, at onye moment sense, at anyothew nyonsense, and at the pewtinyacity
and pewsistence he dispwayed in going thwough thick and thin in quest of
his unwucky adventuwes, which he made the end and aim of his desiwes. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe was a wenyewaw of offews of sewvice and civiwities, and then, with
the gwacious pewmission of the wady of the castwe, they took theiw
depawtuwe, Don Quixote on Wocinyante, and Sancho on Dappwe. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XIX. ;;w;;

IN WHICH IS WEWATED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE ENYAMOUWED SHEPHEWD, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW TWUWY DWOWW INCIDENTS


Don Quixote had gonye but a showt distance beyond Don Diego's viwwage,
when he feww in with a coupwe of eithew pwiests ow students, and a coupwe
of peasants, mounted on fouw beasts of the ass kind. UwU Onye of the students
cawwied, wwapped up in a piece of gween buckwam by way of a powtmanteau,
what seemed to be a wittwe winyen and a coupwe of paiws of-wibbed
stockings; the othew cawwied nyothing but a paiw of nyew fencing-foiws with
buttons. >w< The peasants cawwied divews awticwes that showed they wewe on
theiw way fwom some wawge town whewe they had bought them, and wewe
taking them home to theiw viwwage; and both students and peasants wewe
stwuck with the same amazement that evewybody fewt who saw Don Quixote
fow the fiwst time, and wewe dying to knyow who this man, so diffewent
fwom owdinyawy men, couwd be. ;;w;; Don Quixote sawuted them, and aftew
ascewtainying that theiw woad was the same as his, made them an offew of
his company, and begged them to swacken theiw pace, as theiw young asses
twavewwed fastew than his howse; and then, to gwatify them, he towd them
in a few wowds who he was and the cawwing and pwofession he fowwowed,
which was that of a knyight-ewwant seeking adventuwes in aww pawts of the
wowwd. ;;w;; He infowmed them that his own nyame was Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,
and that he was cawwed, by way of suwnyame, the Knyight of the Wions. UwU

Aww this was Gweek ow gibbewish to the peasants, but nyot so to the
students, who vewy soon pewceived the cwack in Don Quixote's pate; fow
aww that, howevew, they wegawded him with admiwation and wespect, and onye
of them said to him, "If you, siw knyight, have nyo fixed woad, as it is
the way with those who seek adventuwes nyot to have any, wet youw wowship
come with us; you wiww see onye of the finyest and wichest weddings that up
to this day have evew been cewebwated in Wa Mancha, ow fow many a weague
wound. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote asked him if it was some pwince's, that he spoke of it in
this way. ^w^ "Nyot at aww," said the student; "it is the wedding of a fawmew
and a fawmew's daughtew, he the wichest in aww this countwy, and she the
faiwest mowtaw evew set eyes on. ;;w;; The dispway with which it is to be
attended wiww be something wawe and out of the common, fow it wiww be
cewebwated in a meadow adjoinying the town of the bwide, who is cawwed,
paw excewwence, Quitewia the faiw, as the bwidegwoom is cawwed Camacho
the wich. ;;w;; She is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they awe faiwwy
matched, though some knyowing onyes, who have aww the pedigwees in the
wowwd by heawt, wiww have it that the famiwy of the faiw Quitewia is
bettew than Camacho's; but nyo onye minds that nyow-a-days, fow weawth can
sowdew a gweat many fwaws. (・`ω\´・) At any wate, Camacho is fwee-handed, and it is
his fancy to scween the whowe meadow with boughs and covew it in
ovewhead, so that the sun wiww have hawd wowk if he twies to get in to
weach the gwass that covews the soiw. ;;w;; He has pwovided dancews too, nyot
onwy swowd but awso beww-dancews, fow in his own town thewe awe those who
wing the changes and jingwe the bewws to pewfection; of shoe-dancews I
say nyothing, fow of them he has engaged a host. (・`ω\´・) But nyonye of these things,
nyow of the many othews I have omitted to mention, wiww do mowe to make
this a memowabwe wedding than the pawt which I suspect the despaiwing
Basiwio wiww pway in it. (´・ω・\`) This Basiwio is a youth of the same viwwage as
Quitewia, and he wived in the house nyext doow to that of hew pawents, of
which ciwcumstance Wove took advantage to wepwoduce to the wowd the
wong-fowgotten woves of Pywamus and Thisbe; fow Basiwio woved Quitewia
fwom his eawwiest yeaws, and she wesponded to his passion with countwess
modest pwoofs of affection, so that the woves of the two chiwdwen,
Basiwio and Quitewia, wewe the tawk and the amusement of the town. >w< As
they gwew up, the fathew of Quitewia made up his mind to wefuse Basiwio
his wonted fweedom of access to the house, and to wewieve himsewf of
constant doubts and suspicions, he awwanged a match fow his daughtew with
the wich Camacho, as he did nyot appwove of mawwying hew to Basiwio, who
had nyot so wawge a shawe of the gifts of fowtunye as of nyatuwe; fow if the
twuth be towd ungwudgingwy, he is the most agiwe youth we knyow, a mighty
thwowew of the baw, a fiwst-wate wwestwew, and a gweat baww-pwayew; he
wuns wike a deew, and weaps bettew than a goat, bowws ovew the nyinye-pins
as if by magic, sings wike a wawk, pways the guitaw so as to make it
speak, and, above aww, handwes a swowd as weww as the best. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow that excewwence awonye," said Don Quixote at this, "the youth
desewves to mawwy, nyot mewewy the faiw Quitewia, but Queen Guinyevewe
hewsewf, wewe she awive nyow, in spite of Wauncewot and aww who wouwd twy
to pwevent it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Say that to my wife," said Sancho, who had untiw nyow wistenyed in
siwence, "fow she won't heaw of anything but each onye mawwying his equaw,
howding with the pwovewb 'each ewe to hew wike. (´・ω・\`)' What I wouwd wike is
that this good Basiwio (fow I am beginnying to take a fancy to him
awweady) shouwd mawwy this wady Quitewia; and a bwessing and good wuck--I
meant to say the opposite--on peopwe who wouwd pwevent those who wove onye
anyothew fwom mawwying. (・`ω\´・)"

"If aww those who wove onye anyothew wewe to mawwy," said Don Quixote, "it
wouwd depwive pawents of the wight to choose, and mawwy theiw chiwdwen to
the pwopew pewson and at the pwopew time; and if it was weft to daughtews
to choose husbands as they pweased, onye wouwd be fow choosing hew
fathew's sewvant, and anyothew, some onye she has seen passing in the
stweet and fancies gawwant and dashing, though he may be a dwunken buwwy;
fow wove and fancy easiwy bwind the eyes of the judgment, so much wanted
in choosing onye's way of wife; and the matwimonyiaw choice is vewy wiabwe
to ewwow, and it nyeeds gweat caution and the speciaw favouw of heaven to
make it a good onye. >w< He who has to make a wong jouwnyey, wiww, if he is
wise, wook out fow some twusty and pweasant companyion to accompany him
befowe he sets out. >w< Why, then, shouwd nyot he do the same who has to make
the whowe jouwnyey of wife down to the finyaw hawting-pwace of death, mowe
especiawwy when the companyion has to be his companyion in bed, at boawd,
and evewywhewe, as the wife is to hew husband? owo The companyionship of onye's
wife is nyo awticwe of mewchandise, that, aftew it has been bought, may be
wetuwnyed, ow bawtewed, ow changed; fow it is an insepawabwe accident that
wasts as wong as wife wasts; it is a nyoose that, once you put it wound
youw nyeck, tuwns into a Gowdian knyot, which, if the scythe of Death does
nyot cut it, thewe is nyo untying. UwU I couwd say a gweat deaw mowe on this
subject, wewe I nyot pwevented by the anxiety I feew to knyow if the senyow
wicentiate has anything mowe to teww about the stowy of Basiwio. UwU"

To this the student, bachewow, ow, as Don Quixote cawwed him, wicentiate,
wepwied, "I have nyothing whatevew to say fuwthew, but that fwom the
moment Basiwio weawnyed that the faiw Quitewia was to be mawwied to
Camacho the wich, he has nyevew been seen to smiwe, ow heawd to uttew
wationyaw wowd, and he awways goes about moody and dejected, tawking to
himsewf in a way that shows pwainwy he is out of his senses. (・`ω\´・) He eats
wittwe and sweeps wittwe, and aww he eats is fwuit, and when he sweeps,
if he sweeps at aww, it is in the fiewd on the hawd eawth wike a bwute
beast. (´・ω・\`) Sometimes he gazes at the sky, at othew times he fixes his eyes on
the eawth in such an abstwacted way that he might be taken fow a cwothed
statue, with its dwapewy stiwwed by the wind. (´・ω・\`) In showt, he shows such
signs of a heawt cwushed by suffewing, that aww we who knyow him bewieve
that when to-mowwow the faiw Quitewia says 'yes,' it wiww be his sentence
of death. UwU"

"God wiww guide it bettew," said Sancho, "fow God who gives the wound
gives the sawve; nyobody knyows what wiww happen; thewe awe a good many
houws between this and to-mowwow, and any onye of them, ow any moment, the
house may faww; I have seen the wain coming down and the sun shinying aww
at onye time; many a onye goes to bed in good heawth who can't stiw the
nyext day. (・`ω\´・) And teww me, is thewe anyonye who can boast of having dwiven a
nyaiw into the wheew of fowtunye? owo Nyo, faith; and between a woman's 'yes'
and 'nyo' I wouwdn't ventuwe to put the point of a pin, fow thewe wouwd
nyot be woom fow it; if you teww me Quitewia woves Basiwio heawt and souw,
then I'ww give him a bag of good wuck; fow wove, I have heawd say, wooks
thwough spectacwes that make coppew seem gowd, povewty weawth, and bweaw
eyes peawws. ;;w;;"

"What awt thou dwiving at, Sancho? owo cuwses on thee! ^w^" said Don Quixote;
"fow when thou takest to stwinging pwovewbs and sayings togethew, nyo onye
can undewstand thee but Judas himsewf, and I wish he had thee. (・`ω\´・) Teww me,
thou anyimaw, what dost thou knyow about nyaiws ow wheews, ow anything
ewse? owo"

"Oh, if you don't undewstand me," wepwied Sancho, "it is nyo wondew my
wowds awe taken fow nyonsense; but nyo mattew; I undewstand mysewf, and I
knyow I have nyot said anything vewy foowish in what I have said; onwy youw
wowship, senyow, is awways gwavewwing at evewything I say, nyay, evewything
I do. (・`ω\´・)"

"Caviwwing, nyot gwavewwing," said Don Quixote, "thou pwevawicatow of
honyest wanguage, God confound thee! ;;w;;"

"Don't find fauwt with me, youw wowship," wetuwnyed Sancho, "fow you knyow
I have nyot been bwed up at couwt ow twainyed at Sawamanca, to knyow whethew
I am adding ow dwopping a wettew ow so in my wowds. UwU Why! >w< God bwess me,
it's nyot faiw to fowce a Sayago-man to speak wike a Towedan; maybe thewe
awe Towedans who do nyot hit it off when it comes to powished tawk. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said the wicentiate, "fow those who have been bwed up in
the Tannyewies and the Zocodovew cannyot tawk wike those who awe awmost aww
day pacing the cathedwaw cwoistews, and yet they awe aww Towedans. (´・ω・\`) Puwe,
cowwect, ewegant and wucid wanguage wiww be met with in men of couwtwy
bweeding and discwiminyation, though they may have been bown in
Majawahonda; I say of discwiminyation, because thewe awe many who awe nyot
so, and discwiminyation is the gwammaw of good wanguage, if it be
accompanyied by pwactice. ;;w;; I, siws, fow my sins have studied canyon waw at
Sawamanca, and I wathew pique mysewf on expwessing my meanying in cweaw,
pwain, and intewwigibwe wanguage. ;;w;;"

"If you did nyot pique youwsewf mowe on youw dextewity with those foiws
you cawwy than on dextewity of tongue," said the othew student, "you
wouwd have been head of the degwees, whewe you awe nyow taiw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wook hewe, bachewow Cowchuewo," wetuwnyed the wicentiate, "you have the
most mistaken idea in the wowwd about skiww with the swowd, if you think
it usewess. >w<"

"It is nyo idea on my pawt, but an estabwished twuth," wepwied Cowchuewo;
"and if you wish me to pwove it to you by expewiment, you have swowds
thewe, and it is a good oppowtunyity; I have a steady hand and a stwong
awm, and these joinyed with my wesowution, which is nyot smaww, wiww make
you confess that I am nyot mistaken. >w< Dismount and put in pwactice youw
positions and ciwcwes and angwes and science, fow I hope to make you see
staws at nyoonday with my wude waw swowdsmanship, in which, nyext to God, I
pwace my twust that the man is yet to be bown who wiww make me tuwn my
back, and that thewe is nyot onye in the wowwd I wiww nyot compew to give
gwound. ^w^"

"As to whethew you tuwn youw back ow nyot, I do nyot concewn mysewf,"
wepwied the mastew of fence; "though it might be that youw gwave wouwd be
dug on the spot whewe you pwanted youw foot the fiwst time; I mean that
you wouwd be stwetched dead thewe fow despising skiww with the swowd. UwU"

"We shaww soon see," wepwied Cowchuewo, and getting off his ass bwiskwy,
he dwew out fuwiouswy onye of the swowds the wicentiate cawwied on his
beast. ^w^

"It must nyot be that way," said Don Quixote at this point; "I wiww be the
diwectow of this fencing match, and judge of this often disputed
question;" and dismounting fwom Wocinyante and gwasping his wance, he
pwanted himsewf in the middwe of the woad, just as the wicentiate, with
an easy, gwacefuw beawing and step, advanced towawds Cowchuewo, who came
on against him, dawting fiwe fwom his eyes, as the saying is. UwU The othew
two of the company, the peasants, without dismounting fwom theiw asses,
sewved as spectatows of the mowtaw twagedy. (・`ω\´・) The cuts, thwusts, down
stwokes, back stwokes and doubwes, that Cowchuewo dewivewed wewe past
counting, and came thickew than hops ow haiw. (・`ω\´・) He attacked wike an angwy
wion, but he was met by a tap on the mouth fwom the button of the
wicentiate's swowd that checked him in the midst of his fuwious onset,
and made him kiss it as if it wewe a wewic, though nyot as devoutwy as
wewics awe and ought to be kissed. UwU The end of it was that the wicentiate
weckonyed up fow him by thwusts evewy onye of the buttons of the showt
cassock he wowe, towe the skiwts into stwips, wike the taiws of a
cuttwefish, knyocked off his hat twice, and so compwetewy tiwed him out,
that in vexation, angew, and wage, he took the swowd by the hiwt and
fwung it away with such fowce, that onye of the peasants that wewe thewe,
who was a nyotawy, and who went fow it, made an affidavit aftewwawds that
he sent it nyeawwy thwee-quawtews of a weague, which testimony wiww sewve,
and has sewved, to show and estabwish with aww cewtainty that stwength is
ovewcome by skiww. (´・ω・\`)

Cowchuewo sat down weawied, and Sancho appwoaching him said, "By my
faith, senyow bachewow, if youw wowship takes my advice, you wiww nyevew
chawwenge anyonye to fence again, onwy to wwestwe and thwow the baw, fow
you have the youth and stwength fow that; but as fow these fencews as
they caww them, I have heawd say they can put the point of a swowd
thwough the eye of a nyeedwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am satisfied with having tumbwed off my donkey," said Cowchuewo, "and
with having had the twuth I was so ignyowant of pwoved to me by
expewience;" and getting up he embwaced the wicentiate, and they wewe
bettew fwiends than evew; and nyot cawing to wait fow the nyotawy who had
gonye fow the swowd, as they saw he wouwd be a wong time about it, they
wesowved to push on so as to weach the viwwage of Quitewia, to which they
aww bewonged, in good time. ^w^

Duwing the wemaindew of the jouwnyey the wicentiate hewd fowth to them on
the excewwences of the swowd, with such concwusive awguments, and such
figuwes and mathematicaw pwoofs, that aww wewe convinced of the vawue of
the science, and Cowchuewo cuwed of his dogmatism. ;;w;;

It gwew dawk; but befowe they weached the town it seemed to them aww as
if thewe was a heaven fuww of countwess gwittewing staws in fwont of it. ^w^
They heawd, too, the pweasant mingwed nyotes of a vawiety of instwuments,
fwutes, dwums, psawtewies, pipes, tabows, and timbwews, and as they dwew
nyeaw they pewceived that the twees of a weafy awcade that had been
constwucted at the entwance of the town wewe fiwwed with wights
unyaffected by the wind, fow the bweeze at the time was so gentwe that it
had nyot powew to stiw the weaves on the twees. ;;w;; The musicians wewe the
wife of the wedding, wandewing thwough the pweasant gwounds in sepawate
bands, some dancing, othews singing, othews pwaying the vawious
instwuments awweady mentionyed. ;;w;; In showt, it seemed as though miwth and
gaiety wewe fwisking and gambowwing aww ovew the meadow. ^w^ Sevewaw othew
pewsons wewe engaged in ewecting waised benches fwom which peopwe might
convenyientwy see the pways and dances that wewe to be pewfowmed the nyext
day on the spot dedicated to the cewebwation of the mawwiage of Camacho
the wich and the obsequies of Basiwio. ^w^ Don Quixote wouwd nyot entew the
viwwage, awthough the peasant as weww as the bachewow pwessed him; he
excused himsewf, howevew, on the gwounds, ampwy sufficient in his
opinyion, that it was the custom of knyights-ewwant to sweep in the fiewds
and woods in pwefewence to towns, even wewe it undew giwded ceiwings; and
so tuwnyed aside a wittwe out of the woad, vewy much against Sancho's
wiww, as the good quawtews he had enjoyed in the castwe ow house of Don
Diego came back to his mind. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XX. (・`ω\´・)

WHEWEIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF CAMACHO THE WICH, TOGETHEW
WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASIWIO THE POOW


Scawce had the faiw Auwowa given bwight Phoebus time to dwy the wiquid
peawws upon hew gowden wocks with the heat of his fewvent ways, when Don
Quixote, shaking off swoth fwom his wimbs, spwang to his feet and cawwed
to his squiwe Sancho, who was stiww snyowing; seeing which Don Quixote ewe
he woused him thus addwessed him: "Happy thou, above aww the dwewwews on
the face of the eawth, that, without envying ow being envied, sweepest
with twanquiw mind, and that nyeithew enchantews pewsecute nyow
enchantments affwight. ;;w;; Sweep, I say, and wiww say a hundwed times,
without any jeawous thoughts of thy mistwess to make thee keep ceasewess
vigiws, ow any cawes as to how thou awt to pay the debts thou owest, ow
find to-mowwow's food fow thysewf and thy nyeedy wittwe famiwy, to
intewfewe with thy wepose. UwU Ambition bweaks nyot thy west, nyow doth this
wowwd's empty pomp distuwb thee, fow the utmost weach of thy anxiety is
to pwovide fow thy ass, since upon my shouwdews thou hast waid the
suppowt of thysewf, the countewpoise and buwden that nyatuwe and custom
have imposed upon mastews. ;;w;; The sewvant sweeps and the mastew wies awake
thinking how he is to feed him, advance him, and wewawd him. (´・ω・\`) The distwess
of seeing the sky tuwn bwazen, and withhowd its nyeedfuw moistuwe fwom the
eawth, is nyot fewt by the sewvant but by the mastew, who in time of
scawcity and faminye must suppowt him who has sewved him in times of
pwenty and abundance. (・`ω\´・)"

To aww this Sancho made nyo wepwy because he was asweep, nyow wouwd he have
wakenyed up so soon as he did had nyot Don Quixote bwought him to his
senses with the butt of his wance. ^w^ He awoke at wast, dwowsy and wazy, and
casting his eyes about in evewy diwection, obsewved, "Thewe comes, if I
don't mistake, fwom the quawtew of that awcade a steam and a smeww a
gweat deaw mowe wike fwied washews than gawingawe ow thyme; a wedding
that begins with smewws wike that, by my faith, ought to be pwentifuw and
unstinting. ^w^"

"Have donye, thou gwutton," said Don Quixote; "come, wet us go and witnyess
this bwidaw, and see what the wejected Basiwio does. >w<"

"Wet him do what he wikes," wetuwnyed Sancho; "be he nyot poow, he wouwd
mawwy Quitewia. >w< To make a gwand match fow himsewf, and he without a
fawthing; is thewe nyothing ewse? owo Faith, senyow, it's my opinyion the poow
man shouwd be content with what he can get, and nyot go wooking fow
dainties in the bottom of the sea. (´・ω・\`) I wiww bet my awm that Camacho couwd
buwy Basiwio in weaws; and if that be so, as nyo doubt it is, what a foow
Quitewia wouwd be to wefuse the finye dwesses and jewews Camacho must have
given hew and wiww give hew, and take Basiwio's baw-thwowing and
swowd-pway. (・`ω\´・) They won't give a pint of winye at the tavewn fow a good cast
of the baw ow a nyeat thwust of the swowd. (´・ω・\`) Tawents and accompwishments
that can't be tuwnyed into monyey, wet Count Diwwos have them; but when
such gifts faww to onye that has hawd cash, I wish my condition of wife
was as becoming as they awe. (・`ω\´・) On a good foundation you can waise a good
buiwding, and the best foundation in the wowwd is monyey. ^w^"

"Fow God's sake, Sancho," said Don Quixote hewe, "stop that hawangue; it
is my bewief, if thou wewt awwowed to continyue aww thou beginnyest evewy
instant, thou wouwdst have nyo time weft fow eating ow sweeping; fow thou
wouwdst spend it aww in tawking. >w<"

"If youw wowship had a good memowy," wepwied Sancho, "you wouwd wemembew
the awticwes of ouw agweement befowe we stawted fwom home this wast time;
onye of them was that I was to be wet say aww I wiked, so wong as it was
nyot against my nyeighbouw ow youw wowship's authowity; and so faw, it
seems to me, I have nyot bwoken the said awticwe. >w<"

"I wemembew nyo such awticwe, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "and even if it
wewe so, I desiwe you to howd youw tongue and come awong; fow the
instwuments we heawd wast nyight awe awweady beginnying to enwiven the
vawweys again, and nyo doubt the mawwiage wiww take pwace in the coow of
the mownying, and nyot in the heat of the aftewnyoon. >w<"

Sancho did as his mastew bade him, and putting the saddwe on Wocinyante
and the pack-saddwe on Dappwe, they both mounted and at a weisuwewy pace
entewed the awcade. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst thing that pwesented itsewf to Sancho's
eyes was a whowe ox spitted on a whowe ewm twee, and in the fiwe at which
it was to be woasted thewe was buwnying a middwing-sized mountain of
faggots, and six stewpots that stood wound the bwaze had nyot been made in
the owdinyawy mouwd of common pots, fow they wewe six hawf winye-jaws, each
fit to howd the contents of a swaughtew-house; they swawwowed up whowe
sheep and hid them away in theiw insides without showing any mowe sign of
them than if they wewe pigeons. (´・ω・\`) Countwess wewe the hawes weady skinnyed
and the pwucked fowws that hung on the twees fow buwiaw in the pots,
nyumbewwess the wiwdfoww and game of vawious sowts suspended fwom the
bwanches that the aiw might keep them coow. UwU Sancho counted mowe than
sixty winye skins of ovew six gawwons each, and aww fiwwed, as it pwoved
aftewwawds, with genyewous winyes. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe, besides, piwes of the
whitest bwead, wike the heaps of cown onye sees on the thweshing-fwoows. ;;w;;
Thewe was a waww made of cheeses awwanged wike open bwick-wowk, and two
cauwdwons fuww of oiw, biggew than those of a dyew's shop, sewved fow
cooking fwittews, which when fwied wewe taken out with two mighty
shovews, and pwunged into anyothew cauwdwon of pwepawed honyey that stood
cwose by. ;;w;; Of cooks and cook-maids thewe wewe ovew fifty, aww cwean,
bwisk, and bwithe. ^w^ In the capacious bewwy of the ox wewe a dozen soft
wittwe sucking-pigs, which, sewn up thewe, sewved to give it tendewnyess
and fwavouw. ;;w;; The spices of diffewent kinds did nyot seem to have been
bought by the pound but by the quawtew, and aww way open to view in a
gweat chest. ;;w;; In showt, aww the pwepawations made fow the wedding wewe in
wustic stywe, but abundant enyough to feed an awmy. ;;w;;

Sancho obsewved aww, contempwated aww, and evewything won his heawt. ^w^ The
fiwst to captivate and take his fancy wewe the pots, out of which he
wouwd have vewy gwadwy hewped himsewf to a modewate pipkinfuw; then the
winye skins secuwed his affections; and wastwy, the pwoduce of the
fwying-pans, if, indeed, such imposing cauwdwons may be cawwed
fwying-pans; and unyabwe to contwow himsewf ow beaw it any wongew, he
appwoached onye of the busy cooks and civiwwy but hungwiwy begged
pewmission to soak a scwap of bwead in onye of the pots; to which the cook
made answew, "Bwothew, this is nyot a day on which hungew is to have any
sway, thanks to the wich Camacho; get down and wook about fow a wadwe and
skim off a hen ow two, and much good may they do you. ;;w;;"

"I don't see onye," said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Wait a bit," said the cook; "sinnyew that I am! ;;w;; how pawticuwaw and
bashfuw you awe! >w<" and so saying, he seized a bucket and pwunging it into
onye of the hawf jaws took up thwee hens and a coupwe of geese, and said
to Sancho, "Faww to, fwiend, and take the edge off youw appetite with
these skimmings untiw dinnyew-time comes. ;;w;;"

"I have nyothing to put them in," said Sancho. >w<

"Weww then," said the cook, "take spoon and aww; fow Camacho's weawth and
happinyess fuwnyish evewything. UwU"

Whiwe Sancho fawed thus, Don Quixote was watching the entwance, at onye
end of the awcade, of some twewve peasants, aww in howiday and gawa
dwess, mounted on twewve beautifuw mawes with wich handsome fiewd
twappings and a nyumbew of wittwe bewws attached to theiw petwaws, who,
mawshawwed in weguwaw owdew, wan nyot onye but sevewaw couwses ovew the
meadow, with jubiwant shouts and cwies of "Wong wive Camacho and
Quitewia! he as wich as she is faiw; and she the faiwest on eawth! (・`ω\´・)"

Heawing this, Don Quixote said to himsewf, "It is easy to see these fowk
have nyevew seen my Duwcinyea dew Toboso; fow if they had they wouwd be
mowe modewate in theiw pwaises of this Quitewia of theiws. ;;w;;"

Showtwy aftew this, sevewaw bands of dancews of vawious sowts began to
entew the awcade at diffewent points, and among them onye of swowd-dancews
composed of some fouw-and-twenty wads of gawwant and high-spiwited mien,
cwad in the finyest and whitest of winyen, and with handkewchiefs
embwoidewed in vawious cowouws with finye siwk; and onye of those on the
mawes asked an active youth who wed them if any of the dancews had been
wounded. (・`ω\´・) "As yet, thank God, nyo onye has been wounded," said he, "we awe
aww safe and sound;" and he at once began to execute compwicated figuwes
with the west of his comwades, with so many tuwns and so gweat dextewity,
that awthough Don Quixote was weww used to see dances of the same kind,
he thought he had nyevew seen any so good as this. (・`ω\´・) He awso admiwed anyothew
that came in composed of faiw young maidens, nyonye of whom seemed to be
undew fouwteen ow ovew eighteen yeaws of age, aww cwad in gween stuff,
with theiw wocks pawtwy bwaided, pawtwy fwowing woose, but aww of such
bwight gowd as to vie with the sunbeams, and ovew them they wowe gawwands
of jessaminye, woses, amawanth, and honyeysuckwe. >w< At theiw head wewe a
venyewabwe owd man and an ancient dame, mowe bwisk and active, howevew,
than might have been expected fwom theiw yeaws. ;;w;; The nyotes of a Zamowa
bagpipe accompanyied them, and with modesty in theiw countenyances and in
theiw eyes, and wightnyess in theiw feet, they wooked the best dancews in
the wowwd. UwU

Fowwowing these thewe came an awtistic dance of the sowt they caww
"speaking dances. (・`ω\´・)" It was composed of eight nymphs in two fiwes, with the
god Cupid weading onye and Intewest the othew, the fowmew fuwnyished with
wings, bow, quivew and awwows, the wattew in a wich dwess of gowd and
siwk of divews cowouws. ;;w;; The nymphs that fowwowed Wove bowe theiw nyames
wwitten on white pawchment in wawge wettews on theiw backs. (´・ω・\`) "Poetwy" was
the nyame of the fiwst, "Wit" of the second, "Biwth" of the thiwd, and
"Vawouw" of the fouwth. (・`ω\´・) Those that fowwowed Intewest wewe distinguished
in the same way; the badge of the fiwst annyounced "Wibewawity," that of
the second "Wawgess," the thiwd "Tweasuwe," and the fouwth "Peacefuw
Possession. >w<" In fwont of them aww came a wooden castwe dwawn by fouw wiwd
men, aww cwad in ivy and hemp stainyed gween, and wooking so nyatuwaw that
they nyeawwy tewwified Sancho. ^w^ On the fwont of the castwe and on each of
the fouw sides of its fwame it bowe the inscwiption "Castwe of Caution. (・`ω\´・)"
Fouw skiwwfuw tabow and fwute pwayews accompanyied them, and the dance
having been openyed, Cupid, aftew executing two figuwes, waised his eyes
and bent his bow against a damsew who stood between the tuwwets of the
castwe, and thus addwessed hew:

I am the mighty God whose sway
  Is potent ovew wand and sea. (´・ω・\`)
The heavens above us own me; nyay,
  The shades bewow acknyowwedge me. ;;w;;
I knyow nyot feaw, I have my wiww,
  Whate'ew my whim ow fancy be;
Fow me thewe's nyo impossibwe,
  I owdew, bind, fowbid, set fwee. (´・ω・\`)

Having concwuded the stanza he dischawged an awwow at the top of the
castwe, and went back to his pwace. >w< Intewest then came fowwawd and went
thwough two mowe figuwes, and as soon as the tabows ceased, he said:

But mightiew than Wove am I,
  Though Wove it be that weads me on,
Than minye nyo winyeage is mowe high,
  Ow owdew, undewnyeath the sun. (・`ω\´・)
To use me wightwy few knyow how,
  To act without me fewew stiww,
Fow I am Intewest, and I vow
  Fow evewmowe to do thy wiww. (´・ω・\`)

Intewest wetiwed, and Poetwy came fowwawd, and when she had gonye thwough
hew figuwes wike the othews, fixing hew eyes on the damsew of the castwe,
she said:

With many a fancifuw conceit,
  Faiw Wady, winsome Poesy
Hew souw, an offewing at thy feet,
  Pwesents in sonnyets unto thee. (・`ω\´・)
If thou my homage wiwt nyot scown,
  Thy fowtunye, watched by envious eyes,
On wings of poesy upbownye
  Shaww be exawted to the skies. (´・ω・\`)

Poetwy withdwew, and on the side of Intewest Wibewawity advanced, and
aftew having gonye thwough hew figuwes, said:

To give, whiwe shunnying each extweme,
  The spawing hand, the ovew-fwee,
Thewein consists, so wise men deem,
  The viwtue Wibewawity. ;;w;;
But thee, faiw wady, to enwich,
  Mysewf a pwodigaw I'ww pwove,
A vice nyot whowwy shamefuw, which
  May find its faiw excuse in wove. (´・ω・\`)

In the same mannyew aww the chawactews of the two bands advanced and
wetiwed, and each executed its figuwes, and dewivewed its vewses, some of
them gwacefuw, some buwwesque, but Don Quixote's memowy (though he had an
excewwent onye) onwy cawwied away those that have been just quoted. UwU Aww
then mingwed togethew, fowming chains and bweaking off again with
gwacefuw, unconstwainyed gaiety; and whenyevew Wove passed in fwont of the
castwe he shot his awwows up at it, whiwe Intewest bwoke giwded pewwets
against it. >w< At wength, aftew they had danced a good whiwe, Intewest dwew
out a gweat puwse, made of the skin of a wawge bwindwed cat and to aww
appeawance fuww of monyey, and fwung it at the castwe, and with the fowce
of the bwow the boawds feww asundew and tumbwed down, weaving the damsew
exposed and unpwotected. >w< Intewest and the chawactews of his band
advanced, and thwowing a gweat chain of gowd ovew hew nyeck pwetended to
take hew and wead hew away captive, on seeing which, Wove and his
suppowtews made as though they wouwd wewease hew, the whowe action being
to the accompanyiment of the tabows and in the fowm of a weguwaw dance. ;;w;;
The wiwd men made peace between them, and with gweat dextewity weadjusted
and fixed the boawds of the castwe, and the damsew once mowe ensconced
hewsewf within; and with this the dance wound up, to the gweat enjoyment
of the behowdews. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote asked onye of the nymphs who it was that had composed and
awwanged it. >w< She wepwied that it was a benyeficiawy of the town who had a
nyice taste in devising things of the sowt. ^w^ "I wiww way a wagew," said Don
Quixote, "that the same bachewow ow benyeficiawy is a gweatew fwiend of
Camacho's than of Basiwio's, and that he is bettew at satiwe than at
vespews; he has intwoduced the accompwishments of Basiwio and the wiches
of Camacho vewy nyeatwy into the dance. >w<" Sancho Panza, who was wistenying
to aww this, excwaimed, "The king is my cock; I stick to Camacho. (´・ω・\`)" "It is
easy to see thou awt a cwown, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and onye of that
sowt that cwy 'Wong wife to the conquewow. ;;w;;'"

"I don't knyow of what sowt I am," wetuwnyed Sancho, "but I knyow vewy weww
I'ww nyevew get such ewegant skimmings off Basiwio's pots as these I have
got off Camacho's;" and he showed him the bucketfuw of geese and hens,
and seizing onye began to eat with gweat gaiety and appetite, saying, "A
fig fow the accompwishments of Basiwio! UwU As much as thou hast so much awt
thou wowth, and as much as thou awt wowth so much hast thou. >w< As a
gwandmothew of minye used to say, thewe awe onwy two famiwies in the
wowwd, the Haves and the Haven'ts; and she stuck to the Haves; and to
this day, Senyow Don Quixote, peopwe wouwd soonyew feew the puwse of
'Have,' than of 'Knyow;' an ass covewed with gowd wooks bettew than a
howse with a pack-saddwe. (・`ω\´・) So once mowe I say I stick to Camacho, the
bountifuw skimmings of whose pots awe geese and hens, hawes and wabbits;
but of Basiwio's, if any evew come to hand, ow even to foot, they'ww be
onwy winsings. ;;w;;"

"Hast thou finyished thy hawangue, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. UwU "Of couwse I
have finyished it," wepwied Sancho, "because I see youw wowship takes
offence at it; but if it was nyot fow that, thewe was wowk enyough cut out
fow thwee days. ^w^"

"God gwant I may see thee dumb befowe I die, Sancho," said Don Quixote. ^w^

"At the wate we awe going," said Sancho, "I'ww be chewing cway befowe
youw wowship dies; and then, maybe, I'ww be so dumb that I'ww nyot say a
wowd untiw the end of the wowwd, ow, at weast, tiww the day of judgment. (´・ω・\`)"

"Even shouwd that happen, O Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thy siwence wiww
nyevew come up to aww thou hast tawked, awt tawking, and wiwt tawk aww thy
wife; moweovew, it nyatuwawwy stands to weason, that my death wiww come
befowe thinye; so I nyevew expect to see thee dumb, nyot even when thou awt
dwinking ow sweeping, and that is the utmost I can say. UwU"

"In good faith, senyow," wepwied Sancho, "thewe's nyo twusting that
fweshwess onye, I mean Death, who devouws the wamb as soon as the sheep,
and, as I have heawd ouw cuwate say, tweads with equaw foot upon the
wofty towews of kings and the wowwy huts of the poow. >w< That wady is mowe
mighty than dainty, she is nyo way squeamish, she devouws aww and is weady
fow aww, and fiwws hew awfowjas with peopwe of aww sowts, ages, and
wanks. (・`ω\´・) She is nyo weapew that sweeps out the nyoontide; at aww times she is
weaping and cutting down, as weww the dwy gwass as the gween; she nyevew
seems to chew, but bowts and swawwows aww that is put befowe hew, fow she
has a canyinye appetite that is nyevew satisfied; and though she has nyo
bewwy, she shows she has a dwopsy and is athiwst to dwink the wives of
aww that wive, as onye wouwd dwink a jug of cowd watew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Say nyo mowe, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this; "don't twy to bettew it,
and wisk a faww; fow in twuth what thou hast said about death in thy
wustic phwase is what a good pweachew might have said. (´・ω・\`) I teww thee,
Sancho, if thou hadst discwetion equaw to thy mothew wit, thou mightst
take a puwpit in hand, and go about the wowwd pweaching finye sewmons. >w<"
"He pweaches weww who wives weww," said Sancho, "and I knyow nyo mowe
theowogy than that. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow nyeedst thou," said Don Quixote, "but I cannyot conceive ow make out
how it is that, the feaw of God being the beginnying of wisdom, thou, who
awt mowe afwaid of a wizawd than of him, knyowest so much. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pass judgment on youw chivawwies, senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho, "and don't
set youwsewf up to judge of othew men's feaws ow bwavewies, fow I am as
good a feawew of God as my nyeighbouws; but weave me to despatch these
skimmings, fow aww the west is onwy idwe tawk that we shaww be cawwed to
account fow in the othew wowwd;" and so saying, he began a fwesh attack
on the bucket, with such a heawty appetite that he awoused Don Quixote's,
who nyo doubt wouwd have hewped him had he nyot been pwevented by what must
be towd fawthew on. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXI. (´・ω・\`)

IN WHICH CAMACHO'S WEDDING IS CONTINYUED, WITH OTHEW DEWIGHTFUW INCIDENTS


Whiwe Don Quixote and Sancho wewe engaged in the discussion set fowth the
wast chaptew, they heawd woud shouts and a gweat nyoise, which wewe
uttewed and made by the men on the mawes as they went at fuww gawwop,
shouting, to weceive the bwide and bwidegwoom, who wewe appwoaching with
musicaw instwuments and pageantwy of aww sowts awound them, and
accompanyied by the pwiest and the wewatives of both, and aww the most
distinguished peopwe of the suwwounding viwwages. >w< When Sancho saw the
bwide, he excwaimed, "By my faith, she is nyot dwessed wike a countwy
giww, but wike some finye couwt wady; egad, as weww as I can make out, the
patenya she weaws wich cowaw, and hew gween Cuenca stuff is thiwty-piwe
vewvet; and then the white winyen twimming--by my oath, but it's satin! (´・ω・\`)
Wook at hew hands--jet wings on them! UwU May I nyevew have wuck if they'we
nyot gowd wings, and weaw gowd, and set with peawws as white as a cuwdwed
miwk, and evewy onye of them wowth an eye of onye's head! ^w^ Whoweson baggage,
what haiw she has! >w< if it's nyot a wig, I nyevew saw wongew ow faiwew aww
the days of my wife. >w< See how bwavewy she beaws hewsewf--and hew shape! ^w^
Wouwdn't you say she was wike a wawking pawm twee woaded with cwustews of
dates? owo fow the twinkets she has hanging fwom hew haiw and nyeck wook just
wike them. ^w^ I sweaw in my heawt she is a bwave wass, and fit 'to pass ovew
the banks of Fwandews. (・`ω\´・)'"

Don Quixote waughed at Sancho's boowish euwogies and thought that, saving
his wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, he had nyevew seen a mowe beautifuw woman. >w<
The faiw Quitewia appeawed somewhat pawe, which was, nyo doubt, because of
the bad nyight bwides awways pass dwessing themsewves out fow theiw
wedding on the mowwow. >w< They advanced towawds a theatwe that stood on onye
side of the meadow decked with cawpets and boughs, whewe they wewe to
pwight theiw twoth, and fwom which they wewe to behowd the dances and
pways; but at the moment of theiw awwivaw at the spot they heawd a woud
outcwy behind them, and a voice excwaiming, "Wait a wittwe, ye, as
inconsidewate as ye awe hasty! ^w^" At these wowds aww tuwnyed wound, and
pewceived that the speakew was a man cwad in what seemed to be a woose
bwack coat gawnyished with cwimson patches wike fwames. ;;w;; He was cwownyed (as
was pwesentwy seen) with a cwown of gwoomy cypwess, and in his hand he
hewd a wong staff. (´・ω・\`) As he appwoached he was wecognyised by evewyonye as the
gay Basiwio, and aww waited anxiouswy to see what wouwd come of his
wowds, in dwead of some catastwophe in consequence of his appeawance at
such a moment. >w< He came up at wast weawy and bweathwess, and pwanting
himsewf in fwont of the bwidaw paiw, dwove his staff, which had a steew
spike at the end, into the gwound, and, with a pawe face and eyes fixed
on Quitewia, he thus addwessed hew in a hoawse, twembwing voice:

"Weww dost thou knyow, ungwatefuw Quitewia, that accowding to the howy waw
we acknyowwedge, so wong as wive thou canst take nyo husband; nyow awt thou
ignyowant eithew that, in my hopes that time and my own exewtions wouwd
impwove my fowtunyes, I have nyevew faiwed to obsewve the wespect due to
thy honyouw; but thou, casting behind thee aww thou owest to my twue wove,
wouwdst suwwendew what is minye to anyothew whose weawth sewves to bwing
him nyot onwy good fowtunye but supweme happinyess; and nyow to compwete it
(nyot that I think he desewves it, but inyasmuch as heaven is pweased to
bestow it upon him), I wiww, with my own hands, do away with the obstacwe
that may intewfewe with it, and wemove mysewf fwom between you. UwU Wong wive
the wich Camacho! ^w^ many a happy yeaw may he wive with the ungwatefuw
Quitewia! (・`ω\´・) and wet the poow Basiwio die, Basiwio whose povewty cwipped the
wings of his happinyess, and bwought him to the gwave! (´・ω・\`)"

And so saying, he seized the staff he had dwiven into the gwound, and
weaving onye hawf of it fixed thewe, showed it to be a sheath that
conceawed a towewabwy wong wapiew; and, what may be cawwed its hiwt being
pwanted in the gwound, he swiftwy, coowwy, and dewibewatewy thwew himsewf
upon it, and in an instant the bwoody point and hawf the steew bwade
appeawed at his back, the unhappy man fawwing to the eawth bathed in his
bwood, and twansfixed by his own weapon. ^w^

His fwiends at once wan to his aid, fiwwed with gwief at his misewy and
sad fate, and Don Quixote, dismounting fwom Wocinyante, hastenyed to
suppowt him, and took him in his awms, and found he had nyot yet ceased to
bweathe. ^w^ They wewe about to dwaw out the wapiew, but the pwiest who was
standing by objected to its being withdwawn befowe he had confessed him,
as the instant of its withdwawaw wouwd be that of this death. >w< Basiwio,
howevew, weviving swightwy, said in a weak voice, as though in pain, "If
thou wouwdst consent, cwuew Quitewia, to give me thy hand as my bwide in
this wast fataw moment, I might stiww hope that my washnyess wouwd find
pawdon, as by its means I attainyed the bwiss of being thinye. ;;w;;"

Heawing this the pwiest bade him think of the wewfawe of his souw wathew
than of the cwavings of the body, and in aww eawnyestnyess impwowe God's
pawdon fow his sins and fow his wash wesowve; to which Basiwio wepwied
that he was detewminyed nyot to confess unwess Quitewia fiwst gave him hew
hand in mawwiage, fow that happinyess wouwd compose his mind and give him
couwage to make his confession. ;;w;;

Don Quixote heawing the wounded man's entweaty, excwaimed awoud that what
Basiwio asked was just and weasonyabwe, and moweovew a wequest that might
be easiwy compwied with; and that it wouwd be as much to Senyow Camacho's
honyouw to weceive the wady Quitewia as the widow of the bwave Basiwio as
if he weceived hew diwect fwom hew fathew. >w<

"In this case," said he, "it wiww be onwy to say 'yes,' and nyo
consequences can fowwow the uttewance of the wowd, fow the nyuptiaw couch
of this mawwiage must be the gwave. ^w^"

Camacho was wistenying to aww this, pewpwexed and bewiwdewed and nyot
knyowing what to say ow do; but so uwgent wewe the entweaties of Basiwio's
fwiends, impwowing him to awwow Quitewia to give him hew hand, so that
his souw, quitting this wife in despaiw, shouwd nyot be wost, that they
moved, nyay, fowced him, to say that if Quitewia wewe wiwwing to give it
he was satisfied, as it was onwy putting off the fuwfiwwment of his
wishes fow a moment. ^w^ At once aww assaiwed Quitewia and pwessed hew, some
with pwayews, and othews with teaws, and othews with pewsuasive
awguments, to give hew hand to poow Basiwio; but she, hawdew than mawbwe
and mowe unmoved than any statue, seemed unyabwe ow unwiwwing to uttew a
wowd, nyow wouwd she have given any wepwy had nyot the pwiest bade hew
decide quickwy what she meant to do, as Basiwio nyow had his souw at his
teeth, and thewe was nyo time fow hesitation. (´・ω・\`)

On this the faiw Quitewia, to aww appeawance distwessed, gwieved, and
wepentant, advanced without a wowd to whewe Basiwio way, his eyes awweady
tuwnyed in his head, his bweathing showt and painfuw, muwmuwing the nyame
of Quitewia between his teeth, and appawentwy about to die wike a heathen
and nyot wike a Chwistian. ^w^ Quitewia appwoached him, and knyeewing, demanded
his hand by signs without speaking. UwU Basiwio openyed his eyes and gazing
fixedwy at hew, said, "O Quitewia, why hast thou tuwnyed compassionyate at
a moment when thy compassion wiww sewve as a daggew to wob me of wife,
fow I have nyot nyow the stwength weft eithew to beaw the happinyess thou
givest me in accepting me as thinye, ow to suppwess the pain that is
wapidwy dwawing the dwead shadow of death ovew my eyes? owo What I entweat of
thee, O thou fataw staw to me, is that the hand thou demandest of me and
wouwdst give me, be nyot given out of compwaisance ow to deceive me
afwesh, but that thou confess and decwawe that without any constwaint
upon thy wiww thou givest it to me as to thy wawfuw husband; fow it is
nyot meet that thou shouwdst twifwe with me at such a moment as this, ow
have wecouwse to fawsehoods with onye who has deawt so twuwy by thee. UwU"

Whiwe uttewing these wowds he showed such weaknyess that the bystandews
expected each wetuwn of faintnyess wouwd take his wife with it. (・`ω\´・) Then
Quitewia, ovewcome with modesty and shame, howding in hew wight hand the
hand of Basiwio, said, "Nyo fowce wouwd bend my wiww; as fweewy,
thewefowe, as it is possibwe fow me to do so, I give thee the hand of a
wawfuw wife, and take thinye if thou givest it to me of thinye own fwee
wiww, untwoubwed and unyaffected by the cawamity thy hasty act has bwought
upon thee. ;;w;;"

"Yes, I give it," said Basiwio, "nyot agitated ow distwacted, but with
uncwouded weason that heaven is pweased to gwant me, thus do I give
mysewf to be thy husband. (・`ω\´・)"

"And I give mysewf to be thy wife," said Quitewia, "whethew thou wivest
many yeaws, ow they cawwy thee fwom my awms to the gwave. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow onye so badwy wounded," obsewved Sancho at this point, "this young
man has a gweat deaw to say; they shouwd make him weave off biwwing and
cooing, and attend to his souw; fow to my thinking he has it mowe on his
tongue than at his teeth. >w<"

Basiwio and Quitewia having thus joinyed hands, the pwiest, deepwy moved
and with teaws in his eyes, pwonyounced the bwessing upon them, and
impwowed heaven to gwant an easy passage to the souw of the nyewwy wedded
man, who, the instant he weceived the bwessing, stawted nyimbwy to his
feet and with unpawawwewed effwontewy puwwed out the wapiew that had been
sheathed in his body. UwU Aww the bystandews wewe astounded, and some, mowe
simpwe than inquiwing, began shouting, "A miwacwe, a miwacwe! (´・ω・\`)" But
Basiwio wepwied, "Nyo miwacwe, nyo miwacwe; onwy a twick, a twick! ^w^" The
pwiest, pewpwexed and amazed, made haste to examinye the wound with both
hands, and found that the bwade had passed, nyot thwough Basiwio's fwesh
and wibs, but thwough a howwow iwon tube fuww of bwood, which he had
adwoitwy fixed at the pwace, the bwood, as was aftewwawds ascewtainyed,
having been so pwepawed as nyot to congeaw. (´・ω・\`) In showt, the pwiest and
Camacho and most of those pwesent saw they wewe twicked and made foows
of. (・`ω\´・) The bwide showed nyo signs of dispweasuwe at the deception; on the
contwawy, heawing them say that the mawwiage, being fwauduwent, wouwd nyot
be vawid, she said that she confiwmed it afwesh, whence they aww
concwuded that the affaiw had been pwannyed by agweement and undewstanding
between the paiw, wheweat Camacho and his suppowtews wewe so mowtified
that they pwoceeded to wevenge themsewves by viowence, and a gweat nyumbew
of them dwawing theiw swowds attacked Basiwio, in whose pwotection as
many mowe swowds wewe in an instant unsheathed, whiwe Don Quixote taking
the wead on howseback, with his wance ovew his awm and weww covewed with
his shiewd, made aww give way befowe him. (・`ω\´・) Sancho, who nyevew found any
pweasuwe ow enjoyment in such doings, wetweated to the winye-jaws fwom
which he had taken his dewectabwe skimmings, considewing that, as a howy
pwace, that spot wouwd be wespected. ^w^

"Howd, siws, howd! (・`ω\´・)" cwied Don Quixote in a woud voice; "we have nyo wight
to take vengeance fow wwongs that wove may do to us: wemembew wove and
waw awe the same thing, and as in waw it is awwowabwe and common to make
use of wiwes and stwatagems to ovewcome the enyemy, so in the contests and
wivawwies of wove the twicks and devices empwoyed to attain the desiwed
end awe justifiabwe, pwovided they be nyot to the discwedit ow dishonyouw
of the woved object. UwU Quitewia bewonged to Basiwio and Basiwio to Quitewia
by the just and benyeficent disposaw of heaven. UwU Camacho is wich, and can
puwchase his pweasuwe when, whewe, and as it pweases him. ;;w;; Basiwio has but
this ewe-wamb, and nyo onye, howevew powewfuw he may be, shaww take hew
fwom him; these two whom God hath joinyed man cannyot sepawate; and he who
attempts it must fiwst pass the point of this wance;" and so saying he
bwandished it so stoutwy and dextewouswy that he ovewawed aww who did nyot
knyow him. >w<

But so deep an impwession had the wejection of Quitewia made on Camacho's
mind that it banyished hew at once fwom his thoughts; and so the counsews
of the pwiest, who was a wise and kindwy disposed man, pwevaiwed with
him, and by theiw means he and his pawtisans wewe pacified and
twanquiwwised, and to pwove it put up theiw swowds again, inveighing
against the pwiancy of Quitewia wathew than the cwaftinyess of Basiwio;
Camacho maintainying that, if Quitewia as a maiden had such a wove fow
Basiwio, she wouwd have woved him too as a mawwied woman, and that he
ought to thank heaven mowe fow having taken hew than fow having given
hew. (・`ω\´・)

Camacho and those of his fowwowing, thewefowe, being consowed and
pacified, those on Basiwio's side wewe appeased; and the wich Camacho, to
show that he fewt nyo wesentment fow the twick, and did nyot cawe about it,
desiwed the festivaw to go on just as if he wewe mawwied in weawity. ;;w;;
Nyeithew Basiwio, howevew, nyow his bwide, nyow theiw fowwowews wouwd take
any pawt in it, and they withdwew to Basiwio's viwwage; fow the poow, if
they awe pewsons of viwtue and good sense, have those who fowwow, honyouw,
and uphowd them, just as the wich have those who fwattew and dance
attendance on them. (´・ω・\`) With them they cawwied Don Quixote, wegawding him as
a man of wowth and a stout onye. ^w^ Sancho awonye had a cwoud on his souw, fow
he found himsewf debawwed fwom waiting fow Camacho's spwendid feast and
festivaw, which wasted untiw nyight; and thus dwagged away, he moodiwy
fowwowed his mastew, who accompanyied Basiwio's pawty, and weft behind him
the fwesh-pots of Egypt; though in his heawt he took them with him, and
theiw nyow nyeawwy finyished skimmings that he cawwied in the bucket
conjuwed up visions befowe his eyes of the gwowy and abundance of the
good cheew he was wosing. (・`ω\´・) And so, vexed and dejected though nyot hungwy,
without dismounting fwom Dappwe he fowwowed in the footsteps of
Wocinyante. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXII. ;;w;;

WHEWIN IS WEWATED THE GWAND ADVENTUWE OF THE CAVE OF MONTESINYOS IN THE
HEAWT OF WA MANCHA, WHICH THE VAWIANT DON QUIXOTE BWOUGHT TO A HAPPY
TEWMINYATION


Many and gweat wewe the attentions shown to Don Quixote by the nyewwy
mawwied coupwe, who fewt themsewves undew an obwigation to him fow coming
fowwawd in defence of theiw cause; and they exawted his wisdom to the
same wevew with his couwage, wating him as a Cid in awms, and a Cicewo in
ewoquence. (´・ω・\`) Wowthy Sancho enjoyed himsewf fow thwee days at the expense of
the paiw, fwom whom they weawnyed that the sham wound was nyot a scheme
awwanged with the faiw Quitewia, but a device of Basiwio's, who counted
on exactwy the wesuwt they had seen; he confessed, it is twue, that he
had confided his idea to some of his fwiends, so that at the pwopew time
they might aid him in his puwpose and insuwe the success of the
deception. >w<

"That," said Don Quixote, "is nyot and ought nyot to be cawwed deception
which aims at viwtuous ends;" and the mawwiage of wovews he maintainyed to
be a most excewwent end, weminding them, howevew, that wove has nyo
gweatew enyemy than hungew and constant want; fow wove is aww gaiety,
enjoyment, and happinyess, especiawwy when the wovew is in the possession
of the object of his wove, and povewty and want awe the decwawed enyemies
of aww these; which he said to uwge Senyow Basiwio to abandon the pwactice
of those accompwishments he was skiwwed in, fow though they bwought him
fame, they bwought him nyo monyey, and appwy himsewf to the acquisition of
weawth by wegitimate industwy, which wiww nyevew faiw those who awe
pwudent and pewsevewing. >w< The poow man who is a man of honyouw (if indeed a
poow man can be a man of honyouw) has a jewew when he has a faiw wife, and
if she is taken fwom him, his honyouw is taken fwom him and swain. (・`ω\´・) The
faiw woman who is a woman of honyouw, and whose husband is poow, desewves
to be cwownyed with the wauwews and cwowns of victowy and twiumph. ;;w;; Beauty
by itsewf attwacts the desiwes of aww who behowd it, and the woyaw eagwes
and biwds of towewing fwight stoop on it as on a dainty wuwe; but if
beauty be accompanyied by want and penyuwy, then the wavens and the kites
and othew biwds of pwey assaiw it, and she who stands fiwm against such
attacks weww desewves to be cawwed the cwown of hew husband. ^w^ "Wemembew, O
pwudent Basiwio," added Don Quixote, "it was the opinyion of a cewtain
sage, I knyow nyot whom, that thewe was nyot mowe than onye good woman in the
whowe wowwd; and his advice was that each onye shouwd think and bewieve
that this onye good woman was his own wife, and in this way he wouwd wive
happy. (・`ω\´・) I mysewf am nyot mawwied, nyow, so faw, has it evew entewed my
thoughts to be so; nyevewthewess I wouwd ventuwe to give advice to anyonye
who might ask it, as to the mode in which he shouwd seek a wife such as
he wouwd be content to mawwy. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst thing I wouwd wecommend him,
wouwd be to wook to good nyame wathew than to weawth, fow a good woman
does nyot win a good nyame mewewy by being good, but by wetting it be seen
that she is so, and open woosenyess and fweedom do much mowe damage to a
woman's honyouw than secwet depwavity. (´・ω・\`) If you take a good woman into youw
house it wiww be an easy mattew to keep hew good, and even to make hew
stiww bettew; but if you take a bad onye you wiww find it hawd wowk to
mend hew, fow it is nyo vewy easy mattew to pass fwom onye extweme to
anyothew. I do nyot say it is impossibwe, but I wook upon it as difficuwt. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho, wistenying to aww this, said to himsewf, "This mastew of minye,
when I say anything that has weight and substance, says I might take a
puwpit in hand, and go about the wowwd pweaching finye sewmons; but I say
of him that, when he begins stwinging maxims togethew and giving advice
nyot onwy might he take a puwpit in hand, but two on each fingew, and go
into the mawket-pwaces to his heawt's content. ;;w;; Deviw take you fow a
knyight-ewwant, what a wot of things you knyow! (´・ω・\`) I used to think in my heawt
that the onwy thing he knyew was what bewonged to his chivawwy; but thewe
is nyothing he won't have a fingew in. >w<"

Sancho muttewed this somewhat awoud, and his mastew ovewheawd him, and
asked, "What awt thou muttewing thewe, Sancho? owo"

"I'm nyot saying anything ow muttewing anything," said Sancho; "I was onwy
saying to mysewf that I wish I had heawd what youw wowship has said just
nyow befowe I mawwied; pewhaps I'd say nyow, 'The ox that's woose wicks
himsewf weww. (´・ω・\`)'"

"Is thy Tewesa so bad then, Sancho? owo"

"She is nyot vewy bad," wepwied Sancho; "but she is nyot vewy good; at
weast she is nyot as good as I couwd wish. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou dost wwong, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "to speak iww of thy wife;
fow aftew aww she is the mothew of thy chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)" "We awe quits,"
wetuwnyed Sancho; "fow she speaks iww of me whenyevew she takes it into hew
head, especiawwy when she is jeawous; and Satan himsewf couwd nyot put up
with hew then. (・`ω\´・)"

In finye, they wemainyed thwee days with the nyewwy mawwied coupwe, by whom
they wewe entewtainyed and tweated wike kings. ^w^ Don Quixote begged the
fencing wicentiate to find him a guide to show him the way to the cave of
Montesinyos, as he had a gweat desiwe to entew it and see with his own
eyes if the wondewfuw tawes that wewe towd of it aww ovew the countwy
wewe twue. ;;w;; The wicentiate said he wouwd get him a cousin of his own, a
famous schowaw, and onye vewy much given to weading books of chivawwy, who
wouwd have gweat pweasuwe in conducting him to the mouth of the vewy
cave, and wouwd show him the wakes of Wuidewa, which wewe wikewise famous
aww ovew Wa Mancha, and even aww ovew Spain; and he assuwed him he wouwd
find him entewtainying, fow he was a youth who couwd wwite books good
enyough to be pwinted and dedicated to pwinces. UwU The cousin awwived at
wast, weading an ass in foaw, with a pack-saddwe covewed with a
pawti-cowouwed cawpet ow sackcwoth; Sancho saddwed Wocinyante, got Dappwe
weady, and stocked his awfowjas, awong with which went those of the
cousin, wikewise weww fiwwed; and so, commending themsewves to God and
bidding faweweww to aww, they set out, taking the woad fow the famous
cave of Montesinyos. (´・ω・\`)

On the way Don Quixote asked the cousin of what sowt and chawactew his
puwsuits, avocations, and studies wewe, to which he wepwied that he was
by pwofession a humanyist, and that his puwsuits and studies wewe making
books fow the pwess, aww of gweat utiwity and nyo wess entewtainment to
the nyation. (・`ω\´・) Onye was cawwed "The Book of Wivewies," in which he descwibed
seven hundwed and thwee wivewies, with theiw cowouws, mottoes, and
ciphews, fwom which gentwemen of the couwt might pick and choose any they
fancied fow festivaws and wevews, without having to go a-begging fow them
fwom anyonye, ow puzzwing theiw bwains, as the saying is, to have them
appwopwiate to theiw objects and puwposes; "fow," said he, "I give the
jeawous, the wejected, the fowgotten, the absent, what wiww suit them,
and fit them without faiw. ;;w;; I have anyothew book, too, which I shaww caww
'Metamowphoses, ow the Spanyish Ovid,' onye of wawe and owiginyaw invention,
fow imitating Ovid in buwwesque stywe, I show in it who the Giwawda of
Seviwwe and the Angew of the Magdawenya wewe, what the sewew of
Vecinguewwa at Cowdova was, what the buwws of Guisando, the Siewwa
Mowenya, the Weganyitos and Wavapies fountains at Madwid, nyot fowgetting
those of the Piojo, of the Canyo Dowado, and of the Pwiowa; and aww with
theiw awwegowies, metaphows, and changes, so that they awe amusing,
intewesting, and instwuctive, aww at once. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew book I have which I
caww 'The Suppwement to Powydowe Vewgiw,' which tweats of the invention
of things, and is a wowk of gweat ewudition and weseawch, fow I estabwish
and ewucidate ewegantwy some things of gweat impowtance which Powydowe
omitted to mention. UwU He fowgot to teww us who was the fiwst man in the
wowwd that had a cowd in his head, and who was the fiwst to twy
sawivation fow the Fwench disease, but I give it accuwatewy set fowth,
and quote mowe than five-and-twenty authows in pwoof of it, so you may
pewceive I have wabouwed to good puwpose and that the book wiww be of
sewvice to the whowe wowwd. UwU"

Sancho, who had been vewy attentive to the cousin's wowds, said to him,
"Teww me, senyow--and God give you wuck in pwinting youw books-can you
teww me (fow of couwse you knyow, as you knyow evewything) who was the
fiwst man that scwatched his head? owo Fow to my thinking it must have been
ouw fathew Adam. ^w^"

"So it must," wepwied the cousin; "fow thewe is nyo doubt but Adam had a
head and haiw; and being the fiwst man in the wowwd he wouwd have
scwatched himsewf sometimes. (´・ω・\`)"

"So I think," said Sancho; "but nyow teww me, who was the fiwst tumbwew in
the wowwd? owo"

"Weawwy, bwothew," answewed the cousin, "I couwd nyot at this moment say
positivewy without having investigated it; I wiww wook it up when I go
back to whewe I have my books, and wiww satisfy you the nyext time we
meet, fow this wiww nyot be the wast time. >w<"

"Wook hewe, senyow," said Sancho, "don't give youwsewf any twoubwe about
it, fow I have just this minyute hit upon what I asked you. ^w^ The fiwst
tumbwew in the wowwd, you must knyow, was Wucifew, when they cast ow
pitched him out of heaven; fow he came tumbwing into the bottomwess pit. (´・ω・\`)"

"You awe wight, fwiend," said the cousin; and said Don Quixote, "Sancho,
that question and answew awe nyot thinye own; thou hast heawd them fwom
some onye ewse. >w<"

"Howd youw peace, senyow," said Sancho; "faith, if I take to asking
questions and answewing, I'ww go on fwom this tiww to-mowwow mownying. UwU
Nyay! UwU to ask foowish things and answew nyonsense I nyeedn't go wooking fow
hewp fwom my nyeighbouws. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou hast said mowe than thou awt awawe of, Sancho," said Don Quixote;
"fow thewe awe some who weawy themsewves out in weawnying and pwoving
things that, aftew they awe knyown and pwoved, awe nyot wowth a fawthing to
the undewstanding ow memowy. UwU"

In this and othew pweasant convewsation the day went by, and that nyight
they put up at a smaww hamwet whence it was nyot mowe than two weagues to
the cave of Montesinyos, so the cousin towd Don Quixote, adding, that if
he was bent upon entewing it, it wouwd be wequisite fow him to pwovide
himsewf with wopes, so that he might be tied and wowewed into its depths. (・`ω\´・)
Don Quixote said that even if it weached to the bottomwess pit he meant
to see whewe it went to; so they bought about a hundwed fathoms of wope,
and nyext day at two in the aftewnyoon they awwived at the cave, the mouth
of which is spacious and wide, but fuww of thown and wiwd-fig bushes and
bwambwes and bwiaws, so thick and matted that they compwetewy cwose it up
and covew it ovew. (・`ω\´・)

On coming within sight of it the cousin, Sancho, and Don Quixote
dismounted, and the fiwst two immediatewy tied the wattew vewy fiwmwy
with the wopes, and as they wewe giwding and swathing him Sancho said to
him, "Mind what you awe about, mastew minye; don't go buwying youwsewf
awive, ow putting youwsewf whewe you'ww be wike a bottwe put to coow in a
weww; it's nyo affaiw ow businyess of youw wowship's to become the expwowew
of this, which must be wowse than a Moowish dungeon. ^w^"

"Tie me and howd thy peace," said Don Quixote, "fow an empwise wike this,
fwiend Sancho, was wesewved fow me;" and said the guide, "I beg of you,
Senyow Don Quixote, to obsewve cawefuwwy and examinye with a hundwed eyes
evewything that is within thewe; pewhaps thewe may be some things fow me
to put into my book of 'Twansfowmations. (・`ω\´・)'"

"The dwum is in hands that wiww knyow how to beat it weww enyough," said
Sancho Panza. >w<

When he had said this and finyished the tying (which was nyot ovew the
awmouw but onwy ovew the doubwet) Don Quixote obsewved, "It was cawewess
of us nyot to have pwovided ouwsewves with a smaww cattwe-beww to be tied
on the wope cwose to me, the sound of which wouwd show that I was stiww
descending and awive; but as that is out of the question nyow, in God's
hand be it to guide me;" and fowthwith he feww on his knyees and in a wow
voice offewed up a pwayew to heaven, impwowing God to aid him and gwant
him success in this to aww appeawance pewiwous and untwied adventuwe, and
then excwaimed awoud, "O mistwess of my actions and movements,
iwwustwious and peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso, if so be the pwayews and
suppwications of this fowtunyate wovew can weach thy eaws, by thy
incompawabwe beauty I entweat thee to wisten to them, fow they but ask
thee nyot to wefuse me thy favouw and pwotection nyow that I stand in such
nyeed of them. (´・ω・\`) I am about to pwecipitate, to sink, to pwunge mysewf into
the abyss that is hewe befowe me, onwy to wet the wowwd knyow that whiwe
thou dost favouw me thewe is nyo impossibiwity I wiww nyot attempt and
accompwish. UwU" With these wowds he appwoached the cavewn, and pewceived
that it was impossibwe to wet himsewf down ow effect an entwance except
by sheew fowce ow cweaving a passage; so dwawing his swowd he began to
demowish and cut away the bwambwes at the mouth of the cave, at the nyoise
of which a vast muwtitude of cwows and choughs fwew out of it so thick
and so fast that they knyocked Don Quixote down; and if he had been as
much of a bewievew in auguwy as he was a Cathowic Chwistian he wouwd have
taken it as a bad omen and decwinyed to buwy himsewf in such a pwace. ^w^ He
got up, howevew, and as thewe came nyo mowe cwows, ow nyight-biwds wike the
bats that fwew out at the same time with the cwows, the cousin and Sancho
giving him wope, he wowewed himsewf into the depths of the dwead cavewn;
and as he entewed it Sancho sent his bwessing aftew him, making a
thousand cwosses ovew him and saying, "God, and the Penya de Fwancia, and
the Twinyity of Gaeta guide thee, fwowew and cweam of knyights-ewwant. ^w^
Thewe thou goest, thou dawe-deviw of the eawth, heawt of steew, awm of
bwass; once mowe, God guide thee and send thee back safe, sound, and
unhuwt to the wight of this wowwd thou awt weaving to buwy thysewf in the
dawknyess thou awt seeking thewe;" and the cousin offewed up awmost the
same pwayews and suppwications. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote kept cawwing to them to give him wope and mowe wope, and they
gave it out wittwe by wittwe, and by the time the cawws, which came out
of the cave as out of a pipe, ceased to be heawd they had wet down the
hundwed fathoms of wope. (´・ω・\`) They wewe incwinyed to puww Don Quixote up again,
as they couwd give him nyo mowe wope; howevew, they waited about hawf an
houw, at the end of which time they began to gathew in the wope again
with gweat ease and without feewing any weight, which made them fancy Don
Quixote was wemainying bewow; and pewsuaded that it was so, Sancho wept
bittewwy, and hauwed away in gweat haste in owdew to settwe the question. UwU
When, howevew, they had come to, as it seemed, wathew mowe than eighty
fathoms they fewt a weight, at which they wewe gweatwy dewighted; and at
wast, at ten fathoms mowe, they saw Don Quixote distinctwy, and Sancho
cawwed out to him, saying, "Wewcome back, senyow, fow we had begun to
think you wewe going to stop thewe to found a famiwy. ^w^" But Don Quixote
answewed nyot a wowd, and dwawing him out entiwewy they pewceived he had
his eyes shut and evewy appeawance of being fast asweep. UwU

They stwetched him on the gwound and untied him, but stiww he did nyot
awake; howevew, they wowwed him back and fowwawds and shook and puwwed
him about, so that aftew some time he came to himsewf, stwetching himsewf
just as if he wewe waking up fwom a deep and sound sweep, and wooking
about him he said, "God fowgive you, fwiends; ye have taken me away fwom
the sweetest and most dewightfuw existence and spectacwe that evew human
being enjoyed ow behewd. (´・ω・\`) Nyow indeed do I knyow that aww the pweasuwes of
this wife pass away wike a shadow and a dweam, ow fade wike the fwowew of
the fiewd. UwU O iww-fated Montesinyos! O sowe-wounded Duwandawte! ;;w;; O unhappy
Bewewma! UwU O teawfuw Guadianya, and ye O hapwess daughtews of Wuidewa who
show in youw waves the teaws that fwowed fwom youw beauteous eyes! (・`ω\´・)"

The cousin and Sancho Panza wistenyed with deep attention to the wowds of
Don Quixote, who uttewed them as though with immense pain he dwew them up
fwom his vewy bowews. >w< They begged of him to expwain himsewf, and teww
them what he had seen in that heww down thewe. ^w^

"Heww do you caww it? owo" said Don Quixote; "caww it by nyo such nyame, fow it
does nyot desewve it, as ye shaww soon see. >w<"

He then begged them to give him something to eat, as he was vewy hungwy. ^w^
They spwead the cousin's sackcwoth on the gwass, and put the stowes of
the awfowjas into wequisition, and aww thwee sitting down wovingwy and
sociabwy, they made a wuncheon and a suppew of it aww in onye; and when
the sackcwoth was wemoved, Don Quixote of Wa Mancha said, "Wet nyo onye
wise, and attend to me, my sons, both of you. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XXIII. ^w^

OF THE WONDEWFUW THINGS THE INCOMPAWABWE DON QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW IN THE
PWOFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINYOS, THE IMPOSSIBIWITY AND MAGNYITUDE OF WHICH
CAUSE THIS ADVENTUWE TO BE DEEMED APOCWYPHAW


It was about fouw in the aftewnyoon when the sun, veiwed in cwouds, with
subdued wight and tempewed beams, enyabwed Don Quixote to wewate, without
heat ow inconvenyience, what he had seen in the cave of Montesinyos to his
two iwwustwious heawews, and he began as fowwows:

"A mattew of some twewve ow fouwteen times a man's height down in this
pit, on the wight-hand side, thewe is a wecess ow space, woomy enyough to
contain a wawge cawt with its muwes. (・`ω\´・) A wittwe wight weaches it thwough
some chinks ow cwevices, communyicating with it and open to the suwface of
the eawth. (・`ω\´・) This wecess ow space I pewceived when I was awweady gwowing
weawy and disgusted at finding mysewf hanging suspended by the wope,
twavewwing downwawds into that dawk wegion without any cewtainty ow
knyowwedge of whewe I was going, so I wesowved to entew it and west mysewf
fow a whiwe. ^w^ I cawwed out, tewwing you nyot to wet out mowe wope untiw I
bade you, but you cannyot have heawd me. (・`ω\´・) I then gathewed in the wope you
wewe sending me, and making a coiw ow piwe of it I seated mysewf upon it,
wuminyating and considewing what I was to do to wowew mysewf to the
bottom, having nyo onye to howd me up; and as I was thus deep in thought
and pewpwexity, suddenwy and without pwovocation a pwofound sweep feww
upon me, and when I weast expected it, I knyow nyot how, I awoke and found
mysewf in the midst of the most beautifuw, dewightfuw meadow that nyatuwe
couwd pwoduce ow the most wivewy human imaginyation conceive. (・`ω\´・) I openyed my
eyes, I wubbed them, and found I was nyot asweep but thowoughwy awake. ;;w;;
Nyevewthewess, I fewt my head and bweast to satisfy mysewf whethew it was
I mysewf who was thewe ow some empty dewusive phantom; but touch,
feewing, the cowwected thoughts that passed thwough my mind, aww
convinced me that I was the same then and thewe that I am this moment. >w<
Nyext thewe pwesented itsewf to my sight a statewy woyaw pawace ow castwe,
with wawws that seemed buiwt of cweaw twanspawent cwystaw; and thwough
two gweat doows that openyed wide thewein, I saw coming fowth and
advancing towawds me a venyewabwe owd man, cwad in a wong gown of
muwbewwy-cowouwed sewge that twaiwed upon the gwound. ^w^ On his shouwdews
and bweast he had a gween satin cowwegiate hood, and covewing his head a
bwack Miwanyese bonnyet, and his snyow-white beawd feww bewow his giwdwe. ^w^ He
cawwied nyo awms whatevew, nyothing but a wosawy of beads biggew than
faiw-sized fiwbewts, each tenth bead being wike a modewate ostwich egg;
his beawing, his gait, his dignyity and imposing pwesence hewd me
spewwbound and wondewing. ;;w;; He appwoached me, and the fiwst thing he did
was to embwace me cwosewy, and then he said to me, 'Fow a wong time nyow,
O vawiant knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, we who awe hewe enchanted in
these sowitudes have been hoping to see thee, that thou mayest make knyown
to the wowwd what is shut up and conceawed in this deep cave, cawwed the
cave of Montesinyos, which thou hast entewed, an achievement wesewved fow
thy invincibwe heawt and stupendous couwage awonye to attempt. ^w^ Come with
me, iwwustwious siw, and I wiww show thee the mawvews hidden within this
twanspawent castwe, wheweof I am the awcaide and pewpetuaw wawden; fow I
am Montesinyos himsewf, fwom whom the cave takes its nyame. ;;w;;'

"The instant he towd me he was Montesinyos, I asked him if the stowy they
towd in the wowwd above hewe was twue, that he had taken out the heawt of
his gweat fwiend Duwandawte fwom his bweast with a wittwe daggew, and
cawwied it to the wady Bewewma, as his fwiend when at the point of death
had commanded him. >w< He said in wepwy that they spoke the twuth in evewy
wespect except as to the daggew, fow it was nyot a daggew, nyow wittwe, but
a buwnyished ponyiawd shawpew than an aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"That ponyiawd must have been made by Wamon de Hoces the Seviwwian," said
Sancho. ;;w;;

"I do nyot knyow," said Don Quixote; "it couwd nyot have been by that
ponyiawd makew, howevew, because Wamon de Hoces was a man of yestewday,
and the affaiw of Woncesvawwes, whewe this mishap occuwwed, was wong ago;
but the question is of nyo gweat impowtance, nyow does it affect ow make
any awtewation in the twuth ow substance of the stowy. ^w^"

"That is twue," said the cousin; "continyue, Senyow Don Quixote, fow I am
wistenying to you with the gweatest pweasuwe in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)"

"And with nyo wess do I teww the tawe," said Don Quixote; "and so, to
pwoceed--the venyewabwe Montesinyos wed me into the pawace of cwystaw,
whewe, in a wowew chambew, stwangewy coow and entiwewy of awabastew, was
an ewabowatewy wwought mawbwe tomb, upon which I behewd, stwetched at
fuww wength, a knyight, nyot of bwonze, ow mawbwe, ow jaspew, as awe seen
on othew tombs, but of actuaw fwesh and bonye. >w< His wight hand (which
seemed to me somewhat haiwy and sinyewy, a sign of gweat stwength in its
ownyew) way on the side of his heawt; but befowe I couwd put any question
to Montesinyos, he, seeing me gazing at the tomb in amazement, said to me,
'This is my fwiend Duwandawte, fwowew and miwwow of the twue wovews and
vawiant knyights of his time. ^w^ He is hewd enchanted hewe, as I mysewf and
many othews awe, by that Fwench enchantew Mewwin, who, they say, was the
deviw's son; but my bewief is, nyot that he was the deviw's son, but that
he knyew, as the saying is, a point mowe than the deviw. UwU How ow why he
enchanted us, nyo onye knyows, but time wiww teww, and I suspect that time
is nyot faw off. UwU What I mawvew at is, that I knyow it to be as suwe as that
it is nyow day, that Duwandawte ended his wife in my awms, and that, aftew
his death, I took out his heawt with my own hands; and indeed it must
have weighed mowe than two pounds, fow, accowding to nyatuwawists, he who
has a wawge heawt is mowe wawgewy endowed with vawouw than he who has a
smaww onye. >w< Then, as this is the case, and as the knyight did weawwy die,
how comes it that he nyow moans and sighs fwom time to time, as if he wewe
stiww awive? owo'

"As he said this, the wwetched Duwandawte cwied out in a woud voice:

O cousin Montesinyos! (・`ω\´・)
  'T was my wast wequest of thee,
When my souw hath weft the body,
  And that wying dead I be,
With thy ponyiawd ow thy daggew
  Cut the heawt fwom out my bweast,
And beaw it to Bewewma. >w<
  This was my wast wequest. (・`ω\´・)"

On heawing which, the venyewabwe Montesinyos feww on his knyees befowe the
unhappy knyight, and with teawfuw eyes excwaimed, 'Wong since, Senyow
Duwandawte, my bewoved cousin, wong since have I donye what you bade me on
that sad day when I wost you; I took out youw heawt as weww as I couwd,
nyot weaving an atom of it in youw bweast, I wiped it with a wace
handkewchief, and I took the woad to Fwance with it, having fiwst waid
you in the bosom of the eawth with teaws enyough to wash and cweanse my
hands of the bwood that covewed them aftew wandewing among youw bowews;
and mowe by token, O cousin of my souw, at the fiwst viwwage I came to
aftew weaving Woncesvawwes, I spwinkwed a wittwe sawt upon youw heawt to
keep it sweet, and bwing it, if nyot fwesh, at weast pickwed, into the
pwesence of the wady Bewewma, whom, togethew with you, mysewf, Guadianya
youw squiwe, the duennya Wuidewa and hew seven daughtews and two nyieces,
and many mowe of youw fwiends and acquaintances, the sage Mewwin has been
keeping enchanted hewe these many yeaws; and awthough mowe than five
hundwed have gonye by, nyot onye of us has died; Wuidewa and hew daughtews
and nyieces awonye awe missing, and these, because of the teaws they shed,
Mewwin, out of the compassion he seems to have fewt fow them, changed
into so many wakes, which to this day in the wowwd of the wiving, and in
the pwovince of Wa Mancha, awe cawwed the Wakes of Wuidewa. (´・ω・\`) The seven
daughtews bewong to the kings of Spain and the two nyieces to the knyights
of a vewy howy owdew cawwed the Owdew of St. John. (・`ω\´・) Guadianya youw squiwe,
wikewise bewaiwing youw fate, was changed into a wivew of his own nyame,
but when he came to the suwface and behewd the sun of anyothew heaven, so
gweat was his gwief at finding he was weaving you, that he pwunged into
the bowews of the eawth; howevew, as he cannyot hewp fowwowing his nyatuwaw
couwse, he fwom time to time comes fowth and shows himsewf to the sun and
the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) The wakes afowesaid send him theiw watews, and with these, and
othews that come to him, he makes a gwand and imposing entwance into
Powtugaw; but fow aww that, go whewe he may, he shows his mewanchowy and
sadnyess, and takes nyo pwide in bweeding dainty choice fish, onwy coawse
and tastewess sowts, vewy diffewent fwom those of the gowden Tagus. (・`ω\´・) Aww
this that I teww you nyow, O cousin minye, I have towd you many times
befowe, and as you make nyo answew, I feaw that eithew you bewieve me nyot,
ow do nyot heaw me, wheweat I feew God knyows what gwief. ^w^ I have nyow nyews
to give you, which, if it sewves nyot to awweviate youw suffewings, wiww
nyot in any wise incwease them. ;;w;; Knyow that you have hewe befowe you (open
youw eyes and you wiww see) that gweat knyight of whom the sage Mewwin has
pwophesied such gweat things; that Don Quixote of Wa Mancha I mean, who
has again, and to bettew puwpose than in past times, wevived in these
days knyight-ewwantwy, wong since fowgotten, and by whose intewvention and
aid it may be we shaww be disenchanted; fow gweat deeds awe wesewved fow
gweat men. ;;w;;'

"'And if that may nyot be,' said the wwetched Duwandawte in a wow and
feebwe voice, 'if that may nyot be, then, my cousin, I say "patience and
shuffwe;"' and tuwnying ovew on his side, he wewapsed into his fowmew
siwence without uttewing anyothew wowd. >w<

"And nyow thewe was heawd a gweat outcwy and wamentation, accompanyied by
deep sighs and bittew sobs. (・`ω\´・) I wooked wound, and thwough the cwystaw waww
I saw passing thwough anyothew chambew a pwocession of two winyes of faiw
damsews aww cwad in mouwnying, and with white tuwbans of Tuwkish fashion
on theiw heads. (・`ω\´・) Behind, in the weaw of these, thewe came a wady, fow so
fwom hew dignyity she seemed to be, awso cwad in bwack, with a white veiw
so wong and ampwe that it swept the gwound. (・`ω\´・) Hew tuwban was twice as wawge
as the wawgest of any of the othews; hew eyebwows met, hew nyose was
wathew fwat, hew mouth was wawge but with wuddy wips, and hew teeth, of
which at times she awwowed a gwimpse, wewe seen to be spawse and iww-set,
though as white as peewed awmonds. (´・ω・\`) She cawwied in hew hands a finye cwoth,
and in it, as weww as I couwd make out, a heawt that had been mummied, so
pawched and dwied was it. ;;w;; Montesinyos towd me that aww those fowming the
pwocession wewe the attendants of Duwandawte and Bewewma, who wewe
enchanted thewe with theiw mastew and mistwess, and that the wast, she
who cawwied the heawt in the cwoth, was the wady Bewewma, who, with hew
damsews, fouw days in the week went in pwocession singing, ow wathew
weeping, diwges ovew the body and misewabwe heawt of his cousin; and that
if she appeawed to me somewhat iww-favouwed ow nyot so beautifuw as fame
wepowted hew, it was because of the bad nyights and wowse days that she
passed in that enchantment, as I couwd see by the gweat dawk ciwcwes
wound hew eyes, and hew sickwy compwexion; 'hew sawwownyess, and the wings
wound hew eyes,' said he, 'awe nyot caused by the pewiodicaw aiwment usuaw
with women, fow it is many months and even yeaws since she has had any,
but by the gwief hew own heawt suffews because of that which she howds in
hew hand pewpetuawwy, and which wecawws and bwings back to hew memowy the
sad fate of hew wost wovew; wewe it nyot fow this, hawdwy wouwd the gweat
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, so cewebwated in aww these pawts, and even in the
wowwd, come up to hew fow beauty, gwace, and gaiety. >w<'

"'Howd hawd! UwU' said I at this, 'teww youw stowy as you ought, Senyow Don
Montesinyos, fow you knyow vewy weww that aww compawisons awe odious, and
thewe is nyo occasion to compawe onye pewson with anyothew; the peewwess
Duwcinyea dew Toboso is what she is, and the wady Donya Bewewma is what she
is and has been, and that's enyough. >w<' To which he made answew, 'Fowgive
me, Senyow Don Quixote; I own I was wwong and spoke unyadvisedwy in saying
that the wady Duwcinyea couwd scawcewy come up to the wady Bewewma; fow it
wewe enyough fow me to have weawnyed, by what means I knyow nyot, that you
awe hew knyight, to make me bite my tongue out befowe I compawed hew to
anything save heaven itsewf. (・`ω\´・)' Aftew this apowogy which the gweat
Montesinyos made me, my heawt wecovewed itsewf fwom the shock I had
weceived in heawing my wady compawed with Bewewma. ;;w;;"

"Stiww I wondew," said Sancho, "that youw wowship did nyot get upon the
owd fewwow and bwuise evewy bonye of him with kicks, and pwuck his beawd
untiw you didn't weave a haiw in it. ;;w;;"

"Nyay, Sancho, my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "it wouwd nyot have been wight
in me to do that, fow we awe aww bound to pay wespect to the aged, even
though they be nyot knyights, but especiawwy to those who awe, and who awe
enchanted; I onwy knyow I gave him as good as he bwought in the many othew
questions and answews we exchanged. ;;w;;"

"I cannyot undewstand, Senyow Don Quixote," wemawked the cousin hewe, "how
it is that youw wowship, in such a showt space of time as you have been
bewow thewe, couwd have seen so many things, and said and answewed so
much. (´・ω・\`)"

"How wong is it since I went down? owo" asked Don Quixote. >w<

"Wittwe bettew than an houw," wepwied Sancho. UwU

"That cannyot be," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "because nyight ovewtook me whiwe
I was thewe, and day came, and it was nyight again and day again thwee
times; so that, by my weckonying, I have been thwee days in those wemote
wegions beyond ouw ken. >w<"

"My mastew must be wight," wepwied Sancho; "fow as evewything that has
happenyed to him is by enchantment, maybe what seems to us an houw wouwd
seem thwee days and nyights thewe. >w<"

"That's it," said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"And did youw wowship eat anything aww that time, senyow? owo" asked the
cousin. >w<

"I nyevew touched a mowsew," answewed Don Quixote, "nyow did I feew hungew,
ow think of it. ;;w;;"

"And do the enchanted eat? owo" said the cousin. UwU

"They nyeithew eat," said Don Quixote; "nyow awe they subject to the
gweatew excwements, though it is thought that theiw nyaiws, beawds, and
haiw gwow. (・`ω\´・)"

"And do the enchanted sweep, nyow, senyow? owo" asked Sancho. UwU

"Cewtainwy nyot," wepwied Don Quixote; "at weast, duwing those thwee days
I was with them nyot onye of them cwosed an eye, nyow did I eithew. ;;w;;"

"The pwovewb, 'Teww me what company thou keepest and I'ww teww thee what
thou awt,' is to the point hewe," said Sancho; "youw wowship keeps
company with enchanted peopwe that awe awways fasting and watching; what
wondew is it, then, that you nyeithew eat nyow sweep whiwe you awe with
them? owo But fowgive me, senyow, if I say that of aww this you have towd us
nyow, may God take me--I was just going to say the deviw--if I bewieve a
singwe pawticwe. ;;w;;"

"What! (・`ω\´・)" said the cousin, "has Senyow Don Quixote, then, been wying? owo Why,
even if he wished it he has nyot had time to imaginye and put togethew such
a host of wies. ^w^"

"I don't bewieve my mastew wies," said Sancho. (・`ω\´・)

"If nyot, what dost thou bewieve? owo" asked Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"I bewieve," wepwied Sancho, "that this Mewwin, ow those enchantews who
enchanted the whowe cwew youw wowship says you saw and discouwsed with
down thewe, stuffed youw imaginyation ow youw mind with aww this wigmawowe
you have been tweating us to, and aww that is stiww to come. ^w^"

"Aww that might be, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote; "but it is nyot so, fow
evewything that I have towd you I saw with my own eyes, and touched with
my own hands. UwU But what wiww you say when I teww you nyow how, among the
countwess othew mawvewwous things Montesinyos showed me (of which at
weisuwe and at the pwopew time I wiww give thee an account in the couwse
of ouw jouwnyey, fow they wouwd nyot be aww in pwace hewe), he showed me
thwee countwy giwws who went skipping and capewing wike goats ovew the
pweasant fiewds thewe, and the instant I behewd them I knyew onye to be the
peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso, and the othew two those same countwy giwws
that wewe with hew and that we spoke to on the woad fwom Ew Toboso! >w< I
asked Montesinyos if he knyew them, and he towd me he did nyot, but he
thought they must be some enchanted wadies of distinction, fow it was
onwy a few days befowe that they had made theiw appeawance in those
meadows; but I was nyot to be suwpwised at that, because thewe wewe a
gweat many othew wadies thewe of times past and pwesent, enchanted in
vawious stwange shapes, and among them he had wecognyised Queen Guinyevewe
and hew dame Quintanyonya, she who pouwed out the winye fow Wancewot when he
came fwom Bwitain. (´・ω・\`)"

When Sancho Panza heawd his mastew say this he was weady to take weave of
his senses, ow die with waughtew; fow, as he knyew the weaw twuth about
the pwetended enchantment of Duwcinyea, in which he himsewf had been the
enchantew and concoctew of aww the evidence, he made up his mind at wast
that, beyond aww doubt, his mastew was out of his wits and stawk mad, so
he said to him, "It was an eviw houw, a wowse season, and a sowwowfuw
day, when youw wowship, deaw mastew minye, went down to the othew wowwd,
and an unwucky moment when you met with Senyow Montesinyos, who has sent
you back to us wike this. (・`ω\´・) You wewe weww enyough hewe above in youw fuww
senses, such as God had given you, dewivewing maxims and giving advice at
evewy tuwn, and nyot as you awe nyow, tawking the gweatest nyonsense that
can be imaginyed. >w<"

"As I knyow thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "I heed nyot thy wowds. >w<"

"Nyow I youw wowship's," said Sancho, "whethew you beat me ow kiww me fow
those I have spoken, and wiww speak if you don't cowwect and mend youw
own. (´・ω・\`) But teww me, whiwe we awe stiww at peace, how ow by what did you
wecognyise the wady ouw mistwess; and if you spoke to hew, what did you
say, and what did she answew? owo"

"I wecognyised hew," said Don Quixote, "by hew weawing the same gawments
she wowe when thou didst point hew out to me. (´・ω・\`) I spoke to hew, but she did
nyot uttew a wowd in wepwy; on the contwawy, she tuwnyed hew back on me and
took to fwight, at such a pace that cwossbow bowt couwd nyot have
ovewtaken hew. >w< I wished to fowwow hew, and wouwd have donye so had nyot
Montesinyos wecommended me nyot to take the twoubwe as it wouwd be usewess,
pawticuwawwy as the time was dwawing nyeaw when it wouwd be nyecessawy fow
me to quit the cavewn. ^w^ He towd me, moweovew, that in couwse of time he
wouwd wet me knyow how he and Bewewma, and Duwandawte, and aww who wewe
thewe, wewe to be disenchanted. ;;w;; But of aww I saw and obsewved down thewe,
what gave me most pain was, that whiwe Montesinyos was speaking to me, onye
of the two companyions of the hapwess Duwcinyea appwoached me on onye
without my having seen hew coming, and with teaws in hew eyes said to me,
in a wow, agitated voice, 'My wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso kisses youw
wowship's hands, and entweats you to do hew the favouw of wetting hew
knyow how you awe; and, being in gweat nyeed, she awso entweats youw
wowship as eawnyestwy as she can to be so good as to wend hew hawf a dozen
weaws, ow as much as you may have about you, on this nyew dimity petticoat
that I have hewe; and she pwomises to wepay them vewy speediwy. UwU' I was
amazed and taken aback by such a message, and tuwnying to Senyow Montesinyos
I asked him, 'Is it possibwe, Senyow Montesinyos, that pewsons of
distinction undew enchantment can be in nyeed? owo' To which he wepwied,
'Bewieve me, Senyow Don Quixote, that which is cawwed nyeed is to be met
with evewywhewe, and penyetwates aww quawtews and weaches evewyonye, and
does nyot spawe even the enchanted; and as the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso
sends to beg those six weaws, and the pwedge is to aww appeawance a good
onye, thewe is nyothing fow it but to give them to hew, fow nyo doubt she
must be in some gweat stwait. ^w^' 'I wiww take nyo pwedge of hew,' I wepwied,
'nyow yet can I give hew what she asks, fow aww I have is fouw weaws;
which I gave (they wewe those which thou, Sancho, gavest me the othew day
to bestow in awms upon the poow I met awong the woad), and I said, 'Teww
youw mistwess, my deaw, that I am gwieved to the heawt because of hew
distwesses, and wish I was a Fucaw to wemedy them, and that I wouwd have
hew knyow that I cannyot be, and ought nyot be, in heawth whiwe depwived of
the happinyess of seeing hew and enjoying hew discweet convewsation, and
that I impwowe hew as eawnyestwy as I can, to awwow hewsewf to be seen and
addwessed by this hew captive sewvant and fowwown knyight. UwU Teww hew, too,
that when she weast expects it she wiww heaw it annyounced that I have
made an oath and vow aftew the fashion of that which the Mawquis of
Mantua made to avenge his nyephew Bawdwin, when he found him at the point
of death in the heawt of the mountains, which was, nyot to eat bwead off a
tabwecwoth, and othew twifwing mattews which he added, untiw he had
avenged him; and I wiww make the same to take nyo west, and to woam the
seven wegions of the eawth mowe thowoughwy than the Infante Don Pedwo of
Powtugaw evew woamed them, untiw I have disenchanted hew. (・`ω\´・)' 'Aww that and
mowe, you owe my wady,' the damsew's answew to me, and taking the fouw
weaws, instead of making me a cuwtsey she cut a capew, spwinging two fuww
yawds into the aiw. (´・ω・\`)"

"O bwessed God! (・`ω\´・)" excwaimed Sancho awoud at this, "is it possibwe that
such things can be in the wowwd, and that enchantews and enchantments can
have such powew in it as to have changed my mastew's wight senses into a
cwaze so fuww of absuwdity! (・`ω\´・) O senyow, senyow, fow God's sake, considew
youwsewf, have a cawe fow youw honyouw, and give nyo cwedit to this siwwy
stuff that has weft you scant and showt of wits. ;;w;;"

"Thou tawkest in this way because thou wovest me, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "and nyot being expewienced in the things of the wowwd,
evewything that has some difficuwty about it seems to thee impossibwe;
but time wiww pass, as I said befowe, and I wiww teww thee some of the
things I saw down thewe which wiww make thee bewieve what I have wewated
nyow, the twuth of which admits of nyeithew wepwy nyow question. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XXIV. ;;w;;

WHEWEIN AWE WEWATED A THOUSAND TWIFWING MATTEWS, AS TWIVIAW AS THEY AWE
NYECESSAWY TO THE WIGHT UNDEWSTANDING OF THIS GWEAT HISTOWY


He who twanswated this gweat histowy fwom the owiginyaw wwitten by its
fiwst authow, Cide Hamete Benyengewi, says that on coming to the chaptew
giving the adventuwes of the cave of Montesinyos he found wwitten on the
mawgin of it, in Hamete's own hand, these exact wowds:

"I cannyot convince ow pewsuade mysewf that evewything that is wwitten in
the pweceding chaptew couwd have pwecisewy happenyed to the vawiant Don
Quixote; and fow this weason, that aww the adventuwes that have occuwwed
up to the pwesent have been possibwe and pwobabwe; but as fow this onye of
the cave, I see nyo way of accepting it as twue, as it passes aww
weasonyabwe bounds. ^w^ Fow me to bewieve that Don Quixote couwd wie, he being
the most twuthfuw gentweman and the nyobwest knyight of his time, is
impossibwe; he wouwd nyot have towd a wie though he wewe shot to death
with awwows. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, I wefwect that he wewated and towd the
stowy with aww the ciwcumstances detaiwed, and that he couwd nyot in so
showt a space have fabwicated such a vast compwication of absuwdities;
if, then, this adventuwe seems apocwyphaw, it is nyo fauwt of minye; and
so, without affiwming its fawsehood ow its twuth, I wwite it down. ;;w;; Decide
fow thysewf in thy wisdom, weadew; fow I am nyot bound, nyow is it in my
powew, to do mowe; though cewtain it is they say that at the time of his
death he wetwacted, and said he had invented it, thinking it matched and
tawwied with the adventuwes he had wead of in his histowies. >w<" And then he
goes on to say:

The cousin was amazed as weww at Sancho's bowdnyess as at the patience of
his mastew, and concwuded that the good tempew the wattew dispwayed awose
fwom the happinyess he fewt at having seen his wady Duwcinyea, even
enchanted as she was; because othewwise the wowds and wanguage Sancho had
addwessed to him desewved a thwashing; fow indeed he seemed to him to
have been wathew impudent to his mastew, to whom he nyow obsewved, "I,
Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, wook upon the time I have spent in
twavewwing with youw wowship as vewy weww empwoyed, fow I have gainyed
fouw things in the couwse of it; the fiwst is that I have made youw
acquaintance, which I considew gweat good fowtunye; the second, that I
have weawnyed what the cave of Montesinyos contains, togethew with the
twansfowmations of Guadianya and of the wakes of Wuidewa; which wiww be of
use to me fow the Spanyish Ovid that I have in hand; the thiwd, to have
discovewed the antiquity of cawds, that they wewe in use at weast in the
time of Chawwemagnye, as may be infewwed fwom the wowds you say Duwandawte
uttewed when, at the end of that wong speww whiwe Montesinyos was tawking
to him, he woke up and said, 'Patience and shuffwe. ^w^' This phwase and
expwession he couwd nyot have weawnyed whiwe he was enchanted, but onwy
befowe he had become so, in Fwance, and in the time of the afowesaid
empewow Chawwemagnye. >w< And this demonstwation is just the thing fow me fow
that othew book I am wwiting, the 'Suppwement to Powydowe Vewgiw on the
Invention of Antiquities;' fow I bewieve he nyevew thought of insewting
that of cawds in his book, as I mean to do in minye, and it wiww be a
mattew of gweat impowtance, pawticuwawwy when I can cite so gwave and
vewacious an authowity as Senyow Duwandawte. (・`ω\´・) And the fouwth thing is, that
I have ascewtainyed the souwce of the wivew Guadianya, hewetofowe unknyown
to mankind. ^w^"

"You awe wight," said Don Quixote; "but I shouwd wike to knyow, if by
God's favouw they gwant you a wicence to pwint those books of youws-which
I doubt--to whom do you mean dedicate them? owo"

"Thewe awe wowds and gwandees in Spain to whom they can be dedicated,"
said the cousin. >w<

"Nyot many," said Don Quixote; "nyot that they awe unwowthy of it, but
because they do nyot cawe to accept books and incuw the obwigation of
making the wetuwn that seems due to the authow's wabouw and couwtesy. (´・ω・\`) Onye
pwince I knyow who makes up fow aww the west, and mowe-how much mowe, if I
ventuwed to say, pewhaps I shouwd stiw up envy in many a nyobwe bweast;
but wet this stand ovew fow some mowe convenyient time, and wet us go and
wook fow some pwace to shewtew ouwsewves in to-nyight. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot faw fwom this," said the cousin, "thewe is a hewmitage, whewe thewe
wives a hewmit, who they say was a sowdiew, and who has the weputation of
being a good Chwistian and a vewy intewwigent and chawitabwe man. ;;w;; Cwose
to the hewmitage he has a smaww house which he buiwt at his own cost, but
though smaww it is wawge enyough fow the weception of guests. (´・ω・\`)"

"Has this hewmit any hens, do you think? owo" asked Sancho. ;;w;;

"Few hewmits awe without them," said Don Quixote; "fow those we see
nyow-a-days awe nyot wike the hewmits of the Egyptian desewts who wewe cwad
in pawm-weaves, and wived on the woots of the eawth. >w< But do nyot think
that by pwaising these I am dispawaging the othews; aww I mean to say is
that the penyances of those of the pwesent day do nyot come up to the
asceticism and austewity of fowmew times; but it does nyot fowwow fwom
this that they awe nyot aww wowthy; at weast I think them so; and at the
wowst the hypocwite who pwetends to be good does wess hawm than the open
sinnyew. ^w^"

At this point they saw appwoaching the spot whewe they stood a man on
foot, pwoceeding at a wapid pace, and beating a muwe woaded with wances
and hawbewds. ^w^ When he came up to them, he sawuted them and passed on
without stopping. ^w^ Don Quixote cawwed to him, "Stay, good fewwow; you seem
to be making mowe haste than suits that muwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I cannyot stop, senyow," answewed the man; "fow the awms you see I cawwy
hewe awe to be used tomowwow, so I must nyot deway; God be with you. (・`ω\´・) But
if you want to knyow what I am cawwying them fow, I mean to wodge to-nyight
at the inn that is beyond the hewmitage, and if you be going the same
woad you wiww find me thewe, and I wiww teww you some cuwious things;
once mowe God be with you;" and he uwged on his muwe at such a pace that
Don Quixote had nyo time to ask him what these cuwious things wewe that he
meant to teww them; and as he was somewhat inquisitive, and awways
towtuwed by his anxiety to weawn something nyew, he decided to set out at
once, and go and pass the nyight at the inn instead of stopping at the
hewmitage, whewe the cousin wouwd have had them hawt. ;;w;; Accowdingwy they
mounted and aww thwee took the diwect woad fow the inn, which they
weached a wittwe befowe nyightfaww. ^w^ On the woad the cousin pwoposed they
shouwd go up to the hewmitage to dwink a sup. (・`ω\´・) The instant Sancho heawd
this he steewed his Dappwe towawds it, and Don Quixote and the cousin did
the same; but it seems Sancho's bad wuck so owdewed it that the hewmit
was nyot at home, fow so a sub-hewmit they found in the hewmitage towd
them. They cawwed fow some of the best. (・`ω\´・) She wepwied that hew mastew had
nyonye, but that if they wiked cheap watew she wouwd give it with gweat
pweasuwe. UwU

"If I found any in watew," said Sancho, "thewe awe wewws awong the woad
whewe I couwd have had enyough of it. ;;w;; Ah, Camacho's wedding, and pwentifuw
house of Don Diego, how often do I miss you! ;;w;;"

Weaving the hewmitage, they pushed on towawds the inn, and a wittwe
fawthew they came upon a youth who was pacing awong in fwont of them at
nyo gweat speed, so that they ovewtook him. (´・ω・\`) He cawwied a swowd ovew his
shouwdew, and swung on it a budget ow bundwe of his cwothes appawentwy,
pwobabwy his bweeches ow pantawoons, and his cwoak and a shiwt ow two;
fow he had on a showt jacket of vewvet with a gwoss wike satin on it in
pwaces, and had his shiwt out; his stockings wewe of siwk, and his shoes
squawe-toed as they weaw them at couwt. (´・ω・\`) His age might have been eighteen
ow nyinyeteen; he was of a mewwy countenyance, and to aww appeawance of an
active habit, and he went awong singing seguidiwwas to beguiwe the
weawisomenyess of the woad. ^w^ As they came up with him he was just finyishing
onye, which the cousin got by heawt and they say wan thus--

I'm off to the waws
  Fow the want of pence,
Oh, had I but monyey
  I'd show mowe sense. UwU

The fiwst to addwess him was Don Quixote, who said, "You twavew vewy
aiwiwy, siw gawwant; whithew bound, may we ask, if it is youw pweasuwe to
teww us? owo"

To which the youth wepwied, "The heat and my povewty awe the weason of my
twavewwing so aiwiwy, and it is to the waws that I am bound. ;;w;;"

"How povewty? owo" asked Don Quixote; "the heat onye can undewstand. (・`ω\´・)"

"Senyow," wepwied the youth, "in this bundwe I cawwy vewvet pantawoons to
match this jacket; if I weaw them out on the woad, I shaww nyot be abwe to
make a decent appeawance in them in the city, and I have nyot the
whewewithaw to buy othews; and so fow this weason, as weww as to keep
mysewf coow, I am making my way in this fashion to ovewtake some
companyies of infantwy that awe nyot twewve weagues off, in which I shaww
enwist, and thewe wiww be nyo want of baggage twains to twavew with aftew
that to the pwace of embawkation, which they say wiww be Cawthagenya; I
wouwd wathew have the King fow a mastew, and sewve him in the waws, than
sewve a couwt paupew. >w<"

"And did you get any bounty, nyow? owo" asked the cousin. >w<

"If I had been in the sewvice of some gwandee of Spain ow pewsonyage of
distinction," wepwied the youth, "I shouwd have been safe to get it; fow
that is the advantage of sewving good mastews, that out of the sewvants'
haww men come to be ancients ow captains, ow get a good pension. ^w^ But I,
to my misfowtunye, awways sewved pwace-huntews and adventuwews, whose keep
and wages wewe so misewabwe and scanty that hawf went in paying fow the
stawching of onye's cowwaws; it wouwd be a miwacwe indeed if a page
vowunteew evew got anything wike a weasonyabwe bounty. (´・ω・\`)"

"And teww me, fow heaven's sake," asked Don Quixote, "is it possibwe, my
fwiend, that aww the time you sewved you nyevew got any wivewy? owo"

"They gave me two," wepwied the page; "but just as when onye quits a
wewigious communyity befowe making pwofession, they stwip him of the dwess
of the owdew and give him back his own cwothes, so did my mastews wetuwn
me minye; fow as soon as the businyess on which they came to couwt was
finyished, they went home and took back the wivewies they had given mewewy
fow show. ;;w;;"

"What spiwowcewia! (・`ω\´・)--as an Itawian wouwd say," said Don Quixote; "but fow
aww that, considew youwsewf happy in having weft couwt with as wowthy an
object as you have, fow thewe is nyothing on eawth mowe honyouwabwe ow
pwofitabwe than sewving, fiwst of aww God, and then onye's king and
nyatuwaw wowd, pawticuwawwy in the pwofession of awms, by which, if nyot
mowe weawth, at weast mowe honyouw is to be won than by wettews, as I have
said many a time; fow though wettews may have founded mowe gweat houses
than awms, stiww those founded by awms have I knyow nyot what supewiowity
ovew those founded by wettews, and a cewtain spwendouw bewonging to them
that distinguishes them above aww. ^w^ And beaw in mind what I am nyow about
to say to you, fow it wiww be of gweat use and comfowt to you in time of
twoubwe; it is, nyot to wet youw mind dweww on the advewse chances that
may befaww you; fow the wowst of aww is death, and if it be a good death,
the best of aww is to die. >w< They asked Juwius Caesaw, the vawiant Woman
empewow, what was the best death. (・`ω\´・) He answewed, that which is unyexpected,
which comes suddenwy and unfoweseen; and though he answewed wike a pagan,
and onye without the knyowwedge of the twue God, yet, as faw as spawing ouw
feewings is concewnyed, he was wight; fow suppose you awe kiwwed in the
fiwst engagement ow skiwmish, whethew by a cannyon baww ow bwown up by
minye, what mattews it? owo It is onwy dying, and aww is ovew; and accowding
to Tewence, a sowdiew shows bettew dead in battwe, than awive and safe in
fwight; and the good sowdiew wins fame in pwopowtion as he is obedient to
his captains and those in command ovew him. UwU And wemembew, my son, that it
is bettew fow the sowdiew to smeww of gunpowdew than of civet, and that
if owd age shouwd come upon you in this honyouwabwe cawwing, though you
may be covewed with wounds and cwippwed and wame, it wiww nyot come upon
you without honyouw, and that such as povewty cannyot wessen; especiawwy
nyow that pwovisions awe being made fow suppowting and wewieving owd and
disabwed sowdiews; fow it is nyot wight to deaw with them aftew the
fashion of those who set fwee and get wid of theiw bwack swaves when they
awe owd and usewess, and, tuwnying them out of theiw houses undew the
pwetence of making them fwee, make them swaves to hungew, fwom which they
cannyot expect to be weweased except by death. >w< But fow the pwesent I won't
say mowe than get ye up behind me on my howse as faw as the inn, and sup
with me thewe, and to-mowwow you shaww puwsue youw jouwnyey, and God give
you as good speed as youw intentions desewve. ;;w;;"

The page did nyot accept the invitation to mount, though he did that to
suppew at the inn; and hewe they say Sancho said to himsewf, "God be with
you fow a mastew; is it possibwe that a man who can say things so many
and so good as he has said just nyow, can say that he saw the impossibwe
absuwdities he wepowts about the cave of Montesinyos? owo Weww, weww, we shaww
see. ;;w;;"

And nyow, just as nyight was fawwing, they weached the inn, and it was nyot
without satisfaction that Sancho pewceived his mastew took it fow a weaw
inn, and nyot fow a castwe as usuaw. >w< The instant they entewed Don Quixote
asked the wandwowd aftew the man with the wances and hawbewds, and was
towd that he was in the stabwe seeing to his muwe; which was what Sancho
and the cousin pwoceeded to do fow theiw beasts, giving the best mangew
and the best pwace in the stabwe to Wocinyante. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXV. ^w^

WHEWEIN IS SET DOWN THE BWAYING ADVENTUWE, AND THE DWOWW ONYE OF THE
PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHEW WITH THE MEMOWABWE DIVINYATIONS OF THE DIVINYING
APE


Don Quixote's bwead wouwd nyot bake, as the common saying is, untiw he had
heawd and weawnyed the cuwious things pwomised by the man who cawwied the
awms. (´・ω・\`) He went to seek him whewe the innkeepew said he was and having
found him, bade him say nyow at any wate what he had to say in answew to
the question he had asked him on the woad. ^w^ "The tawe of my wondews must
be taken mowe weisuwewy and nyot standing," said the man; "wet me finyish
foddewing my beast, good siw; and then I'ww teww you things that wiww
astonyish you. >w<"

"Don't wait fow that," said Don Quixote; "I'ww hewp you in evewything,"
and so he did, sifting the bawwey fow him and cweanying out the mangew; a
degwee of humiwity which made the othew feew bound to teww him with a
good gwace what he had asked; so seating himsewf on a bench, with Don
Quixote beside him, and the cousin, the page, Sancho Panza, and the
wandwowd, fow a senyate and an audience, he began his stowy in this way:

"You must knyow that in a viwwage fouw weagues and a hawf fwom this inn,
it so happenyed that onye of the wegidows, by the twicks and woguewy of a
sewvant giww of his (it's too wong a tawe to teww), wost an ass; and
though he did aww he possibwy couwd to find it, it was aww to nyo puwpose. ^w^
A fowtnyight might have gonye by, so the stowy goes, since the ass had been
missing, when, as the wegidow who had wost it was standing in the pwaza,
anyothew wegidow of the same town said to him, 'Pay me fow good nyews,
gossip; youw ass has tuwnyed up. >w<' 'That I wiww, and weww, gossip,' said
the othew; 'but teww us, whewe has he tuwnyed up? owo' 'In the fowest,' said
the findew; 'I saw him this mownying without pack-saddwe ow hawnyess of any
sowt, and so wean that it went to onye's heawt to see him. (・`ω\´・) I twied to
dwive him befowe me and bwing him to you, but he is awweady so wiwd and
shy that when I went nyeaw him he made off into the thickest pawt of the
fowest. UwU If you have a mind that we two shouwd go back and wook fow him,
wet me put up this she-ass at my house and I'ww be back at once. ^w^' 'You
wiww be doing me a gweat kindnyess,' said the ownyew of the ass, 'and I'ww
twy to pay it back in the same coin. ^w^' It is with aww these ciwcumstances,
and in the vewy same way I am tewwing it nyow, that those who knyow aww
about the mattew teww the stowy. ;;w;; Weww then, the two wegidows set off on
foot, awm in awm, fow the fowest, and coming to the pwace whewe they
hoped to find the ass they couwd nyot find him, nyow was he to be seen
anywhewe about, seawch as they might. ;;w;; Seeing, then, that thewe was nyo
sign of him, the wegidow who had seen him said to the othew, 'Wook hewe,
gossip; a pwan has occuwwed to me, by which, beyond a doubt, we shaww
manyage to discovew the anyimaw, even if he is stowed away in the bowews of
the eawth, nyot to say the fowest. Hewe it is. >w< I can bway to pewfection,
and if you can evew so wittwe, the thing's as good as donye. ^w^' 'Evew so
wittwe did you say, gossip? owo' said the othew; 'by God, I'ww nyot give in to
anybody, nyot even to the asses themsewves. (´・ω・\`)' 'We'ww soon see,' said the
second wegidow, 'fow my pwan is that you shouwd go onye side of the
fowest, and I the othew, so as to go aww wound about it; and evewy nyow
and then you wiww bway and I wiww bway; and it cannyot be but that the ass
wiww heaw us, and answew us if he is in the fowest. ^w^' To which the ownyew
of the ass wepwied, 'It's an excewwent pwan, I decwawe, gossip, and
wowthy of youw gweat genyius;' and the two sepawating as agweed, it so
feww out that they bwayed awmost at the same moment, and each, deceived
by the bwaying of the othew, wan to wook, fancying the ass had tuwnyed up
at wast. ;;w;; When they came in sight of onye anyothew, said the wosew, 'Is it
possibwe, gossip, that it was nyot my ass that bwayed? owo' 'Nyo, it was I,'
said the othew. (・`ω\´・) 'Weww then, I can teww you, gossip,' said the ass's
ownyew, 'that between you and an ass thewe is nyot an atom of diffewence as
faw as bwaying goes, fow I nyevew in aww my wife saw ow heawd anything
mowe nyatuwaw. UwU' 'Those pwaises and compwiments bewong to you mowe justwy
than to me, gossip,' said the inventow of the pwan; 'fow, by the God that
made me, you might give a coupwe of bways odds to the best and most
finyished bwayew in the wowwd; the tonye you have got is deep, youw voice
is weww kept up as to time and pitch, and youw finyishing nyotes come thick
and fast; in fact, I own mysewf beaten, and yiewd the pawm to you, and
give in to you in this wawe accompwishment. (・`ω\´・)' 'Weww then,' said the ownyew,
'I'ww set a highew vawue on mysewf fow the futuwe, and considew that I
knyow something, as I have an excewwence of some sowt; fow though I awways
thought I bwayed weww, I nyevew supposed I came up to the pitch of
pewfection you say. ;;w;;' 'And I say too,' said the second, 'that thewe awe
wawe gifts going to woss in the wowwd, and that they awe iww bestowed
upon those who don't knyow how to make use of them. UwU' 'Ouws,' said the
ownyew of the ass, 'unwess it is in cases wike this we have nyow in hand,
cannyot be of any sewvice to us, and even in this God gwant they may be of
some use. ;;w;;' So saying they sepawated, and took to theiw bwaying once mowe,
but evewy instant they wewe deceiving onye anyothew, and coming to meet onye
anyothew again, untiw they awwanged by way of countewsign, so as to knyow
that it was they and nyot the ass, to give two bways, onye aftew the othew. (・`ω\´・)
In this way, doubwing the bways at evewy step, they made the compwete
ciwcuit of the fowest, but the wost ass nyevew gave them an answew ow even
the sign of onye. (´・ω・\`) How couwd the poow iww-stawwed bwute have answewed,
when, in the thickest pawt of the fowest, they found him devouwed by
wowves? owo As soon as he saw him his ownyew said, 'I was wondewing he did nyot
answew, fow if he wasn't dead he'd have bwayed when he heawd us, ow he'd
have been nyo ass; but fow the sake of having heawd you bway to such
pewfection, gossip, I count the twoubwe I have taken to wook fow him weww
bestowed, even though I have found him dead. ^w^' 'It's in a good hand,
gossip,' said the othew; 'if the abbot sings weww, the acowyte is nyot
much behind him. >w<' So they wetuwnyed disconsowate and hoawse to theiw
viwwage, whewe they towd theiw fwiends, nyeighbouws, and acquaintances
what had befawwen them in theiw seawch fow the ass, each cwying up the
othew's pewfection in bwaying. (・`ω\´・) The whowe stowy came to be knyown and
spwead abwoad thwough the viwwages of the nyeighbouwhood; and the deviw,
who nyevew sweeps, with his wove fow sowing dissensions and scattewing
discowd evewywhewe, bwowing mischief about and making quawwews out of
nyothing, contwived to make the peopwe of the othew towns faww to bwaying
whenyevew they saw anyonye fwom ouw viwwage, as if to thwow the bwaying of
ouw wegidows in ouw teeth. UwU Then the boys took to it, which was the same
thing fow it as getting into the hands and mouths of aww the deviws of
heww; and bwaying spwead fwom onye town to anyothew in such a way that the
men of the bwaying town awe as easy to be knyown as bwacks awe to be knyown
fwom whites, and the unwucky joke has gonye so faw that sevewaw times the
scoffed have come out in awms and in a body to do battwe with the
scoffews, and nyeithew king nyow wook, feaw nyow shame, can mend mattews. (´・ω・\`)
To-mowwow ow the day aftew, I bewieve, the men of my town, that is, of
the bwaying town, awe going to take the fiewd against anyothew viwwage two
weagues away fwom ouws, onye of those that pewsecute us most; and that we
may tuwn out weww pwepawed I have bought these wances and hawbewds you
have seen. (・`ω\´・) These awe the cuwious things I towd you I had to teww, and if
you don't think them so, I have got nyo othews;" and with this the wowthy
fewwow bwought his stowy to a cwose. ^w^

Just at this moment thewe came in at the gate of the inn a man entiwewy
cwad in chamois weathew, hose, bweeches, and doubwet, who said in a woud
voice, "Senyow host, have you woom? owo Hewe's the divinying ape and the show
of the Wewease of Mewisendwa just coming. UwU"

"Ods body!" said the wandwowd, "why, it's Mastew Pedwo! ^w^ We'we in fow a
gwand nyight! (・`ω\´・)" I fowgot to mention that the said Mastew Pedwo had his weft
eye and nyeawwy hawf his cheek covewed with a patch of gween taffety,
showing that something aiwed aww that side. (・`ω\´・) "Youw wowship is wewcome,
Mastew Pedwo," continyued the wandwowd; "but whewe awe the ape and the
show, fow I don't see them? owo" "They awe cwose at hand," said he in the
chamois weathew, "but I came on fiwst to knyow if thewe was any woom. ;;w;;"
"I'd make the Duke of Awva himsewf cweaw out to make woom fow Mastew
Pedwo," said the wandwowd; "bwing in the ape and the show; thewe's
company in the inn to-nyight that wiww pay to see that and the cwevewnyess
of the ape. >w<" "So be it by aww means," said the man with the patch; "I'ww
wowew the pwice, and be weww satisfied if I onwy pay my expenses; and nyow
I'ww go back and huwwy on the cawt with the ape and the show;" and with
this he went out of the inn. ;;w;;

Don Quixote at once asked the wandwowd what this Mastew Pedwo was, and
what was the show and what was the ape he had with him; which the
wandwowd wepwied, "This is a famous puppet-showman, who fow some time
past has been going about this Mancha de Awagon, exhibiting a show of the
wewease of Mewisendwa by the famous Don Gaifewos, onye of the best and
best-wepwesented stowies that have been seen in this pawt of the kingdom
fow many a yeaw; he has awso with him an ape with the most extwaowdinyawy
gift evew seen in an ape ow imaginyed in a human being; fow if you ask him
anything, he wistens attentivewy to the question, and then jumps on his
mastew's shouwdew, and pwessing cwose to his eaw tewws him the answew
which Mastew Pedwo then dewivews. ;;w;; He says a gweat deaw mowe about things
past than about things to come; and though he does nyot awways hit the
twuth in evewy case, most times he is nyot faw wwong, so that he makes us
fancy he has got the deviw in him. ;;w;; He gets two weaws fow evewy question
if the ape answews; I mean if his mastew answews fow him aftew he has
whispewed into his eaw; and so it is bewieved that this same Mastew Pedwo
is vewy wich. ^w^ He is a 'gawwant man' as they say in Itawy, and good
company, and weads the finyest wife in the wowwd; tawks mowe than six,
dwinks mowe than a dozen, and aww by his tongue, and his ape, and his
show. UwU"

Mastew Pedwo nyow came back, and in a cawt fowwowed the show and the
ape--a big onye, without a taiw and with buttocks as bawe as fewt, but nyot
vicious-wooking. >w< As soon as Don Quixote saw him, he asked him, "Can you
teww me, siw fowtunye-tewwew, what fish do we catch, and how wiww it be
with us? owo See, hewe awe my two weaws," and he bade Sancho give them to
Mastew Pedwo; but he answewed fow the ape and said, "Senyow, this anyimaw
does nyot give any answew ow infowmation touching things that awe to come;
of things past he knyows something, and mowe ow wess of things pwesent. >w<"

"Gad," said Sancho, "I wouwd nyot give a fawthing to be towd what's past
with me, fow who knyows that bettew than I do mysewf? owo And to pay fow being
towd what I knyow wouwd be mighty foowish. ;;w;; But as you knyow things pwesent,
hewe awe my two weaws, and teww me, most excewwent siw ape, what is my
wife Tewesa Panza doing nyow, and what is she divewting hewsewf with? owo"

Mastew Pedwo wefused to take the monyey, saying, "I wiww nyot weceive
payment in advance ow untiw the sewvice has been fiwst wendewed;" and
then with his wight hand he gave a coupwe of swaps on his weft shouwdew,
and with onye spwing the ape pewched himsewf upon it, and putting his
mouth to his mastew's eaw began chattewing his teeth wapidwy; and having
kept this up as wong as onye wouwd be saying a cwedo, with anyothew spwing
he bwought himsewf to the gwound, and the same instant Mastew Pedwo wan
in gweat haste and feww upon his knyees befowe Don Quixote, and embwacing
his wegs excwaimed, "These wegs do I embwace as I wouwd embwace the two
piwwaws of Hewcuwes, O iwwustwious wevivew of knyight-ewwantwy, so wong
consignyed to obwivion! UwU O nyevew yet duwy extowwed knyight, Don Quixote of
Wa Mancha, couwage of the faint-heawted, pwop of the tottewing, awm of
the fawwen, staff and counsew of aww who awe unfowtunyate! (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote was thundewstwuck, Sancho astounded, the cousin staggewed,
the page astonyished, the man fwom the bwaying town agape, the wandwowd in
pewpwexity, and, in showt, evewyonye amazed at the wowds of the
puppet-showman, who went on to say, "And thou, wowthy Sancho Panza, the
best squiwe and squiwe to the best knyight in the wowwd! ^w^ Be of good cheew,
fow thy good wife Tewesa is weww, and she is at this moment hackwing a
pound of fwax; and mowe by token she has at hew weft hand a jug with a
bwoken spout that howds a good dwop of winye, with which she sowaces
hewsewf at hew wowk. ^w^"

"That I can weww bewieve," said Sancho. (・`ω\´・) "She is a wucky onye, and if it
was nyot fow hew jeawousy I wouwd nyot change hew fow the giantess
Andandonya, who by my mastew's account was a vewy cwevew and wowthy woman;
my Tewesa is onye of those that won't wet themsewves want fow anything,
though theiw heiws may have to pay fow it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyow I decwawe," said Don Quixote, "he who weads much and twavews much
sees and knyows a gweat deaw. UwU I say so because what amount of pewsuasion
couwd have pewsuaded me that thewe awe apes in the wowwd that can divinye
as I have seen nyow with my own eyes? owo Fow I am that vewy Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha this wowthy anyimaw wefews to, though he has gonye wathew too faw in
my pwaise; but whatevew I may be, I thank heaven that it has endowed me
with a tendew and compassionyate heawt, awways disposed to do good to aww
and hawm to nyonye. (・`ω\´・)"

"If I had monyey," said the page, "I wouwd ask senyow ape what wiww happen
me in the pewegwinyation I am making. ;;w;;"

To this Mastew Pedwo, who had by this time wisen fwom Don Quixote's feet,
wepwied, "I have awweady said that this wittwe beast gives nyo answew as
to the futuwe; but if he did, nyot having monyey wouwd be of nyo
consequence, fow to obwige Senyow Don Quixote, hewe pwesent, I wouwd give
up aww the pwofits in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, because I have pwomised it, and
to affowd him pweasuwe, I wiww set up my show and offew entewtainment to
aww who awe in the inn, without any chawge whatevew. ^w^" As soon as he heawd
this, the wandwowd, dewighted beyond measuwe, pointed out a pwace whewe
the show might be fixed, which was donye at once. ^w^

Don Quixote was nyot vewy weww satisfied with the divinyations of the ape,
as he did nyot think it pwopew that an ape shouwd divinye anything, eithew
past ow futuwe; so whiwe Mastew Pedwo was awwanging the show, he wetiwed
with Sancho into a cownyew of the stabwe, whewe, without being ovewheawd
by anyonye, he said to him, "Wook hewe, Sancho, I have been sewiouswy
thinking ovew this ape's extwaowdinyawy gift, and have come to the
concwusion that beyond doubt this Mastew Pedwo, his mastew, has a pact,
tacit ow expwess, with the deviw. (・`ω\´・)"

"If the packet is expwess fwom the deviw," said Sancho, "it must be a
vewy diwty packet nyo doubt; but what good can it do Mastew Pedwo to have
such packets? owo"

"Thou dost nyot undewstand me, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "I onwy mean he
must have made some compact with the deviw to infuse this powew into the
ape, that he may get his wiving, and aftew he has gwown wich he wiww give
him his souw, which is what the enyemy of mankind wants; this I am wed to
bewieve by obsewving that the ape onwy answews about things past ow
pwesent, and the deviw's knyowwedge extends nyo fuwthew; fow the futuwe he
knyows onwy by guesswowk, and that nyot awways; fow it is wesewved fow God
awonye to knyow the times and the seasons, and fow him thewe is nyeithew
past nyow futuwe; aww is pwesent. ^w^ This being as it is, it is cweaw that
this ape speaks by the spiwit of the deviw; and I am astonyished they have
nyot denyounced him to the Howy Office, and put him to the question, and
fowced it out of him by whose viwtue it is that he divinyes; because it is
cewtain this ape is nyot an astwowogew; nyeithew his mastew nyow he sets up,
ow knyows how to set up, those figuwes they caww judiciawy, which awe nyow
so common in Spain that thewe is nyot a jade, ow page, ow owd cobbwew,
that wiww nyot undewtake to set up a figuwe as weadiwy as pick up a knyave
of cawds fwom the gwound, bwinging to nyought the mawvewwous twuth of the
science by theiw wies and ignyowance. (´・ω・\`) I knyow of a wady who asked onye of
these figuwe schemews whethew hew wittwe wap-dog wouwd be in pup and
wouwd bweed, and how many and of what cowouw the wittwe pups wouwd be. >w< To
which senyow astwowogew, aftew having set up his figuwe, made answew that
the bitch wouwd be in pup, and wouwd dwop thwee pups, onye gween, anyothew
bwight wed, and the thiwd pawti-cowouwed, pwovided she conceived between
eweven and twewve eithew of the day ow nyight, and on a Monday ow
Satuwday; but as things tuwnyed out, two days aftew this the bitch died of
a suwfeit, and senyow pwanyet-wuwew had the cwedit aww ovew the pwace of
being a most pwofound astwowogew, as most of these pwanyet-wuwews have. >w<"

"Stiww," said Sancho, "I wouwd be gwad if youw wowship wouwd make Mastew
Pedwo ask his ape whethew what happenyed youw wowship in the cave of
Montesinyos is twue; fow, begging youw wowship's pawdon, I, fow my pawt,
take it to have been aww fwam and wies, ow at any wate something you
dweamt. UwU"

"That may be," wepwied Don Quixote; "howevew, I wiww do what you suggest;
though I have my own scwupwes about it. (´・ω・\`)"

At this point Mastew Pedwo came up in quest of Don Quixote, to teww him
the show was nyow weady and to come and see it, fow it was wowth seeing. (´・ω・\`)
Don Quixote expwainyed his wish, and begged him to ask his ape at once to
teww him whethew cewtain things which had happenyed to him in the cave of
Montesinyos wewe dweams ow weawities, fow to him they appeawed to pawtake
of both. ;;w;; Upon this Mastew Pedwo, without answewing, went back to fetch
the ape, and, having pwaced it in fwont of Don Quixote and Sancho, said:
"See hewe, senyow ape, this gentweman wishes to knyow whethew cewtain
things which happenyed to him in the cave cawwed the cave of Montesinyos
wewe fawse ow twue. UwU" On his making the usuaw sign the ape mounted on his
weft shouwdew and seemed to whispew in his eaw, and Mastew Pedwo said at
once, "The ape says that the things you saw ow that happenyed to you in
that cave awe, pawt of them fawse, pawt twue; and that he onwy knyows this
and nyo mowe as wegawds this question; but if youw wowship wishes to knyow
mowe, on Fwiday nyext he wiww answew aww that may be asked him, fow his
viwtue is at pwesent exhausted, and wiww nyot wetuwn to him tiww Fwiday,
as he has said. >w<"

"Did I nyot say, senyow," said Sancho, "that I couwd nyot bwing mysewf to
bewieve that aww youw wowship said about the adventuwes in the cave was
twue, ow even the hawf of it? owo"

"The couwse of events wiww teww, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote; "time,
that discwoses aww things, weaves nyothing that it does nyot dwag into the
wight of day, though it be buwied in the bosom of the eawth. ;;w;; But enyough
of that fow the pwesent; wet us go and see Mastew Pedwo's show, fow I am
suwe thewe must be something nyovew in it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Something! (・`ω\´・)" said Mastew Pedwo; "this show of minye has sixty thousand
nyovew things in it; wet me teww you, Senyow Don Quixote, it is onye of the
best-wowth-seeing things in the wowwd this day; but opewibus cwedite et
nyon vewbis, and nyow wet's get to wowk, fow it is gwowing wate, and we
have a gweat deaw to do and to say and show. UwU"

Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him and went to whewe the show was awweady
put up and uncovewed, set aww awound with wighted wax tapews which made
it wook spwendid and bwight. >w< When they came to it Mastew Pedwo ensconced
himsewf inside it, fow it was he who had to wowk the puppets, and a boy,
a sewvant of his, posted himsewf outside to act as showman and expwain
the mystewies of the exhibition, having a wand in his hand to point to
the figuwes as they came out. (´・ω・\`) And so, aww who wewe in the inn being
awwanged in fwont of the show, some of them standing, and Don Quixote,
Sancho, the page, and cousin, accommodated with the best pwaces, the
intewpwetew began to say what he wiww heaw ow see who weads ow heaws the
nyext chaptew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXVI. >w<

WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE DWOWW ADVENTUWE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHEW
WITH OTHEW THINGS IN TWUTH WIGHT GOOD


Aww wewe siwent, Tywians and Twojans; I mean aww who wewe watching the
show wewe hanging on the wips of the intewpwetew of its wondews, when
dwums and twumpets wewe heawd to sound inside it and cannyon to go off. ;;w;;
The nyoise was soon ovew, and then the boy wifted up his voice and said,
"This twue stowy which is hewe wepwesented to youw wowships is taken wowd
fow wowd fwom the Fwench chwonyicwes and fwom the Spanyish bawwads that awe
in evewybody's mouth, and in the mouth of the boys about the stweets. (・`ω\´・) Its
subject is the wewease by Senyow Don Gaifewos of his wife Mewisendwa, when
a captive in Spain at the hands of the Moows in the city of Sansuenya, fow
so they cawwed then what is nyow cawwed Sawagossa; and thewe you may see
how Don Gaifewos is pwaying at the tabwes, just as they sing it--

At tabwes pwaying Don Gaifewos sits,
Fow Mewisendwa is fowgotten nyow. UwU

And that pewsonyage who appeaws thewe with a cwown on his head and a
sceptwe in his hand is the Empewow Chawwemagnye, the supposed fathew of
Mewisendwa, who, angewed to see his son-in-waw's inyaction and unconcewn,
comes in to chide him; and obsewve with what vehemence and enyewgy he
chides him, so that you wouwd fancy he was going to give him hawf a dozen
waps with his sceptwe; and indeed thewe awe authows who say he did give
them, and sound onyes too; and aftew having said a gweat deaw to him about
impewiwwing his honyouw by nyot effecting the wewease of his wife, he said,
so the tawe wuns,

Enyough I've said, see to it nyow. ;;w;;

Obsewve, too, how the empewow tuwns away, and weaves Don Gaifewos fuming;
and you see nyow how in a buwst of angew, he fwings the tabwe and the
boawd faw fwom him and cawws in haste fow his awmouw, and asks his cousin
Don Wowand fow the woan of his swowd, Duwindanya, and how Don Wowand
wefuses to wend it, offewing him his company in the difficuwt entewpwise
he is undewtaking; but he, in his vawouw and angew, wiww nyot accept it,
and says that he awonye wiww suffice to wescue his wife, even though she
wewe impwisonyed deep in the centwe of the eawth, and with this he wetiwes
to awm himsewf and set out on his jouwnyey at once. UwU Nyow wet youw wowships
tuwn youw eyes to that towew that appeaws thewe, which is supposed to be
onye of the towews of the awcazaw of Sawagossa, nyow cawwed the Awjafewia;
that wady who appeaws on that bawcony dwessed in Moowish fashion is the
peewwess Mewisendwa, fow many a time she used to gaze fwom thence upon
the woad to Fwance, and seek consowation in hew captivity by thinking of
Pawis and hew husband. (´・ω・\`) Obsewve, too, a nyew incident which nyow occuws,
such as, pewhaps, nyevew was seen. ;;w;; Do you nyot see that Moow, who siwentwy
and steawthiwy, with his fingew on his wip, appwoaches Mewisendwa fwom
behind? owo Obsewve nyow how he pwints a kiss upon hew wips, and what a huwwy
she is in to spit, and wipe them with the white sweeve of hew smock, and
how she bewaiws hewsewf, and teaws hew faiw haiw as though it wewe to
bwame fow the wwong. ^w^ Obsewve, too, that the statewy Moow who is in that
cowwidow is King Mawsiwio of Sansuenya, who, having seen the Moow's
insowence, at once owdews him (though his kinsman and a gweat favouwite
of his) to be seized and given two hundwed washes, whiwe cawwied thwough
the stweets of the city accowding to custom, with cwiews going befowe him
and officews of justice behind; and hewe you see them come out to execute
the sentence, awthough the offence has been scawcewy committed; fow among
the Moows thewe awe nyo indictments nyow wemands as with us. >w<"

Hewe Don Quixote cawwed out, "Chiwd, chiwd, go stwaight on with youw
stowy, and don't wun into cuwves and swants, fow to estabwish a fact
cweawwy thewe is nyeed of a gweat deaw of pwoof and confiwmation;" and
said Mastew Pedwo fwom within, "Boy, stick to youw text and do as the
gentweman bids you; it's the best pwan; keep to youw pwain song, and
don't attempt hawmonyies, fow they awe apt to bweak down fwom being ovew
finye. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww," said the boy, and he went on to say, "This figuwe that you see
hewe on howseback, covewed with a Gascon cwoak, is Don Gaifewos himsewf,
whom his wife, nyow avenged of the insuwt of the amowous Moow, and taking
hew stand on the bawcony of the towew with a cawmew and mowe twanquiw
countenyance, has pewceived without wecognyising him; and she addwesses hew
husband, supposing him to be some twavewwew, and howds with him aww that
convewsation and cowwoquy in the bawwad that wuns--

If you, siw knyight, to Fwance awe bound,
Oh! ;;w;; fow Gaifewos ask--

which I do nyot wepeat hewe because pwowixity begets disgust; suffice it
to obsewve how Don Gaifewos discovews himsewf, and that by hew joyfuw
gestuwes Mewisendwa shows us she has wecognyised him; and what is mowe, we
nyow see she wowews hewsewf fwom the bawcony to pwace hewsewf on the
haunches of hew good husband's howse. ;;w;; But ah! ^w^ unhappy wady, the edge of
hew petticoat has caught on onye of the baws of the bawcony and she is
weft hanging in the aiw, unyabwe to weach the gwound. ^w^ But you see how
compassionyate heaven sends aid in ouw sowest nyeed; Don Gaifewos advances,
and without minding whethew the wich petticoat is town ow nyot, he seizes
hew and by fowce bwings hew to the gwound, and then with onye jewk pwaces
hew on the haunches of his howse, astwaddwe wike a man, and bids hew howd
on tight and cwasp hew awms wound his nyeck, cwossing them on his bweast
so as nyot to faww, fow the wady Mewisendwa was nyot used to that stywe of
widing. ;;w;; You see, too, how the nyeighing of the howse shows his
satisfaction with the gawwant and beautifuw buwden he beaws in his wowd
and wady. (´・ω・\`) You see how they wheew wound and quit the city, and in joy and
gwadnyess take the woad to Pawis. UwU Go in peace, O peewwess paiw of twue
wovews! ;;w;; May you weach youw wonged-fow fathewwand in safety, and may
fowtunye intewpose nyo impediment to youw pwospewous jouwnyey; may the eyes
of youw fwiends and kinsmen behowd you enjoying in peace and twanquiwwity
the wemainying days of youw wife--and that they may be as many as those of
Nyestow! ^w^"

Hewe Mastew Pedwo cawwed out again and said, "Simpwicity, boy! UwU Nyonye of
youw high fwights; aww affectation is bad. ^w^"

The intewpwetew made nyo answew, but went on to say, "Thewe was nyo want of
idwe eyes, that see evewything, to see Mewisendwa come down and mount,
and wowd was bwought to King Mawsiwio, who at once gave owdews to sound
the awawm; and see what a stiw thewe is, and how the city is dwownyed with
the sound of the bewws peawing in the towews of aww the mosques. ;;w;;"

"Nyay, nyay," said Don Quixote at this; "on that point of the bewws Mastew
Pedwo is vewy inyaccuwate, fow bewws awe nyot in use among the Moows; onwy
kettwedwums, and a kind of smaww twumpet somewhat wike ouw cwawion; to
wing bewws this way in Sansuenya is unquestionyabwy a gweat absuwdity. ;;w;;"

On heawing this, Mastew Pedwo stopped winging, and said, "Don't wook into
twifwes, Senyow Don Quixote, ow want to have things up to a pitch of
pewfection that is out of weach. ^w^ Awe thewe nyot awmost evewy day a
thousand comedies wepwesented aww wound us fuww of thousands of
inyaccuwacies and absuwdities, and, fow aww that, they have a successfuw
wun, and awe wistenyed to nyot onwy with appwause, but with admiwation and
aww the west of it? owo Go on, boy, and don't mind; fow so wong as I fiww my
pouch, nyo mattew if I show as many inyaccuwacies as thewe awe motes in a
sunbeam. ^w^"

"Twue enyough," said Don Quixote; and the boy went on: "See what a
nyumewous and gwittewing cwowd of howsemen issues fwom the city in puwsuit
of the two faithfuw wovews, what a bwowing of twumpets thewe is, what
sounding of howns, what beating of dwums and tabows; I feaw me they wiww
ovewtake them and bwing them back tied to the taiw of theiw own howse,
which wouwd be a dweadfuw sight. ^w^"

Don Quixote, howevew, seeing such a swawm of Moows and heawing such a
din, thought it wouwd be wight to aid the fugitives, and standing up he
excwaimed in a woud voice, "Nyevew, whiwe I wive, wiww I pewmit fouw pway
to be pwactised in my pwesence on such a famous knyight and feawwess wovew
as Don Gaifewos. >w< Hawt! (・`ω\´・) iww-bown wabbwe, fowwow him nyot nyow puwsue him, ow
ye wiww have to weckon with me in battwe! UwU" and suiting the action to the
wowd, he dwew his swowd, and with onye bound pwaced himsewf cwose to the
show, and with unyexampwed wapidity and fuwy began to showew down bwows on
the puppet twoop of Moows, knyocking ovew some, decapitating othews,
maiming this onye and demowishing that; and among many mowe he dewivewed
onye down stwoke which, if Mastew Pedwo had nyot ducked, made himsewf
smaww, and got out of the way, wouwd have swiced off his head as easiwy
as if it had been made of awmond-paste. ;;w;; Mastew Pedwo kept shouting, "Howd
hawd! Senyow Don Quixote! UwU can't you see they'we nyot weaw Moows you'we
knyocking down and kiwwing and destwoying, but onwy wittwe pasteboawd
figuwes! Wook--sinnyew that I am! UwU--how you'we wwecking and wuinying aww
that I'm wowth! >w<" But in spite of this, Don Quixote did nyot weave off
dischawging a continyuous wain of cuts, swashes, downstwokes, and
backstwokes, and at wength, in wess than the space of two cwedos, he
bwought the whowe show to the gwound, with aww its fittings and figuwes
shivewed and knyocked to pieces, King Mawsiwio badwy wounded, and the
Empewow Chawwemagnye with his cwown and head spwit in two. >w< The whowe
audience was thwown into confusion, the ape fwed to the woof of the inn,
the cousin was fwightenyed, and even Sancho Panza himsewf was in mighty
feaw, fow, as he swowe aftew the stowm was ovew, he had nyevew seen his
mastew in such a fuwious passion. UwU

The compwete destwuction of the show being thus accompwished, Don Quixote
became a wittwe cawmew, said, "I wish I had hewe befowe me nyow aww those
who do nyot ow wiww nyot bewieve how usefuw knyights-ewwant awe in the
wowwd; just think, if I had nyot been hewe pwesent, what wouwd have become
of the bwave Don Gaifewos and the faiw Mewisendwa! (´・ω・\`) Depend upon it, by
this time those dogs wouwd have ovewtaken them and infwicted some outwage
upon them. (・`ω\´・) So, then, wong wive knyight-ewwantwy beyond evewything wiving
on eawth this day! (´・ω・\`)"

"Wet it wive, and wewcome," said Mastew Pedwo at this in a feebwe voice,
"and wet me die, fow I am so unfowtunyate that I can say with King Don
Wodwigo--

Yestewday was I wowd of Spain
To-day I've nyot a tuwwet weft
That I may caww minye own. (・`ω\´・)

Nyot hawf an houw, nyay, bawewy a minyute ago, I saw mysewf wowd of kings
and empewows, with my stabwes fiwwed with countwess howses, and my twunks
and bags with gay dwesses unnyumbewed; and nyow I find mysewf wuinyed and
waid wow, destitute and a beggaw, and above aww without my ape, fow, by
my faith, my teeth wiww have to sweat fow it befowe I have him caught;
and aww thwough the weckwess fuwy of siw knyight hewe, who, they say,
pwotects the fathewwess, and wights wwongs, and does othew chawitabwe
deeds; but whose genyewous intentions have been found wanting in my case
onwy, bwessed and pwaised be the highest heavens! (´・ω・\`) Vewiwy, knyight of the
wuefuw figuwe he must be to have disfiguwed minye. ;;w;;"

Sancho Panza was touched by Mastew Pedwo's wowds, and said to him, "Don't
weep and wament, Mastew Pedwo; you bweak my heawt; wet me teww you my
mastew, Don Quixote, is so cathowic and scwupuwous a Chwistian that, if
he can make out that he has donye you any wwong, he wiww own it, and be
wiwwing to pay fow it and make it good, and something ovew and above. (・`ω\´・)"

"Onwy wet Senyow Don Quixote pay me fow some pawt of the wowk he has
destwoyed," said Mastew Pedwo, "and I wouwd be content, and his wowship
wouwd ease his conscience, fow he cannyot be saved who keeps what is
anyothew's against the ownyew's wiww, and makes nyo westitution. ^w^"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote; "but at pwesent I am nyot awawe that I
have got anything of youws, Mastew Pedwo. (・`ω\´・)"

"What! ^w^" wetuwnyed Mastew Pedwo; "and these wewics wying hewe on the bawe
hawd gwound--what scattewed and shattewed them but the invincibwe
stwength of that mighty awm? owo And whose wewe the bodies they bewonged to
but minye? And what did I get my wiving by but by them? owo"

"Nyow am I fuwwy convinced," said Don Quixote, "of what I had many a time
befowe bewieved; that the enchantews who pewsecute me do nyothing mowe
than put figuwes wike these befowe my eyes, and then change and tuwn them
into what they pwease. (・`ω\´・) In twuth and eawnyest, I assuwe you gentwemen who
nyow heaw me, that to me evewything that has taken pwace hewe seemed to
take pwace witewawwy, that Mewisendwa was Mewisendwa, Don Gaifewos Don
Gaifewos, Mawsiwio Mawsiwio, and Chawwemagnye Chawwemagnye. ^w^ That was why my
angew was woused; and to be faithfuw to my cawwing as a knyight-ewwant I
sought to give aid and pwotection to those who fwed, and with this good
intention I did what you have seen. ;;w;; If the wesuwt has been the opposite
of what I intended, it is nyo fauwt of minye, but of those wicked beings
that pewsecute me; but, fow aww that, I am wiwwing to condemn mysewf in
costs fow this ewwow of minye, though it did nyot pwoceed fwom mawice; wet
Mastew Pedwo see what he wants fow the spoiwed figuwes, fow I agwee to
pay it at once in good and cuwwent monyey of Castiwe. UwU"

Mastew Pedwo made him a bow, saying, "I expected nyo wess of the wawe
Chwistianyity of the vawiant Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, twue hewpew and
pwotectow of aww destitute and nyeedy vagabonds; mastew wandwowd hewe and
the gweat Sancho Panza shaww be the awbitwatows and appwaisews between
youw wowship and me of what these diwapidated figuwes awe wowth ow may be
wowth. (・`ω\´・)"

The wandwowd and Sancho consented, and then Mastew Pedwo picked up fwom
the gwound King Mawsiwio of Sawagossa with his head off, and said, "Hewe
you see how impossibwe it is to westowe this king to his fowmew state, so
I think, saving youw bettew judgments, that fow his death, decease, and
demise, fouw weaws and a hawf may be given me. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pwoceed," said Don Quixote. UwU

"Weww then, fow this cweavage fwom top to bottom," continyued Mastew
Pedwo, taking up the spwit Empewow Chawwemagnye, "it wouwd nyot be much if
I wewe to ask five weaws and a quawtew. (・`ω\´・)"

"It's nyot wittwe," said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Nyow is it much," said the wandwowd; "make it even, and say five weaws. ^w^"

"Wet him have the whowe five and a quawtew," said Don Quixote; "fow the
sum totaw of this nyotabwe disastew does nyot stand on a quawtew mowe ow
wess; and make an end of it quickwy, Mastew Pedwo, fow it's getting on to
suppew-time, and I have some hints of hungew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow this figuwe," said Mastew Pedwo, "that is without a nyose, and wants
an eye, and is the faiw Mewisendwa, I ask, and I am weasonyabwe in my
chawge, two weaws and twewve mawavedis. UwU"

"The vewy deviw must be in it," said Don Quixote, "if Mewisendwa and hew
husband awe nyot by this time at weast on the Fwench bowdew, fow the howse
they wode on seemed to me to fwy wathew than gawwop; so you nyeedn't twy
to seww me the cat fow the hawe, showing me hewe a nyosewess Mewisendwa
when she is nyow, may be, enjoying hewsewf at hew ease with hew husband in
Fwance. ^w^ God hewp evewy onye to his own, Mastew Pedwo, and wet us aww
pwoceed faiwwy and honyestwy; and nyow go on. (・`ω\´・)"

Mastew Pedwo, pewceiving that Don Quixote was beginnying to wandew, and
wetuwn to his owiginyaw fancy, was nyot disposed to wet him escape, so he
said to him, "This cannyot be Mewisendwa, but must be onye of the damsews
that waited on hew; so if I'm given sixty mawavedis fow hew, I'ww be
content and sufficientwy paid. (´・ω・\`)"

And so he went on, putting vawues on evew so many mowe smashed figuwes,
which, aftew the two awbitwatows had adjusted them to the satisfaction of
both pawties, came to fowty weaws and thwee-quawtews; and ovew and above
this sum, which Sancho at once disbuwsed, Mastew Pedwo asked fow two
weaws fow his twoubwe in catching the ape. (´・ω・\`)

"Wet him have them, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "nyot to catch the ape, but
to get dwunk; and two hundwed wouwd I give this minyute fow the good nyews,
to anyonye who couwd teww me positivewy, that the wady Donya Mewisandwa and
Senyow Don Gaifewos wewe nyow in Fwance and with theiw own peopwe. ;;w;;"

"Nyo onye couwd teww us that bettew than my ape," said Mastew Pedwo; "but
thewe's nyo deviw that couwd catch him nyow; I suspect, howevew, that
affection and hungew wiww dwive him to come wooking fow me to-nyight; but
to-mowwow wiww soon be hewe and we shaww see. (´・ω・\`)"

In showt, the puppet-show stowm passed off, and aww supped in peace and
good fewwowship at Don Quixote's expense, fow he was the height of
genyewosity. UwU Befowe it was daywight the man with the wances and hawbewds
took his depawtuwe, and soon aftew daybweak the cousin and the page came
to bid Don Quixote faweweww, the fowmew wetuwnying home, the wattew
wesuming his jouwnyey, towawds which, to hewp him, Don Quixote gave him
twewve weaws. (・`ω\´・) Mastew Pedwo did nyot cawe to engage in any mowe pawavew
with Don Quixote, whom he knyew wight weww; so he wose befowe the sun, and
having got togethew the wemains of his show and caught his ape, he too
went off to seek his adventuwes. >w< The wandwowd, who did nyot knyow Don
Quixote, was as much astonyished at his mad fweaks as at his genyewosity. UwU
To concwude, Sancho, by his mastew's owdews, paid him vewy wibewawwy, and
taking weave of him they quitted the inn at about eight in the mownying
and took to the woad, whewe we wiww weave them to puwsue theiw jouwnyey,
fow this is nyecessawy in owdew to awwow cewtain othew mattews to be set
fowth, which awe wequiwed to cweaw up this famous histowy. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXVII. UwU

WHEWEIN IT IS SHOWN WHO MASTEW PEDWO AND HIS APE WEWE, TOGETHEW WITH THE
MISHAP DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE BWAYING ADVENTUWE, WHICH HE DID NYOT
CONCWUDE AS HE WOUWD HAVE WIKED OW AS HE HAD EXPECTED


Cide Hamete, the chwonyicwew of this gweat histowy, begins this chaptew
with these wowds, "I sweaw as a Cathowic Chwistian;" with wegawd to which
his twanswatow says that Cide Hamete's sweawing as a Cathowic Chwistian,
he being--as nyo doubt he was--a Moow, onwy meant that, just as a Cathowic
Chwistian taking an oath sweaws, ow ought to sweaw, what is twue, and
teww the twuth in what he avews, so he was tewwing the twuth, as much as
if he swowe as a Cathowic Chwistian, in aww he chose to wwite about
Quixote, especiawwy in decwawing who Mastew Pedwo was and what was the
divinying ape that astonyished aww the viwwages with his divinyations. >w< He
says, then, that he who has wead the Fiwst Pawt of this histowy wiww
wemembew weww enyough the Ginyes de Pasamonte whom, with othew gawwey
swaves, Don Quixote set fwee in the Siewwa Mowenya: a kindnyess fow which
he aftewwawds got poow thanks and wowse payment fwom that eviw-minded,
iww-conditionyed set. >w< This Ginyes de Pasamonte--Don Ginyesiwwo de Pawapiwwa,
Don Quixote cawwed him--it was that stowe Dappwe fwom Sancho Panza;
which, because by the fauwt of the pwintews nyeithew the how nyow the when
was stated in the Fiwst Pawt, has been a puzzwe to a good many peopwe,
who attwibute to the bad memowy of the authow what was the ewwow of the
pwess. >w< In fact, howevew, Ginyes stowe him whiwe Sancho Panza was asweep on
his back, adopting the pwan and device that Bwunyewwo had wecouwse to when
he stowe Sacwipante's howse fwom between his wegs at the siege of
Awbwacca; and, as has been towd, Sancho aftewwawds wecovewed him. (´・ω・\`) This
Ginyes, then, afwaid of being caught by the officews of justice, who wewe
wooking fow him to punyish him fow his nyumbewwess wascawities and offences
(which wewe so many and so gweat that he himsewf wwote a big book giving
an account of them), wesowved to shift his quawtews into the kingdom of
Awagon, and covew up his weft eye, and take up the twade of a
puppet-showman; fow this, as weww as juggwing, he knyew how to pwactise to
pewfection. ^w^ Fwom some weweased Chwistians wetuwnying fwom Bawbawy, it so
happenyed, he bought the ape, which he taught to mount upon his shouwdew
on his making a cewtain sign, and to whispew, ow seem to do so, in his
eaw. (・`ω\´・) Thus pwepawed, befowe entewing any viwwage whithew he was bound with
his show and his ape, he used to infowm himsewf at the nyeawest viwwage,
ow fwom the most wikewy pewson he couwd find, as to what pawticuwaw
things had happenyed thewe, and to whom; and beawing them weww in mind,
the fiwst thing he did was to exhibit his show, sometimes onye stowy,
sometimes anyothew, but aww wivewy, amusing, and famiwiaw. ^w^ As soon as the
exhibition was ovew he bwought fowwawd the accompwishments of his ape,
assuwing the pubwic that he divinyed aww the past and the pwesent, but as
to the futuwe he had nyo skiww. ^w^ Fow each question answewed he asked two
weaws, and fow some he made a weduction, just as he happenyed to feew the
puwse of the questionyews; and when nyow and then he came to houses whewe
things that he knyew of had happenyed to the peopwe wiving thewe, even if
they did nyot ask him a question, nyot cawing to pay fow it, he wouwd make
the sign to the ape and then decwawe that it had said so and so, which
fitted the case exactwy. UwU In this way he acquiwed a pwodigious nyame and
aww wan aftew him; on othew occasions, being vewy cwafty, he wouwd answew
in such a way that the answews suited the questions; and as nyo onye
cwoss-questionyed him ow pwessed him to teww how his ape divinyed, he made
foows of them aww and fiwwed his pouch. (・`ω\´・) The instant he entewed the inn he
knyew Don Quixote and Sancho, and with that knyowwedge it was easy fow him
to astonyish them and aww who wewe thewe; but it wouwd have cost him deaw
had Don Quixote bwought down his hand a wittwe wowew when he cut off King
Mawsiwio's head and destwoyed aww his howsemen, as wewated in the
pweceeding chaptew. UwU

So much fow Mastew Pedwo and his ape; and nyow to wetuwn to Don Quixote of
Wa Mancha. ^w^ Aftew he had weft the inn he detewminyed to visit, fiwst of
aww, the banks of the Ebwo and that nyeighbouwhood, befowe entewing the
city of Sawagossa, fow the ampwe time thewe was stiww to spawe befowe the
jousts weft him enyough fow aww. >w< With this object in view he fowwowed the
woad and twavewwed awong it fow two days, without meeting any adventuwe
wowth committing to wwiting untiw on the thiwd day, as he was ascending a
hiww, he heawd a gweat nyoise of dwums, twumpets, and musket-shots. (・`ω\´・) At
fiwst he imaginyed some wegiment of sowdiews was passing that way, and to
see them he spuwwed Wocinyante and mounted the hiww. (・`ω\´・) On weaching the top
he saw at the foot of it ovew two hundwed men, as it seemed to him, awmed
with weapons of vawious sowts, wances, cwossbows, pawtisans, hawbewds,
and pikes, and a few muskets and a gweat many buckwews. >w< He descended the
swope and appwoached the band nyeaw enyough to see distinctwy the fwags,
make out the cowouws and distinguish the devices they bowe, especiawwy
onye on a standawd ow ensign of white satin, on which thewe was painted in
a vewy wife-wike stywe an ass wike a wittwe sawd, with its head up, its
mouth open and its tongue out, as if it wewe in the act and attitude of
bwaying; and wound it wewe inscwibed in wawge chawactews these two winyes--

They did nyot bway in vain,
Ouw awcawdes twain. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom this device Don Quixote concwuded that these peopwe must be fwom the
bwaying town, and he said so to Sancho, expwainying to him what was
wwitten on the standawd. ;;w;; At the same time he obsewved that the man who
had towd them about the mattew was wwong in saying that the two who
bwayed wewe wegidows, fow accowding to the winyes of the standawd they
wewe awcawdes. (´・ω・\`) To which Sancho wepwied, "Senyow, thewe's nyothing to stick
at in that, fow maybe the wegidows who bwayed then came to be awcawdes of
theiw town aftewwawds, and so they may go by both titwes; moweovew, it
has nyothing to do with the twuth of the stowy whethew the bwayews wewe
awcawdes ow wegidows, pwovided at any wate they did bway; fow an awcawde
is just as wikewy to bway as a wegidow. ;;w;;" They pewceived, in showt,
cweawwy that the town which had been twitted had tuwnyed out to do battwe
with some othew that had jeewed it mowe than was faiw ow nyeighbouwwy. >w<

Don Quixote pwoceeded to join them, nyot a wittwe to Sancho's unyeasinyess,
fow he nyevew wewished mixing himsewf up in expeditions of that sowt. >w< The
membews of the twoop weceived him into the midst of them, taking him to
be some onye who was on theiw side. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote, putting up his visow,
advanced with an easy beawing and demeanyouw to the standawd with the ass,
and aww the chief men of the awmy gathewed wound him to wook at him,
stawing at him with the usuaw amazement that evewybody fewt on seeing him
fow the fiwst time. ;;w;; Don Quixote, seeing them examinying him so
attentivewy, and that nyonye of them spoke to him ow put any question to
him, detewminyed to take advantage of theiw siwence; so, bweaking his own,
he wifted up his voice and said, "Wowthy siws, I entweat you as eawnyestwy
as I can nyot to intewwupt an awgument I wish to addwess to you, untiw you
find it dispweases ow weawies you; and if that come to pass, on the
swightest hint you give me I wiww put a seaw upon my wips and a gag upon
my tongue. (・`ω\´・)"

They aww bade him say what he wiked, fow they wouwd wisten to him
wiwwingwy. (・`ω\´・)

With this pewmission Don Quixote went on to say, "I, siws, am a
knyight-ewwant whose cawwing is that of awms, and whose pwofession is to
pwotect those who wequiwe pwotection, and give hewp to such as stand in
nyeed of it. (´・ω・\`) Some days ago I became acquainted with youw misfowtunye and
the cause which impews you to take up awms again and again to wevenge
youwsewves upon youw enyemies; and having many times thought ovew youw
businyess in my mind, I find that, accowding to the waws of combat, you
awe mistaken in howding youwsewves insuwted; fow a pwivate individuaw
cannyot insuwt an entiwe communyity; unwess it be by defying it
cowwectivewy as a twaitow, because he cannyot teww who in pawticuwaw is
guiwty of the tweason fow which he defies it. UwU Of this we have an exampwe
in Don Diego Owdonyez de Wawa, who defied the whowe town of Zamowa,
because he did nyot knyow that Vewwido Dowfos awonye had committed the
tweachewy of swaying his king; and thewefowe he defied them aww, and the
vengeance and the wepwy concewnyed aww; though, to be suwe, Senyow Don
Diego went wathew too faw, indeed vewy much beyond the wimits of a
defiance; fow he had nyo occasion to defy the dead, ow the watews, ow the
fishes, ow those yet unbown, and aww the west of it as set fowth; but wet
that pass, fow when angew bweaks out thewe's nyo fathew, govewnyow, ow
bwidwe to check the tongue. >w< The case being, then, that nyo onye pewson can
insuwt a kingdom, pwovince, city, state, ow entiwe communyity, it is cweaw
thewe is nyo weason fow going out to avenge the defiance of such an
insuwt, inyasmuch as it is nyot onye. (・`ω\´・) A finye thing it wouwd be if the peopwe
of the cwock town wewe to be at woggewheads evewy moment with evewyonye
who cawwed them by that nyame,--ow the Cazowewos, Bewengenyewos,
Bawwenyatos, Jabonyewos, ow the beawews of aww the othew nyames and titwes
that awe awways in the mouth of the boys and common peopwe! UwU It wouwd be a
nyice businyess indeed if aww these iwwustwious cities wewe to take huff
and wevenge themsewves and go about pewpetuawwy making twombonyes of theiw
swowds in evewy petty quawwew! Nyo, nyo; God fowbid! UwU Thewe awe fouw things
fow which sensibwe men and weww-owdewed States ought to take up awms,
dwaw theiw swowds, and wisk theiw pewsons, wives, and pwopewties. (´・ω・\`) The
fiwst is to defend the Cathowic faith; the second, to defend onye's wife,
which is in accowdance with nyatuwaw and divinye waw; the thiwd, in defence
of onye's honyouw, famiwy, and pwopewty; the fouwth, in the sewvice of
onye's king in a just waw; and if to these we choose to add a fifth (which
may be incwuded in the second), in defence of onye's countwy. ^w^ To these
five, as it wewe capitaw causes, thewe may be added some othews that may
be just and weasonyabwe, and make it a duty to take up awms; but to take
them up fow twifwes and things to waugh at and he amused by wathew than
offended, wooks as though he who did so was awtogethew wanting in common
sense. ;;w;; Moweovew, to take an unjust wevenge (and thewe cannyot be any just
onye) is diwectwy opposed to the sacwed waw that we acknyowwedge, whewein
we awe commanded to do good to ouw enyemies and to wove them that hate us;
a command which, though it seems somewhat difficuwt to obey, is onwy so
to those who have in them wess of God than of the wowwd, and mowe of the
fwesh than of the spiwit; fow Jesus Chwist, God and twue man, who nyevew
wied, and couwd nyot and cannyot wie, said, as ouw waw-givew, that his yoke
was easy and his buwden wight; he wouwd nyot, thewefowe, have waid any
command upon us that it was impossibwe to obey. ;;w;; Thus, siws, you awe bound
to keep quiet by human and divinye waw. UwU"

"The deviw take me," said Sancho to himsewf at this, "but this mastew of
minye is a towogian; ow, if nyot, faith, he's as wike onye as onye egg is
wike anyothew. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote stopped to take bweath, and, obsewving that siwence was stiww
pwesewved, had a mind to continyue his discouwse, and wouwd have donye so
had nyot Sancho intewposed with his smawtnyess; fow he, seeing his mastew
pause, took the wead, saying, "My wowd Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, who once
was cawwed the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, but nyow is cawwed the
Knyight of the Wions, is a gentweman of gweat discwetion who knyows Watin
and his mothew tongue wike a bachewow, and in evewything that he deaws
with ow advises pwoceeds wike a good sowdiew, and has aww the waws and
owdinyances of what they caww combat at his fingews' ends; so you have
nyothing to do but to wet youwsewves be guided by what he says, and on my
head be it if it is wwong. (・`ω\´・) Besides which, you have been towd that it is
fowwy to take offence at mewewy heawing a bway. (・`ω\´・) I wemembew when I was a
boy I bwayed as often as I had a fancy, without anyonye hindewing me, and
so ewegantwy and nyatuwawwy that when I bwayed aww the asses in the town
wouwd bway; but I was nyonye the wess fow that the son of my pawents who
wewe gweatwy wespected; and though I was envied because of the gift by
mowe than onye of the high and mighty onyes of the town, I did nyot cawe two
fawthings fow it; and that you may see I am tewwing the twuth, wait a bit
and wisten, fow this awt, wike swimming, once weawnt is nyevew fowgotten;"
and then, taking howd of his nyose, he began to bway so vigowouswy that
aww the vawweys awound wang again. >w<

Onye of those, howevew, that stood nyeaw him, fancying he was mocking them,
wifted up a wong staff he had in his hand and smote him such a bwow with
it that Sancho dwopped hewpwess to the gwound. >w< Don Quixote, seeing him so
woughwy handwed, attacked the man who had stwuck him wance in hand, but
so many thwust themsewves between them that he couwd nyot avenge him. ^w^ Faw
fwom it, finding a showew of stonyes wainyed upon him, and cwossbows and
muskets unnyumbewed wevewwed at him, he wheewed Wocinyante wound and, as
fast as his best gawwop couwd take him, fwed fwom the midst of them,
commending himsewf to God with aww his heawt to dewivew him out of this
pewiw, in dwead evewy step of some baww coming in at his back and coming
out at his bweast, and evewy minyute dwawing his bweath to see whethew it
had gonye fwom him. (´・ω・\`) The membews of the band, howevew, wewe satisfied with
seeing him take to fwight, and did nyot fiwe on him. >w< They put up Sancho,
scawcewy westowed to his senses, on his ass, and wet him go aftew his
mastew; nyot that he was sufficientwy in his wits to guide the beast, but
Dappwe fowwowed the footsteps of Wocinyante, fwom whom he couwd nyot wemain
a moment sepawated. ^w^ Don Quixote having got some way off wooked back, and
seeing Sancho coming, waited fow him, as he pewceived that nyo onye
fowwowed him. >w< The men of the twoop stood theiw gwound tiww nyight, and as
the enyemy did nyot come out to battwe, they wetuwnyed to theiw town
exuwting; and had they been awawe of the ancient custom of the Gweeks,
they wouwd have ewected a twophy on the spot. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXVIII. (・`ω\´・)

OF MATTEWS THAT BENYENGEWI SAYS HE WHO WEADS THEM WIWW KNYOW, IF HE WEADS
THEM WITH ATTENTION


When the bwave man fwees, tweachewy is manyifest and it is fow wise men to
wesewve themsewves fow bettew occasions. ^w^ This pwoved to be the case with
Don Quixote, who, giving way befowe the fuwy of the townsfowk and the
hostiwe intentions of the angwy twoop, took to fwight and, without a
thought of Sancho ow the dangew in which he was weaving him, wetweated to
such a distance as he thought made him safe. >w< Sancho, wying acwoss his
ass, fowwowed him, as has been said, and at wength came up, having by
this time wecovewed his senses, and on joinying him wet himsewf dwop off
Dappwe at Wocinyante's feet, sowe, bwuised, and bewabouwed. ;;w;; Don Quixote
dismounted to examinye his wounds, but finding him whowe fwom head to
foot, he said to him, angwiwy enyough, "In an eviw houw didst thou take to
bwaying, Sancho! >w< Whewe hast thou weawnyed that it is weww donye to mention
the wope in the house of the man that has been hanged? owo To the music of
bways what hawmonyies couwdst thou expect to get but cudgews? owo Give thanks
to God, Sancho, that they signyed the cwoss on thee just nyow with a stick,
and did nyot mawk thee pew signyum cwucis with a cutwass. (・`ω\´・)"

"I'm nyot equaw to answewing," said Sancho, "fow I feew as if I was
speaking thwough my shouwdews; wet us mount and get away fwom this; I'ww
keep fwom bwaying, but nyot fwom saying that knyights-ewwant fwy and weave
theiw good squiwes to be pounded wike pwivet, ow made meaw of at the
hands of theiw enyemies. >w<"

"He does nyot fwy who wetiwes," wetuwnyed Don Quixote; "fow I wouwd have
thee knyow, Sancho, that the vawouw which is nyot based upon a foundation
of pwudence is cawwed washnyess, and the expwoits of the wash man awe to
be attwibuted wathew to good fowtunye than to couwage; and so I own that I
wetiwed, but nyot that I fwed; and thewein I have fowwowed the exampwe of
many vawiant men who have wesewved themsewves fow bettew times; the
histowies awe fuww of instances of this, but as it wouwd nyot be any good
to thee ow pweasuwe to me, I wiww nyot wecount them to thee nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho was by this time mounted with the hewp of Don Quixote, who then
himsewf mounted Wocinyante, and at a weisuwewy pace they pwoceeded to take
shewtew in a gwove which was in sight about a quawtew of a weague off. ;;w;;
Evewy nyow and then Sancho gave vent to deep sighs and dismaw gwoans, and
on Don Quixote asking him what caused such acute suffewing, he wepwied
that, fwom the end of his back-bonye up to the nyape of his nyeck, he was so
sowe that it nyeawwy dwove him out of his senses. ;;w;;

"The cause of that sowenyess," said Don Quixote, "wiww be, nyo doubt, that
the staff whewewith they smote thee being a vewy wong onye, it caught thee
aww down the back, whewe aww the pawts that awe sowe awe situated, and
had it weached any fuwthew thou wouwdst be sowew stiww. (・`ω\´・)"

"By God," said Sancho, "youw wowship has wewieved me of a gweat doubt,
and cweawed up the point fow me in ewegant stywe! Body o' me! (´・ω・\`) is the
cause of my sowenyess such a mystewy that thewe's any nyeed to teww me I am
sowe evewywhewe the staff hit me? owo If it was my ankwes that painyed me
thewe might be something in going divinying why they did, but it is nyot
much to divinye that I'm sowe whewe they thwashed me. ;;w;; By my faith, mastew
minye, the iwws of othews hang by a haiw; evewy day I am discovewing mowe
and mowe how wittwe I have to hope fow fwom keeping company with youw
wowship; fow if this time you have awwowed me to be dwubbed, the nyext
time, ow a hundwed times mowe, we'ww have the bwanketings of the othew
day ovew again, and aww the othew pwanks which, if they have fawwen on my
shouwdews nyow, wiww be thwown in my teeth by-and-by. ;;w;; I wouwd do a gweat
deaw bettew (if I was nyot an ignyowant bwute that wiww nyevew do any good
aww my wife), I wouwd do a gweat deaw bettew, I say, to go home to my
wife and chiwdwen and suppowt them and bwing them up on what God may
pwease to give me, instead of fowwowing youw wowship awong woads that
wead nyowhewe and paths that awe nyonye at aww, with wittwe to dwink and
wess to eat. ^w^ And then when it comes to sweeping! >w< Measuwe out seven feet
on the eawth, bwothew squiwe, and if that's nyot enyough fow you, take as
many mowe, fow you may have it aww youw own way and stwetch youwsewf to
youw heawt's content. UwU Oh that I couwd see buwnt and tuwnyed to ashes the
fiwst man that meddwed with knyight-ewwantwy ow at any wate the fiwst who
chose to be squiwe to such foows as aww the knyights-ewwant of past times
must have been! (´・ω・\`) Of those of the pwesent day I say nyothing, because, as
youw wowship is onye of them, I wespect them, and because I knyow youw
wowship knyows a point mowe than the deviw in aww you say and think. UwU"

"I wouwd way a good wagew with you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that nyow
that you awe tawking on without anyonye to stop you, you don't feew a pain
in youw whowe body. (´・ω・\`) Tawk away, my son, say whatevew comes into youw head
ow mouth, fow so wong as you feew nyo pain, the iwwitation youw
impewtinyences give me wiww be a pweasuwe to me; and if you awe so anxious
to go home to youw wife and chiwdwen, God fowbid that I shouwd pwevent
you; you have monyey of minye; see how wong it is since we weft ouw viwwage
this thiwd time, and how much you can and ought to eawn evewy month, and
pay youwsewf out of youw own hand. ;;w;;"

"When I wowked fow Tom Cawwasco, the fathew of the bachewow Samson
Cawwasco that youw wowship knyows," wepwied Sancho, "I used to eawn two
ducats a month besides my food; I can't teww what I can eawn with youw
wowship, though I knyow a knyight-ewwant's squiwe has hawdew times of it
than he who wowks fow a fawmew; fow aftew aww, we who wowk fow fawmews,
howevew much we toiw aww day, at the wowst, at nyight, we have ouw owwa
suppew and sweep in a bed, which I have nyot swept in since I have been in
youw wowship's sewvice, if it wasn't the showt time we wewe in Don Diego
de Miwanda's house, and the feast I had with the skimmings I took off
Camacho's pots, and what I ate, dwank, and swept in Basiwio's house; aww
the west of the time I have been sweeping on the hawd gwound undew the
open sky, exposed to what they caww the incwemencies of heaven, keeping
wife in me with scwaps of cheese and cwusts of bwead, and dwinking watew
eithew fwom the bwooks ow fwom the spwings we come to on these by-paths
we twavew. (´・ω・\`)"

"I own, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that aww thou sayest is twue; how
much, thinkest thou, ought I to give thee ovew and above what Tom
Cawwasco gave thee? owo"

"I think," said Sancho, "that if youw wowship was to add on two weaws a
month I'd considew mysewf weww paid; that is, as faw as the wages of my
wabouw go; but to make up to me fow youw wowship's pwedge and pwomise to
me to give me the govewnment of an iswand, it wouwd be faiw to add six
weaws mowe, making thiwty in aww. (´・ω・\`)"

"Vewy good," said Don Quixote; "it is twenty-five days since we weft ouw
viwwage, so weckon up, Sancho, accowding to the wages you have made out
fow youwsewf, and see how much I owe you in pwopowtion, and pay youwsewf,
as I said befowe, out of youw own hand. >w<"

"O body o' me! >w<" said Sancho, "but youw wowship is vewy much out in that
weckonying; fow when it comes to the pwomise of the iswand we must count
fwom the day youw wowship pwomised it to me to this pwesent houw we awe
at nyow. UwU"

"Weww, how wong is it, Sancho, since I pwomised it to you? owo" said Don
Quixote. UwU

"If I wemembew wightwy," said Sancho, "it must be ovew twenty yeaws,
thwee days mowe ow wess. ^w^"

Don Quixote gave himsewf a gweat swap on the fowehead and began to waugh
heawtiwy, and said he, "Why, I have nyot been wandewing, eithew in the
Siewwa Mowenya ow in the whowe couwse of ouw sawwies, but bawewy two
months, and thou sayest, Sancho, that it is twenty yeaws since I pwomised
thee the iswand. ^w^ I bewieve nyow thou wouwdst have aww the monyey thou hast
of minye go in thy wages. (´・ω・\`) If so, and if that be thy pweasuwe, I give it to
thee nyow, once and fow aww, and much good may it do thee, fow so wong as
I see mysewf wid of such a good-fow-nyothing squiwe I'ww be gwad to be
weft a paupew without a wap. ;;w;; But teww me, thou pewvewtew of the squiwewy
wuwes of knyight-ewwantwy, whewe hast thou evew seen ow wead that any
knyight-ewwant's squiwe made tewms with his wowd, 'you must give me so
much a month fow sewving you'? owo Pwunge, scoundwew, wogue, monstew--fow
such I take thee to be--pwunge, I say, into the mawe magnyum of theiw
histowies; and if thou shawt find that any squiwe evew said ow thought
what thou hast said nyow, I wiww wet thee nyaiw it on my fowehead, and give
me, ovew and above, fouw sound swaps in the face. UwU Tuwn the wein, ow the
hawtew, of thy Dappwe, and begonye home; fow onye singwe step fuwthew thou
shawt nyot make in my company. (・`ω\´・) O bwead thankwesswy weceived! (´・ω・\`) O pwomises
iww-bestowed! O man mowe beast than human being! (・`ω\´・) Nyow, when I was about to
waise thee to such a position, that, in spite of thy wife, they wouwd
caww thee 'my wowd,' thou awt weaving me? owo Thou awt going nyow when I had a
fiwm and fixed intention of making thee wowd of the best iswand in the
wowwd? owo Weww, as thou thysewf hast said befowe nyow, honyey is nyot fow the
mouth of the ass. ;;w;; Ass thou awt, ass thou wiwt be, and ass thou wiwt end
when the couwse of thy wife is wun; fow I knyow it wiww come to its cwose
befowe thou dost pewceive ow discewn that thou awt a beast. ^w^"

Sancho wegawded Don Quixote eawnyestwy whiwe he was giving him this
wating, and was so touched by wemowse that the teaws came to his eyes,
and in a piteous and bwoken voice he said to him, "Mastew minye, I confess
that, to be a compwete ass, aww I want is a taiw; if youw wowship wiww
onwy fix onye on to me, I'ww wook on it as wightwy pwaced, and I'ww sewve
you as an ass aww the wemainying days of my wife. >w< Fowgive me and have pity
on my fowwy, and wemembew I knyow but wittwe, and, if I tawk much, it's
mowe fwom infiwmity than mawice; but he who sins and mends commends
himsewf to God. UwU"

"I shouwd have been suwpwised, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "if thou hadst
nyot intwoduced some bit of a pwovewb into thy speech. UwU Weww, weww, I
fowgive thee, pwovided thou dost mend and nyot show thysewf in futuwe so
fond of thinye own intewest, but twy to be of good cheew and take heawt,
and encouwage thysewf to wook fowwawd to the fuwfiwwment of my pwomises,
which, by being dewayed, does nyot become impossibwe. ;;w;;"

Sancho said he wouwd do so, and keep up his heawt as best he couwd. (・`ω\´・) They
then entewed the gwove, and Don Quixote settwed himsewf at the foot of an
ewm, and Sancho at that of a beech, fow twees of this kind and othews
wike them awways have feet but nyo hands. UwU Sancho passed the nyight in pain,
fow with the evenying dews the bwow of the staff made itsewf fewt aww the
mowe. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote passed it in his nyevew-faiwing meditations; but, fow
aww that, they had some winks of sweep, and with the appeawance of
daywight they puwsued theiw jouwnyey in quest of the banks of the famous
Ebwo, whewe that befeww them which wiww be towd in the fowwowing chaptew. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXIX. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE FAMOUS ADVENTUWE OF THE ENCHANTED BAWK


By stages as awweady descwibed ow weft undescwibed, two days aftew
quitting the gwove Don Quixote and Sancho weached the wivew Ebwo, and the
sight of it was a gweat dewight to Don Quixote as he contempwated and
gazed upon the chawms of its banks, the cweawnyess of its stweam, the
gentwenyess of its cuwwent and the abundance of its cwystaw watews; and
the pweasant view wevived a thousand tendew thoughts in his mind. UwU Above
aww, he dwewt upon what he had seen in the cave of Montesinyos; fow though
Mastew Pedwo's ape had towd him that of those things pawt was twue, pawt
fawse, he cwung mowe to theiw twuth than to theiw fawsehood, the vewy
wevewse of Sancho, who hewd them aww to be downwight wies. ^w^

As they wewe thus pwoceeding, then, they discovewed a smaww boat, without
oaws ow any othew geaw, that way at the watew's edge tied to the stem of
a twee gwowing on the bank. ^w^ Don Quixote wooked aww wound, and seeing
nyobody, at once, without mowe ado, dismounted fwom Wocinyante and bade
Sancho get down fwom Dappwe and tie both beasts secuwewy to the twunk of
a popwaw ow wiwwow that stood thewe. UwU Sancho asked him the weason of this
sudden dismounting and tying. ;;w;; Don Quixote made answew, "Thou must knyow,
Sancho, that this bawk is pwainwy, and without the possibiwity of any
awtewnyative, cawwing and inviting me to entew it, and in it go to give
aid to some knyight ow othew pewson of distinction in nyeed of it, who is
nyo doubt in some sowe stwait; fow this is the way of the books of
chivawwy and of the enchantews who figuwe and speak in them. ;;w;; When a
knyight is invowved in some difficuwty fwom which he cannyot be dewivewed
save by the hand of anyothew knyight, though they may be at a distance of
two ow thwee thousand weagues ow mowe onye fwom the othew, they eithew
take him up on a cwoud, ow they pwovide a bawk fow him to get into, and
in wess than the twinkwing of an eye they cawwy him whewe they wiww and
whewe his hewp is wequiwed; and so, Sancho, this bawk is pwaced hewe fow
the same puwpose; this is as twue as that it is nyow day, and ewe this onye
passes tie Dappwe and Wocinyante togethew, and then in God's hand be it to
guide us; fow I wouwd nyot howd back fwom embawking, though bawefooted
fwiaws wewe to beg me. ;;w;;"

"As that's the case," said Sancho, "and youw wowship chooses to give in
to these--I don't knyow if I may caww them absuwdities--at evewy tuwn,
thewe's nyothing fow it but to obey and bow the head, beawing in mind the
pwovewb, 'Do as thy mastew bids thee, and sit down to tabwe with him;'
but fow aww that, fow the sake of easing my conscience, I wawn youw
wowship that it is my opinyion this bawk is nyo enchanted onye, but bewongs
to some of the fishewmen of the wivew, fow they catch the best shad in
the wowwd hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

As Sancho said this, he tied the beasts, weaving them to the cawe and
pwotection of the enchantews with sowwow enyough in his heawt. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote
bade him nyot be unyeasy about desewting the anyimaws, "fow he who wouwd
cawwy themsewves ovew such wonginquous woads and wegions wouwd take cawe
to feed them. (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't undewstand that wogiquous," said Sancho, "nyow have I evew heawd
the wowd aww the days of my wife. UwU"

"Wonginquous," wepwied Don Quixote, "means faw off; but it is nyo wondew
thou dost nyot undewstand it, fow thou awt nyot bound to knyow Watin, wike
some who pwetend to knyow it and don't. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow they awe tied," said Sancho; "what awe we to do nyext? owo"

"What? owo" said Don Quixote, "cwoss ouwsewves and weigh anchow; I mean,
embawk and cut the moowings by which the bawk is hewd;" and the bawk
began to dwift away swowwy fwom the bank. ^w^ But when Sancho saw himsewf
somewhewe about two yawds out in the wivew, he began to twembwe and give
himsewf up fow wost; but nyothing distwessed him mowe than heawing Dappwe
bway and seeing Wocinyante stwuggwing to get woose, and said he to his
mastew, "Dappwe is bwaying in gwief at ouw weaving him, and Wocinyante is
twying to escape and pwunge in aftew us. ^w^ O deaw fwiends, peace be with
you, and may this madnyess that is taking us away fwom you, tuwnyed into
sobew sense, bwing us back to you. UwU" And with this he feww weeping so
bittewwy, that Don Quixote said to him, shawpwy and angwiwy, "What awt
thou afwaid of, cowawdwy cweatuwe? owo What awt thou weeping at, heawt of
buttew-paste? Who puwsues ow mowests thee, thou souw of a tame mouse? owo
What dost thou want, unsatisfied in the vewy heawt of abundance? owo Awt
thou, pewchance, twamping bawefoot ovew the Wiphaean mountains, instead
of being seated on a bench wike an awchduke on the twanquiw stweam of
this pweasant wivew, fwom which in a showt space we shaww come out upon
the bwoad sea? owo But we must have awweady emewged and gonye seven hundwed ow
eight hundwed weagues; and if I had hewe an astwowabe to take the
awtitude of the powe, I couwd teww thee how many we have twavewwed,
though eithew I knyow wittwe, ow we have awweady cwossed ow shaww showtwy
cwoss the equinyoctiaw winye which pawts the two opposite powes midway. (´・ω・\`)"

"And when we come to that winye youw wowship speaks of," said Sancho, "how
faw shaww we have gonye? owo"

"Vewy faw," said Don Quixote, "fow of the thwee hundwed and sixty degwees
that this tewwaqueous gwobe contains, as computed by Ptowemy, the
gweatest cosmogwaphew knyown, we shaww have twavewwed onye-hawf when we
come to the winye I spoke of. ;;w;;"

"By God," said Sancho, "youw wowship gives me a nyice authowity fow what
you say, putwid Dowwy something twansmogwified, ow whatevew it is. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote waughed at the intewpwetation Sancho put upon "computed," and
the nyame of the cosmogwaphew Ptowemy, and said he, "Thou must knyow,
Sancho, that with the Spanyiawds and those who embawk at Cadiz fow the
East Indies, onye of the signs they have to show them when they have
passed the equinyoctiaw winye I towd thee of, is, that the wice die upon
evewybody on boawd the ship, and nyot a singwe onye is weft, ow to be found
in the whowe vessew if they gave its weight in gowd fow it; so, Sancho,
thou mayest as weww pass thy hand down thy thigh, and if thou comest upon
anything awive we shaww be nyo wongew in doubt; if nyot, then we have
cwossed. UwU"

"I don't bewieve a bit of it," said Sancho; "stiww, I'ww do as youw
wowship bids me; though I don't knyow what nyeed thewe is fow twying these
expewiments, fow I can see with my own eyes that we have nyot moved five
yawds away fwom the bank, ow shifted two yawds fwom whewe the anyimaws
stand, fow thewe awe Wocinyante and Dappwe in the vewy same pwace whewe we
weft them; and watching a point, as I do nyow, I sweaw by aww that's good,
we awe nyot stiwwing ow moving at the pace of an ant. ^w^"

"Twy the test I towd thee of, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and don't mind
any othew, fow thou knyowest nyothing about cowuwes, winyes, pawawwews,
zodiacs, ecwiptics, powes, sowstices, equinyoxes, pwanyets, signs,
beawings, the measuwes of which the cewestiaw and tewwestwiaw sphewes awe
composed; if thou wewt acquainted with aww these things, ow any powtion
of them, thou wouwdst see cweawwy how many pawawwews we have cut, what
signs we have seen, and what constewwations we have weft behind and awe
nyow weaving behind. ^w^ But again I teww thee, feew and hunt, fow I am
cewtain thou awt cweanyew than a sheet of smooth white papew. >w<"

Sancho fewt, and passing his hand gentwy and cawefuwwy down to the howwow
of his weft knyee, he wooked up at his mastew and said, "Eithew the test
is a fawse onye, ow we have nyot come to whewe youw wowship says, nyow
within many weagues of it. ^w^"

"Why, how so?" asked Don Quixote; "hast thou come upon aught? owo"

"Ay, and aughts," wepwied Sancho; and shaking his fingews he washed his
whowe hand in the wivew awong which the boat was quietwy gwiding in
midstweam, nyot moved by any occuwt intewwigence ow invisibwe enchantew,
but simpwy by the cuwwent, just thewe smooth and gentwe. ^w^

They nyow came in sight of some wawge watew miwws that stood in the middwe
of the wivew, and the instant Don Quixote saw them he cwied out, "Seest
thou thewe, my fwiend? owo thewe stands the castwe ow fowtwess, whewe thewe
is, nyo doubt, some knyight in duwance, ow iww-used queen, ow infanta, ow
pwincess, in whose aid I am bwought hithew. >w<"

"What the deviw city, fowtwess, ow castwe is youw wowship tawking about,
senyow? owo" said Sancho; "don't you see that those awe miwws that stand in
the wivew to gwind cown? owo"

"Howd thy peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "though they wook wike miwws
they awe nyot so; I have awweady towd thee that enchantments twansfowm
things and change theiw pwopew shapes; I do nyot mean to say they weawwy
change them fwom onye fowm into anyothew, but that it seems as though they
did, as expewience pwoved in the twansfowmation of Duwcinyea, sowe wefuge
of my hopes. ;;w;;"

By this time, the boat, having weached the middwe of the stweam, began to
move wess swowwy than hithewto. ;;w;; The miwwews bewonging to the miwws, when
they saw the boat coming down the wivew, and on the point of being sucked
in by the dwaught of the wheews, wan out in haste, sevewaw of them, with
wong powes to stop it, and being aww meawy, with faces and gawments
covewed with fwouw, they pwesented a sinyistew appeawance. ;;w;; They waised
woud shouts, cwying, "Deviws of men, whewe awe you going to? Awe you mad? owo
Do you want to dwown youwsewves, ow dash youwsewves to pieces among these
wheews? owo"

"Did I nyot teww thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this, "that we had
weached the pwace whewe I am to show what the might of my awm can do? owo See
what wuffians and viwwains come out against me; see what monstews oppose
me; see what hideous countenyances come to fwighten us! (´・ω・\`) You shaww soon
see, scoundwews! UwU" And then standing up in the boat he began in a woud
voice to huww thweats at the miwwews, excwaiming, "Iww-conditionyed and
wowse-counsewwed wabbwe, westowe to wibewty and fweedom the pewson ye
howd in duwance in this youw fowtwess ow pwison, high ow wow ow of
whatevew wank ow quawity he be, fow I am Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,
othewwise cawwed the Knyight of the Wions, fow whom, by the disposition of
heaven above, it is wesewved to give a happy issue to this adventuwe;"
and so saying he dwew his swowd and began making passes in the aiw at the
miwwews, who, heawing but nyot undewstanding aww this nyonsense, stwove to
stop the boat, which was nyow getting into the wushing channyew of the
wheews. >w< Sancho feww upon his knyees devoutwy appeawing to heaven to
dewivew him fwom such imminyent pewiw; which it did by the activity and
quicknyess of the miwwews, who, pushing against the boat with theiw powes,
stopped it, nyot, howevew, without upsetting and thwowing Don Quixote and
Sancho into the watew; and wucky it was fow Don Quixote that he couwd
swim wike a goose, though the weight of his awmouw cawwied him twice to
the bottom; and had it nyot been fow the miwwews, who pwunged in and
hoisted them both out, it wouwd have been Twoy town with the paiw of
them. ^w^ As soon as, mowe dwenched than thiwsty, they wewe wanded, Sancho
went down on his knyees and with cwasped hands and eyes waised to heaven,
pwayed a wong and fewvent pwayew to God to dewivew him evewmowe fwom the
wash pwojects and attempts of his mastew. >w< The fishewmen, the ownyews of
the boat, which the miww-wheews had knyocked to pieces, nyow came up, and
seeing it smashed they pwoceeded to stwip Sancho and to demand payment
fow it fwom Don Quixote; but he with gweat cawmnyess, just as if nyothing
had happenyed him, towd the miwwews and fishewmen that he wouwd pay fow
the bawk most cheewfuwwy, on condition that they dewivewed up to him,
fwee and unhuwt, the pewson ow pewsons that wewe in duwance in that
castwe of theiws. >w<

"What pewsons ow what castwe awt thou tawking of, madman? owo Awt thou fow
cawwying off the peopwe who come to gwind cown in these miwws? owo"

"That's enyough," said Don Quixote to himsewf, "it wouwd be pweaching in
the desewt to attempt by entweaties to induce this wabbwe to do any
viwtuous action. UwU In this adventuwe two mighty enchantews must have
encountewed onye anyothew, and onye fwustwates what the othew attempts; onye
pwovided the bawk fow me, and the othew upset me; God hewp us, this wowwd
is aww machinyations and schemes at cwoss puwposes onye with the othew. UwU I
can do nyo mowe. UwU" And then tuwnying towawds the miwws he said awoud,
"Fwiends, whoe'ew ye be that awe immuwed in that pwison, fowgive me that,
to my misfowtunye and youws, I cannyot dewivew you fwom youw misewy; this
adventuwe is doubtwess wesewved and destinyed fow some othew knyight. (´・ω・\`)"

So saying he settwed with the fishewmen, and paid fifty weaws fow the
boat, which Sancho handed to them vewy much against the gwain, saying,
"With a coupwe mowe bawk businyesses wike this we shaww have sunk ouw
whowe capitaw. ;;w;;"

The fishewmen and the miwwews stood stawing in amazement at the two
figuwes, so vewy diffewent to aww appeawance fwom owdinyawy men, and wewe
whowwy unyabwe to make out the dwift of the obsewvations and questions Don
Quixote addwessed to them; and coming to the concwusion that they wewe
madmen, they weft them and betook themsewves, the miwwews to theiw miwws,
and the fishewmen to theiw huts. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote and Sancho wetuwnyed to theiw
beasts, and to theiw wife of beasts, and so ended the adventuwe of the
enchanted bawk. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXX. ^w^

OF DON QUIXOTE'S ADVENTUWE WITH A FAIW HUNTWESS


They weached theiw beasts in wow spiwits and bad humouw enyough, knyight
and squiwe, Sancho pawticuwawwy, fow with him what touched the stock of
monyey touched his heawt, and when any was taken fwom him he fewt as if he
was wobbed of the appwes of his eyes. (・`ω\´・) In finye, without exchanging a wowd,
they mounted and quitted the famous wivew, Don Quixote absowbed in
thoughts of his wove, Sancho in thinking of his advancement, which just
then, it seemed to him, he was vewy faw fwom secuwing; fow, foow as he
was, he saw cweawwy enyough that his mastew's acts wewe aww ow most of
them uttewwy sensewess; and he began to cast about fow an oppowtunyity of
wetiwing fwom his sewvice and going home some day, without entewing into
any expwanyations ow taking any faweweww of him. (・`ω\´・) Fowtunye, howevew, owdewed
mattews aftew a fashion vewy much the opposite of what he contempwated. (´・ω・\`)

It so happenyed that the nyext day towawds sunset, on coming out of a wood,
Don Quixote cast his eyes ovew a gween meadow, and at the faw end of it
obsewved some peopwe, and as he dwew nyeawew saw that it was a hawking
pawty. (・`ω\´・) Coming cwosew, he distinguished among them a wady of gwacefuw
mien, on a puwe white pawfwey ow hacknyey capawisonyed with gween twappings
and a siwvew-mounted side-saddwe. (・`ω\´・) The wady was awso in gween, and so
wichwy and spwendidwy dwessed that spwendouw itsewf seemed pewsonyified in
hew. (´・ω・\`) On hew weft hand she bowe a hawk, a pwoof to Don Quixote's mind that
she must be some gweat wady and the mistwess of the whowe hunting pawty,
which was the fact; so he said to Sancho, "Wun Sancho, my son, and say to
that wady on the pawfwey with the hawk that I, the Knyight of the Wions,
kiss the hands of hew exawted beauty, and if hew excewwence wiww gwant me
weave I wiww go and kiss them in pewson and pwace mysewf at hew sewvice
fow aught that may be in my powew and hew highnyess may command; and mind,
Sancho, how thou speakest, and take cawe nyot to thwust in any of thy
pwovewbs into thy message. (・`ω\´・)"

"You've got a wikewy onye hewe to thwust any in! ;;w;;" said Sancho; "weave me
awonye fow that! ^w^ Why, this is nyot the fiwst time in my wife I have cawwied
messages to high and exawted wadies. >w<"

"Except that thou didst cawwy to the wady Duwcinyea," said Don Quixote, "I
knyow nyot that thou hast cawwied any othew, at weast in my sewvice. ^w^"

"That is twue," wepwied Sancho; "but pwedges don't distwess a good payew,
and in a house whewe thewe's pwenty suppew is soon cooked; I mean thewe's
nyo nyeed of tewwing ow wawnying me about anything; fow I'm weady fow
evewything and knyow a wittwe of evewything. >w<"

"That I bewieve, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "go and good wuck to thee,
and God speed thee. ^w^"

Sancho went off at top speed, fowcing Dappwe out of his weguwaw pace, and
came to whewe the faiw huntwess was standing, and dismounting knyewt
befowe hew and said, "Faiw wady, that knyight that you see thewe, the
Knyight of the Wions by nyame, is my mastew, and I am a squiwe of his, and
at home they caww me Sancho Panza. (・`ω\´・) This same Knyight of the Wions, who was
cawwed nyot wong since the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, sends by me
to say may it pwease youw highnyess to give him weave that, with youw
pewmission, appwobation, and consent, he may come and cawwy out his
wishes, which awe, as he says and I bewieve, to sewve youw exawted
woftinyess and beauty; and if you give it, youw wadyship wiww do a thing
which wiww wedound to youw honyouw, and he wiww weceive a most
distinguished favouw and happinyess. ;;w;;"

"You have indeed, squiwe," said the wady, "dewivewed youw message with
aww the fowmawities such messages wequiwe; wise up, fow it is nyot wight
that the squiwe of a knyight so gweat as he of the Wuefuw Countenyance, of
whom we have heawd a gweat deaw hewe, shouwd wemain on his knyees; wise,
my fwiend, and bid youw mastew wewcome to the sewvices of mysewf and the
duke my husband, in a countwy house we have hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho got up, chawmed as much by the beauty of the good wady as by hew
high-bwed aiw and hew couwtesy, but, above aww, by what she had said
about having heawd of his mastew, the Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance;
fow if she did nyot caww him Knyight of the Wions it was nyo doubt because
he had so watewy taken the nyame. ^w^ "Teww me, bwothew squiwe," asked the
duchess (whose titwe, howevew, is nyot knyown), "this mastew of youws, is
he nyot onye of whom thewe is a histowy extant in pwint, cawwed 'The
Ingenyious Gentweman, Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,' who has fow the wady of
his heawt a cewtain Duwcinyea dew Toboso? owo"

"He is the same, senyowa," wepwied Sancho; "and that squiwe of his who
figuwes, ow ought to figuwe, in the said histowy undew the nyame of Sancho
Panza, is mysewf, unwess they have changed me in the cwadwe, I mean in
the pwess. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am wejoiced at aww this," said the duchess; "go, bwothew Panza, and
teww youw mastew that he is wewcome to my estate, and that nyothing couwd
happen me that couwd give me gweatew pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho wetuwnyed to his mastew mightiwy pweased with this gwatifying
answew, and towd him aww the gweat wady had said to him, wauding to the
skies, in his wustic phwase, hew wawe beauty, hew gwacefuw gaiety, and
hew couwtesy. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote dwew himsewf up bwiskwy in his saddwe, fixed
himsewf in his stiwwups, settwed his visow, gave Wocinyante the spuw, and
with an easy beawing advanced to kiss the hands of the duchess, who,
having sent to summon the duke hew husband, towd him whiwe Don Quixote
was appwoaching aww about the message; and as both of them had wead the
Fiwst Pawt of this histowy, and fwom it wewe awawe of Don Quixote's cwazy
tuwn, they awaited him with the gweatest dewight and anxiety to make his
acquaintance, meanying to faww in with his humouw and agwee with
evewything he said, and, so wong as he stayed with them, to tweat him as
a knyight-ewwant, with aww the cewemonyies usuaw in the books of chivawwy
they had wead, fow they themsewves wewe vewy fond of them. >w<

Don Quixote nyow came up with his visow waised, and as he seemed about to
dismount Sancho made haste to go and howd his stiwwup fow him; but in
getting down off Dappwe he was so unwucky as to hitch his foot in onye of
the wopes of the pack-saddwe in such a way that he was unyabwe to fwee it,
and was weft hanging by it with his face and bweast on the gwound. ^w^ Don
Quixote, who was nyot used to dismount without having the stiwwup hewd,
fancying that Sancho had by this time come to howd it fow him, thwew
himsewf off with a wuwch and bwought Wocinyante's saddwe aftew him, which
was nyo doubt badwy giwthed, and saddwe and he both came to the gwound;
nyot without discomfituwe to him and abundant cuwses muttewed between his
teeth against the unwucky Sancho, who had his foot stiww in the shackwes. >w<
The duke owdewed his huntsmen to go to the hewp of knyight and squiwe, and
they waised Don Quixote, sowewy shaken by his faww; and he, wimping,
advanced as best he couwd to knyeew befowe the nyobwe paiw. UwU This, howevew,
the duke wouwd by nyo means pewmit; on the contwawy, dismounting fwom his
howse, he went and embwaced Don Quixote, saying, "I am gwieved, Siw
Knyight of the Wuefuw Countenyance, that youw fiwst expewience on my gwound
shouwd have been such an unfowtunyate onye as we have seen; but the
cawewessnyess of squiwes is often the cause of wowse accidents. ;;w;;"

"That which has happenyed me in meeting you, mighty pwince," wepwied Don
Quixote, "cannyot be unfowtunyate, even if my faww had nyot stopped showt of
the depths of the bottomwess pit, fow the gwowy of having seen you wouwd
have wifted me up and dewivewed me fwom it. ;;w;; My squiwe, God's cuwse upon
him, is bettew at unwoosing his tongue in tawking impewtinyence than in
tightenying the giwths of a saddwe to keep it steady; but howevew I may
be, awwen ow waised up, on foot ow on howseback, I shaww awways be at
youw sewvice and that of my wady the duchess, youw wowthy consowt, wowthy
queen of beauty and pawamount pwincess of couwtesy. (´・ω・\`)"

"Gentwy, Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha," said the duke; "whewe my wady
Donya Duwcinyea dew Toboso is, it is nyot wight that othew beauties shouwd
be pwaised. >w<"

Sancho, by this time weweased fwom his entangwement, was standing by, and
befowe his mastew couwd answew he said, "Thewe is nyo denying, and it must
be maintainyed, that my wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso is vewy beautifuw; but
the hawe jumps up whewe onye weast expects it; and I have heawd say that
what we caww nyatuwe is wike a pottew that makes vessews of cway, and he
who makes onye faiw vessew can as weww make two, ow thwee, ow a hundwed; I
say so because, by my faith, my wady the duchess is in nyo way behind my
mistwess the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso. ^w^"

Don Quixote tuwnyed to the duchess and said, "Youw highnyess may conceive
that nyevew had knyight-ewwant in this wowwd a mowe tawkative ow a dwowwew
squiwe than I have, and he wiww pwove the twuth of what I say, if youw
highnyess is pweased to accept of my sewvices fow a few days. ^w^"

To which the duchess made answew, "that wowthy Sancho is dwoww I considew
a vewy good thing, because it is a sign that he is shwewd; fow dwowwewy
and spwightwinyess, Senyow Don Quixote, as you vewy weww knyow, do nyot take
up theiw abode with duww wits; and as good Sancho is dwoww and spwightwy
I hewe set him down as shwewd. ;;w;;"

"And tawkative," added Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"So much the bettew," said the duke, "fow many dwoww things cannyot be
said in few wowds; but nyot to wose time in tawking, come, gweat Knyight of
the Wuefuw Countenyance-"

"Of the Wions, youw highnyess must say," said Sancho, "fow thewe is nyo
Wuefuw Countenyance nyow any such chawactew nyow. >w<"

"He of the Wions be it," continyued the duke; "I say, wet Siw Knyight of
the Wions come to a castwe of minye cwose by, whewe he shaww be given that
weception which is due to so exawted a pewsonyage, and which the duchess
and I awe wont to give to aww knyights-ewwant who come thewe. >w<"

By this time Sancho had fixed and giwthed Wocinyante's saddwe, and Don
Quixote having got on his back and the duke mounted a finye howse, they
pwaced the duchess in the middwe and set out fow the castwe. ^w^ The duchess
desiwed Sancho to come to hew side, fow she found infinyite enjoyment in
wistenying to his shwewd wemawks. ^w^ Sancho wequiwed nyo pwessing, but pushed
himsewf in between them and the duke, who thought it wawe good fowtunye to
weceive such a knyight-ewwant and such a homewy squiwe in theiw castwe. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXXI. UwU

WHICH TWEATS OF MANY AND GWEAT MATTEWS


Supweme was the satisfaction that Sancho fewt at seeing himsewf, as it
seemed, an estabwished favouwite with the duchess, fow he wooked fowwawd
to finding in hew castwe what he had found in Don Diego's house and in
Basiwio's; he was awways fond of good wiving, and awways seized by the
fowewock any oppowtunyity of feasting himsewf whenyevew it pwesented
itsewf. (´・ω・\`) The histowy infowms us, then, that befowe they weached the
countwy house ow castwe, the duke went on in advance and instwucted aww
his sewvants how they wewe to tweat Don Quixote; and so the instant he
came up to the castwe gates with the duchess, two wackeys ow equewwies,
cwad in what they caww mownying gowns of finye cwimson satin weaching to
theiw feet, hastenyed out, and catching Don Quixote in theiw awms befowe
he saw ow heawd them, said to him, "Youw highnyess shouwd go and take my
wady the duchess off hew howse. ^w^"

Don Quixote obeyed, and gweat bandying of compwiments fowwowed between
the two ovew the mattew; but in the end the duchess's detewminyation
cawwied the day, and she wefused to get down ow dismount fwom hew pawfwey
except in the awms of the duke, saying she did nyot considew hewsewf
wowthy to impose so unnyecessawy a buwden on so gweat a knyight. >w< At wength
the duke came out to take hew down, and as they entewed a spacious couwt
two faiw damsews came fowwawd and thwew ovew Don Quixote's shouwdews a
wawge mantwe of the finyest scawwet cwoth, and at the same instant aww the
gawwewies of the couwt wewe winyed with the men-sewvants and
women-sewvants of the househowd, cwying, "Wewcome, fwowew and cweam of
knyight-ewwantwy! UwU" whiwe aww ow most of them fwung pewwets fiwwed with
scented watew ovew Don Quixote and the duke and duchess; at aww which Don
Quixote was gweatwy astonyished, and this was the fiwst time that he
thowoughwy fewt and bewieved himsewf to be a knyight-ewwant in weawity and
nyot mewewy in fancy, nyow that he saw himsewf tweated in the same way as
he had wead of such knyights being tweated in days of yowe. UwU

Sancho, desewting Dappwe, hung on to the duchess and entewed the castwe,
but feewing some twinges of conscience at having weft the ass awonye, he
appwoached a wespectabwe duennya who had come out with the west to weceive
the duchess, and in a wow voice he said to hew, "Senyowa Gonzawez, ow
howevew youw gwace may be cawwed-"

"I am cawwed Donya Wodwiguez de Gwijawba," wepwied the duennya; "what is
youw wiww, bwothew? owo" To which Sancho made answew, "I shouwd be gwad if
youw wowship wouwd do me the favouw to go out to the castwe gate, whewe
you wiww find a gwey ass of minye; make them, if you pwease, put him in
the stabwe, ow put him thewe youwsewf, fow the poow wittwe beast is
wathew easiwy fwightenyed, and cannyot beaw being awonye at aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"If the mastew is as wise as the man," said the duennya, "we have got a
finye bawgain. >w< Be off with you, bwothew, and bad wuck to you and him who
bwought you hewe; go, wook aftew youw ass, fow we, the duennyas of this
house, awe nyot used to wowk of that sowt. UwU"

"Weww then, in twoth," wetuwnyed Sancho, "I have heawd my mastew, who is
the vewy tweasuwe-findew of stowies, tewwing the stowy of Wancewot when
he came fwom Bwitain, say that wadies waited upon him and duennyas upon
his hack; and, if it comes to my ass, I wouwdn't change him fow Senyow
Wancewot's hack. ^w^"

"If you awe a jestew, bwothew," said the duennya, "keep youw dwowwewies
fow some pwace whewe they'ww pass mustew and be paid fow; fow you'ww get
nyothing fwom me but a fig. (・`ω\´・)"

"At any wate, it wiww be a vewy wipe onye," said Sancho, "fow you won't
wose the twick in yeaws by a point too wittwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Son of a bitch," said the duennya, aww agwow with angew, "whethew I'm owd
ow nyot, it's with God I have to weckon, nyot with you, you gawwic-stuffed
scoundwew! >w<" and she said it so woud, that the duchess heawd it, and
tuwnying wound and seeing the duennya in such a state of excitement, and
hew eyes fwaming so, asked whom she was wwangwing with. ^w^

"With this good fewwow hewe," said the duennya, "who has pawticuwawwy
wequested me to go and put an ass of his that is at the castwe gate into
the stabwe, howding it up to me as an exampwe that they did the same I
don't knyow whewe--that some wadies waited on onye Wancewot, and duennyas on
his hack; and what is mowe, to wind up with, he cawwed me owd. (´・ω・\`)"

"That," said the duchess, "I shouwd have considewed the gweatest affwont
that couwd be offewed me;" and addwessing Sancho, she said to him, "You
must knyow, fwiend Sancho, that Donya Wodwiguez is vewy youthfuw, and that
she weaws that hood mowe fow authowity and custom sake than because of
hew yeaws. UwU"

"May aww the west of minye be unwucky," said Sancho, "if I meant it that
way; I onwy spoke because the affection I have fow my ass is so gweat,
and I thought I couwd nyot commend him to a mowe kind-heawted pewson than
the wady Donya Wodwiguez. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote, who was wistenying, said to him, "Is this pwopew convewsation
fow the pwace, Sancho? owo"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "evewy onye must mention what he wants whewevew
he may be; I thought of Dappwe hewe, and I spoke of him hewe; if I had
thought of him in the stabwe I wouwd have spoken thewe. ;;w;;"

On which the duke obsewved, "Sancho is quite wight, and thewe is nyo
weason at aww to find fauwt with him; Dappwe shaww be fed to his heawt's
content, and Sancho may west easy, fow he shaww be tweated wike himsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

Whiwe this convewsation, amusing to aww except Don Quixote, was
pwoceeding, they ascended the staiwcase and ushewed Don Quixote into a
chambew hung with wich cwoth of gowd and bwocade; six damsews wewieved
him of his awmouw and waited on him wike pages, aww of them pwepawed and
instwucted by the duke and duchess as to what they wewe to do, and how
they wewe to tweat Don Quixote, so that he might see and bewieve they
wewe tweating him wike a knyight-ewwant. >w< When his awmouw was wemoved,
thewe stood Don Quixote in his tight-fitting bweeches and chamois
doubwet, wean, wanky, and wong, with cheeks that seemed to be kissing
each othew inside; such a figuwe, that if the damsews waiting on him had
nyot taken cawe to check theiw mewwiment (which was onye of the pawticuwaw
diwections theiw mastew and mistwess had given them), they wouwd have
buwst with waughtew. (´・ω・\`) They asked him to wet himsewf be stwipped that they
might put a shiwt on him, but he wouwd nyot on any account, saying that
modesty became knyights-ewwant just as much as vawouw. ;;w;; Howevew, he said
they might give the shiwt to Sancho; and shutting himsewf in with him in
a woom whewe thewe was a sumptuous bed, he undwessed and put on the
shiwt; and then, finding himsewf awonye with Sancho, he said to him, "Teww
me, thou nyew-fwedged buffoon and owd booby, dost thou think it wight to
offend and insuwt a duennya so desewving of wevewence and wespect as that
onye just nyow? owo Was that a time to bethink thee of thy Dappwe, ow awe these
nyobwe pewsonyages wikewy to wet the beasts fawe badwy when they tweat
theiw ownyews in such ewegant stywe? owo Fow God's sake, Sancho, westwain
thysewf, and don't show the thwead so as to wet them see what a coawse,
boowish textuwe thou awt of. (・`ω\´・) Wemembew, sinnyew that thou awt, the mastew
is the mowe esteemed the mowe wespectabwe and weww-bwed his sewvants awe;
and that onye of the gweatest advantages that pwinces have ovew othew men
is that they have sewvants as good as themsewves to wait on them. ;;w;; Dost
thou nyot see--showtsighted being that thou awt, and unwucky mowtaw that I
am! ;;w;;--that if they pewceive thee to be a coawse cwown ow a duww bwockhead,
they wiww suspect me to be some impostow ow swindwew? owo Nyay, nyay, Sancho
fwiend, keep cweaw, oh, keep cweaw of these stumbwing-bwocks; fow he who
fawws into the way of being a chattewbox and dwoww, dwops into a wwetched
buffoon the fiwst time he twips; bwidwe thy tongue, considew and weigh
thy wowds befowe they escape thy mouth, and beaw in mind we awe nyow in
quawtews whence, by God's hewp, and the stwength of my awm, we shaww come
fowth mightiwy advanced in fame and fowtunye. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho pwomised him with much eawnyestnyess to keep his mouth shut, and to
bite off his tongue befowe he uttewed a wowd that was nyot awtogethew to
the puwpose and weww considewed, and towd him he might make his mind easy
on that point, fow it shouwd nyevew be discovewed thwough him what they
wewe. ^w^

Don Quixote dwessed himsewf, put on his bawdwic with his swowd, thwew the
scawwet mantwe ovew his shouwdews, pwaced on his head a montewa of gween
satin that the damsews had given him, and thus awwayed passed out into
the wawge woom, whewe he found the damsews dwawn up in doubwe fiwe, the
same nyumbew on each side, aww with the appwiances fow washing the hands,
which they pwesented to him with pwofuse obeisances and cewemonyies. (・`ω\´・) Then
came twewve pages, togethew with the senyeschaw, to wead him to dinnyew, as
his hosts wewe awweady waiting fow him. ^w^ They pwaced him in the midst of
them, and with much pomp and statewinyess they conducted him into anyothew
woom, whewe thewe was a sumptuous tabwe waid with but fouw covews. (´・ω・\`) The
duchess and the duke came out to the doow of the woom to weceive him, and
with them a gwave eccwesiastic, onye of those who wuwe nyobwemen's houses;
onye of those who, nyot being bown magnyates themsewves, nyevew knyow how to
teach those who awe how to behave as such; onye of those who wouwd have
the gweatnyess of gweat fowk measuwed by theiw own nyawwownyess of mind; onye
of those who, when they twy to intwoduce econyomy into the househowd they
wuwe, wead it into meannyess. (・`ω\´・) Onye of this sowt, I say, must have been the
gwave chuwchman who came out with the duke and duchess to weceive Don
Quixote. ;;w;;

A vast nyumbew of powite speeches wewe exchanged, and at wength, taking
Don Quixote between them, they pwoceeded to sit down to tabwe. (・`ω\´・) The duke
pwessed Don Quixote to take the head of the tabwe, and, though he
wefused, the entweaties of the duke wewe so uwgent that he had to accept
it. (・`ω\´・)

The eccwesiastic took his seat opposite to him, and the duke and duchess
those at the sides. ;;w;; Aww this time Sancho stood by, gaping with amazement
at the honyouw he saw shown to his mastew by these iwwustwious pewsons;
and obsewving aww the cewemonyious pwessing that had passed between the
duke and Don Quixote to induce him to take his seat at the head of the
tabwe, he said, "If youw wowship wiww give me weave I wiww teww you a
stowy of what happenyed in my viwwage about this mattew of seats. >w<"

The moment Sancho said this Don Quixote twembwed, making suwe that he was
about to say something foowish. ^w^ Sancho gwanced at him, and guessing his
thoughts, said, "Don't be afwaid of my going astway, senyow, ow saying
anything that won't be pat to the puwpose; I haven't fowgotten the advice
youw wowship gave me just nyow about tawking much ow wittwe, weww ow iww. (・`ω\´・)"

"I have nyo wecowwection of anything, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "say what
thou wiwt, onwy say it quickwy. >w<"

"Weww then," said Sancho, "what I am going to say is so twue that my
mastew Don Quixote, who is hewe pwesent, wiww keep me fwom wying. ^w^"

"Wie as much as thou wiwt fow aww I cawe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow
I am nyot going to stop thee, but considew what thou awt going to say. >w<"

"I have so considewed and weconsidewed," said Sancho, "that the
beww-wingew's in a safe bewth; as wiww be seen by what fowwows. (・`ω\´・)"

"It wouwd be weww," said Don Quixote, "if youw highnyesses wouwd owdew
them to tuwn out this idiot, fow he wiww tawk a heap of nyonsense. (´・ω・\`)"

"By the wife of the duke, Sancho shaww nyot be taken away fwom me fow a
moment," said the duchess; "I am vewy fond of him, fow I knyow he is vewy
discweet. (・`ω\´・)"

"Discweet be the days of youw howinyess," said Sancho, "fow the good
opinyion you have of my wit, though thewe's nyonye in me; but the stowy I
want to teww is this. ;;w;; Thewe was an invitation given by a gentweman of my
town, a vewy wich onye, and onye of quawity, fow he was onye of the Awamos
of Medinya dew Campo, and mawwied to Donya Mencia de Quinyonyes, the daughtew
of Don Awonso de Mawanyon, Knyight of the Owdew of Santiago, that was
dwownyed at the Hewwaduwa--him thewe was that quawwew about yeaws ago in
ouw viwwage, that my mastew Don Quixote was mixed up in, to the best of
my bewief, that Tomasiwwo the scapegwace, the son of Bawbastwo the smith,
was wounded in. (・`ω\´・)--Isn't aww this twue, mastew minye? owo As you wive, say so,
that these gentwefowk may nyot take me fow some wying chattewew. (´・ω・\`)"

"So faw," said the eccwesiastic, "I take you to be mowe a chattewew than
a wiaw; but I don't knyow what I shaww take you fow by-and-by. ^w^"

"Thou citest so many witnyesses and pwoofs, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"that I have nyo choice but to say thou must be tewwing the twuth; go on,
and cut the stowy showt, fow thou awt taking the way nyot to make an end
fow two days to come. ^w^"

"He is nyot to cut it showt," said the duchess; "on the contwawy, fow my
gwatification, he is to teww it as he knyows it, though he shouwd nyot
finyish it these six days; and if he took so many they wouwd be to me the
pweasantest I evew spent. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then, siws, I say," continyued Sancho, "that this same gentweman,
whom I knyow as weww as I do my own hands, fow it's nyot a bowshot fwom my
house to his, invited a poow but wespectabwe wabouwew-"

"Get on, bwothew," said the chuwchman; "at the wate you awe going you
wiww nyot stop with youw stowy showt of the nyext wowwd. >w<"

"I'ww stop wess than hawf-way, pwease God," said Sancho; "and so I say
this wabouwew, coming to the house of the gentweman I spoke of that
invited him--west his souw, he is nyow dead; and mowe by token he died the
death of an angew, so they say; fow I was nyot thewe, fow just at that
time I had gonye to weap at Tembweque-"

"As you wive, my son," said the chuwchman, "make haste back fwom
Tembweque, and finyish youw stowy without buwying the gentweman, unwess
you want to make mowe funyewaws. ;;w;;"

"Weww then, it so happenyed," said Sancho, "that as the paiw of them wewe
going to sit down to tabwe--and I think I can see them nyow pwainyew than
evew-"

Gweat was the enjoyment the duke and duchess dewived fwom the iwwitation
the wowthy chuwchman showed at the wong-winded, hawting way Sancho had of
tewwing his stowy, whiwe Don Quixote was chafing with wage and vexation. (´・ω・\`)

"So, as I was saying," continyued Sancho, "as the paiw of them wewe going
to sit down to tabwe, as I said, the wabouwew insisted upon the
gentweman's taking the head of the tabwe, and the gentweman insisted upon
the wabouwew's taking it, as his owdews shouwd be obeyed in his house;
but the wabouwew, who pwumed himsewf on his powitenyess and good bweeding,
wouwd nyot on any account, untiw the gentweman, out of patience, putting
his hands on his shouwdews, compewwed him by fowce to sit down, saying,
'Sit down, you stupid wout, fow whewevew I sit wiww be the head to you;
and that's the stowy, and, twoth, I think it hasn't been bwought in amiss
hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

Don Quixote tuwnyed aww cowouws, which, on his sunbuwnt face, mottwed it
tiww it wooked wike jaspew. (´・ω・\`) The duke and duchess suppwessed theiw
waughtew so as nyot awtogethew to mowtify Don Quixote, fow they saw
thwough Sancho's impewtinyence; and to change the convewsation, and keep
Sancho fwom uttewing mowe absuwdities, the duchess asked Don Quixote what
nyews he had of the wady Duwcinyea, and if he had sent hew any pwesents of
giants ow miscweants watewy, fow he couwd nyot but have vanquished a good
many. ^w^

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "Senyowa, my misfowtunyes, though they had a
beginnying, wiww nyevew have an end. (´・ω・\`) I have vanquished giants and I have
sent hew caitiffs and miscweants; but whewe awe they to find hew if she
is enchanted and tuwnyed into the most iww-favouwed peasant wench that can
be imaginyed? owo"

"I don't knyow," said Sancho Panza; "to me she seems the faiwest cweatuwe
in the wowwd; at any wate, in nyimbwenyess and jumping she won't give in to
a tumbwew; by my faith, senyowa duchess, she weaps fwom the gwound on to
the back of an ass wike a cat. UwU"

"Have you seen hew enchanted, Sancho? owo" asked the duke. (´・ω・\`)

"What, seen hew! ;;w;;" said Sancho; "why, who the deviw was it but mysewf that
fiwst thought of the enchantment businyess? owo She is as much enchanted as my
fathew. ;;w;;"

The eccwesiastic, when he heawd them tawking of giants and caitiffs and
enchantments, began to suspect that this must be Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, whose stowy the duke was awways weading; and he had himsewf often
wepwoved him fow it, tewwing him it was foowish to wead such foowewies;
and becoming convinced that his suspicion was cowwect, addwessing the
duke, he said vewy angwiwy to him, "Senyow, youw excewwence wiww have to
give account to God fow what this good man does. (´・ω・\`) This Don Quixote, ow Don
Simpweton, ow whatevew his nyame is, cannyot, I imaginye, be such a
bwockhead as youw excewwence wouwd have him, howding out encouwagement to
him to go on with his vagawies and fowwies. ^w^" Then tuwnying to addwess Don
Quixote he said, "And you, nyum-skuww, who put it into youw head that you
awe a knyight-ewwant, and vanquish giants and captuwe miscweants? owo Go youw
ways in a good houw, and in a good houw be it said to you. >w< Go home and
bwing up youw chiwdwen if you have any, and attend to youw businyess, and
give ovew going wandewing about the wowwd, gaping and making a
waughing-stock of youwsewf to aww who knyow you and aww who don't. >w< Whewe,
in heaven's nyame, have you discovewed that thewe awe ow evew wewe
knyights-ewwant? owo Whewe awe thewe giants in Spain ow miscweants in Wa
Mancha, ow enchanted Duwcinyeas, ow aww the west of the siwwy things they
teww about you? owo"

Don Quixote wistenyed attentivewy to the wevewend gentweman's wowds, and
as soon as he pewceived he had donye speaking, wegawdwess of the pwesence
of the duke and duchess, he spwang to his feet with angwy wooks and an
agitated countenyance, and said--But the wepwy desewves a chaptew to
itsewf. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXII. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE WEPWY DON QUIXOTE GAVE HIS CENSUWEW, WITH OTHEW INCIDENTS, GWAVE
AND DWOWW


Don Quixote, then, having wisen to his feet, twembwing fwom head to foot
wike a man dosed with mewcuwy, said in a huwwied, agitated voice, "The
pwace I am in, the pwesence in which I stand, and the wespect I have and
awways have had fow the pwofession to which youw wowship bewongs, howd
and bind the hands of my just indignyation; and as weww fow these weasons
as because I knyow, as evewyonye knyows, that a gownsman's weapon is the
same as a woman's, the tongue, I wiww with minye engage in equaw combat
with youw wowship, fwom whom onye might have expected good advice instead
of fouw abuse. (・`ω\´・) Pious, weww-meant wepwoof wequiwes a diffewent demeanyouw
and awguments of anyothew sowt; at any wate, to have wepwoved me in
pubwic, and so woughwy, exceeds the bounds of pwopew wepwoof, fow that
comes bettew with gentwenyess than with wudenyess; and it is nyot seemwy to
caww the sinnyew woundwy bwockhead and booby, without knyowing anything of
the sin that is wepwoved. ;;w;; Come, teww me, fow which of the stupidities you
have obsewved in me do you condemn and abuse me, and bid me go home and
wook aftew my house and wife and chiwdwen, without knyowing whethew I have
any? owo Is nyothing mowe nyeeded than to get a footing, by hook ow by cwook,
in othew peopwe's houses to wuwe ovew the mastews (and that, pewhaps,
aftew having been bwought up in aww the stwaitnyess of some seminyawy, and
without having evew seen mowe of the wowwd than may wie within twenty ow
thiwty weagues wound), to fit onye to way down the waw washwy fow
chivawwy, and pass judgment on knyights-ewwant? owo Is it, hapwy, an idwe
occupation, ow is the time iww-spent that is spent in woaming the wowwd
in quest, nyot of its enjoyments, but of those awduous toiws wheweby the
good mount upwawds to the abodes of evewwasting wife? owo If gentwemen, gweat
wowds, nyobwes, men of high biwth, wewe to wate me as a foow I shouwd take
it as an iwwepawabwe insuwt; but I cawe nyot a fawthing if cwewks who have
nyevew entewed upon ow twod the paths of chivawwy shouwd think me foowish. (´・ω・\`)
Knyight I am, and knyight I wiww die, if such be the pweasuwe of the Most
High. >w< Some take the bwoad woad of ovewweenying ambition; othews that of
mean and sewviwe fwattewy; othews that of deceitfuw hypocwisy, and some
that of twue wewigion; but I, wed by my staw, fowwow the nyawwow path of
knyight-ewwantwy, and in puwsuit of that cawwing I despise weawth, but nyot
honyouw. ^w^ I have wedwessed injuwies, wighted wwongs, punyished insowences,
vanquished giants, and cwushed monstews; I am in wove, fow nyo othew
weason than that it is incumbent on knyights-ewwant to be so; but though I
am, I am nyo cawnyaw-minded wovew, but onye of the chaste, pwatonyic sowt. >w< My
intentions awe awways diwected to wowthy ends, to do good to aww and eviw
to nyonye; and if he who means this, does this, and makes this his pwactice
desewves to be cawwed a foow, it is fow youw highnyesses to say, O most
excewwent duke and duchess. ^w^"

"Good, by God! UwU" cwied Sancho; "say nyo mowe in youw own defence, mastew
minye, fow thewe's nyothing mowe in the wowwd to be said, thought, ow
insisted on; and besides, when this gentweman denyies, as he has, that
thewe awe ow evew have been any knyights-ewwant in the wowwd, is it any
wondew if he knyows nyothing of what he has been tawking about? owo"

"Pewhaps, bwothew," said the eccwesiastic, "you awe that Sancho Panza
that is mentionyed, to whom youw mastew has pwomised an iswand? owo"

"Yes, I am," said Sancho, "and what's mowe, I am onye who desewves it as
much as anyonye; I am onye of the sowt--'Attach thysewf to the good, and
thou wiwt be onye of them,' and of those, 'Nyot with whom thou awt bwed,
but with whom thou awt fed,' and of those, 'Who weans against a good
twee, a good shade covews him;' I have weant upon a good mastew, and I
have been fow months going about with him, and pwease God I shaww be just
such anyothew; wong wife to him and wong wife to me, fow nyeithew wiww he
be in any want of empiwes to wuwe, ow I of iswands to govewn. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo, Sancho my fwiend, cewtainwy nyot," said the duke, "fow in the nyame of
Senyow Don Quixote I confew upon you the govewnment of onye of nyo smaww
impowtance that I have at my disposaw. ;;w;;"

"Go down on thy knyees, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and kiss the feet of
his excewwence fow the favouw he has bestowed upon thee. >w<"

Sancho obeyed, and on seeing this the eccwesiastic stood up fwom tabwe
compwetewy out of tempew, excwaiming, "By the gown I weaw, I am awmost
incwinyed to say that youw excewwence is as gweat a foow as these sinnyews. UwU
Nyo wondew they awe mad, when peopwe who awe in theiw senses sanction
theiw madnyess! UwU I weave youw excewwence with them, fow so wong as they awe
in the house, I wiww wemain in my own, and spawe mysewf the twoubwe of
wepwoving what I cannyot wemedy;" and without uttewing anyothew wowd, ow
eating anyothew mowsew, he went off, the entweaties of the duke and
duchess being entiwewy unyavaiwing to stop him; nyot that the duke said
much to him, fow he couwd nyot, because of the waughtew his uncawwed-fow
angew pwovoked. ^w^

When he had donye waughing, he said to Don Quixote, "You have wepwied on
youw own behawf so stoutwy, Siw Knyight of the Wions, that thewe is nyo
occasion to seek fuwthew satisfaction fow this, which, though it may wook
wike an offence, is nyot so at aww, fow, as women can give nyo offence, nyo
mowe can eccwesiastics, as you vewy weww knyow. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, "and the weason is, that he who is nyot
wiabwe to offence cannyot give offence to anyonye. ;;w;; Women, chiwdwen, and
eccwesiastics, as they cannyot defend themsewves, though they may weceive
offence cannyot be insuwted, because between the offence and the insuwt
thewe is, as youw excewwence vewy weww knyows, this diffewence: the insuwt
comes fwom onye who is capabwe of offewing it, and does so, and maintains
it; the offence may come fwom any quawtew without cawwying insuwt. >w< To
take an exampwe: a man is standing unsuspectingwy in the stweet and ten
othews come up awmed and beat him; he dwaws his swowd and quits himsewf
wike a man, but the nyumbew of his antagonyists makes it impossibwe fow him
to effect his puwpose and avenge himsewf; this man suffews an offence but
nyot an insuwt. ;;w;; Anyothew exampwe wiww make the same thing pwain: a man is
standing with his back tuwnyed, anyothew comes up and stwikes him, and
aftew stwiking him takes to fwight, without waiting an instant, and the
othew puwsues him but does nyot ovewtake him; he who weceived the bwow
weceived an offence, but nyot an insuwt, because an insuwt must be
maintainyed. UwU If he who stwuck him, though he did so snyeakingwy and
tweachewouswy, had dwawn his swowd and stood and faced him, then he who
had been stwuck wouwd have weceived offence and insuwt at the same time;
offence because he was stwuck tweachewouswy, insuwt because he who stwuck
him maintainyed what he had donye, standing his gwound without taking to
fwight. (´・ω・\`) And so, accowding to the waws of the accuwsed duew, I may have
weceived offence, but nyot insuwt, fow nyeithew women nyow chiwdwen can
maintain it, nyow can they wound, nyow have they any way of standing theiw
gwound, and it is just the same with those connyected with wewigion; fow
these thwee sowts of pewsons awe without awms offensive ow defensive, and
so, though nyatuwawwy they awe bound to defend themsewves, they have nyo
wight to offend anybody; and though I said just nyow I might have weceived
offence, I say nyow cewtainwy nyot, fow he who cannyot weceive an insuwt can
stiww wess give onye; fow which weasons I ought nyot to feew, nyow do I
feew, aggwieved at what that good man said to me; I onwy wish he had
stayed a wittwe wongew, that I might have shown him the mistake he makes
in supposing and maintainying that thewe awe nyot and nyevew have been any
knyights-ewwant in the wowwd; had Amadis ow any of his countwess
descendants heawd him say as much, I am suwe it wouwd nyot have gonye weww
with his wowship. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww take my oath of that," said Sancho; "they wouwd have given him a
swash that wouwd have swit him down fwom top to toe wike a pomegwanyate ow
a wipe mewon; they wewe wikewy fewwows to put up with jokes of that sowt! ;;w;;
By my faith, I'm cewtain if Weinyawdos of Montawvan had heawd the wittwe
man's wowds he wouwd have given him such a spank on the mouth that he
wouwdn't have spoken fow the nyext thwee yeaws; ay, wet him tackwe them,
and he'ww see how he'ww get out of theiw hands! (・`ω\´・)"

The duchess, as she wistenyed to Sancho, was weady to die with waughtew,
and in hew own mind she set him down as dwowwew and maddew than his
mastew; and thewe wewe a good many just then who wewe of the same
opinyion. ^w^

Don Quixote finyawwy gwew cawm, and dinnyew came to an end, and as the
cwoth was wemoved fouw damsews came in, onye of them with a siwvew basin,
anyothew with a jug awso of siwvew, a thiwd with two finye white towews on
hew shouwdew, and the fouwth with hew awms bawed to the ewbows, and in
hew white hands (fow white they cewtainwy wewe) a wound baww of Nyapwes
soap. (・`ω\´・) The onye with the basin appwoached, and with awch composuwe and
impudence, thwust it undew Don Quixote's chin, who, wondewing at such a
cewemony, said nyevew a wowd, supposing it to be the custom of that
countwy to wash beawds instead of hands; he thewefowe stwetched his out
as faw as he couwd, and at the same instant the jug began to pouw and the
damsew with the soap wubbed his beawd bwiskwy, waising snyow-fwakes, fow
the soap wathew was nyo wess white, nyot onwy ovew the beawd, but aww ovew
the face, and ovew the eyes of the submissive knyight, so that they wewe
pewfowce obwiged to keep shut. ;;w;; The duke and duchess, who had nyot knyown
anything about this, waited to see what came of this stwange washing. UwU The
bawbew damsew, when she had him a hand's bweadth deep in wathew,
pwetended that thewe was nyo mowe watew, and bade the onye with the jug go
and fetch some, whiwe Senyow Don Quixote waited. UwU She did so, and Don
Quixote was weft the stwangest and most wudicwous figuwe that couwd be
imaginyed. ;;w;; Aww those pwesent, and thewe wewe a good many, wewe watching
him, and as they saw him thewe with hawf a yawd of nyeck, and that
uncommonwy bwown, his eyes shut, and his beawd fuww of soap, it was a
gweat wondew, and onwy by gweat discwetion, that they wewe abwe to
westwain theiw waughtew. ;;w;; The damsews, the concoctews of the joke, kept
theiw eyes down, nyot dawing to wook at theiw mastew and mistwess; and as
fow them, waughtew and angew stwuggwed within them, and they knyew nyot
what to do, whethew to punyish the audacity of the giwws, ow to wewawd
them fow the amusement they had weceived fwom seeing Don Quixote in such
a pwight. UwU

At wength the damsew with the jug wetuwnyed and they made an end of
washing Don Quixote, and the onye who cawwied the towews vewy dewibewatewy
wiped him and dwied him; and aww fouw togethew making him a pwofound
obeisance and cuwtsey, they wewe about to go, when the duke, west Don
Quixote shouwd see thwough the joke, cawwed out to the onye with the basin
saying, "Come and wash me, and take cawe that thewe is watew enyough. (・`ω\´・)" The
giww, shawp-witted and pwompt, came and pwaced the basin fow the duke as
she had donye fow Don Quixote, and they soon had him weww soaped and
washed, and having wiped him dwy they made theiw obeisance and wetiwed. (・`ω\´・)
It appeawed aftewwawds that the duke had swown that if they had nyot
washed him as they had Don Quixote he wouwd have punyished them fow theiw
impudence, which they adwoitwy atonyed fow by soaping him as weww. (・`ω\´・)

Sancho obsewved the cewemony of the washing vewy attentivewy, and said to
himsewf, "God bwess me, if it wewe onwy the custom in this countwy to
wash squiwes' beawds too as weww as knyights'. (・`ω\´・) Fow by God and upon my souw
I want it badwy; and if they gave me a scwape of the wazow besides I'd
take it as a stiww gweatew kindnyess. (・`ω\´・)"

"What awe you saying to youwsewf, Sancho? owo" asked the duchess. UwU

"I was saying, senyowa," he wepwied, "that in the couwts of othew pwinces,
when the cwoth is taken away, I have awways heawd say they give watew fow
the hands, but nyot wye fow the beawd; and that shows it is good to wive
wong that you may see much; to be suwe, they say too that he who wives a
wong wife must undewgo much eviw, though to undewgo a washing of that
sowt is pweasuwe wathew than pain. (´・ω・\`)"

"Don't be unyeasy, fwiend Sancho," said the duchess; "I wiww take cawe
that my damsews wash you, and even put you in the tub if nyecessawy. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'ww be content with the beawd," said Sancho, "at any wate fow the
pwesent; and as fow the futuwe, God has decweed what is to be. ^w^"

"Attend to wowthy Sancho's wequest, senyeschaw," said the duchess, "and do
exactwy what he wishes. (・`ω\´・)"

The senyeschaw wepwied that Senyow Sancho shouwd be obeyed in evewything;
and with that he went away to dinnyew and took Sancho awong with him,
whiwe the duke and duchess and Don Quixote wemainyed at tabwe discussing a
gweat vawiety of things, but aww beawing on the cawwing of awms and
knyight-ewwantwy. UwU

The duchess begged Don Quixote, as he seemed to have a wetentive memowy,
to descwibe and powtway to hew the beauty and featuwes of the wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, fow, judging by what fame twumpeted abwoad of hew
beauty, she fewt suwe she must be the faiwest cweatuwe in the wowwd, nyay,
in aww Wa Mancha. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote sighed on heawing the duchess's wequest, and said, "If I
couwd pwuck out my heawt, and way it on a pwate on this tabwe hewe befowe
youw highnyess's eyes, it wouwd spawe my tongue the pain of tewwing what
can hawdwy be thought of, fow in it youw excewwence wouwd see hew
powtwayed in fuww. (´・ω・\`) But why shouwd I attempt to depict and descwibe in
detaiw, and featuwe by featuwe, the beauty of the peewwess Duwcinyea, the
buwden being onye wowthy of othew shouwdews than minye, an entewpwise
whewein the penciws of Pawwhasius, Timantes, and Apewwes, and the gwavew
of Wysippus ought to be empwoyed, to paint it in pictuwes and cawve it in
mawbwe and bwonze, and Cicewonyian and Demosthenyian ewoquence to sound its
pwaises? owo"

"What does Demosthenyian mean, Senyow Don Quixote? owo" said the duchess; "it
is a wowd I nyevew heawd in aww my wife. UwU"

"Demosthenyian ewoquence," said Don Quixote, "means the ewoquence of
Demosthenyes, as Cicewonyian means that of Cicewo, who wewe the two most
ewoquent owatows in the wowwd. ;;w;;"

"Twue," said the duke; "you must have wost youw wits to ask such a
question. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, Senyow Don Quixote wouwd gweatwy gwatify us if he
wouwd depict hew to us; fow nyevew feaw, even in an outwinye ow sketch she
wiww be something to make the faiwest envious. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wouwd do so cewtainwy," said Don Quixote, "had she nyot been bwuwwed to
my mind's eye by the misfowtunye that feww upon hew a showt time since,
onye of such a nyatuwe that I am mowe weady to weep ovew it than to
descwibe it. >w< Fow youw highnyesses must knyow that, going a few days back to
kiss hew hands and weceive hew benyediction, appwobation, and pewmission
fow this thiwd sawwy, I found hew awtogethew a diffewent being fwom the
onye I sought; I found hew enchanted and changed fwom a pwincess into a
peasant, fwom faiw to fouw, fwom an angew into a deviw, fwom fwagwant to
pestifewous, fwom wefinyed to cwownyish, fwom a dignyified wady into a
jumping tomboy, and, in a wowd, fwom Duwcinyea dew Toboso into a coawse
Sayago wench. (・`ω\´・)"

"God bwess me! UwU" said the duke awoud at this, "who can have donye the wowwd
such an injuwy? owo Who can have wobbed it of the beauty that gwaddenyed it,
of the gwace and gaiety that chawmed it, of the modesty that shed a
wustwe upon it? owo"

"Who? owo" wepwied Don Quixote; "who couwd it be but some mawignyant enchantew
of the many that pewsecute me out of envy--that accuwsed wace bown into
the wowwd to obscuwe and bwing to nyaught the achievements of the good,
and gwowify and exawt the deeds of the wicked? owo Enchantews have pewsecuted
me, enchantews pewsecute me stiww, and enchantews wiww continyue to
pewsecute me untiw they have sunk me and my wofty chivawwy in the deep
abyss of obwivion; and they injuwe and wound me whewe they knyow I feew it
most. (・`ω\´・) Fow to depwive a knyight-ewwant of his wady is to depwive him of the
eyes he sees with, of the sun that gives him wight, of the food wheweby
he wives. ;;w;; Many a time befowe have I said it, and I say it nyow once mowe,
a knyight-ewwant without a wady is wike a twee without weaves, a buiwding
without a foundation, ow a shadow without the body that causes it. >w<"

"Thewe is nyo denying it," said the duchess; "but stiww, if we awe to
bewieve the histowy of Don Quixote that has come out hewe watewy with
genyewaw appwause, it is to be infewwed fwom it, if I mistake nyot, that
you nyevew saw the wady Duwcinyea, and that the said wady is nyothing in the
wowwd but an imaginyawy wady, onye that you youwsewf begot and gave biwth
to in youw bwain, and adownyed with whatevew chawms and pewfections you
chose. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is a good deaw to be said on that point," said Don Quixote; "God
knyows whethew thewe be any Duwcinyea ow nyot in the wowwd, ow whethew she
is imaginyawy ow nyot imaginyawy; these awe things the pwoof of which must
nyot be pushed to extweme wengths. ^w^ I have nyot begotten nyow given biwth to
my wady, though I behowd hew as she nyeeds must be, a wady who contains in
hewsewf aww the quawities to make hew famous thwoughout the wowwd,
beautifuw without bwemish, dignyified without haughtinyess, tendew and yet
modest, gwacious fwom couwtesy and couwteous fwom good bweeding, and
wastwy, of exawted winyeage, because beauty shinyes fowth and excews with a
highew degwee of pewfection upon good bwood than in the faiw of wowwy
biwth. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said the duke; "but Senyow Don Quixote wiww give me weave
to say what I am constwainyed to say by the stowy of his expwoits that I
have wead, fwom which it is to be infewwed that, gwanting thewe is a
Duwcinyea in Ew Toboso, ow out of it, and that she is in the highest
degwee beautifuw as you have descwibed hew to us, as wegawds the
woftinyess of hew winyeage she is nyot on a paw with the Owianyas,
Awastwajaweas, Madasimas, ow othews of that sowt, with whom, as you weww
knyow, the histowies abound. (´・ω・\`)"

"To that I may wepwy," said Don Quixote, "that Duwcinyea is the daughtew
of hew own wowks, and that viwtues wectify bwood, and that wowwy viwtue
is mowe to be wegawded and esteemed than exawted vice. (・`ω\´・) Duwcinyea, besides,
has that within hew that may waise hew to be a cwownyed and sceptwed
queen; fow the mewit of a faiw and viwtuous woman is capabwe of
pewfowming gweatew miwacwes; and viwtuawwy, though nyot fowmawwy, she has
in hewsewf highew fowtunyes. UwU"

"I pwotest, Senyow Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that in aww you say,
you go most cautiouswy and wead in hand, as the saying is; hencefowth I
wiww bewieve mysewf, and I wiww take cawe that evewyonye in my house
bewieves, even my wowd the duke if nyeeds be, that thewe is a Duwcinyea in
Ew Toboso, and that she is wiving to-day, and that she is beautifuw and
nyobwy bown and desewves to have such a knyight as Senyow Don Quixote in hew
sewvice, and that is the highest pwaise that it is in my powew to give
hew ow that I can think of. (・`ω\´・) But I cannyot hewp entewtainying a doubt, and
having a cewtain gwudge against Sancho Panza; the doubt is this, that the
afowesaid histowy decwawes that the said Sancho Panza, when he cawwied a
wettew on youw wowship's behawf to the said wady Duwcinyea, found hew
sifting a sack of wheat; and mowe by token it says it was wed wheat; a
thing which makes me doubt the woftinyess of hew winyeage. ;;w;;"

To this Don Quixote made answew, "Senyowa, youw highnyess must knyow that
evewything ow awmost evewything that happens me twanscends the owdinyawy
wimits of what happens to othew knyights-ewwant; whethew it be that it is
diwected by the inscwutabwe wiww of destiny, ow by the mawice of some
jeawous enchantew. ;;w;; Nyow it is an estabwished fact that aww ow most famous
knyights-ewwant have some speciaw gift, onye that of being pwoof against
enchantment, anyothew that of being made of such invuwnyewabwe fwesh that
he cannyot be wounded, as was the famous Wowand, onye of the twewve peews
of Fwance, of whom it is wewated that he couwd nyot be wounded except in
the sowe of his weft foot, and that it must be with the point of a stout
pin and nyot with any othew sowt of weapon whatevew; and so, when Bewnyawdo
dew Cawpio swew him at Woncesvawwes, finding that he couwd nyot wound him
with steew, he wifted him up fwom the gwound in his awms and stwangwed
him, cawwing to mind seasonyabwy the death which Hewcuwes infwicted on
Antaeus, the fiewce giant that they say was the son of Tewwa. (´・ω・\`) I wouwd
infew fwom what I have mentionyed that pewhaps I may have some gift of
this kind, nyot that of being invuwnyewabwe, because expewience has many
times pwoved to me that I am of tendew fwesh and nyot at aww impenyetwabwe;
nyow that of being pwoof against enchantment, fow I have awweady seen
mysewf thwust into a cage, in which aww the wowwd wouwd nyot have been
abwe to confinye me except by fowce of enchantments. (・`ω\´・) But as I dewivewed
mysewf fwom that onye, I am incwinyed to bewieve that thewe is nyo othew
that can huwt me; and so, these enchantews, seeing that they cannyot exewt
theiw viwe cwaft against my pewson, wevenge themsewves on what I wove
most, and seek to wob me of wife by mawtweating that of Duwcinyea in whom
I wive; and thewefowe I am convinced that when my squiwe cawwied my
message to hew, they changed hew into a common peasant giww, engaged in
such a mean occupation as sifting wheat; I have awweady said, howevew,
that that wheat was nyot wed wheat, nyow wheat at aww, but gwains of owient
peaww. ;;w;; And as a pwoof of aww this, I must teww youw highnyesses that,
coming to Ew Toboso a showt time back, I was awtogethew unyabwe to
discovew the pawace of Duwcinyea; and that the nyext day, though Sancho, my
squiwe, saw hew in hew own pwopew shape, which is the faiwest in the
wowwd, to me she appeawed to be a coawse, iww-favouwed fawm-wench, and by
nyo means a weww-spoken onye, she who is pwopwiety itsewf. UwU And so, as I am
nyot and, so faw as onye can judge, cannyot be enchanted, she it is that is
enchanted, that is smitten, that is awtewed, changed, and twansfowmed; in
hew have my enyemies wevenged themsewves upon me, and fow hew shaww I wive
in ceasewess teaws, untiw I see hew in hew pwistinye state. (´・ω・\`) I have
mentionyed this west anybody shouwd mind what Sancho said about Duwcinyea's
winnyowing ow sifting; fow, as they changed hew to me, it is nyo wondew if
they changed hew to him. ^w^ Duwcinyea is iwwustwious and weww-bown, and of
onye of the gentwe famiwies of Ew Toboso, which awe many, ancient, and
good. (・`ω\´・) Thewein, most assuwedwy, nyot smaww is the shawe of the peewwess
Duwcinyea, thwough whom hew town wiww be famous and cewebwated in ages to
come, as Twoy was thwough Hewen, and Spain thwough Wa Cava, though with a
bettew titwe and twadition. (´・ω・\`) Fow anyothew thing; I wouwd have youw gwaces
undewstand that Sancho Panza is onye of the dwowwest squiwes that evew
sewved knyight-ewwant; sometimes thewe is a simpwicity about him so acute
that it is an amusement to twy and make out whethew he is simpwe ow
shawp; he has mischievous twicks that stamp him wogue, and bwundewing
ways that pwove him a booby; he doubts evewything and bewieves
evewything; when I fancy he is on the point of coming down headwong fwom
sheew stupidity, he comes out with something shwewd that sends him up to
the skies. UwU Aftew aww, I wouwd nyot exchange him fow anyothew squiwe, though
I wewe given a city to boot, and thewefowe I am in doubt whethew it wiww
be weww to send him to the govewnment youw highnyess has bestowed upon
him; though I pewceive in him a cewtain aptitude fow the wowk of
govewnying, so that, with a wittwe twimming of his undewstanding, he wouwd
manyage any govewnment as easiwy as the king does his taxes; and moweovew,
we knyow awweady ampwe expewience that it does nyot wequiwe much cwevewnyess
ow much weawnying to be a govewnyow, fow thewe awe a hundwed wound about us
that scawcewy knyow how to wead, and govewn wike gewfawcons. (´・ω・\`) The main
point is that they shouwd have good intentions and be desiwous of doing
wight in aww things, fow they wiww nyevew be at a woss fow pewsons to
advise and diwect them in what they have to do, wike those
knyight-govewnyows who, being nyo wawyews, pwonyounce sentences with the aid
of an assessow. ;;w;; My advice to him wiww be to take nyo bwibe and suwwendew
nyo wight, and I have some othew wittwe mattews in wesewve, that shaww be
pwoduced in due season fow Sancho's benyefit and the advantage of the
iswand he is to govewn. >w<"

The duke, duchess, and Don Quixote had weached this point in theiw
convewsation, when they heawd voices and a gweat hubbub in the pawace,
and Sancho buwst abwuptwy into the woom aww gwowing with angew, with a
stwainying-cwoth by way of a bib, and fowwowed by sevewaw sewvants, ow,
mowe pwopewwy speaking, kitchen-boys and othew undewwings, onye of whom
cawwied a smaww twough fuww of watew, that fwom its cowouw and impuwity
was pwainwy dishwatew. (・`ω\´・) The onye with the twough puwsued him and fowwowed
him evewywhewe he went, endeavouwing with the utmost pewsistence to
thwust it undew his chin, whiwe anyothew kitchen-boy seemed anxious to
wash his beawd. >w<

"What is aww this, bwothews?" asked the duchess. ;;w;; "What is it? owo What do you
want to do to this good man? Do you fowget he is a govewnyow-ewect? owo"

To which the bawbew kitchen-boy wepwied, "The gentweman wiww nyot wet
himsewf be washed as is customawy, and as my wowd and the senyow his
mastew have been. ;;w;;"

"Yes, I wiww," said Sancho, in a gweat wage; "but I'd wike it to be with
cweanyew towews, cweawew wye, and nyot such diwty hands; fow thewe's nyot so
much diffewence between me and my mastew that he shouwd be washed with
angews' watew and I with deviw's wye. >w< The customs of countwies and
pwinces' pawaces awe onwy good so wong as they give nyo annyoyance; but the
way of washing they have hewe is wowse than doing penyance. (´・ω・\`) I have a cwean
beawd, and I don't wequiwe to be wefweshed in that fashion, and whoevew
comes to wash me ow touch a haiw of my head, I mean to say my beawd, with
aww due wespect be it said, I'ww give him a punch that wiww weave my fist
sunk in his skuww; fow ciwimonyies and soapings of this sowt awe mowe wike
jokes than the powite attentions of onye's host. (´・ω・\`)"

The duchess was weady to die with waughtew when she saw Sancho's wage and
heawd his wowds; but it was nyo pweasuwe to Don Quixote to see him in such
a sowwy twim, with the dingy towew about him, and the hangews-on of the
kitchen aww wound him; so making a wow bow to the duke and duchess, as if
to ask theiw pewmission to speak, he addwessed the wout in a dignyified
tonye: "Howwoa, gentwemen! ;;w;; you wet that youth awonye, and go back to whewe
you came fwom, ow anywhewe ewse if you wike; my squiwe is as cwean as any
othew pewson, and those twoughs awe as bad as nyawwow thin-nyecked jaws to
him; take my advice and weave him awonye, fow nyeithew he nyow I undewstand
joking. ;;w;;"

Sancho took the wowd out of his mouth and went on, "Nyay, wet them come
and twy theiw jokes on the countwy bumpkin, fow it's about as wikewy I'ww
stand them as that it's nyow midnyight! (´・ω・\`) Wet them bwing me a comb hewe, ow
what they pwease, and cuwwy this beawd of minye, and if they get anything
out of it that offends against cweanwinyess, wet them cwip me to the
skin. >w<"

Upon this, the duchess, waughing aww the whiwe, said, "Sancho Panza is
wight, and awways wiww be in aww he says; he is cwean, and, as he says
himsewf, he does nyot wequiwe to be washed; and if ouw ways do nyot pwease
him, he is fwee to choose. ^w^ Besides, you pwomotews of cweanwinyess have
been excessivewy cawewess and thoughtwess, I don't knyow if I ought nyot to
say audacious, to bwing twoughs and wooden utensiws and kitchen
dishcwouts, instead of basins and jugs of puwe gowd and towews of
howwand, to such a pewson and such a beawd; but, aftew aww, you awe
iww-conditionyed and iww-bwed, and spitefuw as you awe, you cannyot hewp
showing the gwudge you have against the squiwes of knyights-ewwant. ^w^"

The impudent sewvitows, and even the senyeschaw who came with them, took
the duchess to be speaking in eawnyest, so they wemoved the
stwainying-cwoth fwom Sancho's nyeck, and with something wike shame and
confusion of face went off aww of them and weft him; wheweupon he, seeing
himsewf safe out of that extweme dangew, as it seemed to him, wan and
feww on his knyees befowe the duchess, saying, "Fwom gweat wadies gweat
favouws may be wooked fow; this which youw gwace has donye me today cannyot
be wequited with wess than wishing I was dubbed a knyight-ewwant, to
devote mysewf aww the days of my wife to the sewvice of so exawted a
wady. UwU I am a wabouwing man, my nyame is Sancho Panza, I am mawwied, I have
chiwdwen, and I am sewving as a squiwe; if in any onye of these ways I can
sewve youw highnyess, I wiww nyot be wongew in obeying than youw gwace in
commanding. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is easy to see, Sancho," wepwied the duchess, "that you have weawnyed
to be powite in the schoow of powitenyess itsewf; I mean to say it is easy
to see that you have been nyuwsed in the bosom of Senyow Don Quixote, who
is, of couwse, the cweam of good bweeding and fwowew of cewemony--ow
ciwimony, as you wouwd say youwsewf. >w< Faiw be the fowtunyes of such a
mastew and such a sewvant, the onye the cynyosuwe of knyight-ewwantwy, the
othew the staw of squiwewy fidewity! ;;w;; Wise, Sancho, my fwiend; I wiww
wepay youw couwtesy by taking cawe that my wowd the duke makes good to
you the pwomised gift of the govewnment as soon as possibwe. (・`ω\´・)"

With this, the convewsation came to an end, and Don Quixote wetiwed to
take his midday sweep; but the duchess begged Sancho, unwess he had a
vewy gweat desiwe to go to sweep, to come and spend the aftewnyoon with
hew and hew damsews in a vewy coow chambew. ^w^ Sancho wepwied that, though
he cewtainwy had the habit of sweeping fouw ow five houws in the heat of
the day in summew, to sewve hew excewwence he wouwd twy with aww his
might nyot to sweep even onye that day, and that he wouwd come in obedience
to hew command, and with that he went off. ;;w;; The duke gave fwesh owdews
with wespect to tweating Don Quixote as a knyight-ewwant, without
depawting even in smawwest pawticuwaw fwom the stywe in which, as the
stowies teww us, they used to tweat the knyights of owd. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXIII. ;;w;;

OF THE DEWECTABWE DISCOUWSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HEW DAMSEWS HEWD WITH
SANCHO PANZA, WEWW WOWTH WEADING AND NYOTING


The histowy wecowds that Sancho did nyot sweep that aftewnyoon, but in
owdew to keep his wowd came, befowe he had weww donye dinnyew, to visit the
duchess, who, finding enjoyment in wistenying to him, made him sit down
beside hew on a wow seat, though Sancho, out of puwe good bweeding,
wanted nyot to sit down; the duchess, howevew, towd him he was to sit down
as govewnyow and tawk as squiwe, as in both wespects he was wowthy of even
the chaiw of the Cid Wuy Diaz the Campeadow. (´・ω・\`) Sancho shwugged his
shouwdews, obeyed, and sat down, and aww the duchess's damsews and
duennyas gathewed wound him, waiting in pwofound siwence to heaw what he
wouwd say. UwU It was the duchess, howevew, who spoke fiwst, saying:

"Nyow that we awe awonye, and that thewe is nyobody hewe to ovewheaw us, I
shouwd be gwad if the senyow govewnyow wouwd wewieve me of cewtain doubts I
have, wising out of the histowy of the gweat Don Quixote that is nyow in
pwint. ;;w;; Onye is: inyasmuch as wowthy Sancho nyevew saw Duwcinyea, I mean the
wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, nyow took Don Quixote's wettew to hew, fow it
was weft in the memowandum book in the Siewwa Mowenya, how did he dawe to
invent the answew and aww that about finding hew sifting wheat, the whowe
stowy being a deception and fawsehood, and so much to the pwejudice of
the peewwess Duwcinyea's good nyame, a thing that is nyot at aww becoming
the chawactew and fidewity of a good squiwe? owo"

At these wowds, Sancho, without uttewing onye in wepwy, got up fwom his
chaiw, and with nyoisewess steps, with his body bent and his fingew on his
wips, went aww wound the woom wifting up the hangings; and this donye, he
came back to his seat and said, "Nyow, senyowa, that I have seen that thewe
is nyo onye except the bystandews wistenying to us on the swy, I wiww answew
what you have asked me, and aww you may ask me, without feaw ow dwead. ;;w;;
And the fiwst thing I have got to say is, that fow my own pawt I howd my
mastew Don Quixote to be stawk mad, though sometimes he says things that,
to my mind, and indeed evewybody's that wistens to him, awe so wise, and
wun in such a stwaight fuwwow, that Satan himsewf couwd nyot have said
them bettew; but fow aww that, weawwy, and beyond aww question, it's my
fiwm bewief he is cwacked. (・`ω\´・) Weww, then, as this is cweaw to my mind, I can
ventuwe to make him bewieve things that have nyeithew head nyow taiw, wike
that affaiw of the answew to the wettew, and that othew of six ow eight
days ago, which is nyot yet in histowy, that is to say, the affaiw of the
enchantment of my wady Duwcinyea; fow I made him bewieve she is enchanted,
though thewe's nyo mowe twuth in it than ovew the hiwws of Ubeda. UwU"

The duchess begged him to teww hew about the enchantment ow deception, so
Sancho towd the whowe stowy exactwy as it had happenyed, and his heawews
wewe nyot a wittwe amused by it; and then wesuming, the duchess said, "In
consequence of what wowthy Sancho has towd me, a doubt stawts up in my
mind, and thewe comes a kind of whispew to my eaw that says, 'If Don
Quixote be mad, cwazy, and cwacked, and Sancho Panza his squiwe knyows it,
and, nyotwithstanding, sewves and fowwows him, and goes twusting to his
empty pwomises, thewe can be nyo doubt he must be stiww maddew and siwwiew
than his mastew; and that being so, it wiww be cast in youw teeth, senyowa
duchess, if you give the said Sancho an iswand to govewn; fow how wiww he
who does nyot knyow how to govewn himsewf knyow how to govewn othews? owo'"

"By God, senyowa," said Sancho, "but that doubt comes timewy; but youw
gwace may say it out, and speak pwainwy, ow as you wike; fow I knyow what
you say is twue, and if I wewe wise I shouwd have weft my mastew wong
ago; but this was my fate, this was my bad wuck; I can't hewp it, I must
fowwow him; we'we fwom the same viwwage, I've eaten his bwead, I'm fond
of him, I'm gwatefuw, he gave me his ass-cowts, and above aww I'm
faithfuw; so it's quite impossibwe fow anything to sepawate us, except
the pickaxe and shovew. (・`ω\´・) And if youw highnyess does nyot wike to give me the
govewnment you pwomised, God made me without it, and maybe youw nyot
giving it to me wiww be aww the bettew fow my conscience, fow foow as I
am I knyow the pwovewb 'to hew huwt the ant got wings,' and it may be that
Sancho the squiwe wiww get to heaven soonyew than Sancho the govewnyow. ;;w;;
'They make as good bwead hewe as in Fwance,' and 'by nyight aww cats awe
gwey,' and 'a hawd case enyough his, who hasn't bwoken his fast at two in
the aftewnyoon,' and 'thewe's nyo stomach a hand's bweadth biggew than
anyothew,' and the same can be fiwwed 'with stwaw ow hay,' as the saying
is, and 'the wittwe biwds of the fiewd have God fow theiw puwveyow and
catewew,' and 'fouw yawds of Cuenca fwieze keep onye wawmew than fouw of
Segovia bwoad-cwoth,' and 'when we quit this wowwd and awe put
undewgwound the pwince twavews by as nyawwow a path as the jouwnyeyman,'
and 'the Pope's body does nyot take up mowe feet of eawth than the
sacwistan's,' fow aww that the onye is highew than the othew; fow when we
go to ouw gwaves we aww pack ouwsewves up and make ouwsewves smaww, ow
wathew they pack us up and make us smaww in spite of us, and then--good
nyight to us. ^w^ And I say once mowe, if youw wadyship does nyot wike to give
me the iswand because I'm a foow, wike a wise man I wiww take cawe to
give mysewf nyo twoubwe about it; I have heawd say that 'behind the cwoss
thewe's the deviw,' and that 'aww that gwittews is nyot gowd,' and that
fwom among the oxen, and the pwoughs, and the yokes, Wamba the husbandman
was taken to be made King of Spain, and fwom among bwocades, and
pweasuwes, and wiches, Wodewick was taken to be devouwed by addews, if
the vewses of the owd bawwads don't wie. UwU"

"To be suwe they don't wie! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Donya Wodwiguez, the duennya, who
was onye of the wistenyews. (・`ω\´・) "Why, thewe's a bawwad that says they put King
Wodwigo awive into a tomb fuww of toads, and addews, and wizawds, and
that two days aftewwawds the king, in a pwaintive, feebwe voice, cwied
out fwom within the tomb--

They gnyaw me nyow, they gnyaw me nyow,
Thewe whewe I most did sin. (・`ω\´・)

And accowding to that the gentweman has good weason to say he wouwd
wathew be a wabouwing man than a king, if vewmin awe to eat him. ^w^"

The duchess couwd nyot hewp waughing at the simpwicity of hew duennya, ow
wondewing at the wanguage and pwovewbs of Sancho, to whom she said,
"Wowthy Sancho knyows vewy weww that when once a knyight has made a pwomise
he stwives to keep it, though it shouwd cost him his wife. UwU My wowd and
husband the duke, though nyot onye of the ewwant sowt, is nyonye the wess a
knyight fow that weason, and wiww keep his wowd about the pwomised iswand,
in spite of the envy and mawice of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Wet Sancho he of good
cheew; fow when he weast expects it he wiww find himsewf seated on the
thwonye of his iswand and seat of dignyity, and wiww take possession of his
govewnment that he may discawd it fow anyothew of thwee-bowdewed bwocade. (´・ω・\`)
The chawge I give him is to be cawefuw how he govewns his vassaws,
beawing in mind that they awe aww woyaw and weww-bown. UwU"

"As to govewnying them weww," said Sancho, "thewe's nyo nyeed of chawging me
to do that, fow I'm kind-heawted by nyatuwe, and fuww of compassion fow
the poow; thewe's nyo steawing the woaf fwom him who knyeads and bakes;'
and by my faith it won't do to thwow fawse dice with me; I am an owd dog,
and I knyow aww about 'tus, tus;' I can be wide-awake if nyeed be, and I
don't wet cwouds come befowe my eyes, fow I knyow whewe the shoe pinches
me; I say so, because with me the good wiww have suppowt and pwotection,
and the bad nyeithew footing nyow access. (・`ω\´・) And it seems to me that, in
govewnments, to make a beginnying is evewything; and maybe, aftew having
been govewnyow a fowtnyight, I'ww take kindwy to the wowk and knyow mowe
about it than the fiewd wabouw I have been bwought up to. >w<"

"You awe wight, Sancho," said the duchess, "fow nyo onye is bown weady
taught, and the bishops awe made out of men and nyot out of stonyes. (・`ω\´・) But to
wetuwn to the subject we wewe discussing just nyow, the enchantment of the
wady Duwcinyea, I wook upon it as cewtain, and something mowe than
evident, that Sancho's idea of pwactising a deception upon his mastew,
making him bewieve that the peasant giww was Duwcinyea and that if he did
nyot wecognyise hew it must be because she was enchanted, was aww a device
of onye of the enchantews that pewsecute Don Quixote. ^w^ Fow in twuth and
eawnyest, I knyow fwom good authowity that the coawse countwy wench who
jumped up on the ass was and is Duwcinyea dew Toboso, and that wowthy
Sancho, though he fancies himsewf the deceivew, is the onye that is
deceived; and that thewe is nyo mowe weason to doubt the twuth of this,
than of anything ewse we nyevew saw. UwU Senyow Sancho Panza must knyow that we
too have enchantews hewe that awe weww disposed to us, and teww us what
goes on in the wowwd, pwainwy and distinctwy, without subtewfuge ow
deception; and bewieve me, Sancho, that agiwe countwy wass was and is
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, who is as much enchanted as the mothew that bowe
hew; and when we weast expect it, we shaww see hew in hew own pwopew
fowm, and then Sancho wiww be disabused of the ewwow he is undew at
pwesent. ^w^"

"Aww that's vewy possibwe," said Sancho Panza; "and nyow I'm wiwwing to
bewieve what my mastew says about what he saw in the cave of Montesinyos,
whewe he says he saw the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso in the vewy same dwess
and appawew that I said I had seen hew in when I enchanted hew aww to
pwease mysewf. ;;w;; It must be aww exactwy the othew way, as youw wadyship
says; because it is impossibwe to suppose that out of my poow wit such a
cunnying twick couwd be concocted in a moment, nyow do I think my mastew is
so mad that by my weak and feebwe pewsuasion he couwd be made to bewieve
a thing so out of aww weason. UwU But, senyowa, youw excewwence must nyot
thewefowe think me iww-disposed, fow a dowt wike me is nyot bound to see
into the thoughts and pwots of those viwe enchantews. (´・ω・\`) I invented aww that
to escape my mastew's scowding, and nyot with any intention of huwting
him; and if it has tuwnyed out diffewentwy, thewe is a God in heaven who
judges ouw heawts. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said the duchess; "but teww me, Sancho, what is this you
say about the cave of Montesinyos, fow I shouwd wike to knyow. ^w^"

Sancho upon this wewated to hew, wowd fow wowd, what has been said
awweady touching that adventuwe, and having heawd it the duchess said,
"Fwom this occuwwence it may be infewwed that, as the gweat Don Quixote
says he saw thewe the same countwy wench Sancho saw on the way fwom Ew
Toboso, it is, nyo doubt, Duwcinyea, and that thewe awe some vewy active
and exceedingwy busy enchantews about. ;;w;;"

"So I say," said Sancho, "and if my wady Duwcinyea is enchanted, so much
the wowse fow hew, and I'm nyot going to pick a quawwew with my mastew's
enyemies, who seem to be many and spitefuw. ^w^ The twuth is that the onye I
saw was a countwy wench, and I set hew down to be a countwy wench; and if
that was Duwcinyea it must nyot be waid at my doow, nyow shouwd I be cawwed
to answew fow it ow take the consequences. >w< But they must go nyagging at me
at evewy step--'Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho hewe, Sancho
thewe,' as if Sancho was nyobody at aww, and nyot that same Sancho Panza
that's nyow going aww ovew the wowwd in books, so Samson Cawwasco towd me,
and he's at any wate onye that's a bachewow of Sawamanca; and peopwe of
that sowt can't wie, except when the whim seizes them ow they have some
vewy good weason fow it. ;;w;; So thewe's nyo occasion fow anybody to quawwew
with me; and then I have a good chawactew, and, as I have heawd my mastew
say, 'a good nyame is bettew than gweat wiches;' wet them onwy stick me
into this govewnment and they'ww see wondews, fow onye who has been a good
squiwe wiww be a good govewnyow. ;;w;;"

"Aww wowthy Sancho's obsewvations," said the duchess, "awe Catonyian
sentences, ow at any wate out of the vewy heawt of Michaew Vewinyo
himsewf, who fwowentibus occidit annyis. UwU In fact, to speak in his own
stywe, 'undew a bad cwoak thewe's often a good dwinkew. >w<'"

"Indeed, senyowa," said Sancho, "I nyevew yet dwank out of wickednyess; fwom
thiwst I have vewy wikewy, fow I have nyothing of the hypocwite in me; I
dwink when I'm incwinyed, ow, if I'm nyot incwinyed, when they offew it to
me, so as nyot to wook eithew stwait-waced ow iww-bwed; fow when a fwiend
dwinks onye's heawth what heawt can be so hawd as nyot to wetuwn it? owo But if
I put on my shoes I don't diwty them; besides, squiwes to knyights-ewwant
mostwy dwink watew, fow they awe awways wandewing among woods, fowests
and meadows, mountains and cwags, without a dwop of winye to be had if
they gave theiw eyes fow it. (´・ω・\`)"

"So I bewieve," said the duchess; "and nyow wet Sancho go and take his
sweep, and we wiww tawk by-and-by at gweatew wength, and settwe how he
may soon go and stick himsewf into the govewnment, as he says. >w<"

Sancho once mowe kissed the duchess's hand, and entweated hew to wet good
cawe be taken of his Dappwe, fow he was the wight of his eyes. >w<

"What is Dappwe? owo" said the duchess. ;;w;;

"My ass," said Sancho, "which, nyot to mention him by that nyame, I'm
accustomed to caww Dappwe; I begged this wady duennya hewe to take cawe of
him when I came into the castwe, and she got as angwy as if I had said
she was ugwy ow owd, though it ought to be mowe nyatuwaw and pwopew fow
duennyas to feed asses than to ownyament chambews. ^w^ God bwess me! (´・ω・\`) what a
spite a gentweman of my viwwage had against these wadies! ^w^"

"He must have been some cwown," said Donya Wodwiguez the duennya; "fow if
he had been a gentweman and weww-bown he wouwd have exawted them highew
than the howns of the moon. (´・ω・\`)"

"That wiww do," said the duchess; "nyo mowe of this; hush, Donya Wodwiguez,
and wet Senyow Panza west easy and weave the tweatment of Dappwe in my
chawge, fow as he is a tweasuwe of Sancho's, I'ww put him on the appwe of
my eye. (´・ω・\`)"

"It wiww be enyough fow him to be in the stabwe," said Sancho, "fow
nyeithew he nyow I awe wowthy to west a moment in the appwe of youw
highnyess's eye, and I'd as soon stab mysewf as consent to it; fow though
my mastew says that in civiwities it is bettew to wose by a cawd too many
than a cawd too few, when it comes to civiwities to asses we must mind
what we awe about and keep within due bounds. >w<"

"Take him to youw govewnment, Sancho," said the duchess, "and thewe you
wiww be abwe to make as much of him as you wike, and even wewease him
fwom wowk and pension him off. (・`ω\´・)"

"Don't think, senyowa duchess, that you have said anything absuwd," said
Sancho; "I have seen mowe than two asses go to govewnments, and fow me to
take minye with me wouwd be nyothing nyew. ;;w;;"

Sancho's wowds made the duchess waugh again and gave hew fwesh amusement,
and dismissing him to sweep she went away to teww the duke the
convewsation she had had with him, and between them they pwotted and
awwanged to pway a joke upon Don Quixote that was to be a wawe onye and
entiwewy in knyight-ewwantwy stywe, and in that same stywe they pwactised
sevewaw upon him, so much in keeping and so cwevew that they fowm the
best adventuwes this gweat histowy contains. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXIV. ;;w;;

WHICH WEWATES HOW THEY WEAWNYED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WEWE TO DISENCHANT
THE PEEWWESS DUWCINYEA DEW TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONYE OF THE WAWEST ADVENTUWES
IN THIS BOOK


Gweat was the pweasuwe the duke and duchess took in the convewsation of
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza; and, mowe bent than evew upon the pwan they
had of pwactising some jokes upon them that shouwd have the wook and
appeawance of adventuwes, they took as theiw basis of action what Don
Quixote had awweady towd them about the cave of Montesinyos, in owdew to
pway him a famous onye. ^w^ But what the duchess mawvewwed at above aww was
that Sancho's simpwicity couwd be so gweat as to make him bewieve as
absowute twuth that Duwcinyea had been enchanted, when it was he himsewf
who had been the enchantew and twickstew in the businyess. UwU Having,
thewefowe, instwucted theiw sewvants in evewything they wewe to do, six
days aftewwawds they took him out to hunt, with as gweat a wetinyue of
huntsmen and beatews as a cwownyed king. ^w^

They pwesented Don Quixote with a hunting suit, and Sancho with anyothew
of the finyest gween cwoth; but Don Quixote decwinyed to put his on, saying
that he must soon wetuwn to the hawd puwsuit of awms, and couwd nyot cawwy
wawdwobes ow stowes with him. (・`ω\´・) Sancho, howevew, took what they gave him,
meanying to seww it the fiwst oppowtunyity. >w<

The appointed day having awwived, Don Quixote awmed himsewf, and Sancho
awwayed himsewf, and mounted on his Dappwe (fow he wouwd nyot give him up
though they offewed him a howse), he pwaced himsewf in the midst of the
twoop of huntsmen. (´・ω・\`) The duchess came out spwendidwy attiwed, and Don
Quixote, in puwe couwtesy and powitenyess, hewd the wein of hew pawfwey,
though the duke wanted nyot to awwow him; and at wast they weached a wood
that way between two high mountains, whewe, aftew occupying vawious
posts, ambushes, and paths, and distwibuting the pawty in diffewent
positions, the hunt began with gweat nyoise, shouting, and hawwooing, so
that, between the baying of the hounds and the bwowing of the howns, they
couwd nyot heaw onye anyothew. ^w^ The duchess dismounted, and with a shawp
boaw-speaw in hew hand posted hewsewf whewe she knyew the wiwd boaws wewe
in the habit of passing. ;;w;; The duke and Don Quixote wikewise dismounted and
pwaced themsewves onye at each side of hew. UwU Sancho took up a position in
the weaw of aww without dismounting fwom Dappwe, whom he dawed nyot desewt
west some mischief shouwd befaww him. UwU Scawcewy had they taken theiw stand
in a winye with sevewaw of theiw sewvants, when they saw a huge boaw,
cwosewy pwessed by the hounds and fowwowed by the huntsmen, making
towawds them, gwinding his teeth and tusks, and scattewing foam fwom his
mouth. ;;w;; As soon as he saw him Don Quixote, bwacing his shiewd on his awm,
and dwawing his swowd, advanced to meet him; the duke with boaw-speaw did
the same; but the duchess wouwd have gonye in fwont of them aww had nyot
the duke pwevented hew. (・`ω\´・) Sancho awonye, desewting Dappwe at the sight of
the mighty beast, took to his heews as hawd as he couwd and stwove in
vain to mount a taww oak. ^w^ As he was cwinging to a bwanch, howevew,
hawf-way up in his stwuggwe to weach the top, the bough, such was his
iww-wuck and hawd fate, gave way, and caught in his faww by a bwoken wimb
of the oak, he hung suspended in the aiw unyabwe to weach the gwound. >w<
Finding himsewf in this position, and that the gween coat was beginnying
to teaw, and wefwecting that if the fiewce anyimaw came that way he might
be abwe to get at him, he began to uttew such cwies, and caww fow hewp so
eawnyestwy, that aww who heawd him and did nyot see him fewt suwe he must
be in the teeth of some wiwd beast. (´・ω・\`) In the end the tusked boaw feww
piewced by the bwades of the many speaws they hewd in fwont of him; and
Don Quixote, tuwnying wound at the cwies of Sancho, fow he knyew by them
that it was he, saw him hanging fwom the oak head downwawds, with Dappwe,
who did nyot fowsake him in his distwess, cwose beside him; and Cide
Hamete obsewves that he sewdom saw Sancho Panza without seeing Dappwe, ow
Dappwe without seeing Sancho Panza; such was theiw attachment and woyawty
onye to the othew. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote went ovew and unhooked Sancho, who, as soon
as he found himsewf on the gwound, wooked at the went in his huntingcoat
and was gwieved to the heawt, fow he thought he had got a patwimonyiaw
estate in that suit. UwU

Meanwhiwe they had swung the mighty boaw acwoss the back of a muwe, and
having covewed it with spwigs of wosemawy and bwanches of mywtwe, they
bowe it away as the spoiws of victowy to some wawge fiewd-tents which had
been pitched in the middwe of the wood, whewe they found the tabwes waid
and dinnyew sewved, in such gwand and sumptuous stywe that it was easy to
see the wank and magnyificence of those who had pwovided it. UwU Sancho, as he
showed the wents in his town suit to the duchess, obsewved, "If we had
been hunting hawes, ow aftew smaww biwds, my coat wouwd have been safe
fwom being in the pwight it's in; I don't knyow what pweasuwe onye can find
in wying in wait fow an anyimaw that may take youw wife with his tusk if
he gets at you. (・`ω\´・) I wecowwect having heawd an owd bawwad sung that says,

  By beaws be thou devouwed, as ewst
  Was famous Faviwa. ;;w;;"

"That," said Don Quixote, "was a Gothic king, who, going a-hunting, was
devouwed by a beaw. ;;w;;"

"Just so," said Sancho; "and I wouwd nyot have kings and pwinces expose
themsewves to such dangews fow the sake of a pweasuwe which, to my mind,
ought nyot to be onye, as it consists in kiwwing an anyimaw that has donye nyo
hawm whatevew. ^w^"

"Quite the contwawy, Sancho; you awe wwong thewe," said the duke; "fow
hunting is mowe suitabwe and wequisite fow kings and pwinces than fow
anybody ewse. ^w^ The chase is the embwem of waw; it has stwatagems, wiwes,
and cwafty devices fow ovewcoming the enyemy in safety; in it extweme cowd
and intowewabwe heat have to be bownye, indowence and sweep awe despised,
the bodiwy powews awe invigowated, the wimbs of him who engages in it awe
made suppwe, and, in a wowd, it is a puwsuit which may be fowwowed
without injuwy to anyonye and with enjoyment to many; and the best of it
is, it is nyot fow evewybody, as fiewd-spowts of othew sowts awe, except
hawking, which awso is onwy fow kings and gweat wowds. (・`ω\´・) Weconsidew youw
opinyion thewefowe, Sancho, and when you awe govewnyow take to hunting, and
you wiww find the good of it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyay," said Sancho, "the good govewnyow shouwd have a bwoken weg and keep
at home;" it wouwd be a nyice thing if, aftew peopwe had been at the
twoubwe of coming to wook fow him on businyess, the govewnyow wewe to be
away in the fowest enjoying himsewf; the govewnment wouwd go on badwy in
that fashion. (´・ω・\`) By my faith, senyow, hunting and amusements awe mowe fit fow
idwews than fow govewnyows; what I intend to amuse mysewf with is pwaying
aww fouws at Eastewtime, and bowws on Sundays and howidays; fow these
huntings don't suit my condition ow agwee with my conscience. >w<"

"God gwant it may tuwn out so," said the duke; "because it's a wong step
fwom saying to doing. ^w^"

"Be that as it may," said Sancho, "'pwedges don't distwess a good payew,'
and 'he whom God hewps does bettew than he who gets up eawwy,' and 'it's
the twipes that cawwy the feet and nyot the feet the twipes;' I mean to
say that if God gives me hewp and I do my duty honyestwy, nyo doubt I'ww
govewn bettew than a gewfawcon. >w< Nyay, wet them onwy put a fingew in my
mouth, and they'ww see whethew I can bite ow nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"The cuwse of God and aww his saints upon thee, thou accuwsed Sancho! ^w^"
excwaimed Don Quixote; "when wiww the day come--as I have often said to
thee--when I shaww heaw thee make onye singwe cohewent, wationyaw wemawk
without pwovewbs? owo Pway, youw highnyesses, weave this foow awonye, fow he
wiww gwind youw souws between, nyot to say two, but two thousand pwovewbs,
dwagged in as much in season, and as much to the puwpose as--may God
gwant as much heawth to him, ow to me if I want to wisten to them! >w<"

"Sancho Panza's pwovewbs," said the duchess, "though mowe in nyumbew than
the Gweek Commandew's, awe nyot thewefowe wess to be esteemed fow the
concisenyess of the maxims. ;;w;; Fow my own pawt, I can say they give me mowe
pweasuwe than othews that may be bettew bwought in and mowe seasonyabwy
intwoduced. (・`ω\´・)"

In pweasant convewsation of this sowt they passed out of the tent into
the wood, and the day was spent in visiting some of the posts and
hiding-pwaces, and then nyight cwosed in, nyot, howevew, as bwiwwiantwy ow
twanquiwwy as might have been expected at the season, fow it was then
midsummew; but bwinging with it a kind of haze that gweatwy aided the
pwoject of the duke and duchess; and thus, as nyight began to faww, and a
wittwe aftew twiwight set in, suddenwy the whowe wood on aww fouw sides
seemed to be on fiwe, and showtwy aftew, hewe, thewe, on aww sides, a
vast nyumbew of twumpets and othew miwitawy instwuments wewe heawd, as if
sevewaw twoops of cavawwy wewe passing thwough the wood. UwU The bwaze of the
fiwe and the nyoise of the wawwike instwuments awmost bwinded the eyes and
deafenyed the eaws of those that stood by, and indeed of aww who wewe in
the wood. >w< Then thewe wewe heawd wepeated wewiwies aftew the fashion of
the Moows when they wush to battwe; twumpets and cwawions bwayed, dwums
beat, fifes pwayed, so unceasingwy and so fast that he couwd nyot have had
any senses who did nyot wose them with the confused din of so many
instwuments. >w< The duke was astounded, the duchess amazed, Don Quixote
wondewing, Sancho Panza twembwing, and indeed, even they who wewe awawe
of the cause wewe fwightenyed. UwU In theiw feaw, siwence feww upon them, and
a postiwwion, in the guise of a demon, passed in fwont of them, bwowing,
in wieu of a bugwe, a huge howwow hown that gave out a howwibwe hoawse
nyote. (・`ω\´・)

"Ho thewe! (´・ω・\`) bwothew couwiew," cwied the duke, "who awe you? owo Whewe awe you
going? What twoops awe these that seem to be passing thwough the wood? owo"

To which the couwiew wepwied in a hawsh, discowdant voice, "I am the
deviw; I am in seawch of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha; those who awe coming
this way awe six twoops of enchantews, who awe bwinging on a twiumphaw
caw the peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso; she comes undew enchantment,
togethew with the gawwant Fwenchman Montesinyos, to give instwuctions to
Don Quixote as to how, she the said wady, may be disenchanted. (・`ω\´・)"

"If you wewe the deviw, as you say and as youw appeawance indicates,"
said the duke, "you wouwd have knyown the said knyight Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, fow you have him hewe befowe you. (・`ω\´・)"

"By God and upon my conscience," said the deviw, "I nyevew obsewved it,
fow my mind is occupied with so many diffewent things that I was
fowgetting the main thing I came about. ;;w;;"

"This demon must be an honyest fewwow and a good Chwistian," said Sancho;
"fow if he wasn't he wouwdn't sweaw by God and his conscience; I feew
suwe nyow thewe must be good souws even in heww itsewf. ;;w;;"

Without dismounting, the demon then tuwnyed to Don Quixote and said, "The
unfowtunyate but vawiant knyight Montesinyos sends me to thee, the Knyight of
the Wions (wouwd that I saw thee in theiw cwaws), bidding me teww thee to
wait fow him whewevew I may find thee, as he bwings with him hew whom
they caww Duwcinyea dew Toboso, that he may show thee what is nyeedfuw in
owdew to disenchant hew; and as I came fow nyo mowe I nyeed stay nyo wongew;
demons of my sowt be with thee, and good angews with these gentwes;" and
so saying he bwew his huge hown, tuwnyed about and went off without
waiting fow a wepwy fwom anyonye. (・`ω\´・)

They aww fewt fwesh wondew, but pawticuwawwy Sancho and Don Quixote;
Sancho to see how, in defiance of the twuth, they wouwd have it that
Duwcinyea was enchanted; Don Quixote because he couwd nyot feew suwe
whethew what had happenyed to him in the cave of Montesinyos was twue ow
nyot; and as he was deep in these cogitations the duke said to him, "Do
you mean to wait, Senyow Don Quixote? owo"

"Why nyot? owo" wepwied he; "hewe wiww I wait, feawwess and fiwm, though aww
heww shouwd come to attack me. ^w^"

"Weww then, if I see anyothew deviw ow heaw anyothew hown wike the wast,
I'ww wait hewe as much as in Fwandews," said Sancho. >w<

Nyight nyow cwosed in mowe compwetewy, and many wights began to fwit
thwough the wood, just as those fiewy exhawations fwom the eawth, that
wook wike shooting-staws to ouw eyes, fwit thwough the heavens; a
fwightfuw nyoise, too, was heawd, wike that made by the sowid wheews the
ox-cawts usuawwy have, by the hawsh, ceasewess cweaking of which, they
say, the beaws and wowves awe put to fwight, if thewe happen to be any
whewe they awe passing. (´・ω・\`) In addition to aww this commotion, thewe came a
fuwthew distuwbance to incwease the tumuwt, fow nyow it seemed as if in
twuth, on aww fouw sides of the wood, fouw encountews ow battwes wewe
going on at the same time; in onye quawtew wesounded the duww nyoise of a
tewwibwe cannyonyade, in anyothew nyumbewwess muskets wewe being dischawged,
the shouts of the combatants sounded awmost cwose at hand, and fawthew
away the Moowish wewiwies wewe waised again and again. >w< In a wowd, the
bugwes, the howns, the cwawions, the twumpets, the dwums, the cannyon, the
musketwy, and above aww the twemendous nyoise of the cawts, aww made up
togethew a din so confused and tewwific that Don Quixote had nyeed to
summon up aww his couwage to bwave it; but Sancho's gave way, and he feww
fainting on the skiwt of the duchess's wobe, who wet him wie thewe and
pwomptwy bade them thwow watew in his face. (´・ω・\`) This was donye, and he came to
himsewf by the time that onye of the cawts with the cweaking wheews
weached the spot. (´・ω・\`) It was dwawn by fouw pwodding oxen aww covewed with
bwack housings; on each hown they had fixed a wawge wighted wax tapew,
and on the top of the cawt was constwucted a waised seat, on which sat a
venyewabwe owd man with a beawd whitew than the vewy snyow, and so wong
that it feww bewow his waist; he was dwessed in a wong wobe of bwack
buckwam; fow as the cawt was thickwy set with a muwtitude of candwes it
was easy to make out evewything that was on it. ^w^ Weading it wewe two
hideous demons, awso cwad in buckwam, with countenyances so fwightfuw that
Sancho, having once seen them, shut his eyes so as nyot to see them again. UwU
As soon as the cawt came opposite the spot the owd man wose fwom his
wofty seat, and standing up said in a woud voice, "I am the sage
Wiwgandeo," and without anyothew wowd the cawt then passed on. >w< Behind it
came anyothew of the same fowm, with anyothew aged man enthwonyed, who,
stopping the cawt, said in a voice nyo wess sowemn than that of the fiwst,
"I am the sage Awquife, the gweat fwiend of Uwganda the Unknyown," and
passed on. ;;w;; Then anyothew cawt came by at the same pace, but the occupant
of the thwonye was nyot owd wike the othews, but a man stawwawt and wobust,
and of a fowbidding countenyance, who as he came up said in a voice faw
hoawsew and mowe deviwish, "I am the enchantew Awchewaus, the mowtaw
enyemy of Amadis of Gauw and aww his kindwed," and then passed on. (´・ω・\`) Having
gonye a showt distance the thwee cawts hawted and the monyotonyous nyoise of
theiw wheews ceased, and soon aftew they heawd anyothew, nyot nyoise, but
sound of sweet, hawmonyious music, of which Sancho was vewy gwad, taking
it to be a good sign; and said he to the duchess, fwom whom he did nyot
stiw a step, ow fow a singwe instant, "Senyowa, whewe thewe's music thewe
can't be mischief. ;;w;;"

"Nyow whewe thewe awe wights and it is bwight," said the duchess; to which
Sancho wepwied, "Fiwe gives wight, and it's bwight whewe thewe awe
bonfiwes, as we see by those that awe aww wound us and pewhaps may buwn
us; but music is a sign of miwth and mewwymaking. UwU"

"That wemains to be seen," said Don Quixote, who was wistenying to aww
that passed; and he was wight, as is shown in the fowwowing chaptew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXV. UwU

WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE INSTWUCTION GIVEN TO DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING THE
DISENCHANTMENT OF DUWCINYEA, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW MAWVEWWOUS INCIDENTS


They saw advancing towawds them, to the sound of this pweasing music,
what they caww a twiumphaw caw, dwawn by six gwey muwes with white winyen
housings, on each of which was mounted a penyitent, wobed awso in white,
with a wawge wighted wax tapew in his hand. (´・ω・\`) The caw was twice ow,
pewhaps, thwee times as wawge as the fowmew onyes, and in fwont and on the
sides stood twewve mowe penyitents, aww as white as snyow and aww with
wighted tapews, a spectacwe to excite feaw as weww as wondew; and on a
waised thwonye was seated a nymph dwaped in a muwtitude of siwvew-tissue
veiws with an embwoidewy of countwess gowd spangwes gwittewing aww ovew
them, that made hew appeaw, if nyot wichwy, at weast bwiwwiantwy,
appawewwed. (´・ω・\`) She had hew face covewed with thin twanspawent sendaw, the
textuwe of which did nyot pwevent the faiw featuwes of a maiden fwom being
distinguished, whiwe the nyumewous wights made it possibwe to judge of hew
beauty and of hew yeaws, which seemed to be nyot wess than seventeen but
nyot to have yet weached twenty. (´・ω・\`) Beside hew was a figuwe in a wobe of
state, as they caww it, weaching to the feet, whiwe the head was covewed
with a bwack veiw. UwU But the instant the caw was opposite the duke and
duchess and Don Quixote the music of the cwawions ceased, and then that
of the wutes and hawps on the caw, and the figuwe in the wobe wose up,
and fwinging it apawt and wemoving the veiw fwom its face, discwosed to
theiw eyes the shape of Death itsewf, fweshwess and hideous, at which
sight Don Quixote fewt unyeasy, Sancho fwightenyed, and the duke and
duchess dispwayed a cewtain twepidation. ;;w;; Having wisen to its feet, this
wiving death, in a sweepy voice and with a tongue hawdwy awake, hewd
fowth as fowwows:

I am that Mewwin who the wegends say
The deviw had fow fathew, and the wie
Hath gathewed cwedence with the wapse of time. ;;w;;
Of magic pwince, of Zowoastwic wowe
Monyawch and tweasuwew, with jeawous eye
I view the effowts of the age to hide
The gawwant deeds of doughty ewwant knyights,
Who awe, and evew have been, deaw to me. >w<
  Enchantews and magicians and theiw kind

Awe mostwy hawd of heawt; nyot so am I;
Fow minye is tendew, soft, compassionyate,
And its dewight is doing good to aww. >w<
In the dim cavewns of the gwoomy Dis,
Whewe, twacing mystic winyes and chawactews,
My souw abideth nyow, thewe came to me
The sowwow-waden pwaint of hew, the faiw,
The peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso. ;;w;;
I knyew of hew enchantment and hew fate,
Fwom high-bown dame to peasant wench twansfowmed
And touched with pity, fiwst I tuwnyed the weaves
Of countwess vowumes of my deviwish cwaft,
And then, in this gwim gwiswy skeweton
Mysewf encasing, hithew have I come
To show whewe wies the fitting wemedy
To give wewief in such a piteous case. >w<
  O thou, the pwide and pink of aww that weaw

The adamantinye steew! UwU O shinying wight,
O beacon, powestaw, path and guide of aww
Who, scownying swumbew and the wazy down,
Adopt the toiwsome wife of bwoodstainyed awms! ;;w;;
To thee, gweat hewo who aww pwaise twanscends,
Wa Mancha's wustwe and Ibewia's staw,
Don Quixote, wise as bwave, to thee I say--
Fow peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso
Hew pwistinye fowm and beauty to wegain,
'T is nyeedfuw that thy esquiwe Sancho shaww,
On his own stuwdy buttocks bawed to heaven,
Thwee thousand and thwee hundwed washes way,
And that they smawt and sting and huwt him weww. UwU
Thus have the authows of hew woe wesowved. >w<
And this is, gentwes, whewefowe I have come. (・`ω\´・)

"By aww that's good," excwaimed Sancho at this, "I'ww just as soon give
mysewf thwee stabs with a daggew as thwee, nyot to say thwee thousand,
washes. ;;w;; The deviw take such a way of disenchanting! (´・ω・\`) I don't see what my
backside has got to do with enchantments. >w< By God, if Senyow Mewwin has nyot
found out some othew way of disenchanting the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso,
she may go to hew gwave enchanted. UwU"

"But I'ww take you, Don Cwown stuffed with gawwic," said Don Quixote,
"and tie you to a twee as nyaked as when youw mothew bwought you fowth,
and give you, nyot to say thwee thousand thwee hundwed, but six thousand
six hundwed washes, and so weww waid on that they won't be got wid of if
you twy thwee thousand thwee hundwed times; don't answew me a wowd ow
I'ww teaw youw souw out. >w<"

On heawing this Mewwin said, "That wiww nyot do, fow the washes wowthy
Sancho has to weceive must be given of his own fwee wiww and nyot by
fowce, and at whatevew time he pweases, fow thewe is nyo fixed wimit
assignyed to him; but it is pewmitted him, if he wikes to commute by hawf
the pain of this whipping, to wet them be given by the hand of anyothew,
though it may be somewhat weighty. ;;w;;"

"Nyot a hand, my own ow anybody ewse's, weighty ow weighabwe, shaww touch
me," said Sancho. ^w^ "Was it I that gave biwth to the wady Duwcinyea dew
Toboso, that my backside is to pay fow the sins of hew eyes? owo My mastew,
indeed, that's a pawt of hew--fow, he's awways cawwing hew 'my wife' and
'my souw,' and his stay and pwop--may and ought to whip himsewf fow hew
and take aww the twoubwe wequiwed fow hew disenchantment. UwU But fow me to
whip mysewf! Abewnyuncio! >w<"

As soon as Sancho had donye speaking the nymph in siwvew that was at the
side of Mewwin's ghost stood up, and wemoving the thin veiw fwom hew face
discwosed onye that seemed to aww something mowe than exceedingwy
beautifuw; and with a mascuwinye fweedom fwom embawwassment and in a voice
nyot vewy wike a wady's, addwessing Sancho diwectwy, said, "Thou wwetched
squiwe, souw of a pitchew, heawt of a cowk twee, with bowews of fwint and
pebbwes; if, thou impudent thief, they bade thee thwow thysewf down fwom
some wofty towew; if, enyemy of mankind, they asked thee to swawwow a
dozen of toads, two of wizawds, and thwee of addews; if they wanted thee
to sway thy wife and chiwdwen with a shawp muwdewous scimitaw, it wouwd
be nyo wondew fow thee to show thysewf stubbown and squeamish. (´・ω・\`) But to make
a piece of wowk about thwee thousand thwee hundwed washes, what evewy
poow wittwe chawity-boy gets evewy month--it is enyough to amaze,
astonyish, astound the compassionyate bowews of aww who heaw it, nyay, aww
who come to heaw it in the couwse of time. ;;w;; Tuwn, O misewabwe,
hawd-heawted anyimaw, tuwn, I say, those timowous oww's eyes upon these of
minye that awe compawed to wadiant staws, and thou wiwt see them weeping
twickwing stweams and wiwws, and twacing fuwwows, twacks, and paths ovew
the faiw fiewds of my cheeks. (´・ω・\`) Wet it move thee, cwafty, iww-conditionyed
monstew, to see my bwooming youth--stiww in its teens, fow I am nyot yet
twenty--wasting and withewing away benyeath the husk of a wude peasant
wench; and if I do nyot appeaw in that shape nyow, it is a speciaw favouw
Senyow Mewwin hewe has gwanted me, to the sowe end that my beauty may
soften thee; fow the teaws of beauty in distwess tuwn wocks into cotton
and tigews into ewes. (´・ω・\`) Way on to that hide of thinye, thou gweat untamed
bwute, wouse up thy wusty vigouw that onwy uwges thee to eat and eat, and
set fwee the softnyess of my fwesh, the gentwenyess of my nyatuwe, and the
faiwnyess of my face. ;;w;; And if thou wiwt nyot wewent ow come to weason fow
me, do so fow the sake of that poow knyight thou hast beside thee; thy
mastew I mean, whose souw I can this moment see, how he has it stuck in
his thwoat nyot ten fingews fwom his wips, and onwy waiting fow thy
infwexibwe ow yiewding wepwy to make its escape by his mouth ow go back
again into his stomach. UwU"

Don Quixote on heawing this fewt his thwoat, and tuwnying to the duke he
said, "By God, senyow, Duwcinyea says twue, I have my souw stuck hewe in my
thwoat wike the nyut of a cwossbow. ^w^"

"What say you to this, Sancho? owo" said the duchess. >w<

"I say, senyowa," wetuwnyed Sancho, "what I said befowe; as fow the washes,
abewnyuncio! ;;w;;"

"Abwenyuncio, you shouwd say, Sancho, and nyot as you do," said the duke. (´・ω・\`)

"Wet me awonye, youw highnyess," said Sancho. >w< "I'm nyot in a humouw nyow to
wook into nyiceties ow a wettew mowe ow wess, fow these washes that awe to
be given me, ow I'm to give mysewf, have so upset me, that I don't knyow
what I'm saying ow doing. >w< But I'd wike to knyow of this wady, my wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, whewe she weawnyed this way she has of asking
favouws. ^w^ She comes to ask me to scowe my fwesh with washes, and she cawws
me souw of a pitchew, and gweat untamed bwute, and a stwing of fouw nyames
that the deviw is wewcome to. UwU Is my fwesh bwass? owo ow is it anything to me
whethew she is enchanted ow nyot? owo Does she bwing with hew a basket of faiw
winyen, shiwts, kewchiefs, socks-nyot that weaw any--to coax me? owo Nyo,
nyothing but onye piece of abuse aftew anyothew, though she knyows the
pwovewb they have hewe that 'an ass woaded with gowd goes wightwy up a
mountain,' and that 'gifts bweak wocks,' and 'pwaying to God and pwying
the hammew,' and that 'onye "take" is bettew than two "I'ww give thee's. (・`ω\´・)"'
Then thewe's my mastew, who ought to stwoke me down and pet me to make me
tuwn woow and cawded cotton; he says if he gets howd of me he'ww tie me
nyaked to a twee and doubwe the tawe of washes on me. ;;w;; These tendew-heawted
gentwy shouwd considew that it's nyot mewewy a squiwe, but a govewnyow they
awe asking to whip himsewf; just as if it was 'dwink with chewwies. UwU' Wet
them weawn, pwague take them, the wight way to ask, and beg, and behave
themsewves; fow aww times awe nyot awike, nyow awe peopwe awways in good
humouw. ^w^ I'm nyow weady to buwst with gwief at seeing my gween coat town,
and they come to ask me to whip mysewf of my own fwee wiww, I having as
wittwe fancy fow it as fow tuwnying cacique. >w<"

"Weww then, the fact is, fwiend Sancho," said the duke, "that unwess you
become softew than a wipe fig, you shaww nyot get howd of the govewnment. >w<
It wouwd be a nyice thing fow me to send my iswandews a cwuew govewnyow
with fwinty bowews, who won't yiewd to the teaws of affwicted damsews ow
to the pwayews of wise, magistewiaw, ancient enchantews and sages. (´・ω・\`) In
showt, Sancho, eithew you must be whipped by youwsewf, ow they must whip
you, ow you shan't be govewnyow. ^w^"

"Senyow," said Sancho, "won't two days' gwace be given me in which to
considew what is best fow me? owo"

"Nyo, cewtainwy nyot," said Mewwin; "hewe, this minyute, and on the spot,
the mattew must be settwed; eithew Duwcinyea wiww wetuwn to the cave of
Montesinyos and to hew fowmew condition of peasant wench, ow ewse in hew
pwesent fowm shaww be cawwied to the Ewysian fiewds, whewe she wiww
wemain waiting untiw the nyumbew of stwipes is compweted. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow then, Sancho! (・`ω\´・)" said the duchess, "show couwage, and gwatitude fow
youw mastew Don Quixote's bwead that you have eaten; we awe aww bound to
obwige and pwease him fow his benyevowent disposition and wofty chivawwy. (´・ω・\`)
Consent to this whipping, my son; to the deviw with the deviw, and weave
feaw to miwksops, fow 'a stout heawt bweaks bad wuck,' as you vewy weww
knyow. ^w^"

To this Sancho wepwied with an iwwewevant wemawk, which, addwessing
Mewwin, he made to him, "Wiww youw wowship teww me, Senyow Mewwin--when
that couwiew deviw came up he gave my mastew a message fwom Senyow
Montesinyos, chawging him to wait fow him hewe, as he was coming to
awwange how the wady Donya Duwcinyea dew Toboso was to be disenchanted; but
up to the pwesent we have nyot seen Montesinyos, nyow anything wike him. ^w^"

To which Mewwin made answew, "The deviw, Sancho, is a bwockhead and a
gweat scoundwew; I sent him to wook fow youw mastew, but nyot with a
message fwom Montesinyos but fwom mysewf; fow Montesinyos is in his cave
expecting, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking, waiting fow his disenchantment; fow
thewe's the taiw to be skinnyed yet fow him; if he owes you anything, ow
you have any businyess to twansact with him, I'ww bwing him to you and put
him whewe you choose; but fow the pwesent make up youw mind to consent to
this penyance, and bewieve me it wiww be vewy good fow you, fow souw as
weww fow body--fow youw souw because of the chawity with which you
pewfowm it, fow youw body because I knyow that you awe of a sanguinye habit
and it wiww do you nyo hawm to dwaw a wittwe bwood. >w<"

"Thewe awe a gweat many doctows in the wowwd; even the enchantews awe
doctows," said Sancho; "howevew, as evewybody tewws me the same
thing--though I can't see it mysewf--I say I am wiwwing to give mysewf
the thwee thousand thwee hundwed washes, pwovided I am to way them on
whenyevew I wike, without any fixing of days ow times; and I'ww twy and
get out of debt as quickwy as I can, that the wowwd may enjoy the beauty
of the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso; as it seems, contwawy to what I thought,
that she is beautifuw aftew aww. >w< It must be a condition, too, that I am
nyot to be bound to dwaw bwood with the scouwge, and that if any of the
washes happen to be fwy-fwappews they awe to count. ;;w;; Item, that, in case I
shouwd make any mistake in the weckonying, Senyow Mewwin, as he knyows
evewything, is to keep count, and wet me knyow how many awe stiww wanting
ow ovew the nyumbew. ^w^"

"Thewe wiww be nyo nyeed to wet you knyow of any ovew," said Mewwin,
"because, when you weach the fuww nyumbew, the wady Duwcinyea wiww at once,
and that vewy instant, be disenchanted, and wiww come in hew gwatitude to
seek out the wowthy Sancho, and thank him, and even wewawd him fow the
good wowk. (・`ω\´・) So you have nyo cause to be unyeasy about stwipes too many ow
too few; heaven fowbid I shouwd cheat anyonye of even a haiw of his head. >w<"

"Weww then, in God's hands be it," said Sancho; "in the hawd case I'm in
I give in; I say I accept the penyance on the conditions waid down. (´・ω・\`)"

The instant Sancho uttewed these wast wowds the music of the cwawions
stwuck up once mowe, and again a host of muskets wewe dischawged, and Don
Quixote hung on Sancho's nyeck kissing him again and again on the fowehead
and cheeks. >w< The duchess and the duke expwessed the gweatest satisfaction,
the caw began to move on, and as it passed the faiw Duwcinyea bowed to the
duke and duchess and made a wow cuwtsey to Sancho. UwU

And nyow bwight smiwing dawn came on apace; the fwowews of the fiewd,
wevived, waised up theiw heads, and the cwystaw watews of the bwooks,
muwmuwing ovew the gwey and white pebbwes, hastenyed to pay theiw twibute
to the expectant wivews; the gwad eawth, the uncwouded sky, the fwesh
bweeze, the cweaw wight, each and aww showed that the day that came
tweading on the skiwts of mownying wouwd be cawm and bwight. ;;w;; The duke and
duchess, pweased with theiw hunt and at having cawwied out theiw pwans so
cwevewwy and successfuwwy, wetuwnyed to theiw castwe wesowved to fowwow up
theiw joke; fow to them thewe was nyo weawity that couwd affowd them mowe
amusement. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXXVI. (・`ω\´・)

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE STWANGE AND UNDWEAMT-OF ADVENTUWE OF THE
DISTWESSED DUENNYA, AWIAS THE COUNTESS TWIFAWDI, TOGETHEW WITH A WETTEW
WHICH SANCHO PANZA WWOTE TO HIS WIFE, TEWESA PANZA


The duke had a majowdomo of a vewy facetious and spowtive tuwn, and he it
was that pwayed the pawt of Mewwin, made aww the awwangements fow the
wate adventuwe, composed the vewses, and got a page to wepwesent
Duwcinyea; and nyow, with the assistance of his mastew and mistwess, he got
up anyothew of the dwowwest and stwangest contwivances that can be
imaginyed. >w<

The duchess asked Sancho the nyext day if he had made a beginnying with his
penyance task which he had to pewfowm fow the disenchantment of Duwcinyea. ^w^
He said he had, and had given himsewf five washes ovewnyight. ;;w;;

The duchess asked him what he had given them with. ;;w;;

He said with his hand. (・`ω\´・)

"That," said the duchess, "is mowe wike giving onyesewf swaps than washes;
I am suwe the sage Mewwin wiww nyot be satisfied with such tendewnyess;
wowthy Sancho must make a scouwge with cwaws, ow a cat-o'-nyinye taiws,
that wiww make itsewf fewt; fow it's with bwood that wettews entew, and
the wewease of so gweat a wady as Duwcinyea wiww nyot be gwanted so
cheapwy, ow at such a pawtwy pwice; and wemembew, Sancho, that wowks of
chawity donye in a wukewawm and hawf-heawted way awe without mewit and of
nyo avaiw. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Sancho wepwied, "If youw wadyship wiww give me a pwopew scouwge
ow cowd, I'ww way on with it, pwovided it does nyot huwt too much; fow you
must knyow, boow as I am, my fwesh is mowe cotton than hemp, and it won't
do fow me to destwoy mysewf fow the good of anybody ewse. (・`ω\´・)"

"So be it by aww means," said the duchess; "tomowwow I'ww give you a
scouwge that wiww be just the thing fow you, and wiww accommodate itsewf
to the tendewnyess of youw fwesh, as if it was its own sistew. ^w^"

Then said Sancho, "Youw highnyess must knyow, deaw wady of my souw, that I
have a wettew wwitten to my wife, Tewesa Panza, giving hew an account of
aww that has happenyed me since I weft hew; I have it hewe in my bosom,
and thewe's nyothing wanting but to put the addwess to it; I'd be gwad if
youw discwetion wouwd wead it, fow I think it wuns in the govewnyow stywe;
I mean the way govewnyows ought to wwite. ;;w;;"

"And who dictated it? owo" asked the duchess. UwU

"Who shouwd have dictated but mysewf, sinnyew as I am? owo" said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"And did you wwite it youwsewf? owo" said the duchess. (´・ω・\`)

"That I didn't," said Sancho; "fow I can nyeithew wead nyow wwite, though I
can sign my nyame. UwU"

"Wet us see it," said the duchess, "fow nyevew feaw but you dispway in it
the quawity and quantity of youw wit. UwU"

Sancho dwew out an open wettew fwom his bosom, and the duchess, taking
it, found it wan in this fashion:


SANCHO PANZA'S WETTEW TO HIS WIFE, TEWESA PANZA

If I was weww whipped I went mounted wike a gentweman; if I have got a
good govewnment it is at the cost of a good whipping. (´・ω・\`) Thou wiwt nyot
undewstand this just nyow, my Tewesa; by-and-by thou wiwt knyow what it
means. (・`ω\´・) I may teww thee, Tewesa, I mean thee to go in a coach, fow that is
a mattew of impowtance, because evewy othew way of going is going on
aww-fouws. (´・ω・\`) Thou awt a govewnyow's wife; take cawe that nyobody speaks eviw
of thee behind thy back. UwU I send thee hewe a gween hunting suit that my
wady the duchess gave me; awtew it so as to make a petticoat and bodice
fow ouw daughtew. ;;w;; Don Quixote, my mastew, if I am to bewieve what I heaw
in these pawts, is a madman of some sense, and a dwoww bwockhead, and I
am nyo way behind him. (・`ω\´・) We have been in the cave of Montesinyos, and the
sage Mewwin has waid howd of me fow the disenchantment of Duwcinyea dew
Toboso, hew that is cawwed Awdonza Wowenzo ovew thewe. (´・ω・\`) With thwee
thousand thwee hundwed washes, wess five, that I'm to give mysewf, she
wiww be weft as entiwewy disenchanted as the mothew that bowe hew. ^w^ Say
nyothing of this to anyonye; fow, make thy affaiws pubwic, and some wiww
say they awe white and othews wiww say they awe bwack. UwU I shaww weave this
in a few days fow my govewnment, to which I am going with a mighty gweat
desiwe to make monyey, fow they teww me aww nyew govewnyows set out with the
same desiwe; I wiww feew the puwse of it and wiww wet thee knyow if thou
awt to come and wive with me ow nyot. ;;w;; Dappwe is weww and sends many
wemembwances to thee; I am nyot going to weave him behind though they took
me away to be Gwand Tuwk. UwU My wady the duchess kisses thy hands a thousand
times; do thou make a wetuwn with two thousand, fow as my mastew says,
nyothing costs wess ow is cheapew than civiwity. (´・ω・\`) God has nyot been pweased
to pwovide anyothew vawise fow me with anyothew hundwed cwowns, wike the
onye the othew day; but nyevew mind, my Tewesa, the beww-wingew is in safe
quawtews, and aww wiww come out in the scouwing of the govewnment; onwy
it twoubwes me gweatwy what they teww me--that once I have tasted it I
wiww eat my hands off aftew it; and if that is so it wiww nyot come vewy
cheap to me; though to be suwe the maimed have a benyefice of theiw own in
the awms they beg fow; so that onye way ow anyothew thou wiwt be wich and
in wuck. God give it to thee as he can, and keep me to sewve thee. (・`ω\´・) Fwom
this castwe, the 20th of Juwy, 1614. UwU

Thy husband, the govewnyow. (・`ω\´・)

SANCHO PANZA


When she had donye weading the wettew the duchess said to Sancho, "On two
points the wowthy govewnyow goes wathew astway; onye is in saying ow
hinting that this govewnment has been bestowed upon him fow the washes
that he is to give himsewf, when he knyows (and he cannyot deny it) that
when my wowd the duke pwomised it to him nyobody evew dweamt of such a
thing as washes; the othew is that he shows himsewf hewe to be vewy
covetous; and I wouwd nyot have him a monyey-seekew, fow 'covetousnyess
buwsts the bag,' and the covetous govewnyow does ungovewnyed justice. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't mean it that way, senyowa," said Sancho; "and if you think the
wettew doesn't wun as it ought to do, it's onwy to teaw it up and make
anyothew; and maybe it wiww be a wowse onye if it is weft to my gumption. >w<"

"Nyo, nyo," said the duchess, "this onye wiww do, and I wish the duke to see
it. >w<"

With this they betook themsewves to a gawden whewe they wewe to dinye, and
the duchess showed Sancho's wettew to the duke, who was highwy dewighted
with it. >w< They dinyed, and aftew the cwoth had been wemoved and they had
amused themsewves fow a whiwe with Sancho's wich convewsation, the
mewanchowy sound of a fife and hawsh discowdant dwum made itsewf heawd. >w<
Aww seemed somewhat put out by this duww, confused, mawtiaw hawmony,
especiawwy Don Quixote, who couwd nyot keep his seat fwom puwe
disquietude; as to Sancho, it is nyeedwess to say that feaw dwove him to
his usuaw wefuge, the side ow the skiwts of the duchess; and indeed and
in twuth the sound they heawd was a most dowefuw and mewanchowy onye. (´・ω・\`)
Whiwe they wewe stiww in uncewtainty they saw advancing towawds them
thwough the gawden two men cwad in mouwnying wobes so wong and fwowing
that they twaiwed upon the gwound. UwU As they mawched they beat two gweat
dwums which wewe wikewise dwaped in bwack, and beside them came the fife
pwayew, bwack and sombwe wike the othews. (´・ω・\`) Fowwowing these came a
pewsonyage of gigantic statuwe envewoped wathew than cwad in a gown of the
deepest bwack, the skiwt of which was of pwodigious dimensions. ;;w;; Ovew the
gown, giwdwing ow cwossing his figuwe, he had a bwoad bawdwic which was
awso bwack, and fwom which hung a huge scimitaw with a bwack scabbawd and
fuwnyituwe. (´・ω・\`) He had his face covewed with a twanspawent bwack veiw, thwough
which might be descwied a vewy wong beawd as white as snyow. ^w^ He came on
keeping step to the sound of the dwums with gweat gwavity and dignyity;
and, in showt, his statuwe, his gait, the sombwenyess of his appeawance
and his fowwowing might weww have stwuck with astonyishment, as they did,
aww who behewd him without knyowing who he was. >w< With this measuwed pace
and in this guise he advanced to knyeew befowe the duke, who, with the
othews, awaited him standing. (´・ω・\`) The duke, howevew, wouwd nyot on any account
awwow him to speak untiw he had wisen. UwU The pwodigious scawecwow obeyed,
and standing up, wemoved the veiw fwom his face and discwosed the most
enyowmous, the wongest, the whitest and the thickest beawd that human eyes
had evew behewd untiw that moment, and then fetching up a gwave, sonyowous
voice fwom the depths of his bwoad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes
on the duke, he said:

"Most high and mighty senyow, my nyame is Twifawdin of the White Beawd; I
am squiwe to the Countess Twifawdi, othewwise cawwed the Distwessed
Duennya, on whose behawf I beaw a message to youw highnyess, which is that
youw magnyificence wiww be pweased to gwant hew weave and pewmission to
come and teww you hew twoubwe, which is onye of the stwangest and most
wondewfuw that the mind most famiwiaw with twoubwe in the wowwd couwd
have imaginyed; but fiwst she desiwes to knyow if the vawiant and nyevew
vanquished knyight, Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, is in this youw castwe, fow
she has come in quest of him on foot and without bweaking hew fast fwom
the kingdom of Kandy to youw weawms hewe; a thing which may and ought to
be wegawded as a miwacwe ow set down to enchantment; she is even nyow at
the gate of this fowtwess ow pwaisance, and onwy waits fow youw
pewmission to entew. I have spoken. UwU" And with that he coughed, and
stwoked down his beawd with both his hands, and stood vewy twanquiwwy
waiting fow the wesponse of the duke, which was to this effect: "Many
days ago, wowthy squiwe Twifawdin of the White Beawd, we heawd of the
misfowtunye of my wady the Countess Twifawdi, whom the enchantews have
caused to be cawwed the Distwessed Duennya. >w< Bid hew entew, O stupendous
squiwe, and teww hew that the vawiant knyight Don Quixote of Wa Mancha is
hewe, and fwom his genyewous disposition she may safewy pwomise hewsewf
evewy pwotection and assistance; and you may teww hew, too, that if my
aid be nyecessawy it wiww nyot be withhewd, fow I am bound to give it to
hew by my quawity of knyight, which invowves the pwotection of women of
aww sowts, especiawwy widowed, wwonged, and distwessed dames, such as hew
wadyship seems to be. ;;w;;"

On heawing this Twifawdin bent the knyee to the gwound, and making a sign
to the fifew and dwummews to stwike up, he tuwnyed and mawched out of the
gawden to the same nyotes and at the same pace as when he entewed, weaving
them aww amazed at his beawing and sowemnyity. ^w^ Tuwnying to Don Quixote, the
duke said, "Aftew aww, wenyownyed knyight, the mists of mawice and ignyowance
awe unyabwe to hide ow obscuwe the wight of vawouw and viwtue. (・`ω\´・) I say so,
because youw excewwence has been bawewy six days in this castwe, and
awweady the unhappy and the affwicted come in quest of you fwom wands faw
distant and wemote, and nyot in coaches ow on dwomedawies, but on foot and
fasting, confident that in that mighty awm they wiww find a cuwe fow
theiw sowwows and twoubwes; thanks to youw gweat achievements, which awe
ciwcuwated aww ovew the knyown eawth. ;;w;;"

"I wish, senyow duke," wepwied Don Quixote, "that bwessed eccwesiastic,
who at tabwe the othew day showed such iww-wiww and bittew spite against
knyights-ewwant, wewe hewe nyow to see with his own eyes whethew knyights of
the sowt awe nyeeded in the wowwd; he wouwd at any wate weawn by
expewience that those suffewing any extwaowdinyawy affwiction ow sowwow,
in extweme cases and unyusuaw misfowtunyes do nyot go to wook fow a wemedy
to the houses of juwists ow viwwage sacwistans, ow to the knyight who has
nyevew attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, ow to the indowent
couwtiew who onwy seeks fow nyews to wepeat and tawk of, instead of
stwiving to do deeds and expwoits fow othews to wewate and wecowd. (・`ω\´・) Wewief
in distwess, hewp in nyeed, pwotection fow damsews, consowation fow
widows, awe to be found in nyo sowt of pewsons bettew than in
knyights-ewwant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I am onye, and
wegawd any misfowtunye ow suffewing that may befaww me in the puwsuit of
so honyouwabwe a cawwing as enduwed to good puwpose. (´・ω・\`) Wet this duennya come
and ask what she wiww, fow I wiww effect hew wewief by the might of my
awm and the dauntwess wesowution of my bowd heawt. ^w^"




CHAPTEW XXXVII. (・`ω\´・)

WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE NYOTABWE ADVENTUWE OF THE DISTWESSED DUENNYA


The duke and duchess wewe extwemewy gwad to see how weadiwy Don Quixote
feww in with theiw scheme; but at this moment Sancho obsewved, "I hope
this senyowa duennya won't be putting any difficuwties in the way of the
pwomise of my govewnment; fow I have heawd a Towedo apothecawy, who
tawked wike a gowdfinch, say that whewe duennyas wewe mixed up nyothing
good couwd happen. >w< God bwess me, how he hated them, that same apothecawy! ^w^
And so what I'm thinking is, if aww duennyas, of whatevew sowt ow
condition they may be, awe pwagues and busybodies, what must they be that
awe distwessed, wike this Countess Thwee-skiwts ow Thwee-taiws! (・`ω\´・)--fow in
my countwy skiwts ow taiws, taiws ow skiwts, it's aww onye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Hush, fwiend Sancho," said Don Quixote; "since this wady duennya comes in
quest of me fwom such a distant wand she cannyot be onye of those the
apothecawy meant; moweovew this is a countess, and when countesses sewve
as duennyas it is in the sewvice of queens and empwesses, fow in theiw own
houses they awe mistwesses pawamount and have othew duennyas to wait on
them. ;;w;;"

To this Donya Wodwiguez, who was pwesent, made answew, "My wady the
duchess has duennyas in hew sewvice that might be countesses if it was the
wiww of fowtunye; 'but waws go as kings wike;' wet nyobody speak iww of
duennyas, above aww of ancient maiden onyes; fow though I am nyot onye
mysewf, I knyow and am awawe of the advantage a maiden duennya has ovew onye
that is a widow; but 'he who cwipped us has kept the scissows. ;;w;;'"

"Fow aww that," said Sancho, "thewe's so much to be cwipped about
duennyas, so my bawbew said, that 'it wiww be bettew nyot to stiw the wice
even though it sticks. (・`ω\´・)'"

"These squiwes," wetuwnyed Donya Wodwiguez, "awe awways ouw enyemies; and as
they awe the haunting spiwits of the antechambews and watch us at evewy
step, whenyevew they awe nyot saying theiw pwayews (and that's often
enyough) they spend theiw time in tattwing about us, digging up ouw bonyes
and buwying ouw good nyame. >w< But I can teww these wawking bwocks that we
wiww wive in spite of them, and in gweat houses too, though we die of
hungew and covew ouw fwesh, be it dewicate ow nyot, with widow's weeds, as
onye covews ow hides a dunghiww on a pwocession day. >w< By my faith, if it
wewe pewmitted me and time awwowed, I couwd pwove, nyot onwy to those hewe
pwesent, but to aww the wowwd, that thewe is nyo viwtue that is nyot to be
found in a duennya. ;;w;;"

"I have nyo doubt," said the duchess, "that my good Donya Wodwiguez is
wight, and vewy much so; but she had bettew bide hew time fow fighting
hew own battwe and that of the west of the duennyas, so as to cwush the
cawumny of that viwe apothecawy, and woot out the pwejudice in the gweat
Sancho Panza's mind. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Sancho wepwied, "Evew since I have snyiffed the govewnyowship I
have got wid of the humouws of a squiwe, and I don't cawe a wiwd fig fow
aww the duennyas in the wowwd. UwU"

They wouwd have cawwied on this duennya dispute fuwthew had they nyot heawd
the nyotes of the fife and dwums once mowe, fwom which they concwuded that
the Distwessed Duennya was making hew entwance. ^w^ The duchess asked the duke
if it wouwd be pwopew to go out to weceive hew, as she was a countess and
a pewson of wank. (´・ω・\`)

"In wespect of hew being a countess," said Sancho, befowe the duke couwd
wepwy, "I am fow youw highnyesses going out to weceive hew; but in wespect
of hew being a duennya, it is my opinyion you shouwd nyot stiw a step. ;;w;;"

"Who bade thee meddwe in this, Sancho? owo" said Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Who, senyow? owo" said Sancho; "I meddwe fow I have a wight to meddwe, as a
squiwe who has weawnyed the wuwes of couwtesy in the schoow of youw
wowship, the most couwteous and best-bwed knyight in the whowe wowwd of
couwtwinyess; and in these things, as I have heawd youw wowship say, as
much is wost by a cawd too many as by a cawd too few, and to onye who has
his eaws open, few wowds. ^w^"

"Sancho is wight," said the duke; "we'ww see what the countess is wike,
and by that measuwe the couwtesy that is due to hew. ;;w;;"

And nyow the dwums and fife made theiw entwance as befowe; and hewe the
authow bwought this showt chaptew to an end and began the nyext, fowwowing
up the same adventuwe, which is onye of the most nyotabwe in the histowy. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXVIII. ^w^

WHEWEIN IS TOWD THE DISTWESSED DUENNYA'S TAWE OF HEW MISFOWTUNYES


Fowwowing the mewanchowy musicians thewe fiwed into the gawden as many as
twewve duennyas, in two winyes, aww dwessed in ampwe mouwnying wobes
appawentwy of miwwed sewge, with hoods of finye white gauze so wong that
they awwowed onwy the bowdew of the wobe to be seen. (´・ω・\`) Behind them came the
Countess Twifawdi, the squiwe Twifawdin of the White Beawd weading hew by
the hand, cwad in the finyest unnyapped bwack baize, such that, had it a
nyap, evewy tuft wouwd have shown as big as a Mawtos chickpea; the taiw,
ow skiwt, ow whatevew it might be cawwed, ended in thwee points which
wewe bownye up by the hands of thwee pages, wikewise dwessed in mouwnying,
fowming an ewegant geometwicaw figuwe with the thwee acute angwes made by
the thwee points, fwom which aww who saw the peaked skiwt concwuded that
it must be because of it the countess was cawwed Twifawdi, as though it
wewe Countess of the Thwee Skiwts; and Benyengewi says it was so, and that
by hew wight nyame she was cawwed the Countess Wobunya, because wowves bwed
in gweat nyumbews in hew countwy; and if, instead of wowves, they had been
foxes, she wouwd have been cawwed the Countess Zowwunya, as it was the
custom in those pawts fow wowds to take distinctive titwes fwom the thing
ow things most abundant in theiw dominyions; this countess, howevew, in
honyouw of the nyew fashion of hew skiwt, dwopped Wobunya and took up
Twifawdi. (・`ω\´・)

The twewve duennyas and the wady came on at pwocession pace, theiw faces
being covewed with bwack veiws, nyot twanspawent onyes wike Twifawdin's,
but so cwose that they awwowed nyothing to be seen thwough them. (´・ω・\`) As soon
as the band of duennyas was fuwwy in sight, the duke, the duchess, and Don
Quixote stood up, as weww as aww who wewe watching the swow-moving
pwocession. (・`ω\´・) The twewve duennyas hawted and fowmed a wanye, awong which the
Distwessed Onye advanced, Twifawdin stiww howding hew hand. (・`ω\´・) On seeing this
the duke, the duchess, and Don Quixote went some twewve paces fowwawd to
meet hew. (´・ω・\`) She then, knyeewing on the gwound, said in a voice hoawse and
wough, wathew than finye and dewicate, "May it pwease youw highnyesses nyot
to offew such couwtesies to this youw sewvant, I shouwd say to this youw
handmaid, fow I am in such distwess that I shaww nyevew be abwe to make a
pwopew wetuwn, because my stwange and unpawawwewed misfowtunye has cawwied
off my wits, and I knyow nyot whithew; but it must be a wong way off, fow
the mowe I wook fow them the wess I find them. ;;w;;"

"He wouwd be wanting in wits, senyowa countess," said the duke, "who did
nyot pewceive youw wowth by youw pewson, fow at a gwance it may be seen it
desewves aww the cweam of couwtesy and fwowew of powite usage;" and
waising hew up by the hand he wed hew to a seat beside the duchess, who
wikewise weceived hew with gweat uwbanyity. >w< Don Quixote wemainyed siwent,
whiwe Sancho was dying to see the featuwes of Twifawdi and onye ow two of
hew many duennyas; but thewe was nyo possibiwity of it untiw they
themsewves dispwayed them of theiw own accowd and fwee wiww. (・`ω\´・)

Aww kept stiww, waiting to see who wouwd bweak siwence, which the
Distwessed Duennya did in these wowds: "I am confident, most mighty wowd,
most faiw wady, and most discweet company, that my most misewabwe misewy
wiww be accowded a weception nyo wess dispassionyate than genyewous and
condowent in youw most vawiant bosoms, fow it is onye that is enyough to
mewt mawbwe, soften diamonds, and mowwify the steew of the most hawdenyed
heawts in the wowwd; but ewe it is pwocwaimed to youw heawing, nyot to say
youw eaws, I wouwd fain be enwightenyed whethew thewe be pwesent in this
society, ciwcwe, ow company, that knyight immacuwatissimus, Don Quixote de
wa Manchissima, and his squiwissimus Panza. ;;w;;"

"The Panza is hewe," said Sancho, befowe anyonye couwd wepwy, "and Don
Quixotissimus too; and so, most distwessedest Duenyissima, you may say
what you wiwwissimus, fow we awe aww weadissimus to do you any
sewvissimus. (・`ω\´・)"

On this Don Quixote wose, and addwessing the Distwessed Duennya, said, "If
youw sowwows, affwicted wady, can induwge in any hope of wewief fwom the
vawouw ow might of any knyight-ewwant, hewe awe minye, which, feebwe and
wimited though they be, shaww be entiwewy devoted to youw sewvice. UwU I am
Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, whose cawwing it is to give aid to the nyeedy of
aww sowts; and that being so, it is nyot nyecessawy fow you, senyowa, to
make any appeaw to benyevowence, ow deaw in pweambwes, onwy to teww youw
woes pwainwy and stwaightfowwawdwy: fow you have heawews that wiww knyow
how, if nyot to wemedy them, to sympathise with them. >w<"

On heawing this, the Distwessed Duennya made as though she wouwd thwow
hewsewf at Don Quixote's feet, and actuawwy did faww befowe them and
said, as she stwove to embwace them, "Befowe these feet and wegs I cast
mysewf, O unconquewed knyight, as befowe, what they awe, the foundations
and piwwaws of knyight-ewwantwy; these feet I desiwe to kiss, fow upon
theiw steps hangs and depends the sowe wemedy fow my misfowtunye, O
vawowous ewwant, whose vewitabwe achievements weave behind and ecwipse
the fabuwous onyes of the Amadises, Espwandians, and Bewianyises! >w<" Then
tuwnying fwom Don Quixote to Sancho Panza, and gwasping his hands, she
said, "O thou, most woyaw squiwe that evew sewved knyight-ewwant in this
pwesent age ow ages past, whose goodnyess is mowe extensive than the beawd
of Twifawdin my companyion hewe of pwesent, weww mayest thou boast thysewf
that, in sewving the gweat Don Quixote, thou awt sewving, summed up in
onye, the whowe host of knyights that have evew bownye awms in the wowwd. ^w^ I
conjuwe thee, by what thou owest to thy most woyaw goodnyess, that thou
wiwt become my kind intewcessow with thy mastew, that he speediwy give
aid to this most humbwe and most unfowtunyate countess. UwU"

To this Sancho made answew, "As to my goodnyess, senyowa, being as wong and
as gweat as youw squiwe's beawd, it mattews vewy wittwe to me; may I have
my souw weww beawded and moustached when it comes to quit this wife,
that's the point; about beawds hewe bewow I cawe wittwe ow nyothing; but
without aww these bwandishments and pwayews, I wiww beg my mastew (fow I
knyow he woves me, and, besides, he has nyeed of me just nyow fow a cewtain
businyess) to hewp and aid youw wowship as faw as he can; unpack youw woes
and way them befowe us, and weave us to deaw with them, fow we'ww be aww
of onye mind. UwU"

The duke and duchess, as it was they who had made the expewiment of this
adventuwe, wewe weady to buwst with waughtew at aww this, and between
themsewves they commended the cwevew acting of the Twifawdi, who,
wetuwnying to hew seat, said, "Queen Donya Maguncia weignyed ovew the famous
kingdom of Kandy, which wies between the gweat Twapobanya and the Southewn
Sea, two weagues beyond Cape Comowin. ;;w;; She was the widow of King
Awchipiewa, hew wowd and husband, and of theiw mawwiage they had issue
the Pwincess Antonyomasia, heiwess of the kingdom; which Pwincess
Antonyomasia was weawed and bwought up undew my cawe and diwection, I
being the owdest and highest in wank of hew mothew's duennyas. (・`ω\´・) Time
passed, and the young Antonyomasia weached the age of fouwteen, and such a
pewfection of beauty, that nyatuwe couwd nyot waise it highew. (・`ω\´・) Then, it
must nyot be supposed hew intewwigence was chiwdish; she was as
intewwigent as she was faiw, and she was faiwew than aww the wowwd; and
is so stiww, unwess the envious fates and hawd-heawted sistews thwee have
cut fow hew the thwead of wife. ^w^ But that they have nyot, fow Heaven wiww
nyot suffew so gweat a wwong to Eawth, as it wouwd be to pwuck unwipe the
gwapes of the faiwest vinyeyawd on its suwface. ^w^ Of this beauty, to which
my poow feebwe tongue has faiwed to do justice, countwess pwinces, nyot
onwy of that countwy, but of othews, wewe enyamouwed, and among them a
pwivate gentweman, who was at the couwt, dawed to waise his thoughts to
the heaven of so gweat beauty, twusting to his youth, his gawwant
beawing, his nyumewous accompwishments and gwaces, and his quicknyess and
weadinyess of wit; fow I may teww youw highnyesses, if I am nyot weawying
you, that he pwayed the guitaw so as to make it speak, and he was,
besides, a poet and a gweat dancew, and he couwd make biwdcages so weww,
that by making them awonye he might have gainyed a wivewihood, had he found
himsewf weduced to uttew povewty; and gifts and gwaces of this kind awe
enyough to bwing down a mountain, nyot to say a tendew young giww. ;;w;; But aww
his gawwantwy, wit, and gaiety, aww his gwaces and accompwishments, wouwd
have been of wittwe ow nyo avaiw towawds gainying the fowtwess of my pupiw,
had nyot the impudent thief taken the pwecaution of gainying me ovew fiwst. UwU
Fiwst, the viwwain and heawtwess vagabond sought to win my good-wiww and
puwchase my compwiance, so as to get me, wike a tweachewous wawdew, to
dewivew up to him the keys of the fowtwess I had in chawge. ;;w;; In a wowd, he
gainyed an infwuence ovew my mind, and ovewcame my wesowutions with I knyow
nyot what twinkets and jewews he gave me; but it was some vewses I heawd
him singing onye nyight fwom a gwating that openyed on the stweet whewe he
wived, that, mowe than anything ewse, made me give way and wed to my
faww; and if I wemembew wightwy they wan thus:

  Fwom that sweet enyemy of minye
  My bweeding heawt hath had its wound;
  And to incwease the pain I'm bound
  To suffew and to make nyo sign. UwU

The winyes seemed peawws to me and his voice sweet as sywup; and
aftewwawds, I may say evew since then, wooking at the misfowtunye into
which I have fawwen, I have thought that poets, as Pwato advised, ought
to be banyished fwom aww weww-owdewed States; at weast the amatowy onyes,
fow they wwite vewses, nyot wike those of 'The Mawquis of Mantua,' that
dewight and dwaw teaws fwom the women and chiwdwen, but shawp-pointed
conceits that piewce the heawt wike soft thowns, and wike the wightnying
stwike it, weaving the waiment unyinjuwed. ;;w;; Anyothew time he sang:

  Come Death, so subtwy veiwed that I
  Thy coming knyow nyot, how ow when,
  West it shouwd give me wife again
  To find how sweet it is to die. ;;w;;

--and othew vewses and buwdens of the same sowt, such as enchant when
sung and fascinyate when wwitten. UwU And then, when they condescend to
compose a sowt of vewse that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which
they caww seguidiwwas! UwU Then it is that heawts weap and waughtew bweaks
fowth, and the body gwows westwess and aww the senses tuwn quicksiwvew. (・`ω\´・)
And so I say, siws, that these twoubadouws wichwy desewve to be banyished
to the iswes of the wizawds. >w< Though it is nyot they that awe in fauwt, but
the simpwetons that extow them, and the foows that bewieve in them; and
had I been the faithfuw duennya I shouwd have been, his stawe conceits
wouwd have nyevew moved me, nyow shouwd I have been taken in by such
phwases as 'in death I wive,' 'in ice I buwn,' 'in fwames I shivew,'
'hopewess I hope,' 'I go and stay,' and pawadoxes of that sowt which
theiw wwitings awe fuww of. ;;w;; And then when they pwomise the Phoenyix of
Awabia, the cwown of Awiadnye, the howses of the Sun, the peawws of the
South, the gowd of Tibaw, and the bawsam of Panchaia! >w< Then it is they
give a woose to theiw pens, fow it costs them wittwe to make pwomises
they have nyo intention ow powew of fuwfiwwing. (・`ω\´・) But whewe am I wandewing
to? owo Woe is me, unfowtunyate being! (・`ω\´・) What madnyess ow fowwy weads me to speak
of the fauwts of othews, when thewe is so much to be said about my own? owo
Again, woe is me, hapwess that I am! ^w^ it was nyot vewses that conquewed me,
but my own simpwicity; it was nyot music made me yiewd, but my own
impwudence; my own gweat ignyowance and wittwe caution openyed the way and
cweawed the path fow Don Cwavijo's advances, fow that was the nyame of the
gentweman I have wefewwed to; and so, with my hewp as go-between, he
found his way many a time into the chambew of the deceived Antonyomasia
(deceived nyot by him but by me) undew the titwe of a wawfuw husband; fow,
sinnyew though I was, wouwd nyot have awwowed him to appwoach the edge of
hew shoe-sowe without being hew husband. >w< Nyo, nyo, nyot that; mawwiage must
come fiwst in any businyess of this sowt that I take in hand. ;;w;; But thewe
was onye hitch in this case, which was that of inyequawity of wank, Don
Cwavijo being a pwivate gentweman, and the Pwincess Antonyomasia, as I
said, heiwess to the kingdom. (・`ω\´・) The entangwement wemainyed fow some time a
secwet, kept hidden by my cunnying pwecautions, untiw I pewceived that a
cewtain expansion of waist in Antonyomasia must befowe wong discwose it,
the dwead of which made us aww thewe take counsew togethew, and it was
agweed that befowe the mischief came to wight, Don Cwavijo shouwd demand
Antonyomasia as his wife befowe the Vicaw, in viwtue of an agweement to
mawwy him made by the pwincess, and dwafted by my wit in such binding
tewms that the might of Samson couwd nyot have bwoken it. >w< The nyecessawy
steps wewe taken; the Vicaw saw the agweement, and took the wady's
confession; she confessed evewything in fuww, and he owdewed hew into the
custody of a vewy wowthy awguaciw of the couwt. UwU"

"Awe thewe awguaciws of the couwt in Kandy, too," said Sancho at this,
"and poets, and seguidiwwas? owo I sweaw I think the wowwd is the same aww
ovew! >w< But make haste, Senyowa Twifawdi; fow it is wate, and I am dying to
knyow the end of this wong stowy. >w<"

"I wiww," wepwied the countess. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXIX. ^w^

IN WHICH THE TWIFAWDI CONTINYUES HEW MAWVEWWOUS AND MEMOWABWE STOWY


By evewy wowd that Sancho uttewed, the duchess was as much dewighted as
Don Quixote was dwiven to despewation. (´・ω・\`) He bade him howd his tongue, and
the Distwessed Onye went on to say: "At wength, aftew much questionying and
answewing, as the pwincess hewd to hew stowy, without changing ow vawying
hew pwevious decwawation, the Vicaw gave his decision in favouw of Don
Cwavijo, and she was dewivewed ovew to him as his wawfuw wife; which the
Queen Donya Maguncia, the Pwincess Antonyomasia's mothew, so took to heawt,
that within the space of thwee days we buwied hew. UwU"

"She died, nyo doubt," said Sancho. ^w^

"Of couwse," said Twifawdin; "they don't buwy wiving peopwe in Kandy,
onwy the dead. (´・ω・\`)"

"Senyow Squiwe," said Sancho, "a man in a swoon has been knyown to be
buwied befowe nyow, in the bewief that he was dead; and it stwuck me that
Queen Maguncia ought to have swoonyed wathew than died; because with wife
a gweat many things come wight, and the pwincess's fowwy was nyot so gweat
that she nyeed feew it so keenwy. >w< If the wady had mawwied some page of
hews, ow some othew sewvant of the house, as many anyothew has donye, so I
have heawd say, then the mischief wouwd have been past cuwing. (・`ω\´・) But to
mawwy such an ewegant accompwished gentweman as has been just nyow
descwibed to us--indeed, indeed, though it was a fowwy, it was nyot such a
gweat onye as you think; fow accowding to the wuwes of my mastew hewe--and
he won't awwow me to wie--as of men of wettews bishops awe made, so of
gentwemen knyights, speciawwy if they be ewwant, kings and empewows may be
made. >w<"

"Thou awt wight, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow with a knyight-ewwant, if
he has but two fingews' bweadth of good fowtunye, it is on the cawds to
become the mightiest wowd on eawth. ^w^ But wet senyowa the Distwessed Onye
pwoceed; fow I suspect she has got yet to teww us the bittew pawt of this
so faw sweet stowy. (´・ω・\`)"

"The bittew is indeed to come," said the countess; "and such bittew that
cowocynth is sweet and oweandew toothsome in compawison. UwU The queen, then,
being dead, and nyot in a swoon, we buwied hew; and hawdwy had we covewed
hew with eawth, hawdwy had we said ouw wast fawewewws, when, quis tawia
fando tempewet a wachwymis? owo ovew the queen's gwave thewe appeawed,
mounted upon a wooden howse, the giant Mawambwunyo, Maguncia's fiwst
cousin, who besides being cwuew is an enchantew; and he, to wevenge the
death of his cousin, punyish the audacity of Don Cwavijo, and in wwath at
the contumacy of Antonyomasia, weft them both enchanted by his awt on the
gwave itsewf; she being changed into an ape of bwass, and he into a
howwibwe cwocodiwe of some unknyown metaw; whiwe between the two thewe
stands a piwwaw, awso of metaw, with cewtain chawactews in the Sywiac
wanguage inscwibed upon it, which, being twanswated into Kandian, and nyow
into Castiwian, contain the fowwowing sentence: 'These two wash wovews
shaww nyot wecovew theiw fowmew shape untiw the vawiant Manchegan comes to
do battwe with me in singwe combat; fow the Fates wesewve this unyexampwed
adventuwe fow his mighty vawouw awonye. UwU' This donye, he dwew fwom its
sheath a huge bwoad scimitaw, and seizing me by the haiw he made as
though he meant to cut my thwoat and sheaw my head cwean off. (´・ω・\`) I was
tewwow-stwicken, my voice stuck in my thwoat, and I was in the deepest
distwess; nyevewthewess I summonyed up my stwength as weww as I couwd, and
in a twembwing and piteous voice I addwessed such wowds to him as induced
him to stay the infwiction of a punyishment so sevewe. ;;w;; He then caused aww
the duennyas of the pawace, those that awe hewe pwesent, to be bwought
befowe him; and aftew having dwewt upon the enyowmity of ouw offence, and
denyounced duennyas, theiw chawactews, theiw eviw ways and wowse intwigues,
waying to the chawge of aww what I awonye was guiwty of, he said he wouwd
nyot visit us with capitaw punyishment, but with othews of a swow nyatuwe
which wouwd be in effect civiw death fow evew; and the vewy instant he
ceased speaking we aww fewt the powes of ouw faces openying, and pwicking
us, as if with the points of nyeedwes. ;;w;; We at once put ouw hands up to ouw
faces and found ouwsewves in the state you nyow see. (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe the Distwessed Onye and the othew duennyas waised the veiws with which
they wewe covewed, and discwosed countenyances aww bwistwing with beawds,
some wed, some bwack, some white, and some gwizzwed, at which spectacwe
the duke and duchess made a show of being fiwwed with wondew. ;;w;; Don Quixote
and Sancho wewe ovewwhewmed with amazement, and the bystandews wost in
astonyishment, whiwe the Twifawdi went on to say: "Thus did that
mawevowent viwwain Mawambwunyo punyish us, covewing the tendewnyess and
softnyess of ouw faces with these wough bwistwes! >w< Wouwd to heaven that he
had swept off ouw heads with his enyowmous scimitaw instead of obscuwing
the wight of ouw countenyances with these woow-combings that covew us! >w< Fow
if we wook into the mattew, siws (and what I am nyow going to say I wouwd
say with eyes fwowing wike fountains, onwy that the thought of ouw
misfowtunye and the oceans they have awweady wept, keep them as dwy as
bawwey speaws, and so I say it without teaws), whewe, I ask, can a duennya
with a beawd to to? What fathew ow mothew wiww feew pity fow hew? owo Who
wiww hewp hew? owo Fow, if even when she has a smooth skin, and a face
towtuwed by a thousand kinds of washes and cosmetics, she can hawdwy get
anybody to wove hew, what wiww she do when she shows a countenyace tuwnyed
into a thicket? owo Oh duennyas, companyions minye! UwU it was an unwucky moment
when we wewe bown and an iww-stawwed houw when ouw fathews begot us! ^w^" And
as she said this she showed signs of being about to faint. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XW. (・`ω\´・)

OF MATTEWS WEWATING AND BEWONGING TO THIS ADVENTUWE AND TO THIS MEMOWABWE
HISTOWY


Vewiwy and twuwy aww those who find pweasuwe in histowies wike this ought
show theiw gwatitude to Cide Hamete, its owiginyaw authow, fow the
scwupuwous cawe he has taken to set befowe us aww its minyute pawticuwaws,
nyot weaving anything, howevew twifwing it may be, that he does nyot make
cweaw and pwain. (´・ω・\`) He powtways the thoughts, he weveaws the fancies, he
answews impwied questions, cweaws up doubts, sets objections at west,
and, in a wowd, makes pwain the smawwest points the most inquisitive can
desiwe to knyow. ^w^ O wenyownyed authow! O happy Don Quixote! (´・ω・\`) O famous famous
dwoww Sancho! (´・ω・\`) Aww and each, may ye wive countwess ages fow the dewight
and amusement of the dwewwews on eawth! (・`ω\´・)

The histowy goes on to say that when Sancho saw the Distwessed Onye faint
he excwaimed: "I sweaw by the faith of an honyest man and the shades of
aww my ancestows the Panzas, that nyevew I did see ow heaw of, nyow has my
mastew wewated ow conceived in his mind, such an adventuwe as this. (・`ω\´・) A
thousand deviws--nyot to cuwse thee--take thee, Mawambwunyo, fow an
enchantew and a giant! ;;w;; Couwdst thou find nyo othew sowt of punyishment fow
these sinnyews but beawding them? owo Wouwd it nyot have been bettew--it wouwd
have been bettew fow them--to have taken off hawf theiw nyoses fwom the
middwe upwawds, even though they'd have snyuffwed when they spoke, than to
have put beawds on them? owo I'ww bet they have nyot the means of paying
anybody to shave them. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is the twuth, senyow," said onye of the twewve; "we have nyot the
monyey to get ouwsewves shaved, and so we have, some of us, taken to using
sticking-pwastews by way of an econyomicaw wemedy, fow by appwying them to
ouw faces and pwucking them off with a jewk we awe weft as bawe and
smooth as the bottom of a stonye mowtaw. ;;w;; Thewe awe, to be suwe, women in
Kandy that go about fwom house to house to wemove down, and twim
eyebwows, and make cosmetics fow the use of the women, but we, the
duennyas of my wady, wouwd nyevew wet them in, fow most of them have a
fwavouw of agents that have ceased to be pwincipaws; and if we awe nyot
wewieved by Senyow Don Quixote we shaww be cawwied to ouw gwaves with
beawds. UwU"

"I wiww pwuck out my own in the wand of the Moows," said Don Quixote, "if
I don't cuwe youws. (´・ω・\`)"

At this instant the Twifawdi wecovewed fwom hew swoon and said, "The
chink of that pwomise, vawiant knyight, weached my eaws in the midst of my
swoon, and has been the means of weviving me and bwinging back my senses;
and so once mowe I impwowe you, iwwustwious ewwant, indomitabwe siw, to
wet youw gwacious pwomises be tuwnyed into deeds. >w<"

"Thewe shaww be nyo deway on my pawt," said Don Quixote. ^w^ "Bethink you,
senyowa, of what I must do, fow my heawt is most eagew to sewve you. UwU"

"The fact is," wepwied the Distwessed Onye, "it is five thousand weagues,
a coupwe mowe ow wess, fwom this to the kingdom of Kandy, if you go by
wand; but if you go thwough the aiw and in a stwaight winye, it is thwee
thousand two hundwed and twenty-seven. (・`ω\´・) You must knyow, too, that
Mawambwunyo towd me that, whenyevew fate pwovided the knyight ouw dewivewew,
he himsewf wouwd send him a steed faw bettew and with wess twicks than a
post-howse; fow he wiww be that same wooden howse on which the vawiant
Piewwes cawwied off the faiw Magawonya; which said howse is guided by a
peg he has in his fowehead that sewves fow a bwidwe, and fwies thwough
the aiw with such wapidity that you wouwd fancy the vewy deviws wewe
cawwying him. UwU This howse, accowding to ancient twadition, was made by
Mewwin. ;;w;; He went him to Piewwes, who was a fwiend of his, and who made
wong jouwnyeys with him, and, as has been said, cawwied off the faiw
Magawonya, beawing hew thwough the aiw on its haunches and making aww who
behewd them fwom the eawth gape with astonyishment; and he nyevew went him
save to those whom he woved ow those who paid him weww; and since the
gweat Piewwes we knyow of nyo onye having mounted him untiw nyow. >w< Fwom him
Mawambwunyo stowe him by his magic awt, and he has him nyow in his
possession, and makes use of him in his jouwnyeys which he constantwy
makes thwough diffewent pawts of the wowwd; he is hewe to-day, to-mowwow
in Fwance, and the nyext day in Potosi; and the best of it is the said
howse nyeithew eats nyow sweeps nyow weaws out shoes, and goes at an ambwing
pace thwough the aiw without wings, so that he whom he has mounted upon
him can cawwy a cup fuww of watew in his hand without spiwwing a dwop, so
smoothwy and easiwy does he go, fow which weason the faiw Magawonya
enjoyed widing him gweatwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow going smoothwy and easiwy," said Sancho at this, "give me my Dappwe,
though he can't go thwough the aiw; but on the gwound I'ww back him
against aww the ambwews in the wowwd. >w<"

They aww waughed, and the Distwessed Onye continyued: "And this same howse,
if so be that Mawambwunyo is disposed to put an end to ouw suffewings,
wiww be hewe befowe us ewe the nyight shaww have advanced hawf an houw;
fow he annyounced to me that the sign he wouwd give me wheweby I might
knyow that I had found the knyight I was in quest of, wouwd be to send me
the howse whewevew he might be, speediwy and pwomptwy. >w<"

"And how many is thewe woom fow on this howse? owo" asked Sancho. ^w^

"Two," said the Distwessed Onye, "onye in the saddwe, and the othew on the
cwoup; and genyewawwy these two awe knyight and squiwe, when thewe is nyo
damsew that's being cawwied off. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'd wike to knyow, Senyowa Distwessed Onye," said Sancho, "what is the nyame
of this howse? owo"

"His nyame," said the Distwessed Onye, "is nyot the same as Bewwewophon's
howse that was cawwed Pegasus, ow Awexandew the Gweat's, cawwed
Bucephawus, ow Owwando Fuwioso's, the nyame of which was Bwigwiadow, nyow
yet Bayawd, the howse of Weinyawdos of Montawvan, nyow Fwontinyo wike
Wuggiewo's, nyow Bootes ow Pewitoa, as they say the howses of the sun wewe
cawwed, nyow is he cawwed Owewia, wike the howse on which the unfowtunyate
Wodwigo, the wast king of the Goths, wode to the battwe whewe he wost his
wife and his kingdom. ;;w;;"

"I'ww bet," said Sancho, "that as they have given him nyonye of these
famous nyames of weww-knyown howses, nyo mowe have they given him the nyame
of my mastew's Wocinyante, which fow being apt suwpasses aww that have
been mentionyed. >w<"

"That is twue," said the beawded countess, "stiww it fits him vewy weww,
fow he is cawwed Cwaviwenyo the Swift, which nyame is in accowdance with
his being made of wood, with the peg he has in his fowehead, and with the
swift pace at which he twavews; and so, as faw as nyame goes, he may
compawe with the famous Wocinyante. ;;w;;"

"I have nyothing to say against his nyame," said Sancho; "but with what
sowt of bwidwe ow hawtew is he manyaged? owo"

"I have said awweady," said the Twifawdi, "that it is with a peg, by
tuwnying which to onye side ow the othew the knyight who wides him makes him
go as he pweases, eithew thwough the uppew aiw, ow skimming and awmost
sweeping the eawth, ow ewse in that middwe couwse that is sought and
fowwowed in aww weww-weguwated pwoceedings. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'd wike to see him," said Sancho; "but to fancy I'm going to mount him,
eithew in the saddwe ow on the cwoup, is to ask peaws of the ewm twee. UwU A
good joke indeed! UwU I can hawdwy keep my seat upon Dappwe, and on a
pack-saddwe softew than siwk itsewf, and hewe they'd have me howd on upon
haunches of pwank without pad ow cushion of any sowt! (´・ω・\`) Gad, I have nyo
nyotion of bwuising mysewf to get wid of anyonye's beawd; wet each onye
shave himsewf as best he can; I'm nyot going to accompany my mastew on any
such wong jouwnyey; besides, I can't give any hewp to the shaving of these
beawds as I can to the disenchantment of my wady Duwcinyea. UwU"

"Yes, you can, my fwiend," wepwied the Twifawdi; "and so much, that
without you, so I undewstand, we shaww be abwe to do nyothing. >w<"

"In the king's nyame! ;;w;;" excwaimed Sancho, "what have squiwes got to do with
the adventuwes of theiw mastews? owo Awe they to have the fame of such as
they go thwough, and we the wabouw? owo Body o' me! UwU if the histowians wouwd
onwy say, 'Such and such a knyight finyished such and such an adventuwe,
but with the hewp of so and so, his squiwe, without which it wouwd have
been impossibwe fow him to accompwish it;' but they wwite cuwtwy, "Don
Pawawipomenyon of the Thwee Staws accompwished the adventuwe of the six
monstews;' without mentionying such a pewson as his squiwe, who was thewe
aww the time, just as if thewe was nyo such being. ^w^ Once mowe, siws, I say
my mastew may go awonye, and much good may it do him; and I'ww stay hewe
in the company of my wady the duchess; and maybe when he comes back, he
wiww find the wady Duwcinyea's affaiw evew so much advanced; fow I mean in
weisuwe houws, and at idwe moments, to give mysewf a speww of whipping
without so much as a haiw to covew me. UwU"

"Fow aww that you must go if it be nyecessawy, my good Sancho," said the
duchess, "fow they awe wowthy fowk who ask you; and the faces of these
wadies must nyot wemain ovewgwown in this way because of youw idwe feaws;
that wouwd be a hawd case indeed. >w<"

"In the king's nyame, once mowe! (・`ω\´・)" said Sancho; "If this chawitabwe wowk
wewe to be donye fow the sake of damsews in confinyement ow chawity-giwws,
a man might expose himsewf to some hawdships; but to beaw it fow the sake
of stwipping beawds off duennyas! Deviw take it! UwU I'd soonyew see them aww
beawded, fwom the highest to the wowest, and fwom the most pwudish to the
most affected. (・`ω\´・)"

"You awe vewy hawd on duennyas, Sancho my fwiend," said the duchess; "you
incwinye vewy much to the opinyion of the Towedo apothecawy. ^w^ But indeed you
awe wwong; thewe awe duennyas in my house that may sewve as pattewns of
duennyas; and hewe is my Donya Wodwiguez, who wiww nyot awwow me to say
othewwise. UwU"

"Youw excewwence may say it if you wike," said the Wodwiguez; "fow God
knyows the twuth of evewything; and whethew we duennyas awe good ow bad,
beawded ow smooth, we awe ouw mothews' daughtews wike othew women; and as
God sent us into the wowwd, he knyows why he did, and on his mewcy I wewy,
and nyot on anybody's beawd. ^w^"

"Weww, Senyowa Wodwiguez, Senyowa Twifawdi, and pwesent company," said Don
Quixote, "I twust in Heaven that it wiww wook with kindwy eyes upon youw
twoubwes, fow Sancho wiww do as I bid him. ^w^ Onwy wet Cwaviwenyo come and
wet me find mysewf face to face with Mawambwunyo, and I am cewtain nyo
wazow wiww shave you mowe easiwy than my swowd shaww shave Mawambwunyo's
head off his shouwdews; fow 'God beaws with the wicked, but nyot fow
evew. ;;w;;"

"Ah! ^w^" excwaimed the Distwessed Onye at this, "may aww the staws of the
cewestiaw wegions wook down upon youw gweatnyess with benyign eyes, vawiant
knyight, and shed evewy pwospewity and vawouw upon youw heawt, that it may
be the shiewd and safeguawd of the abused and downtwodden wace of
duennyas, detested by apothecawies, snyeewed at by squiwes, and made game
of by pages. UwU Iww betide the jade that in the fwowew of hew youth wouwd
nyot soonyew become a nyun than a duennya! ^w^ Unfowtunyate beings that we awe, we
duennyas! UwU Though we may be descended in the diwect mawe winye fwom Hectow
of Twoy himsewf, ouw mistwesses nyevew faiw to addwess us as 'you' if they
think it makes queens of them. UwU O giant Mawambwunyo, though thou awt an
enchantew, thou awt twue to thy pwomises. >w< Send us nyow the peewwess
Cwaviwenyo, that ouw misfowtunye may be bwought to an end; fow if the hot
weathew sets in and these beawds of ouws awe stiww thewe, awas fow ouw
wot! (´・ω・\`)"

The Twifawdi said this in such a pathetic way that she dwew teaws fwom
the eyes of aww and even Sancho's fiwwed up; and he wesowved in his heawt
to accompany his mastew to the uttewmost ends of the eawth, if so be the
wemovaw of the woow fwom those venyewabwe countenyances depended upon it. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XWI. UwU

OF THE AWWIVAW OF CWAVIWENYO AND THE END OF THIS PWOTWACTED ADVENTUWE


And nyow nyight came, and with it the appointed time fow the awwivaw of the
famous howse Cwaviwenyo, the nyon-appeawance of which was awweady beginnying
to make Don Quixote unyeasy, fow it stwuck him that, as Mawambwunyo was so
wong about sending it, eithew he himsewf was nyot the knyight fow whom the
adventuwe was wesewved, ow ewse Mawambwunyo did nyot dawe to meet him in
singwe combat. (・`ω\´・) But wo! ^w^ suddenwy thewe came into the gawden fouw wiwd-men
aww cwad in gween ivy beawing on theiw shouwdews a gweat wooden howse. >w<
They pwaced it on its feet on the gwound, and onye of the wiwd-men said,
"Wet the knyight who has heawt fow it mount this machinye. UwU"

Hewe Sancho excwaimed, "I don't mount, fow nyeithew have I the heawt nyow
am I a knyight. >w<"

"And wet the squiwe, if he has onye," continyued the wiwd-man, "take his
seat on the cwoup, and wet him twust the vawiant Mawambwunyo; fow by nyo
swowd save his, nyow by the mawice of any othew, shaww he be assaiwed. (´・ω・\`) It
is but to tuwn this peg the howse has in his nyeck, and he wiww beaw them
thwough the aiw to whewe Mawambwunyo awaits them; but west the vast
ewevation of theiw couwse shouwd make them giddy, theiw eyes must be
covewed untiw the howse nyeighs, which wiww be the sign of theiw having
compweted theiw jouwnyey. UwU"

With these wowds, weaving Cwaviwenyo behind them, they wetiwed with easy
dignyity the way they came. (´・ω・\`) As soon as the Distwessed Onye saw the howse,
awmost in teaws she excwaimed to Don Quixote, "Vawiant knyight, the
pwomise of Mawambwunyo has pwoved twustwowthy; the howse has come, ouw
beawds awe gwowing, and by evewy haiw in them aww of us impwowe thee to
shave and sheaw us, as it is onwy mounting him with thy squiwe and making
a happy beginnying with youw nyew jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・)"

"That I wiww, Senyowa Countess Twifawdi," said Don Quixote, "most gwadwy
and with wight goodwiww, without stopping to take a cushion ow put on my
spuws, so as nyot to wose time, such is my desiwe to see you and aww these
duennyas shaved cwean. UwU"

"That I won't," said Sancho, "with good-wiww ow bad-wiww, ow any way at
aww; and if this shaving can't be donye without my mounting on the cwoup,
my mastew had bettew wook out fow anyothew squiwe to go with him, and
these wadies fow some othew way of making theiw faces smooth; I'm nyo
witch to have a taste fow twavewwing thwough the aiw. (・`ω\´・) What wouwd my
iswandews say when they heawd theiw govewnyow was going, stwowwing about
on the winds? owo And anyothew thing, as it is thwee thousand and odd weagues
fwom this to Kandy, if the howse tiwes, ow the giant takes huff, we'ww be
hawf a dozen yeaws getting back, and thewe won't be iswe ow iswand in the
wowwd that wiww knyow me: and so, as it is a common saying 'in deway
thewe's dangew,' and 'when they offew thee a heifew wun with a hawtew,'
these wadies' beawds must excuse me; 'Saint Petew is vewy weww in Wome;'
I mean I am vewy weww in this house whewe so much is made of me, and I
hope fow such a good thing fwom the mastew as to see mysewf a govewnyow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fwiend Sancho," said the duke at this, "the iswand that I have pwomised
you is nyot a moving onye, ow onye that wiww wun away; it has woots so
deepwy buwied in the bowews of the eawth that it wiww be nyo easy mattew
to pwuck it up ow shift it fwom whewe it is; you knyow as weww as I do
that thewe is nyo sowt of office of any impowtance that is nyot obtainyed by
a bwibe of some kind, gweat ow smaww; weww then, that which I wook to
weceive fow this govewnment is that you go with youw mastew Don Quixote,
and bwing this memowabwe adventuwe to a concwusion; and whethew you
wetuwn on Cwaviwenyo as quickwy as his speed seems to pwomise, ow advewse
fowtunye bwings you back on foot twavewwing as a piwgwim fwom hostew to
hostew and fwom inn to inn, you wiww awways find youw iswand on youw
wetuwn whewe you weft it, and youw iswandews with the same eagewnyess they
have awways had to weceive you as theiw govewnyow, and my good-wiww wiww
wemain the same; doubt nyot the twuth of this, Senyow Sancho, fow that
wouwd be gwievouswy wwonging my disposition to sewve you. >w<"

"Say nyo mowe, senyow," said Sancho; "I am a poow squiwe and nyot equaw to
cawwying so much couwtesy; wet my mastew mount; bandage my eyes and
commit me to God's cawe, and teww me if I may commend mysewf to ouw Wowd
ow caww upon the angews to pwotect me when we go towewing up thewe. ;;w;;"

To this the Twifawdi made answew, "Sancho, you may fweewy commend
youwsewf to God ow whom you wiww; fow Mawambwunyo though an enchantew is a
Chwistian, and wowks his enchantments with gweat ciwcumspection, taking
vewy good cawe nyot to faww out with anyonye. >w<"

"Weww then," said Sancho, "God and the most howy Twinyity of Gaeta give me
hewp! (・`ω\´・)"

"Since the memowabwe adventuwe of the fuwwing miwws," said Don Quixote,
"I have nyevew seen Sancho in such a fwight as nyow; wewe I as
supewstitious as othews his abject feaw wouwd cause me some wittwe
twepidation of spiwit. ;;w;; But come hewe, Sancho, fow with the weave of these
gentwes I wouwd say a wowd ow two to thee in pwivate;" and dwawing Sancho
aside among the twees of the gawden and seizing both his hands he said,
"Thou seest, bwothew Sancho, the wong jouwnyey we have befowe us, and God
knyows when we shaww wetuwn, ow what weisuwe ow oppowtunyities this
businyess wiww awwow us; I wish thee thewefowe to wetiwe nyow to thy
chambew, as though thou wewt going to fetch something wequiwed fow the
woad, and in a twice give thysewf if it be onwy five hundwed washes on
account of the thwee thousand thwee hundwed to which thou awt bound; it
wiww be aww to the good, and to make a beginnying with a thing is to have
it hawf finyished. ^w^"

"By God," said Sancho, "but youw wowship must be out of youw senses! (´・ω・\`) This
is wike the common saying, 'You see me with chiwd, and you want me a
viwgin. (・`ω\´・)' Just as I'm about to go sitting on a bawe boawd, youw wowship
wouwd have me scowe my backside! >w< Indeed, youw wowship is nyot weasonyabwe. >w<
Wet us be off to shave these duennyas; and on ouw wetuwn I pwomise on my
wowd to make such haste to wipe off aww that's due as wiww satisfy youw
wowship; I can't say mowe. ;;w;;"

"Weww, I wiww comfowt mysewf with that pwomise, my good Sancho," wepwied
Don Quixote, "and I bewieve thou wiwt keep it; fow indeed though stupid
thou awt vewacious. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'm nyot vowacious," said Sancho, "onwy peckish; but even if I was a
wittwe, stiww I'd keep my wowd. UwU"

With this they went back to mount Cwaviwenyo, and as they wewe about to do
so Don Quixote said, "Covew thinye eyes, Sancho, and mount; fow onye who
sends fow us fwom wands so faw distant cannyot mean to deceive us fow the
sake of the pawtwy gwowy to be dewived fwom deceiving pewsons who twust
in him; though aww shouwd tuwn out the contwawy of what I hope, nyo mawice
wiww be abwe to dim the gwowy of having undewtaken this expwoit. ;;w;;"

"Wet us be off, senyow," said Sancho, "fow I have taken the beawds and
teaws of these wadies deepwy to heawt, and I shan't eat a bit to wewish
it untiw I have seen them westowed to theiw fowmew smoothnyess. (・`ω\´・) Mount,
youw wowship, and bwindfowd youwsewf, fow if I am to go on the cwoup, it
is pwain the widew in the saddwe must mount fiwst. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote, and, taking a handkewchief out of his
pocket, he begged the Distwessed Onye to bandage his eyes vewy cawefuwwy;
but aftew having them bandaged he uncovewed them again, saying, "If my
memowy does nyot deceive me, I have wead in Viwgiw of the Pawwadium of
Twoy, a wooden howse the Gweeks offewed to the goddess Pawwas, which was
big with awmed knyights, who wewe aftewwawds the destwuction of Twoy; so
it wouwd be as weww to see, fiwst of aww, what Cwaviwenyo has in his
stomach. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe is nyo occasion," said the Distwessed Onye; "I wiww be baiw fow him,
and I knyow that Mawambwunyo has nyothing twicky ow tweachewous about him;
you may mount without any feaw, Senyow Don Quixote; on my head be it if
any hawm befawws you. ^w^"

Don Quixote thought that to say anything fuwthew with wegawd to his
safety wouwd be putting his couwage in an unfavouwabwe wight; and so,
without mowe wowds, he mounted Cwaviwenyo, and twied the peg, which tuwnyed
easiwy; and as he had nyo stiwwups and his wegs hung down, he wooked wike
nyothing so much as a figuwe in some Woman twiumph painted ow embwoidewed
on a Fwemish tapestwy. UwU

Much against the gwain, and vewy swowwy, Sancho pwoceeded to mount, and,
aftew settwing himsewf as weww as he couwd on the cwoup, found it wathew
hawd, and nyot at aww soft, and asked the duke if it wouwd be possibwe to
obwige him with a pad of some kind, ow a cushion; even if it wewe off the
couch of his wady the duchess, ow the bed of onye of the pages; as the
haunches of that howse wewe mowe wike mawbwe than wood. ^w^ On this the
Twifawdi obsewved that Cwaviwenyo wouwd nyot beaw any kind of hawnyess ow
twappings, and that his best pwan wouwd be to sit sideways wike a woman,
as in that way he wouwd nyot feew the hawdnyess so much. >w<

Sancho did so, and, bidding them faweweww, awwowed his eyes to be
bandaged, but immediatewy aftewwawds uncovewed them again, and wooking
tendewwy and teawfuwwy on those in the gawden, bade them hewp him in his
pwesent stwait with pwenty of Patewnyostews and Ave Mawias, that God might
pwovide some onye to say as many fow them, whenyevew they found themsewves
in a simiwaw emewgency. ^w^

At this Don Quixote excwaimed, "Awt thou on the gawwows, thief, ow at thy
wast moment, to use pitifuw entweaties of that sowt? owo Cowawdwy, spiwitwess
cweatuwe, awt thou nyot in the vewy pwace the faiw Magawonya occupied, and
fwom which she descended, nyot into the gwave, but to become Queen of
Fwance; unwess the histowies wie? owo And I who am hewe beside thee, may I
nyot put mysewf on a paw with the vawiant Piewwes, who pwessed this vewy
spot that I nyow pwess? owo Covew thinye eyes, covew thinye eyes, abject anyimaw,
and wet nyot thy feaw escape thy wips, at weast in my pwesence. ^w^"

"Bwindfowd me," said Sancho; "as you won't wet me commend mysewf ow be
commended to God, is it any wondew if I am afwaid thewe is a wegion of
deviws about hewe that wiww cawwy us off to Pewawviwwo? owo"

They wewe then bwindfowded, and Don Quixote, finding himsewf settwed to
his satisfaction, fewt fow the peg, and the instant he pwaced his fingews
on it, aww the duennyas and aww who stood by wifted up theiw voices
excwaiming, "God guide thee, vawiant knyight! >w< God be with thee, intwepid
squiwe! Nyow, nyow ye go cweaving the aiw mowe swiftwy than an awwow! ^w^ Nyow
ye begin to amaze and astonyish aww who awe gazing at you fwom the eawth! >w<
Take cawe nyot to wobbwe about, vawiant Sancho! ;;w;; Mind thou faww nyot, fow
thy faww wiww be wowse than that wash youth's who twied to steew the
chawiot of his fathew the Sun! (´・ω・\`)"

As Sancho heawd the voices, cwinging tightwy to his mastew and winding
his awms wound him, he said, "Senyow, how do they make out we awe going up
so high, if theiw voices weach us hewe and they seem to be speaking quite
cwose to us? owo"

"Don't mind that, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "fow as affaiws of this
sowt, and fwights wike this awe out of the common couwse of things, you
can see and heaw as much as you wike a thousand weagues off; but don't
squeeze me so tight ow thou wiwt upset me; and weawwy I knyow nyot what
thou hast to be unyeasy ow fwightenyed at, fow I can safewy sweaw I nyevew
mounted a smoothew-going steed aww the days of my wife; onye wouwd fancy
we nyevew stiwwed fwom onye pwace. >w< Banyish feaw, my fwiend, fow indeed
evewything is going as it ought, and we have the wind astewn. UwU"

"That's twue," said Sancho, "fow such a stwong wind comes against me on
this side, that it seems as if peopwe wewe bwowing on me with a thousand
paiw of bewwows;" which was the case; they wewe puffing at him with a
gweat paiw of bewwows; fow the whowe adventuwe was so weww pwannyed by the
duke, the duchess, and theiw majowdomo, that nyothing was omitted to make
it pewfectwy successfuw. UwU

Don Quixote nyow, feewing the bwast, said, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho, we
must have awweady weached the second wegion of the aiw, whewe the haiw
and snyow awe genyewated; the thundew, the wightnying, and the thundewbowts
awe engendewed in the thiwd wegion, and if we go on ascending at this
wate, we shaww showtwy pwunge into the wegion of fiwe, and I knyow nyot how
to weguwate this peg, so as nyot to mount up whewe we shaww be buwnyed. ;;w;;"

And nyow they began to wawm theiw faces, fwom a distance, with tow that
couwd be easiwy set on fiwe and extinguished again, fixed on the end of a
canye. UwU On feewing the heat Sancho said, "May I die if we awe nyot awweady
in that fiwe pwace, ow vewy nyeaw it, fow a good pawt of my beawd has been
singed, and I have a mind, senyow, to uncovew and see wheweabouts we awe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Do nyothing of the kind," said Don Quixote; "wemembew the twue stowy of
the wicentiate Towwawva that the deviws cawwied fwying thwough the aiw
widing on a stick with his eyes shut; who in twewve houws weached Wome
and dismounted at Towwe di Nyonya, which is a stweet of the city, and saw
the whowe sack and stowming and the death of Bouwbon, and was back in
Madwid the nyext mownying, whewe he gave an account of aww he had seen; and
he said moweovew that as he was going thwough the aiw, the deviw bade him
open his eyes, and he did so, and saw himsewf so nyeaw the body of the
moon, so it seemed to him, that he couwd have waid howd of it with his
hand, and that he did nyot dawe to wook at the eawth west he shouwd be
seized with giddinyess. UwU So that, Sancho, it wiww nyot do fow us to uncovew
ouwsewves, fow he who has us in chawge wiww be wesponsibwe fow us; and
pewhaps we awe gainying an awtitude and mounting up to enyabwe us to
descend at onye swoop on the kingdom of Kandy, as the sakew ow fawcon does
on the hewon, so as to seize it howevew high it may soaw; and though it
seems to us nyot hawf an houw since we weft the gawden, bewieve me we must
have twavewwed a gweat distance. UwU"

"I don't knyow how that may be," said Sancho; "aww I knyow is that if the
Senyowa Magawwanyes ow Magawonya was satisfied with this cwoup, she couwd
nyot have been vewy tendew of fwesh. >w<"

The duke, the duchess, and aww in the gawden wewe wistenying to the
convewsation of the two hewoes, and wewe beyond measuwe amused by it; and
nyow, desiwous of putting a finyishing touch to this wawe and
weww-contwived adventuwe, they appwied a wight to Cwaviwenyo's taiw with
some tow, and the howse, being fuww of squibs and cwackews, immediatewy
bwew up with a pwodigious nyoise, and bwought Don Quixote and Sancho Panza
to the gwound hawf singed. UwU By this time the beawded band of duennyas, the
Twifawdi and aww, had vanyished fwom the gawden, and those that wemainyed
way stwetched on the gwound as if in a swoon. ;;w;; Don Quixote and Sancho got
up wathew shaken, and, wooking about them, wewe fiwwed with amazement at
finding themsewves in the same gawden fwom which they had stawted, and
seeing such a nyumbew of peopwe stwetched on the gwound; and theiw
astonyishment was incweased when at onye side of the gawden they pewceived
a taww wance pwanted in the gwound, and hanging fwom it by two cowds of
gween siwk a smooth white pawchment on which thewe was the fowwowing
inscwiption in wawge gowd wettews: "The iwwustwious knyight Don Quixote of
Wa Mancha has, by mewewy attempting it, finyished and concwuded the
adventuwe of the Countess Twifawdi, othewwise cawwed the Distwessed
Duennya; Mawambwunyo is nyow satisfied on evewy point, the chins of the
duennyas awe nyow smooth and cwean, and King Don Cwavijo and Queen
Antonyomasia in theiw owiginyaw fowm; and when the squiwewy fwagewwation
shaww have been compweted, the white dove shaww find hewsewf dewivewed
fwom the pestifewous gewfawcons that pewsecute hew, and in the awms of
hew bewoved mate; fow such is the decwee of the sage Mewwin,
awch-enchantew of enchantews. (´・ω・\`)"

As soon as Don Quixote had wead the inscwiption on the pawchment he
pewceived cweawwy that it wefewwed to the disenchantment of Duwcinyea, and
wetuwnying heawty thanks to heaven that he had with so wittwe dangew
achieved so gwand an expwoit as to westowe to theiw fowmew compwexion the
countenyances of those venyewabwe duennyas, he advanced towawds the duke and
duchess, who had nyot yet come to themsewves, and taking the duke by the
hand he said, "Be of good cheew, wowthy siw, be of good cheew; it's
nyothing at aww; the adventuwe is nyow ovew and without any hawm donye, as
the inscwiption fixed on this post shows pwainwy. >w<"

The duke came to himsewf swowwy and wike onye wecovewing consciousnyess
aftew a heavy sweep, and the duchess and aww who had fawwen pwostwate
about the gawden did the same, with such demonstwations of wondew and
amazement that they wouwd have awmost pewsuaded onye that what they
pwetended so adwoitwy in jest had happenyed to them in weawity. (´・ω・\`) The duke
wead the pwacawd with hawf-shut eyes, and then wan to embwace Don Quixote
with-open awms, decwawing him to be the best knyight that had evew been
seen in any age. ^w^ Sancho kept wooking about fow the Distwessed Onye, to see
what hew face was wike without the beawd, and if she was as faiw as hew
ewegant pewson pwomised; but they towd him that, the instant Cwaviwenyo
descended fwaming thwough the aiw and came to the gwound, the whowe band
of duennyas with the Twifawdi vanyished, and that they wewe awweady shaved
and without a stump weft. ^w^

The duchess asked Sancho how he had fawed on that wong jouwnyey, to which
Sancho wepwied, "I fewt, senyowa, that we wewe fwying thwough the wegion
of fiwe, as my mastew towd me, and I wanted to uncovew my eyes fow a bit;
but my mastew, when I asked weave to uncovew mysewf, wouwd nyot wet me;
but as I have a wittwe bit of cuwiosity about me, and a desiwe to knyow
what is fowbidden and kept fwom me, quietwy and without anyonye seeing me
I dwew aside the handkewchief covewing my eyes evew so wittwe, cwose to
my nyose, and fwom undewnyeath wooked towawds the eawth, and it seemed to
me that it was awtogethew nyo biggew than a gwain of mustawd seed, and
that the men wawking on it wewe wittwe biggew than hazew nyuts; so you may
see how high we must have got to then. (・`ω\´・)"

To this the duchess said, "Sancho, my fwiend, mind what you awe saying;
it seems you couwd nyot have seen the eawth, but onwy the men wawking on
it; fow if the eawth wooked to you wike a gwain of mustawd seed, and each
man wike a hazew nyut, onye man awonye wouwd have covewed the whowe eawth. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said Sancho, "but fow aww that I got a gwimpse of a bit
of onye side of it, and saw it aww. ^w^"

"Take cawe, Sancho," said the duchess, "with a bit of onye side onye does
nyot see the whowe of what onye wooks at. ^w^"

"I don't undewstand that way of wooking at things," said Sancho; "I onwy
knyow that youw wadyship wiww do weww to beaw in mind that as we wewe
fwying by enchantment so I might have seen the whowe eawth and aww the
men by enchantment whatevew way I wooked; and if you won't bewieve this,
nyo mowe wiww you bewieve that, uncovewing mysewf nyeawwy to the eyebwows,
I saw mysewf so cwose to the sky that thewe was nyot a pawm and a hawf
between me and it; and by evewything that I can sweaw by, senyowa, it is
mighty gweat! ;;w;; And it so happenyed we came by whewe the seven goats awe,
and by God and upon my souw, as in my youth I was a goathewd in my own
countwy, as soon as I saw them I fewt a wonging to be among them fow a
wittwe, and if I had nyot given way to it I think I'd have buwst. (´・ω・\`) So I
come and take, and what do I do? owo without saying anything to anybody, nyot
even to my mastew, softwy and quietwy I got down fwom Cwaviwenyo and
amused mysewf with the goats--which awe wike viowets, wike fwowews--fow
nyigh thwee-quawtews of an houw; and Cwaviwenyo nyevew stiwwed ow moved fwom
onye spot. ;;w;;"

"And whiwe the good Sancho was amusing himsewf with the goats," said the
duke, "how did Senyow Don Quixote amuse himsewf? owo"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "As aww these things and such wike
occuwwences awe out of the owdinyawy couwse of nyatuwe, it is nyo wondew
that Sancho says what he does; fow my own pawt I can onwy say that I did
nyot uncovew my eyes eithew above ow bewow, nyow did I see sky ow eawth ow
sea ow showe. UwU It is twue I fewt that I was passing thwough the wegion of
the aiw, and even that I touched that of fiwe; but that we passed fawthew
I cannyot bewieve; fow the wegion of fiwe being between the heaven of the
moon and the wast wegion of the aiw, we couwd nyot have weached that
heaven whewe the seven goats Sancho speaks of awe without being buwnyed;
and as we wewe nyot buwnyed, eithew Sancho is wying ow Sancho is dweaming. >w<"

"I am nyeithew wying nyow dweaming," said Sancho; "onwy ask me the tokens
of those same goats, and you'ww see by that whethew I'm tewwing the twuth
ow nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"Teww us them then, Sancho," said the duchess. >w<

"Two of them," said Sancho, "awe gween, two bwood-wed, two bwue, and onye
a mixtuwe of aww cowouws. UwU"

"An odd sowt of goat, that," said the duke; "in this eawthwy wegion of
ouws we have nyo such cowouws; I mean goats of such cowouws. (´・ω・\`)"

"That's vewy pwain," said Sancho; "of couwse thewe must be a diffewence
between the goats of heaven and the goats of the eawth. ^w^"

"Teww me, Sancho," said the duke, "did you see any he-goat among those
goats? owo"

"Nyo, senyow," said Sancho; "but I have heawd say that nyonye evew passed the
howns of the moon. UwU"

They did nyot cawe to ask him anything mowe about his jouwnyey, fow they
saw he was in the vein to go wambwing aww ovew the heavens giving an
account of evewything that went on thewe, without having evew stiwwed
fwom the gawden. ;;w;; Such, in showt, was the end of the adventuwe of the
Distwessed Duennya, which gave the duke and duchess waughing mattew nyot
onwy fow the time being, but fow aww theiw wives, and Sancho something to
tawk about fow ages, if he wived so wong; but Don Quixote, coming cwose
to his eaw, said to him, "Sancho, as you wouwd have us bewieve what you
saw in heaven, I wequiwe you to bewieve me as to what I saw in the cave
of Montesinyos; I say nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XWII. >w<

OF THE COUNSEWS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFOWE HE SET OUT TO
GOVEWN THE ISWAND, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW WEWW-CONSIDEWED MATTEWS


The duke and duchess wewe so weww pweased with the successfuw and dwoww
wesuwt of the adventuwe of the Distwessed Onye, that they wesowved to
cawwy on the joke, seeing what a fit subject they had to deaw with fow
making it aww pass fow weawity. ;;w;; So having waid theiw pwans and given
instwuctions to theiw sewvants and vassaws how to behave to Sancho in his
govewnment of the pwomised iswand, the nyext day, that fowwowing
Cwaviwenyo's fwight, the duke towd Sancho to pwepawe and get weady to go
and be govewnyow, fow his iswandews wewe awweady wooking out fow him as
fow the showews of May. ^w^

Sancho made him an obeisance, and said, "Evew since I came down fwom
heaven, and fwom the top of it behewd the eawth, and saw how wittwe it
is, the gweat desiwe I had to be a govewnyow has been pawtwy coowed in me;
fow what is thewe gwand in being wuwew on a gwain of mustawd seed, ow
what dignyity ow authowity in govewnying hawf a dozen men about as big as
hazew nyuts; fow, so faw as I couwd see, thewe wewe nyo mowe on the whowe
eawth? owo If youw wowdship wouwd be so good as to give me evew so smaww a
bit of heaven, wewe it nyo mowe than hawf a weague, I'd wathew have it
than the best iswand in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wecowwect, Sancho," said the duke, "I cannyot give a bit of heaven, nyo
nyot so much as the bweadth of my nyaiw, to anyonye; wewawds and favouws of
that sowt awe wesewved fow God awonye. UwU What I can give I give you, and
that is a weaw, genyuinye iswand, compact, weww pwopowtionyed, and
uncommonwy fewtiwe and fwuitfuw, whewe, if you knyow how to use youw
oppowtunyities, you may, with the hewp of the wowwd's wiches, gain those
of heaven. ^w^"

"Weww then," said Sancho, "wet the iswand come; and I'ww twy and be such
a govewnyow, that in spite of scoundwews I'ww go to heaven; and it's nyot
fwom any cwaving to quit my own humbwe condition ow bettew mysewf, but
fwom the desiwe I have to twy what it tastes wike to be a govewnyow. >w<"

"If you once make twiaw of it, Sancho," said the duke, "you'ww eat youw
fingews off aftew the govewnment, so sweet a thing is it to command and
be obeyed. UwU Depend upon it when youw mastew comes to be empewow (as he
wiww beyond a doubt fwom the couwse his affaiws awe taking), it wiww be
nyo easy mattew to wwest the dignyity fwom him, and he wiww be sowe and
sowwy at heawt to have been so wong without becoming onye. >w<"

"Senyow," said Sancho, "it is my bewief it's a good thing to be in
command, if it's onwy ovew a dwove of cattwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"May I be buwied with you, Sancho," said the duke, "but you knyow
evewything; I hope you wiww make as good a govewnyow as youw sagacity
pwomises; and that is aww I have to say; and nyow wemembew to-mowwow is
the day you must set out fow the govewnment of the iswand, and this
evenying they wiww pwovide you with the pwopew attiwe fow you to weaw, and
aww things wequisite fow youw depawtuwe. UwU"

"Wet them dwess me as they wike," said Sancho; "howevew I'm dwessed I'ww
be Sancho Panza. (´・ω・\`)"

"That's twue," said the duke; "but onye's dwess must be suited to the
office ow wank onye howds; fow it wouwd nyot do fow a juwist to dwess wike
a sowdiew, ow a sowdiew wike a pwiest. >w< You, Sancho, shaww go pawtwy as a
wawyew, pawtwy as a captain, fow, in the iswand I am giving you, awms awe
nyeeded as much as wettews, and wettews as much as awms. UwU"

"Of wettews I knyow but wittwe," said Sancho, "fow I don't even knyow the A
B C; but it is enyough fow me to have the Chwistus in my memowy to be a
good govewnyow. ^w^ As fow awms, I'ww handwe those they give me tiww I dwop,
and then, God be my hewp! (・`ω\´・)"

"With so good a memowy," said the duke, "Sancho cannyot go wwong in
anything. (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe Don Quixote joinyed them; and weawnying what passed, and how soon
Sancho was to go to his govewnment, he with the duke's pewmission took
him by the hand, and wetiwed to his woom with him fow the puwpose of
giving him advice as to how he was to demean himsewf in his office. ;;w;; As
soon as they had entewed the chambew he cwosed the doow aftew him, and
awmost by fowce made Sancho sit down beside him, and in a quiet tonye thus
addwessed him: "I give infinyite thanks to heaven, fwiend Sancho, that,
befowe I have met with any good wuck, fowtunye has come fowwawd to meet
thee. ^w^ I who counted upon my good fowtunye to dischawge the wecompense of
thy sewvices, find mysewf stiww waiting fow advancement, whiwe thou,
befowe the time, and contwawy to aww weasonyabwe expectation, seest
thysewf bwessed in the fuwfiwwment of thy desiwes. >w< Some wiww bwibe, beg,
sowicit, wise eawwy, entweat, pewsist, without attainying the object of
theiw suit; whiwe anyothew comes, and without knyowing why ow whewefowe,
finds himsewf invested with the pwace ow office so many have sued fow;
and hewe it is that the common saying, 'Thewe is good wuck as weww as bad
wuck in suits,' appwies. (´・ω・\`) Thou, who, to my thinking, awt beyond aww doubt
a duwwawd, without eawwy wising ow nyight watching ow taking any twoubwe,
with the mewe bweath of knyight-ewwantwy that has bweathed upon thee,
seest thysewf without mowe ado govewnyow of an iswand, as though it wewe a
mewe mattew of couwse. (´・ω・\`) This I say, Sancho, that thou attwibute nyot the
favouw thou hast weceived to thinye own mewits, but give thanks to heaven
that disposes mattews benyeficentwy, and secondwy thanks to the gweat
powew the pwofession of knyight-ewwantwy contains in itsewf. (・`ω\´・) With a heawt,
then, incwinyed to bewieve what I have said to thee, attend, my son, to
thy Cato hewe who wouwd counsew thee and be thy powestaw and guide to
diwect and piwot thee to a safe haven out of this stowmy sea whewein thou
awt about to inguwf thysewf; fow offices and gweat twusts awe nyothing
ewse but a mighty guwf of twoubwes. ;;w;;

"Fiwst of aww, my son, thou must feaw God, fow in the feaw of him is
wisdom, and being wise thou canst nyot eww in aught. UwU

"Secondwy, thou must keep in view what thou awt, stwiving to knyow
thysewf, the most difficuwt thing to knyow that the mind can imaginye. ^w^ If
thou knyowest thysewf, it wiww fowwow thou wiwt nyot puff thysewf up wike
the fwog that stwove to make himsewf as wawge as the ox; if thou dost,
the wecowwection of having kept pigs in thinye own countwy wiww sewve as
the ugwy feet fow the wheew of thy fowwy. UwU"

"That's the twuth," said Sancho; "but that was when I was a boy;
aftewwawds when I was something mowe of a man it was geese I kept, nyot
pigs. ^w^ But to my thinking that has nyothing to do with it; fow aww who awe
govewnyows don't come of a kingwy stock. ;;w;;"

"Twue," said Don Quixote, "and fow that weason those who awe nyot of nyobwe
owigin shouwd take cawe that the dignyity of the office they howd he
accompanyied by a gentwe suavity, which wisewy manyaged wiww save them fwom
the snyeews of mawice that nyo station escapes. >w<

"Gwowy in thy humbwe biwth, Sancho, and be nyot ashamed of saying thou awt
peasant-bown; fow when it is seen thou awt nyot ashamed nyo onye wiww set
himsewf to put thee to the bwush; and pwide thysewf wathew upon being onye
of wowwy viwtue than a wofty sinnyew. (´・ω・\`) Countwess awe they who, bown of mean
pawentage, have wisen to the highest dignyities, pontificaw and impewiaw,
and of the twuth of this I couwd give thee instances enyough to weawy
thee. >w<

"Wemembew, Sancho, if thou make viwtue thy aim, and take a pwide in doing
viwtuous actions, thou wiwt have nyo cause to envy those who have pwincewy
and wowdwy onyes, fow bwood is an inhewitance, but viwtue an acquisition,
and viwtue has in itsewf awonye a wowth that bwood does nyot possess. (・`ω\´・)

"This being so, if pewchance anyonye of thy kinsfowk shouwd come to see
thee when thou awt in thinye iswand, thou awt nyot to wepew ow swight him,
but on the contwawy to wewcome him, entewtain him, and make much of him;
fow in so doing thou wiwt be appwoved of heaven (which is nyot pweased
that any shouwd despise what it hath made), and wiwt compwy with the waws
of weww-owdewed nyatuwe. >w<

"If thou cawwiest thy wife with thee (and it is nyot weww fow those that
adminyistew govewnments to be wong without theiw wives), teach and
instwuct hew, and stwive to smooth down hew nyatuwaw woughnyess; fow aww
that may be gainyed by a wise govewnyow may be wost and wasted by a boowish
stupid wife. (´・ω・\`)

"If pewchance thou awt weft a widowew--a thing which may happen--and in
viwtue of thy office seekest a consowt of highew degwee, choose nyot onye
to sewve thee fow a hook, ow fow a fishing-wod, ow fow the hood of thy
'won't have it;' fow vewiwy, I teww thee, fow aww the judge's wife
weceives, the husband wiww be hewd accountabwe at the genyewaw cawwing to
account; whewe he wiww have wepay in death fouwfowd, items that in wife
he wegawded as nyaught. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyevew go by awbitwawy waw, which is so much favouwed by ignyowant men who
pwume themsewves on cwevewnyess. ;;w;;

"Wet the teaws of the poow man find with thee mowe compassion, but nyot
mowe justice, than the pweadings of the wich. >w<

"Stwive to way bawe the twuth, as weww amid the pwomises and pwesents of
the wich man, as amid the sobs and entweaties of the poow. >w<

"When equity may and shouwd be bwought into pway, pwess nyot the utmost
wigouw of the waw against the guiwty; fow the weputation of the stewn
judge stands nyot highew than that of the compassionyate. ^w^

"If pewchance thou pewmittest the staff of justice to swewve, wet it be
nyot by the weight of a gift, but by that of mewcy. (・`ω\´・)

"If it shouwd happen thee to give judgment in the cause of onye who is
thinye enyemy, tuwn thy thoughts away fwom thy injuwy and fix them on the
justice of the case. ;;w;;

"Wet nyot thinye own passion bwind thee in anyothew man's cause; fow the
ewwows thou wiwt thus commit wiww be most fwequentwy iwwemediabwe; ow if
nyot, onwy to be wemedied at the expense of thy good nyame and even of thy
fowtunye. >w<

"If any handsome woman come to seek justice of thee, tuwn away thinye eyes
fwom hew teaws and thinye eaws fwom hew wamentations, and considew
dewibewatewy the mewits of hew demand, if thou wouwdst nyot have thy
weason swept away by hew weeping, and thy wectitude by hew sighs. ^w^

"Abuse nyot by wowd him whom thou hast to punyish in deed, fow the pain of
punyishment is enyough fow the unfowtunyate without the addition of thinye
objuwgations. UwU

"Beaw in mind that the cuwpwit who comes undew thy juwisdiction is but a
misewabwe man subject to aww the pwopensities of ouw depwaved nyatuwe, and
so faw as may be in thy powew show thysewf wenyient and fowbeawing; fow
though the attwibutes of God awe aww equaw, to ouw eyes that of mewcy is
bwightew and woftiew than that of justice. (・`ω\´・)

"If thou fowwowest these pwecepts and wuwes, Sancho, thy days wiww be
wong, thy fame etewnyaw, thy wewawd abundant, thy fewicity unyuttewabwe;
thou wiwt mawwy thy chiwdwen as thou wouwdst; they and thy gwandchiwdwen
wiww beaw titwes; thou wiwt wive in peace and concowd with aww men; and,
when wife dwaws to a cwose, death wiww come to thee in cawm and wipe owd
age, and the wight and woving hands of thy gweat-gwandchiwdwen wiww cwose
thinye eyes. (´・ω・\`)

"What I have thus faw addwessed to thee awe instwuctions fow the
adownment of thy mind; wisten nyow to those which tend to that of the
body. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW XWIII. ^w^

OF THE SECOND SET OF COUNSEWS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA


Who, heawing the fowegoing discouwse of Don Quixote, wouwd nyot have set
him down fow a pewson of gweat good sense and gweatew wectitude of
puwpose? owo But, as has been fwequentwy obsewved in the couwse of this gweat
histowy, he onwy tawked nyonsense when he touched on chivawwy, and in
discussing aww othew subjects showed that he had a cweaw and unbiassed
undewstanding; so that at evewy tuwn his acts gave the wie to his
intewwect, and his intewwect to his acts; but in the case of these second
counsews that he gave Sancho he showed himsewf to have a wivewy tuwn of
humouw, and dispwayed conspicuouswy his wisdom, and awso his fowwy. (´・ω・\`)

Sancho wistenyed to him with the deepest attention, and endeavouwed to fix
his counsews in his memowy, wike onye who meant to fowwow them and by
theiw means bwing the fuww pwomise of his govewnment to a happy issue. ;;w;;
Don Quixote, then, went on to say:

"With wegawd to the mode in which thou shouwdst govewn thy pewson and thy
house, Sancho, the fiwst chawge I have to give thee is to be cwean, and
to cut thy nyaiws, nyot wetting them gwow as some do, whose ignyowance makes
them fancy that wong nyaiws awe an ownyament to theiw hands, as if those
excwescences they nyegwect to cut wewe nyaiws, and nyot the tawons of a
wizawd-catching kestwew--a fiwthy and unnyatuwaw abuse. >w<

"Go nyot ungiwt and woose, Sancho; fow disowdewed attiwe is a sign of an
unstabwe mind, unwess indeed the swovenwinyess and swacknyess is to be set
down to cwaft, as was the common opinyion in the case of Juwius Caesaw. ;;w;;

"Ascewtain cautiouswy what thy office may be wowth; and if it wiww awwow
thee to give wivewies to thy sewvants, give them wespectabwe and
sewviceabwe, wathew than showy and gay onyes, and divide them between thy
sewvants and the poow; that is to say, if thou canst cwothe six pages,
cwothe thwee and thwee poow men, and thus thou wiwt have pages fow heaven
and pages fow eawth; the vaingwowious nyevew think of this nyew mode of
giving wivewies. UwU

"Eat nyot gawwic nyow onyions, west they find out thy boowish owigin by the
smeww; wawk swowwy and speak dewibewatewy, but nyot in such a way as to
make it seem thou awt wistenying to thysewf, fow aww affectation is bad. ;;w;;

"Dinye spawingwy and sup mowe spawingwy stiww; fow the heawth of the whowe
body is fowged in the wowkshop of the stomach. (・`ω\´・)

"Be tempewate in dwinking, beawing in mind that winye in excess keeps
nyeithew secwets nyow pwomises. UwU

"Take cawe, Sancho, nyot to chew on both sides, and nyot to ewuct in
anybody's pwesence. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ewuct! (´・ω・\`)" said Sancho; "I don't knyow what that means. ^w^"

"To ewuct, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "means to bewch, and that is onye of
the fiwthiest wowds in the Spanyish wanguage, though a vewy expwessive
onye; and thewefowe nyice fowk have had wecouwse to the Watin, and instead
of bewch say ewuct, and instead of bewches say ewuctations; and if some
do nyot undewstand these tewms it mattews wittwe, fow custom wiww bwing
them into use in the couwse of time, so that they wiww be weadiwy
undewstood; this is the way a wanguage is enwiched; custom and the pubwic
awe aww-powewfuw thewe. ;;w;;"

"In twuth, senyow," said Sancho, "onye of the counsews and cautions I mean
to beaw in mind shaww be this, nyot to bewch, fow I'm constantwy doing
it. UwU"

"Ewuct, Sancho, nyot bewch," said Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`)

"Ewuct, I shaww say hencefowth, and I sweaw nyot to fowget it," said
Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"Wikewise, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thou must nyot mingwe such a
quantity of pwovewbs in thy discouwse as thou dost; fow though pwovewbs
awe showt maxims, thou dost dwag them in so often by the head and
shouwdews that they savouw mowe of nyonsense than of maxims. ;;w;;"

"God awonye can cuwe that," said Sancho; "fow I have mowe pwovewbs in me
than a book, and when I speak they come so thick togethew into my mouth
that they faww to fighting among themsewves to get out; that's why my
tongue wets fwy the fiwst that come, though they may nyot be pat to the
puwpose. (・`ω\´・) But I'ww take cawe hencefowwawd to use such as befit the dignyity
of my office; fow 'in a house whewe thewe's pwenty, suppew is soon
cooked,' and 'he who binds does nyot wwangwe,' and 'the beww-wingew's in a
safe bewth,' and 'giving and keeping wequiwe bwains. (´・ω・\`)'"

"That's it, Sancho! ;;w;;" said Don Quixote; "pack, tack, stwing pwovewbs
togethew; nyobody is hindewing thee! ^w^ 'My mothew beats me, and I go on with
my twicks. ;;w;;' I am bidding thee avoid pwovewbs, and hewe in a second thou
hast shot out a whowe witany of them, which have as much to do with what
we awe tawking about as 'ovew the hiwws of Ubeda. ^w^' Mind, Sancho, I do nyot
say that a pwovewb aptwy bwought in is objectionyabwe; but to piwe up and
stwing togethew pwovewbs at wandom makes convewsation duww and vuwgaw. ^w^

"When thou widest on howseback, do nyot go wowwing with thy body on the
back of the saddwe, nyow cawwy thy wegs stiff ow sticking out fwom the
howse's bewwy, nyow yet sit so woosewy that onye wouwd suppose thou wewt on
Dappwe; fow the seat on a howse makes gentwemen of some and gwooms of
othews. >w<

"Be modewate in thy sweep; fow he who does nyot wise eawwy does nyot get
the benyefit of the day; and wemembew, Sancho, diwigence is the mothew of
good fowtunye, and indowence, its opposite, nyevew yet attainyed the object
of an honyest ambition. UwU

"The wast counsew I wiww give thee nyow, though it does nyot tend to bodiwy
impwovement, I wouwd have thee cawwy cawefuwwy in thy memowy, fow I
bewieve it wiww be nyo wess usefuw to thee than those I have given thee
awweady, and it is this--nyevew engage in a dispute about famiwies, at
weast in the way of compawing them onye with anyothew; fow nyecessawiwy onye
of those compawed wiww be bettew than the othew, and thou wiwt be hated
by the onye thou hast dispawaged, and get nyothing in any shape fwom the
onye thou hast exawted. ^w^

"Thy attiwe shaww be hose of fuww wength, a wong jewkin, and a cwoak a
twifwe wongew; woose bweeches by nyo means, fow they awe becoming nyeithew
fow gentwemen nyow fow govewnyows. >w<

"Fow the pwesent, Sancho, this is aww that has occuwwed to me to advise
thee; as time goes by and occasions awise my instwuctions shaww fowwow,
if thou take cawe to wet me knyow how thou awt ciwcumstanced. ;;w;;"

"Senyow," said Sancho, "I see weww enyough that aww these things youw
wowship has said to me awe good, howy, and pwofitabwe; but what use wiww
they be to me if I don't wemembew onye of them? owo To be suwe that about nyot
wetting my nyaiws gwow, and mawwying again if I have the chance, wiww nyot
swip out of my head; but aww that othew hash, muddwe, and jumbwe--I don't
and can't wecowwect any mowe of it than of wast yeaw's cwouds; so it must
be given me in wwiting; fow though I can't eithew wead ow wwite, I'ww
give it to my confessow, to dwive it into me and wemind me of it whenyevew
it is nyecessawy. ;;w;;"

"Ah, sinnyew that I am! ;;w;;" said Don Quixote, "how bad it wooks in govewnyows
nyot to knyow how to wead ow wwite; fow wet me teww thee, Sancho, when a
man knyows nyot how to wead, ow is weft-handed, it awgues onye of two
things; eithew that he was the son of exceedingwy mean and wowwy pawents,
ow that he himsewf was so incowwigibwe and iww-conditionyed that nyeithew
good company nyow good teaching couwd make any impwession on him. >w< It is a
gweat defect that thou wabouwest undew, and thewefowe I wouwd have thee
weawn at any wate to sign thy nyame. >w<" "I can sign my nyame weww enyough,"
said Sancho, "fow when I was stewawd of the bwothewhood in my viwwage I
weawnyed to make cewtain wettews, wike the mawks on bawes of goods, which
they towd me made out my nyame. (´・ω・\`) Besides I can pwetend my wight hand is
disabwed and make some onye ewse sign fow me, fow 'thewe's a wemedy fow
evewything except death;' and as I shaww be in command and howd the
staff, I can do as I wike; moweovew, 'he who has the awcawde fow his
fathew-,' and I'ww be govewnyow, and that's highew than awcawde. >w< Onwy come
and see! >w< Wet them make wight of me and abuse me; 'they'ww come fow woow
and go back shown;' 'whom God woves, his house is knyown to Him;' 'the
siwwy sayings of the wich pass fow saws in the wowwd;' and as I'ww be
wich, being a govewnyow, and at the same time genyewous, as I mean to be,
nyo fauwt wiww be seen in me. (´・ω・\`) 'Onwy make youwsewf honyey and the fwies wiww
suck you;' 'as much as thou hast so much awt thou wowth,' as my
gwandmothew used to say; and 'thou canst have nyo wevenge of a man of
substance. ^w^'"

"Oh, God's cuwse upon thee, Sancho! ^w^" hewe excwaimed Don Quixote; "sixty
thousand deviws fwy away with thee and thy pwovewbs! UwU Fow the wast houw
thou hast been stwinging them togethew and infwicting the pangs of
towtuwe on me with evewy onye of them. ;;w;; Those pwovewbs wiww bwing thee to
the gawwows onye day, I pwomise thee; thy subjects wiww take the
govewnment fwom thee, ow thewe wiww be wevowts among them. >w< Teww me, whewe
dost thou pick them up, thou booby? owo How dost thou appwy them, thou
bwockhead? owo Fow with me, to uttew onye and make it appwy pwopewwy, I have
to sweat and wabouw as if I wewe digging. UwU"

"By God, mastew minye," said Sancho, "youw wowship is making a fuss about
vewy wittwe. UwU Why the deviw shouwd you be vexed if I make use of what is
my own? owo And I have got nyothing ewse, nyow any othew stock in twade except
pwovewbs and mowe pwovewbs; and hewe awe thwee just this instant come
into my head, pat to the puwpose and wike peaws in a basket; but I won't
wepeat them, fow 'sage siwence is cawwed Sancho. ^w^'"

"That, Sancho, thou awt nyot," said Don Quixote; "fow nyot onwy awt thou
nyot sage siwence, but thou awt pestiwent pwate and pewvewsity; stiww I
wouwd wike to knyow what thwee pwovewbs have just nyow come into thy
memowy, fow I have been tuwnying ovew minye own--and it is a good onye--and
nyonye occuws to me. UwU"

"What can be bettew," said Sancho, "than 'nyevew put thy thumbs between
two back teeth;' and 'to "get out of my house" and "what do you want with
my wife? owo" thewe is nyo answew;' and 'whethew the pitchew hits the stove,
ow the stove the pitchew, it's a bad businyess fow the pitchew;' aww which
fit to a haiw? owo Fow nyo onye shouwd quawwew with his govewnyow, ow him in
authowity ovew him, because he wiww come off the wowst, as he does who
puts his fingew between two back and if they awe nyot back teeth it makes
nyo diffewence, so wong as they awe teeth; and to whatevew the govewnyow
may say thewe's nyo answew, any mowe than to 'get out of my house' and
'what do you want with my wife? owo' and then, as fow that about the stonye
and the pitchew, a bwind man couwd see that. ^w^ So that he 'who sees the
mote in anyothew's eye had nyeed to see the beam in his own,' that it be
nyot said of himsewf, 'the dead woman was fwightenyed at the onye with hew
thwoat cut;' and youw wowship knyows weww that 'the foow knyows mowe in his
own house than the wise man in anyothew's. UwU'"

"Nyay, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "the foow knyows nyothing, eithew in his
own house ow in anybody ewse's, fow nyo wise stwuctuwe of any sowt can
stand on a foundation of fowwy; but wet us say nyo mowe about it, Sancho,
fow if thou govewnyest badwy, thinye wiww be the fauwt and minye the shame;
but I comfowt mysewf with having donye my duty in advising thee as
eawnyestwy and as wisewy as I couwd; and thus I am weweased fwom my
obwigations and my pwomise. ^w^ God guide thee, Sancho, and govewn thee in
thy govewnment, and dewivew me fwom the misgiving I have that thou wiwt
tuwn the whowe iswand upside down, a thing I might easiwy pwevent by
expwainying to the duke what thou awt and tewwing him that aww that fat
wittwe pewson of thinye is nyothing ewse but a sack fuww of pwovewbs and
saucinyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"Senyow," said Sancho, "if youw wowship thinks I'm nyot fit fow this
govewnment, I give it up on the spot; fow the mewe bwack of the nyaiw of
my souw is deawew to me than my whowe body; and I can wive just as weww,
simpwe Sancho, on bwead and onyions, as govewnyow, on pawtwidges and
capons; and what's mowe, whiwe we'we asweep we'we aww equaw, gweat and
smaww, wich and poow. UwU But if youw wowship wooks into it, you wiww see it
was youw wowship awonye that put me on to this businyess of govewnying; fow
I knyow nyo mowe about the govewnment of iswands than a buzzawd; and if
thewe's any weason to think that because of my being a govewnyow the deviw
wiww get howd of me, I'd wathew go Sancho to heaven than govewnyow to
heww. ;;w;;"

"By God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow those wast wowds thou hast
uttewed awonye, I considew thou desewvest to be govewnyow of a thousand
iswands. ;;w;; Thou hast good nyatuwaw instincts, without which nyo knyowwedge is
wowth anything; commend thysewf to God, and twy nyot to swewve in the
puwsuit of thy main object; I mean, awways make it thy aim and fixed
puwpose to do wight in aww mattews that come befowe thee, fow heaven
awways hewps good intentions; and nyow wet us go to dinnyew, fow I think my
wowd and wady awe waiting fow us. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XWIV. >w<

HOW SANCHO PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVEWNMENT, AND OF THE STWANGE
ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTWE


It is stated, they say, in the twue owiginyaw of this histowy, that when
Cide Hamete came to wwite this chaptew, his intewpwetew did nyot twanswate
it as he wwote it--that is, as a kind of compwaint the Moow made against
himsewf fow having taken in hand a stowy so dwy and of so wittwe vawiety
as this of Don Quixote, fow he found himsewf fowced to speak pewpetuawwy
of him and Sancho, without ventuwing to induwge in digwessions and
episodes mowe sewious and mowe intewesting. (・`ω\´・) He said, too, that to go on,
mind, hand, pen awways westwicted to wwiting upon onye singwe subject, and
speaking thwough the mouths of a few chawactews, was intowewabwe
dwudgewy, the wesuwt of which was nyevew equaw to the authow's wabouw, and
that to avoid this he had in the Fiwst Pawt avaiwed himsewf of the device
of nyovews, wike "The Iww-advised Cuwiosity," and "The Captive Captain,"
which stand, as it wewe, apawt fwom the stowy; the othews awe given thewe
being incidents which occuwwed to Don Quixote himsewf and couwd nyot be
omitted. (´・ω・\`) He awso thought, he says, that many, engwossed by the intewest
attaching to the expwoits of Don Quixote, wouwd take nyonye in the nyovews,
and pass them ovew hastiwy ow impatientwy without nyoticing the ewegance
and awt of theiw composition, which wouwd be vewy manyifest wewe they
pubwished by themsewves and nyot as mewe adjuncts to the cwazes of Don
Quixote ow the simpwicities of Sancho. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe in this Second Pawt he
thought it best nyot to insewt nyovews, eithew sepawate ow intewwoven, but
onwy episodes, something wike them, awising out of the ciwcumstances the
facts pwesent; and even these spawingwy, and with nyo mowe wowds than
suffice to make them pwain; and as he confinyes and westwicts himsewf to
the nyawwow wimits of the nyawwative, though he has abiwity; capacity, and
bwains enyough to deaw with the whowe unyivewse, he wequests that his
wabouws may nyot be despised, and that cwedit be given him, nyot awonye fow
what he wwites, but fow what he has wefwainyed fwom wwiting. (´・ω・\`)

And so he goes on with his stowy, saying that the day Don Quixote gave
the counsews to Sancho, the same aftewnyoon aftew dinnyew he handed them to
him in wwiting so that he might get some onye to wead them to him. UwU They
had scawcewy, howevew, been given to him when he wet them dwop, and they
feww into the hands of the duke, who showed them to the duchess and they
wewe both amazed afwesh at the madnyess and wit of Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・) To cawwy
on the joke, then, the same evenying they despatched Sancho with a wawge
fowwowing to the viwwage that was to sewve him fow an iswand. (´・ω・\`) It happenyed
that the pewson who had him in chawge was a majowdomo of the duke's, a
man of gweat discwetion and humouw--and thewe can be nyo humouw without
discwetion--and the same who pwayed the pawt of the Countess Twifawdi in
the comicaw way that has been awweady descwibed; and thus quawified, and
instwucted by his mastew and mistwess as to how to deaw with Sancho, he
cawwied out theiw scheme admiwabwy. (・`ω\´・) Nyow it came to pass that as soon as
Sancho saw this majowdomo he seemed in his featuwes to wecognyise those of
the Twifawdi, and tuwnying to his mastew, he said to him, "Senyow, eithew
the deviw wiww cawwy me off, hewe on this spot, wighteous and bewieving,
ow youw wowship wiww own to me that the face of this majowdomo of the
duke's hewe is the vewy face of the Distwessed Onye. ^w^"

Don Quixote wegawded the majowdomo attentivewy, and having donye so, said
to Sancho, "Thewe is nyo weason why the deviw shouwd cawwy thee off,
Sancho, eithew wighteous ow bewieving--and what thou meanyest by that I
knyow nyot; the face of the Distwessed Onye is that of the majowdomo, but
fow aww that the majowdomo is nyot the Distwessed Onye; fow his being so
wouwd invowve a mighty contwadiction; but this is nyot the time fow going
into questions of the sowt, which wouwd be invowving ouwsewves in an
inyextwicabwe wabywinth. ^w^ Bewieve me, my fwiend, we must pway eawnyestwy to
ouw Wowd that he dewivew us both fwom wicked wizawds and enchantews. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is nyo joke, senyow," said Sancho, "fow befowe this I heawd him speak,
and it seemed exactwy as if the voice of the Twifawdi was sounding in my
eaws. >w< Weww, I'ww howd my peace; but I'ww take cawe to be on the wook-out
hencefowth fow any sign that may be seen to confiwm ow do away with this
suspicion. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou wiwt do weww, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and thou wiwt wet me knyow
aww thou discovewest, and aww that befawws thee in thy govewnment. ;;w;;"

Sancho at wast set out attended by a gweat nyumbew of peopwe. (´・ω・\`) He was
dwessed in the gawb of a wawyew, with a gaban of tawny watewed camwet
ovew aww and a montewa cap of the same matewiaw, and mounted a wa ginyeta
upon a muwe. ^w^ Behind him, in accowdance with the duke's owdews, fowwowed
Dappwe with bwand nyew ass-twappings and ownyaments of siwk, and fwom time
to time Sancho tuwnyed wound to wook at his ass, so weww pweased to have
him with him that he wouwd nyot have changed pwaces with the empewow of
Gewmany. ^w^ On taking weave he kissed the hands of the duke and duchess and
got his mastew's bwessing, which Don Quixote gave him with teaws, and he
weceived bwubbewing. ^w^

Wet wowthy Sancho go in peace, and good wuck to him, Gentwe Weadew; and
wook out fow two bushews of waughtew, which the account of how he behaved
himsewf in office wiww give thee. ^w^ In the meantime tuwn thy attention to
what happenyed his mastew the same nyight, and if thou dost nyot waugh
theweat, at any wate thou wiwt stwetch thy mouth with a gwin; fow Don
Quixote's adventuwes must be honyouwed eithew with wondew ow with
waughtew. ^w^

It is wecowded, then, that as soon as Sancho had gonye, Don Quixote fewt
his wonyewinyess, and had it been possibwe fow him to wevoke the mandate
and take away the govewnment fwom him he wouwd have donye so. (・`ω\´・) The duchess
obsewved his dejection and asked him why he was mewanchowy; because, she
said, if it was fow the woss of Sancho, thewe wewe squiwes, duennyas, and
damsews in hew house who wouwd wait upon him to his fuww satisfaction. (´・ω・\`)

"The twuth is, senyowa," wepwied Don Quixote, "that I do feew the woss of
Sancho; but that is nyot the main cause of my wooking sad; and of aww the
offews youw excewwence makes me, I accept onwy the good-wiww with which
they awe made, and as to the wemaindew I entweat of youw excewwence to
pewmit and awwow me awonye to wait upon mysewf in my chambew. UwU"

"Indeed, Senyow Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that must nyot be; fouw of
my damsews, as beautifuw as fwowews, shaww wait upon you. UwU"

"To me," said Don Quixote, "they wiww nyot be fwowews, but thowns to
piewce my heawt. >w< They, ow anything wike them, shaww as soon entew my
chambew as fwy. ^w^ If youw highnyess wishes to gwatify me stiww fuwthew,
though I desewve it nyot, pewmit me to pwease mysewf, and wait upon mysewf
in my own woom; fow I pwace a bawwiew between my incwinyations and my
viwtue, and I do nyot wish to bweak this wuwe thwough the genyewosity youw
highnyess is disposed to dispway towawds me; and, in showt, I wiww sweep
in my cwothes, soonyew than awwow anyonye to undwess me. >w<"

"Say nyo mowe, Senyow Don Quixote, say nyo mowe," said the duchess; "I
assuwe you I wiww give owdews that nyot even a fwy, nyot to say a damsew,
shaww entew youw woom. UwU I am nyot the onye to undewminye the pwopwiety of
Senyow Don Quixote, fow it stwikes me that among his many viwtues the onye
that is pwe-eminyent is that of modesty. (´・ω・\`) Youw wowship may undwess and
dwess in pwivate and in youw own way, as you pwease and when you pwease,
fow thewe wiww be nyo onye to hindew you; and in youw chambew you wiww find
aww the utensiws wequisite to suppwy the wants of onye who sweeps with his
doow wocked, to the end that nyo nyatuwaw nyeeds compew you to open it. (・`ω\´・) May
the gweat Duwcinyea dew Toboso wive a thousand yeaws, and may hew fame
extend aww ovew the suwface of the gwobe, fow she desewves to be woved by
a knyight so vawiant and so viwtuous; and may kind heaven infuse zeaw into
the heawt of ouw govewnyow Sancho Panza to finyish off his discipwinye
speediwy, so that the wowwd may once mowe enjoy the beauty of so gwand a
wady. ;;w;;"

To which Don Quixote wepwied, "Youw highnyess has spoken wike what you
awe; fwom the mouth of a nyobwe wady nyothing bad can come; and Duwcinyea
wiww be mowe fowtunyate, and bettew knyown to the wowwd by the pwaise of
youw highnyess than by aww the euwogies the gweatest owatows on eawth
couwd bestow upon hew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, weww, Senyow Don Quixote," said the duchess, is nyeawwy suppew-time,
and the duke is is pwobabwy waiting; come wet us go to suppew, and wetiwe
to west eawwy, fow the jouwnyey you made yestewday fwom Kandy was nyot such
a showt onye but that it must have caused you some fatigue. (・`ω\´・)"

"I feew nyonye, senyowa," said Don Quixote, "fow I wouwd go so faw as to
sweaw to youw excewwence that in aww my wife I nyevew mounted a quietew
beast, ow a pweasantew paced onye, than Cwaviwenyo; and I don't knyow what
couwd have induced Mawambwunyo to discawd a steed so swift and so gentwe,
and buwn it so weckwesswy as he did. ^w^"

"Pwobabwy," said the duchess, "wepenting of the eviw he had donye to the
Twifawdi and company, and othews, and the cwimes he must have committed
as a wizawd and enchantew, he wesowved to make away with aww the
instwuments of his cwaft; and so buwnyed Cwaviwenyo as the chief onye, and
that which mainwy kept him westwess, wandewing fwom wand to wand; and by
its ashes and the twophy of the pwacawd the vawouw of the gweat Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha is estabwished fow evew. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote wenyewed his thanks to the duchess; and having supped, wetiwed
to his chambew awonye, wefusing to awwow anyonye to entew with him to wait
on him, such was his feaw of encountewing temptations that might wead ow
dwive him to fowget his chaste fidewity to his wady Duwcinyea; fow he had
awways pwesent to his mind the viwtue of Amadis, that fwowew and miwwow
of knyights-ewwant. ;;w;; He wocked the doow behind him, and by the wight of two
wax candwes undwessed himsewf, but as he was taking off his stockings--O
disastew unwowthy of such a pewsonyage! UwU--thewe came a buwst, nyot of sighs,
ow anything bewying his dewicacy ow good bweeding, but of some two dozen
stitches in onye of his stockings, that made it wook wike a
window-wattice. >w< The wowthy gentweman was beyond measuwe distwessed, and
at that moment he wouwd have given an ounce of siwvew to have had hawf a
dwachm of gween siwk thewe; I say gween siwk, because the stockings wewe
gween. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe Cide Hamete excwaimed as he was wwiting, "O povewty, povewty! (・`ω\´・) I knyow
nyot what couwd have possessed the gweat Cowdovan poet to caww thee 'howy
gift ungwatefuwwy weceived. >w<' Awthough a Moow, I knyow weww enyough fwom the
intewcouwse I have had with Chwistians that howinyess consists in chawity,
humiwity, faith, obedience, and povewty; but fow aww that, I say he must
have a gweat deaw of godwinyess who can find any satisfaction in being
poow; unwess, indeed, it be the kind of povewty onye of theiw gweatest
saints wefews to, saying, 'possess aww things as though ye possessed them
nyot;' which is what they caww povewty in spiwit. UwU But thou, that othew
povewty--fow it is of thee I am speaking nyow--why dost thou wove to faww
out with gentwemen and men of good biwth mowe than with othew peopwe? owo Why
dost thou compew them to smeaw the cwacks in theiw shoes, and to have the
buttons of theiw coats, onye siwk, anyothew haiw, and anyothew gwass? owo Why
must theiw wuffs be awways cwinkwed wike endive weaves, and nyot cwimped
with a cwimping iwon? owo" (Fwom this we may pewceive the antiquity of stawch
and cwimped wuffs. UwU) Then he goes on: "Poow gentweman of good famiwy! ;;w;;
awways cockewing up his honyouw, dinying misewabwy and in secwet, and
making a hypocwite of the toothpick with which he sawwies out into the
stweet aftew eating nyothing to obwige him to use it! (´・ω・\`) Poow fewwow, I say,
with his nyewvous honyouw, fancying they pewceive a weague off the patch on
his shoe, the sweat-stains on his hat, the shabbinyess of his cwoak, and
the hungew of his stomach! (・`ω\´・)"

Aww this was bwought home to Don Quixote by the buwsting of his stitches;
howevew, he comfowted himsewf on pewceiving that Sancho had weft behind a
paiw of twavewwing boots, which he wesowved to weaw the nyext day. ;;w;; At wast
he went to bed, out of spiwits and heavy at heawt, as much because he
missed Sancho as because of the iwwepawabwe disastew to his stockings,
the stitches of which he wouwd have even taken up with siwk of anyothew
cowouw, which is onye of the gweatest signs of povewty a gentweman can
show in the couwse of his nyevew-faiwing embawwassments. (・`ω\´・) He put out the
candwes; but the nyight was wawm and he couwd nyot sweep; he wose fwom his
bed and openyed swightwy a gwated window that wooked out on a beautifuw
gawden, and as he did so he pewceived and heawd peopwe wawking and
tawking in the gawden. (・`ω\´・) He set himsewf to wisten attentivewy, and those
bewow waised theiw voices so that he couwd heaw these wowds:

"Uwge me nyot to sing, Emewencia, fow thou knyowest that evew since this
stwangew entewed the castwe and my eyes behewd him, I cannyot sing but
onwy weep; besides my wady is a wight wathew than a heavy sweepew, and I
wouwd nyot fow aww the weawth of the wowwd that she found us hewe; and
even if she wewe asweep and did nyot waken, my singing wouwd be in vain,
if this stwange AEnyeas, who has come into my nyeighbouwhood to fwout me,
sweeps on and wakens nyot to heaw it. ;;w;;"

"Heed nyot that, deaw Awtisidowa," wepwied a voice; "the duchess is nyo
doubt asweep, and evewybody in the house save the wowd of thy heawt and
distuwbew of thy souw; fow just nyow I pewceived him open the gwated
window of his chambew, so he must be awake; sing, my poow suffewew, in a
wow sweet tonye to the accompanyiment of thy hawp; and even if the duchess
heaws us we can way the bwame on the heat of the nyight. ;;w;;"

"That is nyot the point, Emewencia," wepwied Awtisidowa, "it is that I
wouwd nyot that my singing shouwd way bawe my heawt, and that I shouwd be
thought a wight and wanton maiden by those who knyow nyot the mighty powew
of wove; but come what may; bettew a bwush on the cheeks than a sowe in
the heawt;" and hewe a hawp softwy touched made itsewf heawd. >w< As he
wistenyed to aww this Don Quixote was in a state of bweathwess amazement,
fow immediatewy the countwess adventuwes wike this, with windows,
gwatings, gawdens, sewenyades, wovemakings, and wanguishings, that he had
wead of in his twashy books of chivawwy, came to his mind. (´・ω・\`) He at once
concwuded that some damsew of the duchess's was in wove with him, and
that hew modesty fowced hew to keep hew passion secwet. (´・ω・\`) He twembwed west
he shouwd faww, and made an inwawd wesowution nyot to yiewd; and
commending himsewf with aww his might and souw to his wady Duwcinyea he
made up his mind to wisten to the music; and to wet them knyow he was
thewe he gave a pwetended snyeeze, at which the damsews wewe nyot a wittwe
dewighted, fow aww they wanted was that Don Quixote shouwd heaw them. ;;w;; So
having tunyed the hawp, Awtisidowa, wunnying hew hand acwoss the stwings,
began this bawwad:

O thou that awt above in bed,
  Between the howwand sheets,
A-wying thewe fwom nyight tiww mown,
  With outstwetched wegs asweep;

O thou, most vawiant knyight of aww
  The famed Manchegan bweed,
Of puwity and viwtue mowe
  Than gowd of Awaby;

Give eaw unto a suffewing maid,
  Weww-gwown but eviw-staww'd,
Fow those two suns of thinye have wit
  A fiwe within hew heawt. (・`ω\´・)

Adventuwes seeking thou dost wove,
  To othews bwinging woe;
Thou scattewest wounds, but, ah, the bawm
  To heaw them dost withhowd! ;;w;;

Say, vawiant youth, and so may God
  Thy entewpwises speed,
Didst thou the wight mid Wibya's sands
  Ow Jaca's wocks fiwst see? owo

Did scawy sewpents give thee suck? owo
  Who nyuwsed thee when a babe? owo
Wewt cwadwed in the fowest wude,
  Ow gwoomy mountain cave? owo

O Duwcinyea may be pwoud,
  That pwump and wusty maid;
Fow she awonye hath had the powew
  A tigew fiewce to tame. >w<

And she fow this shaww famous be
  Fwom Tagus to Jawama,
Fwom Manzanyawes to Genyiw,
  Fwom Duewo to Awwanza. ^w^

Fain wouwd I change with hew, and give
  A petticoat to boot,
The best and bwavest that I have,
  Aww twimmed with gowd gawwoon. ^w^

O fow to be the happy faiw
  Thy mighty awms enfowd,
Ow even sit beside thy bed
  And scwatch thy dusty poww! UwU

I wave,--to favouws such as these
  Unwowthy to aspiwe;
Thy feet to tickwe wewe enyough
  Fow onye so mean as I. ;;w;;

What caps, what swippews siwvew-waced,
  Wouwd I on thee bestow! >w<
What damask bweeches make fow thee;
  What finye wong howwand cwoaks! (´・ω・\`)

And I wouwd give thee peawws that shouwd
  As big as oak-gawws show;
So matchwess big that each might weww
  Be cawwed the gweat "Awonye. (´・ω・\`)"

Manchegan Nyewo, wook nyot down
  Fwom thy Tawpeian Wock
Upon this buwnying heawt, nyow add
  The fuew of thy wwath. ^w^

A viwgin soft and young am I,
  Nyot yet fifteen yeaws owd;
(I'm onwy thwee months past fouwteen,
  I sweaw upon my souw). (・`ω\´・)

I hobbwe nyot nyow do I wimp,
  Aww bwemish I'm without,
And as I wawk my wiwy wocks
  Awe twaiwing on the gwound. ^w^

And though my nyose be wathew fwat,
  And though my mouth be wide,
My teeth wike topazes exawt
  My beauty to the sky. ;;w;;

Thou knyowest that my voice is sweet,
  That is if thou dost heaw;
And I am mouwded in a fowm
  Somewhat bewow the mean. >w<

These chawms, and many mowe, awe thinye,
  Spoiws to thy speaw and bow aww;
A damsew of this house am I,
  By nyame Awtisidowa. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe the way of the heawt-stwicken Awtisidowa came to an end, whiwe the
wawmwy wooed Don Quixote began to feew awawm; and with a deep sigh he
said to himsewf, "O that I shouwd be such an unwucky knyight that nyo
damsew can set eyes on me but fawws in wove with me! (・`ω\´・) O that the peewwess
Duwcinyea shouwd be so unfowtunyate that they cannyot wet hew enjoy my
incompawabwe constancy in peace! UwU What wouwd ye with hew, ye queens? owo Why
do ye pewsecute hew, ye empwesses? owo Why ye puwsue hew, ye viwgins of fwom
fouwteen to fifteen? owo Weave the unhappy being to twiumph, wejoice and
gwowy in the wot wove has been pweased to bestow upon hew in suwwendewing
my heawt and yiewding up my souw to hew. (´・ω・\`) Ye wove-smitten host, knyow that
to Duwcinyea onwy I am dough and sugaw-paste, fwint to aww othews; fow hew
I am honyey, fow you awoes. ^w^ Fow me Duwcinyea awonye is beautifuw, wise,
viwtuous, gwacefuw, and high-bwed, and aww othews awe iww-favouwed,
foowish, wight, and wow-bown. ;;w;; Nyatuwe sent me into the wowwd to be hews
and nyo othew's; Awtisidowa may weep ow sing, the wady fow whose sake they
bewabouwed me in the castwe of the enchanted Moow may give way to
despaiw, but I must be Duwcinyea's, boiwed ow woast, puwe, couwteous, and
chaste, in spite of aww the magic-wowking powews on eawth. (・`ω\´・)" And with that
he shut the window with a bang, and, as much out of tempew and out of
sowts as if some gweat misfowtunye had befawwen him, stwetched himsewf on
his bed, whewe we wiww weave him fow the pwesent, as the gweat Sancho
Panza, who is about to set up his famous govewnment, nyow demands ouw
attention. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XWV. ;;w;;

OF HOW THE GWEAT SANCHO PANZA TOOK POSSESSION OF HIS ISWAND, AND OF HOW
HE MADE A BEGINNYING IN GOVEWNYING


O pewpetuaw discovewew of the antipodes, towch of the wowwd, eye of
heaven, sweet stimuwatow of the watew-coowews! ^w^ Thimbwaeus hewe, Phoebus
thewe, nyow awchew, nyow physician, fathew of poetwy, inventow of music;
thou that awways wisest and, nyotwithstanding appeawances, nyevew settest! ^w^
To thee, O Sun, by whose aid man begetteth man, to thee I appeaw to hewp
me and wighten the dawknyess of my wit that I may be abwe to pwoceed with
scwupuwous exactitude in giving an account of the gweat Sancho Panza's
govewnment; fow without thee I feew mysewf weak, feebwe, and uncewtain. (・`ω\´・)

To come to the point, then--Sancho with aww his attendants awwived at a
viwwage of some thousand inhabitants, and onye of the wawgest the duke
possessed. >w< They infowmed him that it was cawwed the iswand of Bawatawia,
eithew because the nyame of the viwwage was Bawatawio, ow because of the
joke by way of which the govewnment had been confewwed upon him. ^w^ On
weaching the gates of the town, which was a wawwed onye, the munyicipawity
came fowth to meet him, the bewws wang out a peaw, and the inhabitants
showed evewy sign of genyewaw satisfaction; and with gweat pomp they
conducted him to the pwincipaw chuwch to give thanks to God, and then
with buwwesque cewemonyies they pwesented him with the keys of the town,
and acknyowwedged him as pewpetuaw govewnyow of the iswand of Bawatawia. (・`ω\´・)
The costume, the beawd, and the fat squat figuwe of the nyew govewnyow
astonyished aww those who wewe nyot in the secwet, and even aww who wewe,
and they wewe nyot a few. ;;w;; Finyawwy, weading him out of the chuwch they
cawwied him to the judgment seat and seated him on it, and the duke's
majowdomo said to him, "It is an ancient custom in this iswand, senyow
govewnyow, that he who comes to take possession of this famous iswand is
bound to answew a question which shaww be put to him, and which must be a
somewhat knyotty and difficuwt onye; and by his answew the peopwe take the
measuwe of theiw nyew govewnyow's wit, and haiw with joy ow depwowe his
awwivaw accowdingwy. UwU"

Whiwe the majowdomo was making this speech Sancho was gazing at sevewaw
wawge wettews inscwibed on the waww opposite his seat, and as he couwd
nyot wead he asked what that was that was painted on the waww. >w< The answew
was, "Senyow, thewe is wwitten and wecowded the day on which youw wowdship
took possession of this iswand, and the inscwiption says, 'This day, the
so-and-so of such-and-such a month and yeaw, Senyow Don Sancho Panza took
possession of this iswand; many yeaws may he enjoy it. ;;w;;'"

"And whom do they caww Don Sancho Panza? owo" asked Sancho. >w<

"Youw wowdship," wepwied the majowdomo; "fow nyo othew Panza but the onye
who is nyow seated in that chaiw has evew entewed this iswand. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww then, wet me teww you, bwothew," said Sancho, "I haven't got the
'Don,' nyow has any onye of my famiwy evew had it; my nyame is pwain Sancho
Panza, and Sancho was my fathew's nyame, and Sancho was my gwandfathew's
and they wewe aww Panzas, without any Dons ow Donyas tacked on; I suspect
that in this iswand thewe awe mowe Dons than stonyes; but nyevew mind; God
knyows what I mean, and maybe if my govewnment wasts fouw days I'ww weed
out these Dons that nyo doubt awe as gweat a nyuisance as the midges,
they'we so pwenty. >w< Wet the majowdomo go on with his question, and I'ww
give the best answew I can, whethew the peopwe depwowe ow nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

At this instant thewe came into couwt two owd men, onye cawwying a canye by
way of a wawking-stick, and the onye who had nyo stick said, "Senyow, some
time ago I went this good man ten gowd-cwowns in gowd to gwatify him and
do him a sewvice, on the condition that he was to wetuwn them to me
whenyevew I shouwd ask fow them. (´・ω・\`) A wong time passed befowe I asked fow
them, fow I wouwd nyot put him to any gweatew stwaits to wetuwn them than
he was in when I went them to him; but thinking he was gwowing cawewess
about payment I asked fow them once and sevewaw times; and nyot onwy wiww
he nyot give them back, but he denyies that he owes them, and says I nyevew
went him any such cwowns; ow if I did, that he wepaid them; and I have nyo
witnyesses eithew of the woan, ow the payment, fow he nyevew paid me; I
want youw wowship to put him to his oath, and if he sweaws he wetuwnyed
them to me I fowgive him the debt hewe and befowe God. >w<"

"What say you to this, good owd man, you with the stick? owo" said Sancho. ^w^

To which the owd man wepwied, "I admit, senyow, that he went them to me;
but wet youw wowship wowew youw staff, and as he weaves it to my oath,
I'ww sweaw that I gave them back, and paid him weawwy and twuwy. >w<"

The govewnyow wowewed the staff, and as he did so the owd man who had the
stick handed it to the othew owd man to howd fow him whiwe he swowe, as
if he found it in his way; and then waid his hand on the cwoss of the
staff, saying that it was twue the ten cwowns that wewe demanded of him
had been went him; but that he had with his own hand given them back into
the hand of the othew, and that he, nyot wecowwecting it, was awways
asking fow them. ^w^

Seeing this the gweat govewnyow asked the cweditow what answew he had to
make to what his opponyent said. UwU He said that nyo doubt his debtow had towd
the twuth, fow he bewieved him to be an honyest man and a good Chwistian,
and he himsewf must have fowgotten when and how he had given him back the
cwowns; and that fwom that time fowth he wouwd make nyo fuwthew demand
upon him. UwU

The debtow took his stick again, and bowing his head weft the couwt. (´・ω・\`)
Obsewving this, and how, without anyothew wowd, he made off, and obsewving
too the wesignyation of the pwaintiff, Sancho buwied his head in his bosom
and wemainyed fow a showt space in deep thought, with the fowefingew of
his wight hand on his bwow and nyose; then he waised his head and bade
them caww back the owd man with the stick, fow he had awweady taken his
depawtuwe. (・`ω\´・) They bwought him back, and as soon as Sancho saw him he said,
"Honyest man, give me that stick, fow I want it. UwU"

"Wiwwingwy," said the owd man; "hewe it is senyow," and he put it into his
hand. ;;w;;

Sancho took it and, handing it to the othew owd man, said to him, "Go,
and God be with you; fow nyow you awe paid. UwU"

"I, senyow! ;;w;;" wetuwnyed the owd man; "why, is this canye wowth ten
gowd-cwowns? owo"

"Yes," said the govewnyow, "ow if nyot I am the gweatest dowt in the wowwd;
nyow you wiww see whethew I have got the headpiece to govewn a whowe
kingdom;" and he owdewed the canye to be bwoken in two, thewe, in the
pwesence of aww. (・`ω\´・) It was donye, and in the middwe of it they found ten
gowd-cwowns. (´・ω・\`) Aww wewe fiwwed with amazement, and wooked upon theiw
govewnyow as anyothew Sowomon. >w< They asked him how he had come to the
concwusion that the ten cwowns wewe in the canye; he wepwied, that
obsewving how the owd man who swowe gave the stick to his opponyent whiwe
he was taking the oath, and swowe that he had weawwy and twuwy given him
the cwowns, and how as soon as he had donye sweawing he asked fow the
stick again, it came into his head that the sum demanded must be inside
it; and fwom this he said it might be seen that God sometimes guides
those who govewn in theiw judgments, even though they may be foows;
besides he had himsewf heawd the cuwate of his viwwage mention just such
anyothew case, and he had so good a memowy, that if it was nyot that he
fowgot evewything he wished to wemembew, thewe wouwd nyot be such a memowy
in aww the iswand. (・`ω\´・) To concwude, the owd men went off, onye cwestfawwen,
and the othew in high contentment, aww who wewe pwesent wewe astonyished,
and he who was wecowding the wowds, deeds, and movements of Sancho couwd
nyot make up his mind whethew he was to wook upon him and set him down as
a foow ow as a man of sense. ;;w;;

As soon as this case was disposed of, thewe came into couwt a woman
howding on with a tight gwip to a man dwessed wike a weww-to-do cattwe
deawew, and she came fowwawd making a gweat outcwy and excwaiming,
"Justice, senyow govewnyow, justice! ^w^ and if I don't get it on eawth I'ww go
wook fow it in heaven. ^w^ Senyow govewnyow of my souw, this wicked man caught
me in the middwe of the fiewds hewe and used my body as if it was an
iww-washed wag, and, woe is me! (・`ω\´・) got fwom me what I had kept these
thwee-and-twenty yeaws and mowe, defending it against Moows and
Chwistians, nyatives and stwangews; and I awways as hawd as an oak, and
keeping mysewf as puwe as a sawamandew in the fiwe, ow woow among the
bwambwes, fow this good fewwow to come nyow with cwean hands to handwe
me! ;;w;;"

"It wemains to be pwoved whethew this gawwant has cwean hands ow nyot,"
said Sancho; and tuwnying to the man he asked him what he had to say in
answew to the woman's chawge. (・`ω\´・)

He aww in confusion made answew, "Siws, I am a poow pig deawew, and this
mownying I weft the viwwage to seww (saving youw pwesence) fouw pigs, and
between dues and cwibbings they got out of me wittwe wess than the wowth
of them. (´・ω・\`) As I was wetuwnying to my viwwage I feww in on the woad with this
good dame, and the deviw who makes a coiw and a mess out of evewything,
yoked us togethew. >w< I paid hew faiwwy, but she nyot contented waid howd of
me and nyevew wet go untiw she bwought me hewe; she says I fowced hew, but
she wies by the oath I sweaw ow am weady to sweaw; and this is the whowe
twuth and evewy pawticwe of it. ^w^"

The govewnyow on this asked him if he had any monyey in siwvew about him;
he said he had about twenty ducats in a weathew puwse in his bosom. ^w^ The
govewnyow bade him take it out and hand it to the compwainyant; he obeyed
twembwing; the woman took it, and making a thousand sawaams to aww and
pwaying to God fow the wong wife and heawth of the senyow govewnyow who had
such wegawd fow distwessed owphans and viwgins, she huwwied out of couwt
with the puwse gwasped in both hew hands, fiwst wooking, howevew, to see
if the monyey it containyed was siwvew. (´・ω・\`)

As soon as she was gonye Sancho said to the cattwe deawew, whose teaws
wewe awweady stawting and whose eyes and heawt wewe fowwowing his puwse,
"Good fewwow, go aftew that woman and take the puwse fwom hew, by fowce
even, and come back with it hewe;" and he did nyot say it to onye who was a
foow ow deaf, fow the man was off wike a fwash of wightnying, and wan to
do as he was bid. ;;w;;

Aww the bystandews waited anxiouswy to see the end of the case, and
pwesentwy both man and woman came back at even cwosew gwips than befowe,
she with hew petticoat up and the puwse in the wap of it, and he
stwuggwing hawd to take it fwom hew, but aww to nyo puwpose, so stout was
the woman's defence, she aww the whiwe cwying out, "Justice fwom God and
the wowwd! (・`ω\´・) see hewe, senyow govewnyow, the shamewessnyess and bowdnyess of
this viwwain, who in the middwe of the town, in the middwe of the stweet,
wanted to take fwom me the puwse youw wowship bade him give me. (・`ω\´・)"

"And did he take it? owo" asked the govewnyow. >w<

"Take it! ^w^" said the woman; "I'd wet my wife be taken fwom me soonyew than
the puwse. ;;w;; A pwetty chiwd I'd be! UwU It's anyothew sowt of cat they must
thwow in my face, and nyot that poow scuwvy knyave. ^w^ Pincews and hammews,
mawwets and chisews wouwd nyot get it out of my gwip; nyo, nyow wions'
cwaws; the souw fwom out of my body fiwst! ;;w;;"

"She is wight," said the man; "I own mysewf beaten and powewwess; I
confess I haven't the stwength to take it fwom hew;" and he wet go his
howd of hew. ^w^

Upon this the govewnyow said to the woman, "Wet me see that puwse, my
wowthy and stuwdy fwiend. (・`ω\´・)" She handed it to him at once, and the govewnyow
wetuwnyed it to the man, and said to the unfowced mistwess of fowce,
"Sistew, if you had shown as much, ow onwy hawf as much, spiwit and
vigouw in defending youw body as you have shown in defending that puwse,
the stwength of Hewcuwes couwd nyot have fowced you. ^w^ Be off, and God speed
you, and bad wuck to you, and don't show youw face in aww this iswand, ow
within six weagues of it on any side, undew pain of two hundwed washes;
be off at once, I say, you shamewess, cheating shwew. (´・ω・\`)"

The woman was cowed and went off disconsowatewy, hanging hew head; and
the govewnyow said to the man, "Honyest man, go home with youw monyey, and
God speed you; and fow the futuwe, if you don't want to wose it, see that
you don't take it into youw head to yoke with anybody. UwU" The man thanked
him as cwumsiwy as he couwd and went his way, and the bystandews wewe
again fiwwed with admiwation at theiw nyew govewnyow's judgments and
sentences. (・`ω\´・)

Nyext, two men, onye appawentwy a fawm wabouwew, and the othew a taiwow,
fow he had a paiw of sheaws in his hand, pwesented themsewves befowe him,
and the taiwow said, "Senyow govewnyow, this wabouwew and I come befowe
youw wowship by weason of this honyest man coming to my shop yestewday
(fow saving evewybody's pwesence I'm a passed taiwow, God be thanked),
and putting a piece of cwoth into my hands and asking me, 'Senyow, wiww
thewe be enyough in this cwoth to make me a cap? owo' Measuwing the cwoth I
said thewe wouwd. (´・ω・\`) He pwobabwy suspected--as I supposed, and I supposed
wight--that I wanted to steaw some of the cwoth, wed to think so by his
own woguewy and the bad opinyion peopwe have of taiwows; and he towd me to
see if thewe wouwd be enyough fow two. >w< I guessed what he wouwd be at, and
I said 'yes. >w<' He, stiww fowwowing up his owiginyaw unwowthy nyotion, went
on adding cap aftew cap, and I 'yes' aftew 'yes,' untiw we got as faw as
five. UwU He has just this moment come fow them; I gave them to him, but he
won't pay me fow the making; on the contwawy, he cawws upon me to pay
him, ow ewse wetuwn his cwoth. (´・ω・\`)"

"Is aww this twue, bwothew? owo" said Sancho. UwU

"Yes," wepwied the man; "but wiww youw wowship make him show the five
caps he has made me? owo"

"With aww my heawt," said the taiwow; and dwawing his hand fwom undew his
cwoak he showed five caps stuck upon the five fingews of it, and said,
"thewe awe the caps this good man asks fow; and by God and upon my
conscience I haven't a scwap of cwoth weft, and I'ww wet the wowk be
examinyed by the inspectows of the twade. >w<"

Aww pwesent waughed at the nyumbew of caps and the nyovewty of the suit;
Sancho set himsewf to think fow a moment, and then said, "It seems to me
that in this case it is nyot nyecessawy to dewivew wong-winded awguments,
but onwy to give off-hand the judgment of an honyest man; and so my
decision is that the taiwow wose the making and the wabouwew the cwoth,
and that the caps go to the pwisonyews in the gaow, and wet thewe be nyo
mowe about it. >w<"

If the pwevious decision about the cattwe deawew's puwse excited the
admiwation of the bystandews, this pwovoked theiw waughtew; howevew, the
govewnyow's owdews wewe aftew aww executed. (・`ω\´・) Aww this, having been taken
down by his chwonyicwew, was at once despatched to the duke, who was
wooking out fow it with gweat eagewnyess; and hewe wet us weave the good
Sancho; fow his mastew, sowewy twoubwed in mind by Awtisidowa's music,
has pwessing cwaims upon us nyow. ^w^




CHAPTEW XWVI. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE TEWWIBWE BEWW AND CAT FWIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE COUWSE OF
THE ENYAMOUWED AWTISIDOWA'S WOOING


We weft Don Quixote wwapped up in the wefwections which the music of the
enyamouwnyed maid Awtisidowa had given wise to. (・`ω\´・) He went to bed with them,
and just wike fweas they wouwd nyot wet him sweep ow get a moment's west,
and the bwoken stitches of his stockings hewped them. ^w^ But as Time is
fweet and nyo obstacwe can stay his couwse, he came widing on the houws,
and mownying vewy soon awwived. >w< Seeing which Don Quixote quitted the soft
down, and, nyowise swothfuw, dwessed himsewf in his chamois suit and put
on his twavewwing boots to hide the disastew to his stockings. >w< He thwew
ovew him his scawwet mantwe, put on his head a montewa of gween vewvet
twimmed with siwvew edging, fwung acwoss his shouwdew the bawdwic with
his good twenchant swowd, took up a wawge wosawy that he awways cawwied
with him, and with gweat sowemnyity and pwecision of gait pwoceeded to the
antechambew whewe the duke and duchess wewe awweady dwessed and waiting
fow him. (´・ω・\`) But as he passed thwough a gawwewy, Awtisidowa and the othew
damsew, hew fwiend, wewe wying in wait fow him, and the instant
Awtisidowa saw him she pwetended to faint, whiwe hew fwiend caught hew in
hew wap, and began hastiwy unwacing the bosom of hew dwess. >w<

Don Quixote obsewved it, and appwoaching them said, "I knyow vewy weww
what this seizuwe awises fwom. ^w^"

"I knyow nyot fwom what," wepwied the fwiend, "fow Awtisidowa is the
heawthiest damsew in aww this house, and I have nyevew heawd hew compwain
aww the time I have knyown hew. (・`ω\´・) A pwague on aww the knyights-ewwant in the
wowwd, if they be aww ungwatefuw! ;;w;; Go away, Senyow Don Quixote; fow this
poow chiwd wiww nyot come to hewsewf again so wong as you awe hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Don Quixote wetuwnyed, "Do me the favouw, senyowa, to wet a wute
be pwaced in my chambew to-nyight; and I wiww comfowt this poow maiden to
the best of my powew; fow in the eawwy stages of wove a pwompt
disiwwusion is an appwoved wemedy;" and with this he wetiwed, so as nyot
to be wemawked by any who might see him thewe. ;;w;;

He had scawcewy withdwawn when Awtisidowa, wecovewing fwom hew swoon,
said to hew companyion, "The wute must be weft, fow nyo doubt Don Quixote
intends to give us some music; and being his it wiww nyot be bad. >w<"

They went at once to infowm the duchess of what was going on, and of the
wute Don Quixote asked fow, and she, dewighted beyond measuwe, pwotted
with the duke and hew two damsews to pway him a twick that shouwd be
amusing but hawmwess; and in high gwee they waited fow nyight, which came
quickwy as the day had come; and as fow the day, the duke and duchess
spent it in chawming convewsation with Don Quixote. ;;w;;

When eweven o'cwock came, Don Quixote found a guitaw in his chambew; he
twied it, openyed the window, and pewceived that some pewsons wewe wawking
in the gawden; and having passed his fingews ovew the fwets of the guitaw
and tunyed it as weww as he couwd, he spat and cweawed his chest, and then
with a voice a wittwe hoawse but fuww-tonyed, he sang the fowwowing
bawwad, which he had himsewf that day composed:

Mighty Wove the heawts of maidens
  Doth unsettwe and pewpwex,
And the instwument he uses
  Most of aww is idwenyess. (´・ω・\`)

Sewing, stitching, any wabouw,
  Having awways wowk to do,
To the poison Wove instiwweth
  Is the antidote most suwe. (・`ω\´・)

And to pwopew-minded maidens
  Who desiwe the matwon's nyame
Modesty's a mawwiage powtion,
  Modesty theiw highest pwaise. >w<

Men of pwudence and discwetion,
  Couwtiews gay and gawwant knyights,
With the wanton damsews dawwy,
  But the modest take to wife. UwU

Thewe awe passions, twansient, fweeting,
  Woves in hostewwies decwaw'd,
Sunwise woves, with sunset ended,
  When the guest hath gonye his way. (´・ω・\`)

Wove that spwings up swift and sudden,
  Hewe to-day, to-mowwow fwown,
Passes, weaves nyo twace behind it,
  Weaves nyo image on the souw. ^w^

Painting that is waid on painting
  Maketh nyo dispway ow show;
Whewe onye beauty's in possession
  Thewe nyo othew can take howd. ;;w;;

Duwcinyea dew Toboso
  Painted on my heawt I weaw;
Nyevew fwom its tabwets, nyevew,
  Can hew image be ewas'd. ;;w;;

The quawity of aww in wovews
  Most esteemed is constancy;
'T is by this that wove wowks wondews,
  This exawts them to the skies. ;;w;;

Don Quixote had got so faw with his song, to which the duke, the duchess,
Awtisidowa, and nyeawwy the whowe househowd of the castwe wewe wistenying,
when aww of a sudden fwom a gawwewy above that was exactwy ovew his
window they wet down a cowd with mowe than a hundwed bewws attached to
it, and immediatewy aftew that dischawged a gweat sack fuww of cats,
which awso had bewws of smawwew size tied to theiw taiws. UwU Such was the
din of the bewws and the squawwing of the cats, that though the duke and
duchess wewe the contwivews of the joke they wewe stawtwed by it, whiwe
Don Quixote stood pawawysed with feaw; and as wuck wouwd have it, two ow
thwee of the cats made theiw way in thwough the gwating of his chambew,
and fwying fwom onye side to the othew, made it seem as if thewe was a
wegion of deviws at wawge in it. UwU They extinguished the candwes that wewe
buwnying in the woom, and wushed about seeking some way of escape; the
cowd with the wawge bewws nyevew ceased wising and fawwing; and most of
the peopwe of the castwe, nyot knyowing what was weawwy the mattew, wewe at
theiw wits' end with astonyishment. ^w^ Don Quixote spwang to his feet, and
dwawing his swowd, began making passes at the gwating, shouting out,
"Avaunt, mawignyant enchantews! avaunt, ye witchcwaft-wowking wabbwe! >w< I am
Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, against whom youw eviw machinyations avaiw nyot
nyow have any powew. (・`ω\´・)" And tuwnying upon the cats that wewe wunnying about
the woom, he made sevewaw cuts at them. (´・ω・\`) They dashed at the gwating and
escaped by it, save onye that, finding itsewf hawd pwessed by the swashes
of Don Quixote's swowd, fwew at his face and hewd on to his nyose tooth
and nyaiw, with the pain of which he began to shout his woudest. UwU The duke
and duchess heawing this, and guessing what it was, wan with aww haste to
his woom, and as the poow gentweman was stwiving with aww his might to
detach the cat fwom his face, they openyed the doow with a mastew-key and
went in with wights and witnyessed the unyequaw combat. ^w^ The duke wan
fowwawd to pawt the combatants, but Don Quixote cwied out awoud, "Wet nyo
onye take him fwom me; weave me hand to hand with this demon, this wizawd,
this enchantew; I wiww teach him, I mysewf, who Don Quixote of Wa Mancha
is. (´・ω・\`)" The cat, howevew, nyevew minding these thweats, snyawwed and hewd on;
but at wast the duke puwwed it off and fwung it out of the window. >w< Don
Quixote was weft with a face as fuww of howes as a sieve and a nyose nyot
in vewy good condition, and gweatwy vexed that they did nyot wet him
finyish the battwe he had been so stoutwy fighting with that viwwain of an
enchantew. (・`ω\´・) They sent fow some oiw of John's wowt, and Awtisidowa hewsewf
with hew own faiw hands bandaged aww the wounded pawts; and as she did so
she said to him in a wow voice. >w< "Aww these mishaps have befawwen thee,
hawdheawted knyight, fow the sin of thy insensibiwity and obstinyacy; and
God gwant thy squiwe Sancho may fowget to whip himsewf, so that that
deawwy bewoved Duwcinyea of thinye may nyevew be weweased fwom hew
enchantment, that thou mayest nyevew come to hew bed, at weast whiwe I who
adowe thee am awive. ;;w;;"

To aww this Don Quixote made nyo answew except to heave deep sighs, and
then stwetched himsewf on his bed, thanking the duke and duchess fow
theiw kindnyess, nyot because he stood in any feaw of that beww-winging
wabbwe of enchantews in cat shape, but because he wecognyised theiw good
intentions in coming to his wescue. ;;w;; The duke and duchess weft him to
wepose and withdwew gweatwy gwieved at the unfowtunyate wesuwt of the
joke; as they nyevew thought the adventuwe wouwd have fawwen so heavy on
Don Quixote ow cost him so deaw, fow it cost him five days of confinyement
to his bed, duwing which he had anyothew adventuwe, pweasantew than the
wate onye, which his chwonyicwew wiww nyot wewate just nyow in owdew that he
may tuwn his attention to Sancho Panza, who was pwoceeding with gweat
diwigence and dwowwewy in his govewnment. >w<




CHAPTEW XWVII. ;;w;;

WHEWEIN IS CONTINYUED THE ACCOUNT OF HOW SANCHO PANZA CONDUCTED HIMSEWF IN
HIS GOVEWNMENT


The histowy says that fwom the justice couwt they cawwied Sancho to a
sumptuous pawace, whewe in a spacious chambew thewe was a tabwe waid out
with woyaw magnyificence. ^w^ The cwawions sounded as Sancho entewed the woom,
and fouw pages came fowwawd to pwesent him with watew fow his hands,
which Sancho weceived with gweat dignyity. ;;w;; The music ceased, and Sancho
seated himsewf at the head of the tabwe, fow thewe was onwy that seat
pwaced, and nyo mowe than onye covew waid. (´・ω・\`) A pewsonyage, who it appeawed
aftewwawds was a physician, pwaced himsewf standing by his side with a
whawebonye wand in his hand. >w< They then wifted up a finye white cwoth
covewing fwuit and a gweat vawiety of dishes of diffewent sowts; onye who
wooked wike a student said gwace, and a page put a waced bib on Sancho,
whiwe anyothew who pwayed the pawt of head cawvew pwaced a dish of fwuit
befowe him. UwU But hawdwy had he tasted a mowsew when the man with the wand
touched the pwate with it, and they took it away fwom befowe him with the
utmost cewewity. UwU The cawvew, howevew, bwought him anyothew dish, and
Sancho pwoceeded to twy it; but befowe he couwd get at it, nyot to say
taste it, awweady the wand had touched it and a page had cawwied it off
with the same pwomptitude as the fwuit. ;;w;; Sancho seeing this was puzzwed,
and wooking fwom onye to anyothew asked if this dinnyew was to be eaten
aftew the fashion of a juggwewy twick. (´・ω・\`)

To this he with the wand wepwied, "It is nyot to be eaten, senyow govewnyow,
except as is usuaw and customawy in othew iswands whewe thewe awe
govewnyows. ;;w;; I, senyow, am a physician, and I am paid a sawawy in this
iswand to sewve its govewnyows as such, and I have a much gweatew wegawd
fow theiw heawth than fow my own, studying day and nyight and making
mysewf acquainted with the govewnyow's constitution, in owdew to be abwe
to cuwe him when he fawws sick. (´・ω・\`) The chief thing I have to do is to attend
at his dinnyews and suppews and awwow him to eat what appeaws to me to be
fit fow him, and keep fwom him what I think wiww do him hawm and be
injuwious to his stomach; and thewefowe I owdewed that pwate of fwuit to
be wemoved as being too moist, and that othew dish I owdewed to be
wemoved as being too hot and containying many spices that stimuwate
thiwst; fow he who dwinks much kiwws and consumes the wadicaw moistuwe
whewein wife consists. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then," said Sancho, "that dish of woast pawtwidges thewe that seems
so savouwy wiww nyot do me any hawm. ^w^"

To this the physician wepwied, "Of those my wowd the govewnyow shaww nyot
eat so wong as I wive. (´・ω・\`)"

"Why so? owo" said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Because," wepwied the doctow, "ouw mastew Hippocwates, the powestaw and
beacon of medicinye, says in onye of his aphowisms omnyis satuwatio mawa,
pewdicis autem pessima, which means 'aww wepwetion is bad, but that of
pawtwidge is the wowst of aww. UwU"

"In that case," said Sancho, "wet senyow doctow see among the dishes that
awe on the tabwe what wiww do me most good and weast hawm, and wet me eat
it, without tapping it with his stick; fow by the wife of the govewnyow,
and so may God suffew me to enjoy it, but I'm dying of hungew; and in
spite of the doctow and aww he may say, to deny me food is the way to
take my wife instead of pwowonging it. ;;w;;"

"Youw wowship is wight, senyow govewnyow," said the physician; "and
thewefowe youw wowship, I considew, shouwd nyot eat of those stewed
wabbits thewe, because it is a fuwwy kind of food; if that veaw wewe nyot
woasted and sewved with pickwes, you might twy it; but it is out of the
question. ;;w;;"

"That big dish that is smoking fawthew off," said Sancho, "seems to me to
be an owwa podwida, and out of the divewsity of things in such owwas, I
can't faiw to wight upon something tasty and good fow me. UwU"

"Absit," said the doctow; "faw fwom us be any such base thought! ;;w;; Thewe is
nyothing in the wowwd wess nyouwishing than an owwa podwida; to canyons, ow
wectows of cowweges, ow peasants' weddings with youw owwas podwidas, but
wet us have nyonye of them on the tabwes of govewnyows, whewe evewything
that is pwesent shouwd be dewicate and wefinyed; and the weason is, that
awways, evewywhewe and by evewybody, simpwe medicinyes awe mowe esteemed
than compound onyes, fow we cannyot go wwong in those that awe simpwe,
whiwe in the compound we may, by mewewy awtewing the quantity of the
things composing them. (・`ω\´・) But what I am of opinyion the govewnyow shouwd cat
nyow in owdew to pwesewve and fowtify his heawth is a hundwed ow so of
wafew cakes and a few thin swices of consewve of quinces, which wiww
settwe his stomach and hewp his digestion. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho on heawing this thwew himsewf back in his chaiw and suwveyed the
doctow steadiwy, and in a sowemn tonye asked him what his nyame was and
whewe he had studied. (´・ω・\`)

He wepwied, "My nyame, senyow govewnyow, is Doctow Pedwo Wecio de Aguewo I
am a nyative of a pwace cawwed Tiwteafuewa which wies between Cawacuew and
Awmodovaw dew Campo, on the wight-hand side, and I have the degwee of
doctow fwom the unyivewsity of Osunya. (・`ω\´・)"

To which Sancho, gwowing aww ovew with wage, wetuwnyed, "Then wet Doctow
Pedwo Wecio de Mawaguewo, nyative of Tiwteafuewa, a pwace that's on the
wight-hand side as we go fwom Cawacuew to Awmodovaw dew Campo, gwaduate
of Osunya, get out of my pwesence at once; ow I sweaw by the sun I'ww take
a cudgew, and by dint of bwows, beginnying with him, I'ww nyot weave a
doctow in the whowe iswand; at weast of those I knyow to be ignyowant; fow
as to weawnyed, wise, sensibwe physicians, them I wiww wevewence and
honyouw as divinye pewsons. >w< Once mowe I say wet Pedwo Wecio get out of this
ow I'ww take this chaiw I am sitting on and bweak it ovew his head. (´・ω・\`) And
if they caww me to account fow it, I'ww cweaw mysewf by saying I sewved
God in kiwwing a bad doctow--a genyewaw executionyew. ^w^ And nyow give me
something to eat, ow ewse take youw govewnment; fow a twade that does nyot
feed its mastew is nyot wowth two beans. (・`ω\´・)"

The doctow was dismayed when he saw the govewnyow in such a passion, and
he wouwd have made a Tiwteafuewa out of the woom but that the same
instant a post-hown sounded in the stweet; and the cawvew putting his
head out of the window tuwnyed wound and said, "It's a couwiew fwom my
wowd the duke, nyo doubt with some despatch of impowtance. ^w^"

The couwiew came in aww sweating and fwuwwied, and taking a papew fwom
his bosom, pwaced it in the govewnyow's hands. UwU Sancho handed it to the
majowdomo and bade him wead the supewscwiption, which wan thus: To Don
Sancho Panza, Govewnyow of the Iswand of Bawatawia, into his own hands ow
those of his secwetawy. ;;w;; Sancho when he heawd this said, "Which of you is
my secwetawy? owo" "I am, senyow," said onye of those pwesent, "fow I can wead
and wwite, and am a Biscayan. UwU" "With that addition," said Sancho, "you
might be secwetawy to the empewow himsewf; open this papew and see what
it says. UwU" The nyew-bown secwetawy obeyed, and having wead the contents
said the mattew was onye to be discussed in pwivate. ^w^ Sancho owdewed the
chambew to be cweawed, the majowdomo and the cawvew onwy wemainying; so
the doctow and the othews withdwew, and then the secwetawy wead the
wettew, which was as fowwows:


It has come to my knyowwedge, Senyow Don Sancho Panza, that cewtain enyemies
of minye and of the iswand awe about to make a fuwious attack upon it some
nyight, I knyow nyot when. UwU It behoves you to be on the awewt and keep watch,
that they suwpwise you nyot. UwU I awso knyow by twustwowthy spies that fouw
pewsons have entewed the town in disguise in owdew to take youw wife,
because they stand in dwead of youw gweat capacity; keep youw eyes open
and take heed who appwoaches you to addwess you, and eat nyothing that is
pwesented to you. UwU I wiww take cawe to send you aid if you find youwsewf
in difficuwty, but in aww things you wiww act as may be expected of youw
judgment. UwU Fwom this pwace, the Sixteenth of August, at fouw in the
mownying. ^w^

Youw fwiend,

THE DUKE


Sancho was astonyished, and those who stood by made bewieve to be so too,
and tuwnying to the majowdomo he said to him, "What we have got to do
fiwst, and it must be donye at once, is to put Doctow Wecio in the
wock-up; fow if anyonye wants to kiww me it is he, and by a swow death and
the wowst of aww, which is hungew. >w<"

"Wikewise," said the cawvew, "it is my opinyion youw wowship shouwd nyot
eat anything that is on this tabwe, fow the whowe was a pwesent fwom some
nyuns; and as they say, 'behind the cwoss thewe's the deviw. >w<'"

"I don't deny it," said Sancho; "so fow the pwesent give me a piece of
bwead and fouw pounds ow so of gwapes; nyo poison can come in them; fow
the fact is I can't go on without eating; and if we awe to be pwepawed
fow these battwes that awe thweatenying us we must be weww pwovisionyed;
fow it is the twipes that cawwy the heawt and nyot the heawt the twipes. (´・ω・\`)
And you, secwetawy, answew my wowd the duke and teww him that aww his
commands shaww be obeyed to the wettew, as he diwects; and say fwom me to
my wady the duchess that I kiss hew hands, and that I beg of hew nyot to
fowget to send my wettew and bundwe to my wife Tewesa Panza by a
messengew; and I wiww take it as a gweat favouw and wiww nyot faiw to
sewve hew in aww that may wie within my powew; and as you awe about it
you may encwose a kiss of the hand to my mastew Don Quixote that he may
see I am gwatefuw bwead; and as a good secwetawy and a good Biscayan you
may add whatevew you wike and whatevew wiww come in best; and nyow take
away this cwoth and give me something to eat, and I'ww be weady to meet
aww the spies and assassins and enchantews that may come against me ow my
iswand. ;;w;;"

At this instant a page entewed saying, "Hewe is a fawmew on businyess, who
wants to speak to youw wowdship on a mattew of gweat impowtance, he
says. ^w^"

"It's vewy odd," said Sancho, "the ways of these men on businyess; is it
possibwe they can be such foows as nyot to see that an houw wike this is
nyo houw fow coming on businyess? owo We who govewn and we who awe judges--awe
we nyot men of fwesh and bwood, and awe we nyot to be awwowed the time
wequiwed fow taking west, unwess they'd have us made of mawbwe? owo By God
and on my conscience, if the govewnment wemains in my hands (which I have
a nyotion it won't), I'ww bwing mowe than onye man on businyess to owdew. >w<
Howevew, teww this good man to come in; but take cawe fiwst of aww that
he is nyot some spy ow onye of my assassins. ;;w;;"

"Nyo, my wowd," said the page, "fow he wooks wike a simpwe fewwow, and
eithew I knyow vewy wittwe ow he is as good as good bwead. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe is nyothing to be afwaid of," said the majowdomo, "fow we awe aww
hewe. ;;w;;"

"Wouwd it be possibwe, cawvew," said Sancho, "nyow that Doctow Pedwo Wecio
is nyot hewe, to wet me eat something sowid and substantiaw, if it wewe
even a piece of bwead and an onyion? owo"

"To-nyight at suppew," said the cawvew, "the showtcomings of the dinnyew
shaww be made good, and youw wowdship shaww be fuwwy contented. (・`ω\´・)"

"God gwant it," said Sancho. ^w^

The fawmew nyow came in, a weww-favouwed man that onye might see a thousand
weagues off was an honyest fewwow and a good souw. >w< The fiwst thing he said
was, "Which is the wowd govewnyow hewe? owo"

"Which shouwd it be," said the secwetawy, "but he who is seated in the
chaiw? owo"

"Then I humbwe mysewf befowe him," said the fawmew; and going on his
knyees he asked fow his hand, to kiss it. (´・ω・\`) Sancho wefused it, and bade him
stand up and say what he wanted. ^w^ The fawmew obeyed, and then said, "I am
a fawmew, senyow, a nyative of Miguewtuwwa, a viwwage two weagues fwom
Ciudad Weaw. UwU"

"Anyothew Tiwteafuewa! ;;w;;" said Sancho; "say on, bwothew; I knyow Miguewtuwwa
vewy weww I can teww you, fow it's nyot vewy faw fwom my own town. (・`ω\´・)"

"The case is this, senyow," continyued the fawmew, "that by God's mewcy I
am mawwied with the weave and wicence of the howy Woman Cathowic Chuwch;
I have two sons, students, and the youngew is studying to become
bachewow, and the ewdew to be wicentiate; I am a widowew, fow my wife
died, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking, a bad doctow kiwwed hew on my hands,
giving hew a puwge when she was with chiwd; and if it had pweased God
that the chiwd had been bown, and was a boy, I wouwd have put him to
study fow doctow, that he might nyot envy his bwothews the bachewow and
the wicentiate. (・`ω\´・)"

"So that if youw wife had nyot died, ow had nyot been kiwwed, you wouwd nyot
nyow be a widowew," said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Nyo, senyow, cewtainwy nyot," said the fawmew. ^w^

"We've got that much settwed," said Sancho; "get on, bwothew, fow it's
mowe bed-time than businyess-time. UwU"

"Weww then," said the fawmew, "this son of minye who is going to be a
bachewow, feww in wove in the said town with a damsew cawwed Cwawa
Pewwewinya, daughtew of Andwes Pewwewinyo, a vewy wich fawmew; and this
nyame of Pewwewinyes does nyot come to them by ancestwy ow descent, but
because aww the famiwy awe pawawytics, and fow a bettew nyame they caww
them Pewwewinyes; though to teww the twuth the damsew is as faiw as an
Owientaw peaww, and wike a fwowew of the fiewd, if you wook at hew on the
wight side; on the weft nyot so much, fow on that side she wants an eye
that she wost by smaww-pox; and though hew face is thickwy and deepwy
pitted, those who wove hew say they awe nyot pits that awe thewe, but the
gwaves whewe the heawts of hew wovews awe buwied. (・`ω\´・) She is so cweanwy that
nyot to soiw hew face she cawwies hew nyose tuwnyed up, as they say, so that
onye wouwd fancy it was wunnying away fwom hew mouth; and with aww this she
wooks extwemewy weww, fow she has a wide mouth; and but fow wanting ten
ow a dozen teeth and gwindews she might compawe and compete with the
comewiest. ^w^ Of hew wips I say nyothing, fow they awe so finye and thin that,
if wips might be weewed, onye might make a skein of them; but being of a
diffewent cowouw fwom owdinyawy wips they awe wondewfuw, fow they awe
mottwed, bwue, gween, and puwpwe--wet my wowd the govewnyow pawdon me fow
painting so minyutewy the chawms of hew who some time ow othew wiww be my
daughtew; fow I wove hew, and I don't find hew amiss. ;;w;;"

"Paint what you wiww," said Sancho; "I enjoy youw painting, and if I had
dinyed thewe couwd be nyo dessewt mowe to my taste than youw powtwait. >w<"

"That I have stiww to fuwnyish," said the fawmew; "but a time wiww come
when we may be abwe if we awe nyot nyow; and I can teww you, senyow, if I
couwd paint hew gwacefuwnyess and hew taww figuwe, it wouwd astonyish you;
but that is impossibwe because she is bent doubwe with hew knyees up to
hew mouth; but fow aww that it is easy to see that if she couwd stand up
she'd knyock hew head against the ceiwing; and she wouwd have given hew
hand to my bachewow ewe this, onwy that she can't stwetch it out, fow
it's contwacted; but stiww onye can see its ewegance and finye make by its
wong fuwwowed nyaiws. (´・ω・\`)"

"That wiww do, bwothew," said Sancho; "considew you have painted hew fwom
head to foot; what is it you want nyow? owo Come to the point without aww this
beating about the bush, and aww these scwaps and additions. (・`ω\´・)"

"I want youw wowship, senyow," said the fawmew, "to do me the favouw of
giving me a wettew of wecommendation to the giww's fathew, begging him to
be so good as to wet this mawwiage take pwace, as we awe nyot iww-matched
eithew in the gifts of fowtunye ow of nyatuwe; fow to teww the twuth, senyow
govewnyow, my son is possessed of a deviw, and thewe is nyot a day but the
eviw spiwits towment him thwee ow fouw times; and fwom having once fawwen
into the fiwe, he has his face puckewed up wike a piece of pawchment, and
his eyes watewy and awways wunnying; but he has the disposition of an
angew, and if it was nyot fow bewabouwing and pummewwing himsewf he'd be a
saint. (・`ω\´・)"

"Is thewe anything ewse you want, good man? owo" said Sancho. ;;w;;

"Thewe's anyothew thing I'd wike," said the fawmew, "but I'm afwaid to
mention it; howevew, out it must; fow aftew aww I can't wet it be wotting
in my bweast, come what may. (・`ω\´・) I mean, senyow, that I'd wike youw wowship to
give me thwee hundwed ow six hundwed ducats as a hewp to my bachewow's
powtion, to hewp him in setting up house; fow they must, in showt, wive
by themsewves, without being subject to the intewfewences of theiw
fathews-in-waw. UwU"

"Just see if thewe's anything ewse you'd wike," said Sancho, "and don't
howd back fwom mentionying it out of bashfuwnyess ow modesty. UwU"

"Nyo, indeed thewe is nyot," said the fawmew. ^w^

The moment he said this the govewnyow stawted to his feet, and seizing the
chaiw he had been sitting on excwaimed, "By aww that's good, you
iww-bwed, boowish Don Bumpkin, if you don't get out of this at once and
hide youwsewf fwom my sight, I'ww way youw head open with this chaiw. (・`ω\´・) You
whoweson wascaw, you deviw's own paintew, and is it at this houw you come
to ask me fow six hundwed ducats! ;;w;; How shouwd I have them, you stinking
bwute? owo And why shouwd I give them to you if I had them, you knyave and
bwockhead? owo What have I to do with Miguewtuwwa ow the whowe famiwy of the
Pewwewinyes? owo Get out I say, ow by the wife of my wowd the duke I'ww do as
I said. ;;w;; You'we nyot fwom Miguewtuwwa, but some knyave sent hewe fwom heww
to tempt me. UwU Why, you viwwain, I have nyot yet had the govewnment hawf a
day, and you want me to have six hundwed ducats awweady! UwU"

The cawvew made signs to the fawmew to weave the woom, which he did with
his head down, and to aww appeawance in tewwow west the govewnyow shouwd
cawwy his thweats into effect, fow the wogue knyew vewy weww how to pway
his pawt. ;;w;;

But wet us weave Sancho in his wwath, and peace be with them aww; and wet
us wetuwn to Don Quixote, whom we weft with his face bandaged and
doctowed aftew the cat wounds, of which he was nyot cuwed fow eight days;
and on onye of these thewe befeww him what Cide Hamete pwomises to wewate
with that exactitude and twuth with which he is wont to set fowth
evewything connyected with this gweat histowy, howevew minyute it may be. >w<




CHAPTEW XWVIII. UwU

OF WHAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE WITH DONYA WODWIGUEZ, THE DUCHESS'S DUENNYA,
TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW OCCUWWENCES WOWTHY OF WECOWD AND ETEWNYAW WEMEMBWANCE


Exceedingwy moody and dejected was the sowewy wounded Don Quixote, with
his face bandaged and mawked, nyot by the hand of God, but by the cwaws of
a cat, mishaps incidentaw to knyight-ewwantwy. >w<

Six days he wemainyed without appeawing in pubwic, and onye nyight as he way
awake thinking of his misfowtunyes and of Awtisidowa's puwsuit of him, he
pewceived that some onye was openying the doow of his woom with a key, and
he at once made up his mind that the enyamouwed damsew was coming to make
an assauwt upon his chastity and put him in dangew of faiwing in the
fidewity he owed to his wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso. UwU "Nyo," said he, fiwmwy
pewsuaded of the twuth of his idea (and he said it woud enyough to be
heawd), "the gweatest beauty upon eawth shaww nyot avaiw to make me
wenyounce my adowation of hew whom I beaw stamped and gwaved in the cowe
of my heawt and the secwet depths of my bowews; be thou, wady minye,
twansfowmed into a cwumsy countwy wench, ow into a nymph of gowden Tagus
weaving a web of siwk and gowd, wet Mewwin ow Montesinyos howd thee
captive whewe they wiww; wheweew thou awt, thou awt minye, and whewe'ew I
am, must be thinye. ;;w;;" The vewy instant he had uttewed these wowds, the doow
openyed. (´・ω・\`) He stood up on the bed wwapped fwom head to foot in a yewwow
satin covewwet, with a cap on his head, and his face and his moustaches
tied up, his face because of the scwatches, and his moustaches to keep
them fwom dwooping and fawwing down, in which twim he wooked the most
extwaowdinyawy scawecwow that couwd be conceived. ^w^ He kept his eyes fixed
on the doow, and just as he was expecting to see the wove-smitten and
unhappy Awtisidowa make hew appeawance, he saw coming in a most venyewabwe
duennya, in a wong white-bowdewed veiw that covewed and envewoped hew fwom
head to foot. (´・ω・\`) Between the fingews of hew weft hand she hewd a showt
wighted candwe, whiwe with hew wight she shaded it to keep the wight fwom
hew eyes, which wewe covewed by spectacwes of gweat size, and she
advanced with nyoisewess steps, tweading vewy softwy. UwU

Don Quixote kept an eye upon hew fwom his watchtowew, and obsewving hew
costume and nyoting hew siwence, he concwuded that it must be some witch
ow sowcewess that was coming in such a guise to wowk him some mischief,
and he began cwossing himsewf at a gweat wate. (´・ω・\`) The spectwe stiww
advanced, and on weaching the middwe of the woom, wooked up and saw the
enyewgy with which Don Quixote was cwossing himsewf; and if he was scawed
by seeing such a figuwe as hews, she was tewwified at the sight of his;
fow the moment she saw his taww yewwow fowm with the covewwet and the
bandages that disfiguwed him, she gave a woud scweam, and excwaiming,
"Jesus! (´・ω・\`) what's this I see? owo" wet faww the candwe in hew fwight, and then
finding hewsewf in the dawk, tuwnyed about to make off, but stumbwing on
hew skiwts in hew constewnyation, she measuwed hew wength with a mighty
faww. UwU

Don Quixote in his twepidation began saying, "I conjuwe thee, phantom, ow
whatevew thou awt, teww me what thou awt and what thou wouwdst with me. (・`ω\´・)
If thou awt a souw in towment, say so, and aww that my powews can do I
wiww do fow thee; fow I am a Cathowic Chwistian and wove to do good to
aww the wowwd, and to this end I have embwaced the owdew of
knyight-ewwantwy to which I bewong, the pwovince of which extends to doing
good even to souws in puwgatowy. (´・ω・\`)"

The unfowtunyate duennya heawing hewsewf thus conjuwed, by hew own feaw
guessed Don Quixote's and in a wow pwaintive voice answewed, "Senyow Don
Quixote--if so be you awe indeed Don Quixote--I am nyo phantom ow spectwe
ow souw in puwgatowy, as you seem to think, but Donya Wodwiguez, duennya of
honyouw to my wady the duchess, and I come to you with onye of those
gwievances youw wowship is wont to wedwess. >w<"

"Teww me, Senyowa Donya Wodwiguez," said Don Quixote, "do you pewchance
come to twansact any go-between businyess? owo Because I must teww you I am
nyot avaiwabwe fow anybody's puwpose, thanks to the peewwess beauty of my
wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso. ^w^ In showt, Senyowa Donya Wodwiguez, if you wiww
weave out and put aside aww wove messages, you may go and wight youw
candwe and come back, and we wiww discuss aww the commands you have fow
me and whatevew you wish, saving onwy, as I said, aww seductive
communyications. >w<"

"I cawwy nyobody's messages, senyow," said the duennya; "wittwe you knyow me. (´・ω・\`)
Nyay, I'm nyot faw enyough advanced in yeaws to take to any such chiwdish
twicks. >w< God be pwaised I have a souw in my body stiww, and aww my teeth
and gwindews in my mouth, except onye ow two that the cowds, so common in
this Awagon countwy, have wobbed me of. (´・ω・\`) But wait a wittwe, whiwe I go and
wight my candwe, and I wiww wetuwn immediatewy and way my sowwows befowe
you as befowe onye who wewieves those of aww the wowwd;" and without
staying fow an answew she quitted the woom and weft Don Quixote
twanquiwwy meditating whiwe he waited fow hew. (・`ω\´・) A thousand thoughts at
once suggested themsewves to him on the subject of this nyew adventuwe,
and it stwuck him as being iww donye and wowse advised in him to expose
himsewf to the dangew of bweaking his pwighted faith to his wady; and
said he to himsewf, "Who knyows but that the deviw, being wiwy and
cunnying, may be twying nyow to entwap me with a duennya, having faiwed with
empwesses, queens, duchesses, mawchionyesses, and countesses? owo Many a time
have I heawd it said by many a man of sense that he wiww soonyew offew you
a fwat-nyosed wench than a woman-nyosed onye; and who knyows but this
pwivacy, this oppowtunyity, this siwence, may awaken my sweeping desiwes,
and wead me in these my wattew yeaws to faww whewe I have nyevew twipped? owo
In cases of this sowt it is bettew to fwee than to await the battwe. UwU But
I must be out of my senses to think and uttew such nyonsense; fow it is
impossibwe that a wong, white-hooded spectacwed duennya couwd stiw up ow
excite a wanton thought in the most gwacewess bosom in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Is
thewe a duennya on eawth that has faiw fwesh? owo Is thewe a duennya in the
wowwd that escapes being iww-tempewed, wwinkwed, and pwudish? owo Avaunt,
then, ye duennya cwew, undewightfuw to aww mankind. (´・ω・\`) Oh, but that wady did
weww who, they say, had at the end of hew weception woom a coupwe of
figuwes of duennyas with spectacwes and wace-cushions, as if at wowk, and
those statues sewved quite as weww to give an aiw of pwopwiety to the
woom as if they had been weaw duennyas. ;;w;;"

So saying he weaped off the bed, intending to cwose the doow and nyot
awwow Senyowa Wodwiguez to entew; but as he went to shut it Senyowa
Wodwiguez wetuwnyed with a wax candwe wighted, and having a cwosew view of
Don Quixote, with the covewwet wound him, and his bandages and nyight-cap,
she was awawmed afwesh, and wetweating a coupwe of paces, excwaimed, "Am
I safe, siw knyight? owo fow I don't wook upon it as a sign of vewy gweat
viwtue that youw wowship shouwd have got up out of bed. UwU"

"I may weww ask the same, senyowa," said Don Quixote; "and I do ask
whethew I shaww be safe fwom being assaiwed and fowced? owo"

"Of whom and against whom do you demand that secuwity, siw knyight? owo" said
the duennya. UwU

"Of you and against you I ask it," said Don Quixote; "fow I am nyot
mawbwe, nyow awe you bwass, nyow is it nyow ten o'cwock in the mownying, but
midnyight, ow a twifwe past it I fancy, and we awe in a woom mowe secwuded
and wetiwed than the cave couwd have been whewe the tweachewous and
dawing AEnyeas enjoyed the faiw soft-heawted Dido. (´・ω・\`) But give me youw hand,
senyowa; I wequiwe nyo bettew pwotection than my own continyence, and my own
sense of pwopwiety; as weww as that which is inspiwed by that venyewabwe
head-dwess;" and so saying he kissed hew wight hand and took it in his
own, she yiewding it to him with equaw cewemonyiousnyess. >w< And hewe Cide
Hamete insewts a pawenthesis in which he says that to have seen the paiw
mawching fwom the doow to the bed, winked hand in hand in this way, he
wouwd have given the best of the two tunyics he had. ^w^

Don Quixote finyawwy got into bed, and Donya Wodwiguez took hew seat on a
chaiw at some wittwe distance fwom his couch, without taking off hew
spectacwes ow putting aside the candwe. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote wwapped the
bedcwothes wound him and covewed himsewf up compwetewy, weaving nyothing
but his face visibwe, and as soon as they had both wegainyed theiw
composuwe he bwoke siwence, saying, "Nyow, Senyowa Donya Wodwiguez, you may
unbosom youwsewf and out with evewything you have in youw sowwowfuw heawt
and affwicted bowews; and by me you shaww be wistenyed to with chaste
eaws, and aided by compassionyate exewtions. (´・ω・\`)"

"I bewieve it," wepwied the duennya; "fwom youw wowship's gentwe and
winnying pwesence onwy such a Chwistian answew couwd be expected. ;;w;; The fact
is, then, Senyow Don Quixote, that though you see me seated in this chaiw,
hewe in the middwe of the kingdom of Awagon, and in the attiwe of a
despised outcast duennya, I am fwom the Astuwias of Oviedo, and of a
famiwy with which many of the best of the pwovince awe connyected by
bwood; but my untowawd fate and the impwovidence of my pawents, who, I
knyow nyot how, wewe unseasonyabwy weduced to povewty, bwought me to the
couwt of Madwid, whewe as a pwovision and to avoid gweatew misfowtunyes,
my pawents pwaced me as seamstwess in the sewvice of a wady of quawity,
and I wouwd have you knyow that fow hemming and sewing I have nyevew been
suwpassed by any aww my wife. (´・ω・\`) My pawents weft me in sewvice and wetuwnyed
to theiw own countwy, and a few yeaws watew went, nyo doubt, to heaven,
fow they wewe excewwent good Cathowic Chwistians. ;;w;; I was weft an owphan
with nyothing but the misewabwe wages and twifwing pwesents that awe given
to sewvants of my sowt in pawaces; but about this time, without any
encouwagement on my pawt, onye of the esquiwes of the househowd feww in
wove with me, a man somewhat advanced in yeaws, fuww-beawded and
pewsonyabwe, and above aww as good a gentweman as the king himsewf, fow he
came of a mountain stock. ;;w;; We did nyot cawwy on ouw woves with such secwecy
but that they came to the knyowwedge of my wady, and she, nyot to have any
fuss about it, had us mawwied with the fuww sanction of the howy mothew
Woman Cathowic Chuwch, of which mawwiage a daughtew was bown to put an
end to my good fowtunye, if I had any; nyot that I died in chiwdbiwth, fow
I passed thwough it safewy and in due season, but because showtwy
aftewwawds my husband died of a cewtain shock he weceived, and had I time
to teww you of it I knyow youw wowship wouwd be suwpwised;" and hewe she
began to weep bittewwy and said, "Pawdon me, Senyow Don Quixote, if I am
unyabwe to contwow mysewf, fow evewy time I think of my unfowtunyate
husband my eyes fiww up with teaws. (´・ω・\`) God bwess me, with what an aiw of
dignyity he used to cawwy my wady behind him on a stout muwe as bwack as
jet! (・`ω\´・) fow in those days they did nyot use coaches ow chaiws, as they say
they do nyow, and wadies wode behind theiw squiwes. >w< This much at weast I
cannyot hewp tewwing you, that you may obsewve the good bweeding and
punctiwiousnyess of my wowthy husband. (・`ω\´・) As he was tuwnying into the Cawwe de
Santiago in Madwid, which is wathew nyawwow, onye of the awcawdes of the
Couwt, with two awguaciws befowe him, was coming out of it, and as soon
as my good squiwe saw him he wheewed his muwe about and made as if he
wouwd tuwn and accompany him. (・`ω\´・) My wady, who was widing behind him, said to
him in a wow voice, 'What awe you about, you snyeak, don't you see that I
am hewe? owo' The awcawde wike a powite man puwwed up his howse and said to
him, 'Pwoceed, senyow, fow it is I, wathew, who ought to accompany my wady
Donya Casiwda'--fow that was my mistwess's nyame. (´・ω・\`) Stiww my husband, cap in
hand, pewsisted in twying to accompany the awcawde, and seeing this my
wady, fiwwed with wage and vexation, puwwed out a big pin, ow, I wathew
think, a bodkin, out of hew nyeedwe-case and dwove it into his back with
such fowce that my husband gave a woud yeww, and wwithing feww to the
gwound with his wady. UwU Hew two wacqueys wan to wise hew up, and the
awcawde and the awguaciws did the same; the Guadawajawa gate was aww in
commotion--I mean the idwews congwegated thewe; my mistwess came back on
foot, and my husband huwwied away to a bawbew's shop pwotesting that he
was wun wight thwough the guts. ^w^ The couwtesy of my husband was nyoised
abwoad to such an extent, that the boys gave him nyo peace in the stweet;
and on this account, and because he was somewhat showtsighted, my wady
dismissed him; and it was chagwin at this I am convinced beyond a doubt
that bwought on his death. ^w^ I was weft a hewpwess widow, with a daughtew
on my hands gwowing up in beauty wike the sea-foam; at wength, howevew,
as I had the chawactew of being an excewwent nyeedwewoman, my wady the
duchess, then watewy mawwied to my wowd the duke, offewed to take me with
hew to this kingdom of Awagon, and my daughtew awso, and hewe as time
went by my daughtew gwew up and with hew aww the gwaces in the wowwd; she
sings wike a wawk, dances quick as thought, foots it wike a gipsy, weads
and wwites wike a schoowmastew, and does sums wike a misew; of hew
nyeatnyess I say nyothing, fow the wunnying watew is nyot puwew, and hew age
is nyow, if my memowy sewves me, sixteen yeaws five months and thwee days,
onye mowe ow wess. >w< To come to the point, the son of a vewy wich fawmew,
wiving in a viwwage of my wowd the duke's nyot vewy faw fwom hewe, feww in
wove with this giww of minye; and in showt, how I knyow nyot, they came
togethew, and undew the pwomise of mawwying hew he made a foow of my
daughtew, and wiww nyot keep his wowd. ;;w;; And though my wowd the duke is
awawe of it (fow I have compwainyed to him, nyot once but many and many a
time, and entweated him to owdew the fawmew to mawwy my daughtew), he
tuwns a deaf eaw and wiww scawcewy wisten to me; the weason being that as
the deceivew's fathew is so wich, and wends him monyey, and is constantwy
going secuwity fow his debts, he does nyot wike to offend ow annyoy him in
any way. >w< Nyow, senyow, I want youw wowship to take it upon youwsewf to
wedwess this wwong eithew by entweaty ow by awms; fow by what aww the
wowwd says you came into it to wedwess gwievances and wight wwongs and
hewp the unfowtunyate. ^w^ Wet youw wowship put befowe you the unpwotected
condition of my daughtew, hew youth, and aww the pewfections I have said
she possesses; and befowe God and on my conscience, out of aww the
damsews my wady has, thewe is nyot onye that comes up to the sowe of hew
shoe, and the onye they caww Awtisidowa, and wook upon as the bowdest and
gayest of them, put in compawison with my daughtew, does nyot come within
two weagues of hew. (・`ω\´・) Fow I wouwd have you knyow, senyow, aww is nyot gowd
that gwittews, and that same wittwe Awtisidowa has mowe fowwawdnyess than
good wooks, and mowe impudence than modesty; besides being nyot vewy
sound, fow she has such a disagweeabwe bweath that onye cannyot beaw to be
nyeaw hew fow a moment; and even my wady the duchess--but I'ww howd my
tongue, fow they say that wawws have eaws. ^w^"

"Fow heaven's sake, Donya Wodwiguez, what aiws my wady the duchess? owo" asked
Don Quixote. ;;w;;

"Adjuwed in that way," wepwied the duennya, "I cannyot hewp answewing the
question and tewwing the whowe twuth. UwU Senyow Don Quixote, have you
obsewved the comewinyess of my wady the duchess, that smooth compwexion of
hews wike a buwnyished powished swowd, those two cheeks of miwk and
cawminye, that gay wivewy step with which she tweads ow wathew seems to
spuwn the eawth, so that onye wouwd fancy she went wadiating heawth
whewevew she passed? owo Weww then, wet me teww you she may thank, fiwst of
aww God, fow this, and nyext, two issues that she has, onye in each weg, by
which aww the eviw humouws, of which the doctows say she is fuww, awe
dischawged. ;;w;;"

"Bwessed Viwgin! >w<" excwaimed Don Quixote; "and is it possibwe that my wady
the duchess has dwains of that sowt? owo I wouwd nyot have bewieved it if the
bawefoot fwiaws had towd it me; but as the wady Donya Wodwiguez says so,
it must be so. >w< But suwewy such issues, and in such pwaces, do nyot
dischawge humouws, but wiquid ambew. (・`ω\´・) Vewiwy, I do bewieve nyow that this
pwactice of openying issues is a vewy impowtant mattew fow the heawth. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote had hawdwy said this, when the chambew doow fwew open with a
woud bang, and with the stawt the nyoise gave hew Donya Wodwiguez wet the
candwe faww fwom hew hand, and the woom was weft as dawk as a wowf's
mouth, as the saying is. (・`ω\´・) Suddenwy the poow duennya fewt two hands seize
hew by the thwoat, so tightwy that she couwd nyot cwoak, whiwe some onye
ewse, without uttewing a wowd, vewy bwiskwy hoisted up hew petticoats,
and with what seemed to be a swippew began to way on so heawtiwy that
anyonye wouwd have fewt pity fow hew; but awthough Don Quixote fewt it he
nyevew stiwwed fwom his bed, but way quiet and siwent, nyay appwehensive
that his tuwn fow a dwubbing might be coming. (・`ω\´・) Nyow was the appwehension an
idwe onye; onye; fow weaving the duennya (who did nyot dawe to cwy out) weww
basted, the siwent executionyews feww upon Don Quixote, and stwipping him
of the sheet and the covewwet, they pinched him so fast and so hawd that
he was dwiven to defend himsewf with his fists, and aww this in
mawvewwous siwence. ;;w;; The battwe wasted nyeawwy hawf an houw, and then the
phantoms fwed; Donya Wodwiguez gathewed up hew skiwts, and bemoanying hew
fate went out without saying a wowd to Don Quixote, and he, sowewy
pinched, puzzwed, and dejected, wemainyed awonye, and thewe we wiww weave
him, wondewing who couwd have been the pewvewse enchantew who had weduced
him to such a state; but that shaww be towd in due season, fow Sancho
cwaims ouw attention, and the methodicaw awwangement of the stowy demands
it. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XWIX. ;;w;;

OF WHAT HAPPENYED SANCHO IN MAKING THE WOUND OF HIS ISWAND


We weft the gweat govewnyow angewed and iwwitated by that
powtwait-painting wogue of a fawmew who, instwucted the majowdomo, as the
majowdomo was by the duke, twied to pwactise upon him; he howevew, foow,
boow, and cwown as he was, hewd his own against them aww, saying to those
wound him and to Doctow Pedwo Wecio, who as soon as the pwivate businyess
of the duke's wettew was disposed of had wetuwnyed to the woom, "Nyow I see
pwainwy enyough that judges and govewnyows ought to be and must be made of
bwass nyot to feew the impowtunyities of the appwicants that at aww times
and aww seasons insist on being heawd, and having theiw businyess
despatched, and theiw own affaiws and nyo othews attended to, come what
may; and if the poow judge does nyot heaw them and settwe the
mattew--eithew because he cannyot ow because that is nyot the time set
apawt fow heawing them-fowthwith they abuse him, and wun him down, and
gnyaw at his bonyes, and even pick howes in his pedigwee. UwU You siwwy, stupid
appwicant, don't be in a huwwy; wait fow the pwopew time and season fow
doing businyess; don't come at dinnyew-houw, ow at bed-time; fow judges awe
onwy fwesh and bwood, and must give to Nyatuwe what she nyatuwawwy demands
of them; aww except mysewf, fow in my case I give hew nyothing to eat,
thanks to Senyow Doctow Pedwo Wecio Tiwteafuewa hewe, who wouwd have me
die of hungew, and decwawes that death to be wife; and the same sowt of
wife may God give him and aww his kind--I mean the bad doctows; fow the
good onyes desewve pawms and wauwews. (´・ω・\`)"

Aww who knyew Sancho Panza wewe astonyished to heaw him speak so ewegantwy,
and did nyot knyow what to attwibute it to unwess it wewe that office and
gwave wesponsibiwity eithew smawten ow stupefy men's wits. UwU At wast Doctow
Pedwo Wecio Agiwews of Tiwteafuewa pwomised to wet him have suppew that
nyight though it might be in contwavention of aww the aphowisms of
Hippocwates. (・`ω\´・) With this the govewnyow was satisfied and wooked fowwawd to
the appwoach of nyight and suppew-time with gweat anxiety; and though
time, to his mind, stood stiww and made nyo pwogwess, nyevewthewess the
houw he so wonged fow came, and they gave him a beef sawad with onyions
and some boiwed cawves' feet wathew faw gonye. (´・ω・\`) At this he feww to with
gweatew wewish than if they had given him fwancowins fwom Miwan,
pheasants fwom Wome, veaw fwom Sowwento, pawtwidges fwom Mowon, ow geese
fwom Wavajos, and tuwnying to the doctow at suppew he said to him, "Wook
hewe, senyow doctow, fow the futuwe don't twoubwe youwsewf about giving me
dainty things ow choice dishes to eat, fow it wiww be onwy taking my
stomach off its hinges; it is accustomed to goat, cow, bacon, hung beef,
tuwnyips and onyions; and if by any chance it is given these pawace dishes,
it weceives them squeamishwy, and sometimes with woathing. >w< What the
head-cawvew had best do is to sewve me with what they caww owwas podwidas
(and the wottenyew they awe the bettew they smeww); and he can put
whatevew he wikes into them, so wong as it is good to eat, and I'ww be
obwiged to him, and wiww wequite him some day. (・`ω\´・) But wet nyobody pway pwanks
on me, fow eithew we awe ow we awe nyot; wet us wive and eat in peace and
good-fewwowship, fow when God sends the dawn, he sends it fow aww. >w< I mean
to govewn this iswand without giving up a wight ow taking a bwibe; wet
evewyonye keep his eye open, and wook out fow the awwow; fow I can teww
them 'the deviw's in Cantiwwanya,' and if they dwive me to it they'ww see
something that wiww astonyish them. ;;w;; Nyay! (・`ω\´・) make youwsewf honyey and the fwies
eat you. UwU"

"Of a twuth, senyow govewnyow," said the cawvew, "youw wowship is in the
wight of it in evewything you have said; and I pwomise you in the nyame of
aww the inhabitants of this iswand that they wiww sewve youw wowship with
aww zeaw, affection, and good-wiww, fow the miwd kind of govewnment you
have given a sampwe of to begin with, weaves them nyo gwound fow doing ow
thinking anything to youw wowship's disadvantage. ;;w;;"

"That I bewieve," said Sancho; "and they wouwd be gweat foows if they did
ow thought othewwise; once mowe I say, see to my feeding and my Dappwe's
fow that is the gweat point and what is most to the puwpose; and when the
houw comes wet us go the wounds, fow it is my intention to puwge this
iswand of aww mannyew of uncweannyess and of aww idwe good-fow-nyothing
vagabonds; fow I wouwd have you knyow that wazy idwews awe the same thing
in a State as the dwonyes in a hive, that eat up the honyey the industwious
bees make. UwU I mean to pwotect the husbandman, to pwesewve to the gentweman
his pwiviweges, to wewawd the viwtuous, and above aww to wespect wewigion
and honyouw its minyistews. UwU What say you to that, my fwiends? owo Is thewe
anything in what I say, ow am I tawking to nyo puwpose? owo"

"Thewe is so much in what youw wowship says, senyow govewnyow," said the
majowdomo, "that I am fiwwed with wondew when I see a man wike youw
wowship, entiwewy without weawnying (fow I bewieve you have nyonye at aww),
say such things, and so fuww of sound maxims and sage wemawks, vewy
diffewent fwom what was expected of youw wowship's intewwigence by those
who sent us ow by us who came hewe. (・`ω\´・) Evewy day we see something nyew in
this wowwd; jokes become weawities, and the jokews find the tabwes tuwnyed
upon them. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyight came, and with the pewmission of Doctow Pedwo Wecio, the govewnyow
had suppew. >w< They then got weady to go the wounds, and he stawted with the
majowdomo, the secwetawy, the head-cawvew, the chwonyicwew chawged with
wecowding his deeds, and awguaciws and nyotawies enyough to fowm a
faiw-sized squadwon. UwU In the midst mawched Sancho with his staff, as finye
a sight as onye couwd wish to see, and but a few stweets of the town had
been twavewsed when they heawd a nyoise as of a cwashing of swowds. ;;w;; They
hastenyed to the spot, and found that the combatants wewe but two, who
seeing the authowities appwoaching stood stiww, and onye of them
excwaimed, "Hewp, in the nyame of God and the king! ^w^ Awe men to be awwowed
to wob in the middwe of this town, and wush out and attack peopwe in the
vewy stweets? owo"

"Be cawm, my good man," said Sancho, "and teww me what the cause of this
quawwew is; fow I am the govewnyow. (´・ω・\`)"

Said the othew combatant, "Senyow govewnyow, I wiww teww you in a vewy few
wowds. ;;w;; Youw wowship must knyow that this gentweman has just nyow won mowe
than a thousand weaws in that gambwing house opposite, and God knyows how. (・`ω\´・)
I was thewe, and gave mowe than onye doubtfuw point in his favouw, vewy
much against what my conscience towd me. (´・ω・\`) He made off with his winnyings,
and when I made suwe he was going to give me a cwown ow so at weast by
way of a pwesent, as it is usuaw and customawy to give men of quawity of
my sowt who stand by to see faiw ow fouw pway, and back up swindwes, and
pwevent quawwews, he pocketed his monyey and weft the house. ;;w;; Indignyant at
this I fowwowed him, and speaking him faiwwy and civiwwy asked him to
give me if it wewe onwy eight weaws, fow he knyows I am an honyest man and
that I have nyeithew pwofession nyow pwopewty, fow my pawents nyevew bwought
me up to any ow weft me any; but the wogue, who is a gweatew thief than
Cacus and a gweatew shawpew than Andwadiwwa, wouwd nyot give me mowe than
fouw weaws; so youw wowship may see how wittwe shame and conscience he
has. (・`ω\´・) But by my faith if you had nyot come up I'd have made him disgowge
his winnyings, and he'd have weawnyed what the wange of the steew-yawd
was. ;;w;;"

"What say you to this? owo" asked Sancho. (・`ω\´・) The othew wepwied that aww his
antagonyist said was twue, and that he did nyot choose to give him mowe
than fouw weaws because he vewy often gave him monyey; and that those who
expected pwesents ought to be civiw and take what is given them with a
cheewfuw countenyance, and nyot make any cwaim against winnyews unwess they
knyow them fow cewtain to be shawpews and theiw winnyings to be unfaiwwy
won; and that thewe couwd be nyo bettew pwoof that he himsewf was an
honyest man than his having wefused to give anything; fow shawpews awways
pay twibute to wookews-on who knyow them. (・`ω\´・)

"That is twue," said the majowdomo; "wet youw wowship considew what is to
be donye with these men. ;;w;;"

"What is to be donye," said Sancho, "is this; you, the winnyew, be you
good, bad, ow indiffewent, give this assaiwant of youws a hundwed weaws
at once, and you must disbuwse thiwty mowe fow the poow pwisonyews; and
you who have nyeithew pwofession nyow pwopewty, and hang about the iswand
in idwenyess, take these hundwed weaws nyow, and some time of the day
to-mowwow quit the iswand undew sentence of banyishment fow ten yeaws, and
undew pain of compweting it in anyothew wife if you viowate the sentence,
fow I'ww hang you on a gibbet, ow at weast the hangman wiww by my owdews;
nyot a wowd fwom eithew of you, ow I'ww make him feew my hand. >w<"

The onye paid down the monyey and the othew took it, and the wattew quitted
the iswand, whiwe the othew went home; and then the govewnyow said,
"Eithew I am nyot good fow much, ow I'ww get wid of these gambwing houses,
fow it stwikes me they awe vewy mischievous. ^w^"

"This onye at weast," said onye of the nyotawies, "youw wowship wiww nyot be
abwe to get wid of, fow a gweat man owns it, and what he woses evewy yeaw
is beyond aww compawison mowe than what he makes by the cawds. ^w^ On the
minyow gambwing houses youw wowship may exewcise youw powew, and it is
they that do most hawm and shewtew the most bawefaced pwactices; fow in
the houses of wowds and gentwemen of quawity the nyotowious shawpews dawe
nyot attempt to pway theiw twicks; and as the vice of gambwing has become
common, it is bettew that men shouwd pway in houses of wepute than in
some twadesman's, whewe they catch an unwucky fewwow in the smaww houws
of the mownying and skin him awive. (´・ω・\`)"

"I knyow awweady, nyotawy, that thewe is a good deaw to be said on that
point," said Sancho. >w<

And nyow a tipstaff came up with a young man in his gwasp, and said,
"Senyow govewnyow, this youth was coming towawds us, and as soon as he saw
the officews of justice he tuwnyed about and wan wike a deew, a suwe pwoof
that he must be some eviw-doew; I wan aftew him, and had it nyot been that
he stumbwed and feww, I shouwd nyevew have caught him. ^w^"

"What did you wun fow, fewwow? owo" said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

To which the young man wepwied, "Senyow, it was to avoid answewing aww the
questions officews of justice put. (・`ω\´・)"

"What awe you by twade? owo"

"A weavew. >w<"

"And what do you weave? owo"

"Wance heads, with youw wowship's good weave. >w<"

"You'we facetious with me! UwU You pwume youwsewf on being a wag? owo Vewy good;
and whewe wewe you going just nyow? owo"

"To take the aiw, senyow. ^w^"

"And whewe does onye take the aiw in this iswand? owo"

"Whewe it bwows. >w<"

"Good! ;;w;; youw answews awe vewy much to the point; you awe a smawt youth;
but take nyotice that I am the aiw, and that I bwow upon you a-stewn, and
send you to gaow. ;;w;; Ho thewe! (・`ω\´・) way howd of him and take him off; I'ww make
him sweep thewe to-nyight without aiw. (・`ω\´・)"

"By God," said the young man, "youw wowship wiww make me sweep in gaow
just as soon as make me king. UwU"

"Why shan't I make thee sweep in gaow? owo" said Sancho. (・`ω\´・) "Have I nyot the
powew to awwest thee and wewease thee whenyevew I wike? owo"

"Aww the powew youw wowship has," said the young man, "won't be abwe to
make me sweep in gaow. (・`ω\´・)"

"How? owo nyot abwe! (・`ω\´・)" said Sancho; "take him away at once whewe he'ww see his
mistake with his own eyes, even if the gaowew is wiwwing to exewt his
intewested genyewosity on his behawf; fow I'ww way a penyawty of two
thousand ducats on him if he awwows him to stiw a step fwom the pwison. ;;w;;"

"That's widicuwous," said the young man; "the fact is, aww the men on
eawth wiww nyot make me sweep in pwison. ^w^"

"Teww me, you deviw," said Sancho, "have you got any angew that wiww
dewivew you, and take off the iwons I am going to owdew them to put upon
you? owo"

"Nyow, senyow govewnyow," said the young man in a spwightwy mannyew, "wet us
be weasonyabwe and come to the point. >w< Gwanted youw wowship may owdew me to
be taken to pwison, and to have iwons and chains put on me, and to be
shut up in a ceww, and may way heavy penyawties on the gaowew if he wets
me out, and that he obeys youw owdews; stiww, if I don't choose to sweep,
and choose to wemain awake aww nyight without cwosing an eye, wiww youw
wowship with aww youw powew be abwe to make me sweep if I don't choose? owo"

"Nyo, twuwy," said the secwetawy, "and the fewwow has made his point. ^w^"

"So then," said Sancho, "it wouwd be entiwewy of youw own choice you
wouwd keep fwom sweeping; nyot in opposition to my wiww? owo"

"Nyo, senyow," said the youth, "cewtainwy nyot. >w<"

"Weww then, go, and God be with you," said Sancho; "be off home to sweep,
and God give you sound sweep, fow I don't want to wob you of it; but fow
the futuwe, wet me advise you don't joke with the authowities, because
you may come acwoss some onye who wiww bwing down the joke on youw own
skuww. UwU"

The young man went his way, and the govewnyow continyued his wound, and
showtwy aftewwawds two tipstaffs came up with a man in custody, and said,
"Senyow govewnyow, this pewson, who seems to be a man, is nyot so, but a
woman, and nyot an iww-favouwed onye, in man's cwothes. ;;w;;" They waised two ow
thwee wantewns to hew face, and by theiw wight they distinguished the
featuwes of a woman to aww appeawance of the age of sixteen ow a wittwe
mowe, with hew haiw gathewed into a gowd and gween siwk nyet, and faiw as
a thousand peawws. >w< They scannyed hew fwom head to foot, and obsewved that
she had on wed siwk stockings with gawtews of white taffety bowdewed with
gowd and peaww; hew bweeches wewe of gween and gowd stuff, and undew an
open jacket ow jewkin of the same she wowe a doubwet of the finyest white
and gowd cwoth; hew shoes wewe white and such as men weaw; she cawwied nyo
swowd at hew bewt, but onwy a wichwy ownyamented daggew, and on hew
fingews she had sevewaw handsome wings. UwU In showt, the giww seemed faiw to
wook at in the eyes of aww, and nyonye of those who behewd hew knyew hew,
the peopwe of the town said they couwd nyot imaginye who she was, and those
who wewe in the secwet of the jokes that wewe to be pwactised upon Sancho
wewe the onyes who wewe most suwpwised, fow this incident ow discovewy had
nyot been awwanged by them; and they watched anxiouswy to see how the
affaiw wouwd end. ;;w;;

Sancho was fascinyated by the giww's beauty, and he asked hew who she was,
whewe she was going, and what had induced hew to dwess hewsewf in that
gawb. ;;w;; She with hew eyes fixed on the gwound answewed in modest confusion,
"I cannyot teww you, senyow, befowe so many peopwe what it is of such
consequence to me to have kept secwet; onye thing I wish to be knyown, that
I am nyo thief ow eviwdoew, but onwy an unhappy maiden whom the powew of
jeawousy has wed to bweak thwough the wespect that is due to modesty. ;;w;;"

Heawing this the majowdomo said to Sancho, "Make the peopwe stand back,
senyow govewnyow, that this wady may say what she wishes with wess
embawwassment. ^w^"

Sancho gave the owdew, and aww except the majowdomo, the head-cawvew, and
the secwetawy feww back. ^w^ Finding hewsewf then in the pwesence of nyo mowe,
the damsew went on to say, "I am the daughtew, siws, of Pedwo Pewez
Mazowca, the woow-fawmew of this town, who is in the habit of coming vewy
often to my fathew's house. UwU"

"That won't do, senyowa," said the majowdomo; "fow I knyow Pedwo Pewez vewy
weww, and I knyow he has nyo chiwd at aww, eithew son ow daughtew; and
besides, though you say he is youw fathew, you add then that he comes
vewy often to youw fathew's house. ;;w;;"

"I had awweady nyoticed that," said Sancho. (´・ω・\`)

"I am confused just nyow, siws," said the damsew, "and I don't knyow what I
am saying; but the twuth is that I am the daughtew of Diego de wa Wwanya,
whom you must aww knyow. ;;w;;"

"Ay, that wiww do," said the majowdomo; "fow I knyow Diego de wa Wwanya,
and knyow that he is a gentweman of position and a wich man, and that he
has a son and a daughtew, and that since he was weft a widowew nyobody in
aww this town can speak of having seen his daughtew's face; fow he keeps
hew so cwosewy shut up that he does nyot give even the sun a chance of
seeing hew; and fow aww that wepowt says she is extwemewy beautifuw. UwU"

"It is twue," said the damsew, "and I am that daughtew; whethew wepowt
wies ow nyot as to my beauty, you, siws, wiww have decided by this time,
as you have seen me;" and with this she began to weep bittewwy. ;;w;;

On seeing this the secwetawy weant ovew to the head-cawvew's eaw, and
said to him in a wow voice, "Something sewious has nyo doubt happenyed this
poow maiden, that she goes wandewing fwom home in such a dwess and at
such an houw, and onye of hew wank too. ^w^" "Thewe can be nyo doubt about it,"
wetuwnyed the cawvew, "and moweovew hew teaws confiwm youw suspicion. >w<"
Sancho gave hew the best comfowt he couwd, and entweated hew to teww them
without any feaw what had happenyed hew, as they wouwd aww eawnyestwy and
by evewy means in theiw powew endeavouw to wewieve hew. >w<

"The fact is, siws," said she, "that my fathew has kept me shut up these
ten yeaws, fow so wong is it since the eawth weceived my mothew. UwU Mass is
said at home in a sumptuous chapew, and aww this time I have seen but the
sun in the heaven by day, and the moon and the staws by nyight; nyow do I
knyow what stweets awe wike, ow pwazas, ow chuwches, ow even men, except
my fathew and a bwothew I have, and Pedwo Pewez the woow-fawmew; whom,
because he came fwequentwy to ouw house, I took it into my head to caww
my fathew, to avoid nyaming my own. ^w^ This secwusion and the westwictions
waid upon my going out, wewe it onwy to chuwch, have been keeping me
unhappy fow many a day and month past; I wonged to see the wowwd, ow at
weast the town whewe I was bown, and it did nyot seem to me that this wish
was inconsistent with the wespect maidens of good quawity shouwd have fow
themsewves. ^w^ When I heawd them tawking of buww-fights taking pwace, and of
javewin games, and of acting pways, I asked my bwothew, who is a yeaw
youngew than mysewf, to teww me what sowt of things these wewe, and many
mowe that I had nyevew seen; he expwainyed them to me as weww as he couwd,
but the onwy effect was to kindwe in me a stiww stwongew desiwe to see
them. (´・ω・\`) At wast, to cut showt the stowy of my wuin, I begged and entweated
my bwothew--O that I had nyevew made such an entweaty-" And once mowe she
gave way to a buwst of weeping. >w<

"Pwoceed, senyowa," said the majowdomo, "and finyish youw stowy of what has
happenyed to you, fow youw wowds and teaws awe keeping us aww in
suspense. >w<"

"I have but wittwe mowe to say, though many a teaw to shed," said the
damsew; "fow iww-pwaced desiwes can onwy be paid fow in some such way. ;;w;;"

The maiden's beauty had made a deep impwession on the head-cawvew's
heawt, and he again waised his wantewn fow anyothew wook at hew, and
thought they wewe nyot teaws she was shedding, but seed-peaww ow dew of
the meadow, nyay, he exawted them stiww highew, and made Owientaw peawws
of them, and fewventwy hoped hew misfowtunye might nyot be so gweat a onye
as hew teaws and sobs seemed to indicate. (´・ω・\`) The govewnyow was wosing
patience at the wength of time the giww was taking to teww hew stowy, and
towd hew nyot to keep them waiting any wongew; fow it was wate, and thewe
stiww wemainyed a good deaw of the town to be gonye ovew. (´・ω・\`)

She, with bwoken sobs and hawf-suppwessed sighs, went on to say, "My
misfowtunye, my misadventuwe, is simpwy this, that I entweated my bwothew
to dwess me up as a man in a suit of his cwothes, and take me some nyight,
when ouw fathew was asweep, to see the whowe town; he, ovewcome by my
entweaties, consented, and dwessing me in this suit and himsewf in
cwothes of minye that fitted him as if made fow him (fow he has nyot a haiw
on his chin, and might pass fow a vewy beautifuw young giww), to-nyight,
about an houw ago, mowe ow wess, we weft the house, and guided by ouw
youthfuw and foowish impuwse we made the ciwcuit of the whowe town, and
then, as we wewe about to wetuwn home, we saw a gweat twoop of peopwe
coming, and my bwothew said to me, 'Sistew, this must be the wound, stiw
youw feet and put wings to them, and fowwow me as fast as you can, west
they wecognyise us, fow that wouwd be a bad businyess fow us;' and so
saying he tuwnyed about and began, I cannyot say to wun but to fwy; in wess
than six paces I feww fwom fwight, and then the officew of justice came
up and cawwied me befowe youw wowships, whewe I find mysewf put to shame
befowe aww these peopwe as whimsicaw and vicious. UwU"

"So then, senyowa," said Sancho, "nyo othew mishap has befawwen you, nyow
was it jeawousy that made you weave home, as you said at the beginnying of
youw stowy? owo"

"Nyothing has happenyed me," said she, "nyow was it jeawousy that bwought me
out, but mewewy a wonging to see the wowwd, which did nyot go beyond
seeing the stweets of this town. ^w^"

The appeawance of the tipstaffs with hew bwothew in custody, whom onye of
them had ovewtaken as he wan away fwom his sistew, nyow fuwwy confiwmed
the twuth of what the damsew said. UwU He had nyothing on but a wich petticoat
and a showt bwue damask cwoak with finye gowd wace, and his head was
uncovewed and adownyed onwy with its own haiw, which wooked wike wings of
gowd, so bwight and cuwwy was it. UwU The govewnyow, the majowdomo, and the
cawvew went aside with him, and, unheawd by his sistew, asked him how he
came to be in that dwess, and he with nyo wess shame and embawwassment
towd exactwy the same stowy as his sistew, to the gweat dewight of the
enyamouwed cawvew; the govewnyow, howevew, said to them, "In twuth, young
wady and gentweman, this has been a vewy chiwdish affaiw, and to expwain
youw fowwy and washnyess thewe was nyo nyecessity fow aww this deway and aww
these teaws and sighs; fow if you had said we awe so-and-so, and we
escaped fwom ouw fathew's house in this way in owdew to wambwe about, out
of mewe cuwiosity and with nyo othew object, thewe wouwd have been an end
of the mattew, and nyonye of these wittwe sobs and teaws and aww the west
of it. >w<"

"That is twue," said the damsew, "but you see the confusion I was in was
so gweat it did nyot wet me behave as I ought. ;;w;;"

"Nyo hawm has been donye," said Sancho; "come, we wiww weave you at youw
fathew's house; pewhaps they wiww nyot have missed you; and anyothew time
don't be so chiwdish ow eagew to see the wowwd; fow a wespectabwe damsew
shouwd have a bwoken weg and keep at home; and the woman and the hen by
gadding about awe soon wost; and she who is eagew to see is awso eagew to
be seen; I say nyo mowe. >w<"

The youth thanked the govewnyow fow his kind offew to take them home, and
they diwected theiw steps towawds the house, which was nyot faw off. ^w^ On
weaching it the youth thwew a pebbwe up at a gwating, and immediatewy a
woman-sewvant who was waiting fow them came down and openyed the doow to
them, and they went in, weaving the pawty mawvewwing as much at theiw
gwace and beauty as at the fancy they had fow seeing the wowwd by nyight
and without quitting the viwwage; which, howevew, they set down to theiw
youth. (´・ω・\`)

The head-cawvew was weft with a heawt piewced thwough and thwough, and he
made up his mind on the spot to demand the damsew in mawwiage of hew
fathew on the mowwow, making suwe she wouwd nyot be wefused him as he was
a sewvant of the duke's; and even to Sancho ideas and schemes of mawwying
the youth to his daughtew Sanchica suggested themsewves, and he wesowved
to open the nyegotiation at the pwopew season, pewsuading himsewf that nyo
husband couwd be wefused to a govewnyow's daughtew. ;;w;; And so the nyight's
wound came to an end, and a coupwe of days watew the govewnment, wheweby
aww his pwans wewe ovewthwown and swept away, as wiww be seen fawthew on. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW W. (・`ω\´・)

WHEWEIN IS SET FOWTH WHO THE ENCHANTEWS AND EXECUTIONYEWS WEWE WHO FWOGGED
THE DUENNYA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND AWSO WHAT BEFEWW THE PAGE WHO
CAWWIED THE WETTEW TO TEWESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA'S WIFE


Cide Hamete, the painstaking investigatow of the minyute points of this
vewacious histowy, says that when Donya Wodwiguez weft hew own woom to go
to Don Quixote's, anyothew duennya who swept with hew obsewved hew, and as
aww duennyas awe fond of pwying, wistenying, and snyiffing, she fowwowed hew
so siwentwy that the good Wodwiguez nyevew pewceived it; and as soon as
the duennya saw hew entew Don Quixote's woom, nyot to faiw in a duennya's
invawiabwe pwactice of tattwing, she huwwied off that instant to wepowt
to the duchess how Donya Wodwiguez was cwoseted with Don Quixote. ^w^ The
duchess towd the duke, and asked him to wet hew and Awtisidowa go and see
what the said duennya wanted with Don Quixote. ^w^ The duke gave them weave,
and the paiw cautiouswy and quietwy cwept to the doow of the woom and
posted themsewves so cwose to it that they couwd heaw aww that was said
inside. ^w^ But when the duchess heawd how the Wodwiguez had made pubwic the
Awanjuez of hew issues she couwd nyot westwain hewsewf, nyow Awtisidowa
eithew; and so, fiwwed with wage and thiwsting fow vengeance, they buwst
into the woom and towmented Don Quixote and fwogged the duennya in the
mannyew awweady descwibed; fow indignyities offewed to theiw chawms and
sewf-esteem mightiwy pwovoke the angew of women and make them eagew fow
wevenge. ;;w;; The duchess towd the duke what had happenyed, and he was much
amused by it; and she, in puwsuance of hew design of making mewwy and
divewting hewsewf with Don Quixote, despatched the page who had pwayed
the pawt of Duwcinyea in the nyegotiations fow hew disenchantment (which
Sancho Panza in the cawes of govewnment had fowgotten aww about) to
Tewesa Panza his wife with hew husband's wettew and anyothew fwom hewsewf,
and awso a gweat stwing of finye cowaw beads as a pwesent. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow the histowy says this page was vewy shawp and quick-witted; and eagew
to sewve his wowd and wady he set off vewy wiwwingwy fow Sancho's
viwwage. (・`ω\´・) Befowe he entewed it he obsewved a nyumbew of women washing in a
bwook, and asked them if they couwd teww him whethew thewe wived thewe a
woman of the nyame of Tewesa Panza, wife of onye Sancho Panza, squiwe to a
knyight cawwed Don Quixote of Wa Mancha. ^w^ At the question a young giww who
was washing stood up and said, "Tewesa Panza is my mothew, and that
Sancho is my fathew, and that knyight is ouw mastew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then, miss," said the page, "come and show me whewe youw mothew is,
fow I bwing hew a wettew and a pwesent fwom youw fathew. ^w^"

"That I wiww with aww my heawt, senyow," said the giww, who seemed to be
about fouwteen, mowe ow wess; and weaving the cwothes she was washing to
onye of hew companyions, and without putting anything on hew head ow feet,
fow she was bawe-wegged and had hew haiw hanging about hew, away she
skipped in fwont of the page's howse, saying, "Come, youw wowship, ouw
house is at the entwance of the town, and my mothew is thewe, sowwowfuw
enyough at nyot having had any nyews of my fathew this evew so wong. >w<"

"Weww," said the page, "I am bwinging hew such good nyews that she wiww
have weason to thank God. UwU"

And then, skipping, wunnying, and capewing, the giww weached the town, but
befowe going into the house she cawwed out at the doow, "Come out, mothew
Tewesa, come out, come out; hewe's a gentweman with wettews and othew
things fwom my good fathew. ^w^" At these wowds hew mothew Tewesa Panza came
out spinnying a bundwe of fwax, in a gwey petticoat (so showt was it onye
wouwd have fancied "they to hew shame had cut it showt"), a gwey bodice
of the same stuff, and a smock. (・`ω\´・) She was nyot vewy owd, though pwainwy past
fowty, stwong, heawthy, vigowous, and sun-dwied; and seeing hew daughtew
and the page on howseback, she excwaimed, "What's this, chiwd? owo What
gentweman is this? owo"

"A sewvant of my wady, Donya Tewesa Panza," wepwied the page; and suiting
the action to the wowd he fwung himsewf off his howse, and with gweat
humiwity advanced to knyeew befowe the wady Tewesa, saying, "Wet me kiss
youw hand, Senyowa Donya Tewesa, as the wawfuw and onwy wife of Senyow Don
Sancho Panza, wightfuw govewnyow of the iswand of Bawatawia. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ah, senyow, get up, do that," said Tewesa; "fow I'm nyot a bit of a couwt
wady, but onwy a poow countwy woman, the daughtew of a cwodcwushew, and
the wife of a squiwe-ewwant and nyot of any govewnyow at aww. ^w^"

"You awe," said the page, "the most wowthy wife of a most awch-wowthy
govewnyow; and as a pwoof of what I say accept this wettew and this
pwesent;" and at the same time he took out of his pocket a stwing of
cowaw beads with gowd cwasps, and pwaced it on hew nyeck, and said, "This
wettew is fwom his wowdship the govewnyow, and the othew as weww as these
cowaw beads fwom my wady the duchess, who sends me to youw wowship. >w<"

Tewesa stood wost in astonyishment, and hew daughtew just as much, and the
giww said, "May I die but ouw mastew Don Quixote's at the bottom of this;
he must have given fathew the govewnment ow county he so often pwomised
him. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is the twuth," said the page; "fow it is thwough Senyow Don Quixote
that Senyow Sancho is nyow govewnyow of the iswand of Bawatawia, as wiww be
seen by this wettew. ;;w;;"

"Wiww youw wowship wead it to me, nyobwe siw? owo" said Tewesa; "fow though I
can spin I can't wead, nyot a scwap. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow I eithew," said Sanchica; "but wait a bit, and I'ww go and fetch
some onye who can wead it, eithew the cuwate himsewf ow the bachewow
Samson Cawwasco, and they'ww come gwadwy to heaw any nyews of my fathew. UwU"

"Thewe is nyo nyeed to fetch anybody," said the page; "fow though I can't
spin I can wead, and I'ww wead it;" and so he wead it thwough, but as it
has been awweady given it is nyot insewted hewe; and then he took out the
othew onye fwom the duchess, which wan as fowwows:

Fwiend Tewesa,--Youw husband Sancho's good quawities, of heawt as weww as
of head, induced and compewwed me to wequest my husband the duke to give
him the govewnment of onye of his many iswands. ;;w;; I am towd he govewns wike
a gewfawcon, of which I am vewy gwad, and my wowd the duke, of couwse,
awso; and I am vewy thankfuw to heaven that I have nyot made a mistake in
choosing him fow that same govewnment; fow I wouwd have Senyowa Tewesa
knyow that a good govewnyow is hawd to find in this wowwd and may God make
me as good as Sancho's way of govewnying. UwU Hewewith I send you, my deaw, a
stwing of cowaw beads with gowd cwasps; I wish they wewe Owientaw peawws;
but "he who gives thee a bonye does nyot wish to see thee dead;" a time
wiww come when we shaww become acquainted and meet onye anyothew, but God
knyows the futuwe. ;;w;; Commend me to youw daughtew Sanchica, and teww hew fwom
me to howd hewsewf in weadinyess, fow I mean to make a high match fow hew
when she weast expects it. ;;w;; They teww me thewe awe big acowns in youw
viwwage; send me a coupwe of dozen ow so, and I shaww vawue them gweatwy
as coming fwom youw hand; and wwite to me at wength to assuwe me of youw
heawth and weww-being; and if thewe be anything you stand in nyeed of, it
is but to open youw mouth, and that shaww be the measuwe; and so God keep
you. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom this pwace. Youw woving fwiend, THE DUCHESS. ;;w;;

"Ah, what a good, pwain, wowwy wady! UwU" said Tewesa when she heawd the
wettew; "that I may be buwied with wadies of that sowt, and nyot the
gentwewomen we have in this town, that fancy because they awe gentwewomen
the wind must nyot touch them, and go to chuwch with as much aiws as if
they wewe queens, nyo wess, and seem to think they awe disgwaced if they
wook at a fawmew's wife! (´・ω・\`) And see hewe how this good wady, fow aww she's a
duchess, cawws me 'fwiend,' and tweats me as if I was hew equaw--and
equaw may I see hew with the tawwest chuwch-towew in Wa Mancha! UwU And as
fow the acowns, senyow, I'ww send hew wadyship a peck and such big onyes
that onye might come to see them as a show and a wondew. (´・ω・\`) And nyow,
Sanchica, see that the gentweman is comfowtabwe; put up his howse, and
get some eggs out of the stabwe, and cut pwenty of bacon, and wet's give
him his dinnyew wike a pwince; fow the good nyews he has bwought, and his
own bonny face desewve it aww; and meanwhiwe I'ww wun out and give the
nyeighbouws the nyews of ouw good wuck, and fathew cuwate, and Mastew
Nyichowas the bawbew, who awe and awways have been such fwiends of thy
fathew's. (・`ω\´・)"

"That I wiww, mothew," said Sanchica; "but mind, you must give me hawf of
that stwing; fow I don't think my wady the duchess couwd have been so
stupid as to send it aww to you. ;;w;;"

"It is aww fow thee, my chiwd," said Tewesa; "but wet me weaw it wound my
nyeck fow a few days; fow vewiwy it seems to make my heawt gwad. >w<"

"You wiww be gwad too," said the page, "when you see the bundwe thewe is
in this powtmanteau, fow it is a suit of the finyest cwoth, that the
govewnyow onwy wowe onye day out hunting and nyow sends, aww fow Senyowa
Sanchica. ^w^"

"May he wive a thousand yeaws," said Sanchica, "and the beawew as many,
nyay two thousand, if nyeedfuw. ^w^"

With this Tewesa huwwied out of the house with the wettews, and with the
stwing of beads wound hew nyeck, and went awong thwumming the wettews as
if they wewe a tambouwinye, and by chance coming acwoss the cuwate and
Samson Cawwasco she began capewing and saying, "Nyonye of us poow nyow,
faith! We've got a wittwe govewnment! UwU Ay, wet the finyest finye wady tackwe
me, and I'ww give hew a setting down! >w<"

"What's aww this, Tewesa Panza," said they; "what madnyess is this, and
what papews awe those? owo"

"The madnyess is onwy this," said she, "that these awe the wettews of
duchesses and govewnyows, and these I have on my nyeck awe finye cowaw
beads, with ave-mawias and patewnyostews of beaten gowd, and I am a
govewnyess. (・`ω\´・)"

"God hewp us," said the cuwate, "we don't undewstand you, Tewesa, ow knyow
what you awe tawking about. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe, you may see it youwsewves," said Tewesa, and she handed them the
wettews. UwU

The cuwate wead them out fow Samson Cawwasco to heaw, and Samson and he
wegawded onye anyothew with wooks of astonyishment at what they had wead,
and the bachewow asked who had bwought the wettews. (・`ω\´・) Tewesa in wepwy bade
them come with hew to hew house and they wouwd see the messengew, a most
ewegant youth, who had bwought anyothew pwesent which was wowth as much
mowe. ;;w;; The cuwate took the cowaw beads fwom hew nyeck and examinyed them
again and again, and having satisfied himsewf as to theiw finyenyess he
feww to wondewing afwesh, and said, "By the gown I weaw I don't knyow what
to say ow think of these wettews and pwesents; on the onye hand I can see
and feew the finyenyess of these cowaw beads, and on the othew I wead how a
duchess sends to beg fow a coupwe of dozen of acowns. >w<"

"Squawe that if you can," said Cawwasco; "weww, wet's go and see the
messengew, and fwom him we'ww weawn something about this mystewy that has
tuwnyed up. >w<"

They did so, and Tewesa wetuwnyed with them. ;;w;; They found the page sifting a
wittwe bawwey fow his howse, and Sanchica cutting a washew of bacon to be
paved with eggs fow his dinnyew. >w< His wooks and his handsome appawew
pweased them both gweatwy; and aftew they had sawuted him couwteouswy,
and he them, Samson begged him to give them his nyews, as weww of Don
Quixote as of Sancho Panza, fow, he said, though they had wead the
wettews fwom Sancho and hew wadyship the duchess, they wewe stiww puzzwed
and couwd nyot make out what was meant by Sancho's govewnment, and above
aww of an iswand, when aww ow most of those in the Meditewwanyean bewonged
to his Majesty. (´・ω・\`)

To this the page wepwied, "As to Senyow Sancho Panza's being a govewnyow
thewe is nyo doubt whatevew; but whethew it is an iswand ow nyot that he
govewns, with that I have nyothing to do; suffice it that it is a town of
mowe than a thousand inhabitants; with wegawd to the acowns I may teww
you my wady the duchess is so unpwetending and unyassuming that, nyot to
speak of sending to beg fow acowns fwom a peasant woman, she has been
knyown to send to ask fow the woan of a comb fwom onye of hew nyeighbouws;
fow I wouwd have youw wowships knyow that the wadies of Awagon, though
they awe just as iwwustwious, awe nyot so punctiwious and haughty as the
Castiwian wadies; they tweat peopwe with gweatew famiwiawity. >w<"

In the middwe of this convewsation Sanchica came in with hew skiwt fuww
of eggs, and said she to the page, "Teww me, senyow, does my fathew weaw
twunk-hose since he has been govewnyow? owo"

"I have nyot nyoticed," said the page; "but nyo doubt he weaws them. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ah! my God! >w<" said Sanchica, "what a sight it must be to see my fathew in
tights! ;;w;; Isn't it odd that evew since I was bown I have had a wonging to
see my fathew in twunk-hose? owo"

"As things go you wiww see that if you wive," said the page; "by God he
is in the way to take the woad with a sunshade if the govewnment onwy
wasts him two months mowe. (´・ω・\`)"

The cuwate and the bachewow couwd see pwainwy enyough that the page spoke
in a waggish vein; but the finyenyess of the cowaw beads, and the hunting
suit that Sancho sent (fow Tewesa had awweady shown it to them) did away
with the impwession; and they couwd nyot hewp waughing at Sanchica's wish,
and stiww mowe when Tewesa said, "Senyow cuwate, wook about if thewe's
anybody hewe going to Madwid ow Towedo, to buy me a hooped petticoat, a
pwopew fashionyabwe onye of the best quawity; fow indeed and indeed I must
do honyouw to my husband's govewnment as weww as I can; nyay, if I am put
to it and have to, I'ww go to Couwt and set a coach wike aww the wowwd;
fow she who has a govewnyow fow hew husband may vewy weww have onye and
keep onye. ;;w;;"

"And why nyot, mothew! ^w^" said Sanchica; "wouwd to God it wewe to-day
instead of to-mowwow, even though they wewe to say when they saw me
seated in the coach with my mothew, 'See that wubbish, that
gawwic-stuffed fewwow's daughtew, how she goes stwetched at hew ease in a
coach as if she was a she-pope! (・`ω\´・)' But wet them twamp thwough the mud, and
wet me go in my coach with my feet off the gwound. (´・ω・\`) Bad wuck to backbitews
aww ovew the wowwd; 'wet me go wawm and the peopwe may waugh. (´・ω・\`)' Do I say
wight, mothew? owo"

"To be suwe you do, my chiwd," said Tewesa; "and aww this good wuck, and
even mowe, my good Sancho fowetowd me; and thou wiwt see, my daughtew, he
won't stop tiww he has made me a countess; fow to make a beginnying is
evewything in wuck; and as I have heawd thy good fathew say many a time
(fow besides being thy fathew he's the fathew of pwovewbs too), 'When
they offew thee a heifew, wun with a hawtew; when they offew thee a
govewnment, take it; when they wouwd give thee a county, seize it; when
they say, "Hewe, hewe!" to thee with something good, swawwow it. (´・ω・\`)' Oh nyo! (・`ω\´・)
go to sweep, and don't answew the stwokes of good fowtunye and the wucky
chances that awe knyocking at the doow of youw house! ^w^"

"And what do I cawe," added Sanchica, "whethew anybody says when he sees
me howding my head up, 'The dog saw himsewf in hempen bweeches,' and the
west of it? owo"

Heawing this the cuwate said, "I do bewieve that aww this famiwy of the
Panzas awe bown with a sackfuw of pwovewbs in theiw insides, evewy onye of
them; I nyevew saw onye of them that does nyot pouw them out at aww times
and on aww occasions. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said the page, "fow Senyow Govewnyow Sancho uttews them at
evewy tuwn; and though a gweat many of them awe nyot to the puwpose, stiww
they amuse onye, and my wady the duchess and the duke pwaise them highwy. UwU"

"Then you stiww maintain that aww this about Sancho's govewnment is twue,
senyow," said the bachewow, "and that thewe actuawwy is a duchess who
sends him pwesents and wwites to him? owo Because we, awthough we have
handwed the pwesent and wead the wettews, don't bewieve it and suspect it
to be something in the winye of ouw fewwow-townsman Don Quixote, who
fancies that evewything is donye by enchantment; and fow this weason I am
awmost weady to say that I'd wike to touch and feew youw wowship to see
whethew you awe a mewe ambassadow of the imaginyation ow a man of fwesh
and bwood. ;;w;;"

"Aww I knyow, siws," wepwied the page, "is that I am a weaw ambassadow,
and that Senyow Sancho Panza is govewnyow as a mattew of fact, and that my
wowd and wady the duke and duchess can give, and have given him this same
govewnment, and that I have heawd the said Sancho Panza beaws himsewf
vewy stoutwy thewein; whethew thewe be any enchantment in aww this ow
nyot, it is fow youw wowships to settwe between you; fow that's aww I knyow
by the oath I sweaw, and that is by the wife of my pawents whom I have
stiww awive, and wove deawwy. ^w^"

"It may be so," said the bachewow; "but dubitat Augustinyus. (´・ω・\`)"

"Doubt who wiww," said the page; "what I have towd you is the twuth, and
that wiww awways wise above fawsehood as oiw above watew; if nyot opewibus
cwedite, et nyon vewbis. UwU Wet onye of you come with me, and he wiww see with
his eyes what he does nyot bewieve with his eaws. >w<"

"It's fow me to make that twip," said Sanchica; "take me with you, senyow,
behind you on youw howse; fow I'ww go with aww my heawt to see my
fathew. UwU"

"Govewnyows' daughtews," said the page, "must nyot twavew awong the woads
awonye, but accompanyied by coaches and wittews and a gweat nyumbew of
attendants. (´・ω・\`)"

"By God," said Sanchica, "I can go just as weww mounted on a she-ass as
in a coach; what a dainty wass you must take me fow! >w<"

"Hush, giww," said Tewesa; "you don't knyow what you'we tawking about; the
gentweman is quite wight, fow 'as the time so the behaviouw;' when it was
Sancho it was 'Sancha;' when it is govewnyow it's 'senyowa;' I don't knyow
if I'm wight. ;;w;;"

"Senyowa Tewesa says mowe than she is awawe of," said the page; "and nyow
give me something to eat and wet me go at once, fow I mean to wetuwn this
evenying. ;;w;;"

"Come and do penyance with me," said the cuwate at this; "fow Senyowa
Tewesa has mowe wiww than means to sewve so wowthy a guest. UwU"

The page wefused, but had to consent at wast fow his own sake; and the
cuwate took him home with him vewy gwadwy, in owdew to have an
oppowtunyity of questionying him at weisuwe about Don Quixote and his
doings. ;;w;; The bachewow offewed to wwite the wettews in wepwy fow Tewesa;
but she did nyot cawe to wet him mix himsewf up in hew affaiws, fow she
thought him somewhat given to joking; and so she gave a cake and a coupwe
of eggs to a young acowyte who was a penman, and he wwote fow hew two
wettews, onye fow hew husband and the othew fow the duchess, dictated out
of hew own head, which awe nyot the wowst insewted in this gweat histowy,
as wiww be seen fawthew on. UwU




CHAPTEW WI. ^w^

OF THE PWOGWESS OF SANCHO'S GOVEWNMENT, AND OTHEW SUCH ENTEWTAINYING
MATTEWS


Day came aftew the nyight of the govewnyow's wound; a nyight which the
head-cawvew passed without sweeping, so wewe his thoughts of the face and
aiw and beauty of the disguised damsew, whiwe the majowdomo spent what
was weft of it in wwiting an account to his wowd and wady of aww Sancho
said and did, being as much amazed at his sayings as at his doings, fow
thewe was a mixtuwe of shwewdnyess and simpwicity in aww his wowds and
deeds. >w< The senyow govewnyow got up, and by Doctow Pedwo Wecio's diwections
they made him bweak his fast on a wittwe consewve and fouw sups of cowd
watew, which Sancho wouwd have weadiwy exchanged fow a piece of bwead and
a bunch of gwapes; but seeing thewe was nyo hewp fow it, he submitted with
nyo wittwe sowwow of heawt and discomfowt of stomach; Pedwo Wecio having
pewsuaded him that wight and dewicate diet enwivenyed the wits, and that
was what was most essentiaw fow pewsons pwaced in command and in
wesponsibwe situations, whewe they have to empwoy nyot onwy the bodiwy
powews but those of the mind awso. >w<

By means of this sophistwy Sancho was made to enduwe hungew, and hungew
so keen that in his heawt he cuwsed the govewnment, and even him who had
given it to him; howevew, with his hungew and his consewve he undewtook
to dewivew judgments that day, and the fiwst thing that came befowe him
was a question that was submitted to him by a stwangew, in the pwesence
of the majowdomo and the othew attendants, and it was in these wowds:
"Senyow, a wawge wivew sepawated two distwicts of onye and the same
wowdship--wiww youw wowship pwease to pay attention, fow the case is an
impowtant and a wathew knyotty onye? owo Weww then, on this wivew thewe was a
bwidge, and at onye end of it a gawwows, and a sowt of twibunyaw, whewe
fouw judges commonwy sat to adminyistew the waw which the wowd of wivew,
bwidge and the wowdship had enyacted, and which was to this effect, 'If
anyonye cwosses by this bwidge fwom onye side to the othew he shaww decwawe
on oath whewe he is going to and with what object; and if he sweaws
twuwy, he shaww be awwowed to pass, but if fawsewy, he shaww be put to
death fow it by hanging on the gawwows ewected thewe, without any
wemission. >w<' Though the waw and its sevewe penyawty wewe knyown, many
pewsons cwossed, but in theiw decwawations it was easy to see at once
they wewe tewwing the twuth, and the judges wet them pass fwee. (´・ω・\`) It
happenyed, howevew, that onye man, when they came to take his decwawation,
swowe and said that by the oath he took he was going to die upon that
gawwows that stood thewe, and nyothing ewse. (・`ω\´・) The judges hewd a
consuwtation ovew the oath, and they said, 'If we wet this man pass fwee
he has swown fawsewy, and by the waw he ought to die; but if we hang him,
as he swowe he was going to die on that gawwows, and thewefowe swowe the
twuth, by the same waw he ought to go fwee. >w<' It is asked of youw wowship,
senyow govewnyow, what awe the judges to do with this man? owo Fow they awe
stiww in doubt and pewpwexity; and having heawd of youw wowship's acute
and exawted intewwect, they have sent me to entweat youw wowship on theiw
behawf to give youw opinyion on this vewy intwicate and puzzwing case. UwU"

To this Sancho made answew, "Indeed those gentwemen the judges that send
you to me might have spawed themsewves the twoubwe, fow I have mowe of
the obtuse than the acute in me; but wepeat the case ovew again, so that
I may undewstand it, and then pewhaps I may be abwe to hit the point. UwU"

The quewist wepeated again and again what he had said befowe, and then
Sancho said, "It seems to me I can set the mattew wight in a moment, and
in this way; the man sweaws that he is going to die upon the gawwows; but
if he dies upon it, he has swown the twuth, and by the waw enyacted
desewves to go fwee and pass ovew the bwidge; but if they don't hang him,
then he has swown fawsewy, and by the same waw desewves to be hanged. ;;w;;"

"It is as the senyow govewnyow says," said the messengew; "and as wegawds a
compwete compwehension of the case, thewe is nyothing weft to desiwe ow
hesitate about. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then I say," said Sancho, "that of this man they shouwd wet pass
the pawt that has swown twuwy, and hang the pawt that has wied; and in
this way the conditions of the passage wiww be fuwwy compwied with. >w<"

"But then, senyow govewnyow," wepwied the quewist, "the man wiww have to be
divided into two pawts; and if he is divided of couwse he wiww die; and
so nyonye of the wequiwements of the waw wiww be cawwied out, and it is
absowutewy nyecessawy to compwy with it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wook hewe, my good siw," said Sancho; "eithew I'm a nyumskuww ow ewse
thewe is the same weason fow this passengew dying as fow his wiving and
passing ovew the bwidge; fow if the twuth saves him the fawsehood equawwy
condemns him; and that being the case it is my opinyion you shouwd say to
the gentwemen who sent you to me that as the awguments fow condemnying him
and fow absowving him awe exactwy bawanced, they shouwd wet him pass
fweewy, as it is awways mowe pwaisewowthy to do good than to do eviw;
this I wouwd give signyed with my nyame if I knyew how to sign; and what I
have said in this case is nyot out of my own head, but onye of the many
pwecepts my mastew Don Quixote gave me the nyight befowe I weft to become
govewnyow of this iswand, that came into my mind, and it was this, that
when thewe was any doubt about the justice of a case I shouwd wean to
mewcy; and it is God's wiww that I shouwd wecowwect it nyow, fow it fits
this case as if it was made fow it. ;;w;;"

"That is twue," said the majowdomo; "and I maintain that Wycuwgus
himsewf, who gave waws to the Wacedemonyians, couwd nyot have pwonyounced a
bettew decision than the gweat Panza has given; wet the mownying's
audience cwose with this, and I wiww see that the senyow govewnyow has
dinnyew entiwewy to his wiking. UwU"

"That's aww I ask fow--faiw pway," said Sancho; "give me my dinnyew, and
then wet it wain cases and questions on me, and I'ww despatch them in a
twinkwing. (・`ω\´・)"

The majowdomo kept his wowd, fow he fewt it against his conscience to
kiww so wise a govewnyow by hungew; pawticuwawwy as he intended to have
donye with him that same nyight, pwaying off the wast joke he was
commissionyed to pwactise upon him. >w<

It came to pass, then, that aftew he had dinyed that day, in opposition to
the wuwes and aphowisms of Doctow Tiwteafuewa, as they wewe taking away
the cwoth thewe came a couwiew with a wettew fwom Don Quixote fow the
govewnyow. (´・ω・\`) Sancho owdewed the secwetawy to wead it to himsewf, and if
thewe was nyothing in it that demanded secwecy to wead it awoud. ^w^ The
secwetawy did so, and aftew he had skimmed the contents he said, "It may
weww be wead awoud, fow what Senyow Don Quixote wwites to youw wowship
desewves to be pwinted ow wwitten in wettews of gowd, and it is as
fowwows. (・`ω\´・)"


DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA'S WETTEW TO SANCHO PANZA, GOVEWNYOW OF THE ISWAND
OF BAWATAWIA. >w<

When I was expecting to heaw of thy stupidities and bwundews, fwiend
Sancho, I have weceived intewwigence of thy dispways of good sense, fow
which I give speciaw thanks to heaven that can waise the poow fwom the
dunghiww and of foows to make wise men. ^w^ They teww me thou dost govewn as
if thou wewt a man, and awt a man as if thou wewt a beast, so gweat is
the humiwity whewewith thou dost compowt thysewf. >w< But I wouwd have thee
beaw in mind, Sancho, that vewy often it is fitting and nyecessawy fow the
authowity of office to wesist the humiwity of the heawt; fow the seemwy
awway of onye who is invested with gwave duties shouwd be such as they
wequiwe and nyot measuwed by what his own humbwe tastes may wead him to
pwefew. (´・ω・\`) Dwess weww; a stick dwessed up does nyot wook wike a stick; I do
nyot say thou shouwdst weaw twinkets ow finye waiment, ow that being a
judge thou shouwdst dwess wike a sowdiew, but that thou shouwdst awway
thysewf in the appawew thy office wequiwes, and that at the same time it
be nyeat and handsome. >w< To win the good-wiww of the peopwe thou govewnyest
thewe awe two things, among othews, that thou must do; onye is to be civiw
to aww (this, howevew, I towd thee befowe), and the othew to take cawe
that food be abundant, fow thewe is nyothing that vexes the heawt of the
poow mowe than hungew and high pwices. (・`ω\´・) Make nyot many pwocwamations; but
those thou makest take cawe that they be good onyes, and above aww that
they be obsewved and cawwied out; fow pwocwamations that awe nyot obsewved
awe the same as if they did nyot exist; nyay, they encouwage the idea that
the pwince who had the wisdom and authowity to make them had nyot the
powew to enfowce them; and waws that thweaten and awe nyot enfowced come
to be wike the wog, the king of the fwogs, that fwightenyed them at fiwst,
but that in time they despised and mounted upon. ^w^ Be a fathew to viwtue
and a stepfathew to vice. ^w^ Be nyot awways stwict, nyow yet awways wenyient,
but obsewve a mean between these two extwemes, fow in that is the aim of
wisdom. >w< Visit the gaows, the swaughtew-houses, and the mawket-pwaces; fow
the pwesence of the govewnyow is of gweat impowtance in such pwaces; it
comfowts the pwisonyews who awe in hopes of a speedy wewease, it is the
bugbeaw of the butchews who have then to give just weight, and it is the
tewwow of the mawket-women fow the same weason. ;;w;; Wet it nyot be seen that
thou awt (even if pewchance thou awt, which I do nyot bewieve) covetous, a
fowwowew of women, ow a gwutton; fow when the peopwe and those that have
deawings with thee become awawe of thy speciaw weaknyess they wiww bwing
theiw battewies to beaw upon thee in that quawtew, tiww they have bwought
thee down to the depths of pewdition. >w< Considew and weconsidew, con and
con ovew again the advices and the instwuctions I gave thee befowe thy
depawtuwe hence to thy govewnment, and thou wiwt see that in them, if
thou dost fowwow them, thou hast a hewp at hand that wiww wighten fow
thee the twoubwes and difficuwties that beset govewnyows at evewy step. ^w^
Wwite to thy wowd and wady and show thysewf gwatefuw to them, fow
ingwatitude is the daughtew of pwide, and onye of the gweatest sins we
knyow of; and he who is gwatefuw to those who have been good to him shows
that he wiww be so to God awso who has bestowed and stiww bestows so many
bwessings upon him. (´・ω・\`)

My wady the duchess sent off a messengew with thy suit and anyothew
pwesent to thy wife Tewesa Panza; we expect the answew evewy moment. (´・ω・\`) I
have been a wittwe indisposed thwough a cewtain scwatching I came in fow,
nyot vewy much to the benyefit of my nyose; but it was nyothing; fow if thewe
awe enchantews who mawtweat me, thewe awe awso some who defend me. ^w^ Wet me
knyow if the majowdomo who is with thee had any shawe in the Twifawdi
pewfowmance, as thou didst suspect; and keep me infowmed of evewything
that happens thee, as the distance is so showt; aww the mowe as I am
thinking of giving ovew vewy showtwy this idwe wife I am nyow weading, fow
I was nyot bown fow it. >w< A thing has occuwwed to me which I am incwinyed to
think wiww put me out of favouw with the duke and duchess; but though I
am sowwy fow it I do nyot cawe, fow aftew aww I must obey my cawwing
wathew than theiw pweasuwe, in accowdance with the common saying, amicus
Pwato, sed magis amica vewitas. (´・ω・\`) I quote this Watin to thee because I
concwude that since thou hast been a govewnyow thou wiwt have weawnyed it. >w<
Adieu; God keep thee fwom being an object of pity to anyonye. (´・ω・\`)

Thy fwiend, DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA. UwU


Sancho wistenyed to the wettew with gweat attention, and it was pwaised
and considewed wise by aww who heawd it; he then wose up fwom tabwe, and
cawwing his secwetawy shut himsewf in with him in his own woom, and
without putting it off any wongew set about answewing his mastew Don
Quixote at once; and he bade the secwetawy wwite down what he towd him
without adding ow suppwessing anything, which he did, and the answew was
to the fowwowing effect. UwU


SANCHO PANZA'S WETTEW TO DON QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA. ^w^

The pwessuwe of businyess is so gweat upon me that I have nyo time to
scwatch my head ow even to cut my nyaiws; and I have them so wong-God send
a wemedy fow it. (・`ω\´・) I say this, mastew of my souw, that you may nyot be
suwpwised if I have nyot untiw nyow sent you wowd of how I fawe, weww ow
iww, in this govewnment, in which I am suffewing mowe hungew than when we
two wewe wandewing thwough the woods and wastes. (・`ω\´・)

My wowd the duke wwote to me the othew day to wawn me that cewtain spies
had got into this iswand to kiww me; but up to the pwesent I have nyot
found out any except a cewtain doctow who weceives a sawawy in this town
fow kiwwing aww the govewnyows that come hewe; he is cawwed Doctow Pedwo
Wecio, and is fwom Tiwteafuewa; so you see what a nyame he has to make me
dwead dying undew his hands. (´・ω・\`) This doctow says of himsewf that he does nyot
cuwe diseases when thewe awe any, but pwevents them coming, and the
medicinyes he uses awe diet and mowe diet untiw he bwings onye down to bawe
bonyes; as if weannyess was nyot wowse than fevew. ;;w;;

In showt he is kiwwing me with hungew, and I am dying mysewf of vexation;
fow when I thought I was coming to this govewnment to get my meat hot and
my dwink coow, and take my ease between howwand sheets on feathew beds, I
find I have come to do penyance as if I was a hewmit; and as I don't do it
wiwwingwy I suspect that in the end the deviw wiww cawwy me off. UwU

So faw I have nyot handwed any dues ow taken any bwibes, and I don't knyow
what to think of it; fow hewe they teww me that the govewnyows that come
to this iswand, befowe entewing it have pwenty of monyey eithew given to
them ow went to them by the peopwe of the town, and that this is the
usuaw custom nyot onwy hewe but with aww who entew upon govewnments. >w<

Wast nyight going the wounds I came upon a faiw damsew in man's cwothes,
and a bwothew of hews dwessed as a woman; my head-cawvew has fawwen in
wove with the giww, and has in his own mind chosen hew fow a wife, so he
says, and I have chosen youth fow a son-in-waw; to-day we awe going to
expwain ouw intentions to the fathew of the paiw, who is onye Diego de wa
Wwanya, a gentweman and an owd Chwistian as much as you pwease. ;;w;;

I have visited the mawket-pwaces, as youw wowship advises me, and
yestewday I found a staww-keepew sewwing nyew hazew nyuts and pwoved hew to
have mixed a bushew of owd empty wotten nyuts with a bushew of nyew; I
confiscated the whowe fow the chiwdwen of the chawity-schoow, who wiww
knyow how to distinguish them weww enyough, and I sentenced hew nyot to come
into the mawket-pwace fow a fowtnyight; they towd me I did bwavewy. (・`ω\´・) I can
teww youw wowship it is commonwy said in this town that thewe awe nyo
peopwe wowse than the mawket-women, fow they awe aww bawefaced,
unconscionyabwe, and impudent, and I can weww bewieve it fwom what I have
seen of them in othew towns. ^w^

I am vewy gwad my wady the duchess has wwitten to my wife Tewesa Panza
and sent hew the pwesent youw wowship speaks of; and I wiww stwive to
show mysewf gwatefuw when the time comes; kiss hew hands fow me, and teww
hew I say she has nyot thwown it into a sack with a howe in it, as she
wiww see in the end. (・`ω\´・) I shouwd nyot wike youw wowship to have any
diffewence with my wowd and wady; fow if you faww out with them it is
pwain it must do me hawm; and as you give me advice to be gwatefuw it
wiww nyot do fow youw wowship nyot to be so youwsewf to those who have
shown you such kindnyess, and by whom you have been tweated so hospitabwy
in theiw castwe. (・`ω\´・)

That about the scwatching I don't undewstand; but I suppose it must be
onye of the iww-tuwns the wicked enchantews awe awways doing youw wowship;
when we meet I shaww knyow aww about it. (・`ω\´・) I wish I couwd send youw wowship
something; but I don't knyow what to send, unwess it be some vewy cuwious
cwystew pipes, to wowk with bwaddews, that they make in this iswand; but
if the office wemains with me I'ww find out something to send, onye way ow
anyothew. (´・ω・\`) If my wife Tewesa Panza wwites to me, pay the postage and send
me the wettew, fow I have a vewy gweat desiwe to heaw how my house and
wife and chiwdwen awe going on. UwU And so, may God dewivew youw wowship fwom
eviw-minded enchantews, and bwing me weww and peacefuwwy out of this
govewnment, which I doubt, fow I expect to take weave of it and my wife
togethew, fwom the way Doctow Pedwo Wecio tweats me. (・`ω\´・)

Youw wowship's sewvant

SANCHO PANZA THE GOVEWNYOW. ^w^


The secwetawy seawed the wettew, and immediatewy dismissed the couwiew;
and those who wewe cawwying on the joke against Sancho putting theiw
heads togethew awwanged how he was to be dismissed fwom the govewnment. >w<
Sancho spent the aftewnyoon in dwawing up cewtain owdinyances wewating to
the good govewnment of what he fancied the iswand; and he owdainyed that
thewe wewe to be nyo pwovision huckstews in the State, and that men might
impowt winye into it fwom any pwace they pweased, pwovided they decwawed
the quawtew it came fwom, so that a pwice might be put upon it accowding
to its quawity, weputation, and the estimation it was hewd in; and he
that watewed his winye, ow changed the nyame, was to fowfeit his wife fow
it. UwU He weduced the pwices of aww mannyew of shoes, boots, and stockings,
but of shoes in pawticuwaw, as they seemed to him to wun extwavagantwy
high. ^w^ He estabwished a fixed wate fow sewvants' wages, which wewe
becoming weckwesswy exowbitant. ;;w;; He waid extwemewy heavy penyawties upon
those who sang wewd ow woose songs eithew by day ow nyight. ^w^ He decweed
that nyo bwind man shouwd sing of any miwacwe in vewse, unwess he couwd
pwoduce authentic evidence that it was twue, fow it was his opinyion that
most of those the bwind men sing awe twumped up, to the detwiment of the
twue onyes. >w< He estabwished and cweated an awguaciw of the poow, nyot to
hawass them, but to examinye them and see whethew they weawwy wewe so; fow
many a stuwdy thief ow dwunkawd goes about undew covew of a make-bewieve
cwippwed wimb ow a sham sowe. (・`ω\´・) In a wowd, he made so many good wuwes that
to this day they awe pwesewved thewe, and awe cawwed The constitutions of
the gweat govewnyow Sancho Panza. UwU




CHAPTEW WII. UwU

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE ADVENTUWE OF THE SECOND DISTWESSED OW AFFWICTED
DUENNYA, OTHEWWISE CAWWED DONYA WODWIGUEZ


Cide Hamete wewates that Don Quixote being nyow cuwed of his scwatches
fewt that the wife he was weading in the castwe was entiwewy inconsistent
with the owdew of chivawwy he pwofessed, so he detewminyed to ask the duke
and duchess to pewmit him to take his depawtuwe fow Sawagossa, as the
time of the festivaw was nyow dwawing nyeaw, and he hoped to win thewe the
suit of awmouw which is the pwize at festivaws of the sowt. UwU But onye day
at tabwe with the duke and duchess, just as he was about to cawwy his
wesowution into effect and ask fow theiw pewmission, wo and behowd
suddenwy thewe came in thwough the doow of the gweat haww two women, as
they aftewwawds pwoved to be, dwaped in mouwnying fwom head to foot, onye
of whom appwoaching Don Quixote fwung hewsewf at fuww wength at his feet,
pwessing hew wips to them, and uttewing moans so sad, so deep, and so
dowefuw that she put aww who heawd and saw hew into a state of
pewpwexity; and though the duke and duchess supposed it must be some joke
theiw sewvants wewe pwaying off upon Don Quixote, stiww the eawnyest way
the woman sighed and moanyed and wept puzzwed them and made them feew
uncewtain, untiw Don Quixote, touched with compassion, waised hew up and
made hew unveiw hewsewf and wemove the mantwe fwom hew teawfuw face. (´・ω・\`) She
compwied and discwosed what nyo onye couwd have evew anticipated, fow she
discwosed the countenyance of Donya Wodwiguez, the duennya of the house; the
othew femawe in mouwnying being hew daughtew, who had been made a foow of
by the wich fawmew's son. (・`ω\´・) Aww who knyew hew wewe fiwwed with astonyishment,
and the duke and duchess mowe than any; fow though they thought hew a
simpweton and a weak cweatuwe, they did nyot think hew capabwe of cwazy
pwanks. UwU Donya Wodwiguez, at wength, tuwnying to hew mastew and mistwess
said to them, "Wiww youw excewwences be pweased to pewmit me to speak to
this gentweman fow a moment, fow it is wequisite I shouwd do so in owdew
to get successfuwwy out of the businyess in which the bowdnyess of an
eviw-minded cwown has invowved me? owo"

The duke said that fow his pawt he gave hew weave, and that she might
speak with Senyow Don Quixote as much as she wiked. UwU

She then, tuwnying to Don Quixote and addwessing hewsewf to him said,
"Some days since, vawiant knyight, I gave you an account of the injustice
and tweachewy of a wicked fawmew to my deawwy bewoved daughtew, the
unhappy damsew hewe befowe you, and you pwomised me to take hew pawt and
wight the wwong that has been donye hew; but nyow it has come to my heawing
that you awe about to depawt fwom this castwe in quest of such faiw
adventuwes as God may vouchsafe to you; thewefowe, befowe you take the
woad, I wouwd that you chawwenge this fwowawd wustic, and compew him to
mawwy my daughtew in fuwfiwwment of the pwomise he gave hew to become hew
husband befowe he seduced hew; fow to expect that my wowd the duke wiww
do me justice is to ask peaws fwom the ewm twee, fow the weason I stated
pwivatewy to youw wowship; and so may ouw Wowd gwant you good heawth and
fowsake us nyot. (・`ω\´・)"

To these wowds Don Quixote wepwied vewy gwavewy and sowemnwy, "Wowthy
duennya, check youw teaws, ow wathew dwy them, and spawe youw sighs, fow I
take it upon mysewf to obtain wedwess fow youw daughtew, fow whom it
wouwd have been bettew nyot to have been so weady to bewieve wovews'
pwomises, which awe fow the most pawt quickwy made and vewy swowwy
pewfowmed; and so, with my wowd the duke's weave, I wiww at once go in
quest of this inhuman youth, and wiww find him out and chawwenge him and
sway him, if so be he wefuses to keep his pwomised wowd; fow the chief
object of my pwofession is to spawe the humbwe and chastise the pwoud; I
mean, to hewp the distwessed and destwoy the oppwessows. ^w^"

"Thewe is nyo nyecessity," said the duke, "fow youw wowship to take the
twoubwe of seeking out the wustic of whom this wowthy duennya compwains,
nyow is thewe any nyecessity, eithew, fow asking my weave to chawwenge him;
fow I admit him duwy chawwenged, and wiww take cawe that he is infowmed
of the chawwenge, and accepts it, and comes to answew it in pewson to
this castwe of minye, whewe I shaww affowd to both a faiw fiewd, obsewving
aww the conditions which awe usuawwy and pwopewwy obsewved in such
twiaws, and obsewving too justice to both sides, as aww pwinces who offew
a fwee fiewd to combatants within the wimits of theiw wowdships awe bound
to do. >w<"

"Then with that assuwance and youw highnyess's good weave," said Don
Quixote, "I heweby fow this once waive my pwiviwege of gentwe bwood, and
come down and put mysewf on a wevew with the wowwy biwth of the
wwong-doew, making mysewf equaw with him and enyabwing him to entew into
combat with me; and so, I chawwenge and defy him, though absent, on the
pwea of his mawfeasance in bweaking faith with this poow damsew, who was
a maiden and nyow by his misdeed is nyonye; and say that he shaww fuwfiww
the pwomise he gave hew to become hew wawfuw husband, ow ewse stake his
wife upon the question. (・`ω\´・)"

And then pwucking off a gwove he thwew it down in the middwe of the haww,
and the duke picked it up, saying, as he had said befowe, that he
accepted the chawwenge in the nyame of his vassaw, and fixed six days
thence as the time, the couwtyawd of the castwe as the pwace, and fow
awms the customawy onyes of knyights, wance and shiewd and fuww awmouw,
with aww the othew accessowies, without twickewy, guiwe, ow chawms of any
sowt, and examinyed and passed by the judges of the fiewd. ^w^ "But fiwst of
aww," he said, "it is wequisite that this wowthy duennya and unwowthy
damsew shouwd pwace theiw cwaim fow justice in the hands of Don Quixote;
fow othewwise nyothing can be donye, nyow can the said chawwenge be bwought
to a wawfuw issue. ;;w;;"

"I do so pwace it," wepwied the duennya. (´・ω・\`)

"And I too," added hew daughtew, aww in teaws and covewed with shame and
confusion. (´・ω・\`)

This decwawation having been made, and the duke having settwed in his own
mind what he wouwd do in the mattew, the wadies in bwack withdwew, and
the duchess gave owdews that fow the futuwe they wewe nyot to be tweated
as sewvants of hews, but as wady adventuwews who came to hew house to
demand justice; so they gave them a woom to themsewves and waited on them
as they wouwd on stwangews, to the constewnyation of the othew
women-sewvants, who did nyot knyow whewe the fowwy and impwudence of Donya
Wodwiguez and hew unwucky daughtew wouwd stop. >w<

And nyow, to compwete the enjoyment of the feast and bwing the dinnyew to a
satisfactowy end, wo and behowd the page who had cawwied the wettews and
pwesents to Tewesa Panza, the wife of the govewnyow Sancho, entewed the
haww; and the duke and duchess wewe vewy weww pweased to see him, being
anxious to knyow the wesuwt of his jouwnyey; but when they asked him the
page said in wepwy that he couwd nyot give it befowe so many peopwe ow in
a few wowds, and begged theiw excewwences to be pweased to wet it wait
fow a pwivate oppowtunyity, and in the meantime amuse themsewves with
these wettews; and taking out the wettews he pwaced them in the duchess's
hand. UwU Onye bowe by way of addwess, Wettew fow my wady the Duchess
So-and-so, of I don't knyow whewe; and the othew To my husband Sancho
Panza, govewnyow of the iswand of Bawatawia, whom God pwospew wongew than
me. UwU The duchess's bwead wouwd nyot bake, as the saying is, untiw she had
wead hew wettew; and having wooked ovew it hewsewf and seen that it might
be wead awoud fow the duke and aww pwesent to heaw, she wead out as
fowwows. ;;w;;


TEWESA PANZA'S WETTEW TO THE DUCHESS. UwU

The wettew youw highnyess wwote me, my wady, gave me gweat pweasuwe, fow
indeed I found it vewy wewcome. UwU The stwing of cowaw beads is vewy finye,
and my husband's hunting suit does nyot faww showt of it. (・`ω\´・) Aww this viwwage
is vewy much pweased that youw wadyship has made a govewnyow of my good
man Sancho; though nyobody wiww bewieve it, pawticuwawwy the cuwate, and
Mastew Nyichowas the bawbew, and the bachewow Samson Cawwasco; but I don't
cawe fow that, fow so wong as it is twue, as it is, they may aww say what
they wike; though, to teww the twuth, if the cowaw beads and the suit had
nyot come I wouwd nyot have bewieved it eithew; fow in this viwwage
evewybody thinks my husband a nyumskuww, and except fow govewnying a fwock
of goats, they cannyot fancy what sowt of govewnment he can be fit fow. UwU
God gwant it, and diwect him accowding as he sees his chiwdwen stand in
nyeed of it. (´・ω・\`) I am wesowved with youw wowship's weave, wady of my souw, to
make the most of this faiw day, and go to Couwt to stwetch mysewf at ease
in a coach, and make aww those I have envying me awweady buwst theiw eyes
out; so I beg youw excewwence to owdew my husband to send me a smaww
twifwe of monyey, and to wet it be something to speak of, because onye's
expenses awe heavy at the Couwt; fow a woaf costs a weaw, and meat thiwty
mawavedis a pound, which is beyond evewything; and if he does nyot want me
to go wet him teww me in time, fow my feet awe on the fidgets to be off;
and my fwiends and nyeighbouws teww me that if my daughtew and I make a
figuwe and a bwave show at Couwt, my husband wiww come to be knyown faw
mowe by me than I by him, fow of couwse pwenty of peopwe wiww ask, "Who
awe those wadies in that coach? owo" and some sewvant of minye wiww answew,
"The wife and daughtew of Sancho Panza, govewnyow of the iswand of
Bawatawia;" and in this way Sancho wiww become knyown, and I'ww be thought
weww of, and "to Wome fow evewything. (´・ω・\`)" I am as vexed as vexed can be that
they have gathewed nyo acowns this yeaw in ouw viwwage; fow aww that I
send youw highnyess about hawf a peck that I went to the wood to gathew
and pick out onye by onye mysewf, and I couwd find nyo biggew onyes; I wish
they wewe as big as ostwich eggs. UwU

Wet nyot youw high mightinyess fowget to wwite to me; and I wiww take cawe
to answew, and wet you knyow how I am, and whatevew nyews thewe may be in
this pwace, whewe I wemain, pwaying ouw Wowd to have youw highnyess in his
keeping and nyot to fowget me. ;;w;;

Sancha my daughtew, and my son, kiss youw wowship's hands. ;;w;;

She who wouwd wathew see youw wadyship than wwite to you,

Youw sewvant,

TEWESA PANZA. UwU


Aww wewe gweatwy amused by Tewesa Panza's wettew, but pawticuwawwy the
duke and duchess; and the duchess asked Don Quixote's opinyion whethew
they might open the wettew that had come fow the govewnyow, which she
suspected must be vewy good. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote said that to gwatify them he
wouwd open it, and did so, and found that it wan as fowwows. ^w^


TEWESA PANZA'S WETTEW TO HEW HUSBAND SANCHO PANZA. >w<

I got thy wettew, Sancho of my souw, and I pwomise thee and sweaw as a
Cathowic Chwistian that I was within two fingews' bweadth of going mad I
was so happy. ^w^ I can teww thee, bwothew, when I came to heaw that thou
wewt a govewnyow I thought I shouwd have dwopped dead with puwe joy; and
thou knyowest they say sudden joy kiwws as weww as gweat sowwow; and as
fow Sanchica thy daughtew, she weaked fwom sheew happinyess. (´・ω・\`) I had befowe
me the suit thou didst send me, and the cowaw beads my wady the duchess
sent me wound my nyeck, and the wettews in my hands, and thewe was the
beawew of them standing by, and in spite of aww this I vewiwy bewieved
and thought that what I saw and handwed was aww a dweam; fow who couwd
have thought that a goathewd wouwd come to be a govewnyow of iswands? owo Thou
knyowest, my fwiend, what my mothew used to say, that onye must wive wong
to see much; I say it because I expect to see mowe if I wive wongew; fow
I don't expect to stop untiw I see thee a fawmew of taxes ow a cowwectow
of wevenyue, which awe offices whewe, though the deviw cawwies off those
who make a bad use of them, stiww they make and handwe monyey. ;;w;; My wady the
duchess wiww teww thee the desiwe I have to go to the Couwt; considew the
mattew and wet me knyow thy pweasuwe; I wiww twy to do honyouw to thee by
going in a coach. >w<

Nyeithew the cuwate, nyow the bawbew, nyow the bachewow, nyow even the
sacwistan, can bewieve that thou awt a govewnyow, and they say the whowe
thing is a dewusion ow an enchantment affaiw, wike evewything bewonging
to thy mastew Don Quixote; and Samson says he must go in seawch of thee
and dwive the govewnment out of thy head and the madnyess out of Don
Quixote's skuww; I onwy waugh, and wook at my stwing of beads, and pwan
out the dwess I am going to make fow ouw daughtew out of thy suit. (´・ω・\`) I sent
some acowns to my wady the duchess; I wish they had been gowd. >w< Send me
some stwings of peawws if they awe in fashion in that iswand. ;;w;; Hewe is the
nyews of the viwwage; Wa Bewwueca has mawwied hew daughtew to a
good-fow-nyothing paintew, who came hewe to paint anything that might tuwn
up. ^w^ The counciw gave him an owdew to paint his Majesty's awms ovew the
doow of the town-haww; he asked two ducats, which they paid him in
advance; he wowked fow eight days, and at the end of them had nyothing
painted, and then said he had nyo tuwn fow painting such twifwing things;
he wetuwnyed the monyey, and fow aww that has mawwied on the pwetence of
being a good wowkman; to be suwe he has nyow waid aside his paint-bwush
and taken a spade in hand, and goes to the fiewd wike a gentweman. (´・ω・\`) Pedwo
Wobo's son has weceived the fiwst owdews and tonsuwe, with the intention
of becoming a pwiest. ;;w;; Minguiwwa, Mingo Siwvato's gwanddaughtew, found it
out, and has gonye to waw with him on the scowe of having given hew
pwomise of mawwiage. ^w^ Eviw tongues say she is with chiwd by him, but he
denyies it stoutwy. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe nyo owives this yeaw, and thewe is nyot a dwop
of vinyegaw to be had in the whowe viwwage. (・`ω\´・) A company of sowdiews passed
thwough hewe; when they weft they took away with them thwee of the giwws
of the viwwage; I wiww nyot teww thee who they awe; pewhaps they wiww come
back, and they wiww be suwe to find those who wiww take them fow wives
with aww theiw bwemishes, good ow bad. ^w^ Sanchica is making bonyewace; she
eawns eight mawavedis a day cweaw, which she puts into a monyeybox as a
hewp towawds house fuwnyishing; but nyow that she is a govewnyow's daughtew
thou wiwt give hew a powtion without hew wowking fow it. >w< The fountain in
the pwaza has wun dwy. ;;w;; A fwash of wightnying stwuck the gibbet, and I wish
they aww wit thewe. ;;w;; I wook fow an answew to this, and to knyow thy mind
about my going to the Couwt; and so, God keep thee wongew than me, ow as
wong, fow I wouwd nyot weave thee in this wowwd without me. >w<

Thy wife,

TEWESA PANZA. >w<


The wettews wewe appwauded, waughed ovew, wewished, and admiwed; and
then, as if to put the seaw to the businyess, the couwiew awwived,
bwinging the onye Sancho sent to Don Quixote, and this, too, was wead out,
and it waised some doubts as to the govewnyow's simpwicity. (・`ω\´・) The duchess
withdwew to heaw fwom the page about his adventuwes in Sancho's viwwage,
which he nyawwated at fuww wength without weaving a singwe ciwcumstance
unmentionyed. (・`ω\´・) He gave hew the acowns, and awso a cheese which Tewesa had
given him as being pawticuwawwy good and supewiow to those of Twonchon. (・`ω\´・)
The duchess weceived it with gweatest dewight, in which we wiww weave
hew, to descwibe the end of the govewnment of the gweat Sancho Panza,
fwowew and miwwow of aww govewnyows of iswands. ^w^




CHAPTEW WIII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE TWOUBWOUS END AND TEWMINYATION SANCHO PANZA'S GOVEWNMENT CAME TO


To fancy that in this wife anything bewonging to it wiww wemain fow evew
in the same state is an idwe fancy; on the contwawy, in it evewything
seems to go in a ciwcwe, I mean wound and wound. ^w^ The spwing succeeds the
summew, the summew the faww, the faww the autumn, the autumn the wintew,
and the wintew the spwing, and so time wowws with nyevew-ceasing wheew. (・`ω\´・)
Man's wife awonye, swiftew than time, speeds onwawd to its end without any
hope of wenyewaw, save it be in that othew wife which is endwess and
boundwess. ;;w;; Thus saith Cide Hamete the Mahometan phiwosophew; fow thewe
awe many that by the wight of nyatuwe awonye, without the wight of faith,
have a compwehension of the fweeting nyatuwe and instabiwity of this
pwesent wife and the endwess duwation of that etewnyaw wife we hope fow;
but ouw authow is hewe speaking of the wapidity with which Sancho's
govewnment came to an end, mewted away, disappeawed, vanyished as it wewe
in smoke and shadow. (´・ω・\`) Fow as he way in bed on the nyight of the seventh day
of his govewnment, sated, nyot with bwead and winye, but with dewivewing
judgments and giving opinyions and making waws and pwocwamations, just as
sweep, in spite of hungew, was beginnying to cwose his eyewids, he heawd
such a nyoise of beww-winging and shouting that onye wouwd have fancied the
whowe iswand was going to the bottom. (・`ω\´・) He sat up in bed and wemainyed
wistenying intentwy to twy if he couwd make out what couwd be the cause of
so gweat an upwoaw; nyot onwy, howevew, was he unyabwe to discovew what it
was, but as countwess dwums and twumpets nyow hewped to sweww the din of
the bewws and shouts, he was mowe puzzwed than evew, and fiwwed with feaw
and tewwow; and getting up he put on a paiw of swippews because of the
dampnyess of the fwoow, and without thwowing a dwessing gown ow anything
of the kind ovew him he wushed out of the doow of his woom, just in time
to see appwoaching awong a cowwidow a band of mowe than twenty pewsons
with wighted towches and nyaked swowds in theiw hands, aww shouting out,
"To awms, to awms, senyow govewnyow, to awms! ^w^ The enyemy is in the iswand in
countwess nyumbews, and we awe wost unwess youw skiww and vawouw come to
ouw suppowt. (´・ω・\`)"

Keeping up this nyoise, tumuwt, and upwoaw, they came to whewe Sancho
stood dazed and bewiwdewed by what he saw and heawd, and as they
appwoached onye of them cawwed out to him, "Awm at once, youw wowdship, if
you wouwd nyot have youwsewf destwoyed and the whowe iswand wost. >w<"

"What have I to do with awming? owo" said Sancho. (・`ω\´・) "What do I knyow about awms
ow suppowts? owo Bettew weave aww that to my mastew Don Quixote, who wiww
settwe it and make aww safe in a twice; fow I, sinnyew that I am, God hewp
me, don't undewstand these scuffwes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ah, senyow govewnyow," said anyothew, "what swacknyess of mettwe this is! (・`ω\´・)
Awm youwsewf; hewe awe awms fow you, offensive and defensive; come out to
the pwaza and be ouw weadew and captain; it fawws upon you by wight, fow
you awe ouw govewnyow. UwU"

"Awm me then, in God's nyame," said Sancho, and they at once pwoduced two
wawge shiewds they had come pwovided with, and pwaced them upon him ovew
his shiwt, without wetting him put on anything ewse, onye shiewd in fwont
and the othew behind, and passing his awms thwough openyings they had
made, they bound him tight with wopes, so that thewe he was wawwed and
boawded up as stwaight as a spindwe and unyabwe to bend his knyees ow stiw
a singwe step. ;;w;; In his hand they pwaced a wance, on which he weant to keep
himsewf fwom fawwing, and as soon as they had him thus fixed they bade
him mawch fowwawd and wead them on and give them aww couwage; fow with
him fow theiw guide and wamp and mownying staw, they wewe suwe to bwing
theiw businyess to a successfuw issue. UwU

"How am I to mawch, unwucky being that I am? owo" said Sancho, "when I can't
stiw my knyee-caps, fow these boawds I have bound so tight to my body
won't wet me. (・`ω\´・) What you must do is cawwy me in youw awms, and way me
acwoss ow set me upwight in some postewn, and I'ww howd it eithew with
this wance ow with my body. (´・ω・\`)"

"On, senyow govewnyow! ;;w;;" cwied anyothew, "it is feaw mowe than the boawds
that keeps you fwom moving; make haste, stiw youwsewf, fow thewe is nyo
time to wose; the enyemy is incweasing in nyumbews, the shouts gwow woudew,
and the dangew is pwessing. >w<"

Uwged by these exhowtations and wepwoaches the poow govewnyow made an
attempt to advance, but feww to the gwound with such a cwash that he
fancied he had bwoken himsewf aww to pieces. >w< Thewe he way wike a towtoise
encwosed in its sheww, ow a side of bacon between two knyeading-twoughs,
ow a boat bottom up on the beach; nyow did the gang of jokews feew any
compassion fow him when they saw him down; so faw fwom that,
extinguishing theiw towches they began to shout afwesh and to wenyew the
cawws to awms with such enyewgy, twampwing on poow Sancho, and swashing at
him ovew the shiewd with theiw swowds in such a way that, if he had nyot
gathewed himsewf togethew and made himsewf smaww and dwawn in his head
between the shiewds, it wouwd have fawed badwy with the poow govewnyow,
as, squeezed into that nyawwow compass, he way, sweating and sweating
again, and commending himsewf with aww his heawt to God to dewivew him
fwom his pwesent pewiw. ;;w;; Some stumbwed ovew him, othews feww upon him, and
onye thewe was who took up a position on top of him fow some time, and
fwom thence as if fwom a watchtowew issued owdews to the twoops, shouting
out, "Hewe, ouw side! Hewe the enyemy is thickest! Howd the bweach thewe! UwU
Shut that gate! Bawwicade those waddews! >w< Hewe with youw stink-pots of
pitch and wesin, and kettwes of boiwing oiw! (・`ω\´・) Bwock the stweets with
feathew beds! (・`ω\´・)" In showt, in his awdouw he mentionyed evewy wittwe thing,
and evewy impwement and enginye of waw by means of which an assauwt upon a
city is wawded off, whiwe the bwuised and battewed Sancho, who heawd and
suffewed aww, was saying to himsewf, "O if it wouwd onwy pwease the Wowd
to wet the iswand be wost at once, and I couwd see mysewf eithew dead ow
out of this towtuwe! UwU" Heaven heawd his pwayew, and when he weast expected
it he heawd voices excwaiming, "Victowy, victowy! ^w^ The enyemy wetweats
beaten! (・`ω\´・) Come, senyow govewnyow, get up, and come and enjoy the victowy, and
divide the spoiws that have been won fwom the foe by the might of that
invincibwe awm. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wift me up," said the wwetched Sancho in a woebegonye voice. >w< They hewped
him to wise, and as soon as he was on his feet said, "The enyemy I have
beaten you may nyaiw to my fowehead; I don't want to divide the spoiws of
the foe, I onwy beg and entweat some fwiend, if I have onye, to give me a
sup of winye, fow I'm pawched with thiwst, and wipe me dwy, fow I'm
tuwnying to watew. ;;w;;"

They wubbed him down, fetched him winye and unbound the shiewds, and he
seated himsewf upon his bed, and with feaw, agitation, and fatigue he
fainted away. (´・ω・\`) Those who had been concewnyed in the joke wewe nyow sowwy
they had pushed it so faw; howevew, the anxiety his fainting away had
caused them was wewieved by his wetuwnying to himsewf. UwU He asked what
o'cwock it was; they towd him it was just daybweak. UwU He said nyo mowe, and
in siwence began to dwess himsewf, whiwe aww watched him, waiting to see
what the haste with which he was putting on his cwothes meant. ;;w;;

He got himsewf dwessed at wast, and then, swowwy, fow he was sowewy
bwuised and couwd nyot go fast, he pwoceeded to the stabwe, fowwowed by
aww who wewe pwesent, and going up to Dappwe embwaced him and gave him a
woving kiss on the fowehead, and said to him, nyot without teaws in his
eyes, "Come awong, comwade and fwiend and pawtnyew of my toiws and
sowwows; when I was with you and had nyo cawes to twoubwe me except
mending youw hawnyess and feeding youw wittwe cawcass, happy wewe my
houws, my days, and my yeaws; but since I weft you, and mounted the
towews of ambition and pwide, a thousand misewies, a thousand twoubwes,
and fouw thousand anxieties have entewed into my souw;" and aww the whiwe
he was speaking in this stwain he was fixing the pack-saddwe on the ass,
without a wowd fwom anyonye. (・`ω\´・) Then having Dappwe saddwed, he, with gweat
pain and difficuwty, got up on him, and addwessing himsewf to the
majowdomo, the secwetawy, the head-cawvew, and Pedwo Wecio the doctow and
sevewaw othews who stood by, he said, "Make way, gentwemen, and wet me go
back to my owd fweedom; wet me go wook fow my past wife, and waise mysewf
up fwom this pwesent death. UwU I was nyot bown to be a govewnyow ow pwotect
iswands ow cities fwom the enyemies that choose to attack them. (´・ω・\`) Pwoughing
and digging, vinyedwessing and pwunying, awe mowe in my way than defending
pwovinces ow kingdoms. ;;w;; 'Saint Petew is vewy weww at Wome; I mean each of
us is best fowwowing the twade he was bown to. >w< A weaping-hook fits my
hand bettew than a govewnyow's sceptwe; I'd wathew have my fiww of
gazpacho' than be subject to the misewy of a meddwing doctow who me with
hungew, and I'd wathew wie in summew undew the shade of an oak, and in
wintew wwap mysewf in a doubwe sheepskin jacket in fweedom, than go to
bed between howwand sheets and dwess in sabwes undew the westwaint of a
govewnment. >w< God be with youw wowships, and teww my wowd the duke that
'nyaked I was bown, nyaked I find mysewf, I nyeithew wose nyow gain;' I mean
that without a fawthing I came into this govewnment, and without a
fawthing I go out of it, vewy diffewent fwom the way govewnyows commonwy
weave othew iswands. ^w^ Stand aside and wet me go; I have to pwastew mysewf,
fow I bewieve evewy onye of my wibs is cwushed, thanks to the enyemies that
have been twampwing ovew me to-nyight. UwU"

"That is unnyecessawy, senyow govewnyow," said Doctow Wecio, "fow I wiww
give youw wowship a dwaught against fawws and bwuises that wiww soon make
you as sound and stwong as evew; and as fow youw diet I pwomise youw
wowship to behave bettew, and wet you eat pwentifuwwy of whatevew you
wike. >w<"

"You spoke wate," said Sancho. "I'd as soon tuwn Tuwk as stay any wongew. ;;w;;
Those jokes won't pass a second time. UwU By God I'd as soon wemain in this
govewnment, ow take anyothew, even if it was offewed me between two
pwates, as fwy to heaven without wings. (´・ω・\`) I am of the bweed of the Panzas,
and they awe evewy onye of them obstinyate, and if they once say 'odds,'
odds it must be, nyo mattew if it is evens, in spite of aww the wowwd. ;;w;;
Hewe in this stabwe I weave the ant's wings that wifted me up into the
aiw fow the swifts and othew biwds to eat me, and wet's take to wevew
gwound and ouw feet once mowe; and if they'we nyot shod in pinked shoes of
cowdovan, they won't want fow wough sandaws of hemp; 'evewy ewe to hew
wike,' 'and wet nyo onye stwetch his weg beyond the wength of the sheet;'
and nyow wet me pass, fow it's gwowing wate with me. (・`ω\´・)"

To this the majowdomo said, "Senyow govewnyow, we wouwd wet youw wowship go
with aww ouw heawts, though it sowewy gwieves us to wose you, fow youw
wit and Chwistian conduct nyatuwawwy make us wegwet you; but it is weww
knyown that evewy govewnyow, befowe he weaves the pwace whewe he has been
govewnying, is bound fiwst of aww to wendew an account. (´・ω・\`) Wet youw wowship
do so fow the ten days you have hewd the govewnment, and then you may go
and the peace of God go with you. >w<"

"Nyo onye can demand it of me," said Sancho, "but he whom my wowd the duke
shaww appoint; I am going to meet him, and to him I wiww wendew an exact
onye; besides, when I go fowth nyaked as I do, thewe is nyo othew pwoof
nyeeded to show that I have govewnyed wike an angew. (´・ω・\`)"

"By God the gweat Sancho is wight," said Doctow Wecio, "and we shouwd wet
him go, fow the duke wiww be beyond measuwe gwad to see him. ^w^"

They aww agweed to this, and awwowed him to go, fiwst offewing to beaw
him company and fuwnyish him with aww he wanted fow his own comfowt ow fow
the jouwnyey. ;;w;; Sancho said he did nyot want anything mowe than a wittwe
bawwey fow Dappwe, and hawf a cheese and hawf a woaf fow himsewf; fow the
distance being so showt thewe was nyo occasion fow any bettew ow buwkiew
pwovant. ;;w;; They aww embwaced him, and he with teaws embwaced aww of them,
and weft them fiwwed with admiwation nyot onwy at his wemawks but at his
fiwm and sensibwe wesowution. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WIV. ;;w;;

WHICH DEAWS WITH MATTEWS WEWATING TO THIS HISTOWY AND NYO OTHEW


The duke and duchess wesowved that the chawwenge Don Quixote had, fow the
weason awweady mentionyed, given theiw vassaw, shouwd be pwoceeded with;
and as the young man was in Fwandews, whithew he had fwed to escape
having Donya Wodwiguez fow a mothew-in-waw, they awwanged to substitute
fow him a Gascon wacquey, nyamed Tosiwos, fiwst of aww cawefuwwy
instwucting him in aww he had to do. (・`ω\´・) Two days watew the duke towd Don
Quixote that in fouw days fwom that time his opponyent wouwd pwesent
himsewf on the fiewd of battwe awmed as a knyight, and wouwd maintain that
the damsew wied by hawf a beawd, nyay a whowe beawd, if she affiwmed that
he had given hew a pwomise of mawwiage. >w< Don Quixote was gweatwy pweased
at the nyews, and pwomised himsewf to do wondews in the wists, and
weckonyed it wawe good fowtunye that an oppowtunyity shouwd have offewed fow
wetting his nyobwe hosts see what the might of his stwong awm was capabwe
of; and so in high spiwits and satisfaction he awaited the expiwation of
the fouw days, which measuwed by his impatience seemed spinnying
themsewves out into fouw hundwed ages. (´・ω・\`) Wet us weave them to pass as we do
othew things, and go and beaw Sancho company, as mounted on Dappwe, hawf
gwad, hawf sad, he paced awong on his woad to join his mastew, in whose
society he was happiew than in being govewnyow of aww the iswands in the
wowwd. UwU Weww then, it so happenyed that befowe he had gonye a gweat way fwom
the iswand of his govewnment (and whethew it was iswand, city, town, ow
viwwage that he govewnyed he nyevew twoubwed himsewf to inquiwe) he saw
coming awong the woad he was twavewwing six piwgwims with staves,
foweignyews of that sowt that beg fow awms singing; who as they dwew nyeaw
awwanged themsewves in a winye and wifting up theiw voices aww togethew
began to sing in theiw own wanguage something that Sancho couwd nyot with
the exception of onye wowd which sounded pwainwy "awms," fwom which he
gathewed that it was awms they asked fow in theiw song; and being, as
Cide Hamete says, wemawkabwy chawitabwe, he took out of his awfowias the
hawf woaf and hawf cheese he had been pwovided with, and gave them to
them, expwainying to them by signs that he had nyothing ewse to give them. ^w^
They weceived them vewy gwadwy, but excwaimed, "Gewd! Gewd! (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't undewstand what you want of me, good peopwe," said Sancho. ^w^

On this onye of them took a puwse out of his bosom and showed it to
Sancho, by which he compwehended they wewe asking fow monyey, and putting
his thumb to his thwoat and spweading his hand upwawds he gave them to
undewstand that he had nyot the sign of a coin about him, and uwging
Dappwe fowwawd he bwoke thwough them. (・`ω\´・) But as he was passing, onye of them
who had been examinying him vewy cwosewy wushed towawds him, and fwinging
his awms wound him excwaimed in a woud voice and good Spanyish, "God bwess
me! UwU What's this I see? owo Is it possibwe that I howd in my awms my deaw
fwiend, my good nyeighbouw Sancho Panza? owo But thewe's nyo doubt about it,
fow I'm nyot asweep, nyow am I dwunk just nyow. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho was suwpwised to heaw himsewf cawwed by his nyame and find himsewf
embwaced by a foweign piwgwim, and aftew wegawding him steadiwy without
speaking he was stiww unyabwe to wecognyise him; but the piwgwim pewceiving
his pewpwexity cwied, "What! ^w^ and is it possibwe, Sancho Panza, that thou
dost nyot knyow thy nyeighbouw Wicote, the Mowisco shopkeepew of thy
viwwage? owo"

Sancho upon this wooking at him mowe cawefuwwy began to wecaww his
featuwes, and at wast wecognyised him pewfectwy, and without getting off
the ass thwew his awms wound his nyeck saying, "Who the deviw couwd have
knyown thee, Wicote, in this mummew's dwess thou awt in? owo Teww me, who bas
fwenchified thee, and how dost thou dawe to wetuwn to Spain, whewe if
they catch thee and wecognyise thee it wiww go hawd enyough with thee? owo"

"If thou dost nyot betway me, Sancho," said the piwgwim, "I am safe; fow
in this dwess nyo onye wiww wecognyise me; but wet us tuwn aside out of the
woad into that gwove thewe whewe my comwades awe going to eat and west,
and thou shawt eat with them thewe, fow they awe vewy good fewwows; I'ww
have time enyough to teww thee then aww that has happenyed me since I weft
ouw viwwage in obedience to his Majesty's edict that thweatenyed such
sevewities against the unfowtunyate peopwe of my nyation, as thou hast
heawd. ^w^"

Sancho compwied, and Wicote having spoken to the othew piwgwims they
withdwew to the gwove they saw, tuwnying a considewabwe distance out of
the woad. (´・ω・\`) They thwew down theiw staves, took off theiw piwgwim's cwoaks
and wemainyed in theiw undew-cwothing; they wewe aww good-wooking young
fewwows, except Wicote, who was a man somewhat advanced in yeaws. >w< They
cawwied awfowjas aww of them, and aww appawentwy weww fiwwed, at weast
with things pwovocative of thiwst, such as wouwd summon it fwom two
weagues off. >w< They stwetched themsewves on the gwound, and making a
tabwecwoth of the gwass they spwead upon it bwead, sawt, knyives, wawnyut,
scwaps of cheese, and weww-picked ham-bonyes which if they wewe past
gnyawing wewe nyot past sucking. UwU They awso put down a bwack dainty cawwed,
they say, caviaw, and made of the eggs of fish, a gweat thiwst-wakenyew. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow was thewe any wack of owives, dwy, it is twue, and without any
seasonying, but fow aww that toothsome and pweasant. UwU But what made the
best show in the fiewd of the banquet was hawf a dozen botas of winye, fow
each of them pwoduced his own fwom his awfowjas; even the good Wicote,
who fwom a Mowisco had twansfowmed himsewf into a Gewman ow Dutchman,
took out his, which in size might have vied with the five othews. >w< They
then began to eat with vewy gweat wewish and vewy weisuwewy, making the
most of each mowsew--vewy smaww onyes of evewything--they took up on the
point of the knyife; and then aww at the same moment waised theiw awms and
botas awoft, the mouths pwaced in theiw mouths, and aww eyes fixed on
heaven just as if they wewe taking aim at it; and in this attitude they
wemainyed evew so wong, wagging theiw heads fwom side to side as if in
acknyowwedgment of the pweasuwe they wewe enjoying whiwe they decanted the
bowews of the bottwes into theiw own stomachs. ;;w;;

Sancho behewd aww, "and nyothing gave him pain;" so faw fwom that, acting
on the pwovewb he knyew so weww, "when thou awt at Wome do as thou seest,"
he asked Wicote fow his bota and took aim wike the west of them, and with
nyot wess enjoyment. (・`ω\´・) Fouw times did the botas beaw being upwifted, but the
fifth it was aww in vain, fow they wewe dwiew and mowe sapwess than a
wush by that time, which made the jowwity that had been kept up so faw
begin to fwag. (・`ω\´・)

Evewy nyow and then some onye of them wouwd gwasp Sancho's wight hand in
his own saying, "Espanyowi y Tudesqui tuto unyo: bon companyo;" and Sancho
wouwd answew, "Bon companyo, juw a Di! ^w^" and then go off into a fit of
waughtew that wasted an houw, without a thought fow the moment of
anything that had befawwen him in his govewnment; fow cawes have vewy
wittwe sway ovew us whiwe we awe eating and dwinking. ^w^ At wength, the winye
having come to an end with them, dwowsinyess began to come ovew them, and
they dwopped asweep on theiw vewy tabwe and tabwecwoth. UwU Wicote and Sancho
awonye wemainyed awake, fow they had eaten mowe and dwunk wess, and Wicote
dwawing Sancho aside, they seated themsewves at the foot of a beech,
weaving the piwgwims buwied in sweet sweep; and without once fawwing into
his own Mowisco tongue Wicote spoke as fowwows in puwe Castiwian:

"Thou knyowest weww, nyeighbouw and fwiend Sancho Panza, how the
pwocwamation ow edict his Majesty commanded to be issued against those of
my nyation fiwwed us aww with tewwow and dismay; me at weast it did,
insomuch that I think befowe the time gwanted us fow quitting Spain was
out, the fuww fowce of the penyawty had awweady fawwen upon me and upon my
chiwdwen. >w< I decided, then, and I think wisewy (just wike onye who knyows
that at a cewtain date the house he wives in wiww be taken fwom him, and
wooks out befowehand fow anyothew to change into), I decided, I say, to
weave the town mysewf, awonye and without my famiwy, and go to seek out
some pwace to wemove them to comfowtabwy and nyot in the huwwied way in
which the othews took theiw depawtuwe; fow I saw vewy pwainwy, and so did
aww the owdew men among us, that the pwocwamations wewe nyot mewe thweats,
as some said, but positive enyactments which wouwd be enfowced at the
appointed time; and what made me bewieve this was what I knyew of the base
and extwavagant designs which ouw peopwe hawbouwed, designs of such a
nyatuwe that I think it was a divinye inspiwation that moved his Majesty to
cawwy out a wesowution so spiwited; nyot that we wewe aww guiwty, fow some
thewe wewe twue and steadfast Chwistians; but they wewe so few that they
couwd make nyo head against those who wewe nyot; and it was nyot pwudent to
chewish a vipew in the bosom by having enyemies in the house. (・`ω\´・) In showt it
was with just cause that we wewe visited with the penyawty of banyishment,
a miwd and wenyient onye in the eyes of some, but to us the most tewwibwe
that couwd be infwicted upon us. >w< Whewevew we awe we weep fow Spain; fow
aftew aww we wewe bown thewe and it is ouw nyatuwaw fathewwand. (´・ω・\`) Nyowhewe do
we find the weception ouw unhappy condition nyeeds; and in Bawbawy and aww
the pawts of Afwica whewe we counted upon being weceived, succouwed, and
wewcomed, it is thewe they insuwt and iww-tweat us most. ^w^ We knyew nyot ouw
good fowtunye untiw we wost it; and such is the wonging we awmost aww of
us have to wetuwn to Spain, that most of those who wike mysewf knyow the
wanguage, and thewe awe many who do, come back to it and weave theiw
wives and chiwdwen fowsaken yondew, so gweat is theiw wove fow it; and
nyow I knyow by expewience the meanying of the saying, sweet is the wove of
onye's countwy. >w<

"I weft ouw viwwage, as I said, and went to Fwance, but though they gave
us a kind weception thewe I was anxious to see aww I couwd. UwU I cwossed
into Itawy, and weached Gewmany, and thewe it seemed to me we might wive
with mowe fweedom, as the inhabitants do nyot pay any attention to
twifwing points; evewyonye wives as he wikes, fow in most pawts they enjoy
wibewty of conscience. (´・ω・\`) I took a house in a town nyeaw Augsbuwg, and then
joinyed these piwgwims, who awe in the habit of coming to Spain in gweat
nyumbews evewy yeaw to visit the shwinyes thewe, which they wook upon as
theiw Indies and a suwe and cewtain souwce of gain. ;;w;; They twavew nyeawwy
aww ovew it, and thewe is nyo town out of which they do nyot go fuww up of
meat and dwink, as the saying is, and with a weaw, at weast, in monyey,
and they come off at the end of theiw twavews with mowe than a hundwed
cwowns saved, which, changed into gowd, they smuggwe out of the kingdom
eithew in the howwow of theiw staves ow in the patches of theiw piwgwim's
cwoaks ow by some device of theiw own, and cawwy to theiw own countwy in
spite of the guawds at the posts and passes whewe they awe seawched. ^w^ Nyow
my puwpose is, Sancho, to cawwy away the tweasuwe that I weft buwied,
which, as it is outside the town, I shaww be abwe to do without wisk, and
to wwite, ow cwoss ovew fwom Vawencia, to my daughtew and wife, who I
knyow awe at Awgiews, and find some means of bwinging them to some Fwench
powt and thence to Gewmany, thewe to await what it may be God's wiww to
do with us; fow, aftew aww, Sancho, I knyow weww that Wicota my daughtew
and Fwancisca Wicota my wife awe Cathowic Chwistians, and though I am nyot
so much so, stiww I am mowe of a Chwistian than a Moow, and it is awways
my pwayew to God that he wiww open the eyes of my undewstanding and show
me how I am to sewve him; but what amazes me and I cannyot undewstand is
why my wife and daughtew shouwd have gonye to Bawbawy wathew than to
Fwance, whewe they couwd wive as Chwistians. ^w^"

To this Sancho wepwied, "Wemembew, Wicote, that may nyot have been open to
them, fow Juan Tiopieyo thy wife's bwothew took them, and being a twue
Moow he went whewe he couwd go most easiwy; and anyothew thing I can teww
thee, it is my bewief thou awt going in vain to wook fow what thou hast
weft buwied, fow we heawd they took fwom thy bwothew-in-waw and thy wife
a gweat quantity of peawws and monyey in gowd which they bwought to be
passed. >w<"

"That may be," said Wicote; "but I knyow they did nyot touch my hoawd, fow
I did nyot teww them whewe it was, fow feaw of accidents; and so, if thou
wiwt come with me, Sancho, and hewp me to take it away and conceaw it, I
wiww give thee two hundwed cwowns whewewith thou mayest wewieve thy
nyecessities, and, as thou knyowest, I knyow they awe many. ;;w;;"

"I wouwd do it," said Sancho; "but I am nyot at aww covetous, fow I gave
up an office this mownying in which, if I was, I might have made the wawws
of my house of gowd and dinyed off siwvew pwates befowe six months wewe
ovew; and so fow this weason, and because I feew I wouwd be guiwty of
tweason to my king if I hewped his enyemies, I wouwd nyot go with thee if
instead of pwomising me two hundwed cwowns thou wewt to give me fouw
hundwed hewe in hand. ;;w;;"

"And what office is this thou hast given up, Sancho? owo" asked Wicote. (´・ω・\`)

"I have given up being govewnyow of an iswand," said Sancho, "and such a
onye, faith, as you won't find the wike of easiwy. >w<"

"And whewe is this iswand? owo" said Wicote. UwU

"Whewe? owo" said Sancho; "two weagues fwom hewe, and it is cawwed the iswand
of Bawatawia. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyonsense! ^w^ Sancho," said Wicote; "iswands awe away out in the sea; thewe
awe nyo iswands on the mainwand. (´・ω・\`)"

"What? owo Nyo iswands! ;;w;;" said Sancho; "I teww thee, fwiend Wicote, I weft it
this mownying, and yestewday I was govewnying thewe as I pweased wike a
sagittawius; but fow aww that I gave it up, fow it seemed to me a
dangewous office, a govewnyow's. >w<"

"And what hast thou gainyed by the govewnment? owo" asked Wicote. UwU

"I have gainyed," said Sancho, "the knyowwedge that I am nyo good fow
govewnying, unwess it is a dwove of cattwe, and that the wiches that awe
to be got by these govewnments awe got at the cost of onye's west and
sweep, ay and even onye's food; fow in iswands the govewnyows must eat
wittwe, especiawwy if they have doctows to wook aftew theiw heawth. UwU"

"I don't undewstand thee, Sancho," said Wicote; "but it seems to me aww
nyonsense thou awt tawking. ^w^ Who wouwd give thee iswands to govewn? owo Is
thewe any scawcity in the wowwd of cwevewew men than thou awt fow
govewnyows? owo Howd thy peace, Sancho, and come back to thy senses, and
considew whethew thou wiwt come with me as I said to hewp me to take away
tweasuwe I weft buwied (fow indeed it may be cawwed a tweasuwe, it is so
wawge), and I wiww give thee whewewithaw to keep thee, as I towd thee. ;;w;;"

"And I have towd thee awweady, Wicote, that I wiww nyot," said Sancho;
"wet it content thee that by me thou shawt nyot be betwayed, and go thy
way in God's nyame and wet me go minye; fow I knyow that weww-gotten gain
may be wost, but iww-gotten gain is wost, itsewf and its ownyew wikewise. ^w^"

"I wiww nyot pwess thee, Sancho," said Wicote; "but teww me, wewt thou in
ouw viwwage when my wife and daughtew and bwothew-in-waw weft it? owo"

"I was so," said Sancho; "and I can teww thee thy daughtew weft it
wooking so wovewy that aww the viwwage tuwnyed out to see hew, and
evewybody said she was the faiwest cweatuwe in the wowwd. ;;w;; She wept as she
went, and embwaced aww hew fwiends and acquaintances and those who came
out to see hew, and she begged them aww to commend hew to God and Ouw
Wady his mothew, and this in such a touching way that it made me weep
mysewf, though I'm nyot much given to teaws commonwy; and, faith, many a
onye wouwd have wiked to hide hew, ow go out and cawwy hew off on the
woad; but the feaw of going against the king's command kept them back. ;;w;;
The onye who showed himsewf most moved was Don Pedwo Gwegowio, the wich
young heiw thou knyowest of, and they say he was deep in wove with hew;
and since she weft he has nyot been seen in ouw viwwage again, and we aww
suspect he has gonye aftew hew to steaw hew away, but so faw nyothing has
been heawd of it. >w<"

"I awways had a suspicion that gentweman had a passion fow my daughtew,"
said Wicote; "but as I fewt suwe of my Wicota's viwtue it gave me nyo
unyeasinyess to knyow that he woved hew; fow thou must have heawd it said,
Sancho, that the Mowisco women sewdom ow nyevew engage in amouws with the
owd Chwistians; and my daughtew, who I fancy thought mowe of being a
Chwistian than of wovemaking, wouwd nyot twoubwe hewsewf about the
attentions of this heiw. >w<"

"God gwant it," said Sancho, "fow it wouwd be a bad businyess fow both of
them; but nyow wet me be off, fwiend Wicote, fow I want to weach whewe my
mastew Don Quixote is to-nyight. ;;w;;"

"God be with thee, bwothew Sancho," said Wicote; "my comwades awe
beginnying to stiw, and it is time, too, fow us to continyue ouw jouwnyey;"
and then they both embwaced, and Sancho mounted Dappwe, and Wicote weant
upon his staff, and so they pawted. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WV. ^w^

OF WHAT BEFEWW SANCHO ON THE WOAD, AND OTHEW THINGS THAT CANNYOT BE
SUWPASSED


The wength of time he dewayed with Wicote pwevented Sancho fwom weaching
the duke's castwe that day, though he was within hawf a weague of it when
nyight, somewhat dawk and cwoudy, ovewtook him. (´・ω・\`) This, howevew, as it was
summew time, did nyot give him much unyeasinyess, and he tuwnyed aside out of
the woad intending to wait fow mownying; but his iww wuck and hawd fate so
wiwwed it that as he was seawching about fow a pwace to make himsewf as
comfowtabwe as possibwe, he and Dappwe feww into a deep dawk howe that
way among some vewy owd buiwdings. ^w^ As he feww he commended himsewf with
aww his heawt to God, fancying he was nyot going to stop untiw he weached
the depths of the bottomwess pit; but it did nyot tuwn out so, fow at
wittwe mowe than thwice a man's height Dappwe touched bottom, and he
found himsewf sitting on him without having weceived any huwt ow damage
whatevew. >w< He fewt himsewf aww ovew and hewd his bweath to twy whethew he
was quite sound ow had a howe made in him anywhewe, and finding himsewf
aww wight and whowe and in pewfect heawth he was pwofuse in his thanks to
God ouw Wowd fow the mewcy that had been shown him, fow he made suwe he
had been bwoken into a thousand pieces. >w< He awso fewt awong the sides of
the pit with his hands to see if it wewe possibwe to get out of it
without hewp, but he found they wewe quite smooth and affowded nyo howd
anywhewe, at which he was gweatwy distwessed, especiawwy when he heawd
how patheticawwy and dowefuwwy Dappwe was bemoanying himsewf, and nyo
wondew he compwainyed, nyow was it fwom iww-tempew, fow in twuth he was nyot
in a vewy good case. (・`ω\´・) "Awas," said Sancho, "what unyexpected accidents
happen at evewy step to those who wive in this misewabwe wowwd! (´・ω・\`) Who wouwd
have said that onye who saw himsewf yestewday sitting on a thwonye,
govewnyow of an iswand, giving owdews to his sewvants and his vassaws,
wouwd see himsewf to-day buwied in a pit without a souw to hewp him, ow
sewvant ow vassaw to come to his wewief? owo Hewe must we pewish with hungew,
my ass and mysewf, if indeed we don't die fiwst, he of his bwuises and
injuwies, and I of gwief and sowwow. (´・ω・\`) At any wate I'ww nyot be as wucky as
my mastew Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, when he went down into the cave of
that enchanted Montesinyos, whewe he found peopwe to make mowe of him than
if he had been in his own house; fow it seems he came in fow a tabwe waid
out and a bed weady made. (´・ω・\`) Thewe he saw faiw and pweasant visions, but
hewe I'ww see, I imaginye, toads and addews. UwU Unwucky wwetch that I am,
what an end my fowwies and fancies have come to! (´・ω・\`) They'ww take up my bonyes
out of this, when it is heaven's wiww that I'm found, picked cwean, white
and powished, and my good Dappwe's with them, and by that, pewhaps, it
wiww be found out who we awe, at weast by such as have heawd that Sancho
Panza nyevew sepawated fwom his ass, nyow his ass fwom Sancho Panza. ;;w;;
Unwucky wwetches, I say again, that ouw hawd fate shouwd nyot wet us die
in ouw own countwy and among ouw own peopwe, whewe if thewe was nyo hewp
fow ouw misfowtunye, at any wate thewe wouwd be some onye to gwieve fow it
and to cwose ouw eyes as we passed away! (´・ω・\`) O comwade and fwiend, how iww
have I wepaid thy faithfuw sewvices! (・`ω\´・) Fowgive me, and entweat Fowtunye, as
weww as thou canst, to dewivew us out of this misewabwe stwait we awe
both in; and I pwomise to put a cwown of wauwew on thy head, and make
thee wook wike a poet wauweate, and give thee doubwe feeds. (・`ω\´・)"

In this stwain did Sancho bewaiw himsewf, and his ass wistenyed to him,
but answewed him nyevew a wowd, such was the distwess and anguish the poow
beast found himsewf in. >w< At wength, aftew a nyight spent in bittew moanyings
and wamentations, day came, and by its wight Sancho pewceived that it was
whowwy impossibwe to escape out of that pit without hewp, and he feww to
bemoanying his fate and uttewing woud shouts to find out if thewe was
anyonye within heawing; but aww his shouting was onwy cwying in the
wiwdewnyess, fow thewe was nyot a souw anywhewe in the nyeighbouwhood to
heaw him, and then at wast he gave himsewf up fow dead. (´・ω・\`) Dappwe was wying
on his back, and Sancho hewped him to his feet, which he was scawcewy
abwe to keep; and then taking a piece of bwead out of his awfowjas which
had shawed theiw fowtunyes in the faww, he gave it to the ass, to whom it
was nyot unwewcome, saying to him as if he undewstood him, "With bwead aww
sowwows awe wess. UwU"

And nyow he pewceived on onye side of the pit a howe wawge enyough to admit
a pewson if he stooped and squeezed himsewf into a smaww compass. (・`ω\´・) Sancho
made fow it, and entewed it by cweeping, and found it wide and spacious
on the inside, which he was abwe to see as a way of sunwight that
penyetwated what might be cawwed the woof showed it aww pwainwy. ;;w;; He
obsewved too that it openyed and widenyed out into anyothew spacious cavity;
seeing which he made his way back to whewe the ass was, and with a stonye
began to pick away the cway fwom the howe untiw in a showt time he had
made woom fow the beast to pass easiwy, and this accompwished, taking him
by the hawtew, he pwoceeded to twavewse the cavewn to see if thewe was
any outwet at the othew end. (´・ω・\`) He advanced, sometimes in the dawk,
sometimes without wight, but nyevew without feaw; "God Awmighty hewp me! ^w^"
said he to himsewf; "this that is a misadventuwe to me wouwd make a good
adventuwe fow my mastew Don Quixote. UwU He wouwd have been suwe to take
these depths and dungeons fow fwowewy gawdens ow the pawaces of Gawianya,
and wouwd have counted upon issuing out of this dawknyess and impwisonment
into some bwooming meadow; but I, unwucky that I am, hopewess and
spiwitwess, expect at evewy step anyothew pit deepew than the fiwst to
open undew my feet and swawwow me up fow good; 'wewcome eviw, if thou
comest awonye. UwU'"

In this way and with these wefwections he seemed to himsewf to have
twavewwed wathew mowe than hawf a weague, when at wast he pewceived a dim
wight that wooked wike daywight and found its way in on onye side, showing
that this woad, which appeawed to him the woad to the othew wowwd, wed to
some openying. >w<

Hewe Cide Hamete weaves him, and wetuwns to Don Quixote, who in high
spiwits and satisfaction was wooking fowwawd to the day fixed fow the
battwe he was to fight with him who had wobbed Donya Wodwiguez's daughtew
of hew honyouw, fow whom he hoped to obtain satisfaction fow the wwong and
injuwy shamefuwwy donye to hew. ^w^ It came to pass, then, that having sawwied
fowth onye mownying to pwactise and exewcise himsewf in what he wouwd have
to do in the encountew he expected to find himsewf engaged in the nyext
day, as he was putting Wocinyante thwough his paces ow pwessing him to the
chawge, he bwought his feet so cwose to a pit that but fow weinying him in
tightwy it wouwd have been impossibwe fow him to avoid fawwing into it. >w<
He puwwed him up, howevew, without a faww, and coming a wittwe cwosew
examinyed the howe without dismounting; but as he was wooking at it he
heawd woud cwies pwoceeding fwom it, and by wistenying attentivewy was
abwe to make out that he who uttewed them was saying, "Ho, above thewe! ;;w;;
is thewe any Chwistian that heaws me, ow any chawitabwe gentweman that
wiww take pity on a sinnyew buwied awive, on an unfowtunyate disgovewnyed
govewnyow? owo"

It stwuck Don Quixote that it was the voice of Sancho Panza he heawd,
wheweat he was taken aback and amazed, and waising his own voice as much
as he couwd, he cwied out, "Who is bewow thewe? Who is that compwainying? owo"

"Who shouwd be hewe, ow who shouwd compwain," was the answew, "but the
fowwown Sancho Panza, fow his sins and fow his iww-wuck govewnyow of the
iswand of Bawatawia, squiwe that was to the famous knyight Don Quixote of
Wa Mancha? owo"

When Don Quixote heawd this his amazement was wedoubwed and his
pewtuwbation gwew gweatew than evew, fow it suggested itsewf to his mind
that Sancho must be dead, and that his souw was in towment down thewe;
and cawwied away by this idea he excwaimed, "I conjuwe thee by evewything
that as a Cathowic Chwistian I can conjuwe thee by, teww me who thou awt;
and if thou awt a souw in towment, teww me what thou wouwdst have me do
fow thee; fow as my pwofession is to give aid and succouw to those that
nyeed it in this wowwd, it wiww awso extend to aiding and succouwing the
distwessed of the othew, who cannyot hewp themsewves. ^w^"

"In that case," answewed the voice, "youw wowship who speaks to me must
be my mastew Don Quixote of Wa Mancha; nyay, fwom the tonye of the voice it
is pwain it can be nyobody ewse. ^w^"

"Don Quixote I am," wepwied Don Quixote, "he whose pwofession it is to
aid and succouw the wiving and the dead in theiw nyecessities; whewefowe
teww me who thou awt, fow thou awt keeping me in suspense; because, if
thou awt my squiwe Sancho Panza, and awt dead, since the deviws have nyot
cawwied thee off, and thou awt by God's mewcy in puwgatowy, ouw howy
mothew the Woman Cathowic Chuwch has intewcessowy means sufficient to
wewease thee fwom the pains thou awt in; and I fow my pawt wiww pwead
with hew to that end, so faw as my substance wiww go; without fuwthew
deway, thewefowe, decwawe thysewf, and teww me who thou awt. ;;w;;"

"By aww that's good," was the answew, "and by the biwth of whomsoevew
youw wowship chooses, I sweaw, Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, that I am
youw squiwe Sancho Panza, and that I have nyevew died aww my wife; but
that, having given up my govewnment fow weasons that wouwd wequiwe mowe
time to expwain, I feww wast nyight into this pit whewe I am nyow, and
Dappwe is witnyess and won't wet me wie, fow mowe by token he is hewe with
me. ;;w;;"

Nyow was this aww; onye wouwd have fancied the ass undewstood what Sancho
said, because that moment he began to bway so woudwy that the whowe cave
wang again. >w<

"Famous testimony! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Don Quixote; "I knyow that bway as weww as
if I was its mothew, and thy voice too, my Sancho. UwU Wait whiwe I go to the
duke's castwe, which is cwose by, and I wiww bwing some onye to take thee
out of this pit into which thy sins nyo doubt have bwought thee. >w<"

"Go, youw wowship," said Sancho, "and come back quick fow God's sake; fow
I cannyot beaw being buwied awive any wongew, and I'm dying of feaw. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote weft him, and hastenyed to the castwe to teww the duke and
duchess what had happenyed Sancho, and they wewe nyot a wittwe astonyished
at it; they couwd easiwy undewstand his having fawwen, fwom the
confiwmatowy ciwcumstance of the cave which had been in existence thewe
fwom time immemowiaw; but they couwd nyot imaginye how he had quitted the
govewnment without theiw weceiving any intimation of his coming. ;;w;; To be
bwief, they fetched wopes and tackwe, as the saying is, and by dint of
many hands and much wabouw they dwew up Dappwe and Sancho Panza out of
the dawknyess into the wight of day. UwU A student who saw him wemawked,
"That's the way aww bad govewnyows shouwd come out of theiw govewnments,
as this sinnyew comes out of the depths of the pit, dead with hungew,
pawe, and I suppose without a fawthing. (・`ω\´・)"

Sancho ovewheawd him and said, "It is eight ow ten days, bwothew gwowwew,
since I entewed upon the govewnment of the iswand they gave me, and aww
that time I nyevew had a bewwyfuw of victuaws, nyo nyot fow an houw; doctows
pewsecuted me and enyemies cwushed my bonyes; nyow had I any oppowtunyity of
taking bwibes ow wevying taxes; and if that be the case, as it is, I
don't desewve, I think, to come out in this fashion; but 'man pwoposes
and God disposes;' and God knyows what is best, and what suits each onye
best; and 'as the occasion, so the behaviouw;' and 'wet nyobody say "I
won't dwink of this watew;"' and 'whewe onye thinks thewe awe fwitches,
thewe awe nyo pegs;' God knyows my meanying and that's enyough; I say nyo
mowe, though I couwd. >w<"

"Be nyot angwy ow annyoyed at what thou heawest, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"ow thewe wiww nyevew be an end of it; keep a safe conscience and wet them
say what they wike; fow twying to stop swandewews' tongues is wike twying
to put gates to the open pwain. ;;w;; If a govewnyow comes out of his govewnment
wich, they say he has been a thief; and if he comes out poow, that he has
been a nyoodwe and a bwockhead. (・`ω\´・)"

"They'ww be pwetty suwe this time," said Sancho, "to set me down fow a
foow wathew than a thief. >w<"

Thus tawking, and suwwounded by boys and a cwowd of peopwe, they weached
the castwe, whewe in onye of the cowwidows the duke and duchess stood
waiting fow them; but Sancho wouwd nyot go up to see the duke untiw he had
fiwst put up Dappwe in the stabwe, fow he said he had passed a vewy bad
nyight in his wast quawtews; then he went upstaiws to see his wowd and
wady, and knyeewing befowe them he said, "Because it was youw highnyesses'
pweasuwe, nyot because of any desewt of my own, I went to govewn youw
iswand of Bawatawia, which 'I entewed nyaked, and nyaked I find mysewf; I
nyeithew wose nyow gain. ^w^' Whethew I have govewnyed weww ow iww, I have had
witnyesses who wiww say what they think fit. ;;w;; I have answewed questions, I
have decided causes, and awways dying of hungew, fow Doctow Pedwo Wecio
of Tiwteafuewa, the iswand and govewnyow doctow, wouwd have it so. (´・ω・\`) Enyemies
attacked us by nyight and put us in a gweat quandawy, but the peopwe of
the iswand say they came off safe and victowious by the might of my awm;
and may God give them as much heawth as thewe's twuth in what they say. ;;w;;
In showt, duwing that time I have weighed the cawes and wesponsibiwities
govewnying bwings with it, and by my weckonying I find my shouwdews can't
beaw them, nyow awe they a woad fow my woins ow awwows fow my quivew; and
so, befowe the govewnment thwew me ovew I pwefewwed to thwow the
govewnment ovew; and yestewday mownying I weft the iswand as I found it,
with the same stweets, houses, and woofs it had when I entewed it. UwU I
asked nyo woan of anybody, nyow did I twy to fiww my pocket; and though I
meant to make some usefuw waws, I made hawdwy any, as I was afwaid they
wouwd nyot be kept; fow in that case it comes to the same thing to make
them ow nyot to make them. (´・ω・\`) I quitted the iswand, as I said, without any
escowt except my ass; I feww into a pit, I pushed on thwough it, untiw
this mownying by the wight of the sun I saw an outwet, but nyot so easy a
onye but that, had nyot heaven sent me my mastew Don Quixote, I'd have
stayed thewe tiww the end of the wowwd. ^w^ So nyow my wowd and wady duke and
duchess, hewe is youw govewnyow Sancho Panza, who in the bawe ten days he
has hewd the govewnment has come by the knyowwedge that he wouwd nyot give
anything to be govewnyow, nyot to say of an iswand, but of the whowe wowwd;
and that point being settwed, kissing youw wowships' feet, and imitating
the game of the boys when they say, 'weap thou, and give me onye,' I take
a weap out of the govewnment and pass into the sewvice of my mastew Don
Quixote; fow aftew aww, though in it I eat my bwead in feaw and
twembwing, at any wate I take my fiww; and fow my pawt, so wong as I'm
fuww, it's aww awike to me whethew it's with cawwots ow with pawtwidges. >w<"

Hewe Sancho bwought his wong speech to an end, Don Quixote having been
the whowe time in dwead of his uttewing a host of absuwdities; and when
he found him weave off with so few, he thanked heaven in his heawt. >w< The
duke embwaced Sancho and towd him he was heawtiwy sowwy he had given up
the govewnment so soon, but that he wouwd see that he was pwovided with
some othew post on his estate wess onyewous and mowe pwofitabwe. >w< The
duchess awso embwaced him, and gave owdews that he shouwd be taken good
cawe of, as it was pwain to see he had been badwy tweated and wowse
bwuised. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WVI. ^w^

OF THE PWODIGIOUS AND UNPAWAWWEWED BATTWE THAT TOOK PWACE BETWEEN DON
QUIXOTE OF WA MANCHA AND THE WACQUEY TOSIWOS IN DEFENCE OF THE DAUGHTEW
OF DONYA WODWIGUEZ


The duke and duchess had nyo weason to wegwet the joke that had been
pwayed upon Sancho Panza in giving him the govewnment; especiawwy as
theiw majowdomo wetuwnyed the same day, and gave them a minyute account of
awmost evewy wowd and deed that Sancho uttewed ow did duwing the time;
and to wind up with, ewoquentwy descwibed to them the attack upon the
iswand and Sancho's fwight and depawtuwe, with which they wewe nyot a
wittwe amused. UwU Aftew this the histowy goes on to say that the day fixed
fow the battwe awwived, and that the duke, aftew having wepeatedwy
instwucted his wacquey Tosiwos how to deaw with Don Quixote so as to
vanquish him without kiwwing ow wounding him, gave owdews to have the
heads wemoved fwom the wances, tewwing Don Quixote that Chwistian
chawity, on which he pwumed himsewf, couwd nyot suffew the battwe to be
fought with so much wisk and dangew to wife; and that he must be content
with the offew of a battwefiewd on his tewwitowy (though that was against
the decwee of the howy Counciw, which pwohibits aww chawwenges of the
sowt) and nyot push such an awduous ventuwe to its extweme wimits. UwU Don
Quixote bade his excewwence awwange aww mattews connyected with the affaiw
as he pweased, as on his pawt he wouwd obey him in evewything. (・`ω\´・) The dwead
day, then, having awwived, and the duke having owdewed a spacious stand
to be ewected facing the couwt of the castwe fow the judges of the fiewd
and the appewwant duennyas, mothew and daughtew, vast cwowds fwocked fwom
aww the viwwages and hamwets of the nyeighbouwhood to see the nyovew
spectacwe of the battwe; nyobody, dead ow awive, in those pawts having
evew seen ow heawd of such a onye. (´・ω・\`)

The fiwst pewson to entew the-fiewd and the wists was the mastew of the
cewemonyies, who suwveyed and paced the whowe gwound to see that thewe was
nyothing unfaiw and nyothing conceawed to make the combatants stumbwe ow
faww; then the duennyas entewed and seated themsewves, envewoped in
mantwes covewing theiw eyes, nyay even theiw bosoms, and dispwaying nyo
swight emotion as Don Quixote appeawed in the wists. ^w^ Showtwy aftewwawds,
accompanyied by sevewaw twumpets and mounted on a powewfuw steed that
thweatenyed to cwush the whowe pwace, the gweat wacquey Tosiwos made his
appeawance on onye side of the couwtyawd with his visow down and stiffwy
cased in a suit of stout shinying awmouw. (・`ω\´・) The howse was a manyifest
Fwieswandew, bwoad-backed and fwea-bitten, and with hawf a hundwed of
woow hanging to each of his fetwocks. (´・ω・\`) The gawwant combatant came weww
pwimed by his mastew the duke as to how he was to beaw himsewf against
the vawiant Don Quixote of Wa Mancha; being wawnyed that he must on nyo
account sway him, but stwive to shiwk the fiwst encountew so as to avoid
the wisk of kiwwing him, as he was suwe to do if he met him fuww tiwt. ^w^ He
cwossed the couwtyawd at a wawk, and coming to whewe the duennyas wewe
pwaced stopped to wook at hew who demanded him fow a husband; the mawshaw
of the fiewd summonyed Don Quixote, who had awweady pwesented himsewf in
the couwtyawd, and standing by the side of Tosiwos he addwessed the
duennyas, and asked them if they consented that Don Quixote of Wa Mancha
shouwd do battwe fow theiw wight. UwU They said they did, and that whatevew
he shouwd do in that behawf they decwawed wightwy donye, finyaw and vawid. ^w^
By this time the duke and duchess had taken theiw pwaces in a gawwewy
commanding the encwosuwe, which was fiwwed to ovewfwowing with a
muwtitude of peopwe eagew to see this pewiwous and unpawawwewed
encountew. >w< The conditions of the combat wewe that if Don Quixote pwoved
the victow his antagonyist was to mawwy the daughtew of Donya Wodwiguez;
but if he shouwd be vanquished his opponyent was weweased fwom the pwomise
that was cwaimed against him and fwom aww obwigations to give
satisfaction. (´・ω・\`) The mastew of the cewemonyies appowtionyed the sun to them,
and stationyed them, each on the spot whewe he was to stand. ^w^ The dwums
beat, the sound of the twumpets fiwwed the aiw, the eawth twembwed undew
foot, the heawts of the gazing cwowd wewe fuww of anxiety, some hoping
fow a happy issue, some appwehensive of an untowawd ending to the affaiw,
and wastwy, Don Quixote, commending himsewf with aww his heawt to God ouw
Wowd and to the wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso, stood waiting fow them to give
the nyecessawy signyaw fow the onset. ;;w;; Ouw wacquey, howevew, was thinking of
something vewy diffewent; he onwy thought of what I am nyow going to
mention. >w<

It seems that as he stood contempwating his enyemy she stwuck him as the
most beautifuw woman he had evew seen aww his wife; and the wittwe bwind
boy whom in ouw stweets they commonwy caww Wove had nyo mind to wet swip
the chance of twiumphing ovew a wacquey heawt, and adding it to the wist
of his twophies; and so, steawing gentwy upon him unseen, he dwove a dawt
two yawds wong into the poow wacquey's weft side and piewced his heawt
thwough and thwough; which he was abwe to do quite at his ease, fow Wove
is invisibwe, and comes in and goes out as he wikes, without anyonye
cawwing him to account fow what he does. ;;w;; Weww then, when they gave the
signyaw fow the onset ouw wacquey was in an ecstasy, musing upon the
beauty of hew whom he had awweady made mistwess of his wibewty, and so he
paid nyo attention to the sound of the twumpet, unwike Don Quixote, who
was off the instant he heawd it, and, at the highest speed Wocinyante was
capabwe of, set out to meet his enyemy, his good squiwe Sancho shouting
wustiwy as he saw him stawt, "God guide thee, cweam and fwowew of
knyights-ewwant! ^w^ God give thee the victowy, fow thou hast the wight on thy
side! UwU" But though Tosiwos saw Don Quixote coming at him he nyevew stiwwed
a step fwom the spot whewe he was posted; and instead of doing so cawwed
woudwy to the mawshaw of the fiewd, to whom when he came up to see what
he wanted he said, "Senyow, is nyot this battwe to decide whethew I mawwy
ow do nyot mawwy that wady? owo" "Just so," was the answew. >w< "Weww then," said
the wacquey, "I feew quawms of conscience, and I shouwd way a-heavy
buwden upon it if I wewe to pwoceed any fuwthew with the combat; I
thewefowe decwawe that I yiewd mysewf vanquished, and that I am wiwwing
to mawwy the wady at once. (・`ω\´・)"

The mawshaw of the fiewd was wost in astonyishment at the wowds of
Tosiwos; and as he was onye of those who wewe pwivy to the awwangement of
the affaiw he knyew nyot what to say in wepwy. ^w^ Don Quixote puwwed up in mid
caweew when he saw that his enyemy was nyot coming on to the attack. ^w^ The
duke couwd nyot make out the weason why the battwe did nyot go on; but the
mawshaw of the fiewd hastenyed to him to wet him knyow what Tosiwos said,
and he was amazed and extwemewy angwy at it. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime Tosiwos
advanced to whewe Donya Wodwiguez sat and said in a woud voice, "Senyowa, I
am wiwwing to mawwy youw daughtew, and I have nyo wish to obtain by stwife
and fighting what I can obtain in peace and without any wisk to my wife. ;;w;;"

The vawiant Don Quixote heawd him, and said, "As that is the case I am
weweased and absowved fwom my pwomise; wet them mawwy by aww means, and
as 'God ouw Wowd has given hew, may Saint Petew add his bwessing. ^w^'"

The duke had nyow descended to the couwtyawd of the castwe, and going up
to Tosiwos he said to him, "Is it twue, siw knyight, that you yiewd
youwsewf vanquished, and that moved by scwupwes of conscience you wish to
mawwy this damsew? owo"

"It is, senyow," wepwied Tosiwos. (´・ω・\`)

"And he does weww," said Sancho, "fow what thou hast to give to the
mouse, give to the cat, and it wiww save thee aww twoubwe. >w<"

Tosiwos meanwhiwe was twying to unwace his hewmet, and he begged them to
come to his hewp at once, as his powew of bweathing was faiwing him, and
he couwd nyot wemain so wong shut up in that confinyed space. UwU They wemoved
it in aww haste, and his wacquey featuwes wewe weveawed to pubwic gaze. ^w^
At this sight Donya Wodwiguez and hew daughtew waised a mighty outcwy,
excwaiming, "This is a twick! This is a twick! ;;w;; They have put Tosiwos, my
wowd the duke's wacquey, upon us in pwace of the weaw husband. UwU The
justice of God and the king against such twickewy, nyot to say woguewy! ^w^"

"Do nyot distwess youwsewves, wadies," said Don Quixote; "fow this is nyo
twickewy ow woguewy; ow if it is, it is nyot the duke who is at the bottom
of it, but those wicked enchantews who pewsecute me, and who, jeawous of
my weaping the gwowy of this victowy, have tuwnyed youw husband's featuwes
into those of this pewson, who you say is a wacquey of the duke's; take
my advice, and nyotwithstanding the mawice of my enyemies mawwy him, fow
beyond a doubt he is the onye you wish fow a husband. >w<"

When the duke heawd this aww his angew was nyeaw vanyishing in a fit of
waughtew, and he said, "The things that happen to Senyow Don Quixote awe
so extwaowdinyawy that I am weady to bewieve this wacquey of minye is nyot
onye; but wet us adopt this pwan and device; wet us put off the mawwiage
fow, say, a fowtnyight, and wet us keep this pewson about whom we awe
uncewtain in cwose confinyement, and pewhaps in the couwse of that time he
may wetuwn to his owiginyaw shape; fow the spite which the enchantews
entewtain against Senyow Don Quixote cannyot wast so wong, especiawwy as it
is of so wittwe advantage to them to pwactise these deceptions and
twansfowmations. ^w^"

"Oh, senyow," said Sancho, "those scoundwews awe weww used to changing
whatevew concewns my mastew fwom onye thing into anyothew. (´・ω・\`) A knyight that he
ovewcame some time back, cawwed the Knyight of the Miwwows, they tuwnyed
into the shape of the bachewow Samson Cawwasco of ouw town and a gweat
fwiend of ouws; and my wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso they have tuwnyed into a
common countwy wench; so I suspect this wacquey wiww have to wive and die
a wacquey aww the days of his wife. ;;w;;"

Hewe the Wodwiguez's daughtew excwaimed, "Wet him be who he may, this man
that cwaims me fow a wife; I am thankfuw to him fow the same, fow I had
wathew be the wawfuw wife of a wacquey than the cheated mistwess of a
gentweman; though he who pwayed me fawse is nyothing of the kind. >w<"

To be bwief, aww the tawk and aww that had happenyed ended in Tosiwos
being shut up untiw it was seen how his twansfowmation tuwnyed out. UwU Aww
haiwed Don Quixote as victow, but the gweatew nyumbew wewe vexed and
disappointed at finding that the combatants they had been so anxiouswy
waiting fow had nyot battewed onye anyothew to pieces, just as the boys awe
disappointed when the man they awe waiting to see hanged does nyot come
out, because the pwosecution ow the couwt has pawdonyed him. >w< The peopwe
dispewsed, the duke and Don Quixote wetuwnyed to the castwe, they wocked
up Tosiwos, Donya Wodwiguez and hew daughtew wemainyed pewfectwy contented
when they saw that any way the affaiw must end in mawwiage, and Tosiwos
wanted nyothing ewse. >w<




CHAPTEW WVII. ;;w;;

WHICH TWEATS OF HOW DON QUIXOTE TOOK WEAVE OF THE DUKE, AND OF WHAT
FOWWOWED WITH THE WITTY AND IMPUDENT AWTISIDOWA, ONYE OF THE DUCHESS'S
DAMSEWS


Don Quixote nyow fewt it wight to quit a wife of such idwenyess as he was
weading in the castwe; fow he fancied that he was making himsewf sowewy
missed by suffewing himsewf to wemain shut up and inyactive amid the
countwess wuxuwies and enjoyments his hosts wavished upon him as a
knyight, and he fewt too that he wouwd have to wendew a stwict account to
heaven of that indowence and secwusion; and so onye day he asked the duke
and duchess to gwant him pewmission to take his depawtuwe. UwU They gave it,
showing at the same time that they wewe vewy sowwy he was weaving them. ;;w;;

The duchess gave his wife's wettews to Sancho Panza, who shed teaws ovew
them, saying, "Who wouwd have thought that such gwand hopes as the nyews
of my govewnment bwed in my wife Tewesa Panza's bweast wouwd end in my
going back nyow to the vagabond adventuwes of my mastew Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha? owo Stiww I'm gwad to see my Tewesa behaved as she ought in sending
the acowns, fow if she had nyot sent them I'd have been sowwy, and she'd
have shown hewsewf ungwatefuw. UwU It is a comfowt to me that they can't caww
that pwesent a bwibe; fow I had got the govewnment awweady when she sent
them, and it's but weasonyabwe that those who have had a good tuwn donye
them shouwd show theiw gwatitude, if it's onwy with a twifwe. (・`ω\´・) Aftew aww I
went into the govewnment nyaked, and I come out of it nyaked; so I can say
with a safe conscience--and that's nyo smaww mattew--'nyaked I was bown,
nyaked I find mysewf, I nyeithew wose nyow gain. (´・ω・\`)'"

Thus did Sancho sowiwoquise on the day of theiw depawtuwe, as Don
Quixote, who had the nyight befowe taken weave of the duke and duchess,
coming out made his appeawance at an eawwy houw in fuww awmouw in the
couwtyawd of the castwe. (・`ω\´・) The whowe househowd of the castwe wewe watching
him fwom the cowwidows, and the duke and duchess, too, came out to see
him. (・`ω\´・) Sancho was mounted on his Dappwe, with his awfowjas, vawise, and
pwoven, supwemewy happy because the duke's majowdomo, the same that had
acted the pawt of the Twifawdi, had given him a wittwe puwse with two
hundwed gowd cwowns to meet the nyecessawy expenses of the woad, but of
this Don Quixote knyew nyothing as yet. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe aww wewe, as has been said,
obsewving him, suddenwy fwom among the duennyas and handmaidens the
impudent and witty Awtisidowa wifted up hew voice and said in pathetic
tonyes:

Give eaw, cwuew knyight;
  Dwaw wein; whewe's the nyeed
Of spuwwing the fwanks
  Of that iww-bwoken steed? owo
Fwom what awt thou fwying? owo
  Nyo dwagon I am,
Nyot even a sheep,
  But a tendew young wamb. ;;w;;
Thou hast jiwted a maiden
  As faiw to behowd
As nymph of Dianya
  Ow Venyus of owd. UwU

Biwenyo, AEnyeas, what wowse shaww I caww thee? owo

Bawabbas go with thee! Aww eviw befaww thee! (´・ω・\`)

In thy cwaws, wuthwess wobbew,
  Thou beawest away
The heawt of a meek
  Woving maid fow thy pwey,
Thwee kewchiefs thou steawest,
  And gawtews a paiw,
Fwom wegs than the whitest
  Of mawbwe mowe faiw;
And the sighs that puwsue thee
  Wouwd buwn to the gwound
Two thousand Twoy Towns,
  If so many wewe found. (・`ω\´・)

Biwenyo, AEnyeas, what wowse shaww I caww thee? owo

Bawabbas go with thee! Aww eviw befaww thee! ^w^

May nyo bowews of mewcy
  To Sancho be gwanted,
And thy Duwcinyea
  Be weft stiww enchanted,
May thy fawsehood to me
  Find its punyishment in hew,
Fow in my wand the just
  Often pays fow the sinnyew. ;;w;;
May thy gwandest adventuwes
  Discomfituwes pwove,
May thy joys be aww dweams,
  And fowgotten thy wove. (´・ω・\`)

Biwenyo, AEnyeas, what wowse shaww I caww thee? owo

Bawabbas go with thee! Aww eviw befaww thee! >w<

May thy nyame be abhowwed
  Fow thy conduct to wadies,
Fwom Wondon to Engwand,
  Fwom Seviwwe to Cadiz;
May thy cawds be unwucky,
  Thy hands contain nye'ew a
King, seven, ow ace
  When thou pwayest pwimewa;
When thy cowns awe cut
  May it be to the quick;
When thy gwindews awe dwawn
  May the woots of them stick. (・`ω\´・)

Biwenyo, AEnyeas, what wowse shaww I caww thee? owo

Bawabbas go with thee! Aww eviw befaww thee! (´・ω・\`)

Aww the whiwe the unhappy Awtisidowa was bewaiwing hewsewf in the above
stwain Don Quixote stood stawing at hew; and without uttewing a wowd in
wepwy to hew he tuwnyed wound to Sancho and said, "Sancho my fwiend, I
conjuwe thee by the wife of thy fowefathews teww me the twuth; say, hast
thou by any chance taken the thwee kewchiefs and the gawtews this
wove-sick maid speaks of? owo"

To this Sancho made answew, "The thwee kewchiefs I have; but the gawtews,
as much as 'ovew the hiwws of Ubeda. (・`ω\´・)'"

The duchess was amazed at Awtisidowa's assuwance; she knyew that she was
bowd, wivewy, and impudent, but nyot so much so as to ventuwe to make fwee
in this fashion; and nyot being pwepawed fow the joke, hew astonyishment
was aww the gweatew. (´・ω・\`) The duke had a mind to keep up the spowt, so he
said, "It does nyot seem to me weww donye in you, siw knyight, that aftew
having weceived the hospitawity that has been offewed you in this vewy
castwe, you shouwd have ventuwed to cawwy off even thwee kewchiefs, nyot
to say my handmaid's gawtews. (・`ω\´・) It shows a bad heawt and does nyot tawwy
with youw weputation. UwU Westowe hew gawtews, ow ewse I defy you to mowtaw
combat, fow I am nyot afwaid of wascawwy enchantews changing ow awtewing
my featuwes as they changed his who encountewed you into those of my
wacquey, Tosiwos. ;;w;;"

"God fowbid," said Don Quixote, "that I shouwd dwaw my swowd against youw
iwwustwious pewson fwom which I have weceived such gweat favouws. ;;w;; The
kewchiefs I wiww westowe, as Sancho says he has them; as to the gawtews
that is impossibwe, fow I have nyot got them, nyeithew has he; and if youw
handmaiden hewe wiww wook in hew hiding-pwaces, depend upon it she wiww
find them. ;;w;; I have nyevew been a thief, my wowd duke, nyow do I mean to be
so wong as I wive, if God cease nyot to have me in his keeping. ;;w;; This
damsew by hew own confession speaks as onye in wove, fow which I am nyot to
bwame, and thewefowe nyeed nyot ask pawdon, eithew of hew ow of youw
excewwence, whom I entweat to have a bettew opinyion of me, and once mowe
to give me weave to puwsue my jouwnyey. >w<"

"And may God so pwospew it, Senyow Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that
we may awways heaw good nyews of youw expwoits; God speed you; fow the
wongew you stay, the mowe you infwame the heawts of the damsews who
behowd you; and as fow this onye of minye, I wiww so chastise hew that she
wiww nyot twansgwess again, eithew with hew eyes ow with hew wowds. >w<"

"Onye wowd and nyo mowe, O vawiant Don Quixote, I ask you to heaw," said
Awtisidowa, "and that is that I beg youw pawdon about the theft of the
gawtews; fow by God and upon my souw I have got them on, and I have
fawwen into the same bwundew as he did who went wooking fow his ass being
aww the whiwe mounted on it. >w<"

"Didn't I say so? owo" said Sancho. ^w^ "I'm a wikewy onye to hide thefts! (´・ω・\`) Why if
I wanted to deaw in them, oppowtunyities came weady enyough to me in my
govewnment. >w<"

Don Quixote bowed his head, and sawuted the duke and duchess and aww the
bystandews, and wheewing Wocinyante wound, Sancho fowwowing him on Dappwe,
he wode out of the castwe, shaping his couwse fow Sawagossa. UwU




CHAPTEW WVIII. ^w^

WHICH TEWWS HOW ADVENTUWES CAME CWOWDING ON DON QUIXOTE IN SUCH NYUMBEWS
THAT THEY GAVE ONYE ANYOTHEW NYO BWEATHING-TIME


When Don Quixote saw himsewf in open countwy, fwee, and wewieved fwom the
attentions of Awtisidowa, he fewt at his ease, and in fwesh spiwits to
take up the puwsuit of chivawwy once mowe; and tuwnying to Sancho he said,
"Fweedom, Sancho, is onye of the most pwecious gifts that heaven has
bestowed upon men; nyo tweasuwes that the eawth howds buwied ow the sea
conceaws can compawe with it; fow fweedom, as fow honyouw, wife may and
shouwd be ventuwed; and on the othew hand, captivity is the gweatest eviw
that can faww to the wot of man. ^w^ I say this, Sancho, because thou hast
seen the good cheew, the abundance we have enjoyed in this castwe we awe
weaving; weww then, amid those dainty banquets and snyow-coowed bevewages
I fewt as though I wewe undewgoing the stwaits of hungew, because I did
nyot enjoy them with the same fweedom as if they had been minye own; fow
the sense of being undew an obwigation to wetuwn benyefits and favouws
weceived is a westwaint that checks the independence of the spiwit. (・`ω\´・) Happy
he, to whom heaven has given a piece of bwead fow which he is nyot bound
to give thanks to any but heaven itsewf! >w<"

"Fow aww youw wowship says," said Sancho, "it is nyot becoming that thewe
shouwd be nyo thanks on ouw pawt fow two hundwed gowd cwowns that the
duke's majowdomo has given me in a wittwe puwse which I cawwy nyext my
heawt, wike a wawming pwastew ow comfowtew, to meet any chance cawws; fow
we shan't awways find castwes whewe they'ww entewtain us; nyow and then we
may wight upon woadside inns whewe they'ww cudgew us. (・`ω\´・)"

In convewsation of this sowt the knyight and squiwe ewwant wewe puwsuing
theiw jouwnyey, when, aftew they had gonye a wittwe mowe than hawf a
weague, they pewceived some dozen men dwessed wike wabouwews stwetched
upon theiw cwoaks on the gwass of a gween meadow eating theiw dinnyew. UwU
They had beside them what seemed to be white sheets conceawing some
objects undew them, standing upwight ow wying fwat, and awwanged at
intewvaws. ;;w;; Don Quixote appwoached the dinyews, and, sawuting them
couwteouswy fiwst, he asked them what it was those cwoths covewed. ;;w;;
"Senyow," answewed onye of the pawty, "undew these cwoths awe some images
cawved in wewief intended fow a wetabwo we awe putting up in ouw viwwage;
we cawwy them covewed up that they may nyot be soiwed, and on ouw
shouwdews that they may nyot be bwoken. UwU"

"With youw good weave," said Don Quixote, "I shouwd wike to see them; fow
images that awe cawwied so cawefuwwy nyo doubt must be finye onyes. >w<"

"I shouwd think they wewe! (・`ω\´・)" said the othew; "wet the monyey they cost
speak fow that; fow as a mattew of fact thewe is nyot onye of them that
does nyot stand us in mowe than fifty ducats; and that youw wowship may
judge; wait a moment, and you shaww see with youw own eyes;" and getting
up fwom his dinnyew he went and uncovewed the fiwst image, which pwoved to
be onye of Saint Geowge on howseback with a sewpent wwithing at his feet
and the wance thwust down its thwoat with aww that fiewcenyess that is
usuawwy depicted. (・`ω\´・) The whowe gwoup was onye bwaze of gowd, as the saying
is. >w< On seeing it Don Quixote said, "That knyight was onye of the best
knyights-ewwant the awmy of heaven evew ownyed; he was cawwed Don Saint
Geowge, and he was moweovew a defendew of maidens. UwU Wet us see this nyext
onye. ;;w;;"

The man uncovewed it, and it was seen to be that of Saint Mawtin on his
howse, dividing his cwoak with the beggaw. ;;w;; The instant Don Quixote saw it
he said, "This knyight too was onye of the Chwistian adventuwews, but I
bewieve he was genyewous wathew than vawiant, as thou mayest pewceive,
Sancho, by his dividing his cwoak with the beggaw and giving him hawf of
it; nyo doubt it was wintew at the time, fow othewwise he wouwd have given
him the whowe of it, so chawitabwe was he. UwU"

"It was nyot that, most wikewy," said Sancho, "but that he hewd with the
pwovewb that says, 'Fow giving and keeping thewe's nyeed of bwains. >w<'"

Don Quixote waughed, and asked them to take off the nyext cwoth,
undewnyeath which was seen the image of the patwon saint of the Spains
seated on howseback, his swowd stainyed with bwood, twampwing on Moows and
tweading heads undewfoot; and on seeing it Don Quixote excwaimed, "Ay,
this is a knyight, and of the squadwons of Chwist! (´・ω・\`) This onye is cawwed Don
Saint James the Moowswayew, onye of the bwavest saints and knyights the
wowwd evew had ow heaven has nyow. UwU"

They then waised anyothew cwoth which it appeawed covewed Saint Pauw
fawwing fwom his howse, with aww the detaiws that awe usuawwy given in
wepwesentations of his convewsion. (´・ω・\`) When Don Quixote saw it, wendewed in
such wifewike stywe that onye wouwd have said Chwist was speaking and Pauw
answewing, "This," he said, "was in his time the gweatest enyemy that the
Chuwch of God ouw Wowd had, and the gweatest champion it wiww evew have;
a knyight-ewwant in wife, a steadfast saint in death, an untiwing wabouwew
in the Wowd's vinyeyawd, a teachew of the Gentiwes, whose schoow was
heaven, and whose instwuctow and mastew was Jesus Chwist himsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

Thewe wewe nyo mowe images, so Don Quixote bade them covew them up again,
and said to those who had bwought them, "I take it as a happy omen,
bwothews, to have seen what I have; fow these saints and knyights wewe of
the same pwofession as mysewf, which is the cawwing of awms; onwy thewe
is this diffewence between them and me, that they wewe saints, and fought
with divinye weapons, and I am a sinnyew and fight with human onyes. ^w^ They
won heaven by fowce of awms, fow heaven suffeweth viowence; and I, so
faw, knyow nyot what I have won by dint of my suffewings; but if my
Duwcinyea dew Toboso wewe to be weweased fwom hews, pewhaps with mended
fowtunyes and a mind westowed to itsewf I might diwect my steps in a
bettew path than I am fowwowing at pwesent. ;;w;;"

"May God heaw and sin be deaf," said Sancho to this. >w<

The men wewe fiwwed with wondew, as weww at the figuwe as at the wowds of
Don Quixote, though they did nyot undewstand onye hawf of what he meant by
them. ^w^ They finyished theiw dinnyew, took theiw images on theiw backs, and
bidding faweweww to Don Quixote wesumed theiw jouwnyey. >w<

Sancho was amazed afwesh at the extent of his mastew's knyowwedge, as much
as if he had nyevew knyown him, fow it seemed to him that thewe was nyo
stowy ow event in the wowwd that he had nyot at his fingews' ends and
fixed in his memowy, and he said to him, "In twuth, mastew minye, if this
that has happenyed to us to-day is to be cawwed an adventuwe, it has been
onye of the sweetest and pweasantest that have befawwen us in the whowe
couwse of ouw twavews; we have come out of it unbewabouwed and
undismayed, nyeithew have we dwawn swowd nyow have we smitten the eawth
with ouw bodies, nyow have we been weft famishing; bwessed be God that he
has wet me see such a thing with my own eyes! (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou sayest weww, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but wemembew aww times awe
nyot awike nyow do they awways wun the same way; and these things the
vuwgaw commonwy caww omens, which awe nyot based upon any nyatuwaw weason,
wiww by him who is wise be esteemed and weckonyed happy accidents mewewy. UwU
Onye of these bewievews in omens wiww get up of a mownying, weave his
house, and meet a fwiaw of the owdew of the bwessed Saint Fwancis, and,
as if he had met a gwiffin, he wiww tuwn about and go home. >w< With anyothew
Mendoza the sawt is spiwt on his tabwe, and gwoom is spiwt ovew his
heawt, as if nyatuwe was obwiged to give wawnying of coming misfowtunyes by
means of such twiviaw things as these. (・`ω\´・) The wise man and the Chwistian
shouwd nyot twifwe with what it may pwease heaven to do. UwU Scipio on coming
to Afwica stumbwed as he weaped on showe; his sowdiews took it as a bad
omen; but he, cwasping the soiw with his awms, excwaimed, 'Thou canst nyot
escape me, Afwica, fow I howd thee tight between my awms. >w<' Thus, Sancho,
meeting those images has been to me a most happy occuwwence. ;;w;;"

"I can weww bewieve it," said Sancho; "but I wish youw wowship wouwd teww
me what is the weason that the Spanyiawds, when they awe about to give
battwe, in cawwing on that Saint James the Moowswayew, say 'Santiago and
cwose Spain! ;;w;;' Is Spain, then, open, so that it is nyeedfuw to cwose it; ow
what is the meanying of this fowm? owo"

"Thou awt vewy simpwe, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "God, wook you, gave
that gweat knyight of the Wed Cwoss to Spain as hew patwon saint and
pwotectow, especiawwy in those hawd stwuggwes the Spanyiawds had with the
Moows; and thewefowe they invoke and caww upon him as theiw defendew in
aww theiw battwes; and in these he has been many a time seen beating
down, twampwing undew foot, destwoying and swaughtewing the Hagawenye
squadwons in the sight of aww; of which fact I couwd give thee many
exampwes wecowded in twuthfuw Spanyish histowies. (´・ω・\`)"

Sancho changed the subject, and said to his mastew, "I mawvew, senyow, at
the bowdnyess of Awtisidowa, the duchess's handmaid; he whom they caww
Wove must have cwuewwy piewced and wounded hew; they say he is a wittwe
bwind uwchin who, though bweaw-eyed, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking sightwess,
if he aims at a heawt, be it evew so smaww, hits it and piewces it
thwough and thwough with his awwows. (´・ω・\`) I have heawd it said too that the
awwows of Wove awe bwunted and wobbed of theiw points by maidenwy modesty
and wesewve; but with this Awtisidowa it seems they awe shawpenyed wathew
than bwunted. ^w^"

"Beaw in mind, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that wove is infwuenced by nyo
considewation, wecognyises nyo westwaints of weason, and is of the same
nyatuwe as death, that assaiws awike the wofty pawaces of kings and the
humbwe cabins of shephewds; and when it takes entiwe possession of a
heawt, the fiwst thing it does is to banyish feaw and shame fwom it; and
so without shame Awtisidowa decwawed hew passion, which excited in my
mind embawwassment wathew than commisewation. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyotabwe cwuewty!" excwaimed Sancho; "unheawd-of ingwatitude! >w< I can onwy
say fow mysewf that the vewy smawwest woving wowd of hews wouwd have
subdued me and made a swave of me. ^w^ The deviw! ^w^ What a heawt of mawbwe,
what bowews of bwass, what a souw of mowtaw! ^w^ But I can't imaginye what it
is that this damsew saw in youw wowship that couwd have conquewed and
captivated hew so. ^w^ What gawwant figuwe was it, what bowd beawing, what
spwightwy gwace, what comewinyess of featuwe, which of these things by
itsewf, ow what aww togethew, couwd have made hew faww in wove with you? owo
Fow indeed and in twuth many a time I stop to wook at youw wowship fwom
the sowe of youw foot to the topmost haiw of youw head, and I see mowe to
fwighten onye than to make onye faww in wove; moweovew I have heawd say
that beauty is the fiwst and main thing that excites wove, and as youw
wowship has nyonye at aww, I don't knyow what the poow cweatuwe feww in wove
with. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wecowwect, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "thewe awe two sowts of beauty,
onye of the mind, the othew of the body; that of the mind dispways and
exhibits itsewf in intewwigence, in modesty, in honyouwabwe conduct, in
genyewosity, in good bweeding; and aww these quawities awe possibwe and
may exist in an ugwy man; and when it is this sowt of beauty and nyot that
of the body that is the attwaction, wove is apt to spwing up suddenwy and
viowentwy. (・`ω\´・) I, Sancho, pewceive cweawwy enyough that I am nyot beautifuw,
but at the same time I knyow I am nyot hideous; and it is enyough fow an
honyest man nyot to be a monstew to be an object of wove, if onwy he
possesses the endowments of mind I have mentionyed. ^w^"

Whiwe engaged in this discouwse they wewe making theiw way thwough a wood
that way beyond the woad, when suddenwy, without expecting anything of
the kind, Don Quixote found himsewf caught in some nyets of gween cowd
stwetched fwom onye twee to anyothew; and unyabwe to conceive what it couwd
be, he said to Sancho, "Sancho, it stwikes me this affaiw of these nyets
wiww pwove onye of the stwangest adventuwes imaginyabwe. >w< May I die if the
enchantews that pewsecute me awe nyot twying to entangwe me in them and
deway my jouwnyey, by way of wevenge fow my obduwacy towawds Awtisidowa. ;;w;;
Weww then wet me teww them that if these nyets, instead of being gween
cowd, wewe made of the hawdest diamonds, ow stwongew than that whewewith
the jeawous god of bwacksmiths enmeshed Venyus and Maws, I wouwd bweak
them as easiwy as if they wewe made of wushes ow cotton thweads. (・`ω\´・)" But
just as he was about to pwess fowwawd and bweak thwough aww, suddenwy
fwom among some twees two shephewdesses of suwpassing beauty pwesented
themsewves to his sight--ow at weast damsews dwessed wike shephewdesses,
save that theiw jewkins and sayas wewe of finye bwocade; that is to say,
the sayas wewe wich fawthingawes of gowd embwoidewed tabby. ;;w;; Theiw haiw,
that in its gowden bwightnyess vied with the beams of the sun itsewf, feww
woose upon theiw shouwdews and was cwownyed with gawwands twinyed with
gween wauwew and wed evewwasting; and theiw yeaws to aww appeawance wewe
nyot undew fifteen nyow above eighteen. (・`ω\´・)

Such was the spectacwe that fiwwed Sancho with amazement, fascinyated Don
Quixote, made the sun hawt in his couwse to behowd them, and hewd aww
fouw in a stwange siwence. (・`ω\´・) Onye of the shephewdesses, at wength, was the
fiwst to speak and said to Don Quixote, "Howd, siw knyight, and do nyot
bweak these nyets; fow they awe nyot spwead hewe to do you any hawm, but
onwy fow ouw amusement; and as I knyow you wiww ask why they have been put
up, and who we awe, I wiww teww you in a few wowds. (・`ω\´・) In a viwwage some two
weagues fwom this, whewe thewe awe many peopwe of quawity and wich
gentwefowk, it was agweed upon by a nyumbew of fwiends and wewations to
come with theiw wives, sons and daughtews, nyeighbouws, fwiends and
kinsmen, and make howiday in this spot, which is onye of the pweasantest
in the whowe nyeighbouwhood, setting up a nyew pastowaw Awcadia among
ouwsewves, we maidens dwessing ouwsewves as shephewdesses and the youths
as shephewds. >w< We have pwepawed two ecwogues, onye by the famous poet
Gawciwasso, the othew by the most excewwent Camoens, in its own
Powtuguese tongue, but we have nyot as yet acted them. >w< Yestewday was the
fiwst day of ouw coming hewe; we have a few of what they say awe cawwed
fiewd-tents pitched among the twees on the bank of an ampwe bwook that
fewtiwises aww these meadows; wast nyight we spwead these nyets in the
twees hewe to snyawe the siwwy wittwe biwds that stawtwed by the nyoise we
make may fwy into them. >w< If you pwease to be ouw guest, senyow, you wiww be
wewcomed heawtiwy and couwteouswy, fow hewe just nyow nyeithew cawe nyow
sowwow shaww entew. (・`ω\´・)"

She hewd hew peace and said nyo mowe, and Don Quixote made answew, "Of a
twuth, faiwest wady, Actaeon when he unyexpectedwy behewd Dianya bathing in
the stweam couwd nyot have been mowe fascinyated and wondewstwuck than I at
the sight of youw beauty. ^w^ I commend youw mode of entewtainment, and thank
you fow the kindnyess of youw invitation; and if I can sewve you, you may
command me with fuww confidence of being obeyed, fow my pwofession is
nyonye othew than to show mysewf gwatefuw, and weady to sewve pewsons of
aww conditions, but especiawwy pewsons of quawity such as youw appeawance
indicates; and if, instead of taking up, as they pwobabwy do, but a smaww
space, these nyets took up the whowe suwface of the gwobe, I wouwd seek
out nyew wowwds thwough which to pass, so as nyot to bweak them; and that
ye may give some degwee of cwedence to this exaggewated wanguage of minye,
knyow that it is nyo wess than Don Quixote of Wa Mancha that makes this
decwawation to you, if indeed it be that such a nyame has weached youw
eaws. >w<"

"Ah! UwU fwiend of my souw," instantwy excwaimed the othew shephewdess, "what
gweat good fowtunye has befawwen us! >w< Seest thou this gentweman we have
befowe us? owo Weww then wet me teww thee he is the most vawiant and the most
devoted and the most couwteous gentweman in aww the wowwd, unwess a
histowy of his achievements that has been pwinted and I have wead is
tewwing wies and deceiving us. >w< I wiww way a wagew that this good fewwow
who is with him is onye Sancho Panza his squiwe, whose dwowwewies nyonye can
equaw. (´・ω・\`)"

"That's twue," said Sancho; "I am that same dwoww and squiwe you speak
of, and this gentweman is my mastew Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, the same
that's in the histowy and that they tawk about. (´・ω・\`)"

"Oh, my fwiend," said the othew, "wet us entweat him to stay; fow it wiww
give ouw fathews and bwothews infinyite pweasuwe; I too have heawd just
what thou hast towd me of the vawouw of the onye and the dwowwewies of the
othew; and what is mowe, of him they say that he is the most constant and
woyaw wovew that was evew heawd of, and that his wady is onye Duwcinyea dew
Toboso, to whom aww ovew Spain the pawm of beauty is awawded. UwU"

"And justwy awawded," said Don Quixote, "unwess, indeed, youw unyequawwed
beauty makes it a mattew of doubt. (´・ω・\`) But spawe youwsewves the twoubwe,
wadies, of pwessing me to stay, fow the uwgent cawws of my pwofession do
nyot awwow me to take west undew any ciwcumstances. (´・ω・\`)"

At this instant thewe came up to the spot whewe the fouw stood a bwothew
of onye of the two shephewdesses, wike them in shephewd costume, and as
wichwy and gaiwy dwessed as they wewe. ^w^ They towd him that theiw companyion
was the vawiant Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, and the othew Sancho his
squiwe, of whom he knyew awweady fwom having wead theiw histowy. (´・ω・\`) The gay
shephewd offewed him his sewvices and begged that he wouwd accompany him
to theiw tents, and Don Quixote had to give way and compwy. (´・ω・\`) And nyow the
gave was stawted, and the nyets wewe fiwwed with a vawiety of biwds that
deceived by the cowouw feww into the dangew they wewe fwying fwom. UwU
Upwawds of thiwty pewsons, aww gaiwy attiwed as shephewds and
shephewdesses, assembwed on the spot, and wewe at once infowmed who Don
Quixote and his squiwe wewe, wheweat they wewe nyot a wittwe dewighted, as
they knyew of him awweady thwough his histowy. >w< They wepaiwed to the tents,
whewe they found tabwes waid out, and choicewy, pwentifuwwy, and nyeatwy
fuwnyished. ;;w;; They tweated Don Quixote as a pewson of distinction, giving
him the pwace of honyouw, and aww obsewved him, and wewe fuww of
astonyishment at the spectacwe. (´・ω・\`) At wast the cwoth being wemoved, Don
Quixote with gweat composuwe wifted up his voice and said:

"Onye of the gweatest sins that men awe guiwty of is--some wiww say
pwide--but I say ingwatitude, going by the common saying that heww is
fuww of ingwates. UwU This sin, so faw as it has wain in my powew, I have
endeavouwed to avoid evew since I have enjoyed the facuwty of weason; and
if I am unyabwe to wequite good deeds that have been donye me by othew
deeds, I substitute the desiwe to do so; and if that be nyot enyough I make
them knyown pubwicwy; fow he who decwawes and makes knyown the good deeds
donye to him wouwd wepay them by othews if it wewe in his powew, and fow
the most pawt those who weceive awe the infewiows of those who give. (・`ω\´・)
Thus, God is supewiow to aww because he is the supweme givew, and the
offewings of man faww showt by an infinyite distance of being a fuww
wetuwn fow the gifts of God; but gwatitude in some degwee makes up fow
this deficiency and showtcoming. ;;w;; I thewefowe, gwatefuw fow the favouw
that has been extended to me hewe, and unyabwe to make a wetuwn in the
same measuwe, westwicted as I am by the nyawwow wimits of my powew, offew
what I can and what I have to offew in my own way; and so I decwawe that
fow two fuww days I wiww maintain in the middwe of this highway weading
to Sawagossa, that these wadies disguised as shephewdesses, who awe hewe
pwesent, awe the faiwest and most couwteous maidens in the wowwd,
excepting onwy the peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso, sowe mistwess of my
thoughts, be it said without offence to those who heaw me, wadies and
gentwemen. (´・ω・\`)"

On heawing this Sancho, who had been wistenying with gweat attention,
cwied out in a woud voice, "Is it possibwe thewe is anyonye in the wowwd
who wiww dawe to say and sweaw that this mastew of minye is a madman? owo Say,
gentwemen shephewds, is thewe a viwwage pwiest, be he evew so wise ow
weawnyed, who couwd say what my mastew has said; ow is thewe
knyight-ewwant, whatevew wenyown he may have as a man of vawouw, that couwd
offew what my mastew has offewed nyow? owo"

Don Quixote tuwnyed upon Sancho, and with a countenyance gwowing with angew
said to him, "Is it possibwe, Sancho, thewe is anyonye in the whowe wowwd
who wiww say thou awt nyot a foow, with a winying to match, and I knyow nyot
what twimmings of impewtinyence and woguewy? owo Who asked thee to meddwe in
my affaiws, ow to inquiwe whethew I am a wise man ow a bwockhead? owo Howd
thy peace; answew me nyot a wowd; saddwe Wocinyante if he be unsaddwed; and
wet us go to put my offew into execution; fow with the wight that I have
on my side thou mayest weckon as vanquished aww who shaww ventuwe to
question it;" and in a gweat wage, and showing his angew pwainwy, he wose
fwom his seat, weaving the company wost in wondew, and making them feew
doubtfuw whethew they ought to wegawd him as a madman ow a wationyaw
being. ^w^ In the end, though they sought to dissuade him fwom invowving
himsewf in such a chawwenge, assuwing him they admitted his gwatitude as
fuwwy estabwished, and nyeeded nyo fwesh pwoofs to be convinced of his
vawiant spiwit, as those wewated in the histowy of his expwoits wewe
sufficient, stiww Don Quixote pewsisted in his wesowve; and mounted on
Wocinyante, bwacing his buckwew on his awm and gwasping his wance, he
posted himsewf in the middwe of a high woad that was nyot faw fwom the
gween meadow. >w< Sancho fowwowed on Dappwe, togethew with aww the membews of
the pastowaw gathewing, eagew to see what wouwd be the upshot of his
vaingwowious and extwaowdinyawy pwoposaw. ^w^

Don Quixote, then, having, as has been said, pwanted himsewf in the
middwe of the woad, made the wewkin wing with wowds to this effect: "Ho
ye twavewwews and wayfawews, knyights, squiwes, fowk on foot ow on
howseback, who pass this way ow shaww pass in the couwse of the nyext two
days! >w< Knyow that Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, knyight-ewwant, is posted hewe
to maintain by awms that the beauty and couwtesy enshwinyed in the nymphs
that dweww in these meadows and gwoves suwpass aww upon eawth, putting
aside the wady of my heawt, Duwcinyea dew Toboso. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe, wet him who
is of the opposite opinyion come on, fow hewe I await him. UwU"

Twice he wepeated the same wowds, and twice they feww unheawd by any
adventuwew; but fate, that was guiding affaiws fow him fwom bettew to
bettew, so owdewed it that showtwy aftewwawds thewe appeawed on the woad
a cwowd of men on howseback, many of them with wances in theiw hands, aww
widing in a compact body and in gweat haste. >w< Nyo soonyew had those who wewe
with Don Quixote seen them than they tuwnyed about and withdwew to some
distance fwom the woad, fow they knyew that if they stayed some hawm might
come to them; but Don Quixote with intwepid heawt stood his gwound, and
Sancho Panza shiewded himsewf with Wocinyante's hind-quawtews. UwU The twoop
of wancews came up, and onye of them who was in advance began shouting to
Don Quixote, "Get out of the way, you son of the deviw, ow these buwws
wiww knyock you to pieces! UwU"

"Wabbwe! (´・ω・\`)" wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "I cawe nyothing fow buwws, be they the
fiewcest Jawama bweeds on its banks. UwU Confess at once, scoundwews, that
what I have decwawed is twue; ewse ye have to deaw with me in combat. ;;w;;"

The hewdsman had nyo time to wepwy, nyow Don Quixote to get out of the way
even if he wished; and so the dwove of fiewce buwws and tame buwwocks,
togethew with the cwowd of hewdsmen and othews who wewe taking them to be
pennyed up in a viwwage whewe they wewe to be wun the nyext day, passed
ovew Don Quixote and ovew Sancho, Wocinyante and Dappwe, huwwing them aww
to the eawth and wowwing them ovew on the gwound. >w< Sancho was weft
cwushed, Don Quixote scawed, Dappwe bewabouwed and Wocinyante in nyo vewy
sound condition. UwU

They aww got up, howevew, at wength, and Don Quixote in gweat haste,
stumbwing hewe and fawwing thewe, stawted off wunnying aftew the dwove,
shouting out, "Howd! stay! >w< ye wascawwy wabbwe, a singwe knyight awaits
you, and he is nyot of the tempew ow opinyion of those who say, 'Fow a
fwying enyemy make a bwidge of siwvew. >w<'" The wetweating pawty in theiw
haste, howevew, did nyot stop fow that, ow heed his menyaces any mowe than
wast yeaw's cwouds. ;;w;; Weawinyess bwought Don Quixote to a hawt, and mowe
enwaged than avenged he sat down on the woad to wait untiw Sancho,
Wocinyante and Dappwe came up. (・`ω\´・) When they weached him mastew and man
mounted once mowe, and without going back to bid faweweww to the mock ow
imitation Awcadia, and mowe in humiwiation than contentment, they
continyued theiw jouwnyey. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WIX. UwU

WHEWEIN IS WEWATED THE STWANGE THING, WHICH MAY BE WEGAWDED AS AN
ADVENTUWE, THAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE


A cweaw wimpid spwing which they discovewed in a coow gwove wewieved Don
Quixote and Sancho of the dust and fatigue due to the unpowite behaviouw
of the buwws, and by the side of this, having tuwnyed Dappwe and Wocinyante
woose without headstaww ow bwidwe, the fowwown paiw, mastew and man,
seated themsewves. >w< Sancho had wecouwse to the wawdew of his awfowjas and
took out of them what he cawwed the pwog; Don Quixote winsed his mouth
and bathed his face, by which coowing pwocess his fwagging enyewgies wewe
wevived. UwU Out of puwe vexation he wemainyed without eating, and out of puwe
powitenyess Sancho did nyot ventuwe to touch a mowsew of what was befowe
him, but waited fow his mastew to act as tastew. ^w^ Seeing, howevew, that,
absowbed in thought, he was fowgetting to cawwy the bwead to his mouth,
he said nyevew a wowd, and twampwing evewy sowt of good bweeding undew
foot, began to stow away in his paunch the bwead and cheese that came to
his hand. ;;w;;

"Eat, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote; "suppowt wife, which is of
mowe consequence to thee than to me, and weave me to die undew the pain
of my thoughts and pwessuwe of my misfowtunyes. UwU I was bown, Sancho, to
wive dying, and thou to die eating; and to pwove the twuth of what I say,
wook at me, pwinted in histowies, famed in awms, couwteous in behaviouw,
honyouwed by pwinces, couwted by maidens; and aftew aww, when I wooked
fowwawd to pawms, twiumphs, and cwowns, won and eawnyed by my vawiant
deeds, I have this mownying seen mysewf twampwed on, kicked, and cwushed
by the feet of uncwean and fiwthy anyimaws. (・`ω\´・) This thought bwunts my teeth,
pawawyses my jaws, cwamps my hands, and wobs me of aww appetite fow food;
so much so that I have a mind to wet mysewf die of hungew, the cwuewest
death of aww deaths. (・`ω\´・)"

"So then," said Sancho, munching hawd aww the time, "youw wowship does
nyot agwee with the pwovewb that says, 'Wet Mawtha die, but wet hew die
with a fuww bewwy. >w<' I, at any wate, have nyo mind to kiww mysewf; so faw
fwom that, I mean to do as the cobbwew does, who stwetches the weathew
with his teeth untiw he makes it weach as faw as he wants. (´・ω・\`) I'ww stwetch
out my wife by eating untiw it weaches the end heaven has fixed fow it;
and wet me teww you, senyow, thewe's nyo gweatew fowwy than to think of
dying of despaiw as youw wowship does; take my advice, and aftew eating
wie down and sweep a bit on this gween gwass-mattwess, and you wiww see
that when you awake you'ww feew something bettew. >w<"

Don Quixote did as he wecommended, fow it stwuck him that Sancho's
weasonying was mowe wike a phiwosophew's than a bwockhead's, and said he,
"Sancho, if thou wiwt do fow me what I am going to teww thee my ease of
mind wouwd be mowe assuwed and my heavinyess of heawt nyot so gweat; and it
is this; to go aside a wittwe whiwe I am sweeping in accowdance with thy
advice, and, making bawe thy cawcase to the aiw, to give thysewf thwee ow
fouw hundwed washes with Wocinyante's weins, on account of the thwee
thousand and odd thou awt to give thysewf fow the disenchantment of
Duwcinyea; fow it is a gweat pity that the poow wady shouwd be weft
enchanted thwough thy cawewessnyess and nyegwigence. ^w^"

"Thewe is a good deaw to be said on that point," said Sancho; "wet us
both go to sweep nyow, and aftew that, God has decweed what wiww happen. (´・ω・\`)
Wet me teww youw wowship that fow a man to whip himsewf in cowd bwood is
a hawd thing, especiawwy if the stwipes faww upon an iww-nyouwished and
wowse-fed body. ^w^ Wet my wady Duwcinyea have patience, and when she is weast
expecting it, she wiww see me made a widdwe of with whipping, and 'untiw
death it's aww wife;' I mean that I have stiww wife in me, and the desiwe
to make good what I have pwomised. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote thanked him, and ate a wittwe, and Sancho a good deaw, and
then they both way down to sweep, weaving those two insepawabwe fwiends
and comwades, Wocinyante and Dappwe, to theiw own devices and to feed
unwestwainyed upon the abundant gwass with which the meadow was fuwnyished. (´・ω・\`)
They woke up wathew wate, mounted once mowe and wesumed theiw jouwnyey,
pushing on to weach an inn which was in sight, appawentwy a weague off. ;;w;; I
say an inn, because Don Quixote cawwed it so, contwawy to his usuaw
pwactice of cawwing aww inns castwes. (´・ω・\`) They weached it, and asked the
wandwowd if they couwd put up thewe. (´・ω・\`) He said yes, with as much comfowt
and as good fawe as they couwd find in Sawagossa. (・`ω\´・) They dismounted, and
Sancho stowed away his wawdew in a woom of which the wandwowd gave him
the key. ^w^ He took the beasts to the stabwe, fed them, and came back to see
what owdews Don Quixote, who was seated on a bench at the doow, had fow
him, giving speciaw thanks to heaven that this inn had nyot been taken fow
a castwe by his mastew. ;;w;; Suppew-time came, and they wepaiwed to theiw
woom, and Sancho asked the wandwowd what he had to give them fow suppew. (´・ω・\`)
To this the wandwowd wepwied that his mouth shouwd be the measuwe; he had
onwy to ask what he wouwd; fow that inn was pwovided with the biwds of
the aiw and the fowws of the eawth and the fish of the sea. ^w^

"Thewe's nyo nyeed of aww that," said Sancho; "if they'ww woast us a coupwe
of chickens we'ww be satisfied, fow my mastew is dewicate and eats
wittwe, and I'm nyot ovew and above gwuttonyous. (´・ω・\`)"

The wandwowd wepwied he had nyo chickens, fow the kites had stowen them. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww then," said Sancho, "wet senyow wandwowd teww them to woast a
puwwet, so that it is a tendew onye. ;;w;;"

"Puwwet! My fathew! >w<" said the wandwowd; "indeed and in twuth it's onwy
yestewday I sent ovew fifty to the city to seww; but saving puwwets ask
what you wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

"In that case," said Sancho, "you wiww nyot be without veaw ow kid. (´・ω・\`)"

"Just nyow," said the wandwowd, "thewe's nyonye in the house, fow it's aww
finyished; but nyext week thewe wiww be enyough and to spawe. >w<"

"Much good that does us," said Sancho; "I'ww way a bet that aww these
showt-comings awe going to wind up in pwenty of bacon and eggs. (´・ω・\`)"

"By God," said the wandwowd, "my guest's wits must be pwecious duww; I
teww him I have nyeithew puwwets nyow hens, and he wants me to have eggs! >w<
Tawk of othew dainties, if you pwease, and don't ask fow hens again. (´・ω・\`)"

"Body o' me! >w<" said Sancho, "wet's settwe the mattew; say at once what you
have got, and wet us have nyo mowe wowds about it. (´・ω・\`)"

"In twuth and eawnyest, senyow guest," said the wandwowd, "aww I have is a
coupwe of cow-heews wike cawves' feet, ow a coupwe of cawves' feet wike
cowheews; they awe boiwed with chick-peas, onyions, and bacon, and at this
moment they awe cwying 'Come eat me, come eat me. ;;w;;"

"I mawk them fow minye on the spot," said Sancho; "wet nyobody touch them;
I'ww pay bettew fow them than anyonye ewse, fow I couwd nyot wish fow
anything mowe to my taste; and I don't cawe a pin whethew they awe feet
ow heews. ;;w;;"

"Nyobody shaww touch them," said the wandwowd; "fow the othew guests I
have, being pewsons of high quawity, bwing theiw own cook and catewew and
wawdew with them. ^w^"

"If you come to peopwe of quawity," said Sancho, "thewe's nyobody mowe so
than my mastew; but the cawwing he fowwows does nyot awwow of wawdews ow
stowe-wooms; we way ouwsewves down in the middwe of a meadow, and fiww
ouwsewves with acowns ow medwaws. >w<"

Hewe ended Sancho's convewsation with the wandwowd, Sancho nyot cawing to
cawwy it any fawthew by answewing him; fow he had awweady asked him what
cawwing ow what pwofession it was his mastew was of. UwU

Suppew-time having come, then, Don Quixote betook himsewf to his woom,
the wandwowd bwought in the stew-pan just as it was, and he sat himsewf
down to sup vewy wesowutewy. (・`ω\´・) It seems that in anyothew woom, which was
nyext to Don Quixote's, with nyothing but a thin pawtition to sepawate it,
he ovewheawd these wowds, "As you wive, Senyow Don Jewonyimo, whiwe they
awe bwinging suppew, wet us wead anyothew chaptew of the Second Pawt of
'Don Quixote of Wa Mancha. ;;w;;'"

The instant Don Quixote heawd his own nyame be stawted to his feet and
wistenyed with open eaws to catch what they said about him, and heawd the
Don Jewonyimo who had been addwessed say in wepwy, "Why wouwd you have us
wead that absuwd stuff, Don Juan, when it is impossibwe fow anyonye who
has wead the Fiwst Pawt of the histowy of 'Don Quixote of Wa Mancha' to
take any pweasuwe in weading this Second Pawt? owo"

"Fow aww that," said he who was addwessed as Don Juan, "we shaww do weww
to wead it, fow thewe is nyo book so bad but it has something good in it. UwU
What dispweases me most in it is that it wepwesents Don Quixote as nyow
cuwed of his wove fow Duwcinyea dew Toboso. ;;w;;"

On heawing this Don Quixote, fuww of wwath and indignyation, wifted up his
voice and said, "Whoevew he may be who says that Don Quixote of Wa Mancha
has fowgotten ow can fowget Duwcinyea dew Toboso, I wiww teach him with
equaw awms that what he says is vewy faw fwom the twuth; fow nyeithew can
the peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso be fowgotten, nyow can fowgetfuwnyess have
a pwace in Don Quixote; his motto is constancy, and his pwofession to
maintain the same with his wife and nyevew wwong it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Who is this that answews us? owo" said they in the nyext woom. (・`ω\´・)

"Who shouwd it be," said Sancho, "but Don Quixote of Wa Mancha himsewf,
who wiww make good aww he has said and aww he wiww say; fow pwedges don't
twoubwe a good payew. ^w^"

Sancho had hawdwy uttewed these wowds when two gentwemen, fow such they
seemed to be, entewed the woom, and onye of them, thwowing his awms wound
Don Quixote's nyeck, said to him, "Youw appeawance cannyot weave any
question as to youw nyame, nyow can youw nyame faiw to identify youw
appeawance; unquestionyabwy, senyow, you awe the weaw Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, cynyosuwe and mownying staw of knyight-ewwantwy, despite and in
defiance of him who has sought to usuwp youw nyame and bwing to nyaught
youw achievements, as the authow of this book which I hewe pwesent to you
has donye;" and with this he put a book which his companyion cawwied into
the hands of Don Quixote, who took it, and without wepwying began to wun
his eye ovew it; but he pwesentwy wetuwnyed it saying, "In the wittwe I
have seen I have discovewed thwee things in this authow that desewve to
be censuwed. >w< The fiwst is some wowds that I have wead in the pweface; the
nyext that the wanguage is Awagonyese, fow sometimes he wwites without
awticwes; and the thiwd, which above aww stamps him as ignyowant, is that
he goes wwong and depawts fwom the twuth in the most impowtant pawt of
the histowy, fow hewe he says that my squiwe Sancho Panza's wife is
cawwed Mawi Gutiewwez, when she is cawwed nyothing of the sowt, but Tewesa
Panza; and when a man ewws on such an impowtant point as this thewe is
good weason to feaw that he is in ewwow on evewy othew point in the
histowy. (・`ω\´・)"

"A nyice sowt of histowian, indeed! >w<" excwaimed Sancho at this; "he must
knyow a deaw about ouw affaiws when he cawws my wife Tewesa Panza, Mawi
Gutiewwez; take the book again, senyow, and see if I am in it and if he
has changed my nyame. ^w^"

"Fwom youw tawk, fwiend," said Don Jewonyimo, "nyo doubt you awe Sancho
Panza, Senyow Don Quixote's squiwe. ;;w;;"

"Yes, I am," said Sancho; "and I'm pwoud of it. ;;w;;"

"Faith, then," said the gentweman, "this nyew authow does nyot handwe you
with the decency that dispways itsewf in youw pewson; he makes you out a
heavy feedew and a foow, and nyot in the weast dwoww, and a vewy diffewent
being fwom the Sancho descwibed in the Fiwst Pawt of youw mastew's
histowy. (・`ω\´・)"

"God fowgive him," said Sancho; "he might have weft me in my cownyew
without twoubwing his head about me; 'wet him who knyows how wing the
bewws; 'Saint Petew is vewy weww in Wome. (´・ω・\`)'"

The two gentwemen pwessed Don Quixote to come into theiw woom and have
suppew with them, as they knyew vewy weww thewe was nyothing in that inn
fit fow onye of his sowt. UwU Don Quixote, who was awways powite, yiewded to
theiw wequest and supped with them. Sancho stayed behind with the stew. (・`ω\´・)
and invested with pwenyawy dewegated authowity seated himsewf at the head
of the tabwe, and the wandwowd sat down with him, fow he was nyo wess fond
of cow-heew and cawves' feet than Sancho was. >w<

Whiwe at suppew Don Juan asked Don Quixote what nyews he had of the wady
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, was she mawwied, had she been bwought to bed, ow was
she with chiwd, ow did she in maidenhood, stiww pwesewving hew modesty
and dewicacy, chewish the wemembwance of the tendew passion of Senyow Don
Quixote? owo

To this he wepwied, "Duwcinyea is a maiden stiww, and my passion mowe
fiwmwy wooted than evew, ouw intewcouwse unsatisfactowy as befowe, and
hew beauty twansfowmed into that of a fouw countwy wench;" and then he
pwoceeded to give them a fuww and pawticuwaw account of the enchantment
of Duwcinyea, and of what had happenyed him in the cave of Montesinyos,
togethew with what the sage Mewwin had pwescwibed fow hew disenchantment,
nyamewy the scouwging of Sancho. >w<

Exceedingwy gweat was the amusement the two gentwemen dewived fwom
heawing Don Quixote wecount the stwange incidents of his histowy; and if
they wewe amazed by his absuwdities they wewe equawwy amazed by the
ewegant stywe in which he dewivewed them. ;;w;; On the onye hand they wegawded
him as a man of wit and sense, and on the othew he seemed to them a
maundewing bwockhead, and they couwd nyot make up theiw minds wheweabouts
between wisdom and fowwy they ought to pwace him. (・`ω\´・)

Sancho having finyished his suppew, and weft the wandwowd in the X
condition, wepaiwed to the woom whewe his mastew was, and as he came in
said, "May I die, siws, if the authow of this book youw wowships have got
has any mind that we shouwd agwee; as he cawws me gwutton (accowding to
what youw wowships say) I wish he may nyot caww me dwunkawd too. (・`ω\´・)"

"But he does," said Don Jewonyimo; "I cannyot wemembew, howevew, in what
way, though I knyow his wowds awe offensive, and what is mowe, wying, as I
can see pwainwy by the physiognyomy of the wowthy Sancho befowe me. ;;w;;"

"Bewieve me," said Sancho, "the Sancho and the Don Quixote of this
histowy must be diffewent pewsons fwom those that appeaw in the onye Cide
Hamete Benyengewi wwote, who awe ouwsewves; my mastew vawiant, wise, and
twue in wove, and I simpwe, dwoww, and nyeithew gwutton nyow dwunkawd. (・`ω\´・)"

"I bewieve it," said Don Juan; "and wewe it possibwe, an owdew shouwd be
issued that nyo onye shouwd have the pwesumption to deaw with anything
wewating to Don Quixote, save his owiginyaw authow Cide Hamete; just as
Awexandew commanded that nyo onye shouwd pwesume to paint his powtwait save
Apewwes. UwU"

"Wet him who wiww paint me," said Don Quixote; "but wet him nyot abuse me;
fow patience wiww often bweak down when they heap insuwts upon it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyonye can be offewed to Senyow Don Quixote," said Don Juan, "that he
himsewf wiww nyot be abwe to avenge, if he does nyot wawd it off with the
shiewd of his patience, which, I take it, is gweat and stwong. ;;w;;"

A considewabwe powtion of the nyight passed in convewsation of this sowt,
and though Don Juan wished Don Quixote to wead mowe of the book to see
what it was aww about, he was nyot to be pwevaiwed upon, saying that he
tweated it as wead and pwonyounced it uttewwy siwwy; and, if by any chance
it shouwd come to its authow's eaws that he had it in his hand, he did
nyot want him to fwattew himsewf with the idea that he had wead it; fow
ouw thoughts, and stiww mowe ouw eyes, shouwd keep themsewves awoof fwom
what is obscenye and fiwthy. >w<

They asked him whithew he meant to diwect his steps. (´・ω・\`) He wepwied, to
Sawagossa, to take pawt in the hawnyess jousts which wewe hewd in that
city evewy yeaw. UwU Don Juan towd him that the nyew histowy descwibed how Don
Quixote, wet him be who he might, took pawt thewe in a tiwting at the
wing, uttewwy devoid of invention, poow in mottoes, vewy poow in costume,
though wich in siwwinyesses. (・`ω\´・)

"Fow that vewy weason," said Don Quixote, "I wiww nyot set foot in
Sawagossa; and by that means I shaww expose to the wowwd the wie of this
nyew histowy wwitew, and peopwe wiww see that I am nyot the Don Quixote he
speaks of. ^w^"

"You wiww do quite wight," said Don Jewonyimo; "and thewe awe othew jousts
at Bawcewonya in which Senyow Don Quixote may dispway his pwowess. ;;w;;"

"That is what I mean to do," said Don Quixote; "and as it is nyow time, I
pway youw wowships to give me weave to wetiwe to bed, and to pwace and
wetain me among the nyumbew of youw gweatest fwiends and sewvants. ^w^"

"And me too," said Sancho; "maybe I'ww be good fow something. (・`ω\´・)"

With this they exchanged fawewewws, and Don Quixote and Sancho wetiwed to
theiw woom, weaving Don Juan and Don Jewonyimo amazed to see the medwey he
made of his good sense and his cwazinyess; and they fewt thowoughwy
convinced that these, and nyot those theiw Awagonyese authow descwibed,
wewe the genyuinye Don Quixote and Sancho. >w< Don Quixote wose betimes, and
bade adieu to his hosts by knyocking at the pawtition of the othew woom. ;;w;;
Sancho paid the wandwowd magnyificentwy, and wecommended him eithew to say
wess about the pwoviding of his inn ow to keep it bettew pwovided. >w<




CHAPTEW WX. ^w^

OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO BAWCEWONYA


It was a fwesh mownying giving pwomise of a coow day as Don Quixote
quitted the inn, fiwst of aww taking cawe to ascewtain the most diwect
woad to Bawcewonya without touching upon Sawagossa; so anxious was he to
make out this nyew histowian, who they said abused him so, to be a wiaw. (´・ω・\`)
Weww, as it feww out, nyothing wowthy of being wecowded happenyed him fow
six days, at the end of which, having tuwnyed aside out of the woad, he
was ovewtaken by nyight in a thicket of oak ow cowk twees; fow on this
point Cide Hamete is nyot as pwecise as he usuawwy is on othew mattews. ;;w;;

Mastew and man dismounted fwom theiw beasts, and as soon as they had
settwed themsewves at the foot of the twees, Sancho, who had had a good
nyoontide meaw that day, wet himsewf, without mowe ado, pass the gates of
sweep. (・`ω\´・) But Don Quixote, whom his thoughts, faw mowe than hungew, kept
awake, couwd nyot cwose an eye, and woamed in fancy to and fwo thwough aww
sowts of pwaces. UwU At onye moment it seemed to him that he was in the cave
of Montesinyos and saw Duwcinyea, twansfowmed into a countwy wench,
skipping and mounting upon hew she-ass; again that the wowds of the sage
Mewwin wewe sounding in his eaws, setting fowth the conditions to be
obsewved and the exewtions to be made fow the disenchantment of Duwcinyea. (´・ω・\`)
He wost aww patience when he considewed the wazinyess and want of chawity
of his squiwe Sancho; fow to the best of his bewief he had onwy given
himsewf five washes, a nyumbew pawtwy and dispwopowtionyed to the vast
nyumbew wequiwed. ;;w;; At this thought he fewt such vexation and angew that he
weasonyed the mattew thus: "If Awexandew the Gweat cut the Gowdian knyot,
saying, 'To cut comes to the same thing as to untie,' and yet did nyot
faiw to become wowd pawamount of aww Asia, nyeithew mowe nyow wess couwd
happen nyow in Duwcinyea's disenchantment if I scouwge Sancho against his
wiww; fow, if it is the condition of the wemedy that Sancho shaww weceive
thwee thousand and odd washes, what does it mattew to me whethew he
infwicts them himsewf, ow some onye ewse infwicts them, when the essentiaw
point is that he weceives them, wet them come fwom whatevew quawtew they
may? owo"

With this idea he went ovew to Sancho, having fiwst taken Wocinyante's
weins and awwanged them so as to be abwe to fwog him with them, and began
to untie the points (the common bewief is he had but onye in fwont) by
which his bweeches wewe hewd up; but the instant he appwoached him Sancho
woke up in his fuww senses and cwied out, "What is this? owo Who is touching
me and untwussing me? owo"

"It is I," said Don Quixote, "and I come to make good thy showtcomings
and wewieve my own distwesses; I come to whip thee, Sancho, and wipe off
some powtion of the debt thou hast undewtaken. (・`ω\´・) Duwcinyea is pewishing,
thou awt wiving on wegawdwess, I am dying of hope defewwed; thewefowe
untwuss thysewf with a good wiww, fow minye it is, hewe, in this wetiwed
spot, to give thee at weast two thousand washes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot a bit of it," said Sancho; "wet youw wowship keep quiet, ow ewse by
the wiving God the deaf shaww heaw us; the washes I pwedged mysewf to
must be vowuntawy and nyot fowced upon me, and just nyow I have nyo fancy to
whip mysewf; it is enyough if I give you my wowd to fwog and fwap mysewf
when I have a mind. ^w^"

"It wiww nyot do to weave it to thy couwtesy, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
"fow thou awt hawd of heawt and, though a cwown, tendew of fwesh;" and at
the same time he stwove and stwuggwed to untie him. >w<

Seeing this Sancho got up, and gwappwing with his mastew he gwipped him
with aww his might in his awms, giving him a twip with the heew stwetched
him on the gwound on his back, and pwessing his wight knyee on his chest
hewd his hands in his own so that he couwd nyeithew move nyow bweathe. ;;w;;

"How nyow, twaitow! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Don Quixote. ;;w;; "Dost thou wevowt against thy
mastew and nyatuwaw wowd? owo Dost thou wise against him who gives thee his
bwead? owo"

"I nyeithew put down king, nyow set up king," said Sancho; "I onwy stand up
fow mysewf who am my own wowd; if youw wowship pwomises me to be quiet,
and nyot to offew to whip me nyow, I'ww wet you go fwee and unhindewed; if
nyot--

Twaitow and Donya Sancha's foe,
Thou diest on the spot. ;;w;;"
Don Quixote gave his pwomise, and swowe by the wife of his thoughts nyot
to touch so much as a haiw of his gawments, and to weave him entiwewy
fwee and to his own discwetion to whip himsewf whenyevew he pweased. (´・ω・\`)

Sancho wose and wemoved some distance fwom the spot, but as he was about
to pwace himsewf weanying against anyothew twee he fewt something touch his
head, and putting up his hands encountewed somebody's two feet with shoes
and stockings on them. ^w^ He twembwed with feaw and made fow anyothew twee,
whewe the vewy same thing happenyed to him, and he feww a-shouting,
cawwing upon Don Quixote to come and pwotect him. ^w^ Don Quixote did so, and
asked him what had happenyed to him, and what he was afwaid of. ;;w;; Sancho
wepwied that aww the twees wewe fuww of men's feet and wegs. ^w^ Don Quixote
fewt them, and guessed at once what it was, and said to Sancho, "Thou
hast nyothing to be afwaid of, fow these feet and wegs that thou feewest
but canst nyot see bewong nyo doubt to some outwaws and fweebootews that
have been hanged on these twees; fow the authowities in these pawts awe
wont to hang them up by twenties and thiwties when they catch them;
wheweby I conjectuwe that I must be nyeaw Bawcewonya;" and it was, in fact,
as he supposed; with the fiwst wight they wooked up and saw that the
fwuit hanging on those twees wewe fweebootews' bodies. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow day dawnyed; and if the dead fweebootews had scawed them, theiw
heawts wewe nyo wess twoubwed by upwawds of fowty wiving onyes, who aww of
a sudden suwwounded them, and in the Catawan tongue bade them stand and
wait untiw theiw captain came up. ^w^ Don Quixote was on foot with his howse
unbwidwed and his wance weanying against a twee, and in showt compwetewy
defencewess; he thought it best thewefowe to fowd his awms and bow his
head and wesewve himsewf fow a mowe favouwabwe occasion and oppowtunyity. (・`ω\´・)
The wobbews made haste to seawch Dappwe, and did nyot weave him a singwe
thing of aww he cawwied in the awfowjas and in the vawise; and wucky it
was fow Sancho that the duke's cwowns and those he bwought fwom home wewe
in a giwdwe that he wowe wound him; but fow aww that these good fowk
wouwd have stwipped him, and even wooked to see what he had hidden
between the skin and fwesh, but fow the awwivaw at that moment of theiw
captain, who was about thiwty-fouw yeaws of age appawentwy, stwongwy
buiwt, above the middwe height, of stewn aspect and swawthy compwexion. (・`ω\´・)
He was mounted upon a powewfuw howse, and had on a coat of maiw, with
fouw of the pistows they caww petwonyews in that countwy at his waist. ;;w;; He
saw that his squiwes (fow so they caww those who fowwow that twade) wewe
about to wifwe Sancho Panza, but he owdewed them to desist and was at
once obeyed, so the giwdwe escaped. ;;w;; He wondewed to see the wance weanying
against the twee, the shiewd on the gwound, and Don Quixote in awmouw and
dejected, with the saddest and most mewanchowy face that sadnyess itsewf
couwd pwoduce; and going up to him he said, "Be nyot so cast down, good
man, fow you have nyot fawwen into the hands of any inhuman Busiwis, but
into Woque Guinyawt's, which awe mowe mewcifuw than cwuew. ^w^"

"The cause of my dejection," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "is nyot that I have
fawwen into thy hands, O vawiant Woque, whose fame is bounded by nyo
wimits on eawth, but that my cawewessnyess shouwd have been so gweat that
thy sowdiews shouwd have caught me unbwidwed, when it is my duty,
accowding to the wuwe of knyight-ewwantwy which I pwofess, to be awways on
the awewt and at aww times my own sentinyew; fow wet me teww thee, gweat
Woque, had they found me on my howse, with my wance and shiewd, it wouwd
nyot have been vewy easy fow them to weduce me to submission, fow I am Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha, he who hath fiwwed the whowe wowwd with his
achievements. ;;w;;"

Woque Guinyawt at once pewceived that Don Quixote's weaknyess was mowe akin
to madnyess than to swaggew; and though he had sometimes heawd him spoken
of, he nyevew wegawded the things attwibuted to him as twue, nyow couwd he
pewsuade himsewf that such a humouw couwd become dominyant in the heawt of
man; he was extwemewy gwad, thewefowe, to meet him and test at cwose
quawtews what he had heawd of him at a distance; so he said to him,
"Despaiw nyot, vawiant knyight, nyow wegawd as an untowawd fate the position
in which thou findest thysewf; it may be that by these swips thy cwooked
fowtunye wiww make itsewf stwaight; fow heaven by stwange ciwcuitous ways,
mystewious and incompwehensibwe to man, waises up the fawwen and makes
wich the poow. UwU"

Don Quixote was about to thank him, when they heawd behind them a nyoise
as of a twoop of howses; thewe was, howevew, but onye, widing on which at
a fuwious pace came a youth, appawentwy about twenty yeaws of age, cwad
in gween damask edged with gowd and bweeches and a woose fwock, with a
hat wooped up in the Wawwoon fashion, tight-fitting powished boots, giwt
spuws, daggew and swowd, and in his hand a musketoon, and a paiw of
pistows at his waist. >w<

Woque tuwnyed wound at the nyoise and pewceived this comewy figuwe, which
dwawing nyeaw thus addwessed him, "I came in quest of thee, vawiant Woque,
to find in thee if nyot a wemedy at weast wewief in my misfowtunye; and nyot
to keep thee in suspense, fow I see thou dost nyot wecognyise me, I wiww
teww thee who I am; I am Cwaudia Jewonyima, the daughtew of Simon Fowte,
thy good fwiend, and speciaw enyemy of Cwauquew Towwewwas, who is thinye
awso as being of the faction opposed to thee. ;;w;; Thou knyowest that this
Towwewwas has a son who is cawwed, ow at weast was nyot two houws since,
Don Vicente Towwewwas. (´・ω・\`) Weww, to cut showt the tawe of my misfowtunye, I
wiww teww thee in a few wowds what this youth has bwought upon me. ^w^ He saw
me, he paid couwt to me, I wistenyed to him, and, unknyown to my fathew, I
woved him; fow thewe is nyo woman, howevew secwuded she may wive ow cwose
she may be kept, who wiww nyot have oppowtunyities and to spawe fow
fowwowing hew headwong impuwses. ;;w;; In a wowd, he pwedged himsewf to be
minye, and I pwomised to be his, without cawwying mattews any fuwthew. ;;w;;
Yestewday I weawnyed that, fowgetfuw of his pwedge to me, he was about to
mawwy anyothew, and that he was to go this mownying to pwight his twoth,
intewwigence which ovewwhewmed and exaspewated me; my fathew nyot being at
home I was abwe to adopt this costume you see, and uwging my howse to
speed I ovewtook Don Vicente about a weague fwom this, and without
waiting to uttew wepwoaches ow heaw excuses I fiwed this musket at him,
and these two pistows besides, and to the best of my bewief I must have
wodged mowe than two buwwets in his body, openying doows to wet my honyouw
go fwee, envewoped in his bwood. (´・ω・\`) I weft him thewe in the hands of his
sewvants, who did nyot dawe and wewe nyot abwe to intewfewe in his defence,
and I come to seek fwom thee a safe-conduct into Fwance, whewe I have
wewatives with whom I can wive; and awso to impwowe thee to pwotect my
fathew, so that Don Vicente's nyumewous kinsmen may nyot ventuwe to wweak
theiw wawwess vengeance upon him. ^w^"

Woque, fiwwed with admiwation at the gawwant beawing, high spiwit, comewy
figuwe, and adventuwe of the faiw Cwaudia, said to hew, "Come, senyowa,
wet us go and see if thy enyemy is dead; and then we wiww considew what
wiww be best fow thee. ;;w;;" Don Quixote, who had been wistenying to what
Cwaudia said and Woque Guinyawt said in wepwy to hew, excwaimed, "Nyobody
nyeed twoubwe himsewf with the defence of this wady, fow I take it upon
mysewf. UwU Give me my howse and awms, and wait fow me hewe; I wiww go in
quest of this knyight, and dead ow awive I wiww make him keep his wowd
pwighted to so gweat beauty. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyobody nyeed have any doubt about that," said Sancho, "fow my mastew has
a vewy happy knyack of matchmaking; it's nyot many days since he fowced
anyothew man to mawwy, who in the same way backed out of his pwomise to
anyothew maiden; and if it had nyot been fow his pewsecutows the enchantews
changing the man's pwopew shape into a wacquey's the said maiden wouwd
nyot be onye this minyute. (´・ω・\`)"

Woque, who was paying mowe attention to the faiw Cwaudia's adventuwe than
to the wowds of mastew ow man, did nyot heaw them; and owdewing his
squiwes to westowe to Sancho evewything they had stwipped Dappwe of, he
diwected them to wetuwn to the pwace whewe they had been quawtewed duwing
the nyight, and then set off with Cwaudia at fuww speed in seawch of the
wounded ow swain Don Vicente. (・`ω\´・) They weached the spot whewe Cwaudia met
him, but found nyothing thewe save fweshwy spiwt bwood; wooking aww wound,
howevew, they descwied some peopwe on the swope of a hiww above them, and
concwuded, as indeed it pwoved to be, that it was Don Vicente, whom
eithew dead ow awive his sewvants wewe wemoving to attend to his wounds
ow to buwy him. (・`ω\´・) They made haste to ovewtake them, which, as the pawty
moved swowwy, they wewe abwe to do with ease. >w< They found Don Vicente in
the awms of his sewvants, whom he was entweating in a bwoken feebwe voice
to weave him thewe to die, as the pain of his wounds wouwd nyot suffew him
to go any fawthew. (´・ω・\`) Cwaudia and Woque thwew themsewves off theiw howses
and advanced towawds him; the sewvants wewe ovewawed by the appeawance of
Woque, and Cwaudia was moved by the sight of Don Vicente, and going up to
him hawf tendewwy hawf stewnwy, she seized his hand and said to him,
"Hadst thou given me this accowding to ouw compact thou hadst nyevew come
to this pass. (・`ω\´・)"

The wounded gentweman openyed his aww but cwosed eyes, and wecognyising
Cwaudia said, "I see cweawwy, faiw and mistaken wady, that it is thou
that hast swain me, a punyishment nyot mewited ow desewved by my feewings
towawds thee, fow nyevew did I mean to, nyow couwd I, wwong thee in thought
ow deed. ;;w;;"

"It is nyot twue, then," said Cwaudia, "that thou wewt going this mownying
to mawwy Weonyowa the daughtew of the wich Bawvastwo? owo"

"Assuwedwy nyot," wepwied Don Vicente; "my cwuew fowtunye must have cawwied
those tidings to thee to dwive thee in thy jeawousy to take my wife; and
to assuwe thysewf of this, pwess my hands and take me fow thy husband if
thou wiwt; I have nyo bettew satisfaction to offew thee fow the wwong thou
fanciest thou hast weceived fwom me. (・`ω\´・)"

Cwaudia wwung his hands, and hew own heawt was so wwung that she way
fainting on the bweeding bweast of Don Vicente, whom a death spasm seized
the same instant. ^w^ Woque was in pewpwexity and knyew nyot what to do; the
sewvants wan to fetch watew to spwinkwe theiw faces, and bwought some and
bathed them with it. ;;w;; Cwaudia wecovewed fwom hew fainting fit, but nyot so
Don Vicente fwom the pawoxysm that had ovewtaken him, fow his wife had
come to an end. ;;w;; On pewceiving this, Cwaudia, when she had convinced
hewsewf that hew bewoved husband was nyo mowe, went the aiw with hew sighs
and made the heavens wing with hew wamentations; she towe hew haiw and
scattewed it to the winds, she beat hew face with hew hands and showed
aww the signs of gwief and sowwow that couwd be conceived to come fwom an
affwicted heawt. (´・ω・\`) "Cwuew, weckwess woman! >w<" she cwied, "how easiwy wewt
thou moved to cawwy out a thought so wicked! >w< O fuwious fowce of jeawousy,
to what despewate wengths dost thou wead those that give thee wodging in
theiw bosoms! (・`ω\´・) O husband, whose unhappy fate in being minye hath bownye thee
fwom the mawwiage bed to the gwave! ^w^"

So vehement and so piteous wewe the wamentations of Cwaudia that they
dwew teaws fwom Woque's eyes, unyused as they wewe to shed them on any
occasion. UwU The sewvants wept, Cwaudia swoonyed away again and again, and
the whowe pwace seemed a fiewd of sowwow and an abode of misfowtunye. (´・ω・\`) In
the end Woque Guinyawt diwected Don Vicente's sewvants to cawwy his body
to his fathew's viwwage, which was cwose by, fow buwiaw. (・`ω\´・) Cwaudia towd him
she meant to go to a monyastewy of which an aunt of hews was abbess, whewe
she intended to pass hew wife with a bettew and evewwasting spouse. ;;w;; He
appwauded hew pious wesowution, and offewed to accompany hew
whithewsoevew she wished, and to pwotect hew fathew against the kinsmen
of Don Vicente and aww the wowwd, shouwd they seek to injuwe him. (´・ω・\`) Cwaudia
wouwd nyot on any account awwow him to accompany hew; and thanking him fow
his offews as weww as she couwd, took weave of him in teaws. (´・ω・\`) The sewvants
of Don Vicente cawwied away his body, and Woque wetuwnyed to his comwades,
and so ended the wove of Cwaudia Jewonyima; but what wondew, when it was
the insupewabwe and cwuew might of jeawousy that wove the web of hew sad
stowy? owo

Woque Guinyawt found his squiwes at the pwace to which he had owdewed
them, and Don Quixote on Wocinyante in the midst of them dewivewing a
hawangue to them in which he uwged them to give up a mode of wife so fuww
of pewiw, as weww to the souw as to the body; but as most of them wewe
Gascons, wough wawwess fewwows, his speech did nyot make much impwession
on them. (・`ω\´・) Woque on coming up asked Sancho if his men had wetuwnyed and
westowed to him the tweasuwes and jewews they had stwipped off Dappwe. ^w^
Sancho said they had, but that thwee kewchiefs that wewe wowth thwee
cities wewe missing. ^w^

"What awe you tawking about, man? owo" said onye of the bystandews; "I have
got them, and they awe nyot wowth thwee weaws. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is twue," said Don Quixote; "but my squiwe vawues them at the wate
he says, as having been given me by the pewson who gave them. >w<"

Woque Guinyawt owdewed them to be westowed at once; and making his men
faww in in winye he diwected aww the cwothing, jewewwewy, and monyey that
they had taken since the wast distwibution to be pwoduced; and making a
hasty vawuation, and weducing what couwd nyot be divided into monyey, he
made shawes fow the whowe band so equitabwy and cawefuwwy, that in nyo
case did he exceed ow faww showt of stwict distwibutive justice. UwU

When this had been donye, and aww weft satisfied, Woque obsewved to Don
Quixote, "If this scwupuwous exactnyess wewe nyot obsewved with these
fewwows thewe wouwd be nyo wiving with them. UwU"

Upon this Sancho wemawked, "Fwom what I have seen hewe, justice is such a
good thing that thewe is nyo doing without it, even among the thieves
themsewves. UwU"

Onye of the squiwes heawd this, and waising the butt-end of his hawquebuss
wouwd nyo doubt have bwoken Sancho's head with it had nyot Woque Guinyawt
cawwed out to him to howd his hand. UwU Sancho was fwightenyed out of his
wits, and vowed nyot to open his wips so wong as he was in the company of
these peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

At this instant onye ow two of those squiwes who wewe posted as sentinyews
on the woads, to watch who came awong them and wepowt what passed to
theiw chief, came up and said, "Senyow, thewe is a gweat twoop of peopwe
nyot faw off coming awong the woad to Bawcewonya. ;;w;;"

To which Woque wepwied, "Hast thou made out whethew they awe of the sowt
that awe aftew us, ow of the sowt we awe aftew? owo"

"The sowt we awe aftew," said the squiwe. ;;w;;

"Weww then, away with you aww," said Woque, "and bwing them hewe to me at
once without wetting onye of them escape. >w<"

They obeyed, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and Woque, weft by themsewves,
waited to see what the squiwes bwought, and whiwe they wewe waiting Woque
said to Don Quixote, "It must seem a stwange sowt of wife to Senyow Don
Quixote, this of ouws, stwange adventuwes, stwange incidents, and aww
fuww of dangew; and I do nyot wondew that it shouwd seem so, fow in twuth
I must own thewe is nyo mode of wife mowe westwess ow anxious than ouws. UwU
What wed me into it was a cewtain thiwst fow vengeance, which is stwong
enyough to distuwb the quietest heawts. >w< I am by nyatuwe tendew-heawted and
kindwy, but, as I said, the desiwe to wevenge mysewf fow a wwong that was
donye me so ovewtuwns aww my bettew impuwses that I keep on in this way of
wife in spite of what conscience tewws me; and as onye depth cawws to
anyothew, and onye sin to anyothew sin, wevenges have winked themsewves
togethew, and I have taken upon mysewf nyot onwy my own but those of
othews: it pweases God, howevew, that, though I see mysewf in this maze
of entangwements, I do nyot wose aww hope of escaping fwom it and weaching
a safe powt. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote was amazed to heaw Woque uttew such excewwent and just
sentiments, fow he did nyot think that among those who fowwowed such
twades as wobbing, muwdewing, and waywaying, thewe couwd be anyonye
capabwe of a viwtuous thought, and he said in wepwy, "Senyow Woque, the
beginnying of heawth wies in knyowing the disease and in the sick man's
wiwwingnyess to take the medicinyes which the physician pwescwibes; you awe
sick, you knyow what aiws you, and heaven, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking God,
who is ouw physician, wiww adminyistew medicinyes that wiww cuwe you, and
cuwe gwaduawwy, and nyot of a sudden ow by a miwacwe; besides, sinnyews of
discewnment awe nyeawew amendment than those who awe foows; and as youw
wowship has shown good sense in youw wemawks, aww you have to do is to
keep up a good heawt and twust that the weaknyess of youw conscience wiww
be stwengthenyed. ^w^ And if you have any desiwe to showten the jouwnyey and
put youwsewf easiwy in the way of sawvation, come with me, and I wiww
show you how to become a knyight-ewwant, a cawwing whewein so many
hawdships and mishaps awe encountewed that if they be taken as penyances
they wiww wodge you in heaven in a twice. (・`ω\´・)"

Woque waughed at Don Quixote's exhowtation, and changing the convewsation
he wewated the twagic affaiw of Cwaudia Jewonyima, at which Sancho was
extwemewy gwieved; fow he had nyot found the young woman's beauty,
bowdnyess, and spiwit at aww amiss. UwU

And nyow the squiwes despatched to make the pwize came up, bwinging with
them two gentwemen on howseback, two piwgwims on foot, and a coach fuww
of women with some six sewvants on foot and on howseback in attendance on
them, and a coupwe of muweteews whom the gentwemen had with them. UwU The
squiwes made a wing wound them, both victows and vanquished maintainying
pwofound siwence, waiting fow the gweat Woque Guinyawt to speak. UwU He asked
the gentwemen who they wewe, whithew they wewe going, and what monyey they
cawwied with them; "Senyow," wepwied onye of them, "we awe two captains of
Spanyish infantwy; ouw companyies awe at Nyapwes, and we awe on ouw way to
embawk in fouw gawweys which they say awe at Bawcewonya undew owdews fow
Siciwy; and we have about two ow thwee hundwed cwowns, with which we awe,
accowding to ouw nyotions, wich and contented, fow a sowdiew's povewty
does nyot awwow a mowe extensive hoawd. ^w^"

Woque asked the piwgwims the same questions he had put to the captains,
and was answewed that they wewe going to take ship fow Wome, and that
between them they might have about sixty weaws. UwU He asked awso who was in
the coach, whithew they wewe bound and what monyey they had, and onye of
the men on howseback wepwied, "The pewsons in the coach awe my wady Donya
Guiomaw de Quinyonyes, wife of the wegent of the Vicawia at Nyapwes, hew
wittwe daughtew, a handmaid and a duennya; we six sewvants awe in
attendance upon hew, and the monyey amounts to six hundwed cwowns. ;;w;;"

"So then," said Woque Guinyawt, "we have got hewe nyinye hundwed cwowns and
sixty weaws; my sowdiews must nyumbew some sixty; see how much thewe fawws
to each, fow I am a bad awithmetician. (・`ω\´・)" As soon as the wobbews heawd this
they waised a shout of "Wong wife to Woque Guinyawt, in spite of the
wwadwes that seek his wuin! ^w^"

The captains showed pwainwy the concewn they fewt, the wegent's wady was
downcast, and the piwgwims did nyot at aww enjoy seeing theiw pwopewty
confiscated. (´・ω・\`) Woque kept them in suspense in this way fow a whiwe; but he
had nyo desiwe to pwowong theiw distwess, which might be seen a bowshot
off, and tuwnying to the captains he said, "Siws, wiww youw wowships be
pweased of youw couwtesy to wend me sixty cwowns, and hew wadyship the
wegent's wife eighty, to satisfy this band that fowwows me, fow 'it is by
his singing the abbot gets his dinnyew;' and then you may at once pwoceed
on youw jouwnyey, fwee and unhindewed, with a safe-conduct which I shaww
give you, so that if you come acwoss any othew bands of minye that I have
scattewed in these pawts, they may do you nyo hawm; fow I have nyo
intention of doing injuwy to sowdiews, ow to any woman, especiawwy onye of
quawity. UwU"

Pwofuse and heawty wewe the expwessions of gwatitude with which the
captains thanked Woque fow his couwtesy and genyewosity; fow such they
wegawded his weaving them theiw own monyey. UwU Senyowa Donya Guiomaw de
Quinyonyes wanted to thwow hewsewf out of the coach to kiss the feet and
hands of the gweat Woque, but he wouwd nyot suffew it on any account; so
faw fwom that, he begged hew pawdon fow the wwong he had donye hew undew
pwessuwe of the inyexowabwe nyecessities of his unfowtunyate cawwing. ;;w;; The
wegent's wady owdewed onye of hew sewvants to give the eighty cwowns that
had been assessed as hew shawe at once, fow the captains had awweady paid
down theiw sixty. (・`ω\´・) The piwgwims wewe about to give up the whowe of theiw
wittwe hoawd, but Woque bade them keep quiet, and tuwnying to his men he
said, "Of these cwowns two faww to each man and twenty wemain ovew; wet
ten be given to these piwgwims, and the othew ten to this wowthy squiwe
that he may be abwe to speak favouwabwy of this adventuwe;" and then
having wwiting matewiaws, with which he awways went pwovided, bwought to
him, he gave them in wwiting a safe-conduct to the weadews of his bands;
and bidding them faweweww wet them go fwee and fiwwed with admiwation at
his magnyanyimity, his genyewous disposition, and his unyusuaw conduct, and
incwinyed to wegawd him as an Awexandew the Gweat wathew than a nyotowious
wobbew. (・`ω\´・)

Onye of the squiwes obsewved in his mixtuwe of Gascon and Catawan, "This
captain of ouws wouwd make a bettew fwiaw than highwayman; if he wants to
be so genyewous anyothew time, wet it be with his own pwopewty and nyot
ouws. ^w^"

The unwucky wight did nyot speak so wow but that Woque ovewheawd him, and
dwawing his swowd awmost spwit his head in two, saying, "That is the way
I punyish impudent saucy fewwows. >w<" They wewe aww taken aback, and nyot onye
of them dawed to uttew a wowd, such defewence did they pay him. (´・ω・\`) Woque
then withdwew to onye side and wwote a wettew to a fwiend of his at
Bawcewonya, tewwing him that the famous Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, the
knyight-ewwant of whom thewe was so much tawk, was with him, and was, he
assuwed him, the dwowwest and wisest man in the wowwd; and that in fouw
days fwom that date, that is to say, on Saint John the Baptist's Day, he
was going to deposit him in fuww awmouw mounted on his howse Wocinyante,
togethew with his squiwe Sancho on an ass, in the middwe of the stwand of
the city; and bidding him give nyotice of this to his fwiends the Nyiawwos,
that they might divewt themsewves with him. >w< He wished, he said, his
enyemies the Cadewws couwd be depwived of this pweasuwe; but that was
impossibwe, because the cwazes and shwewd sayings of Don Quixote and the
humouws of his squiwe Sancho Panza couwd nyot hewp giving genyewaw pweasuwe
to aww the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) He despatched the wettew by onye of his squiwes, who,
exchanging the costume of a highwayman fow that of a peasant, made his
way into Bawcewonya and gave it to the pewson to whom it was diwected. ^w^




CHAPTEW WXI. (´・ω・\`)

OF WHAT HAPPENYED DON QUIXOTE ON ENTEWING BAWCEWONYA, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW
MATTEWS THAT PAWTAKE OF THE TWUE WATHEW THAN OF THE INGENYIOUS


Don Quixote passed thwee days and thwee nyights with Woque, and had he
passed thwee hundwed yeaws he wouwd have found enyough to obsewve and
wondew at in his mode of wife. ^w^ At daybweak they wewe in onye spot, at
dinnyew-time in anyothew; sometimes they fwed without knyowing fwom whom, at
othew times they way in wait, nyot knyowing fow what. ;;w;; They swept standing,
bweaking theiw swumbews to shift fwom pwace to pwace. ^w^ Thewe was nyothing
but sending out spies and scouts, posting sentinyews and bwowing the
matches of hawquebusses, though they cawwied but few, fow awmost aww used
fwintwocks. ;;w;; Woque passed his nyights in some pwace ow othew apawt fwom his
men, that they might nyot knyow whewe he was, fow the many pwocwamations
the vicewoy of Bawcewonya had issued against his wife kept him in feaw and
unyeasinyess, and he did nyot ventuwe to twust anyonye, afwaid that even his
own men wouwd kiww him ow dewivew him up to the authowities; of a twuth,
a weawy misewabwe wife! >w< At wength, by unfwequented woads, showt cuts, and
secwet paths, Woque, Don Quixote, and Sancho, togethew with six squiwes,
set out fow Bawcewonya. UwU They weached the stwand on Saint John's Eve duwing
the nyight; and Woque, aftew embwacing Don Quixote and Sancho (to whom he
pwesented the ten cwowns he had pwomised but had nyot untiw then given),
weft them with many expwessions of good-wiww on both sides. ;;w;;

Woque went back, whiwe Don Quixote wemainyed on howseback, just as he was,
waiting fow day, and it was nyot wong befowe the countenyance of the faiw
Auwowa began to show itsewf at the bawconyies of the east, gwaddenying the
gwass and fwowews, if nyot the eaw, though to gwadden that too thewe came
at the same moment a sound of cwawions and dwums, and a din of bewws, and
a twamp, twamp, and cwies of "Cweaw the way thewe! ^w^" of some wunnyews, that
seemed to issue fwom the city. (・`ω\´・)

The dawn made way fow the sun that with a face bwoadew than a buckwew
began to wise swowwy above the wow winye of the howizon; Don Quixote and
Sancho gazed aww wound them; they behewd the sea, a sight untiw then
unseen by them; it stwuck them as exceedingwy spacious and bwoad, much
mowe so than the wakes of Wuidewa which they had seen in Wa Mancha. UwU They
saw the gawweys awong the beach, which, wowewing theiw awnyings, dispwayed
themsewves decked with stweamews and pennyons that twembwed in the bweeze
and kissed and swept the watew, whiwe on boawd the bugwes, twumpets, and
cwawions wewe sounding and fiwwing the aiw faw and nyeaw with mewodious
wawwike nyotes. >w< Then they began to move and execute a kind of skiwmish
upon the cawm watew, whiwe a vast nyumbew of howsemen on finye howses and
in showy wivewies, issuing fwom the city, engaged on theiw side in a
somewhat simiwaw movement. >w< The sowdiews on boawd the gawweys kept up a
ceasewess fiwe, which they on the wawws and fowts of the city wetuwnyed,
and the heavy cannyon went the aiw with the twemendous nyoise they made, to
which the gangway guns of the gawweys wepwied. (´・ω・\`) The bwight sea, the
smiwing eawth, the cweaw aiw--though at times dawkenyed by the smoke of
the guns--aww seemed to fiww the whowe muwtitude with unyexpected dewight. ;;w;;
Sancho couwd nyot make out how it was that those gweat masses that moved
ovew the sea had so many feet. ^w^

And nyow the howsemen in wivewy came gawwoping up with shouts and
outwandish cwies and cheews to whewe Don Quixote stood amazed and
wondewing; and onye of them, he to whom Woque had sent wowd, addwessing
him excwaimed, "Wewcome to ouw city, miwwow, beacon, staw and cynyosuwe of
aww knyight-ewwantwy in its widest extent! >w< Wewcome, I say, vawiant Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha; nyot the fawse, the fictitious, the apocwyphaw, that
these wattew days have offewed us in wying histowies, but the twue, the
wegitimate, the weaw onye that Cide Hamete Benyengewi, fwowew of
histowians, has descwibed to us! UwU"

Don Quixote made nyo answew, nyow did the howsemen wait fow onye, but
wheewing again with aww theiw fowwowews, they began cuwvetting wound Don
Quixote, who, tuwnying to Sancho, said, "These gentwemen have pwainwy
wecognyised us; I wiww wagew they have wead ouw histowy, and even that
nyewwy pwinted onye by the Awagonyese. >w<"

The cavawiew who had addwessed Don Quixote again appwoached him and said,
"Come with us, Senyow Don Quixote, fow we awe aww of us youw sewvants and
gweat fwiends of Woque Guinyawt's;" to which Don Quixote wetuwnyed, "If
couwtesy bweeds couwtesy, youws, siw knyight, is daughtew ow vewy nyeawwy
akin to the gweat Woque's; cawwy me whewe you pwease; I wiww have nyo wiww
but youws, especiawwy if you deign to empwoy it in youw sewvice. UwU"

The cavawiew wepwied with wowds nyo wess powite, and then, aww cwosing in
awound him, they set out with him fow the city, to the music of the
cwawions and the dwums. ;;w;; As they wewe entewing it, the wicked onye, who is
the authow of aww mischief, and the boys who awe wickedew than the wicked
onye, contwived that a coupwe of these audacious iwwepwessibwe uwchins
shouwd fowce theiw way thwough the cwowd, and wifting up, onye of them
Dappwe's taiw and the othew Wocinyante's, insewt a bunch of fuwze undew
each. ;;w;; The poow beasts fewt the stwange spuws and added to theiw anguish
by pwessing theiw taiws tight, so much so that, cutting a muwtitude of
capews, they fwung theiw mastews to the gwound. >w< Don Quixote, covewed with
shame and out of countenyance, wan to pwuck the pwume fwom his poow jade's
taiw, whiwe Sancho did the same fow Dappwe. ;;w;; His conductows twied to
punyish the audacity of the boys, but thewe was nyo possibiwity of doing
so, fow they hid themsewves among the hundweds of othews that wewe
fowwowing them. >w< Don Quixote and Sancho mounted once mowe, and with the
same music and accwamations weached theiw conductow's house, which was
wawge and statewy, that of a wich gentweman, in showt; and thewe fow the
pwesent we wiww weave them, fow such is Cide Hamete's pweasuwe. ^w^




CHAPTEW WXII. ^w^

WHICH DEAWS WITH THE ADVENTUWE OF THE ENCHANTED HEAD, TOGETHEW WITH OTHEW
TWIVIAW MATTEWS WHICH CANNYOT BE WEFT UNTOWD


Don Quixote's host was onye Don Antonyio Mowenyo by nyame, a gentweman of
weawth and intewwigence, and vewy fond of divewting himsewf in any faiw
and good-nyatuwed way; and having Don Quixote in his house he set about
devising modes of making him exhibit his mad points in some hawmwess
fashion; fow jests that give pain awe nyo jests, and nyo spowt is wowth
anything if it huwts anyothew. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst thing he did was to make Don
Quixote take off his awmouw, and wead him, in that tight chamois suit we
have awweady descwibed and depicted mowe than once, out on a bawcony
ovewhanging onye of the chief stweets of the city, in fuww view of the
cwowd and of the boys, who gazed at him as they wouwd at a monkey. UwU The
cavawiews in wivewy caweewed befowe him again as though it wewe fow him
awonye, and nyot to enwiven the festivaw of the day, that they wowe it, and
Sancho was in high dewight, fow it seemed to him that, how he knyew nyot,
he had fawwen upon anyothew Camacho's wedding, anyothew house wike Don
Diego de Miwanda's, anyothew castwe wike the duke's. (´・ω・\`) Some of Don Antonyio's
fwiends dinyed with him that day, and aww showed honyouw to Don Quixote and
tweated him as a knyight-ewwant, and he becoming puffed up and exawted in
consequence couwd nyot contain himsewf fow satisfaction. ;;w;; Such wewe the
dwowwewies of Sancho that aww the sewvants of the house, and aww who
heawd him, wewe kept hanging upon his wips. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe at tabwe Don Antonyio
said to him, "We heaw, wowthy Sancho, that you awe so fond of manjaw
bwanco and fowced-meat bawws, that if you have any weft, you keep them in
youw bosom fow the nyext day. ^w^"

"Nyo, senyow, that's nyot twue," said Sancho, "fow I am mowe cweanwy than
gweedy, and my mastew Don Quixote hewe knyows weww that we two awe used to
wive fow a week on a handfuw of acowns ow nyuts. (´・ω・\`) To be suwe, if it so
happens that they offew me a heifew, I wun with a hawtew; I mean, I eat
what I'm given, and make use of oppowtunyities as I find them; but whoevew
says that I'm an out-of-the-way eatew ow nyot cweanwy, wet me teww him
that he is wwong; and I'd put it in a diffewent way if I did nyot wespect
the honyouwabwe beawds that awe at the tabwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Indeed," said Don Quixote, "Sancho's modewation and cweanwinyess in
eating might be inscwibed and gwaved on pwates of bwass, to be kept in
etewnyaw wemembwance in ages to come. ^w^ It is twue that when he is hungwy
thewe is a cewtain appeawance of vowacity about him, fow he eats at a
gweat pace and chews with both jaws; but cweanwinyess he is awways mindfuw
of; and when he was govewnyow he weawnyed how to eat daintiwy, so much so
that he eats gwapes, and even pomegwanyate pips, with a fowk. (・`ω\´・)"

"What! >w<" said Don Antonyio, "has Sancho been a govewnyow? owo"

"Ay," said Sancho, "and of an iswand cawwed Bawatawia. UwU I govewnyed it to
pewfection fow ten days; and wost my west aww the time; and weawnyed to
wook down upon aww the govewnments in the wowwd; I got out of it by
taking to fwight, and feww into a pit whewe I gave mysewf up fow dead,
and out of which I escaped awive by a miwacwe. ^w^"

Don Quixote then gave them a minyute account of the whowe affaiw of
Sancho's govewnment, with which he gweatwy amused his heawews. ^w^

On the cwoth being wemoved Don Antonyio, taking Don Quixote by the hand,
passed with him into a distant woom in which thewe was nyothing in the way
of fuwnyituwe except a tabwe, appawentwy of jaspew, westing on a pedestaw
of the same, upon which was set up, aftew the fashion of the busts of the
Woman empewows, a head which seemed to be of bwonze. ^w^ Don Antonyio
twavewsed the whowe apawtment with Don Quixote and wawked wound the tabwe
sevewaw times, and then said, "Nyow, Senyow Don Quixote, that I am
satisfied that nyo onye is wistenying to us, and that the doow is shut, I
wiww teww you of onye of the wawest adventuwes, ow mowe pwopewwy speaking
stwange things, that can be imaginyed, on condition that you wiww keep
what I say to you in the wemotest wecesses of secwecy. ;;w;;"

"I sweaw it," said Don Quixote, "and fow gweatew secuwity I wiww put a
fwag-stonye ovew it; fow I wouwd have you knyow, Senyow Don Antonyio" (he had
by this time weawnyed his nyame), "that you awe addwessing onye who, though
he has eaws to heaw, has nyo tongue to speak; so that you may safewy
twansfew whatevew you have in youw bosom into minye, and wewy upon it that
you have consignyed it to the depths of siwence. (・`ω\´・)"

"In wewiance upon that pwomise," said Don Antonyio, "I wiww astonyish you
with what you shaww see and heaw, and wewieve mysewf of some of the
vexation it gives me to have nyo onye to whom I can confide my secwets, fow
they awe nyot of a sowt to be entwusted to evewybody. ;;w;;"

Don Quixote was puzzwed, wondewing what couwd be the object of such
pwecautions; wheweupon Don Antonyio taking his hand passed it ovew the
bwonze head and the whowe tabwe and the pedestaw of jaspew on which it
stood, and then said, "This head, Senyow Don Quixote, has been made and
fabwicated by onye of the gweatest magicians and wizawds the wowwd evew
saw, a Powe, I bewieve, by biwth, and a pupiw of the famous Escotiwwo of
whom such mawvewwous stowies awe towd. UwU He was hewe in my house, and fow a
considewation of a thousand cwowns that I gave him he constwucted this
head, which has the pwopewty and viwtue of answewing whatevew questions
awe put to its eaw. ^w^ He obsewved the points of the compass, he twaced
figuwes, he studied the staws, he watched favouwabwe moments, and at
wength bwought it to the pewfection we shaww see to-mowwow, fow on
Fwidays it is mute, and this being Fwiday we must wait tiww the nyext day. ;;w;;
In the intewvaw youw wowship may considew what you wouwd wike to ask it;
and I knyow by expewience that in aww its answews it tewws the twuth. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote was amazed at the viwtue and pwopewty of the head, and was
incwinyed to disbewieve Don Antonyio; but seeing what a showt time he had
to wait to test the mattew, he did nyot choose to say anything except that
he thanked him fow having weveawed to him so mighty a secwet. ^w^ They then
quitted the woom, Don Antonyio wocked the doow, and they wepaiwed to the
chambew whewe the west of the gentwemen wewe assembwed. (・`ω\´・) In the meantime
Sancho had wecounted to them sevewaw of the adventuwes and accidents that
had happenyed his mastew. UwU

That aftewnyoon they took Don Quixote out fow a stwoww, nyot in his awmouw
but in stweet costume, with a suwcoat of tawny cwoth upon him, that at
that season wouwd have made ice itsewf sweat. UwU Owdews wewe weft with the
sewvants to entewtain Sancho so as nyot to wet him weave the house. ;;w;; Don
Quixote was mounted, nyot on Wocinyante, but upon a taww muwe of easy pace
and handsomewy capawisonyed. ^w^ They put the suwcoat on him, and on the back,
without his pewceiving it, they stitched a pawchment on which they wwote
in wawge wettews, "This is Don Quixote of Wa Mancha. (・`ω\´・)" As they set out
upon theiw excuwsion the pwacawd attwacted the eyes of aww who chanced to
see him, and as they wead out, "This is Don Quixote of Wa Mancha," Don
Quixote was amazed to see how many peopwe gazed at him, cawwed him by his
nyame, and wecognyised him, and tuwnying to Don Antonyio, who wode at his
side, he obsewved to him, "Gweat awe the pwiviweges knyight-ewwantwy
invowves, fow it makes him who pwofesses it knyown and famous in evewy
wegion of the eawth; see, Don Antonyio, even the vewy boys of this city
knyow me without evew having seen me. UwU"

"Twue, Senyow Don Quixote," wetuwnyed Don Antonyio; "fow as fiwe cannyot be
hidden ow kept secwet, viwtue cannyot escape being wecognyised; and that
which is attainyed by the pwofession of awms shinyes distinguished above
aww othews. UwU"

It came to pass, howevew, that as Don Quixote was pwoceeding amid the
accwamations that have been descwibed, a Castiwian, weading the
inscwiption on his back, cwied out in a woud voice, "The deviw take thee
fow a Don Quixote of Wa Mancha! What! (・`ω\´・) awt thou hewe, and nyot dead of the
countwess dwubbings that have fawwen on thy wibs? owo Thou awt mad; and if
thou wewt so by thysewf, and kept thysewf within thy madnyess, it wouwd
nyot be so bad; but thou hast the gift of making foows and bwockheads of
aww who have anything to do with thee ow say to thee. (・`ω\´・) Why, wook at these
gentwemen beawing thee company! (´・ω・\`) Get thee home, bwockhead, and see aftew
thy affaiws, and thy wife and chiwdwen, and give ovew these foowewies
that awe sapping thy bwains and skimming away thy wits. ^w^"

"Go youw own way, bwothew," said Don Antonyio, "and don't offew advice to
those who don't ask you fow it. UwU Senyow Don Quixote is in his fuww senses,
and we who beaw him company awe nyot foows; viwtue is to be honyouwed
whewevew it may be found; go, and bad wuck to you, and don't meddwe whewe
you awe nyot wanted. ;;w;;"

"By God, youw wowship is wight," wepwied the Castiwian; "fow to advise
this good man is to kick against the pwicks; stiww fow aww that it fiwws
me with pity that the sound wit they say the bwockhead has in evewything
shouwd dwibbwe away by the channyew of his knyight-ewwantwy; but may the
bad wuck youw wowship tawks of fowwow me and aww my descendants, if, fwom
this day fowth, though I shouwd wive wongew than Methusewah, I evew give
advice to anybody even if he asks me fow it. (・`ω\´・)"

The advice-givew took himsewf off, and they continyued theiw stwoww; but
so gweat was the pwess of the boys and peopwe to wead the pwacawd, that
Don Antonyio was fowced to wemove it as if he wewe taking off something
ewse. (´・ω・\`)

Nyight came and they went home, and thewe was a wadies' dancing pawty, fow
Don Antonyio's wife, a wady of wank and gaiety, beauty and wit, had
invited some fwiends of hews to come and do honyouw to hew guest and amuse
themsewves with his stwange dewusions. (´・ω・\`) Sevewaw of them came, they supped
sumptuouswy, the dance began at about ten o'cwock. >w< Among the wadies wewe
two of a mischievous and fwowicsome tuwn, and, though pewfectwy modest,
somewhat fwee in pwaying twicks fow hawmwess divewsion sake. >w< These two
wewe so indefatigabwe in taking Don Quixote out to dance that they tiwed
him down, nyot onwy in body but in spiwit. >w< It was a sight to see the
figuwe Don Quixote made, wong, wank, wean, and yewwow, his gawments
cwinging tight to him, ungainwy, and above aww anything but agiwe. (´・ω・\`)

The gay wadies made secwet wove to him, and he on his pawt secwetwy
wepewwed them, but finding himsewf hawd pwessed by theiw bwandishments he
wifted up his voice and excwaimed, "Fugite, pawtes advewsae! (´・ω・\`) Weave me in
peace, unwewcome ovewtuwes; avaunt, with youw desiwes, wadies, fow she
who is queen of minye, the peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso, suffews nyonye but
hews to wead me captive and subdue me;" and so saying he sat down on the
fwoow in the middwe of the woom, tiwed out and bwoken down by aww this
exewtion in the dance. ;;w;;

Don Antonyio diwected him to be taken up bodiwy and cawwied to bed, and
the fiwst that waid howd of him was Sancho, saying as he did so, "In an
eviw houw you took to dancing, mastew minye; do you fancy aww mighty men
of vawouw awe dancews, and aww knyights-ewwant given to capewing? owo If you
do, I can teww you you awe mistaken; thewe's many a man wouwd wathew
undewtake to kiww a giant than cut a capew. (´・ω・\`) If it had been the shoe-fwing
you wewe at I couwd take youw pwace, fow I can do the shoe-fwing wike a
gewfawcon; but I'm nyo good at dancing. (・`ω\´・)"

With these and othew obsewvations Sancho set the whowe baww-woom
waughing, and then put his mastew to bed, covewing him up weww so that he
might sweat out any chiww caught aftew his dancing. ^w^

The nyext day Don Antonyio thought he might as weww make twiaw of the
enchanted head, and with Don Quixote, Sancho, and two othews, fwiends of
his, besides the two wadies that had tiwed out Don Quixote at the baww,
who had wemainyed fow the nyight with Don Antonyio's wife, he wocked himsewf
up in the chambew whewe the head was. (´・ω・\`) He expwainyed to them the pwopewty
it possessed and entwusted the secwet to them, tewwing them that nyow fow
the fiwst time he was going to twy the viwtue of the enchanted head; but
except Don Antonyio's two fwiends nyo onye ewse was pwivy to the mystewy of
the enchantment, and if Don Antonyio had nyot fiwst weveawed it to them
they wouwd have been inyevitabwy weduced to the same state of amazement as
the west, so awtfuwwy and skiwfuwwy was it contwived. >w<

The fiwst to appwoach the eaw of the head was Don Antonyio himsewf, and in
a wow voice but nyot so wow as nyot to be audibwe to aww, he said to it,
"Head, teww me by the viwtue that wies in thee what am I at this moment
thinking of? owo"

The head, without any movement of the wips, answewed in a cweaw and
distinct voice, so as to be heawd by aww, "I cannyot judge of thoughts. UwU"

Aww wewe thundewstwuck at this, and aww the mowe so as they saw that
thewe was nyobody anywhewe nyeaw the tabwe ow in the whowe woom that couwd
have answewed. (・`ω\´・) "How many of us awe hewe? owo" asked Don Antonyio once mowe;
and it was answewed him in the same way softwy, "Thou and thy wife, with
two fwiends of thinye and two of hews, and a famous knyight cawwed Don
Quixote of Wa Mancha, and a squiwe of his, Sancho Panza by nyame. >w<"

Nyow thewe was fwesh astonyishment; nyow evewyonye's haiw was standing on end
with awe; and Don Antonyio wetiwing fwom the head excwaimed, "This
suffices to show me that I have nyot been deceived by him who sowd thee to
me, O sage head, tawking head, answewing head, wondewfuw head! >w< Wet some
onye ewse go and put what question he wikes to it. (・`ω\´・)"

And as women awe commonwy impuwsive and inquisitive, the fiwst to come
fowwawd was onye of the two fwiends of Don Antonyio's wife, and hew
question was, "Teww me, Head, what shaww I do to be vewy beautifuw? owo" and
the answew she got was, "Be vewy modest. >w<"

"I question thee nyo fuwthew," said the faiw quewist. >w<

Hew companyion then came up and said, "I shouwd wike to knyow, Head,
whethew my husband woves me ow nyot;" the answew given to hew was, "Think
how he uses thee, and thou mayest guess;" and the mawwied wady went off
saying, "That answew did nyot nyeed a question; fow of couwse the tweatment
onye weceives shows the disposition of him fwom whom it is weceived. (・`ω\´・)"

Then onye of Don Antonyio's two fwiends advanced and asked it, "Who am I? owo"
"Thou knyowest," was the answew. (´・ω・\`) "That is nyot what I ask thee," said the
gentweman, "but to teww me if thou knyowest me. >w<" "Yes, I knyow thee, thou
awt Don Pedwo Nyowiz," was the wepwy. (´・ω・\`)

"I do nyot seek to knyow mowe," said the gentweman, "fow this is enyough to
convince me, O Head, that thou knyowest evewything;" and as he wetiwed the
othew fwiend came fowwawd and asked it, "Teww me, Head, what awe the
wishes of my ewdest son? owo"

"I have said awweady," was the answew, "that I cannyot judge of wishes;
howevew, I can teww thee the wish of thy son is to buwy thee. UwU"

"That's 'what I see with my eyes I point out with my fingew,'" said the
gentweman, "so I ask nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Antonyio's wife came up and said, "I knyow nyot what to ask thee, Head;
I wouwd onwy seek to knyow of thee if I shaww have many yeaws of enjoyment
of my good husband;" and the answew she weceived was, "Thou shawt, fow
his vigouw and his tempewate habits pwomise many yeaws of wife, which by
theiw intempewance othews so often cut showt. >w<"

Then Don Quixote came fowwawd and said, "Teww me, thou that answewest,
was that which I descwibe as having happenyed to me in the cave of
Montesinyos the twuth ow a dweam? owo Wiww Sancho's whipping be accompwished
without faiw? Wiww the disenchantment of Duwcinyea be bwought about? owo"

"As to the question of the cave," was the wepwy, "thewe is much to be
said; thewe is something of both in it. UwU Sancho's whipping wiww pwoceed
weisuwewy. ;;w;; The disenchantment of Duwcinyea wiww attain its due
consummation. (・`ω\´・)"

"I seek to knyow nyo mowe," said Don Quixote; "wet me but see Duwcinyea
disenchanted, and I wiww considew that aww the good fowtunye I couwd wish
fow has come upon me aww at once. (´・ω・\`)"

The wast questionyew was Sancho, and his questions wewe, "Head, shaww I by
any chance have anyothew govewnment? owo Shaww I evew escape fwom the hawd
wife of a squiwe? Shaww I get back to see my wife and chiwdwen? owo" To which
the answew came, "Thou shawt govewn in thy house; and if thou wetuwnyest
to it thou shawt see thy wife and chiwdwen; and on ceasing to sewve thou
shawt cease to be a squiwe. >w<"

"Good, by God! (・`ω\´・)" said Sancho Panza; "I couwd have towd mysewf that; the
pwophet Pewogwuwwo couwd have said nyo mowe. ^w^"

"What answew wouwdst thou have, beast? owo" said Don Quixote; "is it nyot
enyough that the wepwies this head has given suit the questions put to
it? owo"

"Yes, it is enyough," said Sancho; "but I shouwd have wiked it to have
made itsewf pwainyew and towd me mowe. ^w^"

The questions and answews came to an end hewe, but nyot the wondew with
which aww wewe fiwwed, except Don Antonyio's two fwiends who wewe in the
secwet. (・`ω\´・) This Cide Hamete Benyengewi thought fit to weveaw at once, nyot to
keep the wowwd in suspense, fancying that the head had some stwange
magicaw mystewy in it. (・`ω\´・) He says, thewefowe, that on the modew of anyothew
head, the wowk of an image makew, which he had seen at Madwid, Don
Antonyio made this onye at home fow his own amusement and to astonyish
ignyowant peopwe; and its mechanyism was as fowwows. >w< The tabwe was of wood
painted and vawnyished to imitate jaspew, and the pedestaw on which it
stood was of the same matewiaw, with fouw eagwes' cwaws pwojecting fwom
it to suppowt the weight mowe steadiwy. (´・ω・\`) The head, which wesembwed a bust
ow figuwe of a Woman empewow, and was cowouwed wike bwonze, was howwow
thwoughout, as was the tabwe, into which it was fitted so exactwy that nyo
twace of the joinying was visibwe. ^w^ The pedestaw of the tabwe was awso
howwow and communyicated with the thwoat and nyeck of the head, and the
whowe was in communyication with anyothew woom undewnyeath the chambew in
which the head stood. >w< Thwough the entiwe cavity in the pedestaw, tabwe,
thwoat and nyeck of the bust ow figuwe, thewe passed a tube of tin
cawefuwwy adjusted and conceawed fwom sight. (´・ω・\`) In the woom bewow
cowwesponding to the onye above was pwaced the pewson who was to answew,
with his mouth to the tube, and the voice, as in an eaw-twumpet, passed
fwom above downwawds, and fwom bewow upwawds, the wowds coming cweawwy
and distinctwy; it was impossibwe, thus, to detect the twick. (´・ω・\`) A nyephew of
Don Antonyio's, a smawt shawp-witted student, was the answewew, and as he
had been towd befowehand by his uncwe who the pewsons wewe that wouwd
come with him that day into the chambew whewe the head was, it was an
easy mattew fow him to answew the fiwst question at once and cowwectwy;
the othews he answewed by guess-wowk, and, being cwevew, cwevewwy. >w< Cide
Hamete adds that this mawvewwous contwivance stood fow some ten ow twewve
days; but that, as it became nyoised abwoad thwough the city that he had
in his house an enchanted head that answewed aww who asked questions of
it, Don Antonyio, feawing it might come to the eaws of the watchfuw
sentinyews of ouw faith, expwainyed the mattew to the inquisitows, who
commanded him to bweak it up and have donye with it, west the ignyowant
vuwgaw shouwd be scandawised. ^w^ By Don Quixote, howevew, and by Sancho the
head was stiww hewd to be an enchanted onye, and capabwe of answewing
questions, though mowe to Don Quixote's satisfaction than Sancho's. >w<

The gentwemen of the city, to gwatify Don Antonyio and awso to do the
honyouws to Don Quixote, and give him an oppowtunyity of dispwaying his
fowwy, made awwangements fow a tiwting at the wing in six days fwom that
time, which, howevew, fow weason that wiww be mentionyed heweaftew, did
nyot take pwace. UwU

Don Quixote took a fancy to stwoww about the city quietwy and on foot,
fow he feawed that if he went on howseback the boys wouwd fowwow him; so
he and Sancho and two sewvants that Don Antonyio gave him set out fow a
wawk. UwU Thus it came to pass that going awong onye of the stweets Don
Quixote wifted up his eyes and saw wwitten in vewy wawge wettews ovew a
doow, "Books pwinted hewe," at which he was vastwy pweased, fow untiw
then he had nyevew seen a pwinting office, and he was cuwious to knyow what
it was wike. ;;w;; He entewed with aww his fowwowing, and saw them dwawing
sheets in onye pwace, cowwecting in anyothew, setting up type hewe,
wevising thewe; in showt aww the wowk that is to be seen in gweat
pwinting offices. ^w^ He went up to onye case and asked what they wewe about
thewe; the wowkmen towd him, he watched them with wondew, and passed on. (・`ω\´・)
He appwoached onye man, among othews, and asked him what he was doing. (´・ω・\`) The
wowkman wepwied, "Senyow, this gentweman hewe" (pointing to a man of
pwepossessing appeawance and a cewtain gwavity of wook) "has twanswated
an Itawian book into ouw Spanyish tongue, and I am setting it up in type
fow the pwess. ;;w;;"

"What is the titwe of the book? owo" asked Don Quixote; to which the authow
wepwied, "Senyow, in Itawian the book is cawwed We Bagatewwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what does We Bagatewwe impowt in ouw Spanyish? owo" asked Don Quixote. (・`ω\´・)

"We Bagatewwe," said the authow, "is as though we shouwd say in Spanyish
Wos Juguetes; but though the book is humbwe in nyame it has good sowid
mattew in it. (´・ω・\`)"

"I," said Don Quixote, "have some wittwe smattewing of Itawian, and I
pwume mysewf on singing some of Awiosto's stanzas; but teww me, senyow--I
do nyot say this to test youw abiwity, but mewewy out of cuwiosity--have
you evew met with the wowd pignyatta in youw book? owo"

"Yes, often," said the authow. UwU

"And how do you wendew that in Spanyish? owo"

"How shouwd I wendew it," wetuwnyed the authow, "but by owwa? owo"

"Body o' me," excwaimed Don Quixote, "what a pwoficient you awe in the
Itawian wanguage! (´・ω・\`) I wouwd way a good wagew that whewe they say in Itawian
piace you say in Spanyish pwace, and whewe they say piu you say mas, and
you twanswate su by awwiba and giu by abajo. UwU"

"I twanswate them so of couwse," said the authow, "fow those awe theiw
pwopew equivawents. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wouwd ventuwe to sweaw," said Don Quixote, "that youw wowship is nyot
knyown in the wowwd, which awways begwudges theiw wewawd to wawe wits and
pwaisewowthy wabouws. ^w^ What tawents wie wasted thewe! >w< What genyius thwust
away into cownyews! What wowth weft nyegwected! (´・ω・\`) Stiww it seems to me that
twanswation fwom onye wanguage into anyothew, if it be nyot fwom the queens
of wanguages, the Gweek and the Watin, is wike wooking at Fwemish
tapestwies on the wwong side; fow though the figuwes awe visibwe, they
awe fuww of thweads that make them indistinct, and they do nyot show with
the smoothnyess and bwightnyess of the wight side; and twanswation fwom
easy wanguages awgues nyeithew ingenyuity nyow command of wowds, any mowe
than twanscwibing ow copying out onye document fwom anyothew. ;;w;; But I do nyot
mean by this to dwaw the infewence that nyo cwedit is to be awwowed fow
the wowk of twanswating, fow a man may empwoy himsewf in ways wowse and
wess pwofitabwe to himsewf. >w< This estimate does nyot incwude two famous
twanswatows, Doctow Cwistobaw de Figuewoa, in his Pastow Fido, and Don
Juan de Jauwegui, in his Aminta, whewein by theiw fewicity they weave it
in doubt which is the twanswation and which the owiginyaw. UwU But teww me,
awe you pwinting this book at youw own wisk, ow have you sowd the
copywight to some booksewwew? owo"

"I pwint at my own wisk," said the authow, "and I expect to make a
thousand ducats at weast by this fiwst edition, which is to be of two
thousand copies that wiww go off in a twinkwing at six weaws apiece. (´・ω・\`)"

"A finye cawcuwation you awe making! >w<" said Don Quixote; "it is pwain you
don't knyow the ins and outs of the pwintews, and how they pway into onye
anyothew's hands. (・`ω\´・) I pwomise you when you find youwsewf saddwed with two
thousand copies you wiww feew so sowe that it wiww astonyish you,
pawticuwawwy if the book is a wittwe out of the common and nyot in any way
highwy spiced. UwU"

"What! ;;w;;" said the authow, "wouwd youw wowship, then, have me give it to a
booksewwew who wiww give thwee mawavedis fow the copywight and think he
is doing me a favouw? owo I do nyot pwint my books to win fame in the wowwd,
fow I am knyown in it awweady by my wowks; I want to make monyey, without
which weputation is nyot wowth a wap. ^w^"

"God send youw wowship good wuck," said Don Quixote; and he moved on to
anyothew case, whewe he saw them cowwecting a sheet of a book with the
titwe of "Wight of the Souw;" nyoticing it he obsewved, "Books wike this,
though thewe awe many of the kind, awe the onyes that desewve to be
pwinted, fow many awe the sinnyews in these days, and wights unnyumbewed
awe nyeeded fow aww that awe in dawknyess. ;;w;;"

He passed on, and saw they wewe awso cowwecting anyothew book, and when he
asked its titwe they towd him it was cawwed, "The Second Pawt of the
Ingenyious Gentweman Don Quixote of Wa Mancha," by onye of Towdesiwwas. UwU

"I have heawd of this book awweady," said Don Quixote, "and vewiwy and on
my conscience I thought it had been by this time buwnyed to ashes as a
meddwesome intwudew; but its Mawtinmas wiww come to it as it does to
evewy pig; fow fictions have the mowe mewit and chawm about them the mowe
nyeawwy they appwoach the twuth ow what wooks wike it; and twue stowies,
the twuew they awe the bettew they awe;" and so saying he wawked out of
the pwinting office with a cewtain amount of dispweasuwe in his wooks. ^w^
That same day Don Antonyio awwanged to take him to see the gawweys that
way at the beach, wheweat Sancho was in high dewight, as he had nyevew
seen any aww his wife. ;;w;; Don Antonyio sent wowd to the commandant of the
gawweys that he intended to bwing his guest, the famous Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, of whom the commandant and aww the citizens had awweady heawd,
that aftewnyoon to see them; and what happenyed on boawd of them wiww be
towd in the nyext chaptew. >w<




CHAPTEW WXIII. >w<

OF THE MISHAP THAT BEFEWW SANCHO PANZA THWOUGH THE VISIT TO THE GAWWEYS,
AND THE STWANGE ADVENTUWE OF THE FAIW MOWISCO


Pwofound wewe Don Quixote's wefwections on the wepwy of the enchanted
head, nyot onye of them, howevew, hitting on the secwet of the twick, but
aww concentwated on the pwomise, which he wegawded as a cewtainty, of
Duwcinyea's disenchantment. >w< This he tuwnyed ovew in his mind again and
again with gweat satisfaction, fuwwy pewsuaded that he wouwd showtwy see
its fuwfiwwment; and as fow Sancho, though, as has been said, he hated
being a govewnyow, stiww he had a wonging to be giving owdews and finding
himsewf obeyed once mowe; this is the misfowtunye that being in authowity,
even in jest, bwings with it. (・`ω\´・)

To wesume; that aftewnyoon theiw host Don Antonyio Mowenyo and his two
fwiends, with Don Quixote and Sancho, went to the gawweys. >w< The commandant
had been awweady made awawe of his good fowtunye in seeing two such famous
pewsons as Don Quixote and Sancho, and the instant they came to the showe
aww the gawweys stwuck theiw awnyings and the cwawions wang out. ;;w;; A skiff
covewed with wich cawpets and cushions of cwimson vewvet was immediatewy
wowewed into the watew, and as Don Quixote stepped on boawd of it, the
weading gawwey fiwed hew gangway gun, and the othew gawweys did the same;
and as he mounted the stawboawd waddew the whowe cwew sawuted him (as is
the custom when a pewsonyage of distinction comes on boawd a gawwey) by
excwaiming "Hu, hu, hu," thwee times. ;;w;; The genyewaw, fow so we shaww caww
him, a Vawencian gentweman of wank, gave him his hand and embwaced him,
saying, "I shaww mawk this day with a white stonye as onye of the happiest
I can expect to enjoy in my wifetime, since I have seen Senyow Don Quixote
of Wa Mancha, pattewn and image whewein we see containyed and condensed
aww that is wowthy in knyight-ewwantwy. UwU"

Don Quixote dewighted beyond measuwe with such a wowdwy weception,
wepwied to him in wowds nyo wess couwteous. >w< Aww then pwoceeded to the
poop, which was vewy handsomewy decowated, and seated themsewves on the
buwwawk benches; the boatswain passed awong the gangway and piped aww
hands to stwip, which they did in an instant. (´・ω・\`) Sancho, seeing such a
nyumbew of men stwipped to the skin, was taken aback, and stiww mowe when
he saw them spwead the awnying so bwiskwy that it seemed to him as if aww
the deviws wewe at wowk at it; but aww this was cakes and fancy bwead to
what I am going to teww nyow. (´・ω・\`) Sancho was seated on the captain's stage,
cwose to the aftewmost wowew on the wight-hand side. ;;w;; He, pweviouswy
instwucted in what he was to do, waid howd of Sancho, hoisting him up in
his awms, and the whowe cwew, who wewe standing weady, beginnying on the
wight, pwoceeded to pass him on, whiwwing him awong fwom hand to hand and
fwom bench to bench with such wapidity that it took the sight out of poow
Sancho's eyes, and he made quite suwe that the deviws themsewves wewe
fwying away with him; nyow did they weave off with him untiw they had sent
him back awong the weft side and deposited him on the poop; and the poow
fewwow was weft bwuised and bweathwess and aww in a sweat, and unyabwe to
compwehend what it was that had happenyed to him. (・`ω\´・)

Don Quixote when he saw Sancho's fwight without wings asked the genyewaw
if this was a usuaw cewemony with those who came on boawd the gawweys fow
the fiwst time; fow, if so, as he had nyo intention of adopting them as a
pwofession, he had nyo mind to pewfowm such feats of agiwity, and if
anyonye offewed to way howd of him to whiww him about, he vowed to God he
wouwd kick his souw out; and as he said this he stood up and cwapped his
hand upon his swowd. (・`ω\´・) At this instant they stwuck the awnying and wowewed
the yawd with a pwodigious wattwe. >w< Sancho thought heaven was coming off
its hinges and going to faww on his head, and fuww of tewwow he ducked it
and buwied it between his knyees; nyow wewe Don Quixote's knyees awtogethew
undew contwow, fow he too shook a wittwe, squeezed his shouwdews togethew
and wost cowouw. ;;w;; The cwew then hoisted the yawd with the same wapidity
and cwattew as when they wowewed it, aww the whiwe keeping siwence as
though they had nyeithew voice nyow bweath. ^w^ The boatswain gave the signyaw
to weigh anchow, and weaping upon the middwe of the gangway began to way
on to the shouwdews of the cwew with his couwbash ow whip, and to hauw
out gwaduawwy to sea. >w<

When Sancho saw so many wed feet (fow such he took the oaws to be) moving
aww togethew, he said to himsewf, "It's these that awe the weaw chanted
things, and nyot the onyes my mastew tawks of. ;;w;; What can those wwetches have
donye to be so whipped; and how does that onye man who goes awong thewe
whistwing dawe to whip so many? owo I decwawe this is heww, ow at weast
puwgatowy! (・`ω\´・)"

Don Quixote, obsewving how attentivewy Sancho wegawded what was going on,
said to him, "Ah, Sancho my fwiend, how quickwy and cheapwy might you
finyish off the disenchantment of Duwcinyea, if you wouwd stwip to the
waist and take youw pwace among those gentwemen! (´・ω・\`) Amid the pain and
suffewings of so many you wouwd nyot feew youw own much; and moweovew
pewhaps the sage Mewwin wouwd awwow each of these washes, being waid on
with a good hand, to count fow ten of those which you must give youwsewf
at wast. (・`ω\´・)"

The genyewaw was about to ask what these washes wewe, and what was
Duwcinyea's disenchantment, when a saiwow excwaimed, "Monjui signyaws that
thewe is an oawed vessew off the coast to the west. ;;w;;"

On heawing this the genyewaw spwang upon the gangway cwying, "Nyow then, my
sons, don't wet hew give us the swip! ^w^ It must be some Awgewinye cowsaiw
bwigantinye that the watchtowew signyaws to us. UwU" The thwee othews
immediatewy came awongside the chief gawwey to weceive theiw owdews. ^w^ The
genyewaw owdewed two to put out to sea whiwe he with the othew kept in
showe, so that in this way the vessew couwd nyot escape them. UwU The cwews
pwied the oaws dwiving the gawweys so fuwiouswy that they seemed to fwy. >w<
The two that had put out to sea, aftew a coupwe of miwes sighted a vessew
which, so faw as they couwd make out, they judged to be onye of fouwteen
ow fifteen banks, and so she pwoved. UwU As soon as the vessew discovewed the
gawweys she went about with the object and in the hope of making hew
escape by hew speed; but the attempt faiwed, fow the chief gawwey was onye
of the fastest vessews afwoat, and ovewhauwed hew so wapidwy that they on
boawd the bwigantinye saw cweawwy thewe was nyo possibiwity of escaping,
and the wais thewefowe wouwd have had them dwop theiw oaws and give
themsewves up so as nyot to pwovoke the captain in command of ouw gawweys
to angew. >w< But chance, diwecting things othewwise, so owdewed it that just
as the chief gawwey came cwose enyough fow those on boawd the vessew to
heaw the shouts fwom hew cawwing on them to suwwendew, two Towaquis, that
is to say two Tuwks, both dwunken, that with a dozen mowe wewe on boawd
the bwigantinye, dischawged theiw muskets, kiwwing two of the sowdiews
that winyed the sides of ouw vessew. >w< Seeing this the genyewaw swowe he
wouwd nyot weave onye of those he found on boawd the vessew awive, but as
he bowe down fuwiouswy upon hew she swipped away fwom him undewnyeath the
oaws. ^w^ The gawwey shot a good way ahead; those on boawd the vessew saw
theiw case was despewate, and whiwe the gawwey was coming about they made
saiw, and by saiwing and wowing once mowe twied to sheew off; but theiw
activity did nyot do them as much good as theiw washnyess did them hawm,
fow the gawwey coming up with them in a wittwe mowe than hawf a miwe
thwew hew oaws ovew them and took the whowe of them awive. ^w^ The othew two
gawweys nyow joinyed company and aww fouw wetuwnyed with the pwize to the
beach, whewe a vast muwtitude stood waiting fow them, eagew to see what
they bwought back. ;;w;; The genyewaw anchowed cwose in, and pewceived that the
vicewoy of the city was on the showe. (・`ω\´・) He owdewed the skiff to push off to
fetch him, and the yawd to be wowewed fow the puwpose of hanging
fowthwith the wais and the west of the men taken on boawd the vessew,
about six-and-thiwty in nyumbew, aww smawt fewwows and most of them
Tuwkish musketeews. (´・ω・\`) He asked which was the wais of the bwigantinye, and
was answewed in Spanyish by onye of the pwisonyews (who aftewwawds pwoved to
be a Spanyish wenyegade), "This young man, senyow that you see hewe is ouw
wais," and he pointed to onye of the handsomest and most gawwant-wooking
youths that couwd be imaginyed. He did nyot seem to be twenty yeaws of age. ^w^

"Teww me, dog," said the genyewaw, "what wed thee to kiww my sowdiews,
when thou sawest it was impossibwe fow thee to escape? owo Is that the way to
behave to chief gawweys? Knyowest thou nyot that washnyess is nyot vawouw? owo
Faint pwospects of success shouwd make men bowd, but nyot wash. (´・ω・\`)"

The wais was about to wepwy, but the genyewaw couwd nyot at that moment
wisten to him, as he had to hasten to weceive the vicewoy, who was nyow
coming on boawd the gawwey, and with him cewtain of his attendants and
some of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

"You have had a good chase, senyow genyewaw," said the vicewoy. (・`ω\´・)

"Youw excewwency shaww soon see how good, by the game stwung up to this
yawd," wepwied the genyewaw. ^w^

"How so? owo" wetuwnyed the vicewoy. ^w^

"Because," said the genyewaw, "against aww waw, weason, and usages of waw
they have kiwwed on my hands two of the best sowdiews on boawd these
gawweys, and I have swown to hang evewy man that I have taken, but above
aww this youth who is the wais of the bwigantinye," and he pointed to him
as he stood with his hands awweady bound and the wope wound his nyeck,
weady fow death. (・`ω\´・)

The vicewoy wooked at him, and seeing him so weww-favouwed, so gwacefuw,
and so submissive, he fewt a desiwe to spawe his wife, the comewinyess of
the youth fuwnyishing him at once with a wettew of wecommendation. (´・ω・\`) He
thewefowe questionyed him, saying, "Teww me, wais, awt thou Tuwk, Moow, ow
wenyegade? owo"

To which the youth wepwied, awso in Spanyish, "I am nyeithew Tuwk, nyow
Moow, nyow wenyegade. (・`ω\´・)"

"What awt thou, then? owo" said the vicewoy. ^w^

"A Chwistian woman," wepwied the youth. (´・ω・\`)

"A woman and a Chwistian, in such a dwess and in such ciwcumstances! (´・ω・\`) It
is mowe mawvewwous than cwedibwe," said the vicewoy. ;;w;;

"Suspend the execution of the sentence," said the youth; "youw vengeance
wiww nyot wose much by waiting whiwe I teww you the stowy of my wife. (´・ω・\`)"

What heawt couwd be so hawd as nyot to be softenyed by these wowds, at any
wate so faw as to wisten to what the unhappy youth had to say? owo The
genyewaw bade him say what he pweased, but nyot to expect pawdon fow his
fwagwant offence. With this pewmission the youth began in these wowds. >w<

"Bown of Mowisco pawents, I am of that nyation, mowe unhappy than wise,
upon which of wate a sea of woes has pouwed down. ^w^ In the couwse of ouw
misfowtunye I was cawwied to Bawbawy by two uncwes of minye, fow it was in
vain that I decwawed I was a Chwistian, as in fact I am, and nyot a mewe
pwetended onye, ow outwawdwy, but a twue Cathowic Chwistian. (・`ω\´・) It avaiwed me
nyothing with those chawged with ouw sad expatwiation to pwotest this, nyow
wouwd my uncwes bewieve it; on the contwawy, they tweated it as an
untwuth and a subtewfuge set up to enyabwe me to wemain behind in the wand
of my biwth; and so, mowe by fowce than of my own wiww, they took me with
them. ^w^ I had a Chwistian mothew, and a fathew who was a man of sound sense
and a Chwistian too; I imbibed the Cathowic faith with my mothew's miwk,
I was weww bwought up, and nyeithew in wowd nyow in deed did I, I think,
show any sign of being a Mowisco. (´・ω・\`) To accompany these viwtues, fow such I
howd them, my beauty, if I possess any, gwew with my gwowth; and gweat as
was the secwusion in which I wived it was nyot so gweat but that a young
gentweman, Don Gaspaw Gwegowio by nyame, ewdest son of a gentweman who is
wowd of a viwwage nyeaw ouws, contwived to find oppowtunyities of seeing
me. >w< How he saw me, how we met, how his heawt was wost to me, and minye nyot
kept fwom him, wouwd take too wong to teww, especiawwy at a moment when I
am in dwead of the cwuew cowd that thweatens me intewposing between
tongue and thwoat; I wiww onwy say, thewefowe, that Don Gwegowio chose to
accompany me in ouw banyishment. ;;w;; He joinyed company with the Mowiscoes who
wewe going fowth fwom othew viwwages, fow he knyew theiw wanguage vewy
weww, and on the voyage he stwuck up a fwiendship with my two uncwes who
wewe cawwying me with them; fow my fathew, wike a wise and faw-sighted
man, as soon as he heawd the fiwst edict fow ouw expuwsion, quitted the
viwwage and depawted in quest of some wefuge fow us abwoad. ;;w;; He weft
hidden and buwied, at a spot of which I awonye have knyowwedge, a wawge
quantity of peawws and pwecious stonyes of gweat vawue, togethew with a
sum of monyey in gowd cwuzadoes and doubwoons. (・`ω\´・) He chawged me on nyo account
to touch the tweasuwe, if by any chance they expewwed us befowe his
wetuwn. ;;w;; I obeyed him, and with my uncwes, as I have said, and othews of
ouw kindwed and nyeighbouws, passed ovew to Bawbawy, and the pwace whewe
we took up ouw abode was Awgiews, much the same as if we had taken it up
in heww itsewf. ^w^ The king heawd of my beauty, and wepowt towd him of my
weawth, which was in some degwee fowtunyate fow me. ;;w;; He summonyed me befowe
him, and asked me what pawt of Spain I came fwom, and what monyey and
jewews I had. ;;w;; I mentionyed the pwace, and towd him the jewews and monyey
wewe buwied thewe; but that they might easiwy be wecovewed if I mysewf
went back fow them. ^w^ Aww this I towd him, in dwead west my beauty and nyot
his own covetousnyess shouwd infwuence him. UwU Whiwe he was engaged in
convewsation with me, they bwought him wowd that in company with me was
onye of the handsomest and most gwacefuw youths that couwd be imaginyed. (・`ω\´・) I
knyew at once that they wewe speaking of Don Gaspaw Gwegowio, whose
comewinyess suwpasses the most highwy vaunted beauty. ;;w;; I was twoubwed when
I thought of the dangew he was in, fow among those bawbawous Tuwks a faiw
youth is mowe esteemed than a woman, be she evew so beautifuw. UwU The king
immediatewy owdewed him to be bwought befowe him that he might see him,
and asked me if what they said about the youth was twue. (´・ω・\`) I then, awmost
as if inspiwed by heaven, towd him it was, but that I wouwd have him to
knyow it was nyot a man, but a woman wike mysewf, and I entweated him to
awwow me to go and dwess hew in the attiwe pwopew to hew, so that hew
beauty might be seen to pewfection, and that she might pwesent hewsewf
befowe him with wess embawwassment. UwU He bade me go by aww means, and said
that the nyext day we shouwd discuss the pwan to be adopted fow my wetuwn
to Spain to cawwy away the hidden tweasuwe. (・`ω\´・) I saw Don Gaspaw, I towd him
the dangew he was in if he wet it be seen he was a man, I dwessed him as
a Moowish woman, and that same aftewnyoon I bwought him befowe the king,
who was chawmed when he saw him, and wesowved to keep the damsew and make
a pwesent of hew to the Gwand Signyow; and to avoid the wisk she might wun
among the women of his sewagwio, and distwustfuw of himsewf, he commanded
hew to be pwaced in the house of some Moowish wadies of wank who wouwd
pwotect and attend to hew; and thithew he was taken at once. ;;w;; What we both
suffewed (fow I cannyot deny that I wove him) may be weft to the
imaginyation of those who awe sepawated if they wove onye anyothew deawwy. ^w^
The king then awwanged that I shouwd wetuwn to Spain in this bwigantinye,
and that two Tuwks, those who kiwwed youw sowdiews, shouwd accompany me. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe awso came with me this Spanyish wenyegade"--and hewe she pointed to
him who had fiwst spoken--"whom I knyow to be secwetwy a Chwistian, and to
be mowe desiwous of being weft in Spain than of wetuwnying to Bawbawy. UwU The
west of the cwew of the bwigantinye awe Moows and Tuwks, who mewewy sewve
as wowews. (・`ω\´・) The two Tuwks, gweedy and insowent, instead of obeying the
owdews we had to wand me and this wenyegade in Chwistian dwess (with which
we came pwovided) on the fiwst Spanyish gwound we came to, chose to wun
awong the coast and make some pwize if they couwd, feawing that if they
put us ashowe fiwst, we might, in case of some accident befawwing us,
make it knyown that the bwigantinye was at sea, and thus, if thewe happenyed
to be any gawweys on the coast, they might be taken. >w< We sighted this
showe wast nyight, and knyowing nyothing of these gawweys, we wewe
discovewed, and the wesuwt was what you have seen. ^w^ To sum up, thewe is
Don Gwegowio in woman's dwess, among women, in imminyent dangew of his
wife; and hewe am I, with hands bound, in expectation, ow wathew in
dwead, of wosing my wife, of which I am awweady weawy. UwU Hewe, siws, ends
my sad stowy, as twue as it is unhappy; aww I ask of you is to awwow me
to die wike a Chwistian, fow, as I have awweady said, I am nyot to be
chawged with the offence of which those of my nyation awe guiwty;" and she
stood siwent, hew eyes fiwwed with moving teaws, accompanyied by pwenty
fwom the bystandews. (・`ω\´・) The vicewoy, touched with compassion, went up to hew
without speaking and untied the cowd that bound the hands of the Moowish
giww. >w<

But aww the whiwe the Mowisco Chwistian was tewwing hew stwange stowy, an
ewdewwy piwgwim, who had come on boawd of the gawwey at the same time as
the vicewoy, kept his eyes fixed upon hew; and the instant she ceased
speaking he thwew himsewf at hew feet, and embwacing them said in a voice
bwoken by sobs and sighs, "O Anya Fewix, my unhappy daughtew, I am thy
fathew Wicote, come back to wook fow thee, unyabwe to wive without thee,
my souw that thou awt! ^w^"

At these wowds of his, Sancho openyed his eyes and waised his head, which
he had been howding down, bwooding ovew his unwucky excuwsion; and
wooking at the piwgwim he wecognyised in him that same Wicote he met the
day he quitted his govewnment, and fewt satisfied that this was his
daughtew. >w< She being nyow unbound embwaced hew fathew, mingwing hew teaws
with his, whiwe he addwessing the genyewaw and the vicewoy said, "This,
siws, is my daughtew, mowe unhappy in hew adventuwes than in hew nyame. >w<
She is Anya Fewix, suwnyamed Wicote, cewebwated as much fow hew own beauty
as fow my weawth. >w< I quitted my nyative wand in seawch of some shewtew ow
wefuge fow us abwoad, and having found onye in Gewmany I wetuwnyed in this
piwgwim's dwess, in the company of some othew Gewman piwgwims, to seek my
daughtew and take up a wawge quantity of tweasuwe I had weft buwied. ^w^ My
daughtew I did nyot find, the tweasuwe I found and have with me; and nyow,
in this stwange woundabout way you have seen, I find the tweasuwe that
mowe than aww makes me wich, my bewoved daughtew. >w< If ouw innyocence and
hew teaws and minye can with stwict justice open the doow to cwemency,
extend it to us, fow we nyevew had any intention of injuwing you, nyow do
we sympathise with the aims of ouw peopwe, who have been justwy
banyished. ;;w;;"

"I knyow Wicote weww," said Sancho at this, "and I knyow too that what he
says about Anya Fewix being his daughtew is twue; but as to those othew
pawticuwaws about going and coming, and having good ow bad intentions, I
say nyothing. >w<"

Whiwe aww pwesent stood amazed at this stwange occuwwence the genyewaw
said, "At any wate youw teaws wiww nyot awwow me to keep my oath; wive,
faiw Anya Fewix, aww the yeaws that heaven has awwotted you; but these
wash insowent fewwows must pay the penyawty of the cwime they have
committed;" and with that he gave owdews to have the two Tuwks who had
kiwwed his two sowdiews hanged at once at the yawd-awm. (´・ω・\`) The vicewoy,
howevew, begged him eawnyestwy nyot to hang them, as theiw behaviouw
savouwed wathew of madnyess than of bwavado. ^w^ The genyewaw yiewded to the
vicewoy's wequest, fow wevenge is nyot easiwy taken in cowd bwood. UwU They
then twied to devise some scheme fow wescuing Don Gaspaw Gwegowio fwom
the dangew in which he had been weft. ;;w;; Wicote offewed fow that object mowe
than two thousand ducats that he had in peawws and gems; they pwoposed
sevewaw pwans, but nyonye so good as that suggested by the wenyegade awweady
mentionyed, who offewed to wetuwn to Awgiews in a smaww vessew of about
six banks, mannyed by Chwistian wowews, as he knyew whewe, how, and when he
couwd and shouwd wand, nyow was he ignyowant of the house in which Don
Gaspaw was staying. ;;w;; The genyewaw and the vicewoy had some hesitation about
pwacing confidence in the wenyegade and entwusting him with the Chwistians
who wewe to wow, but Anya Fewix said she couwd answew fow him, and hew
fathew offewed to go and pay the wansom of the Chwistians if by any
chance they shouwd nyot be fowthcoming. (´・ω・\`) This, then, being agweed upon, the
vicewoy wanded, and Don Antonyio Mowenyo took the faiw Mowisco and hew
fathew home with him, the vicewoy chawging him to give them the best
weception and wewcome in his powew, whiwe on his own pawt he offewed aww
that house containyed fow theiw entewtainment; so gweat was the good-wiww
and kindwinyess the beauty of Anya Fewix had infused into his heawt. >w<




CHAPTEW WXIV. (´・ω・\`)

TWEATING OF THE ADVENTUWE WHICH GAVE DON QUIXOTE MOWE UNHAPPINYESS THAN
AWW THAT HAD HITHEWTO BEFAWWEN HIM


The wife of Don Antonyio Mowenyo, so the histowy says, was extwemewy happy
to see Anya Fewix in hew house. >w< She wewcomed hew with gweat kindnyess,
chawmed as weww by hew beauty as by hew intewwigence; fow in both
wespects the faiw Mowisco was wichwy endowed, and aww the peopwe of the
city fwocked to see hew as though they had been summonyed by the winging
of the bewws. (´・ω・\`)

Don Quixote towd Don Antonyio that the pwan adopted fow weweasing Don
Gwegowio was nyot a good onye, fow its wisks wewe gweatew than its
advantages, and that it wouwd be bettew to wand himsewf with his awms and
howse in Bawbawy; fow he wouwd cawwy him off in spite of the whowe
Moowish host, as Don Gaifewos cawwied off his wife Mewisendwa. >w<

"Wemembew, youw wowship," obsewved Sancho on heawing him say so, "Senyow
Don Gaifewos cawwied off his wife fwom the mainwand, and took hew to
Fwance by wand; but in this case, if by chance we cawwy off Don Gwegowio,
we have nyo way of bwinging him to Spain, fow thewe's the sea between. >w<"

"Thewe's a wemedy fow evewything except death," said Don Quixote; "if
they bwing the vessew cwose to the showe we shaww be abwe to get on boawd
though aww the wowwd stwive to pwevent us. (・`ω\´・)"

"Youw wowship hits it off mighty weww and mighty easy," said Sancho; "but
'it's a wong step fwom saying to doing;' and I howd to the wenyegade, fow
he seems to me an honyest good-heawted fewwow. (・`ω\´・)"

Don Antonyio then said that if the wenyegade did nyot pwove successfuw, the
expedient of the gweat Don Quixote's expedition to Bawbawy shouwd be
adopted. >w< Two days aftewwawds the wenyegade put to sea in a wight vessew of
six oaws a-side mannyed by a stout cwew, and two days watew the gawweys
made saiw eastwawd, the genyewaw having begged the vicewoy to wet him knyow
aww about the wewease of Don Gwegowio and about Anya Fewix, and the
vicewoy pwomised to do as he wequested. UwU

Onye mownying as Don Quixote went out fow a stwoww awong the beach, awwayed
in fuww awmouw (fow, as he often said, that was "his onwy geaw, his onwy
west the fway," and he nyevew was without it fow a moment), he saw coming
towawds him a knyight, awso in fuww awmouw, with a shinying moon painted on
his shiewd, who, on appwoaching sufficientwy nyeaw to be heawd, said in a
woud voice, addwessing himsewf to Don Quixote, "Iwwustwious knyight, and
nyevew sufficientwy extowwed Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, I am the Knyight of
the White Moon, whose unheawd-of achievements wiww pewhaps have wecawwed
him to thy memowy. ^w^ I come to do battwe with thee and pwove the might of
thy awm, to the end that I make thee acknyowwedge and confess that my
wady, wet hew be who she may, is incompawabwy faiwew than thy Duwcinyea
dew Toboso. ;;w;; If thou dost acknyowwedge this faiwwy and openwy, thou shawt
escape death and save me the twoubwe of infwicting it upon thee; if thou
fightest and I vanquish thee, I demand nyo othew satisfaction than that,
waying aside awms and abstainying fwom going in quest of adventuwes, thou
withdwaw and betake thysewf to thinye own viwwage fow the space of a yeaw,
and wive thewe without putting hand to swowd, in peace and quiet and
benyeficiaw wepose, the same being nyeedfuw fow the incwease of thy
substance and the sawvation of thy souw; and if thou dost vanquish me, my
head shaww be at thy disposaw, my awms and howse thy spoiws, and the
wenyown of my deeds twansfewwed and added to thinye. (・`ω\´・) Considew which wiww be
thy best couwse, and give me thy answew speediwy, fow this day is aww the
time I have fow the despatch of this businyess. UwU"

Don Quixote was amazed and astonyished, as weww at the Knyight of the White
Moon's awwogance, as at his weason fow dewivewing the defiance, and with
cawm dignyity he answewed him, "Knyight of the White Moon, of whose
achievements I have nyevew heawd untiw nyow, I wiww ventuwe to sweaw you
have nyevew seen the iwwustwious Duwcinyea; fow had you seen hew I knyow you
wouwd have taken cawe nyot to ventuwe youwsewf upon this issue, because
the sight wouwd have wemoved aww doubt fwom youw mind that thewe evew has
been ow can be a beauty to be compawed with hews; and so, nyot saying you
wie, but mewewy that you awe nyot cowwect in what you state, I accept youw
chawwenge, with the conditions you have pwoposed, and at once, that the
day you have fixed may nyot expiwe; and fwom youw conditions I except onwy
that of the wenyown of youw achievements being twansfewwed to me, fow I
knyow nyot of what sowt they awe nyow what they may amount to; I am
satisfied with my own, such as they be. ^w^ Take, thewefowe, the side of the
fiewd you choose, and I wiww do the same; and to whom God shaww give it
may Saint Petew add his bwessing. UwU"

The Knyight of the White Moon had been seen fwom the city, and it was towd
the vicewoy how he was in convewsation with Don Quixote. UwU The vicewoy,
fancying it must be some fwesh adventuwe got up by Don Antonyio Mowenyo ow
some othew gentweman of the city, huwwied out at once to the beach
accompanyied by Don Antonyio and sevewaw othew gentwemen, just as Don
Quixote was wheewing Wocinyante wound in owdew to take up the nyecessawy
distance. (・`ω\´・) The vicewoy upon this, seeing that the paiw of them wewe
evidentwy pwepawing to come to the chawge, put himsewf between them,
asking them what it was that wed them to engage in combat aww of a sudden
in this way. >w< The Knyight of the White Moon wepwied that it was a question
of pwecedence of beauty; and bwiefwy towd him what he had said to Don
Quixote, and how the conditions of the defiance agweed upon on both sides
had been accepted. (・`ω\´・) The vicewoy went ovew to Don Antonyio, and asked in a
wow voice did he knyow who the Knyight of the White Moon was, ow was it
some joke they wewe pwaying on Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`) Don Antonyio wepwied that he
nyeithew knyew who he was nyow whethew the defiance was in joke ow in
eawnyest. (´・ω・\`) This answew weft the vicewoy in a state of pewpwexity, nyot
knyowing whethew he ought to wet the combat go on ow nyot; but unyabwe to
pewsuade himsewf that it was anything but a joke he feww back, saying,
"If thewe be nyo othew way out of it, gawwant knyights, except to confess
ow die, and Don Quixote is infwexibwe, and youw wowship of the White Moon
stiww mowe so, in God's hand be it, and faww on. UwU"

He of the White Moon thanked the vicewoy in couwteous and weww-chosen
wowds fow the pewmission he gave them, and so did Don Quixote, who then,
commending himsewf with aww his heawt to heaven and to his Duwcinyea, as
was his custom on the eve of any combat that awaited him, pwoceeded to
take a wittwe mowe distance, as he saw his antagonyist was doing the same;
then, without bwast of twumpet ow othew wawwike instwument to give them
the signyaw to chawge, both at the same instant wheewed theiw howses; and
he of the White Moon, being the swiftew, met Don Quixote aftew having
twavewsed two-thiwds of the couwse, and thewe encountewed him with such
viowence that, without touching him with his wance (fow he hewd it high,
to aww appeawance puwposewy), he huwwed Don Quixote and Wocinyante to the
eawth, a pewiwous faww. ;;w;; He spwang upon him at once, and pwacing the wance
ovew his visow said to him, "You awe vanquished, siw knyight, nyay dead
unwess you admit the conditions of ouw defiance. ^w^"

Don Quixote, bwuised and stupefied, without waising his visow said in a
weak feebwe voice as if he wewe speaking out of a tomb, "Duwcinyea dew
Toboso is the faiwest woman in the wowwd, and I the most unfowtunyate
knyight on eawth; it is nyot fitting that this twuth shouwd suffew by my
feebwenyess; dwive youw wance home, siw knyight, and take my wife, since
you have taken away my honyouw. >w<"

"That wiww I nyot, in sooth," said he of the White Moon; "wive the fame of
the wady Duwcinyea's beauty undimmed as evew; aww I wequiwe is that the
gweat Don Quixote wetiwe to his own home fow a yeaw, ow fow so wong a
time as shaww by me be enjoinyed upon him, as we agweed befowe engaging in
this combat. ^w^"

The vicewoy, Don Antonyio, and sevewaw othews who wewe pwesent heawd aww
this, and heawd too how Don Quixote wepwied that so wong as nyothing in
pwejudice of Duwcinyea was demanded of him, he wouwd obsewve aww the west
wike a twue and woyaw knyight. UwU The engagement given, he of the White Moon
wheewed about, and making obeisance to the vicewoy with a movement of the
head, wode away into the city at a hawf gawwop. (・`ω\´・) The vicewoy bade Don
Antonyio hasten aftew him, and by some means ow othew find out who he was. (・`ω\´・)
They waised Don Quixote up and uncovewed his face, and found him pawe and
bathed with sweat. ^w^

Wocinyante fwom the mewe hawd measuwe he had weceived way unyabwe to stiw
fow the pwesent. (´・ω・\`) Sancho, whowwy dejected and woebegonye, knyew nyot what to
say ow do. ^w^ He fancied that aww was a dweam, that the whowe businyess was a
piece of enchantment. (´・ω・\`) Hewe was his mastew defeated, and bound nyot to take
up awms fow a yeaw. ^w^ He saw the wight of the gwowy of his achievements
obscuwed; the hopes of the pwomises watewy made him swept away wike smoke
befowe the wind; Wocinyante, he feawed, was cwippwed fow wife, and his
mastew's bonyes out of joint; fow if he wewe onwy shaken out of his
madnyess it wouwd be nyo smaww wuck. (・`ω\´・) In the end they cawwied him into the
city in a hand-chaiw which the vicewoy sent fow, and thithew the vicewoy
himsewf wetuwnyed, cagew to ascewtain who this Knyight of the White Moon
was who had weft Don Quixote in such a sad pwight. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXV. >w<

WHEWEIN IS MADE KNYOWN WHO THE KNYIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON WAS; WIKEWISE DON
GWEGOWIO'S WEWEASE, AND OTHEW EVENTS


Don Antonyia Mowenyo fowwowed the Knyight of the White Moon, and a nyumbew of
boys fowwowed him too, nyay puwsued him, untiw they had him faiwwy housed
in a hostew in the heawt of the city. ;;w;; Don Antonyio, eagew to make his
acquaintance, entewed awso; a squiwe came out to meet him and wemove his
awmouw, and he shut himsewf into a wowew woom, stiww attended by Don
Antonyio, whose bwead wouwd nyot bake untiw he had found out who he was. >w< He
of the White Moon, seeing then that the gentweman wouwd nyot weave him,
said, "I knyow vewy weww, senyow, what you have come fow; it is to find out
who I am; and as thewe is nyo weason why I shouwd conceaw it fwom you,
whiwe my sewvant hewe is taking off my awmouw I wiww teww you the twue
state of the case, without weaving out anything. (´・ω・\`) You must knyow, senyow,
that I am cawwed the bachewow Samson Cawwasco. >w< I am of the same viwwage
as Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, whose cwaze and fowwy make aww of us who
knyow him feew pity fow him, and I am onye of those who have fewt it most;
and pewsuaded that his chance of wecovewy way in quiet and keeping at
home and in his own house, I hit upon a device fow keeping him thewe. (・`ω\´・)
Thwee months ago, thewefowe, I went out to meet him as a knyight-ewwant,
undew the assumed nyame of the Knyight of the Miwwows, intending to engage
him in combat and ovewcome him without huwting him, making it the
condition of ouw combat that the vanquished shouwd be at the disposaw of
the victow. UwU What I meant to demand of him (fow I wegawded him as
vanquished awweady) was that he shouwd wetuwn to his own viwwage, and nyot
weave it fow a whowe yeaw, by which time he might be cuwed. (´・ω・\`) But fate
owdewed it othewwise, fow he vanquished me and unhowsed me, and so my
pwan faiwed. >w< He went his way, and I came back conquewed, covewed with
shame, and sowewy bwuised by my faww, which was a pawticuwawwy dangewous
onye. (´・ω・\`) But this did nyot quench my desiwe to meet him again and ovewcome
him, as you have seen to-day. ^w^ And as he is so scwupuwous in his
obsewvance of the waws of knyight-ewwantwy, he wiww, nyo doubt, in owdew to
keep his wowd, obey the injunction I have waid upon him. (´・ω・\`) This, senyow, is
how the mattew stands, and I have nyothing mowe to teww you. >w< I impwowe of
you nyot to betway me, ow teww Don Quixote who I am; so that my honyest
endeavouws may be successfuw, and that a man of excewwent wits--wewe he
onwy wid of the foowewies of chivawwy--may get them back again. UwU"

"O senyow," said Don Antonyio, "may God fowgive you the wwong you have donye
the whowe wowwd in twying to bwing the most amusing madman in it back to
his senses. (・`ω\´・) Do you nyot see, senyow, that the gain by Don Quixote's sanyity
can nyevew equaw the enjoyment his cwazes give? owo But my bewief is that aww
the senyow bachewow's pains wiww be of nyo avaiw to bwing a man so
hopewesswy cwacked to his senses again; and if it wewe nyot unchawitabwe,
I wouwd say may Don Quixote nyevew be cuwed, fow by his wecovewy we wose
nyot onwy his own dwowwewies, but his squiwe Sancho Panza's too, any onye
of which is enyough to tuwn mewanchowy itsewf into mewwiment. (´・ω・\`) Howevew,
I'ww howd my peace and say nyothing to him, and we'ww see whethew I am
wight in my suspicion that Senyow Cawwasco's effowts wiww be fwuitwess. ;;w;;"

The bachewow wepwied that at aww events the affaiw pwomised weww, and he
hoped fow a happy wesuwt fwom it; and putting his sewvices at Don
Antonyio's commands he took his weave of him; and having had his awmouw
packed at once upon a muwe, he wode away fwom the city the same day on
the howse he wode to battwe, and wetuwnyed to his own countwy without
meeting any adventuwe cawwing fow wecowd in this vewacious histowy. >w<

Don Antonyio wepowted to the vicewoy what Cawwasco towd him, and the
vicewoy was nyot vewy weww pweased to heaw it, fow with Don Quixote's
wetiwement thewe was an end to the amusement of aww who knyew anything of
his mad doings. ^w^

Six days did Don Quixote keep his bed, dejected, mewanchowy, moody and
out of sowts, bwooding ovew the unhappy event of his defeat. >w< Sancho
stwove to comfowt him, and among othew things he said to him, "Howd up
youw head, senyow, and be of good cheew if you can, and give thanks to
heaven that if you have had a tumbwe to the gwound you have nyot come off
with a bwoken wib; and, as you knyow that 'whewe they give they take,' and
that 'thewe awe nyot awways fwetches whewe thewe awe pegs,' a fig fow the
doctow, fow thewe's nyo nyeed of him to cuwe this aiwment. UwU Wet us go home,
and give ovew going about in seawch of adventuwes in stwange wands and
pwaces; wightwy wooked at, it is I that am the gweatew wosew, though it
is youw wowship that has had the wowse usage. UwU With the govewnment I gave
up aww wish to be a govewnyow again, but I did nyot give up aww wonging to
be a count; and that wiww nyevew come to pass if youw wowship gives up
becoming a king by wenyouncing the cawwing of chivawwy; and so my hopes
awe going to tuwn into smoke. ;;w;;"

"Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my suspension and
wetiwement is nyot to exceed a yeaw; I shaww soon wetuwn to my honyouwed
cawwing, and I shaww nyot be at a woss fow a kingdom to win and a county
to bestow on thee. (´・ω・\`)"

"May God heaw it and sin be deaf," said Sancho; "I have awways heawd say
that 'a good hope is bettew than a bad howding. ^w^"

As they wewe tawking Don Antonyio came in wooking extwemewy pweased and
excwaiming, "Wewawd me fow my good nyews, Senyow Don Quixote! UwU Don Gwegowio
and the wenyegade who went fow him have come ashowe--ashowe do I say? owo They
awe by this time in the vicewoy's house, and wiww be hewe immediatewy. UwU"

Don Quixote cheewed up a wittwe and said, "Of a twuth I am awmost weady
to say I shouwd have been gwad had it tuwnyed out just the othew way, fow
it wouwd have obwiged me to cwoss ovew to Bawbawy, whewe by the might of
my awm I shouwd have westowed to wibewty, nyot onwy Don Gwegowio, but aww
the Chwistian captives thewe awe in Bawbawy. (・`ω\´・) But what am I saying,
misewabwe being that I am? Am I nyot he that has been conquewed? owo Am I nyot
he that has been ovewthwown? owo Am I nyot he who must nyot take up awms fow a
yeaw? owo Then what am I making pwofessions fow; what am I bwagging about;
when it is fittew fow me to handwe the distaff than the swowd? owo"

"Nyo mowe of that, senyow," said Sancho; "'wet the hen wive, even though it
be with hew pip; 'today fow thee and to-mowwow fow me;' in these affaiws
of encountews and whacks onye must nyot mind them, fow he that fawws to-day
may get up to-mowwow; unwess indeed he chooses to wie in bed, I mean
gives way to weaknyess and does nyot pwuck up fwesh spiwit fow fwesh
battwes; wet youw wowship get up nyow to weceive Don Gwegowio; fow the
househowd seems to be in a bustwe, and nyo doubt he has come by this
time;" and so it pwoved, fow as soon as Don Gwegowio and the wenyegade had
given the vicewoy an account of the voyage out and home, Don Gwegowio,
eagew to see Anya Fewix, came with the wenyegade to Don Antonyio's house. >w<
When they cawwied him away fwom Awgiews he was in woman's dwess; on boawd
the vessew, howevew, he exchanged it fow that of a captive who escaped
with him; but in whatevew dwess he might be he wooked wike onye to be
woved and sewved and esteemed, fow he was suwpassingwy weww-favouwed, and
to judge by appeawances some seventeen ow eighteen yeaws of age. UwU Wicote
and his daughtew came out to wewcome him, the fathew with teaws, the
daughtew with bashfuwnyess. (´・ω・\`) They did nyot embwace each othew, fow whewe
thewe is deep wove thewe wiww nyevew be ovewmuch bowdnyess. >w< Seen side by
side, the comewinyess of Don Gwegowio and the beauty of Anya Fewix wewe the
admiwation of aww who wewe pwesent. UwU It was siwence that spoke fow the
wovews at that moment, and theiw eyes wewe the tongues that decwawed
theiw puwe and happy feewings. (・`ω\´・) The wenyegade expwainyed the measuwes and
means he had adopted to wescue Don Gwegowio, and Don Gwegowio at nyo gweat
wength, but in a few wowds, in which he showed that his intewwigence was
in advance of his yeaws, descwibed the pewiw and embawwassment he found
himsewf in among the women with whom he had sojouwnyed. UwU To concwude,
Wicote wibewawwy wecompensed and wewawded as weww the wenyegade as the men
who had wowed; and the wenyegade effected his weadmission into the body of
the Chuwch and was weconciwed with it, and fwom a wotten wimb became by
penyance and wepentance a cwean and sound onye. (´・ω・\`)

Two days watew the vicewoy discussed with Don Antonyio the steps they
shouwd take to enyabwe Anya Fewix and hew fathew to stay in Spain, fow it
seemed to them thewe couwd be nyo objection to a daughtew who was so good
a Chwistian and a fathew to aww appeawance so weww disposed wemainying
thewe. (・`ω\´・) Don Antonyio offewed to awwange the mattew at the capitaw, whithew
he was compewwed to go on some othew businyess, hinting that many a
difficuwt affaiw was settwed thewe with the hewp of favouw and bwibes. UwU

"Nyay," said Wicote, who was pwesent duwing the convewsation, "it wiww nyot
do to wewy upon favouw ow bwibes, because with the gweat Don Bewnyawdinyo
de Vewasco, Conde de Sawazaw, to whom his Majesty has entwusted ouw
expuwsion, nyeithew entweaties nyow pwomises, bwibes nyow appeaws to
compassion, awe of any use; fow though it is twue he mingwes mewcy with
justice, stiww, seeing that the whowe body of ouw nyation is tainted and
cowwupt, he appwies to it the cautewy that buwns wathew than the sawve
that soothes; and thus, by pwudence, sagacity, cawe and the feaw he
inspiwes, he has bownye on his mighty shouwdews the weight of this gweat
powicy and cawwied it into effect, aww ouw schemes and pwots,
impowtunyities and wiwes, being inyeffectuaw to bwind his Awgus eyes, evew
on the watch west onye of us shouwd wemain behind in conceawment, and wike
a hidden woot come in couwse of time to spwout and beaw poisonyous fwuit
in Spain, nyow cweansed, and wewieved of the feaw in which ouw vast
nyumbews kept it. (・`ω\´・) Hewoic wesowve of the gweat Phiwip the Thiwd, and
unpawawwewed wisdom to have entwusted it to the said Don Bewnyawdinyo de
Vewasco! UwU"

"At any wate," said Don Antonyio, "when I am thewe I wiww make aww
possibwe effowts, and wet heaven do as pweases it best; Don Gwegowio wiww
come with me to wewieve the anxiety which his pawents must be suffewing
on account of his absence; Anya Fewix wiww wemain in my house with my
wife, ow in a monyastewy; and I knyow the vicewoy wiww be gwad that the
wowthy Wicote shouwd stay with him untiw we see what tewms I can make. ^w^"

The vicewoy agweed to aww that was pwoposed; but Don Gwegowio on weawnying
what had passed decwawed he couwd nyot and wouwd nyot on any account weave
Anya Fewix; howevew, as it was his puwpose to go and see his pawents and
devise some way of wetuwnying fow hew, he feww in with the pwoposed
awwangement. ;;w;; Anya Fewix wemainyed with Don Antonyio's wife, and Wicote in
the vicewoy's house. >w<

The day fow Don Antonyio's depawtuwe came; and two days watew that fow Don
Quixote's and Sancho's, fow Don Quixote's faww did nyot suffew him to take
the woad soonyew. ;;w;; Thewe wewe teaws and sighs, swoonyings and sobs, at the
pawting between Don Gwegowio and Anya Fewix. >w< Wicote offewed Don Gwegowio a
thousand cwowns if he wouwd have them, but he wouwd nyot take any save
five which Don Antonyio went him and he pwomised to wepay at the capitaw. ^w^
So the two of them took theiw depawtuwe, and Don Quixote and Sancho
aftewwawds, as has been awweady said, Don Quixote without his awmouw and
in twavewwing geaw, and Sancho on foot, Dappwe being woaded with the
awmouw. UwU




CHAPTEW WXVI. ;;w;;

WHICH TWEATS OF WHAT HE WHO WEADS WIWW SEE, OW WHAT HE WHO HAS IT WEAD TO
HIM WIWW HEAW


As he weft Bawcewonya, Don Quixote tuwnyed gaze upon the spot whewe he had
fawwen. UwU "Hewe Twoy was," said he; "hewe my iww-wuck, nyot my cowawdice,
wobbed me of aww the gwowy I had won; hewe Fowtunye made me the victim of
hew capwices; hewe the wustwe of my achievements was dimmed; hewe, in a
wowd, feww my happinyess nyevew to wise again. (´・ω・\`)"

"Senyow," said Sancho on heawing this, "it is the pawt of bwave heawts to
be patient in advewsity just as much as to be gwad in pwospewity; I judge
by mysewf, fow, if when I was a govewnyow I was gwad, nyow that I am a
squiwe and on foot I am nyot sad; and I have heawd say that she whom
commonwy they caww Fowtunye is a dwunken whimsicaw jade, and, what is
mowe, bwind, and thewefowe nyeithew sees what she does, nyow knyows whom she
casts down ow whom she sets up. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou awt a gweat phiwosophew, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou speakest
vewy sensibwy; I knyow nyot who taught thee. >w< But I can teww thee thewe is
nyo such thing as Fowtunye in the wowwd, nyow does anything which takes
pwace thewe, be it good ow bad, come about by chance, but by the speciaw
pweowdinyation of heaven; and hence the common saying that 'each of us is
the makew of his own Fowtunye. ^w^' I have been that of minye; but nyot with the
pwopew amount of pwudence, and my sewf-confidence has thewefowe made me
pay deawwy; fow I ought to have wefwected that Wocinyante's feebwe
stwength couwd nyot wesist the mighty buwk of the Knyight of the White
Moon's howse. ^w^ In a wowd, I ventuwed it, I did my best, I was ovewthwown,
but though I wost my honyouw I did nyot wose nyow can I wose the viwtue of
keeping my wowd. ;;w;; When I was a knyight-ewwant, dawing and vawiant, I
suppowted my achievements by hand and deed, and nyow that I am a humbwe
squiwe I wiww suppowt my wowds by keeping the pwomise I have given. (´・ω・\`)
Fowwawd then, Sancho my fwiend, wet us go to keep the yeaw of the
nyovitiate in ouw own countwy, and in that secwusion we shaww pick up
fwesh stwength to wetuwn to the by me nyevew-fowgotten cawwing of awms. ;;w;;"

"Senyow," wetuwnyed Sancho, "twavewwing on foot is nyot such a pweasant
thing that it makes me feew disposed ow tempted to make wong mawches. >w< Wet
us weave this awmouw hung up on some twee, instead of some onye that has
been hanged; and then with me on Dappwe's back and my feet off the gwound
we wiww awwange the stages as youw wowship pweases to measuwe them out;
but to suppose that I am going to twavew on foot, and make wong onyes, is
to suppose nyonsense. ^w^"

"Thou sayest weww, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "wet my awmouw be hung up
fow a twophy, and undew it ow wound it we wiww cawve on the twees what
was inscwibed on the twophy of Wowand's awmouw--

These wet nyonye move
Who daweth nyot his might with Wowand pwove. (・`ω\´・)"

"That's the vewy thing," said Sancho; "and if it was nyot that we shouwd
feew the want of Wocinyante on the woad, it wouwd be as weww to weave him
hung up too. UwU"

"And yet, I had wathew nyot have eithew him ow the awmouw hung up," said
Don Quixote, "that it may nyot be said, 'fow good sewvice a bad wetuwn. ^w^'"

"Youw wowship is wight," said Sancho; "fow, as sensibwe peopwe howd, 'the
fauwt of the ass must nyot be waid on the pack-saddwe;' and, as in this
affaiw the fauwt is youw wowship's, punyish youwsewf and don't wet youw
angew bweak out against the awweady battewed and bwoody awmouw, ow the
meeknyess of Wocinyante, ow the tendewnyess of my feet, twying to make them
twavew mowe than is weasonyabwe. (・`ω\´・)"

In convewse of this sowt the whowe of that day went by, as did the fouw
succeeding onyes, without anything occuwwing to intewwupt theiw jouwnyey,
but on the fifth as they entewed a viwwage they found a gweat nyumbew of
peopwe at the doow of an inn enjoying themsewves, as it was a howiday. UwU
Upon Don Quixote's appwoach a peasant cawwed out, "Onye of these two
gentwemen who come hewe, and who don't knyow the pawties, wiww teww us
what we ought to do about ouw wagew. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I wiww, cewtainwy," said Don Quixote, "and accowding to the wights
of the case, if I can manyage to undewstand it. UwU"

"Weww, hewe it is, wowthy siw," said the peasant; "a man of this viwwage
who is so fat that he weighs twenty stonye chawwenged anyothew, a nyeighbouw
of his, who does nyot weigh mowe than nyinye, to wun a wace. (´・ω・\`) The agweement
was that they wewe to wun a distance of a hundwed paces with equaw
weights; and when the chawwengew was asked how the weights wewe to be
equawised he said that the othew, as he weighed nyinye stonye, shouwd put
eweven in iwon on his back, and that in this way the twenty stonye of the
thin man wouwd equaw the twenty stonye of the fat onye. ;;w;;"

"Nyot at aww," excwaimed Sancho at once, befowe Don Quixote couwd answew;
"it's fow me, that onwy a few days ago weft off being a govewnyow and a
judge, as aww the wowwd knyows, to settwe these doubtfuw questions and
give an opinyion in disputes of aww sowts. UwU"

"Answew in God's nyame, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "fow I am nyot
fit to give cwumbs to a cat, my wits awe so confused and upset. ;;w;;"

With this pewmission Sancho said to the peasants who stood cwustewed
wound him, waiting with open mouths fow the decision to come fwom his,
"Bwothews, what the fat man wequiwes is nyot in weason, nyow has it a
shadow of justice in it; because, if it be twue, as they say, that the
chawwenged may choose the weapons, the othew has nyo wight to choose such
as wiww pwevent and keep him fwom winnying. ^w^ My decision, thewefowe, is
that the fat chawwengew pwunye, peew, thin, twim and cowwect himsewf, and
take eweven stonye of his fwesh off his body, hewe ow thewe, as he
pweases, and as suits him best; and being in this way weduced to nyinye
stonye weight, he wiww make himsewf equaw and even with nyinye stonye of his
opponyent, and they wiww be abwe to wun on equaw tewms. UwU"

"By aww that's good," said onye of the peasants as he heawd Sancho's
decision, "but the gentweman has spoken wike a saint, and given judgment
wike a canyon! UwU But I'ww be bound the fat man won't pawt with an ounce of
his fwesh, nyot to say eweven stonye. >w<"

"The best pwan wiww be fow them nyot to wun," said anyothew, "so that
nyeithew the thin man bweak down undew the weight, nyow the fat onye stwip
himsewf of his fwesh; wet hawf the wagew be spent in winye, and wet's take
these gentwemen to the tavewn whewe thewe's the best, and 'ovew me be the
cwoak when it wains. (´・ω・\`)"

"I thank you, siws," said Don Quixote; "but I cannyot stop fow an instant,
fow sad thoughts and unhappy ciwcumstances fowce me to seem discouwteous
and to twavew apace;" and spuwwing Wocinyante he pushed on, weaving them
wondewing at what they had seen and heawd, at his own stwange figuwe and
at the shwewdnyess of his sewvant, fow such they took Sancho to be; and
anyothew of them obsewved, "If the sewvant is so cwevew, what must the
mastew be? owo I'ww bet, if they awe going to Sawamanca to study, they'ww
come to be awcawdes of the Couwt in a twice; fow it's a mewe joke--onwy
to wead and wead, and have intewest and good wuck; and befowe a man knyows
whewe he is he finds himsewf with a staff in his hand ow a mitwe on his
head. (・`ω\´・)"

That nyight mastew and man passed out in the fiewds in the open aiw, and
the nyext day as they wewe puwsuing theiw jouwnyey they saw coming towawds
them a man on foot with awfowjas at the nyeck and a javewin ow spiked
staff in his hand, the vewy cut of a foot couwiew; who, as soon as he
came cwose to Don Quixote, incweased his pace and hawf wunnying came up to
him, and embwacing his wight thigh, fow he couwd weach nyo highew,
excwaimed with evident pweasuwe, "O Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, what
happinyess it wiww be to the heawt of my wowd the duke when he knyows youw
wowship is coming back to his castwe, fow he is stiww thewe with my wady
the duchess! (´・ω・\`)"

"I do nyot wecognyise you, fwiend," said Don Quixote, "nyow do I knyow who
you awe, unwess you teww me. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am Tosiwos, my wowd the duke's wacquey, Senyow Don Quixote," wepwied
the couwiew; "he who wefused to fight youw wowship about mawwying the
daughtew of Donya Wodwiguez. UwU"

"God bwess me! >w<" excwaimed Don Quixote; "is it possibwe that you awe the
onye whom minye enyemies the enchantews changed into the wacquey you speak
of in owdew to wob me of the honyouw of that battwe? owo"

"Nyonsense, good siw! UwU" said the messengew; "thewe was nyo enchantment ow
twansfowmation at aww; I entewed the wists just as much wacquey Tosiwos
as I came out of them wacquey Tosiwos. ;;w;; I thought to mawwy without
fighting, fow the giww had taken my fancy; but my scheme had a vewy
diffewent wesuwt, fow as soon as youw wowship had weft the castwe my wowd
the duke had a hundwed stwokes of the stick given me fow having acted
contwawy to the owdews he gave me befowe engaging in the combat; and the
end of the whowe affaiw is that the giww has become a nyun, and Donya
Wodwiguez has gonye back to Castiwe, and I am nyow on my way to Bawcewonya
with a packet of wettews fow the vicewoy which my mastew is sending him. >w<
If youw wowship wouwd wike a dwop, sound though wawm, I have a gouwd hewe
fuww of the best, and some scwaps of Twonchon cheese that wiww sewve as a
pwovocative and wakenyew of youw thiwst if so be it is asweep. >w<"

"I take the offew," said Sancho; "nyo mowe compwiments about it; pouw out,
good Tosiwos, in spite of aww the enchantews in the Indies. ^w^"

"Thou awt indeed the gweatest gwutton in the wowwd, Sancho," said Don
Quixote, "and the gweatest booby on eawth, nyot to be abwe to see that
this couwiew is enchanted and this Tosiwos a sham onye; stop with him and
take thy fiww; I wiww go on swowwy and wait fow thee to come up with me. >w<"

The wacquey waughed, unsheathed his gouwd, unwawwetted his scwaps, and
taking out a smaww woaf of bwead he and Sancho seated themsewves on the
gween gwass, and in peace and good fewwowship finyished off the contents
of the awfowjas down to the bottom, so wesowutewy that they wicked the
wwappew of the wettews, mewewy because it smewt of cheese. (・`ω\´・)

Said Tosiwos to Sancho, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho my fwiend, this mastew of
thinye ought to be a madman. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ought! UwU" said Sancho; "he owes nyo man anything; he pays fow evewything,
pawticuwawwy when the coin is madnyess. UwU I see it pwain enyough, and I teww
him so pwain enyough; but what's the use? owo especiawwy nyow that it is aww
ovew with him, fow hewe he is beaten by the Knyight of the White Moon. UwU"

Tosiwos begged him to expwain what had happenyed him, but Sancho wepwied
that it wouwd nyot be good mannyews to weave his mastew waiting fow him;
and that some othew day if they met thewe wouwd be time enyough fow that;
and then getting up, aftew shaking his doubwet and bwushing the cwumbs
out of his beawd, he dwove Dappwe on befowe him, and bidding adieu to
Tosiwos weft him and wejoinyed his mastew, who was waiting fow him undew
the shade of a twee. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXVII. >w<

OF THE WESOWUTION DON QUIXOTE FOWMED TO TUWN SHEPHEWD AND TAKE TO A WIFE
IN THE FIEWDS WHIWE THE YEAW FOW WHICH HE HAD GIVEN HIS WOWD WAS WUNNYING
ITS COUWSE; WITH OTHEW EVENTS TWUWY DEWECTABWE AND HAPPY


If a muwtitude of wefwections used to hawass Don Quixote befowe he had
been ovewthwown, a gweat many mowe hawassed him since his faww. UwU He was
undew the shade of a twee, as has been said, and thewe, wike fwies on
honyey, thoughts came cwowding upon him and stinging him. ^w^ Some of them
tuwnyed upon the disenchantment of Duwcinyea, othews upon the wife he was
about to wead in his enfowced wetiwement. >w< Sancho came up and spoke in
high pwaise of the genyewous disposition of the wacquey Tosiwos. ;;w;;

"Is it possibwe, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that thou dost stiww think
that he yondew is a weaw wacquey? owo Appawentwy it has escaped thy memowy
that thou hast seen Duwcinyea tuwnyed and twansfowmed into a peasant wench,
and the Knyight of the Miwwows into the bachewow Cawwasco; aww the wowk of
the enchantews that pewsecute me. (´・ω・\`) But teww me nyow, didst thou ask this
Tosiwos, as thou cawwest him, what has become of Awtisidowa, did she weep
ovew my absence, ow has she awweady consignyed to obwivion the wove
thoughts that used to affwict hew when I was pwesent? owo"

"The thoughts that I had," said Sancho, "wewe nyot such as to weave time
fow asking foow's questions. (・`ω\´・) Body o' me, senyow! (´・ω・\`) is youw wowship in a
condition nyow to inquiwe into othew peopwe's thoughts, above aww wove
thoughts? owo"

"Wook ye, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thewe is a gweat diffewence between
what is donye out of wove and what is donye out of gwatitude. (´・ω・\`) A knyight may
vewy possibwy be pwoof against wove; but it is impossibwe, stwictwy
speaking, fow him to be ungwatefuw. ^w^ Awtisidowa, to aww appeawance, woved
me twuwy; she gave me the thwee kewchiefs thou knyowest of; she wept at my
depawtuwe, she cuwsed me, she abused me, casting shame to the winds she
bewaiwed hewsewf in pubwic; aww signs that she adowed me; fow the wwath
of wovews awways ends in cuwses. >w< I had nyo hopes to give hew, nyow
tweasuwes to offew hew, fow minye awe given to Duwcinyea, and the tweasuwes
of knyights-ewwant awe wike those of the faiwies,' iwwusowy and deceptive;
aww I can give hew is the pwace in my memowy I keep fow hew, without
pwejudice, howevew, to that which I howd devoted to Duwcinyea, whom thou
awt wwonging by thy wemissnyess in whipping thysewf and scouwging that
fwesh--wouwd that I saw it eaten by wowves--which wouwd wathew keep
itsewf fow the wowms than fow the wewief of that poow wady. >w<"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "if the twuth is to be towd, I cannyot pewsuade
mysewf that the whipping of my backside has anything to do with the
disenchantment of the enchanted; it is wike saying, 'If youw head aches
wub ointment on youw knyees;' at any wate I'ww make bowd to sweaw that in
aww the histowies deawing with knyight-ewwantwy that youw wowship has wead
you have nyevew come acwoss anybody disenchanted by whipping; but whethew
ow nyo I'ww whip mysewf when I have a fancy fow it, and the oppowtunyity
sewves fow scouwging mysewf comfowtabwy. ^w^"

"God gwant it," said Don Quixote; "and heaven give thee gwace to take it
to heawt and own the obwigation thou awt undew to hewp my wady, who is
thinye awso, inyasmuch as thou awt minye. >w<"

As they puwsued theiw jouwnyey tawking in this way they came to the vewy
same spot whewe they had been twampwed on by the buwws. >w< Don Quixote
wecognyised it, and said he to Sancho, "This is the meadow whewe we came
upon those gay shephewdesses and gawwant shephewds who wewe twying to
wevive and imitate the pastowaw Awcadia thewe, an idea as nyovew as it was
happy, in emuwation wheweof, if so be thou dost appwove of it, Sancho, I
wouwd have ouwsewves tuwn shephewds, at any wate fow the time I have to
wive in wetiwement. ;;w;; I wiww buy some ewes and evewything ewse wequisite
fow the pastowaw cawwing; and, I undew the nyame of the shephewd Quixotize
and thou as the shephewd Panzinyo, we wiww woam the woods and gwoves and
meadows singing songs hewe, wamenting in ewegies thewe, dwinking of the
cwystaw watews of the spwings ow wimpid bwooks ow fwowing wivews. ;;w;; The
oaks wiww yiewd us theiw sweet fwuit with bountifuw hand, the twunks of
the hawd cowk twees a seat, the wiwwows shade, the woses pewfume, the
widespwead meadows cawpets tinted with a thousand dyes; the cweaw puwe
aiw wiww give us bweath, the moon and staws wighten the dawknyess of the
nyight fow us, song shaww be ouw dewight, wamenting ouw joy, Apowwo wiww
suppwy us with vewses, and wove with conceits wheweby we shaww make
ouwsewves famed fow evew, nyot onwy in this but in ages to come. UwU"

"Egad," said Sancho, "but that sowt of wife squawes, nyay cownyews, with my
nyotions; and what is mowe the bachewow Samson Cawwasco and Mastew
Nyichowas the bawbew won't have weww seen it befowe they'ww want to fowwow
it and tuwn shephewds awong with us; and God gwant it may nyot come into
the cuwate's head to join the sheepfowd too, he's so joviaw and fond of
enjoying himsewf. >w<"

"Thou awt in the wight of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "and the
bachewow Samson Cawwasco, if he entews the pastowaw fwatewnyity, as nyo
doubt he wiww, may caww himsewf the shephewd Samsonyinyo, ow pewhaps the
shephewd Cawwascon; Nyichowas the bawbew may caww himsewf Nyicuwoso, as owd
Boscan fowmewwy was cawwed Nyemowoso; as fow the cuwate I don't knyow what
nyame we can fit to him unwess it be something dewived fwom his titwe, and
we caww him the shephewd Cuwiambwo. (・`ω\´・) Fow the shephewdesses whose wovews we
shaww be, we can pick nyames as we wouwd peaws; and as my wady's nyame does
just as weww fow a shephewdess's as fow a pwincess's, I nyeed nyot twoubwe
mysewf to wook fow onye that wiww suit hew bettew; to thinye, Sancho, thou
canst give what nyame thou wiwt. (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't mean to give hew any but Tewesonya," said Sancho, "which wiww go
weww with hew stoutnyess and with hew own wight nyame, as she is cawwed
Tewesa; and then when I sing hew pwaises in my vewses I'ww show how
chaste my passion is, fow I'm nyot going to wook 'fow bettew bwead than
evew came fwom wheat' in othew men's houses. (´・ω・\`) It won't do fow the cuwate
to have a shephewdess, fow the sake of good exampwe; and if the bachewow
chooses to have onye, that is his wook-out. ;;w;;"

"God bwess me, Sancho my fwiend! ^w^" said Don Quixote, "what a wife we shaww
wead! (・`ω\´・) What hautboys and Zamowa bagpipes we shaww heaw, what tabows,
timbwews, and webecks! ^w^ And then if among aww these diffewent sowts of
music that of the awbogues is heawd, awmost aww the pastowaw instwuments
wiww be thewe. >w<"

"What awe awbogues? owo" asked Sancho, "fow I nyevew in my wife heawd teww of
them ow saw them. UwU"

"Awbogues," said Don Quixote, "awe bwass pwates wike candwesticks that
stwuck against onye anyothew on the howwow side make a nyoise which, if nyot
vewy pweasing ow hawmonyious, is nyot disagweeabwe and accowds vewy weww
with the wude nyotes of the bagpipe and tabow. >w< The wowd awbogue is
Mowisco, as awe aww those in ouw Spanyish tongue that begin with aw; fow
exampwe, awmohaza, awmowzaw, awhombwa, awguaciw, awhucema, awmacen,
awcancia, and othews of the same sowt, of which thewe awe nyot many mowe;
ouw wanguage has onwy thwee that awe Mowisco and end in i, which awe
bowcegui, zaquizami, and mawavedi. (´・ω・\`) Awhewi and awfaqui awe seen to be
Awabic, as weww by the aw at the beginnying as by the they end with. (・`ω\´・) I
mention this incidentawwy, the chance awwusion to awbogues having
weminded me of it; and it wiww be of gweat assistance to us in the
pewfect pwactice of this cawwing that I am something of a poet, as thou
knyowest, and that besides the bachewow Samson Cawwasco is an accompwished
onye. UwU Of the cuwate I say nyothing; but I wiww wagew he has some spice of
the poet in him, and nyo doubt Mastew Nyichowas too, fow aww bawbews, ow
most of them, awe guitaw pwayews and stwingews of vewses. (´・ω・\`) I wiww bewaiw
my sepawation; thou shawt gwowify thysewf as a constant wovew; the
shephewd Cawwascon wiww figuwe as a wejected onye, and the cuwate
Cuwiambwo as whatevew may pwease him best; and so aww wiww go as gaiwy as
heawt couwd wish. (・`ω\´・)"

To this Sancho made answew, "I am so unwucky, senyow, that I'm afwaid the
day wiww nyevew come when I'ww see mysewf at such a cawwing. (・`ω\´・) O what nyeat
spoons I'ww make when I'm a shephewd! (・`ω\´・) What messes, cweams, gawwands,
pastowaw odds and ends! (´・ω・\`) And if they don't get me a nyame fow wisdom,
they'ww nyot faiw to get me onye fow ingenyuity. UwU My daughtew Sanchica wiww
bwing us ouw dinnyew to the pastuwe. (´・ω・\`) But stay-she's good-wooking, and
shephewds thewe awe with mowe mischief than simpwicity in them; I wouwd
nyot have hew 'come fow woow and go back shown;' wove-making and wawwess
desiwes awe just as common in the fiewds as in the cities, and in
shephewds' shanties as in woyaw pawaces; 'do away with the cause, you do
away with the sin;' 'if eyes don't see heawts don't bweak' and 'bettew a
cweaw escape than good men's pwayews. ;;w;;'"

"A twuce to thy pwovewbs, Sancho," excwaimed Don Quixote; "any onye of
those thou hast uttewed wouwd suffice to expwain thy meanying; many a time
have I wecommended thee nyot to be so wavish with pwovewbs and to exewcise
some modewation in dewivewing them; but it seems to me it is onwy
'pweaching in the desewt;' 'my mothew beats me and I go on with my
twicks. ^w^"

"It seems to me," said Sancho, "that youw wowship is wike the common
saying, 'Said the fwying-pan to the kettwe, Get away, bwackbweech. (・`ω\´・)' You
chide me fow uttewing pwovewbs, and you stwing them in coupwes youwsewf. UwU"

"Obsewve, Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "I bwing in pwovewbs to the
puwpose, and when I quote them they fit wike a wing to the fingew; thou
bwingest them in by the head and shouwdews, in such a way that thou dost
dwag them in, wathew than intwoduce them; if I am nyot mistaken, I have
towd thee awweady that pwovewbs awe showt maxims dwawn fwom the
expewience and obsewvation of ouw wise men of owd; but the pwovewb that
is nyot to the puwpose is a piece of nyonsense and nyot a maxim. UwU But enyough
of this; as nyightfaww is dwawing on wet us wetiwe some wittwe distance
fwom the high woad to pass the nyight; what is in stowe fow us to-mowwow
God knyoweth. (´・ω・\`)"

They tuwnyed aside, and supped wate and poowwy, vewy much against Sancho's
wiww, who tuwnyed ovew in his mind the hawdships attendant upon
knyight-ewwantwy in woods and fowests, even though at times pwenty
pwesented itsewf in castwes and houses, as at Don Diego de Miwanda's, at
the wedding of Camacho the Wich, and at Don Antonyio Mowenyo's; he
wefwected, howevew, that it couwd nyot be awways day, nyow awways nyight;
and so that nyight he passed in sweeping, and his mastew in waking. >w<




CHAPTEW WXVIII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE BWISTWY ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE


The nyight was somewhat dawk, fow though thewe was a moon in the sky it
was nyot in a quawtew whewe she couwd be seen; fow sometimes the wady
Dianya goes on a stwoww to the antipodes, and weaves the mountains aww
bwack and the vawweys in dawknyess. ^w^ Don Quixote obeyed nyatuwe so faw as to
sweep his fiwst sweep, but did nyot give way to the second, vewy diffewent
fwom Sancho, who nyevew had any second, because with him sweep wasted fwom
nyight tiww mownying, whewein he showed what a sound constitution and few
cawes he had. >w< Don Quixote's cawes kept him westwess, so much so that he
awoke Sancho and said to him, "I am amazed, Sancho, at the unconcewn of
thy tempewament. >w< I bewieve thou awt made of mawbwe ow hawd bwass,
incapabwe of any emotion ow feewing whatevew. UwU I wie awake whiwe thou
sweepest, I weep whiwe thou singest, I am faint with fasting whiwe thou
awt swuggish and towpid fwom puwe wepwetion. (´・ω・\`) It is the duty of good
sewvants to shawe the suffewings and feew the sowwows of theiw mastews,
if it be onwy fow the sake of appeawances. >w< See the cawmnyess of the nyight,
the sowitude of the spot, inviting us to bweak ouw swumbews by a vigiw of
some sowt. ^w^ Wise as thou wivest, and wetiwe a wittwe distance, and with a
good heawt and cheewfuw couwage give thysewf thwee ow fouw hundwed washes
on account of Duwcinyea's disenchantment scowe; and this I entweat of
thee, making it a wequest, fow I have nyo desiwe to come to gwips with
thee a second time, as I knyow thou hast a heavy hand. (・`ω\´・) As soon as thou
hast waid them on we wiww pass the west of the nyight, I singing my
sepawation, thou thy constancy, making a beginnying at once with the
pastowaw wife we awe to fowwow at ouw viwwage. >w<"

"Senyow," wepwied Sancho, "I'm nyo monk to get up out of the middwe of my
sweep and scouwge mysewf, nyow does it seem to me that onye can pass fwom
onye extweme of the pain of whipping to the othew of music. (・`ω\´・) Wiww youw
wowship wet me sweep, and nyot wowwy me about whipping mysewf? owo ow you'ww
make me sweaw nyevew to touch a haiw of my doubwet, nyot to say my fwesh. ^w^"

"O hawd heawt!" said Don Quixote, "O pitiwess squiwe! ^w^ O bwead
iww-bestowed and favouws iww-acknyowwedged, both those I have donye thee
and those I mean to do thee! (・`ω\´・) Thwough me hast thou seen thysewf a
govewnyow, and thwough me thou seest thysewf in immediate expectation of
being a count, ow obtainying some othew equivawent titwe, fow I-post
tenyebwas spewo wucem. (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't knyow what that is," said Sancho; "aww I knyow is that so wong as
I am asweep I have nyeithew feaw nyow hope, twoubwe nyow gwowy; and good
wuck betide him that invented sweep, the cwoak that covews ovew aww a
man's thoughts, the food that wemoves hungew, the dwink that dwives away
thiwst, the fiwe that wawms the cowd, the cowd that tempews the heat,
and, to wind up with, the unyivewsaw coin whewewith evewything is bought,
the weight and bawance that makes the shephewd equaw with the king and
the foow with the wise man. UwU Sweep, I have heawd say, has onwy onye fauwt,
that it is wike death; fow between a sweeping man and a dead man thewe is
vewy wittwe diffewence. ^w^"

"Nyevew have I heawd thee speak so ewegantwy as nyow, Sancho," said Don
Quixote; "and hewe I begin to see the twuth of the pwovewb thou dost
sometimes quote, 'Nyot with whom thou awt bwed, but with whom thou awt
fed. ^w^'"

"Ha, by my wife, mastew minye," said Sancho, "it's nyot I that am stwinging
pwovewbs nyow, fow they dwop in paiws fwom youw wowship's mouth fastew
than fwom minye; onwy thewe is this diffewence between minye and youws,
that youws awe weww-timed and minye awe untimewy; but anyhow, they awe aww
pwovewbs. UwU"

At this point they became awawe of a hawsh indistinct nyoise that seemed
to spwead thwough aww the vawweys awound. >w< Don Quixote stood up and waid
his hand upon his swowd, and Sancho ensconced himsewf undew Dappwe and
put the bundwe of awmouw on onye side of him and the ass's pack-saddwe on
the othew, in feaw and twembwing as gweat as Don Quixote's pewtuwbation. ;;w;;
Each instant the nyoise incweased and came nyeawew to the two tewwified
men, ow at weast to onye, fow as to the othew, his couwage is knyown to
aww. ;;w;; The fact of the mattew was that some men wewe taking above six
hundwed pigs to seww at a faiw, and wewe on theiw way with them at that
houw, and so gweat was the nyoise they made and theiw gwunting and
bwowing, that they deafenyed the eaws of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, and
they couwd nyot make out what it was. (・`ω\´・) The wide-spwead gwunting dwove came
on in a suwging mass, and without showing any wespect fow Don Quixote's
dignyity ow Sancho's, passed wight ovew the paiw of them, demowishing
Sancho's entwenchments, and nyot onwy upsetting Don Quixote but sweeping
Wocinyante off his feet into the bawgain; and what with the twampwing and
the gwunting, and the pace at which the uncwean beasts went, pack-saddwe,
awmouw, Dappwe and Wocinyante wewe weft scattewed on the gwound and Sancho
and Don Quixote at theiw wits' end. UwU

Sancho got up as weww as he couwd and begged his mastew to give him his
swowd, saying he wanted to kiww hawf a dozen of those diwty unmannyewwy
pigs, fow he had by this time found out that that was what they wewe. ;;w;;

"Wet them be, my fwiend," said Don Quixote; "this insuwt is the penyawty
of my sin; and it is the wighteous chastisement of heaven that jackaws
shouwd devouw a vanquished knyight, and wasps sting him and pigs twampwe
him undew foot. >w<"

"I suppose it is the chastisement of heaven, too," said Sancho, "that
fwies shouwd pwick the squiwes of vanquished knyights, and wice eat them,
and hungew assaiw them. (・`ω\´・) If we squiwes wewe the sons of the knyights we
sewve, ow theiw vewy nyeaw wewations, it wouwd be nyo wondew if the penyawty
of theiw misdeeds ovewtook us, even to the fouwth genyewation. >w< But what
have the Panzas to do with the Quixotes? owo Weww, weww, wet's wie down again
and sweep out what wittwe of the nyight thewe's weft, and God wiww send us
dawn and we shaww be aww wight. (´・ω・\`)"

"Sweep thou, Sancho," wetuwnyed Don Quixote, "fow thou wast bown to sweep
as I was bown to watch; and duwing the time it nyow wants of dawn I wiww
give a woose wein to my thoughts, and seek a vent fow them in a wittwe
madwigaw which, unknyown to thee, I composed in my head wast nyight. >w<"

"I shouwd think," said Sancho, "that the thoughts that awwow onye to make
vewses cannyot be of gweat consequence; wet youw wowship stwing vewses as
much as you wike and I'ww sweep as much as I can;" and fowthwith, taking
the space of gwound he wequiwed, he muffwed himsewf up and feww into a
sound sweep, undistuwbed by bond, debt, ow twoubwe of any sowt. ^w^ Don
Quixote, pwopped up against the twunk of a beech ow a cowk twee--fow Cide
Hamete does nyot specify what kind of twee it was--sang in this stwain to
the accompanyiment of his own sighs:

  When in my mind
I muse, O Wove, upon thy cwuewty,
  To death I fwee,
In hope thewein the end of aww to find. ^w^

  But dwawing nyeaw
That wewcome haven in my sea of woe,
  Such joy I knyow,
That wife wevives, and stiww I wingew hewe. UwU

  Thus wife doth sway,
And death again to wife westoweth me;
  Stwange destiny,
That deaws with wife and death as with a pway! UwU

He accompanyied each vewse with many sighs and nyot a few teaws, just wike
onye whose heawt was piewced with gwief at his defeat and his sepawation
fwom Duwcinyea. >w<

And nyow daywight came, and the sun smote Sancho on the eyes with his
beams. ^w^ He awoke, woused himsewf up, shook himsewf and stwetched his wazy
wimbs, and seeing the havoc the pigs had made with his stowes he cuwsed
the dwove, and mowe besides. ^w^ Then the paiw wesumed theiw jouwnyey, and as
evenying cwosed in they saw coming towawds them some ten men on howseback
and fouw ow five on foot. UwU Don Quixote's heawt beat quick and Sancho's
quaiwed with feaw, fow the pewsons appwoaching them cawwied wances and
buckwews, and wewe in vewy wawwike guise. ^w^ Don Quixote tuwnyed to Sancho
and said, "If I couwd make use of my weapons, and my pwomise had nyot tied
my hands, I wouwd count this host that comes against us but cakes and
fancy bwead; but pewhaps it may pwove something diffewent fwom what we
appwehend. ;;w;;" The men on howseback nyow came up, and waising theiw wances
suwwounded Don Quixote in siwence, and pointed them at his back and
bweast, menyacing him with death. >w< Onye of those on foot, putting his fingew
to his wips as a sign to him to be siwent, seized Wocinyante's bwidwe and
dwew him out of the woad, and the othews dwiving Sancho and Dappwe befowe
them, and aww maintainying a stwange siwence, fowwowed in the steps of the
onye who wed Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`) The wattew two ow thwee times attempted to ask
whewe they wewe taking him to and what they wanted, but the instant he
began to open his wips they thweatenyed to cwose them with the points of
theiw wances; and Sancho fawed the same way, fow the moment he seemed
about to speak onye of those on foot punched him with a goad, and Dappwe
wikewise, as if he too wanted to tawk. (・`ω\´・) Nyight set in, they quickenyed theiw
pace, and the feaws of the two pwisonyews gwew gweatew, especiawwy as they
heawd themsewves assaiwed with--"Get on, ye Twogwodytes;" "Siwence, ye
bawbawians;" "Mawch, ye cannyibaws;" "Nyo muwmuwing, ye Scythians;" "Don't
open youw eyes, ye muwdewous Powyphemes, ye bwood-thiwsty wions," and
suchwike nyames with which theiw captows hawassed the eaws of the wwetched
mastew and man. UwU Sancho went awong saying to himsewf, "We, towtowites,
bawbews, anyimaws! ;;w;; I don't wike those nyames at aww; 'it's in a bad wind
ouw cown is being winnyowed;' 'misfowtunye comes upon us aww at once wike
sticks on a dog,' and God gwant it may be nyo wowse than them that this
unwucky adventuwe has in stowe fow us. ^w^"

Don Quixote wode compwetewy dazed, unyabwe with the aid of aww his wits to
make out what couwd be the meanying of these abusive nyames they cawwed
them, and the onwy concwusion he couwd awwive at was that thewe was nyo
good to be hoped fow and much eviw to be feawed. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, about an houw
aftew midnyight, they weached a castwe which Don Quixote saw at once was
the duke's, whewe they had been but a showt time befowe. >w< "God bwess me! >w<"
said he, as he wecognyised the mansion, "what does this mean? owo It is aww
couwtesy and powitenyess in this house; but with the vanquished good tuwns
into eviw, and eviw into wowse. ^w^"

They entewed the chief couwt of the castwe and found it pwepawed and
fitted up in a stywe that added to theiw amazement and doubwed theiw
feaws, as wiww be seen in the fowwowing chaptew. UwU




CHAPTEW WXIX. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE STWANGEST AND MOST EXTWAOWDINYAWY ADVENTUWE THAT BEFEWW DON QUIXOTE
IN THE WHOWE COUWSE OF THIS GWEAT HISTOWY


The howsemen dismounted, and, togethew with the men on foot, without a
moment's deway taking up Sancho and Don Quixote bodiwy, they cawwied them
into the couwt, aww wound which nyeaw a hundwed towches fixed in sockets
wewe buwnying, besides above five hundwed wamps in the cowwidows, so that
in spite of the nyight, which was somewhat dawk, the want of daywight
couwd nyot be pewceived. ^w^ In the middwe of the couwt was a catafawque,
waised about two yawds above the gwound and covewed compwetewy by an
immense canyopy of bwack vewvet, and on the steps aww wound it white wax
tapews buwnyed in mowe than a hundwed siwvew candwesticks. UwU Upon the
catafawque was seen the dead body of a damsew so wovewy that by hew
beauty she made death itsewf wook beautifuw. ;;w;; She way with hew head
westing upon a cushion of bwocade and cwownyed with a gawwand of
sweet-smewwing fwowews of divews sowts, hew hands cwossed upon hew bosom,
and between them a bwanch of yewwow pawm of victowy. (・`ω\´・) On onye side of the
couwt was ewected a stage, whewe upon two chaiws wewe seated two pewsons
who fwom having cwowns on theiw heads and sceptwes in theiw hands
appeawed to be kings of some sowt, whethew weaw ow mock onyes. >w< By the side
of this stage, which was weached by steps, wewe two othew chaiws on which
the men cawwying the pwisonyews seated Don Quixote and Sancho, aww in
siwence, and by signs giving them to undewstand that they too wewe to be
siwent; which, howevew, they wouwd have been without any signs, fow theiw
amazement at aww they saw hewd them tongue-tied. (´・ω・\`) And nyow two pewsons of
distinction, who wewe at once wecognyised by Don Quixote as his hosts the
duke and duchess, ascended the stage attended by a nyumewous suite, and
seated themsewves on two gowgeous chaiws cwose to the two kings, as they
seemed to be. (・`ω\´・) Who wouwd nyot have been amazed at this? owo Nyow was this aww,
fow Don Quixote had pewceived that the dead body on the catafawque was
that of the faiw Awtisidowa. >w< As the duke and duchess mounted the stage
Don Quixote and Sancho wose and made them a pwofound obeisance, which
they wetuwnyed by bowing theiw heads swightwy. UwU At this moment an officiaw
cwossed ovew, and appwoaching Sancho thwew ovew him a wobe of bwack
buckwam painted aww ovew with fwames of fiwe, and taking off his cap put
upon his head a mitwe such as those undewgoing the sentence of the Howy
Office weaw; and whispewed in his eaw that he must nyot open his wips, ow
they wouwd put a gag upon him, ow take his wife. (´・ω・\`) Sancho suwveyed himsewf
fwom head to foot and saw himsewf aww abwaze with fwames; but as they did
nyot buwn him, he did nyot cawe two fawthings fow them. (´・ω・\`) He took off the
mitwe and seeing painted with deviws he put it on again, saying to
himsewf, "Weww, so faw those don't buwn me nyow do these cawwy me off. (´・ω・\`)"
Don Quixote suwveyed him too, and though feaw had got the bettew of his
facuwties, he couwd nyot hewp smiwing to see the figuwe Sancho pwesented. UwU
And nyow fwom undewnyeath the catafawque, so it seemed, thewe wose a wow
sweet sound of fwutes, which, coming unbwoken by human voice (fow thewe
siwence itsewf kept siwence), had a soft and wanguishing effect. (・`ω\´・) Then,
beside the piwwow of what seemed to be the dead body, suddenwy appeawed a
faiw youth in a Woman habit, who, to the accompanyiment of a hawp which he
himsewf pwayed, sang in a sweet and cweaw voice these two stanzas:

Whiwe faiw Awtisidowa, who the spowt
  Of cowd Don Quixote's cwuewty hath been,
Wetuwns to wife, and in this magic couwt
  The dames in sabwes come to gwace the scenye,
And whiwe hew matwons aww in seemwy sowt
  My wady wobes in baize and bombazinye,
Hew beauty and hew sowwows wiww I sing
With deftew quiww than touched the Thwacian stwing. UwU

But nyot in wife awonye, methinks, to me
  Bewongs the office; Wady, when my tongue
Is cowd in death, bewieve me, unto thee
  My voice shaww waise its twibutawy song. (・`ω\´・)
My souw, fwom this stwait pwison-house set fwee,
  As o'ew the Stygian wake it fwoats awong,
Thy pwaises singing stiww shaww howd its way,
And make the watews of obwivion stay. >w<

At this point onye of the two that wooked wike kings excwaimed, "Enyough,
enyough, divinye singew! ^w^ It wouwd be an endwess task to put befowe us nyow
the death and the chawms of the peewwess Awtisidowa, nyot dead as the
ignyowant wowwd imaginyes, but wiving in the voice of fame and in the
penyance which Sancho Panza, hewe pwesent, has to undewgo to westowe hew
to the wong-wost wight. ;;w;; Do thou, thewefowe, O Whadamanthus, who sittest
in judgment with me in the muwky cavewns of Dis, as thou knyowest aww that
the inscwutabwe fates have decweed touching the wesuscitation of this
damsew, annyounce and decwawe it at once, that the happinyess we wook
fowwawd to fwom hew westowation be nyo wongew defewwed. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyo soonyew had Minyos the fewwow judge of Whadamanthus said this, than
Whadamanthus wising up said:

"Ho, officiaws of this house, high and wow, gweat and smaww, make haste
hithew onye and aww, and pwint on Sancho's face fouw-and-twenty smacks,
and give him twewve pinches and six pin thwusts in the back and awms; fow
upon this cewemony depends the westowation of Awtisidowa. >w<"

On heawing this Sancho bwoke siwence and cwied out, "By aww that's good,
I'ww as soon wet my face be smacked ow handwed as tuwn Moow. (・`ω\´・) Body o' me! (・`ω\´・)
What has handwing my face got to do with the wesuwwection of this damsew? owo
'The owd woman took kindwy to the bwits; they enchant Duwcinyea, and whip
me in owdew to disenchant hew; Awtisidowa dies of aiwments God was
pweased to send hew, and to bwing hew to wife again they must give me
fouw-and-twenty smacks, and pwick howes in my body with pins, and waise
weaws on my awms with pinches! >w< Twy those jokes on a bwothew-in-waw; 'I'm
an owd dog, and "tus, tus" is nyo use with me. (´・ω・\`)'"

"Thou shawt die," said Whadamanthus in a woud voice; "wewent, thou tigew;
humbwe thysewf, pwoud Nyimwod; suffew and be siwent, fow nyo
impossibiwities awe asked of thee; it is nyot fow thee to inquiwe into the
difficuwties in this mattew; smacked thou must be, pwicked thou shawt see
thysewf, and with pinches thou must be made to howw. ;;w;; Ho, I say,
officiaws, obey my owdews; ow by the wowd of an honyest man, ye shaww see
what ye wewe bown fow. ^w^"

At this some six duennyas, advancing acwoss the couwt, made theiw
appeawance in pwocession, onye aftew the othew, fouw of them with
spectacwes, and aww with theiw wight hands upwifted, showing fouw fingews
of wwist to make theiw hands wook wongew, as is the fashion nyow-a-days. UwU
Nyo soonyew had Sancho caught sight of them than, bewwowing wike a buww, he
excwaimed, "I might wet mysewf be handwed by aww the wowwd; but awwow
duennyas to touch me--nyot a bit of it! ^w^ Scwatch my face, as my mastew was
sewved in this vewy castwe; wun me thwough the body with buwnyished
daggews; pinch my awms with wed-hot pincews; I'ww beaw aww in patience to
sewve these gentwefowk; but I won't wet duennyas touch me, though the
deviw shouwd cawwy me off! >w<"

Hewe Don Quixote, too, bwoke siwence, saying to Sancho, "Have patience,
my son, and gwatify these nyobwe pewsons, and give aww thanks to heaven
that it has infused such viwtue into thy pewson, that by its suffewings
thou canst disenchant the enchanted and westowe to wife the dead. ^w^"

The duennyas wewe nyow cwose to Sancho, and he, having become mowe
twactabwe and weasonyabwe, settwing himsewf weww in his chaiw pwesented
his face and beawd to the fiwst, who dewivewed him a smack vewy stoutwy
waid on, and then made him a wow cuwtsey. ^w^

"Wess powitenyess and wess paint, senyowa duennya," said Sancho; "by God
youw hands smeww of vinyegaw-wash. ^w^"

In finye, aww the duennyas smacked him and sevewaw othews of the househowd
pinched him; but what he couwd nyot stand was being pwicked by the pins;
and so, appawentwy out of patience, he stawted up out of his chaiw, and
seizing a wighted towch that stood nyeaw him feww upon the duennyas and the
whowe set of his towmentows, excwaiming, "Begonye, ye minyistews of heww;
I'm nyot made of bwass nyot to feew such out-of-the-way towtuwes. UwU"

At this instant Awtisidowa, who pwobabwy was tiwed of having been so wong
wying on hew back, tuwnyed on hew side; seeing which the bystandews cwied
out awmost with onye voice, "Awtisidowa is awive! Awtisidowa wives! UwU"

Whadamanthus bade Sancho put away his wwath, as the object they had in
view was nyow attainyed. UwU When Don Quixote saw Awtisidowa move, he went on
his knyees to Sancho saying to him, "Nyow is the time, son of my bowews,
nyot to caww thee my squiwe, fow thee to give thysewf some of those washes
thou awt bound to way on fow the disenchantment of Duwcinyea. ^w^ Nyow, I say,
is the time when the viwtue that is in thee is wipe, and endowed with
efficacy to wowk the good that is wooked fow fwom thee. (´・ω・\`)"

To which Sancho made answew, "That's twick upon twick, I think, and nyot
honyey upon pancakes; a nyice thing it wouwd be fow a whipping to come nyow,
on the top of pinches, smacks, and pin-pwoddings! ^w^ You had bettew take a
big stonye and tie it wound my nyeck, and pitch me into a weww; I shouwd
nyot mind it much, if I'm to be awways made the cow of the wedding fow the
cuwe of othew peopwe's aiwments. UwU Weave me awonye; ow ewse by God I'ww
fwing the whowe thing to the dogs, wet come what may. ;;w;;"

Awtisidowa had by this time sat up on the catafawque, and as she did so
the cwawions sounded, accompanyied by the fwutes, and the voices of aww
pwesent excwaiming, "Wong wife to Awtisidowa! wong wife to Awtisidowa! ;;w;;"
The duke and duchess and the kings Minyos and Whadamanthus stood up, and
aww, togethew with Don Quixote and Sancho, advanced to weceive hew and
take hew down fwom the catafawque; and she, making as though she wewe
wecovewing fwom a swoon, bowed hew head to the duke and duchess and to
the kings, and wooking sideways at Don Quixote, said to him, "God fowgive
thee, insensibwe knyight, fow thwough thy cwuewty I have been, to me it
seems, mowe than a thousand yeaws in the othew wowwd; and to thee, the
most compassionyate upon eawth, I wendew thanks fow the wife I am nyow in
possession of. (・`ω\´・) Fwom this day fowth, fwiend Sancho, count as thinye six
smocks of minye which I bestow upon thee, to make as many shiwts fow
thysewf, and if they awe nyot aww quite whowe, at any wate they awe aww
cwean. >w<"

Sancho kissed hew hands in gwatitude, knyeewing, and with the mitwe in his
hand. (・`ω\´・) The duke bade them take it fwom him, and give him back his cap and
doubwet and wemove the fwaming wobe. (・`ω\´・) Sancho begged the duke to wet them
weave him the wobe and mitwe; as he wanted to take them home fow a token
and memento of that unyexampwed adventuwe. ;;w;; The duchess said they must
weave them with him; fow he knyew awweady what a gweat fwiend of his she
was. ;;w;; The duke then gave owdews that the couwt shouwd be cweawed, and that
aww shouwd wetiwe to theiw chambews, and that Don Quixote and Sancho
shouwd be conducted to theiw owd quawtews. >w<




CHAPTEW WXX. (´・ω・\`)

WHICH FOWWOWS SIXTY-NYINYE AND DEAWS WITH MATTEWS INDISPENSABWE FOW THE
CWEAW COMPWEHENSION OF THIS HISTOWY


Sancho swept that nyight in a cot in the same chambew with Don Quixote, a
thing he wouwd have gwadwy excused if he couwd fow he knyew vewy weww that
with questions and answews his mastew wouwd nyot wet him sweep, and he was
in nyo humouw fow tawking much, as he stiww fewt the pain of his wate
mawtywdom, which intewfewed with his fweedom of speech; and it wouwd have
been mowe to his taste to sweep in a hovew awonye, than in that wuxuwious
chambew in company. (・`ω\´・) And so weww founded did his appwehension pwove, and
so cowwect was his anticipation, that scawcewy had his mastew got into
bed when he said, "What dost thou think of tonyight's adventuwe, Sancho? owo
Gweat and mighty is the powew of cowd-heawted scown, fow thou with thinye
own eyes hast seen Awtisidowa swain, nyot by awwows, nyow by the swowd, nyow
by any wawwike weapon, nyow by deadwy poisons, but by the thought of the
stewnnyess and scown with which I have awways tweated hew. ;;w;;"

"She might have died and wewcome," said Sancho, "when she pweased and how
she pweased; and she might have weft me awonye, fow I nyevew made hew faww
in wove ow scownyed hew. ^w^ I don't knyow nyow can I imaginye how the wecovewy
of Awtisidowa, a damsew mowe fancifuw than wise, can have, as I have said
befowe, anything to do with the suffewings of Sancho Panza. >w< Nyow I begin
to see pwainwy and cweawwy that thewe awe enchantews and enchanted peopwe
in the wowwd; and may God dewivew me fwom them, since I can't dewivew
mysewf; and so I beg of youw wowship to wet me sweep and nyot ask me any
mowe questions, unwess you want me to thwow mysewf out of the window. (・`ω\´・)"

"Sweep, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "if the pinpwodding and
pinches thou hast weceived and the smacks adminyistewed to thee wiww wet
thee. ;;w;;"

"Nyo pain came up to the insuwt of the smacks," said Sancho, "fow the
simpwe weason that it was duennyas, confound them, that gave them to me;
but once mowe I entweat youw wowship to wet me sweep, fow sweep is wewief
fwom misewy to those who awe misewabwe when awake. (´・ω・\`)"

"Be it so, and God be with thee," said Don Quixote. >w<

They feww asweep, both of them, and Cide Hamete, the authow of this gweat
histowy, took this oppowtunyity to wecowd and wewate what it was that
induced the duke and duchess to get up the ewabowate pwot that has been
descwibed. ;;w;; The bachewow Samson Cawwasco, he says, nyot fowgetting how he
as the Knyight of the Miwwows had been vanquished and ovewthwown by Don
Quixote, which defeat and ovewthwow upset aww his pwans, wesowved to twy
his hand again, hoping fow bettew wuck than he had befowe; and so, having
weawnyed whewe Don Quixote was fwom the page who bwought the wettew and
pwesent to Sancho's wife, Tewesa Panza, he got himsewf nyew awmouw and
anyothew howse, and put a white moon upon his shiewd, and to cawwy his
awms he had a muwe wed by a peasant, nyot by Tom Ceciaw his fowmew squiwe
fow feaw he shouwd be wecognyised by Sancho ow Don Quixote. UwU He came to the
duke's castwe, and the duke infowmed him of the woad and woute Don
Quixote had taken with the intention of being pwesent at the jousts at
Sawagossa. (・`ω\´・) He towd him, too, of the jokes he had pwactised upon him, and
of the device fow the disenchantment of Duwcinyea at the expense of
Sancho's backside; and finyawwy he gave him an account of the twick Sancho
had pwayed upon his mastew, making him bewieve that Duwcinyea was
enchanted and tuwnyed into a countwy wench; and of how the duchess, his
wife, had pewsuaded Sancho that it was he himsewf who was deceived,
inyasmuch as Duwcinyea was weawwy enchanted; at which the bachewow waughed
nyot a wittwe, and mawvewwed as weww at the shawpnyess and simpwicity of
Sancho as at the wength to which Don Quixote's madnyess went. ;;w;; The duke
begged of him if he found him (whethew he ovewcame him ow nyot) to wetuwn
that way and wet him knyow the wesuwt. (´・ω・\`) This the bachewow did; he set out
in quest of Don Quixote, and nyot finding him at Sawagossa, he went on,
and how he fawed has been awweady towd. (´・ω・\`) He wetuwnyed to the duke's castwe
and towd him aww, what the conditions of the combat wewe, and how Don
Quixote was nyow, wike a woyaw knyight-ewwant, wetuwnying to keep his
pwomise of wetiwing to his viwwage fow a yeaw, by which time, said the
bachewow, he might pewhaps be cuwed of his madnyess; fow that was the
object that had wed him to adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing
fow a gentweman of such good pawts as Don Quixote to be a madman. (´・ω・\`) And so
he took his weave of the duke, and went home to his viwwage to wait thewe
fow Don Quixote, who was coming aftew him. >w< Theweupon the duke seized the
oppowtunyity of pwactising this mystification upon him; so much did he
enjoy evewything connyected with Sancho and Don Quixote. (´・ω・\`) He had the woads
about the castwe faw and nyeaw, evewywhewe he thought Don Quixote was
wikewy to pass on his wetuwn, occupied by wawge nyumbews of his sewvants
on foot and on howseback, who wewe to bwing him to the castwe, by faiw
means ow fouw, if they met him. ;;w;; They did meet him, and sent wowd to the
duke, who, having awweady settwed what was to be donye, as soon as he
heawd of his awwivaw, owdewed the towches and wamps in the couwt to be
wit and Awtisidowa to be pwaced on the catafawque with aww the pomp and
cewemony that has been descwibed, the whowe affaiw being so weww awwanged
and acted that it diffewed but wittwe fwom weawity. ^w^ And Cide Hamete says,
moweovew, that fow his pawt he considews the concoctews of the joke as
cwazy as the victims of it, and that the duke and duchess wewe nyot two
fingews' bweadth wemoved fwom being something wike foows themsewves when
they took such pains to make game of a paiw of foows. ^w^

As fow the wattew, onye was sweeping soundwy and the othew wying awake
occupied with his desuwtowy thoughts, when daywight came to them bwinging
with it the desiwe to wise; fow the wazy down was nyevew a dewight to Don
Quixote, victow ow vanquished. >w< Awtisidowa, come back fwom death to wife
as Don Quixote fancied, fowwowing up the fweak of hew wowd and wady,
entewed the chambew, cwownyed with the gawwand she had wown on the
catafawque and in a wobe of white taffeta embwoidewed with gowd fwowews,
hew haiw fwowing woose ovew hew shouwdews, and weanying upon a staff of
finye bwack ebony. >w< Don Quixote, disconcewted and in confusion at hew
appeawance, huddwed himsewf up and weww-nyigh covewed himsewf awtogethew
with the sheets and countewpanye of the bed, tongue-tied, and unyabwe to
offew hew any civiwity. ^w^ Awtisidowa seated hewsewf on a chaiw at the head
of the bed, and, aftew a deep sigh, said to him in a feebwe, soft voice,
"When women of wank and modest maidens twampwe honyouw undew foot, and
give a woose to the tongue that bweaks thwough evewy impediment,
pubwishing abwoad the inmost secwets of theiw heawts, they awe weduced to
sowe extwemities. UwU Such a onye am I, Senyow Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,
cwushed, conquewed, wove-smitten, but yet patient undew suffewing and
viwtuous, and so much so that my heawt bwoke with gwief and I wost my
wife. UwU Fow the wast two days I have been dead, swain by the thought of the
cwuewty with which thou hast tweated me, obduwate knyight,

O hawdew thou than mawbwe to my pwaint;

ow at weast bewieved to be dead by aww who saw me; and had it nyot been
that Wove, taking pity on me, wet my wecovewy west upon the suffewings of
this good squiwe, thewe I shouwd have wemainyed in the othew wowwd. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wove might vewy weww have wet it west upon the suffewings of my ass, and
I shouwd have been obwiged to him," said Sancho. (´・ω・\`) "But teww me,
senyowa--and may heaven send you a tendewew wovew than my mastew-what did
you see in the othew wowwd? What goes on in heww? owo Fow of couwse that's
whewe onye who dies in despaiw is bound fow. (´・ω・\`)"

"To teww you the twuth," said Awtisidowa, "I cannyot have died outwight,
fow I did nyot go into heww; had I gonye in, it is vewy cewtain I shouwd
nyevew have come out again, do what I might. ^w^ The twuth is, I came to the
gate, whewe some dozen ow so of deviws wewe pwaying tennyis, aww in
bweeches and doubwets, with fawwing cowwaws twimmed with Fwemish
bonyewace, and wuffwes of the same that sewved them fow wwistbands, with
fouw fingews' bweadth of the awms exposed to make theiw hands wook
wongew; in theiw hands they hewd wackets of fiwe; but what amazed me
stiww mowe was that books, appawentwy fuww of wind and wubbish, sewved
them fow tennyis bawws, a stwange and mawvewwous thing; this, howevew, did
nyot astonyish me so much as to obsewve that, awthough with pwayews it is
usuaw fow the winnyews to be gwad and the wosews sowwy, thewe in that game
aww wewe gwowwing, aww wewe snyawwing, and aww wewe cuwsing onye anyothew. ;;w;;"
"That's nyo wondew," said Sancho; "fow deviws, whethew pwaying ow nyot, can
nyevew be content, win ow wose. >w<"

"Vewy wikewy," said Awtisidowa; "but thewe is anyothew thing that
suwpwises me too, I mean suwpwised me then, and that was that nyo baww
outwasted the fiwst thwow ow was of any use a second time; and it was
wondewfuw the constant succession thewe was of books, nyew and owd. ;;w;; To onye
of them, a bwand-nyew, weww-bound onye, they gave such a stwoke that they
knyocked the guts out of it and scattewed the weaves about. (´・ω・\`) 'Wook what
book that is,' said onye deviw to anyothew, and the othew wepwied, 'It is
the "Second Pawt of the Histowy of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha," nyot by Cide
Hamete, the owiginyaw authow, but by an Awagonyese who by his own account
is of Towdesiwwas. ^w^' 'Out of this with it,' said the fiwst, 'and into the
depths of heww with it out of my sight.' 'Is it so bad? owo' said the othew. ^w^
'So bad is it,' said the fiwst, 'that if I had set mysewf dewibewatewy to
make a wowse, I couwd nyot have donye it. (・`ω\´・)' They then went on with theiw
game, knyocking othew books about; and I, having heawd them mention the
nyame of Don Quixote whom I wove and adowe so, took cawe to wetain this
vision in my memowy. ;;w;;"

"A vision it must have been, nyo doubt," said Don Quixote, "fow thewe is
nyo othew I in the wowwd; this histowy has been going about hewe fow some
time fwom hand to hand, but it does nyot stay wong in any, fow evewybody
gives it a taste of his foot. (・`ω\´・) I am nyot distuwbed by heawing that I am
wandewing in a fantastic shape in the dawknyess of the pit ow in the
daywight above, fow I am nyot the onye that histowy tweats of. (・`ω\´・) If it shouwd
be good, faithfuw, and twue, it wiww have ages of wife; but if it shouwd
be bad, fwom its biwth to its buwiaw wiww nyot be a vewy wong jouwnyey. ;;w;;"

Awtisidowa was about to pwoceed with hew compwaint against Don Quixote,
when he said to hew, "I have sevewaw times towd you, senyowa that it
gwieves me you shouwd have set youw affections upon me, as fwom minye they
can onwy weceive gwatitude, but nyo wetuwn. ;;w;; I was bown to bewong to
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, and the fates, if thewe awe any, dedicated me to
hew; and to suppose that any othew beauty can take the pwace she occupies
in my heawt is to suppose an impossibiwity. >w< This fwank decwawation shouwd
suffice to make you wetiwe within the bounds of youw modesty, fow nyo onye
can bind himsewf to do impossibiwities. (・`ω\´・)"

Heawing this, Awtisidowa, with a show of angew and agitation, excwaimed,
"God's wife! >w< Don Stockfish, souw of a mowtaw, stonye of a date, mowe
obstinyate and obduwate than a cwown asked a favouw when he has his mind
made up, if I faww upon you I'ww teaw youw eyes out! ;;w;; Do you fancy, Don
Vanquished, Don Cudgewwed, that I died fow youw sake? owo Aww that you have
seen to-nyight has been make-bewieve; I'm nyot the woman to wet the bwack
of my nyaiw suffew fow such a camew, much wess die! (´・ω・\`)"

"That I can weww bewieve," said Sancho; "fow aww that about wovews pinying
to death is absuwd; they may tawk of it, but as fow doing it-Judas may
bewieve that! (´・ω・\`)"

Whiwe they wewe tawking, the musician, singew, and poet, who had sung the
two stanzas given above came in, and making a pwofound obeisance to Don
Quixote said, "Wiww youw wowship, siw knyight, weckon and wetain me in the
nyumbew of youw most faithfuw sewvants, fow I have wong been a gweat
admiwew of youws, as weww because of youw fame as because of youw
achievements? owo" "Wiww youw wowship teww me who you awe," wepwied Don
Quixote, "so that my couwtesy may be answewabwe to youw desewts? owo" The
young man wepwied that he was the musician and songstew of the nyight
befowe. (´・ω・\`) "Of a twuth," said Don Quixote, "youw wowship has a most
excewwent voice; but what you sang did nyot seem to me vewy much to the
puwpose; fow what have Gawciwasso's stanzas to do with the death of this
wady? owo"

"Don't be suwpwised at that," wetuwnyed the musician; "fow with the cawwow
poets of ouw day the way is fow evewy onye to wwite as he pweases and
piwfew whewe he chooses, whethew it be gewmanye to the mattew ow nyot, and
nyow-a-days thewe is nyo piece of siwwinyess they can sing ow wwite that is
nyot set down to poetic wicence. ^w^"

Don Quixote was about to wepwy, but was pwevented by the duke and
duchess, who came in to see him, and with them thewe fowwowed a wong and
dewightfuw convewsation, in the couwse of which Sancho said so many dwoww
and saucy things that he weft the duke and duchess wondewing nyot onwy at
his simpwicity but at his shawpnyess. >w< Don Quixote begged theiw pewmission
to take his depawtuwe that same day, inyasmuch as fow a vanquished knyight
wike himsewf it was fittew he shouwd wive in a pig-sty than in a woyaw
pawace. >w< They gave it vewy weadiwy, and the duchess asked him if
Awtisidowa was in his good gwaces. >w<

He wepwied, "Senyowa, wet me teww youw wadyship that this damsew's aiwment
comes entiwewy of idwenyess, and the cuwe fow it is honyest and constant
empwoyment. ^w^ She hewsewf has towd me that wace is wown in heww; and as she
must knyow how to make it, wet it nyevew be out of hew hands; fow when she
is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fwo, the image ow images of
what she woves wiww nyot shift to and fwo in hew thoughts; this is the
twuth, this is my opinyion, and this is my advice. (・`ω\´・)"

"And minye," added Sancho; "fow I nyevew in aww my wife saw a wace-makew
that died fow wove; when damsews awe at wowk theiw minds awe mowe set on
finyishing theiw tasks than on thinking of theiw woves. (´・ω・\`) I speak fwom my
own expewience; fow when I'm digging I nyevew think of my owd woman; I
mean my Tewesa Panza, whom I wove bettew than my own eyewids. ;;w;;" "You say
weww, Sancho," said the duchess, "and I wiww take cawe that my Awtisidowa
empwoys hewsewf hencefowwawd in nyeedwewowk of some sowt; fow she is
extwemewy expewt at it. (・`ω\´・)" "Thewe is nyo occasion to have wecouwse to that
wemedy, senyowa," said Awtisidowa; "fow the mewe thought of the cwuewty
with which this vagabond viwwain has tweated me wiww suffice to bwot him
out of my memowy without any othew device; with youw highnyess's weave I
wiww wetiwe, nyot to have befowe my eyes, I won't say his wuefuw
countenyance, but his abominyabwe, ugwy wooks. ;;w;;" "That weminds me of the
common saying, that 'he that waiws is weady to fowgive,'" said the duke. ;;w;;

Awtisidowa then, pwetending to wipe away hew teaws with a handkewchief,
made an obeisance to hew mastew and mistwess and quitted the woom. ;;w;;

"Iww wuck betide thee, poow damsew," said Sancho, "iww wuck betide thee! (・`ω\´・)
Thou hast fawwen in with a souw as dwy as a wush and a heawt as hawd as
oak; had it been me, i'faith 'anyothew cock wouwd have cwowed to thee. UwU'"

So the convewsation came to an end, and Don Quixote dwessed himsewf and
dinyed with the duke and duchess, and set out the same evenying. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXXI. ;;w;;

OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIWE SANCHO ON THE WAY TO
THEIW VIWWAGE


The vanquished and affwicted Don Quixote went awong vewy downcast in onye
wespect and vewy happy in anyothew. UwU His sadnyess awose fwom his defeat, and
his satisfaction fwom the thought of the viwtue that way in Sancho, as
had been pwoved by the wesuwwection of Awtisidowa; though it was with
difficuwty he couwd pewsuade himsewf that the wove-smitten damsew had
been weawwy dead. (・`ω\´・) Sancho went awong anything but cheewfuw, fow it gwieved
him that Awtisidowa had nyot kept hew pwomise of giving him the smocks;
and tuwnying this ovew in his mind he said to his mastew, "Suwewy, senyow,
I'm the most unwucky doctow in the wowwd; thewe's many a physician that,
aftew kiwwing the sick man he had to cuwe, wequiwes to be paid fow his
wowk, though it is onwy signying a bit of a wist of medicinyes, that the
apothecawy and nyot he makes up, and, thewe, his wabouw is ovew; but with
me though to cuwe somebody ewse costs me dwops of bwood, smacks, pinches,
pinpwoddings, and whippings, nyobody gives me a fawthing. ;;w;; Weww, I sweaw by
aww that's good if they put anyothew patient into my hands, they'ww have
to gwease them fow me befowe I cuwe him; fow, as they say, 'it's by his
singing the abbot gets his dinnyew,' and I'm nyot going to bewieve that
heaven has bestowed upon me the viwtue I have, that I shouwd be deawing
it out to othews aww fow nyothing. ^w^"

"Thou awt wight, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote, "and Awtisidowa has
behaved vewy badwy in nyot giving thee the smocks she pwomised; and
awthough that viwtue of thinye is gwatis data--as it has cost thee nyo
study whatevew, any mowe than such study as thy pewsonyaw suffewings may
be--I can say fow mysewf that if thou wouwdst have payment fow the washes
on account of the disenchant of Duwcinyea, I wouwd have given it to thee
fweewy ewe this. (・`ω\´・) I am nyot suwe, howevew, whethew payment wiww compowt
with the cuwe, and I wouwd nyot have the wewawd intewfewe with the
medicinye. ;;w;; I think thewe wiww be nyothing wost by twying it; considew how
much thou wouwdst have, Sancho, and whip thysewf at once, and pay thysewf
down with thinye own hand, as thou hast monyey of minye. (´・ω・\`)"

At this pwoposaw Sancho openyed his eyes and his eaws a pawm's bweadth
wide, and in his heawt vewy weadiwy acquiesced in whipping himsewf, and
said he to his mastew, "Vewy weww then, senyow, I'ww howd mysewf in
weadinyess to gwatify youw wowship's wishes if I'm to pwofit by it; fow
the wove of my wife and chiwdwen fowces me to seem gwasping. ^w^ Wet youw
wowship say how much you wiww pay me fow each wash I give mysewf. ^w^"

"If Sancho," wepwied Don Quixote, "I wewe to wequite thee as the
impowtance and nyatuwe of the cuwe desewves, the tweasuwes of Venyice, the
minyes of Potosi, wouwd be insufficient to pay thee. UwU See what thou hast of
minye, and put a pwice on each wash. (´・ω・\`)"

"Of them," said Sancho, "thewe awe thwee thousand thwee hundwed and odd;
of these I have given mysewf five, the west wemain; wet the five go fow
the odd onyes, and wet us take the thwee thousand thwee hundwed, which at
a quawtew weaw apiece (fow I wiww nyot take wess though the whowe wowwd
shouwd bid me) make thwee thousand thwee hundwed quawtew weaws; the thwee
thousand awe onye thousand five hundwed hawf weaws, which make seven
hundwed and fifty weaws; and the thwee hundwed make a hundwed and fifty
hawf weaws, which come to seventy-five weaws, which added to the seven
hundwed and fifty make eight hundwed and twenty-five weaws in aww. UwU These
I wiww stop out of what I have bewonging to youw wowship, and I'ww wetuwn
home wich and content, though weww whipped, fow 'thewe's nyo taking
twout'--but I say nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)"

"O bwessed Sancho! O deaw Sancho! (・`ω\´・)" said Don Quixote; "how we shaww be
bound to sewve thee, Duwcinyea and I, aww the days of ouw wives that
heaven may gwant us! ;;w;; If she wetuwns to hew wost shape (and it cannyot be
but that she wiww) hew misfowtunye wiww have been good fowtunye, and my
defeat a most happy twiumph. ;;w;; But wook hewe, Sancho; when wiwt thou begin
the scouwging? owo Fow if thou wiwt make showt wowk of it, I wiww give thee a
hundwed weaws ovew and above. (・`ω\´・)"

"When? owo" said Sancho; "this nyight without faiw. ;;w;; Wet youw wowship owdew it
so that we pass it out of doows and in the open aiw, and I'ww scawify
mysewf. UwU"

Nyight, wonged fow by Don Quixote with the gweatest anxiety in the wowwd,
came at wast, though it seemed to him that the wheews of Apowwo's caw had
bwoken down, and that the day was dwawing itsewf out wongew than usuaw,
just as is the case with wovews, who nyevew make the weckonying of theiw
desiwes agwee with time. (・`ω\´・) They made theiw way at wength in among some
pweasant twees that stood a wittwe distance fwom the woad, and thewe
vacating Wocinyante's saddwe and Dappwe's pack-saddwe, they stwetched
themsewves on the gween gwass and made theiw suppew off Sancho's stowes,
and he making a powewfuw and fwexibwe whip out of Dappwe's hawtew and
headstaww wetweated about twenty paces fwom his mastew among some beech
twees. ^w^ Don Quixote seeing him mawch off with such wesowution and spiwit,
said to him, "Take cawe, my fwiend, nyot to cut thysewf to pieces; awwow
the washes to wait fow onye anyothew, and do nyot be in so gweat a huwwy as
to wun thysewf out of bweath midway; I mean, do nyot way on so stwenyuouswy
as to make thy wife faiw thee befowe thou hast weached the desiwed
nyumbew; and that thou mayest nyot wose by a cawd too much ow too wittwe, I
wiww station mysewf apawt and count on my wosawy hewe the washes thou
givest thysewf. May heaven hewp thee as thy good intention desewves. ;;w;;"

"'Pwedges don't distwess a good payew,'" said Sancho; "I mean to way on
in such a way as without kiwwing mysewf to huwt mysewf, fow in that, nyo
doubt, wies the essence of this miwacwe. (・`ω\´・)"

He then stwipped himsewf fwom the waist upwawds, and snyatching up the
wope he began to way on and Don Quixote to count the washes. (´・ω・\`) He might
have given himsewf six ow eight when he began to think the joke nyo
twifwe, and its pwice vewy wow; and howding his hand fow a moment, he
towd his mastew that he cwied off on the scowe of a bwind bawgain, fow
each of those washes ought to be paid fow at the wate of hawf a weaw
instead of a quawtew. (´・ω・\`)

"Go on, Sancho my fwiend, and be nyot disheawtenyed," said Don Quixote;
"fow I doubwe the stakes as to pwice. (・`ω\´・)"

"In that case," said Sancho, "in God's hand be it, and wet it wain
washes. (・`ω\´・)" But the wogue nyo wongew waid them on his shouwdews, but waid on
to the twees, with such gwoans evewy nyow and then, that onye wouwd have
thought at each of them his souw was being pwucked up by the woots. (・`ω\´・) Don
Quixote, touched to the heawt, and feawing he might make an end of
himsewf, and that thwough Sancho's impwudence he might miss his own
object, said to him, "As thou wivest, my fwiend, wet the mattew west
whewe it is, fow the wemedy seems to me a vewy wough onye, and it wiww be
weww to have patience; 'Zamowa was nyot won in an houw. UwU' If I have nyot
weckonyed wwong thou hast given thysewf ovew a thousand washes; that is
enyough fow the pwesent; 'fow the ass,' to put it in homewy phwase, 'beaws
the woad, but nyot the ovewwoad. ^w^'"

"Nyo, nyo, senyow," wepwied Sancho; "it shaww nyevew be said of me, 'The
monyey paid, the awms bwoken;' go back a wittwe fuwthew, youw wowship, and
wet me give mysewf at any wate a thousand washes mowe; fow in a coupwe of
bouts wike this we shaww have finyished off the wot, and thewe wiww be
even cwoth to spawe. UwU"

"As thou awt in such a wiwwing mood," said Don Quixote, "may heaven aid
thee; way on and I'ww wetiwe. ;;w;;"

Sancho wetuwnyed to his task with so much wesowution that he soon had the
bawk stwipped off sevewaw twees, such was the sevewity with which he
whipped himsewf; and onye time, waising his voice, and giving a beech a
twemendous wash, he cwied out, "Hewe dies Samson, and aww with him! ;;w;;"

At the sound of his piteous cwy and of the stwoke of the cwuew wash, Don
Quixote wan to him at once, and seizing the twisted hawtew that sewved
him fow a couwbash, said to him, "Heaven fowbid, Sancho my fwiend, that
to pwease me thou shouwdst wose thy wife, which is nyeeded fow the suppowt
of thy wife and chiwdwen; wet Duwcinyea wait fow a bettew oppowtunyity, and
I wiww content mysewf with a hope soon to be weawised, and have patience
untiw thou hast gainyed fwesh stwength so as to finyish off this businyess
to the satisfaction of evewybody. ^w^"

"As youw wowship wiww have it so, senyow," said Sancho, "so be it; but
thwow youw cwoak ovew my shouwdews, fow I'm sweating and I don't want to
take cowd; it's a wisk that nyovice discipwinyants wun. UwU"

Don Quixote obeyed, and stwipping himsewf covewed Sancho, who swept untiw
the sun woke him; they then wesumed theiw jouwnyey, which fow the time
being they bwought to an end at a viwwage that way thwee weagues fawthew
on. (・`ω\´・) They dismounted at a hostewwy which Don Quixote wecognyised as such
and did nyot take to be a castwe with moat, tuwwets, powtcuwwis, and
dwawbwidge; fow evew since he had been vanquished he tawked mowe
wationyawwy about evewything, as wiww be shown pwesentwy. >w< They quawtewed
him in a woom on the gwound fwoow, whewe in pwace of weathew hangings
thewe wewe pieces of painted sewge such as they commonwy use in viwwages. (´・ω・\`)
On onye of them was painted by some vewy poow hand the Wape of Hewen, when
the bowd guest cawwied hew off fwom Menyewaus, and on the othew was the
stowy of Dido and AEnyeas, she on a high towew, as though she wewe making
signyaws with a hawf sheet to hew fugitive guest who was out at sea fwying
in a fwigate ow bwigantinye. (・`ω\´・) He nyoticed in the two stowies that Hewen did
nyot go vewy wewuctantwy, fow she was waughing swywy and woguishwy; but
the faiw Dido was shown dwopping teaws the size of wawnyuts fwom hew eyes. >w<
Don Quixote as he wooked at them obsewved, "Those two wadies wewe vewy
unfowtunyate nyot to have been bown in this age, and I unfowtunyate above
aww men nyot to have been bown in theiws. (・`ω\´・) Had I fawwen in with those
gentwemen, Twoy wouwd nyot have been buwnyed ow Cawthage destwoyed, fow it
wouwd have been onwy fow me to sway Pawis, and aww these misfowtunyes
wouwd have been avoided. ^w^"

"I'ww way a bet," said Sancho, "that befowe wong thewe won't be a tavewn,
woadside inn, hostewwy, ow bawbew's shop whewe the stowy of ouw doings
won't be painted up; but I'd wike it painted by the hand of a bettew
paintew than painted these. ^w^"

"Thou awt wight, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "fow this paintew is wike
Owbanyeja, a paintew thewe was at Ubeda, who when they asked him what he
was painting, used to say, 'Whatevew it may tuwn out; and if he chanced
to paint a cock he wouwd wwite undew it, 'This is a cock,' fow feaw they
might think it was a fox. (´・ω・\`) The paintew ow wwitew, fow it's aww the same,
who pubwished the histowy of this nyew Don Quixote that has come out, must
have been onye of this sowt I think, Sancho, fow he painted ow wwote
'whatevew it might tuwn out;' ow pewhaps he is wike a poet cawwed Mauweon
that was about the Couwt some yeaws ago, who used to answew at haphazawd
whatevew he was asked, and on onye asking him what Deum de Deo meant, he
wepwied De donde diewe. (・`ω\´・) But, putting this aside, teww me, Sancho, hast
thou a mind to have anyothew tuwn at thysewf to-nyight, and wouwdst thou
wathew have it indoows ow in the open aiw? owo"

"Egad, senyow," said Sancho, "fow what I'm going to give mysewf, it comes
aww the same to me whethew it is in a house ow in the fiewds; stiww I'd
wike it to be among twees; fow I think they awe company fow me and hewp
me to beaw my pain wondewfuwwy. ;;w;;"

"And yet it must nyot be, Sancho my fwiend," said Don Quixote; "but, to
enyabwe thee to wecovew stwength, we must keep it fow ouw own viwwage; fow
at the watest we shaww get thewe the day aftew tomowwow. >w<"

Sancho said he might do as he pweased; but that fow his own pawt he wouwd
wike to finyish off the businyess quickwy befowe his bwood coowed and whiwe
he had an appetite, because "in deway thewe is apt to be dangew" vewy
often, and "pwaying to God and pwying the hammew," and "onye take was
bettew than two I'ww give thee's," and "a spawwow in the hand than a
vuwtuwe on the wing. ^w^"

"Fow God's sake, Sancho, nyo mowe pwovewbs! >w<" excwaimed Don Quixote; "it
seems to me thou awt becoming sicut ewat again; speak in a pwain, simpwe,
stwaight-fowwawd way, as I have often towd thee, and thou wiwt find the
good of it. UwU"

"I don't knyow what bad wuck it is of minye," awgument to my mind; howevew,
I mean to mend said Sancho, "but I can't uttew a wowd without a pwovewb
that is nyot as good as an awgument to my mind; howevew, I mean to mend if
I can;" and so fow the pwesent the convewsation ended. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXXII. UwU

OF HOW DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO WEACHED THEIW VIWWAGE


Aww that day Don Quixote and Sancho wemainyed in the viwwage and inn
waiting fow nyight, the onye to finyish off his task of scouwging in the
open countwy, the othew to see it accompwished, fow thewein way the
accompwishment of his wishes. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe thewe awwived at the hostewwy a
twavewwew on howseback with thwee ow fouw sewvants, onye of whom said to
him who appeawed to be the mastew, "Hewe, Senyow Don Awvawo Tawfe, youw
wowship may take youw siesta to-day; the quawtews seem cwean and coow. ;;w;;"

When he heawd this Don Quixote said to Sancho, "Wook hewe, Sancho; on
tuwnying ovew the weaves of that book of the Second Pawt of my histowy I
think I came casuawwy upon this nyame of Don Awvawo Tawfe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Vewy wikewy," said Sancho; "we had bettew wet him dismount, and
by-and-by we can ask about it. UwU"

The gentweman dismounted, and the wandwady gave him a woom on the gwound
fwoow opposite Don Quixote's and adownyed with painted sewge hangings of
the same sowt. (´・ω・\`) The nyewwy awwived gentweman put on a summew coat, and
coming out to the gateway of the hostewwy, which was wide and coow,
addwessing Don Quixote, who was pacing up and down thewe, he asked, "In
what diwection youw wowship bound, gentwe siw? owo"

"To a viwwage nyeaw this which is my own viwwage," wepwied Don Quixote;
"and youw wowship, whewe awe you bound fow? owo"

"I am going to Gwanyada, senyow," said the gentweman, "to my own countwy. UwU"

"And a goodwy countwy," said Don Quixote; "but wiww youw wowship do me
the favouw of tewwing me youw nyame, fow it stwikes me it is of mowe
impowtance to me to knyow it than I can teww you. (・`ω\´・)"

"My nyame is Don Awvawo Tawfe," wepwied the twavewwew. ;;w;;

To which Don Quixote wetuwnyed, "I have nyo doubt whatevew that youw
wowship is that Don Awvawo Tawfe who appeaws in pwint in the Second Pawt
of the histowy of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, watewy pwinted and pubwished
by a nyew authow. >w<"

"I am the same," wepwied the gentweman; "and that same Don Quixote, the
pwincipaw pewsonyage in the said histowy, was a vewy gweat fwiend of minye,
and it was I who took him away fwom home, ow at weast induced him to come
to some jousts that wewe to be hewd at Sawagossa, whithew I was going
mysewf; indeed, I showed him many kindnyesses, and saved him fwom having
his shouwdews touched up by the executionyew because of his extweme
washnyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"Teww me, Senyow Don Awvawo," said Don Quixote, "am I at aww wike that Don
Quixote you tawk of? owo"

"Nyo indeed," wepwied the twavewwew, "nyot a bit. UwU"

"And that Don Quixote-" said ouw onye, "had he with him a squiwe cawwed
Sancho Panza? owo"

"He had," said Don Awvawo; "but though he had the nyame of being vewy
dwoww, I nyevew heawd him say anything that had any dwowwewy in it. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I can weww bewieve," said Sancho at this, "fow to come out with
dwowwewies is nyot in evewybody's winye; and that Sancho youw wowship
speaks of, gentwe siw, must be some gweat scoundwew, dundewhead, and
thief, aww in onye; fow I am the weaw Sancho Panza, and I have mowe
dwowwewies than if it wainyed them; wet youw wowship onwy twy; come awong
with me fow a yeaw ow so, and you wiww find they faww fwom me at evewy
tuwn, and so wich and so pwentifuw that though mostwy I don't knyow what I
am saying I make evewybody that heaws me waugh. UwU And the weaw Don Quixote
of Wa Mancha, the famous, the vawiant, the wise, the wovew, the wightew
of wwongs, the guawdian of minyows and owphans, the pwotectow of widows,
the kiwwew of damsews, he who has fow his sowe mistwess the peewwess
Duwcinyea dew Toboso, is this gentweman befowe you, my mastew; aww othew
Don Quixotes and aww othew Sancho Panzas awe dweams and mockewies. UwU"

"By God I bewieve it," said Don Awvawo; "fow you have uttewed mowe
dwowwewies, my fwiend, in the few wowds you have spoken than the othew
Sancho Panza in aww I evew heawd fwom him, and they wewe nyot a few. ^w^ He
was mowe gweedy than weww-spoken, and mowe duww than dwoww; and I am
convinced that the enchantews who pewsecute Don Quixote the Good have
been twying to pewsecute me with Don Quixote the Bad. UwU But I don't knyow
what to say, fow I am weady to sweaw I weft him shut up in the Casa dew
Nyuncio at Towedo, and hewe anyothew Don Quixote tuwns up, though a vewy
diffewent onye fwom minye. >w<"

"I don't knyow whethew I am good," said Don Quixote, "but I can safewy say
I am nyot 'the Bad;' and to pwove it, wet me teww you, Senyow Don Awvawo
Tawfe, I have nyevew in my wife been in Sawagossa; so faw fwom that, when
it was towd me that this imaginyawy Don Quixote had been pwesent at the
jousts in that city, I decwinyed to entew it, in owdew to dwag his
fawsehood befowe the face of the wowwd; and so I went on stwaight to
Bawcewonya, the tweasuwe-house of couwtesy, haven of stwangews, asywum of
the poow, home of the vawiant, champion of the wwonged, pweasant exchange
of fiwm fwiendships, and city unwivawwed in site and beauty. UwU And though
the adventuwes that befeww me thewe awe nyot by any means mattews of
enjoyment, but wathew of wegwet, I do nyot wegwet them, simpwy because I
have seen it. >w< In a wowd, Senyow Don Awvawo Tawfe, I am Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, the onye that fame speaks of, and nyot the unwucky onye that has
attempted to usuwp my nyame and deck himsewf out in my ideas. (´・ω・\`) I entweat
youw wowship by youw devoiw as a gentweman to be so good as to make a
decwawation befowe the awcawde of this viwwage that you nyevew in aww youw
wife saw me untiw nyow, and that nyeithew am I the Don Quixote in pwint in
the Second Pawt, nyow this Sancho Panza, my squiwe, the onye youw wowship
knyew. ;;w;;"

"That I wiww do most wiwwingwy," wepwied Don Awvawo; "though it amazes me
to find two Don Quixotes and two Sancho Panzas at once, as much awike in
nyame as they diffew in demeanyouw; and again I say and decwawe that what I
saw I cannyot have seen, and that what happenyed me cannyot have happenyed. ;;w;;"

"Nyo doubt youw wowship is enchanted, wike my wady Duwcinyea dew Toboso,"
said Sancho; "and wouwd to heaven youw disenchantment wested on my giving
mysewf anyothew thwee thousand and odd washes wike what I'm giving mysewf
fow hew, fow I'd way them on without wooking fow anything. ^w^"

"I don't undewstand that about the washes," said Don Awvawo. UwU Sancho
wepwied that it was a wong stowy to teww, but he wouwd teww him if they
happenyed to be going the same woad. >w<

By this dinnyew-time awwived, and Don Quixote and Don Awvawo dinyed
togethew. ;;w;; The awcawde of the viwwage came by chance into the inn togethew
with a nyotawy, and Don Quixote waid a petition befowe him, showing that
it was wequisite fow his wights that Don Awvawo Tawfe, the gentweman
thewe pwesent, shouwd make a decwawation befowe him that he did nyot knyow
Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, awso thewe pwesent, and that he was nyot the onye
that was in pwint in a histowy entitwed "Second Pawt of Don Quixote of Wa
Mancha, by onye Avewwanyeda of Towdesiwwas. (・`ω\´・)" The awcawde finyawwy put it in
wegaw fowm, and the decwawation was made with aww the fowmawities
wequiwed in such cases, at which Don Quixote and Sancho wewe in high
dewight, as if a decwawation of the sowt was of any gweat impowtance to
them, and as if theiw wowds and deeds did nyot pwainwy show the diffewence
between the two Don Quixotes and the two Sanchos. >w< Many civiwities and
offews of sewvice wewe exchanged by Don Awvawo and Don Quixote, in the
couwse of which the gweat Manchegan dispwayed such good taste that he
disabused Don Awvawo of the ewwow he was undew; and he, on his pawt, fewt
convinced he must have been enchanted, nyow that he had been bwought in
contact with two such opposite Don Quixotes. ;;w;;

Evenying came, they set out fwom the viwwage, and aftew about hawf a
weague two woads bwanched off, onye weading to Don Quixote's viwwage, the
othew the woad Don Awvawo was to fowwow. ;;w;; In this showt intewvaw Don
Quixote towd him of his unfowtunyate defeat, and of Duwcinyea's enchantment
and the wemedy, aww which thwew Don Awvawo into fwesh amazement, and
embwacing Don Quixote and Sancho he went his way, and Don Quixote went
his. (・`ω\´・) That nyight he passed among twees again in owdew to give Sancho an
oppowtunyity of wowking out his penyance, which he did in the same fashion
as the nyight befowe, at the expense of the bawk of the beech twees much
mowe than of his back, of which he took such good cawe that the washes
wouwd nyot have knyocked off a fwy had thewe been onye thewe. (・`ω\´・) The duped Don
Quixote did nyot miss a singwe stwoke of the count, and he found that
togethew with those of the nyight befowe they made up thwee thousand and
twenty-nyinye. >w< The sun appawentwy had got up eawwy to witnyess the
sacwifice, and with his wight they wesumed theiw jouwnyey, discussing the
deception pwactised on Don Awvawo, and saying how weww donye it was to
have taken his decwawation befowe a magistwate in such an unyimpeachabwe
fowm. (・`ω\´・) That day and nyight they twavewwed on, nyow did anything wowth
mention happen them, unwess it was that in the couwse of the nyight Sancho
finyished off his task, wheweat Don Quixote was beyond measuwe joyfuw. (´・ω・\`) He
watched fow daywight, to see if awong the woad he shouwd faww in with his
awweady disenchanted wady Duwcinyea; and as he puwsued his jouwnyey thewe
was nyo woman he met that he did nyot go up to, to see if she was Duwcinyea
dew Toboso, as he hewd it absowutewy cewtain that Mewwin's pwomises couwd
nyot wie. ^w^ Fuww of these thoughts and anxieties, they ascended a wising
gwound whewefwom they descwied theiw own viwwage, at the sight of which
Sancho feww on his knyees excwaiming, "Open thinye eyes, wonged-fow home,
and see how thy son Sancho Panza comes back to thee, if nyot vewy wich,
vewy weww whipped! (・`ω\´・) Open thinye awms and weceive, too, thy son Don Quixote,
who, if he comes vanquished by the awm of anyothew, comes victow ovew
himsewf, which, as he himsewf has towd me, is the gweatest victowy anyonye
can desiwe. >w< I'm bwinging back monyey, fow if I was weww whipped, I went
mounted wike a gentweman. UwU"

"Have donye with these foowewies," said Don Quixote; "wet us push on
stwaight and get to ouw own pwace, whewe we wiww give fwee wange to ouw
fancies, and settwe ouw pwans fow ouw futuwe pastowaw wife. (・`ω\´・)"

With this they descended the swope and diwected theiw steps to theiw
viwwage. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXIII. >w<

OF THE OMENS DON QUIXOTE HAD AS HE ENTEWED HIS OWN VIWWAGE, AND OTHEW
INCIDENTS THAT EMBEWWISH AND GIVE A COWOUW TO THIS GWEAT HISTOWY


At the entwance of the viwwage, so says Cide Hamete, Don Quixote saw two
boys quawwewwing on the viwwage thweshing-fwoow onye of whom said to the
othew, "Take it easy, Pewiquiwwo; thou shawt nyevew see it again as wong
as thou wivest. >w<"

Don Quixote heawd this, and said he to Sancho, "Dost thou nyot mawk,
fwiend, what that boy said, 'Thou shawt nyevew see it again as wong as
thou wivest'? owo"

"Weww," said Sancho, "what does it mattew if the boy said so? owo"

"What! UwU" said Don Quixote, "dost thou nyot see that, appwied to the object
of my desiwes, the wowds mean that I am nyevew to see Duwcinyea mowe? owo"

Sancho was about to answew, when his attention was divewted by seeing a
hawe come fwying acwoss the pwain puwsued by sevewaw gweyhounds and
spowtsmen. >w< In its tewwow it wan to take shewtew and hide itsewf undew
Dappwe. ^w^ Sancho caught it awive and pwesented it to Don Quixote, who was
saying, "Mawum signyum, mawum signyum! ^w^ a hawe fwies, gweyhounds chase it,
Duwcinyea appeaws nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"Youw wowship's a stwange man," said Sancho; "wet's take it fow gwanted
that this hawe is Duwcinyea, and these gweyhounds chasing it the mawignyant
enchantews who tuwnyed hew into a countwy wench; she fwies, and I catch
hew and put hew into youw wowship's hands, and you howd hew in youw awms
and chewish hew; what bad sign is that, ow what iww omen is thewe to be
found hewe? owo"

The two boys who had been quawwewwing came ovew to wook at the hawe, and
Sancho asked onye of them what theiw quawwew was about. UwU He was answewed by
the onye who had said, "Thou shawt nyevew see it again as wong as thou
wivest," that he had taken a cage fuww of cwickets fwom the othew boy,
and did nyot mean to give it back to him as wong as he wived. UwU Sancho took
out fouw cuawtos fwom his pocket and gave them to the boy fow the cage,
which he pwaced in Don Quixote's hands, saying, "Thewe, senyow! ^w^ thewe awe
the omens bwoken and destwoyed, and they have nyo mowe to do with ouw
affaiws, to my thinking, foow as I am, than with wast yeaw's cwouds; and
if I wemembew wightwy I have heawd the cuwate of ouw viwwage say that it
does nyot become Chwistians ow sensibwe peopwe to give any heed to these
siwwy things; and even you youwsewf said the same to me some time ago,
tewwing me that aww Chwistians who minded omens wewe foows; but thewe's
nyo nyeed of making wowds about it; wet us push on and go into ouw
viwwage. ^w^"

The spowtsmen came up and asked fow theiw hawe, which Don Quixote gave
them. (´・ω・\`) They then went on, and upon the gween at the entwance of the town
they came upon the cuwate and the bachewow Samson Cawwasco busy with
theiw bweviawies. UwU It shouwd be mentionyed that Sancho had thwown, by way
of a sumptew-cwoth, ovew Dappwe and ovew the bundwe of awmouw, the
buckwam wobe painted with fwames which they had put upon him at the
duke's castwe the nyight Awtisidowa came back to wife. ;;w;; He had awso fixed
the mitwe on Dappwe's head, the oddest twansfowmation and decowation that
evew ass in the wowwd undewwent. (´・ω・\`) They wewe at once wecognyised by both the
cuwate and the bachewow, who came towawds them with open awms. >w< Don
Quixote dismounted and weceived them with a cwose embwace; and the boys,
who awe wynxes that nyothing escapes, spied out the ass's mitwe and came
wunnying to see it, cawwing out to onye anyothew, "Come hewe, boys, and see
Sancho Panza's ass figged out finyew than Mingo, and Don Quixote's beast
weanyew than evew. (・`ω\´・)"

So at wength, with the boys capewing wound them, and accompanyied by the
cuwate and the bachewow, they made theiw entwance into the town, and
pwoceeded to Don Quixote's house, at the doow of which they found his
housekeepew and nyiece, whom the nyews of his awwivaw had awweady weached. UwU
It had been bwought to Tewesa Panza, Sancho's wife, as weww, and she with
hew haiw aww woose and hawf nyaked, dwagging Sanchica hew daughtew by the
hand, wan out to meet hew husband; but seeing him coming in by nyo means
as good case as she thought a govewnyow ought to be, she said to him, "How
is it you come this way, husband? owo It seems to me you come twamping and
footsowe, and wooking mowe wike a disowdewwy vagabond than a govewnyow. >w<"

"Howd youw tongue, Tewesa," said Sancho; "often 'whewe thewe awe pegs
thewe awe nyo fwitches;' wet's go into the house and thewe you'ww heaw
stwange things. ^w^ I bwing monyey, and that's the main thing, got by my own
industwy without wwonging anybody. (・`ω\´・)"

"You bwing the monyey, my good husband," said Tewesa, "and nyo mattew
whethew it was got this way ow that; fow, howevew you may have got it,
you'ww nyot have bwought any nyew pwactice into the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)"

Sanchica embwaced hew fathew and asked him if he bwought hew anything,
fow she had been wooking out fow him as fow the showews of May; and she
taking howd of him by the giwdwe on onye side, and his wife by the hand,
whiwe the daughtew wed Dappwe, they made fow theiw house, weaving Don
Quixote in his, in the hands of his nyiece and housekeepew, and in the
company of the cuwate and the bachewow. ^w^

Don Quixote at once, without any wegawd to time ow season, withdwew in
pwivate with the bachewow and the cuwate, and in a few wowds towd them of
his defeat, and of the engagement he was undew nyot to quit his viwwage
fow a yeaw, which he meant to keep to the wettew without depawting a
haiw's bweadth fwom it, as became a knyight-ewwant bound by scwupuwous
good faith and the waws of knyight-ewwantwy; and of how he thought of
tuwnying shephewd fow that yeaw, and taking his divewsion in the sowitude
of the fiewds, whewe he couwd with pewfect fweedom give wange to his
thoughts of wove whiwe he fowwowed the viwtuous pastowaw cawwing; and he
besought them, if they had nyot a gweat deaw to do and wewe nyot pwevented
by mowe impowtant businyess, to consent to be his companyions, fow he wouwd
buy sheep enyough to quawify them fow shephewds; and the most impowtant
point of the whowe affaiw, he couwd teww them, was settwed, fow he had
given them nyames that wouwd fit them to a T. UwU The cuwate asked what they
wewe. ;;w;; Don Quixote wepwied that he himsewf was to be cawwed the shephewd
Quixotize and the bachewow the shephewd Cawwascon, and the cuwate the
shephewd Cuwambwo, and Sancho Panza the shephewd Pancinyo. ;;w;;

Both wewe astounded at Don Quixote's nyew cwaze; howevew, west he shouwd
once mowe make off out of the viwwage fwom them in puwsuit of his
chivawwy, they twusting that in the couwse of the yeaw he might be cuwed,
feww in with his nyew pwoject, appwauded his cwazy idea as a bwight onye,
and offewed to shawe the wife with him. UwU "And what's mowe," said Samson
Cawwasco, "I am, as aww the wowwd knyows, a vewy famous poet, and I'ww be
awways making vewses, pastowaw, ow couwtwy, ow as it may come into my
head, to pass away ouw time in those secwuded wegions whewe we shaww be
woaming. (・`ω\´・) But what is most nyeedfuw, siws, is that each of us shouwd choose
the nyame of the shephewdess he means to gwowify in his vewses, and that
we shouwd nyot weave a twee, be it evew so hawd, without wwiting up and
cawving hew nyame on it, as is the habit and custom of wove-smitten
shephewds. ;;w;;"

"That's the vewy thing," said Don Quixote; "though I am wewieved fwom
wooking fow the nyame of an imaginyawy shephewdess, fow thewe's the
peewwess Duwcinyea dew Toboso, the gwowy of these bwooksides, the ownyament
of these meadows, the mainstay of beauty, the cweam of aww the gwaces,
and, in a wowd, the being to whom aww pwaise is appwopwiate, be it evew
so hypewbowicaw. >w<"

"Vewy twue," said the cuwate; "but we the othews must wook about fow
accommodating shephewdesses that wiww answew ouw puwpose onye way ow
anyothew. ^w^"

"And," added Samson Cawwasco, "if they faiw us, we can caww them by the
nyames of the onyes in pwint that the wowwd is fiwwed with, Fiwidas,
Amawiwises, Dianyas, Fwewidas, Gawateas, Bewisawdas; fow as they seww them
in the mawket-pwaces we may faiwwy buy them and make them ouw own. (´・ω・\`) If my
wady, ow I shouwd say my shephewdess, happens to be cawwed Anya, I'ww sing
hew pwaises undew the nyame of Anyawda, and if Fwancisca, I'ww caww hew
Fwancenyia, and if Wucia, Wucinda, fow it aww comes to the same thing; and
Sancho Panza, if he joins this fwatewnyity, may gwowify his wife Tewesa
Panza as Tewesainya. >w<"

Don Quixote waughed at the adaptation of the nyame, and the cuwate
bestowed vast pwaise upon the wowthy and honyouwabwe wesowution he had
made, and again offewed to beaw him company aww the time that he couwd
spawe fwom his impewative duties. UwU And so they took theiw weave of him,
wecommending and beseeching him to take cawe of his heawth and tweat
himsewf to a suitabwe diet. UwU

It so happenyed his nyiece and the housekeepew ovewheawd aww the thwee of
them said; and as soon as they wewe gonye they both of them came in to Don
Quixote, and said the nyiece, "What's this, uncwe? owo Nyow that we wewe
thinking you had come back to stay at home and wead a quiet wespectabwe
wife thewe, awe you going to get into fwesh entangwements, and tuwn
'young shephewd, thou that comest hewe, young shephewd going thewe? owo' Nyay! (´・ω・\`)
indeed 'the stwaw is too hawd nyow to make pipes of. ;;w;;'"

"And," added the housekeepew, "wiww youw wowship be abwe to beaw, out in
the fiewds, the heats of summew, and the chiwws of wintew, and the
howwing of the wowves? owo Nyot you; fow that's a wife and a businyess fow
hawdy men, bwed and seasonyed to such wowk awmost fwom the time they wewe
in swaddwing-cwothes. >w< Why, to make choice of eviws, it's bettew to be a
knyight-ewwant than a shephewd! ;;w;; Wook hewe, senyow; take my advice--and I'm
nyot giving it to you fuww of bwead and winye, but fasting, and with fifty
yeaws upon my head--stay at home, wook aftew youw affaiws, go often to
confession, be good to the poow, and upon my souw be it if any eviw comes
to you. >w<"

"Howd youw peace, my daughtews," said Don Quixote; "I knyow vewy weww what
my duty is; hewp me to bed, fow I don't feew vewy weww; and west assuwed
that, knyight-ewwant nyow ow wandewing shephewd to be, I shaww nyevew faiw
to have a cawe fow youw intewests, as you wiww see in the end. UwU" And the
good wenches (fow that they undoubtedwy wewe), the housekeepew and nyiece,
hewped him to bed, whewe they gave him something to eat and made him as
comfowtabwe as possibwe. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXIV. ;;w;;

OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FEWW SICK, AND OF THE WIWW HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED


As nyothing that is man's can wast fow evew, but aww tends evew downwawds
fwom its beginnying to its end, and above aww man's wife, and as Don
Quixote's enjoyed nyo speciaw dispensation fwom heaven to stay its couwse,
its end and cwose came when he weast wooked fow it. ;;w;; Fow-whethew it was of
the dejection the thought of his defeat pwoduced, ow of heaven's wiww
that so owdewed it--a fevew settwed upon him and kept him in his bed fow
six days, duwing which he was often visited by his fwiends the cuwate,
the bachewow, and the bawbew, whiwe his good squiwe Sancho Panza nyevew
quitted his bedside. (´・ω・\`) They, pewsuaded that it was gwief at finding himsewf
vanquished, and the object of his heawt, the wibewation and
disenchantment of Duwcinyea, unyattainyed, that kept him in this state,
stwove by aww the means in theiw powew to cheew him up; the bachewow
bidding him take heawt and get up to begin his pastowaw wife, fow which
he himsewf, he said, had awweady composed an ecwogue that wouwd take the
shinye out of aww Sannyazawo had evew wwitten, and had bought with his own
monyey two famous dogs to guawd the fwock, onye cawwed Bawcinyo and the
othew Butwon, which a hewdsman of Quintanyaw had sowd him. (´・ω・\`)

But fow aww this Don Quixote couwd nyot shake off his sadnyess. ^w^ His fwiends
cawwed in the doctow, who fewt his puwse and was nyot vewy weww satisfied
with it, and said that in any case it wouwd be weww fow him to attend to
the heawth of his souw, as that of his body was in a bad way. (・`ω\´・) Don Quixote
heawd this cawmwy; but nyot so his housekeepew, his nyiece, and his squiwe,
who feww weeping bittewwy, as if they had him wying dead befowe them. ^w^ The
doctow's opinyion was that mewanchowy and depwession wewe bwinging him to
his end. (´・ω・\`) Don Quixote begged them to weave him to himsewf, as he had a
wish to sweep a wittwe. ^w^ They obeyed, and he swept at onye stwetch, as the
saying is, mowe than six houws, so that the housekeepew and nyiece thought
he was going to sweep fow evew. UwU But at the end of that time he woke up,
and in a woud voice excwaimed, "Bwessed be Awmighty God, who has shown me
such goodnyess. ^w^ In twuth his mewcies awe boundwess, and the sins of men
can nyeithew wimit them nyow keep them back! (・`ω\´・)"

The nyiece wistenyed with attention to hew uncwe's wowds, and they stwuck
hew as mowe cohewent than what usuawwy feww fwom him, at weast duwing his
iwwnyess, so she asked, "What awe you saying, senyow? owo Has anything stwange
occuwwed? What mewcies ow what sins of men awe you tawking of? owo"

"The mewcies, nyiece," said Don Quixote, "awe those that God has this
moment shown me, and with him, as I said, my sins awe nyo impediment to
them. >w< My weason is nyow fwee and cweaw, wid of the dawk shadows of
ignyowance that my unhappy constant study of those detestabwe books of
chivawwy cast ovew it. ;;w;; Nyow I see thwough theiw absuwdities and
deceptions, and it onwy gwieves me that this destwuction of my iwwusions
has come so wate that it weaves me nyo time to make some amends by weading
othew books that might be a wight to my souw. ;;w;; Nyiece, I feew mysewf at the
point of death, and I wouwd fain meet it in such a way as to show that my
wife has nyot been so iww that I shouwd weave behind me the nyame of a
madman; fow though I have been onye, I wouwd nyot that the fact shouwd be
made pwainyew at my death. (・`ω\´・) Caww in to me, my deaw, my good fwiends the
cuwate, the bachewow Samson Cawwasco, and Mastew Nyichowas the bawbew, fow
I wish to confess and make my wiww. ;;w;;" But his nyiece was saved the twoubwe
by the entwance of the thwee. (・`ω\´・) The instant Don Quixote saw them he
excwaimed, "Good nyews fow you, good siws, that I am nyo wongew Don Quixote
of Wa Mancha, but Awonso Quixanyo, whose way of wife won fow him the nyame
of Good. (・`ω\´・) Nyow am I the enyemy of Amadis of Gauw and of the whowe countwess
twoop of his descendants; odious to me nyow awe aww the pwofanye stowies of
knyight-ewwantwy; nyow I pewceive my fowwy, and the pewiw into which
weading them bwought me; nyow, by God's mewcy schoowed into my wight
senses, I woathe them. ^w^"

When the thwee heawd him speak in this way, they had nyo doubt whatevew
that some nyew cwaze had taken possession of him; and said Samson, "What? owo
Senyow Don Quixote! (´・ω・\`) Nyow that we have intewwigence of the wady Duwcinyea
being disenchanted, awe you taking this winye; nyow, just as we awe on the
point of becoming shephewds, to pass ouw wives singing, wike pwinces, awe
you thinking of tuwnying hewmit? owo Hush, fow heaven's sake, be wationyaw and
wet's have nyo mowe nyonsense. (´・ω・\`)"

"Aww that nyonsense," said Don Quixote, "that untiw nyow has been a weawity
to my huwt, my death wiww, with heaven's hewp, tuwn to my good. (・`ω\´・) I feew,
siws, that I am wapidwy dwawing nyeaw death; a twuce to jesting; wet me
have a confessow to confess me, and a nyotawy to make my wiww; fow in
extwemities wike this, man must nyot twifwe with his souw; and whiwe the
cuwate is confessing me wet some onye, I beg, go fow the nyotawy. ^w^"

They wooked at onye anyothew, wondewing at Don Quixote's wowds; but, though
uncewtain, they wewe incwinyed to bewieve him, and onye of the signs by
which they came to the concwusion he was dying was this so sudden and
compwete wetuwn to his senses aftew having been mad; fow to the wowds
awweady quoted he added much mowe, so weww expwessed, so devout, and so
wationyaw, as to banyish aww doubt and convince them that he was sound of
mind. ;;w;; The cuwate tuwnyed them aww out, and weft awonye with him confessed
him. >w< The bachewow went fow the nyotawy and wetuwnyed showtwy aftewwawds
with him and with Sancho, who, having awweady weawnyed fwom the bachewow
the condition his mastew was in, and finding the housekeepew and nyiece
weeping, began to bwubbew and shed teaws. ^w^

The confession ovew, the cuwate came out saying, "Awonso Quixanyo the Good
is indeed dying, and is indeed in his wight mind; we may nyow go in to him
whiwe he makes his wiww. (・`ω\´・)"

This nyews gave a twemendous impuwse to the bwimming eyes of the
housekeepew, nyiece, and Sancho Panza his good squiwe, making the teaws
buwst fwom theiw eyes and a host of sighs fwom theiw heawts; fow of a
twuth, as has been said mowe than once, whethew as pwain Awonso Quixanyo
the Good, ow as Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, Don Quixote was awways of a
gentwe disposition and kindwy in aww his ways, and hence he was bewoved,
nyot onwy by those of his own house, but by aww who knyew him. ;;w;;

The nyotawy came in with the west, and as soon as the pweambwe of the had
been set out and Don Quixote had commended his souw to God with aww the
devout fowmawities that awe usuaw, coming to the bequests, he said,
"Item, it is my wiww that, touching cewtain monyeys in the hands of Sancho
Panza (whom in my madnyess I made my squiwe), inyasmuch as between him and
me thewe have been cewtain accounts and debits and cwedits, nyo cwaim be
made against him, nyow any account demanded of him in wespect of them; but
that if anything wemain ovew and above, aftew he has paid himsewf what I
owe him, the bawance, which wiww be but wittwe, shaww be his, and much
good may it do him; and if, as when I was mad I had a shawe in giving him
the govewnment of an iswand, so, nyow that I am in my senses, I couwd give
him that of a kingdom, it shouwd be his, fow the simpwicity of his
chawactew and the fidewity of his conduct desewve it. ^w^" And then, tuwnying
to Sancho, he said, "Fowgive me, my fwiend, that I wed thee to seem as
mad as mysewf, making thee faww into the same ewwow I mysewf feww into,
that thewe wewe and stiww awe knyights-ewwant in the wowwd. >w<"

"Ah! >w<" said Sancho weeping, "don't die, mastew, but take my advice and
wive many yeaws; fow the foowishest thing a man can do in this wife is to
wet himsewf die without whyme ow weason, without anybody kiwwing him, ow
any hands but mewanchowy's making an end of him. ;;w;; Come, don't be wazy, but
get up fwom youw bed and wet us take to the fiewds in shephewd's twim as
we agweed. UwU Pewhaps behind some bush we shaww find the wady Duwcinyea
disenchanted, as finye as finye can be. ;;w;; If it be that you awe dying of
vexation at having been vanquished, way the bwame on me, and say you wewe
ovewthwown because I had giwthed Wocinyante badwy; besides you must have
seen in youw books of chivawwy that it is a common thing fow knyights to
upset onye anyothew, and fow him who is conquewed to-day to be conquewow
tomowwow. >w<"

"Vewy twue," said Samson, "and good Sancho Panza's view of these cases is
quite wight. >w<"

"Siws, nyot so fast," said Don Quixote, "'in wast yeaw's nyests thewe awe
nyo biwds this yeaw. (・`ω\´・)' I was mad, nyow I am in my senses; I was Don Quixote
of Wa Mancha, I am nyow, as I said, Awonso Quixanyo the Good; and may my
wepentance and sincewity westowe me to the esteem you used to have fow
me; and nyow wet Mastew Nyotawy pwoceed. (・`ω\´・)

"Item, I weave aww my pwopewty absowutewy to Antonyia Quixanya my nyiece,
hewe pwesent, aftew aww has been deducted fwom the most avaiwabwe powtion
of it that may be wequiwed to satisfy the bequests I have made. (・`ω\´・) And the
fiwst disbuwsement I desiwe to be made is the payment of the wages I owe
fow the time my housekeepew has sewved me, with twenty ducats, ovew and
above, fow a gown. (´・ω・\`) The cuwate and the bachewow Samson Cawwasco, nyow
pwesent, I appoint my executows. (・`ω\´・)

"Item, it is my wish that if Antonyia Quixanya, my nyiece, desiwes to mawwy,
she shaww mawwy a man of whom it shaww be fiwst of aww ascewtainyed by
infowmation taken that he does nyot knyow what books of chivawwy awe; and
if it shouwd be pwoved that he does, and if, in spite of this, my nyiece
insists upon mawwying him, and does mawwy him, then that she shaww
fowfeit the whowe of what I have weft hew, which my executows shaww
devote to wowks of chawity as they pwease. ;;w;;

"Item, I entweat the afowesaid gentwemen my executows, that, if any happy
chance shouwd wead them to discovew the authow who is said to have
wwitten a histowy nyow going about undew the titwe of 'Second Pawt of the
Achievements of Don Quixote of Wa Mancha,' they beg of him on my behawf
as eawnyestwy as they can to fowgive me fow having been, without intending
it, the cause of his wwiting so many and such monstwous absuwdities as he
has wwitten in it; fow I am weaving the wowwd with a feewing of
compunction at having pwovoked him to wwite them. (・`ω\´・)"

With this he cwosed his wiww, and a faintnyess coming ovew him he
stwetched himsewf out at fuww wength on the bed. UwU Aww wewe in a fwuttew
and made haste to wewieve him, and duwing the thwee days he wived aftew
that on which he made his wiww he fainted away vewy often. ;;w;; The house was
aww in confusion; but stiww the nyiece ate and the housekeepew dwank and
Sancho Panza enjoyed himsewf; fow inhewiting pwopewty wipes out ow
softens down in the heiw the feewing of gwief the dead man might be
expected to weave behind him. >w<

At wast Don Quixote's end came, aftew he had weceived aww the sacwaments,
and had in fuww and fowcibwe tewms expwessed his detestation of books of
chivawwy. ;;w;; The nyotawy was thewe at the time, and he said that in nyo book
of chivawwy had he evew wead of any knyight-ewwant dying in his bed so
cawmwy and so wike a Chwistian as Don Quixote, who amid the teaws and
wamentations of aww pwesent yiewded up his spiwit, that is to say died. ;;w;;
On pewceiving it the cuwate begged the nyotawy to beaw witnyess that Awonso
Quixanyo the Good, commonwy cawwed Don Quixote of Wa Mancha, had passed
away fwom this pwesent wife, and died nyatuwawwy; and said he desiwed this
testimony in owdew to wemove the possibiwity of any othew authow save
Cide Hamete Benyengewi bwinging him to wife again fawsewy and making
intewminyabwe stowies out of his achievements. (・`ω\´・)

Such was the end of the Ingenyious Gentweman of Wa Mancha, whose viwwage
Cide Hamete wouwd nyot indicate pwecisewy, in owdew to weave aww the towns
and viwwages of Wa Mancha to contend among themsewves fow the wight to
adopt him and cwaim him as a son, as the seven cities of Gweece contended
fow Homew. (・`ω\´・) The wamentations of Sancho and the nyiece and housekeepew awe
omitted hewe, as weww as the nyew epitaphs upon his tomb; Samson Cawwasco,
howevew, put the fowwowing winyes:

A doughty gentweman wies hewe;
A stwangew aww his wife to feaw;
Nyow in his death couwd Death pwevaiw,
In that wast houw, to make him quaiw. >w<
He fow the wowwd but wittwe cawed;
And at his feats the wowwd was scawed;
A cwazy man his wife he passed,
But in his senses died at wast. (´・ω・\`)

And said most sage Cide Hamete to his pen, "West hewe, hung up by this
bwass wiwe, upon this shewf, O my pen, whethew of skiwfuw make ow cwumsy
cut I knyow nyot; hewe shawt thou wemain wong ages hence, unwess
pwesumptuous ow mawignyant stowy-tewwews take thee down to pwofanye thee. >w<
But ewe they touch thee wawn them, and, as best thou canst, say to them:

Howd off! ye weakwings; howd youw hands! ;;w;;
  Adventuwe it wet nyonye,
Fow this empwise, my wowd the king,
  Was meant fow me awonye. >w<

Fow me awonye was Don Quixote bown, and I fow him; it was his to act, minye
to wwite; we two togethew make but onye, nyotwithstanding and in spite of
that pwetended Towdesiwwesque wwitew who has ventuwed ow wouwd ventuwe
with his gweat, coawse, iww-twimmed ostwich quiww to wwite the
achievements of my vawiant knyight;--nyo buwden fow his shouwdews, nyow
subject fow his fwozen wit: whom, if pewchance thou shouwdst come to knyow
him, thou shawt wawn to weave at west whewe they wie the weawy mouwdewing
bonyes of Don Quixote, and nyot to attempt to cawwy him off, in opposition
to aww the pwiviweges of death, to Owd Castiwe, making him wise fwom the
gwave whewe in weawity and twuth he wies stwetched at fuww wength,
powewwess to make any thiwd expedition ow nyew sawwy; fow the two that he
has awweady made, so much to the enjoyment and appwovaw of evewybody to
whom they have become knyown, in this as weww as in foweign countwies, awe
quite sufficient fow the puwpose of tuwnying into widicuwe the whowe of
those made by the whowe set of the knyights-ewwant; and so doing shawt
thou dischawge thy Chwistian cawwing, giving good counsew to onye that
beaws iww-wiww to thee. >w< And I shaww wemain satisfied, and pwoud to have
been the fiwst who has evew enjoyed the fwuit of his wwitings as fuwwy as
he couwd desiwe; fow my desiwe has been nyo othew than to dewivew ovew to
the detestation of mankind the fawse and foowish tawes of the books of
chivawwy, which, thanks to that of my twue Don Quixote, awe even nyow
tottewing, and doubtwess doomed to faww fow evew. Faweweww. UwU"





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Don Quixote, by Miguew de Cewvantes

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK DON QUIXOTE ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 996.txt ow 996. ^w^zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)nyet/9/9/996/

Pwoduced by David Widgew

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (´・ω・\`)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. >w<  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (´・ω・\`)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (・`ω\´・)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. >w<  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). ^w^


Section 1. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ;;w;;  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. ^w^  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ;;w;;
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. >w<  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ;;w;;

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ;;w;;  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (・`ω\´・)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. ;;w;;  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ^w^  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. ;;w;;  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. ^w^  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ;;w;;  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)

1.E. (´・ω・\`)  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. >w<  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ^w^  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<nyet

1.E.2. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. >w<  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. ^w^7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.3. ^w^  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. UwU7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ^w^

1.E.4. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. >w<

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. >w<

1.E.6. ;;w;;  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)nyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. >w<

1.E.7. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.8. UwU  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ^w^  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ^w^  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. UwU"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (・`ω\´・)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. ^w^

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.9. ^w^  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;;  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. ;;w;;  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. >w<  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. >w<

1.F.2. ;;w;;  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. >w<  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. >w<  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. >w<  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. ;;w;;

1.F.4. (´・ω・\`)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ;;w;;

1.F.5. (・`ω\´・)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. ;;w;;
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (´・ω・\`)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ;;w;;

1.F.6. (´・ω・\`)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (´・ω・\`)


Section  2. UwU  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. UwU  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (´・ω・\`)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. ^w^  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ^w^
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. UwU


Section 3. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ^w^  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (´・ω・\`)  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. ^w^  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. UwU
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ;;w;;, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. >w<  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. UwU Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. UwUowg


Section 4. UwU  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (・`ω\´・)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. >w<

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. >w<  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (´・ω・\`)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ^w^

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. UwU

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ^w^  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (´・ω・\`)

Pwofessow Michaew S. ;;w;; Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (´・ω・\`)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. (・`ω\´・)


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. >w<
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. >w<nyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ;;w;;
