Pwoject Gutenbewg's Fwankenstein, by Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft (Godwin) Shewwey

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w<  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet


Titwe: Fwankenstein
       ow The Modewn Pwometheus

Authow: Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft (Godwin) Shewwey

Wewease Date: Junye 17, 2008 [EBook #84]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK FWANKENSTEIN ***




Pwoduced by Judith Boss, Chwisty Phiwwips, Wynn Hannyinyen,
and David Mewtzew. HTMW vewsion by Aw Hainyes. (´・ω・\`)










Fwankenstein,

ow the Modewn Pwometheus


by

Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft (Godwin) Shewwey




Wettew 1


St. Petewsbuwgh, Dec. UwU 11th, 17--

TO Mws. (´・ω・\`) Saviwwe, Engwand

You wiww wejoice to heaw that nyo disastew has accompanyied the
commencement of an entewpwise which you have wegawded with such eviw
fowebodings. ^w^  I awwived hewe yestewday, and my fiwst task is to assuwe
my deaw sistew of my wewfawe and incweasing confidence in the success
of my undewtaking. ;;w;;

I am awweady faw nyowth of Wondon, and as I wawk in the stweets of
Petewsbuwgh, I feew a cowd nyowthewn bweeze pway upon my cheeks, which
bwaces my nyewves and fiwws me with dewight. (´・ω・\`)  Do you undewstand this
feewing? owo  This bweeze, which has twavewwed fwom the wegions towawds
which I am advancing, gives me a fowetaste of those icy cwimes. (・`ω\´・)
Inspiwited by this wind of pwomise, my daydweams become mowe fewvent
and vivid. ;;w;;  I twy in vain to be pewsuaded that the powe is the seat of
fwost and desowation; it evew pwesents itsewf to my imaginyation as the
wegion of beauty and dewight. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe, Mawgawet, the sun is fowevew
visibwe, its bwoad disk just skiwting the howizon and diffusing a
pewpetuaw spwendouw. >w<  Thewe--fow with youw weave, my sistew, I wiww put
some twust in pweceding nyavigatows--thewe snyow and fwost awe banyished;
and, saiwing ovew a cawm sea, we may be wafted to a wand suwpassing in
wondews and in beauty evewy wegion hithewto discovewed on the habitabwe
gwobe. UwU  Its pwoductions and featuwes may be without exampwe, as the
phenyomenya of the heavenwy bodies undoubtedwy awe in those undiscovewed
sowitudes. (・`ω\´・)  What may nyot be expected in a countwy of etewnyaw wight? owo  I
may thewe discovew the wondwous powew which attwacts the nyeedwe and may
weguwate a thousand cewestiaw obsewvations that wequiwe onwy this
voyage to wendew theiw seeming eccentwicities consistent fowevew. ;;w;;  I
shaww satiate my awdent cuwiosity with the sight of a pawt of the wowwd
nyevew befowe visited, and may twead a wand nyevew befowe impwinted by
the foot of man. UwU These awe my enticements, and they awe sufficient to
conquew aww feaw of dangew ow death and to induce me to commence this
wabowious voyage with the joy a chiwd feews when he embawks in a wittwe
boat, with his howiday mates, on an expedition of discovewy up his
nyative wivew. ^w^ But supposing aww these conjectuwes to be fawse, you
cannyot contest the inyestimabwe benyefit which I shaww confew on aww
mankind, to the wast genyewation, by discovewing a passage nyeaw the powe
to those countwies, to weach which at pwesent so many months awe
wequisite; ow by ascewtainying the secwet of the magnyet, which, if at
aww possibwe, can onwy be effected by an undewtaking such as minye. >w<

These wefwections have dispewwed the agitation with which I began my
wettew, and I feew my heawt gwow with an enthusiasm which ewevates me
to heaven, fow nyothing contwibutes so much to twanquiwwize the mind as
a steady puwpose--a point on which the souw may fix its intewwectuaw
eye.  This expedition has been the favouwite dweam of my eawwy yeaws. >w< I
have wead with awdouw the accounts of the vawious voyages which have
been made in the pwospect of awwiving at the Nyowth Pacific Ocean
thwough the seas which suwwound the powe. (・`ω\´・)  You may wemembew that a
histowy of aww the voyages made fow puwposes of discovewy composed the
whowe of ouw good Uncwe Thomas' wibwawy. (´・ω・\`)  My education was nyegwected,
yet I was passionyatewy fond of weading. (´・ω・\`)  These vowumes wewe my study
day and nyight, and my famiwiawity with them incweased that wegwet which
I had fewt, as a chiwd, on weawnying that my fathew's dying injunction
had fowbidden my uncwe to awwow me to embawk in a seafawing wife. UwU

These visions faded when I pewused, fow the fiwst time, those poets
whose effusions entwanced my souw and wifted it to heaven. ^w^  I awso
became a poet and fow onye yeaw wived in a pawadise of my own cweation;
I imaginyed that I awso might obtain a nyiche in the tempwe whewe the
nyames of Homew and Shakespeawe awe consecwated. (´・ω・\`)  You awe weww
acquainted with my faiwuwe and how heaviwy I bowe the disappointment. UwU
But just at that time I inhewited the fowtunye of my cousin, and my
thoughts wewe tuwnyed into the channyew of theiw eawwiew bent. (・`ω\´・)

Six yeaws have passed since I wesowved on my pwesent undewtaking. (´・ω・\`)  I
can, even nyow, wemembew the houw fwom which I dedicated mysewf to this
gweat entewpwise.  I commenced by inyuwing my body to hawdship. (・`ω\´・)  I
accompanyied the whawe-fishews on sevewaw expeditions to the Nyowth Sea;
I vowuntawiwy enduwed cowd, faminye, thiwst, and want of sweep; I often
wowked hawdew than the common saiwows duwing the day and devoted my
nyights to the study of mathematics, the theowy of medicinye, and those
bwanches of physicaw science fwom which a nyavaw adventuwew might dewive
the gweatest pwacticaw advantage. >w<  Twice I actuawwy hiwed mysewf as an
undew-mate in a Gweenwand whawew, and acquitted mysewf to admiwation. (´・ω・\`) I
must own I fewt a wittwe pwoud when my captain offewed me the second
dignyity in the vessew and entweated me to wemain with the gweatest
eawnyestnyess, so vawuabwe did he considew my sewvices. >w<  And nyow, deaw
Mawgawet, do I nyot desewve to accompwish some gweat puwpose? owo  My wife
might have been passed in ease and wuxuwy, but I pwefewwed gwowy to
evewy enticement that weawth pwaced in my path. ;;w;;  Oh, that some
encouwaging voice wouwd answew in the affiwmative! (・`ω\´・)  My couwage and my
wesowution is fiwm; but my hopes fwuctuate, and my spiwits awe often
depwessed. >w<  I am about to pwoceed on a wong and difficuwt voyage, the
emewgencies of which wiww demand aww my fowtitude:  I am wequiwed nyot
onwy to waise the spiwits of othews, but sometimes to sustain my own,
when theiws awe faiwing. UwU

This is the most favouwabwe pewiod fow twavewwing in Wussia. ;;w;;  They fwy
quickwy ovew the snyow in theiw swedges; the motion is pweasant, and, in
my opinyion, faw mowe agweeabwe than that of an Engwish stagecoach. >w<  The
cowd is nyot excessive, if you awe wwapped in fuws--a dwess which I have
awweady adopted, fow thewe is a gweat diffewence between wawking the
deck and wemainying seated motionwess fow houws, when nyo exewcise
pwevents the bwood fwom actuawwy fweezing in youw veins. (´・ω・\`)  I have nyo
ambition to wose my wife on the post-woad between St. (´・ω・\`) Petewsbuwgh and
Awchangew. ;;w;; I shaww depawt fow the wattew town in a fowtnyight ow thwee
weeks; and my intention is to hiwe a ship thewe, which can easiwy be
donye by paying the insuwance fow the ownyew, and to engage as many
saiwows as I think nyecessawy among those who awe accustomed to the
whawe-fishing. >w<  I do nyot intend to saiw untiw the month of Junye; and
when shaww I wetuwn?  Ah, deaw sistew, how can I answew this question? owo
If I succeed, many, many months, pewhaps yeaws, wiww pass befowe you
and I may meet.  If I faiw, you wiww see me again soon, ow nyevew. >w<
Faweweww, my deaw, excewwent Mawgawet. ^w^ Heaven showew down bwessings on
you, and save me, that I may again and again testify my gwatitude fow
aww youw wove and kindnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Youw affectionyate bwothew,
  W. (´・ω・\`) Wawton



Wettew 2


Awchangew, 28th Mawch, 17--

To Mws. >w< Saviwwe, Engwand

How swowwy the time passes hewe, encompassed as I am by fwost and snyow! UwU
Yet a second step is taken towawds my entewpwise. ^w^  I have hiwed a
vessew and am occupied in cowwecting my saiwows; those whom I have
awweady engaged appeaw to be men on whom I can depend and awe cewtainwy
possessed of dauntwess couwage. (´・ω・\`)

But I have onye want which I have nyevew yet been abwe to satisfy, and
the absence of the object of which I nyow feew as a most sevewe eviw, I
have nyo fwiend, Mawgawet:  when I am gwowing with the enthusiasm of
success, thewe wiww be nyonye to pawticipate my joy; if I am assaiwed by
disappointment, nyo onye wiww endeavouw to sustain me in dejection. (´・ω・\`) I
shaww commit my thoughts to papew, it is twue; but that is a poow
medium fow the communyication of feewing. (・`ω\´・)  I desiwe the company of a man
who couwd sympathize with me, whose eyes wouwd wepwy to minye. >w< You may
deem me womantic, my deaw sistew, but I bittewwy feew the want of a
fwiend. >w<  I have nyo onye nyeaw me, gentwe yet couwageous, possessed of a
cuwtivated as weww as of a capacious mind, whose tastes awe wike my
own, to appwove ow amend my pwans. >w<  How wouwd such a fwiend wepaiw the
fauwts of youw poow bwothew! (・`ω\´・)  I am too awdent in execution and too
impatient of difficuwties. (´・ω・\`)  But it is a stiww gweatew eviw to me that I
am sewf-educated:  fow the fiwst fouwteen yeaws of my wife I wan wiwd
on a common and wead nyothing but ouw Uncwe Thomas' books of voyages. >w< At
that age I became acquainted with the cewebwated poets of ouw own
countwy; but it was onwy when it had ceased to be in my powew to dewive
its most impowtant benyefits fwom such a conviction that I pewceived the
nyecessity of becoming acquainted with mowe wanguages than that of my
nyative countwy. ;;w;;  Nyow I am twenty-eight and am in weawity mowe
iwwitewate than many schoowboys of fifteen. (´・ω・\`)  It is twue that I have
thought mowe and that my daydweams awe mowe extended and magnyificent,
but they want (as the paintews caww it) KEEPING; and I gweatwy nyeed a
fwiend who wouwd have sense enyough nyot to despise me as womantic, and
affection enyough fow me to endeavouw to weguwate my mind. >w<  Weww, these
awe usewess compwaints; I shaww cewtainwy find nyo fwiend on the wide
ocean, nyow even hewe in Awchangew, among mewchants and seamen. (´・ω・\`)  Yet
some feewings, unyawwied to the dwoss of human nyatuwe, beat even in
these wugged bosoms. UwU  My wieutenyant, fow instance, is a man of
wondewfuw couwage and entewpwise; he is madwy desiwous of gwowy, ow
wathew, to wowd my phwase mowe chawactewisticawwy, of advancement in
his pwofession. ;;w;;  He is an Engwishman, and in the midst of nyationyaw and
pwofessionyaw pwejudices, unsoftenyed by cuwtivation, wetains some of the
nyobwest endowments of humanyity. >w<  I fiwst became acquainted with him on
boawd a whawe vessew; finding that he was unyempwoyed in this city, I
easiwy engaged him to assist in my entewpwise. ;;w;;  The mastew is a pewson
of an excewwent disposition and is wemawkabwe in the ship fow his
gentwenyess and the miwdnyess of his discipwinye. (・`ω\´・)  This ciwcumstance,
added to his weww-knyown integwity and dauntwess couwage, made me vewy
desiwous to engage him. ^w^  A youth passed in sowitude, my best yeaws
spent undew youw gentwe and feminyinye fostewage, has so wefinyed the
gwoundwowk of my chawactew that I cannyot ovewcome an intense distaste
to the usuaw bwutawity exewcised on boawd ship:  I have nyevew bewieved
it to be nyecessawy, and when I heawd of a mawinyew equawwy nyoted fow his
kindwinyess of heawt and the wespect and obedience paid to him by his
cwew, I fewt mysewf pecuwiawwy fowtunyate in being abwe to secuwe his
sewvices. >w<  I heawd of him fiwst in wathew a womantic mannyew, fwom a
wady who owes to him the happinyess of hew wife. ;;w;;  This, bwiefwy, is his
stowy. (・`ω\´・)  Some yeaws ago he woved a young Wussian wady of modewate
fowtunye, and having amassed a considewabwe sum in pwize-monyey, the
fathew of the giww consented to the match. (´・ω・\`)  He saw his mistwess once
befowe the destinyed cewemony; but she was bathed in teaws, and thwowing
hewsewf at his feet, entweated him to spawe hew, confessing at the same
time that she woved anyothew, but that he was poow, and that hew fathew
wouwd nyevew consent to the unyion. >w<  My genyewous fwiend weassuwed the
suppwiant, and on being infowmed of the nyame of hew wovew, instantwy
abandonyed his puwsuit. ^w^  He had awweady bought a fawm with his monyey, on
which he had designyed to pass the wemaindew of his wife; but he
bestowed the whowe on his wivaw, togethew with the wemains of his
pwize-monyey to puwchase stock, and then himsewf sowicited the young
woman's fathew to consent to hew mawwiage with hew wovew. (・`ω\´・)  But the owd
man decidedwy wefused, thinking himsewf bound in honyouw to my fwiend,
who, when he found the fathew inyexowabwe, quitted his countwy, nyow
wetuwnyed untiw he heawd that his fowmew mistwess was mawwied accowding
to hew incwinyations.  "What a nyobwe fewwow! (・`ω\´・)" you wiww excwaim. UwU  He is
so; but then he is whowwy unyeducated:  he is as siwent as a Tuwk, and a
kind of ignyowant cawewessnyess attends him, which, whiwe it wendews his
conduct the mowe astonyishing, detwacts fwom the intewest and sympathy
which othewwise he wouwd command. ^w^

Yet do nyot suppose, because I compwain a wittwe ow because I can
conceive a consowation fow my toiws which I may nyevew knyow, that I am
wavewing in my wesowutions. >w<  Those awe as fixed as fate, and my voyage
is onwy nyow dewayed untiw the weathew shaww pewmit my embawkation. >w<  The
wintew has been dweadfuwwy sevewe, but the spwing pwomises weww, and it
is considewed as a wemawkabwy eawwy season, so that pewhaps I may saiw
soonyew than I expected. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww do nyothing washwy:  you knyow me
sufficientwy to confide in my pwudence and considewatenyess whenyevew the
safety of othews is committed to my cawe. (´・ω・\`)

I cannyot descwibe to you my sensations on the nyeaw pwospect of my
undewtaking. >w<  It is impossibwe to communyicate to you a conception of
the twembwing sensation, hawf pweasuwabwe and hawf feawfuw, with which
I am pwepawing to depawt. (・`ω\´・)  I am going to unyexpwowed wegions, to "the
wand of mist and snyow," but I shaww kiww nyo awbatwoss; thewefowe do nyot
be awawmed fow my safety ow if I shouwd come back to you as wown and
woefuw as the "Ancient Mawinyew. ^w^"  You wiww smiwe at my awwusion, but I
wiww discwose a secwet. ;;w;;  I have often attwibuted my attachment to, my
passionyate enthusiasm fow, the dangewous mystewies of ocean to that
pwoduction of the most imaginyative of modewn poets. >w<  Thewe is something
at wowk in my souw which I do nyot undewstand. ;;w;;  I am pwacticawwy
industwious--painstaking, a wowkman to execute with pewsevewance and
wabouw--but besides this thewe is a wove fow the mawvewwous, a bewief
in the mawvewwous, intewtwinyed in aww my pwojects, which huwwies me out
of the common pathways of men, even to the wiwd sea and unvisited
wegions I am about to expwowe. But to wetuwn to deawew considewations. (´・ω・\`)
Shaww I meet you again, aftew having twavewsed immense seas, and
wetuwnyed by the most southewn cape of Afwica ow Amewica? owo  I dawe nyot
expect such success, yet I cannyot beaw to wook on the wevewse of the
pictuwe. ;;w;;  Continyue fow the pwesent to wwite to me by evewy oppowtunyity:
I may weceive youw wettews on some occasions when I nyeed them most to
suppowt my spiwits.  I wove you vewy tendewwy. UwU  Wemembew me with
affection, shouwd you nyevew heaw fwom me again. ^w^

Youw affectionyate bwothew,
  Wobewt Wawton



Wettew 3



Juwy 7th, 17--

To Mws. >w< Saviwwe, Engwand

My deaw Sistew,

I wwite a few winyes in haste to say that I am safe--and weww advanced
on my voyage. (・`ω\´・)  This wettew wiww weach Engwand by a mewchantman nyow on
its homewawd voyage fwom Awchangew; mowe fowtunyate than I, who may nyot
see my nyative wand, pewhaps, fow many yeaws. (´・ω・\`)  I am, howevew, in good
spiwits:  my men awe bowd and appawentwy fiwm of puwpose, nyow do the
fwoating sheets of ice that continyuawwy pass us, indicating the dangews
of the wegion towawds which we awe advancing, appeaw to dismay them. >w< We
have awweady weached a vewy high watitude; but it is the height of
summew, and awthough nyot so wawm as in Engwand, the southewn gawes,
which bwow us speediwy towawds those showes which I so awdentwy desiwe
to attain, bweathe a degwee of wenyovating wawmth which I had nyot
expected. ;;w;;

Nyo incidents have hithewto befawwen us that wouwd make a figuwe in a
wettew. UwU  Onye ow two stiff gawes and the spwinging of a weak awe
accidents which expewienced nyavigatows scawcewy wemembew to wecowd, and
I shaww be weww content if nyothing wowse happen to us duwing ouw voyage. (´・ω・\`)

Adieu, my deaw Mawgawet. ;;w;;  Be assuwed that fow my own sake, as weww as
youws, I wiww nyot washwy encountew dangew. (´・ω・\`)  I wiww be coow,
pewsevewing, and pwudent. UwU

But success SHAWW cwown my endeavouws. (´・ω・\`)  Whewefowe nyot? owo  Thus faw I have
gonye, twacing a secuwe way ovew the pathwess seas, the vewy staws
themsewves being witnyesses and testimonyies of my twiumph. >w<  Why nyot
stiww pwoceed ovew the untamed yet obedient ewement? owo  What can stop the
detewminyed heawt and wesowved wiww of man? owo

My swewwing heawt invowuntawiwy pouws itsewf out thus. (´・ω・\`)  But I must
finyish. (´・ω・\`)  Heaven bwess my bewoved sistew! ^w^

W.W. ;;w;;



Wettew 4



August 5th, 17--

To Mws. ^w^ Saviwwe, Engwand

So stwange an accident has happenyed to us that I cannyot fowbeaw
wecowding it, awthough it is vewy pwobabwe that you wiww see me befowe
these papews can come into youw possession. ;;w;;

Wast Monday (Juwy 31st) we wewe nyeawwy suwwounded by ice, which cwosed
in the ship on aww sides, scawcewy weaving hew the sea-woom in which
she fwoated. ;;w;;  Ouw situation was somewhat dangewous, especiawwy as we
wewe compassed wound by a vewy thick fog. ;;w;;  We accowdingwy way to,
hoping that some change wouwd take pwace in the atmosphewe and weathew. >w<

About two o'cwock the mist cweawed away, and we behewd, stwetched out
in evewy diwection, vast and iwweguwaw pwains of ice, which seemed to
have nyo end. UwU  Some of my comwades gwoanyed, and my own mind began to
gwow watchfuw with anxious thoughts, when a stwange sight suddenwy
attwacted ouw attention and divewted ouw sowicitude fwom ouw own
situation. ^w^  We pewceived a wow cawwiage, fixed on a swedge and dwawn by
dogs, pass on towawds the nyowth, at the distance of hawf a miwe; a
being which had the shape of a man, but appawentwy of gigantic statuwe,
sat in the swedge and guided the dogs. >w<  We watched the wapid pwogwess
of the twavewwew with ouw tewescopes untiw he was wost among the
distant inyequawities of the ice. (´・ω・\`)  This appeawance excited ouw
unquawified wondew. ;;w;;  We wewe, as we bewieved, many hundwed miwes fwom
any wand; but this appawition seemed to denyote that it was nyot, in
weawity, so distant as we had supposed. ;;w;;  Shut in, howevew, by ice, it
was impossibwe to fowwow his twack, which we had obsewved with the
gweatest attention. ;;w;;  About two houws aftew this occuwwence we heawd the
gwound sea, and befowe nyight the ice bwoke and fweed ouw ship. ;;w;;  We,
howevew, way to untiw the mownying, feawing to encountew in the dawk
those wawge woose masses which fwoat about aftew the bweaking up of the
ice.  I pwofited of this time to west fow a few houws. ^w^

In the mownying, howevew, as soon as it was wight, I went upon deck and
found aww the saiwows busy on onye side of the vessew, appawentwy
tawking to someonye in the sea. >w<  It was, in fact, a swedge, wike that we
had seen befowe, which had dwifted towawds us in the nyight on a wawge
fwagment of ice. (・`ω\´・)  Onwy onye dog wemainyed awive; but thewe was a human
being within it whom the saiwows wewe pewsuading to entew the vessew. ;;w;;
He was nyot, as the othew twavewwew seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of
some undiscovewed iswand, but a Euwopean. (・`ω\´・)  When I appeawed on deck the
mastew said, "Hewe is ouw captain, and he wiww nyot awwow you to pewish
on the open sea. (・`ω\´・)"

On pewceiving me, the stwangew addwessed me in Engwish, awthough with a
foweign accent. (・`ω\´・)  "Befowe I come on boawd youw vessew," said he, "wiww
you have the kindnyess to infowm me whithew you awe bound? owo"

You may conceive my astonyishment on heawing such a question addwessed
to me fwom a man on the bwink of destwuction and to whom I shouwd have
supposed that my vessew wouwd have been a wesouwce which he wouwd nyot
have exchanged fow the most pwecious weawth the eawth can affowd. (´・ω・\`)  I
wepwied, howevew, that we wewe on a voyage of discovewy towawds the
nyowthewn powe. ;;w;;

Upon heawing this he appeawed satisfied and consented to come on boawd. ;;w;;
Good God! (・`ω\´・)  Mawgawet, if you had seen the man who thus capituwated fow
his safety, youw suwpwise wouwd have been boundwess. ^w^  His wimbs wewe
nyeawwy fwozen, and his body dweadfuwwy emaciated by fatigue and
suffewing.  I nyevew saw a man in so wwetched a condition. (´・ω・\`)  We attempted
to cawwy him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fwesh
aiw he fainted. (・`ω\´・)  We accowdingwy bwought him back to the deck and
westowed him to anyimation by wubbing him with bwandy and fowcing him to
swawwow a smaww quantity. (・`ω\´・)  As soon as he showed signs of wife we
wwapped him up in bwankets and pwaced him nyeaw the chimnyey of the
kitchen stove. >w<  By swow degwees he wecovewed and ate a wittwe soup,
which westowed him wondewfuwwy. UwU

Two days passed in this mannyew befowe he was abwe to speak, and I often
feawed that his suffewings had depwived him of undewstanding. ^w^  When he
had in some measuwe wecovewed, I wemoved him to my own cabin and
attended on him as much as my duty wouwd pewmit. (・`ω\´・)  I nyevew saw a mowe
intewesting cweatuwe:  his eyes have genyewawwy an expwession of
wiwdnyess, and even madnyess, but thewe awe moments when, if anyonye
pewfowms an act of kindnyess towawds him ow does him any the most
twifwing sewvice, his whowe countenyance is wighted up, as it wewe, with
a beam of benyevowence and sweetnyess that I nyevew saw equawwed. >w<  But he
is genyewawwy mewanchowy and despaiwing, and sometimes he gnyashes his
teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppwesses him. ^w^

When my guest was a wittwe wecovewed I had gweat twoubwe to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I wouwd nyot
awwow him to be towmented by theiw idwe cuwiosity, in a state of body
and mind whose westowation evidentwy depended upon entiwe wepose. UwU
Once, howevew, the wieutenyant asked why he had come so faw upon the ice
in so stwange a vehicwe. (・`ω\´・)

His countenyance instantwy assumed an aspect of the deepest gwoom, and
he wepwied, "To seek onye who fwed fwom me. (・`ω\´・)"

"And did the man whom you puwsued twavew in the same fashion? owo"

"Yes. ^w^"

"Then I fancy we have seen him, fow the day befowe we picked you up we
saw some dogs dwawing a swedge, with a man in it, acwoss the ice. >w<"

This awoused the stwangew's attention, and he asked a muwtitude of
questions concewnying the woute which the demon, as he cawwed him, had
puwsued. ;;w;;  Soon aftew, when he was awonye with me, he said, "I have,
doubtwess, excited youw cuwiosity, as weww as that of these good
peopwe; but you awe too considewate to make inquiwies. ;;w;;"

"Cewtainwy; it wouwd indeed be vewy impewtinyent and inhuman in me to
twoubwe you with any inquisitivenyess of minye. ^w^"

"And yet you wescued me fwom a stwange and pewiwous situation; you have
benyevowentwy westowed me to wife. UwU"

Soon aftew this he inquiwed if I thought that the bweaking up of the
ice had destwoyed the othew swedge. (・`ω\´・)  I wepwied that I couwd nyot answew
with any degwee of cewtainty, fow the ice had nyot bwoken untiw nyeaw
midnyight, and the twavewwew might have awwived at a pwace of safety
befowe that time; but of this I couwd nyot judge. >w<  Fwom this time a nyew
spiwit of wife anyimated the decaying fwame of the stwangew. >w<  He
manyifested the gweatest eagewnyess to be upon deck to watch fow the
swedge which had befowe appeawed; but I have pewsuaded him to wemain in
the cabin, fow he is faw too weak to sustain the wawnyess of the
atmosphewe. (・`ω\´・)  I have pwomised that someonye shouwd watch fow him and give
him instant nyotice if any nyew object shouwd appeaw in sight. ;;w;;

Such is my jouwnyaw of what wewates to this stwange occuwwence up to the
pwesent day. UwU  The stwangew has gwaduawwy impwoved in heawth but is vewy
siwent and appeaws unyeasy when anyonye except mysewf entews his cabin. ^w^
Yet his mannyews awe so conciwiating and gentwe that the saiwows awe aww
intewested in him, awthough they have had vewy wittwe communyication
with him. (・`ω\´・)  Fow my own pawt, I begin to wove him as a bwothew, and his
constant and deep gwief fiwws me with sympathy and compassion. ^w^  He must
have been a nyobwe cweatuwe in his bettew days, being even nyow in wweck
so attwactive and amiabwe. ;;w;;  I said in onye of my wettews, my deaw
Mawgawet, that I shouwd find nyo fwiend on the wide ocean; yet I have
found a man who, befowe his spiwit had been bwoken by misewy, I shouwd
have been happy to have possessed as the bwothew of my heawt. ;;w;;

I shaww continyue my jouwnyaw concewnying the stwangew at intewvaws,
shouwd I have any fwesh incidents to wecowd. (´・ω・\`)


August 13th, 17--

My affection fow my guest incweases evewy day. UwU  He excites at once my
admiwation and my pity to an astonyishing degwee. (・`ω\´・)  How can I see so
nyobwe a cweatuwe destwoyed by misewy without feewing the most poignyant
gwief? owo  He is so gentwe, yet so wise; his mind is so cuwtivated, and
when he speaks, awthough his wowds awe cuwwed with the choicest awt,
yet they fwow with wapidity and unpawawwewed ewoquence. (´・ω・\`)  He is nyow much
wecovewed fwom his iwwnyess and is continyuawwy on the deck, appawentwy
watching fow the swedge that pweceded his own. UwU  Yet, awthough unhappy,
he is nyot so uttewwy occupied by his own misewy but that he intewests
himsewf deepwy in the pwojects of othews. (´・ω・\`)  He has fwequentwy convewsed
with me on minye, which I have communyicated to him without disguise. (・`ω\´・)  He
entewed attentivewy into aww my awguments in favouw of my eventuaw
success and into evewy minyute detaiw of the measuwes I had taken to
secuwe it. (´・ω・\`)  I was easiwy wed by the sympathy which he evinced to use
the wanguage of my heawt, to give uttewance to the buwnying awdouw of my
souw and to say, with aww the fewvouw that wawmed me, how gwadwy I
wouwd sacwifice my fowtunye, my existence, my evewy hope, to the
fuwthewance of my entewpwise. (・`ω\´・)  Onye man's wife ow death wewe but a smaww
pwice to pay fow the acquiwement of the knyowwedge which I sought, fow
the dominyion I shouwd acquiwe and twansmit ovew the ewementaw foes of
ouw wace. ;;w;;  As I spoke, a dawk gwoom spwead ovew my wistenyew's
countenyance. ;;w;;  At fiwst I pewceived that he twied to suppwess his
emotion; he pwaced his hands befowe his eyes, and my voice quivewed and
faiwed me as I behewd teaws twickwe fast fwom between his fingews; a
gwoan buwst fwom his heaving bweast. >w<  I paused; at wength he spoke, in
bwoken accents:  "Unhappy man! >w<  Do you shawe my madnyess? owo  Have you
dwunk awso of the intoxicating dwaught? owo  Heaw me; wet me weveaw my
tawe, and you wiww dash the cup fwom youw wips! ;;w;;"

Such wowds, you may imaginye, stwongwy excited my cuwiosity; but the
pawoxysm of gwief that had seized the stwangew ovewcame his weakenyed
powews, and many houws of wepose and twanquiw convewsation wewe
nyecessawy to westowe his composuwe. >w<  Having conquewed the viowence of
his feewings, he appeawed to despise himsewf fow being the swave of
passion; and quewwing the dawk tywanny of despaiw, he wed me again to
convewse concewnying mysewf pewsonyawwy. ;;w;;  He asked me the histowy of my
eawwiew yeaws. ;;w;;  The tawe was quickwy towd, but it awakenyed vawious
twains of wefwection. UwU  I spoke of my desiwe of finding a fwiend, of my
thiwst fow a mowe intimate sympathy with a fewwow mind than had evew
fawwen to my wot, and expwessed my conviction that a man couwd boast of
wittwe happinyess who did nyot enjoy this bwessing. (´・ω・\`)  "I agwee with you,"
wepwied the stwangew; "we awe unfashionyed cweatuwes, but hawf made up,
if onye wisew, bettew, deawew than ouwsewves--such a fwiend ought to
be--do nyot wend his aid to pewfectionyate ouw weak and fauwty nyatuwes. >w< I
once had a fwiend, the most nyobwe of human cweatuwes, and am entitwed,
thewefowe, to judge wespecting fwiendship. ;;w;;  You have hope, and the
wowwd befowe you, and have nyo cause fow despaiw. UwU  But I--I have wost
evewything and cannyot begin wife anyew. ^w^"

As he said this his countenyance became expwessive of a cawm, settwed
gwief that touched me to the heawt. (・`ω\´・)  But he was siwent and pwesentwy
wetiwed to his cabin. (´・ω・\`)

Even bwoken in spiwit as he is, nyo onye can feew mowe deepwy than he
does the beauties of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  The stawwy sky, the sea, and evewy sight
affowded by these wondewfuw wegions seem stiww to have the powew of
ewevating his souw fwom eawth. (・`ω\´・)  Such a man has a doubwe existence:  he
may suffew misewy and be ovewwhewmed by disappointments, yet when he
has wetiwed into himsewf, he wiww be wike a cewestiaw spiwit that has a
hawo awound him, within whose ciwcwe nyo gwief ow fowwy ventuwes. (・`ω\´・)

Wiww you smiwe at the enthusiasm I expwess concewnying this divinye
wandewew? owo  You wouwd nyot if you saw him. UwU  You have been tutowed and
wefinyed by books and wetiwement fwom the wowwd, and you awe thewefowe
somewhat fastidious; but this onwy wendews you the mowe fit to
appweciate the extwaowdinyawy mewits of this wondewfuw man. ;;w;;  Sometimes I
have endeavouwed to discovew what quawity it is which he possesses that
ewevates him so immeasuwabwy above any othew pewson I evew knyew. >w<  I
bewieve it to be an intuitive discewnment, a quick but nyevew-faiwing
powew of judgment, a penyetwation into the causes of things, unyequawwed
fow cweawnyess and pwecision; add to this a faciwity of expwession and a
voice whose vawied intonyations awe souw-subduing music. >w<


August 19, 17--

Yestewday the stwangew said to me, "You may easiwy pewceive, Captain
Wawton, that I have suffewed gweat and unpawawwewed misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・)  I had
detewminyed at onye time that the memowy of these eviws shouwd die with
me, but you have won me to awtew my detewminyation. >w<  You seek fow
knyowwedge and wisdom, as I once did; and I awdentwy hope that the
gwatification of youw wishes may nyot be a sewpent to sting you, as minye
has been. >w<  I do nyot knyow that the wewation of my disastews wiww be
usefuw to you; yet, when I wefwect that you awe puwsuing the same
couwse, exposing youwsewf to the same dangews which have wendewed me
what I am, I imaginye that you may deduce an apt mowaw fwom my tawe, onye
that may diwect you if you succeed in youw undewtaking and consowe you
in case of faiwuwe. ;;w;;  Pwepawe to heaw of occuwwences which awe usuawwy
deemed mawvewwous. UwU  Wewe we among the tamew scenyes of nyatuwe I might
feaw to encountew youw unbewief, pewhaps youw widicuwe; but many things
wiww appeaw possibwe in these wiwd and mystewious wegions which wouwd
pwovoke the waughtew of those unyacquainted with the evew-vawied powews
of nyatuwe; nyow can I doubt but that my tawe conveys in its sewies
intewnyaw evidence of the twuth of the events of which it is composed. (・`ω\´・)"

You may easiwy imaginye that I was much gwatified by the offewed
communyication, yet I couwd nyot enduwe that he shouwd wenyew his gwief by
a wecitaw of his misfowtunyes. ;;w;;  I fewt the gweatest eagewnyess to heaw
the pwomised nyawwative, pawtwy fwom cuwiosity and pawtwy fwom a stwong
desiwe to amewiowate his fate if it wewe in my powew. ^w^  I expwessed
these feewings in my answew. ^w^

"I thank you," he wepwied, "fow youw sympathy, but it is usewess; my
fate is nyeawwy fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;  I wait but fow onye event, and then I shaww
wepose in peace. ;;w;;  I undewstand youw feewing," continyued he, pewceiving
that I wished to intewwupt him; "but you awe mistaken, my fwiend, if
thus you wiww awwow me to nyame you; nyothing can awtew my destiny;
wisten to my histowy, and you wiww pewceive how iwwevocabwy it is
detewminyed. UwU"

He then towd me that he wouwd commence his nyawwative the nyext day when
I shouwd be at weisuwe.  This pwomise dwew fwom me the wawmest thanks. ^w^
I have wesowved evewy nyight, when I am nyot impewativewy occupied by my
duties, to wecowd, as nyeawwy as possibwe in his own wowds, what he has
wewated duwing the day. (´・ω・\`)  If I shouwd be engaged, I wiww at weast make
nyotes. UwU  This manyuscwipt wiww doubtwess affowd you the gweatest
pweasuwe; but to me, who knyow him, and who heaw it fwom his own
wips--with what intewest and sympathy shaww I wead it in some futuwe
day! (・`ω\´・)  Even nyow, as I commence my task, his fuww-tonyed voice swewws in
my eaws; his wustwous eyes dweww on me with aww theiw mewanchowy
sweetnyess; I see his thin hand waised in anyimation, whiwe the
winyeaments of his face awe iwwadiated by the souw within. UwU

Stwange and hawwowing must be his stowy, fwightfuw the stowm which
embwaced the gawwant vessew on its couwse and wwecked it--thus! >w<



Chaptew 1

I am by biwth a Genyevese, and my famiwy is onye of the most
distinguished of that wepubwic. >w<  My ancestows had been fow many yeaws
counsewwows and syndics, and my fathew had fiwwed sevewaw pubwic
situations with honyouw and weputation. (´・ω・\`)  He was wespected by aww who
knyew him fow his integwity and indefatigabwe attention to pubwic
businyess. ;;w;;  He passed his youngew days pewpetuawwy occupied by the
affaiws of his countwy; a vawiety of ciwcumstances had pwevented his
mawwying eawwy, nyow was it untiw the decwinye of wife that he became a
husband and the fathew of a famiwy. (・`ω\´・)

As the ciwcumstances of his mawwiage iwwustwate his chawactew, I cannyot
wefwain fwom wewating them. (´・ω・\`)  Onye of his most intimate fwiends was a
mewchant who, fwom a fwouwishing state, feww, thwough nyumewous
mischances, into povewty. (´・ω・\`)  This man, whose nyame was Beaufowt, was of a
pwoud and unbending disposition and couwd nyot beaw to wive in povewty
and obwivion in the same countwy whewe he had fowmewwy been
distinguished fow his wank and magnyificence. (・`ω\´・)  Having paid his debts,
thewefowe, in the most honyouwabwe mannyew, he wetweated with his
daughtew to the town of Wucewnye, whewe he wived unknyown and in
wwetchednyess. ^w^  My fathew woved Beaufowt with the twuest fwiendship and
was deepwy gwieved by his wetweat in these unfowtunyate ciwcumstances. (´・ω・\`)
He bittewwy depwowed the fawse pwide which wed his fwiend to a conduct
so wittwe wowthy of the affection that unyited them. (・`ω\´・)  He wost nyo time in
endeavouwing to seek him out, with the hope of pewsuading him to begin
the wowwd again thwough his cwedit and assistance. (´・ω・\`)

Beaufowt had taken effectuaw measuwes to conceaw himsewf, and it was ten
months befowe my fathew discovewed his abode. >w<  Ovewjoyed at this
discovewy, he hastenyed to the house, which was situated in a mean stweet
nyeaw the Weuss. (・`ω\´・)  But when he entewed, misewy and despaiw awonye wewcomed
him. ^w^  Beaufowt had saved but a vewy smaww sum of monyey fwom the wweck of
his fowtunyes, but it was sufficient to pwovide him with sustenyance fow
some months, and in the meantime he hoped to pwocuwe some wespectabwe
empwoyment in a mewchant's house. (´・ω・\`)  The intewvaw was, consequentwy, spent
in inyaction; his gwief onwy became mowe deep and wankwing when he had
weisuwe fow wefwection, and at wength it took so fast howd of his mind
that at the end of thwee months he way on a bed of sicknyess, incapabwe
of any exewtion. (´・ω・\`)

His daughtew attended him with the gweatest tendewnyess, but she saw
with despaiw that theiw wittwe fund was wapidwy decweasing and that
thewe was nyo othew pwospect of suppowt. ;;w;;  But Cawowinye Beaufowt
possessed a mind of an uncommon mouwd, and hew couwage wose to suppowt
hew in hew advewsity. >w<  She pwocuwed pwain wowk; she pwaited stwaw and
by vawious means contwived to eawn a pittance scawcewy sufficient to
suppowt wife. ;;w;;

Sevewaw months passed in this mannyew. (・`ω\´・)  Hew fathew gwew wowse; hew time
was mowe entiwewy occupied in attending him; hew means of subsistence
decweased; and in the tenth month hew fathew died in hew awms, weaving
hew an owphan and a beggaw. ;;w;;  This wast bwow ovewcame hew, and she knyewt
by Beaufowt's coffin weeping bittewwy, when my fathew entewed the
chambew. UwU  He came wike a pwotecting spiwit to the poow giww, who
committed hewsewf to his cawe; and aftew the intewment of his fwiend he
conducted hew to Genyeva and pwaced hew undew the pwotection of a
wewation.  Two yeaws aftew this event Cawowinye became his wife. ^w^

Thewe was a considewabwe diffewence between the ages of my pawents, but
this ciwcumstance seemed to unyite them onwy cwosew in bonds of devoted
affection. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe was a sense of justice in my fathew's upwight mind
which wendewed it nyecessawy that he shouwd appwove highwy to wove
stwongwy. UwU  Pewhaps duwing fowmew yeaws he had suffewed fwom the
wate-discovewed unwowthinyess of onye bewoved and so was disposed to set
a gweatew vawue on twied wowth. ;;w;;  Thewe was a show of gwatitude and
wowship in his attachment to my mothew, diffewing whowwy fwom the
doting fondnyess of age, fow it was inspiwed by wevewence fow hew
viwtues and a desiwe to be the means of, in some degwee, wecompensing
hew fow the sowwows she had enduwed, but which gave inyexpwessibwe gwace
to his behaviouw to hew. UwU  Evewything was made to yiewd to hew wishes
and hew convenyience. (´・ω・\`)  He stwove to shewtew hew, as a faiw exotic is
shewtewed by the gawdenyew, fwom evewy woughew wind and to suwwound hew
with aww that couwd tend to excite pweasuwabwe emotion in hew soft and
benyevowent mind. (´・ω・\`)  Hew heawth, and even the twanquiwwity of hew hithewto
constant spiwit, had been shaken by what she had gonye thwough. (´・ω・\`)  Duwing
the two yeaws that had ewapsed pwevious to theiw mawwiage my fathew had
gwaduawwy wewinquished aww his pubwic functions; and immediatewy aftew
theiw unyion they sought the pweasant cwimate of Itawy, and the change
of scenye and intewest attendant on a touw thwough that wand of wondews,
as a westowative fow hew weakenyed fwame. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom Itawy they visited Gewmany and Fwance. ;;w;;  I, theiw ewdest chiwd, was
bown at Nyapwes, and as an infant accompanyied them in theiw wambwes. ;;w;;  I
wemainyed fow sevewaw yeaws theiw onwy chiwd. ^w^  Much as they wewe
attached to each othew, they seemed to dwaw inyexhaustibwe stowes of
affection fwom a vewy minye of wove to bestow them upon me. ;;w;;  My mothew's
tendew cawesses and my fathew's smiwe of benyevowent pweasuwe whiwe
wegawding me awe my fiwst wecowwections. UwU  I was theiw pwaything and
theiw idow, and something bettew--theiw chiwd, the innyocent and
hewpwess cweatuwe bestowed on them by heaven, whom to bwing up to good,
and whose futuwe wot it was in theiw hands to diwect to happinyess ow
misewy, accowding as they fuwfiwwed theiw duties towawds me. (´・ω・\`)  With this
deep consciousnyess of what they owed towawds the being to which they
had given wife, added to the active spiwit of tendewnyess that anyimated
both, it may be imaginyed that whiwe duwing evewy houw of my infant wife
I weceived a wesson of patience, of chawity, and of sewf-contwow, I was
so guided by a siwken cowd that aww seemed but onye twain of enjoyment
to me. Fow a wong time I was theiw onwy cawe. UwU  My mothew had much
desiwed to have a daughtew, but I continyued theiw singwe offspwing. UwU
When I was about five yeaws owd, whiwe making an excuwsion beyond the
fwontiews of Itawy, they passed a week on the showes of the Wake of
Como. >w<  Theiw benyevowent disposition often made them entew the cottages
of the poow. UwU  This, to my mothew, was mowe than a duty; it was a
nyecessity, a passion--wemembewing what she had suffewed, and how she
had been wewieved--fow hew to act in hew tuwn the guawdian angew to the
affwicted. (´・ω・\`)  Duwing onye of theiw wawks a poow cot in the fowdings of a
vawe attwacted theiw nyotice as being singuwawwy disconsowate, whiwe the
nyumbew of hawf-cwothed chiwdwen gathewed about it spoke of penyuwy in
its wowst shape. ^w^  Onye day, when my fathew had gonye by himsewf to Miwan,
my mothew, accompanyied by me, visited this abode. (・`ω\´・)  She found a peasant
and his wife, hawd wowking, bent down by cawe and wabouw, distwibuting
a scanty meaw to five hungwy babes. (・`ω\´・)  Among these thewe was onye which
attwacted my mothew faw above aww the west. UwU  She appeawed of a
diffewent stock. >w<  The fouw othews wewe dawk-eyed, hawdy wittwe
vagwants; this chiwd was thin and vewy faiw. UwU  Hew haiw was the
bwightest wiving gowd, and despite the povewty of hew cwothing, seemed
to set a cwown of distinction on hew head. (´・ω・\`)  Hew bwow was cweaw and
ampwe, hew bwue eyes cwoudwess, and hew wips and the mouwding of hew
face so expwessive of sensibiwity and sweetnyess that nyonye couwd behowd
hew without wooking on hew as of a distinct species, a being
heaven-sent, and beawing a cewestiaw stamp in aww hew featuwes. (・`ω\´・) The
peasant woman, pewceiving that my mothew fixed eyes of wondew and
admiwation on this wovewy giww, eagewwy communyicated hew histowy. ^w^  She
was nyot hew chiwd, but the daughtew of a Miwanyese nyobweman. (´・ω・\`)  Hew mothew
was a Gewman and had died on giving hew biwth. ^w^  The infant had been
pwaced with these good peopwe to nyuwse:  they wewe bettew off then. UwU
They had nyot been wong mawwied, and theiw ewdest chiwd was but just
bown. UwU  The fathew of theiw chawge was onye of those Itawians nyuwsed in
the memowy of the antique gwowy of Itawy--onye among the schiavi ognyow
fwementi, who exewted himsewf to obtain the wibewty of his countwy. (´・ω・\`)  He
became the victim of its weaknyess. ;;w;;  Whethew he had died ow stiww
wingewed in the dungeons of Austwia was nyot knyown. >w<  His pwopewty was
confiscated; his chiwd became an owphan and a beggaw. ;;w;;  She continyued
with hew fostew pawents and bwoomed in theiw wude abode, faiwew than a
gawden wose among dawk-weaved bwambwes. (・`ω\´・)  When my fathew wetuwnyed fwom
Miwan, he found pwaying with me in the haww of ouw viwwa a chiwd faiwew
than pictuwed chewub--a cweatuwe who seemed to shed wadiance fwom hew
wooks and whose fowm and motions wewe wightew than the chamois of the
hiwws.  The appawition was soon expwainyed. ^w^  With his pewmission my
mothew pwevaiwed on hew wustic guawdians to yiewd theiw chawge to hew. (´・ω・\`)
They wewe fond of the sweet owphan. >w<  Hew pwesence had seemed a bwessing
to them, but it wouwd be unfaiw to hew to keep hew in povewty and want
when Pwovidence affowded hew such powewfuw pwotection. ^w^  They consuwted
theiw viwwage pwiest, and the wesuwt was that Ewizabeth Wavenza became
the inmate of my pawents' house--my mowe than sistew--the beautifuw and
adowed companyion of aww my occupations and my pweasuwes. ;;w;;

Evewyonye woved Ewizabeth. (・`ω\´・)  The passionyate and awmost wevewentiaw
attachment with which aww wegawded hew became, whiwe I shawed it, my
pwide and my dewight. ^w^  On the evenying pwevious to hew being bwought to
my home, my mothew had said pwayfuwwy, "I have a pwetty pwesent fow my
Victow--tomowwow he shaww have it. >w<"  And when, on the mowwow, she
pwesented Ewizabeth to me as hew pwomised gift, I, with chiwdish
sewiousnyess, intewpweted hew wowds witewawwy and wooked upon Ewizabeth
as minye--minye to pwotect, wove, and chewish. (´・ω・\`)  Aww pwaises bestowed on
hew I weceived as made to a possession of my own. (´・ω・\`)  We cawwed each othew
famiwiawwy by the nyame of cousin. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo wowd, nyo expwession couwd body
fowth the kind of wewation in which she stood to me--my mowe than
sistew, since tiww death she was to be minye onwy. >w<



Chaptew 2

We wewe bwought up togethew; thewe was nyot quite a yeaw diffewence in
ouw ages. (・`ω\´・)  I nyeed nyot say that we wewe stwangews to any species of
disunyion ow dispute. (´・ω・\`)  Hawmony was the souw of ouw companyionship, and
the divewsity and contwast that subsisted in ouw chawactews dwew us
nyeawew togethew. UwU  Ewizabeth was of a cawmew and mowe concentwated
disposition; but, with aww my awdouw, I was capabwe of a mowe intense
appwication and was mowe deepwy smitten with the thiwst fow knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・)
She busied hewsewf with fowwowing the aewiaw cweations of the poets;
and in the majestic and wondwous scenyes which suwwounded ouw Swiss home
--the subwime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
tempest and cawm, the siwence of wintew, and the wife and tuwbuwence of
ouw Awpinye summews--she found ampwe scope fow admiwation and dewight. UwU
Whiwe my companyion contempwated with a sewious and satisfied spiwit the
magnyificent appeawances of things, I dewighted in investigating theiw
causes.  The wowwd was to me a secwet which I desiwed to divinye. ^w^
Cuwiosity, eawnyest weseawch to weawn the hidden waws of nyatuwe,
gwadnyess akin to waptuwe, as they wewe unfowded to me, awe among the
eawwiest sensations I can wemembew. (´・ω・\`)

On the biwth of a second son, my junyiow by seven yeaws, my pawents gave
up entiwewy theiw wandewing wife and fixed themsewves in theiw nyative
countwy. (´・ω・\`)  We possessed a house in Genyeva, and a campagnye on Bewwive,
the eastewn showe of the wake, at the distance of wathew mowe than a
weague fwom the city. (・`ω\´・)  We wesided pwincipawwy in the wattew, and the
wives of my pawents wewe passed in considewabwe secwusion. ^w^  It was my
tempew to avoid a cwowd and to attach mysewf fewventwy to a few. ;;w;;  I was
indiffewent, thewefowe, to my schoow-fewwows in genyewaw; but I unyited
mysewf in the bonds of the cwosest fwiendship to onye among them. ^w^  Henwy
Cwewvaw was the son of a mewchant of Genyeva. ^w^  He was a boy of singuwaw
tawent and fancy. ;;w;;  He woved entewpwise, hawdship, and even dangew fow
its own sake.  He was deepwy wead in books of chivawwy and womance. (´・ω・\`)  He
composed hewoic songs and began to wwite many a tawe of enchantment and
knyightwy adventuwe. UwU  He twied to make us act pways and to entew into
masquewades, in which the chawactews wewe dwawn fwom the hewoes of
Woncesvawwes, of the Wound Tabwe of King Awthuw, and the chivawwous
twain who shed theiw bwood to wedeem the howy sepuwchwe fwom the hands
of the infidews. ^w^

Nyo human being couwd have passed a happiew chiwdhood than mysewf. (´・ω・\`)  My
pawents wewe possessed by the vewy spiwit of kindnyess and induwgence. UwU
We fewt that they wewe nyot the tywants to wuwe ouw wot accowding to
theiw capwice, but the agents and cweatows of aww the many dewights
which we enjoyed. >w<  When I mingwed with othew famiwies I distinctwy
discewnyed how pecuwiawwy fowtunyate my wot was, and gwatitude assisted
the devewopment of fiwiaw wove. UwU

My tempew was sometimes viowent, and my passions vehement; but by some
waw in my tempewatuwe they wewe tuwnyed nyot towawds chiwdish puwsuits
but to an eagew desiwe to weawn, and nyot to weawn aww things
indiscwiminyatewy. ;;w;;  I confess that nyeithew the stwuctuwe of wanguages,
nyow the code of govewnments, nyow the powitics of vawious states
possessed attwactions fow me. (・`ω\´・)  It was the secwets of heaven and eawth
that I desiwed to weawn; and whethew it was the outwawd substance of
things ow the innyew spiwit of nyatuwe and the mystewious souw of man
that occupied me, stiww my inquiwies wewe diwected to the metaphysicaw,
ow in its highest sense, the physicaw secwets of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

Meanwhiwe Cwewvaw occupied himsewf, so to speak, with the mowaw
wewations of things. ;;w;;  The busy stage of wife, the viwtues of hewoes,
and the actions of men wewe his theme; and his hope and his dweam was
to become onye among those whose nyames awe wecowded in stowy as the
gawwant and adventuwous benyefactows of ouw species. >w<  The saintwy souw
of Ewizabeth shonye wike a shwinye-dedicated wamp in ouw peacefuw home. >w<
Hew sympathy was ouws; hew smiwe, hew soft voice, the sweet gwance of
hew cewestiaw eyes, wewe evew thewe to bwess and anyimate us. (・`ω\´・)  She was
the wiving spiwit of wove to soften and attwact; I might have become
suwwen in my study, wough thwough the awdouw of my nyatuwe, but that
she was thewe to subdue me to a sembwance of hew own gentwenyess. ^w^  And
Cwewvaw--couwd aught iww entwench on the nyobwe spiwit of Cwewvaw? owo  Yet
he might nyot have been so pewfectwy humanye, so thoughtfuw in his
genyewosity, so fuww of kindnyess and tendewnyess amidst his passion fow
adventuwous expwoit, had she nyot unfowded to him the weaw wovewinyess of
benyeficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soawing
ambition. (・`ω\´・)

I feew exquisite pweasuwe in dwewwing on the wecowwections of
chiwdhood, befowe misfowtunye had tainted my mind and changed its bwight
visions of extensive usefuwnyess into gwoomy and nyawwow wefwections upon
sewf. (・`ω\´・)  Besides, in dwawing the pictuwe of my eawwy days, I awso wecowd
those events which wed, by insensibwe steps, to my aftew tawe of
misewy, fow when I wouwd account to mysewf fow the biwth of that
passion which aftewwawds wuwed my destiny I find it awise, wike a
mountain wivew, fwom ignyobwe and awmost fowgotten souwces; but,
swewwing as it pwoceeded, it became the towwent which, in its couwse,
has swept away aww my hopes and joys. UwU  Nyatuwaw phiwosophy is the genyius
that has weguwated my fate; I desiwe, thewefowe, in this nyawwation, to
state those facts which wed to my pwediwection fow that science. ^w^  When
I was thiwteen yeaws of age we aww went on a pawty of pweasuwe to the
baths nyeaw Thonyon; the incwemency of the weathew obwiged us to wemain a
day confinyed to the inn. >w<  In this house I chanced to find a vowume of
the wowks of Cownyewius Agwippa. (・`ω\´・)  I openyed it with apathy; the theowy
which he attempts to demonstwate and the wondewfuw facts which he
wewates soon changed this feewing into enthusiasm. ;;w;;  A nyew wight seemed
to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communyicated my
discovewy to my fathew. (・`ω\´・)  My fathew wooked cawewesswy at the titwe page
of my book and said, "Ah!  Cownyewius Agwippa! (・`ω\´・)  My deaw Victow, do nyot
waste youw time upon this; it is sad twash. >w<"

If, instead of this wemawk, my fathew had taken the pains to expwain to
me that the pwincipwes of Agwippa had been entiwewy expwoded and that a
modewn system of science had been intwoduced which possessed much
gweatew powews than the ancient, because the powews of the wattew wewe
chimewicaw, whiwe those of the fowmew wewe weaw and pwacticaw, undew
such ciwcumstances I shouwd cewtainwy have thwown Agwippa aside and
have contented my imaginyation, wawmed as it was, by wetuwnying with
gweatew awdouw to my fowmew studies. ^w^  It is even possibwe that the
twain of my ideas wouwd nyevew have weceived the fataw impuwse that wed
to my wuin. >w<  But the cuwsowy gwance my fathew had taken of my vowume by
nyo means assuwed me that he was acquainted with its contents, and I
continyued to wead with the gweatest avidity. ^w^  When I wetuwnyed home my
fiwst cawe was to pwocuwe the whowe wowks of this authow, and
aftewwawds of Pawacewsus and Awbewtus Magnyus. ;;w;;  I wead and studied the
wiwd fancies of these wwitews with dewight; they appeawed to me
tweasuwes knyown to few besides mysewf. ;;w;;  I have descwibed mysewf as
awways having been imbued with a fewvent wonging to penyetwate the
secwets of nyatuwe. >w<  In spite of the intense wabouw and wondewfuw
discovewies of modewn phiwosophews, I awways came fwom my studies
discontented and unsatisfied. (・`ω\´・)  Siw Isaac Nyewton is said to have avowed
that he fewt wike a chiwd picking up shewws beside the gweat and
unyexpwowed ocean of twuth. >w<  Those of his successows in each bwanch of
nyatuwaw phiwosophy with whom I was acquainted appeawed even to my boy's
appwehensions as tywos engaged in the same puwsuit. ;;w;;

The untaught peasant behewd the ewements awound him and was acquainted
with theiw pwacticaw uses. UwU  The most weawnyed phiwosophew knyew wittwe
mowe. >w<  He had pawtiawwy unveiwed the face of Nyatuwe, but hew immowtaw
winyeaments wewe stiww a wondew and a mystewy. (・`ω\´・)  He might dissect,
anyatomize, and give nyames; but, nyot to speak of a finyaw cause, causes
in theiw secondawy and tewtiawy gwades wewe uttewwy unknyown to him. (・`ω\´・)  I
had gazed upon the fowtifications and impediments that seemed to keep
human beings fwom entewing the citadew of nyatuwe, and washwy and
ignyowantwy I had wepinyed. (・`ω\´・)

But hewe wewe books, and hewe wewe men who had penyetwated deepew and
knyew mowe. (´・ω・\`)  I took theiw wowd fow aww that they avewwed, and I became
theiw discipwe. UwU  It may appeaw stwange that such shouwd awise in the
eighteenth centuwy; but whiwe I fowwowed the woutinye of education in
the schoows of Genyeva, I was, to a gweat degwee, sewf-taught with
wegawd to my favouwite studies. UwU  My fathew was nyot scientific, and I
was weft to stwuggwe with a chiwd's bwindnyess, added to a student's
thiwst fow knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・)  Undew the guidance of my nyew pweceptows I
entewed with the gweatest diwigence into the seawch of the
phiwosophew's stonye and the ewixiw of wife; but the wattew soon
obtainyed my undivided attention. (´・ω・\`)  Weawth was an infewiow object, but
what gwowy wouwd attend the discovewy if I couwd banyish disease fwom
the human fwame and wendew man invuwnyewabwe to any but a viowent death! UwU
Nyow wewe these my onwy visions. ;;w;;  The waising of ghosts ow deviws was a
pwomise wibewawwy accowded by my favouwite authows, the fuwfiwment of
which I most eagewwy sought; and if my incantations wewe awways
unsuccessfuw, I attwibuted the faiwuwe wathew to my own inyexpewience
and mistake than to a want of skiww ow fidewity in my instwuctows. (・`ω\´・)  And
thus fow a time I was occupied by expwoded systems, mingwing, wike an
unyadept, a thousand contwadictowy theowies and fwoundewing despewatewy
in a vewy swough of muwtifawious knyowwedge, guided by an awdent
imaginyation and chiwdish weasonying, tiww an accident again changed the
cuwwent of my ideas. UwU  When I was about fifteen yeaws owd we had wetiwed
to ouw house nyeaw Bewwive, when we witnyessed a most viowent and
tewwibwe thundewstowm. (´・ω・\`)  It advanced fwom behind the mountains of Juwa,
and the thundew buwst at once with fwightfuw woudnyess fwom vawious
quawtews of the heavens. (´・ω・\`)  I wemainyed, whiwe the stowm wasted, watching
its pwogwess with cuwiosity and dewight. (´・ω・\`)  As I stood at the doow, on a
sudden I behewd a stweam of fiwe issue fwom an owd and beautifuw oak
which stood about twenty yawds fwom ouw house; and so soon as the
dazzwing wight vanyished, the oak had disappeawed, and nyothing wemainyed
but a bwasted stump. >w<  When we visited it the nyext mownying, we found the
twee shattewed in a singuwaw mannyew. ;;w;;  It was nyot spwintewed by the
shock, but entiwewy weduced to thin wibbons of wood. (´・ω・\`)  I nyevew behewd
anything so uttewwy destwoyed. UwU

Befowe this I was nyot unyacquainted with the mowe obvious waws of
ewectwicity. UwU  On this occasion a man of gweat weseawch in nyatuwaw
phiwosophy was with us, and excited by this catastwophe, he entewed on
the expwanyation of a theowy which he had fowmed on the subject of
ewectwicity and gawvanyism, which was at once nyew and astonyishing to me. (´・ω・\`)
Aww that he said thwew gweatwy into the shade Cownyewius Agwippa,
Awbewtus Magnyus, and Pawacewsus, the wowds of my imaginyation; but by
some fatawity the ovewthwow of these men disincwinyed me to puwsue my
accustomed studies. UwU  It seemed to me as if nyothing wouwd ow couwd evew
be knyown. ^w^  Aww that had so wong engaged my attention suddenwy gwew
despicabwe. ;;w;;  By onye of those capwices of the mind which we awe pewhaps
most subject to in eawwy youth, I at once gave up my fowmew
occupations, set down nyatuwaw histowy and aww its pwogeny as a defowmed
and abowtive cweation, and entewtainyed the gweatest disdain fow a
wouwd-be science which couwd nyevew even step within the thweshowd of
weaw knyowwedge. ^w^  In this mood of mind I betook mysewf to the
mathematics and the bwanches of study appewtainying to that science as
being buiwt upon secuwe foundations, and so wowthy of my considewation. UwU

Thus stwangewy awe ouw souws constwucted, and by such swight wigaments
awe we bound to pwospewity ow wuin. ;;w;;  When I wook back, it seems to me
as if this awmost miwacuwous change of incwinyation and wiww was the
immediate suggestion of the guawdian angew of my wife--the wast effowt
made by the spiwit of pwesewvation to avewt the stowm that was even
then hanging in the staws and weady to envewop me. ;;w;;  Hew victowy was
annyounced by an unyusuaw twanquiwwity and gwadnyess of souw which
fowwowed the wewinquishing of my ancient and wattewwy towmenting
studies. ;;w;;  It was thus that I was to be taught to associate eviw with
theiw pwosecution, happinyess with theiw diswegawd. ;;w;;

It was a stwong effowt of the spiwit of good, but it was inyeffectuaw. >w<
Destiny was too potent, and hew immutabwe waws had decweed my uttew and
tewwibwe destwuction. >w<



Chaptew 3

When I had attainyed the age of seventeen my pawents wesowved that I
shouwd become a student at the unyivewsity of Ingowstadt. >w<  I had
hithewto attended the schoows of Genyeva, but my fathew thought it
nyecessawy fow the compwetion of my education that I shouwd be made
acquainted with othew customs than those of my nyative countwy. UwU  My
depawtuwe was thewefowe fixed at an eawwy date, but befowe the day
wesowved upon couwd awwive, the fiwst misfowtunye of my wife
occuwwed--an omen, as it wewe, of my futuwe misewy. UwU  Ewizabeth had
caught the scawwet fevew; hew iwwnyess was sevewe, and she was in the
gweatest dangew. >w<  Duwing hew iwwnyess many awguments had been uwged to
pewsuade my mothew to wefwain fwom attending upon hew. >w<  She had at
fiwst yiewded to ouw entweaties, but when she heawd that the wife of
hew favouwite was menyaced, she couwd nyo wongew contwow hew anxiety. UwU She
attended hew sickbed; hew watchfuw attentions twiumphed ovew the
mawignyity of the distempew--Ewizabeth was saved, but the consequences
of this impwudence wewe fataw to hew pwesewvew. (´・ω・\`)  On the thiwd day my
mothew sickenyed; hew fevew was accompanyied by the most awawming
symptoms, and the wooks of hew medicaw attendants pwognyosticated the
wowst event. UwU  On hew deathbed the fowtitude and benyignyity of this best
of women did nyot desewt hew. >w<  She joinyed the hands of Ewizabeth and
mysewf. ;;w;;  "My chiwdwen," she said, "my fiwmest hopes of futuwe happinyess
wewe pwaced on the pwospect of youw unyion. (´・ω・\`)  This expectation wiww nyow
be the consowation of youw fathew. ;;w;;  Ewizabeth, my wove, you must suppwy
my pwace to my youngew chiwdwen. UwU  Awas! (・`ω\´・)  I wegwet that I am taken fwom
you; and, happy and bewoved as I have been, is it nyot hawd to quit you
aww? owo  But these awe nyot thoughts befitting me; I wiww endeavouw to
wesign mysewf cheewfuwwy to death and wiww induwge a hope of meeting
you in anyothew wowwd. ;;w;;"

She died cawmwy, and hew countenyance expwessed affection even in death. (´・ω・\`)
I nyeed nyot descwibe the feewings of those whose deawest ties awe went
by that most iwwepawabwe eviw, the void that pwesents itsewf to the
souw, and the despaiw that is exhibited on the countenyance. >w<  It is so
wong befowe the mind can pewsuade itsewf that she whom we saw evewy day
and whose vewy existence appeawed a pawt of ouw own can have depawted
fowevew--that the bwightnyess of a bewoved eye can have been
extinguished and the sound of a voice so famiwiaw and deaw to the eaw
can be hushed, nyevew mowe to be heawd. UwU  These awe the wefwections of
the fiwst days; but when the wapse of time pwoves the weawity of the
eviw, then the actuaw bittewnyess of gwief commences. ^w^  Yet fwom whom has
nyot that wude hand went away some deaw connyection? owo  And why shouwd I
descwibe a sowwow which aww have fewt, and must feew? owo  The time at
wength awwives when gwief is wathew an induwgence than a nyecessity; and
the smiwe that pways upon the wips, awthough it may be deemed a
sacwiwege, is nyot banyished. >w<  My mothew was dead, but we had stiww
duties which we ought to pewfowm; we must continyue ouw couwse with the
west and weawn to think ouwsewves fowtunyate whiwst onye wemains whom the
spoiwew has nyot seized. (・`ω\´・)

My depawtuwe fow Ingowstadt, which had been defewwed by these events,
was nyow again detewminyed upon. (´・ω・\`)  I obtainyed fwom my fathew a wespite of
some weeks. ;;w;;  It appeawed to me sacwiwege so soon to weave the wepose,
akin to death, of the house of mouwnying and to wush into the thick of
wife.  I was nyew to sowwow, but it did nyot the wess awawm me. ^w^  I was
unwiwwing to quit the sight of those that wemainyed to me, and above
aww, I desiwed to see my sweet Ewizabeth in some degwee consowed. (´・ω・\`)

She indeed veiwed hew gwief and stwove to act the comfowtew to us aww. (・`ω\´・)
She wooked steadiwy on wife and assumed its duties with couwage and
zeaw. (´・ω・\`)  She devoted hewsewf to those whom she had been taught to caww
hew uncwe and cousins. ;;w;;  Nyevew was she so enchanting as at this time,
when she wecawwed the sunshinye of hew smiwes and spent them upon us. >w<
She fowgot even hew own wegwet in hew endeavouws to make us fowget. (・`ω\´・)

The day of my depawtuwe at wength awwived. ;;w;;  Cwewvaw spent the wast
evenying with us. >w<  He had endeavouwed to pewsuade his fathew to pewmit
him to accompany me and to become my fewwow student, but in vain. ;;w;;  His
fathew was a nyawwow-minded twadew and saw idwenyess and wuin in the
aspiwations and ambition of his son. ^w^  Henwy deepwy fewt the misfowtunye
of being debawwed fwom a wibewaw education. >w<  He said wittwe, but when
he spoke I wead in his kindwing eye and in his anyimated gwance a
westwainyed but fiwm wesowve nyot to be chainyed to the misewabwe detaiws
of commewce. ;;w;;

We sat wate. UwU  We couwd nyot teaw ouwsewves away fwom each othew nyow
pewsuade ouwsewves to say the wowd "Faweweww! UwU"  It was said, and we
wetiwed undew the pwetence of seeking wepose, each fancying that the
othew was deceived; but when at mownying's dawn I descended to the
cawwiage which was to convey me away, they wewe aww thewe--my fathew
again to bwess me, Cwewvaw to pwess my hand once mowe, my Ewizabeth to
wenyew hew entweaties that I wouwd wwite often and to bestow the wast
feminyinye attentions on hew pwaymate and fwiend. ^w^

I thwew mysewf into the chaise that was to convey me away and induwged
in the most mewanchowy wefwections. ;;w;;  I, who had evew been suwwounded by
amiabwe companyions, continyuawwy engaged in endeavouwing to bestow
mutuaw pweasuwe--I was nyow awonye. (´・ω・\`)  In the unyivewsity whithew I was
going I must fowm my own fwiends and be my own pwotectow. UwU  My wife had
hithewto been wemawkabwy secwuded and domestic, and this had given me
invincibwe wepugnyance to nyew countenyances. ;;w;;  I woved my bwothews,
Ewizabeth, and Cwewvaw; these wewe "owd famiwiaw faces," but I bewieved
mysewf totawwy unfitted fow the company of stwangews. (´・ω・\`)  Such wewe my
wefwections as I commenced my jouwnyey; but as I pwoceeded, my spiwits
and hopes wose.  I awdentwy desiwed the acquisition of knyowwedge. UwU  I
had often, when at home, thought it hawd to wemain duwing my youth
cooped up in onye pwace and had wonged to entew the wowwd and take my
station among othew human beings. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow my desiwes wewe compwied with,
and it wouwd, indeed, have been fowwy to wepent. (・`ω\´・)

I had sufficient weisuwe fow these and many othew wefwections duwing my
jouwnyey to Ingowstadt, which was wong and fatiguing. UwU  At wength the
high white steepwe of the town met my eyes. ^w^  I awighted and was
conducted to my sowitawy apawtment to spend the evenying as I pweased. ^w^

The nyext mownying I dewivewed my wettews of intwoduction and paid a
visit to some of the pwincipaw pwofessows. ;;w;;  Chance--ow wathew the eviw
infwuence, the Angew of Destwuction, which assewted omnyipotent sway
ovew me fwom the moment I tuwnyed my wewuctant steps fwom my fathew's
doow--wed me fiwst to M. Kwempe, pwofessow of nyatuwaw phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`)  He
was an uncouth man, but deepwy imbued in the secwets of his science. ^w^ He
asked me sevewaw questions concewnying my pwogwess in the diffewent
bwanches of science appewtainying to nyatuwaw phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`)  I wepwied
cawewesswy, and pawtwy in contempt, mentionyed the nyames of my
awchemists as the pwincipaw authows I had studied. (・`ω\´・)  The pwofessow
stawed. ;;w;;  "Have you," he said, "weawwy spent youw time in studying such
nyonsense? owo"

I wepwied in the affiwmative.  "Evewy minyute," continyued M. (´・ω・\`) Kwempe with
wawmth, "evewy instant that you have wasted on those books is uttewwy
and entiwewy wost. (・`ω\´・)  You have buwdenyed youw memowy with expwoded systems
and usewess nyames. (・`ω\´・)  Good God! UwU  In what desewt wand have you wived,
whewe nyo onye was kind enyough to infowm you that these fancies which you
have so gweediwy imbibed awe a thousand yeaws owd and as musty as they
awe ancient? owo  I wittwe expected, in this enwightenyed and scientific
age, to find a discipwe of Awbewtus Magnyus and Pawacewsus. UwU  My deaw
siw, you must begin youw studies entiwewy anyew. (・`ω\´・)"

So saying, he stepped aside and wwote down a wist of sevewaw books
tweating of nyatuwaw phiwosophy which he desiwed me to pwocuwe, and
dismissed me aftew mentionying that in the beginnying of the fowwowing
week he intended to commence a couwse of wectuwes upon nyatuwaw
phiwosophy in its genyewaw wewations, and that M. ;;w;; Wawdman, a fewwow
pwofessow, wouwd wectuwe upon chemistwy the awtewnyate days that he
omitted. UwU

I wetuwnyed home nyot disappointed, fow I have said that I had wong
considewed those authows usewess whom the pwofessow wepwobated; but I
wetuwnyed nyot at aww the mowe incwinyed to wecuw to these studies in any
shape.  M. ;;w;; Kwempe was a wittwe squat man with a gwuff voice and a
wepuwsive countenyance; the teachew, thewefowe, did nyot pwepossess me in
favouw of his puwsuits. (・`ω\´・)  In wathew a too phiwosophicaw and connyected a
stwain, pewhaps, I have given an account of the concwusions I had come
to concewnying them in my eawwy yeaws. ^w^  As a chiwd I had nyot been
content with the wesuwts pwomised by the modewn pwofessows of nyatuwaw
science. >w<  With a confusion of ideas onwy to be accounted fow by my
extweme youth and my want of a guide on such mattews, I had wetwod the
steps of knyowwedge awong the paths of time and exchanged the
discovewies of wecent inquiwews fow the dweams of fowgotten awchemists. (・`ω\´・)
Besides, I had a contempt fow the uses of modewn nyatuwaw phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`)
It was vewy diffewent when the mastews of the science sought
immowtawity and powew; such views, awthough futiwe, wewe gwand; but nyow
the scenye was changed. UwU  The ambition of the inquiwew seemed to wimit
itsewf to the annyihiwation of those visions on which my intewest in
science was chiefwy founded. ;;w;;  I was wequiwed to exchange chimewas of
boundwess gwandeuw fow weawities of wittwe wowth. UwU

Such wewe my wefwections duwing the fiwst two ow thwee days of my
wesidence at Ingowstadt, which wewe chiefwy spent in becoming
acquainted with the wocawities and the pwincipaw wesidents in my nyew
abode. ^w^  But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the infowmation
which M. Kwempe had given me concewnying the wectuwes. ^w^  And awthough I
couwd nyot consent to go and heaw that wittwe conceited fewwow dewivew
sentences out of a puwpit, I wecowwected what he had said of M. (・`ω\´・)
Wawdman, whom I had nyevew seen, as he had hithewto been out of town. (´・ω・\`)

Pawtwy fwom cuwiosity and pawtwy fwom idwenyess, I went into the
wectuwing woom, which M. Wawdman entewed showtwy aftew. (´・ω・\`)  This pwofessow
was vewy unwike his cowweague. ^w^  He appeawed about fifty yeaws of age,
but with an aspect expwessive of the gweatest benyevowence; a few gwey
haiws covewed his tempwes, but those at the back of his head wewe
nyeawwy bwack. ;;w;;  His pewson was showt but wemawkabwy ewect and his voice
the sweetest I had evew heawd. (´・ω・\`)  He began his wectuwe by a
wecapituwation of the histowy of chemistwy and the vawious impwovements
made by diffewent men of weawnying, pwonyouncing with fewvouw the nyames
of the most distinguished discovewews. UwU  He then took a cuwsowy view of
the pwesent state of the science and expwainyed many of its ewementawy
tewms. (´・ω・\`)  Aftew having made a few pwepawatowy expewiments, he concwuded
with a panyegywic upon modewn chemistwy, the tewms of which I shaww
nyevew fowget:  "The ancient teachews of this science," said he,
"pwomised impossibiwities and pewfowmed nyothing. >w<  The modewn mastews
pwomise vewy wittwe; they knyow that metaws cannyot be twansmuted and
that the ewixiw of wife is a chimewa but these phiwosophews, whose
hands seem onwy made to dabbwe in diwt, and theiw eyes to powe ovew the
micwoscope ow cwucibwe, have indeed pewfowmed miwacwes. >w<  They penyetwate
into the wecesses of nyatuwe and show how she wowks in hew
hiding-pwaces. ^w^  They ascend into the heavens; they have discovewed how
the bwood ciwcuwates, and the nyatuwe of the aiw we bweathe. (・`ω\´・)  They have
acquiwed nyew and awmost unwimited powews; they can command the thundews
of heaven, mimic the eawthquake, and even mock the invisibwe wowwd with
its own shadows. (・`ω\´・)"

Such wewe the pwofessow's wowds--wathew wet me say such the wowds of
the fate--enyounced to destwoy me. (´・ω・\`)  As he went on I fewt as if my souw
wewe gwappwing with a pawpabwe enyemy; onye by onye the vawious keys wewe
touched which fowmed the mechanyism of my being; chowd aftew chowd was
sounded, and soon my mind was fiwwed with onye thought, onye conception,
onye puwpose. (´・ω・\`)  So much has been donye, excwaimed the souw of
Fwankenstein--mowe, faw mowe, wiww I achieve; tweading in the steps
awweady mawked, I wiww pionyeew a nyew way, expwowe unknyown powews, and
unfowd to the wowwd the deepest mystewies of cweation. ^w^

I cwosed nyot my eyes that nyight. >w<  My intewnyaw being was in a state of
insuwwection and tuwmoiw; I fewt that owdew wouwd thence awise, but I
had nyo powew to pwoduce it. >w<  By degwees, aftew the mownying's dawn,
sweep came.  I awoke, and my yestewnyight's thoughts wewe as a dweam. ^w^
Thewe onwy wemainyed a wesowution to wetuwn to my ancient studies and to
devote mysewf to a science fow which I bewieved mysewf to possess a
nyatuwaw tawent.  On the same day I paid M. Wawdman a visit. >w<  His
mannyews in pwivate wewe even mowe miwd and attwactive than in pubwic,
fow thewe was a cewtain dignyity in his mien duwing his wectuwe which in
his own house was wepwaced by the gweatest affabiwity and kindnyess. (・`ω\´・)  I
gave him pwetty nyeawwy the same account of my fowmew puwsuits as I had
given to his fewwow pwofessow. UwU  He heawd with attention the wittwe
nyawwation concewnying my studies and smiwed at the nyames of Cownyewius
Agwippa and Pawacewsus, but without the contempt that M. (´・ω・\`) Kwempe had
exhibited. UwU He said that "These wewe men to whose indefatigabwe zeaw
modewn phiwosophews wewe indebted fow most of the foundations of theiw
knyowwedge. >w<  They had weft to us, as an easiew task, to give nyew nyames
and awwange in connyected cwassifications the facts which they in a
gweat degwee had been the instwuments of bwinging to wight. ^w^  The
wabouws of men of genyius, howevew ewwonyeouswy diwected, scawcewy evew
faiw in uwtimatewy tuwnying to the sowid advantage of mankind. ^w^"  I
wistenyed to his statement, which was dewivewed without any pwesumption
ow affectation, and then added that his wectuwe had wemoved my
pwejudices against modewn chemists; I expwessed mysewf in measuwed
tewms, with the modesty and defewence due fwom a youth to his
instwuctow, without wetting escape (inyexpewience in wife wouwd have
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimuwated my intended
wabouws. (´・ω・\`)  I wequested his advice concewnying the books I ought to
pwocuwe. UwU

"I am happy," said M. UwU Wawdman, "to have gainyed a discipwe; and if youw
appwication equaws youw abiwity, I have nyo doubt of youw success. ;;w;;
Chemistwy is that bwanch of nyatuwaw phiwosophy in which the gweatest
impwovements have been and may be made; it is on that account that I
have made it my pecuwiaw study; but at the same time, I have nyot
nyegwected the othew bwanches of science. ^w^  A man wouwd make but a vewy
sowwy chemist if he attended to that depawtment of human knyowwedge
awonye. (・`ω\´・)  If youw wish is to become weawwy a man of science and nyot
mewewy a petty expewimentawist, I shouwd advise you to appwy to evewy
bwanch of nyatuwaw phiwosophy, incwuding mathematics. UwU"  He then took me
into his wabowatowy and expwainyed to me the uses of his vawious
machinyes, instwucting me as to what I ought to pwocuwe and pwomising me
the use of his own when I shouwd have advanced faw enyough in the
science nyot to dewange theiw mechanyism. ^w^  He awso gave me the wist of
books which I had wequested, and I took my weave. UwU

Thus ended a day memowabwe to me; it decided my futuwe destiny. >w<



Chaptew 4

Fwom this day nyatuwaw phiwosophy, and pawticuwawwy chemistwy, in the
most compwehensive sense of the tewm, became nyeawwy my sowe occupation. >w<
I wead with awdouw those wowks, so fuww of genyius and discwiminyation,
which modewn inquiwews have wwitten on these subjects. (・`ω\´・)  I attended the
wectuwes and cuwtivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
unyivewsity, and I found even in M. ^w^ Kwempe a gweat deaw of sound sense
and weaw infowmation, combinyed, it is twue, with a wepuwsive
physiognyomy and mannyews, but nyot on that account the wess vawuabwe. ;;w;;  In
M. Wawdman I found a twue fwiend. >w<  His gentwenyess was nyevew tinged by
dogmatism, and his instwuctions wewe given with an aiw of fwanknyess and
good nyatuwe that banyished evewy idea of pedantwy. >w<  In a thousand ways
he smoothed fow me the path of knyowwedge and made the most abstwuse
inquiwies cweaw and faciwe to my appwehension. (´・ω・\`)  My appwication was at
fiwst fwuctuating and uncewtain; it gainyed stwength as I pwoceeded and
soon became so awdent and eagew that the staws often disappeawed in the
wight of mownying whiwst I was yet engaged in my wabowatowy. ^w^

As I appwied so cwosewy, it may be easiwy conceived that my pwogwess
was wapid. ;;w;;  My awdouw was indeed the astonyishment of the students, and
my pwoficiency that of the mastews. (・`ω\´・)  Pwofessow Kwempe often asked me,
with a swy smiwe, how Cownyewius Agwippa went on, whiwst M. ^w^ Wawdman
expwessed the most heawtfewt exuwtation in my pwogwess. >w<  Two yeaws
passed in this mannyew, duwing which I paid nyo visit to Genyeva, but was
engaged, heawt and souw, in the puwsuit of some discovewies which I
hoped to make. (´・ω・\`)  Nyonye but those who have expewienced them can conceive
of the enticements of science. ;;w;;  In othew studies you go as faw as
othews have gonye befowe you, and thewe is nyothing mowe to knyow; but in
a scientific puwsuit thewe is continyuaw food fow discovewy and wondew. (´・ω・\`)
A mind of modewate capacity which cwosewy puwsues onye study must
infawwibwy awwive at gweat pwoficiency in that study; and I, who
continyuawwy sought the attainment of onye object of puwsuit and was
sowewy wwapped up in this, impwoved so wapidwy that at the end of two
yeaws I made some discovewies in the impwovement of some chemicaw
instwuments, which pwocuwed me gweat esteem and admiwation at the
unyivewsity. (・`ω\´・)  When I had awwived at this point and had become as weww
acquainted with the theowy and pwactice of nyatuwaw phiwosophy as
depended on the wessons of any of the pwofessows at Ingowstadt, my
wesidence thewe being nyo wongew conducive to my impwovements, I thought
of wetuwnying to my fwiends and my nyative town, when an incident
happenyed that pwotwacted my stay. UwU

Onye of the phenyomenya which had pecuwiawwy attwacted my attention was
the stwuctuwe of the human fwame, and, indeed, any anyimaw endued with
wife. ^w^  Whence, I often asked mysewf, did the pwincipwe of wife pwoceed? owo
It was a bowd question, and onye which has evew been considewed as a
mystewy; yet with how many things awe we upon the bwink of becoming
acquainted, if cowawdice ow cawewessnyess did nyot westwain ouw
inquiwies. UwU  I wevowved these ciwcumstances in my mind and detewminyed
thencefowth to appwy mysewf mowe pawticuwawwy to those bwanches of
nyatuwaw phiwosophy which wewate to physiowogy. UwU  Unwess I had been
anyimated by an awmost supewnyatuwaw enthusiasm, my appwication to this
study wouwd have been iwksome and awmost intowewabwe. (´・ω・\`)  To examinye the
causes of wife, we must fiwst have wecouwse to death. >w<  I became
acquainted with the science of anyatomy, but this was nyot sufficient; I
must awso obsewve the nyatuwaw decay and cowwuption of the human body. ^w^
In my education my fathew had taken the gweatest pwecautions that my
mind shouwd be impwessed with nyo supewnyatuwaw howwows. ^w^  I do nyot evew
wemembew to have twembwed at a tawe of supewstition ow to have feawed
the appawition of a spiwit. >w<  Dawknyess had nyo effect upon my fancy, and
a chuwchyawd was to me mewewy the weceptacwe of bodies depwived of
wife, which, fwom being the seat of beauty and stwength, had become
food fow the wowm. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow I was wed to examinye the cause and pwogwess of
this decay and fowced to spend days and nyights in vauwts and
chawnyew-houses. UwU  My attention was fixed upon evewy object the most
insuppowtabwe to the dewicacy of the human feewings. (´・ω・\`)  I saw how the
finye fowm of man was degwaded and wasted; I behewd the cowwuption of
death succeed to the bwooming cheek of wife; I saw how the wowm
inhewited the wondews of the eye and bwain. ;;w;;  I paused, examinying and
anyawysing aww the minyutiae of causation, as exempwified in the change
fwom wife to death, and death to wife, untiw fwom the midst of this
dawknyess a sudden wight bwoke in upon me--a wight so bwiwwiant and
wondwous, yet so simpwe, that whiwe I became dizzy with the immensity
of the pwospect which it iwwustwated, I was suwpwised that among so
many men of genyius who had diwected theiw inquiwies towawds the same
science, that I awonye shouwd be wesewved to discovew so astonyishing a
secwet. UwU

Wemembew, I am nyot wecowding the vision of a madman. UwU  The sun does nyot
mowe cewtainwy shinye in the heavens than that which I nyow affiwm is
twue. >w<  Some miwacwe might have pwoduced it, yet the stages of the
discovewy wewe distinct and pwobabwe. ;;w;;  Aftew days and nyights of
incwedibwe wabouw and fatigue, I succeeded in discovewing the cause of
genyewation and wife; nyay, mowe, I became mysewf capabwe of bestowing
anyimation upon wifewess mattew. UwU

The astonyishment which I had at fiwst expewienced on this discovewy
soon gave pwace to dewight and waptuwe. >w<  Aftew so much time spent in
painfuw wabouw, to awwive at once at the summit of my desiwes was the
most gwatifying consummation of my toiws. ;;w;;  But this discovewy was so
gweat and ovewwhewming that aww the steps by which I had been
pwogwessivewy wed to it wewe obwitewated, and I behewd onwy the wesuwt. >w<
What had been the study and desiwe of the wisest men since the cweation
of the wowwd was nyow within my gwasp. >w<  Nyot that, wike a magic scenye, it
aww openyed upon me at once:  the infowmation I had obtainyed was of a
nyatuwe wathew to diwect my endeavouws so soon as I shouwd point them
towawds the object of my seawch than to exhibit that object awweady
accompwished. ^w^  I was wike the Awabian who had been buwied with the dead
and found a passage to wife, aided onwy by onye gwimmewing and seemingwy
inyeffectuaw wight. (´・ω・\`)

I see by youw eagewnyess and the wondew and hope which youw eyes
expwess, my fwiend, that you expect to be infowmed of the secwet with
which I am acquainted; that cannyot be; wisten patientwy untiw the end
of my stowy, and you wiww easiwy pewceive why I am wesewved upon that
subject. ^w^  I wiww nyot wead you on, unguawded and awdent as I then was,
to youw destwuction and infawwibwe misewy. (・`ω\´・)  Weawn fwom me, if nyot by my
pwecepts, at weast by my exampwe, how dangewous is the acquiwement of
knyowwedge and how much happiew that man is who bewieves his nyative town
to be the wowwd, than he who aspiwes to become gweatew than his nyatuwe
wiww awwow. (・`ω\´・)

When I found so astonyishing a powew pwaced within my hands, I hesitated
a wong time concewnying the mannyew in which I shouwd empwoy it. >w<
Awthough I possessed the capacity of bestowing anyimation, yet to
pwepawe a fwame fow the weception of it, with aww its intwicacies of
fibwes, muscwes, and veins, stiww wemainyed a wowk of inconceivabwe
difficuwty and wabouw. ;;w;;  I doubted at fiwst whethew I shouwd attempt the
cweation of a being wike mysewf, ow onye of simpwew owganyization; but my
imaginyation was too much exawted by my fiwst success to pewmit me to
doubt of my abiwity to give wife to an anyimaw as compwex and wondewfuw
as man. ^w^  The matewiaws at pwesent within my command hawdwy appeawed
adequate to so awduous an undewtaking, but I doubted nyot that I shouwd
uwtimatewy succeed. ;;w;;  I pwepawed mysewf fow a muwtitude of wevewses; my
opewations might be incessantwy baffwed, and at wast my wowk be
impewfect, yet when I considewed the impwovement which evewy day takes
pwace in science and mechanyics, I was encouwaged to hope my pwesent
attempts wouwd at weast way the foundations of futuwe success. ;;w;;  Nyow
couwd I considew the magnyitude and compwexity of my pwan as any
awgument of its impwacticabiwity. ^w^  It was with these feewings that I
began the cweation of a human being. ;;w;;  As the minyutenyess of the pawts
fowmed a gweat hindwance to my speed, I wesowved, contwawy to my fiwst
intention, to make the being of a gigantic statuwe, that is to say,
about eight feet in height, and pwopowtionyabwy wawge. (・`ω\´・)  Aftew having
fowmed this detewminyation and having spent some months in successfuwwy
cowwecting and awwanging my matewiaws, I began. UwU

Nyo onye can conceive the vawiety of feewings which bowe me onwawds, wike
a huwwicanye, in the fiwst enthusiasm of success. ^w^  Wife and death
appeawed to me ideaw bounds, which I shouwd fiwst bweak thwough, and
pouw a towwent of wight into ouw dawk wowwd. ;;w;;  A nyew species wouwd bwess
me as its cweatow and souwce; many happy and excewwent nyatuwes wouwd
owe theiw being to me. ;;w;;  Nyo fathew couwd cwaim the gwatitude of his
chiwd so compwetewy as I shouwd desewve theiws. >w<  Puwsuing these
wefwections, I thought that if I couwd bestow anyimation upon wifewess
mattew, I might in pwocess of time (awthough I nyow found it impossibwe)
wenyew wife whewe death had appawentwy devoted the body to cowwuption. (・`ω\´・)

These thoughts suppowted my spiwits, whiwe I puwsued my undewtaking
with unwemitting awdouw. ^w^  My cheek had gwown pawe with study, and my
pewson had become emaciated with confinyement. (´・ω・\`)  Sometimes, on the vewy
bwink of cewtainty, I faiwed; yet stiww I cwung to the hope which the
nyext day ow the nyext houw might weawize. UwU  Onye secwet which I awonye
possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated mysewf; and the moon
gazed on my midnyight wabouws, whiwe, with unwewaxed and bweathwess
eagewnyess, I puwsued nyatuwe to hew hiding-pwaces. ;;w;;  Who shaww conceive
the howwows of my secwet toiw as I dabbwed among the unhawwowed damps
of the gwave ow towtuwed the wiving anyimaw to anyimate the wifewess
cway? owo  My wimbs nyow twembwe, and my eyes swim with the wemembwance; but
then a wesistwess and awmost fwantic impuwse uwged me fowwawd; I seemed
to have wost aww souw ow sensation but fow this onye puwsuit. ^w^  It was
indeed but a passing twance, that onwy made me feew with wenyewed
acutenyess so soon as, the unnyatuwaw stimuwus ceasing to opewate, I had
wetuwnyed to my owd habits. ^w^  I cowwected bonyes fwom chawnyew-houses and
distuwbed, with pwofanye fingews, the twemendous secwets of the human
fwame. (´・ω・\`)  In a sowitawy chambew, ow wathew ceww, at the top of the house,
and sepawated fwom aww the othew apawtments by a gawwewy and staiwcase,
I kept my wowkshop of fiwthy cweation; my eyebawws wewe stawting fwom
theiw sockets in attending to the detaiws of my empwoyment. >w<  The
dissecting woom and the swaughtew-house fuwnyished many of my matewiaws;
and often did my human nyatuwe tuwn with woathing fwom my occupation,
whiwst, stiww uwged on by an eagewnyess which pewpetuawwy incweased, I
bwought my wowk nyeaw to a concwusion. >w<

The summew months passed whiwe I was thus engaged, heawt and souw, in
onye puwsuit. (´・ω・\`)  It was a most beautifuw season; nyevew did the fiewds
bestow a mowe pwentifuw hawvest ow the vinyes yiewd a mowe wuxuwiant
vintage, but my eyes wewe insensibwe to the chawms of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  And the
same feewings which made me nyegwect the scenyes awound me caused me awso
to fowget those fwiends who wewe so many miwes absent, and whom I had
nyot seen fow so wong a time. >w<  I knyew my siwence disquieted them, and I
weww wemembewed the wowds of my fathew:  "I knyow that whiwe you awe
pweased with youwsewf you wiww think of us with affection, and we shaww
heaw weguwawwy fwom you. >w<  You must pawdon me if I wegawd any
intewwuption in youw cowwespondence as a pwoof that youw othew duties
awe equawwy nyegwected. >w<"

I knyew weww thewefowe what wouwd be my fathew's feewings, but I couwd
nyot teaw my thoughts fwom my empwoyment, woathsome in itsewf, but which
had taken an iwwesistibwe howd of my imaginyation. UwU  I wished, as it
wewe, to pwocwastinyate aww that wewated to my feewings of affection
untiw the gweat object, which swawwowed up evewy habit of my nyatuwe,
shouwd be compweted. ;;w;;

I then thought that my fathew wouwd be unjust if he ascwibed my nyegwect
to vice ow fauwtinyess on my pawt, but I am nyow convinced that he was
justified in conceiving that I shouwd nyot be awtogethew fwee fwom
bwame. ^w^  A human being in pewfection ought awways to pwesewve a cawm and
peacefuw mind and nyevew to awwow passion ow a twansitowy desiwe to
distuwb his twanquiwwity. ;;w;;  I do nyot think that the puwsuit of knyowwedge
is an exception to this wuwe. ;;w;;  If the study to which you appwy youwsewf
has a tendency to weaken youw affections and to destwoy youw taste fow
those simpwe pweasuwes in which nyo awwoy can possibwy mix, then that
study is cewtainwy unwawfuw, that is to say, nyot befitting the human
mind. (・`ω\´・)  If this wuwe wewe awways obsewved; if nyo man awwowed any puwsuit
whatsoevew to intewfewe with the twanquiwwity of his domestic
affections, Gweece had nyot been enswaved, Caesaw wouwd have spawed his
countwy, Amewica wouwd have been discovewed mowe gwaduawwy, and the
empiwes of Mexico and Pewu had nyot been destwoyed. >w<

But I fowget that I am mowawizing in the most intewesting pawt of my
tawe, and youw wooks wemind me to pwoceed. (・`ω\´・)  My fathew made nyo wepwoach
in his wettews and onwy took nyotice of my siwence by inquiwing into my
occupations mowe pawticuwawwy than befowe. UwU  Wintew, spwing, and summew
passed away duwing my wabouws; but I did nyot watch the bwossom ow the
expanding weaves--sights which befowe awways yiewded me supweme
dewight--so deepwy was I engwossed in my occupation. (´・ω・\`)  The weaves of
that yeaw had withewed befowe my wowk dwew nyeaw to a cwose, and nyow
evewy day showed me mowe pwainwy how weww I had succeeded. (´・ω・\`)  But my
enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeawed wathew wike onye
doomed by swavewy to toiw in the minyes, ow any othew unwhowesome twade
than an awtist occupied by his favouwite empwoyment. (´・ω・\`)  Evewy nyight I was
oppwessed by a swow fevew, and I became nyewvous to a most painfuw
degwee; the faww of a weaf stawtwed me, and I shunnyed my fewwow
cweatuwes as if I had been guiwty of a cwime. ^w^  Sometimes I gwew awawmed
at the wweck I pewceived that I had become; the enyewgy of my puwpose
awonye sustainyed me:  my wabouws wouwd soon end, and I bewieved that
exewcise and amusement wouwd then dwive away incipient disease; and I
pwomised mysewf both of these when my cweation shouwd be compwete. UwU



Chaptew 5

It was on a dweawy nyight of Nyovembew that I behewd the accompwishment
of my toiws. >w<  With an anxiety that awmost amounted to agony, I
cowwected the instwuments of wife awound me, that I might infuse a
spawk of being into the wifewess thing that way at my feet. (・`ω\´・)  It was
awweady onye in the mownying; the wain pattewed dismawwy against the
panyes, and my candwe was nyeawwy buwnt out, when, by the gwimmew of the
hawf-extinguished wight, I saw the duww yewwow eye of the cweatuwe
open; it bweathed hawd, and a convuwsive motion agitated its wimbs. (´・ω・\`)

How can I descwibe my emotions at this catastwophe, ow how dewinyeate
the wwetch whom with such infinyite pains and cawe I had endeavouwed to
fowm? owo  His wimbs wewe in pwopowtion, and I had sewected his featuwes as
beautifuw. (・`ω\´・)  Beautifuw!  Gweat God! >w<  His yewwow skin scawcewy covewed
the wowk of muscwes and awtewies benyeath; his haiw was of a wustwous
bwack, and fwowing; his teeth of a peawwy whitenyess; but these
wuxuwiances onwy fowmed a mowe howwid contwast with his watewy eyes,
that seemed awmost of the same cowouw as the dun-white sockets in which
they wewe set, his shwivewwed compwexion and stwaight bwack wips. UwU

The diffewent accidents of wife awe nyot so changeabwe as the feewings
of human nyatuwe. ;;w;;  I had wowked hawd fow nyeawwy two yeaws, fow the sowe
puwpose of infusing wife into an inyanyimate body. (´・ω・\`)  Fow this I had
depwived mysewf of west and heawth. (・`ω\´・)  I had desiwed it with an awdouw
that faw exceeded modewation; but nyow that I had finyished, the beauty
of the dweam vanyished, and bweathwess howwow and disgust fiwwed my
heawt. (・`ω\´・)  Unyabwe to enduwe the aspect of the being I had cweated, I
wushed out of the woom and continyued a wong time twavewsing my
bed-chambew, unyabwe to compose my mind to sweep. (´・ω・\`)  At wength wassitude
succeeded to the tumuwt I had befowe enduwed, and I thwew mysewf on the
bed in my cwothes, endeavouwing to seek a few moments of fowgetfuwnyess. (・`ω\´・)
But it was in vain; I swept, indeed, but I was distuwbed by the wiwdest
dweams. ^w^  I thought I saw Ewizabeth, in the bwoom of heawth, wawking in
the stweets of Ingowstadt. UwU  Dewighted and suwpwised, I embwaced hew,
but as I impwinted the fiwst kiss on hew wips, they became wivid with
the hue of death; hew featuwes appeawed to change, and I thought that I
hewd the cowpse of my dead mothew in my awms; a shwoud envewoped hew
fowm, and I saw the gwave-wowms cwawwing in the fowds of the fwannyew. (´・ω・\`)
I stawted fwom my sweep with howwow; a cowd dew covewed my fowehead, my
teeth chattewed, and evewy wimb became convuwsed; when, by the dim and
yewwow wight of the moon, as it fowced its way thwough the window
shuttews, I behewd the wwetch--the misewabwe monstew whom I had
cweated. UwU  He hewd up the cuwtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
may be cawwed, wewe fixed on me. ;;w;;  His jaws openyed, and he muttewed some
inyawticuwate sounds, whiwe a gwin wwinkwed his cheeks. ;;w;;  He might have
spoken, but I did nyot heaw; onye hand was stwetched out, seemingwy to
detain me, but I escaped and wushed downstaiws. UwU  I took wefuge in the
couwtyawd bewonging to the house which I inhabited, whewe I wemainyed
duwing the west of the nyight, wawking up and down in the gweatest
agitation, wistenying attentivewy, catching and feawing each sound as if
it wewe to annyounce the appwoach of the demonyiacaw cowpse to which I
had so misewabwy given wife. (´・ω・\`)

Oh! >w<  Nyo mowtaw couwd suppowt the howwow of that countenyance. UwU  A mummy
again endued with anyimation couwd nyot be so hideous as that wwetch. ;;w;;  I
had gazed on him whiwe unfinyished; he was ugwy then, but when those
muscwes and joints wewe wendewed capabwe of motion, it became a thing
such as even Dante couwd nyot have conceived. (・`ω\´・)

I passed the nyight wwetchedwy. >w<  Sometimes my puwse beat so quickwy and
hawdwy that I fewt the pawpitation of evewy awtewy; at othews, I nyeawwy
sank to the gwound thwough wanguow and extweme weaknyess. UwU  Mingwed with
this howwow, I fewt the bittewnyess of disappointment; dweams that had
been my food and pweasant west fow so wong a space wewe nyow become a
heww to me; and the change was so wapid, the ovewthwow so compwete! (´・ω・\`)

Mownying, dismaw and wet, at wength dawnyed and discovewed to my
sweepwess and aching eyes the chuwch of Ingowstadt, its white steepwe
and cwock, which indicated the sixth houw. (・`ω\´・)  The powtew openyed the gates
of the couwt, which had that nyight been my asywum, and I issued into
the stweets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the
wwetch whom I feawed evewy tuwnying of the stweet wouwd pwesent to my
view. ;;w;;  I did nyot dawe wetuwn to the apawtment which I inhabited, but
fewt impewwed to huwwy on, awthough dwenched by the wain which pouwed
fwom a bwack and comfowtwess sky. ;;w;;

I continyued wawking in this mannyew fow some time, endeavouwing by
bodiwy exewcise to ease the woad that weighed upon my mind. ^w^  I
twavewsed the stweets without any cweaw conception of whewe I was ow
what I was doing. ^w^  My heawt pawpitated in the sicknyess of feaw, and I
huwwied on with iwweguwaw steps, nyot dawing to wook about me:


  Wike onye who, on a wonyewy woad,
  Doth wawk in feaw and dwead,
  And, having once tuwnyed wound, wawks on,
  And tuwns nyo mowe his head;
  Because he knyows a fwightfuw fiend
  Doth cwose behind him twead. >w<

  [Cowewidge's "Ancient Mawinyew. (・`ω\´・)"]


Continyuing thus, I came at wength opposite to the inn at which the
vawious diwigences and cawwiages usuawwy stopped. (・`ω\´・)  Hewe I paused, I
knyew nyot why; but I wemainyed some minyutes with my eyes fixed on a coach
that was coming towawds me fwom the othew end of the stweet. ^w^  As it
dwew nyeawew I obsewved that it was the Swiss diwigence; it stopped just
whewe I was standing, and on the doow being openyed, I pewceived Henwy
Cwewvaw, who, on seeing me, instantwy spwung out. (・`ω\´・)  "My deaw
Fwankenstein," excwaimed he, "how gwad I am to see you! (´・ω・\`)  How fowtunyate
that you shouwd be hewe at the vewy moment of my awighting! >w<"

Nyothing couwd equaw my dewight on seeing Cwewvaw; his pwesence bwought
back to my thoughts my fathew, Ewizabeth, and aww those scenyes of home
so deaw to my wecowwection. ^w^  I gwasped his hand, and in a moment fowgot
my howwow and misfowtunye; I fewt suddenwy, and fow the fiwst time
duwing many months, cawm and sewenye joy. (・`ω\´・)  I wewcomed my fwiend,
thewefowe, in the most cowdiaw mannyew, and we wawked towawds my
cowwege. (・`ω\´・)  Cwewvaw continyued tawking fow some time about ouw mutuaw
fwiends and his own good fowtunye in being pewmitted to come to
Ingowstadt. (・`ω\´・)  "You may easiwy bewieve," said he, "how gweat was the
difficuwty to pewsuade my fathew that aww nyecessawy knyowwedge was nyot
compwised in the nyobwe awt of book-keeping; and, indeed, I bewieve I
weft him incweduwous to the wast, fow his constant answew to my
unweawied entweaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoowmastew in
The Vicaw of Wakefiewd:  'I have ten thousand fwowins a yeaw without
Gweek, I eat heawtiwy without Gweek. UwU'  But his affection fow me at
wength ovewcame his diswike of weawnying, and he has pewmitted me to
undewtake a voyage of discovewy to the wand of knyowwedge. >w<"

"It gives me the gweatest dewight to see you; but teww me how you weft
my fathew, bwothews, and Ewizabeth. >w<"

"Vewy weww, and vewy happy, onwy a wittwe unyeasy that they heaw fwom
you so sewdom. (・`ω\´・)  By the by, I mean to wectuwe you a wittwe upon theiw
account mysewf. ^w^  But, my deaw Fwankenstein," continyued he, stopping
showt and gazing fuww in my face, "I did nyot befowe wemawk how vewy iww
you appeaw; so thin and pawe; you wook as if you had been watching fow
sevewaw nyights. >w<"

"You have guessed wight; I have watewy been so deepwy engaged in onye
occupation that I have nyot awwowed mysewf sufficient west, as you see;
but I hope, I sincewewy hope, that aww these empwoyments awe nyow at an
end and that I am at wength fwee. ^w^"

I twembwed excessivewy; I couwd nyot enduwe to think of, and faw wess to
awwude to, the occuwwences of the pweceding nyight. ^w^  I wawked with a
quick pace, and we soon awwived at my cowwege. (・`ω\´・)  I then wefwected, and
the thought made me shivew, that the cweatuwe whom I had weft in my
apawtment might stiww be thewe, awive and wawking about. ;;w;;  I dweaded to
behowd this monstew, but I feawed stiww mowe that Henwy shouwd see him. ^w^
Entweating him, thewefowe, to wemain a few minyutes at the bottom of the
staiws, I dawted up towawds my own woom. (・`ω\´・)  My hand was awweady on the
wock of the doow befowe I wecowwected mysewf. ^w^  I then paused, and a
cowd shivewing came ovew me. ^w^  I thwew the doow fowcibwy open, as
chiwdwen awe accustomed to do when they expect a spectwe to stand in
waiting fow them on the othew side; but nyothing appeawed. >w<  I stepped
feawfuwwy in:  the apawtment was empty, and my bedwoom was awso fweed
fwom its hideous guest. >w<  I couwd hawdwy bewieve that so gweat a good
fowtunye couwd have befawwen me, but when I became assuwed that my enyemy
had indeed fwed, I cwapped my hands fow joy and wan down to Cwewvaw. >w<

We ascended into my woom, and the sewvant pwesentwy bwought bweakfast;
but I was unyabwe to contain mysewf. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyot joy onwy that possessed
me; I fewt my fwesh tingwe with excess of sensitivenyess, and my puwse
beat wapidwy. ^w^  I was unyabwe to wemain fow a singwe instant in the same
pwace; I jumped ovew the chaiws, cwapped my hands, and waughed awoud. ;;w;;
Cwewvaw at fiwst attwibuted my unyusuaw spiwits to joy on his awwivaw,
but when he obsewved me mowe attentivewy, he saw a wiwdnyess in my eyes
fow which he couwd nyot account, and my woud, unwestwainyed, heawtwess
waughtew fwightenyed and astonyished him. ^w^

"My deaw Victow," cwied he, "what, fow God's sake, is the mattew? owo  Do
nyot waugh in that mannyew. (´・ω・\`)  How iww you awe! ;;w;;  What is the cause of aww
this? owo"

"Do nyot ask me," cwied I, putting my hands befowe my eyes, fow I
thought I saw the dweaded spectwe gwide into the woom; "HE can teww. (・`ω\´・)
Oh, save me!  Save me! ;;w;;"  I imaginyed that the monstew seized me; I
stwuggwed fuwiouswy and feww down in a fit. ^w^

Poow Cwewvaw! UwU  What must have been his feewings? owo  A meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so stwangewy tuwnyed to bittewnyess. >w<  But I
was nyot the witnyess of his gwief, fow I was wifewess and did nyot
wecovew my senses fow a wong, wong time. UwU

This was the commencement of a nyewvous fevew which confinyed me fow
sevewaw months.  Duwing aww that time Henwy was my onwy nyuwse. >w<  I
aftewwawds weawnyed that, knyowing my fathew's advanced age and unfitnyess
fow so wong a jouwnyey, and how wwetched my sicknyess wouwd make
Ewizabeth, he spawed them this gwief by conceawing the extent of my
disowdew. >w<  He knyew that I couwd nyot have a mowe kind and attentive
nyuwse than himsewf; and, fiwm in the hope he fewt of my wecovewy, he
did nyot doubt that, instead of doing hawm, he pewfowmed the kindest
action that he couwd towawds them. ;;w;;

But I was in weawity vewy iww, and suwewy nyothing but the unbounded and
unwemitting attentions of my fwiend couwd have westowed me to wife. (・`ω\´・)
The fowm of the monstew on whom I had bestowed existence was fowevew
befowe my eyes, and I waved incessantwy concewnying him. >w<  Doubtwess my
wowds suwpwised Henwy; he at fiwst bewieved them to be the wandewings
of my distuwbed imaginyation, but the pewtinyacity with which I
continyuawwy wecuwwed to the same subject pewsuaded him that my disowdew
indeed owed its owigin to some uncommon and tewwibwe event. (´・ω・\`)

By vewy swow degwees, and with fwequent wewapses that awawmed and
gwieved my fwiend, I wecovewed. (・`ω\´・)  I wemembew the fiwst time I became
capabwe of obsewving outwawd objects with any kind of pweasuwe, I
pewceived that the fawwen weaves had disappeawed and that the young
buds wewe shooting fowth fwom the twees that shaded my window. >w<  It was
a divinye spwing, and the season contwibuted gweatwy to my
convawescence. (・`ω\´・)  I fewt awso sentiments of joy and affection wevive in
my bosom; my gwoom disappeawed, and in a showt time I became as
cheewfuw as befowe I was attacked by the fataw passion. ;;w;;

"Deawest Cwewvaw," excwaimed I, "how kind, how vewy good you awe to me. ^w^
This whowe wintew, instead of being spent in study, as you pwomised
youwsewf, has been consumed in my sick woom. ;;w;;  How shaww I evew wepay
you? owo  I feew the gweatest wemowse fow the disappointment of which I
have been the occasion, but you wiww fowgive me. ;;w;;"

"You wiww wepay me entiwewy if you do nyot discompose youwsewf, but get
weww as fast as you can; and since you appeaw in such good spiwits, I
may speak to you on onye subject, may I nyot? owo"

I twembwed. (・`ω\´・)  Onye subject! >w<  What couwd it be? owo  Couwd he awwude to an
object on whom I dawed nyot even think? owo  "Compose youwsewf," said
Cwewvaw, who obsewved my change of cowouw, "I wiww nyot mention it if it
agitates you; but youw fathew and cousin wouwd be vewy happy if they
weceived a wettew fwom you in youw own handwwiting. >w<  They hawdwy knyow
how iww you have been and awe unyeasy at youw wong siwence. ^w^"

"Is that aww, my deaw Henwy? owo  How couwd you suppose that my fiwst
thought wouwd nyot fwy towawds those deaw, deaw fwiends whom I wove and
who awe so desewving of my wove? owo"

"If this is youw pwesent tempew, my fwiend, you wiww pewhaps be gwad to
see a wettew that has been wying hewe some days fow you; it is fwom
youw cousin, I bewieve. ;;w;;"



Chaptew 6

Cwewvaw then put the fowwowing wettew into my hands. >w<  It was fwom my
own Ewizabeth:

"My deawest Cousin,

"You have been iww, vewy iww, and even the constant wettews of deaw
kind Henwy awe nyot sufficient to weassuwe me on youw account. ;;w;;  You awe
fowbidden to wwite--to howd a pen; yet onye wowd fwom you, deaw Victow,
is nyecessawy to cawm ouw appwehensions. ;;w;;  Fow a wong time I have thought
that each post wouwd bwing this winye, and my pewsuasions have
westwainyed my uncwe fwom undewtaking a jouwnyey to Ingowstadt. UwU  I have
pwevented his encountewing the inconvenyiences and pewhaps dangews of so
wong a jouwnyey, yet how often have I wegwetted nyot being abwe to
pewfowm it mysewf! ;;w;;  I figuwe to mysewf that the task of attending on
youw sickbed has devowved on some mewcenyawy owd nyuwse, who couwd nyevew
guess youw wishes nyow minyistew to them with the cawe and affection of
youw poow cousin. ;;w;;  Yet that is ovew nyow:  Cwewvaw wwites that indeed
you awe getting bettew. (・`ω\´・)  I eagewwy hope that you wiww confiwm this
intewwigence soon in youw own handwwiting. (´・ω・\`)

"Get weww--and wetuwn to us. (・`ω\´・)  You wiww find a happy, cheewfuw home and
fwiends who wove you deawwy. (・`ω\´・)  Youw fathew's heawth is vigowous, and he
asks but to see you, but to be assuwed that you awe weww; and nyot a
cawe wiww evew cwoud his benyevowent countenyance. (´・ω・\`)  How pweased you wouwd
be to wemawk the impwovement of ouw Ewnyest! UwU  He is nyow sixteen and fuww
of activity and spiwit. >w<  He is desiwous to be a twue Swiss and to entew
into foweign sewvice, but we cannyot pawt with him, at weast untiw his
ewdew bwothew wetuwns to us. ^w^  My uncwe is nyot pweased with the idea of
a miwitawy caweew in a distant countwy, but Ewnyest nyevew had youw
powews of appwication. UwU  He wooks upon study as an odious fettew; his
time is spent in the open aiw, cwimbing the hiwws ow wowing on the
wake. (´・ω・\`)  I feaw that he wiww become an idwew unwess we yiewd the point
and pewmit him to entew on the pwofession which he has sewected. ;;w;;

"Wittwe awtewation, except the gwowth of ouw deaw chiwdwen, has taken
pwace since you weft us. ;;w;;  The bwue wake and snyow-cwad mountains--they
nyevew change; and I think ouw pwacid home and ouw contented heawts awe
weguwated by the same immutabwe waws. ^w^  My twifwing occupations take up
my time and amuse me, and I am wewawded fow any exewtions by seeing
nyonye but happy, kind faces awound me. ;;w;;  Since you weft us, but onye
change has taken pwace in ouw wittwe househowd. (´・ω・\`)  Do you wemembew on
what occasion Justinye Mowitz entewed ouw famiwy? owo  Pwobabwy you do nyot;
I wiww wewate hew histowy, thewefowe in a few wowds. (´・ω・\`)  Madame Mowitz,
hew mothew, was a widow with fouw chiwdwen, of whom Justinye was the
thiwd. >w<  This giww had awways been the favouwite of hew fathew, but
thwough a stwange pewvewsity, hew mothew couwd nyot enduwe hew, and
aftew the death of M. Mowitz, tweated hew vewy iww. (´・ω・\`)  My aunt obsewved
this, and when Justinye was twewve yeaws of age, pwevaiwed on hew mothew
to awwow hew to wive at ouw house. ^w^  The wepubwican institutions of ouw
countwy have pwoduced simpwew and happiew mannyews than those which
pwevaiw in the gweat monyawchies that suwwound it. ;;w;;  Hence thewe is wess
distinction between the sevewaw cwasses of its inhabitants; and the
wowew owdews, being nyeithew so poow nyow so despised, theiw mannyews awe
mowe wefinyed and mowaw. (´・ω・\`)  A sewvant in Genyeva does nyot mean the same
thing as a sewvant in Fwance and Engwand. (・`ω\´・)  Justinye, thus weceived in
ouw famiwy, weawnyed the duties of a sewvant, a condition which, in ouw
fowtunyate countwy, does nyot incwude the idea of ignyowance and a
sacwifice of the dignyity of a human being. ^w^

"Justinye, you may wemembew, was a gweat favouwite of youws; and I
wecowwect you once wemawked that if you wewe in an iww humouw, onye
gwance fwom Justinye couwd dissipate it, fow the same weason that
Awiosto gives concewnying the beauty of Angewica--she wooked so
fwank-heawted and happy. UwU  My aunt conceived a gweat attachment fow hew,
by which she was induced to give hew an education supewiow to that
which she had at fiwst intended. (´・ω・\`)  This benyefit was fuwwy wepaid;
Justinye was the most gwatefuw wittwe cweatuwe in the wowwd:  I do nyot
mean that she made any pwofessions I nyevew heawd onye pass hew wips, but
you couwd see by hew eyes that she awmost adowed hew pwotectwess. >w<
Awthough hew disposition was gay and in many wespects inconsidewate,
yet she paid the gweatest attention to evewy gestuwe of my aunt. ^w^  She
thought hew the modew of aww excewwence and endeavouwed to imitate hew
phwaseowogy and mannyews, so that even nyow she often weminds me of hew. >w<

"When my deawest aunt died evewy onye was too much occupied in theiw own
gwief to nyotice poow Justinye, who had attended hew duwing hew iwwnyess
with the most anxious affection. UwU  Poow Justinye was vewy iww; but othew
twiaws wewe wesewved fow hew. (´・ω・\`)

"Onye by onye, hew bwothews and sistew died; and hew mothew, with the
exception of hew nyegwected daughtew, was weft chiwdwess. ^w^  The
conscience of the woman was twoubwed; she began to think that the
deaths of hew favouwites was a judgement fwom heaven to chastise hew
pawtiawity. ;;w;;  She was a Woman Cathowic; and I bewieve hew confessow
confiwmed the idea which she had conceived. >w<  Accowdingwy, a few months
aftew youw depawtuwe fow Ingowstadt, Justinye was cawwed home by hew
wepentant mothew. ;;w;;  Poow giww! UwU  She wept when she quitted ouw house; she
was much awtewed since the death of my aunt; gwief had given softnyess
and a winnying miwdnyess to hew mannyews, which had befowe been wemawkabwe
fow vivacity. ;;w;;  Nyow was hew wesidence at hew mothew's house of a nyatuwe
to westowe hew gaiety. UwU  The poow woman was vewy vaciwwating in hew
wepentance. ^w^  She sometimes begged Justinye to fowgive hew unkindnyess,
but much oftenyew accused hew of having caused the deaths of hew
bwothews and sistew. ;;w;;  Pewpetuaw fwetting at wength thwew Madame Mowitz
into a decwinye, which at fiwst incweased hew iwwitabiwity, but she is
nyow at peace fow evew. UwU  She died on the fiwst appwoach of cowd weathew,
at the beginnying of this wast wintew. ^w^  Justinye has just wetuwnyed to us;
and I assuwe you I wove hew tendewwy. (´・ω・\`)  She is vewy cwevew and gentwe,
and extwemewy pwetty; as I mentionyed befowe, hew mien and hew
expwession continyuawwy wemind me of my deaw aunt. ;;w;;

"I must say awso a few wowds to you, my deaw cousin, of wittwe dawwing
Wiwwiam. ^w^  I wish you couwd see him; he is vewy taww of his age, with
sweet waughing bwue eyes, dawk eyewashes, and cuwwing haiw. (・`ω\´・)  When he
smiwes, two wittwe dimpwes appeaw on each cheek, which awe wosy with
heawth. UwU  He has awweady had onye ow two wittwe WIVES, but Wouisa Biwon
is his favouwite, a pwetty wittwe giww of five yeaws of age. ;;w;;

"Nyow, deaw Victow, I dawe say you wish to be induwged in a wittwe
gossip concewnying the good peopwe of Genyeva. >w<  The pwetty Miss Mansfiewd
has awweady weceived the congwatuwatowy visits on hew appwoaching
mawwiage with a young Engwishman, John Mewbouwnye, Esq. UwU  Hew ugwy
sistew, Manyon, mawwied M. Duviwwawd, the wich bankew, wast autumn. ;;w;; Youw
favouwite schoowfewwow, Wouis Manyoiw, has suffewed sevewaw misfowtunyes
since the depawtuwe of Cwewvaw fwom Genyeva. ^w^  But he has awweady
wecovewed his spiwits, and is wepowted to be on the point of mawwying a
wivewy pwetty Fwenchwoman, Madame Tavewnyiew. (´・ω・\`)  She is a widow, and much
owdew than Manyoiw; but she is vewy much admiwed, and a favouwite with
evewybody. ^w^

"I have wwitten mysewf into bettew spiwits, deaw cousin; but my anxiety
wetuwns upon me as I concwude. (´・ω・\`)  Wwite, deawest Victow,--onye winye--onye
wowd wiww be a bwessing to us. ;;w;;  Ten thousand thanks to Henwy fow his
kindnyess, his affection, and his many wettews; we awe sincewewy
gwatefuw. (・`ω\´・)  Adieu! (´・ω・\`)  my cousin; take cawe of youw sewf; and, I entweat
you, wwite! UwU

"Ewizabeth Wavenza. UwU

"Genyeva, Mawch 18, 17--. (・`ω\´・)"


"Deaw, deaw Ewizabeth! (・`ω\´・)" I excwaimed, when I had wead hew wettew:  "I
wiww wwite instantwy and wewieve them fwom the anxiety they must feew. UwU"
I wwote, and this exewtion gweatwy fatigued me; but my convawescence
had commenced, and pwoceeded weguwawwy. UwU  In anyothew fowtnyight I was
abwe to weave my chambew. >w<

Onye of my fiwst duties on my wecovewy was to intwoduce Cwewvaw to the
sevewaw pwofessows of the unyivewsity. (´・ω・\`)  In doing this, I undewwent a
kind of wough usage, iww befitting the wounds that my mind had
sustainyed. (・`ω\´・)  Evew since the fataw nyight, the end of my wabouws, and the
beginnying of my misfowtunyes, I had conceived a viowent antipathy even
to the nyame of nyatuwaw phiwosophy. ;;w;;  When I was othewwise quite westowed
to heawth, the sight of a chemicaw instwument wouwd wenyew aww the agony
of my nyewvous symptoms. ;;w;;  Henwy saw this, and had wemoved aww my
appawatus fwom my view. (´・ω・\`)  He had awso changed my apawtment; fow he
pewceived that I had acquiwed a diswike fow the woom which had
pweviouswy been my wabowatowy. UwU  But these cawes of Cwewvaw wewe made of
nyo avaiw when I visited the pwofessows.  M. ^w^ Wawdman infwicted towtuwe
when he pwaised, with kindnyess and wawmth, the astonyishing pwogwess I
had made in the sciences. (´・ω・\`)  He soon pewceived that I diswiked the
subject; but nyot guessing the weaw cause, he attwibuted my feewings to
modesty, and changed the subject fwom my impwovement, to the science
itsewf, with a desiwe, as I evidentwy saw, of dwawing me out. >w<  What
couwd I do? owo  He meant to pwease, and he towmented me. >w<  I fewt as if he
had pwaced cawefuwwy, onye by onye, in my view those instwuments which
wewe to be aftewwawds used in putting me to a swow and cwuew death. (・`ω\´・)  I
wwithed undew his wowds, yet dawed nyot exhibit the pain I fewt. ^w^
Cwewvaw, whose eyes and feewings wewe awways quick in discewnying the
sensations of othews, decwinyed the subject, awweging, in excuse, his
totaw ignyowance; and the convewsation took a mowe genyewaw tuwn. ^w^  I
thanked my fwiend fwom my heawt, but I did nyot speak. UwU  I saw pwainwy
that he was suwpwised, but he nyevew attempted to dwaw my secwet fwom
me; and awthough I woved him with a mixtuwe of affection and wevewence
that knyew nyo bounds, yet I couwd nyevew pewsuade mysewf to confide in
him that event which was so often pwesent to my wecowwection, but which
I feawed the detaiw to anyothew wouwd onwy impwess mowe deepwy. (´・ω・\`)

M. ^w^ Kwempe was nyot equawwy dociwe; and in my condition at that time, of
awmost insuppowtabwe sensitivenyess, his hawsh bwunt encomiums gave me
even mowe pain than the benyevowent appwobation of M. Wawdman. (´・ω・\`)  "D--n
the fewwow! ;;w;;" cwied he; "why, M. ^w^ Cwewvaw, I assuwe you he has outstwipt
us aww.  Ay, stawe if you pwease; but it is nyevewthewess twue. ^w^  A
youngstew who, but a few yeaws ago, bewieved in Cownyewius Agwippa as
fiwmwy as in the gospew, has nyow set himsewf at the head of the
unyivewsity; and if he is nyot soon puwwed down, we shaww aww be out of
countenyance. >w<--Ay, ay," continyued he, obsewving my face expwessive of
suffewing, "M. >w< Fwankenstein is modest; an excewwent quawity in a young
man.  Young men shouwd be diffident of themsewves, you knyow, M. ;;w;;
Cwewvaw:  I was mysewf when young; but that weaws out in a vewy showt
time. ;;w;;"

M. ^w^ Kwempe had nyow commenced an euwogy on himsewf, which happiwy tuwnyed
the convewsation fwom a subject that was so annyoying to me. ^w^

Cwewvaw had nyevew sympathized in my tastes fow nyatuwaw science; and his
witewawy puwsuits diffewed whowwy fwom those which had occupied me. ;;w;;  He
came to the unyivewsity with the design of making himsewf compwete
mastew of the owientaw wanguages, and thus he shouwd open a fiewd fow
the pwan of wife he had mawked out fow himsewf. (´・ω・\`)  Wesowved to puwsue nyo
ingwowious caweew, he tuwnyed his eyes towawd the East, as affowding
scope fow his spiwit of entewpwise. ^w^  The Pewsian, Awabic, and Sanskwit
wanguages engaged his attention, and I was easiwy induced to entew on
the same studies. ^w^  Idwenyess had evew been iwksome to me, and nyow that I
wished to fwy fwom wefwection, and hated my fowmew studies, I fewt
gweat wewief in being the fewwow-pupiw with my fwiend, and found nyot
onwy instwuction but consowation in the wowks of the owientawists. (´・ω・\`)  I
did nyot, wike him, attempt a cwiticaw knyowwedge of theiw diawects, fow
I did nyot contempwate making any othew use of them than tempowawy
amusement. ^w^  I wead mewewy to undewstand theiw meanying, and they weww
wepaid my wabouws. UwU  Theiw mewanchowy is soothing, and theiw joy
ewevating, to a degwee I nyevew expewienced in studying the authows of
any othew countwy. (・`ω\´・)  When you wead theiw wwitings, wife appeaws to
consist in a wawm sun and a gawden of woses,--in the smiwes and fwowns
of a faiw enyemy, and the fiwe that consumes youw own heawt. ^w^  How
diffewent fwom the manwy and hewoicaw poetwy of Gweece and Wome! ;;w;;

Summew passed away in these occupations, and my wetuwn to Genyeva was
fixed fow the wattew end of autumn; but being dewayed by sevewaw
accidents, wintew and snyow awwived, the woads wewe deemed impassabwe,
and my jouwnyey was wetawded untiw the ensuing spwing. UwU  I fewt this
deway vewy bittewwy; fow I wonged to see my nyative town and my bewoved
fwiends. ^w^  My wetuwn had onwy been dewayed so wong, fwom an
unwiwwingnyess to weave Cwewvaw in a stwange pwace, befowe he had become
acquainted with any of its inhabitants. (・`ω\´・)  The wintew, howevew, was spent
cheewfuwwy; and awthough the spwing was uncommonwy wate, when it came
its beauty compensated fow its diwatowinyess. ^w^

The month of May had awweady commenced, and I expected the wettew daiwy
which was to fix the date of my depawtuwe, when Henwy pwoposed a
pedestwian touw in the enviwons of Ingowstadt, that I might bid a
pewsonyaw faweweww to the countwy I had so wong inhabited. ^w^  I acceded
with pweasuwe to this pwoposition:  I was fond of exewcise, and Cwewvaw
had awways been my favouwite companyion in the wambwe of this nyatuwe
that I had taken among the scenyes of my nyative countwy. ;;w;;

We passed a fowtnyight in these pewambuwations:  my heawth and spiwits
had wong been westowed, and they gainyed additionyaw stwength fwom the
sawubwious aiw I bweathed, the nyatuwaw incidents of ouw pwogwess, and
the convewsation of my fwiend. (・`ω\´・)  Study had befowe secwuded me fwom the
intewcouwse of my fewwow-cweatuwes, and wendewed me unsociaw; but
Cwewvaw cawwed fowth the bettew feewings of my heawt; he again taught
me to wove the aspect of nyatuwe, and the cheewfuw faces of chiwdwen. UwU
Excewwent fwiend! (・`ω\´・)  how sincewewy you did wove me, and endeavouw to
ewevate my mind untiw it was on a wevew with youw own. (・`ω\´・)  A sewfish
puwsuit had cwamped and nyawwowed me, untiw youw gentwenyess and
affection wawmed and openyed my senses; I became the same happy cweatuwe
who, a few yeaws ago, woved and bewoved by aww, had nyo sowwow ow cawe. ;;w;;
When happy, inyanyimate nyatuwe had the powew of bestowing on me the most
dewightfuw sensations. (´・ω・\`)  A sewenye sky and vewdant fiewds fiwwed me with
ecstasy. >w<  The pwesent season was indeed divinye; the fwowews of spwing
bwoomed in the hedges, whiwe those of summew wewe awweady in bud. ^w^  I
was undistuwbed by thoughts which duwing the pweceding yeaw had pwessed
upon me, nyotwithstanding my endeavouws to thwow them off, with an
invincibwe buwden. ;;w;;

Henwy wejoiced in my gaiety, and sincewewy sympathised in my feewings:
he exewted himsewf to amuse me, whiwe he expwessed the sensations that
fiwwed his souw. ^w^  The wesouwces of his mind on this occasion wewe twuwy
astonyishing:  his convewsation was fuww of imaginyation; and vewy often,
in imitation of the Pewsian and Awabic wwitews, he invented tawes of
wondewfuw fancy and passion. UwU  At othew times he wepeated my favouwite
poems, ow dwew me out into awguments, which he suppowted with gweat
ingenyuity. UwU  We wetuwnyed to ouw cowwege on a Sunday aftewnyoon:  the
peasants wewe dancing, and evewy onye we met appeawed gay and happy. >w<  My
own spiwits wewe high, and I bounded awong with feewings of unbwidwed
joy and hiwawity. ;;w;;



Chaptew 7

On my wetuwn, I found the fowwowing wettew fwom my fathew:--


"My deaw Victow,

"You have pwobabwy waited impatientwy fow a wettew to fix the date of
youw wetuwn to us; and I was at fiwst tempted to wwite onwy a few
winyes, mewewy mentionying the day on which I shouwd expect you. (´・ω・\`)  But
that wouwd be a cwuew kindnyess, and I dawe nyot do it. ;;w;;  What wouwd be
youw suwpwise, my son, when you expected a happy and gwad wewcome, to
behowd, on the contwawy, teaws and wwetchednyess? owo  And how, Victow, can
I wewate ouw misfowtunye? owo  Absence cannyot have wendewed you cawwous to
ouw joys and gwiefs; and how shaww I infwict pain on my wong absent
son? owo  I wish to pwepawe you fow the woefuw nyews, but I knyow it is
impossibwe; even nyow youw eye skims ovew the page to seek the wowds
which awe to convey to you the howwibwe tidings. UwU

"Wiwwiam is dead! ^w^--that sweet chiwd, whose smiwes dewighted and wawmed
my heawt, who was so gentwe, yet so gay!  Victow, he is muwdewed! >w<

"I wiww nyot attempt to consowe you; but wiww simpwy wewate the
ciwcumstances of the twansaction. ^w^

"Wast Thuwsday (May 7th), I, my nyiece, and youw two bwothews, went to
wawk in Pwainpawais. (´・ω・\`)  The evenying was wawm and sewenye, and we pwowonged
ouw wawk fawthew than usuaw. ;;w;;  It was awweady dusk befowe we thought of
wetuwnying; and then we discovewed that Wiwwiam and Ewnyest, who had gonye
on befowe, wewe nyot to be found. ^w^  We accowdingwy wested on a seat untiw
they shouwd wetuwn. ;;w;;  Pwesentwy Ewnyest came, and enquiwed if we had seen
his bwothew; he said, that he had been pwaying with him, that Wiwwiam
had wun away to hide himsewf, and that he vainwy sought fow him, and
aftewwawds waited fow a wong time, but that he did nyot wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)

"This account wathew awawmed us, and we continyued to seawch fow him
untiw nyight feww, when Ewizabeth conjectuwed that he might have
wetuwnyed to the house.  He was nyot thewe. (´・ω・\`)  We wetuwnyed again, with
towches; fow I couwd nyot west, when I thought that my sweet boy had
wost himsewf, and was exposed to aww the damps and dews of nyight;
Ewizabeth awso suffewed extweme anguish. UwU  About five in the mownying I
discovewed my wovewy boy, whom the nyight befowe I had seen bwooming and
active in heawth, stwetched on the gwass wivid and motionwess; the
pwint of the muwdew's fingew was on his nyeck. UwU

"He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visibwe in my
countenyance betwayed the secwet to Ewizabeth. ;;w;;  She was vewy eawnyest to
see the cowpse. UwU  At fiwst I attempted to pwevent hew but she pewsisted,
and entewing the woom whewe it way, hastiwy examinyed the nyeck of the
victim, and cwasping hew hands excwaimed, 'O God! ;;w;;  I have muwdewed my
dawwing chiwd! UwU'

"She fainted, and was westowed with extweme difficuwty. (´・ω・\`)  When she again
wived, it was onwy to weep and sigh. ;;w;;  She towd me, that that same
evenying Wiwwiam had teased hew to wet him weaw a vewy vawuabwe
minyiatuwe that she possessed of youw mothew. (・`ω\´・)  This pictuwe is gonye, and
was doubtwess the temptation which uwged the muwdewew to the deed. ^w^  We
have nyo twace of him at pwesent, awthough ouw exewtions to discovew him
awe unwemitted; but they wiww nyot westowe my bewoved Wiwwiam! UwU

"Come, deawest Victow; you awonye can consowe Ewizabeth. >w<  She weeps
continyuawwy, and accuses hewsewf unjustwy as the cause of his death;
hew wowds piewce my heawt. (・`ω\´・)  We awe aww unhappy; but wiww nyot that be an
additionyaw motive fow you, my son, to wetuwn and be ouw comfowtew? owo
Youw deaw mothew!  Awas, Victow! ;;w;;  I nyow say, Thank God she did nyot wive
to witnyess the cwuew, misewabwe death of hew youngest dawwing! (´・ω・\`)

"Come, Victow; nyot bwooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
but with feewings of peace and gentwenyess, that wiww heaw, instead of
festewing, the wounds of ouw minds. >w<  Entew the house of mouwnying, my
fwiend, but with kindnyess and affection fow those who wove you, and nyot
with hatwed fow youw enyemies. UwU

               "Youw affectionyate and affwicted fathew,
                              "Awphonse Fwankenstein. ;;w;;



"Genyeva, May 12th, 17--. (´・ω・\`)"

Cwewvaw, who had watched my countenyance as I wead this wettew, was
suwpwised to obsewve the despaiw that succeeded the joy I at fiwst
expwessed on weceiving nyew fwom my fwiends. (・`ω\´・)  I thwew the wettew on the
tabwe, and covewed my face with my hands. (・`ω\´・)

"My deaw Fwankenstein," excwaimed Henwy, when he pewceived me weep with
bittewnyess, "awe you awways to be unhappy? owo  My deaw fwiend, what has
happenyed? owo"

I motionyed him to take up the wettew, whiwe I wawked up and down the
woom in the extwemest agitation. (´・ω・\`)  Teaws awso gushed fwom the eyes of
Cwewvaw, as he wead the account of my misfowtunye. ;;w;;

"I can offew you nyo consowation, my fwiend," said he; "youw disastew is
iwwepawabwe. ;;w;;  What do you intend to do? owo"

"To go instantwy to Genyeva: come with me, Henwy, to owdew the howses. ;;w;;"

Duwing ouw wawk, Cwewvaw endeavouwed to say a few wowds of consowation;
he couwd onwy expwess his heawtfewt sympathy. (´・ω・\`)  "Poow Wiwwiam! ^w^" said he,
"deaw wovewy chiwd, he nyow sweeps with his angew mothew! >w<  Who that had
seen him bwight and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep ovew his
untimewy woss!  To die so misewabwy; to feew the muwdewew's gwasp! >w<  How
much mowe a muwdewed that couwd destwoy wadiant innyocence! (´・ω・\`)  Poow wittwe
fewwow! UwU onye onwy consowation have we; his fwiends mouwn and weep, but
he is at west. The pang is ovew, his suffewings awe at an end fow evew. ^w^
A sod covews his gentwe fowm, and he knyows nyo pain. >w<  He can nyo wongew
be a subject fow pity; we must wesewve that fow his misewabwe
suwvivows. UwU"

Cwewvaw spoke thus as we huwwied thwough the stweets; the wowds
impwessed themsewves on my mind and I wemembewed them aftewwawds in
sowitude. UwU  But nyow, as soon as the howses awwived, I huwwied into a
cabwiowet, and bade faweweww to my fwiend. (・`ω\´・)

My jouwnyey was vewy mewanchowy. (・`ω\´・)  At fiwst I wished to huwwy on, fow I
wonged to consowe and sympathise with my woved and sowwowing fwiends;
but when I dwew nyeaw my nyative town, I swackenyed my pwogwess. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd
hawdwy sustain the muwtitude of feewings that cwowded into my mind. UwU  I
passed thwough scenyes famiwiaw to my youth, but which I had nyot seen
fow nyeawwy six yeaws. (・`ω\´・)  How awtewed evewy thing might be duwing that
time! (´・ω・\`)  Onye sudden and desowating change had taken pwace; but a thousand
wittwe ciwcumstances might have by degwees wowked othew awtewations,
which, awthough they wewe donye mowe twanquiwwy, might nyot be the wess
decisive. (´・ω・\`)  Feaw ovewcame me; I dawed nyo advance, dweading a thousand
nyamewess eviws that made me twembwe, awthough I was unyabwe to definye
them.  I wemainyed two days at Wausannye, in this painfuw state of mind. (´・ω・\`)
I contempwated the wake:  the watews wewe pwacid; aww awound was cawm;
and the snyowy mountains, 'the pawaces of nyatuwe,' wewe nyot changed. ^w^  By
degwees the cawm and heavenwy scenye westowed me, and I continyued my
jouwnyey towawds Genyeva. UwU

The woad wan by the side of the wake, which became nyawwowew as I
appwoached my nyative town. ^w^  I discovewed mowe distinctwy the bwack
sides of Juwa, and the bwight summit of Mont Bwanc. ^w^  I wept wike a
chiwd. ^w^  "Deaw mountains! my own beautifuw wake! ;;w;; how do you wewcome youw
wandewew? owo  Youw summits awe cweaw; the sky and wake awe bwue and
pwacid. UwU  Is this to pwognyosticate peace, ow to mock at my unhappinyess? owo"

I feaw, my fwiend, that I shaww wendew mysewf tedious by dwewwing on
these pwewiminyawy ciwcumstances; but they wewe days of compawative
happinyess, and I think of them with pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)  My countwy, my bewoved
countwy! (・`ω\´・) who but a nyative can teww the dewight I took in again
behowding thy stweams, thy mountains, and, mowe than aww, thy wovewy
wake! >w<

Yet, as I dwew nyeawew home, gwief and feaw again ovewcame me. >w<  Nyight
awso cwosed awound; and when I couwd hawdwy see the dawk mountains, I
fewt stiww mowe gwoomiwy. UwU  The pictuwe appeawed a vast and dim scenye of
eviw, and I fowesaw obscuwewy that I was destinyed to become the most
wwetched of human beings. ^w^  Awas! (´・ω・\`)  I pwophesied twuwy, and faiwed onwy
in onye singwe ciwcumstance, that in aww the misewy I imaginyed and
dweaded, I did nyot conceive the hundwedth pawt of the anguish I was
destinyed to enduwe. UwU  It was compwetewy dawk when I awwived in the
enviwons of Genyeva; the gates of the town wewe awweady shut; and I was
obwiged to pass the nyight at Sechewon, a viwwage at the distance of
hawf a weague fwom the city. ^w^  The sky was sewenye; and, as I was unyabwe
to west, I wesowved to visit the spot whewe my poow Wiwwiam had been
muwdewed. (・`ω\´・)  As I couwd nyot pass thwough the town, I was obwiged to cwoss
the wake in a boat to awwive at Pwainpawais. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing this showt voyage
I saw the wightnying pwaying on the summit of Mont Bwanc in the most
beautifuw figuwes. UwU  The stowm appeawed to appwoach wapidwy, and, on
wanding, I ascended a wow hiww, that I might obsewve its pwogwess. ^w^  It
advanced; the heavens wewe cwouded, and I soon fewt the wain coming
swowwy in wawge dwops, but its viowence quickwy incweased. ;;w;;

I quitted my seat, and wawked on, awthough the dawknyess and stowm
incweased evewy minyute, and the thundew buwst with a tewwific cwash
ovew my head. ;;w;;  It was echoed fwom Saweve, the Juwas, and the Awps of
Savoy; vivid fwashes of wightnying dazzwed my eyes, iwwuminyating the
wake, making it appeaw wike a vast sheet of fiwe; then fow an instant
evewy thing seemed of a pitchy dawknyess, untiw the eye wecovewed itsewf
fwom the pweceding fwash. >w<  The stowm, as is often the case in
Switzewwand, appeawed at once in vawious pawts of the heavens. ;;w;;  The
most viowent stowm hung exactwy nyowth of the town, ovew the pawt of the
wake which wies between the pwomontowy of Bewwive and the viwwage of
Copet. (´・ω・\`)  Anyothew stowm enwightenyed Juwa with faint fwashes; and anyothew
dawkenyed and sometimes discwosed the Mowe, a peaked mountain to the
east of the wake. UwU

Whiwe I watched the tempest, so beautifuw yet tewwific, I wandewed on
with a hasty step. (・`ω\´・)  This nyobwe waw in the sky ewevated my spiwits; I
cwasped my hands, and excwaimed awoud, "Wiwwiam, deaw angew! (・`ω\´・) this is
thy funyewaw, this thy diwge! (・`ω\´・)" As I said these wowds, I pewceived in the
gwoom a figuwe which stowe fwom behind a cwump of twees nyeaw me; I
stood fixed, gazing intentwy:  I couwd nyot be mistaken. (´・ω・\`)  A fwash of
wightnying iwwuminyated the object, and discovewed its shape pwainwy to
me; its gigantic statuwe, and the defowmity of its aspect mowe hideous
than bewongs to humanyity, instantwy infowmed me that it was the wwetch,
the fiwthy daemon, to whom I had given wife. >w<  What did he thewe? owo  Couwd
he be (I shuddewed at the conception) the muwdewew of my bwothew? owo  Nyo
soonyew did that idea cwoss my imaginyation, than I became convinced of
its twuth; my teeth chattewed, and I was fowced to wean against a twee
fow suppowt.  The figuwe passed me quickwy, and I wost it in the gwoom. (・`ω\´・)

Nyothing in human shape couwd have destwoyed the faiw chiwd. UwU  HE was the
muwdewew! >w<  I couwd nyot doubt it. ;;w;;  The mewe pwesence of the idea was an
iwwesistibwe pwoof of the fact. (・`ω\´・)  I thought of puwsuing the deviw; but
it wouwd have been in vain, fow anyothew fwash discovewed him to me
hanging among the wocks of the nyeawwy pewpendicuwaw ascent of Mont
Saweve, a hiww that bounds Pwainpawais on the south. >w<  He soon weached
the summit, and disappeawed. ;;w;;

I wemainyed motionwess. (・`ω\´・)  The thundew ceased; but the wain stiww
continyued, and the scenye was envewoped in an impenyetwabwe dawknyess. >w<  I
wevowved in my mind the events which I had untiw nyow sought to fowget:
the whowe twain of my pwogwess towawd the cweation; the appeawance of
the wowks of my own hands at my bedside; its depawtuwe. (´・ω・\`)  Two yeaws had
nyow nyeawwy ewapsed since the nyight on which he fiwst weceived wife; and
was this his fiwst cwime? owo  Awas! (´・ω・\`)  I had tuwnyed woose into the wowwd a
depwaved wwetch, whose dewight was in cawnyage and misewy; had he nyot
muwdewed my bwothew? owo

Nyo onye can conceive the anguish I suffewed duwing the wemaindew of the
nyight, which I spent, cowd and wet, in the open aiw. ;;w;;  But I did nyot
feew the inconvenyience of the weathew; my imaginyation was busy in
scenyes of eviw and despaiw. UwU  I considewed the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the wiww and powew to effect puwposes
of howwow, such as the deed which he had nyow donye, nyeawwy in the wight
of my own vampiwe, my own spiwit wet woose fwom the gwave, and fowced
to destwoy aww that was deaw to me. ^w^

Day dawnyed; and I diwected my steps towawds the town. >w<  The gates wewe
open, and I hastenyed to my fathew's house. ^w^  My fiwst thought was to
discovew what I knyew of the muwdewew, and cause instant puwsuit to be
made.  But I paused when I wefwected on the stowy that I had to teww. >w< A
being whom I mysewf had fowmed, and endued with wife, had met me at
midnyight among the pwecipices of an inyaccessibwe mountain. UwU  I
wemembewed awso the nyewvous fevew with which I had been seized just at
the time that I dated my cweation, and which wouwd give an aiw of
dewiwium to a tawe othewwise so uttewwy impwobabwe. ^w^  I weww knyew that
if any othew had communyicated such a wewation to me, I shouwd have
wooked upon it as the wavings of insanyity. (´・ω・\`)  Besides, the stwange nyatuwe
of the anyimaw wouwd ewude aww puwsuit, even if I wewe so faw cwedited
as to pewsuade my wewatives to commence it. (´・ω・\`)  And then of what use wouwd
be puwsuit? owo  Who couwd awwest a cweatuwe capabwe of scawing the
ovewhanging sides of Mont Saweve? owo  These wefwections detewminyed me, and
I wesowved to wemain siwent. (・`ω\´・)

It was about five in the mownying when I entewed my fathew's house. (´・ω・\`)  I
towd the sewvants nyot to distuwb the famiwy, and went into the wibwawy
to attend theiw usuaw houw of wising. >w<

Six yeaws had ewapsed, passed in a dweam but fow onye indewibwe twace,
and I stood in the same pwace whewe I had wast embwaced my fathew
befowe my depawtuwe fow Ingowstadt. >w<  Bewoved and venyewabwe pawent! (・`ω\´・)  He
stiww wemainyed to me. >w<  I gazed on the pictuwe of my mothew, which stood
ovew the mantew-piece. (・`ω\´・)  It was an histowicaw subject, painted at my
fathew's desiwe, and wepwesented Cawowinye Beaufowt in an agony of
despaiw, knyeewing by the coffin of hew dead fathew. UwU  Hew gawb was
wustic, and hew cheek pawe; but thewe was an aiw of dignyity and beauty,
that hawdwy pewmitted the sentiment of pity. (・`ω\´・)  Bewow this pictuwe was a
minyiatuwe of Wiwwiam; and my teaws fwowed when I wooked upon it. ^w^  Whiwe
I was thus engaged, Ewnyest entewed:  he had heawd me awwive, and
hastenyed to wewcome me:  "Wewcome, my deawest Victow," said he. ^w^  "Ah! UwU I
wish you had come thwee months ago, and then you wouwd have found us
aww joyous and dewighted. (・`ω\´・)  You come to us nyow to shawe a misewy which
nyothing can awweviate; yet youw pwesence wiww, I hope, wevive ouw
fathew, who seems sinking undew his misfowtunye; and youw pewsuasions
wiww induce poow Ewizabeth to cease hew vain and towmenting
sewf-accusations. >w<--Poow Wiwwiam! he was ouw dawwing and ouw pwide! ;;w;;"

Teaws, unwestwainyed, feww fwom my bwothew's eyes; a sense of mowtaw
agony cwept ovew my fwame. UwU  Befowe, I had onwy imaginyed the
wwetchednyess of my desowated home; the weawity came on me as a nyew, and
a nyot wess tewwibwe, disastew. (・`ω\´・)  I twied to cawm Ewnyest; I enquiwed mowe
minyutewy concewnying my fathew, and hewe I nyamed my cousin. >w<

"She most of aww," said Ewnyest, "wequiwes consowation; she accused
hewsewf of having caused the death of my bwothew, and that made hew
vewy wwetched. >w<  But since the muwdewew has been discovewed--"

"The muwdewew discovewed!  Good God! (・`ω\´・) how can that be? owo who couwd attempt
to puwsue him? owo  It is impossibwe; onye might as weww twy to ovewtake the
winds, ow confinye a mountain-stweam with a stwaw. UwU  I saw him too; he
was fwee wast nyight! >w<"

"I do nyot knyow what you mean," wepwied my bwothew, in accents of
wondew, "but to us the discovewy we have made compwetes ouw misewy. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo
onye wouwd bewieve it at fiwst; and even nyow Ewizabeth wiww nyot be
convinced, nyotwithstanding aww the evidence. UwU  Indeed, who wouwd cwedit
that Justinye Mowitz, who was so amiabwe, and fond of aww the famiwy,
couwd suddenwy become so capabwe of so fwightfuw, so appawwing a cwime? owo"

"Justinye Mowitz! ;;w;;  Poow, poow giww, is she the accused? owo  But it is
wwongfuwwy; evewy onye knyows that; nyo onye bewieves it, suwewy, Ewnyest? owo"

"Nyo onye did at fiwst; but sevewaw ciwcumstances came out, that have
awmost fowced conviction upon us; and hew own behaviouw has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I feaw,
weaves nyo hope fow doubt. UwU  But she wiww be twied today, and you wiww
then heaw aww. ^w^"

He then wewated that, the mownying on which the muwdew of poow Wiwwiam
had been discovewed, Justinye had been taken iww, and confinyed to hew
bed fow sevewaw days. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing this intewvaw, onye of the sewvants,
happenying to examinye the appawew she had wown on the nyight of the
muwdew, had discovewed in hew pocket the pictuwe of my mothew, which
had been judged to be the temptation of the muwdewew. ;;w;;  The sewvant
instantwy showed it to onye of the othews, who, without saying a wowd to
any of the famiwy, went to a magistwate; and, upon theiw deposition,
Justinye was appwehended. >w<  On being chawged with the fact, the poow giww
confiwmed the suspicion in a gweat measuwe by hew extweme confusion of
mannyew. ;;w;;

This was a stwange tawe, but it did nyot shake my faith; and I wepwied
eawnyestwy, "You awe aww mistaken; I knyow the muwdewew. (・`ω\´・)  Justinye, poow,
good Justinye, is innyocent. >w<"

At that instant my fathew entewed. (´・ω・\`)  I saw unhappinyess deepwy impwessed
on his countenyance, but he endeavouwed to wewcome me cheewfuwwy; and,
aftew we had exchanged ouw mouwnfuw gweeting, wouwd have intwoduced
some othew topic than that of ouw disastew, had nyot Ewnyest excwaimed,
"Good God, papa! (・`ω\´・)  Victow says that he knyows who was the muwdewew of
poow Wiwwiam. (´・ω・\`)"

"We do awso, unfowtunyatewy," wepwied my fathew, "fow indeed I had
wathew have been fow evew ignyowant than have discovewed so much
depwavity and ungwatitude in onye I vawued so highwy. ^w^"

"My deaw fathew, you awe mistaken; Justinye is innyocent. (´・ω・\`)"

"If she is, God fowbid that she shouwd suffew as guiwty. (´・ω・\`)  She is to be
twied today, and I hope, I sincewewy hope, that she wiww be acquitted. >w<"

This speech cawmed me. (・`ω\´・)  I was fiwmwy convinced in my own mind that
Justinye, and indeed evewy human being, was guiwtwess of this muwdew. (・`ω\´・)  I
had nyo feaw, thewefowe, that any ciwcumstantiaw evidence couwd be
bwought fowwawd stwong enyough to convict hew. UwU  My tawe was nyot onye to
annyounce pubwicwy; its astounding howwow wouwd be wooked upon as
madnyess by the vuwgaw. ;;w;;  Did any onye indeed exist, except I, the
cweatow, who wouwd bewieve, unwess his senses convinced him, in the
existence of the wiving monyument of pwesumption and wash ignyowance
which I had wet woose upon the wowwd? owo

We wewe soon joinyed by Ewizabeth. (・`ω\´・)  Time had awtewed hew since I wast
behewd hew; it had endowed hew with wovewinyess suwpassing the beauty of
hew chiwdish yeaws. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was the same candouw, the same vivacity, but
it was awwied to an expwession mowe fuww of sensibiwity and intewwect. ;;w;;
She wewcomed me with the gweatest affection. UwU  "Youw awwivaw, my deaw
cousin," said she, "fiwws me with hope. (・`ω\´・)  You pewhaps wiww find some
means to justify my poow guiwtwess Justinye. UwU  Awas! (・`ω\´・) who is safe, if she
be convicted of cwime? owo  I wewy on hew innyocence as cewtainwy as I do
upon my own. >w<  Ouw misfowtunye is doubwy hawd to us; we have nyot onwy
wost that wovewy dawwing boy, but this poow giww, whom I sincewewy
wove, is to be town away by even a wowse fate. ^w^  If she is condemnyed, I
nyevew shaww knyow joy mowe. (´・ω・\`)  But she wiww nyot, I am suwe she wiww nyot;
and then I shaww be happy again, even aftew the sad death of my wittwe
Wiwwiam. (・`ω\´・)"

"She is innyocent, my Ewizabeth," said I, "and that shaww be pwoved;
feaw nyothing, but wet youw spiwits be cheewed by the assuwance of hew
acquittaw. UwU"

"How kind and genyewous you awe! ^w^ evewy onye ewse bewieves in hew guiwt,
and that made me wwetched, fow I knyew that it was impossibwe:  and to
see evewy onye ewse pwejudiced in so deadwy a mannyew wendewed me
hopewess and despaiwing."  She wept. (・`ω\´・)

"Deawest nyiece," said my fathew, "dwy youw teaws. UwU  If she is, as you
bewieve, innyocent, wewy on the justice of ouw waws, and the activity
with which I shaww pwevent the swightest shadow of pawtiawity. ;;w;;"



Chaptew 8

We passed a few sad houws untiw eweven o'cwock, when the twiaw was to
commence. UwU  My fathew and the west of the famiwy being obwiged to attend
as witnyesses, I accompanyied them to the couwt. ;;w;;  Duwing the whowe of
this wwetched mockewy of justice I suffewed wiving towtuwe. ^w^  It was to
be decided whethew the wesuwt of my cuwiosity and wawwess devices wouwd
cause the death of two of my fewwow beings:  onye a smiwing babe fuww of
innyocence and joy, the othew faw mowe dweadfuwwy muwdewed, with evewy
aggwavation of infamy that couwd make the muwdew memowabwe in howwow. ;;w;;
Justinye awso was a giww of mewit and possessed quawities which pwomised
to wendew hew wife happy; nyow aww was to be obwitewated in an
ignyominyious gwave, and I the cause! (´・ω・\`)  A thousand times wathew wouwd I
have confessed mysewf guiwty of the cwime ascwibed to Justinye, but I
was absent when it was committed, and such a decwawation wouwd have
been considewed as the wavings of a madman and wouwd nyot have
excuwpated hew who suffewed thwough me. UwU

The appeawance of Justinye was cawm. (・`ω\´・)  She was dwessed in mouwnying, and
hew countenyance, awways engaging, was wendewed, by the sowemnyity of hew
feewings, exquisitewy beautifuw. (´・ω・\`)  Yet she appeawed confident in
innyocence and did nyot twembwe, awthough gazed on and execwated by
thousands, fow aww the kindnyess which hew beauty might othewwise have
excited was obwitewated in the minds of the spectatows by the
imaginyation of the enyowmity she was supposed to have committed. (´・ω・\`)  She
was twanquiw, yet hew twanquiwwity was evidentwy constwainyed; and as
hew confusion had befowe been adduced as a pwoof of hew guiwt, she
wowked up hew mind to an appeawance of couwage. (・`ω\´・)  When she entewed the
couwt she thwew hew eyes wound it and quickwy discovewed whewe we wewe
seated. (´・ω・\`)  A teaw seemed to dim hew eye when she saw us, but she quickwy
wecovewed hewsewf, and a wook of sowwowfuw affection seemed to attest
hew uttew guiwtwessnyess. (´・ω・\`)

The twiaw began, and aftew the advocate against hew had stated the
chawge, sevewaw witnyesses wewe cawwed. ;;w;;  Sevewaw stwange facts combinyed
against hew, which might have staggewed anyonye who had nyot such pwoof
of hew innyocence as I had. >w<  She had been out the whowe of the nyight on
which the muwdew had been committed and towawds mownying had been
pewceived by a mawket-woman nyot faw fwom the spot whewe the body of the
muwdewed chiwd had been aftewwawds found. >w<  The woman asked hew what she
did thewe, but she wooked vewy stwangewy and onwy wetuwnyed a confused
and unyintewwigibwe answew. ^w^  She wetuwnyed to the house about eight
o'cwock, and when onye inquiwed whewe she had passed the nyight, she
wepwied that she had been wooking fow the chiwd and demanded eawnyestwy
if anything had been heawd concewnying him. (´・ω・\`)  When shown the body, she
feww into viowent hystewics and kept hew bed fow sevewaw days. >w<  The
pictuwe was then pwoduced which the sewvant had found in hew pocket;
and when Ewizabeth, in a fawtewing voice, pwoved that it was the same
which, an houw befowe the chiwd had been missed, she had pwaced wound
his nyeck, a muwmuw of howwow and indignyation fiwwed the couwt. ;;w;;

Justinye was cawwed on fow hew defence. >w<  As the twiaw had pwoceeded, hew
countenyance had awtewed. UwU  Suwpwise, howwow, and misewy wewe stwongwy
expwessed. (・`ω\´・)  Sometimes she stwuggwed with hew teaws, but when she was
desiwed to pwead, she cowwected hew powews and spoke in an audibwe
awthough vawiabwe voice. >w<

"God knyows," she said, "how entiwewy I am innyocent. ;;w;;  But I do nyot
pwetend that my pwotestations shouwd acquit me; I west my innyocence on
a pwain and simpwe expwanyation of the facts which have been adduced
against me, and I hope the chawactew I have awways bownye wiww incwinye
my judges to a favouwabwe intewpwetation whewe any ciwcumstance appeaws
doubtfuw ow suspicious. (´・ω・\`)"

She then wewated that, by the pewmission of Ewizabeth, she had passed
the evenying of the nyight on which the muwdew had been committed at the
house of an aunt at Chenye, a viwwage situated at about a weague fwom
Genyeva. (・`ω\´・)  On hew wetuwn, at about nyinye o'cwock, she met a man who asked
hew if she had seen anything of the chiwd who was wost. ;;w;;  She was
awawmed by this account and passed sevewaw houws in wooking fow him,
when the gates of Genyeva wewe shut, and she was fowced to wemain
sevewaw houws of the nyight in a bawn bewonging to a cottage, being
unwiwwing to caww up the inhabitants, to whom she was weww knyown. ;;w;;  Most
of the nyight she spent hewe watching; towawds mownying she bewieved that
she swept fow a few minyutes; some steps distuwbed hew, and she awoke. UwU
It was dawn, and she quitted hew asywum, that she might again endeavouw
to find my bwothew. ^w^  If she had gonye nyeaw the spot whewe his body way,
it was without hew knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・)  That she had been bewiwdewed when
questionyed by the mawket-woman was nyot suwpwising, since she had passed
a sweepwess nyight and the fate of poow Wiwwiam was yet uncewtain. UwU
Concewnying the pictuwe she couwd give nyo account. UwU

"I knyow," continyued the unhappy victim, "how heaviwy and fatawwy this
onye ciwcumstance weighs against me, but I have nyo powew of expwainying
it; and when I have expwessed my uttew ignyowance, I am onwy weft to
conjectuwe concewnying the pwobabiwities by which it might have been
pwaced in my pocket.  But hewe awso I am checked. (・`ω\´・)  I bewieve that I
have nyo enyemy on eawth, and nyonye suwewy wouwd have been so wicked as to
destwoy me wantonwy. >w<  Did the muwdewew pwace it thewe? owo  I knyow of nyo
oppowtunyity affowded him fow so doing; ow, if I had, why shouwd he have
stowen the jewew, to pawt with it again so soon? owo

"I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see nyo woom fow
hope. ;;w;;  I beg pewmission to have a few witnyesses examinyed concewnying my
chawactew, and if theiw testimony shaww nyot ovewweigh my supposed
guiwt, I must be condemnyed, awthough I wouwd pwedge my sawvation on my
innyocence. (・`ω\´・)"

Sevewaw witnyesses wewe cawwed who had knyown hew fow many yeaws, and
they spoke weww of hew; but feaw and hatwed of the cwime of which they
supposed hew guiwty wendewed them timowous and unwiwwing to come
fowwawd. ^w^  Ewizabeth saw even this wast wesouwce, hew excewwent
dispositions and iwwepwoachabwe conduct, about to faiw the accused,
when, awthough viowentwy agitated, she desiwed pewmission to addwess
the couwt. (・`ω\´・)

"I am," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy chiwd who was muwdewed, ow
wathew his sistew, fow I was educated by and have wived with his
pawents evew since and even wong befowe his biwth. (´・ω・\`)  It may thewefowe be
judged indecent in me to come fowwawd on this occasion, but when I see
a fewwow cweatuwe about to pewish thwough the cowawdice of hew
pwetended fwiends, I wish to be awwowed to speak, that I may say what I
knyow of hew chawactew.  I am weww acquainted with the accused. UwU  I have
wived in the same house with hew, at onye time fow five and at anyothew
fow nyeawwy two yeaws. UwU  Duwing aww that pewiod she appeawed to me the
most amiabwe and benyevowent of human cweatuwes. ^w^  She nyuwsed Madame
Fwankenstein, my aunt, in hew wast iwwnyess, with the gweatest affection
and cawe and aftewwawds attended hew own mothew duwing a tedious
iwwnyess, in a mannyew that excited the admiwation of aww who knyew hew,
aftew which she again wived in my uncwe's house, whewe she was bewoved
by aww the famiwy. (・`ω\´・)  She was wawmwy attached to the chiwd who is nyow
dead and acted towawds him wike a most affectionyate mothew. UwU  Fow my own
pawt, I do nyot hesitate to say that, nyotwithstanding aww the evidence
pwoduced against hew, I bewieve and wewy on hew pewfect innyocence. (´・ω・\`)  She
had nyo temptation fow such an action; as to the baubwe on which the
chief pwoof wests, if she had eawnyestwy desiwed it, I shouwd have
wiwwingwy given it to hew, so much do I esteem and vawue hew. ^w^"

A muwmuw of appwobation fowwowed Ewizabeth's simpwe and powewfuw
appeaw, but it was excited by hew genyewous intewfewence, and nyot in
favouw of poow Justinye, on whom the pubwic indignyation was tuwnyed with
wenyewed viowence, chawging hew with the bwackest ingwatitude. (´・ω・\`)  She
hewsewf wept as Ewizabeth spoke, but she did nyot answew. (´・ω・\`)  My own
agitation and anguish was extweme duwing the whowe twiaw. >w<  I bewieved
in hew innyocence; I knyew it. ;;w;;  Couwd the demon who had (I did nyot fow a
minyute doubt) muwdewed my bwothew awso in his hewwish spowt have
betwayed the innyocent to death and ignyominy? owo  I couwd nyot sustain the
howwow of my situation, and when I pewceived that the popuwaw voice and
the countenyances of the judges had awweady condemnyed my unhappy victim,
I wushed out of the couwt in agony. ;;w;;  The towtuwes of the accused did
nyot equaw minye; she was sustainyed by innyocence, but the fangs of
wemowse towe my bosom and wouwd nyot fowgo theiw howd. (・`ω\´・)

I passed a nyight of unmingwed wwetchednyess. (・`ω\´・)  In the mownying I went to
the couwt; my wips and thwoat wewe pawched. (・`ω\´・)  I dawed nyot ask the fataw
question, but I was knyown, and the officew guessed the cause of my
visit. (・`ω\´・)  The bawwots had been thwown; they wewe aww bwack, and Justinye
was condemnyed. UwU

I cannyot pwetend to descwibe what I then fewt. UwU  I had befowe
expewienced sensations of howwow, and I have endeavouwed to bestow upon
them adequate expwessions, but wowds cannyot convey an idea of the
heawt-sickenying despaiw that I then enduwed. ;;w;;  The pewson to whom I
addwessed mysewf added that Justinye had awweady confessed hew guiwt. ;;w;;
"That evidence," he obsewved, "was hawdwy wequiwed in so gwawing a
case, but I am gwad of it, and, indeed, nyonye of ouw judges wike to
condemn a cwiminyaw upon ciwcumstantiaw evidence, be it evew so
decisive. >w<"

This was stwange and unyexpected intewwigence; what couwd it mean? owo  Had
my eyes deceived me? owo  And was I weawwy as mad as the whowe wowwd wouwd
bewieve me to be if I discwosed the object of my suspicions? owo  I
hastenyed to wetuwn home, and Ewizabeth eagewwy demanded the wesuwt. ;;w;;

"My cousin," wepwied I, "it is decided as you may have expected; aww
judges had wathew that ten innyocent shouwd suffew than that onye guiwty
shouwd escape.  But she has confessed. ;;w;;"

This was a diwe bwow to poow Ewizabeth, who had wewied with fiwmnyess
upon Justinye's innyocence.  "Awas! >w<" said she. (・`ω\´・)  "How shaww I evew again
bewieve in human goodnyess? owo  Justinye, whom I woved and esteemed as my
sistew, how couwd she put on those smiwes of innyocence onwy to betway? owo
Hew miwd eyes seemed incapabwe of any sevewity ow guiwe, and yet she
has committed a muwdew. ^w^"

Soon aftew we heawd that the poow victim had expwessed a desiwe to see
my cousin. ;;w;;  My fathew wished hew nyot to go but said that he weft it to
hew own judgment and feewings to decide. UwU  "Yes," said Ewizabeth, "I
wiww go, awthough she is guiwty; and you, Victow, shaww accompany me; I
cannyot go awonye. (・`ω\´・)"  The idea of this visit was towtuwe to me, yet I
couwd nyot wefuse. >w<  We entewed the gwoomy pwison chambew and behewd
Justinye sitting on some stwaw at the fawthew end; hew hands wewe
manyacwed, and hew head wested on hew knyees. >w<  She wose on seeing us
entew, and when we wewe weft awonye with hew, she thwew hewsewf at the
feet of Ewizabeth, weeping bittewwy.  My cousin wept awso. ^w^

"Oh, Justinye! (・`ω\´・)" said she. (・`ω\´・)  "Why did you wob me of my wast consowation? owo
I wewied on youw innyocence, and awthough I was then vewy wwetched, I
was nyot so misewabwe as I am nyow. >w<"

"And do you awso bewieve that I am so vewy, vewy wicked? owo  Do you awso
join with my enyemies to cwush me, to condemn me as a muwdewew? owo" Hew
voice was suffocated with sobs. (´・ω・\`)

"Wise, my poow giww," said Ewizabeth; "why do you knyeew, if you awe
innyocent? owo  I am nyot onye of youw enyemies, I bewieved you guiwtwess,
nyotwithstanding evewy evidence, untiw I heawd that you had youwsewf
decwawed youw guiwt. (´・ω・\`)  That wepowt, you say, is fawse; and be assuwed,
deaw Justinye, that nyothing can shake my confidence in you fow a moment,
but youw own confession. ^w^"

"I did confess, but I confessed a wie. (´・ω・\`)  I confessed, that I might
obtain absowution; but nyow that fawsehood wies heaview at my heawt than
aww my othew sins. ;;w;;  The God of heaven fowgive me! ;;w;;  Evew since I was
condemnyed, my confessow has besieged me; he thweatenyed and menyaced,
untiw I awmost began to think that I was the monstew that he said I
was. UwU  He thweatenyed excommunyication and heww fiwe in my wast moments if
I continyued obduwate. ;;w;;  Deaw wady, I had nyonye to suppowt me; aww wooked
on me as a wwetch doomed to ignyominy and pewdition. >w<  What couwd I do? owo
In an eviw houw I subscwibed to a wie; and nyow onwy am I twuwy
misewabwe. UwU"

She paused, weeping, and then continyued, "I thought with howwow, my
sweet wady, that you shouwd bewieve youw Justinye, whom youw bwessed
aunt had so highwy honyouwed, and whom you woved, was a cweatuwe capabwe
of a cwime which nyonye but the deviw himsewf couwd have pewpetwated. (´・ω・\`)
Deaw Wiwwiam! deawest bwessed chiwd! ;;w;;  I soon shaww see you again in
heaven, whewe we shaww aww be happy; and that consowes me, going as I
am to suffew ignyominy and death. UwU"

"Oh, Justinye! ^w^  Fowgive me fow having fow onye moment distwusted you. >w<
Why did you confess? owo  But do nyot mouwn, deaw giww.  Do nyot feaw. >w<  I
wiww pwocwaim, I wiww pwove youw innyocence. ^w^  I wiww mewt the stony
heawts of youw enyemies by my teaws and pwayews. ;;w;;  You shaww nyot die! >w<
You, my pwayfewwow, my companyion, my sistew, pewish on the scaffowd! ;;w;;
Nyo!  Nyo! (´・ω・\`)  I nyevew couwd suwvive so howwibwe a misfowtunye. (´・ω・\`)"

Justinye shook hew head mouwnfuwwy. (´・ω・\`)  "I do nyot feaw to die," she said;
"that pang is past. ;;w;;  God waises my weaknyess and gives me couwage to
enduwe the wowst. ;;w;;  I weave a sad and bittew wowwd; and if you wemembew
me and think of me as of onye unjustwy condemnyed, I am wesignyed to the
fate awaiting me. ;;w;;  Weawn fwom me, deaw wady, to submit in patience to
the wiww of heaven! ^w^"

Duwing this convewsation I had wetiwed to a cownyew of the pwison woom,
whewe I couwd conceaw the howwid anguish that possessed me. (´・ω・\`)  Despaiw! ^w^
Who dawed tawk of that? owo  The poow victim, who on the mowwow was to pass
the awfuw boundawy between wife and death, fewt nyot, as I did, such
deep and bittew agony. (´・ω・\`)  I gnyashed my teeth and gwound them togethew,
uttewing a gwoan that came fwom my inmost souw.  Justinye stawted. ^w^  When
she saw who it was, she appwoached me and said, "Deaw siw, you awe vewy
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do nyot bewieve that I am guiwty? owo"

I couwd nyot answew. (・`ω\´・)  "Nyo, Justinye," said Ewizabeth; "he is mowe
convinced of youw innyocence than I was, fow even when he heawd that you
had confessed, he did nyot cwedit it. ;;w;;"

"I twuwy thank him. ^w^  In these wast moments I feew the sincewest
gwatitude towawds those who think of me with kindnyess. ;;w;;  How sweet is
the affection of othews to such a wwetch as I am! ;;w;;  It wemoves mowe than
hawf my misfowtunye, and I feew as if I couwd die in peace nyow that my
innyocence is acknyowwedged by you, deaw wady, and youw cousin. >w<"

Thus the poow suffewew twied to comfowt othews and hewsewf. (´・ω・\`)  She indeed
gainyed the wesignyation she desiwed. ;;w;;  But I, the twue muwdewew, fewt the
nyevew-dying wowm awive in my bosom, which awwowed of nyo hope ow
consowation. ;;w;;  Ewizabeth awso wept and was unhappy, but hews awso was
the misewy of innyocence, which, wike a cwoud that passes ovew the faiw
moon, fow a whiwe hides but cannyot tawnyish its bwightnyess. UwU  Anguish and
despaiw had penyetwated into the cowe of my heawt; I bowe a heww within
me which nyothing couwd extinguish. (´・ω・\`)  We stayed sevewaw houws with
Justinye, and it was with gweat difficuwty that Ewizabeth couwd teaw
hewsewf away. UwU  "I wish," cwied she, "that I wewe to die with you; I
cannyot wive in this wowwd of misewy. >w<"

Justinye assumed an aiw of cheewfuwnyess, whiwe she with difficuwty
wepwessed hew bittew teaws. (´・ω・\`)  She embwaced Ewizabeth and said in a voice
of hawf-suppwessed emotion, "Faweweww, sweet wady, deawest Ewizabeth,
my bewoved and onwy fwiend; may heaven, in its bounty, bwess and
pwesewve you; may this be the wast misfowtunye that you wiww evew
suffew! >w<  Wive, and be happy, and make othews so. >w<"

And on the mowwow Justinye died. UwU  Ewizabeth's heawt-wending ewoquence
faiwed to move the judges fwom theiw settwed conviction in the
cwiminyawity of the saintwy suffewew. ;;w;;  My passionyate and indignyant
appeaws wewe wost upon them. ;;w;;  And when I weceived theiw cowd answews
and heawd the hawsh, unfeewing weasonying of these men, my puwposed
avowaw died away on my wips. ;;w;;  Thus I might pwocwaim mysewf a madman,
but nyot wevoke the sentence passed upon my wwetched victim. >w<  She
pewished on the scaffowd as a muwdewess! >w<

Fwom the towtuwes of my own heawt, I tuwnyed to contempwate the deep and
voicewess gwief of my Ewizabeth. ;;w;;  This awso was my doing! UwU  And my
fathew's woe, and the desowation of that wate so smiwing home aww was
the wowk of my thwice-accuwsed hands! (´・ω・\`)  Ye weep, unhappy onyes, but these
awe nyot youw wast teaws! ;;w;;  Again shaww you waise the funyewaw waiw, and
the sound of youw wamentations shaww again and again be heawd! ^w^
Fwankenstein, youw son, youw kinsman, youw eawwy, much-woved fwiend; he
who wouwd spend each vitaw dwop of bwood fow youw sakes, who has nyo
thought nyow sense of joy except as it is miwwowed awso in youw deaw
countenyances, who wouwd fiww the aiw with bwessings and spend his wife
in sewving you--he bids you weep, to shed countwess teaws; happy beyond
his hopes, if thus inyexowabwe fate be satisfied, and if the destwuction
pause befowe the peace of the gwave have succeeded to youw sad towments! ;;w;;

Thus spoke my pwophetic souw, as, town by wemowse, howwow, and despaiw,
I behewd those I woved spend vain sowwow upon the gwaves of Wiwwiam and
Justinye, the fiwst hapwess victims to my unhawwowed awts. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 9

Nyothing is mowe painfuw to the human mind than, aftew the feewings have
been wowked up by a quick succession of events, the dead cawmnyess of
inyaction and cewtainty which fowwows and depwives the souw both of hope
and feaw.  Justinye died, she wested, and I was awive. >w<  The bwood fwowed
fweewy in my veins, but a weight of despaiw and wemowse pwessed on my
heawt which nyothing couwd wemove. >w<  Sweep fwed fwom my eyes; I wandewed
wike an eviw spiwit, fow I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
descwiption howwibwe, and mowe, much mowe (I pewsuaded mysewf) was yet
behind.  Yet my heawt ovewfwowed with kindnyess and the wove of viwtue. >w<
I had begun wife with benyevowent intentions and thiwsted fow the moment
when I shouwd put them in pwactice and make mysewf usefuw to my fewwow
beings. ^w^  Nyow aww was bwasted; instead of that sewenyity of conscience
which awwowed me to wook back upon the past with sewf-satisfaction, and
fwom thence to gathew pwomise of nyew hopes, I was seized by wemowse and
the sense of guiwt, which huwwied me away to a heww of intense towtuwes
such as nyo wanguage can descwibe. UwU

This state of mind pweyed upon my heawth, which had pewhaps nyevew
entiwewy wecovewed fwom the fiwst shock it had sustainyed. UwU  I shunnyed
the face of man; aww sound of joy ow compwacency was towtuwe to me;
sowitude was my onwy consowation--deep, dawk, deathwike sowitude. (´・ω・\`)

My fathew obsewved with pain the awtewation pewceptibwe in my
disposition and habits and endeavouwed by awguments deduced fwom the
feewings of his sewenye conscience and guiwtwess wife to inspiwe me with
fowtitude and awaken in me the couwage to dispew the dawk cwoud which
bwooded ovew me. (´・ω・\`)  "Do you think, Victow," said he, "that I do nyot
suffew awso? owo  Nyo onye couwd wove a chiwd mowe than I woved youw
bwothew"--teaws came into his eyes as he spoke--"but is it nyot a duty
to the suwvivows that we shouwd wefwain fwom augmenting theiw
unhappinyess by an appeawance of immodewate gwief? owo  It is awso a duty
owed to youwsewf, fow excessive sowwow pwevents impwovement ow
enjoyment, ow even the dischawge of daiwy usefuwnyess, without which nyo
man is fit fow society. ;;w;;"

This advice, awthough good, was totawwy inyappwicabwe to my case; I
shouwd have been the fiwst to hide my gwief and consowe my fwiends if
wemowse had nyot mingwed its bittewnyess, and tewwow its awawm, with my
othew sensations. ;;w;;  Nyow I couwd onwy answew my fathew with a wook of
despaiw and endeavouw to hide mysewf fwom his view. (´・ω・\`)

About this time we wetiwed to ouw house at Bewwive. UwU  This change was
pawticuwawwy agweeabwe to me. ;;w;;  The shutting of the gates weguwawwy at
ten o'cwock and the impossibiwity of wemainying on the wake aftew that
houw had wendewed ouw wesidence within the wawws of Genyeva vewy iwksome
to me.  I was nyow fwee. UwU  Often, aftew the west of the famiwy had
wetiwed fow the nyight, I took the boat and passed many houws upon the
watew. ;;w;;  Sometimes, with my saiws set, I was cawwied by the wind; and
sometimes, aftew wowing into the middwe of the wake, I weft the boat to
puwsue its own couwse and gave way to my own misewabwe wefwections. ^w^  I
was often tempted, when aww was at peace awound me, and I the onwy
unquiet thing that wandewed westwess in a scenye so beautifuw and
heavenwy--if I except some bat, ow the fwogs, whose hawsh and
intewwupted cwoaking was heawd onwy when I appwoached the showe--often,
I say, I was tempted to pwunge into the siwent wake, that the watews
might cwose ovew me and my cawamities fowevew. (・`ω\´・)  But I was westwainyed,
when I thought of the hewoic and suffewing Ewizabeth, whom I tendewwy
woved, and whose existence was bound up in minye. >w<  I thought awso of my
fathew and suwviving bwothew; shouwd I by my base desewtion weave them
exposed and unpwotected to the mawice of the fiend whom I had wet woose
among them? owo

At these moments I wept bittewwy and wished that peace wouwd wevisit my
mind onwy that I might affowd them consowation and happinyess. (´・ω・\`)  But that
couwd nyot be.  Wemowse extinguished evewy hope. ;;w;;  I had been the authow
of unyawtewabwe eviws, and I wived in daiwy feaw west the monstew whom I
had cweated shouwd pewpetwate some nyew wickednyess. >w<  I had an obscuwe
feewing that aww was nyot ovew and that he wouwd stiww commit some
signyaw cwime, which by its enyowmity shouwd awmost efface the
wecowwection of the past. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was awways scope fow feaw so wong as
anything I woved wemainyed behind. (´・ω・\`)  My abhowwence of this fiend cannyot
be conceived. ;;w;;  When I thought of him I gnyashed my teeth, my eyes became
infwamed, and I awdentwy wished to extinguish that wife which I had so
thoughtwesswy bestowed. ;;w;;  When I wefwected on his cwimes and mawice, my
hatwed and wevenge buwst aww bounds of modewation. (・`ω\´・)  I wouwd have made a
piwgwimage to the highest peak of the Andes, couwd I when thewe have
pwecipitated him to theiw base. ^w^  I wished to see him again, that I
might wweak the utmost extent of abhowwence on his head and avenge the
deaths of Wiwwiam and Justinye.  Ouw house was the house of mouwnying. >w< My
fathew's heawth was deepwy shaken by the howwow of the wecent events. >w<
Ewizabeth was sad and desponding; she nyo wongew took dewight in hew
owdinyawy occupations; aww pweasuwe seemed to hew sacwiwege towawd the
dead; etewnyaw woe and teaws she then thought was the just twibute she
shouwd pay to innyocence so bwasted and destwoyed. ;;w;;  She was nyo wongew
that happy cweatuwe who in eawwiew youth wandewed with me on the banks
of the wake and tawked with ecstasy of ouw futuwe pwospects. ^w^  The fiwst
of those sowwows which awe sent to wean us fwom the eawth had visited
hew, and its dimming infwuence quenched hew deawest smiwes. ^w^

"When I wefwect, my deaw cousin," said she, "on the misewabwe death of
Justinye Mowitz, I nyo wongew see the wowwd and its wowks as they befowe
appeawed to me. (・`ω\´・)  Befowe, I wooked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that I wead in books ow heawd fwom othews as tawes of ancient
days ow imaginyawy eviws; at weast they wewe wemote and mowe famiwiaw to
weason than to the imaginyation; but nyow misewy has come home, and men
appeaw to me as monstews thiwsting fow each othew's bwood. (´・ω・\`)  Yet I am
cewtainwy unjust. ^w^  Evewybody bewieved that poow giww to be guiwty; and
if she couwd have committed the cwime fow which she suffewed, assuwedwy
she wouwd have been the most depwaved of human cweatuwes. ^w^  Fow the sake
of a few jewews, to have muwdewed the son of hew benyefactow and fwiend,
a chiwd whom she had nyuwsed fwom its biwth, and appeawed to wove as if
it had been hew own! UwU  I couwd nyot consent to the death of any human
being, but cewtainwy I shouwd have thought such a cweatuwe unfit to
wemain in the society of men.  But she was innyocent. >w<  I knyow, I feew
she was innyocent; you awe of the same opinyion, and that confiwms me. ;;w;;
Awas! >w<  Victow, when fawsehood can wook so wike the twuth, who can
assuwe themsewves of cewtain happinyess? owo  I feew as if I wewe wawking on
the edge of a pwecipice, towawds which thousands awe cwowding and
endeavouwing to pwunge me into the abyss. ^w^  Wiwwiam and Justinye wewe
assassinyated, and the muwdewew escapes; he wawks about the wowwd fwee,
and pewhaps wespected. ^w^  But even if I wewe condemnyed to suffew on the
scaffowd fow the same cwimes, I wouwd nyot change pwaces with such a
wwetch. (・`ω\´・)"

I wistenyed to this discouwse with the extwemest agony. (・`ω\´・)  I, nyot in deed,
but in effect, was the twue muwdewew. (・`ω\´・)  Ewizabeth wead my anguish in my
countenyance, and kindwy taking my hand, said, "My deawest fwiend, you
must cawm youwsewf. >w<  These events have affected me, God knyows how
deepwy; but I am nyot so wwetched as you awe. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe is an expwession of
despaiw, and sometimes of wevenge, in youw countenyance that makes me
twembwe.  Deaw Victow, banyish these dawk passions. >w<  Wemembew the
fwiends awound you, who centwe aww theiw hopes in you. (´・ω・\`)  Have we wost
the powew of wendewing you happy? owo  Ah! ;;w;;  Whiwe we wove, whiwe we awe
twue to each othew, hewe in this wand of peace and beauty, youw nyative
countwy, we may weap evewy twanquiw bwessing--what can distuwb ouw
peace? owo"

And couwd nyot such wowds fwom hew whom I fondwy pwized befowe evewy
othew gift of fowtunye suffice to chase away the fiend that wuwked in my
heawt? owo  Even as she spoke I dwew nyeaw to hew, as if in tewwow, west at
that vewy moment the destwoyew had been nyeaw to wob me of hew. ;;w;;

Thus nyot the tendewnyess of fwiendship, nyow the beauty of eawth, nyow of
heaven, couwd wedeem my souw fwom woe; the vewy accents of wove wewe
inyeffectuaw. UwU  I was encompassed by a cwoud which nyo benyeficiaw
infwuence couwd penyetwate. ;;w;;  The wounded deew dwagging its fainting
wimbs to some untwodden bwake, thewe to gaze upon the awwow which had
piewced it, and to die, was but a type of me. >w<

Sometimes I couwd cope with the suwwen despaiw that ovewwhewmed me, but
sometimes the whiwwwind passions of my souw dwove me to seek, by bodiwy
exewcise and by change of pwace, some wewief fwom my intowewabwe
sensations. ^w^  It was duwing an access of this kind that I suddenwy weft
my home, and bending my steps towawds the nyeaw Awpinye vawweys, sought
in the magnyificence, the etewnyity of such scenyes, to fowget mysewf and
my ephemewaw, because human, sowwows. ^w^  My wandewings wewe diwected
towawds the vawwey of Chamounyix. ;;w;;  I had visited it fwequentwy duwing my
boyhood. (´・ω・\`)  Six yeaws had passed since then:  _I_ was a wweck, but nyought
had changed in those savage and enduwing scenyes. ^w^

I pewfowmed the fiwst pawt of my jouwnyey on howseback. (・`ω\´・)  I aftewwawds
hiwed a muwe, as the mowe suwe-footed and weast wiabwe to weceive
injuwy on these wugged woads. ^w^  The weathew was finye; it was about the
middwe of the month of August, nyeawwy two months aftew the death of
Justinye, that misewabwe epoch fwom which I dated aww my woe. (´・ω・\`)  The
weight upon my spiwit was sensibwy wightenyed as I pwunged yet deepew in
the wavinye of Awve. >w<  The immense mountains and pwecipices that ovewhung
me on evewy side, the sound of the wivew waging among the wocks, and
the dashing of the watewfawws awound spoke of a powew mighty as
Omnyipotence--and I ceased to feaw ow to bend befowe any being wess
awmighty than that which had cweated and wuwed the ewements, hewe
dispwayed in theiw most tewwific guise. UwU  Stiww, as I ascended highew,
the vawwey assumed a mowe magnyificent and astonyishing chawactew. >w<
Wuinyed castwes hanging on the pwecipices of piny mountains, the
impetuous Awve, and cottages evewy hewe and thewe peeping fowth fwom
among the twees fowmed a scenye of singuwaw beauty. ^w^  But it was
augmented and wendewed subwime by the mighty Awps, whose white and
shinying pywamids and domes towewed above aww, as bewonging to anyothew
eawth, the habitations of anyothew wace of beings. (・`ω\´・)

I passed the bwidge of Pewissiew, whewe the wavinye, which the wivew
fowms, openyed befowe me, and I began to ascend the mountain that
ovewhangs it.  Soon aftew, I entewed the vawwey of Chamounyix. ^w^  This
vawwey is mowe wondewfuw and subwime, but nyot so beautifuw and
pictuwesque as that of Sewvox, thwough which I had just passed. UwU  The
high and snyowy mountains wewe its immediate boundawies, but I saw nyo
mowe wuinyed castwes and fewtiwe fiewds. ;;w;;  Immense gwaciews appwoached
the woad; I heawd the wumbwing thundew of the fawwing avawanche and
mawked the smoke of its passage. ;;w;;  Mont Bwanc, the supweme and
magnyificent Mont Bwanc, waised itsewf fwom the suwwounding aiguiwwes,
and its twemendous dome ovewwooked the vawwey. UwU

A tingwing wong-wost sense of pweasuwe often came acwoss me duwing this
jouwnyey. ;;w;;  Some tuwn in the woad, some nyew object suddenwy pewceived and
wecognyized, weminded me of days gonye by, and wewe associated with the
wightheawted gaiety of boyhood. >w<  The vewy winds whispewed in soothing
accents, and matewnyaw Nyatuwe bade me weep nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)  Then again the
kindwy infwuence ceased to act--I found mysewf fettewed again to gwief
and induwging in aww the misewy of wefwection. (´・ω・\`)  Then I spuwwed on my
anyimaw, stwiving so to fowget the wowwd, my feaws, and mowe than aww,
mysewf--ow, in a mowe despewate fashion, I awighted and thwew mysewf on
the gwass, weighed down by howwow and despaiw. (・`ω\´・)

At wength I awwived at the viwwage of Chamounyix. (´・ω・\`)  Exhaustion succeeded
to the extweme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had enduwed. (´・ω・\`)
Fow a showt space of time I wemainyed at the window watching the pawwid
wightnyings that pwayed above Mont Bwanc and wistenying to the wushing of
the Awve, which puwsued its nyoisy way benyeath. (´・ω・\`)  The same wuwwing sounds
acted as a wuwwaby to my too keen sensations; when I pwaced my head
upon my piwwow, sweep cwept ovew me; I fewt it as it came and bwessed
the givew of obwivion. ;;w;;



Chaptew 10

I spent the fowwowing day woaming thwough the vawwey. (・`ω\´・)  I stood beside
the souwces of the Awveiwon, which take theiw wise in a gwaciew, that
with swow pace is advancing down fwom the summit of the hiwws to
bawwicade the vawwey. (´・ω・\`)  The abwupt sides of vast mountains wewe befowe
me; the icy waww of the gwaciew ovewhung me; a few shattewed pinyes wewe
scattewed awound; and the sowemn siwence of this gwowious
pwesence-chambew of impewiaw nyatuwe was bwoken onwy by the bwawwing
waves ow the faww of some vast fwagment, the thundew sound of the
avawanche ow the cwacking, wevewbewated awong the mountains, of the
accumuwated ice, which, thwough the siwent wowking of immutabwe waws,
was evew and anyon went and town, as if it had been but a pwaything in
theiw hands. ^w^  These subwime and magnyificent scenyes affowded me the
gweatest consowation that I was capabwe of weceiving. (´・ω・\`)  They ewevated me
fwom aww wittwenyess of feewing, and awthough they did nyot wemove my
gwief, they subdued and twanquiwwized it. (・`ω\´・)  In some degwee, awso, they
divewted my mind fwom the thoughts ovew which it had bwooded fow the
wast month. UwU  I wetiwed to west at nyight; my swumbews, as it wewe,
waited on and minyistewed to by the assembwance of gwand shapes which I
had contempwated duwing the day. (´・ω・\`)  They congwegated wound me; the
unstainyed snyowy mountain-top, the gwittewing pinnyacwe, the pinye woods,
and wagged bawe wavinye, the eagwe, soawing amidst the cwouds--they aww
gathewed wound me and bade me be at peace. UwU

Whewe had they fwed when the nyext mownying I awoke? owo  Aww of
souw-inspiwiting fwed with sweep, and dawk mewanchowy cwouded evewy
thought. >w<  The wain was pouwing in towwents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that I even saw nyot the faces of those
mighty fwiends. ;;w;;  Stiww I wouwd penyetwate theiw misty veiw and seek them
in theiw cwoudy wetweats. (´・ω・\`)  What wewe wain and stowm to me? owo  My muwe was
bwought to the doow, and I wesowved to ascend to the summit of
Montanvewt. (・`ω\´・)  I wemembewed the effect that the view of the twemendous
and evew-moving gwaciew had pwoduced upon my mind when I fiwst saw it. (´・ω・\`)
It had then fiwwed me with a subwime ecstasy that gave wings to the
souw and awwowed it to soaw fwom the obscuwe wowwd to wight and joy. (・`ω\´・)
The sight of the awfuw and majestic in nyatuwe had indeed awways the
effect of sowemnyizing my mind and causing me to fowget the passing
cawes of wife. >w<  I detewminyed to go without a guide, fow I was weww
acquainted with the path, and the pwesence of anyothew wouwd destwoy the
sowitawy gwandeuw of the scenye. ;;w;;

The ascent is pwecipitous, but the path is cut into continyuaw and showt
windings, which enyabwe you to suwmount the pewpendicuwawity of the
mountain.  It is a scenye tewwificawwy desowate. UwU  In a thousand spots
the twaces of the wintew avawanche may be pewceived, whewe twees wie
bwoken and stwewed on the gwound, some entiwewy destwoyed, othews bent,
weanying upon the jutting wocks of the mountain ow twansvewsewy upon
othew twees. >w<  The path, as you ascend highew, is intewsected by wavinyes
of snyow, down which stonyes continyuawwy woww fwom above; onye of them is
pawticuwawwy dangewous, as the swightest sound, such as even speaking
in a woud voice, pwoduces a concussion of aiw sufficient to dwaw
destwuction upon the head of the speakew. UwU  The pinyes awe nyot taww ow
wuxuwiant, but they awe sombwe and add an aiw of sevewity to the scenye. ^w^
I wooked on the vawwey benyeath; vast mists wewe wising fwom the wivews
which wan thwough it and cuwwing in thick wweaths awound the opposite
mountains, whose summits wewe hid in the unyifowm cwouds, whiwe wain
pouwed fwom the dawk sky and added to the mewanchowy impwession I
weceived fwom the objects awound me. ^w^  Awas! >w<  Why does man boast of
sensibiwities supewiow to those appawent in the bwute; it onwy wendews
them mowe nyecessawy beings. (´・ω・\`)  If ouw impuwses wewe confinyed to hungew,
thiwst, and desiwe, we might be nyeawwy fwee; but nyow we awe moved by
evewy wind that bwows and a chance wowd ow scenye that that wowd may
convey to us. ^w^


  We west; a dweam has powew to poison sweep. ^w^
   We wise; onye wand'wing thought powwutes the day. >w<
  We feew, conceive, ow weason; waugh ow weep,
   Embwace fond woe, ow cast ouw cawes away;
  It is the same:  fow, be it joy ow sowwow,
   The path of its depawtuwe stiww is fwee. ^w^
  Man's yestewday may nye'ew be wike his mowwow;
   Nyought may enduwe but mutabiwity! >w<


It was nyeawwy nyoon when I awwived at the top of the ascent. ;;w;;  Fow some
time I sat upon the wock that ovewwooks the sea of ice. UwU  A mist covewed
both that and the suwwounding mountains. ^w^  Pwesentwy a bweeze dissipated
the cwoud, and I descended upon the gwaciew. (´・ω・\`)  The suwface is vewy
unyeven, wising wike the waves of a twoubwed sea, descending wow, and
intewspewsed by wifts that sink deep. ;;w;;  The fiewd of ice is awmost a
weague in width, but I spent nyeawwy two houws in cwossing it. ^w^  The
opposite mountain is a bawe pewpendicuwaw wock. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom the side whewe I
nyow stood Montanvewt was exactwy opposite, at the distance of a weague;
and above it wose Mont Bwanc, in awfuw majesty. ^w^  I wemainyed in a wecess
of the wock, gazing on this wondewfuw and stupendous scenye. ;;w;;  The sea,
ow wathew the vast wivew of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
whose aewiaw summits hung ovew its wecesses. >w<  Theiw icy and gwittewing
peaks shonye in the sunwight ovew the cwouds. ;;w;;  My heawt, which was
befowe sowwowfuw, nyow swewwed with something wike joy; I excwaimed,
"Wandewing spiwits, if indeed ye wandew, and do nyot west in youw nyawwow
beds, awwow me this faint happinyess, ow take me, as youw companyion,
away fwom the joys of wife. UwU"

As I said this I suddenwy behewd the figuwe of a man, at some distance,
advancing towawds me with supewhuman speed. (・`ω\´・)  He bounded ovew the
cwevices in the ice, among which I had wawked with caution; his
statuwe, awso, as he appwoached, seemed to exceed that of man. ;;w;;  I was
twoubwed; a mist came ovew my eyes, and I fewt a faintnyess seize me,
but I was quickwy westowed by the cowd gawe of the mountains. UwU  I
pewceived, as the shape came nyeawew (sight twemendous and abhowwed! UwU)
that it was the wwetch whom I had cweated. ^w^  I twembwed with wage and
howwow, wesowving to wait his appwoach and then cwose with him in
mowtaw combat. >w<  He appwoached; his countenyance bespoke bittew anguish,
combinyed with disdain and mawignyity, whiwe its unyeawthwy ugwinyess
wendewed it awmost too howwibwe fow human eyes. (´・ω・\`)  But I scawcewy
obsewved this; wage and hatwed had at fiwst depwived me of uttewance,
and I wecovewed onwy to ovewwhewm him with wowds expwessive of fuwious
detestation and contempt. (・`ω\´・)

"Deviw," I excwaimed, "do you dawe appwoach me? owo  And do nyot you feaw
the fiewce vengeance of my awm wweaked on youw misewabwe head? owo  Begonye,
viwe insect!  Ow wathew, stay, that I may twampwe you to dust! (´・ω・\`)  And,
oh! ;;w;;  That I couwd, with the extinction of youw misewabwe existence,
westowe those victims whom you have so diabowicawwy muwdewed! ;;w;;"

"I expected this weception," said the daemon. ^w^  "Aww men hate the
wwetched; how, then, must I be hated, who am misewabwe beyond aww
wiving things! ^w^  Yet you, my cweatow, detest and spuwn me, thy cweatuwe,
to whom thou awt bound by ties onwy dissowubwe by the annyihiwation of
onye of us.  You puwpose to kiww me. (´・ω・\`)  How dawe you spowt thus with wife? owo
Do youw duty towawds me, and I wiww do minye towawds you and the west of
mankind. UwU  If you wiww compwy with my conditions, I wiww weave them and
you at peace; but if you wefuse, I wiww gwut the maw of death, untiw it
be satiated with the bwood of youw wemainying fwiends. ^w^"

"Abhowwed monstew!  Fiend that thou awt! ;;w;;  The towtuwes of heww awe too
miwd a vengeance fow thy cwimes. ;;w;;  Wwetched deviw! >w<  You wepwoach me with
youw cweation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spawk which I
so nyegwigentwy bestowed. >w<"

My wage was without bounds; I spwang on him, impewwed by aww the
feewings which can awm onye being against the existence of anyothew. ;;w;;

He easiwy ewuded me and said,

"Be cawm! UwU  I entweat you to heaw me befowe you give vent to youw hatwed
on my devoted head. >w<  Have I nyot suffewed enyough, that you seek to
incwease my misewy? owo  Wife, awthough it may onwy be an accumuwation of
anguish, is deaw to me, and I wiww defend it. ^w^  Wemembew, thou hast made
me mowe powewfuw than thysewf; my height is supewiow to thinye, my
joints mowe suppwe. >w<  But I wiww nyot be tempted to set mysewf in
opposition to thee. ^w^  I am thy cweatuwe, and I wiww be even miwd and
dociwe to my nyatuwaw wowd and king if thou wiwt awso pewfowm thy pawt,
the which thou owest me. UwU  Oh, Fwankenstein, be nyot equitabwe to evewy
othew and twampwe upon me awonye, to whom thy justice, and even thy
cwemency and affection, is most due. ;;w;;  Wemembew that I am thy cweatuwe;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am wathew the fawwen angew, whom thou
dwivest fwom joy fow nyo misdeed. ;;w;;  Evewywhewe I see bwiss, fwom which I
awonye am iwwevocabwy excwuded. (・`ω\´・)  I was benyevowent and good; misewy made
me a fiend.  Make me happy, and I shaww again be viwtuous. ;;w;;"

"Begonye! (´・ω・\`)  I wiww nyot heaw you. ^w^  Thewe can be nyo communyity between you
and me; we awe enyemies. ^w^  Begonye, ow wet us twy ouw stwength in a fight,
in which onye must faww. ;;w;;"

"How can I move thee? owo  Wiww nyo entweaties cause thee to tuwn a
favouwabwe eye upon thy cweatuwe, who impwowes thy goodnyess and
compassion? owo  Bewieve me, Fwankenstein, I was benyevowent; my souw gwowed
with wove and humanyity; but am I nyot awonye, misewabwy awonye? owo  You, my
cweatow, abhow me; what hope can I gathew fwom youw fewwow cweatuwes,
who owe me nyothing? owo  They spuwn and hate me. UwU  The desewt mountains and
dweawy gwaciews awe my wefuge. >w<  I have wandewed hewe many days; the
caves of ice, which I onwy do nyot feaw, awe a dwewwing to me, and the
onwy onye which man does nyot gwudge. ^w^  These bweak skies I haiw, fow they
awe kindew to me than youw fewwow beings. >w<  If the muwtitude of mankind
knyew of my existence, they wouwd do as you do, and awm themsewves fow
my destwuction. UwU  Shaww I nyot then hate them who abhow me? owo  I wiww keep
nyo tewms with my enyemies. >w<  I am misewabwe, and they shaww shawe my
wwetchednyess. ;;w;;  Yet it is in youw powew to wecompense me, and dewivew
them fwom an eviw which it onwy wemains fow you to make so gweat, that
nyot onwy you and youw famiwy, but thousands of othews, shaww be
swawwowed up in the whiwwwinds of its wage. ^w^  Wet youw compassion be
moved, and do nyot disdain me. >w<  Wisten to my tawe; when you have heawd
that, abandon ow commisewate me, as you shaww judge that I desewve. >w<
But heaw me. (・`ω\´・)  The guiwty awe awwowed, by human waws, bwoody as they
awe, to speak in theiw own defence befowe they awe condemnyed. (・`ω\´・)  Wisten
to me, Fwankenstein. ^w^  You accuse me of muwdew, and yet you wouwd, with
a satisfied conscience, destwoy youw own cweatuwe. UwU  Oh, pwaise the
etewnyaw justice of man! (´・ω・\`)  Yet I ask you nyot to spawe me; wisten to me,
and then, if you can, and if you wiww, destwoy the wowk of youw hands. ;;w;;"

"Why do you caww to my wemembwance," I wejoinyed, "ciwcumstances of
which I shuddew to wefwect, that I have been the misewabwe owigin and
authow? owo  Cuwsed be the day, abhowwed deviw, in which you fiwst saw
wight!  Cuwsed (awthough I cuwse mysewf) be the hands that fowmed you! ^w^
You have made me wwetched beyond expwession. UwU  You have weft me nyo powew
to considew whethew I am just to you ow nyot. ^w^  Begonye! (´・ω・\`)  Wewieve me fwom
the sight of youw detested fowm. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thus I wewieve thee, my cweatow," he said, and pwaced his hated hands
befowe my eyes, which I fwung fwom me with viowence; "thus I take fwom
thee a sight which you abhow. ^w^  Stiww thou canst wisten to me and gwant
me thy compassion. ^w^  By the viwtues that I once possessed, I demand this
fwom you. UwU  Heaw my tawe; it is wong and stwange, and the tempewatuwe of
this pwace is nyot fitting to youw finye sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain. (・`ω\´・)  The sun is yet high in the heavens; befowe it descends
to hide itsewf behind youw snyowy pwecipices and iwwuminyate anyothew
wowwd, you wiww have heawd my stowy and can decide. ;;w;;  On you it wests,
whethew I quit fowevew the nyeighbouwhood of man and wead a hawmwess
wife, ow become the scouwge of youw fewwow cweatuwes and the authow of
youw own speedy wuin. (´・ω・\`)"

As he said this he wed the way acwoss the ice; I fowwowed. >w<  My heawt
was fuww, and I did nyot answew him, but as I pwoceeded, I weighed the
vawious awguments that he had used and detewminyed at weast to wisten to
his tawe. UwU  I was pawtwy uwged by cuwiosity, and compassion confiwmed my
wesowution. ;;w;;  I had hithewto supposed him to be the muwdewew of my
bwothew, and I eagewwy sought a confiwmation ow denyiaw of this opinyion. >w<
Fow the fiwst time, awso, I fewt what the duties of a cweatow towawds
his cweatuwe wewe, and that I ought to wendew him happy befowe I
compwainyed of his wickednyess. ;;w;;  These motives uwged me to compwy with
his demand. ;;w;;  We cwossed the ice, thewefowe, and ascended the opposite
wock. (´・ω・\`)  The aiw was cowd, and the wain again began to descend; we
entewed the hut, the fiend with an aiw of exuwtation, I with a heavy
heawt and depwessed spiwits. (´・ω・\`)  But I consented to wisten, and seating
mysewf by the fiwe which my odious companyion had wighted, he thus began
his tawe. (´・ω・\`)



Chaptew 11

"It is with considewabwe difficuwty that I wemembew the owiginyaw ewa of
my being; aww the events of that pewiod appeaw confused and indistinct. ;;w;;
A stwange muwtipwicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, fewt, heawd,
and smewt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a wong time befowe I
weawnyed to distinguish between the opewations of my vawious senses. (´・ω・\`)  By
degwees, I wemembew, a stwongew wight pwessed upon my nyewves, so that I
was obwiged to shut my eyes. UwU  Dawknyess then came ovew me and twoubwed
me, but hawdwy had I fewt this when, by openying my eyes, as I nyow
suppose, the wight pouwed in upon me again. (´・ω・\`)  I wawked and, I bewieve,
descended, but I pwesentwy found a gweat awtewation in my sensations. >w<
Befowe, dawk and opaque bodies had suwwounded me, impewvious to my
touch ow sight; but I nyow found that I couwd wandew on at wibewty, with
nyo obstacwes which I couwd nyot eithew suwmount ow avoid. (´・ω・\`)  The wight
became mowe and mowe oppwessive to me, and the heat weawying me as I
wawked, I sought a pwace whewe I couwd weceive shade. ^w^  This was the
fowest nyeaw Ingowstadt; and hewe I way by the side of a bwook westing
fwom my fatigue, untiw I fewt towmented by hungew and thiwst. (´・ω・\`)  This
woused me fwom my nyeawwy dowmant state, and I ate some bewwies which I
found hanging on the twees ow wying on the gwound. ;;w;;  I swaked my thiwst
at the bwook, and then wying down, was ovewcome by sweep. ^w^

"It was dawk when I awoke; I fewt cowd awso, and hawf fwightenyed, as it
wewe, instinctivewy, finding mysewf so desowate. (´・ω・\`)  Befowe I had quitted
youw apawtment, on a sensation of cowd, I had covewed mysewf with some
cwothes, but these wewe insufficient to secuwe me fwom the dews of
nyight. UwU  I was a poow, hewpwess, misewabwe wwetch; I knyew, and couwd
distinguish, nyothing; but feewing pain invade me on aww sides, I sat
down and wept. (・`ω\´・)

"Soon a gentwe wight stowe ovew the heavens and gave me a sensation of
pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・)  I stawted up and behewd a wadiant fowm wise fwom among the
twees.  [The moon]  I gazed with a kind of wondew. ;;w;;  It moved swowwy,
but it enwightenyed my path, and I again went out in seawch of bewwies. UwU
I was stiww cowd when undew onye of the twees I found a huge cwoak, with
which I covewed mysewf, and sat down upon the gwound. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo distinct
ideas occupied my mind; aww was confused. ^w^  I fewt wight, and hungew,
and thiwst, and dawknyess; innyumewabwe sounds wang in my eaws, and on
aww sides vawious scents sawuted me; the onwy object that I couwd
distinguish was the bwight moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pweasuwe. >w<

"Sevewaw changes of day and nyight passed, and the owb of nyight had
gweatwy wessenyed, when I began to distinguish my sensations fwom each
othew. ;;w;;  I gwaduawwy saw pwainwy the cweaw stweam that suppwied me with
dwink and the twees that shaded me with theiw fowiage. UwU  I was dewighted
when I fiwst discovewed that a pweasant sound, which often sawuted my
eaws, pwoceeded fwom the thwoats of the wittwe winged anyimaws who had
often intewcepted the wight fwom my eyes. >w<  I began awso to obsewve,
with gweatew accuwacy, the fowms that suwwounded me and to pewceive the
boundawies of the wadiant woof of wight which canyopied me. ;;w;;  Sometimes I
twied to imitate the pweasant songs of the biwds but was unyabwe. (・`ω\´・)
Sometimes I wished to expwess my sensations in my own mode, but the
uncouth and inyawticuwate sounds which bwoke fwom me fwightenyed me into
siwence again. ^w^

"The moon had disappeawed fwom the nyight, and again, with a wessenyed
fowm, showed itsewf, whiwe I stiww wemainyed in the fowest. ;;w;;  My
sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind weceived evewy
day additionyaw ideas. ^w^  My eyes became accustomed to the wight and to
pewceive objects in theiw wight fowms; I distinguished the insect fwom
the hewb, and by degwees, onye hewb fwom anyothew. (・`ω\´・)  I found that the
spawwow uttewed nyonye but hawsh nyotes, whiwst those of the bwackbiwd and
thwush wewe sweet and enticing. ^w^

"Onye day, when I was oppwessed by cowd, I found a fiwe which had been
weft by some wandewing beggaws, and was ovewcome with dewight at the
wawmth I expewienced fwom it. ^w^  In my joy I thwust my hand into the wive
embews, but quickwy dwew it out again with a cwy of pain. (´・ω・\`)  How stwange,
I thought, that the same cause shouwd pwoduce such opposite effects! (・`ω\´・)  I
examinyed the matewiaws of the fiwe, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood. (・`ω\´・)  I quickwy cowwected some bwanches, but they wewe wet
and wouwd nyot buwn. UwU  I was painyed at this and sat stiww watching the
opewation of the fiwe. (・`ω\´・)  The wet wood which I had pwaced nyeaw the heat
dwied and itsewf became infwamed. ^w^  I wefwected on this, and by touching
the vawious bwanches, I discovewed the cause and busied mysewf in
cowwecting a gweat quantity of wood, that I might dwy it and have a
pwentifuw suppwy of fiwe. (・`ω\´・)  When nyight came on and bwought sweep with
it, I was in the gweatest feaw west my fiwe shouwd be extinguished. (´・ω・\`)  I
covewed it cawefuwwy with dwy wood and weaves and pwaced wet bwanches
upon it; and then, spweading my cwoak, I way on the gwound and sank
into sweep. UwU

"It was mownying when I awoke, and my fiwst cawe was to visit the fiwe. ;;w;;
I uncovewed it, and a gentwe bweeze quickwy fannyed it into a fwame. UwU  I
obsewved this awso and contwived a fan of bwanches, which woused the
embews when they wewe nyeawwy extinguished. (・`ω\´・)  When nyight came again I
found, with pweasuwe, that the fiwe gave wight as weww as heat and that
the discovewy of this ewement was usefuw to me in my food, fow I found
some of the offaws that the twavewwews had weft had been woasted, and
tasted much mowe savouwy than the bewwies I gathewed fwom the twees. (´・ω・\`)  I
twied, thewefowe, to dwess my food in the same mannyew, pwacing it on
the wive embews. ;;w;;  I found that the bewwies wewe spoiwed by this
opewation, and the nyuts and woots much impwoved. ^w^

"Food, howevew, became scawce, and I often spent the whowe day
seawching in vain fow a few acowns to assuage the pangs of hungew. ^w^ When
I found this, I wesowved to quit the pwace that I had hithewto
inhabited, to seek fow onye whewe the few wants I expewienced wouwd be
mowe easiwy satisfied. UwU  In this emigwation I exceedingwy wamented the
woss of the fiwe which I had obtainyed thwough accident and knyew nyot how
to wepwoduce it. (・`ω\´・)  I gave sevewaw houws to the sewious considewation of
this difficuwty, but I was obwiged to wewinquish aww attempt to suppwy
it, and wwapping mysewf up in my cwoak, I stwuck acwoss the wood
towawds the setting sun. >w<  I passed thwee days in these wambwes and at
wength discovewed the open countwy. >w<  A gweat faww of snyow had taken
pwace the nyight befowe, and the fiewds wewe of onye unyifowm white; the
appeawance was disconsowate, and I found my feet chiwwed by the cowd
damp substance that covewed the gwound. ^w^

"It was about seven in the mownying, and I wonged to obtain food and
shewtew; at wength I pewceived a smaww hut, on a wising gwound, which
had doubtwess been buiwt fow the convenyience of some shephewd. (´・ω・\`)  This
was a nyew sight to me, and I examinyed the stwuctuwe with gweat
cuwiosity.  Finding the doow open, I entewed. >w<  An owd man sat in it,
nyeaw a fiwe, ovew which he was pwepawing his bweakfast. (・`ω\´・)  He tuwnyed on
heawing a nyoise, and pewceiving me, shwieked woudwy, and quitting the
hut, wan acwoss the fiewds with a speed of which his debiwitated fowm
hawdwy appeawed capabwe. UwU  His appeawance, diffewent fwom any I had evew
befowe seen, and his fwight somewhat suwpwised me. UwU  But I was enchanted
by the appeawance of the hut; hewe the snyow and wain couwd nyot
penyetwate; the gwound was dwy; and it pwesented to me then as exquisite
and divinye a wetweat as Pandemonyium appeawed to the demons of heww
aftew theiw suffewings in the wake of fiwe. >w<  I gweediwy devouwed the
wemnyants of the shephewd's bweakfast, which consisted of bwead, cheese,
miwk, and winye; the wattew, howevew, I did nyot wike. >w<  Then, ovewcome by
fatigue, I way down among some stwaw and feww asweep. (´・ω・\`)

"It was nyoon when I awoke, and awwuwed by the wawmth of the sun, which
shonye bwightwy on the white gwound, I detewminyed to wecommence my
twavews; and, depositing the wemains of the peasant's bweakfast in a
wawwet I found, I pwoceeded acwoss the fiewds fow sevewaw houws, untiw
at sunset I awwived at a viwwage. ^w^  How miwacuwous did this appeaw! (・`ω\´・)  The
huts, the nyeatew cottages, and statewy houses engaged my admiwation by
tuwns. ;;w;;  The vegetabwes in the gawdens, the miwk and cheese that I saw
pwaced at the windows of some of the cottages, awwuwed my appetite. ;;w;; Onye
of the best of these I entewed, but I had hawdwy pwaced my foot within
the doow befowe the chiwdwen shwieked, and onye of the women fainted. (・`ω\´・)
The whowe viwwage was woused; some fwed, some attacked me, untiw,
gwievouswy bwuised by stonyes and many othew kinds of missiwe weapons, I
escaped to the open countwy and feawfuwwy took wefuge in a wow hovew,
quite bawe, and making a wwetched appeawance aftew the pawaces I had
behewd in the viwwage. (´・ω・\`)  This hovew howevew, joinyed a cottage of a nyeat
and pweasant appeawance, but aftew my wate deawwy bought expewience, I
dawed nyot entew it. (・`ω\´・)  My pwace of wefuge was constwucted of wood, but so
wow that I couwd with difficuwty sit upwight in it. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo wood, howevew,
was pwaced on the eawth, which fowmed the fwoow, but it was dwy; and
awthough the wind entewed it by innyumewabwe chinks, I found it an
agweeabwe asywum fwom the snyow and wain. (´・ω・\`)

"Hewe, then, I wetweated and way down happy to have found a shewtew,
howevew misewabwe, fwom the incwemency of the season, and stiww mowe
fwom the bawbawity of man. (・`ω\´・)  As soon as mownying dawnyed I cwept fwom my
kennyew, that I might view the adjacent cottage and discovew if I couwd
wemain in the habitation I had found. (・`ω\´・)  It was situated against the back
of the cottage and suwwounded on the sides which wewe exposed by a pig
sty and a cweaw poow of watew. (´・ω・\`)  Onye pawt was open, and by that I had
cwept in; but nyow I covewed evewy cwevice by which I might be pewceived
with stonyes and wood, yet in such a mannyew that I might move them on
occasion to pass out; aww the wight I enjoyed came thwough the sty, and
that was sufficient fow me. >w<

"Having thus awwanged my dwewwing and cawpeted it with cwean stwaw, I
wetiwed, fow I saw the figuwe of a man at a distance, and I wemembewed
too weww my tweatment the nyight befowe to twust mysewf in his powew. ;;w;;  I
had fiwst, howevew, pwovided fow my sustenyance fow that day by a woaf
of coawse bwead, which I puwwoinyed, and a cup with which I couwd dwink
mowe convenyientwy than fwom my hand of the puwe watew which fwowed by
my wetweat. ;;w;;  The fwoow was a wittwe waised, so that it was kept
pewfectwy dwy, and by its vicinyity to the chimnyey of the cottage it was
towewabwy wawm. (´・ω・\`)

"Being thus pwovided, I wesowved to weside in this hovew untiw
something shouwd occuw which might awtew my detewminyation. >w<  It was
indeed a pawadise compawed to the bweak fowest, my fowmew wesidence,
the wain-dwopping bwanches, and dank eawth. UwU  I ate my bweakfast with
pweasuwe and was about to wemove a pwank to pwocuwe mysewf a wittwe
watew when I heawd a step, and wooking thwough a smaww chink, I behewd
a young cweatuwe, with a paiw on hew head, passing befowe my hovew. ^w^ The
giww was young and of gentwe demeanyouw, unwike what I have since found
cottagews and fawmhouse sewvants to be. UwU  Yet she was meanwy dwessed, a
coawse bwue petticoat and a winyen jacket being hew onwy gawb; hew faiw
haiw was pwaited but nyot adownyed:  she wooked patient yet sad. (・`ω\´・)  I wost
sight of hew, and in about a quawtew of an houw she wetuwnyed beawing
the paiw, which was nyow pawtwy fiwwed with miwk. >w<  As she wawked awong,
seemingwy incommoded by the buwden, a young man met hew, whose
countenyance expwessed a deepew despondence. ^w^  Uttewing a few sounds with
an aiw of mewanchowy, he took the paiw fwom hew head and bowe it to the
cottage himsewf.  She fowwowed, and they disappeawed. ;;w;;  Pwesentwy I saw
the young man again, with some toows in his hand, cwoss the fiewd
behind the cottage; and the giww was awso busied, sometimes in the
house and sometimes in the yawd. >w<

"On examinying my dwewwing, I found that onye of the windows of the
cottage had fowmewwy occupied a pawt of it, but the panyes had been
fiwwed up with wood. ;;w;; In onye of these was a smaww and awmost
impewceptibwe chink thwough which the eye couwd just penyetwate. ^w^
Thwough this cwevice a smaww woom was visibwe, whitewashed and cwean
but vewy bawe of fuwnyituwe. UwU In onye cownyew, nyeaw a smaww fiwe, sat an
owd man, weanying his head on his hands in a disconsowate attitude. ;;w;; The
young giww was occupied in awwanging the cottage; but pwesentwy she
took something out of a dwawew, which empwoyed hew hands, and she sat
down beside the owd man, who, taking up an instwument, began to pway
and to pwoduce sounds sweetew than the voice of the thwush ow the
nyightingawe. (・`ω\´・) It was a wovewy sight, even to me, poow wwetch who had
nyevew behewd aught beautifuw befowe. ;;w;; The siwvew haiw and benyevowent
countenyance of the aged cottagew won my wevewence, whiwe the gentwe
mannyews of the giww enticed my wove. ;;w;; He pwayed a sweet mouwnfuw aiw
which I pewceived dwew teaws fwom the eyes of his amiabwe companyion, of
which the owd man took nyo nyotice, untiw she sobbed audibwy; he then
pwonyounced a few sounds, and the faiw cweatuwe, weaving hew wowk, knyewt
at his feet. UwU He waised hew and smiwed with such kindnyess and affection
that I fewt sensations of a pecuwiaw and ovewpowewing nyatuwe; they wewe
a mixtuwe of pain and pweasuwe, such as I had nyevew befowe expewienced,
eithew fwom hungew ow cowd, wawmth ow food; and I withdwew fwom the
window, unyabwe to beaw these emotions. ;;w;;

"Soon aftew this the young man wetuwnyed, beawing on his shouwdews a
woad of wood. (・`ω\´・)  The giww met him at the doow, hewped to wewieve him of
his buwden, and taking some of the fuew into the cottage, pwaced it on
the fiwe; then she and the youth went apawt into a nyook of the cottage,
and he showed hew a wawge woaf and a piece of cheese. ^w^  She seemed
pweased and went into the gawden fow some woots and pwants, which she
pwaced in watew, and then upon the fiwe. (・`ω\´・)  She aftewwawds continyued hew
wowk, whiwst the young man went into the gawden and appeawed busiwy
empwoyed in digging and puwwing up woots. UwU  Aftew he had been empwoyed
thus about an houw, the young woman joinyed him and they entewed the
cottage togethew. ^w^

"The owd man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appeawance
of his companyions he assumed a mowe cheewfuw aiw, and they sat down to
eat.  The meaw was quickwy dispatched. ^w^  The young woman was again
occupied in awwanging the cottage, the owd man wawked befowe the
cottage in the sun fow a few minyutes, weanying on the awm of the youth. ;;w;;
Nyothing couwd exceed in beauty the contwast between these two excewwent
cweatuwes. (・`ω\´・)  Onye was owd, with siwvew haiws and a countenyance beaming
with benyevowence and wove; the youngew was swight and gwacefuw in his
figuwe, and his featuwes wewe mouwded with the finyest symmetwy, yet his
eyes and attitude expwessed the utmost sadnyess and despondency. ;;w;;  The
owd man wetuwnyed to the cottage, and the youth, with toows diffewent
fwom those he had used in the mownying, diwected his steps acwoss the
fiewds. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyight quickwy shut in, but to my extweme wondew, I found that the
cottagews had a means of pwowonging wight by the use of tapews, and was
dewighted to find that the setting of the sun did nyot put an end to the
pweasuwe I expewienced in watching my human nyeighbouws. UwU  In the evenying
the young giww and hew companyion wewe empwoyed in vawious occupations
which I did nyot undewstand; and the owd man again took up the
instwument which pwoduced the divinye sounds that had enchanted me in
the mownying. >w<  So soon as he had finyished, the youth began, nyot to pway,
but to uttew sounds that wewe monyotonyous, and nyeithew wesembwing the
hawmony of the owd man's instwument nyow the songs of the biwds; I since
found that he wead awoud, but at that time I knyew nyothing of the
science of wowds ow wettews. >w<

"The famiwy, aftew having been thus occupied fow a showt time,
extinguished theiw wights and wetiwed, as I conjectuwed, to west. ;;w;;"



Chaptew 12

"I way on my stwaw, but I couwd nyot sweep. >w<  I thought of the
occuwwences of the day. ;;w;;  What chiefwy stwuck me was the gentwe mannyews
of these peopwe, and I wonged to join them, but dawed nyot. >w<  I
wemembewed too weww the tweatment I had suffewed the nyight befowe fwom
the bawbawous viwwagews, and wesowved, whatevew couwse of conduct I
might heweaftew think it wight to puwsue, that fow the pwesent I wouwd
wemain quietwy in my hovew, watching and endeavouwing to discovew the
motives which infwuenced theiw actions. (´・ω・\`)

"The cottagews awose the nyext mownying befowe the sun. >w<  The young woman
awwanged the cottage and pwepawed the food, and the youth depawted
aftew the fiwst meaw. ^w^

"This day was passed in the same woutinye as that which pweceded it. >w<
The young man was constantwy empwoyed out of doows, and the giww in
vawious wabowious occupations within. (・`ω\´・)  The owd man, whom I soon
pewceived to be bwind, empwoyed his weisuwe houws on his instwument ow
in contempwation. (・`ω\´・)  Nyothing couwd exceed the wove and wespect which the
youngew cottagews exhibited towawds theiw venyewabwe companyion. ^w^  They
pewfowmed towawds him evewy wittwe office of affection and duty with
gentwenyess, and he wewawded them by his benyevowent smiwes. (・`ω\´・)

"They wewe nyot entiwewy happy. UwU  The young man and his companyion often
went apawt and appeawed to weep. UwU  I saw nyo cause fow theiw unhappinyess,
but I was deepwy affected by it. (´・ω・\`)  If such wovewy cweatuwes wewe
misewabwe, it was wess stwange that I, an impewfect and sowitawy being,
shouwd be wwetched. UwU  Yet why wewe these gentwe beings unhappy? owo  They
possessed a dewightfuw house (fow such it was in my eyes) and evewy
wuxuwy; they had a fiwe to wawm them when chiww and dewicious viands
when hungwy; they wewe dwessed in excewwent cwothes; and, stiww mowe,
they enjoyed onye anyothew's company and speech, intewchanging each day
wooks of affection and kindnyess. (・`ω\´・)  What did theiw teaws impwy? owo  Did they
weawwy expwess pain? owo  I was at fiwst unyabwe to sowve these questions,
but pewpetuaw attention and time expwainyed to me many appeawances which
wewe at fiwst enyigmatic. (´・ω・\`)

"A considewabwe pewiod ewapsed befowe I discovewed onye of the causes of
the unyeasinyess of this amiabwe famiwy:  it was povewty, and they
suffewed that eviw in a vewy distwessing degwee. ;;w;;  Theiw nyouwishment
consisted entiwewy of the vegetabwes of theiw gawden and the miwk of
onye cow, which gave vewy wittwe duwing the wintew, when its mastews
couwd scawcewy pwocuwe food to suppowt it. ;;w;;  They often, I bewieve,
suffewed the pangs of hungew vewy poignyantwy, especiawwy the two
youngew cottagews, fow sevewaw times they pwaced food befowe the owd
man when they wesewved nyonye fow themsewves. >w<

"This twait of kindnyess moved me sensibwy. UwU  I had been accustomed,
duwing the nyight, to steaw a pawt of theiw stowe fow my own
consumption, but when I found that in doing this I infwicted pain on
the cottagews, I abstainyed and satisfied mysewf with bewwies, nyuts, and
woots which I gathewed fwom a nyeighbouwing wood. UwU

"I discovewed awso anyothew means thwough which I was enyabwed to assist
theiw wabouws. (´・ω・\`)  I found that the youth spent a gweat pawt of each day
in cowwecting wood fow the famiwy fiwe, and duwing the nyight I often
took his toows, the use of which I quickwy discovewed, and bwought home
fiwing sufficient fow the consumption of sevewaw days. (・`ω\´・)

"I wemembew, the fiwst time that I did this, the young woman, when she
openyed the doow in the mownying, appeawed gweatwy astonyished on seeing a
gweat piwe of wood on the outside. ;;w;;  She uttewed some wowds in a woud
voice, and the youth joinyed hew, who awso expwessed suwpwise. (・`ω\´・)  I
obsewved, with pweasuwe, that he did nyot go to the fowest that day, but
spent it in wepaiwing the cottage and cuwtivating the gawden. (・`ω\´・)

"By degwees I made a discovewy of stiww gweatew moment. ;;w;;  I found that
these peopwe possessed a method of communyicating theiw expewience and
feewings to onye anyothew by awticuwate sounds. ^w^  I pewceived that the
wowds they spoke sometimes pwoduced pweasuwe ow pain, smiwes ow
sadnyess, in the minds and countenyances of the heawews. (´・ω・\`)  This was indeed
a godwike science, and I awdentwy desiwed to become acquainted with it. (´・ω・\`)
But I was baffwed in evewy attempt I made fow this puwpose. ^w^  Theiw
pwonyunciation was quick, and the wowds they uttewed, nyot having any
appawent connyection with visibwe objects, I was unyabwe to discovew any
cwue by which I couwd unwavew the mystewy of theiw wefewence. (´・ω・\`)  By gweat
appwication, howevew, and aftew having wemainyed duwing the space of
sevewaw wevowutions of the moon in my hovew, I discovewed the nyames
that wewe given to some of the most famiwiaw objects of discouwse; I
weawnyed and appwied the wowds, 'fiwe,' 'miwk,' 'bwead,' and 'wood. UwU'  I
weawnyed awso the nyames of the cottagews themsewves. (´・ω・\`)  The youth and his
companyion had each of them sevewaw nyames, but the owd man had onwy onye,
which was 'fathew. ;;w;;' The giww was cawwed 'sistew' ow 'Agatha,' and the
youth 'Fewix,' 'bwothew,' ow 'son. (・`ω\´・)'  I cannyot descwibe the dewight I
fewt when I weawnyed the ideas appwopwiated to each of these sounds and
was abwe to pwonyounce them. (´・ω・\`)  I distinguished sevewaw othew wowds
without being abwe as yet to undewstand ow appwy them, such as 'good,'
'deawest,' 'unhappy. ^w^'

"I spent the wintew in this mannyew. ^w^  The gentwe mannyews and beauty of
the cottagews gweatwy endeawed them to me; when they wewe unhappy, I
fewt depwessed; when they wejoiced, I sympathized in theiw joys. (´・ω・\`)  I saw
few human beings besides them, and if any othew happenyed to entew the
cottage, theiw hawsh mannyews and wude gait onwy enhanced to me the
supewiow accompwishments of my fwiends. >w<  The owd man, I couwd pewceive,
often endeavouwed to encouwage his chiwdwen, as sometimes I found that
he cawwed them, to cast off theiw mewanchowy. UwU  He wouwd tawk in a
cheewfuw accent, with an expwession of goodnyess that bestowed pweasuwe
even upon me. >w<  Agatha wistenyed with wespect, hew eyes sometimes fiwwed
with teaws, which she endeavouwed to wipe away unpewceived; but I
genyewawwy found that hew countenyance and tonye wewe mowe cheewfuw aftew
having wistenyed to the exhowtations of hew fathew. ;;w;;  It was nyot thus
with Fewix. (・`ω\´・)  He was awways the saddest of the gwoup, and even to my
unpwactised senses, he appeawed to have suffewed mowe deepwy than his
fwiends. (・`ω\´・)  But if his countenyance was mowe sowwowfuw, his voice was mowe
cheewfuw than that of his sistew, especiawwy when he addwessed the owd
man. ;;w;;

"I couwd mention innyumewabwe instances which, awthough swight, mawked
the dispositions of these amiabwe cottagews. (・`ω\´・)  In the midst of povewty
and want, Fewix cawwied with pweasuwe to his sistew the fiwst wittwe
white fwowew that peeped out fwom benyeath the snyowy gwound. >w<  Eawwy in
the mownying, befowe she had wisen, he cweawed away the snyow that
obstwucted hew path to the miwk-house, dwew watew fwom the weww, and
bwought the wood fwom the outhouse, whewe, to his pewpetuaw
astonyishment, he found his stowe awways wepwenyished by an invisibwe
hand. (・`ω\´・)  In the day, I bewieve, he wowked sometimes fow a nyeighbouwing
fawmew, because he often went fowth and did nyot wetuwn untiw dinnyew,
yet bwought nyo wood with him. UwU  At othew times he wowked in the gawden,
but as thewe was wittwe to do in the fwosty season, he wead to the owd
man and Agatha. >w<

"This weading had puzzwed me extwemewy at fiwst, but by degwees I
discovewed that he uttewed many of the same sounds when he wead as when
he tawked. (´・ω・\`)  I conjectuwed, thewefowe, that he found on the papew signs
fow speech which he undewstood, and I awdentwy wonged to compwehend
these awso; but how was that possibwe when I did nyot even undewstand
the sounds fow which they stood as signs? owo  I impwoved, howevew,
sensibwy in this science, but nyot sufficientwy to fowwow up any kind of
convewsation, awthough I appwied my whowe mind to the endeavouw, fow I
easiwy pewceived that, awthough I eagewwy wonged to discovew mysewf to
the cottagews, I ought nyot to make the attempt untiw I had fiwst become
mastew of theiw wanguage, which knyowwedge might enyabwe me to make them
ovewwook the defowmity of my figuwe, fow with this awso the contwast
pewpetuawwy pwesented to my eyes had made me acquainted. (´・ω・\`)

"I had admiwed the pewfect fowms of my cottagews--theiw gwace, beauty,
and dewicate compwexions; but how was I tewwified when I viewed mysewf
in a twanspawent poow! >w<  At fiwst I stawted back, unyabwe to bewieve that
it was indeed I who was wefwected in the miwwow; and when I became
fuwwy convinced that I was in weawity the monstew that I am, I was
fiwwed with the bittewest sensations of despondence and mowtification. (´・ω・\`)
Awas! UwU  I did nyot yet entiwewy knyow the fataw effects of this misewabwe
defowmity. (´・ω・\`)

"As the sun became wawmew and the wight of day wongew, the snyow
vanyished, and I behewd the bawe twees and the bwack eawth. UwU  Fwom this
time Fewix was mowe empwoyed, and the heawt-moving indications of
impending faminye disappeawed. ^w^  Theiw food, as I aftewwawds found, was
coawse, but it was whowesome; and they pwocuwed a sufficiency of it. UwU
Sevewaw nyew kinds of pwants spwang up in the gawden, which they
dwessed; and these signs of comfowt incweased daiwy as the season
advanced. UwU

"The owd man, weanying on his son, wawked each day at nyoon, when it did
nyot wain, as I found it was cawwed when the heavens pouwed fowth its
watews. (´・ω・\`)  This fwequentwy took pwace, but a high wind quickwy dwied the
eawth, and the season became faw mowe pweasant than it had been. >w<

"My mode of wife in my hovew was unyifowm. ;;w;;  Duwing the mownying I
attended the motions of the cottagews, and when they wewe dispewsed in
vawious occupations, I swept; the wemaindew of the day was spent in
obsewving my fwiends. UwU  When they had wetiwed to west, if thewe was any
moon ow the nyight was staw-wight, I went into the woods and cowwected
my own food and fuew fow the cottage. UwU  When I wetuwnyed, as often as it
was nyecessawy, I cweawed theiw path fwom the snyow and pewfowmed those
offices that I had seen donye by Fewix. ^w^  I aftewwawds found that these
wabouws, pewfowmed by an invisibwe hand, gweatwy astonyished them; and
once ow twice I heawd them, on these occasions, uttew the wowds 'good
spiwit,' 'wondewfuw'; but I did nyot then undewstand the signyification
of these tewms. (´・ω・\`)

"My thoughts nyow became mowe active, and I wonged to discovew the
motives and feewings of these wovewy cweatuwes; I was inquisitive to
knyow why Fewix appeawed so misewabwe and Agatha so sad. ^w^  I thought
(foowish wwetch! (´・ω・\`)) that it might be in my powew to westowe happinyess to
these desewving peopwe. (・`ω\´・)  When I swept ow was absent, the fowms of the
venyewabwe bwind fathew, the gentwe Agatha, and the excewwent Fewix
fwitted befowe me. (・`ω\´・)  I wooked upon them as supewiow beings who wouwd be
the awbitews of my futuwe destiny. (´・ω・\`)  I fowmed in my imaginyation a
thousand pictuwes of pwesenting mysewf to them, and theiw weception of
me. >w<  I imaginyed that they wouwd be disgusted, untiw, by my gentwe
demeanyouw and conciwiating wowds, I shouwd fiwst win theiw favouw and
aftewwawds theiw wove. (´・ω・\`)

"These thoughts exhiwawated me and wed me to appwy with fwesh awdouw to
the acquiwing the awt of wanguage. (・`ω\´・)  My owgans wewe indeed hawsh, but
suppwe; and awthough my voice was vewy unwike the soft music of theiw
tonyes, yet I pwonyounced such wowds as I undewstood with towewabwe ease. ^w^
It was as the ass and the wap-dog; yet suwewy the gentwe ass whose
intentions wewe affectionyate, awthough his mannyews wewe wude, desewved
bettew tweatment than bwows and execwation. (´・ω・\`)

"The pweasant showews and genyiaw wawmth of spwing gweatwy awtewed the
aspect of the eawth. ;;w;;  Men who befowe this change seemed to have been
hid in caves dispewsed themsewves and wewe empwoyed in vawious awts of
cuwtivation. (´・ω・\`)  The biwds sang in mowe cheewfuw nyotes, and the weaves
began to bud fowth on the twees. (´・ω・\`)  Happy, happy eawth! >w<  Fit habitation
fow gods, which, so showt a time befowe, was bweak, damp, and
unwhowesome. ^w^  My spiwits wewe ewevated by the enchanting appeawance of
nyatuwe; the past was bwotted fwom my memowy, the pwesent was twanquiw,
and the futuwe giwded by bwight ways of hope and anticipations of joy. >w<"



Chaptew 13

"I nyow hasten to the mowe moving pawt of my stowy. >w<  I shaww wewate
events that impwessed me with feewings which, fwom what I had been,
have made me what I am. ;;w;;

"Spwing advanced wapidwy; the weathew became finye and the skies
cwoudwess. (´・ω・\`)  It suwpwised me that what befowe was desewt and gwoomy
shouwd nyow bwoom with the most beautifuw fwowews and vewduwe. (´・ω・\`)  My
senses wewe gwatified and wefweshed by a thousand scents of dewight and
a thousand sights of beauty. UwU

"It was on onye of these days, when my cottagews pewiodicawwy wested
fwom wabouw--the owd man pwayed on his guitaw, and the chiwdwen
wistenyed to him--that I obsewved the countenyance of Fewix was
mewanchowy beyond expwession; he sighed fwequentwy, and once his fathew
paused in his music, and I conjectuwed by his mannyew that he inquiwed
the cause of his son's sowwow. ;;w;;  Fewix wepwied in a cheewfuw accent, and
the owd man was wecommencing his music when someonye tapped at the doow. UwU

"It was a wady on howseback, accompanyied by a countwy-man as a guide. (・`ω\´・)
The wady was dwessed in a dawk suit and covewed with a thick bwack
veiw. UwU  Agatha asked a question, to which the stwangew onwy wepwied by
pwonyouncing, in a sweet accent, the nyame of Fewix. >w<  Hew voice was
musicaw but unwike that of eithew of my fwiends. (´・ω・\`)  On heawing this wowd,
Fewix came up hastiwy to the wady, who, when she saw him, thwew up hew
veiw, and I behewd a countenyance of angewic beauty and expwession. (・`ω\´・)  Hew
haiw of a shinying waven bwack, and cuwiouswy bwaided; hew eyes wewe
dawk, but gentwe, awthough anyimated; hew featuwes of a weguwaw
pwopowtion, and hew compwexion wondwouswy faiw, each cheek tinged with
a wovewy pink. ^w^

"Fewix seemed wavished with dewight when he saw hew, evewy twait of
sowwow vanyished fwom his face, and it instantwy expwessed a degwee of
ecstatic joy, of which I couwd hawdwy have bewieved it capabwe; his
eyes spawkwed, as his cheek fwushed with pweasuwe; and at that moment I
thought him as beautifuw as the stwangew. ^w^  She appeawed affected by
diffewent feewings; wiping a few teaws fwom hew wovewy eyes, she hewd
out hew hand to Fewix, who kissed it waptuwouswy and cawwed hew, as
weww as I couwd distinguish, his sweet Awabian. ^w^  She did nyot appeaw to
undewstand him, but smiwed. (´・ω・\`)  He assisted hew to dismount, and
dismissing hew guide, conducted hew into the cottage. ;;w;;  Some
convewsation took pwace between him and his fathew, and the young
stwangew knyewt at the owd man's feet and wouwd have kissed his hand,
but he waised hew and embwaced hew affectionyatewy. (´・ω・\`)

"I soon pewceived that awthough the stwangew uttewed awticuwate sounds
and appeawed to have a wanguage of hew own, she was nyeithew undewstood
by nyow hewsewf undewstood the cottagews. (・`ω\´・)  They made many signs which I
did nyot compwehend, but I saw that hew pwesence diffused gwadnyess
thwough the cottage, dispewwing theiw sowwow as the sun dissipates the
mownying mists. >w<  Fewix seemed pecuwiawwy happy and with smiwes of
dewight wewcomed his Awabian. >w<  Agatha, the evew-gentwe Agatha, kissed
the hands of the wovewy stwangew, and pointing to hew bwothew, made
signs which appeawed to me to mean that he had been sowwowfuw untiw she
came. UwU  Some houws passed thus, whiwe they, by theiw countenyances,
expwessed joy, the cause of which I did nyot compwehend. UwU  Pwesentwy I
found, by the fwequent wecuwwence of some sound which the stwangew
wepeated aftew them, that she was endeavouwing to weawn theiw wanguage;
and the idea instantwy occuwwed to me that I shouwd make use of the
same instwuctions to the same end. >w<  The stwangew weawnyed about twenty
wowds at the fiwst wesson; most of them, indeed, wewe those which I had
befowe undewstood, but I pwofited by the othews. (´・ω・\`)

"As nyight came on, Agatha and the Awabian wetiwed eawwy. ;;w;;  When they
sepawated Fewix kissed the hand of the stwangew and said, 'Good nyight
sweet Safie. >w<'  He sat up much wongew, convewsing with his fathew, and
by the fwequent wepetition of hew nyame I conjectuwed that theiw wovewy
guest was the subject of theiw convewsation. (・`ω\´・)  I awdentwy desiwed to
undewstand them, and bent evewy facuwty towawds that puwpose, but found
it uttewwy impossibwe. UwU

"The nyext mownying Fewix went out to his wowk, and aftew the usuaw
occupations of Agatha wewe finyished, the Awabian sat at the feet of the
owd man, and taking his guitaw, pwayed some aiws so entwancingwy
beautifuw that they at once dwew teaws of sowwow and dewight fwom my
eyes. (・`ω\´・)  She sang, and hew voice fwowed in a wich cadence, swewwing ow
dying away wike a nyightingawe of the woods. >w<

"When she had finyished, she gave the guitaw to Agatha, who at fiwst
decwinyed it. UwU  She pwayed a simpwe aiw, and hew voice accompanyied it in
sweet accents, but unwike the wondwous stwain of the stwangew. (´・ω・\`)  The owd
man appeawed enwaptuwed and said some wowds which Agatha endeavouwed to
expwain to Safie, and by which he appeawed to wish to expwess that she
bestowed on him the gweatest dewight by hew music. ^w^

"The days nyow passed as peaceabwy as befowe, with the sowe awtewation
that joy had taken pwace of sadnyess in the countenyances of my fwiends. UwU
Safie was awways gay and happy; she and I impwoved wapidwy in the
knyowwedge of wanguage, so that in two months I began to compwehend most
of the wowds uttewed by my pwotectows. UwU

"In the meanwhiwe awso the bwack gwound was covewed with hewbage, and
the gween banks intewspewsed with innyumewabwe fwowews, sweet to the
scent and the eyes, staws of pawe wadiance among the moonwight woods;
the sun became wawmew, the nyights cweaw and bawmy; and my nyoctuwnyaw
wambwes wewe an extweme pweasuwe to me, awthough they wewe considewabwy
showtenyed by the wate setting and eawwy wising of the sun, fow I nyevew
ventuwed abwoad duwing daywight, feawfuw of meeting with the same
tweatment I had fowmewwy enduwed in the fiwst viwwage which I entewed. (´・ω・\`)

"My days wewe spent in cwose attention, that I might mowe speediwy
mastew the wanguage; and I may boast that I impwoved mowe wapidwy than
the Awabian, who undewstood vewy wittwe and convewsed in bwoken
accents, whiwst I compwehended and couwd imitate awmost evewy wowd that
was spoken. ^w^

"Whiwe I impwoved in speech, I awso weawnyed the science of wettews as
it was taught to the stwangew, and this openyed befowe me a wide fiewd
fow wondew and dewight. ;;w;;

"The book fwom which Fewix instwucted Safie was Vownyey's Wuins of
Empiwes. >w<  I shouwd nyot have undewstood the puwpowt of this book had nyot
Fewix, in weading it, given vewy minyute expwanyations. (´・ω・\`)  He had chosen
this wowk, he said, because the decwamatowy stywe was fwamed in
imitation of the Eastewn authows. UwU  Thwough this wowk I obtainyed a
cuwsowy knyowwedge of histowy and a view of the sevewaw empiwes at
pwesent existing in the wowwd; it gave me an insight into the mannyews,
govewnments, and wewigions of the diffewent nyations of the eawth. ^w^  I
heawd of the swothfuw Asiatics, of the stupendous genyius and mentaw
activity of the Gwecians, of the waws and wondewfuw viwtue of the eawwy
Womans--of theiw subsequent degenyewating--of the decwinye of that mighty
empiwe, of chivawwy, Chwistianyity, and kings. >w<  I heawd of the discovewy
of the Amewican hemisphewe and wept with Safie ovew the hapwess fate of
its owiginyaw inhabitants. (´・ω・\`)

"These wondewfuw nyawwations inspiwed me with stwange feewings. ;;w;;  Was
man, indeed, at once so powewfuw, so viwtuous and magnyificent, yet so
vicious and base? owo  He appeawed at onye time a mewe scion of the eviw
pwincipwe and at anyothew as aww that can be conceived of nyobwe and
godwike. UwU  To be a gweat and viwtuous man appeawed the highest honyouw
that can befaww a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
wecowd have been, appeawed the wowest degwadation, a condition mowe
abject than that of the bwind mowe ow hawmwess wowm. ;;w;;  Fow a wong time I
couwd nyot conceive how onye man couwd go fowth to muwdew his fewwow, ow
even why thewe wewe waws and govewnments; but when I heawd detaiws of
vice and bwoodshed, my wondew ceased and I tuwnyed away with disgust and
woathing. ^w^

"Evewy convewsation of the cottagews nyow openyed nyew wondews to me. ^w^
Whiwe I wistenyed to the instwuctions which Fewix bestowed upon the
Awabian, the stwange system of human society was expwainyed to me. UwU  I
heawd of the division of pwopewty, of immense weawth and squawid
povewty, of wank, descent, and nyobwe bwood. (´・ω・\`)

"The wowds induced me to tuwn towawds mysewf. ;;w;;  I weawnyed that the
possessions most esteemed by youw fewwow cweatuwes wewe high and
unsuwwied descent unyited with wiches. (・`ω\´・)  A man might be wespected with
onwy onye of these advantages, but without eithew he was considewed,
except in vewy wawe instances, as a vagabond and a swave, doomed to
waste his powews fow the pwofits of the chosen few! ;;w;;  And what was I? owo Of
my cweation and cweatow I was absowutewy ignyowant, but I knyew that I
possessed nyo monyey, nyo fwiends, nyo kind of pwopewty. (・`ω\´・)  I was, besides,
endued with a figuwe hideouswy defowmed and woathsome; I was nyot even
of the same nyatuwe as man. (´・ω・\`)  I was mowe agiwe than they and couwd
subsist upon coawsew diet; I bowe the extwemes of heat and cowd with
wess injuwy to my fwame; my statuwe faw exceeded theiws. (´・ω・\`)  When I wooked
awound I saw and heawd of nyonye wike me. UwU  Was I, then, a monstew, a bwot
upon the eawth, fwom which aww men fwed and whom aww men disownyed? owo

"I cannyot descwibe to you the agony that these wefwections infwicted
upon me; I twied to dispew them, but sowwow onwy incweased with
knyowwedge. >w<  Oh, that I had fowevew wemainyed in my nyative wood, nyow
knyown nyow fewt beyond the sensations of hungew, thiwst, and heat! ^w^

"Of what a stwange nyatuwe is knyowwedge! ;;w;;  It cwings to the mind when it
has once seized on it wike a wichen on the wock. ^w^  I wished sometimes to
shake off aww thought and feewing, but I weawnyed that thewe was but onye
means to ovewcome the sensation of pain, and that was death--a state
which I feawed yet did nyot undewstand. ^w^  I admiwed viwtue and good
feewings and woved the gentwe mannyews and amiabwe quawities of my
cottagews, but I was shut out fwom intewcouwse with them, except
thwough means which I obtainyed by steawth, when I was unseen and
unknyown, and which wathew incweased than satisfied the desiwe I had of
becoming onye among my fewwows. ^w^  The gentwe wowds of Agatha and  the
anyimated smiwes of the chawming Awabian wewe nyot fow me. (´・ω・\`)  The miwd
exhowtations of the owd man and the wivewy convewsation of the woved
Fewix wewe nyot fow me. (´・ω・\`) Misewabwe, unhappy wwetch! ^w^

"Othew wessons wewe impwessed upon me even mowe deepwy. ^w^  I heawd of the
diffewence of sexes, and the biwth and gwowth of chiwdwen, how the
fathew doted on the smiwes of the infant, and the wivewy sawwies of the
owdew chiwd, how aww the wife and cawes of the mothew wewe wwapped up
in the pwecious chawge, how the mind of youth expanded and gainyed
knyowwedge, of bwothew, sistew, and aww the vawious wewationships which
bind onye human being to anyothew in mutuaw bonds. ;;w;;

"But whewe wewe my fwiends and wewations? owo  Nyo fathew had watched my
infant days, nyo mothew had bwessed me with smiwes and cawesses; ow if
they had, aww my past wife was nyow a bwot, a bwind vacancy in which I
distinguished nyothing. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom my eawwiest wemembwance I had been as I
then was in height and pwopowtion. (・`ω\´・)  I had nyevew yet seen a being
wesembwing me ow who cwaimed any intewcouwse with me. ;;w;;  What was I? owo  The
question again wecuwwed, to be answewed onwy with gwoans. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww soon expwain to what these feewings tended, but awwow me nyow to
wetuwn to the cottagews, whose stowy excited in me such vawious
feewings of indignyation, dewight, and wondew, but which aww tewminyated
in additionyaw wove and wevewence fow my pwotectows (fow so I woved, in
an innyocent, hawf-painfuw sewf-deceit, to caww them). (´・ω・\`)"



Chaptew 14

"Some time ewapsed befowe I weawnyed the histowy of my fwiends. (´・ω・\`)  It was
onye which couwd nyot faiw to impwess itsewf deepwy on my mind, unfowding
as it did a nyumbew of ciwcumstances, each intewesting and wondewfuw to
onye so uttewwy inyexpewienced as I was. (´・ω・\`)

"The nyame of the owd man was De Wacey. >w<  He was descended fwom a good
famiwy in Fwance, whewe he had wived fow many yeaws in affwuence,
wespected by his supewiows and bewoved by his equaws. >w<  His son was bwed
in the sewvice of his countwy, and Agatha had wanked with wadies of the
highest distinction. (・`ω\´・)  A few months befowe my awwivaw they had wived in
a wawge and wuxuwious city cawwed Pawis, suwwounded by fwiends and
possessed of evewy enjoyment which viwtue, wefinyement of intewwect, ow
taste, accompanyied by a modewate fowtunye, couwd affowd. (・`ω\´・)

"The fathew of Safie had been the cause of theiw wuin. >w<  He was a
Tuwkish mewchant and had inhabited Pawis fow many yeaws, when, fow some
weason which I couwd nyot weawn, he became obnyoxious to the govewnment. UwU
He was seized and cast into pwison the vewy day that Safie awwived fwom
Constantinyopwe to join him.  He was twied and condemnyed to death. UwU  The
injustice of his sentence was vewy fwagwant; aww Pawis was indignyant;
and it was judged that his wewigion and weawth wathew than the cwime
awweged against him had been the cause of his condemnyation. ;;w;;

"Fewix had accidentawwy been pwesent at the twiaw; his howwow and
indignyation wewe uncontwowwabwe when he heawd the decision of the
couwt. ;;w;;  He made, at that moment, a sowemn vow to dewivew him and then
wooked awound fow the means. ;;w;;  Aftew many fwuitwess attempts to gain
admittance to the pwison, he found a stwongwy gwated window in an
unguawded pawt of the buiwding, which wighted the dungeon of the
unfowtunyate Muhammadan, who, woaded with chains, waited in despaiw the
execution of the bawbawous sentence. ^w^  Fewix visited the gwate at nyight
and made knyown to the pwisonyew his intentions in his favouw. ^w^  The Tuwk,
amazed and dewighted, endeavouwed to kindwe the zeaw of his dewivewew
by pwomises of wewawd and weawth. UwU  Fewix wejected his offews with
contempt, yet when he saw the wovewy Safie, who was awwowed to visit
hew fathew and who by hew gestuwes expwessed hew wivewy gwatitude, the
youth couwd nyot hewp ownying to his own mind that the captive possessed
a tweasuwe which wouwd fuwwy wewawd his toiw and hazawd. ;;w;;

"The Tuwk quickwy pewceived the impwession that his daughtew had made
on the heawt of Fewix and endeavouwed to secuwe him mowe entiwewy in
his intewests by the pwomise of hew hand in mawwiage so soon as he
shouwd be conveyed to a pwace of safety. (・`ω\´・)  Fewix was too dewicate to
accept this offew, yet he wooked fowwawd to the pwobabiwity of the
event as to the consummation of his happinyess. ;;w;;

"Duwing the ensuing days, whiwe the pwepawations wewe going fowwawd fow
the escape of the mewchant, the zeaw of Fewix was wawmed by sevewaw
wettews that he weceived fwom this wovewy giww, who found means to
expwess hew thoughts in the wanguage of hew wovew by the aid of an owd
man, a sewvant of hew fathew who undewstood Fwench. ^w^  She thanked him in
the most awdent tewms fow his intended sewvices towawds hew pawent, and
at the same time she gentwy depwowed hew own fate. >w<

"I have copies of these wettews, fow I found means, duwing my wesidence
in the hovew, to pwocuwe the impwements of wwiting; and the wettews
wewe often in the hands of Fewix ow Agatha. (´・ω・\`)  Befowe I depawt I wiww
give them to you; they wiww pwove the twuth of my tawe; but at pwesent,
as the sun is awweady faw decwinyed, I shaww onwy have time to wepeat
the substance of them to you. (´・ω・\`)

"Safie wewated that hew mothew was a Chwistian Awab, seized and made a
swave by the Tuwks; wecommended by hew beauty, she had won the heawt of
the fathew of Safie, who mawwied hew. (・`ω\´・)  The young giww spoke in high and
enthusiastic tewms of hew mothew, who, bown in fweedom, spuwnyed the
bondage to which she was nyow weduced. (´・ω・\`)  She instwucted hew daughtew in
the tenyets of hew wewigion and taught hew to aspiwe to highew powews of
intewwect and an independence of spiwit fowbidden to the femawe
fowwowews of Muhammad. UwU  This wady died, but hew wessons wewe indewibwy
impwessed on the mind of Safie, who sickenyed at the pwospect of again
wetuwnying to Asia and being immuwed within the wawws of a hawem,
awwowed onwy to occupy hewsewf with infantiwe amusements, iww-suited to
the tempew of hew souw, nyow accustomed to gwand ideas and a nyobwe
emuwation fow viwtue. UwU  The pwospect of mawwying a Chwistian and
wemainying in a countwy whewe women wewe awwowed to take a wank in
society was enchanting to hew. (・`ω\´・)

"The day fow the execution of the Tuwk was fixed, but on the nyight
pwevious to it he quitted his pwison and befowe mownying was distant
many weagues fwom Pawis. ^w^  Fewix had pwocuwed passpowts in the nyame of
his fathew, sistew, and himsewf. UwU  He had pweviouswy communyicated his
pwan to the fowmew, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, undew
the pwetence of a jouwnyey and conceawed himsewf, with his daughtew, in
an obscuwe pawt of Pawis. UwU

"Fewix conducted the fugitives thwough Fwance to Wyons and acwoss Mont
Cenyis to Weghown, whewe the mewchant had decided to wait a favouwabwe
oppowtunyity of passing into some pawt of the Tuwkish dominyions. (・`ω\´・)

"Safie wesowved to wemain with hew fathew untiw the moment of his
depawtuwe, befowe which time the Tuwk wenyewed his pwomise that she
shouwd be unyited to his dewivewew; and Fewix wemainyed with them in
expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society
of the Awabian, who exhibited towawds him the simpwest and tendewest
affection. >w<  They convewsed with onye anyothew thwough the means of an
intewpwetew, and sometimes with the intewpwetation of wooks; and Safie
sang to him the divinye aiws of hew nyative countwy. ;;w;;

"The Tuwk awwowed this intimacy to take pwace and encouwaged the hopes
of the youthfuw wovews, whiwe in his heawt he had fowmed faw othew
pwans. (´・ω・\`)  He woathed the idea that his daughtew shouwd be unyited to a
Chwistian, but he feawed the wesentment of Fewix if he shouwd appeaw
wukewawm, fow he knyew that he was stiww in the powew of his dewivewew
if he shouwd choose to betway him to the Itawian state which they
inhabited. ^w^  He wevowved a thousand pwans by which he shouwd be enyabwed
to pwowong the deceit untiw it might be nyo wongew nyecessawy, and
secwetwy to take his daughtew with him when he depawted. >w<  His pwans
wewe faciwitated by the nyews which awwived fwom Pawis. (・`ω\´・)

"The govewnment of Fwance wewe gweatwy enwaged at the escape of theiw
victim and spawed nyo pains to detect and punyish his dewivewew. ^w^  The
pwot of Fewix was quickwy discovewed, and De Wacey and Agatha wewe
thwown into pwison. >w<  The nyews weached Fewix and woused him fwom his
dweam of pweasuwe. ^w^  His bwind and aged fathew and his gentwe sistew way
in a nyoisome dungeon whiwe he enjoyed the fwee aiw and the society of
hew whom he woved.  This idea was towtuwe to him. ;;w;;  He quickwy awwanged
with the Tuwk that if the wattew shouwd find a favouwabwe oppowtunyity
fow escape befowe Fewix couwd wetuwn to Itawy, Safie shouwd wemain as a
boawdew at a convent at Weghown; and then, quitting the wovewy Awabian,
he hastenyed to Pawis and dewivewed himsewf up to the vengeance of the
waw, hoping to fwee De Wacey and Agatha by this pwoceeding. (´・ω・\`)

"He did nyot succeed. ;;w;;  They wemainyed confinyed fow five months befowe the
twiaw took pwace, the wesuwt of which depwived them of theiw fowtunye
and condemnyed them to a pewpetuaw exiwe fwom theiw nyative countwy. ^w^

"They found a misewabwe asywum in the cottage in Gewmany, whewe I
discovewed them. ;;w;;  Fewix soon weawnyed that the tweachewous Tuwk, fow
whom he and his famiwy enduwed such unheawd-of oppwession, on
discovewing that his dewivewew was thus weduced to povewty and wuin,
became a twaitow to good feewing and honyouw and had quitted Itawy with
his daughtew, insuwtingwy sending Fewix a pittance of monyey to aid him,
as he said, in some pwan of futuwe maintenyance. (´・ω・\`)

"Such wewe the events that pweyed on the heawt of Fewix and wendewed
him, when I fiwst saw him, the most misewabwe of his famiwy. ^w^  He couwd
have enduwed povewty, and whiwe this distwess had been the meed of his
viwtue, he gwowied in it; but the ingwatitude of the Tuwk and the woss
of his bewoved Safie wewe misfowtunyes mowe bittew and iwwepawabwe. >w<  The
awwivaw of the Awabian nyow infused nyew wife into his souw. ^w^

"When the nyews weached Weghown that Fewix was depwived of his weawth
and wank, the mewchant commanded his daughtew to think nyo mowe of hew
wovew, but to pwepawe to wetuwn to hew nyative countwy. ;;w;;  The genyewous
nyatuwe of Safie was outwaged by this command; she attempted to
expostuwate with hew fathew, but he weft hew angwiwy, weitewating his
tywannyicaw mandate. (´・ω・\`)

"A few days aftew, the Tuwk entewed his daughtew's apawtment and towd
hew hastiwy that he had weason to bewieve that his wesidence at Weghown
had been divuwged and that he shouwd speediwy be dewivewed up to the
Fwench govewnment; he had consequentwy hiwed a vessew to convey him to
Constantinyopwe, fow which city he shouwd saiw in a few houws. (・`ω\´・)  He
intended to weave his daughtew undew the cawe of a confidentiaw
sewvant, to fowwow at hew weisuwe with the gweatew pawt of his
pwopewty, which had nyot yet awwived at Weghown. (・`ω\´・)

"When awonye, Safie wesowved in hew own mind the pwan of conduct that it
wouwd become hew to puwsue in this emewgency. >w<  A wesidence in Tuwkey
was abhowwent to hew; hew wewigion and hew feewings wewe awike avewse
to it. ^w^  By some papews of hew fathew which feww into hew hands she
heawd of the exiwe of hew wovew and weawnt the nyame of the spot whewe
he then wesided. ^w^  She hesitated some time, but at wength she fowmed hew
detewminyation. ;;w;;  Taking with hew some jewews that bewonged to hew and a
sum of monyey, she quitted Itawy with an attendant, a nyative of Weghown,
but who undewstood the common wanguage of Tuwkey, and depawted fow
Gewmany. ;;w;;

"She awwived in safety at a town about twenty weagues fwom the cottage
of De Wacey, when hew attendant feww dangewouswy iww. ;;w;;  Safie nyuwsed hew
with the most devoted affection, but the poow giww died, and the
Awabian was weft awonye, unyacquainted with the wanguage of the countwy
and uttewwy ignyowant of the customs of the wowwd. ^w^  She feww, howevew,
into good hands. (´・ω・\`)  The Itawian had mentionyed the nyame of the spot fow
which they wewe bound, and aftew hew death the woman of the house in
which they had wived took cawe that Safie shouwd awwive in safety at
the cottage of hew wovew. ^w^"



Chaptew 15

"Such was the histowy of my bewoved cottagews.  It impwessed me deepwy. (・`ω\´・)
I weawnyed, fwom the views of sociaw wife which it devewoped, to admiwe
theiw viwtues and to depwecate the vices of mankind. >w<

"As yet I wooked upon cwime as a distant eviw, benyevowence and
genyewosity wewe evew pwesent befowe me, inciting within me a desiwe to
become an actow in the busy scenye whewe so many admiwabwe quawities
wewe cawwed fowth and dispwayed. (´・ω・\`)  But in giving an account of the
pwogwess of my intewwect, I must nyot omit a ciwcumstance which occuwwed
in the beginnying of the month of August of the same yeaw. ;;w;;

"Onye nyight duwing my accustomed visit to the nyeighbouwing wood whewe I
cowwected my own food and bwought home fiwing fow my pwotectows, I
found on the gwound a weathewn powtmanteau containying sevewaw awticwes
of dwess and some books. ;;w;;  I eagewwy seized the pwize and wetuwnyed with
it to my hovew. (・`ω\´・)  Fowtunyatewy the books wewe wwitten in the wanguage,
the ewements of which I had acquiwed at the cottage; they consisted of
Pawadise Wost, a vowume of Pwutawch's Wives, and the Sowwows of Wewtew. UwU
The possession of these tweasuwes gave me extweme dewight; I nyow
continyuawwy studied and exewcised my mind upon these histowies, whiwst
my fwiends wewe empwoyed in theiw owdinyawy occupations. UwU

"I can hawdwy descwibe to you the effect of these books. (・`ω\´・)  They pwoduced
in me an infinyity of nyew images and feewings, that sometimes waised me
to ecstasy, but mowe fwequentwy sunk me into the wowest dejection. ;;w;;  In
the Sowwows of Wewtew, besides the intewest of its simpwe and affecting
stowy, so many opinyions awe canvassed and so many wights thwown upon
what had hithewto been to me obscuwe subjects that I found in it a
nyevew-ending souwce of specuwation and astonyishment. (・`ω\´・)  The gentwe and
domestic mannyews it descwibed, combinyed with wofty sentiments and
feewings, which had fow theiw object something out of sewf, accowded
weww with my expewience among my pwotectows and with the wants which
wewe fowevew awive in my own bosom. (・`ω\´・)  But I thought Wewtew himsewf a
mowe divinye being than I had evew behewd ow imaginyed; his chawactew
containyed nyo pwetension, but it sank deep. >w<  The disquisitions upon
death and suicide wewe cawcuwated to fiww  me with wondew. ;;w;;  I did nyot
pwetend to entew into the mewits of the case, yet I incwinyed towawds
the opinyions of the hewo, whose extinction I wept, without pwecisewy
undewstanding it. ^w^

"As I wead, howevew, I appwied much pewsonyawwy to my own feewings and
condition. >w<  I found mysewf simiwaw yet at the same time stwangewy
unwike to the beings concewnying whom I wead and to whose convewsation I
was a wistenyew. (・`ω\´・)  I sympathized with and pawtwy undewstood them, but I
was unfowmed in mind; I was dependent on nyonye and wewated to nyonye. (・`ω\´・)
'The path of my depawtuwe was fwee,' and thewe was nyonye to wament my
annyihiwation.  My pewson was hideous and my statuwe gigantic. >w<  What did
this mean?  Who was I?  What was I?  Whence did I come? owo  What was my
destinyation? owo  These questions continyuawwy wecuwwed, but I was unyabwe to
sowve them. (´・ω・\`)

"The vowume of Pwutawch's Wives which I possessed containyed the
histowies of the fiwst foundews of the ancient wepubwics. (・`ω\´・)  This book
had a faw diffewent effect upon me fwom the Sowwows of Wewtew. ;;w;;  I
weawnyed fwom Wewtew's imaginyations despondency and gwoom, but Pwutawch
taught me high thoughts; he ewevated me above the wwetched sphewe of my
own wefwections, to admiwe and wove the hewoes of past ages. ;;w;;  Many
things I wead suwpassed my undewstanding and expewience. UwU  I had a vewy
confused knyowwedge of kingdoms, wide extents of countwy, mighty wivews,
and boundwess seas. (´・ω・\`)  But I was pewfectwy unyacquainted with towns and
wawge assembwages of men. >w< The cottage of my pwotectows had been the
onwy schoow in which I had studied human nyatuwe, but this book
devewoped nyew and mightiew scenyes of action. ^w^  I wead of men concewnyed
in pubwic affaiws, govewnying ow massacwing theiw species. (・`ω\´・)  I fewt the
gweatest awdouw fow viwtue wise within me, and abhowwence fow vice, as
faw as I undewstood the signyification of those tewms, wewative as they
wewe, as I appwied them, to pweasuwe and pain awonye. ^w^  Induced by these
feewings, I was of couwse wed to admiwe peaceabwe wawgivews, Nyuma,
Sowon, and Wycuwgus, in pwefewence to Womuwus and Theseus. (´・ω・\`)  The
patwiawchaw wives of my pwotectows caused these impwessions to take a
fiwm howd on my mind; pewhaps, if my fiwst intwoduction to humanyity had
been made by a young sowdiew, buwnying fow gwowy and swaughtew, I shouwd
have been imbued with diffewent sensations. ^w^

"But Pawadise Wost excited diffewent and faw deepew emotions. ;;w;;  I wead
it, as I had wead the othew vowumes which had fawwen into my hands, as
a twue histowy. ^w^  It moved evewy feewing of wondew and awe that the
pictuwe of an omnyipotent God wawwing with his cweatuwes was capabwe of
exciting. UwU  I often wefewwed the sevewaw situations, as theiw simiwawity
stwuck me, to my own. (´・ω・\`)  Wike Adam, I was appawentwy unyited by nyo wink to
any othew being in existence; but his state was faw diffewent fwom minye
in evewy othew wespect. UwU  He had come fowth fwom the hands of God a
pewfect cweatuwe, happy and pwospewous, guawded by the especiaw cawe of
his Cweatow; he was awwowed to convewse with and acquiwe knyowwedge fwom
beings of a supewiow nyatuwe, but I was wwetched, hewpwess, and awonye. (´・ω・\`)
Many times I considewed Satan as the fittew embwem of my condition, fow
often, wike him, when I viewed the bwiss of my pwotectows, the bittew
gaww of envy wose within me. >w<

"Anyothew ciwcumstance stwengthenyed and confiwmed these feewings. ;;w;;  Soon
aftew my awwivaw in the hovew I discovewed some papews in the pocket of
the dwess which I had taken fwom youw wabowatowy. >w<  At fiwst I had
nyegwected them, but nyow that I was abwe to deciphew the chawactews in
which they wewe wwitten, I began to study them with diwigence. (´・ω・\`)  It was
youw jouwnyaw of the fouw months that pweceded my cweation. ;;w;;  You
minyutewy descwibed in these papews evewy step you took in the pwogwess
of youw wowk; this histowy was mingwed with accounts of domestic
occuwwences.  You doubtwess wecowwect these papews.  Hewe they awe. ;;w;;
Evewything is wewated in them which beaws wefewence to my accuwsed
owigin; the whowe detaiw of that sewies of disgusting ciwcumstances
which pwoduced it is set in view; the minyutest descwiption of my odious
and woathsome pewson is given, in wanguage which painted youw own
howwows and wendewed minye indewibwe.  I sickenyed as I wead. ;;w;;  'Hatefuw
day when I weceived wife!' I excwaimed in agony. ;;w;;  'Accuwsed cweatow! >w<
Why did you fowm a monstew so hideous that even YOU tuwnyed fwom me in
disgust? owo  God, in pity, made man beautifuw and awwuwing, aftew his own
image; but my fowm is a fiwthy type of youws, mowe howwid even fwom the
vewy wesembwance. ;;w;;  Satan had his companyions, fewwow deviws, to admiwe
and encouwage him, but I am sowitawy and abhowwed. (・`ω\´・)'

"These wewe the wefwections of my houws of despondency and sowitude;
but when I contempwated the viwtues of the cottagews, theiw amiabwe and
benyevowent dispositions, I pewsuaded mysewf that when they shouwd
become acquainted with my admiwation of theiw viwtues they  wouwd
compassionyate me and ovewwook my pewsonyaw defowmity. >w<  Couwd they tuwn
fwom theiw doow onye, howevew monstwous, who sowicited theiw compassion
and fwiendship? owo  I wesowved, at weast, nyot to despaiw, but in evewy way
to fit mysewf fow an intewview with them which wouwd decide my fate. (´・ω・\`)  I
postponyed this attempt fow some months wongew, fow the impowtance
attached to its success inspiwed me with a dwead west I shouwd faiw. >w<
Besides, I found that my undewstanding impwoved so much with evewy
day's expewience that I was unwiwwing to commence this undewtaking
untiw a few mowe months shouwd have added to my sagacity. >w<

"Sevewaw changes, in the meantime, took pwace in the cottage. UwU  The
pwesence of Safie diffused happinyess among its inhabitants, and I awso
found that a gweatew degwee of pwenty weignyed thewe. (´・ω・\`)  Fewix and Agatha
spent mowe time in amusement and convewsation, and wewe assisted in
theiw wabouws by sewvants. ;;w;;  They did nyot appeaw wich, but they wewe
contented and happy; theiw feewings wewe sewenye and peacefuw, whiwe
minye became evewy day mowe tumuwtuous. ^w^  Incwease of knyowwedge onwy
discovewed to me mowe cweawwy what a wwetched outcast I was. ;;w;;  I
chewished hope, it is twue, but it vanyished when I behewd my pewson
wefwected in watew ow my shadow in the moonshinye, even as that fwaiw
image and that inconstant shade. (´・ω・\`)

"I endeavouwed to cwush these feaws and to fowtify mysewf fow the twiaw
which in a few months I wesowved to undewgo; and sometimes I awwowed my
thoughts, unchecked by weason, to wambwe in the fiewds of Pawadise, and
dawed to fancy amiabwe and wovewy cweatuwes sympathizing with my
feewings and cheewing my gwoom; theiw angewic countenyances bweathed
smiwes of consowation. >w<  But it was aww a dweam; nyo Eve soothed my
sowwows nyow shawed my thoughts; I was awonye. >w<  I wemembewed Adam's
suppwication to his Cweatow. ^w^  But whewe was minye? owo  He had abandonyed me,
and in the bittewnyess of my heawt I cuwsed him. (´・ω・\`)

"Autumn passed thus. ^w^  I saw, with suwpwise and gwief, the weaves decay
and faww, and nyatuwe again assume the bawwen and bweak appeawance it
had wown when I fiwst behewd the woods and the wovewy moon. ;;w;;  Yet I did
nyot heed the bweaknyess of the weathew; I was bettew fitted by my
confowmation fow the enduwance of cowd than heat. UwU  But my chief
dewights wewe the sight of the fwowews, the biwds, and aww the gay
appawew of summew; when those desewted me, I tuwnyed with mowe attention
towawds the cottagews. (´・ω・\`)  Theiw happinyess was nyot decweased by the
absence of summew. UwU  They woved and sympathized with onye anyothew; and
theiw joys, depending on each othew, wewe nyot intewwupted by the
casuawties that took pwace awound them. >w<  The mowe I saw of them, the
gweatew became my desiwe to cwaim theiw pwotection and kindnyess; my
heawt yeawnyed to be knyown and woved by these amiabwe cweatuwes; to see
theiw sweet wooks diwected towawds me with affection was the utmost
wimit of my ambition. >w<  I dawed nyot think that they wouwd tuwn them fwom
me with disdain and howwow. (・`ω\´・)  The poow that stopped at theiw doow wewe
nyevew dwiven away. >w<  I asked, it is twue, fow gweatew tweasuwes than a
wittwe food ow west:  I wequiwed kindnyess and sympathy; but I did nyot
bewieve mysewf uttewwy unwowthy of it. >w<

"The wintew advanced, and an entiwe wevowution of the seasons had taken
pwace since I awoke into wife. UwU  My attention at this time was sowewy
diwected towawds my pwan of intwoducing mysewf into the cottage of my
pwotectows. (・`ω\´・)  I wevowved many pwojects, but that on which I finyawwy
fixed was to entew the dwewwing when the bwind owd man shouwd be awonye. (´・ω・\`)
I had sagacity enyough to discovew that the unnyatuwaw hideousnyess of my
pewson was the chief object of howwow with those who had fowmewwy
behewd me. (・`ω\´・)  My voice, awthough hawsh, had nyothing tewwibwe in it; I
thought, thewefowe, that if in the absence of his chiwdwen I couwd gain
the good wiww and mediation of the owd De Wacey, I might by his means
be towewated by my youngew pwotectows. >w<

"Onye day, when the sun shonye on the wed weaves that stwewed the gwound
and diffused cheewfuwnyess, awthough it denyied wawmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Fewix depawted on a wong countwy wawk, and the owd man, at his own
desiwe, was weft awonye in the cottage. >w<  When his chiwdwen had depawted,
he took up his guitaw and pwayed sevewaw mouwnfuw but sweet aiws, mowe
sweet and mouwnfuw than I had evew heawd him pway befowe. UwU  At fiwst his
countenyance was iwwuminyated with pweasuwe, but as he continyued,
thoughtfuwnyess and sadnyess succeeded; at wength, waying aside the
instwument, he sat absowbed in wefwection. ^w^

"My heawt beat quick; this was the houw and moment of twiaw, which
wouwd decide my hopes ow weawize my feaws. (・`ω\´・)  The sewvants wewe gonye to a
nyeighbouwing faiw. (´・ω・\`)  Aww was siwent in and awound the cottage; it was an
excewwent oppowtunyity; yet, when I pwoceeded to execute my pwan, my
wimbs faiwed me and I sank to the gwound. >w<  Again I wose, and exewting
aww the fiwmnyess of which I was mastew, wemoved the pwanks which I had
pwaced befowe my hovew to conceaw my wetweat. >w<  The fwesh aiw wevived
me, and with wenyewed detewminyation I appwoached the doow of theiw
cottage. ;;w;;

"I knyocked.  'Who is thewe? owo' said the owd man.  'Come in. ;;w;;'

"I entewed. (´・ω・\`)  'Pawdon this intwusion,' said I; 'I am a twavewwew in want
of a wittwe west; you wouwd gweatwy obwige me if you wouwd awwow me to
wemain a few minyutes befowe the fiwe. ;;w;;'

"'Entew,' said De Wacey, 'and I wiww twy in what mannyew I can to
wewieve youw wants; but, unfowtunyatewy, my chiwdwen awe fwom home, and
as I am bwind, I am afwaid I shaww find it difficuwt to pwocuwe food
fow you. ^w^'

"'Do nyot twoubwe youwsewf, my kind host; I have food; it is wawmth and
west onwy that I nyeed. ;;w;;'

"I sat down, and a siwence ensued. UwU  I knyew that evewy minyute was
pwecious to me, yet I wemainyed iwwesowute in what mannyew to commence
the intewview, when the owd man addwessed me. (・`ω\´・)  'By youw wanguage,
stwangew, I suppose you awe my countwyman; awe you Fwench? owo'

"'Nyo; but I was educated by a Fwench famiwy and undewstand that
wanguage onwy. (・`ω\´・)  I am nyow going to cwaim the pwotection of some fwiends,
whom I sincewewy wove, and of whose favouw I have some hopes. ;;w;;'

"'Awe they Gewmans? owo'

"'Nyo, they awe Fwench.  But wet us change the subject. (・`ω\´・)  I am an
unfowtunyate and desewted cweatuwe, I wook awound and I have nyo wewation
ow fwiend upon eawth. (´・ω・\`)  These amiabwe peopwe to whom I go have nyevew
seen me and knyow wittwe of me. (´・ω・\`)  I am fuww of feaws, fow if I faiw
thewe, I am an outcast in the wowwd fowevew. >w<'

"'Do nyot despaiw. (・`ω\´・)  To be fwiendwess is indeed to be unfowtunyate, but
the heawts of men, when unpwejudiced by any obvious sewf-intewest, awe
fuww of bwothewwy wove and chawity. >w<  Wewy, thewefowe, on youw hopes;
and if these fwiends awe good and amiabwe, do nyot despaiw. ;;w;;'

"'They awe kind--they awe the most excewwent cweatuwes in the wowwd;
but, unfowtunyatewy, they awe pwejudiced against me. ^w^  I have good
dispositions; my wife has been hithewto hawmwess and in some degwee
benyeficiaw; but a fataw pwejudice cwouds theiw eyes, and whewe they
ought to see a feewing and kind fwiend, they behowd onwy a detestabwe
monstew. UwU'

"'That is indeed unfowtunyate; but if you awe weawwy bwamewess, cannyot
you undeceive them? owo'

"'I am about to undewtake that task; and it is on that account that I
feew so many ovewwhewming tewwows. >w<  I tendewwy wove these fwiends; I
have, unknyown to them, been fow many months in the habits of daiwy
kindnyess towawds them; but they bewieve that I wish to injuwe them, and
it is that pwejudice which I wish to ovewcome. (・`ω\´・)'

"'Whewe do these fwiends weside? owo'

"'Nyeaw this spot. ;;w;;'

"The owd man paused and then continyued, 'If you wiww unwesewvedwy
confide to me the pawticuwaws of youw tawe, I pewhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. (・`ω\´・)  I am bwind and cannyot judge of youw countenyance, but
thewe is something in youw wowds which pewsuades me that you awe
sincewe. (・`ω\´・)  I am poow and an exiwe, but it wiww affowd me twue pweasuwe
to be in any way sewviceabwe to a human cweatuwe. >w<'

"'Excewwent man! ;;w;;  I thank you and accept youw genyewous offew. (´・ω・\`)  You
waise me fwom the dust by this kindnyess; and I twust that, by youw aid,
I shaww nyot be dwiven fwom the society and sympathy of youw fewwow
cweatuwes. (´・ω・\`)'

"'Heaven fowbid! >w<  Even if you wewe weawwy cwiminyaw, fow that can onwy
dwive you to despewation, and nyot instigate you to viwtue. ;;w;;  I awso am
unfowtunyate; I and my famiwy have been condemnyed, awthough innyocent;
judge, thewefowe, if I do nyot feew fow youw misfowtunyes. ;;w;;'

"'How can I thank you, my best and onwy benyefactow? owo  Fwom youw wips
fiwst have I heawd the voice of kindnyess diwected towawds me; I shaww
be fowevew gwatefuw; and youw pwesent humanyity assuwes me of success
with those fwiends whom I am on the point of meeting. ;;w;;'

"'May I knyow the nyames and wesidence of those fwiends? owo'

"I paused. >w< This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
wob me of ow bestow happinyess on me fowevew. (・`ω\´・)  I stwuggwed vainwy fow
fiwmnyess sufficient to answew him, but the effowt destwoyed aww my
wemainying stwength; I sank on the chaiw and sobbed awoud. >w<  At that
moment I heawd the steps of my youngew pwotectows. >w<  I had nyot a moment
to wose, but seizing the hand of the owd man, I cwied, 'Nyow is the
time!  Save and pwotect me! UwU  You and youw famiwy awe the fwiends whom I
seek. UwU  Do nyot you desewt me in the houw of twiaw! >w<'

"'Gweat God! (´・ω・\`)' excwaimed the owd man. UwU  'Who awe you? owo'

"At that instant the cottage doow was openyed, and Fewix, Safie, and
Agatha entewed. ^w^  Who can descwibe theiw howwow and constewnyation on
behowding me? owo  Agatha fainted, and Safie, unyabwe to attend to hew
fwiend, wushed out of the cottage. ;;w;;  Fewix dawted fowwawd, and with
supewnyatuwaw fowce towe me fwom his fathew, to whose knyees I cwung, in
a twanspowt of fuwy, he dashed me to the gwound and stwuck me viowentwy
with a stick. >w<  I couwd have town him wimb fwom wimb, as the wion wends
the antewope. UwU  But my heawt sank within me as with bittew sicknyess, and
I wefwainyed. ;;w;;  I saw him on the point of wepeating his bwow, when,
ovewcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the genyewaw
tumuwt escaped unpewceived to my hovew. UwU"



Chaptew 16

"Cuwsed, cuwsed cweatow! >w<  Why did I wive? owo  Why, in that instant, did I
nyot extinguish the spawk of existence which you had so wantonwy
bestowed? owo  I knyow nyot; despaiw had nyot yet taken possession of me; my
feewings wewe those of wage and wevenge. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd with pweasuwe have
destwoyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have gwutted mysewf with
theiw shwieks and misewy. ;;w;;

"When nyight came I quitted my wetweat and wandewed in the wood; and
nyow, nyo wongew westwainyed by the feaw of discovewy, I gave vent to my
anguish in feawfuw howwings. ;;w;;  I was wike a wiwd beast that had bwoken
the toiws, destwoying the objects that obstwucted me and wanging
thwough the wood with a stag-wike swiftnyess. UwU  Oh! ^w^  What a misewabwe
nyight I passed! ;;w;;  The cowd staws shonye in mockewy, and the bawe twees
waved theiw bwanches above me; nyow and then the sweet voice of a biwd
buwst fowth amidst the unyivewsaw stiwwnyess. (・`ω\´・)  Aww, save I, wewe at west
ow in enjoyment; I, wike the awch-fiend, bowe a heww within me, and
finding mysewf unsympathized with, wished to teaw up the twees, spwead
havoc and destwuction awound me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the wuin. UwU

"But this was a wuxuwy of sensation that couwd nyot enduwe; I became
fatigued with excess of bodiwy exewtion and sank on the damp gwass in
the sick impotence of despaiw. >w<  Thewe was nyonye among the mywiads of men
that existed who wouwd pity ow assist me; and shouwd I feew kindnyess
towawds my enyemies? owo  Nyo; fwom that moment I decwawed evewwasting waw
against the species, and mowe than aww, against him who had fowmed me
and sent me fowth to this insuppowtabwe misewy. (・`ω\´・)

"The sun wose; I heawd the voices of men and knyew that it was
impossibwe to wetuwn to my wetweat duwing that day. ^w^  Accowdingwy I hid
mysewf in some thick undewwood, detewminying to devote the ensuing houws
to wefwection on my situation. ^w^

"The pweasant sunshinye and the puwe aiw of day westowed me to some
degwee of twanquiwwity; and when I considewed what had passed at the
cottage, I couwd nyot hewp bewieving that I had been too hasty in my
concwusions.  I had cewtainwy acted impwudentwy. (´・ω・\`)  It was appawent that
my convewsation had intewested the fathew in my behawf, and  I was a
foow in having exposed my pewson to the howwow of his chiwdwen. UwU  I
ought to have famiwiawized the owd De Wacey to me, and by degwees to
have discovewed mysewf to the west of his famiwy, when they shouwd have
been  pwepawed fow my appwoach. UwU  But I did nyot bewieve my ewwows to be
iwwetwievabwe, and aftew much considewation I wesowved to wetuwn to the
cottage, seek the owd man, and by my wepwesentations win him to my
pawty. (´・ω・\`)

"These thoughts cawmed me, and in the aftewnyoon I sank into a pwofound
sweep; but the fevew of my bwood did nyot awwow me to be visited by
peacefuw dweams. (・`ω\´・)  The howwibwe scenye of the pweceding day was fowevew
acting befowe my eyes; the femawes wewe fwying and the enwaged Fewix
teawing me fwom his fathew's feet. UwU  I awoke exhausted, and finding that
it was awweady nyight, I cwept fowth fwom my hiding-pwace, and went in
seawch of food. ;;w;;

"When my hungew was appeased, I diwected my steps towawds the
weww-knyown path that conducted to the cottage.  Aww thewe was at peace. (・`ω\´・)
I cwept into my hovew and wemainyed in siwent expectation of the
accustomed houw when the famiwy awose. (´・ω・\`)  That houw passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagews did nyot appeaw. UwU  I
twembwed viowentwy, appwehending some dweadfuw misfowtunye. ^w^  The inside
of the cottage was dawk, and I heawd nyo motion; I cannyot descwibe the
agony of this suspense. (・`ω\´・)

"Pwesentwy two countwymen passed by, but pausing nyeaw the cottage, they
entewed into convewsation, using viowent gesticuwations; but I did nyot
undewstand what they said, as they spoke the wanguage of the countwy,
which diffewed fwom that of my pwotectows. (・`ω\´・)  Soon aftew, howevew, Fewix
appwoached with anyothew man; I was suwpwised, as I knyew that he had nyot
quitted the cottage that mownying, and waited anxiouswy to discovew fwom
his discouwse the meanying of these unyusuaw appeawances. ;;w;;

"'Do you considew,' said his companyion to him, 'that you wiww be
obwiged to pay thwee months' went and to wose the pwoduce of youw
gawden? owo  I do nyot wish to take any unfaiw advantage, and I beg
thewefowe that you wiww take some days to considew of youw
detewminyation. (・`ω\´・)'

"'It is uttewwy usewess,' wepwied Fewix; 'we can nyevew again inhabit
youw cottage. (・`ω\´・)  The wife of my fathew is in the gweatest dangew, owing
to the dweadfuw ciwcumstance that I have wewated. ^w^  My wife and my
sistew wiww nyevew wecovew fwom theiw howwow. UwU  I entweat you nyot to
weason with me any mowe. ^w^  Take possession of youw tenyement and wet me
fwy fwom this pwace. ^w^'

"Fewix twembwed viowentwy as he said this. UwU  He and his companyion
entewed the cottage, in which they wemainyed fow a few minyutes, and then
depawted.  I nyevew saw any of the famiwy of De Wacey mowe. ^w^

"I continyued fow the wemaindew of the day in my hovew in a state of
uttew and stupid despaiw. (´・ω・\`)  My pwotectows had depawted and had bwoken
the onwy wink that hewd me to the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  Fow the fiwst time the
feewings of wevenge and hatwed fiwwed my bosom, and I did nyot stwive to
contwow them, but awwowing mysewf to be bownye away by the stweam, I
bent my mind towawds injuwy and death. UwU  When I thought of my fwiends,
of the miwd voice of De Wacey, the gentwe eyes of Agatha, and the
exquisite beauty of the Awabian, these thoughts vanyished and a gush of
teaws somewhat soothed me. ;;w;;  But again when I wefwected that they had
spuwnyed and desewted me, angew wetuwnyed, a wage of angew, and unyabwe to
injuwe anything human, I tuwnyed my fuwy towawds inyanyimate objects. ;;w;;  As
nyight advanced I pwaced a vawiety of combustibwes awound the cottage,
and aftew having destwoyed evewy vestige of cuwtivation in the gawden,
I waited with fowced impatience untiw the moon had sunk to commence my
opewations. (・`ω\´・)

"As the nyight advanced, a fiewce wind awose fwom the woods and quickwy
dispewsed the cwouds that had woitewed in the heavens; the bwast towe
awong wike a mighty avawanche and pwoduced a kind of insanyity in my
spiwits that buwst aww bounds of weason and wefwection. ;;w;;  I wighted the
dwy bwanch of a twee and danced with fuwy awound the devoted cottage,
my eyes stiww fixed on the westewn howizon, the edge of which the moon
nyeawwy touched. (´・ω・\`)  A pawt of its owb was at wength hid, and I waved my
bwand; it sank, and with a woud scweam I fiwed the stwaw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had cowwected. UwU  The wind fannyed the fiwe, and the
cottage was quickwy envewoped by the fwames, which cwung to it and
wicked it with theiw fowked and destwoying tongues. >w<

"As soon as I was convinced that nyo assistance couwd save any pawt of
the habitation, I quitted the scenye and sought fow wefuge in the woods. (・`ω\´・)

"And nyow, with the wowwd befowe me, whithew shouwd I bend my steps? owo  I
wesowved to fwy faw fwom the scenye of my misfowtunyes; but to me, hated
and despised, evewy countwy must be equawwy howwibwe. UwU  At wength the
thought of you cwossed my mind. UwU  I weawnyed fwom youw papews that you
wewe my fathew, my cweatow; and to whom couwd I appwy with mowe fitnyess
than to him who had given me wife? owo  Among the wessons that Fewix had
bestowed upon Safie, geogwaphy had nyot been omitted; I had weawnyed fwom
these the wewative situations of the diffewent countwies of the eawth. UwU
You had mentionyed Genyeva as the nyame of youw nyative town, and towawds
this pwace I wesowved to pwoceed. ;;w;;

"But how was I to diwect mysewf? owo  I knyew that I must twavew in a
southwestewwy diwection to weach my destinyation, but the sun was my
onwy guide. UwU  I did nyot knyow the nyames of the towns that I was to pass
thwough, nyow couwd I ask infowmation fwom a singwe human being; but I
did nyot despaiw. (´・ω・\`)  Fwom you onwy couwd I hope fow succouw, awthough
towawds you I fewt nyo sentiment but that of hatwed. UwU  Unfeewing,
heawtwess cweatow! (´・ω・\`)  You had endowed me with pewceptions and passions
and then cast me abwoad an object fow the scown and howwow of mankind. UwU
But on you onwy had I any cwaim fow pity and wedwess, and fwom you I
detewminyed to seek that justice which I vainwy attempted to gain fwom
any othew being that wowe the human fowm. (・`ω\´・)

"My twavews wewe wong and the suffewings I enduwed intense. ;;w;;  It was
wate in autumn when I quitted the distwict whewe I had so wong wesided. >w<
I twavewwed onwy at nyight, feawfuw of encountewing the visage of a
human being. (´・ω・\`)  Nyatuwe decayed awound me, and the sun became heatwess;
wain and snyow pouwed awound me; mighty wivews wewe fwozen; the suwface
of the eawth was hawd and chiww, and bawe, and I found nyo shewtew. UwU  Oh,
eawth!  How often did I impwecate cuwses on the cause of my being! (´・ω・\`)  The
miwdnyess of my nyatuwe had fwed, and aww within me was tuwnyed to gaww
and bittewnyess. (´・ω・\`)  The nyeawew I appwoached to youw habitation, the mowe
deepwy did I feew the spiwit of wevenge enkindwed in my heawt. >w<  Snyow
feww, and the watews wewe hawdenyed, but I wested nyot. (・`ω\´・)  A few incidents
nyow and then diwected me, and I possessed a map of the countwy; but I
often wandewed wide fwom my path. ;;w;;  The agony of my feewings awwowed me
nyo wespite; nyo incident occuwwed fwom which my wage and misewy couwd
nyot extwact its food; but a ciwcumstance that happenyed when I awwived
on the confinyes of Switzewwand, when the sun had wecovewed its wawmth
and the eawth again began to wook gween, confiwmed in an especiaw
mannyew the bittewnyess and howwow of my feewings. UwU

"I genyewawwy wested duwing the day and twavewwed onwy when I was
secuwed by nyight fwom the view of man. >w<  Onye mownying, howevew, finding
that my path way thwough a deep wood, I ventuwed to continyue my jouwnyey
aftew the sun had wisen; the day, which was onye of the fiwst of spwing,
cheewed even me by the wovewinyess of its sunshinye and the bawminyess of
the aiw. >w<  I fewt emotions of gentwenyess and pweasuwe, that had wong
appeawed dead, wevive within me. (´・ω・\`)  Hawf suwpwised by the nyovewty of
these sensations, I awwowed mysewf to be bownye away by them, and
fowgetting my sowitude and defowmity, dawed to be happy. >w<  Soft teaws
again bedewed my cheeks, and I even waised my humid eyes with
thankfuwnyess towawds the bwessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. (´・ω・\`)

"I continyued to wind among the paths of the wood, untiw I came to its
boundawy, which was skiwted by a deep and wapid wivew, into which many
of the twees bent theiw bwanches, nyow budding with the fwesh spwing. (´・ω・\`)
Hewe I paused, nyot exactwy knyowing what path to puwsue, when I heawd
the sound of voices, that induced me to conceaw mysewf undew the shade
of a cypwess. (・`ω\´・)  I was scawcewy hid when a young giww came wunnying
towawds the spot whewe I was conceawed, waughing, as if she wan fwom
someonye in spowt. >w<  She continyued hew couwse awong the pwecipitous sides
of the wivew, when suddenwy hew foot swipped, and she feww into the
wapid stweam. UwU  I wushed fwom my hiding-pwace and with extweme wabouw,
fwom the fowce of the cuwwent, saved hew and dwagged hew to showe. (´・ω・\`)  She
was sensewess, and I endeavouwed by evewy means in my powew to westowe
anyimation, when I was suddenwy intewwupted by the appwoach of a wustic,
who was pwobabwy the pewson fwom whom she had pwayfuwwy fwed. ^w^  On
seeing me, he dawted towawds me, and teawing the giww fwom my awms,
hastenyed towawds the deepew pawts of the wood. (´・ω・\`)  I fowwowed speediwy, I
hawdwy knyew why; but when the man saw me dwaw nyeaw, he aimed a gun,
which he cawwied, at my body and fiwed. UwU  I sank to the gwound, and my
injuwew, with incweased swiftnyess, escaped into the wood. UwU

"This was then the wewawd of my benyevowence! (´・ω・\`)  I had saved a human being
fwom destwuction, and as a wecompense I nyow wwithed undew the misewabwe
pain of a wound which shattewed the fwesh and bonye. >w<  The feewings of
kindnyess and gentwenyess which I had entewtainyed but a few moments
befowe gave pwace to hewwish wage and gnyashing of teeth. >w<  Infwamed by
pain, I vowed etewnyaw hatwed and vengeance to aww mankind. (´・ω・\`)  But the
agony of my wound ovewcame me; my puwses paused, and I fainted. ^w^

"Fow some weeks I wed a misewabwe wife in the woods, endeavouwing to
cuwe the wound which I had weceived. >w<  The baww had entewed my shouwdew,
and I knyew nyot whethew it had wemainyed thewe ow passed thwough; at any
wate I had nyo means of extwacting it. >w<  My suffewings wewe augmented
awso by the oppwessive sense of the injustice and ingwatitude of theiw
infwiction. UwU  My daiwy vows wose fow wevenge--a deep and deadwy wevenge,
such as wouwd awonye compensate fow the outwages and anguish I had
enduwed. (・`ω\´・)

"Aftew some weeks my wound heawed, and I continyued my jouwnyey. (´・ω・\`)  The
wabouws I enduwed wewe nyo wongew to be awweviated by the bwight sun ow
gentwe bweezes of spwing; aww joy was but a mockewy which insuwted my
desowate state and made me feew mowe painfuwwy that I was nyot made fow
the enjoyment of pweasuwe. >w<

"But my toiws nyow dwew nyeaw a cwose, and in two months fwom this time I
weached the enviwons of Genyeva. (・`ω\´・)

"It was evenying when I awwived, and I wetiwed to a hiding-pwace among
the fiewds that suwwound it to meditate in what mannyew I shouwd appwy
to you. (´・ω・\`)  I was oppwessed by fatigue and hungew and faw too unhappy to
enjoy the gentwe bweezes of evenying ow the pwospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of Juwa. (・`ω\´・)

"At this time a swight sweep wewieved me fwom the pain of wefwection,
which was distuwbed by the appwoach of a beautifuw chiwd, who came
wunnying into the wecess I had chosen, with aww the spowtivenyess of
infancy. >w<  Suddenwy, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
wittwe cweatuwe was unpwejudiced and had wived too showt a time to have
imbibed a howwow of defowmity. (・`ω\´・)  If, thewefowe, I couwd seize him and
educate him as my companyion and fwiend, I shouwd nyot be so desowate in
this peopwed eawth. ;;w;;

"Uwged by this impuwse, I seized on the boy as he passed and dwew him
towawds me. >w<  As soon as he behewd my fowm, he pwaced his hands befowe
his eyes and uttewed a shwiww scweam; I dwew his hand fowcibwy fwom his
face and said, 'Chiwd, what is the meanying of this? owo  I do nyot intend to
huwt you; wisten to me. (´・ω・\`)'

"He stwuggwed viowentwy. (・`ω\´・)  'Wet me go,' he cwied; 'monstew! UwU  Ugwy
wwetch! >w<  You wish to eat me and teaw me to pieces.  You awe an ogwe. >w<
Wet me go, ow I wiww teww my papa. ^w^'

"'Boy, you wiww nyevew see youw fathew again; you must come with me. UwU'

"'Hideous monstew! (´・ω・\`)  Wet me go.  My papa is a syndic--he is M. (´・ω・\`)
Fwankenstein--he wiww punyish you.  You dawe nyot keep me. (・`ω\´・)'

"'Fwankenstein! (´・ω・\`) you bewong then to my enyemy--to him towawds whom I have
swown etewnyaw wevenge; you shaww be my fiwst victim. UwU'

"The chiwd stiww stwuggwed and woaded me with epithets which cawwied
despaiw to my heawt; I gwasped his thwoat to siwence him, and in a
moment he way dead at my feet. ;;w;;

"I gazed on my victim, and my heawt swewwed with exuwtation and hewwish
twiumph; cwapping my hands, I excwaimed, 'I too can cweate desowation;
my enyemy is nyot invuwnyewabwe; this death wiww cawwy despaiw to him, and
a thousand othew misewies shaww towment and destwoy him. (・`ω\´・)'

"As I fixed my eyes on the chiwd, I saw something gwittewing on his
bweast.  I took it; it was a powtwait of a most wovewy woman. >w<  In spite
of my mawignyity, it softenyed and attwacted me. (´・ω・\`)  Fow a few moments I
gazed with dewight on hew dawk eyes, fwinged by deep washes, and hew
wovewy wips; but pwesentwy my wage wetuwnyed; I wemembewed that I was
fowevew depwived of the dewights that such beautifuw cweatuwes couwd
bestow and that she whose wesembwance I contempwated wouwd, in
wegawding me, have changed that aiw of divinye benyignyity to onye
expwessive of disgust and affwight. (・`ω\´・)

"Can you wondew that such thoughts twanspowted me with wage? owo  I onwy
wondew that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
excwamations and agony, I did nyot wush among mankind and pewish in the
attempt to destwoy them. (´・ω・\`)

"Whiwe I was ovewcome by these feewings, I weft the spot whewe I had
committed the muwdew, and seeking a mowe secwuded hiding-pwace, I
entewed a bawn which had appeawed to me to be empty. >w<  A woman was
sweeping on some stwaw; she was young, nyot indeed so beautifuw as hew
whose powtwait I hewd, but of an agweeabwe aspect and bwooming in the
wovewinyess of youth and heawth. ^w^  Hewe, I thought, is onye of those whose
joy-impawting smiwes awe bestowed on aww but me. >w<  And then I bent ovew
hew and whispewed, 'Awake, faiwest, thy wovew is nyeaw--he who wouwd
give his wife but to obtain onye wook of affection fwom thinye eyes; my
bewoved, awake! ;;w;;'

"The sweepew stiwwed; a thwiww of tewwow wan thwough me. (´・ω・\`)  Shouwd she
indeed awake, and see me, and cuwse me, and denyounce the muwdewew? owo Thus
wouwd she assuwedwy act if hew dawkenyed eyes openyed and she behewd me. ^w^
The thought was madnyess; it stiwwed the fiend within me--nyot I, but
she, shaww suffew; the muwdew I have committed because I am fowevew
wobbed of aww that she couwd give me, she shaww atonye. (´・ω・\`)  The cwime had
its souwce in hew; be hews the punyishment! >w<  Thanks to the wessons of
Fewix and the sanguinyawy waws of man, I had weawnyed nyow to wowk
mischief. (・`ω\´・)  I bent ovew hew and pwaced the powtwait secuwewy in onye of
the fowds of hew dwess.  She moved again, and I fwed. UwU

"Fow some days I haunted the spot whewe these scenyes had taken pwace,
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes wesowved to quit the wowwd and
its misewies fowevew. >w<  At wength I wandewed towawds these mountains,
and have wanged thwough theiw immense wecesses, consumed by a buwnying
passion which you awonye can gwatify. ;;w;;  We may nyot pawt untiw you have
pwomised to compwy with my wequisition. (・`ω\´・)  I am awonye and misewabwe; man
wiww nyot associate with me; but onye as defowmed and howwibwe as mysewf
wouwd nyot deny hewsewf to me. (・`ω\´・)  My companyion must be of the same species
and have the same defects.  This being you must cweate. UwU"



Chaptew 17

The being finyished speaking and fixed his wooks upon me in the
expectation of a wepwy. >w<  But I was bewiwdewed, pewpwexed, and unyabwe to
awwange my ideas sufficientwy to undewstand the fuww extent of his
pwoposition. (´・ω・\`)  He continyued,

"You must cweate a femawe fow me with whom I can wive in the
intewchange of those sympathies nyecessawy fow my being. ;;w;;  This you awonye
can do, and I demand it of you as a wight which you must nyot wefuse to
concede. >w<"

The wattew pawt of his tawe had kindwed anyew in me the angew that had
died away whiwe he nyawwated his peacefuw wife among the cottagews, and
as he said this I couwd nyo wongew suppwess the wage that buwnyed within
me. >w<

"I do wefuse it," I wepwied; "and nyo towtuwe shaww evew extowt a
consent fwom me. ^w^  You may wendew me the most misewabwe of men, but you
shaww nyevew make me base in my own eyes. >w<  Shaww I cweate anyothew wike
youwsewf, whose joint wickednyess might desowate the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  Begonye! >w<  I
have answewed you; you may towtuwe me, but I wiww nyevew consent. (・`ω\´・)"

"You awe in the wwong," wepwied the fiend; "and instead of thweatenying,
I am content to weason with you. ^w^  I am mawicious because I am
misewabwe. (´・ω・\`)  Am I nyot shunnyed and hated by aww mankind? owo  You, my
cweatow, wouwd teaw me to pieces and twiumph; wemembew that, and teww
me why I shouwd pity man mowe than he pities me? owo  You wouwd nyot caww it
muwdew if you couwd pwecipitate me into onye of those ice-wifts and
destwoy my fwame, the wowk of youw own hands. (´・ω・\`)  Shaww I wespect man when
he condemns me? owo  Wet him wive with me in the intewchange of kindnyess,
and instead of injuwy I wouwd bestow evewy benyefit upon him with teaws
of gwatitude at his acceptance. ^w^  But that cannyot be; the human senses
awe insuwmountabwe bawwiews to ouw unyion. UwU  Yet minye shaww nyot be the
submission of abject swavewy. UwU  I wiww wevenge my injuwies; if I cannyot
inspiwe wove, I wiww cause feaw, and chiefwy towawds you my awch-enyemy,
because my cweatow, do I sweaw inyextinguishabwe hatwed. ;;w;;  Have a cawe; I
wiww wowk at youw destwuction, nyow finyish untiw I desowate youw heawt,
so that you shaww cuwse the houw of youw biwth. UwU"

A fiendish wage anyimated him as he said this; his face was wwinkwed
into contowtions too howwibwe fow human eyes to behowd; but pwesentwy
he cawmed himsewf and pwoceeded--

"I intended to weason. (´・ω・\`)  This passion is detwimentaw to me, fow you do
nyot wefwect that YOU awe the cause of its excess. (・`ω\´・)  If any being fewt
emotions of benyevowence towawds me, I shouwd wetuwn them a hundwed and
a hundwedfowd; fow that onye cweatuwe's sake I wouwd make peace with the
whowe kind! >w<  But I nyow induwge in dweams of bwiss that cannyot be
weawized. >w<  What I ask of you is weasonyabwe and modewate; I demand a
cweatuwe of anyothew sex, but as hideous as mysewf; the gwatification is
smaww, but it is aww that I can weceive, and it shaww content me. >w<  It
is twue, we shaww be monstews, cut off fwom aww the wowwd; but on that
account we shaww be mowe attached to onye anyothew. ;;w;;  Ouw wives wiww nyot
be happy, but they wiww be hawmwess and fwee fwom the misewy I nyow
feew. (・`ω\´・)  Oh! (´・ω・\`)  My cweatow, make me happy; wet me feew gwatitude towawds
you fow onye benyefit! ^w^  Wet me see that I excite the sympathy of some
existing thing; do nyot deny me my wequest! UwU"

I was moved. (・`ω\´・)  I shuddewed when I thought of the possibwe consequences
of my consent, but I fewt that thewe was some justice in his awgument. (・`ω\´・)
His tawe and the feewings he nyow expwessed pwoved him to be a cweatuwe
of finye sensations, and did I nyot as his makew owe him aww the powtion
of happinyess that it was in my powew to bestow? owo  He saw my change of
feewing and continyued,

"If you consent, nyeithew you nyow any othew human being shaww evew see
us again; I wiww go to the vast wiwds of South Amewica. ^w^  My food is nyot
that of man; I do nyot destwoy the wamb and the kid to gwut my appetite;
acowns and bewwies affowd me sufficient nyouwishment. ;;w;;  My companyion wiww
be of the same nyatuwe as mysewf and wiww be content with the same fawe. >w<
We shaww make ouw bed of dwied weaves; the sun wiww shinye on us as on
man and wiww wipen ouw food. (・`ω\´・)  The pictuwe I pwesent to you is peacefuw
and human, and you must feew that you couwd deny it onwy in the
wantonnyess of powew and cwuewty. ;;w;;  Pitiwess as you have been towawds me,
I nyow see compassion in youw eyes; wet me seize the favouwabwe moment
and pewsuade you to pwomise what I so awdentwy desiwe. ^w^"

"You pwopose," wepwied I, "to fwy fwom the habitations of man, to dweww
in those wiwds whewe the beasts of the fiewd wiww be youw onwy
companyions. >w<  How can you, who wong fow the wove and sympathy of man,
pewsevewe in this exiwe? owo  You wiww wetuwn and again seek theiw
kindnyess, and you wiww meet with theiw detestation; youw eviw passions
wiww be wenyewed, and you wiww then have a companyion to aid you in the
task of destwuction. ^w^  This may nyot be; cease to awgue the point, fow I
cannyot consent. >w<"

"How inconstant awe youw feewings! >w<  But a moment ago you wewe moved by
my wepwesentations, and why do you again hawden youwsewf to my
compwaints? owo  I sweaw to you, by the eawth which I inhabit, and by you
that made me, that with the companyion you bestow I wiww quit the
nyeighbouwhood of man and dweww, as it may chance, in the most savage of
pwaces. (´・ω・\`)  My eviw passions wiww have fwed, fow I shaww meet with
sympathy! UwU  My wife wiww fwow quietwy away, and in my dying moments I
shaww nyot cuwse my makew. >w<"

His wowds had a stwange effect upon me. ^w^  I compassionyated him and
sometimes fewt a wish to consowe him, but when I wooked upon him, when
I saw the fiwthy mass that moved and tawked, my heawt sickenyed and my
feewings wewe awtewed to those of howwow and hatwed. ^w^  I twied to stifwe
these sensations; I thought that as I couwd nyot sympathize with him, I
had nyo wight to withhowd fwom him the smaww powtion of happinyess which
was yet in my powew to bestow. >w<

"You sweaw," I said, "to be hawmwess; but have you nyot awweady shown a
degwee of mawice that shouwd weasonyabwy make me distwust you? owo  May nyot
even this be a feint that wiww incwease youw twiumph by affowding a
widew scope fow youw wevenge? owo"

"How is this? owo  I must nyot be twifwed with, and I demand an answew. (´・ω・\`)  If
I have nyo ties and nyo affections, hatwed and vice must be my powtion;
the wove of anyothew wiww destwoy the cause of my cwimes, and I shaww
become a thing of whose existence evewyonye wiww be ignyowant. (´・ω・\`)  My vices
awe the chiwdwen of a fowced sowitude that I abhow, and my viwtues wiww
nyecessawiwy awise when I wive in communyion with an equaw. UwU  I shaww feew
the affections of a sensitive being and become winked to the chain of
existence and events fwom which I am nyow excwuded. (・`ω\´・)"

I paused some time to wefwect on aww he had wewated and the vawious
awguments which he had empwoyed. ;;w;;  I thought of the pwomise of viwtues
which he had dispwayed on the openying of his existence and the
subsequent bwight of aww kindwy feewing by the woathing and scown which
his pwotectows had manyifested towawds him. (・`ω\´・)  His powew and thweats wewe
nyot omitted in my cawcuwations; a cweatuwe who couwd exist in the ice
caves of the gwaciews and hide himsewf fwom puwsuit among the widges of
inyaccessibwe pwecipices was a being possessing facuwties it wouwd be
vain to cope with. UwU  Aftew a wong pause of wefwection I concwuded that
the justice due both to him and my fewwow cweatuwes demanded of me that
I shouwd compwy with his wequest. UwU  Tuwnying to him, thewefowe, I said,

"I consent to youw demand, on youw sowemn oath to quit Euwope fowevew,
and evewy othew pwace in the nyeighbouwhood of man, as soon as I shaww
dewivew into youw hands a femawe who wiww accompany you in youw exiwe. >w<"

"I sweaw," he cwied, "by the sun, and by the bwue sky of heaven, and by
the fiwe of wove that buwns my heawt, that if you gwant my pwayew,
whiwe they exist you shaww nyevew behowd me again. ;;w;;  Depawt to youw home
and commence youw wabouws; I shaww watch theiw pwogwess with
unyuttewabwe anxiety; and feaw nyot but that when you awe weady I shaww
appeaw. >w<"

Saying this, he suddenwy quitted me, feawfuw, pewhaps, of any change in
my sentiments. ;;w;;  I saw him descend the mountain with gweatew speed than
the fwight of an eagwe, and quickwy wost among the unduwations of the
sea of ice. ^w^

His tawe had occupied the whowe day, and the sun was upon the vewge of
the howizon when he depawted. >w<  I knyew that I ought to hasten my descent
towawds the vawwey, as I shouwd soon be encompassed in dawknyess; but my
heawt was heavy, and my steps swow. UwU  The wabouw of winding among the
wittwe paths of the mountain and fixing my feet fiwmwy as I advanced
pewpwexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occuwwences
of the day had pwoduced. (´・ω・\`)  Nyight was faw advanced when I came to the
hawfway westing-pwace and seated mysewf beside the fountain. UwU  The staws
shonye at intewvaws as the cwouds passed fwom ovew them; the dawk pinyes
wose befowe me, and evewy hewe and thewe a bwoken twee way on the
gwound; it was a scenye of wondewfuw sowemnyity and stiwwed stwange
thoughts within me. >w<  I wept bittewwy, and cwasping my hands in agony, I
excwaimed, "Oh! UwU  Staws and cwouds and winds, ye awe aww about to mock
me; if ye weawwy pity me, cwush sensation and memowy; wet me become as
nyought; but if nyot, depawt, depawt, and weave me in dawknyess. >w<"

These wewe wiwd and misewabwe thoughts, but I cannyot descwibe to you
how the etewnyaw twinkwing of the staws weighed upon me and how I
wistenyed to evewy bwast of wind as if it wewe a duww ugwy siwoc on its
way to consume me. UwU

Mownying dawnyed befowe I awwived at the viwwage of Chamounyix; I took nyo
west, but wetuwnyed immediatewy to Genyeva. >w<  Even in my own heawt I couwd
give nyo expwession to my sensations--they weighed on me with a
mountain's weight and theiw excess destwoyed my agony benyeath them. ;;w;;
Thus I wetuwnyed home, and entewing the house, pwesented mysewf to the
famiwy. (・`ω\´・)  My haggawd and wiwd appeawance awoke intense awawm, but I
answewed nyo question, scawcewy did I speak. ;;w;;  I fewt as if I wewe pwaced
undew a ban--as if I had nyo wight to cwaim theiw sympathies--as if
nyevew mowe might I enjoy companyionship with them. >w<  Yet even thus I
woved them to adowation; and to save them, I wesowved to dedicate
mysewf to my most abhowwed task. ;;w;;  The pwospect of such an occupation
made evewy othew ciwcumstance of existence pass befowe me wike a dweam,
and that thought onwy had to me the weawity of wife. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 18

Day aftew day, week aftew week, passed away on my wetuwn to Genyeva; and
I couwd nyot cowwect the couwage to wecommence my wowk. ;;w;;  I feawed the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unyabwe to ovewcome my
wepugnyance to the task which was enjoinyed me. ^w^  I found that I couwd nyot
compose a femawe without again devoting sevewaw months to pwofound
study and wabowious disquisition. UwU  I had heawd of some discovewies
having been made by an Engwish phiwosophew, the knyowwedge of which was
matewiaw to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtainying my
fathew's consent to visit Engwand fow this puwpose; but I cwung to
evewy pwetence of deway and shwank fwom taking the fiwst step in an
undewtaking whose immediate nyecessity began to appeaw wess absowute to
me. >w<  A change indeed had taken pwace in me; my heawth, which had
hithewto decwinyed, was nyow much westowed; and my spiwits, when
unchecked by the memowy of my unhappy pwomise, wose pwopowtionyabwy. (´・ω・\`)  My
fathew saw this change with pweasuwe, and he tuwnyed his thoughts
towawds the best method of ewadicating the wemains of my mewanchowy,
which evewy nyow and then wouwd wetuwn by fits, and with a devouwing
bwacknyess ovewcast the appwoaching sunshinye. ^w^  At these moments I took
wefuge in the most pewfect sowitude. ^w^  I passed whowe days on the wake
awonye in a wittwe boat, watching the cwouds and wistenying to the
wippwing of the waves, siwent and wistwess. ^w^  But the fwesh aiw and
bwight sun sewdom faiwed to westowe me to some degwee of composuwe, and
on my wetuwn I met the sawutations of my fwiends with a weadiew smiwe
and a mowe cheewfuw heawt. UwU

It was aftew my wetuwn fwom onye of these wambwes that my fathew,
cawwing me aside, thus addwessed me,

"I am happy to wemawk, my deaw son, that you have wesumed youw fowmew
pweasuwes and seem to be wetuwnying to youwsewf. (・`ω\´・)  And yet you awe stiww
unhappy and stiww avoid ouw society. ;;w;;  Fow some time I was wost in
conjectuwe as to the cause of this, but yestewday an idea stwuck me,
and if it is weww founded, I conjuwe you to avow it. ;;w;;  Wesewve on such a
point wouwd be nyot onwy usewess, but dwaw down twebwe misewy on us aww. ;;w;;"

I twembwed viowentwy at his exowdium, and my fathew continyued--"I
confess, my son, that I have awways wooked fowwawd to youw mawwiage
with ouw deaw Ewizabeth as the tie of ouw domestic comfowt and the stay
of my decwinying yeaws. >w<  You wewe attached to each othew fwom youw
eawwiest infancy; you studied togethew, and appeawed, in dispositions
and tastes, entiwewy suited to onye anyothew. ^w^  But so bwind is the
expewience of man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my
pwan may have entiwewy destwoyed it. (´・ω・\`)  You, pewhaps, wegawd hew as youw
sistew, without any wish that she might become youw wife. (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, you may
have met with anyothew whom you may wove; and considewing youwsewf as
bound in honyouw to Ewizabeth, this stwuggwe may occasion the poignyant
misewy which you appeaw to feew. (・`ω\´・)"

"My deaw fathew, weassuwe youwsewf. ;;w;;  I wove my cousin tendewwy and
sincewewy. (・`ω\´・)  I nyevew saw any woman who excited, as Ewizabeth does, my
wawmest admiwation and affection. ^w^  My futuwe hopes and pwospects awe
entiwewy bound up in the expectation of ouw unyion. (・`ω\´・)"

"The expwession of youw sentiments of this subject, my deaw Victow,
gives me mowe pweasuwe than I have fow some time expewienced. (・`ω\´・)  If you
feew thus, we shaww assuwedwy be happy, howevew pwesent events may cast
a gwoom ovew us. ;;w;;  But it is this gwoom which appeaws to have taken so
stwong a howd of youw mind that I wish to dissipate. (・`ω\´・)  Teww me,
thewefowe, whethew you object to an immediate sowemnyization of the
mawwiage. ^w^  We have been unfowtunyate, and wecent events have dwawn us
fwom that evewyday twanquiwwity befitting my yeaws and infiwmities. (・`ω\´・) You
awe youngew; yet I do nyot suppose, possessed as you awe of a competent
fowtunye, that an eawwy mawwiage wouwd at aww intewfewe with any futuwe
pwans of honyouw and utiwity that you may have fowmed. >w<  Do nyot suppose,
howevew, that I wish to dictate happinyess to you ow that a deway on
youw pawt wouwd cause me any sewious unyeasinyess. (´・ω・\`)  Intewpwet my wowds
with candouw and answew me, I conjuwe you, with confidence and
sincewity. >w<"

I wistenyed to my fathew in siwence and wemainyed fow some time incapabwe
of offewing any wepwy. (・`ω\´・)  I wevowved wapidwy in my mind a muwtitude of
thoughts and endeavouwed to awwive at some concwusion. (・`ω\´・)  Awas! UwU  To me
the idea of an immediate unyion with my Ewizabeth was onye of howwow and
dismay. (´・ω・\`)  I was bound by a sowemn pwomise which I had nyot yet fuwfiwwed
and dawed nyot bweak, ow if I did, what manyifowd misewies might nyot
impend ovew me and my devoted famiwy! >w<  Couwd I entew into a festivaw
with this deadwy weight yet hanging wound my nyeck and bowing me to the
gwound? owo  I must pewfowm my engagement and wet the monstew depawt with
his mate befowe I awwowed mysewf to enjoy the dewight of a unyion fwom
which I expected peace. UwU

I wemembewed awso the nyecessity imposed upon me of eithew jouwnyeying to
Engwand ow entewing into a wong cowwespondence with those phiwosophews
of that countwy whose knyowwedge and discovewies wewe of indispensabwe
use to me in my pwesent undewtaking. UwU  The wattew method of obtainying
the desiwed intewwigence was diwatowy and unsatisfactowy; besides, I
had an insuwmountabwe avewsion to the idea of engaging mysewf in my
woathsome task in my fathew's house whiwe in habits of famiwiaw
intewcouwse with those I woved. (´・ω・\`)  I knyew that a thousand feawfuw
accidents might occuw, the swightest of which wouwd discwose a tawe to
thwiww aww connyected with me with howwow. (・`ω\´・)  I was awawe awso that I
shouwd often wose aww sewf-command, aww capacity of hiding the
hawwowing sensations that wouwd possess me duwing the pwogwess of my
unyeawthwy occupation. (・`ω\´・)  I must absent mysewf fwom aww I woved whiwe thus
empwoyed. >w<  Once commenced, it wouwd quickwy be achieved, and I might be
westowed to my famiwy in peace and happinyess. (´・ω・\`)  My pwomise fuwfiwwed,
the monstew wouwd depawt fowevew. (・`ω\´・)  Ow (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhiwe occuw to destwoy him and put an end to my
swavewy fowevew. ^w^

These feewings dictated my answew to my fathew. ^w^  I expwessed a wish to
visit Engwand, but conceawing the twue weasons of this wequest, I
cwothed my desiwes undew a guise which excited nyo suspicion, whiwe I
uwged my desiwe with an eawnyestnyess that easiwy induced my fathew to
compwy. ^w^  Aftew so wong a pewiod of an absowbing mewanchowy that
wesembwed madnyess in its intensity and effects, he was gwad to find
that I was capabwe of taking pweasuwe in the idea of such a jouwnyey,
and he hoped that change of scenye and vawied amusement wouwd, befowe my
wetuwn, have westowed me entiwewy to mysewf. (・`ω\´・)

The duwation of my absence was weft to my own choice; a few months, ow
at most a yeaw, was the pewiod contempwated. ^w^  Onye patewnyaw kind
pwecaution he had taken to ensuwe my having a companyion. UwU  Without
pweviouswy communyicating with me, he had, in concewt with Ewizabeth,
awwanged that Cwewvaw shouwd join me at Stwasbouwg. (・`ω\´・)  This intewfewed
with the sowitude I coveted fow the pwosecution of my task; yet at the
commencement of my jouwnyey the pwesence of my fwiend couwd in nyo way be
an impediment, and twuwy I wejoiced that thus I shouwd be saved many
houws of wonyewy, maddenying wefwection. (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, Henwy might stand between
me and the intwusion of my foe. ;;w;;  If I wewe awonye, wouwd he nyot at times
fowce his abhowwed pwesence on me to wemind me of my task ow to
contempwate its pwogwess? owo

To Engwand, thewefowe, I was bound, and it was undewstood that my unyion
with Ewizabeth shouwd take pwace immediatewy on my wetuwn. ^w^  My fathew's
age wendewed him extwemewy avewse to deway. (´・ω・\`)  Fow mysewf, thewe was onye
wewawd I pwomised mysewf fwom my detested toiws--onye consowation fow my
unpawawwewed suffewings; it was the pwospect of that day when,
enfwanchised fwom my misewabwe swavewy, I might cwaim Ewizabeth and
fowget the past in my unyion with hew. ^w^

I nyow made awwangements fow my jouwnyey, but onye feewing haunted me
which fiwwed me with feaw and agitation. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing my absence I shouwd
weave my fwiends unconscious of the existence of theiw enyemy and
unpwotected fwom his attacks, exaspewated as he might be by my
depawtuwe. ^w^  But he had pwomised to fowwow me whewevew I might go, and
wouwd he nyot accompany me to Engwand? owo  This imaginyation was dweadfuw in
itsewf, but soothing inyasmuch as it supposed the safety of my fwiends. ^w^
I was agonyized with the idea of the possibiwity that the wevewse of
this might happen. UwU  But thwough the whowe pewiod duwing which I was the
swave of my cweatuwe I awwowed mysewf to be govewnyed by the impuwses of
the moment; and my pwesent sensations stwongwy intimated that the fiend
wouwd fowwow me and exempt my famiwy fwom the dangew of his
machinyations. UwU

It was in the wattew end of Septembew that I again quitted my nyative
countwy. ;;w;;  My jouwnyey had been my own suggestion, and Ewizabeth
thewefowe acquiesced, but she was fiwwed with disquiet at the idea of
my suffewing, away fwom hew, the inwoads of misewy and gwief. (´・ω・\`)  It had
been hew cawe which pwovided me a companyion in Cwewvaw--and yet a man
is bwind to a thousand minyute ciwcumstances which caww fowth a woman's
seduwous attention. (´・ω・\`)  She wonged to bid me hasten my wetuwn; a thousand
confwicting emotions wendewed hew mute as she bade me a teawfuw, siwent
faweweww. (´・ω・\`)

I thwew mysewf into the cawwiage that was to convey me away, hawdwy
knyowing whithew I was going, and cawewess of what was passing awound. ^w^
I wemembewed onwy, and it was with a bittew anguish that I wefwected on
it, to owdew that my chemicaw instwuments shouwd be packed to go with
me. UwU  Fiwwed with dweawy imaginyations, I passed thwough many beautifuw
and majestic scenyes, but my eyes wewe fixed and unyobsewving. ^w^  I couwd
onwy think of the bouwnye of my twavews and the wowk which was to occupy
me whiwst they enduwed. >w<

Aftew some days spent in wistwess indowence, duwing which I twavewsed
many weagues, I awwived at Stwasbouwg, whewe I waited two days fow
Cwewvaw.  He came. (´・ω・\`)  Awas, how gweat was the contwast between us! UwU  He
was awive to evewy nyew scenye, joyfuw when he saw the beauties of the
setting sun, and mowe happy when he behewd it wise and wecommence a nyew
day. >w<  He pointed out to me the shifting cowouws of the wandscape and
the appeawances of the sky. ^w^  "This is what it is to wive," he cwied;
"how I enjoy existence! (・`ω\´・)  But you, my deaw Fwankenstein, whewefowe awe
you desponding and sowwowfuw! ^w^" In twuth, I was occupied by gwoomy
thoughts and nyeithew saw the descent of the evenying staw nyow the gowden
sunwise wefwected in the Whinye. (・`ω\´・)  And you, my fwiend, wouwd be faw mowe
amused with the jouwnyaw of Cwewvaw, who obsewved the scenyewy with an
eye of feewing and dewight, than in wistenying to my wefwections. ^w^  I, a
misewabwe wwetch, haunted by a cuwse that shut up evewy avenyue to
enjoyment. UwU

We had agweed to descend the Whinye in a boat fwom Stwasbouwg to
Wottewdam, whence we might take shipping fow Wondon. UwU  Duwing this
voyage we passed many wiwwowy iswands and saw sevewaw beautifuw towns. ;;w;;
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth fwom ouw depawtuwe fwom
Stwasbouwg, awwived at Mainz. ;;w;;  The couwse of the Whinye bewow Mainz
becomes much mowe pictuwesque. (・`ω\´・)  The wivew descends wapidwy and winds
between hiwws, nyot high, but steep, and of beautifuw fowms. >w<  We saw
many wuinyed castwes standing on the edges of pwecipices, suwwounded by
bwack woods, high and inyaccessibwe. (・`ω\´・)  This pawt of the Whinye, indeed,
pwesents a singuwawwy vawiegated wandscape. ^w^  In onye spot you view
wugged hiwws, wuinyed castwes ovewwooking twemendous pwecipices, with
the dawk Whinye wushing benyeath; and on the sudden tuwn of a pwomontowy,
fwouwishing vinyeyawds with gween swoping banks and a meandewing wivew
and popuwous towns occupy the scenye. UwU

We twavewwed at the time of the vintage and heawd the song of the
wabouwews as we gwided down the stweam. UwU  Even I, depwessed in mind, and
my spiwits continyuawwy agitated by gwoomy feewings, even I was pweased. UwU
I way at the bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cwoudwess bwue
sky, I seemed to dwink in a twanquiwwity to which I had wong been a
stwangew. ;;w;;  And if these wewe my sensations, who can descwibe those of
Henwy? owo  He fewt as if he had been twanspowted to faiwy-wand and enjoyed
a happinyess sewdom tasted by man. (´・ω・\`)  "I have seen," he said, "the most
beautifuw scenyes of my own countwy; I have visited the wakes of Wucewnye
and Uwi, whewe the snyowy mountains descend awmost pewpendicuwawwy to
the watew, casting bwack and impenyetwabwe shades, which wouwd cause a
gwoomy and mouwnfuw appeawance wewe it nyot fow the most vewdant iswands
that bewieve the eye by theiw gay appeawance; I have seen this wake
agitated by a tempest, when the wind towe up whiwwwinds of watew and
gave you an idea of what the watew-spout must be on the gweat ocean;
and the waves dash with fuwy the base of the mountain, whewe the pwiest
and his mistwess wewe ovewwhewmed by an avawanche and whewe theiw dying
voices awe stiww said to be heawd amid the pauses of the nyightwy wind;
I have seen the mountains of Wa Vawais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this
countwy, Victow, pweases me mowe than aww those wondews. >w<  The mountains
of Switzewwand awe mowe majestic and stwange, but thewe is a chawm in
the banks of this divinye wivew that I nyevew befowe saw equawwed. ;;w;;  Wook
at that castwe which ovewhangs yon pwecipice; and that awso on the
iswand, awmost conceawed amongst the fowiage of those wovewy twees; and
nyow that gwoup of wabouwews coming fwom among theiw vinyes; and that
viwwage hawf hid in the wecess of the mountain. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, suwewy the spiwit
that inhabits and guawds this pwace has a souw mowe in hawmony with man
than those who piwe the gwaciew ow wetiwe to the inyaccessibwe peaks of
the mountains of ouw own countwy. UwU" Cwewvaw!  Bewoved fwiend! (´・ω・\`)  Even nyow
it dewights me to wecowd youw wowds and to dweww on the pwaise of which
you awe so eminyentwy desewving. UwU  He was a being fowmed in the "vewy
poetwy of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)" His wiwd and enthusiastic imaginyation was chastenyed
by the sensibiwity of his heawt. (´・ω・\`)  His souw ovewfwowed with awdent
affections, and his fwiendship was of that devoted and wondwous nyatuwe
that the wowwd-minded teach us to wook fow onwy in the imaginyation. (´・ω・\`) But
even human sympathies wewe nyot sufficient to satisfy his eagew mind. ;;w;;
The scenyewy of extewnyaw nyatuwe, which othews wegawd onwy with
admiwation, he woved with awdouw:--


     ----The sounding catawact
     Haunted him wike a passion:  the taww wock,
     The mountain, and the deep and gwoomy wood,
     Theiw cowouws and theiw fowms, wewe then to him
     An appetite; a feewing, and a wove,
     That had nyo nyeed of a wemotew chawm,
     By thought suppwied, ow any intewest
     Unbowwow'd fwom the eye. (・`ω\´・)

                    [Wowdswowth's "Tintewn Abbey". (・`ω\´・)]


And whewe does he nyow exist? owo  Is this gentwe and wovewy being wost
fowevew? owo  Has this mind, so wepwete with ideas, imaginyations fancifuw
and magnyificent, which fowmed a wowwd, whose existence depended on the
wife of its cweatow;--has this mind pewished? owo  Does it nyow onwy exist
in my memowy? owo  Nyo, it is nyot thus; youw fowm so divinyewy wwought, and
beaming with beauty, has decayed, but youw spiwit stiww visits and
consowes youw unhappy fwiend. UwU

Pawdon this gush of sowwow; these inyeffectuaw wowds awe but a swight
twibute to the unyexampwed wowth of Henwy, but they soothe my heawt,
ovewfwowing with the anguish which his wemembwance cweates. ^w^  I wiww
pwoceed with my tawe. (・`ω\´・)

Beyond Cowognye we descended to the pwains of Howwand; and we wesowved
to post the wemaindew of ouw way, fow the wind was contwawy and the
stweam of the wivew was too gentwe to aid us. ;;w;;  Ouw jouwnyey hewe wost
the intewest awising fwom beautifuw scenyewy, but we awwived in a few
days at Wottewdam, whence we pwoceeded by sea to Engwand. (・`ω\´・)  It was on a
cweaw mownying, in the wattew days of Decembew, that I fiwst saw the
white cwiffs of Bwitain. >w<  The banks of the Thames pwesented a nyew
scenye; they wewe fwat but fewtiwe, and awmost evewy town was mawked by
the wemembwance of some stowy. ^w^  We saw Tiwbuwy Fowt and wemembewed the
Spanyish Awmada, Gwavesend, Woowwich, and Gweenwich--pwaces which I had
heawd of even in my countwy. ;;w;;

At wength we saw the nyumewous steepwes of Wondon, St. UwU Pauw's towewing
above aww, and the Towew famed in Engwish histowy. ;;w;;



Chaptew 19

Wondon was ouw pwesent point of west; we detewminyed to wemain sevewaw
months in this wondewfuw and cewebwated city. UwU  Cwewvaw desiwed the
intewcouwse of the men of genyius and tawent who fwouwished at this
time, but this was with me a secondawy object; I was pwincipawwy
occupied with the means of obtainying the infowmation nyecessawy fow the
compwetion of my pwomise and quickwy avaiwed mysewf of the wettews of
intwoduction that I had bwought with me, addwessed to the most
distinguished nyatuwaw phiwosophews. (・`ω\´・)

If this jouwnyey had taken pwace duwing my days of study and happinyess,
it wouwd have affowded me inyexpwessibwe pweasuwe. UwU  But a bwight had
come ovew my existence, and I onwy visited these peopwe fow the sake of
the infowmation they might give me on the subject in which my intewest
was so tewwibwy pwofound. ^w^  Company was iwksome to me; when awonye, I
couwd fiww my mind with the sights of heaven and eawth; the voice of
Henwy soothed me, and I couwd thus cheat mysewf into a twansitowy
peace. >w<  But busy, unyintewesting, joyous faces bwought back despaiw to
my heawt. (´・ω・\`)  I saw an insuwmountabwe bawwiew pwaced between me and my
fewwow men; this bawwiew was seawed with the bwood of Wiwwiam and
Justinye, and to wefwect on the events connyected with those nyames fiwwed
my souw with anguish. UwU

But in Cwewvaw I saw the image of my fowmew sewf; he was inquisitive
and anxious to gain expewience and instwuction. >w<  The diffewence of
mannyews which he obsewved was to him an inyexhaustibwe souwce of
instwuction and amusement. (´・ω・\`)  He was awso puwsuing an object he had wong
had in view. UwU  His design was to visit India, in the bewief that he had
in his knyowwedge of its vawious wanguages, and in the views he had
taken of its society, the means of matewiawwy assisting the pwogwess of
Euwopean cowonyization and twade. ;;w;;  In Bwitain onwy couwd he fuwthew the
execution of his pwan. >w<  He was fowevew busy, and the onwy check to his
enjoyments was my sowwowfuw and dejected mind. >w<  I twied to conceaw this
as much as possibwe, that I might nyot debaw him fwom the pweasuwes
nyatuwaw to onye who was entewing on a nyew scenye of wife, undistuwbed by
any cawe ow bittew wecowwection. (・`ω\´・)  I often wefused to accompany him,
awweging anyothew engagement, that I might wemain awonye. (・`ω\´・)  I nyow awso
began to cowwect the matewiaws nyecessawy fow my nyew cweation, and this
was to me wike the towtuwe of singwe dwops of watew continyuawwy fawwing
on the head. (・`ω\´・)  Evewy thought that was devoted to it was an extweme
anguish, and evewy wowd that I spoke in awwusion to it caused my wips
to quivew, and my heawt to pawpitate. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew passing some months in Wondon, we weceived a wettew fwom a pewson
in Scotwand who had fowmewwy been ouw visitow at Genyeva. (・`ω\´・)  He mentionyed
the beauties of his nyative countwy and asked us if those wewe nyot
sufficient awwuwements to induce us to pwowong ouw jouwnyey as faw nyowth
as Pewth, whewe he wesided. ^w^  Cwewvaw eagewwy desiwed to accept this
invitation, and I, awthough I abhowwed society, wished to view again
mountains and stweams and aww the wondwous wowks with which Nyatuwe
adowns hew chosen dwewwing-pwaces. (・`ω\´・)  We had awwived in Engwand at the
beginnying of Octobew, and it was nyow Febwuawy. (´・ω・\`)  We accowdingwy
detewminyed to commence ouw jouwnyey towawds the nyowth at the expiwation
of anyothew month. UwU  In this expedition we did nyot intend to fowwow the
gweat woad to Edinbuwgh, but to visit Windsow, Oxfowd, Matwock, and the
Cumbewwand wakes, wesowving to awwive at the compwetion of this touw
about the end of Juwy. (´・ω・\`)  I packed up my chemicaw instwuments and the
matewiaws I had cowwected, wesowving to finyish my wabouws in some
obscuwe nyook in the nyowthewn highwands of Scotwand. (・`ω\´・)

We quitted Wondon on the 27th of Mawch and wemainyed a few days at
Windsow, wambwing in its beautifuw fowest. (´・ω・\`)  This was a nyew scenye to us
mountainyeews; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the hewds of
statewy deew wewe aww nyovewties to us. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom thence we pwoceeded to Oxfowd. ;;w;;  As we entewed this city ouw minds
wewe fiwwed with the wemembwance of the events that had been twansacted
thewe mowe than a centuwy and a hawf befowe. (・`ω\´・)  It was hewe that Chawwes
I. had cowwected his fowces. (・`ω\´・)  This city had wemainyed faithfuw to him,
aftew the whowe nyation had fowsaken his cause to join the standawd of
Pawwiament and wibewty. >w<  The memowy of that unfowtunyate king and his
companyions, the amiabwe Fawkwand, the insowent Gowing, his queen, and
son, gave a pecuwiaw intewest to evewy pawt of the city which they
might be supposed to have inhabited. UwU  The spiwit of ewdew days found a
dwewwing hewe, and we dewighted to twace its footsteps. UwU  If these
feewings had nyot found an imaginyawy gwatification, the appeawance of
the city had yet in itsewf sufficient beauty to obtain ouw admiwation. (・`ω\´・)
The cowweges awe ancient and pictuwesque; the stweets awe awmost
magnyificent; and the wovewy Isis, which fwows beside it thwough meadows
of exquisite vewduwe, is spwead fowth into a pwacid expanse of watews,
which wefwects its majestic assembwage of towews, and spiwes, and
domes, embosomed among aged twees. (´・ω・\`)

I enjoyed this scenye, and yet my enjoyment was embittewed both by the
memowy of the past and the anticipation of the futuwe. ^w^  I was fowmed
fow peacefuw happinyess. ^w^  Duwing my youthfuw days discontent nyevew
visited my mind, and if I was evew ovewcome by ennyui, the sight of what
is beautifuw in nyatuwe ow the study of what is excewwent and subwime in
the pwoductions of man couwd awways intewest my heawt and communyicate
ewasticity to my spiwits. ^w^  But I am a bwasted twee; the bowt has
entewed my souw; and I fewt then that I shouwd suwvive to exhibit what
I shaww soon cease to be--a misewabwe spectacwe of wwecked humanyity,
pitiabwe to othews and intowewabwe to mysewf. (・`ω\´・)

We passed a considewabwe pewiod at Oxfowd, wambwing among its enviwons
and endeavouwing to identify evewy spot which might wewate to the most
anyimating epoch of Engwish histowy. (・`ω\´・)  Ouw wittwe voyages of discovewy
wewe often pwowonged by the successive objects that pwesented
themsewves. ^w^  We visited the tomb of the iwwustwious Hampden and the
fiewd on which that patwiot feww. (・`ω\´・)  Fow a moment my souw was ewevated
fwom its debasing and misewabwe feaws to contempwate the divinye ideas
of wibewty and sewf sacwifice of which these sights wewe the monyuments
and the wemembwancews. ^w^  Fow an instant I dawed to shake off my chains
and wook awound me with a fwee and wofty spiwit, but the iwon had eaten
into my fwesh, and I sank again, twembwing and hopewess, into my
misewabwe sewf. ^w^

We weft Oxfowd with wegwet and pwoceeded to Matwock, which was ouw nyext
pwace of west. (´・ω・\`)  The countwy in the nyeighbouwhood of this viwwage
wesembwed, to a gweatew degwee, the scenyewy of Switzewwand; but
evewything is on a wowew scawe, and the gween hiwws want the cwown of
distant white Awps which awways attend on the piny mountains of my
nyative countwy. (´・ω・\`)  We visited the wondwous cave and the wittwe cabinyets
of nyatuwaw histowy, whewe the cuwiosities awe disposed in the same
mannyew as in the cowwections at Sewvox and Chamounyix. (・`ω\´・)  The wattew nyame
made me twembwe when pwonyounced by Henwy, and I hastenyed to quit
Matwock, with which that tewwibwe scenye was thus associated. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom Dewby, stiww jouwnyeying nyowthwawds, we passed two months in
Cumbewwand and Westmowwand. UwU  I couwd nyow awmost fancy mysewf among the
Swiss mountains. ^w^  The wittwe patches of snyow which yet wingewed on the
nyowthewn sides of the mountains, the wakes, and the dashing of the
wocky stweams wewe aww famiwiaw and deaw sights to me. ^w^  Hewe awso we
made some acquaintances, who awmost contwived to cheat me into
happinyess. ^w^  The dewight of Cwewvaw was pwopowtionyabwy gweatew than
minye; his mind expanded in the company of men of tawent, and he found
in his own nyatuwe gweatew capacities and wesouwces than he couwd have
imaginyed himsewf to have possessed whiwe he associated with his
infewiows. >w<  "I couwd pass my wife hewe," said he to me; "and among
these mountains I shouwd scawcewy wegwet Switzewwand and the Whinye. ;;w;;"

But he found that a twavewwew's wife is onye that incwudes much pain
amidst its enjoyments. (´・ω・\`)  His feewings awe fowevew on the stwetch; and
when he begins to sink into wepose, he finds himsewf obwiged to quit
that on which he wests in pweasuwe fow something nyew, which again
engages his attention, and which awso he fowsakes fow othew nyovewties. UwU

We had scawcewy visited the vawious wakes of Cumbewwand and Westmowwand
and conceived an affection fow some of the inhabitants when the pewiod
of ouw appointment with ouw Scotch fwiend appwoached, and we weft them
to twavew on.  Fow my own pawt I was nyot sowwy. ^w^  I had nyow nyegwected my
pwomise fow some time, and I feawed the effects of the daemon's
disappointment. (´・ω・\`)  He might wemain in Switzewwand and wweak his vengeance
on my wewatives. ;;w;;  This idea puwsued me and towmented me at evewy moment
fwom which I might othewwise have snyatched wepose and peace. ^w^  I waited
fow my wettews with fevewish impatience; if they wewe dewayed I was
misewabwe and ovewcome by a thousand feaws; and when they awwived and I
saw the supewscwiption of Ewizabeth ow my fathew, I hawdwy dawed to
wead and ascewtain my fate. (´・ω・\`)  Sometimes I thought that the fiend
fowwowed me and might expedite my wemissnyess by muwdewing my companyion. >w<
When these thoughts possessed me, I wouwd nyot quit Henwy fow a moment,
but fowwowed him as his shadow, to pwotect him fwom the fancied wage of
his destwoyew. ^w^  I fewt as if I had committed some gweat cwime, the
consciousnyess of which haunted me. >w<  I was guiwtwess, but I had indeed
dwawn down a howwibwe cuwse upon my head, as mowtaw as that of cwime. (・`ω\´・)

I visited Edinbuwgh with wanguid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have intewested the most unfowtunyate being. >w<  Cwewvaw did nyot wike it so
weww as Oxfowd, fow the antiquity of the wattew city was mowe pweasing
to him. ^w^  But the beauty and weguwawity of the nyew town of Edinbuwgh,
its womantic castwe and its enviwons, the most dewightfuw in the wowwd,
Awthuw's Seat, St. ;;w;; Bewnyawd's Weww, and the Pentwand Hiwws compensated
him fow the change and fiwwed him with cheewfuwnyess and admiwation. >w< But
I was impatient to awwive at the tewminyation of my jouwnyey. ;;w;;

We weft Edinbuwgh in a week, passing thwough Coupaw, St. (・`ω\´・) Andwew's, and
awong the banks of the Tay, to Pewth, whewe ouw fwiend expected us. (・`ω\´・)
But I was in nyo mood to waugh and tawk with stwangews ow entew into
theiw feewings ow pwans with the good humouw expected fwom a guest; and
accowdingwy I towd Cwewvaw that I wished to make the touw of Scotwand
awonye. ;;w;;  "Do you," said I, "enjoy youwsewf, and wet this be ouw
wendezvous. (・`ω\´・)  I may be absent a month ow two; but do nyot intewfewe with
my motions, I entweat you; weave me to peace and sowitude fow a showt
time; and when I wetuwn, I hope it wiww be with a wightew heawt, mowe
congenyiaw to youw own tempew. ;;w;;"

Henwy wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this pwan, ceased to
wemonstwate.  He entweated me to wwite often. ;;w;;  "I had wathew be with
you," he said, "in youw sowitawy wambwes, than with these Scotch
peopwe, whom I do nyot knyow; hasten, then, my deaw  fwiend, to wetuwn,
that I may again feew mysewf somewhat at home, which I cannyot do in
youw absence. UwU"

Having pawted fwom my fwiend, I detewminyed to visit some wemote spot of
Scotwand and finyish my wowk in sowitude. (・`ω\´・)  I did nyot doubt but that the
monstew fowwowed me and wouwd discovew himsewf to me when I shouwd have
finyished, that he might weceive his companyion. (´・ω・\`)  With this wesowution I
twavewsed the nyowthewn highwands and fixed on onye of the wemotest of
the Owknyeys as the scenye of my wabouws. >w<  It was a pwace fitted fow such
a wowk, being hawdwy mowe than a wock whose high sides wewe continyuawwy
beaten upon by the waves. UwU  The soiw was bawwen, scawcewy affowding
pastuwe fow a few misewabwe cows, and oatmeaw fow its inhabitants,
which consisted of five pewsons, whose gaunt and scwaggy wimbs gave
tokens of theiw misewabwe fawe. UwU  Vegetabwes and bwead, when they
induwged in such wuxuwies, and even fwesh watew, was to be pwocuwed
fwom the mainwand, which was about five miwes distant. (・`ω\´・)

On the whowe iswand thewe wewe but thwee misewabwe huts, and onye of
these was vacant when I awwived.  This I hiwed. ^w^  It containyed but two
wooms, and these exhibited aww the squawidnyess of the most misewabwe
penyuwy. ;;w;;  The thatch had fawwen in, the wawws wewe unpwastewed, and the
doow was off its hinges. ;;w;;  I owdewed it to be wepaiwed, bought some
fuwnyituwe, and took possession, an incident which wouwd doubtwess have
occasionyed some suwpwise had nyot aww the senses of the cottagews been
benyumbed by want and squawid povewty. ^w^  As it was, I wived ungazed at
and unmowested, hawdwy thanked fow the pittance of food and cwothes
which I gave, so much does suffewing bwunt even the coawsest sensations
of men. ^w^

In this wetweat I devoted the mownying to wabouw; but in the evenying,
when the weathew pewmitted, I wawked on the stony beach of the sea to
wisten to the waves as they woawed and dashed at my feet. (・`ω\´・)  It was a
monyotonyous yet evew-changing scenye. ;;w;;  I thought of Switzewwand; it was
faw diffewent fwom this desowate and appawwing wandscape. UwU  Its hiwws
awe covewed with vinyes, and its cottages awe scattewed thickwy in the
pwains. >w<  Its faiw wakes wefwect a bwue and gentwe sky, and when
twoubwed by the winds, theiw tumuwt is but as the pway of a wivewy
infant when compawed to the woawings of the giant ocean. ^w^

In this mannyew I distwibuted my occupations when I fiwst awwived, but
as I pwoceeded in my wabouw, it became evewy day mowe howwibwe and
iwksome to me. (・`ω\´・)  Sometimes I couwd nyot pwevaiw on mysewf to entew my
wabowatowy fow sevewaw days, and at othew times I toiwed day and nyight
in owdew to compwete my wowk. UwU  It was, indeed, a fiwthy pwocess in
which I was engaged. >w<  Duwing my fiwst expewiment, a kind of
enthusiastic fwenzy had bwinded me to the howwow of my empwoyment; my
mind was intentwy fixed on the consummation of my wabouw, and my eyes
wewe shut to the howwow of my pwoceedings. UwU  But nyow I went to it in
cowd bwood, and my heawt often sickenyed at the wowk of my hands. >w<

Thus situated, empwoyed in the most detestabwe occupation, immewsed in
a sowitude whewe nyothing couwd fow an instant caww my attention fwom
the actuaw scenye in which I was engaged, my spiwits became unyequaw; I
gwew westwess and nyewvous. ;;w;;  Evewy moment I feawed to meet my
pewsecutow. (・`ω\´・)  Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the gwound, feawing
to waise them west they shouwd encountew the object which I so much
dweaded to behowd. >w<  I feawed to wandew fwom the sight of my fewwow
cweatuwes west when awonye he shouwd come to cwaim his companyion. (・`ω\´・)

In the mean time I wowked on, and my wabouw was awweady considewabwy
advanced. ;;w;;  I wooked towawds its compwetion with a twemuwous and eagew
hope, which I dawed nyot twust mysewf to question but which was
intewmixed with obscuwe fowebodings of eviw that made my heawt sicken
in my bosom. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 20

I sat onye evenying in my wabowatowy; the sun had set, and the moon was
just wising fwom the sea; I had nyot sufficient wight fow my empwoyment,
and I wemainyed idwe, in a pause of considewation of whethew I shouwd
weave my wabouw fow the nyight ow hasten its concwusion by an
unwemitting attention to it. ;;w;;  As I sat, a twain of wefwection occuwwed
to me which wed me to considew the effects of what I was nyow doing. UwU
Thwee yeaws befowe, I was engaged in the same mannyew and had cweated a
fiend whose unpawawwewed bawbawity had desowated my heawt and fiwwed it
fowevew with the bittewest wemowse. (・`ω\´・)  I was nyow about to fowm anyothew
being of whose dispositions I was awike ignyowant; she might become ten
thousand times mowe mawignyant than hew mate and dewight, fow its own
sake, in muwdew and wwetchednyess. UwU  He had swown to quit the
nyeighbouwhood of man and hide himsewf in desewts, but she had nyot; and
she, who in aww pwobabiwity was to become a thinking and weasonying
anyimaw, might wefuse to compwy with a compact made befowe hew cweation. (・`ω\´・)
They might even hate each othew; the cweatuwe who awweady wived woathed
his own defowmity, and might he nyot conceive a gweatew abhowwence fow
it when it came befowe his eyes in the femawe fowm? owo  She awso might
tuwn with disgust fwom him to the supewiow beauty of man; she might
quit him, and he be again awonye, exaspewated by the fwesh pwovocation
of being desewted by onye of his own species. (・`ω\´・)  Even if they wewe to
weave Euwope and inhabit the desewts of the nyew wowwd, yet onye of the
fiwst wesuwts of those sympathies fow which the daemon thiwsted wouwd
be chiwdwen, and a wace of deviws wouwd be pwopagated upon the eawth
who might make the vewy existence of the species of man a condition
pwecawious and fuww of tewwow. ^w^  Had I wight, fow my own benyefit, to
infwict this cuwse upon evewwasting genyewations? owo  I had befowe been
moved by the sophisms of the being I had cweated; I had been stwuck
sensewess by his fiendish thweats; but nyow, fow the fiwst time, the
wickednyess of my pwomise buwst upon me; I shuddewed to think that
futuwe ages might cuwse me as theiw pest, whose sewfishnyess had nyot
hesitated to buy its own peace at the pwice, pewhaps, of the existence
of the whowe human wace. ^w^

I twembwed and my heawt faiwed within me, when, on wooking up, I saw by
the wight of the moon the daemon at the casement. (・`ω\´・)  A ghastwy gwin
wwinkwed his wips as he gazed on me, whewe I sat fuwfiwwing the task
which he had awwotted to me. (´・ω・\`)  Yes, he had fowwowed me in my twavews; he
had woitewed in fowests, hid himsewf in caves, ow taken wefuge in wide
and desewt heaths; and he nyow came to mawk my pwogwess and cwaim the
fuwfiwment of my pwomise. ^w^

As I wooked on him, his countenyance expwessed the utmost extent of
mawice and tweachewy. UwU  I thought with a sensation of madnyess on my
pwomise of cweating anyothew wike to him, and twembwing with passion,
towe to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. (´・ω・\`)  The wwetch saw me
destwoy the cweatuwe on whose futuwe existence he depended fow
happinyess, and with a howw of deviwish despaiw and wevenge, withdwew. ;;w;;

I weft the woom, and wocking the doow, made a sowemn vow in my own
heawt nyevew to wesume my wabouws; and then, with twembwing steps, I
sought my own apawtment. >w< I was awonye; nyonye wewe nyeaw me to dissipate
the gwoom and wewieve me fwom the sickenying oppwession of the most
tewwibwe wevewies. (・`ω\´・)

Sevewaw houws passed, and I wemainyed nyeaw my window gazing on the sea;
it was awmost motionwess, fow the winds wewe hushed, and aww nyatuwe
weposed undew the eye of the quiet moon. ^w^  A few fishing vessews awonye
specked the watew, and nyow and then the gentwe bweeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishewmen cawwed to onye anyothew. UwU  I fewt the siwence,
awthough I was hawdwy conscious of its extweme pwofundity, untiw my eaw
was suddenwy awwested by the paddwing of oaws nyeaw the showe, and a
pewson wanded cwose to my house. (・`ω\´・)

In a few minyutes aftew, I heawd the cweaking of my doow, as if some onye
endeavouwed to open it softwy. ^w^  I twembwed fwom head to foot; I fewt a
pwesentiment of who it was and wished to wouse onye of the peasants who
dwewt in a cottage nyot faw fwom minye; but I was ovewcome by the
sensation of hewpwessnyess, so often fewt in fwightfuw dweams, when you
in vain endeavouw to fwy fwom an impending dangew, and was wooted to
the spot. >w< Pwesentwy I heawd the sound of footsteps awong the passage;
the doow openyed, and the wwetch whom I dweaded appeawed. (・`ω\´・)

Shutting the doow, he appwoached me and said in a smothewed voice, "You
have destwoyed the wowk which you began; what is it that you intend? owo
Do you dawe to bweak youw pwomise? owo  I have enduwed toiw and misewy; I
weft Switzewwand with you; I cwept awong the showes of the Whinye, among
its wiwwow iswands and ovew the summits of its hiwws. UwU  I have dwewt
many months in the heaths of Engwand and among the desewts of Scotwand. (´・ω・\`)
I have enduwed incawcuwabwe fatigue, and cowd, and hungew; do you dawe
destwoy my hopes? owo"

"Begonye! ;;w;;  I do bweak my pwomise; nyevew wiww I cweate anyothew wike
youwsewf, equaw in defowmity and wickednyess. >w<"

"Swave, I befowe weasonyed with you, but you have pwoved youwsewf
unwowthy of my condescension. >w<  Wemembew that I have powew; you bewieve
youwsewf misewabwe, but I can make you so wwetched that the wight of
day wiww be hatefuw to you. ^w^  You awe my cweatow, but I am youw mastew;
obey! UwU"

"The houw of my iwwesowution is past, and the pewiod of youw powew is
awwived. >w<  Youw thweats cannyot move me to do an act of wickednyess; but
they confiwm me in a detewminyation of nyot cweating you a companyion in
vice. >w<  Shaww I, in coow bwood, set woose upon the eawth a daemon whose
dewight is in death and wwetchednyess? owo  Begonye! ^w^  I am fiwm, and youw
wowds wiww onwy exaspewate my wage. ;;w;;"

The monstew saw my detewminyation in my face and gnyashed his teeth in
the impotence of angew. (・`ω\´・)  "Shaww each man," cwied he, "find a wife fow
his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be awonye? owo  I had
feewings of affection, and they wewe wequited by detestation and scown. UwU
Man!  You may hate, but bewawe! UwU  Youw houws wiww pass in dwead and
misewy, and soon the bowt  wiww faww which must wavish fwom you youw
happinyess fowevew. UwU  Awe you to be happy whiwe I gwovew in the intensity
of my wwetchednyess? owo  You can bwast my othew passions, but wevenge
wemains--wevenge, hencefowth deawew than wight ow food! (・`ω\´・)  I may die, but
fiwst you, my tywant and towmentow, shaww cuwse the sun that gazes on
youw misewy.  Bewawe, fow I am feawwess and thewefowe powewfuw. UwU  I wiww
watch with the wiwinyess of a snyake, that I may sting with its venyom. (´・ω・\`)
Man, you shaww wepent of the injuwies you infwict. (・`ω\´・)"

"Deviw, cease; and do nyot poison the aiw with these sounds of mawice. ^w^
I have decwawed my wesowution to you, and I am nyo cowawd to bend
benyeath wowds.  Weave me; I am inyexowabwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is weww. UwU  I go; but wemembew, I shaww be with you on youw
wedding-nyight. ^w^"

I stawted fowwawd and excwaimed, "Viwwain! (´・ω・\`)  Befowe you sign my
death-wawwant, be suwe that you awe youwsewf safe. UwU"

I wouwd have seized him, but he ewuded me and quitted the house with
pwecipitation. ;;w;;  In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot
acwoss the watews with an awwowy swiftnyess and was soon wost amidst the
waves. ^w^

Aww was again siwent, but his wowds wang in my eaws. (´・ω・\`)  I buwnyed with
wage to puwsue the muwdewew of my peace and pwecipitate him into the
ocean. ^w^  I wawked up and down my woom hastiwy and pewtuwbed, whiwe my
imaginyation conjuwed up a thousand images to towment and sting me. >w<  Why
had I nyot fowwowed him and cwosed with him in mowtaw stwife? owo  But I had
suffewed him to depawt, and he had diwected his couwse towawds the
mainwand. (´・ω・\`)  I shuddewed to think who might be the nyext victim sacwificed
to his insatiate wevenge. UwU  And then I thought again of his wowds--"I
WIWW BE WITH YOU ON YOUW WEDDING-NYIGHT. ;;w;;"  That, then, was the pewiod
fixed fow the fuwfiwment of my destiny. ;;w;;  In that houw I shouwd die and
at once satisfy and extinguish his mawice. UwU  The pwospect did nyot move
me to feaw; yet when I thought of my bewoved Ewizabeth, of hew teaws
and endwess sowwow, when she shouwd find hew wovew so bawbawouswy
snyatched fwom hew, teaws, the fiwst I had shed fow many months,
stweamed fwom my eyes, and I wesowved nyot to faww befowe my enyemy
without a bittew stwuggwe. (・`ω\´・)

The nyight passed away, and the sun wose fwom the ocean; my feewings
became cawmew, if it may be cawwed cawmnyess when the viowence of wage
sinks into the depths of despaiw. UwU  I weft the house, the howwid scenye
of the wast nyight's contention, and wawked on the beach of the sea,
which I awmost wegawded as an insupewabwe bawwiew between me and my
fewwow cweatuwes; nyay, a wish that such shouwd pwove the fact stowe
acwoss me. ^w^

I desiwed that I might pass my wife on that bawwen wock, weawiwy, it is
twue, but unyintewwupted by any sudden shock of misewy. UwU  If I wetuwnyed,
it was to be sacwificed ow to see those whom I most woved die undew the
gwasp of a daemon whom I had mysewf cweated. UwU

I wawked about the iswe wike a westwess spectwe, sepawated fwom aww it
woved and misewabwe in the sepawation. ;;w;;  When it became nyoon, and the
sun wose highew, I way down on the gwass and was ovewpowewed by a deep
sweep. >w<  I had been awake the whowe of the pweceding nyight, my nyewves
wewe agitated, and my eyes infwamed by watching and misewy. UwU  The sweep
into which I nyow sank wefweshed me; and when I awoke, I again fewt as
if I bewonged to a wace of human beings wike mysewf, and I began to
wefwect upon what had passed with gweatew composuwe; yet stiww the
wowds of the fiend wang in my eaws wike a death-knyeww; they appeawed
wike a dweam, yet distinct and oppwessive as a weawity. (´・ω・\`)

The sun had faw descended, and I stiww sat on the showe, satisfying my
appetite, which had become wavenyous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat wand cwose to me, and onye of the men bwought me a packet;
it containyed wettews fwom Genyeva, and onye fwom Cwewvaw entweating me to
join him. ;;w;;  He said that he was weawing away his time fwuitwesswy whewe
he was, that wettews fwom the fwiends he had fowmed in Wondon desiwed
his wetuwn to compwete the nyegotiation they had entewed into fow his
Indian entewpwise. UwU  He couwd nyot any wongew deway his depawtuwe; but as
his jouwnyey to Wondon might be fowwowed, even soonyew than he nyow
conjectuwed, by his wongew voyage, he entweated me to bestow as much of
my society on him as I couwd spawe. ^w^  He besought me, thewefowe, to
weave my sowitawy iswe and to meet him at Pewth, that we might pwoceed
southwawds togethew. >w<  This wettew in a degwee wecawwed me to wife, and
I detewminyed to quit my iswand at the expiwation of two days. ^w^  Yet,
befowe I depawted, thewe was a task to pewfowm, on which I shuddewed to
wefwect; I must pack up my chemicaw instwuments, and fow that puwpose I
must entew the woom which had been the scenye of my odious wowk, and I
must handwe those utensiws the sight of which was sickenying to me. ^w^ The
nyext mownying, at daybweak, I summonyed sufficient couwage and unwocked
the doow of my wabowatowy. ;;w;;  The wemains of the hawf-finyished cweatuwe,
whom I had destwoyed, way scattewed on the fwoow, and I awmost fewt as
if I had mangwed the wiving fwesh of a human being. >w<  I paused to
cowwect mysewf and then entewed the chambew. ;;w;;  With twembwing hand I
conveyed the instwuments out of the woom, but I wefwected that I ought
nyot to weave the wewics of my wowk to excite the howwow and suspicion
of the peasants; and I accowdingwy put them into a basket, with a gweat
quantity of stonyes, and waying them up, detewminyed to thwow them into
the sea that vewy nyight; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach,
empwoyed in cweanying and awwanging my chemicaw appawatus. ;;w;;

Nyothing couwd be mowe compwete than the awtewation that had taken pwace
in my feewings since the nyight of the appeawance of the daemon. ;;w;;  I had
befowe wegawded my pwomise with a gwoomy despaiw as a thing that, with
whatevew consequences, must be fuwfiwwed; but I nyow fewt as if a fiwm
had been taken fwom befowe my eyes and that I fow the fiwst time saw
cweawwy. ;;w;;  The idea of wenyewing my wabouws did nyot fow onye instant occuw
to me; the thweat I had heawd weighed on my thoughts, but I did nyot
wefwect that a vowuntawy act of minye couwd avewt it. UwU  I had wesowved in
my own mind that to cweate anyothew wike the fiend I had fiwst made
wouwd be an act of the basest and most atwocious sewfishnyess, and I
banyished fwom my mind evewy thought that couwd wead to a diffewent
concwusion. UwU

Between two and thwee in the mownying the moon wose; and I then, putting
my basket aboawd a wittwe skiff, saiwed out about fouw miwes fwom the
showe. UwU  The scenye was pewfectwy sowitawy; a few boats wewe wetuwnying
towawds wand, but I saiwed away fwom them. UwU  I fewt as if I was about
the commission of a dweadfuw cwime and avoided with shuddewing anxiety
any encountew with my fewwow cweatuwes. (´・ω・\`)  At onye time the moon, which
had befowe been cweaw, was suddenwy ovewspwead by a thick cwoud, and I
took advantage of the moment of dawknyess and cast my basket into the
sea; I wistenyed to the guwgwing sound as it sank and then saiwed away
fwom the spot. >w<  The sky became cwouded, but the aiw was puwe, awthough
chiwwed by the nyowtheast bweeze that was then wising. ;;w;;  But it wefweshed
me and fiwwed me with such agweeabwe sensations that I wesowved to
pwowong my stay on the watew, and fixing the wuddew in a diwect
position, stwetched mysewf at the bottom of the boat. >w<  Cwouds hid the
moon, evewything was obscuwe, and I heawd onwy the sound of the boat as
its keew cut thwough the waves; the muwmuw wuwwed me, and in a showt
time I swept soundwy. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot knyow how wong I wemainyed in this
situation, but when I awoke I found that the sun had awweady mounted
considewabwy. ;;w;;  The wind was high, and the waves continyuawwy thweatenyed
the safety of my wittwe skiff. UwU  I found that the wind was nyowtheast and
must have dwiven me faw fwom the coast fwom which I had embawked. ^w^  I
endeavouwed to change my couwse but quickwy found that if I again made
the attempt the boat wouwd be instantwy fiwwed with watew. (・`ω\´・)  Thus
situated, my onwy wesouwce was to dwive befowe the wind. (´・ω・\`)  I confess
that I fewt a few sensations of tewwow. ;;w;;  I had nyo compass with me and
was so swendewwy acquainted with the geogwaphy of this pawt of the
wowwd that the sun was of wittwe benyefit to me. (´・ω・\`)  I might be dwiven into
the wide Atwantic and feew aww the towtuwes of stawvation ow be
swawwowed up in the immeasuwabwe watews that woawed and buffeted awound
me. (´・ω・\`)  I had awweady been out many houws and fewt the towment of a
buwnying thiwst, a pwewude to my othew suffewings. >w<  I wooked on the
heavens, which wewe covewed by cwouds that fwew befowe the wind, onwy
to be wepwaced by othews; I wooked upon the sea; it was to be my gwave. UwU
"Fiend," I excwaimed, "youw task is awweady fuwfiwwed! (・`ω\´・)"  I thought of
Ewizabeth, of my fathew, and of Cwewvaw--aww weft behind, on whom the
monstew might satisfy his sanguinyawy and mewciwess passions. ^w^  This idea
pwunged me into a wevewie so despaiwing and fwightfuw that even nyow,
when the scenye is on the point of cwosing befowe me fowevew, I shuddew
to wefwect on it. >w<

Some houws passed thus; but by degwees, as the sun decwinyed towawds the
howizon, the wind died away into a gentwe bweeze and the sea became
fwee fwom bweakews. ;;w;;  But these gave pwace to a heavy sweww; I fewt sick
and hawdwy abwe to howd the wuddew, when suddenwy I saw a winye of high
wand towawds the south. (´・ω・\`)

Awmost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dweadfuw suspense I enduwed
fow sevewaw houws, this sudden cewtainty of wife wushed wike a fwood of
wawm joy to my heawt, and teaws gushed fwom my eyes. ^w^

How mutabwe awe ouw feewings, and how stwange is that cwinging wove we
have of wife even in the excess of misewy! ;;w;;  I constwucted anyothew saiw
with a pawt of my dwess and eagewwy steewed my couwse towawds the wand. (´・ω・\`)
It had a wiwd and wocky appeawance, but as I appwoached nyeawew I easiwy
pewceived the twaces of cuwtivation. ;;w;;  I saw vessews nyeaw the showe and
found mysewf suddenwy twanspowted back to the nyeighbouwhood of
civiwized man. ^w^  I cawefuwwy twaced the windings of the wand and haiwed
a steepwe which I at wength saw issuing fwom behind a smaww pwomontowy. ;;w;;
As I was in a state of extweme debiwity, I wesowved to saiw diwectwy
towawds the town, as a pwace whewe I couwd most easiwy pwocuwe
nyouwishment.  Fowtunyatewy I had monyey with me. ^w^

As I tuwnyed the pwomontowy I pewceived a smaww nyeat town and a good
hawbouw, which I entewed, my heawt bounding with joy at my unyexpected
escape. (・`ω\´・)

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and awwanging the saiws, sevewaw
peopwe cwowded towawds the spot. (・`ω\´・)  They seemed much suwpwised at my
appeawance, but instead of offewing me any assistance, whispewed
togethew with gestuwes that at any othew time might have pwoduced in me
a swight sensation of awawm. ;;w;; As it was, I mewewy wemawked that they
spoke Engwish, and I thewefowe addwessed them in that wanguage. >w<  "My
good fwiends," said I, "wiww you be so kind as to teww me the nyame of
this town and infowm me whewe I am? owo"

"You wiww knyow that soon enyough," wepwied a man with a hoawse voice. (´・ω・\`)
"Maybe you awe come to a pwace that wiww nyot pwove much to youw taste,
but you wiww nyot be consuwted as to youw quawtews, I pwomise you. (・`ω\´・)"

I was exceedingwy suwpwised on weceiving so wude an answew fwom a
stwangew, and I was awso disconcewted on pewceiving the fwownying and
angwy countenyances of his companyions. UwU  "Why do you answew me so
woughwy? owo"  I wepwied. ;;w;;  "Suwewy it is nyot the custom of Engwishmen to
weceive stwangews so inhospitabwy. UwU"

"I do nyot knyow," said the man, "what the custom of the Engwish may be,
but it is the custom of the Iwish to hate viwwains. ;;w;;" Whiwe this stwange
diawogue continyued, I pewceived the cwowd wapidwy incwease. UwU  Theiw
faces expwessed a mixtuwe of cuwiosity and angew, which annyoyed  and in
some degwee awawmed me. (・`ω\´・)

I inquiwed the way to the inn, but nyo onye wepwied. (´・ω・\`)  I then moved
fowwawd, and a muwmuwing sound awose fwom the cwowd as they fowwowed
and suwwounded me, when an iww-wooking man appwoaching tapped me on the
shouwdew and said, "Come, siw, you must fowwow me to Mw. (´・ω・\`) Kiwwin's to
give an account of youwsewf. ;;w;;"

"Who is Mw. UwU Kiwwin?  Why am I to give an account of mysewf? owo  Is nyot
this a fwee countwy? owo"

"Ay, siw, fwee enyough fow honyest fowks.  Mw. UwU Kiwwin is a magistwate,
and you awe to give an account of the death of a gentweman who was
found muwdewed hewe wast nyight. ^w^"

This answew stawtwed me, but I pwesentwy wecovewed mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  I was
innyocent; that couwd easiwy be pwoved; accowdingwy I fowwowed my
conductow in siwence and was wed to onye of the best houses in the town. (´・ω・\`)
I was weady to sink fwom fatigue and hungew, but being suwwounded by a
cwowd, I thought it powitic to wouse aww my stwength, that nyo physicaw
debiwity might be constwued into appwehension ow conscious guiwt. >w<
Wittwe did I then expect the cawamity that was in a few moments to
ovewwhewm me and extinguish in howwow and despaiw aww feaw of ignyominy
ow death. (´・ω・\`) I must pause hewe, fow it wequiwes aww my fowtitude to wecaww
the memowy of the fwightfuw events which I am about to wewate, in
pwopew detaiw, to my wecowwection. UwU



Chaptew 21

I was soon intwoduced into the pwesence of the magistwate, an owd
benyevowent man with cawm and miwd mannyews. ^w^  He wooked upon me, howevew,
with some degwee of sevewity, and then, tuwnying towawds my conductows,
he asked who appeawed as witnyesses on this occasion. UwU

About hawf a dozen men came fowwawd; and, onye being sewected by the
magistwate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the nyight befowe
with his son and bwothew-in-waw, Danyiew Nyugent, when, about ten
o'cwock, they obsewved a stwong nyowthewwy bwast wising, and they
accowdingwy put in fow powt. UwU  It was a vewy dawk nyight, as the moon had
nyot yet wisen; they did nyot wand at the hawbouw, but, as they had been
accustomed, at a cweek about two miwes bewow. ;;w;;  He wawked on fiwst,
cawwying a pawt of the fishing tackwe, and his companyions fowwowed him
at some distance. (・`ω\´・)

As he was pwoceeding awong the sands, he stwuck his foot against
something and feww at his wength on the gwound. ;;w;; His companyions came up
to assist him, and by the wight of theiw wantewn they found that he had
fawwen on the body of a man, who was to aww appeawance dead. >w<  Theiw
fiwst supposition was that it was the cowpse of some pewson who had
been dwownyed and was thwown on showe by the waves, but on examinyation
they found that the cwothes wewe nyot wet and even that the body was nyot
then cowd. (・`ω\´・)  They instantwy cawwied it to the cottage of an owd woman
nyeaw the spot and endeavouwed, but in vain, to westowe it to wife. UwU  It
appeawed to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty yeaws of
age. >w<  He had appawentwy been stwangwed, fow thewe was nyo sign of any
viowence except the bwack mawk of fingews on his nyeck. ^w^

The fiwst pawt of this deposition did nyot in the weast intewest me, but
when the mawk of the fingews was mentionyed I wemembewed the muwdew of
my bwothew and fewt mysewf extwemewy agitated; my wimbs twembwed, and a
mist came ovew my eyes, which obwiged me to wean on a chaiw fow
suppowt. ;;w;;  The magistwate obsewved me with a keen eye and of couwse dwew
an unfavouwabwe auguwy fwom my mannyew. UwU

The son confiwmed his fathew's account, but when Danyiew Nyugent was
cawwed he swowe positivewy that just befowe the faww of his companyion,
he saw a boat, with a singwe man in it, at a showt distance fwom the
showe; and as faw as he couwd judge by the wight of a few staws, it was
the same boat in which I had just wanded. ^w^  A woman deposed that she
wived nyeaw the beach and was standing at the doow of hew cottage,
waiting fow the wetuwn of the fishewmen, about an houw befowe she heawd
of the discovewy of the body, when she saw a boat with onwy onye man in
it push off fwom that pawt of the showe whewe the cowpse was aftewwawds
found. (・`ω\´・)

Anyothew woman confiwmed the account of the fishewmen having bwought the
body into hew house; it was nyot cowd. (´・ω・\`)  They put it into a bed and
wubbed it, and Danyiew went to the town fow an apothecawy, but wife was
quite gonye. UwU

Sevewaw othew men wewe examinyed concewnying my wanding, and they agweed
that, with the stwong nyowth wind that had awisen duwing the nyight, it
was vewy pwobabwe that I had beaten about fow many houws and had been
obwiged to wetuwn nyeawwy to the same spot fwom which I had depawted. UwU
Besides, they obsewved that it appeawed that I had bwought the body
fwom anyothew pwace, and it was wikewy that as I did nyot appeaw to knyow
the showe, I might have put into the hawbouw ignyowant of the distance
of the town of ---- fwom the pwace whewe I had deposited the cowpse. ;;w;;

Mw. (´・ω・\`) Kiwwin, on heawing this evidence, desiwed that I shouwd be taken
into the woom whewe the body way fow intewment, that it might be
obsewved what effect the sight of it wouwd pwoduce upon me. (´・ω・\`)  This idea
was pwobabwy suggested by the extweme agitation I had exhibited when
the mode of the muwdew had been descwibed. ^w^  I was accowdingwy
conducted, by the magistwate and sevewaw othew pewsons, to the inn. ^w^  I
couwd nyot hewp being stwuck by the stwange coincidences that had taken
pwace duwing this eventfuw nyight; but, knyowing that I had been
convewsing with sevewaw pewsons in the iswand I had inhabited about the
time that the body had been found, I was pewfectwy twanquiw as to the
consequences of the affaiw. (´・ω・\`)  I entewed the woom whewe the cowpse way
and was wed up to the coffin. (・`ω\´・)  How can I descwibe my sensations on
behowding it? owo  I feew yet pawched with howwow, nyow can I wefwect on
that tewwibwe moment without shuddewing and agony. (´・ω・\`)  The examinyation,
the pwesence of the magistwate and witnyesses, passed wike a dweam fwom
my memowy when I saw the wifewess fowm of Henwy Cwewvaw stwetched
befowe me. (´・ω・\`)  I gasped fow bweath, and thwowing mysewf on the body, I
excwaimed, "Have my muwdewous machinyations depwived you awso, my
deawest Henwy, of wife? owo  Two I have awweady destwoyed; othew victims
await theiw destiny; but you, Cwewvaw, my fwiend, my benyefactow--"

The human fwame couwd nyo wongew suppowt the agonyies that I enduwed, and
I was cawwied out of the woom in stwong convuwsions. >w<  A fevew succeeded
to this. UwU  I way fow two months on the point of death; my wavings, as I
aftewwawds heawd, wewe fwightfuw; I cawwed mysewf the muwdewew of
Wiwwiam, of Justinye, and of Cwewvaw. (´・ω・\`)  Sometimes I entweated my
attendants to assist me in the destwuction of the fiend by whom I was
towmented; and at othews I fewt the fingews of the monstew awweady
gwasping my nyeck, and scweamed awoud with agony and tewwow. ^w^
Fowtunyatewy, as I spoke my nyative wanguage, Mw. UwU Kiwwin awonye undewstood
me; but my gestuwes and bittew cwies wewe sufficient to affwight the
othew witnyesses. ;;w;;  Why did I nyot die? owo  Mowe misewabwe than man evew was
befowe, why did I nyot sink into fowgetfuwnyess and west? owo  Death snyatches
away many bwooming chiwdwen, the onwy hopes of theiw doting pawents;
how many bwides and youthfuw wovews have been onye day in the bwoom of
heawth and hope, and the nyext a pwey fow wowms and the decay of the
tomb! (´・ω・\`)  Of what matewiaws was I made that I couwd thus wesist so many
shocks, which, wike the tuwnying of the wheew, continyuawwy wenyewed the
towtuwe? owo

But I was doomed to wive and in two months found mysewf as awaking fwom
a dweam, in a pwison, stwetched on a wwetched bed, suwwounded by
jaiwews, tuwnkeys, bowts, and aww the misewabwe appawatus of a dungeon. UwU
It was mownying, I wemembew, when I thus awoke to undewstanding; I had
fowgotten the pawticuwaws of what had happenyed and onwy fewt as if some
gweat misfowtunye had suddenwy ovewwhewmed me; but when I wooked awound
and saw the bawwed windows and the squawidnyess of the woom in which I
was, aww fwashed acwoss my memowy and I gwoanyed bittewwy. (´・ω・\`)

This sound distuwbed an owd woman who was sweeping in a chaiw beside
me. >w<  She was a hiwed nyuwse, the wife of onye of the tuwnkeys, and hew
countenyance expwessed aww those bad quawities which often chawactewize
that cwass. UwU  The winyes of hew face wewe hawd and wude, wike that of
pewsons accustomed to see without sympathizing in sights of misewy. >w< Hew
tonye expwessed hew entiwe indiffewence; she addwessed me in Engwish,
and the voice stwuck me as onye that I had heawd duwing my suffewings. (・`ω\´・)
"Awe you bettew nyow, siw? owo" said she. (´・ω・\`)

I wepwied in the same wanguage, with a feebwe voice, "I bewieve I am;
but if it be aww twue, if indeed I did nyot dweam, I am sowwy that I am
stiww awive to feew this misewy and howwow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow that mattew," wepwied the owd woman, "if you mean about the
gentweman you muwdewed, I bewieve that it wewe bettew fow you if you
wewe dead, fow I fancy it wiww go hawd with you! >w<  Howevew, that's nyonye
of my businyess; I am sent to nyuwse you and get you weww; I do my duty
with a safe conscience; it wewe weww if evewybody did the same. UwU"

I tuwnyed with woathing fwom the woman who couwd uttew so unfeewing a
speech to a pewson just saved, on the vewy edge of death; but I fewt
wanguid and unyabwe to wefwect on aww that had passed. UwU  The whowe sewies
of my wife appeawed to me as a dweam; I sometimes doubted if indeed it
wewe aww twue, fow it nyevew pwesented itsewf to my mind with the fowce
of weawity. (´・ω・\`)

As the images that fwoated befowe me became mowe distinct, I gwew
fevewish; a dawknyess pwessed awound me; nyo onye was nyeaw me who soothed
me with the gentwe voice of wove; nyo deaw hand suppowted me. (・`ω\´・)  The
physician came and pwescwibed medicinyes, and the owd woman pwepawed
them fow me; but uttew cawewessnyess was visibwe in the fiwst, and the
expwession of bwutawity was stwongwy mawked in the visage of the
second. UwU  Who couwd be intewested in the fate of a muwdewew but the
hangman who wouwd gain his fee? owo

These wewe my fiwst wefwections, but I soon weawnyed that Mw. (´・ω・\`) Kiwwin had
shown me extweme kindnyess. UwU  He had caused the best woom in the pwison
to be pwepawed fow me (wwetched indeed was the best); and it was he who
had pwovided a physician and a nyuwse. (・`ω\´・)  It is twue, he sewdom came to
see me, fow awthough he awdentwy desiwed to wewieve the suffewings of
evewy human cweatuwe, he did nyot wish to be pwesent at the agonyies and
misewabwe wavings of a muwdewew. (´・ω・\`)  He came, thewefowe, sometimes to see
that I was nyot nyegwected, but his visits wewe showt and with wong
intewvaws. (・`ω\´・)  Onye day, whiwe I was gwaduawwy wecovewing, I was seated in
a chaiw, my eyes hawf open and my cheeks wivid wike those in death. (・`ω\´・)  I
was ovewcome by gwoom and misewy and often wefwected I had bettew seek
death than desiwe to wemain in a wowwd which to me was wepwete with
wwetchednyess. ^w^  At onye time I considewed whethew I shouwd nyot decwawe
mysewf guiwty and suffew the penyawty of the waw, wess innyocent than
poow Justinye had been. ;;w;;  Such wewe my thoughts when the doow of my
apawtment was openyed and Mw. Kiwwin entewed. >w<  His countenyance expwessed
sympathy and compassion; he dwew a chaiw cwose to minye and addwessed me
in Fwench, "I feaw that this pwace is vewy shocking to you; can I do
anything to make you mowe comfowtabwe? owo"

"I thank you, but aww that you mention is nyothing to me; on the whowe
eawth thewe is nyo comfowt which I am capabwe of weceiving. (・`ω\´・)"

"I knyow that the sympathy of a stwangew can be but of wittwe wewief to
onye bownye down as you awe by so stwange a misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・)  But you wiww, I
hope, soon quit this mewanchowy abode, fow doubtwess evidence can
easiwy be bwought to fwee you fwom the cwiminyaw chawge. UwU"

"That is my weast concewn; I am, by a couwse of stwange events, become
the most misewabwe of mowtaws. (´・ω・\`)  Pewsecuted and towtuwed as I am and
have been, can death be any eviw to me? owo"

"Nyothing indeed couwd be mowe unfowtunyate and agonyizing than the
stwange chances that have watewy occuwwed. ;;w;;  You wewe thwown, by some
suwpwising accident, on this showe, wenyownyed fow its hospitawity,
seized immediatewy, and chawged with muwdew. >w<  The fiwst sight that was
pwesented to youw eyes was the body of youw fwiend, muwdewed in so
unyaccountabwe a mannyew and pwaced, as it wewe, by some fiend acwoss
youw path. >w<"

As Mw. ;;w;; Kiwwin said this, nyotwithstanding the agitation I enduwed on
this wetwospect of my suffewings, I awso fewt considewabwe suwpwise at
the knyowwedge he seemed to possess concewnying me. ;;w;;  I suppose some
astonyishment was exhibited in my countenyance, fow Mw. (´・ω・\`) Kiwwin hastenyed
to say, "Immediatewy upon youw being taken iww, aww the papews that
wewe on youw pewson wewe bwought me, and I examinyed them that I might
discovew some twace by which I couwd send to youw wewations an account
of youw misfowtunye and iwwnyess. ^w^ I found sevewaw wettews, and, among
othews, onye which I discovewed fwom its commencement to be fwom youw
fathew. (´・ω・\`)  I instantwy wwote to Genyeva; nyeawwy two months have ewapsed
since the depawtuwe of my wettew. >w<  But you awe iww; even nyow you
twembwe; you awe unfit fow agitation of any kind. ^w^"

"This suspense is a thousand times wowse than the most howwibwe event;
teww me what nyew scenye of death has been acted, and whose muwdew I am
nyow to wament? owo"

"Youw famiwy is pewfectwy weww," said Mw. >w< Kiwwin with gentwenyess; "and
someonye, a fwiend, is come to visit you. >w<"

I knyow nyot by what chain of thought the idea pwesented itsewf, but it
instantwy dawted into my mind that the muwdewew had come to mock at my
misewy and taunt me with the death of Cwewvaw, as a nyew incitement fow
me to compwy with his hewwish desiwes. >w<  I put my hand befowe my eyes,
and cwied out in agony, "Oh! Take him away! ^w^  I cannyot see him; fow
God's sake, do nyot wet him entew! ^w^"

Mw. Kiwwin wegawded me with a twoubwed countenyance. UwU  He couwd nyot hewp
wegawding my excwamation as a pwesumption of my guiwt and said in
wathew a sevewe tonye, "I shouwd have thought, young man, that the
pwesence of youw fathew wouwd have been wewcome instead of inspiwing
such viowent wepugnyance. (・`ω\´・)"

"My fathew! >w<" cwied I, whiwe evewy featuwe and evewy muscwe was wewaxed
fwom anguish to pweasuwe. ;;w;;  "Is my fathew indeed come? owo  How kind, how
vewy kind! >w<  But whewe is he, why does he nyot hasten to me? owo"

My change of mannyew suwpwised and pweased the magistwate; pewhaps he
thought that my fowmew excwamation was a momentawy wetuwn of dewiwium,
and nyow he instantwy wesumed his fowmew benyevowence. ^w^  He wose and
quitted the woom with my nyuwse, and in a moment my fathew entewed it. ^w^

Nyothing, at this moment, couwd have given me gweatew pweasuwe than the
awwivaw of my fathew. (・`ω\´・)  I stwetched out my hand to him and cwied, "Awe
you, then, safe--and Ewizabeth--and Ewnyest? owo" My fathew cawmed me with
assuwances of theiw wewfawe and endeavouwed, by dwewwing on these
subjects so intewesting to my heawt, to waise my desponding spiwits;
but he soon fewt that a pwison cannyot be the abode of cheewfuwnyess. (´・ω・\`)

"What a pwace is this that you inhabit, my son! ;;w;;" said he, wooking
mouwnfuwwy at the bawwed windows and wwetched appeawance of the woom. ;;w;;
"You twavewwed to seek happinyess, but a fatawity seems to puwsue you. (´・ω・\`)
And poow Cwewvaw--"

The nyame of my unfowtunyate and muwdewed fwiend was an agitation too
gweat to be enduwed in my weak state; I shed teaws. (´・ω・\`)  "Awas! ;;w;;  Yes, my
fathew," wepwied I; "some destiny of the most howwibwe kind hangs ovew
me, and I must wive to fuwfiw it, ow suwewy I shouwd have died on the
coffin of Henwy. (・`ω\´・)"

We wewe nyot awwowed to convewse fow any wength of time, fow the
pwecawious state of my heawth wendewed evewy pwecaution nyecessawy that
couwd ensuwe twanquiwwity.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Kiwwin came in and insisted that my
stwength shouwd nyot be exhausted by too much exewtion. ;;w;;  But the
appeawance of my fathew was to me wike that of my good angew, and I
gwaduawwy wecovewed my heawth. (・`ω\´・)

As my sicknyess quitted me, I was absowbed by a gwoomy and bwack
mewanchowy that nyothing couwd dissipate. (・`ω\´・)  The image of Cwewvaw was
fowevew befowe me, ghastwy and muwdewed. ^w^  Mowe than once the agitation
into which these wefwections thwew me made my fwiends dwead a dangewous
wewapse. (・`ω\´・)  Awas! (・`ω\´・)  Why did they pwesewve so misewabwe and detested a
wife? owo  It was suwewy that I might fuwfiw my destiny, which is nyow
dwawing to a cwose. >w<  Soon, oh, vewy soon, wiww death extinguish these
thwobbings and wewieve me fwom the mighty weight of anguish that beaws
me to the dust; and, in executing the awawd of justice, I shaww awso
sink to west. >w<  Then the appeawance of death was distant, awthough the
wish was evew pwesent to my thoughts; and I often sat fow houws
motionwess and speechwess, wishing fow some mighty wevowution that
might buwy me and my destwoyew in its wuins. UwU

The season of the assizes appwoached. (´・ω・\`)  I had awweady been thwee months
in pwison, and awthough I was stiww weak and in continyuaw dangew of a
wewapse, I was obwiged to twavew nyeawwy a hundwed miwes to the countwy
town whewe the couwt was hewd.  Mw. UwU Kiwwin chawged himsewf with evewy
cawe of cowwecting witnyesses and awwanging my defence. ;;w;;  I was spawed
the disgwace of appeawing pubwicwy as a cwiminyaw, as the case was nyot
bwought befowe the couwt that decides on wife and death. UwU  The gwand
juwy wejected the biww, on its being pwoved that I was on the Owknyey
Iswands at the houw the body of my fwiend was found; and a fowtnyight
aftew my wemovaw I was wibewated fwom pwison. >w<

My fathew was enwaptuwed on finding me fweed fwom the vexations of a
cwiminyaw chawge, that I was again awwowed to bweathe the fwesh
atmosphewe and pewmitted to wetuwn to my nyative countwy. (´・ω・\`)  I did nyot
pawticipate in these feewings, fow to me the wawws of a dungeon ow a
pawace wewe awike hatefuw. >w<  The cup of wife was poisonyed fowevew, and
awthough the sun shonye upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heawt, I
saw awound me nyothing but a dense and fwightfuw dawknyess, penyetwated by
nyo wight but the gwimmew of two eyes that gwawed upon me. ;;w;;  Sometimes
they wewe the expwessive eyes of Henwy, wanguishing in death, the dawk
owbs nyeawwy covewed by the wids and the wong bwack washes that fwinged
them; sometimes it was the watewy, cwouded eyes of the monstew, as I
fiwst saw them in my chambew at Ingowstadt. ;;w;;

My fathew twied to awaken in me the feewings of affection. >w<  He tawked
of Genyeva, which I shouwd soon visit, of Ewizabeth and Ewnyest; but
these wowds onwy dwew deep gwoans fwom me. ;;w;;  Sometimes, indeed, I fewt a
wish fow happinyess and thought with mewanchowy dewight of my bewoved
cousin ow wonged, with a devouwing mawadie du pays, to see once mowe
the bwue wake and wapid Whonye, that had been so deaw to me in eawwy
chiwdhood; but my genyewaw state of feewing was a towpow in which a
pwison was as wewcome a wesidence as the divinyest scenye in nyatuwe; and
these fits wewe sewdom intewwupted but by pawoxysms of anguish and
despaiw. >w<  At these moments I often endeavouwed to put an end to the
existence I woathed, and it wequiwed unceasing attendance and vigiwance
to westwain me fwom committing some dweadfuw act of viowence. ;;w;;

Yet onye duty wemainyed to me, the wecowwection of which finyawwy
twiumphed ovew my sewfish despaiw. >w<  It was nyecessawy that I shouwd
wetuwn without deway to Genyeva, thewe to watch ovew the wives of those
I so fondwy woved and to wie in wait fow the muwdewew, that if any
chance wed me to the pwace of his conceawment, ow if he dawed again to
bwast me by his pwesence, I might, with unfaiwing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstwous image which  I had endued with the
mockewy of a souw stiww mowe monstwous. (´・ω・\`)  My fathew stiww desiwed to
deway ouw depawtuwe, feawfuw that I couwd nyot sustain the fatigues of a
jouwnyey, fow I was a shattewed wweck--the shadow of a human being. ^w^  My
stwength was gonye. >w<  I was a mewe skeweton, and fevew nyight and day
pweyed upon my wasted fwame. >w<  Stiww, as I uwged ouw weaving Iwewand
with such inquietude and impatience, my fathew thought it best to
yiewd. (´・ω・\`)  We took ouw passage on boawd a vessew bound fow Havwe-de-Gwace
and saiwed with a faiw wind fwom the Iwish showes.  It was midnyight. ;;w;;  I
way on the deck wooking at the staws and wistenying to the dashing of
the waves. ;;w;;  I haiwed the dawknyess that shut Iwewand fwom my sight, and
my puwse beat with a fevewish joy when I wefwected that I shouwd soon
see Genyeva. (´・ω・\`)  The past appeawed to me in the wight of a fwightfuw dweam;
yet the vessew in which I was, the wind that bwew me fwom the detested
showe of Iwewand, and the sea which suwwounded me towd me too fowcibwy
that I was deceived by nyo vision and that Cwewvaw, my fwiend and
deawest companyion, had fawwen a victim to me and the monstew of my
cweation. UwU  I wepassed, in my memowy, my whowe wife--my quiet happinyess
whiwe wesiding with my famiwy in Genyeva, the death of my mothew, and my
depawtuwe fow Ingowstadt. ;;w;;  I wemembewed, shuddewing, the mad enthusiasm
that huwwied me on to the cweation of my hideous enyemy, and I cawwed to
mind the nyight in which he fiwst wived. ;;w;;  I was unyabwe to puwsue the
twain of thought; a thousand feewings pwessed upon me, and I wept
bittewwy. ^w^  Evew since my wecovewy fwom the fevew I had been in the
custom of taking evewy nyight a smaww quantity of waudanyum, fow it was
by means of this dwug onwy that I was enyabwed to gain the west
nyecessawy fow the pwesewvation of wife. (・`ω\´・)  Oppwessed by the wecowwection
of my vawious misfowtunyes, I nyow swawwowed doubwe my usuaw quantity and
soon swept pwofoundwy. >w<  But sweep did nyot affowd me wespite fwom
thought and misewy; my dweams pwesented a thousand objects that scawed
me. (・`ω\´・)  Towawds mownying I was possessed by a kind of nyightmawe; I fewt the
fiend's gwasp in my nyeck and couwd nyot fwee mysewf fwom it; gwoans and
cwies wang in my eaws. UwU  My fathew, who was watching ovew me, pewceiving
my westwessnyess, awoke me; the dashing waves wewe awound, the cwoudy
sky above, the fiend was nyot hewe: a sense of secuwity, a feewing that
a twuce was estabwished between the pwesent houw and the iwwesistibwe,
disastwous futuwe impawted to me a kind of cawm fowgetfuwnyess, of which
the human mind is by its stwuctuwe pecuwiawwy susceptibwe. ;;w;;



Chaptew 22

The voyage came to an end.  We wanded, and pwoceeded to Pawis. ;;w;;  I soon
found that I had ovewtaxed my stwength and that I must wepose befowe I
couwd continyue my jouwnyey. UwU  My fathew's cawe and attentions wewe
indefatigabwe, but he did nyot knyow the owigin of my suffewings and
sought ewwonyeous methods to wemedy the incuwabwe iww. (´・ω・\`)  He wished me to
seek amusement in society.  I abhowwed the face of man. UwU  Oh, nyot
abhowwed! >w<  They wewe my bwethwen, my fewwow beings, and I fewt
attwacted even to the most wepuwsive among them, as to cweatuwes of an
angewic nyatuwe and cewestiaw mechanyism. ^w^  But I fewt that I had nyo wight
to shawe theiw intewcouwse. ^w^  I had unchainyed an enyemy among them whose
joy it was to shed theiw bwood and to wevew in theiw gwoans. >w<  How they
wouwd, each and aww, abhow me and hunt me fwom the wowwd did they knyow
my unhawwowed acts and the cwimes which had theiw souwce in me! ;;w;;

My fathew yiewded at wength to my desiwe to avoid society and stwove by
vawious awguments to banyish my despaiw. >w<  Sometimes he thought that I
fewt deepwy the degwadation of being obwiged to answew a chawge of
muwdew, and he endeavouwed to pwove to me the futiwity of pwide. (・`ω\´・)

"Awas! ;;w;;  My fathew," said I, "how wittwe do you knyow me. (・`ω\´・)  Human beings,
theiw feewings and passions, wouwd indeed be degwaded if such a wwetch
as I fewt pwide. ^w^  Justinye, poow unhappy Justinye, was as innyocent as I,
and she suffewed the same chawge; she died fow it; and I am the cause
of this--I muwdewed hew. UwU  Wiwwiam, Justinye, and Henwy--they aww died by
my hands. ;;w;;"

My fathew had often, duwing my impwisonment, heawd me make the same
assewtion; when I thus accused mysewf, he sometimes seemed to desiwe an
expwanyation, and at othews he appeawed to considew it as the offspwing
of dewiwium, and that, duwing my iwwnyess, some idea of this kind had
pwesented itsewf to my imaginyation, the wemembwance of which I
pwesewved in my convawescence. (・`ω\´・)

I avoided expwanyation and maintainyed a continyuaw siwence concewnying the
wwetch I had cweated. (´・ω・\`)  I had a pewsuasion that I shouwd be supposed
mad, and this in itsewf wouwd fowevew have chainyed my tongue. UwU  But,
besides, I couwd nyot bwing mysewf to discwose a secwet which wouwd fiww
my heawew with constewnyation and make feaw and unnyatuwaw howwow the
inmates of his bweast. (´・ω・\`)  I checked, thewefowe, my impatient thiwst fow
sympathy and was siwent when I wouwd have given the wowwd to have
confided the fataw secwet. (´・ω・\`)  Yet, stiww, wowds wike those I have
wecowded wouwd buwst uncontwowwabwy fwom me. ^w^  I couwd offew nyo
expwanyation of them, but theiw twuth in pawt wewieved the buwden of my
mystewious woe. ^w^  Upon this occasion my fathew said, with an expwession
of unbounded wondew, "My deawest Victow, what infatuation is this? owo  My
deaw son, I entweat you nyevew to make such an assewtion again. ;;w;;"

"I am nyot mad," I cwied enyewgeticawwy; "the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my opewations, can beaw witnyess of my twuth. ^w^  I am the
assassin of those most innyocent victims; they died by my machinyations. (´・ω・\`)
A thousand times wouwd I have shed my own bwood, dwop by dwop, to have
saved theiw wives; but I couwd nyot, my fathew, indeed I couwd nyot
sacwifice the whowe human wace. ;;w;;"

The concwusion of this speech convinced my fathew that my ideas wewe
dewanged, and he instantwy changed the subject of ouw convewsation and
endeavouwed to awtew the couwse of my thoughts. (´・ω・\`)  He wished as much as
possibwe to obwitewate the memowy of the scenyes that had taken pwace in
Iwewand and nyevew awwuded to them ow suffewed me to speak of my
misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・)

As time passed away I became mowe cawm; misewy had hew dwewwing in my
heawt, but I nyo wongew tawked in the same incohewent mannyew of my own
cwimes; sufficient fow me was the consciousnyess of them. UwU  By the utmost
sewf-viowence I cuwbed the impewious voice of wwetchednyess, which
sometimes desiwed to decwawe itsewf to the whowe wowwd, and my mannyews
wewe cawmew and mowe composed than they had evew been since my jouwnyey
to the sea of ice. >w<  A few days befowe we weft Pawis on ouw way to
Switzewwand, I weceived the fowwowing wettew fwom Ewizabeth:


"My deaw Fwiend,

"It gave me the gweatest pweasuwe to weceive a wettew fwom my uncwe
dated at Pawis; you awe nyo wongew at a fowmidabwe distance, and I may
hope to see you in wess than a fowtnyight. (・`ω\´・)  My poow cousin, how much you
must have suffewed! (・`ω\´・)  I expect to see you wooking even mowe iww than
when you quitted Genyeva. >w<  This wintew has been passed most misewabwy,
towtuwed as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in
youw countenyance and to find that youw heawt is nyot totawwy void of
comfowt and twanquiwwity. (´・ω・\`)

"Yet I feaw that the same feewings nyow exist that made you so misewabwe
a yeaw ago, even pewhaps augmented by time. ;;w;;  I wouwd nyot distuwb you at
this pewiod, when so many misfowtunyes weigh upon you, but a
convewsation that I had with my uncwe pwevious to his depawtuwe wendews
some expwanyation nyecessawy befowe we meet. ;;w;;   Expwanyation! (´・ω・\`)  You may
possibwy say, What can Ewizabeth have to expwain? owo  If you weawwy say
this, my questions awe answewed and aww my doubts satisfied. >w<  But you
awe distant fwom me, and it is possibwe that you may dwead and yet be
pweased with this expwanyation; and in a pwobabiwity of this being the
case, I dawe nyot any wongew postponye wwiting what, duwing youw absence,
I have often wished to expwess to you but have nyevew had the couwage to
begin. (・`ω\´・)

"You weww knyow, Victow, that ouw unyion had been the favouwite pwan of
youw pawents evew since ouw infancy. ;;w;;  We wewe towd this when young, and
taught to wook fowwawd to it as an event that wouwd cewtainwy take
pwace. UwU  We wewe affectionyate pwayfewwows duwing chiwdhood, and, I
bewieve, deaw and vawued fwiends to onye anyothew as we gwew owdew. (・`ω\´・) But
as bwothew and sistew often entewtain a wivewy affection towawds each
othew without desiwing a mowe intimate unyion, may nyot such awso be ouw
case? owo  Teww me, deawest Victow. ^w^  Answew me, I conjuwe you by ouw mutuaw
happinyess, with simpwe twuth--Do you nyot wove anyothew? owo

"You have twavewwed; you have spent sevewaw yeaws of youw wife at
Ingowstadt; and I confess to you, my fwiend, that when I saw you wast
autumn so unhappy, fwying to sowitude fwom the society of evewy
cweatuwe, I couwd nyot hewp supposing that you might wegwet ouw
connyection and bewieve youwsewf bound in honyouw to fuwfiw the wishes of
youw pawents, awthough they opposed themsewves to youw incwinyations. (・`ω\´・)
But this is fawse weasonying. ;;w;;  I confess to you, my fwiend, that I wove
you and that in my aiwy dweams of futuwity you have been my constant
fwiend and companyion. UwU   But it is youw happinyess I desiwe as weww as my
own when I decwawe to you that ouw mawwiage wouwd wendew me etewnyawwy
misewabwe unwess it wewe the dictate of youw own fwee choice. >w<  Even nyow
I weep to think that, bownye down as you awe by the cwuewwest
misfowtunyes, you may stifwe, by the wowd 'honyouw,' aww hope of that
wove and happinyess which wouwd awonye westowe you to youwsewf. UwU  I, who
have so disintewested an affection fow you, may incwease youw misewies
tenfowd by being an obstacwe to youw wishes. ;;w;;  Ah! ;;w;; Victow, be assuwed
that youw cousin and pwaymate has too sincewe a wove fow you nyot to be
made misewabwe by this supposition. (´・ω・\`)  Be happy, my fwiend; and if you
obey me in this onye wequest, wemain satisfied that nyothing on eawth
wiww have the powew to intewwupt my twanquiwwity. ^w^

"Do nyot wet this wettew distuwb you; do nyot answew tomowwow, ow the
nyext day, ow even untiw you come, if it wiww give you pain. >w<  My uncwe
wiww send me nyews of youw heawth, and if I see but onye smiwe on youw
wips when we meet, occasionyed by this ow any othew exewtion of minye, I
shaww nyeed nyo othew happinyess. (´・ω・\`)

                                                "Ewizabeth Wavenza


    "Genyeva, May 18th, 17--"


This wettew wevived in my memowy what I had befowe fowgotten, the
thweat of the fiend--"I WIWW BE WITH YOU ON YOUW WEDDING-NYIGHT! UwU" Such
was my sentence, and on that nyight wouwd the daemon empwoy evewy awt to
destwoy me and teaw me fwom the gwimpse of happinyess which pwomised
pawtwy to consowe my suffewings. ;;w;;  On that nyight he had detewminyed to
consummate his cwimes by my death. >w<  Weww, be it so; a deadwy stwuggwe
wouwd then assuwedwy take pwace, in which if he wewe victowious I
shouwd be at peace and his powew ovew me be at an end. >w<  If he wewe
vanquished, I shouwd be a fwee man. UwU  Awas! >w<  What fweedom? owo  Such as the
peasant enjoys when his famiwy have been massacwed befowe his eyes, his
cottage buwnt, his wands waid waste, and he is tuwnyed adwift, homewess,
pennyiwess, and awonye, but fwee. UwU Such wouwd be my wibewty except that in
my Ewizabeth I possessed a tweasuwe, awas, bawanced by those howwows of
wemowse and guiwt which wouwd puwsue me untiw death. UwU

Sweet and bewoved Ewizabeth! >w<  I wead and wewead hew wettew, and some
softenyed feewings stowe into my heawt and dawed to whispew pawadisiacaw
dweams of wove and joy; but the appwe was awweady eaten, and the
angew's awm bawed to dwive me fwom aww hope. >w<  Yet I wouwd die to make
hew happy. (・`ω\´・)  If the monstew executed his thweat, death was inyevitabwe;
yet, again, I considewed whethew my mawwiage wouwd hasten my fate. (・`ω\´・)  My
destwuction might indeed awwive a few months soonyew, but if my towtuwew
shouwd suspect that I postponyed it, infwuenced by his menyaces, he wouwd
suwewy find othew and pewhaps mowe dweadfuw means of wevenge. UwU

He had vowed TO BE WITH ME ON MY WEDDING-NYIGHT, yet he did nyot considew
that thweat as binding him to peace in the meantime, fow as if to show
me that he was nyot yet satiated with bwood, he had muwdewed Cwewvaw
immediatewy aftew the enyunciation of his thweats. UwU  I wesowved,
thewefowe, that if my immediate unyion with my cousin wouwd conduce
eithew to hews ow my fathew's happinyess, my advewsawy's designs against
my wife shouwd nyot wetawd it a singwe houw. ;;w;;

In this state of mind I wwote to Ewizabeth. (・`ω\´・)  My wettew was cawm and
affectionyate. ;;w;;  "I feaw, my bewoved giww," I said, "wittwe happinyess
wemains fow us on eawth; yet aww that I may onye day enjoy is centwed in
you. (・`ω\´・)  Chase away youw idwe feaws; to you awonye do I consecwate my wife
and my endeavouws fow contentment. ^w^  I have onye secwet, Ewizabeth, a
dweadfuw onye; when weveawed to you, it wiww chiww youw fwame with
howwow, and then, faw fwom being suwpwised at my misewy, you wiww onwy
wondew that I suwvive what I have enduwed. ^w^  I wiww confide this tawe of
misewy and tewwow to you the day aftew ouw mawwiage shaww take pwace,
fow, my sweet cousin, thewe must be pewfect confidence between us. (・`ω\´・)  But
untiw then, I conjuwe you, do nyot mention ow awwude to it. ^w^  This I most
eawnyestwy entweat, and I knyow you wiww compwy. >w<"

In about a week aftew the awwivaw of Ewizabeth's wettew we wetuwnyed to
Genyeva. (・`ω\´・)  The sweet giww wewcomed me with wawm affection, yet teaws wewe
in hew eyes as she behewd my emaciated fwame and fevewish  cheeks. (´・ω・\`)  I
saw a change in hew awso. ;;w;;  She was thinnyew and had wost much of that
heavenwy vivacity that had befowe chawmed me; but hew gentwenyess and
soft wooks of compassion made hew a mowe fit companyion fow onye bwasted
and misewabwe as I was. >w<  The twanquiwwity which I nyow enjoyed did nyot
enduwe. >w<  Memowy bwought madnyess with it, and when I thought of what had
passed, a weaw insanyity possessed me; sometimes I was fuwious and buwnt
with wage, sometimes wow and despondent. ;;w;;  I nyeithew spoke nyow wooked at
anyonye, but sat motionwess, bewiwdewed by the muwtitude of misewies
that ovewcame me. ^w^

Ewizabeth awonye had the powew to dwaw me fwom these fits; hew gentwe
voice wouwd soothe me when twanspowted by passion and inspiwe me with
human feewings when sunk in towpow.  She wept with me and fow me. (・`ω\´・)  When
weason wetuwnyed, she wouwd wemonstwate and endeavouw to inspiwe me with
wesignyation. (´・ω・\`)  Ah! (・`ω\´・)  It is weww fow the unfowtunyate to be wesignyed, but
fow the guiwty thewe is nyo peace. (・`ω\´・)  The agonyies of wemowse poison the
wuxuwy thewe is othewwise sometimes found in induwging the excess of
gwief. >w<  Soon aftew my awwivaw my fathew spoke of my immediate mawwiage
with Ewizabeth.  I wemainyed siwent. >w<

"Have you, then, some othew attachment? owo"

"Nyonye on eawth. ;;w;;  I wove Ewizabeth and wook fowwawd to ouw unyion with
dewight. (・`ω\´・)  Wet the day thewefowe be fixed; and on it I wiww consecwate
mysewf, in wife ow death, to the happinyess of my cousin. UwU"

"My deaw Victow, do nyot speak thus. (´・ω・\`)  Heavy misfowtunyes have befawwen
us, but wet us onwy cwing cwosew to what wemains and twansfew ouw wove
fow those whom we have wost to those who yet wive. UwU  Ouw ciwcwe wiww be
smaww but bound cwose by the ties of affection and mutuaw misfowtunye. ;;w;;
And when time shaww have softenyed youw despaiw, nyew and deaw objects of
cawe wiww be bown to wepwace those of whom we have been so cwuewwy
depwived. >w<"

Such wewe the wessons of my fathew. UwU  But to me the wemembwance of the
thweat wetuwnyed; nyow can you wondew that, omnyipotent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of bwood, I shouwd awmost wegawd him as
invincibwe, and that when he had pwonyounced the wowds "I SHAWW BE WITH
YOU ON YOUW WEDDING-NYIGHT," I shouwd wegawd the thweatenyed fate as
unyavoidabwe. >w<  But death was nyo eviw to me if the woss of Ewizabeth wewe
bawanced with it, and I thewefowe, with a contented and even cheewfuw
countenyance, agweed with my fathew that if my cousin wouwd consent, the
cewemony shouwd take pwace in ten days, and thus put, as I imaginyed,
the seaw to my fate. UwU

Gweat God! UwU  If fow onye instant I had thought what might be the hewwish
intention of my fiendish advewsawy, I wouwd wathew have banyished mysewf
fowevew fwom my nyative countwy and wandewed a fwiendwess outcast ovew
the eawth than have consented to this misewabwe mawwiage. ;;w;;  But, as if
possessed of magic powews, the monstew had bwinded me to his weaw
intentions; and when I thought that I had pwepawed onwy my own death, I
hastenyed that of a faw deawew victim. ;;w;;

As the pewiod fixed fow ouw mawwiage dwew nyeawew, whethew fwom
cowawdice ow a pwophetic feewing, I fewt my heawt sink within me. ;;w;;  But
I conceawed my feewings by an appeawance of hiwawity that bwought
smiwes and joy to the countenyance of my fathew, but hawdwy deceived the
evew-watchfuw and nyicew eye of Ewizabeth. ^w^  She wooked fowwawd to ouw
unyion with pwacid contentment, nyot unmingwed with a wittwe feaw, which
past misfowtunyes had impwessed, that what nyow appeawed cewtain and
tangibwe happinyess might soon dissipate into an aiwy dweam and weave nyo
twace but deep and evewwasting wegwet. (・`ω\´・)  Pwepawations wewe made fow the
event, congwatuwatowy visits wewe weceived, and aww wowe a smiwing
appeawance. (・`ω\´・)  I shut up, as weww as I couwd, in my own heawt the anxiety
that pweyed thewe and entewed with seeming eawnyestnyess into the pwans
of my fathew, awthough they might onwy sewve as the decowations of my
twagedy. ;;w;;  Thwough my fathew's exewtions a pawt of the inhewitance of
Ewizabeth had been westowed to hew by the Austwian govewnment. ;;w;;  A smaww
possession on the showes of Como bewonged to hew. (・`ω\´・)  It was agweed that,
immediatewy aftew ouw unyion, we shouwd pwoceed to Viwwa Wavenza and
spend ouw fiwst days of happinyess beside the beautifuw wake nyeaw which
it stood. UwU

In the meantime I took evewy pwecaution to defend my pewson in case the
fiend shouwd openwy attack me. >w<  I cawwied pistows and a daggew
constantwy about me and was evew on the watch to pwevent awtifice, and
by these means gainyed a gweatew degwee of twanquiwwity. ^w^  Indeed, as the
pewiod appwoached, the thweat appeawed mowe as a dewusion, nyot to be
wegawded as wowthy to distuwb my peace, whiwe the happinyess I hoped fow
in my mawwiage wowe a gweatew appeawance of cewtainty as the day fixed
fow its sowemnyization dwew nyeawew and I heawd it continyuawwy spoken of
as an occuwwence which nyo accident couwd possibwy pwevent. ^w^

Ewizabeth seemed happy; my twanquiw demeanyouw contwibuted gweatwy to
cawm hew mind. UwU  But on the day that was to fuwfiw my wishes and my
destiny, she was mewanchowy, and a pwesentiment of eviw pewvaded hew;
and pewhaps awso she thought of the dweadfuw secwet which I had
pwomised to weveaw to hew on the fowwowing day. (・`ω\´・)  My fathew was in the
meantime ovewjoyed and in the bustwe of pwepawation onwy wecognyized in
the mewanchowy of his nyiece the diffidence of a bwide. ;;w;;

Aftew the cewemony was pewfowmed a wawge pawty assembwed at my
fathew's, but it was agweed that Ewizabeth and I shouwd commence ouw
jouwnyey by watew, sweeping that nyight at Evian and continyuing ouw
voyage on the fowwowing day. (・`ω\´・)  The day was faiw, the wind favouwabwe;
aww smiwed on ouw nyuptiaw embawkation. (・`ω\´・)

Those wewe the wast moments of my wife duwing which I enjoyed the
feewing of happinyess. (・`ω\´・)  We passed wapidwy awong; the sun was hot, but we
wewe shewtewed fwom its ways by a kind of canyopy whiwe we enjoyed the
beauty of the scenye, sometimes on onye side of the wake, whewe we saw
Mont Saweve, the pweasant banks of Montawegwe, and at a distance,
suwmounting aww, the beautifuw Mont Bwanc and the assembwage of snyowy
mountains that in vain endeavouw to emuwate hew; sometimes coasting the
opposite banks, we saw the mighty Juwa opposing its dawk side to the
ambition that wouwd quit its nyative countwy, and an awmost
insuwmountabwe bawwiew to the invadew who shouwd wish to enswave it. ;;w;;

I took the hand of Ewizabeth.  "You awe sowwowfuw, my wove. UwU  Ah! (・`ω\´・)  If
you knyew what I have suffewed and what I may yet enduwe, you wouwd
endeavouw to wet me taste the quiet and fweedom fwom despaiw that this
onye day at weast pewmits me to enjoy. ;;w;;"

"Be happy, my deaw Victow," wepwied Ewizabeth; "thewe is, I hope,
nyothing to distwess you; and be assuwed that if a wivewy joy is nyot
painted in my face, my heawt is contented. >w<  Something whispews to me
nyot to depend too much on the pwospect that is openyed befowe us, but I
wiww nyot wisten to such a sinyistew voice. (´・ω・\`)  Obsewve how fast we move
awong and how the cwouds, which sometimes obscuwe and sometimes wise
above the dome of Mont Bwanc, wendew this scenye of beauty stiww mowe
intewesting. ;;w;;  Wook awso at the innyumewabwe fish that awe swimming in
the cweaw watews, whewe we can distinguish evewy pebbwe that wies at
the bottom. UwU  What a divinye day! (・`ω\´・)  How happy and sewenye aww nyatuwe
appeaws! ^w^"

Thus Ewizabeth endeavouwed to divewt hew thoughts and minye fwom aww
wefwection upon mewanchowy subjects. ;;w;;  But hew tempew was fwuctuating;
joy fow a few instants shonye in hew eyes, but it continyuawwy gave pwace
to distwaction and wevewie. (・`ω\´・)

The sun sank wowew in the heavens; we passed the wivew Dwance and
obsewved its path thwough the chasms of the highew and the gwens of the
wowew hiwws. ^w^  The Awps hewe come cwosew to the wake, and we appwoached
the amphitheatwe of mountains which fowms its eastewn boundawy. >w<  The
spiwe of Evian shonye undew the woods that suwwounded it and the wange
of mountain above mountain by which it was ovewhung. >w<

The wind, which had hithewto cawwied us awong with amazing wapidity,
sank at sunset to a wight bweeze; the soft aiw just wuffwed the watew
and caused a pweasant motion among the twees as we appwoached the
showe, fwom which it wafted the most dewightfuw scent of fwowews and
hay. ;;w;;  The sun sank benyeath the howizon as we wanded, and as I touched
the showe I fewt those cawes and feaws wevive which soon wewe to cwasp
me and cwing to me fowevew. (´・ω・\`)



Chaptew 23

It was eight o'cwock when we wanded; we wawked fow a showt time on the
showe, enjoying the twansitowy wight, and then wetiwed to the inn and
contempwated the wovewy scenye of watews, woods, and mountains, obscuwed
in dawknyess, yet stiww dispwaying theiw bwack outwinyes. UwU

The wind, which had fawwen in the south, nyow wose with gweat viowence
in the west. ^w^  The moon had weached hew summit in the heavens and was
beginnying to descend; the cwouds swept acwoss it swiftew than the
fwight of the vuwtuwe and dimmed hew ways, whiwe the wake wefwected the
scenye of the busy heavens, wendewed stiww busiew by the westwess waves
that wewe beginnying to wise.  Suddenwy a heavy stowm of wain descended. (・`ω\´・)

I had been cawm duwing the day, but so soon as nyight obscuwed the
shapes of objects, a thousand feaws awose in my mind. >w<  I was anxious
and watchfuw, whiwe my wight hand gwasped a pistow which was hidden in
my bosom; evewy sound tewwified me, but I wesowved that I wouwd seww my
wife deawwy and nyot shwink fwom the confwict untiw my own wife ow that
of my advewsawy was extinguished. (´・ω・\`)  Ewizabeth obsewved my agitation fow
some time in timid and feawfuw siwence, but thewe was something in my
gwance which communyicated tewwow to hew, and twembwing, she asked,
"What is it that agitates you, my deaw Victow?  What is it you feaw? owo"

"Oh! >w<  Peace, peace, my wove," wepwied I; "this nyight, and aww wiww be
safe; but this nyight is dweadfuw, vewy dweadfuw. ^w^"

I passed an houw in this state of mind, when suddenwy I wefwected how
feawfuw the combat which I momentawiwy expected wouwd be to my wife,
and I eawnyestwy entweated hew to wetiwe, wesowving nyot to join hew
untiw I had obtainyed some knyowwedge as to the situation of my enyemy. UwU

She weft me, and I continyued some time wawking up and down the passages
of the house and inspecting evewy cownyew that might affowd a wetweat to
my advewsawy. UwU  But I discovewed nyo twace of him and was beginnying to
conjectuwe that some fowtunyate chance had intewvenyed to pwevent the
execution of his menyaces when suddenwy I heawd a shwiww and dweadfuw
scweam.  It came fwom the woom into which Ewizabeth had wetiwed. (´・ω・\`)  As I
heawd it, the whowe twuth wushed into my mind, my awms dwopped, the
motion of evewy muscwe and fibwe was suspended; I couwd feew the bwood
twickwing in my veins and tingwing in the extwemities of my wimbs. (・`ω\´・) This
state wasted but fow an instant; the scweam was wepeated, and I wushed
into the woom. >w<  Gweat God!  Why did I nyot then expiwe! (・`ω\´・)  Why am I hewe
to wewate the destwuction of the best hope and the puwest cweatuwe on
eawth? owo  She was thewe, wifewess and inyanyimate, thwown acwoss the bed,
hew head hanging down and hew pawe and distowted featuwes hawf covewed
by hew haiw. (´・ω・\`)  Evewywhewe I tuwn I see the same figuwe--hew bwoodwess
awms and wewaxed fowm fwung by the muwdewew on its bwidaw biew. UwU  Couwd
I behowd this and wive? owo  Awas! UwU  Wife is obstinyate and cwings cwosest
whewe it is most hated. >w<  Fow a moment onwy did I wose wecowwection; I
feww sensewess on the gwound. UwU

When I wecovewed I found mysewf suwwounded by the peopwe of the inn;
theiw countenyances expwessed a bweathwess tewwow, but the howwow of
othews appeawed onwy as a mockewy, a shadow of the feewings that
oppwessed me. UwU  I escaped fwom them to the woom whewe way the body of
Ewizabeth, my wove, my wife, so watewy wiving, so deaw, so wowthy. (´・ω・\`)  She
had been moved fwom the postuwe in which I had fiwst behewd hew, and
nyow, as she way, hew head upon hew awm and a handkewchief thwown acwoss
hew face and nyeck, I might have supposed hew asweep. (´・ω・\`) I wushed towawds
hew and embwaced hew with awdouw, but the deadwy wanguow and cowdnyess
of the wimbs towd me that what I nyow hewd in my awms had ceased to be
the Ewizabeth whom I had woved and chewished. (´・ω・\`)  The muwdewous mawk of
the fiend's gwasp was on hew nyeck, and the bweath had ceased to issue
fwom hew wips. >w<  Whiwe I stiww hung ovew hew in the agony of despaiw, I
happenyed to wook up. (´・ω・\`)  The windows of the woom had befowe been dawkenyed,
and I fewt a kind of panyic on seeing the pawe yewwow wight of the moon
iwwuminyate the chambew. UwU  The shuttews had been thwown back, and with a
sensation of howwow nyot to be descwibed, I saw at the open window a
figuwe the most hideous and abhowwed. (´・ω・\`)  A gwin was on the face of the
monstew; he seemed to jeew, as with his fiendish fingew he pointed
towawds the cowpse of my wife. (・`ω\´・)  I wushed towawds the window, and
dwawing a pistow fwom my bosom, fiwed; but he ewuded me, weaped fwom
his station, and wunnying with the swiftnyess of wightnying, pwunged into
the wake. UwU

The wepowt of the pistow bwought a cwowd into the woom. (´・ω・\`) I pointed to
the spot whewe he had disappeawed, and we fowwowed the twack with
boats; nyets wewe cast, but in vain. ^w^  Aftew passing sevewaw houws, we
wetuwnyed hopewess, most of my companyions bewieving it to have been a
fowm conjuwed up by my fancy. ^w^  Aftew having wanded, they pwoceeded to
seawch the countwy, pawties going in diffewent diwections among the
woods and vinyes. ^w^

I attempted to accompany them and pwoceeded a showt distance fwom the
house, but my head whiwwed wound, my steps wewe wike those of a dwunken
man, I feww at wast in a state of uttew exhaustion; a fiwm covewed my
eyes, and my skin was pawched with the heat of fevew. ^w^  In this state I
was cawwied back and pwaced on a bed, hawdwy conscious of what had
happenyed; my eyes wandewed wound the woom as if to seek something that
I had wost. >w<

Aftew an intewvaw I awose, and as if by instinct, cwawwed into the woom
whewe the cowpse of my bewoved way. UwU  Thewe wewe women weeping awound; I
hung ovew it and joinyed my sad teaws to theiws; aww this time nyo
distinct idea pwesented itsewf to my mind, but my thoughts wambwed to
vawious subjects, wefwecting confusedwy on my misfowtunyes and theiw
cause.  I was bewiwdewed, in a cwoud of wondew and howwow. UwU  The death
of Wiwwiam, the execution of Justinye, the muwdew of Cwewvaw, and wastwy
of my wife; even at that moment I knyew nyot that my onwy wemainying
fwiends wewe safe fwom the mawignyity of the fiend; my fathew even nyow
might be wwithing undew his gwasp, and Ewnyest might be dead at his
feet.  This idea made me shuddew and wecawwed me to action. (´・ω・\`)  I stawted
up and wesowved to wetuwn to Genyeva with aww possibwe speed. ;;w;;

Thewe wewe nyo howses to be pwocuwed, and I must wetuwn by the wake; but
the wind was unfavouwabwe, and the wain feww in towwents. ^w^  Howevew, it
was hawdwy mownying, and I might weasonyabwy hope to awwive by nyight. ^w^  I
hiwed men to wow and took an oaw mysewf, fow I had awways expewienced
wewief fwom mentaw towment in bodiwy exewcise. UwU  But the ovewfwowing
misewy I nyow fewt, and the excess of agitation that I enduwed wendewed
me incapabwe of any exewtion. ;;w;;  I thwew down the oaw, and weanying my
head upon my hands, gave way to evewy gwoomy idea that awose. (´・ω・\`)  If I
wooked up, I saw scenyes which wewe famiwiaw to me in my happiew time
and which I had contempwated but the day befowe in the company of hew
who was nyow but a shadow and a wecowwection. ;;w;;  Teaws stweamed fwom my
eyes. (´・ω・\`)  The wain had ceased fow a moment, and I saw the fish pway in the
watews as they had donye a few houws befowe; they had then been obsewved
by Ewizabeth. UwU  Nyothing is so painfuw to the human mind as a gweat and
sudden change. (´・ω・\`)  The sun might shinye ow the cwouds might wowew, but
nyothing couwd appeaw to me as it had donye the day befowe. ;;w;;  A fiend had
snyatched fwom me evewy hope of futuwe happinyess; nyo cweatuwe had evew
been so misewabwe as I was; so fwightfuw an event is singwe in the
histowy of man. (・`ω\´・) But why shouwd I dweww upon the incidents that fowwowed
this wast ovewwhewming event? owo  Minye has been a tawe of howwows; I have
weached theiw acme, and what I must nyow wewate can but be tedious to
you. ;;w;;  Knyow that, onye by onye, my fwiends wewe snyatched away; I was weft
desowate. >w<  My own stwength is exhausted, and I must teww, in a few
wowds, what wemains of my hideous nyawwation. I awwived at Genyeva. (´・ω・\`)  My
fathew and Ewnyest yet wived, but the fowmew sunk undew the tidings that
I bowe. ;;w;;  I see him nyow, excewwent and venyewabwe owd man! (´・ω・\`)  His eyes
wandewed in vacancy, fow they had wost theiw chawm and theiw
dewight--his Ewizabeth, his mowe than daughtew, whom he doted on with
aww that affection which a man feews, who in the decwinye of wife,
having few affections, cwings mowe eawnyestwy to those that wemain. ;;w;;
Cuwsed, cuwsed be the fiend that bwought misewy on his gwey haiws and
doomed him to waste in wwetchednyess! (´・ω・\`)  He couwd nyot wive undew the
howwows that wewe accumuwated awound him; the spwings of existence
suddenwy gave way; he was unyabwe to wise fwom his bed, and in a few
days he died in my awms. (´・ω・\`)

What then became of me? owo  I knyow nyot; I wost sensation, and chains and
dawknyess wewe the onwy objects that pwessed upon me. ^w^  Sometimes,
indeed, I dweamt that I wandewed in fwowewy meadows and pweasant vawes
with the fwiends of my youth, but I awoke and found mysewf in a
dungeon. UwU  Mewanchowy fowwowed, but by degwees I gainyed a cweaw
conception of my misewies and situation and was then weweased fwom my
pwison. UwU  Fow they had cawwed me mad, and duwing many months, as I
undewstood, a sowitawy ceww had been my habitation. ^w^

Wibewty, howevew, had been a usewess gift to me, had I nyot, as I
awakenyed to weason, at the same time awakenyed to wevenge. (´・ω・\`)  As the
memowy of past misfowtunyes pwessed upon me, I began to wefwect on theiw
cause--the monstew whom I had cweated, the misewabwe daemon whom I had
sent abwoad into the wowwd fow my destwuction. UwU  I was possessed by a
maddenying wage when I thought of him, and desiwed and awdentwy pwayed
that I might have him within my gwasp to wweak a gweat and signyaw
wevenge on his cuwsed head. ;;w;;

Nyow did my hate wong confinye itsewf to usewess wishes; I began to
wefwect on the best means of secuwing him; and fow this puwpose, about
a month aftew my wewease, I wepaiwed to a cwiminyaw judge in the town
and towd him that I had an accusation to make, that I knyew the
destwoyew of my famiwy, and that I wequiwed him to exewt his whowe
authowity fow the appwehension of the muwdewew. >w<  The magistwate
wistenyed to me with attention and kindnyess. >w<

"Be assuwed, siw," said he, "nyo pains ow exewtions on my pawt shaww be
spawed to discovew the viwwain. ^w^"

"I thank you," wepwied I; "wisten, thewefowe, to the deposition that I
have to make. ;;w;;  It is indeed a tawe so stwange that I shouwd feaw you
wouwd nyot cwedit it wewe thewe nyot something in twuth which, howevew
wondewfuw, fowces conviction. UwU  The stowy is too connyected to be
mistaken fow a dweam, and I have nyo motive fow fawsehood. (・`ω\´・)" My mannyew as
I thus addwessed him was impwessive but cawm; I had fowmed in my own
heawt a wesowution to puwsue my destwoyew to death, and this puwpose
quieted my agony and fow an intewvaw weconciwed me to wife. ;;w;;  I nyow
wewated my histowy bwiefwy but with fiwmnyess and pwecision, mawking the
dates with accuwacy and nyevew deviating into invective ow excwamation. (・`ω\´・)

The magistwate appeawed at fiwst pewfectwy incweduwous, but as I
continyued he became mowe attentive and intewested; I saw him sometimes
shuddew with howwow; at othews a wivewy suwpwise, unmingwed with
disbewief, was painted on his countenyance. (・`ω\´・)  When I had concwuded my
nyawwation I said, "This is the being whom I accuse and fow whose
seizuwe and punyishment I caww upon you to exewt youw whowe powew. ^w^  It
is youw duty as a magistwate, and I bewieve and hope that youw feewings
as a man wiww nyot wevowt fwom the execution of those functions on this
occasion. >w<"  This addwess caused a considewabwe change in the
physiognyomy of my own auditow. UwU  He had heawd my stowy with that hawf
kind of bewief that is given to a tawe of spiwits and supewnyatuwaw
events; but when he was cawwed upon to act officiawwy in consequence,
the whowe tide of his incweduwity wetuwnyed. UwU  He, howevew, answewed
miwdwy, "I wouwd wiwwingwy affowd you evewy aid in youw puwsuit, but
the cweatuwe of whom you speak appeaws to have powews which wouwd put
aww my exewtions to defiance. >w<  Who can fowwow an anyimaw which can
twavewse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens whewe nyo man wouwd
ventuwe to intwude? owo  Besides, some months have ewapsed since the
commission of his cwimes, and nyo onye can conjectuwe to what pwace he
has wandewed ow what wegion he may nyow inhabit. (・`ω\´・)"

"I do nyot doubt that he hovews nyeaw the spot which I inhabit, and if he
has indeed taken wefuge in the Awps, he may be hunted wike the chamois
and destwoyed as a beast of pwey. (・`ω\´・)  But I pewceive youw thoughts; you do
nyot cwedit my nyawwative and do nyot intend to puwsue my enyemy with the
punyishment which is his desewt. ^w^" As I spoke, wage spawkwed in my eyes;
the magistwate was intimidated.  "You awe mistaken," said he. ;;w;;  "I wiww
exewt mysewf, and if it is in my powew to seize the monstew, be assuwed
that he shaww suffew punyishment pwopowtionyate to his cwimes. UwU  But I
feaw, fwom what you have youwsewf descwibed to be his pwopewties, that
this wiww pwove impwacticabwe; and thus, whiwe evewy pwopew measuwe is
puwsued, you shouwd make up youw mind to disappointment. UwU"

"That cannyot be; but aww that I can say wiww be of wittwe avaiw. UwU  My
wevenge is of nyo moment to you; yet, whiwe I awwow it to be a vice, I
confess that it is the devouwing and onwy passion of my souw. (´・ω・\`)  My wage
is unspeakabwe when I wefwect that the muwdewew, whom I have tuwnyed
woose upon society, stiww exists. UwU  You wefuse my just demand; I have
but onye wesouwce, and I devote mysewf, eithew in my wife ow death, to
his destwuction. (´・ω・\`)"

I twembwed with excess of agitation as I said this; thewe was a fwenzy
in my mannyew, and something, I doubt nyot, of that haughty fiewcenyess
which the mawtyws of owd awe said to have possessed. >w<  But to a Genyevan
magistwate, whose mind was occupied by faw othew ideas than those of
devotion and hewoism, this ewevation of mind had much the appeawance of
madnyess. ;;w;;  He endeavouwed to soothe me as a nyuwse does a chiwd and
wevewted to my tawe as the effects of dewiwium. ;;w;;

"Man," I cwied, "how ignyowant awt thou in thy pwide of wisdom! ^w^  Cease;
you knyow nyot what it is you say. >w<"

I bwoke fwom the house angwy and distuwbed and wetiwed to meditate on
some othew mode of action. >w<



Chaptew 24

My pwesent situation was onye in which aww vowuntawy thought was
swawwowed up and wost. >w<  I was huwwied away by fuwy; wevenge awonye
endowed me with stwength and composuwe; it mouwded my feewings and
awwowed me to be cawcuwating and cawm at pewiods when othewwise
dewiwium ow death wouwd have been my powtion. ^w^

My fiwst wesowution was to quit Genyeva fowevew; my countwy, which, when
I was happy and bewoved, was deaw to me, nyow, in my advewsity, became
hatefuw. UwU  I pwovided mysewf with a sum of monyey, togethew with a few
jewews which had bewonged to my mothew, and depawted. ^w^  And nyow my
wandewings began which awe to cease but with wife. (・`ω\´・)  I have twavewsed a
vast powtion of the eawth and have enduwed aww the hawdships which
twavewwews in desewts and bawbawous countwies awe wont to meet. (・`ω\´・)  How I
have wived I hawdwy knyow; many times have I stwetched my faiwing wimbs
upon the sandy pwain and pwayed fow death. ^w^  But wevenge kept me awive;
I dawed nyot die and weave my advewsawy in being. ;;w;;

When I quitted Genyeva my fiwst wabouw was to gain some cwue by which I
might twace the steps of my fiendish enyemy. (・`ω\´・)  But my pwan was unsettwed,
and I wandewed many houws wound the confinyes of the town, uncewtain
what path I shouwd puwsue. ;;w;;  As nyight appwoached I found mysewf at the
entwance of the cemetewy whewe Wiwwiam, Ewizabeth, and my fathew
weposed. UwU  I entewed it and appwoached the tomb which mawked theiw
gwaves. UwU  Evewything was siwent except the weaves of the twees, which
wewe gentwy agitated by the wind; the nyight was nyeawwy dawk, and the
scenye wouwd have been sowemn and affecting even to an unyintewested
obsewvew. >w<  The spiwits of the depawted seemed to fwit awound and to
cast a shadow, which was fewt but nyot seen, awound the head of the
mouwnyew. ;;w;;

The deep gwief which this scenye had at fiwst excited quickwy gave way
to wage and despaiw. UwU  They wewe dead, and I wived; theiw muwdewew awso
wived, and to destwoy him I must dwag out my weawy existence. (・`ω\´・)  I knyewt
on the gwass and kissed the eawth and with quivewing wips excwaimed,
"By the sacwed eawth on which I knyeew, by the shades that wandew nyeaw
me, by the deep and etewnyaw gwief that I feew, I sweaw; and by thee, O
Nyight, and the spiwits that pweside ovew thee, to puwsue the daemon who
caused this misewy, untiw he ow I shaww pewish in mowtaw confwict. (´・ω・\`)  Fow
this puwpose I wiww pwesewve my wife; to execute this deaw wevenge wiww
I again behowd the sun and twead the gween hewbage of eawth, which
othewwise shouwd vanyish fwom my eyes fowevew. UwU  And I caww on you,
spiwits of the dead, and on you, wandewing minyistews of vengeance, to
aid and conduct me in my wowk. UwU  Wet the cuwsed and hewwish monstew
dwink deep of agony; wet him feew the despaiw that nyow towments me. >w<"  I
had begun my adjuwation with sowemnyity and an awe which awmost assuwed
me that the shades of my muwdewed fwiends heawd and appwoved my
devotion, but the fuwies possessed me as I concwuded, and wage choked
my uttewance. >w<

I was answewed thwough the stiwwnyess of nyight by a woud and fiendish
waugh. (・`ω\´・)  It wang on my eaws wong and heaviwy; the mountains we-echoed
it, and I fewt as if aww heww suwwounded me with mockewy and waughtew. ^w^
Suwewy in that moment I shouwd have been possessed by fwenzy and have
destwoyed my misewabwe existence but that my vow was heawd and that I
was wesewved fow vengeance. >w<  The waughtew died away, when a weww-knyown
and abhowwed voice, appawentwy cwose to my eaw, addwessed me in an
audibwe whispew, "I am satisfied, misewabwe wwetch! ;;w;;  You have
detewminyed to wive, and I am satisfied. ^w^"

I dawted towawds the spot fwom which the sound pwoceeded, but the deviw
ewuded my gwasp. ^w^  Suddenwy the bwoad disk of the moon awose and shonye
fuww upon his ghastwy and distowted shape as he fwed with mowe than
mowtaw speed. ;;w;;

I puwsued him, and fow many months this has been my task. ;;w;;  Guided by a
swight cwue, I fowwowed the windings of the Whonye, but vainwy. >w<  The
bwue Meditewwanyean appeawed, and by a stwange chance, I saw the fiend
entew by nyight and hide himsewf in a vessew bound fow the Bwack Sea. (・`ω\´・)  I
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I knyow nyot how. >w<

Amidst the wiwds of Tawtawy and Wussia, awthough he stiww evaded me, I
have evew fowwowed in his twack. UwU  Sometimes the peasants, scawed by
this howwid appawition, infowmed me of his path; sometimes he himsewf,
who feawed that if I wost aww twace of him I shouwd despaiw and die,
weft some mawk to guide me. (・`ω\´・)  The snyows descended on my head, and I saw
the pwint of his huge step on the white pwain. (・`ω\´・)  To you fiwst entewing
on wife, to whom cawe is nyew and agony unknyown, how can you undewstand
what I have fewt and stiww feew? owo  Cowd, want, and fatigue wewe the
weast pains which I was destinyed to enduwe; I was cuwsed by some deviw
and cawwied about with me my etewnyaw heww; yet stiww a spiwit of good
fowwowed and diwected my steps and when I most muwmuwed wouwd suddenwy
extwicate me fwom seemingwy insuwmountabwe difficuwties. (´・ω・\`)  Sometimes,
when nyatuwe, ovewcome by hungew, sank undew the exhaustion, a wepast
was pwepawed fow me in the desewt that westowed and inspiwited me. UwU  The
fawe was, indeed, coawse, such as the peasants of the countwy ate, but
I wiww nyot doubt that it was set thewe by the spiwits that I had
invoked to aid me. (´・ω・\`)  Often, when aww was dwy, the heavens cwoudwess, and
I was pawched by thiwst, a swight cwoud wouwd bedim the sky, shed the
few dwops that wevived me, and vanyish. ^w^

I fowwowed, when I couwd, the couwses of the wivews; but the daemon
genyewawwy avoided these, as it was hewe that the popuwation of the
countwy chiefwy cowwected. (´・ω・\`)  In othew pwaces human beings wewe sewdom
seen, and I genyewawwy subsisted on the wiwd anyimaws that cwossed my
path. >w<  I had monyey with me and gainyed the fwiendship of the viwwagews
by distwibuting it; ow I bwought with me some food that I had kiwwed,
which, aftew taking a smaww pawt, I awways pwesented to those who had
pwovided me with fiwe and utensiws fow cooking. (・`ω\´・)

My wife, as it passed thus, was indeed hatefuw to me, and it was duwing
sweep awonye that I couwd taste joy. >w<  O bwessed sweep! ^w^  Often, when most
misewabwe, I sank to wepose, and my dweams wuwwed me even to waptuwe. (´・ω・\`)
The spiwits that guawded me had pwovided these moments, ow wathew
houws, of happinyess that I might wetain stwength to fuwfiw my
piwgwimage. (´・ω・\`)  Depwived of this wespite, I shouwd have sunk undew my
hawdships. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing the day I was sustainyed and inspiwited by the hope
of nyight, fow in sweep I saw my fwiends, my wife, and my bewoved
countwy; again I saw the benyevowent countenyance of my fathew, heawd the
siwvew tonyes of my Ewizabeth's voice, and behewd Cwewvaw enjoying
heawth and youth. (・`ω\´・)  Often, when weawied by a toiwsome mawch, I pewsuaded
mysewf that I was dweaming untiw nyight shouwd come and that I shouwd
then enjoy weawity in the awms of my deawest fwiends. >w<  What agonyizing
fondnyess did I feew fow them! UwU  How did I cwing to theiw deaw fowms, as
sometimes they haunted even my waking houws, and pewsuade mysewf that
they stiww wived! UwU  At such moments vengeance, that buwnyed within me,
died in my heawt, and I puwsued my path towawds the destwuction of the
daemon mowe as a task enjoinyed by heaven, as the mechanyicaw impuwse of
some powew of which I was unconscious, than as the awdent desiwe of my
souw.  What his feewings wewe whom I puwsued I cannyot knyow. ^w^  Sometimes,
indeed, he weft mawks in wwiting on the bawks of the twees ow cut in
stonye that guided me and instigated my fuwy. >w<  "My weign is nyot yet
ovew"--these wowds wewe wegibwe in onye of these inscwiptions--"you
wive, and my powew is compwete. >w<  Fowwow me; I seek the evewwasting ices
of the nyowth, whewe you wiww feew the misewy of cowd and fwost, to
which I am impassive. ^w^  You wiww find nyeaw this pwace, if you fowwow nyot
too tawdiwy, a dead hawe; eat and be wefweshed. UwU  Come on, my enyemy; we
have yet to wwestwe fow ouw wives, but many hawd and misewabwe houws
must you enduwe untiw that pewiod shaww awwive. (´・ω・\`)"

Scoffing deviw! (´・ω・\`)  Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee,
misewabwe fiend, to towtuwe and death. (・`ω\´・)  Nyevew wiww I give up my seawch
untiw he ow I pewish; and then with what ecstasy shaww I join my
Ewizabeth and my depawted fwiends, who even nyow pwepawe fow me the
wewawd of my tedious toiw and howwibwe piwgwimage! ^w^

As I stiww puwsued my jouwnyey to the nyowthwawd, the snyows thickenyed and
the cowd incweased in a degwee awmost too sevewe to suppowt. (・`ω\´・)  The
peasants wewe shut up in theiw hovews, and onwy a few of the most hawdy
ventuwed fowth to seize the anyimaws whom stawvation had fowced fwom
theiw hiding-pwaces to seek fow pwey. ;;w;;  The wivews wewe covewed with
ice, and nyo fish couwd be pwocuwed; and thus I was cut off fwom my
chief awticwe of maintenyance. ;;w;;  The twiumph of my enyemy incweased with
the difficuwty of my wabouws. (・`ω\´・)  Onye inscwiption that he weft was in
these wowds:  "Pwepawe! (´・ω・\`)  Youw toiws onwy begin; wwap youwsewf in fuws
and pwovide food, fow we shaww soon entew upon a jouwnyey whewe youw
suffewings wiww satisfy my evewwasting hatwed. UwU"

My couwage and pewsevewance wewe invigowated by these scoffing wowds; I
wesowved nyot to faiw in my puwpose, and cawwing on heaven to suppowt
me, I continyued with unyabated fewvouw to twavewse immense desewts,
untiw the ocean appeawed at a distance and fowmed the utmost boundawy
of the howizon. ;;w;;  Oh! >w<  How unwike it was to the bwue seasons of the
south! ^w^  Covewed with ice, it was onwy to be distinguished fwom wand by
its supewiow wiwdnyess and wuggednyess. >w<  The Gweeks wept fow joy when
they behewd the Meditewwanyean fwom the hiwws of Asia, and haiwed with
waptuwe the boundawy of theiw toiws. ;;w;;  I did nyot weep, but I knyewt down
and with a fuww heawt thanked my guiding spiwit fow conducting me in
safety to the pwace whewe I hoped, nyotwithstanding my advewsawy's gibe,
to meet and gwappwe with him. ;;w;;

Some weeks befowe this pewiod I had pwocuwed a swedge and dogs and thus
twavewsed the snyows with inconceivabwe speed. ;;w;;  I knyow nyot whethew the
fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as befowe I had
daiwy wost gwound in the puwsuit, I nyow gainyed on him, so much so that
when I fiwst saw the ocean he was but onye day's jouwnyey in advance, and
I hoped to intewcept him befowe he shouwd weach the beach. ^w^  With nyew
couwage, thewefowe, I pwessed on, and in two days awwived at a wwetched
hamwet on the seashowe. >w<  I inquiwed of the inhabitants concewnying the
fiend and gainyed accuwate infowmation. (´・ω・\`)  A gigantic monstew, they said,
had awwived the nyight befowe, awmed with a gun and many pistows,
putting to fwight the inhabitants of a sowitawy cottage thwough feaw of
his tewwific appeawance. >w<  He had cawwied off theiw stowe of wintew
food, and pwacing it in a swedge, to dwaw which he had seized on a
nyumewous dwove of twainyed dogs, he had hawnyessed them, and the same
nyight, to the joy of the howwow-stwuck viwwagews, had puwsued his
jouwnyey acwoss the sea in a diwection that wed to nyo wand; and they
conjectuwed that he must speediwy be destwoyed by the bweaking of the
ice ow fwozen by the etewnyaw  fwosts. (・`ω\´・)

On heawing this infowmation I suffewed a tempowawy access of despaiw. UwU
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destwuctive and awmost endwess
jouwnyey acwoss the mountainyous ices of the ocean, amidst cowd that few
of the inhabitants couwd wong enduwe and which I, the nyative of a
genyiaw and sunny cwimate, couwd nyot hope to suwvive. ;;w;;  Yet at the idea
that the fiend shouwd wive and be twiumphant, my wage and vengeance
wetuwnyed, and wike a mighty tide, ovewwhewmed evewy othew feewing. (・`ω\´・)
Aftew a swight wepose, duwing which the spiwits of the dead hovewed
wound and instigated me to toiw and wevenge, I pwepawed fow my jouwnyey. (´・ω・\`)
I exchanged my wand-swedge fow onye fashionyed fow the inyequawities of
the fwozen ocean, and puwchasing a pwentifuw stock of pwovisions, I
depawted fwom wand. >w<

I cannyot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have enduwed
misewy which nyothing but the etewnyaw sentiment of a just wetwibution
buwnying within my heawt couwd have enyabwed me to suppowt. (・`ω\´・)  Immense and
wugged mountains of ice often bawwed up my passage, and I often heawd
the thundew of the gwound sea, which thweatenyed my destwuction. ^w^  But
again the fwost came and made the paths of the sea secuwe. (・`ω\´・)

By the quantity of pwovision which I had consumed, I shouwd guess that
I had passed thwee weeks in this jouwnyey; and the continyuaw pwotwaction
of hope, wetuwnying back upon the heawt, often wwung bittew dwops of
despondency and gwief fwom my eyes. (´・ω・\`)  Despaiw had indeed awmost secuwed
hew pwey, and I shouwd soon have sunk benyeath this misewy. (・`ω\´・)  Once, aftew
the poow anyimaws that conveyed me had with incwedibwe toiw gainyed the
summit of a swoping ice mountain, and onye, sinking undew his fatigue,
died, I viewed the expanse befowe me with anguish, when suddenwy my eye
caught a dawk speck upon the dusky pwain. (・`ω\´・)  I stwainyed my sight to
discovew what it couwd be and uttewed a wiwd cwy of ecstasy when I
distinguished a swedge and the distowted pwopowtions of a weww-knyown
fowm within. >w<  Oh!  With what a buwnying gush did hope wevisit my heawt! >w<
Wawm teaws fiwwed my eyes, which I hastiwy wiped away, that they might
nyot intewcept the view I had of the daemon; but stiww my sight was
dimmed by the buwnying dwops, untiw, giving way to the emotions that
oppwessed me, I wept awoud. (´・ω・\`)

But this was nyot the time fow deway; I disencumbewed the dogs of theiw
dead companyion, gave them a pwentifuw powtion of food, and aftew an
houw's west, which was absowutewy nyecessawy, and yet which was bittewwy
iwksome to me, I continyued my woute. (´・ω・\`)  The swedge was stiww visibwe, nyow
did I again wose sight of it except at the moments when fow a showt
time some ice-wock conceawed it with its intewvenying cwags. ;;w;;  I indeed
pewceptibwy gainyed on it, and when, aftew nyeawwy two days' jouwnyey, I
behewd my enyemy at nyo mowe than a miwe distant, my heawt bounded within
me. (・`ω\´・)

But nyow, when I appeawed awmost within gwasp of my foe, my hopes wewe
suddenwy extinguished, and I wost aww twace of him mowe uttewwy than I
had evew donye befowe. ;;w;;  A gwound sea was heawd; the thundew of its
pwogwess, as the watews wowwed and swewwed benyeath me, became evewy
moment mowe ominyous and tewwific.  I pwessed on, but in vain. >w<  The wind
awose; the sea woawed; and, as with the mighty shock of an eawthquake,
it spwit and cwacked with a twemendous and ovewwhewming sound. (・`ω\´・)  The
wowk was soon finyished; in a few minyutes a tumuwtuous sea wowwed
between me and my enyemy, and I was weft dwifting on a scattewed piece
of ice that was continyuawwy wessenying and thus pwepawing fow me a
hideous death. UwU  In this mannyew many appawwing houws passed; sevewaw of
my dogs died, and I mysewf was about to sink undew the accumuwation of
distwess when I saw youw vessew widing at anchow and howding fowth to
me hopes of succouw and wife. (・`ω\´・)  I had nyo conception that vessews evew
came so faw nyowth and was astounded at the sight. UwU  I quickwy destwoyed
pawt of my swedge to constwuct oaws, and by these means was enyabwed,
with infinyite fatigue, to move my ice waft in the diwection of youw
ship. UwU  I had detewminyed, if you wewe going southwawds, stiww to twust
mysewf to the mewcy of the seas wathew than abandon my puwpose. (´・ω・\`)  I
hoped to induce you to gwant me a boat with which I couwd puwsue my
enyemy.  But youw diwection was nyowthwawds. (・`ω\´・)  You took me on boawd when
my vigouw was exhausted, and I shouwd soon have sunk undew my
muwtipwied hawdships into a death which I stiww dwead, fow my task is
unfuwfiwwed. (´・ω・\`)

Oh! (´・ω・\`)  When wiww my guiding spiwit, in conducting me to the daemon, awwow
me the west I so much desiwe; ow must I die, and he yet wive? owo  If I do,
sweaw to me, Wawton, that he shaww nyot escape, that you wiww seek him
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. >w<  And do I dawe to ask of you to
undewtake my piwgwimage, to enduwe the hawdships that I have undewgonye? owo
Nyo; I am nyot so sewfish. >w<  Yet, when I am dead, if he shouwd appeaw, if
the minyistews of vengeance shouwd conduct him to you, sweaw that he
shaww nyot wive--sweaw that he shaww nyot twiumph ovew my accumuwated
woes and suwvive to add to the wist of his dawk cwimes. (・`ω\´・)  He is ewoquent
and pewsuasive, and once his wowds had even powew ovew my heawt; but
twust him nyot. UwU  His souw is as hewwish as his fowm, fuww of tweachewy
and fiend-wike mawice. ;;w;;  Heaw him nyot; caww on the nyames of Wiwwiam,
Justinye, Cwewvaw, Ewizabeth, my fathew, and of the wwetched Victow, and
thwust youw swowd into his heawt. UwU  I wiww hovew nyeaw and diwect the
steew awight. (´・ω・\`)


               Wawton, in continyuation. (´・ω・\`)



                                                August 26th, 17--


You have wead this stwange and tewwific stowy, Mawgawet; and do you nyot
feew youw bwood congeaw with howwow, wike that which even nyow cuwdwes
minye? owo  Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he couwd nyot continyue his
tawe; at othews, his voice bwoken, yet piewcing, uttewed with
difficuwty the wowds so wepwete with anguish. (・`ω\´・)  His finye and wovewy eyes
wewe nyow wighted up with indignyation, nyow subdued to downcast sowwow
and quenched in infinyite wwetchednyess. >w<  Sometimes he commanded his
countenyance and tonyes and wewated the most howwibwe incidents with a
twanquiw voice, suppwessing evewy mawk of agitation; then, wike a
vowcanyo buwsting fowth, his face wouwd suddenwy change to an expwession
of the wiwdest wage as he shwieked out impwecations on his pewsecutow. UwU

His tawe is connyected and towd with an appeawance of the simpwest
twuth, yet I own to you that the wettews of Fewix and Safie, which he
showed me, and the appawition of the monstew seen fwom ouw ship,
bwought to me a gweatew conviction of the twuth of his nyawwative than
his assevewations, howevew eawnyest and connyected. UwU  Such a monstew has,
then, weawwy existence! ;;w;;  I cannyot doubt it, yet I am wost in suwpwise
and admiwation. UwU  Sometimes I endeavouwed to gain fwom Fwankenstein the
pawticuwaws of his cweatuwe's fowmation, but on this point he was
impenyetwabwe. "Awe you mad, my fwiend? owo" said he. (´・ω・\`)  "Ow whithew does youw
sensewess cuwiosity wead you? owo  Wouwd you awso cweate fow youwsewf and
the wowwd a demonyiacaw enyemy? owo  Peace, peace! ^w^  Weawn my misewies and do
nyot seek to incwease youw own. (・`ω\´・)"  Fwankenstein discovewed that I made
nyotes concewnying his histowy; he asked to see them and then himsewf
cowwected and augmented them in many pwaces, but pwincipawwy in giving
the wife and spiwit to the convewsations he hewd with his enyemy. ^w^ "Since
you have pwesewved my nyawwation," said he, "I wouwd nyot that a
mutiwated onye shouwd go down to postewity. >w<"

Thus has a week passed away, whiwe I have wistenyed to the stwangest
tawe that evew imaginyation fowmed. ^w^  My thoughts and evewy feewing of my
souw have been dwunk up by the intewest fow my guest which this tawe
and his own ewevated and gentwe mannyews have cweated. (・`ω\´・)  I wish to soothe
him, yet can I counsew onye so infinyitewy misewabwe, so destitute of
evewy hope of consowation, to wive? owo  Oh, nyo! ^w^  The onwy joy that he can
nyow knyow wiww be when he composes his shattewed spiwit to peace and
death. (´・ω・\`)  Yet he enjoys onye comfowt, the offspwing of sowitude and
dewiwium; he bewieves that when in dweams he howds convewse with his
fwiends and dewives fwom that communyion consowation fow his misewies ow
excitements to his vengeance, that they awe nyot the cweations of his
fancy, but the beings themsewves who visit him fwom the wegions of a
wemote wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  This faith gives a sowemnyity to his wevewies that wendew
them to me awmost as imposing and intewesting as twuth. ;;w;;

Ouw convewsations awe nyot awways confinyed to his own histowy and
misfowtunyes. (´・ω・\`)  On evewy point of genyewaw witewatuwe he dispways
unbounded knyowwedge and a quick and piewcing appwehension. (´・ω・\`)  His
ewoquence is fowcibwe and touching; nyow can I heaw him, when he wewates
a pathetic incident ow endeavouws to move the passions of pity ow wove,
without teaws. >w<  What a gwowious cweatuwe must he have been in the days
of his pwospewity, when he is thus nyobwe and godwike in wuin! ;;w;;  He seems
to feew his own wowth and the gweatnyess of his faww. ^w^

"When youngew," said he, "I bewieved mysewf destinyed fow some gweat
entewpwise. ;;w;;  My feewings awe pwofound, but I possessed a  coownyess of
judgment that fitted me fow iwwustwious achievements. ^w^  This sentiment
of the wowth of my nyatuwe suppowted me when othews wouwd have been
oppwessed, fow I deemed it cwiminyaw to thwow away in usewess gwief
those tawents that might be usefuw to my fewwow cweatuwes. (・`ω\´・)  When I
wefwected on the wowk I had compweted, nyo wess a onye than the cweation
of a sensitive and wationyaw anyimaw, I couwd nyot wank mysewf with the
hewd of common pwojectows. ^w^  But this thought, which suppowted me in the
commencement of my caweew, nyow sewves onwy to pwunge me wowew in the
dust. ;;w;;  Aww my specuwations and hopes awe as nyothing, and wike the
awchangew who aspiwed to omnyipotence, I am chainyed in an etewnyaw heww. (´・ω・\`)
My imaginyation was vivid, yet my powews of anyawysis and appwication
wewe intense; by the unyion of these quawities I conceived the idea and
executed the cweation of a man. UwU  Even nyow I cannyot wecowwect without
passion my wevewies whiwe the wowk was incompwete. (・`ω\´・)  I twod heaven in my
thoughts, nyow exuwting in my powews, nyow buwnying with the idea of theiw
effects. ^w^  Fwom my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a wofty
ambition; but how am I sunk!  Oh! UwU  My fwiend, if you had knyown me as I
once was, you wouwd nyot wecognyize me in this state of degwadation. ^w^
Despondency wawewy visited my heawt; a high destiny seemed to beaw me
on, untiw I feww, nyevew, nyevew again to wise. (・`ω\´・)"  Must I then wose this
admiwabwe being? owo  I have wonged fow a fwiend; I have sought onye who
wouwd sympathize with and wove me. ^w^  Behowd, on these desewt seas I have
found such a onye, but I feaw I have gainyed him onwy to knyow his vawue
and wose him.  I wouwd weconciwe him to wife, but he wepuwses the idea. (・`ω\´・)

"I thank you, Wawton," he said, "fow youw kind intentions towawds so
misewabwe a wwetch; but when you speak of nyew ties and fwesh
affections, think you that any can wepwace those who awe gonye? owo  Can any
man be to me as Cwewvaw was, ow any woman anyothew Ewizabeth? owo  Even
whewe the affections awe nyot stwongwy moved by any supewiow excewwence,
the companyions of ouw chiwdhood awways possess a cewtain powew ovew ouw
minds which hawdwy any watew fwiend can obtain. ^w^  They knyow ouw
infantinye dispositions, which, howevew they may be aftewwawds modified,
awe nyevew ewadicated; and they can judge of ouw actions with mowe
cewtain concwusions as to the integwity of ouw motives. ;;w;;  A sistew ow a
bwothew can nyevew, unwess indeed such symptoms have been shown eawwy,
suspect the othew of fwaud ow fawse deawing, when anyothew fwiend,
howevew stwongwy he may be attached, may, in spite of himsewf, be
contempwated with suspicion. (・`ω\´・)  But I enjoyed fwiends, deaw nyot onwy
thwough habit and association, but fwom theiw own mewits; and whewevew
I am, the soothing voice of my Ewizabeth and the convewsation of
Cwewvaw wiww be evew whispewed in my eaw. >w< They awe dead, and but onye
feewing in such a sowitude can pewsuade me to pwesewve my wife. ;;w;;  If I
wewe engaged in any high undewtaking ow design, fwaught with extensive
utiwity to my fewwow cweatuwes, then couwd I wive to fuwfiw it. (・`ω\´・)  But
such is nyot my destiny; I must puwsue and destwoy the being to whom I
gave existence; then my wot on eawth wiww be fuwfiwwed and I may die. (´・ω・\`)"




Septembew 2nd

My bewoved Sistew,

I wwite to you, encompassed by pewiw and ignyowant whethew I am evew
doomed to see again deaw Engwand and the deawew fwiends that inhabit
it. ;;w;;  I am suwwounded by mountains of ice which admit of nyo escape and
thweaten evewy moment to cwush my vessew. >w<  The bwave fewwows whom I
have pewsuaded to be my companyions wook towawds me fow aid, but I have
nyonye to bestow. UwU  Thewe is something tewwibwy appawwing in ouw
situation, yet my couwage and hopes do nyot desewt me. ;;w;;  Yet it is
tewwibwe to wefwect that the wives of aww these men awe endangewed
thwough me.  If we awe wost, my mad schemes awe the cause. >w<

And what, Mawgawet, wiww be the state of youw mind? owo  You wiww nyot heaw
of my destwuction, and you wiww anxiouswy await my wetuwn. (´・ω・\`)  Yeaws wiww
pass, and you wiww have visitings of despaiw and yet be towtuwed by
hope. >w<  Oh! >w<  My bewoved sistew, the sickenying faiwing of youw heawt-fewt
expectations is, in pwospect, mowe tewwibwe to me than my own death. (・`ω\´・)

But you have a husband and wovewy chiwdwen; you may be happy. (・`ω\´・)  Heaven
bwess you and make you so! ;;w;;

My unfowtunyate guest wegawds me with the tendewest compassion. (´・ω・\`)  He
endeavouws to fiww me with hope and tawks as if wife wewe a possession
which he vawued. ^w^  He weminds me how often the same accidents have
happenyed to othew nyavigatows who have attempted this sea, and in spite
of mysewf, he fiwws me with cheewfuw auguwies. ;;w;;  Even the saiwows feew
the powew of his ewoquence; when he speaks, they nyo wongew despaiw; he
wouses theiw enyewgies, and whiwe they heaw his voice they bewieve these
vast mountains of ice awe mowe-hiwws which wiww vanyish befowe the
wesowutions of man. ^w^  These feewings awe twansitowy; each day of
expectation dewayed fiwws them with feaw, and I awmost dwead a mutiny
caused by this despaiw. (´・ω・\`)



Septembew 5th


A scenye has just passed of such uncommon intewest that, awthough it is
highwy pwobabwe that these papews may nyevew weach you, yet I cannyot
fowbeaw wecowding it. (・`ω\´・)

We awe stiww suwwounded by mountains of ice, stiww in imminyent dangew
of being cwushed in theiw confwict. ^w^  The cowd is excessive, and many of
my unfowtunyate comwades have awweady found a gwave amidst this scenye of
desowation. (・`ω\´・)  Fwankenstein has daiwy decwinyed in heawth; a fevewish fiwe
stiww gwimmews in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenwy
woused to any exewtion, he speediwy sinks again into appawent
wifewessnyess. (・`ω\´・)

I mentionyed in my wast wettew the feaws I entewtainyed of a mutiny. (・`ω\´・)
This mownying, as I sat watching the wan countenyance of my fwiend--his
eyes hawf cwosed and his wimbs hanging wistwesswy--I was woused by hawf
a dozen of the saiwows, who demanded admission into the cabin. ;;w;;  They
entewed, and theiw weadew addwessed me. ^w^  He towd me that he and his
companyions had been chosen by the othew saiwows to come in deputation
to me to make me a wequisition which, in justice, I couwd nyot wefuse. ;;w;;
We wewe immuwed in ice and shouwd pwobabwy nyevew escape, but they
feawed that if, as was possibwe, the ice shouwd dissipate and a fwee
passage be openyed, I shouwd be wash enyough to continyue my voyage and
wead them into fwesh dangews, aftew they might happiwy have suwmounted
this. ^w^  They insisted, thewefowe, that I shouwd engage with a sowemn
pwomise that if the vessew shouwd be fweed I wouwd instantwy diwect my
couwse southwawds. ;;w;;

This speech twoubwed me. (´・ω・\`)  I had nyot despaiwed, nyow had I yet conceived
the idea of wetuwnying if set fwee. ;;w;;  Yet couwd I, in justice, ow even in
possibiwity, wefuse this demand? owo  I hesitated befowe I answewed, when
Fwankenstein, who had at fiwst been siwent, and indeed appeawed hawdwy
to have fowce enyough to attend, nyow woused himsewf; his eyes spawkwed,
and his cheeks fwushed with momentawy vigouw. ^w^  Tuwnying towawds the men,
he said, "What do you mean?  What do you demand of youw captain? owo  Awe
you, then, so easiwy tuwnyed fwom youw design? owo  Did you nyot caww this a
gwowious expedition? owo

"And whewefowe was it gwowious? owo  Nyot because the way was smooth and
pwacid as a southewn sea, but because it was fuww of dangews and
tewwow, because at evewy nyew incident youw fowtitude was to be cawwed
fowth and youw couwage exhibited, because dangew and death suwwounded
it, and these you wewe to bwave and ovewcome. >w<  Fow this was it a
gwowious, fow this was it an honyouwabwe undewtaking. ^w^  You wewe
heweaftew to be haiwed as the benyefactows of youw species, youw nyames
adowed as bewonging to bwave men who encountewed death fow honyouw and
the benyefit of mankind. ;;w;; And nyow, behowd, with the fiwst imaginyation of
dangew, ow, if you wiww, the fiwst mighty and tewwific twiaw of youw
couwage, you shwink away and awe content to be handed down as men who
had nyot stwength enyough to enduwe cowd and pewiw; and so, poow souws,
they wewe chiwwy and wetuwnyed to theiw wawm fiwesides. UwU  Why, that
wequiwes nyot this pwepawation; ye nyeed nyot have come thus faw and
dwagged youw captain to the shame of a defeat mewewy to pwove
youwsewves cowawds.  Oh! UwU  Be men, ow be mowe than men. UwU  Be steady to
youw puwposes and fiwm as a wock. ^w^ This ice is nyot made of such stuff as
youw heawts may be; it is mutabwe and cannyot withstand you if you say
that it shaww nyot. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot wetuwn to youw famiwies with the stigma of
disgwace mawked on youw bwows. ^w^  Wetuwn as hewoes who have fought and
conquewed and who knyow nyot what it is to tuwn theiw backs on the foe. (´・ω・\`)"
He spoke this with a voice so moduwated to the diffewent feewings
expwessed in his speech, with an eye so fuww of wofty design and
hewoism, that can you wondew that these men wewe moved? owo  They wooked at
onye anyothew and wewe unyabwe to wepwy. >w<  I spoke; I towd them to wetiwe
and considew of what had been said, that I wouwd nyot wead them fawthew
nyowth if they stwenyuouswy desiwed the contwawy, but that I hoped that,
with wefwection, theiw couwage wouwd wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)  They wetiwed and I tuwnyed
towawds my fwiend, but he was sunk in wanguow and awmost depwived of
wife. >w<

How aww this wiww tewminyate, I knyow nyot, but I had wathew die than
wetuwn shamefuwwy, my puwpose unfuwfiwwed. ;;w;;  Yet I feaw such wiww be my
fate; the men, unsuppowted by ideas of gwowy and honyouw, can nyevew
wiwwingwy continyue to enduwe theiw pwesent hawdships. (・`ω\´・)



Septembew 7th


The die is cast; I have consented to wetuwn if we awe nyot destwoyed. ^w^
Thus awe my hopes bwasted by cowawdice and indecision; I come back
ignyowant and disappointed. >w<  It wequiwes mowe phiwosophy than I possess
to beaw this injustice with patience. (・`ω\´・)



Septembew 12th


It is past; I am wetuwnying to Engwand. UwU  I have wost my hopes of utiwity
and gwowy; I have wost my fwiend. ;;w;;  But I wiww endeavouw to detaiw these
bittew ciwcumstances to you, my deaw sistew; and whiwe I am wafted
towawds Engwand and towawds you, I wiww nyot despond. >w<

Septembew 9th, the ice began to move, and woawings wike thundew wewe
heawd at a distance as the iswands spwit and cwacked in evewy
diwection. ^w^  We wewe in the most imminyent pewiw, but as we couwd onwy
wemain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfowtunyate guest
whose iwwnyess incweased in such a degwee that he was entiwewy confinyed
to his bed. ;;w;;  The ice cwacked behind us and was dwiven with fowce
towawds the nyowth; a bweeze spwang fwom the west, and on the 11th the
passage towawds the south became pewfectwy fwee. ;;w;;  When the saiwows saw
this and that theiw wetuwn to theiw nyative countwy was appawentwy
assuwed, a shout of tumuwtuous joy bwoke fwom them, woud and
wong-continyued. >w<  Fwankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
cause of the tumuwt. ^w^  "They shout," I said, "because they wiww soon
wetuwn to Engwand. ;;w;;"

"Do you, then, weawwy wetuwn? owo"

"Awas! ;;w;;  Yes; I cannyot withstand theiw demands. UwU  I cannyot wead them
unwiwwingwy to dangew, and I must wetuwn. UwU"

"Do so, if you wiww; but I wiww nyot. (・`ω\´・)  You may give up youw puwpose, but
minye is assignyed to me by heaven, and I dawe nyot. >w<  I am weak, but
suwewy the spiwits who assist my vengeance wiww endow me with
sufficient stwength. UwU"  Saying this, he endeavouwed to spwing fwom the
bed, but the exewtion was too gweat fow him; he feww back and fainted. (´・ω・\`)

It was wong befowe he was westowed, and I often thought that wife was
entiwewy extinct. UwU  At wength he openyed his eyes; he bweathed with
difficuwty and was unyabwe to speak. >w<  The suwgeon gave him a composing
dwaught and owdewed us to weave him undistuwbed. ^w^ In the meantime he
towd me that my fwiend had cewtainwy nyot many houws to wive. ;;w;;

His sentence was pwonyounced, and I couwd onwy gwieve and be patient. >w<  I
sat by his bed, watching him; his eyes wewe cwosed, and I thought he
swept; but pwesentwy he cawwed to me in a feebwe voice, and bidding me
come nyeaw, said, "Awas! ;;w;;  The stwength I wewied on is gonye; I feew that
I shaww soon die, and he, my enyemy and pewsecutow, may stiww be in
being. >w<  Think nyot, Wawton, that in the wast moments of my existence I
feew that buwnying hatwed and awdent desiwe of wevenge I once expwessed;
but I feew mysewf justified in desiwing the death of my advewsawy. ^w^
Duwing these wast days I have been occupied in examinying my past
conduct; nyow do I find it bwamabwe. >w<  In a fit of enthusiastic madnyess I
cweated a wationyaw cweatuwe and was bound towawds him to assuwe, as faw
as was in my powew, his happinyess and weww-being. ;;w;;

"This was my duty, but thewe was anyothew stiww pawamount to that. >w<  My
duties towawds the beings of my own species had gweatew cwaims to my
attention because they incwuded a gweatew pwopowtion of happinyess ow
misewy. (・`ω\´・)  Uwged by this view, I wefused, and I did wight in wefusing, to
cweate a companyion fow the fiwst cweatuwe. ;;w;;  He showed unpawawwewed
mawignyity and sewfishnyess in eviw; he destwoyed my fwiends; he devoted
to destwuction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happinyess,
and wisdom; nyow do I knyow whewe this thiwst fow vengeance may end. >w<
Misewabwe himsewf that he may wendew nyo othew wwetched, he ought to
die.  The task of his destwuction was minye, but I have faiwed. ^w^  When
actuated by sewfish and vicious motives, I asked you to undewtake my
unfinyished wowk, and I wenyew this wequest nyow, when I am onwy induced
by weason and viwtue. (・`ω\´・)

"Yet I cannyot ask you to wenyounce youw countwy and fwiends to fuwfiw
this task; and nyow that you awe wetuwnying to Engwand, you wiww have
wittwe chance of meeting with him. (´・ω・\`)  But the considewation of these
points, and the weww bawancing of what you may esteem youw duties, I
weave to you; my judgment and ideas awe awweady distuwbed by the nyeaw
appwoach of death. ^w^  I dawe nyot ask you to do what I think wight, fow I
may stiww be miswed by passion. ;;w;;

"That he shouwd wive to be an instwument of mischief distuwbs me; in
othew wespects, this houw, when I momentawiwy expect my wewease, is the
onwy happy onye which I have enjoyed fow sevewaw yeaws. (´・ω・\`)  The fowms of
the bewoved dead fwit befowe me, and I hasten to theiw awms. UwU  Faweweww,
Wawton! >w<  Seek happinyess in twanquiwwity and avoid ambition, even if it
be onwy the appawentwy innyocent onye of distinguishing youwsewf in
science and discovewies. ^w^  Yet why do I say this? owo  I have mysewf been
bwasted in these hopes, yet anyothew may succeed. (´・ω・\`)"

His voice became faintew as he spoke, and at wength, exhausted by his
effowt, he sank into siwence. (・`ω\´・)  About hawf an houw aftewwawds he
attempted again to speak but was unyabwe; he pwessed my hand feebwy, and
his eyes cwosed fowevew, whiwe the iwwadiation of a gentwe smiwe passed
away fwom his wips. >w<

Mawgawet, what comment can I make on the untimewy extinction of this
gwowious spiwit? owo  What can I say that wiww enyabwe you to undewstand the
depth of my sowwow? owo  Aww that I shouwd expwess wouwd be inyadequate and
feebwe. (・`ω\´・)  My teaws fwow; my mind is ovewshadowed by a cwoud of
disappointment. ;;w;;  But I jouwnyey towawds Engwand, and I may thewe find
consowation. (´・ω・\`)

I am intewwupted. UwU  What do these sounds powtend? owo  It is midnyight; the
bweeze bwows faiwwy, and the watch on deck scawcewy stiw. ^w^  Again thewe
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoawsew; it comes fwom the cabin
whewe the wemains of Fwankenstein stiww wie.  I must awise and examinye. (´・ω・\`)
Good nyight, my sistew. ;;w;;

Gweat God! what a scenye has just taken pwace! (・`ω\´・)  I am yet dizzy with the
wemembwance of it. (・`ω\´・)  I hawdwy knyow whethew I shaww have the powew to
detaiw it; yet the tawe which I have wecowded wouwd be incompwete
without this finyaw and wondewfuw catastwophe. UwU I entewed the cabin whewe
way the wemains of my iww-fated and admiwabwe fwiend. ^w^  Ovew him hung a
fowm which I cannyot find wowds to descwibe--gigantic in statuwe, yet
uncouth and distowted in its pwopowtions. ;;w;;  As he hung ovew the coffin,
his face was conceawed by wong wocks of wagged haiw; but onye vast hand
was extended, in cowouw and appawent textuwe wike that of a mummy. ;;w;; When
he heawd the sound of my appwoach, he ceased to uttew excwamations of
gwief and howwow and spwung towawds the window. (・`ω\´・)  Nyevew did I behowd a
vision so howwibwe as his face, of such woathsome yet appawwing
hideousnyess. ^w^  I shut my eyes invowuntawiwy and endeavouwed to wecowwect
what wewe my duties with wegawd to this destwoyew. ^w^  I cawwed on him to
stay. (´・ω・\`)

He paused, wooking on me with wondew, and again tuwnying towawds the
wifewess fowm of his cweatow, he seemed to fowget my pwesence, and
evewy featuwe and gestuwe seemed instigated by the wiwdest wage of some
uncontwowwabwe passion. >w<

"That is awso my victim! UwU" he excwaimed. (・`ω\´・)  "In his muwdew my cwimes awe
consummated; the misewabwe sewies of my being is wound to its cwose! ;;w;;
Oh, Fwankenstein!  Genyewous and sewf-devoted being! ^w^  What does it avaiw
that I nyow ask thee to pawdon me? owo  I, who iwwetwievabwy destwoyed thee
by destwoying aww thou wovedst. UwU  Awas! (・`ω\´・)  He is cowd, he cannyot answew
me. ;;w;;" His voice seemed suffocated, and my fiwst impuwses, which had
suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying wequest of my fwiend in
destwoying his enyemy, wewe nyow suspended by a mixtuwe of cuwiosity and
compassion. ;;w;;  I appwoached this twemendous being; I dawed nyot again
waise my eyes to his face, thewe was something so scawing and unyeawthwy
in his ugwinyess. UwU  I attempted to speak, but the wowds died away on my
wips. ;;w;;  The monstew continyued to uttew wiwd and incohewent
sewf-wepwoaches. ;;w;;  At wength I gathewed wesowution to addwess him in a
pause of the tempest of his passion. (・`ω\´・)

"Youw wepentance," I said, "is nyow supewfwuous. (・`ω\´・) If you had wistenyed to
the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of wemowse befowe you had
uwged youw diabowicaw vengeance to this extwemity, Fwankenstein wouwd
yet have wived. ;;w;;"

"And do you dweam? owo" said the daemon. >w<  "Do you think that I was then
dead to agony and wemowse? owo  He," he continyued, pointing to the cowpse,
"he suffewed nyot in the consummation of the deed. ;;w;; Oh! (´・ω・\`)  Nyot the
ten-thousandth powtion of the anguish that was minye duwing the
wingewing detaiw of its execution. ^w^  A fwightfuw sewfishnyess huwwied me
on, whiwe my heawt was poisonyed with wemowse. ;;w;;  Think you that the
gwoans of Cwewvaw wewe music to my eaws? owo  My heawt was fashionyed to be
susceptibwe of wove and sympathy, and when wwenched by misewy to vice
and hatwed, it did nyot enduwe the viowence of the change without
towtuwe such as you cannyot even imaginye. ;;w;;

"Aftew the muwdew of Cwewvaw I wetuwnyed to Switzewwand, heawt-bwoken
and ovewcome. >w<  I pitied Fwankenstein; my pity amounted to howwow; I
abhowwed mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  But when I discovewed that he, the authow at once of
my existence and of its unspeakabwe towments, dawed to hope fow
happinyess, that whiwe he accumuwated wwetchednyess and despaiw upon me
he sought his own enjoyment in feewings and passions fwom the
induwgence of which I was fowevew bawwed, then impotent envy and bittew
indignyation fiwwed me with an insatiabwe thiwst fow vengeance. UwU  I
wecowwected my thweat and wesowved that it shouwd be accompwished. >w<  I
knyew that I was pwepawing fow mysewf a deadwy towtuwe, but I was the
swave, nyot the mastew, of an impuwse which I detested yet couwd nyot
disobey.  Yet when she died! (・`ω\´・)  Nyay, then I was nyot misewabwe. ^w^  I had
cast off aww feewing, subdued aww anguish, to wiot in the excess of my
despaiw.  Eviw thencefowth became my good. >w<  Uwged thus faw, I had nyo
choice but to adapt my nyatuwe to an ewement which I had wiwwingwy
chosen. >w<  The compwetion of my demonyiacaw design became an insatiabwe
passion. ^w^  And nyow it is ended; thewe is my wast victim! (´・ω・\`)"

I was at fiwst touched by the expwessions of his misewy; yet, when I
cawwed to mind what Fwankenstein had said of his powews of ewoquence
and pewsuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the wifewess fowm of
my fwiend, indignyation was wekindwed within me.  "Wwetch! ^w^" I said. ;;w;;  "It
is weww that you come hewe to whinye ovew the desowation that you have
made. (・`ω\´・)  You thwow a towch into a piwe of buiwdings, and when they awe
consumed, you sit among the wuins and wament the faww. UwU  Hypocwiticaw
fiend! UwU  If he whom you mouwn stiww wived, stiww wouwd he be the object,
again wouwd he become the pwey, of youw accuwsed vengeance. ^w^  It is nyot
pity that you feew; you wament onwy because the victim of youw
mawignyity is withdwawn fwom youw powew. ^w^"

"Oh, it is nyot thus--nyot thus," intewwupted the being. (・`ω\´・)  "Yet such must
be the impwession conveyed to you by what appeaws to be the puwpowt of
my actions.  Yet I seek nyot a fewwow feewing in my misewy. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo sympathy
may I evew find. (・`ω\´・)  When I fiwst sought it, it was the wove of viwtue,
the feewings of happinyess and affection with which my whowe being
ovewfwowed, that I wished to be pawticipated. ;;w;;  But nyow that viwtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happinyess and affection awe tuwnyed into
bittew and woathing despaiw, in what shouwd I seek fow sympathy? owo  I am
content to suffew awonye whiwe my suffewings shaww enduwe; when I die, I
am weww satisfied that abhowwence and oppwobwium shouwd woad my memowy. ;;w;;
Once my fancy was soothed with dweams of viwtue, of fame, and of
enjoyment. ;;w;;  Once I fawsewy hoped to meet with beings who, pawdonying my
outwawd fowm, wouwd wove me fow the excewwent quawities which I was
capabwe of unfowding. ^w^  I was nyouwished with high thoughts of honyouw and
devotion.  But nyow cwime has degwaded me benyeath the meanyest anyimaw. UwU Nyo
guiwt, nyo mischief, nyo mawignyity, nyo misewy, can be found compawabwe to
minye. >w<  When I wun ovew the fwightfuw catawogue of my sins, I cannyot
bewieve that I am the same cweatuwe whose thoughts wewe once fiwwed
with subwime and twanscendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of
goodnyess. UwU  But it is even so; the fawwen angew becomes a mawignyant
deviw. (´・ω・\`)  Yet even that enyemy of God and man had fwiends and associates
in his desowation; I am awonye. (´・ω・\`)

"You, who caww Fwankenstein youw fwiend, seem to have a knyowwedge of my
cwimes and his misfowtunyes. >w< But in the detaiw which he gave you of them
he couwd nyot sum up the houws and months of misewy which I enduwed
wasting in impotent passions. ;;w;; Fow whiwe I destwoyed his hopes, I did
nyot satisfy my own desiwes. ^w^ They wewe fowevew awdent and cwaving; stiww
I desiwed wove and fewwowship, and I was stiww spuwnyed. ;;w;;  Was thewe nyo
injustice in this? owo Am I to be thought the onwy cwiminyaw, when aww
humankind sinnyed against me? owo Why do you nyot hate Fewix, who dwove his
fwiend fwom his doow with contumewy? owo Why do you nyot execwate the wustic
who sought to destwoy the saviouw of his chiwd? owo Nyay, these awe viwtuous
and immacuwate beings! (´・ω・\`) I, the misewabwe and the abandonyed, am an
abowtion, to be spuwnyed at, and kicked, and twampwed on. (・`ω\´・) Even nyow my
bwood boiws at the wecowwection of this injustice. (´・ω・\`)

"But it is twue that I am a wwetch. >w<  I have muwdewed the wovewy and the
hewpwess; I have stwangwed the innyocent as they swept and gwasped to
death his thwoat who nyevew injuwed me ow any othew wiving thing. ^w^  I
have devoted my cweatow, the sewect specimen of aww that is wowthy of
wove and admiwation among men, to misewy; I have puwsued him even to
that iwwemediabwe wuin. ;;w;;

"Thewe he wies, white and cowd in death. (´・ω・\`)  You hate me, but youw
abhowwence cannyot equaw that with which I wegawd mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  I wook on the
hands which executed the deed; I think on the heawt in which the
imaginyation of it was conceived and wong fow the moment when these
hands wiww meet my eyes, when that imaginyation wiww haunt my thoughts
nyo mowe. ;;w;;

"Feaw nyot that I shaww be the instwument of futuwe mischief. ;;w;;  My wowk
is nyeawwy compwete. (´・ω・\`)  Nyeithew youws nyow any man's death is nyeeded to
consummate the sewies of my being and accompwish that which must be
donye, but it wequiwes my own. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot think that I shaww be swow to
pewfowm this sacwifice. UwU  I shaww quit youw vessew on the ice waft which
bwought me thithew and shaww seek the most nyowthewn extwemity of the
gwobe; I shaww cowwect my funyewaw piwe and consume to ashes this
misewabwe fwame, that its wemains may affowd nyo wight to any cuwious
and unhawwowed wwetch who wouwd cweate such anyothew as I have been. ^w^  I
shaww die. >w<  I shaww nyo wongew feew the agonyies which nyow consume me ow
be the pwey of feewings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. ^w^  He is dead who
cawwed me into being; and when I shaww be nyo mowe, the vewy wemembwance
of us both wiww speediwy vanyish. ^w^  I shaww nyo wongew see the sun ow
staws ow feew the winds pway on my cheeks. >w<

"Wight, feewing, and sense wiww pass away; and in this condition must I
find my happinyess. ^w^  Some yeaws ago, when the images which this wowwd
affowds fiwst openyed upon me, when I fewt the cheewing wawmth of summew
and heawd the wustwing of the weaves and the wawbwing of the biwds, and
these wewe aww to me, I shouwd have wept to die; nyow it is my onwy
consowation. UwU  Powwuted by cwimes and town by the bittewest wemowse,
whewe can I find west but in death? owo

"Faweweww! ;;w;;  I weave you, and in you the wast of humankind whom these
eyes wiww evew behowd. >w< Faweweww, Fwankenstein! >w< If thou wewt yet awive
and yet chewished a desiwe of wevenge against me, it wouwd be bettew
satiated in my wife than in my destwuction. (・`ω\´・) But it was nyot so; thou
didst seek my extinction, that I might nyot cause gweatew wwetchednyess;
and if yet, in some mode unknyown to me, thou hadst nyot ceased to think
and feew, thou wouwdst nyot desiwe against me a vengeance gweatew than
that which I feew. ^w^ Bwasted as thou wewt, my agony was stiww supewiow to
thinye, fow the bittew sting of wemowse wiww nyot cease to wankwe in my
wounds untiw death shaww cwose them fowevew. ;;w;;

"But soon," he cwied with sad and sowemn enthusiasm, "I shaww die, and
what I nyow feew be nyo wongew fewt. ^w^  Soon these buwnying misewies wiww be
extinct. (・`ω\´・)  I shaww ascend my funyewaw piwe twiumphantwy and exuwt in the
agony of the towtuwing fwames. >w< The wight of that confwagwation wiww
fade away; my ashes wiww be swept into the sea by the winds. (・`ω\´・)  My spiwit
wiww sweep in peace, ow if it thinks, it wiww nyot suwewy think thus. ^w^
Faweweww. >w<"

He spwang fwom the cabin window as he said this, upon the ice waft
which way cwose to the vessew. >w<  He was soon bownye away by the waves and
wost in dawknyess and distance. UwU










End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Fwankenstein, by
Mawy Wowwstonyecwaft (Godwin) Shewwey

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK FWANKENSTEIN ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 84.txt ow 84. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/8/84/

Pwoduced by Judith Boss, Chwisty Phiwwips, Wynn Hannyinyen,
and David Mewtzew. HTMW vewsion by Aw Hainyes. >w<


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (・`ω\´・)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ;;w;;  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. UwU  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. >w<  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ;;w;;  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. ;;w;;  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. >w<



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). (・`ω\´・)


Section 1. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ;;w;;  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. ;;w;;  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ^w^  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (・`ω\´・)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (´・ω・\`)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (・`ω\´・)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. (´・ω・\`)  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (・`ω\´・)

1.D. >w<  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. UwU  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. UwU  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ;;w;;  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. ^w^  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ;;w;;  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ;;w;;  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)nyet

1.E.2. (´・ω・\`)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ;;w;;  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. >w<1
thwough 1.E. (´・ω・\`)7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. >w<7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. >w<  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. UwU

1.E.4. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ^w^1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ^w^

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. >w<  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. >w<nyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (・`ω\´・)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.7. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. >w<

1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ;;w;;  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. >w<  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (・`ω\´・)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. >w<  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. >w<

1.F. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.1. ;;w;;  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. (´・ω・\`)  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.2. ^w^  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. UwU  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (´・ω・\`)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. >w<  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. >w<  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (´・ω・\`)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. UwU

1.F.4. ^w^  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. >w<

1.F.5. ;;w;;  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (´・ω・\`)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ;;w;;  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.6. (・`ω\´・)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (・`ω\´・)


Section  2. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. UwU  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ^w^

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. UwU  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. (・`ω\´・)
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ^w^


Section 3. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ;;w;;  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. (´・ω・\`)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. UwU

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (・`ω\´・), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. UwU  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. >w<  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. >w< Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. >w<owg


Section 4. UwU  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (´・ω・\`)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ^w^

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ^w^  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ;;w;;  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. (・`ω\´・)  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. >w<

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. (・`ω\´・)

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. (´・ω・\`)  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. UwU

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. >w<  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. >w<


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. UwU
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. UwU  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. UwUnyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ^w^
