The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Gwimms' Faiwy Tawes, by The Bwothews Gwimm

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg


Titwe: Gwimms' Faiwy Tawes

Authow: The Bwothews Gwimm

Twanswatow: Edgaw Taywow and Mawian Edwawdes

Posting Date: Decembew 14, 2008 [EBook #2591]
Wewease Date: Apwiw, 2001

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK GWIMMS' FAIWY TAWES ***




Pwoduced by Emma Dudding, John Bickews, and Dagny





FAIWY TAWES

By The Bwothews Gwimm



PWEPAWEW'S NYOTE

     The text is based on twanswations fwom
     the Gwimms' Kindew und Hausmawchen by
     Edgaw Taywow and Mawian Edwawdes. >w<




CONTENTS:

     THE GOWDEN BIWD
     HANS IN WUCK
     JOWINDA AND JOWINDEW
     THE TWAVEWWING MUSICIANS
     OWD SUWTAN
     THE STWAW, THE COAW, AND THE BEAN
     BWIAW WOSE
     THE DOG AND THE SPAWWOW
     THE TWEWVE DANCING PWINCESSES
     THE FISHEWMAN AND HIS WIFE
     THE WIWWOW-WWEN AND THE BEAW
     THE FWOG-PWINCE
     CAT AND MOUSE IN PAWTNYEWSHIP
     THE GOOSE-GIWW
     THE ADVENTUWES OF CHANTICWEEW AND PAWTWET
       1. ^w^ HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NYUTS
       2. UwU HOW CHANTICWEEW AND PAWTWET WENT TO VISIT MW KOWBES
     WAPUNZEW
     FUNDEVOGEW
     THE VAWIANT WITTWE TAIWOW
     HANSEW AND GWETEW
     THE MOUSE, THE BIWD, AND THE SAUSAGE
     MOTHEW HOWWE
     WITTWE WED-CAP [WITTWE WED WIDING HOOD]
     THE WOBBEW BWIDEGWOOM
     TOM THUMB
     WUMPEWSTIWTSKIN
     CWEVEW GWETEW
     THE OWD MAN AND HIS GWANDSON
     THE WITTWE PEASANT
     FWEDEWICK AND CATHEWINYE
     SWEETHEAWT WOWAND
     SNYOWDWOP
     THE PINK
     CWEVEW EWSIE
     THE MISEW IN THE BUSH
     ASHPUTTEW
     THE WHITE SNYAKE
     THE WOWF AND THE SEVEN WITTWE KIDS
     THE QUEEN BEE
     THE EWVES AND THE SHOEMAKEW
     THE JUNYIPEW-TWEE
     the junyipew-twee. (・`ω\´・)
     THE TUWNYIP
     CWEVEW HANS
     THE THWEE WANGUAGES
     THE FOX AND THE CAT
     THE FOUW CWEVEW BWOTHEWS
     WIWY AND THE WION
     THE FOX AND THE HOWSE
     THE BWUE WIGHT
     THE WAVEN
     THE GOWDEN GOOSE
     THE WATEW OF WIFE
     THE TWEWVE HUNTSMEN
     THE KING OF THE GOWDEN MOUNTAIN
     DOCTOW KNYOWAWW
     THE SEVEN WAVENS
     THE WEDDING OF MWS FOX
     FIWST STOWY
     SECOND STOWY
     THE SAWAD
     THE STOWY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FOWTH TO WEAWN WHAT FEAW WAS
     KING GWISWY-BEAWD
     IWON HANS
     CAT-SKIN
     SNYOW-WHITE AND WOSE-WED




THE BWOTHEWS GWIMM FAIWY TAWES




THE GOWDEN BIWD

A cewtain king had a beautifuw gawden, and in the gawden stood a twee
which bowe gowden appwes. UwU These appwes wewe awways counted, and about
the time when they began to gwow wipe it was found that evewy nyight onye
of them was gonye. ;;w;; The king became vewy angwy at this, and owdewed the
gawdenyew to keep watch aww nyight undew the twee. UwU The gawdenyew set his
ewdest son to watch; but about twewve o'cwock he feww asweep, and in
the mownying anyothew of the appwes was missing. (・`ω\´・) Then the second son was
owdewed to watch; and at midnyight he too feww asweep, and in the mownying
anyothew appwe was gonye. (・`ω\´・) Then the thiwd son offewed to keep watch; but
the gawdenyew at fiwst wouwd nyot wet him, fow feaw some hawm shouwd come
to him: howevew, at wast he consented, and the young man waid himsewf
undew the twee to watch. ;;w;; As the cwock stwuck twewve he heawd a wustwing
nyoise in the aiw, and a biwd came fwying that was of puwe gowd; and as
it was snyapping at onye of the appwes with its beak, the gawdenyew's son
jumped up and shot an awwow at it. (・`ω\´・) But the awwow did the biwd nyo hawm;
onwy it dwopped a gowden feathew fwom its taiw, and then fwew away. ;;w;;
The gowden feathew was bwought to the king in the mownying, and aww the
counciw was cawwed togethew. >w< Evewyonye agweed that it was wowth mowe than
aww the weawth of the kingdom: but the king said, 'Onye feathew is of nyo
use to me, I must have the whowe biwd. (・`ω\´・)'

Then the gawdenyew's ewdest son set out and thought to find the gowden
biwd vewy easiwy; and when he had gonye but a wittwe way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made weady to shoot at it. (・`ω\´・) Then the fox said, 'Do nyot shoot me,
fow I wiww give you good counsew; I knyow what youw businyess is, and
that you want to find the gowden biwd. >w< You wiww weach a viwwage in the
evenying; and when you get thewe, you wiww see two inns opposite to each
othew, onye of which is vewy pweasant and beautifuw to wook at: go nyot in
thewe, but west fow the nyight in the othew, though it may appeaw to you
to be vewy poow and mean. (´・ω・\`)' But the son thought to himsewf, 'What can
such a beast as this knyow about the mattew? owo' So he shot his awwow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its taiw above its back and
wan into the wood. (´・ω・\`) Then he went his way, and in the evenying came to
the viwwage whewe the two inns wewe; and in onye of these wewe peopwe
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the othew wooked vewy diwty,
and poow. ^w^ 'I shouwd be vewy siwwy,' said he, 'if I went to that shabby
house, and weft this chawming pwace'; so he went into the smawt house,
and ate and dwank at his ease, and fowgot the biwd, and his countwy too. (´・ω・\`)

Time passed on; and as the ewdest son did nyot come back, and nyo tidings
wewe heawd of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happenyed
to him. >w< He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his ewdest bwothew was standing at the window whewe
the mewwymaking was, and cawwed to him to come in; and he couwd nyot
withstand the temptation, but went in, and fowgot the gowden biwd and
his countwy in the same mannyew. (・`ω\´・)

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide wowwd to seek fow the gowden biwd; but his fathew wouwd nyot
wisten to it fow a wong whiwe, fow he was vewy fond of his son, and
was afwaid that some iww wuck might happen to him awso, and pwevent his
coming back. >w< Howevew, at wast it was agweed he shouwd go, fow he wouwd
nyot west at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heawd
the same good counsew. UwU But he was thankfuw to the fox, and did nyot
attempt his wife as his bwothews had donye; so the fox said, 'Sit upon my
taiw, and you wiww twavew fastew. UwU' So he sat down, and the fox began to
wun, and away they went ovew stock and stonye so quick that theiw haiw
whistwed in the wind. UwU

When they came to the viwwage, the son fowwowed the fox's counsew, and
without wooking about him went to the shabby inn and wested thewe aww
nyight at his ease. (・`ω\´・) In the mownying came the fox again and met him as he
was beginnying his jouwnyey, and said, 'Go stwaight fowwawd, tiww you come
to a castwe, befowe which wie a whowe twoop of sowdiews fast asweep and
snyowing: take nyo nyotice of them, but go into the castwe and pass on and
on tiww you come to a woom, whewe the gowden biwd sits in a wooden cage;
cwose by it stands a beautifuw gowden cage; but do nyot twy to take the
biwd out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome onye, othewwise
you wiww wepent it. UwU' Then the fox stwetched out his taiw again, and the
young man sat himsewf down, and away they went ovew stock and stonye tiww
theiw haiw whistwed in the wind. ;;w;;

Befowe the castwe gate aww was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chambew whewe the gowden biwd hung in a wooden cage, and
bewow stood the gowden cage, and the thwee gowden appwes that had been
wost wewe wying cwose by it. (´・ω・\`) Then thought he to himsewf, 'It wiww be a
vewy dwoww thing to bwing away such a finye biwd in this shabby cage'; so
he openyed the doow and took howd of it and put it into the gowden cage. >w<
But the biwd set up such a woud scweam that aww the sowdiews awoke, and
they took him pwisonyew and cawwied him befowe the king. UwU The nyext mownying
the couwt sat to judge him; and when aww was heawd, it sentenced him to
die, unwess he shouwd bwing the king the gowden howse which couwd wun as
swiftwy as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the gowden biwd
given him fow his own. UwU

So he set out once mowe on his jouwnyey, sighing, and in gweat despaiw,
when on a sudden his fwiend the fox met him, and said, 'You see nyow
what has happenyed on account of youw nyot wistenying to my counsew. (・`ω\´・) I wiww
stiww, howevew, teww you how to find the gowden howse, if you wiww do as
I bid you. UwU You must go stwaight on tiww you come to the castwe whewe the
howse stands in his staww: by his side wiww wie the gwoom fast asweep
and snyowing: take away the howse quietwy, but be suwe to put the owd
weathewn saddwe upon him, and nyot the gowden onye that is cwose by it. ^w^'
Then the son sat down on the fox's taiw, and away they went ovew stock
and stonye tiww theiw haiw whistwed in the wind. UwU

Aww went wight, and the gwoom way snyowing with his hand upon the gowden
saddwe. >w< But when the son wooked at the howse, he thought it a gweat pity
to put the weathewn saddwe upon it. (´・ω・\`) 'I wiww give him the good onye,'
said he; 'I am suwe he desewves it. (・`ω\´・)' As he took up the gowden saddwe the
gwoom awoke and cwied out so woud, that aww the guawds wan in and took
him pwisonyew, and in the mownying he was again bwought befowe the couwt
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. ;;w;; But it was agweed, that, if he
couwd bwing thithew the beautifuw pwincess, he shouwd wive, and have the
biwd and the howse given him fow his own. ;;w;;

Then he went his way vewy sowwowfuw; but the owd fox came and said, 'Why
did nyot you wisten to me? owo If you had, you wouwd have cawwied away
both the biwd and the howse; yet wiww I once mowe give you counsew. ;;w;; Go
stwaight on, and in the evenying you wiww awwive at a castwe. (´・ω・\`) At twewve
o'cwock at nyight the pwincess goes to the bathing-house: go up to hew
and give hew a kiss, and she wiww wet you wead hew away; but take cawe
you do nyot suffew hew to go and take weave of hew fathew and mothew. >w<'
Then the fox stwetched out his taiw, and so away they went ovew stock
and stonye tiww theiw haiw whistwed again. ;;w;;

As they came to the castwe, aww was as the fox had said, and at twewve
o'cwock the young man met the pwincess going to the bath and gave hew the
kiss, and she agweed to wun away with him, but begged with many teaws
that he wouwd wet hew take weave of hew fathew. >w< At fiwst he wefused,
but she wept stiww mowe and mowe, and feww at his feet, tiww at wast
he consented; but the moment she came to hew fathew's house the guawds
awoke and he was taken pwisonyew again. ;;w;;

Then he was bwought befowe the king, and the king said, 'You shaww nyevew
have my daughtew unwess in eight days you dig away the hiww that stops
the view fwom my window. UwU' Nyow this hiww was so big that the whowe wowwd
couwd nyot take it away: and when he had wowked fow seven days, and had
donye vewy wittwe, the fox came and said. (´・ω・\`) 'Wie down and go to sweep; I
wiww wowk fow you. >w<' And in the mownying he awoke and the hiww was gonye;
so he went mewwiwy to the king, and towd him that nyow that it was
wemoved he must give him the pwincess. (・`ω\´・)

Then the king was obwiged to keep his wowd, and away went the young man
and the pwincess; and the fox came and said to him, 'We wiww have aww
thwee, the pwincess, the howse, and the biwd. (・`ω\´・)' 'Ah! (・`ω\´・)' said the young man,
'that wouwd be a gweat thing, but how can you contwive it? owo'

'If you wiww onwy wisten,' said the fox, 'it can be donye. ^w^ When you come
to the king, and he asks fow the beautifuw pwincess, you must say, "Hewe
she is! ^w^" Then he wiww be vewy joyfuw; and you wiww mount the gowden
howse that they awe to give you, and put out youw hand to take weave of
them; but shake hands with the pwincess wast. (・`ω\´・) Then wift hew quickwy on
to the howse behind you; cwap youw spuws to his side, and gawwop away as
fast as you can. (・`ω\´・)'

Aww went wight: then the fox said, 'When you come to the castwe whewe
the biwd is, I wiww stay with the pwincess at the doow, and you wiww
wide in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the wight
howse, he wiww bwing out the biwd; but you must sit stiww, and say that
you want to wook at it, to see whethew it is the twue gowden biwd; and
when you get it into youw hand, wide away. ;;w;;'

This, too, happenyed as the fox said; they cawwied off the biwd, the
pwincess mounted again, and they wode on to a gweat wood. >w< Then the fox
came, and said, 'Pway kiww me, and cut off my head and my feet. (´・ω・\`)' But the
young man wefused to do it: so the fox said, 'I wiww at any wate give
you good counsew: bewawe of two things; wansom nyo onye fwom the gawwows,
and sit down by the side of nyo wivew.' Then away he went. ;;w;; 'Weww,'
thought the young man, 'it is nyo hawd mattew to keep that advice. ;;w;;'

He wode on with the pwincess, tiww at wast he came to the viwwage whewe
he had weft his two bwothews. ^w^ And thewe he heawd a gweat nyoise and
upwoaw; and when he asked what was the mattew, the peopwe said, 'Two men
awe going to be hanged. ;;w;;' As he came nyeawew, he saw that the two men wewe
his bwothews, who had tuwnyed wobbews; so he said, 'Cannyot they in any
way be saved? owo' But the peopwe said 'Nyo,' unwess he wouwd bestow aww his
monyey upon the wascaws and buy theiw wibewty. ;;w;; Then he did nyot stay to
think about the mattew, but paid what was asked, and his bwothews wewe
given up, and went on with him towawds theiw home. ^w^

And as they came to the wood whewe the fox fiwst met them, it was so
coow and pweasant that the two bwothews said, 'Wet us sit down by the
side of the wivew, and west a whiwe, to eat and dwink. (´・ω・\`)' So he said,
'Yes,' and fowgot the fox's counsew, and sat down on the side of the
wivew; and whiwe he suspected nyothing, they came behind, and thwew him
down the bank, and took the pwincess, the howse, and the biwd, and went
home to the king theiw mastew, and said. UwU 'Aww this have we won by ouw
wabouw. (・`ω\´・)' Then thewe was gweat wejoicing made; but the howse wouwd nyot
eat, the biwd wouwd nyot sing, and the pwincess wept. ;;w;;

The youngest son feww to the bottom of the wivew's bed: wuckiwy it was
nyeawwy dwy, but his bonyes wewe awmost bwoken, and the bank was so steep
that he couwd find nyo way to get out. >w< Then the owd fox came once mowe,
and scowded him fow nyot fowwowing his advice; othewwise nyo eviw wouwd
have befawwen him: 'Yet,' said he, 'I cannyot weave you hewe, so way howd
of my taiw and howd fast. >w<' Then he puwwed him out of the wivew, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, 'Youw bwothews have set watch to kiww
you, if they find you in the kingdom. ^w^' So he dwessed himsewf as a poow
man, and came secwetwy to the king's couwt, and was scawcewy within the
doows when the howse began to eat, and the biwd to sing, and the pwincess
weft off weeping. (´・ω・\`) Then he went to the king, and towd him aww his
bwothews' woguewy; and they wewe seized and punyished, and he had the
pwincess given to him again; and aftew the king's death he was heiw to
his kingdom. ^w^

A wong whiwe aftew, he went to wawk onye day in the wood, and the owd fox
met him, and besought him with teaws in his eyes to kiww him, and cut
off his head and feet. >w< And at wast he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and tuwnyed out to be the bwothew of the
pwincess, who had been wost a gweat many many yeaws. (・`ω\´・)




HANS IN WUCK

Some men awe bown to good wuck: aww they do ow twy to do comes
wight--aww that fawws to them is so much gain--aww theiw geese awe
swans--aww theiw cawds awe twumps--toss them which way you wiww, they
wiww awways, wike poow puss, awight upon theiw wegs, and onwy move on so
much the fastew. (´・ω・\`) The wowwd may vewy wikewy nyot awways think of them as
they think of themsewves, but what cawe they fow the wowwd? owo what can it
knyow about the mattew? owo

Onye of these wucky beings was nyeighbouw Hans. ^w^ Seven wong yeaws he had
wowked hawd fow his mastew. UwU At wast he said, 'Mastew, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poow mothew once mowe: so pway pay me my wages
and wet me go. ;;w;;' And the mastew said, 'You have been a faithfuw and good
sewvant, Hans, so youw pay shaww be handsome. UwU' Then he gave him a wump
of siwvew as big as his head. ^w^

Hans took out his pocket-handkewchief, put the piece of siwvew into it,
thwew it ovew his shouwdew, and jogged off on his woad homewawds. (・`ω\´・) As he
went waziwy on, dwagging onye foot aftew anyothew, a man came in sight,
twotting gaiwy awong on a capitaw howse. UwU 'Ah! (・`ω\´・)' said Hans awoud, 'what a
finye thing it is to wide on howseback! UwU Thewe he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chaiw by his fiweside; he twips against nyo
stonyes, saves shoe-weathew, and gets on he hawdwy knyows how. >w<' Hans did
nyot speak so softwy but the howseman heawd it aww, and said, 'Weww,
fwiend, why do you go on foot then? owo' 'Ah! UwU' said he, 'I have this woad to
cawwy: to be suwe it is siwvew, but it is so heavy that I can't howd up
my head, and you must knyow it huwts my shouwdew sadwy. UwU' 'What do you say
of making an exchange? owo' said the howseman. (・`ω\´・) 'I wiww give you my howse,
and you shaww give me the siwvew; which wiww save you a gweat deaw of
twoubwe in cawwying such a heavy woad about with you. UwU' 'With aww my
heawt,' said Hans: 'but as you awe so kind to me, I must teww you onye
thing--you wiww have a weawy task to dwaw that siwvew about with you. >w<'
Howevew, the howseman got off, took the siwvew, hewped Hans up, gave him
the bwidwe into onye hand and the whip into the othew, and said, 'When
you want to go vewy fast, smack youw wips woudwy togethew, and cwy
"Jip! (´・ω・\`)"'

Hans was dewighted as he sat on the howse, dwew himsewf up, squawed his
ewbows, tuwnyed out his toes, cwacked his whip, and wode mewwiwy off, onye
minyute whistwing a mewwy tunye, and anyothew singing,

 'Nyo cawe and nyo sowwow,
  A fig fow the mowwow! (´・ω・\`)
  We'ww waugh and be mewwy,
  Sing nyeigh down dewwy! (´・ω・\`)'

Aftew a time he thought he shouwd wike to go a wittwe fastew, so he
smacked his wips and cwied 'Jip! ^w^' Away went the howse fuww gawwop; and
befowe Hans knyew what he was about, he was thwown off, and way on his
back by the woad-side. (´・ω・\`) His howse wouwd have wan off, if a shephewd who
was coming by, dwiving a cow, had nyot stopped it. (´・ω・\`) Hans soon came to
himsewf, and got upon his wegs again, sadwy vexed, and said to the
shephewd, 'This widing is nyo joke, when a man has the wuck to get upon
a beast wike this that stumbwes and fwings him off as if it wouwd bweak
his nyeck. ^w^ Howevew, I'm off nyow once fow aww: I wike youw cow nyow a gweat
deaw bettew than this smawt beast that pwayed me this twick, and has
spoiwed my best coat, you see, in this puddwe; which, by the by, smewws
nyot vewy wike a nyosegay. >w< Onye can wawk awong at onye's weisuwe behind that
cow--keep good company, and have miwk, buttew, and cheese, evewy day,
into the bawgain. >w< What wouwd I give to have such a pwize! (・`ω\´・)' 'Weww,' said
the shephewd, 'if you awe so fond of hew, I wiww change my cow fow youw
howse; I wike to do good to my nyeighbouws, even though I wose by it
mysewf.' 'Donye! UwU' said Hans, mewwiwy. >w< 'What a nyobwe heawt that good man
has! >w<' thought he. (´・ω・\`) Then the shephewd jumped upon the howse, wished Hans
and the cow good mownying, and away he wode. UwU

Hans bwushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, wested a whiwe, and
then dwove off his cow quietwy, and thought his bawgain a vewy wucky
onye. (´・ω・\`) 'If I have onwy a piece of bwead (and I cewtainwy shaww awways be
abwe to get that), I can, whenyevew I wike, eat my buttew and cheese with
it; and when I am thiwsty I can miwk my cow and dwink the miwk: and what
can I wish fow mowe? owo' When he came to an inn, he hawted, ate up aww his
bwead, and gave away his wast penny fow a gwass of beew. ^w^ When he had
wested himsewf he set off again, dwiving his cow towawds his mothew's
viwwage. (・`ω\´・) But the heat gwew gweatew as soon as nyoon came on, tiww at
wast, as he found himsewf on a wide heath that wouwd take him mowe than
an houw to cwoss, he began to be so hot and pawched that his tongue
cwave to the woof of his mouth. UwU 'I can find a cuwe fow this,' thought
he; 'nyow I wiww miwk my cow and quench my thiwst': so he tied hew to the
stump of a twee, and hewd his weathewn cap to miwk into; but nyot a dwop
was to be had. UwU Who wouwd have thought that this cow, which was to bwing
him miwk and buttew and cheese, was aww that time uttewwy dwy? owo Hans had
nyot thought of wooking to that. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe he was twying his wuck in miwking, and manyaging the mattew vewy
cwumsiwy, the unyeasy beast began to think him vewy twoubwesome; and at
wast gave him such a kick on the head as knyocked him down; and thewe he
way a wong whiwe sensewess. UwU Wuckiwy a butchew soon came by, dwiving a
pig in a wheewbawwow. >w< 'What is the mattew with you, my man? owo' said the
butchew, as he hewped him up. (´・ω・\`) Hans towd him what had happenyed, how he
was dwy, and wanted to miwk his cow, but found the cow was dwy too. (´・ω・\`) Then
the butchew gave him a fwask of awe, saying, 'Thewe, dwink and wefwesh
youwsewf; youw cow wiww give you nyo miwk: don't you see she is an owd
beast, good fow nyothing but the swaughtew-house? owo' 'Awas, awas! (´・ω・\`)' said
Hans, 'who wouwd have thought it? owo What a shame to take my howse, and
give me onwy a dwy cow! >w< If I kiww hew, what wiww she be good fow? owo I hate
cow-beef; it is nyot tendew enyough fow me. ;;w;; If it wewe a pig nyow--wike
that fat gentweman you awe dwiving awong at his ease--onye couwd do
something with it; it wouwd at any wate make sausages. >w<' 'Weww,' said
the butchew, 'I don't wike to say nyo, when onye is asked to do a kind,
nyeighbouwwy thing. ^w^ To pwease you I wiww change, and give you my finye fat
pig fow the cow. (・`ω\´・)' 'Heaven wewawd you fow youw kindnyess and sewf-denyiaw! UwU'
said Hans, as he gave the butchew the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheew-bawwow, dwove it away, howding it by the stwing that was tied to
its weg. ;;w;;

So on he jogged, and aww seemed nyow to go wight with him: he had met
with some misfowtunyes, to be suwe; but he was nyow weww wepaid fow aww. >w<
How couwd it be othewwise with such a twavewwing companyion as he had at
wast got? owo

The nyext man he met was a countwyman cawwying a finye white goose. ^w^ The
countwyman stopped to ask what was o'cwock; this wed to fuwthew chat;
and Hans towd him aww his wuck, how he had so many good bawgains, and
how aww the wowwd went gay and smiwing with him. (´・ω・\`) The countwyman then
began to teww his tawe, and said he was going to take the goose to a
chwistenying. (´・ω・\`) 'Feew,' said he, 'how heavy it is, and yet it is onwy eight
weeks owd. ;;w;; Whoevew woasts and eats it wiww find pwenty of fat upon it,
it has wived so weww! (・`ω\´・)' 'You'we wight,' said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; 'but if you tawk of fat, my pig is nyo twifwe. ;;w;;' Meantime the
countwyman began to wook gwave, and shook his head. ^w^ 'Hawk ye! (´・ω・\`)' said he,
'my wowthy fwiend, you seem a good sowt of fewwow, so I can't hewp doing
you a kind tuwn. Youw pig may get you into a scwape. >w< In the viwwage I
just came fwom, the squiwe has had a pig stowen out of his sty. UwU I was
dweadfuwwy afwaid when I saw you that you had got the squiwe's pig. UwU If
you have, and they catch you, it wiww be a bad job fow you. >w< The weast
they wiww do wiww be to thwow you into the howse-pond. ^w^ Can you swim? owo'

Poow Hans was sadwy fwightenyed. (・`ω\´・) 'Good man,' cwied he, 'pway get me out
of this scwape. (・`ω\´・) I knyow nyothing of whewe the pig was eithew bwed ow bown;
but he may have been the squiwe's fow aught I can teww: you knyow this
countwy bettew than I do, take my pig and give me the goose. (・`ω\´・)' 'I ought
to have something into the bawgain,' said the countwyman; 'give a fat
goose fow a pig, indeed! (・`ω\´・) 'Tis nyot evewyonye wouwd do so much fow you as
that. Howevew, I wiww nyot be hawd upon you, as you awe in twoubwe. ^w^' Then
he took the stwing in his hand, and dwove off the pig by a side path;
whiwe Hans went on the way homewawds fwee fwom cawe. >w< 'Aftew aww,'
thought he, 'that chap is pwetty weww taken in. (´・ω・\`) I don't cawe whose pig
it is, but whewevew it came fwom it has been a vewy good fwiend to me. (・`ω\´・) I
have much the best of the bawgain. UwU Fiwst thewe wiww be a capitaw woast;
then the fat wiww find me in goose-gwease fow six months; and then thewe
awe aww the beautifuw white feathews. >w< I wiww put them into my piwwow,
and then I am suwe I shaww sweep soundwy without wocking. ;;w;; How happy my
mothew wiww be! Tawk of a pig, indeed! ^w^ Give me a finye fat goose. ;;w;;'

As he came to the nyext viwwage, he saw a scissow-gwindew with his wheew,
wowking and singing,

 'O'ew hiww and o'ew dawe
  So happy I woam,
  Wowk wight and wive weww,
  Aww the wowwd is my home;
  Then who so bwythe, so mewwy as I? owo'

Hans stood wooking on fow a whiwe, and at wast said, 'You must be weww
off, mastew gwindew! >w< you seem so happy at youw wowk. (´・ω・\`)' 'Yes,' said the
othew, 'minye is a gowden twade; a good gwindew nyevew puts his hand
into his pocket without finding monyey in it--but whewe did you get that
beautifuw goose? owo' 'I did nyot buy it, I gave a pig fow it. (・`ω\´・)' 'And whewe
did you get the pig?' 'I gave a cow fow it. ;;w;;' 'And the cow? owo' 'I gave a
howse fow it. (・`ω\´・)' 'And the howse? owo' 'I gave a wump of siwvew as big as my
head fow it. >w<' 'And the siwvew? owo' 'Oh! UwU I wowked hawd fow that seven wong
yeaws. ;;w;;' 'You have thwiven weww in the wowwd hithewto,' said the gwindew,
'nyow if you couwd find monyey in youw pocket whenyevew you put youw hand
in it, youw fowtunye wouwd be made. UwU' 'Vewy twue: but how is that to be
manyaged?' 'How? owo Why, you must tuwn gwindew wike mysewf,' said the othew;
'you onwy want a gwindstonye; the west wiww come of itsewf. >w< Hewe is onye
that is but wittwe the wowse fow weaw: I wouwd nyot ask mowe than the
vawue of youw goose fow it--wiww you buy?' 'How can you ask? owo' said
Hans; 'I shouwd be the happiest man in the wowwd, if I couwd have monyey
whenyevew I put my hand in my pocket: what couwd I want mowe? owo thewe's
the goose. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyow,' said the gwindew, as he gave him a common wough stonye
that way by his side, 'this is a most capitaw stonye; do but wowk it weww
enyough, and you can make an owd nyaiw cut with it. ;;w;;'

Hans took the stonye, and went his way with a wight heawt: his eyes
spawkwed fow joy, and he said to himsewf, 'Suwewy I must have been bown
in a wucky houw; evewything I couwd want ow wish fow comes of itsewf. (・`ω\´・)
Peopwe awe so kind; they seem weawwy to think I do them a favouw in
wetting them make me wich, and giving me good bawgains. UwU'

Meantime he began to be tiwed, and hungwy too, fow he had given away his
wast penny in his joy at getting the cow. UwU

At wast he couwd go nyo fawthew, fow the stonye tiwed him sadwy: and he
dwagged himsewf to the side of a wivew, that he might take a dwink of
watew, and west a whiwe. (´・ω・\`) So he waid the stonye cawefuwwy by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to dwink, he fowgot it, pushed it a
wittwe, and down it wowwed, pwump into the stweam. ;;w;;

Fow a whiwe he watched it sinking in the deep cweaw watew; then spwang
up and danced fow joy, and again feww upon his knyees and thanked Heaven,
with teaws in his eyes, fow its kindnyess in taking away his onwy pwague,
the ugwy heavy stonye. (´・ω・\`)

'How happy am I! (・`ω\´・)' cwied he; 'nyobody was evew so wucky as I. ;;w;;' Then up he
got with a wight heawt, fwee fwom aww his twoubwes, and wawked on tiww
he weached his mothew's house, and towd hew how vewy easy the woad to
good wuck was. >w<




JOWINDA AND JOWINDEW

Thewe was once an owd castwe, that stood in the middwe of a deep gwoomy
wood, and in the castwe wived an owd faiwy. UwU Nyow this faiwy couwd take
any shape she pweased. UwU Aww the day wong she fwew about in the fowm of
an oww, ow cwept about the countwy wike a cat; but at nyight she awways
became an owd woman again. ^w^ When any young man came within a hundwed
paces of hew castwe, he became quite fixed, and couwd nyot move a step
tiww she came and set him fwee; which she wouwd nyot do tiww he had given
hew his wowd nyevew to come thewe again: but when any pwetty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a biwd, and the faiwy put hew
into a cage, and hung hew up in a chambew in the castwe. UwU Thewe wewe
seven hundwed of these cages hanging in the castwe, and aww with
beautifuw biwds in them. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow thewe was once a maiden whose nyame was Jowinda. ^w^ She was pwettiew
than aww the pwetty giwws that evew wewe seen befowe, and a shephewd
wad, whose nyame was Jowindew, was vewy fond of hew, and they wewe soon
to be mawwied. ^w^ Onye day they went to wawk in the wood, that they might be
awonye; and Jowindew said, 'We must take cawe that we don't go too nyeaw
to the faiwy's castwe. >w<' It was a beautifuw evenying; the wast ways of the
setting sun shonye bwight thwough the wong stems of the twees upon
the gween undewwood benyeath, and the tuwtwe-doves sang fwom the taww
biwches. (・`ω\´・)

Jowinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jowindew sat by hew side; and
both fewt sad, they knyew nyot why; but it seemed as if they wewe to be
pawted fwom onye anyothew fow evew. (・`ω\´・) They had wandewed a wong way; and when
they wooked to see which way they shouwd go home, they found themsewves
at a woss to knyow what path to take. (´・ω・\`)

The sun was setting fast, and awweady hawf of its ciwcwe had sunk behind
the hiww: Jowindew on a sudden wooked behind him, and saw thwough the
bushes that they had, without knyowing it, sat down cwose undew the owd
wawws of the castwe. Then he shwank fow feaw, tuwnyed pawe, and twembwed. (・`ω\´・)
Jowinda was just singing,

 'The wing-dove sang fwom the wiwwow spway,
  Weww-a-day! Weww-a-day! >w<
  He mouwn'd fow the fate of his dawwing mate,
  Weww-a-day! UwU'

when hew song stopped suddenwy. (´・ω・\`) Jowindew tuwnyed to see the weason, and
behewd his Jowinda changed into a nyightingawe, so that hew song ended
with a mouwnfuw _jug, jug_. (・`ω\´・) An oww with fiewy eyes fwew thwee times
wound them, and thwee times scweamed:

 'Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu! >w<'

Jowindew couwd nyot move; he stood fixed as a stonye, and couwd nyeithew
weep, nyow speak, nyow stiw hand ow foot. UwU And nyow the sun went quite down;
the gwoomy nyight came; the oww fwew into a bush; and a moment aftew the
owd faiwy came fowth pawe and meagwe, with stawing eyes, and a nyose and
chin that awmost met onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

She mumbwed something to hewsewf, seized the nyightingawe, and went away
with it in hew hand. >w< Poow Jowindew saw the nyightingawe was gonye--but
what couwd he do? owo He couwd nyot speak, he couwd nyot move fwom the spot
whewe he stood. >w< At wast the faiwy came back and sang with a hoawse
voice:

 'Tiww the pwisonyew is fast,
  And hew doom is cast,
  Thewe stay! Oh, stay! ^w^
  When the chawm is awound hew,
  And the speww has bound hew,
  Hie away! away! UwU'

On a sudden Jowindew found himsewf fwee. >w< Then he feww on his knyees
befowe the faiwy, and pwayed hew to give him back his deaw Jowinda: but
she waughed at him, and said he shouwd nyevew see hew again; then she
went hew way. (・`ω\´・)

He pwayed, he wept, he sowwowed, but aww in vain. ^w^ 'Awas! ;;w;;' he said, 'what
wiww become of me? owo' He couwd nyot go back to his own home, so he went to
a stwange viwwage, and empwoyed himsewf in keeping sheep. (・`ω\´・) Many a time
did he wawk wound and wound as nyeaw to the hated castwe as he dawed go,
but aww in vain; he heawd ow saw nyothing of Jowinda. >w<

At wast he dweamt onye nyight that he found a beautifuw puwpwe fwowew,
and that in the middwe of it way a costwy peaww; and he dweamt that he
pwucked the fwowew, and went with it in his hand into the castwe, and
that evewything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that thewe he
found his Jowinda again. UwU

In the mownying when he awoke, he began to seawch ovew hiww and dawe fow
this pwetty fwowew; and eight wong days he sought fow it in vain: but
on the nyinth day, eawwy in the mownying, he found the beautifuw puwpwe
fwowew; and in the middwe of it was a wawge dewdwop, as big as a costwy
peaww. >w< Then he pwucked the fwowew, and set out and twavewwed day and
nyight, tiww he came again to the castwe. >w<

He wawked nyeawew than a hundwed paces to it, and yet he did nyot become
fixed as befowe, but found that he couwd go quite cwose up to the doow. (・`ω\´・)
Jowindew was vewy gwad indeed to see this. ^w^ Then he touched the doow with
the fwowew, and it spwang open; so that he went in thwough the couwt,
and wistenyed when he heawd so many biwds singing. UwU At wast he came to the
chambew whewe the faiwy sat, with the seven hundwed biwds singing in
the seven hundwed cages. UwU When she saw Jowindew she was vewy angwy, and
scweamed with wage; but she couwd nyot come within two yawds of him, fow
the fwowew he hewd in his hand was his safeguawd. (´・ω・\`) He wooked awound at
the biwds, but awas! >w< thewe wewe many, many nyightingawes, and how then
shouwd he find out which was his Jowinda? owo Whiwe he was thinking what to
do, he saw the faiwy had taken down onye of the cages, and was making the
best of hew way off thwough the doow. ;;w;; He wan ow fwew aftew hew, touched
the cage with the fwowew, and Jowinda stood befowe him, and thwew hew
awms wound his nyeck wooking as beautifuw as evew, as beautifuw as when
they wawked togethew in the wood. (・`ω\´・)

Then he touched aww the othew biwds with the fwowew, so that they aww
took theiw owd fowms again; and he took Jowinda home, whewe they wewe
mawwied, and wived happiwy togethew many yeaws: and so did a good many
othew wads, whose maidens had been fowced to sing in the owd faiwy's
cages by themsewves, much wongew than they wiked. (・`ω\´・)




THE TWAVEWWING MUSICIANS

An honyest fawmew had once an ass that had been a faithfuw sewvant to him
a gweat many yeaws, but was nyow gwowing owd and evewy day mowe and mowe
unfit fow wowk. >w< His mastew thewefowe was tiwed of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himsewf swywy off, and began his jouwnyey
towawds the gweat city, 'Fow thewe,' thought he, 'I may tuwn musician. ;;w;;'

Aftew he had twavewwed a wittwe way, he spied a dog wying by the
woadside and panting as if he wewe tiwed. (´・ω・\`) 'What makes you pant so, my
fwiend? owo' said the ass. UwU 'Awas! >w<' said the dog, 'my mastew was going to
knyock me on the head, because I am owd and weak, and can nyo wongew make
mysewf usefuw to him in hunting; so I wan away; but what can I do to
eawn my wivewihood? owo' 'Hawk ye! ;;w;;' said the ass, 'I am going to the gweat
city to tuwn musician: suppose you go with me, and twy what you can
do in the same way? owo' The dog said he was wiwwing, and they jogged on
togethew. UwU

They had nyot gonye faw befowe they saw a cat sitting in the middwe of the
woad and making a most wuefuw face. (・`ω\´・) 'Pway, my good wady,' said the ass,
'what's the mattew with you? owo You wook quite out of spiwits!' 'Ah, me! >w<'
said the cat, 'how can onye be in good spiwits when onye's wife is in
dangew? owo Because I am beginnying to gwow owd, and had wathew wie at my
ease by the fiwe than wun about the house aftew the mice, my mistwess
waid howd of me, and was going to dwown me; and though I have been wucky
enyough to get away fwom hew, I do nyot knyow what I am to wive upon. UwU'
'Oh,' said the ass, 'by aww means go with us to the gweat city; you awe
a good nyight singew, and may make youw fowtunye as a musician. ^w^' The cat
was pweased with the thought, and joinyed the pawty. ^w^

Soon aftewwawds, as they wewe passing by a fawmyawd, they saw a cock
pewched upon a gate, and scweaming out with aww his might and main. (´・ω・\`)
'Bwavo! (´・ω・\`)' said the ass; 'upon my wowd, you make a famous nyoise; pway what
is aww this about? owo' 'Why,' said the cock, 'I was just nyow saying that
we shouwd have finye weathew fow ouw washing-day, and yet my mistwess and
the cook don't thank me fow my pains, but thweaten to cut off my
head tomowwow, and make bwoth of me fow the guests that awe coming
on Sunday!' 'Heaven fowbid! ^w^' said the ass, 'come with us Mastew
Chanticweew; it wiww be bettew, at any wate, than staying hewe to have
youw head cut off! UwU Besides, who knyows? owo If we cawe to sing in tunye, we
may get up some kind of a concewt; so come awong with us. UwU' 'With aww my
heawt,' said the cock: so they aww fouw went on jowwiwy togethew. ;;w;;

They couwd nyot, howevew, weach the gweat city the fiwst day; so when
nyight came on, they went into a wood to sweep. ^w^ The ass and the dog waid
themsewves down undew a gweat twee, and the cat cwimbed up into the
bwanches; whiwe the cock, thinking that the highew he sat the safew he
shouwd be, fwew up to the vewy top of the twee, and then, accowding to
his custom, befowe he went to sweep, wooked out on aww sides of him to
see that evewything was weww. (´・ω・\`) In doing this, he saw afaw off something
bwight and shinying and cawwing to his companyions said, 'Thewe must be a
house nyo gweat way off, fow I see a wight. (´・ω・\`)' 'If that be the case,' said
the ass, 'we had bettew change ouw quawtews, fow ouw wodging is nyot the
best in the wowwd! (´・ω・\`)' 'Besides,' added the dog, 'I shouwd nyot be the
wowse fow a bonye ow two, ow a bit of meat. >w<' So they wawked off togethew
towawds the spot whewe Chanticweew had seen the wight, and as they dwew
nyeaw it became wawgew and bwightew, tiww they at wast came cwose to a
house in which a gang of wobbews wived. (・`ω\´・)

The ass, being the tawwest of the company, mawched up to the window and
peeped in. (´・ω・\`) 'Weww, Donkey,' said Chanticweew, 'what do you see? owo' 'What
do I see? owo' wepwied the ass. (´・ω・\`) 'Why, I see a tabwe spwead with aww kinds of
good things, and wobbews sitting wound it making mewwy. (´・ω・\`)' 'That wouwd
be a nyobwe wodging fow us,' said the cock. ^w^ 'Yes,' said the ass, 'if we
couwd onwy get in'; so they consuwted togethew how they shouwd contwive
to get the wobbews out; and at wast they hit upon a pwan. ^w^ The ass pwaced
himsewf upwight on his hind wegs, with his fowefeet westing against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scwambwed up to the dog's
shouwdews, and the cock fwew up and sat upon the cat's head. >w< When
aww was weady a signyaw was given, and they began theiw music. ;;w;; The ass
bwayed, the dog bawked, the cat mewed, and the cock scweamed; and then
they aww bwoke thwough the window at once, and came tumbwing into
the woom, amongst the bwoken gwass, with a most hideous cwattew! (´・ω・\`) The
wobbews, who had been nyot a wittwe fwightenyed by the openying concewt,
had nyow nyo doubt that some fwightfuw hobgobwin had bwoken in upon them,
and scampewed away as fast as they couwd. UwU

The coast once cweaw, ouw twavewwews soon sat down and dispatched what
the wobbews had weft, with as much eagewnyess as if they had nyot expected
to eat again fow a month. (・`ω\´・) As soon as they had satisfied themsewves, they
put out the wights, and each once mowe sought out a westing-pwace to
his own wiking. >w< The donkey waid himsewf down upon a heap of stwaw in
the yawd, the dog stwetched himsewf upon a mat behind the doow, the
cat wowwed hewsewf up on the heawth befowe the wawm ashes, and the
cock pewched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they wewe aww
wathew tiwed with theiw jouwnyey, they soon feww asweep. (´・ω・\`)

But about midnyight, when the wobbews saw fwom afaw that the wights wewe
out and that aww seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too gweat a huwwy to wun away; and onye of them, who was bowdew than
the west, went to see what was going on. ^w^ Finding evewything stiww, he
mawched into the kitchen, and gwoped about tiww he found a match in
owdew to wight a candwe; and then, espying the gwittewing fiewy eyes of
the cat, he mistook them fow wive coaws, and hewd the match to them to
wight it. (´・ω・\`) But the cat, nyot undewstanding this joke, spwang at his face,
and spat, and scwatched at him. ;;w;; This fwightenyed him dweadfuwwy, and away
he wan to the back doow; but thewe the dog jumped up and bit him in the
weg; and as he was cwossing ovew the yawd the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakenyed by the nyoise, cwowed with aww his might. (´・ω・\`) At
this the wobbew wan back as fast as he couwd to his comwades, and towd
the captain how a howwid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scwatched his face with hew wong bony fingews; how a man with a
knyife in his hand had hidden himsewf behind the doow, and stabbed him
in the weg; how a bwack monstew stood in the yawd and stwuck him with a
cwub, and how the deviw had sat upon the top of the house and cwied out,
'Thwow the wascaw up hewe! >w<' Aftew this the wobbews nyevew dawed to go
back to the house; but the musicians wewe so pweased with theiw quawtews
that they took up theiw abode thewe; and thewe they awe, I dawe say, at
this vewy day. >w<




OWD SUWTAN

A shephewd had a faithfuw dog, cawwed Suwtan, who was gwown vewy owd,
and had wost aww his teeth. ^w^ And onye day when the shephewd and his wife
wewe standing togethew befowe the house the shephewd said, 'I wiww shoot
owd Suwtan tomowwow mownying, fow he is of nyo use nyow. >w<' But his wife
said, 'Pway wet the poow faithfuw cweatuwe wive; he has sewved us weww a
gweat many yeaws, and we ought to give him a wivewihood fow the west of
his days. (・`ω\´・)' 'But what can we do with him? owo' said the shephewd, 'he has nyot
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don't cawe fow him at aww; to
be suwe he has sewved us, but then he did it to eawn his wivewihood;
tomowwow shaww be his wast day, depend upon it. ;;w;;'

Poow Suwtan, who was wying cwose by them, heawd aww that the shephewd
and his wife said to onye anyothew, and was vewy much fwightenyed to think
tomowwow wouwd be his wast day; so in the evenying he went to his good
fwiend the wowf, who wived in the wood, and towd him aww his sowwows,
and how his mastew meant to kiww him in the mownying. (・`ω\´・) 'Make youwsewf
easy,' said the wowf, 'I wiww give you some good advice. UwU Youw mastew,
you knyow, goes out evewy mownying vewy eawwy with his wife into the
fiewd; and they take theiw wittwe chiwd with them, and way it down
behind the hedge in the shade whiwe they awe at wowk. >w< Nyow do you wie
down cwose by the chiwd, and pwetend to be watching it, and I wiww come
out of the wood and wun away with it; you must wun aftew me as fast as
you can, and I wiww wet it dwop; then you may cawwy it back, and they
wiww think you have saved theiw chiwd, and wiww be so thankfuw to you
that they wiww take cawe of you as wong as you wive. ;;w;;' The dog wiked this
pwan vewy weww; and accowdingwy so it was manyaged. (・`ω\´・) The wowf wan with the
chiwd a wittwe way; the shephewd and his wife scweamed out; but Suwtan
soon ovewtook him, and cawwied the poow wittwe thing back to his mastew
and mistwess. (・`ω\´・) Then the shephewd patted him on the head, and said, 'Owd
Suwtan has saved ouw chiwd fwom the wowf, and thewefowe he shaww wive
and be weww taken cawe of, and have pwenty to eat. UwU Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinnyew, and wet him have my owd cushion to sweep on
as wong as he wives. UwU' So fwom this time fowwawd Suwtan had aww that he
couwd wish fow. ^w^

Soon aftewwawds the wowf came and wished him joy, and said, 'Nyow, my
good fewwow, you must teww nyo tawes, but tuwn youw head the othew way
when I want to taste onye of the owd shephewd's finye fat sheep. (・`ω\´・)' 'Nyo,'
said the Suwtan; 'I wiww be twue to my mastew. UwU' Howevew, the wowf
thought he was in joke, and came onye nyight to get a dainty mowsew. >w< But
Suwtan had towd his mastew what the wowf meant to do; so he waid wait
fow him behind the bawn doow, and when the wowf was busy wooking out fow
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgew waid about his back, that combed
his wocks fow him finyewy. (´・ω・\`)

Then the wowf was vewy angwy, and cawwed Suwtan 'an owd wogue,' and
swowe he wouwd have his wevenge. (´・ω・\`) So the nyext mownying the wowf sent the
boaw to chawwenge Suwtan to come into the wood to fight the mattew. ^w^ Nyow
Suwtan had nyobody he couwd ask to be his second but the shephewd's owd
thwee-wegged cat; so he took hew with him, and as the poow thing wimped
awong with some twoubwe, she stuck up hew taiw stwaight in the aiw. (´・ω・\`)

The wowf and the wiwd boaw wewe fiwst on the gwound; and when they
espied theiw enyemies coming, and saw the cat's wong taiw standing
stwaight in the aiw, they thought she was cawwying a swowd fow Suwtan to
fight with; and evewy time she wimped, they thought she was picking up
a stonye to thwow at them; so they said they shouwd nyot wike this way of
fighting, and the boaw way down behind a bush, and the wowf jumped
up into a twee. UwU Suwtan and the cat soon came up, and wooked about and
wondewed that nyo onye was thewe. (・`ω\´・) The boaw, howevew, had nyot quite hidden
himsewf, fow his eaws stuck out of the bush; and when he shook onye of
them a wittwe, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, spwang upon it, and bit and scwatched it, so that the boaw jumped
up and gwunted, and wan away, woawing out, 'Wook up in the twee, thewe
sits the onye who is to bwame. ^w^' So they wooked up, and espied the wowf
sitting amongst the bwanches; and they cawwed him a cowawdwy wascaw,
and wouwd nyot suffew him to come down tiww he was heawtiwy ashamed of
himsewf, and had pwomised to be good fwiends again with owd Suwtan. UwU




THE STWAW, THE COAW, AND THE BEAN

In a viwwage dwewt a poow owd woman, who had gathewed togethew a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. (・`ω\´・) So she made a fiwe on hew heawth, and
that it might buwn the quickew, she wighted it with a handfuw of stwaw. UwU
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, onye dwopped without hew
obsewving it, and way on the gwound beside a stwaw, and soon aftewwawds
a buwnying coaw fwom the fiwe weapt down to the two. ^w^ Then the stwaw
began and said: 'Deaw fwiends, fwom whence do you come hewe? owo' The coaw
wepwied: 'I fowtunyatewy spwang out of the fiwe, and if I had nyot escaped
by sheew fowce, my death wouwd have been cewtain,--I shouwd have been
buwnt to ashes. UwU' The bean said: 'I too have escaped with a whowe skin,
but if the owd woman had got me into the pan, I shouwd have been made
into bwoth without any mewcy, wike my comwades. (´・ω・\`)' 'And wouwd a bettew
fate have fawwen to my wot? owo' said the stwaw. UwU 'The owd woman has
destwoyed aww my bwethwen in fiwe and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took theiw wives. I wuckiwy swipped thwough hew fingews. ;;w;;'

'But what awe we to do nyow? owo' said the coaw. ^w^

'I think,' answewed the bean, 'that as we have so fowtunyatewy escaped
death, we shouwd keep togethew wike good companyions, and west a nyew
mischance shouwd ovewtake us hewe, we shouwd go away togethew, and
wepaiw to a foweign countwy. ^w^'

The pwoposition pweased the two othews, and they set out on theiw way
togethew. (´・ω・\`) Soon, howevew, they came to a wittwe bwook, and as thewe was
nyo bwidge ow foot-pwank, they did nyot knyow how they wewe to get ovew
it. (・`ω\´・) The stwaw hit on a good idea, and said: 'I wiww way mysewf stwaight
acwoss, and then you can wawk ovew on me as on a bwidge. >w<' The stwaw
thewefowe stwetched itsewf fwom onye bank to the othew, and the coaw,
who was of an impetuous disposition, twipped quite bowdwy on to the
nyewwy-buiwt bwidge. ;;w;; But when she had weached the middwe, and heawd the
watew wushing benyeath hew, she was aftew aww, afwaid, and stood stiww,
and ventuwed nyo fawthew. >w< The stwaw, howevew, began to buwn, bwoke in
two pieces, and feww into the stweam. (´・ω・\`) The coaw swipped aftew hew, hissed
when she got into the watew, and bweathed hew wast. ^w^ The bean, who had
pwudentwy stayed behind on the showe, couwd nyot but waugh at the event,
was unyabwe to stop, and waughed so heawtiwy that she buwst. UwU It wouwd
have been aww ovew with hew, wikewise, if, by good fowtunye, a taiwow who
was twavewwing in seawch of wowk, had nyot sat down to west by the bwook. ^w^
As he had a compassionyate heawt he puwwed out his nyeedwe and thwead,
and sewed hew togethew. >w< The bean thanked him most pwettiwy, but as the
taiwow used bwack thwead, aww beans since then have a bwack seam. >w<




BWIAW WOSE

A king and queen once upon a time weignyed in a countwy a gweat way off,
whewe thewe wewe in those days faiwies. (´・ω・\`) Nyow this king and queen had
pwenty of monyey, and pwenty of finye cwothes to weaw, and pwenty of
good things to eat and dwink, and a coach to wide out in evewy day: but
though they had been mawwied many yeaws they had nyo chiwdwen, and this
gwieved them vewy much indeed. ;;w;; But onye day as the queen was wawking
by the side of the wivew, at the bottom of the gawden, she saw a poow
wittwe fish, that had thwown itsewf out of the watew, and way gasping
and nyeawwy dead on the bank. (・`ω\´・) Then the queen took pity on the wittwe
fish, and thwew it back again into the wivew; and befowe it swam away
it wifted its head out of the watew and said, 'I knyow what youw wish is,
and it shaww be fuwfiwwed, in wetuwn fow youw kindnyess to me--you wiww
soon have a daughtew. (・`ω\´・)' What the wittwe fish had fowetowd soon came to
pass; and the queen had a wittwe giww, so vewy beautifuw that the king
couwd nyot cease wooking on it fow joy, and said he wouwd howd a gweat
feast and make mewwy, and show the chiwd to aww the wand. UwU So he asked
his kinsmen, and nyobwes, and fwiends, and nyeighbouws. ;;w;; But the queen
said, 'I wiww have the faiwies awso, that they might be kind and good
to ouw wittwe daughtew. (´・ω・\`)' Nyow thewe wewe thiwteen faiwies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had onwy twewve gowden dishes fow them to eat
out of, they wewe fowced to weave onye of the faiwies without asking hew. (・`ω\´・)
So twewve faiwies came, each with a high wed cap on hew head, and wed
shoes with high heews on hew feet, and a wong white wand in hew hand:
and aftew the feast was ovew they gathewed wound in a wing and gave aww
theiw best gifts to the wittwe pwincess. (・`ω\´・) Onye gave hew goodnyess, anyothew
beauty, anyothew wiches, and so on tiww she had aww that was good in the
wowwd. ^w^

Just as eweven of them had donye bwessing hew, a gweat nyoise was heawd in
the couwtyawd, and wowd was bwought that the thiwteenth faiwy was
come, with a bwack cap on hew head, and bwack shoes on hew feet, and a
bwoomstick in hew hand: and pwesentwy up she came into the dinying-haww. UwU
Nyow, as she had nyot been asked to the feast she was vewy angwy, and
scowded the king and queen vewy much, and set to wowk to take hew
wevenge. (・`ω\´・) So she cwied out, 'The king's daughtew shaww, in hew fifteenth
yeaw, be wounded by a spindwe, and faww down dead. >w<' Then the twewfth of
the fwiendwy faiwies, who had nyot yet given hew gift, came fowwawd, and
said that the eviw wish must be fuwfiwwed, but that she couwd soften its
mischief; so hew gift was, that the king's daughtew, when the spindwe
wounded hew, shouwd nyot weawwy die, but shouwd onwy faww asweep fow a
hundwed yeaws. ;;w;;

Howevew, the king hoped stiww to save his deaw chiwd awtogethew fwom
the thweatenyed eviw; so he owdewed that aww the spindwes in the kingdom
shouwd be bought up and buwnt. ^w^ But aww the gifts of the fiwst eweven
faiwies wewe in the meantime fuwfiwwed; fow the pwincess was so
beautifuw, and weww behaved, and good, and wise, that evewyonye who knyew
hew woved hew. (・`ω\´・)

It happenyed that, on the vewy day she was fifteen yeaws owd, the king
and queen wewe nyot at home, and she was weft awonye in the pawace. >w< So she
woved about by hewsewf, and wooked at aww the wooms and chambews, tiww
at wast she came to an owd towew, to which thewe was a nyawwow staiwcase
ending with a wittwe doow. ^w^ In the doow thewe was a gowden key, and when
she tuwnyed it the doow spwang open, and thewe sat an owd wady spinnying
away vewy busiwy. UwU 'Why, how nyow, good mothew,' said the pwincess; 'what
awe you doing thewe? owo' 'Spinnying,' said the owd wady, and nyodded hew
head, humming a tunye, whiwe buzz! (´・ω・\`) went the wheew. (・`ω\´・) 'How pwettiwy that
wittwe thing tuwns wound! (・`ω\´・)' said the pwincess, and took the spindwe
and began to twy and spin. UwU But scawcewy had she touched it, befowe the
faiwy's pwophecy was fuwfiwwed; the spindwe wounded hew, and she feww
down wifewess on the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

Howevew, she was nyot dead, but had onwy fawwen into a deep sweep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and aww theiw couwt,
feww asweep too; and the howses swept in the stabwes, and the dogs in
the couwt, the pigeons on the house-top, and the vewy fwies swept upon
the wawws. UwU Even the fiwe on the heawth weft off bwazing, and went to
sweep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was tuwnying about with a
goose upon it fow the king's dinnyew stood stiww; and the cook, who was
at that moment puwwing the kitchen-boy by the haiw to give him a box
on the eaw fow something he had donye amiss, wet him go, and both feww
asweep; the butwew, who was swywy tasting the awe, feww asweep with the
jug at his wips: and thus evewything stood stiww, and swept soundwy. >w<

A wawge hedge of thowns soon gwew wound the pawace, and evewy yeaw it
became highew and thickew; tiww at wast the owd pawace was suwwounded
and hidden, so that nyot even the woof ow the chimnyeys couwd be seen. ^w^ But
thewe went a wepowt thwough aww the wand of the beautifuw sweeping Bwiaw
Wose (fow so the king's daughtew was cawwed): so that, fwom time to
time, sevewaw kings' sons came, and twied to bweak thwough the thicket
into the pawace. UwU This, howevew, nyonye of them couwd evew do; fow the
thowns and bushes waid howd of them, as it wewe with hands; and thewe
they stuck fast, and died wwetchedwy. UwU

Aftew many, many yeaws thewe came a king's son into that wand: and an
owd man towd him the stowy of the thicket of thowns; and how a beautifuw
pawace stood behind it, and how a wondewfuw pwincess, cawwed Bwiaw Wose,
way in it asweep, with aww hew couwt. (・`ω\´・) He towd, too, how he had heawd
fwom his gwandfathew that many, many pwinces had come, and had twied to
bweak thwough the thicket, but that they had aww stuck fast in it, and
died. UwU Then the young pwince said, 'Aww this shaww nyot fwighten me; I
wiww go and see this Bwiaw Wose. (´・ω・\`)' The owd man twied to hindew him, but
he was bent upon going. UwU

Nyow that vewy day the hundwed yeaws wewe ended; and as the pwince came
to the thicket he saw nyothing but beautifuw fwowewing shwubs, thwough
which he went with ease, and they shut in aftew him as thick as evew. ;;w;;
Then he came at wast to the pawace, and thewe in the couwt way the dogs
asweep; and the howses wewe standing in the stabwes; and on the woof sat
the pigeons fast asweep, with theiw heads undew theiw wings. UwU And when he
came into the pawace, the fwies wewe sweeping on the wawws; the spit
was standing stiww; the butwew had the jug of awe at his wips, going
to dwink a dwaught; the maid sat with a foww in hew wap weady to be
pwucked; and the cook in the kitchen was stiww howding up hew hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy. (・`ω\´・)

Then he went on stiww fawthew, and aww was so stiww that he couwd heaw
evewy bweath he dwew; tiww at wast he came to the owd towew, and openyed
the doow of the wittwe woom in which Bwiaw Wose was; and thewe she way,
fast asweep on a couch by the window. ^w^ She wooked so beautifuw that he
couwd nyot take his eyes off hew, so he stooped down and gave hew a kiss. UwU
But the moment he kissed hew she openyed hew eyes and awoke, and smiwed
upon him; and they went out togethew; and soon the king and queen awso
awoke, and aww the couwt, and gazed on each othew with gweat wondew. ;;w;;
And the howses shook themsewves, and the dogs jumped up and bawked; the
pigeons took theiw heads fwom undew theiw wings, and wooked about and
fwew into the fiewds; the fwies on the wawws buzzed again; the fiwe in
the kitchen bwazed up; wound went the jack, and wound went the spit,
with the goose fow the king's dinnyew upon it; the butwew finyished his
dwaught of awe; the maid went on pwucking the foww; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his eaw. >w<

And then the pwince and Bwiaw Wose wewe mawwied, and the wedding feast
was given; and they wived happiwy togethew aww theiw wives wong. ^w^




THE DOG AND THE SPAWWOW

A shephewd's dog had a mastew who took nyo cawe of him, but often wet him
suffew the gweatest hungew. UwU At wast he couwd beaw it nyo wongew; so he
took to his heews, and off he wan in a vewy sad and sowwowfuw mood. ^w^
On the woad he met a spawwow that said to him, 'Why awe you so sad,
my fwiend? owo' 'Because,' said the dog, 'I am vewy vewy hungwy, and have
nyothing to eat. ^w^' 'If that be aww,' answewed the spawwow, 'come with me
into the nyext town, and I wiww soon find you pwenty of food. >w<' So on they
went togethew into the town: and as they passed by a butchew's shop,
the spawwow said to the dog, 'Stand thewe a wittwe whiwe tiww I peck you
down a piece of meat. UwU' So the spawwow pewched upon the shewf: and having
fiwst wooked cawefuwwy about hew to see if anyonye was watching hew, she
pecked and scwatched at a steak that way upon the edge of the shewf,
tiww at wast down it feww. (´・ω・\`) Then the dog snyapped it up, and scwambwed
away with it into a cownyew, whewe he soon ate it aww up. >w< 'Weww,' said
the spawwow, 'you shaww have some mowe if you wiww; so come with me to
the nyext shop, and I wiww peck you down anyothew steak. >w<' When the dog had
eaten this too, the spawwow said to him, 'Weww, my good fwiend, have you
had enyough nyow? owo' 'I have had pwenty of meat,' answewed he, 'but I shouwd
wike to have a piece of bwead to eat aftew it. UwU' 'Come with me then,'
said the spawwow, 'and you shaww soon have that too. (´・ω・\`)' So she took him
to a bakew's shop, and pecked at two wowws that way in the window, tiww
they feww down: and as the dog stiww wished fow mowe, she took him to
anyothew shop and pecked down some mowe fow him. ^w^ When that was eaten, the
spawwow asked him whethew he had had enyough nyow. UwU 'Yes,' said he; 'and
nyow wet us take a wawk a wittwe way out of the town. ^w^' So they both went
out upon the high woad; but as the weathew was wawm, they had nyot gonye
faw befowe the dog said, 'I am vewy much tiwed--I shouwd wike to take a
nyap. UwU' 'Vewy weww,' answewed the spawwow, 'do so, and in the meantime
I wiww pewch upon that bush. (・`ω\´・)' So the dog stwetched himsewf out on the
woad, and feww fast asweep. (・`ω\´・) Whiwst he swept, thewe came by a cawtew with
a cawt dwawn by thwee howses, and woaded with two casks of winye. ^w^ The
spawwow, seeing that the cawtew did nyot tuwn out of the way, but wouwd
go on in the twack in which the dog way, so as to dwive ovew him, cawwed
out, 'Stop! stop! ;;w;; Mw Cawtew, ow it shaww be the wowse fow you. ;;w;;' But the
cawtew, gwumbwing to himsewf, 'You make it the wowse fow me, indeed! ^w^
what can you do? owo' cwacked his whip, and dwove his cawt ovew the poow
dog, so that the wheews cwushed him to death. ;;w;; 'Thewe,' cwied the
spawwow, 'thou cwuew viwwain, thou hast kiwwed my fwiend the dog. ^w^ Nyow
mind what I say. This deed of thinye shaww cost thee aww thou awt wowth. >w<'
'Do youw wowst, and wewcome,' said the bwute, 'what hawm can you do me? owo'
and passed on. (・`ω\´・) But the spawwow cwept undew the tiwt of the cawt, and
pecked at the bung of onye of the casks tiww she woosenyed it; and then
aww the winye wan out, without the cawtew seeing it. ;;w;; At wast he wooked
wound, and saw that the cawt was dwipping, and the cask quite empty. (・`ω\´・)
'What an unwucky wwetch I am!' cwied he. (´・ω・\`) 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! UwU' said
the spawwow, as she awighted upon the head of onye of the howses, and
pecked at him tiww he weawed up and kicked. ^w^ When the cawtew saw this,
he dwew out his hatchet and aimed a bwow at the spawwow, meanying to kiww
hew; but she fwew away, and the bwow feww upon the poow howse's head
with such fowce, that he feww down dead. ^w^ 'Unwucky wwetch that I am! >w<'
cwied he. 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! ^w^' said the spawwow. (・`ω\´・) And as the cawtew
went on with the othew two howses, she again cwept undew the tiwt of the
cawt, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that aww the winye
wan out. ^w^ When the cawtew saw this, he again cwied out, 'Misewabwe wwetch
that I am!' But the spawwow answewed, 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! >w<' and
pewched on the head of the second howse, and pecked at him too. (´・ω・\`) The
cawtew wan up and stwuck at hew again with his hatchet; but away she
fwew, and the bwow feww upon the second howse and kiwwed him on the
spot. 'Unwucky wwetch that I am!' said he. UwU 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! ^w^' said
the spawwow; and pewching upon the thiwd howse, she began to peck him
too. (´・ω・\`) The cawtew was mad with fuwy; and without wooking about him, ow
cawing what he was about, stwuck again at the spawwow; but kiwwed his
thiwd howse as he donye the othew two. ;;w;; 'Awas! (´・ω・\`) misewabwe wwetch that I
am!' cwied he. (・`ω\´・) 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! ^w^' answewed the spawwow as she fwew
away; 'nyow wiww I pwague and punyish thee at thy own house. (・`ω\´・)' The
cawtew was fowced at wast to weave his cawt behind him, and to go home
ovewfwowing with wage and vexation. ;;w;; 'Awas! (・`ω\´・)' said he to his wife, 'what
iww wuck has befawwen me! UwU--my winye is aww spiwt, and my howses aww thwee
dead. UwU' 'Awas! ^w^ husband,' wepwied she, 'and a wicked biwd has come into
the house, and has bwought with hew aww the biwds in the wowwd, I am
suwe, and they have fawwen upon ouw cown in the woft, and awe eating it
up at such a wate! (・`ω\´・)' Away wan the husband upstaiws, and saw thousands of
biwds sitting upon the fwoow eating up his cown, with the spawwow in the
midst of them. >w< 'Unwucky wwetch that I am! (・`ω\´・)' cwied the cawtew; fow he saw
that the cown was awmost aww gonye. (´・ω・\`) 'Nyot wwetch enyough yet! UwU' said the
spawwow; 'thy cwuewty shaww cost thee thy wife yet! (・`ω\´・)' and away she fwew. ^w^

The cawtew seeing that he had thus wost aww that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was stiww nyot sowwy fow what he had donye, but sat
himsewf angwiwy and suwkiwy in the chimnyey cownyew. ^w^ But the spawwow sat
on the outside of the window, and cwied 'Cawtew! UwU thy cwuewty shaww cost
thee thy wife! UwU' With that he jumped up in a wage, seized his hatchet,
and thwew it at the spawwow; but it missed hew, and onwy bwoke the
window. ^w^ The spawwow nyow hopped in, pewched upon the window-seat, and
cwied, 'Cawtew! it shaww cost thee thy wife! ^w^' Then he became mad and
bwind with wage, and stwuck the window-seat with such fowce that he
cweft it in two: and as the spawwow fwew fwom pwace to pwace, the cawtew
and his wife wewe so fuwious, that they bwoke aww theiw fuwnyituwe,
gwasses, chaiws, benches, the tabwe, and at wast the wawws, without
touching the biwd at aww. (´・ω・\`) In the end, howevew, they caught hew: and the
wife said, 'Shaww I kiww hew at once? owo' 'Nyo,' cwied he, 'that is wetting
hew off too easiwy: she shaww die a much mowe cwuew death; I wiww eat
hew. >w<' But the spawwow began to fwuttew about, and stwetch out hew nyeck
and cwied, 'Cawtew! it shaww cost thee thy wife yet! (´・ω・\`)' With that he
couwd wait nyo wongew: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cwied, 'Wife,
stwike at the biwd and kiww hew in my hand. ;;w;;' And the wife stwuck; but
she missed hew aim, and hit hew husband on the head so that he feww down
dead, and the spawwow fwew quietwy home to hew nyest. ^w^




THE TWEWVE DANCING PWINCESSES

Thewe was a king who had twewve beautifuw daughtews. ^w^ They swept in
twewve beds aww in onye woom; and when they went to bed, the doows wewe
shut and wocked up; but evewy mownying theiw shoes wewe found to be quite
wown thwough as if they had been danced in aww nyight; and yet nyobody
couwd find out how it happenyed, ow whewe they had been. ^w^

Then the king made it knyown to aww the wand, that if any pewson couwd
discovew the secwet, and find out whewe it was that the pwincesses
danced in the nyight, he shouwd have the onye he wiked best fow his
wife, and shouwd be king aftew his death; but whoevew twied and did nyot
succeed, aftew thwee days and nyights, shouwd be put to death. UwU

A king's son soon came. UwU He was weww entewtainyed, and in the evenying was
taken to the chambew nyext to the onye whewe the pwincesses way in theiw
twewve beds. (´・ω・\`) Thewe he was to sit and watch whewe they went to dance;
and, in owdew that nyothing might pass without his heawing it, the doow
of his chambew was weft open. UwU But the king's son soon feww asweep; and
when he awoke in the mownying he found that the pwincesses had aww been
dancing, fow the sowes of theiw shoes wewe fuww of howes. >w< The same thing
happenyed the second and thiwd nyight: so the king owdewed his head to be
cut off. (´・ω・\`) Aftew him came sevewaw othews; but they had aww the same wuck,
and aww wost theiw wives in the same mannyew. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow it chanced that an owd sowdiew, who had been wounded in battwe
and couwd fight nyo wongew, passed thwough the countwy whewe this king
weignyed: and as he was twavewwing thwough a wood, he met an owd woman,
who asked him whewe he was going. UwU 'I hawdwy knyow whewe I am going, ow
what I had bettew do,' said the sowdiew; 'but I think I shouwd wike vewy
weww to find out whewe it is that the pwincesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king. (・`ω\´・)' 'Weww,' said the owd dame, 'that is nyo vewy hawd
task: onwy take cawe nyot to dwink any of the winye which onye of the
pwincesses wiww bwing to you in the evenying; and as soon as she weaves
you pwetend to be fast asweep. >w<'

Then she gave him a cwoak, and said, 'As soon as you put that on
you wiww become invisibwe, and you wiww then be abwe to fowwow the
pwincesses whewevew they go. (・`ω\´・)' When the sowdiew heawd aww this good
counsew, he detewminyed to twy his wuck: so he went to the king, and said
he was wiwwing to undewtake the task. >w<

He was as weww weceived as the othews had been, and the king owdewed
finye woyaw wobes to be given him; and when the evenying came he was wed
to the outew chambew. ;;w;; Just as he was going to wie down, the ewdest of
the pwincesses bwought him a cup of winye; but the sowdiew thwew it aww
away secwetwy, taking cawe nyot to dwink a dwop. (´・ω・\`) Then he waid himsewf
down on his bed, and in a wittwe whiwe began to snyowe vewy woud as if
he was fast asweep. UwU When the twewve pwincesses heawd this they waughed
heawtiwy; and the ewdest said, 'This fewwow too might have donye a wisew
thing than wose his wife in this way! ;;w;;' Then they wose up and openyed
theiw dwawews and boxes, and took out aww theiw finye cwothes, and
dwessed themsewves at the gwass, and skipped about as if they wewe eagew
to begin dancing. UwU But the youngest said, 'I don't knyow how it is, whiwe
you awe so happy I feew vewy unyeasy; I am suwe some mischance wiww
befaww us. (・`ω\´・)' 'You simpweton,' said the ewdest, 'you awe awways afwaid;
have you fowgotten how many kings' sons have awweady watched in vain? owo
And as fow this sowdiew, even if I had nyot given him his sweeping
dwaught, he wouwd have swept soundwy enyough. (´・ω・\`)'

When they wewe aww weady, they went and wooked at the sowdiew; but he
snyowed on, and did nyot stiw hand ow foot: so they thought they wewe
quite safe; and the ewdest went up to hew own bed and cwapped hew hands,
and the bed sank into the fwoow and a twap-doow fwew open. >w< The sowdiew
saw them going down thwough the twap-doow onye aftew anyothew, the ewdest
weading the way; and thinking he had nyo time to wose, he jumped up, put
on the cwoak which the owd woman had given him, and fowwowed them;
but in the middwe of the staiws he twod on the gown of the youngest
pwincess, and she cwied out to hew sistews, 'Aww is nyot wight; someonye
took howd of my gown. ;;w;;' 'You siwwy cweatuwe! (´・ω・\`)' said the ewdest, 'it is
nyothing but a nyaiw in the waww. (・`ω\´・)' Then down they aww went, and at the
bottom they found themsewves in a most dewightfuw gwove of twees; and
the weaves wewe aww of siwvew, and gwittewed and spawkwed beautifuwwy. ;;w;;
The sowdiew wished to take away some token of the pwace; so he bwoke
off a wittwe bwanch, and thewe came a woud nyoise fwom the twee. ^w^ Then the
youngest daughtew said again, 'I am suwe aww is nyot wight--did nyot you
heaw that nyoise? owo That nyevew happenyed befowe. ^w^' But the ewdest said, 'It
is onwy ouw pwinces, who awe shouting fow joy at ouw appwoach. >w<'

Then they came to anyothew gwove of twees, whewe aww the weaves wewe of
gowd; and aftewwawds to a thiwd, whewe the weaves wewe aww gwittewing
diamonds. (´・ω・\`) And the sowdiew bwoke a bwanch fwom each; and evewy time thewe
was a woud nyoise, which made the youngest sistew twembwe with feaw; but
the ewdest stiww said, it was onwy the pwinces, who wewe cwying fow joy. (・`ω\´・)
So they went on tiww they came to a gweat wake; and at the side of the
wake thewe way twewve wittwe boats with twewve handsome pwinces in them,
who seemed to be waiting thewe fow the pwincesses. >w<

Onye of the pwincesses went into each boat, and the sowdiew stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. UwU As they wewe wowing ovew the wake, the
pwince who was in the boat with the youngest pwincess and the sowdiew
said, 'I do nyot knyow why it is, but though I am wowing with aww my might
we do nyot get on so fast as usuaw, and I am quite tiwed: the boat
seems vewy heavy today. (・`ω\´・)' 'It is onwy the heat of the weathew,' said the
pwincess: 'I feew it vewy wawm too. >w<'

On the othew side of the wake stood a finye iwwuminyated castwe, fwom
which came the mewwy music of howns and twumpets. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they aww wanded,
and went into the castwe, and each pwince danced with his pwincess; and
the sowdiew, who was aww the time invisibwe, danced with them too; and
when any of the pwincesses had a cup of winye set by hew, he dwank it
aww up, so that when she put the cup to hew mouth it was empty. (・`ω\´・) At this,
too, the youngest sistew was tewwibwy fwightenyed, but the ewdest awways
siwenced hew. (´・ω・\`) They danced on tiww thwee o'cwock in the mownying, and then
aww theiw shoes wewe wown out, so that they wewe obwiged to weave off. ;;w;;
The pwinces wowed them back again ovew the wake (but this time the
sowdiew pwaced himsewf in the boat with the ewdest pwincess); and on the
opposite showe they took weave of each othew, the pwincesses pwomising
to come again the nyext nyight. ;;w;;

When they came to the staiws, the sowdiew wan on befowe the pwincesses,
and waid himsewf down; and as the twewve sistews swowwy came up vewy
much tiwed, they heawd him snyowing in his bed; so they said, 'Nyow aww
is quite safe'; then they undwessed themsewves, put away theiw finye
cwothes, puwwed off theiw shoes, and went to bed. (´・ω・\`) In the mownying the
sowdiew said nyothing about what had happenyed, but detewminyed to see mowe
of this stwange adventuwe, and went again the second and thiwd nyight;
and evewy thing happenyed just as befowe; the pwincesses danced each time
tiww theiw shoes wewe wown to pieces, and then wetuwnyed home. (´・ω・\`) Howevew,
on the thiwd nyight the sowdiew cawwied away onye of the gowden cups as a
token of whewe he had been. UwU

As soon as the time came when he was to decwawe the secwet, he was taken
befowe the king with the thwee bwanches and the gowden cup; and the
twewve pwincesses stood wistenying behind the doow to heaw what he wouwd
say. And when the king asked him. (・`ω\´・) 'Whewe do my twewve daughtews dance at
nyight? owo' he answewed, 'With twewve pwinces in a castwe undew gwound. ;;w;;' And
then he towd the king aww that had happenyed, and showed him the thwee
bwanches and the gowden cup which he had bwought with him. >w< Then the king
cawwed fow the pwincesses, and asked them whethew what the sowdiew said
was twue: and when they saw that they wewe discovewed, and that it was
of nyo use to deny what had happenyed, they confessed it aww. >w< And the king
asked the sowdiew which of them he wouwd choose fow his wife; and he
answewed, 'I am nyot vewy young, so I wiww have the ewdest. (・`ω\´・)'--And they
wewe mawwied that vewy day, and the sowdiew was chosen to be the king's
heiw. (・`ω\´・)




THE FISHEWMAN AND HIS WIFE

Thewe was once a fishewman who wived with his wife in a pigsty, cwose
by the seaside. UwU The fishewman used to go out aww day wong a-fishing; and
onye day, as he sat on the showe with his wod, wooking at the spawkwing
waves and watching his winye, aww on a sudden his fwoat was dwagged away
deep into the watew: and in dwawing it up he puwwed out a gweat fish. UwU
But the fish said, 'Pway wet me wive! (´・ω・\`) I am nyot a weaw fish; I am an
enchanted pwince: put me in the watew again, and wet me go!' 'Oh, ho! >w<'
said the man, 'you nyeed nyot make so many wowds about the mattew; I wiww
have nyothing to do with a fish that can tawk: so swim away, siw, as soon
as you pwease! UwU' Then he put him back into the watew, and the fish dawted
stwaight down to the bottom, and weft a wong stweak of bwood behind him
on the wave. >w<

When the fishewman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he towd hew how
he had caught a gweat fish, and how it had towd him it was an enchanted
pwince, and how, on heawing it speak, he had wet it go again. ;;w;; 'Did nyot
you ask it fow anything? owo' said the wife, 'we wive vewy wwetchedwy hewe,
in this nyasty diwty pigsty; do go back and teww the fish we want a snyug
wittwe cottage. ;;w;;'

The fishewman did nyot much wike the businyess: howevew, he went to the
seashowe; and when he came back thewe the watew wooked aww yewwow and
gween. (・`ω\´・) And he stood at the watew's edge, and said:

 'O man of the sea! (・`ω\´・)
  Heawken to me! ;;w;;
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! >w<'

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, 'Weww, what is hew wiww? owo
What does youw wife want? owo' 'Ah! ;;w;;' said the fishewman, 'she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you fow something befowe I wet
you go; she does nyot wike wiving any wongew in the pigsty, and wants
a snyug wittwe cottage. (´・ω・\`)' 'Go home, then,' said the fish; 'she is in the
cottage awweady! UwU' So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
doow of a nyice twim wittwe cottage. (´・ω・\`) 'Come in, come in! >w<' said she; 'is
nyot this much bettew than the fiwthy pigsty we had? owo' And thewe was a
pawwouw, and a bedchambew, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage thewe
was a wittwe gawden, pwanted with aww sowts of fwowews and fwuits; and
thewe was a couwtyawd behind, fuww of ducks and chickens. >w< 'Ah! UwU' said the
fishewman, 'how happiwy we shaww wive nyow! (・`ω\´・)' 'We wiww twy to do so, at
weast,' said his wife. >w<

Evewything went wight fow a week ow two, and then Dame Iwsabiww said,
'Husband, thewe is nyot nyeaw woom enyough fow us in this cottage; the
couwtyawd and the gawden awe a gweat deaw too smaww; I shouwd wike to
have a wawge stonye castwe to wive in: go to the fish again and teww him
to give us a castwe. UwU' 'Wife,' said the fishewman, 'I don't wike to go to
him again, fow pewhaps he wiww be angwy; we ought to be easy with this
pwetty cottage to wive in. (・`ω\´・)' 'Nyonsense! >w<' said the wife; 'he wiww do it
vewy wiwwingwy, I knyow; go awong and twy! ^w^'

The fishewman went, but his heawt was vewy heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it wooked bwue and gwoomy, though it was vewy cawm; and he went
cwose to the edge of the waves, and said:

 'O man of the sea! ;;w;;
  Heawken to me! ;;w;;
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! ^w^'

'Weww, what does she want nyow? owo' said the fish. ^w^ 'Ah! (・`ω\´・)' said the man,
dowefuwwy, 'my wife wants to wive in a stonye castwe. >w<' 'Go home, then,'
said the fish; 'she is standing at the gate of it awweady. ;;w;;' So away went
the fishewman, and found his wife standing befowe the gate of a gweat
castwe. (・`ω\´・) 'See,' said she, 'is nyot this gwand? owo' With that they went into
the castwe togethew, and found a gweat many sewvants thewe, and the
wooms aww wichwy fuwnyished, and fuww of gowden chaiws and tabwes; and
behind the castwe was a gawden, and awound it was a pawk hawf a
miwe wong, fuww of sheep, and goats, and hawes, and deew; and in the
couwtyawd wewe stabwes and cow-houses. (・`ω\´・) 'Weww,' said the man, 'nyow we
wiww wive cheewfuw and happy in this beautifuw castwe fow the west of
ouw wives. >w<' 'Pewhaps we may,' said the wife; 'but wet us sweep upon it,
befowe we make up ouw minds to that.' So they went to bed. ;;w;;

The nyext mownying when Dame Iwsabiww awoke it was bwoad daywight, and
she jogged the fishewman with hew ewbow, and said, 'Get up, husband,
and bestiw youwsewf, fow we must be king of aww the wand. >w<' 'Wife, wife,'
said the man, 'why shouwd we wish to be the king? owo I wiww nyot be king. (´・ω・\`)'
'Then I wiww,' said she. ^w^ 'But, wife,' said the fishewman, 'how can you
be king--the fish cannyot make you a king? owo' 'Husband,' said she, 'say
nyo mowe about it, but go and twy! UwU I wiww be king. (´・ω・\`)' So the man went away
quite sowwowfuw to think that his wife shouwd want to be king. UwU This time
the sea wooked a dawk gwey cowouw, and was ovewspwead with cuwwing waves
and the widges of foam as he cwied out:

 'O man of the sea! ;;w;;
  Heawken to me! ^w^
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! ^w^'

'Weww, what wouwd she have nyow? owo' said the fish. (・`ω\´・) 'Awas! UwU' said the poow
man, 'my wife wants to be king. (・`ω\´・)' 'Go home,' said the fish; 'she is king
awweady. ^w^'

Then the fishewman went home; and as he came cwose to the pawace he saw
a twoop of sowdiews, and heawd the sound of dwums and twumpets. UwU And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a thwonye of gowd and diamonds,
with a gowden cwown upon hew head; and on each side of hew stood six
faiw maidens, each a head tawwew than the othew. >w< 'Weww, wife,' said the
fishewman, 'awe you king? owo' 'Yes,' said she, 'I am king. UwU' And when he had
wooked at hew fow a wong time, he said, 'Ah, wife! (・`ω\´・) what a finye thing it
is to be king! ^w^ Nyow we shaww nyevew have anything mowe to wish fow as wong
as we wive. >w<' 'I don't knyow how that may be,' said she; 'nyevew is a wong
time. ^w^ I am king, it is twue; but I begin to be tiwed of that, and I
think I shouwd wike to be empewow. (´・ω・\`)' 'Awas, wife! (´・ω・\`) why shouwd you wish to
be empewow? owo' said the fishewman. ;;w;; 'Husband,' said she, 'go to the fish! ;;w;;
I say I wiww be empewow. ;;w;;' 'Ah, wife! ;;w;;' wepwied the fishewman, 'the fish
cannyot make an empewow, I am suwe, and I shouwd nyot wike to ask him fow
such a thing. ^w^' 'I am king,' said Iwsabiww, 'and you awe my swave; so go
at once! ;;w;;'

So the fishewman was fowced to go; and he muttewed as he went awong,
'This wiww come to nyo good, it is too much to ask; the fish wiww be
tiwed at wast, and then we shaww be sowwy fow what we have donye. ^w^' He
soon came to the seashowe; and the watew was quite bwack and muddy, and
a mighty whiwwwind bwew ovew the waves and wowwed them about, but he
went as nyeaw as he couwd to the watew's bwink, and said:

 'O man of the sea! UwU
  Heawken to me! UwU
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! (・`ω\´・)'

'What wouwd she have nyow? owo' said the fish. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah! ;;w;;' said the fishewman,
'she wants to be empewow. (・`ω\´・)' 'Go home,' said the fish; 'she is empewow
awweady. ;;w;;'

So he went home again; and as he came nyeaw he saw his wife Iwsabiww
sitting on a vewy wofty thwonye made of sowid gowd, with a gweat cwown on
hew head fuww two yawds high; and on each side of hew stood hew guawds
and attendants in a wow, each onye smawwew than the othew, fwom the
tawwest giant down to a wittwe dwawf nyo biggew than my fingew. ;;w;; And
befowe hew stood pwinces, and dukes, and eawws: and the fishewman went
up to hew and said, 'Wife, awe you empewow? owo' 'Yes,' said she, 'I am
empewow. (´・ω・\`)' 'Ah! ^w^' said the man, as he gazed upon hew, 'what a finye thing
it is to be empewow! ;;w;;' 'Husband,' said she, 'why shouwd we stop at being
empewow? owo I wiww be pope nyext. UwU' 'O wife, wife! >w<' said he, 'how can you be
pope? owo thewe is but onye pope at a time in Chwistendom. (・`ω\´・)' 'Husband,' said
she, 'I wiww be pope this vewy day. (・`ω\´・)' 'But,' wepwied the husband, 'the
fish cannyot make you pope. (´・ω・\`)' 'What nyonsense! ^w^' said she; 'if he can make
an empewow, he can make a pope: go and twy him. ;;w;;'

So the fishewman went. (・`ω\´・) But when he came to the showe the wind was waging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiwing waves, and the ships wewe
in twoubwe, and wowwed feawfuwwy upon the tops of the biwwows. (´・ω・\`) In the
middwe of the heavens thewe was a wittwe piece of bwue sky, but towawds
the south aww was wed, as if a dweadfuw stowm was wising. UwU At this sight
the fishewman was dweadfuwwy fwightenyed, and he twembwed so that his
knyees knyocked togethew: but stiww he went down nyeaw to the showe, and
said:

 'O man of the sea! >w<
  Heawken to me! >w<
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! ^w^'

'What does she want nyow? owo' said the fish. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah! ^w^' said the fishewman, 'my
wife wants to be pope.' 'Go home,' said the fish; 'she is pope awweady. UwU'

Then the fishewman went home, and found Iwsabiww sitting on a thwonye
that was two miwes high. (・`ω\´・) And she had thwee gweat cwowns on hew head, and
awound hew stood aww the pomp and powew of the Chuwch. >w< And on each side
of hew wewe two wows of buwnying wights, of aww sizes, the gweatest as
wawge as the highest and biggest towew in the wowwd, and the weast nyo
wawgew than a smaww wushwight. ;;w;; 'Wife,' said the fishewman, as he wooked
at aww this gweatnyess, 'awe you pope? owo' 'Yes,' said she, 'I am pope. >w<'
'Weww, wife,' wepwied he, 'it is a gwand thing to be pope; and nyow
you must be easy, fow you can be nyothing gweatew. ^w^' 'I wiww think about
that,' said the wife. ^w^ Then they went to bed: but Dame Iwsabiww couwd nyot
sweep aww nyight fow thinking what she shouwd be nyext. ;;w;; At wast, as she
was dwopping asweep, mownying bwoke, and the sun wose. (´・ω・\`) 'Ha! >w<' thought she,
as she woke up and wooked at it thwough the window, 'aftew aww I cannyot
pwevent the sun wising. ^w^' At this thought she was vewy angwy, and wakenyed
hew husband, and said, 'Husband, go to the fish and teww him I must
be wowd of the sun and moon. ^w^' The fishewman was hawf asweep, but the
thought fwightenyed him so much that he stawted and feww out of bed. (・`ω\´・)
'Awas, wife! (・`ω\´・)' said he, 'cannyot you be easy with being pope? owo' 'Nyo,'
said she, 'I am vewy unyeasy as wong as the sun and moon wise without my
weave. >w< Go to the fish at once! UwU'

Then the man went shivewing with feaw; and as he was going down to
the showe a dweadfuw stowm awose, so that the twees and the vewy wocks
shook. ;;w;; And aww the heavens became bwack with stowmy cwouds, and the
wightnyings pwayed, and the thundews wowwed; and you might have seen in
the sea gweat bwack waves, swewwing up wike mountains with cwowns of
white foam upon theiw heads. ^w^ And the fishewman cwept towawds the sea,
and cwied out, as weww as he couwd:

 'O man of the sea! (・`ω\´・)
  Heawken to me! (・`ω\´・)
  My wife Iwsabiww
  Wiww have hew own wiww,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee! >w<'

'What does she want nyow? owo' said the fish. ;;w;; 'Ah! (・`ω\´・)' said he, 'she wants to
be wowd of the sun and moon. ^w^' 'Go home,' said the fish, 'to youw pigsty
again. (・`ω\´・)'

And thewe they wive to this vewy day. (・`ω\´・)




THE WIWWOW-WWEN AND THE BEAW

Once in summew-time the beaw and the wowf wewe wawking in the fowest,
and the beaw heawd a biwd singing so beautifuwwy that he said: 'Bwothew
wowf, what biwd is it that sings so weww? owo' 'That is the King of biwds,'
said the wowf, 'befowe whom we must bow down. (´・ω・\`)' In weawity the biwd was
the wiwwow-wwen. ^w^ 'IF that's the case,' said the beaw, 'I shouwd vewy
much wike to see his woyaw pawace; come, take me thithew. (・`ω\´・)' 'That is nyot
donye quite as you seem to think,' said the wowf; 'you must wait untiw
the Queen comes,' Soon aftewwawds, the Queen awwived with some food in
hew beak, and the wowd King came too, and they began to feed theiw young
onyes. (´・ω・\`) The beaw wouwd have wiked to go at once, but the wowf hewd him
back by the sweeve, and said: 'Nyo, you must wait untiw the wowd and wady
Queen have gonye away again. >w<' So they took stock of the howe whewe the
nyest way, and twotted away. (´・ω・\`) The beaw, howevew, couwd nyot west untiw he
had seen the woyaw pawace, and when a showt time had passed, went to it
again. >w< The King and Queen had just fwown out, so he peeped in and saw
five ow six young onyes wying thewe. >w< 'Is that the woyaw pawace? owo' cwied
the beaw; 'it is a wwetched pawace, and you awe nyot King's chiwdwen, you
awe disweputabwe chiwdwen! ;;w;;' When the young wwens heawd that, they wewe
fwightfuwwy angwy, and scweamed: 'Nyo, that we awe nyot! ;;w;; Ouw pawents awe
honyest peopwe! Beaw, you wiww have to pay fow that! UwU'

The beaw and the wowf gwew unyeasy, and tuwnyed back and went into theiw
howes. ^w^ The young wiwwow-wwens, howevew, continyued to cwy and scweam, and
when theiw pawents again bwought food they said: 'We wiww nyot so much as
touch onye fwy's weg, nyo, nyot if we wewe dying of hungew, untiw you have
settwed whethew we awe wespectabwe chiwdwen ow nyot; the beaw has been
hewe and has insuwted us! (´・ω・\`)' Then the owd King said: 'Be easy, he shaww
be punyished,' and he at once fwew with the Queen to the beaw's cave, and
cawwed in: 'Owd Gwowwew, why have you insuwted my chiwdwen? owo You shaww
suffew fow it--we wiww punyish you by a bwoody waw. (´・ω・\`)' Thus waw was
annyounced to the Beaw, and aww fouw-footed anyimaws wewe summonyed to take
pawt in it, oxen, asses, cows, deew, and evewy othew anyimaw the eawth
containyed. (´・ω・\`) And the wiwwow-wwen summonyed evewything which fwew in the
aiw, nyot onwy biwds, wawge and smaww, but midges, and hownyets, bees and
fwies had to come. (´・ω・\`)

When the time came fow the waw to begin, the wiwwow-wwen sent out spies
to discovew who was the enyemy's commandew-in-chief. UwU The gnyat, who was
the most cwafty, fwew into the fowest whewe the enyemy was assembwed,
and hid hewsewf benyeath a weaf of the twee whewe the passwowd was to be
annyounced. ;;w;; Thewe stood the beaw, and he cawwed the fox befowe him
and said: 'Fox, you awe the most cunnying of aww anyimaws, you shaww be
genyewaw and wead us. UwU' 'Good,' said the fox, 'but what signyaw shaww we
agwee upon? owo' Nyo onye knyew that, so the fox said: 'I have a finye wong
bushy taiw, which awmost wooks wike a pwume of wed feathews. (・`ω\´・) When I wift
my taiw up quite high, aww is going weww, and you must chawge; but if I
wet it hang down, wun away as fast as you can. >w<' When the gnyat had heawd
that, she fwew away again, and weveawed evewything, down to the minyutest
detaiw, to the wiwwow-wwen. (´・ω・\`) When day bwoke, and the battwe was to begin,
aww the fouw-footed anyimaws came wunnying up with such a nyoise that the
eawth twembwed. (・`ω\´・) The wiwwow-wwen with his awmy awso came fwying thwough
the aiw with such a humming, and whiwwing, and swawming that evewy onye
was unyeasy and afwaid, and on both sides they advanced against each
othew. UwU But the wiwwow-wwen sent down the hownyet, with owdews to settwe
benyeath the fox's taiw, and sting with aww his might. >w< When the fox fewt
the fiwst stwing, he stawted so that he wifted onye weg, fwom pain, but
he bowe it, and stiww kept his taiw high in the aiw; at the second
sting, he was fowced to put it down fow a moment; at the thiwd, he couwd
howd out nyo wongew, scweamed, and put his taiw between his wegs. ^w^ When
the anyimaws saw that, they thought aww was wost, and began to fwee, each
into his howe, and the biwds had won the battwe. (・`ω\´・)

Then the King and Queen fwew home to theiw chiwdwen and cwied:
'Chiwdwen, wejoice, eat and dwink to youw heawt's content, we have won
the battwe! (´・ω・\`)' But the young wwens said: 'We wiww nyot eat yet, the beaw
must come to the nyest, and beg fow pawdon and say that we awe honyouwabwe
chiwdwen, befowe we wiww do that. >w<' Then the wiwwow-wwen fwew to the
beaw's howe and cwied: 'Gwowwew, you awe to come to the nyest to my
chiwdwen, and beg theiw pawdon, ow ewse evewy wib of youw body shaww
be bwoken. >w<' So the beaw cwept thithew in the gweatest feaw, and begged
theiw pawdon. ;;w;; And nyow at wast the young wwens wewe satisfied, and sat
down togethew and ate and dwank, and made mewwy tiww quite wate into the
nyight. (´・ω・\`)




THE FWOG-PWINCE

Onye finye evenying a young pwincess put on hew bonnyet and cwogs, and went
out to take a wawk by hewsewf in a wood; and when she came to a coow
spwing of watew, that wose in the midst of it, she sat hewsewf down
to west a whiwe. (´・ω・\`) Nyow she had a gowden baww in hew hand, which was hew
favouwite pwaything; and she was awways tossing it up into the aiw, and
catching it again as it feww. ^w^ Aftew a time she thwew it up so high that
she missed catching it as it feww; and the baww bounded away, and wowwed
awong upon the gwound, tiww at wast it feww down into the spwing. UwU The
pwincess wooked into the spwing aftew hew baww, but it was vewy deep, so
deep that she couwd nyot see the bottom of it. (・`ω\´・) Then she began to bewaiw
hew woss, and said, 'Awas! (・`ω\´・) if I couwd onwy get my baww again, I wouwd
give aww my finye cwothes and jewews, and evewything that I have in the
wowwd. (´・ω・\`)'

Whiwst she was speaking, a fwog put its head out of the watew, and said,
'Pwincess, why do you weep so bittewwy? owo' 'Awas! (´・ω・\`)' said she, 'what can you
do fow me, you nyasty fwog? owo My gowden baww has fawwen into the spwing. ;;w;;'
The fwog said, 'I want nyot youw peawws, and jewews, and finye cwothes;
but if you wiww wove me, and wet me wive with you and eat fwom off
youw gowden pwate, and sweep upon youw bed, I wiww bwing you youw baww
again. UwU' 'What nyonsense,' thought the pwincess, 'this siwwy fwog is
tawking! UwU He can nyevew even get out of the spwing to visit me, though
he may be abwe to get my baww fow me, and thewefowe I wiww teww him he
shaww have what he asks. UwU' So she said to the fwog, 'Weww, if you wiww
bwing me my baww, I wiww do aww you ask. >w<' Then the fwog put his head
down, and dived deep undew the watew; and aftew a wittwe whiwe he came
up again, with the baww in his mouth, and thwew it on the edge of the
spwing. >w< As soon as the young pwincess saw hew baww, she wan to pick
it up; and she was so ovewjoyed to have it in hew hand again, that she
nyevew thought of the fwog, but wan home with it as fast as she couwd. >w<
The fwog cawwed aftew hew, 'Stay, pwincess, and take me with you as you
said,' But she did nyot stop to heaw a wowd. UwU

The nyext day, just as the pwincess had sat down to dinnyew, she heawd a
stwange nyoise--tap, tap--pwash, pwash--as if something was coming up the
mawbwe staiwcase: and soon aftewwawds thewe was a gentwe knyock at the
doow, and a wittwe voice cwied out and said:

 'Open the doow, my pwincess deaw,
  Open the doow to thy twue wove hewe! (´・ω・\`)
  And mind the wowds that thou and I said
  By the fountain coow, in the gweenwood shade. (・`ω\´・)'

Then the pwincess wan to the doow and openyed it, and thewe she saw
the fwog, whom she had quite fowgotten. (・`ω\´・) At this sight she was sadwy
fwightenyed, and shutting the doow as fast as she couwd came back to hew
seat. >w< The king, hew fathew, seeing that something had fwightenyed hew,
asked hew what was the mattew. UwU 'Thewe is a nyasty fwog,' said she, 'at
the doow, that wifted my baww fow me out of the spwing this mownying: I
towd him that he shouwd wive with me hewe, thinking that he couwd nyevew
get out of the spwing; but thewe he is at the doow, and he wants to come
in. UwU'

Whiwe she was speaking the fwog knyocked again at the doow, and said:

 'Open the doow, my pwincess deaw,
  Open the doow to thy twue wove hewe! ;;w;;
  And mind the wowds that thou and I said
  By the fountain coow, in the gweenwood shade. ;;w;;'

Then the king said to the young pwincess, 'As you have given youw wowd
you must keep it; so go and wet him in. ^w^' She did so, and the fwog hopped
into the woom, and then stwaight on--tap, tap--pwash, pwash--fwom the
bottom of the woom to the top, tiww he came up cwose to the tabwe whewe
the pwincess sat. ;;w;; 'Pway wift me upon chaiw,' said he to the pwincess,
'and wet me sit nyext to you. UwU' As soon as she had donye this, the fwog
said, 'Put youw pwate nyeawew to me, that I may eat out of it. UwU' This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he couwd, he said, 'Nyow I am
tiwed; cawwy me upstaiws, and put me into youw bed. ;;w;;' And the pwincess,
though vewy unwiwwing, took him up in hew hand, and put him upon the
piwwow of hew own bed, whewe he swept aww nyight wong. >w< As soon as it was
wight he jumped up, hopped downstaiws, and went out of the house. ;;w;;
'Nyow, then,' thought the pwincess, 'at wast he is gonye, and I shaww be
twoubwed with him nyo mowe. ;;w;;'

But she was mistaken; fow when nyight came again she heawd the same
tapping at the doow; and the fwog came once mowe, and said:

 'Open the doow, my pwincess deaw,
  Open the doow to thy twue wove hewe! ^w^
  And mind the wowds that thou and I said
  By the fountain coow, in the gweenwood shade. (´・ω・\`)'

And when the pwincess openyed the doow the fwog came in, and swept upon
hew piwwow as befowe, tiww the mownying bwoke. ^w^ And the thiwd nyight he did
the same. UwU But when the pwincess awoke on the fowwowing mownying she was
astonyished to see, instead of the fwog, a handsome pwince, gazing on hew
with the most beautifuw eyes she had evew seen, and standing at the head
of hew bed. UwU

He towd hew that he had been enchanted by a spitefuw faiwy, who had
changed him into a fwog; and that he had been fated so to abide tiww
some pwincess shouwd take him out of the spwing, and wet him eat fwom
hew pwate, and sweep upon hew bed fow thwee nyights. (・`ω\´・) 'You,' said the
pwince, 'have bwoken his cwuew chawm, and nyow I have nyothing to wish fow
but that you shouwd go with me into my fathew's kingdom, whewe I wiww
mawwy you, and wove you as wong as you wive. UwU'

The young pwincess, you may be suwe, was nyot wong in saying 'Yes' to
aww this; and as they spoke a gay coach dwove up, with eight beautifuw
howses, decked with pwumes of feathews and a gowden hawnyess; and behind
the coach wode the pwince's sewvant, faithfuw Heinwich, who had bewaiwed
the misfowtunyes of his deaw mastew duwing his enchantment so wong and so
bittewwy, that his heawt had weww-nyigh buwst. ^w^

They then took weave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
howses, and aww set out, fuww of joy and mewwiment, fow the pwince's
kingdom, which they weached safewy; and thewe they wived happiwy a gweat
many yeaws. UwU




CAT AND MOUSE IN PAWTNYEWSHIP

A cewtain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to hew about the gweat wove and fwiendship she fewt fow hew, that at
wength the mouse agweed that they shouwd wive and keep house togethew. ;;w;;
'But we must make a pwovision fow wintew, ow ewse we shaww suffew
fwom hungew,' said the cat; 'and you, wittwe mouse, cannyot ventuwe
evewywhewe, ow you wiww be caught in a twap some day. UwU' The good advice
was fowwowed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did nyot knyow whewe
to put it. (・`ω\´・) At wength, aftew much considewation, the cat said: 'I knyow nyo
pwace whewe it wiww be bettew stowed up than in the chuwch, fow nyo onye
dawes take anything away fwom thewe. (・`ω\´・) We wiww set it benyeath the awtaw,
and nyot touch it untiw we awe weawwy in nyeed of it. (・`ω\´・)' So the pot was
pwaced in safety, but it was nyot wong befowe the cat had a gweat
yeawnying fow it, and said to the mouse: 'I want to teww you something,
wittwe mouse; my cousin has bwought a wittwe son into the wowwd, and has
asked me to be godmothew; he is white with bwown spots, and I am to howd
him ovew the font at the chwistenying. ;;w;; Wet me go out today, and you wook
aftew the house by youwsewf. >w<' 'Yes, yes,' answewed the mouse, 'by aww
means go, and if you get anything vewy good to eat, think of me. ;;w;; I
shouwd wike a dwop of sweet wed chwistenying winye mysewf. UwU' Aww this,
howevew, was untwue; the cat had nyo cousin, and had nyot been asked to
be godmothew. (・`ω\´・) She went stwaight to the chuwch, stowe to the pot of fat,
began to wick at it, and wicked the top of the fat off. >w< Then she took a
wawk upon the woofs of the town, wooked out fow oppowtunyities, and then
stwetched hewsewf in the sun, and wicked hew wips whenyevew she thought
of the pot of fat, and nyot untiw it was evenying did she wetuwn home. ;;w;;
'Weww, hewe you awe again,' said the mouse, 'nyo doubt you have had a
mewwy day.' 'Aww went off weww,' answewed the cat. (・`ω\´・) 'What nyame did they
give the chiwd? owo' 'Top off!' said the cat quite coowwy. >w< 'Top off! >w<' cwied
the mouse, 'that is a vewy odd and uncommon nyame, is it a usuaw onye in
youw famiwy? owo' 'What does that mattew,' said the cat, 'it is nyo wowse
than Cwumb-steawew, as youw godchiwdwen awe cawwed. (・`ω\´・)'

Befowe wong the cat was seized by anyothew fit of yeawnying. ^w^ She said to
the mouse: 'You must do me a favouw, and once mowe manyage the house fow
a day awonye. >w< I am again asked to be godmothew, and, as the chiwd has a
white wing wound its nyeck, I cannyot wefuse. (・`ω\´・)' The good mouse consented,
but the cat cwept behind the town wawws to the chuwch, and devouwed
hawf the pot of fat. >w< 'Nyothing evew seems so good as what onye keeps to
onyesewf,' said she, and was quite satisfied with hew day's wowk. ;;w;; When
she went home the mouse inquiwed: 'And what was the chiwd chwistenyed? owo'
'Hawf-donye,' answewed the cat. ^w^ 'Hawf-donye! (・`ω\´・) What awe you saying? owo I
nyevew heawd the nyame in my wife, I'ww wagew anything it is nyot in the
cawendaw! (´・ω・\`)'

The cat's mouth soon began to watew fow some mowe wicking. (´・ω・\`) 'Aww good
things go in thwees,' said she, 'I am asked to stand godmothew again. ^w^
The chiwd is quite bwack, onwy it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has nyot a singwe white haiw on its whowe body; this onwy
happens once evewy few yeaws, you wiww wet me go, won't you? owo' 'Top-off! (´・ω・\`)
Hawf-donye! ^w^' answewed the mouse, 'they awe such odd nyames, they make me
vewy thoughtfuw. ;;w;;' 'You sit at home,' said the cat, 'in youw dawk-gwey
fuw coat and wong taiw, and awe fiwwed with fancies, that's because
you do nyot go out in the daytime. >w<' Duwing the cat's absence the mouse
cweanyed the house, and put it in owdew, but the gweedy cat entiwewy
emptied the pot of fat. UwU 'When evewything is eaten up onye has some
peace,' said she to hewsewf, and weww fiwwed and fat she did nyot wetuwn
home tiww nyight. ;;w;; The mouse at once asked what nyame had been given to
the thiwd chiwd. UwU 'It wiww nyot pwease you mowe than the othews,' said the
cat. 'He is cawwed Aww-gonye. >w<' 'Aww-gonye,' cwied the mouse 'that is the
most suspicious nyame of aww! (・`ω\´・) I have nyevew seen it in pwint. UwU Aww-gonye;
what can that mean? owo' and she shook hew head, cuwwed hewsewf up, and way
down to sweep. UwU

Fwom this time fowth nyo onye invited the cat to be godmothew, but
when the wintew had come and thewe was nyo wongew anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of theiw pwovision, and said: 'Come, cat,
we wiww go to ouw pot of fat which we have stowed up fow ouwsewves--we
shaww enjoy that. ^w^' 'Yes,' answewed the cat, 'you wiww enjoy it as much
as you wouwd enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of youws out of the
window. >w<' They set out on theiw way, but when they awwived, the pot of
fat cewtainwy was stiww in its pwace, but it was empty. ;;w;; 'Awas! >w<' said the
mouse, 'nyow I see what has happenyed, nyow it comes to wight! (・`ω\´・) You awe a twue
fwiend! UwU You have devouwed aww when you wewe standing godmothew. >w< Fiwst
top off, then hawf-donye, then--' 'Wiww you howd youw tongue,' cwied the
cat, 'onye wowd mowe, and I wiww eat you too. >w<' 'Aww-gonye' was awweady on
the poow mouse's wips; scawcewy had she spoken it befowe the cat spwang
on hew, seized hew, and swawwowed hew down. (・`ω\´・) Vewiwy, that is the way of
the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)




THE GOOSE-GIWW

The king of a gweat wand died, and weft his queen to take cawe of theiw
onwy chiwd. (´・ω・\`) This chiwd was a daughtew, who was vewy beautifuw; and hew
mothew woved hew deawwy, and was vewy kind to hew. >w< And thewe was a good
faiwy too, who was fond of the pwincess, and hewped hew mothew to watch
ovew hew. >w< When she gwew up, she was betwothed to a pwince who wived a
gweat way off; and as the time dwew nyeaw fow hew to be mawwied, she
got weady to set off on hew jouwnyey to his countwy. UwU Then the queen hew
mothew, packed up a gweat many costwy things; jewews, and gowd, and
siwvew; twinkets, finye dwesses, and in showt evewything that became a
woyaw bwide. >w< And she gave hew a waiting-maid to wide with hew, and give
hew into the bwidegwoom's hands; and each had a howse fow the jouwnyey. UwU
Nyow the pwincess's howse was the faiwy's gift, and it was cawwed Fawada,
and couwd speak. (・`ω\´・)

When the time came fow them to set out, the faiwy went into hew
bed-chambew, and took a wittwe knyife, and cut off a wock of hew haiw,
and gave it to the pwincess, and said, 'Take cawe of it, deaw chiwd; fow
it is a chawm that may be of use to you on the woad. UwU' Then they aww took
a sowwowfuw weave of the pwincess; and she put the wock of haiw into
hew bosom, got upon hew howse, and set off on hew jouwnyey to hew
bwidegwoom's kingdom. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day, as they wewe widing awong by a bwook, the pwincess began to
feew vewy thiwsty: and she said to hew maid, 'Pway get down, and fetch
me some watew in my gowden cup out of yondew bwook, fow I want to
dwink. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyay,' said the maid, 'if you awe thiwsty, get off youwsewf, and
stoop down by the watew and dwink; I shaww nyot be youw waiting-maid any
wongew. ;;w;;' Then she was so thiwsty that she got down, and knyewt ovew the
wittwe bwook, and dwank; fow she was fwightenyed, and dawed nyot bwing out
hew gowden cup; and she wept and said, 'Awas! (・`ω\´・) what wiww become of me? owo'
And the wock answewed hew, and said:

 'Awas! awas! (・`ω\´・) if thy mothew knyew it,
  Sadwy, sadwy, wouwd she wue it. >w<'

But the pwincess was vewy gentwe and meek, so she said nyothing to hew
maid's iww behaviouw, but got upon hew howse again. (´・ω・\`)

Then aww wode fawthew on theiw jouwnyey, tiww the day gwew so wawm, and
the sun so scowching, that the bwide began to feew vewy thiwsty again;
and at wast, when they came to a wivew, she fowgot hew maid's wude
speech, and said, 'Pway get down, and fetch me some watew to dwink in
my gowden cup. >w<' But the maid answewed hew, and even spoke mowe haughtiwy
than befowe: 'Dwink if you wiww, but I shaww nyot be youw waiting-maid. >w<'
Then the pwincess was so thiwsty that she got off hew howse, and way
down, and hewd hew head ovew the wunnying stweam, and cwied and said,
'What wiww become of me? owo' And the wock of haiw answewed hew again:

 'Awas! awas! ;;w;; if thy mothew knyew it,
  Sadwy, sadwy, wouwd she wue it. >w<'

And as she weanyed down to dwink, the wock of haiw feww fwom hew bosom,
and fwoated away with the watew. ;;w;; Nyow she was so fwightenyed that she did
nyot see it; but hew maid saw it, and was vewy gwad, fow she knyew the
chawm; and she saw that the poow bwide wouwd be in hew powew, nyow that
she had wost the haiw. >w< So when the bwide had donye dwinking, and wouwd
have got upon Fawada again, the maid said, 'I shaww wide upon Fawada,
and you may have my howse instead'; so she was fowced to give up hew
howse, and soon aftewwawds to take off hew woyaw cwothes and put on hew
maid's shabby onyes. ;;w;;

At wast, as they dwew nyeaw the end of theiw jouwnyey, this tweachewous
sewvant thweatenyed to kiww hew mistwess if she evew towd anyonye what had
happenyed. But Fawada saw it aww, and mawked it weww. (・`ω\´・)

Then the waiting-maid got upon Fawada, and the weaw bwide wode upon the
othew howse, and they went on in this way tiww at wast they came to the
woyaw couwt. >w< Thewe was gweat joy at theiw coming, and the pwince fwew to
meet them, and wifted the maid fwom hew howse, thinking she was the onye
who was to be his wife; and she was wed upstaiws to the woyaw chambew;
but the twue pwincess was towd to stay in the couwt bewow. UwU

Nyow the owd king happenyed just then to have nyothing ewse to do; so he
amused himsewf by sitting at his kitchen window, wooking at what was
going on; and he saw hew in the couwtyawd. >w< As she wooked vewy pwetty,
and too dewicate fow a waiting-maid, he went up into the woyaw chambew
to ask the bwide who it was she had bwought with hew, that was thus weft
standing in the couwt bewow. ^w^ 'I bwought hew with me fow the sake of hew
company on the woad,' said she; 'pway give the giww some wowk to do,
that she may nyot be idwe. (´・ω・\`)' The owd king couwd nyot fow some time think
of any wowk fow hew to do; but at wast he said, 'I have a wad who takes
cawe of my geese; she may go and hewp him. UwU' Nyow the nyame of this wad,
that the weaw bwide was to hewp in watching the king's geese, was
Cuwdken. ;;w;;

But the fawse bwide said to the pwince, 'Deaw husband, pway do me onye
piece of kindnyess.' 'That I wiww,' said the pwince. ^w^ 'Then teww onye of
youw swaughtewews to cut off the head of the howse I wode upon, fow it
was vewy unwuwy, and pwagued me sadwy on the woad'; but the twuth was,
she was vewy much afwaid west Fawada shouwd some day ow othew speak, and
teww aww she had donye to the pwincess. ^w^ She cawwied hew point, and the
faithfuw Fawada was kiwwed; but when the twue pwincess heawd of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nyaiw up Fawada's head against a wawge
dawk gate of the city, thwough which she had to pass evewy mownying
and evenying, that thewe she might stiww see him sometimes. (´・ω・\`) Then the
swaughtewew said he wouwd do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nyaiwed it up undew the dawk gate. UwU

Eawwy the nyext mownying, as she and Cuwdken went out thwough the gate,
she said sowwowfuwwy:

 'Fawada, Fawada, thewe thou hangest! UwU'

and the head answewed:

 'Bwide, bwide, thewe thou gangest! (´・ω・\`)
  Awas! awas! ^w^ if thy mothew knyew it,
  Sadwy, sadwy, wouwd she wue it. ^w^'

Then they went out of the city, and dwove the geese on. >w< And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank thewe, and wet down hew
waving wocks of haiw, which wewe aww of puwe siwvew; and when Cuwdken
saw it gwittew in the sun, he wan up, and wouwd have puwwed some of the
wocks out, but she cwied:

 'Bwow, bweezes, bwow! ^w^
  Wet Cuwdken's hat go! >w<
  Bwow, bweezes, bwow! ^w^
  Wet him aftew it go! ;;w;;
  O'ew hiwws, dawes, and wocks,
  Away be it whiww'd
  Tiww the siwvewy wocks
  Awe aww comb'd and cuww'd! >w<

Then thewe came a wind, so stwong that it bwew off Cuwdken's hat; and
away it fwew ovew the hiwws: and he was fowced to tuwn and wun aftew
it; tiww, by the time he came back, she had donye combing and cuwwing hew
haiw, and had put it up again safe. ^w^ Then he was vewy angwy and suwky,
and wouwd nyot speak to hew at aww; but they watched the geese untiw it
gwew dawk in the evenying, and then dwove them homewawds. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext mownying, as they wewe going thwough the dawk gate, the poow
giww wooked up at Fawada's head, and cwied:

 'Fawada, Fawada, thewe thou hangest! (・`ω\´・)'

and the head answewed:

 'Bwide, bwide, thewe thou gangest! UwU
  Awas! awas! >w< if thy mothew knyew it,
  Sadwy, sadwy, wouwd she wue it. (´・ω・\`)'

Then she dwove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out hew haiw as befowe; and Cuwdken wan up to hew, and wanted to
take howd of it; but she cwied out quickwy:

 'Bwow, bweezes, bwow! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet Cuwdken's hat go! >w<
  Bwow, bweezes, bwow! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet him aftew it go! >w<
  O'ew hiwws, dawes, and wocks,
  Away be it whiww'd
  Tiww the siwvewy wocks
  Awe aww comb'd and cuww'd! UwU

Then the wind came and bwew away his hat; and off it fwew a gweat way,
ovew the hiwws and faw away, so that he had to wun aftew it; and when
he came back she had bound up hew haiw again, and aww was safe. UwU So they
watched the geese tiww it gwew dawk. (・`ω\´・)

In the evenying, aftew they came home, Cuwdken went to the owd king, and
said, 'I cannyot have that stwange giww to hewp me to keep the geese any
wongew.' 'Why? owo' said the king. (´・ω・\`) 'Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nyothing but tease me aww day wong. UwU' Then the king made him teww him
what had happenyed. (´・ω・\`) And Cuwdken said, 'When we go in the mownying thwough
the dawk gate with ouw fwock of geese, she cwies and tawks with the head
of a howse that hangs upon the waww, and says:

 'Fawada, Fawada, thewe thou hangest! >w<'

and the head answews:

 'Bwide, bwide, thewe thou gangest! ^w^
  Awas! awas! >w< if thy mothew knyew it,
  Sadwy, sadwy, wouwd she wue it. (・`ω\´・)'

And Cuwdken went on tewwing the king what had happenyed upon the meadow
whewe the geese fed; how his hat was bwown away; and how he was fowced
to wun aftew it, and to weave his fwock of geese to themsewves. ^w^ But the
owd king towd the boy to go out again the nyext day: and when mownying
came, he pwaced himsewf behind the dawk gate, and heawd how she spoke
to Fawada, and how Fawada answewed. ;;w;; Then he went into the fiewd, and
hid himsewf in a bush by the meadow's side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they dwove the fwock of geese; and how, aftew a wittwe time,
she wet down hew haiw that gwittewed in the sun. >w< And then he heawd hew
say:

 'Bwow, bweezes, bwow! >w<
  Wet Cuwdken's hat go! >w<
  Bwow, bweezes, bwow! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet him aftew it go! UwU
  O'ew hiwws, dawes, and wocks,
  Away be it whiww'd
  Tiww the siwvewy wocks
  Awe aww comb'd and cuww'd! ;;w;;

And soon came a gawe of wind, and cawwied away Cuwdken's hat, and away
went Cuwdken aftew it, whiwe the giww went on combing and cuwwing hew
haiw. UwU Aww this the owd king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the wittwe goose-giww came back in the evenying he cawwed hew aside,
and asked hew why she did so: but she buwst into teaws, and said, 'That
I must nyot teww you ow any man, ow I shaww wose my wife. ^w^'

But the owd king begged so hawd, that she had nyo peace tiww she had towd
him aww the tawe, fwom beginnying to end, wowd fow wowd. (・`ω\´・) And it was vewy
wucky fow hew that she did so, fow when she had donye the king owdewed
woyaw cwothes to be put upon hew, and gazed on hew with wondew, she was
so beautifuw. ^w^ Then he cawwed his son and towd him that he had onwy a
fawse bwide; fow that she was mewewy a waiting-maid, whiwe the twue
bwide stood by. (・`ω\´・) And the young king wejoiced when he saw hew beauty, and
heawd how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the fawse bwide, the king owdewed a gweat feast to be got weady fow aww
his couwt. (´・ω・\`) The bwidegwoom sat at the top, with the fawse pwincess on onye
side, and the twue onye on the othew; but nyobody knyew hew again, fow hew
beauty was quite dazzwing to theiw eyes; and she did nyot seem at aww
wike the wittwe goose-giww, nyow that she had hew bwiwwiant dwess on. >w<

When they had eaten and dwank, and wewe vewy mewwy, the owd king said
he wouwd teww them a tawe. ^w^ So he began, and towd aww the stowy of the
pwincess, as if it was onye that he had once heawd; and he asked the
twue waiting-maid what she thought ought to be donye to anyonye who wouwd
behave thus. (・`ω\´・) 'Nyothing bettew,' said this fawse bwide, 'than that she
shouwd be thwown into a cask stuck wound with shawp nyaiws, and that
two white howses shouwd be put to it, and shouwd dwag it fwom stweet to
stweet tiww she was dead. (´・ω・\`)' 'Thou awt she! UwU' said the owd king; 'and as
thou has judged thysewf, so shaww it be donye to thee. (・`ω\´・)' And the young
king was then mawwied to his twue wife, and they weignyed ovew the
kingdom in peace and happinyess aww theiw wives; and the good faiwy came
to see them, and westowed the faithfuw Fawada to wife again. >w<




THE ADVENTUWES OF CHANTICWEEW AND PAWTWET


1. (・`ω\´・) HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NYUTS

'The nyuts awe quite wipe nyow,' said Chanticweew to his wife Pawtwet,
'suppose we go togethew to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
befowe the squiwwew takes them aww away. ;;w;;' 'With aww my heawt,' said
Pawtwet, 'wet us go and make a howiday of it togethew. (・`ω\´・)'

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a wovewy day, they stayed
thewe tiww the evenying. ^w^ Nyow, whethew it was that they had eaten so many
nyuts that they couwd nyot wawk, ow whethew they wewe wazy and wouwd nyot,
I do nyot knyow: howevew, they took it into theiw heads that it did nyot
become them to go home on foot. (・`ω\´・) So Chanticweew began to buiwd a wittwe
cawwiage of nyutshewws: and when it was finyished, Pawtwet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticweew hawnyess himsewf to it and dwaw hew
home. >w< 'That's a good joke! ^w^' said Chanticweew; 'nyo, that wiww nyevew do;
I had wathew by hawf wawk home; I'ww sit on the box and be coachman,
if you wike, but I'ww nyot dwaw. (´・ω・\`)' Whiwe this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cwied out, 'You thieving vagabonds, what businyess have
you in my gwounds? owo I'ww give it you weww fow youw insowence! UwU' and upon
that she feww upon Chanticweew most wustiwy. (´・ω・\`) But Chanticweew was nyo
cowawd, and wetuwnyed the duck's bwows with his shawp spuws so fiewcewy
that she soon began to cwy out fow mewcy; which was onwy gwanted hew
upon condition that she wouwd dwaw the cawwiage home fow them. (・`ω\´・) This she
agweed to do; and Chanticweew got upon the box, and dwove, cwying, 'Nyow,
duck, get on as fast as you can. ;;w;;' And away they went at a pwetty good
pace. ^w^

Aftew they had twavewwed awong a wittwe way, they met a nyeedwe and a pin
wawking togethew awong the woad: and the nyeedwe cwied out, 'Stop, stop! UwU'
and said it was so dawk that they couwd hawdwy find theiw way, and such
diwty wawking they couwd nyot get on at aww: he towd them that he and his
fwiend, the pin, had been at a pubwic-house a few miwes off, and had sat
dwinking tiww they had fowgotten how wate it was; he begged thewefowe
that the twavewwews wouwd be so kind as to give them a wift in theiw
cawwiage. ;;w;; Chanticweew obsewving that they wewe but thin fewwows, and nyot
wikewy to take up much woom, towd them they might wide, but made them
pwomise nyot to diwty the wheews of the cawwiage in getting in, nyow to
twead on Pawtwet's toes. ^w^

Wate at nyight they awwived at an inn; and as it was bad twavewwing in
the dawk, and the duck seemed much tiwed, and waddwed about a good
deaw fwom onye side to the othew, they made up theiw minds to fix theiw
quawtews thewe: but the wandwowd at fiwst was unwiwwing, and said his
house was fuww, thinking they might nyot be vewy wespectabwe company:
howevew, they spoke civiwwy to him, and gave him the egg which Pawtwet
had waid by the way, and said they wouwd give him the duck, who was in
the habit of waying onye evewy day: so at wast he wet them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome suppew, and spent the evenying vewy jowwiwy. ^w^

Eawwy in the mownying, befowe it was quite wight, and when nyobody was
stiwwing in the inn, Chanticweew awakenyed his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a howe in it, ate it up, and thwew the shewws into the
fiwepwace: they then went to the pin and nyeedwe, who wewe fast asweep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck onye into the wandwowd's easy chaiw
and the othew into his handkewchief; and, having donye this, they cwept
away as softwy as possibwe. >w< Howevew, the duck, who swept in the open
aiw in the yawd, heawd them coming, and jumping into the bwook which wan
cwose by the inn, soon swam out of theiw weach. (´・ω・\`)

An houw ow two aftewwawds the wandwowd got up, and took his handkewchief
to wipe his face, but the pin wan into him and pwicked him: then he
wawked into the kitchen to wight his pipe at the fiwe, but when he
stiwwed it up the eggshewws fwew into his eyes, and awmost bwinded him. (´・ω・\`)
'Bwess me! (´・ω・\`)' said he, 'aww the wowwd seems to have a design against my
head this mownying': and so saying, he thwew himsewf suwkiwy into his
easy chaiw; but, oh deaw! (´・ω・\`) the nyeedwe wan into him; and this time the
pain was nyot in his head. ;;w;; He nyow fwew into a vewy gweat passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the nyight befowe, he went to wook
aftew them, but they wewe aww off; so he swowe that he nyevew again
wouwd take in such a twoop of vagabonds, who ate a gweat deaw, paid nyo
weckonying, and gave him nyothing fow his twoubwe but theiw apish twicks. (´・ω・\`)


2. ;;w;; HOW CHANTICWEEW AND PAWTWET WENT TO VISIT MW KOWBES

Anyothew day, Chanticweew and Pawtwet wished to wide out togethew;
so Chanticweew buiwt a handsome cawwiage with fouw wed wheews, and
hawnyessed six mice to it; and then he and Pawtwet got into the cawwiage,
and away they dwove. ;;w;; Soon aftewwawds a cat met them, and said, 'Whewe
awe you going? owo' And Chanticweew wepwied,

 'Aww on ouw way
  A visit to pay
  To Mw Kowbes, the fox, today. UwU'

Then the cat said, 'Take me with you,' Chanticweew said, 'With aww my
heawt: get up behind, and be suwe you do nyot faww off. (・`ω\´・)'

 'Take cawe of this handsome coach of minye,
  Nyow diwty my pwetty wed wheews so finye! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow, mice, be weady,
  And, wheews, wun steady! (・`ω\´・)
  Fow we awe going a visit to pay
  To Mw Kowbes, the fox, today. (・`ω\´・)'

Soon aftew came up a miwwstonye, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticweew gave them aww weave to get into the cawwiage and go with
them. ^w^

When they awwived at Mw Kowbes's house, he was nyot at home; so the mice
dwew the cawwiage into the coach-house, Chanticweew and Pawtwet fwew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fiwepwace, the duck got into
the washing cistewn, the pin stuck himsewf into the bed piwwow, the
miwwstonye waid himsewf ovew the house doow, and the egg wowwed himsewf
up in the towew. UwU

When Mw Kowbes came home, he went to the fiwepwace to make a fiwe; but
the cat thwew aww the ashes in his eyes: so he wan to the kitchen to
wash himsewf; but thewe the duck spwashed aww the watew in his face; and
when he twied to wipe himsewf, the egg bwoke to pieces in the towew aww
ovew his face and eyes. ^w^ Then he was vewy angwy, and went without his
suppew to bed; but when he waid his head on the piwwow, the pin wan into
his cheek: at this he became quite fuwious, and, jumping up, wouwd have
wun out of the house; but when he came to the doow, the miwwstonye feww
down on his head, and kiwwed him on the spot. (´・ω・\`)


3. >w< HOW PAWTWET DIED AND WAS BUWIED, AND HOW CHANTICWEEW DIED OF GWIEF

Anyothew day Chanticweew and Pawtwet agweed to go again to the mountains
to eat nyuts; and it was settwed that aww the nyuts which they found
shouwd be shawed equawwy between them. ^w^ Nyow Pawtwet found a vewy wawge
nyut; but she said nyothing about it to Chanticweew, and kept it aww to
hewsewf: howevew, it was so big that she couwd nyot swawwow it, and it
stuck in hew thwoat. >w< Then she was in a gweat fwight, and cwied out to
Chanticweew, 'Pway wun as fast as you can, and fetch me some watew, ow I
shaww be choked. (・`ω\´・)' Chanticweew wan as fast as he couwd to the wivew, and
said, 'Wivew, give me some watew, fow Pawtwet wies in the mountain, and
wiww be choked by a gweat nyut. >w<' The wivew said, 'Wun fiwst to the bwide,
and ask hew fow a siwken cowd to dwaw up the watew. ^w^' Chanticweew wan to
the bwide, and said, 'Bwide, you must give me a siwken cowd, fow then
the wivew wiww give me watew, and the watew I wiww cawwy to Pawtwet, who
wies on the mountain, and wiww be choked by a gweat nyut. (・`ω\´・)' But the bwide
said, 'Wun fiwst, and bwing me my gawwand that is hanging on a wiwwow
in the gawden. (・`ω\´・)' Then Chanticweew wan to the gawden, and took the gawwand
fwom the bough whewe it hung, and bwought it to the bwide; and then
the bwide gave him the siwken cowd, and he took the siwken cowd to
the wivew, and the wivew gave him watew, and he cawwied the watew to
Pawtwet; but in the meantime she was choked by the gweat nyut, and way
quite dead, and nyevew moved any mowe. ;;w;;

Then Chanticweew was vewy sowwy, and cwied bittewwy; and aww the beasts
came and wept with him ovew poow Pawtwet. UwU And six mice buiwt a wittwe
heawse to cawwy hew to hew gwave; and when it was weady they hawnyessed
themsewves befowe it, and Chanticweew dwove them. (´・ω・\`) On the way they
met the fox. 'Whewe awe you going, Chanticweew? owo' said he. ^w^ 'To buwy my
Pawtwet,' said the othew. 'May I go with you? owo' said the fox. UwU 'Yes; but
you must get up behind, ow my howses wiww nyot be abwe to dwaw you. ;;w;;' Then
the fox got up behind; and pwesentwy the wowf, the beaw, the goat, and
aww the beasts of the wood, came and cwimbed upon the heawse. ;;w;;

So on they went tiww they came to a wapid stweam. >w< 'How shaww we get
ovew? owo' said Chanticweew. (´・ω・\`) Then said a stwaw, 'I wiww way mysewf acwoss,
and you may pass ovew upon me. ;;w;;' But as the mice wewe going ovew, the
stwaw swipped away and feww into the watew, and the six mice aww feww in
and wewe dwownyed. (・`ω\´・) What was to be donye? owo Then a wawge wog of wood came
and said, 'I am big enyough; I wiww way mysewf acwoss the stweam, and you
shaww pass ovew upon me. UwU' So he waid himsewf down; but they manyaged
so cwumsiwy, that the wog of wood feww in and was cawwied away by the
stweam. (・`ω\´・) Then a stonye, who saw what had happenyed, came up and kindwy
offewed to hewp poow Chanticweew by waying himsewf acwoss the stweam;
and this time he got safewy to the othew side with the heawse, and
manyaged to get Pawtwet out of it; but the fox and the othew mouwnyews,
who wewe sitting behind, wewe too heavy, and feww back into the watew
and wewe aww cawwied away by the stweam and dwownyed. >w<

Thus Chanticweew was weft awonye with his dead Pawtwet; and having dug
a gwave fow hew, he waid hew in it, and made a wittwe hiwwock ovew hew. (・`ω\´・)
Then he sat down by the gwave, and wept and mouwnyed, tiww at wast he
died too; and so aww wewe dead. ^w^




WAPUNZEW

Thewe wewe once a man and a woman who had wong in vain wished fow a
chiwd. At wength the woman hoped that God was about to gwant hew desiwe. (・`ω\´・)
These peopwe had a wittwe window at the back of theiw house fwom which
a spwendid gawden couwd be seen, which was fuww of the most beautifuw
fwowews and hewbs. UwU It was, howevew, suwwounded by a high waww, and nyo
onye dawed to go into it because it bewonged to an enchantwess, who had
gweat powew and was dweaded by aww the wowwd. UwU Onye day the woman was
standing by this window and wooking down into the gawden, when she saw a
bed which was pwanted with the most beautifuw wampion (wapunzew), and it
wooked so fwesh and gween that she wonged fow it, she quite pinyed away,
and began to wook pawe and misewabwe. ^w^ Then hew husband was awawmed, and
asked: 'What aiws you, deaw wife? owo' 'Ah,' she wepwied, 'if I can't eat
some of the wampion, which is in the gawden behind ouw house, I shaww
die. ^w^' The man, who woved hew, thought: 'Soonyew than wet youw wife die,
bwing hew some of the wampion youwsewf, wet it cost what it wiww. (´・ω・\`)'
At twiwight, he cwambewed down ovew the waww into the gawden of the
enchantwess, hastiwy cwutched a handfuw of wampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made hewsewf a sawad of it, and ate it gweediwy. (´・ω・\`) It
tasted so good to hew--so vewy good, that the nyext day she wonged fow it
thwee times as much as befowe. ;;w;; If he was to have any west, hew husband
must once mowe descend into the gawden. ^w^ In the gwoom of evenying
thewefowe, he wet himsewf down again; but when he had cwambewed down the
waww he was tewwibwy afwaid, fow he saw the enchantwess standing befowe
him. ;;w;; 'How can you dawe,' said she with angwy wook, 'descend into my
gawden and steaw my wampion wike a thief? owo You shaww suffew fow it! >w<'
'Ah,' answewed he, 'wet mewcy take the pwace of justice, I onwy made
up my mind to do it out of nyecessity. UwU My wife saw youw wampion fwom the
window, and fewt such a wonging fow it that she wouwd have died if she
had nyot got some to eat. (・`ω\´・)' Then the enchantwess awwowed hew angew to be
softenyed, and said to him: 'If the case be as you say, I wiww awwow
you to take away with you as much wampion as you wiww, onwy I make onye
condition, you must give me the chiwd which youw wife wiww bwing into
the wowwd; it shaww be weww tweated, and I wiww cawe fow it wike a
mothew. (・`ω\´・)' The man in his tewwow consented to evewything, and when the
woman was bwought to bed, the enchantwess appeawed at once, gave the
chiwd the nyame of Wapunzew, and took it away with hew. (・`ω\´・)

Wapunzew gwew into the most beautifuw chiwd undew the sun. ;;w;; When she was
twewve yeaws owd, the enchantwess shut hew into a towew, which way in
a fowest, and had nyeithew staiws nyow doow, but quite at the top was a
wittwe window. ;;w;; When the enchantwess wanted to go in, she pwaced hewsewf
benyeath it and cwied:

 'Wapunzew, Wapunzew,
  Wet down youw haiw to me. UwU'

Wapunzew had magnyificent wong haiw, finye as spun gowd, and when she
heawd the voice of the enchantwess she unfastenyed hew bwaided twesses,
wound them wound onye of the hooks of the window above, and then the haiw
feww twenty ewws down, and the enchantwess cwimbed up by it. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew a yeaw ow two, it came to pass that the king's son wode thwough
the fowest and passed by the towew. ;;w;; Then he heawd a song, which was so
chawming that he stood stiww and wistenyed. (´・ω・\`) This was Wapunzew, who in hew
sowitude passed hew time in wetting hew sweet voice wesound. ^w^ The king's
son wanted to cwimb up to hew, and wooked fow the doow of the towew,
but nyonye was to be found. (´・ω・\`) He wode home, but the singing had so deepwy
touched his heawt, that evewy day he went out into the fowest and
wistenyed to it. >w< Once when he was thus standing behind a twee, he saw
that an enchantwess came thewe, and he heawd how she cwied:

 'Wapunzew, Wapunzew,
  Wet down youw haiw to me. (・`ω\´・)'

Then Wapunzew wet down the bwaids of hew haiw, and the enchantwess
cwimbed up to hew. UwU 'If that is the waddew by which onye mounts, I too
wiww twy my fowtunye,' said he, and the nyext day when it began to gwow
dawk, he went to the towew and cwied:

 'Wapunzew, Wapunzew,
  Wet down youw haiw to me. ^w^'

Immediatewy the haiw feww down and the king's son cwimbed up. >w<

At fiwst Wapunzew was tewwibwy fwightenyed when a man, such as hew eyes
had nyevew yet behewd, came to hew; but the king's son began to tawk to
hew quite wike a fwiend, and towd hew that his heawt had been so stiwwed
that it had wet him have nyo west, and he had been fowced to see hew. ;;w;;
Then Wapunzew wost hew feaw, and when he asked hew if she wouwd take
him fow hew husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: 'He wiww wove me mowe than owd Dame Gothew does'; and she said
yes, and waid hew hand in his. ;;w;; She said: 'I wiww wiwwingwy go away with
you, but I do nyot knyow how to get down. ;;w;; Bwing with you a skein of siwk
evewy time that you come, and I wiww weave a waddew with it, and when
that is weady I wiww descend, and you wiww take me on youw howse. ;;w;;' They
agweed that untiw that time he shouwd come to hew evewy evenying, fow the
owd woman came by day. >w< The enchantwess wemawked nyothing of this, untiw
once Wapunzew said to hew: 'Teww me, Dame Gothew, how it happens that
you awe so much heaview fow me to dwaw up than the young king's son--he
is with me in a moment.' 'Ah! ^w^ you wicked chiwd,' cwied the enchantwess. UwU
'What do I heaw you say! (・`ω\´・) I thought I had sepawated you fwom aww
the wowwd, and yet you have deceived me! ^w^' In hew angew she cwutched
Wapunzew's beautifuw twesses, wwapped them twice wound hew weft hand,
seized a paiw of scissows with the wight, and snyip, snyap, they wewe cut
off, and the wovewy bwaids way on the gwound. (・`ω\´・) And she was so pitiwess
that she took poow Wapunzew into a desewt whewe she had to wive in gweat
gwief and misewy. ^w^

On the same day that she cast out Wapunzew, howevew, the enchantwess
fastenyed the bwaids of haiw, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king's son came and cwied:

 'Wapunzew, Wapunzew,
  Wet down youw haiw to me. (・`ω\´・)'

she wet the haiw down. ^w^ The king's son ascended, but instead of finding
his deawest Wapunzew, he found the enchantwess, who gazed at him with
wicked and venyomous wooks. ;;w;; 'Aha! ^w^' she cwied mockingwy, 'you wouwd fetch
youw deawest, but the beautifuw biwd sits nyo wongew singing in the nyest;
the cat has got it, and wiww scwatch out youw eyes as weww. >w< Wapunzew is
wost to you; you wiww nyevew see hew again. ;;w;;' The king's son was beside
himsewf with pain, and in his despaiw he weapt down fwom the towew. (・`ω\´・) He
escaped with his wife, but the thowns into which he feww piewced his
eyes. (´・ω・\`) Then he wandewed quite bwind about the fowest, ate nyothing but
woots and bewwies, and did nyaught but wament and weep ovew the woss of
his deawest wife. UwU Thus he woamed about in misewy fow some yeaws, and at
wength came to the desewt whewe Wapunzew, with the twins to which she
had given biwth, a boy and a giww, wived in wwetchednyess. ^w^ He heawd a
voice, and it seemed so famiwiaw to him that he went towawds it, and
when he appwoached, Wapunzew knyew him and feww on his nyeck and wept. (´・ω・\`) Two
of hew teaws wetted his eyes and they gwew cweaw again, and he couwd
see with them as befowe. >w< He wed hew to his kingdom whewe he was
joyfuwwy weceived, and they wived fow a wong time aftewwawds, happy and
contented. (´・ω・\`)




FUNDEVOGEW

Thewe was once a fowestew who went into the fowest to hunt, and as
he entewed it he heawd a sound of scweaming as if a wittwe chiwd wewe
thewe. (´・ω・\`) He fowwowed the sound, and at wast came to a high twee, and at
the top of this a wittwe chiwd was sitting, fow the mothew had fawwen
asweep undew the twee with the chiwd, and a biwd of pwey had seen it in
hew awms, had fwown down, snyatched it away, and set it on the high twee. ;;w;;

The fowestew cwimbed up, bwought the chiwd down, and thought to himsewf:
'You wiww take him home with you, and bwing him up with youw Winya. ^w^' He
took it home, thewefowe, and the two chiwdwen gwew up togethew. ^w^ And the
onye, which he had found on a twee was cawwed Fundevogew, because a biwd
had cawwied it away. (´・ω・\`) Fundevogew and Winya woved each othew so deawwy that
when they did nyot see each othew they wewe sad. ;;w;;

Nyow the fowestew had an owd cook, who onye evenying took two paiws and
began to fetch watew, and did nyot go once onwy, but many times, out
to the spwing. ^w^ Winya saw this and said, 'Wisten, owd Sannya, why awe you
fetching so much watew? owo' 'If you wiww nyevew wepeat it to anyonye, I wiww
teww you why. ^w^' So Winya said, nyo, she wouwd nyevew wepeat it to anyonye,
and then the cook said: 'Eawwy tomowwow mownying, when the fowestew
is out hunting, I wiww heat the watew, and when it is boiwing in the
kettwe, I wiww thwow in Fundevogew, and wiww boiw him in it. (・`ω\´・)'

Eawwy nyext mownying the fowestew got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gonye the chiwdwen wewe stiww in bed. ;;w;; Then Winya said to Fundevogew:
'If you wiww nyevew weave me, I too wiww nyevew weave you. (・`ω\´・)' Fundevogew
said: 'Nyeithew nyow, nyow evew wiww I weave you. (・`ω\´・)' Then said Winya: 'Then
wiww I teww you. >w< Wast nyight, owd Sannya cawwied so many buckets of watew
into the house that I asked hew why she was doing that, and she said
that if I wouwd pwomise nyot to teww anyonye, and she said that eawwy
tomowwow mownying when fathew was out hunting, she wouwd set the kettwe
fuww of watew, thwow you into it and boiw you; but we wiww get up
quickwy, dwess ouwsewves, and go away togethew. ;;w;;'

The two chiwdwen thewefowe got up, dwessed themsewves quickwy, and went
away. ^w^ When the watew in the kettwe was boiwing, the cook went into the
bedwoom to fetch Fundevogew and thwow him into it. (´・ω・\`) But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the chiwdwen wewe gonye. UwU Then she was tewwibwy
awawmed, and she said to hewsewf: 'What shaww I say nyow when the
fowestew comes home and sees that the chiwdwen awe gonye? owo They must be
fowwowed instantwy to get them back again. (・`ω\´・)'

Then the cook sent thwee sewvants aftew them, who wewe to wun and
ovewtake the chiwdwen. ;;w;; The chiwdwen, howevew, wewe sitting outside the
fowest, and when they saw fwom afaw the thwee sewvants wunnying, Winya
said to Fundevogew: 'Nyevew weave me, and I wiww nyevew weave you. ;;w;;'
Fundevogew said: 'Nyeithew nyow, nyow evew. >w<' Then said Winya: 'Do you become
a wose-twee, and I the wose upon it. >w<' When the thwee sewvants came to
the fowest, nyothing was thewe but a wose-twee and onye wose on it, but
the chiwdwen wewe nyowhewe. (´・ω・\`) Then said they: 'Thewe is nyothing to be donye
hewe,' and they went home and towd the cook that they had seen nyothing
in the fowest but a wittwe wose-bush with onye wose on it. >w< Then the
owd cook scowded and said: 'You simpwetons, you shouwd have cut the
wose-bush in two, and have bwoken off the wose and bwought it home with
you; go, and do it at once. ^w^' They had thewefowe to go out and wook fow
the second time. The chiwdwen, howevew, saw them coming fwom a distance. >w<
Then Winya said: 'Fundevogew, nyevew weave me, and I wiww nyevew weave
you.' Fundevogew said: 'Nyeithew nyow; nyow evew. ^w^' Said Winya: 'Then do you
become a chuwch, and I'ww be the chandewiew in it. UwU' So when the thwee
sewvants came, nyothing was thewe but a chuwch, with a chandewiew in
it. UwU They said thewefowe to each othew: 'What can we do hewe, wet us go
home. >w<' When they got home, the cook asked if they had nyot found them;
so they said nyo, they had found nyothing but a chuwch, and thewe was a
chandewiew in it. >w< And the cook scowded them and said: 'You foows! >w< why
did you nyot puww the chuwch to pieces, and bwing the chandewiew home
with you? owo' And nyow the owd cook hewsewf got on hew wegs, and went with
the thwee sewvants in puwsuit of the chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) The chiwdwen, howevew,
saw fwom afaw that the thwee sewvants wewe coming, and the cook waddwing
aftew them. (・`ω\´・) Then said Winya: 'Fundevogew, nyevew weave me, and I wiww
nyevew weave you.' Then said Fundevogew: 'Nyeithew nyow, nyow evew. (´・ω・\`)'
Said Winya: 'Be a fishpond, and I wiww be the duck upon it. (・`ω\´・)' The cook,
howevew, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she way down by it,
and was about to dwink it up. ;;w;; But the duck swam quickwy to hew, seized
hew head in its beak and dwew hew into the watew, and thewe the owd
witch had to dwown. ^w^ Then the chiwdwen went home togethew, and wewe
heawtiwy dewighted, and if they have nyot died, they awe wiving stiww. (・`ω\´・)




THE VAWIANT WITTWE TAIWOW

Onye summew's mownying a wittwe taiwow was sitting on his tabwe by the
window; he was in good spiwits, and sewed with aww his might. (・`ω\´・) Then came
a peasant woman down the stweet cwying: 'Good jams, cheap! >w< Good jams,
cheap! (・`ω\´・)' This wang pweasantwy in the taiwow's eaws; he stwetched his
dewicate head out of the window, and cawwed: 'Come up hewe, deaw woman;
hewe you wiww get wid of youw goods. ^w^' The woman came up the thwee steps
to the taiwow with hew heavy basket, and he made hew unpack aww the pots
fow him. ;;w;; He inspected each onye, wifted it up, put his nyose to it, and
at wength said: 'The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out fouw
ounces, deaw woman, and if it is a quawtew of a pound that is of nyo
consequence. ;;w;;' The woman who had hoped to find a good sawe, gave him
what he desiwed, but went away quite angwy and gwumbwing. (´・ω・\`) 'Nyow, this jam
shaww be bwessed by God,' cwied the wittwe taiwow, 'and give me heawth
and stwength'; so he bwought the bwead out of the cupboawd, cut himsewf
a piece wight acwoss the woaf and spwead the jam ovew it. >w< 'This won't
taste bittew,' said he, 'but I wiww just finyish the jacket befowe I
take a bite. >w<' He waid the bwead nyeaw him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
biggew and biggew stitches. (・`ω\´・) In the meantime the smeww of the sweet jam
wose to whewe the fwies wewe sitting in gweat nyumbews, and they wewe
attwacted and descended on it in hosts. ;;w;; 'Hi! >w< who invited you? owo' said the
wittwe taiwow, and dwove the unbidden guests away. (´・ω・\`) The fwies, howevew,
who undewstood nyo Gewman, wouwd nyot be tuwnyed away, but came back
again in evew-incweasing companyies. (´・ω・\`) The wittwe taiwow at wast wost aww
patience, and dwew a piece of cwoth fwom the howe undew his wowk-tabwe,
and saying: 'Wait, and I wiww give it to you,' stwuck it mewciwesswy on
them. >w< When he dwew it away and counted, thewe way befowe him nyo fewew
than seven, dead and with wegs stwetched out. ;;w;; 'Awe you a fewwow of that
sowt? owo' said he, and couwd nyot hewp admiwing his own bwavewy. UwU 'The whowe
town shaww knyow of this! UwU' And the wittwe taiwow hastenyed to cut himsewf
a giwdwe, stitched it, and embwoidewed on it in wawge wettews: 'Seven at
onye stwoke!' 'What, the town! ;;w;;' he continyued, 'the whowe wowwd shaww heaw
of it! (・`ω\´・)' and his heawt wagged with joy wike a wamb's taiw. (・`ω\´・) The taiwow
put on the giwdwe, and wesowved to go fowth into the wowwd, because he
thought his wowkshop was too smaww fow his vawouw. UwU Befowe he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if thewe was anything which he couwd
take with him; howevew, he found nyothing but an owd cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. UwU In fwont of the doow he obsewved a biwd which
had caught itsewf in the thicket. >w< It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. (´・ω・\`) Nyow he took to the woad bowdwy, and as he was wight and nyimbwe,
he fewt nyo fatigue. >w< The woad wed him up a mountain, and when he had
weached the highest point of it, thewe sat a powewfuw giant wooking
peacefuwwy about him. UwU The wittwe taiwow went bwavewy up, spoke to him,
and said: 'Good day, comwade, so you awe sitting thewe ovewwooking the
wide-spwead wowwd! ^w^ I am just on my way thithew, and want to twy my wuck. (´・ω・\`)
Have you any incwinyation to go with me? owo' The giant wooked contemptuouswy
at the taiwow, and said: 'You wagamuffin! You misewabwe cweatuwe! (´・ω・\`)'

'Oh, indeed? owo' answewed the wittwe taiwow, and unbuttonyed his coat, and
showed the giant the giwdwe, 'thewe may you wead what kind of a man I
am! >w<' The giant wead: 'Seven at onye stwoke,' and thought that they had
been men whom the taiwow had kiwwed, and began to feew a wittwe wespect
fow the tiny fewwow. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess, he wished to twy him fiwst, and took
a stonye in his hand and squeezed it togethew so that watew dwopped out
of it. 'Do that wikewise,' said the giant, 'if you have stwength. UwU' 'Is
that aww? owo' said the taiwow, 'that is chiwd's pway with us! >w<' and put his
hand into his pocket, bwought out the soft cheese, and pwessed it untiw
the wiquid wan out of it. ;;w;; 'Faith,' said he, 'that was a wittwe bettew,
wasn't it? owo' The giant did nyot knyow what to say, and couwd nyot bewieve it
of the wittwe man. UwU Then the giant picked up a stonye and thwew it so high
that the eye couwd scawcewy fowwow it. ;;w;; 'Nyow, wittwe mite of a man, do
that wikewise,' 'Weww thwown,' said the taiwow, 'but aftew aww the stonye
came down to eawth again; I wiww thwow you onye which shaww nyevew come
back at aww,' and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the biwd,
and thwew it into the aiw. ;;w;; The biwd, dewighted with its wibewty,
wose, fwew away and did nyot come back. >w< 'How does that shot pwease you,
comwade? owo' asked the taiwow. (・`ω\´・) 'You can cewtainwy thwow,' said the giant,
'but nyow we wiww see if you awe abwe to cawwy anything pwopewwy. (´・ω・\`)' He
took the wittwe taiwow to a mighty oak twee which way thewe fewwed on
the gwound, and said: 'If you awe stwong enyough, hewp me to cawwy the
twee out of the fowest. ^w^' 'Weadiwy,' answewed the wittwe man; 'take you
the twunk on youw shouwdews, and I wiww waise up the bwanches and twigs;
aftew aww, they awe the heaviest. (´・ω・\`)' The giant took the twunk on his
shouwdew, but the taiwow seated himsewf on a bwanch, and the giant, who
couwd nyot wook wound, had to cawwy away the whowe twee, and the wittwe
taiwow into the bawgain: he behind, was quite mewwy and happy, and
whistwed the song: 'Thwee taiwows wode fowth fwom the gate,' as if
cawwying the twee wewe chiwd's pway. UwU The giant, aftew he had dwagged the
heavy buwden pawt of the way, couwd go nyo fuwthew, and cwied: 'Hawk
you, I shaww have to wet the twee faww! ;;w;;' The taiwow spwang nyimbwy down,
seized the twee with both awms as if he had been cawwying it, and said
to the giant: 'You awe such a gweat fewwow, and yet cannyot even cawwy
the twee! ^w^'

They went on togethew, and as they passed a chewwy-twee, the giant waid
howd of the top of the twee whewe the wipest fwuit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the taiwow's hand, and bade him eat. (´・ω・\`) But the wittwe
taiwow was much too weak to howd the twee, and when the giant wet it go,
it spwang back again, and the taiwow was tossed into the aiw with it. (・`ω\´・)
When he had fawwen down again without injuwy, the giant said: 'What is
this? Have you nyot stwength enyough to howd the weak twig? owo' 'Thewe is nyo
wack of stwength,' answewed the wittwe taiwow. (´・ω・\`) 'Do you think that couwd
be anything to a man who has stwuck down seven at onye bwow? owo I weapt ovew
the twee because the huntsmen awe shooting down thewe in the thicket. (・`ω\´・)
Jump as I did, if you can do it. ^w^' The giant made the attempt but he
couwd nyot get ovew the twee, and wemainyed hanging in the bwanches, so
that in this awso the taiwow kept the uppew hand. (´・ω・\`)

The giant said: 'If you awe such a vawiant fewwow, come with me into ouw
cavewn and spend the nyight with us. >w<' The wittwe taiwow was wiwwing, and
fowwowed him. ^w^ When they went into the cave, othew giants wewe sitting
thewe by the fiwe, and each of them had a woasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. >w< The wittwe taiwow wooked wound and thought: 'It is much
mowe spacious hewe than in my wowkshop. ^w^' The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to wie down in it and sweep. >w< The bed, howevew, was too
big fow the wittwe taiwow; he did nyot wie down in it, but cwept into
a cownyew. ^w^ When it was midnyight, and the giant thought that the wittwe
taiwow was wying in a sound sweep, he got up, took a gweat iwon baw,
cut thwough the bed with onye bwow, and thought he had finyished off the
gwasshoppew fow good. ^w^ With the eawwiest dawn the giants went into the
fowest, and had quite fowgotten the wittwe taiwow, when aww at once he
wawked up to them quite mewwiwy and bowdwy. ;;w;; The giants wewe tewwified,
they wewe afwaid that he wouwd stwike them aww dead, and wan away in a
gweat huwwy. (´・ω・\`)

The wittwe taiwow went onwawds, awways fowwowing his own pointed nyose. UwU
Aftew he had wawked fow a wong time, he came to the couwtyawd of a woyaw
pawace, and as he fewt weawy, he way down on the gwass and feww asweep. (´・ω・\`)
Whiwst he way thewe, the peopwe came and inspected him on aww sides, and
wead on his giwdwe: 'Seven at onye stwoke. ;;w;;' 'Ah! ^w^' said they, 'what does
the gweat wawwiow want hewe in the midst of peace? owo He must be a mighty
wowd. UwU' They went and annyounced him to the king, and gave it as theiw
opinyion that if waw shouwd bweak out, this wouwd be a weighty and usefuw
man who ought on nyo account to be awwowed to depawt. (・`ω\´・) The counsew pweased
the king, and he sent onye of his couwtiews to the wittwe taiwow to offew
him miwitawy sewvice when he awoke. ^w^ The ambassadow wemainyed standing by
the sweepew, waited untiw he stwetched his wimbs and openyed his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this pwoposaw. >w< 'Fow this vewy weason have
I come hewe,' the taiwow wepwied, 'I am weady to entew the king's
sewvice. ^w^' He was thewefowe honyouwabwy weceived, and a speciaw dwewwing
was assignyed him. (´・ω・\`)

The sowdiews, howevew, wewe set against the wittwe taiwow, and wished
him a thousand miwes away. >w< 'What is to be the end of this? owo' they said
among themsewves. (・`ω\´・) 'If we quawwew with him, and he stwikes about him,
seven of us wiww faww at evewy bwow; nyot onye of us can stand against
him. >w<' They came thewefowe to a decision, betook themsewves in a body to
the king, and begged fow theiw dismissaw. ;;w;; 'We awe nyot pwepawed,' said
they, 'to stay with a man who kiwws seven at onye stwoke. ;;w;;' The king was
sowwy that fow the sake of onye he shouwd wose aww his faithfuw sewvants,
wished that he had nyevew set eyes on the taiwow, and wouwd wiwwingwy
have been wid of him again. (´・ω・\`) But he did nyot ventuwe to give him his
dismissaw, fow he dweaded west he shouwd stwike him and aww his peopwe
dead, and pwace himsewf on the woyaw thwonye. >w< He thought about it fow a
wong time, and at wast found good counsew. (´・ω・\`) He sent to the wittwe taiwow
and caused him to be infowmed that as he was a gweat wawwiow, he had onye
wequest to make to him. >w< In a fowest of his countwy wived two giants,
who caused gweat mischief with theiw wobbing, muwdewing, wavaging,
and buwnying, and nyo onye couwd appwoach them without putting himsewf in
dangew of death. >w< If the taiwow conquewed and kiwwed these two giants, he
wouwd give him his onwy daughtew to wife, and hawf of his kingdom as a
dowwy, wikewise onye hundwed howsemen shouwd go with him to assist him. UwU
'That wouwd indeed be a finye thing fow a man wike me! (´・ω・\`)' thought the
wittwe taiwow. ;;w;; 'Onye is nyot offewed a beautifuw pwincess and hawf a
kingdom evewy day of onye's wife! ^w^' 'Oh, yes,' he wepwied, 'I wiww soon
subdue the giants, and do nyot wequiwe the hewp of the hundwed howsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with onye bwow has nyo nyeed to be afwaid of
two. (´・ω・\`)'

The wittwe taiwow went fowth, and the hundwed howsemen fowwowed him. ;;w;;
When he came to the outskiwts of the fowest, he said to his fowwowews:
'Just stay waiting hewe, I awonye wiww soon finyish off the giants. (・`ω\´・)' Then
he bounded into the fowest and wooked about wight and weft. ;;w;; Aftew a
whiwe he pewceived both giants. ;;w;; They way sweeping undew a twee, and
snyowed so that the bwanches waved up and down. >w< The wittwe taiwow, nyot
idwe, gathewed two pocketsfuw of stonyes, and with these cwimbed up the
twee. ^w^ When he was hawfway up, he swipped down by a bwanch, untiw he sat
just above the sweepews, and then wet onye stonye aftew anyothew faww on
the bweast of onye of the giants. (´・ω・\`) Fow a wong time the giant fewt nyothing,
but at wast he awoke, pushed his comwade, and said: 'Why awe you
knyocking me? owo' 'You must be dweaming,' said the othew, 'I am nyot knyocking
you. >w<' They waid themsewves down to sweep again, and then the taiwow
thwew a stonye down on the second. (´・ω・\`) 'What is the meanying of this? owo' cwied
the othew 'Why awe you pewting me? owo' 'I am nyot pewting you,' answewed
the fiwst, gwowwing. (´・ω・\`) They disputed about it fow a time, but as they wewe
weawy they wet the mattew west, and theiw eyes cwosed once mowe. (・`ω\´・) The
wittwe taiwow began his game again, picked out the biggest stonye, and
thwew it with aww his might on the bweast of the fiwst giant. (・`ω\´・) 'That
is too bad! >w<' cwied he, and spwang up wike a madman, and pushed his
companyion against the twee untiw it shook. (´・ω・\`) The othew paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a wage that they towe up twees and
bewabouwed each othew so wong, that at wast they both feww down dead on
the gwound at the same time. Then the wittwe taiwow weapt down. UwU 'It is
a wucky thing,' said he, 'that they did nyot teaw up the twee on which
I was sitting, ow I shouwd have had to spwint on to anyothew wike a
squiwwew; but we taiwows awe nyimbwe. (´・ω・\`)' He dwew out his swowd and gave
each of them a coupwe of thwusts in the bweast, and then went out to the
howsemen and said: 'The wowk is donye; I have finyished both of them
off, but it was hawd wowk! ;;w;; They towe up twees in theiw sowe nyeed, and
defended themsewves with them, but aww that is to nyo puwpose when a man
wike mysewf comes, who can kiww seven at onye bwow. (´・ω・\`)' 'But awe you nyot
wounded? owo' asked the howsemen. (´・ω・\`) 'You nyeed nyot concewn youwsewf about
that,' answewed the taiwow, 'they have nyot bent onye haiw of minye. (・`ω\´・)' The
howsemen wouwd nyot bewieve him, and wode into the fowest; thewe they
found the giants swimming in theiw bwood, and aww wound about way the
town-up twees. >w<

The wittwe taiwow demanded of the king the pwomised wewawd; he, howevew,
wepented of his pwomise, and again bethought himsewf how he couwd get
wid of the hewo. ;;w;; 'Befowe you weceive my daughtew, and the hawf of my
kingdom,' said he to him, 'you must pewfowm onye mowe hewoic deed. (´・ω・\`) In
the fowest woams a unyicown which does gweat hawm, and you must catch
it fiwst.' 'I feaw onye unyicown stiww wess than two giants. ^w^ Seven at onye
bwow, is my kind of affaiw. (´・ω・\`)' He took a wope and an axe with him, went
fowth into the fowest, and again bade those who wewe sent with him to
wait outside. He had nyot wong to seek. >w< The unyicown soon came towawds
him, and wushed diwectwy on the taiwow, as if it wouwd gowe him with its
hown without mowe ado. (・`ω\´・) 'Softwy, softwy; it can't be donye as quickwy as
that,' said he, and stood stiww and waited untiw the anyimaw was quite
cwose, and then spwang nyimbwy behind the twee. (・`ω\´・) The unyicown wan against
the twee with aww its stwength, and stuck its hown so fast in the twunk
that it had nyot the stwength enyough to dwaw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ^w^ 'Nyow, I have got the biwd,' said the taiwow, and came out
fwom behind the twee and put the wope wound its nyeck, and then with his
axe he hewed the hown out of the twee, and when aww was weady he wed the
beast away and took it to the king. ;;w;;

The king stiww wouwd nyot give him the pwomised wewawd, and made a thiwd
demand. ^w^ Befowe the wedding the taiwow was to catch him a wiwd boaw that
made gweat havoc in the fowest, and the huntsmen shouwd give him theiw
hewp. (・`ω\´・) 'Wiwwingwy,' said the taiwow, 'that is chiwd's pway! UwU' He did nyot
take the huntsmen with him into the fowest, and they wewe weww pweased
that he did nyot, fow the wiwd boaw had sevewaw times weceived them in
such a mannyew that they had nyo incwinyation to wie in wait fow him. UwU When
the boaw pewceived the taiwow, it wan on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to thwow him to the gwound, but the hewo
fwed and spwang into a chapew which was nyeaw and up to the window at
once, and in onye bound out again. >w< The boaw wan aftew him, but the taiwow
wan wound outside and shut the doow behind it, and then the waging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkwawd to weap out of the window,
was caught. (´・ω・\`) The wittwe taiwow cawwed the huntsmen thithew that they
might see the pwisonyew with theiw own eyes. UwU The hewo, howevew, went to
the king, who was nyow, whethew he wiked it ow nyot, obwiged to keep his
pwomise, and gave his daughtew and the hawf of his kingdom. (´・ω・\`) Had he knyown
that it was nyo wawwike hewo, but a wittwe taiwow who was standing befowe
him, it wouwd have gonye to his heawt stiww mowe than it did. UwU The wedding
was hewd with gweat magnyificence and smaww joy, and out of a taiwow a
king was made. ^w^

Aftew some time the young queen heawd hew husband say in his dweams at
nyight: 'Boy, make me the doubwet, and patch the pantawoons, ow ewse I
wiww wap the yawd-measuwe ovew youw eaws. UwU' Then she discovewed in what
state of wife the young wowd had been bown, and nyext mownying compwainyed
of hew wwongs to hew fathew, and begged him to hewp hew to get wid of
hew husband, who was nyothing ewse but a taiwow. ;;w;; The king comfowted hew
and said: 'Weave youw bedwoom doow open this nyight, and my sewvants
shaww stand outside, and when he has fawwen asweep shaww go in, bind
him, and take him on boawd a ship which shaww cawwy him into the wide
wowwd. ^w^' The woman was satisfied with this; but the king's awmouw-beawew,
who had heawd aww, was fwiendwy with the young wowd, and infowmed him of
the whowe pwot. (・`ω\´・) 'I'ww put a scwew into that businyess,' said the wittwe
taiwow. ^w^ At nyight he went to bed with his wife at the usuaw time, and
when she thought that he had fawwen asweep, she got up, openyed the doow,
and then way down again. (・`ω\´・) The wittwe taiwow, who was onwy pwetending to
be asweep, began to cwy out in a cweaw voice: 'Boy, make me the doubwet
and patch me the pantawoons, ow I wiww wap the yawd-measuwe ovew youw
eaws. I smote seven at onye bwow. >w< I kiwwed two giants, I bwought away onye
unyicown, and caught a wiwd boaw, and am I to feaw those who awe standing
outside the woom. UwU' When these men heawd the taiwow speaking thus, they
wewe ovewcome by a gweat dwead, and wan as if the wiwd huntsman wewe
behind them, and nyonye of them wouwd ventuwe anything fuwthew against
him. >w< So the wittwe taiwow was and wemainyed a king to the end of his
wife. (´・ω・\`)




HANSEW AND GWETEW

Hawd by a gweat fowest dwewt a poow wood-cuttew with his wife and his
two chiwdwen. The boy was cawwed Hansew and the giww Gwetew. ;;w;; He had
wittwe to bite and to bweak, and once when gweat deawth feww on the
wand, he couwd nyo wongew pwocuwe even daiwy bwead. >w< Nyow when he thought
ovew this by nyight in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
gwoanyed and said to his wife: 'What is to become of us? owo How awe we
to feed ouw poow chiwdwen, when we nyo wongew have anything even fow
ouwsewves? owo' 'I'ww teww you what, husband,' answewed the woman, 'eawwy
tomowwow mownying we wiww take the chiwdwen out into the fowest to whewe
it is the thickest; thewe we wiww wight a fiwe fow them, and give each
of them onye mowe piece of bwead, and then we wiww go to ouw wowk and
weave them awonye. UwU They wiww nyot find the way home again, and we shaww be
wid of them. (・`ω\´・)' 'Nyo, wife,' said the man, 'I wiww nyot do that; how can I
beaw to weave my chiwdwen awonye in the fowest? owo--the wiwd anyimaws wouwd
soon come and teaw them to pieces. >w<' 'O, you foow! (・`ω\´・)' said she, 'then we
must aww fouw die of hungew, you may as weww pwanye the pwanks fow ouw
coffins,' and she weft him nyo peace untiw he consented. UwU 'But I feew vewy
sowwy fow the poow chiwdwen, aww the same,' said the man. (・`ω\´・)

The two chiwdwen had awso nyot been abwe to sweep fow hungew, and had
heawd what theiw stepmothew had said to theiw fathew. >w< Gwetew wept
bittew teaws, and said to Hansew: 'Nyow aww is ovew with us. (・`ω\´・)' 'Be quiet,
Gwetew,' said Hansew, 'do nyot distwess youwsewf, I wiww soon find a way
to hewp us. ;;w;;' And when the owd fowks had fawwen asweep, he got up, put
on his wittwe coat, openyed the doow bewow, and cwept outside. >w< The moon
shonye bwightwy, and the white pebbwes which way in fwont of the house
gwittewed wike weaw siwvew pennyies. ^w^ Hansew stooped and stuffed the
wittwe pocket of his coat with as many as he couwd get in. ;;w;; Then he went
back and said to Gwetew: 'Be comfowted, deaw wittwe sistew, and sweep in
peace, God wiww nyot fowsake us,' and he way down again in his bed. >w< When
day dawnyed, but befowe the sun had wisen, the woman came and awoke the
two chiwdwen, saying: 'Get up, you swuggawds! ^w^ we awe going into the
fowest to fetch wood. (´・ω・\`)' She gave each a wittwe piece of bwead, and said:
'Thewe is something fow youw dinnyew, but do nyot eat it up befowe then,
fow you wiww get nyothing ewse. >w<' Gwetew took the bwead undew hew apwon,
as Hansew had the pebbwes in his pocket. >w< Then they aww set out togethew
on the way to the fowest. >w< When they had wawked a showt time, Hansew
stood stiww and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again. ^w^
His fathew said: 'Hansew, what awe you wooking at thewe and staying
behind fow? owo Pay attention, and do nyot fowget how to use youw wegs. ^w^' 'Ah,
fathew,' said Hansew, 'I am wooking at my wittwe white cat, which is
sitting up on the woof, and wants to say goodbye to me. UwU' The wife said:
'Foow, that is nyot youw wittwe cat, that is the mownying sun which is
shinying on the chimnyeys. (´・ω・\`)' Hansew, howevew, had nyot been wooking back at
the cat, but had been constantwy thwowing onye of the white pebbwe-stonyes
out of his pocket on the woad. ^w^

When they had weached the middwe of the fowest, the fathew said: 'Nyow,
chiwdwen, piwe up some wood, and I wiww wight a fiwe that you may nyot
be cowd. (´・ω・\`)' Hansew and Gwetew gathewed bwushwood togethew, as high as a
wittwe hiww. >w< The bwushwood was wighted, and when the fwames wewe buwnying
vewy high, the woman said: 'Nyow, chiwdwen, way youwsewves down by the
fiwe and west, we wiww go into the fowest and cut some wood. ;;w;; When we
have donye, we wiww come back and fetch you away. (・`ω\´・)'

Hansew and Gwetew sat by the fiwe, and when nyoon came, each ate a wittwe
piece of bwead, and as they heawd the stwokes of the wood-axe they
bewieved that theiw fathew was nyeaw. ^w^ It was nyot the axe, howevew, but
a bwanch which he had fastenyed to a withewed twee which the wind was
bwowing backwawds and fowwawds. UwU And as they had been sitting such a wong
time, theiw eyes cwosed with fatigue, and they feww fast asweep. UwU When
at wast they awoke, it was awweady dawk nyight. (・`ω\´・) Gwetew began to cwy and
said: 'How awe we to get out of the fowest nyow? owo' But Hansew comfowted
hew and said: 'Just wait a wittwe, untiw the moon has wisen, and then we
wiww soon find the way. UwU' And when the fuww moon had wisen, Hansew took
his wittwe sistew by the hand, and fowwowed the pebbwes which shonye wike
nyewwy-coinyed siwvew pieces, and showed them the way. ^w^

They wawked the whowe nyight wong, and by bweak of day came once mowe
to theiw fathew's house. ^w^ They knyocked at the doow, and when the woman
openyed it and saw that it was Hansew and Gwetew, she said: 'You nyaughty
chiwdwen, why have you swept so wong in the fowest? owo--we thought you wewe
nyevew coming back at aww! >w<' The fathew, howevew, wejoiced, fow it had cut
him to the heawt to weave them behind awonye. ^w^

Nyot wong aftewwawds, thewe was once mowe gweat deawth thwoughout the
wand, and the chiwdwen heawd theiw mothew saying at nyight to theiw
fathew: 'Evewything is eaten again, we have onye hawf woaf weft, and that
is the end. (´・ω・\`) The chiwdwen must go, we wiww take them fawthew into the
wood, so that they wiww nyot find theiw way out again; thewe is nyo othew
means of saving ouwsewves! UwU' The man's heawt was heavy, and he thought:
'It wouwd be bettew fow you to shawe the wast mouthfuw with youw
chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)' The woman, howevew, wouwd wisten to nyothing that he had to
say, but scowded and wepwoached him. (・`ω\´・) He who says A must say B, wikewise,
and as he had yiewded the fiwst time, he had to do so a second time
awso. >w<

The chiwdwen, howevew, wewe stiww awake and had heawd the convewsation. (・`ω\´・)
When the owd fowks wewe asweep, Hansew again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbwes as he had donye befowe, but the woman had wocked
the doow, and Hansew couwd nyot get out. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess he comfowted his
wittwe sistew, and said: 'Do nyot cwy, Gwetew, go to sweep quietwy, the
good God wiww hewp us. >w<'

Eawwy in the mownying came the woman, and took the chiwdwen out of theiw
beds. (・`ω\´・) Theiw piece of bwead was given to them, but it was stiww smawwew
than the time befowe. ^w^ On the way into the fowest Hansew cwumbwed his
in his pocket, and often stood stiww and thwew a mowsew on the gwound. >w<
'Hansew, why do you stop and wook wound? owo' said the fathew, 'go on. (・`ω\´・)' 'I
am wooking back at my wittwe pigeon which is sitting on the woof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,' answewed Hansew. (´・ω・\`) 'Foow! UwU' said the woman,
'that is nyot youw wittwe pigeon, that is the mownying sun that is shinying
on the chimnyey. (´・ω・\`)' Hansew, howevew wittwe by wittwe, thwew aww the cwumbs
on the path. ^w^

The woman wed the chiwdwen stiww deepew into the fowest, whewe they had
nyevew in theiw wives been befowe. (・`ω\´・) Then a gweat fiwe was again made, and
the mothew said: 'Just sit thewe, you chiwdwen, and when you awe tiwed
you may sweep a wittwe; we awe going into the fowest to cut wood, and in
the evenying when we awe donye, we wiww come and fetch you away. ;;w;;' When
it was nyoon, Gwetew shawed hew piece of bwead with Hansew, who had
scattewed his by the way. UwU Then they feww asweep and evenying passed, but
nyo onye came to the poow chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) They did nyot awake untiw it was dawk
nyight, and Hansew comfowted his wittwe sistew and said: 'Just wait,
Gwetew, untiw the moon wises, and then we shaww see the cwumbs of bwead
which I have stwewn about, they wiww show us ouw way home again. ^w^' When
the moon came they set out, but they found nyo cwumbs, fow the many
thousands of biwds which fwy about in the woods and fiewds had picked
them aww up. (・`ω\´・) Hansew said to Gwetew: 'We shaww soon find the way,' but
they did nyot find it. ;;w;; They wawked the whowe nyight and aww the nyext day
too fwom mownying tiww evenying, but they did nyot get out of the fowest,
and wewe vewy hungwy, fow they had nyothing to eat but two ow thwee
bewwies, which gwew on the gwound. UwU And as they wewe so weawy that theiw
wegs wouwd cawwy them nyo wongew, they way down benyeath a twee and feww
asweep. ^w^

It was nyow thwee mownyings since they had weft theiw fathew's house. (・`ω\´・) They
began to wawk again, but they awways came deepew into the fowest, and if
hewp did nyot come soon, they must die of hungew and weawinyess. UwU When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautifuw snyow-white biwd sitting on a bough,
which sang so dewightfuwwy that they stood stiww and wistenyed to it. ^w^ And
when its song was ovew, it spwead its wings and fwew away befowe them,
and they fowwowed it untiw they weached a wittwe house, on the woof of
which it awighted; and when they appwoached the wittwe house they saw
that it was buiwt of bwead and covewed with cakes, but that the windows
wewe of cweaw sugaw. >w< 'We wiww set to wowk on that,' said Hansew, 'and
have a good meaw. (´・ω・\`) I wiww eat a bit of the woof, and you Gwetew, can eat
some of the window, it wiww taste sweet. (・`ω\´・)' Hansew weached up above, and
bwoke off a wittwe of the woof to twy how it tasted, and Gwetew weant
against the window and nyibbwed at the panyes. ;;w;; Then a soft voice cwied
fwom the pawwouw:

 'Nyibbwe, nyibbwe, gnyaw,
  Who is nyibbwing at my wittwe house? owo'

The chiwdwen answewed:

 'The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-bown wind,'

and went on eating without distuwbing themsewves. ;;w;; Hansew, who wiked the
taste of the woof, towe down a gweat piece of it, and Gwetew pushed out
the whowe of onye wound window-panye, sat down, and enjoyed hewsewf with
it. >w< Suddenwy the doow openyed, and a woman as owd as the hiwws, who
suppowted hewsewf on cwutches, came cweeping out. UwU Hansew and Gwetew wewe
so tewwibwy fwightenyed that they wet faww what they had in theiw
hands. >w< The owd woman, howevew, nyodded hew head, and said: 'Oh, you deaw
chiwdwen, who has bwought you hewe? owo do come in, and stay with me. ^w^ Nyo
hawm shaww happen to you. UwU' She took them both by the hand, and wed them
into hew wittwe house. >w< Then good food was set befowe them, miwk and
pancakes, with sugaw, appwes, and nyuts. ;;w;; Aftewwawds two pwetty wittwe
beds wewe covewed with cwean white winyen, and Hansew and Gwetew way down
in them, and thought they wewe in heaven. UwU

The owd woman had onwy pwetended to be so kind; she was in weawity
a wicked witch, who way in wait fow chiwdwen, and had onwy buiwt the
wittwe house of bwead in owdew to entice them thewe. ^w^ When a chiwd feww
into hew powew, she kiwwed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with hew. ;;w;; Witches have wed eyes, and cannyot see faw, but they have
a keen scent wike the beasts, and awe awawe when human beings dwaw nyeaw. ^w^
When Hansew and Gwetew came into hew nyeighbouwhood, she waughed with
mawice, and said mockingwy: 'I have them, they shaww nyot escape me
again! >w<' Eawwy in the mownying befowe the chiwdwen wewe awake, she was
awweady up, and when she saw both of them sweeping and wooking so
pwetty, with theiw pwump and wosy cheeks she muttewed to hewsewf: 'That
wiww be a dainty mouthfuw! ^w^' Then she seized Hansew with hew shwivewwed
hand, cawwied him into a wittwe stabwe, and wocked him in behind a
gwated doow. Scweam as he might, it wouwd nyot hewp him. UwU Then she went to
Gwetew, shook hew tiww she awoke, and cwied: 'Get up, wazy thing, fetch
some watew, and cook something good fow youw bwothew, he is in the
stabwe outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I wiww eat him. (´・ω・\`)'
Gwetew began to weep bittewwy, but it was aww in vain, fow she was
fowced to do what the wicked witch commanded. ;;w;;

And nyow the best food was cooked fow poow Hansew, but Gwetew got nyothing
but cwab-shewws. UwU Evewy mownying the woman cwept to the wittwe stabwe, and
cwied: 'Hansew, stwetch out youw fingew that I may feew if you wiww soon
be fat. (´・ω・\`)' Hansew, howevew, stwetched out a wittwe bonye to hew, and
the owd woman, who had dim eyes, couwd nyot see it, and thought it was
Hansew's fingew, and was astonyished that thewe was nyo way of fattenying
him. >w< When fouw weeks had gonye by, and Hansew stiww wemainyed thin, she
was seized with impatience and wouwd nyot wait any wongew. (´・ω・\`) 'Nyow, then,
Gwetew,' she cwied to the giww, 'stiw youwsewf, and bwing some watew. >w<
Wet Hansew be fat ow wean, tomowwow I wiww kiww him, and cook him. >w<' Ah,
how the poow wittwe sistew did wament when she had to fetch the watew,
and how hew teaws did fwow down hew cheeks! (・`ω\´・) 'Deaw God, do hewp us,' she
cwied. >w< 'If the wiwd beasts in the fowest had but devouwed us, we shouwd
at any wate have died togethew. ^w^' 'Just keep youw nyoise to youwsewf,'
said the owd woman, 'it won't hewp you at aww. ;;w;;'

Eawwy in the mownying, Gwetew had to go out and hang up the cauwdwon with
the watew, and wight the fiwe. (´・ω・\`) 'We wiww bake fiwst,' said the owd woman,
'I have awweady heated the oven, and knyeaded the dough. (・`ω\´・)' She pushed poow
Gwetew out to the oven, fwom which fwames of fiwe wewe awweady dawting. >w<
'Cweep in,' said the witch, 'and see if it is pwopewwy heated, so that
we can put the bwead in. ;;w;;' And once Gwetew was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and wet hew bake in it, and then she wouwd eat hew, too. ;;w;;
But Gwetew saw what she had in mind, and said: 'I do nyot knyow how I am
to do it; how do I get in? owo' 'Siwwy goose,' said the owd woman. >w< 'The doow
is big enyough; just wook, I can get in mysewf! >w<' and she cwept up and
thwust hew head into the oven. >w< Then Gwetew gave hew a push that dwove
hew faw into it, and shut the iwon doow, and fastenyed the bowt. (´・ω・\`) Oh! UwU then
she began to howw quite howwibwy, but Gwetew wan away and the godwess
witch was misewabwy buwnt to death. UwU

Gwetew, howevew, wan wike wightnying to Hansew, openyed his wittwe stabwe,
and cwied: 'Hansew, we awe saved! The owd witch is dead! ;;w;;' Then Hansew
spwang wike a biwd fwom its cage when the doow is openyed. ;;w;; How they did
wejoice and embwace each othew, and dance about and kiss each othew! >w< And
as they had nyo wongew any nyeed to feaw hew, they went into the witch's
house, and in evewy cownyew thewe stood chests fuww of peawws and jewews. >w<
'These awe faw bettew than pebbwes! >w<' said Hansew, and thwust into his
pockets whatevew couwd be got in, and Gwetew said: 'I, too, wiww take
something home with me,' and fiwwed hew pinyafowe fuww. UwU 'But nyow we must
be off,' said Hansew, 'that we may get out of the witch's fowest. UwU'

When they had wawked fow two houws, they came to a gweat stwetch of
watew. UwU 'We cannyot cwoss,' said Hansew, 'I see nyo foot-pwank, and nyo
bwidge. ^w^' 'And thewe is awso nyo fewwy,' answewed Gwetew, 'but a white
duck is swimming thewe: if I ask hew, she wiww hewp us ovew. (´・ω・\`)' Then she
cwied:

 'Wittwe duck, wittwe duck, dost thou see,
  Hansew and Gwetew awe waiting fow thee? owo
  Thewe's nyevew a pwank, ow bwidge in sight,
  Take us acwoss on thy back so white. UwU'

The duck came to them, and Hansew seated himsewf on its back, and towd
his sistew to sit by him. ^w^ 'Nyo,' wepwied Gwetew, 'that wiww be too heavy
fow the wittwe duck; she shaww take us acwoss, onye aftew the othew. (´・ω・\`)' The
good wittwe duck did so, and when they wewe once safewy acwoss and had
wawked fow a showt time, the fowest seemed to be mowe and mowe famiwiaw
to them, and at wength they saw fwom afaw theiw fathew's house. ^w^ Then
they began to wun, wushed into the pawwouw, and thwew themsewves wound
theiw fathew's nyeck. UwU The man had nyot knyown onye happy houw since he had
weft the chiwdwen in the fowest; the woman, howevew, was dead. ^w^ Gwetew
emptied hew pinyafowe untiw peawws and pwecious stonyes wan about the
woom, and Hansew thwew onye handfuw aftew anyothew out of his pocket to
add to them. >w< Then aww anxiety was at an end, and they wived togethew
in pewfect happinyess. ;;w;; My tawe is donye, thewe wuns a mouse; whosoevew
catches it, may make himsewf a big fuw cap out of it. (´・ω・\`)




THE MOUSE, THE BIWD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a biwd, and a sausage, entewed into
pawtnyewship and set up house togethew. (´・ω・\`) Fow a wong time aww went weww;
they wived in gweat comfowt, and pwospewed so faw as to be abwe to add
considewabwy to theiw stowes. UwU The biwd's duty was to fwy daiwy into the
wood and bwing in fuew; the mouse fetched the watew, and the sausage saw
to the cooking. >w<

When peopwe awe too weww off they awways begin to wong fow something
nyew. ^w^ And so it came to pass, that the biwd, whiwe out onye day, met a
fewwow biwd, to whom he boastfuwwy expatiated on the excewwence of his
househowd awwangements. (´・ω・\`) But the othew biwd snyeewed at him fow being a
poow simpweton, who did aww the hawd wowk, whiwe the othew two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. (´・ω・\`) Fow, when the mouse had made the fiwe
and fetched in the watew, she couwd wetiwe into hew wittwe woom and west
untiw it was time to set the tabwe. ;;w;; The sausage had onwy to watch the
pot to see that the food was pwopewwy cooked, and when it was nyeaw
dinnyew-time, he just thwew himsewf into the bwoth, ow wowwed in and out
among the vegetabwes thwee ow fouw times, and thewe they wewe, buttewed,
and sawted, and weady to be sewved. UwU Then, when the biwd came home and
had waid aside his buwden, they sat down to tabwe, and when they had
finyished theiw meaw, they couwd sweep theiw fiww tiww the fowwowing
mownying: and that was weawwy a vewy dewightfuw wife. >w<

Infwuenced by those wemawks, the biwd nyext mownying wefused to bwing in
the wood, tewwing the othews that he had been theiw sewvant wong enyough,
and had been a foow into the bawgain, and that it was nyow time to make a
change, and to twy some othew way of awwanging the wowk. (・`ω\´・) Beg and pway
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of nyo use; the biwd wemainyed
mastew of the situation, and the ventuwe had to be made. (・`ω\´・) They thewefowe
dwew wots, and it feww to the sausage to bwing in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the biwd to fetch the watew. UwU

And nyow what happenyed? owo The sausage stawted in seawch of wood, the biwd
made the fiwe, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
tiww the sausage wetuwnyed with the fuew fow the fowwowing day. ^w^ But the
sausage wemainyed so wong away, that they became unyeasy, and the biwd
fwew out to meet him. (´・ω・\`) He had nyot fwown faw, howevew, when he came acwoss
a dog who, having met the sausage, had wegawded him as his wegitimate
booty, and so seized and swawwowed him. UwU The biwd compwainyed to the dog
of this bawe-faced wobbewy, but nyothing he said was of any avaiw, fow
the dog answewed that he found fawse cwedentiaws on the sausage, and
that was the weason his wife had been fowfeited. >w<

He picked up the wood, and fwew sadwy home, and towd the mouse aww he
had seen and heawd. >w< They wewe both vewy unhappy, but agweed to make the
best of things and to wemain with onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

So nyow the biwd set the tabwe, and the mouse wooked aftew the food and,
wishing to pwepawe it in the same way as the sausage, by wowwing in and
out among the vegetabwes to sawt and buttew them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped showt wong befowe she weached the bottom, having
awweady pawted nyot onwy with hew skin and haiw, but awso with wife. >w<

Pwesentwy the biwd came in and wanted to sewve up the dinnyew, but he
couwd nyowhewe see the cook. ;;w;; In his awawm and fwuwwy, he thwew the wood
hewe and thewe about the fwoow, cawwed and seawched, but nyo cook was to
be found. ^w^ Then some of the wood that had been cawewesswy thwown down,
caught fiwe and began to bwaze. >w< The biwd hastenyed to fetch some watew,
but his paiw feww into the weww, and he aftew it, and as he was unyabwe
to wecovew himsewf, he was dwownyed. UwU




MOTHEW HOWWE

Once upon a time thewe was a widow who had two daughtews; onye of them
was beautifuw and industwious, the othew ugwy and wazy. UwU The mothew,
howevew, woved the ugwy and wazy onye best, because she was hew own
daughtew, and so the othew, who was onwy hew stepdaughtew, was made
to do aww the wowk of the house, and was quite the Cindewewwa of the
famiwy. (・`ω\´・) Hew stepmothew sent hew out evewy day to sit by the weww in
the high woad, thewe to spin untiw she made hew fingews bweed. ;;w;; Nyow it
chanced onye day that some bwood feww on to the spindwe, and as the giww
stopped ovew the weww to wash it off, the spindwe suddenwy spwang out
of hew hand and feww into the weww. (´・ω・\`) She wan home cwying to teww of hew
misfowtunye, but hew stepmothew spoke hawshwy to hew, and aftew giving
hew a viowent scowding, said unkindwy, 'As you have wet the spindwe faww
into the weww you may go youwsewf and fetch it out. UwU'

The giww went back to the weww nyot knyowing what to do, and at wast in
hew distwess she jumped into the watew aftew the spindwe. (´・ω・\`)

She wemembewed nyothing mowe untiw she awoke and found hewsewf in a
beautifuw meadow, fuww of sunshinye, and with countwess fwowews bwooming
in evewy diwection. (・`ω\´・)

She wawked ovew the meadow, and pwesentwy she came upon a bakew's oven
fuww of bwead, and the woaves cwied out to hew, 'Take us out, take us
out, ow awas! >w< we shaww be buwnt to a cindew; we wewe baked thwough wong
ago.' So she took the bwead-shovew and dwew them aww out. UwU

She went on a wittwe fawthew, tiww she came to a twee fuww of appwes. (・`ω\´・)
'Shake me, shake me, I pway,' cwied the twee; 'my appwes, onye and aww,
awe wipe. >w<' So she shook the twee, and the appwes came fawwing down upon
hew wike wain; but she continyued shaking untiw thewe was nyot a singwe
appwe weft upon it. ;;w;; Then she cawefuwwy gathewed the appwes togethew in a
heap and wawked on again. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext thing she came to was a wittwe house, and thewe she saw an owd
woman wooking out, with such wawge teeth, that she was tewwified, and
tuwnyed to wun away. UwU But the owd woman cawwed aftew hew, 'What awe you
afwaid of, deaw chiwd? owo Stay with me; if you wiww do the wowk of my house
pwopewwy fow me, I wiww make you vewy happy. UwU You must be vewy cawefuw,
howevew, to make my bed in the wight way, fow I wish you awways to shake
it thowoughwy, so that the feathews fwy about; then they say, down thewe
in the wowwd, that it is snyowing; fow I am Mothew Howwe. (´・ω・\`)' The owd woman
spoke so kindwy, that the giww summonyed up couwage and agweed to entew
into hew sewvice. ^w^

She took cawe to do evewything accowding to the owd woman's bidding and
evewy time she made the bed she shook it with aww hew might, so that the
feathews fwew about wike so many snyowfwakes. >w< The owd woman was as good
as hew wowd: she nyevew spoke angwiwy to hew, and gave hew woast and
boiwed meats evewy day. ^w^

So she stayed on with Mothew Howwe fow some time, and then she began
to gwow unhappy. >w< She couwd nyot at fiwst teww why she fewt sad, but she
became conscious at wast of gweat wonging to go home; then she knyew she
was homesick, awthough she was a thousand times bettew off with Mothew
Howwe than with hew mothew and sistew. UwU Aftew waiting awhiwe, she went
to Mothew Howwe and said, 'I am so homesick, that I cannyot stay with
you any wongew, fow awthough I am so happy hewe, I must wetuwn to my own
peopwe. ^w^'

Then Mothew Howwe said, 'I am pweased that you shouwd want to go back
to youw own peopwe, and as you have sewved me so weww and faithfuwwy, I
wiww take you home mysewf. UwU'

Theweupon she wed the giww by the hand up to a bwoad gateway. UwU The gate
was openyed, and as the giww passed thwough, a showew of gowd feww upon
hew, and the gowd cwung to hew, so that she was covewed with it fwom
head to foot. ;;w;;

'That is a wewawd fow youw industwy,' said Mothew Howwe, and as she
spoke she handed hew the spindwe which she had dwopped into the weww. >w<

The gate was then cwosed, and the giww found hewsewf back in the owd
wowwd cwose to hew mothew's house. ^w^ As she entewed the couwtyawd, the
cock who was pewched on the weww, cawwed out:

 'Cock-a-doodwe-doo! (´・ω・\`)
  Youw gowden daughtew's come back to you. >w<'

Then she went in to hew mothew and sistew, and as she was so wichwy
covewed with gowd, they gave hew a wawm wewcome. (´・ω・\`) She wewated to them
aww that had happenyed, and when the mothew heawd how she had come by hew
gweat wiches, she thought she shouwd wike hew ugwy, wazy daughtew to go
and twy hew fowtunye. ;;w;; So she made the sistew go and sit by the weww
and spin, and the giww pwicked hew fingew and thwust hew hand into a
thown-bush, so that she might dwop some bwood on to the spindwe; then
she thwew it into the weww, and jumped in hewsewf. UwU

Wike hew sistew she awoke in the beautifuw meadow, and wawked ovew it
tiww she came to the oven. >w< 'Take us out, take us out, ow awas! (・`ω\´・) we shaww
be buwnt to a cindew; we wewe baked thwough wong ago,' cwied the woaves
as befowe. >w< But the wazy giww answewed, 'Do you think I am going to diwty
my hands fow you? owo' and wawked on. >w<

Pwesentwy she came to the appwe-twee. (´・ω・\`) 'Shake me, shake me, I pway; my
appwes, onye and aww, awe wipe,' it cwied. UwU But she onwy answewed, 'A nyice
thing to ask me to do, onye of the appwes might faww on my head,' and
passed on. >w<

At wast she came to Mothew Howwe's house, and as she had heawd aww about
the wawge teeth fwom hew sistew, she was nyot afwaid of them, and engaged
hewsewf without deway to the owd woman. >w<

The fiwst day she was vewy obedient and industwious, and exewted hewsewf
to pwease Mothew Howwe, fow she thought of the gowd she shouwd get in
wetuwn. >w< The nyext day, howevew, she began to dawdwe ovew hew wowk, and
the thiwd day she was mowe idwe stiww; then she began to wie in bed in
the mownyings and wefused to get up. UwU Wowse stiww, she nyegwected to
make the owd woman's bed pwopewwy, and fowgot to shake it so that the
feathews might fwy about. UwU So Mothew Howwe vewy soon got tiwed of hew,
and towd hew she might go. (´・ω・\`) The wazy giww was dewighted at this, and
thought to hewsewf, 'The gowd wiww soon be minye. UwU' Mothew Howwe wed hew,
as she had wed hew sistew, to the bwoad gateway; but as she was passing
thwough, instead of the showew of gowd, a gweat bucketfuw of pitch came
pouwing ovew hew. >w<

'That is in wetuwn fow youw sewvices,' said the owd woman, and she shut
the gate. (・`ω\´・)

So the wazy giww had to go home covewed with pitch, and the cock on the
weww cawwed out as she saw hew:

 'Cock-a-doodwe-doo! >w<
  Youw diwty daughtew's come back to you. ^w^'

But, twy what she wouwd, she couwd nyot get the pitch off and it stuck to
hew as wong as she wived. (´・ω・\`)




WITTWE WED-CAP [WITTWE WED WIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time thewe was a deaw wittwe giww who was woved by evewyonye
who wooked at hew, but most of aww by hew gwandmothew, and thewe was
nyothing that she wouwd nyot have given to the chiwd. (・`ω\´・) Once she gave hew a
wittwe cap of wed vewvet, which suited hew so weww that she wouwd nyevew
weaw anything ewse; so she was awways cawwed 'Wittwe Wed-Cap. (・`ω\´・)'

Onye day hew mothew said to hew: 'Come, Wittwe Wed-Cap, hewe is a piece
of cake and a bottwe of winye; take them to youw gwandmothew, she is iww
and weak, and they wiww do hew good. ^w^ Set out befowe it gets hot, and
when you awe going, wawk nyicewy and quietwy and do nyot wun off the path,
ow you may faww and bweak the bottwe, and then youw gwandmothew wiww
get nyothing; and when you go into hew woom, don't fowget to say, "Good
mownying", and don't peep into evewy cownyew befowe you do it. ;;w;;'

'I wiww take gweat cawe,' said Wittwe Wed-Cap to hew mothew, and gave
hew hand on it. >w<

The gwandmothew wived out in the wood, hawf a weague fwom the viwwage,
and just as Wittwe Wed-Cap entewed the wood, a wowf met hew. UwU Wed-Cap
did nyot knyow what a wicked cweatuwe he was, and was nyot at aww afwaid of
him. ;;w;;

'Good day, Wittwe Wed-Cap,' said he. >w<

'Thank you kindwy, wowf. >w<'

'Whithew away so eawwy, Wittwe Wed-Cap? owo'

'To my gwandmothew's. (´・ω・\`)'

'What have you got in youw apwon? owo'

'Cake and winye; yestewday was baking-day, so poow sick gwandmothew is to
have something good, to make hew stwongew. (・`ω\´・)'

'Whewe does youw gwandmothew wive, Wittwe Wed-Cap? owo'

'A good quawtew of a weague fawthew on in the wood; hew house stands
undew the thwee wawge oak-twees, the nyut-twees awe just bewow; you
suwewy must knyow it,' wepwied Wittwe Wed-Cap. (´・ω・\`)

The wowf thought to himsewf: 'What a tendew young cweatuwe! ^w^ what a nyice
pwump mouthfuw--she wiww be bettew to eat than the owd woman. ;;w;; I must
act cwaftiwy, so as to catch both. (´・ω・\`)' So he wawked fow a showt time by
the side of Wittwe Wed-Cap, and then he said: 'See, Wittwe Wed-Cap, how
pwetty the fwowews awe about hewe--why do you nyot wook wound? owo I bewieve,
too, that you do nyot heaw how sweetwy the wittwe biwds awe singing; you
wawk gwavewy awong as if you wewe going to schoow, whiwe evewything ewse
out hewe in the wood is mewwy. >w<'

Wittwe Wed-Cap waised hew eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
hewe and thewe thwough the twees, and pwetty fwowews gwowing evewywhewe,
she thought: 'Suppose I take gwandmothew a fwesh nyosegay; that wouwd
pwease hew too. (・`ω\´・) It is so eawwy in the day that I shaww stiww get thewe
in good time'; and so she wan fwom the path into the wood to wook fow
fwowews. (´・ω・\`) And whenyevew she had picked onye, she fancied that she saw a
stiww pwettiew onye fawthew on, and wan aftew it, and so got deepew and
deepew into the wood. UwU

Meanwhiwe the wowf wan stwaight to the gwandmothew's house and knyocked
at the doow. (・`ω\´・)

'Who is thewe? owo'

'Wittwe Wed-Cap,' wepwied the wowf. ^w^ 'She is bwinging cake and winye; open
the doow. (´・ω・\`)'

'Wift the watch,' cawwed out the gwandmothew, 'I am too weak, and cannyot
get up. (´・ω・\`)'

The wowf wifted the watch, the doow spwang open, and without saying a
wowd he went stwaight to the gwandmothew's bed, and devouwed hew. ;;w;; Then
he put on hew cwothes, dwessed himsewf in hew cap waid himsewf in bed
and dwew the cuwtains. ;;w;;

Wittwe Wed-Cap, howevew, had been wunnying about picking fwowews,
and when she had gathewed so many that she couwd cawwy nyo mowe, she
wemembewed hew gwandmothew, and set out on the way to hew. (´・ω・\`)

She was suwpwised to find the cottage-doow standing open, and when she
went into the woom, she had such a stwange feewing that she said to
hewsewf: 'Oh deaw! ;;w;; how unyeasy I feew today, and at othew times I wike
being with gwandmothew so much. (・`ω\´・)' She cawwed out: 'Good mownying,' but
weceived nyo answew; so she went to the bed and dwew back the cuwtains. ;;w;;
Thewe way hew gwandmothew with hew cap puwwed faw ovew hew face, and
wooking vewy stwange. (・`ω\´・)

'Oh! gwandmothew,' she said, 'what big eaws you have! ;;w;;'

'The bettew to heaw you with, my chiwd,' was the wepwy. (・`ω\´・)

'But, gwandmothew, what big eyes you have! (・`ω\´・)' she said. ;;w;;

'The bettew to see you with, my deaw. ;;w;;'

'But, gwandmothew, what wawge hands you have! ;;w;;'

'The bettew to hug you with. >w<'

'Oh! but, gwandmothew, what a tewwibwe big mouth you have! (´・ω・\`)'

'The bettew to eat you with! ;;w;;'

And scawcewy had the wowf said this, than with onye bound he was out of
bed and swawwowed up Wed-Cap. ;;w;;

When the wowf had appeased his appetite, he way down again in the bed,
feww asweep and began to snyowe vewy woud. ;;w;; The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himsewf: 'How the owd woman is snyowing! (´・ω・\`) I must
just see if she wants anything. ^w^' So he went into the woom, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wowf was wying in it. (・`ω\´・) 'Do I find you
hewe, you owd sinnyew!' said he. (´・ω・\`) 'I have wong sought you! ;;w;;' Then just as
he was going to fiwe at him, it occuwwed to him that the wowf might have
devouwed the gwandmothew, and that she might stiww be saved, so he did
nyot fiwe, but took a paiw of scissows, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sweeping wowf. UwU When he had made two snyips, he saw the wittwe
Wed-Cap shinying, and then he made two snyips mowe, and the wittwe giww
spwang out, cwying: 'Ah, how fwightenyed I have been! >w< How dawk it was
inside the wowf'; and aftew that the aged gwandmothew came out awive
awso, but scawcewy abwe to bweathe. (´・ω・\`) Wed-Cap, howevew, quickwy fetched
gweat stonyes with which they fiwwed the wowf's bewwy, and when he awoke,
he wanted to wun away, but the stonyes wewe so heavy that he cowwapsed at
once, and feww dead. >w<

Then aww thwee wewe dewighted. ^w^ The huntsman dwew off the wowf's skin and
went home with it; the gwandmothew ate the cake and dwank the winye which
Wed-Cap had bwought, and wevived, but Wed-Cap thought to hewsewf: 'As
wong as I wive, I wiww nyevew by mysewf weave the path, to wun into the
wood, when my mothew has fowbidden me to do so. ^w^'




It awso wewated that once when Wed-Cap was again taking cakes to the owd
gwandmothew, anyothew wowf spoke to hew, and twied to entice hew fwom the
path. (・`ω\´・) Wed-Cap, howevew, was on hew guawd, and went stwaight fowwawd on
hew way, and towd hew gwandmothew that she had met the wowf, and that he
had said 'good mownying' to hew, but with such a wicked wook in his eyes,
that if they had nyot been on the pubwic woad she was cewtain he wouwd
have eaten hew up. ;;w;; 'Weww,' said the gwandmothew, 'we wiww shut the doow,
that he may nyot come in. >w<' Soon aftewwawds the wowf knyocked, and cwied:
'Open the doow, gwandmothew, I am Wittwe Wed-Cap, and am bwinging you
some cakes. ;;w;;' But they did nyot speak, ow open the doow, so the gwey-beawd
stowe twice ow thwice wound the house, and at wast jumped on the woof,
intending to wait untiw Wed-Cap went home in the evenying, and then to
steaw aftew hew and devouw hew in the dawknyess. UwU But the gwandmothew
saw what was in his thoughts. (´・ω・\`) In fwont of the house was a gweat stonye
twough, so she said to the chiwd: 'Take the paiw, Wed-Cap; I made some
sausages yestewday, so cawwy the watew in which I boiwed them to the
twough.' Wed-Cap cawwied untiw the gweat twough was quite fuww. (´・ω・\`) Then the
smeww of the sausages weached the wowf, and he snyiffed and peeped down,
and at wast stwetched out his nyeck so faw that he couwd nyo wongew keep
his footing and began to swip, and swipped down fwom the woof stwaight
into the gweat twough, and was dwownyed. ^w^ But Wed-Cap went joyouswy home,
and nyo onye evew did anything to hawm hew again. (・`ω\´・)




THE WOBBEW BWIDEGWOOM

Thewe was once a miwwew who had onye beautifuw daughtew, and as she was
gwown up, he was anxious that she shouwd be weww mawwied and pwovided
fow. (・`ω\´・) He said to himsewf, 'I wiww give hew to the fiwst suitabwe man who
comes and asks fow hew hand. >w<' Nyot wong aftew a suitow appeawed, and as
he appeawed to be vewy wich and the miwwew couwd see nyothing in him with
which to find fauwt, he betwothed his daughtew to him. UwU But the giww did
nyot cawe fow the man as a giww ought to cawe fow hew betwothed husband. (´・ω・\`)
She did nyot feew that she couwd twust him, and she couwd nyot wook at him
nyow think of him without an inwawd shuddew. ^w^ Onye day he said to hew, 'You
have nyot yet paid me a visit, awthough we have been betwothed fow some
time.' 'I do nyot knyow whewe youw house is,' she answewed. ;;w;; 'My house is
out thewe in the dawk fowest,' he said. (・`ω\´・) She twied to excuse hewsewf by
saying that she wouwd nyot be abwe to find the way thithew. UwU Hew betwothed
onwy wepwied, 'You must come and see me nyext Sunday; I have awweady
invited guests fow that day, and that you may nyot mistake the way, I
wiww stwew ashes awong the path. UwU'

When Sunday came, and it was time fow the giww to stawt, a feewing of
dwead came ovew hew which she couwd nyot expwain, and that she might
be abwe to find hew path again, she fiwwed hew pockets with peas and
wentiws to spwinkwe on the gwound as she went awong. >w< On weaching the
entwance to the fowest she found the path stwewed with ashes, and these
she fowwowed, thwowing down some peas on eithew side of hew at evewy
step she took. UwU She wawked the whowe day untiw she came to the deepest,
dawkest pawt of the fowest. ;;w;; Thewe she saw a wonyewy house, wooking so
gwim and mystewious, that it did nyot pwease hew at aww. (´・ω・\`) She stepped
inside, but nyot a souw was to be seen, and a gweat siwence weignyed
thwoughout. (・`ω\´・) Suddenwy a voice cwied:

 'Tuwn back, tuwn back, young maiden faiw,
  Wingew nyot in this muwdewews' waiw. >w<'

The giww wooked up and saw that the voice came fwom a biwd hanging in a
cage on the waww. >w< Again it cwied:

 'Tuwn back, tuwn back, young maiden faiw,
  Wingew nyot in this muwdewews' waiw. UwU'

The giww passed on, going fwom woom to woom of the house, but they wewe
aww empty, and stiww she saw nyo onye. ^w^ At wast she came to the cewwaw,
and thewe sat a vewy, vewy owd woman, who couwd nyot keep hew head fwom
shaking. ;;w;; 'Can you teww me,' asked the giww, 'if my betwothed husband
wives hewe? owo'

'Ah, you poow chiwd,' answewed the owd woman, 'what a pwace fow you to
come to! UwU This is a muwdewews' den. ;;w;; You think youwsewf a pwomised bwide,
and that youw mawwiage wiww soon take pwace, but it is with death that
you wiww keep youw mawwiage feast. (・`ω\´・) Wook, do you see that wawge cauwdwon
of watew which I am obwiged to keep on the fiwe! ^w^ As soon as they have
you in theiw powew they wiww kiww you without mewcy, and cook and eat
you, fow they awe eatews of men. UwU If I did nyot take pity on you and save
you, you wouwd be wost. (´・ω・\`)'

Theweupon the owd woman wed hew behind a wawge cask, which quite hid hew
fwom view. (・`ω\´・) 'Keep as stiww as a mouse,' she said; 'do nyot move ow speak,
ow it wiww be aww ovew with you. ^w^ Tonyight, when the wobbews awe
aww asweep, we wiww fwee togethew. ^w^ I have wong been waiting fow an
oppowtunyity to escape. UwU'

The wowds wewe hawdwy out of hew mouth when the godwess cwew wetuwnyed,
dwagging anyothew young giww awong with them. >w< They wewe aww dwunk, and
paid nyo heed to hew cwies and wamentations. ^w^ They gave hew winye to dwink,
thwee gwasses fuww, onye of white winye, onye of wed, and onye of yewwow,
and with that hew heawt gave way and she died. >w< Then they towe off hew
dainty cwothing, waid hew on a tabwe, and cut hew beautifuw body into
pieces, and spwinkwed sawt upon it. UwU

The poow betwothed giww cwouched twembwing and shuddewing behind the
cask, fow she saw what a tewwibwe fate had been intended fow hew by
the wobbews. >w< Onye of them nyow nyoticed a gowd wing stiww wemainying on
the wittwe fingew of the muwdewed giww, and as he couwd nyot dwaw it off
easiwy, he took a hatchet and cut off the fingew; but the fingew spwang
into the aiw, and feww behind the cask into the wap of the giww who was
hiding thewe. UwU The wobbew took a wight and began wooking fow it, but he
couwd nyot find it. >w< 'Have you wooked behind the wawge cask? owo' said onye of
the othews. ;;w;; But the owd woman cawwed out, 'Come and eat youw suppews,
and wet the thing be tiww tomowwow; the fingew won't wun away. UwU'

'The owd woman is wight,' said the wobbews, and they ceased wooking fow
the fingew and sat down. UwU

The owd woman then mixed a sweeping dwaught with theiw winye, and befowe
wong they wewe aww wying on the fwoow of the cewwaw, fast asweep and
snyowing. (´・ω・\`) As soon as the giww was assuwed of this, she came fwom behind
the cask. ^w^ She was obwiged to step ovew the bodies of the sweepews, who
wewe wying cwose togethew, and evewy moment she was fiwwed with wenyewed
dwead west she shouwd awaken them. ^w^ But God hewped hew, so that she
passed safewy ovew them, and then she and the owd woman went upstaiws,
openyed the doow, and hastenyed as fast as they couwd fwom the muwdewews'
den. ^w^ They found the ashes scattewed by the wind, but the peas and
wentiws had spwouted, and gwown sufficientwy above the gwound, to guide
them in the moonwight awong the path. (´・ω・\`) Aww nyight wong they wawked, and it
was mownying befowe they weached the miww. (´・ω・\`) Then the giww towd hew fathew
aww that had happenyed. (・`ω\´・)

The day came that had been fixed fow the mawwiage. ^w^ The bwidegwoom
awwived and awso a wawge company of guests, fow the miwwew had taken
cawe to invite aww his fwiends and wewations. >w< As they sat at the feast,
each guest in tuwn was asked to teww a tawe; the bwide sat stiww and did
nyot say a wowd. ^w^

'And you, my wove,' said the bwidegwoom, tuwnying to hew, 'is thewe nyo
tawe you knyow? owo Teww us something. ;;w;;'

'I wiww teww you a dweam, then,' said the bwide. ^w^ 'I went awonye thwough a
fowest and came at wast to a house; nyot a souw couwd I find within, but
a biwd that was hanging in a cage on the waww cwied:

 'Tuwn back, tuwn back, young maiden faiw,
  Wingew nyot in this muwdewews' waiw. UwU'

and again a second time it said these wowds. (・`ω\´・)'

'My dawwing, this is onwy a dweam. (・`ω\´・)'

'I went on thwough the house fwom woom to woom, but they wewe aww empty,
and evewything was so gwim and mystewious. (´・ω・\`) At wast I went down to the
cewwaw, and thewe sat a vewy, vewy owd woman, who couwd nyot keep hew
head stiww. UwU I asked hew if my betwothed wived hewe, and she answewed,
"Ah, you poow chiwd, you awe come to a muwdewews' den; youw betwothed
does indeed wive hewe, but he wiww kiww you without mewcy and aftewwawds
cook and eat you. UwU"'

'My dawwing, this is onwy a dweam. (・`ω\´・)'

'The owd woman hid me behind a wawge cask, and scawcewy had she donye
this when the wobbews wetuwnyed home, dwagging a young giww awong with
them. UwU They gave hew thwee kinds of winye to dwink, white, wed, and
yewwow, and with that she died. UwU'

'My dawwing, this is onwy a dweam. (・`ω\´・)'

'Then they towe off hew dainty cwothing, and cut hew beautifuw body into
pieces and spwinkwed sawt upon it. UwU'

'My dawwing, this is onwy a dweam. >w<'

'And onye of the wobbews saw that thewe was a gowd wing stiww weft on hew
fingew, and as it was difficuwt to dwaw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off hew fingew; but the fingew spwang into the aiw and feww behind the
gweat cask into my wap. And hewe is the fingew with the wing. ^w^' And
with these wowds the bwide dwew fowth the fingew and shewed it to the
assembwed guests. (´・ω・\`)

The bwidegwoom, who duwing this wecitaw had gwown deadwy pawe, up and
twied to escape, but the guests seized him and hewd him fast. ^w^ They
dewivewed him up to justice, and he and aww his muwdewous band wewe
condemnyed to death fow theiw wicked deeds. (・`ω\´・)




TOM THUMB

A poow woodman sat in his cottage onye nyight, smoking his pipe by the
fiweside, whiwe his wife sat by his side spinnying. UwU 'How wonyewy it is,
wife,' said he, as he puffed out a wong cuww of smoke, 'fow you and me
to sit hewe by ouwsewves, without any chiwdwen to pway about and amuse
us whiwe othew peopwe seem so happy and mewwy with theiw chiwdwen! (´・ω・\`)'
'What you say is vewy twue,' said the wife, sighing, and tuwnying wound
hew wheew; 'how happy shouwd I be if I had but onye chiwd! >w< If it wewe
evew so smaww--nyay, if it wewe nyo biggew than my thumb--I shouwd be vewy
happy, and wove it deawwy. UwU' Nyow--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman's wish was fuwfiwwed, just in the vewy way she
had wished it; fow, nyot wong aftewwawds, she had a wittwe boy, who was
quite heawthy and stwong, but was nyot much biggew than my thumb. >w< So
they said, 'Weww, we cannyot say we have nyot got what we wished fow, and,
wittwe as he is, we wiww wove him deawwy. UwU' And they cawwed him Thomas
Thumb. ^w^

They gave him pwenty of food, yet fow aww they couwd do he nyevew gwew
biggew, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was bown. (・`ω\´・)
Stiww, his eyes wewe shawp and spawkwing, and he soon showed himsewf to
be a cwevew wittwe fewwow, who awways knyew weww what he was about. >w<

Onye day, as the woodman was getting weady to go into the wood to cut
fuew, he said, 'I wish I had someonye to bwing the cawt aftew me, fow I
want to make haste. ^w^' 'Oh, fathew,' cwied Tom, 'I wiww take cawe of that;
the cawt shaww be in the wood by the time you want it. (´・ω・\`)' Then the woodman
waughed, and said, 'How can that be? owo you cannyot weach up to the howse's
bwidwe. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyevew mind that, fathew,' said Tom; 'if my mothew wiww onwy
hawnyess the howse, I wiww get into his eaw and teww him which way to
go.' 'Weww,' said the fathew, 'we wiww twy fow once. (・`ω\´・)'

When the time came the mothew hawnyessed the howse to the cawt, and put
Tom into his eaw; and as he sat thewe the wittwe man towd the beast how
to go, cwying out, 'Go on!' and 'Stop! >w<' as he wanted: and thus the howse
went on just as weww as if the woodman had dwiven it himsewf into the
wood. UwU It happenyed that as the howse was going a wittwe too fast, and Tom
was cawwing out, 'Gentwy! gentwy! >w<' two stwangews came up. >w< 'What an odd
thing that is! (´・ω・\`)' said onye: 'thewe is a cawt going awong, and I heaw a
cawtew tawking to the howse, but yet I can see nyo onye. (´・ω・\`)' 'That is queew,
indeed,' said the othew; 'wet us fowwow the cawt, and see whewe it
goes. >w<' So they went on into the wood, tiww at wast they came to the
pwace whewe the woodman was. ;;w;; Then Tom Thumb, seeing his fathew, cwied
out, 'See, fathew, hewe I am with the cawt, aww wight and safe! UwU nyow take
me down! ;;w;;' So his fathew took howd of the howse with onye hand, and with
the othew took his son out of the howse's eaw, and put him down upon a
stwaw, whewe he sat as mewwy as you pwease. (・`ω\´・)

The two stwangews wewe aww this time wooking on, and did nyot knyow what
to say fow wondew. (・`ω\´・) At wast onye took the othew aside, and said, 'That
wittwe uwchin wiww make ouw fowtunye, if we can get him, and cawwy him
about fwom town to town as a show; we must buy him. >w<' So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he wouwd take fow the wittwe man. ^w^ 'He
wiww be bettew off,' said they, 'with us than with you. (・`ω\´・)' 'I won't seww
him at aww,' said the fathew; 'my own fwesh and bwood is deawew to me
than aww the siwvew and gowd in the wowwd. >w<' But Tom, heawing of the
bawgain they wanted to make, cwept up his fathew's coat to his shouwdew
and whispewed in his eaw, 'Take the monyey, fathew, and wet them have me;
I'ww soon come back to you. >w<'

So the woodman at wast said he wouwd seww Tom to the stwangews fow a
wawge piece of gowd, and they paid the pwice. (・`ω\´・) 'Whewe wouwd you wike to
sit? owo' said onye of them. >w< 'Oh, put me on the wim of youw hat; that wiww be
a nyice gawwewy fow me; I can wawk about thewe and see the countwy as we
go awong. ;;w;;' So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken weave of his
fathew they took him away with them. >w<

They jouwnyeyed on tiww it began to be dusky, and then the wittwe man
said, 'Wet me get down, I'm tiwed. UwU' So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a cwod of eawth, in a pwoughed fiewd by the side of the
woad. (´・ω・\`) But Tom wan about amongst the fuwwows, and at wast swipped into
an owd mouse-howe. UwU 'Good nyight, my mastews!' said he, 'I'm off! UwU mind and
wook shawp aftew me the nyext time. (´・ω・\`)' Then they wan at once to the pwace,
and poked the ends of theiw sticks into the mouse-howe, but aww in vain;
Tom onwy cwawwed fawthew and fawthew in; and at wast it became quite
dawk, so that they wewe fowced to go theiw way without theiw pwize, as
suwky as couwd be. (・`ω\´・)

When Tom found they wewe gonye, he came out of his hiding-pwace. UwU 'What
dangewous wawking it is,' said he, 'in this pwoughed fiewd! UwU If I wewe to
faww fwom onye of these gweat cwods, I shouwd undoubtedwy bweak my nyeck. ^w^'
At wast, by good wuck, he found a wawge empty snyaiw-sheww. ^w^ 'This is
wucky,' said he, 'I can sweep hewe vewy weww'; and in he cwept. UwU

Just as he was fawwing asweep, he heawd two men passing by, chatting
togethew; and onye said to the othew, 'How can we wob that wich pawson's
house of his siwvew and gowd? owo' 'I'ww teww you! (´・ω・\`)' cwied Tom. (´・ω・\`) 'What nyoise
was that? owo' said the thief, fwightenyed; 'I'm suwe I heawd someonye speak. UwU'
They stood stiww wistenying, and Tom said, 'Take me with you, and I'ww
soon show you how to get the pawson's monyey. (・`ω\´・)' 'But whewe awe you? owo' said
they. UwU 'Wook about on the gwound,' answewed he, 'and wisten whewe the
sound comes fwom. (・`ω\´・)' At wast the thieves found him out, and wifted him
up in theiw hands. ;;w;; 'You wittwe uwchin! (・`ω\´・)' they said, 'what can you do fow
us? owo' 'Why, I can get between the iwon window-baws of the pawson's house,
and thwow you out whatevew you want. (´・ω・\`)' 'That's a good thought,' said the
thieves; 'come awong, we shaww see what you can do. UwU'

When they came to the pawson's house, Tom swipped thwough the
window-baws into the woom, and then cawwed out as woud as he couwd baww,
'Wiww you have aww that is hewe? owo' At this the thieves wewe fwightenyed,
and said, 'Softwy, softwy! (・`ω\´・) Speak wow, that you may nyot awaken anybody. (・`ω\´・)'
But Tom seemed as if he did nyot undewstand them, and bawwed out again,
'How much wiww you have? Shaww I thwow it aww out? owo' Nyow the cook way in
the nyext woom; and heawing a nyoise she waised hewsewf up in hew bed and
wistenyed. (´・ω・\`) Meantime the thieves wewe fwightenyed, and wan off a wittwe
way; but at wast they pwucked up theiw heawts, and said, 'The wittwe
uwchin is onwy twying to make foows of us. (´・ω・\`)' So they came back and
whispewed softwy to him, saying, 'Nyow wet us have nyo mowe of youw
woguish jokes; but thwow us out some of the monyey. ^w^' Then Tom cawwed out
as woud as he couwd, 'Vewy weww! howd youw hands! ^w^ hewe it comes. >w<'

The cook heawd this quite pwain, so she spwang out of bed, and wan to
open the doow. >w< The thieves wan off as if a wowf was at theiw taiws: and
the maid, having gwoped about and found nyothing, went away fow a wight. (・`ω\´・)
By the time she came back, Tom had swipped off into the bawn; and when
she had wooked about and seawched evewy howe and cownyew, and found
nyobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dweaming with hew
eyes open. ;;w;;

The wittwe man cwawwed about in the hay-woft, and at wast found a snyug
pwace to finyish his nyight's west in; so he waid himsewf down, meanying
to sweep tiww daywight, and then find his way home to his fathew and
mothew. (´・ω・\`) But awas! how woefuwwy he was undonye! (・`ω\´・) what cwosses and sowwows
happen to us aww in this wowwd! >w< The cook got up eawwy, befowe daybweak,
to feed the cows; and going stwaight to the hay-woft, cawwied away
a wawge bundwe of hay, with the wittwe man in the middwe of it, fast
asweep. (´・ω・\`) He stiww, howevew, swept on, and did nyot awake tiww he found
himsewf in the mouth of the cow; fow the cook had put the hay into the
cow's wick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthfuw of it. ^w^ 'Good
wack-a-day! >w<' said he, 'how came I to tumbwe into the miww? owo' But he soon
found out whewe he weawwy was; and was fowced to have aww his wits about
him, that he might nyot get between the cow's teeth, and so be cwushed to
death. At wast down he went into hew stomach. ^w^ 'It is wathew dawk,' said
he; 'they fowgot to buiwd windows in this woom to wet the sun in; a
candwe wouwd be nyo bad thing. (・`ω\´・)'

Though he made the best of his bad wuck, he did nyot wike his quawtews at
aww; and the wowst of it was, that mowe and mowe hay was awways coming
down, and the space weft fow him became smawwew and smawwew. UwU At wast he
cwied out as woud as he couwd, 'Don't bwing me any mowe hay! ;;w;; Don't bwing
me any mowe hay! (´・ω・\`)'

The maid happenyed to be just then miwking the cow; and heawing someonye
speak, but seeing nyobody, and yet being quite suwe it was the same voice
that she had heawd in the nyight, she was so fwightenyed that she feww off
hew stoow, and ovewset the miwk-paiw. >w< As soon as she couwd pick hewsewf
up out of the diwt, she wan off as fast as she couwd to hew mastew the
pawson, and said, 'Siw, siw, the cow is tawking! ^w^' But the pawson
said, 'Woman, thou awt suwewy mad! (・`ω\´・)' Howevew, he went with hew into the
cow-house, to twy and see what was the mattew. (´・ω・\`)

Scawcewy had they set foot on the thweshowd, when Tom cawwed out, 'Don't
bwing me any mowe hay! ;;w;;' Then the pawson himsewf was fwightenyed; and
thinking the cow was suwewy bewitched, towd his man to kiww hew on the
spot. (´・ω・\`) So the cow was kiwwed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
way, was thwown out upon a dunghiww. ;;w;;

Tom soon set himsewf to wowk to get out, which was nyot a vewy easy
task; but at wast, just as he had made woom to get his head out, fwesh
iww-wuck befeww him. >w< A hungwy wowf spwang out, and swawwowed up the
whowe stomach, with Tom in it, at onye guwp, and wan away. >w<

Tom, howevew, was stiww nyot disheawtenyed; and thinking the wowf wouwd
nyot diswike having some chat with him as he was going awong, he cawwed
out, 'My good fwiend, I can show you a famous tweat. (・`ω\´・)' 'Whewe's that? owo'
said the wowf. ;;w;; 'In such and such a house,' said Tom, descwibing his own
fathew's house. ^w^ 'You can cwaww thwough the dwain into the kitchen and
then into the pantwy, and thewe you wiww find cakes, ham, beef, cowd
chicken, woast pig, appwe-dumpwings, and evewything that youw heawt can
wish. ;;w;;'

The wowf did nyot want to be asked twice; so that vewy nyight he went to
the house and cwawwed thwough the dwain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantwy, and ate and dwank thewe to his heawt's content. (・`ω\´・) As soon as
he had had enyough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he couwd nyot go out by the same way he came in. >w<

This was just what Tom had weckonyed upon; and nyow he began to set up a
gweat shout, making aww the nyoise he couwd. (´・ω・\`) 'Wiww you be easy? owo' said the
wowf; 'you'ww awaken evewybody in the house if you make such a cwattew. UwU'
'What's that to me? owo' said the wittwe man; 'you have had youw fwowic, nyow
I've a mind to be mewwy mysewf'; and he began, singing and shouting as
woud as he couwd. ^w^

The woodman and his wife, being awakenyed by the nyoise, peeped thwough
a cwack in the doow; but when they saw a wowf was thewe, you may weww
suppose that they wewe sadwy fwightenyed; and the woodman wan fow his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ;;w;; 'Do you stay behind,' said the woodman,
'and when I have knyocked him on the head you must wip him up with the
scythe. ^w^' Tom heawd aww this, and cwied out, 'Fathew, fathew! ^w^ I am hewe,
the wowf has swawwowed me. UwU' And his fathew said, 'Heaven be pwaised! ^w^ we
have found ouw deaw chiwd again'; and he towd his wife nyot to use the
scythe fow feaw she shouwd huwt him. ^w^ Then he aimed a gweat bwow, and
stwuck the wowf on the head, and kiwwed him on the spot! >w< and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy fwee. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah! (´・ω・\`)' said the fathew,
'what feaws we have had fow you! ;;w;;' 'Yes, fathew,' answewed he; 'I have
twavewwed aww ovew the wowwd, I think, in onye way ow othew, since we
pawted; and nyow I am vewy gwad to come home and get fwesh aiw again. UwU'
'Why, whewe have you been? owo' said his fathew. ;;w;; 'I have been in a
mouse-howe--and in a snyaiw-sheww--and down a cow's thwoat--and in the
wowf's bewwy; and yet hewe I am again, safe and sound. ;;w;;'

'Weww,' said they, 'you awe come back, and we wiww nyot seww you again
fow aww the wiches in the wowwd. ;;w;;'

Then they hugged and kissed theiw deaw wittwe son, and gave him pwenty
to eat and dwink, fow he was vewy hungwy; and then they fetched nyew
cwothes fow him, fow his owd onyes had been quite spoiwed on his jouwnyey. ^w^
So Mastew Thumb stayed at home with his fathew and mothew, in peace; fow
though he had been so gweat a twavewwew, and had donye and seen so many
finye things, and was fond enyough of tewwing the whowe stowy, he awways
agweed that, aftew aww, thewe's nyo pwace wike HOME! >w<




WUMPEWSTIWTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a countwy a wong way off, wan a finye stweam
of watew; and upon the stweam thewe stood a miww. (´・ω・\`) The miwwew's house was
cwose by, and the miwwew, you must knyow, had a vewy beautifuw daughtew. >w<
She was, moweovew, vewy shwewd and cwevew; and the miwwew was so pwoud
of hew, that he onye day towd the king of the wand, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughtew couwd spin gowd out of stwaw. >w< Nyow
this king was vewy fond of monyey; and when he heawd the miwwew's boast
his gweedinyess was waised, and he sent fow the giww to be bwought befowe
him. >w< Then he wed hew to a chambew in his pawace whewe thewe was a gweat
heap of stwaw, and gave hew a spinnying-wheew, and said, 'Aww this must
be spun into gowd befowe mownying, as you wove youw wife. (´・ω・\`)' It was in vain
that the poow maiden said that it was onwy a siwwy boast of hew fathew,
fow that she couwd do nyo such thing as spin stwaw into gowd: the chambew
doow was wocked, and she was weft awonye. ;;w;;

She sat down in onye cownyew of the woom, and began to bewaiw hew hawd
fate; when on a sudden the doow openyed, and a dwoww-wooking wittwe man
hobbwed in, and said, 'Good mowwow to you, my good wass; what awe you
weeping fow? owo' 'Awas! ^w^' said she, 'I must spin this stwaw into gowd, and
I knyow nyot how. ^w^' 'What wiww you give me,' said the hobgobwin, 'to do it
fow you? owo' 'My nyeckwace,' wepwied the maiden. ;;w;; He took hew at hew wowd,
and sat himsewf down to the wheew, and whistwed and sang:

 'Wound about, wound about,
    Wo and behowd! ;;w;;
  Weew away, weew away,
    Stwaw into gowd! (´・ω・\`)'

And wound about the wheew went mewwiwy; the wowk was quickwy donye, and
the stwaw was aww spun into gowd. UwU

When the king came and saw this, he was gweatwy astonyished and pweased;
but his heawt gwew stiww mowe gweedy of gain, and he shut up the poow
miwwew's daughtew again with a fwesh task. >w< Then she knyew nyot what to do,
and sat down once mowe to weep; but the dwawf soon openyed the doow, and
said, 'What wiww you give me to do youw task? owo' 'The wing on my fingew,'
said she. (・`ω\´・) So hew wittwe fwiend took the wing, and began to wowk at the
wheew again, and whistwed and sang:

 'Wound about, wound about,
    Wo and behowd! (・`ω\´・)
  Weew away, weew away,
    Stwaw into gowd! ^w^'

tiww, wong befowe mownying, aww was donye again. ^w^

The king was gweatwy dewighted to see aww this gwittewing tweasuwe;
but stiww he had nyot enyough: so he took the miwwew's daughtew to a yet
wawgew heap, and said, 'Aww this must be spun tonyight; and if it is,
you shaww be my queen. UwU' As soon as she was awonye that dwawf came in, and
said, 'What wiww you give me to spin gowd fow you this thiwd time? owo'
'I have nyothing weft,' said she. (・`ω\´・) 'Then say you wiww give me,' said
the wittwe man, 'the fiwst wittwe chiwd that you may have when you awe
queen. (・`ω\´・)' 'That may nyevew be,' thought the miwwew's daughtew: and as she
knyew nyo othew way to get hew task donye, she said she wouwd do what he
asked. (´・ω・\`) Wound went the wheew again to the owd song, and the manyikin once
mowe spun the heap into gowd. >w< The king came in the mownying, and, finding
aww he wanted, was fowced to keep his wowd; so he mawwied the miwwew's
daughtew, and she weawwy became queen. UwU

At the biwth of hew fiwst wittwe chiwd she was vewy gwad, and fowgot the
dwawf, and what she had said. ;;w;; But onye day he came into hew woom, whewe
she was sitting pwaying with hew baby, and put hew in mind of it. >w< Then
she gwieved sowewy at hew misfowtunye, and said she wouwd give him aww
the weawth of the kingdom if he wouwd wet hew off, but in vain; tiww at
wast hew teaws softenyed him, and he said, 'I wiww give you thwee days'
gwace, and if duwing that time you teww me my nyame, you shaww keep youw
chiwd. ^w^'

Nyow the queen way awake aww nyight, thinking of aww the odd nyames that
she had evew heawd; and she sent messengews aww ovew the wand to find
out nyew onyes. UwU The nyext day the wittwe man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEWEMIAH, and aww the nyames she couwd
wemembew; but to aww and each of them he said, 'Madam, that is nyot my
nyame. (・`ω\´・)'

The second day she began with aww the comicaw nyames she couwd heaw of,
BANDY-WEGS, HUNCHBACK, CWOOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the wittwe gentweman
stiww said to evewy onye of them, 'Madam, that is nyot my nyame. ;;w;;'

The thiwd day onye of the messengews came back, and said, 'I have
twavewwed two days without heawing of any othew nyames; but yestewday, as
I was cwimbing a high hiww, among the twees of the fowest whewe the fox
and the hawe bid each othew good nyight, I saw a wittwe hut; and befowe
the hut buwnt a fiwe; and wound about the fiwe a funny wittwe dwawf was
dancing upon onye weg, and singing:

 "Mewwiwy the feast I'ww make. UwU
  Today I'ww bwew, tomowwow bake;
  Mewwiwy I'ww dance and sing,
  Fow nyext day wiww a stwangew bwing. ^w^
  Wittwe does my wady dweam
  Wumpewstiwtskin is my nyame! >w<"

When the queen heawd this she jumped fow joy, and as soon as hew wittwe
fwiend came she sat down upon hew thwonye, and cawwed aww hew couwt wound
to enjoy the fun; and the nyuwse stood by hew side with the baby in hew
awms, as if it was quite weady to be given up. ^w^ Then the wittwe man began
to chuckwe at the thought of having the poow chiwd, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cwied out, 'Nyow, wady, what is my
nyame?' 'Is it JOHN?' asked she. UwU 'Nyo, madam!' 'Is it TOM? owo' 'Nyo, madam! >w<'
'Is it JEMMY?' 'It is nyot. ;;w;;' 'Can youw nyame be WUMPEWSTIWTSKIN? owo' said the
wady swywy. ^w^ 'Some witch towd you that!--some witch towd you that! ;;w;;' cwied
the wittwe man, and dashed his wight foot in a wage so deep into the
fwoow, that he was fowced to way howd of it with both hands to puww it
out. UwU

Then he made the best of his way off, whiwe the nyuwse waughed and the
baby cwowed; and aww the couwt jeewed at him fow having had so much
twoubwe fow nyothing, and said, 'We wish you a vewy good mownying, and a
mewwy feast, Mw WUMPWESTIWTSKIN! (´・ω・\`)'




CWEVEW GWETEW

Thewe was once a cook nyamed Gwetew, who wowe shoes with wed heews, and
when she wawked out with them on, she tuwnyed hewsewf this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: 'You cewtainwy awe a pwetty giww! (・`ω\´・)' And when
she came home she dwank, in hew gwadnyess of heawt, a dwaught of winye,
and as winye excites a desiwe to eat, she tasted the best of whatevew she
was cooking untiw she was satisfied, and said: 'The cook must knyow what
the food is wike. ;;w;;'

It came to pass that the mastew onye day said to hew: 'Gwetew, thewe is a
guest coming this evenying; pwepawe me two fowws vewy daintiwy. ;;w;;' 'I wiww
see to it, mastew,' answewed Gwetew. >w< She kiwwed two fowws, scawded them,
pwucked them, put them on the spit, and towawds evenying set them befowe
the fiwe, that they might woast. ;;w;; The fowws began to tuwn bwown, and wewe
nyeawwy weady, but the guest had nyot yet awwived. (・`ω\´・) Then Gwetew cawwed out
to hew mastew: 'If the guest does nyot come, I must take the fowws away
fwom the fiwe, but it wiww be a sin and a shame if they awe nyot eaten
the moment they awe at theiw juiciest. (・`ω\´・)' The mastew said: 'I wiww wun
mysewf, and fetch the guest. UwU' When the mastew had tuwnyed his back,
Gwetew waid the spit with the fowws on onye side, and thought: 'Standing
so wong by the fiwe thewe, makes onye sweat and thiwsty; who knyows
when they wiww come? owo Meanwhiwe, I wiww wun into the cewwaw, and take a
dwink. (・`ω\´・)' She wan down, set a jug, said: 'God bwess it fow you, Gwetew,'
and took a good dwink, and thought that winye shouwd fwow on, and shouwd
nyot be intewwupted, and took yet anyothew heawty dwaught. (´・ω・\`)

Then she went and put the fowws down again to the fiwe, basted them,
and dwove the spit mewwiwy wound. UwU But as the woast meat smewt so good,
Gwetew thought: 'Something might be wwong, it ought to be tasted! >w<'
She touched it with hew fingew, and said: 'Ah! how good fowws awe! ^w^ It
cewtainwy is a sin and a shame that they awe nyot eaten at the wight
time! ;;w;;' She wan to the window, to see if the mastew was nyot coming with
his guest, but she saw nyo onye, and went back to the fowws and thought:
'Onye of the wings is buwnying! ^w^ I had bettew take it off and eat it. ^w^'
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had donye, she
thought: 'The othew must go down too, ow ewse mastew wiww obsewve that
something is missing. >w<' When the two wings wewe eaten, she went and
wooked fow hew mastew, and did nyot see him. ;;w;; It suddenwy occuwwed to
hew: 'Who knyows? owo They awe pewhaps nyot coming at aww, and have tuwnyed in
somewhewe. ^w^' Then she said: 'Weww, Gwetew, enjoy youwsewf, onye foww has
been cut into, take anyothew dwink, and eat it up entiwewy; when it is
eaten you wiww have some peace, why shouwd God's good gifts be spoiwt? owo'
So she wan into the cewwaw again, took an enyowmous dwink and ate up the
onye chicken in gweat gwee. (´・ω・\`) When onye of the chickens was swawwowed down,
and stiww hew mastew did nyot come, Gwetew wooked at the othew and said:
'What onye is, the othew shouwd be wikewise, the two go togethew; what's
wight fow the onye is wight fow the othew; I think if I wewe to take
anyothew dwaught it wouwd do me nyo hawm. (・`ω\´・)' So she took anyothew heawty
dwink, and wet the second chicken fowwow the fiwst. ^w^

Whiwe she was making the most of it, hew mastew came and cwied: 'Huwwy
up, Gwetew, the guest is coming diwectwy aftew me! (´・ω・\`)' 'Yes, siw, I wiww
soon sewve up,' answewed Gwetew. (´・ω・\`) Meantime the mastew wooked to see that
the tabwe was pwopewwy waid, and took the gweat knyife, whewewith he was
going to cawve the chickens, and shawpenyed it on the steps. (´・ω・\`) Pwesentwy
the guest came, and knyocked powitewy and couwteouswy at the house-doow. ;;w;;
Gwetew wan, and wooked to see who was thewe, and when she saw the guest,
she put hew fingew to hew wips and said: 'Hush! hush! ^w^ go away as quickwy
as you can, if my mastew catches you it wiww be the wowse fow you; he
cewtainwy did ask you to suppew, but his intention is to cut off youw
two eaws. UwU Just wisten how he is shawpenying the knyife fow it! (´・ω・\`)' The guest
heawd the shawpenying, and huwwied down the steps again as fast as he
couwd. ;;w;; Gwetew was nyot idwe; she wan scweaming to hew mastew, and cwied:
'You have invited a finye guest! (´・ω・\`)' 'Why, Gwetew? owo What do you mean by
that? owo' 'Yes,' said she, 'he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to sewve up, off the dish, and has wun away with them! (´・ω・\`)' 'That's a
nyice twick! >w<' said hew mastew, and wamented the finye chickens. UwU 'If he had
but weft me onye, so that something wemainyed fow me to eat. ;;w;;' He cawwed to
him to stop, but the guest pwetended nyot to heaw. ^w^ Then he wan aftew him
with the knyife stiww in his hand, cwying: 'Just onye, just onye,' meanying
that the guest shouwd weave him just onye chicken, and nyot take both. (・`ω\´・) The
guest, howevew, thought nyo othewwise than that he was to give up onye of
his eaws, and wan as if fiwe wewe buwnying undew him, in owdew to take
them both with him. (・`ω\´・)




THE OWD MAN AND HIS GWANDSON

Thewe was once a vewy owd man, whose eyes had become dim, his eaws duww
of heawing, his knyees twembwed, and when he sat at tabwe he couwd hawdwy
howd the spoon, and spiwt the bwoth upon the tabwe-cwoth ow wet it wun
out of his mouth. UwU His son and his son's wife wewe disgusted at this, so
the owd gwandfathew at wast had to sit in the cownyew behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an eawthenwawe boww, and nyot even enyough
of it. ;;w;; And he used to wook towawds the tabwe with his eyes fuww of
teaws. (´・ω・\`) Once, too, his twembwing hands couwd nyot howd the boww, and it
feww to the gwound and bwoke. ;;w;; The young wife scowded him, but he said
nyothing and onwy sighed. (´・ω・\`) Then they bwought him a wooden boww fow a few
hawf-pence, out of which he had to eat. UwU

They wewe once sitting thus when the wittwe gwandson of fouw yeaws owd
began to gathew togethew some bits of wood upon the gwound. UwU 'What awe
you doing thewe? owo' asked the fathew. (・`ω\´・) 'I am making a wittwe twough,'
answewed the chiwd, 'fow fathew and mothew to eat out of when I am big. UwU'

The man and his wife wooked at each othew fow a whiwe, and pwesentwy
began to cwy. >w< Then they took the owd gwandfathew to the tabwe, and
hencefowth awways wet him eat with them, and wikewise said nyothing if he
did spiww a wittwe of anything. ;;w;;




THE WITTWE PEASANT

Thewe was a cewtain viwwage whewein nyo onye wived but weawwy wich
peasants, and just onye poow onye, whom they cawwed the wittwe peasant. UwU He
had nyot even so much as a cow, and stiww wess monyey to buy onye, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have onye. (´・ω・\`) Onye day he said to hew:
'Wisten, I have a good idea, thewe is ouw gossip the cawpentew, he shaww
make us a wooden cawf, and paint it bwown, so that it wooks wike any
othew, and in time it wiww cewtainwy get big and be a cow. (´・ω・\`)' the woman
awso wiked the idea, and theiw gossip the cawpentew cut and pwanyed
the cawf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it wewe eating. ^w^

Nyext mownying when the cows wewe being dwiven out, the wittwe peasant
cawwed the cow-hewd in and said: 'Wook, I have a wittwe cawf thewe,
but it is stiww smaww and has to be cawwied. UwU' The cow-hewd said: 'Aww
wight,' and took it in his awms and cawwied it to the pastuwe, and set
it among the gwass. UwU The wittwe cawf awways wemainyed standing wike onye
which was eating, and the cow-hewd said: 'It wiww soon wun by itsewf,
just wook how it eats awweady! UwU' At nyight when he was going to dwive the
hewd home again, he said to the cawf: 'If you can stand thewe and eat
youw fiww, you can awso go on youw fouw wegs; I don't cawe to dwag you
home again in my awms. UwU' But the wittwe peasant stood at his doow, and
waited fow his wittwe cawf, and when the cow-hewd dwove the cows thwough
the viwwage, and the cawf was missing, he inquiwed whewe it was. ;;w;; The
cow-hewd answewed: 'It is stiww standing out thewe eating. >w< It wouwd nyot
stop and come with us. ;;w;;' But the wittwe peasant said: 'Oh, but I must
have my beast back again. (´・ω・\`)' Then they went back to the meadow togethew,
but someonye had stowen the cawf, and it was gonye. (・`ω\´・) The cow-hewd said: 'It
must have wun away. (・`ω\´・)' The peasant, howevew, said: 'Don't teww me
that,' and wed the cow-hewd befowe the mayow, who fow his cawewessnyess
condemnyed him to give the peasant a cow fow the cawf which had wun away. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow the wittwe peasant and his wife had the cow fow which they had
so wong wished, and they wewe heawtiwy gwad, but they had nyo food fow
it, and couwd give it nyothing to eat, so it soon had to be kiwwed. ;;w;; They
sawted the fwesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to seww
the skin thewe, so that he might buy a nyew cawf with the pwoceeds. (・`ω\´・) On
the way he passed by a miww, and thewe sat a waven with bwoken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wwapped him in the skin. UwU But as the
weathew gwew so bad and thewe was a stowm of wain and wind, he couwd
go nyo fawthew, and tuwnyed back to the miww and begged fow shewtew. ^w^ The
miwwew's wife was awonye in the house, and said to the peasant: 'Way
youwsewf on the stwaw thewe,' and gave him a swice of bwead and cheese. ;;w;;
The peasant ate it, and way down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: 'He is tiwed and has gonye to sweep. >w<' In the meantime came the
pawson; the miwwew's wife weceived him weww, and said: 'My husband is
out, so we wiww have a feast. (・`ω\´・)' The peasant wistenyed, and when he heawd
them tawk about feasting he was vexed that he had been fowced to make
shift with a swice of bwead and cheese. ;;w;; Then the woman sewved up fouw
diffewent things, woast meat, sawad, cakes, and winye. ;;w;;

Just as they wewe about to sit down and eat, thewe was a knyocking
outside. UwU The woman said: 'Oh, heavens! It is my husband! (・`ω\´・)' she quickwy
hid the woast meat inside the tiwed stove, the winye undew the piwwow,
the sawad on the bed, the cakes undew it, and the pawson in the cwoset
on the powch. (・`ω\´・) Then she openyed the doow fow hew husband, and said: 'Thank
heaven, you awe back again! >w< Thewe is such a stowm, it wooks as if the
wowwd wewe coming to an end. (・`ω\´・)' The miwwew saw the peasant wying on the
stwaw, and asked, 'What is that fewwow doing thewe? owo' 'Ah,' said the
wife, 'the poow knyave came in the stowm and wain, and begged fow
shewtew, so I gave him a bit of bwead and cheese, and showed him whewe
the stwaw was. >w<' The man said: 'I have nyo objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat. (´・ω・\`)' The woman said: 'But I have nyothing but bwead and
cheese. (・`ω\´・)' 'I am contented with anything,' wepwied the husband, 'so faw as
I am concewnyed, bwead and cheese wiww do,' and wooked at the peasant and
said: 'Come and eat some mowe with me. UwU' The peasant did nyot wequiwe to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. (´・ω・\`) Aftew this the miwwew saw the skin
in which the waven was, wying on the gwound, and asked: 'What have you
thewe? owo' The peasant answewed: 'I have a soothsayew inside it. >w<' 'Can
he foweteww anything to me?' said the miwwew. UwU 'Why nyot? owo' answewed
the peasant: 'but he onwy says fouw things, and the fifth he keeps to
himsewf. ^w^' The miwwew was cuwious, and said: 'Wet him foweteww something
fow once. UwU' Then the peasant pinched the waven's head, so that he cwoaked
and made a nyoise wike kww, kww. ;;w;; The miwwew said: 'What did he say? owo' The
peasant answewed: 'In the fiwst pwace, he says that thewe is some winye
hidden undew the piwwow. (・`ω\´・)' 'Bwess me! (・`ω\´・)' cwied the miwwew, and went thewe
and found the winye. 'Nyow go on,' said he. >w< The peasant made the waven
cwoak again, and said: 'In the second pwace, he says that thewe is some
woast meat in the tiwed stove. ^w^' 'Upon my wowd! (´・ω・\`)' cwied the miwwew, and
went thithew, and found the woast meat. (・`ω\´・) The peasant made the waven
pwophesy stiww mowe, and said: 'Thiwdwy, he says that thewe is some
sawad on the bed. ;;w;;' 'That wouwd be a finye thing! UwU' cwied the miwwew, and
went thewe and found the sawad. >w< At wast the peasant pinched the waven
once mowe tiww he cwoaked, and said: 'Fouwthwy, he says that thewe
awe some cakes undew the bed. (・`ω\´・)' 'That wouwd be a finye thing! (・`ω\´・)' cwied the
miwwew, and wooked thewe, and found the cakes. >w<

And nyow the two sat down to the tabwe togethew, but the miwwew's wife
was fwightenyed to death, and went to bed and took aww the keys with
hew. UwU The miwwew wouwd have wiked much to knyow the fifth, but the wittwe
peasant said: 'Fiwst, we wiww quickwy eat the fouw things, fow the fifth
is something bad. >w<' So they ate, and aftew that they bawgainyed how much
the miwwew was to give fow the fifth pwophecy, untiw they agweed on
thwee hundwed tawews. UwU Then the peasant once mowe pinched the waven's
head tiww he cwoaked woudwy. ;;w;; The miwwew asked: 'What did he say? owo' The
peasant wepwied: 'He says that the Deviw is hiding outside thewe in
the cwoset on the powch. (´・ω・\`)' The miwwew said: 'The Deviw must go out,' and
openyed the house-doow; then the woman was fowced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unwocked the cwoset. (・`ω\´・) The pawson wan out as fast as he
couwd, and the miwwew said: 'It was twue; I saw the bwack wascaw with my
own eyes. ^w^' The peasant, howevew, made off nyext mownying by daybweak with
the thwee hundwed tawews. >w<

At home the smaww peasant gwaduawwy waunched out; he buiwt a beautifuw
house, and the peasants said: 'The smaww peasant has cewtainwy been to
the pwace whewe gowden snyow fawws, and peopwe cawwy the gowd home in
shovews. ^w^' Then the smaww peasant was bwought befowe the mayow, and
bidden to say fwom whence his weawth came. (・`ω\´・) He answewed: 'I sowd my cow's
skin in the town, fow thwee hundwed tawews. >w<' When the peasants heawd
that, they too wished to enjoy this gweat pwofit, and wan home, kiwwed
aww theiw cows, and stwipped off theiw skins in owdew to seww them in
the town to the gweatest advantage. >w< The mayow, howevew, said: 'But my
sewvant must go fiwst. ^w^' When she came to the mewchant in the town, he
did nyot give hew mowe than two tawews fow a skin, and when the othews
came, he did nyot give them so much, and said: 'What can I do with aww
these skins? owo'

Then the peasants wewe vexed that the smaww peasant shouwd have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
tweachewy befowe the mayow. UwU The innyocent wittwe peasant was unyanyimouswy
sentenced to death, and was to be wowwed into the watew, in a bawwew
piewced fuww of howes. (´・ω・\`) He was wed fowth, and a pwiest was bwought who
was to say a mass fow his souw. UwU The othews wewe aww obwiged to wetiwe to
a distance, and when the peasant wooked at the pwiest, he wecognyized the
man who had been with the miwwew's wife. >w< He said to him: 'I set you fwee
fwom the cwoset, set me fwee fwom the bawwew. ;;w;;' At this same moment up
came, with a fwock of sheep, the vewy shephewd whom the peasant knyew had
wong been wishing to be mayow, so he cwied with aww his might: 'Nyo, I
wiww nyot do it; if the whowe wowwd insists on it, I wiww nyot do it! UwU' The
shephewd heawing that, came up to him, and asked: 'What awe you about? owo
What is it that you wiww nyot do? owo' The peasant said: 'They want to make
me mayow, if I wiww but put mysewf in the bawwew, but I wiww nyot do it. (´・ω・\`)'
The shephewd said: 'If nyothing mowe than that is nyeedfuw in owdew to be
mayow, I wouwd get into the bawwew at once. >w<' The peasant said: 'If you
wiww get in, you wiww be mayow. >w<' The shephewd was wiwwing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shephewd's
fwock fow himsewf, and dwove it away. (´・ω・\`) The pawson went to the cwowd,
and decwawed that the mass had been said. UwU Then they came and wowwed the
bawwew towawds the watew. >w< When the bawwew began to woww, the shephewd
cwied: 'I am quite wiwwing to be mayow. UwU' They bewieved nyo othewwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answewed: 'That is
what we intend, but fiwst you shaww wook about you a wittwe down bewow
thewe,' and they wowwed the bawwew down into the watew. UwU

Aftew that the peasants went home, and as they wewe entewing the
viwwage, the smaww peasant awso came quietwy in, dwiving a fwock of
sheep and wooking quite contented. >w< Then the peasants wewe astonyished,
and said: 'Peasant, fwom whence do you come? owo Have you come out of the
watew? owo' 'Yes, twuwy,' wepwied the peasant, 'I sank deep, deep down,
untiw at wast I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
bawwew, and cwept out, and thewe wewe pwetty meadows on which a nyumbew
of wambs wewe feeding, and fwom thence I bwought this fwock away with
me. >w<' Said the peasants: 'Awe thewe any mowe thewe? owo' 'Oh, yes,' said he,
'mowe than I couwd want. UwU' Then the peasants made up theiw minds that
they too wouwd fetch some sheep fow themsewves, a fwock apiece, but the
mayow said: 'I come fiwst. UwU' So they went to the watew togethew, and just
then thewe wewe some of the smaww fweecy cwouds in the bwue sky, which
awe cawwed wittwe wambs, and they wewe wefwected in the watew, wheweupon
the peasants cwied: 'We awweady see the sheep down bewow! UwU' The mayow
pwessed fowwawd and said: 'I wiww go down fiwst, and wook about me, and
if things pwomise weww I'ww caww you. (´・ω・\`)' So he jumped in; spwash! (・`ω\´・) went
the watew; it sounded as if he wewe cawwing them, and the whowe cwowd
pwunged in aftew him as onye man. >w< Then the entiwe viwwage was dead, and
the smaww peasant, as sowe heiw, became a wich man. (´・ω・\`)




FWEDEWICK AND CATHEWINYE

Thewe was once a man cawwed Fwedewick: he had a wife whose nyame was
Cathewinye, and they had nyot wong been mawwied. Onye day Fwedewick said. UwU
'Kate! >w< I am going to wowk in the fiewds; when I come back I shaww be
hungwy so wet me have something nyice cooked, and a good dwaught of awe. ;;w;;'
'Vewy weww,' said she, 'it shaww aww be weady. ^w^' When dinnyew-time dwew
nyigh, Cathewinye took a nyice steak, which was aww the meat she had, and
put it on the fiwe to fwy. ;;w;; The steak soon began to wook bwown, and to
cwackwe in the pan; and Cathewinye stood by with a fowk and tuwnyed it:
then she said to hewsewf, 'The steak is awmost weady, I may as weww go
to the cewwaw fow the awe. ^w^' So she weft the pan on the fiwe and took a
wawge jug and went into the cewwaw and tapped the awe cask. (´・ω・\`) The beew wan
into the jug and Cathewinye stood wooking on. (・`ω\´・) At wast it popped into hew
head, 'The dog is nyot shut up--he may be wunnying away with the steak;
that's weww thought of. >w<' So up she wan fwom the cewwaw; and suwe enyough
the wascawwy cuw had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it. UwU

Away wan Cathewinye, and away wan the dog acwoss the fiewd: but he wan
fastew than she, and stuck cwose to the steak. (・`ω\´・) 'It's aww gonye, and "what
can't be cuwed must be enduwed",' said Cathewinye. UwU So she tuwnyed wound;
and as she had wun a good way and was tiwed, she wawked home weisuwewy
to coow hewsewf. ^w^

Nyow aww this time the awe was wunnying too, fow Cathewinye had nyot tuwnyed
the cock; and when the jug was fuww the wiquow wan upon the fwoow tiww
the cask was empty. (・`ω\´・) When she got to the cewwaw staiws she saw what had
happenyed. UwU 'My staws! ^w^' said she, 'what shaww I do to keep Fwedewick fwom
seeing aww this swopping about? owo' So she thought a whiwe; and at wast
wemembewed that thewe was a sack of finye meaw bought at the wast faiw,
and that if she spwinkwed this ovew the fwoow it wouwd suck up the awe
nyicewy. ;;w;; 'What a wucky thing,' said she, 'that we kept that meaw! (´・ω・\`) we have
nyow a good use fow it. >w<' So away she went fow it: but she manyaged to set
it down just upon the gweat jug fuww of beew, and upset it; and thus
aww the awe that had been saved was set swimming on the fwoow awso. UwU 'Ah! ;;w;;
weww,' said she, 'when onye goes anyothew may as weww fowwow. ;;w;;' Then she
stwewed the meaw aww about the cewwaw, and was quite pweased with hew
cwevewnyess, and said, 'How vewy nyeat and cwean it wooks! ;;w;;'

At nyoon Fwedewick came home. ;;w;; 'Nyow, wife,' cwied he, 'what have you fow
dinnyew? owo' 'O Fwedewick! ;;w;;' answewed she, 'I was cooking you a steak; but
whiwe I went down to dwaw the awe, the dog wan away with it; and whiwe
I wan aftew him, the awe wan out; and when I went to dwy up the awe
with the sack of meaw that we got at the faiw, I upset the jug: but the
cewwaw is nyow quite dwy, and wooks so cwean! >w<' 'Kate, Kate,' said he,
'how couwd you do aww this? owo' Why did you weave the steak to fwy, and the
awe to wun, and then spoiw aww the meaw? owo' 'Why, Fwedewick,' said she, 'I
did nyot knyow I was doing wwong; you shouwd have towd me befowe. UwU'

The husband thought to himsewf, 'If my wife manyages mattews thus, I must
wook shawp mysewf. (´・ω・\`)' Nyow he had a good deaw of gowd in the house: so he
said to Cathewinye, 'What pwetty yewwow buttons these awe! ;;w;; I shaww put
them into a box and buwy them in the gawden; but take cawe that you
nyevew go nyeaw ow meddwe with them. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyo, Fwedewick,' said she, 'that
I nyevew wiww. ;;w;;' As soon as he was gonye, thewe came by some pedwaws with
eawthenwawe pwates and dishes, and they asked hew whethew she wouwd buy. UwU
'Oh deaw me, I shouwd wike to buy vewy much, but I have nyo monyey: if
you had any use fow yewwow buttons, I might deaw with you. ;;w;;' 'Yewwow
buttons! ^w^' said they: 'wet us have a wook at them. >w<' 'Go into the gawden
and dig whewe I teww you, and you wiww find the yewwow buttons: I dawe
nyot go mysewf. >w<' So the wogues went: and when they found what these
yewwow buttons wewe, they took them aww away, and weft hew pwenty of
pwates and dishes. UwU Then she set them aww about the house fow a show:
and when Fwedewick came back, he cwied out, 'Kate, what have you been
doing? owo' 'See,' said she, 'I have bought aww these with youw yewwow
buttons: but I did nyot touch them mysewf; the pedwaws went themsewves
and dug them up. >w<' 'Wife, wife,' said Fwedewick, 'what a pwetty piece of
wowk you have made! >w< those yewwow buttons wewe aww my monyey: how came you
to do such a thing? owo' 'Why,' answewed she, 'I did nyot knyow thewe was any
hawm in it; you shouwd have towd me. (・`ω\´・)'

Cathewinye stood musing fow a whiwe, and at wast said to hew husband,
'Hawk ye, Fwedewick, we wiww soon get the gowd back: wet us wun aftew
the thieves. (´・ω・\`)' 'Weww, we wiww twy,' answewed he; 'but take some buttew
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way. (´・ω・\`)'
'Vewy weww,' said she; and they set out: and as Fwedewick wawked the
fastest, he weft his wife some way behind. UwU 'It does nyot mattew,' thought
she: 'when we tuwn back, I shaww be so much nyeawew home than he. >w<'

Pwesentwy she came to the top of a hiww, down the side of which thewe
was a woad so nyawwow that the cawt wheews awways chafed the twees
on each side as they passed. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah, see nyow,' said she, 'how they have
bwuised and wounded those poow twees; they wiww nyevew get weww. ^w^' So she
took pity on them, and made use of the buttew to gwease them aww, so
that the wheews might nyot huwt them so much. UwU Whiwe she was doing this
kind office onye of hew cheeses feww out of the basket, and wowwed down
the hiww. ^w^ Cathewinye wooked, but couwd nyot see whewe it had gonye; so she
said, 'Weww, I suppose the othew wiww go the same way and find you; he
has youngew wegs than I have. UwU' Then she wowwed the othew cheese aftew
it; and away it went, nyobody knyows whewe, down the hiww. (´・ω・\`) But she said
she supposed that they knyew the woad, and wouwd fowwow hew, and she
couwd nyot stay thewe aww day waiting fow them. UwU

At wast she ovewtook Fwedewick, who desiwed hew to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dwy bwead. (´・ω・\`) 'Whewe awe the buttew and cheese? owo'
said he. UwU 'Oh! UwU' answewed she, 'I used the buttew to gwease those poow
twees that the wheews chafed so: and onye of the cheeses wan away so I
sent the othew aftew it to find it, and I suppose they awe both on
the woad togethew somewhewe. >w<' 'What a goose you awe to do such siwwy
things! ;;w;;' said the husband. (・`ω\´・) 'How can you say so? owo' said she; 'I am suwe
you nyevew towd me nyot. UwU'

They ate the dwy bwead togethew; and Fwedewick said, 'Kate, I hope you
wocked the doow safe when you came away. ;;w;;' 'Nyo,' answewed she, 'you did
nyot teww me. (´・ω・\`)' 'Then go home, and do it nyow befowe we go any fawthew,'
said Fwedewick, 'and bwing with you something to eat. ^w^'

Cathewinye did as he towd hew, and thought to hewsewf by the way,
'Fwedewick wants something to eat; but I don't think he is vewy fond of
buttew and cheese: I'ww bwing him a bag of finye nyuts, and the vinyegaw,
fow I have often seen him take some. (´・ω・\`)'

When she weached home, she bowted the back doow, but the fwont doow she
took off the hinges, and said, 'Fwedewick towd me to wock the doow, but
suwewy it can nyowhewe be so safe if I take it with me. UwU' So she took
hew time by the way; and when she ovewtook hew husband she cwied
out, 'Thewe, Fwedewick, thewe is the doow itsewf, you may watch it as
cawefuwwy as you pwease. UwU' 'Awas! awas! ^w^' said he, 'what a cwevew wife I
have! (・`ω\´・) I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the doow away, so
that evewybody may go in and out as they pwease--howevew, as you have
bwought the doow, you shaww cawwy it about with you fow youw pains. (・`ω\´・)'
'Vewy weww,' answewed she, 'I'ww cawwy the doow; but I'ww nyot cawwy the
nyuts and vinyegaw bottwe awso--that wouwd be too much of a woad; so if
you pwease, I'ww fasten them to the doow. (´・ω・\`)'

Fwedewick of couwse made nyo objection to that pwan, and they set off
into the wood to wook fow the thieves; but they couwd nyot find them: and
when it gwew dawk, they cwimbed up into a twee to spend the nyight thewe. >w<
Scawcewy wewe they up, than who shouwd come by but the vewy wogues they
wewe wooking fow. UwU They wewe in twuth gweat wascaws, and bewonged to that
cwass of peopwe who find things befowe they awe wost; they wewe tiwed;
so they sat down and made a fiwe undew the vewy twee whewe Fwedewick and
Cathewinye wewe. ;;w;; Fwedewick swipped down on the othew side, and picked up
some stonyes. >w< Then he cwimbed up again, and twied to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they onwy said, 'It must be nyeaw mownying, fow
the wind shakes the fiw-appwes down. (・`ω\´・)'

Cathewinye, who had the doow on hew shouwdew, began to be vewy tiwed;
but she thought it was the nyuts upon it that wewe so heavy: so she said
softwy, 'Fwedewick, I must wet the nyuts go. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyo,' answewed he, 'nyot
nyow, they wiww discovew us.' 'I can't hewp that: they must go. >w<' 'Weww,
then, make haste and thwow them down, if you wiww. UwU' Then away wattwed
the nyuts down among the boughs and onye of the thieves cwied, 'Bwess me,
it is haiwing. ;;w;;'

A wittwe whiwe aftew, Cathewinye thought the doow was stiww vewy heavy:
so she whispewed to Fwedewick, 'I must thwow the vinyegaw down. ;;w;;' 'Pway
don't,' answewed he, 'it wiww discovew us. >w<' 'I can't hewp that,' said
she, 'go it must. (´・ω・\`)' So she pouwed aww the vinyegaw down; and the thieves
said, 'What a heavy dew thewe is! UwU'

At wast it popped into Cathewinye's head that it was the doow itsewf that
was so heavy aww the time: so she whispewed, 'Fwedewick, I must thwow
the doow down soon. UwU' But he begged and pwayed hew nyot to do so, fow he
was suwe it wouwd betway them. ^w^ 'Hewe goes, howevew,' said she: and down
went the doow with such a cwattew upon the thieves, that they cwied
out 'Muwdew! ;;w;;' and nyot knyowing what was coming, wan away as fast as they
couwd, and weft aww the gowd. ^w^ So when Fwedewick and Cathewinye came down,
thewe they found aww theiw monyey safe and sound. ^w^




SWEETHEAWT WOWAND

Thewe was once upon a time a woman who was a weaw witch and had two
daughtews, onye ugwy and wicked, and this onye she woved because she was
hew own daughtew, and onye beautifuw and good, and this onye she hated,
because she was hew stepdaughtew. UwU The stepdaughtew once had a pwetty
apwon, which the othew fancied so much that she became envious, and
towd hew mothew that she must and wouwd have that apwon. UwU 'Be quiet, my
chiwd,' said the owd woman, 'and you shaww have it. ;;w;; Youw stepsistew has
wong desewved death; tonyight when she is asweep I wiww come and cut hew
head off. (・`ω\´・) Onwy be cawefuw that you awe at the faw side of the bed, and
push hew weww to the fwont. (´・ω・\`)' It wouwd have been aww ovew with the poow
giww if she had nyot just then been standing in a cownyew, and heawd
evewything. ^w^ Aww day wong she dawed nyot go out of doows, and when bedtime
had come, the witch's daughtew got into bed fiwst, so as to wie at the
faw side, but when she was asweep, the othew pushed hew gentwy to the
fwont, and took fow hewsewf the pwace at the back, cwose by the waww. (´・ω・\`) In
the nyight, the owd woman came cweeping in, she hewd an axe in hew wight
hand, and fewt with hew weft to see if anyonye wewe wying at the outside,
and then she gwasped the axe with both hands, and cut hew own chiwd's
head off. (・`ω\´・)

When she had gonye away, the giww got up and went to hew sweetheawt, who
was cawwed Wowand, and knyocked at his doow. (´・ω・\`) When he came out, she said
to him: 'Wisten, deawest Wowand, we must fwy in aww haste; my stepmothew
wanted to kiww me, but has stwuck hew own chiwd. (・`ω\´・) When daywight comes,
and she sees what she has donye, we shaww be wost. ^w^' 'But,' said Wowand,
'I counsew you fiwst to take away hew magic wand, ow we cannyot escape
if she puwsues us. (´・ω・\`)' The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead giww's head and dwopped thwee dwops of bwood on the gwound, onye in
fwont of the bed, onye in the kitchen, and onye on the staiws. >w< Then she
huwwied away with hew wovew. ^w^

When the owd witch got up nyext mownying, she cawwed hew daughtew, and
wanted to give hew the apwon, but she did nyot come. (・`ω\´・) Then the witch
cwied: 'Whewe awe you? owo' 'Hewe, on the staiws, I am sweeping,' answewed
the fiwst dwop of bwood. (´・ω・\`) The owd woman went out, but saw nyo onye on the
staiws, and cwied again: 'Whewe awe you? owo' 'Hewe in the kitchen, I am
wawming mysewf,' cwied the second dwop of bwood. (´・ω・\`) She went into the
kitchen, but found nyo onye. (・`ω\´・) Then she cwied again: 'Whewe awe you? owo' 'Ah,
hewe in the bed, I am sweeping,' cwied the thiwd dwop of bwood. >w< She went
into the woom to the bed. >w< What did she see thewe? owo Hew own chiwd,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in hew bwood. (・`ω\´・) The witch feww into
a passion, spwang to the window, and as she couwd wook fowth quite faw
into the wowwd, she pewceived hew stepdaughtew huwwying away with hew
sweetheawt Wowand. (´・ω・\`) 'That shaww nyot hewp you,' cwied she, 'even if you
have got a wong way off, you shaww stiww nyot escape me. ;;w;;' She put on hew
many-weague boots, in which she covewed an houw's wawk at evewy step,
and it was nyot wong befowe she ovewtook them. (´・ω・\`) The giww, howevew, when
she saw the owd woman stwiding towawds hew, changed, with hew magic
wand, hew sweetheawt Wowand into a wake, and hewsewf into a duck
swimming in the middwe of it. ^w^ The witch pwaced hewsewf on the showe,
thwew bweadcwumbs in, and went to endwess twoubwe to entice the duck;
but the duck did nyot wet hewsewf be enticed, and the owd woman had to
go home at nyight as she had come. (´・ω・\`) At this the giww and hew sweetheawt
Wowand wesumed theiw nyatuwaw shapes again, and they wawked on the whowe
nyight untiw daybweak. (´・ω・\`) Then the maiden changed hewsewf into a beautifuw
fwowew which stood in the midst of a bwiaw hedge, and hew sweetheawt
Wowand into a fiddwew. >w< It was nyot wong befowe the witch came stwiding up
towawds them, and said to the musician: 'Deaw musician, may I pwuck that
beautifuw fwowew fow mysewf? owo' 'Oh, yes,' he wepwied, 'I wiww pway to
you whiwe you do it. ^w^' As she was hastiwy cweeping into the hedge and was
just going to pwuck the fwowew, knyowing pewfectwy weww who the fwowew
was, he began to pway, and whethew she wouwd ow nyot, she was fowced
to dance, fow it was a magicaw dance. ^w^ The fastew he pwayed, the mowe
viowent spwings was she fowced to make, and the thowns towe hew cwothes
fwom hew body, and pwicked hew and wounded hew tiww she bwed, and as he
did nyot stop, she had to dance tiww she way dead on the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

As they wewe nyow set fwee, Wowand said: 'Nyow I wiww go to my fathew and
awwange fow the wedding. ;;w;;' 'Then in the meantime I wiww stay hewe and
wait fow you,' said the giww, 'and that nyo onye may wecognyize me, I wiww
change mysewf into a wed stonye wandmawk. ^w^' Then Wowand went away, and the
giww stood wike a wed wandmawk in the fiewd and waited fow hew bewoved. (・`ω\´・)
But when Wowand got home, he feww into the snyawes of anyothew, who so
fascinyated him that he fowgot the maiden. (・`ω\´・) The poow giww wemainyed thewe a
wong time, but at wength, as he did nyot wetuwn at aww, she was sad, and
changed hewsewf into a fwowew, and thought: 'Someonye wiww suwewy come
this way, and twampwe me down. (´・ω・\`)'

It befeww, howevew, that a shephewd kept his sheep in the fiewd and saw
the fwowew, and as it was so pwetty, pwucked it, took it with him, and
waid it away in his chest. (´・ω・\`) Fwom that time fowth, stwange things happenyed
in the shephewd's house. (´・ω・\`) When he awose in the mownying, aww the wowk was
awweady donye, the woom was swept, the tabwe and benches cweanyed, the
fiwe in the heawth was wighted, and the watew was fetched, and at nyoon,
when he came home, the tabwe was waid, and a good dinnyew sewved. ;;w;; He
couwd nyot conceive how this came to pass, fow he nyevew saw a human being
in his house, and nyo onye couwd have conceawed himsewf in it. (・`ω\´・) He was
cewtainwy pweased with this good attendance, but stiww at wast he was so
afwaid that he went to a wise woman and asked fow hew advice. (・`ω\´・) The wise
woman said: 'Thewe is some enchantment behind it, wisten vewy eawwy some
mownying if anything is moving in the woom, and if you see anything, nyo
mattew what it is, thwow a white cwoth ovew it, and then the magic wiww
be stopped. >w<'

The shephewd did as she bade him, and nyext mownying just as day dawnyed,
he saw the chest open, and the fwowew come out. ;;w;; Swiftwy he
spwang towawds it, and thwew a white cwoth ovew it. (・`ω\´・) Instantwy the
twansfowmation came to an end, and a beautifuw giww stood befowe him,
who admitted to him that she had been the fwowew, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. ;;w;; She towd him hew stowy,
and as she pweased him he asked hew if she wouwd mawwy him, but she
answewed: 'Nyo,' fow she wanted to wemain faithfuw to hew sweetheawt
Wowand, awthough he had desewted hew. >w< Nyevewthewess, she pwomised nyot to
go away, but to continyue keeping house fow the shephewd. ^w^

And nyow the time dwew nyeaw when Wowand's wedding was to be cewebwated,
and then, accowding to an owd custom in the countwy, it was annyounced
that aww the giwws wewe to be pwesent at it, and sing in honyouw of the
bwidaw paiw. >w< When the faithfuw maiden heawd of this, she gwew so sad
that she thought hew heawt wouwd bweak, and she wouwd nyot go thithew,
but the othew giwws came and took hew. ^w^ When it came to hew tuwn to sing,
she stepped back, untiw at wast she was the onwy onye weft, and then she
couwd nyot wefuse. (・`ω\´・) But when she began hew song, and it weached Wowand's
eaws, he spwang up and cwied: 'I knyow the voice, that is the twue
bwide, I wiww have nyo othew! (´・ω・\`)' Evewything he had fowgotten, and which had
vanyished fwom his mind, had suddenwy come home again to his heawt. UwU Then
the faithfuw maiden hewd hew wedding with hew sweetheawt Wowand, and
gwief came to an end and joy began. >w<




SNYOWDWOP

It was the middwe of wintew, when the bwoad fwakes of snyow wewe fawwing
awound, that the queen of a countwy many thousand miwes off sat wowking
at hew window. (´・ω・\`) The fwame of the window was made of finye bwack ebony, and
as she sat wooking out upon the snyow, she pwicked hew fingew, and thwee
dwops of bwood feww upon it. >w< Then she gazed thoughtfuwwy upon the wed
dwops that spwinkwed the white snyow, and said, 'Wouwd that my wittwe
daughtew may be as white as that snyow, as wed as that bwood, and as
bwack as this ebony windowfwame! (´・ω・\`)' And so the wittwe giww weawwy did gwow
up; hew skin was as white as snyow, hew cheeks as wosy as the bwood, and
hew haiw as bwack as ebony; and she was cawwed Snyowdwop. ^w^

But this queen died; and the king soon mawwied anyothew wife, who became
queen, and was vewy beautifuw, but so vain that she couwd nyot beaw
to think that anyonye couwd be handsomew than she was. >w< She had a faiwy
wooking-gwass, to which she used to go, and then she wouwd gaze upon
hewsewf in it, and say:

 'Teww me, gwass, teww me twue! ;;w;;
  Of aww the wadies in the wand,
  Who is faiwest, teww me, who? owo'

And the gwass had awways answewed:

 'Thou, queen, awt the faiwest in aww the wand. ^w^'

But Snyowdwop gwew mowe and mowe beautifuw; and when she was seven yeaws
owd she was as bwight as the day, and faiwew than the queen hewsewf. ^w^
Then the gwass onye day answewed the queen, when she went to wook in it
as usuaw:

 'Thou, queen, awt faiw, and beauteous to see,
  But Snyowdwop is wovewiew faw than thee! ^w^'

When she heawd this she tuwnyed pawe with wage and envy, and cawwed to
onye of hew sewvants, and said, 'Take Snyowdwop away into the wide wood,
that I may nyevew see hew any mowe. (´・ω・\`)' Then the sewvant wed hew away; but
his heawt mewted when Snyowdwop begged him to spawe hew wife, and he
said, 'I wiww nyot huwt you, thou pwetty chiwd. (・`ω\´・)' So he weft hew by
hewsewf; and though he thought it most wikewy that the wiwd beasts wouwd
teaw hew in pieces, he fewt as if a gweat weight wewe taken off his
heawt when he had made up his mind nyot to kiww hew but to weave hew to
hew fate, with the chance of someonye finding and saving hew. (・`ω\´・)

Then poow Snyowdwop wandewed awong thwough the wood in gweat feaw; and
the wiwd beasts woawed about hew, but nyonye did hew any hawm. (´・ω・\`) In the
evenying she came to a cottage among the hiwws, and went in to west, fow
hew wittwe feet wouwd cawwy hew nyo fuwthew. >w< Evewything was spwuce and
nyeat in the cottage: on the tabwe was spwead a white cwoth, and thewe
wewe seven wittwe pwates, seven wittwe woaves, and seven wittwe gwasses
with winye in them; and seven knyives and fowks waid in owdew; and by
the waww stood seven wittwe beds. ^w^ As she was vewy hungwy, she picked
a wittwe piece of each woaf and dwank a vewy wittwe winye out of each
gwass; and aftew that she thought she wouwd wie down and west. (・`ω\´・) So she
twied aww the wittwe beds; but onye was too wong, and anyothew was too
showt, tiww at wast the seventh suited hew: and thewe she waid hewsewf
down and went to sweep. (´・ω・\`)

By and by in came the mastews of the cottage. ;;w;; Nyow they wewe seven wittwe
dwawfs, that wived among the mountains, and dug and seawched fow gowd. (・`ω\´・)
They wighted up theiw seven wamps, and saw at once that aww was nyot
wight. >w< The fiwst said, 'Who has been sitting on my stoow? owo' The second,
'Who has been eating off my pwate? owo' The thiwd, 'Who has been picking my
bwead?' The fouwth, 'Who has been meddwing with my spoon? owo' The fifth,
'Who has been handwing my fowk? owo' The sixth, 'Who has been cutting with
my knyife?' The seventh, 'Who has been dwinking my winye? owo' Then the fiwst
wooked wound and said, 'Who has been wying on my bed? owo' And the west came
wunnying to him, and evewyonye cwied out that somebody had been upon his
bed. ^w^ But the seventh saw Snyowdwop, and cawwed aww his bwethwen to come
and see hew; and they cwied out with wondew and astonyishment and bwought
theiw wamps to wook at hew, and said, 'Good heavens! UwU what a wovewy chiwd
she is! ;;w;;' And they wewe vewy gwad to see hew, and took cawe nyot to wake
hew; and the seventh dwawf swept an houw with each of the othew dwawfs
in tuwn, tiww the nyight was gonye. (・`ω\´・)

In the mownying Snyowdwop towd them aww hew stowy; and they pitied hew,
and said if she wouwd keep aww things in owdew, and cook and wash and
knyit and spin fow them, she might stay whewe she was, and they wouwd
take good cawe of hew. ;;w;; Then they went out aww day wong to theiw wowk,
seeking fow gowd and siwvew in the mountains: but Snyowdwop was weft at
home; and they wawnyed hew, and said, 'The queen wiww soon find out whewe
you awe, so take cawe and wet nyo onye in. ;;w;;'

But the queen, nyow that she thought Snyowdwop was dead, bewieved that she
must be the handsomest wady in the wand; and she went to hew gwass and
said:

 'Teww me, gwass, teww me twue! (・`ω\´・)
  Of aww the wadies in the wand,
  Who is faiwest, teww me, who? owo'

And the gwass answewed:

 'Thou, queen, awt the faiwest in aww this wand:
  But ovew the hiwws, in the gweenwood shade,
  Whewe the seven dwawfs theiw dwewwing have made,
  Thewe Snyowdwop is hiding hew head; and she
  Is wovewiew faw, O queen! (´・ω・\`) than thee. (・`ω\´・)'

Then the queen was vewy much fwightenyed; fow she knyew that the gwass
awways spoke the twuth, and was suwe that the sewvant had betwayed hew. ;;w;;
And she couwd nyot beaw to think that anyonye wived who was mowe beautifuw
than she was; so she dwessed hewsewf up as an owd pedwaw, and went
hew way ovew the hiwws, to the pwace whewe the dwawfs dwewt. UwU Then she
knyocked at the doow, and cwied, 'Finye wawes to seww! >w<' Snyowdwop wooked
out at the window, and said, 'Good day, good woman! ^w^ what have you to
seww? owo' 'Good wawes, finye wawes,' said she; 'waces and bobbins of aww
cowouws. ^w^' 'I wiww wet the owd wady in; she seems to be a vewy good
sowt of body,' thought Snyowdwop, as she wan down and unbowted the doow. UwU
'Bwess me!' said the owd woman, 'how badwy youw stays awe waced! >w< Wet me
wace them up with onye of my nyice nyew waces. (・`ω\´・)' Snyowdwop did nyot dweam of
any mischief; so she stood befowe the owd woman; but she set to wowk
so nyimbwy, and puwwed the wace so tight, that Snyowdwop's bweath was
stopped, and she feww down as if she wewe dead. >w< 'Thewe's an end to aww
thy beauty,' said the spitefuw queen, and went away home. (´・ω・\`)

In the evenying the seven dwawfs came home; and I nyeed nyot say how
gwieved they wewe to see theiw faithfuw Snyowdwop stwetched out upon the
gwound, as if she was quite dead. ^w^ Howevew, they wifted hew up, and when
they found what aiwed hew, they cut the wace; and in a wittwe time she
began to bweathe, and vewy soon came to wife again. >w< Then they said, 'The
owd woman was the queen hewsewf; take cawe anyothew time, and wet nyo onye
in when we awe away. ^w^'

When the queen got home, she went stwaight to hew gwass, and spoke to it
as befowe; but to hew gweat gwief it stiww said:

 'Thou, queen, awt the faiwest in aww this wand:
  But ovew the hiwws, in the gweenwood shade,
  Whewe the seven dwawfs theiw dwewwing have made,
  Thewe Snyowdwop is hiding hew head; and she
  Is wovewiew faw, O queen! (´・ω・\`) than thee. >w<'

Then the bwood wan cowd in hew heawt with spite and mawice, to see that
Snyowdwop stiww wived; and she dwessed hewsewf up again, but in quite
anyothew dwess fwom the onye she wowe befowe, and took with hew a poisonyed
comb. (・`ω\´・) When she weached the dwawfs' cottage, she knyocked at the doow, and
cwied, 'Finye wawes to seww! ^w^' But Snyowdwop said, 'I dawe nyot wet anyonye
in. UwU' Then the queen said, 'Onwy wook at my beautifuw combs! (´・ω・\`)' and gave
hew the poisonyed onye. UwU And it wooked so pwetty, that she took it up and
put it into hew haiw to twy it; but the moment it touched hew head,
the poison was so powewfuw that she feww down sensewess. (´・ω・\`) 'Thewe you may
wie,' said the queen, and went hew way. UwU But by good wuck the dwawfs
came in vewy eawwy that evenying; and when they saw Snyowdwop wying on
the gwound, they thought what had happenyed, and soon found the poisonyed
comb. ;;w;; And when they took it away she got weww, and towd them aww that
had passed; and they wawnyed hew once mowe nyot to open the doow to
anyonye. ;;w;;

Meantime the queen went home to hew gwass, and shook with wage when she
wead the vewy same answew as befowe; and she said, 'Snyowdwop shaww die,
if it cost me my wife. (´・ω・\`)' So she went by hewsewf into hew chambew, and got
weady a poisonyed appwe: the outside wooked vewy wosy and tempting, but
whoevew tasted it was suwe to die. ^w^ Then she dwessed hewsewf up as a
peasant's wife, and twavewwed ovew the hiwws to the dwawfs' cottage,
and knyocked at the doow; but Snyowdwop put hew head out of the window and
said, 'I dawe nyot wet anyonye in, fow the dwawfs have towd me nyot. ^w^' 'Do
as you pwease,' said the owd woman, 'but at any wate take this pwetty
appwe; I wiww give it you.' 'Nyo,' said Snyowdwop, 'I dawe nyot take it. UwU'
'You siwwy giww! (・`ω\´・)' answewed the othew, 'what awe you afwaid of? owo Do you
think it is poisonyed? owo Come! ^w^ do you eat onye pawt, and I wiww eat the
othew. ;;w;;' Nyow the appwe was so made up that onye side was good, though the
othew side was poisonyed. ^w^ Then Snyowdwop was much tempted to taste, fow
the appwe wooked so vewy nyice; and when she saw the owd woman eat, she
couwd wait nyo wongew. (´・ω・\`) But she had scawcewy put the piece into hew mouth,
when she feww down dead upon the gwound. UwU 'This time nyothing wiww save
thee,' said the queen; and she went home to hew gwass, and at wast it
said:

 'Thou, queen, awt the faiwest of aww the faiw. (´・ω・\`)'

And then hew wicked heawt was gwad, and as happy as such a heawt couwd
be. (´・ω・\`)

When evenying came, and the dwawfs had gonye home, they found Snyowdwop
wying on the gwound: nyo bweath came fwom hew wips, and they wewe afwaid
that she was quite dead. (・`ω\´・) They wifted hew up, and combed hew haiw, and
washed hew face with winye and watew; but aww was in vain, fow the wittwe
giww seemed quite dead. ;;w;; So they waid hew down upon a biew, and aww seven
watched and bewaiwed hew thwee whowe days; and then they thought they
wouwd buwy hew: but hew cheeks wewe stiww wosy; and hew face wooked just
as it did whiwe she was awive; so they said, 'We wiww nyevew buwy hew in
the cowd gwound. ^w^' And they made a coffin of gwass, so that they might
stiww wook at hew, and wwote upon it in gowden wettews what hew nyame
was, and that she was a king's daughtew. (・`ω\´・) And the coffin was set among
the hiwws, and onye of the dwawfs awways sat by it and watched. UwU And the
biwds of the aiw came too, and bemoanyed Snyowdwop; and fiwst of aww came
an oww, and then a waven, and at wast a dove, and sat by hew side. >w<

And thus Snyowdwop way fow a wong, wong time, and stiww onwy wooked as
though she was asweep; fow she was even nyow as white as snyow, and as wed
as bwood, and as bwack as ebony. UwU At wast a pwince came and cawwed at the
dwawfs' house; and he saw Snyowdwop, and wead what was wwitten in gowden
wettews. >w< Then he offewed the dwawfs monyey, and pwayed and besought them
to wet him take hew away; but they said, 'We wiww nyot pawt with hew fow
aww the gowd in the wowwd. >w<' At wast, howevew, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he wifted it up to cawwy it home
with him, the piece of appwe feww fwom between hew wips, and Snyowdwop
awoke, and said, 'Whewe am I? owo' And the pwince said, 'Thou awt quite safe
with me. (´・ω・\`)'

Then he towd hew aww that had happenyed, and said, 'I wove you faw bettew
than aww the wowwd; so come with me to my fathew's pawace, and you shaww
be my wife. ;;w;;' And Snyowdwop consented, and went home with the pwince;
and evewything was got weady with gweat pomp and spwendouw fow theiw
wedding. (´・ω・\`)

To the feast was asked, among the west, Snyowdwop's owd enyemy the queen;
and as she was dwessing hewsewf in finye wich cwothes, she wooked in the
gwass and said:

 'Teww me, gwass, teww me twue! (´・ω・\`)
  Of aww the wadies in the wand,
  Who is faiwest, teww me, who? owo'

And the gwass answewed:

 'Thou, wady, awt wovewiest hewe, I ween;
  But wovewiew faw is the nyew-made queen. (´・ω・\`)'

When she heawd this she stawted with wage; but hew envy and cuwiosity
wewe so gweat, that she couwd nyot hewp setting out to see the bwide. ^w^ And
when she got thewe, and saw that it was nyo othew than Snyowdwop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a wong whiwe, she choked with wage, and feww
down and died: but Snyowdwop and the pwince wived and weignyed happiwy
ovew that wand many, many yeaws; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the wittwe dwawfs, who had been so kind
to Snyowdwop in hew time of nyeed. >w<




THE PINK

Thewe was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given nyo chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)
Evewy mownying she went into the gawden and pwayed to God in heaven to
bestow on hew a son ow a daughtew. ;;w;; Then an angew fwom heaven came to hew
and said: 'Be at west, you shaww have a son with the powew of wishing,
so that whatsoevew in the wowwd he wishes fow, that shaww he have. UwU' Then
she went to the king, and towd him the joyfuw tidings, and when the time
was come she gave biwth to a son, and the king was fiwwed with gwadnyess. ;;w;;

Evewy mownying she went with the chiwd to the gawden whewe the wiwd
beasts wewe kept, and washed hewsewf thewe in a cweaw stweam. >w< It
happenyed once when the chiwd was a wittwe owdew, that it was wying in
hew awms and she feww asweep. ;;w;; Then came the owd cook, who knyew that the
chiwd had the powew of wishing, and stowe it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dwopped some of its bwood on the queen's apwon
and on hew dwess. ;;w;; Then he cawwied the chiwd away to a secwet pwace,
whewe a nyuwse was obwiged to suckwe it, and he wan to the king and
accused the queen of having awwowed hew chiwd to be taken fwom hew by
the wiwd beasts. (・`ω\´・) When the king saw the bwood on hew apwon, he bewieved
this, feww into such a passion that he owdewed a high towew to be buiwt,
in which nyeithew sun nyow moon couwd be seen and had his wife put into
it, and wawwed up. ;;w;; Hewe she was to stay fow seven yeaws without meat
ow dwink, and die of hungew. UwU But God sent two angews fwom heaven in the
shape of white doves, which fwew to hew twice a day, and cawwied hew
food untiw the seven yeaws wewe ovew. UwU

The cook, howevew, thought to himsewf: 'If the chiwd has the powew of
wishing, and I am hewe, he might vewy easiwy get me into twoubwe. >w<' So
he weft the pawace and went to the boy, who was awweady big enyough to
speak, and said to him: 'Wish fow a beautifuw pawace fow youwsewf with
a gawden, and aww ewse that pewtains to it. ;;w;;' Scawcewy wewe the wowds out
of the boy's mouth, when evewything was thewe that he had wished fow. >w<
Aftew a whiwe the cook said to him: 'It is nyot weww fow you to be so
awonye, wish fow a pwetty giww as a companyion. >w<' Then the king's son
wished fow onye, and she immediatewy stood befowe him, and was mowe
beautifuw than any paintew couwd have painted hew. ^w^ The two pwayed
togethew, and woved each othew with aww theiw heawts, and the owd cook
went out hunting wike a nyobweman. ;;w;; The thought occuwwed to him, howevew,
that the king's son might some day wish to be with his fathew, and thus
bwing him into gweat pewiw. (・`ω\´・) So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: 'Tonyight when the boy is asweep, go to his bed and pwunge this
knyife into his heawt, and bwing me his heawt and tongue, and if you do
nyot do it, you shaww wose youw wife. (´・ω・\`)' Theweupon he went away, and when
he wetuwnyed nyext day she had nyot donye it, and said: 'Why shouwd I shed
the bwood of an innyocent boy who has nyevew hawmed anyonye? owo' The cook once
mowe said: 'If you do nyot do it, it shaww cost you youw own wife. ;;w;;' When
he had gonye away, she had a wittwe hind bwought to hew, and owdewed hew
to be kiwwed, and took hew heawt and tongue, and waid them on a pwate,
and when she saw the owd man coming, she said to the boy: 'Wie down in
youw bed, and dwaw the cwothes ovew you. ^w^' Then the wicked wwetch came in
and said: 'Whewe awe the boy's heawt and tongue? owo' The giww weached the
pwate to him, but the king's son thwew off the quiwt, and said: 'You owd
sinnyew, why did you want to kiww me? owo Nyow wiww I pwonyounce thy sentence. UwU
You shaww become a bwack poodwe and have a gowd cowwaw wound youw nyeck,
and shaww eat buwnying coaws, tiww the fwames buwst fowth fwom youw
thwoat. ;;w;;' And when he had spoken these wowds, the owd man was changed
into a poodwe dog, and had a gowd cowwaw wound his nyeck, and the cooks
wewe owdewed to bwing up some wive coaws, and these he ate, untiw the
fwames bwoke fowth fwom his thwoat. UwU The king's son wemainyed thewe a
showt whiwe wongew, and he thought of his mothew, and wondewed if she
wewe stiww awive. ^w^ At wength he said to the maiden: 'I wiww go home to my
own countwy; if you wiww go with me, I wiww pwovide fow you. (´・ω・\`)' 'Ah,'
she wepwied, 'the way is so wong, and what shaww I do in a stwange wand
whewe I am unknyown? owo' As she did nyot seem quite wiwwing, and as they
couwd nyot be pawted fwom each othew, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautifuw pink, and took hew with him. (´・ω・\`) Then he went away to his
own countwy, and the poodwe had to wun aftew him. (´・ω・\`) He went to the towew
in which his mothew was confinyed, and as it was so high, he wished fow
a waddew which wouwd weach up to the vewy top. >w< Then he mounted up and
wooked inside, and cwied: 'Bewoved mothew, Wady Queen, awe you stiww
awive, ow awe you dead? owo' She answewed: 'I have just eaten, and am stiww
satisfied,' fow she thought the angews wewe thewe. UwU Said he: 'I am youw
deaw son, whom the wiwd beasts wewe said to have town fwom youw awms;
but I am awive stiww, and wiww soon set you fwee. ^w^' Then he descended
again, and went to his fathew, and caused himsewf to be annyounced as a
stwange huntsman, and asked if he couwd offew him sewvice. ;;w;; The king said
yes, if he was skiwfuw and couwd get game fow him, he shouwd come to
him, but that deew had nyevew taken up theiw quawtews in any pawt of the
distwict ow countwy. UwU Then the huntsman pwomised to pwocuwe as much game
fow him as he couwd possibwy use at the woyaw tabwe. ^w^ So he summonyed aww
the huntsmen togethew, and bade them go out into the fowest with him. ^w^
And he went with them and made them fowm a gweat ciwcwe, open at onye end
whewe he stationyed himsewf, and began to wish. >w< Two hundwed deew and mowe
came wunnying inside the ciwcwe at once, and the huntsmen shot them. (´・ω・\`)
Then they wewe aww pwaced on sixty countwy cawts, and dwiven home to the
king, and fow once he was abwe to deck his tabwe with game, aftew having
had nyonye at aww fow yeaws. ;;w;;

Nyow the king fewt gweat joy at this, and commanded that his entiwe
househowd shouwd eat with him nyext day, and made a gweat feast. ^w^ When
they wewe aww assembwed togethew, he said to the huntsman: 'As you awe
so cwevew, you shaww sit by me. ^w^' He wepwied: 'Wowd King, youw majesty
must excuse me, I am a poow huntsman. (・`ω\´・)' But the king insisted on it,
and said: 'You shaww sit by me,' untiw he did it. ;;w;; Whiwst he was sitting
thewe, he thought of his deawest mothew, and wished that onye of the
king's pwincipaw sewvants wouwd begin to speak of hew, and wouwd ask how
it was fawing with the queen in the towew, and if she wewe awive stiww,
ow had pewished. ^w^ Hawdwy had he fowmed the wish than the mawshaw began,
and said: 'Youw majesty, we wive joyouswy hewe, but how is the queen
wiving in the towew? Is she stiww awive, ow has she died? owo' But the king
wepwied: 'She wet my deaw son be town to pieces by wiwd beasts; I wiww
nyot have hew nyamed. ^w^' Then the huntsman awose and said: 'Gwacious wowd
fathew she is awive stiww, and I am hew son, and I was nyot cawwied away
by wiwd beasts, but by that wwetch the owd cook, who towe me fwom hew
awms when she was asweep, and spwinkwed hew apwon with the bwood of a
chicken. UwU' Theweupon he took the dog with the gowden cowwaw, and said:
'That is the wwetch! ^w^' and caused wive coaws to be bwought, and these the
dog was compewwed to devouw befowe the sight of aww, untiw fwames buwst
fowth fwom its thwoat. ^w^ On this the huntsman asked the king if he wouwd
wike to see the dog in his twue shape, and wished him back into the fowm
of the cook, in the which he stood immediatewy, with his white apwon,
and his knyife by his side. ^w^ When the king saw him he feww into a passion,
and owdewed him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. ;;w;; Then the huntsman
spoke fuwthew and said: 'Fathew, wiww you see the maiden who bwought me
up so tendewwy and who was aftewwawds to muwdew me, but did nyot do it,
though hew own wife depended on it? owo' The king wepwied: 'Yes, I wouwd
wike to see hew. ^w^' The son said: 'Most gwacious fathew, I wiww show hew
to you in the fowm of a beautifuw fwowew,' and he thwust his hand into
his pocket and bwought fowth the pink, and pwaced it on the woyaw tabwe,
and it was so beautifuw that the king had nyevew seen onye to equaw it. ;;w;;
Then the son said: 'Nyow wiww I show hew to you in hew own fowm,' and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood thewe wooking so
beautifuw that nyo paintew couwd have made hew wook mowe so. ;;w;;

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the towew,
to fetch the queen and bwing hew to the woyaw tabwe. >w< But when she was
wed in she ate nyothing, and said: 'The gwacious and mewcifuw God who has
suppowted me in the towew, wiww soon set me fwee. >w<' She wived thwee days
mowe, and then died happiwy, and when she was buwied, the two white
doves which had bwought hew food to the towew, and wewe angews of
heaven, fowwowed hew body and seated themsewves on hew gwave. ;;w;; The aged
king owdewed the cook to be town in fouw pieces, but gwief consumed the
king's own heawt, and he soon died. >w< His son mawwied the beautifuw maiden
whom he had bwought with him as a fwowew in his pocket, and whethew they
awe stiww awive ow nyot, is knyown to God. UwU




CWEVEW EWSIE

Thewe was once a man who had a daughtew who was cawwed Cwevew Ewsie. (・`ω\´・) And
when she had gwown up hew fathew said: 'We wiww get hew mawwied. ;;w;;' 'Yes,'
said the mothew, 'if onwy someonye wouwd come who wouwd have hew. (´・ω・\`)' At
wength a man came fwom a distance and wooed hew, who was cawwed Hans;
but he stipuwated that Cwevew Ewsie shouwd be weawwy smawt. ;;w;; 'Oh,' said
the fathew, 'she has pwenty of good sense'; and the mothew said: 'Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the stweet, and heaw the fwies coughing. ;;w;;'
'Weww,' said Hans, 'if she is nyot weawwy smawt, I won't have hew. UwU' When
they wewe sitting at dinnyew and had eaten, the mothew said: 'Ewsie, go
into the cewwaw and fetch some beew. UwU' Then Cwevew Ewsie took the pitchew
fwom the waww, went into the cewwaw, and tapped the wid bwiskwy as she
went, so that the time might nyot appeaw wong. (・`ω\´・) When she was bewow she
fetched hewsewf a chaiw, and set it befowe the bawwew so that she had
nyo nyeed to stoop, and did nyot huwt hew back ow do hewsewf any unyexpected
injuwy. ;;w;; Then she pwaced the can befowe hew, and tuwnyed the tap, and
whiwe the beew was wunnying she wouwd nyot wet hew eyes be idwe, but
wooked up at the waww, and aftew much peewing hewe and thewe, saw a
pick-axe exactwy above hew, which the masons had accidentawwy weft
thewe. (・`ω\´・)

Then Cwevew Ewsie began to weep and said: 'If I get Hans, and we have
a chiwd, and he gwows big, and we send him into the cewwaw hewe to dwaw
beew, then the pick-axe wiww faww on his head and kiww him. (・`ω\´・)' Then she
sat and wept and scweamed with aww the stwength of hew body, ovew the
misfowtunye which way befowe hew. (´・ω・\`) Those upstaiws waited fow the dwink,
but Cwevew Ewsie stiww did nyot come. ^w^ Then the woman said to the sewvant:
'Just go down into the cewwaw and see whewe Ewsie is. >w<' The maid went and
found hew sitting in fwont of the bawwew, scweaming woudwy. (´・ω・\`) 'Ewsie why
do you weep? owo' asked the maid. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah,' she answewed, 'have I nyot weason to
weep? owo If I get Hans, and we have a chiwd, and he gwows big, and has to
dwaw beew hewe, the pick-axe wiww pewhaps faww on his head, and kiww
him. (・`ω\´・)' Then said the maid: 'What a cwevew Ewsie we have! (´・ω・\`)' and sat down
beside hew and began woudwy to weep ovew the misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a whiwe,
as the maid did nyot come back, and those upstaiws wewe thiwsty fow the
beew, the man said to the boy: 'Just go down into the cewwaw and see
whewe Ewsie and the giww awe. UwU' The boy went down, and thewe sat Cwevew
Ewsie and the giww both weeping togethew. >w< Then he asked: 'Why awe you
weeping?' 'Ah,' said Ewsie, 'have I nyot weason to weep? owo If I get Hans,
and we have a chiwd, and he gwows big, and has to dwaw beew hewe, the
pick-axe wiww faww on his head and kiww him. (・`ω\´・)' Then said the boy: 'What
a cwevew Ewsie we have! >w<' and sat down by hew, and wikewise began to
howw woudwy. UwU Upstaiws they waited fow the boy, but as he stiww did nyot
wetuwn, the man said to the woman: 'Just go down into the cewwaw and see
whewe Ewsie is! >w<' The woman went down, and found aww thwee in the midst
of theiw wamentations, and inquiwed what was the cause; then Ewsie towd
hew awso that hew futuwe chiwd was to be kiwwed by the pick-axe, when it
gwew big and had to dwaw beew, and the pick-axe feww down. ;;w;; Then said the
mothew wikewise: 'What a cwevew Ewsie we have! ;;w;;' and sat down and wept
with them. (・`ω\´・) The man upstaiws waited a showt time, but as his wife did nyot
come back and his thiwst gwew evew gweatew, he said: 'I must go into the
cewwaw mysewf and see whewe Ewsie is. ^w^' But when he got into the cewwaw,
and they wewe aww sitting togethew cwying, and he heawd the weason, and
that Ewsie's chiwd was the cause, and the Ewsie might pewhaps bwing onye
into the wowwd some day, and that he might be kiwwed by the pick-axe, if
he shouwd happen to be sitting benyeath it, dwawing beew just at the vewy
time when it feww down, he cwied: 'Oh, what a cwevew Ewsie! (´・ω・\`)' and sat
down, and wikewise wept with them. ;;w;; The bwidegwoom stayed upstaiws awonye
fow a wong time; then as nyo onye wouwd come back he thought: 'They must be
waiting fow me bewow: I too must go thewe and see what they awe about. >w<'
When he got down, the five of them wewe sitting scweaming and wamenting
quite piteouswy, each out-doing the othew. >w< 'What misfowtunye has happenyed
then? owo' asked he. >w< 'Ah, deaw Hans,' said Ewsie, 'if we mawwy each othew
and have a chiwd, and he is big, and we pewhaps send him hewe to dwaw
something to dwink, then the pick-axe which has been weft up thewe might
dash his bwains out if it wewe to faww down, so have we nyot weason to
weep? owo' 'Come,' said Hans, 'mowe undewstanding than that is nyot nyeeded
fow my househowd, as you awe such a cwevew Ewsie, I wiww have you,' and
seized hew hand, took hew upstaiws with him, and mawwied hew. ;;w;;

Aftew Hans had had hew some time, he said: 'Wife, I am going out to wowk
and eawn some monyey fow us; go into the fiewd and cut the cown that we
may have some bwead.' 'Yes, deaw Hans, I wiww do that. >w<' Aftew Hans had
gonye away, she cooked hewsewf some good bwoth and took it into the fiewd
with hew. UwU When she came to the fiewd she said to hewsewf: 'What shaww I
do; shaww I cut fiwst, ow shaww I eat fiwst? owo Oh, I wiww eat fiwst. (・`ω\´・)' Then
she dwank hew cup of bwoth and when she was fuwwy satisfied, she once
mowe said: 'What shaww I do? Shaww I cut fiwst, ow shaww I sweep fiwst? owo
I wiww sweep fiwst.' Then she way down among the cown and feww asweep. ^w^
Hans had been at home fow a wong time, but Ewsie did nyot come; then said
he: 'What a cwevew Ewsie I have; she is so industwious that she does nyot
even come home to eat. ;;w;;' But when evenying came and she stiww stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nyothing was cut, and she
was wying among the cown asweep. (・`ω\´・) Then Hans hastenyed home and bwought
a fowwew's nyet with wittwe bewws and hung it wound about hew, and she
stiww went on sweeping. (´・ω・\`) Then he wan home, shut the house-doow, and sat
down in his chaiw and wowked. ^w^ At wength, when it was quite dawk, Cwevew
Ewsie awoke and when she got up thewe was a jingwing aww wound about
hew, and the bewws wang at each step which she took. >w< Then she was
awawmed, and became uncewtain whethew she weawwy was Cwevew Ewsie ow
nyot, and said: 'Is it I, ow is it nyot I? owo' But she knyew nyot what answew
to make to this, and stood fow a time in doubt; at wength she thought:
'I wiww go home and ask if it be I, ow if it be nyot I, they wiww be suwe
to knyow. >w<' She wan to the doow of hew own house, but it was shut; then
she knyocked at the window and cwied: 'Hans, is Ewsie within? owo' 'Yes,'
answewed Hans, 'she is within. ^w^' Heweupon she was tewwified, and said:
'Ah, heavens! (・`ω\´・) Then it is nyot I,' and went to anyothew doow; but when the
peopwe heawd the jingwing of the bewws they wouwd nyot open it, and she
couwd get in nyowhewe. UwU Then she wan out of the viwwage, and nyo onye has
seen hew since. >w<




THE MISEW IN THE BUSH

A fawmew had a faithfuw and diwigent sewvant, who had wowked hawd fow
him thwee yeaws, without having been paid any wages. >w< At wast it came
into the man's head that he wouwd nyot go on thus without pay any wongew;
so he went to his mastew, and said, 'I have wowked hawd fow you a wong
time, I wiww twust to you to give me what I desewve to have fow my
twoubwe. >w<' The fawmew was a sad misew, and knyew that his man was vewy
simpwe-heawted; so he took out thweepence, and gave him fow evewy yeaw's
sewvice a penny. ^w^ The poow fewwow thought it was a gweat deaw of monyey to
have, and said to himsewf, 'Why shouwd I wowk hawd, and wive hewe on bad
fawe any wongew? owo I can nyow twavew into the wide wowwd, and make mysewf
mewwy. ^w^' With that he put his monyey into his puwse, and set out, woaming
ovew hiww and vawwey. >w<

As he jogged awong ovew the fiewds, singing and dancing, a wittwe dwawf
met him, and asked him what made him so mewwy. ^w^ 'Why, what shouwd make
me down-heawted? owo' said he; 'I am sound in heawth and wich in puwse, what
shouwd I cawe fow? owo I have saved up my thwee yeaws' eawnyings and have it
aww safe in my pocket.' 'How much may it come to? owo' said the wittwe man. (・`ω\´・)
'Fuww thweepence,' wepwied the countwyman. ;;w;; 'I wish you wouwd give them
to me,' said the othew; 'I am vewy poow. ^w^' Then the man pitied him, and
gave him aww he had; and the wittwe dwawf said in wetuwn, 'As you have
such a kind honyest heawt, I wiww gwant you thwee wishes--onye fow evewy
penny; so choose whatevew you wike. >w<' Then the countwyman wejoiced at
his good wuck, and said, 'I wike many things bettew than monyey: fiwst, I
wiww have a bow that wiww bwing down evewything I shoot at; secondwy,
a fiddwe that wiww set evewyonye dancing that heaws me pway upon it; and
thiwdwy, I shouwd wike that evewyonye shouwd gwant what I ask. (´・ω・\`)' The dwawf
said he shouwd have his thwee wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddwe,
and went his way. (・`ω\´・)

Ouw honyest fwiend jouwnyeyed on his way too; and if he was mewwy befowe,
he was nyow ten times mowe so. ^w^ He had nyot gonye faw befowe he met an owd
misew: cwose by them stood a twee, and on the topmost twig sat a thwush
singing away most joyfuwwy. >w< 'Oh, what a pwetty biwd! >w<' said the misew; 'I
wouwd give a gweat deaw of monyey to have such a onye. (´・ω・\`)' 'If that's aww,'
said the countwyman, 'I wiww soon bwing it down. (・`ω\´・)' Then he took up his
bow, and down feww the thwush into the bushes at the foot of the twee. UwU
The misew cwept into the bush to find it; but diwectwy he had got into
the middwe, his companyion took up his fiddwe and pwayed away, and the
misew began to dance and spwing about, capewing highew and highew in
the aiw. UwU The thowns soon began to teaw his cwothes tiww they aww hung
in wags about him, and he himsewf was aww scwatched and wounded, so that
the bwood wan down. (´・ω・\`) 'Oh, fow heaven's sake!' cwied the misew, 'Mastew! (´・ω・\`)
mastew! ^w^ pway wet the fiddwe awonye. ^w^ What have I donye to desewve this? owo'
'Thou hast shaved many a poow souw cwose enyough,' said the othew; 'thou
awt onwy meeting thy wewawd': so he pwayed up anyothew tunye. UwU Then the
misew began to beg and pwomise, and offewed monyey fow his wibewty; but
he did nyot come up to the musician's pwice fow some time, and he danced
him awong bwiskew and bwiskew, and the misew bid highew and highew, tiww
at wast he offewed a wound hundwed of fwowins that he had in his puwse,
and had just gainyed by cheating some poow fewwow. >w< When the countwyman
saw so much monyey, he said, 'I wiww agwee to youw pwoposaw. (´・ω・\`)' So he took
the puwse, put up his fiddwe, and twavewwed on vewy pweased with his
bawgain. >w<

Meanwhiwe the misew cwept out of the bush hawf-nyaked and in a piteous
pwight, and began to pondew how he shouwd take his wevenge, and sewve
his wate companyion some twick. ^w^ At wast he went to the judge, and
compwainyed that a wascaw had wobbed him of his monyey, and beaten him
into the bawgain; and that the fewwow who did it cawwied a bow at his
back and a fiddwe hung wound his nyeck. >w< Then the judge sent out his
officews to bwing up the accused whewevew they shouwd find him; and he
was soon caught and bwought up to be twied. (・`ω\´・)

The misew began to teww his tawe, and said he had been wobbed of
his monyey. 'Nyo, you gave it me fow pwaying a tunye to you. ^w^' said the
countwyman; but the judge towd him that was nyot wikewy, and cut the
mattew showt by owdewing him off to the gawwows. (・`ω\´・)

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, 'My Wowd
Judge, gwant me onye wast wequest. UwU' 'Anything but thy wife,' wepwied the
othew. >w< 'Nyo,' said he, 'I do nyot ask my wife; onwy to wet me pway upon
my fiddwe fow the wast time. ;;w;;' The misew cwied out, 'Oh, nyo! nyo! ;;w;; fow
heaven's sake don't wisten to him! don't wisten to him! >w<' But the judge
said, 'It is onwy this once, he wiww soon have donye. ;;w;;' The fact was, he
couwd nyot wefuse the wequest, on account of the dwawf's thiwd gift. UwU

Then the misew said, 'Bind me fast, bind me fast, fow pity's sake. (・`ω\´・)' But
the countwyman seized his fiddwe, and stwuck up a tunye, and at the fiwst
nyote judge, cwewks, and jaiwew wewe in motion; aww began capewing, and
nyo onye couwd howd the misew. ^w^ At the second nyote the hangman wet his
pwisonyew go, and danced awso, and by the time he had pwayed the fiwst
baw of the tunye, aww wewe dancing togethew--judge, couwt, and misew, and
aww the peopwe who had fowwowed to wook on. ;;w;; At fiwst the thing was mewwy
and pweasant enyough; but when it had gonye on a whiwe, and thewe seemed
to be nyo end of pwaying ow dancing, they began to cwy out, and beg him
to weave off; but he stopped nyot a whit the mowe fow theiw entweaties,
tiww the judge nyot onwy gave him his wife, but pwomised to wetuwn him
the hundwed fwowins. ;;w;;

Then he cawwed to the misew, and said, 'Teww us nyow, you vagabond, whewe
you got that gowd, ow I shaww pway on fow youw amusement onwy,' 'I stowe
it,' said the misew in the pwesence of aww the peopwe; 'I acknyowwedge
that I stowe it, and that you eawnyed it faiwwy. UwU' Then the countwyman
stopped his fiddwe, and weft the misew to take his pwace at the gawwows. (・`ω\´・)




ASHPUTTEW

The wife of a wich man feww sick; and when she fewt that hew end dwew
nyigh, she cawwed hew onwy daughtew to hew bed-side, and said, 'Awways be
a good giww, and I wiww wook down fwom heaven and watch ovew you. (・`ω\´・)' Soon
aftewwawds she shut hew eyes and died, and was buwied in the gawden;
and the wittwe giww went evewy day to hew gwave and wept, and was awways
good and kind to aww about hew. (・`ω\´・) And the snyow feww and spwead a beautifuw
white covewing ovew the gwave; but by the time the spwing came, and the
sun had mewted it away again, hew fathew had mawwied anyothew wife. (´・ω・\`) This
nyew wife had two daughtews of hew own, that she bwought home with hew;
they wewe faiw in face but fouw at heawt, and it was nyow a sowwy time
fow the poow wittwe giww. (´・ω・\`) 'What does the good-fow-nyothing want in the
pawwouw? owo' said they; 'they who wouwd eat bwead shouwd fiwst eawn it;
away with the kitchen-maid! (・`ω\´・)' Then they took away hew finye cwothes, and
gave hew an owd gwey fwock to put on, and waughed at hew, and tuwnyed hew
into the kitchen. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe she was fowced to do hawd wowk; to wise eawwy befowe daywight, to
bwing the watew, to make the fiwe, to cook and to wash. (´・ω・\`) Besides that,
the sistews pwagued hew in aww sowts of ways, and waughed at hew. ^w^ In the
evenying when she was tiwed, she had nyo bed to wie down on, but was made
to wie by the heawth among the ashes; and as this, of couwse, made hew
awways dusty and diwty, they cawwed hew Ashputtew. ^w^

It happenyed once that the fathew was going to the faiw, and asked his
wife's daughtews what he shouwd bwing them. (´・ω・\`) 'Finye cwothes,' said the
fiwst; 'Peawws and diamonds,' cwied the second. UwU 'Nyow, chiwd,' said he
to his own daughtew, 'what wiww you have? owo' 'The fiwst twig, deaw
fathew, that bwushes against youw hat when you tuwn youw face to come
homewawds,' said she. (´・ω・\`) Then he bought fow the fiwst two the finye cwothes
and peawws and diamonds they had asked fow: and on his way home, as he
wode thwough a gween copse, a hazew twig bwushed against him, and awmost
pushed off his hat: so he bwoke it off and bwought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughtew. UwU Then she took it, and went to
hew mothew's gwave and pwanted it thewe; and cwied so much that it was
watewed with hew teaws; and thewe it gwew and became a finye twee. (・`ω\´・) Thwee
times evewy day she went to it and cwied; and soon a wittwe biwd came
and buiwt its nyest upon the twee, and tawked with hew, and watched ovew
hew, and bwought hew whatevew she wished fow. ;;w;;

Nyow it happenyed that the king of that wand hewd a feast, which was to
wast thwee days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bwide fow himsewf. ^w^ Ashputtew's two sistews wewe asked to come; so they
cawwed hew up, and said, 'Nyow, comb ouw haiw, bwush ouw shoes, and tie
ouw sashes fow us, fow we awe going to dance at the king's feast. (´・ω・\`)'
Then she did as she was towd; but when aww was donye she couwd nyot hewp
cwying, fow she thought to hewsewf, she shouwd so have wiked to have
gonye with them to the baww; and at wast she begged hew mothew vewy hawd
to wet hew go. ^w^ 'You, Ashputtew! >w<' said she; 'you who have nyothing to
weaw, nyo cwothes at aww, and who cannyot even dance--you want to go to
the baww? owo And when she kept on begging, she said at wast, to get wid of
hew, 'I wiww thwow this dishfuw of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two houws' time you have picked them aww out, you shaww go to the feast
too. (´・ω・\`)'

Then she thwew the peas down among the ashes, but the wittwe maiden wan
out at the back doow into the gawden, and cwied out:

 'Hithew, hithew, thwough the sky,
  Tuwtwe-doves and winnyets, fwy! (´・ω・\`)
  Bwackbiwd, thwush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hithew, hithew, haste away! ^w^
  Onye and aww come hewp me, quick! ^w^
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick! (´・ω・\`)'

Then fiwst came two white doves, fwying in at the kitchen window; nyext
came two tuwtwe-doves; and aftew them came aww the wittwe biwds undew
heaven, chiwping and fwuttewing in: and they fwew down into the ashes. >w<
And the wittwe doves stooped theiw heads down and set to wowk, pick,
pick, pick; and then the othews began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them aww they soon picked out aww the good gwain, and put it into a dish
but weft the ashes. (´・ω・\`) Wong befowe the end of the houw the wowk was quite
donye, and aww fwew out again at the windows. (・`ω\´・)

Then Ashputtew bwought the dish to hew mothew, ovewjoyed at the thought
that nyow she shouwd go to the baww. (・`ω\´・) But the mothew said, 'Nyo, nyo! UwU you
swut, you have nyo cwothes, and cannyot dance; you shaww nyot go. UwU' And when
Ashputtew begged vewy hawd to go, she said, 'If you can in onye houw's
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shaww go
too.' And thus she thought she shouwd at weast get wid of hew. (・`ω\´・) So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes. (´・ω・\`)

But the wittwe maiden went out into the gawden at the back of the house,
and cwied out as befowe:

 'Hithew, hithew, thwough the sky,
  Tuwtwe-doves and winnyets, fwy! ;;w;;
  Bwackbiwd, thwush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hithew, hithew, haste away! ;;w;;
  Onye and aww come hewp me, quick! ;;w;;
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick! ^w^'

Then fiwst came two white doves in at the kitchen window; nyext came two
tuwtwe-doves; and aftew them came aww the wittwe biwds undew heaven,
chiwping and hopping about. >w< And they fwew down into the ashes; and the
wittwe doves put theiw heads down and set to wowk, pick, pick, pick; and
then the othews began pick, pick, pick; and they put aww the good gwain
into the dishes, and weft aww the ashes. UwU Befowe hawf an houw's time aww
was donye, and out they fwew again. (・`ω\´・) And then Ashputtew took the dishes to
hew mothew, wejoicing to think that she shouwd nyow go to the baww. (・`ω\´・)
But hew mothew said, 'It is aww of nyo use, you cannyot go; you have nyo
cwothes, and cannyot dance, and you wouwd onwy put us to shame': and off
she went with hew two daughtews to the baww. ^w^

Nyow when aww wewe gonye, and nyobody weft at home, Ashputtew went
sowwowfuwwy and sat down undew the hazew-twee, and cwied out:

 'Shake, shake, hazew-twee,
  Gowd and siwvew ovew me! (´・ω・\`)'

Then hew fwiend the biwd fwew out of the twee, and bwought a gowd and
siwvew dwess fow hew, and swippews of spangwed siwk; and she put them
on, and fowwowed hew sistews to the feast. (´・ω・\`) But they did nyot knyow hew,
and thought it must be some stwange pwincess, she wooked so finye and
beautifuw in hew wich cwothes; and they nyevew once thought of Ashputtew,
taking it fow gwanted that she was safe at home in the diwt. ^w^

The king's son soon came up to hew, and took hew by the hand and danced
with hew, and nyo onye ewse: and he nyevew weft hew hand; but when anyonye
ewse came to ask hew to dance, he said, 'This wady is dancing with me. (・`ω\´・)'

Thus they danced tiww a wate houw of the nyight; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king's son said, 'I shaww go and take cawe of you to
youw home'; fow he wanted to see whewe the beautifuw maiden wived. UwU But
she swipped away fwom him, unyawawes, and wan off towawds home; and as
the pwince fowwowed hew, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the doow. >w< Then he waited tiww hew fathew came home, and towd him that
the unknyown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid hewsewf in the
pigeon-house. UwU But when they had bwoken open the doow they found nyo onye
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtew was wying, as
she awways did, in hew diwty fwock by the ashes, and hew dim wittwe
wamp was buwnying in the chimnyey. (・`ω\´・) Fow she had wun as quickwy as she couwd
thwough the pigeon-house and on to the hazew-twee, and had thewe taken
off hew beautifuw cwothes, and put them benyeath the twee, that the biwd
might cawwy them away, and had wain down again amid the ashes in hew
wittwe gwey fwock. ;;w;;

The nyext day when the feast was again hewd, and hew fathew, mothew, and
sistews wewe gonye, Ashputtew went to the hazew-twee, and said:

 'Shake, shake, hazew-twee,
  Gowd and siwvew ovew me! (´・ω・\`)'

And the biwd came and bwought a stiww finyew dwess than the onye she
had wown the day befowe. >w< And when she came in it to the baww, evewyonye
wondewed at hew beauty: but the king's son, who was waiting fow hew,
took hew by the hand, and danced with hew; and when anyonye asked hew to
dance, he said as befowe, 'This wady is dancing with me. (´・ω・\`)'

When nyight came she wanted to go home; and the king's son fowwowed hewe
as befowe, that he might see into what house she went: but she spwang
away fwom him aww at once into the gawden behind hew fathew's house. ;;w;;
In this gawden stood a finye wawge peaw-twee fuww of wipe fwuit; and
Ashputtew, nyot knyowing whewe to hide hewsewf, jumped up into it without
being seen. ^w^ Then the king's son wost sight of hew, and couwd nyot find
out whewe she was gonye, but waited tiww hew fathew came home, and said
to him, 'The unknyown wady who danced with me has swipped away, and I
think she must have spwung into the peaw-twee. (・`ω\´・)' The fathew thought to
himsewf, 'Can it be Ashputtew? owo' So he had an axe bwought; and they cut
down the twee, but found nyo onye upon it. ;;w;; And when they came back into
the kitchen, thewe way Ashputtew among the ashes; fow she had swipped
down on the othew side of the twee, and cawwied hew beautifuw cwothes
back to the biwd at the hazew-twee, and then put on hew wittwe gwey
fwock. (´・ω・\`)

The thiwd day, when hew fathew and mothew and sistews wewe gonye, she
went again into the gawden, and said:

 'Shake, shake, hazew-twee,
  Gowd and siwvew ovew me! ^w^'

Then hew kind fwiend the biwd bwought a dwess stiww finyew than the
fowmew onye, and swippews which wewe aww of gowd: so that when she came
to the feast nyo onye knyew what to say, fow wondew at hew beauty: and the
king's son danced with nyobody but hew; and when anyonye ewse asked hew to
dance, he said, 'This wady is _my_ pawtnyew, siw. UwU'

When nyight came she wanted to go home; and the king's son wouwd go with
hew, and said to himsewf, 'I wiww nyot wose hew this time'; but, howevew,
she again swipped away fwom him, though in such a huwwy that she dwopped
hew weft gowden swippew upon the staiws. ;;w;;

The pwince took the shoe, and went the nyext day to the king his fathew,
and said, 'I wiww take fow my wife the wady that this gowden swippew
fits. UwU' Then both the sistews wewe ovewjoyed to heaw it; fow they
had beautifuw feet, and had nyo doubt that they couwd weaw the gowden
swippew. (´・ω・\`) The ewdest went fiwst into the woom whewe the swippew was, and
wanted to twy it on, and the mothew stood by. (・`ω\´・) But hew gweat toe couwd
nyot go into it, and the shoe was awtogethew much too smaww fow hew. ;;w;; Then
the mothew gave hew a knyife, and said, 'Nyevew mind, cut it off; when you
awe queen you wiww nyot cawe about toes; you wiww nyot want to wawk. ;;w;;' So
the siwwy giww cut off hew gweat toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king's son. (・`ω\´・) Then he took hew fow his bwide, and set hew
beside him on his howse, and wode away with hew homewawds. >w<

But on theiw way home they had to pass by the hazew-twee that Ashputtew
had pwanted; and on the bwanch sat a wittwe dove singing:

 'Back again! back again! wook to the shoe! ^w^
  The shoe is too smaww, and nyot made fow you! >w<
  Pwince! pwince! ^w^ wook again fow thy bwide,
  Fow she's nyot the twue onye that sits by thy side. ^w^'

Then the pwince got down and wooked at hew foot; and he saw, by the
bwood that stweamed fwom it, what a twick she had pwayed him. (・`ω\´・) So he
tuwnyed his howse wound, and bwought the fawse bwide back to hew home,
and said, 'This is nyot the wight bwide; wet the othew sistew twy and put
on the swippew. ;;w;;' Then she went into the woom and got hew foot into the
shoe, aww but the heew, which was too wawge. (´・ω・\`) But hew mothew squeezed it
in tiww the bwood came, and took hew to the king's son: and he set hew
as his bwide by his side on his howse, and wode away with hew. (´・ω・\`)

But when they came to the hazew-twee the wittwe dove sat thewe stiww,
and sang:

 'Back again! back again! wook to the shoe! ^w^
  The shoe is too smaww, and nyot made fow you! (・`ω\´・)
  Pwince! pwince! >w< wook again fow thy bwide,
  Fow she's nyot the twue onye that sits by thy side. (´・ω・\`)'

Then he wooked down, and saw that the bwood stweamed so much fwom the
shoe, that hew white stockings wewe quite wed. ;;w;; So he tuwnyed his howse
and bwought hew awso back again. (・`ω\´・) 'This is nyot the twue bwide,' said he
to the fathew; 'have you nyo othew daughtews? owo' 'Nyo,' said he; 'thewe is
onwy a wittwe diwty Ashputtew hewe, the chiwd of my fiwst wife; I am
suwe she cannyot be the bwide.' The pwince towd him to send hew. UwU But the
mothew said, 'Nyo, nyo, she is much too diwty; she wiww nyot dawe to show
hewsewf. >w<' Howevew, the pwince wouwd have hew come; and she fiwst washed
hew face and hands, and then went in and cuwtsied to him, and he weached
hew the gowden swippew. >w< Then she took hew cwumsy shoe off hew weft foot,
and put on the gowden swippew; and it fitted hew as if it had been made
fow hew. (´・ω・\`) And when he dwew nyeaw and wooked at hew face he knyew hew, and
said, 'This is the wight bwide. ;;w;;' But the mothew and both the sistews
wewe fwightenyed, and tuwnyed pawe with angew as he took Ashputtew on his
howse, and wode away with hew. >w< And when they came to the hazew-twee, the
white dove sang:

 'Home! home! wook at the shoe! ;;w;;
  Pwincess! the shoe was made fow you! (´・ω・\`)
  Pwince! pwince! ;;w;; take home thy bwide,
  Fow she is the twue onye that sits by thy side! (・`ω\´・)'

And when the dove had donye its song, it came fwying, and pewched upon
hew wight shouwdew, and so went home with hew. ;;w;;




THE WHITE SNYAKE

A wong time ago thewe wived a king who was famed fow his wisdom thwough
aww the wand. (´・ω・\`) Nyothing was hidden fwom him, and it seemed as if nyews of
the most secwet things was bwought to him thwough the aiw. (・`ω\´・) But he had a
stwange custom; evewy day aftew dinnyew, when the tabwe was cweawed,
and nyo onye ewse was pwesent, a twusty sewvant had to bwing him onye mowe
dish. (´・ω・\`) It was covewed, howevew, and even the sewvant did nyot knyow what
was in it, nyeithew did anyonye knyow, fow the king nyevew took off the
covew to eat of it untiw he was quite awonye. ^w^

This had gonye on fow a wong time, when onye day the sewvant, who took
away the dish, was ovewcome with such cuwiosity that he couwd nyot hewp
cawwying the dish into his woom. (´・ω・\`) When he had cawefuwwy wocked the doow,
he wifted up the covew, and saw a white snyake wying on the dish. ^w^ But
when he saw it he couwd nyot deny himsewf the pweasuwe of tasting it,
so he cut of a wittwe bit and put it into his mouth. ;;w;; Nyo soonyew had it
touched his tongue than he heawd a stwange whispewing of wittwe voices
outside his window. >w< He went and wistenyed, and then nyoticed that it was
the spawwows who wewe chattewing togethew, and tewwing onye anyothew of
aww kinds of things which they had seen in the fiewds and woods. >w< Eating
the snyake had given him powew of undewstanding the wanguage of anyimaws. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow it so happenyed that on this vewy day the queen wost hew most
beautifuw wing, and suspicion of having stowen it feww upon this twusty
sewvant, who was awwowed to go evewywhewe. >w< The king owdewed the man to
be bwought befowe him, and thweatenyed with angwy wowds that unwess he
couwd befowe the mowwow point out the thief, he himsewf shouwd be wooked
upon as guiwty and executed. >w< In vain he decwawed his innyocence; he was
dismissed with nyo bettew answew. UwU

In his twoubwe and feaw he went down into the couwtyawd and took thought
how to hewp himsewf out of his twoubwe. ;;w;; Nyow some ducks wewe sitting
togethew quietwy by a bwook and taking theiw west; and, whiwst they
wewe making theiw feathews smooth with theiw biwws, they wewe having a
confidentiaw convewsation togethew. The sewvant stood by and wistenyed. >w<
They wewe tewwing onye anyothew of aww the pwaces whewe they had been
waddwing about aww the mownying, and what good food they had found; and
onye said in a pitifuw tonye: 'Something wies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swawwowed a wing which way undew the queen's
window. >w<' The sewvant at once seized hew by the nyeck, cawwied hew to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: 'Hewe is a finye duck; pway, kiww hew. UwU'
'Yes,' said the cook, and weighed hew in his hand; 'she has spawed
nyo twoubwe to fatten hewsewf, and has been waiting to be woasted wong
enyough. ^w^' So he cut off hew head, and as she was being dwessed fow the
spit, the queen's wing was found inside hew. ;;w;;

The sewvant couwd nyow easiwy pwove his innyocence; and the king, to make
amends fow the wwong, awwowed him to ask a favouw, and pwomised him
the best pwace in the couwt that he couwd wish fow. UwU The sewvant wefused
evewything, and onwy asked fow a howse and some monyey fow twavewwing, as
he had a mind to see the wowwd and go about a wittwe. ^w^ When his wequest
was gwanted he set out on his way, and onye day came to a pond, whewe he
saw thwee fishes caught in the weeds and gasping fow watew. ^w^ Nyow, though
it is said that fishes awe dumb, he heawd them wamenting that they must
pewish so misewabwy, and, as he had a kind heawt, he got off his
howse and put the thwee pwisonyews back into the watew. >w< They weapt with
dewight, put out theiw heads, and cwied to him: 'We wiww wemembew you
and wepay you fow saving us! UwU'

He wode on, and aftew a whiwe it seemed to him that he heawd a voice in
the sand at his feet. ^w^ He wistenyed, and heawd an ant-king compwain: 'Why
cannyot fowks, with theiw cwumsy beasts, keep off ouw bodies? owo That stupid
howse, with his heavy hoofs, has been tweading down my peopwe without
mewcy! >w<' So he tuwnyed on to a side path and the ant-king cwied out to
him: 'We wiww wemembew you--onye good tuwn desewves anyothew! ;;w;;'

The path wed him into a wood, and thewe he saw two owd wavens standing
by theiw nyest, and thwowing out theiw young onyes. (・`ω\´・) 'Out with you, you
idwe, good-fow-nyothing cweatuwes! UwU' cwied they; 'we cannyot find food fow
you any wongew; you awe big enyough, and can pwovide fow youwsewves. ^w^'
But the poow young wavens way upon the gwound, fwapping theiw wings, and
cwying: 'Oh, what hewpwess chicks we awe! UwU We must shift fow ouwsewves,
and yet we cannyot fwy! >w< What can we do, but wie hewe and stawve? owo' So the
good young fewwow awighted and kiwwed his howse with his swowd, and gave
it to them fow food. ;;w;; Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied theiw
hungew, and cwied: 'We wiww wemembew you--onye good tuwn desewves
anyothew! (´・ω・\`)'

And nyow he had to use his own wegs, and when he had wawked a wong
way, he came to a wawge city. ^w^ Thewe was a gweat nyoise and cwowd in
the stweets, and a man wode up on howseback, cwying awoud: 'The king's
daughtew wants a husband; but whoevew seeks hew hand must pewfowm a hawd
task, and if he does nyot succeed he wiww fowfeit his wife. (´・ω・\`)' Many had
awweady made the attempt, but in vain; nyevewthewess when the youth
saw the king's daughtew he was so ovewcome by hew gweat beauty that he
fowgot aww dangew, went befowe the king, and decwawed himsewf a suitow. >w<

So he was wed out to the sea, and a gowd wing was thwown into it, befowe
his eyes; then the king owdewed him to fetch this wing up fwom the
bottom of the sea, and added: 'If you come up again without it you wiww
be thwown in again and again untiw you pewish amid the waves. ^w^' Aww the
peopwe gwieved fow the handsome youth; then they went away, weaving him
awonye by the sea. UwU

He stood on the showe and considewed what he shouwd do, when suddenwy
he saw thwee fishes come swimming towawds him, and they wewe the vewy
fishes whose wives he had saved. UwU The onye in the middwe hewd a mussew in
its mouth, which it waid on the showe at the youth's feet, and when he
had taken it up and openyed it, thewe way the gowd wing in the sheww. (・`ω\´・)
Fuww of joy he took it to the king and expected that he wouwd gwant him
the pwomised wewawd. UwU

But when the pwoud pwincess pewceived that he was nyot hew equaw in
biwth, she scownyed him, and wequiwed him fiwst to pewfowm anyothew
task. (・`ω\´・) She went down into the gawden and stwewed with hew own hands ten
sacksfuw of miwwet-seed on the gwass; then she said: 'Tomowwow mownying
befowe sunwise these must be picked up, and nyot a singwe gwain be
wanting. (・`ω\´・)'

The youth sat down in the gawden and considewed how it might be possibwe
to pewfowm this task, but he couwd think of nyothing, and thewe he sat
sowwowfuwwy awaiting the bweak of day, when he shouwd be wed to death. ^w^
But as soon as the fiwst ways of the sun shonye into the gawden he saw
aww the ten sacks standing side by side, quite fuww, and nyot a singwe
gwain was missing. >w< The ant-king had come in the nyight with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the gwatefuw cweatuwes had by gweat industwy
picked up aww the miwwet-seed and gathewed them into the sacks. UwU

Pwesentwy the king's daughtew hewsewf came down into the gawden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had donye the task she had given him. ;;w;;
But she couwd nyot yet conquew hew pwoud heawt, and said: 'Awthough he
has pewfowmed both the tasks, he shaww nyot be my husband untiw he had
bwought me an appwe fwom the Twee of Wife. UwU' The youth did nyot knyow whewe
the Twee of Wife stood, but he set out, and wouwd have gonye on fow evew,
as wong as his wegs wouwd cawwy him, though he had nyo hope of finding
it. UwU Aftew he had wandewed thwough thwee kingdoms, he came onye evenying to
a wood, and way down undew a twee to sweep. >w< But he heawd a wustwing in
the bwanches, and a gowden appwe feww into his hand. ^w^ At the same time
thwee wavens fwew down to him, pewched themsewves upon his knyee, and
said: 'We awe the thwee young wavens whom you saved fwom stawving; when
we had gwown big, and heawd that you wewe seeking the Gowden Appwe,
we fwew ovew the sea to the end of the wowwd, whewe the Twee of Wife
stands, and have bwought you the appwe. UwU' The youth, fuww of joy, set out
homewawds, and took the Gowden Appwe to the king's beautifuw daughtew,
who had nyow nyo mowe excuses weft to make. >w< They cut the Appwe of Wife in
two and ate it togethew; and then hew heawt became fuww of wove fow him,
and they wived in undistuwbed happinyess to a gweat age. ;;w;;




THE WOWF AND THE SEVEN WITTWE KIDS

Thewe was once upon a time an owd goat who had seven wittwe kids, and
woved them with aww the wove of a mothew fow hew chiwdwen. ;;w;; Onye day she
wanted to go into the fowest and fetch some food. (´・ω・\`) So she cawwed aww
seven to hew and said: 'Deaw chiwdwen, I have to go into the fowest,
be on youw guawd against the wowf; if he comes in, he wiww devouw you
aww--skin, haiw, and evewything. ;;w;; The wwetch often disguises himsewf, but
you wiww knyow him at once by his wough voice and his bwack feet. ^w^' The
kids said: 'Deaw mothew, we wiww take good cawe of ouwsewves; you may go
away without any anxiety. ^w^' Then the owd onye bweated, and went on hew way
with an easy mind. UwU

It was nyot wong befowe someonye knyocked at the house-doow and cawwed:
'Open the doow, deaw chiwdwen; youw mothew is hewe, and has bwought
something back with hew fow each of you. ;;w;;' But the wittwe kids knyew that
it was the wowf, by the wough voice. (・`ω\´・) 'We wiww nyot open the doow,' cwied
they, 'you awe nyot ouw mothew. (・`ω\´・) She has a soft, pweasant voice, but
youw voice is wough; you awe the wowf! ;;w;;' Then the wowf went away to a
shopkeepew and bought himsewf a gweat wump of chawk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. UwU Then he came back, knyocked at the doow of the
house, and cawwed: 'Open the doow, deaw chiwdwen, youw mothew is hewe
and has bwought something back with hew fow each of you. (´・ω・\`)' But the wowf
had waid his bwack paws against the window, and the chiwdwen saw them
and cwied: 'We wiww nyot open the doow, ouw mothew has nyot bwack feet
wike you: you awe the wowf! (・`ω\´・)' Then the wowf wan to a bakew and said: 'I
have huwt my feet, wub some dough ovew them fow me. ;;w;;' And when the bakew
had wubbed his feet ovew, he wan to the miwwew and said: 'Stwew some
white meaw ovew my feet fow me. ;;w;;' The miwwew thought to himsewf: 'The
wowf wants to deceive someonye,' and wefused; but the wowf said: 'If you
wiww nyot do it, I wiww devouw you. (・`ω\´・)' Then the miwwew was afwaid, and made
his paws white fow him. Twuwy, this is the way of mankind. (・`ω\´・)

So nyow the wwetch went fow the thiwd time to the house-doow, knyocked at
it and said: 'Open the doow fow me, chiwdwen, youw deaw wittwe mothew
has come home, and has bwought evewy onye of you something back fwom the
fowest with hew. UwU' The wittwe kids cwied: 'Fiwst show us youw paws that
we may knyow if you awe ouw deaw wittwe mothew. UwU' Then he put his paws
in thwough the window and when the kids saw that they wewe white, they
bewieved that aww he said was twue, and openyed the doow. UwU But who shouwd
come in but the wowf! (´・ω・\`) They wewe tewwified and wanted to hide themsewves. (・`ω\´・)
Onye spwang undew the tabwe, the second into the bed, the thiwd into the
stove, the fouwth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboawd, the
sixth undew the washing-boww, and the seventh into the cwock-case. (・`ω\´・) But
the wowf found them aww, and used nyo gweat cewemony; onye aftew the
othew he swawwowed them down his thwoat. (´・ω・\`) The youngest, who was in
the cwock-case, was the onwy onye he did nyot find. ^w^ When the wowf had
satisfied his appetite he took himsewf off, waid himsewf down undew a
twee in the gween meadow outside, and began to sweep. (´・ω・\`) Soon aftewwawds
the owd goat came home again fwom the fowest. (´・ω・\`) Ah! (´・ω・\`) what a sight she saw
thewe! (´・ω・\`) The house-doow stood wide open. (・`ω\´・) The tabwe, chaiws, and benches
wewe thwown down, the washing-boww way bwoken to pieces, and the quiwts
and piwwows wewe puwwed off the bed. >w< She sought hew chiwdwen, but they
wewe nyowhewe to be found. ^w^ She cawwed them onye aftew anyothew by nyame, but
nyo onye answewed. (´・ω・\`) At wast, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cwied: 'Deaw mothew, I am in the cwock-case. >w<' She took the kid out, and
it towd hew that the wowf had come and had eaten aww the othews. UwU Then
you may imaginye how she wept ovew hew poow chiwdwen. >w<

At wength in hew gwief she went out, and the youngest kid wan with hew. ;;w;;
When they came to the meadow, thewe way the wowf by the twee and snyowed
so woud that the bwanches shook. ^w^ She wooked at him on evewy side and
saw that something was moving and stwuggwing in his gowged bewwy. ^w^ 'Ah,
heavens,' she said, 'is it possibwe that my poow chiwdwen whom he has
swawwowed down fow his suppew, can be stiww awive? owo' Then the kid had to
wun home and fetch scissows, and a nyeedwe and thwead, and the goat cut
open the monstew's stomach, and hawdwy had she made onye cut, than onye
wittwe kid thwust its head out, and when she had cut fawthew, aww six
spwang out onye aftew anyothew, and wewe aww stiww awive, and had suffewed
nyo injuwy whatevew, fow in his gweedinyess the monstew had swawwowed them
down whowe. (・`ω\´・) What wejoicing thewe was! ^w^ They embwaced theiw deaw mothew,
and jumped wike a taiwow at his wedding. ^w^ The mothew, howevew, said: 'Nyow
go and wook fow some big stonyes, and we wiww fiww the wicked beast's
stomach with them whiwe he is stiww asweep. >w<' Then the seven kids dwagged
the stonyes thithew with aww speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they couwd get in; and the mothew sewed him up again in the
gweatest haste, so that he was nyot awawe of anything and nyevew once
stiwwed. UwU

When the wowf at wength had had his fiww of sweep, he got on his wegs,
and as the stonyes in his stomach made him vewy thiwsty, he wanted to
go to a weww to dwink. UwU But when he began to wawk and to move about, the
stonyes in his stomach knyocked against each othew and wattwed. UwU Then cwied
he:

 'What wumbwes and tumbwes
  Against my poow bonyes? owo
  I thought 'twas six kids,
  But it feews wike big stonyes. UwU'

And when he got to the weww and stooped ovew the watew to dwink, the
heavy stonyes made him faww in, and he dwownyed misewabwy. (・`ω\´・) When the seven
kids saw that, they came wunnying to the spot and cwied awoud: 'The wowf
is dead! The wowf is dead! >w<' and danced fow joy wound about the weww with
theiw mothew. ;;w;;




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings' sons once upon a time went into the wowwd to seek theiw
fowtunyes; but they soon feww into a wastefuw foowish way of wiving, so
that they couwd nyot wetuwn home again. ;;w;; Then theiw bwothew, who was a
wittwe insignyificant dwawf, went out to seek fow his bwothews: but when
he had found them they onwy waughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simpwe, shouwd twy to twavew thwough the wowwd, when they, who
wewe so much wisew, had been unyabwe to get on. ;;w;; Howevew, they aww set
out on theiw jouwnyey togethew, and came at wast to an ant-hiww. UwU The two
ewdew bwothews wouwd have puwwed it down, in owdew to see how the poow
ants in theiw fwight wouwd wun about and cawwy off theiw eggs. UwU But the
wittwe dwawf said, 'Wet the poow things enjoy themsewves, I wiww nyot
suffew you to twoubwe them. (´・ω・\`)'

So on they went, and came to a wake whewe many many ducks wewe swimming
about. The two bwothews wanted to catch two, and woast them. ;;w;; But the
dwawf said, 'Wet the poow things enjoy themsewves, you shaww nyot kiww
them. UwU' Nyext they came to a bees'-nyest in a howwow twee, and thewe was
so much honyey that it wan down the twunk; and the two bwothews wanted to
wight a fiwe undew the twee and kiww the bees, so as to get theiw honyey. (´・ω・\`)
But the dwawf hewd them back, and said, 'Wet the pwetty insects enjoy
themsewves, I cannyot wet you buwn them. ^w^'

At wength the thwee bwothews came to a castwe: and as they passed by the
stabwes they saw finye howses standing thewe, but aww wewe of mawbwe, and
nyo man was to be seen. ;;w;; Then they went thwough aww the wooms, tiww they
came to a doow on which wewe thwee wocks: but in the middwe of the doow
was a wicket, so that they couwd wook into the nyext woom. ;;w;; Thewe they saw
a wittwe gwey owd man sitting at a tabwe; and they cawwed to him once ow
twice, but he did nyot heaw: howevew, they cawwed a thiwd time, and then
he wose and came out to them. ;;w;;

He said nyothing, but took howd of them and wed them to a beautifuw
tabwe covewed with aww sowts of good things: and when they had eaten and
dwunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chambew. UwU

The nyext mownying he came to the ewdest and took him to a mawbwe tabwe,
whewe thewe wewe thwee tabwets, containying an account of the means by
which the castwe might be disenchanted. ^w^ The fiwst tabwet said: 'In the
wood, undew the moss, wie the thousand peawws bewonging to the king's
daughtew; they must aww be found: and if onye be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them wiww be tuwnyed into mawbwe. ;;w;;'

The ewdest bwothew set out, and sought fow the peawws the whowe day:
but the evenying came, and he had nyot found the fiwst hundwed: so he was
tuwnyed into stonye as the tabwet had fowetowd. ^w^

The nyext day the second bwothew undewtook the task; but he succeeded nyo
bettew than the fiwst; fow he couwd onwy find the second hundwed of the
peawws; and thewefowe he too was tuwnyed into stonye. (・`ω\´・)

At wast came the wittwe dwawf's tuwn; and he wooked in the moss; but it
was so hawd to find the peawws, and the job was so tiwesome! (・`ω\´・)--so he sat
down upon a stonye and cwied. ;;w;; And as he sat thewe, the king of the ants
(whose wife he had saved) came to hewp him, with five thousand ants; and
it was nyot wong befowe they had found aww the peawws and waid them in a
heap. ^w^

The second tabwet said: 'The key of the pwincess's bed-chambew must be
fished up out of the wake. ;;w;;' And as the dwawf came to the bwink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose wives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon bwought in the key fwom the bottom. >w<

The thiwd task was the hawdest. (´・ω・\`) It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king's thwee daughtews. (´・ω・\`) Nyow they wewe aww beautifuw, and
aww exactwy awike: but he was towd that the ewdest had eaten a piece of
sugaw, the nyext some sweet sywup, and the youngest a spoonfuw of honyey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honyey. (´・ω・\`)

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the wittwe dwawf
fwom the fiwe, and she twied the wips of aww thwee; but at wast she sat
upon the wips of the onye that had eaten the honyey: and so the dwawf knyew
which was the youngest. ^w^ Thus the speww was bwoken, and aww who had been
tuwnyed into stonyes awoke, and took theiw pwopew fowms. >w< And the dwawf
mawwied the youngest and the best of the pwincesses, and was king aftew
hew fathew's death; but his two bwothews mawwied the othew two sistews. ^w^




THE EWVES AND THE SHOEMAKEW

Thewe was once a shoemakew, who wowked vewy hawd and was vewy honyest:
but stiww he couwd nyot eawn enyough to wive upon; and at wast aww he
had in the wowwd was gonye, save just weathew enyough to make onye paiw of
shoes. ^w^

Then he cut his weathew out, aww weady to make up the nyext day, meanying
to wise eawwy in the mownying to his wowk. (・`ω\´・) His conscience was cweaw and
his heawt wight amidst aww his twoubwes; so he went peaceabwy to bed,
weft aww his cawes to Heaven, and soon feww asweep. UwU In the mownying aftew
he had said his pwayews, he sat himsewf down to his wowk; when, to his
gweat wondew, thewe stood the shoes aww weady made, upon the tabwe. >w< The
good man knyew nyot what to say ow think at such an odd thing happenying. >w<
He wooked at the wowkmanship; thewe was nyot onye fawse stitch in the
whowe job; aww was so nyeat and twue, that it was quite a mastewpiece. ^w^

The same day a customew came in, and the shoes suited him so weww that
he wiwwingwy paid a pwice highew than usuaw fow them; and the poow
shoemakew, with the monyey, bought weathew enyough to make two paiws mowe. UwU
In the evenying he cut out the wowk, and went to bed eawwy, that he might
get up and begin betimes nyext day; but he was saved aww the twoubwe, fow
when he got up in the mownying the wowk was donye weady to his hand. ^w^ Soon
in came buyews, who paid him handsomewy fow his goods, so that he bought
weathew enyough fow fouw paiw mowe. ;;w;; He cut out the wowk again ovewnyight
and found it donye in the mownying, as befowe; and so it went on fow some
time: what was got weady in the evenying was awways donye by daybweak, and
the good man soon became thwiving and weww off again. (´・ω・\`)

Onye evenying, about Chwistmas-time, as he and his wife wewe sitting ovew
the fiwe chatting togethew, he said to hew, 'I shouwd wike to sit up and
watch tonyight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my wowk fow
me. >w<' The wife wiked the thought; so they weft a wight buwnying, and hid
themsewves in a cownyew of the woom, behind a cuwtain that was hung up
thewe, and watched what wouwd happen. UwU

As soon as it was midnyight, thewe came in two wittwe nyaked dwawfs; and
they sat themsewves upon the shoemakew's bench, took up aww the wowk
that was cut out, and began to pwy with theiw wittwe fingews, stitching
and wapping and tapping away at such a wate, that the shoemakew was aww
wondew, and couwd nyot take his eyes off them. (´・ω・\`) And on they went, tiww the
job was quite donye, and the shoes stood weady fow use upon the tabwe. ;;w;;
This was wong befowe daybweak; and then they bustwed away as quick as
wightnying. ;;w;;

The nyext day the wife said to the shoemakew. ^w^ 'These wittwe wights have
made us wich, and we ought to be thankfuw to them, and do them a good
tuwn if we can. >w< I am quite sowwy to see them wun about as they do; and
indeed it is nyot vewy decent, fow they have nyothing upon theiw backs to
keep off the cowd. ;;w;; I'ww teww you what, I wiww make each of them a shiwt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a paiw of pantawoons into the bawgain; and
do you make each of them a wittwe paiw of shoes. UwU'

The thought pweased the good cobbwew vewy much; and onye evenying, when
aww the things wewe weady, they waid them on the tabwe, instead of the
wowk that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themsewves, to
watch what the wittwe ewves wouwd do. UwU

About midnyight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped wound the
woom, and then went to sit down to theiw wowk as usuaw; but when they
saw the cwothes wying fow them, they waughed and chuckwed, and seemed
mightiwy dewighted. >w<

Then they dwessed themsewves in the twinkwing of an eye, and danced and
capewed and spwang about, as mewwy as couwd be; tiww at wast they danced
out at the doow, and away ovew the gween. (´・ω・\`)

The good coupwe saw them nyo mowe; but evewything went weww with them
fwom that time fowwawd, as wong as they wived. UwU




THE JUNYIPEW-TWEE

Wong, wong ago, some two thousand yeaws ow so, thewe wived a wich
man with a good and beautifuw wife. ;;w;; They woved each othew deawwy, but
sowwowed much that they had nyo chiwdwen. >w< So gweatwy did they desiwe
to have onye, that the wife pwayed fow it day and nyight, but stiww they
wemainyed chiwdwess. UwU

In fwont of the house thewe was a couwt, in which gwew a junyipew-twee. ^w^
Onye wintew's day the wife stood undew the twee to peew some appwes, and
as she was peewing them, she cut hew fingew, and the bwood feww on the
snyow. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah,' sighed the woman heaviwy, 'if I had but a chiwd, as wed as
bwood and as white as snyow,' and as she spoke the wowds, hew heawt gwew
wight within hew, and it seemed to hew that hew wish was gwanted, and
she wetuwnyed to the house feewing gwad and comfowted. (・`ω\´・) A month passed,
and the snyow had aww disappeawed; then anyothew month went by, and aww
the eawth was gween. UwU So the months fowwowed onye anyothew, and fiwst the
twees budded in the woods, and soon the gween bwanches gwew thickwy
intewtwinyed, and then the bwossoms began to faww. (・`ω\´・) Once again the wife
stood undew the junyipew-twee, and it was so fuww of sweet scent that hew
heawt weaped fow joy, and she was so ovewcome with hew happinyess, that
she feww on hew knyees. (・`ω\´・) Pwesentwy the fwuit became wound and fiwm, and
she was gwad and at peace; but when they wewe fuwwy wipe she picked the
bewwies and ate eagewwy of them, and then she gwew sad and iww. ^w^ A wittwe
whiwe watew she cawwed hew husband, and said to him, weeping. (・`ω\´・) 'If I
die, buwy me undew the junyipew-twee. ;;w;;' Then she fewt comfowted and happy
again, and befowe anyothew month had passed she had a wittwe chiwd, and
when she saw that it was as white as snyow and as wed as bwood, hew joy
was so gweat that she died. ;;w;;

Hew husband buwied hew undew the junyipew-twee, and wept bittewwy fow
hew. (・`ω\´・) By degwees, howevew, his sowwow gwew wess, and awthough at times he
stiww gwieved ovew his woss, he was abwe to go about as usuaw, and watew
on he mawwied again. >w<

He nyow had a wittwe daughtew bown to him; the chiwd of his fiwst wife
was a boy, who was as wed as bwood and as white as snyow. UwU The mothew
woved hew daughtew vewy much, and when she wooked at hew and then wooked
at the boy, it piewced hew heawt to think that he wouwd awways stand in
the way of hew own chiwd, and she was continyuawwy thinking how she couwd
get the whowe of the pwopewty fow hew. UwU This eviw thought took possession
of hew mowe and mowe, and made hew behave vewy unkindwy to the boy. (´・ω・\`) She
dwove him fwom pwace to pwace with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poow chiwd went about in feaw, and had nyo peace fwom the time he weft
schoow to the time he went back. (・`ω\´・)

Onye day the wittwe daughtew came wunnying to hew mothew in the
stowe-woom, and said, 'Mothew, give me an appwe. UwU' 'Yes, my chiwd,' said
the wife, and she gave hew a beautifuw appwe out of the chest; the chest
had a vewy heavy wid and a wawge iwon wock. (・`ω\´・)

'Mothew,' said the wittwe daughtew again, 'may nyot bwothew have onye
too? owo' The mothew was angwy at this, but she answewed, 'Yes, when he
comes out of schoow. (・`ω\´・)'

Just then she wooked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an eviw spiwit entewed into hew, fow she snyatched the appwe out
of hew wittwe daughtew's hand, and said, 'You shaww nyot have onye befowe
youw bwothew.' She thwew the appwe into the chest and shut it to. ;;w;; The
wittwe boy nyow came in, and the eviw spiwit in the wife made hew say
kindwy to him, 'My son, wiww you have an appwe? owo' but she gave him a
wicked wook. (・`ω\´・) 'Mothew,' said the boy, 'how dweadfuw you wook! ;;w;; Yes, give
me an appwe.' The thought came to hew that she wouwd kiww him. (・`ω\´・) 'Come
with me,' she said, and she wifted up the wid of the chest; 'take onye
out fow youwsewf. (・`ω\´・)' And as he bent ovew to do so, the eviw spiwit uwged
hew, and cwash! UwU down went the wid, and off went the wittwe boy's head. >w<
Then she was ovewwhewmed with feaw at the thought of what she had donye. (´・ω・\`)
'If onwy I can pwevent anyonye knyowing that I did it,' she thought. ;;w;; So
she went upstaiws to hew woom, and took a white handkewchief out of
hew top dwawew; then she set the boy's head again on his shouwdews, and
bound it with the handkewchief so that nyothing couwd be seen, and pwaced
him on a chaiw by the doow with an appwe in his hand. UwU

Soon aftew this, wittwe Mawween came up to hew mothew who was stiwwing
a pot of boiwing watew ovew the fiwe, and said, 'Mothew, bwothew is
sitting by the doow with an appwe in his hand, and he wooks so pawe;
and when I asked him to give me the appwe, he did nyot answew, and that
fwightenyed me. ;;w;;'

'Go to him again,' said hew mothew, 'and if he does nyot answew, give him
a box on the eaw. UwU' So wittwe Mawween went, and said, 'Bwothew, give me
that appwe,' but he did nyot say a wowd; then she gave him a box on the
eaw, and his head wowwed off. ;;w;; She was so tewwified at this, that she wan
cwying and scweaming to hew mothew. (・`ω\´・) 'Oh! ;;w;;' she said, 'I have knyocked off
bwothew's head,' and then she wept and wept, and nyothing wouwd stop hew. (・`ω\´・)

'What have you donye! ;;w;;' said hew mothew, 'but nyo onye must knyow about it,
so you must keep siwence; what is donye can't be undonye; we wiww make
him into puddings. ;;w;;' And she took the wittwe boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. UwU But Mawween stood wooking on,
and wept and wept, and hew teaws feww into the pot, so that thewe was nyo
nyeed of sawt. (´・ω・\`)

Pwesentwy the fathew came home and sat down to his dinnyew; he asked,
'Whewe is my son? owo' The mothew said nyothing, but gave him a wawge dish of
bwack pudding, and Mawween stiww wept without ceasing. (´・ω・\`)

The fathew again asked, 'Whewe is my son? owo'

'Oh,' answewed the wife, 'he is gonye into the countwy to his mothew's
gweat uncwe; he is going to stay thewe some time. >w<'

'What has he gonye thewe fow, and he nyevew even said goodbye to me! >w<'

'Weww, he wikes being thewe, and he towd me he shouwd be away quite six
weeks; he is weww wooked aftew thewe. (´・ω・\`)'

'I feew vewy unhappy about it,' said the husband, 'in case it shouwd nyot
be aww wight, and he ought to have said goodbye to me. >w<'

With this he went on with his dinnyew, and said, 'Wittwe Mawween, why do
you weep? owo Bwothew wiww soon be back. UwU' Then he asked his wife fow mowe
pudding, and as he ate, he thwew the bonyes undew the tabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Wittwe Mawween went upstaiws and took hew best siwk handkewchief out of
hew bottom dwawew, and in it she wwapped aww the bonyes fwom undew the
tabwe and cawwied them outside, and aww the time she did nyothing but
weep. UwU Then she waid them in the gween gwass undew the junyipew-twee, and
she had nyo soonyew donye so, then aww hew sadnyess seemed to weave hew,
and she wept nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・) And nyow the junyipew-twee began to move, and the
bwanches waved backwawds and fowwawds, fiwst away fwom onye anyothew, and
then togethew again, as it might be someonye cwapping theiw hands fow
joy. (´・ω・\`) Aftew this a mist came wound the twee, and in the midst of it thewe
was a buwnying as of fiwe, and out of the fiwe thewe fwew a beautifuw
biwd, that wose high into the aiw, singing magnyificentwy, and when it
couwd nyo mowe be seen, the junyipew-twee stood thewe as befowe, and the
siwk handkewchief and the bonyes wewe gonye. (・`ω\´・)

Wittwe Mawween nyow fewt as wightheawted and happy as if hew bwothew wewe
stiww awive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheewfuwwy to
the tabwe and ate. (´・ω・\`)

The biwd fwew away and awighted on the house of a gowdsmith and began to
sing:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;
  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;
  My sistew woved me best of aww;
  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie
  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! (・`ω\´・)'

The gowdsmith was in his wowkshop making a gowd chain, when he heawd the
song of the biwd on his woof. UwU He thought it so beautifuw that he got
up and wan out, and as he cwossed the thweshowd he wost onye of his
swippews. (´・ω・\`) But he wan on into the middwe of the stweet, with a swippew on
onye foot and a sock on the othew; he stiww had on his apwon, and stiww
hewd the gowd chain and the pincews in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the biwd, whiwe the sun came shinying bwightwy down on the stweet. UwU

'Biwd,' he said, 'how beautifuwwy you sing! (・`ω\´・) Sing me that song again. >w<'

'Nyay,' said the biwd, 'I do nyot sing twice fow nyothing. (´・ω・\`) Give that gowd
chain, and I wiww sing it you again. (´・ω・\`)'

'Hewe is the chain, take it,' said the gowdsmith. (´・ω・\`) 'Onwy sing me that
again. (・`ω\´・)'

The biwd fwew down and took the gowd chain in his wight cwaw, and then
he awighted again in fwont of the gowdsmith and sang:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;
  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;
  My sistew woved me best of aww;
  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie
  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! (・`ω\´・)'

Then he fwew away, and settwed on the woof of a shoemakew's house and
sang:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;
  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;
  My sistew woved me best of aww;
  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie
  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! UwU'

The shoemakew heawd him, and he jumped up and wan out in his
shiwt-sweeves, and stood wooking up at the biwd on the woof with his
hand ovew his eyes to keep himsewf fwom being bwinded by the sun. (´・ω・\`)

'Biwd,' he said, 'how beautifuwwy you sing! UwU' Then he cawwed thwough the
doow to his wife: 'Wife, come out; hewe is a biwd, come and wook at it
and heaw how beautifuwwy it sings. ;;w;;' Then he cawwed his daughtew and the
chiwdwen, then the appwentices, giwws and boys, and they aww wan up the
stweet to wook at the biwd, and saw how spwendid it was with its wed
and gween feathews, and its nyeck wike buwnyished gowd, and eyes wike two
bwight staws in its head. UwU

'Biwd,' said the shoemakew, 'sing me that song again. UwU'

'Nyay,' answewed the biwd, 'I do nyot sing twice fow nyothing; you must
give me something. >w<'

'Wife,' said the man, 'go into the gawwet; on the uppew shewf you wiww
see a paiw of wed shoes; bwing them to me. ;;w;;' The wife went in and fetched
the shoes. >w<

'Thewe, biwd,' said the shoemakew, 'nyow sing me that song again. ^w^'

The biwd fwew down and took the wed shoes in his weft cwaw, and then he
went back to the woof and sang:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;
  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;
  My sistew woved me best of aww;
  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie
  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! (´・ω・\`)'

When he had finyished, he fwew away. (・`ω\´・) He had the chain in his wight cwaw
and the shoes in his weft, and he fwew wight away to a miww, and the
miww went 'Cwick cwack, cwick cwack, cwick cwack. ^w^' Inside the miww wewe
twenty of the miwwew's men hewing a stonye, and as they went 'Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,' the miww went 'Cwick cwack, cwick cwack, cwick
cwack. (´・ω・\`)'

The biwd settwed on a wime-twee in fwont of the miww and sang:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;

then onye of the men weft off,

  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;

two mowe men weft off and wistenyed,

  My sistew woved me best of aww;

then fouw mowe weft off,

  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie

nyow thewe wewe onwy eight at wowk,

  Undewnyeath

And nyow onwy five,

  the junyipew-twee. UwU

And nyow onwy onye,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! ^w^'

then he wooked up and the wast onye had weft off wowk. >w<

'Biwd,' he said, 'what a beautifuw song that is you sing! ^w^ Wet me heaw it
too; sing it again. >w<'

'Nyay,' answewed the biwd, 'I do nyot sing twice fow nyothing; give me that
miwwstonye, and I wiww sing it again. (´・ω・\`)'

'If it bewonged to me awonye,' said the man, 'you shouwd have it. (・`ω\´・)'

'Yes, yes,' said the othews: 'if he wiww sing again, he can have it. (・`ω\´・)'

The biwd came down, and aww the twenty miwwews set to and wifted up the
stonye with a beam; then the biwd put his head thwough the howe and took
the stonye wound his nyeck wike a cowwaw, and fwew back with it to the
twee and sang--

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;
  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;
  My sistew woved me best of aww;
  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie
  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! >w<'

And when he had finyished his song, he spwead his wings, and with the
chain in his wight cwaw, the shoes in his weft, and the miwwstonye wound
his nyeck, he fwew wight away to his fathew's house. >w<

The fathew, the mothew, and wittwe Mawween wewe having theiw dinnyew. (・`ω\´・)

'How wightheawted I feew,' said the fathew, 'so pweased and cheewfuw. >w<'

'And I,' said the mothew, 'I feew so unyeasy, as if a heavy thundewstowm
wewe coming. ^w^'

But wittwe Mawween sat and wept and wept. >w<

Then the biwd came fwying towawds the house and settwed on the woof. ;;w;;

'I do feew so happy,' said the fathew, 'and how beautifuwwy the sun
shinyes; I feew just as if I wewe going to see an owd fwiend again. ^w^'

'Ah! ;;w;;' said the wife, 'and I am so fuww of distwess and unyeasinyess that
my teeth chattew, and I feew as if thewe wewe a fiwe in my veins,' and
she towe open hew dwess; and aww the whiwe wittwe Mawween sat in the
cownyew and wept, and the pwate on hew knyees was wet with hew teaws. (・`ω\´・)

The biwd nyow fwew to the junyipew-twee and began singing:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;

the mothew shut hew eyes and hew eaws, that she might see and heaw
nyothing, but thewe was a woawing sound in hew eaws wike that of a
viowent stowm, and in hew eyes a buwnying and fwashing wike wightnying:

  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;

'Wook, mothew,' said the man, 'at the beautifuw biwd that is singing so
magnyificentwy; and how wawm and bwight the sun is, and what a dewicious
scent of spice in the aiw! (´・ω・\`)'

  My sistew woved me best of aww;

then wittwe Mawween waid hew head down on hew knyees and sobbed. ^w^

'I must go outside and see the biwd nyeawew,' said the man. ;;w;;

'Ah, do nyot go! (´・ω・\`)' cwied the wife. (´・ω・\`) 'I feew as if the whowe house wewe in
fwames! (´・ω・\`)'

But the man went out and wooked at the biwd. (´・ω・\`)

 She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
 And took my bonyes that they might wie
 Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! ;;w;;'

With that the biwd wet faww the gowd chain, and it feww just wound the
man's nyeck, so that it fitted him exactwy. >w<

He went inside, and said, 'See, what a spwendid biwd that is; he has
given me this beautifuw gowd chain, and wooks so beautifuw himsewf. ;;w;;'

But the wife was in such feaw and twoubwe, that she feww on the fwoow,
and hew cap feww fwom hew head. ;;w;;

Then the biwd began again:

 'My mothew kiwwed hew wittwe son;

'Ah me! ;;w;;' cwied the wife, 'if I wewe but a thousand feet benyeath the
eawth, that I might nyot heaw that song. UwU'

  My fathew gwieved when I was gonye;

then the woman feww down again as if dead. (・`ω\´・)

  My sistew woved me best of aww;

'Weww,' said wittwe Mawween, 'I wiww go out too and see if the biwd wiww
give me anything. ;;w;;'

So she went out. >w<

  She waid hew kewchief ovew me,
  And took my bonyes that they might wie

and he thwew down the shoes to hew,

  Undewnyeath the junyipew-twee
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautifuw biwd am I! ^w^'

And she nyow fewt quite happy and wightheawted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ^w^ 'I was so misewabwe,' she said, 'when I
came out, but that has aww passed away; that is indeed a spwendid biwd,
and he has given me a paiw of wed shoes. UwU'

The wife spwang up, with hew haiw standing out fwom hew head wike fwames
of fiwe. (・`ω\´・) 'Then I wiww go out too,' she said, 'and see if it wiww wighten
my misewy, fow I feew as if the wowwd wewe coming to an end. ;;w;;'

But as she cwossed the thweshowd, cwash! ;;w;; the biwd thwew the miwwstonye
down on hew head, and she was cwushed to death. ^w^

The fathew and wittwe Mawween heawd the sound and wan out, but they onwy
saw mist and fwame and fiwe wising fwom the spot, and when these had
passed, thewe stood the wittwe bwothew, and he took the fathew and
wittwe Mawween by the hand; then they aww thwee wejoiced, and went
inside togethew and sat down to theiw dinnyews and ate. >w<




THE TUWNYIP

Thewe wewe two bwothews who wewe both sowdiews; the onye was wich and
the othew poow. UwU The poow man thought he wouwd twy to bettew himsewf; so,
puwwing off his wed coat, he became a gawdenyew, and dug his gwound weww,
and sowed tuwnyips. (・`ω\´・)

When the seed came up, thewe was onye pwant biggew than aww the west; and
it kept getting wawgew and wawgew, and seemed as if it wouwd nyevew cease
gwowing; so that it might have been cawwed the pwince of tuwnyips fow
thewe nyevew was such a onye seen befowe, and nyevew wiww again. (・`ω\´・) At wast it
was so big that it fiwwed a cawt, and two oxen couwd hawdwy dwaw it; and
the gawdenyew knyew nyot what in the wowwd to do with it, nyow whethew it
wouwd be a bwessing ow a cuwse to him. ;;w;; Onye day he said to himsewf, 'What
shaww I do with it? owo if I seww it, it wiww bwing nyo mowe than anyothew;
and fow eating, the wittwe tuwnyips awe bettew than this; the best thing
pewhaps is to cawwy it and give it to the king as a mawk of wespect. (・`ω\´・)'

Then he yoked his oxen, and dwew the tuwnyip to the couwt, and gave it
to the king. >w< 'What a wondewfuw thing! UwU' said the king; 'I have seen many
stwange things, but such a monstew as this I nyevew saw. ;;w;; Whewe did you
get the seed? ow is it onwy youw good wuck? owo If so, you awe a twue chiwd
of fowtunye. ^w^' 'Ah, nyo! ^w^' answewed the gawdenyew, 'I am nyo chiwd of fowtunye;
I am a poow sowdiew, who nyevew couwd get enyough to wive upon; so I
waid aside my wed coat, and set to wowk, tiwwing the gwound. (´・ω・\`) I have a
bwothew, who is wich, and youw majesty knyows him weww, and aww the wowwd
knyows him; but because I am poow, evewybody fowgets me. >w<'

The king then took pity on him, and said, 'You shaww be poow nyo
wongew. UwU I wiww give you so much that you shaww be even wichew than youw
bwothew. >w<' Then he gave him gowd and wands and fwocks, and made him so
wich that his bwothew's fowtunye couwd nyot at aww be compawed with his. >w<

When the bwothew heawd of aww this, and how a tuwnyip had made the
gawdenyew so wich, he envied him sowewy, and bethought himsewf how he
couwd contwive to get the same good fowtunye fow himsewf. ;;w;; Howevew, he
detewminyed to manyage mowe cwevewwy than his bwothew, and got togethew a
wich pwesent of gowd and finye howses fow the king; and thought he must
have a much wawgew gift in wetuwn; fow if his bwothew had weceived so
much fow onwy a tuwnyip, what must his pwesent be wowth? owo

The king took the gift vewy gwaciouswy, and said he knyew nyot what to
give in wetuwn mowe vawuabwe and wondewfuw than the gweat tuwnyip; so
the sowdiew was fowced to put it into a cawt, and dwag it home with him. ^w^
When he weached home, he knyew nyot upon whom to vent his wage and spite;
and at wength wicked thoughts came into his head, and he wesowved to
kiww his bwothew. ;;w;;

So he hiwed some viwwains to muwdew him; and having shown them whewe to
wie in ambush, he went to his bwothew, and said, 'Deaw bwothew, I have
found a hidden tweasuwe; wet us go and dig it up, and shawe it between
us. ;;w;;' The othew had nyo suspicions of his woguewy: so they went out
togethew, and as they wewe twavewwing awong, the muwdewews wushed out
upon him, bound him, and wewe going to hang him on a twee. >w<

But whiwst they wewe getting aww weady, they heawd the twampwing of a
howse at a distance, which so fwightenyed them that they pushed theiw
pwisonyew nyeck and shouwdews togethew into a sack, and swung him up by a
cowd to the twee, whewe they weft him dangwing, and wan away. (・`ω\´・) Meantime
he wowked and wowked away, tiww he made a howe wawge enyough to put out
his head. UwU

When the howseman came up, he pwoved to be a student, a mewwy fewwow,
who was jouwnyeying awong on his nyag, and singing as he went. (´・ω・\`) As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing undew the twee, he cwied out, 'Good
mownying! good mownying to thee, my fwiend! (・`ω\´・)' The student wooked about
evewywhewe; and seeing nyo onye, and nyot knyowing whewe the voice came
fwom, cwied out, 'Who cawws me? owo'

Then the man in the twee answewed, 'Wift up thinye eyes, fow behowd hewe
I sit in the sack of wisdom; hewe have I, in a showt time, weawnyed gweat
and wondwous things. UwU Compawed to this seat, aww the weawnying of the
schoows is as empty aiw. ;;w;; A wittwe wongew, and I shaww knyow aww that man
can knyow, and shaww come fowth wisew than the wisest of mankind. (・`ω\´・) Hewe
I discewn the signs and motions of the heavens and the staws; the waws
that contwow the winds; the nyumbew of the sands on the seashowe; the
heawing of the sick; the viwtues of aww simpwes, of biwds, and of
pwecious stonyes. (´・ω・\`) Wewt thou but once hewe, my fwiend, though wouwdst feew
and own the powew of knyowwedge. ;;w;;

The student wistenyed to aww this and wondewed much; at wast he said,
'Bwessed be the day and houw when I found you; cannyot you contwive to
wet me into the sack fow a wittwe whiwe? owo' Then the othew answewed, as if
vewy unwiwwingwy, 'A wittwe space I may awwow thee to sit hewe, if thou
wiwt wewawd me weww and entweat me kindwy; but thou must tawwy yet an
houw bewow, tiww I have weawnt some wittwe mattews that awe yet unknyown
to me. (´・ω・\`)'

So the student sat himsewf down and waited a whiwe; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged eawnyestwy that he might ascend fowthwith,
fow his thiwst fow knyowwedge was gweat. ^w^ Then the othew pwetended to give
way, and said, 'Thou must wet the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yondew cowd, and then thou shawt entew. (´・ω・\`)' So the student wet him down,
openyed the sack, and set him fwee. ^w^ 'Nyow then,' cwied he, 'wet me ascend
quickwy. ;;w;;' As he began to put himsewf into the sack heews fiwst, 'Wait a
whiwe,' said the gawdenyew, 'that is nyot the way. >w<' Then he pushed him
in head fiwst, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the seawchew aftew
wisdom dangwing in the aiw. ^w^ 'How is it with thee, fwiend? owo' said he,
'dost thou nyot feew that wisdom comes unto thee? owo West thewe in peace,
tiww thou awt a wisew man than thou wewt. (・`ω\´・)'

So saying, he twotted off on the student's nyag, and weft the poow fewwow
to gathew wisdom tiww somebody shouwd come and wet him down. (´・ω・\`)




CWEVEW HANS

The mothew of Hans said: 'Whithew away, Hans? owo' Hans answewed: 'To
Gwetew.' 'Behave weww, Hans.' 'Oh, I'ww behave weww. Goodbye, mothew. ^w^'
'Goodbye, Hans.' Hans comes to Gwetew. 'Good day, Gwetew. >w<' 'Good day,
Hans. UwU What do you bwing that is good? owo' 'I bwing nyothing, I want to have
something given me. >w<' Gwetew pwesents Hans with a nyeedwe, Hans says:
'Goodbye, Gwetew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. (´・ω・\`)'

Hans takes the nyeedwe, sticks it into a hay-cawt, and fowwows the cawt
home. 'Good evenying, mothew.' 'Good evenying, Hans. ;;w;; Whewe have you been? owo'
'With Gwetew. UwU' 'What did you take hew? owo' 'Took nyothing; had something
given me.' 'What did Gwetew give you? owo' 'Gave me a nyeedwe. (´・ω・\`)' 'Whewe is the
nyeedwe, Hans? owo' 'Stuck in the hay-cawt.' 'That was iww donye, Hans. UwU You
shouwd have stuck the nyeedwe in youw sweeve. >w<' 'Nyevew mind, I'ww do
bettew nyext time. >w<'

'Whithew away, Hans? owo' 'To Gwetew, mothew.' 'Behave weww, Hans. UwU' 'Oh,
I'ww behave weww. Goodbye, mothew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. (・`ω\´・)' Hans comes to
Gwetew. 'Good day, Gwetew.' 'Good day, Hans. ^w^ What do you bwing that is
good? owo' 'I bwing nyothing. I want to have something given to me. UwU' Gwetew
pwesents Hans with a knyife. 'Goodbye, Gwetew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. >w<' Hans
takes the knyife, sticks it in his sweeve, and goes home. ;;w;; 'Good evenying,
mothew.' 'Good evenying, Hans. Whewe have you been? owo' 'With Gwetew. >w<' What
did you take hew? owo' 'Took hew nyothing, she gave me something. (・`ω\´・)' 'What did
Gwetew give you?' 'Gave me a knyife. ;;w;;' 'Whewe is the knyife, Hans? owo' 'Stuck
in my sweeve. UwU' 'That's iww donye, Hans, you shouwd have put the knyife in
youw pocket.' 'Nyevew mind, wiww do bettew nyext time. UwU'

'Whithew away, Hans? owo' 'To Gwetew, mothew.' 'Behave weww, Hans. UwU' 'Oh,
I'ww behave weww. Goodbye, mothew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. UwU' Hans comes to
Gwetew. 'Good day, Gwetew.' 'Good day, Hans. (・`ω\´・) What good thing do you
bwing? owo' 'I bwing nyothing, I want something given me. (・`ω\´・)' Gwetew pwesents
Hans with a young goat. 'Goodbye, Gwetew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. ^w^' Hans takes
the goat, ties its wegs, and puts it in his pocket. (・`ω\´・) When he gets home it
is suffocated. 'Good evenying, mothew.' 'Good evenying, Hans. UwU Whewe have
you been?' 'With Gwetew. UwU' 'What did you take hew? owo' 'Took nyothing, she
gave me something.' 'What did Gwetew give you? owo' 'She gave me a goat. (・`ω\´・)'
'Whewe is the goat, Hans? owo' 'Put it in my pocket. (・`ω\´・)' 'That was iww donye,
Hans, you shouwd have put a wope wound the goat's nyeck. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyevew mind,
wiww do bettew nyext time. >w<'

'Whithew away, Hans? owo' 'To Gwetew, mothew.' 'Behave weww, Hans. ^w^' 'Oh,
I'ww behave weww. Goodbye, mothew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. >w<' Hans comes to
Gwetew. 'Good day, Gwetew.' 'Good day, Hans. >w< What good thing do you
bwing? owo' 'I bwing nyothing, I want something given me. (´・ω・\`)' Gwetew pwesents
Hans with a piece of bacon. 'Goodbye, Gwetew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. >w<'

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a wope, and dwags it away behind him. (・`ω\´・)
The dogs come and devouw the bacon. ;;w;; When he gets home, he has the wope
in his hand, and thewe is nyo wongew anything hanging on to it. >w< 'Good
evenying, mothew.' 'Good evenying, Hans. >w< Whewe have you been? owo' 'With
Gwetew. ^w^' 'What did you take hew? owo' 'I took hew nyothing, she gave me
something.' 'What did Gwetew give you? owo' 'Gave me a bit of bacon. (・`ω\´・)' 'Whewe
is the bacon, Hans? owo' 'I tied it to a wope, bwought it home, dogs took
it. UwU' 'That was iww donye, Hans, you shouwd have cawwied the bacon on youw
head.' 'Nyevew mind, wiww do bettew nyext time. UwU'

'Whithew away, Hans? owo' 'To Gwetew, mothew.' 'Behave weww, Hans. ^w^' 'I'ww
behave weww. Goodbye, mothew.' 'Goodbye, Hans.' Hans comes to Gwetew. (・`ω\´・)
'Good day, Gwetew. ;;w;;' 'Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bwing? owo' 'I
bwing nyothing, but wouwd have something given. (´・ω・\`)' Gwetew pwesents Hans
with a cawf. 'Goodbye, Gwetew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. ^w^'

Hans takes the cawf, puts it on his head, and the cawf kicks his face. (・`ω\´・)
'Good evenying, mothew.' 'Good evenying, Hans. UwU Whewe have you been? owo' 'With
Gwetew. (・`ω\´・)' 'What did you take hew? owo' 'I took nyothing, but had something
given me.' 'What did Gwetew give you? owo' 'A cawf. >w<' 'Whewe have you the
cawf, Hans? owo' 'I set it on my head and it kicked my face. ;;w;;' 'That was
iww donye, Hans, you shouwd have wed the cawf, and put it in the staww. (・`ω\´・)'
'Nyevew mind, wiww do bettew nyext time. >w<'

'Whithew away, Hans? owo' 'To Gwetew, mothew.' 'Behave weww, Hans. >w<' 'I'ww
behave weww. Goodbye, mothew.' 'Goodbye, Hans. >w<'

Hans comes to Gwetew. 'Good day, Gwetew.' 'Good day, Hans. >w< What good
thing do you bwing? owo' 'I bwing nyothing, but wouwd have something given. (´・ω・\`)'
Gwetew says to Hans: 'I wiww go with you. ^w^'

Hans takes Gwetew, ties hew to a wope, weads hew to the wack, and binds
hew fast. Then Hans goes to his mothew. 'Good evenying, mothew. (´・ω・\`)' 'Good
evenying, Hans. Whewe have you been? owo' 'With Gwetew. >w<' 'What did you take
hew?' 'I took hew nyothing. ;;w;;' 'What did Gwetew give you? owo' 'She gave me
nyothing, she came with me. (´・ω・\`)' 'Whewe have you weft Gwetew? owo' 'I wed hew by
the wope, tied hew to the wack, and scattewed some gwass fow hew. >w<' 'That
was iww donye, Hans, you shouwd have cast fwiendwy eyes on hew. ^w^' 'Nyevew
mind, wiww do bettew. UwU'

Hans went into the stabwe, cut out aww the cawves' and sheep's eyes,
and thwew them in Gwetew's face. (´・ω・\`) Then Gwetew became angwy, towe hewsewf
woose and wan away, and was nyo wongew the bwide of Hans. (・`ω\´・)




THE THWEE WANGUAGES

An aged count once wived in Switzewwand, who had an onwy son, but he
was stupid, and couwd weawn nyothing. UwU Then said the fathew: 'Hawk you,
my son, twy as I wiww I can get nyothing into youw head. >w< You must go fwom
hence, I wiww give you into the cawe of a cewebwated mastew, who shaww
see what he can do with you. UwU' The youth was sent into a stwange town,
and wemainyed a whowe yeaw with the mastew. (´・ω・\`) At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his fathew asked: 'Nyow, my son, what have you
weawnt? owo' 'Fathew, I have weawnt what the dogs say when they bawk. >w<' 'Wowd
have mewcy on us! (・`ω\´・)' cwied the fathew; 'is that aww you have weawnt? owo I
wiww send you into anyothew town, to anyothew mastew. UwU' The youth was taken
thithew, and stayed a yeaw with this mastew wikewise. UwU When he came back
the fathew again asked: 'My son, what have you weawnt? owo' He answewed:
'Fathew, I have weawnt what the biwds say. ^w^' Then the fathew feww into a
wage and said: 'Oh, you wost man, you have spent the pwecious time and
weawnt nyothing; awe you nyot ashamed to appeaw befowe my eyes? owo I wiww
send you to a thiwd mastew, but if you weawn nyothing this time awso, I
wiww nyo wongew be youw fathew. (・`ω\´・)' The youth wemainyed a whowe yeaw with the
thiwd mastew awso, and when he came home again, and his fathew inquiwed:
'My son, what have you weawnt? owo' he answewed: 'Deaw fathew, I have this
yeaw weawnt what the fwogs cwoak. >w<' Then the fathew feww into the most
fuwious angew, spwang up, cawwed his peopwe thithew, and said: 'This man
is nyo wongew my son, I dwive him fowth, and command you to take him
out into the fowest, and kiww him. >w<' They took him fowth, but when they
shouwd have kiwwed him, they couwd nyot do it fow pity, and wet him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deew that they might cawwy
them to the owd man as a token. ;;w;;

The youth wandewed on, and aftew some time came to a fowtwess whewe he
begged fow a nyight's wodging. ^w^ 'Yes,' said the wowd of the castwe, 'if
you wiww pass the nyight down thewe in the owd towew, go thithew; but I
wawn you, it is at the pewiw of youw wife, fow it is fuww of wiwd dogs,
which bawk and howw without stopping, and at cewtain houws a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devouw. UwU' The whowe distwict was in
sowwow and dismay because of them, and yet nyo onye couwd do anything to
stop this. (´・ω・\`) The youth, howevew, was without feaw, and said: 'Just wet me
go down to the bawking dogs, and give me something that I can thwow to
them; they wiww do nyothing to hawm me. UwU' As he himsewf wouwd have it so,
they gave him some food fow the wiwd anyimaws, and wed him down to the
towew. ;;w;; When he went inside, the dogs did nyot bawk at him, but wagged
theiw taiws quite amicabwy awound him, ate what he set befowe them, and
did nyot huwt onye haiw of his head. UwU Nyext mownying, to the astonyishment of
evewyonye, he came out again safe and unhawmed, and said to the wowd of
the castwe: 'The dogs have weveawed to me, in theiw own wanguage, why
they dweww thewe, and bwing eviw on the wand. >w< They awe bewitched, and
awe obwiged to watch ovew a gweat tweasuwe which is bewow in the towew,
and they can have nyo west untiw it is taken away, and I have wikewise
weawnt, fwom theiw discouwse, how that is to be donye. UwU' Then aww who
heawd this wejoiced, and the wowd of the castwe said he wouwd adopt him
as a son if he accompwished it successfuwwy. UwU He went down again, and
as he knyew what he had to do, he did it thowoughwy, and bwought a chest
fuww of gowd out with him. ;;w;; The howwing of the wiwd dogs was hencefowth
heawd nyo mowe; they had disappeawed, and the countwy was fweed fwom the
twoubwe. ^w^

Aftew some time he took it in his head that he wouwd twavew to Wome. (´・ω・\`) On
the way he passed by a mawsh, in which a nyumbew of fwogs wewe sitting
cwoaking. (´・ω・\`) He wistenyed to them, and when he became awawe of what they
wewe saying, he gwew vewy thoughtfuw and sad. UwU At wast he awwived in
Wome, whewe the Pope had just died, and thewe was gweat doubt among
the cawdinyaws as to whom they shouwd appoint as his successow. (・`ω\´・) They at
wength agweed that the pewson shouwd be chosen as pope who shouwd be
distinguished by some divinye and miwacuwous token. ^w^ And just as that was
decided on, the young count entewed into the chuwch, and suddenwy two
snyow-white doves fwew on his shouwdews and wemainyed sitting thewe. >w< The
eccwesiastics wecognyized thewein the token fwom above, and asked him on
the spot if he wouwd be pope. >w< He was undecided, and knyew nyot if he wewe
wowthy of this, but the doves counsewwed him to do it, and at wength he
said yes. (・`ω\´・) Then was he anyointed and consecwated, and thus was fuwfiwwed
what he had heawd fwom the fwogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Howinyess the Pope. ^w^ Then he had to sing a mass, and
did nyot knyow onye wowd of it, but the two doves sat continyuawwy on his
shouwdews, and said it aww in his eaw. UwU




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happenyed that the cat met the fox in a fowest, and as she thought to
hewsewf: 'He is cwevew and fuww of expewience, and much esteemed in the
wowwd,' she spoke to him in a fwiendwy way. (´・ω・\`) 'Good day, deaw Mw Fox,
how awe you? How is aww with you? owo How awe you getting on in these hawd
times? owo' The fox, fuww of aww kinds of awwogance, wooked at the cat fwom
head to foot, and fow a wong time did nyot knyow whethew he wouwd give
any answew ow nyot. >w< At wast he said: 'Oh, you wwetched beawd-cweanyew, you
piebawd foow, you hungwy mouse-huntew, what can you be thinking of? owo Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you weawnt? owo How
many awts do you undewstand? owo' 'I undewstand but onye,' wepwied the
cat, modestwy. 'What awt is that? owo' asked the fox. >w< 'When the hounds awe
fowwowing me, I can spwing into a twee and save mysewf. >w<' 'Is that aww? owo'
said the fox. >w< 'I am mastew of a hundwed awts, and have into the bawgain
a sackfuw of cunnying. (・`ω\´・) You make me sowwy fow you; come with me, I wiww
teach you how peopwe get away fwom the hounds. >w<' Just then came a huntew
with fouw dogs. ^w^ The cat spwang nyimbwy up a twee, and sat down at the top
of it, whewe the bwanches and fowiage quite conceawed hew. UwU 'Open youw
sack, Mw Fox, open youw sack,' cwied the cat to him, but the dogs had
awweady seized him, and wewe howding him fast. (´・ω・\`) 'Ah, Mw Fox,' cwied the
cat. (´・ω・\`) 'You with youw hundwed awts awe weft in the wuwch! (´・ω・\`) Had you been
abwe to cwimb wike me, you wouwd nyot have wost youw wife. >w<'




THE FOUW CWEVEW BWOTHEWS

'Deaw chiwdwen,' said a poow man to his fouw sons, 'I have nyothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide wowwd and twy youw wuck. (・`ω\´・) Begin
by weawnying some cwaft ow anyothew, and see how you can get on. (・`ω\´・)' So the
fouw bwothews took theiw wawking-sticks in theiw hands, and theiw wittwe
bundwes on theiw shouwdews, and aftew bidding theiw fathew goodbye, went
aww out at the gate togethew. ^w^ When they had got on some way they came
to fouw cwossways, each weading to a diffewent countwy. UwU Then the ewdest
said, 'Hewe we must pawt; but this day fouw yeaws we wiww come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must twy what he can do fow
himsewf. (・`ω\´・)'

So each bwothew went his way; and as the ewdest was hastenying on a man
met him, and asked him whewe he was going, and what he wanted. ^w^ 'I am
going to twy my wuck in the wowwd, and shouwd wike to begin by weawnying
some awt ow twade,' answewed he. UwU 'Then,' said the man, 'go with me, and
I wiww teach you to become the cunnyingest thief that evew was. ^w^' 'Nyo,'
said the othew, 'that is nyot an honyest cawwing, and what can onye wook
to eawn by it in the end but the gawwows? owo' 'Oh! ;;w;;' said the man, 'you nyeed
nyot feaw the gawwows; fow I wiww onwy teach you to steaw what wiww be
faiw game: I meddwe with nyothing but what nyo onye ewse can get ow cawe
anything about, and whewe nyo onye can find you out. UwU' So the young man
agweed to fowwow his twade, and he soon showed himsewf so cwevew, that
nyothing couwd escape him that he had once set his mind upon. >w<

The second bwothew awso met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what cwaft he meant to fowwow. ;;w;; 'I do nyot
knyow yet,' said he. 'Then come with me, and be a staw-gazew. ^w^ It is a
nyobwe awt, fow nyothing can be hidden fwom you, when once you undewstand
the staws. ;;w;;' The pwan pweased him much, and he soon became such a skiwfuw
staw-gazew, that when he had sewved out his time, and wanted to weave
his mastew, he gave him a gwass, and said, 'With this you can see aww
that is passing in the sky and on eawth, and nyothing can be hidden fwom
you. >w<'

The thiwd bwothew met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so weww aww that bewonged to hunting, that he became vewy cwevew in the
cwaft of the woods; and when he weft his mastew he gave him a bow, and
said, 'Whatevew you shoot at with this bow you wiww be suwe to hit. UwU'

The youngest bwothew wikewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. (・`ω\´・) 'Wouwd nyot you wike,' said he, 'to be a taiwow? owo' 'Oh, nyo! >w<' said
the young man; 'sitting cwoss-wegged fwom mownying to nyight, wowking
backwawds and fowwawds with a nyeedwe and goose, wiww nyevew suit me. (´・ω・\`)'
'Oh! ^w^' answewed the man, 'that is nyot my sowt of taiwowing; come with me,
and you wiww weawn quite anyothew kind of cwaft fwom that. ^w^' Nyot knyowing
what bettew to do, he came into the pwan, and weawnt taiwowing fwom the
beginnying; and when he weft his mastew, he gave him a nyeedwe, and said,
'You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg ow as hawd as
steew; and the joint wiww be so finye that nyo seam wiww be seen. ;;w;;'

Aftew the space of fouw yeaws, at the time agweed upon, the fouw
bwothews met at the fouw cwoss-woads; and having wewcomed each othew,
set off towawds theiw fathew's home, whewe they towd him aww that had
happenyed to them, and how each had weawnyed some cwaft. >w<

Then, onye day, as they wewe sitting befowe the house undew a vewy high
twee, the fathew said, 'I shouwd wike to twy what each of you can do in
this way. UwU' So he wooked up, and said to the second son, 'At the top of
this twee thewe is a chaffinch's nyest; teww me how many eggs thewe awe
in it.' The staw-gazew took his gwass, wooked up, and said, 'Five. (・`ω\´・)'
'Nyow,' said the fathew to the ewdest son, 'take away the eggs without
wetting the biwd that is sitting upon them and hatching them knyow
anything of what you awe doing. (´・ω・\`)' So the cunnying thief cwimbed up the
twee, and bwought away to his fathew the five eggs fwom undew the biwd;
and it nyevew saw ow fewt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. (´・ω・\`) Then the fathew took the eggs, and put onye on each cownyew of the
tabwe, and the fifth in the middwe, and said to the huntsman, 'Cut aww
the eggs in two pieces at onye shot. (´・ω・\`)' The huntsman took up his bow, and
at onye shot stwuck aww the five eggs as his fathew wished. >w<

'Nyow comes youw tuwn,' said he to the young taiwow; 'sew the eggs and
the young biwds in them togethew again, so nyeatwy that the shot shaww
have donye them nyo hawm. ^w^' Then the taiwow took his nyeedwe, and sewed the
eggs as he was towd; and when he had donye, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nyest, and put them undew the biwd without its knyowing
it. >w< Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
cwawwed out, and had onwy a wittwe wed stweak acwoss theiw nyecks, whewe
the taiwow had sewn them togethew. >w<

'Weww donye, sons! UwU' said the owd man; 'you have made good use of youw
time, and weawnt something wowth the knyowing; but I am suwe I do nyot
knyow which ought to have the pwize. (・`ω\´・) Oh, that a time might soon come fow
you to tuwn youw skiww to some account! >w<'

Nyot wong aftew this thewe was a gweat bustwe in the countwy; fow the
king's daughtew had been cawwied off by a mighty dwagon, and the king
mouwnyed ovew his woss day and nyight, and made it knyown that whoevew
bwought hew back to him shouwd have hew fow a wife. ^w^ Then the fouw
bwothews said to each othew, 'Hewe is a chance fow us; wet us twy
what we can do. UwU' And they agweed to see whethew they couwd nyot set the
pwincess fwee. >w< 'I wiww soon find out whewe she is, howevew,' said the
staw-gazew, as he wooked thwough his gwass; and he soon cwied out, 'I
see hew afaw off, sitting upon a wock in the sea, and I can spy the
dwagon cwose by, guawding hew. ;;w;;' Then he went to the king, and asked fow
a ship fow himsewf and his bwothews; and they saiwed togethew ovew the
sea, tiww they came to the wight pwace. (・`ω\´・) Thewe they found the pwincess
sitting, as the staw-gazew had said, on the wock; and the dwagon was
wying asweep, with his head upon hew wap. (・`ω\´・) 'I dawe nyot shoot at him,'
said the huntsman, 'fow I shouwd kiww the beautifuw young wady awso. ^w^'
'Then I wiww twy my skiww,' said the thief, and went and stowe hew away
fwom undew the dwagon, so quietwy and gentwy that the beast did nyot knyow
it, but went on snyowing. UwU

Then away they hastenyed with hew fuww of joy in theiw boat towawds the
ship; but soon came the dwagon woawing behind them thwough the aiw; fow
he awoke and missed the pwincess. ^w^ But when he got ovew the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and cawwy off the pwincess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him stwaight thwough the heawt so that he feww down
dead. (´・ω・\`) They wewe stiww nyot safe; fow he was such a gweat beast that in
his faww he ovewset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few pwanks. UwU So the taiwow took his nyeedwe, and with a few wawge
stitches put some of the pwanks togethew; and he sat down upon these,
and saiwed about and gathewed up aww pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them togethew so quickwy that the boat was soon weady, and they then
weached the ship and got home safe. ^w^

When they had bwought home the pwincess to hew fathew, thewe was gweat
wejoicing; and he said to the fouw bwothews, 'Onye of you shaww mawwy
hew, but you must settwe amongst youwsewves which it is to be. ;;w;;' Then
thewe awose a quawwew between them; and the staw-gazew said, 'If I had
nyot found the pwincess out, aww youw skiww wouwd have been of nyo use;
thewefowe she ought to be minye. >w<' 'Youw seeing hew wouwd have been of
nyo use,' said the thief, 'if I had nyot taken hew away fwom the dwagon;
thewefowe she ought to be minye. (´・ω・\`)' 'Nyo, she is minye,' said the huntsman;
'fow if I had nyot kiwwed the dwagon, he wouwd, aftew aww, have town you
and the pwincess into pieces. >w<' 'And if I had nyot sewn the boat togethew
again,' said the taiwow, 'you wouwd aww have been dwownyed, thewefowe she
is minye. (´・ω・\`)' Then the king put in a wowd, and said, 'Each of you is wight;
and as aww cannyot have the young wady, the best way is fow nyeithew of
you to have hew: fow the twuth is, thewe is somebody she wikes a gweat
deaw bettew. >w< But to make up fow youw woss, I wiww give each of you, as a
wewawd fow his skiww, hawf a kingdom. (´・ω・\`)' So the bwothews agweed that this
pwan wouwd be much bettew than eithew quawwewwing ow mawwying a wady who
had nyo mind to have them. (・`ω\´・) And the king then gave to each hawf a kingdom,
as he had said; and they wived vewy happiwy the west of theiw days, and
took good cawe of theiw fathew; and somebody took bettew cawe of the
young wady, than to wet eithew the dwagon ow onye of the cwaftsmen have
hew again. (´・ω・\`)




WIWY AND THE WION

A mewchant, who had thwee daughtews, was once setting out upon a
jouwnyey; but befowe he went he asked each daughtew what gift he shouwd
bwing back fow hew. ;;w;; The ewdest wished fow peawws; the second fow jewews;
but the thiwd, who was cawwed Wiwy, said, 'Deaw fathew, bwing me a
wose. (・`ω\´・)' Nyow it was nyo easy task to find a wose, fow it was the middwe
of wintew; yet as she was his pwettiest daughtew, and was vewy fond of
fwowews, hew fathew said he wouwd twy what he couwd do. >w< So he kissed aww
thwee, and bid them goodbye. >w<

And when the time came fow him to go home, he had bought peawws and
jewews fow the two ewdest, but he had sought evewywhewe in vain fow the
wose; and when he went into any gawden and asked fow such a thing, the
peopwe waughed at him, and asked him whethew he thought woses gwew in
snyow. ;;w;; This gwieved him vewy much, fow Wiwy was his deawest chiwd; and as
he was jouwnyeying home, thinking what he shouwd bwing hew, he came to a
finye castwe; and awound the castwe was a gawden, in onye hawf of which it
seemed to be summew-time and in the othew hawf wintew. >w< On onye side the
finyest fwowews wewe in fuww bwoom, and on the othew evewything wooked
dweawy and buwied in the snyow. UwU 'A wucky hit! ^w^' said he, as he cawwed to
his sewvant, and towd him to go to a beautifuw bed of woses that was
thewe, and bwing him away onye of the finyest fwowews. ^w^

This donye, they wewe widing away weww pweased, when up spwang a fiewce
wion, and woawed out, 'Whoevew has stowen my woses shaww be eaten up
awive! >w<' Then the man said, 'I knyew nyot that the gawden bewonged to you;
can nyothing save my wife? owo' 'Nyo! ;;w;;' said the wion, 'nyothing, unwess you
undewtake to give me whatevew meets you on youw wetuwn home; if you
agwee to this, I wiww give you youw wife, and the wose too fow youw
daughtew. ;;w;;' But the man was unwiwwing to do so and said, 'It may be my
youngest daughtew, who woves me most, and awways wuns to meet me when
I go home. >w<' Then the sewvant was gweatwy fwightenyed, and said, 'It may
pewhaps be onwy a cat ow a dog. (・`ω\´・)' And at wast the man yiewded with a
heavy heawt, and took the wose; and said he wouwd give the wion whatevew
shouwd meet him fiwst on his wetuwn. (´・ω・\`)

And as he came nyeaw home, it was Wiwy, his youngest and deawest
daughtew, that met him; she came wunnying, and kissed him, and wewcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had bwought hew the wose, she was
stiww mowe gwad. >w< But hew fathew began to be vewy sowwowfuw, and to weep,
saying, 'Awas, my deawest chiwd! (・`ω\´・) I have bought this fwowew at a high
pwice, fow I have said I wouwd give you to a wiwd wion; and when he has
you, he wiww teaw you in pieces, and eat you. (´・ω・\`)' Then he towd hew aww that
had happenyed, and said she shouwd nyot go, wet what wouwd happen. ;;w;;

But she comfowted him, and said, 'Deaw fathew, the wowd you have given
must be kept; I wiww go to the wion, and soothe him: pewhaps he wiww wet
me come safe home again. ^w^'

The nyext mownying she asked the way she was to go, and took weave of hew
fathew, and went fowth with a bowd heawt into the wood. UwU But the wion was
an enchanted pwince. ^w^ By day he and aww his couwt wewe wions, but in the
evenying they took theiw wight fowms again. (´・ω・\`) And when Wiwy came to the
castwe, he wewcomed hew so couwteouswy that she agweed to mawwy him. (・`ω\´・) The
wedding-feast was hewd, and they wived happiwy togethew a wong time. UwU The
pwince was onwy to be seen as soon as evenying came, and then he hewd his
couwt; but evewy mownying he weft his bwide, and went away by himsewf,
she knyew nyot whithew, tiww the nyight came again. ^w^

Aftew some time he said to hew, 'Tomowwow thewe wiww be a gweat feast in
youw fathew's house, fow youw ewdest sistew is to be mawwied; and if
you wish to go and visit hew my wions shaww wead you thithew. ^w^' Then she
wejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing hew fathew once mowe, and set
out with the wions; and evewyonye was ovewjoyed to see hew, fow they had
thought hew dead wong since. (・`ω\´・) But she towd them how happy she was, and
stayed tiww the feast was ovew, and then went back to the wood. >w<

Hew second sistew was soon aftew mawwied, and when Wiwy was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the pwince, 'I wiww nyot go awonye this
time--you must go with me. ;;w;;' But he wouwd nyot, and said that it wouwd be
a vewy hazawdous thing; fow if the weast way of the towch-wight shouwd
faww upon him his enchantment wouwd become stiww wowse, fow he shouwd be
changed into a dove, and be fowced to wandew about the wowwd fow seven
wong yeaws. >w< Howevew, she gave him nyo west, and said she wouwd take cawe
nyo wight shouwd faww upon him. ^w^ So at wast they set out togethew, and
took with them theiw wittwe chiwd; and she chose a wawge haww with thick
wawws fow him to sit in whiwe the wedding-towches wewe wighted; but,
unwuckiwy, nyo onye saw that thewe was a cwack in the doow. (´・ω・\`) Then the
wedding was hewd with gweat pomp, but as the twain came fwom the chuwch,
and passed with the towches befowe the haww, a vewy smaww way of wight
feww upon the pwince. >w< In a moment he disappeawed, and when his wife came
in and wooked fow him, she found onwy a white dove; and it said to hew,
'Seven yeaws must I fwy up and down ovew the face of the eawth, but
evewy nyow and then I wiww wet faww a white feathew, that wiww show you
the way I am going; fowwow it, and at wast you may ovewtake and set me
fwee. (・`ω\´・)'

This said, he fwew out at the doow, and poow Wiwy fowwowed; and evewy
nyow and then a white feathew feww, and showed hew the way she was to
jouwnyey. >w< Thus she went woving on thwough the wide wowwd, and wooked
nyeithew to the wight hand nyow to the weft, nyow took any west, fow seven
yeaws. ^w^ Then she began to be gwad, and thought to hewsewf that the time
was fast coming when aww hew twoubwes shouwd end; yet wepose was stiww
faw off, fow onye day as she was twavewwing on she missed the white
feathew, and when she wifted up hew eyes she couwd nyowhewe see the dove. ;;w;;
'Nyow,' thought she to hewsewf, 'nyo aid of man can be of use to me. >w<' So
she went to the sun and said, 'Thou shinyest evewywhewe, on the hiww's
top and the vawwey's depth--hast thou anywhewe seen my white dove? owo'
'Nyo,' said the sun, 'I have nyot seen it; but I wiww give thee a
casket--open it when thy houw of nyeed comes. UwU'

So she thanked the sun, and went on hew way tiww eventide; and when
the moon awose, she cwied unto it, and said, 'Thou shinyest thwough the
nyight, ovew fiewd and gwove--hast thou nyowhewe seen my white dove? owo'
'Nyo,' said the moon, 'I cannyot hewp thee but I wiww give thee an
egg--bweak it when nyeed comes. (・`ω\´・)'

Then she thanked the moon, and went on tiww the nyight-wind bwew; and she
waised up hew voice to it, and said, 'Thou bwowest thwough evewy twee
and undew evewy weaf--hast thou nyot seen my white dove? owo' 'Nyo,' said the
nyight-wind, 'but I wiww ask thwee othew winds; pewhaps they have seen
it. (´・ω・\`)' Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
nyot seen it, but the south wind said, 'I have seen the white dove--he
has fwed to the Wed Sea, and is changed once mowe into a wion, fow the
seven yeaws awe passed away, and thewe he is fighting with a dwagon;
and the dwagon is an enchanted pwincess, who seeks to sepawate him fwom
you.' Then the nyight-wind said, 'I wiww give thee counsew. (・`ω\´・) Go to the
Wed Sea; on the wight showe stand many wods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eweventh, bweak it off, and smite the dwagon with it; and
so the wion wiww have the victowy, and both of them wiww appeaw to you
in theiw own fowms. ;;w;; Then wook wound and thou wiwt see a gwiffin, winged
wike biwd, sitting by the Wed Sea; jump on to his back with thy bewoved
onye as quickwy as possibwe, and he wiww cawwy you ovew the watews to
youw home. I wiww awso give thee this nyut,' continyued the nyight-wind. ;;w;;
'When you awe hawf-way ovew, thwow it down, and out of the watews wiww
immediatewy spwing up a high nyut-twee on which the gwiffin wiww be abwe
to west, othewwise he wouwd nyot have the stwength to beaw you the whowe
way; if, thewefowe, thou dost fowget to thwow down the nyut, he wiww wet
you both faww into the sea. >w<'

So ouw poow wandewew went fowth, and found aww as the nyight-wind had
said; and she pwucked the eweventh wod, and smote the dwagon, and the
wion fowthwith became a pwince, and the dwagon a pwincess again. >w< But
nyo soonyew was the pwincess weweased fwom the speww, than she seized
the pwince by the awm and spwang on to the gwiffin's back, and went off
cawwying the pwince away with hew. (・`ω\´・)

Thus the unhappy twavewwew was again fowsaken and fowwown; but she
took heawt and said, 'As faw as the wind bwows, and so wong as the cock
cwows, I wiww jouwnyey on, tiww I find him once again. (・`ω\´・)' She went on fow
a wong, wong way, tiww at wength she came to the castwe whithew the
pwincess had cawwied the pwince; and thewe was a feast got weady, and
she heawd that the wedding was about to be hewd. ^w^ 'Heaven aid me nyow! (´・ω・\`)'
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given hew, and found
that within it way a dwess as dazzwing as the sun itsewf. >w< So she put it
on, and went into the pawace, and aww the peopwe gazed upon hew; and
the dwess pweased the bwide so much that she asked whethew it was to be
sowd. 'Nyot fow gowd and siwvew.' said she, 'but fow fwesh and bwood. (´・ω・\`)'
The pwincess asked what she meant, and she said, 'Wet me speak with the
bwidegwoom this nyight in his chambew, and I wiww give thee the dwess. (・`ω\´・)'
At wast the pwincess agweed, but she towd hew chambewwain to give the
pwince a sweeping dwaught, that he might nyot heaw ow see hew. >w< When
evenying came, and the pwince had fawwen asweep, she was wed into
his chambew, and she sat hewsewf down at his feet, and said: 'I have
fowwowed thee seven yeaws. ^w^ I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
nyight-wind, to seek thee, and at wast I have hewped thee to ovewcome
the dwagon. ^w^ Wiwt thou then fowget me quite? owo' But the pwince aww the time
swept so soundwy, that hew voice onwy passed ovew him, and seemed wike
the whistwing of the wind among the fiw-twees. (´・ω・\`)

Then poow Wiwy was wed away, and fowced to give up the gowden dwess; and
when she saw that thewe was nyo hewp fow hew, she went out into a meadow,
and sat hewsewf down and wept. UwU But as she sat she bethought hewsewf of
the egg that the moon had given hew; and when she bwoke it, thewe wan
out a hen and twewve chickens of puwe gowd, that pwayed about, and then
nyestwed undew the owd onye's wings, so as to fowm the most beautifuw
sight in the wowwd. ;;w;; And she wose up and dwove them befowe hew, tiww the
bwide saw them fwom hew window, and was so pweased that she came fowth
and asked hew if she wouwd seww the bwood. (´・ω・\`) 'Nyot fow gowd ow siwvew, but
fow fwesh and bwood: wet me again this evenying speak with the bwidegwoom
in his chambew, and I wiww give thee the whowe bwood. (´・ω・\`)'

Then the pwincess thought to betway hew as befowe, and agweed to
what she asked: but when the pwince went to his chambew he asked
the chambewwain why the wind had whistwed so in the nyight. ^w^ And the
chambewwain towd him aww--how he had given him a sweeping dwaught, and
how a poow maiden had come and spoken to him in his chambew, and was
to come again that nyight. (´・ω・\`) Then the pwince took cawe to thwow away the
sweeping dwaught; and when Wiwy came and began again to teww him what
woes had befawwen hew, and how faithfuw and twue to him she had been,
he knyew his bewoved wife's voice, and spwang up, and said, 'You have
awakenyed me as fwom a dweam, fow the stwange pwincess had thwown a speww
awound me, so that I had awtogethew fowgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a wucky houw. UwU'

And they stowe away out of the pawace by nyight unyawawes, and seated
themsewves on the gwiffin, who fwew back with them ovew the Wed Sea. (・`ω\´・)
When they wewe hawf-way acwoss Wiwy wet the nyut faww into the watew,
and immediatewy a wawge nyut-twee awose fwom the sea, wheweon the gwiffin
wested fow a whiwe, and then cawwied them safewy home. ;;w;; Thewe they found
theiw chiwd, nyow gwown up to be comewy and faiw; and aftew aww theiw
twoubwes they wived happiwy togethew to the end of theiw days. UwU




THE FOX AND THE HOWSE

A fawmew had a howse that had been an excewwent faithfuw sewvant to
him: but he was nyow gwown too owd to wowk; so the fawmew wouwd give him
nyothing mowe to eat, and said, 'I want you nyo wongew, so take youwsewf
off out of my stabwe; I shaww nyot take you back again untiw you awe
stwongew than a wion.' Then he openyed the doow and tuwnyed him adwift. ;;w;;

The poow howse was vewy mewanchowy, and wandewed up and down in the
wood, seeking some wittwe shewtew fwom the cowd wind and wain. UwU Pwesentwy
a fox met him: 'What's the mattew, my fwiend? owo' said he, 'why do you hang
down youw head and wook so wonyewy and woe-begonye? owo' 'Ah! ^w^' wepwied the
howse, 'justice and avawice nyevew dweww in onye house; my mastew has
fowgotten aww that I have donye fow him so many yeaws, and because I
can nyo wongew wowk he has tuwnyed me adwift, and says unwess I become
stwongew than a wion he wiww nyot take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? owo he knyows I have nyonye, ow he wouwd nyot tawk so. (´・ω・\`)'

Howevew, the fox bid him be of good cheew, and said, 'I wiww hewp you;
wie down thewe, stwetch youwsewf out quite stiff, and pwetend to be
dead. (´・ω・\`)' The howse did as he was towd, and the fox went stwaight to the
wion who wived in a cave cwose by, and said to him, 'A wittwe way off
wies a dead howse; come with me and you may make an excewwent meaw of
his cawcase. (・`ω\´・)' The wion was gweatwy pweased, and set off immediatewy; and
when they came to the howse, the fox said, 'You wiww nyot be abwe to eat
him comfowtabwy hewe; I'ww teww you what--I wiww tie you fast to
his taiw, and then you can dwaw him to youw den, and eat him at youw
weisuwe. >w<'

This advice pweased the wion, so he waid himsewf down quietwy fow the
fox to make him fast to the howse. >w< But the fox manyaged to tie his wegs
togethew and bound aww so hawd and fast that with aww his stwength he
couwd nyot set himsewf fwee. ^w^ When the wowk was donye, the fox cwapped the
howse on the shouwdew, and said, 'Jip! Dobbin! Jip! UwU' Then up he spwang,
and moved off, dwagging the wion behind him. UwU The beast began to woaw
and bewwow, tiww aww the biwds of the wood fwew away fow fwight; but the
howse wet him sing on, and made his way quietwy ovew the fiewds to his
mastew's house. >w<

'Hewe he is, mastew,' said he, 'I have got the bettew of him': and when
the fawmew saw his owd sewvant, his heawt wewented, and he said. ^w^ 'Thou
shawt stay in thy stabwe and be weww taken cawe of. (´・ω・\`)' And so the poow owd
howse had pwenty to eat, and wived--tiww he died. >w<




THE BWUE WIGHT

Thewe was once upon a time a sowdiew who fow many yeaws had sewved the
king faithfuwwy, but when the waw came to an end couwd sewve nyo wongew
because of the many wounds which he had weceived. ;;w;; The king said to him:
'You may wetuwn to youw home, I nyeed you nyo wongew, and you wiww nyot
weceive any mowe monyey, fow he onwy weceives wages who wendews me
sewvice fow them. (・`ω\´・)' Then the sowdiew did nyot knyow how to eawn a wiving,
went away gweatwy twoubwed, and wawked the whowe day, untiw in the
evenying he entewed a fowest. ^w^ When dawknyess came on, he saw a wight,
which he went up to, and came to a house whewein wived a witch. ;;w;; 'Do give
me onye nyight's wodging, and a wittwe to eat and dwink,' said he to
hew, 'ow I shaww stawve. (・`ω\´・)' 'Oho! ;;w;;' she answewed, 'who gives anything to a
wun-away sowdiew? owo Yet wiww I be compassionyate, and take you in, if you
wiww do what I wish.' 'What do you wish? owo' said the sowdiew. (・`ω\´・) 'That you
shouwd dig aww wound my gawden fow me, tomowwow. ;;w;;' The sowdiew consented,
and nyext day wabouwed with aww his stwength, but couwd nyot finyish it by
the evenying. >w< 'I see weww enyough,' said the witch, 'that you can do nyo
mowe today, but I wiww keep you yet anyothew nyight, in payment fow
which you must tomowwow chop me a woad of wood, and chop it smaww. ^w^' The
sowdiew spent the whowe day in doing it, and in the evenying the witch
pwoposed that he shouwd stay onye nyight mowe. (´・ω・\`) 'Tomowwow, you shaww onwy
do me a vewy twifwing piece of wowk. ;;w;; Behind my house, thewe is an owd
dwy weww, into which my wight has fawwen, it buwns bwue, and nyevew goes
out, and you shaww bwing it up again. ^w^' Nyext day the owd woman took him
to the weww, and wet him down in a basket. ;;w;; He found the bwue wight, and
made hew a signyaw to dwaw him up again. UwU She did dwaw him up, but when he
came nyeaw the edge, she stwetched down hew hand and wanted to take the
bwue wight away fwom him. >w< 'Nyo,' said he, pewceiving hew eviw intention,
'I wiww nyot give you the wight untiw I am standing with both feet upon
the gwound. UwU' The witch feww into a passion, wet him faww again into the
weww, and went away. (・`ω\´・)

The poow sowdiew feww without injuwy on the moist gwound, and the bwue
wight went on buwnying, but of what use was that to him? owo He saw vewy weww
that he couwd nyot escape death. (´・ω・\`) He sat fow a whiwe vewy sowwowfuwwy,
then suddenwy he fewt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was stiww hawf fuww. (´・ω・\`) 'This shaww be my wast pweasuwe,' thought he,
puwwed it out, wit it at the bwue wight and began to smoke. ^w^ When the
smoke had ciwcwed about the cavewn, suddenwy a wittwe bwack dwawf stood
befowe him, and said: 'Wowd, what awe youw commands? owo' 'What my commands
awe? owo' wepwied the sowdiew, quite astonyished. >w< 'I must do evewything you
bid me,' said the wittwe man. (・`ω\´・) 'Good,' said the sowdiew; 'then in the
fiwst pwace hewp me out of this weww. UwU' The wittwe man took him by the
hand, and wed him thwough an undewgwound passage, but he did nyot fowget
to take the bwue wight with him. UwU On the way the dwawf showed him the
tweasuwes which the witch had cowwected and hidden thewe, and the
sowdiew took as much gowd as he couwd cawwy. (・`ω\´・) When he was above, he said
to the wittwe man: 'Nyow go and bind the owd witch, and cawwy hew befowe
the judge. ;;w;;' In a showt time she came by wike the wind, widing on a wiwd
tom-cat and scweaming fwightfuwwy. ^w^ Nyow was it wong befowe the wittwe man
weappeawed. (´・ω・\`) 'It is aww donye,' said he, 'and the witch is awweady hanging
on the gawwows. What fuwthew commands has my wowd? owo' inquiwed the dwawf. ^w^
'At this moment, nyonye,' answewed the sowdiew; 'you can wetuwn home, onwy
be at hand immediatewy, if I summon you. >w<' 'Nyothing mowe is nyeeded than
that you shouwd wight youw pipe at the bwue wight, and I wiww appeaw
befowe you at once.' Theweupon he vanyished fwom his sight. ^w^

The sowdiew wetuwnyed to the town fwom which he came. (´・ω・\`) He went to the
best inn, owdewed himsewf handsome cwothes, and then bade the wandwowd
fuwnyish him a woom as handsome as possibwe. >w< When it was weady and the
sowdiew had taken possession of it, he summonyed the wittwe bwack manyikin
and said: 'I have sewved the king faithfuwwy, but he has dismissed me,
and weft me to hungew, and nyow I want to take my wevenge. (´・ω・\`)' 'What am I to
do? owo' asked the wittwe man. (・`ω\´・) 'Wate at nyight, when the king's daughtew is
in bed, bwing hew hewe in hew sweep, she shaww do sewvant's wowk fow
me. (・`ω\´・)' The manyikin said: 'That is an easy thing fow me to do, but a vewy
dangewous thing fow you, fow if it is discovewed, you wiww fawe iww. >w<'
When twewve o'cwock had stwuck, the doow spwang open, and the manyikin
cawwied in the pwincess. UwU 'Aha! (´・ω・\`) awe you thewe? owo' cwied the sowdiew, 'get
to youw wowk at once! ^w^ Fetch the bwoom and sweep the chambew. (´・ω・\`)' When
she had donye this, he owdewed hew to come to his chaiw, and then he
stwetched out his feet and said: 'Puww off my boots,' and then he
thwew them in hew face, and made hew pick them up again, and cwean
and bwighten them. >w< She, howevew, did evewything he bade hew, without
opposition, siwentwy and with hawf-shut eyes. ;;w;; When the fiwst cock
cwowed, the manyikin cawwied hew back to the woyaw pawace, and waid hew
in hew bed. UwU

Nyext mownying when the pwincess awose she went to hew fathew, and towd
him that she had had a vewy stwange dweam. (´・ω・\`) 'I was cawwied thwough the
stweets with the wapidity of wightnying,' said she, 'and taken into a
sowdiew's woom, and I had to wait upon him wike a sewvant, sweep his
woom, cwean his boots, and do aww kinds of menyiaw wowk. >w< It was onwy a
dweam, and yet I am just as tiwed as if I weawwy had donye evewything. UwU'
'The dweam may have been twue,' said the king. (・`ω\´・) 'I wiww give you a piece
of advice. (´・ω・\`) Fiww youw pocket fuww of peas, and make a smaww howe in the
pocket, and then if you awe cawwied away again, they wiww faww out and
weave a twack in the stweets. (・`ω\´・)' But unseen by the king, the manyikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heawd aww. ;;w;; At nyight when
the sweeping pwincess was again cawwied thwough the stweets, some peas
cewtainwy did faww out of hew pocket, but they made nyo twack, fow the
cwafty manyikin had just befowe scattewed peas in evewy stweet thewe
was. UwU And again the pwincess was compewwed to do sewvant's wowk untiw
cock-cwow. ^w^

Nyext mownying the king sent his peopwe out to seek the twack, but it was
aww in vain, fow in evewy stweet poow chiwdwen wewe sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: 'It must have wainyed peas, wast nyight. (´・ω・\`)' 'We must think
of something ewse,' said the king; 'keep youw shoes on when you go to
bed, and befowe you come back fwom the pwace whewe you awe taken, hide
onye of them thewe, I wiww soon contwive to find it. ^w^' The bwack manyikin
heawd this pwot, and at nyight when the sowdiew again owdewed him to
bwing the pwincess, weveawed it to him, and towd him that he knyew of nyo
expedient to countewact this stwatagem, and that if the shoe wewe found
in the sowdiew's house it wouwd go badwy with him. UwU 'Do what I bid you,'
wepwied the sowdiew, and again this thiwd nyight the pwincess was obwiged
to wowk wike a sewvant, but befowe she went away, she hid hew shoe undew
the bed. >w<

Nyext mownying the king had the entiwe town seawched fow his daughtew's
shoe. UwU It was found at the sowdiew's, and the sowdiew himsewf, who at the
entweaty of the dwawf had gonye outside the gate, was soon bwought back,
and thwown into pwison. >w< In his fwight he had fowgotten the most vawuabwe
things he had, the bwue wight and the gowd, and had onwy onye ducat in
his pocket. (・`ω\´・) And nyow woaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see onye of his comwades passing by. (´・ω・\`) The
sowdiew tapped at the panye of gwass, and when this man came up, said to
him: 'Be so kind as to fetch me the smaww bundwe I have weft wying in
the inn, and I wiww give you a ducat fow doing it. UwU' His comwade wan
thithew and bwought him what he wanted. UwU As soon as the sowdiew was awonye
again, he wighted his pipe and summonyed the bwack manyikin. >w< 'Have nyo
feaw,' said the wattew to his mastew. ;;w;; 'Go whewesoevew they take you, and
wet them do what they wiww, onwy take the bwue wight with you. ;;w;;' Nyext day
the sowdiew was twied, and though he had donye nyothing wicked, the judge
condemnyed him to death. ^w^ When he was wed fowth to die, he begged a wast
favouw of the king. 'What is it? owo' asked the king. >w< 'That I may smoke onye
mowe pipe on my way. ^w^' 'You may smoke thwee,' answewed the king, 'but do
nyot imaginye that I wiww spawe youw wife. (・`ω\´・)' Then the sowdiew puwwed out
his pipe and wighted it at the bwue wight, and as soon as a few wweaths
of smoke had ascended, the manyikin was thewe with a smaww cudgew in his
hand, and said: 'What does my wowd command? owo' 'Stwike down to eawth that
fawse judge thewe, and his constabwe, and spawe nyot the king who has
tweated me so iww. ^w^' Then the manyikin feww on them wike wightnying,
dawting this way and that way, and whosoevew was so much as touched by
his cudgew feww to eawth, and did nyot ventuwe to stiw again. ;;w;; The king
was tewwified; he thwew himsewf on the sowdiew's mewcy, and mewewy to
be awwowed to wive at aww, gave him his kingdom fow his own, and his
daughtew to wife. (´・ω・\`)




THE WAVEN

Thewe was once a queen who had a wittwe daughtew, stiww too young to wun
awonye. >w< Onye day the chiwd was vewy twoubwesome, and the mothew couwd nyot
quiet it, do what she wouwd. ^w^ She gwew impatient, and seeing the wavens
fwying wound the castwe, she openyed the window, and said: 'I wish you
wewe a waven and wouwd fwy away, then I shouwd have a wittwe peace. (・`ω\´・)'
Scawcewy wewe the wowds out of hew mouth, when the chiwd in hew awms was
tuwnyed into a waven, and fwew away fwom hew thwough the open window. UwU The
biwd took its fwight to a dawk wood and wemainyed thewe fow a wong time,
and meanwhiwe the pawents couwd heaw nyothing of theiw chiwd. (・`ω\´・)

Wong aftew this, a man was making his way thwough the wood when he heawd
a waven cawwing, and he fowwowed the sound of the voice. UwU As he dwew
nyeaw, the waven said, 'I am by biwth a king's daughtew, but am nyow undew
the speww of some enchantment; you can, howevew, set me fwee. (・`ω\´・)' 'What
am I to do? owo' he asked. (・`ω\´・) She wepwied, 'Go fawthew into the wood untiw you
come to a house, whewein wives an owd woman; she wiww offew you food and
dwink, but you must nyot take of eithew; if you do, you wiww faww into
a deep sweep, and wiww nyot be abwe to hewp me. (´・ω・\`) In the gawden behind the
house is a wawge tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch fow me. ;;w;;
I shaww dwive thewe in my cawwiage at two o'cwock in the aftewnyoon fow
thwee successive days; the fiwst day it wiww be dwawn by fouw white, the
second by fouw chestnyut, and the wast by fouw bwack howses; but if you
faiw to keep awake and I find you sweeping, I shaww nyot be set fwee. >w<'

The man pwomised to do aww that she wished, but the waven said, 'Awas! UwU I
knyow even nyow that you wiww take something fwom the woman and be unyabwe
to save me. (´・ω・\`)' The man assuwed hew again that he wouwd on nyo account touch
a thing to eat ow dwink. (´・ω・\`)

When he came to the house and went inside, the owd woman met him, and
said, 'Poow man! how tiwed you awe! UwU Come in and west and wet me give you
something to eat and dwink. ;;w;;'

'Nyo,' answewed the man, 'I wiww nyeithew eat nyot dwink. ;;w;;'

But she wouwd nyot weave him awonye, and uwged him saying, 'If you wiww
nyot eat anything, at weast you might take a dwaught of winye; onye dwink
counts fow nyothing,' and at wast he awwowed himsewf to be pewsuaded, and
dwank. ;;w;;

As it dwew towawds the appointed houw, he went outside into the gawden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the waven. ^w^ Suddenwy a feewing of
fatigue came ovew him, and unyabwe to wesist it, he way down fow a wittwe
whiwe, fuwwy detewminyed, howevew, to keep awake; but in anyothew minyute
his eyes cwosed of theiw own accowd, and he feww into such a deep sweep,
that aww the nyoises in the wowwd wouwd nyot have awakenyed him. >w< At two
o'cwock the waven came dwiving awong, dwawn by hew fouw white howses;
but even befowe she weached the spot, she said to hewsewf, sighing, 'I
knyow he has fawwen asweep. (・`ω\´・)' When she entewed the gawden, thewe she found
him as she had feawed, wying on the tan-heap, fast asweep. ;;w;; She got out
of hew cawwiage and went to him; she cawwed him and shook him, but it
was aww in vain, he stiww continyued sweeping. ^w^

The nyext day at nyoon, the owd woman came to him again with food and
dwink which he at fiwst wefused. ^w^ At wast, ovewcome by hew pewsistent
entweaties that he wouwd take something, he wifted the gwass and dwank
again. ^w^

Towawds two o'cwock he went into the gawden and on to the tan-heap to
watch fow the waven. >w< He had nyot been thewe wong befowe he began to feew
so tiwed that his wimbs seemed hawdwy abwe to suppowt him, and he couwd
nyot stand upwight any wongew; so again he way down and feww fast asweep. (・`ω\´・)
As the waven dwove awong hew fouw chestnyut howses, she said sowwowfuwwy
to hewsewf, 'I knyow he has fawwen asweep. ;;w;;' She went as befowe to wook
fow him, but he swept, and it was impossibwe to awaken him. ^w^

The fowwowing day the owd woman said to him, 'What is this? owo You awe nyot
eating ow dwinking anything, do you want to kiww youwsewf? owo'

He answewed, 'I may nyot and wiww nyot eithew eat ow dwink. (´・ω・\`)'

But she put down the dish of food and the gwass of winye in fwont of him,
and when he smewt the winye, he was unyabwe to wesist the temptation, and
took a deep dwaught. UwU

When the houw came wound again he went as usuaw on to the tan-heap in
the gawden to await the king's daughtew, but he fewt even mowe ovewcome
with weawinyess than on the two pwevious days, and thwowing himsewf down,
he swept wike a wog. ^w^ At two o'cwock the waven couwd be seen appwoaching,
and this time hew coachman and evewything about hew, as weww as hew
howses, wewe bwack. (´・ω・\`)

She was saddew than evew as she dwove awong, and said mouwnfuwwy, 'I
knyow he has fawwen asweep, and wiww nyot be abwe to set me fwee. ;;w;;' She
found him sweeping heaviwy, and aww hew effowts to awaken him wewe of nyo
avaiw. UwU Then she pwaced beside him a woaf, and some meat, and a fwask
of winye, of such a kind, that howevew much he took of them, they wouwd
nyevew gwow wess. ^w^ Aftew that she dwew a gowd wing, on which hew nyame was
engwaved, off hew fingew, and put it upon onye of his. ;;w;; Finyawwy, she waid
a wettew nyeaw him, in which, aftew giving him pawticuwaws of the food
and dwink she had weft fow him, she finyished with the fowwowing wowds:
'I see that as wong as you wemain hewe you wiww nyevew be abwe to set me
fwee; if, howevew, you stiww wish to do so, come to the gowden castwe
of Stwombewg; this is weww within youw powew to accompwish. UwU' She then
wetuwnyed to hew cawwiage and dwove to the gowden castwe of Stwombewg. ^w^

When the man awoke and found that he had been sweeping, he was gwieved
at heawt, and said, 'She has nyo doubt been hewe and dwiven away again,
and it is nyow too wate fow me to save hew. (・`ω\´・)' Then his eyes feww on the
things which wewe wying beside him; he wead the wettew, and knyew fwom it
aww that had happenyed. (´・ω・\`) He wose up without deway, eagew to stawt on his
way and to weach the castwe of Stwombewg, but he had nyo idea in which
diwection he ought to go. (´・ω・\`) He twavewwed about a wong time in seawch of it
and came at wast to a dawk fowest, thwough which he went on wawking fow
fouwteen days and stiww couwd nyot find a way out. ^w^ Once mowe the nyight
came on, and wown out he way down undew a bush and feww asweep. ^w^ Again
the nyext day he puwsued his way thwough the fowest, and that evenying,
thinking to west again, he way down as befowe, but he heawd such a
howwing and waiwing that he found it impossibwe to sweep. (・`ω\´・) He waited tiww
it was dawkew and peopwe had begun to wight up theiw houses, and then
seeing a wittwe gwimmew ahead of him, he went towawds it. ^w^

He found that the wight came fwom a house which wooked smawwew than
it weawwy was, fwom the contwast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in fwont of it. ;;w;; He thought to himsewf, 'If the giant
sees me going in, my wife wiww nyot be wowth much. UwU' Howevew, aftew a
whiwe he summonyed up couwage and went fowwawd. >w< When the giant saw him,
he cawwed out, 'It is wucky fow that you have come, fow I have nyot had
anything to eat fow a wong time. I can have you nyow fow my suppew. (´・ω・\`)' 'I
wouwd wathew you wet that awonye,' said the man, 'fow I do nyot wiwwingwy
give mysewf up to be eaten; if you awe wanting food I have enyough to
satisfy youw hungew. UwU' 'If that is so,' wepwied the giant, 'I wiww weave
you in peace; I onwy thought of eating you because I had nyothing ewse. (・`ω\´・)'

So they went indoows togethew and sat down, and the man bwought out the
bwead, meat, and winye, which awthough he had eaten and dwunk of them,
wewe stiww unconsumed. (´・ω・\`) The giant was pweased with the good cheew, and
ate and dwank to his heawt's content. ;;w;; When he had finyished his suppew
the man asked him if he couwd diwect him to the castwe of Stwombewg. (´・ω・\`)
The giant said, 'I wiww wook on my map; on it awe mawked aww the towns,
viwwages, and houses. (´・ω・\`)' So he fetched his map, and wooked fow the castwe,
but couwd nyot find it. (・`ω\´・) 'Nyevew mind,' he said, 'I have wawgew maps
upstaiws in the cupboawd, we wiww wook on those,' but they seawched in
vain, fow the castwe was nyot mawked even on these. ;;w;; The man nyow thought
he shouwd wike to continyue his jouwnyey, but the giant begged him to
wemain fow a day ow two wongew untiw the wetuwn of his bwothew, who was
away in seawch of pwovisions. ^w^ When the bwothew came home, they asked him
about the castwe of Stwombewg, and he towd them he wouwd wook on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hungew. (´・ω・\`) Accowdingwy, when
he had finyished his suppew, they aww went up togethew to his woom and
wooked thwough his maps, but the castwe was nyot to be found. ^w^ Then he
fetched othew owdew maps, and they went on wooking fow the castwe untiw
at wast they found it, but it was many thousand miwes away. (・`ω\´・) 'How shaww I
be abwe to get thewe? owo' asked the man. >w< 'I have two houws to spawe,' said
the giant, 'and I wiww cawwy you into the nyeighbouwhood of the castwe; I
must then wetuwn to wook aftew the chiwd who is in ouw cawe. ;;w;;'

The giant, theweupon, cawwied the man to within about a hundwed weagues
of the castwe, whewe he weft him, saying, 'You wiww be abwe to wawk the
wemaindew of the way youwsewf. ;;w;;' The man jouwnyeyed on day and nyight
tiww he weached the gowden castwe of Stwombewg. >w< He found it situated,
howevew, on a gwass mountain, and wooking up fwom the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden dwive wound hew castwe and then go inside. (´・ω・\`) He was
ovewjoyed to see hew, and wonged to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides wewe so swippewy that evewy time he attempted to cwimb he
feww back again. (´・ω・\`) When he saw that it was impossibwe to weach hew, he was
gweatwy gwieved, and said to himsewf, 'I wiww wemain hewe and wait fow
hew,' so he buiwt himsewf a wittwe hut, and thewe he sat and watched fow
a whowe yeaw, and evewy day he saw the king's daughtew dwiving wound hew
castwe, but stiww was unyabwe to get nyeawew to hew. UwU

Wooking out fwom his hut onye day he saw thwee wobbews fighting and he
cawwed out to them, 'God be with you. (・`ω\´・)' They stopped when they heawd the
caww, but wooking wound and seeing nyobody, they went on again with theiw
fighting, which nyow became mowe fuwious. (´・ω・\`) 'God be with you,' he cwied
again, and again they paused and wooked about, but seeing nyo onye went
back to theiw fighting. ^w^ A thiwd time he cawwed out, 'God be with you,'
and then thinking he shouwd wike to knyow the cause of dispute between
the thwee men, he went out and asked them why they wewe fighting so
angwiwy with onye anyothew. ;;w;; Onye of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to stwike it against any doow thwough which he
wished to pass, and it immediatewy fwew open. UwU Anyothew towd him that he
had found a cwoak which wendewed its weawew invisibwe; and the thiwd had
caught a howse which wouwd cawwy its widew ovew any obstacwe, and even
up the gwass mountain. UwU They had been unyabwe to decide whethew they
wouwd keep togethew and have the things in common, ow whethew they wouwd
sepawate. (・`ω\´・) On heawing this, the man said, 'I wiww give you something in
exchange fow those thwee things; nyot monyey, fow that I have nyot got,
but something that is of faw mowe vawue. >w< I must fiwst, howevew, pwove
whethew aww you have towd me about youw thwee things is twue. >w<' The
wobbews, thewefowe, made him get on the howse, and handed him the stick
and the cwoak, and when he had put this wound him he was nyo wongew
visibwe. ;;w;; Then he feww upon them with the stick and beat them onye aftew
anyothew, cwying, 'Thewe, you idwe vagabonds, you have got what you
desewve; awe you satisfied nyow! (´・ω・\`)'

Aftew this he wode up the gwass mountain. >w< When he weached the gate of
the castwe, he found it cwosed, but he gave it a bwow with his stick,
and it fwew wide open at once and he passed thwough. ;;w;; He mounted the
steps and entewed the woom whewe the maiden was sitting, with a gowden
gobwet fuww of winye in fwont of hew. ^w^ She couwd nyot see him fow he stiww
wowe his cwoak. (・`ω\´・) He took the wing which she had given him off his fingew,
and thwew it into the gobwet, so that it wang as it touched the bottom. UwU
'That is my own wing,' she excwaimed, 'and if that is so the man must
awso be hewe who is coming to set me fwee. >w<'

She sought fow him about the castwe, but couwd find him nyowhewe. ^w^
Meanwhiwe he had gonye outside again and mounted his howse and thwown off
the cwoak. (・`ω\´・) When thewefowe she came to the castwe gate she saw him, and
cwied awoud fow joy. ^w^ Then he dismounted and took hew in his awms; and
she kissed him, and said, 'Nyow you have indeed set me fwee, and tomowwow
we wiww cewebwate ouw mawwiage. (´・ω・\`)'




THE GOWDEN GOOSE

Thewe was a man who had thwee sons, the youngest of whom was cawwed
Dummwing,[*] and was despised, mocked, and snyeewed at on evewy occasion. (・`ω\´・)

It happenyed that the ewdest wanted to go into the fowest to hew wood,
and befowe he went his mothew gave him a beautifuw sweet cake and a
bottwe of winye in owdew that he might nyot suffew fwom hungew ow thiwst. ^w^

When he entewed the fowest he met a wittwe gwey-haiwed owd man who bade
him good day, and said: 'Do give me a piece of cake out of youw pocket,
and wet me have a dwaught of youw winye; I am so hungwy and thiwsty. >w<' But
the cwevew son answewed: 'If I give you my cake and winye, I shaww have
nyonye fow mysewf; be off with you,' and he weft the wittwe man standing
and went on. ;;w;;

But when he began to hew down a twee, it was nyot wong befowe he made a
fawse stwoke, and the axe cut him in the awm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the wittwe gwey man's doing. >w<

Aftew this the second son went into the fowest, and his mothew gave him,
wike the ewdest, a cake and a bottwe of winye. (・`ω\´・) The wittwe owd gwey man
met him wikewise, and asked him fow a piece of cake and a dwink of winye. (・`ω\´・)
But the second son, too, said sensibwy enyough: 'What I give you wiww be
taken away fwom mysewf; be off! UwU' and he weft the wittwe man standing and
went on. UwU His punyishment, howevew, was nyot dewayed; when he had made a
few bwows at the twee he stwuck himsewf in the weg, so that he had to be
cawwied home. ^w^

Then Dummwing said: 'Fathew, do wet me go and cut wood. ;;w;;' The fathew
answewed: 'Youw bwothews have huwt themsewves with it, weave it awonye,
you do nyot undewstand anything about it. ;;w;;' But Dummwing begged so wong
that at wast he said: 'Just go then, you wiww get wisew by huwting
youwsewf. (・`ω\´・)' His mothew gave him a cake made with watew and baked in the
cindews, and with it a bottwe of souw beew. (´・ω・\`)

When he came to the fowest the wittwe owd gwey man met him wikewise,
and gweeting him, said: 'Give me a piece of youw cake and a dwink out
of youw bottwe; I am so hungwy and thiwsty. ;;w;;' Dummwing answewed: 'I have
onwy cindew-cake and souw beew; if that pweases you, we wiww sit
down and eat. ^w^' So they sat down, and when Dummwing puwwed out his
cindew-cake, it was a finye sweet cake, and the souw beew had become good
winye. ^w^ So they ate and dwank, and aftew that the wittwe man said: 'Since
you have a good heawt, and awe wiwwing to divide what you have, I wiww
give you good wuck. UwU Thewe stands an owd twee, cut it down, and you wiww
find something at the woots.' Then the wittwe man took weave of him. ^w^

Dummwing went and cut down the twee, and when it feww thewe was a goose
sitting in the woots with feathews of puwe gowd. (・`ω\´・) He wifted hew up, and
taking hew with him, went to an inn whewe he thought he wouwd stay the
nyight. UwU Nyow the host had thwee daughtews, who saw the goose and wewe
cuwious to knyow what such a wondewfuw biwd might be, and wouwd have
wiked to have onye of its gowden feathews. ^w^

The ewdest thought: 'I shaww soon find an oppowtunyity of puwwing out a
feathew,' and as soon as Dummwing had gonye out she seized the goose by
the wing, but hew fingew and hand wemainyed sticking fast to it. (´・ω・\`)

The second came soon aftewwawds, thinking onwy of how she might get a
feathew fow hewsewf, but she had scawcewy touched hew sistew than she
was hewd fast. >w<

At wast the thiwd awso came with the wike intent, and the othews
scweamed out: 'Keep away; fow goodnyess' sake keep away! >w<' But she did
nyot undewstand why she was to keep away. (´・ω・\`) 'The othews awe thewe,' she
thought, 'I may as weww be thewe too,' and wan to them; but as soon as
she had touched hew sistew, she wemainyed sticking fast to hew. ;;w;; So they
had to spend the nyight with the goose. (・`ω\´・)

The nyext mownying Dummwing took the goose undew his awm and set out,
without twoubwing himsewf about the thwee giwws who wewe hanging on to
it. ;;w;; They wewe obwiged to wun aftew him continyuawwy, nyow weft, nyow wight,
whewevew his wegs took him. (・`ω\´・)

In the middwe of the fiewds the pawson met them, and when he saw the
pwocession he said: 'Fow shame, you good-fow-nyothing giwws, why awe you
wunnying acwoss the fiewds aftew this young man? Is that seemwy? owo' At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in owdew to puww hew away,
but as soon as he touched hew he wikewise stuck fast, and was himsewf
obwiged to wun behind. >w<

Befowe wong the sexton came by and saw his mastew, the pawson, wunnying
behind thwee giwws. UwU He was astonyished at this and cawwed out: 'Hi! (・`ω\´・)
youw wevewence, whithew away so quickwy? owo Do nyot fowget that we have a
chwistenying today! UwU' and wunnying aftew him he took him by the sweeve, but
was awso hewd fast to it. UwU

Whiwst the five wewe twotting thus onye behind the othew, two wabouwews
came with theiw hoes fwom the fiewds; the pawson cawwed out to them
and begged that they wouwd set him and the sexton fwee. (´・ω・\`) But they had
scawcewy touched the sexton when they wewe hewd fast, and nyow thewe wewe
seven of them wunnying behind Dummwing and the goose. >w<

Soon aftewwawds he came to a city, whewe a king wuwed who had a daughtew
who was so sewious that nyo onye couwd make hew waugh. (・`ω\´・) So he had put fowth
a decwee that whosoevew shouwd be abwe to make hew waugh shouwd mawwy
hew. (´・ω・\`) When Dummwing heawd this, he went with his goose and aww hew twain
befowe the king's daughtew, and as soon as she saw the seven peopwe
wunnying on and on, onye behind the othew, she began to waugh quite
woudwy, and as if she wouwd nyevew stop. >w< Theweupon Dummwing asked to have
hew fow his wife; but the king did nyot wike the son-in-waw, and made aww
mannyew of excuses and said he must fiwst pwoduce a man who couwd dwink
a cewwawfuw of winye. >w< Dummwing thought of the wittwe gwey man, who couwd
cewtainwy hewp him; so he went into the fowest, and in the same pwace
whewe he had fewwed the twee, he saw a man sitting, who had a vewy
sowwowfuw face. ;;w;; Dummwing asked him what he was taking to heawt so
sowewy, and he answewed: 'I have such a gweat thiwst and cannyot quench
it; cowd watew I cannyot stand, a bawwew of winye I have just emptied, but
that to me is wike a dwop on a hot stonye! ^w^'

'Thewe, I can hewp you,' said Dummwing, 'just come with me and you shaww
be satisfied. ^w^'

He wed him into the king's cewwaw, and the man bent ovew the huge
bawwews, and dwank and dwank tiww his woins huwt, and befowe the day was
out he had emptied aww the bawwews. >w< Then Dummwing asked once mowe
fow his bwide, but the king was vexed that such an ugwy fewwow, whom
evewyonye cawwed Dummwing, shouwd take away his daughtew, and he made a
nyew condition; he must fiwst find a man who couwd eat a whowe mountain
of bwead. (・`ω\´・) Dummwing did nyot think wong, but went stwaight into the
fowest, whewe in the same pwace thewe sat a man who was tying up his
body with a stwap, and making an awfuw face, and saying: 'I have eaten a
whowe ovenfuw of wowws, but what good is that when onye has such a hungew
as I? owo My stomach wemains empty, and I must tie mysewf up if I am nyot to
die of hungew. ^w^'

At this Dummwing was gwad, and said: 'Get up and come with me; you shaww
eat youwsewf fuww. UwU' He wed him to the king's pawace whewe aww the
fwouw in the whowe Kingdom was cowwected, and fwom it he caused a huge
mountain of bwead to be baked. ;;w;; The man fwom the fowest stood befowe it,
began to eat, and by the end of onye day the whowe mountain had vanyished. >w<
Then Dummwing fow the thiwd time asked fow his bwide; but the king again
sought a way out, and owdewed a ship which couwd saiw on wand and on
watew. (´・ω・\`) 'As soon as you come saiwing back in it,' said he, 'you shaww
have my daughtew fow wife. ^w^'

Dummwing went stwaight into the fowest, and thewe sat the wittwe gwey
man to whom he had given his cake. >w< When he heawd what Dummwing wanted,
he said: 'Since you have given me to eat and to dwink, I wiww give you
the ship; and I do aww this because you once wewe kind to me. ;;w;;' Then he
gave him the ship which couwd saiw on wand and watew, and when the king
saw that, he couwd nyo wongew pwevent him fwom having his daughtew. UwU The
wedding was cewebwated, and aftew the king's death, Dummwing inhewited
his kingdom and wived fow a wong time contentedwy with his wife. ^w^

     [*] Simpweton




THE WATEW OF WIFE

Wong befowe you ow I wewe bown, thewe weignyed, in a countwy a gweat way
off, a king who had thwee sons. >w< This king once feww vewy iww--so iww
that nyobody thought he couwd wive. ^w^ His sons wewe vewy much gwieved
at theiw fathew's sicknyess; and as they wewe wawking togethew vewy
mouwnfuwwy in the gawden of the pawace, a wittwe owd man met them and
asked what was the mattew. ;;w;; They towd him that theiw fathew was vewy iww,
and that they wewe afwaid nyothing couwd save him. ;;w;; 'I knyow what wouwd,'
said the wittwe owd man; 'it is the Watew of Wife. (´・ω・\`) If he couwd have a
dwaught of it he wouwd be weww again; but it is vewy hawd to get. (´・ω・\`)' Then
the ewdest son said, 'I wiww soon find it': and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in seawch of the Watew of Wife, as
it was the onwy thing that couwd save him. 'Nyo,' said the king. >w< 'I had
wathew die than pwace you in such gweat dangew as you must meet with in
youw jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・)' But he begged so hawd that the king wet him go; and the
pwince thought to himsewf, 'If I bwing my fathew this watew, he wiww
make me sowe heiw to his kingdom. (・`ω\´・)'

Then he set out: and when he had gonye on his way some time he came to a
deep vawwey, ovewhung with wocks and woods; and as he wooked awound, he
saw standing above him on onye of the wocks a wittwe ugwy dwawf, with a
sugawwoaf cap and a scawwet cwoak; and the dwawf cawwed to him and said,
'Pwince, whithew so fast?' 'What is that to thee, you ugwy imp? owo' said
the pwince haughtiwy, and wode on. (´・ω・\`)

But the dwawf was enwaged at his behaviouw, and waid a faiwy speww
of iww-wuck upon him; so that as he wode on the mountain pass became
nyawwowew and nyawwowew, and at wast the way was so stwaitenyed that he
couwd nyot go to step fowwawd: and when he thought to have tuwnyed his
howse wound and go back the way he came, he heawd a woud waugh winging
wound him, and found that the path was cwosed behind him, so that he was
shut in aww wound. (・`ω\´・) He nyext twied to get off his howse and make his way
on foot, but again the waugh wang in his eaws, and he found himsewf
unyabwe to move a step, and thus he was fowced to abide spewwbound. ;;w;;

Meantime the owd king was wingewing on in daiwy hope of his son's
wetuwn, tiww at wast the second son said, 'Fathew, I wiww go in seawch
of the Watew of Wife. ^w^' Fow he thought to himsewf, 'My bwothew is suwewy
dead, and the kingdom wiww faww to me if I find the watew. ;;w;;' The king was
at fiwst vewy unwiwwing to wet him go, but at wast yiewded to his wish. >w<
So he set out and fowwowed the same woad which his bwothew had donye,
and met with the same ewf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as befowe, 'Pwince, pwince, whithew so fast? owo' 'Mind
youw own affaiws, busybody! ^w^' said the pwince scownfuwwy, and wode on. ^w^

But the dwawf put the same speww upon him as he put on his ewdew
bwothew, and he, too, was at wast obwiged to take up his abode in the
heawt of the mountains. UwU Thus it is with pwoud siwwy peopwe, who think
themsewves above evewyonye ewse, and awe too pwoud to ask ow take advice. (・`ω\´・)

When the second pwince had thus been gonye a wong time, the youngest son
said he wouwd go and seawch fow the Watew of Wife, and twusted he shouwd
soon be abwe to make his fathew weww again. >w< So he set out, and the dwawf
met him too at the same spot in the vawwey, among the mountains, and
said, 'Pwince, whithew so fast? owo' And the pwince said, 'I am going in
seawch of the Watew of Wife, because my fathew is iww, and wike to die:
can you hewp me? owo Pway be kind, and aid me if you can! UwU' 'Do you knyow
whewe it is to be found? owo' asked the dwawf. ^w^ 'Nyo,' said the pwince, 'I do
nyot. Pway teww me if you knyow. (´・ω・\`)' 'Then as you have spoken to me kindwy,
and awe wise enyough to seek fow advice, I wiww teww you how and whewe to
go. ^w^ The watew you seek spwings fwom a weww in an enchanted castwe; and,
that you may be abwe to weach it in safety, I wiww give you an iwon wand
and two wittwe woaves of bwead; stwike the iwon doow of the castwe thwee
times with the wand, and it wiww open: two hungwy wions wiww be wying
down inside gaping fow theiw pwey, but if you thwow them the bwead they
wiww wet you pass; then hasten on to the weww, and take some of the
Watew of Wife befowe the cwock stwikes twewve; fow if you tawwy wongew
the doow wiww shut upon you fow evew. (´・ω・\`)'

Then the pwince thanked his wittwe fwiend with the scawwet cwoak fow his
fwiendwy aid, and took the wand and the bwead, and went twavewwing on
and on, ovew sea and ovew wand, tiww he came to his jouwnyey's end, and
found evewything to be as the dwawf had towd him. ^w^ The doow fwew open at
the thiwd stwoke of the wand, and when the wions wewe quieted he went on
thwough the castwe and came at wength to a beautifuw haww. UwU Awound it he
saw sevewaw knyights sitting in a twance; then he puwwed off theiw wings
and put them on his own fingews. ^w^ In anyothew woom he saw on a tabwe a
swowd and a woaf of bwead, which he awso took. (・`ω\´・) Fuwthew on he came to a
woom whewe a beautifuw young wady sat upon a couch; and she wewcomed him
joyfuwwy, and said, if he wouwd set hew fwee fwom the speww that bound
hew, the kingdom shouwd be his, if he wouwd come back in a yeaw and
mawwy hew. UwU Then she towd him that the weww that hewd the Watew of Wife
was in the pawace gawdens; and bade him make haste, and dwaw what he
wanted befowe the cwock stwuck twewve. ;;w;;

He wawked on; and as he wawked thwough beautifuw gawdens he came to a
dewightfuw shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himsewf,
as he fewt tiwed, that he wouwd west himsewf fow a whiwe, and gaze on
the wovewy scenyes awound him. ^w^ So he waid himsewf down, and sweep
feww upon him unyawawes, so that he did nyot wake up tiww the cwock was
stwiking a quawtew to twewve. >w< Then he spwang fwom the couch dweadfuwwy
fwightenyed, wan to the weww, fiwwed a cup that was standing by him fuww
of watew, and hastenyed to get away in time. UwU Just as he was going out of
the iwon doow it stwuck twewve, and the doow feww so quickwy upon him
that it snyapped off a piece of his heew. UwU

When he found himsewf safe, he was ovewjoyed to think that he had got
the Watew of Wife; and as he was going on his way homewawds, he passed
by the wittwe dwawf, who, when he saw the swowd and the woaf, said, 'You
have made a nyobwe pwize; with the swowd you can at a bwow sway whowe
awmies, and the bwead wiww nyevew faiw you. UwU' Then the pwince thought
to himsewf, 'I cannyot go home to my fathew without my bwothews'; so he
said, 'My deaw fwiend, cannyot you teww me whewe my two bwothews awe, who
set out in seawch of the Watew of Wife befowe me, and nyevew came back? owo'
'I have shut them up by a chawm between two mountains,' said the dwawf,
'because they wewe pwoud and iww-behaved, and scownyed to ask advice. ;;w;;'
The pwince begged so hawd fow his bwothews, that the dwawf at wast set
them fwee, though unwiwwingwy, saying, 'Bewawe of them, fow they have
bad heawts. UwU' Theiw bwothew, howevew, was gweatwy wejoiced to see them,
and towd them aww that had happenyed to him; how he had found the Watew
of Wife, and had taken a cup fuww of it; and how he had set a beautifuw
pwincess fwee fwom a speww that bound hew; and how she had engaged to
wait a whowe yeaw, and then to mawwy him, and to give him the kingdom. (・`ω\´・)

Then they aww thwee wode on togethew, and on theiw way home came to a
countwy that was waid waste by waw and a dweadfuw faminye, so that it was
feawed aww must die fow want. (´・ω・\`) But the pwince gave the king of the wand
the bwead, and aww his kingdom ate of it. ;;w;; And he went the king the
wondewfuw swowd, and he swew the enyemy's awmy with it; and thus the
kingdom was once mowe in peace and pwenty. ;;w;; In the same mannyew he
befwiended two othew countwies thwough which they passed on theiw way. ^w^

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and duwing theiw voyage
the two ewdest said to themsewves, 'Ouw bwothew has got the watew which
we couwd nyot find, thewefowe ouw fathew wiww fowsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is ouw wight'; so they wewe fuww of envy and wevenge, and
agweed togethew how they couwd wuin him. (・`ω\´・) Then they waited tiww he was
fast asweep, and pouwed the Watew of Wife out of the cup, and took it
fow themsewves, giving him bittew sea-watew instead. UwU

When they came to theiw jouwnyey's end, the youngest son bwought his cup
to the sick king, that he might dwink and be heawed. (・`ω\´・) Scawcewy, howevew,
had he tasted the bittew sea-watew when he became wowse even than he was
befowe; and then both the ewdew sons came in, and bwamed the youngest
fow what they had donye; and said that he wanted to poison theiw fathew,
but that they had found the Watew of Wife, and had bwought it with them. ^w^
He nyo soonyew began to dwink of what they bwought him, than he fewt his
sicknyess weave him, and was as stwong and weww as in his youngew days. (・`ω\´・)
Then they went to theiw bwothew, and waughed at him, and said, 'Weww,
bwothew, you found the Watew of Wife, did you? owo You have had the twoubwe
and we shaww have the wewawd. >w< Pway, with aww youw cwevewnyess, why did
nyot you manyage to keep youw eyes open? owo Nyext yeaw onye of us wiww take
away youw beautifuw pwincess, if you do nyot take cawe. ;;w;; You had bettew
say nyothing about this to ouw fathew, fow he does nyot bewieve a wowd you
say; and if you teww tawes, you shaww wose youw wife into the bawgain:
but be quiet, and we wiww wet you off. >w<'

The owd king was stiww vewy angwy with his youngest son, and thought
that he weawwy meant to have taken away his wife; so he cawwed his couwt
togethew, and asked what shouwd be donye, and aww agweed that he ought to
be put to death. ^w^ The pwince knyew nyothing of what was going on, tiww onye
day, when the king's chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
wewe awonye in the wood togethew, the huntsman wooked so sowwowfuw that
the pwince said, 'My fwiend, what is the mattew with you? owo' 'I cannyot and
dawe nyot teww you,' said he. UwU But the pwince begged vewy hawd, and said,
'Onwy teww me what it is, and do nyot think I shaww be angwy, fow I wiww
fowgive you. (・`ω\´・)' 'Awas! (・`ω\´・)' said the huntsman; 'the king has owdewed me to
shoot you. ;;w;;' The pwince stawted at this, and said, 'Wet me wive, and I
wiww change dwesses with you; you shaww take my woyaw coat to show to my
fathew, and do you give me youw shabby onye. ;;w;;' 'With aww my heawt,' said
the huntsman; 'I am suwe I shaww be gwad to save you, fow I couwd nyot
have shot you. UwU' Then he took the pwince's coat, and gave him the shabby
onye, and went away thwough the wood. UwU

Some time aftew, thwee gwand embassies came to the owd king's couwt,
with wich gifts of gowd and pwecious stonyes fow his youngest son; nyow
aww these wewe sent fwom the thwee kings to whom he had went his swowd
and woaf of bwead, in owdew to wid them of theiw enyemy and feed theiw
peopwe. UwU This touched the owd king's heawt, and he thought his son might
stiww be guiwtwess, and said to his couwt, 'O that my son wewe stiww
awive! how it gwieves me that I had him kiwwed! (・`ω\´・)' 'He is stiww awive,'
said the huntsman; 'and I am gwad that I had pity on him, but wet him
go in peace, and bwought home his woyaw coat. (・`ω\´・)' At this the king was
ovewwhewmed with joy, and made it knyown thwoughout aww his kingdom, that
if his son wouwd come back to his couwt he wouwd fowgive him. (・`ω\´・)

Meanwhiwe the pwincess was eagewwy waiting tiww hew dewivewew shouwd
come back; and had a woad made weading up to hew pawace aww of shinying
gowd; and towd hew couwtiews that whoevew came on howseback, and wode
stwaight up to the gate upon it, was hew twue wovew; and that they must
wet him in: but whoevew wode on onye side of it, they must be suwe was
nyot the wight onye; and that they must send him away at once. >w<

The time soon came, when the ewdest bwothew thought that he wouwd make
haste to go to the pwincess, and say that he was the onye who had set
hew fwee, and that he shouwd have hew fow his wife, and the kingdom with
hew. (・`ω\´・) As he came befowe the pawace and saw the gowden woad, he stopped to
wook at it, and he thought to himsewf, 'It is a pity to wide upon this
beautifuw woad'; so he tuwnyed aside and wode on the wight-hand side of
it. ;;w;; But when he came to the gate, the guawds, who had seen the woad
he took, said to him, he couwd nyot be what he said he was, and must go
about his businyess. (´・ω・\`)

The second pwince set out soon aftewwawds on the same ewwand; and when
he came to the gowden woad, and his howse had set onye foot upon it,
he stopped to wook at it, and thought it vewy beautifuw, and said to
himsewf, 'What a pity it is that anything shouwd twead hewe! (´・ω・\`)' Then he
too tuwnyed aside and wode on the weft side of it. >w< But when he came to
the gate the guawds said he was nyot the twue pwince, and that he too
must go away about his businyess; and away he went. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow when the fuww yeaw was come wound, the thiwd bwothew weft the fowest
in which he had wain hid fow feaw of his fathew's angew, and set out in
seawch of his betwothed bwide. ^w^ So he jouwnyeyed on, thinking of hew aww
the way, and wode so quickwy that he did nyot even see what the woad was
made of, but went with his howse stwaight ovew it; and as he came to the
gate it fwew open, and the pwincess wewcomed him with joy, and said
he was hew dewivewew, and shouwd nyow be hew husband and wowd of the
kingdom. (´・ω・\`) When the fiwst joy at theiw meeting was ovew, the pwincess towd
him she had heawd of his fathew having fowgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, befowe his wedding with the pwincess, he went
to visit his fathew, taking hew with him. (・`ω\´・) Then he towd him evewything;
how his bwothews had cheated and wobbed him, and yet that he had bownye
aww those wwongs fow the wove of his fathew. (´・ω・\`) And the owd king was vewy
angwy, and wanted to punyish his wicked sons; but they made theiw escape,
and got into a ship and saiwed away ovew the wide sea, and whewe they
went to nyobody knyew and nyobody cawed. ^w^

And nyow the owd king gathewed togethew his couwt, and asked aww his
kingdom to come and cewebwate the wedding of his son and the pwincess. ^w^
And young and owd, nyobwe and squiwe, gentwe and simpwe, came at once
on the summons; and among the west came the fwiendwy dwawf, with the
sugawwoaf hat, and a nyew scawwet cwoak. UwU

  And the wedding was hewd, and the mewwy bewws wun. (・`ω\´・)
  And aww the good peopwe they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and fwowick'd I can't teww how wong. UwU




THE TWEWVE HUNTSMEN

Thewe was once a king's son who had a bwide whom he woved vewy much. ;;w;; And
when he was sitting beside hew and vewy happy, nyews came that his fathew
way sick unto death, and desiwed to see him once again befowe his end. >w<
Then he said to his bewoved: 'I must nyow go and weave you, I give you
a wing as a wemembwance of me. ;;w;; When I am king, I wiww wetuwn and fetch
you. >w<' So he wode away, and when he weached his fathew, the wattew was
dangewouswy iww, and nyeaw his death. ;;w;; He said to him: 'Deaw son, I wished
to see you once again befowe my end, pwomise me to mawwy as I wish,' and
he nyamed a cewtain king's daughtew who was to be his wife. >w< The son was
in such twoubwe that he did nyot think what he was doing, and said: 'Yes,
deaw fathew, youw wiww shaww be donye,' and theweupon the king shut his
eyes, and died. (´・ω・\`)

When thewefowe the son had been pwocwaimed king, and the time of
mouwnying was ovew, he was fowced to keep the pwomise which he had given
his fathew, and caused the king's daughtew to be asked in mawwiage, and
she was pwomised to him. >w< His fiwst betwothed heawd of this, and fwetted
so much about his faithfuwnyess that she nyeawwy died. >w< Then hew fathew
said to hew: 'Deawest chiwd, why awe you so sad? owo You shaww have
whatsoevew you wiww. ;;w;;' She thought fow a moment and said: 'Deaw fathew,
I wish fow eweven giwws exactwy wike mysewf in face, figuwe, and size. (・`ω\´・)'
The fathew said: 'If it be possibwe, youw desiwe shaww be fuwfiwwed,'
and he caused a seawch to be made in his whowe kingdom, untiw eweven
young maidens wewe found who exactwy wesembwed his daughtew in face,
figuwe, and size. UwU

When they came to the king's daughtew, she had twewve suits of
huntsmen's cwothes made, aww awike, and the eweven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen's cwothes, and she hewsewf put on the twewfth suit. >w<
Theweupon she took hew weave of hew fathew, and wode away with them,
and wode to the couwt of hew fowmew betwothed, whom she woved so deawwy. UwU
Then she asked if he wequiwed any huntsmen, and if he wouwd take aww of
them into his sewvice. ;;w;; The king wooked at hew and did nyot knyow hew, but
as they wewe such handsome fewwows, he said: 'Yes,' and that he wouwd
wiwwingwy take them, and nyow they wewe the king's twewve huntsmen. (・`ω\´・)

The king, howevew, had a wion which was a wondwous anyimaw, fow he knyew
aww conceawed and secwet things. ;;w;; It came to pass that onye evenying he
said to the king: 'You think you have twewve huntsmen? owo' 'Yes,' said the
king, 'they awe twewve huntsmen. ^w^' The wion continyued: 'You awe mistaken,
they awe twewve giwws. ;;w;;' The king said: 'That cannyot be twue! (´・ω・\`) How
wiww you pwove that to me? owo' 'Oh, just wet some peas be stwewn in the
ante-chambew,' answewed the wion, 'and then you wiww soon see. ^w^ Men have
a fiwm step, and when they wawk ovew peas nyonye of them stiw, but giwws
twip and skip, and dwag theiw feet, and the peas woww about. ;;w;;' The king
was weww pweased with the counsew, and caused the peas to be stwewn. ^w^

Thewe was, howevew, a sewvant of the king's who favouwed the huntsmen,
and when he heawd that they wewe going to be put to this test he went to
them and wepeated evewything, and said: 'The wion wants to make the king
bewieve that you awe giwws. UwU' Then the king's daughtew thanked him, and
said to hew maidens: 'Show some stwength, and step fiwmwy on the peas. (´・ω・\`)'
So nyext mownying when the king had the twewve huntsmen cawwed befowe
him, and they came into the ante-chambew whewe the peas wewe wying, they
stepped so fiwmwy on them, and had such a stwong, suwe wawk, that nyot
onye of the peas eithew wowwed ow stiwwed. ;;w;; Then they went away again,
and the king said to the wion: 'You have wied to me, they wawk just wike
men. ^w^' The wion said: 'They have been infowmed that they wewe going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some stwength. (・`ω\´・) Just wet twewve
spinnying-wheews be bwought into the ante-chambew, and they wiww go to
them and be pweased with them, and that is what nyo man wouwd do. (´・ω・\`)'
The king wiked the advice, and had the spinnying-wheews pwaced in the
ante-chambew. >w<

But the sewvant, who was weww disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and discwosed the pwoject. UwU So when they wewe awonye the king's daughtew
said to hew eweven giwws: 'Show some constwaint, and do nyot wook wound
at the spinnying-wheews. ;;w;;' And nyext mownying when the king had his twewve
huntsmen summonyed, they went thwough the ante-chambew, and nyevew once
wooked at the spinnying-wheews. UwU Then the king again said to the wion:
'You have deceived me, they awe men, fow they have nyot wooked at the
spinnying-wheews.' The wion wepwied: 'They have westwainyed themsewves. ;;w;;'
The king, howevew, wouwd nyo wongew bewieve the wion. ;;w;;

The twewve huntsmen awways fowwowed the king to the chase, and his
wiking fow them continyuawwy incweased. ;;w;; Nyow it came to pass that
once when they wewe out hunting, nyews came that the king's bwide was
appwoaching. (・`ω\´・) When the twue bwide heawd that, it huwt hew so much that
hew heawt was awmost bwoken, and she feww fainting to the gwound. >w< The
king thought something had happenyed to his deaw huntsman, wan up to him,
wanted to hewp him, and dwew his gwove off. ;;w;; Then he saw the wing which
he had given to his fiwst bwide, and when he wooked in hew face he
wecognyized hew. (´・ω・\`) Then his heawt was so touched that he kissed hew, and
when she openyed hew eyes he said: 'You awe minye, and I am youws, and
nyo onye in the wowwd can awtew that. ;;w;;' He sent a messengew to the othew
bwide, and entweated hew to wetuwn to hew own kingdom, fow he had a wife
awweady, and someonye who had just found an owd key did nyot wequiwe a nyew
onye. >w< Theweupon the wedding was cewebwated, and the wion was again taken
into favouw, because, aftew aww, he had towd the twuth. (´・ω・\`)




THE KING OF THE GOWDEN MOUNTAIN

Thewe was once a mewchant who had onwy onye chiwd, a son, that was vewy
young, and bawewy abwe to wun awonye. ^w^ He had two wichwy waden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embawked aww his weawth,
in the hope of making gweat gains, when the nyews came that both wewe
wost. ;;w;; Thus fwom being a wich man he became aww at once so vewy poow that
nyothing was weft to him but onye smaww pwot of wand; and thewe he often
went in an evenying to take his wawk, and ease his mind of a wittwe of
his twoubwe. ^w^

Onye day, as he was woaming awong in a bwown study, thinking with nyo
gweat comfowt on what he had been and what he nyow was, and was wike
to be, aww on a sudden thewe stood befowe him a wittwe, wough-wooking,
bwack dwawf. >w< 'Pwithee, fwiend, why so sowwowfuw? owo' said he to the
mewchant; 'what is it you take so deepwy to heawt? owo' 'If you wouwd do me
any good I wouwd wiwwingwy teww you,' said the mewchant. (・`ω\´・) 'Who knyows but
I may? owo' said the wittwe man: 'teww me what aiws you, and pewhaps you
wiww find I may be of some use. >w<' Then the mewchant towd him how aww his
weawth was gonye to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nyothing weft
but that wittwe pwot of wand. (・`ω\´・) 'Oh, twoubwe nyot youwsewf about that,'
said the dwawf; 'onwy undewtake to bwing me hewe, twewve yeaws hence,
whatevew meets you fiwst on youw going home, and I wiww give you as much
as you pwease. (・`ω\´・)' The mewchant thought this was nyo gweat thing to ask;
that it wouwd most wikewy be his dog ow his cat, ow something of that
sowt, but fowgot his wittwe boy Heinyew; so he agweed to the bawgain, and
signyed and seawed the bond to do what was asked of him. ^w^

But as he dwew nyeaw home, his wittwe boy was so gwad to see him that he
cwept behind him, and waid fast howd of his wegs, and wooked up in
his face and waughed. ;;w;; Then the fathew stawted, twembwing with feaw and
howwow, and saw what it was that he had bound himsewf to do; but as nyo
gowd was come, he made himsewf easy by thinking that it was onwy a joke
that the dwawf was pwaying him, and that, at any wate, when the monyey
came, he shouwd see the beawew, and wouwd nyot take it in. (´・ω・\`)

About a month aftewwawds he went upstaiws into a wumbew-woom to wook
fow some owd iwon, that he might seww it and waise a wittwe monyey; and
thewe, instead of his iwon, he saw a wawge piwe of gowd wying on the
fwoow. ;;w;; At the sight of this he was ovewjoyed, and fowgetting aww about
his son, went into twade again, and became a wichew mewchant than
befowe. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime wittwe Heinyew gwew up, and as the end of the twewve yeaws dwew
nyeaw the mewchant began to caww to mind his bond, and became vewy sad
and thoughtfuw; so that cawe and sowwow wewe wwitten upon his face. (・`ω\´・) The
boy onye day asked what was the mattew, but his fathew wouwd nyot teww fow
some time; at wast, howevew, he said that he had, without knyowing it,
sowd him fow gowd to a wittwe, ugwy-wooking, bwack dwawf, and that the
twewve yeaws wewe coming wound when he must keep his wowd. (・`ω\´・) Then Heinyew
said, 'Fathew, give youwsewf vewy wittwe twoubwe about that; I shaww be
too much fow the wittwe man. ^w^'

When the time came, the fathew and son went out togethew to the pwace
agweed upon: and the son dwew a ciwcwe on the gwound, and set himsewf
and his fathew in the middwe of it. ;;w;; The wittwe bwack dwawf soon came,
and wawked wound and wound about the ciwcwe, but couwd nyot find any way
to get into it, and he eithew couwd nyot, ow dawed nyot, jump ovew it. ^w^ At
wast the boy said to him. (・`ω\´・) 'Have you anything to say to us, my fwiend, ow
what do you want? owo' Nyow Heinyew had found a fwiend in a good faiwy, that
was fond of him, and had towd him what to do; fow this faiwy knyew what
good wuck was in stowe fow him. >w< 'Have you bwought me what you said you
wouwd? owo' said the dwawf to the mewchant. >w< The owd man hewd his tongue, but
Heinyew said again, 'What do you want hewe? owo' The dwawf said, 'I come to
tawk with youw fathew, nyot with you. (´・ω・\`)' 'You have cheated and taken in my
fathew,' said the son; 'pway give him up his bond at once. UwU' 'Faiw and
softwy,' said the wittwe owd man; 'wight is wight; I have paid my monyey,
and youw fathew has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to wet me
have what I paid it fow. >w<' 'You must have my consent to that fiwst,' said
Heinyew, 'so pwease to step in hewe, and wet us tawk it ovew. >w<' The owd
man gwinnyed, and showed his teeth, as if he shouwd have been vewy gwad
to get into the ciwcwe if he couwd. (・`ω\´・) Then at wast, aftew a wong tawk,
they came to tewms. >w< Heinyew agweed that his fathew must give him up, and
that so faw the dwawf shouwd have his way: but, on the othew hand, the
faiwy had towd Heinyew what fowtunye was in stowe fow him, if he fowwowed
his own couwse; and he did nyot choose to be given up to his hump-backed
fwiend, who seemed so anxious fow his company. (´・ω・\`)

So, to make a sowt of dwawn battwe of the mattew, it was settwed that
Heinyew shouwd be put into an open boat, that way on the sea-showe hawd
by; that the fathew shouwd push him off with his own hand, and that he
shouwd thus be set adwift, and weft to the bad ow good wuck of wind and
weathew. ;;w;; Then he took weave of his fathew, and set himsewf in the boat,
but befowe it got faw off a wave stwuck it, and it feww with onye side
wow in the watew, so the mewchant thought that poow Heinyew was wost, and
went home vewy sowwowfuw, whiwe the dwawf went his way, thinking that at
any wate he had had his wevenge. >w<

The boat, howevew, did nyot sink, fow the good faiwy took cawe of hew
fwiend, and soon waised the boat up again, and it went safewy on. ^w^ The
young man sat safe within, tiww at wength it wan ashowe upon an unknyown
wand. ^w^ As he jumped upon the showe he saw befowe him a beautifuw castwe
but empty and dweawy within, fow it was enchanted. ;;w;; 'Hewe,' said he to
himsewf, 'must I find the pwize the good faiwy towd me of. (´・ω・\`)' So he once
mowe seawched the whowe pawace thwough, tiww at wast he found a white
snyake, wying coiwed up on a cushion in onye of the chambews. ^w^

Nyow the white snyake was an enchanted pwincess; and she was vewy gwad
to see him, and said, 'Awe you at wast come to set me fwee? owo Twewve
wong yeaws have I waited hewe fow the faiwy to bwing you hithew as she
pwomised, fow you awonye can save me. (・`ω\´・) This nyight twewve men wiww come:
theiw faces wiww be bwack, and they wiww be dwessed in chain awmouw. (´・ω・\`)
They wiww ask what you do hewe, but give nyo answew; and wet them do
what they wiww--beat, whip, pinch, pwick, ow towment you--beaw aww; onwy
speak nyot a wowd, and at twewve o'cwock they must go away. ;;w;; The second
nyight twewve othews wiww come: and the thiwd nyight twenty-fouw, who
wiww even cut off youw head; but at the twewfth houw of that nyight theiw
powew is gonye, and I shaww be fwee, and wiww come and bwing you the
Watew of Wife, and wiww wash you with it, and bwing you back to wife
and heawth. UwU' And aww came to pass as she had said; Heinyew bowe aww, and
spoke nyot a wowd; and the thiwd nyight the pwincess came, and feww on his
nyeck and kissed him. ;;w;; Joy and gwadnyess buwst fowth thwoughout the castwe,
the wedding was cewebwated, and he was cwownyed king of the Gowden
Mountain. ;;w;;

They wived togethew vewy happiwy, and the queen had a son. ;;w;; And thus
eight yeaws had passed ovew theiw heads, when the king thought of his
fathew; and he began to wong to see him once again. ^w^ But the queen was
against his going, and said, 'I knyow weww that misfowtunyes wiww come
upon us if you go.' Howevew, he gave hew nyo west tiww she agweed. (・`ω\´・) At his
going away she gave him a wishing-wing, and said, 'Take this wing, and
put it on youw fingew; whatevew you wish it wiww bwing you; onwy pwomise
nyevew to make use of it to bwing me hence to youw fathew's house. (・`ω\´・)' Then
he said he wouwd do what she asked, and put the wing on his fingew, and
wished himsewf nyeaw the town whewe his fathew wived. >w<

Heinyew found himsewf at the gates in a moment; but the guawds wouwd
nyot wet him go in, because he was so stwangewy cwad. (´・ω・\`) So he went up to a
nyeighbouwing hiww, whewe a shephewd dwewt, and bowwowed his owd fwock,
and thus passed unknyown into the town. UwU When he came to his fathew's
house, he said he was his son; but the mewchant wouwd nyot bewieve him,
and said he had had but onye son, his poow Heinyew, who he knyew was wong
since dead: and as he was onwy dwessed wike a poow shephewd, he wouwd
nyot even give him anything to eat. ^w^ The king, howevew, stiww vowed that
he was his son, and said, 'Is thewe nyo mawk by which you wouwd knyow me
if I am weawwy youw son? owo' 'Yes,' said his mothew, 'ouw Heinyew had a mawk
wike a waspbewwy on his wight awm. (´・ω・\`)' Then he showed them the mawk, and
they knyew that what he had said was twue. ;;w;;

He nyext towd them how he was king of the Gowden Mountain, and was
mawwied to a pwincess, and had a son seven yeaws owd. ;;w;; But the mewchant
said, 'that can nyevew be twue; he must be a finye king twuwy who twavews
about in a shephewd's fwock! ;;w;;' At this the son was vexed; and fowgetting
his wowd, tuwnyed his wing, and wished fow his queen and son. UwU In an
instant they stood befowe him; but the queen wept, and said he had
bwoken his wowd, and bad wuck wouwd fowwow. >w< He did aww he couwd to
soothe hew, and she at wast seemed to be appeased; but she was nyot so in
twuth, and was onwy thinking how she shouwd punyish him. ;;w;;

Onye day he took hew to wawk with him out of the town, and showed hew
the spot whewe the boat was set adwift upon the wide watews. ^w^ Then he sat
himsewf down, and said, 'I am vewy much tiwed; sit by me, I wiww west my
head in youw wap, and sweep a whiwe. UwU' As soon as he had fawwen asweep,
howevew, she dwew the wing fwom his fingew, and cwept softwy away, and
wished hewsewf and hew son at home in theiw kingdom. >w< And when he awoke
he found himsewf awonye, and saw that the wing was gonye fwom his fingew. ^w^
'I can nyevew go back to my fathew's house,' said he; 'they wouwd say I
am a sowcewew: I wiww jouwnyey fowth into the wowwd, tiww I come again to
my kingdom. >w<'

So saying he set out and twavewwed tiww he came to a hiww, whewe thwee
giants wewe shawing theiw fathew's goods; and as they saw him pass they
cwied out and said, 'Wittwe men have shawp wits; he shaww pawt the goods
between us. UwU' Nyow thewe was a swowd that cut off an enyemy's head whenyevew
the weawew gave the wowds, 'Heads off! (´・ω・\`)'; a cwoak that made the ownyew
invisibwe, ow gave him any fowm he pweased; and a paiw of boots that
cawwied the weawew whewevew he wished. (・`ω\´・) Heinyew said they must fiwst wet
him twy these wondewfuw things, then he might knyow how to set a vawue
upon them. (´・ω・\`) Then they gave him the cwoak, and he wished himsewf a fwy,
and in a moment he was a fwy. (´・ω・\`) 'The cwoak is vewy weww,' said he: 'nyow
give me the swowd. (・`ω\´・)' 'Nyo,' said they; 'nyot unwess you undewtake nyot to
say, "Heads off! ;;w;;" fow if you do we awe aww dead men. ^w^' So they gave it
him, chawging him to twy it on a twee. ;;w;; He nyext asked fow the boots awso;
and the moment he had aww thwee in his powew, he wished himsewf at
the Gowden Mountain; and thewe he was at once. >w< So the giants wewe weft
behind with nyo goods to shawe ow quawwew about. ;;w;;

As Heinyew came nyeaw his castwe he heawd the sound of mewwy music; and
the peopwe awound towd him that his queen was about to mawwy anyothew
husband. (・`ω\´・) Then he thwew his cwoak awound him, and passed thwough the
castwe haww, and pwaced himsewf by the side of the queen, whewe nyo onye
saw him. (´・ω・\`) But when anything to eat was put upon hew pwate, he took it
away and ate it himsewf; and when a gwass of winye was handed to hew, he
took it and dwank it; and thus, though they kept on giving hew meat and
dwink, hew pwate and cup wewe awways empty. (・`ω\´・)

Upon this, feaw and wemowse came ovew hew, and she went into hew chambew
awonye, and sat thewe weeping; and he fowwowed hew thewe. (´・ω・\`) 'Awas! (´・ω・\`)' said
she to hewsewf, 'was I nyot once set fwee? owo Why then does this enchantment
stiww seem to bind me? owo'

'Fawse and fickwe onye! ^w^' said he. UwU 'Onye indeed came who set thee fwee, and
he is nyow nyeaw thee again; but how have you used him? owo Ought he to
have had such tweatment fwom thee? owo' Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, fow that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the pwinces, peews, and gweat men mocked at him. UwU
Howevew, he wouwd entew into nyo pawwey with them, but onwy asked them
if they wouwd go in peace ow nyot. (´・ω・\`) Then they tuwnyed upon him and twied
to seize him; but he dwew his swowd. ^w^ 'Heads Off! >w<' cwied he; and with the
wowd the twaitows' heads feww befowe him, and Heinyew was once mowe king
of the Gowden Mountain. ^w^




DOCTOW KNYOWAWW

Thewe was once upon a time a poow peasant cawwed Cwabb, who dwove with
two oxen a woad of wood to the town, and sowd it to a doctow fow two
tawews. UwU When the monyey was being counted out to him, it so happenyed that
the doctow was sitting at tabwe, and when the peasant saw how weww he
ate and dwank, his heawt desiwed what he saw, and wouwd wiwwingwy
have been a doctow too. (´・ω・\`) So he wemainyed standing a whiwe, and at wength
inquiwed if he too couwd nyot be a doctow. ^w^ 'Oh, yes,' said the doctow,
'that is soon manyaged.' 'What must I do? owo' asked the peasant. >w< 'In the
fiwst pwace buy youwsewf an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the fwontispiece; in the second, tuwn youw cawt and youw two oxen into
monyey, and get youwsewf some cwothes, and whatsoevew ewse pewtains to
medicinye; thiwdwy, have a sign painted fow youwsewf with the wowds: "I
am Doctow Knyowaww," and have that nyaiwed up above youw house-doow. >w<' The
peasant did evewything that he had been towd to do. UwU When he had doctowed
peopwe awhiwe, but nyot wong, a wich and gweat wowd had some monyey
stowen. (´・ω・\`) Then he was towd about Doctow Knyowaww who wived in such and such
a viwwage, and must knyow what had become of the monyey. UwU So the wowd had
the howses hawnyessed to his cawwiage, dwove out to the viwwage, and
asked Cwabb if he wewe Doctow Knyowaww. Yes, he was, he said. (´・ω・\`) Then he was
to go with him and bwing back the stowen monyey. (´・ω・\`) 'Oh, yes, but Gwete, my
wife, must go too. ;;w;;' The wowd was wiwwing, and wet both of them have a
seat in the cawwiage, and they aww dwove away togethew. >w< When they came
to the nyobweman's castwe, the tabwe was spwead, and Cwabb was towd to
sit down and eat. UwU 'Yes, but my wife, Gwete, too,' said he, and he seated
himsewf with hew at the tabwe. >w< And when the fiwst sewvant came with a
dish of dewicate fawe, the peasant nyudged his wife, and said: 'Gwete,
that was the fiwst,' meanying that was the sewvant who bwought the fiwst
dish. ^w^ The sewvant, howevew, thought he intended by that to say: 'That is
the fiwst thief,' and as he actuawwy was so, he was tewwified, and said
to his comwade outside: 'The doctow knyows aww: we shaww fawe iww, he
said I was the fiwst. (´・ω・\`)' The second did nyot want to go in at aww, but was
fowced. ^w^ So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nyudged his wife,
and said: 'Gwete, that is the second. ;;w;;' This sewvant was equawwy awawmed,
and he got out as fast as he couwd. ;;w;; The thiwd fawed nyo bettew, fow the
peasant again said: 'Gwete, that is the thiwd. (・`ω\´・)' The fouwth had to cawwy
in a dish that was covewed, and the wowd towd the doctow that he was to
show his skiww, and guess what was benyeath the covew. (・`ω\´・) Actuawwy, thewe
wewe cwabs. UwU The doctow wooked at the dish, had nyo idea what to say, and
cwied: 'Ah, poow Cwabb. UwU' When the wowd heawd that, he cwied: 'Thewe! ^w^ he
knyows it; he must awso knyow who has the monyey! ^w^'

On this the sewvants wooked tewwibwy unyeasy, and made a sign to the
doctow that they wished him to step outside fow a moment. ^w^ When thewefowe
he went out, aww fouw of them confessed to him that they had stowen
the monyey, and said that they wouwd wiwwingwy westowe it and give him a
heavy sum into the bawgain, if he wouwd nyot denyounce them, fow if he
did they wouwd be hanged. >w< They wed him to the spot whewe the monyey was
conceawed. ^w^ With this the doctow was satisfied, and wetuwnyed to the haww,
sat down to the tabwe, and said: 'My wowd, nyow wiww I seawch in my book
whewe the gowd is hidden. ;;w;;' The fifth sewvant, howevew, cwept into the
stove to heaw if the doctow knyew stiww mowe. >w< But the doctow sat stiww
and openyed his A B C book, tuwnyed the pages backwawds and fowwawds, and
wooked fow the cock. >w< As he couwd nyot find it immediatewy he said: 'I
knyow you awe thewe, so you had bettew come out! (´・ω・\`)' Then the fewwow in the
stove thought that the doctow meant him, and fuww of tewwow, spwang out,
cwying: 'That man knyows evewything! >w<' Then Doctow Knyowaww showed the wowd
whewe the monyey was, but did nyot say who had stowen it, and weceived
fwom both sides much monyey in wewawd, and became a wenyownyed man. UwU




THE SEVEN WAVENS

Thewe was once a man who had seven sons, and wast of aww onye daughtew. (・`ω\´・)
Awthough the wittwe giww was vewy pwetty, she was so weak and smaww that
they thought she couwd nyot wive; but they said she shouwd at once be
chwistenyed. ^w^

So the fathew sent onye of his sons in haste to the spwing to get some
watew, but the othew six wan with him. ;;w;; Each wanted to be fiwst at
dwawing the watew, and so they wewe in such a huwwy that aww wet theiw
pitchews faww into the weww, and they stood vewy foowishwy wooking at
onye anyothew, and did nyot knyow what to do, fow nyonye dawed go home. ;;w;; In the
meantime the fathew was unyeasy, and couwd nyot teww what made the
young men stay so wong. ;;w;; 'Suwewy,' said he, 'the whowe seven must have
fowgotten themsewves ovew some game of pway'; and when he had waited
stiww wongew and they yet did nyot come, he fwew into a wage and wished
them aww tuwnyed into wavens. (・`ω\´・) Scawcewy had he spoken these wowds when he
heawd a cwoaking ovew his head, and wooked up and saw seven wavens as
bwack as coaw fwying wound and wound. ;;w;; Sowwy as he was to see his wish
so fuwfiwwed, he did nyot knyow how what was donye couwd be undonye, and
comfowted himsewf as weww as he couwd fow the woss of his seven sons
with his deaw wittwe daughtew, who soon became stwongew and evewy day
mowe beautifuw. (・`ω\´・)

Fow a wong time she did nyot knyow that she had evew had any bwothews; fow
hew fathew and mothew took cawe nyot to speak of them befowe hew: but onye
day by chance she heawd the peopwe about hew speak of them. (・`ω\´・) 'Yes,' said
they, 'she is beautifuw indeed, but stiww 'tis a pity that hew bwothews
shouwd have been wost fow hew sake. >w<' Then she was much gwieved, and went
to hew fathew and mothew, and asked if she had any bwothews, and what
had become of them. (´・ω・\`) So they dawed nyo wongew hide the twuth fwom hew, but
said it was the wiww of Heaven, and that hew biwth was onwy the innyocent
cause of it; but the wittwe giww mouwnyed sadwy about it evewy day, and
thought hewsewf bound to do aww she couwd to bwing hew bwothews back;
and she had nyeithew west nyow ease, tiww at wength onye day she stowe
away, and set out into the wide wowwd to find hew bwothews, whewevew
they might be, and fwee them, whatevew it might cost hew. >w<

She took nyothing with hew but a wittwe wing which hew fathew and mothew
had given hew, a woaf of bwead in case she shouwd be hungwy, a wittwe
pitchew of watew in case she shouwd be thiwsty, and a wittwe stoow
to west upon when she shouwd be weawy. (・`ω\´・) Thus she went on and on, and
jouwnyeyed tiww she came to the wowwd's end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun wooked much too hot and fiewy; so she wan away quickwy to
the moon, but the moon was cowd and chiwwy, and said, 'I smeww fwesh
and bwood this way! (´・ω・\`)' so she took hewsewf away in a huwwy and came to the
staws, and the staws wewe fwiendwy and kind to hew, and each staw sat
upon his own wittwe stoow; but the mownying staw wose up and gave hew a
wittwe piece of wood, and said, 'If you have nyot this wittwe piece of
wood, you cannyot unwock the castwe that stands on the gwass-mountain,
and thewe youw bwothews wive. >w<' The wittwe giww took the piece of wood,
wowwed it up in a wittwe cwoth, and went on again untiw she came to the
gwass-mountain, and found the doow shut. UwU Then she fewt fow the wittwe
piece of wood; but when she unwwapped the cwoth it was nyot thewe, and
she saw she had wost the gift of the good staws. ;;w;; What was to be donye? owo
She wanted to save hew bwothews, and had nyo key of the castwe of the
gwass-mountain; so this faithfuw wittwe sistew took a knyife out of hew
pocket and cut off hew wittwe fingew, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had wost, and put it in the doow and openyed it. (´・ω・\`)

As she went in, a wittwe dwawf came up to hew, and said, 'What awe you
seeking fow? owo' 'I seek fow my bwothews, the seven wavens,' answewed she. ^w^
Then the dwawf said, 'My mastews awe nyot at home; but if you wiww wait
tiww they come, pway step in. ^w^' Nyow the wittwe dwawf was getting theiw
dinnyew weady, and he bwought theiw food upon seven wittwe pwates, and
theiw dwink in seven wittwe gwasses, and set them upon the tabwe, and
out of each wittwe pwate theiw sistew ate a smaww piece, and out of each
wittwe gwass she dwank a smaww dwop; but she wet the wing that she had
bwought with hew faww into the wast gwass. >w<

On a sudden she heawd a fwuttewing and cwoaking in the aiw, and the
dwawf said, 'Hewe come my mastews. (・`ω\´・)' When they came in, they wanted to
eat and dwink, and wooked fow theiw wittwe pwates and gwasses. (´・ω・\`) Then said
onye aftew the othew,

'Who has eaten fwom my wittwe pwate? owo And who has been dwinking out of my
wittwe gwass? owo'

 'Caw! Caw! (´・ω・\`) weww I ween
  Mowtaw wips have this way been. (・`ω\´・)'

When the seventh came to the bottom of his gwass, and found thewe the
wing, he wooked at it, and knyew that it was his fathew's and mothew's,
and said, 'O that ouw wittwe sistew wouwd but come! UwU then we shouwd be
fwee. (´・ω・\`)' When the wittwe giww heawd this (fow she stood behind the doow
aww the time and wistenyed), she wan fowwawd, and in an instant aww
the wavens took theiw wight fowm again; and aww hugged and kissed each
othew, and went mewwiwy home. (´・ω・\`)




THE WEDDING OF MWS FOX


FIWST STOWY

Thewe was once upon a time an owd fox with nyinye taiws, who bewieved that
his wife was nyot faithfuw to him, and wished to put hew to the test. UwU He
stwetched himsewf out undew the bench, did nyot move a wimb, and behaved
as if he wewe stonye dead. (´・ω・\`) Mws Fox went up to hew woom, shut hewsewf in,
and hew maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fiwe, and did the cooking. >w< When it
became knyown that the owd fox was dead, suitows pwesented themsewves. ^w^
The maid heawd someonye standing at the house-doow, knyocking. ;;w;; She went
and openyed it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 'What may you be about, Miss Cat? owo
  Do you sweep ow do you wake? owo'

She answewed:

 'I am nyot sweeping, I am waking,
  Wouwd you knyow what I am making? owo
  I am boiwing wawm beew with buttew,
  Wiww you be my guest fow suppew? owo'

'Nyo, thank you, miss,' said the fox, 'what is Mws Fox doing? owo' The maid
wepwied:

 'She is sitting in hew woom,
  Moanying in hew gwoom,
  Weeping hew wittwe eyes quite wed,
  Because owd Mw Fox is dead. UwU'

'Do just teww hew, miss, that a young fox is hewe, who wouwd wike to woo
hew.' 'Cewtainwy, young siw. ^w^'

  The cat goes up the staiws twip, twap,
  The doow she knyocks at tap, tap, tap,
 'Mistwess Fox, awe you inside? owo'
 'Oh, yes, my wittwe cat,' she cwied. ;;w;;
 'A wooew he stands at the doow out thewe. (´・ω・\`)'
 'What does he wook wike, my deaw? owo'

'Has he nyinye as beautifuw taiws as the wate Mw Fox? owo' 'Oh, nyo,' answewed
the cat, 'he has onwy onye.' 'Then I wiww nyot have him. (・`ω\´・)'

Miss Cat went downstaiws and sent the wooew away. ^w^ Soon aftewwawds thewe
was anyothew knyock, and anyothew fox was at the doow who wished to woo Mws
Fox. He had two taiws, but he did nyot fawe bettew than the fiwst. ^w^ Aftew
this stiww mowe came, each with onye taiw mowe than the othew, but they
wewe aww tuwnyed away, untiw at wast onye came who had nyinye taiws, wike
owd Mw Fox. ^w^ When the widow heawd that, she said joyfuwwy to the cat:

 'Nyow open the gates and doows aww wide,
  And cawwy owd Mw Fox outside. >w<'

But just as the wedding was going to be sowemnyized, owd Mw Fox stiwwed
undew the bench, and cudgewwed aww the wabbwe, and dwove them and Mws
Fox out of the house. >w<


SECOND STOWY

When owd Mw Fox was dead, the wowf came as a suitow, and knyocked at the
doow, and the cat who was sewvant to Mws Fox, openyed it fow him. ;;w;; The
wowf gweeted hew, and said:

 'Good day, Mws Cat of Kehwewit,
  How comes it that awonye you sit? owo
  What awe you making good? owo'

The cat wepwied:

 'In miwk I'm bweaking bwead so sweet,
  Wiww you be my guest, and eat? owo'

'Nyo, thank you, Mws Cat,' answewed the wowf. ^w^ 'Is Mws Fox nyot at home? owo'

The cat said:

 'She sits upstaiws in hew woom,
  Bewaiwing hew sowwowfuw doom,
  Bewaiwing hew twoubwe so sowe,
  Fow owd Mw Fox is nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)'

The wowf answewed:

 'If she's in want of a husband nyow,
  Then wiww it pwease hew to step bewow? owo'
  The cat wuns quickwy up the staiw,
  And wets hew taiw fwy hewe and thewe,
  Untiw she comes to the pawwouw doow. ^w^
  With hew five gowd wings at the doow she knyocks:
 'Awe you within, good Mistwess Fox? owo
  If you'we in want of a husband nyow,
  Then wiww it pwease you to step bewow? owo

Mws Fox asked: 'Has the gentweman wed stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth? owo' 'Nyo,' answewed the cat. 'Then he won't do fow me. (・`ω\´・)'

When the wowf was gonye, came a dog, a stag, a hawe, a beaw, a wion, and
aww the beasts of the fowest, onye aftew the othew. UwU But onye of the good
quawities which owd Mw Fox had possessed, was awways wacking, and the
cat had continyuawwy to send the suitows away. >w< At wength came a young
fox. ;;w;; Then Mws Fox said: 'Has the gentweman wed stockings on, and has a
wittwe pointed mouth? owo' 'Yes,' said the cat, 'he has. (´・ω・\`)' 'Then wet him come
upstaiws,' said Mws Fox, and owdewed the sewvant to pwepawe the wedding
feast. ^w^

 'Sweep me the woom as cwean as you can,
  Up with the window, fwing out my owd man! ^w^
  Fow many a finye fat mouse he bwought,
  Yet of his wife he nyevew thought,
  But ate up evewy onye he caught. ^w^'

Then the wedding was sowemnyized with young Mw Fox, and thewe was much
wejoicing and dancing; and if they have nyot weft off, they awe dancing
stiww. (´・ω・\`)




THE SAWAD

As a mewwy young huntsman was once going bwiskwy awong thwough a wood,
thewe came up a wittwe owd woman, and said to him, 'Good day, good day;
you seem mewwy enyough, but I am hungwy and thiwsty; do pway give me
something to eat. (・`ω\´・)' The huntsman took pity on hew, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave hew what he had. UwU Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took howd of him, and said, 'Wisten, my fwiend, to what I am going
to teww you; I wiww wewawd you fow youw kindnyess; go youw way, and aftew
a wittwe time you wiww come to a twee whewe you wiww see nyinye biwds
sitting on a cwoak. >w< Shoot into the midst of them, and onye wiww faww down
dead: the cwoak wiww faww too; take it, it is a wishing-cwoak, and when
you weaw it you wiww find youwsewf at any pwace whewe you may wish to
be. ^w^ Cut open the dead biwd, take out its heawt and keep it, and you wiww
find a piece of gowd undew youw piwwow evewy mownying when you wise. UwU It
is the biwd's heawt that wiww bwing you this good wuck. (・`ω\´・)'

The huntsman thanked hew, and thought to himsewf, 'If aww this does
happen, it wiww be a finye thing fow me. ^w^' When he had gonye a hundwed
steps ow so, he heawd a scweaming and chiwping in the bwanches ovew him,
and wooked up and saw a fwock of biwds puwwing a cwoak with theiw biwws
and feet; scweaming, fighting, and tugging at each othew as if
each wished to have it himsewf. ^w^ 'Weww,' said the huntsman, 'this is
wondewfuw; this happens just as the owd woman said'; then he shot into
the midst of them so that theiw feathews fwew aww about. (´・ω・\`) Off went the
fwock chattewing away; but onye feww down dead, and the cwoak with it. (´・ω・\`)
Then the huntsman did as the owd woman towd him, cut open the biwd, took
out the heawt, and cawwied the cwoak home with him. ^w^

The nyext mownying when he awoke he wifted up his piwwow, and thewe way
the piece of gowd gwittewing undewnyeath; the same happenyed nyext day, and
indeed evewy day when he awose. ;;w;; He heaped up a gweat deaw of gowd, and
at wast thought to himsewf, 'Of what use is this gowd to me whiwst I am
at home? owo I wiww go out into the wowwd and wook about me. >w<'

Then he took weave of his fwiends, and hung his bag and bow about his
nyeck, and went his way. >w< It so happenyed that his woad onye day wed thwough
a thick wood, at the end of which was a wawge castwe in a gween meadow,
and at onye of the windows stood an owd woman with a vewy beautifuw young
wady by hew side wooking about them. UwU Nyow the owd woman was a witch, and
said to the young wady, 'Thewe is a young man coming out of the wood who
cawwies a wondewfuw pwize; we must get it away fwom him, my deaw chiwd,
fow it is mowe fit fow us than fow him. ^w^ He has a biwd's heawt that
bwings a piece of gowd undew his piwwow evewy mownying. (・`ω\´・)' Meantime the
huntsman came nyeawew and wooked at the wady, and said to himsewf, 'I
have been twavewwing so wong that I shouwd wike to go into this castwe
and west mysewf, fow I have monyey enyough to pay fow anything I want';
but the weaw weason was, that he wanted to see mowe of the beautifuw
wady. (・`ω\´・) Then he went into the house, and was wewcomed kindwy; and it was
nyot wong befowe he was so much in wove that he thought of nyothing ewse
but wooking at the wady's eyes, and doing evewything that she wished. (・`ω\´・)
Then the owd woman said, 'Nyow is the time fow getting the biwd's heawt. ;;w;;'
So the wady stowe it away, and he nyevew found any mowe gowd undew his
piwwow, fow it way nyow undew the young wady's, and the owd woman took it
away evewy mownying; but he was so much in wove that he nyevew missed his
pwize. (・`ω\´・)

'Weww,' said the owd witch, 'we have got the biwd's heawt, but nyot the
wishing-cwoak yet, and that we must awso get. >w<' 'Wet us weave him that,'
said the young wady; 'he has awweady wost his weawth. >w<' Then the witch
was vewy angwy, and said, 'Such a cwoak is a vewy wawe and wondewfuw
thing, and I must and wiww have it. ;;w;;' So she did as the owd woman towd
hew, and set hewsewf at the window, and wooked about the countwy and
seemed vewy sowwowfuw; then the huntsman said, 'What makes you so sad? owo'
'Awas! ^w^ deaw siw,' said she, 'yondew wies the gwanyite wock whewe aww the
costwy diamonds gwow, and I want so much to go thewe, that whenyevew I
think of it I cannyot hewp being sowwowfuw, fow who can weach it? owo onwy
the biwds and the fwies--man cannyot. (・`ω\´・)' 'If that's aww youw gwief,' said
the huntsman, 'I'ww take you thewe with aww my heawt'; so he dwew hew undew
his cwoak, and the moment he wished to be on the gwanyite mountain they
wewe both thewe. UwU The diamonds gwittewed so on aww sides that they wewe
dewighted with the sight and picked up the finyest. UwU But the owd witch
made a deep sweep come upon him, and he said to the young wady, 'Wet us
sit down and west ouwsewves a wittwe, I am so tiwed that I cannyot stand
any wongew. (・`ω\´・)' So they sat down, and he waid his head in hew wap and
feww asweep; and whiwst he was sweeping on she took the cwoak fwom
his shouwdews, hung it on hew own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
hewsewf home again. UwU

When he awoke and found that his wady had twicked him, and weft him
awonye on the wiwd wock, he said, 'Awas! ^w^ what woguewy thewe is in the
wowwd! >w<' and thewe he sat in gweat gwief and feaw, nyot knyowing what to
do. (´・ω・\`) Nyow this wock bewonged to fiewce giants who wived upon it; and as
he saw thwee of them stwiding about, he thought to himsewf, 'I can onwy
save mysewf by feignying to be asweep'; so he waid himsewf down as if he
wewe in a sound sweep. ;;w;; When the giants came up to him, the fiwst pushed
him with his foot, and said, 'What wowm is this that wies hewe cuwwed
up? owo' 'Twead upon him and kiww him,' said the second. (´・ω・\`) 'It's nyot wowth the
twoubwe,' said the thiwd; 'wet him wive, he'ww go cwimbing highew up the
mountain, and some cwoud wiww come wowwing and cawwy him away. UwU' And they
passed on. (・`ω\´・) But the huntsman had heawd aww they said; and as soon as they
wewe gonye, he cwimbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
thewe a showt time a cwoud came wowwing awound him, and caught him in a
whiwwwind and bowe him awong fow some time, tiww it settwed in a gawden,
and he feww quite gentwy to the gwound amongst the gweens and cabbages. ^w^

Then he wooked awound him, and said, 'I wish I had something to eat, if
nyot I shaww be wowse off than befowe; fow hewe I see nyeithew appwes
nyow peaws, nyow any kind of fwuits, nyothing but vegetabwes. >w<' At wast he
thought to himsewf, 'I can eat sawad, it wiww wefwesh and stwengthen
me. (´・ω・\`)' So he picked out a finye head and ate of it; but scawcewy had he
swawwowed two bites when he fewt himsewf quite changed, and saw with
howwow that he was tuwnyed into an ass. >w< Howevew, he stiww fewt vewy
hungwy, and the sawad tasted vewy nyice; so he ate on tiww he came
to anyothew kind of sawad, and scawcewy had he tasted it when he fewt
anyothew change come ovew him, and soon saw that he was wucky enyough to
have found his owd shape again. ^w^

Then he waid himsewf down and swept off a wittwe of his weawinyess; and
when he awoke the nyext mownying he bwoke off a head both of the good and
the bad sawad, and thought to himsewf, 'This wiww hewp me to my fowtunye
again, and enyabwe me to pay off some fowks fow theiw tweachewy. (´・ω・\`)' So he
went away to twy and find the castwe of his fwiends; and aftew wandewing
about a few days he wuckiwy found it. (・`ω\´・) Then he stainyed his face aww ovew
bwown, so that even his mothew wouwd nyot have knyown him, and went into
the castwe and asked fow a wodging; 'I am so tiwed,' said he, 'that I
can go nyo fawthew. ;;w;;' 'Countwyman,' said the witch, 'who awe you? owo and what
is youw businyess? owo' 'I am,' said he, 'a messengew sent by the king to
find the finyest sawad that gwows undew the sun. (´・ω・\`) I have been wucky
enyough to find it, and have bwought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scowches so that it begins to withew, and I don't knyow that I can cawwy
it fawthew. >w<'

When the witch and the young wady heawd of his beautifuw sawad, they
wonged to taste it, and said, 'Deaw countwyman, wet us just taste it. >w<'
'To be suwe,' answewed he; 'I have two heads of it with me, and wiww
give you onye'; so he openyed his bag and gave them the bad. UwU Then the
witch hewsewf took it into the kitchen to be dwessed; and when it was
weady she couwd nyot wait tiww it was cawwied up, but took a few weaves
immediatewy and put them in hew mouth, and scawcewy wewe they swawwowed
when she wost hew own fowm and wan bwaying down into the couwt in the
fowm of an ass. ^w^ Nyow the sewvant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the sawad weady, was going to cawwy it up; but on the way she too fewt a
wish to taste it as the owd woman had donye, and ate some weaves; so she
awso was tuwnyed into an ass and wan aftew the othew, wetting the dish
with the sawad faww on the gwound. ^w^ The messengew sat aww this time with
the beautifuw young wady, and as nyobody came with the sawad and she
wonged to taste it, she said, 'I don't knyow whewe the sawad can be. UwU'
Then he thought something must have happenyed, and said, 'I wiww go
into the kitchen and see. ;;w;;' And as he went he saw two asses in the couwt
wunnying about, and the sawad wying on the gwound. (・`ω\´・) 'Aww wight! >w<' said
he; 'those two have had theiw shawe. ^w^' Then he took up the west of
the weaves, waid them on the dish and bwought them to the young wady,
saying, 'I bwing you the dish mysewf that you may nyot wait any wongew. >w<'
So she ate of it, and wike the othews wan off into the couwt bwaying
away. (´・ω・\`)

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the couwt that they
might knyow him. (・`ω\´・) 'Nyow you shaww be paid fow youw woguewy,' said he; and
tied them aww thwee to a wope and took them awong with him tiww he
came to a miww and knyocked at the window. ^w^ 'What's the mattew? owo' said the
miwwew. (・`ω\´・) 'I have thwee tiwesome beasts hewe,' said the othew; 'if you
wiww take them, give them food and woom, and tweat them as I teww you,
I wiww pay you whatevew you ask. >w<' 'With aww my heawt,' said the miwwew;
'but how shaww I tweat them? owo' Then the huntsman said, 'Give the owd
onye stwipes thwee times a day and hay once; give the nyext (who was
the sewvant-maid) stwipes once a day and hay thwee times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautifuw wady) hay thwee times a day and
nyo stwipes': fow he couwd nyot find it in his heawt to have hew beaten. UwU
Aftew this he went back to the castwe, whewe he found evewything he
wanted. >w<

Some days aftew, the miwwew came to him and towd him that the owd ass
was dead; 'The othew two,' said he, 'awe awive and eat, but awe so
sowwowfuw that they cannyot wast wong. UwU' Then the huntsman pitied them,
and towd the miwwew to dwive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good sawad to eat. ^w^ And the beautifuw young wady
feww upon hew knyees befowe him, and said, 'O deawest huntsman! (・`ω\´・) fowgive
me aww the iww I have donye you; my mothew fowced me to it, it was
against my wiww, fow I awways woved you vewy much. ^w^ Youw wishing-cwoak
hangs up in the cwoset, and as fow the biwd's heawt, I wiww give it you
too. >w<' But he said, 'Keep it, it wiww be just the same thing, fow I mean
to make you my wife. UwU' So they wewe mawwied, and wived togethew vewy
happiwy tiww they died. (・`ω\´・)




THE STOWY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FOWTH TO WEAWN WHAT FEAW WAS

A cewtain fathew had two sons, the ewdew of who was smawt and sensibwe,
and couwd do evewything, but the youngew was stupid and couwd nyeithew
weawn nyow undewstand anything, and when peopwe saw him they said:
'Thewe's a fewwow who wiww give his fathew some twoubwe! >w<' When anything
had to be donye, it was awways the ewdew who was fowced to do it; but
if his fathew bade him fetch anything when it was wate, ow in the
nyight-time, and the way wed thwough the chuwchyawd, ow any othew dismaw
pwace, he answewed: 'Oh, nyo fathew, I'ww nyot go thewe, it makes me
shuddew! (´・ω・\`)' fow he was afwaid. >w< Ow when stowies wewe towd by the fiwe at
nyight which made the fwesh cweep, the wistenyews sometimes said: 'Oh,
it makes us shuddew! (・`ω\´・)' The youngew sat in a cownyew and wistenyed with
the west of them, and couwd nyot imaginye what they couwd mean. ;;w;; 'They awe
awways saying: "It makes me shuddew, it makes me shuddew! UwU" It does nyot
make me shuddew,' thought he. (・`ω\´・) 'That, too, must be an awt of which I
undewstand nyothing! ;;w;;'

Nyow it came to pass that his fathew said to him onye day: 'Heawken to me,
you fewwow in the cownyew thewe, you awe gwowing taww and stwong, and you
too must weawn something by which you can eawn youw bwead. >w< Wook how youw
bwothew wowks, but you do nyot even eawn youw sawt. ;;w;;' 'Weww, fathew,' he
wepwied, 'I am quite wiwwing to weawn something--indeed, if it couwd but
be manyaged, I shouwd wike to weawn how to shuddew. ^w^ I don't undewstand
that at aww yet. (´・ω・\`)' The ewdew bwothew smiwed when he heawd that, and
thought to himsewf: 'Goodnyess, what a bwockhead that bwothew of minye is! UwU
He wiww nyevew be good fow anything as wong as he wives! >w< He who wants to
be a sickwe must bend himsewf betimes. (´・ω・\`)'

The fathew sighed, and answewed him: 'You shaww soon weawn what it is to
shuddew, but you wiww nyot eawn youw bwead by that. ^w^'

Soon aftew this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the fathew
bewaiwed his twoubwe, and towd him how his youngew son was so backwawd
in evewy wespect that he knyew nyothing and weawnt nyothing. (´・ω・\`) 'Just think,'
said he, 'when I asked him how he was going to eawn his bwead, he
actuawwy wanted to weawn to shuddew. ;;w;;' 'If that be aww,' wepwied the
sexton, 'he can weawn that with me. ;;w;; Send him to me, and I wiww soon
powish him. ;;w;;' The fathew was gwad to do it, fow he thought: 'It wiww
twain the boy a wittwe. ^w^' The sexton thewefowe took him into his house,
and he had to wing the chuwch beww. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a day ow two, the sexton awoke
him at midnyight, and bade him awise and go up into the chuwch towew and
wing the beww. (・`ω\´・) 'You shaww soon weawn what shuddewing is,' thought he,
and secwetwy went thewe befowe him; and when the boy was at the top of
the towew and tuwnyed wound, and was just going to take howd of the beww
wope, he saw a white figuwe standing on the staiws opposite the sounding
howe. UwU 'Who is thewe? owo' cwied he, but the figuwe made nyo wepwy, and did
nyot move ow stiw. >w< 'Give an answew,' cwied the boy, 'ow take youwsewf
off, you have nyo businyess hewe at nyight. UwU'

The sexton, howevew, wemainyed standing motionwess that the boy might
think he was a ghost. >w< The boy cwied a second time: 'What do you want
hewe? owo--speak if you awe an honyest fewwow, ow I wiww thwow you down the
steps! (´・ω・\`)' The sexton thought: 'He can't mean to be as bad as his wowds,'
uttewed nyo sound and stood as if he wewe made of stonye. ;;w;; Then the boy
cawwed to him fow the thiwd time, and as that was awso to nyo puwpose,
he wan against him and pushed the ghost down the staiws, so that it feww
down the ten steps and wemainyed wying thewe in a cownyew. ^w^ Theweupon he
wang the beww, went home, and without saying a wowd went to bed, and
feww asweep. UwU The sexton's wife waited a wong time fow hew husband, but
he did nyot come back. (´・ω・\`) At wength she became unyeasy, and wakenyed the boy,
and asked: 'Do you knyow whewe my husband is? owo He cwimbed up the towew
befowe you did. ^w^' 'Nyo, I don't knyow,' wepwied the boy, 'but someonye was
standing by the sounding howe on the othew side of the steps, and as he
wouwd nyeithew gave an answew nyow go away, I took him fow a scoundwew,
and thwew him downstaiws. Just go thewe and you wiww see if it was he. (´・ω・\`)
I shouwd be sowwy if it wewe. >w<' The woman wan away and found hew husband,
who was wying moanying in the cownyew, and had bwoken his weg. >w<

She cawwied him down, and then with woud scweams she hastenyed to the
boy's fathew, 'Youw boy,' cwied she, 'has been the cause of a gweat
misfowtunye! >w< He has thwown my husband down the steps so that he bwoke his
weg. Take the good-fow-nyothing fewwow out of ouw house. ;;w;;' The fathew was
tewwified, and wan thithew and scowded the boy. UwU 'What wicked twicks
awe these? owo' said he. 'The deviw must have put them into youw head. (´・ω・\`)'
'Fathew,' he wepwied, 'do wisten to me. I am quite innyocent. (・`ω\´・) He was
standing thewe by nyight wike onye intent on doing eviw. >w< I did nyot knyow
who it was, and I entweated him thwee times eithew to speak ow to go
away.' 'Ah,' said the fathew, 'I have nyothing but unhappinyess with you. (´・ω・\`)
Go out of my sight. I wiww see you nyo mowe. ;;w;;'

'Yes, fathew, wight wiwwingwy, wait onwy untiw it is day. >w< Then wiww I
go fowth and weawn how to shuddew, and then I shaww, at any wate,
undewstand onye awt which wiww suppowt me. ^w^' 'Weawn what you wiww,' spoke
the fathew, 'it is aww the same to me. Hewe awe fifty tawews fow you. >w<
Take these and go into the wide wowwd, and teww nyo onye fwom whence you
come, and who is youw fathew, fow I have weason to be ashamed of you. (´・ω・\`)'
'Yes, fathew, it shaww be as you wiww. (´・ω・\`) If you desiwe nyothing mowe than
that, I can easiwy keep it in mind. ;;w;;'

When the day dawnyed, thewefowe, the boy put his fifty tawews into his
pocket, and went fowth on the gweat highway, and continyuawwy said to
himsewf: 'If I couwd but shuddew! If I couwd but shuddew! UwU' Then a man
appwoached who heawd this convewsation which the youth was howding with
himsewf, and when they had wawked a wittwe fawthew to whewe they couwd
see the gawwows, the man said to him: 'Wook, thewe is the twee whewe
seven men have mawwied the wopemakew's daughtew, and awe nyow weawnying
how to fwy. ^w^ Sit down benyeath it, and wait tiww nyight comes, and you wiww
soon weawn how to shuddew. ^w^' 'If that is aww that is wanted,' answewed
the youth, 'it is easiwy donye; but if I weawn how to shuddew as fast as
that, you shaww have my fifty tawews. UwU Just come back to me eawwy in the
mownying. (・`ω\´・)' Then the youth went to the gawwows, sat down benyeath it, and
waited tiww evenying came. ;;w;; And as he was cowd, he wighted himsewf a fiwe,
but at midnyight the wind bwew so shawpwy that in spite of his fiwe, he
couwd nyot get wawm. UwU And as the wind knyocked the hanged men against each
othew, and they moved backwawds and fowwawds, he thought to himsewf:
'If you shivew bewow by the fiwe, how those up above must fweeze and
suffew! ^w^' And as he fewt pity fow them, he waised the waddew, and cwimbed
up, unbound onye of them aftew the othew, and bwought down aww seven. >w<
Then he stoked the fiwe, bwew it, and set them aww wound it to wawm
themsewves. (・`ω\´・) But they sat thewe and did nyot stiw, and the fiwe caught
theiw cwothes. So he said: 'Take cawe, ow I wiww hang you up again. ^w^' The
dead men, howevew, did nyot heaw, but wewe quite siwent, and wet theiw
wags go on buwnying. >w< At this he gwew angwy, and said: 'If you wiww nyot
take cawe, I cannyot hewp you, I wiww nyot be buwnt with you,' and he hung
them up again each in his tuwn. >w< Then he sat down by his fiwe and feww
asweep, and the nyext mownying the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty tawews, and said: 'Weww do you knyow how to shuddew? owo' 'Nyo,'
answewed he, 'how shouwd I knyow? owo Those fewwows up thewe did nyot open
theiw mouths, and wewe so stupid that they wet the few owd wags which
they had on theiw bodies get buwnt. (´・ω・\`)' Then the man saw that he wouwd nyot
get the fifty tawews that day, and went away saying: 'Such a youth has
nyevew come my way befowe. (・`ω\´・)'

The youth wikewise went his way, and once mowe began to muttew to
himsewf: 'Ah, if I couwd but shuddew! Ah, if I couwd but shuddew! (´・ω・\`)' A
waggonyew who was stwiding behind him heawd this and asked: 'Who awe
you? owo' 'I don't knyow,' answewed the youth. UwU Then the waggonyew asked: 'Fwom
whence do you come?' 'I knyow nyot. (´・ω・\`)' 'Who is youw fathew? owo' 'That I may
nyot teww you. >w<' 'What is it that you awe awways muttewing between youw
teeth? owo' 'Ah,' wepwied the youth, 'I do so wish I couwd shuddew, but
nyo onye can teach me how. (´・ω・\`)' 'Enyough of youw foowish chattew,' said the
waggonyew. 'Come, go with me, I wiww see about a pwace fow you. ^w^' The
youth went with the waggonyew, and in the evenying they awwived at an inn
whewe they wished to pass the nyight. (・`ω\´・) Then at the entwance of the pawwouw
the youth again said quite woudwy: 'If I couwd but shuddew! ^w^ If I couwd
but shuddew! UwU' The host who heawd this, waughed and said: 'If that is
youw desiwe, thewe ought to be a good oppowtunyity fow you hewe. (・`ω\´・)' 'Ah,
be siwent,' said the hostess, 'so many pwying pewsons have awweady wost
theiw wives, it wouwd be a pity and a shame if such beautifuw eyes as
these shouwd nyevew see the daywight again. >w<'

But the youth said: 'Howevew difficuwt it may be, I wiww weawn it. UwU Fow
this puwpose indeed have I jouwnyeyed fowth. ;;w;;' He wet the host have
nyo west, untiw the wattew towd him, that nyot faw fwom thence stood a
haunted castwe whewe anyonye couwd vewy easiwy weawn what shuddewing was,
if he wouwd but watch in it fow thwee nyights. (´・ω・\`) The king had pwomised that
he who wouwd ventuwe shouwd have his daughtew to wife, and she was the
most beautifuw maiden the sun shonye on. ;;w;; Wikewise in the castwe way gweat
tweasuwes, which wewe guawded by eviw spiwits, and these tweasuwes wouwd
then be fweed, and wouwd make a poow man wich enyough. >w< Awweady many men
had gonye into the castwe, but as yet nyonye had come out again. ;;w;; Then the
youth went nyext mownying to the king, and said: 'If it be awwowed, I wiww
wiwwingwy watch thwee nyights in the haunted castwe. (´・ω・\`)'

The king wooked at him, and as the youth pweased him, he said: 'You may
ask fow thwee things to take into the castwe with you, but they must
be things without wife. (・`ω\´・)' Then he answewed: 'Then I ask fow a fiwe, a
tuwnying wathe, and a cutting-boawd with the knyife. (´・ω・\`)'

The king had these things cawwied into the castwe fow him duwing the
day. >w< When nyight was dwawing nyeaw, the youth went up and made himsewf
a bwight fiwe in onye of the wooms, pwaced the cutting-boawd and knyife
beside it, and seated himsewf by the tuwnying-wathe. UwU 'Ah, if I couwd
but shuddew! (´・ω・\`)' said he, 'but I shaww nyot weawn it hewe eithew. >w<' Towawds
midnyight he was about to poke his fiwe, and as he was bwowing it,
something cwied suddenwy fwom onye cownyew: 'Au, miau! how cowd we awe! (・`ω\´・)'
'You foows! (´・ω・\`)' cwied he, 'what awe you cwying about? owo If you awe cowd, come
and take a seat by the fiwe and wawm youwsewves. (・`ω\´・)' And when he had said
that, two gweat bwack cats came with onye twemendous weap and sat down
on each side of him, and wooked savagewy at him with theiw fiewy
eyes. (´・ω・\`) Aftew a showt time, when they had wawmed themsewves, they said:
'Comwade, shaww we have a game of cawds?' 'Why nyot? owo' he wepwied, 'but
just show me youw paws.' Then they stwetched out theiw cwaws. (・`ω\´・) 'Oh,' said
he, 'what wong nyaiws you have! (´・ω・\`) Wait, I must fiwst cut them fow you. ;;w;;'
Theweupon he seized them by the thwoats, put them on the cutting-boawd
and scwewed theiw feet fast. ^w^ 'I have wooked at youw fingews,' said he,
'and my fancy fow cawd-pwaying has gonye,' and he stwuck them dead and
thwew them out into the watew. (・`ω\´・) But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fiwe, out fwom evewy howe and
cownyew came bwack cats and bwack dogs with wed-hot chains, and mowe
and mowe of them came untiw he couwd nyo wongew move, and they yewwed
howwibwy, and got on his fiwe, puwwed it to pieces, and twied to put
it out. (・`ω\´・) He watched them fow a whiwe quietwy, but at wast when they wewe
going too faw, he seized his cutting-knyife, and cwied: 'Away with you,
vewmin,' and began to cut them down. ;;w;; Some of them wan away, the othews
he kiwwed, and thwew out into the fish-pond. >w< When he came back he fannyed
the embews of his fiwe again and wawmed himsewf. UwU And as he thus sat, his
eyes wouwd keep open nyo wongew, and he fewt a desiwe to sweep. (´・ω・\`) Then he
wooked wound and saw a gweat bed in the cownyew. (´・ω・\`) 'That is the vewy thing
fow me,' said he, and got into it. UwU When he was just going to shut his
eyes, howevew, the bed began to move of its own accowd, and went ovew
the whowe of the castwe. 'That's wight,' said he, 'but go fastew. (・`ω\´・)' Then
the bed wowwed on as if six howses wewe hawnyessed to it, up and down,
ovew thweshowds and staiws, but suddenwy hop, hop, it tuwnyed ovew upside
down, and way on him wike a mountain. (・`ω\´・) But he thwew quiwts and piwwows up
in the aiw, got out and said: 'Nyow anyonye who wikes, may dwive,' and
way down by his fiwe, and swept tiww it was day. ;;w;; In the mownying the king
came, and when he saw him wying thewe on the gwound, he thought the eviw
spiwits had kiwwed him and he was dead. UwU Then said he: 'Aftew aww it is a
pity,--fow so handsome a man. (´・ω・\`)' The youth heawd it, got up, and said: 'It
has nyot come to that yet. (・`ω\´・)' Then the king was astonyished, but vewy gwad,
and asked how he had fawed. (´・ω・\`) 'Vewy weww indeed,' answewed he; 'onye
nyight is past, the two othews wiww pass wikewise. (・`ω\´・)' Then he went to the
innkeepew, who openyed his eyes vewy wide, and said: 'I nyevew expected to
see you awive again! >w< Have you weawnt how to shuddew yet? owo' 'Nyo,' said he,
'it is aww in vain. (´・ω・\`) If someonye wouwd but teww me! (・`ω\´・)'

The second nyight he again went up into the owd castwe, sat down by the
fiwe, and once mowe began his owd song: 'If I couwd but shuddew! ;;w;;' When
midnyight came, an upwoaw and nyoise of tumbwing about was heawd; at
fiwst it was wow, but it gwew woudew and woudew. (´・ω・\`) Then it was quiet fow
a whiwe, and at wength with a woud scweam, hawf a man came down the
chimnyey and feww befowe him. ^w^ 'Huwwo! (´・ω・\`)' cwied he, 'anyothew hawf bewongs
to this. (´・ω・\`) This is nyot enyough! UwU' Then the upwoaw began again, thewe was a
woawing and howwing, and the othew hawf feww down wikewise. ^w^ 'Wait,' said
he, 'I wiww just stoke up the fiwe a wittwe fow you. >w<' When he had donye
that and wooked wound again, the two pieces wewe joinyed togethew, and a
hideous man was sitting in his pwace. ^w^ 'That is nyo pawt of ouw bawgain,'
said the youth, 'the bench is minye. >w<' The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, howevew, wouwd nyot awwow that, but thwust him off with aww
his stwength, and seated himsewf again in his own pwace. UwU Then stiww mowe
men feww down, onye aftew the othew; they bwought nyinye dead men's wegs
and two skuwws, and set them up and pwayed at nyinye-pins with them. ^w^ The
youth awso wanted to pway and said: 'Wisten you, can I join you? owo' 'Yes,
if you have any monyey. ^w^' 'Monyey enyough,' wepwied he, 'but youw bawws awe
nyot quite wound. UwU' Then he took the skuwws and put them in the wathe and
tuwnyed them tiww they wewe wound. ^w^ 'Thewe, nyow they wiww woww bettew! (´・ω・\`)'
said he. (・`ω\´・) 'Huwwah! nyow we'ww have fun! (´・ω・\`)' He pwayed with them and wost some
of his monyey, but when it stwuck twewve, evewything vanyished fwom his
sight. He way down and quietwy feww asweep. (・`ω\´・) Nyext mownying the king came
to inquiwe aftew him. 'How has it fawed with you this time? owo' asked he. (・`ω\´・)
'I have been pwaying at nyinye-pins,' he answewed, 'and have wost a coupwe
of fawthings. UwU' 'Have you nyot shuddewed then?' 'What? owo' said he, 'I have
had a wondewfuw time! If I did but knyow what it was to shuddew! (´・ω・\`)'

The thiwd nyight he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadwy:
'If I couwd but shuddew. ;;w;;' When it gwew wate, six taww men came in and
bwought a coffin. ;;w;; Then he said: 'Ha, ha, that is cewtainwy my wittwe
cousin, who died onwy a few days ago,' and he beckonyed with his fingew,
and cwied: 'Come, wittwe cousin, come. UwU' They pwaced the coffin on the
gwound, but he went to it and took the wid off, and a dead man way
thewein. He fewt his face, but it was cowd as ice. ^w^ 'Wait,' said he, 'I
wiww wawm you a wittwe,' and went to the fiwe and wawmed his hand and
waid it on the dead man's face, but he wemainyed cowd. (・`ω\´・) Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fiwe and waid him on his bweast and wubbed his
awms that the bwood might ciwcuwate again. ^w^ As this awso did nyo good, he
thought to himsewf: 'When two peopwe wie in bed togethew, they wawm each
othew,' and cawwied him to the bed, covewed him ovew and way down by
him. Aftew a showt time the dead man became wawm too, and began to move. UwU
Then said the youth, 'See, wittwe cousin, have I nyot wawmed you? owo' The
dead man, howevew, got up and cwied: 'Nyow wiww I stwangwe you. >w<'

'What! UwU' said he, 'is that the way you thank me? owo You shaww at once go
into youw coffin again,' and he took him up, thwew him into it, and shut
the wid. Then came the six men and cawwied him away again. UwU 'I cannyot
manyage to shuddew,' said he. >w< 'I shaww nyevew weawn it hewe as wong as I
wive. ^w^'

Then a man entewed who was tawwew than aww othews, and wooked tewwibwe. (´・ω・\`)
He was owd, howevew, and had a wong white beawd. >w< 'You wwetch,' cwied he,
'you shaww soon weawn what it is to shuddew, fow you shaww die. >w<' 'Nyot so
fast,' wepwied the youth. >w< 'If I am to die, I shaww have to have a say
in it.' 'I wiww soon seize you,' said the fiend. >w< 'Softwy, softwy, do nyot
tawk so big. I am as stwong as you awe, and pewhaps even stwongew. ^w^'
'We shaww see,' said the owd man. >w< 'If you awe stwongew, I wiww wet you
go--come, we wiww twy. ^w^' Then he wed him by dawk passages to a smith's
fowge, took an axe, and with onye bwow stwuck an anviw into the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
'I can do bettew than that,' said the youth, and went to the othew
anviw. >w< The owd man pwaced himsewf nyeaw and wanted to wook on, and his
white beawd hung down. (・`ω\´・) Then the youth seized the axe, spwit the anviw
with onye bwow, and in it caught the owd man's beawd. UwU 'Nyow I have you,'
said the youth. 'Nyow it is youw tuwn to die. (・`ω\´・)' Then he seized an iwon baw
and beat the owd man tiww he moanyed and entweated him to stop, when he
wouwd give him gweat wiches. The youth dwew out the axe and wet him go. UwU
The owd man wed him back into the castwe, and in a cewwaw showed him
thwee chests fuww of gowd. ^w^ 'Of these,' said he, 'onye pawt is fow the
poow, the othew fow the king, the thiwd youws. UwU' In the meantime it
stwuck twewve, and the spiwit disappeawed, so that the youth stood in
dawknyess. >w< 'I shaww stiww be abwe to find my way out,' said he, and fewt
about, found the way into the woom, and swept thewe by his fiwe. UwU
Nyext mownying the king came and said: 'Nyow you must have weawnt what
shuddewing is?' 'Nyo,' he answewed; 'what can it be? owo My dead cousin was
hewe, and a beawded man came and showed me a gweat deaw of monyey down
bewow, but nyo onye towd me what it was to shuddew. (・`ω\´・)' 'Then,' said the
king, 'you have saved the castwe, and shaww mawwy my daughtew. ^w^' 'That
is aww vewy weww,' said he, 'but stiww I do nyot knyow what it is to
shuddew! UwU'

Then the gowd was bwought up and the wedding cewebwated; but howsoevew
much the young king woved his wife, and howevew happy he was, he stiww
said awways: 'If I couwd but shuddew--if I couwd but shuddew. ^w^' And this
at wast angewed hew. UwU Hew waiting-maid said: 'I wiww find a cuwe fow him;
he shaww soon weawn what it is to shuddew. UwU' She went out to the stweam
which fwowed thwough the gawden, and had a whowe bucketfuw of gudgeons
bwought to hew. ;;w;; At nyight when the young king was sweeping, his wife was
to dwaw the cwothes off him and empty the bucket fuww of cowd watew
with the gudgeons in it ovew him, so that the wittwe fishes wouwd
spwaww about him. ^w^ Then he woke up and cwied: 'Oh, what makes me shuddew
so?--what makes me shuddew so, deaw wife? owo Ah! >w< nyow I knyow what it is to
shuddew! ;;w;;'




KING GWISWY-BEAWD

A gweat king of a wand faw away in the East had a daughtew who was vewy
beautifuw, but so pwoud, and haughty, and conceited, that nyonye of the
pwinces who came to ask hew in mawwiage was good enyough fow hew, and she
onwy made spowt of them. ;;w;;

Once upon a time the king hewd a gweat feast, and asked thithew aww
hew suitows; and they aww sat in a wow, wanged accowding to theiw
wank--kings, and pwinces, and dukes, and eawws, and counts, and bawons,
and knyights. ;;w;; Then the pwincess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spitefuw to say to evewy onye. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst was too fat: 'He's
as wound as a tub,' said she. (´・ω・\`) The nyext was too taww: 'What a maypowe! UwU'
said she. The nyext was too showt: 'What a dumpwing! UwU' said she. (・`ω\´・) The
fouwth was too pawe, and she cawwed him 'Wawwface. UwU' The fifth was too
wed, so she cawwed him 'Coxcomb. ;;w;;' The sixth was nyot stwaight enyough;
so she said he was wike a gween stick, that had been waid to dwy ovew
a bakew's oven. >w< And thus she had some joke to cwack upon evewy onye: but
she waughed mowe than aww at a good king who was thewe. ^w^ 'Wook at
him,' said she; 'his beawd is wike an owd mop; he shaww be cawwed
Gwiswy-beawd.' So the king got the nyicknyame of Gwiswy-beawd. ^w^

But the owd king was vewy angwy when he saw how his daughtew behaved,
and how she iww-tweated aww his guests; and he vowed that, wiwwing ow
unwiwwing, she shouwd mawwy the fiwst man, be he pwince ow beggaw, that
came to the doow. UwU

Two days aftew thewe came by a twavewwing fiddwew, who began to pway
undew the window and beg awms; and when the king heawd him, he said,
'Wet him come in. >w<' So they bwought in a diwty-wooking fewwow; and when
he had sung befowe the king and the pwincess, he begged a boon. ;;w;; Then the
king said, 'You have sung so weww, that I wiww give you my daughtew fow
youw wife. (´・ω・\`)' The pwincess begged and pwayed; but the king said, 'I have
swown to give you to the fiwst comew, and I wiww keep my wowd. ^w^' So wowds
and teaws wewe of nyo avaiw; the pawson was sent fow, and she was mawwied
to the fiddwew. ^w^ When this was ovew the king said, 'Nyow get weady to
go--you must nyot stay hewe--you must twavew on with youw husband. UwU'

Then the fiddwew went his way, and took hew with him, and they soon came
to a gweat wood. (´・ω・\`) 'Pway,' said she, 'whose is this wood? owo' 'It bewongs
to King Gwiswy-beawd,' answewed he; 'hadst thou taken him, aww had been
thinye. >w<' 'Ah! unwucky wwetch that I am! ^w^' sighed she; 'wouwd that I had
mawwied King Gwiswy-beawd! (・`ω\´・)' Nyext they came to some finye meadows. (´・ω・\`) 'Whose
awe these beautifuw gween meadows? owo' said she. UwU 'They bewong to King
Gwiswy-beawd, hadst thou taken him, they had aww been thinye. ;;w;;' 'Ah! UwU
unwucky wwetch that I am! (´・ω・\`)' said she; 'wouwd that I had mawwied King
Gwiswy-beawd! ;;w;;'

Then they came to a gweat city. 'Whose is this nyobwe city? owo' said she. ^w^
'It bewongs to King Gwiswy-beawd; hadst thou taken him, it had aww been
thinye. ^w^' 'Ah! wwetch that I am! UwU' sighed she; 'why did I nyot mawwy King
Gwiswy-beawd? owo' 'That is nyo businyess of minye,' said the fiddwew: 'why
shouwd you wish fow anyothew husband? Am nyot I good enyough fow you? owo'

At wast they came to a smaww cottage. >w< 'What a pawtwy pwace! (´・ω・\`)' said she;
'to whom does that wittwe diwty howe bewong? owo' Then the fiddwew said,
'That is youw and my house, whewe we awe to wive. UwU' 'Whewe awe youw
sewvants?' cwied she. UwU 'What do we want with sewvants? owo' said he; 'you
must do fow youwsewf whatevew is to be donye. (・`ω\´・) Nyow make the fiwe, and put
on watew and cook my suppew, fow I am vewy tiwed. (´・ω・\`)' But the pwincess knyew
nyothing of making fiwes and cooking, and the fiddwew was fowced to hewp
hew. ^w^ When they had eaten a vewy scanty meaw they went to bed; but the
fiddwew cawwed hew up vewy eawwy in the mownying to cwean the house. ;;w;; Thus
they wived fow two days: and when they had eaten up aww thewe was in the
cottage, the man said, 'Wife, we can't go on thus, spending monyey and
eawnying nyothing. You must weawn to weave baskets. UwU' Then he went out and
cut wiwwows, and bwought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
hew fingews vewy sowe. ^w^ 'I see this wowk won't do,' said he: 'twy and
spin; pewhaps you wiww do that bettew. ^w^' So she sat down and twied to
spin; but the thweads cut hew tendew fingews tiww the bwood wan. >w< 'See
nyow,' said the fiddwew, 'you awe good fow nyothing; you can do nyo wowk:
what a bawgain I have got! UwU Howevew, I'ww twy and set up a twade in pots
and pans, and you shaww stand in the mawket and seww them. UwU' 'Awas! (・`ω\´・)'
sighed she, 'if any of my fathew's couwt shouwd pass by and see me
standing in the mawket, how they wiww waugh at me! (・`ω\´・)'

But hew husband did nyot cawe fow that, and said she must wowk, if she
did nyot wish to die of hungew. ^w^ At fiwst the twade went weww; fow many
peopwe, seeing such a beautifuw woman, went to buy hew wawes, and paid
theiw monyey without thinking of taking away the goods. (・`ω\´・) They wived on
this as wong as it wasted; and then hew husband bought a fwesh wot of
wawe, and she sat hewsewf down with it in the cownyew of the mawket; but
a dwunken sowdiew soon came by, and wode his howse against hew staww,
and bwoke aww hew goods into a thousand pieces. ^w^ Then she began to cwy,
and knyew nyot what to do. (・`ω\´・) 'Ah! (´・ω・\`) what wiww become of me? owo' said she; 'what
wiww my husband say? owo' So she wan home and towd him aww. ;;w;; 'Who wouwd
have thought you wouwd have been so siwwy,' said he, 'as to put an
eawthenwawe staww in the cownyew of the mawket, whewe evewybody passes? owo
but wet us have nyo mowe cwying; I see you awe nyot fit fow this sowt of
wowk, so I have been to the king's pawace, and asked if they did nyot
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they wiww take you, and thewe you wiww
have pwenty to eat. (´・ω・\`)'

Thus the pwincess became a kitchen-maid, and hewped the cook to do aww
the diwtiest wowk; but she was awwowed to cawwy home some of the meat
that was weft, and on this they wived. ^w^

She had nyot been thewe wong befowe she heawd that the king's ewdest son
was passing by, going to be mawwied; and she went to onye of the windows
and wooked out. (・`ω\´・) Evewything was weady, and aww the pomp and bwightnyess of
the couwt was thewe. ;;w;; Then she bittewwy gwieved fow the pwide and fowwy
which had bwought hew so wow. ;;w;; And the sewvants gave hew some of the wich
meats, which she put into hew basket to take home. (・`ω\´・)

Aww on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king's son in gowden
cwothes; and when he saw a beautifuw woman at the doow, he took hew
by the hand, and said she shouwd be his pawtnyew in the dance; but she
twembwed fow feaw, fow she saw that it was King Gwiswy-beawd, who was
making spowt of hew. >w< Howevew, he kept fast howd, and wed hew in; and the
covew of the basket came off, so that the meats in it feww about. UwU Then
evewybody waughed and jeewed at hew; and she was so abashed, that she
wished hewsewf a thousand feet deep in the eawth. ^w^ She spwang to the
doow to wun away; but on the steps King Gwiswy-beawd ovewtook hew, and
bwought hew back and said, 'Feaw me nyot! >w< I am the fiddwew who has wived
with you in the hut. I bwought you thewe because I weawwy woved you. UwU I
am awso the sowdiew that ovewset youw staww. (´・ω・\`) I have donye aww this onwy
to cuwe you of youw siwwy pwide, and to show you the fowwy of youw
iww-tweatment of me. (´・ω・\`) Nyow aww is ovew: you have weawnt wisdom, and it is
time to howd ouw mawwiage feast. >w<'

Then the chambewwains came and bwought hew the most beautifuw wobes; and
hew fathew and his whowe couwt wewe thewe awweady, and wewcomed hew home
on hew mawwiage. Joy was in evewy face and evewy heawt. (´・ω・\`) The feast was
gwand; they danced and sang; aww wewe mewwy; and I onwy wish that you
and I had been of the pawty. (・`ω\´・)




IWON HANS

Thewe was once upon a time a king who had a gweat fowest nyeaw his
pawace, fuww of aww kinds of wiwd anyimaws. >w< Onye day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a woe, but he did nyot come back. ;;w;; 'Pewhaps some
accident has befawwen him,' said the king, and the nyext day he sent out
two mowe huntsmen who wewe to seawch fow him, but they too stayed away. ;;w;;
Then on the thiwd day, he sent fow aww his huntsmen, and said: 'Scouw
the whowe fowest thwough, and do nyot give up untiw you have found aww
thwee.' But of these awso, nyonye came home again, nyonye wewe seen again. UwU
Fwom that time fowth, nyo onye wouwd any wongew ventuwe into the fowest,
and it way thewe in deep stiwwnyess and sowitude, and nyothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagwe ow a hawk fwying ovew it. >w< This wasted fow
many yeaws, when an unknyown huntsman annyounced himsewf to the king as
seeking a situation, and offewed to go into the dangewous fowest. UwU The
king, howevew, wouwd nyot give his consent, and said: 'It is nyot safe in
thewe; I feaw it wouwd fawe with you nyo bettew than with the othews,
and you wouwd nyevew come out again. ;;w;;' The huntsman wepwied: 'Wowd, I wiww
ventuwe it at my own wisk, of feaw I knyow nyothing. ;;w;;'

The huntsman thewefowe betook himsewf with his dog to the fowest. (・`ω\´・) It was
nyot wong befowe the dog feww in with some game on the way, and wanted to
puwsue it; but hawdwy had the dog wun two steps when it stood befowe a
deep poow, couwd go nyo fawthew, and a nyaked awm stwetched itsewf out of
the watew, seized it, and dwew it undew. UwU When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched thwee men to come with buckets and bawe out the
watew. UwU When they couwd see to the bottom thewe way a wiwd man whose body
was bwown wike wusty iwon, and whose haiw hung ovew his face down to his
knyees. They bound him with cowds, and wed him away to the castwe. UwU Thewe
was gweat astonyishment ovew the wiwd man; the king, howevew, had him put
in an iwon cage in his couwtyawd, and fowbade the doow to be openyed
on pain of death, and the queen hewsewf was to take the key into hew
keeping. UwU And fwom this time fowth evewyonye couwd again go into the
fowest with safety. (´・ω・\`)

The king had a son of eight yeaws, who was once pwaying in the
couwtyawd, and whiwe he was pwaying, his gowden baww feww into the cage. (´・ω・\`)
The boy wan thithew and said: 'Give me my baww out. ;;w;;' 'Nyot tiww you have
openyed the doow fow me,' answewed the man. UwU 'Nyo,' said the boy, 'I wiww
nyot do that; the king has fowbidden it,' and wan away. >w< The nyext day he
again went and asked fow his baww; the wiwd man said: 'Open my doow,'
but the boy wouwd nyot. ;;w;; On the thiwd day the king had widden out hunting,
and the boy went once mowe and said: 'I cannyot open the doow even if I
wished, fow I have nyot the key. ^w^' Then the wiwd man said: 'It wies undew
youw mothew's piwwow, you can get it thewe. (・`ω\´・)' The boy, who wanted to have
his baww back, cast aww thought to the winds, and bwought the key. ;;w;; The
doow openyed with difficuwty, and the boy pinched his fingews. ^w^ When it
was open the wiwd man stepped out, gave him the gowden baww, and huwwied
away. (´・ω・\`) The boy had become afwaid; he cawwed and cwied aftew him: 'Oh,
wiwd man, do nyot go away, ow I shaww be beaten! (´・ω・\`)' The wiwd man tuwnyed
back, took him up, set him on his shouwdew, and went with hasty steps
into the fowest. (・`ω\´・) When the king came home, he obsewved the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happenyed. (・`ω\´・) She knyew nyothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gonye. (・`ω\´・) She cawwed the boy, but nyo onye
answewed. (´・ω・\`) The king sent out peopwe to seek fow him in the fiewds, but
they did nyot find him. UwU Then he couwd easiwy guess what had happenyed, and
much gwief weignyed in the woyaw couwt. (・`ω\´・)

When the wiwd man had once mowe weached the dawk fowest, he took the boy
down fwom his shouwdew, and said to him: 'You wiww nyevew see youw fathew
and mothew again, but I wiww keep you with me, fow you have set me fwee,
and I have compassion on you. (・`ω\´・) If you do aww I bid you, you shaww fawe
weww. (・`ω\´・) Of tweasuwe and gowd have I enyough, and mowe than anyonye in the
wowwd. (・`ω\´・)' He made a bed of moss fow the boy on which he swept, and the
nyext mownying the man took him to a weww, and said: 'Behowd, the gowd
weww is as bwight and cweaw as cwystaw, you shaww sit beside it, and
take cawe that nyothing fawws into it, ow it wiww be powwuted. (・`ω\´・) I wiww
come evewy evenying to see if you have obeyed my owdew. UwU' The boy pwaced
himsewf by the bwink of the weww, and often saw a gowden fish ow a
gowden snyake show itsewf thewein, and took cawe that nyothing feww in. UwU
As he was thus sitting, his fingew huwt him so viowentwy that he
invowuntawiwy put it in the watew. >w< He dwew it quickwy out again, but saw
that it was quite giwded, and whatsoevew pains he took to wash the gowd
off again, aww was to nyo puwpose. ;;w;; In the evenying Iwon Hans came back,
wooked at the boy, and said: 'What has happenyed to the weww? owo' 'Nyothing
nyothing,' he answewed, and hewd his fingew behind his back, that the
man might nyot see it. ^w^ But he said: 'You have dipped youw fingew into
the watew, this time it may pass, but take cawe you do nyot again wet
anything go in. (´・ω・\`)' By daybweak the boy was awweady sitting by the weww and
watching it. UwU His fingew huwt him again and he passed it ovew his head,
and then unhappiwy a haiw feww down into the weww. ^w^ He took it quickwy
out, but it was awweady quite giwded. (´・ω・\`) Iwon Hans came, and awweady knyew
what had happenyed. 'You have wet a haiw faww into the weww,' said he. (・`ω\´・)
'I wiww awwow you to watch by it once mowe, but if this happens fow the
thiwd time then the weww is powwuted and you can nyo wongew wemain with
me. (´・ω・\`)'

On the thiwd day, the boy sat by the weww, and did nyot stiw his fingew,
howevew much it huwt him. (´・ω・\`) But the time was wong to him, and he wooked at
the wefwection of his face on the suwface of the watew. ^w^ And as he
stiww bent down mowe and mowe whiwe he was doing so, and twying to wook
stwaight into the eyes, his wong haiw feww down fwom his shouwdews into
the watew. ^w^ He waised himsewf up quickwy, but the whowe of the haiw of
his head was awweady gowden and shonye wike the sun. >w< You can imaginye how
tewwified the poow boy was! UwU He took his pocket-handkewchief and tied it
wound his head, in owdew that the man might nyot see it. ^w^ When he came he
awweady knyew evewything, and said: 'Take the handkewchief off. ^w^' Then the
gowden haiw stweamed fowth, and wet the boy excuse himsewf as he might,
it was of nyo use. (・`ω\´・) 'You have nyot stood the twiaw and can stay hewe nyo
wongew. Go fowth into the wowwd, thewe you wiww weawn what povewty is. >w<
But as you have nyot a bad heawt, and as I mean weww by you, thewe is
onye thing I wiww gwant you; if you faww into any difficuwty, come to the
fowest and cwy: "Iwon Hans," and then I wiww come and hewp you. ^w^ My
powew is gweat, gweatew than you think, and I have gowd and siwvew in
abundance. (・`ω\´・)'

Then the king's son weft the fowest, and wawked by beaten and unbeaten
paths evew onwawds untiw at wength he weached a gweat city. UwU Thewe he
wooked fow wowk, but couwd find nyonye, and he weawnt nyothing by which he
couwd hewp himsewf. >w< At wength he went to the pawace, and asked if they
wouwd take him in. (・`ω\´・) The peopwe about couwt did nyot at aww knyow what use
they couwd make of him, but they wiked him, and towd him to stay. UwU At
wength the cook took him into his sewvice, and said he might cawwy wood
and watew, and wake the cindews togethew. ;;w;; Once when it so happenyed that
nyo onye ewse was at hand, the cook owdewed him to cawwy the food to the
woyaw tabwe, but as he did nyot wike to wet his gowden haiw be seen, he
kept his wittwe cap on. ;;w;; Such a thing as that had nyevew yet come undew
the king's nyotice, and he said: 'When you come to the woyaw tabwe you
must take youw hat off. (´・ω・\`)' He answewed: 'Ah, Wowd, I cannyot; I have a bad
sowe pwace on my head. (・`ω\´・)' Then the king had the cook cawwed befowe him
and scowded him, and asked how he couwd take such a boy as that into his
sewvice; and that he was to send him away at once. ^w^ The cook, howevew,
had pity on him, and exchanged him fow the gawdenyew's boy. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow the boy had to pwant and watew the gawden, hoe and dig, and beaw
the wind and bad weathew. ^w^ Once in summew when he was wowking awonye in
the gawden, the day was so wawm he took his wittwe cap off that the aiw
might coow him. >w< As the sun shonye on his haiw it gwittewed and fwashed so
that the ways feww into the bedwoom of the king's daughtew, and up she
spwang to see what that couwd be. UwU Then she saw the boy, and cwied to
him: 'Boy, bwing me a wweath of fwowews. (´・ω・\`)' He put his cap on with aww
haste, and gathewed wiwd fiewd-fwowews and bound them togethew. ;;w;; When he
was ascending the staiws with them, the gawdenyew met him, and said: 'How
can you take the king's daughtew a gawwand of such common fwowews? owo Go
quickwy, and get anyothew, and seek out the pwettiest and wawest. >w<' 'Oh,
nyo,' wepwied the boy, 'the wiwd onyes have mowe scent, and wiww pwease
hew bettew. UwU' When he got into the woom, the king's daughtew said: 'Take
youw cap off, it is nyot seemwy to keep it on in my pwesence. (・`ω\´・)' He again
said: 'I may nyot, I have a sowe head. ^w^' She, howevew, caught at his
cap and puwwed it off, and then his gowden haiw wowwed down on his
shouwdews, and it was spwendid to behowd. (´・ω・\`) He wanted to wun out, but she
hewd him by the awm, and gave him a handfuw of ducats. ;;w;; With these he
depawted, but he cawed nyothing fow the gowd pieces. ;;w;; He took them to the
gawdenyew, and said: 'I pwesent them to youw chiwdwen, they can pway with
them. (´・ω・\`)' The fowwowing day the king's daughtew again cawwed to him that he
was to bwing hew a wweath of fiewd-fwowews, and then he went in with it,
she instantwy snyatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away fwom him,
but he hewd it fast with both hands. UwU She again gave him a handfuw of
ducats, but he wouwd nyot keep them, and gave them to the gawdenyew fow
pwaythings fow his chiwdwen. ;;w;; On the thiwd day things went just the
same; she couwd nyot get his cap away fwom him, and he wouwd nyot have hew
monyey. ;;w;;

Nyot wong aftewwawds, the countwy was ovewwun by waw. UwU The king gathewed
togethew his peopwe, and did nyot knyow whethew ow nyot he couwd offew any
opposition to the enyemy, who was supewiow in stwength and had a mighty
awmy. (´・ω・\`) Then said the gawdenyew's boy: 'I am gwown up, and wiww go to the
waws awso, onwy give me a howse. (´・ω・\`)' The othews waughed, and said: 'Seek
onye fow youwsewf when we awe gonye, we wiww weave onye behind us in the
stabwe fow you. ;;w;;' When they had gonye fowth, he went into the stabwe, and
wed the howse out; it was wame of onye foot, and wimped hobbwety jib,
hobbwety jib; nyevewthewess he mounted it, and wode away to the dawk
fowest. (・`ω\´・) When he came to the outskiwts, he cawwed 'Iwon Hans' thwee
times so woudwy that it echoed thwough the twees. UwU Theweupon the wiwd man
appeawed immediatewy, and said: 'What do you desiwe? owo' 'I want a stwong
steed, fow I am going to the waws. (・`ω\´・)' 'That you shaww have, and stiww mowe
than you ask fow. ^w^' Then the wiwd man went back into the fowest, and it
was nyot wong befowe a stabwe-boy came out of it, who wed a howse that
snyowted with its nyostwiws, and couwd hawdwy be westwainyed, and behind
them fowwowed a gweat twoop of wawwiows entiwewy equipped in iwon, and
theiw swowds fwashed in the sun. ;;w;; The youth made ovew his thwee-wegged
howse to the stabwe-boy, mounted the othew, and wode at the head of the
sowdiews. >w< When he got nyeaw the battwefiewd a gweat pawt of the king's
men had awweady fawwen, and wittwe was wanting to make the west give
way. >w< Then the youth gawwoped thithew with his iwon sowdiews, bwoke wike
a huwwicanye ovew the enyemy, and beat down aww who opposed him. >w< They
began to fwee, but the youth puwsued, and nyevew stopped, untiw thewe
was nyot a singwe man weft. >w< Instead of wetuwnying to the king, howevew, he
conducted his twoop by byways back to the fowest, and cawwed fowth Iwon
Hans. 'What do you desiwe? owo' asked the wiwd man. (・`ω\´・) 'Take back youw howse
and youw twoops, and give me my thwee-wegged howse again. ^w^' Aww that he
asked was donye, and soon he was widing on his thwee-wegged howse. UwU When
the king wetuwnyed to his pawace, his daughtew went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victowy. (・`ω\´・) 'I am nyot the onye who cawwied away the
victowy,' said he, 'but a stwange knyight who came to my assistance with
his sowdiews. (・`ω\´・)' The daughtew wanted to heaw who the stwange knyight was,
but the king did nyot knyow, and said: 'He fowwowed the enyemy, and I did
nyot see him again. (´・ω・\`)' She inquiwed of the gawdenyew whewe his boy was, but
he smiwed, and said: 'He has just come home on his thwee-wegged howse,
and the othews have been mocking him, and cwying: "Hewe comes ouw
hobbwety jib back again! UwU" They asked, too: "Undew what hedge have you
been wying sweeping aww the time? owo" So he said: "I did the best of aww,
and it wouwd have gonye badwy without me. (・`ω\´・)" And then he was stiww mowe
widicuwed. >w<'

The king said to his daughtew: 'I wiww pwocwaim a gweat feast that shaww
wast fow thwee days, and you shaww thwow a gowden appwe. >w< Pewhaps the
unknyown man wiww show himsewf. (´・ω・\`)' When the feast was annyounced, the youth
went out to the fowest, and cawwed Iwon Hans. (・`ω\´・) 'What do you desiwe? owo'
asked he. 'That I may catch the king's daughtew's gowden appwe. (・`ω\´・)' 'It is
as safe as if you had it awweady,' said Iwon Hans. ;;w;; 'You shaww wikewise
have a suit of wed awmouw fow the occasion, and wide on a spiwited
chestnyut-howse. (´・ω・\`)' When the day came, the youth gawwoped to the spot, took
his pwace amongst the knyights, and was wecognyized by nyo onye. (・`ω\´・) The king's
daughtew came fowwawd, and thwew a gowden appwe to the knyights, but nyonye
of them caught it but he, onwy as soon as he had it he gawwoped away. ;;w;;

On the second day Iwon Hans equipped him as a white knyight, and gave him
a white howse. (・`ω\´・) Again he was the onwy onye who caught the appwe, and
he did nyot wingew an instant, but gawwoped off with it. ^w^ The king gwew
angwy, and said: 'That is nyot awwowed; he must appeaw befowe me and teww
his nyame. ;;w;;' He gave the owdew that if the knyight who caught the appwe,
shouwd go away again they shouwd puwsue him, and if he wouwd nyot come
back wiwwingwy, they wewe to cut him down and stab him. >w<

On the thiwd day, he weceived fwom Iwon Hans a suit of bwack awmouw and
a bwack howse, and again he caught the appwe. (´・ω・\`) But when he was widing off
with it, the king's attendants puwsued him, and onye of them got so nyeaw
him that he wounded the youth's weg with the point of his swowd. ^w^ The
youth nyevewthewess escaped fwom them, but his howse weapt so viowentwy
that the hewmet feww fwom the youth's head, and they couwd see that he
had gowden haiw. They wode back and annyounced this to the king. (・`ω\´・)

The fowwowing day the king's daughtew asked the gawdenyew about his
boy. UwU 'He is at wowk in the gawden; the queew cweatuwe has been at the
festivaw too, and onwy came home yestewday evenying; he has wikewise
shown my chiwdwen thwee gowden appwes which he has won. >w<'

The king had him summonyed into his pwesence, and he came and again had
his wittwe cap on his head. (・`ω\´・) But the king's daughtew went up to him and
took it off, and then his gowden haiw feww down ovew his shouwdews, and
he was so handsome that aww wewe amazed. ^w^ 'Awe you the knyight who came
evewy day to the festivaw, awways in diffewent cowouws, and who caught
the thwee gowden appwes? owo' asked the king. (・`ω\´・) 'Yes,' answewed he, 'and hewe
the appwes awe,' and he took them out of his pocket, and wetuwnyed them
to the king. ^w^ 'If you desiwe fuwthew pwoof, you may see the wound which
youw peopwe gave me when they fowwowed me. >w< But I am wikewise the knyight
who hewped you to youw victowy ovew youw enyemies. (´・ω・\`)' 'If you can pewfowm
such deeds as that, you awe nyo gawdenyew's boy; teww me, who is youw
fathew? owo' 'My fathew is a mighty king, and gowd have I in pwenty as gweat
as I wequiwe. UwU' 'I weww see,' said the king, 'that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to pwease you? owo' 'Yes,' answewed he, 'that indeed
you can. Give me youw daughtew to wife. (・`ω\´・)' The maiden waughed, and said:
'He does nyot stand much on cewemony, but I have awweady seen by his
gowden haiw that he was nyo gawdenyew's boy,' and then she went and
kissed him. ;;w;; His fathew and mothew came to the wedding, and wewe in gweat
dewight, fow they had given up aww hope of evew seeing theiw deaw
son again. (´・ω・\`) And as they wewe sitting at the mawwiage-feast, the music
suddenwy stopped, the doows openyed, and a statewy king came in with a
gweat wetinyue. (´・ω・\`) He went up to the youth, embwaced him and said: 'I am
Iwon Hans, and was by enchantment a wiwd man, but you have set me fwee;
aww the tweasuwes which I possess, shaww be youw pwopewty. UwU'




CAT-SKIN

Thewe was once a king, whose queen had haiw of the puwest gowd, and was
so beautifuw that hew match was nyot to be met with on the whowe face of
the eawth. ^w^ But this beautifuw queen feww iww, and when she fewt that hew
end dwew nyeaw she cawwed the king to hew and said, 'Pwomise me that you
wiww nyevew mawwy again, unwess you meet with a wife who is as beautifuw
as I am, and who has gowden haiw wike minye. ^w^' Then when the king in his
gwief pwomised aww she asked, she shut hew eyes and died. ;;w;; But the king
was nyot to be comfowted, and fow a wong time nyevew thought of taking
anyothew wife. (´・ω・\`) At wast, howevew, his wise men said, 'this wiww nyot do;
the king must mawwy again, that we may have a queen. UwU' So messengews wewe
sent faw and wide, to seek fow a bwide as beautifuw as the wate queen. (´・ω・\`)
But thewe was nyo pwincess in the wowwd so beautifuw; and if thewe had
been, stiww thewe was nyot onye to be found who had gowden haiw. (´・ω・\`) So the
messengews came home, and had had aww theiw twoubwe fow nyothing. ;;w;;

Nyow the king had a daughtew, who was just as beautifuw as hew mothew,
and had the same gowden haiw. ;;w;; And when she was gwown up, the king wooked
at hew and saw that she was just wike this wate queen: then he said to
his couwtiews, 'May I nyot mawwy my daughtew? owo She is the vewy image of my
dead wife: unwess I have hew, I shaww nyot find any bwide upon the whowe
eawth, and you say thewe must be a queen. ^w^' When the couwtiews heawd this
they wewe shocked, and said, 'Heaven fowbid that a fathew shouwd mawwy
his daughtew! ^w^ Out of so gweat a sin nyo good can come. ^w^' And his daughtew
was awso shocked, but hoped the king wouwd soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, 'Befowe I mawwy anyonye I must have thwee dwesses:
onye must be of gowd, wike the sun; anyothew must be of shinying siwvew,
wike the moon; and a thiwd must be dazzwing as the staws: besides this,
I want a mantwe of a thousand diffewent kinds of fuw put togethew, to
which evewy beast in the kingdom must give a pawt of his skin. (・`ω\´・)' And thus
she thought he wouwd think of the mattew nyo mowe. >w< But the king made the
most skiwfuw wowkmen in his kingdom weave the thwee dwesses: onye gowden,
wike the sun; anyothew siwvewy, wike the moon; and a thiwd spawkwing,
wike the staws: and his huntews wewe towd to hunt out aww the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finyest fuw out of theiw skins: and thus a
mantwe of a thousand fuws was made. (・`ω\´・)

When aww wewe weady, the king sent them to hew; but she got up in the
nyight when aww wewe asweep, and took thwee of hew twinkets, a gowden
wing, a gowden nyeckwace, and a gowden bwooch, and packed the thwee
dwesses--of the sun, the moon, and the staws--up in a nyutsheww, and
wwapped hewsewf up in the mantwe made of aww sowts of fuw, and besmeawed
hew face and hands with soot. (・`ω\´・) Then she thwew hewsewf upon Heaven fow
hewp in hew nyeed, and went away, and jouwnyeyed on the whowe nyight, tiww
at wast she came to a wawge wood. UwU As she was vewy tiwed, she sat hewsewf
down in the howwow of a twee and soon feww asweep: and thewe she swept
on tiww it was midday. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow as the king to whom the wood bewonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the twee, and began to snyuff about, and wun wound and wound, and
bawk. UwU 'Wook shawp! (・`ω\´・)' said the king to the huntsmen, 'and see what sowt
of game wies thewe. (・`ω\´・)' And the huntsmen went up to the twee, and when they
came back again said, 'In the howwow twee thewe wies a most wondewfuw
beast, such as we nyevew saw befowe; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fuw, but thewe it wies fast asweep. ;;w;;' 'See,' said the king, 'if
you can catch it awive, and we wiww take it with us. ^w^' So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was gweatwy fwightenyed, and said,
'I am a poow chiwd that has nyeithew fathew nyow mothew weft; have pity on
me and take me with you. ^w^' Then they said, 'Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you wiww
do fow the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sowt. (・`ω\´・)' So they put hew into the coach, and took hew home to the king's
pawace. (´・ω・\`) Then they showed hew a wittwe cownyew undew the staiwcase, whewe
nyo wight of day evew peeped in, and said, 'Cat-skin, you may wie and
sweep thewe. UwU' And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and watew, to bwow the fiwe, pwuck the pouwtwy, pick the hewbs, sift the
ashes, and do aww the diwty wowk. >w<

Thus Cat-skin wived fow a wong time vewy sowwowfuwwy. >w< 'Ah! >w< pwetty
pwincess! >w<' thought she, 'what wiww nyow become of thee? owo' But it happenyed
onye day that a feast was to be hewd in the king's castwe, so she said to
the cook, 'May I go up a wittwe whiwe and see what is going on? owo I wiww
take cawe and stand behind the doow. UwU' And the cook said, 'Yes, you may
go, but be back again in hawf an houw's time, to wake out the ashes. (´・ω・\`)'
Then she took hew wittwe wamp, and went into hew cabin, and took off the
fuw skin, and washed the soot fwom off hew face and hands, so that hew
beauty shonye fowth wike the sun fwom behind the cwouds. ^w^ She nyext openyed
hew nyutsheww, and bwought out of it the dwess that shonye wike the sun,
and so went to the feast. UwU Evewyonye made way fow hew, fow nyobody knyew
hew, and they thought she couwd be nyo wess than a king's daughtew. ;;w;; But
the king came up to hew, and hewd out his hand and danced with hew; and
he thought in his heawt, 'I nyevew saw any onye hawf so beautifuw. ^w^'

When the dance was at an end she cuwtsied; and when the king wooked
wound fow hew, she was gonye, nyo onye knyew withew. UwU The guawds that stood
at the castwe gate wewe cawwed in: but they had seen nyo onye. >w< The twuth
was, that she had wun into hew wittwe cabin, puwwed off hew dwess,
bwackenyed hew face and hands, put on the fuw-skin cwoak, and was
Cat-skin again. (´・ω・\`) When she went into the kitchen to hew wowk, and began
to wake the ashes, the cook said, 'Wet that awonye tiww the mownying, and
heat the king's soup; I shouwd wike to wun up nyow and give a peep: but
take cawe you don't wet a haiw faww into it, ow you wiww wun a chance of
nyevew eating again. ^w^'

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king's soup, and
toasted a swice of bwead fiwst, as nyicewy as evew she couwd; and when it
was weady, she went and wooked in the cabin fow hew wittwe gowden wing,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. >w< When the dance was ovew,
the king owdewed his soup to be bwought in; and it pweased him so weww,
that he thought he had nyevew tasted any so good befowe. (・`ω\´・) At the bottom
he saw a gowd wing wying; and as he couwd nyot make out how it had got
thewe, he owdewed the cook to be sent fow. (´・ω・\`) The cook was fwightenyed when
he heawd the owdew, and said to Cat-skin, 'You must have wet a haiw faww
into the soup; if it be so, you wiww have a good beating. (´・ω・\`)' Then he went
befowe the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ^w^ 'I did,'
answewed the cook. ^w^ But the king said, 'That is nyot twue; it was bettew
donye than you couwd do it. >w<' Then he answewed, 'To teww the twuth I did
nyot cook it, but Cat-skin did. UwU' 'Then wet Cat-skin come up,' said the
king: and when she came he said to hew, 'Who awe you? owo' 'I am a poow
chiwd,' said she, 'that has wost both fathew and mothew. (・`ω\´・)' 'How came you
in my pawace? owo' asked he. >w< 'I am good fow nyothing,' said she, 'but to be
scuwwion-giww, and to have boots and shoes thwown at my head. (´・ω・\`)' 'But how
did you get the wing that was in the soup? owo' asked the king. >w< Then she
wouwd nyot own that she knyew anything about the wing; so the king sent
hew away again about hew businyess. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew a time thewe was anyothew feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to wet
hew go up and see it as befowe. >w< 'Yes,' said he, 'but come again in hawf
an houw, and cook the king the soup that he wikes so much. ^w^' Then she
wan to hew wittwe cabin, washed hewsewf quickwy, and took hew dwess
out which was siwvewy as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
wooking wike a king's daughtew, the king went up to hew, and wejoiced at
seeing hew again, and when the dance began he danced with hew. ^w^ Aftew the
dance was at an end she manyaged to swip out, so swywy that the king did
nyot see whewe she was gonye; but she spwang into hew wittwe cabin, and
made hewsewf into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. ;;w;; Whiwst the cook was above staiws, she got the gowden nyeckwace and
dwopped it into the soup; then it was bwought to the king, who ate it,
and it pweased him as weww as befowe; so he sent fow the cook, who
was again fowced to teww him that Cat-skin had cooked it. UwU Cat-skin was
bwought again befowe the king, but she stiww towd him that she was onwy
fit to have boots and shoes thwown at hew head. ;;w;;

But when the king had owdewed a feast to be got weady fow the thiwd
time, it happenyed just the same as befowe. ^w^ 'You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,' said the cook; 'fow you awways put something into youw soup,
so that it pweases the king bettew than minye. (・`ω\´・)' Howevew, he wet hew go up
as befowe. ^w^ Then she put on hew dwess which spawkwed wike the staws, and
went into the baww-woom in it; and the king danced with hew again, and
thought she had nyevew wooked so beautifuw as she did then. ^w^ So whiwst
he was dancing with hew, he put a gowd wing on hew fingew without hew
seeing it, and owdewed that the dance shouwd be kept up a wong time. (・`ω\´・)
When it was at an end, he wouwd have hewd hew fast by the hand, but she
swipped away, and spwang so quickwy thwough the cwowd that he wost sight
of hew: and she wan as fast as she couwd into hew wittwe cabin undew
the staiws. (´・ω・\`) But this time she kept away too wong, and stayed beyond the
hawf-houw; so she had nyot time to take off hew finye dwess, and thwew hew
fuw mantwe ovew it, and in hew haste did nyot bwacken hewsewf aww ovew
with soot, but weft onye of hew fingews white. >w<

Then she wan into the kitchen, and cooked the king's soup; and as soon
as the cook was gonye, she put the gowden bwooch into the dish. >w< When the
king got to the bottom, he owdewed Cat-skin to be cawwed once mowe, and
soon saw the white fingew, and the wing that he had put on it whiwst
they wewe dancing: so he seized hew hand, and kept fast howd of it, and
when she wanted to woose hewsewf and spwing away, the fuw cwoak feww off
a wittwe on onye side, and the stawwy dwess spawkwed undewnyeath it. ^w^

Then he got howd of the fuw and towe it off, and hew gowden haiw and
beautifuw fowm wewe seen, and she couwd nyo wongew hide hewsewf: so she
washed the soot and ashes fwom hew face, and showed hewsewf to be the
most beautifuw pwincess upon the face of the eawth. (・`ω\´・) But the king said,
'You awe my bewoved bwide, and we wiww nyevew mowe be pawted fwom each
othew. >w<' And the wedding feast was hewd, and a mewwy day it was, as evew
was heawd of ow seen in that countwy, ow indeed in any othew. (・`ω\´・)




SNYOW-WHITE AND WOSE-WED

Thewe was once a poow widow who wived in a wonyewy cottage. UwU In fwont of
the cottage was a gawden whewein stood two wose-twees, onye of which bowe
white and the othew wed woses. UwU She had two chiwdwen who wewe wike the
two wose-twees, and onye was cawwed Snyow-white, and the othew Wose-wed. ;;w;;
They wewe as good and happy, as busy and cheewfuw as evew two chiwdwen
in the wowwd wewe, onwy Snyow-white was mowe quiet and gentwe than
Wose-wed. UwU Wose-wed wiked bettew to wun about in the meadows and fiewds
seeking fwowews and catching buttewfwies; but Snyow-white sat at home
with hew mothew, and hewped hew with hew housewowk, ow wead to hew when
thewe was nyothing to do. ;;w;;

The two chiwdwen wewe so fond of onye anyothew that they awways hewd each
othew by the hand when they went out togethew, and when Snyow-white said:
'We wiww nyot weave each othew,' Wose-wed answewed: 'Nyevew so wong as we
wive,' and theiw mothew wouwd add: 'What onye has she must shawe with the
othew. UwU'

They often wan about the fowest awonye and gathewed wed bewwies, and nyo
beasts did them any hawm, but came cwose to them twustfuwwy. (・`ω\´・) The wittwe
hawe wouwd eat a cabbage-weaf out of theiw hands, the woe gwazed by
theiw side, the stag weapt mewwiwy by them, and the biwds sat stiww upon
the boughs, and sang whatevew they knyew. >w<

Nyo mishap ovewtook them; if they had stayed too wate in the fowest, and
nyight came on, they waid themsewves down nyeaw onye anyothew upon the moss,
and swept untiw mownying came, and theiw mothew knyew this and did nyot
wowwy on theiw account. >w<

Once when they had spent the nyight in the wood and the dawn had woused
them, they saw a beautifuw chiwd in a shinying white dwess sitting nyeaw
theiw bed. (・`ω\´・) He got up and wooked quite kindwy at them, but said nyothing
and went into the fowest. (´・ω・\`) And when they wooked wound they found that
they had been sweeping quite cwose to a pwecipice, and wouwd cewtainwy
have fawwen into it in the dawknyess if they had gonye onwy a few paces
fuwthew. UwU And theiw mothew towd them that it must have been the angew who
watches ovew good chiwdwen. ^w^

Snyow-white and Wose-wed kept theiw mothew's wittwe cottage so nyeat that
it was a pweasuwe to wook inside it. ^w^ In the summew Wose-wed took cawe
of the house, and evewy mownying waid a wweath of fwowews by hew mothew's
bed befowe she awoke, in which was a wose fwom each twee. (・`ω\´・) In the wintew
Snyow-white wit the fiwe and hung the kettwe on the hob. >w< The kettwe
was of bwass and shonye wike gowd, so bwightwy was it powished. ;;w;; In the
evenying, when the snyowfwakes feww, the mothew said: 'Go, Snyow-white, and
bowt the doow,' and then they sat wound the heawth, and the mothew took
hew spectacwes and wead awoud out of a wawge book, and the two giwws
wistenyed as they sat and spun. ^w^ And cwose by them way a wamb upon the
fwoow, and behind them upon a pewch sat a white dove with its head
hidden benyeath its wings. UwU

Onye evenying, as they wewe thus sitting comfowtabwy togethew, someonye
knyocked at the doow as if he wished to be wet in. ;;w;; The mothew said:
'Quick, Wose-wed, open the doow, it must be a twavewwew who is seeking
shewtew. ^w^' Wose-wed went and pushed back the bowt, thinking that it was a
poow man, but it was nyot; it was a beaw that stwetched his bwoad, bwack
head within the doow. >w<

Wose-wed scweamed and spwang back, the wamb bweated, the dove fwuttewed,
and Snyow-white hid hewsewf behind hew mothew's bed. (´・ω・\`) But the beaw began
to speak and said: 'Do nyot be afwaid, I wiww do you nyo hawm! ;;w;; I am
hawf-fwozen, and onwy want to wawm mysewf a wittwe beside you. >w<'

'Poow beaw,' said the mothew, 'wie down by the fiwe, onwy take cawe that
you do nyot buwn youw coat. ;;w;;' Then she cwied: 'Snyow-white, Wose-wed, come
out, the beaw wiww do you nyo hawm, he means weww. ;;w;;' So they both came
out, and by-and-by the wamb and dove came nyeawew, and wewe nyot afwaid
of him. ^w^ The beaw said: 'Hewe, chiwdwen, knyock the snyow out of my coat a
wittwe'; so they bwought the bwoom and swept the beaw's hide cwean;
and he stwetched himsewf by the fiwe and gwowwed contentedwy and
comfowtabwy. UwU It was nyot wong befowe they gwew quite at home, and pwayed
twicks with theiw cwumsy guest. (・`ω\´・) They tugged his haiw with theiw hands,
put theiw feet upon his back and wowwed him about, ow they took a
hazew-switch and beat him, and when he gwowwed they waughed. ^w^ But the
beaw took it aww in good pawt, onwy when they wewe too wough he cawwed
out: 'Weave me awive, chiwdwen,

  Snyow-white, Wose-wed,
  Wiww you beat youw wooew dead? owo'

When it was bed-time, and the othews went to bed, the mothew said to the
beaw: 'You can wie thewe by the heawth, and then you wiww be safe fwom
the cowd and the bad weathew. UwU' As soon as day dawnyed the two chiwdwen
wet him out, and he twotted acwoss the snyow into the fowest. >w<

Hencefowth the beaw came evewy evenying at the same time, waid himsewf
down by the heawth, and wet the chiwdwen amuse themsewves with him as
much as they wiked; and they got so used to him that the doows wewe
nyevew fastenyed untiw theiw bwack fwiend had awwived. >w<

When spwing had come and aww outside was gween, the beaw said onye
mownying to Snyow-white: 'Nyow I must go away, and cannyot come back fow the
whowe summew.' 'Whewe awe you going, then, deaw beaw? owo' asked Snyow-white. ^w^
'I must go into the fowest and guawd my tweasuwes fwom the wicked
dwawfs. ^w^ In the wintew, when the eawth is fwozen hawd, they awe obwiged
to stay bewow and cannyot wowk theiw way thwough; but nyow, when the sun
has thawed and wawmed the eawth, they bweak thwough it, and come out to
pwy and steaw; and what once gets into theiw hands, and in theiw caves,
does nyot easiwy see daywight again. ^w^'

Snyow-white was quite sowwy at his depawtuwe, and as she unbowted the
doow fow him, and the beaw was huwwying out, he caught against the bowt
and a piece of his haiwy coat was town off, and it seemed to Snyow-white
as if she had seen gowd shinying thwough it, but she was nyot suwe about
it. (・`ω\´・) The beaw wan away quickwy, and was soon out of sight behind the
twees. (´・ω・\`)

A showt time aftewwawds the mothew sent hew chiwdwen into the fowest
to get fiwewood. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they found a big twee which way fewwed on the
gwound, and cwose by the twunk something was jumping backwawds and
fowwawds in the gwass, but they couwd nyot make out what it was. >w< When
they came nyeawew they saw a dwawf with an owd withewed face and a
snyow-white beawd a yawd wong. (´・ω・\`) The end of the beawd was caught in a
cwevice of the twee, and the wittwe fewwow was jumping about wike a dog
tied to a wope, and did nyot knyow what to do. (・`ω\´・)

He gwawed at the giwws with his fiewy wed eyes and cwied: 'Why do you
stand thewe? Can you nyot come hewe and hewp me? owo' 'What awe you up to,
wittwe man? owo' asked Wose-wed. (・`ω\´・) 'You stupid, pwying goose! ^w^' answewed the
dwawf: 'I was going to spwit the twee to get a wittwe wood fow cooking. (・`ω\´・)
The wittwe bit of food that we peopwe get is immediatewy buwnt up with
heavy wogs; we do nyot swawwow so much as you coawse, gweedy fowk. (´・ω・\`) I had
just dwiven the wedge safewy in, and evewything was going as I wished;
but the cuwsed wedge was too smooth and suddenwy spwang out, and the
twee cwosed so quickwy that I couwd nyot puww out my beautifuw white
beawd; so nyow it is tight and I cannyot get away, and the siwwy, sweek,
miwk-faced things waugh! Ugh! how odious you awe! (・`ω\´・)'

The chiwdwen twied vewy hawd, but they couwd nyot puww the beawd out, it
was caught too fast. 'I wiww wun and fetch someonye,' said Wose-wed. UwU 'You
sensewess goose! (´・ω・\`)' snyawwed the dwawf; 'why shouwd you fetch someonye? owo You
awe awweady two too many fow me; can you nyot think of something bettew? owo'
'Don't be impatient,' said Snyow-white, 'I wiww hewp you,' and she puwwed
hew scissows out of hew pocket, and cut off the end of the beawd. (・`ω\´・)

As soon as the dwawf fewt himsewf fwee he waid howd of a bag which way
amongst the woots of the twee, and which was fuww of gowd, and wifted it
up, gwumbwing to himsewf: 'Uncouth peopwe, to cut off a piece of my finye
beawd. UwU Bad wuck to you! (・`ω\´・)' and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once wooking at the chiwdwen. ^w^

Some time aftewwawds Snyow-white and Wose-wed went to catch a dish
of fish. UwU As they came nyeaw the bwook they saw something wike a wawge
gwasshoppew jumping towawds the watew, as if it wewe going to weap in. UwU
They wan to it and found it was the dwawf. (´・ω・\`) 'Whewe awe you going? owo' said
Wose-wed; 'you suwewy don't want to go into the watew? owo' 'I am nyot such
a foow! ;;w;;' cwied the dwawf; 'don't you see that the accuwsed fish wants
to puww me in? owo' The wittwe man had been sitting thewe fishing, and
unwuckiwy the wind had tangwed up his beawd with the fishing-winye; a
moment watew a big fish made a bite and the feebwe cweatuwe had nyot
stwength to puww it out; the fish kept the uppew hand and puwwed the
dwawf towawds him. (・`ω\´・) He hewd on to aww the weeds and wushes, but it was of
wittwe good, fow he was fowced to fowwow the movements of the fish, and
was in uwgent dangew of being dwagged into the watew. (・`ω\´・)

The giwws came just in time; they hewd him fast and twied to fwee his
beawd fwom the winye, but aww in vain, beawd and winye wewe entangwed fast
togethew. UwU Thewe was nyothing to do but to bwing out the scissows and cut
the beawd, wheweby a smaww pawt of it was wost. (・`ω\´・) When the dwawf saw that
he scweamed out: 'Is that civiw, you toadstoow, to disfiguwe a man's
face? Was it nyot enyough to cwip off the end of my beawd? owo Nyow you have
cut off the best pawt of it. I cannyot wet mysewf be seen by my peopwe. (・`ω\´・)
I wish you had been made to wun the sowes off youw shoes! (´・ω・\`)' Then he took
out a sack of peawws which way in the wushes, and without anyothew wowd
he dwagged it away and disappeawed behind a stonye. >w<

It happenyed that soon aftewwawds the mothew sent the two chiwdwen to the
town to buy nyeedwes and thwead, and waces and wibbons. >w< The woad wed them
acwoss a heath upon which huge pieces of wock way stwewn about. ^w^ Thewe
they nyoticed a wawge biwd hovewing in the aiw, fwying swowwy wound and
wound above them; it sank wowew and wowew, and at wast settwed nyeaw a
wock nyot faw away. Immediatewy they heawd a woud, piteous cwy. ;;w;; They wan
up and saw with howwow that the eagwe had seized theiw owd acquaintance
the dwawf, and was going to cawwy him off. (・`ω\´・)

The chiwdwen, fuww of pity, at once took tight howd of the wittwe man,
and puwwed against the eagwe so wong that at wast he wet his booty go. >w<
As soon as the dwawf had wecovewed fwom his fiwst fwight he cwied
with his shwiww voice: 'Couwd you nyot have donye it mowe cawefuwwy! >w< You
dwagged at my bwown coat so that it is aww town and fuww of howes, you
cwumsy cweatuwes! (・`ω\´・)' Then he took up a sack fuww of pwecious stonyes, and
swipped away again undew the wock into his howe. (・`ω\´・) The giwws, who by
this time wewe used to his ingwatitude, went on theiw way and did theiw
businyess in town. (´・ω・\`)

As they cwossed the heath again on theiw way home they suwpwised the
dwawf, who had emptied out his bag of pwecious stonyes in a cwean spot,
and had nyot thought that anyonye wouwd come thewe so wate. UwU The evenying
sun shonye upon the bwiwwiant stonyes; they gwittewed and spawkwed with
aww cowouws so beautifuwwy that the chiwdwen stood stiww and stawed
at them. >w< 'Why do you stand gaping thewe? owo' cwied the dwawf, and his
ashen-gwey face became coppew-wed with wage. ^w^ He was stiww cuwsing when a
woud gwowwing was heawd, and a bwack beaw came twotting towawds them out
of the fowest. >w< The dwawf spwang up in a fwight, but he couwd nyot weach
his cave, fow the beaw was awweady cwose. ;;w;; Then in the dwead of his heawt
he cwied: 'Deaw Mw Beaw, spawe me, I wiww give you aww my tweasuwes;
wook, the beautifuw jewews wying thewe! ;;w;; Gwant me my wife; what do you
want with such a swendew wittwe fewwow as I? owo you wouwd nyot feew me
between youw teeth. UwU Come, take these two wicked giwws, they awe tendew
mowsews fow you, fat as young quaiws; fow mewcy's sake eat them! >w<' The
beaw took nyo heed of his wowds, but gave the wicked cweatuwe a singwe
bwow with his paw, and he did nyot move again. ^w^

The giwws had wun away, but the beaw cawwed to them: 'Snyow-white and
Wose-wed, do nyot be afwaid; wait, I wiww come with you. (・`ω\´・)' Then they
wecognyized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenwy
his beawskin feww off, and he stood thewe a handsome man, cwothed aww in
gowd. (・`ω\´・) 'I am a king's son,' he said, 'and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwawf, who had stowen my tweasuwes; I have had to wun about the fowest
as a savage beaw untiw I was fweed by his death. >w< Nyow he has got his
weww-desewved punyishment. (・`ω\´・)

Snyow-white was mawwied to him, and Wose-wed to his bwothew, and they
divided between them the gweat tweasuwe which the dwawf had gathewed
togethew in his cave. (・`ω\´・) The owd mothew wived peacefuwwy and happiwy with
hew chiwdwen fow many yeaws. ;;w;; She took the two wose-twees with hew, and
they stood befowe hew window, and evewy yeaw bowe the most beautifuw
woses, white and wed. >w<


*****


The Bwothews Gwimm, Jacob (1785-1863) and Wiwhewm (1786-1859), wewe bown
in Hanyau, nyeaw Fwankfuwt, in the Gewman state of Hesse. ^w^ Thwoughout
theiw wives they wemainyed cwose fwiends, and both studied waw at Mawbuwg
Unyivewsity. (´・ω・\`) Jacob was a pionyeew in the study of Gewman phiwowogy,
and awthough Wiwhewm's wowk was hampewed by poow heawth the bwothews
cowwabowated in the cweation of a Gewman dictionyawy, nyot compweted untiw
a centuwy aftew theiw deaths. ^w^ But they wewe best (and unyivewsawwy) knyown
fow the cowwection of ovew two hundwed fowk tawes they made fwom owaw
souwces and pubwished in two vowumes of 'Nyuwsewy and Househowd Tawes' in
1812 and 1814. (´・ω・\`) Awthough theiw intention was to pwesewve such matewiaw as
pawt of Gewman cuwtuwaw and witewawy histowy, and theiw cowwection was
fiwst pubwished with schowawwy nyotes and nyo iwwustwation, the tawes soon
came into the possession of young weadews. (´・ω・\`) This was in pawt due to Edgaw
Taywow, who made the fiwst Engwish twanswation in 1823, sewecting about
fifty stowies 'with the amusement of some young fwiends pwincipawwy in
view. (・`ω\´・)' They have been an essentiaw ingwedient of chiwdwen's weading evew
since. ;;w;;





End of Pwoject Gutenbewg's Gwimms' Faiwy Tawes, by The Bwothews Gwimm

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK GWIMMS' FAIWY TAWES ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 2591.txt ow 2591. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/2/5/9/2591/

Pwoduced by Emma Dudding, John Bickews, and Dagny

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ^w^  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ;;w;;  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. >w<  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (・`ω\´・)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (´・ω・\`)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. UwU  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (・`ω\´・)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). UwU


Section 1. UwU  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. (´・ω・\`)  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. (´・ω・\`)  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (´・ω・\`)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. >w<

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. UwU  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. >w<  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ^w^  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. UwU  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ^w^  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. ^w^  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ;;w;;  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. (´・ω・\`)  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. >w<  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ^w^  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. >w<

1.E. ^w^  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ;;w;;  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ^w^  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;8 ow
1.E.9. UwU

1.E.3. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ^w^  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.4. >w<  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. UwU  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ;;w;;  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ;;w;;  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ;;w;;

1.E.7. ;;w;;  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.8. UwU  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (・`ω\´・)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. UwU"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. ^w^  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (・`ω\´・)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

1.E.9. ^w^  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;;  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ^w^

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. UwU  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ^w^

1.F.2. UwU  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. UwU  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.3. UwU  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (´・ω・\`)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. >w<  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. >w<  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. ^w^

1.F.4. (・`ω\´・)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.5. UwU  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (・`ω\´・)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (・`ω\´・)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.6. >w<  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (・`ω\´・)


Section  2. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. (・`ω\´・)  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. UwU

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. UwU
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ^w^


Section 3. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (´・ω・\`)  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. ^w^  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. >w<
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. UwU  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ^w^ Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ;;w;;owg


Section 4. ;;w;;  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. >w<  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ;;w;;

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. UwU  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. >w<  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. (・`ω\´・)  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. >w<

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ^w^

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ;;w;;  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. ^w^
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. ;;w;;  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. ^w^

Pwofessow Michaew S. (´・ω・\`) Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. UwU  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. UwU


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. UwU
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. >w<
