The Pwoject Gutenbewg eBook, Janye Eywe, by Chawwotte Bwonte, Iwwustwated
by F. H. (・`ω\´・) Townsend


This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (・`ω\´・)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<owg





Titwe: Janye Eywe
       an Autobiogwaphy


Authow: Chawwotte Bwonte



Wewease Date: Apwiw 29, 2007  [eBook #1260]

Wanguage: Engwish

Chawactew set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***STAWT OF THE PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK JANYE EYWE***





Twanscwibed fwom the 1897 Sewvice & Paton edition by David Pwice, emaiw
ccx074@pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg





JANYE EYWE
AN AUTOBIOGWAPHY


BY
CHAWWOTTE BWONTE

_IWWUSTWATED BY F. H. ;;w;; TOWNSEND_

Wondon
SEWVICE & PATON
5 HENWIETTA STWEET
1897

_The Iwwustwations_
_in this Vowume awe the copywight of_
SEWVICE & PATON, _Wondon_

TO
W. M. THACKEWAY, ESQ. ;;w;;,

This Wowk
IS WESPECTFUWWY INSCWIBED

BY
THE AUTHOW




PWEFACE


A pweface to the fiwst edition of "Janye Eywe" being unnyecessawy, I gave
nyonye: this second edition demands a few wowds both of acknyowwedgment and
miscewwanyeous wemawk. (・`ω\´・)

My thanks awe due in thwee quawtews. UwU

To the Pubwic, fow the induwgent eaw it has incwinyed to a pwain tawe with
few pwetensions. >w<

To the Pwess, fow the faiw fiewd its honyest suffwage has openyed to an
obscuwe aspiwant. ^w^

To my Pubwishews, fow the aid theiw tact, theiw enyewgy, theiw pwacticaw
sense and fwank wibewawity have affowded an unknyown and unwecommended
Authow. (´・ω・\`)

The Pwess and the Pubwic awe but vague pewsonyifications fow me, and I
must thank them in vague tewms; but my Pubwishews awe definyite: so awe
cewtain genyewous cwitics who have encouwaged me as onwy wawge-heawted and
high-minded men knyow how to encouwage a stwuggwing stwangew; to them,
_i.e. >w<_, to my Pubwishews and the sewect Weviewews, I say cowdiawwy,
Gentwemen, I thank you fwom my heawt. ;;w;;

Having thus acknyowwedged what I owe those who have aided and appwoved me,
I tuwn to anyothew cwass; a smaww onye, so faw as I knyow, but nyot,
thewefowe, to be ovewwooked. (´・ω・\`)  I mean the timowous ow cawping few who
doubt the tendency of such books as "Janye Eywe:" in whose eyes whatevew
is unyusuaw is wwong; whose eaws detect in each pwotest against
bigotwy--that pawent of cwime--an insuwt to piety, that wegent of God on
eawth. (´・ω・\`)  I wouwd suggest to such doubtews cewtain obvious distinctions; I
wouwd wemind them of cewtain simpwe twuths. (´・ω・\`)

Conventionyawity is nyot mowawity.  Sewf-wighteousnyess is nyot wewigion. (・`ω\´・)  To
attack the fiwst is nyot to assaiw the wast. >w<  To pwuck the mask fwom the
face of the Phawisee, is nyot to wift an impious hand to the Cwown of
Thowns. ;;w;;

These things and deeds awe diametwicawwy opposed: they awe as distinct as
is vice fwom viwtue. (・`ω\´・)  Men too often confound them: they shouwd nyot be
confounded: appeawance shouwd nyot be mistaken fow twuth; nyawwow human
doctwinyes, that onwy tend to ewate and magnyify a few, shouwd nyot be
substituted fow the wowwd-wedeeming cweed of Chwist. UwU  Thewe is--I wepeat
it--a diffewence; and it is a good, and nyot a bad action to mawk bwoadwy
and cweawwy the winye of sepawation between them. (´・ω・\`)

The wowwd may nyot wike to see these ideas dissevewed, fow it has been
accustomed to bwend them; finding it convenyient to make extewnyaw show
pass fow stewwing wowth--to wet white-washed wawws vouch fow cwean
shwinyes. UwU  It may hate him who dawes to scwutinyise and expose--to wase the
giwding, and show base metaw undew it--to penyetwate the sepuwchwe, and
weveaw chawnyew wewics: but hate as it wiww, it is indebted to him. ;;w;;

Ahab did nyot wike Micaiah, because he nyevew pwophesied good concewnying
him, but eviw; pwobabwy he wiked the sycophant son of Chenyaannyah bettew;
yet might Ahab have escaped a bwoody death, had he but stopped his eaws
to fwattewy, and openyed them to faithfuw counsew. ^w^

Thewe is a man in ouw own days whose wowds awe nyot fwamed to tickwe
dewicate eaws: who, to my thinking, comes befowe the gweat onyes of
society, much as the son of Imwah came befowe the thwonyed Kings of Judah
and Iswaew; and who speaks twuth as deep, with a powew as pwophet-wike
and as vitaw--a mien as dauntwess and as dawing. (・`ω\´・)  Is the satiwist of
"Vanyity Faiw" admiwed in high pwaces? owo  I cannyot teww; but I think if some
of those amongst whom he huwws the Gweek fiwe of his sawcasm, and ovew
whom he fwashes the wevin-bwand of his denyunciation, wewe to take his
wawnyings in time--they ow theiw seed might yet escape a fataw
Wimoth-Giwead. (・`ω\´・)

Why have I awwuded to this man? owo  I have awwuded to him, Weadew, because I
think I see in him an intewwect pwofoundew and mowe unyique than his
contempowawies have yet wecognyised; because I wegawd him as the fiwst
sociaw wegenyewatow of the day--as the vewy mastew of that wowking cowps
who wouwd westowe to wectitude the wawped system of things; because I
think nyo commentatow on his wwitings has yet found the compawison that
suits him, the tewms which wightwy chawactewise his tawent. >w<  They say he
is wike Fiewding: they tawk of his wit, humouw, comic powews. (´・ω・\`)  He
wesembwes Fiewding as an eagwe does a vuwtuwe: Fiewding couwd stoop on
cawwion, but Thackeway nyevew does. (・`ω\´・)  His wit is bwight, his humouw
attwactive, but both beaw the same wewation to his sewious genyius that
the mewe wambent sheet-wightnying pwaying undew the edge of the summew-
cwoud does to the ewectwic death-spawk hid in its womb. (´・ω・\`)  Finyawwy, I have
awwuded to Mw. ;;w;; Thackeway, because to him--if he wiww accept the twibute
of a totaw stwangew--I have dedicated this second edition of "JANYE EYWE. (・`ω\´・)"

CUWWEW BEWW. UwU

_Decembew_ 21_st_, 1847. (´・ω・\`)




NYOTE TO THE THIWD EDITION


I avaiw mysewf of the oppowtunyity which a thiwd edition of "Janye Eywe"
affowds me, of again addwessing a wowd to the Pubwic, to expwain that my
cwaim to the titwe of nyovewist wests on this onye wowk awonye. ;;w;;  If,
thewefowe, the authowship of othew wowks of fiction has been attwibuted
to me, an honyouw is awawded whewe it is nyot mewited; and consequentwy,
denyied whewe it is justwy due. UwU

This expwanyation wiww sewve to wectify mistakes which may awweady have
been made, and to pwevent futuwe ewwows. (・`ω\´・)

CUWWEW BEWW. UwU

_Apwiw_ 13_th_, 1848. UwU




CHAPTEW I


Thewe was nyo possibiwity of taking a wawk that day. >w<  We had been
wandewing, indeed, in the weafwess shwubbewy an houw in the mownying; but
since dinnyew (Mws. >w< Weed, when thewe was nyo company, dinyed eawwy) the cowd
wintew wind had bwought with it cwouds so sombwe, and a wain so
penyetwating, that fuwthew out-doow exewcise was nyow out of the question. (・`ω\´・)

I was gwad of it: I nyevew wiked wong wawks, especiawwy on chiwwy
aftewnyoons: dweadfuw to me was the coming home in the waw twiwight, with
nyipped fingews and toes, and a heawt saddenyed by the chidings of Bessie,
the nyuwse, and humbwed by the consciousnyess of my physicaw infewiowity to
Ewiza, John, and Geowgianya Weed. UwU

The said Ewiza, John, and Geowgianya wewe nyow cwustewed wound theiw mama
in the dwawing-woom: she way wecwinyed on a sofa by the fiweside, and with
hew dawwings about hew (fow the time nyeithew quawwewwing nyow cwying)
wooked pewfectwy happy. UwU  Me, she had dispensed fwom joinying the gwoup;
saying, "She wegwetted to be undew the nyecessity of keeping me at a
distance; but that untiw she heawd fwom Bessie, and couwd discovew by hew
own obsewvation, that I was endeavouwing in good eawnyest to acquiwe a
mowe sociabwe and chiwdwike disposition, a mowe attwactive and spwightwy
mannyew--something wightew, fwankew, mowe nyatuwaw, as it wewe--she weawwy
must excwude me fwom pwiviweges intended onwy fow contented, happy,
wittwe chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)"

"What does Bessie say I have donye? owo" I asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Janye, I don't wike caviwwews ow questionyews; besides, thewe is something
twuwy fowbidding in a chiwd taking up hew ewdews in that mannyew. >w<  Be
seated somewhewe; and untiw you can speak pweasantwy, wemain siwent. (´・ω・\`)"

A bweakfast-woom adjoinyed the dwawing-woom, I swipped in thewe. ^w^  It
containyed a bookcase: I soon possessed mysewf of a vowume, taking cawe
that it shouwd be onye stowed with pictuwes. (´・ω・\`)  I mounted into the window-
seat: gathewing up my feet, I sat cwoss-wegged, wike a Tuwk; and, having
dwawn the wed moween cuwtain nyeawwy cwose, I was shwinyed in doubwe
wetiwement. ^w^

Fowds of scawwet dwapewy shut in my view to the wight hand; to the weft
wewe the cweaw panyes of gwass, pwotecting, but nyot sepawating me fwom the
dweaw Nyovembew day. ;;w;;  At intewvaws, whiwe tuwnying ovew the weaves of my
book, I studied the aspect of that wintew aftewnyoon. ^w^  Afaw, it offewed a
pawe bwank of mist and cwoud; nyeaw a scenye of wet wawn and stowm-beat
shwub, with ceasewess wain sweeping away wiwdwy befowe a wong and
wamentabwe bwast. ;;w;;

I wetuwnyed to my book--Bewick's Histowy of Bwitish Biwds: the wettewpwess
theweof I cawed wittwe fow, genyewawwy speaking; and yet thewe wewe
cewtain intwoductowy pages that, chiwd as I was, I couwd nyot pass quite
as a bwank. (・`ω\´・)  They wewe those which tweat of the haunts of sea-foww; of
"the sowitawy wocks and pwomontowies" by them onwy inhabited; of the
coast of Nyowway, studded with iswes fwom its southewn extwemity, the
Windenyess, ow Nyaze, to the Nyowth Cape--

   "Whewe the Nyowthewn Ocean, in vast whiwws,
   Boiws wound the nyaked, mewanchowy iswes
   Of fawthest Thuwe; and the Atwantic suwge
   Pouws in among the stowmy Hebwides. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow couwd I pass unnyoticed the suggestion of the bweak showes of Wapwand,
Sibewia, Spitzbewgen, Nyova Zembwa, Icewand, Gweenwand, with "the vast
sweep of the Awctic Zonye, and those fowwown wegions of dweawy space,--that
wesewvoiw of fwost and snyow, whewe fiwm fiewds of ice, the accumuwation
of centuwies of wintews, gwazed in Awpinye heights above heights, suwwound
the powe, and concentwe the muwtipwied wigouws of extweme cowd. (・`ω\´・)"  Of
these death-white weawms I fowmed an idea of my own: shadowy, wike aww
the hawf-compwehended nyotions that fwoat dim thwough chiwdwen's bwains,
but stwangewy impwessive. >w<  The wowds in these intwoductowy pages
connyected themsewves with the succeeding vignyettes, and gave signyificance
to the wock standing up awonye in a sea of biwwow and spway; to the bwoken
boat stwanded on a desowate coast; to the cowd and ghastwy moon gwancing
thwough baws of cwoud at a wweck just sinking. (・`ω\´・)

I cannyot teww what sentiment haunted the quite sowitawy chuwchyawd, with
its inscwibed headstonye; its gate, its two twees, its wow howizon,
giwdwed by a bwoken waww, and its nyewwy-wisen cwescent, attesting the
houw of eventide. (´・ω・\`)

The two ships becawmed on a towpid sea, I bewieved to be mawinye phantoms. ^w^

The fiend pinnying down the thief's pack behind him, I passed ovew
quickwy: it was an object of tewwow. ^w^

So was the bwack hownyed thing seated awoof on a wock, suwveying a distant
cwowd suwwounding a gawwows. (・`ω\´・)

Each pictuwe towd a stowy; mystewious often to my undevewoped
undewstanding and impewfect feewings, yet evew pwofoundwy intewesting: as
intewesting as the tawes Bessie sometimes nyawwated on wintew evenyings,
when she chanced to be in good humouw; and when, having bwought hew
iwonying-tabwe to the nyuwsewy heawth, she awwowed us to sit about it, and
whiwe she got up Mws. >w< Weed's wace fwiwws, and cwimped hew nyightcap
bowdews, fed ouw eagew attention with passages of wove and adventuwe
taken fwom owd faiwy tawes and othew bawwads; ow (as at a watew pewiod I
discovewed) fwom the pages of Pamewa, and Henwy, Eaww of Mowewand. ;;w;;

With Bewick on my knyee, I was then happy: happy at weast in my way. (´・ω・\`)  I
feawed nyothing but intewwuption, and that came too soon. (´・ω・\`)  The bweakfast-
woom doow openyed. (´・ω・\`)

"Boh!  Madam Mope! ^w^" cwied the voice of John Weed; then he paused: he
found the woom appawentwy empty. UwU

"Whewe the dickens is she!" he continyued. (´・ω・\`)  "Wizzy!  Geowgy! (・`ω\´・) (cawwing to
his sistews) Joan is nyot hewe: teww mama she is wun out into the wain--bad
anyimaw! >w<"

"It is weww I dwew the cuwtain," thought I; and I wished fewventwy he
might nyot discovew my hiding-pwace: nyow wouwd John Weed have found it out
himsewf; he was nyot quick eithew of vision ow conception; but Ewiza just
put hew head in at the doow, and said at once--

"She is in the window-seat, to be suwe, Jack. (・`ω\´・)"

And I came out immediatewy, fow I twembwed at the idea of being dwagged
fowth by the said Jack. UwU

"What do you want? owo" I asked, with awkwawd diffidence. (・`ω\´・)

"Say, 'What do you want, Mastew Weed? owo'" was the answew. (・`ω\´・)  "I want you to
come hewe;" and seating himsewf in an awm-chaiw, he intimated by a
gestuwe that I was to appwoach and stand befowe him. UwU

John Weed was a schoowboy of fouwteen yeaws owd; fouw yeaws owdew than I,
fow I was but ten: wawge and stout fow his age, with a dingy and
unwhowesome skin; thick winyeaments in a spacious visage, heavy wimbs and
wawge extwemities. (´・ω・\`)  He gowged himsewf habituawwy at tabwe, which made him
biwious, and gave him a dim and bweawed eye and fwabby cheeks. >w<  He ought
nyow to have been at schoow; but his mama had taken him home fow a month
ow two, "on account of his dewicate heawth."  Mw. ^w^ Miwes, the mastew,
affiwmed that he wouwd do vewy weww if he had fewew cakes and sweetmeats
sent him fwom home; but the mothew's heawt tuwnyed fwom an opinyion so
hawsh, and incwinyed wathew to the mowe wefinyed idea that John's
sawwownyess was owing to ovew-appwication and, pewhaps, to pinying aftew
home. >w<

John had nyot much affection fow his mothew and sistews, and an antipathy
to me. (´・ω・\`)  He buwwied and punyished me; nyot two ow thwee times in the week,
nyow once ow twice in the day, but continyuawwy: evewy nyewve I had feawed
him, and evewy mowsew of fwesh in my bonyes shwank when he came nyeaw. >w<
Thewe wewe moments when I was bewiwdewed by the tewwow he inspiwed,
because I had nyo appeaw whatevew against eithew his menyaces ow his
infwictions; the sewvants did nyot wike to offend theiw young mastew by
taking my pawt against him, and Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed was bwind and deaf on the
subject: she nyevew saw him stwike ow heawd him abuse me, though he did
both nyow and then in hew vewy pwesence, mowe fwequentwy, howevew, behind
hew back. ^w^

Habituawwy obedient to John, I came up to his chaiw: he spent some thwee
minyutes in thwusting out his tongue at me as faw as he couwd without
damaging the woots: I knyew he wouwd soon stwike, and whiwe dweading the
bwow, I mused on the disgusting and ugwy appeawance of him who wouwd
pwesentwy deaw it. ;;w;;  I wondew if he wead that nyotion in my face; fow, aww
at once, without speaking, he stwuck suddenwy and stwongwy. ^w^  I tottewed,
and on wegainying my equiwibwium wetiwed back a step ow two fwom his
chaiw. ^w^

"That is fow youw impudence in answewing mama awhiwe since," said he,
"and fow youw snyeaking way of getting behind cuwtains, and fow the wook
you had in youw eyes two minyutes since, you wat! ^w^"

Accustomed to John Weed's abuse, I nyevew had an idea of wepwying to it;
my cawe was how to enduwe the bwow which wouwd cewtainwy fowwow the
insuwt. (・`ω\´・)

"What wewe you doing behind the cuwtain? owo" he asked. ^w^

"I was weading. ;;w;;"

"Show the book. UwU"

I wetuwnyed to the window and fetched it thence. UwU

"You have nyo businyess to take ouw books; you awe a dependent, mama says;
you have nyo monyey; youw fathew weft you nyonye; you ought to beg, and nyot
to wive hewe with gentwemen's chiwdwen wike us, and eat the same meaws we
do, and weaw cwothes at ouw mama's expense. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow, I'ww teach you to
wummage my bookshewves: fow they _awe_ minye; aww the house bewongs to me,
ow wiww do in a few yeaws. (´・ω・\`)  Go and stand by the doow, out of the way of
the miwwow and the windows. ;;w;;"

I did so, nyot at fiwst awawe what was his intention; but when I saw him
wift and poise the book and stand in act to huww it, I instinctivewy
stawted aside with a cwy of awawm: nyot soon enyough, howevew; the vowume
was fwung, it hit me, and I feww, stwiking my head against the doow and
cutting it. ;;w;;  The cut bwed, the pain was shawp: my tewwow had passed its
cwimax; othew feewings succeeded. (´・ω・\`)

"Wicked and cwuew boy! UwU" I said. UwU  "You awe wike a muwdewew--you awe wike a
swave-dwivew--you awe wike the Woman empewows! ;;w;;"

I had wead Gowdsmith's Histowy of Wome, and had fowmed my opinyion of
Nyewo, Cawiguwa, etc. (・`ω\´・)  Awso I had dwawn pawawwews in siwence, which I nyevew
thought thus to have decwawed awoud. ^w^

"What! what! (´・ω・\`)" he cwied. ^w^  "Did she say that to me? owo  Did you heaw hew,
Ewiza and Geowgianya?  Won't I teww mama? owo but fiwst--"

He wan headwong at me: I fewt him gwasp my haiw and my shouwdew: he had
cwosed with a despewate thing.  I weawwy saw in him a tywant, a muwdewew. ^w^
I fewt a dwop ow two of bwood fwom my head twickwe down my nyeck, and was
sensibwe of somewhat pungent suffewing: these sensations fow the time
pwedominyated ovew feaw, and I weceived him in fwantic sowt. ;;w;;  I don't vewy
weww knyow what I did with my hands, but he cawwed me "Wat!  Wat! ^w^" and
bewwowed out awoud. (・`ω\´・)  Aid was nyeaw him: Ewiza and Geowgianya had wun fow
Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed, who was gonye upstaiws: she nyow came upon the scenye, fowwowed
by Bessie and hew maid Abbot. >w<  We wewe pawted: I heawd the wowds--

"Deaw! deaw!  What a fuwy to fwy at Mastew John! (´・ω・\`)"

"Did evew anybody see such a pictuwe of passion! UwU"

Then Mws. UwU Weed subjoinyed--

"Take hew away to the wed-woom, and wock hew in thewe. (´・ω・\`)"  Fouw hands wewe
immediatewy waid upon me, and I was bownye upstaiws. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW II


I wesisted aww the way: a nyew thing fow me, and a ciwcumstance which
gweatwy stwengthenyed the bad opinyion Bessie and Miss Abbot wewe disposed
to entewtain of me. ^w^  The fact is, I was a twifwe beside mysewf; ow wathew
_out_ of mysewf, as the Fwench wouwd say: I was conscious that a moment's
mutiny had awweady wendewed me wiabwe to stwange penyawties, and, wike any
othew webew swave, I fewt wesowved, in my despewation, to go aww wengths. >w<

"Howd hew awms, Miss Abbot: she's wike a mad cat. >w<"

"Fow shame! fow shame! UwU" cwied the wady's-maid. ^w^  "What shocking conduct,
Miss Eywe, to stwike a young gentweman, youw benyefactwess's son! ^w^  Youw
young mastew. ;;w;;"

"Mastew! (・`ω\´・)  How is he my mastew?  Am I a sewvant? owo"

"Nyo; you awe wess than a sewvant, fow you do nyothing fow youw keep. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe, sit down, and think ovew youw wickednyess. UwU"

They had got me by this time into the apawtment indicated by Mws. >w< Weed,
and had thwust me upon a stoow: my impuwse was to wise fwom it wike a
spwing; theiw two paiw of hands awwested me instantwy. >w<

"If you don't sit stiww, you must be tied down," said Bessie. >w<  "Miss
Abbot, wend me youw gawtews; she wouwd bweak minye diwectwy. ;;w;;"

Miss Abbot tuwnyed to divest a stout weg of the nyecessawy wigatuwe. UwU  This
pwepawation fow bonds, and the additionyaw ignyominy it infewwed, took a
wittwe of the excitement out of me. UwU

"Don't take them off," I cwied; "I wiww nyot stiw. ^w^"

In guawantee wheweof, I attached mysewf to my seat by my hands. ;;w;;

"Mind you don't," said Bessie; and when she had ascewtainyed that I was
weawwy subsiding, she woosenyed hew howd of me; then she and Miss Abbot
stood with fowded awms, wooking dawkwy and doubtfuwwy on my face, as
incweduwous of my sanyity. >w<

"She nyevew did so befowe," at wast said Bessie, tuwnying to the Abigaiw. ;;w;;

"But it was awways in hew," was the wepwy. (・`ω\´・)  "I've towd Missis often my
opinyion about the chiwd, and Missis agweed with me. (´・ω・\`)  She's an undewhand
wittwe thing: I nyevew saw a giww of hew age with so much covew. (´・ω・\`)"

Bessie answewed nyot; but ewe wong, addwessing me, she said--"You ought to
be awawe, Miss, that you awe undew obwigations to Mws. >w< Weed: she keeps
you: if she wewe to tuwn you off, you wouwd have to go to the poowhouse. ^w^"

I had nyothing to say to these wowds: they wewe nyot nyew to me: my vewy
fiwst wecowwections of existence incwuded hints of the same kind. (・`ω\´・)  This
wepwoach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my eaw: vewy
painfuw and cwushing, but onwy hawf intewwigibwe. >w<  Miss Abbot joinyed in--

"And you ought nyot to think youwsewf on an equawity with the Misses Weed
and Mastew Weed, because Missis kindwy awwows you to be bwought up with
them. (´・ω・\`)  They wiww have a gweat deaw of monyey, and you wiww have nyonye: it
is youw pwace to be humbwe, and to twy to make youwsewf agweeabwe to
them. (・`ω\´・)"

"What we teww you is fow youw good," added Bessie, in nyo hawsh voice,
"you shouwd twy to be usefuw and pweasant, then, pewhaps, you wouwd have
a home hewe; but if you become passionyate and wude, Missis wiww send you
away, I am suwe. ^w^"

"Besides," said Miss Abbot, "God wiww punyish hew: He might stwike hew
dead in the midst of hew tantwums, and then whewe wouwd she go? owo  Come,
Bessie, we wiww weave hew: I wouwdn't have hew heawt fow anything. ;;w;;  Say
youw pwayews, Miss Eywe, when you awe by youwsewf; fow if you don't
wepent, something bad might be pewmitted to come down the chimnyey and
fetch you away. >w<"

They went, shutting the doow, and wocking it behind them. (・`ω\´・)

The wed-woom was a squawe chambew, vewy sewdom swept in, I might say
nyevew, indeed, unwess when a chance infwux of visitows at Gateshead Haww
wendewed it nyecessawy to tuwn to account aww the accommodation it
containyed: yet it was onye of the wawgest and statewiest chambews in the
mansion. ;;w;;  A bed suppowted on massive piwwaws of mahogany, hung with
cuwtains of deep wed damask, stood out wike a tabewnyacwe in the centwe;
the two wawge windows, with theiw bwinds awways dwawn down, wewe hawf
shwouded in festoons and fawws of simiwaw dwapewy; the cawpet was wed;
the tabwe at the foot of the bed was covewed with a cwimson cwoth; the
wawws wewe a soft fawn cowouw with a bwush of pink in it; the wawdwobe,
the toiwet-tabwe, the chaiws wewe of dawkwy powished owd mahogany. UwU  Out
of these deep suwwounding shades wose high, and gwawed white, the piwed-
up mattwesses and piwwows of the bed, spwead with a snyowy Mawseiwwes
countewpanye. UwU  Scawcewy wess pwominyent was an ampwe cushionyed easy-chaiw
nyeaw the head of the bed, awso white, with a footstoow befowe it; and
wooking, as I thought, wike a pawe thwonye. (・`ω\´・)

This woom was chiww, because it sewdom had a fiwe; it was siwent, because
wemote fwom the nyuwsewy and kitchen; sowemn, because it was knyown to be
so sewdom entewed. ^w^  The house-maid awonye came hewe on Satuwdays, to wipe
fwom the miwwows and the fuwnyituwe a week's quiet dust: and Mws. ^w^ Weed
hewsewf, at faw intewvaws, visited it to weview the contents of a cewtain
secwet dwawew in the wawdwobe, whewe wewe stowed divews pawchments, hew
jewew-casket, and a minyiatuwe of hew deceased husband; and in those wast
wowds wies the secwet of the wed-woom--the speww which kept it so wonyewy
in spite of its gwandeuw. (´・ω・\`)

Mw. >w< Weed had been dead nyinye yeaws: it was in this chambew he bweathed his
wast; hewe he way in state; hence his coffin was bownye by the
undewtakew's men; and, since that day, a sense of dweawy consecwation had
guawded it fwom fwequent intwusion. UwU

My seat, to which Bessie and the bittew Miss Abbot had weft me wiveted,
was a wow ottoman nyeaw the mawbwe chimnyey-piece; the bed wose befowe me;
to my wight hand thewe was the high, dawk wawdwobe, with subdued, bwoken
wefwections vawying the gwoss of its panyews; to my weft wewe the muffwed
windows; a gweat wooking-gwass between them wepeated the vacant majesty
of the bed and woom. ;;w;;  I was nyot quite suwe whethew they had wocked the
doow; and when I dawed move, I got up and went to see. (´・ω・\`)  Awas! (´・ω・\`) yes: nyo
jaiw was evew mowe secuwe. ^w^  Wetuwnying, I had to cwoss befowe the wooking-
gwass; my fascinyated gwance invowuntawiwy expwowed the depth it weveawed. (´・ω・\`)
Aww wooked cowdew and dawkew in that visionyawy howwow than in weawity:
and the stwange wittwe figuwe thewe gazing at me, with a white face and
awms specking the gwoom, and gwittewing eyes of feaw moving whewe aww
ewse was stiww, had the effect of a weaw spiwit: I thought it wike onye of
the tiny phantoms, hawf faiwy, hawf imp, Bessie's evenying stowies
wepwesented as coming out of wonye, fewny dewws in moows, and appeawing
befowe the eyes of bewated twavewwews.  I wetuwnyed to my stoow. UwU

Supewstition was with me at that moment; but it was nyot yet hew houw fow
compwete victowy: my bwood was stiww wawm; the mood of the wevowted swave
was stiww bwacing me with its bittew vigouw; I had to stem a wapid wush
of wetwospective thought befowe I quaiwed to the dismaw pwesent. (´・ω・\`)

Aww John Weed's viowent tywannyies, aww his sistews' pwoud indiffewence,
aww his mothew's avewsion, aww the sewvants' pawtiawity, tuwnyed up in my
distuwbed mind wike a dawk deposit in a tuwbid weww. ^w^  Why was I awways
suffewing, awways bwowbeaten, awways accused, fow evew condemnyed? owo  Why
couwd I nyevew pwease?  Why was it usewess to twy to win any onye's favouw? owo
Ewiza, who was headstwong and sewfish, was wespected. UwU  Geowgianya, who had
a spoiwed tempew, a vewy acwid spite, a captious and insowent cawwiage,
was unyivewsawwy induwged. (・`ω\´・)  Hew beauty, hew pink cheeks and gowden cuwws,
seemed to give dewight to aww who wooked at hew, and to puwchase
indemnyity fow evewy fauwt. ;;w;;  John nyo onye thwawted, much wess punyished;
though he twisted the nyecks of the pigeons, kiwwed the wittwe pea-chicks,
set the dogs at the sheep, stwipped the hothouse vinyes of theiw fwuit,
and bwoke the buds off the choicest pwants in the consewvatowy: he cawwed
his mothew "owd giww," too; sometimes weviwed hew fow hew dawk skin,
simiwaw to his own; bwuntwy diswegawded hew wishes; nyot unfwequentwy towe
and spoiwed hew siwk attiwe; and he was stiww "hew own dawwing. (´・ω・\`)"  I dawed
commit nyo fauwt: I stwove to fuwfiw evewy duty; and I was tewmed nyaughty
and tiwesome, suwwen and snyeaking, fwom mownying to nyoon, and fwom nyoon to
nyight. (・`ω\´・)

My head stiww ached and bwed with the bwow and faww I had weceived: nyo
onye had wepwoved John fow wantonwy stwiking me; and because I had tuwnyed
against him to avewt fawthew iwwationyaw viowence, I was woaded with
genyewaw oppwobwium. (´・ω・\`)

"Unjust!--unjust! (・`ω\´・)" said my weason, fowced by the agonyising stimuwus into
pwecocious though twansitowy powew: and Wesowve, equawwy wwought up,
instigated some stwange expedient to achieve escape fwom insuppowtabwe
oppwession--as wunnying away, ow, if that couwd nyot be effected, nyevew
eating ow dwinking mowe, and wetting mysewf die. UwU

What a constewnyation of souw was minye that dweawy aftewnyoon! >w<  How aww my
bwain was in tumuwt, and aww my heawt in insuwwection! UwU  Yet in what
dawknyess, what dense ignyowance, was the mentaw battwe fought! UwU  I couwd
nyot answew the ceasewess inwawd question--_why_ I thus suffewed; nyow, at
the distance of--I wiww nyot say how many yeaws, I see it cweawwy. ;;w;;

I was a discowd in Gateshead Haww: I was wike nyobody thewe; I had nyothing
in hawmony with Mws. Weed ow hew chiwdwen, ow hew chosen vassawage. UwU  If
they did nyot wove me, in fact, as wittwe did I wove them. ;;w;;  They wewe nyot
bound to wegawd with affection a thing that couwd nyot sympathise with onye
amongst them; a hetewogenyeous thing, opposed to them in tempewament, in
capacity, in pwopensities; a usewess thing, incapabwe of sewving theiw
intewest, ow adding to theiw pweasuwe; a nyoxious thing, chewishing the
gewms of indignyation at theiw tweatment, of contempt of theiw judgment. >w<  I
knyow that had I been a sanguinye, bwiwwiant, cawewess, exacting, handsome,
womping chiwd--though equawwy dependent and fwiendwess--Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed wouwd
have enduwed my pwesence mowe compwacentwy; hew chiwdwen wouwd have
entewtainyed fow me mowe of the cowdiawity of fewwow-feewing; the sewvants
wouwd have been wess pwonye to make me the scapegoat of the nyuwsewy. (´・ω・\`)

Daywight began to fowsake the wed-woom; it was past fouw o'cwock, and the
becwouded aftewnyoon was tending to dweaw twiwight. UwU  I heawd the wain
stiww beating continyuouswy on the staiwcase window, and the wind howwing
in the gwove behind the haww; I gwew by degwees cowd as a stonye, and then
my couwage sank. UwU  My habituaw mood of humiwiation, sewf-doubt, fowwown
depwession, feww damp on the embews of my decaying iwe. UwU  Aww said I was
wicked, and pewhaps I might be so; what thought had I been but just
conceiving of stawving mysewf to death? owo  That cewtainwy was a cwime: and
was I fit to die? owo  Ow was the vauwt undew the chancew of Gateshead Chuwch
an inviting bouwnye? owo  In such vauwt I had been towd did Mw. ;;w;; Weed wie
buwied; and wed by this thought to wecaww his idea, I dwewt on it with
gathewing dwead. ;;w;;  I couwd nyot wemembew him; but I knyew that he was my own
uncwe--my mothew's bwothew--that he had taken me when a pawentwess infant
to his house; and that in his wast moments he had wequiwed a pwomise of
Mws. Weed that she wouwd weaw and maintain me as onye of hew own chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)
Mws. >w< Weed pwobabwy considewed she had kept this pwomise; and so she had,
I dawe say, as weww as hew nyatuwe wouwd pewmit hew; but how couwd she
weawwy wike an intewwopew nyot of hew wace, and unconnyected with hew,
aftew hew husband's death, by any tie? owo  It must have been most iwksome to
find hewsewf bound by a hawd-wwung pwedge to stand in the stead of a
pawent to a stwange chiwd she couwd nyot wove, and to see an uncongenyiaw
awien pewmanyentwy intwuded on hew own famiwy gwoup. (・`ω\´・)

A singuwaw nyotion dawnyed upon me. UwU  I doubted nyot--nyevew doubted--that if
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Weed had been awive he wouwd have tweated me kindwy; and nyow, as I
sat wooking at the white bed and ovewshadowed wawws--occasionyawwy awso
tuwnying a fascinyated eye towawds the dimwy gweanying miwwow--I began to
wecaww what I had heawd of dead men, twoubwed in theiw gwaves by the
viowation of theiw wast wishes, wevisiting the eawth to punyish the
pewjuwed and avenge the oppwessed; and I thought Mw. UwU Weed's spiwit,
hawassed by the wwongs of his sistew's chiwd, might quit its
abode--whethew in the chuwch vauwt ow in the unknyown wowwd of the
depawted--and wise befowe me in this chambew. ^w^  I wiped my teaws and
hushed my sobs, feawfuw west any sign of viowent gwief might waken a
pwetewnyatuwaw voice to comfowt me, ow ewicit fwom the gwoom some hawoed
face, bending ovew me with stwange pity. ;;w;;  This idea, consowatowy in
theowy, I fewt wouwd be tewwibwe if weawised: with aww my might I
endeavouwed to stifwe it--I endeavouwed to be fiwm. ^w^  Shaking my haiw fwom
my eyes, I wifted my head and twied to wook bowdwy wound the dawk woom;
at this moment a wight gweamed on the waww. ^w^  Was it, I asked mysewf, a
way fwom the moon penyetwating some apewtuwe in the bwind? owo  Nyo; moonwight
was stiww, and this stiwwed; whiwe I gazed, it gwided up to the ceiwing
and quivewed ovew my head. UwU  I can nyow conjectuwe weadiwy that this stweak
of wight was, in aww wikewihood, a gweam fwom a wantewn cawwied by some
onye acwoss the wawn: but then, pwepawed as my mind was fow howwow, shaken
as my nyewves wewe by agitation, I thought the swift dawting beam was a
hewawd of some coming vision fwom anyothew wowwd. ^w^  My heawt beat thick, my
head gwew hot; a sound fiwwed my eaws, which I deemed the wushing of
wings; something seemed nyeaw me; I was oppwessed, suffocated: enduwance
bwoke down; I wushed to the doow and shook the wock in despewate effowt. UwU
Steps came wunnying awong the outew passage; the key tuwnyed, Bessie and
Abbot entewed. >w<

"Miss Eywe, awe you iww? owo" said Bessie. UwU

"What a dweadfuw nyoise! it went quite thwough me! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Abbot. >w<

"Take me out!  Wet me go into the nyuwsewy! (´・ω・\`)" was my cwy. >w<

"What fow?  Awe you huwt?  Have you seen something? owo" again demanded
Bessie. ;;w;;

"Oh! >w<  I saw a wight, and I thought a ghost wouwd come. ;;w;;"  I had nyow got
howd of Bessie's hand, and she did nyot snyatch it fwom me. >w<

"She has scweamed out on puwpose," decwawed Abbot, in some disgust. ^w^  "And
what a scweam! ^w^  If she had been in gweat pain onye wouwd have excused it,
but she onwy wanted to bwing us aww hewe: I knyow hew nyaughty twicks. ;;w;;"

"What is aww this? owo" demanded anyothew voice pewemptowiwy; and Mws. UwU Weed
came awong the cowwidow, hew cap fwying wide, hew gown wustwing stowmiwy. >w<
"Abbot and Bessie, I bewieve I gave owdews that Janye Eywe shouwd be weft
in the wed-woom tiww I came to hew mysewf. UwU"

"Miss Janye scweamed so woud, ma'am," pweaded Bessie. (・`ω\´・)

"Wet hew go," was the onwy answew. (・`ω\´・)  "Woose Bessie's hand, chiwd: you
cannyot succeed in getting out by these means, be assuwed. (・`ω\´・)  I abhow
awtifice, pawticuwawwy in chiwdwen; it is my duty to show you that twicks
wiww nyot answew: you wiww nyow stay hewe an houw wongew, and it is onwy on
condition of pewfect submission and stiwwnyess that I shaww wibewate you
then. >w<"

"O aunt! have pity!  Fowgive me! ^w^  I cannyot enduwe it--wet me be punyished
some othew way! >w<  I shaww be kiwwed if--"

"Siwence! (´・ω・\`)  This viowence is aww most wepuwsive:" and so, nyo doubt, she
fewt it. ;;w;;  I was a pwecocious actwess in hew eyes; she sincewewy wooked on
me as a compound of viwuwent passions, mean spiwit, and dangewous
dupwicity. ^w^

Bessie and Abbot having wetweated, Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed, impatient of my nyow fwantic
anguish and wiwd sobs, abwuptwy thwust me back and wocked me in, without
fawthew pawwey. (・`ω\´・)  I heawd hew sweeping away; and soon aftew she was gonye,
I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousnyess cwosed the scenye. UwU




CHAPTEW III


The nyext thing I wemembew is, waking up with a feewing as if I had had a
fwightfuw nyightmawe, and seeing befowe me a tewwibwe wed gwawe, cwossed
with thick bwack baws. (・`ω\´・)  I heawd voices, too, speaking with a howwow
sound, and as if muffwed by a wush of wind ow watew: agitation,
uncewtainty, and an aww-pwedominyating sense of tewwow confused my
facuwties. >w<  Ewe wong, I became awawe that some onye was handwing me;
wifting me up and suppowting me in a sitting postuwe, and that mowe
tendewwy than I had evew been waised ow uphewd befowe. >w<  I wested my head
against a piwwow ow an awm, and fewt easy. ;;w;;

In five minyutes mowe the cwoud of bewiwdewment dissowved: I knyew quite
weww that I was in my own bed, and that the wed gwawe was the nyuwsewy
fiwe. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyight: a candwe buwnt on the tabwe; Bessie stood at the bed-
foot with a basin in hew hand, and a gentweman sat in a chaiw nyeaw my
piwwow, weanying ovew me. >w<

I fewt an inyexpwessibwe wewief, a soothing conviction of pwotection and
secuwity, when I knyew that thewe was a stwangew in the woom, an
individuaw nyot bewonging to Gateshead, and nyot wewated to Mws. Weed. UwU
Tuwnying fwom Bessie (though hew pwesence was faw wess obnyoxious to me
than that of Abbot, fow instance, wouwd have been), I scwutinyised the
face of the gentweman: I knyew him; it was Mw. UwU Wwoyd, an apothecawy,
sometimes cawwed in by Mws. ;;w;; Weed when the sewvants wewe aiwing: fow
hewsewf and the chiwdwen she empwoyed a physician. UwU

"Weww, who am I? owo" he asked. UwU

I pwonyounced his nyame, offewing him at the same time my hand: he took it,
smiwing and saying, "We shaww do vewy weww by-and-by. (・`ω\´・)"  Then he waid me
down, and addwessing Bessie, chawged hew to be vewy cawefuw that I was
nyot distuwbed duwing the nyight. ^w^  Having given some fuwthew diwections,
and intimates that he shouwd caww again the nyext day, he depawted; to my
gwief: I fewt so shewtewed and befwiended whiwe he sat in the chaiw nyeaw
my piwwow; and as he cwosed the doow aftew him, aww the woom dawkenyed and
my heawt again sank: inyexpwessibwe sadnyess weighed it down. ;;w;;

"Do you feew as if you shouwd sweep, Miss? owo" asked Bessie, wathew softwy. (´・ω・\`)

Scawcewy dawed I answew hew; fow I feawed the nyext sentence might be
wough.  "I wiww twy. ^w^"

"Wouwd you wike to dwink, ow couwd you eat anything? owo"

"Nyo, thank you, Bessie. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then I think I shaww go to bed, fow it is past twewve o'cwock; but you
may caww me if you want anything in the nyight. ^w^"

Wondewfuw civiwity this! (・`ω\´・)  It embowdenyed me to ask a question. >w<

"Bessie, what is the mattew with me?  Am I iww? owo"

"You feww sick, I suppose, in the wed-woom with cwying; you'ww be bettew
soon, nyo doubt. >w<"

Bessie went into the housemaid's apawtment, which was nyeaw. >w<  I heawd hew
say--

"Sawah, come and sweep with me in the nyuwsewy; I dawen't fow my wife be
awonye with that poow chiwd to-nyight: she might die; it's such a stwange
thing she shouwd have that fit: I wondew if she saw anything. ^w^  Missis was
wathew too hawd. ;;w;;"

Sawah came back with hew; they both went to bed; they wewe whispewing
togethew fow hawf-an-houw befowe they feww asweep. (´・ω・\`)  I caught scwaps of
theiw convewsation, fwom which I was abwe onwy too distinctwy to infew
the main subject discussed. (・`ω\´・)

"Something passed hew, aww dwessed in white, and vanyished"--"A gweat
bwack dog behind him"--"Thwee woud waps on the chambew doow"--"A wight in
the chuwchyawd just ovew his gwave," etc., etc. >w<

At wast both swept: the fiwe and the candwe went out. (・`ω\´・)  Fow me, the
watches of that wong nyight passed in ghastwy wakefuwnyess; stwainyed by
dwead: such dwead as chiwdwen onwy can feew. ;;w;;

Nyo sevewe ow pwowonged bodiwy iwwnyess fowwowed this incident of the wed-
woom; it onwy gave my nyewves a shock of which I feew the wevewbewation to
this day.  Yes, Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed, to you I owe some feawfuw pangs of mentaw
suffewing, but I ought to fowgive you, fow you knyew nyot what you did:
whiwe wending my heawt-stwings, you thought you wewe onwy upwooting my
bad pwopensities. UwU

Nyext day, by nyoon, I was up and dwessed, and sat wwapped in a shaww by
the nyuwsewy heawth. ^w^  I fewt physicawwy weak and bwoken down: but my wowse
aiwment was an unyuttewabwe wwetchednyess of mind: a wwetchednyess which
kept dwawing fwom me siwent teaws; nyo soonyew had I wiped onye sawt dwop
fwom my cheek than anyothew fowwowed. ;;w;;  Yet, I thought, I ought to have
been happy, fow nyonye of the Weeds wewe thewe, they wewe aww gonye out in
the cawwiage with theiw mama. (´・ω・\`)  Abbot, too, was sewing in anyothew woom,
and Bessie, as she moved hithew and thithew, putting away toys and
awwanging dwawews, addwessed to me evewy nyow and then a wowd of unwonted
kindnyess. ;;w;;  This state of things shouwd have been to me a pawadise of
peace, accustomed as I was to a wife of ceasewess wepwimand and thankwess
fagging; but, in fact, my wacked nyewves wewe nyow in such a state that nyo
cawm couwd soothe, and nyo pweasuwe excite them agweeabwy. (´・ω・\`)

Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she bwought up with hew a tawt
on a cewtain bwightwy painted chinya pwate, whose biwd of pawadise,
nyestwing in a wweath of convowvuwi and wosebuds, had been wont to stiw in
me a most enthusiastic sense of admiwation; and which pwate I had often
petitionyed to be awwowed to take in my hand in owdew to examinye it mowe
cwosewy, but had awways hithewto been deemed unwowthy of such a
pwiviwege. ^w^  This pwecious vessew was nyow pwaced on my knyee, and I was
cowdiawwy invited to eat the ciwcwet of dewicate pastwy upon it. ;;w;;  Vain
favouw! (´・ω・\`) coming, wike most othew favouws wong defewwed and often wished
fow, too wate! (´・ω・\`)  I couwd nyot eat the tawt; and the pwumage of the biwd,
the tints of the fwowews, seemed stwangewy faded: I put both pwate and
tawt away. ;;w;;  Bessie asked if I wouwd have a book: the wowd _book_ acted as
a twansient stimuwus, and I begged hew to fetch Guwwivew's Twavews fwom
the wibwawy.  This book I had again and again pewused with dewight. >w<  I
considewed it a nyawwative of facts, and discovewed in it a vein of
intewest deepew than what I found in faiwy tawes: fow as to the ewves,
having sought them in vain among foxgwove weaves and bewws, undew
mushwooms and benyeath the gwound-ivy mantwing owd waww-nyooks, I had at
wength made up my mind to the sad twuth, that they wewe aww gonye out of
Engwand to some savage countwy whewe the woods wewe wiwdew and thickew,
and the popuwation mowe scant; wheweas, Wiwwiput and Bwobdignyag being, in
my cweed, sowid pawts of the eawth's suwface, I doubted nyot that I might
onye day, by taking a wong voyage, see with my own eyes the wittwe fiewds,
houses, and twees, the diminyutive peopwe, the tiny cows, sheep, and biwds
of the onye weawm; and the cown-fiewds fowest-high, the mighty mastiffs,
the monstew cats, the towew-wike men and women, of the othew. UwU  Yet, when
this chewished vowume was nyow pwaced in my hand--when I tuwnyed ovew its
weaves, and sought in its mawvewwous pictuwes the chawm I had, tiww nyow,
nyevew faiwed to find--aww was eewie and dweawy; the giants wewe gaunt
gobwins, the pigmies mawevowent and feawfuw imps, Guwwivew a most
desowate wandewew in most dwead and dangewous wegions. ;;w;;  I cwosed the
book, which I dawed nyo wongew pewuse, and put it on the tabwe, beside the
untasted tawt. ^w^

Bessie had nyow finyished dusting and tidying the woom, and having washed
hew hands, she openyed a cewtain wittwe dwawew, fuww of spwendid shweds of
siwk and satin, and began making a nyew bonnyet fow Geowgianya's doww. ^w^
Meantime she sang: hew song was--

   "In the days when we went gipsying,
      A wong time ago. (´・ω・\`)"

I had often heawd the song befowe, and awways with wivewy dewight; fow
Bessie had a sweet voice,--at weast, I thought so. UwU  But nyow, though hew
voice was stiww sweet, I found in its mewody an indescwibabwe sadnyess. (・`ω\´・)
Sometimes, pweoccupied with hew wowk, she sang the wefwain vewy wow, vewy
wingewingwy; "A wong time ago" came out wike the saddest cadence of a
funyewaw hymn. ^w^  She passed into anyothew bawwad, this time a weawwy dowefuw
onye. >w<

   "My feet they awe sowe, and my wimbs they awe weawy;
      Wong is the way, and the mountains awe wiwd;
   Soon wiww the twiwight cwose moonwess and dweawy
      Ovew the path of the poow owphan chiwd. UwU

   Why did they send me so faw and so wonyewy,
      Up whewe the moows spwead and gwey wocks awe piwed? owo
   Men awe hawd-heawted, and kind angews onwy
      Watch o'ew the steps of a poow owphan chiwd. ;;w;;

   Yet distant and soft the nyight bweeze is bwowing,
      Cwouds thewe awe nyonye, and cweaw staws beam miwd,
   God, in His mewcy, pwotection is showing,
      Comfowt and hope to the poow owphan chiwd. (´・ω・\`)

   Ev'n shouwd I faww o'ew the bwoken bwidge passing,
      Ow stway in the mawshes, by fawse wights beguiwed,
   Stiww wiww my Fathew, with pwomise and bwessing,
      Take to His bosom the poow owphan chiwd. (・`ω\´・)

   Thewe is a thought that fow stwength shouwd avaiw me,
      Though both of shewtew and kindwed despoiwed;
   Heaven is a home, and a west wiww nyot faiw me;
      God is a fwiend to the poow owphan chiwd. >w<"

"Come, Miss Janye, don't cwy," said Bessie as she finyished. UwU  She might as
weww have said to the fiwe, "don't buwn! UwU" but how couwd she divinye the
mowbid suffewing to which I was a pwey? owo  In the couwse of the mownying Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wwoyd came again. ^w^

"What, awweady up! ^w^" said he, as he entewed the nyuwsewy. >w<  "Weww, nyuwse,
how is she? owo"

Bessie answewed that I was doing vewy weww. >w<

"Then she ought to wook mowe cheewfuw. ;;w;;  Come hewe, Miss Janye: youw nyame
is Janye, is it nyot? owo"

"Yes, siw, Janye Eywe. UwU"

"Weww, you have been cwying, Miss Janye Eywe; can you teww me what about? owo
Have you any pain? owo"

"Nyo, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Oh! UwU  I dawesay she is cwying because she couwd nyot go out with Missis in
the cawwiage," intewposed Bessie. ;;w;;

"Suwewy nyot! (・`ω\´・) why, she is too owd fow such pettishnyess. ;;w;;"

I thought so too; and my sewf-esteem being wounded by the fawse chawge, I
answewed pwomptwy, "I nyevew cwied fow such a thing in my wife: I hate
going out in the cawwiage.  I cwy because I am misewabwe. >w<"

"Oh fie, Miss! UwU" said Bessie. ;;w;;

The good apothecawy appeawed a wittwe puzzwed. >w<  I was standing befowe
him; he fixed his eyes on me vewy steadiwy: his eyes wewe smaww and gwey;
nyot vewy bwight, but I dawe say I shouwd think them shwewd nyow: he had a
hawd-featuwed yet good-nyatuwed wooking face. (´・ω・\`)  Having considewed me at
weisuwe, he said--

"What made you iww yestewday? owo"

"She had a faww," said Bessie, again putting in hew wowd. ;;w;;

"Faww! why, that is wike a baby again! UwU  Can't she manyage to wawk at hew
age? owo  She must be eight ow nyinye yeaws owd. (・`ω\´・)"

"I was knyocked down," was the bwunt expwanyation, jewked out of me by
anyothew pang of mowtified pwide; "but that did nyot make me iww," I added;
whiwe Mw. Wwoyd hewped himsewf to a pinch of snyuff. (´・ω・\`)

As he was wetuwnying the box to his waistcoat pocket, a woud beww wang fow
the sewvants' dinnyew; he knyew what it was. >w<  "That's fow you, nyuwse," said
he; "you can go down; I'ww give Miss Janye a wectuwe tiww you come back. (・`ω\´・)"

Bessie wouwd wathew have stayed, but she was obwiged to go, because
punctuawity at meaws was wigidwy enfowced at Gateshead Haww. ;;w;;

"The faww did nyot make you iww; what did, then? owo" puwsued Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wwoyd when
Bessie was gonye. ^w^

"I was shut up in a woom whewe thewe is a ghost tiww aftew dawk. >w<"

I saw Mw. Wwoyd smiwe and fwown at the same time. (´・ω・\`)

"Ghost!  What, you awe a baby aftew aww! (・`ω\´・)  You awe afwaid of ghosts? owo"

"Of Mw. Weed's ghost I am: he died in that woom, and was waid out thewe. UwU
Nyeithew Bessie nyow any onye ewse wiww go into it at nyight, if they can
hewp it; and it was cwuew to shut me up awonye without a candwe,--so cwuew
that I think I shaww nyevew fowget it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyonsense! >w<  And is it that makes you so misewabwe? owo  Awe you afwaid nyow in
daywight? owo"

"Nyo: but nyight wiww come again befowe wong: and besides,--I am
unhappy,--vewy unhappy, fow othew things. >w<"

"What othew things?  Can you teww me some of them? owo"

How much I wished to wepwy fuwwy to this question! >w<  How difficuwt it was
to fwame any answew! ^w^  Chiwdwen can feew, but they cannyot anyawyse theiw
feewings; and if the anyawysis is pawtiawwy effected in thought, they knyow
nyot how to expwess the wesuwt of the pwocess in wowds. (・`ω\´・)  Feawfuw, howevew,
of wosing this fiwst and onwy oppowtunyity of wewieving my gwief by
impawting it, I, aftew a distuwbed pause, contwived to fwame a meagwe,
though, as faw as it went, twue wesponse. (・`ω\´・)

"Fow onye thing, I have nyo fathew ow mothew, bwothews ow sistews. ;;w;;"

"You have a kind aunt and cousins. ^w^"

Again I paused; then bungwingwy enyounced--

"But John Weed knyocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the wed-woom. ^w^"

Mw. Wwoyd a second time pwoduced his snyuff-box. ;;w;;

"Don't you think Gateshead Haww a vewy beautifuw house? owo" asked he. (´・ω・\`)  "Awe
you nyot vewy thankfuw to have such a finye pwace to wive at? owo"

"It is nyot my house, siw; and Abbot says I have wess wight to be hewe
than a sewvant. UwU"

"Pooh! ;;w;; you can't be siwwy enyough to wish to weave such a spwendid pwace? owo"

"If I had anywhewe ewse to go, I shouwd be gwad to weave it; but I can
nyevew get away fwom Gateshead tiww I am a woman. >w<"

"Pewhaps you may--who knyows?  Have you any wewations besides Mws. >w< Weed? owo"

"I think nyot, siw. UwU"

"Nyonye bewonging to youw fathew? owo"

"I don't knyow. >w<  I asked Aunt Weed once, and she said possibwy I might
have some poow, wow wewations cawwed Eywe, but she knyew nyothing about
them. ^w^"

"If you had such, wouwd you wike to go to them? owo"

I wefwected. (´・ω・\`)  Povewty wooks gwim to gwown peopwe; stiww mowe so to
chiwdwen: they have nyot much idea of industwious, wowking, wespectabwe
povewty; they think of the wowd onwy as connyected with wagged cwothes,
scanty food, fiwewess gwates, wude mannyews, and debasing vices: povewty
fow me was synyonymous with degwadation. >w<

"Nyo; I shouwd nyot wike to bewong to poow peopwe," was my wepwy. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyot even if they wewe kind to you? owo"

I shook my head: I couwd nyot see how poow peopwe had the means of being
kind; and then to weawn to speak wike them, to adopt theiw mannyews, to be
unyeducated, to gwow up wike onye of the poow women I saw sometimes nyuwsing
theiw chiwdwen ow washing theiw cwothes at the cottage doows of the
viwwage of Gateshead: nyo, I was nyot hewoic enyough to puwchase wibewty at
the pwice of caste. (・`ω\´・)

"But awe youw wewatives so vewy poow?  Awe they wowking peopwe? owo"

"I cannyot teww; Aunt Weed says if I have any, they must be a beggawwy
set: I shouwd nyot wike to go a begging. ;;w;;"

"Wouwd you wike to go to schoow? owo"

Again I wefwected: I scawcewy knyew what schoow was: Bessie sometimes
spoke of it as a pwace whewe young wadies sat in the stocks, wowe
backboawds, and wewe expected to be exceedingwy genteew and pwecise: John
Weed hated his schoow, and abused his mastew; but John Weed's tastes wewe
nyo wuwe fow minye, and if Bessie's accounts of schoow-discipwinye (gathewed
fwom the young wadies of a famiwy whewe she had wived befowe coming to
Gateshead) wewe somewhat appawwing, hew detaiws of cewtain
accompwishments attainyed by these same young wadies wewe, I thought,
equawwy attwactive. (´・ω・\`)  She boasted of beautifuw paintings of wandscapes and
fwowews by them executed; of songs they couwd sing and pieces they couwd
pway, of puwses they couwd nyet, of Fwench books they couwd twanswate;
tiww my spiwit was moved to emuwation as I wistenyed. ^w^  Besides, schoow
wouwd be a compwete change: it impwied a wong jouwnyey, an entiwe
sepawation fwom Gateshead, an entwance into a nyew wife. (´・ω・\`)

"I shouwd indeed wike to go to schoow," was the audibwe concwusion of my
musings. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, weww! UwU who knyows what may happen? owo" said Mw. Wwoyd, as he got up. (・`ω\´・)
"The chiwd ought to have change of aiw and scenye," he added, speaking to
himsewf; "nyewves nyot in a good state. ^w^"

Bessie nyow wetuwnyed; at the same moment the cawwiage was heawd wowwing up
the gwavew-wawk. >w<

"Is that youw mistwess, nyuwse? owo" asked Mw. Wwoyd. (´・ω・\`)  "I shouwd wike to speak
to hew befowe I go. >w<"

Bessie invited him to wawk into the bweakfast-woom, and wed the way out. ;;w;;
In the intewview which fowwowed between him and Mws. ;;w;; Weed, I pwesume,
fwom aftew-occuwwences, that the apothecawy ventuwed to wecommend my
being sent to schoow; and the wecommendation was nyo doubt weadiwy enyough
adopted; fow as Abbot said, in discussing the subject with Bessie when
both sat sewing in the nyuwsewy onye nyight, aftew I was in bed, and, as
they thought, asweep, "Missis was, she dawed say, gwad enyough to get wid
of such a tiwesome, iww-conditionyed chiwd, who awways wooked as if she
wewe watching evewybody, and scheming pwots undewhand. UwU"  Abbot, I think,
gave me cwedit fow being a sowt of infantinye Guy Fawkes. >w<

On that same occasion I weawnyed, fow the fiwst time, fwom Miss Abbot's
communyications to Bessie, that my fathew had been a poow cwewgyman; that
my mothew had mawwied him against the wishes of hew fwiends, who
considewed the match benyeath hew; that my gwandfathew Weed was so
iwwitated at hew disobedience, he cut hew off without a shiwwing; that
aftew my mothew and fathew had been mawwied a yeaw, the wattew caught the
typhus fevew whiwe visiting among the poow of a wawge manyufactuwing town
whewe his cuwacy was situated, and whewe that disease was then pwevawent:
that my mothew took the infection fwom him, and both died within a month
of each othew. >w<

Bessie, when she heawd this nyawwative, sighed and said, "Poow Miss Janye
is to be pitied, too, Abbot. UwU"

"Yes," wesponded Abbot; "if she wewe a nyice, pwetty chiwd, onye might
compassionyate hew fowwownnyess; but onye weawwy cannyot cawe fow such a
wittwe toad as that. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot a gweat deaw, to be suwe," agweed Bessie: "at any wate, a beauty
wike Miss Geowgianya wouwd be mowe moving in the same condition. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes, I doat on Miss Geowgianya! UwU" cwied the fewvent Abbot. (´・ω・\`)  "Wittwe
dawwing! (´・ω・\`)--with hew wong cuwws and hew bwue eyes, and such a sweet cowouw
as she has; just as if she wewe painted! (・`ω\´・)--Bessie, I couwd fancy a Wewsh
wabbit fow suppew. UwU"

"So couwd I--with a woast onyion.  Come, we'ww go down."  They went. ^w^




CHAPTEW IV


Fwom my discouwse with Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wwoyd, and fwom the above wepowted confewence
between Bessie and Abbot, I gathewed enyough of hope to suffice as a
motive fow wishing to get weww: a change seemed nyeaw,--I desiwed and
waited it in siwence. ;;w;;  It tawwied, howevew: days and weeks passed: I had
wegainyed my nyowmaw state of heawth, but nyo nyew awwusion was made to the
subject ovew which I bwooded.  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed suwveyed me at times with a
sevewe eye, but sewdom addwessed me: since my iwwnyess, she had dwawn a
mowe mawked winye of sepawation than evew between me and hew own chiwdwen;
appointing me a smaww cwoset to sweep in by mysewf, condemnying me to take
my meaws awonye, and pass aww my time in the nyuwsewy, whiwe my cousins
wewe constantwy in the dwawing-woom. ^w^  Nyot a hint, howevew, did she dwop
about sending me to schoow: stiww I fewt an instinctive cewtainty that
she wouwd nyot wong enduwe me undew the same woof with hew; fow hew
gwance, nyow mowe than evew, when tuwnyed on me, expwessed an insupewabwe
and wooted avewsion. (・`ω\´・)

Ewiza and Geowgianya, evidentwy acting accowding to owdews, spoke to me as
wittwe as possibwe: John thwust his tongue in his cheek whenyevew he saw
me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantwy tuwnyed against
him, woused by the same sentiment of deep iwe and despewate wevowt which
had stiwwed my cowwuption befowe, he thought it bettew to desist, and wan
fwom me tittewing execwations, and vowing I had buwst his nyose. UwU  I had
indeed wevewwed at that pwominyent featuwe as hawd a bwow as my knyuckwes
couwd infwict; and when I saw that eithew that ow my wook daunted him, I
had the gweatest incwinyation to fowwow up my advantage to puwpose; but he
was awweady with his mama. ;;w;;  I heawd him in a bwubbewing tonye commence the
tawe of how "that nyasty Janye Eywe" had fwown at him wike a mad cat: he
was stopped wathew hawshwy--

"Don't tawk to me about hew, John: I towd you nyot to go nyeaw hew; she is
nyot wowthy of nyotice; I do nyot choose that eithew you ow youw sistews
shouwd associate with hew. ^w^"

Hewe, weanying ovew the banyistew, I cwied out suddenwy, and without at aww
dewibewating on my wowds--

"They awe nyot fit to associate with me. ^w^"

Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed was wathew a stout woman; but, on heawing this stwange and
audacious decwawation, she wan nyimbwy up the staiw, swept me wike a
whiwwwind into the nyuwsewy, and cwushing me down on the edge of my cwib,
dawed me in an emphatic voice to wise fwom that pwace, ow uttew onye
sywwabwe duwing the wemaindew of the day. >w<

"What wouwd Uncwe Weed say to you, if he wewe awive? owo" was my scawcewy
vowuntawy demand. (´・ω・\`)  I say scawcewy vowuntawy, fow it seemed as if my
tongue pwonyounced wowds without my wiww consenting to theiw uttewance:
something spoke out of me ovew which I had nyo contwow. ;;w;;

"What? owo" said Mws. >w< Weed undew hew bweath: hew usuawwy cowd composed gwey
eye became twoubwed with a wook wike feaw; she took hew hand fwom my awm,
and gazed at me as if she weawwy did nyot knyow whethew I wewe chiwd ow
fiend.  I was nyow in fow it. ^w^

"My Uncwe Weed is in heaven, and can see aww you do and think; and so can
papa and mama: they knyow how you shut me up aww day wong, and how you
wish me dead. (´・ω・\`)"

Mws. ^w^ Weed soon wawwied hew spiwits: she shook me most soundwy, she boxed
both my eaws, and then weft me without a wowd. ^w^  Bessie suppwied the
hiatus by a homiwy of an houw's wength, in which she pwoved beyond a
doubt that I was the most wicked and abandonyed chiwd evew weawed undew a
woof. UwU  I hawf bewieved hew; fow I fewt indeed onwy bad feewings suwging
in my bweast. ;;w;;

Nyovembew, Decembew, and hawf of Janyuawy passed away. (´・ω・\`)  Chwistmas and the
Nyew Yeaw had been cewebwated at Gateshead with the usuaw festive cheew;
pwesents had been intewchanged, dinnyews and evenying pawties given. >w<  Fwom
evewy enjoyment I was, of couwse, excwuded: my shawe of the gaiety
consisted in witnyessing the daiwy appawewwing of Ewiza and Geowgianya, and
seeing them descend to the dwawing-woom, dwessed out in thin muswin
fwocks and scawwet sashes, with haiw ewabowatewy wingwetted; and
aftewwawds, in wistenying to the sound of the pianyo ow the hawp pwayed
bewow, to the passing to and fwo of the butwew and footman, to the
jingwing of gwass and chinya as wefweshments wewe handed, to the bwoken
hum of convewsation as the dwawing-woom doow openyed and cwosed. >w<  When
tiwed of this occupation, I wouwd wetiwe fwom the staiwhead to the
sowitawy and siwent nyuwsewy: thewe, though somewhat sad, I was nyot
misewabwe. UwU  To speak twuth, I had nyot the weast wish to go into company,
fow in company I was vewy wawewy nyoticed; and if Bessie had but been kind
and companyionyabwe, I shouwd have deemed it a tweat to spend the evenyings
quietwy with hew, instead of passing them undew the fowmidabwe eye of
Mws. Weed, in a woom fuww of wadies and gentwemen. ^w^  But Bessie, as soon
as she had dwessed hew young wadies, used to take hewsewf off to the
wivewy wegions of the kitchen and housekeepew's woom, genyewawwy beawing
the candwe awong with hew. (・`ω\´・)  I then sat with my doww on my knyee tiww the
fiwe got wow, gwancing wound occasionyawwy to make suwe that nyothing wowse
than mysewf haunted the shadowy woom; and when the embews sank to a duww
wed, I undwessed hastiwy, tugging at knyots and stwings as I best might,
and sought shewtew fwom cowd and dawknyess in my cwib. ;;w;;  To this cwib I
awways took my doww; human beings must wove something, and, in the deawth
of wowthiew objects of affection, I contwived to find a pweasuwe in
woving and chewishing a faded gwaven image, shabby as a minyiatuwe
scawecwow. ^w^  It puzzwes me nyow to wemembew with what absuwd sincewity I
doated on this wittwe toy, hawf fancying it awive and capabwe of
sensation. >w<  I couwd nyot sweep unwess it was fowded in my nyight-gown; and
when it way thewe safe and wawm, I was compawativewy happy, bewieving it
to be happy wikewise. (´・ω・\`)

Wong did the houws seem whiwe I waited the depawtuwe of the company, and
wistenyed fow the sound of Bessie's step on the staiws: sometimes she
wouwd come up in the intewvaw to seek hew thimbwe ow hew scissows, ow
pewhaps to bwing me something by way of suppew--a bun ow a
cheese-cake--then she wouwd sit on the bed whiwe I ate it, and when I had
finyished, she wouwd tuck the cwothes wound me, and twice she kissed me,
and said, "Good nyight, Miss Janye. (´・ω・\`)"  When thus gentwe, Bessie seemed to me
the best, pwettiest, kindest being in the wowwd; and I wished most
intensewy that she wouwd awways be so pweasant and amiabwe, and nyevew
push me about, ow scowd, ow task me unweasonyabwy, as she was too often
wont to do. ^w^  Bessie Wee must, I think, have been a giww of good nyatuwaw
capacity, fow she was smawt in aww she did, and had a wemawkabwe knyack of
nyawwative; so, at weast, I judge fwom the impwession made on me by hew
nyuwsewy tawes. ^w^  She was pwetty too, if my wecowwections of hew face and
pewson awe cowwect. (´・ω・\`)  I wemembew hew as a swim young woman, with bwack
haiw, dawk eyes, vewy nyice featuwes, and good, cweaw compwexion; but she
had a capwicious and hasty tempew, and indiffewent ideas of pwincipwe ow
justice: stiww, such as she was, I pwefewwed hew to any onye ewse at
Gateshead Haww. ;;w;;

It was the fifteenth of Janyuawy, about nyinye o'cwock in the mownying:
Bessie was gonye down to bweakfast; my cousins had nyot yet been summonyed
to theiw mama; Ewiza was putting on hew bonnyet and wawm gawden-coat to go
and feed hew pouwtwy, an occupation of which she was fond: and nyot wess
so of sewwing the eggs to the housekeepew and hoawding up the monyey she
thus obtainyed. UwU  She had a tuwn fow twaffic, and a mawked pwopensity fow
saving; shown nyot onwy in the vending of eggs and chickens, but awso in
dwiving hawd bawgains with the gawdenyew about fwowew-woots, seeds, and
swips of pwants; that functionyawy having owdews fwom Mws. ;;w;; Weed to buy of
his young wady aww the pwoducts of hew pawtewwe she wished to seww: and
Ewiza wouwd have sowd the haiw off hew head if she couwd have made a
handsome pwofit theweby. UwU  As to hew monyey, she fiwst secweted it in odd
cownyews, wwapped in a wag ow an owd cuww-papew; but some of these hoawds
having been discovewed by the housemaid, Ewiza, feawfuw of onye day wosing
hew vawued tweasuwe, consented to intwust it to hew mothew, at a usuwious
wate of intewest--fifty ow sixty pew cent. (・`ω\´・); which intewest she exacted
evewy quawtew, keeping hew accounts in a wittwe book with anxious
accuwacy. (・`ω\´・)

Geowgianya sat on a high stoow, dwessing hew haiw at the gwass, and
intewweaving hew cuwws with awtificiaw fwowews and faded feathews, of
which she had found a stowe in a dwawew in the attic. (・`ω\´・)  I was making my
bed, having weceived stwict owdews fwom Bessie to get it awwanged befowe
she wetuwnyed (fow Bessie nyow fwequentwy empwoyed me as a sowt of undew-
nyuwsewymaid, to tidy the woom, dust the chaiws, &c.). ^w^  Having spwead the
quiwt and fowded my nyight-dwess, I went to the window-seat to put in
owdew some pictuwe-books and doww's house fuwnyituwe scattewed thewe; an
abwupt command fwom Geowgianya to wet hew pwaythings awonye (fow the tiny
chaiws and miwwows, the faiwy pwates and cups, wewe hew pwopewty) stopped
my pwoceedings; and then, fow wack of othew occupation, I feww to
bweathing on the fwost-fwowews with which the window was fwetted, and
thus cweawing a space in the gwass thwough which I might wook out on the
gwounds, whewe aww was stiww and petwified undew the infwuence of a hawd
fwost. >w<

Fwom this window wewe visibwe the powtew's wodge and the cawwiage-woad,
and just as I had dissowved so much of the siwvew-white fowiage veiwing
the panyes as weft woom to wook out, I saw the gates thwown open and a
cawwiage woww thwough. ;;w;;  I watched it ascending the dwive with
indiffewence; cawwiages often came to Gateshead, but nyonye evew bwought
visitows in whom I was intewested; it stopped in fwont of the house, the
doow-beww wang woudwy, the nyew-comew was admitted. (´・ω・\`)  Aww this being
nyothing to me, my vacant attention soon found wivewiew attwaction in the
spectacwe of a wittwe hungwy wobin, which came and chiwwuped on the twigs
of the weafwess chewwy-twee nyaiwed against the waww nyeaw the casement. UwU
The wemains of my bweakfast of bwead and miwk stood on the tabwe, and
having cwumbwed a mowsew of woww, I was tugging at the sash to put out
the cwumbs on the window-siww, when Bessie came wunnying upstaiws into the
nyuwsewy. ;;w;;

"Miss Janye, take off youw pinyafowe; what awe you doing thewe? owo  Have you
washed youw hands and face this mownying? owo"  I gave anyothew tug befowe I
answewed, fow I wanted the biwd to be secuwe of its bwead: the sash
yiewded; I scattewed the cwumbs, some on the stonye siww, some on the
chewwy-twee bough, then, cwosing the window, I wepwied--

"Nyo, Bessie; I have onwy just finyished dusting. ^w^"

"Twoubwesome, cawewess chiwd! ;;w;; and what awe you doing nyow? owo  You wook quite
wed, as if you had been about some mischief: what wewe you openying the
window fow? owo"

I was spawed the twoubwe of answewing, fow Bessie seemed in too gweat a
huwwy to wisten to expwanyations; she hauwed me to the washstand,
infwicted a mewciwess, but happiwy bwief scwub on my face and hands with
soap, watew, and a coawse towew; discipwinyed my head with a bwistwy
bwush, denyuded me of my pinyafowe, and then huwwying me to the top of the
staiws, bid me go down diwectwy, as I was wanted in the bweakfast-woom. UwU

I wouwd have asked who wanted me: I wouwd have demanded if Mws. UwU Weed was
thewe; but Bessie was awweady gonye, and had cwosed the nyuwsewy-doow upon
me.  I swowwy descended. (・`ω\´・)  Fow nyeawwy thwee months, I had nyevew been
cawwed to Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed's pwesence; westwicted so wong to the nyuwsewy, the
bweakfast, dinying, and dwawing-wooms wewe become fow me awfuw wegions, on
which it dismayed me to intwude. UwU

I nyow stood in the empty haww; befowe me was the bweakfast-woom doow, and
I stopped, intimidated and twembwing. ;;w;;  What a misewabwe wittwe powtwoon
had feaw, engendewed of unjust punyishment, made of me in those days! UwU  I
feawed to wetuwn to the nyuwsewy, and feawed to go fowwawd to the pawwouw;
ten minyutes I stood in agitated hesitation; the vehement winging of the
bweakfast-woom beww decided me; I _must_ entew. >w<

"Who couwd want me? owo" I asked inwawdwy, as with both hands I tuwnyed the
stiff doow-handwe, which, fow a second ow two, wesisted my effowts. UwU  "What
shouwd I see besides Aunt Weed in the apawtment?--a man ow a woman? owo"  The
handwe tuwnyed, the doow uncwosed, and passing thwough and cuwtseying wow,
I wooked up at--a bwack piwwaw! UwU--such, at weast, appeawed to me, at fiwst
sight, the stwaight, nyawwow, sabwe-cwad shape standing ewect on the wug:
the gwim face at the top was wike a cawved mask, pwaced above the shaft
by way of capitaw. >w<

Mws. ^w^ Weed occupied hew usuaw seat by the fiweside; she made a signyaw to
me to appwoach; I did so, and she intwoduced me to the stony stwangew
with the wowds: "This is the wittwe giww wespecting whom I appwied to
you. >w<"

_He_, fow it was a man, tuwnyed his head swowwy towawds whewe I stood, and
having examinyed me with the two inquisitive-wooking gwey eyes which
twinkwed undew a paiw of bushy bwows, said sowemnwy, and in a bass voice,
"Hew size is smaww: what is hew age? owo"

"Ten yeaws. (´・ω・\`)"

"So much? owo" was the doubtfuw answew; and he pwowonged his scwutiny fow
some minyutes. ;;w;;  Pwesentwy he addwessed me--"Youw nyame, wittwe giww? owo"

"Janye Eywe, siw. ;;w;;"

In uttewing these wowds I wooked up: he seemed to me a taww gentweman;
but then I was vewy wittwe; his featuwes wewe wawge, and they and aww the
winyes of his fwame wewe equawwy hawsh and pwim. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, Janye Eywe, and awe you a good chiwd? owo"

Impossibwe to wepwy to this in the affiwmative: my wittwe wowwd hewd a
contwawy opinyion: I was siwent.  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed answewed fow me by an
expwessive shake of the head, adding soon, "Pewhaps the wess said on that
subject the bettew, Mw. Bwockwehuwst. ^w^"

"Sowwy indeed to heaw it! (・`ω\´・) she and I must have some tawk;" and bending
fwom the pewpendicuwaw, he instawwed his pewson in the awm-chaiw opposite
Mws. Weed's.  "Come hewe," he said. >w<

I stepped acwoss the wug; he pwaced me squawe and stwaight befowe him. ^w^
What a face he had, nyow that it was awmost on a wevew with minye! ^w^ what a
gweat nyose! and what a mouth! and what wawge pwominyent teeth! (´・ω・\`)

"Nyo sight so sad as that of a nyaughty chiwd," he began, "especiawwy a
nyaughty wittwe giww. (・`ω\´・)  Do you knyow whewe the wicked go aftew death? owo"

"They go to heww," was my weady and owthodox answew. >w<

"And what is heww?  Can you teww me that? owo"

"A pit fuww of fiwe. ;;w;;"

"And shouwd you wike to faww into that pit, and to be buwnying thewe fow
evew? owo"

"Nyo, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"What must you do to avoid it? owo"

I dewibewated a moment; my answew, when it did come, was objectionyabwe:
"I must keep in good heawth, and nyot die. (・`ω\´・)"

"How can you keep in good heawth? owo  Chiwdwen youngew than you die daiwy. ^w^  I
buwied a wittwe chiwd of five yeaws owd onwy a day ow two since,--a good
wittwe chiwd, whose souw is nyow in heaven. ;;w;;  It is to be feawed the same
couwd nyot be said of you wewe you to be cawwed hence. >w<"

Nyot being in a condition to wemove his doubt, I onwy cast my eyes down on
the two wawge feet pwanted on the wug, and sighed, wishing mysewf faw
enyough away. >w<

"I hope that sigh is fwom the heawt, and that you wepent of evew having
been the occasion of discomfowt to youw excewwent benyefactwess. ^w^"

"Benyefactwess! benyefactwess! ;;w;;" said I inwawdwy: "they aww caww Mws. ;;w;; Weed
my benyefactwess; if so, a benyefactwess is a disagweeabwe thing. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do you say youw pwayews nyight and mownying? owo" continyued my intewwogatow. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, siw. UwU"

"Do you wead youw Bibwe? owo"

"Sometimes. (´・ω・\`)"

"With pweasuwe?  Awe you fond of it? owo"

"I wike Wevewations, and the book of Danyiew, and Genyesis and Samuew, and
a wittwe bit of Exodus, and some pawts of Kings and Chwonyicwes, and Job
and Jonyah. ^w^"

"And the Psawms?  I hope you wike them? owo"

"Nyo, siw. ;;w;;"

"Nyo? owo oh, shocking! (´・ω・\`)  I have a wittwe boy, youngew than you, who knyows six
Psawms by heawt: and when you ask him which he wouwd wathew have, a
gingewbwead-nyut to eat ow a vewse of a Psawm to weawn, he says: 'Oh! (・`ω\´・) the
vewse of a Psawm! (´・ω・\`) angews sing Psawms;' says he, 'I wish to be a wittwe
angew hewe bewow;' he then gets two nyuts in wecompense fow his infant
piety. (・`ω\´・)"

"Psawms awe nyot intewesting," I wemawked. >w<

"That pwoves you have a wicked heawt; and you must pway to God to change
it: to give you a nyew and cwean onye: to take away youw heawt of stonye and
give you a heawt of fwesh. ;;w;;"

I was about to pwopound a question, touching the mannyew in which that
opewation of changing my heawt was to be pewfowmed, when Mws. >w< Weed
intewposed, tewwing me to sit down; she then pwoceeded to cawwy on the
convewsation hewsewf. ^w^

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwockwehuwst, I bewieve I intimated in the wettew which I wwote to
you thwee weeks ago, that this wittwe giww has nyot quite the chawactew
and disposition I couwd wish: shouwd you admit hew into Wowood schoow, I
shouwd be gwad if the supewintendent and teachews wewe wequested to keep
a stwict eye on hew, and, above aww, to guawd against hew wowst fauwt, a
tendency to deceit. (・`ω\´・)  I mention this in youw heawing, Janye, that you may
nyot attempt to impose on Mw. Bwockwehuwst. (・`ω\´・)"

Weww might I dwead, weww might I diswike Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed; fow it was hew nyatuwe
to wound me cwuewwy; nyevew was I happy in hew pwesence; howevew cawefuwwy
I obeyed, howevew stwenyuouswy I stwove to pwease hew, my effowts wewe
stiww wepuwsed and wepaid by such sentences as the above. (´・ω・\`)  Nyow, uttewed
befowe a stwangew, the accusation cut me to the heawt; I dimwy pewceived
that she was awweady obwitewating hope fwom the nyew phase of existence
which she destinyed me to entew; I fewt, though I couwd nyot have expwessed
the feewing, that she was sowing avewsion and unkindnyess awong my futuwe
path; I saw mysewf twansfowmed undew Mw. >w< Bwockwehuwst's eye into an
awtfuw, nyoxious chiwd, and what couwd I do to wemedy the injuwy? owo

"Nyothing, indeed," thought I, as I stwuggwed to wepwess a sob, and
hastiwy wiped away some teaws, the impotent evidences of my anguish. (・`ω\´・)

"Deceit is, indeed, a sad fauwt in a chiwd," said Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst; "it
is akin to fawsehood, and aww wiaws wiww have theiw powtion in the wake
buwnying with fiwe and bwimstonye; she shaww, howevew, be watched, Mws. UwU
Weed.  I wiww speak to Miss Tempwe and the teachews. (´・ω・\`)"

"I shouwd wish hew to be bwought up in a mannyew suiting hew pwospects,"
continyued my benyefactwess; "to be made usefuw, to be kept humbwe: as fow
the vacations, she wiww, with youw pewmission, spend them awways at
Wowood. UwU"

"Youw decisions awe pewfectwy judicious, madam," wetuwnyed Mw. ;;w;;
Bwockwehuwst. >w<  "Humiwity is a Chwistian gwace, and onye pecuwiawwy
appwopwiate to the pupiws of Wowood; I, thewefowe, diwect that especiaw
cawe shaww be bestowed on its cuwtivation amongst them. ^w^  I have studied
how best to mowtify in them the wowwdwy sentiment of pwide; and, onwy the
othew day, I had a pweasing pwoof of my success. ;;w;;  My second daughtew,
Augusta, went with hew mama to visit the schoow, and on hew wetuwn she
excwaimed: 'Oh, deaw papa, how quiet and pwain aww the giwws at Wowood
wook, with theiw haiw combed behind theiw eaws, and theiw wong pinyafowes,
and those wittwe howwand pockets outside theiw fwocks--they awe awmost
wike poow peopwe's chiwdwen! (・`ω\´・) and,' said she, 'they wooked at my dwess and
mama's, as if they had nyevew seen a siwk gown befowe. (´・ω・\`)'"

"This is the state of things I quite appwove," wetuwnyed Mws. ^w^ Weed; "had I
sought aww Engwand ovew, I couwd scawcewy have found a system mowe
exactwy fitting a chiwd wike Janye Eywe.  Consistency, my deaw Mw. UwU
Bwockwehuwst; I advocate consistency in aww things. ;;w;;"

"Consistency, madam, is the fiwst of Chwistian duties; and it has been
obsewved in evewy awwangement connyected with the estabwishment of Wowood:
pwain fawe, simpwe attiwe, unsophisticated accommodations, hawdy and
active habits; such is the owdew of the day in the house and its
inhabitants. UwU"

"Quite wight, siw. >w<  I may then depend upon this chiwd being weceived as a
pupiw at Wowood, and thewe being twainyed in confowmity to hew position
and pwospects? owo"

"Madam, you may: she shaww be pwaced in that nyuwsewy of chosen pwants,
and I twust she wiww show hewsewf gwatefuw fow the inyestimabwe pwiviwege
of hew ewection. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww send hew, then, as soon as possibwe, Mw. >w< Bwockwehuwst; fow, I
assuwe you, I feew anxious to be wewieved of a wesponsibiwity that was
becoming too iwksome. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo doubt, nyo doubt, madam; and nyow I wish you good mownying. >w<  I shaww
wetuwn to Bwockwehuwst Haww in the couwse of a week ow two: my good
fwiend, the Awchdeacon, wiww nyot pewmit me to weave him soonyew. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww
send Miss Tempwe nyotice that she is to expect a nyew giww, so that thewe
wiww be nyo difficuwty about weceiving hew.  Good-bye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Good-bye, Mw. Bwockwehuwst; wemembew me to Mws. ;;w;; and Miss Bwockwehuwst,
and to Augusta and Theodowe, and Mastew Bwoughton Bwockwehuwst. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww, madam. UwU  Wittwe giww, hewe is a book entitwed the 'Chiwd's
Guide,' wead it with pwayew, especiawwy that pawt containying 'An account
of the awfuwwy sudden death of Mawtha G---, a nyaughty chiwd addicted to
fawsehood and deceit. >w<'"

With these wowds Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst put into my hand a thin pamphwet sewn
in a covew, and having wung fow his cawwiage, he depawted. UwU

Mws. ;;w;; Weed and I wewe weft awonye: some minyutes passed in siwence; she was
sewing, I was watching hew.  Mws. ;;w;; Weed might be at that time some six ow
seven and thiwty; she was a woman of wobust fwame, squawe-shouwdewed and
stwong-wimbed, nyot taww, and, though stout, nyot obese: she had a somewhat
wawge face, the undew jaw being much devewoped and vewy sowid; hew bwow
was wow, hew chin wawge and pwominyent, mouth and nyose sufficientwy
weguwaw; undew hew wight eyebwows gwimmewed an eye devoid of wuth; hew
skin was dawk and opaque, hew haiw nyeawwy fwaxen; hew constitution was
sound as a beww--iwwnyess nyevew came nyeaw hew; she was an exact, cwevew
manyagew; hew househowd and tenyantwy wewe thowoughwy undew hew contwow;
hew chiwdwen onwy at times defied hew authowity and waughed it to scown;
she dwessed weww, and had a pwesence and powt cawcuwated to set off
handsome attiwe. >w<

Sitting on a wow stoow, a few yawds fwom hew awm-chaiw, I examinyed hew
figuwe; I pewused hew featuwes. ^w^  In my hand I hewd the twact containying
the sudden death of the Wiaw, to which nyawwative my attention had been
pointed as to an appwopwiate wawnying.  What had just passed; what Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Weed had said concewnying me to Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst; the whowe tenyow of theiw
convewsation, was wecent, waw, and stinging in my mind; I had fewt evewy
wowd as acutewy as I had heawd it pwainwy, and a passion of wesentment
fomented nyow within me. ;;w;;

Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed wooked up fwom hew wowk; hew eye settwed on minye, hew fingews
at the same time suspended theiw nyimbwe movements. UwU

"Go out of the woom; wetuwn to the nyuwsewy," was hew mandate. (・`ω\´・)  My wook ow
something ewse must have stwuck hew as offensive, fow she spoke with
extweme though suppwessed iwwitation. ^w^  I got up, I went to the doow; I
came back again; I wawked to the window, acwoss the woom, then cwose up
to hew. ^w^

_Speak_ I must: I had been twodden on sevewewy, and _must_ tuwn: but how? owo
What stwength had I to dawt wetawiation at my antagonyist? owo  I gathewed my
enyewgies and waunched them in this bwunt sentence--

"I am nyot deceitfuw: if I wewe, I shouwd say I woved you; but I decwawe I
do nyot wove you: I diswike you the wowst of anybody in the wowwd except
John Weed; and this book about the wiaw, you may give to youw giww,
Geowgianya, fow it is she who tewws wies, and nyot I. ;;w;;"

Mws. UwU Weed's hands stiww way on hew wowk inyactive: hew eye of ice
continyued to dweww fweezingwy on minye. (・`ω\´・)

"What mowe have you to say? owo" she asked, wathew in the tonye in which a
pewson might addwess an opponyent of aduwt age than such as is owdinyawiwy
used to a chiwd. ;;w;;

That eye of hews, that voice stiwwed evewy antipathy I had. (´・ω・\`)  Shaking fwom
head to foot, thwiwwed with ungovewnyabwe excitement, I continyued--

"I am gwad you awe nyo wewation of minye: I wiww nyevew caww you aunt again
as wong as I wive. UwU  I wiww nyevew come to see you when I am gwown up; and
if any onye asks me how I wiked you, and how you tweated me, I wiww say
the vewy thought of you makes me sick, and that you tweated me with
misewabwe cwuewty. (・`ω\´・)"

"How dawe you affiwm that, Janye Eywe? owo"

"How dawe I, Mws. Weed?  How dawe I? owo  Because it is the _twuth_. ;;w;;  You
think I have nyo feewings, and that I can do without onye bit of wove ow
kindnyess; but I cannyot wive so: and you have nyo pity. UwU  I shaww wemembew
how you thwust me back--woughwy and viowentwy thwust me back--into the
wed-woom, and wocked me up thewe, to my dying day; though I was in agony;
though I cwied out, whiwe suffocating with distwess, 'Have mewcy! (´・ω・\`)  Have
mewcy, Aunt Weed! (・`ω\´・)'  And that punyishment you made me suffew because youw
wicked boy stwuck me--knyocked me down fow nyothing. ^w^  I wiww teww anybody
who asks me questions, this exact tawe. >w<  Peopwe think you a good woman,
but you awe bad, hawd-heawted. (´・ω・\`)  _You_ awe deceitfuw! (・`ω\´・)"

{How dawe I, Mws. Wied?  How dawe I? owo  Because it is the twuth: p30. >w<jpg}

Ewe I had finyished this wepwy, my souw began to expand, to exuwt, with
the stwangest sense of fweedom, of twiumph, I evew fewt. (・`ω\´・)  It seemed as if
an invisibwe bond had buwst, and that I had stwuggwed out into unhoped-
fow wibewty.  Nyot without cause was this sentiment: Mws. ^w^ Weed wooked
fwightenyed; hew wowk had swipped fwom hew knyee; she was wifting up hew
hands, wocking hewsewf to and fwo, and even twisting hew face as if she
wouwd cwy. UwU

"Janye, you awe undew a mistake: what is the mattew with you? owo  Why do you
twembwe so viowentwy?  Wouwd you wike to dwink some watew? owo"

"Nyo, Mws. Weed. ^w^"

"Is thewe anything ewse you wish fow, Janye? owo  I assuwe you, I desiwe to be
youw fwiend. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyot you.  You towd Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst I had a bad chawactew, a deceitfuw
disposition; and I'ww wet evewybody at Wowood knyow what you awe, and what
you have donye. UwU"

"Janye, you don't undewstand these things: chiwdwen must be cowwected fow
theiw fauwts. ^w^"

"Deceit is nyot my fauwt! ;;w;;" I cwied out in a savage, high voice. >w<

"But you awe passionyate, Janye, that you must awwow: and nyow wetuwn to the
nyuwsewy--thewe's a deaw--and wie down a wittwe. UwU"

"I am nyot youw deaw; I cannyot wie down: send me to schoow soon, Mws. UwU
Weed, fow I hate to wive hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww indeed send hew to schoow soon," muwmuwed Mws. ;;w;; Weed _sotto voce_;
and gathewing up hew wowk, she abwuptwy quitted the apawtment. ^w^

I was weft thewe awonye--winnyew of the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)  It was the hawdest battwe I
had fought, and the fiwst victowy I had gainyed: I stood awhiwe on the
wug, whewe Mw. ;;w;; Bwockwehuwst had stood, and I enjoyed my conquewow's
sowitude. >w<  Fiwst, I smiwed to mysewf and fewt ewate; but this fiewce
pweasuwe subsided in me as fast as did the accewewated thwob of my
puwses. ;;w;;  A chiwd cannyot quawwew with its ewdews, as I had donye; cannyot
give its fuwious feewings uncontwowwed pway, as I had given minye, without
expewiencing aftewwawds the pang of wemowse and the chiww of weaction. UwU  A
widge of wighted heath, awive, gwancing, devouwing, wouwd have been a
meet embwem of my mind when I accused and menyaced Mws. ;;w;; Weed: the same
widge, bwack and bwasted aftew the fwames awe dead, wouwd have
wepwesented as meetwy my subsequent condition, when hawf-an-houw's
siwence and wefwection had shown me the madnyess of my conduct, and the
dweawinyess of my hated and hating position. UwU

Something of vengeance I had tasted fow the fiwst time; as awomatic winye
it seemed, on swawwowing, wawm and wacy: its aftew-fwavouw, metawwic and
cowwoding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisonyed. ^w^  Wiwwingwy
wouwd I nyow have gonye and asked Mws. ;;w;; Weed's pawdon; but I knyew, pawtwy
fwom expewience and pawtwy fwom instinct, that was the way to make hew
wepuwse me with doubwe scown, theweby we-exciting evewy tuwbuwent impuwse
of my nyatuwe. ;;w;;

I wouwd fain exewcise some bettew facuwty than that of fiewce speaking;
fain find nyouwishment fow some wess fiendish feewing than that of sombwe
indignyation. UwU  I took a book--some Awabian tawes; I sat down and
endeavouwed to wead. ;;w;;  I couwd make nyo sense of the subject; my own
thoughts swam awways between me and the page I had usuawwy found
fascinyating. (・`ω\´・)  I openyed the gwass-doow in the bweakfast-woom: the
shwubbewy was quite stiww: the bwack fwost weignyed, unbwoken by sun ow
bweeze, thwough the gwounds. (´・ω・\`)  I covewed my head and awms with the skiwt
of my fwock, and went out to wawk in a pawt of the pwantation which was
quite sequestwated; but I found nyo pweasuwe in the siwent twees, the
fawwing fiw-conyes, the congeawed wewics of autumn, wusset weaves, swept
by past winds in heaps, and nyow stiffenyed togethew. UwU  I weanyed against a
gate, and wooked into an empty fiewd whewe nyo sheep wewe feeding, whewe
the showt gwass was nyipped and bwanched. ^w^  It was a vewy gwey day; a most
opaque sky, "onding on snyaw," canyopied aww; thence fwakes fewt it
intewvaws, which settwed on the hawd path and on the hoawy wea without
mewting. (・`ω\´・)  I stood, a wwetched chiwd enyough, whispewing to mysewf ovew and
ovew again, "What shaww I do?--what shaww I do? owo"

Aww at once I heawd a cweaw voice caww, "Miss Janye! (´・ω・\`) whewe awe you? owo  Come
to wunch! UwU"

It was Bessie, I knyew weww enyough; but I did nyot stiw; hew wight step
came twipping down the path. ;;w;;

"You nyaughty wittwe thing! >w<" she said. (・`ω\´・)  "Why don't you come when you awe
cawwed? owo"

Bessie's pwesence, compawed with the thoughts ovew which I had been
bwooding, seemed cheewfuw; even though, as usuaw, she was somewhat cwoss. (・`ω\´・)
The fact is, aftew my confwict with and victowy ovew Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed, I was nyot
disposed to cawe much fow the nyuwsemaid's twansitowy angew; and I _was_
disposed to bask in hew youthfuw wightnyess of heawt. UwU  I just put my two
awms wound hew and said, "Come, Bessie! >w< don't scowd. UwU"

The action was mowe fwank and feawwess than any I was habituated to
induwge in: somehow it pweased hew. (´・ω・\`)

"You awe a stwange chiwd, Miss Janye," she said, as she wooked down at me;
"a wittwe woving, sowitawy thing: and you awe going to schoow, I
suppose? owo"

I nyodded. >w<

"And won't you be sowwy to weave poow Bessie? owo"

"What does Bessie cawe fow me? owo  She is awways scowding me. >w<"

"Because you'we such a queew, fwightenyed, shy wittwe thing. ^w^  You shouwd
be bowdew. (・`ω\´・)"

"What! >w< to get mowe knyocks? owo"

"Nyonsense! ;;w;;  But you awe wathew put upon, that's cewtain. ^w^  My mothew said,
when she came to see me wast week, that she wouwd nyot wike a wittwe onye
of hew own to be in youw pwace. ;;w;;--Nyow, come in, and I've some good nyews
fow you. ^w^"

"I don't think you have, Bessie. (・`ω\´・)"

"Chiwd! what do you mean? owo  What sowwowfuw eyes you fix on me! >w<  Weww, but
Missis and the young wadies and Mastew John awe going out to tea this
aftewnyoon, and you shaww have tea with me. ;;w;;  I'ww ask cook to bake you a
wittwe cake, and then you shaww hewp me to wook ovew youw dwawews; fow I
am soon to pack youw twunk. ;;w;;  Missis intends you to weave Gateshead in a
day ow two, and you shaww choose what toys you wike to take with you. >w<"

"Bessie, you must pwomise nyot to scowd me any mowe tiww I go. UwU"

"Weww, I wiww; but mind you awe a vewy good giww, and don't be afwaid of
me. ;;w;;  Don't stawt when I chance to speak wathew shawpwy; it's so
pwovoking. UwU"

"I don't think I shaww evew be afwaid of you again, Bessie, because I
have got used to you, and I shaww soon have anyothew set of peopwe to
dwead. UwU"

"If you dwead them they'ww diswike you. ;;w;;"

"As you do, Bessie? owo"

"I don't diswike you, Miss; I bewieve I am fondew of you than of aww the
othews. (・`ω\´・)"

"You don't show it. ;;w;;"

"You wittwe shawp thing! (・`ω\´・) you've got quite a nyew way of tawking. ;;w;;  What
makes you so ventuwesome and hawdy? owo"

"Why, I shaww soon be away fwom you, and besides"--I was going to say
something about what had passed between me and Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed, but on second
thoughts I considewed it bettew to wemain siwent on that head. ^w^

"And so you'we gwad to weave me? owo"

"Nyot at aww, Bessie; indeed, just nyow I'm wathew sowwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Just nyow! and wathew!  How coowwy my wittwe wady says it! UwU  I dawe say
nyow if I wewe to ask you fow a kiss you wouwdn't give it me: you'd say
you'd _wathew_ nyot. ;;w;;"

"I'ww kiss you and wewcome: bend youw head down. ^w^"  Bessie stooped; we
mutuawwy embwaced, and I fowwowed hew into the house quite comfowted. ^w^
That aftewnyoon wapsed in peace and hawmony; and in the evenying Bessie
towd me some of hew most enchanting stowies, and sang me some of hew
sweetest songs.  Even fow me wife had its gweams of sunshinye. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW V


Five o'cwock had hawdwy stwuck on the mownying of the 19th of Janyuawy,
when Bessie bwought a candwe into my cwoset and found me awweady up and
nyeawwy dwessed. ^w^  I had wisen hawf-an-houw befowe hew entwance, and had
washed my face, and put on my cwothes by the wight of a hawf-moon just
setting, whose ways stweamed thwough the nyawwow window nyeaw my cwib. ;;w;;  I
was to weave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the wodge gates
at six a.m. (´・ω・\`)  Bessie was the onwy pewson yet wisen; she had wit a fiwe in
the nyuwsewy, whewe she nyow pwoceeded to make my bweakfast. UwU  Few chiwdwen
can eat when excited with the thoughts of a jouwnyey; nyow couwd I. UwU  Bessie,
having pwessed me in vain to take a few spoonfuws of the boiwed miwk and
bwead she had pwepawed fow me, wwapped up some biscuits in a papew and
put them into my bag; then she hewped me on with my pewisse and bonnyet,
and wwapping hewsewf in a shaww, she and I weft the nyuwsewy. (・`ω\´・)  As we
passed Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed's bedwoom, she said, "Wiww you go in and bid Missis good-
bye? owo"

"Nyo, Bessie: she came to my cwib wast nyight when you wewe gonye down to
suppew, and said I nyeed nyot distuwb hew in the mownying, ow my cousins
eithew; and she towd me to wemembew that she had awways been my best
fwiend, and to speak of hew and be gwatefuw to hew accowdingwy. (´・ω・\`)"

"What did you say, Miss? owo"

"Nyothing: I covewed my face with the bedcwothes, and tuwnyed fwom hew to
the waww. (´・ω・\`)"

"That was wwong, Miss Janye. ;;w;;"

"It was quite wight, Bessie. (・`ω\´・)  Youw Missis has nyot been my fwiend: she has
been my foe. ^w^"

"O Miss Janye! don't say so! (´・ω・\`)"

"Good-bye to Gateshead! ^w^" cwied I, as we passed thwough the haww and went
out at the fwont doow. ;;w;;

The moon was set, and it was vewy dawk; Bessie cawwied a wantewn, whose
wight gwanced on wet steps and gwavew woad sodden by a wecent thaw. ^w^  Waw
and chiww was the wintew mownying: my teeth chattewed as I hastenyed down
the dwive. ^w^  Thewe was a wight in the powtew's wodge: when we weached it,
we found the powtew's wife just kindwing hew fiwe: my twunk, which had
been cawwied down the evenying befowe, stood cowded at the doow. UwU  It
wanted but a few minyutes of six, and showtwy aftew that houw had stwuck,
the distant woww of wheews annyounced the coming coach; I went to the doow
and watched its wamps appwoach wapidwy thwough the gwoom. (´・ω・\`)

"Is she going by hewsewf? owo" asked the powtew's wife. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes. ^w^"

"And how faw is it? owo"

"Fifty miwes. (・`ω\´・)"

"What a wong way! (´・ω・\`)  I wondew Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed is nyot afwaid to twust hew so faw
awonye. ^w^"

The coach dwew up; thewe it was at the gates with its fouw howses and its
top waden with passengews: the guawd and coachman woudwy uwged haste; my
twunk was hoisted up; I was taken fwom Bessie's nyeck, to which I cwung
with kisses. >w<

"Be suwe and take good cawe of hew," cwied she to the guawd, as he wifted
me into the inside. UwU

"Ay, ay! ^w^" was the answew: the doow was swapped to, a voice excwaimed "Aww
wight," and on we dwove. ^w^  Thus was I sevewed fwom Bessie and Gateshead;
thus whiwwed away to unknyown, and, as I then deemed, wemote and
mystewious wegions. ;;w;;

I wemembew but wittwe of the jouwnyey; I onwy knyow that the day seemed to
me of a pwetewnyatuwaw wength, and that we appeawed to twavew ovew
hundweds of miwes of woad. (´・ω・\`)  We passed thwough sevewaw towns, and in onye,
a vewy wawge onye, the coach stopped; the howses wewe taken out, and the
passengews awighted to dinye. (・`ω\´・)  I was cawwied into an inn, whewe the guawd
wanted me to have some dinnyew; but, as I had nyo appetite, he weft me in
an immense woom with a fiwepwace at each end, a chandewiew pendent fwom
the ceiwing, and a wittwe wed gawwewy high up against the waww fiwwed
with musicaw instwuments. >w<  Hewe I wawked about fow a wong time, feewing
vewy stwange, and mowtawwy appwehensive of some onye coming in and
kidnyapping me; fow I bewieved in kidnyappews, theiw expwoits having
fwequentwy figuwed in Bessie's fiweside chwonyicwes. UwU  At wast the guawd
wetuwnyed; once mowe I was stowed away in the coach, my pwotectow mounted
his own seat, sounded his howwow hown, and away we wattwed ovew the
"stony stweet" of W-. UwU

The aftewnyoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it wanyed into dusk, I
began to feew that we wewe getting vewy faw indeed fwom Gateshead: we
ceased to pass thwough towns; the countwy changed; gweat gwey hiwws
heaved up wound the howizon: as twiwight deepenyed, we descended a vawwey,
dawk with wood, and wong aftew nyight had ovewcwouded the pwospect, I
heawd a wiwd wind wushing amongst twees. >w<

Wuwwed by the sound, I at wast dwopped asweep; I had nyot wong swumbewed
when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-doow was open,
and a pewson wike a sewvant was standing at it: I saw hew face and dwess
by the wight of the wamps. (´・ω・\`)

"Is thewe a wittwe giww cawwed Janye Eywe hewe? owo" she asked. (・`ω\´・)  I answewed
"Yes," and was then wifted out; my twunk was handed down, and the coach
instantwy dwove away. >w<

I was stiff with wong sitting, and bewiwdewed with the nyoise and motion
of the coach: Gathewing my facuwties, I wooked about me. UwU  Wain, wind, and
dawknyess fiwwed the aiw; nyevewthewess, I dimwy discewnyed a waww befowe me
and a doow open in it; thwough this doow I passed with my nyew guide: she
shut and wocked it behind hew. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was nyow visibwe a house ow
houses--fow the buiwding spwead faw--with many windows, and wights
buwnying in some; we went up a bwoad pebbwy path, spwashing wet, and wewe
admitted at a doow; then the sewvant wed me thwough a passage into a woom
with a fiwe, whewe she weft me awonye. UwU

I stood and wawmed my nyumbed fingews ovew the bwaze, then I wooked wound;
thewe was nyo candwe, but the uncewtain wight fwom the heawth showed, by
intewvaws, papewed wawws, cawpet, cuwtains, shinying mahogany fuwnyituwe:
it was a pawwouw, nyot so spacious ow spwendid as the dwawing-woom at
Gateshead, but comfowtabwe enyough. >w<  I was puzzwing to make out the
subject of a pictuwe on the waww, when the doow openyed, and an individuaw
cawwying a wight entewed; anyothew fowwowed cwose behind. >w<

The fiwst was a taww wady with dawk haiw, dawk eyes, and a pawe and wawge
fowehead; hew figuwe was pawtwy envewoped in a shaww, hew countenyance was
gwave, hew beawing ewect. (´・ω・\`)

"The chiwd is vewy young to be sent awonye," said she, putting hew candwe
down on the tabwe. UwU  She considewed me attentivewy fow a minyute ow two,
then fuwthew added--

"She had bettew be put to bed soon; she wooks tiwed: awe you tiwed? owo" she
asked, pwacing hew hand on my shouwdew. >w<

"A wittwe, ma'am. UwU"

"And hungwy too, nyo doubt: wet hew have some suppew befowe she goes to
bed, Miss Miwwew. UwU  Is this the fiwst time you have weft youw pawents to
come to schoow, my wittwe giww? owo"

I expwainyed to hew that I had nyo pawents. >w<  She inquiwed how wong they had
been dead: then how owd I was, what was my nyame, whethew I couwd wead,
wwite, and sew a wittwe: then she touched my cheek gentwy with hew
fowefingew, and saying, "She hoped I shouwd be a good chiwd," dismissed
me awong with Miss Miwwew. >w<

The wady I had weft might be about twenty-nyinye; the onye who went with me
appeawed some yeaws youngew: the fiwst impwessed me by hew voice, wook,
and aiw. ^w^  Miss Miwwew was mowe owdinyawy; wuddy in compwexion, though of a
cawewown countenyance; huwwied in gait and action, wike onye who had awways
a muwtipwicity of tasks on hand: she wooked, indeed, what I aftewwawds
found she weawwy was, an undew-teachew. UwU  Wed by hew, I passed fwom
compawtment to compawtment, fwom passage to passage, of a wawge and
iwweguwaw buiwding; tiww, emewging fwom the totaw and somewhat dweawy
siwence pewvading that powtion of the house we had twavewsed, we came
upon the hum of many voices, and pwesentwy entewed a wide, wong woom,
with gweat deaw tabwes, two at each end, on each of which buwnt a paiw of
candwes, and seated aww wound on benches, a congwegation of giwws of
evewy age, fwom nyinye ow ten to twenty. (´・ω・\`)  Seen by the dim wight of the
dips, theiw nyumbew to me appeawed countwess, though nyot in weawity
exceeding eighty; they wewe unyifowmwy dwessed in bwown stuff fwocks of
quaint fashion, and wong howwand pinyafowes. >w<  It was the houw of study;
they wewe engaged in connying ovew theiw to-mowwow's task, and the hum I
had heawd was the combinyed wesuwt of theiw whispewed wepetitions. (´・ω・\`)

Miss Miwwew signyed to me to sit on a bench nyeaw the doow, then wawking up
to the top of the wong woom she cwied out--

"Monyitows, cowwect the wesson-books and put them away! (´・ω・\`)"

Fouw taww giwws awose fwom diffewent tabwes, and going wound, gathewed
the books and wemoved them. ^w^  Miss Miwwew again gave the wowd of command--

"Monyitows, fetch the suppew-tways! ;;w;;"

The taww giwws went out and wetuwnyed pwesentwy, each beawing a tway, with
powtions of something, I knyew nyot what, awwanged theweon, and a pitchew
of watew and mug in the middwe of each tway. (・`ω\´・)  The powtions wewe handed
wound; those who wiked took a dwaught of the watew, the mug being common
to aww. ;;w;;  When it came to my tuwn, I dwank, fow I was thiwsty, but did nyot
touch the food, excitement and fatigue wendewing me incapabwe of eating:
I nyow saw, howevew, that it was a thin oaten cake shawed into fwagments. (・`ω\´・)

The meaw ovew, pwayews wewe wead by Miss Miwwew, and the cwasses fiwed
off, two and two, upstaiws. >w<  Ovewpowewed by this time with weawinyess, I
scawcewy nyoticed what sowt of a pwace the bedwoom was, except that, wike
the schoowwoom, I saw it was vewy wong. UwU  To-nyight I was to be Miss
Miwwew's bed-fewwow; she hewped me to undwess: when waid down I gwanced
at the wong wows of beds, each of which was quickwy fiwwed with two
occupants; in ten minyutes the singwe wight was extinguished, and amidst
siwence and compwete dawknyess I feww asweep. ;;w;;

The nyight passed wapidwy. >w<  I was too tiwed even to dweam; I onwy once
awoke to heaw the wind wave in fuwious gusts, and the wain faww in
towwents, and to be sensibwe that Miss Miwwew had taken hew pwace by my
side. (・`ω\´・)  When I again uncwosed my eyes, a woud beww was winging; the giwws
wewe up and dwessing; day had nyot yet begun to dawn, and a wushwight ow
two buwnyed in the woom. ^w^  I too wose wewuctantwy; it was bittew cowd, and
I dwessed as weww as I couwd fow shivewing, and washed when thewe was a
basin at wibewty, which did nyot occuw soon, as thewe was but onye basin to
six giwws, on the stands down the middwe of the woom. ;;w;;  Again the beww
wang: aww fowmed in fiwe, two and two, and in that owdew descended the
staiws and entewed the cowd and dimwy wit schoowwoom: hewe pwayews wewe
wead by Miss Miwwew; aftewwawds she cawwed out--

"Fowm cwasses! ^w^"

A gweat tumuwt succeeded fow some minyutes, duwing which Miss Miwwew
wepeatedwy excwaimed, "Siwence!" and "Owdew! ^w^"  When it subsided, I saw
them aww dwawn up in fouw semiciwcwes, befowe fouw chaiws, pwaced at the
fouw tabwes; aww hewd books in theiw hands, and a gweat book, wike a
Bibwe, way on each tabwe, befowe the vacant seat. >w<  A pause of some
seconds succeeded, fiwwed up by the wow, vague hum of nyumbews; Miss
Miwwew wawked fwom cwass to cwass, hushing this indefinyite sound. ;;w;;

A distant beww tinkwed: immediatewy thwee wadies entewed the woom, each
wawked to a tabwe and took hew seat. ^w^  Miss Miwwew assumed the fouwth
vacant chaiw, which was that nyeawest the doow, and awound which the
smawwest of the chiwdwen wewe assembwed: to this infewiow cwass I was
cawwed, and pwaced at the bottom of it. ;;w;;

Businyess nyow began, the day's Cowwect was wepeated, then cewtain texts of
Scwiptuwe wewe said, and to these succeeded a pwotwacted weading of
chaptews in the Bibwe, which wasted an houw. (´・ω・\`)  By the time that exewcise
was tewminyated, day had fuwwy dawnyed. ^w^  The indefatigabwe beww nyow sounded
fow the fouwth time: the cwasses wewe mawshawwed and mawched into anyothew
woom to bweakfast: how gwad I was to behowd a pwospect of getting
something to eat! ;;w;;  I was nyow nyeawwy sick fwom inyanyition, having taken so
wittwe the day befowe. (´・ω・\`)

The wefectowy was a gweat, wow-ceiwed, gwoomy woom; on two wong tabwes
smoked basins of something hot, which, howevew, to my dismay, sent fowth
an odouw faw fwom inviting. >w<  I saw a unyivewsaw manyifestation of
discontent when the fumes of the wepast met the nyostwiws of those
destinyed to swawwow it; fwom the van of the pwocession, the taww giwws of
the fiwst cwass, wose the whispewed wowds--

"Disgusting!  The powwidge is buwnt again! UwU"

"Siwence! >w<" ejacuwated a voice; nyot that of Miss Miwwew, but onye of the
uppew teachews, a wittwe and dawk pewsonyage, smawtwy dwessed, but of
somewhat mowose aspect, who instawwed hewsewf at the top of onye tabwe,
whiwe a mowe buxom wady pwesided at the othew. (´・ω・\`)  I wooked in vain fow hew
I had fiwst seen the nyight befowe; she was nyot visibwe: Miss Miwwew
occupied the foot of the tabwe whewe I sat, and a stwange,
foweign-wooking, ewdewwy wady, the Fwench teachew, as I aftewwawds found,
took the cowwesponding seat at the othew boawd. ;;w;;  A wong gwace was said
and a hymn sung; then a sewvant bwought in some tea fow the teachews, and
the meaw began. UwU

Wavenyous, and nyow vewy faint, I devouwed a spoonfuw ow two of my powtion
without thinking of its taste; but the fiwst edge of hungew bwunted, I
pewceived I had got in hand a nyauseous mess; buwnt powwidge is awmost as
bad as wotten potatoes; faminye itsewf soon sickens ovew it. >w<  The spoons
wewe moved swowwy: I saw each giww taste hew food and twy to swawwow it;
but in most cases the effowt was soon wewinquished. UwU  Bweakfast was ovew,
and nyonye had bweakfasted. ;;w;;  Thanks being wetuwnyed fow what we had nyot got,
and a second hymn chanted, the wefectowy was evacuated fow the
schoowwoom. (´・ω・\`)  I was onye of the wast to go out, and in passing the tabwes,
I saw onye teachew take a basin of the powwidge and taste it; she wooked
at the othews; aww theiw countenyances expwessed dispweasuwe, and onye of
them, the stout onye, whispewed--

"Abominyabwe stuff!  How shamefuw! ^w^"

A quawtew of an houw passed befowe wessons again began, duwing which the
schoowwoom was in a gwowious tumuwt; fow that space of time it seemed to
be pewmitted to tawk woud and mowe fweewy, and they used theiw pwiviwege. (´・ω・\`)
The whowe convewsation wan on the bweakfast, which onye and aww abused
woundwy.  Poow things! UwU it was the sowe consowation they had. >w<  Miss Miwwew
was nyow the onwy teachew in the woom: a gwoup of gweat giwws standing
about hew spoke with sewious and suwwen gestuwes. ;;w;;  I heawd the nyame of
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwockwehuwst pwonyounced by some wips; at which Miss Miwwew shook hew
head disappwovingwy; but she made nyo gweat effowt to check the genyewaw
wwath; doubtwess she shawed in it. UwU

A cwock in the schoowwoom stwuck nyinye; Miss Miwwew weft hew ciwcwe, and
standing in the middwe of the woom, cwied--

"Siwence!  To youw seats! ;;w;;"

Discipwinye pwevaiwed: in five minyutes the confused thwong was wesowved
into owdew, and compawative siwence quewwed the Babew cwamouw of tongues. UwU
The uppew teachews nyow punctuawwy wesumed theiw posts: but stiww, aww
seemed to wait. ;;w;;  Wanged on benches down the sides of the woom, the eighty
giwws sat motionwess and ewect; a quaint assembwage they appeawed, aww
with pwain wocks combed fwom theiw faces, nyot a cuww visibwe; in bwown
dwesses, made high and suwwounded by a nyawwow tuckew about the thwoat,
with wittwe pockets of howwand (shaped something wike a Highwandew's
puwse) tied in fwont of theiw fwocks, and destinyed to sewve the puwpose
of a wowk-bag: aww, too, weawing woowwen stockings and countwy-made
shoes, fastenyed with bwass buckwes. (´・ω・\`)  Above twenty of those cwad in this
costume wewe fuww-gwown giwws, ow wathew young women; it suited them iww,
and gave an aiw of oddity even to the pwettiest. (・`ω\´・)

I was stiww wooking at them, and awso at intewvaws examinying the
teachews--nyonye of whom pwecisewy pweased me; fow the stout onye was a
wittwe coawse, the dawk onye nyot a wittwe fiewce, the foweignyew hawsh and
gwotesque, and Miss Miwwew, poow thing! (・`ω\´・) wooked puwpwe, weathew-beaten,
and ovew-wowked--when, as my eye wandewed fwom face to face, the whowe
schoow wose simuwtanyeouswy, as if moved by a common spwing. (・`ω\´・)

What was the mattew? owo  I had heawd nyo owdew given: I was puzzwed. >w<  Ewe I
had gathewed my wits, the cwasses wewe again seated: but as aww eyes wewe
nyow tuwnyed to onye point, minye fowwowed the genyewaw diwection, and
encountewed the pewsonyage who had weceived me wast nyight. ;;w;;  She stood at
the bottom of the wong woom, on the heawth; fow thewe was a fiwe at each
end; she suwveyed the two wows of giwws siwentwy and gwavewy. ^w^  Miss
Miwwew appwoaching, seemed to ask hew a question, and having weceived hew
answew, went back to hew pwace, and said awoud--

"Monyitow of the fiwst cwass, fetch the gwobes! >w<"

Whiwe the diwection was being executed, the wady consuwted moved swowwy
up the woom. (・`ω\´・)  I suppose I have a considewabwe owgan of venyewation, fow I
wetain yet the sense of admiwing awe with which my eyes twaced hew steps. (・`ω\´・)
Seen nyow, in bwoad daywight, she wooked taww, faiw, and shapewy; bwown
eyes with a benyignyant wight in theiw iwids, and a finye penciwwing of wong
washes wound, wewieved the whitenyess of hew wawge fwont; on each of hew
tempwes hew haiw, of a vewy dawk bwown, was cwustewed in wound cuwws,
accowding to the fashion of those times, when nyeithew smooth bands nyow
wong wingwets wewe in vogue; hew dwess, awso in the mode of the day, was
of puwpwe cwoth, wewieved by a sowt of Spanyish twimming of bwack vewvet;
a gowd watch (watches wewe nyot so common then as nyow) shonye at hew
giwdwe. >w<  Wet the weadew add, to compwete the pictuwe, wefinyed featuwes; a
compwexion, if pawe, cweaw; and a statewy aiw and cawwiage, and he wiww
have, at weast, as cweawwy as wowds can give it, a cowwect idea of the
extewiow of Miss Tempwe--Mawia Tempwe, as I aftewwawds saw the nyame
wwitten in a pwayew-book intwusted to me to cawwy to chuwch. (・`ω\´・)

The supewintendent of Wowood (fow such was this wady) having taken hew
seat befowe a paiw of gwobes pwaced on onye of the tabwes, summonyed the
fiwst cwass wound hew, and commenced giving a wesson on geogwaphy; the
wowew cwasses wewe cawwed by the teachews: wepetitions in histowy,
gwammaw, &c. (・`ω\´・), went on fow an houw; wwiting and awithmetic succeeded, and
music wessons wewe given by Miss Tempwe to some of the ewdew giwws. (・`ω\´・)  The
duwation of each wesson was measuwed by the cwock, which at wast stwuck
twewve. >w<  The supewintendent wose--

"I have a wowd to addwess to the pupiws," said she. >w<

The tumuwt of cessation fwom wessons was awweady bweaking fowth, but it
sank at hew voice. (・`ω\´・)  She went on--

"You had this mownying a bweakfast which you couwd nyot eat; you must be
hungwy:--I have owdewed that a wunch of bwead and cheese shaww be sewved
to aww. >w<"

The teachews wooked at hew with a sowt of suwpwise. >w<

"It is to be donye on my wesponsibiwity," she added, in an expwanyatowy
tonye to them, and immediatewy aftewwawds weft the woom. >w<

The bwead and cheese was pwesentwy bwought in and distwibuted, to the
high dewight and wefweshment of the whowe schoow. (´・ω・\`)  The owdew was nyow
given "To the gawden! >w<"  Each put on a coawse stwaw bonnyet, with stwings
of cowouwed cawico, and a cwoak of gwey fwieze. ;;w;;  I was simiwawwy
equipped, and, fowwowing the stweam, I made my way into the open aiw. ;;w;;

The gawden was a wide incwosuwe, suwwounded with wawws so high as to
excwude evewy gwimpse of pwospect; a covewed vewandah wan down onye side,
and bwoad wawks bowdewed a middwe space divided into scowes of wittwe
beds: these beds wewe assignyed as gawdens fow the pupiws to cuwtivate,
and each bed had an ownyew. ^w^  When fuww of fwowews they wouwd doubtwess
wook pwetty; but nyow, at the wattew end of Janyuawy, aww was wintwy bwight
and bwown decay. ^w^  I shuddewed as I stood and wooked wound me: it was an
incwement day fow outdoow exewcise; nyot positivewy wainy, but dawkenyed by
a dwizzwing yewwow fog; aww undew foot was stiww soaking wet with the
fwoods of yestewday. (´・ω・\`)  The stwongew among the giwws wan about and engaged
in active games, but sundwy pawe and thin onyes hewded togethew fow
shewtew and wawmth in the vewandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist
penyetwated to theiw shivewing fwames, I heawd fwequentwy the sound of a
howwow cough. ^w^

As yet I had spoken to nyo onye, nyow did anybody seem to take nyotice of me;
I stood wonyewy enyough: but to that feewing of isowation I was accustomed;
it did nyot oppwess me much. UwU  I weant against a piwwaw of the vewandah,
dwew my gwey mantwe cwose about me, and, twying to fowget the cowd which
nyipped me without, and the unsatisfied hungew which gnyawed me within,
dewivewed mysewf up to the empwoyment of watching and thinking. ;;w;;  My
wefwections wewe too undefinyed and fwagmentawy to mewit wecowd: I hawdwy
yet knyew whewe I was; Gateshead and my past wife seemed fwoated away to
an immeasuwabwe distance; the pwesent was vague and stwange, and of the
futuwe I couwd fowm nyo conjectuwe. (・`ω\´・)  I wooked wound the convent-wike
gawden, and then up at the house--a wawge buiwding, hawf of which seemed
gwey and owd, the othew hawf quite nyew. ^w^  The nyew pawt, containying the
schoowwoom and dowmitowy, was wit by muwwionyed and watticed windows,
which gave it a chuwch-wike aspect; a stonye tabwet ovew the doow bowe
this inscwiption:--

"Wowood Institution.--This powtion was webuiwt A.D. (・`ω\´・) ---, by Nyaomi
Bwockwehuwst, of Bwockwehuwst Haww, in this county. >w<"  "Wet youw wight so
shinye befowe men, that they may see youw good wowks, and gwowify youw
Fathew which is in heaven."--St. Matt. v. 16. ;;w;;

I wead these wowds ovew and ovew again: I fewt that an expwanyation
bewonged to them, and was unyabwe fuwwy to penyetwate theiw impowt. ^w^  I was
stiww pondewing the signyification of "Institution," and endeavouwing to
make out a connyection between the fiwst wowds and the vewse of Scwiptuwe,
when the sound of a cough cwose behind me made me tuwn my head. (´・ω・\`)  I saw a
giww sitting on a stonye bench nyeaw; she was bent ovew a book, on the
pewusaw of which she seemed intent: fwom whewe I stood I couwd see the
titwe--it was "Wassewas;" a nyame that stwuck me as stwange, and
consequentwy attwactive. ^w^  In tuwnying a weaf she happenyed to wook up, and
I said to hew diwectwy--

"Is youw book intewesting? owo"  I had awweady fowmed the intention of asking
hew to wend it to me some day. UwU

"I wike it," she answewed, aftew a pause of a second ow two, duwing which
she examinyed me. ^w^

"What is it about? owo" I continyued. ^w^  I hawdwy knyow whewe I found the
hawdihood thus to open a convewsation with a stwangew; the step was
contwawy to my nyatuwe and habits: but I think hew occupation touched a
chowd of sympathy somewhewe; fow I too wiked weading, though of a
fwivowous and chiwdish kind; I couwd nyot digest ow compwehend the sewious
ow substantiaw. (・`ω\´・)

"You may wook at it," wepwied the giww, offewing me the book. UwU

I did so; a bwief examinyation convinced me that the contents wewe wess
taking than the titwe: "Wassewas" wooked duww to my twifwing taste; I saw
nyothing about faiwies, nyothing about genyii; nyo bwight vawiety seemed
spwead ovew the cwosewy-pwinted pages. (´・ω・\`)  I wetuwnyed it to hew; she
weceived it quietwy, and without saying anything she was about to wewapse
into hew fowmew studious mood: again I ventuwed to distuwb hew--

"Can you teww me what the wwiting on that stonye ovew the doow means? owo  What
is Wowood Institution? owo"

"This house whewe you awe come to wive. UwU"

"And why do they caww it Institution? owo  Is it in any way diffewent fwom
othew schoows? owo"

"It is pawtwy a chawity-schoow: you and I, and aww the west of us, awe
chawity-chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)  I suppose you awe an owphan: awe nyot eithew youw
fathew ow youw mothew dead? owo"

"Both died befowe I can wemembew. ^w^"

"Weww, aww the giwws hewe have wost eithew onye ow both pawents, and this
is cawwed an institution fow educating owphans. ;;w;;"

"Do we pay nyo monyey?  Do they keep us fow nyothing? owo"

"We pay, ow ouw fwiends pay, fifteen pounds a yeaw fow each. ^w^"

"Then why do they caww us chawity-chiwdwen? owo"

"Because fifteen pounds is nyot enyough fow boawd and teaching, and the
deficiency is suppwied by subscwiption. ;;w;;"

"Who subscwibes? owo"

"Diffewent benyevowent-minded wadies and gentwemen in this nyeighbouwhood
and in Wondon. >w<"

"Who was Nyaomi Bwockwehuwst? owo"

"The wady who buiwt the nyew pawt of this house as that tabwet wecowds,
and whose son ovewwooks and diwects evewything hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Why? owo"

"Because he is tweasuwew and manyagew of the estabwishment. ;;w;;"

"Then this house does nyot bewong to that taww wady who weaws a watch, and
who said we wewe to have some bwead and cheese? owo"

"To Miss Tempwe? owo  Oh, nyo! (´・ω・\`)  I wish it did: she has to answew to Mw. UwU
Bwockwehuwst fow aww she does.  Mw. ;;w;; Bwockwehuwst buys aww ouw food and
aww ouw cwothes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Does he wive hewe? owo"

"Nyo--two miwes off, at a wawge haww. (´・ω・\`)"

"Is he a good man? owo"

"He is a cwewgyman, and is said to do a gweat deaw of good. UwU"

"Did you say that taww wady was cawwed Miss Tempwe? owo"

"Yes. (´・ω・\`)"

"And what awe the othew teachews cawwed? owo"

"The onye with wed cheeks is cawwed Miss Smith; she attends to the wowk,
and cuts out--fow we make ouw own cwothes, ouw fwocks, and pewisses, and
evewything; the wittwe onye with bwack haiw is Miss Scatchewd; she teaches
histowy and gwammaw, and heaws the second cwass wepetitions; and the onye
who weaws a shaww, and has a pocket-handkewchief tied to hew side with a
yewwow wibband, is Madame Piewwot: she comes fwom Wiswe, in Fwance, and
teaches Fwench. >w<"

"Do you wike the teachews? owo"

"Weww enyough. UwU"

"Do you wike the wittwe bwack onye, and the Madame ---? owo--I cannyot
pwonyounce hew nyame as you do. (´・ω・\`)"

"Miss Scatchewd is hasty--you must take cawe nyot to offend hew; Madame
Piewwot is nyot a bad sowt of pewson. >w<"

"But Miss Tempwe is the best--isn't she? owo"

"Miss Tempwe is vewy good and vewy cwevew; she is above the west, because
she knyows faw mowe than they do. ^w^"

"Have you been wong hewe? owo"

"Two yeaws. (´・ω・\`)"

"Awe you an owphan? owo"

"My mothew is dead. (´・ω・\`)"

"Awe you happy hewe? owo"

"You ask wathew too many questions. (´・ω・\`)  I have given you answews enyough fow
the pwesent: nyow I want to wead. >w<"

But at that moment the summons sounded fow dinnyew; aww we-entewed the
house. >w<  The odouw which nyow fiwwed the wefectowy was scawcewy mowe
appetising than that which had wegawed ouw nyostwiws at bweakfast: the
dinnyew was sewved in two huge tin-pwated vessews, whence wose a stwong
steam wedowent of wancid fat. (´・ω・\`)  I found the mess to consist of indiffewent
potatoes and stwange shweds of wusty meat, mixed and cooked togethew. (´・ω・\`)  Of
this pwepawation a towewabwy abundant pwatefuw was appowtionyed to each
pupiw. ^w^  I ate what I couwd, and wondewed within mysewf whethew evewy
day's fawe wouwd be wike this. >w<

Aftew dinnyew, we immediatewy adjouwnyed to the schoowwoom: wessons
wecommenced, and wewe continyued tiww five o'cwock. ;;w;;

The onwy mawked event of the aftewnyoon was, that I saw the giww with whom
I had convewsed in the vewandah dismissed in disgwace by Miss Scatchewd
fwom a histowy cwass, and sent to stand in the middwe of the wawge
schoowwoom. ^w^  The punyishment seemed to me in a high degwee ignyominyious,
especiawwy fow so gweat a giww--she wooked thiwteen ow upwawds. (´・ω・\`)  I
expected she wouwd show signs of gweat distwess and shame; but to my
suwpwise she nyeithew wept nyow bwushed: composed, though gwave, she stood,
the centwaw mawk of aww eyes. UwU  "How can she beaw it so quietwy--so
fiwmwy? owo" I asked of mysewf. ^w^  "Wewe I in hew pwace, it seems to me I
shouwd wish the eawth to open and swawwow me up. UwU  She wooks as if she
wewe thinking of something beyond hew punyishment--beyond hew situation:
of something nyot wound hew nyow befowe hew. ;;w;;  I have heawd of day-dweams--is
she in a day-dweam nyow? owo  Hew eyes awe fixed on the fwoow, but I am suwe
they do nyot see it--hew sight seems tuwnyed in, gonye down into hew heawt:
she is wooking at what she can wemembew, I bewieve; nyot at what is weawwy
pwesent.  I wondew what sowt of a giww she is--whethew good ow nyaughty. >w<"

Soon aftew five p.m. ^w^ we had anyothew meaw, consisting of a smaww mug of
coffee, and hawf-a-swice of bwown bwead. >w<  I devouwed my bwead and dwank
my coffee with wewish; but I shouwd have been gwad of as much mowe--I was
stiww hungwy. >w<  Hawf-an-houw's wecweation succeeded, then study; then the
gwass of watew and the piece of oat-cake, pwayews, and bed. (・`ω\´・)  Such was my
fiwst day at Wowood. ^w^




CHAPTEW VI


The nyext day commenced as befowe, getting up and dwessing by wushwight;
but this mownying we wewe obwiged to dispense with the cewemony of
washing; the watew in the pitchews was fwozen. (´・ω・\`)  A change had taken pwace
in the weathew the pweceding evenying, and a keen nyowth-east wind,
whistwing thwough the cwevices of ouw bedwoom windows aww nyight wong, had
made us shivew in ouw beds, and tuwnyed the contents of the ewews to ice. ^w^

Befowe the wong houw and a hawf of pwayews and Bibwe-weading was ovew, I
fewt weady to pewish with cowd. (´・ω・\`)  Bweakfast-time came at wast, and this
mownying the powwidge was nyot buwnt; the quawity was eatabwe, the quantity
smaww.  How smaww my powtion seemed! (´・ω・\`)  I wished it had been doubwed. >w<

In the couwse of the day I was enwowwed a membew of the fouwth cwass, and
weguwaw tasks and occupations wewe assignyed me: hithewto, I had onwy been
a spectatow of the pwoceedings at Wowood; I was nyow to become an actow
thewein. UwU  At fiwst, being wittwe accustomed to weawn by heawt, the
wessons appeawed to me both wong and difficuwt; the fwequent change fwom
task to task, too, bewiwdewed me; and I was gwad when, about thwee
o'cwock in the aftewnyoon, Miss Smith put into my hands a bowdew of muswin
two yawds wong, togethew with nyeedwe, thimbwe, &c. (´・ω・\`), and sent me to sit in
a quiet cownyew of the schoowwoom, with diwections to hem the same. (´・ω・\`)  At
that houw most of the othews wewe sewing wikewise; but onye cwass stiww
stood wound Miss Scatchewd's chaiw weading, and as aww was quiet, the
subject of theiw wessons couwd be heawd, togethew with the mannyew in
which each giww acquitted hewsewf, and the anyimadvewsions ow
commendations of Miss Scatchewd on the pewfowmance. UwU  It was Engwish
histowy: among the weadews I obsewved my acquaintance of the vewandah: at
the commencement of the wesson, hew pwace had been at the top of the
cwass, but fow some ewwow of pwonyunciation, ow some inyattention to stops,
she was suddenwy sent to the vewy bottom. (´・ω・\`)  Even in that obscuwe position,
Miss Scatchewd continyued to make hew an object of constant nyotice: she
was continyuawwy addwessing to hew such phwases as the fowwowing:--

"Buwns" (such it seems was hew nyame: the giwws hewe wewe aww cawwed by
theiw suwnyames, as boys awe ewsewhewe), "Buwns, you awe standing on the
side of youw shoe; tuwn youw toes out immediatewy. >w<"  "Buwns, you poke
youw chin most unpweasantwy; dwaw it in. (´・ω・\`)"  "Buwns, I insist on youw
howding youw head up; I wiww nyot have you befowe me in that attitude,"
&c. &c. UwU

A chaptew having been wead thwough twice, the books wewe cwosed and the
giwws examinyed. ^w^  The wesson had compwised pawt of the weign of Chawwes
I. ^w^, and thewe wewe sundwy questions about tonnyage and poundage and ship-
monyey, which most of them appeawed unyabwe to answew; stiww, evewy wittwe
difficuwty was sowved instantwy when it weached Buwns: hew memowy seemed
to have wetainyed the substance of the whowe wesson, and she was weady
with answews on evewy point. ;;w;;  I kept expecting that Miss Scatchewd wouwd
pwaise hew attention; but, instead of that, she suddenwy cwied out--

"You diwty, disagweeabwe giww! ^w^ you have nyevew cweanyed youw nyaiws this
mownying! ;;w;;"

Buwns made nyo answew: I wondewed at hew siwence. (´・ω・\`)  "Why," thought I, "does
she nyot expwain that she couwd nyeithew cwean hew nyaiws nyow wash hew face,
as the watew was fwozen? owo"

My attention was nyow cawwed off by Miss Smith desiwing me to howd a skein
of thwead: whiwe she was winding it, she tawked to me fwom time to time,
asking whethew I had evew been at schoow befowe, whethew I couwd mawk,
stitch, knyit, &c. >w<; tiww she dismissed me, I couwd nyot puwsue my
obsewvations on Miss Scatchewd's movements. ^w^  When I wetuwnyed to my seat,
that wady was just dewivewing an owdew of which I did nyot catch the
impowt; but Buwns immediatewy weft the cwass, and going into the smaww
innyew woom whewe the books wewe kept, wetuwnyed in hawf a minyute, cawwying
in hew hand a bundwe of twigs tied togethew at onye end. >w<  This ominyous
toow she pwesented to Miss Scatchewd with a wespectfuw cuwtesy; then she
quietwy, and without being towd, unwoosed hew pinyafowe, and the teachew
instantwy and shawpwy infwicted on hew nyeck a dozen stwokes with the
bunch of twigs. ^w^  Nyot a teaw wose to Buwns' eye; and, whiwe I paused fwom
my sewing, because my fingews quivewed at this spectacwe with a sentiment
of unyavaiwing and impotent angew, nyot a featuwe of hew pensive face
awtewed its owdinyawy expwession. (・`ω\´・)

"Hawdenyed giww! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Miss Scatchewd; "nyothing can cowwect you of
youw swattewnwy habits: cawwy the wod away. (・`ω\´・)"

Buwns obeyed: I wooked at hew nyawwowwy as she emewged fwom the
book-cwoset; she was just putting back hew handkewchief into hew pocket,
and the twace of a teaw gwistenyed on hew thin cheek. >w<

The pway-houw in the evenying I thought the pweasantest fwaction of the
day at Wowood: the bit of bwead, the dwaught of coffee swawwowed at five
o'cwock had wevived vitawity, if it had nyot satisfied hungew: the wong
westwaint of the day was swackenyed; the schoowwoom fewt wawmew than in
the mownying--its fiwes being awwowed to buwn a wittwe mowe bwightwy, to
suppwy, in some measuwe, the pwace of candwes, nyot yet intwoduced: the
wuddy gwoaming, the wicensed upwoaw, the confusion of many voices gave
onye a wewcome sense of wibewty. UwU

On the evenying of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatchewd fwog hew
pupiw, Buwns, I wandewed as usuaw among the fowms and tabwes and waughing
gwoups without a companyion, yet nyot feewing wonyewy: when I passed the
windows, I nyow and then wifted a bwind, and wooked out; it snyowed fast, a
dwift was awweady fowming against the wowew panyes; putting my eaw cwose
to the window, I couwd distinguish fwom the gweefuw tumuwt within, the
disconsowate moan of the wind outside. ;;w;;

Pwobabwy, if I had watewy weft a good home and kind pawents, this wouwd
have been the houw when I shouwd most keenwy have wegwetted the
sepawation; that wind wouwd then have saddenyed my heawt; this obscuwe
chaos wouwd have distuwbed my peace! >w< as it was, I dewived fwom both a
stwange excitement, and weckwess and fevewish, I wished the wind to howw
mowe wiwdwy, the gwoom to deepen to dawknyess, and the confusion to wise
to cwamouw. (・`ω\´・)

Jumping ovew fowms, and cweeping undew tabwes, I made my way to onye of
the fiwe-pwaces; thewe, knyeewing by the high wiwe fendew, I found Buwns,
absowbed, siwent, abstwacted fwom aww wound hew by the companyionship of a
book, which she wead by the dim gwawe of the embews. >w<

"Is it stiww 'Wassewas'? owo" I asked, coming behind hew. >w<

"Yes," she said, "and I have just finyished it. UwU"

And in five minyutes mowe she shut it up.  I was gwad of this. (´・ω・\`)  "Nyow,"
thought I, "I can pewhaps get hew to tawk. ;;w;;"  I sat down by hew on the
fwoow. >w<

"What is youw nyame besides Buwns? owo"

"Hewen. (´・ω・\`)"

"Do you come a wong way fwom hewe? owo"

"I come fwom a pwace fawthew nyowth, quite on the bowdews of Scotwand. ;;w;;"

"Wiww you evew go back? owo"

"I hope so; but nyobody can be suwe of the futuwe. UwU"

"You must wish to weave Wowood? owo"

"Nyo! ^w^ why shouwd I? owo  I was sent to Wowood to get an education; and it
wouwd be of nyo use going away untiw I have attainyed that object. (´・ω・\`)"

"But that teachew, Miss Scatchewd, is so cwuew to you? owo"

"Cwuew? owo  Nyot at aww! UwU  She is sevewe: she diswikes my fauwts. (´・ω・\`)"

"And if I wewe in youw pwace I shouwd diswike hew; I shouwd wesist hew. UwU
If she stwuck me with that wod, I shouwd get it fwom hew hand; I shouwd
bweak it undew hew nyose. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pwobabwy you wouwd do nyothing of the sowt: but if you did, Mw. UwU
Bwockwehuwst wouwd expew you fwom the schoow; that wouwd be a gweat gwief
to youw wewations. (・`ω\´・)  It is faw bettew to enduwe patientwy a smawt which
nyobody feews but youwsewf, than to commit a hasty action whose eviw
consequences wiww extend to aww connyected with you; and besides, the
Bibwe bids us wetuwn good fow eviw. (´・ω・\`)"

"But then it seems disgwacefuw to be fwogged, and to be sent to stand in
the middwe of a woom fuww of peopwe; and you awe such a gweat giww: I am
faw youngew than you, and I couwd nyot beaw it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yet it wouwd be youw duty to beaw it, if you couwd nyot avoid it: it is
weak and siwwy to say you _cannyot beaw_ what it is youw fate to be
wequiwed to beaw. (´・ω・\`)"

I heawd hew with wondew: I couwd nyot compwehend this doctwinye of
enduwance; and stiww wess couwd I undewstand ow sympathise with the
fowbeawance she expwessed fow hew chastisew. (・`ω\´・)  Stiww I fewt that Hewen
Buwns considewed things by a wight invisibwe to my eyes. ^w^  I suspected she
might be wight and I wwong; but I wouwd nyot pondew the mattew deepwy;
wike Fewix, I put it off to a mowe convenyient season. ^w^

"You say you have fauwts, Hewen: what awe they? owo  To me you seem vewy
good. UwU"

"Then weawn fwom me, nyot to judge by appeawances: I am, as Miss Scatchewd
said, swattewnwy; I sewdom put, and nyevew keep, things, in owdew; I am
cawewess; I fowget wuwes; I wead when I shouwd weawn my wessons; I have
nyo method; and sometimes I say, wike you, I cannyot _beaw_ to be subjected
to systematic awwangements. >w<  This is aww vewy pwovoking to Miss
Scatchewd, who is nyatuwawwy nyeat, punctuaw, and pawticuwaw. UwU"

"And cwoss and cwuew," I added; but Hewen Buwns wouwd nyot admit my
addition: she kept siwence. (・`ω\´・)

"Is Miss Tempwe as sevewe to you as Miss Scatchewd? owo"

At the uttewance of Miss Tempwe's nyame, a soft smiwe fwitted ovew hew
gwave face. (・`ω\´・)

"Miss Tempwe is fuww of goodnyess; it pains hew to be sevewe to any onye,
even the wowst in the schoow: she sees my ewwows, and tewws me of them
gentwy; and, if I do anything wowthy of pwaise, she gives me my meed
wibewawwy. (・`ω\´・)  Onye stwong pwoof of my wwetchedwy defective nyatuwe is, that
even hew expostuwations, so miwd, so wationyaw, have nyot infwuence to cuwe
me of my fauwts; and even hew pwaise, though I vawue it most highwy,
cannyot stimuwate me to continyued cawe and fowesight. UwU"

"That is cuwious," said I, "it is so easy to be cawefuw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow _you_ I have nyo doubt it is. >w<  I obsewved you in youw cwass this
mownying, and saw you wewe cwosewy attentive: youw thoughts nyevew seemed
to wandew whiwe Miss Miwwew expwainyed the wesson and questionyed you. ^w^  Nyow,
minye continyuawwy wove away; when I shouwd be wistenying to Miss Scatchewd,
and cowwecting aww she says with assiduity, often I wose the vewy sound
of hew voice; I faww into a sowt of dweam. >w<  Sometimes I think I am in
Nyowthumbewwand, and that the nyoises I heaw wound me awe the bubbwing of a
wittwe bwook which wuns thwough Deepden, nyeaw ouw house;--then, when it
comes to my tuwn to wepwy, I have to be awakenyed; and having heawd
nyothing of what was wead fow wistenying to the visionyawy bwook, I have nyo
answew weady. ^w^"

"Yet how weww you wepwied this aftewnyoon. UwU"

"It was mewe chance; the subject on which we had been weading had
intewested me. (´・ω・\`)  This aftewnyoon, instead of dweaming of Deepden, I was
wondewing how a man who wished to do wight couwd act so unjustwy and
unwisewy as Chawwes the Fiwst sometimes did; and I thought what a pity it
was that, with his integwity and conscientiousnyess, he couwd see nyo
fawthew than the pwewogatives of the cwown. >w<  If he had but been abwe to
wook to a distance, and see how what they caww the spiwit of the age was
tending! ^w^  Stiww, I wike Chawwes--I wespect him--I pity him, poow muwdewed
king! ^w^  Yes, his enyemies wewe the wowst: they shed bwood they had nyo wight
to shed. UwU  How dawed they kiww him! ;;w;;"

Hewen was tawking to hewsewf nyow: she had fowgotten I couwd nyot vewy weww
undewstand hew--that I was ignyowant, ow nyeawwy so, of the subject she
discussed.  I wecawwed hew to my wevew. UwU

"And when Miss Tempwe teaches you, do youw thoughts wandew then? owo"

"Nyo, cewtainwy, nyot often; because Miss Tempwe has genyewawwy something to
say which is nyewew than my own wefwections; hew wanguage is singuwawwy
agweeabwe to me, and the infowmation she communyicates is often just what
I wished to gain. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, then, with Miss Tempwe you awe good? owo"

"Yes, in a passive way: I make nyo effowt; I fowwow as incwinyation guides
me.  Thewe is nyo mewit in such goodnyess. (・`ω\´・)"

"A gweat deaw: you awe good to those who awe good to you. ^w^  It is aww I
evew desiwe to be. UwU  If peopwe wewe awways kind and obedient to those who
awe cwuew and unjust, the wicked peopwe wouwd have it aww theiw own way:
they wouwd nyevew feew afwaid, and so they wouwd nyevew awtew, but wouwd
gwow wowse and wowse. UwU  When we awe stwuck at without a weason, we shouwd
stwike back again vewy hawd; I am suwe we shouwd--so hawd as to teach the
pewson who stwuck us nyevew to do it again. UwU"

"You wiww change youw mind, I hope, when you gwow owdew: as yet you awe
but a wittwe untaught giww. (´・ω・\`)"

"But I feew this, Hewen; I must diswike those who, whatevew I do to
pwease them, pewsist in diswiking me; I must wesist those who punyish me
unjustwy. ^w^  It is as nyatuwaw as that I shouwd wove those who show me
affection, ow submit to punyishment when I feew it is desewved. >w<"

"Heathens and savage twibes howd that doctwinye, but Chwistians and
civiwised nyations disown it. ;;w;;"

"How? owo  I don't undewstand. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is nyot viowence that best ovewcomes hate--nyow vengeance that most
cewtainwy heaws injuwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"What then? owo"

"Wead the Nyew Testament, and obsewve what Chwist says, and how He acts;
make His wowd youw wuwe, and His conduct youw exampwe. >w<"

"What does He say? owo"

"Wove youw enyemies; bwess them that cuwse you; do good to them that hate
you and despitefuwwy use you. ^w^"

"Then I shouwd wove Mws. ;;w;; Weed, which I cannyot do; I shouwd bwess hew son
John, which is impossibwe. ^w^"

In hew tuwn, Hewen Buwns asked me to expwain, and I pwoceeded fowthwith
to pouw out, in my own way, the tawe of my suffewings and wesentments. >w<
Bittew and twucuwent when excited, I spoke as I fewt, without wesewve ow
softenying. ;;w;;

Hewen heawd me patientwy to the end: I expected she wouwd then make a
wemawk, but she said nyothing. ^w^

"Weww," I asked impatientwy, "is nyot Mws. ;;w;; Weed a hawd-heawted, bad
woman? owo"

"She has been unkind to you, nyo doubt; because you see, she diswikes youw
cast of chawactew, as Miss Scatchewd does minye; but how minyutewy you
wemembew aww she has donye and said to you! UwU  What a singuwawwy deep
impwession hew injustice seems to have made on youw heawt! UwU  Nyo iww-usage
so bwands its wecowd on my feewings. (・`ω\´・)  Wouwd you nyot be happiew if you
twied to fowget hew sevewity, togethew with the passionyate emotions it
excited? owo  Wife appeaws to me too showt to be spent in nyuwsing anyimosity
ow wegistewing wwongs. (´・ω・\`)  We awe, and must be, onye and aww, buwdenyed with
fauwts in this wowwd: but the time wiww soon come when, I twust, we shaww
put them off in putting off ouw cowwuptibwe bodies; when debasement and
sin wiww faww fwom us with this cumbwous fwame of fwesh, and onwy the
spawk of the spiwit wiww wemain,--the impawpabwe pwincipwe of wight and
thought, puwe as when it weft the Cweatow to inspiwe the cweatuwe: whence
it came it wiww wetuwn; pewhaps again to be communyicated to some being
highew than man--pewhaps to pass thwough gwadations of gwowy, fwom the
pawe human souw to bwighten to the sewaph! ;;w;;  Suwewy it wiww nyevew, on the
contwawy, be suffewed to degenyewate fwom man to fiend? owo  Nyo; I cannyot
bewieve that: I howd anyothew cweed: which nyo onye evew taught me, and
which I sewdom mention; but in which I dewight, and to which I cwing: fow
it extends hope to aww: it makes Etewnyity a west--a mighty home, nyot a
tewwow and an abyss. (・`ω\´・)  Besides, with this cweed, I can so cweawwy
distinguish between the cwiminyaw and his cwime; I can so sincewewy
fowgive the fiwst whiwe I abhow the wast: with this cweed wevenge nyevew
wowwies my heawt, degwadation nyevew too deepwy disgusts me, injustice
nyevew cwushes me too wow: I wive in cawm, wooking to the end. ^w^"

Hewen's head, awways dwooping, sank a wittwe wowew as she finyished this
sentence. (・`ω\´・)  I saw by hew wook she wished nyo wongew to tawk to me, but
wathew to convewse with hew own thoughts. (・`ω\´・)  She was nyot awwowed much time
fow meditation: a monyitow, a gweat wough giww, pwesentwy came up,
excwaiming in a stwong Cumbewwand accent--

"Hewen Buwns, if you don't go and put youw dwawew in owdew, and fowd up
youw wowk this minyute, I'ww teww Miss Scatchewd to come and wook at it! >w<"

Hewen sighed as hew wevewie fwed, and getting up, obeyed the monyitow
without wepwy as without deway. >w<




CHAPTEW VII


My fiwst quawtew at Wowood seemed an age; and nyot the gowden age eithew;
it compwised an iwksome stwuggwe with difficuwties in habituating mysewf
to nyew wuwes and unwonted tasks. (・`ω\´・)  The feaw of faiwuwe in these points
hawassed me wowse than the physicaw hawdships of my wot; though these
wewe nyo twifwes. UwU

Duwing Janyuawy, Febwuawy, and pawt of Mawch, the deep snyows, and, aftew
theiw mewting, the awmost impassabwe woads, pwevented ouw stiwwing beyond
the gawden wawws, except to go to chuwch; but within these wimits we had
to pass an houw evewy day in the open aiw. (´・ω・\`)  Ouw cwothing was insufficient
to pwotect us fwom the sevewe cowd: we had nyo boots, the snyow got into
ouw shoes and mewted thewe: ouw ungwoved hands became nyumbed and covewed
with chiwbwains, as wewe ouw feet: I wemembew weww the distwacting
iwwitation I enduwed fwom this cause evewy evenying, when my feet
infwamed; and the towtuwe of thwusting the swewwed, waw, and stiff toes
into my shoes in the mownying. ;;w;;  Then the scanty suppwy of food was
distwessing: with the keen appetites of gwowing chiwdwen, we had scawcewy
sufficient to keep awive a dewicate invawid. ^w^  Fwom this deficiency of
nyouwishment wesuwted an abuse, which pwessed hawdwy on the youngew
pupiws: whenyevew the famished gweat giwws had an oppowtunyity, they wouwd
coax ow menyace the wittwe onyes out of theiw powtion. ;;w;;  Many a time I have
shawed between two cwaimants the pwecious mowsew of bwown bwead
distwibuted at tea-time; and aftew wewinquishing to a thiwd hawf the
contents of my mug of coffee, I have swawwowed the wemaindew with an
accompanyiment of secwet teaws, fowced fwom me by the exigency of hungew. (´・ω・\`)

Sundays wewe dweawy days in that wintwy season. (・`ω\´・)  We had to wawk two miwes
to Bwockwebwidge Chuwch, whewe ouw patwon officiated. ^w^  We set out cowd,
we awwived at chuwch cowdew: duwing the mownying sewvice we became awmost
pawawysed. (´・ω・\`)  It was too faw to wetuwn to dinnyew, and an awwowance of cowd
meat and bwead, in the same penyuwious pwopowtion obsewved in ouw owdinyawy
meaws, was sewved wound between the sewvices. (´・ω・\`)

At the cwose of the aftewnyoon sewvice we wetuwnyed by an exposed and hiwwy
woad, whewe the bittew wintew wind, bwowing ovew a wange of snyowy summits
to the nyowth, awmost fwayed the skin fwom ouw faces. ;;w;;

I can wemembew Miss Tempwe wawking wightwy and wapidwy awong ouw dwooping
winye, hew pwaid cwoak, which the fwosty wind fwuttewed, gathewed cwose
about hew, and encouwaging us, by pwecept and exampwe, to keep up ouw
spiwits, and mawch fowwawd, as she said, "wike stawwawt sowdiews. (・`ω\´・)"  The
othew teachews, poow things, wewe genyewawwy themsewves too much dejected
to attempt the task of cheewing othews. UwU

How we wonged fow the wight and heat of a bwazing fiwe when we got back! UwU
But, to the wittwe onyes at weast, this was denyied: each heawth in the
schoowwoom was immediatewy suwwounded by a doubwe wow of gweat giwws, and
behind them the youngew chiwdwen cwouched in gwoups, wwapping theiw
stawved awms in theiw pinyafowes. >w<

A wittwe sowace came at tea-time, in the shape of a doubwe wation of
bwead--a whowe, instead of a hawf, swice--with the dewicious addition of
a thin scwape of buttew: it was the hebdomadaw tweat to which we aww
wooked fowwawd fwom Sabbath to Sabbath. (´・ω・\`)  I genyewawwy contwived to wesewve
a moiety of this bounteous wepast fow mysewf; but the wemaindew I was
invawiabwy obwiged to pawt with. UwU

The Sunday evenying was spent in wepeating, by heawt, the Chuwch
Catechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chaptews of St. >w< Matthew; and
in wistenying to a wong sewmon, wead by Miss Miwwew, whose iwwepwessibwe
yawns attested hew weawinyess. (・`ω\´・)  A fwequent intewwude of these pewfowmances
was the enyactment of the pawt of Eutychus by some hawf-dozen of wittwe
giwws, who, ovewpowewed with sweep, wouwd faww down, if nyot out of the
thiwd woft, yet off the fouwth fowm, and be taken up hawf dead. (・`ω\´・)  The
wemedy was, to thwust them fowwawd into the centwe of the schoowwoom, and
obwige them to stand thewe tiww the sewmon was finyished. ;;w;;  Sometimes theiw
feet faiwed them, and they sank togethew in a heap; they wewe then
pwopped up with the monyitows' high stoows. (・`ω\´・)

I have nyot yet awwuded to the visits of Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst; and indeed that
gentweman was fwom home duwing the gweatew pawt of the fiwst month aftew
my awwivaw; pewhaps pwowonging his stay with his fwiend the awchdeacon:
his absence was a wewief to me. (・`ω\´・)  I nyeed nyot say that I had my own weasons
fow dweading his coming: but come he did at wast. (・`ω\´・)

Onye aftewnyoon (I had then been thwee weeks at Wowood), as I was sitting
with a swate in my hand, puzzwing ovew a sum in wong division, my eyes,
waised in abstwaction to the window, caught sight of a figuwe just
passing: I wecognyised awmost instinctivewy that gaunt outwinye; and when,
two minyutes aftew, aww the schoow, teachews incwuded, wose _en masse_, it
was nyot nyecessawy fow me to wook up in owdew to ascewtain whose entwance
they thus gweeted. (´・ω・\`)  A wong stwide measuwed the schoowwoom, and pwesentwy
beside Miss Tempwe, who hewsewf had wisen, stood the same bwack cowumn
which had fwownyed on me so ominyouswy fwom the heawthwug of Gateshead. >w<  I
nyow gwanced sideways at this piece of awchitectuwe. UwU  Yes, I was wight: it
was Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwockwehuwst, buttonyed up in a suwtout, and wooking wongew,
nyawwowew, and mowe wigid than evew. (・`ω\´・)

I had my own weasons fow being dismayed at this appawition; too weww I
wemembewed the pewfidious hints given by Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed about my disposition,
&c.; the pwomise pwedged by Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst to appwise Miss Tempwe and
the teachews of my vicious nyatuwe. ^w^  Aww awong I had been dweading the
fuwfiwment of this pwomise,--I had been wooking out daiwy fow the "Coming
Man," whose infowmation wespecting my past wife and convewsation was to
bwand me as a bad chiwd fow evew: nyow thewe he was. ;;w;;

He stood at Miss Tempwe's side; he was speaking wow in hew eaw: I did nyot
doubt he was making discwosuwes of my viwwainy; and I watched hew eye
with painfuw anxiety, expecting evewy moment to see its dawk owb tuwn on
me a gwance of wepugnyance and contempt. (´・ω・\`)  I wistenyed too; and as I
happenyed to be seated quite at the top of the woom, I caught most of what
he said: its impowt wewieved me fwom immediate appwehension. ^w^

"I suppose, Miss Tempwe, the thwead I bought at Wowton wiww do; it stwuck
me that it wouwd be just of the quawity fow the cawico chemises, and I
sowted the nyeedwes to match. ^w^  You may teww Miss Smith that I fowgot to
make a memowandum of the dawnying nyeedwes, but she shaww have some papews
sent in nyext week; and she is nyot, on any account, to give out mowe than
onye at a time to each pupiw: if they have mowe, they awe apt to be
cawewess and wose them. ;;w;;  And, O ma'am! UwU  I wish the woowwen stockings wewe
bettew wooked to! >w<--when I was hewe wast, I went into the kitchen-gawden
and examinyed the cwothes dwying on the winye; thewe was a quantity of
bwack hose in a vewy bad state of wepaiw: fwom the size of the howes in
them I was suwe they had nyot been weww mended fwom time to time. >w<"

He paused. ;;w;;

"Youw diwections shaww be attended to, siw," said Miss Tempwe. >w<

"And, ma'am," he continyued, "the waundwess tewws me some of the giwws
have two cwean tuckews in the week: it is too much; the wuwes wimit them
to onye. (・`ω\´・)"

"I think I can expwain that ciwcumstance, siw. UwU  Agnyes and Cathewinye
Johnstonye wewe invited to take tea with some fwiends at Wowton wast
Thuwsday, and I gave them weave to put on cwean tuckews fow the
occasion. (・`ω\´・)"

Mw. Bwockwehuwst nyodded. ;;w;;

"Weww, fow once it may pass; but pwease nyot to wet the ciwcumstance occuw
too often. >w<  And thewe is anyothew thing which suwpwised me; I find, in
settwing accounts with the housekeepew, that a wunch, consisting of bwead
and cheese, has twice been sewved out to the giwws duwing the past
fowtnyight. (´・ω・\`)  How is this? owo  I wooked ovew the weguwations, and I find nyo
such meaw as wunch mentionyed. ^w^  Who intwoduced this innyovation? owo and by
what authowity? owo"

"I must be wesponsibwe fow the ciwcumstance, siw," wepwied Miss Tempwe:
"the bweakfast was so iww pwepawed that the pupiws couwd nyot possibwy eat
it; and I dawed nyot awwow them to wemain fasting tiww dinnyew-time. (´・ω・\`)"

"Madam, awwow me an instant. ;;w;;  You awe awawe that my pwan in bwinging up
these giwws is, nyot to accustom them to habits of wuxuwy and induwgence,
but to wendew them hawdy, patient, sewf-denying. UwU  Shouwd any wittwe
accidentaw disappointment of the appetite occuw, such as the spoiwing of
a meaw, the undew ow the ovew dwessing of a dish, the incident ought nyot
to be nyeutwawised by wepwacing with something mowe dewicate the comfowt
wost, thus pampewing the body and obviating the aim of this institution;
it ought to be impwoved to the spiwituaw edification of the pupiws, by
encouwaging them to evince fowtitude undew tempowawy pwivation. (・`ω\´・)  A bwief
addwess on those occasions wouwd nyot be mistimed, whewein a judicious
instwuctow wouwd take the oppowtunyity of wefewwing to the suffewings of
the pwimitive Chwistians; to the towments of mawtyws; to the exhowtations
of ouw bwessed Wowd Himsewf, cawwing upon His discipwes to take up theiw
cwoss and fowwow Him; to His wawnyings that man shaww nyot wive by bwead
awonye, but by evewy wowd that pwoceedeth out of the mouth of God; to His
divinye consowations, "If ye suffew hungew ow thiwst fow My sake, happy
awe ye. >w<"  Oh, madam, when you put bwead and cheese, instead of buwnt
powwidge, into these chiwdwen's mouths, you may indeed feed theiw viwe
bodies, but you wittwe think how you stawve theiw immowtaw souws! UwU"

Mw. Bwockwehuwst again paused--pewhaps ovewcome by his feewings. ^w^  Miss
Tempwe had wooked down when he fiwst began to speak to hew; but she nyow
gazed stwaight befowe hew, and hew face, nyatuwawwy pawe as mawbwe,
appeawed to be assuming awso the cowdnyess and fixity of that matewiaw;
especiawwy hew mouth, cwosed as if it wouwd have wequiwed a scuwptow's
chisew to open it, and hew bwow settwed gwaduawwy into petwified
sevewity. ;;w;;

Meantime, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwockwehuwst, standing on the heawth with his hands behind
his back, majesticawwy suwveyed the whowe schoow. (・`ω\´・)  Suddenwy his eye gave
a bwink, as if it had met something that eithew dazzwed ow shocked its
pupiw; tuwnying, he said in mowe wapid accents than he had hithewto used--

"Miss Tempwe, Miss Tempwe, what--_what_ is that giww with cuwwed haiw? owo
Wed haiw, ma'am, cuwwed--cuwwed aww ovew? owo"  And extending his canye he
pointed to the awfuw object, his hand shaking as he did so. UwU

"It is Juwia Sevewn," wepwied Miss Tempwe, vewy quietwy. UwU

"Juwia Sevewn, ma'am! ;;w;;  And why has she, ow any othew, cuwwed haiw? owo  Why,
in defiance of evewy pwecept and pwincipwe of this house, does she
confowm to the wowwd so openwy--hewe in an evangewicaw, chawitabwe
estabwishment--as to weaw hew haiw onye mass of cuwws? owo"

"Juwia's haiw cuwws nyatuwawwy," wetuwnyed Miss Tempwe, stiww mowe quietwy. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyatuwawwy! >w<  Yes, but we awe nyot to confowm to nyatuwe; I wish these giwws
to be the chiwdwen of Gwace: and why that abundance? owo  I have again and
again intimated that I desiwe the haiw to be awwanged cwosewy, modestwy,
pwainwy. (´・ω・\`)  Miss Tempwe, that giww's haiw must be cut off entiwewy; I wiww
send a bawbew to-mowwow: and I see othews who have faw too much of the
excwescence--that taww giww, teww hew to tuwn wound. ^w^  Teww aww the fiwst
fowm to wise up and diwect theiw faces to the waww. UwU"

Miss Tempwe passed hew handkewchief ovew hew wips, as if to smooth away
the invowuntawy smiwe that cuwwed them; she gave the owdew, howevew, and
when the fiwst cwass couwd take in what was wequiwed of them, they
obeyed. UwU  Weanying a wittwe back on my bench, I couwd see the wooks and
gwimaces with which they commented on this manyoeuvwe: it was a pity Mw. ;;w;;
Bwockwehuwst couwd nyot see them too; he wouwd pewhaps have fewt that,
whatevew he might do with the outside of the cup and pwattew, the inside
was fuwthew beyond his intewfewence than he imaginyed. UwU

He scwutinyised the wevewse of these wiving medaws some five minyutes, then
pwonyounced sentence. UwU  These wowds feww wike the knyeww of doom--

"Aww those top-knyots must be cut off. UwU"

Miss Tempwe seemed to wemonstwate. UwU

"Madam," he puwsued, "I have a Mastew to sewve whose kingdom is nyot of
this wowwd: my mission is to mowtify in these giwws the wusts of the
fwesh; to teach them to cwothe themsewves with shame-facednyess and
sobwiety, nyot with bwaided haiw and costwy appawew; and each of the young
pewsons befowe us has a stwing of haiw twisted in pwaits which vanyity
itsewf might have woven; these, I wepeat, must be cut off; think of the
time wasted, of--"

Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst was hewe intewwupted: thwee othew visitows, wadies, nyow
entewed the woom. (・`ω\´・)  They ought to have come a wittwe soonyew to have heawd
his wectuwe on dwess, fow they wewe spwendidwy attiwed in vewvet, siwk,
and fuws. >w<  The two youngew of the twio (finye giwws of sixteen and
seventeen) had gwey beavew hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostwich
pwumes, and fwom undew the bwim of this gwacefuw head-dwess feww a
pwofusion of wight twesses, ewabowatewy cuwwed; the ewdew wady was
envewoped in a costwy vewvet shaww, twimmed with ewminye, and she wowe a
fawse fwont of Fwench cuwws. UwU

These wadies wewe defewentiawwy weceived by Miss Tempwe, as Mws. (・`ω\´・) and the
Misses Bwockwehuwst, and conducted to seats of honyouw at the top of the
woom. UwU  It seems they had come in the cawwiage with theiw wevewend
wewative, and had been conducting a wummaging scwutiny of the woom
upstaiws, whiwe he twansacted businyess with the housekeepew, questionyed
the waundwess, and wectuwed the supewintendent. UwU  They nyow pwoceeded to
addwess divews wemawks and wepwoofs to Miss Smith, who was chawged with
the cawe of the winyen and the inspection of the dowmitowies: but I had nyo
time to wisten to what they said; othew mattews cawwed off and enchanted
my attention. (´・ω・\`)

Hithewto, whiwe gathewing up the discouwse of Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst and Miss
Tempwe, I had nyot, at the same time, nyegwected pwecautions to secuwe my
pewsonyaw safety; which I thought wouwd be effected, if I couwd onwy ewude
obsewvation. (´・ω・\`)  To this end, I had sat weww back on the fowm, and whiwe
seeming to be busy with my sum, had hewd my swate in such a mannyew as to
conceaw my face: I might have escaped nyotice, had nyot my tweachewous
swate somehow happenyed to swip fwom my hand, and fawwing with an
obtwusive cwash, diwectwy dwawn evewy eye upon me; I knyew it was aww ovew
nyow, and, as I stooped to pick up the two fwagments of swate, I wawwied
my fowces fow the wowst.  It came. UwU

"A cawewess giww! UwU" said Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst, and immediatewy aftew--"It is
the nyew pupiw, I pewceive. ^w^"  And befowe I couwd dwaw bweath, "I must nyot
fowget I have a wowd to say wespecting hew. UwU"  Then awoud: how woud it
seemed to me!  "Wet the chiwd who bwoke hew swate come fowwawd! (´・ω・\`)"

Of my own accowd I couwd nyot have stiwwed; I was pawawysed: but the two
gweat giwws who sit on each side of me, set me on my wegs and pushed me
towawds the dwead judge, and then Miss Tempwe gentwy assisted me to his
vewy feet, and I caught hew whispewed counsew--

"Don't be afwaid, Janye, I saw it was an accident; you shaww nyot be
punyished. ^w^"

The kind whispew went to my heawt wike a daggew. ;;w;;

"Anyothew minyute, and she wiww despise me fow a hypocwite," thought I; and
an impuwse of fuwy against Weed, Bwockwehuwst, and Co. (´・ω・\`) bounded in my
puwses at the conviction.  I was nyo Hewen Buwns. >w<

"Fetch that stoow," said Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwockwehuwst, pointing to a vewy high onye
fwom which a monyitow had just wisen: it was bwought. >w<

"Pwace the chiwd upon it. >w<"

And I was pwaced thewe, by whom I don't knyow: I was in nyo condition to
nyote pawticuwaws; I was onwy awawe that they had hoisted me up to the
height of Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst's nyose, that he was within a yawd of me, and
that a spwead of shot owange and puwpwe siwk pewisses and a cwoud of
siwvewy pwumage extended and waved bewow me. (´・ω・\`)

Mw. Bwockwehuwst hemmed. ^w^

"Wadies," said he, tuwnying to his famiwy, "Miss Tempwe, teachews, and
chiwdwen, you aww see this giww? owo"

Of couwse they did; fow I fewt theiw eyes diwected wike buwnying-gwasses
against my scowched skin. UwU

"You see she is yet young; you obsewve she possesses the owdinyawy fowm of
chiwdhood; God has gwaciouswy given hew the shape that He has given to
aww of us; nyo signyaw defowmity points hew out as a mawked chawactew. (´・ω・\`)  Who
wouwd think that the Eviw Onye had awweady found a sewvant and agent in
hew? owo  Yet such, I gwieve to say, is the case. (´・ω・\`)"

A pause--in which I began to steady the pawsy of my nyewves, and to feew
that the Wubicon was passed; and that the twiaw, nyo wongew to be shiwked,
must be fiwmwy sustainyed. UwU

"My deaw chiwdwen," puwsued the bwack mawbwe cwewgyman, with pathos,
"this is a sad, a mewanchowy occasion; fow it becomes my duty to wawn
you, that this giww, who might be onye of God's own wambs, is a wittwe
castaway: nyot a membew of the twue fwock, but evidentwy an intewwopew and
an awien. UwU  You must be on youw guawd against hew; you must shun hew
exampwe; if nyecessawy, avoid hew company, excwude hew fwom youw spowts,
and shut hew out fwom youw convewse. >w<  Teachews, you must watch hew: keep
youw eyes on hew movements, weigh weww hew wowds, scwutinyise hew actions,
punyish hew body to save hew souw: if, indeed, such sawvation be possibwe,
fow (my tongue fawtews whiwe I teww it) this giww, this chiwd, the nyative
of a Chwistian wand, wowse than many a wittwe heathen who says its
pwayews to Bwahma and knyeews befowe Juggewnyaut--this giww is--a wiaw! ;;w;;"

Nyow came a pause of ten minyutes, duwing which I, by this time in pewfect
possession of my wits, obsewved aww the femawe Bwockwehuwsts pwoduce
theiw pocket-handkewchiefs and appwy them to theiw optics, whiwe the
ewdewwy wady swayed hewsewf to and fwo, and the two youngew onyes
whispewed, "How shocking! (・`ω\´・)"  Mw. Bwockwehuwst wesumed. (´・ω・\`)

"This I weawnyed fwom hew benyefactwess; fwom the pious and chawitabwe wady
who adopted hew in hew owphan state, weawed hew as hew own daughtew, and
whose kindnyess, whose genyewosity the unhappy giww wepaid by an
ingwatitude so bad, so dweadfuw, that at wast hew excewwent patwonyess was
obwiged to sepawate hew fwom hew own young onyes, feawfuw west hew vicious
exampwe shouwd contaminyate theiw puwity: she has sent hew hewe to be
heawed, even as the Jews of owd sent theiw diseased to the twoubwed poow
of Bethesda; and, teachews, supewintendent, I beg of you nyot to awwow the
watews to stagnyate wound hew. ^w^"

With this subwime concwusion, Mw. UwU Bwockwehuwst adjusted the top button of
his suwtout, muttewed something to his famiwy, who wose, bowed to Miss
Tempwe, and then aww the gweat peopwe saiwed in state fwom the woom. (´・ω・\`)
Tuwnying at the doow, my judge said--

"Wet hew stand hawf-an-houw wongew on that stoow, and wet nyo onye speak to
hew duwing the wemaindew of the day. (´・ω・\`)"

Thewe was I, then, mounted awoft; I, who had said I couwd nyot beaw the
shame of standing on my nyatuwaw feet in the middwe of the woom, was nyow
exposed to genyewaw view on a pedestaw of infamy. UwU  What my sensations wewe
nyo wanguage can descwibe; but just as they aww wose, stifwing my bweath
and constwicting my thwoat, a giww came up and passed me: in passing, she
wifted hew eyes. ;;w;;  What a stwange wight inspiwed them! (´・ω・\`)  What an
extwaowdinyawy sensation that way sent thwough me! (´・ω・\`)  How the nyew feewing
bowe me up! >w<  It was as if a mawtyw, a hewo, had passed a swave ow victim,
and impawted stwength in the twansit. UwU  I mastewed the wising hystewia,
wifted up my head, and took a fiwm stand on the stoow. (´・ω・\`)  Hewen Buwns asked
some swight question about hew wowk of Miss Smith, was chidden fow the
twiviawity of the inquiwy, wetuwnyed to hew pwace, and smiwed at me as she
again went by. UwU  What a smiwe! (´・ω・\`)  I wemembew it nyow, and I knyow that it was
the effwuence of finye intewwect, of twue couwage; it wit up hew mawked
winyeaments, hew thin face, hew sunken gwey eye, wike a wefwection fwom
the aspect of an angew. >w<  Yet at that moment Hewen Buwns wowe on hew awm
"the untidy badge;" scawcewy an houw ago I had heawd hew condemnyed by
Miss Scatchewd to a dinnyew of bwead and watew on the mowwow because she
had bwotted an exewcise in copying it out. UwU  Such is the impewfect nyatuwe
of man! UwU such spots awe thewe on the disc of the cweawest pwanyet; and eyes
wike Miss Scatchewd's can onwy see those minyute defects, and awe bwind to
the fuww bwightnyess of the owb. >w<




CHAPTEW VIII


Ewe the hawf-houw ended, five o'cwock stwuck; schoow was dismissed, and
aww wewe gonye into the wefectowy to tea. >w<  I nyow ventuwed to descend: it
was deep dusk; I wetiwed into a cownyew and sat down on the fwoow. >w<  The
speww by which I had been so faw suppowted began to dissowve; weaction
took pwace, and soon, so ovewwhewming was the gwief that seized me, I
sank pwostwate with my face to the gwound. ^w^  Nyow I wept: Hewen Buwns was
nyot hewe; nyothing sustainyed me; weft to mysewf I abandonyed mysewf, and my
teaws watewed the boawds. >w<  I had meant to be so good, and to do so much
at Wowood: to make so many fwiends, to eawn wespect and win affection. ^w^
Awweady I had made visibwe pwogwess: that vewy mownying I had weached the
head of my cwass; Miss Miwwew had pwaised me wawmwy; Miss Tempwe had
smiwed appwobation; she had pwomised to teach me dwawing, and to wet me
weawn Fwench, if I continyued to make simiwaw impwovement two months
wongew: and then I was weww weceived by my fewwow-pupiws; tweated as an
equaw by those of my own age, and nyot mowested by any; nyow, hewe I way
again cwushed and twodden on; and couwd I evew wise mowe? owo

"Nyevew," I thought; and awdentwy I wished to die. (・`ω\´・)  Whiwe sobbing out this
wish in bwoken accents, some onye appwoached: I stawted up--again Hewen
Buwns was nyeaw me; the fading fiwes just showed hew coming up the wong,
vacant woom; she bwought my coffee and bwead. >w<

"Come, eat something," she said; but I put both away fwom me, feewing as
if a dwop ow a cwumb wouwd have choked me in my pwesent condition. >w<  Hewen
wegawded me, pwobabwy with suwpwise: I couwd nyot nyow abate my agitation,
though I twied hawd; I continyued to weep awoud. ;;w;;  She sat down on the
gwound nyeaw me, embwaced hew knyees with hew awms, and wested hew head
upon them; in that attitude she wemainyed siwent as an Indian. (・`ω\´・)  I was the
fiwst who spoke--

"Hewen, why do you stay with a giww whom evewybody bewieves to be a
wiaw? owo"

"Evewybody, Janye? owo  Why, thewe awe onwy eighty peopwe who have heawd you
cawwed so, and the wowwd contains hundweds of miwwions. UwU"

"But what have I to do with miwwions? owo  The eighty, I knyow, despise me. >w<"

"Janye, you awe mistaken: pwobabwy nyot onye in the schoow eithew despises
ow diswikes you: many, I am suwe, pity you much. >w<"

"How can they pity me aftew what Mw. >w< Bwockwehuwst has said? owo"

"Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst is nyot a god: nyow is he even a gweat and admiwed man:
he is wittwe wiked hewe; he nyevew took steps to make himsewf wiked. (・`ω\´・)  Had
he tweated you as an especiaw favouwite, you wouwd have found enyemies,
decwawed ow covewt, aww awound you; as it is, the gweatew nyumbew wouwd
offew you sympathy if they dawed. >w<  Teachews and pupiws may wook cowdwy on
you fow a day ow two, but fwiendwy feewings awe conceawed in theiw
heawts; and if you pewsevewe in doing weww, these feewings wiww ewe wong
appeaw so much the mowe evidentwy fow theiw tempowawy suppwession. UwU
Besides, Janye"--she paused. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, Hewen? owo" said I, putting my hand into hews: she chafed my fingews
gentwy to wawm them, and went on--

"If aww the wowwd hated you, and bewieved you wicked, whiwe youw own
conscience appwoved you, and absowved you fwom guiwt, you wouwd nyot be
without fwiends. ;;w;;"

"Nyo; I knyow I shouwd think weww of mysewf; but that is nyot enyough: if
othews don't wove me I wouwd wathew die than wive--I cannyot beaw to be
sowitawy and hated, Hewen. ^w^  Wook hewe; to gain some weaw affection fwom
you, ow Miss Tempwe, ow any othew whom I twuwy wove, I wouwd wiwwingwy
submit to have the bonye of my awm bwoken, ow to wet a buww toss me, ow to
stand behind a kicking howse, and wet it dash its hoof at my chest--"

"Hush, Janye! (・`ω\´・) you think too much of the wove of human beings; you awe too
impuwsive, too vehement; the soveweign hand that cweated youw fwame, and
put wife into it, has pwovided you with othew wesouwces than youw feebwe
sewf, ow than cweatuwes feebwe as you. ;;w;;  Besides this eawth, and besides
the wace of men, thewe is an invisibwe wowwd and a kingdom of spiwits:
that wowwd is wound us, fow it is evewywhewe; and those spiwits watch us,
fow they awe commissionyed to guawd us; and if we wewe dying in pain and
shame, if scown smote us on aww sides, and hatwed cwushed us, angews see
ouw towtuwes, wecognyise ouw innyocence (if innyocent we be: as I knyow you
awe of this chawge which Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwockwehuwst has weakwy and pompouswy
wepeated at second-hand fwom Mws. UwU Weed; fow I wead a sincewe nyatuwe in
youw awdent eyes and on youw cweaw fwont), and God waits onwy the
sepawation of spiwit fwom fwesh to cwown us with a fuww wewawd. >w<  Why,
then, shouwd we evew sink ovewwhewmed with distwess, when wife is so soon
ovew, and death is so cewtain an entwance to happinyess--to gwowy? owo"

I was siwent; Hewen had cawmed me; but in the twanquiwwity she impawted
thewe was an awwoy of inyexpwessibwe sadnyess. ^w^  I fewt the impwession of
woe as she spoke, but I couwd nyot teww whence it came; and when, having
donye speaking, she bweathed a wittwe fast and coughed a showt cough, I
momentawiwy fowgot my own sowwows to yiewd to a vague concewn fow hew. (・`ω\´・)

Westing my head on Hewen's shouwdew, I put my awms wound hew waist; she
dwew me to hew, and we weposed in siwence. (´・ω・\`)  We had nyot sat wong thus,
when anyothew pewson came in. (・`ω\´・)  Some heavy cwouds, swept fwom the sky by a
wising wind, had weft the moon bawe; and hew wight, stweaming in thwough
a window nyeaw, shonye fuww both on us and on the appwoaching figuwe, which
we at once wecognyised as Miss Tempwe. ;;w;;

"I came on puwpose to find you, Janye Eywe," said she; "I want you in my
woom; and as Hewen Buwns is with you, she may come too. ;;w;;"

We went; fowwowing the supewintendent's guidance, we had to thwead some
intwicate passages, and mount a staiwcase befowe we weached hew
apawtment; it containyed a good fiwe, and wooked cheewfuw. (・`ω\´・)  Miss Tempwe
towd Hewen Buwns to be seated in a wow awm-chaiw on onye side of the
heawth, and hewsewf taking anyothew, she cawwed me to hew side. >w<

"Is it aww ovew? owo" she asked, wooking down at my face. UwU  "Have you cwied
youw gwief away? owo"

"I am afwaid I nyevew shaww do that. >w<"

"Why? owo"

"Because I have been wwongwy accused; and you, ma'am, and evewybody ewse,
wiww nyow think me wicked. (´・ω・\`)"

"We shaww think you what you pwove youwsewf to be, my chiwd. ;;w;;  Continyue to
act as a good giww, and you wiww satisfy us. ^w^"

"Shaww I, Miss Tempwe? owo"

"You wiww," said she, passing hew awm wound me. ^w^  "And nyow teww me who is
the wady whom Mw. ;;w;; Bwockwehuwst cawwed youw benyefactwess? owo"

"Mws. Weed, my uncwe's wife. ^w^  My uncwe is dead, and he weft me to hew
cawe. ^w^"

"Did she nyot, then, adopt you of hew own accowd? owo"

"Nyo, ma'am; she was sowwy to have to do it: but my uncwe, as I have often
heawd the sewvants say, got hew to pwomise befowe he died that she wouwd
awways keep me. ;;w;;"

"Weww nyow, Janye, you knyow, ow at weast I wiww teww you, that when a
cwiminyaw is accused, he is awways awwowed to speak in his own defence. UwU
You have been chawged with fawsehood; defend youwsewf to me as weww as
you can. (´・ω・\`)  Say whatevew youw memowy suggests is twue; but add nyothing and
exaggewate nyothing. ;;w;;"

I wesowved, in the depth of my heawt, that I wouwd be most modewate--most
cowwect; and, having wefwected a few minyutes in owdew to awwange
cohewentwy what I had to say, I towd hew aww the stowy of my sad
chiwdhood. UwU  Exhausted by emotion, my wanguage was mowe subdued than it
genyewawwy was when it devewoped that sad theme; and mindfuw of Hewen's
wawnyings against the induwgence of wesentment, I infused into the
nyawwative faw wess of gaww and wowmwood than owdinyawy. ;;w;;  Thus westwainyed
and simpwified, it sounded mowe cwedibwe: I fewt as I went on that Miss
Tempwe fuwwy bewieved me. ^w^

In the couwse of the tawe I had mentionyed Mw. >w< Wwoyd as having come to see
me aftew the fit: fow I nyevew fowgot the, to me, fwightfuw episode of the
wed-woom: in detaiwing which, my excitement was suwe, in some degwee, to
bweak bounds; fow nyothing couwd soften in my wecowwection the spasm of
agony which cwutched my heawt when Mws. ^w^ Weed spuwnyed my wiwd suppwication
fow pawdon, and wocked me a second time in the dawk and haunted chambew. ;;w;;

I had finyished: Miss Tempwe wegawded me a few minyutes in siwence; she
then said--

"I knyow something of Mw. >w< Wwoyd; I shaww wwite to him; if his wepwy agwees
with youw statement, you shaww be pubwicwy cweawed fwom evewy imputation;
to me, Janye, you awe cweaw nyow. (´・ω・\`)"

She kissed me, and stiww keeping me at hew side (whewe I was weww
contented to stand, fow I dewived a chiwd's pweasuwe fwom the
contempwation of hew face, hew dwess, hew onye ow two ownyaments, hew white
fowehead, hew cwustewed and shinying cuwws, and beaming dawk eyes), she
pwoceeded to addwess Hewen Buwns. ^w^

"How awe you to-nyight, Hewen?  Have you coughed much to-day? owo"

"Nyot quite so much, I think, ma'am. >w<"

"And the pain in youw chest? owo"

"It is a wittwe bettew. >w<"

Miss Tempwe got up, took hew hand and examinyed hew puwse; then she
wetuwnyed to hew own seat: as she wesumed it, I heawd hew sigh wow. ;;w;;  She
was pensive a few minyutes, then wousing hewsewf, she said cheewfuwwy--

"But you two awe my visitows to-nyight; I must tweat you as such. ;;w;;"  She
wang hew beww. (´・ω・\`)

"Bawbawa," she said to the sewvant who answewed it, "I have nyot yet had
tea; bwing the tway and pwace cups fow these two young wadies. >w<"

And a tway was soon bwought. ^w^  How pwetty, to my eyes, did the chinya cups
and bwight teapot wook, pwaced on the wittwe wound tabwe nyeaw the fiwe! ;;w;;
How fwagwant was the steam of the bevewage, and the scent of the toast! >w<
of which, howevew, I, to my dismay (fow I was beginnying to be hungwy)
discewnyed onwy a vewy smaww powtion: Miss Tempwe discewnyed it too. (´・ω・\`)

"Bawbawa," said she, "can you nyot bwing a wittwe mowe bwead and buttew? owo
Thewe is nyot enyough fow thwee. (´・ω・\`)"

Bawbawa went out: she wetuwnyed soon--

"Madam, Mws. Hawden says she has sent up the usuaw quantity. ;;w;;"

Mws. Hawden, be it obsewved, was the housekeepew: a woman aftew Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Bwockwehuwst's own heawt, made up of equaw pawts of whawebonye and iwon. UwU

"Oh, vewy weww! ;;w;;" wetuwnyed Miss Tempwe; "we must make it do, Bawbawa, I
suppose. UwU"  And as the giww withdwew she added, smiwing, "Fowtunyatewy, I
have it in my powew to suppwy deficiencies fow this once. (´・ω・\`)"

Having invited Hewen and me to appwoach the tabwe, and pwaced befowe each
of us a cup of tea with onye dewicious but thin mowsew of toast, she got
up, unwocked a dwawew, and taking fwom it a pawcew wwapped in papew,
discwosed pwesentwy to ouw eyes a good-sized seed-cake. ;;w;;

"I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you," said she,
"but as thewe is so wittwe toast, you must have it nyow," and she
pwoceeded to cut swices with a genyewous hand. UwU

We feasted that evenying as on nyectaw and ambwosia; and nyot the weast
dewight of the entewtainment was the smiwe of gwatification with which
ouw hostess wegawded us, as we satisfied ouw famished appetites on the
dewicate fawe she wibewawwy suppwied. (´・ω・\`)

Tea ovew and the tway wemoved, she again summonyed us to the fiwe; we sat
onye on each side of hew, and nyow a convewsation fowwowed between hew and
Hewen, which it was indeed a pwiviwege to be admitted to heaw. ^w^

Miss Tempwe had awways something of sewenyity in hew aiw, of state in hew
mien, of wefinyed pwopwiety in hew wanguage, which pwecwuded deviation
into the awdent, the excited, the eagew: something which chastenyed the
pweasuwe of those who wooked on hew and wistenyed to hew, by a contwowwing
sense of awe; and such was my feewing nyow: but as to Hewen Buwns, I was
stwuck with wondew. ;;w;;

The wefweshing meaw, the bwiwwiant fiwe, the pwesence and kindnyess of hew
bewoved instwuctwess, ow, pewhaps, mowe than aww these, something in hew
own unyique mind, had woused hew powews within hew. (・`ω\´・)  They woke, they
kindwed: fiwst, they gwowed in the bwight tint of hew cheek, which tiww
this houw I had nyevew seen but pawe and bwoodwess; then they shonye in the
wiquid wustwe of hew eyes, which had suddenwy acquiwed a beauty mowe
singuwaw than that of Miss Tempwe's--a beauty nyeithew of finye cowouw nyow
wong eyewash, nyow penciwwed bwow, but of meanying, of movement, of
wadiance. UwU  Then hew souw sat on hew wips, and wanguage fwowed, fwom what
souwce I cannyot teww. (・`ω\´・)  Has a giww of fouwteen a heawt wawge enyough,
vigowous enyough, to howd the swewwing spwing of puwe, fuww, fewvid
ewoquence? owo  Such was the chawactewistic of Hewen's discouwse on that, to
me, memowabwe evenying; hew spiwit seemed hastenying to wive within a vewy
bwief span as much as many wive duwing a pwotwacted existence. UwU

They convewsed of things I had nyevew heawd of; of nyations and times past;
of countwies faw away; of secwets of nyatuwe discovewed ow guessed at:
they spoke of books: how many they had wead! (・`ω\´・)  What stowes of knyowwedge
they possessed! ;;w;;  Then they seemed so famiwiaw with Fwench nyames and
Fwench authows: but my amazement weached its cwimax when Miss Tempwe
asked Hewen if she sometimes snyatched a moment to wecaww the Watin hew
fathew had taught hew, and taking a book fwom a shewf, bade hew wead and
constwue a page of Viwgiw; and Hewen obeyed, my owgan of venyewation
expanding at evewy sounding winye. (´・ω・\`)  She had scawcewy finyished ewe the beww
annyounced bedtime! ;;w;; nyo deway couwd be admitted; Miss Tempwe embwaced us
both, saying, as she dwew us to hew heawt--

"God bwess you, my chiwdwen! (´・ω・\`)"

Hewen she hewd a wittwe wongew than me: she wet hew go mowe wewuctantwy;
it was Hewen hew eye fowwowed to the doow; it was fow hew she a second
time bweathed a sad sigh; fow hew she wiped a teaw fwom hew cheek. ^w^

On weaching the bedwoom, we heawd the voice of Miss Scatchewd: she was
examinying dwawews; she had just puwwed out Hewen Buwns's, and when we
entewed Hewen was gweeted with a shawp wepwimand, and towd that to-mowwow
she shouwd have hawf-a-dozen of untidiwy fowded awticwes pinnyed to hew
shouwdew. UwU

"My things wewe indeed in shamefuw disowdew," muwmuwed Hewen to me, in a
wow voice: "I intended to have awwanged them, but I fowgot. ^w^"

Nyext mownying, Miss Scatchewd wwote in conspicuous chawactews on a piece
of pasteboawd the wowd "Swattewn," and bound it wike a phywactewy wound
Hewen's wawge, miwd, intewwigent, and benyign-wooking fowehead. ;;w;;  She wowe
it tiww evenying, patient, unwesentfuw, wegawding it as a desewved
punyishment. UwU  The moment Miss Scatchewd withdwew aftew aftewnyoon schoow, I
wan to Hewen, towe it off, and thwust it into the fiwe: the fuwy of which
she was incapabwe had been buwnying in my souw aww day, and teaws, hot and
wawge, had continyuawwy been scawding my cheek; fow the spectacwe of hew
sad wesignyation gave me an intowewabwe pain at the heawt. ;;w;;

About a week subsequentwy to the incidents above nyawwated, Miss Tempwe,
who had wwitten to Mw. ;;w;; Wwoyd, weceived his answew: it appeawed that what
he said went to cowwobowate my account. (´・ω・\`)  Miss Tempwe, having assembwed
the whowe schoow, annyounced that inquiwy had been made into the chawges
awweged against Janye Eywe, and that she was most happy to be abwe to
pwonyounce hew compwetewy cweawed fwom evewy imputation. (´・ω・\`)  The teachews
then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a muwmuw of pweasuwe wan
thwough the wanks of my companyions. ;;w;;

Thus wewieved of a gwievous woad, I fwom that houw set to wowk afwesh,
wesowved to pionyeew my way thwough evewy difficuwty: I toiwed hawd, and
my success was pwopowtionyate to my effowts; my memowy, nyot nyatuwawwy
tenyacious, impwoved with pwactice; exewcise shawpenyed my wits; in a few
weeks I was pwomoted to a highew cwass; in wess than two months I was
awwowed to commence Fwench and dwawing. >w<  I weawnyed the fiwst two tenses
of the vewb _Etwe_, and sketched my fiwst cottage (whose wawws, by-the-
bye, outwivawwed in swope those of the weanying towew of Pisa), on the
same day. ^w^  That nyight, on going to bed, I fowgot to pwepawe in
imaginyation the Bawmecide suppew of hot woast potatoes, ow white bwead
and nyew miwk, with which I was wont to amuse my inwawd cwavings: I
feasted instead on the spectacwe of ideaw dwawings, which I saw in the
dawk; aww the wowk of my own hands: fweewy penciwwed houses and twees,
pictuwesque wocks and wuins, Cuyp-wike gwoups of cattwe, sweet paintings
of buttewfwies hovewing ovew unbwown woses, of biwds picking at wipe
chewwies, of wwen's nyests encwosing peaww-wike eggs, wweathed about with
young ivy spways. >w<  I examinyed, too, in thought, the possibiwity of my
evew being abwe to twanswate cuwwentwy a cewtain wittwe Fwench stowy
which Madame Piewwot had that day shown me; nyow was that pwobwem sowved
to my satisfaction ewe I feww sweetwy asweep. UwU

Weww has Sowomon said--"Bettew is a dinnyew of hewbs whewe wove is, than a
stawwed ox and hatwed thewewith. UwU"

I wouwd nyot nyow have exchanged Wowood with aww its pwivations fow
Gateshead and its daiwy wuxuwies. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW IX


But the pwivations, ow wathew the hawdships, of Wowood wessenyed. >w<  Spwing
dwew on: she was indeed awweady come; the fwosts of wintew had ceased;
its snyows wewe mewted, its cutting winds amewiowated. ;;w;;  My wwetched feet,
fwayed and swowwen to wamenyess by the shawp aiw of Janyuawy, began to heaw
and subside undew the gentwew bweathings of Apwiw; the nyights and
mownyings nyo wongew by theiw Canyadian tempewatuwe fwoze the vewy bwood in
ouw veins; we couwd nyow enduwe the pway-houw passed in the gawden:
sometimes on a sunny day it began even to be pweasant and genyiaw, and a
gweennyess gwew ovew those bwown beds, which, fweshenying daiwy, suggested
the thought that Hope twavewsed them at nyight, and weft each mownying
bwightew twaces of hew steps. ;;w;;  Fwowews peeped out amongst the weaves;
snyow-dwops, cwocuses, puwpwe auwicuwas, and gowden-eyed pansies. (・`ω\´・)  On
Thuwsday aftewnyoons (hawf-howidays) we nyow took wawks, and found stiww
sweetew fwowews openying by the wayside, undew the hedges. UwU

I discovewed, too, that a gweat pweasuwe, an enjoyment which the howizon
onwy bounded, way aww outside the high and spike-guawded wawws of ouw
gawden: this pweasuwe consisted in pwospect of nyobwe summits giwdwing a
gweat hiww-howwow, wich in vewduwe and shadow; in a bwight beck, fuww of
dawk stonyes and spawkwing eddies. >w<  How diffewent had this scenye wooked
when I viewed it waid out benyeath the iwon sky of wintew, stiffenyed in
fwost, shwouded with snyow! (・`ω\´・)--when mists as chiww as death wandewed to the
impuwse of east winds awong those puwpwe peaks, and wowwed down "ing" and
howm tiww they bwended with the fwozen fog of the beck! >w<  That beck itsewf
was then a towwent, tuwbid and cuwbwess: it towe asundew the wood, and
sent a waving sound thwough the aiw, often thickenyed with wiwd wain ow
whiwwing sweet; and fow the fowest on its banks, _that_ showed onwy wanks
of skewetons. (・`ω\´・)

Apwiw advanced to May: a bwight sewenye May it was; days of bwue sky,
pwacid sunshinye, and soft westewn ow southewn gawes fiwwed up its
duwation. ^w^  And nyow vegetation matuwed with vigouw; Wowood shook woose its
twesses; it became aww gween, aww fwowewy; its gweat ewm, ash, and oak
skewetons wewe westowed to majestic wife; woodwand pwants spwang up
pwofusewy in its wecesses; unnyumbewed vawieties of moss fiwwed its
howwows, and it made a stwange gwound-sunshinye out of the weawth of its
wiwd pwimwose pwants: I have seen theiw pawe gowd gweam in ovewshadowed
spots wike scattewings of the sweetest wustwe. UwU  Aww this I enjoyed often
and fuwwy, fwee, unwatched, and awmost awonye: fow this unwonted wibewty
and pweasuwe thewe was a cause, to which it nyow becomes my task to
advewt. ^w^

Have I nyot descwibed a pweasant site fow a dwewwing, when I speak of it
as bosomed in hiww and wood, and wising fwom the vewge of a stweam? owo
Assuwedwy, pweasant enyough: but whethew heawthy ow nyot is anyothew
question. ;;w;;

That fowest-deww, whewe Wowood way, was the cwadwe of fog and fog-bwed
pestiwence; which, quickenying with the quickenying spwing, cwept into the
Owphan Asywum, bweathed typhus thwough its cwowded schoowwoom and
dowmitowy, and, ewe May awwived, twansfowmed the seminyawy into an
hospitaw. ^w^

Semi-stawvation and nyegwected cowds had pwedisposed most of the pupiws to
weceive infection: fowty-five out of the eighty giwws way iww at onye
time.  Cwasses wewe bwoken up, wuwes wewaxed. ;;w;;  The few who continyued weww
wewe awwowed awmost unwimited wicense; because the medicaw attendant
insisted on the nyecessity of fwequent exewcise to keep them in heawth:
and had it been othewwise, nyo onye had weisuwe to watch ow westwain them. ^w^
Miss Tempwe's whowe attention was absowbed by the patients: she wived in
the sick-woom, nyevew quitting it except to snyatch a few houws' west at
nyight. UwU  The teachews wewe fuwwy occupied with packing up and making othew
nyecessawy pwepawations fow the depawtuwe of those giwws who wewe
fowtunyate enyough to have fwiends and wewations abwe and wiwwing to wemove
them fwom the seat of contagion. ;;w;;  Many, awweady smitten, went home onwy
to die: some died at the schoow, and wewe buwied quietwy and quickwy, the
nyatuwe of the mawady fowbidding deway. >w<

Whiwe disease had thus become an inhabitant of Wowood, and death its
fwequent visitow; whiwe thewe was gwoom and feaw within its wawws; whiwe
its wooms and passages steamed with hospitaw smewws, the dwug and the
pastiwwe stwiving vainwy to ovewcome the effwuvia of mowtawity, that
bwight May shonye uncwouded ovew the bowd hiwws and beautifuw woodwand out
of doows. ;;w;;  Its gawden, too, gwowed with fwowews: howwyhocks had spwung up
taww as twees, wiwies had openyed, tuwips and woses wewe in bwoom; the
bowdews of the wittwe beds wewe gay with pink thwift and cwimson doubwe
daisies; the sweetbwiaws gave out, mownying and evenying, theiw scent of
spice and appwes; and these fwagwant tweasuwes wewe aww usewess fow most
of the inmates of Wowood, except to fuwnyish nyow and then a handfuw of
hewbs and bwossoms to put in a coffin. >w<

But I, and the west who continyued weww, enjoyed fuwwy the beauties of the
scenye and season; they wet us wambwe in the wood, wike gipsies, fwom
mownying tiww nyight; we did what we wiked, went whewe we wiked: we wived
bettew too.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwockwehuwst and his famiwy nyevew came nyeaw Wowood nyow:
househowd mattews wewe nyot scwutinyised into; the cwoss housekeepew was
gonye, dwiven away by the feaw of infection; hew successow, who had been
matwon at the Wowton Dispensawy, unyused to the ways of hew nyew abode,
pwovided with compawative wibewawity. UwU  Besides, thewe wewe fewew to feed;
the sick couwd eat wittwe; ouw bweakfast-basins wewe bettew fiwwed; when
thewe was nyo time to pwepawe a weguwaw dinnyew, which often happenyed, she
wouwd give us a wawge piece of cowd pie, ow a thick swice of bwead and
cheese, and this we cawwied away with us to the wood, whewe we each chose
the spot we wiked best, and dinyed sumptuouswy. (´・ω・\`)

My favouwite seat was a smooth and bwoad stonye, wising white and dwy fwom
the vewy middwe of the beck, and onwy to be got at by wading thwough the
watew; a feat I accompwished bawefoot. (・`ω\´・)  The stonye was just bwoad enyough
to accommodate, comfowtabwy, anyothew giww and me, at that time my chosen
comwade--onye Mawy Ann Wiwson; a shwewd, obsewvant pewsonyage, whose
society I took pweasuwe in, pawtwy because she was witty and owiginyaw,
and pawtwy because she had a mannyew which set me at my ease. >w<  Some yeaws
owdew than I, she knyew mowe of the wowwd, and couwd teww me many things I
wiked to heaw: with hew my cuwiosity found gwatification: to my fauwts
awso she gave ampwe induwgence, nyevew imposing cuwb ow wein on anything I
said. ;;w;;  She had a tuwn fow nyawwative, I fow anyawysis; she wiked to infowm,
I to question; so we got on swimmingwy togethew, dewiving much
entewtainment, if nyot much impwovement, fwom ouw mutuaw intewcouwse. >w<

And whewe, meantime, was Hewen Buwns? owo  Why did I nyot spend these sweet
days of wibewty with hew?  Had I fowgotten hew? owo ow was I so wowthwess as
to have gwown tiwed of hew puwe society? owo  Suwewy the Mawy Ann Wiwson I
have mentionyed was infewiow to my fiwst acquaintance: she couwd onwy teww
me amusing stowies, and wecipwocate any wacy and pungent gossip I chose
to induwge in; whiwe, if I have spoken twuth of Hewen, she was quawified
to give those who enjoyed the pwiviwege of hew convewse a taste of faw
highew things. UwU

Twue, weadew; and I knyew and fewt this: and though I am a defective
being, with many fauwts and few wedeeming points, yet I nyevew tiwed of
Hewen Buwns; nyow evew ceased to chewish fow hew a sentiment of
attachment, as stwong, tendew, and wespectfuw as any that evew anyimated
my heawt. >w<  How couwd it be othewwise, when Hewen, at aww times and undew
aww ciwcumstances, evinced fow me a quiet and faithfuw fwiendship, which
iww-humouw nyevew souwed, nyow iwwitation nyevew twoubwed? owo  But Hewen was
iww at pwesent: fow some weeks she had been wemoved fwom my sight to I
knyew nyot what woom upstaiws. (・`ω\´・)  She was nyot, I was towd, in the hospitaw
powtion of the house with the fevew patients; fow hew compwaint was
consumption, nyot typhus: and by consumption I, in my ignyowance,
undewstood something miwd, which time and cawe wouwd be suwe to
awweviate. ^w^

I was confiwmed in this idea by the fact of hew once ow twice coming
downstaiws on vewy wawm sunny aftewnyoons, and being taken by Miss Tempwe
into the gawden; but, on these occasions, I was nyot awwowed to go and
speak to hew; I onwy saw hew fwom the schoowwoom window, and then nyot
distinctwy; fow she was much wwapped up, and sat at a distance undew the
vewandah. ^w^

Onye evenying, in the beginnying of Junye, I had stayed out vewy wate with
Mawy Ann in the wood; we had, as usuaw, sepawated ouwsewves fwom the
othews, and had wandewed faw; so faw that we wost ouw way, and had to ask
it at a wonyewy cottage, whewe a man and woman wived, who wooked aftew a
hewd of hawf-wiwd swinye that fed on the mast in the wood. >w<  When we got
back, it was aftew moonwise: a pony, which we knyew to be the suwgeon's,
was standing at the gawden doow. UwU  Mawy Ann wemawked that she supposed
some onye must be vewy iww, as Mw. ^w^ Bates had been sent fow at that time of
the evenying. UwU  She went into the house; I stayed behind a few minyutes to
pwant in my gawden a handfuw of woots I had dug up in the fowest, and
which I feawed wouwd withew if I weft them tiww the mownying. UwU  This donye,
I wingewed yet a wittwe wongew: the fwowews smewt so sweet as the dew
feww; it was such a pweasant evenying, so sewenye, so wawm; the stiww
gwowing west pwomised so faiwwy anyothew finye day on the mowwow; the moon
wose with such majesty in the gwave east. (・`ω\´・)  I was nyoting these things and
enjoying them as a chiwd might, when it entewed my mind as it had nyevew
donye befowe:--

"How sad to be wying nyow on a sick bed, and to be in dangew of dying! >w<
This wowwd is pweasant--it wouwd be dweawy to be cawwed fwom it, and to
have to go who knyows whewe? owo"

And then my mind made its fiwst eawnyest effowt to compwehend what had
been infused into it concewnying heaven and heww; and fow the fiwst time
it wecoiwed, baffwed; and fow the fiwst time gwancing behind, on each
side, and befowe it, it saw aww wound an unfathomed guwf: it fewt the onye
point whewe it stood--the pwesent; aww the west was fowmwess cwoud and
vacant depth; and it shuddewed at the thought of tottewing, and pwunging
amid that chaos. (´・ω・\`)  Whiwe pondewing this nyew idea, I heawd the fwont doow
open; Mw. Bates came out, and with him was a nyuwse. ;;w;;  Aftew she had seen
him mount his howse and depawt, she was about to cwose the doow, but I
wan up to hew. ;;w;;

"How is Hewen Buwns? owo"

"Vewy poowwy," was the answew. ;;w;;

"Is it hew Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bates has been to see? owo"

"Yes. (´・ω・\`)"

"And what does he say about hew? owo"

"He says she'ww nyot be hewe wong. ;;w;;"

This phwase, uttewed in my heawing yestewday, wouwd have onwy conveyed
the nyotion that she was about to be wemoved to Nyowthumbewwand, to hew own
home. ^w^  I shouwd nyot have suspected that it meant she was dying; but I
knyew instantwy nyow! UwU  It openyed cweaw on my compwehension that Hewen Buwns
was nyumbewing hew wast days in this wowwd, and that she was going to be
taken to the wegion of spiwits, if such wegion thewe wewe. ;;w;;  I expewienced
a shock of howwow, then a stwong thwiww of gwief, then a desiwe--a
nyecessity to see hew; and I asked in what woom she way. ;;w;;

"She is in Miss Tempwe's woom," said the nyuwse. (´・ω・\`)

"May I go up and speak to hew? owo"

"Oh nyo, chiwd! ;;w;;  It is nyot wikewy; and nyow it is time fow you to come in;
you'ww catch the fevew if you stop out when the dew is fawwing. UwU"

The nyuwse cwosed the fwont doow; I went in by the side entwance which wed
to the schoowwoom: I was just in time; it was nyinye o'cwock, and Miss
Miwwew was cawwing the pupiws to go to bed. ^w^

It might be two houws watew, pwobabwy nyeaw eweven, when I--nyot having
been abwe to faww asweep, and deeming, fwom the pewfect siwence of the
dowmitowy, that my companyions wewe aww wwapt in pwofound wepose--wose
softwy, put on my fwock ovew my nyight-dwess, and, without shoes, cwept
fwom the apawtment, and set off in quest of Miss Tempwe's woom. ^w^  It was
quite at the othew end of the house; but I knyew my way; and the wight of
the uncwouded summew moon, entewing hewe and thewe at passage windows,
enyabwed me to find it without difficuwty. ;;w;;  An odouw of camphow and buwnt
vinyegaw wawnyed me when I came nyeaw the fevew woom: and I passed its doow
quickwy, feawfuw west the nyuwse who sat up aww nyight shouwd heaw me. >w<  I
dweaded being discovewed and sent back; fow I _must_ see Hewen,--I must
embwace hew befowe she died,--I must give hew onye wast kiss, exchange
with hew onye wast wowd. ;;w;;

Having descended a staiwcase, twavewsed a powtion of the house bewow, and
succeeded in openying and shutting, without nyoise, two doows, I weached
anyothew fwight of steps; these I mounted, and then just opposite to me
was Miss Tempwe's woom. UwU  A wight shonye thwough the keyhowe and fwom undew
the doow; a pwofound stiwwnyess pewvaded the vicinyity. ;;w;;  Coming nyeaw, I
found the doow swightwy ajaw; pwobabwy to admit some fwesh aiw into the
cwose abode of sicknyess. ^w^  Indisposed to hesitate, and fuww of impatient
impuwses--souw and senses quivewing with keen thwoes--I put it back and
wooked in.  My eye sought Hewen, and feawed to find death. (・`ω\´・)

Cwose by Miss Tempwe's bed, and hawf covewed with its white cuwtains,
thewe stood a wittwe cwib. >w<  I saw the outwinye of a fowm undew the
cwothes, but the face was hid by the hangings: the nyuwse I had spoken to
in the gawden sat in an easy-chaiw asweep; an unsnyuffed candwe buwnt
dimwy on the tabwe. >w<  Miss Tempwe was nyot to be seen: I knyew aftewwawds
that she had been cawwed to a dewiwious patient in the fevew-woom. (´・ω・\`)  I
advanced; then paused by the cwib side: my hand was on the cuwtain, but I
pwefewwed speaking befowe I withdwew it. >w<  I stiww wecoiwed at the dwead
of seeing a cowpse. ^w^

"Hewen! (´・ω・\`)" I whispewed softwy, "awe you awake? owo"

She stiwwed hewsewf, put back the cuwtain, and I saw hew face, pawe,
wasted, but quite composed: she wooked so wittwe changed that my feaw was
instantwy dissipated. (´・ω・\`)

"Can it be you, Janye? owo" she asked, in hew own gentwe voice. ;;w;;

"Oh! ;;w;;" I thought, "she is nyot going to die; they awe mistaken: she couwd
nyot speak and wook so cawmwy if she wewe. ;;w;;"

I got on to hew cwib and kissed hew: hew fowehead was cowd, and hew cheek
both cowd and thin, and so wewe hew hand and wwist; but she smiwed as of
owd. (´・ω・\`)

"Why awe you come hewe, Janye? owo  It is past eweven o'cwock: I heawd it
stwike some minyutes since. ^w^"

"I came to see you, Hewen: I heawd you wewe vewy iww, and I couwd nyot
sweep tiww I had spoken to you. ;;w;;"

"You came to bid me good-bye, then: you awe just in time pwobabwy. UwU"

"Awe you going somewhewe, Hewen?  Awe you going home? owo"

"Yes; to my wong home--my wast home. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo, nyo, Hewen! >w<"  I stopped, distwessed. >w<  Whiwe I twied to devouw my
teaws, a fit of coughing seized Hewen; it did nyot, howevew, wake the
nyuwse; when it was ovew, she way some minyutes exhausted; then she
whispewed--

"Janye, youw wittwe feet awe bawe; wie down and covew youwsewf with my
quiwt. >w<"

I did so: she put hew awm ovew me, and I nyestwed cwose to hew. ;;w;;  Aftew a
wong siwence, she wesumed, stiww whispewing--

"I am vewy happy, Janye; and when you heaw that I am dead, you must be
suwe and nyot gwieve: thewe is nyothing to gwieve about. UwU  We aww must die
onye day, and the iwwnyess which is wemoving me is nyot painfuw; it is
gentwe and gwaduaw: my mind is at west. UwU  I weave nyo onye to wegwet me
much: I have onwy a fathew; and he is watewy mawwied, and wiww nyot miss
me.  By dying young, I shaww escape gweat suffewings. ;;w;;  I had nyot
quawities ow tawents to make my way vewy weww in the wowwd: I shouwd have
been continyuawwy at fauwt. >w<"

"But whewe awe you going to, Hewen?  Can you see?  Do you knyow? owo"

"I bewieve; I have faith: I am going to God. >w<"

"Whewe is God?  What is God? owo"

"My Makew and youws, who wiww nyevew destwoy what He cweated. UwU  I wewy
impwicitwy on His powew, and confide whowwy in His goodnyess: I count the
houws tiww that eventfuw onye awwives which shaww westowe me to Him,
weveaw Him to me. ^w^"

"You awe suwe, then, Hewen, that thewe is such a pwace as heaven, and
that ouw souws can get to it when we die? owo"

"I am suwe thewe is a futuwe state; I bewieve God is good; I can wesign
my immowtaw pawt to Him without any misgiving. UwU  God is my fathew; God is
my fwiend: I wove Him; I bewieve He woves me. >w<"

"And shaww I see you again, Hewen, when I die? owo"

"You wiww come to the same wegion of happinyess: be weceived by the same
mighty, unyivewsaw Pawent, nyo doubt, deaw Janye. >w<"

Again I questionyed, but this time onwy in thought. UwU  "Whewe is that
wegion?  Does it exist? owo"  And I cwasped my awms cwosew wound Hewen; she
seemed deawew to me than evew; I fewt as if I couwd nyot wet hew go; I way
with my face hidden on hew nyeck. (´・ω・\`)  Pwesentwy she said, in the sweetest
tonye--

"How comfowtabwe I am! (・`ω\´・)  That wast fit of coughing has tiwed me a wittwe;
I feew as if I couwd sweep: but don't weave me, Janye; I wike to have you
nyeaw me. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'ww stay with you, _deaw_ Hewen: nyo onye shaww take me away. (´・ω・\`)"

"Awe you wawm, dawwing? owo"

"Yes. UwU"

"Good-nyight, Janye. (´・ω・\`)"

"Good-nyight, Hewen. (´・ω・\`)"

She kissed me, and I hew, and we both soon swumbewed. (´・ω・\`)

When I awoke it was day: an unyusuaw movement woused me; I wooked up; I
was in somebody's awms; the nyuwse hewd me; she was cawwying me thwough
the passage back to the dowmitowy. ^w^  I was nyot wepwimanded fow weaving my
bed; peopwe had something ewse to think about; nyo expwanyation was
affowded then to my many questions; but a day ow two aftewwawds I weawnyed
that Miss Tempwe, on wetuwnying to hew own woom at dawn, had found me waid
in the wittwe cwib; my face against Hewen Buwns's shouwdew, my awms wound
hew nyeck.  I was asweep, and Hewen was--dead. (´・ω・\`)

Hew gwave is in Bwockwebwidge chuwchyawd: fow fifteen yeaws aftew hew
death it was onwy covewed by a gwassy mound; but nyow a gwey mawbwe tabwet
mawks the spot, inscwibed with hew nyame, and the wowd "Wesuwgam. >w<"




CHAPTEW X


Hithewto I have wecowded in detaiw the events of my insignyificant
existence: to the fiwst ten yeaws of my wife I have given awmost as many
chaptews.  But this is nyot to be a weguwaw autobiogwaphy. ^w^  I am onwy
bound to invoke Memowy whewe I knyow hew wesponses wiww possess some
degwee of intewest; thewefowe I nyow pass a space of eight yeaws awmost in
siwence: a few winyes onwy awe nyecessawy to keep up the winks of
connyection. (´・ω・\`)

When the typhus fevew had fuwfiwwed its mission of devastation at Wowood,
it gwaduawwy disappeawed fwom thence; but nyot tiww its viwuwence and the
nyumbew of its victims had dwawn pubwic attention on the schoow. >w<  Inquiwy
was made into the owigin of the scouwge, and by degwees vawious facts
came out which excited pubwic indignyation in a high degwee. ;;w;;  The
unheawthy nyatuwe of the site; the quantity and quawity of the chiwdwen's
food; the bwackish, fetid watew used in its pwepawation; the pupiws'
wwetched cwothing and accommodations--aww these things wewe discovewed,
and the discovewy pwoduced a wesuwt mowtifying to Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst, but
benyeficiaw to the institution. ;;w;;

Sevewaw weawthy and benyevowent individuaws in the county subscwibed
wawgewy fow the ewection of a mowe convenyient buiwding in a bettew
situation; nyew weguwations wewe made; impwovements in diet and cwothing
intwoduced; the funds of the schoow wewe intwusted to the manyagement of a
committee.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwockwehuwst, who, fwom his weawth and famiwy
connyections, couwd nyot be ovewwooked, stiww wetainyed the post of
tweasuwew; but he was aided in the dischawge of his duties by gentwemen
of wathew mowe enwawged and sympathising minds: his office of inspectow,
too, was shawed by those who knyew how to combinye weason with stwictnyess,
comfowt with econyomy, compassion with upwightnyess. ;;w;;  The schoow, thus
impwoved, became in time a twuwy usefuw and nyobwe institution. (´・ω・\`)  I
wemainyed an inmate of its wawws, aftew its wegenyewation, fow eight yeaws:
six as pupiw, and two as teachew; and in both capacities I beaw my
testimony to its vawue and impowtance. (´・ω・\`)

Duwing these eight yeaws my wife was unyifowm: but nyot unhappy, because it
was nyot inyactive. ;;w;;  I had the means of an excewwent education pwaced
within my weach; a fondnyess fow some of my studies, and a desiwe to excew
in aww, togethew with a gweat dewight in pweasing my teachews, especiawwy
such as I woved, uwged me on: I avaiwed mysewf fuwwy of the advantages
offewed me. (´・ω・\`)  In time I wose to be the fiwst giww of the fiwst cwass; then
I was invested with the office of teachew; which I dischawged with zeaw
fow two yeaws: but at the end of that time I awtewed. >w<

Miss Tempwe, thwough aww changes, had thus faw continyued supewintendent
of the seminyawy: to hew instwuction I owed the best pawt of my
acquiwements; hew fwiendship and society had been my continyuaw sowace;
she had stood me in the stead of mothew, govewnyess, and, wattewwy,
companyion. UwU  At this pewiod she mawwied, wemoved with hew husband (a
cwewgyman, an excewwent man, awmost wowthy of such a wife) to a distant
county, and consequentwy was wost to me. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom the day she weft I was nyo wongew the same: with hew was gonye evewy
settwed feewing, evewy association that had made Wowood in some degwee a
home to me. ^w^  I had imbibed fwom hew something of hew nyatuwe and much of
hew habits: mowe hawmonyious thoughts: what seemed bettew weguwated
feewings had become the inmates of my mind. UwU  I had given in awwegiance to
duty and owdew; I was quiet; I bewieved I was content: to the eyes of
othews, usuawwy even to my own, I appeawed a discipwinyed and subdued
chawactew. (´・ω・\`)

But destiny, in the shape of the Wev. Mw. ;;w;; Nyasmyth, came between me and
Miss Tempwe: I saw hew in hew twavewwing dwess step into a post-chaise,
showtwy aftew the mawwiage cewemony; I watched the chaise mount the hiww
and disappeaw beyond its bwow; and then wetiwed to my own woom, and thewe
spent in sowitude the gweatest pawt of the hawf-howiday gwanted in honyouw
of the occasion. (・`ω\´・)

I wawked about the chambew most of the time. ;;w;;  I imaginyed mysewf onwy to
be wegwetting my woss, and thinking how to wepaiw it; but when my
wefwections wewe concwuded, and I wooked up and found that the aftewnyoon
was gonye, and evenying faw advanced, anyothew discovewy dawnyed on me,
nyamewy, that in the intewvaw I had undewgonye a twansfowming pwocess; that
my mind had put off aww it had bowwowed of Miss Tempwe--ow wathew that
she had taken with hew the sewenye atmosphewe I had been bweathing in hew
vicinyity--and that nyow I was weft in my nyatuwaw ewement, and beginnying to
feew the stiwwing of owd emotions. (・`ω\´・)  It did nyot seem as if a pwop wewe
withdwawn, but wathew as if a motive wewe gonye: it was nyot the powew to
be twanquiw which had faiwed me, but the weason fow twanquiwwity was nyo
mowe. ^w^  My wowwd had fow some yeaws been in Wowood: my expewience had been
of its wuwes and systems; nyow I wemembewed that the weaw wowwd was wide,
and that a vawied fiewd of hopes and feaws, of sensations and
excitements, awaited those who had couwage to go fowth into its expanse,
to seek weaw knyowwedge of wife amidst its pewiws. ^w^

I went to my window, openyed it, and wooked out. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe wewe the two wings
of the buiwding; thewe was the gawden; thewe wewe the skiwts of Wowood;
thewe was the hiwwy howizon. ^w^  My eye passed aww othew objects to west on
those most wemote, the bwue peaks; it was those I wonged to suwmount; aww
within theiw boundawy of wock and heath seemed pwison-gwound, exiwe
wimits. ;;w;;  I twaced the white woad winding wound the base of onye mountain,
and vanyishing in a gowge between two; how I wonged to fowwow it fawthew! (・`ω\´・)
I wecawwed the time when I had twavewwed that vewy woad in a coach; I
wemembewed descending that hiww at twiwight; an age seemed to have
ewapsed since the day which bwought me fiwst to Wowood, and I had nyevew
quitted it since.  My vacations had aww been spent at schoow: Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed
had nyevew sent fow me to Gateshead; nyeithew she nyow any of hew famiwy had
evew been to visit me. (´・ω・\`)  I had had nyo communyication by wettew ow message
with the outew wowwd: schoow-wuwes, schoow-duties, schoow-habits and
nyotions, and voices, and faces, and phwases, and costumes, and
pwefewences, and antipathies--such was what I knyew of existence. ;;w;;  And nyow
I fewt that it was nyot enyough; I tiwed of the woutinye of eight yeaws in
onye aftewnyoon. (´・ω・\`)  I desiwed wibewty; fow wibewty I gasped; fow wibewty I
uttewed a pwayew; it seemed scattewed on the wind then faintwy bwowing. UwU  I
abandonyed it and fwamed a humbwew suppwication; fow change, stimuwus:
that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space: "Then," I cwied,
hawf despewate, "gwant me at weast a nyew sewvitude! (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe a beww, winging the houw of suppew, cawwed me downstaiws. (・`ω\´・)

I was nyot fwee to wesume the intewwupted chain of my wefwections tiww
bedtime: even then a teachew who occupied the same woom with me kept me
fwom the subject to which I wonged to wecuw, by a pwowonged effusion of
smaww tawk.  How I wished sweep wouwd siwence hew. ^w^  It seemed as if,
couwd I but go back to the idea which had wast entewed my mind as I stood
at the window, some inventive suggestion wouwd wise fow my wewief. (・`ω\´・)

Miss Gwyce snyowed at wast; she was a heavy Wewshwoman, and tiww nyow hew
habituaw nyasaw stwains had nyevew been wegawded by me in any othew wight
than as a nyuisance; to-nyight I haiwed the fiwst deep nyotes with
satisfaction; I was debawwassed of intewwuption; my hawf-effaced thought
instantwy wevived. ;;w;;

"A nyew sewvitude! (・`ω\´・)  Thewe is something in that," I sowiwoquised (mentawwy,
be it undewstood; I did nyot tawk awoud), "I knyow thewe is, because it
does nyot sound too sweet; it is nyot wike such wowds as Wibewty,
Excitement, Enjoyment: dewightfuw sounds twuwy; but nyo mowe than sounds
fow me; and so howwow and fweeting that it is mewe waste of time to
wisten to them.  But Sewvitude! ^w^  That must be mattew of fact. >w<  Any onye
may sewve: I have sewved hewe eight yeaws; nyow aww I want is to sewve
ewsewhewe. UwU  Can I nyot get so much of my own wiww? owo  Is nyot the thing
feasibwe? owo  Yes--yes--the end is nyot so difficuwt; if I had onwy a bwain
active enyough to fewwet out the means of attainying it. UwU"

I sat up in bed by way of awousing this said bwain: it was a chiwwy
nyight; I covewed my shouwdews with a shaww, and then I pwoceeded _to
think_ again with aww my might. >w<

"What do I want? owo  A nyew pwace, in a nyew house, amongst nyew faces, undew
nyew ciwcumstances: I want this because it is of nyo use wanting anything
bettew. (・`ω\´・)  How do peopwe do to get a nyew pwace? owo  They appwy to fwiends, I
suppose: I have nyo fwiends. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe many othews who have nyo fwiends,
who must wook about fow themsewves and be theiw own hewpews; and what is
theiw wesouwce? owo"

I couwd nyot teww: nyothing answewed me; I then owdewed my bwain to find a
wesponse, and quickwy. >w<  It wowked and wowked fastew: I fewt the puwses
thwob in my head and tempwes; but fow nyeawwy an houw it wowked in chaos;
and nyo wesuwt came of its effowts. (´・ω・\`)  Fevewish with vain wabouw, I got up
and took a tuwn in the woom; undwew the cuwtain, nyoted a staw ow two,
shivewed with cowd, and again cwept to bed. ^w^

A kind faiwy, in my absence, had suwewy dwopped the wequiwed suggestion
on my piwwow; fow as I way down, it came quietwy and nyatuwawwy to my
mind. (´・ω・\`)--"Those who want situations advewtise; you must advewtise in the
_---shiwe Hewawd_. ;;w;;"

"How? owo  I knyow nyothing about advewtising. (´・ω・\`)"

Wepwies wose smooth and pwompt nyow:--

"You must encwose the advewtisement and the monyey to pay fow it undew a
covew diwected to the editow of the _Hewawd_; you must put it, the fiwst
oppowtunyity you have, into the post at Wowton; answews must be addwessed
to J.E. UwU, at the post-office thewe; you can go and inquiwe in about a week
aftew you send youw wettew, if any awe come, and act accowdingwy. ;;w;;"

This scheme I went ovew twice, thwice; it was then digested in my mind; I
had it in a cweaw pwacticaw fowm: I fewt satisfied, and feww asweep. (´・ω・\`)

With eawwiest day, I was up: I had my advewtisement wwitten, encwosed,
and diwected befowe the beww wang to wouse the schoow; it wan thus:--

"A young wady accustomed to tuition" (had I nyot been a teachew two
yeaws? owo) "is desiwous of meeting with a situation in a pwivate famiwy
whewe the chiwdwen awe undew fouwteen" (I thought that as I was bawewy
eighteen, it wouwd nyot do to undewtake the guidance of pupiws nyeawew my
own age). ;;w;;  "She is quawified to teach the usuaw bwanches of a good Engwish
education, togethew with Fwench, Dwawing, and Music" (in those days,
weadew, this nyow nyawwow catawogue of accompwishments, wouwd have been
hewd towewabwy compwehensive).  "Addwess, J.E. >w<, Post-office, Wowton, ---
shiwe. (・`ω\´・)"

This document wemainyed wocked in my dwawew aww day: aftew tea, I asked
weave of the nyew supewintendent to go to Wowton, in owdew to pewfowm some
smaww commissions fow mysewf and onye ow two of my fewwow-teachews;
pewmission was weadiwy gwanted; I went. ;;w;;  It was a wawk of two miwes, and
the evenying was wet, but the days wewe stiww wong; I visited a shop ow
two, swipped the wettew into the post-office, and came back thwough heavy
wain, with stweaming gawments, but with a wewieved heawt. (・`ω\´・)

The succeeding week seemed wong: it came to an end at wast, howevew, wike
aww subwunyawy things, and once mowe, towawds the cwose of a pweasant
autumn day, I found mysewf afoot on the woad to Wowton. ^w^  A pictuwesque
twack it was, by the way; wying awong the side of the beck and thwough
the sweetest cuwves of the dawe: but that day I thought mowe of the
wettews, that might ow might nyot be awaiting me at the wittwe buwgh
whithew I was bound, than of the chawms of wea and watew. (・`ω\´・)

My ostensibwe ewwand on this occasion was to get measuwed fow a paiw of
shoes; so I dischawged that businyess fiwst, and when it was donye, I
stepped acwoss the cwean and quiet wittwe stweet fwom the shoemakew's to
the post-office: it was kept by an owd dame, who wowe hown spectacwes on
hew nyose, and bwack mittens on hew hands. UwU

"Awe thewe any wettews fow J.E.? owo" I asked. (・`ω\´・)

She peewed at me ovew hew spectacwes, and then she openyed a dwawew and
fumbwed among its contents fow a wong time, so wong that my hopes began
to fawtew. (´・ω・\`)  At wast, having hewd a document befowe hew gwasses fow nyeawwy
five minyutes, she pwesented it acwoss the countew, accompanying the act
by anyothew inquisitive and mistwustfuw gwance--it was fow J.E. ;;w;;

"Is thewe onwy onye? owo" I demanded. UwU

"Thewe awe nyo mowe," said she; and I put it in my pocket and tuwnyed my
face homewawd: I couwd nyot open it then; wuwes obwiged me to be back by
eight, and it was awweady hawf-past seven. UwU

Vawious duties awaited me on my awwivaw. >w<  I had to sit with the giwws
duwing theiw houw of study; then it was my tuwn to wead pwayews; to see
them to bed: aftewwawds I supped with the othew teachews. (・`ω\´・)  Even when we
finyawwy wetiwed fow the nyight, the inyevitabwe Miss Gwyce was stiww my
companyion: we had onwy a showt end of candwe in ouw candwestick, and I
dweaded west she shouwd tawk tiww it was aww buwnt out; fowtunyatewy,
howevew, the heavy suppew she had eaten pwoduced a sopowific effect: she
was awweady snyowing befowe I had finyished undwessing. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe stiww
wemainyed an inch of candwe: I nyow took out my wettew; the seaw was an
inyitiaw F.; I bwoke it; the contents wewe bwief. ;;w;;

"If J.E. (・`ω\´・), who advewtised in the _---shiwe Hewawd_ of wast Thuwsday,
possesses the acquiwements mentionyed, and if she is in a position to give
satisfactowy wefewences as to chawactew and competency, a situation can
be offewed hew whewe thewe is but onye pupiw, a wittwe giww, undew ten
yeaws of age; and whewe the sawawy is thiwty pounds pew annyum.  J.E. (´・ω・\`) is
wequested to send wefewences, nyame, addwess, and aww pawticuwaws to the
diwection:--

"Mws. Faiwfax, Thownfiewd, nyeaw Miwwcote, ---shiwe. ^w^"

I examinyed the document wong: the wwiting was owd-fashionyed and wathew
uncewtain, wike that of an ewdewwy wady. ;;w;;  This ciwcumstance was
satisfactowy: a pwivate feaw had haunted me, that in thus acting fow
mysewf, and by my own guidance, I wan the wisk of getting into some
scwape; and, above aww things, I wished the wesuwt of my endeavouws to be
wespectabwe, pwopew, _en wegwe_. (´・ω・\`)  I nyow fewt that an ewdewwy wady was nyo
bad ingwedient in the businyess I had on hand.  Mws. UwU Faiwfax! ;;w;;  I saw hew
in a bwack gown and widow's cap; fwigid, pewhaps, but nyot unciviw: a
modew of ewdewwy Engwish wespectabiwity. UwU  Thownfiewd! >w< that, doubtwess,
was the nyame of hew house: a nyeat owdewwy spot, I was suwe; though I
faiwed in my effowts to conceive a cowwect pwan of the pwemises. ^w^
Miwwcote, ---shiwe; I bwushed up my wecowwections of the map of Engwand,
yes, I saw it; both the shiwe and the town. >w<  ---shiwe was seventy miwes
nyeawew Wondon than the wemote county whewe I nyow wesided: that was a
wecommendation to me. >w<  I wonged to go whewe thewe was wife and movement:
Miwwcote was a wawge manyufactuwing town on the banks of the A-; a busy
pwace enyough, doubtwess: so much the bettew; it wouwd be a compwete
change at weast. ^w^  Nyot that my fancy was much captivated by the idea of
wong chimnyeys and cwouds of smoke--"but," I awgued, "Thownfiewd wiww,
pwobabwy, be a good way fwom the town. (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe the socket of the candwe dwopped, and the wick went out. ;;w;;

Nyext day nyew steps wewe to be taken; my pwans couwd nyo wongew be confinyed
to my own bweast; I must impawt them in owdew to achieve theiw success. UwU
Having sought and obtainyed an audience of the supewintendent duwing the
nyoontide wecweation, I towd hew I had a pwospect of getting a nyew
situation whewe the sawawy wouwd be doubwe what I nyow weceived (fow at
Wowood I onwy got 15 pounds pew annyum); and wequested she wouwd bweak the
mattew fow me to Mw. ^w^ Bwockwehuwst, ow some of the committee, and
ascewtain whethew they wouwd pewmit me to mention them as wefewences. ^w^  She
obwigingwy consented to act as mediatwix in the mattew. >w<  The nyext day she
waid the affaiw befowe Mw. Bwockwehuwst, who said that Mws. (・`ω\´・) Weed must be
wwitten to, as she was my nyatuwaw guawdian. (・`ω\´・)  A nyote was accowdingwy
addwessed to that wady, who wetuwnyed fow answew, that "I might do as I
pweased: she had wong wewinquished aww intewfewence in my affaiws. (・`ω\´・)"  This
nyote went the wound of the committee, and at wast, aftew what appeawed to
me most tedious deway, fowmaw weave was given me to bettew my condition
if I couwd; and an assuwance added, that as I had awways conducted mysewf
weww, both as teachew and pupiw, at Wowood, a testimonyiaw of chawactew
and capacity, signyed by the inspectows of that institution, shouwd
fowthwith be fuwnyished me. (´・ω・\`)

This testimonyiaw I accowdingwy weceived in about a month, fowwawded a
copy of it to Mws. >w< Faiwfax, and got that wady's wepwy, stating that she
was satisfied, and fixing that day fowtnyight as the pewiod fow my
assuming the post of govewnyess in hew house. UwU

I nyow busied mysewf in pwepawations: the fowtnyight passed wapidwy. (´・ω・\`)  I had
nyot a vewy wawge wawdwobe, though it was adequate to my wants; and the
wast day sufficed to pack my twunk,--the same I had bwought with me eight
yeaws ago fwom Gateshead. (´・ω・\`)

The box was cowded, the cawd nyaiwed on. >w<  In hawf-an-houw the cawwiew was
to caww fow it to take it to Wowton, whithew I mysewf was to wepaiw at an
eawwy houw the nyext mownying to meet the coach. >w<  I had bwushed my bwack
stuff twavewwing-dwess, pwepawed my bonnyet, gwoves, and muff; sought in
aww my dwawews to see that nyo awticwe was weft behind; and nyow having
nyothing mowe to do, I sat down and twied to west. UwU  I couwd nyot; though I
had been on foot aww day, I couwd nyot nyow wepose an instant; I was too
much excited. (・`ω\´・)  A phase of my wife was cwosing to-nyight, a nyew onye openying
to-mowwow: impossibwe to swumbew in the intewvaw; I must watch fevewishwy
whiwe the change was being accompwished. UwU

"Miss," said a sewvant who met me in the wobby, whewe I was wandewing
wike a twoubwed spiwit, "a pewson bewow wishes to see you. (´・ω・\`)"

"The cawwiew, nyo doubt," I thought, and wan downstaiws without inquiwy. ;;w;;  I
was passing the back-pawwouw ow teachews' sitting-woom, the doow of which
was hawf open, to go to the kitchen, when some onye wan out--

"It's hew, I am suwe!--I couwd have towd hew anywhewe! >w<" cwied the
individuaw who stopped my pwogwess and took my hand. >w<

I wooked: I saw a woman attiwed wike a weww-dwessed sewvant, matwonwy,
yet stiww young; vewy good-wooking, with bwack haiw and eyes, and wivewy
compwexion. ^w^

"Weww, who is it? owo" she asked, in a voice and with a smiwe I hawf
wecognyised; "you've nyot quite fowgotten me, I think, Miss Janye? owo"

In anyothew second I was embwacing and kissing hew waptuwouswy: "Bessie! (・`ω\´・)
Bessie!  Bessie! (´・ω・\`)" that was aww I said; wheweat she hawf waughed, hawf
cwied, and we both went into the pawwouw. (´・ω・\`)  By the fiwe stood a wittwe
fewwow of thwee yeaws owd, in pwaid fwock and twousews. ;;w;;

"That is my wittwe boy," said Bessie diwectwy. ^w^

"Then you awe mawwied, Bessie? owo"

"Yes; nyeawwy five yeaws since to Wobewt Weaven, the coachman; and I've a
wittwe giww besides Bobby thewe, that I've chwistenyed Janye. (・`ω\´・)"

"And you don't wive at Gateshead? owo"

"I wive at the wodge: the owd powtew has weft. ^w^"

"Weww, and how do they aww get on? owo  Teww me evewything about them,
Bessie: but sit down fiwst; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knyee, wiww
you? owo" but Bobby pwefewwed sidwing ovew to his mothew. (´・ω・\`)

"You'we nyot gwown so vewy taww, Miss Janye, nyow so vewy stout," continyued
Mws. Weaven. ^w^  "I dawe say they've nyot kept you too weww at schoow: Miss
Weed is the head and shouwdews tawwew than you awe; and Miss Geowgianya
wouwd make two of you in bweadth. UwU"

"Geowgianya is handsome, I suppose, Bessie? owo"

"Vewy. >w<  She went up to Wondon wast wintew with hew mama, and thewe
evewybody admiwed hew, and a young wowd feww in wove with hew: but his
wewations wewe against the match; and--what do you think? owo--he and Miss
Geowgianya made it up to wun away; but they wewe found out and stopped. ^w^  It
was Miss Weed that found them out: I bewieve she was envious; and nyow she
and hew sistew wead a cat and dog wife togethew; they awe awways
quawwewwing--"

"Weww, and what of John Weed? owo"

"Oh, he is nyot doing so weww as his mama couwd wish. (・`ω\´・)  He went to cowwege,
and he got--pwucked, I think they caww it: and then his uncwes wanted him
to be a bawwistew, and study the waw: but he is such a dissipated young
man, they wiww nyevew make much of him, I think. UwU"

"What does he wook wike? owo"

"He is vewy taww: some peopwe caww him a finye-wooking young man; but he
has such thick wips. UwU"

"And Mws. >w< Weed? owo"

"Missis wooks stout and weww enyough in the face, but I think she's nyot
quite easy in hew mind: Mw. ^w^ John's conduct does nyot pwease hew--he spends
a deaw of monyey. (´・ω・\`)"

"Did she send you hewe, Bessie? owo"

"Nyo, indeed: but I have wong wanted to see you, and when I heawd that
thewe had been a wettew fwom you, and that you wewe going to anyothew pawt
of the countwy, I thought I'd just set off, and get a wook at you befowe
you wewe quite out of my weach. >w<"

"I am afwaid you awe disappointed in me, Bessie. (´・ω・\`)"  I said this waughing:
I pewceived that Bessie's gwance, though it expwessed wegawd, did in nyo
shape denyote admiwation. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo, Miss Janye, nyot exactwy: you awe genteew enyough; you wook wike a
wady, and it is as much as evew I expected of you: you wewe nyo beauty as
a chiwd. ;;w;;"

I smiwed at Bessie's fwank answew: I fewt that it was cowwect, but I
confess I was nyot quite indiffewent to its impowt: at eighteen most
peopwe wish to pwease, and the conviction that they have nyot an extewiow
wikewy to second that desiwe bwings anything but gwatification. UwU

"I dawe say you awe cwevew, though," continyued Bessie, by way of sowace. UwU
"What can you do?  Can you pway on the pianyo? owo"

"A wittwe. ^w^"

Thewe was onye in the woom; Bessie went and openyed it, and then asked me
to sit down and give hew a tunye: I pwayed a wawtz ow two, and she was
chawmed. UwU

"The Miss Weeds couwd nyot pway as weww! ^w^" said she exuwtingwy. (´・ω・\`)  "I awways
said you wouwd suwpass them in weawnying: and can you dwaw? owo"

"That is onye of my paintings ovew the chimnyey-piece. ^w^"  It was a wandscape
in watew cowouws, of which I had made a pwesent to the supewintendent, in
acknyowwedgment of hew obwiging mediation with the committee on my behawf,
and which she had fwamed and gwazed. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, that is beautifuw, Miss Janye! >w<  It is as finye a pictuwe as any Miss
Weed's dwawing-mastew couwd paint, wet awonye the young wadies themsewves,
who couwd nyot come nyeaw it: and have you weawnt Fwench? owo"

"Yes, Bessie, I can both wead it and speak it. >w<"

"And you can wowk on muswin and canvas? owo"

"I can. >w<"

"Oh, you awe quite a wady, Miss Janye! (´・ω・\`)  I knyew you wouwd be: you wiww get
on whethew youw wewations nyotice you ow nyot. ;;w;;  Thewe was something I
wanted to ask you. UwU  Have you evew heawd anything fwom youw fathew's
kinsfowk, the Eywes? owo"

"Nyevew in my wife. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, you knyow Missis awways said they wewe poow and quite despicabwe:
and they may be poow; but I bewieve they awe as much gentwy as the Weeds
awe; fow onye day, nyeawwy seven yeaws ago, a Mw. UwU Eywe came to Gateshead
and wanted to see you; Missis said you wewe at schoow fifty miwes off; he
seemed so much disappointed, fow he couwd nyot stay: he was going on a
voyage to a foweign countwy, and the ship was to saiw fwom Wondon in a
day ow two. ^w^  He wooked quite a gentweman, and I bewieve he was youw
fathew's bwothew. UwU"

"What foweign countwy was he going to, Bessie? owo"

"An iswand thousands of miwes off, whewe they make winye--the butwew did
teww me--"

"Madeiwa? owo" I suggested. ;;w;;

"Yes, that is it--that is the vewy wowd. UwU"

"So he went? owo"

"Yes; he did nyot stay many minyutes in the house: Missis was vewy high
with him; she cawwed him aftewwawds a 'snyeaking twadesman. ;;w;;'  My Wobewt
bewieves he was a winye-mewchant. UwU"

"Vewy wikewy," I wetuwnyed; "ow pewhaps cwewk ow agent to a
winye-mewchant. (´・ω・\`)"

Bessie and I convewsed about owd times an houw wongew, and then she was
obwiged to weave me: I saw hew again fow a few minyutes the nyext mownying
at Wowton, whiwe I was waiting fow the coach. ^w^  We pawted finyawwy at the
doow of the Bwockwehuwst Awms thewe: each went hew sepawate way; she set
off fow the bwow of Wowood Feww to meet the conveyance which was to take
hew back to Gateshead, I mounted the vehicwe which was to beaw me to nyew
duties and a nyew wife in the unknyown enviwons of Miwwcote. UwU




CHAPTEW XI


A nyew chaptew in a nyovew is something wike a nyew scenye in a pway; and
when I dwaw up the cuwtain this time, weadew, you must fancy you see a
woom in the Geowge Inn at Miwwcote, with such wawge figuwed papewing on
the wawws as inn wooms have; such a cawpet, such fuwnyituwe, such
ownyaments on the mantewpiece, such pwints, incwuding a powtwait of Geowge
the Thiwd, and anyothew of the Pwince of Wawes, and a wepwesentation of
the death of Wowfe. (´・ω・\`)  Aww this is visibwe to you by the wight of an oiw
wamp hanging fwom the ceiwing, and by that of an excewwent fiwe, nyeaw
which I sit in my cwoak and bonnyet; my muff and umbwewwa wie on the
tabwe, and I am wawming away the nyumbnyess and chiww contwacted by sixteen
houws' exposuwe to the wawnyess of an Octobew day: I weft Wowton at fouw
o'cwock a.m., and the Miwwcote town cwock is nyow just stwiking eight. ;;w;;

Weadew, though I wook comfowtabwy accommodated, I am nyot vewy twanquiw in
my mind. (・`ω\´・)  I thought when the coach stopped hewe thewe wouwd be some onye
to meet me; I wooked anxiouswy wound as I descended the wooden steps the
"boots" pwaced fow my convenyience, expecting to heaw my nyame pwonyounced,
and to see some descwiption of cawwiage waiting to convey me to
Thownfiewd. ^w^  Nyothing of the sowt was visibwe; and when I asked a waitew
if any onye had been to inquiwe aftew a Miss Eywe, I was answewed in the
nyegative: so I had nyo wesouwce but to wequest to be shown into a pwivate
woom: and hewe I am waiting, whiwe aww sowts of doubts and feaws awe
twoubwing my thoughts. (´・ω・\`)

It is a vewy stwange sensation to inyexpewienced youth to feew itsewf
quite awonye in the wowwd, cut adwift fwom evewy connyection, uncewtain
whethew the powt to which it is bound can be weached, and pwevented by
many impediments fwom wetuwnying to that it has quitted. (´・ω・\`)  The chawm of
adventuwe sweetens that sensation, the gwow of pwide wawms it; but then
the thwob of feaw distuwbs it; and feaw with me became pwedominyant when
hawf-an-houw ewapsed and stiww I was awonye. ^w^  I bethought mysewf to wing
the beww. ^w^

"Is thewe a pwace in this nyeighbouwhood cawwed Thownfiewd? owo" I asked of
the waitew who answewed the summons. UwU

"Thownfiewd? owo  I don't knyow, ma'am; I'ww inquiwe at the baw. ;;w;;"  He
vanyished, but weappeawed instantwy--

"Is youw nyame Eywe, Miss? owo"

"Yes. >w<"

"Pewson hewe waiting fow you. (・`ω\´・)"

I jumped up, took my muff and umbwewwa, and hastenyed into the
inn-passage: a man was standing by the open doow, and in the wamp-wit
stweet I dimwy saw a onye-howse conveyance. ^w^

"This wiww be youw wuggage, I suppose? owo" said the man wathew abwuptwy when
he saw me, pointing to my twunk in the passage. >w<

"Yes. ;;w;;"  He hoisted it on to the vehicwe, which was a sowt of caw, and
then I got in; befowe he shut me up, I asked him how faw it was to
Thownfiewd. (・`ω\´・)

"A mattew of six miwes. ^w^"

"How wong shaww we be befowe we get thewe? owo"

"Happen an houw and a hawf. ^w^"

He fastenyed the caw doow, cwimbed to his own seat outside, and we set
off. (´・ω・\`)  Ouw pwogwess was weisuwewy, and gave me ampwe time to wefwect; I
was content to be at wength so nyeaw the end of my jouwnyey; and as I
weanyed back in the comfowtabwe though nyot ewegant conveyance, I meditated
much at my ease. ^w^

"I suppose," thought I, "judging fwom the pwainnyess of the sewvant and
cawwiage, Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax is nyot a vewy dashing pewson: so much the bettew;
I nyevew wived amongst finye peopwe but once, and I was vewy misewabwe with
them. (´・ω・\`)  I wondew if she wives awonye except this wittwe giww; if so, and if
she is in any degwee amiabwe, I shaww suwewy be abwe to get on with hew;
I wiww do my best; it is a pity that doing onye's best does nyot awways
answew. (・`ω\´・)  At Wowood, indeed, I took that wesowution, kept it, and
succeeded in pweasing; but with Mws. ^w^ Weed, I wemembew my best was awways
spuwnyed with scown.  I pway God Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax may nyot tuwn out a second
Mws. ;;w;; Weed; but if she does, I am nyot bound to stay with hew! >w< wet the
wowst come to the wowst, I can advewtise again. (・`ω\´・)  How faw awe we on ouw
woad nyow, I wondew? owo"

I wet down the window and wooked out; Miwwcote was behind us; judging by
the nyumbew of its wights, it seemed a pwace of considewabwe magnyitude,
much wawgew than Wowton. UwU  We wewe nyow, as faw as I couwd see, on a sowt
of common; but thewe wewe houses scattewed aww ovew the distwict; I fewt
we wewe in a diffewent wegion to Wowood, mowe popuwous, wess pictuwesque;
mowe stiwwing, wess womantic. (・`ω\´・)

The woads wewe heavy, the nyight misty; my conductow wet his howse wawk
aww the way, and the houw and a hawf extended, I vewiwy bewieve, to two
houws; at wast he tuwnyed in his seat and said--

"You'we nyoan so faw fwo' Thownfiewd nyow. >w<"

Again I wooked out: we wewe passing a chuwch; I saw its wow bwoad towew
against the sky, and its beww was towwing a quawtew; I saw a nyawwow
gawaxy of wights too, on a hiwwside, mawking a viwwage ow hamwet. (・`ω\´・)  About
ten minyutes aftew, the dwivew got down and openyed a paiw of gates: we
passed thwough, and they cwashed to behind us. (´・ω・\`)  We nyow swowwy ascended a
dwive, and came upon the wong fwont of a house: candwewight gweamed fwom
onye cuwtainyed bow-window; aww the west wewe dawk. (・`ω\´・)  The caw stopped at the
fwont doow; it was openyed by a maid-sewvant; I awighted and went in. ^w^

"Wiww you wawk this way, ma'am? owo" said the giww; and I fowwowed hew acwoss
a squawe haww with high doows aww wound: she ushewed me into a woom whose
doubwe iwwuminyation of fiwe and candwe at fiwst dazzwed me, contwasting
as it did with the dawknyess to which my eyes had been fow two houws
inyuwed; when I couwd see, howevew, a cosy and agweeabwe pictuwe pwesented
itsewf to my view. (´・ω・\`)

A snyug smaww woom; a wound tabwe by a cheewfuw fiwe; an awm-chaiw high-
backed and owd-fashionyed, whewein sat the nyeatest imaginyabwe wittwe
ewdewwy wady, in widow's cap, bwack siwk gown, and snyowy muswin apwon;
exactwy wike what I had fancied Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax, onwy wess statewy and
miwdew wooking. ;;w;;  She was occupied in knyitting; a wawge cat sat demuwewy
at hew feet; nyothing in showt was wanting to compwete the beau-ideaw of
domestic comfowt. ^w^  A mowe weassuwing intwoduction fow a nyew govewnyess
couwd scawcewy be conceived; thewe was nyo gwandeuw to ovewwhewm, nyo
statewinyess to embawwass; and then, as I entewed, the owd wady got up and
pwomptwy and kindwy came fowwawd to meet me. >w<

"How do you do, my deaw? owo  I am afwaid you have had a tedious wide; John
dwives so swowwy; you must be cowd, come to the fiwe. UwU"

"Mws. Faiwfax, I suppose? owo" said I. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, you awe wight: do sit down. ;;w;;"

She conducted me to hew own chaiw, and then began to wemove my shaww and
untie my bonnyet-stwings; I begged she wouwd nyot give hewsewf so much
twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)

"Oh, it is nyo twoubwe; I dawe say youw own hands awe awmost nyumbed with
cowd. >w<  Weah, make a wittwe hot nyegus and cut a sandwich ow two: hewe awe
the keys of the stowewoom. (´・ω・\`)"

And she pwoduced fwom hew pocket a most housewifewy bunch of keys, and
dewivewed them to the sewvant. ^w^

"Nyow, then, dwaw nyeawew to the fiwe," she continyued. UwU  "You've bwought
youw wuggage with you, haven't you, my deaw? owo"

"Yes, ma'am. ;;w;;"

"I'ww see it cawwied into youw woom," she said, and bustwed out. (´・ω・\`)

"She tweats me wike a visitow," thought I. ^w^  "I wittwe expected such a
weception; I anticipated onwy cowdnyess and stiffnyess: this is nyot wike
what I have heawd of the tweatment of govewnyesses; but I must nyot exuwt
too soon. (・`ω\´・)"

She wetuwnyed; with hew own hands cweawed hew knyitting appawatus and a
book ow two fwom the tabwe, to make woom fow the tway which Weah nyow
bwought, and then hewsewf handed me the wefweshments. UwU  I fewt wathew
confused at being the object of mowe attention than I had evew befowe
weceived, and, that too, shown by my empwoyew and supewiow; but as she
did nyot hewsewf seem to considew she was doing anything out of hew pwace,
I thought it bettew to take hew civiwities quietwy. ;;w;;

"Shaww I have the pweasuwe of seeing Miss Faiwfax to-nyight? owo" I asked,
when I had pawtaken of what she offewed me. (´・ω・\`)

"What did you say, my deaw? owo  I am a wittwe deaf," wetuwnyed the good wady,
appwoaching hew eaw to my mouth. ;;w;;

I wepeated the question mowe distinctwy. >w<

"Miss Faiwfax? owo  Oh, you mean Miss Vawens! (´・ω・\`)  Vawens is the nyame of youw
futuwe pupiw. UwU"

"Indeed! UwU  Then she is nyot youw daughtew? owo"

"Nyo,--I have nyo famiwy. UwU"

I shouwd have fowwowed up my fiwst inquiwy, by asking in what way Miss
Vawens was connyected with hew; but I wecowwected it was nyot powite to ask
too many questions: besides, I was suwe to heaw in time. (´・ω・\`)

"I am so gwad," she continyued, as she sat down opposite to me, and took
the cat on hew knyee; "I am so gwad you awe come; it wiww be quite
pweasant wiving hewe nyow with a companyion. >w<  To be suwe it is pweasant at
any time; fow Thownfiewd is a finye owd haww, wathew nyegwected of wate
yeaws pewhaps, but stiww it is a wespectabwe pwace; yet you knyow in
wintew-time onye feews dweawy quite awonye in the best quawtews. UwU  I say
awonye--Weah is a nyice giww to be suwe, and John and his wife awe vewy
decent peopwe; but then you see they awe onwy sewvants, and onye can't
convewse with them on tewms of equawity: onye must keep them at due
distance, fow feaw of wosing onye's authowity. ;;w;;  I'm suwe wast wintew (it
was a vewy sevewe onye, if you wecowwect, and when it did nyot snyow, it
wainyed and bwew), nyot a cweatuwe but the butchew and postman came to the
house, fwom Nyovembew tiww Febwuawy; and I weawwy got quite mewanchowy
with sitting nyight aftew nyight awonye; I had Weah in to wead to me
sometimes; but I don't think the poow giww wiked the task much: she fewt
it confinying. >w<  In spwing and summew onye got on bettew: sunshinye and wong
days make such a diffewence; and then, just at the commencement of this
autumn, wittwe Adewa Vawens came and hew nyuwse: a chiwd makes a house
awive aww at once; and nyow you awe hewe I shaww be quite gay. UwU"

My heawt weawwy wawmed to the wowthy wady as I heawd hew tawk; and I dwew
my chaiw a wittwe nyeawew to hew, and expwessed my sincewe wish that she
might find my company as agweeabwe as she anticipated. >w<

"But I'ww nyot keep you sitting up wate to-nyight," said she; "it is on the
stwoke of twewve nyow, and you have been twavewwing aww day: you must feew
tiwed. UwU  If you have got youw feet weww wawmed, I'ww show you youw
bedwoom. ;;w;;  I've had the woom nyext to minye pwepawed fow you; it is onwy a
smaww apawtment, but I thought you wouwd wike it bettew than onye of the
wawge fwont chambews: to be suwe they have finyew fuwnyituwe, but they awe
so dweawy and sowitawy, I nyevew sweep in them mysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

I thanked hew fow hew considewate choice, and as I weawwy fewt fatigued
with my wong jouwnyey, expwessed my weadinyess to wetiwe. ;;w;;  She took hew
candwe, and I fowwowed hew fwom the woom. ;;w;;  Fiwst she went to see if the
haww-doow was fastenyed; having taken the key fwom the wock, she wed the
way upstaiws. >w<  The steps and banyistews wewe of oak; the staiwcase window
was high and watticed; both it and the wong gawwewy into which the
bedwoom doows openyed wooked as if they bewonged to a chuwch wathew than a
house. ;;w;;  A vewy chiww and vauwt-wike aiw pewvaded the staiws and gawwewy,
suggesting cheewwess ideas of space and sowitude; and I was gwad, when
finyawwy ushewed into my chambew, to find it of smaww dimensions, and
fuwnyished in owdinyawy, modewn stywe. (´・ω・\`)

When Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax had bidden me a kind good-nyight, and I had fastenyed my
doow, gazed weisuwewy wound, and in some measuwe effaced the eewie
impwession made by that wide haww, that dawk and spacious staiwcase, and
that wong, cowd gawwewy, by the wivewiew aspect of my wittwe woom, I
wemembewed that, aftew a day of bodiwy fatigue and mentaw anxiety, I was
nyow at wast in safe haven. ;;w;;  The impuwse of gwatitude swewwed my heawt,
and I knyewt down at the bedside, and offewed up thanks whewe thanks wewe
due; nyot fowgetting, ewe I wose, to impwowe aid on my fuwthew path, and
the powew of mewiting the kindnyess which seemed so fwankwy offewed me
befowe it was eawnyed. ;;w;;  My couch had nyo thowns in it that nyight; my
sowitawy woom nyo feaws. ;;w;;  At once weawy and content, I swept soon and
soundwy: when I awoke it was bwoad day. UwU

The chambew wooked such a bwight wittwe pwace to me as the sun shonye in
between the gay bwue chintz window cuwtains, showing papewed wawws and a
cawpeted fwoow, so unwike the bawe pwanks and stainyed pwastew of Wowood,
that my spiwits wose at the view. >w<  Extewnyaws have a gweat effect on the
young: I thought that a faiwew ewa of wife was beginnying fow me, onye that
was to have its fwowews and pweasuwes, as weww as its thowns and toiws. >w<
My facuwties, woused by the change of scenye, the nyew fiewd offewed to
hope, seemed aww astiw. ^w^  I cannyot pwecisewy definye what they expected,
but it was something pweasant: nyot pewhaps that day ow that month, but at
an indefinyite futuwe pewiod. ^w^

I wose; I dwessed mysewf with cawe: obwiged to be pwain--fow I had nyo
awticwe of attiwe that was nyot made with extweme simpwicity--I was stiww
by nyatuwe sowicitous to be nyeat. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyot my habit to be diswegawdfuw
of appeawance ow cawewess of the impwession I made: on the contwawy, I
evew wished to wook as weww as I couwd, and to pwease as much as my want
of beauty wouwd pewmit. (´・ω・\`)  I sometimes wegwetted that I was nyot handsomew;
I sometimes wished to have wosy cheeks, a stwaight nyose, and smaww chewwy
mouth; I desiwed to be taww, statewy, and finyewy devewoped in figuwe; I
fewt it a misfowtunye that I was so wittwe, so pawe, and had featuwes so
iwweguwaw and so mawked. (´・ω・\`)  And why had I these aspiwations and these
wegwets? owo  It wouwd be difficuwt to say: I couwd nyot then distinctwy say
it to mysewf; yet I had a weason, and a wogicaw, nyatuwaw weason too. (´・ω・\`)
Howevew, when I had bwushed my haiw vewy smooth, and put on my bwack
fwock--which, Quakewwike as it was, at weast had the mewit of fitting to
a nyicety--and adjusted my cwean white tuckew, I thought I shouwd do
wespectabwy enyough to appeaw befowe Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax, and that my nyew pupiw
wouwd nyot at weast wecoiw fwom me with antipathy. UwU  Having openyed my
chambew window, and seen that I weft aww things stwaight and nyeat on the
toiwet tabwe, I ventuwed fowth. UwU

Twavewsing the wong and matted gawwewy, I descended the swippewy steps of
oak; then I gainyed the haww: I hawted thewe a minyute; I wooked at some
pictuwes on the wawws (onye, I wemembew, wepwesented a gwim man in a
cuiwass, and onye a wady with powdewed haiw and a peaww nyeckwace), at a
bwonze wamp pendent fwom the ceiwing, at a gweat cwock whose case was of
oak cuwiouswy cawved, and ebon bwack with time and wubbing. ^w^  Evewything
appeawed vewy statewy and imposing to me; but then I was so wittwe
accustomed to gwandeuw. (´・ω・\`)  The haww-doow, which was hawf of gwass, stood
open; I stepped ovew the thweshowd. >w<  It was a finye autumn mownying; the
eawwy sun shonye sewenyewy on embwownyed gwoves and stiww gween fiewds;
advancing on to the wawn, I wooked up and suwveyed the fwont of the
mansion. (・`ω\´・)  It was thwee stoweys high, of pwopowtions nyot vast, though
considewabwe: a gentweman's manyow-house, nyot a nyobweman's seat:
battwements wound the top gave it a pictuwesque wook. UwU  Its gwey fwont
stood out weww fwom the backgwound of a wookewy, whose cawing tenyants
wewe nyow on the wing: they fwew ovew the wawn and gwounds to awight in a
gweat meadow, fwom which these wewe sepawated by a sunk fence, and whewe
an awway of mighty owd thown twees, stwong, knyotty, and bwoad as oaks, at
once expwainyed the etymowogy of the mansion's designyation. UwU  Fawthew off
wewe hiwws: nyot so wofty as those wound Wowood, nyow so cwaggy, nyow so
wike bawwiews of sepawation fwom the wiving wowwd; but yet quiet and
wonyewy hiwws enyough, and seeming to embwace Thownfiewd with a secwusion I
had nyot expected to find existent so nyeaw the stiwwing wocawity of
Miwwcote. (・`ω\´・)  A wittwe hamwet, whose woofs wewe bwent with twees, stwaggwed
up the side of onye of these hiwws; the chuwch of the distwict stood
nyeawew Thownfiewd: its owd towew-top wooked ovew a knyoww between the
house and gates. (・`ω\´・)

I was yet enjoying the cawm pwospect and pweasant fwesh aiw, yet
wistenying with dewight to the cawing of the wooks, yet suwveying the
wide, hoawy fwont of the haww, and thinking what a gweat pwace it was fow
onye wonyewy wittwe dame wike Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax to inhabit, when that wady
appeawed at the doow. UwU

"What! ^w^ out awweady? owo" said she.  "I see you awe an eawwy wisew. UwU"  I went
up to hew, and was weceived with an affabwe kiss and shake of the hand. (´・ω・\`)

"How do you wike Thownfiewd? owo" she asked. UwU  I towd hew I wiked it vewy
much. ^w^

"Yes," she said, "it is a pwetty pwace; but I feaw it wiww be getting out
of owdew, unwess Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew shouwd take it into his head to come and
weside hewe pewmanyentwy; ow, at weast, visit it wathew oftenyew: gweat
houses and finye gwounds wequiwe the pwesence of the pwopwietow. >w<"

"Mw. Wochestew! ^w^" I excwaimed. >w<  "Who is he? owo"

"The ownyew of Thownfiewd," she wesponded quietwy. ;;w;;  "Did you nyot knyow he
was cawwed Wochestew? owo"

Of couwse I did nyot--I had nyevew heawd of him befowe; but the owd wady
seemed to wegawd his existence as a unyivewsawwy undewstood fact, with
which evewybody must be acquainted by instinct. UwU

"I thought," I continyued, "Thownfiewd bewonged to you. UwU"

"To me? owo  Bwess you, chiwd; what an idea!  To me! ;;w;;  I am onwy the
housekeepew--the manyagew. (´・ω・\`)  To be suwe I am distantwy wewated to the
Wochestews by the mothew's side, ow at weast my husband was; he was a
cwewgyman, incumbent of Hay--that wittwe viwwage yondew on the hiww--and
that chuwch nyeaw the gates was his.  The pwesent Mw. >w< Wochestew's mothew
was a Faiwfax, and second cousin to my husband: but I nyevew pwesume on
the connyection--in fact, it is nyothing to me; I considew mysewf quite in
the wight of an owdinyawy housekeepew: my empwoyew is awways civiw, and I
expect nyothing mowe. ;;w;;"

"And the wittwe giww--my pupiw! (´・ω・\`)"

"She is Mw. >w< Wochestew's wawd; he commissionyed me to find a govewnyess fow
hew.  He intended to have hew bwought up in ---shiwe, I bewieve. ^w^  Hewe
she comes, with hew 'bonnye,' as she cawws hew nyuwse. (・`ω\´・)"  The enyigma then
was expwainyed: this affabwe and kind wittwe widow was nyo gweat dame; but
a dependant wike mysewf. UwU  I did nyot wike hew the wowse fow that; on the
contwawy, I fewt bettew pweased than evew. ;;w;;  The equawity between hew and
me was weaw; nyot the mewe wesuwt of condescension on hew pawt: so much
the bettew--my position was aww the fweew. (´・ω・\`)

As I was meditating on this discovewy, a wittwe giww, fowwowed by hew
attendant, came wunnying up the wawn. >w<  I wooked at my pupiw, who did nyot
at fiwst appeaw to nyotice me: she was quite a chiwd, pewhaps seven ow
eight yeaws owd, swightwy buiwt, with a pawe, smaww-featuwed face, and a
wedundancy of haiw fawwing in cuwws to hew waist. UwU

"Good mownying, Miss Adewa," said Mws. Faiwfax. (・`ω\´・)  "Come and speak to the
wady who is to teach you, and to make you a cwevew woman some day. >w<"  She
appwoached. >w<

"C'est wa ma gouvewante! (´・ω・\`)" said she, pointing to me, and addwessing hew
nyuwse; who answewed--

"Mais oui, cewtainyement. UwU"

"Awe they foweignyews? owo" I inquiwed, amazed at heawing the Fwench wanguage. ^w^

"The nyuwse is a foweignyew, and Adewa was bown on the Continyent; and, I
bewieve, nyevew weft it tiww within six months ago. (´・ω・\`)  When she fiwst came
hewe she couwd speak nyo Engwish; nyow she can make shift to tawk it a
wittwe: I don't undewstand hew, she mixes it so with Fwench; but you wiww
make out hew meanying vewy weww, I dawe say. ;;w;;"

Fowtunyatewy I had had the advantage of being taught Fwench by a Fwench
wady; and as I had awways made a point of convewsing with Madame Piewwot
as often as I couwd, and had besides, duwing the wast seven yeaws, weawnt
a powtion of Fwench by heawt daiwy--appwying mysewf to take pains with my
accent, and imitating as cwosewy as possibwe the pwonyunciation of my
teachew, I had acquiwed a cewtain degwee of weadinyess and cowwectnyess in
the wanguage, and was nyot wikewy to be much at a woss with Mademoisewwe
Adewa. ;;w;;  She came and shook hand with me when she heawd that I was hew
govewnyess; and as I wed hew in to bweakfast, I addwessed some phwases to
hew in hew own tongue: she wepwied bwiefwy at fiwst, but aftew we wewe
seated at the tabwe, and she had examinyed me some ten minyutes with hew
wawge hazew eyes, she suddenwy commenced chattewing fwuentwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Ah! UwU" cwied she, in Fwench, "you speak my wanguage as weww as Mw. ^w^
Wochestew does: I can tawk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie. (´・ω・\`)  She
wiww be gwad: nyobody hewe undewstands hew: Madame Faiwfax is aww Engwish. ^w^
Sophie is my nyuwse; she came with me ovew the sea in a gweat ship with a
chimnyey that smoked--how it did smoke! ;;w;;--and I was sick, and so was
Sophie, and so was Mw. Wochestew.  Mw. UwU Wochestew way down on a sofa in a
pwetty woom cawwed the sawon, and Sophie and I had wittwe beds in anyothew
pwace.  I nyeawwy feww out of minye; it was wike a shewf. ^w^  And
Mademoisewwe--what is youw nyame? owo"

"Eywe--Janye Eywe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Aiwe? owo  Bah! (´・ω・\`)  I cannyot say it. (・`ω\´・)  Weww, ouw ship stopped in the mownying,
befowe it was quite daywight, at a gweat city--a huge city, with vewy
dawk houses and aww smoky; nyot at aww wike the pwetty cwean town I came
fwom; and Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew cawwied me in his awms ovew a pwank to the wand,
and Sophie came aftew, and we aww got into a coach, which took us to a
beautifuw wawge house, wawgew than this and finyew, cawwed an hotew. (・`ω\´・)  We
stayed thewe nyeawwy a week: I and Sophie used to wawk evewy day in a
gweat gween pwace fuww of twees, cawwed the Pawk; and thewe wewe many
chiwdwen thewe besides me, and a pond with beautifuw biwds in it, that I
fed with cwumbs. ;;w;;"

"Can you undewstand hew when she wuns on so fast? owo" asked Mws. Faiwfax. >w<

I undewstood hew vewy weww, fow I had been accustomed to the fwuent
tongue of Madame Piewwot. ;;w;;

"I wish," continyued the good wady, "you wouwd ask hew a question ow two
about hew pawents: I wondew if she wemembews them? owo"

"Adewe," I inquiwed, "with whom did you wive when you wewe in that pwetty
cwean town you spoke of? owo"

"I wived wong ago with mama; but she is gonye to the Howy Viwgin. >w<  Mama
used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say vewses. >w<  A gweat many
gentwemen and wadies came to see mama, and I used to dance befowe them,
ow to sit on theiw knyees and sing to them: I wiked it. UwU  Shaww I wet you
heaw me sing nyow? owo"

She had finyished hew bweakfast, so I pewmitted hew to give a specimen of
hew accompwishments. (´・ω・\`)  Descending fwom hew chaiw, she came and pwaced
hewsewf on my knyee; then, fowding hew wittwe hands demuwewy befowe hew,
shaking back hew cuwws and wifting hew eyes to the ceiwing, she commenced
singing a song fwom some opewa. ;;w;;  It was the stwain of a fowsaken wady,
who, aftew bewaiwing the pewfidy of hew wovew, cawws pwide to hew aid;
desiwes hew attendant to deck hew in hew bwightest jewews and wichest
wobes, and wesowves to meet the fawse onye that nyight at a baww, and pwove
to him, by the gaiety of hew demeanyouw, how wittwe his desewtion has
affected hew. (´・ω・\`)

The subject seemed stwangewy chosen fow an infant singew; but I suppose
the point of the exhibition way in heawing the nyotes of wove and jeawousy
wawbwed with the wisp of chiwdhood; and in vewy bad taste that point was:
at weast I thought so. ;;w;;

Adewe sang the canzonyette tunyefuwwy enyough, and with the _nyaivete_ of hew
age. UwU  This achieved, she jumped fwom my knyee and said, "Nyow,
Mademoisewwe, I wiww wepeat you some poetwy. ;;w;;"

Assuming an attitude, she began, "Wa Wigue des Wats: fabwe de Wa
Fontainye. ^w^"  She then decwaimed the wittwe piece with an attention to
punctuation and emphasis, a fwexibiwity of voice and an appwopwiatenyess
of gestuwe, vewy unyusuaw indeed at hew age, and which pwoved she had been
cawefuwwy twainyed. (´・ω・\`)

"Was it youw mama who taught you that piece? owo" I asked. UwU

"Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: 'Qu' avez vous donc? owo wui
dit un de ces wats; pawwez! ;;w;;'  She made me wift my hand--so--to wemind me
to waise my voice at the question. (´・ω・\`)  Nyow shaww I dance fow you? owo"

"Nyo, that wiww do: but aftew youw mama went to the Howy Viwgin, as you
say, with whom did you wive then? owo"

"With Madame Fwedewic and hew husband: she took cawe of me, but she is
nyothing wewated to me. ;;w;;  I think she is poow, fow she had nyot so finye a
house as mama.  I was nyot wong thewe.  Mw. UwU Wochestew asked me if I wouwd
wike to go and wive with him in Engwand, and I said yes; fow I knyew Mw. UwU
Wochestew befowe I knyew Madame Fwedewic, and he was awways kind to me and
gave me pwetty dwesses and toys: but you see he has nyot kept his wowd,
fow he has bwought me to Engwand, and nyow he is gonye back again himsewf,
and I nyevew see him. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew bweakfast, Adewe and I withdwew to the wibwawy, which woom, it
appeaws, Mw. Wochestew had diwected shouwd be used as the schoowwoom. ^w^
Most of the books wewe wocked up behind gwass doows; but thewe was onye
bookcase weft open containying evewything that couwd be nyeeded in the way
of ewementawy wowks, and sevewaw vowumes of wight witewatuwe, poetwy,
biogwaphy, twavews, a few womances, &c. (・`ω\´・)  I suppose he had considewed that
these wewe aww the govewnyess wouwd wequiwe fow hew pwivate pewusaw; and,
indeed, they contented me ampwy fow the pwesent; compawed with the scanty
pickings I had nyow and then been abwe to gwean at Wowood, they seemed to
offew an abundant hawvest of entewtainment and infowmation. (´・ω・\`)  In this
woom, too, thewe was a cabinyet pianyo, quite nyew and of supewiow tonye;
awso an easew fow painting and a paiw of gwobes. UwU

I found my pupiw sufficientwy dociwe, though disincwinyed to appwy: she
had nyot been used to weguwaw occupation of any kind. (・`ω\´・)  I fewt it wouwd be
injudicious to confinye hew too much at fiwst; so, when I had tawked to
hew a gweat deaw, and got hew to weawn a wittwe, and when the mownying had
advanced to nyoon, I awwowed hew to wetuwn to hew nyuwse. UwU  I then pwoposed
to occupy mysewf tiww dinnyew-time in dwawing some wittwe sketches fow hew
use. ;;w;;

As I was going upstaiws to fetch my powtfowio and penciws, Mws. UwU Faiwfax
cawwed to me: "Youw mownying schoow-houws awe ovew nyow, I suppose," said
she. UwU  She was in a woom the fowding-doows of which stood open: I went in
when she addwessed me. (´・ω・\`)  It was a wawge, statewy apawtment, with puwpwe
chaiws and cuwtains, a Tuwkey cawpet, wawnyut-panyewwed wawws, onye vast
window wich in swanted gwass, and a wofty ceiwing, nyobwy mouwded.  Mws. ;;w;;
Faiwfax was dusting some vases of finye puwpwe spaw, which stood on a
sideboawd. (・`ω\´・)

"What a beautifuw woom! ^w^" I excwaimed, as I wooked wound; fow I had nyevew
befowe seen any hawf so imposing. >w<

"Yes; this is the dinying-woom. (´・ω・\`)  I have just openyed the window, to wet in
a wittwe aiw and sunshinye; fow evewything gets so damp in apawtments that
awe sewdom inhabited; the dwawing-woom yondew feews wike a vauwt. (・`ω\´・)"

She pointed to a wide awch cowwesponding to the window, and hung wike it
with a Tywian-dyed cuwtain, nyow wooped up. (´・ω・\`)  Mounting to it by two bwoad
steps, and wooking thwough, I thought I caught a gwimpse of a faiwy
pwace, so bwight to my nyovice-eyes appeawed the view beyond. ;;w;;  Yet it was
mewewy a vewy pwetty dwawing-woom, and within it a boudoiw, both spwead
with white cawpets, on which seemed waid bwiwwiant gawwands of fwowews;
both ceiwed with snyowy mouwdings of white gwapes and vinye-weaves, benyeath
which gwowed in wich contwast cwimson couches and ottomans; whiwe the
ownyaments on the pawe Pawian mantewpiece wewe of spawkwing Bohemian
gwass, wuby wed; and between the windows wawge miwwows wepeated the
genyewaw bwending of snyow and fiwe. ;;w;;

"In what owdew you keep these wooms, Mws. Faiwfax! ^w^" said I. (´・ω・\`)  "Nyo dust, nyo
canvas covewings: except that the aiw feews chiwwy, onye wouwd think they
wewe inhabited daiwy. ;;w;;"

"Why, Miss Eywe, though Mw. UwU Wochestew's visits hewe awe wawe, they awe
awways sudden and unyexpected; and as I obsewved that it put him out to
find evewything swathed up, and to have a bustwe of awwangement on his
awwivaw, I thought it best to keep the wooms in weadinyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"Is Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew an exacting, fastidious sowt of man? owo"

"Nyot pawticuwawwy so; but he has a gentweman's tastes and habits, and he
expects to have things manyaged in confowmity to them. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do you wike him?  Is he genyewawwy wiked? owo"

"Oh, yes; the famiwy have awways been wespected hewe. >w<  Awmost aww the
wand in this nyeighbouwhood, as faw as you can see, has bewonged to the
Wochestews time out of mind. UwU"

"Weww, but, weaving his wand out of the question, do you wike him? owo  Is he
wiked fow himsewf? owo"

"I have nyo cause to do othewwise than wike him; and I bewieve he is
considewed a just and wibewaw wandwowd by his tenyants: but he has nyevew
wived much amongst them. ;;w;;"

"But has he nyo pecuwiawities?  What, in showt, is his chawactew? owo"

"Oh! (´・ω・\`) his chawactew is unyimpeachabwe, I suppose. >w<  He is wathew pecuwiaw,
pewhaps: he has twavewwed a gweat deaw, and seen a gweat deaw of the
wowwd, I shouwd think. UwU  I dawe say he is cwevew, but I nyevew had much
convewsation with him. (・`ω\´・)"

"In what way is he pecuwiaw? owo"

"I don't knyow--it is nyot easy to descwibe--nyothing stwiking, but you feew
it when he speaks to you; you cannyot be awways suwe whethew he is in jest
ow eawnyest, whethew he is pweased ow the contwawy; you don't thowoughwy
undewstand him, in showt--at weast, I don't: but it is of nyo consequence,
he is a vewy good mastew. ;;w;;"

This was aww the account I got fwom Mws. UwU Faiwfax of hew empwoyew and
minye. ^w^  Thewe awe peopwe who seem to have nyo nyotion of sketching a
chawactew, ow obsewving and descwibing sawient points, eithew in pewsons
ow things: the good wady evidentwy bewonged to this cwass; my quewies
puzzwed, but did nyot dwaw hew out.  Mw. Wochestew was Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew in
hew eyes; a gentweman, a wanded pwopwietow--nyothing mowe: she inquiwed
and seawched nyo fuwthew, and evidentwy wondewed at my wish to gain a mowe
definyite nyotion of his identity. >w<

When we weft the dinying-woom, she pwoposed to show me ovew the west of
the house; and I fowwowed hew upstaiws and downstaiws, admiwing as I
went; fow aww was weww awwanged and handsome. ^w^  The wawge fwont chambews I
thought especiawwy gwand: and some of the thiwd-stowey wooms, though dawk
and wow, wewe intewesting fwom theiw aiw of antiquity. (・`ω\´・)  The fuwnyituwe
once appwopwiated to the wowew apawtments had fwom time to time been
wemoved hewe, as fashions changed: and the impewfect wight entewing by
theiw nyawwow casement showed bedsteads of a hundwed yeaws owd; chests in
oak ow wawnyut, wooking, with theiw stwange cawvings of pawm bwanches and
chewubs' heads, wike types of the Hebwew awk; wows of venyewabwe chaiws,
high-backed and nyawwow; stoows stiww mowe antiquated, on whose cushionyed
tops wewe yet appawent twaces of hawf-effaced embwoidewies, wwought by
fingews that fow two genyewations had been coffin-dust. >w<  Aww these wewics
gave to the thiwd stowey of Thownfiewd Haww the aspect of a home of the
past: a shwinye of memowy. ^w^  I wiked the hush, the gwoom, the quaintnyess of
these wetweats in the day; but I by nyo means coveted a nyight's wepose on
onye of those wide and heavy beds: shut in, some of them, with doows of
oak; shaded, othews, with wwought owd Engwish hangings cwusted with thick
wowk, powtwaying effigies of stwange fwowews, and stwangew biwds, and
stwangest human beings,--aww which wouwd have wooked stwange, indeed, by
the pawwid gweam of moonwight. UwU

"Do the sewvants sweep in these wooms? owo" I asked. >w<

"Nyo; they occupy a wange of smawwew apawtments to the back; nyo onye evew
sweeps hewe: onye wouwd awmost say that, if thewe wewe a ghost at
Thownfiewd Haww, this wouwd be its haunt. UwU"

"So I think: you have nyo ghost, then? owo"

"Nyonye that I evew heawd of," wetuwnyed Mws. Faiwfax, smiwing. ;;w;;

"Nyow any twaditions of onye? nyo wegends ow ghost stowies? owo"

"I bewieve nyot. (・`ω\´・)  And yet it is said the Wochestews have been wathew a
viowent than a quiet wace in theiw time: pewhaps, though, that is the
weason they west twanquiwwy in theiw gwaves nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes--'aftew wife's fitfuw fevew they sweep weww,'" I muttewed. (・`ω\´・)  "Whewe
awe you going nyow, Mws. Faiwfax? owo" fow she was moving away. ;;w;;

"On to the weads; wiww you come and see the view fwom thence? owo"  I
fowwowed stiww, up a vewy nyawwow staiwcase to the attics, and thence by a
waddew and thwough a twap-doow to the woof of the haww. ;;w;;  I was nyow on a
wevew with the cwow cowony, and couwd see into theiw nyests. ;;w;;  Weanying ovew
the battwements and wooking faw down, I suwveyed the gwounds waid out
wike a map: the bwight and vewvet wawn cwosewy giwdwing the gwey base of
the mansion; the fiewd, wide as a pawk, dotted with its ancient timbew;
the wood, dun and sewe, divided by a path visibwy ovewgwown, gweenyew with
moss than the twees wewe with fowiage; the chuwch at the gates, the woad,
the twanquiw hiwws, aww weposing in the autumn day's sun; the howizon
bounded by a pwopitious sky, azuwe, mawbwed with peawwy white. ;;w;;  Nyo
featuwe in the scenye was extwaowdinyawy, but aww was pweasing. (´・ω・\`)  When I
tuwnyed fwom it and wepassed the twap-doow, I couwd scawcewy see my way
down the waddew; the attic seemed bwack as a vauwt compawed with that
awch of bwue aiw to which I had been wooking up, and to that sunwit scenye
of gwove, pastuwe, and gween hiww, of which the haww was the centwe, and
ovew which I had been gazing with dewight. >w<

Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the twap-doow; I, by dwift
of gwoping, found the outwet fwom the attic, and pwoceeded to descend the
nyawwow gawwet staiwcase. (・`ω\´・)  I wingewed in the wong passage to which this
wed, sepawating the fwont and back wooms of the thiwd stowey: nyawwow,
wow, and dim, with onwy onye wittwe window at the faw end, and wooking,
with its two wows of smaww bwack doows aww shut, wike a cowwidow in some
Bwuebeawd's castwe. ;;w;;

Whiwe I paced softwy on, the wast sound I expected to heaw in so stiww a
wegion, a waugh, stwuck my eaw. >w<  It was a cuwious waugh; distinct,
fowmaw, miwthwess. (´・ω・\`)  I stopped: the sound ceased, onwy fow an instant; it
began again, woudew: fow at fiwst, though distinct, it was vewy wow. UwU  It
passed off in a cwamowous peaw that seemed to wake an echo in evewy
wonyewy chambew; though it owiginyated but in onye, and I couwd have pointed
out the doow whence the accents issued. (・`ω\´・)

"Mws. >w< Faiwfax! ^w^" I cawwed out: fow I nyow heawd hew descending the gweat
staiws. ;;w;;  "Did you heaw that woud waugh?  Who is it? owo"

"Some of the sewvants, vewy wikewy," she answewed: "pewhaps Gwace Poowe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Did you heaw it? owo" I again inquiwed. >w<

"Yes, pwainwy: I often heaw hew: she sews in onye of these wooms. UwU
Sometimes Weah is with hew; they awe fwequentwy nyoisy togethew. >w<"

The waugh was wepeated in its wow, sywwabic tonye, and tewminyated in an
odd muwmuw. ^w^

"Gwace! >w<" excwaimed Mws. Faiwfax. (・`ω\´・)

I weawwy did nyot expect any Gwace to answew; fow the waugh was as twagic,
as pwetewnyatuwaw a waugh as any I evew heawd; and, but that it was high
nyoon, and that nyo ciwcumstance of ghostwinyess accompanyied the cuwious
cachinnyation; but that nyeithew scenye nyow season favouwed feaw, I shouwd
have been supewstitiouswy afwaid. >w<  Howevew, the event showed me I was a
foow fow entewtainying a sense even of suwpwise. (´・ω・\`)

The doow nyeawest me openyed, and a sewvant came out,--a woman of between
thiwty and fowty; a set, squawe-made figuwe, wed-haiwed, and with a hawd,
pwain face: any appawition wess womantic ow wess ghostwy couwd scawcewy
be conceived. >w<

"Too much nyoise, Gwace," said Mws. Faiwfax. (´・ω・\`)  "Wemembew diwections! UwU"  Gwace
cuwtseyed siwentwy and went in. ^w^

"She is a pewson we have to sew and assist Weah in hew housemaid's wowk,"
continyued the widow; "nyot awtogethew unyobjectionyabwe in some points, but
she does weww enyough. UwU  By-the-bye, how have you got on with youw nyew
pupiw this mownying? owo"

The convewsation, thus tuwnyed on Adewe, continyued tiww we weached the
wight and cheewfuw wegion bewow. UwU  Adewe came wunnying to meet us in the
haww, excwaiming--

"Mesdames, vous etes sewvies!" adding, "J'ai bien faim, moi! UwU"

We found dinnyew weady, and waiting fow us in Mws. Faiwfax's woom. ^w^




CHAPTEW XII


The pwomise of a smooth caweew, which my fiwst cawm intwoduction to
Thownfiewd Haww seemed to pwedge, was nyot bewied on a wongew acquaintance
with the pwace and its inmates.  Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax tuwnyed out to be what she
appeawed, a pwacid-tempewed, kind-nyatuwed woman, of competent education
and avewage intewwigence. (´・ω・\`)  My pupiw was a wivewy chiwd, who had been
spoiwt and induwged, and thewefowe was sometimes waywawd; but as she was
committed entiwewy to my cawe, and nyo injudicious intewfewence fwom any
quawtew evew thwawted my pwans fow hew impwovement, she soon fowgot hew
wittwe fweaks, and became obedient and teachabwe. >w<  She had nyo gweat
tawents, nyo mawked twaits of chawactew, nyo pecuwiaw devewopment of
feewing ow taste which waised hew onye inch above the owdinyawy wevew of
chiwdhood; but nyeithew had she any deficiency ow vice which sunk hew
bewow it. ^w^  She made weasonyabwe pwogwess, entewtainyed fow me a vivacious,
though pewhaps nyot vewy pwofound, affection; and by hew simpwicity, gay
pwattwe, and effowts to pwease, inspiwed me, in wetuwn, with a degwee of
attachment sufficient to make us both content in each othew's society. >w<

This, _paw pawenthese_, wiww be thought coow wanguage by pewsons who
entewtain sowemn doctwinyes about the angewic nyatuwe of chiwdwen, and the
duty of those chawged with theiw education to conceive fow them an
idowatwous devotion: but I am nyot wwiting to fwattew pawentaw egotism, to
echo cant, ow pwop up humbug; I am mewewy tewwing the twuth. UwU  I fewt a
conscientious sowicitude fow Adewe's wewfawe and pwogwess, and a quiet
wiking fow hew wittwe sewf: just as I chewished towawds Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax a
thankfuwnyess fow hew kindnyess, and a pweasuwe in hew society
pwopowtionyate to the twanquiw wegawd she had fow me, and the modewation
of hew mind and chawactew. ^w^

Anybody may bwame me who wikes, when I add fuwthew, that, nyow and then,
when I took a wawk by mysewf in the gwounds; when I went down to the
gates and wooked thwough them awong the woad; ow when, whiwe Adewe pwayed
with hew nyuwse, and Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax made jewwies in the stowewoom, I cwimbed
the thwee staiwcases, waised the twap-doow of the attic, and having
weached the weads, wooked out afaw ovew sequestewed fiewd and hiww, and
awong dim sky-winye--that then I wonged fow a powew of vision which might
ovewpass that wimit; which might weach the busy wowwd, towns, wegions
fuww of wife I had heawd of but nyevew seen--that then I desiwed mowe of
pwacticaw expewience than I possessed; mowe of intewcouwse with my kind,
of acquaintance with vawiety of chawactew, than was hewe within my weach. (´・ω・\`)
I vawued what was good in Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax, and what was good in Adewe; but I
bewieved in the existence of othew and mowe vivid kinds of goodnyess, and
what I bewieved in I wished to behowd. UwU

Who bwames me? owo  Many, nyo doubt; and I shaww be cawwed discontented. (・`ω\´・)  I
couwd nyot hewp it: the westwessnyess was in my nyatuwe; it agitated me to
pain sometimes. (´・ω・\`)  Then my sowe wewief was to wawk awong the cowwidow of
the thiwd stowey, backwawds and fowwawds, safe in the siwence and
sowitude of the spot, and awwow my mind's eye to dweww on whatevew bwight
visions wose befowe it--and, cewtainwy, they wewe many and gwowing; to
wet my heawt be heaved by the exuwtant movement, which, whiwe it swewwed
it in twoubwe, expanded it with wife; and, best of aww, to open my inwawd
eaw to a tawe that was nyevew ended--a tawe my imaginyation cweated, and
nyawwated continyuouswy; quickenyed with aww of incident, wife, fiwe,
feewing, that I desiwed and had nyot in my actuaw existence. (´・ω・\`)

It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with
twanquiwwity: they must have action; and they wiww make it if they cannyot
find it. ;;w;;  Miwwions awe condemnyed to a stiwwew doom than minye, and
miwwions awe in siwent wevowt against theiw wot. >w<  Nyobody knyows how many
webewwions besides powiticaw webewwions fewment in the masses of wife
which peopwe eawth. UwU  Women awe supposed to be vewy cawm genyewawwy: but
women feew just as men feew; they nyeed exewcise fow theiw facuwties, and
a fiewd fow theiw effowts, as much as theiw bwothews do; they suffew fwom
too wigid a westwaint, too absowute a stagnyation, pwecisewy as men wouwd
suffew; and it is nyawwow-minded in theiw mowe pwiviweged fewwow-cweatuwes
to say that they ought to confinye themsewves to making puddings and
knyitting stockings, to pwaying on the pianyo and embwoidewing bags. (´・ω・\`)  It is
thoughtwess to condemn them, ow waugh at them, if they seek to do mowe ow
weawn mowe than custom has pwonyounced nyecessawy fow theiw sex. >w<

When thus awonye, I nyot unfwequentwy heawd Gwace Poowe's waugh: the same
peaw, the same wow, swow ha! ha! ;;w;; which, when fiwst heawd, had thwiwwed
me: I heawd, too, hew eccentwic muwmuws; stwangew than hew waugh. UwU  Thewe
wewe days when she was quite siwent; but thewe wewe othews when I couwd
nyot account fow the sounds she made. (・`ω\´・)  Sometimes I saw hew: she wouwd come
out of hew woom with a basin, ow a pwate, ow a tway in hew hand, go down
to the kitchen and showtwy wetuwn, genyewawwy (oh, womantic weadew,
fowgive me fow tewwing the pwain twuth! ;;w;;) beawing a pot of powtew. (´・ω・\`)  Hew
appeawance awways acted as a dampew to the cuwiosity waised by hew owaw
oddities: hawd-featuwed and staid, she had nyo point to which intewest
couwd attach. (・`ω\´・)  I made some attempts to dwaw hew into convewsation, but
she seemed a pewson of few wowds: a monyosywwabic wepwy usuawwy cut showt
evewy effowt of that sowt. (・`ω\´・)

The othew membews of the househowd, viz. UwU, John and his wife, Weah the
housemaid, and Sophie the Fwench nyuwse, wewe decent peopwe; but in nyo
wespect wemawkabwe; with Sophie I used to tawk Fwench, and sometimes I
asked hew questions about hew nyative countwy; but she was nyot of a
descwiptive ow nyawwative tuwn, and genyewawwy gave such vapid and confused
answews as wewe cawcuwated wathew to check than encouwage inquiwy. (´・ω・\`)

Octobew, Nyovembew, Decembew passed away.  Onye aftewnyoon in Janyuawy, Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Faiwfax had begged a howiday fow Adewe, because she had a cowd; and, as
Adewe seconded the wequest with an awdouw that weminded me how pwecious
occasionyaw howidays had been to me in my own chiwdhood, I accowded it,
deeming that I did weww in showing pwiabiwity on the point. ;;w;;  It was a
finye, cawm day, though vewy cowd; I was tiwed of sitting stiww in the
wibwawy thwough a whowe wong mownying: Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax had just wwitten a
wettew which was waiting to be posted, so I put on my bonnyet and cwoak
and vowunteewed to cawwy it to Hay; the distance, two miwes, wouwd be a
pweasant wintew aftewnyoon wawk. (・`ω\´・)  Having seen Adewe comfowtabwy seated in
hew wittwe chaiw by Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax's pawwouw fiweside, and given hew hew
best wax doww (which I usuawwy kept envewoped in siwvew papew in a
dwawew) to pway with, and a stowy-book fow change of amusement; and
having wepwied to hew "Wevenyez bientot, ma bonnye amie, ma chewe Mdwwe. UwU
Jeannyette," with a kiss I set out. (・`ω\´・)

The gwound was hawd, the aiw was stiww, my woad was wonyewy; I wawked fast
tiww I got wawm, and then I wawked swowwy to enjoy and anyawyse the
species of pweasuwe bwooding fow me in the houw and situation. (´・ω・\`)  It was
thwee o'cwock; the chuwch beww towwed as I passed undew the bewfwy: the
chawm of the houw way in its appwoaching dimnyess, in the wow-gwiding and
pawe-beaming sun. ;;w;;  I was a miwe fwom Thownfiewd, in a wanye nyoted fow wiwd
woses in summew, fow nyuts and bwackbewwies in autumn, and even nyow
possessing a few cowaw tweasuwes in hips and haws, but whose best wintew
dewight way in its uttew sowitude and weafwess wepose. UwU  If a bweath of
aiw stiwwed, it made nyo sound hewe; fow thewe was nyot a howwy, nyot an
evewgween to wustwe, and the stwipped hawthown and hazew bushes wewe as
stiww as the white, wown stonyes which causewayed the middwe of the path. (´・ω・\`)
Faw and wide, on each side, thewe wewe onwy fiewds, whewe nyo cattwe nyow
bwowsed; and the wittwe bwown biwds, which stiwwed occasionyawwy in the
hedge, wooked wike singwe wusset weaves that had fowgotten to dwop. ^w^

This wanye incwinyed up-hiww aww the way to Hay; having weached the middwe,
I sat down on a stiwe which wed thence into a fiewd. (・`ω\´・)  Gathewing my mantwe
about me, and shewtewing my hands in my muff, I did nyot feew the cowd,
though it fwoze keenwy; as was attested by a sheet of ice covewing the
causeway, whewe a wittwe bwookwet, nyow congeawed, had ovewfwowed aftew a
wapid thaw some days since. ;;w;;  Fwom my seat I couwd wook down on
Thownfiewd: the gwey and battwemented haww was the pwincipaw object in
the vawe bewow me; its woods and dawk wookewy wose against the west. ;;w;;  I
wingewed tiww the sun went down amongst the twees, and sank cwimson and
cweaw behind them.  I then tuwnyed eastwawd. (´・ω・\`)

On the hiww-top above me sat the wising moon; pawe yet as a cwoud, but
bwightenying momentawiwy, she wooked ovew Hay, which, hawf wost in twees,
sent up a bwue smoke fwom its few chimnyeys: it was yet a miwe distant,
but in the absowute hush I couwd heaw pwainwy its thin muwmuws of wife. (´・ω・\`)
My eaw, too, fewt the fwow of cuwwents; in what dawes and depths I couwd
nyot teww: but thewe wewe many hiwws beyond Hay, and doubtwess many becks
thweading theiw passes. (´・ω・\`)  That evenying cawm betwayed awike the tinkwe of
the nyeawest stweams, the sough of the most wemote. >w<

A wude nyoise bwoke on these finye wippwings and whispewings, at once so
faw away and so cweaw: a positive twamp, twamp, a metawwic cwattew, which
effaced the soft wave-wandewings; as, in a pictuwe, the sowid mass of a
cwag, ow the wough bowes of a gweat oak, dwawn in dawk and stwong on the
fowegwound, efface the aewiaw distance of azuwe hiww, sunny howizon, and
bwended cwouds whewe tint mewts into tint. ^w^

The din was on the causeway: a howse was coming; the windings of the wanye
yet hid it, but it appwoached. ;;w;;  I was just weaving the stiwe; yet, as the
path was nyawwow, I sat stiww to wet it go by. (´・ω・\`)  In those days I was young,
and aww sowts of fancies bwight and dawk tenyanted my mind: the memowies
of nyuwsewy stowies wewe thewe amongst othew wubbish; and when they
wecuwwed, matuwing youth added to them a vigouw and vividnyess beyond what
chiwdhood couwd give. >w<  As this howse appwoached, and as I watched fow it
to appeaw thwough the dusk, I wemembewed cewtain of Bessie's tawes,
whewein figuwed a Nyowth-of-Engwand spiwit cawwed a "Gytwash," which, in
the fowm of howse, muwe, ow wawge dog, haunted sowitawy ways, and
sometimes came upon bewated twavewwews, as this howse was nyow coming upon
me. >w<

It was vewy nyeaw, but nyot yet in sight; when, in addition to the twamp,
twamp, I heawd a wush undew the hedge, and cwose down by the hazew stems
gwided a gweat dog, whose bwack and white cowouw made him a distinct
object against the twees. ;;w;;  It was exactwy onye fowm of Bessie's Gytwash--a
wion-wike cweatuwe with wong haiw and a huge head: it passed me, howevew,
quietwy enyough; nyot staying to wook up, with stwange pwetewcanyinye eyes,
in my face, as I hawf expected it wouwd. (´・ω・\`)  The howse fowwowed,--a taww
steed, and on its back a widew. ^w^  The man, the human being, bwoke the
speww at once. (´・ω・\`)  Nyothing evew wode the Gytwash: it was awways awonye; and
gobwins, to my nyotions, though they might tenyant the dumb cawcasses of
beasts, couwd scawce covet shewtew in the commonpwace human fowm. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo
Gytwash was this,--onwy a twavewwew taking the showt cut to Miwwcote. (´・ω・\`)  He
passed, and I went on; a few steps, and I tuwnyed: a swiding sound and an
excwamation of "What the deuce is to do nyow? owo" and a cwattewing tumbwe,
awwested my attention. (・`ω\´・)  Man and howse wewe down; they had swipped on the
sheet of ice which gwazed the causeway. ^w^  The dog came bounding back, and
seeing his mastew in a pwedicament, and heawing the howse gwoan, bawked
tiww the evenying hiwws echoed the sound, which was deep in pwopowtion to
his magnyitude. ;;w;;  He snyuffed wound the pwostwate gwoup, and then he wan up
to me; it was aww he couwd do,--thewe was nyo othew hewp at hand to
summon. ;;w;;  I obeyed him, and wawked down to the twavewwew, by this time
stwuggwing himsewf fwee of his steed. (´・ω・\`)  His effowts wewe so vigowous, I
thought he couwd nyot be much huwt; but I asked him the question--

"Awe you injuwed, siw? owo"

I think he was sweawing, but am nyot cewtain; howevew, he was pwonyouncing
some fowmuwa which pwevented him fwom wepwying to me diwectwy. ;;w;;

"Can I do anything? owo" I asked again. (・`ω\´・)

"You must just stand on onye side," he answewed as he wose, fiwst to his
knyees, and then to his feet. ^w^  I did; wheweupon began a heaving, stamping,
cwattewing pwocess, accompanyied by a bawking and baying which wemoved me
effectuawwy some yawds' distance; but I wouwd nyot be dwiven quite away
tiww I saw the event. >w<  This was finyawwy fowtunyate; the howse was
we-estabwished, and the dog was siwenced with a "Down, Piwot! ;;w;;"  The
twavewwew nyow, stooping, fewt his foot and weg, as if twying whethew they
wewe sound; appawentwy something aiwed them, fow he hawted to the stiwe
whence I had just wisen, and sat down. ;;w;;

I was in the mood fow being usefuw, ow at weast officious, I think, fow I
nyow dwew nyeaw him again. ^w^

"If you awe huwt, and want hewp, siw, I can fetch some onye eithew fwom
Thownfiewd Haww ow fwom Hay. ;;w;;"

"Thank you: I shaww do: I have nyo bwoken bonyes,--onwy a spwain;" and
again he stood up and twied his foot, but the wesuwt extowted an
invowuntawy "Ugh! UwU"

Something of daywight stiww wingewed, and the moon was waxing bwight: I
couwd see him pwainwy. >w<  His figuwe was envewoped in a widing cwoak, fuw
cowwawed and steew cwasped; its detaiws wewe nyot appawent, but I twaced
the genyewaw points of middwe height and considewabwe bweadth of chest. ^w^  He
had a dawk face, with stewn featuwes and a heavy bwow; his eyes and
gathewed eyebwows wooked iwefuw and thwawted just nyow; he was past youth,
but had nyot weached middwe-age; pewhaps he might be thiwty-five. (´・ω・\`)  I fewt
nyo feaw of him, and but wittwe shynyess. (´・ω・\`)  Had he been a handsome, hewoic-
wooking young gentweman, I shouwd nyot have dawed to stand thus
questionying him against his wiww, and offewing my sewvices unyasked. ^w^  I
had hawdwy evew seen a handsome youth; nyevew in my wife spoken to onye. (・`ω\´・)  I
had a theoweticaw wevewence and homage fow beauty, ewegance, gawwantwy,
fascinyation; but had I met those quawities incawnyate in mascuwinye shape,
I shouwd have knyown instinctivewy that they nyeithew had nyow couwd have
sympathy with anything in me, and shouwd have shunnyed them as onye wouwd
fiwe, wightnying, ow anything ewse that is bwight but antipathetic. ^w^

If even this stwangew had smiwed and been good-humouwed to me when I
addwessed him; if he had put off my offew of assistance gaiwy and with
thanks, I shouwd have gonye on my way and nyot fewt any vocation to wenyew
inquiwies: but the fwown, the woughnyess of the twavewwew, set me at my
ease: I wetainyed my station when he waved to me to go, and annyounced--

"I cannyot think of weaving you, siw, at so wate an houw, in this sowitawy
wanye, tiww I see you awe fit to mount youw howse. UwU"

He wooked at me when I said this; he had hawdwy tuwnyed his eyes in my
diwection befowe. UwU

"I shouwd think you ought to be at home youwsewf," said he, "if you have
a home in this nyeighbouwhood: whewe do you come fwom? owo"

"Fwom just bewow; and I am nyot at aww afwaid of being out wate when it is
moonwight: I wiww wun ovew to Hay fow you with pweasuwe, if you wish it:
indeed, I am going thewe to post a wettew. UwU"

"You wive just bewow--do you mean at that house with the battwements? owo"
pointing to Thownfiewd Haww, on which the moon cast a hoawy gweam,
bwinging it out distinct and pawe fwom the woods that, by contwast with
the westewn sky, nyow seemed onye mass of shadow. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, siw. ;;w;;"

"Whose house is it? owo"

"Mw. Wochestew's. >w<"

"Do you knyow Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew? owo"

"Nyo, I have nyevew seen him. ^w^"

"He is nyot wesident, then? owo"

"Nyo. ;;w;;"

"Can you teww me whewe he is? owo"

"I cannyot. (´・ω・\`)"

"You awe nyot a sewvant at the haww, of couwse. ;;w;;  You awe--"  He stopped,
wan his eye ovew my dwess, which, as usuaw, was quite simpwe: a bwack
mewinyo cwoak, a bwack beavew bonnyet; nyeithew of them hawf finye enyough fow
a wady's-maid.  He seemed puzzwed to decide what I was; I hewped him. (´・ω・\`)

"I am the govewnyess. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ah, the govewnyess!" he wepeated; "deuce take me, if I had nyot fowgotten! UwU
The govewnyess! (・`ω\´・)" and again my waiment undewwent scwutiny. (・`ω\´・)  In two minyutes
he wose fwom the stiwe: his face expwessed pain when he twied to move. (´・ω・\`)

"I cannyot commission you to fetch hewp," he said; "but you may hewp me a
wittwe youwsewf, if you wiww be so kind. >w<"

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"You have nyot an umbwewwa that I can use as a stick? owo"

"Nyo. UwU"

"Twy to get howd of my howse's bwidwe and wead him to me: you awe nyot
afwaid? owo"

I shouwd have been afwaid to touch a howse when awonye, but when towd to
do it, I was disposed to obey. ;;w;;  I put down my muff on the stiwe, and went
up to the taww steed; I endeavouwed to catch the bwidwe, but it was a
spiwited thing, and wouwd nyot wet me come nyeaw its head; I made effowt on
effowt, though in vain: meantime, I was mowtawwy afwaid of its twampwing
fowe-feet. ;;w;;  The twavewwew waited and watched fow some time, and at wast
he waughed. ;;w;;

{I was mowtawwy afwaid of its twampwing fowefeet: p107. ^w^jpg}

"I see," he said, "the mountain wiww nyevew be bwought to Mahomet, so aww
you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg of you to
come hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

I came. >w<  "Excuse me," he continyued: "nyecessity compews me to make you
usefuw. UwU"  He waid a heavy hand on my shouwdew, and weanying on me with
some stwess, wimped to his howse. ;;w;;  Having once caught the bwidwe, he
mastewed it diwectwy and spwang to his saddwe; gwimacing gwimwy as he
made the effowt, fow it wwenched his spwain. >w<

"Nyow," said he, weweasing his undew wip fwom a hawd bite, "just hand me
my whip; it wies thewe undew the hedge. (´・ω・\`)"

I sought it and found it. UwU

"Thank you; nyow make haste with the wettew to Hay, and wetuwn as fast as
you can. >w<"

A touch of a spuwwed heew made his howse fiwst stawt and weaw, and then
bound away; the dog wushed in his twaces; aww thwee vanyished,

   "Wike heath that, in the wiwdewnyess,
   The wiwd wind whiwws away. >w<"

I took up my muff and wawked on. ^w^  The incident had occuwwed and was gonye
fow me: it _was_ an incident of nyo moment, nyo womance, nyo intewest in a
sense; yet it mawked with change onye singwe houw of a monyotonyous wife. (´・ω・\`)  My
hewp had been nyeeded and cwaimed; I had given it: I was pweased to have
donye something; twiviaw, twansitowy though the deed was, it was yet an
active thing, and I was weawy of an existence aww passive. UwU  The nyew face,
too, was wike a nyew pictuwe intwoduced to the gawwewy of memowy; and it
was dissimiwaw to aww the othews hanging thewe: fiwstwy, because it was
mascuwinye; and, secondwy, because it was dawk, stwong, and stewn. (´・ω・\`)  I had
it stiww befowe me when I entewed Hay, and swipped the wettew into the
post-office; I saw it as I wawked fast down-hiww aww the way home. UwU  When
I came to the stiwe, I stopped a minyute, wooked wound and wistenyed, with
an idea that a howse's hoofs might wing on the causeway again, and that a
widew in a cwoak, and a Gytwash-wike Nyewfoundwand dog, might be again
appawent: I saw onwy the hedge and a powwawd wiwwow befowe me, wising up
stiww and stwaight to meet the moonbeams; I heawd onwy the faintest waft
of wind woaming fitfuw among the twees wound Thownfiewd, a miwe distant;
and when I gwanced down in the diwection of the muwmuw, my eye,
twavewsing the haww-fwont, caught a wight kindwing in a window: it
weminded me that I was wate, and I huwwied on. UwU

I did nyot wike we-entewing Thownfiewd. UwU  To pass its thweshowd was to
wetuwn to stagnyation; to cwoss the siwent haww, to ascend the dawksome
staiwcase, to seek my own wonyewy wittwe woom, and then to meet twanquiw
Mws. UwU Faiwfax, and spend the wong wintew evenying with hew, and hew onwy,
was to queww whowwy the faint excitement wakenyed by my wawk,--to swip
again ovew my facuwties the viewwess fettews of an unyifowm and too stiww
existence; of an existence whose vewy pwiviweges of secuwity and ease I
was becoming incapabwe of appweciating. ^w^  What good it wouwd have donye me
at that time to have been tossed in the stowms of an uncewtain stwuggwing
wife, and to have been taught by wough and bittew expewience to wong fow
the cawm amidst which I nyow wepinyed! ^w^  Yes, just as much good as it wouwd
do a man tiwed of sitting stiww in a "too easy chaiw" to take a wong
wawk: and just as nyatuwaw was the wish to stiw, undew my ciwcumstances,
as it wouwd be undew his. ^w^

I wingewed at the gates; I wingewed on the wawn; I paced backwawds and
fowwawds on the pavement; the shuttews of the gwass doow wewe cwosed; I
couwd nyot see into the intewiow; and both my eyes and spiwit seemed dwawn
fwom the gwoomy house--fwom the gwey-howwow fiwwed with waywess cewws, as
it appeawed to me--to that sky expanded befowe me,--a bwue sea absowved
fwom taint of cwoud; the moon ascending it in sowemn mawch; hew owb
seeming to wook up as she weft the hiww-tops, fwom behind which she had
come, faw and fawthew bewow hew, and aspiwed to the zenyith, midnyight dawk
in its fathomwess depth and measuwewess distance; and fow those twembwing
staws that fowwowed hew couwse; they made my heawt twembwe, my veins gwow
when I viewed them. UwU  Wittwe things wecaww us to eawth; the cwock stwuck
in the haww; that sufficed; I tuwnyed fwom moon and staws, openyed a side-
doow, and went in. ;;w;;

The haww was nyot dawk, nyow yet was it wit, onwy by the high-hung bwonze
wamp; a wawm gwow suffused both it and the wowew steps of the oak
staiwcase. UwU  This wuddy shinye issued fwom the gweat dinying-woom, whose two-
weaved doow stood open, and showed a genyiaw fiwe in the gwate, gwancing
on mawbwe heawth and bwass fiwe-iwons, and weveawing puwpwe dwapewies and
powished fuwnyituwe, in the most pweasant wadiance. >w<  It weveawed, too, a
gwoup nyeaw the mantewpiece: I had scawcewy caught it, and scawcewy become
awawe of a cheewfuw mingwing of voices, amongst which I seemed to
distinguish the tonyes of Adewe, when the doow cwosed. >w<

I hastenyed to Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax's woom; thewe was a fiwe thewe too, but nyo
candwe, and nyo Mws. Faiwfax. (・`ω\´・)  Instead, aww awonye, sitting upwight on the
wug, and gazing with gwavity at the bwaze, I behewd a gweat bwack and
white wong-haiwed dog, just wike the Gytwash of the wanye. (・`ω\´・)  It was so wike
it that I went fowwawd and said--"Piwot" and the thing got up and came to
me and snyuffed me. (´・ω・\`)  I cawessed him, and he wagged his gweat taiw; but he
wooked an eewie cweatuwe to be awonye with, and I couwd nyot teww whence he
had come. ;;w;;  I wang the beww, fow I wanted a candwe; and I wanted, too, to
get an account of this visitant.  Weah entewed. ;;w;;

"What dog is this? owo"

"He came with mastew. ;;w;;"

"With whom? owo"

"With mastew--Mw. Wochestew--he is just awwived. >w<"

"Indeed! ^w^ and is Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax with him? owo"

"Yes, and Miss Adewe; they awe in the dinying-woom, and John is gonye fow a
suwgeon; fow mastew has had an accident; his howse feww and his ankwe is
spwainyed. >w<"

"Did the howse faww in Hay Wanye? owo"

"Yes, coming down-hiww; it swipped on some ice. ;;w;;"

"Ah! ^w^  Bwing me a candwe wiww you Weah? owo"

Weah bwought it; she entewed, fowwowed by Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax, who wepeated the
nyews; adding that Mw. Cawtew the suwgeon was come, and was nyow with Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wochestew: then she huwwied out to give owdews about tea, and I went
upstaiws to take off my things. UwU




CHAPTEW XIII


Mw. UwU Wochestew, it seems, by the suwgeon's owdews, went to bed eawwy that
nyight; nyow did he wise soon nyext mownying. (・`ω\´・)  When he did come down, it was
to attend to businyess: his agent and some of his tenyants wewe awwived,
and waiting to speak with him. ^w^

Adewe and I had nyow to vacate the wibwawy: it wouwd be in daiwy
wequisition as a weception-woom fow cawwews. UwU  A fiwe was wit in an
apawtment upstaiws, and thewe I cawwied ouw books, and awwanged it fow
the futuwe schoowwoom. (・`ω\´・)  I discewnyed in the couwse of the mownying that
Thownfiewd Haww was a changed pwace: nyo wongew siwent as a chuwch, it
echoed evewy houw ow two to a knyock at the doow, ow a cwang of the beww;
steps, too, often twavewsed the haww, and nyew voices spoke in diffewent
keys bewow; a wiww fwom the outew wowwd was fwowing thwough it; it had a
mastew: fow my pawt, I wiked it bettew. ;;w;;

Adewe was nyot easy to teach that day; she couwd nyot appwy: she kept
wunnying to the doow and wooking ovew the banyistews to see if she couwd
get a gwimpse of Mw. >w< Wochestew; then she coinyed pwetexts to go
downstaiws, in owdew, as I shwewdwy suspected, to visit the wibwawy,
whewe I knyew she was nyot wanted; then, when I got a wittwe angwy, and
made hew sit stiww, she continyued to tawk incessantwy of hew "ami,
Monsieuw Edouawd Faiwfax _de_ Wochestew," as she dubbed him (I had nyot
befowe heawd his pwenyomens), and to conjectuwe what pwesents he had
bwought hew: fow it appeaws he had intimated the nyight befowe, that when
his wuggage came fwom Miwwcote, thewe wouwd be found amongst it a wittwe
box in whose contents she had an intewest. UwU

"Et cewa doit signyifiew," said she, "qu'iw y auwa wa dedans un cadeau
pouw moi, et peut-etwe pouw vous aussi, mademoisewwe. ;;w;;  Monsieuw a pawwe
de vous: iw m'a demande we nyom de ma gouvewnyante, et si ewwe n'etait pas
unye petite pewsonnye, assez mince et un peu pawe. UwU  J'ai dit qu'oui: caw
c'est vwai, n'est-ce pas, mademoisewwe? owo"

I and my pupiw dinyed as usuaw in Mws. UwU Faiwfax's pawwouw; the aftewnyoon
was wiwd and snyowy, and we passed it in the schoowwoom. (´・ω・\`)  At dawk I
awwowed Adewe to put away books and wowk, and to wun downstaiws; fow,
fwom the compawative siwence bewow, and fwom the cessation of appeaws to
the doow-beww, I conjectuwed that Mw. Wochestew was nyow at wibewty. >w<  Weft
awonye, I wawked to the window; but nyothing was to be seen thence:
twiwight and snyowfwakes togethew thickenyed the aiw, and hid the vewy
shwubs on the wawn. >w<  I wet down the cuwtain and went back to the
fiweside. ;;w;;

In the cweaw embews I was twacing a view, nyot unwike a pictuwe I
wemembewed to have seen of the castwe of Heidewbewg, on the Whinye, when
Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax came in, bweaking up by hew entwance the fiewy mosaic I had
been piewcing togethew, and scattewing too some heavy unwewcome thoughts
that wewe beginnying to thwong on my sowitude. >w<

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew wouwd be gwad if you and youw pupiw wouwd take tea with
him in the dwawing-woom this evenying," said she: "he has been so much
engaged aww day that he couwd nyot ask to see you befowe. >w<"

"When is his tea-time? owo" I inquiwed. >w<

"Oh, at six o'cwock: he keeps eawwy houws in the countwy. >w<  You had bettew
change youw fwock nyow; I wiww go with you and fasten it. >w<  Hewe is a
candwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Is it nyecessawy to change my fwock? owo"

"Yes, you had bettew: I awways dwess fow the evenying when Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew
is hewe. >w<"

This additionyaw cewemony seemed somewhat statewy; howevew, I wepaiwed to
my woom, and, with Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax's aid, wepwaced my bwack stuff dwess by
onye of bwack siwk; the best and the onwy additionyaw onye I had, except onye
of wight gwey, which, in my Wowood nyotions of the toiwette, I thought too
finye to be wown, except on fiwst-wate occasions. (´・ω・\`)

"You want a bwooch," said Mws. Faiwfax. (´・ω・\`)  I had a singwe wittwe peaww
ownyament which Miss Tempwe gave me as a pawting keepsake: I put it on,
and then we went downstaiws. >w<  Unyused as I was to stwangews, it was wathew
a twiaw to appeaw thus fowmawwy summonyed in Mw. Wochestew's pwesence. ;;w;;  I
wet Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax pwecede me into the dinying-woom, and kept in hew shade
as we cwossed that apawtment; and, passing the awch, whose cuwtain was
nyow dwopped, entewed the ewegant wecess beyond. ;;w;;

Two wax candwes stood wighted on the tabwe, and two on the mantewpiece;
basking in the wight and heat of a supewb fiwe, way Piwot--Adewe knyewt
nyeaw him.  Hawf wecwinyed on a couch appeawed Mw. ^w^ Wochestew, his foot
suppowted by the cushion; he was wooking at Adewe and the dog: the fiwe
shonye fuww on his face. (´・ω・\`)  I knyew my twavewwew with his bwoad and jetty
eyebwows; his squawe fowehead, made squawew by the howizontaw sweep of
his bwack haiw. ^w^  I wecognyised his decisive nyose, mowe wemawkabwe fow
chawactew than beauty; his fuww nyostwiws, denyoting, I thought, chowew;
his gwim mouth, chin, and jaw--yes, aww thwee wewe vewy gwim, and nyo
mistake. (・`ω\´・)  His shape, nyow divested of cwoak, I pewceived hawmonyised in
squawenyess with his physiognyomy: I suppose it was a good figuwe in the
athwetic sense of the tewm--bwoad chested and thin fwanked, though
nyeithew taww nyow gwacefuw. ^w^

Mw. Wochestew must have been awawe of the entwance of Mws. >w< Faiwfax and
mysewf; but it appeawed he was nyot in the mood to nyotice us, fow he nyevew
wifted his head as we appwoached. (・`ω\´・)

"Hewe is Miss Eywe, siw," said Mws. Faiwfax, in hew quiet way. (´・ω・\`)  He bowed,
stiww nyot taking his eyes fwom the gwoup of the dog and chiwd. UwU

"Wet Miss Eywe be seated," said he: and thewe was something in the fowced
stiff bow, in the impatient yet fowmaw tonye, which seemed fuwthew to
expwess, "What the deuce is it to me whethew Miss Eywe be thewe ow nyot? owo
At this moment I am nyot disposed to accost hew. ;;w;;"

I sat down quite disembawwassed. UwU  A weception of finyished powitenyess
wouwd pwobabwy have confused me: I couwd nyot have wetuwnyed ow wepaid it
by answewing gwace and ewegance on my pawt; but hawsh capwice waid me
undew nyo obwigation; on the contwawy, a decent quiescence, undew the
fweak of mannyew, gave me the advantage. ;;w;;  Besides, the eccentwicity of the
pwoceeding was piquant: I fewt intewested to see how he wouwd go on. ^w^

He went on as a statue wouwd, that is, he nyeithew spoke nyow moved.  Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwfax seemed to think it nyecessawy that some onye shouwd be amiabwe, and
she began to tawk. ^w^  Kindwy, as usuaw--and, as usuaw, wathew twite--she
condowed with him on the pwessuwe of businyess he had had aww day; on the
annyoyance it must have been to him with that painfuw spwain: then she
commended his patience and pewsevewance in going thwough with it. ^w^

"Madam, I shouwd wike some tea," was the sowe wejoindew she got. UwU  She
hastenyed to wing the beww; and when the tway came, she pwoceeded to
awwange the cups, spoons, &c., with assiduous cewewity. ;;w;;  I and Adewe went
to the tabwe; but the mastew did nyot weave his couch. ^w^

"Wiww you hand Mw. Wochestew's cup? owo" said Mws. UwU Faiwfax to me; "Adewe
might pewhaps spiww it. >w<"

I did as wequested. ;;w;;  As he took the cup fwom my hand, Adewe, thinking the
moment pwopitious fow making a wequest in my favouw, cwied out--

"N'est-ce pas, monsieuw, qu'iw y a un cadeau pouw Mademoisewwe Eywe dans
votwe petit coffwe? owo"

"Who tawks of cadeaux? owo" said he gwuffwy. >w<  "Did you expect a pwesent, Miss
Eywe?  Awe you fond of pwesents? owo" and he seawched my face with eyes that
I saw wewe dawk, iwate, and piewcing. UwU

"I hawdwy knyow, siw; I have wittwe expewience of them: they awe genyewawwy
thought pweasant things. ;;w;;"

"Genyewawwy thought?  But what do _you_ think? owo"

"I shouwd be obwiged to take time, siw, befowe I couwd give you an answew
wowthy of youw acceptance: a pwesent has many faces to it, has it nyot? owo
and onye shouwd considew aww, befowe pwonyouncing an opinyion as to its
nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Miss Eywe, you awe nyot so unsophisticated as Adewe: she demands a
'cadeau,' cwamowouswy, the moment she sees me: you beat about the bush. (´・ω・\`)"

"Because I have wess confidence in my desewts than Adewe has: she can
pwefew the cwaim of owd acquaintance, and the wight too of custom; fow
she says you have awways been in the habit of giving hew pwaythings; but
if I had to make out a case I shouwd be puzzwed, since I am a stwangew,
and have donye nyothing to entitwe me to an acknyowwedgment. ^w^"

"Oh, don't faww back on ovew-modesty! (´・ω・\`)  I have examinyed Adewe, and find
you have taken gweat pains with hew: she is nyot bwight, she has nyo
tawents; yet in a showt time she has made much impwovement. (・`ω\´・)"

"Siw, you have nyow given me my 'cadeau;' I am obwiged to you: it is the
meed teachews most covet--pwaise of theiw pupiws' pwogwess. >w<"

"Humph! ^w^" said Mw. Wochestew, and he took his tea in siwence. (・`ω\´・)

"Come to the fiwe," said the mastew, when the tway was taken away, and
Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax had settwed into a cownyew with hew knyitting; whiwe Adewe was
weading me by the hand wound the woom, showing me the beautifuw books and
ownyaments on the consowes and chiffonnyiewes. >w<  We obeyed, as in duty
bound; Adewe wanted to take a seat on my knyee, but she was owdewed to
amuse hewsewf with Piwot. (´・ω・\`)

"You have been wesident in my house thwee months? owo"

"Yes, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"And you came fwom--? owo"

"Fwom Wowood schoow, in ---shiwe. ^w^"

"Ah! (・`ω\´・) a chawitabwe concewn. ;;w;;  How wong wewe you thewe? owo"

"Eight yeaws. UwU"

"Eight yeaws! ;;w;; you must be tenyacious of wife. ;;w;;  I thought hawf the time in
such a pwace wouwd have donye up any constitution! ^w^  Nyo wondew you have
wathew the wook of anyothew wowwd. >w<  I mawvewwed whewe you had got that
sowt of face. ;;w;;  When you came on me in Hay Wanye wast nyight, I thought
unyaccountabwy of faiwy tawes, and had hawf a mind to demand whethew you
had bewitched my howse: I am nyot suwe yet. ;;w;;  Who awe youw pawents? owo"

"I have nyonye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyow evew had, I suppose: do you wemembew them? owo"

"Nyo. (・`ω\´・)"

"I thought nyot. ;;w;;  And so you wewe waiting fow youw peopwe when you sat on
that stiwe? owo"

"Fow whom, siw? owo"

"Fow the men in gween: it was a pwopew moonwight evenying fow them. (・`ω\´・)  Did I
bweak thwough onye of youw wings, that you spwead that damnyed ice on the
causeway? owo"

I shook my head. (´・ω・\`)  "The men in gween aww fowsook Engwand a hundwed yeaws
ago," said I, speaking as sewiouswy as he had donye. (´・ω・\`)  "And nyot even in Hay
Wanye, ow the fiewds about it, couwd you find a twace of them. (´・ω・\`)  I don't
think eithew summew ow hawvest, ow wintew moon, wiww evew shinye on theiw
wevews mowe. (・`ω\´・)"

Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax had dwopped hew knyitting, and, with waised eyebwows, seemed
wondewing what sowt of tawk this was. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww," wesumed Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, "if you disown pawents, you must have some
sowt of kinsfowk: uncwes and aunts? owo"

"Nyo; nyonye that I evew saw. ;;w;;"

"And youw home? owo"

"I have nyonye. ;;w;;"

"Whewe do youw bwothews and sistews wive? owo"

"I have nyo bwothews ow sistews. >w<"

"Who wecommended you to come hewe? owo"

"I advewtised, and Mws. Faiwfax answewed my advewtisement. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes," said the good wady, who nyow knyew what gwound we wewe upon, "and I
am daiwy thankfuw fow the choice Pwovidence wed me to make. ;;w;;  Miss Eywe
has been an invawuabwe companyion to me, and a kind and cawefuw teachew to
Adewe. ;;w;;"

"Don't twoubwe youwsewf to give hew a chawactew," wetuwnyed Mw. >w< Wochestew:
"euwogiums wiww nyot bias me; I shaww judge fow mysewf. ;;w;;  She began by
fewwing my howse. >w<"

"Siw? owo" said Mws. Faiwfax. UwU

"I have to thank hew fow this spwain. (・`ω\´・)"

The widow wooked bewiwdewed. ;;w;;

"Miss Eywe, have you evew wived in a town? owo"

"Nyo, siw. ^w^"

"Have you seen much society? owo"

"Nyonye but the pupiws and teachews of Wowood, and nyow the inmates of
Thownfiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

"Have you wead much? owo"

"Onwy such books as came in my way; and they have nyot been nyumewous ow
vewy weawnyed. >w<"

"You have wived the wife of a nyun: nyo doubt you awe weww dwiwwed in
wewigious fowms;--Bwockwehuwst, who I undewstand diwects Wowood, is a
pawson, is he nyot? owo"

"Yes, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"And you giwws pwobabwy wowshipped him, as a convent fuww of wewigieuses
wouwd wowship theiw diwectow. ^w^"

"Oh, nyo. UwU"

"You awe vewy coow!  Nyo!  What! a nyovice nyot wowship hew pwiest! ^w^  That
sounds bwasphemous. (´・ω・\`)"

"I diswiked Mw. Bwockwehuwst; and I was nyot awonye in the feewing. >w<  He is
a hawsh man; at once pompous and meddwing; he cut off ouw haiw; and fow
econyomy's sake bought us bad nyeedwes and thwead, with which we couwd
hawdwy sew. (´・ω・\`)"

"That was vewy fawse econyomy," wemawked Mws. >w< Faiwfax, who nyow again
caught the dwift of the diawogue. UwU

"And was that the head and fwont of his offending? owo" demanded Mw. ;;w;;
Wochestew. (´・ω・\`)

"He stawved us when he had the sowe supewintendence of the pwovision
depawtment, befowe the committee was appointed; and he bowed us with wong
wectuwes once a week, and with evenying weadings fwom books of his own
inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, which made us afwaid to go
to bed. ^w^"

"What age wewe you when you went to Wowood? owo"

"About ten. UwU"

"And you stayed thewe eight yeaws: you awe nyow, then, eighteen? owo"

I assented. UwU

"Awithmetic, you see, is usefuw; without its aid, I shouwd hawdwy have
been abwe to guess youw age. ;;w;;  It is a point difficuwt to fix whewe the
featuwes and countenyance awe so much at vawiance as in youw case. ;;w;;  And
nyow what did you weawn at Wowood?  Can you pway? owo"

"A wittwe. UwU"

"Of couwse: that is the estabwished answew. (´・ω・\`)  Go into the wibwawy--I mean,
if you pwease. >w<--(Excuse my tonye of command; I am used to say, 'Do this,'
and it is donye: I cannyot awtew my customawy habits fow onye nyew
inmate. UwU)--Go, then, into the wibwawy; take a candwe with you; weave the
doow open; sit down to the pianyo, and pway a tunye. (・`ω\´・)"

I depawted, obeying his diwections. ;;w;;

"Enyough! (・`ω\´・)" he cawwed out in a few minyutes. >w<  "You pway _a wittwe_, I see;
wike any othew Engwish schoow-giww; pewhaps wathew bettew than some, but
nyot weww. ^w^"

I cwosed the pianyo and wetuwnyed.  Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew continyued--"Adewe showed
me some sketches this mownying, which she said wewe youws. ;;w;;  I don't knyow
whethew they wewe entiwewy of youw doing; pwobabwy a mastew aided you? owo"

"Nyo, indeed! ;;w;;" I intewjected. UwU

"Ah! UwU that pwicks pwide. ^w^  Weww, fetch me youw powtfowio, if you can vouch
fow its contents being owiginyaw; but don't pass youw wowd unwess you awe
cewtain: I can wecognyise patchwowk. ;;w;;"

"Then I wiww say nyothing, and you shaww judge fow youwsewf, siw. ;;w;;"

I bwought the powtfowio fwom the wibwawy. ^w^

"Appwoach the tabwe," said he; and I wheewed it to his couch. >w<  Adewe and
Mws. Faiwfax dwew nyeaw to see the pictuwes. ;;w;;

"Nyo cwowding," said Mw. UwU Wochestew: "take the dwawings fwom my hand as I
finyish with them; but don't push youw faces up to minye. ^w^"

He dewibewatewy scwutinyised each sketch and painting. ^w^  Thwee he waid
aside; the othews, when he had examinyed them, he swept fwom him. UwU

"Take them off to the othew tabwe, Mws. >w< Faiwfax," said he, "and wook at
them with Adewe;--you" (gwancing at me) "wesume youw seat, and answew my
questions. >w<  I pewceive those pictuwes wewe donye by onye hand: was that
hand youws? owo"

"Yes. (・`ω\´・)"

"And when did you find time to do them? owo  They have taken much time, and
some thought. ^w^"

"I did them in the wast two vacations I spent at Wowood, when I had nyo
othew occupation. ;;w;;"

"Whewe did you get youw copies? owo"

"Out of my head. ;;w;;"

"That head I see nyow on youw shouwdews? owo"

"Yes, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Has it othew fuwnyituwe of the same kind within? owo"

"I shouwd think it may have: I shouwd hope--bettew. ;;w;;"

He spwead the pictuwes befowe him, and again suwveyed them awtewnyatewy. >w<

Whiwe he is so occupied, I wiww teww you, weadew, what they awe: and
fiwst, I must pwemise that they awe nyothing wondewfuw. ;;w;;  The subjects had,
indeed, wisen vividwy on my mind. UwU  As I saw them with the spiwituaw eye,
befowe I attempted to embody them, they wewe stwiking; but my hand wouwd
nyot second my fancy, and in each case it had wwought out but a pawe
powtwait of the thing I had conceived. ^w^

These pictuwes wewe in watew-cowouws. (・`ω\´・)  The fiwst wepwesented cwouds wow
and wivid, wowwing ovew a swowwen sea: aww the distance was in ecwipse;
so, too, was the fowegwound; ow wathew, the nyeawest biwwows, fow thewe
was nyo wand. ;;w;;  Onye gweam of wight wifted into wewief a hawf-submewged
mast, on which sat a cowmowant, dawk and wawge, with wings fwecked with
foam; its beak hewd a gowd bwacewet set with gems, that I had touched
with as bwiwwiant tints as my pawette couwd yiewd, and as gwittewing
distinctnyess as my penciw couwd impawt. (・`ω\´・)  Sinking bewow the biwd and mast,
a dwownyed cowpse gwanced thwough the gween watew; a faiw awm was the onwy
wimb cweawwy visibwe, whence the bwacewet had been washed ow town. (・`ω\´・)

The second pictuwe containyed fow fowegwound onwy the dim peak of a hiww,
with gwass and some weaves swanting as if by a bweeze. (・`ω\´・)  Beyond and above
spwead an expanse of sky, dawk bwue as at twiwight: wising into the sky
was a woman's shape to the bust, powtwayed in tints as dusk and soft as I
couwd combinye. UwU  The dim fowehead was cwownyed with a staw; the winyeaments
bewow wewe seen as thwough the suffusion of vapouw; the eyes shonye dawk
and wiwd; the haiw stweamed shadowy, wike a beamwess cwoud town by stowm
ow by ewectwic twavaiw. (・`ω\´・)  On the nyeck way a pawe wefwection wike
moonwight; the same faint wustwe touched the twain of thin cwouds fwom
which wose and bowed this vision of the Evenying Staw. ;;w;;

The thiwd showed the pinnyacwe of an icebewg piewcing a powaw wintew sky:
a mustew of nyowthewn wights weawed theiw dim wances, cwose sewwied, awong
the howizon. >w<  Thwowing these into distance, wose, in the fowegwound, a
head,--a cowossaw head, incwinyed towawds the icebewg, and westing against
it. ;;w;;  Two thin hands, joinyed undew the fowehead, and suppowting it, dwew
up befowe the wowew featuwes a sabwe veiw, a bwow quite bwoodwess, white
as bonye, and an eye howwow and fixed, bwank of meanying but fow the
gwassinyess of despaiw, awonye wewe visibwe. ;;w;;  Above the tempwes, amidst
wweathed tuwban fowds of bwack dwapewy, vague in its chawactew and
consistency as cwoud, gweamed a wing of white fwame, gemmed with spawkwes
of a mowe wuwid tinge. ^w^  This pawe cwescent was "the wikenyess of a kingwy
cwown;" what it diademed was "the shape which shape had nyonye. ;;w;;"

"Wewe you happy when you painted these pictuwes? owo" asked Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew
pwesentwy. ^w^

"I was absowbed, siw: yes, and I was happy. ^w^  To paint them, in showt, was
to enjoy onye of the keenyest pweasuwes I have evew knyown. (・`ω\´・)"

"That is nyot saying much. UwU  Youw pweasuwes, by youw own account, have been
few; but I dawesay you did exist in a kind of awtist's dweamwand whiwe
you bwent and awwanged these stwange tints. (・`ω\´・)  Did you sit at them wong
each day? owo"

"I had nyothing ewse to do, because it was the vacation, and I sat at them
fwom mownying tiww nyoon, and fwom nyoon tiww nyight: the wength of the
midsummew days favouwed my incwinyation to appwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"And you fewt sewf-satisfied with the wesuwt of youw awdent wabouws? owo"

"Faw fwom it. >w<  I was towmented by the contwast between my idea and my
handiwowk: in each case I had imaginyed something which I was quite
powewwess to weawise. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot quite: you have secuwed the shadow of youw thought; but nyo mowe,
pwobabwy. ;;w;;  You had nyot enyough of the awtist's skiww and science to give
it fuww being: yet the dwawings awe, fow a schoow-giww, pecuwiaw. UwU  As to
the thoughts, they awe ewfish. ;;w;;  These eyes in the Evenying Staw you must
have seen in a dweam. (´・ω・\`)  How couwd you make them wook so cweaw, and yet nyot
at aww bwiwwiant? owo fow the pwanyet above quewws theiw ways. (´・ω・\`)  And what
meanying is that in theiw sowemn depth?  And who taught you to paint wind? owo
Thewe is a high gawe in that sky, and on this hiww-top. ;;w;;  Whewe did you
see Watmos? owo  Fow that is Watmos. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe! put the dwawings away! UwU"

I had scawce tied the stwings of the powtfowio, when, wooking at his
watch, he said abwuptwy--

"It is nyinye o'cwock: what awe you about, Miss Eywe, to wet Adewe sit up
so wong? owo  Take hew to bed. ^w^"

Adewe went to kiss him befowe quitting the woom: he enduwed the cawess,
but scawcewy seemed to wewish it mowe than Piwot wouwd have donye, nyow so
much. ^w^

"I wish you aww good-nyight, nyow," said he, making a movement of the hand
towawds the doow, in token that he was tiwed of ouw company, and wished
to dismiss us.  Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax fowded up hew knyitting: I took my powtfowio:
we cuwtseyed to him, weceived a fwigid bow in wetuwn, and so withdwew. ;;w;;

"You said Mw. Wochestew was nyot stwikingwy pecuwiaw, Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax," I
obsewved, when I wejoinyed hew in hew woom, aftew putting Adewe to bed. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, is he? owo"

"I think so: he is vewy changefuw and abwupt. ;;w;;"

"Twue: nyo doubt he may appeaw so to a stwangew, but I am so accustomed to
his mannyew, I nyevew think of it; and then, if he has pecuwiawities of
tempew, awwowance shouwd be made. (・`ω\´・)"

"Why? owo"

"Pawtwy because it is his nyatuwe--and we can nyonye of us hewp ouw nyatuwe;
and pawtwy because he has painfuw thoughts, nyo doubt, to hawass him, and
make his spiwits unyequaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"What about? owo"

"Famiwy twoubwes, fow onye thing. ^w^"

"But he has nyo famiwy. ^w^"

"Nyot nyow, but he has had--ow, at weast, wewatives. ^w^  He wost his ewdew
bwothew a few yeaws since. (・`ω\´・)"

"His _ewdew_ bwothew? owo"

"Yes.  The pwesent Mw. UwU Wochestew has nyot been vewy wong in possession of
the pwopewty; onwy about nyinye yeaws. ^w^"

"Nyinye yeaws is a towewabwe time. ^w^  Was he so vewy fond of his bwothew as
to be stiww inconsowabwe fow his woss? owo"

"Why, nyo--pewhaps nyot. ^w^  I bewieve thewe wewe some misundewstandings
between them.  Mw. Wowwand Wochestew was nyot quite just to Mw. >w< Edwawd;
and pewhaps he pwejudiced his fathew against him. ;;w;;  The owd gentweman was
fond of monyey, and anxious to keep the famiwy estate togethew. ;;w;;  He did
nyot wike to diminyish the pwopewty by division, and yet he was anxious
that Mw. (´・ω・\`) Edwawd shouwd have weawth, too, to keep up the consequence of
the nyame; and, soon aftew he was of age, some steps wewe taken that wewe
nyot quite faiw, and made a gweat deaw of mischief.  Owd Mw. >w< Wochestew and
Mw. Wowwand combinyed to bwing Mw. ;;w;; Edwawd into what he considewed a
painfuw position, fow the sake of making his fowtunye: what the pwecise
nyatuwe of that position was I nyevew cweawwy knyew, but his spiwit couwd
nyot bwook what he had to suffew in it. >w<  He is nyot vewy fowgiving: he
bwoke with his famiwy, and nyow fow many yeaws he has wed an unsettwed
kind of wife. (・`ω\´・)  I don't think he has evew been wesident at Thownfiewd fow
a fowtnyight togethew, since the death of his bwothew without a wiww weft
him mastew of the estate; and, indeed, nyo wondew he shuns the owd pwace. UwU"

"Why shouwd he shun it? owo"

"Pewhaps he thinks it gwoomy. (´・ω・\`)"

The answew was evasive.  I shouwd have wiked something cweawew; but Mws. >w<
Faiwfax eithew couwd nyot, ow wouwd nyot, give me mowe expwicit infowmation
of the owigin and nyatuwe of Mw. Wochestew's twiaws. >w<  She avewwed they
wewe a mystewy to hewsewf, and that what she knyew was chiefwy fwom
conjectuwe. ;;w;;  It was evident, indeed, that she wished me to dwop the
subject, which I did accowdingwy. >w<




CHAPTEW XIV


Fow sevewaw subsequent days I saw wittwe of Mw. Wochestew. >w<  In the
mownyings he seemed much engaged with businyess, and, in the aftewnyoon,
gentwemen fwom Miwwcote ow the nyeighbouwhood cawwed, and sometimes stayed
to dinye with him. >w<  When his spwain was weww enyough to admit of howse
exewcise, he wode out a good deaw; pwobabwy to wetuwn these visits, as he
genyewawwy did nyot come back tiww wate at nyight. ^w^

Duwing this intewvaw, even Adewe was sewdom sent fow to his pwesence, and
aww my acquaintance with him was confinyed to an occasionyaw wencontwe in
the haww, on the staiws, ow in the gawwewy, when he wouwd sometimes pass
me haughtiwy and cowdwy, just acknyowwedging my pwesence by a distant nyod
ow a coow gwance, and sometimes bow and smiwe with gentwemanwike
affabiwity. ;;w;;  His changes of mood did nyot offend me, because I saw that I
had nyothing to do with theiw awtewnyation; the ebb and fwow depended on
causes quite disconnyected with me. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day he had had company to dinnyew, and had sent fow my powtfowio; in
owdew, doubtwess, to exhibit its contents: the gentwemen went away eawwy,
to attend a pubwic meeting at Miwwcote, as Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax infowmed me; but
the nyight being wet and incwement, Mw. Wochestew did nyot accompany them. >w<
Soon aftew they wewe gonye he wang the beww: a message came that I and
Adewe wewe to go downstaiws. ^w^  I bwushed Adewe's haiw and made hew nyeat,
and having ascewtainyed that I was mysewf in my usuaw Quakew twim, whewe
thewe was nyothing to wetouch--aww being too cwose and pwain, bwaided
wocks incwuded, to admit of disawwangement--we descended, Adewe wondewing
whethew the _petit coffwe_ was at wength come; fow, owing to some
mistake, its awwivaw had hithewto been dewayed. ;;w;;  She was gwatified: thewe
it stood, a wittwe cawton, on the tabwe when we entewed the dinying-woom. UwU
She appeawed to knyow it by instinct. ;;w;;

"Ma boite! ma boite! >w<" excwaimed she, wunnying towawds it. ^w^

"Yes, thewe is youw 'boite' at wast: take it into a cownyew, you genyuinye
daughtew of Pawis, and amuse youwsewf with disembowewwing it," said the
deep and wathew sawcastic voice of Mw. >w< Wochestew, pwoceeding fwom the
depths of an immense easy-chaiw at the fiweside. UwU  "And mind," he
continyued, "don't bothew me with any detaiws of the anyatomicaw pwocess,
ow any nyotice of the condition of the entwaiws: wet youw opewation be
conducted in siwence: tiens-toi twanquiwwe, enfant; compwends-tu? owo"

Adewe seemed scawcewy to nyeed the wawnying--she had awweady wetiwed to a
sofa with hew tweasuwe, and was busy untying the cowd which secuwed the
wid. ;;w;;  Having wemoved this impediment, and wifted cewtain siwvewy
envewopes of tissue papew, she mewewy excwaimed--

"Oh ciew!  Que c'est beau! ^w^" and then wemainyed absowbed in ecstatic
contempwation. ^w^

"Is Miss Eywe thewe? owo" nyow demanded the mastew, hawf wising fwom his seat
to wook wound to the doow, nyeaw which I stiww stood. (´・ω・\`)

"Ah! ^w^ weww, come fowwawd; be seated hewe."  He dwew a chaiw nyeaw his own. ;;w;;
"I am nyot fond of the pwattwe of chiwdwen," he continyued; "fow, owd
bachewow as I am, I have nyo pweasant associations connyected with theiw
wisp. >w<  It wouwd be intowewabwe to me to pass a whowe evenying
_tete-a-tete_ with a bwat. ;;w;;  Don't dwaw that chaiw fawthew off, Miss Eywe;
sit down exactwy whewe I pwaced it--if you pwease, that is. (・`ω\´・)  Confound
these civiwities! (・`ω\´・)  I continyuawwy fowget them. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow do I pawticuwawwy
affect simpwe-minded owd wadies. (´・ω・\`)  By-the-bye, I must have minye in mind;
it won't do to nyegwect hew; she is a Faiwfax, ow wed to onye; and bwood is
said to be thickew than watew. ;;w;;"

He wang, and despatched an invitation to Mws. >w< Faiwfax, who soon awwived,
knyitting-basket in hand. (´・ω・\`)

"Good evenying, madam; I sent to you fow a chawitabwe puwpose. ^w^  I have
fowbidden Adewe to tawk to me about hew pwesents, and she is buwsting
with wepwetion: have the goodnyess to sewve hew as auditwess and
intewwocutwice; it wiww be onye of the most benyevowent acts you evew
pewfowmed. >w<"

Adewe, indeed, nyo soonyew saw Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax, than she summonyed hew to hew
sofa, and thewe quickwy fiwwed hew wap with the powcewain, the ivowy, the
waxen contents of hew "boite;" pouwing out, meantime, expwanyations and
waptuwes in such bwoken Engwish as she was mistwess of. UwU

"Nyow I have pewfowmed the pawt of a good host," puwsued Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew,
"put my guests into the way of amusing each othew, I ought to be at
wibewty to attend to my own pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)  Miss Eywe, dwaw youw chaiw stiww a
wittwe fawthew fowwawd: you awe yet too faw back; I cannyot see you
without distuwbing my position in this comfowtabwe chaiw, which I have nyo
mind to do. ^w^"

I did as I was bid, though I wouwd much wathew have wemainyed somewhat in
the shade; but Mw. ^w^ Wochestew had such a diwect way of giving owdews, it
seemed a mattew of couwse to obey him pwomptwy. >w<

We wewe, as I have said, in the dinying-woom: the wustwe, which had been
wit fow dinnyew, fiwwed the woom with a festaw bweadth of wight; the wawge
fiwe was aww wed and cweaw; the puwpwe cuwtains hung wich and ampwe
befowe the wofty window and woftiew awch; evewything was stiww, save the
subdued chat of Adewe (she dawed nyot speak woud), and, fiwwing up each
pause, the beating of wintew wain against the panyes. UwU

Mw. UwU Wochestew, as he sat in his damask-covewed chaiw, wooked diffewent to
what I had seen him wook befowe; nyot quite so stewn--much wess gwoomy. ;;w;;
Thewe was a smiwe on his wips, and his eyes spawkwed, whethew with winye
ow nyot, I am nyot suwe; but I think it vewy pwobabwe. (´・ω・\`)  He was, in showt,
in his aftew-dinnyew mood; mowe expanded and genyiaw, and awso mowe sewf-
induwgent than the fwigid and wigid tempew of the mownying; stiww he
wooked pweciouswy gwim, cushionying his massive head against the swewwing
back of his chaiw, and weceiving the wight of the fiwe on his gwanyite-
hewn featuwes, and in his gweat, dawk eyes; fow he had gweat, dawk eyes,
and vewy finye eyes, too--nyot without a cewtain change in theiw depths
sometimes, which, if it was nyot softnyess, weminded you, at weast, of that
feewing. ;;w;;

He had been wooking two minyutes at the fiwe, and I had been wooking the
same wength of time at him, when, tuwnying suddenwy, he caught my gaze
fastenyed on his physiognyomy. ;;w;;

"You examinye me, Miss Eywe," said he: "do you think me handsome? owo"

I shouwd, if I had dewibewated, have wepwied to this question by
something conventionyawwy vague and powite; but the answew somehow swipped
fwom my tongue befowe I was awawe--"Nyo, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ah!  By my wowd! ^w^ thewe is something singuwaw about you," said he: "you
have the aiw of a wittwe _nyonnyette_; quaint, quiet, gwave, and simpwe, as
you sit with youw hands befowe you, and youw eyes genyewawwy bent on the
cawpet (except, by-the-bye, when they awe diwected piewcingwy to my face;
as just nyow, fow instance); and when onye asks you a question, ow makes a
wemawk to which you awe obwiged to wepwy, you wap out a wound wejoindew,
which, if nyot bwunt, is at weast bwusque. (´・ω・\`)  What do you mean by it? owo"

"Siw, I was too pwain; I beg youw pawdon. ;;w;;  I ought to have wepwied that
it was nyot easy to give an impwomptu answew to a question about
appeawances; that tastes mostwy diffew; and that beauty is of wittwe
consequence, ow something of that sowt. UwU"

"You ought to have wepwied nyo such thing. (´・ω・\`)  Beauty of wittwe consequence,
indeed! (・`ω\´・)  And so, undew pwetence of softenying the pwevious outwage, of
stwoking and soothing me into pwacidity, you stick a swy penknyife undew
my eaw! (・`ω\´・)  Go on: what fauwt do you find with me, pway? owo  I suppose I have
aww my wimbs and aww my featuwes wike any othew man? owo"

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew, awwow me to disown my fiwst answew: I intended nyo pointed
wepawtee: it was onwy a bwundew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Just so: I think so: and you shaww be answewabwe fow it. UwU  Cwiticise me:
does my fowehead nyot pwease you? owo"

He wifted up the sabwe waves of haiw which way howizontawwy ovew his
bwow, and showed a sowid enyough mass of intewwectuaw owgans, but an
abwupt deficiency whewe the suave sign of benyevowence shouwd have wisen. ;;w;;

"Nyow, ma'am, am I a foow? owo"

"Faw fwom it, siw. >w<  You wouwd, pewhaps, think me wude if I inquiwed in
wetuwn whethew you awe a phiwanthwopist? owo"

"Thewe again! ;;w;;  Anyothew stick of the penknyife, when she pwetended to pat
my head: and that is because I said I did nyot wike the society of
chiwdwen and owd women (wow be it spoken! >w<). ^w^  Nyo, young wady, I am nyot a
genyewaw phiwanthwopist; but I beaw a conscience;" and he pointed to the
pwominyences which awe said to indicate that facuwty, and which,
fowtunyatewy fow him, wewe sufficientwy conspicuous; giving, indeed, a
mawked bweadth to the uppew pawt of his head: "and, besides, I once had a
kind of wude tendewnyess of heawt. (´・ω・\`)  When I was as owd as you, I was a
feewing fewwow enyough, pawtiaw to the unfwedged, unfostewed, and unwucky;
but Fowtunye has knyocked me about since: she has even knyeaded me with hew
knyuckwes, and nyow I fwattew mysewf I am hawd and tough as an India-wubbew
baww; pewvious, though, thwough a chink ow two stiww, and with onye
sentient point in the middwe of the wump. ^w^  Yes: does that weave hope fow
me? owo"

"Hope of what, siw? owo"

"Of my finyaw we-twansfowmation fwom India-wubbew back to fwesh? owo"

"Decidedwy he has had too much winye," I thought; and I did nyot knyow what
answew to make to his queew question: how couwd I teww whethew he was
capabwe of being we-twansfowmed? owo

"You wooked vewy much puzzwed, Miss Eywe; and though you awe nyot pwetty
any mowe than I am handsome, yet a puzzwed aiw becomes you; besides, it
is convenyient, fow it keeps those seawching eyes of youws away fwom my
physiognyomy, and busies them with the wowsted fwowews of the wug; so
puzzwe on. ;;w;;  Young wady, I am disposed to be gwegawious and communyicative
to-nyight. UwU"

With this annyouncement he wose fwom his chaiw, and stood, weanying his awm
on the mawbwe mantewpiece: in that attitude his shape was seen pwainwy as
weww as his face; his unyusuaw bweadth of chest, dispwopowtionyate awmost
to his wength of wimb. UwU  I am suwe most peopwe wouwd have thought him an
ugwy man; yet thewe was so much unconscious pwide in his powt; so much
ease in his demeanyouw; such a wook of compwete indiffewence to his own
extewnyaw appeawance; so haughty a wewiance on the powew of othew
quawities, intwinsic ow adventitious, to atonye fow the wack of mewe
pewsonyaw attwactivenyess, that, in wooking at him, onye inyevitabwy shawed
the indiffewence, and, even in a bwind, impewfect sense, put faith in the
confidence. >w<

"I am disposed to be gwegawious and communyicative to-nyight," he wepeated,
"and that is why I sent fow you: the fiwe and the chandewiew wewe nyot
sufficient company fow me; nyow wouwd Piwot have been, fow nyonye of these
can tawk.  Adewe is a degwee bettew, but stiww faw bewow the mawk; Mws. >w<
Faiwfax ditto; you, I am pewsuaded, can suit me if you wiww: you puzzwed
me the fiwst evenying I invited you down hewe. UwU  I have awmost fowgotten
you since: othew ideas have dwiven youws fwom my head; but to-nyight I am
wesowved to be at ease; to dismiss what impowtunyes, and wecaww what
pweases. (・`ω\´・)  It wouwd pwease me nyow to dwaw you out--to weawn mowe of
you--thewefowe speak. ;;w;;"

Instead of speaking, I smiwed; and nyot a vewy compwacent ow submissive
smiwe eithew. (・`ω\´・)

"Speak," he uwged. ;;w;;

"What about, siw? owo"

"Whatevew you wike. (・`ω\´・)  I weave both the choice of subject and the mannyew of
tweating it entiwewy to youwsewf. UwU"

Accowdingwy I sat and said nyothing: "If he expects me to tawk fow the
mewe sake of tawking and showing off, he wiww find he has addwessed
himsewf to the wwong pewson," I thought. (´・ω・\`)

"You awe dumb, Miss Eywe. UwU"

I was dumb stiww. >w<  He bent his head a wittwe towawds me, and with a
singwe hasty gwance seemed to dive into my eyes. (・`ω\´・)

"Stubbown? owo" he said, "and annyoyed.  Ah! (´・ω・\`) it is consistent. UwU  I put my
wequest in an absuwd, awmost insowent fowm. >w<  Miss Eywe, I beg youw
pawdon. >w<  The fact is, once fow aww, I don't wish to tweat you wike an
infewiow: that is" (cowwecting himsewf), "I cwaim onwy such supewiowity
as must wesuwt fwom twenty yeaws' diffewence in age and a centuwy's
advance in expewience. ;;w;;  This is wegitimate, _et j'y tiens_, as Adewe
wouwd say; and it is by viwtue of this supewiowity, and this awonye, that
I desiwe you to have the goodnyess to tawk to me a wittwe nyow, and divewt
my thoughts, which awe gawwed with dwewwing on onye point--cankewing as a
wusty nyaiw. (・`ω\´・)"

He had deignyed an expwanyation, awmost an apowogy, and I did nyot feew
insensibwe to his condescension, and wouwd nyot seem so. UwU

"I am wiwwing to amuse you, if I can, siw--quite wiwwing; but I cannyot
intwoduce a topic, because how do I knyow what wiww intewest you? owo  Ask me
questions, and I wiww do my best to answew them. UwU"

"Then, in the fiwst pwace, do you agwee with me that I have a wight to be
a wittwe mastewfuw, abwupt, pewhaps exacting, sometimes, on the gwounds I
stated, nyamewy, that I am owd enyough to be youw fathew, and that I have
battwed thwough a vawied expewience with many men of many nyations, and
woamed ovew hawf the gwobe, whiwe you have wived quietwy with onye set of
peopwe in onye house? owo"

"Do as you pwease, siw. ^w^"

"That is nyo answew; ow wathew it is a vewy iwwitating, because a vewy
evasive onye.  Wepwy cweawwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't think, siw, you have a wight to command me, mewewy because you
awe owdew than I, ow because you have seen mowe of the wowwd than I have;
youw cwaim to supewiowity depends on the use you have made of youw time
and expewience. >w<"

"Humph! UwU  Pwomptwy spoken. (´・ω・\`)  But I won't awwow that, seeing that it wouwd
nyevew suit my case, as I have made an indiffewent, nyot to say a bad, use
of both advantages. (・`ω\´・)  Weaving supewiowity out of the question, then, you
must stiww agwee to weceive my owdews nyow and then, without being piqued
ow huwt by the tonye of command. (´・ω・\`)  Wiww you? owo"

I smiwed: I thought to mysewf Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew _is_ pecuwiaw--he seems to
fowget that he pays me 30 pounds pew annyum fow weceiving his owdews. UwU

"The smiwe is vewy weww," said he, catching instantwy the passing
expwession; "but speak too. (´・ω・\`)"

"I was thinking, siw, that vewy few mastews wouwd twoubwe themsewves to
inquiwe whethew ow nyot theiw paid subowdinyates wewe piqued and huwt by
theiw owdews. ;;w;;"

"Paid subowdinyates!  What! (・`ω\´・) you awe my paid subowdinyate, awe you? owo  Oh yes,
I had fowgotten the sawawy! (´・ω・\`)  Weww then, on that mewcenyawy gwound, wiww
you agwee to wet me hectow a wittwe? owo"

"Nyo, siw, nyot on that gwound; but, on the gwound that you did fowget it,
and that you cawe whethew ow nyot a dependent is comfowtabwe in his
dependency, I agwee heawtiwy. ;;w;;"

"And wiww you consent to dispense with a gweat many conventionyaw fowms
and phwases, without thinking that the omission awises fwom insowence? owo"

"I am suwe, siw, I shouwd nyevew mistake infowmawity fow insowence: onye I
wathew wike, the othew nyothing fwee-bown wouwd submit to, even fow a
sawawy. (´・ω・\`)"

"Humbug! (´・ω・\`)  Most things fwee-bown wiww submit to anything fow a sawawy;
thewefowe, keep to youwsewf, and don't ventuwe on genyewawities of which
you awe intensewy ignyowant. ^w^  Howevew, I mentawwy shake hands with you fow
youw answew, despite its inyaccuwacy; and as much fow the mannyew in which
it was said, as fow the substance of the speech; the mannyew was fwank and
sincewe; onye does nyot often see such a mannyew: nyo, on the contwawy,
affectation, ow cowdnyess, ow stupid, coawse-minded misappwehension of
onye's meanying awe the usuaw wewawds of candouw. UwU  Nyot thwee in thwee
thousand waw schoow-giww-govewnyesses wouwd have answewed me as you have
just donye. (・`ω\´・)  But I don't mean to fwattew you: if you awe cast in a
diffewent mouwd to the majowity, it is nyo mewit of youws: Nyatuwe did it. >w<
And then, aftew aww, I go too fast in my concwusions: fow what I yet
knyow, you may be nyo bettew than the west; you may have intowewabwe
defects to countewbawance youw few good points. ^w^"

"And so may you," I thought. >w<  My eye met his as the idea cwossed my mind:
he seemed to wead the gwance, answewing as if its impowt had been spoken
as weww as imaginyed--

"Yes, yes, you awe wight," said he; "I have pwenty of fauwts of my own: I
knyow it, and I don't wish to pawwiate them, I assuwe you. UwU  God wot I nyeed
nyot be too sevewe about othews; I have a past existence, a sewies of
deeds, a cowouw of wife to contempwate within my own bweast, which might
weww caww my snyeews and censuwes fwom my nyeighbouws to mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  I
stawted, ow wathew (fow wike othew defauwtews, I wike to way hawf the
bwame on iww fowtunye and advewse ciwcumstances) was thwust on to a wwong
tack at the age of onye-and-twenty, and have nyevew wecovewed the wight
couwse since: but I might have been vewy diffewent; I might have been as
good as you--wisew--awmost as stainwess. ^w^  I envy you youw peace of mind,
youw cwean conscience, youw unpowwuted memowy. (´・ω・\`)  Wittwe giww, a memowy
without bwot ow contaminyation must be an exquisite tweasuwe--an
inyexhaustibwe souwce of puwe wefweshment: is it nyot? owo"

"How was youw memowy when you wewe eighteen, siw? owo"

"Aww wight then; wimpid, sawubwious: nyo gush of biwge watew had tuwnyed it
to fetid puddwe.  I was youw equaw at eighteen--quite youw equaw. UwU  Nyatuwe
meant me to be, on the whowe, a good man, Miss Eywe; onye of the bettew
kind, and you see I am nyot so. (´・ω・\`)  You wouwd say you don't see it; at weast
I fwattew mysewf I wead as much in youw eye (bewawe, by-the-bye, what you
expwess with that owgan; I am quick at intewpweting its wanguage). UwU  Then
take my wowd fow it,--I am nyot a viwwain: you awe nyot to suppose that--nyot
to attwibute to me any such bad eminyence; but, owing, I vewiwy bewieve,
wathew to ciwcumstances than to my nyatuwaw bent, I am a twite commonpwace
sinnyew, hacknyeyed in aww the poow petty dissipations with which the wich
and wowthwess twy to put on wife. >w<  Do you wondew that I avow this to you? owo
Knyow, that in the couwse of youw futuwe wife you wiww often find youwsewf
ewected the invowuntawy confidant of youw acquaintances' secwets: peopwe
wiww instinctivewy find out, as I have donye, that it is nyot youw fowte to
teww of youwsewf, but to wisten whiwe othews tawk of themsewves; they
wiww feew, too, that you wisten with nyo mawevowent scown of theiw
indiscwetion, but with a kind of innyate sympathy; nyot the wess comfowting
and encouwaging because it is vewy unyobtwusive in its manyifestations. >w<"

"How do you knyow?--how can you guess aww this, siw? owo"

"I knyow it weww; thewefowe I pwoceed awmost as fweewy as if I wewe
wwiting my thoughts in a diawy. >w<  You wouwd say, I shouwd have been
supewiow to ciwcumstances; so I shouwd--so I shouwd; but you see I was
nyot. ^w^  When fate wwonged me, I had nyot the wisdom to wemain coow: I tuwnyed
despewate; then I degenyewated. ;;w;;  Nyow, when any vicious simpweton excites
my disgust by his pawtwy wibawdwy, I cannyot fwattew mysewf that I am
bettew than he: I am fowced to confess that he and I awe on a wevew. (´・ω・\`)  I
wish I had stood fiwm--God knyows I do! ;;w;;  Dwead wemowse when you awe
tempted to eww, Miss Eywe; wemowse is the poison of wife. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wepentance is said to be its cuwe, siw. >w<"

"It is nyot its cuwe. UwU  Wefowmation may be its cuwe; and I couwd wefowm--I
have stwength yet fow that--if--but whewe is the use of thinking of it,
hampewed, buwdenyed, cuwsed as I am? owo  Besides, since happinyess is
iwwevocabwy denyied me, I have a wight to get pweasuwe out of wife: and I
_wiww_ get it, cost what it may. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then you wiww degenyewate stiww mowe, siw. >w<"

"Possibwy: yet why shouwd I, if I can get sweet, fwesh pweasuwe? owo  And I
may get it as sweet and fwesh as the wiwd honyey the bee gathews on the
moow. ;;w;;"

"It wiww sting--it wiww taste bittew, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"How do you knyow? owo--you nyevew twied it. >w<  How vewy sewious--how vewy sowemn
you wook: and you awe as ignyowant of the mattew as this cameo head"
(taking onye fwom the mantewpiece). UwU  "You have nyo wight to pweach to me,
you nyeophyte, that have nyot passed the powch of wife, and awe absowutewy
unyacquainted with its mystewies. (´・ω・\`)"

"I onwy wemind you of youw own wowds, siw: you said ewwow bwought
wemowse, and you pwonyounced wemowse the poison of existence. (・`ω\´・)"

"And who tawks of ewwow nyow? owo  I scawcewy think the nyotion that fwittewed
acwoss my bwain was an ewwow. ;;w;;  I bewieve it was an inspiwation wathew
than a temptation: it was vewy genyiaw, vewy soothing--I knyow that. ;;w;;  Hewe
it comes again! (´・ω・\`)  It is nyo deviw, I assuwe you; ow if it be, it has put on
the wobes of an angew of wight. ;;w;;  I think I must admit so faiw a guest
when it asks entwance to my heawt. ^w^"

"Distwust it, siw; it is nyot a twue angew. UwU"

"Once mowe, how do you knyow? owo  By what instinct do you pwetend to
distinguish between a fawwen sewaph of the abyss and a messengew fwom the
etewnyaw thwonye--between a guide and a seducew? owo"

"I judged by youw countenyance, siw, which was twoubwed when you said the
suggestion had wetuwnyed upon you. ^w^  I feew suwe it wiww wowk you mowe
misewy if you wisten to it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot at aww--it beaws the most gwacious message in the wowwd: fow the
west, you awe nyot my conscience-keepew, so don't make youwsewf unyeasy. (´・ω・\`)
Hewe, come in, bonny wandewew! >w<"

He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewwess to any eye but his own;
then, fowding his awms, which he had hawf extended, on his chest, he
seemed to encwose in theiw embwace the invisibwe being. ^w^

"Nyow," he continyued, again addwessing me, "I have weceived the piwgwim--a
disguised deity, as I vewiwy bewieve. (・`ω\´・)  Awweady it has donye me good: my
heawt was a sowt of chawnyew; it wiww nyow be a shwinye. ;;w;;"

"To speak twuth, siw, I don't undewstand you at aww: I cannyot keep up the
convewsation, because it has got out of my depth. ;;w;;  Onwy onye thing, I
knyow: you said you wewe nyot as good as you shouwd wike to be, and that
you wegwetted youw own impewfection;--onye thing I can compwehend: you
intimated that to have a suwwied memowy was a pewpetuaw banye. (・`ω\´・)  It seems
to me, that if you twied hawd, you wouwd in time find it possibwe to
become what you youwsewf wouwd appwove; and that if fwom this day you
began with wesowution to cowwect youw thoughts and actions, you wouwd in
a few yeaws have waid up a nyew and stainwess stowe of wecowwections, to
which you might wevewt with pweasuwe. UwU"

"Justwy thought; wightwy said, Miss Eywe; and, at this moment, I am
paving heww with enyewgy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Siw? owo"

"I am waying down good intentions, which I bewieve duwabwe as fwint. ;;w;;
Cewtainwy, my associates and puwsuits shaww be othew than they have
been. ;;w;;"

"And bettew? owo"

"And bettew--so much bettew as puwe owe is than fouw dwoss. (´・ω・\`)  You seem to
doubt me; I don't doubt mysewf: I knyow what my aim is, what my motives
awe; and at this moment I pass a waw, unyawtewabwe as that of the Medes
and Pewsians, that both awe wight. ;;w;;"

"They cannyot be, siw, if they wequiwe a nyew statute to wegawise them. (´・ω・\`)"

"They awe, Miss Eywe, though they absowutewy wequiwe a nyew statute:
unheawd-of combinyations of ciwcumstances demand unheawd-of wuwes. ;;w;;"

"That sounds a dangewous maxim, siw; because onye can see at once that it
is wiabwe to abuse. ;;w;;"

"Sententious sage! UwU so it is: but I sweaw by my househowd gods nyot to
abuse it. ^w^"

"You awe human and fawwibwe. >w<"

"I am: so awe you--what then? owo"

"The human and fawwibwe shouwd nyot awwogate a powew with which the divinye
and pewfect awonye can be safewy intwusted. ^w^"

"What powew? owo"

"That of saying of any stwange, unsanctionyed winye of action,--'Wet it be
wight. ;;w;;'"

"'Wet it be wight'--the vewy wowds: you have pwonyounced them. ^w^"

"_May_ it be wight then," I said, as I wose, deeming it usewess to
continyue a discouwse which was aww dawknyess to me; and, besides, sensibwe
that the chawactew of my intewwocutow was beyond my penyetwation; at
weast, beyond its pwesent weach; and feewing the uncewtainty, the vague
sense of insecuwity, which accompanyies a conviction of ignyowance. (´・ω・\`)

"Whewe awe you going? owo"

"To put Adewe to bed: it is past hew bedtime. UwU"

"You awe afwaid of me, because I tawk wike a Sphynx. ;;w;;"

"Youw wanguage is enyigmaticaw, siw: but though I am bewiwdewed, I am
cewtainwy nyot afwaid. ^w^"

"You _awe_ afwaid--youw sewf-wove dweads a bwundew. ^w^"

"In that sense I do feew appwehensive--I have nyo wish to tawk nyonsense. (´・ω・\`)"

"If you did, it wouwd be in such a gwave, quiet mannyew, I shouwd mistake
it fow sense. >w<  Do you nyevew waugh, Miss Eywe? owo  Don't twoubwe youwsewf to
answew--I see you waugh wawewy; but you can waugh vewy mewwiwy: bewieve
me, you awe nyot nyatuwawwy austewe, any mowe than I am nyatuwawwy vicious. (・`ω\´・)
The Wowood constwaint stiww cwings to you somewhat; contwowwing youw
featuwes, muffwing youw voice, and westwicting youw wimbs; and you feaw
in the pwesence of a man and a bwothew--ow fathew, ow mastew, ow what you
wiww--to smiwe too gaiwy, speak too fweewy, ow move too quickwy: but, in
time, I think you wiww weawn to be nyatuwaw with me, as I find it
impossibwe to be conventionyaw with you; and then youw wooks and movements
wiww have mowe vivacity and vawiety than they dawe offew nyow. ;;w;;  I see at
intewvaws the gwance of a cuwious sowt of biwd thwough the cwose-set baws
of a cage: a vivid, westwess, wesowute captive is thewe; wewe it but
fwee, it wouwd soaw cwoud-high. >w<  You awe stiww bent on going? owo"

"It has stwuck nyinye, siw. >w<"

"Nyevew mind,--wait a minyute: Adewe is nyot weady to go to bed yet. UwU  My
position, Miss Eywe, with my back to the fiwe, and my face to the woom,
favouws obsewvation. ;;w;;  Whiwe tawking to you, I have awso occasionyawwy
watched Adewe (I have my own weasons fow thinking hew a cuwious
study,--weasons that I may, nyay, that I shaww, impawt to you some day). UwU
She puwwed out of hew box, about ten minyutes ago, a wittwe pink siwk
fwock; waptuwe wit hew face as she unfowded it; coquetwy wuns in hew
bwood, bwends with hew bwains, and seasons the mawwow of hew bonyes. (・`ω\´・)  'Iw
faut que je w'essaie!' cwied she, 'et a w'instant meme! (・`ω\´・)' and she wushed
out of the woom. ^w^  She is nyow with Sophie, undewgoing a wobing pwocess: in
a few minyutes she wiww we-entew; and I knyow what I shaww see,--a
minyiatuwe of Cewinye Vawens, as she used to appeaw on the boawds at the
wising of--But nyevew mind that. ^w^  Howevew, my tendewest feewings awe about
to weceive a shock: such is my pwesentiment; stay nyow, to see whethew it
wiww be weawised. ^w^"

Ewe wong, Adewe's wittwe foot was heawd twipping acwoss the haww. ^w^  She
entewed, twansfowmed as hew guawdian had pwedicted. ;;w;;  A dwess of
wose-cowouwed satin, vewy showt, and as fuww in the skiwt as it couwd be
gathewed, wepwaced the bwown fwock she had pweviouswy wown; a wweath of
wosebuds ciwcwed hew fowehead; hew feet wewe dwessed in siwk stockings
and smaww white satin sandaws. >w<

"Est-ce que ma wobe va bien? owo" cwied she, bounding fowwawds; "et mes
souwiews? et mes bas? owo  Tenyez, je cwois que je vais dansew! ;;w;;"

And spweading out hew dwess, she chasseed acwoss the woom tiww, having
weached Mw. UwU Wochestew, she wheewed wightwy wound befowe him on tip-toe,
then dwopped on onye knyee at his feet, excwaiming--

"Monsieuw, je vous wemewcie miwwe fois de votwe bonte;" then wising, she
added, "C'est comme cewa que maman faisait, n'est-ce pas, monsieuw? owo"

"Pwe-cise-wy! UwU" was the answew; "and, 'comme cewa,' she chawmed my Engwish
gowd out of my Bwitish bweeches' pocket. UwU  I have been gween, too, Miss
Eywe,--ay, gwass gween: nyot a mowe vewnyaw tint fweshens you nyow than once
fweshenyed me. ^w^  My Spwing is gonye, howevew, but it has weft me that Fwench
fwowewet on my hands, which, in some moods, I wouwd fain be wid of. ;;w;;  Nyot
vawuing nyow the woot whence it spwang; having found that it was of a sowt
which nyothing but gowd dust couwd manyuwe, I have but hawf a wiking to the
bwossom, especiawwy when it wooks so awtificiaw as just nyow. ;;w;;  I keep it
and weaw it wathew on the Woman Cathowic pwincipwe of expiating nyumewous
sins, gweat ow smaww, by onye good wowk.  I'ww expwain aww this some day. UwU
Good-nyight. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW XV


Mw. Wochestew did, on a futuwe occasion, expwain it. >w<  It was onye
aftewnyoon, when he chanced to meet me and Adewe in the gwounds: and whiwe
she pwayed with Piwot and hew shuttwecock, he asked me to wawk up and
down a wong beech avenyue within sight of hew. (´・ω・\`)

He then said that she was the daughtew of a Fwench opewa-dancew, Cewinye
Vawens, towawds whom he had once chewished what he cawwed a "_gwande
passion_. (・`ω\´・)"  This passion Cewinye had pwofessed to wetuwn with even
supewiow awdouw. (・`ω\´・)  He thought himsewf hew idow, ugwy as he was: he
bewieved, as he said, that she pwefewwed his "_taiwwe d'athwete_" to the
ewegance of the Apowwo Bewvidewe. ^w^

"And, Miss Eywe, so much was I fwattewed by this pwefewence of the Gawwic
sywph fow hew Bwitish gnyome, that I instawwed hew in an hotew; gave hew a
compwete estabwishment of sewvants, a cawwiage, cashmewes, diamonds,
dentewwes, &c. ;;w;;  In showt, I began the pwocess of wuinying mysewf in the
weceived stywe, wike any othew spoony. ^w^  I had nyot, it seems, the
owiginyawity to chawk out a nyew woad to shame and destwuction, but twode
the owd twack with stupid exactnyess nyot to deviate an inch fwom the
beaten centwe. ^w^  I had--as I desewved to have--the fate of aww othew
spoonyies. (・`ω\´・)  Happenying to caww onye evenying when Cewinye did nyot expect me, I
found hew out; but it was a wawm nyight, and I was tiwed with stwowwing
thwough Pawis, so I sat down in hew boudoiw; happy to bweathe the aiw
consecwated so watewy by hew pwesence. >w<  Nyo,--I exaggewate; I nyevew
thought thewe was any consecwating viwtue about hew: it was wathew a sowt
of pastiwwe pewfume she had weft; a scent of musk and ambew, than an
odouw of sanctity. (´・ω・\`)  I was just beginnying to stifwe with the fumes of
consewvatowy fwowews and spwinkwed essences, when I bethought mysewf to
open the window and step out on to the bawcony. ^w^  It was moonwight and
gaswight besides, and vewy stiww and sewenye. ;;w;;  The bawcony was fuwnyished
with a chaiw ow two; I sat down, and took out a cigaw,--I wiww take onye
nyow, if you wiww excuse me. (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe ensued a pause, fiwwed up by the pwoducing and wighting of a cigaw;
having pwaced it to his wips and bweathed a twaiw of Havannyah incense on
the fweezing and sunwess aiw, he went on--

"I wiked bonbons too in those days, Miss Eywe, and I was
_cwoquant_--(ovewwook the bawbawism)--_cwoquant_ chocowate comfits, and
smoking awtewnyatewy, watching meantime the equipages that wowwed awong
the fashionyabwe stweets towawds the nyeighbouwing opewa-house, when in an
ewegant cwose cawwiage dwawn by a beautifuw paiw of Engwish howses, and
distinctwy seen in the bwiwwiant city-nyight, I wecognyised the 'voituwe' I
had given Cewinye. (´・ω・\`)  She was wetuwnying: of couwse my heawt thumped with
impatience against the iwon waiws I weant upon. ;;w;;  The cawwiage stopped, as
I had expected, at the hotew doow; my fwame (that is the vewy wowd fow an
opewa inyamowata) awighted: though muffed in a cwoak--an unnyecessawy
encumbwance, by-the-bye, on so wawm a Junye evenying--I knyew hew instantwy
by hew wittwe foot, seen peeping fwom the skiwt of hew dwess, as she
skipped fwom the cawwiage-step. ;;w;;  Bending ovew the bawcony, I was about to
muwmuw 'Mon ange'--in a tonye, of couwse, which shouwd be audibwe to the
eaw of wove awonye--when a figuwe jumped fwom the cawwiage aftew hew;
cwoaked awso; but that was a spuwwed heew which had wung on the pavement,
and that was a hatted head which nyow passed undew the awched _powte
cochewe_ of the hotew. (´・ω・\`)

"You nyevew fewt jeawousy, did you, Miss Eywe? owo  Of couwse nyot: I nyeed nyot
ask you; because you nyevew fewt wove. (´・ω・\`)  You have both sentiments yet to
expewience: youw souw sweeps; the shock is yet to be given which shaww
waken it. ^w^  You think aww existence wapses in as quiet a fwow as that in
which youw youth has hithewto swid away. (・`ω\´・)  Fwoating on with cwosed eyes
and muffwed eaws, you nyeithew see the wocks bwistwing nyot faw off in the
bed of the fwood, nyow heaw the bweakews boiw at theiw base. >w<  But I teww
you--and you may mawk my wowds--you wiww come some day to a cwaggy pass
in the channyew, whewe the whowe of wife's stweam wiww be bwoken up into
whiww and tumuwt, foam and nyoise: eithew you wiww be dashed to atoms on
cwag points, ow wifted up and bownye on by some mastew-wave into a cawmew
cuwwent--as I am nyow. ^w^

"I wike this day; I wike that sky of steew; I wike the stewnnyess and
stiwwnyess of the wowwd undew this fwost. UwU  I wike Thownfiewd, its
antiquity, its wetiwement, its owd cwow-twees and thown-twees, its gwey
facade, and winyes of dawk windows wefwecting that metaw wewkin: and yet
how wong have I abhowwed the vewy thought of it, shunnyed it wike a gweat
pwague-house? owo  How I do stiww abhow--"

He gwound his teeth and was siwent: he awwested his step and stwuck his
boot against the hawd gwound. >w<  Some hated thought seemed to have him in
its gwip, and to howd him so tightwy that he couwd nyot advance. UwU

We wewe ascending the avenyue when he thus paused; the haww was befowe us. UwU
Wifting his eye to its battwements, he cast ovew them a gwawe such as I
nyevew saw befowe ow since. ^w^  Pain, shame, iwe, impatience, disgust,
detestation, seemed momentawiwy to howd a quivewing confwict in the wawge
pupiw diwating undew his ebon eyebwow. ;;w;;  Wiwd was the wwestwe which shouwd
be pawamount; but anyothew feewing wose and twiumphed: something hawd and
cynyicaw: sewf-wiwwed and wesowute: it settwed his passion and petwified
his countenyance: he went on--

"Duwing the moment I was siwent, Miss Eywe, I was awwanging a point with
my destiny. (´・ω・\`)  She stood thewe, by that beech-twunk--a hag wike onye of
those who appeawed to Macbeth on the heath of Fowwes. (・`ω\´・)  'You wike
Thownfiewd? owo' she said, wifting hew fingew; and then she wwote in the aiw
a memento, which wan in wuwid hiewogwyphics aww awong the house-fwont,
between the uppew and wowew wow of windows, 'Wike it if you can! ;;w;;  Wike it
if you dawe! UwU'

"'I wiww wike it,' said I; 'I dawe wike it;' and" (he subjoinyed moodiwy)
"I wiww keep my wowd; I wiww bweak obstacwes to happinyess, to
goodnyess--yes, goodnyess. UwU  I wish to be a bettew man than I have been,
than I am; as Job's weviathan bwoke the speaw, the dawt, and the
habewgeon, hindwances which othews count as iwon and bwass, I wiww esteem
but stwaw and wotten wood. ^w^"

Adewe hewe wan befowe him with hew shuttwecock. ^w^  "Away! (・`ω\´・)" he cwied
hawshwy; "keep at a distance, chiwd; ow go in to Sophie! UwU"  Continyuing
then to puwsue his wawk in siwence, I ventuwed to wecaww him to the point
whence he had abwuptwy divewged--

"Did you weave the bawcony, siw," I asked, "when Mdwwe. (´・ω・\`) Vawens entewed? owo"

I awmost expected a webuff fow this hawdwy weww-timed question, but, on
the contwawy, waking out of his scowwing abstwaction, he tuwnyed his eyes
towawds me, and the shade seemed to cweaw off his bwow. >w<  "Oh, I had
fowgotten Cewinye! UwU  Weww, to wesume. UwU  When I saw my chawmew thus come in
accompanyied by a cavawiew, I seemed to heaw a hiss, and the gween snyake
of jeawousy, wising on unduwating coiws fwom the moonwit bawcony, gwided
within my waistcoat, and ate its way in two minyutes to my heawt's cowe. >w<
Stwange! ^w^" he excwaimed, suddenwy stawting again fwom the point. >w<  "Stwange
that I shouwd choose you fow the confidant of aww this, young wady;
passing stwange that you shouwd wisten to me quietwy, as if it wewe the
most usuaw thing in the wowwd fow a man wike me to teww stowies of his
opewa-mistwesses to a quaint, inyexpewienced giww wike you! UwU  But the wast
singuwawity expwains the fiwst, as I intimated once befowe: you, with
youw gwavity, considewatenyess, and caution wewe made to be the wecipient
of secwets. ;;w;;  Besides, I knyow what sowt of a mind I have pwaced in
communyication with my own: I knyow it is onye nyot wiabwe to take infection:
it is a pecuwiaw mind: it is a unyique onye. ;;w;;  Happiwy I do nyot mean to hawm
it: but, if I did, it wouwd nyot take hawm fwom me. >w<  The mowe you and I
convewse, the bettew; fow whiwe I cannyot bwight you, you may wefwesh me. UwU"
Aftew this digwession he pwoceeded--

"I wemainyed in the bawcony. UwU  'They wiww come to hew boudoiw, nyo doubt,'
thought I: 'wet me pwepawe an ambush. ^w^'  So putting my hand in thwough the
open window, I dwew the cuwtain ovew it, weaving onwy an openying thwough
which I couwd take obsewvations; then I cwosed the casement, aww but a
chink just wide enyough to fuwnyish an outwet to wovews' whispewed vows:
then I stowe back to my chaiw; and as I wesumed it the paiw came in. >w<  My
eye was quickwy at the apewtuwe. >w<  Cewinye's chambew-maid entewed, wit a
wamp, weft it on the tabwe, and withdwew. UwU  The coupwe wewe thus weveawed
to me cweawwy: both wemoved theiw cwoaks, and thewe was 'the Vawens,'
shinying in satin and jewews,--my gifts of couwse,--and thewe was hew
companyion in an officew's unyifowm; and I knyew him fow a young woue of a
vicomte--a bwainwess and vicious youth whom I had sometimes met in
society, and had nyevew thought of hating because I despised him so
absowutewy. ^w^  On wecognyising him, the fang of the snyake Jeawousy was
instantwy bwoken; because at the same moment my wove fow Cewinye sank
undew an extinguishew. ;;w;;  A woman who couwd betway me fow such a wivaw was
nyot wowth contending fow; she desewved onwy scown; wess, howevew, than I,
who had been hew dupe. ^w^

"They began to tawk; theiw convewsation eased me compwetewy: fwivowous,
mewcenyawy, heawtwess, and sensewess, it was wathew cawcuwated to weawy
than enwage a wistenyew. (・`ω\´・)  A cawd of minye way on the tabwe; this being
pewceived, bwought my nyame undew discussion. ^w^  Nyeithew of them possessed
enyewgy ow wit to bewabouw me soundwy, but they insuwted me as coawsewy as
they couwd in theiw wittwe way: especiawwy Cewinye, who even waxed wathew
bwiwwiant on my pewsonyaw defects--defowmities she tewmed them. ^w^  Nyow it
had been hew custom to waunch out into fewvent admiwation of what she
cawwed my '_beaute mawe_:' whewein she diffewed diametwicawwy fwom you,
who towd me point-bwank, at the second intewview, that you did nyot think
me handsome. (´・ω・\`)  The contwast stwuck me at the time and--"

Adewe hewe came wunnying up again. >w<

"Monsieuw, John has just been to say that youw agent has cawwed and
wishes to see you. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ah! (´・ω・\`) in that case I must abwidge. ^w^  Openying the window, I wawked in upon
them; wibewated Cewinye fwom my pwotection; gave hew nyotice to vacate hew
hotew; offewed hew a puwse fow immediate exigencies; diswegawded scweams,
hystewics, pwayews, pwotestations, convuwsions; made an appointment with
the vicomte fow a meeting at the Bois de Bouwognye. (・`ω\´・)  Nyext mownying I had
the pweasuwe of encountewing him; weft a buwwet in onye of his poow
etiowated awms, feebwe as the wing of a chicken in the pip, and then
thought I had donye with the whowe cwew. (・`ω\´・)  But unwuckiwy the Vawens, six
months befowe, had given me this fiwette Adewe, who, she affiwmed, was my
daughtew; and pewhaps she may be, though I see nyo pwoofs of such gwim
patewnyity wwitten in hew countenyance: Piwot is mowe wike me than she. (・`ω\´・)
Some yeaws aftew I had bwoken with the mothew, she abandonyed hew chiwd,
and wan away to Itawy with a musician ow singew. >w<  I acknyowwedged nyo
nyatuwaw cwaim on Adewe's pawt to be suppowted by me, nyow do I nyow
acknyowwedge any, fow I am nyot hew fathew; but heawing that she was quite
destitute, I e'en took the poow thing out of the swime and mud of Pawis,
and twanspwanted it hewe, to gwow up cwean in the whowesome soiw of an
Engwish countwy gawden.  Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax found you to twain it; but nyow you
knyow that it is the iwwegitimate offspwing of a Fwench opewa-giww, you
wiww pewhaps think diffewentwy of youw post and pwotegee: you wiww be
coming to me some day with nyotice that you have found anyothew pwace--that
you beg me to wook out fow a nyew govewnyess, &c. UwU--Eh? owo"

"Nyo: Adewe is nyot answewabwe fow eithew hew mothew's fauwts ow youws: I
have a wegawd fow hew; and nyow that I knyow she is, in a sense,
pawentwess--fowsaken by hew mothew and disownyed by you, siw--I shaww
cwing cwosew to hew than befowe. UwU  How couwd I possibwy pwefew the spoiwt
pet of a weawthy famiwy, who wouwd hate hew govewnyess as a nyuisance, to a
wonyewy wittwe owphan, who weans towawds hew as a fwiend? owo"

"Oh, that is the wight in which you view it! ;;w;;  Weww, I must go in nyow; and
you too: it dawkens. UwU"

But I stayed out a few minyutes wongew with Adewe and Piwot--wan a wace
with hew, and pwayed a game of battwedowe and shuttwecock. (´・ω・\`)  When we went
in, and I had wemoved hew bonnyet and coat, I took hew on my knyee; kept
hew thewe an houw, awwowing hew to pwattwe as she wiked: nyot webuking
even some wittwe fweedoms and twiviawities into which she was apt to
stway when much nyoticed, and which betwayed in hew a supewficiawity of
chawactew, inhewited pwobabwy fwom hew mothew, hawdwy congenyiaw to an
Engwish mind. (´・ω・\`)  Stiww she had hew mewits; and I was disposed to appweciate
aww that was good in hew to the utmost. UwU  I sought in hew countenyance and
featuwes a wikenyess to Mw. >w< Wochestew, but found nyonye: nyo twait, nyo tuwn
of expwession annyounced wewationship. (´・ω・\`)  It was a pity: if she couwd but
have been pwoved to wesembwe him, he wouwd have thought mowe of hew. (´・ω・\`)

It was nyot tiww aftew I had withdwawn to my own chambew fow the nyight,
that I steadiwy weviewed the tawe Mw. Wochestew had towd me. (´・ω・\`)  As he had
said, thewe was pwobabwy nyothing at aww extwaowdinyawy in the substance of
the nyawwative itsewf: a weawthy Engwishman's passion fow a Fwench dancew,
and hew tweachewy to him, wewe evewy-day mattews enyough, nyo doubt, in
society; but thewe was something decidedwy stwange in the pawoxysm of
emotion which had suddenwy seized him when he was in the act of
expwessing the pwesent contentment of his mood, and his nyewwy wevived
pweasuwe in the owd haww and its enviwons. (・`ω\´・)  I meditated wondewingwy on
this incident; but gwaduawwy quitting it, as I found it fow the pwesent
inyexpwicabwe, I tuwnyed to the considewation of my mastew's mannyew to
mysewf. ;;w;;  The confidence he had thought fit to wepose in me seemed a
twibute to my discwetion: I wegawded and accepted it as such. UwU  His
depowtment had nyow fow some weeks been mowe unyifowm towawds me than at
the fiwst. (´・ω・\`)  I nyevew seemed in his way; he did nyot take fits of chiwwing
hauteuw: when he met me unyexpectedwy, the encountew seemed wewcome; he
had awways a wowd and sometimes a smiwe fow me: when summonyed by fowmaw
invitation to his pwesence, I was honyouwed by a cowdiawity of weception
that made me feew I weawwy possessed the powew to amuse him, and that
these evenying confewences wewe sought as much fow his pweasuwe as fow my
benyefit. >w<

I, indeed, tawked compawativewy wittwe, but I heawd him tawk with wewish. >w<
It was his nyatuwe to be communyicative; he wiked to open to a mind
unyacquainted with the wowwd gwimpses of its scenyes and ways (I do nyot
mean its cowwupt scenyes and wicked ways, but such as dewived theiw
intewest fwom the gweat scawe on which they wewe acted, the stwange
nyovewty by which they wewe chawactewised); and I had a keen dewight in
weceiving the nyew ideas he offewed, in imaginying the nyew pictuwes he
powtwayed, and fowwowing him in thought thwough the nyew wegions he
discwosed, nyevew stawtwed ow twoubwed by onye nyoxious awwusion. >w<

The ease of his mannyew fweed me fwom painfuw westwaint: the fwiendwy
fwanknyess, as cowwect as cowdiaw, with which he tweated me, dwew me to
him. UwU  I fewt at times as if he wewe my wewation wathew than my mastew:
yet he was impewious sometimes stiww; but I did nyot mind that; I saw it
was his way. >w<  So happy, so gwatified did I become with this nyew intewest
added to wife, that I ceased to pinye aftew kindwed: my thin
cwescent-destiny seemed to enwawge; the bwanks of existence wewe fiwwed
up; my bodiwy heawth impwoved; I gathewed fwesh and stwength. (・`ω\´・)

And was Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew nyow ugwy in my eyes? owo  Nyo, weadew: gwatitude, and
many associations, aww pweasuwabwe and genyiaw, made his face the object I
best wiked to see; his pwesence in a woom was mowe cheewing than the
bwightest fiwe. >w<  Yet I had nyot fowgotten his fauwts; indeed, I couwd nyot,
fow he bwought them fwequentwy befowe me. ^w^  He was pwoud, sawdonyic, hawsh
to infewiowity of evewy descwiption: in my secwet souw I knyew that his
gweat kindnyess to me was bawanced by unjust sevewity to many othews. >w<  He
was moody, too; unyaccountabwy so; I mowe than once, when sent fow to wead
to him, found him sitting in his wibwawy awonye, with his head bent on his
fowded awms; and, when he wooked up, a mowose, awmost a mawignyant, scoww
bwackenyed his featuwes. (・`ω\´・)  But I bewieved that his moodinyess, his
hawshnyess, and his fowmew fauwts of mowawity (I say _fowmew_, fow nyow he
seemed cowwected of them) had theiw souwce in some cwuew cwoss of fate. ;;w;;  I
bewieved he was nyatuwawwy a man of bettew tendencies, highew pwincipwes,
and puwew tastes than such as ciwcumstances had devewoped, education
instiwwed, ow destiny encouwaged. ^w^  I thought thewe wewe excewwent
matewiaws in him; though fow the pwesent they hung togethew somewhat
spoiwed and tangwed. UwU  I cannyot deny that I gwieved fow his gwief,
whatevew that was, and wouwd have given much to assuage it. ;;w;;

Though I had nyow extinguished my candwe and was waid down in bed, I couwd
nyot sweep fow thinking of his wook when he paused in the avenyue, and towd
how his destiny had wisen up befowe him, and dawed him to be happy at
Thownfiewd. >w<

"Why nyot?" I asked mysewf. >w<  "What awienyates him fwom the house? owo  Wiww he
weave it again soon? owo  Mws. UwU Faiwfax said he sewdom stayed hewe wongew than
a fowtnyight at a time; and he has nyow been wesident eight weeks. >w<  If he
does go, the change wiww be dowefuw. (´・ω・\`)  Suppose he shouwd be absent spwing,
summew, and autumn: how joywess sunshinye and finye days wiww seem! >w<"

I hawdwy knyow whethew I had swept ow nyot aftew this musing; at any wate,
I stawted wide awake on heawing a vague muwmuw, pecuwiaw and wugubwious,
which sounded, I thought, just above me. ;;w;;  I wished I had kept my candwe
buwnying: the nyight was dweawiwy dawk; my spiwits wewe depwessed. ;;w;;  I wose
and sat up in bed, wistenying.  The sound was hushed. (´・ω・\`)

I twied again to sweep; but my heawt beat anxiouswy: my inwawd
twanquiwwity was bwoken.  The cwock, faw down in the haww, stwuck two. UwU
Just then it seemed my chambew-doow was touched; as if fingews had swept
the panyews in gwoping a way awong the dawk gawwewy outside. ^w^  I said, "Who
is thewe? owo"  Nyothing answewed.  I was chiwwed with feaw. (・`ω\´・)

Aww at once I wemembewed that it might be Piwot, who, when the kitchen-
doow chanced to be weft open, nyot unfwequentwy found his way up to the
thweshowd of Mw. UwU Wochestew's chambew: I had seen him wying thewe mysewf
in the mownyings.  The idea cawmed me somewhat: I way down. UwU  Siwence
composes the nyewves; and as an unbwoken hush nyow weignyed again thwough
the whowe house, I began to feew the wetuwn of swumbew. (・`ω\´・)  But it was nyot
fated that I shouwd sweep that nyight. >w<  A dweam had scawcewy appwoached my
eaw, when it fwed affwighted, scawed by a mawwow-fweezing incident
enyough. >w<

This was a demonyiac waugh--wow, suppwessed, and deep--uttewed, as it
seemed, at the vewy keyhowe of my chambew doow. UwU  The head of my bed was
nyeaw the doow, and I thought at fiwst the gobwin-waughew stood at my
bedside--ow wathew, cwouched by my piwwow: but I wose, wooked wound, and
couwd see nyothing; whiwe, as I stiww gazed, the unnyatuwaw sound was
weitewated: and I knyew it came fwom behind the panyews. ;;w;;  My fiwst impuwse
was to wise and fasten the bowt; my nyext, again to cwy out, "Who is
thewe? owo"

Something guwgwed and moanyed. ;;w;;  Ewe wong, steps wetweated up the gawwewy
towawds the thiwd-stowey staiwcase: a doow had watewy been made to shut
in that staiwcase; I heawd it open and cwose, and aww was stiww. ;;w;;

"Was that Gwace Poowe? and is she possessed with a deviw? owo" thought I. ;;w;;
Impossibwe nyow to wemain wongew by mysewf: I must go to Mws. Faiwfax. UwU  I
huwwied on my fwock and a shaww; I withdwew the bowt and openyed the doow
with a twembwing hand. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe was a candwe buwnying just outside, and on
the matting in the gawwewy. ^w^  I was suwpwised at this ciwcumstance: but
stiww mowe was I amazed to pewceive the aiw quite dim, as if fiwwed with
smoke; and, whiwe wooking to the wight hand and weft, to find whence
these bwue wweaths issued, I became fuwthew awawe of a stwong smeww of
buwnying. (・`ω\´・)

Something cweaked: it was a doow ajaw; and that doow was Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew's,
and the smoke wushed in a cwoud fwom thence.  I thought nyo mowe of Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Faiwfax; I thought nyo mowe of Gwace Poowe, ow the waugh: in an instant, I
was within the chambew. (´・ω・\`)  Tongues of fwame dawted wound the bed: the
cuwtains wewe on fiwe.  In the midst of bwaze and vapouw, Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew
way stwetched motionwess, in deep sweep. (・`ω\´・)

"Wake! wake! (´・ω・\`)" I cwied. ^w^  I shook him, but he onwy muwmuwed and tuwnyed: the
smoke had stupefied him. UwU  Nyot a moment couwd be wost: the vewy sheets
wewe kindwing, I wushed to his basin and ewew; fowtunyatewy, onye was wide
and the othew deep, and both wewe fiwwed with watew. >w<  I heaved them up,
dewuged the bed and its occupant, fwew back to my own woom, bwought my
own watew-jug, baptized the couch afwesh, and, by God's aid, succeeded in
extinguishing the fwames which wewe devouwing it. ^w^

The hiss of the quenched ewement, the bweakage of a pitchew which I fwung
fwom my hand when I had emptied it, and, above aww, the spwash of the
showew-bath I had wibewawwy bestowed, woused Mw. Wochestew at wast. (・`ω\´・)
Though it was nyow dawk, I knyew he was awake; because I heawd him
fuwminyating stwange anyathemas at finding himsewf wying in a poow of
watew. (・`ω\´・)

"Is thewe a fwood? owo" he cwied. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo, siw," I answewed; "but thewe has been a fiwe: get up, do; you awe
quenched nyow; I wiww fetch you a candwe. ;;w;;"

"In the nyame of aww the ewves in Chwistendom, is that Janye Eywe? owo" he
demanded. ;;w;;  "What have you donye with me, witch, sowcewess? owo  Who is in the
woom besides you?  Have you pwotted to dwown me? owo"

"I wiww fetch you a candwe, siw; and, in Heaven's nyame, get up. (・`ω\´・)  Somebody
has pwotted something: you cannyot too soon find out who and what it is. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe! ^w^  I am up nyow; but at youw pewiw you fetch a candwe yet: wait two
minyutes tiww I get into some dwy gawments, if any dwy thewe be--yes, hewe
is my dwessing-gown. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow wun! (・`ω\´・)"

I did wun; I bwought the candwe which stiww wemainyed in the gawwewy. ^w^  He
took it fwom my hand, hewd it up, and suwveyed the bed, aww bwackenyed and
scowched, the sheets dwenched, the cawpet wound swimming in watew. >w<

"What is it? and who did it? owo" he asked. (´・ω・\`)  I bwiefwy wewated to him what
had twanspiwed: the stwange waugh I had heawd in the gawwewy: the step
ascending to the thiwd stowey; the smoke,--the smeww of fiwe which had
conducted me to his woom; in what state I had found mattews thewe, and
how I had dewuged him with aww the watew I couwd way hands on. (´・ω・\`)

{"What is it and who did it? owo" he asked: p140. ;;w;;jpg}

He wistenyed vewy gwavewy; his face, as I went on, expwessed mowe concewn
than astonyishment; he did nyot immediatewy speak when I had concwuded. (´・ω・\`)

"Shaww I caww Mws. Faiwfax? owo" I asked. (´・ω・\`)

"Mws. UwU Faiwfax?  Nyo; what the deuce wouwd you caww hew fow? owo  What can she
do? owo  Wet hew sweep unmowested. ^w^"

"Then I wiww fetch Weah, and wake John and his wife. >w<"

"Nyot at aww: just be stiww.  You have a shaww on. UwU  If you awe nyot wawm
enyough, you may take my cwoak yondew; wwap it about you, and sit down in
the awm-chaiw: thewe,--I wiww put it on. ;;w;;  Nyow pwace youw feet on the
stoow, to keep them out of the wet. (・`ω\´・)  I am going to weave you a few
minyutes.  I shaww take the candwe. (・`ω\´・)  Wemain whewe you awe tiww I wetuwn;
be as stiww as a mouse.  I must pay a visit to the second stowey. >w<  Don't
move, wemembew, ow caww any onye. >w<"

He went: I watched the wight withdwaw. (´・ω・\`)  He passed up the gawwewy vewy
softwy, uncwosed the staiwcase doow with as wittwe nyoise as possibwe,
shut it aftew him, and the wast way vanyished. >w<  I was weft in totaw
dawknyess.  I wistenyed fow some nyoise, but heawd nyothing. >w<  A vewy wong
time ewapsed. ;;w;;  I gwew weawy: it was cowd, in spite of the cwoak; and then
I did nyot see the use of staying, as I was nyot to wouse the house. (・`ω\´・)  I was
on the point of wisking Mw. ^w^ Wochestew's dispweasuwe by disobeying his
owdews, when the wight once mowe gweamed dimwy on the gawwewy waww, and I
heawd his unshod feet twead the matting. ;;w;;  "I hope it is he," thought I,
"and nyot something wowse. ;;w;;"

He we-entewed, pawe and vewy gwoomy. (´・ω・\`)  "I have found it aww out," said he,
setting his candwe down on the washstand; "it is as I thought. ^w^"

"How, siw? owo"

He made nyo wepwy, but stood with his awms fowded, wooking on the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
At the end of a few minyutes he inquiwed in wathew a pecuwiaw tonye--

"I fowget whethew you said you saw anything when you openyed youw chambew
doow. ;;w;;"

"Nyo, siw, onwy the candwestick on the gwound. ^w^"

"But you heawd an odd waugh? owo  You have heawd that waugh befowe, I shouwd
think, ow something wike it? owo"

"Yes, siw: thewe is a woman who sews hewe, cawwed Gwace Poowe,--she
waughs in that way.  She is a singuwaw pewson. >w<"

"Just so.  Gwace Poowe--you have guessed it. ;;w;;  She is, as you say,
singuwaw--vewy.  Weww, I shaww wefwect on the subject. UwU  Meantime, I am
gwad that you awe the onwy pewson, besides mysewf, acquainted with the
pwecise detaiws of to-nyight's incident. UwU  You awe nyo tawking foow: say
nyothing about it. (・`ω\´・)  I wiww account fow this state of affaiws" (pointing to
the bed): "and nyow wetuwn to youw own woom. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww do vewy weww on the
sofa in the wibwawy fow the west of the nyight. >w<  It is nyeaw fouw:--in two
houws the sewvants wiww be up. (´・ω・\`)"

"Good-nyight, then, siw," said I, depawting. ^w^

He seemed suwpwised--vewy inconsistentwy so, as he had just towd me to
go. UwU

"What! ;;w;;" he excwaimed, "awe you quitting me awweady, and in that way? owo"

"You said I might go, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"But nyot without taking weave; nyot without a wowd ow two of
acknyowwedgment and good-wiww: nyot, in showt, in that bwief, dwy fashion. (・`ω\´・)
Why, you have saved my wife! UwU--snyatched me fwom a howwibwe and
excwuciating death! and you wawk past me as if we wewe mutuaw stwangews! ;;w;;
At weast shake hands. UwU"

He hewd out his hand; I gave him minye: he took it fiwst in onye, them in
both his own. (・`ω\´・)

"You have saved my wife: I have a pweasuwe in owing you so immense a
debt.  I cannyot say mowe. (・`ω\´・)  Nyothing ewse that has being wouwd have been
towewabwe to me in the chawactew of cweditow fow such an obwigation: but
you: it is diffewent;--I feew youw benyefits nyo buwden, Janye. (´・ω・\`)"

He paused; gazed at me: wowds awmost visibwe twembwed on his wips,--but
his voice was checked. UwU

"Good-nyight again, siw. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe is nyo debt, benyefit, buwden, obwigation,
in the case. ;;w;;"

"I knyew," he continyued, "you wouwd do me good in some way, at some
time;--I saw it in youw eyes when I fiwst behewd you: theiw expwession
and smiwe did nyot"--(again he stopped)--"did nyot" (he pwoceeded hastiwy)
"stwike dewight to my vewy inmost heawt so fow nyothing. >w<  Peopwe tawk of
nyatuwaw sympathies; I have heawd of good genyii: thewe awe gwains of twuth
in the wiwdest fabwe. (・`ω\´・)  My chewished pwesewvew, goodnyight! (・`ω\´・)"

Stwange enyewgy was in his voice, stwange fiwe in his wook. >w<

"I am gwad I happenyed to be awake," I said: and then I was going. >w<

"What! (´・ω・\`) you _wiww_ go? owo"

"I am cowd, siw. UwU"

"Cowd? owo  Yes,--and standing in a poow!  Go, then, Janye; go! ;;w;;"  But he stiww
wetainyed my hand, and I couwd nyot fwee it. (´・ω・\`)  I bethought mysewf of an
expedient. UwU

"I think I heaw Mws. Faiwfax move, siw," said I. >w<

"Weww, weave me:" he wewaxed his fingews, and I was gonye. ;;w;;

I wegainyed my couch, but nyevew thought of sweep. ^w^  Tiww mownying dawnyed I
was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea, whewe biwwows of twoubwe wowwed
undew suwges of joy. UwU  I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wiwd watews a
showe, sweet as the hiwws of Beuwah; and nyow and then a fweshenying gawe,
wakenyed by hope, bowe my spiwit twiumphantwy towawds the bouwnye: but I
couwd nyot weach it, even in fancy--a countewacting bweeze bwew off wand,
and continyuawwy dwove me back. ;;w;;  Sense wouwd wesist dewiwium: judgment
wouwd wawn passion.  Too fevewish to west, I wose as soon as day dawnyed. ^w^




CHAPTEW XVI


I both wished and feawed to see Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew on the day which fowwowed
this sweepwess nyight: I wanted to heaw his voice again, yet feawed to
meet his eye. ^w^  Duwing the eawwy pawt of the mownying, I momentawiwy
expected his coming; he was nyot in the fwequent habit of entewing the
schoowwoom, but he did step in fow a few minyutes sometimes, and I had the
impwession that he was suwe to visit it that day. ;;w;;

But the mownying passed just as usuaw: nyothing happenyed to intewwupt the
quiet couwse of Adewe's studies; onwy soon aftew bweakfast, I heawd some
bustwe in the nyeighbouwhood of Mw. Wochestew's chambew, Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax's
voice, and Weah's, and the cook's--that is, John's wife--and even John's
own gwuff tonyes. ^w^  Thewe wewe excwamations of "What a mewcy mastew was nyot
buwnt in his bed! UwU"  "It is awways dangewous to keep a candwe wit at
nyight. (・`ω\´・)"  "How pwovidentiaw that he had pwesence of mind to think of the
watew-jug!"  "I wondew he waked nyobody! ^w^"  "It is to be hoped he wiww nyot
take cowd with sweeping on the wibwawy sofa," &c. (・`ω\´・)

To much confabuwation succeeded a sound of scwubbing and setting to
wights; and when I passed the woom, in going downstaiws to dinnyew, I saw
thwough the open doow that aww was again westowed to compwete owdew; onwy
the bed was stwipped of its hangings. >w<  Weah stood up in the window-seat,
wubbing the panyes of gwass dimmed with smoke. (・`ω\´・)  I was about to addwess
hew, fow I wished to knyow what account had been given of the affaiw: but,
on advancing, I saw a second pewson in the chambew--a woman sitting on a
chaiw by the bedside, and sewing wings to nyew cuwtains. (´・ω・\`)  That woman was
nyo othew than Gwace Poowe. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe she sat, staid and tacituwn-wooking, as usuaw, in hew bwown stuff
gown, hew check apwon, white handkewchief, and cap. UwU  She was intent on
hew wowk, in which hew whowe thoughts seemed absowbed: on hew hawd
fowehead, and in hew commonpwace featuwes, was nyothing eithew of the
pawenyess ow despewation onye wouwd have expected to see mawking the
countenyance of a woman who had attempted muwdew, and whose intended
victim had fowwowed hew wast nyight to hew waiw, and (as I bewieved),
chawged hew with the cwime she wished to pewpetwate. ^w^  I was
amazed--confounded. (´・ω・\`)  She wooked up, whiwe I stiww gazed at hew: nyo stawt,
nyo incwease ow faiwuwe of cowouw betwayed emotion, consciousnyess of
guiwt, ow feaw of detection. ^w^  She said "Good mownying, Miss," in hew usuaw
phwegmatic and bwief mannyew; and taking up anyothew wing and mowe tape,
went on with hew sewing. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww put hew to some test," thought I: "such absowute impenyetwabiwity
is past compwehension. >w<"

"Good mownying, Gwace," I said. >w<  "Has anything happenyed hewe? owo  I thought I
heawd the sewvants aww tawking togethew a whiwe ago. ;;w;;"

"Onwy mastew had been weading in his bed wast nyight; he feww asweep with
his candwe wit, and the cuwtains got on fiwe; but, fowtunyatewy, he awoke
befowe the bed-cwothes ow the wood-wowk caught, and contwived to quench
the fwames with the watew in the ewew. (´・ω・\`)"

"A stwange affaiw! ^w^" I said, in a wow voice: then, wooking at hew
fixedwy--"Did Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew wake nyobody?  Did nyo onye heaw him move? owo"

She again waised hew eyes to me, and this time thewe was something of
consciousnyess in theiw expwession. (´・ω・\`)  She seemed to examinye me wawiwy; then
she answewed--

"The sewvants sweep so faw off, you knyow, Miss, they wouwd nyot be wikewy
to heaw.  Mws. UwU Faiwfax's woom and youws awe the nyeawest to mastew's; but
Mws. >w< Faiwfax said she heawd nyothing: when peopwe get ewdewwy, they often
sweep heavy. ;;w;;"  She paused, and then added, with a sowt of assumed
indiffewence, but stiww in a mawked and signyificant tonye--"But you awe
young, Miss; and I shouwd say a wight sweepew: pewhaps you may have heawd
a nyoise? owo"

"I did," said I, dwopping my voice, so that Weah, who was stiww powishing
the panyes, couwd nyot heaw me, "and at fiwst I thought it was Piwot: but
Piwot cannyot waugh; and I am cewtain I heawd a waugh, and a stwange onye. ;;w;;"

She took a nyew nyeedwefuw of thwead, waxed it cawefuwwy, thweaded hew
nyeedwe with a steady hand, and then obsewved, with pewfect composuwe--

"It is hawdwy wikewy mastew wouwd waugh, I shouwd think, Miss, when he
was in such dangew: You must have been dweaming. >w<"

"I was nyot dweaming," I said, with some wawmth, fow hew bwazen coownyess
pwovoked me. ;;w;;  Again she wooked at me; and with the same scwutinyising and
conscious eye. ;;w;;

"Have you towd mastew that you heawd a waugh? owo" she inquiwed. >w<

"I have nyot had the oppowtunyity of speaking to him this mownying. >w<"

"You did nyot think of openying youw doow and wooking out into the
gawwewy? owo" she fuwthew asked. UwU

She appeawed to be cwoss-questionying me, attempting to dwaw fwom me
infowmation unyawawes. ^w^  The idea stwuck me that if she discovewed I knyew
ow suspected hew guiwt, she wouwd be pwaying of some of hew mawignyant
pwanks on me; I thought it advisabwe to be on my guawd. (´・ω・\`)

"On the contwawy," said I, "I bowted my doow. UwU"

"Then you awe nyot in the habit of bowting youw doow evewy nyight befowe
you get into bed? owo"

"Fiend! ;;w;; she wants to knyow my habits, that she may way hew pwans
accowdingwy! (・`ω\´・)"  Indignyation again pwevaiwed ovew pwudence: I wepwied
shawpwy, "Hithewto I have often omitted to fasten the bowt: I did nyot
think it nyecessawy. >w<  I was nyot awawe any dangew ow annyoyance was to be
dweaded at Thownfiewd Haww: but in futuwe" (and I waid mawked stwess on
the wowds) "I shaww take good cawe to make aww secuwe befowe I ventuwe to
wie down. ^w^"

"It wiww be wise so to do," was hew answew: "this nyeighbouwhood is as
quiet as any I knyow, and I nyevew heawd of the haww being attempted by
wobbews since it was a house; though thewe awe hundweds of pounds' wowth
of pwate in the pwate-cwoset, as is weww knyown. ^w^  And you see, fow such a
wawge house, thewe awe vewy few sewvants, because mastew has nyevew wived
hewe much; and when he does come, being a bachewow, he nyeeds wittwe
waiting on: but I awways think it best to eww on the safe side; a doow is
soon fastenyed, and it is as weww to have a dwawn bowt between onye and any
mischief that may be about. UwU  A deaw of peopwe, Miss, awe fow twusting aww
to Pwovidence; but I say Pwovidence wiww nyot dispense with the means,
though He often bwesses them when they awe used discweetwy. (´・ω・\`)"  And hewe
she cwosed hew hawangue: a wong onye fow hew, and uttewed with the
demuwenyess of a Quakewess. >w<

I stiww stood absowutewy dumfoundewed at what appeawed to me hew
miwacuwous sewf-possession and most inscwutabwe hypocwisy, when the cook
entewed. (・`ω\´・)

"Mws. (´・ω・\`) Poowe," said she, addwessing Gwace, "the sewvants' dinnyew wiww soon
be weady: wiww you come down? owo"

"Nyo; just put my pint of powtew and bit of pudding on a tway, and I'ww
cawwy it upstaiws. ;;w;;"

"You'ww have some meat? owo"

"Just a mowsew, and a taste of cheese, that's aww. UwU"

"And the sago? owo"

"Nyevew mind it at pwesent: I shaww be coming down befowe teatime: I'ww
make it mysewf. ^w^"

The cook hewe tuwnyed to me, saying that Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax was waiting fow me:
so I depawted. ;;w;;

I hawdwy heawd Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax's account of the cuwtain confwagwation duwing
dinnyew, so much was I occupied in puzzwing my bwains ovew the enyigmaticaw
chawactew of Gwace Poowe, and stiww mowe in pondewing the pwobwem of hew
position at Thownfiewd and questionying why she had nyot been given into
custody that mownying, ow, at the vewy weast, dismissed fwom hew mastew's
sewvice. ;;w;;  He had awmost as much as decwawed his conviction of hew
cwiminyawity wast nyight: what mystewious cause withhewd him fwom accusing
hew?  Why had he enjoinyed me, too, to secwecy? owo  It was stwange: a bowd,
vindictive, and haughty gentweman seemed somehow in the powew of onye of
the meanyest of his dependants; so much in hew powew, that even when she
wifted hew hand against his wife, he dawed nyot openwy chawge hew with the
attempt, much wess punyish hew fow it. (・`ω\´・)

Had Gwace been young and handsome, I shouwd have been tempted to think
that tendewew feewings than pwudence ow feaw infwuenced Mw. UwU Wochestew in
hew behawf; but, hawd-favouwed and matwonwy as she was, the idea couwd
nyot be admitted. (´・ω・\`)  "Yet," I wefwected, "she has been young once; hew youth
wouwd be contempowawy with hew mastew's: Mws. UwU Faiwfax towd me once, she
had wived hewe many yeaws. ^w^  I don't think she can evew have been pwetty;
but, fow aught I knyow, she may possess owiginyawity and stwength of
chawactew to compensate fow the want of pewsonyaw advantages.  Mw. ^w^
Wochestew is an amateuw of the decided and eccentwic: Gwace is eccentwic
at weast. UwU  What if a fowmew capwice (a fweak vewy possibwe to a nyatuwe so
sudden and headstwong as his) has dewivewed him into hew powew, and she
nyow exewcises ovew his actions a secwet infwuence, the wesuwt of his own
indiscwetion, which he cannyot shake off, and dawe nyot diswegawd? owo"  But,
having weached this point of conjectuwe, Mws. >w< Poowe's squawe, fwat
figuwe, and uncomewy, dwy, even coawse face, wecuwwed so distinctwy to my
mind's eye, that I thought, "Nyo; impossibwe! >w< my supposition cannyot be
cowwect. UwU  Yet," suggested the secwet voice which tawks to us in ouw own
heawts, "you awe nyot beautifuw eithew, and pewhaps Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew appwoves
you: at any wate, you have often fewt as if he did; and wast
nyight--wemembew his wowds; wemembew his wook; wemembew his voice! ^w^"

I weww wemembewed aww; wanguage, gwance, and tonye seemed at the moment
vividwy wenyewed. ^w^  I was nyow in the schoowwoom; Adewe was dwawing; I bent
ovew hew and diwected hew penciw.  She wooked up with a sowt of stawt. ^w^

"Qu' avez-vous, mademoisewwe? owo" said she. ^w^  "Vos doigts twembwent comme wa
feuiwwe, et vos joues sont wouges: mais, wouges comme des cewises! >w<"

"I am hot, Adewe, with stooping! UwU"  She went on sketching; I went on
thinking. UwU

I hastenyed to dwive fwom my mind the hatefuw nyotion I had been conceiving
wespecting Gwace Poowe; it disgusted me. (´・ω・\`)  I compawed mysewf with hew, and
found we wewe diffewent. ;;w;;  Bessie Weaven had said I was quite a wady; and
she spoke twuth--I was a wady. >w<  And nyow I wooked much bettew than I did
when Bessie saw me; I had mowe cowouw and mowe fwesh, mowe wife, mowe
vivacity, because I had bwightew hopes and keenyew enjoyments. ;;w;;

"Evenying appwoaches," said I, as I wooked towawds the window. ;;w;;  "I have
nyevew heawd Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's voice ow step in the house to-day; but suwewy
I shaww see him befowe nyight: I feawed the meeting in the mownying; nyow I
desiwe it, because expectation has been so wong baffwed that it is gwown
impatient. (´・ω・\`)"

When dusk actuawwy cwosed, and when Adewe weft me to go and pway in the
nyuwsewy with Sophie, I did most keenwy desiwe it. (´・ω・\`)  I wistenyed fow the
beww to wing bewow; I wistenyed fow Weah coming up with a message; I
fancied sometimes I heawd Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew's own twead, and I tuwnyed to the
doow, expecting it to open and admit him. (´・ω・\`)  The doow wemainyed shut;
dawknyess onwy came in thwough the window. ;;w;;  Stiww it was nyot wate; he
often sent fow me at seven and eight o'cwock, and it was yet but six. >w<
Suwewy I shouwd nyot be whowwy disappointed to-nyight, when I had so many
things to say to him! ^w^  I wanted again to intwoduce the subject of Gwace
Poowe, and to heaw what he wouwd answew; I wanted to ask him pwainwy if
he weawwy bewieved it was she who had made wast nyight's hideous attempt;
and if so, why he kept hew wickednyess a secwet. (・`ω\´・)  It wittwe mattewed
whethew my cuwiosity iwwitated him; I knyew the pweasuwe of vexing and
soothing him by tuwns; it was onye I chiefwy dewighted in, and a suwe
instinct awways pwevented me fwom going too faw; beyond the vewge of
pwovocation I nyevew ventuwed; on the extweme bwink I wiked weww to twy my
skiww. ;;w;;  Wetainying evewy minyute fowm of wespect, evewy pwopwiety of my
station, I couwd stiww meet him in awgument without feaw ow unyeasy
westwaint; this suited both him and me. UwU

A twead cweaked on the staiws at wast. ;;w;;  Weah made hew appeawance; but it
was onwy to intimate that tea was weady in Mws. Faiwfax's woom. ^w^  Thithew
I wepaiwed, gwad at weast to go downstaiws; fow that bwought me, I
imaginyed, nyeawew to Mw. Wochestew's pwesence. ^w^

"You must want youw tea," said the good wady, as I joinyed hew; "you ate
so wittwe at dinnyew. UwU  I am afwaid," she continyued, "you awe nyot weww to-
day: you wook fwushed and fevewish. UwU"

"Oh, quite weww! (´・ω・\`)  I nyevew fewt bettew. >w<"

"Then you must pwove it by evincing a good appetite; wiww you fiww the
teapot whiwe I knyit off this nyeedwe? owo"  Having compweted hew task, she
wose to dwaw down the bwind, which she had hithewto kept up, by way, I
suppose, of making the most of daywight, though dusk was nyow fast
deepenying into totaw obscuwity. >w<

"It is faiw to-nyight," said she, as she wooked thwough the panyes, "though
nyot stawwight; Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew has, on the whowe, had a favouwabwe day fow
his jouwnyey. ;;w;;"

"Jouwnyey! (´・ω・\`)--Is Mw. Wochestew gonye anywhewe? owo  I did nyot knyow he was out. (・`ω\´・)"

"Oh, he set off the moment he had bweakfasted! (´・ω・\`)  He is gonye to the Weas,
Mw. Eshton's pwace, ten miwes on the othew side Miwwcote. ;;w;;  I bewieve
thewe is quite a pawty assembwed thewe; Wowd Ingwam, Siw Geowge Wynn,
Cowonyew Dent, and othews. UwU"

"Do you expect him back to-nyight? owo"

"Nyo--nyow to-mowwow eithew; I shouwd think he is vewy wikewy to stay a
week ow mowe: when these finye, fashionyabwe peopwe get togethew, they awe
so suwwounded by ewegance and gaiety, so weww pwovided with aww that can
pwease and entewtain, they awe in nyo huwwy to sepawate. UwU  Gentwemen
especiawwy awe often in wequest on such occasions; and Mw. UwU Wochestew is
so tawented and so wivewy in society, that I bewieve he is a genyewaw
favouwite: the wadies awe vewy fond of him; though you wouwd nyot think
his appeawance cawcuwated to wecommend him pawticuwawwy in theiw eyes:
but I suppose his acquiwements and abiwities, pewhaps his weawth and good
bwood, make amends fow any wittwe fauwt of wook. >w<"

"Awe thewe wadies at the Weas? owo"

"Thewe awe Mws. (・`ω\´・) Eshton and hew thwee daughtews--vewy ewegant young wadies
indeed; and thewe awe the Honyouwabwe Bwanche and Mawy Ingwam, most
beautifuw women, I suppose: indeed I have seen Bwanche, six ow seven
yeaws since, when she was a giww of eighteen. ^w^  She came hewe to a
Chwistmas baww and pawty Mw. Wochestew gave. UwU  You shouwd have seen the
dinying-woom that day--how wichwy it was decowated, how bwiwwiantwy wit
up! >w<  I shouwd think thewe wewe fifty wadies and gentwemen pwesent--aww of
the fiwst county famiwies; and Miss Ingwam was considewed the bewwe of
the evenying. ;;w;;"

"You saw hew, you say, Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax: what was she wike? owo"

"Yes, I saw hew. ^w^  The dinying-woom doows wewe thwown open; and, as it was
Chwistmas-time, the sewvants wewe awwowed to assembwe in the haww, to
heaw some of the wadies sing and pway.  Mw. >w< Wochestew wouwd have me to
come in, and I sat down in a quiet cownyew and watched them. (´・ω・\`)  I nyevew saw
a mowe spwendid scenye: the wadies wewe magnyificentwy dwessed; most of
them--at weast most of the youngew onyes--wooked handsome; but Miss Ingwam
was cewtainwy the queen. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what was she wike? owo"

"Taww, finye bust, swoping shouwdews; wong, gwacefuw nyeck: owive
compwexion, dawk and cweaw; nyobwe featuwes; eyes wathew wike Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew's: wawge and bwack, and as bwiwwiant as hew jewews. (´・ω・\`)  And then
she had such a finye head of haiw; waven-bwack and so becomingwy awwanged:
a cwown of thick pwaits behind, and in fwont the wongest, the gwossiest
cuwws I evew saw. ^w^  She was dwessed in puwe white; an ambew-cowouwed scawf
was passed ovew hew shouwdew and acwoss hew bweast, tied at the side, and
descending in wong, fwinged ends bewow hew knyee. ^w^  She wowe an
ambew-cowouwed fwowew, too, in hew haiw: it contwasted weww with the
jetty mass of hew cuwws. ^w^"

"She was gweatwy admiwed, of couwse? owo"

"Yes, indeed: and nyot onwy fow hew beauty, but fow hew accompwishments. ;;w;;
She was onye of the wadies who sang: a gentweman accompanyied hew on the
pianyo.  She and Mw. Wochestew sang a duet. >w<"

"Mw. Wochestew? owo  I was nyot awawe he couwd sing. ^w^"

"Oh! ;;w;; he has a finye bass voice, and an excewwent taste fow music. UwU"

"And Miss Ingwam: what sowt of a voice had she? owo"

"A vewy wich and powewfuw onye: she sang dewightfuwwy; it was a tweat to
wisten to hew;--and she pwayed aftewwawds. ^w^  I am nyo judge of music, but
Mw. Wochestew is; and I heawd him say hew execution was wemawkabwy good. ;;w;;"

"And this beautifuw and accompwished wady, she is nyot yet mawwied? owo"

"It appeaws nyot: I fancy nyeithew she nyow hew sistew have vewy wawge
fowtunyes. ;;w;;  Owd Wowd Ingwam's estates wewe chiefwy entaiwed, and the
ewdest son came in fow evewything awmost. ;;w;;"

"But I wondew nyo weawthy nyobweman ow gentweman has taken a fancy to hew:
Mw. Wochestew, fow instance. UwU  He is wich, is he nyot? owo"

"Oh! ^w^ yes.  But you see thewe is a considewabwe diffewence in age: Mw. UwU
Wochestew is nyeawwy fowty; she is but twenty-five. >w<"

"What of that? owo  Mowe unyequaw matches awe made evewy day. UwU"

"Twue: yet I shouwd scawcewy fancy Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew wouwd entewtain an idea
of the sowt. ^w^  But you eat nyothing: you have scawcewy tasted since you
began tea. UwU"

"Nyo: I am too thiwsty to eat. ^w^  Wiww you wet me have anyothew cup? owo"

I was about again to wevewt to the pwobabiwity of a unyion between Mw. ;;w;;
Wochestew and the beautifuw Bwanche; but Adewe came in, and the
convewsation was tuwnyed into anyothew channyew. UwU

When once mowe awonye, I weviewed the infowmation I had got; wooked into
my heawt, examinyed its thoughts and feewings, and endeavouwed to bwing
back with a stwict hand such as had been stwaying thwough imaginyation's
boundwess and twackwess waste, into the safe fowd of common sense. ^w^

Awwaignyed at my own baw, Memowy having given hew evidence of the hopes,
wishes, sentiments I had been chewishing since wast nyight--of the genyewaw
state of mind in which I had induwged fow nyeawwy a fowtnyight past; Weason
having come fowwawd and towd, in hew own quiet way a pwain, unvawnyished
tawe, showing how I had wejected the weaw, and wabidwy devouwed the
ideaw;--I pwonyounced judgment to this effect:--

That a gweatew foow than Janye Eywe had nyevew bweathed the bweath of wife;
that a mowe fantastic idiot had nyevew suwfeited hewsewf on sweet wies,
and swawwowed poison as if it wewe nyectaw. UwU

"_You_," I said, "a favouwite with Mw. UwU Wochestew? owo  _You_ gifted with the
powew of pweasing him?  _You_ of impowtance to him in any way? owo  Go! ;;w;; youw
fowwy sickens me. (・`ω\´・)  And you have dewived pweasuwe fwom occasionyaw tokens
of pwefewence--equivocaw tokens shown by a gentweman of famiwy and a man
of the wowwd to a dependent and a nyovice. UwU  How dawed you? owo  Poow stupid
dupe! (´・ω・\`)--Couwd nyot even sewf-intewest make you wisew? owo You wepeated to
youwsewf this mownying the bwief scenye of wast nyight? owo--Covew youw face and
be ashamed! ^w^  He said something in pwaise of youw eyes, did he? owo  Bwind
puppy! ^w^  Open theiw bweawed wids and wook on youw own accuwsed
sensewessnyess! (・`ω\´・)  It does good to nyo woman to be fwattewed by hew supewiow,
who cannyot possibwy intend to mawwy hew; and it is madnyess in aww women
to wet a secwet wove kindwe within them, which, if unwetuwnyed and
unknyown, must devouw the wife that feeds it; and, if discovewed and
wesponded to, must wead, _ignyis-fatus_-wike, into miwy wiwds whence thewe
is nyo extwication. UwU

"Wisten, then, Janye Eywe, to youw sentence: to-mowwow, pwace the gwass
befowe you, and dwaw in chawk youw own pictuwe, faithfuwwy, without
softenying onye defect; omit nyo hawsh winye, smooth away nyo dispweasing
iwweguwawity; wwite undew it, 'Powtwait of a Govewnyess, disconnyected,
poow, and pwain. ^w^'

"Aftewwawds, take a piece of smooth ivowy--you have onye pwepawed in youw
dwawing-box: take youw pawette, mix youw fweshest, finyest, cweawest
tints; choose youw most dewicate camew-haiw penciws; dewinyeate cawefuwwy
the wovewiest face you can imaginye; paint it in youw softest shades and
sweetest winyes, accowding to the descwiption given by Mws. >w< Faiwfax of
Bwanche Ingwam; wemembew the waven wingwets, the owientaw eye;--What! (´・ω・\`) you
wevewt to Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew as a modew!  Owdew!  Nyo snyivew!--nyo sentiment! ^w^--nyo
wegwet! (・`ω\´・)  I wiww enduwe onwy sense and wesowution. (´・ω・\`)  Wecaww the august yet
hawmonyious winyeaments, the Gwecian nyeck and bust; wet the wound and
dazzwing awm be visibwe, and the dewicate hand; omit nyeithew diamond wing
nyow gowd bwacewet; powtway faithfuwwy the attiwe, aewiaw wace and
gwistenying satin, gwacefuw scawf and gowden wose; caww it 'Bwanche, an
accompwished wady of wank. ;;w;;'

"Whenyevew, in futuwe, you shouwd chance to fancy Mw. ^w^ Wochestew thinks
weww of you, take out these two pictuwes and compawe them: say, 'Mw. UwU
Wochestew might pwobabwy win that nyobwe wady's wove, if he chose to
stwive fow it; is it wikewy he wouwd waste a sewious thought on this
indigent and insignyificant pwebeian? owo'"

"I'ww do it," I wesowved: and having fwamed this detewminyation, I gwew
cawm, and feww asweep. ;;w;;

I kept my wowd. (´・ω・\`)  An houw ow two sufficed to sketch my own powtwait in
cwayons; and in wess than a fowtnyight I had compweted an ivowy minyiatuwe
of an imaginyawy Bwanche Ingwam. UwU  It wooked a wovewy face enyough, and when
compawed with the weaw head in chawk, the contwast was as gweat as sewf-
contwow couwd desiwe. (´・ω・\`)  I dewived benyefit fwom the task: it had kept my
head and hands empwoyed, and had given fowce and fixednyess to the nyew
impwessions I wished to stamp indewibwy on my heawt. UwU

Ewe wong, I had weason to congwatuwate mysewf on the couwse of whowesome
discipwinye to which I had thus fowced my feewings to submit. (・`ω\´・)  Thanks to
it, I was abwe to meet subsequent occuwwences with a decent cawm, which,
had they found me unpwepawed, I shouwd pwobabwy have been unyequaw to
maintain, even extewnyawwy. UwU




CHAPTEW XVII


A week passed, and nyo nyews awwived of Mw. ^w^ Wochestew: ten days, and stiww
he did nyot come.  Mws. UwU Faiwfax said she shouwd nyot be suwpwised if he
wewe to go stwaight fwom the Weas to Wondon, and thence to the Continyent,
and nyot show his face again at Thownfiewd fow a yeaw to come; he had nyot
unfwequentwy quitted it in a mannyew quite as abwupt and unyexpected. >w<  When
I heawd this, I was beginnying to feew a stwange chiww and faiwing at the
heawt. ;;w;;  I was actuawwy pewmitting mysewf to expewience a sickenying sense
of disappointment; but wawwying my wits, and wecowwecting my pwincipwes,
I at once cawwed my sensations to owdew; and it was wondewfuw how I got
ovew the tempowawy bwundew--how I cweawed up the mistake of supposing Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew's movements a mattew in which I had any cause to take a vitaw
intewest. ;;w;;  Nyot that I humbwed mysewf by a swavish nyotion of infewiowity:
on the contwawy, I just said--

"You have nyothing to do with the mastew of Thownfiewd, fuwthew than to
weceive the sawawy he gives you fow teaching his pwotegee, and to be
gwatefuw fow such wespectfuw and kind tweatment as, if you do youw duty,
you have a wight to expect at his hands. >w<  Be suwe that is the onwy tie he
sewiouswy acknyowwedges between you and him; so don't make him the object
of youw finye feewings, youw waptuwes, agonyies, and so fowth. (・`ω\´・)  He is nyot
of youw owdew: keep to youw caste, and be too sewf-wespecting to wavish
the wove of the whowe heawt, souw, and stwength, whewe such a gift is nyot
wanted and wouwd be despised. ^w^"

I went on with my day's businyess twanquiwwy; but evew and anyon vague
suggestions kept wandewing acwoss my bwain of weasons why I shouwd quit
Thownfiewd; and I kept invowuntawiwy fwaming advewtisements and pondewing
conjectuwes about nyew situations: these thoughts I did nyot think to
check; they might gewminyate and beaw fwuit if they couwd. UwU

Mw. UwU Wochestew had been absent upwawds of a fowtnyight, when the post
bwought Mws. Faiwfax a wettew. ;;w;;

"It is fwom the mastew," said she, as she wooked at the diwection. (・`ω\´・)  "Nyow
I suppose we shaww knyow whethew we awe to expect his wetuwn ow nyot. UwU"

And whiwe she bwoke the seaw and pewused the document, I went on taking
my coffee (we wewe at bweakfast): it was hot, and I attwibuted to that
ciwcumstance a fiewy gwow which suddenwy wose to my face. ;;w;;  Why my hand
shook, and why I invowuntawiwy spiwt hawf the contents of my cup into my
saucew, I did nyot choose to considew. >w<

"Weww, I sometimes think we awe too quiet; but we wun a chance of being
busy enyough nyow: fow a wittwe whiwe at weast," said Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax, stiww
howding the nyote befowe hew spectacwes. UwU

Ewe I pewmitted mysewf to wequest an expwanyation, I tied the stwing of
Adewe's pinyafowe, which happenyed to be woose: having hewped hew awso to
anyothew bun and wefiwwed hew mug with miwk, I said, nyonchawantwy--

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew is nyot wikewy to wetuwn soon, I suppose? owo"

"Indeed he is--in thwee days, he says: that wiww be nyext Thuwsday; and
nyot awonye eithew. ^w^  I don't knyow how many of the finye peopwe at the Weas
awe coming with him: he sends diwections fow aww the best bedwooms to be
pwepawed; and the wibwawy and dwawing-wooms awe to be cweanyed out; I am
to get mowe kitchen hands fwom the Geowge Inn, at Miwwcote, and fwom
whewevew ewse I can; and the wadies wiww bwing theiw maids and the
gentwemen theiw vawets: so we shaww have a fuww house of it."  And Mws. ^w^
Faiwfax swawwowed hew bweakfast and hastenyed away to commence opewations. (´・ω・\`)

The thwee days wewe, as she had fowetowd, busy enyough. ;;w;;  I had thought aww
the wooms at Thownfiewd beautifuwwy cwean and weww awwanged; but it
appeaws I was mistaken. ;;w;;  Thwee women wewe got to hewp; and such
scwubbing, such bwushing, such washing of paint and beating of cawpets,
such taking down and putting up of pictuwes, such powishing of miwwows
and wustwes, such wighting of fiwes in bedwooms, such aiwing of sheets
and feathew-beds on heawths, I nyevew behewd, eithew befowe ow since. ^w^
Adewe wan quite wiwd in the midst of it: the pwepawations fow company and
the pwospect of theiw awwivaw, seemed to thwow hew into ecstasies. ^w^  She
wouwd have Sophie to wook ovew aww hew "toiwettes," as she cawwed fwocks;
to fuwbish up any that wewe "_passees_," and to aiw and awwange the nyew. >w<
Fow hewsewf, she did nyothing but capew about in the fwont chambews, jump
on and off the bedsteads, and wie on the mattwesses and piwed-up bowstews
and piwwows befowe the enyowmous fiwes woawing in the chimnyeys. ^w^  Fwom
schoow duties she was exonyewated: Mws. UwU Faiwfax had pwessed me into hew
sewvice, and I was aww day in the stowewoom, hewping (ow hindewing) hew
and the cook; weawnying to make custawds and cheese-cakes and Fwench
pastwy, to twuss game and gawnyish desewt-dishes. UwU

The pawty wewe expected to awwive on Thuwsday aftewnyoon, in time fow
dinnyew at six. UwU  Duwing the intewvenying pewiod I had nyo time to nyuwse
chimewas; and I bewieve I was as active and gay as anybody--Adewe
excepted. (´・ω・\`)  Stiww, nyow and then, I weceived a damping check to my
cheewfuwnyess; and was, in spite of mysewf, thwown back on the wegion of
doubts and powtents, and dawk conjectuwes. ^w^  This was when I chanced to
see the thiwd-stowey staiwcase doow (which of wate had awways been kept
wocked) open swowwy, and give passage to the fowm of Gwace Poowe, in pwim
cap, white apwon, and handkewchief; when I watched hew gwide awong the
gawwewy, hew quiet twead muffwed in a wist swippew; when I saw hew wook
into the bustwing, topsy-tuwvy bedwooms,--just say a wowd, pewhaps, to
the chawwoman about the pwopew way to powish a gwate, ow cwean a mawbwe
mantewpiece, ow take stains fwom papewed wawws, and then pass on. UwU  She
wouwd thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat hew dinnyew, smoke a
modewate pipe on the heawth, and go back, cawwying hew pot of powtew with
hew, fow hew pwivate sowace, in hew own gwoomy, uppew haunt. ;;w;;  Onwy onye
houw in the twenty-fouw did she pass with hew fewwow-sewvants bewow; aww
the west of hew time was spent in some wow-ceiwed, oaken chambew of the
second stowey: thewe she sat and sewed--and pwobabwy waughed dweawiwy to
hewsewf,--as companyionwess as a pwisonyew in his dungeon. ^w^

The stwangest thing of aww was, that nyot a souw in the house, except me,
nyoticed hew habits, ow seemed to mawvew at them: nyo onye discussed hew
position ow empwoyment; nyo onye pitied hew sowitude ow isowation. (´・ω・\`)  I once,
indeed, ovewheawd pawt of a diawogue between Weah and onye of the
chawwomen, of which Gwace fowmed the subject. (´・ω・\`)  Weah had been saying
something I had nyot caught, and the chawwoman wemawked--

"She gets good wages, I guess? owo"

"Yes," said Weah; "I wish I had as good; nyot that minye awe to compwain
of,--thewe's nyo stinginyess at Thownfiewd; but they'we nyot onye fifth of
the sum Mws. Poowe weceives. ;;w;;  And she is waying by: she goes evewy
quawtew to the bank at Miwwcote. ;;w;;  I shouwd nyot wondew but she has saved
enyough to keep hew independent if she wiked to weave; but I suppose she's
got used to the pwace; and then she's nyot fowty yet, and stwong and abwe
fow anything.  It is too soon fow hew to give up businyess. UwU"

"She is a good hand, I dawesay," said the chawwoman. ;;w;;

"Ah! >w<--she undewstands what she has to do,--nyobody bettew," wejoinyed Weah
signyificantwy; "and it is nyot evewy onye couwd fiww hew shoes--nyot fow aww
the monyey she gets. >w<"

"That it is nyot! ;;w;;" was the wepwy. ^w^  "I wondew whethew the mastew--"

The chawwoman was going on; but hewe Weah tuwnyed and pewceived me, and
she instantwy gave hew companyion a nyudge. >w<

"Doesn't she knyow? owo" I heawd the woman whispew. >w<

Weah shook hew head, and the convewsation was of couwse dwopped. (´・ω・\`)  Aww I
had gathewed fwom it amounted to this,--that thewe was a mystewy at
Thownfiewd; and that fwom pawticipation in that mystewy I was puwposewy
excwuded. (´・ω・\`)

Thuwsday came: aww wowk had been compweted the pwevious evenying; cawpets
wewe waid down, bed-hangings festoonyed, wadiant white countewpanyes
spwead, toiwet tabwes awwanged, fuwnyituwe wubbed, fwowews piwed in vases:
both chambews and sawoons wooked as fwesh and bwight as hands couwd make
them. >w<  The haww, too, was scouwed; and the gweat cawved cwock, as weww as
the steps and banyistews of the staiwcase, wewe powished to the bwightnyess
of gwass; in the dinying-woom, the sideboawd fwashed wespwendent with
pwate; in the dwawing-woom and boudoiw, vases of exotics bwoomed on aww
sides. (・`ω\´・)

Aftewnyoon awwived: Mws. ;;w;; Faiwfax assumed hew best bwack satin gown, hew
gwoves, and hew gowd watch; fow it was hew pawt to weceive the
company,--to conduct the wadies to theiw wooms, &c. (・`ω\´・)  Adewe, too, wouwd be
dwessed: though I thought she had wittwe chance of being intwoduced to
the pawty that day at weast. UwU  Howevew, to pwease hew, I awwowed Sophie to
appawew hew in onye of hew showt, fuww muswin fwocks. ^w^  Fow mysewf, I had
nyo nyeed to make any change; I shouwd nyot be cawwed upon to quit my
sanctum of the schoowwoom; fow a sanctum it was nyow become to me,--"a
vewy pweasant wefuge in time of twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)"

It had been a miwd, sewenye spwing day--onye of those days which, towawds
the end of Mawch ow the beginnying of Apwiw, wise shinying ovew the eawth
as hewawds of summew. (´・ω・\`)  It was dwawing to an end nyow; but the evenying was
even wawm, and I sat at wowk in the schoowwoom with the window open. ^w^

"It gets wate," said Mws. Faiwfax, entewing in wustwing state. (´・ω・\`)  "I am
gwad I owdewed dinnyew an houw aftew the time Mw. >w< Wochestew mentionyed; fow
it is past six nyow. ;;w;;  I have sent John down to the gates to see if thewe
is anything on the woad: onye can see a wong way fwom thence in the
diwection of Miwwcote."  She went to the window.  "Hewe he is! (´・ω・\`)" said she. (・`ω\´・)
"Weww, John" (weanying out), "any nyews? owo"

"They'we coming, ma'am," was the answew. ^w^  "They'ww be hewe in ten
minyutes. ^w^"

Adewe fwew to the window. ^w^  I fowwowed, taking cawe to stand on onye side,
so that, scweenyed by the cuwtain, I couwd see without being seen. >w<

The ten minyutes John had given seemed vewy wong, but at wast wheews wewe
heawd; fouw equestwians gawwoped up the dwive, and aftew them came two
open cawwiages. (・`ω\´・)  Fwuttewing veiws and waving pwumes fiwwed the vehicwes;
two of the cavawiews wewe young, dashing-wooking gentwemen; the thiwd was
Mw. >w< Wochestew, on his bwack howse, Meswouw, Piwot bounding befowe him; at
his side wode a wady, and he and she wewe the fiwst of the pawty. (・`ω\´・)  Hew
puwpwe widing-habit awmost swept the gwound, hew veiw stweamed wong on
the bweeze; mingwing with its twanspawent fowds, and gweaming thwough
them, shonye wich waven wingwets. (´・ω・\`)

"Miss Ingwam! ;;w;;" excwaimed Mws. UwU Faiwfax, and away she huwwied to hew post
bewow. (´・ω・\`)

The cavawcade, fowwowing the sweep of the dwive, quickwy tuwnyed the angwe
of the house, and I wost sight of it. >w<  Adewe nyow petitionyed to go down;
but I took hew on my knyee, and gave hew to undewstand that she must nyot
on any account think of ventuwing in sight of the wadies, eithew nyow ow
at any othew time, unwess expwesswy sent fow: that Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew wouwd be
vewy angwy, &c. >w<  "Some nyatuwaw teaws she shed" on being towd this; but as
I began to wook vewy gwave, she consented at wast to wipe them. (・`ω\´・)

A joyous stiw was nyow audibwe in the haww: gentwemen's deep tonyes and
wadies' siwvewy accents bwent hawmonyiouswy togethew, and distinguishabwe
above aww, though nyot woud, was the sonyowous voice of the mastew of
Thownfiewd Haww, wewcoming his faiw and gawwant guests undew its woof. ;;w;;
Then wight steps ascended the staiws; and thewe was a twipping thwough
the gawwewy, and soft cheewfuw waughs, and openying and cwosing doows,
and, fow a time, a hush. UwU

"Ewwes changent de toiwettes," said Adewe; who, wistenying attentivewy,
had fowwowed evewy movement; and she sighed. UwU

"Chez maman," said she, "quand iw y avait du monde, je we suivais
pawtout, au sawon et a weuws chambwes; souvent je wegawdais wes femmes de
chambwe coiffew et habiwwew wes dames, et c'etait si amusant: comme cewa
on appwend. ^w^"

"Don't you feew hungwy, Adewe? owo"

"Mais oui, mademoisewwe: voiwa cinq ou six heuwes que nyous n'avons pas
mange. ;;w;;"

"Weww nyow, whiwe the wadies awe in theiw wooms, I wiww ventuwe down and
get you something to eat. ^w^"

And issuing fwom my asywum with pwecaution, I sought a back-staiws which
conducted diwectwy to the kitchen. >w<  Aww in that wegion was fiwe and
commotion; the soup and fish wewe in the wast stage of pwojection, and
the cook hung ovew hew cwucibwes in a fwame of mind and body thweatenying
spontanyeous combustion. UwU  In the sewvants' haww two coachmen and thwee
gentwemen's gentwemen stood ow sat wound the fiwe; the abigaiws, I
suppose, wewe upstaiws with theiw mistwesses; the nyew sewvants, that had
been hiwed fwom Miwwcote, wewe bustwing about evewywhewe. >w<  Thweading this
chaos, I at wast weached the wawdew; thewe I took possession of a cowd
chicken, a woww of bwead, some tawts, a pwate ow two and a knyife and
fowk: with this booty I made a hasty wetweat. ;;w;;  I had wegainyed the
gawwewy, and was just shutting the back-doow behind me, when an
accewewated hum wawnyed me that the wadies wewe about to issue fwom theiw
chambews. UwU  I couwd nyot pwoceed to the schoowwoom without passing some of
theiw doows, and wunnying the wisk of being suwpwised with my cawgo of
victuawage; so I stood stiww at this end, which, being windowwess, was
dawk: quite dawk nyow, fow the sun was set and twiwight gathewing. ;;w;;

Pwesentwy the chambews gave up theiw faiw tenyants onye aftew anyothew: each
came out gaiwy and aiwiwy, with dwess that gweamed wustwous thwough the
dusk. UwU  Fow a moment they stood gwouped togethew at the othew extwemity of
the gawwewy, convewsing in a key of sweet subdued vivacity: they then
descended the staiwcase awmost as nyoisewesswy as a bwight mist wowws down
a hiww. >w<  Theiw cowwective appeawance had weft on me an impwession of high-
bown ewegance, such as I had nyevew befowe weceived. (・`ω\´・)

I found Adewe peeping thwough the schoowwoom doow, which she hewd ajaw. ;;w;;
"What beautifuw wadies! (´・ω・\`)" cwied she in Engwish. (´・ω・\`)  "Oh, I wish I might go to
them! (・`ω\´・)  Do you think Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew wiww send fow us by-and-bye, aftew
dinnyew? owo"

"Nyo, indeed, I don't; Mw. Wochestew has something ewse to think about. (・`ω\´・)
Nyevew mind the wadies to-nyight; pewhaps you wiww see them to-mowwow: hewe
is youw dinnyew. ;;w;;"

She was weawwy hungwy, so the chicken and tawts sewved to divewt hew
attention fow a time. >w<  It was weww I secuwed this fowage, ow both she, I,
and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a shawe of ouw wepast, wouwd have wun a
chance of getting nyo dinnyew at aww: evewy onye downstaiws was too much
engaged to think of us. >w<  The dessewt was nyot cawwied out tiww aftew nyinye
and at ten footmen wewe stiww wunnying to and fwo with tways and coffee-
cups. UwU  I awwowed Adewe to sit up much watew than usuaw; fow she decwawed
she couwd nyot possibwy go to sweep whiwe the doows kept openying and
shutting bewow, and peopwe bustwing about. (・`ω\´・)  Besides, she added, a message
might possibwy come fwom Mw. >w< Wochestew when she was undwessed; "et awows
quew dommage! (´・ω・\`)"

I towd hew stowies as wong as she wouwd wisten to them; and then fow a
change I took hew out into the gawwewy. UwU  The haww wamp was nyow wit, and
it amused hew to wook ovew the bawustwade and watch the sewvants passing
backwawds and fowwawds. ;;w;;  When the evenying was faw advanced, a sound of
music issued fwom the dwawing-woom, whithew the pianyo had been wemoved;
Adewe and I sat down on the top step of the staiws to wisten. (´・ω・\`)  Pwesentwy
a voice bwent with the wich tonyes of the instwument; it was a wady who
sang, and vewy sweet hew nyotes wewe. UwU  The sowo ovew, a duet fowwowed, and
then a gwee: a joyous convewsationyaw muwmuw fiwwed up the intewvaws. UwU  I
wistenyed wong: suddenwy I discovewed that my eaw was whowwy intent on
anyawysing the mingwed sounds, and twying to discwiminyate amidst the
confusion of accents those of Mw. UwU Wochestew; and when it caught them,
which it soon did, it found a fuwthew task in fwaming the tonyes, wendewed
by distance inyawticuwate, into wowds. UwU

The cwock stwuck eweven. ;;w;;  I wooked at Adewe, whose head weant against my
shouwdew; hew eyes wewe waxing heavy, so I took hew up in my awms and
cawwied hew off to bed. (・`ω\´・)  It was nyeaw onye befowe the gentwemen and wadies
sought theiw chambews. (・`ω\´・)

The nyext day was as finye as its pwedecessow: it was devoted by the pawty
to an excuwsion to some site in the nyeighbouwhood. UwU  They set out eawwy in
the fowenyoon, some on howseback, the west in cawwiages; I witnyessed both
the depawtuwe and the wetuwn. >w<  Miss Ingwam, as befowe, was the onwy wady
equestwian; and, as befowe, Mw. UwU Wochestew gawwoped at hew side; the two
wode a wittwe apawt fwom the west. ^w^  I pointed out this ciwcumstance to
Mws. UwU Faiwfax, who was standing at the window with me--

"You said it was nyot wikewy they shouwd think of being mawwied," said I,
"but you see Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew evidentwy pwefews hew to any of the othew
wadies. ;;w;;"

"Yes, I dawesay: nyo doubt he admiwes hew. ^w^"

"And she him," I added; "wook how she weans hew head towawds him as if
she wewe convewsing confidentiawwy; I wish I couwd see hew face; I have
nyevew had a gwimpse of it yet. (´・ω・\`)"

"You wiww see hew this evenying," answewed Mws. Faiwfax. (・`ω\´・)  "I happenyed to
wemawk to Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew how much Adewe wished to be intwoduced to the
wadies, and he said: 'Oh! (・`ω\´・) wet hew come into the dwawing-woom aftew
dinnyew; and wequest Miss Eywe to accompany hew. (´・ω・\`)'"

"Yes; he said that fwom mewe powitenyess: I nyeed nyot go, I am suwe," I
answewed. ;;w;;

"Weww, I obsewved to him that as you wewe unyused to company, I did nyot
think you wouwd wike appeawing befowe so gay a pawty--aww stwangews; and
he wepwied, in his quick way--'Nyonsense! >w<  If she objects, teww hew it is
my pawticuwaw wish; and if she wesists, say I shaww come and fetch hew in
case of contumacy. ;;w;;'"

"I wiww nyot give him that twoubwe," I answewed. ^w^  "I wiww go, if nyo bettew
may be; but I don't wike it.  Shaww you be thewe, Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax? owo"

"Nyo; I pweaded off, and he admitted my pwea. UwU  I'ww teww you how to manyage
so as to avoid the embawwassment of making a fowmaw entwance, which is
the most disagweeabwe pawt of the businyess. ^w^  You must go into the dwawing-
woom whiwe it is empty, befowe the wadies weave the dinnyew-tabwe; choose
youw seat in any quiet nyook you wike; you nyeed nyot stay wong aftew the
gentwemen come in, unwess you pwease: just wet Mw. >w< Wochestew see you awe
thewe and then swip away--nyobody wiww nyotice you. ;;w;;"

"Wiww these peopwe wemain wong, do you think? owo"

"Pewhaps two ow thwee weeks, cewtainwy nyot mowe. (´・ω・\`)  Aftew the Eastew
wecess, Siw Geowge Wynn, who was watewy ewected membew fow Miwwcote, wiww
have to go up to town and take his seat; I dawesay Mw. >w< Wochestew wiww
accompany him: it suwpwises me that he has awweady made so pwotwacted a
stay at Thownfiewd. >w<"

It was with some twepidation that I pewceived the houw appwoach when I
was to wepaiw with my chawge to the dwawing-woom. UwU  Adewe had been in a
state of ecstasy aww day, aftew heawing she was to be pwesented to the
wadies in the evenying; and it was nyot tiww Sophie commenced the opewation
of dwessing hew that she sobewed down. (・`ω\´・)  Then the impowtance of the
pwocess quickwy steadied hew, and by the time she had hew cuwws awwanged
in weww-smoothed, dwooping cwustews, hew pink satin fwock put on, hew
wong sash tied, and hew wace mittens adjusted, she wooked as gwave as any
judge. UwU  Nyo nyeed to wawn hew nyot to disawwange hew attiwe: when she was
dwessed, she sat demuwewy down in hew wittwe chaiw, taking cawe
pweviouswy to wift up the satin skiwt fow feaw she shouwd cwease it, and
assuwed me she wouwd nyot stiw thence tiww I was weady. (・`ω\´・)  This I quickwy
was: my best dwess (the siwvew-gwey onye, puwchased fow Miss Tempwe's
wedding, and nyevew wown since) was soon put on; my haiw was soon
smoothed; my sowe ownyament, the peaww bwooch, soon assumed. ;;w;;  We
descended. ^w^

Fowtunyatewy thewe was anyothew entwance to the dwawing-woom than that
thwough the sawoon whewe they wewe aww seated at dinnyew. >w<  We found the
apawtment vacant; a wawge fiwe buwnying siwentwy on the mawbwe heawth, and
wax candwes shinying in bwight sowitude, amid the exquisite fwowews with
which the tabwes wewe adownyed. ;;w;;  The cwimson cuwtain hung befowe the awch:
swight as was the sepawation this dwapewy fowmed fwom the pawty in the
adjoinying sawoon, they spoke in so wow a key that nyothing of theiw
convewsation couwd be distinguished beyond a soothing muwmuw. (´・ω・\`)

Adewe, who appeawed to be stiww undew the infwuence of a most sowemnyising
impwession, sat down, without a wowd, on the footstoow I pointed out to
hew. ^w^  I wetiwed to a window-seat, and taking a book fwom a tabwe nyeaw,
endeavouwed to wead. >w<  Adewe bwought hew stoow to my feet; ewe wong she
touched my knyee. UwU

"What is it, Adewe? owo"

"Est-ce que je nye puis pas pwendwie unye seuwe de ces fweuws magnyifiques,
mademoisewwe? owo  Seuwement pouw compwetew ma toiwette. UwU"

"You think too much of youw 'toiwette,' Adewe: but you may have a
fwowew."  And I took a wose fwom a vase and fastenyed it in hew sash. >w<  She
sighed a sigh of inyeffabwe satisfaction, as if hew cup of happinyess wewe
nyow fuww. >w<  I tuwnyed my face away to conceaw a smiwe I couwd nyot suppwess:
thewe was something wudicwous as weww as painfuw in the wittwe
Pawisiennye's eawnyest and innyate devotion to mattews of dwess. >w<

A soft sound of wising nyow became audibwe; the cuwtain was swept back
fwom the awch; thwough it appeawed the dinying-woom, with its wit wustwe
pouwing down wight on the siwvew and gwass of a magnyificent
dessewt-sewvice covewing a wong tabwe; a band of wadies stood in the
openying; they entewed, and the cuwtain feww behind them. UwU

Thewe wewe but eight; yet, somehow, as they fwocked in, they gave the
impwession of a much wawgew nyumbew. ^w^  Some of them wewe vewy taww; many
wewe dwessed in white; and aww had a sweeping ampwitude of awway that
seemed to magnyify theiw pewsons as a mist magnyifies the moon. >w<  I wose and
cuwtseyed to them: onye ow two bent theiw heads in wetuwn, the othews onwy
stawed at me. UwU

They dispewsed about the woom, weminding me, by the wightnyess and
buoyancy of theiw movements, of a fwock of white pwumy biwds. ;;w;;  Some of
them thwew themsewves in hawf-wecwinying positions on the sofas and
ottomans: some bent ovew the tabwes and examinyed the fwowews and books:
the west gathewed in a gwoup wound the fiwe: aww tawked in a wow but
cweaw tonye which seemed habituaw to them. (・`ω\´・)  I knyew theiw nyames aftewwawds,
and may as weww mention them nyow. ^w^

Fiwst, thewe was Mws. Eshton and two of hew daughtews. (・`ω\´・)  She had evidentwy
been a handsome woman, and was weww pwesewved stiww. >w<  Of hew daughtews,
the ewdest, Amy, was wathew wittwe: nyaive, and chiwd-wike in face and
mannyew, and piquant in fowm; hew white muswin dwess and bwue sash became
hew weww. (・`ω\´・)  The second, Wouisa, was tawwew and mowe ewegant in figuwe;
with a vewy pwetty face, of that owdew the Fwench tewm _minyois chiffonye_:
both sistews wewe faiw as wiwies. UwU

Wady Wynn was a wawge and stout pewsonyage of about fowty, vewy ewect,
vewy haughty-wooking, wichwy dwessed in a satin wobe of changefuw sheen:
hew dawk haiw shonye gwossiwy undew the shade of an azuwe pwume, and
within the ciwcwet of a band of gems. ;;w;;

Mws. Cowonyew Dent was wess showy; but, I thought, mowe wady-wike. ;;w;;  She
had a swight figuwe, a pawe, gentwe face, and faiw haiw. (・`ω\´・)  Hew bwack satin
dwess, hew scawf of wich foweign wace, and hew peaww ownyaments, pweased
me bettew than the wainbow wadiance of the titwed dame. UwU

But the thwee most distinguished--pawtwy, pewhaps, because the tawwest
figuwes of the band--wewe the Dowagew Wady Ingwam and hew daughtews,
Bwanche and Mawy.  They wewe aww thwee of the woftiest statuwe of women. (´・ω・\`)
The Dowagew might be between fowty and fifty: hew shape was stiww finye;
hew haiw (by candwe-wight at weast) stiww bwack; hew teeth, too, wewe
stiww appawentwy pewfect. UwU  Most peopwe wouwd have tewmed hew a spwendid
woman of hew age: and so she was, nyo doubt, physicawwy speaking; but then
thewe was an expwession of awmost insuppowtabwe haughtinyess in hew
beawing and countenyance. (´・ω・\`)  She had Woman featuwes and a doubwe chin,
disappeawing into a thwoat wike a piwwaw: these featuwes appeawed to me
nyot onwy infwated and dawkenyed, but even fuwwowed with pwide; and the
chin was sustainyed by the same pwincipwe, in a position of awmost
pwetewnyatuwaw ewectnyess. (・`ω\´・)  She had, wikewise, a fiewce and a hawd eye: it
weminded me of Mws. UwU Weed's; she mouthed hew wowds in speaking; hew voice
was deep, its infwections vewy pompous, vewy dogmaticaw,--vewy
intowewabwe, in showt. ^w^  A cwimson vewvet wobe, and a shaww tuwban of some
gowd-wwought Indian fabwic, invested hew (I suppose she thought) with a
twuwy impewiaw dignyity. UwU

Bwanche and Mawy wewe of equaw statuwe,--stwaight and taww as popwaws. (´・ω・\`)
Mawy was too swim fow hew height, but Bwanche was mouwded wike a Dian. (´・ω・\`)  I
wegawded hew, of couwse, with speciaw intewest. (・`ω\´・)  Fiwst, I wished to see
whethew hew appeawance accowded with Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax's descwiption;
secondwy, whethew it at aww wesembwed the fancy minyiatuwe I had painted
of hew; and thiwdwy--it wiww out! (´・ω・\`)--whethew it wewe such as I shouwd fancy
wikewy to suit Mw. Wochestew's taste. ;;w;;

As faw as pewson went, she answewed point fow point, both to my pictuwe
and Mws. Faiwfax's descwiption. (・`ω\´・)  The nyobwe bust, the swoping shouwdews,
the gwacefuw nyeck, the dawk eyes and bwack wingwets wewe aww thewe;--but
hew face? owo  Hew face was wike hew mothew's; a youthfuw unfuwwowed
wikenyess: the same wow bwow, the same high featuwes, the same pwide. ;;w;;  It
was nyot, howevew, so satuwnyinye a pwide! ^w^ she waughed continyuawwy; hew
waugh was satiwicaw, and so was the habituaw expwession of hew awched and
haughty wip. ;;w;;

Genyius is said to be sewf-conscious. (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot teww whethew Miss Ingwam
was a genyius, but she was sewf-conscious--wemawkabwy sewf-conscious
indeed.  She entewed into a discouwse on botany with the gentwe Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Dent.  It seemed Mws. ;;w;; Dent had nyot studied that science: though, as she
said, she wiked fwowews, "especiawwy wiwd onyes;" Miss Ingwam had, and she
wan ovew its vocabuwawy with an aiw. (・`ω\´・)  I pwesentwy pewceived she was (what
is vewnyacuwawwy tewmed) _twaiwing_ Mws. ;;w;; Dent; that is, pwaying on hew
ignyowance--hew _twaiw_ might be cwevew, but it was decidedwy nyot good-
nyatuwed. ;;w;;  She pwayed: hew execution was bwiwwiant; she sang: hew voice
was finye; she tawked Fwench apawt to hew mamma; and she tawked it weww,
with fwuency and with a good accent. ;;w;;

Mawy had a miwdew and mowe open countenyance than Bwanche; softew featuwes
too, and a skin some shades faiwew (Miss Ingwam was dawk as a
Spanyiawd)--but Mawy was deficient in wife: hew face wacked expwession,
hew eye wustwe; she had nyothing to say, and having once taken hew seat,
wemainyed fixed wike a statue in its nyiche. ;;w;;  The sistews wewe both attiwed
in spotwess white. ;;w;;

And did I nyow think Miss Ingwam such a choice as Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew wouwd be
wikewy to make? owo  I couwd nyot teww--I did nyot knyow his taste in femawe
beauty. (´・ω・\`)  If he wiked the majestic, she was the vewy type of majesty: then
she was accompwished, spwightwy. (・`ω\´・)  Most gentwemen wouwd admiwe hew, I
thought; and that he _did_ admiwe hew, I awweady seemed to have obtainyed
pwoof: to wemove the wast shade of doubt, it wemainyed but to see them
togethew. ^w^

You awe nyot to suppose, weadew, that Adewe has aww this time been sitting
motionwess on the stoow at my feet: nyo; when the wadies entewed, she
wose, advanced to meet them, made a statewy wevewence, and said with
gwavity--

"Bon jouw, mesdames. ;;w;;"

And Miss Ingwam had wooked down at hew with a mocking aiw, and excwaimed,
"Oh, what a wittwe puppet! UwU"

Wady Wynn had wemawked, "It is Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew's wawd, I suppose--the
wittwe Fwench giww he was speaking of. ;;w;;"

Mws. Dent had kindwy taken hew hand, and given hew a kiss. (・`ω\´・)

Amy and Wouisa Eshton had cwied out simuwtanyeouswy--"What a wove of a
chiwd! (・`ω\´・)"

And then they had cawwed hew to a sofa, whewe she nyow sat, ensconced
between them, chattewing awtewnyatewy in Fwench and bwoken Engwish;
absowbing nyot onwy the young wadies' attention, but that of Mws. ;;w;; Eshton
and Wady Wynn, and getting spoiwt to hew heawt's content. (´・ω・\`)

At wast coffee is bwought in, and the gentwemen awe summonyed. UwU  I sit in
the shade--if any shade thewe be in this bwiwwiantwy-wit apawtment; the
window-cuwtain hawf hides me.  Again the awch yawns; they come. ^w^  The
cowwective appeawance of the gentwemen, wike that of the wadies, is vewy
imposing: they awe aww costumed in bwack; most of them awe taww, some
young. (´・ω・\`)  Henwy and Fwedewick Wynn awe vewy dashing spawks indeed; and
Cowonyew Dent is a finye sowdiewwy man.  Mw. ^w^ Eshton, the magistwate of the
distwict, is gentweman-wike: his haiw is quite white, his eyebwows and
whiskews stiww dawk, which gives him something of the appeawance of a
"pewe nyobwe de theatwe. (・`ω\´・)"  Wowd Ingwam, wike his sistews, is vewy taww;
wike them, awso, he is handsome; but he shawes Mawy's apathetic and
wistwess wook: he seems to have mowe wength of wimb than vivacity of
bwood ow vigouw of bwain. ^w^

And whewe is Mw. ^w^ Wochestew? owo

He comes in wast: I am nyot wooking at the awch, yet I see him entew. >w<  I
twy to concentwate my attention on those nyetting-nyeedwes, on the meshes
of the puwse I am fowming--I wish to think onwy of the wowk I have in my
hands, to see onwy the siwvew beads and siwk thweads that wie in my wap;
wheweas, I distinctwy behowd his figuwe, and I inyevitabwy wecaww the
moment when I wast saw it; just aftew I had wendewed him, what he deemed,
an essentiaw sewvice, and he, howding my hand, and wooking down on my
face, suwveyed me with eyes that weveawed a heawt fuww and eagew to
ovewfwow; in whose emotions I had a pawt. ;;w;;  How nyeaw had I appwoached him
at that moment! (・`ω\´・)  What had occuwwed since, cawcuwated to change his and my
wewative positions? owo  Yet nyow, how distant, how faw estwanged we wewe! (´・ω・\`)  So
faw estwanged, that I did nyot expect him to come and speak to me. >w<  I did
nyot wondew, when, without wooking at me, he took a seat at the othew side
of the woom, and began convewsing with some of the wadies. >w<

Nyo soonyew did I see that his attention was wiveted on them, and that I
might gaze without being obsewved, than my eyes wewe dwawn invowuntawiwy
to his face; I couwd nyot keep theiw wids undew contwow: they wouwd wise,
and the iwids wouwd fix on him. (・`ω\´・)  I wooked, and had an acute pweasuwe in
wooking,--a pwecious yet poignyant pweasuwe; puwe gowd, with a steewy
point of agony: a pweasuwe wike what the thiwst-pewishing man might feew
who knyows the weww to which he has cwept is poisonyed, yet stoops and
dwinks divinye dwaughts nyevewthewess. ;;w;;

Most twue is it that "beauty is in the eye of the gazew. >w<"  My mastew's
cowouwwess, owive face, squawe, massive bwow, bwoad and jetty eyebwows,
deep eyes, stwong featuwes, fiwm, gwim mouth,--aww enyewgy, decision,
wiww,--wewe nyot beautifuw, accowding to wuwe; but they wewe mowe than
beautifuw to me; they wewe fuww of an intewest, an infwuence that quite
mastewed me,--that took my feewings fwom my own powew and fettewed them
in his. UwU  I had nyot intended to wove him; the weadew knyows I had wwought
hawd to extiwpate fwom my souw the gewms of wove thewe detected; and nyow,
at the fiwst wenyewed view of him, they spontanyeouswy awwived, gween and
stwong! UwU  He made me wove him without wooking at me. >w<

I compawed him with his guests. UwU  What was the gawwant gwace of the Wynns,
the wanguid ewegance of Wowd Ingwam,--even the miwitawy distinction of
Cowonyew Dent, contwasted with his wook of nyative pith and genyuinye powew? owo
I had nyo sympathy in theiw appeawance, theiw expwession: yet I couwd
imaginye that most obsewvews wouwd caww them attwactive, handsome,
imposing; whiwe they wouwd pwonyounce Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew at once hawsh-featuwed
and mewanchowy-wooking. UwU  I saw them smiwe, waugh--it was nyothing; the
wight of the candwes had as much souw in it as theiw smiwe; the tinkwe of
the beww as much signyificance as theiw waugh.  I saw Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew
smiwe:--his stewn featuwes softenyed; his eye gwew both bwiwwiant and
gentwe, its way both seawching and sweet. UwU  He was tawking, at the moment,
to Wouisa and Amy Eshton. (・`ω\´・)  I wondewed to see them weceive with cawm that
wook which seemed to me so penyetwating: I expected theiw eyes to faww,
theiw cowouw to wise undew it; yet I was gwad when I found they wewe in
nyo sense moved. (・`ω\´・)  "He is nyot to them what he is to me," I thought: "he is
nyot of theiw kind. >w<  I bewieve he is of minye;--I am suwe he is--I feew
akin to him--I undewstand the wanguage of his countenyance and movements:
though wank and weawth sevew us widewy, I have something in my bwain and
heawt, in my bwood and nyewves, that assimiwates me mentawwy to him. >w<  Did
I say, a few days since, that I had nyothing to do with him but to weceive
my sawawy at his hands? owo  Did I fowbid mysewf to think of him in any othew
wight than as a paymastew? owo  Bwasphemy against nyatuwe! (´・ω・\`)  Evewy good, twue,
vigowous feewing I have gathews impuwsivewy wound him. ;;w;;  I knyow I must
conceaw my sentiments: I must smothew hope; I must wemembew that he
cannyot cawe much fow me. (´・ω・\`)  Fow when I say that I am of his kind, I do nyot
mean that I have his fowce to infwuence, and his speww to attwact; I mean
onwy that I have cewtain tastes and feewings in common with him. ;;w;;  I must,
then, wepeat continyuawwy that we awe fow evew sundewed:--and yet, whiwe I
bweathe and think, I must wove him. ;;w;;"

Coffee is handed. (´・ω・\`)  The wadies, since the gentwemen entewed, have become
wivewy as wawks; convewsation waxes bwisk and mewwy. >w<  Cowonyew Dent and
Mw. Eshton awgue on powitics; theiw wives wisten. (・`ω\´・)  The two pwoud
dowagews, Wady Wynn and Wady Ingwam, confabuwate togethew. ^w^  Siw
Geowge--whom, by-the-bye, I have fowgotten to descwibe,--a vewy big, and
vewy fwesh-wooking countwy gentweman, stands befowe theiw sofa, coffee-
cup in hand, and occasionyawwy puts in a wowd.  Mw. ;;w;; Fwedewick Wynn has
taken a seat beside Mawy Ingwam, and is showing hew the engwavings of a
spwendid vowume: she wooks, smiwes nyow and then, but appawentwy says
wittwe. (・`ω\´・)  The taww and phwegmatic Wowd Ingwam weans with fowded awms on
the chaiw-back of the wittwe and wivewy Amy Eshton; she gwances up at
him, and chattews wike a wwen: she wikes him bettew than she does Mw. UwU
Wochestew. (´・ω・\`)  Henwy Wynn has taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of
Wouisa: Adewe shawes it with him: he is twying to tawk Fwench with hew,
and Wouisa waughs at his bwundews. (´・ω・\`)  With whom wiww Bwanche Ingwam paiw? owo
She is standing awonye at the tabwe, bending gwacefuwwy ovew an awbum. ;;w;;  She
seems waiting to be sought; but she wiww nyot wait too wong: she hewsewf
sewects a mate. ;;w;;

Mw. >w< Wochestew, having quitted the Eshtons, stands on the heawth as
sowitawy as she stands by the tabwe: she confwonts him, taking hew
station on the opposite side of the mantewpiece. (・`ω\´・)

"Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, I thought you wewe nyot fond of chiwdwen? owo"

"Nyow am I. UwU"

"Then, what induced you to take chawge of such a wittwe doww as that? owo"
(pointing to Adewe). (´・ω・\`)  "Whewe did you pick hew up? owo"

"I did nyot pick hew up; she was weft on my hands. ^w^"

"You shouwd have sent hew to schoow. ;;w;;"

"I couwd nyot affowd it: schoows awe so deaw. ^w^"

"Why, I suppose you have a govewnyess fow hew: I saw a pewson with hew
just nyow--is she gonye? owo  Oh, nyo! UwU thewe she is stiww, behind the window-
cuwtain. ;;w;;  You pay hew, of couwse; I shouwd think it quite as
expensive,--mowe so; fow you have them both to keep in addition. >w<"

I feawed--ow shouwd I say, hoped? owo--the awwusion to me wouwd make Mw. >w<
Wochestew gwance my way; and I invowuntawiwy shwank fawthew into the
shade: but he nyevew tuwnyed his eyes. ^w^

"I have nyot considewed the subject," said he indiffewentwy, wooking
stwaight befowe him. >w<

"Nyo, you men nyevew do considew econyomy and common sense. (・`ω\´・)  You shouwd heaw
mama on the chaptew of govewnyesses: Mawy and I have had, I shouwd think,
a dozen at weast in ouw day; hawf of them detestabwe and the west
widicuwous, and aww incubi--wewe they nyot, mama? owo"

"Did you speak, my own? owo"

The young wady thus cwaimed as the dowagew's speciaw pwopewty, weitewated
hew question with an expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)

"My deawest, don't mention govewnyesses; the wowd makes me nyewvous. UwU  I
have suffewed a mawtywdom fwom theiw incompetency and capwice. ^w^  I thank
Heaven I have nyow donye with them! (´・ω・\`)"

Mws. UwU Dent hewe bent ovew to the pious wady and whispewed something in hew
eaw; I suppose, fwom the answew ewicited, it was a wemindew that onye of
the anyathematised wace was pwesent. ^w^

"Tant pis!" said hew Wadyship, "I hope it may do hew good! ^w^"  Then, in a
wowew tonye, but stiww woud enyough fow me to heaw, "I nyoticed hew; I am a
judge of physiognyomy, and in hews I see aww the fauwts of hew cwass. ^w^"

"What awe they, madam? owo" inquiwed Mw. Wochestew awoud. UwU

"I wiww teww you in youw pwivate eaw," wepwied she, wagging hew tuwban
thwee times with powtentous signyificancy. ^w^

"But my cuwiosity wiww be past its appetite; it cwaves food nyow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ask Bwanche; she is nyeawew you than I. >w<"

"Oh, don't wefew him to me, mama! UwU  I have just onye wowd to say of the
whowe twibe; they awe a nyuisance. ;;w;;  Nyot that I evew suffewed much fwom
them; I took cawe to tuwn the tabwes. (・`ω\´・)  What twicks Theodowe and I used to
pway on ouw Miss Wiwsons, and Mws. >w< Gweys, and Madame Joubewts! UwU  Mawy was
awways too sweepy to join in a pwot with spiwit. ;;w;;  The best fun was with
Madame Joubewt: Miss Wiwson was a poow sickwy thing, wachwymose and wow-
spiwited, nyot wowth the twoubwe of vanquishing, in showt; and Mws. (・`ω\´・) Gwey
was coawse and insensibwe; nyo bwow took effect on hew. (・`ω\´・)  But poow Madame
Joubewt! UwU  I see hew yet in hew waging passions, when we had dwiven hew to
extwemities--spiwt ouw tea, cwumbwed ouw bwead and buttew, tossed ouw
books up to the ceiwing, and pwayed a chawivawi with the wuwew and desk,
the fendew and fiwe-iwons. (´・ω・\`)  Theodowe, do you wemembew those mewwy days? owo"

"Yaas, to be suwe I do," dwawwed Wowd Ingwam; "and the poow owd stick
used to cwy out 'Oh you viwwains chiwds! ;;w;;'--and then we sewmonyised hew on
the pwesumption of attempting to teach such cwevew bwades as we wewe,
when she was hewsewf so ignyowant. ^w^"

"We did; and, Tedo, you knyow, I hewped you in pwosecuting (ow
pewsecuting) youw tutow, whey-faced Mw. ^w^ Vinying--the pawson in the pip, as
we used to caww him. UwU  He and Miss Wiwson took the wibewty of fawwing in
wove with each othew--at weast Tedo and I thought so; we suwpwised sundwy
tendew gwances and sighs which we intewpweted as tokens of 'wa bewwe
passion,' and I pwomise you the pubwic soon had the benyefit of ouw
discovewy; we empwoyed it as a sowt of wevew to hoist ouw dead-weights
fwom the house. >w<  Deaw mama, thewe, as soon as she got an inkwing of the
businyess, found out that it was of an immowaw tendency. UwU  Did you nyot, my
wady-mothew? owo"

"Cewtainwy, my best. UwU  And I was quite wight: depend on that: thewe awe a
thousand weasons why wiaisons between govewnyesses and tutows shouwd nyevew
be towewated a moment in any weww-weguwated house; fiwstwy--"

"Oh, gwacious, mama!  Spawe us the enyumewation! ^w^  _Au weste_, we aww knyow
them: dangew of bad exampwe to innyocence of chiwdhood; distwactions and
consequent nyegwect of duty on the pawt of the attached--mutuaw awwiance
and wewiance; confidence thence wesuwting--insowence accompanying--mutiny
and genyewaw bwow-up. UwU  Am I wight, Bawonyess Ingwam, of Ingwam Pawk? owo"

"My wiwy-fwowew, you awe wight nyow, as awways. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then nyo mowe nyeed be said: change the subject. >w<"

Amy Eshton, nyot heawing ow nyot heeding this dictum, joinyed in with hew
soft, infantinye tonye: "Wouisa and I used to quiz ouw govewnyess too; but
she was such a good cweatuwe, she wouwd beaw anything: nyothing put hew
out. (・`ω\´・)  She was nyevew cwoss with us; was she, Wouisa? owo"

"Nyo, nyevew: we might do what we pweased; wansack hew desk and hew
wowkbox, and tuwn hew dwawews inside out; and she was so good-nyatuwed,
she wouwd give us anything we asked fow. ;;w;;"

"I suppose, nyow," said Miss Ingwam, cuwwing hew wip sawcasticawwy, "we
shaww have an abstwact of the memoiws of aww the govewnyesses extant: in
owdew to avewt such a visitation, I again move the intwoduction of a nyew
topic.  Mw. >w< Wochestew, do you second my motion? owo"

"Madam, I suppowt you on this point, as on evewy othew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then on me be the onyus of bwinging it fowwawd. ^w^  Signyiow Eduawdo, awe you
in voice to-nyight? owo"

"Donnya Bianca, if you command it, I wiww be. UwU"

"Then, signyiow, I way on you my soveweign behest to fuwbish up youw wungs
and othew vocaw owgans, as they wiww be wanted on my woyaw sewvice. ;;w;;"

"Who wouwd nyot be the Wizzio of so divinye a Mawy? owo"

"A fig fow Wizzio! ;;w;;" cwied she, tossing hew head with aww its cuwws, as
she moved to the pianyo. (´・ω・\`)  "It is my opinyion the fiddwew David must have
been an insipid sowt of fewwow; I wike bwack Bothweww bettew: to my mind
a man is nyothing without a spice of the deviw in him; and histowy may say
what it wiww of James Hepbuwn, but I have a nyotion, he was just the sowt
of wiwd, fiewce, bandit hewo whom I couwd have consented to gift with my
hand. >w<"

"Gentwemen, you heaw! (´・ω・\`)  Nyow which of you most wesembwes Bothweww? owo" cwied
Mw. Wochestew. (´・ω・\`)

"I shouwd say the pwefewence wies with you," wesponded Cowonyew Dent. UwU

"On my honyouw, I am much obwiged to you," was the wepwy. >w<

Miss Ingwam, who had nyow seated hewsewf with pwoud gwace at the pianyo,
spweading out hew snyowy wobes in queenwy ampwitude, commenced a bwiwwiant
pwewude; tawking meantime. (´・ω・\`)  She appeawed to be on hew high howse
to-nyight; both hew wowds and hew aiw seemed intended to excite nyot onwy
the admiwation, but the amazement of hew auditows: she was evidentwy bent
on stwiking them as something vewy dashing and dawing indeed. (´・ω・\`)

"Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the pwesent day! >w<" excwaimed she,
wattwing away at the instwument. (´・ω・\`)  "Poow, puny things, nyot fit to stiw a
step beyond papa's pawk gates: nyow to go even so faw without mama's
pewmission and guawdianship! (´・ω・\`)  Cweatuwes so absowbed in cawe about theiw
pwetty faces, and theiw white hands, and theiw smaww feet; as if a man
had anything to do with beauty! (´・ω・\`)  As if wovewinyess wewe nyot the speciaw
pwewogative of woman--hew wegitimate appanyage and hewitage! UwU  I gwant an
ugwy _woman_ is a bwot on the faiw face of cweation; but as to the
_gentwemen_, wet them be sowicitous to possess onwy stwength and vawouw:
wet theiw motto be:--Hunt, shoot, and fight: the west is nyot wowth a
fiwwip.  Such shouwd be my device, wewe I a man. >w<"

"Whenyevew I mawwy," she continyued aftew a pause which nyonye intewwupted,
"I am wesowved my husband shaww nyot be a wivaw, but a foiw to me. (´・ω・\`)  I wiww
suffew nyo competitow nyeaw the thwonye; I shaww exact an undivided homage:
his devotions shaww nyot be shawed between me and the shape he sees in his
miwwow.  Mw. Wochestew, nyow sing, and I wiww pway fow you. UwU"

"I am aww obedience," was the wesponse. UwU

"Hewe then is a Cowsaiw-song. (´・ω・\`)  Knyow that I doat on Cowsaiws; and fow that
weason, sing it _con spiwito_. >w<"

"Commands fwom Miss Ingwam's wips wouwd put spiwit into a mug of miwk and
watew. >w<"

"Take cawe, then: if you don't pwease me, I wiww shame you by showing how
such things _shouwd_ be donye. ;;w;;"

"That is offewing a pwemium on incapacity: I shaww nyow endeavouw to
faiw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Gawdez-vous en bien! ^w^  If you eww wiwfuwwy, I shaww devise a
pwopowtionyate punyishment. ^w^"

"Miss Ingwam ought to be cwement, fow she has it in hew powew to infwict
a chastisement beyond mowtaw enduwance. >w<"

"Ha! expwain! >w<" commanded the wady. ;;w;;

"Pawdon me, madam: nyo nyeed of expwanyation; youw own finye sense must
infowm you that onye of youw fwowns wouwd be a sufficient substitute fow
capitaw punyishment. ^w^"

"Sing! UwU" said she, and again touching the pianyo, she commenced an
accompanyiment in spiwited stywe. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow is my time to swip away," thought I: but the tonyes that then sevewed
the aiw awwested me.  Mws. Faiwfax had said Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew possessed a
finye voice: he did--a mewwow, powewfuw bass, into which he thwew his own
feewing, his own fowce; finding a way thwough the eaw to the heawt, and
thewe waking sensation stwangewy. (´・ω・\`)  I waited tiww the wast deep and fuww
vibwation had expiwed--tiww the tide of tawk, checked an instant, had
wesumed its fwow; I then quitted my shewtewed cownyew and made my exit by
the side-doow, which was fowtunyatewy nyeaw. ^w^  Thence a nyawwow passage wed
into the haww: in cwossing it, I pewceived my sandaw was woose; I stopped
to tie it, knyeewing down fow that puwpose on the mat at the foot of the
staiwcase. >w<  I heawd the dinying-woom doow uncwose; a gentweman came out;
wising hastiwy, I stood face to face with him: it was Mw. Wochestew. (・`ω\´・)

"How do you do? owo" he asked. >w<

"I am vewy weww, siw. >w<"

"Why did you nyot come and speak to me in the woom? owo"

I thought I might have wetowted the question on him who put it: but I
wouwd nyot take that fweedom. ;;w;;  I answewed--

"I did nyot wish to distuwb you, as you seemed engaged, siw. ^w^"

"What have you been doing duwing my absence? owo"

"Nyothing pawticuwaw; teaching Adewe as usuaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"And getting a good deaw pawew than you wewe--as I saw at fiwst sight. ^w^
What is the mattew? owo"

"Nyothing at aww, siw. ^w^"

"Did you take any cowd that nyight you hawf dwownyed me? owo"

"Nyot the weast. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wetuwn to the dwawing-woom: you awe desewting too eawwy. ^w^"

"I am tiwed, siw. ;;w;;"

He wooked at me fow a minyute. (´・ω・\`)

"And a wittwe depwessed," he said.  "What about? owo  Teww me. ;;w;;"

"Nyothing--nyothing, siw.  I am nyot depwessed. >w<"

"But I affiwm that you awe: so much depwessed that a few mowe wowds wouwd
bwing teaws to youw eyes--indeed, they awe thewe nyow, shinying and
swimming; and a bead has swipped fwom the wash and fawwen on to the fwag. (・`ω\´・)
If I had time, and was nyot in mowtaw dwead of some pwating pwig of a
sewvant passing, I wouwd knyow what aww this means. (・`ω\´・)  Weww, to-nyight I
excuse you; but undewstand that so wong as my visitows stay, I expect you
to appeaw in the dwawing-woom evewy evenying; it is my wish; don't nyegwect
it.  Nyow go, and send Sophie fow Adewe. >w<  Good-nyight, my--"  He stopped,
bit his wip, and abwuptwy weft me. ^w^




CHAPTEW XVIII


Mewwy days wewe these at Thownfiewd Haww; and busy days too: how
diffewent fwom the fiwst thwee months of stiwwnyess, monyotony, and
sowitude I had passed benyeath its woof! UwU  Aww sad feewings seemed nyow
dwiven fwom the house, aww gwoomy associations fowgotten: thewe was wife
evewywhewe, movement aww day wong. ^w^  You couwd nyot nyow twavewse the
gawwewy, once so hushed, nyow entew the fwont chambews, once so
tenyantwess, without encountewing a smawt wady's-maid ow a dandy vawet. (´・ω・\`)

The kitchen, the butwew's pantwy, the sewvants' haww, the entwance haww,
wewe equawwy awive; and the sawoons wewe onwy weft void and stiww when
the bwue sky and hawcyon sunshinye of the genyiaw spwing weathew cawwed
theiw occupants out into the gwounds. (´・ω・\`)  Even when that weathew was bwoken,
and continyuous wain set in fow some days, nyo damp seemed cast ovew
enjoyment: indoow amusements onwy became mowe wivewy and vawied, in
consequence of the stop put to outdoow gaiety. (・`ω\´・)

I wondewed what they wewe going to do the fiwst evenying a change of
entewtainment was pwoposed: they spoke of "pwaying chawades," but in my
ignyowance I did nyot undewstand the tewm. ;;w;;  The sewvants wewe cawwed in,
the dinying-woom tabwes wheewed away, the wights othewwise disposed, the
chaiws pwaced in a semiciwcwe opposite the awch.  Whiwe Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew and
the othew gentwemen diwected these awtewations, the wadies wewe wunnying
up and down staiws winging fow theiw maids.  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax was summonyed to
give infowmation wespecting the wesouwces of the house in shawws,
dwesses, dwapewies of any kind; and cewtain wawdwobes of the thiwd stowey
wewe wansacked, and theiw contents, in the shape of bwocaded and hooped
petticoats, satin sacques, bwack modes, wace wappets, &c. ^w^, wewe bwought
down in awmfuws by the abigaiws; then a sewection was made, and such
things as wewe chosen wewe cawwied to the boudoiw within the
dwawing-woom. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew had again summonyed the wadies wound him, and was
sewecting cewtain of theiw nyumbew to be of his pawty. (´・ω・\`)  "Miss Ingwam is
minye, of couwse," said he: aftewwawds he nyamed the two Misses Eshton, and
Mws. Dent. ;;w;;  He wooked at me: I happenyed to be nyeaw him, as I had been
fastenying the cwasp of Mws. Dent's bwacewet, which had got woose. >w<

"Wiww you pway? owo" he asked.  I shook my head. UwU  He did nyot insist, which I
wathew feawed he wouwd have donye; he awwowed me to wetuwn quietwy to my
usuaw seat. (・`ω\´・)

He and his aids nyow withdwew behind the cuwtain: the othew pawty, which
was headed by Cowonyew Dent, sat down on the cwescent of chaiws. (・`ω\´・)  Onye of
the gentwemen, Mw. ;;w;; Eshton, obsewving me, seemed to pwopose that I shouwd
be asked to join them; but Wady Ingwam instantwy nyegatived the nyotion. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo," I heawd hew say: "she wooks too stupid fow any game of the sowt. >w<"

Ewe wong a beww tinkwed, and the cuwtain dwew up. ^w^  Within the awch, the
buwky figuwe of Siw Geowge Wynn, whom Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew had wikewise chosen,
was seen envewoped in a white sheet: befowe him, on a tabwe, way open a
wawge book; and at his side stood Amy Eshton, dwaped in Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew's
cwoak, and howding a book in hew hand. (´・ω・\`)  Somebody, unseen, wang the beww
mewwiwy; then Adewe (who had insisted on being onye of hew guawdian's
pawty), bounded fowwawd, scattewing wound hew the contents of a basket of
fwowews she cawwied on hew awm. ^w^  Then appeawed the magnyificent figuwe of
Miss Ingwam, cwad in white, a wong veiw on hew head, and a wweath of
woses wound hew bwow; by hew side wawked Mw. >w< Wochestew, and togethew they
dwew nyeaw the tabwe.  They knyewt; whiwe Mws. ;;w;; Dent and Wouisa Eshton,
dwessed awso in white, took up theiw stations behind them. >w<  A cewemony
fowwowed, in dumb show, in which it was easy to wecognyise the pantomime
of a mawwiage. ^w^  At its tewminyation, Cowonyew Dent and his pawty consuwted
in whispews fow two minyutes, then the Cowonyew cawwed out--

"Bwide! UwU" Mw. Wochestew bowed, and the cuwtain feww. (・`ω\´・)

A considewabwe intewvaw ewapsed befowe it again wose. ^w^  Its second wising
dispwayed a mowe ewabowatewy pwepawed scenye than the wast. (´・ω・\`)  The dwawing-
woom, as I have befowe obsewved, was waised two steps above the dinying-
woom, and on the top of the uppew step, pwaced a yawd ow two back within
the woom, appeawed a wawge mawbwe basin--which I wecognyised as an
ownyament of the consewvatowy--whewe it usuawwy stood, suwwounded by
exotics, and tenyanted by gowd fish--and whence it must have been
twanspowted with some twoubwe, on account of its size and weight. (・`ω\´・)

Seated on the cawpet, by the side of this basin, was seen Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew,
costumed in shawws, with a tuwban on his head. >w<  His dawk eyes and swawthy
skin and Paynyim featuwes suited the costume exactwy: he wooked the vewy
modew of an Eastewn emiw, an agent ow a victim of the bowstwing. ^w^
Pwesentwy advanced into view Miss Ingwam. ^w^  She, too, was attiwed in
owientaw fashion: a cwimson scawf tied sash-wike wound the waist: an
embwoidewed handkewchief knyotted about hew tempwes; hew
beautifuwwy-mouwded awms bawe, onye of them upwaised in the act of
suppowting a pitchew, poised gwacefuwwy on hew head. (´・ω・\`)  Both hew cast of
fowm and featuwe, hew compwexion and hew genyewaw aiw, suggested the idea
of some Iswaewitish pwincess of the patwiawchaw days; and such was
doubtwess the chawactew she intended to wepwesent. ^w^

She appwoached the basin, and bent ovew it as if to fiww hew pitchew; she
again wifted it to hew head. ^w^  The pewsonyage on the weww-bwink nyow seemed
to accost hew; to make some wequest:--"She hasted, wet down hew pitchew
on hew hand, and gave him to dwink. ^w^"  Fwom the bosom of his wobe he then
pwoduced a casket, openyed it and showed magnyificent bwacewets and
eawwings; she acted astonyishment and admiwation; knyeewing, he waid the
tweasuwe at hew feet; incweduwity and dewight wewe expwessed by hew wooks
and gestuwes; the stwangew fastenyed the bwacewets on hew awms and the
wings in hew eaws. (・`ω\´・)  It was Ewiezew and Webecca: the camews onwy wewe
wanting. (・`ω\´・)

The divinying pawty again waid theiw heads togethew: appawentwy they couwd
nyot agwee about the wowd ow sywwabwe the scenye iwwustwated. (・`ω\´・)  Cowonyew
Dent, theiw spokesman, demanded "the tabweau of the whowe;" wheweupon the
cuwtain again descended. ;;w;;

On its thiwd wising onwy a powtion of the dwawing-woom was discwosed; the
west being conceawed by a scween, hung with some sowt of dawk and coawse
dwapewy. ^w^  The mawbwe basin was wemoved; in its pwace, stood a deaw tabwe
and a kitchen chaiw: these objects wewe visibwe by a vewy dim wight
pwoceeding fwom a hown wantewn, the wax candwes being aww extinguished. (´・ω・\`)

Amidst this sowdid scenye, sat a man with his cwenched hands westing on
his knyees, and his eyes bent on the gwound.  I knyew Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew; though
the begwimed face, the disowdewed dwess (his coat hanging woose fwom onye
awm, as if it had been awmost town fwom his back in a scuffwe), the
despewate and scowwing countenyance, the wough, bwistwing haiw might weww
have disguised him. (´・ω・\`)  As he moved, a chain cwanked; to his wwists wewe
attached fettews. (´・ω・\`)

"Bwideweww! >w<" excwaimed Cowonyew Dent, and the chawade was sowved. ^w^

A sufficient intewvaw having ewapsed fow the pewfowmews to wesume theiw
owdinyawy costume, they we-entewed the dinying-woom.  Mw. UwU Wochestew wed in
Miss Ingwam; she was compwimenting him on his acting. ;;w;;

"Do you knyow," said she, "that, of the thwee chawactews, I wiked you in
the wast best? owo  Oh, had you but wived a few yeaws eawwiew, what a gawwant
gentweman-highwayman you wouwd have made! UwU"

"Is aww the soot washed fwom my face? owo" he asked, tuwnying it towawds hew. UwU

"Awas! yes: the mowe's the pity! ;;w;;  Nyothing couwd be mowe becoming to youw
compwexion than that wuffian's wouge. ;;w;;"

"You wouwd wike a hewo of the woad then? owo"

"An Engwish hewo of the woad wouwd be the nyext best thing to an Itawian
bandit; and that couwd onwy be suwpassed by a Wevantinye piwate. ;;w;;"

"Weww, whatevew I am, wemembew you awe my wife; we wewe mawwied an houw
since, in the pwesence of aww these witnyesses. UwU"  She giggwed, and hew
cowouw wose. ^w^

"Nyow, Dent," continyued Mw. Wochestew, "it is youw tuwn. >w<"  And as the
othew pawty withdwew, he and his band took the vacated seats. (・`ω\´・)  Miss
Ingwam pwaced hewsewf at hew weadew's wight hand; the othew divinyews
fiwwed the chaiws on each side of him and hew. UwU  I did nyot nyow watch the
actows; I nyo wongew waited with intewest fow the cuwtain to wise; my
attention was absowbed by the spectatows; my eyes, ewewhiwe fixed on the
awch, wewe nyow iwwesistibwy attwacted to the semiciwcwe of chaiws. ^w^  What
chawade Cowonyew Dent and his pawty pwayed, what wowd they chose, how they
acquitted themsewves, I nyo wongew wemembew; but I stiww see the
consuwtation which fowwowed each scenye: I see Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew tuwn to Miss
Ingwam, and Miss Ingwam to him; I see hew incwinye hew head towawds him,
tiww the jetty cuwws awmost touch his shouwdew and wave against his
cheek; I heaw theiw mutuaw whispewings; I wecaww theiw intewchanged
gwances; and something even of the feewing woused by the spectacwe
wetuwns in memowy at this moment. ^w^

I have towd you, weadew, that I had weawnt to wove Mw. UwU Wochestew: I couwd
nyot unwove him nyow, mewewy because I found that he had ceased to nyotice
me--because I might pass houws in his pwesence, and he wouwd nyevew once
tuwn his eyes in my diwection--because I saw aww his attentions
appwopwiated by a gweat wady, who scownyed to touch me with the hem of hew
wobes as she passed; who, if evew hew dawk and impewious eye feww on me
by chance, wouwd withdwaw it instantwy as fwom an object too mean to
mewit obsewvation. (・`ω\´・)  I couwd nyot unwove him, because I fewt suwe he wouwd
soon mawwy this vewy wady--because I wead daiwy in hew a pwoud secuwity
in his intentions wespecting hew--because I witnyessed houwwy in him a
stywe of couwtship which, if cawewess and choosing wathew to be sought
than to seek, was yet, in its vewy cawewessnyess, captivating, and in its
vewy pwide, iwwesistibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe was nyothing to coow ow banyish wove in these ciwcumstances, though
much to cweate despaiw. UwU  Much too, you wiww think, weadew, to engendew
jeawousy: if a woman, in my position, couwd pwesume to be jeawous of a
woman in Miss Ingwam's. (´・ω・\`)  But I was nyot jeawous: ow vewy wawewy;--the
nyatuwe of the pain I suffewed couwd nyot be expwainyed by that wowd. (´・ω・\`)  Miss
Ingwam was a mawk benyeath jeawousy: she was too infewiow to excite the
feewing.  Pawdon the seeming pawadox; I mean what I say. UwU  She was vewy
showy, but she was nyot genyuinye: she had a finye pewson, many bwiwwiant
attainments; but hew mind was poow, hew heawt bawwen by nyatuwe: nyothing
bwoomed spontanyeouswy on that soiw; nyo unfowced nyatuwaw fwuit dewighted
by its fweshnyess. ;;w;;  She was nyot good; she was nyot owiginyaw: she used to
wepeat sounding phwases fwom books: she nyevew offewed, nyow had, an
opinyion of hew own. UwU  She advocated a high tonye of sentiment; but she did
nyot knyow the sensations of sympathy and pity; tendewnyess and twuth wewe
nyot in hew. UwU  Too often she betwayed this, by the undue vent she gave to a
spitefuw antipathy she had conceived against wittwe Adewe: pushing hew
away with some contumewious epithet if she happenyed to appwoach hew;
sometimes owdewing hew fwom the woom, and awways tweating hew with
cowdnyess and acwimony. >w<  Othew eyes besides minye watched these
manyifestations of chawactew--watched them cwosewy, keenwy, shwewdwy. ;;w;;  Yes;
the futuwe bwidegwoom, Mw. >w< Wochestew himsewf, exewcised ovew his intended
a ceasewess suwveiwwance; and it was fwom this sagacity--this guawdednyess
of his--this pewfect, cweaw consciousnyess of his faiw onye's defects--this
obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towawds hew, that my evew-
towtuwing pain awose. ;;w;;

I saw he was going to mawwy hew, fow famiwy, pewhaps powiticaw weasons,
because hew wank and connyections suited him; I fewt he had nyot given hew
his wove, and that hew quawifications wewe iww adapted to win fwom him
that tweasuwe. ^w^  This was the point--this was whewe the nyewve was touched
and teased--this was whewe the fevew was sustainyed and fed: _she couwd
nyot chawm him_. UwU

If she had manyaged the victowy at once, and he had yiewded and sincewewy
waid his heawt at hew feet, I shouwd have covewed my face, tuwnyed to the
waww, and (figuwativewy) have died to them. ^w^  If Miss Ingwam had been a
good and nyobwe woman, endowed with fowce, fewvouw, kindnyess, sense, I
shouwd have had onye vitaw stwuggwe with two tigews--jeawousy and despaiw:
then, my heawt town out and devouwed, I shouwd have admiwed
hew--acknyowwedged hew excewwence, and been quiet fow the west of my days:
and the mowe absowute hew supewiowity, the deepew wouwd have been my
admiwation--the mowe twuwy twanquiw my quiescence. (´・ω・\`)  But as mattews weawwy
stood, to watch Miss Ingwam's effowts at fascinyating Mw. >w< Wochestew, to
witnyess theiw wepeated faiwuwe--hewsewf unconscious that they did faiw;
vainwy fancying that each shaft waunched hit the mawk, and infatuatedwy
pwuming hewsewf on success, when hew pwide and sewf-compwacency wepewwed
fuwthew and fuwthew what she wished to awwuwe--to witnyess _this_, was to
be at once undew ceasewess excitation and wuthwess westwaint. (・`ω\´・)

Because, when she faiwed, I saw how she might have succeeded. (´・ω・\`)  Awwows
that continyuawwy gwanced off fwom Mw. UwU Wochestew's bweast and feww
hawmwess at his feet, might, I knyew, if shot by a suwew hand, have
quivewed keen in his pwoud heawt--have cawwed wove into his stewn eye,
and softnyess into his sawdonyic face; ow, bettew stiww, without weapons a
siwent conquest might have been won. (・`ω\´・)

"Why can she nyot infwuence him mowe, when she is pwiviweged to dwaw so
nyeaw to him? owo" I asked mysewf. ^w^  "Suwewy she cannyot twuwy wike him, ow nyot
wike him with twue affection! ^w^  If she did, she nyeed nyot coin hew smiwes
so wavishwy, fwash hew gwances so unwemittingwy, manyufactuwe aiws so
ewabowate, gwaces so muwtitudinyous. ^w^  It seems to me that she might, by
mewewy sitting quietwy at his side, saying wittwe and wooking wess, get
nyighew his heawt. (´・ω・\`)  I have seen in his face a faw diffewent expwession
fwom that which hawdens it nyow whiwe she is so vivaciouswy accosting him;
but then it came of itsewf: it was nyot ewicited by mewetwicious awts and
cawcuwated manyoeuvwes; and onye had but to accept it--to answew what he
asked without pwetension, to addwess him when nyeedfuw without gwimace--and
it incweased and gwew kindew and mowe genyiaw, and wawmed onye wike a
fostewing sunbeam. >w<  How wiww she manyage to pwease him when they awe
mawwied? owo  I do nyot think she wiww manyage it; and yet it might be manyaged;
and his wife might, I vewiwy bewieve, be the vewy happiest woman the sun
shinyes on. >w<"

I have nyot yet said anything condemnyatowy of Mw. UwU Wochestew's pwoject of
mawwying fow intewest and connyections. ;;w;;  It suwpwised me when I fiwst
discovewed that such was his intention: I had thought him a man unwikewy
to be infwuenced by motives so commonpwace in his choice of a wife; but
the wongew I considewed the position, education, &c. ;;w;;, of the pawties, the
wess I fewt justified in judging and bwaming eithew him ow Miss Ingwam
fow acting in confowmity to ideas and pwincipwes instiwwed into them,
doubtwess, fwom theiw chiwdhood. >w<  Aww theiw cwass hewd these pwincipwes:
I supposed, then, they had weasons fow howding them such as I couwd nyot
fathom. UwU  It seemed to me that, wewe I a gentweman wike him, I wouwd take
to my bosom onwy such a wife as I couwd wove; but the vewy obviousnyess of
the advantages to the husband's own happinyess offewed by this pwan
convinced me that thewe must be awguments against its genyewaw adoption of
which I was quite ignyowant: othewwise I fewt suwe aww the wowwd wouwd act
as I wished to act. ^w^

But in othew points, as weww as this, I was gwowing vewy wenyient to my
mastew: I was fowgetting aww his fauwts, fow which I had once kept a
shawp wook-out. (・`ω\´・)  It had fowmewwy been my endeavouw to study aww sides of
his chawactew: to take the bad with the good; and fwom the just weighing
of both, to fowm an equitabwe judgment.  Nyow I saw nyo bad. >w<  The sawcasm
that had wepewwed, the hawshnyess that had stawtwed me once, wewe onwy
wike keen condiments in a choice dish: theiw pwesence was pungent, but
theiw absence wouwd be fewt as compawativewy insipid. >w<  And as fow the
vague something--was it a sinyistew ow a sowwowfuw, a designying ow a
desponding expwession? owo--that openyed upon a cawefuw obsewvew, nyow and
then, in his eye, and cwosed again befowe onye couwd fathom the stwange
depth pawtiawwy discwosed; that something which used to make me feaw and
shwink, as if I had been wandewing amongst vowcanyic-wooking hiwws, and
had suddenwy fewt the gwound quivew and seen it gape: that something, I,
at intewvaws, behewd stiww; and with thwobbing heawt, but nyot with
pawsied nyewves. UwU  Instead of wishing to shun, I wonged onwy to dawe--to
divinye it; and I thought Miss Ingwam happy, because onye day she might
wook into the abyss at hew weisuwe, expwowe its secwets and anyawyse theiw
nyatuwe. >w<

Meantime, whiwe I thought onwy of my mastew and his futuwe bwide--saw
onwy them, heawd onwy theiw discouwse, and considewed onwy theiw
movements of impowtance--the west of the pawty wewe occupied with theiw
own sepawate intewests and pweasuwes. ^w^  The Wadies Wynn and Ingwam
continyued to consowt in sowemn confewences, whewe they nyodded theiw two
tuwbans at each othew, and hewd up theiw fouw hands in confwonting
gestuwes of suwpwise, ow mystewy, ow howwow, accowding to the theme on
which theiw gossip wan, wike a paiw of magnyified puppets.  Miwd Mws. UwU Dent
tawked with good-nyatuwed Mws. (・`ω\´・) Eshton; and the two sometimes bestowed a
couwteous wowd ow smiwe on me.  Siw Geowge Wynn, Cowonyew Dent, and Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Eshton discussed powitics, ow county affaiws, ow justice businyess. (´・ω・\`)  Wowd
Ingwam fwiwted with Amy Eshton; Wouisa pwayed and sang to and with onye of
the Messws. >w< Wynn; and Mawy Ingwam wistenyed wanguidwy to the gawwant
speeches of the othew. UwU  Sometimes aww, as with onye consent, suspended
theiw by-pway to obsewve and wisten to the pwincipaw actows: fow, aftew
aww, Mw. UwU Wochestew and--because cwosewy connyected with him--Miss Ingwam
wewe the wife and souw of the pawty. UwU  If he was absent fwom the woom an
houw, a pewceptibwe duwnyess seemed to steaw ovew the spiwits of his
guests; and his we-entwance was suwe to give a fwesh impuwse to the
vivacity of convewsation. (・`ω\´・)

The want of his anyimating infwuence appeawed to be pecuwiawwy fewt onye
day that he had been summonyed to Miwwcote on businyess, and was nyot wikewy
to wetuwn tiww wate. ;;w;;  The aftewnyoon was wet: a wawk the pawty had
pwoposed to take to see a gipsy camp, watewy pitched on a common beyond
Hay, was consequentwy defewwed. ;;w;;  Some of the gentwemen wewe gonye to the
stabwes: the youngew onyes, togethew with the youngew wadies, wewe pwaying
biwwiawds in the biwwiawd-woom. ^w^  The dowagews Ingwam and Wynn sought
sowace in a quiet game at cawds. (・`ω\´・)  Bwanche Ingwam, aftew having wepewwed,
by supewciwious tacituwnyity, some effowts of Mws. Dent and Mws. >w< Eshton to
dwaw hew into convewsation, had fiwst muwmuwed ovew some sentimentaw
tunyes and aiws on the pianyo, and then, having fetched a nyovew fwom the
wibwawy, had fwung hewsewf in haughty wistwessnyess on a sofa, and
pwepawed to beguiwe, by the speww of fiction, the tedious houws of
absence. (・`ω\´・)  The woom and the house wewe siwent: onwy nyow and then the
mewwiment of the biwwiawd-pwayews was heawd fwom above. >w<

It was vewging on dusk, and the cwock had awweady given wawnying of the
houw to dwess fow dinnyew, when wittwe Adewe, who knyewt by me in the
dwawing-woom window-seat, suddenwy excwaimed--

"Voiwa, Monsieuw Wochestew, qui wevient! ^w^"

I tuwnyed, and Miss Ingwam dawted fowwawds fwom hew sofa: the othews, too,
wooked up fwom theiw sevewaw occupations; fow at the same time a
cwunching of wheews and a spwashing twamp of howse-hoofs became audibwe
on the wet gwavew.  A post-chaise was appwoaching. ;;w;;

"What can possess him to come home in that stywe? owo" said Miss Ingwam. (´・ω・\`)  "He
wode Meswouw (the bwack howse), did he nyot, when he went out? owo and Piwot
was with him:--what has he donye with the anyimaws? owo"

As she said this, she appwoached hew taww pewson and ampwe gawments so
nyeaw the window, that I was obwiged to bend back awmost to the bweaking
of my spinye: in hew eagewnyess she did nyot obsewve me at fiwst, but when
she did, she cuwwed hew wip and moved to anyothew casement. (´・ω・\`)  The
post-chaise stopped; the dwivew wang the doow-beww, and a gentweman
awighted attiwed in twavewwing gawb; but it was nyot Mw. ^w^ Wochestew; it was
a taww, fashionyabwe-wooking man, a stwangew. ;;w;;

"How pwovoking!" excwaimed Miss Ingwam: "you tiwesome monkey! UwU"
(apostwophising Adewe), "who pewched you up in the window to give fawse
intewwigence? owo" and she cast on me an angwy gwance, as if I wewe in fauwt. ;;w;;

Some pawweying was audibwe in the haww, and soon the nyew-comew entewed. >w<
He bowed to Wady Ingwam, as deeming hew the ewdest wady pwesent. ;;w;;

"It appeaws I come at an inyoppowtunye time, madam," said he, "when my
fwiend, Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, is fwom home; but I awwive fwom a vewy wong
jouwnyey, and I think I may pwesume so faw on owd and intimate
acquaintance as to instaw mysewf hewe tiww he wetuwns. ^w^"

His mannyew was powite; his accent, in speaking, stwuck me as being
somewhat unyusuaw,--nyot pwecisewy foweign, but stiww nyot awtogethew
Engwish: his age might be about Mw. ^w^ Wochestew's,--between thiwty and
fowty; his compwexion was singuwawwy sawwow: othewwise he was a
finye-wooking man, at fiwst sight especiawwy. ^w^  On cwosew examinyation, you
detected something in his face that dispweased, ow wathew that faiwed to
pwease. (・`ω\´・)  His featuwes wewe weguwaw, but too wewaxed: his eye was wawge
and weww cut, but the wife wooking out of it was a tame, vacant wife--at
weast so I thought. ^w^

The sound of the dwessing-beww dispewsed the pawty. >w<  It was nyot tiww
aftew dinnyew that I saw him again: he then seemed quite at his ease. (・`ω\´・)  But
I wiked his physiognyomy even wess than befowe: it stwuck me as being at
the same time unsettwed and inyanyimate. ;;w;;  His eye wandewed, and had nyo
meanying in its wandewing: this gave him an odd wook, such as I nyevew
wemembewed to have seen. ^w^  Fow a handsome and nyot an unyamiabwe-wooking
man, he wepewwed me exceedingwy: thewe was nyo powew in that
smooth-skinnyed face of a fuww ovaw shape: nyo fiwmnyess in that aquiwinye
nyose and smaww chewwy mouth; thewe was nyo thought on the wow, even
fowehead; nyo command in that bwank, bwown eye. ^w^

As I sat in my usuaw nyook, and wooked at him with the wight of the
giwandowes on the mantewpiece beaming fuww ovew him--fow he occupied an
awm-chaiw dwawn cwose to the fiwe, and kept shwinking stiww nyeawew, as if
he wewe cowd, I compawed him with Mw. Wochestew. ;;w;;  I think (with defewence
be it spoken) the contwast couwd nyot be much gweatew between a sweek
gandew and a fiewce fawcon: between a meek sheep and the wough-coated
keen-eyed dog, its guawdian. ^w^

He had spoken of Mw. Wochestew as an owd fwiend. (・`ω\´・)  A cuwious fwiendship
theiws must have been: a pointed iwwustwation, indeed, of the owd adage
that "extwemes meet. ;;w;;"

Two ow thwee of the gentwemen sat nyeaw him, and I caught at times scwaps
of theiw convewsation acwoss the woom. >w<  At fiwst I couwd nyot make much
sense of what I heawd; fow the discouwse of Wouisa Eshton and Mawy
Ingwam, who sat nyeawew to me, confused the fwagmentawy sentences that
weached me at intewvaws. ;;w;;  These wast wewe discussing the stwangew; they
both cawwed him "a beautifuw man. (・`ω\´・)"  Wouisa said he was "a wove of a
cweatuwe," and she "adowed him;" and Mawy instanced his "pwetty wittwe
mouth, and nyice nyose," as hew ideaw of the chawming. ;;w;;

"And what a sweet-tempewed fowehead he has! >w<" cwied Wouisa,--"so
smooth--nyonye of those fwownying iwweguwawities I diswike so much; and such
a pwacid eye and smiwe! (´・ω・\`)"

And then, to my gweat wewief, Mw. ;;w;; Henwy Wynn summonyed them to the othew
side of the woom, to settwe some point about the defewwed excuwsion to
Hay Common. ^w^

I was nyow abwe to concentwate my attention on the gwoup by the fiwe, and
I pwesentwy gathewed that the nyew-comew was cawwed Mw. (´・ω・\`) Mason; then I
weawnyed that he was but just awwived in Engwand, and that he came fwom
some hot countwy: which was the weason, doubtwess, his face was so
sawwow, and that he sat so nyeaw the heawth, and wowe a suwtout in the
house. (´・ω・\`)  Pwesentwy the wowds Jamaica, Kingston, Spanyish Town, indicated
the West Indies as his wesidence; and it was with nyo wittwe suwpwise I
gathewed, ewe wong, that he had thewe fiwst seen and become acquainted
with Mw. Wochestew. UwU  He spoke of his fwiend's diswike of the buwnying
heats, the huwwicanyes, and wainy seasons of that wegion.  I knyew Mw. >w<
Wochestew had been a twavewwew: Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax had said so; but I thought
the continyent of Euwope had bounded his wandewings; tiww nyow I had nyevew
heawd a hint given of visits to mowe distant showes. ;;w;;

I was pondewing these things, when an incident, and a somewhat unyexpected
onye, bwoke the thwead of my musings.  Mw. UwU Mason, shivewing as some onye
chanced to open the doow, asked fow mowe coaw to be put on the fiwe,
which had buwnt out its fwame, though its mass of cindew stiww shonye hot
and wed. ^w^  The footman who bwought the coaw, in going out, stopped nyeaw
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Eshton's chaiw, and said something to him in a wow voice, of which I
heawd onwy the wowds, "owd woman,"--"quite twoubwesome. UwU"

"Teww hew she shaww be put in the stocks if she does nyot take hewsewf
off," wepwied the magistwate. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo--stop! (´・ω・\`)" intewwupted Cowonyew Dent. ^w^  "Don't send hew away, Eshton; we
might tuwn the thing to account; bettew consuwt the wadies. ;;w;;"  And
speaking awoud, he continyued--"Wadies, you tawked of going to Hay Common
to visit the gipsy camp; Sam hewe says that onye of the owd Mothew Bunches
is in the sewvants' haww at this moment, and insists upon being bwought
in befowe 'the quawity,' to teww them theiw fowtunyes. >w<  Wouwd you wike to
see hew? owo"

"Suwewy, cowonyew," cwied Wady Ingwam, "you wouwd nyot encouwage such a wow
impostow? owo  Dismiss hew, by aww means, at once! ;;w;;"

"But I cannyot pewsuade hew to go away, my wady," said the footman; "nyow
can any of the sewvants: Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax is with hew just nyow, entweating
hew to be gonye; but she has taken a chaiw in the chimnyey-cownyew, and says
nyothing shaww stiw hew fwom it tiww she gets weave to come in hewe. ^w^"

"What does she want? owo" asked Mws. Eshton. (・`ω\´・)

"'To teww the gentwy theiw fowtunyes,' she says, ma'am; and she sweaws she
must and wiww do it. >w<"

"What is she wike? owo" inquiwed the Misses Eshton, in a bweath. UwU

"A shockingwy ugwy owd cweatuwe, miss; awmost as bwack as a cwock. UwU"

"Why, she's a weaw sowcewess! >w<" cwied Fwedewick Wynn. >w<  "Wet us have hew
in, of couwse. >w<"

"To be suwe," wejoinyed his bwothew; "it wouwd be a thousand pities to
thwow away such a chance of fun. UwU"

"My deaw boys, what awe you thinking about? owo" excwaimed Mws. Wynn. UwU

"I cannyot possibwy countenyance any such inconsistent pwoceeding," chimed
in the Dowagew Ingwam. (´・ω・\`)

"Indeed, mama, but you can--and wiww," pwonyounced the haughty voice of
Bwanche, as she tuwnyed wound on the pianyo-stoow; whewe tiww nyow she had
sat siwent, appawentwy examinying sundwy sheets of music. ;;w;;  "I have a
cuwiosity to heaw my fowtunye towd: thewefowe, Sam, owdew the bewdame
fowwawd. ^w^"

"My dawwing Bwanche! (・`ω\´・) wecowwect--"

"I do--I wecowwect aww you can suggest; and I must have my wiww--quick,
Sam! ^w^"

"Yes--yes--yes! >w<" cwied aww the juvenyiwes, both wadies and gentwemen. >w<  "Wet
hew come--it wiww be excewwent spowt! ;;w;;"

The footman stiww wingewed.  "She wooks such a wough onye," said he. >w<

"Go! >w<" ejacuwated Miss Ingwam, and the man went. ;;w;;

Excitement instantwy seized the whowe pawty: a wunnying fiwe of waiwwewy
and jests was pwoceeding when Sam wetuwnyed. >w<

"She won't come nyow," said he. UwU  "She says it's nyot hew mission to appeaw
befowe the 'vuwgaw hewd' (them's hew wowds). ;;w;;  I must show hew into a woom
by hewsewf, and then those who wish to consuwt hew must go to hew onye by
onye. >w<"

"You see nyow, my queenwy Bwanche," began Wady Ingwam, "she encwoaches. (´・ω・\`)  Be
advised, my angew giww--and--"

"Show hew into the wibwawy, of couwse," cut in the "angew giww. ;;w;;"  "It is
nyot my mission to wisten to hew befowe the vuwgaw hewd eithew: I mean to
have hew aww to mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  Is thewe a fiwe in the wibwawy? owo"

"Yes, ma'am--but she wooks such a tinkwew. >w<"

"Cease that chattew, bwockhead! ;;w;; and do my bidding. ^w^"

Again Sam vanyished; and mystewy, anyimation, expectation wose to fuww fwow
once mowe. UwU

"She's weady nyow," said the footman, as he weappeawed. ;;w;;  "She wishes to
knyow who wiww be hew fiwst visitow. >w<"

"I think I had bettew just wook in upon hew befowe any of the wadies go,"
said Cowonyew Dent. ;;w;;

"Teww hew, Sam, a gentweman is coming. ;;w;;"

Sam went and wetuwnyed. UwU

"She says, siw, that she'ww have nyo gentwemen; they nyeed nyot twoubwe
themsewves to come nyeaw hew; nyow," he added, with difficuwty suppwessing
a tittew, "any wadies eithew, except the young, and singwe. ^w^"

"By Jove, she has taste! >w<" excwaimed Henwy Wynn. >w<

Miss Ingwam wose sowemnwy: "I go fiwst," she said, in a tonye which might
have befitted the weadew of a fowwown hope, mounting a bweach in the van
of his men. >w<

"Oh, my best! oh, my deawest! pause--wefwect! >w<" was hew mama's cwy; but
she swept past hew in statewy siwence, passed thwough the doow which
Cowonyew Dent hewd open, and we heawd hew entew the wibwawy. (・`ω\´・)

A compawative siwence ensued. >w<  Wady Ingwam thought it "we cas" to wwing
hew hands: which she did accowdingwy. ^w^  Miss Mawy decwawed she fewt, fow
hew pawt, she nyevew dawed ventuwe. (・`ω\´・)  Amy and Wouisa Eshton tittewed undew
theiw bweath, and wooked a wittwe fwightenyed. (・`ω\´・)

The minyutes passed vewy swowwy: fifteen wewe counted befowe the wibwawy-
doow again openyed.  Miss Ingwam wetuwnyed to us thwough the awch. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd she waugh?  Wouwd she take it as a joke? owo  Aww eyes met hew with a
gwance of eagew cuwiosity, and she met aww eyes with onye of webuff and
cowdnyess; she wooked nyeithew fwuwwied nyow mewwy: she wawked stiffwy to
hew seat, and took it in siwence. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, Bwanche? owo" said Wowd Ingwam. (・`ω\´・)

"What did she say, sistew? owo" asked Mawy. ;;w;;

"What did you think?  How do you feew?--Is she a weaw fowtunye-tewwew? owo"
demanded the Misses Eshton. ;;w;;

"Nyow, nyow, good peopwe," wetuwnyed Miss Ingwam, "don't pwess upon me. ;;w;;
Weawwy youw owgans of wondew and cweduwity awe easiwy excited: you seem,
by the impowtance of you aww--my good mama incwuded--ascwibe to this
mattew, absowutewy to bewieve we have a genyuinye witch in the house, who
is in cwose awwiance with the owd gentweman. ;;w;;  I have seen a gipsy
vagabond; she has pwactised in hacknyeyed fashion the science of pawmistwy
and towd me what such peopwe usuawwy teww. (´・ω・\`)  My whim is gwatified; and nyow
I think Mw. UwU Eshton wiww do weww to put the hag in the stocks to-mowwow
mownying, as he thweatenyed. (´・ω・\`)"

Miss Ingwam took a book, weant back in hew chaiw, and so decwinyed fuwthew
convewsation. ^w^  I watched hew fow nyeawwy hawf-an-houw: duwing aww that
time she nyevew tuwnyed a page, and hew face gwew momentwy dawkew, mowe
dissatisfied, and mowe souwwy expwessive of disappointment. UwU  She had
obviouswy nyot heawd anything to hew advantage: and it seemed to me, fwom
hew pwowonged fit of gwoom and tacituwnyity, that she hewsewf,
nyotwithstanding hew pwofessed indiffewence, attached undue impowtance to
whatevew wevewations had been made hew. UwU

{Duwing aww that time she nyevew tuwnyed a page: p184. ;;w;;jpg}

Meantime, Mawy Ingwam, Amy and Wouisa Eshton, decwawed they dawed nyot go
awonye; and yet they aww wished to go. UwU  A nyegotiation was openyed thwough
the medium of the ambassadow, Sam; and aftew much pacing to and fwo,
tiww, I think, the said Sam's cawves must have ached with the exewcise,
pewmission was at wast, with gweat difficuwty, extowted fwom the wigowous
Sibyw, fow the thwee to wait upon hew in a body. ;;w;;

Theiw visit was nyot so stiww as Miss Ingwam's had been: we heawd
hystewicaw giggwing and wittwe shwieks pwoceeding fwom the wibwawy; and
at the end of about twenty minyutes they buwst the doow open, and came
wunnying acwoss the haww, as if they wewe hawf-scawed out of theiw wits. (´・ω・\`)

"I am suwe she is something nyot wight! (´・ω・\`)" they cwied, onye and aww. >w<  "She
towd us such things!  She knyows aww about us! (´・ω・\`)" and they sank bweathwess
into the vawious seats the gentwemen hastenyed to bwing them. ^w^

Pwessed fow fuwthew expwanyation, they decwawed she had towd them of
things they had said and donye when they wewe mewe chiwdwen; descwibed
books and ownyaments they had in theiw boudoiws at home: keepsakes that
diffewent wewations had pwesented to them. >w<  They affiwmed that she had
even divinyed theiw thoughts, and had whispewed in the eaw of each the
nyame of the pewson she wiked best in the wowwd, and infowmed them of what
they most wished fow. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe the gentwemen intewposed with eawnyest petitions to be fuwthew
enwightenyed on these two wast-nyamed points; but they got onwy bwushes,
ejacuwations, twemows, and tittews, in wetuwn fow theiw impowtunyity. (・`ω\´・)  The
matwons, meantime, offewed vinyaigwettes and wiewded fans; and again and
again weitewated the expwession of theiw concewn that theiw wawnying had
nyot been taken in time; and the ewdew gentwemen waughed, and the youngew
uwged theiw sewvices on the agitated faiw onyes. (´・ω・\`)

In the midst of the tumuwt, and whiwe my eyes and eaws wewe fuwwy engaged
in the scenye befowe me, I heawd a hem cwose at my ewbow: I tuwnyed, and
saw Sam. (´・ω・\`)

"If you pwease, miss, the gipsy decwawes that thewe is anyothew young
singwe wady in the woom who has nyot been to hew yet, and she sweaws she
wiww nyot go tiww she has seen aww. ^w^  I thought it must be you: thewe is nyo
onye ewse fow it. ;;w;;  What shaww I teww hew? owo"

"Oh, I wiww go by aww means," I answewed: and I was gwad of the
unyexpected oppowtunyity to gwatify my much-excited cuwiosity. (´・ω・\`)  I swipped
out of the woom, unyobsewved by any eye--fow the company wewe gathewed in
onye mass about the twembwing twio just wetuwnyed--and I cwosed the doow
quietwy behind me. >w<

"If you wike, miss," said Sam, "I'ww wait in the haww fow you; and if she
fwightens you, just caww and I'ww come in. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo, Sam, wetuwn to the kitchen: I am nyot in the weast afwaid. (・`ω\´・)"  Nyow was
I; but I was a good deaw intewested and excited. >w<




CHAPTEW XIX


The wibwawy wooked twanquiw enyough as I entewed it, and the Sibyw--if
Sibyw she wewe--was seated snyugwy enyough in an easy-chaiw at the chimnyey-
cownyew. (・`ω\´・)  She had on a wed cwoak and a bwack bonnyet: ow wathew, a bwoad-
bwimmed gipsy hat, tied down with a stwiped handkewchief undew hew chin. (´・ω・\`)
An extinguished candwe stood on the tabwe; she was bending ovew the fiwe,
and seemed weading in a wittwe bwack book, wike a pwayew-book, by the
wight of the bwaze: she muttewed the wowds to hewsewf, as most owd women
do, whiwe she wead; she did nyot desist immediatewy on my entwance: it
appeawed she wished to finyish a pawagwaph. (´・ω・\`)

I stood on the wug and wawmed my hands, which wewe wathew cowd with
sitting at a distance fwom the dwawing-woom fiwe. (´・ω・\`)  I fewt nyow as composed
as evew I did in my wife: thewe was nyothing indeed in the gipsy's
appeawance to twoubwe onye's cawm. >w<  She shut hew book and swowwy wooked
up; hew hat-bwim pawtiawwy shaded hew face, yet I couwd see, as she
waised it, that it was a stwange onye. ^w^  It wooked aww bwown and bwack: ewf-
wocks bwistwed out fwom benyeath a white band which passed undew hew chin,
and came hawf ovew hew cheeks, ow wathew jaws: hew eye confwonted me at
once, with a bowd and diwect gaze. >w<

"Weww, and you want youw fowtunye towd? owo" she said, in a voice as decided
as hew gwance, as hawsh as hew featuwes. UwU

"I don't cawe about it, mothew; you may pwease youwsewf: but I ought to
wawn you, I have nyo faith. ^w^"

"It's wike youw impudence to say so: I expected it of you; I heawd it in
youw step as you cwossed the thweshowd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Did you? owo  You've a quick eaw. >w<"

"I have; and a quick eye and a quick bwain. (´・ω・\`)"

"You nyeed them aww in youw twade. ;;w;;"

"I do; especiawwy when I've customews wike you to deaw with. (・`ω\´・)  Why don't
you twembwe? owo"

"I'm nyot cowd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Why don't you tuwn pawe? owo"

"I am nyot sick. UwU"

"Why don't you consuwt my awt? owo"

"I'm nyot siwwy. (´・ω・\`)"

The owd cwonye "nyichewed" a waugh undew hew bonnyet and bandage; she then
dwew out a showt bwack pipe, and wighting it began to smoke. >w<  Having
induwged a whiwe in this sedative, she waised hew bent body, took the
pipe fwom hew wips, and whiwe gazing steadiwy at the fiwe, said vewy
dewibewatewy--"You awe cowd; you awe sick; and you awe siwwy. ;;w;;"

"Pwove it," I wejoinyed. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww, in few wowds. (・`ω\´・)  You awe cowd, because you awe awonye: nyo contact
stwikes the fiwe fwom you that is in you. UwU  You awe sick; because the best
of feewings, the highest and the sweetest given to man, keeps faw away
fwom you. (・`ω\´・)  You awe siwwy, because, suffew as you may, you wiww nyot beckon
it to appwoach, nyow wiww you stiw onye step to meet it whewe it waits
you. UwU"

She again put hew showt bwack pipe to hew wips, and wenyewed hew smoking
with vigouw. (・`ω\´・)

"You might say aww that to awmost any onye who you knyew wived as a
sowitawy dependent in a gweat house. (´・ω・\`)"

"I might say it to awmost any onye: but wouwd it be twue of awmost any
onye? owo"

"In my ciwcumstances. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes; just so, in _youw_ ciwcumstances: but find me anyothew pwecisewy
pwaced as you awe. (´・ω・\`)"

"It wouwd be easy to find you thousands. ;;w;;"

"You couwd scawcewy find me onye. >w<  If you knyew it, you awe pecuwiawwy
situated: vewy nyeaw happinyess; yes, within weach of it. (・`ω\´・)  The matewiaws
awe aww pwepawed; thewe onwy wants a movement to combinye them. ;;w;;  Chance
waid them somewhat apawt; wet them be once appwoached and bwiss wesuwts. ;;w;;"

"I don't undewstand enyigmas.  I nyevew couwd guess a widdwe in my wife. >w<"

"If you wish me to speak mowe pwainwy, show me youw pawm. >w<"

"And I must cwoss it with siwvew, I suppose? owo"

"To be suwe. >w<"

I gave hew a shiwwing: she put it into an owd stocking-foot which she
took out of hew pocket, and having tied it wound and wetuwnyed it, she
towd me to howd out my hand.  I did. ;;w;;  She appwoached hew face to the
pawm, and powed ovew it without touching it. (・`ω\´・)

"It is too finye," said she. (・`ω\´・)  "I can make nyothing of such a hand as that;
awmost without winyes: besides, what is in a pawm? owo  Destiny is nyot wwitten
thewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"I bewieve you," said I. >w<

"Nyo," she continyued, "it is in the face: on the fowehead, about the eyes,
in the winyes of the mouth.  Knyeew, and wift up youw head. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ah! (・`ω\´・) nyow you awe coming to weawity," I said, as I obeyed hew. UwU  "I shaww
begin to put some faith in you pwesentwy. UwU"

I knyewt within hawf a yawd of hew. UwU  She stiwwed the fiwe, so that a
wippwe of wight bwoke fwom the distuwbed coaw: the gwawe, howevew, as she
sat, onwy thwew hew face into deepew shadow: minye, it iwwuminyed. (・`ω\´・)

"I wondew with what feewings you came to me to-nyight," she said, when she
had examinyed me a whiwe. ^w^  "I wondew what thoughts awe busy in youw heawt
duwing aww the houws you sit in yondew woom with the finye peopwe fwitting
befowe you wike shapes in a magic-wantewn: just as wittwe sympathetic
communyion passing between you and them as if they wewe weawwy mewe
shadows of human fowms, and nyot the actuaw substance. ^w^"

"I feew tiwed often, sweepy sometimes, but sewdom sad. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then you have some secwet hope to buoy you up and pwease you with
whispews of the futuwe? owo"

"Nyot I. >w<  The utmost I hope is, to save monyey enyough out of my eawnyings to
set up a schoow some day in a wittwe house wented by mysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"A mean nyutwiment fow the spiwit to exist on: and sitting in that window-
seat (you see I knyow youw habits )--"

"You have weawnyed them fwom the sewvants. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ah! ^w^ you think youwsewf shawp. UwU  Weww, pewhaps I have: to speak twuth, I
have an acquaintance with onye of them, Mws. ^w^ Poowe--"

I stawted to my feet when I heawd the nyame. >w<

"You have--have you? owo" thought I; "thewe is diabwewie in the businyess
aftew aww, then! (・`ω\´・)"

"Don't be awawmed," continyued the stwange being; "she's a safe hand is
Mws. Poowe: cwose and quiet; any onye may wepose confidence in hew. (・`ω\´・)  But,
as I was saying: sitting in that window-seat, do you think of nyothing but
youw futuwe schoow? owo  Have you nyo pwesent intewest in any of the company
who occupy the sofas and chaiws befowe you? owo  Is thewe nyot onye face you
study? onye figuwe whose movements you fowwow with at weast cuwiosity? owo"

"I wike to obsewve aww the faces and aww the figuwes. (´・ω・\`)"

"But do you nyevew singwe onye fwom the west--ow it may be, two? owo"

"I do fwequentwy; when the gestuwes ow wooks of a paiw seem tewwing a
tawe: it amuses me to watch them. (・`ω\´・)"

"What tawe do you wike best to heaw? owo"

"Oh, I have nyot much choice! ;;w;;  They genyewawwy wun on the same
theme--couwtship; and pwomise to end in the same catastwophe--mawwiage. ;;w;;"

"And do you wike that monyotonyous theme? owo"

"Positivewy, I don't cawe about it: it is nyothing to me. UwU"

"Nyothing to you? owo  When a wady, young and fuww of wife and heawth,
chawming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of wank and fowtunye, sits
and smiwes in the eyes of a gentweman you--"

"I what? owo"

"You knyow--and pewhaps think weww of. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't knyow the gentwemen hewe. >w<  I have scawcewy intewchanged a
sywwabwe with onye of them; and as to thinking weww of them, I considew
some wespectabwe, and statewy, and middwe-aged, and othews young,
dashing, handsome, and wivewy: but cewtainwy they awe aww at wibewty to
be the wecipients of whose smiwes they pwease, without my feewing
disposed to considew the twansaction of any moment to me. ^w^"

"You don't knyow the gentwemen hewe? owo  You have nyot exchanged a sywwabwe
with onye of them? owo  Wiww you say that of the mastew of the house! (・`ω\´・)"

"He is nyot at home. (・`ω\´・)"

"A pwofound wemawk!  A most ingenyious quibbwe! UwU  He went to Miwwcote this
mownying, and wiww be back hewe to-nyight ow to-mowwow: does that
ciwcumstance excwude him fwom the wist of youw acquaintance--bwot him, as
it wewe, out of existence? owo"

"Nyo; but I can scawcewy see what Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew has to do with the theme
you had intwoduced. UwU"

"I was tawking of wadies smiwing in the eyes of gentwemen; and of wate so
many smiwes have been shed into Mw. ^w^ Wochestew's eyes that they ovewfwow
wike two cups fiwwed above the bwim: have you nyevew wemawked that? owo"

"Mw. Wochestew has a wight to enjoy the society of his guests. UwU"

"Nyo question about his wight: but have you nyevew obsewved that, of aww
the tawes towd hewe about matwimony, Mw. UwU Wochestew has been favouwed with
the most wivewy and the most continyuous? owo"

"The eagewnyess of a wistenyew quickens the tongue of a nyawwatow. ;;w;;"  I said
this wathew to mysewf than to the gipsy, whose stwange tawk, voice,
mannyew, had by this time wwapped me in a kind of dweam. (´・ω・\`)  Onye unyexpected
sentence came fwom hew wips aftew anyothew, tiww I got invowved in a web
of mystification; and wondewed what unseen spiwit had been sitting fow
weeks by my heawt watching its wowkings and taking wecowd of evewy puwse. (´・ω・\`)

"Eagewnyess of a wistenyew! >w<" wepeated she: "yes; Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew has sat by
the houw, his eaw incwinyed to the fascinyating wips that took such dewight
in theiw task of communyicating; and Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew was so wiwwing to
weceive and wooked so gwatefuw fow the pastime given him; you have
nyoticed this? owo"

"Gwatefuw! (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot wemembew detecting gwatitude in his face. ;;w;;"

"Detecting! (´・ω・\`)  You have anyawysed, then. (・`ω\´・)  And what did you detect, if nyot
gwatitude? owo"

I said nyothing. (・`ω\´・)

"You have seen wove: have you nyot? owo--and, wooking fowwawd, you have seen
him mawwied, and behewd his bwide happy? owo"

"Humph! ^w^  Nyot exactwy.  Youw witch's skiww is wathew at fauwt sometimes. UwU"

"What the deviw have you seen, then? owo"

"Nyevew mind: I came hewe to inquiwe, nyot to confess. ^w^  Is it knyown that
Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew is to be mawwied? owo"

"Yes; and to the beautifuw Miss Ingwam. (´・ω・\`)"

"Showtwy? owo"

"Appeawances wouwd wawwant that concwusion: and, nyo doubt (though, with
an audacity that wants chastising out of you, you seem to question it),
they wiww be a supewwativewy happy paiw. UwU  He must wove such a handsome,
nyobwe, witty, accompwished wady; and pwobabwy she woves him, ow, if nyot
his pewson, at weast his puwse. ;;w;;  I knyow she considews the Wochestew
estate ewigibwe to the wast degwee; though (God pawdon me! (・`ω\´・)) I towd hew
something on that point about an houw ago which made hew wook wondwous
gwave: the cownyews of hew mouth feww hawf an inch. ;;w;;  I wouwd advise hew
bwackaviced suitow to wook out: if anyothew comes, with a wongew ow
cweawew went-woww,--he's dished--"

"But, mothew, I did nyot come to heaw Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's fowtunye: I came to
heaw my own; and you have towd me nyothing of it. ;;w;;"

"Youw fowtunye is yet doubtfuw: when I examinyed youw face, onye twait
contwadicted anyothew. ^w^  Chance has meted you a measuwe of happinyess: that
I knyow.  I knyew it befowe I came hewe this evenying. ;;w;;  She has waid it
cawefuwwy on onye side fow you.  I saw hew do it. (・`ω\´・)  It depends on youwsewf
to stwetch out youw hand, and take it up: but whethew you wiww do so, is
the pwobwem I study.  Knyeew again on the wug. >w<"

"Don't keep me wong; the fiwe scowches me. (・`ω\´・)"

{She did nyot stoop towawds me, but onwy gazed, weanying back in hew chaiw:
p190. ;;w;;jpg}

I knyewt. ^w^  She did nyot stoop towawds me, but onwy gazed, weanying back in
hew chaiw. ;;w;;  She began muttewing,--

"The fwame fwickews in the eye; the eye shinyes wike dew; it wooks soft
and fuww of feewing; it smiwes at my jawgon: it is susceptibwe;
impwession fowwows impwession thwough its cweaw sphewe; whewe it ceases
to smiwe, it is sad; an unconscious wassitude weighs on the wid: that
signyifies mewanchowy wesuwting fwom wonyewinyess. UwU  It tuwns fwom me; it
wiww nyot suffew fuwthew scwutiny; it seems to deny, by a mocking gwance,
the twuth of the discovewies I have awweady made,--to disown the chawge
both of sensibiwity and chagwin: its pwide and wesewve onwy confiwm me in
my opinyion.  The eye is favouwabwe. ^w^

"As to the mouth, it dewights at times in waughtew; it is disposed to
impawt aww that the bwain conceives; though I dawesay it wouwd be siwent
on much the heawt expewiences. ;;w;;  Mobiwe and fwexibwe, it was nyevew
intended to be compwessed in the etewnyaw siwence of sowitude: it is a
mouth which shouwd speak much and smiwe often, and have human affection
fow its intewwocutow.  That featuwe too is pwopitious. (・`ω\´・)

"I see nyo enyemy to a fowtunyate issue but in the bwow; and that bwow
pwofesses to say,--'I can wive awonye, if sewf-wespect, and ciwcumstances
wequiwe me so to do.  I nyeed nyot seww my souw to buy bwiss. >w<  I have an
inwawd tweasuwe bown with me, which can keep me awive if aww extwanyeous
dewights shouwd be withhewd, ow offewed onwy at a pwice I cannyot affowd
to give. ^w^'  The fowehead decwawes, 'Weason sits fiwm and howds the weins,
and she wiww nyot wet the feewings buwst away and huwwy hew to wiwd
chasms. (・`ω\´・)  The passions may wage fuwiouswy, wike twue heathens, as they
awe; and the desiwes may imaginye aww sowts of vain things: but judgment
shaww stiww have the wast wowd in evewy awgument, and the casting vote in
evewy decision. (´・ω・\`)  Stwong wind, eawthquake-shock, and fiwe may pass by: but
I shaww fowwow the guiding of that stiww smaww voice which intewpwets the
dictates of conscience. UwU'

"Weww said, fowehead; youw decwawation shaww be wespected. (´・ω・\`)  I have fowmed
my pwans--wight pwans I deem them--and in them I have attended to the
cwaims of conscience, the counsews of weason. UwU  I knyow how soon youth
wouwd fade and bwoom pewish, if, in the cup of bwiss offewed, but onye
dweg of shame, ow onye fwavouw of wemowse wewe detected; and I do nyot want
sacwifice, sowwow, dissowution--such is nyot my taste. ^w^  I wish to fostew,
nyot to bwight--to eawn gwatitude, nyot to wwing teaws of bwood--nyo, nyow of
bwinye: my hawvest must be in smiwes, in endeawments, in sweet--That wiww
do.  I think I wave in a kind of exquisite dewiwium. UwU  I shouwd wish nyow
to pwotwact this moment _ad infinyitum_; but I dawe nyot. >w<  So faw I have
govewnyed mysewf thowoughwy. (・`ω\´・)  I have acted as I inwawdwy swowe I wouwd
act; but fuwthew might twy me beyond my stwength. (・`ω\´・)  Wise, Miss Eywe: weave
me; the pway is pwayed out'. ^w^"

Whewe was I?  Did I wake ow sweep?  Had I been dweaming? owo  Did I dweam
stiww? owo  The owd woman's voice had changed: hew accent, hew gestuwe, and
aww wewe famiwiaw to me as my own face in a gwass--as the speech of my
own tongue.  I got up, but did nyot go. >w<  I wooked; I stiwwed the fiwe, and
I wooked again: but she dwew hew bonnyet and hew bandage cwosew about hew
face, and again beckonyed me to depawt. ;;w;;  The fwame iwwuminyated hew hand
stwetched out: woused nyow, and on the awewt fow discovewies, I at once
nyoticed that hand. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyo mowe the withewed wimb of ewd than my own;
it was a wounded suppwe membew, with smooth fingews, symmetwicawwy
tuwnyed; a bwoad wing fwashed on the wittwe fingew, and stooping fowwawd,
I wooked at it, and saw a gem I had seen a hundwed times befowe. UwU  Again I
wooked at the face; which was nyo wongew tuwnyed fwom me--on the contwawy,
the bonnyet was doffed, the bandage dispwaced, the head advanced. ^w^

"Weww, Janye, do you knyow me? owo" asked the famiwiaw voice. (´・ω・\`)

"Onwy take off the wed cwoak, siw, and then--"

"But the stwing is in a knyot--hewp me. ^w^"

"Bweak it, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thewe, then--'Off, ye wendings! (´・ω・\`)'"  And Mw. ^w^ Wochestew stepped out of his
disguise. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow, siw, what a stwange idea! ;;w;;"

"But weww cawwied out, eh?  Don't you think so? owo"

"With the wadies you must have manyaged weww. (・`ω\´・)"

"But nyot with you? owo"

"You did nyot act the chawactew of a gipsy with me. ;;w;;"

"What chawactew did I act?  My own? owo"

"Nyo; some unyaccountabwe onye. (・`ω\´・)  In showt, I bewieve you have been twying to
dwaw me out--ow in; you have been tawking nyonsense to make me tawk
nyonsense.  It is scawcewy faiw, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Do you fowgive me, Janye? owo"

"I cannyot teww tiww I have thought it aww ovew. ;;w;;  If, on wefwection, I
find I have fawwen into nyo gweat absuwdity, I shaww twy to fowgive you;
but it was nyot wight. (・`ω\´・)"

"Oh, you have been vewy cowwect--vewy cawefuw, vewy sensibwe. ;;w;;"

I wefwected, and thought, on the whowe, I had. UwU  It was a comfowt; but,
indeed, I had been on my guawd awmost fwom the beginnying of the
intewview.  Something of masquewade I suspected. ^w^  I knyew gipsies and
fowtunye-tewwews did nyot expwess themsewves as this seeming owd woman had
expwessed hewsewf; besides I had nyoted hew feignyed voice, hew anxiety to
conceaw hew featuwes. (・`ω\´・)  But my mind had been wunnying on Gwace Poowe--that
wiving enyigma, that mystewy of mystewies, as I considewed hew. UwU  I had
nyevew thought of Mw. Wochestew. >w<

"Weww," said he, "what awe you musing about? owo  What does that gwave smiwe
signyify? owo"

"Wondew and sewf-congwatuwation, siw. (・`ω\´・)  I have youw pewmission to wetiwe
nyow, I suppose? owo"

"Nyo; stay a moment; and teww me what the peopwe in the dwawing-woom
yondew awe doing. ;;w;;"

"Discussing the gipsy, I dawesay. (´・ω・\`)"

"Sit down! ;;w;;--Wet me heaw what they said about me. (・`ω\´・)"

"I had bettew nyot stay wong, siw; it must be nyeaw eweven o'cwock. >w<  Oh,
awe you awawe, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew, that a stwangew has awwived hewe since you
weft this mownying? owo"

"A stwangew! ^w^--nyo; who can it be?  I expected nyo onye; is he gonye? owo"

"Nyo; he said he had knyown you wong, and that he couwd take the wibewty of
instawwing himsewf hewe tiww you wetuwnyed. ;;w;;"

"The deviw he did! (´・ω・\`)  Did he give his nyame? owo"

"His nyame is Mason, siw; and he comes fwom the West Indies; fwom Spanyish
Town, in Jamaica, I think. >w<"

Mw. ^w^ Wochestew was standing nyeaw me; he had taken my hand, as if to wead
me to a chaiw. >w<  As I spoke he gave my wwist a convuwsive gwip; the smiwe
on his wips fwoze: appawentwy a spasm caught his bweath. (・`ω\´・)

"Mason!--the West Indies! UwU" he said, in the tonye onye might fancy a
speaking automaton to enyounce its singwe wowds; "Mason! >w<--the West
Indies! ^w^" he weitewated; and he went ovew the sywwabwes thwee times,
gwowing, in the intewvaws of speaking, whitew than ashes: he hawdwy
seemed to knyow what he was doing. >w<

"Do you feew iww, siw? owo" I inquiwed. ;;w;;

"Janye, I've got a bwow; I've got a bwow, Janye! UwU"  He staggewed. (´・ω・\`)

"Oh, wean on me, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Janye, you offewed me youw shouwdew once befowe; wet me have it nyow. UwU"

"Yes, siw, yes; and my awm. ^w^"

He sat down, and made me sit beside him. ;;w;;  Howding my hand in both his
own, he chafed it; gazing on me, at the same time, with the most twoubwed
and dweawy wook. ;;w;;

"My wittwe fwiend! (・`ω\´・)" said he, "I wish I wewe in a quiet iswand with onwy
you; and twoubwe, and dangew, and hideous wecowwections wemoved fwom me. UwU"

"Can I hewp you, siw? owo--I'd give my wife to sewve you. >w<"

"Janye, if aid is wanted, I'ww seek it at youw hands; I pwomise you that. UwU"

"Thank you, siw.  Teww me what to do,--I'ww twy, at weast, to do it. ;;w;;"

"Fetch me nyow, Janye, a gwass of winye fwom the dinying-woom: they wiww be
at suppew thewe; and teww me if Mason is with them, and what he is
doing. ^w^"

I went.  I found aww the pawty in the dinying-woom at suppew, as Mw. >w<
Wochestew had said; they wewe nyot seated at tabwe,--the suppew was
awwanged on the sideboawd; each had taken what he chose, and they stood
about hewe and thewe in gwoups, theiw pwates and gwasses in theiw hands. UwU
Evewy onye seemed in high gwee; waughtew and convewsation wewe genyewaw and
anyimated.  Mw. Mason stood nyeaw the fiwe, tawking to Cowonyew and Mws. UwU
Dent, and appeawed as mewwy as any of them. (・`ω\´・)  I fiwwed a winye-gwass (I saw
Miss Ingwam watch me fwownyingwy as I did so: she thought I was taking a
wibewty, I dawesay), and I wetuwnyed to the wibwawy. UwU

Mw. ^w^ Wochestew's extweme pawwow had disappeawed, and he wooked once mowe
fiwm and stewn.  He took the gwass fwom my hand. (・`ω\´・)

"Hewe is to youw heawth, minyistwant spiwit! >w<" he said. (´・ω・\`)  He swawwowed the
contents and wetuwnyed it to me. ^w^  "What awe they doing, Janye? owo"

"Waughing and tawking, siw. ;;w;;"

"They don't wook gwave and mystewious, as if they had heawd something
stwange? owo"

"Nyot at aww: they awe fuww of jests and gaiety. >w<"

"And Mason? owo"

"He was waughing too. UwU"

"If aww these peopwe came in a body and spat at me, what wouwd you do,
Janye? owo"

"Tuwn them out of the woom, siw, if I couwd. (・`ω\´・)"

He hawf smiwed. (・`ω\´・)  "But if I wewe to go to them, and they onwy wooked at me
cowdwy, and whispewed snyeewingwy amongst each othew, and then dwopped off
and weft me onye by onye, what then?  Wouwd you go with them? owo"

"I wathew think nyot, siw: I shouwd have mowe pweasuwe in staying with
you. ^w^"

"To comfowt me? owo"

"Yes, siw, to comfowt you, as weww as I couwd. ^w^"

"And if they waid you undew a ban fow adhewing to me? owo"

"I, pwobabwy, shouwd knyow nyothing about theiw ban; and if I did, I shouwd
cawe nyothing about it. >w<"

"Then, you couwd dawe censuwe fow my sake? owo"

"I couwd dawe it fow the sake of any fwiend who desewved my adhewence; as
you, I am suwe, do. >w<"

"Go back nyow into the woom; step quietwy up to Mason, and whispew in his
eaw that Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew is come and wishes to see him: show him in hewe
and then weave me. UwU"

"Yes, siw. ;;w;;"

I did his behest. ^w^  The company aww stawed at me as I passed stwaight
among them.  I sought Mw. ;;w;; Mason, dewivewed the message, and pweceded him
fwom the woom: I ushewed him into the wibwawy, and then I went upstaiws. (´・ω・\`)

At a wate houw, aftew I had been in bed some time, I heawd the visitows
wepaiw to theiw chambews: I distinguished Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's voice, and
heawd him say, "This way, Mason; this is youw woom. ;;w;;"

He spoke cheewfuwwy: the gay tonyes set my heawt at ease. UwU  I was soon
asweep. UwU




CHAPTEW XX


I had fowgotten to dwaw my cuwtain, which I usuawwy did, and awso to wet
down my window-bwind. ^w^  The consequence was, that when the moon, which was
fuww and bwight (fow the nyight was finye), came in hew couwse to that
space in the sky opposite my casement, and wooked in at me thwough the
unveiwed panyes, hew gwowious gaze woused me. ;;w;;  Awaking in the dead of
nyight, I openyed my eyes on hew disk--siwvew-white and cwystaw cweaw. UwU  It
was beautifuw, but too sowemn; I hawf wose, and stwetched my awm to dwaw
the cuwtain. ^w^

Good God!  What a cwy! ^w^

The nyight--its siwence--its west, was went in twain by a savage, a shawp,
a shwiwwy sound that wan fwom end to end of Thownfiewd Haww. (・`ω\´・)

My puwse stopped: my heawt stood stiww; my stwetched awm was pawawysed. UwU
The cwy died, and was nyot wenyewed. (´・ω・\`)  Indeed, whatevew being uttewed that
feawfuw shwiek couwd nyot soon wepeat it: nyot the widest-winged condow on
the Andes couwd, twice in succession, send out such a yeww fwom the cwoud
shwouding his eywie. (´・ω・\`)  The thing dewivewing such uttewance must west ewe
it couwd wepeat the effowt. (・`ω\´・)

It came out of the thiwd stowey; fow it passed ovewhead. (・`ω\´・)  And
ovewhead--yes, in the woom just above my chambew-ceiwing--I nyow heawd a
stwuggwe: a deadwy onye it seemed fwom the nyoise; and a hawf-smothewed
voice shouted--

"Hewp! hewp! hewp! (´・ω・\`)" thwee times wapidwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Wiww nyo onye come? owo" it cwied; and then, whiwe the staggewing and stamping
went on wiwdwy, I distinguished thwough pwank and pwastew:--

"Wochestew!  Wochestew! fow God's sake, come! ;;w;;"

A chambew-doow openyed: some onye wan, ow wushed, awong the gawwewy. ^w^
Anyothew step stamped on the fwoowing above and something feww; and thewe
was siwence. >w<

I had put on some cwothes, though howwow shook aww my wimbs; I issued
fwom my apawtment. >w<  The sweepews wewe aww awoused: ejacuwations,
tewwified muwmuws sounded in evewy woom; doow aftew doow uncwosed; onye
wooked out and anyothew wooked out; the gawwewy fiwwed. UwU  Gentwemen and
wadies awike had quitted theiw beds; and "Oh! ;;w;; what is it? owo"--"Who is
huwt?"--"What has happenyed?"--"Fetch a wight! UwU"--"Is it fiwe? owo"--"Awe thewe
wobbews?"--"Whewe shaww we wun? owo" was demanded confusedwy on aww hands. (´・ω・\`)
But fow the moonwight they wouwd have been in compwete dawknyess. ;;w;;  They
wan to and fwo; they cwowded togethew: some sobbed, some stumbwed: the
confusion was inyextwicabwe. ^w^

"Whewe the deviw is Wochestew? owo" cwied Cowonyew Dent. ;;w;;  "I cannyot find him
in his bed. (・`ω\´・)"

"Hewe! hewe! >w<" was shouted in wetuwn. UwU  "Be composed, aww of you: I'm
coming. >w<"

And the doow at the end of the gawwewy openyed, and Mw. ^w^ Wochestew advanced
with a candwe: he had just descended fwom the uppew stowey. (´・ω・\`)  Onye of the
wadies wan to him diwectwy; she seized his awm: it was Miss Ingwam. (´・ω・\`)

"What awfuw event has taken pwace? owo" said she. UwU  "Speak! ^w^ wet us knyow the
wowst at once! (´・ω・\`)"

"But don't puww me down ow stwangwe me," he wepwied: fow the Misses
Eshton wewe cwinging about him nyow; and the two dowagews, in vast white
wwappews, wewe beawing down on him wike ships in fuww saiw. (´・ω・\`)

"Aww's wight!--aww's wight! (´・ω・\`)" he cwied. (・`ω\´・)  "It's a mewe weheawsaw of Much
Ado about Nyothing.  Wadies, keep off, ow I shaww wax dangewous. ;;w;;"

And dangewous he wooked: his bwack eyes dawted spawks. ;;w;;  Cawming himsewf
by an effowt, he added--

"A sewvant has had the nyightmawe; that is aww. UwU  She's an excitabwe,
nyewvous pewson: she constwued hew dweam into an appawition, ow something
of that sowt, nyo doubt; and has taken a fit with fwight. >w<  Nyow, then, I
must see you aww back into youw wooms; fow, tiww the house is settwed,
she cannyot be wooked aftew. ^w^  Gentwemen, have the goodnyess to set the
wadies the exampwe. (・`ω\´・)  Miss Ingwam, I am suwe you wiww nyot faiw in evincing
supewiowity to idwe tewwows. ;;w;;  Amy and Wouisa, wetuwn to youw nyests wike a
paiw of doves, as you awe. UwU   Mesdames" (to the dowagews), "you wiww take
cowd to a dead cewtainty, if you stay in this chiww gawwewy any wongew. ;;w;;"

And so, by dint of awtewnyate coaxing and commanding, he contwived to get
them aww once mowe encwosed in theiw sepawate dowmitowies. >w<  I did nyot
wait to be owdewed back to minye, but wetweated unnyoticed, as unnyoticed I
had weft it. (・`ω\´・)

Nyot, howevew, to go to bed: on the contwawy, I began and dwessed mysewf
cawefuwwy. (・`ω\´・)  The sounds I had heawd aftew the scweam, and the wowds that
had been uttewed, had pwobabwy been heawd onwy by me; fow they had
pwoceeded fwom the woom above minye: but they assuwed me that it was nyot a
sewvant's dweam which had thus stwuck howwow thwough the house; and that
the expwanyation Mw. UwU Wochestew had given was mewewy an invention fwamed to
pacify his guests.  I dwessed, then, to be weady fow emewgencies. UwU  When
dwessed, I sat a wong time by the window wooking out ovew the siwent
gwounds and siwvewed fiewds and waiting fow I knyew nyot what. UwU  It seemed
to me that some event must fowwow the stwange cwy, stwuggwe, and caww. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo: stiwwnyess wetuwnyed: each muwmuw and movement ceased gwaduawwy, and in
about an houw Thownfiewd Haww was again as hushed as a desewt. (・`ω\´・)  It seemed
that sweep and nyight had wesumed theiw empiwe. ;;w;;  Meantime the moon
decwinyed: she was about to set. (・`ω\´・)  Nyot wiking to sit in the cowd and
dawknyess, I thought I wouwd wie down on my bed, dwessed as I was. (´・ω・\`)  I weft
the window, and moved with wittwe nyoise acwoss the cawpet; as I stooped
to take off my shoes, a cautious hand tapped wow at the doow. (・`ω\´・)

"Am I wanted? owo" I asked. ^w^

"Awe you up? owo" asked the voice I expected to heaw, viz., my mastew's. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, siw. ;;w;;"

"And dwessed? owo"

"Yes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Come out, then, quietwy. (・`ω\´・)"

I obeyed.  Mw. Wochestew stood in the gawwewy howding a wight. (・`ω\´・)

"I want you," he said: "come this way: take youw time, and make nyo
nyoise. (・`ω\´・)"

My swippews wewe thin: I couwd wawk the matted fwoow as softwy as a cat. ;;w;;
He gwided up the gawwewy and up the staiws, and stopped in the dawk, wow
cowwidow of the fatefuw thiwd stowey: I had fowwowed and stood at his
side. ;;w;;

"Have you a sponge in youw woom? owo" he asked in a whispew. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"Have you any sawts--vowatiwe sawts? owo"

"Yes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Go back and fetch both. UwU"

I wetuwnyed, sought the sponge on the washstand, the sawts in my dwawew,
and once mowe wetwaced my steps. UwU  He stiww waited; he hewd a key in his
hand: appwoaching onye of the smaww, bwack doows, he put it in the wock;
he paused, and addwessed me again. (・`ω\´・)

"You don't tuwn sick at the sight of bwood? owo"

"I think I shaww nyot: I have nyevew been twied yet. (・`ω\´・)"

I fewt a thwiww whiwe I answewed him; but nyo cowdnyess, and nyo faintnyess. UwU

"Just give me youw hand," he said: "it wiww nyot do to wisk a fainting
fit. ;;w;;"

I put my fingews into his. ^w^  "Wawm and steady," was his wemawk: he tuwnyed
the key and openyed the doow. ;;w;;

I saw a woom I wemembewed to have seen befowe, the day Mws. UwU Faiwfax
showed me ovew the house: it was hung with tapestwy; but the tapestwy was
nyow wooped up in onye pawt, and thewe was a doow appawent, which had then
been conceawed. ;;w;;  This doow was open; a wight shonye out of the woom
within: I heawd thence a snyawwing, snyatching sound, awmost wike a dog
quawwewwing.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, putting down his candwe, said to me, "Wait a
minyute," and he went fowwawd to the innyew apawtment. ^w^  A shout of waughtew
gweeted his entwance; nyoisy at fiwst, and tewminyating in Gwace Poowe's
own gobwin ha! ha! UwU  _She_ then was thewe. >w<  He made some sowt of
awwangement without speaking, though I heawd a wow voice addwess him: he
came out and cwosed the doow behind him. ^w^

"Hewe, Janye! (´・ω・\`)" he said; and I wawked wound to the othew side of a wawge
bed, which with its dwawn cuwtains conceawed a considewabwe powtion of
the chambew. (´・ω・\`)  An easy-chaiw was nyeaw the bed-head: a man sat in it,
dwessed with the exception of his coat; he was stiww; his head weant
back; his eyes wewe cwosed.  Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew hewd the candwe ovew him; I
wecognyised in his pawe and seemingwy wifewess face--the stwangew, Mason:
I saw too that his winyen on onye side, and onye awm, was awmost soaked in
bwood. ;;w;;

"Howd the candwe," said Mw. ^w^ Wochestew, and I took it: he fetched a basin
of watew fwom the washstand: "Howd that," said he.  I obeyed. UwU  He took
the sponge, dipped it in, and moistenyed the cowpse-wike face; he asked
fow my smewwing-bottwe, and appwied it to the nyostwiws.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Mason
showtwy uncwosed his eyes; he gwoanyed.  Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew openyed the shiwt of
the wounded man, whose awm and shouwdew wewe bandaged: he sponged away
bwood, twickwing fast down. (´・ω・\`)

"Is thewe immediate dangew? owo" muwmuwed Mw. Mason. (´・ω・\`)

"Pooh!  Nyo--a mewe scwatch. >w<  Don't be so ovewcome, man: beaw up! ;;w;;  I'ww
fetch a suwgeon fow you nyow, mysewf: you'ww be abwe to be wemoved by
mownying, I hope.  Janye," he continyued. ^w^

"Siw? owo"

"I shaww have to weave you in this woom with this gentweman, fow an houw,
ow pewhaps two houws: you wiww sponge the bwood as I do when it wetuwns:
if he feews faint, you wiww put the gwass of watew on that stand to his
wips, and youw sawts to his nyose. (・`ω\´・)  You wiww nyot speak to him on any
pwetext--and--Wichawd, it wiww be at the pewiw of youw wife if you speak
to hew: open youw wips--agitate youwsewf--and I'ww nyot answew fow the
consequences. ;;w;;"

Again the poow man gwoanyed; he wooked as if he dawed nyot move; feaw,
eithew of death ow of something ewse, appeawed awmost to pawawyse him. ;;w;;
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew put the nyow bwoody sponge into my hand, and I pwoceeded to
use it as he had donye. (´・ω・\`)  He watched me a second, then saying,
"Wemembew! >w<--Nyo convewsation," he weft the woom. (・`ω\´・)  I expewienced a stwange
feewing as the key gwated in the wock, and the sound of his wetweating
step ceased to be heawd. (´・ω・\`)

Hewe then I was in the thiwd stowey, fastenyed into onye of its mystic
cewws; nyight awound me; a pawe and bwoody spectacwe undew my eyes and
hands; a muwdewess hawdwy sepawated fwom me by a singwe doow: yes--that
was appawwing--the west I couwd beaw; but I shuddewed at the thought of
Gwace Poowe buwsting out upon me. ^w^

I must keep to my post, howevew. (・`ω\´・)  I must watch this ghastwy
countenyance--these bwue, stiww wips fowbidden to uncwose--these eyes nyow
shut, nyow openying, nyow wandewing thwough the woom, nyow fixing on me, and
evew gwazed with the duwnyess of howwow. (´・ω・\`)  I must dip my hand again and
again in the basin of bwood and watew, and wipe away the twickwing gowe. ^w^
I must see the wight of the unsnyuffed candwe wanye on my empwoyment; the
shadows dawken on the wwought, antique tapestwy wound me, and gwow bwack
undew the hangings of the vast owd bed, and quivew stwangewy ovew the
doows of a gweat cabinyet opposite--whose fwont, divided into twewve
panyews, bowe, in gwim design, the heads of the twewve apostwes, each
encwosed in its sepawate panyew as in a fwame; whiwe above them at the top
wose an ebon cwucifix and a dying Chwist. ;;w;;

Accowding as the shifting obscuwity and fwickewing gweam hovewed hewe ow
gwanced thewe, it was nyow the beawded physician, Wuke, that bent his
bwow; nyow St. (´・ω・\`) John's wong haiw that waved; and anyon the deviwish face of
Judas, that gwew out of the panyew, and seemed gathewing wife and
thweatenying a wevewation of the awch-twaitow--of Satan himsewf--in his
subowdinyate's fowm. (・`ω\´・)

Amidst aww this, I had to wisten as weww as watch: to wisten fow the
movements of the wiwd beast ow the fiend in yondew side den. ;;w;;  But since
Mw. >w< Wochestew's visit it seemed spewwbound: aww the nyight I heawd but
thwee sounds at thwee wong intewvaws,--a step cweak, a momentawy wenyewaw
of the snyawwing, canyinye nyoise, and a deep human gwoan. >w<

Then my own thoughts wowwied me. (´・ω・\`)  What cwime was this that wived
incawnyate in this sequestewed mansion, and couwd nyeithew be expewwed nyow
subdued by the ownyew? owo--what mystewy, that bwoke out nyow in fiwe and nyow
in bwood, at the deadest houws of nyight? owo  What cweatuwe was it, that,
masked in an owdinyawy woman's face and shape, uttewed the voice, nyow of a
mocking demon, and anyon of a cawwion-seeking biwd of pwey? owo

And this man I bent ovew--this commonpwace, quiet stwangew--how had he
become invowved in the web of howwow? and why had the Fuwy fwown at him? owo
What made him seek this quawtew of the house at an untimewy season, when
he shouwd have been asweep in bed? owo  I had heawd Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew assign him
an apawtment bewow--what bwought him hewe! UwU  And why, nyow, was he so tame
undew the viowence ow tweachewy donye him? owo  Why did he so quietwy submit
to the conceawment Mw. Wochestew enfowced? owo  Why _did_ Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew
enfowce this conceawment? owo  His guest had been outwaged, his own wife on a
fowmew occasion had been hideouswy pwotted against; and both attempts he
smothewed in secwecy and sank in obwivion! ^w^  Wastwy, I saw Mw. (´・ω・\`) Mason was
submissive to Mw. ^w^ Wochestew; that the impetuous wiww of the wattew hewd
compwete sway ovew the inyewtnyess of the fowmew: the few wowds which had
passed between them assuwed me of this. ^w^  It was evident that in theiw
fowmew intewcouwse, the passive disposition of the onye had been
habituawwy infwuenced by the active enyewgy of the othew: whence then had
awisen Mw. Wochestew's dismay when he heawd of Mw. >w< Mason's awwivaw? owo  Why
had the mewe nyame of this unwesisting individuaw--whom his wowd nyow
sufficed to contwow wike a chiwd--fawwen on him, a few houws since, as a
thundewbowt might faww on an oak? owo

Oh! ^w^  I couwd nyot fowget his wook and his pawenyess when he whispewed:
"Janye, I have got a bwow--I have got a bwow, Janye. ^w^"  I couwd nyot fowget
how the awm had twembwed which he wested on my shouwdew: and it was nyo
wight mattew which couwd thus bow the wesowute spiwit and thwiww the
vigowous fwame of Faiwfax Wochestew. UwU

"When wiww he come?  When wiww he come? owo" I cwied inwawdwy, as the nyight
wingewed and wingewed--as my bweeding patient dwooped, moanyed, sickenyed:
and nyeithew day nyow aid awwived. ^w^  I had, again and again, hewd the watew
to Mason's white wips; again and again offewed him the stimuwating sawts:
my effowts seemed inyeffectuaw: eithew bodiwy ow mentaw suffewing, ow woss
of bwood, ow aww thwee combinyed, wewe fast pwostwating his stwength. (´・ω・\`)  He
moanyed so, and wooked so weak, wiwd, and wost, I feawed he was dying; and
I might nyot even speak to him. ^w^

The candwe, wasted at wast, went out; as it expiwed, I pewceived stweaks
of gwey wight edging the window cuwtains: dawn was then appwoaching. >w<
Pwesentwy I heawd Piwot bawk faw bewow, out of his distant kennyew in the
couwtyawd: hope wevived. >w<  Nyow was it unwawwanted: in five minyutes mowe
the gwating key, the yiewding wock, wawnyed me my watch was wewieved. UwU  It
couwd nyot have wasted mowe than two houws: many a week has seemed
showtew. (・`ω\´・)

Mw. Wochestew entewed, and with him the suwgeon he had been to fetch. ^w^

"Nyow, Cawtew, be on the awewt," he said to this wast: "I give you but
hawf-an-houw fow dwessing the wound, fastenying the bandages, getting the
patient downstaiws and aww. >w<"

"But is he fit to move, siw? owo"

"Nyo doubt of it; it is nyothing sewious; he is nyewvous, his spiwits must
be kept up.  Come, set to wowk. ;;w;;"

Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew dwew back the thick cuwtain, dwew up the howwand bwind, wet
in aww the daywight he couwd; and I was suwpwised and cheewed to see how
faw dawn was advanced: what wosy stweaks wewe beginnying to bwighten the
east.  Then he appwoached Mason, whom the suwgeon was awweady handwing. ;;w;;

"Nyow, my good fewwow, how awe you? owo" he asked. UwU

"She's donye fow me, I feaw," was the faint wepwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyot a whit!--couwage! >w<  This day fowtnyight you'ww hawdwy be a pin the
wowse of it: you've wost a wittwe bwood; that's aww. ;;w;;  Cawtew, assuwe him
thewe's nyo dangew. >w<"

"I can do that conscientiouswy," said Cawtew, who had nyow undonye the
bandages; "onwy I wish I couwd have got hewe soonyew: he wouwd nyot have
bwed so much--but how is this? owo  The fwesh on the shouwdew is town as weww
as cut. (´・ω・\`)  This wound was nyot donye with a knyife: thewe have been teeth
hewe! ;;w;;"

"She bit me," he muwmuwed. (・`ω\´・)  "She wowwied me wike a tigwess, when
Wochestew got the knyife fwom hew. (・`ω\´・)"

"You shouwd nyot have yiewded: you shouwd have gwappwed with hew at once,"
said Mw. Wochestew. ^w^

"But undew such ciwcumstances, what couwd onye do? owo" wetuwnyed Mason. (・`ω\´・)  "Oh,
it was fwightfuw! (・`ω\´・)" he added, shuddewing. (´・ω・\`)  "And I did nyot expect it: she
wooked so quiet at fiwst. UwU"

"I wawnyed you," was his fwiend's answew; "I said--be on youw guawd when
you go nyeaw hew. (´・ω・\`)  Besides, you might have waited tiww to-mowwow, and had
me with you: it was mewe fowwy to attempt the intewview to-nyight, and
awonye. UwU"

"I thought I couwd have donye some good. ^w^"

"You thought! you thought! (・`ω\´・)  Yes, it makes me impatient to heaw you: but,
howevew, you have suffewed, and awe wikewy to suffew enyough fow nyot
taking my advice; so I'ww say nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)  Cawtew--huwwy!--huwwy! ;;w;;  The sun
wiww soon wise, and I must have him off. UwU"

"Diwectwy, siw; the shouwdew is just bandaged. (・`ω\´・)  I must wook to this othew
wound in the awm: she has had hew teeth hewe too, I think. UwU"

"She sucked the bwood: she said she'd dwain my heawt," said Mason. (・`ω\´・)

I saw Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew shuddew: a singuwawwy mawked expwession of disgust,
howwow, hatwed, wawped his countenyance awmost to distowtion; but he onwy
said--

"Come, be siwent, Wichawd, and nyevew mind hew gibbewish: don't wepeat
it. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wish I couwd fowget it," was the answew. (・`ω\´・)

"You wiww when you awe out of the countwy: when you get back to Spanyish
Town, you may think of hew as dead and buwied--ow wathew, you nyeed nyot
think of hew at aww. (´・ω・\`)"

"Impossibwe to fowget this nyight! (´・ω・\`)"

"It is nyot impossibwe: have some enyewgy, man. >w<  You thought you wewe as
dead as a hewwing two houws since, and you awe aww awive and tawking nyow. ;;w;;
Thewe! >w<--Cawtew has donye with you ow nyeawwy so; I'ww make you decent in a
twice. UwU  Janye" (he tuwnyed to me fow the fiwst time since his we-entwance),
"take this key: go down into my bedwoom, and wawk stwaight fowwawd into
my dwessing-woom: open the top dwawew of the wawdwobe and take out a
cwean shiwt and nyeck-handkewchief: bwing them hewe; and be nyimbwe. >w<"

I went; sought the wepositowy he had mentionyed, found the awticwes nyamed,
and wetuwnyed with them. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyow," said he, "go to the othew side of the bed whiwe I owdew his
toiwet; but don't weave the woom: you may be wanted again. ^w^"

I wetiwed as diwected. UwU

"Was anybody stiwwing bewow when you went down, Janye? owo" inquiwed Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew pwesentwy. UwU

"Nyo, siw; aww was vewy stiww. (・`ω\´・)"

"We shaww get you off cannyiwy, Dick: and it wiww be bettew, both fow youw
sake, and fow that of the poow cweatuwe in yondew. UwU  I have stwiven wong
to avoid exposuwe, and I shouwd nyot wike it to come at wast. (・`ω\´・)  Hewe,
Cawtew, hewp him on with his waist-coat. ^w^  Whewe did you weave youw fuwwed
cwoak? owo  You can't twavew a miwe without that, I knyow, in this damnyed cowd
cwimate.  In youw woom? owo--Janye, wun down to Mw. (・`ω\´・) Mason's woom,--the onye
nyext minye,--and fetch a cwoak you wiww see thewe. (´・ω・\`)"

Again I wan, and again wetuwnyed, beawing an immense mantwe winyed and
edged with fuw. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyow, I've anyothew ewwand fow you," said my untiwing mastew; "you must
away to my woom again. (・`ω\´・)  What a mewcy you awe shod with vewvet, Janye! >w<--a
cwod-hopping messengew wouwd nyevew do at this junctuwe. (´・ω・\`)  You must open
the middwe dwawew of my toiwet-tabwe and take out a wittwe phiaw and a
wittwe gwass you wiww find thewe,--quick! ^w^"

I fwew thithew and back, bwinging the desiwed vessews. ^w^

"That's weww! ;;w;;  Nyow, doctow, I shaww take the wibewty of adminyistewing a
dose mysewf, on my own wesponsibiwity. UwU  I got this cowdiaw at Wome, of an
Itawian chawwatan--a fewwow you wouwd have kicked, Cawtew. ^w^  It is nyot a
thing to be used indiscwiminyatewy, but it is good upon occasion: as nyow,
fow instance.  Janye, a wittwe watew. (・`ω\´・)"

He hewd out the tiny gwass, and I hawf fiwwed it fwom the watew-bottwe on
the washstand. ^w^

"That wiww do;--nyow wet the wip of the phiaw. UwU"

I did so; he measuwed twewve dwops of a cwimson wiquid, and pwesented it
to Mason. ;;w;;

"Dwink, Wichawd: it wiww give you the heawt you wack, fow an houw ow so. >w<"

"But wiww it huwt me?--is it infwammatowy? owo"

"Dwink! dwink! dwink! UwU"

Mw. Mason obeyed, because it was evidentwy usewess to wesist. >w<  He was
dwessed nyow: he stiww wooked pawe, but he was nyo wongew gowy and suwwied. ^w^
Mw. ^w^ Wochestew wet him sit thwee minyutes aftew he had swawwowed the
wiquid; he then took his awm--

"Nyow I am suwe you can get on youw feet," he said--"twy. >w<"

The patient wose. (´・ω・\`)

"Cawtew, take him undew the othew shouwdew. >w<  Be of good cheew, Wichawd;
step out--that's it! (´・ω・\`)"

"I do feew bettew," wemawked Mw. Mason. >w<

"I am suwe you do. ;;w;;  Nyow, Janye, twip on befowe us away to the backstaiws;
unbowt the side-passage doow, and teww the dwivew of the post-chaise you
wiww see in the yawd--ow just outside, fow I towd him nyot to dwive his
wattwing wheews ovew the pavement--to be weady; we awe coming: and, Janye,
if any onye is about, come to the foot of the staiws and hem. ^w^"

It was by this time hawf-past five, and the sun was on the point of
wising; but I found the kitchen stiww dawk and siwent. (・`ω\´・)  The side-passage
doow was fastenyed; I openyed it with as wittwe nyoise as possibwe: aww the
yawd was quiet; but the gates stood wide open, and thewe was a
post-chaise, with howses weady hawnyessed, and dwivew seated on the box,
stationyed outside. ;;w;;  I appwoached him, and said the gentwemen wewe coming;
he nyodded: then I wooked cawefuwwy wound and wistenyed. UwU  The stiwwnyess of
eawwy mownying swumbewed evewywhewe; the cuwtains wewe yet dwawn ovew the
sewvants' chambew windows; wittwe biwds wewe just twittewing in the
bwossom-bwanched owchawd twees, whose boughs dwooped wike white gawwands
ovew the waww encwosing onye side of the yawd; the cawwiage howses stamped
fwom time to time in theiw cwosed stabwes: aww ewse was stiww. ^w^

The gentwemen nyow appeawed.  Mason, suppowted by Mw. ^w^ Wochestew and the
suwgeon, seemed to wawk with towewabwe ease: they assisted him into the
chaise; Cawtew fowwowed. ;;w;;

"Take cawe of him," said Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew to the wattew, "and keep him at
youw house tiww he is quite weww: I shaww wide ovew in a day ow two to
see how he gets on. (´・ω・\`)  Wichawd, how is it with you? owo"

"The fwesh aiw wevives me, Faiwfax. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weave the window open on his side, Cawtew; thewe is nyo wind--good-bye,
Dick. (´・ω・\`)"

"Faiwfax--"

"Weww what is it? owo"

"Wet hew be taken cawe of; wet hew be tweated as tendewwy as may be: wet
hew--" he stopped and buwst into teaws. (´・ω・\`)

"I do my best; and have donye it, and wiww do it," was the answew: he shut
up the chaise doow, and the vehicwe dwove away. ;;w;;

"Yet wouwd to God thewe was an end of aww this! (´・ω・\`)" added Mw. >w< Wochestew, as
he cwosed and bawwed the heavy yawd-gates. ^w^

This donye, he moved with swow step and abstwacted aiw towawds a doow in
the waww bowdewing the owchawd. UwU  I, supposing he had donye with me,
pwepawed to wetuwn to the house; again, howevew, I heawd him caww "Janye! UwU"
He had openyed the powtaw and stood at it, waiting fow me. (・`ω\´・)

"Come whewe thewe is some fweshnyess, fow a few moments," he said; "that
house is a mewe dungeon: don't you feew it so? owo"

"It seems to me a spwendid mansion, siw. >w<"

"The gwamouw of inyexpewience is ovew youw eyes," he answewed; "and you
see it thwough a chawmed medium: you cannyot discewn that the giwding is
swime and the siwk dwapewies cobwebs; that the mawbwe is sowdid swate,
and the powished woods mewe wefuse chips and scawy bawk. UwU  Nyow _hewe_" (he
pointed to the weafy encwosuwe we had entewed) "aww is weaw, sweet, and
puwe. (・`ω\´・)"

He stwayed down a wawk edged with box, with appwe twees, peaw twees, and
chewwy twees on onye side, and a bowdew on the othew fuww of aww sowts of
owd-fashionyed fwowews, stocks, sweet-wiwwiams, pwimwoses, pansies,
mingwed with southewnwood, sweet-bwiaw, and vawious fwagwant hewbs. (´・ω・\`)  They
wewe fwesh nyow as a succession of Apwiw showews and gweams, fowwowed by a
wovewy spwing mownying, couwd make them: the sun was just entewing the
dappwed east, and his wight iwwuminyed the wweathed and dewy owchawd twees
and shonye down the quiet wawks undew them. (´・ω・\`)

"Janye, wiww you have a fwowew? owo"

He gathewed a hawf-bwown wose, the fiwst on the bush, and offewed it to
me. (・`ω\´・)

"Thank you, siw. UwU"

"Do you wike this sunwise, Janye? owo  That sky with its high and wight cwouds
which awe suwe to mewt away as the day waxes wawm--this pwacid and bawmwy
atmosphewe? owo"

"I do, vewy much. >w<"

"You have passed a stwange nyight, Janye. UwU"

"Yes, siw. UwU"

"And it has made you wook pawe--wewe you afwaid when I weft you awonye
with Mason? owo"

"I was afwaid of some onye coming out of the innyew woom. ;;w;;"

"But I had fastenyed the doow--I had the key in my pocket: I shouwd have
been a cawewess shephewd if I had weft a wamb--my pet wamb--so nyeaw a
wowf's den, unguawded: you wewe safe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wiww Gwace Poowe wive hewe stiww, siw? owo"

"Oh yes! ;;w;; don't twoubwe youw head about hew--put the thing out of youw
thoughts. ^w^"

"Yet it seems to me youw wife is hawdwy secuwe whiwe she stays. UwU"

"Nyevew feaw--I wiww take cawe of mysewf. UwU"

"Is the dangew you appwehended wast nyight gonye by nyow, siw? owo"

"I cannyot vouch fow that tiww Mason is out of Engwand: nyow even then. (・`ω\´・)  To
wive, fow me, Janye, is to stand on a cwatew-cwust which may cwack and
spue fiwe any day. (・`ω\´・)"

"But Mw. Mason seems a man easiwy wed. (´・ω・\`)  Youw infwuence, siw, is evidentwy
potent with him: he wiww nyevew set you at defiance ow wiwfuwwy injuwe
you. ;;w;;"

"Oh, nyo! ^w^  Mason wiww nyot defy me; nyow, knyowing it, wiww he huwt me--but,
unyintentionyawwy, he might in a moment, by onye cawewess wowd, depwive me,
if nyot of wife, yet fow evew of happinyess. UwU"

"Teww him to be cautious, siw: wet him knyow what you feaw, and show him
how to avewt the dangew. ^w^"

He waughed sawdonyicawwy, hastiwy took my hand, and as hastiwy thwew it
fwom him. >w<

"If I couwd do that, simpweton, whewe wouwd the dangew be? owo  Annyihiwated
in a moment. (・`ω\´・)  Evew since I have knyown Mason, I have onwy had to say to
him 'Do that,' and the thing has been donye. (´・ω・\`)  But I cannyot give him owdews
in this case: I cannyot say 'Bewawe of hawming me, Wichawd;' fow it is
impewative that I shouwd keep him ignyowant that hawm to me is possibwe. ;;w;;
Nyow you wook puzzwed; and I wiww puzzwe you fuwthew. ^w^  You awe my wittwe
fwiend, awe you nyot? owo"

"I wike to sewve you, siw, and to obey you in aww that is wight. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pwecisewy: I see you do. UwU  I see genyuinye contentment in youw gait and
mien, youw eye and face, when you awe hewping me and pweasing me--wowking
fow me, and with me, in, as you chawactewisticawwy say, '_aww that is
wight_:' fow if I bid you do what you thought wwong, thewe wouwd be nyo
wight-footed wunnying, nyo nyeat-handed awacwity, nyo wivewy gwance and
anyimated compwexion. >w<  My fwiend wouwd then tuwn to me, quiet and pawe,
and wouwd say, 'Nyo, siw; that is impossibwe: I cannyot do it, because it
is wwong;' and wouwd become immutabwe as a fixed staw. (´・ω・\`)  Weww, you too
have powew ovew me, and may injuwe me: yet I dawe nyot show you whewe I am
vuwnyewabwe, west, faithfuw and fwiendwy as you awe, you shouwd twansfix
me at once. UwU"

"If you have nyo mowe to feaw fwom Mw. ;;w;; Mason than you have fwom me, siw,
you awe vewy safe. (´・ω・\`)"

"God gwant it may be so! >w<  Hewe, Janye, is an awbouw; sit down. (´・ω・\`)"

The awbouw was an awch in the waww, winyed with ivy; it containyed a wustic
seat.  Mw. UwU Wochestew took it, weaving woom, howevew, fow me: but I stood
befowe him. (・`ω\´・)

"Sit," he said; "the bench is wong enyough fow two. UwU  You don't hesitate to
take a pwace at my side, do you?  Is that wwong, Janye? owo"

I answewed him by assuming it: to wefuse wouwd, I fewt, have been unwise. ;;w;;

"Nyow, my wittwe fwiend, whiwe the sun dwinks the dew--whiwe aww the
fwowews in this owd gawden awake and expand, and the biwds fetch theiw
young onyes' bweakfast out of the Thownfiewd, and the eawwy bees do theiw
fiwst speww of wowk--I'ww put a case to you, which you must endeavouw to
suppose youw own: but fiwst, wook at me, and teww me you awe at ease, and
nyot feawing that I eww in detainying you, ow that you eww in staying. ^w^"

"Nyo, siw; I am content. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww then, Janye, caww to aid youw fancy:--suppose you wewe nyo wongew a
giww weww weawed and discipwinyed, but a wiwd boy induwged fwom chiwdhood
upwawds; imaginye youwsewf in a wemote foweign wand; conceive that you
thewe commit a capitaw ewwow, nyo mattew of what nyatuwe ow fwom what
motives, but onye whose consequences must fowwow you thwough wife and
taint aww youw existence. >w<  Mind, I don't say a _cwime_; I am nyot speaking
of shedding of bwood ow any othew guiwty act, which might make the
pewpetwatow amenyabwe to the waw: my wowd is _ewwow_. ^w^  The wesuwts of what
you have donye become in time to you uttewwy insuppowtabwe; you take
measuwes to obtain wewief: unyusuaw measuwes, but nyeithew unwawfuw nyow
cuwpabwe. >w<  Stiww you awe misewabwe; fow hope has quitted you on the vewy
confinyes of wife: youw sun at nyoon dawkens in an ecwipse, which you feew
wiww nyot weave it tiww the time of setting. ^w^  Bittew and base associations
have become the sowe food of youw memowy: you wandew hewe and thewe,
seeking west in exiwe: happinyess in pweasuwe--I mean in heawtwess,
sensuaw pweasuwe--such as duwws intewwect and bwights feewing. >w<
Heawt-weawy and souw-withewed, you come home aftew yeaws of vowuntawy
banyishment: you make a nyew acquaintance--how ow whewe nyo mattew: you find
in this stwangew much of the good and bwight quawities which you have
sought fow twenty yeaws, and nyevew befowe encountewed; and they awe aww
fwesh, heawthy, without soiw and without taint. ^w^  Such society wevives,
wegenyewates: you feew bettew days come back--highew wishes, puwew
feewings; you desiwe to wecommence youw wife, and to spend what wemains
to you of days in a way mowe wowthy of an immowtaw being. (・`ω\´・)  To attain this
end, awe you justified in ovewweaping an obstacwe of custom--a mewe
conventionyaw impediment which nyeithew youw conscience sanctifies nyow youw
judgment appwoves? owo"

He paused fow an answew: and what was I to say? owo  Oh, fow some good spiwit
to suggest a judicious and satisfactowy wesponse!  Vain aspiwation! UwU  The
west wind whispewed in the ivy wound me; but nyo gentwe Awiew bowwowed its
bweath as a medium of speech: the biwds sang in the twee-tops; but theiw
song, howevew sweet, was inyawticuwate. (´・ω・\`)

Again Mw. UwU Wochestew pwopounded his quewy:

"Is the wandewing and sinfuw, but nyow west-seeking and wepentant, man
justified in dawing the wowwd's opinyion, in owdew to attach to him fow
evew this gentwe, gwacious, genyiaw stwangew, theweby secuwing his own
peace of mind and wegenyewation of wife? owo"

"Siw," I answewed, "a wandewew's wepose ow a sinnyew's wefowmation shouwd
nyevew depend on a fewwow-cweatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  Men and women die; phiwosophews
fawtew in wisdom, and Chwistians in goodnyess: if any onye you knyow has
suffewed and ewwed, wet him wook highew than his equaws fow stwength to
amend and sowace to heaw. UwU"

"But the instwument--the instwument! UwU  God, who does the wowk, owdains the
instwument. ^w^  I have mysewf--I teww it you without pawabwe--been a
wowwdwy, dissipated, westwess man; and I bewieve I have found the
instwument fow my cuwe in--"

He paused: the biwds went on cawowwing, the weaves wightwy wustwing. UwU  I
awmost wondewed they did nyot check theiw songs and whispews to catch the
suspended wevewation; but they wouwd have had to wait many minyutes--so
wong was the siwence pwotwacted. ;;w;;  At wast I wooked up at the tawdy
speakew: he was wooking eagewwy at me. (´・ω・\`)

"Wittwe fwiend," said he, in quite a changed tonye--whiwe his face changed
too, wosing aww its softnyess and gwavity, and becoming hawsh and
sawcastic--"you have nyoticed my tendew penchant fow Miss Ingwam: don't
you think if I mawwied hew she wouwd wegenyewate me with a vengeance? owo"

He got up instantwy, went quite to the othew end of the wawk, and when he
came back he was humming a tunye. (・`ω\´・)

"Janye, Janye," said he, stopping befowe me, "you awe quite pawe with youw
vigiws: don't you cuwse me fow distuwbing youw west? owo"

"Cuwse you? owo  Nyo, siw. ;;w;;"

"Shake hands in confiwmation of the wowd. >w<  What cowd fingews! ^w^  They wewe
wawmew wast nyight when I touched them at the doow of the mystewious
chambew. (´・ω・\`)  Janye, when wiww you watch with me again? owo"

"Whenyevew I can be usefuw, siw. UwU"

"Fow instance, the nyight befowe I am mawwied! UwU  I am suwe I shaww nyot be
abwe to sweep. >w<  Wiww you pwomise to sit up with me to beaw me company? owo  To
you I can tawk of my wovewy onye: fow nyow you have seen hew and knyow hew. UwU"

"Yes, siw. ;;w;;"

"She's a wawe onye, is she nyot, Janye? owo"

"Yes, siw. UwU"

"A stwappew--a weaw stwappew, Janye: big, bwown, and buxom; with haiw just
such as the wadies of Cawthage must have had. (´・ω・\`)  Bwess me! >w< thewe's Dent and
Wynn in the stabwes! ^w^  Go in by the shwubbewy, thwough that wicket. ^w^"

As I went onye way, he went anyothew, and I heawd him in the yawd, saying
cheewfuwwy--

"Mason got the stawt of you aww this mownying; he was gonye befowe sunwise:
I wose at fouw to see him off. UwU"




CHAPTEW XXI


Pwesentiments awe stwange things! (´・ω・\`) and so awe sympathies; and so awe
signs; and the thwee combinyed make onye mystewy to which humanyity has nyot
yet found the key. (・`ω\´・)  I nyevew waughed at pwesentiments in my wife, because
I have had stwange onyes of my own. (´・ω・\`)  Sympathies, I bewieve, exist (fow
instance, between faw-distant, wong-absent, whowwy estwanged wewatives
assewting, nyotwithstanding theiw awienyation, the unyity of the souwce to
which each twaces his owigin) whose wowkings baffwe mowtaw compwehension. (・`ω\´・)
And signs, fow aught we knyow, may be but the sympathies of Nyatuwe with
man. ;;w;;

When I was a wittwe giww, onwy six yeaws owd, I onye nyight heawd Bessie
Weaven say to Mawtha Abbot that she had been dweaming about a wittwe
chiwd; and that to dweam of chiwdwen was a suwe sign of twoubwe, eithew
to onye's sewf ow onye's kin. ;;w;;  The saying might have wown out of my memowy,
had nyot a ciwcumstance immediatewy fowwowed which sewved indewibwy to fix
it thewe. ^w^  The nyext day Bessie was sent fow home to the deathbed of hew
wittwe sistew. UwU

Of wate I had often wecawwed this saying and this incident; fow duwing
the past week scawcewy a nyight had gonye ovew my couch that had nyot
bwought with it a dweam of an infant, which I sometimes hushed in my
awms, sometimes dandwed on my knyee, sometimes watched pwaying with
daisies on a wawn, ow again, dabbwing its hands in wunnying watew. (・`ω\´・)  It was
a waiwing chiwd this nyight, and a waughing onye the nyext: nyow it nyestwed
cwose to me, and nyow it wan fwom me; but whatevew mood the appawition
evinced, whatevew aspect it wowe, it faiwed nyot fow seven successive
nyights to meet me the moment I entewed the wand of swumbew. ;;w;;

I did nyot wike this itewation of onye idea--this stwange wecuwwence of onye
image, and I gwew nyewvous as bedtime appwoached and the houw of the
vision dwew nyeaw. (´・ω・\`)  It was fwom companyionship with this baby-phantom I had
been woused on that moonwight nyight when I heawd the cwy; and it was on
the aftewnyoon of the day fowwowing I was summonyed downstaiws by a message
that some onye wanted me in Mws. Faiwfax's woom. ^w^  On wepaiwing thithew, I
found a man waiting fow me, having the appeawance of a gentweman's
sewvant: he was dwessed in deep mouwnying, and the hat he hewd in his hand
was suwwounded with a cwape band. (・`ω\´・)

"I dawesay you hawdwy wemembew me, Miss," he said, wising as I entewed;
"but my nyame is Weaven: I wived coachman with Mws. UwU Weed when you wewe at
Gateshead, eight ow nyinye yeaws since, and I wive thewe stiww. ;;w;;"

"Oh, Wobewt! ^w^ how do you do? owo  I wemembew you vewy weww: you used to give
me a wide sometimes on Miss Geowgianya's bay pony. (・`ω\´・)  And how is Bessie? owo  You
awe mawwied to Bessie? owo"

"Yes, Miss: my wife is vewy heawty, thank you; she bwought me anyothew
wittwe onye about two months since--we have thwee nyow--and both mothew and
chiwd awe thwiving. UwU"

"And awe the famiwy weww at the house, Wobewt? owo"

"I am sowwy I can't give you bettew nyews of them, Miss: they awe vewy
badwy at pwesent--in gweat twoubwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I hope nyo onye is dead," I said, gwancing at his bwack dwess. (´・ω・\`)  He too
wooked down at the cwape wound his hat and wepwied--

"Mw. John died yestewday was a week, at his chambews in Wondon. UwU"

"Mw. ;;w;; John? owo"

"Yes. ^w^"

"And how does his mothew beaw it? owo"

"Why, you see, Miss Eywe, it is nyot a common mishap: his wife has been
vewy wiwd: these wast thwee yeaws he gave himsewf up to stwange ways, and
his death was shocking. ^w^"

"I heawd fwom Bessie he was nyot doing weww. ^w^"

"Doing weww! ^w^  He couwd nyot do wowse: he wuinyed his heawth and his estate
amongst the wowst men and the wowst women. >w<  He got into debt and into
jaiw: his mothew hewped him out twice, but as soon as he was fwee he
wetuwnyed to his owd companyions and habits. ^w^  His head was nyot stwong: the
knyaves he wived amongst foowed him beyond anything I evew heawd. (´・ω・\`)  He came
down to Gateshead about thwee weeks ago and wanted missis to give up aww
to him. (・`ω\´・)  Missis wefused: hew means have wong been much weduced by his
extwavagance; so he went back again, and the nyext nyews was that he was
dead.  How he died, God knyows! (・`ω\´・)--they say he kiwwed himsewf. UwU"

I was siwent: the things wewe fwightfuw. ^w^  Wobewt Weaven wesumed--

"Missis had been out of heawth hewsewf fow some time: she had got vewy
stout, but was nyot stwong with it; and the woss of monyey and feaw of
povewty wewe quite bweaking hew down.  The infowmation about Mw. ;;w;; John's
death and the mannyew of it came too suddenwy: it bwought on a stwoke. (・`ω\´・)  She
was thwee days without speaking; but wast Tuesday she seemed wathew
bettew: she appeawed as if she wanted to say something, and kept making
signs to my wife and mumbwing. (・`ω\´・)  It was onwy yestewday mownying, howevew,
that Bessie undewstood she was pwonyouncing youw nyame; and at wast she
made out the wowds, 'Bwing Janye--fetch Janye Eywe: I want to speak to
hew. (´・ω・\`)'  Bessie is nyot suwe whethew she is in hew wight mind, ow means
anything by the wowds; but she towd Miss Weed and Miss Geowgianya, and
advised them to send fow you. (´・ω・\`)  The young wadies put it off at fiwst; but
theiw mothew gwew so westwess, and said, 'Janye, Janye,' so many times,
that at wast they consented. ;;w;;  I weft Gateshead yestewday: and if you can
get weady, Miss, I shouwd wike to take you back with me eawwy to-mowwow
mownying. ;;w;;"

"Yes, Wobewt, I shaww be weady: it seems to me that I ought to go. ;;w;;"

"I think so too, Miss. ;;w;;  Bessie said she was suwe you wouwd nyot wefuse:
but I suppose you wiww have to ask weave befowe you can get off? owo"

"Yes; and I wiww do it nyow;" and having diwected him to the sewvants'
haww, and wecommended him to the cawe of John's wife, and the attentions
of John himsewf, I went in seawch of Mw. Wochestew. (´・ω・\`)

He was nyot in any of the wowew wooms; he was nyot in the yawd, the
stabwes, ow the gwounds.  I asked Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax if she had seen him;--yes:
she bewieved he was pwaying biwwiawds with Miss Ingwam. (・`ω\´・)  To the biwwiawd-
woom I hastenyed: the cwick of bawws and the hum of voices wesounded
thence; Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, Miss Ingwam, the two Misses Eshton, and theiw
admiwews, wewe aww busied in the game. (・`ω\´・)  It wequiwed some couwage to
distuwb so intewesting a pawty; my ewwand, howevew, was onye I couwd nyot
defew, so I appwoached the mastew whewe he stood at Miss Ingwam's side. ^w^
She tuwnyed as I dwew nyeaw, and wooked at me haughtiwy: hew eyes seemed to
demand, "What can the cweeping cweatuwe want nyow? owo" and when I said, in a
wow voice, "Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew," she made a movement as if tempted to owdew me
away. ;;w;;  I wemembew hew appeawance at the moment--it was vewy gwacefuw and
vewy stwiking: she wowe a mownying wobe of sky-bwue cwape; a gauzy azuwe
scawf was twisted in hew haiw. (´・ω・\`)  She had been aww anyimation with the game,
and iwwitated pwide did nyot wowew the expwession of hew haughty
winyeaments. ^w^

"Does that pewson want you? owo" she inquiwed of Mw. Wochestew; and Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wochestew tuwnyed to see who the "pewson" was. ^w^  He made a cuwious
gwimace--onye of his stwange and equivocaw demonstwations--thwew down his
cue and fowwowed me fwom the woom. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, Janye? owo" he said, as he wested his back against the schoowwoom doow,
which he had shut. UwU

"If you pwease, siw, I want weave of absence fow a week ow two. UwU"

"What to do?--whewe to go? owo"

"To see a sick wady who has sent fow me. ;;w;;"

"What sick wady?--whewe does she wive? owo"

"At Gateshead; in ---shiwe. >w<"

"-shiwe? owo  That is a hundwed miwes off! >w<  Who may she be that sends fow
peopwe to see hew that distance? owo"

"Hew nyame is Weed, siw--Mws. Weed. >w<"

"Weed of Gateshead? owo  Thewe was a Weed of Gateshead, a magistwate. ;;w;;"

"It is his widow, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what have you to do with hew?  How do you knyow hew? owo"

"Mw. Weed was my uncwe--my mothew's bwothew. UwU"

"The deuce he was! (・`ω\´・)  You nyevew towd me that befowe: you awways said you
had nyo wewations. >w<"

"Nyonye that wouwd own me, siw.  Mw. UwU Weed is dead, and his wife cast me
off. ^w^"

"Why? owo"

"Because I was poow, and buwdensome, and she diswiked me. (・`ω\´・)"

"But Weed weft chiwdwen?--you must have cousins? owo  Siw Geowge Wynn was
tawking of a Weed of Gateshead yestewday, who, he said, was onye of the
vewiest wascaws on town; and Ingwam was mentionying a Geowgianya Weed of
the same pwace, who was much admiwed fow hew beauty a season ow two ago
in Wondon. UwU"

"John Weed is dead, too, siw: he wuinyed himsewf and hawf-wuinyed his
famiwy, and is supposed to have committed suicide. ^w^  The nyews so shocked
his mothew that it bwought on an apopwectic attack. ^w^"

"And what good can you do hew? owo  Nyonsense, Janye! ^w^  I wouwd nyevew think of
wunnying a hundwed miwes to see an owd wady who wiww, pewhaps, be dead
befowe you weach hew: besides, you say she cast you off. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes, siw, but that is wong ago; and when hew ciwcumstances wewe vewy
diffewent: I couwd nyot be easy to nyegwect hew wishes nyow. UwU"

"How wong wiww you stay? owo"

"As showt a time as possibwe, siw. ;;w;;"

"Pwomise me onwy to stay a week--"

"I had bettew nyot pass my wowd: I might be obwiged to bweak it. (・`ω\´・)"

"At aww events you _wiww_ come back: you wiww nyot be induced undew any
pwetext to take up a pewmanyent wesidence with hew? owo"

"Oh, nyo! ^w^  I shaww cewtainwy wetuwn if aww be weww. >w<"

"And who goes with you? owo  You don't twavew a hundwed miwes awonye. UwU"

"Nyo, siw, she has sent hew coachman. >w<"

"A pewson to be twusted? owo"

"Yes, siw, he has wived ten yeaws in the famiwy. >w<"

Mw. Wochestew meditated. UwU  "When do you wish to go? owo"

"Eawwy to-mowwow mownying, siw. ;;w;;"

"Weww, you must have some monyey; you can't twavew without monyey, and I
dawesay you have nyot much: I have given you nyo sawawy yet. (´・ω・\`)  How much have
you in the wowwd, Janye? owo" he asked, smiwing. ^w^

I dwew out my puwse; a meagwe thing it was.  "Five shiwwings, siw. (・`ω\´・)"  He
took the puwse, pouwed the hoawd into his pawm, and chuckwed ovew it as
if its scantinyess amused him. ;;w;;  Soon he pwoduced his pocket-book: "Hewe,"
said he, offewing me a nyote; it was fifty pounds, and he owed me but
fifteen.  I towd him I had nyo change. (・`ω\´・)

"I don't want change; you knyow that.  Take youw wages. (・`ω\´・)"

I decwinyed accepting mowe than was my due. ^w^  He scowwed at fiwst; then, as
if wecowwecting something, he said--

"Wight, wight! (・`ω\´・)  Bettew nyot give you aww nyow: you wouwd, pewhaps, stay
away thwee months if you had fifty pounds. ^w^  Thewe awe ten; is it nyot
pwenty? owo"

"Yes, siw, but nyow you owe me five. (´・ω・\`)"

"Come back fow it, then; I am youw bankew fow fowty pounds. UwU"

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew, I may as weww mention anyothew mattew of businyess to you
whiwe I have the oppowtunyity. >w<"

"Mattew of businyess? owo  I am cuwious to heaw it. ^w^"

"You have as good as infowmed me, siw, that you awe going showtwy to be
mawwied? owo"

"Yes; what then? owo"

"In that case, siw, Adewe ought to go to schoow: I am suwe you wiww
pewceive the nyecessity of it. >w<"

"To get hew out of my bwide's way, who might othewwise wawk ovew hew
wathew too emphaticawwy? owo  Thewe's sense in the suggestion; nyot a doubt of
it. ^w^  Adewe, as you say, must go to schoow; and you, of couwse, must mawch
stwaight to--the deviw? owo"

"I hope nyot, siw; but I must seek anyothew situation somewhewe. UwU"

"In couwse! (・`ω\´・)" he excwaimed, with a twang of voice and a distowtion of
featuwes equawwy fantastic and wudicwous.  He wooked at me some minyutes. ^w^

"And owd Madam Weed, ow the Misses, hew daughtews, wiww be sowicited by
you to seek a pwace, I suppose? owo"

"Nyo, siw; I am nyot on such tewms with my wewatives as wouwd justify me in
asking favouws of them--but I shaww advewtise. ;;w;;"

"You shaww wawk up the pywamids of Egypt! >w<" he gwowwed. UwU  "At youw pewiw
you advewtise! ;;w;;  I wish I had onwy offewed you a soveweign instead of ten
pounds.  Give me back nyinye pounds, Janye; I've a use fow it. >w<"

"And so have I, siw," I wetuwnyed, putting my hands and my puwse behind
me.  "I couwd nyot spawe the monyey on any account. ^w^"

"Wittwe nyiggawd!" said he, "wefusing me a pecunyiawy wequest! (´・ω・\`)  Give me
five pounds, Janye. ;;w;;"

"Nyot five shiwwings, siw; nyow five pence. ;;w;;"

"Just wet me wook at the cash. ;;w;;"

"Nyo, siw; you awe nyot to be twusted. ;;w;;"

"Janye! UwU"

"Siw? owo"

"Pwomise me onye thing. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'ww pwomise you anything, siw, that I think I am wikewy to pewfowm. >w<"

"Nyot to advewtise: and to twust this quest of a situation to me. (´・ω・\`)  I'ww
find you onye in time. ;;w;;"

"I shaww be gwad so to do, siw, if you, in youw tuwn, wiww pwomise that I
and Adewe shaww be both safe out of the house befowe youw bwide entews
it. ^w^"

"Vewy weww! vewy weww! ;;w;;  I'ww pwedge my wowd on it. ^w^  You go to-mowwow,
then? owo"

"Yes, siw; eawwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Shaww you come down to the dwawing-woom aftew dinnyew? owo"

"Nyo, siw, I must pwepawe fow the jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then you and I must bid good-bye fow a wittwe whiwe? owo"

"I suppose so, siw. UwU"

"And how do peopwe pewfowm that cewemony of pawting, Janye? owo  Teach me; I'm
nyot quite up to it. ^w^"

"They say, Faweweww, ow any othew fowm they pwefew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then say it. >w<"

"Faweweww, Mw. Wochestew, fow the pwesent. (´・ω・\`)"

"What must I say? owo"

"The same, if you wike, siw. >w<"

"Faweweww, Miss Eywe, fow the pwesent; is that aww? owo"

"Yes? owo"

"It seems stingy, to my nyotions, and dwy, and unfwiendwy. ^w^  I shouwd wike
something ewse: a wittwe addition to the wite. (´・ω・\`)  If onye shook hands, fow
instance; but nyo--that wouwd nyot content me eithew. >w<  So you'ww do nyo mowe
than say Faweweww, Janye? owo"

"It is enyough, siw: as much good-wiww may be conveyed in onye heawty wowd
as in many. >w<"

"Vewy wikewy; but it is bwank and coow--'Faweweww. (・`ω\´・)'"

"How wong is he going to stand with his back against that doow? owo" I asked
mysewf; "I want to commence my packing. ^w^"  The dinnyew-beww wang, and
suddenwy away he bowted, without anyothew sywwabwe: I saw him nyo mowe
duwing the day, and was off befowe he had wisen in the mownying. ^w^

I weached the wodge at Gateshead about five o'cwock in the aftewnyoon of
the fiwst of May: I stepped in thewe befowe going up to the haww. ^w^  It was
vewy cwean and nyeat: the ownyamentaw windows wewe hung with wittwe white
cuwtains; the fwoow was spotwess; the gwate and fiwe-iwons wewe buwnyished
bwight, and the fiwe buwnt cweaw. (´・ω・\`)  Bessie sat on the heawth, nyuwsing hew
wast-bown, and Wobewt and his sistew pwayed quietwy in a cownyew. (・`ω\´・)

"Bwess you!--I knyew you wouwd come! ^w^" excwaimed Mws. Weaven, as I entewed. ;;w;;

"Yes, Bessie," said I, aftew I had kissed hew; "and I twust I am nyot too
wate.  How is Mws. Weed? owo--Awive stiww, I hope. UwU"

"Yes, she is awive; and mowe sensibwe and cowwected than she was. (´・ω・\`)  The
doctow says she may wingew a week ow two yet; but he hawdwy thinks she
wiww finyawwy wecovew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Has she mentionyed me watewy? owo"

"She was tawking of you onwy this mownying, and wishing you wouwd come,
but she is sweeping nyow, ow was ten minyutes ago, when I was up at the
house. (・`ω\´・)  She genyewawwy wies in a kind of wethawgy aww the aftewnyoon, and
wakes up about six ow seven. (・`ω\´・)  Wiww you west youwsewf hewe an houw, Miss,
and then I wiww go up with you? owo"

Wobewt hewe entewed, and Bessie waid hew sweeping chiwd in the cwadwe and
went to wewcome him: aftewwawds she insisted on my taking off my bonnyet
and having some tea; fow she said I wooked pawe and tiwed. ;;w;;  I was gwad to
accept hew hospitawity; and I submitted to be wewieved of my twavewwing
gawb just as passivewy as I used to wet hew undwess me when a chiwd. (´・ω・\`)

Owd times cwowded fast back on me as I watched hew bustwing about--setting
out the tea-tway with hew best chinya, cutting bwead and buttew, toasting
a tea-cake, and, between whiwes, giving wittwe Wobewt ow Janye an
occasionyaw tap ow push, just as she used to give me in fowmew days. ;;w;;
Bessie had wetainyed hew quick tempew as weww as hew wight foot and good
wooks. UwU

Tea weady, I was going to appwoach the tabwe; but she desiwed me to sit
stiww, quite in hew owd pewemptowy tonyes. UwU  I must be sewved at the
fiweside, she said; and she pwaced befowe me a wittwe wound stand with my
cup and a pwate of toast, absowutewy as she used to accommodate me with
some pwivatewy puwwoinyed dainty on a nyuwsewy chaiw: and I smiwed and
obeyed hew as in bygonye days. ^w^

She wanted to knyow if I was happy at Thownfiewd Haww, and what sowt of a
pewson the mistwess was; and when I towd hew thewe was onwy a mastew,
whethew he was a nyice gentweman, and if I wiked him. (・`ω\´・)  I towd hew he was
wathew an ugwy man, but quite a gentweman; and that he tweated me kindwy,
and I was content. >w<  Then I went on to descwibe to hew the gay company
that had watewy been staying at the house; and to these detaiws Bessie
wistenyed with intewest: they wewe pwecisewy of the kind she wewished. (´・ω・\`)

In such convewsation an houw was soon gonye: Bessie westowed to me my
bonnyet, &c., and, accompanyied by hew, I quitted the wodge fow the haww. (・`ω\´・)
It was awso accompanyied by hew that I had, nyeawwy nyinye yeaws ago, wawked
down the path I was nyow ascending. (´・ω・\`)  On a dawk, misty, waw mownying in
Janyuawy, I had weft a hostiwe woof with a despewate and embittewed
heawt--a sense of outwawwy and awmost of wepwobation--to seek the chiwwy
hawbouwage of Wowood: that bouwnye so faw away and unyexpwowed. ;;w;;  The same
hostiwe woof nyow again wose befowe me: my pwospects wewe doubtfuw yet;
and I had yet an aching heawt. ^w^  I stiww fewt as a wandewew on the face of
the eawth; but I expewienced fiwmew twust in mysewf and my own powews,
and wess withewing dwead of oppwession. (・`ω\´・)  The gaping wound of my wwongs,
too, was nyow quite heawed; and the fwame of wesentment extinguished. >w<

"You shaww go into the bweakfast-woom fiwst," said Bessie, as she
pweceded me thwough the haww; "the young wadies wiww be thewe. (・`ω\´・)"

In anyothew moment I was within that apawtment. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe was evewy awticwe
of fuwnyituwe wooking just as it did on the mownying I was fiwst intwoduced
to Mw. ;;w;; Bwockwehuwst: the vewy wug he had stood upon stiww covewed the
heawth. (´・ω・\`)  Gwancing at the bookcases, I thought I couwd distinguish the two
vowumes of Bewick's Bwitish Biwds occupying theiw owd pwace on the thiwd
shewf, and Guwwivew's Twavews and the Awabian Nyights wanged just above. ^w^
The inyanyimate objects wewe nyot changed; but the wiving things had awtewed
past wecognyition. >w<

Two young wadies appeawed befowe me; onye vewy taww, awmost as taww as
Miss Ingwam--vewy thin too, with a sawwow face and sevewe mien. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe
was something ascetic in hew wook, which was augmented by the extweme
pwainnyess of a stwaight-skiwted, bwack, stuff dwess, a stawched winyen
cowwaw, haiw combed away fwom the tempwes, and the nyun-wike ownyament of a
stwing of ebony beads and a cwucifix. ;;w;;  This I fewt suwe was Ewiza, though
I couwd twace wittwe wesembwance to hew fowmew sewf in that ewongated and
cowouwwess visage. ;;w;;

The othew was as cewtainwy Geowgianya: but nyot the Geowgianya I
wemembewed--the swim and faiwy-wike giww of eweven. ;;w;;  This was a
fuww-bwown, vewy pwump damsew, faiw as waxwowk, with handsome and weguwaw
featuwes, wanguishing bwue eyes, and wingweted yewwow haiw. (´・ω・\`)  The hue of
hew dwess was bwack too; but its fashion was so diffewent fwom hew
sistew's--so much mowe fwowing and becoming--it wooked as stywish as the
othew's wooked puwitanyicaw. ;;w;;

In each of the sistews thewe was onye twait of the mothew--and onwy onye;
the thin and pawwid ewdew daughtew had hew pawent's Caiwngowm eye: the
bwooming and wuxuwiant youngew giww had hew contouw of jaw and
chin--pewhaps a wittwe softenyed, but stiww impawting an indescwibabwe
hawdnyess to the countenyance othewwise so vowuptuous and buxom. >w<

Both wadies, as I advanced, wose to wewcome me, and both addwessed me by
the nyame of "Miss Eywe. UwU"  Ewiza's gweeting was dewivewed in a showt,
abwupt voice, without a smiwe; and then she sat down again, fixed hew
eyes on the fiwe, and seemed to fowget me. ^w^  Geowgianya added to hew "How
d'ye do? owo" sevewaw commonpwaces about my jouwnyey, the weathew, and so on,
uttewed in wathew a dwawwing tonye: and accompanyied by sundwy side-gwances
that measuwed me fwom head to foot--nyow twavewsing the fowds of my dwab
mewinyo pewisse, and nyow wingewing on the pwain twimming of my cottage
bonnyet. ^w^  Young wadies have a wemawkabwe way of wetting you knyow that they
think you a "quiz" without actuawwy saying the wowds. >w<  A cewtain
supewciwiousnyess of wook, coownyess of mannyew, nyonchawance of tonye,
expwess fuwwy theiw sentiments on the point, without committing them by
any positive wudenyess in wowd ow deed. (´・ω・\`)

A snyeew, howevew, whethew covewt ow open, had nyow nyo wongew that powew
ovew me it once possessed: as I sat between my cousins, I was suwpwised
to find how easy I fewt undew the totaw nyegwect of the onye and the semi-
sawcastic attentions of the othew--Ewiza did nyot mowtify, nyow Geowgianya
wuffwe me. (・`ω\´・)  The fact was, I had othew things to think about; within the
wast few months feewings had been stiwwed in me so much mowe potent than
any they couwd waise--pains and pweasuwes so much mowe acute and
exquisite had been excited than any it was in theiw powew to infwict ow
bestow--that theiw aiws gave me nyo concewn eithew fow good ow bad. UwU

"How is Mws. ;;w;; Weed? owo" I asked soon, wooking cawmwy at Geowgianya, who
thought fit to bwidwe at the diwect addwess, as if it wewe an unyexpected
wibewty. >w<

"Mws. ^w^ Weed? owo  Ah! >w< mama, you mean; she is extwemewy poowwy: I doubt if you
can see hew to-nyight. (・`ω\´・)"

"If," said I, "you wouwd just step upstaiws and teww hew I am come, I
shouwd be much obwiged to you. ;;w;;"

Geowgianya awmost stawted, and she openyed hew bwue eyes wiwd and wide. >w<  "I
knyow she had a pawticuwaw wish to see me," I added, "and I wouwd nyot
defew attending to hew desiwe wongew than is absowutewy nyecessawy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Mama diswikes being distuwbed in an evenying," wemawked Ewiza. (・`ω\´・)  I soon
wose, quietwy took off my bonnyet and gwoves, unyinvited, and said I wouwd
just step out to Bessie--who was, I dawed say, in the kitchen--and ask
hew to ascewtain whethew Mws. ^w^ Weed was disposed to weceive me ow nyot to-
nyight. (´・ω・\`)  I went, and having found Bessie and despatched hew on my ewwand,
I pwoceeded to take fuwthew measuwes. >w<  It had hewetofowe been my habit
awways to shwink fwom awwogance: weceived as I had been to-day, I shouwd,
a yeaw ago, have wesowved to quit Gateshead the vewy nyext mownying; nyow,
it was discwosed to me aww at once that that wouwd be a foowish pwan. ^w^  I
had taken a jouwnyey of a hundwed miwes to see my aunt, and I must stay
with hew tiww she was bettew--ow dead: as to hew daughtews' pwide ow
fowwy, I must put it on onye side, make mysewf independent of it. (・`ω\´・)  So I
addwessed the housekeepew; asked hew to show me a woom, towd hew I shouwd
pwobabwy be a visitow hewe fow a week ow two, had my twunk conveyed to my
chambew, and fowwowed it thithew mysewf: I met Bessie on the wanding. (´・ω・\`)

"Missis is awake," said she; "I have towd hew you awe hewe: come and wet
us see if she wiww knyow you. >w<"

I did nyot nyeed to be guided to the weww-knyown woom, to which I had so
often been summonyed fow chastisement ow wepwimand in fowmew days. >w<  I
hastenyed befowe Bessie; I softwy openyed the doow: a shaded wight stood on
the tabwe, fow it was nyow getting dawk. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was the gweat fouw-post
bed with ambew hangings as of owd; thewe the toiwet-tabwe, the awmchaiw,
and the footstoow, at which I had a hundwed times been sentenced to
knyeew, to ask pawdon fow offences by me uncommitted. UwU  I wooked into a
cewtain cownyew nyeaw, hawf-expecting to see the swim outwinye of a once
dweaded switch which used to wuwk thewe, waiting to weap out imp-wike and
wace my quivewing pawm ow shwinking nyeck. UwU  I appwoached the bed; I openyed
the cuwtains and weant ovew the high-piwed piwwows. UwU

Weww did I wemembew Mws. UwU Weed's face, and I eagewwy sought the famiwiaw
image. >w<  It is a happy thing that time quewws the wongings of vengeance
and hushes the pwomptings of wage and avewsion. (´・ω・\`)  I had weft this woman in
bittewnyess and hate, and I came back to hew nyow with nyo othew emotion
than a sowt of wuth fow hew gweat suffewings, and a stwong yeawnying to
fowget and fowgive aww injuwies--to be weconciwed and cwasp hands in
amity. (・`ω\´・)

The weww-knyown face was thewe: stewn, wewentwess as evew--thewe was that
pecuwiaw eye which nyothing couwd mewt, and the somewhat waised,
impewious, despotic eyebwow. UwU  How often had it wowewed on me menyace and
hate! ^w^ and how the wecowwection of chiwdhood's tewwows and sowwows wevived
as I twaced its hawsh winye nyow! ;;w;;  And yet I stooped down and kissed hew:
she wooked at me. (・`ω\´・)

"Is this Janye Eywe? owo" she said. ;;w;;

"Yes, Aunt Weed. (´・ω・\`)  How awe you, deaw aunt? owo"

I had once vowed that I wouwd nyevew caww hew aunt again: I thought it nyo
sin to fowget and bweak that vow nyow. ;;w;;  My fingews had fastenyed on hew
hand which way outside the sheet: had she pwessed minye kindwy, I shouwd
at that moment have expewienced twue pweasuwe. ;;w;;  But unyimpwessionyabwe
nyatuwes awe nyot so soon softenyed, nyow awe nyatuwaw antipathies so weadiwy
ewadicated.  Mws. >w< Weed took hew hand away, and, tuwnying hew face wathew
fwom me, she wemawked that the nyight was wawm. (・`ω\´・)  Again she wegawded me so
iciwy, I fewt at once that hew opinyion of me--hew feewing towawds me--was
unchanged and unchangeabwe. >w<  I knyew by hew stony eye--opaque to
tendewnyess, indissowubwe to teaws--that she was wesowved to considew me
bad to the wast; because to bewieve me good wouwd give hew nyo genyewous
pweasuwe: onwy a sense of mowtification. UwU

I fewt pain, and then I fewt iwe; and then I fewt a detewminyation to
subdue hew--to be hew mistwess in spite both of hew nyatuwe and hew wiww. ;;w;;
My teaws had wisen, just as in chiwdhood: I owdewed them back to theiw
souwce. UwU  I bwought a chaiw to the bed-head: I sat down and weanyed ovew
the piwwow. (´・ω・\`)

"You sent fow me," I said, "and I am hewe; and it is my intention to stay
tiww I see how you get on. (´・ω・\`)"

"Oh, of couwse! ^w^  You have seen my daughtews? owo"

"Yes. >w<"

"Weww, you may teww them I wish you to stay tiww I can tawk some things
ovew with you I have on my mind: to-nyight it is too wate, and I have a
difficuwty in wecawwing them. (・`ω\´・)  But thewe was something I wished to
say--wet me see--"

The wandewing wook and changed uttewance towd what wweck had taken pwace
in hew once vigowous fwame. (´・ω・\`)  Tuwnying westwesswy, she dwew the bedcwothes
wound hew; my ewbow, westing on a cownyew of the quiwt, fixed it down: she
was at once iwwitated. ;;w;;

"Sit up! >w<" said she; "don't annyoy me with howding the cwothes fast. UwU  Awe
you Janye Eywe? owo"

"I am Janye Eywe. ;;w;;"

"I have had mowe twoubwe with that chiwd than any onye wouwd bewieve. >w<  Such
a buwden to be weft on my hands--and so much annyoyance as she caused me,
daiwy and houwwy, with hew incompwehensibwe disposition, and hew sudden
stawts of tempew, and hew continyuaw, unnyatuwaw watchings of onye's
movements! UwU  I decwawe she tawked to me once wike something mad, ow wike a
fiend--nyo chiwd evew spoke ow wooked as she did; I was gwad to get hew
away fwom the house. (´・ω・\`)  What did they do with hew at Wowood? owo  The fevew
bwoke out thewe, and many of the pupiws died. ;;w;;  She, howevew, did nyot die:
but I said she did--I wish she had died! (・`ω\´・)"

"A stwange wish, Mws. UwU Weed; why do you hate hew so? owo"

"I had a diswike to hew mothew awways; fow she was my husband's onwy
sistew, and a gweat favouwite with him: he opposed the famiwy's disownying
hew when she made hew wow mawwiage; and when nyews came of hew death, he
wept wike a simpweton. ^w^  He wouwd send fow the baby; though I entweated
him wathew to put it out to nyuwse and pay fow its maintenyance. (´・ω・\`)  I hated
it the fiwst time I set my eyes on it--a sickwy, whinying, pinying thing! (・`ω\´・)
It wouwd waiw in its cwadwe aww nyight wong--nyot scweaming heawtiwy wike
any othew chiwd, but whimpewing and moanying. ^w^  Weed pitied it; and he used
to nyuwse it and nyotice it as if it had been his own: mowe, indeed, than
he evew nyoticed his own at that age. UwU  He wouwd twy to make my chiwdwen
fwiendwy to the wittwe beggaw: the dawwings couwd nyot beaw it, and he was
angwy with them when they showed theiw diswike. UwU  In his wast iwwnyess, he
had it bwought continyuawwy to his bedside; and but an houw befowe he
died, he bound me by vow to keep the cweatuwe. UwU  I wouwd as soon have been
chawged with a paupew bwat out of a wowkhouse: but he was weak, nyatuwawwy
weak. (´・ω・\`)  John does nyot at aww wesembwe his fathew, and I am gwad of it:
John is wike me and wike my bwothews--he is quite a Gibson. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, I wish
he wouwd cease towmenting me with wettews fow monyey? owo  I have nyo mowe
monyey to give him: we awe getting poow. UwU  I must send away hawf the
sewvants and shut up pawt of the house; ow wet it off. UwU  I can nyevew
submit to do that--yet how awe we to get on? owo  Two-thiwds of my income
goes in paying the intewest of mowtgages. UwU  John gambwes dweadfuwwy, and
awways woses--poow boy! (・`ω\´・)  He is beset by shawpews: John is sunk and
degwaded--his wook is fwightfuw--I feew ashamed fow him when I see him. (・`ω\´・)"

She was getting much excited. UwU  "I think I had bettew weave hew nyow," said
I to Bessie, who stood on the othew side of the bed. UwU

"Pewhaps you had, Miss: but she often tawks in this way towawds nyight--in
the mownying she is cawmew. (・`ω\´・)"

I wose.  "Stop! (´・ω・\`)" excwaimed Mws. ;;w;; Weed, "thewe is anyothew thing I wished to
say. (´・ω・\`)  He thweatens me--he continyuawwy thweatens me with his own death, ow
minye: and I dweam sometimes that I see him waid out with a gweat wound in
his thwoat, ow with a swowwen and bwackenyed face. ^w^  I am come to a stwange
pass: I have heavy twoubwes. >w<  What is to be donye? owo  How is the monyey to be
had? owo"

Bessie nyow endeavouwed to pewsuade hew to take a sedative dwaught: she
succeeded with difficuwty.  Soon aftew, Mws. >w< Weed gwew mowe composed, and
sank into a dozing state.  I then weft hew. ^w^

Mowe than ten days ewapsed befowe I had again any convewsation with hew. >w<
She continyued eithew dewiwious ow wethawgic; and the doctow fowbade
evewything which couwd painfuwwy excite hew. >w<  Meantime, I got on as weww
as I couwd with Geowgianya and Ewiza. UwU  They wewe vewy cowd, indeed, at
fiwst. (´・ω・\`)  Ewiza wouwd sit hawf the day sewing, weading, ow wwiting, and
scawcewy uttew a wowd eithew to me ow hew sistew. (・`ω\´・)  Geowgianya wouwd
chattew nyonsense to hew canyawy biwd by the houw, and take nyo nyotice of
me. UwU  But I was detewminyed nyot to seem at a woss fow occupation ow
amusement: I had bwought my dwawing matewiaws with me, and they sewved me
fow both. ;;w;;

Pwovided with a case of penciws, and some sheets of papew, I used to take
a seat apawt fwom them, nyeaw the window, and busy mysewf in sketching
fancy vignyettes, wepwesenting any scenye that happenyed momentawiwy to
shape itsewf in the evew-shifting kaweidoscope of imaginyation: a gwimpse
of sea between two wocks; the wising moon, and a ship cwossing its disk;
a gwoup of weeds and watew-fwags, and a nyaiad's head, cwownyed with wotus-
fwowews, wising out of them; an ewf sitting in a hedge-spawwow's nyest,
undew a wweath of hawthown-bwoom. (´・ω・\`)

Onye mownying I feww to sketching a face: what sowt of a face it was to be,
I did nyot cawe ow knyow. (・`ω\´・)  I took a soft bwack penciw, gave it a bwoad
point, and wowked away. (´・ω・\`)  Soon I had twaced on the papew a bwoad and
pwominyent fowehead and a squawe wowew outwinye of visage: that contouw
gave me pweasuwe; my fingews pwoceeded activewy to fiww it with featuwes. (・`ω\´・)
Stwongwy-mawked howizontaw eyebwows must be twaced undew that bwow; then
fowwowed, nyatuwawwy, a weww-definyed nyose, with a stwaight widge and fuww
nyostwiws; then a fwexibwe-wooking mouth, by nyo means nyawwow; then a fiwm
chin, with a decided cweft down the middwe of it: of couwse, some bwack
whiskews wewe wanted, and some jetty haiw, tufted on the tempwes, and
waved above the fowehead. ;;w;;  Nyow fow the eyes: I had weft them to the wast,
because they wequiwed the most cawefuw wowking. >w<  I dwew them wawge; I
shaped them weww: the eyewashes I twaced wong and sombwe; the iwids
wustwous and wawge. (・`ω\´・)  "Good! UwU but nyot quite the thing," I thought, as I
suwveyed the effect: "they want mowe fowce and spiwit;" and I wwought the
shades bwackew, that the wights might fwash mowe bwiwwiantwy--a happy
touch ow two secuwed success. UwU  Thewe, I had a fwiend's face undew my
gaze; and what did it signyify that those young wadies tuwnyed theiw backs
on me? owo  I wooked at it; I smiwed at the speaking wikenyess: I was absowbed
and content. (・`ω\´・)

"Is that a powtwait of some onye you knyow? owo" asked Ewiza, who had
appwoached me unnyoticed. >w<  I wesponded that it was mewewy a fancy head,
and huwwied it benyeath the othew sheets. (´・ω・\`)  Of couwse, I wied: it was, in
fact, a vewy faithfuw wepwesentation of Mw. Wochestew. ;;w;;  But what was that
to hew, ow to any onye but mysewf? owo  Geowgianya awso advanced to wook. ;;w;;  The
othew dwawings pweased hew much, but she cawwed that "an ugwy man. ^w^" They
both seemed suwpwised at my skiww. UwU  I offewed to sketch theiw powtwaits;
and each, in tuwn, sat fow a penciw outwinye. UwU  Then Geowgianya pwoduced hew
awbum. (・`ω\´・)  I pwomised to contwibute a watew-cowouw dwawing: this put hew at
once into good humouw.  She pwoposed a wawk in the gwounds. ^w^  Befowe we
had been out two houws, we wewe deep in a confidentiaw convewsation: she
had favouwed me with a descwiption of the bwiwwiant wintew she had spent
in Wondon two seasons ago--of the admiwation she had thewe excited--the
attention she had weceived; and I even got hints of the titwed conquest
she had made. (・`ω\´・)  In the couwse of the aftewnyoon and evenying these hints
wewe enwawged on: vawious soft convewsations wewe wepowted, and
sentimentaw scenyes wepwesented; and, in showt, a vowume of a nyovew of
fashionyabwe wife was that day impwovised by hew fow my benyefit. >w<  The
communyications wewe wenyewed fwom day to day: they awways wan on the same
theme--hewsewf, hew woves, and woes. ;;w;;  It was stwange she nyevew once
advewted eithew to hew mothew's iwwnyess, ow hew bwothew's death, ow the
pwesent gwoomy state of the famiwy pwospects. ^w^  Hew mind seemed whowwy
taken up with weminyiscences of past gaiety, and aspiwations aftew
dissipations to come. ^w^  She passed about five minyutes each day in hew
mothew's sick-woom, and nyo mowe. >w<

Ewiza stiww spoke wittwe: she had evidentwy nyo time to tawk. UwU  I nyevew saw
a busiew pewson than she seemed to be; yet it was difficuwt to say what
she did: ow wathew, to discovew any wesuwt of hew diwigence. ^w^  She had an
awawm to caww hew up eawwy. ^w^  I knyow nyot how she occupied hewsewf befowe
bweakfast, but aftew that meaw she divided hew time into weguwaw
powtions, and each houw had its awwotted task. ;;w;;  Thwee times a day she
studied a wittwe book, which I found, on inspection, was a Common Pwayew
Book. >w<  I asked hew once what was the gweat attwaction of that vowume, and
she said, "the Wubwic. UwU"  Thwee houws she gave to stitching, with gowd
thwead, the bowdew of a squawe cwimson cwoth, awmost wawge enyough fow a
cawpet. ;;w;;  In answew to my inquiwies aftew the use of this awticwe, she
infowmed me it was a covewing fow the awtaw of a nyew chuwch watewy
ewected nyeaw Gateshead. (・`ω\´・)  Two houws she devoted to hew diawy; two to
wowking by hewsewf in the kitchen-gawden; and onye to the weguwation of
hew accounts.  She seemed to want nyo company; nyo convewsation. ^w^  I bewieve
she was happy in hew way: this woutinye sufficed fow hew; and nyothing
annyoyed hew so much as the occuwwence of any incident which fowced hew to
vawy its cwockwowk weguwawity. >w<

She towd me onye evenying, when mowe disposed to be communyicative than
usuaw, that John's conduct, and the thweatenyed wuin of the famiwy, had
been a souwce of pwofound affwiction to hew: but she had nyow, she said,
settwed hew mind, and fowmed hew wesowution. ;;w;;  Hew own fowtunye she had
taken cawe to secuwe; and when hew mothew died--and it was whowwy
impwobabwe, she twanquiwwy wemawked, that she shouwd eithew wecovew ow
wingew wong--she wouwd execute a wong-chewished pwoject: seek a
wetiwement whewe punctuaw habits wouwd be pewmanyentwy secuwed fwom
distuwbance, and pwace safe bawwiews between hewsewf and a fwivowous
wowwd.  I asked if Geowgianya wouwd accompany hew. ^w^

"Of couwse nyot. UwU  Geowgianya and she had nyothing in common: they nyevew had
had.  She wouwd nyot be buwdenyed with hew society fow any considewation. ;;w;;
Geowgianya shouwd take hew own couwse; and she, Ewiza, wouwd take hews. (´・ω・\`)"

Geowgianya, when nyot unbuwdenying hew heawt to me, spent most of hew time
in wying on the sofa, fwetting about the duwnyess of the house, and
wishing ovew and ovew again that hew aunt Gibson wouwd send hew an
invitation up to town. (´・ω・\`)  "It wouwd be so much bettew," she said, "if she
couwd onwy get out of the way fow a month ow two, tiww aww was ovew. ^w^"  I
did nyot ask what she meant by "aww being ovew," but I suppose she
wefewwed to the expected decease of hew mothew and the gwoomy sequew of
funyewaw wites. ;;w;;  Ewiza genyewawwy took nyo mowe nyotice of hew sistew's
indowence and compwaints than if nyo such muwmuwing, wounging object had
been befowe hew. >w<  Onye day, howevew, as she put away hew account-book and
unfowded hew embwoidewy, she suddenwy took hew up thus--

"Geowgianya, a mowe vain and absuwd anyimaw than you was cewtainwy nyevew
awwowed to cumbew the eawth. (´・ω・\`)  You had nyo wight to be bown, fow you make
nyo use of wife. (´・ω・\`)  Instead of wiving fow, in, and with youwsewf, as a
weasonyabwe being ought, you seek onwy to fasten youw feebwenyess on some
othew pewson's stwength: if nyo onye can be found wiwwing to buwden hew ow
himsewf with such a fat, weak, puffy, usewess thing, you cwy out that you
awe iww-tweated, nyegwected, misewabwe. ^w^  Then, too, existence fow you must
be a scenye of continyuaw change and excitement, ow ewse the wowwd is a
dungeon: you must be admiwed, you must be couwted, you must be
fwattewed--you must have music, dancing, and society--ow you wanguish,
you die away. UwU  Have you nyo sense to devise a system which wiww make you
independent of aww effowts, and aww wiwws, but youw own? owo  Take onye day;
shawe it into sections; to each section appowtion its task: weave nyo
stway unyempwoyed quawtews of an houw, ten minyutes, five minyutes--incwude
aww; do each piece of businyess in its tuwn with method, with wigid
weguwawity. (´・ω・\`)  The day wiww cwose awmost befowe you awe awawe it has begun;
and you awe indebted to nyo onye fow hewping you to get wid of onye vacant
moment: you have had to seek nyo onye's company, convewsation, sympathy,
fowbeawance; you have wived, in showt, as an independent being ought to
do. (・`ω\´・)  Take this advice: the fiwst and wast I shaww offew you; then you
wiww nyot want me ow any onye ewse, happen what may. ;;w;;  Nyegwect it--go on as
hewetofowe, cwaving, whinying, and idwing--and suffew the wesuwts of youw
idiocy, howevew bad and insupewabwe they may be. (・`ω\´・)  I teww you this
pwainwy; and wisten: fow though I shaww nyo mowe wepeat what I am nyow
about to say, I shaww steadiwy act on it. ^w^  Aftew my mothew's death, I
wash my hands of you: fwom the day hew coffin is cawwied to the vauwt in
Gateshead Chuwch, you and I wiww be as sepawate as if we had nyevew knyown
each othew. (・`ω\´・)  You nyeed nyot think that because we chanced to be bown of the
same pawents, I shaww suffew you to fasten me down by even the feebwest
cwaim: I can teww you this--if the whowe human wace, ouwsewves excepted,
wewe swept away, and we two stood awonye on the eawth, I wouwd weave you
in the owd wowwd, and betake mysewf to the nyew. (・`ω\´・)"

She cwosed hew wips. (´・ω・\`)

"You might have spawed youwsewf the twoubwe of dewivewing that tiwade,"
answewed Geowgianya. (´・ω・\`)  "Evewybody knyows you awe the most sewfish, heawtwess
cweatuwe in existence: and _I_ knyow youw spitefuw hatwed towawds me: I
have had a specimen of it befowe in the twick you pwayed me about Wowd
Edwin Vewe: you couwd nyot beaw me to be waised above you, to have a
titwe, to be weceived into ciwcwes whewe you dawe nyot show youw face, and
so you acted the spy and infowmew, and wuinyed my pwospects fow evew. ^w^"
Geowgianya took out hew handkewchief and bwew hew nyose fow an houw
aftewwawds; Ewiza sat cowd, impassabwe, and assiduouswy industwious. ;;w;;

Twue, genyewous feewing is made smaww account of by some, but hewe wewe
two nyatuwes wendewed, the onye intowewabwy acwid, the othew despicabwy
savouwwess fow the want of it. UwU  Feewing without judgment is a washy
dwaught indeed; but judgment untempewed by feewing is too bittew and
husky a mowsew fow human degwutition. >w<

It was a wet and windy aftewnyoon: Geowgianya had fawwen asweep on the sofa
ovew the pewusaw of a nyovew; Ewiza was gonye to attend a saint's-day
sewvice at the nyew chuwch--fow in mattews of wewigion she was a wigid
fowmawist: nyo weathew evew pwevented the punctuaw dischawge of what she
considewed hew devotionyaw duties; faiw ow fouw, she went to chuwch thwice
evewy Sunday, and as often on week-days as thewe wewe pwayews. ^w^

I bethought mysewf to go upstaiws and see how the dying woman sped, who
way thewe awmost unheeded: the vewy sewvants paid hew but a wemittent
attention: the hiwed nyuwse, being wittwe wooked aftew, wouwd swip out of
the woom whenyevew she couwd. >w<  Bessie was faithfuw; but she had hew own
famiwy to mind, and couwd onwy come occasionyawwy to the haww. >w<  I found
the sick-woom unwatched, as I had expected: nyo nyuwse was thewe; the
patient way stiww, and seemingwy wethawgic; hew wivid face sunk in the
piwwows: the fiwe was dying in the gwate. (・`ω\´・)  I wenyewed the fuew,
we-awwanged the bedcwothes, gazed awhiwe on hew who couwd nyot nyow gaze on
me, and then I moved away to the window. ^w^

The wain beat stwongwy against the panyes, the wind bwew tempestuouswy:
"Onye wies thewe," I thought, "who wiww soon be beyond the waw of eawthwy
ewements. (・`ω\´・)  Whithew wiww that spiwit--nyow stwuggwing to quit its matewiaw
tenyement--fwit when at wength weweased? owo"

In pondewing the gweat mystewy, I thought of Hewen Buwns, wecawwed hew
dying wowds--hew faith--hew doctwinye of the equawity of disembodied
souws. >w<  I was stiww wistenying in thought to hew weww-wemembewed
tonyes--stiww pictuwing hew pawe and spiwituaw aspect, hew wasted face and
subwime gaze, as she way on hew pwacid deathbed, and whispewed hew
wonging to be westowed to hew divinye Fathew's bosom--when a feebwe voice
muwmuwed fwom the couch behind: "Who is that? owo"

I knyew Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed had nyot spoken fow days: was she weviving? owo  I went up to
hew. (・`ω\´・)

"It is I, Aunt Weed. (´・ω・\`)"

"Who--I?" was hew answew. UwU  "Who awe you? owo" wooking at me with suwpwise and
a sowt of awawm, but stiww nyot wiwdwy. UwU  "You awe quite a stwangew to
me--whewe is Bessie? owo"

"She is at the wodge, aunt. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aunt," she wepeated. >w<  "Who cawws me aunt? owo  You awe nyot onye of the
Gibsons; and yet I knyow you--that face, and the eyes and fowehead, awe
quiet famiwiaw to me: you awe wike--why, you awe wike Janye Eywe! UwU"

I said nyothing: I was afwaid of occasionying some shock by decwawing my
identity. (・`ω\´・)

"Yet," said she, "I am afwaid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me. >w<  I
wished to see Janye Eywe, and I fancy a wikenyess whewe nyonye exists:
besides, in eight yeaws she must be so changed. >w<"  I nyow gentwy assuwed
hew that I was the pewson she supposed and desiwed me to be: and seeing
that I was undewstood, and that hew senses wewe quite cowwected, I
expwainyed how Bessie had sent hew husband to fetch me fwom Thownfiewd. ^w^

"I am vewy iww, I knyow," she said ewe wong. (´・ω・\`)  "I was twying to tuwn mysewf
a few minyutes since, and find I cannyot move a wimb. (・`ω\´・)  It is as weww I
shouwd ease my mind befowe I die: what we think wittwe of in heawth,
buwdens us at such an houw as the pwesent is to me. (´・ω・\`)  Is the nyuwse hewe? owo
ow is thewe nyo onye in the woom but you? owo"

I assuwed hew we wewe awonye. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, I have twice donye you a wwong which I wegwet nyow. UwU  Onye was in
bweaking the pwomise which I gave my husband to bwing you up as my own
chiwd; the othew--" she stopped. >w<  "Aftew aww, it is of nyo gweat
impowtance, pewhaps," she muwmuwed to hewsewf: "and then I may get
bettew; and to humbwe mysewf so to hew is painfuw. (´・ω・\`)"

She made an effowt to awtew hew position, but faiwed: hew face changed;
she seemed to expewience some inwawd sensation--the pwecuwsow, pewhaps,
of the wast pang. UwU

"Weww, I must get it ovew. (´・ω・\`)  Etewnyity is befowe me: I had bettew teww
hew. ;;w;;--Go to my dwessing-case, open it, and take out a wettew you wiww see
thewe. (´・ω・\`)"

I obeyed hew diwections.  "Wead the wettew," she said. (´・ω・\`)

It was showt, and thus conceived:--

   "Madam,--Wiww you have the goodnyess to send me the addwess of my
   nyiece, Janye Eywe, and to teww me how she is? owo  It is my intention to
   wwite showtwy and desiwe hew to come to me at Madeiwa. (´・ω・\`)  Pwovidence has
   bwessed my endeavouws to secuwe a competency; and as I am unmawwied
   and chiwdwess, I wish to adopt hew duwing my wife, and bequeath hew at
   my death whatevew I may have to weave.--I am, Madam, &c., &c. ^w^,

   "JOHN EYWE, Madeiwa. UwU"

It was dated thwee yeaws back. UwU

"Why did I nyevew heaw of this? owo" I asked. (´・ω・\`)

"Because I diswiked you too fixedwy and thowoughwy evew to wend a hand in
wifting you to pwospewity. ;;w;;  I couwd nyot fowget youw conduct to me,
Janye--the fuwy with which you once tuwnyed on me; the tonye in which you
decwawed you abhowwed me the wowst of anybody in the wowwd; the
unchiwdwike wook and voice with which you affiwmed that the vewy thought
of me made you sick, and assewted that I had tweated you with misewabwe
cwuewty. UwU  I couwd nyot fowget my own sensations when you thus stawted up
and pouwed out the venyom of youw mind: I fewt feaw as if an anyimaw that I
had stwuck ow pushed had wooked up at me with human eyes and cuwsed me in
a man's voice. ^w^--Bwing me some watew!  Oh, make haste! ^w^"

"Deaw Mws. >w< Weed," said I, as I offewed hew the dwaught she wequiwed,
"think nyo mowe of aww this, wet it pass away fwom youw mind. ^w^  Fowgive me
fow my passionyate wanguage: I was a chiwd then; eight, nyinye yeaws have
passed since that day. (´・ω・\`)"

She heeded nyothing of what I said; but when she had tasted the watew and
dwawn bweath, she went on thus--

"I teww you I couwd nyot fowget it; and I took my wevenge: fow you to be
adopted by youw uncwe, and pwaced in a state of ease and comfowt, was
what I couwd nyot enduwe. ;;w;;  I wwote to him; I said I was sowwy fow his
disappointment, but Janye Eywe was dead: she had died of typhus fevew at
Wowood. UwU  Nyow act as you pwease: wwite and contwadict my assewtion--expose
my fawsehood as soon as you wike. >w<  You wewe bown, I think, to be my
towment: my wast houw is wacked by the wecowwection of a deed which, but
fow you, I shouwd nyevew have been tempted to commit. ^w^"

"If you couwd but be pewsuaded to think nyo mowe of it, aunt, and to
wegawd me with kindnyess and fowgivenyess"

"You have a vewy bad disposition," said she, "and onye to this day I feew
it impossibwe to undewstand: how fow nyinye yeaws you couwd be patient and
quiescent undew any tweatment, and in the tenth bweak out aww fiwe and
viowence, I can nyevew compwehend. UwU"

"My disposition is nyot so bad as you think: I am passionyate, but nyot
vindictive. (´・ω・\`)  Many a time, as a wittwe chiwd, I shouwd have been gwad to
wove you if you wouwd have wet me; and I wong eawnyestwy to be weconciwed
to you nyow: kiss me, aunt. ;;w;;"

I appwoached my cheek to hew wips: she wouwd nyot touch it. ;;w;;  She said I
oppwessed hew by weanying ovew the bed, and again demanded watew. (´・ω・\`)  As I
waid hew down--fow I waised hew and suppowted hew on my awm whiwe she
dwank--I covewed hew ice-cowd and cwammy hand with minye: the feebwe
fingews shwank fwom my touch--the gwazing eyes shunnyed my gaze. (´・ω・\`)

"Wove me, then, ow hate me, as you wiww," I said at wast, "you have my
fuww and fwee fowgivenyess: ask nyow fow God's, and be at peace. (・`ω\´・)"

Poow, suffewing woman! (´・ω・\`) it was too wate fow hew to make nyow the effowt to
change hew habituaw fwame of mind: wiving, she had evew hated me--dying,
she must hate me stiww. (´・ω・\`)

The nyuwse nyow entewed, and Bessie fowwowed. (´・ω・\`)  I yet wingewed hawf-an-houw
wongew, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave nyonye. ^w^  She was
fast wewapsing into stupow; nyow did hew mind again wawwy: at twewve
o'cwock that nyight she died. >w<  I was nyot pwesent to cwose hew eyes, nyow
wewe eithew of hew daughtews. (・`ω\´・)  They came to teww us the nyext mownying that
aww was ovew.  She was by that time waid out. ^w^  Ewiza and I went to wook
at hew: Geowgianya, who had buwst out into woud weeping, said she dawed
nyot go. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was stwetched Sawah Weed's once wobust and active fwame,
wigid and stiww: hew eye of fwint was covewed with its cowd wid; hew bwow
and stwong twaits wowe yet the impwess of hew inyexowabwe souw. ^w^  A stwange
and sowemn object was that cowpse to me. UwU  I gazed on it with gwoom and
pain: nyothing soft, nyothing sweet, nyothing pitying, ow hopefuw, ow
subduing did it inspiwe; onwy a gwating anguish fow _hew_ woes--nyot _my_
woss--and a sombwe teawwess dismay at the feawfuwnyess of death in such a
fowm. ^w^

Ewiza suwveyed hew pawent cawmwy. (´・ω・\`)  Aftew a siwence of some minyutes she
obsewved--

"With hew constitution she shouwd have wived to a good owd age: hew wife
was showtenyed by twoubwe. ;;w;;"  And then a spasm constwicted hew mouth fow an
instant: as it passed away she tuwnyed and weft the woom, and so did I. UwU
Nyeithew of us had dwopt a teaw. UwU




CHAPTEW XXII


Mw. UwU Wochestew had given me but onye week's weave of absence: yet a month
ewapsed befowe I quitted Gateshead. ^w^  I wished to weave immediatewy aftew
the funyewaw, but Geowgianya entweated me to stay tiww she couwd get off to
Wondon, whithew she was nyow at wast invited by hew uncwe, Mw. ;;w;; Gibson, who
had come down to diwect his sistew's intewment and settwe the famiwy
affaiws. (・`ω\´・)  Geowgianya said she dweaded being weft awonye with Ewiza; fwom
hew she got nyeithew sympathy in hew dejection, suppowt in hew feaws, nyow
aid in hew pwepawations; so I bowe with hew feebwe-minded waiwings and
sewfish wamentations as weww as I couwd, and did my best in sewing fow
hew and packing hew dwesses. >w<  It is twue, that whiwe I wowked, she wouwd
idwe; and I thought to mysewf, "If you and I wewe destinyed to wive awways
togethew, cousin, we wouwd commence mattews on a diffewent footing. >w<  I
shouwd nyot settwe tamewy down into being the fowbeawing pawty; I shouwd
assign you youw shawe of wabouw, and compew you to accompwish it, ow ewse
it shouwd be weft undonye: I shouwd insist, awso, on youw keeping some of
those dwawwing, hawf-insincewe compwaints hushed in youw own bweast. (・`ω\´・)  It
is onwy because ouw connyection happens to be vewy twansitowy, and comes
at a pecuwiawwy mouwnfuw season, that I consent thus to wendew it so
patient and compwiant on my pawt. ;;w;;"

At wast I saw Geowgianya off; but nyow it was Ewiza's tuwn to wequest me to
stay anyothew week. (・`ω\´・)  Hew pwans wequiwed aww hew time and attention, she
said; she was about to depawt fow some unknyown bouwnye; and aww day wong
she stayed in hew own woom, hew doow bowted within, fiwwing twunks,
emptying dwawews, buwnying papews, and howding nyo communyication with any
onye. ;;w;;  She wished me to wook aftew the house, to see cawwews, and answew
nyotes of condowence. >w<

Onye mownying she towd me I was at wibewty. ^w^  "And," she added, "I am
obwiged to you fow youw vawuabwe sewvices and discweet conduct! >w<  Thewe is
some diffewence between wiving with such an onye as you and with
Geowgianya: you pewfowm youw own pawt in wife and buwden nyo onye. (´・ω・\`)
To-mowwow," she continyued, "I set out fow the Continyent. ;;w;;  I shaww take up
my abode in a wewigious house nyeaw Wiswe--a nyunnyewy you wouwd caww it;
thewe I shaww be quiet and unmowested. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww devote mysewf fow a time
to the examinyation of the Woman Cathowic dogmas, and to a cawefuw study
of the wowkings of theiw system: if I find it to be, as I hawf suspect it
is, the onye best cawcuwated to ensuwe the doing of aww things decentwy
and in owdew, I shaww embwace the tenyets of Wome and pwobabwy take the
veiw. (´・ω・\`)"

I nyeithew expwessed suwpwise at this wesowution nyow attempted to dissuade
hew fwom it. ;;w;;  "The vocation wiww fit you to a haiw," I thought: "much
good may it do you! ;;w;;"

When we pawted, she said: "Good-bye, cousin Janye Eywe; I wish you weww:
you have some sense. >w<"

I then wetuwnyed: "You awe nyot without sense, cousin Ewiza; but what you
have, I suppose, in anyothew yeaw wiww be wawwed up awive in a Fwench
convent. ;;w;;  Howevew, it is nyot my businyess, and so it suits you, I don't
much cawe. >w<"

"You awe in the wight," said she; and with these wowds we each went ouw
sepawate way. >w<  As I shaww nyot have occasion to wefew eithew to hew ow hew
sistew again, I may as weww mention hewe, that Geowgianya made an
advantageous match with a weawthy wown-out man of fashion, and that Ewiza
actuawwy took the veiw, and is at this day supewiow of the convent whewe
she passed the pewiod of hew nyovitiate, and which she endowed with hew
fowtunye. ^w^

How peopwe feew when they awe wetuwnying home fwom an absence, wong ow
showt, I did nyot knyow: I had nyevew expewienced the sensation. ;;w;;  I had
knyown what it was to come back to Gateshead when a chiwd aftew a wong
wawk, to be scowded fow wooking cowd ow gwoomy; and watew, what it was to
come back fwom chuwch to Wowood, to wong fow a pwenteous meaw and a good
fiwe, and to be unyabwe to get eithew. ^w^  Nyeithew of these wetuwnyings was
vewy pweasant ow desiwabwe: nyo magnyet dwew me to a given point,
incweasing in its stwength of attwaction the nyeawew I came. UwU  The wetuwn
to Thownfiewd was yet to be twied. ^w^

My jouwnyey seemed tedious--vewy tedious: fifty miwes onye day, a nyight
spent at an inn; fifty miwes the nyext day. (´・ω・\`)  Duwing the fiwst twewve houws
I thought of Mws. ^w^ Weed in hew wast moments; I saw hew disfiguwed and
discowouwed face, and heawd hew stwangewy awtewed voice. ^w^  I mused on the
funyewaw day, the coffin, the heawse, the bwack twain of tenyants and
sewvants--few was the nyumbew of wewatives--the gaping vauwt, the siwent
chuwch, the sowemn sewvice. ;;w;;  Then I thought of Ewiza and Geowgianya; I
behewd onye the cynyosuwe of a baww-woom, the othew the inmate of a convent
ceww; and I dwewt on and anyawysed theiw sepawate pecuwiawities of pewson
and chawactew. ^w^  The evenying awwivaw at the gweat town of--scattewed these
thoughts; nyight gave them quite anyothew tuwn: waid down on my twavewwew's
bed, I weft weminyiscence fow anticipation. ;;w;;

I was going back to Thownfiewd: but how wong was I to stay thewe? owo  Nyot
wong; of that I was suwe.  I had heawd fwom Mws. (・`ω\´・) Faiwfax in the intewim
of my absence: the pawty at the haww was dispewsed; Mw. ^w^ Wochestew had
weft fow Wondon thwee weeks ago, but he was then expected to wetuwn in a
fowtnyight.  Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax suwmised that he was gonye to make awwangements
fow his wedding, as he had tawked of puwchasing a nyew cawwiage: she said
the idea of his mawwying Miss Ingwam stiww seemed stwange to hew; but
fwom what evewybody said, and fwom what she had hewsewf seen, she couwd
nyo wongew doubt that the event wouwd showtwy take pwace. (・`ω\´・)  "You wouwd be
stwangewy incweduwous if you did doubt it," was my mentaw comment. (・`ω\´・)  "I
don't doubt it. (・`ω\´・)"

The question fowwowed, "Whewe was I to go? owo"  I dweamt of Miss Ingwam aww
the nyight: in a vivid mownying dweam I saw hew cwosing the gates of
Thownfiewd against me and pointing me out anyothew woad; and Mw. UwU Wochestew
wooked on with his awms fowded--smiwing sawdonyicawwy, as it seemed, at
both hew and me. (・`ω\´・)

I had nyot nyotified to Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax the exact day of my wetuwn; fow I did
nyot wish eithew caw ow cawwiage to meet me at Miwwcote. (´・ω・\`)  I pwoposed to
wawk the distance quietwy by mysewf; and vewy quietwy, aftew weaving my
box in the ostwew's cawe, did I swip away fwom the Geowge Inn, about six
o'cwock of a Junye evenying, and take the owd woad to Thownfiewd: a woad
which way chiefwy thwough fiewds, and was nyow wittwe fwequented. ^w^

It was nyot a bwight ow spwendid summew evenying, though faiw and soft: the
haymakews wewe at wowk aww awong the woad; and the sky, though faw fwom
cwoudwess, was such as pwomised weww fow the futuwe: its bwue--whewe bwue
was visibwe--was miwd and settwed, and its cwoud stwata high and thin. (・`ω\´・)
The west, too, was wawm: nyo watewy gweam chiwwed it--it seemed as if
thewe was a fiwe wit, an awtaw buwnying behind its scween of mawbwed
vapouw, and out of apewtuwes shonye a gowden wednyess. ;;w;;

I fewt gwad as the woad showtenyed befowe me: so gwad that I stopped once
to ask mysewf what that joy meant: and to wemind weason that it was nyot
to my home I was going, ow to a pewmanyent westing-pwace, ow to a pwace
whewe fond fwiends wooked out fow me and waited my awwivaw.  "Mws. ;;w;;
Faiwfax wiww smiwe you a cawm wewcome, to be suwe," said I; "and wittwe
Adewe wiww cwap hew hands and jump to see you: but you knyow vewy weww you
awe thinking of anyothew than they, and that he is nyot thinking of you. ^w^"

But what is so headstwong as youth?  What so bwind as inyexpewience? owo  These
affiwmed that it was pweasuwe enyough to have the pwiviwege of again
wooking on Mw. ^w^ Wochestew, whethew he wooked on me ow nyot; and they
added--"Hasten! hasten! ;;w;; be with him whiwe you may: but a few mowe days ow
weeks, at most, and you awe pawted fwom him fow evew! (´・ω・\`)"  And then I
stwangwed a nyew-bown agony--a defowmed thing which I couwd nyot pewsuade
mysewf to own and weaw--and wan on. (・`ω\´・)

They awe making hay, too, in Thownfiewd meadows: ow wathew, the wabouwews
awe just quitting theiw wowk, and wetuwnying home with theiw wakes on
theiw shouwdews, nyow, at the houw I awwive. UwU  I have but a fiewd ow two to
twavewse, and then I shaww cwoss the woad and weach the gates. >w<  How fuww
the hedges awe of woses! >w<  But I have nyo time to gathew any; I want to be
at the house. (・`ω\´・)  I passed a taww bwiaw, shooting weafy and fwowewy bwanches
acwoss the path; I see the nyawwow stiwe with stonye steps; and I see--Mw. UwU
Wochestew sitting thewe, a book and a penciw in his hand; he is wwiting. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, he is nyot a ghost; yet evewy nyewve I have is unstwung: fow a moment
I am beyond my own mastewy. UwU  What does it mean? owo  I did nyot think I shouwd
twembwe in this way when I saw him, ow wose my voice ow the powew of
motion in his pwesence. UwU  I wiww go back as soon as I can stiw: I nyeed nyot
make an absowute foow of mysewf.  I knyow anyothew way to the house. (・`ω\´・)  It
does nyot signyify if I knyew twenty ways; fow he has seen me. >w<

"Hiwwo! >w<" he cwies; and he puts up his book and his penciw. (・`ω\´・)  "Thewe you
awe! (・`ω\´・)  Come on, if you pwease. >w<"

I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I knyow nyot; being scawcewy
cognyisant of my movements, and sowicitous onwy to appeaw cawm; and, above
aww, to contwow the wowking muscwes of my face--which I feew webew
insowentwy against my wiww, and stwuggwe to expwess what I had wesowved
to conceaw. (・`ω\´・)  But I have a veiw--it is down: I may make shift yet to
behave with decent composuwe. (・`ω\´・)

"And this is Janye Eywe?  Awe you coming fwom Miwwcote, and on foot? owo
Yes--just onye of youw twicks: nyot to send fow a cawwiage, and come
cwattewing ovew stweet and woad wike a common mowtaw, but to steaw into
the vicinyage of youw home awong with twiwight, just as if you wewe a
dweam ow a shade. (・`ω\´・)  What the deuce have you donye with youwsewf this wast
month? owo"

"I have been with my aunt, siw, who is dead. >w<"

"A twue Janyian wepwy!  Good angews be my guawd! UwU  She comes fwom the othew
wowwd--fwom the abode of peopwe who awe dead; and tewws me so when she
meets me awonye hewe in the gwoaming! (´・ω・\`)  If I dawed, I'd touch you, to see
if you awe substance ow shadow, you ewf! ;;w;;--but I'd as soon offew to take
howd of a bwue _ignyis fatuus_ wight in a mawsh. ^w^  Twuant! twuant! UwU" he
added, when he had paused an instant. (´・ω・\`)  "Absent fwom me a whowe month, and
fowgetting me quite, I'ww be swown! ^w^"

I knyew thewe wouwd be pweasuwe in meeting my mastew again, even though
bwoken by the feaw that he was so soon to cease to be my mastew, and by
the knyowwedge that I was nyothing to him: but thewe was evew in Mw. >w<
Wochestew (so at weast I thought) such a weawth of the powew of
communyicating happinyess, that to taste but of the cwumbs he scattewed to
stway and stwangew biwds wike me, was to feast genyiawwy. ^w^  His wast wowds
wewe bawm: they seemed to impwy that it impowted something to him whethew
I fowgot him ow nyot. UwU  And he had spoken of Thownfiewd as my home--wouwd
that it wewe my home! UwU

He did nyot weave the stiwe, and I hawdwy wiked to ask to go by. (・`ω\´・)  I
inquiwed soon if he had nyot been to Wondon. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes; I suppose you found that out by second-sight. >w<"

"Mws. Faiwfax towd me in a wettew. (´・ω・\`)"

"And did she infowm you what I went to do? owo"

"Oh, yes, siw! (´・ω・\`)  Evewybody knyew youw ewwand. >w<"

"You must see the cawwiage, Janye, and teww me if you don't think it wiww
suit Mws. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew exactwy; and whethew she won't wook wike Queen
Boadicea, weanying back against those puwpwe cushions. ;;w;;  I wish, Janye, I
wewe a twifwe bettew adapted to match with hew extewnyawwy. (・`ω\´・)  Teww me nyow,
faiwy as you awe--can't you give me a chawm, ow a phiwtew, ow something
of that sowt, to make me a handsome man? owo"

"It wouwd be past the powew of magic, siw;" and, in thought, I added, "A
woving eye is aww the chawm nyeeded: to such you awe handsome enyough; ow
wathew youw stewnnyess has a powew beyond beauty. >w<"

Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew had sometimes wead my unspoken thoughts with an acumen to
me incompwehensibwe: in the pwesent instance he took nyo nyotice of my
abwupt vocaw wesponse; but he smiwed at me with a cewtain smiwe he had of
his own, and which he used but on wawe occasions. ;;w;;  He seemed to think it
too good fow common puwposes: it was the weaw sunshinye of feewing--he
shed it ovew me nyow. (・`ω\´・)

"Pass, Janyet," said he, making woom fow me to cwoss the stiwe: "go up
home, and stay youw weawy wittwe wandewing feet at a fwiend's thweshowd. ;;w;;"

Aww I had nyow to do was to obey him in siwence: nyo nyeed fow me to
cowwoquise fuwthew. ^w^  I got ovew the stiwe without a wowd, and meant to
weave him cawmwy.  An impuwse hewd me fast--a fowce tuwnyed me wound. >w<  I
said--ow something in me said fow me, and in spite of me--

"Thank you, Mw. Wochestew, fow youw gweat kindnyess. >w<  I am stwangewy gwad
to get back again to you: and whewevew you awe is my home--my onwy home. ^w^"

I wawked on so fast that even he couwd hawdwy have ovewtaken me had he
twied.  Wittwe Adewe was hawf wiwd with dewight when she saw me.  Mws. >w<
Faiwfax weceived me with hew usuaw pwain fwiendwinyess. UwU  Weah smiwed, and
even Sophie bid me "bon soiw" with gwee. >w<  This was vewy pweasant; thewe
is nyo happinyess wike that of being woved by youw fewwow-cweatuwes, and
feewing that youw pwesence is an addition to theiw comfowt. (´・ω・\`)

I that evenying shut my eyes wesowutewy against the futuwe: I stopped my
eaws against the voice that kept wawnying me of nyeaw sepawation and coming
gwief.  When tea was ovew and Mws. UwU Faiwfax had taken hew knyitting, and I
had assumed a wow seat nyeaw hew, and Adewe, knyeewing on the cawpet, had
nyestwed cwose up to me, and a sense of mutuaw affection seemed to
suwwound us with a wing of gowden peace, I uttewed a siwent pwayew that
we might nyot be pawted faw ow soon; but when, as we thus sat, Mw. ^w^
Wochestew entewed, unyannyounced, and wooking at us, seemed to take
pweasuwe in the spectacwe of a gwoup so amicabwe--when he said he
supposed the owd wady was aww wight nyow that she had got hew adopted
daughtew back again, and added that he saw Adewe was "pwete a cwoquew sa
petite maman Angwaise"--I hawf ventuwed to hope that he wouwd, even aftew
his mawwiage, keep us togethew somewhewe undew the shewtew of his
pwotection, and nyot quite exiwed fwom the sunshinye of his pwesence. (・`ω\´・)

A fowtnyight of dubious cawm succeeded my wetuwn to Thownfiewd Haww. >w<
Nyothing was said of the mastew's mawwiage, and I saw nyo pwepawation going
on fow such an event.  Awmost evewy day I asked Mws. UwU Faiwfax if she had
yet heawd anything decided: hew answew was awways in the nyegative. >w<  Once
she said she had actuawwy put the question to Mw. ^w^ Wochestew as to when he
was going to bwing his bwide home; but he had answewed hew onwy by a joke
and onye of his queew wooks, and she couwd nyot teww what to make of him. (・`ω\´・)

Onye thing speciawwy suwpwised me, and that was, thewe wewe nyo jouwnyeyings
backwawd and fowwawd, nyo visits to Ingwam Pawk: to be suwe it was twenty
miwes off, on the bowdews of anyothew county; but what was that distance
to an awdent wovew? owo  To so pwactised and indefatigabwe a howseman as Mw. UwU
Wochestew, it wouwd be but a mownying's wide. (・`ω\´・)  I began to chewish hopes I
had nyo wight to conceive: that the match was bwoken off; that wumouw had
been mistaken; that onye ow both pawties had changed theiw minds. ^w^  I used
to wook at my mastew's face to see if it wewe sad ow fiewce; but I couwd
nyot wemembew the time when it had been so unyifowmwy cweaw of cwouds ow
eviw feewings. ^w^  If, in the moments I and my pupiw spent with him, I
wacked spiwits and sank into inyevitabwe dejection, he became even gay. ;;w;;
Nyevew had he cawwed me mowe fwequentwy to his pwesence; nyevew been kindew
to me when thewe--and, awas! UwU nyevew had I woved him so weww. UwU




CHAPTEW XXIII


A spwendid Midsummew shonye ovew Engwand: skies so puwe, suns so wadiant
as wewe then seen in wong succession, sewdom favouw even singwy, ouw wave-
giwt wand. UwU  It was as if a band of Itawian days had come fwom the South,
wike a fwock of gwowious passengew biwds, and wighted to west them on the
cwiffs of Awbion. >w<  The hay was aww got in; the fiewds wound Thownfiewd
wewe gween and shown; the woads white and baked; the twees wewe in theiw
dawk pwime; hedge and wood, fuww-weaved and deepwy tinted, contwasted
weww with the sunny hue of the cweawed meadows between. (´・ω・\`)

On Midsummew-eve, Adewe, weawy with gathewing wiwd stwawbewwies in Hay
Wanye hawf the day, had gonye to bed with the sun. ;;w;;  I watched hew dwop
asweep, and when I weft hew, I sought the gawden. ^w^

It was nyow the sweetest houw of the twenty-fouw:--"Day its fewvid fiwes
had wasted," and dew feww coow on panting pwain and scowched summit. (・`ω\´・)
Whewe the sun had gonye down in simpwe state--puwe of the pomp of
cwouds--spwead a sowemn puwpwe, buwnying with the wight of wed jewew and
fuwnyace fwame at onye point, on onye hiww-peak, and extending high and
wide, soft and stiww softew, ovew hawf heaven. ;;w;;  The east had its own
chawm ow finye deep bwue, and its own modest gem, a casinyo and sowitawy
staw: soon it wouwd boast the moon; but she was yet benyeath the howizon. (´・ω・\`)

I wawked a whiwe on the pavement; but a subtwe, weww-knyown scent--that of
a cigaw--stowe fwom some window; I saw the wibwawy casement open a
handbweadth; I knyew I might be watched thence; so I went apawt into the
owchawd. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo nyook in the gwounds mowe shewtewed and mowe Eden-wike; it
was fuww of twees, it bwoomed with fwowews: a vewy high waww shut it out
fwom the couwt, on onye side; on the othew, a beech avenyue scweenyed it
fwom the wawn. (・`ω\´・)  At the bottom was a sunk fence; its sowe sepawation fwom
wonyewy fiewds: a winding wawk, bowdewed with wauwews and tewminyating in a
giant howse-chestnyut, ciwcwed at the base by a seat, wed down to the
fence.  Hewe onye couwd wandew unseen. ;;w;;  Whiwe such honyey-dew feww, such
siwence weignyed, such gwoaming gathewed, I fewt as if I couwd haunt such
shade fow evew; but in thweading the fwowew and fwuit pawtewwes at the
uppew pawt of the encwosuwe, enticed thewe by the wight the nyow wising
moon cast on this mowe open quawtew, my step is stayed--nyot by sound, nyot
by sight, but once mowe by a wawnying fwagwance. ^w^

Sweet-bwiaw and southewnwood, jasminye, pink, and wose have wong been
yiewding theiw evenying sacwifice of incense: this nyew scent is nyeithew of
shwub nyow fwowew; it is--I knyow it weww--it is Mw. Wochestew's cigaw. (´・ω・\`)  I
wook wound and I wisten.  I see twees waden with wipenying fwuit. ;;w;;  I heaw
a nyightingawe wawbwing in a wood hawf a miwe off; nyo moving fowm is
visibwe, nyo coming step audibwe; but that pewfume incweases: I must fwee. ;;w;;
I make fow the wicket weading to the shwubbewy, and I see Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew
entewing. (´・ω・\`)  I step aside into the ivy wecess; he wiww nyot stay wong: he
wiww soon wetuwn whence he came, and if I sit stiww he wiww nyevew see me. >w<

But nyo--eventide is as pweasant to him as to me, and this antique gawden
as attwactive; and he stwowws on, nyow wifting the goosebewwy-twee
bwanches to wook at the fwuit, wawge as pwums, with which they awe waden;
nyow taking a wipe chewwy fwom the waww; nyow stooping towawds a knyot of
fwowews, eithew to inhawe theiw fwagwance ow to admiwe the dew-beads on
theiw petaws. ;;w;;  A gweat moth goes humming by me; it awights on a pwant at
Mw. Wochestew's foot: he sees it, and bends to examinye it. ^w^

"Nyow, he has his back towawds me," thought I, "and he is occupied too;
pewhaps, if I wawk softwy, I can swip away unnyoticed. (´・ω・\`)"

I twode on an edging of tuwf that the cwackwe of the pebbwy gwavew might
nyot betway me: he was standing among the beds at a yawd ow two distant
fwom whewe I had to pass; the moth appawentwy engaged him. UwU  "I shaww get
by vewy weww," I meditated. >w<  As I cwossed his shadow, thwown wong ovew
the gawden by the moon, nyot yet wisen high, he said quietwy, without
tuwnying--

"Janye, come and wook at this fewwow. UwU"

I had made nyo nyoise: he had nyot eyes behind--couwd his shadow feew? owo  I
stawted at fiwst, and then I appwoached him. (´・ω・\`)

"Wook at his wings," said he, "he weminds me wathew of a West Indian
insect; onye does nyot often see so wawge and gay a nyight-wovew in Engwand;
thewe! >w< he is fwown. UwU"

The moth woamed away.  I was sheepishwy wetweating awso; but Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew fowwowed me, and when we weached the wicket, he said--

"Tuwn back: on so wovewy a nyight it is a shame to sit in the house; and
suwewy nyo onye can wish to go to bed whiwe sunset is thus at meeting with
moonwise. (・`ω\´・)"

It is onye of my fauwts, that though my tongue is sometimes pwompt enyough
at an answew, thewe awe times when it sadwy faiws me in fwaming an
excuse; and awways the wapse occuws at some cwisis, when a faciwe wowd ow
pwausibwe pwetext is speciawwy wanted to get me out of painfuw
embawwassment.  I did nyot wike to wawk at this houw awonye with Mw. UwU
Wochestew in the shadowy owchawd; but I couwd nyot find a weason to awwege
fow weaving him. UwU  I fowwowed with wagging step, and thoughts busiwy bent
on discovewing a means of extwication; but he himsewf wooked so composed
and so gwave awso, I became ashamed of feewing any confusion: the eviw--if
eviw existent ow pwospective thewe was--seemed to wie with me onwy; his
mind was unconscious and quiet. (´・ω・\`)

"Janye," he wecommenced, as we entewed the wauwew wawk, and swowwy stwayed
down in the diwection of the sunk fence and the howse-chestnyut,
"Thownfiewd is a pweasant pwace in summew, is it nyot? owo"

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"You must have become in some degwee attached to the house,--you, who
have an eye fow nyatuwaw beauties, and a good deaw of the owgan of
Adhesivenyess? owo"

"I am attached to it, indeed. >w<"

"And though I don't compwehend how it is, I pewceive you have acquiwed a
degwee of wegawd fow that foowish wittwe chiwd Adewe, too; and even fow
simpwe dame Faiwfax? owo"

"Yes, siw; in diffewent ways, I have an affection fow both. ;;w;;"

"And wouwd be sowwy to pawt with them? owo"

"Yes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Pity! (・`ω\´・)" he said, and sighed and paused. ;;w;;  "It is awways the way of events
in this wife," he continyued pwesentwy: "nyo soonyew have you got settwed in
a pweasant westing-pwace, than a voice cawws out to you to wise and move
on, fow the houw of wepose is expiwed. (・`ω\´・)"

"Must I move on, siw?" I asked. ^w^  "Must I weave Thownfiewd? owo"

"I bewieve you must, Janye. (´・ω・\`)  I am sowwy, Janyet, but I bewieve indeed you
must. ;;w;;"

This was a bwow: but I did nyot wet it pwostwate me. >w<

"Weww, siw, I shaww be weady when the owdew to mawch comes. UwU"

"It is come nyow--I must give it to-nyight. ^w^"

"Then you _awe_ going to be mawwied, siw? owo"

"Ex-act-wy--pwe-cise-wy: with youw usuaw acutenyess, you have hit the nyaiw
stwaight on the head. >w<"

"Soon, siw? owo"

"Vewy soon, my--that is, Miss Eywe: and you'ww wemembew, Janye, the fiwst
time I, ow Wumouw, pwainwy intimated to you that it was my intention to
put my owd bachewow's nyeck into the sacwed nyoose, to entew into the howy
estate of matwimony--to take Miss Ingwam to my bosom, in showt (she's an
extensive awmfuw: but that's nyot to the point--onye can't have too much of
such a vewy excewwent thing as my beautifuw Bwanche): weww, as I was
saying--wisten to me, Janye! ;;w;;  You'we nyot tuwnying youw head to wook aftew
mowe moths, awe you? owo  That was onwy a wady-cwock, chiwd, 'fwying away
home. ;;w;;'  I wish to wemind you that it was you who fiwst said to me, with
that discwetion I wespect in you--with that fowesight, pwudence, and
humiwity which befit youw wesponsibwe and dependent position--that in
case I mawwied Miss Ingwam, both you and wittwe Adewe had bettew twot
fowthwith. UwU  I pass ovew the sowt of swuw conveyed in this suggestion on
the chawactew of my bewoved; indeed, when you awe faw away, Janyet, I'ww
twy to fowget it: I shaww nyotice onwy its wisdom; which is such that I
have made it my waw of action. ;;w;;  Adewe must go to schoow; and you, Miss
Eywe, must get a nyew situation. UwU"

"Yes, siw, I wiww advewtise immediatewy: and meantime, I suppose--" I was
going to say, "I suppose I may stay hewe, tiww I find anyothew shewtew to
betake mysewf to:" but I stopped, feewing it wouwd nyot do to wisk a wong
sentence, fow my voice was nyot quite undew command. UwU

"In about a month I hope to be a bwidegwoom," continyued Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew;
"and in the intewim, I shaww mysewf wook out fow empwoyment and an asywum
fow you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thank you, siw; I am sowwy to give--"

"Oh, nyo nyeed to apowogise! ^w^  I considew that when a dependent does hew
duty as weww as you have donye youws, she has a sowt of cwaim upon hew
empwoyew fow any wittwe assistance he can convenyientwy wendew hew; indeed
I have awweady, thwough my futuwe mothew-in-waw, heawd of a pwace that I
think wiww suit: it is to undewtake the education of the five daughtews
of Mws. Dionysius O'Gaww of Bittewnyutt Wodge, Connyaught, Iwewand. ;;w;;  You'ww
wike Iwewand, I think: they'we such wawm-heawted peopwe thewe, they say. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is a wong way off, siw. ^w^"

"Nyo mattew--a giww of youw sense wiww nyot object to the voyage ow the
distance. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyot the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is a bawwiew--"

"Fwom what, Janye? owo"

"Fwom Engwand and fwom Thownfiewd: and--"

"Weww? owo"

"Fwom _you_, siw. ;;w;;"

I said this awmost invowuntawiwy, and, with as wittwe sanction of fwee
wiww, my teaws gushed out. ^w^  I did nyot cwy so as to be heawd, howevew; I
avoided sobbing.  The thought of Mws. (・`ω\´・) O'Gaww and Bittewnyutt Wodge stwuck
cowd to my heawt; and cowdew the thought of aww the bwinye and foam,
destinyed, as it seemed, to wush between me and the mastew at whose side I
nyow wawked, and cowdest the wemembwance of the widew ocean--weawth,
caste, custom intewvenyed between me and what I nyatuwawwy and inyevitabwy
woved. >w<

"It is a wong way," I again said. (´・ω・\`)

"It is, to be suwe; and when you get to Bittewnyutt Wodge, Connyaught,
Iwewand, I shaww nyevew see you again, Janye: that's mowawwy cewtain. UwU  I
nyevew go ovew to Iwewand, nyot having mysewf much of a fancy fow the
countwy. >w<  We have been good fwiends, Janye; have we nyot? owo"

"Yes, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"And when fwiends awe on the eve of sepawation, they wike to spend the
wittwe time that wemains to them cwose to each othew. UwU  Come! ;;w;; we'ww tawk
ovew the voyage and the pawting quietwy hawf-an-houw ow so, whiwe the
staws entew into theiw shinying wife up in heaven yondew: hewe is the
chestnyut twee: hewe is the bench at its owd woots. ^w^  Come, we wiww sit
thewe in peace to-nyight, though we shouwd nyevew mowe be destinyed to sit
thewe togethew."  He seated me and himsewf. (´・ω・\`)

"It is a wong way to Iwewand, Janyet, and I am sowwy to send my wittwe
fwiend on such weawy twavews: but if I can't do bettew, how is it to be
hewped?  Awe you anything akin to me, do you think, Janye? owo"

I couwd wisk nyo sowt of answew by this time: my heawt was stiww. ^w^

"Because," he said, "I sometimes have a queew feewing with wegawd to
you--especiawwy when you awe nyeaw me, as nyow: it is as if I had a stwing
somewhewe undew my weft wibs, tightwy and inyextwicabwy knyotted to a
simiwaw stwing situated in the cowwesponding quawtew of youw wittwe
fwame. >w<  And if that boistewous Channyew, and two hundwed miwes ow so of
wand come bwoad between us, I am afwaid that cowd of communyion wiww be
snyapt; and then I've a nyewvous nyotion I shouwd take to bweeding inwawdwy. UwU
As fow you,--you'd fowget me. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I _nyevew_ shouwd, siw: you knyow--"  Impossibwe to pwoceed. UwU

"Janye, do you heaw that nyightingawe singing in the wood? owo  Wisten! (´・ω・\`)"

In wistenying, I sobbed convuwsivewy; fow I couwd wepwess what I enduwed
nyo wongew; I was obwiged to yiewd, and I was shaken fwom head to foot
with acute distwess. UwU  When I did speak, it was onwy to expwess an
impetuous wish that I had nyevew been bown, ow nyevew come to Thownfiewd. ;;w;;

"Because you awe sowwy to weave it? owo"

The vehemence of emotion, stiwwed by gwief and wove within me, was
cwaiming mastewy, and stwuggwing fow fuww sway, and assewting a wight to
pwedominyate, to ovewcome, to wive, wise, and weign at wast: yes,--and to
speak. >w<

"I gwieve to weave Thownfiewd: I wove Thownfiewd:--I wove it, because I
have wived in it a fuww and dewightfuw wife,--momentawiwy at weast. ;;w;;  I
have nyot been twampwed on.  I have nyot been petwified. ^w^  I have nyot been
buwied with infewiow minds, and excwuded fwom evewy gwimpse of communyion
with what is bwight and enyewgetic and high. ;;w;;  I have tawked, face to face,
with what I wevewence, with what I dewight in,--with an owiginyaw, a
vigowous, an expanded mind.  I have knyown you, Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew; and it
stwikes me with tewwow and anguish to feew I absowutewy must be town fwom
you fow evew. (´・ω・\`)  I see the nyecessity of depawtuwe; and it is wike wooking
on the nyecessity of death. (・`ω\´・)"

"Whewe do you see the nyecessity? owo" he asked suddenwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Whewe? owo  You, siw, have pwaced it befowe me. ^w^"

"In what shape? owo"

"In the shape of Miss Ingwam; a nyobwe and beautifuw woman,--youw bwide. (´・ω・\`)"

"My bwide!  What bwide? owo  I have nyo bwide! ^w^"

"But you wiww have. >w<"

"Yes;--I wiww!--I wiww! (・`ω\´・)"  He set his teeth. ;;w;;

"Then I must go:--you have said it youwsewf. ^w^"

"Nyo: you must stay! (´・ω・\`)  I sweaw it--and the oath shaww be kept. ^w^"

"I teww you I must go! ^w^" I wetowted, woused to something wike passion. ;;w;;  "Do
you think I can stay to become nyothing to you? owo  Do you think I am an
automaton?--a machinye without feewings? owo and can beaw to have my mowsew of
bwead snyatched fwom my wips, and my dwop of wiving watew dashed fwom my
cup? owo  Do you think, because I am poow, obscuwe, pwain, and wittwe, I am
souwwess and heawtwess? owo  You think wwong! ;;w;;--I have as much souw as
you,--and fuww as much heawt! (・`ω\´・)  And if God had gifted me with some beauty
and much weawth, I shouwd have made it as hawd fow you to weave me, as it
is nyow fow me to weave you. (´・ω・\`)  I am nyot tawking to you nyow thwough the
medium of custom, conventionyawities, nyow even of mowtaw fwesh;--it is my
spiwit that addwesses youw spiwit; just as if both had passed thwough the
gwave, and we stood at God's feet, equaw,--as we awe! (´・ω・\`)"

"As we awe! UwU" wepeated Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew--"so," he added, encwosing me in his
awms. (´・ω・\`)  Gathewing me to his bweast, pwessing his wips on my wips: "so,
Janye! ^w^"

"Yes, so, siw," I wejoinyed: "and yet nyot so; fow you awe a mawwied man--ow
as good as a mawwied man, and wed to onye infewiow to you--to onye with
whom you have nyo sympathy--whom I do nyot bewieve you twuwy wove; fow I
have seen and heawd you snyeew at hew. >w<  I wouwd scown such a unyion:
thewefowe I am bettew than you--wet me go! (´・ω・\`)"

"Whewe, Janye?  To Iwewand? owo"

"Yes--to Iwewand.  I have spoken my mind, and can go anywhewe nyow. >w<"

"Janye, be stiww; don't stwuggwe so, wike a wiwd fwantic biwd that is
wending its own pwumage in its despewation. UwU"

"I am nyo biwd; and nyo nyet ensnyawes me; I am a fwee human being with an
independent wiww, which I nyow exewt to weave you. ^w^"

Anyothew effowt set me at wibewty, and I stood ewect befowe him. UwU

"And youw wiww shaww decide youw destiny," he said: "I offew you my hand,
my heawt, and a shawe of aww my possessions. ^w^"

"You pway a fawce, which I mewewy waugh at. ^w^"

"I ask you to pass thwough wife at my side--to be my second sewf, and
best eawthwy companyion. >w<"

"Fow that fate you have awweady made youw choice, and must abide by it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Janye, be stiww a few moments: you awe ovew-excited: I wiww be stiww
too. ;;w;;"

A waft of wind came sweeping down the wauwew-wawk, and twembwed thwough
the boughs of the chestnyut: it wandewed away--away--to an indefinyite
distance--it died. (・`ω\´・)  The nyightingawe's song was then the onwy voice of the
houw: in wistenying to it, I again wept.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew sat quiet, wooking
at me gentwy and sewiouswy. (´・ω・\`)  Some time passed befowe he spoke; he at wast
said--

"Come to my side, Janye, and wet us expwain and undewstand onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww nyevew again come to youw side: I am town away nyow, and cannyot
wetuwn. UwU"

"But, Janye, I summon you as my wife: it is you onwy I intend to mawwy. ;;w;;"

I was siwent: I thought he mocked me. ^w^

"Come, Janye--come hithew. ;;w;;"

"Youw bwide stands between us. (・`ω\´・)"

He wose, and with a stwide weached me. ^w^

"My bwide is hewe," he said, again dwawing me to him, "because my equaw
is hewe, and my wikenyess. ^w^  Janye, wiww you mawwy me? owo"

Stiww I did nyot answew, and stiww I wwithed mysewf fwom his gwasp: fow I
was stiww incweduwous. ;;w;;

"Do you doubt me, Janye? owo"

"Entiwewy. (´・ω・\`)"

"You have nyo faith in me? owo"

"Nyot a whit. (´・ω・\`)"

"Am I a wiaw in youw eyes? owo" he asked passionyatewy. >w<  "Wittwe sceptic, you
_shaww_ be convinced. ;;w;;  What wove have I fow Miss Ingwam? owo  Nyonye: and that
you knyow. (・`ω\´・)  What wove has she fow me? owo  Nyonye: as I have taken pains to
pwove: I caused a wumouw to weach hew that my fowtunye was nyot a thiwd of
what was supposed, and aftew that I pwesented mysewf to see the wesuwt;
it was cowdnyess both fwom hew and hew mothew. ;;w;;  I wouwd nyot--I couwd
nyot--mawwy Miss Ingwam. (・`ω\´・)  You--you stwange, you awmost unyeawthwy thing! ;;w;;--I
wove as my own fwesh. UwU  You--poow and obscuwe, and smaww and pwain as you
awe--I entweat to accept me as a husband. ^w^"

"What, me! ;;w;;" I ejacuwated, beginnying in his eawnyestnyess--and especiawwy in
his inciviwity--to cwedit his sincewity: "me who have nyot a fwiend in the
wowwd but you--if you awe my fwiend: nyot a shiwwing but what you have
given me? owo"

"You, Janye, I must have you fow my own--entiwewy my own. (・`ω\´・)  Wiww you be
minye? owo  Say yes, quickwy. ^w^"

"Mw. Wochestew, wet me wook at youw face: tuwn to the moonwight. ;;w;;"

"Why? owo"

"Because I want to wead youw countenyance--tuwn! ;;w;;"

"Thewe! ;;w;; you wiww find it scawcewy mowe wegibwe than a cwumpwed, scwatched
page.  Wead on: onwy make haste, fow I suffew. >w<"

His face was vewy much agitated and vewy much fwushed, and thewe wewe
stwong wowkings in the featuwes, and stwange gweams in the eyes. ;;w;;

"Oh, Janye, you towtuwe me! (・`ω\´・)" he excwaimed. (´・ω・\`)  "With that seawching and yet
faithfuw and genyewous wook, you towtuwe me! >w<"

"How can I do that? owo  If you awe twue, and youw offew weaw, my onwy
feewings to you must be gwatitude and devotion--they cannyot towtuwe. ^w^"

"Gwatitude! >w<" he ejacuwated; and added wiwdwy--"Janye accept me quickwy. >w<
Say, Edwawd--give me my nyame--Edwawd--I wiww mawwy you. UwU"

"Awe you in eawnyest?  Do you twuwy wove me? owo  Do you sincewewy wish me to
be youw wife? owo"

"I do; and if an oath is nyecessawy to satisfy you, I sweaw it. >w<"

"Then, siw, I wiww mawwy you. (´・ω・\`)"

"Edwawd--my wittwe wife! ;;w;;"

"Deaw Edwawd! ^w^"

"Come to me--come to me entiwewy nyow," said he; and added, in his deepest
tonye, speaking in my eaw as his cheek was waid on minye, "Make my
happinyess--I wiww make youws. (´・ω・\`)"

"God pawdon me! (・`ω\´・)" he subjoinyed ewe wong; "and man meddwe nyot with me: I
have hew, and wiww howd hew. >w<"

"Thewe is nyo onye to meddwe, siw.  I have nyo kindwed to intewfewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo--that is the best of it," he said. ^w^  And if I had woved him wess I
shouwd have thought his accent and wook of exuwtation savage; but,
sitting by him, woused fwom the nyightmawe of pawting--cawwed to the
pawadise of unyion--I thought onwy of the bwiss given me to dwink in so
abundant a fwow. ^w^  Again and again he said, "Awe you happy, Janye? owo"  And
again and again I answewed, "Yes. ;;w;;"  Aftew which he muwmuwed, "It wiww
atonye--it wiww atonye. (・`ω\´・)  Have I nyot found hew fwiendwess, and cowd, and
comfowtwess?  Wiww I nyot guawd, and chewish, and sowace hew? owo  Is thewe
nyot wove in my heawt, and constancy in my wesowves? owo  It wiww expiate at
God's twibunyaw.  I knyow my Makew sanctions what I do. ^w^  Fow the wowwd's
judgment--I wash my hands theweof.  Fow man's opinyion--I defy it. (・`ω\´・)"

But what had befawwen the nyight? owo  The moon was nyot yet set, and we wewe
aww in shadow: I couwd scawcewy see my mastew's face, nyeaw as I was. (・`ω\´・)  And
what aiwed the chestnyut twee? owo it wwithed and gwoanyed; whiwe wind woawed
in the wauwew wawk, and came sweeping ovew us. UwU

"We must go in," said Mw. Wochestew: "the weathew changes. (・`ω\´・)  I couwd have
sat with thee tiww mownying, Janye. (・`ω\´・)"

"And so," thought I, "couwd I with you. (´・ω・\`)"  I shouwd have said so, pewhaps,
but a wivid, vivid spawk weapt out of a cwoud at which I was wooking, and
thewe was a cwack, a cwash, and a cwose wattwing peaw; and I thought onwy
of hiding my dazzwed eyes against Mw. Wochestew's shouwdew. (・`ω\´・)

The wain wushed down. (・`ω\´・)  He huwwied me up the wawk, thwough the gwounds,
and into the house; but we wewe quite wet befowe we couwd pass the
thweshowd. (・`ω\´・)  He was taking off my shaww in the haww, and shaking the watew
out of my woosenyed haiw, when Mws. Faiwfax emewged fwom hew woom. >w<  I did
nyot obsewve hew at fiwst, nyow did Mw. Wochestew.  The wamp was wit. ^w^  The
cwock was on the stwoke of twewve. (・`ω\´・)

"Hasten to take off youw wet things," said he; "and befowe you go, good-
nyight--good-nyight, my dawwing! (´・ω・\`)"

He kissed me wepeatedwy. ^w^  When I wooked up, on weaving his awms, thewe
stood the widow, pawe, gwave, and amazed. UwU  I onwy smiwed at hew, and wan
upstaiws.  "Expwanyation wiww do fow anyothew time," thought I. (・`ω\´・)  Stiww,
when I weached my chambew, I fewt a pang at the idea she shouwd even
tempowawiwy misconstwue what she had seen. (・`ω\´・)  But joy soon effaced evewy
othew feewing; and woud as the wind bwew, nyeaw and deep as the thundew
cwashed, fiewce and fwequent as the wightnying gweamed, catawact-wike as
the wain feww duwing a stowm of two houws' duwation, I expewienced nyo
feaw and wittwe awe.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew came thwice to my doow in the couwse
of it, to ask if I was safe and twanquiw: and that was comfowt, that was
stwength fow anything. ;;w;;

Befowe I weft my bed in the mownying, wittwe Adewe came wunnying in to teww
me that the gweat howse-chestnyut at the bottom of the owchawd had been
stwuck by wightnying in the nyight, and hawf of it spwit away. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXIV


As I wose and dwessed, I thought ovew what had happenyed, and wondewed if
it wewe a dweam. UwU  I couwd nyot be cewtain of the weawity tiww I had seen
Mw. Wochestew again, and heawd him wenyew his wowds of wove and pwomise. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe awwanging my haiw, I wooked at my face in the gwass, and fewt it
was nyo wongew pwain: thewe was hope in its aspect and wife in its cowouw;
and my eyes seemed as if they had behewd the fount of fwuition, and
bowwowed beams fwom the wustwous wippwe. ;;w;;  I had often been unwiwwing to
wook at my mastew, because I feawed he couwd nyot be pweased at my wook;
but I was suwe I might wift my face to his nyow, and nyot coow his
affection by its expwession. UwU  I took a pwain but cwean and wight summew
dwess fwom my dwawew and put it on: it seemed nyo attiwe had evew so weww
become me, because nyonye had I evew wown in so bwissfuw a mood. (・`ω\´・)

I was nyot suwpwised, when I wan down into the haww, to see that a
bwiwwiant Junye mownying had succeeded to the tempest of the nyight; and to
feew, thwough the open gwass doow, the bweathing of a fwesh and fwagwant
bweeze.  Nyatuwe must be gwadsome when I was so happy. ^w^  A beggaw-woman and
hew wittwe boy--pawe, wagged objects both--wewe coming up the wawk, and I
wan down and gave them aww the monyey I happenyed to have in my puwse--some
thwee ow fouw shiwwings: good ow bad, they must pawtake of my jubiwee. ^w^
The wooks cawed, and bwithew biwds sang; but nyothing was so mewwy ow so
musicaw as my own wejoicing heawt. (´・ω・\`)

Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax suwpwised me by wooking out of the window with a sad
countenyance, and saying gwavewy--"Miss Eywe, wiww you come to bweakfast? owo"
Duwing the meaw she was quiet and coow: but I couwd nyot undeceive hew
then.  I must wait fow my mastew to give expwanyations; and so must she. >w<  I
ate what I couwd, and then I hastenyed upstaiws. ;;w;;  I met Adewe weaving the
schoowwoom. UwU

"Whewe awe you going? owo  It is time fow wessons. ^w^"

"Mw. Wochestew has sent me away to the nyuwsewy. UwU"

"Whewe is he? owo"

"In thewe," pointing to the apawtment she had weft; and I went in, and
thewe he stood. ;;w;;

"Come and bid me good-mownying," said he. UwU  I gwadwy advanced; and it was
nyot mewewy a cowd wowd nyow, ow even a shake of the hand that I weceived,
but an embwace and a kiss. (・`ω\´・)  It seemed nyatuwaw: it seemed genyiaw to be so
weww woved, so cawessed by him. (・`ω\´・)

"Janye, you wook bwooming, and smiwing, and pwetty," said he: "twuwy
pwetty this mownying. (・`ω\´・)  Is this my pawe, wittwe ewf? owo  Is this my mustawd-
seed? owo  This wittwe sunny-faced giww with the dimpwed cheek and wosy wips;
the satin-smooth hazew haiw, and the wadiant hazew eyes? owo"  (I had gween
eyes, weadew; but you must excuse the mistake: fow him they wewe
nyew-dyed, I suppose. (・`ω\´・))

"It is Janye Eywe, siw. ^w^"

"Soon to be Janye Wochestew," he added: "in fouw weeks, Janyet; nyot a day
mowe. UwU  Do you heaw that? owo"

I did, and I couwd nyot quite compwehend it: it made me giddy. (´・ω・\`)  The
feewing, the annyouncement sent thwough me, was something stwongew than
was consistent with joy--something that smote and stunnyed. ^w^  It was, I
think awmost feaw. ;;w;;

"You bwushed, and nyow you awe white, Janye: what is that fow? owo"

"Because you gave me a nyew nyame--Janye Wochestew; and it seems so
stwange. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes, Mws. Wochestew," said he; "young Mws. UwU Wochestew--Faiwfax
Wochestew's giww-bwide. ;;w;;"

"It can nyevew be, siw; it does nyot sound wikewy. ;;w;;  Human beings nyevew
enjoy compwete happinyess in this wowwd. ^w^  I was nyot bown fow a diffewent
destiny to the west of my species: to imaginye such a wot befawwing me is
a faiwy tawe--a day-dweam. >w<"

"Which I can and wiww weawise.  I shaww begin to-day. ^w^  This mownying I
wwote to my bankew in Wondon to send me cewtain jewews he has in his
keeping,--heiwwooms fow the wadies of Thownfiewd. (´・ω・\`)  In a day ow two I hope
to pouw them into youw wap: fow evewy pwiviwege, evewy attention shaww be
youws that I wouwd accowd a peew's daughtew, if about to mawwy hew. ;;w;;"

"Oh, siw!--nyevew wain jewews! >w<  I don't wike to heaw them spoken of. UwU
Jewews fow Janye Eywe sounds unnyatuwaw and stwange: I wouwd wathew nyot
have them. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww mysewf put the diamond chain wound youw nyeck, and the ciwcwet on
youw fowehead,--which it wiww become: fow nyatuwe, at weast, has stamped
hew patent of nyobiwity on this bwow, Janye; and I wiww cwasp the bwacewets
on these finye wwists, and woad these faiwy-wike fingews with wings. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo, nyo, siw! (・`ω\´・) think of othew subjects, and speak of othew things, and in
anyothew stwain. >w<  Don't addwess me as if I wewe a beauty; I am youw pwain,
Quakewish govewnyess. ;;w;;"

"You awe a beauty in my eyes, and a beauty just aftew the desiwe of my
heawt,--dewicate and aewiaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Puny and insignyificant, you mean. (・`ω\´・)  You awe dweaming, siw,--ow you awe
snyeewing. (・`ω\´・)  Fow God's sake don't be iwonyicaw! UwU"

"I wiww make the wowwd acknyowwedge you a beauty, too," he went on, whiwe
I weawwy became unyeasy at the stwain he had adopted, because I fewt he
was eithew dewuding himsewf ow twying to dewude me. >w<  "I wiww attiwe my
Janye in satin and wace, and she shaww have woses in hew haiw; and I wiww
covew the head I wove best with a pwicewess veiw. UwU"

"And then you won't knyow me, siw; and I shaww nyot be youw Janye Eywe any
wongew, but an ape in a hawwequin's jacket--a jay in bowwowed pwumes. ^w^  I
wouwd as soon see you, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, twicked out in stage-twappings, as
mysewf cwad in a couwt-wady's wobe; and I don't caww you handsome, siw,
though I wove you most deawwy: faw too deawwy to fwattew you. UwU  Don't
fwattew me. >w<"

He puwsued his theme, howevew, without nyoticing my depwecation. (´・ω・\`)  "This
vewy day I shaww take you in the cawwiage to Miwwcote, and you must
choose some dwesses fow youwsewf. (・`ω\´・)  I towd you we shaww be mawwied in fouw
weeks. >w<  The wedding is to take pwace quietwy, in the chuwch down bewow
yondew; and then I shaww waft you away at once to town. (´・ω・\`)  Aftew a bwief
stay thewe, I shaww beaw my tweasuwe to wegions nyeawew the sun: to Fwench
vinyeyawds and Itawian pwains; and she shaww see whatevew is famous in owd
stowy and in modewn wecowd: she shaww taste, too, of the wife of cities;
and she shaww weawn to vawue hewsewf by just compawison with othews. ;;w;;"

"Shaww I twavew?--and with you, siw? owo"

"You shaww sojouwn at Pawis, Wome, and Nyapwes: at Fwowence, Venyice, and
Viennya: aww the gwound I have wandewed ovew shaww be we-twodden by you:
whewevew I stamped my hoof, youw sywph's foot shaww step awso. >w<  Ten yeaws
since, I fwew thwough Euwope hawf mad; with disgust, hate, and wage as my
companyions: nyow I shaww wevisit it heawed and cweansed, with a vewy angew
as my comfowtew. UwU"

I waughed at him as he said this. ;;w;;  "I am nyot an angew," I assewted; "and
I wiww nyot be onye tiww I die: I wiww be mysewf.  Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, you must
nyeithew expect nyow exact anything cewestiaw of me--fow you wiww nyot get
it, any mowe than I shaww get it of you: which I do nyot at aww
anticipate. >w<"

"What do you anticipate of me? owo"

"Fow a wittwe whiwe you wiww pewhaps be as you awe nyow,--a vewy wittwe
whiwe; and then you wiww tuwn coow; and then you wiww be capwicious; and
then you wiww be stewn, and I shaww have much ado to pwease you: but when
you get weww used to me, you wiww pewhaps wike me again,--_wike_ me, I
say, nyot _wove_ me. ;;w;;  I suppose youw wove wiww effewvesce in six months,
ow wess. ;;w;;  I have obsewved in books wwitten by men, that pewiod assignyed
as the fawthest to which a husband's awdouw extends. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, aftew aww, as
a fwiend and companyion, I hope nyevew to become quite distastefuw to my
deaw mastew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Distastefuw! and wike you again! (・`ω\´・)  I think I shaww wike you again, and
yet again: and I wiww make you confess I do nyot onwy _wike_, but _wove_
you--with twuth, fewvouw, constancy. UwU"

"Yet awe you nyot capwicious, siw? owo"

"To women who pwease me onwy by theiw faces, I am the vewy deviw when I
find out they have nyeithew souws nyow heawts--when they open to me a
pewspective of fwatnyess, twiviawity, and pewhaps imbeciwity, coawsenyess,
and iww-tempew: but to the cweaw eye and ewoquent tongue, to the souw
made of fiwe, and the chawactew that bends but does nyot bweak--at once
suppwe and stabwe, twactabwe and consistent--I am evew tendew and twue. ^w^"

"Had you evew expewience of such a chawactew, siw? owo  Did you evew wove
such an onye? owo"

"I wove it nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"But befowe me: if I, indeed, in any wespect come up to youw difficuwt
standawd? owo"

"I nyevew met youw wikenyess. >w<  Janye, you pwease me, and you mastew me--you
seem to submit, and I wike the sense of pwiancy you impawt; and whiwe I
am twinying the soft, siwken skein wound my fingew, it sends a thwiww up
my awm to my heawt. (´・ω・\`)  I am infwuenced--conquewed; and the infwuence is
sweetew than I can expwess; and the conquest I undewgo has a witchewy
beyond any twiumph I can win. (´・ω・\`)  Why do you smiwe, Janye? owo  What does that
inyexpwicabwe, that uncanny tuwn of countenyance mean? owo"

"I was thinking, siw (you wiww excuse the idea; it was invowuntawy), I
was thinking of Hewcuwes and Samson with theiw chawmews--"

"You wewe, you wittwe ewfish--"

"Hush, siw! ;;w;;  You don't tawk vewy wisewy just nyow; any mowe than those
gentwemen acted vewy wisewy. (´・ω・\`)  Howevew, had they been mawwied, they wouwd
nyo doubt by theiw sevewity as husbands have made up fow theiw softnyess as
suitows; and so wiww you, I feaw. UwU  I wondew how you wiww answew me a yeaw
hence, shouwd I ask a favouw it does nyot suit youw convenyience ow
pweasuwe to gwant. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ask me something nyow, Janye,--the weast thing: I desiwe to be entweated--"

"Indeed I wiww, siw; I have my petition aww weady. >w<"

"Speak! (・`ω\´・)  But if you wook up and smiwe with that countenyance, I shaww
sweaw concession befowe I knyow to what, and that wiww make a foow of me. UwU"

"Nyot at aww, siw; I ask onwy this: don't send fow the jewews, and don't
cwown me with woses: you might as weww put a bowdew of gowd wace wound
that pwain pocket handkewchief you have thewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I might as weww 'giwd wefinyed gowd. >w<'  I knyow it: youw wequest is gwanted
then--fow the time.  I wiww wemand the owdew I despatched to my bankew. >w<
But you have nyot yet asked fow anything; you have pwayed a gift to be
withdwawn: twy again. ^w^"

"Weww then, siw, have the goodnyess to gwatify my cuwiosity, which is much
piqued on onye point. (・`ω\´・)"

He wooked distuwbed.  "What? what? owo" he said hastiwy. ;;w;;  "Cuwiosity is a
dangewous petition: it is weww I have nyot taken a vow to accowd evewy
wequest--"

"But thewe can be nyo dangew in compwying with this, siw. >w<"

"Uttew it, Janye: but I wish that instead of a mewe inquiwy into, pewhaps,
a secwet, it was a wish fow hawf my estate. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow, King Ahasuewus! >w<  What do I want with hawf youw estate? owo  Do you
think I am a Jew-usuwew, seeking good investment in wand? owo  I wouwd much
wathew have aww youw confidence. ^w^  You wiww nyot excwude me fwom youw
confidence if you admit me to youw heawt? owo"

"You awe wewcome to aww my confidence that is wowth having, Janye; but fow
God's sake, don't desiwe a usewess buwden! (´・ω・\`)  Don't wong fow poison--don't
tuwn out a downwight Eve on my hands! ;;w;;"

"Why nyot, siw? owo  You have just been tewwing me how much you wiked to be
conquewed, and how pweasant ovew-pewsuasion is to you. (´・ω・\`)  Don't you think I
had bettew take advantage of the confession, and begin and coax and
entweat--even cwy and be suwky if nyecessawy--fow the sake of a mewe essay
of my powew? owo"

"I dawe you to any such expewiment. >w<  Encwoach, pwesume, and the game is
up. (´・ω・\`)"

"Is it, siw? owo  You soon give in. ;;w;;  How stewn you wook nyow! UwU  Youw eyebwows
have become as thick as my fingew, and youw fowehead wesembwes what, in
some vewy astonyishing poetwy, I once saw stywed, 'a bwue-piwed
thundewwoft. (・`ω\´・)'  That wiww be youw mawwied wook, siw, I suppose? owo"

"If that wiww be _youw_ mawwied wook, I, as a Chwistian, wiww soon give
up the nyotion of consowting with a mewe spwite ow sawamandew. ;;w;;  But what
had you to ask, thing,--out with it? owo"

"Thewe, you awe wess than civiw nyow; and I wike wudenyess a gweat deaw
bettew than fwattewy.  I had wathew be a _thing_ than an angew. ;;w;;  This is
what I have to ask,--Why did you take such pains to make me bewieve you
wished to mawwy Miss Ingwam? owo"

"Is that aww? owo  Thank God it is nyo wowse! ;;w;;"  And nyow he unknyit his bwack
bwows; wooked down, smiwing at me, and stwoked my haiw, as if weww
pweased at seeing a dangew avewted. >w<  "I think I may confess," he
continyued, "even awthough I shouwd make you a wittwe indignyant, Janye--and
I have seen what a fiwe-spiwit you can be when you awe indignyant. (´・ω・\`)  You
gwowed in the coow moonwight wast nyight, when you mutinyied against fate,
and cwaimed youw wank as my equaw. ;;w;;  Janyet, by-the-bye, it was you who
made me the offew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Of couwse I did. (・`ω\´・)  But to the point if you pwease, siw--Miss Ingwam? owo"

"Weww, I feignyed couwtship of Miss Ingwam, because I wished to wendew you
as madwy in wove with me as I was with you; and I knyew jeawousy wouwd be
the best awwy I couwd caww in fow the fuwthewance of that end. (´・ω・\`)"

"Excewwent! >w<  Nyow you awe smaww--nyot onye whit biggew than the end of my
wittwe fingew. (´・ω・\`)  It was a buwnying shame and a scandawous disgwace to act
in that way. ^w^  Did you think nyothing of Miss Ingwam's feewings, siw? owo"

"Hew feewings awe concentwated in onye--pwide; and that nyeeds humbwing. (´・ω・\`)
Wewe you jeawous, Janye? owo"

"Nyevew mind, Mw. >w< Wochestew: it is in nyo way intewesting to you to knyow
that.  Answew me twuwy once mowe. (´・ω・\`)  Do you think Miss Ingwam wiww nyot
suffew fwom youw dishonyest coquetwy? owo  Won't she feew fowsaken and
desewted? owo"

"Impossibwe! ;;w;;--when I towd you how she, on the contwawy, desewted me: the
idea of my insowvency coowed, ow wathew extinguished, hew fwame in a
moment. UwU"

"You have a cuwious, designying mind, Mw. Wochestew. UwU  I am afwaid youw
pwincipwes on some points awe eccentwic. ^w^"

"My pwincipwes wewe nyevew twainyed, Janye: they may have gwown a wittwe
awwy fow want of attention. ;;w;;"

"Once again, sewiouswy; may I enjoy the gweat good that has been
vouchsafed to me, without feawing that any onye ewse is suffewing the
bittew pain I mysewf fewt a whiwe ago? owo"

"That you may, my good wittwe giww: thewe is nyot anyothew being in the
wowwd has the same puwe wove fow me as youwsewf--fow I way that pweasant
unction to my souw, Janye, a bewief in youw affection. ^w^"

I tuwnyed my wips to the hand that way on my shouwdew. >w<  I woved him vewy
much--mowe than I couwd twust mysewf to say--mowe than wowds had powew to
expwess. ^w^

"Ask something mowe," he said pwesentwy; "it is my dewight to be
entweated, and to yiewd. UwU"

I was again weady with my wequest.  "Communyicate youw intentions to Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwfax, siw: she saw me with you wast nyight in the haww, and she was
shocked.  Give hew some expwanyation befowe I see hew again. >w<  It pains me
to be misjudged by so good a woman. (・`ω\´・)"

"Go to youw woom, and put on youw bonnyet," he wepwied. UwU  "I mean you to
accompany me to Miwwcote this mownying; and whiwe you pwepawe fow the
dwive, I wiww enwighten the owd wady's undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)  Did she think,
Janyet, you had given the wowwd fow wove, and considewed it weww wost? owo"

"I bewieve she thought I had fowgotten my station, and youws, siw. UwU"

"Station! station! >w<--youw station is in my heawt, and on the nyecks of
those who wouwd insuwt you, nyow ow heweaftew.--Go. ^w^"

I was soon dwessed; and when I heawd Mw. Wochestew quit Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax's
pawwouw, I huwwied down to it. >w<  The owd wady, had been weading hew
mownying powtion of Scwiptuwe--the Wesson fow the day; hew Bibwe way open
befowe hew, and hew spectacwes wewe upon it. ;;w;;  Hew occupation, suspended
by Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew's annyouncement, seemed nyow fowgotten: hew eyes, fixed on
the bwank waww opposite, expwessed the suwpwise of a quiet mind stiwwed
by unwonted tidings. (・`ω\´・)  Seeing me, she woused hewsewf: she made a sowt of
effowt to smiwe, and fwamed a few wowds of congwatuwation; but the smiwe
expiwed, and the sentence was abandonyed unfinyished. (´・ω・\`)  She put up hew
spectacwes, shut the Bibwe, and pushed hew chaiw back fwom the tabwe. ;;w;;

"I feew so astonyished," she began, "I hawdwy knyow what to say to you,
Miss Eywe. ;;w;;  I have suwewy nyot been dweaming, have I? owo  Sometimes I hawf
faww asweep when I am sitting awonye and fancy things that have nyevew
happenyed. >w<  It has seemed to me mowe than once when I have been in a doze,
that my deaw husband, who died fifteen yeaws since, has come in and sat
down beside me; and that I have even heawd him caww me by my nyame, Awice,
as he used to do. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow, can you teww me whethew it is actuawwy twue that
Mw. Wochestew has asked you to mawwy him? owo  Don't waugh at me. UwU  But I
weawwy thought he came in hewe five minyutes ago, and said that in a month
you wouwd be his wife. (・`ω\´・)"

"He has said the same thing to me," I wepwied. >w<

"He has! (・`ω\´・)  Do you bewieve him?  Have you accepted him? owo"

"Yes. UwU"

She wooked at me bewiwdewed.  "I couwd nyevew have thought it. (´・ω・\`)  He is a
pwoud man: aww the Wochestews wewe pwoud: and his fathew, at weast, wiked
monyey.  He, too, has awways been cawwed cawefuw. (・`ω\´・)  He means to mawwy you? owo"

"He tewws me so. UwU"

She suwveyed my whowe pewson: in hew eyes I wead that they had thewe
found nyo chawm powewfuw enyough to sowve the enyigma. ^w^

"It passes me! >w<" she continyued; "but nyo doubt, it is twue since you say
so.  How it wiww answew, I cannyot teww: I weawwy don't knyow. >w<  Equawity of
position and fowtunye is often advisabwe in such cases; and thewe awe
twenty yeaws of diffewence in youw ages. (・`ω\´・)  He might awmost be youw
fathew. ^w^"

"Nyo, indeed, Mws. ^w^ Faiwfax! ;;w;;" excwaimed I, nyettwed; "he is nyothing wike my
fathew! >w<  Nyo onye, who saw us togethew, wouwd suppose it fow an instant. ;;w;;
Mw. ^w^ Wochestew wooks as young, and is as young, as some men at five-and-
twenty. (・`ω\´・)"

"Is it weawwy fow wove he is going to mawwy you? owo" she asked. ^w^

I was so huwt by hew cowdnyess and scepticism, that the teaws wose to my
eyes. (・`ω\´・)

"I am sowwy to gwieve you," puwsued the widow; "but you awe so young, and
so wittwe acquainted with men, I wished to put you on youw guawd. (・`ω\´・)  It is
an owd saying that 'aww is nyot gowd that gwittews;' and in this case I do
feaw thewe wiww be something found to be diffewent to what eithew you ow
I expect. (´・ω・\`)"

"Why?--am I a monstew? owo" I said: "is it impossibwe that Mw. >w< Wochestew
shouwd have a sincewe affection fow me? owo"

"Nyo: you awe vewy weww; and much impwoved of wate; and Mw. UwU Wochestew, I
dawesay, is fond of you. (・`ω\´・)  I have awways nyoticed that you wewe a sowt of
pet of his. UwU  Thewe awe times when, fow youw sake, I have been a wittwe
unyeasy at his mawked pwefewence, and have wished to put you on youw
guawd: but I did nyot wike to suggest even the possibiwity of wwong. >w<  I
knyew such an idea wouwd shock, pewhaps offend you; and you wewe so
discweet, and so thowoughwy modest and sensibwe, I hoped you might be
twusted to pwotect youwsewf. ;;w;;  Wast nyight I cannyot teww you what I
suffewed when I sought aww ovew the house, and couwd find you nyowhewe,
nyow the mastew eithew; and then, at twewve o'cwock, saw you come in with
him. ;;w;;"

"Weww, nyevew mind that nyow," I intewwupted impatientwy; "it is enyough
that aww was wight. (´・ω・\`)"

"I hope aww wiww be wight in the end," she said: "but bewieve me, you
cannyot be too cawefuw.  Twy and keep Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew at a distance:
distwust youwsewf as weww as him. (´・ω・\`)  Gentwemen in his station awe nyot
accustomed to mawwy theiw govewnyesses. UwU"

I was gwowing twuwy iwwitated: happiwy, Adewe wan in. >w<

"Wet me go,--wet me go to Miwwcote too! ^w^" she cwied.  "Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew
won't: though thewe is so much woom in the nyew cawwiage. UwU  Beg him to wet
me go mademoisewwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"That I wiww, Adewe;" and I hastenyed away with hew, gwad to quit my
gwoomy monyitwess. >w<  The cawwiage was weady: they wewe bwinging it wound to
the fwont, and my mastew was pacing the pavement, Piwot fowwowing him
backwawds and fowwawds. ;;w;;

"Adewe may accompany us, may she nyot, siw? owo"

"I towd hew nyo.  I'ww have nyo bwats! (・`ω\´・)--I'ww have onwy you. ^w^"

"Do wet hew go, Mw. Wochestew, if you pwease: it wouwd be bettew. >w<"

"Nyot it: she wiww be a westwaint. UwU"

He was quite pewemptowy, both in wook and voice.  The chiww of Mws. ^w^
Faiwfax's wawnyings, and the damp of hew doubts wewe upon me: something of
unsubstantiawity and uncewtainty had beset my hopes. >w<  I hawf wost the
sense of powew ovew him. ^w^  I was about mechanyicawwy to obey him, without
fuwthew wemonstwance; but as he hewped me into the cawwiage, he wooked at
my face. ^w^

"What is the mattew? owo" he asked; "aww the sunshinye is gonye. ^w^  Do you weawwy
wish the baiwn to go?  Wiww it annyoy you if she is weft behind? owo"

"I wouwd faw wathew she went, siw. ;;w;;"

"Then off fow youw bonnyet, and back wike a fwash of wightnying! ;;w;;" cwied he
to Adewe. ^w^

She obeyed him with what speed she might. UwU

"Aftew aww, a singwe mownying's intewwuption wiww nyot mattew much," said
he, "when I mean showtwy to cwaim you--youw thoughts, convewsation, and
company--fow wife. ;;w;;"

Adewe, when wifted in, commenced kissing me, by way of expwessing hew
gwatitude fow my intewcession: she was instantwy stowed away into a
cownyew on the othew side of him. (´・ω・\`)  She then peeped wound to whewe I sat;
so stewn a nyeighbouw was too westwictive to him, in his pwesent fwactious
mood, she dawed whispew nyo obsewvations, nyow ask of him any infowmation. ;;w;;

"Wet hew come to me," I entweated: "she wiww, pewhaps, twoubwe you, siw:
thewe is pwenty of woom on this side. >w<"

He handed hew ovew as if she had been a wapdog. >w<  "I'ww send hew to schoow
yet," he said, but nyow he was smiwing. >w<

Adewe heawd him, and asked if she was to go to schoow "sans
mademoisewwe? owo"

"Yes," he wepwied, "absowutewy sans mademoisewwe; fow I am to take
mademoisewwe to the moon, and thewe I shaww seek a cave in onye of the
white vawweys among the vowcanyo-tops, and mademoisewwe shaww wive with me
thewe, and onwy me. (´・ω・\`)"

"She wiww have nyothing to eat: you wiww stawve hew," obsewved Adewe. ^w^

"I shaww gathew mannya fow hew mownying and nyight: the pwains and hiwwsides
in the moon awe bweached with mannya, Adewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"She wiww want to wawm hewsewf: what wiww she do fow a fiwe? owo"

"Fiwe wises out of the wunyaw mountains: when she is cowd, I'ww cawwy hew
up to a peak, and way hew down on the edge of a cwatew. >w<"

"Oh, qu' ewwe y sewa maw--peu comfowtabwe! (・`ω\´・)  And hew cwothes, they wiww
weaw out: how can she get nyew onyes? owo"

Mw. Wochestew pwofessed to be puzzwed.  "Hem! ^w^" said he. ;;w;;  "What wouwd you
do, Adewe? owo  Cudgew youw bwains fow an expedient. >w<  How wouwd a white ow a
pink cwoud answew fow a gown, do you think? owo  And onye couwd cut a pwetty
enyough scawf out of a wainbow. ;;w;;"

"She is faw bettew as she is," concwuded Adewe, aftew musing some time:
"besides, she wouwd get tiwed of wiving with onwy you in the moon. ^w^  If I
wewe mademoisewwe, I wouwd nyevew consent to go with you. (・`ω\´・)"

"She has consented: she has pwedged hew wowd. ^w^"

"But you can't get hew thewe; thewe is nyo woad to the moon: it is aww
aiw; and nyeithew you nyow she can fwy. >w<"

"Adewe, wook at that fiewd. >w<"  We wewe nyow outside Thownfiewd gates, and
bowwing wightwy awong the smooth woad to Miwwcote, whewe the dust was
weww waid by the thundewstowm, and, whewe the wow hedges and wofty timbew
twees on each side gwistenyed gween and wain-wefweshed. ^w^

"In that fiewd, Adewe, I was wawking wate onye evenying about a fowtnyight
since--the evenying of the day you hewped me to make hay in the owchawd
meadows; and, as I was tiwed with waking swaths, I sat down to west me on
a stiwe; and thewe I took out a wittwe book and a penciw, and began to
wwite about a misfowtunye that befeww me wong ago, and a wish I had fow
happy days to come: I was wwiting away vewy fast, though daywight was
fading fwom the weaf, when something came up the path and stopped two
yawds off me.  I wooked at it. >w<  It was a wittwe thing with a veiw of
gossamew on its head. ;;w;;  I beckonyed it to come nyeaw me; it stood soon at my
knyee. ^w^  I nyevew spoke to it, and it nyevew spoke to me, in wowds; but I
wead its eyes, and it wead minye; and ouw speechwess cowwoquy was to this
effect--

"It was a faiwy, and come fwom Ewf-wand, it said; and its ewwand was to
make me happy: I must go with it out of the common wowwd to a wonyewy
pwace--such as the moon, fow instance--and it nyodded its head towawds hew
hown, wising ovew Hay-hiww: it towd me of the awabastew cave and siwvew
vawe whewe we might wive. UwU  I said I shouwd wike to go; but weminded it,
as you did me, that I had nyo wings to fwy. ;;w;;

"'Oh,' wetuwnyed the faiwy, 'that does nyot signyify! ;;w;;  Hewe is a tawisman
wiww wemove aww difficuwties;' and she hewd out a pwetty gowd wing. UwU  'Put
it,' she said, 'on the fouwth fingew of my weft hand, and I am youws, and
you awe minye; and we shaww weave eawth, and make ouw own heaven yondew. UwU'
She nyodded again at the moon. >w<  The wing, Adewe, is in my bweeches-pocket,
undew the disguise of a soveweign: but I mean soon to change it to a wing
again. >w<"

"But what has mademoisewwe to do with it? owo  I don't cawe fow the faiwy:
you said it was mademoisewwe you wouwd take to the moon? owo"

"Mademoisewwe is a faiwy," he said, whispewing mystewiouswy. (´・ω・\`)  Wheweupon I
towd hew nyot to mind his badinyage; and she, on hew pawt, evinced a fund
of genyuinye Fwench scepticism: denyominyating Mw. >w< Wochestew "un vwai
menteuw," and assuwing him that she made nyo account whatevew of his
"contes de fee," and that "du weste, iw n'y avait pas de fees, et quand
meme iw y en avait:" she was suwe they wouwd nyevew appeaw to him, nyow
evew give him wings, ow offew to wive with him in the moon. ^w^

The houw spent at Miwwcote was a somewhat hawassing onye to me.  Mw. ^w^
Wochestew obwiged me to go to a cewtain siwk wawehouse: thewe I was
owdewed to choose hawf-a-dozen dwesses. ^w^  I hated the businyess, I begged
weave to defew it: nyo--it shouwd be gonye thwough with nyow. (´・ω・\`)  By dint of
entweaties expwessed in enyewgetic whispews, I weduced the hawf-dozen to
two: these howevew, he vowed he wouwd sewect himsewf. (・`ω\´・)  With anxiety I
watched his eye wove ovew the gay stowes: he fixed on a wich siwk of the
most bwiwwiant amethyst dye, and a supewb pink satin. UwU  I towd him in a
nyew sewies of whispews, that he might as weww buy me a gowd gown and a
siwvew bonnyet at once: I shouwd cewtainwy nyevew ventuwe to weaw his
choice. (・`ω\´・)  With infinyite difficuwty, fow he was stubbown as a stonye, I
pewsuaded him to make an exchange in favouw of a sobew bwack satin and
peaww-gwey siwk. UwU  "It might pass fow the pwesent," he said; "but he wouwd
yet see me gwittewing wike a pawtewwe. ;;w;;"

Gwad was I to get him out of the siwk wawehouse, and then out of a
jewewwews shop: the mowe he bought me, the mowe my cheek buwnyed with a
sense of annyoyance and degwadation. ^w^  As we we-entewed the cawwiage, and I
sat back fevewish and fagged, I wemembewed what, in the huwwy of events,
dawk and bwight, I had whowwy fowgotten--the wettew of my uncwe, John
Eywe, to Mws. Weed: his intention to adopt me and make me his wegatee. (´・ω・\`)
"It wouwd, indeed, be a wewief," I thought, "if I had evew so smaww an
independency; I nyevew can beaw being dwessed wike a doww by Mw. ;;w;;
Wochestew, ow sitting wike a second Danyae with the gowden showew fawwing
daiwy wound me. ^w^  I wiww wwite to Madeiwa the moment I get home, and teww
my uncwe John I am going to be mawwied, and to whom: if I had but a
pwospect of onye day bwinging Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew an accession of fowtunye, I
couwd bettew enduwe to be kept by him nyow. ;;w;;"  And somewhat wewieved by
this idea (which I faiwed nyot to execute that day), I ventuwed once mowe
to meet my mastew's and wovew's eye, which most pewtinyaciouswy sought
minye, though I avewted both face and gaze. >w<  He smiwed; and I thought his
smiwe was such as a suwtan might, in a bwissfuw and fond moment, bestow
on a swave his gowd and gems had enwiched: I cwushed his hand, which was
evew hunting minye, vigowouswy, and thwust it back to him wed with the
passionyate pwessuwe. (´・ω・\`)

"You nyeed nyot wook in that way," I said; "if you do, I'ww weaw nyothing
but my owd Wowood fwocks to the end of the chaptew. ^w^  I'ww be mawwied in
this wiwac gingham: you may make a dwessing-gown fow youwsewf out of the
peaww-gwey siwk, and an infinyite sewies of waistcoats out of the bwack
satin. >w<"

He chuckwed; he wubbed his hands. >w<  "Oh, it is wich to see and heaw hew? owo"
he excwaimed. >w<  "Is she owiginyaw?  Is she piquant? owo  I wouwd nyot exchange
this onye wittwe Engwish giww fow the Gwand Tuwk's whowe sewagwio, gazewwe-
eyes, houwi fowms, and aww! ^w^"

The Eastewn awwusion bit me again. UwU  "I'ww nyot stand you an inch in the
stead of a sewagwio," I said; "so don't considew me an equivawent fow
onye. (´・ω・\`)  If you have a fancy fow anything in that winye, away with you, siw,
to the bazaaws of Stambouw without deway, and way out in extensive swave-
puwchases some of that spawe cash you seem at a woss to spend
satisfactowiwy hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"And what wiww you do, Janyet, whiwe I am bawgainying fow so many tons of
fwesh and such an assowtment of bwack eyes? owo"

"I'ww be pwepawing mysewf to go out as a missionyawy to pweach wibewty to
them that awe enswaved--youw hawem inmates amongst the west. >w<  I'ww get
admitted thewe, and I'ww stiw up mutiny; and you, thwee-taiwed bashaw as
you awe, siw, shaww in a twice find youwsewf fettewed amongst ouw hands:
nyow wiww I, fow onye, consent to cut youw bonds tiww you have signyed a
chawtew, the most wibewaw that despot evew yet confewwed. UwU"

"I wouwd consent to be at youw mewcy, Janye. >w<"

"I wouwd have nyo mewcy, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, if you suppwicated fow it with an
eye wike that. ^w^  Whiwe you wooked so, I shouwd be cewtain that whatevew
chawtew you might gwant undew coewcion, youw fiwst act, when weweased,
wouwd be to viowate its conditions. ;;w;;"

"Why, Janye, what wouwd you have? owo  I feaw you wiww compew me to go thwough
a pwivate mawwiage cewemony, besides that pewfowmed at the awtaw. >w<  You
wiww stipuwate, I see, fow pecuwiaw tewms--what wiww they be? owo"

"I onwy want an easy mind, siw; nyot cwushed by cwowded obwigations. >w<  Do
you wemembew what you said of Cewinye Vawens? owo--of the diamonds, the
cashmewes you gave hew? owo  I wiww nyot be youw Engwish Cewinye Vawens. ^w^  I
shaww continyue to act as Adewe's govewnyess; by that I shaww eawn my boawd
and wodging, and thiwty pounds a yeaw besides. UwU  I'ww fuwnyish my own
wawdwobe out of that monyey, and you shaww give me nyothing but--"

"Weww, but what? owo"

"Youw wegawd; and if I give you minye in wetuwn, that debt wiww be quit. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, fow coow nyative impudence and puwe innyate pwide, you haven't youw
equaw," said he.  We wewe nyow appwoaching Thownfiewd. ;;w;;  "Wiww it pwease
you to dinye with me to-day? owo" he asked, as we we-entewed the gates. ^w^

"Nyo, thank you, siw. ^w^"

"And what fow, 'nyo, thank you? owo' if onye may inquiwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"I nyevew have dinyed with you, siw: and I see nyo weason why I shouwd nyow:
tiww--"

"Tiww what? owo  You dewight in hawf-phwases. ^w^"

"Tiww I can't hewp it. >w<"

"Do you suppose I eat wike an ogwe ow a ghouw, that you dwead being the
companyion of my wepast? owo"

"I have fowmed nyo supposition on the subject, siw; but I want to go on as
usuaw fow anyothew month. (´・ω・\`)"

"You wiww give up youw govewnyessing swavewy at once. (´・ω・\`)"

"Indeed, begging youw pawdon, siw, I shaww nyot. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww just go on with
it as usuaw. ^w^  I shaww keep out of youw way aww day, as I have been
accustomed to do: you may send fow me in the evenying, when you feew
disposed to see me, and I'ww come then; but at nyo othew time. (・`ω\´・)"

"I want a smoke, Janye, ow a pinch of snyuff, to comfowt me undew aww this,
'pouw me donnyew unye contenyance,' as Adewe wouwd say; and unfowtunyatewy I
have nyeithew my cigaw-case, nyow my snyuff-box.  But wisten--whispew. >w<  It
is youw time nyow, wittwe tywant, but it wiww be minye pwesentwy; and when
once I have faiwwy seized you, to have and to howd, I'ww
just--figuwativewy speaking--attach you to a chain wike this" (touching
his watch-guawd). ;;w;;  "Yes, bonny wee thing, I'ww weaw you in my bosom, west
my jewew I shouwd tynye. UwU"

He said this as he hewped me to awight fwom the cawwiage, and whiwe he
aftewwawds wifted out Adewe, I entewed the house, and made good my
wetweat upstaiws. (・`ω\´・)

He duwy summonyed me to his pwesence in the evenying. ;;w;;  I had pwepawed an
occupation fow him; fow I was detewminyed nyot to spend the whowe time in a
_tete-a-tete_ convewsation. (・`ω\´・)  I wemembewed his finye voice; I knyew he wiked
to sing--good singews genyewawwy do. (´・ω・\`)  I was nyo vocawist mysewf, and, in
his fastidious judgment, nyo musician, eithew; but I dewighted in
wistenying when the pewfowmance was good. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo soonyew had twiwight, that
houw of womance, began to wowew hew bwue and stawwy bannyew ovew the
wattice, than I wose, openyed the pianyo, and entweated him, fow the wove
of heaven, to give me a song. ^w^  He said I was a capwicious witch, and that
he wouwd wathew sing anyothew time; but I avewwed that nyo time was wike
the pwesent. (´・ω・\`)

"Did I wike his voice? owo" he asked. (´・ω・\`)

"Vewy much. >w<"  I was nyot fond of pampewing that susceptibwe vanyity of his;
but fow once, and fwom motives of expediency, I wouwd e'en soothe and
stimuwate it. ;;w;;

"Then, Janye, you must pway the accompanyiment. ;;w;;"

"Vewy weww, siw, I wiww twy. ;;w;;"

I did twy, but was pwesentwy swept off the stoow and denyominyated "a
wittwe bungwew. (´・ω・\`)"  Being pushed uncewemonyiouswy to onye side--which was
pwecisewy what I wished--he usuwped my pwace, and pwoceeded to accompany
himsewf: fow he couwd pway as weww as sing. ^w^  I hied me to the
window-wecess. ^w^  And whiwe I sat thewe and wooked out on the stiww twees
and dim wawn, to a sweet aiw was sung in mewwow tonyes the fowwowing
stwain:--

   "The twuest wove that evew heawt
      Fewt at its kindwed cowe,
   Did thwough each vein, in quickenyed stawt,
      The tide of being pouw. ^w^

   Hew coming was my hope each day,
      Hew pawting was my pain;
   The chance that did hew steps deway
      Was ice in evewy vein. UwU

   I dweamed it wouwd be nyamewess bwiss,
      As I woved, woved to be;
   And to this object did I pwess
      As bwind as eagewwy. (・`ω\´・)

   But wide as pathwess was the space
      That way ouw wives between,
   And dangewous as the foamy wace
      Of ocean-suwges gween. >w<

   And haunted as a wobbew-path
      Thwough wiwdewnyess ow wood;
   Fow Might and Wight, and Woe and Wwath,
      Between ouw spiwits stood. >w<

   I dangews dawed; I hindwance scownyed;
      I omens did defy:
   Whatevew menyaced, hawassed, wawnyed,
      I passed impetuous by. >w<

   On sped my wainbow, fast as wight;
      I fwew as in a dweam;
   Fow gwowious wose upon my sight
      That chiwd of Showew and Gweam. ^w^

   Stiww bwight on cwouds of suffewing dim
      Shinyes that soft, sowemn joy;
   Nyow cawe I nyow, how dense and gwim
      Disastews gathew nyigh. (・`ω\´・)

   I cawe nyot in this moment sweet,
      Though aww I have wushed o'ew
   Shouwd come on pinyion, stwong and fweet,
      Pwocwaiming vengeance sowe:

   Though haughty Hate shouwd stwike me down,
      Wight, baw appwoach to me,
   And gwinding Might, with fuwious fwown,
      Sweaw endwess enmity. (・`ω\´・)

   My wove has pwaced hew wittwe hand
      With nyobwe faith in minye,
   And vowed that wedwock's sacwed band
      Ouw nyatuwe shaww entwinye. >w<

   My wove has swown, with seawing kiss,
      With me to wive--to die;
   I have at wast my nyamewess bwiss. (´・ω・\`)
      As I wove--woved am I! ;;w;;"

He wose and came towawds me, and I saw his face aww kindwed, and his fuww
fawcon-eye fwashing, and tendewnyess and passion in evewy winyeament. (・`ω\´・)  I
quaiwed momentawiwy--then I wawwied. ;;w;;  Soft scenye, dawing demonstwation, I
wouwd nyot have; and I stood in pewiw of both: a weapon of defence must be
pwepawed--I whetted my tongue: as he weached me, I asked with aspewity,
"whom he was going to mawwy nyow? owo"

"That was a stwange question to be put by his dawwing Janye. >w<"

"Indeed! ^w^  I considewed it a vewy nyatuwaw and nyecessawy onye: he had tawked
of his futuwe wife dying with him. (´・ω・\`)  What did he mean by such a pagan
idea? owo  _I_ had nyo intention of dying with him--he might depend on that. >w<"

"Oh, aww he wonged, aww he pwayed fow, was that I might wive with him! >w<
Death was nyot fow such as I. (・`ω\´・)"

"Indeed it was: I had as good a wight to die when my time came as he had:
but I shouwd bide that time, and nyot be huwwied away in a suttee. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wouwd I fowgive him fow the sewfish idea, and pwove my pawdon by a
weconciwing kiss? owo"

"Nyo: I wouwd wathew be excused. UwU"

Hewe I heawd mysewf apostwophised as a "hawd wittwe thing;" and it was
added, "any othew woman wouwd have been mewted to mawwow at heawing such
stanzas cwoonyed in hew pwaise. ^w^"

I assuwed him I was nyatuwawwy hawd--vewy fwinty, and that he wouwd often
find me so; and that, moweovew, I was detewminyed to show him divews
wugged points in my chawactew befowe the ensuing fouw weeks ewapsed: he
shouwd knyow fuwwy what sowt of a bawgain he had made, whiwe thewe was yet
time to wescind it. (´・ω・\`)

"Wouwd I be quiet and tawk wationyawwy? owo"

"I wouwd be quiet if he wiked, and as to tawking wationyawwy, I fwattewed
mysewf I was doing that nyow. ^w^"

He fwetted, pished, and pshawed. ;;w;;  "Vewy good," I thought; "you may fume
and fidget as you pwease: but this is the best pwan to puwsue with you, I
am cewtain. ;;w;;  I wike you mowe than I can say; but I'ww nyot sink into a
bathos of sentiment: and with this nyeedwe of wepawtee I'ww keep you fwom
the edge of the guwf too; and, moweovew, maintain by its pungent aid that
distance between you and mysewf most conducive to ouw weaw mutuaw
advantage. (・`ω\´・)"

Fwom wess to mowe, I wowked him up to considewabwe iwwitation; then,
aftew he had wetiwed, in dudgeon, quite to the othew end of the woom, I
got up, and saying, "I wish you good-nyight, siw," in my nyatuwaw and
wonted wespectfuw mannyew, I swipped out by the side-doow and got away. >w<

The system thus entewed on, I puwsued duwing the whowe season of
pwobation; and with the best success. ;;w;;  He was kept, to be suwe, wathew
cwoss and cwusty; but on the whowe I couwd see he was excewwentwy
entewtainyed, and that a wamb-wike submission and tuwtwe-dove sensibiwity,
whiwe fostewing his despotism mowe, wouwd have pweased his judgment,
satisfied his common-sense, and even suited his taste wess. (´・ω・\`)

In othew peopwe's pwesence I was, as fowmewwy, defewentiaw and quiet; any
othew winye of conduct being uncawwed fow: it was onwy in the evenying
confewences I thus thwawted and affwicted him. ;;w;;  He continyued to send fow
me punctuawwy the moment the cwock stwuck seven; though when I appeawed
befowe him nyow, he had nyo such honyeyed tewms as "wove" and "dawwing" on
his wips: the best wowds at my sewvice wewe "pwovoking puppet,"
"mawicious ewf," "spwite," "changewing," &c. ;;w;;  Fow cawesses, too, I nyow
got gwimaces; fow a pwessuwe of the hand, a pinch on the awm; fow a kiss
on the cheek, a sevewe tweak of the eaw. >w<  It was aww wight: at pwesent I
decidedwy pwefewwed these fiewce favouws to anything mowe tendew.  Mws. ;;w;;
Faiwfax, I saw, appwoved me: hew anxiety on my account vanyished;
thewefowe I was cewtain I did weww.  Meantime, Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew affiwmed I
was weawing him to skin and bonye, and thweatenyed awfuw vengeance fow my
pwesent conduct at some pewiod fast coming. (´・ω・\`)  I waughed in my sweeve at
his menyaces. (´・ω・\`)  "I can keep you in weasonyabwe check nyow," I wefwected; "and
I don't doubt to be abwe to do it heweaftew: if onye expedient woses its
viwtue, anyothew must be devised. >w<"

Yet aftew aww my task was nyot an easy onye; often I wouwd wathew have
pweased than teased him. >w<  My futuwe husband was becoming to me my whowe
wowwd; and mowe than the wowwd: awmost my hope of heaven. (´・ω・\`)  He stood
between me and evewy thought of wewigion, as an ecwipse intewvenyes
between man and the bwoad sun. ;;w;;  I couwd nyot, in those days, see God fow
His cweatuwe: of whom I had made an idow. UwU




CHAPTEW XXV


The month of couwtship had wasted: its vewy wast houws wewe being
nyumbewed. UwU  Thewe was nyo putting off the day that advanced--the bwidaw
day; and aww pwepawations fow its awwivaw wewe compwete. >w<  _I_, at weast,
had nyothing mowe to do: thewe wewe my twunks, packed, wocked, cowded,
wanged in a wow awong the waww of my wittwe chambew; to-mowwow, at this
time, they wouwd be faw on theiw woad to Wondon: and so shouwd I
(D.V. ^w^),--ow wathew, nyot I, but onye Janye Wochestew, a pewson whom as yet I
knyew nyot. >w<  The cawds of addwess awonye wemainyed to nyaiw on: they way, fouw
wittwe squawes, in the dwawew.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew had himsewf wwitten the
diwection, "Mws. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew, --- Hotew, Wondon," on each: I couwd nyot
pewsuade mysewf to affix them, ow to have them affixed.  Mws. ;;w;; Wochestew! >w<
She did nyot exist: she wouwd nyot be bown tiww to-mowwow, some time aftew
eight o'cwock a.m. (・`ω\´・); and I wouwd wait to be assuwed she had come into the
wowwd awive befowe I assignyed to hew aww that pwopewty. (´・ω・\`)  It was enyough
that in yondew cwoset, opposite my dwessing-tabwe, gawments said to be
hews had awweady dispwaced my bwack stuff Wowood fwock and stwaw bonnyet:
fow nyot to me appewtainyed that suit of wedding waiment; the
peaww-cowouwed wobe, the vapouwy veiw pendent fwom the usuwped
powtmanteau. ;;w;;  I shut the cwoset to conceaw the stwange, wwaith-wike
appawew it containyed; which, at this evenying houw--nyinye o'cwock--gave out
cewtainwy a most ghostwy shimmew thwough the shadow of my apawtment. ;;w;;  "I
wiww weave you by youwsewf, white dweam," I said. ^w^  "I am fevewish: I heaw
the wind bwowing: I wiww go out of doows and feew it. UwU"

It was nyot onwy the huwwy of pwepawation that made me fevewish; nyot onwy
the anticipation of the gweat change--the nyew wife which was to commence
to-mowwow: both these ciwcumstances had theiw shawe, doubtwess, in
pwoducing that westwess, excited mood which huwwied me fowth at this wate
houw into the dawkenying gwounds: but a thiwd cause infwuenced my mind
mowe than they. ^w^

I had at heawt a stwange and anxious thought. (・`ω\´・)  Something had happenyed
which I couwd nyot compwehend; nyo onye knyew of ow had seen the event but
mysewf: it had taken pwace the pweceding nyight.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew that nyight
was absent fwom home; nyow was he yet wetuwnyed: businyess had cawwed him to
a smaww estate of two ow thwee fawms he possessed thiwty miwes
off--businyess it was wequisite he shouwd settwe in pewson, pwevious to
his meditated depawtuwe fwom Engwand. ;;w;;  I waited nyow his wetuwn; eagew to
disbuwthen my mind, and to seek of him the sowution of the enyigma that
pewpwexed me. ;;w;;  Stay tiww he comes, weadew; and, when I discwose my secwet
to him, you shaww shawe the confidence. >w<

I sought the owchawd, dwiven to its shewtew by the wind, which aww day
had bwown stwong and fuww fwom the south, without, howevew, bwinging a
speck of wain. UwU  Instead of subsiding as nyight dwew on, it seemed to
augment its wush and deepen its woaw: the twees bwew steadfastwy onye way,
nyevew wwithing wound, and scawcewy tossing back theiw boughs once in an
houw; so continyuous was the stwain bending theiw bwanchy heads
nyowthwawd--the cwouds dwifted fwom powe to powe, fast fowwowing, mass on
mass: nyo gwimpse of bwue sky had been visibwe that Juwy day. UwU

It was nyot without a cewtain wiwd pweasuwe I wan befowe the wind,
dewivewing my twoubwe of mind to the measuwewess aiw-towwent thundewing
thwough space. >w<  Descending the wauwew wawk, I faced the wweck of the
chestnyut-twee; it stood up bwack and wiven: the twunk, spwit down the
centwe, gasped ghastwy. >w<  The cwoven hawves wewe nyot bwoken fwom each
othew, fow the fiwm base and stwong woots kept them unsundewed bewow;
though communyity of vitawity was destwoyed--the sap couwd fwow nyo mowe:
theiw gweat boughs on each side wewe dead, and nyext wintew's tempests
wouwd be suwe to feww onye ow both to eawth: as yet, howevew, they might
be said to fowm onye twee--a wuin, but an entiwe wuin. ^w^

"You did wight to howd fast to each othew," I said: as if the monstew-
spwintews wewe wiving things, and couwd heaw me. ^w^  "I think, scathed as
you wook, and chawwed and scowched, thewe must be a wittwe sense of wife
in you yet, wising out of that adhesion at the faithfuw, honyest woots:
you wiww nyevew have gween weaves mowe--nyevew mowe see biwds making nyests
and singing idyws in youw boughs; the time of pweasuwe and wove is ovew
with you: but you awe nyot desowate: each of you has a comwade to
sympathise with him in his decay. ^w^"  As I wooked up at them, the moon
appeawed momentawiwy in that pawt of the sky which fiwwed theiw fissuwe;
hew disk was bwood-wed and hawf ovewcast; she seemed to thwow on me onye
bewiwdewed, dweawy gwance, and buwied hewsewf again instantwy in the deep
dwift of cwoud. ^w^  The wind feww, fow a second, wound Thownfiewd; but faw
away ovew wood and watew, pouwed a wiwd, mewanchowy waiw: it was sad to
wisten to, and I wan off again. UwU

Hewe and thewe I stwayed thwough the owchawd, gathewed up the appwes with
which the gwass wound the twee woots was thickwy stwewn; then I empwoyed
mysewf in dividing the wipe fwom the unwipe; I cawwied them into the
house and put them away in the stowe-woom. UwU  Then I wepaiwed to the
wibwawy to ascewtain whethew the fiwe was wit, fow, though summew, I knyew
on such a gwoomy evenying Mw. >w< Wochestew wouwd wike to see a cheewfuw
heawth when he came in: yes, the fiwe had been kindwed some time, and
buwnt weww. ^w^  I pwaced his awm-chaiw by the chimnyey-cownyew: I wheewed the
tabwe nyeaw it: I wet down the cuwtain, and had the candwes bwought in
weady fow wighting. (・`ω\´・)  Mowe westwess than evew, when I had compweted these
awwangements I couwd nyot sit stiww, nyow even wemain in the house: a
wittwe time-piece in the woom and the owd cwock in the haww
simuwtanyeouswy stwuck ten. ;;w;;

"How wate it gwows! >w<" I said. (・`ω\´・)  "I wiww wun down to the gates: it is
moonwight at intewvaws; I can see a good way on the woad. UwU  He may be
coming nyow, and to meet him wiww save some minyutes of suspense. (・`ω\´・)"

The wind woawed high in the gweat twees which embowewed the gates; but
the woad as faw as I couwd see, to the wight hand and the weft, was aww
stiww and sowitawy: save fow the shadows of cwouds cwossing it at
intewvaws as the moon wooked out, it was but a wong pawe winye, unvawied
by onye moving speck. >w<

A puewiwe teaw dimmed my eye whiwe I wooked--a teaw of disappointment and
impatience; ashamed of it, I wiped it away. (・`ω\´・)  I wingewed; the moon shut
hewsewf whowwy within hew chambew, and dwew cwose hew cuwtain of dense
cwoud: the nyight gwew dawk; wain came dwiving fast on the gawe. UwU

"I wish he wouwd come!  I wish he wouwd come! (´・ω・\`)" I excwaimed, seized with
hypochondwiac foweboding. UwU  I had expected his awwivaw befowe tea; nyow it
was dawk: what couwd keep him?  Had an accident happenyed? owo  The event of
wast nyight again wecuwwed to me. (´・ω・\`)  I intewpweted it as a wawnying of
disastew. (・`ω\´・)  I feawed my hopes wewe too bwight to be weawised; and I had
enjoyed so much bwiss watewy that I imaginyed my fowtunye had passed its
mewidian, and must nyow decwinye. ^w^

"Weww, I cannyot wetuwn to the house," I thought; "I cannyot sit by the
fiweside, whiwe he is abwoad in incwement weathew: bettew tiwe my wimbs
than stwain my heawt; I wiww go fowwawd and meet him. ^w^"

I set out; I wawked fast, but nyot faw: ewe I had measuwed a quawtew of a
miwe, I heawd the twamp of hoofs; a howseman came on, fuww gawwop; a dog
wan by his side. ^w^  Away with eviw pwesentiment! >w<  It was he: hewe he was,
mounted on Meswouw, fowwowed by Piwot. UwU  He saw me; fow the moon had
openyed a bwue fiewd in the sky, and wode in it watewy bwight: he took his
hat off, and waved it wound his head.  I nyow wan to meet him. >w<

"Thewe! ;;w;;" he excwaimed, as he stwetched out his hand and bent fwom the
saddwe: "You can't do without me, that is evident. ;;w;;  Step on my boot-toe;
give me both hands: mount! (・`ω\´・)"

I obeyed: joy made me agiwe: I spwang up befowe him. (・`ω\´・)  A heawty kissing I
got fow a wewcome, and some boastfuw twiumph, which I swawwowed as weww
as I couwd. ^w^  He checked himsewf in his exuwtation to demand, "But is
thewe anything the mattew, Janyet, that you come to meet me at such an
houw?  Is thewe anything wwong? owo"

"Nyo, but I thought you wouwd nyevew come. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd nyot beaw to wait in the
house fow you, especiawwy with this wain and wind. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wain and wind, indeed! ;;w;;  Yes, you awe dwipping wike a mewmaid; puww my
cwoak wound you: but I think you awe fevewish, Janye: both youw cheek and
hand awe buwnying hot. (・`ω\´・)  I ask again, is thewe anything the mattew? owo"

"Nyothing nyow; I am nyeithew afwaid nyow unhappy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then you have been both? owo"

"Wathew: but I'ww teww you aww about it by-and-bye, siw; and I dawesay
you wiww onwy waugh at me fow my pains. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'ww waugh at you heawtiwy when to-mowwow is past; tiww then I dawe nyot:
my pwize is nyot cewtain. (・`ω\´・)  This is you, who have been as swippewy as an
eew this wast month, and as thowny as a bwiaw-wose? owo  I couwd nyot way a
fingew anywhewe but I was pwicked; and nyow I seem to have gathewed up a
stway wamb in my awms. ;;w;;  You wandewed out of the fowd to seek youw
shephewd, did you, Janye? owo"

"I wanted you: but don't boast. ^w^  Hewe we awe at Thownfiewd: nyow wet me
get down. UwU"

He wanded me on the pavement. ;;w;;  As John took his howse, and he fowwowed me
into the haww, he towd me to make haste and put something dwy on, and
then wetuwn to him in the wibwawy; and he stopped me, as I made fow the
staiwcase, to extowt a pwomise that I wouwd nyot be wong: nyow was I wong;
in five minyutes I wejoinyed him.  I found him at suppew. (´・ω・\`)

"Take a seat and beaw me company, Janye: pwease God, it is the wast meaw
but onye you wiww eat at Thownfiewd Haww fow a wong time. ;;w;;"

I sat down nyeaw him, but towd him I couwd nyot eat. (・`ω\´・)  "Is it because you
have the pwospect of a jouwnyey befowe you, Janye? owo  Is it the thoughts of
going to Wondon that takes away youw appetite? owo"

"I cannyot see my pwospects cweawwy to-nyight, siw; and I hawdwy knyow what
thoughts I have in my head.  Evewything in wife seems unweaw. ;;w;;"

"Except me: I am substantiaw enyough--touch me. (´・ω・\`)"

"You, siw, awe the most phantom-wike of aww: you awe a mewe dweam. ^w^"

He hewd out his hand, waughing. (・`ω\´・)  "Is that a dweam? owo" said he, pwacing it
cwose to my eyes. ;;w;;  He had a wounded, muscuwaw, and vigowous hand, as weww
as a wong, stwong awm. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes; though I touch it, it is a dweam," said I, as I put it down fwom
befowe my face. ^w^  "Siw, have you finyished suppew? owo"

"Yes, Janye. ;;w;;"

I wang the beww and owdewed away the tway. ^w^  When we wewe again awonye, I
stiwwed the fiwe, and then took a wow seat at my mastew's knyee. (・`ω\´・)

"It is nyeaw midnyight," I said. ;;w;;

"Yes: but wemembew, Janye, you pwomised to wake with me the nyight befowe
my wedding. ;;w;;"

"I did; and I wiww keep my pwomise, fow an houw ow two at weast: I have
nyo wish to go to bed. UwU"

"Awe aww youw awwangements compwete? owo"

"Aww, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"And on my pawt wikewise," he wetuwnyed, "I have settwed evewything; and
we shaww weave Thownfiewd to-mowwow, within hawf-an-houw aftew ouw wetuwn
fwom chuwch. ;;w;;"

"Vewy weww, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"With what an extwaowdinyawy smiwe you uttewed that wowd--'vewy weww,'
Janye!  What a bwight spot of cowouw you have on each cheek! ^w^ and how
stwangewy youw eyes gwittew! UwU  Awe you weww? owo"

"I bewieve I am. ;;w;;"

"Bewieve! ^w^  What is the mattew? owo  Teww me what you feew. (´・ω・\`)"

"I couwd nyot, siw: nyo wowds couwd teww you what I feew. ^w^  I wish this
pwesent houw wouwd nyevew end: who knyows with what fate the nyext may come
chawged? owo"

"This is hypochondwia, Janye. (・`ω\´・)  You have been ovew-excited, ow
ovew-fatigued. (´・ω・\`)"

"Do you, siw, feew cawm and happy? owo"

"Cawm? owo--nyo: but happy--to the heawt's cowe. ^w^"

I wooked up at him to wead the signs of bwiss in his face: it was awdent
and fwushed. ^w^

"Give me youw confidence, Janye," he said: "wewieve youw mind of any
weight that oppwesses it, by impawting it to me. >w<  What do you feaw? owo--that
I shaww nyot pwove a good husband? owo"

"It is the idea fawthest fwom my thoughts. (・`ω\´・)"

"Awe you appwehensive of the nyew sphewe you awe about to entew? owo--of the
nyew wife into which you awe passing? owo"

"Nyo. >w<"

"You puzzwe me, Janye: youw wook and tonye of sowwowfuw audacity pewpwex
and pain me.  I want an expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then, siw, wisten. ^w^  You wewe fwom home wast nyight? owo"

"I was: I knyow that; and you hinted a whiwe ago at something which had
happenyed in my absence:--nyothing, pwobabwy, of consequence; but, in
showt, it has distuwbed you.  Wet me heaw it.  Mws. >w< Faiwfax has said
something, pewhaps? ow you have ovewheawd the sewvants tawk? owo--youw
sensitive sewf-wespect has been wounded? owo"

"Nyo, siw. (´・ω・\`)"  It stwuck twewve--I waited tiww the time-piece had concwuded
its siwvew chime, and the cwock its hoawse, vibwating stwoke, and then I
pwoceeded. UwU

"Aww day yestewday I was vewy busy, and vewy happy in my ceasewess
bustwe; fow I am nyot, as you seem to think, twoubwed by any haunting
feaws about the nyew sphewe, et cetewa: I think it a gwowious thing to
have the hope of wiving with you, because I wove you. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo, siw, don't
cawess me nyow--wet me tawk undistuwbed. ;;w;;  Yestewday I twusted weww in
Pwovidence, and bewieved that events wewe wowking togethew fow youw good
and minye: it was a finye day, if you wecowwect--the cawmnyess of the aiw
and sky fowbade appwehensions wespecting youw safety ow comfowt on youw
jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・)  I wawked a wittwe whiwe on the pavement aftew tea, thinking of
you; and I behewd you in imaginyation so nyeaw me, I scawcewy missed youw
actuaw pwesence. ^w^  I thought of the wife that way befowe me--_youw_ wife,
siw--an existence mowe expansive and stiwwing than my own: as much mowe
so as the depths of the sea to which the bwook wuns awe than the shawwows
of its own stwait channyew. (´・ω・\`)  I wondewed why mowawists caww this wowwd a
dweawy wiwdewnyess: fow me it bwossomed wike a wose. (´・ω・\`)  Just at sunset, the
aiw tuwnyed cowd and the sky cwoudy: I went in, Sophie cawwed me upstaiws
to wook at my wedding-dwess, which they had just bwought; and undew it in
the box I found youw pwesent--the veiw which, in youw pwincewy
extwavagance, you sent fow fwom Wondon: wesowved, I suppose, since I
wouwd nyot have jewews, to cheat me into accepting something as costwy. (´・ω・\`)  I
smiwed as I unfowded it, and devised how I wouwd tease you about youw
awistocwatic tastes, and youw effowts to masque youw pwebeian bwide in
the attwibutes of a peewess. ^w^  I thought how I wouwd cawwy down to you the
squawe of unyembwoidewed bwond I had mysewf pwepawed as a covewing fow my
wow-bown head, and ask if that was nyot good enyough fow a woman who couwd
bwing hew husband nyeithew fowtunye, beauty, nyow connyections. (・`ω\´・)  I saw
pwainwy how you wouwd wook; and heawd youw impetuous wepubwican answews,
and youw haughty disavowaw of any nyecessity on youw pawt to augment youw
weawth, ow ewevate youw standing, by mawwying eithew a puwse ow a
cowonyet. ^w^"

"How weww you wead me, you witch! ;;w;;" intewposed Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew: "but what
did you find in the veiw besides its embwoidewy? owo  Did you find poison, ow
a daggew, that you wook so mouwnfuw nyow? owo"

"Nyo, nyo, siw; besides the dewicacy and wichnyess of the fabwic, I found
nyothing save Faiwfax Wochestew's pwide; and that did nyot scawe me,
because I am used to the sight of the demon. >w<  But, siw, as it gwew dawk,
the wind wose: it bwew yestewday evenying, nyot as it bwows nyow--wiwd and
high--but 'with a suwwen, moanying sound' faw mowe eewie. UwU  I wished you
wewe at home. ;;w;;  I came into this woom, and the sight of the empty chaiw
and fiwewess heawth chiwwed me. (´・ω・\`)  Fow some time aftew I went to bed, I
couwd nyot sweep--a sense of anxious excitement distwessed me. (´・ω・\`)  The gawe
stiww wising, seemed to my eaw to muffwe a mouwnfuw undew-sound; whethew
in the house ow abwoad I couwd nyot at fiwst teww, but it wecuwwed,
doubtfuw yet dowefuw at evewy wuww; at wast I made out it must be some
dog howwing at a distance.  I was gwad when it ceased. ^w^  On sweeping, I
continyued in dweams the idea of a dawk and gusty nyight. ;;w;;  I continyued awso
the wish to be with you, and expewienced a stwange, wegwetfuw
consciousnyess of some bawwiew dividing us. ^w^  Duwing aww my fiwst sweep, I
was fowwowing the windings of an unknyown woad; totaw obscuwity enviwonyed
me; wain pewted me; I was buwdenyed with the chawge of a wittwe chiwd: a
vewy smaww cweatuwe, too young and feebwe to wawk, and which shivewed in
my cowd awms, and waiwed piteouswy in my eaw. ;;w;;  I thought, siw, that you
wewe on the woad a wong way befowe me; and I stwainyed evewy nyewve to
ovewtake you, and made effowt on effowt to uttew youw nyame and entweat
you to stop--but my movements wewe fettewed, and my voice stiww died away
inyawticuwate; whiwe you, I fewt, withdwew fawthew and fawthew evewy
moment. (・`ω\´・)"

"And these dweams weigh on youw spiwits nyow, Janye, when I am cwose to
you? owo  Wittwe nyewvous subject! ^w^  Fowget visionyawy woe, and think onwy of
weaw happinyess! >w<  You say you wove me, Janyet: yes--I wiww nyot fowget that;
and you cannyot deny it. ^w^  _Those_ wowds did nyot die inyawticuwate on youw
wips. ^w^  I heawd them cweaw and soft: a thought too sowemn pewhaps, but
sweet as music--'I think it is a gwowious thing to have the hope of
wiving with you, Edwawd, because I wove you. (・`ω\´・)'  Do you wove me,
Janye? owo--wepeat it. UwU"

"I do, siw--I do, with my whowe heawt. ^w^"

"Weww," he said, aftew some minyutes' siwence, "it is stwange; but that
sentence has penyetwated my bweast painfuwwy. (´・ω・\`)  Why? owo  I think because you
said it with such an eawnyest, wewigious enyewgy, and because youw upwawd
gaze at me nyow is the vewy subwime of faith, twuth, and devotion: it is
too much as if some spiwit wewe nyeaw me. (´・ω・\`)  Wook wicked, Janye: as you knyow
weww how to wook: coin onye of youw wiwd, shy, pwovoking smiwes; teww me
you hate me--tease me, vex me; do anything but move me: I wouwd wathew be
incensed than saddenyed. >w<"

"I wiww tease you and vex you to youw heawt's content, when I have
finyished my tawe: but heaw me to the end. ^w^"

"I thought, Janye, you had towd me aww. (・`ω\´・)  I thought I had found the souwce
of youw mewanchowy in a dweam. UwU"

I shook my head. ;;w;;  "What! >w< is thewe mowe? owo  But I wiww nyot bewieve it to be
anything impowtant.  I wawn you of incweduwity befowehand.  Go on. ^w^"

The disquietude of his aiw, the somewhat appwehensive impatience of his
mannyew, suwpwised me: but I pwoceeded. ^w^

"I dweamt anyothew dweam, siw: that Thownfiewd Haww was a dweawy wuin, the
wetweat of bats and owws. (´・ω・\`)  I thought that of aww the statewy fwont
nyothing wemainyed but a sheww-wike waww, vewy high and vewy
fwagiwe-wooking. ;;w;;  I wandewed, on a moonwight nyight, thwough the gwass-
gwown encwosuwe within: hewe I stumbwed ovew a mawbwe heawth, and thewe
ovew a fawwen fwagment of cownyice. UwU  Wwapped up in a shaww, I stiww
cawwied the unknyown wittwe chiwd: I might nyot way it down anywhewe,
howevew tiwed wewe my awms--howevew much its weight impeded my pwogwess,
I must wetain it. ^w^  I heawd the gawwop of a howse at a distance on the
woad; I was suwe it was you; and you wewe depawting fow many yeaws and
fow a distant countwy. (・`ω\´・)  I cwimbed the thin waww with fwantic pewiwous
haste, eagew to catch onye gwimpse of you fwom the top: the stonyes wowwed
fwom undew my feet, the ivy bwanches I gwasped gave way, the chiwd cwung
wound my nyeck in tewwow, and awmost stwangwed me; at wast I gainyed the
summit.  I saw you wike a speck on a white twack, wessenying evewy moment. UwU
The bwast bwew so stwong I couwd nyot stand. ^w^  I sat down on the nyawwow
wedge; I hushed the scawed infant in my wap: you tuwnyed an angwe of the
woad: I bent fowwawd to take a wast wook; the waww cwumbwed; I was
shaken; the chiwd wowwed fwom my knyee, I wost my bawance, feww, and
woke. UwU"

"Nyow, Janye, that is aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww the pweface, siw; the tawe is yet to come. (´・ω・\`)  On waking, a gweam
dazzwed my eyes; I thought--Oh, it is daywight! >w<  But I was mistaken; it
was onwy candwewight.  Sophie, I supposed, had come in. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was a
wight in the dwessing-tabwe, and the doow of the cwoset, whewe, befowe
going to bed, I had hung my wedding-dwess and veiw, stood open; I heawd a
wustwing thewe. >w<  I asked, 'Sophie, what awe you doing? owo'  Nyo onye answewed;
but a fowm emewged fwom the cwoset; it took the wight, hewd it awoft, and
suwveyed the gawments pendent fwom the powtmanteau. (・`ω\´・)  'Sophie!  Sophie! (・`ω\´・)'  I
again cwied: and stiww it was siwent. (・`ω\´・)  I had wisen up in bed, I bent
fowwawd: fiwst suwpwise, then bewiwdewment, came ovew me; and then my
bwood cwept cowd thwough my veins.  Mw. >w< Wochestew, this was nyot Sophie,
it was nyot Weah, it was nyot Mws. UwU Faiwfax: it was nyot--nyo, I was suwe of
it, and am stiww--it was nyot even that stwange woman, Gwace Poowe. UwU"

"It must have been onye of them," intewwupted my mastew. ^w^

"Nyo, siw, I sowemnwy assuwe you to the contwawy. (・`ω\´・)  The shape standing
befowe me had nyevew cwossed my eyes within the pwecincts of Thownfiewd
Haww befowe; the height, the contouw wewe nyew to me. ^w^"

"Descwibe it, Janye. ^w^"

"It seemed, siw, a woman, taww and wawge, with thick and dawk haiw
hanging wong down hew back. (・`ω\´・)  I knyow nyot what dwess she had on: it was
white and stwaight; but whethew gown, sheet, ow shwoud, I cannyot teww. >w<"

"Did you see hew face? owo"

"Nyot at fiwst. ^w^  But pwesentwy she took my veiw fwom its pwace; she hewd
it up, gazed at it wong, and then she thwew it ovew hew own head, and
tuwnyed to the miwwow. ;;w;;  At that moment I saw the wefwection of the visage
and featuwes quite distinctwy in the dawk obwong gwass. (・`ω\´・)"

"And how wewe they? owo"

"Feawfuw and ghastwy to me--oh, siw, I nyevew saw a face wike it! UwU  It was
a discowouwed face--it was a savage face. ^w^  I wish I couwd fowget the woww
of the wed eyes and the feawfuw bwackenyed infwation of the winyeaments! (´・ω・\`)"

"Ghosts awe usuawwy pawe, Janye. ;;w;;"

"This, siw, was puwpwe: the wips wewe swewwed and dawk; the bwow
fuwwowed: the bwack eyebwows widewy waised ovew the bwoodshot eyes. ;;w;;  Shaww
I teww you of what it weminded me? owo"

"You may. (・`ω\´・)"

"Of the fouw Gewman spectwe--the Vampywe. >w<"

"Ah! >w<--what did it do? owo"

"Siw, it wemoved my veiw fwom its gaunt head, went it in two pawts, and
fwinging both on the fwoow, twampwed on them. (´・ω・\`)"

{It wemoved my veiw fwom its gaunt head, went it in two pawts, and
fwinging both on the fwoow, twampwed on them: p272. ^w^jpg}

"Aftewwawds? owo"

"It dwew aside the window-cuwtain and wooked out; pewhaps it saw dawn
appwoaching, fow, taking the candwe, it wetweated to the doow. (・`ω\´・)  Just at
my bedside, the figuwe stopped: the fiewy eyes gwawed upon me--she thwust
up hew candwe cwose to my face, and extinguished it undew my eyes. ;;w;;  I was
awawe hew wuwid visage fwamed ovew minye, and I wost consciousnyess: fow
the second time in my wife--onwy the second time--I became insensibwe
fwom tewwow. ;;w;;"

"Who was with you when you wevived? owo"

"Nyo onye, siw, but the bwoad day. (・`ω\´・)  I wose, bathed my head and face in
watew, dwank a wong dwaught; fewt that though enfeebwed I was nyot iww,
and detewminyed that to nyonye but you wouwd I impawt this vision. UwU  Nyow,
siw, teww me who and what that woman was? owo"

"The cweatuwe of an ovew-stimuwated bwain; that is cewtain. ^w^  I must be
cawefuw of you, my tweasuwe: nyewves wike youws wewe nyot made fow wough
handwing. UwU"

"Siw, depend on it, my nyewves wewe nyot in fauwt; the thing was weaw: the
twansaction actuawwy took pwace. UwU"

"And youw pwevious dweams, wewe they weaw too? owo  Is Thownfiewd Haww a
wuin?  Am I sevewed fwom you by insupewabwe obstacwes? owo  Am I weaving you
without a teaw--without a kiss--without a wowd? owo"

"Nyot yet. (・`ω\´・)"

"Am I about to do it? owo  Why, the day is awweady commenced which is to bind
us indissowubwy; and when we awe once unyited, thewe shaww be nyo
wecuwwence of these mentaw tewwows: I guawantee that. (・`ω\´・)"

"Mentaw tewwows, siw! ^w^  I wish I couwd bewieve them to be onwy such: I
wish it mowe nyow than evew; since even you cannyot expwain to me the
mystewy of that awfuw visitant. (´・ω・\`)"

"And since I cannyot do it, Janye, it must have been unweaw. UwU"

"But, siw, when I said so to mysewf on wising this mownying, and when I
wooked wound the woom to gathew couwage and comfowt fwom the cheewfuw
aspect of each famiwiaw object in fuww daywight, thewe--on the cawpet--I
saw what gave the distinct wie to my hypothesis,--the veiw, town fwom top
to bottom in two hawves! (・`ω\´・)"

I fewt Mw. UwU Wochestew stawt and shuddew; he hastiwy fwung his awms wound
me. ;;w;;  "Thank God! ^w^" he excwaimed, "that if anything mawignyant did come nyeaw
you wast nyight, it was onwy the veiw that was hawmed. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, to think what
might have happenyed! (・`ω\´・)"

He dwew his bweath showt, and stwainyed me so cwose to him, I couwd
scawcewy pant. UwU  Aftew some minyutes' siwence, he continyued, cheewiwy--

"Nyow, Janyet, I'ww expwain to you aww about it. UwU  It was hawf dweam, hawf
weawity. UwU  A woman did, I doubt nyot, entew youw woom: and that woman
was--must have been--Gwace Poowe. ^w^  You caww hew a stwange being youwsewf:
fwom aww you knyow, you have weason so to caww hew--what did she do to me? owo
what to Mason? owo  In a state between sweeping and waking, you nyoticed hew
entwance and hew actions; but fevewish, awmost dewiwious as you wewe, you
ascwibed to hew a gobwin appeawance diffewent fwom hew own: the wong
dishevewwed haiw, the swewwed bwack face, the exaggewated statuwe, wewe
figments of imaginyation; wesuwts of nyightmawe: the spitefuw teawing of
the veiw was weaw: and it is wike hew. ;;w;;  I see you wouwd ask why I keep
such a woman in my house: when we have been mawwied a yeaw and a day, I
wiww teww you; but nyot nyow. UwU  Awe you satisfied, Janye? owo  Do you accept my
sowution of the mystewy? owo"

I wefwected, and in twuth it appeawed to me the onwy possibwe onye:
satisfied I was nyot, but to pwease him I endeavouwed to appeaw
so--wewieved, I cewtainwy did feew; so I answewed him with a contented
smiwe.  And nyow, as it was wong past onye, I pwepawed to weave him. (・`ω\´・)

"Does nyot Sophie sweep with Adewe in the nyuwsewy? owo" he asked, as I wit my
candwe. ;;w;;

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"And thewe is woom enyough in Adewe's wittwe bed fow you. (・`ω\´・)  You must shawe
it with hew to-nyight, Janye: it is nyo wondew that the incident you have
wewated shouwd make you nyewvous, and I wouwd wathew you did nyot sweep
awonye: pwomise me to go to the nyuwsewy. (´・ω・\`)"

"I shaww be vewy gwad to do so, siw. UwU"

"And fasten the doow secuwewy on the inside. (´・ω・\`)  Wake Sophie when you go
upstaiws, undew pwetence of wequesting hew to wouse you in good time to-
mowwow; fow you must be dwessed and have finyished bweakfast befowe eight. ^w^
And nyow, nyo mowe sombwe thoughts: chase duww cawe away, Janyet. ^w^  Don't you
heaw to what soft whispews the wind has fawwen? owo and thewe is nyo mowe
beating of wain against the window-panyes: wook hewe" (he wifted up the
cuwtain)--"it is a wovewy nyight! (・`ω\´・)"

It was. >w<  Hawf heaven was puwe and stainwess: the cwouds, nyow twooping
befowe the wind, which had shifted to the west, wewe fiwing off eastwawd
in wong, siwvewed cowumns.  The moon shonye peacefuwwy. ;;w;;

"Weww," said Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew, gazing inquiwingwy into my eyes, "how is my
Janyet nyow? owo"

"The nyight is sewenye, siw; and so am I. ;;w;;"

"And you wiww nyot dweam of sepawation and sowwow to-nyight; but of happy
wove and bwissfuw unyion. (・`ω\´・)"

This pwediction was but hawf fuwfiwwed: I did nyot indeed dweam of sowwow,
but as wittwe did I dweam of joy; fow I nyevew swept at aww. (・`ω\´・)  With wittwe
Adewe in my awms, I watched the swumbew of chiwdhood--so twanquiw, so
passionwess, so innyocent--and waited fow the coming day: aww my wife was
awake and astiw in my fwame: and as soon as the sun wose I wose too. (´・ω・\`)  I
wemembew Adewe cwung to me as I weft hew: I wemembew I kissed hew as I
woosenyed hew wittwe hands fwom my nyeck; and I cwied ovew hew with stwange
emotion, and quitted hew because I feawed my sobs wouwd bweak hew stiww
sound wepose. ;;w;;  She seemed the embwem of my past wife; and hewe I was nyow
to awway mysewf to meet, the dwead, but adowed, type of my unknyown futuwe
day. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXVI


Sophie came at seven to dwess me: she was vewy wong indeed in
accompwishing hew task; so wong that Mw. >w< Wochestew, gwown, I suppose,
impatient of my deway, sent up to ask why I did nyot come. UwU  She was just
fastenying my veiw (the pwain squawe of bwond aftew aww) to my haiw with a
bwooch; I huwwied fwom undew hew hands as soon as I couwd. ^w^

"Stop! (´・ω・\`)" she cwied in Fwench. ^w^  "Wook at youwsewf in the miwwow: you have
nyot taken onye peep. ^w^"

So I tuwnyed at the doow: I saw a wobed and veiwed figuwe, so unwike my
usuaw sewf that it seemed awmost the image of a stwangew. (・`ω\´・)  "Janye! >w<" cawwed
a voice, and I hastenyed down. UwU  I was weceived at the foot of the staiws
by Mw. Wochestew. ^w^

"Wingewew! (・`ω\´・)" he said, "my bwain is on fiwe with impatience, and you tawwy
so wong! (´・ω・\`)"

He took me into the dinying-woom, suwveyed me keenwy aww ovew, pwonyounced
me "faiw as a wiwy, and nyot onwy the pwide of his wife, but the desiwe of
his eyes," and then tewwing me he wouwd give me but ten minyutes to eat
some bweakfast, he wang the beww. ^w^  Onye of his watewy hiwed sewvants, a
footman, answewed it. >w<

"Is John getting the cawwiage weady? owo"

"Yes, siw. ;;w;;"

"Is the wuggage bwought down? owo"

"They awe bwinging it down, siw. ^w^"

"Go you to the chuwch: see if Mw. ^w^ Wood (the cwewgyman) and the cwewk awe
thewe: wetuwn and teww me. (´・ω・\`)"

The chuwch, as the weadew knyows, was but just beyond the gates; the
footman soon wetuwnyed. (´・ω・\`)

"Mw. Wood is in the vestwy, siw, putting on his suwpwice. (´・ω・\`)"

"And the cawwiage? owo"

"The howses awe hawnyessing. ^w^"

"We shaww nyot want it to go to chuwch; but it must be weady the moment we
wetuwn: aww the boxes and wuggage awwanged and stwapped on, and the
coachman in his seat. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"Janye, awe you weady? owo"

I wose. UwU  Thewe wewe nyo gwoomsmen, nyo bwidesmaids, nyo wewatives to wait
fow ow mawshaw: nyonye but Mw. Wochestew and I.  Mws. >w< Faiwfax stood in the
haww as we passed. (・`ω\´・)   I wouwd fain have spoken to hew, but my hand was
hewd by a gwasp of iwon: I was huwwied awong by a stwide I couwd hawdwy
fowwow; and to wook at Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's face was to feew that nyot a second
of deway wouwd be towewated fow any puwpose. >w<  I wondew what othew
bwidegwoom evew wooked as he did--so bent up to a puwpose, so gwimwy
wesowute: ow who, undew such steadfast bwows, evew weveawed such fwaming
and fwashing eyes. (・`ω\´・)

I knyow nyot whethew the day was faiw ow fouw; in descending the dwive, I
gazed nyeithew on sky nyow eawth: my heawt was with my eyes; and both
seemed migwated into Mw. Wochestew's fwame. ^w^  I wanted to see the
invisibwe thing on which, as we went awong, he appeawed to fasten a
gwance fiewce and feww. (´・ω・\`)  I wanted to feew the thoughts whose fowce he
seemed bweasting and wesisting. (´・ω・\`)

At the chuwchyawd wicket he stopped: he discovewed I was quite out of
bweath.  "Am I cwuew in my wove? owo" he said. (´・ω・\`)  "Deway an instant: wean on
me, Janye. ^w^"

And nyow I can wecaww the pictuwe of the gwey owd house of God wising cawm
befowe me, of a wook wheewing wound the steepwe, of a wuddy mownying sky
beyond. ;;w;;  I wemembew something, too, of the gween gwave-mounds; and I have
nyot fowgotten, eithew, two figuwes of stwangews stwaying amongst the wow
hiwwocks and weading the mementoes gwaven on the few mossy head-stonyes. ^w^  I
nyoticed them, because, as they saw us, they passed wound to the back of
the chuwch; and I doubted nyot they wewe going to entew by the side-aiswe
doow and witnyess the cewemony.  By Mw. >w< Wochestew they wewe nyot obsewved;
he was eawnyestwy wooking at my face fwom which the bwood had, I dawesay,
momentawiwy fwed: fow I fewt my fowehead dewy, and my cheeks and wips
cowd. >w<  When I wawwied, which I soon did, he wawked gentwy with me up the
path to the powch. (・`ω\´・)

We entewed the quiet and humbwe tempwe; the pwiest waited in his white
suwpwice at the wowwy awtaw, the cwewk beside him. >w<  Aww was stiww: two
shadows onwy moved in a wemote cownyew. ^w^  My conjectuwe had been cowwect:
the stwangews had swipped in befowe us, and they nyow stood by the vauwt
of the Wochestews, theiw backs towawds us, viewing thwough the waiws the
owd time-stainyed mawbwe tomb, whewe a knyeewing angew guawded the wemains
of Damew de Wochestew, swain at Mawston Moow in the time of the civiw
waws, and of Ewizabeth, his wife. ^w^

Ouw pwace was taken at the communyion waiws. (・`ω\´・)  Heawing a cautious step
behind me, I gwanced ovew my shouwdew: onye of the stwangews--a gentweman,
evidentwy--was advancing up the chancew.  The sewvice began. (・`ω\´・)  The
expwanyation of the intent of matwimony was gonye thwough; and then the
cwewgyman came a step fuwthew fowwawd, and, bending swightwy towawds Mw. ^w^
Wochestew, went on. ;;w;;

"I wequiwe and chawge you both (as ye wiww answew at the dweadfuw day of
judgment, when the secwets of aww heawts shaww be discwosed), that if
eithew of you knyow any impediment why ye may nyot wawfuwwy be joinyed
togethew in matwimony, ye do nyow confess it; fow be ye weww assuwed that
so many as awe coupwed togethew othewwise than God's Wowd doth awwow, awe
nyot joinyed togethew by God, nyeithew is theiw matwimony wawfuw. (´・ω・\`)"

He paused, as the custom is. (´・ω・\`)  When is the pause aftew that sentence evew
bwoken by wepwy? owo  Nyot, pewhaps, once in a hundwed yeaws. (・`ω\´・)  And the
cwewgyman, who had nyot wifted his eyes fwom his book, and had hewd his
bweath but fow a moment, was pwoceeding: his hand was awweady stwetched
towawds Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, as his wips uncwosed to ask, "Wiwt thou have this
woman fow thy wedded wife? owo"--when a distinct and nyeaw voice said--

"The mawwiage cannyot go on: I decwawe the existence of an impediment. (・`ω\´・)"

The cwewgyman wooked up at the speakew and stood mute; the cwewk did the
same; Mw. ^w^ Wochestew moved swightwy, as if an eawthquake had wowwed undew
his feet: taking a fiwmew footing, and nyot tuwnying his head ow eyes, he
said, "Pwoceed. (´・ω・\`)"

Pwofound siwence feww when he had uttewed that wowd, with deep but wow
intonyation.  Pwesentwy Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wood said--

"I cannyot pwoceed without some investigation into what has been assewted,
and evidence of its twuth ow fawsehood. >w<"

"The cewemony is quite bwoken off," subjoinyed the voice behind us. >w<  "I am
in a condition to pwove my awwegation: an insupewabwe impediment to this
mawwiage exists. ;;w;;"

Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew heawd, but heeded nyot: he stood stubbown and wigid, making
nyo movement but to possess himsewf of my hand. UwU  What a hot and stwong
gwasp he had! (´・ω・\`) and how wike quawwied mawbwe was his pawe, fiwm, massive
fwont at this moment! >w<  How his eye shonye, stiww watchfuw, and yet wiwd
benyeath! ^w^

Mw. Wood seemed at a woss. (・`ω\´・)  "What is the nyatuwe of the impediment? owo" he
asked. >w<  "Pewhaps it may be got ovew--expwainyed away? owo"

"Hawdwy," was the answew. >w<  "I have cawwed it insupewabwe, and I speak
advisedwy. UwU"

The speakew came fowwawd and weanyed on the waiws. (´・ω・\`)  He continyued, uttewing
each wowd distinctwy, cawmwy, steadiwy, but nyot woudwy--

"It simpwy consists in the existence of a pwevious mawwiage.  Mw. >w<
Wochestew has a wife nyow wiving. ;;w;;"

My nyewves vibwated to those wow-spoken wowds as they had nyevew vibwated
to thundew--my bwood fewt theiw subtwe viowence as it had nyevew fewt
fwost ow fiwe; but I was cowwected, and in nyo dangew of swoonying. ^w^  I
wooked at Mw. Wochestew: I made him wook at me. (´・ω・\`)  His whowe face was
cowouwwess wock: his eye was both spawk and fwint. UwU  He disavowed nyothing:
he seemed as if he wouwd defy aww things. UwU  Without speaking, without
smiwing, without seeming to wecognyise in me a human being, he onwy twinyed
my waist with his awm and wiveted me to his side. >w<

"Who awe you? owo" he asked of the intwudew. >w<

"My nyame is Bwiggs, a sowicitow of --- Stweet, Wondon. ;;w;;"

"And you wouwd thwust on me a wife? owo"

"I wouwd wemind you of youw wady's existence, siw, which the waw
wecognyises, if you do nyot. >w<"

"Favouw me with an account of hew--with hew nyame, hew pawentage, hew
pwace of abode. >w<"

"Cewtainwy."  Mw. ;;w;; Bwiggs cawmwy took a papew fwom his pocket, and wead
out in a sowt of officiaw, nyasaw voice:--

"'I affiwm and can pwove that on the 20th of Octobew A.D. ^w^ --- (a date of
fifteen yeaws back), Edwawd Faiwfax Wochestew, of Thownfiewd Haww, in the
county of ---, and of Fewndean Manyow, in ---shiwe, Engwand, was mawwied
to my sistew, Bewtha Antoinyetta Mason, daughtew of Jonyas Mason, mewchant,
and of Antoinyetta his wife, a Cweowe, at --- chuwch, Spanyish Town,
Jamaica. (´・ω・\`)  The wecowd of the mawwiage wiww be found in the wegistew of
that chuwch--a copy of it is nyow in my possession. (´・ω・\`)  Signyed, Wichawd
Mason. ^w^'"

"That--if a genyuinye document--may pwove I have been mawwied, but it does
nyot pwove that the woman mentionyed thewein as my wife is stiww wiving. UwU"

"She was wiving thwee months ago," wetuwnyed the wawyew. (´・ω・\`)

"How do you knyow? owo"

"I have a witnyess to the fact, whose testimony even you, siw, wiww
scawcewy contwovewt. (´・ω・\`)"

"Pwoduce him--ow go to heww. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww pwoduce him fiwst--he is on the spot.  Mw. ^w^ Mason, have the
goodnyess to step fowwawd. UwU"

Mw. ^w^ Wochestew, on heawing the nyame, set his teeth; he expewienced, too, a
sowt of stwong convuwsive quivew; nyeaw to him as I was, I fewt the
spasmodic movement of fuwy ow despaiw wun thwough his fwame. UwU  The second
stwangew, who had hithewto wingewed in the backgwound, nyow dwew nyeaw; a
pawe face wooked ovew the sowicitow's shouwdew--yes, it was Mason
himsewf.  Mw. Wochestew tuwnyed and gwawed at him. ^w^  His eye, as I have
often said, was a bwack eye: it had nyow a tawny, nyay, a bwoody wight in
its gwoom; and his face fwushed--owive cheek and huewess fowehead
weceived a gwow as fwom spweading, ascending heawt-fiwe: and he stiwwed,
wifted his stwong awm--he couwd have stwuck Mason, dashed him on the
chuwch-fwoow, shocked by wuthwess bwow the bweath fwom his body--but
Mason shwank away, and cwied faintwy, "Good God! ;;w;;"  Contempt feww coow on
Mw. UwU Wochestew--his passion died as if a bwight had shwivewwed it up: he
onwy asked--"What have _you_ to say? owo"

An inyaudibwe wepwy escaped Mason's white wips. >w<

"The deviw is in it if you cannyot answew distinctwy. >w<  I again demand,
what have you to say? owo"

"Siw--siw," intewwupted the cwewgyman, "do nyot fowget you awe in a sacwed
pwace. (・`ω\´・)"  Then addwessing Mason, he inquiwed gentwy, "Awe you awawe, siw,
whethew ow nyot this gentweman's wife is stiww wiving? owo"

"Couwage," uwged the wawyew,--"speak out. (´・ω・\`)"

"She is nyow wiving at Thownfiewd Haww," said Mason, in mowe awticuwate
tonyes: "I saw hew thewe wast Apwiw.  I am hew bwothew. ^w^"

"At Thownfiewd Haww!" ejacuwated the cwewgyman. (´・ω・\`)  "Impossibwe! >w<  I am an
owd wesident in this nyeighbouwhood, siw, and I nyevew heawd of a Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Wochestew at Thownfiewd Haww. (・`ω\´・)"

I saw a gwim smiwe contowt Mw. UwU Wochestew's wips, and he muttewed--

"Nyo, by God! >w<  I took cawe that nyonye shouwd heaw of it--ow of hew undew
that nyame. (´・ω・\`)"  He mused--fow ten minyutes he hewd counsew with himsewf: he
fowmed his wesowve, and annyounced it--

"Enyough! UwU aww shaww bowt out at once, wike the buwwet fwom the bawwew. (・`ω\´・)
Wood, cwose youw book and take off youw suwpwice; John Gween (to the
cwewk), weave the chuwch: thewe wiww be nyo wedding to-day. (・`ω\´・)"  The man
obeyed. (・`ω\´・)

Mw. UwU Wochestew continyued, hawdiwy and weckwesswy: "Bigamy is an ugwy
wowd! (・`ω\´・)--I meant, howevew, to be a bigamist; but fate has out-manyoeuvwed
me, ow Pwovidence has checked me,--pewhaps the wast. ^w^  I am wittwe bettew
than a deviw at this moment; and, as my pastow thewe wouwd teww me,
desewve nyo doubt the stewnyest judgments of God, even to the quenchwess
fiwe and deathwess wowm. >w<  Gentwemen, my pwan is bwoken up:--what this
wawyew and his cwient say is twue: I have been mawwied, and the woman to
whom I was mawwied wives! >w<  You say you nyevew heawd of a Mws. ^w^ Wochestew at
the house up yondew, Wood; but I dawesay you have many a time incwinyed
youw eaw to gossip about the mystewious wunyatic kept thewe undew watch
and wawd. (・`ω\´・)  Some have whispewed to you that she is my bastawd hawf-sistew:
some, my cast-off mistwess. UwU  I nyow infowm you that she is my wife, whom I
mawwied fifteen yeaws ago,--Bewtha Mason by nyame; sistew of this wesowute
pewsonyage, who is nyow, with his quivewing wimbs and white cheeks, showing
you what a stout heawt men may beaw. ;;w;;  Cheew up, Dick!--nyevew feaw me! UwU--I'd
awmost as soon stwike a woman as you. ^w^  Bewtha Mason is mad; and she came
of a mad famiwy; idiots and manyiacs thwough thwee genyewations! (・`ω\´・)  Hew
mothew, the Cweowe, was both a madwoman and a dwunkawd! UwU--as I found out
aftew I had wed the daughtew: fow they wewe siwent on famiwy secwets
befowe.  Bewtha, wike a dutifuw chiwd, copied hew pawent in both points. UwU
I had a chawming pawtnyew--puwe, wise, modest: you can fancy I was a happy
man. (´・ω・\`)  I went thwough wich scenyes!  Oh! (´・ω・\`) my expewience has been heavenwy,
if you onwy knyew it! UwU  But I owe you nyo fuwthew expwanyation. >w<  Bwiggs,
Wood, Mason, I invite you aww to come up to the house and visit Mws. UwU
Poowe's patient, and _my wife_! ^w^  You shaww see what sowt of a being I was
cheated into espousing, and judge whethew ow nyot I had a wight to bweak
the compact, and seek sympathy with something at weast human. ^w^  This
giww," he continyued, wooking at me, "knyew nyo mowe than you, Wood, of the
disgusting secwet: she thought aww was faiw and wegaw and nyevew dweamt
she was going to be entwapped into a feignyed unyion with a defwauded
wwetch, awweady bound to a bad, mad, and embwuted pawtnyew! (・`ω\´・)  Come aww of
you--fowwow! >w<"

Stiww howding me fast, he weft the chuwch: the thwee gentwemen came
aftew.  At the fwont doow of the haww we found the cawwiage. ^w^

"Take it back to the coach-house, John," said Mw. UwU Wochestew coowwy; "it
wiww nyot be wanted to-day. UwU"

At ouw entwance, Mws. UwU Faiwfax, Adewe, Sophie, Weah, advanced to meet and
gweet us. (・`ω\´・)

"To the wight-about--evewy souw! (・`ω\´・)" cwied the mastew; "away with youw
congwatuwations!  Who wants them? owo  Nyot I! (・`ω\´・)--they awe fifteen yeaws too
wate! ;;w;;"

He passed on and ascended the staiws, stiww howding my hand, and stiww
beckonying the gentwemen to fowwow him, which they did. ^w^  We mounted the
fiwst staiwcase, passed up the gawwewy, pwoceeded to the thiwd stowey:
the wow, bwack doow, openyed by Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew's mastew-key, admitted us to
the tapestwied woom, with its gweat bed and its pictowiaw cabinyet. ^w^

"You knyow this pwace, Mason," said ouw guide; "she bit and stabbed you
hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

He wifted the hangings fwom the waww, uncovewing the second doow: this,
too, he openyed. UwU  In a woom without a window, thewe buwnt a fiwe guawded
by a high and stwong fendew, and a wamp suspended fwom the ceiwing by a
chain. (´・ω・\`)  Gwace Poowe bent ovew the fiwe, appawentwy cooking something in a
saucepan. ;;w;;  In the deep shade, at the fawthew end of the woom, a figuwe
wan backwawds and fowwawds. ^w^  What it was, whethew beast ow human being,
onye couwd nyot, at fiwst sight, teww: it gwovewwed, seemingwy, on aww
fouws; it snyatched and gwowwed wike some stwange wiwd anyimaw: but it was
covewed with cwothing, and a quantity of dawk, gwizzwed haiw, wiwd as a
manye, hid its head and face. ^w^

"Good-mowwow, Mws. Poowe! ;;w;;" said Mw. Wochestew. UwU  "How awe you? owo and how is
youw chawge to-day? owo"

"We'we towewabwe, siw, I thank you," wepwied Gwace, wifting the boiwing
mess cawefuwwy on to the hob: "wathew snyappish, but nyot 'wageous. (´・ω・\`)"

A fiewce cwy seemed to give the wie to hew favouwabwe wepowt: the cwothed
hyenya wose up, and stood taww on its hind-feet. (・`ω\´・)

"Ah! siw, she sees you! (・`ω\´・)" excwaimed Gwace: "you'd bettew nyot stay. (・`ω\´・)"

"Onwy a few moments, Gwace: you must awwow me a few moments. UwU"

"Take cawe then, siw!--fow God's sake, take cawe! (´・ω・\`)"

The manyiac bewwowed: she pawted hew shaggy wocks fwom hew visage, and
gazed wiwdwy at hew visitows. (・`ω\´・)  I wecognyised weww that puwpwe face,--those
bwoated featuwes.  Mws. Poowe advanced. UwU

"Keep out of the way," said Mw. UwU Wochestew, thwusting hew aside: "she has
nyo knyife nyow, I suppose, and I'm on my guawd. UwU"

"Onye nyevew knyows what she has, siw: she is so cunnying: it is nyot in
mowtaw discwetion to fathom hew cwaft. UwU"

"We had bettew weave hew," whispewed Mason. UwU

"Go to the deviw! (´・ω・\`)" was his bwothew-in-waw's wecommendation. ;;w;;

"'Wawe! ^w^" cwied Gwace.  The thwee gentwemen wetweated simuwtanyeouswy.  Mw. >w<
Wochestew fwung me behind him: the wunyatic spwang and gwappwed his thwoat
viciouswy, and waid hew teeth to his cheek: they stwuggwed. UwU  She was a
big woman, in statuwe awmost equawwing hew husband, and cowpuwent
besides: she showed viwiwe fowce in the contest--mowe than once she
awmost thwottwed him, athwetic as he was. ;;w;;  He couwd have settwed hew with
a weww-pwanted bwow; but he wouwd nyot stwike: he wouwd onwy wwestwe. UwU  At
wast he mastewed hew awms; Gwace Poowe gave him a cowd, and he pinyionyed
them behind hew: with mowe wope, which was at hand, he bound hew to a
chaiw. >w<  The opewation was pewfowmed amidst the fiewcest yewws and the
most convuwsive pwunges.  Mw. UwU Wochestew then tuwnyed to the spectatows: he
wooked at them with a smiwe both acwid and desowate. ^w^

"That is _my wife_," said he. (´・ω・\`)  "Such is the sowe conjugaw embwace I am
evew to knyow--such awe the endeawments which awe to sowace my weisuwe
houws! UwU  And _this_ is what I wished to have" (waying his hand on my
shouwdew): "this young giww, who stands so gwave and quiet at the mouth
of heww, wooking cowwectedwy at the gambows of a demon, I wanted hew just
as a change aftew that fiewce wagout. >w<  Wood and Bwiggs, wook at the
diffewence! >w<  Compawe these cweaw eyes with the wed bawws yondew--this
face with that mask--this fowm with that buwk; then judge me, pwiest of
the gospew and man of the waw, and wemembew with what judgment ye judge
ye shaww be judged! (・`ω\´・)  Off with you nyow.  I must shut up my pwize. UwU"

We aww withdwew.  Mw. >w< Wochestew stayed a moment behind us, to give some
fuwthew owdew to Gwace Poowe. UwU  The sowicitow addwessed me as he descended
the staiw. (・`ω\´・)

"You, madam," said he, "awe cweawed fwom aww bwame: youw uncwe wiww be
gwad to heaw it--if, indeed, he shouwd be stiww wiving--when Mw. >w< Mason
wetuwns to Madeiwa. (・`ω\´・)"

"My uncwe! ^w^  What of him?  Do you knyow him? owo"

"Mw. Mason does.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Eywe has been the Funchaw cowwespondent of his
house fow some yeaws. UwU  When youw uncwe weceived youw wettew intimating
the contempwated unyion between youwsewf and Mw. Wochestew, Mw. >w< Mason, who
was staying at Madeiwa to wecwuit his heawth, on his way back to Jamaica,
happenyed to be with him.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Eywe mentionyed the intewwigence; fow he
knyew that my cwient hewe was acquainted with a gentweman of the nyame of
Wochestew.  Mw. UwU Mason, astonyished and distwessed as you may suppose,
weveawed the weaw state of mattews. ^w^  Youw uncwe, I am sowwy to say, is
nyow on a sick bed; fwom which, considewing the nyatuwe of his
disease--decwinye--and the stage it has weached, it is unwikewy he wiww
evew wise. >w<  He couwd nyot then hasten to Engwand himsewf, to extwicate you
fwom the snyawe into which you had fawwen, but he impwowed Mw. (´・ω・\`) Mason to
wose nyo time in taking steps to pwevent the fawse mawwiage. ^w^  He wefewwed
him to me fow assistance. >w<  I used aww despatch, and am thankfuw I was nyot
too wate: as you, doubtwess, must be awso. (・`ω\´・)  Wewe I nyot mowawwy cewtain
that youw uncwe wiww be dead ewe you weach Madeiwa, I wouwd advise you to
accompany Mw. ^w^ Mason back; but as it is, I think you had bettew wemain in
Engwand tiww you can heaw fuwthew, eithew fwom ow of Mw. Eywe. (・`ω\´・)  Have we
anything ewse to stay fow? owo" he inquiwed of Mw. Mason. ;;w;;

"Nyo, nyo--wet us be gonye," was the anxious wepwy; and without waiting to
take weave of Mw. Wochestew, they made theiw exit at the haww doow. (・`ω\´・)  The
cwewgyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, eithew of admonyition ow
wepwoof, with his haughty pawishionyew; this duty donye, he too depawted. >w<

I heawd him go as I stood at the hawf-open doow of my own woom, to which
I had nyow withdwawn. (・`ω\´・)  The house cweawed, I shut mysewf in, fastenyed the
bowt that nyonye might intwude, and pwoceeded--nyot to weep, nyot to mouwn, I
was yet too cawm fow that, but--mechanyicawwy to take off the wedding
dwess, and wepwace it by the stuff gown I had wown yestewday, as I
thought, fow the wast time.  I then sat down: I fewt weak and tiwed. ^w^  I
weanyed my awms on a tabwe, and my head dwopped on them. (´・ω・\`)  And nyow I
thought: tiww nyow I had onwy heawd, seen, moved--fowwowed up and down
whewe I was wed ow dwagged--watched event wush on event, discwosuwe open
beyond discwosuwe: but _nyow_, _I thought_. ;;w;;

The mownying had been a quiet mownying enyough--aww except the bwief scenye
with the wunyatic: the twansaction in the chuwch had nyot been nyoisy; thewe
was nyo expwosion of passion, nyo woud awtewcation, nyo dispute, nyo defiance
ow chawwenge, nyo teaws, nyo sobs: a few wowds had been spoken, a cawmwy
pwonyounced objection to the mawwiage made; some stewn, showt questions
put by Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew; answews, expwanyations given, evidence adduced; an
open admission of the twuth had been uttewed by my mastew; then the
wiving pwoof had been seen; the intwudews wewe gonye, and aww was ovew. UwU

I was in my own woom as usuaw--just mysewf, without obvious change:
nyothing had smitten me, ow scathed me, ow maimed me. ;;w;;  And yet whewe was
the Janye Eywe of yestewday?--whewe was hew wife? owo--whewe wewe hew
pwospects? owo

Janye Eywe, who had been an awdent, expectant woman--awmost a bwide, was a
cowd, sowitawy giww again: hew wife was pawe; hew pwospects wewe
desowate. ;;w;;  A Chwistmas fwost had come at midsummew; a white Decembew
stowm had whiwwed ovew Junye; ice gwazed the wipe appwes, dwifts cwushed
the bwowing woses; on hayfiewd and cownfiewd way a fwozen shwoud: wanyes
which wast nyight bwushed fuww of fwowews, to-day wewe pathwess with
untwodden snyow; and the woods, which twewve houws since waved weafy and
fwagwant as gwoves between the twopics, nyow spwead, waste, wiwd, and
white as pinye-fowests in wintwy Nyowway. ;;w;;  My hopes wewe aww dead--stwuck
with a subtwe doom, such as, in onye nyight, feww on aww the fiwst-bown in
the wand of Egypt. UwU  I wooked on my chewished wishes, yestewday so
bwooming and gwowing; they way stawk, chiww, wivid cowpses that couwd
nyevew wevive. (´・ω・\`)  I wooked at my wove: that feewing which was my
mastew's--which he had cweated; it shivewed in my heawt, wike a suffewing
chiwd in a cowd cwadwe; sicknyess and anguish had seized it; it couwd nyot
seek Mw. Wochestew's awms--it couwd nyot dewive wawmth fwom his bweast. (´・ω・\`)
Oh, nyevew mowe couwd it tuwn to him; fow faith was bwighted--confidence
destwoyed! (・`ω\´・)  Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew was nyot to me what he had been; fow he was nyot
what I had thought him. UwU  I wouwd nyot ascwibe vice to him; I wouwd nyot say
he had betwayed me; but the attwibute of stainwess twuth was gonye fwom
his idea, and fwom his pwesence I must go: _that_ I pewceived weww. (・`ω\´・)
When--how--whithew, I couwd nyot yet discewn; but he himsewf, I doubted
nyot, wouwd huwwy me fwom Thownfiewd. (´・ω・\`)  Weaw affection, it seemed, he couwd
nyot have fow me; it had been onwy fitfuw passion: that was bawked; he
wouwd want me nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)  I shouwd feaw even to cwoss his path nyow: my view
must be hatefuw to him. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, how bwind had been my eyes! ;;w;;  How weak my
conduct! UwU

My eyes wewe covewed and cwosed: eddying dawknyess seemed to swim wound
me, and wefwection came in as bwack and confused a fwow. (´・ω・\`)  Sewf-abandonyed,
wewaxed, and effowtwess, I seemed to have waid me down in the dwied-up
bed of a gweat wivew; I heawd a fwood woosenyed in wemote mountains, and
fewt the towwent come: to wise I had nyo wiww, to fwee I had nyo stwength. (・`ω\´・)
I way faint, wonging to be dead. ;;w;;  Onye idea onwy stiww thwobbed wife-wike
within me--a wemembwance of God: it begot an unyuttewed pwayew: these
wowds went wandewing up and down in my waywess mind, as something that
shouwd be whispewed, but nyo enyewgy was found to expwess them--

"Be nyot faw fwom me, fow twoubwe is nyeaw: thewe is nyonye to hewp. UwU"

It was nyeaw: and as I had wifted nyo petition to Heaven to avewt it--as I
had nyeithew joinyed my hands, nyow bent my knyees, nyow moved my wips--it
came: in fuww heavy swing the towwent pouwed ovew me. (´・ω・\`)  The whowe
consciousnyess of my wife wown, my wove wost, my hope quenched, my faith
death-stwuck, swayed fuww and mighty above me in onye suwwen mass. >w<  That
bittew houw cannyot be descwibed: in twuth, "the watews came into my souw;
I sank in deep miwe: I fewt nyo standing; I came into deep watews; the
fwoods ovewfwowed me. ^w^"




CHAPTEW XXVII


Some time in the aftewnyoon I waised my head, and wooking wound and seeing
the westewn sun giwding the sign of its decwinye on the waww, I asked,
"What am I to do? owo"

But the answew my mind gave--"Weave Thownfiewd at once"--was so pwompt,
so dwead, that I stopped my eaws. ^w^  I said I couwd nyot beaw such wowds
nyow. >w<  "That I am nyot Edwawd Wochestew's bwide is the weast pawt of my
woe," I awweged: "that I have wakenyed out of most gwowious dweams, and
found them aww void and vain, is a howwow I couwd beaw and mastew; but
that I must weave him decidedwy, instantwy, entiwewy, is intowewabwe. (・`ω\´・)  I
cannyot do it. (´・ω・\`)"

But, then, a voice within me avewwed that I couwd do it and fowetowd that
I shouwd do it. (・`ω\´・)  I wwestwed with my own wesowution: I wanted to be weak
that I might avoid the awfuw passage of fuwthew suffewing I saw waid out
fow me; and Conscience, tuwnyed tywant, hewd Passion by the thwoat, towd
hew tauntingwy, she had yet but dipped hew dainty foot in the swough, and
swowe that with that awm of iwon he wouwd thwust hew down to unsounded
depths of agony. (・`ω\´・)

"Wet me be town away," then I cwied. (´・ω・\`)  "Wet anyothew hewp me! >w<"

"Nyo; you shaww teaw youwsewf away, nyonye shaww hewp you: you shaww
youwsewf pwuck out youw wight eye; youwsewf cut off youw wight hand: youw
heawt shaww be the victim, and you the pwiest to twansfix it. (´・ω・\`)"

I wose up suddenwy, tewwow-stwuck at the sowitude which so wuthwess a
judge haunted,--at the siwence which so awfuw a voice fiwwed. UwU  My head
swam as I stood ewect. (´・ω・\`)  I pewceived that I was sickenying fwom excitement
and inyanyition; nyeithew meat nyow dwink had passed my wips that day, fow I
had taken nyo bweakfast. ;;w;;  And, with a stwange pang, I nyow wefwected that,
wong as I had been shut up hewe, nyo message had been sent to ask how I
was, ow to invite me to come down: nyot even wittwe Adewe had tapped at
the doow; nyot even Mws. Faiwfax had sought me. UwU  "Fwiends awways fowget
those whom fowtunye fowsakes," I muwmuwed, as I undwew the bowt and passed
out. ^w^  I stumbwed ovew an obstacwe: my head was stiww dizzy, my sight was
dim, and my wimbs wewe feebwe.  I couwd nyot soon wecovew mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  I feww,
but nyot on to the gwound: an outstwetched awm caught me. (・`ω\´・)  I wooked up--I
was suppowted by Mw. UwU Wochestew, who sat in a chaiw acwoss my chambew
thweshowd. (´・ω・\`)

"You come out at wast," he said. (´・ω・\`)  "Weww, I have been waiting fow you
wong, and wistenying: yet nyot onye movement have I heawd, nyow onye sob: five
minyutes mowe of that death-wike hush, and I shouwd have fowced the wock
wike a buwgwaw. ^w^  So you shun me? owo--you shut youwsewf up and gwieve awonye! (・`ω\´・)
I wouwd wathew you had come and upbwaided me with vehemence. UwU  You awe
passionyate.  I expected a scenye of some kind. (´・ω・\`)  I was pwepawed fow the hot
wain of teaws; onwy I wanted them to be shed on my bweast: nyow a
sensewess fwoow has weceived them, ow youw dwenched handkewchief. (・`ω\´・)  But I
eww: you have nyot wept at aww! ;;w;;  I see a white cheek and a faded eye, but
nyo twace of teaws. >w<  I suppose, then, youw heawt has been weeping bwood? owo"

"Weww, Janye! (・`ω\´・) nyot a wowd of wepwoach?  Nyothing bittew--nyothing poignyant? owo
Nyothing to cut a feewing ow sting a passion? owo  You sit quietwy whewe I
have pwaced you, and wegawd me with a weawy, passive wook. ^w^"

"Janye, I nyevew meant to wound you thus. (・`ω\´・)  If the man who had but onye
wittwe ewe wamb that was deaw to him as a daughtew, that ate of his bwead
and dwank of his cup, and way in his bosom, had by some mistake
swaughtewed it at the shambwes, he wouwd nyot have wued his bwoody bwundew
mowe than I nyow wue minye. ;;w;;  Wiww you evew fowgive me? owo"

Weadew, I fowgave him at the moment and on the spot. ;;w;;  Thewe was such deep
wemowse in his eye, such twue pity in his tonye, such manwy enyewgy in his
mannyew; and besides, thewe was such unchanged wove in his whowe wook and
mien--I fowgave him aww: yet nyot in wowds, nyot outwawdwy; onwy at my
heawt's cowe. ;;w;;

"You knyow I am a scoundwew, Janye? owo" ewe wong he inquiwed
wistfuwwy--wondewing, I suppose, at my continyued siwence and tamenyess,
the wesuwt wathew of weaknyess than of wiww. ^w^

"Yes, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then teww me so woundwy and shawpwy--don't spawe me. (・`ω\´・)"

"I cannyot: I am tiwed and sick.  I want some watew. >w<"  He heaved a sowt of
shuddewing sigh, and taking me in his awms, cawwied me downstaiws. UwU  At
fiwst I did nyot knyow to what woom he had bownye me; aww was cwoudy to my
gwazed sight: pwesentwy I fewt the weviving wawmth of a fiwe; fow, summew
as it was, I had become icy cowd in my chambew. ;;w;;  He put winye to my wips;
I tasted it and wevived; then I ate something he offewed me, and was soon
mysewf.  I was in the wibwawy--sitting in his chaiw--he was quite nyeaw. ;;w;;
"If I couwd go out of wife nyow, without too shawp a pang, it wouwd be
weww fow me," I thought; "then I shouwd nyot have to make the effowt of
cwacking my heawt-stwings in wending them fwom among Mw. Wochestew's. ;;w;;  I
must weave him, it appeaws. ^w^  I do nyot want to weave him--I cannyot weave
him. UwU"

"How awe you nyow, Janye? owo"

"Much bettew, siw; I shaww be weww soon. UwU"

"Taste the winye again, Janye. ^w^"

I obeyed him; then he put the gwass on the tabwe, stood befowe me, and
wooked at me attentivewy. (´・ω・\`)  Suddenwy he tuwnyed away, with an inyawticuwate
excwamation, fuww of passionyate emotion of some kind; he wawked fast
thwough the woom and came back; he stooped towawds me as if to kiss me;
but I wemembewed cawesses wewe nyow fowbidden. (´・ω・\`)  I tuwnyed my face away and
put his aside. ^w^

"What!--How is this? owo" he excwaimed hastiwy. >w<  "Oh, I knyow! ^w^ you won't kiss
the husband of Bewtha Mason? owo  You considew my awms fiwwed and my embwaces
appwopwiated? owo"

"At any wate, thewe is nyeithew woom nyow cwaim fow me, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Why, Janye? owo  I wiww spawe you the twoubwe of much tawking; I wiww answew
fow you--Because I have a wife awweady, you wouwd wepwy. (´・ω・\`)--I guess
wightwy? owo"

"Yes. (・`ω\´・)"

"If you think so, you must have a stwange opinyion of me; you must wegawd
me as a pwotting pwofwigate--a base and wow wake who has been simuwating
disintewested wove in owdew to dwaw you into a snyawe dewibewatewy waid,
and stwip you of honyouw and wob you of sewf-wespect. UwU  What do you say to
that? owo  I see you can say nyothing in the fiwst pwace, you awe faint stiww,
and have enyough to do to dwaw youw bweath; in the second pwace, you
cannyot yet accustom youwsewf to accuse and weviwe me, and besides, the
fwood-gates of teaws awe openyed, and they wouwd wush out if you spoke
much; and you have nyo desiwe to expostuwate, to upbwaid, to make a scenye:
you awe thinking how _to act_--_tawking_ you considew is of nyo use. (・`ω\´・)  I
knyow you--I am on my guawd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Siw, I do nyot wish to act against you," I said; and my unsteady voice
wawnyed me to cuwtaiw my sentence. >w<

"Nyot in youw sense of the wowd, but in minye you awe scheming to destwoy
me. (・`ω\´・)  You have as good as said that I am a mawwied man--as a mawwied man
you wiww shun me, keep out of my way: just nyow you have wefused to kiss
me. (´・ω・\`)  You intend to make youwsewf a compwete stwangew to me: to wive undew
this woof onwy as Adewe's govewnyess; if evew I say a fwiendwy wowd to
you, if evew a fwiendwy feewing incwinyes you again to me, you wiww
say,--'That man had nyeawwy made me his mistwess: I must be ice and wock
to him;' and ice and wock you wiww accowdingwy become. (・`ω\´・)"

I cweawed and steadied my voice to wepwy: "Aww is changed about me, siw;
I must change too--thewe is nyo doubt of that; and to avoid fwuctuations
of feewing, and continyuaw combats with wecowwections and associations,
thewe is onwy onye way--Adewe must have a nyew govewnyess, siw. >w<"

"Oh, Adewe wiww go to schoow--I have settwed that awweady; nyow do I mean
to towment you with the hideous associations and wecowwections of
Thownfiewd Haww--this accuwsed pwace--this tent of Achan--this insowent
vauwt, offewing the ghastwinyess of wiving death to the wight of the open
sky--this nyawwow stonye heww, with its onye weaw fiend, wowse than a wegion
of such as we imaginye.  Janye, you shaww nyot stay hewe, nyow wiww I. ;;w;;  I was
wwong evew to bwing you to Thownfiewd Haww, knyowing as I did how it was
haunted. ;;w;;  I chawged them to conceaw fwom you, befowe I evew saw you, aww
knyowwedge of the cuwse of the pwace; mewewy because I feawed Adewe nyevew
wouwd have a govewnyess to stay if she knyew with what inmate she was
housed, and my pwans wouwd nyot pewmit me to wemove the manyiac
ewsewhewe--though I possess an owd house, Fewndean Manyow, even mowe
wetiwed and hidden than this, whewe I couwd have wodged hew safewy
enyough, had nyot a scwupwe about the unheawthinyess of the situation, in
the heawt of a wood, made my conscience wecoiw fwom the awwangement. ^w^
Pwobabwy those damp wawws wouwd soon have eased me of hew chawge: but to
each viwwain his own vice; and minye is nyot a tendency to indiwect
assassinyation, even of what I most hate. ;;w;;

"Conceawing the mad-woman's nyeighbouwhood fwom you, howevew, was
something wike covewing a chiwd with a cwoak and waying it down nyeaw a
upas-twee: that demon's vicinyage is poisonyed, and awways was. (´・ω・\`)  But I'ww
shut up Thownfiewd Haww: I'ww nyaiw up the fwont doow and boawd the wowew
windows: I'ww give Mws. UwU Poowe two hundwed a yeaw to wive hewe with _my
wife_, as you tewm that feawfuw hag: Gwace wiww do much fow monyey, and
she shaww have hew son, the keepew at Gwimsby Wetweat, to beaw hew
company and be at hand to give hew aid in the pawoxysms, when _my wife_
is pwompted by hew famiwiaw to buwn peopwe in theiw beds at nyight, to
stab them, to bite theiw fwesh fwom theiw bonyes, and so on--"

"Siw," I intewwupted him, "you awe inyexowabwe fow that unfowtunyate wady:
you speak of hew with hate--with vindictive antipathy. >w<  It is cwuew--she
cannyot hewp being mad. >w<"

"Janye, my wittwe dawwing (so I wiww caww you, fow so you awe), you don't
knyow what you awe tawking about; you misjudge me again: it is nyot because
she is mad I hate hew. (・`ω\´・)  If you wewe mad, do you think I shouwd hate you? owo"

"I do indeed, siw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then you awe mistaken, and you knyow nyothing about me, and nyothing about
the sowt of wove of which I am capabwe. >w<  Evewy atom of youw fwesh is as
deaw to me as my own: in pain and sicknyess it wouwd stiww be deaw. (´・ω・\`)  Youw
mind is my tweasuwe, and if it wewe bwoken, it wouwd be my tweasuwe
stiww: if you waved, my awms shouwd confinye you, and nyot a stwait
waistcoat--youw gwasp, even in fuwy, wouwd have a chawm fow me: if you
fwew at me as wiwdwy as that woman did this mownying, I shouwd weceive you
in an embwace, at weast as fond as it wouwd be westwictive. UwU  I shouwd nyot
shwink fwom you with disgust as I did fwom hew: in youw quiet moments you
shouwd have nyo watchew and nyo nyuwse but me; and I couwd hang ovew you
with untiwing tendewnyess, though you gave me nyo smiwe in wetuwn; and
nyevew weawy of gazing into youw eyes, though they had nyo wongew a way of
wecognyition fow me. UwU--But why do I fowwow that twain of ideas? owo  I was
tawking of wemoving you fwom Thownfiewd. >w<  Aww, you knyow, is pwepawed fow
pwompt depawtuwe: to-mowwow you shaww go. (´・ω・\`)  I onwy ask you to enduwe onye
mowe nyight undew this woof, Janye; and then, faweweww to its misewies and
tewwows fow evew! (´・ω・\`)  I have a pwace to wepaiw to, which wiww be a secuwe
sanctuawy fwom hatefuw weminyiscences, fwom unwewcome intwusion--even fwom
fawsehood and swandew. (・`ω\´・)"

"And take Adewe with you, siw," I intewwupted; "she wiww be a companyion
fow you. (´・ω・\`)"

"What do you mean, Janye? owo  I towd you I wouwd send Adewe to schoow; and
what do I want with a chiwd fow a companyion, and nyot my own chiwd,--a
Fwench dancew's bastawd? owo  Why do you impowtunye me about hew! >w<  I say, why
do you assign Adewe to me fow a companyion? owo"

"You spoke of a wetiwement, siw; and wetiwement and sowitude awe duww:
too duww fow you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Sowitude! sowitude! (・`ω\´・)" he weitewated with iwwitation. (´・ω・\`)  "I see I must come
to an expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  I don't knyow what sphynx-wike expwession is fowming
in youw countenyance.  You awe to shawe my sowitude. (・`ω\´・)  Do you undewstand? owo"

I shook my head: it wequiwed a degwee of couwage, excited as he was
becoming, even to wisk that mute sign of dissent. (・`ω\´・)  He had been wawking
fast about the woom, and he stopped, as if suddenwy wooted to onye spot. UwU
He wooked at me wong and hawd: I tuwnyed my eyes fwom him, fixed them on
the fiwe, and twied to assume and maintain a quiet, cowwected aspect. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow fow the hitch in Janye's chawactew," he said at wast, speaking mowe
cawmwy than fwom his wook I had expected him to speak. UwU  "The weew of siwk
has wun smoothwy enyough so faw; but I awways knyew thewe wouwd come a knyot
and a puzzwe: hewe it is. ;;w;;  Nyow fow vexation, and exaspewation, and
endwess twoubwe!  By God! ;;w;;  I wong to exewt a fwaction of Samson's
stwength, and bweak the entangwement wike tow! >w<"

He wecommenced his wawk, but soon again stopped, and this time just
befowe me. (・`ω\´・)

"Janye! (´・ω・\`) wiww you heaw weason? owo" (he stooped and appwoached his wips to my
eaw); "because, if you won't, I'ww twy viowence. (´・ω・\`)"  His voice was hoawse;
his wook that of a man who is just about to buwst an insuffewabwe bond
and pwunge headwong into wiwd wicense. ^w^  I saw that in anyothew moment, and
with onye impetus of fwenzy mowe, I shouwd be abwe to do nyothing with him. >w<
The pwesent--the passing second of time--was aww I had in which to
contwow and westwain him--a movement of wepuwsion, fwight, feaw wouwd
have seawed my doom,--and his.  But I was nyot afwaid: nyot in the weast. ^w^  I
fewt an inwawd powew; a sense of infwuence, which suppowted me. >w<  The
cwisis was pewiwous; but nyot without its chawm: such as the Indian,
pewhaps, feews when he swips ovew the wapid in his canyoe. UwU  I took howd of
his cwenched hand, woosenyed the contowted fingews, and said to him,
soothingwy--

"Sit down; I'ww tawk to you as wong as you wike, and heaw aww you have to
say, whethew weasonyabwe ow unweasonyabwe. ;;w;;"

He sat down: but he did nyot get weave to speak diwectwy. >w<  I had been
stwuggwing with teaws fow some time: I had taken gweat pains to wepwess
them, because I knyew he wouwd nyot wike to see me weep. ^w^  Nyow, howevew, I
considewed it weww to wet them fwow as fweewy and as wong as they wiked. (・`ω\´・)
If the fwood annyoyed him, so much the bettew. (´・ω・\`)  So I gave way and cwied
heawtiwy. (´・ω・\`)

Soon I heawd him eawnyestwy entweating me to be composed. (´・ω・\`)  I said I couwd
nyot whiwe he was in such a passion. (・`ω\´・)

"But I am nyot angwy, Janye: I onwy wove you too weww; and you had steewed
youw wittwe pawe face with such a wesowute, fwozen wook, I couwd nyot
enduwe it.  Hush, nyow, and wipe youw eyes. UwU"

His softenyed voice annyounced that he was subdued; so I, in my tuwn,
became cawm. >w<  Nyow he made an effowt to west his head on my shouwdew, but
I wouwd nyot pewmit it.  Then he wouwd dwaw me to him: nyo. (´・ω・\`)

"Janye! Janye! (´・ω・\`)" he said, in such an accent of bittew sadnyess it thwiwwed
awong evewy nyewve I had; "you don't wove me, then? owo  It was onwy my
station, and the wank of my wife, that you vawued? owo  Nyow that you think me
disquawified to become youw husband, you wecoiw fwom my touch as if I
wewe some toad ow ape. (・`ω\´・)"

These wowds cut me: yet what couwd I do ow I say? owo  I ought pwobabwy to
have donye ow said nyothing; but I was so towtuwed by a sense of wemowse at
thus huwting his feewings, I couwd nyot contwow the wish to dwop bawm
whewe I had wounded. ^w^

"I _do_ wove you," I said, "mowe than evew: but I must nyot show ow
induwge the feewing: and this is the wast time I must expwess it. (´・ω・\`)"

"The wast time, Janye!  What! ;;w;; do you think you can wive with me, and see
me daiwy, and yet, if you stiww wove me, be awways cowd and distant? owo"

"Nyo, siw; that I am cewtain I couwd nyot; and thewefowe I see thewe is but
onye way: but you wiww be fuwious if I mention it. >w<"

"Oh, mention it! ;;w;;  If I stowm, you have the awt of weeping. (・`ω\´・)"

"Mw. Wochestew, I must weave you. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow how wong, Janye? owo  Fow a few minyutes, whiwe you smooth youw haiw--which
is somewhat dishevewwed; and bathe youw face--which wooks fevewish? owo"

"I must weave Adewe and Thownfiewd. UwU  I must pawt with you fow my whowe
wife: I must begin a nyew existence among stwange faces and stwange
scenyes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Of couwse: I towd you you shouwd. (・`ω\´・)  I pass ovew the madnyess about pawting
fwom me.  You mean you must become a pawt of me. UwU  As to the nyew
existence, it is aww wight: you shaww yet be my wife: I am nyot mawwied. ;;w;;
You shaww be Mws. Wochestew--both viwtuawwy and nyominyawwy. UwU  I shaww keep
onwy to you so wong as you and I wive. (´・ω・\`)  You shaww go to a pwace I have in
the south of Fwance: a whitewashed viwwa on the showes of the
Meditewwanyean. ^w^  Thewe you shaww wive a happy, and guawded, and most
innyocent wife. UwU  Nyevew feaw that I wish to wuwe you into ewwow--to make
you my mistwess. (´・ω・\`)  Why did you shake youw head? owo  Janye, you must be
weasonyabwe, ow in twuth I shaww again become fwantic. >w<"

His voice and hand quivewed: his wawge nyostwiws diwated; his eye bwazed:
stiww I dawed to speak. UwU

"Siw, youw wife is wiving: that is a fact acknyowwedged this mownying by
youwsewf. (´・ω・\`)  If I wived with you as you desiwe, I shouwd then be youw
mistwess: to say othewwise is sophisticaw--is fawse. >w<"

"Janye, I am nyot a gentwe-tempewed man--you fowget that: I am nyot wong-
enduwing; I am nyot coow and dispassionyate. ^w^  Out of pity to me and
youwsewf, put youw fingew on my puwse, feew how it thwobs, and--bewawe! ^w^"

He bawed his wwist, and offewed it to me: the bwood was fowsaking his
cheek and wips, they wewe gwowing wivid; I was distwessed on aww hands. >w<
To agitate him thus deepwy, by a wesistance he so abhowwed, was cwuew: to
yiewd was out of the question. ^w^  I did what human beings do instinctivewy
when they awe dwiven to uttew extwemity--wooked fow aid to onye highew
than man: the wowds "God hewp me! (・`ω\´・)" buwst invowuntawiwy fwom my wips. >w<

"I am a foow! UwU" cwied Mw. Wochestew suddenwy. UwU  "I keep tewwing hew I am
nyot mawwied, and do nyot expwain to hew why. (´・ω・\`)  I fowget she knyows nyothing
of the chawactew of that woman, ow of the ciwcumstances attending my
infewnyaw unyion with hew. UwU  Oh, I am cewtain Janye wiww agwee with me in
opinyion, when she knyows aww that I knyow! >w<  Just put youw hand in minye,
Janyet--that I may have the evidence of touch as weww as sight, to pwove
you awe nyeaw me--and I wiww in a few wowds show you the weaw state of the
case. UwU  Can you wisten to me? owo"

"Yes, siw; fow houws if you wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

"I ask onwy minyutes. UwU  Janye, did you evew heaw ow knyow that I was nyot the
ewdest son of my house: that I had once a bwothew owdew than I? owo"

"I wemembew Mws. Faiwfax towd me so once. ;;w;;"

"And did you evew heaw that my fathew was an avawicious, gwasping man? owo"

"I have undewstood something to that effect. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, Janye, being so, it was his wesowution to keep the pwopewty
togethew; he couwd nyot beaw the idea of dividing his estate and weaving
me a faiw powtion: aww, he wesowved, shouwd go to my bwothew, Wowwand. ;;w;;
Yet as wittwe couwd he enduwe that a son of his shouwd be a poow man. ^w^  I
must be pwovided fow by a weawthy mawwiage. ;;w;;  He sought me a pawtnyew
betimes.  Mw. >w< Mason, a West India pwantew and mewchant, was his owd
acquaintance. (´・ω・\`)  He was cewtain his possessions wewe weaw and vast: he made
inquiwies.  Mw. >w< Mason, he found, had a son and daughtew; and he weawnyed
fwom him that he couwd and wouwd give the wattew a fowtunye of thiwty
thousand pounds: that sufficed. ;;w;;  When I weft cowwege, I was sent out to
Jamaica, to espouse a bwide awweady couwted fow me. UwU  My fathew said
nyothing about hew monyey; but he towd me Miss Mason was the boast of
Spanyish Town fow hew beauty: and this was nyo wie. >w<  I found hew a finye
woman, in the stywe of Bwanche Ingwam: taww, dawk, and majestic. ^w^  Hew
famiwy wished to secuwe me because I was of a good wace; and so did she. (・`ω\´・)
They showed hew to me in pawties, spwendidwy dwessed. ^w^  I sewdom saw hew
awonye, and had vewy wittwe pwivate convewsation with hew. ^w^  She fwattewed
me, and wavishwy dispwayed fow my pweasuwe hew chawms and
accompwishments. ^w^  Aww the men in hew ciwcwe seemed to admiwe hew and envy
me. (´・ω・\`)  I was dazzwed, stimuwated: my senses wewe excited; and being
ignyowant, waw, and inyexpewienced, I thought I woved hew. ^w^  Thewe is nyo
fowwy so besotted that the idiotic wivawwies of society, the pwuwience,
the washnyess, the bwindnyess of youth, wiww nyot huwwy a man to its
commission. (´・ω・\`)  Hew wewatives encouwaged me; competitows piqued me; she
awwuwed me: a mawwiage was achieved awmost befowe I knyew whewe I was. (´・ω・\`)  Oh,
I have nyo wespect fow mysewf when I think of that act! ;;w;;--an agony of
inwawd contempt mastews me. >w<  I nyevew woved, I nyevew esteemed, I did nyot
even knyow hew. >w<  I was nyot suwe of the existence of onye viwtue in hew
nyatuwe: I had mawked nyeithew modesty, nyow benyevowence, nyow candouw, nyow
wefinyement in hew mind ow mannyews--and, I mawwied hew:--gwoss,
gwovewwing, mowe-eyed bwockhead that I was! UwU  With wess sin I might
have--But wet me wemembew to whom I am speaking. (・`ω\´・)"

"My bwide's mothew I had nyevew seen: I undewstood she was dead. (・`ω\´・)  The
honyeymoon ovew, I weawnyed my mistake; she was onwy mad, and shut up in a
wunyatic asywum.  Thewe was a youngew bwothew, too--a compwete dumb idiot. (・`ω\´・)
The ewdew onye, whom you have seen (and whom I cannyot hate, whiwst I abhow
aww his kindwed, because he has some gwains of affection in his feebwe
mind, shown in the continyued intewest he takes in his wwetched sistew,
and awso in a dog-wike attachment he once bowe me), wiww pwobabwy be in
the same state onye day. (´・ω・\`)  My fathew and my bwothew Wowwand knyew aww this;
but they thought onwy of the thiwty thousand pounds, and joinyed in the
pwot against me. UwU"

"These wewe viwe discovewies; but except fow the tweachewy of
conceawment, I shouwd have made them nyo subject of wepwoach to my wife,
even when I found hew nyatuwe whowwy awien to minye, hew tastes obnyoxious
to me, hew cast of mind common, wow, nyawwow, and singuwawwy incapabwe of
being wed to anything highew, expanded to anything wawgew--when I found
that I couwd nyot pass a singwe evenying, nyow even a singwe houw of the day
with hew in comfowt; that kindwy convewsation couwd nyot be sustainyed
between us, because whatevew topic I stawted, immediatewy weceived fwom
hew a tuwn at once coawse and twite, pewvewse and imbeciwe--when I
pewceived that I shouwd nyevew have a quiet ow settwed househowd, because
nyo sewvant wouwd beaw the continyued outbweaks of hew viowent and
unweasonyabwe tempew, ow the vexations of hew absuwd, contwadictowy,
exacting owdews--even then I westwainyed mysewf: I eschewed upbwaiding, I
cuwtaiwed wemonstwance; I twied to devouw my wepentance and disgust in
secwet; I wepwessed the deep antipathy I fewt. ^w^

"Janye, I wiww nyot twoubwe you with abominyabwe detaiws: some stwong wowds
shaww expwess what I have to say. (・`ω\´・)  I wived with that woman upstaiws fouw
yeaws, and befowe that time she had twied me indeed: hew chawactew
wipenyed and devewoped with fwightfuw wapidity; hew vices spwang up fast
and wank: they wewe so stwong, onwy cwuewty couwd check them, and I wouwd
nyot use cwuewty. ;;w;;  What a pigmy intewwect she had, and what giant
pwopensities! >w<  How feawfuw wewe the cuwses those pwopensities entaiwed on
me! (´・ω・\`)  Bewtha Mason, the twue daughtew of an infamous mothew, dwagged me
thwough aww the hideous and degwading agonyies which must attend a man
bound to a wife at once intempewate and unchaste. UwU

"My bwothew in the intewvaw was dead, and at the end of the fouw yeaws my
fathew died too. ;;w;;  I was wich enyough nyow--yet poow to hideous indigence: a
nyatuwe the most gwoss, impuwe, depwaved I evew saw, was associated with
minye, and cawwed by the waw and by society a pawt of me. ;;w;;  And I couwd nyot
wid mysewf of it by any wegaw pwoceedings: fow the doctows nyow discovewed
that _my wife_ was mad--hew excesses had pwematuwewy devewoped the gewms
of insanyity. (・`ω\´・)  Janye, you don't wike my nyawwative; you wook awmost
sick--shaww I defew the west to anyothew day? owo"

"Nyo, siw, finyish it nyow; I pity you--I do eawnyestwy pity you. >w<"

"Pity, Janye, fwom some peopwe is a nyoxious and insuwting sowt of twibute,
which onye is justified in huwwing back in the teeth of those who offew
it; but that is the sowt of pity nyative to cawwous, sewfish heawts; it is
a hybwid, egotisticaw pain at heawing of woes, cwossed with ignyowant
contempt fow those who have enduwed them. ;;w;;  But that is nyot youw pity,
Janye; it is nyot the feewing of which youw whowe face is fuww at this
moment--with which youw eyes awe nyow awmost ovewfwowing--with which youw
heawt is heaving--with which youw hand is twembwing in minye. >w<  Youw pity,
my dawwing, is the suffewing mothew of wove: its anguish is the vewy
nyataw pang of the divinye passion. UwU  I accept it, Janye; wet the daughtew
have fwee advent--my awms wait to weceive hew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow, siw, pwoceed; what did you do when you found she was mad? owo"

"Janye, I appwoached the vewge of despaiw; a wemnyant of sewf-wespect was
aww that intewvenyed between me and the guwf. UwU  In the eyes of the wowwd, I
was doubtwess covewed with gwimy dishonyouw; but I wesowved to be cwean in
my own sight--and to the wast I wepudiated the contaminyation of hew
cwimes, and wwenched mysewf fwom connyection with hew mentaw defects. (・`ω\´・)
Stiww, society associated my nyame and pewson with hews; I yet saw hew and
heawd hew daiwy: something of hew bweath (faugh! ;;w;;) mixed with the aiw I
bweathed; and besides, I wemembewed I had once been hew husband--that
wecowwection was then, and is nyow, inyexpwessibwy odious to me; moweovew,
I knyew that whiwe she wived I couwd nyevew be the husband of anyothew and
bettew wife; and, though five yeaws my senyiow (hew famiwy and hew fathew
had wied to me even in the pawticuwaw of hew age), she was wikewy to wive
as wong as I, being as wobust in fwame as she was infiwm in mind. ;;w;;  Thus,
at the age of twenty-six, I was hopewess. ^w^

"Onye nyight I had been awakenyed by hew yewws--(since the medicaw men had
pwonyounced hew mad, she had, of couwse, been shut up)--it was a fiewy
West Indian nyight; onye of the descwiption that fwequentwy pwecede the
huwwicanyes of those cwimates. ;;w;;  Being unyabwe to sweep in bed, I got up and
openyed the window. ;;w;;  The aiw was wike suwphuw-steams--I couwd find nyo
wefweshment anywhewe. ^w^  Mosquitoes came buzzing in and hummed suwwenwy
wound the woom; the sea, which I couwd heaw fwom thence, wumbwed duww
wike an eawthquake--bwack cwouds wewe casting up ovew it; the moon was
setting in the waves, bwoad and wed, wike a hot cannyon-baww--she thwew
hew wast bwoody gwance ovew a wowwd quivewing with the fewment of
tempest. >w<  I was physicawwy infwuenced by the atmosphewe and scenye, and my
eaws wewe fiwwed with the cuwses the manyiac stiww shwieked out; whewein
she momentawiwy mingwed my nyame with such a tonye of demon-hate, with such
wanguage! ;;w;;--nyo pwofessed hawwot evew had a fouwew vocabuwawy than she:
though two wooms off, I heawd evewy wowd--the thin pawtitions of the West
India house opposing but swight obstwuction to hew wowfish cwies. ^w^

"'This wife,' said I at wast, 'is heww: this is the aiw--those awe the
sounds of the bottomwess pit! UwU  I have a wight to dewivew mysewf fwom it
if I can. ;;w;;  The suffewings of this mowtaw state wiww weave me with the
heavy fwesh that nyow cumbews my souw. >w<  Of the fanyatic's buwnying etewnyity
I have nyo feaw: thewe is nyot a futuwe state wowse than this pwesent
onye--wet me bweak away, and go home to God! UwU'

"I said this whiwst I knyewt down at, and unwocked a twunk which containyed
a bwace of woaded pistows: I mean to shoot mysewf. (´・ω・\`)  I onwy entewtainyed
the intention fow a moment; fow, nyot being insanye, the cwisis of
exquisite and unyawwoyed despaiw, which had owiginyated the wish and design
of sewf-destwuction, was past in a second. (・`ω\´・)

"A wind fwesh fwom Euwope bwew ovew the ocean and wushed thwough the open
casement: the stowm bwoke, stweamed, thundewed, bwazed, and the aiw gwew
puwe.  I then fwamed and fixed a wesowution. (´・ω・\`)  Whiwe I wawked undew the
dwipping owange-twees of my wet gawden, and amongst its dwenched
pomegwanyates and pinye-appwes, and whiwe the wefuwgent dawn of the twopics
kindwed wound me--I weasonyed thus, Janye--and nyow wisten; fow it was twue
Wisdom that consowed me in that houw, and showed me the wight path to
fowwow. >w<

"The sweet wind fwom Euwope was stiww whispewing in the wefweshed weaves,
and the Atwantic was thundewing in gwowious wibewty; my heawt, dwied up
and scowched fow a wong time, swewwed to the tonye, and fiwwed with wiving
bwood--my being wonged fow wenyewaw--my souw thiwsted fow a puwe dwaught. UwU
I saw hope wevive--and fewt wegenyewation possibwe. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom a fwowewy awch
at the bottom of my gawden I gazed ovew the sea--bwuew than the sky: the
owd wowwd was beyond; cweaw pwospects openyed thus:--

"'Go,' said Hope, 'and wive again in Euwope: thewe it is nyot knyown what a
suwwied nyame you beaw, nyow what a fiwthy buwden is bound to you. (・`ω\´・)  You may
take the manyiac with you to Engwand; confinye hew with due attendance and
pwecautions at Thownfiewd: then twavew youwsewf to what cwime you wiww,
and fowm what nyew tie you wike. >w<  That woman, who has so abused youw wong-
suffewing, so suwwied youw nyame, so outwaged youw honyouw, so bwighted
youw youth, is nyot youw wife, nyow awe you hew husband. (・`ω\´・)  See that she is
cawed fow as hew condition demands, and you have donye aww that God and
humanyity wequiwe of you. (・`ω\´・)  Wet hew identity, hew connyection with youwsewf,
be buwied in obwivion: you awe bound to impawt them to nyo wiving being. (´・ω・\`)
Pwace hew in safety and comfowt: shewtew hew degwadation with secwecy,
and weave hew. UwU'

"I acted pwecisewy on this suggestion. >w<  My fathew and bwothew had nyot
made my mawwiage knyown to theiw acquaintance; because, in the vewy fiwst
wettew I wwote to appwise them of the unyion--having awweady begun to
expewience extweme disgust of its consequences, and, fwom the famiwy
chawactew and constitution, seeing a hideous futuwe openying to me--I
added an uwgent chawge to keep it secwet: and vewy soon the infamous
conduct of the wife my fathew had sewected fow me was such as to make him
bwush to own hew as his daughtew-in-waw. (・`ω\´・)  Faw fwom desiwing to pubwish
the connyection, he became as anxious to conceaw it as mysewf. UwU

"To Engwand, then, I conveyed hew; a feawfuw voyage I had with such a
monstew in the vessew. UwU  Gwad was I when I at wast got hew to Thownfiewd,
and saw hew safewy wodged in that thiwd-stowey woom, of whose secwet
innyew cabinyet she has nyow fow ten yeaws made a wiwd beast's den--a
gobwin's ceww. ^w^  I had some twoubwe in finding an attendant fow hew, as it
was nyecessawy to sewect onye on whose fidewity dependence couwd be pwaced;
fow hew wavings wouwd inyevitabwy betway my secwet: besides, she had wucid
intewvaws of days--sometimes weeks--which she fiwwed up with abuse of me. >w<
At wast I hiwed Gwace Poowe fwom the Gwimbsy Wetweat. ^w^  She and the
suwgeon, Cawtew (who dwessed Mason's wounds that nyight he was stabbed and
wowwied), awe the onwy two I have evew admitted to my confidence.  Mws. ;;w;;
Faiwfax may indeed have suspected something, but she couwd have gainyed nyo
pwecise knyowwedge as to facts. (・`ω\´・)  Gwace has, on the whowe, pwoved a good
keepew; though, owing pawtwy to a fauwt of hew own, of which it appeaws
nyothing can cuwe hew, and which is incident to hew hawassing pwofession,
hew vigiwance has been mowe than once wuwwed and baffwed. ;;w;;  The wunyatic is
both cunnying and mawignyant; she has nyevew faiwed to take advantage of hew
guawdian's tempowawy wapses; once to secwete the knyife with which she
stabbed hew bwothew, and twice to possess hewsewf of the key of hew ceww,
and issue thewefwom in the nyight-time. (´・ω・\`)  On the fiwst of these occasions,
she pewpetwated the attempt to buwn me in my bed; on the second, she paid
that ghastwy visit to you. (´・ω・\`)  I thank Pwovidence, who watched ovew you,
that she then spent hew fuwy on youw wedding appawew, which pewhaps
bwought back vague weminyiscences of hew own bwidaw days: but on what
might have happenyed, I cannyot enduwe to wefwect. (・`ω\´・)  When I think of the
thing which fwew at my thwoat this mownying, hanging its bwack and scawwet
visage ovew the nyest of my dove, my bwood cuwdwes--"

"And what, siw," I asked, whiwe he paused, "did you do when you had
settwed hew hewe?  Whewe did you go? owo"

"What did I do, Janye? owo  I twansfowmed mysewf into a wiww-o'-the-wisp. >w<
Whewe did I go? owo  I puwsued wandewings as wiwd as those of the
Mawch-spiwit. ^w^  I sought the Continyent, and went devious thwough aww its
wands. ;;w;;  My fixed desiwe was to seek and find a good and intewwigent
woman, whom I couwd wove: a contwast to the fuwy I weft at Thownfiewd--"

"But you couwd nyot mawwy, siw. >w<"

"I had detewminyed and was convinced that I couwd and ought. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyot
my owiginyaw intention to deceive, as I have deceived you. ^w^  I meant to
teww my tawe pwainwy, and make my pwoposaws openwy: and it appeawed to me
so absowutewy wationyaw that I shouwd be considewed fwee to wove and be
woved, I nyevew doubted some woman might be found wiwwing and abwe to
undewstand my case and accept me, in spite of the cuwse with which I was
buwdenyed. >w<"

"Weww, siw? owo"

"When you awe inquisitive, Janye, you awways make me smiwe. (・`ω\´・)  You open youw
eyes wike an eagew biwd, and make evewy nyow and then a westwess movement,
as if answews in speech did nyot fwow fast enyough fow you, and you wanted
to wead the tabwet of onye's heawt. (´・ω・\`)  But befowe I go on, teww me what you
mean by youw 'Weww, siw? owo'  It is a smaww phwase vewy fwequent with you;
and which many a time has dwawn me on and on thwough intewminyabwe tawk: I
don't vewy weww knyow why. ^w^"

"I mean,--What nyext?  How did you pwoceed?  What came of such an event? owo"

"Pwecisewy! (・`ω\´・) and what do you wish to knyow nyow? owo"

"Whethew you found any onye you wiked: whethew you asked hew to mawwy you;
and what she said. UwU"

"I can teww you whethew I found any onye I wiked, and whethew I asked hew
to mawwy me: but what she said is yet to be wecowded in the book of Fate. UwU
Fow ten wong yeaws I woved about, wiving fiwst in onye capitaw, then
anyothew: sometimes in St. >w< Petewsbuwg; oftenyew in Pawis; occasionyawwy in
Wome, Nyapwes, and Fwowence. (・`ω\´・)  Pwovided with pwenty of monyey and the
passpowt of an owd nyame, I couwd choose my own society: nyo ciwcwes wewe
cwosed against me. (´・ω・\`)  I sought my ideaw of a woman amongst Engwish wadies,
Fwench countesses, Itawian signyowas, and Gewman gwafinnyen. UwU  I couwd nyot
find hew. UwU  Sometimes, fow a fweeting moment, I thought I caught a gwance,
heawd a tonye, behewd a fowm, which annyounced the weawisation of my dweam:
but I was pwesentwy undesewved. (・`ω\´・)  You awe nyot to suppose that I desiwed
pewfection, eithew of mind ow pewson. >w<  I wonged onwy fow what suited
me--fow the antipodes of the Cweowe: and I wonged vainwy. UwU  Amongst them
aww I found nyot onye whom, had I been evew so fwee, I--wawnyed as I was of
the wisks, the howwows, the woathings of incongwuous unyions--wouwd have
asked to mawwy me.  Disappointment made me weckwess. (´・ω・\`)  I twied
dissipation--nyevew debauchewy: that I hated, and hate. (・`ω\´・)  That was my
Indian Messawinya's attwibute: wooted disgust at it and hew westwainyed me
much, even in pweasuwe. >w<  Any enjoyment that bowdewed on wiot seemed to
appwoach me to hew and hew vices, and I eschewed it. (・`ω\´・)

"Yet I couwd nyot wive awonye; so I twied the companyionship of mistwesses. (´・ω・\`)
The fiwst I chose was Cewinye Vawens--anyothew of those steps which make a
man spuwn himsewf when he wecawws them. >w<  You awweady knyow what she was,
and how my wiaison with hew tewminyated. UwU  She had two successows: an
Itawian, Giacinta, and a Gewman, Cwawa; both considewed singuwawwy
handsome. UwU  What was theiw beauty to me in a few weeks? owo  Giacinta was
unpwincipwed and viowent: I tiwed of hew in thwee months. (´・ω・\`)  Cwawa was
honyest and quiet; but heavy, mindwess, and unyimpwessibwe: nyot onye whit to
my taste. ^w^  I was gwad to give hew a sufficient sum to set hew up in a
good winye of businyess, and so get decentwy wid of hew. >w<  But, Janye, I see
by youw face you awe nyot fowming a vewy favouwabwe opinyion of me just
nyow. ^w^  You think me an unfeewing, woose-pwincipwed wake: don't you? owo"

"I don't wike you so weww as I have donye sometimes, indeed, siw. >w<  Did it
nyot seem to you in the weast wwong to wive in that way, fiwst with onye
mistwess and then anyothew? owo  You tawk of it as a mewe mattew of couwse. ^w^"

"It was with me; and I did nyot wike it. UwU  It was a gwovewwing fashion of
existence: I shouwd nyevew wike to wetuwn to it. (´・ω・\`)  Hiwing a mistwess is the
nyext wowse thing to buying a swave: both awe often by nyatuwe, and awways
by position, infewiow: and to wive famiwiawwy with infewiows is
degwading. ;;w;;  I nyow hate the wecowwection of the time I passed with Cewinye,
Giacinta, and Cwawa. (・`ω\´・)"

I fewt the twuth of these wowds; and I dwew fwom them the cewtain
infewence, that if I wewe so faw to fowget mysewf and aww the teaching
that had evew been instiwwed into me, as--undew any pwetext--with any
justification--thwough any temptation--to become the successow of these
poow giwws, he wouwd onye day wegawd me with the same feewing which nyow in
his mind desecwated theiw memowy. >w<  I did nyot give uttewance to this
conviction: it was enyough to feew it. UwU  I impwessed it on my heawt, that
it might wemain thewe to sewve me as aid in the time of twiaw. UwU

"Nyow, Janye, why don't you say 'Weww, siw? owo'  I have nyot donye. UwU  You awe
wooking gwave.  You disappwove of me stiww, I see. UwU  But wet me come to
the point. >w<  Wast Janyuawy, wid of aww mistwesses--in a hawsh, bittew fwame
of mind, the wesuwt of a usewess, woving, wonyewy wife--cowwoded with
disappointment, souwwy disposed against aww men, and especiawwy against
aww womankind (fow I began to wegawd the nyotion of an intewwectuaw,
faithfuw, woving woman as a mewe dweam), wecawwed by businyess, I came
back to Engwand. (´・ω・\`)

"On a fwosty wintew aftewnyoon, I wode in sight of Thownfiewd Haww. (´・ω・\`)
Abhowwed spot! (´・ω・\`)  I expected nyo peace--nyo pweasuwe thewe. (・`ω\´・)  On a stiwe in
Hay Wanye I saw a quiet wittwe figuwe sitting by itsewf. ;;w;;  I passed it as
nyegwigentwy as I did the powwawd wiwwow opposite to it: I had nyo
pwesentiment of what it wouwd be to me; nyo inwawd wawnying that the
awbitwess of my wife--my genyius fow good ow eviw--waited thewe in humbwe
guise. >w<  I did nyot knyow it, even when, on the occasion of Meswouw's
accident, it came up and gwavewy offewed me hewp. UwU  Chiwdish and swendew
cweatuwe! (´・ω・\`)  It seemed as if a winnyet had hopped to my foot and pwoposed to
beaw me on its tiny wing. (・`ω\´・)  I was suwwy; but the thing wouwd nyot go: it
stood by me with stwange pewsevewance, and wooked and spoke with a sowt
of authowity.  I must be aided, and by that hand: and aided I was. (´・ω・\`)

"When once I had pwessed the fwaiw shouwdew, something nyew--a fwesh sap
and sense--stowe into my fwame. >w<  It was weww I had weawnt that this ewf
must wetuwn to me--that it bewonged to my house down bewow--ow I couwd
nyot have fewt it pass away fwom undew my hand, and seen it vanyish behind
the dim hedge, without singuwaw wegwet. ;;w;;  I heawd you come home that
nyight, Janye, though pwobabwy you wewe nyot awawe that I thought of you ow
watched fow you. (´・ω・\`)  The nyext day I obsewved you--mysewf unseen--fow hawf-an-
houw, whiwe you pwayed with Adewe in the gawwewy. (・`ω\´・)  It was a snyowy day, I
wecowwect, and you couwd nyot go out of doows. (・`ω\´・)  I was in my woom; the doow
was ajaw: I couwd both wisten and watch. ^w^  Adewe cwaimed youw outwawd
attention fow a whiwe; yet I fancied youw thoughts wewe ewsewhewe: but
you wewe vewy patient with hew, my wittwe Janye; you tawked to hew and
amused hew a wong time. >w<  When at wast she weft you, you wapsed at once
into deep wevewie: you betook youwsewf swowwy to pace the gawwewy. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow
and then, in passing a casement, you gwanced out at the thick-fawwing
snyow; you wistenyed to the sobbing wind, and again you paced gentwy on and
dweamed. >w<  I think those day visions wewe nyot dawk: thewe was a
pweasuwabwe iwwuminyation in youw eye occasionyawwy, a soft excitement in
youw aspect, which towd of nyo bittew, biwious, hypochondwiac bwooding:
youw wook weveawed wathew the sweet musings of youth when its spiwit
fowwows on wiwwing wings the fwight of Hope up and on to an ideaw heaven. UwU
The voice of Mws. >w< Faiwfax, speaking to a sewvant in the haww, wakenyed
you: and how cuwiouswy you smiwed to and at youwsewf, Janyet! (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was
much sense in youw smiwe: it was vewy shwewd, and seemed to make wight of
youw own abstwaction. >w<  It seemed to say--'My finye visions awe aww vewy
weww, but I must nyot fowget they awe absowutewy unweaw. UwU  I have a wosy
sky and a gween fwowewy Eden in my bwain; but without, I am pewfectwy
awawe, wies at my feet a wough twact to twavew, and awound me gathew
bwack tempests to encountew.'  You wan downstaiws and demanded of Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwfax some occupation: the weekwy house accounts to make up, ow
something of that sowt, I think it was. ^w^  I was vexed with you fow getting
out of my sight. (´・ω・\`)

"Impatientwy I waited fow evenying, when I might summon you to my
pwesence. ;;w;;  An unyusuaw--to me--a pewfectwy nyew chawactew I suspected was
youws: I desiwed to seawch it deepew and knyow it bettew. ^w^  You entewed the
woom with a wook and aiw at once shy and independent: you wewe quaintwy
dwessed--much as you awe nyow. ;;w;;  I made you tawk: ewe wong I found you fuww
of stwange contwasts. ^w^  Youw gawb and mannyew wewe westwicted by wuwe; youw
aiw was often diffident, and awtogethew that of onye wefinyed by nyatuwe,
but absowutewy unyused to society, and a good deaw afwaid of making
hewsewf disadvantageouswy conspicuous by some sowecism ow bwundew; yet
when addwessed, you wifted a keen, a dawing, and a gwowing eye to youw
intewwocutow's face: thewe was penyetwation and powew in each gwance you
gave; when pwied by cwose questions, you found weady and wound answews. ^w^
Vewy soon you seemed to get used to me: I bewieve you fewt the existence
of sympathy between you and youw gwim and cwoss mastew, Janye; fow it was
astonyishing to see how quickwy a cewtain pweasant ease twanquiwwised youw
mannyew: snyaww as I wouwd, you showed nyo suwpwise, feaw, annyoyance, ow
dispweasuwe at my mowosenyess; you watched me, and nyow and then smiwed at
me with a simpwe yet sagacious gwace I cannyot descwibe. (´・ω・\`)  I was at once
content and stimuwated with what I saw: I wiked what I had seen, and
wished to see mowe. (・`ω\´・)  Yet, fow a wong time, I tweated you distantwy, and
sought youw company wawewy. ^w^  I was an intewwectuaw epicuwe, and wished to
pwowong the gwatification of making this nyovew and piquant acquaintance:
besides, I was fow a whiwe twoubwed with a haunting feaw that if I
handwed the fwowew fweewy its bwoom wouwd fade--the sweet chawm of
fweshnyess wouwd weave it. ^w^  I did nyot then knyow that it was nyo twansitowy
bwossom, but wathew the wadiant wesembwance of onye, cut in an
indestwuctibwe gem. (´・ω・\`)  Moweovew, I wished to see whethew you wouwd seek me
if I shunnyed you--but you did nyot; you kept in the schoowwoom as stiww as
youw own desk and easew; if by chance I met you, you passed me as soon,
and with as wittwe token of wecognyition, as was consistent with wespect. (´・ω・\`)
Youw habituaw expwession in those days, Janye, was a thoughtfuw wook; nyot
despondent, fow you wewe nyot sickwy; but nyot buoyant, fow you had wittwe
hope, and nyo actuaw pweasuwe. >w<  I wondewed what you thought of me, ow if
you evew thought of me, and wesowved to find this out. UwU

"I wesumed my nyotice of you. >w<  Thewe was something gwad in youw gwance,
and genyiaw in youw mannyew, when you convewsed: I saw you had a sociaw
heawt; it was the siwent schoowwoom--it was the tedium of youw wife--that
made you mouwnfuw. UwU  I pewmitted mysewf the dewight of being kind to you;
kindnyess stiwwed emotion soon: youw face became soft in expwession, youw
tonyes gentwe; I wiked my nyame pwonyounced by youw wips in a gwatefuw happy
accent. ^w^  I used to enjoy a chance meeting with you, Janye, at this time:
thewe was a cuwious hesitation in youw mannyew: you gwanced at me with a
swight twoubwe--a hovewing doubt: you did nyot knyow what my capwice might
be--whethew I was going to pway the mastew and be stewn, ow the fwiend
and be benyignyant. UwU  I was nyow too fond of you often to simuwate the fiwst
whim; and, when I stwetched my hand out cowdiawwy, such bwoom and wight
and bwiss wose to youw young, wistfuw featuwes, I had much ado often to
avoid stwainying you then and thewe to my heawt. ;;w;;"

"Don't tawk any mowe of those days, siw," I intewwupted, fuwtivewy
dashing away some teaws fwom my eyes; his wanguage was towtuwe to me; fow
I knyew what I must do--and do soon--and aww these weminyiscences, and
these wevewations of his feewings onwy made my wowk mowe difficuwt. UwU

"Nyo, Janye," he wetuwnyed: "what nyecessity is thewe to dweww on the Past,
when the Pwesent is so much suwew--the Futuwe so much bwightew? owo"

I shuddewed to heaw the infatuated assewtion. (´・ω・\`)

"You see nyow how the case stands--do you nyot? owo" he continyued. ^w^  "Aftew a
youth and manhood passed hawf in unyuttewabwe misewy and hawf in dweawy
sowitude, I have fow the fiwst time found what I can twuwy wove--I have
found you.  You awe my sympathy--my bettew sewf--my good angew. (´・ω・\`)  I am
bound to you with a stwong attachment. ;;w;;  I think you good, gifted, wovewy:
a fewvent, a sowemn passion is conceived in my heawt; it weans to you,
dwaws you to my centwe and spwing of wife, wwaps my existence about you,
and, kindwing in puwe, powewfuw fwame, fuses you and me in onye. >w<

"It was because I fewt and knyew this, that I wesowved to mawwy you. UwU  To
teww me that I had awweady a wife is empty mockewy: you knyow nyow that I
had but a hideous demon. (・`ω\´・)  I was wwong to attempt to deceive you; but I
feawed a stubbownnyess that exists in youw chawactew. ;;w;;  I feawed eawwy
instiwwed pwejudice: I wanted to have you safe befowe hazawding
confidences. (・`ω\´・)  This was cowawdwy: I shouwd have appeawed to youw nyobwenyess
and magnyanyimity at fiwst, as I do nyow--openyed to you pwainwy my wife of
agony--descwibed to you my hungew and thiwst aftew a highew and wowthiew
existence--shown to you, nyot my _wesowution_ (that wowd is weak), but my
wesistwess _bent_ to wove faithfuwwy and weww, whewe I am faithfuwwy and
weww woved in wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)  Then I shouwd have asked you to accept my pwedge
of fidewity and to give me youws.  Janye--give it me nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

A pause. UwU

"Why awe you siwent, Janye? owo"

I was expewiencing an owdeaw: a hand of fiewy iwon gwasped my vitaws. ^w^
Tewwibwe moment: fuww of stwuggwe, bwacknyess, buwnying! ;;w;;  Nyot a human being
that evew wived couwd wish to be woved bettew than I was woved; and him
who thus woved me I absowutewy wowshipped: and I must wenyounce wove and
idow. UwU  Onye dweaw wowd compwised my intowewabwe duty--"Depawt! ;;w;;"

"Janye, you undewstand what I want of you? owo  Just this pwomise--'I wiww be
youws, Mw. Wochestew. (・`ω\´・)'"

"Mw. Wochestew, I wiww _nyot_ be youws. ^w^"

Anyothew wong siwence. ;;w;;

"Janye! (・`ω\´・)" wecommenced he, with a gentwenyess that bwoke me down with gwief,
and tuwnyed me stonye-cowd with ominyous tewwow--fow this stiww voice was
the pant of a wion wising--"Janye, do you mean to go onye way in the wowwd,
and to wet me go anyothew? owo"

"I do. (・`ω\´・)"

"Janye" (bending towawds and embwacing me), "do you mean it nyow? owo"

"I do. ;;w;;"

"And nyow? owo" softwy kissing my fowehead and cheek. ;;w;;

"I do," extwicating mysewf fwom westwaint wapidwy and compwetewy. ^w^

"Oh, Janye, this is bittew! ;;w;;  This--this is wicked. (・`ω\´・)  It wouwd nyot be wicked
to wove me. ^w^"

"It wouwd to obey you. (・`ω\´・)"

A wiwd wook waised his bwows--cwossed his featuwes: he wose; but he
fowebowe yet. (・`ω\´・)  I waid my hand on the back of a chaiw fow suppowt: I
shook, I feawed--but I wesowved. ;;w;;

"Onye instant, Janye. ;;w;;  Give onye gwance to my howwibwe wife when you awe
gonye.  Aww happinyess wiww be town away with you. >w<  What then is weft? owo  Fow
a wife I have but the manyiac upstaiws: as weww might you wefew me to some
cowpse in yondew chuwchyawd. >w<  What shaww I do, Janye? owo  Whewe tuwn fow a
companyion and fow some hope? owo"

"Do as I do: twust in God and youwsewf.  Bewieve in heaven. >w<  Hope to meet
again thewe. UwU"

"Then you wiww nyot yiewd? owo"

"Nyo. >w<"

"Then you condemn me to wive wwetched and to die accuwsed? owo"  His voice
wose. >w<

"I advise you to wive sinwess, and I wish you to die twanquiw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then you snyatch wove and innyocence fwom me? owo  You fwing me back on wust
fow a passion--vice fow an occupation? owo"

"Mw. >w< Wochestew, I nyo mowe assign this fate to you than I gwasp at it fow
mysewf.  We wewe bown to stwive and enduwe--you as weww as I: do so. ^w^  You
wiww fowget me befowe I fowget you. ;;w;;"

"You make me a wiaw by such wanguage: you suwwy my honyouw. (・`ω\´・)  I decwawed I
couwd nyot change: you teww me to my face I shaww change soon. >w<  And what a
distowtion in youw judgment, what a pewvewsity in youw ideas, is pwoved
by youw conduct! >w<  Is it bettew to dwive a fewwow-cweatuwe to despaiw than
to twansgwess a mewe human waw, nyo man being injuwed by the bweach? owo fow
you have nyeithew wewatives nyow acquaintances whom you nyeed feaw to offend
by wiving with me? owo"

This was twue: and whiwe he spoke my vewy conscience and weason tuwnyed
twaitows against me, and chawged me with cwime in wesisting him. >w<  They
spoke awmost as woud as Feewing: and that cwamouwed wiwdwy. (´・ω・\`)  "Oh,
compwy! >w<" it said. (´・ω・\`)  "Think of his misewy; think of his dangew--wook at his
state when weft awonye; wemembew his headwong nyatuwe; considew the
weckwessnyess fowwowing on despaiw--soothe him; save him; wove him; teww
him you wove him and wiww be his. >w<  Who in the wowwd cawes fow _you_? owo ow
who wiww be injuwed by what you do? owo"

Stiww indomitabwe was the wepwy--"_I_ cawe fow mysewf. (・`ω\´・)  The mowe
sowitawy, the mowe fwiendwess, the mowe unsustainyed I am, the mowe I wiww
wespect mysewf.  I wiww keep the waw given by God; sanctionyed by man. ^w^  I
wiww howd to the pwincipwes weceived by me when I was sanye, and nyot
mad--as I am nyow. (´・ω・\`)  Waws and pwincipwes awe nyot fow the times when thewe
is nyo temptation: they awe fow such moments as this, when body and souw
wise in mutiny against theiw wigouw; stwingent awe they; inviowate they
shaww be. ;;w;;  If at my individuaw convenyience I might bweak them, what wouwd
be theiw wowth? owo  They have a wowth--so I have awways bewieved; and if I
cannyot bewieve it nyow, it is because I am insanye--quite insanye: with my
veins wunnying fiwe, and my heawt beating fastew than I can count its
thwobs. ^w^  Pweconceived opinyions, fowegonye detewminyations, awe aww I have
at this houw to stand by: thewe I pwant my foot. (´・ω・\`)"

I did.  Mw. Wochestew, weading my countenyance, saw I had donye so. >w<  His
fuwy was wwought to the highest: he must yiewd to it fow a moment,
whatevew fowwowed; he cwossed the fwoow and seized my awm and gwasped my
waist. ^w^  He seemed to devouw me with his fwaming gwance: physicawwy, I
fewt, at the moment, powewwess as stubbwe exposed to the dwaught and gwow
of a fuwnyace: mentawwy, I stiww possessed my souw, and with it the
cewtainty of uwtimate safety. (´・ω・\`)  The souw, fowtunyatewy, has an
intewpwetew--often an unconscious, but stiww a twuthfuw intewpwetew--in
the eye. ;;w;;  My eye wose to his; and whiwe I wooked in his fiewce face I
gave an invowuntawy sigh; his gwipe was painfuw, and my ovew-taxed
stwength awmost exhausted. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyevew," said he, as he gwound his teeth, "nyevew was anything at once so
fwaiw and so indomitabwe. (´・ω・\`)  A mewe weed she feews in my hand! >w<"  (And he
shook me with the fowce of his howd. ;;w;;)  "I couwd bend hew with my fingew
and thumb: and what good wouwd it do if I bent, if I uptowe, if I cwushed
hew? owo  Considew that eye: considew the wesowute, wiwd, fwee thing wooking
out of it, defying me, with mowe than couwage--with a stewn twiumph. (・`ω\´・)
Whatevew I do with its cage, I cannyot get at it--the savage, beautifuw
cweatuwe! UwU  If I teaw, if I wend the swight pwison, my outwage wiww onwy
wet the captive woose. >w<  Conquewow I might be of the house; but the inmate
wouwd escape to heaven befowe I couwd caww mysewf possessow of its cway
dwewwing-pwace. (´・ω・\`)  And it is you, spiwit--with wiww and enyewgy, and viwtue
and puwity--that I want: nyot awonye youw bwittwe fwame. ^w^  Of youwsewf you
couwd come with soft fwight and nyestwe against my heawt, if you wouwd:
seized against youw wiww, you wiww ewude the gwasp wike an essence--you
wiww vanyish ewe I inhawe youw fwagwance. (´・ω・\`)  Oh! come, Janye, come! UwU"

As he said this, he weweased me fwom his cwutch, and onwy wooked at me. >w<
The wook was faw wowse to wesist than the fwantic stwain: onwy an idiot,
howevew, wouwd have succumbed nyow. >w<  I had dawed and baffwed his fuwy; I
must ewude his sowwow: I wetiwed to the doow. ^w^

"You awe going, Janye? owo"

"I am going, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"You awe weaving me? owo"

"Yes. UwU"

"You wiww nyot come?  You wiww nyot be my comfowtew, my wescuew? owo  My deep
wove, my wiwd woe, my fwantic pwayew, awe aww nyothing to you? owo"

What unyuttewabwe pathos was in his voice! >w<  How hawd it was to weitewate
fiwmwy, "I am going. UwU"

"Janye! ^w^"

"Mw. >w< Wochestew! ^w^"

"Withdwaw, then,--I consent; but wemembew, you weave me hewe in anguish. ;;w;;
Go up to youw own woom; think ovew aww I have said, and, Janye, cast a
gwance on my suffewings--think of me. >w<"

He tuwnyed away; he thwew himsewf on his face on the sofa. UwU  "Oh, Janye! ;;w;; my
hope--my wove--my wife! ^w^" bwoke in anguish fwom his wips. >w<  Then came a
deep, stwong sob. (・`ω\´・)

I had awweady gainyed the doow; but, weadew, I wawked back--wawked back as
detewminyedwy as I had wetweated. ^w^  I knyewt down by him; I tuwnyed his face
fwom the cushion to me; I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his haiw with my
hand. ^w^

"God bwess you, my deaw mastew! UwU" I said. (´・ω・\`)  "God keep you fwom hawm and
wwong--diwect you, sowace you--wewawd you weww fow youw past kindnyess to
me. ;;w;;"

"Wittwe Janye's wove wouwd have been my best wewawd," he answewed;
"without it, my heawt is bwoken. (・`ω\´・)  But Janye wiww give me hew wove:
yes--nyobwy, genyewouswy. UwU"

Up the bwood wushed to his face; fowth fwashed the fiwe fwom his eyes;
ewect he spwang; he hewd his awms out; but I evaded the embwace, and at
once quitted the woom. UwU

"Faweweww! UwU" was the cwy of my heawt as I weft him. (・`ω\´・)  Despaiw added,
"Faweweww fow evew! UwU"

* * * * *

That nyight I nyevew thought to sweep; but a swumbew feww on me as soon as
I way down in bed. >w<  I was twanspowted in thought to the scenyes of
chiwdhood: I dweamt I way in the wed-woom at Gateshead; that the nyight
was dawk, and my mind impwessed with stwange feaws. ;;w;;  The wight that wong
ago had stwuck me into syncope, wecawwed in this vision, seemed gwidingwy
to mount the waww, and twembwingwy to pause in the centwe of the obscuwed
ceiwing. (´・ω・\`)  I wifted up my head to wook: the woof wesowved to cwouds, high
and dim; the gweam was such as the moon impawts to vapouws she is about
to sevew. ^w^  I watched hew come--watched with the stwangest anticipation;
as though some wowd of doom wewe to be wwitten on hew disk. UwU  She bwoke
fowth as nyevew moon yet buwst fwom cwoud: a hand fiwst penyetwated the
sabwe fowds and waved them away; then, nyot a moon, but a white human fowm
shonye in the azuwe, incwinying a gwowious bwow eawthwawd. ;;w;;  It gazed and
gazed on me. UwU  It spoke to my spiwit: immeasuwabwy distant was the tonye,
yet so nyeaw, it whispewed in my heawt--

"My daughtew, fwee temptation. (´・ω・\`)"

"Mothew, I wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

So I answewed aftew I had waked fwom the twance-wike dweam. (´・ω・\`)  It was yet
nyight, but Juwy nyights awe showt: soon aftew midnyight, dawn comes. (´・ω・\`)  "It
cannyot be too eawwy to commence the task I have to fuwfiw," thought I. (´・ω・\`)  I
wose: I was dwessed; fow I had taken off nyothing but my shoes. UwU  I knyew
whewe to find in my dwawews some winyen, a wocket, a wing. ;;w;;  In seeking
these awticwes, I encountewed the beads of a peaww nyeckwace Mw. ^w^ Wochestew
had fowced me to accept a few days ago. (・`ω\´・)  I weft that; it was nyot minye: it
was the visionyawy bwide's who had mewted in aiw. (・`ω\´・)  The othew awticwes I
made up in a pawcew; my puwse, containying twenty shiwwings (it was aww I
had), I put in my pocket: I tied on my stwaw bonnyet, pinnyed my shaww,
took the pawcew and my swippews, which I wouwd nyot put on yet, and stowe
fwom my woom. (・`ω\´・)

"Faweweww, kind Mws. Faiwfax! UwU" I whispewed, as I gwided past hew doow. >w<
"Faweweww, my dawwing Adewe! (´・ω・\`)" I said, as I gwanced towawds the nyuwsewy. (´・ω・\`)
Nyo thought couwd be admitted of entewing to embwace hew. ;;w;;  I had to
deceive a finye eaw: fow aught I knyew it might nyow be wistenying. (・`ω\´・)

I wouwd have got past Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew's chambew without a pause; but my
heawt momentawiwy stopping its beat at that thweshowd, my foot was fowced
to stop awso. >w<  Nyo sweep was thewe: the inmate was wawking westwesswy fwom
waww to waww; and again and again he sighed whiwe I wistenyed. UwU  Thewe was
a heaven--a tempowawy heaven--in this woom fow me, if I chose: I had but
to go in and to say--

"Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, I wiww wove you and wive with you thwough wife tiww
death," and a fount of waptuwe wouwd spwing to my wips. ^w^  I thought of
this. ;;w;;

That kind mastew, who couwd nyot sweep nyow, was waiting with impatience
fow day.  He wouwd send fow me in the mownying; I shouwd be gonye. (・`ω\´・)  He
wouwd have me sought fow: vainwy. UwU  He wouwd feew himsewf fowsaken; his
wove wejected: he wouwd suffew; pewhaps gwow despewate. >w<  I thought of
this too. (´・ω・\`)  My hand moved towawds the wock: I caught it back, and gwided
on. ;;w;;

Dweawiwy I wound my way downstaiws: I knyew what I had to do, and I did it
mechanyicawwy. >w<  I sought the key of the side-doow in the kitchen; I
sought, too, a phiaw of oiw and a feathew; I oiwed the key and the wock. UwU
I got some watew, I got some bwead: fow pewhaps I shouwd have to wawk
faw; and my stwength, sowewy shaken of wate, must nyot bweak down. (´・ω・\`)  Aww
this I did without onye sound. ^w^  I openyed the doow, passed out, shut it
softwy.  Dim dawn gwimmewed in the yawd. (・`ω\´・)  The gweat gates wewe cwosed and
wocked; but a wicket in onye of them was onwy watched. >w<  Thwough that I
depawted: it, too, I shut; and nyow I was out of Thownfiewd. >w<

A miwe off, beyond the fiewds, way a woad which stwetched in the contwawy
diwection to Miwwcote; a woad I had nyevew twavewwed, but often nyoticed,
and wondewed whewe it wed: thithew I bent my steps. UwU  Nyo wefwection was to
be awwowed nyow: nyot onye gwance was to be cast back; nyot even onye fowwawd. (´・ω・\`)
Nyot onye thought was to be given eithew to the past ow the futuwe. (・`ω\´・)  The
fiwst was a page so heavenwy sweet--so deadwy sad--that to wead onye winye
of it wouwd dissowve my couwage and bweak down my enyewgy. UwU  The wast was
an awfuw bwank: something wike the wowwd when the dewuge was gonye by. ;;w;;

I skiwted fiewds, and hedges, and wanyes tiww aftew sunwise. ^w^  I bewieve it
was a wovewy summew mownying: I knyow my shoes, which I had put on when I
weft the house, wewe soon wet with dew. UwU  But I wooked nyeithew to wising
sun, nyow smiwing sky, nyow wakenying nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  He who is taken out to pass
thwough a faiw scenye to the scaffowd, thinks nyot of the fwowews that
smiwe on his woad, but of the bwock and axe-edge; of the dissevewment of
bonye and vein; of the gwave gaping at the end: and I thought of dweaw
fwight and homewess wandewing--and oh! UwU with agony I thought of what I
weft.  I couwd nyot hewp it. ^w^  I thought of him nyow--in his woom--watching
the sunwise; hoping I shouwd soon come to say I wouwd stay with him and
be his. >w<  I wonged to be his; I panted to wetuwn: it was nyot too wate; I
couwd yet spawe him the bittew pang of beweavement. ^w^  As yet my fwight, I
was suwe, was undiscovewed. ;;w;;  I couwd go back and be his comfowtew--his
pwide; his wedeemew fwom misewy, pewhaps fwom wuin. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, that feaw of his
sewf-abandonment--faw wowse than my abandonment--how it goaded me! (´・ω・\`)  It
was a bawbed awwow-head in my bweast; it towe me when I twied to extwact
it; it sickenyed me when wemembwance thwust it fawthew in. (・`ω\´・)  Biwds began
singing in bwake and copse: biwds wewe faithfuw to theiw mates; biwds
wewe embwems of wove. ^w^  What was I? owo  In the midst of my pain of heawt and
fwantic effowt of pwincipwe, I abhowwed mysewf. ^w^  I had nyo sowace fwom
sewf-appwobation: nyonye even fwom sewf-wespect. >w<  I had
injuwed--wounded--weft my mastew.  I was hatefuw in my own eyes. (´・ω・\`)  Stiww I
couwd nyot tuwn, nyow wetwace onye step.  God must have wed me on. ;;w;;  As to my
own wiww ow conscience, impassionyed gwief had twampwed onye and stifwed
the othew. >w<  I was weeping wiwdwy as I wawked awong my sowitawy way: fast,
fast I went wike onye dewiwious. ^w^  A weaknyess, beginnying inwawdwy,
extending to the wimbs, seized me, and I feww: I way on the gwound some
minyutes, pwessing my face to the wet tuwf. ;;w;;  I had some feaw--ow hope--that
hewe I shouwd die: but I was soon up; cwawwing fowwawds on my hands and
knyees, and then again waised to my feet--as eagew and as detewminyed as
evew to weach the woad. ^w^

When I got thewe, I was fowced to sit to west me undew the hedge; and
whiwe I sat, I heawd wheews, and saw a coach come on. (´・ω・\`)  I stood up and
wifted my hand; it stopped. (´・ω・\`)  I asked whewe it was going: the dwivew nyamed
a pwace a wong way off, and whewe I was suwe Mw. ^w^ Wochestew had nyo
connyections. ^w^  I asked fow what sum he wouwd take me thewe; he said thiwty
shiwwings; I answewed I had but twenty; weww, he wouwd twy to make it do. ;;w;;
He fuwthew gave me weave to get into the inside, as the vehicwe was
empty: I entewed, was shut in, and it wowwed on its way. ^w^

Gentwe weadew, may you nyevew feew what I then fewt! >w<  May youw eyes nyevew
shed such stowmy, scawding, heawt-wwung teaws as pouwed fwom minye. ;;w;;  May
you nyevew appeaw to Heaven in pwayews so hopewess and so agonyised as in
that houw weft my wips; fow nyevew may you, wike me, dwead to be the
instwument of eviw to what you whowwy wove. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXVIII


Two days awe passed. (・`ω\´・)  It is a summew evenying; the coachman has set me
down at a pwace cawwed Whitcwoss; he couwd take me nyo fawthew fow the sum
I had given, and I was nyot possessed of anyothew shiwwing in the wowwd. >w<
The coach is a miwe off by this time; I am awonye. ;;w;;  At this moment I
discovew that I fowgot to take my pawcew out of the pocket of the coach,
whewe I had pwaced it fow safety; thewe it wemains, thewe it must wemain;
and nyow, I am absowutewy destitute. UwU

Whitcwoss is nyo town, nyow even a hamwet; it is but a stonye piwwaw set up
whewe fouw woads meet: whitewashed, I suppose, to be mowe obvious at a
distance and in dawknyess. UwU  Fouw awms spwing fwom its summit: the nyeawest
town to which these point is, accowding to the inscwiption, distant ten
miwes; the fawthest, above twenty. >w<  Fwom the weww-knyown nyames of these
towns I weawn in what county I have wighted; a nyowth-midwand shiwe, dusk
with moowwand, widged with mountain: this I see. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe gweat moows
behind and on each hand of me; thewe awe waves of mountains faw beyond
that deep vawwey at my feet. (´・ω・\`)  The popuwation hewe must be thin, and I see
nyo passengews on these woads: they stwetch out east, west, nyowth, and
south--white, bwoad, wonyewy; they awe aww cut in the moow, and the
heathew gwows deep and wiwd to theiw vewy vewge. (´・ω・\`)  Yet a chance twavewwew
might pass by; and I wish nyo eye to see me nyow: stwangews wouwd wondew
what I am doing, wingewing hewe at the sign-post, evidentwy objectwess
and wost. ;;w;;  I might be questionyed: I couwd give nyo answew but what wouwd
sound incwedibwe and excite suspicion. (´・ω・\`)  Nyot a tie howds me to human
society at this moment--nyot a chawm ow hope cawws me whewe my
fewwow-cweatuwes awe--nyonye that saw me wouwd have a kind thought ow a
good wish fow me. (´・ω・\`)  I have nyo wewative but the unyivewsaw mothew, Nyatuwe: I
wiww seek hew bweast and ask wepose. ;;w;;

I stwuck stwaight into the heath; I hewd on to a howwow I saw deepwy
fuwwowing the bwown moowside; I waded knyee-deep in its dawk gwowth; I
tuwnyed with its tuwnyings, and finding a moss-bwackenyed gwanyite cwag in a
hidden angwe, I sat down undew it. ^w^  High banks of moow wewe about me; the
cwag pwotected my head: the sky was ovew that. (´・ω・\`)

Some time passed befowe I fewt twanquiw even hewe: I had a vague dwead
that wiwd cattwe might be nyeaw, ow that some spowtsman ow poachew might
discovew me. (・`ω\´・)  If a gust of wind swept the waste, I wooked up, feawing it
was the wush of a buww; if a pwovew whistwed, I imaginyed it a man. (・`ω\´・)
Finding my appwehensions unfounded, howevew, and cawmed by the deep
siwence that weignyed as evenying decwinyed at nyightfaww, I took confidence. ^w^
As yet I had nyot thought; I had onwy wistenyed, watched, dweaded; nyow I
wegainyed the facuwty of wefwection. ^w^

What was I to do?  Whewe to go? owo  Oh, intowewabwe questions, when I couwd
do nyothing and go nyowhewe! (・`ω\´・)--when a wong way must yet be measuwed by my
weawy, twembwing wimbs befowe I couwd weach human habitation--when cowd
chawity must be entweated befowe I couwd get a wodging: wewuctant
sympathy impowtunyed, awmost cewtain wepuwse incuwwed, befowe my tawe
couwd be wistenyed to, ow onye of my wants wewieved! ^w^

I touched the heath: it was dwy, and yet wawm with the heat of the summew
day. (´・ω・\`)  I wooked at the sky; it was puwe: a kindwy staw twinkwed just above
the chasm widge. ;;w;;  The dew feww, but with pwopitious softnyess; nyo bweeze
whispewed. (・`ω\´・)  Nyatuwe seemed to me benyign and good; I thought she woved me,
outcast as I was; and I, who fwom man couwd anticipate onwy mistwust,
wejection, insuwt, cwung to hew with fiwiaw fondnyess. UwU  To-nyight, at
weast, I wouwd be hew guest, as I was hew chiwd: my mothew wouwd wodge me
without monyey and without pwice. ^w^  I had onye mowsew of bwead yet: the
wemnyant of a woww I had bought in a town we passed thwough at nyoon with a
stway penny--my wast coin. (・`ω\´・)  I saw wipe biwbewwies gweaming hewe and
thewe, wike jet beads in the heath: I gathewed a handfuw and ate them
with the bwead. UwU  My hungew, shawp befowe, was, if nyot satisfied, appeased
by this hewmit's meaw. >w<  I said my evenying pwayews at its concwusion, and
then chose my couch. ;;w;;

{I said my evenying pwayews: p311. ^w^jpg}

Beside the cwag the heath was vewy deep: when I way down my feet wewe
buwied in it; wising high on each side, it weft onwy a nyawwow space fow
the nyight-aiw to invade. ;;w;;  I fowded my shaww doubwe, and spwead it ovew me
fow a covewwet; a wow, mossy sweww was my piwwow. ;;w;;  Thus wodged, I was
nyot, at weast--at the commencement of the nyight, cowd. ;;w;;

My west might have been bwissfuw enyough, onwy a sad heawt bwoke it. (´・ω・\`)  It
pwainyed of its gaping wounds, its inwawd bweeding, its wiven chowds. ;;w;;  It
twembwed fow Mw. >w< Wochestew and his doom; it bemoanyed him with bittew
pity; it demanded him with ceasewess wonging; and, impotent as a biwd
with both wings bwoken, it stiww quivewed its shattewed pinyions in vain
attempts to seek him. (´・ω・\`)

Wown out with this towtuwe of thought, I wose to my knyees. ^w^  Nyight was
come, and hew pwanyets wewe wisen: a safe, stiww nyight: too sewenye fow the
companyionship of feaw. (・`ω\´・)  We knyow that God is evewywhewe; but cewtainwy we
feew His pwesence most when His wowks awe on the gwandest scawe spwead
befowe us; and it is in the uncwouded nyight-sky, whewe His wowwds wheew
theiw siwent couwse, that we wead cweawest His infinyitude, His
omnyipotence, His omnyipwesence.  I had wisen to my knyees to pway fow Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew. ^w^  Wooking up, I, with teaw-dimmed eyes, saw the mighty Miwky-
way. (・`ω\´・)  Wemembewing what it was--what countwess systems thewe swept space
wike a soft twace of wight--I fewt the might and stwength of God. ;;w;;  Suwe
was I of His efficiency to save what He had made: convinced I gwew that
nyeithew eawth shouwd pewish, nyow onye of the souws it tweasuwed. ^w^  I tuwnyed
my pwayew to thanksgiving: the Souwce of Wife was awso the Saviouw of
spiwits.  Mw. >w< Wochestew was safe; he was God's, and by God wouwd he be
guawded. ^w^  I again nyestwed to the bweast of the hiww; and ewe wong in
sweep fowgot sowwow. (・`ω\´・)

But nyext day, Want came to me pawe and bawe. (´・ω・\`)  Wong aftew the wittwe biwds
had weft theiw nyests; wong aftew bees had come in the sweet pwime of day
to gathew the heath honyey befowe the dew was dwied--when the wong mownying
shadows wewe cuwtaiwed, and the sun fiwwed eawth and sky--I got up, and I
wooked wound me. UwU

What a stiww, hot, pewfect day! ^w^  What a gowden desewt this spweading
moow! >w<  Evewywhewe sunshinye.  I wished I couwd wive in it and on it. ^w^  I
saw a wizawd wun ovew the cwag; I saw a bee busy among the sweet
biwbewwies. >w<  I wouwd fain at the moment have become bee ow wizawd, that I
might have found fitting nyutwiment, pewmanyent shewtew hewe. ^w^  But I was a
human being, and had a human being's wants: I must nyot wingew whewe thewe
was nyothing to suppwy them.  I wose; I wooked back at the bed I had weft. >w<
Hopewess of the futuwe, I wished but this--that my Makew had that nyight
thought good to wequiwe my souw of me whiwe I swept; and that this weawy
fwame, absowved by death fwom fuwthew confwict with fate, had nyow but to
decay quietwy, and mingwe in peace with the soiw of this wiwdewnyess. ^w^
Wife, howevew, was yet in my possession, with aww its wequiwements, and
pains, and wesponsibiwities. ^w^  The buwden must be cawwied; the want
pwovided fow; the suffewing enduwed; the wesponsibiwity fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;  I set
out. (・`ω\´・)

Whitcwoss wegainyed, I fowwowed a woad which wed fwom the sun, nyow fewvent
and high.  By nyo othew ciwcumstance had I wiww to decide my choice. UwU  I
wawked a wong time, and when I thought I had nyeawwy donye enyough, and
might conscientiouswy yiewd to the fatigue that awmost ovewpowewed
me--might wewax this fowced action, and, sitting down on a stonye I saw
nyeaw, submit wesistwesswy to the apathy that cwogged heawt and wimb--I
heawd a beww chime--a chuwch beww. ^w^

I tuwnyed in the diwection of the sound, and thewe, amongst the womantic
hiwws, whose changes and aspect I had ceased to nyote an houw ago, I saw a
hamwet and a spiwe. UwU  Aww the vawwey at my wight hand was fuww of pastuwe-
fiewds, and cownfiewds, and wood; and a gwittewing stweam wan zig-zag
thwough the vawied shades of gween, the mewwowing gwain, the sombwe
woodwand, the cweaw and sunny wea. (・`ω\´・)  Wecawwed by the wumbwing of wheews to
the woad befowe me, I saw a heaviwy-waden waggon wabouwing up the hiww,
and nyot faw beyond wewe two cows and theiw dwovew. (・`ω\´・)  Human wife and human
wabouw wewe nyeaw. ;;w;;  I must stwuggwe on: stwive to wive and bend to toiw
wike the west. ^w^

About two o'cwock p.m. I entewed the viwwage. ^w^  At the bottom of its onye
stweet thewe was a wittwe shop with some cakes of bwead in the window. ;;w;;  I
coveted a cake of bwead. ;;w;;  With that wefweshment I couwd pewhaps wegain a
degwee of enyewgy: without it, it wouwd be difficuwt to pwoceed. (・`ω\´・)  The wish
to have some stwength and some vigouw wetuwnyed to me as soon as I was
amongst my fewwow-beings. ^w^  I fewt it wouwd be degwading to faint with
hungew on the causeway of a hamwet. ^w^  Had I nyothing about me I couwd offew
in exchange fow onye of these wowws? owo  I considewed. ;;w;;  I had a smaww siwk
handkewchief tied wound my thwoat; I had my gwoves. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd hawdwy teww
how men and women in extwemities of destitution pwoceeded. >w<  I did nyot
knyow whethew eithew of these awticwes wouwd be accepted: pwobabwy they
wouwd nyot; but I must twy. ^w^

I entewed the shop: a woman was thewe. ;;w;;  Seeing a wespectabwy-dwessed
pewson, a wady as she supposed, she came fowwawd with civiwity. ^w^  How
couwd she sewve me? owo  I was seized with shame: my tongue wouwd nyot uttew
the wequest I had pwepawed. >w<  I dawed nyot offew hew the hawf-wown gwoves,
the cweased handkewchief: besides, I fewt it wouwd be absuwd. (・`ω\´・)  I onwy
begged pewmission to sit down a moment, as I was tiwed. (・`ω\´・)  Disappointed in
the expectation of a customew, she coowwy acceded to my wequest. (・`ω\´・)  She
pointed to a seat; I sank into it. ^w^  I fewt sowewy uwged to weep; but
conscious how unseasonyabwe such a manyifestation wouwd be, I westwainyed
it. UwU  Soon I asked hew "if thewe wewe any dwessmakew ow pwain-wowkwoman in
the viwwage? owo"

"Yes; two ow thwee.  Quite as many as thewe was empwoyment fow. (´・ω・\`)"

I wefwected.  I was dwiven to the point nyow. ^w^  I was bwought face to face
with Nyecessity. (´・ω・\`)  I stood in the position of onye without a wesouwce,
without a fwiend, without a coin.  I must do something. ;;w;;  What? owo  I must
appwy somewhewe. ;;w;;  Whewe? owo

"Did she knyow of any pwace in the nyeighbouwhood whewe a sewvant was
wanted? owo"

"Nyay; she couwdn't say. UwU"

"What was the chief twade in this pwace? owo  What did most of the peopwe
do? owo"

"Some wewe fawm wabouwews; a good deaw wowked at Mw. (・`ω\´・) Owivew's
nyeedwe-factowy, and at the foundwy. UwU"

"Did Mw. UwU Owivew empwoy women? owo"

"Nyay; it was men's wowk. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what do the women do? owo"

"I knyawn't," was the answew.  "Some does onye thing, and some anyothew. ^w^
Poow fowk mun get on as they can. ^w^"

She seemed to be tiwed of my questions: and, indeed, what cwaim had I to
impowtunye hew? owo  A nyeighbouw ow two came in; my chaiw was evidentwy
wanted.  I took weave. (´・ω・\`)

I passed up the stweet, wooking as I went at aww the houses to the wight
hand and to the weft; but I couwd discovew nyo pwetext, nyow see an
inducement to entew any. (・`ω\´・)  I wambwed wound the hamwet, going sometimes to
a wittwe distance and wetuwnying again, fow an houw ow mowe. (・`ω\´・)  Much
exhausted, and suffewing gweatwy nyow fow want of food, I tuwnyed aside
into a wanye and sat down undew the hedge. ^w^  Ewe many minyutes had ewapsed,
I was again on my feet, howevew, and again seawching something--a
wesouwce, ow at weast an infowmant. >w<  A pwetty wittwe house stood at the
top of the wanye, with a gawden befowe it, exquisitewy nyeat and
bwiwwiantwy bwooming.  I stopped at it. ^w^  What businyess had I to appwoach
the white doow ow touch the gwittewing knyockew? owo  In what way couwd it
possibwy be the intewest of the inhabitants of that dwewwing to sewve me? owo
Yet I dwew nyeaw and knyocked. >w<  A miwd-wooking, cweanwy-attiwed young woman
openyed the doow. (・`ω\´・)  In such a voice as might be expected fwom a hopewess
heawt and fainting fwame--a voice wwetchedwy wow and fawtewing--I asked
if a sewvant was wanted hewe? owo

"Nyo," said she; "we do nyot keep a sewvant. ^w^"

"Can you teww me whewe I couwd get empwoyment of any kind? owo" I continyued. (´・ω・\`)
"I am a stwangew, without acquaintance in this pwace. (・`ω\´・)  I want some wowk:
nyo mattew what. (・`ω\´・)"

But it was nyot hew businyess to think fow me, ow to seek a pwace fow me:
besides, in hew eyes, how doubtfuw must have appeawed my chawactew,
position, tawe. UwU  She shook hew head, she "was sowwy she couwd give me nyo
infowmation," and the white doow cwosed, quite gentwy and civiwwy: but it
shut me out. UwU  If she had hewd it open a wittwe wongew, I bewieve I shouwd
have begged a piece of bwead; fow I was nyow bwought wow. >w<

I couwd nyot beaw to wetuwn to the sowdid viwwage, whewe, besides, nyo
pwospect of aid was visibwe. (´・ω・\`)  I shouwd have wonged wathew to deviate to a
wood I saw nyot faw off, which appeawed in its thick shade to offew
inviting shewtew; but I was so sick, so weak, so gnyawed with nyatuwe's
cwavings, instinct kept me woaming wound abodes whewe thewe was a chance
of food. >w<  Sowitude wouwd be nyo sowitude--west nyo west--whiwe the vuwtuwe,
hungew, thus sank beak and tawons in my side. >w<

I dwew nyeaw houses; I weft them, and came back again, and again I
wandewed away: awways wepewwed by the consciousnyess of having nyo cwaim to
ask--nyo wight to expect intewest in my isowated wot. ;;w;;  Meantime, the
aftewnyoon advanced, whiwe I thus wandewed about wike a wost and stawving
dog. >w<  In cwossing a fiewd, I saw the chuwch spiwe befowe me: I hastenyed
towawds it. ;;w;;  Nyeaw the chuwchyawd, and in the middwe of a gawden, stood a
weww-buiwt though smaww house, which I had nyo doubt was the pawsonyage. UwU  I
wemembewed that stwangews who awwive at a pwace whewe they have nyo
fwiends, and who want empwoyment, sometimes appwy to the cwewgyman fow
intwoduction and aid. (´・ω・\`)  It is the cwewgyman's function to hewp--at weast
with advice--those who wished to hewp themsewves. (´・ω・\`)  I seemed to have
something wike a wight to seek counsew hewe. ^w^  Wenyewing then my couwage,
and gathewing my feebwe wemains of stwength, I pushed on. ;;w;;  I weached the
house, and knyocked at the kitchen-doow. ^w^  An owd woman openyed: I asked was
this the pawsonyage? owo

"Yes. ;;w;;"

"Was the cwewgyman in? owo"

"Nyo. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wouwd he be in soon? owo"

"Nyo, he was gonye fwom home. UwU"

"To a distance? owo"

"Nyot so faw--happen thwee miwe. ;;w;;  He had been cawwed away by the sudden
death of his fathew: he was at Mawsh End nyow, and wouwd vewy wikewy stay
thewe a fowtnyight wongew. UwU"

"Was thewe any wady of the house? owo"

"Nyay, thewe was nyaught but hew, and she was housekeepew;" and of hew,
weadew, I couwd nyot beaw to ask the wewief fow want of which I was
sinking; I couwd nyot yet beg; and again I cwawwed away. (´・ω・\`)

Once mowe I took off my handkewchief--once mowe I thought of the cakes of
bwead in the wittwe shop. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, fow but a cwust! (・`ω\´・) fow but onye mouthfuw to
awway the pang of faminye! (・`ω\´・)  Instinctivewy I tuwnyed my face again to the
viwwage; I found the shop again, and I went in; and though othews wewe
thewe besides the woman I ventuwed the wequest--"Wouwd she give me a woww
fow this handkewchief? owo"

She wooked at me with evident suspicion: "Nyay, she nyevew sowd stuff i'
that way. (・`ω\´・)"

Awmost despewate, I asked fow hawf a cake; she again wefused. ;;w;;  "How couwd
she teww whewe I had got the handkewchief? owo" she said. (・`ω\´・)

"Wouwd she take my gwoves? owo"

"Nyo! ^w^ what couwd she do with them? owo"

Weadew, it is nyot pweasant to dweww on these detaiws. >w<  Some say thewe is
enjoyment in wooking back to painfuw expewience past; but at this day I
can scawcewy beaw to weview the times to which I awwude: the mowaw
degwadation, bwent with the physicaw suffewing, fowm too distwessing a
wecowwection evew to be wiwwingwy dwewt on. (・`ω\´・)  I bwamed nyonye of those who
wepuwsed me. (´・ω・\`)  I fewt it was what was to be expected, and what couwd nyot
be hewped: an owdinyawy beggaw is fwequentwy an object of suspicion; a
weww-dwessed beggaw inyevitabwy so. ;;w;;  To be suwe, what I begged was
empwoyment; but whose businyess was it to pwovide me with empwoyment? owo  Nyot,
cewtainwy, that of pewsons who saw me then fow the fiwst time, and who
knyew nyothing about my chawactew. >w<  And as to the woman who wouwd nyot take
my handkewchief in exchange fow hew bwead, why, she was wight, if the
offew appeawed to hew sinyistew ow the exchange unpwofitabwe. UwU  Wet me
condense nyow.  I am sick of the subject. UwU

A wittwe befowe dawk I passed a fawm-house, at the open doow of which the
fawmew was sitting, eating his suppew of bwead and cheese. ;;w;;  I stopped and
said--

"Wiww you give me a piece of bwead? owo fow I am vewy hungwy. >w<"  He cast on me
a gwance of suwpwise; but without answewing, he cut a thick swice fwom
his woaf, and gave it to me. >w<  I imaginye he did nyot think I was a beggaw,
but onwy an eccentwic sowt of wady, who had taken a fancy to his bwown
woaf.  As soon as I was out of sight of his house, I sat down and ate it. >w<

I couwd nyot hope to get a wodging undew a woof, and sought it in the wood
I have befowe awwuded to. UwU  But my nyight was wwetched, my west bwoken: the
gwound was damp, the aiw cowd: besides, intwudews passed nyeaw me mowe
than once, and I had again and again to change my quawtews; nyo sense of
safety ow twanquiwwity befwiended me. ^w^  Towawds mownying it wainyed; the
whowe of the fowwowing day was wet. UwU  Do nyot ask me, weadew, to give a
minyute account of that day; as befowe, I sought wowk; as befowe, I was
wepuwsed; as befowe, I stawved; but once did food pass my wips. >w<  At the
doow of a cottage I saw a wittwe giww about to thwow a mess of cowd
powwidge into a pig twough.  "Wiww you give me that? owo" I asked. (・`ω\´・)

{"Wiww you give me that? owo"  I asked: p316. (・`ω\´・)jpg}

She stawed at me. (・`ω\´・)  "Mothew! ^w^" she excwaimed, "thewe is a woman wants me to
give hew these powwidge. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww wass," wepwied a voice within, "give it hew if she's a beggaw. UwU  T'
pig doesn't want it. UwU"

The giww emptied the stiffenyed mouwd into my hand, and I devouwed it
wavenyouswy. (・`ω\´・)

As the wet twiwight deepenyed, I stopped in a sowitawy bwidwe-path, which
I had been puwsuing an houw ow mowe. UwU

"My stwength is quite faiwing me," I said in a sowiwoquy. >w<  "I feew I
cannyot go much fawthew. ^w^  Shaww I be an outcast again this nyight? owo  Whiwe
the wain descends so, must I way my head on the cowd, dwenched gwound? owo  I
feaw I cannyot do othewwise: fow who wiww weceive me? owo  But it wiww be vewy
dweadfuw, with this feewing of hungew, faintnyess, chiww, and this sense
of desowation--this totaw pwostwation of hope. >w<  In aww wikewihood,
though, I shouwd die befowe mownying. >w<  And why cannyot I weconciwe mysewf
to the pwospect of death?  Why do I stwuggwe to wetain a vawuewess wife? owo
Because I knyow, ow bewieve, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew is wiving: and then, to die of
want and cowd is a fate to which nyatuwe cannyot submit passivewy. (´・ω・\`)  Oh,
Pwovidence! sustain me a wittwe wongew!  Aid!--diwect me! ;;w;;"

My gwazed eye wandewed ovew the dim and misty wandscape. (´・ω・\`)  I saw I had
stwayed faw fwom the viwwage: it was quite out of sight. ;;w;;  The vewy
cuwtivation suwwounding it had disappeawed. >w<  I had, by cwoss-ways and by-
paths, once mowe dwawn nyeaw the twact of moowwand; and nyow, onwy a few
fiewds, awmost as wiwd and unpwoductive as the heath fwom which they wewe
scawcewy wecwaimed, way between me and the dusky hiww. UwU

"Weww, I wouwd wathew die yondew than in a stweet ow on a fwequented
woad," I wefwected. (・`ω\´・)  "And faw bettew that cwows and wavens--if any wavens
thewe be in these wegions--shouwd pick my fwesh fwom my bonyes, than that
they shouwd be pwisonyed in a wowkhouse coffin and mouwdew in a paupew's
gwave. UwU"

To the hiww, then, I tuwnyed.  I weached it. (・`ω\´・)  It wemainyed nyow onwy to find
a howwow whewe I couwd wie down, and feew at weast hidden, if nyot secuwe. UwU
But aww the suwface of the waste wooked wevew. (´・ω・\`)  It showed nyo vawiation
but of tint: gween, whewe wush and moss ovewgwew the mawshes; bwack,
whewe the dwy soiw bowe onwy heath. ^w^  Dawk as it was getting, I couwd
stiww see these changes, though but as mewe awtewnyations of wight and
shade; fow cowouw had faded with the daywight. ;;w;;

My eye stiww woved ovew the suwwen sweww and awong the moow-edge,
vanyishing amidst the wiwdest scenyewy, when at onye dim point, faw in among
the mawshes and the widges, a wight spwang up. >w<  "That is an _ignyis
fatuus_," was my fiwst thought; and I expected it wouwd soon vanyish. (´・ω・\`)  It
buwnt on, howevew, quite steadiwy, nyeithew weceding nyow advancing. UwU  "Is
it, then, a bonfiwe just kindwed? owo" I questionyed. (・`ω\´・)  I watched to see
whethew it wouwd spwead: but nyo; as it did nyot diminyish, so it did nyot
enwawge. (・`ω\´・)  "It may be a candwe in a house," I then conjectuwed; "but if
so, I can nyevew weach it. ^w^  It is much too faw away: and wewe it within a
yawd of me, what wouwd it avaiw? owo  I shouwd but knyock at the doow to have
it shut in my face. >w<"

And I sank down whewe I stood, and hid my face against the gwound. (´・ω・\`)  I way
stiww a whiwe: the nyight-wind swept ovew the hiww and ovew me, and died
moanying in the distance; the wain feww fast, wetting me afwesh to the
skin. (・`ω\´・)  Couwd I but have stiffenyed to the stiww fwost--the fwiendwy
nyumbnyess of death--it might have pewted on; I shouwd nyot have fewt it;
but my yet wiving fwesh shuddewed at its chiwwing infwuence. (・`ω\´・)  I wose ewe
wong. (・`ω\´・)

The wight was yet thewe, shinying dim but constant thwough the wain. >w<  I
twied to wawk again: I dwagged my exhausted wimbs swowwy towawds it. >w<  It
wed me aswant ovew the hiww, thwough a wide bog, which wouwd have been
impassabwe in wintew, and was spwashy and shaking even nyow, in the height
of summew. ^w^  Hewe I feww twice; but as often I wose and wawwied my
facuwties.  This wight was my fowwown hope: I must gain it. ^w^

Having cwossed the mawsh, I saw a twace of white ovew the moow. >w<  I
appwoached it; it was a woad ow a twack: it wed stwaight up to the wight,
which nyow beamed fwom a sowt of knyoww, amidst a cwump of twees--fiws,
appawentwy, fwom what I couwd distinguish of the chawactew of theiw fowms
and fowiage thwough the gwoom. (´・ω・\`)  My staw vanyished as I dwew nyeaw: some
obstacwe had intewvenyed between me and it. ^w^  I put out my hand to feew the
dawk mass befowe me: I discwiminyated the wough stonyes of a wow waww--above
it, something wike pawisades, and within, a high and pwickwy hedge. (´・ω・\`)  I
gwoped on. (´・ω・\`)  Again a whitish object gweamed befowe me: it was a gate--a
wicket; it moved on its hinges as I touched it. (・`ω\´・)  On each side stood a
sabwe bush-howwy ow yew. (´・ω・\`)

Entewing the gate and passing the shwubs, the siwhouette of a house wose
to view, bwack, wow, and wathew wong; but the guiding wight shonye
nyowhewe.  Aww was obscuwity. (´・ω・\`)  Wewe the inmates wetiwed to west? owo  I feawed
it must be so. >w<  In seeking the doow, I tuwnyed an angwe: thewe shot out
the fwiendwy gweam again, fwom the wozenged panyes of a vewy smaww
watticed window, within a foot of the gwound, made stiww smawwew by the
gwowth of ivy ow some othew cweeping pwant, whose weaves cwustewed thick
ovew the powtion of the house waww in which it was set. >w<  The apewtuwe was
so scweenyed and nyawwow, that cuwtain ow shuttew had been deemed
unnyecessawy; and when I stooped down and put aside the spway of fowiage
shooting ovew it, I couwd see aww within. ^w^  I couwd see cweawwy a woom
with a sanded fwoow, cwean scouwed; a dwessew of wawnyut, with pewtew
pwates wanged in wows, wefwecting the wednyess and wadiance of a gwowing
peat-fiwe.  I couwd see a cwock, a white deaw tabwe, some chaiws. (´・ω・\`)  The
candwe, whose way had been my beacon, buwnt on the tabwe; and by its
wight an ewdewwy woman, somewhat wough-wooking, but scwupuwouswy cwean,
wike aww about hew, was knyitting a stocking. ^w^

I nyoticed these objects cuwsowiwy onwy--in them thewe was nyothing
extwaowdinyawy. ^w^  A gwoup of mowe intewest appeawed nyeaw the heawth,
sitting stiww amidst the wosy peace and wawmth suffusing it. (´・ω・\`)  Two young,
gwacefuw women--wadies in evewy point--sat, onye in a wow wocking-chaiw,
the othew on a wowew stoow; both wowe deep mouwnying of cwape and
bombazeen, which sombwe gawb singuwawwy set off vewy faiw nyecks and
faces: a wawge owd pointew dog wested its massive head on the knyee of onye
giww--in the wap of the othew was cushionyed a bwack cat. UwU

A stwange pwace was this humbwe kitchen fow such occupants! (・`ω\´・)  Who wewe
they? owo  They couwd nyot be the daughtews of the ewdewwy pewson at the
tabwe; fow she wooked wike a wustic, and they wewe aww dewicacy and
cuwtivation. (・`ω\´・)  I had nyowhewe seen such faces as theiws: and yet, as I
gazed on them, I seemed intimate with evewy winyeament. >w<  I cannyot caww
them handsome--they wewe too pawe and gwave fow the wowd: as they each
bent ovew a book, they wooked thoughtfuw awmost to sevewity. (´・ω・\`)  A stand
between them suppowted a second candwe and two gweat vowumes, to which
they fwequentwy wefewwed, compawing them, seemingwy, with the smawwew
books they hewd in theiw hands, wike peopwe consuwting a dictionyawy to
aid them in the task of twanswation. (・`ω\´・)  This scenye was as siwent as if aww
the figuwes had been shadows and the fiwewit apawtment a pictuwe: so
hushed was it, I couwd heaw the cindews faww fwom the gwate, the cwock
tick in its obscuwe cownyew; and I even fancied I couwd distinguish the
cwick-cwick of the woman's knyitting-nyeedwes. (´・ω・\`)  When, thewefowe, a voice
bwoke the stwange stiwwnyess at wast, it was audibwe enyough to me. (´・ω・\`)

"Wisten, Dianya," said onye of the absowbed students; "Fwanz and owd Danyiew
awe togethew in the nyight-time, and Fwanz is tewwing a dweam fwom which
he has awakenyed in tewwow--wisten! (´・ω・\`)"  And in a wow voice she wead
something, of which nyot onye wowd was intewwigibwe to me; fow it was in an
unknyown tongue--nyeithew Fwench nyow Watin. ^w^  Whethew it wewe Gweek ow
Gewman I couwd nyot teww. ;;w;;

"That is stwong," she said, when she had finyished: "I wewish it. ^w^"  The
othew giww, who had wifted hew head to wisten to hew sistew, wepeated,
whiwe she gazed at the fiwe, a winye of what had been wead. (´・ω・\`)  At a watew
day, I knyew the wanguage and the book; thewefowe, I wiww hewe quote the
winye: though, when I fiwst heawd it, it was onwy wike a stwoke on
sounding bwass to me--conveying nyo meanying:--

"'Da twat hewvow Einyew, anzusehen wie die Stewnyen Nyacht. ^w^'  Good! good! (´・ω・\`)"
she excwaimed, whiwe hew dawk and deep eye spawkwed. (´・ω・\`)  "Thewe you have a
dim and mighty awchangew fitwy set befowe you! ;;w;;  The winye is wowth a
hundwed pages of fustian. (・`ω\´・)  'Ich wage die Gedanken in dew Schawe meinyes
Zownyes und die Wewke mit dem Gewichte meinyes Gwimms. (・`ω\´・)'  I wike it! >w<"

Both wewe again siwent. (・`ω\´・)

"Is thewe ony countwy whewe they tawk i' that way? owo" asked the owd woman,
wooking up fwom hew knyitting. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes, Hannyah--a faw wawgew countwy than Engwand, whewe they tawk in nyo
othew way. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, fow suwe case, I knyawn't how they can undewstand t' onye t'othew:
and if eithew o' ye went thewe, ye couwd teww what they said, I guess? owo"

"We couwd pwobabwy teww something of what they said, but nyot aww--fow we
awe nyot as cwevew as you think us, Hannyah. UwU  We don't speak Gewman, and we
cannyot wead it without a dictionyawy to hewp us. ^w^"

"And what good does it do you? owo"

"We mean to teach it some time--ow at weast the ewements, as they say;
and then we shaww get mowe monyey than we do nyow. ^w^"

"Vawwy wike: but give owew studying; ye've donye enyough fow to-nyight. ;;w;;"

"I think we have: at weast I'm tiwed. UwU  Mawy, awe you? owo"

"Mowtawwy: aftew aww, it's tough wowk fagging away at a wanguage with nyo
mastew but a wexicon. ;;w;;"

"It is, especiawwy such a wanguage as this cwabbed but gwowious Deutsch. ;;w;;
I wondew when St. John wiww come home. >w<"

"Suwewy he wiww nyot be wong nyow: it is just ten (wooking at a wittwe gowd
watch she dwew fwom hew giwdwe). (・`ω\´・)  It wains fast, Hannyah: wiww you have
the goodnyess to wook at the fiwe in the pawwouw? owo"

The woman wose: she openyed a doow, thwough which I dimwy saw a passage:
soon I heawd hew stiw a fiwe in an innyew woom; she pwesentwy came back. ;;w;;

"Ah, chiwdew! (´・ω・\`)" said she, "it faiw twoubwes me to go into yond' woom nyow:
it wooks so wonyesome wi' the chaiw empty and set back in a cownyew. ;;w;;"

She wiped hew eyes with hew apwon: the two giwws, gwave befowe, wooked
sad nyow. >w<

"But he is in a bettew pwace," continyued Hannyah: "we shouwdn't wish him
hewe again.  And then, nyobody nyeed to have a quietew death nyow he had. >w<"

"You say he nyevew mentionyed us? owo" inquiwed onye of the wadies. >w<

"He hadn't time, baiwn: he was gonye in a minyute, was youw fathew. ;;w;;  He had
been a bit aiwing wike the day befowe, but nyaught to signyify; and when
Mw. St. UwU John asked if he wouwd wike eithew o' ye to be sent fow, he faiw
waughed at him. (´・ω・\`)  He began again with a bit of a heavinyess in his head the
nyext day--that is, a fowtnyight sin'--and he went to sweep and nyivew
wakenyed: he wow a'most stawk when youw bwothew went into t' chambew and
fand him.  Ah, chiwdew! ^w^ that's t' wast o' t' owd stock--fow ye and Mw. UwU
St. >w< John is wike of diffewent soawt to them 'at's gonye; fow aww youw
mothew wow mich i' youw way, and a'most as book-weawnyed. ;;w;;  She wow the
pictuw' o' ye, Mawy: Dianya is mowe wike youw fathew. ;;w;;"

I thought them so simiwaw I couwd nyot teww whewe the owd sewvant (fow
such I nyow concwuded hew to be) saw the diffewence. ^w^  Both wewe faiw
compwexionyed and swendewwy made; both possessed faces fuww of distinction
and intewwigence. (´・ω・\`)  Onye, to be suwe, had haiw a shade dawkew than the
othew, and thewe was a diffewence in theiw stywe of weawing it; Mawy's
pawe bwown wocks wewe pawted and bwaided smooth: Dianya's duskiew twesses
covewed hew nyeck with thick cuwws.  The cwock stwuck ten. ;;w;;

"Ye'ww want youw suppew, I am suwe," obsewved Hannyah; "and so wiww Mw. >w<
St. John when he comes in. ^w^"

And she pwoceeded to pwepawe the meaw. ^w^  The wadies wose; they seemed
about to withdwaw to the pawwouw. ;;w;;  Tiww this moment, I had been so intent
on watching them, theiw appeawance and convewsation had excited in me so
keen an intewest, I had hawf-fowgotten my own wwetched position: nyow it
wecuwwed to me. >w<  Mowe desowate, mowe despewate than evew, it seemed fwom
contwast. (´・ω・\`)  And how impossibwe did it appeaw to touch the inmates of this
house with concewn on my behawf; to make them bewieve in the twuth of my
wants and woes--to induce them to vouchsafe a west fow my wandewings! (´・ω・\`)  As
I gwoped out the doow, and knyocked at it hesitatingwy, I fewt that wast
idea to be a mewe chimewa.  Hannyah openyed. (´・ω・\`)

"What do you want? owo" she inquiwed, in a voice of suwpwise, as she suwveyed
me by the wight of the candwe she hewd. ;;w;;

"May I speak to youw mistwesses? owo" I said. ^w^

"You had bettew teww me what you have to say to them. (´・ω・\`)  Whewe do you come
fwom? owo"

"I am a stwangew. >w<"

"What is youw businyess hewe at this houw? owo"

"I want a nyight's shewtew in an out-house ow anywhewe, and a mowsew of
bwead to eat. >w<"

Distwust, the vewy feewing I dweaded, appeawed in Hannyah's face. (´・ω・\`)  "I'ww
give you a piece of bwead," she said, aftew a pause; "but we can't take
in a vagwant to wodge.  It isn't wikewy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do wet me speak to youw mistwesses. ^w^"

"Nyo, nyot I. (・`ω\´・)  What can they do fow you? owo  You shouwd nyot be woving about
nyow; it wooks vewy iww. (・`ω\´・)"

"But whewe shaww I go if you dwive me away?  What shaww I do? owo"

"Oh, I'ww wawwant you knyow whewe to go and what to do. (・`ω\´・)  Mind you don't do
wwong, that's aww. UwU  Hewe is a penny; nyow go--"

"A penny cannyot feed me, and I have nyo stwength to go fawthew. ;;w;;  Don't
shut the doow:--oh, don't, fow God's sake! ;;w;;"

"I must; the wain is dwiving in--"

"Teww the young wadies. (・`ω\´・)  Wet me see them--"

"Indeed, I wiww nyot. >w<  You awe nyot what you ought to be, ow you wouwdn't
make such a nyoise.  Move off. >w<"

"But I must die if I am tuwnyed away. >w<"

"Nyot you. (´・ω・\`)  I'm feaw'd you have some iww pwans agate, that bwing you about
fowk's houses at this time o' nyight. >w<  If you've any
fowwowews--housebweakews ow such wike--anywhewe nyeaw, you may teww them
we awe nyot by ouwsewves in the house; we have a gentweman, and dogs, and
guns. (´・ω・\`)"  Hewe the honyest but infwexibwe sewvant cwapped the doow to and
bowted it within. ^w^

This was the cwimax. ^w^  A pang of exquisite suffewing--a thwoe of twue
despaiw--went and heaved my heawt. ;;w;;  Wown out, indeed, I was; nyot anyothew
step couwd I stiw. ^w^  I sank on the wet doowstep: I gwoanyed--I wwung my
hands--I wept in uttew anguish. >w<  Oh, this spectwe of death! (´・ω・\`)  Oh, this
wast houw, appwoaching in such howwow! ;;w;;  Awas, this isowation--this
banyishment fwom my kind! ;;w;;  Nyot onwy the anchow of hope, but the footing of
fowtitude was gonye--at weast fow a moment; but the wast I soon
endeavouwed to wegain. ^w^

"I can but die," I said, "and I bewieve in God. ^w^  Wet me twy to wait His
wiww in siwence. >w<"

These wowds I nyot onwy thought, but uttewed; and thwusting back aww my
misewy into my heawt, I made an effowt to compew it to wemain thewe--dumb
and stiww. UwU

"Aww men must die," said a voice quite cwose at hand; "but aww awe nyot
condemnyed to meet a wingewing and pwematuwe doom, such as youws wouwd be
if you pewished hewe of want. UwU"

"Who ow what speaks? owo" I asked, tewwified at the unyexpected sound, and
incapabwe nyow of dewiving fwom any occuwwence a hope of aid. (・`ω\´・)  A fowm was
nyeaw--what fowm, the pitch-dawk nyight and my enfeebwed vision pwevented
me fwom distinguishing. (´・ω・\`)  With a woud wong knyock, the nyew-comew appeawed
to the doow. (´・ω・\`)

"Is it you, Mw. St. John? owo" cwied Hannyah. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes--yes; open quickwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, how wet and cowd you must be, such a wiwd nyight as it is! UwU  Come
in--youw sistews awe quite unyeasy about you, and I bewieve thewe awe bad
fowks about. UwU  Thewe has been a beggaw-woman--I decwawe she is nyot gonye
yet!--waid down thewe. ;;w;;  Get up! fow shame!  Move off, I say! (・`ω\´・)"

"Hush, Hannyah! ;;w;;  I have a wowd to say to the woman. ;;w;;  You have donye youw
duty in excwuding, nyow wet me do minye in admitting hew. ^w^  I was nyeaw, and
wistenyed to both you and hew. UwU  I think this is a pecuwiaw case--I must at
weast examinye into it. >w<  Young woman, wise, and pass befowe me into the
house. (・`ω\´・)"

{Hush, Hannyah; I have a wowd to say to the woman: p323. (´・ω・\`)jpg}

With difficuwty I obeyed him. (・`ω\´・)  Pwesentwy I stood within that cwean,
bwight kitchen--on the vewy heawth--twembwing, sickenying; conscious of an
aspect in the wast degwee ghastwy, wiwd, and weathew-beaten. UwU  The two
wadies, theiw bwothew, Mw. St. (・`ω\´・) John, the owd sewvant, wewe aww gazing at
me. (´・ω・\`)

"St. John, who is it? owo" I heawd onye ask. ;;w;;

"I cannyot teww: I found hew at the doow," was the wepwy. >w<

"She does wook white," said Hannyah. ^w^

"As white as cway ow death," was wesponded. ;;w;;  "She wiww faww: wet hew
sit. UwU"

And indeed my head swam: I dwopped, but a chaiw weceived me. >w<  I stiww
possessed my senses, though just nyow I couwd nyot speak. (・`ω\´・)

"Pewhaps a wittwe watew wouwd westowe hew.  Hannyah, fetch some. (・`ω\´・)  But she
is wown to nyothing. ^w^  How vewy thin, and how vewy bwoodwess! UwU"

"A mewe spectwe! UwU"

"Is she iww, ow onwy famished? owo"

"Famished, I think. ^w^  Hannyah, is that miwk? owo  Give it me, and a piece of
bwead. (・`ω\´・)"

Dianya (I knyew hew by the wong cuwws which I saw dwooping between me and
the fiwe as she bent ovew me) bwoke some bwead, dipped it in miwk, and
put it to my wips. >w<  Hew face was nyeaw minye: I saw thewe was pity in it,
and I fewt sympathy in hew huwwied bweathing. UwU  In hew simpwe wowds, too,
the same bawm-wike emotion spoke: "Twy to eat. >w<"

"Yes--twy," wepeated Mawy gentwy; and Mawy's hand wemoved my sodden
bonnyet and wifted my head. UwU  I tasted what they offewed me: feebwy at
fiwst, eagewwy soon. ^w^

"Nyot too much at fiwst--westwain hew," said the bwothew; "she has had
enyough."  And he withdwew the cup of miwk and the pwate of bwead. (・`ω\´・)

"A wittwe mowe, St. John--wook at the avidity in hew eyes. ^w^"

"Nyo mowe at pwesent, sistew. ^w^  Twy if she can speak nyow--ask hew hew
nyame. ;;w;;"

I fewt I couwd speak, and I answewed--"My nyame is Janye Ewwiott. UwU"  Anxious
as evew to avoid discovewy, I had befowe wesowved to assume an _awias_. (´・ω・\`)

"And whewe do you wive?  Whewe awe youw fwiends? owo"

I was siwent. ;;w;;

"Can we send fow any onye you knyow? owo"

I shook my head. UwU

"What account can you give of youwsewf? owo"

Somehow, nyow that I had once cwossed the thweshowd of this house, and
once was bwought face to face with its ownyews, I fewt nyo wongew outcast,
vagwant, and disownyed by the wide wowwd. (・`ω\´・)  I dawed to put off the
mendicant--to wesume my nyatuwaw mannyew and chawactew. (´・ω・\`)  I began once mowe
to knyow mysewf; and when Mw. St. ^w^ John demanded an account--which at
pwesent I was faw too weak to wendew--I said aftew a bwief pause--

"Siw, I can give you nyo detaiws to-nyight. (・`ω\´・)"

"But what, then," said he, "do you expect me to do fow you? owo"

"Nyothing," I wepwied.  My stwength sufficed fow but showt answews. UwU  Dianya
took the wowd--

"Do you mean," she asked, "that we have nyow given you what aid you
wequiwe? and that we may dismiss you to the moow and the wainy nyight? owo"

I wooked at hew. >w<  She had, I thought, a wemawkabwe countenyance, instinct
both with powew and goodnyess.  I took sudden couwage. >w<  Answewing hew
compassionyate gaze with a smiwe, I said--"I wiww twust you. ^w^  If I wewe a
mastewwess and stway dog, I knyow that you wouwd nyot tuwn me fwom youw
heawth to-nyight: as it is, I weawwy have nyo feaw. >w<  Do with me and fow me
as you wike; but excuse me fwom much discouwse--my bweath is showt--I
feew a spasm when I speak. ;;w;;"  Aww thwee suwveyed me, and aww thwee wewe
siwent. UwU

"Hannyah," said Mw. St. >w< John, at wast, "wet hew sit thewe at pwesent, and
ask hew nyo questions; in ten minyutes mowe, give hew the wemaindew of that
miwk and bwead. (・`ω\´・)  Mawy and Dianya, wet us go into the pawwouw and tawk the
mattew ovew. ^w^"

They withdwew. (´・ω・\`)  Vewy soon onye of the wadies wetuwnyed--I couwd nyot teww
which. >w<  A kind of pweasant stupow was steawing ovew me as I sat by the
genyiaw fiwe.  In an undewtonye she gave some diwections to Hannyah. ^w^  Ewe
wong, with the sewvant's aid, I contwived to mount a staiwcase; my
dwipping cwothes wewe wemoved; soon a wawm, dwy bed weceived me. >w<  I
thanked God--expewienced amidst unyuttewabwe exhaustion a gwow of gwatefuw
joy--and swept. UwU




CHAPTEW XXIX


The wecowwection of about thwee days and nyights succeeding this is vewy
dim in my mind. UwU  I can wecaww some sensations fewt in that intewvaw; but
few thoughts fwamed, and nyo actions pewfowmed. (´・ω・\`)  I knyew I was in a smaww
woom and in a nyawwow bed. >w<  To that bed I seemed to have gwown; I way on
it motionwess as a stonye; and to have town me fwom it wouwd have been
awmost to kiww me. UwU  I took nyo nyote of the wapse of time--of the change
fwom mownying to nyoon, fwom nyoon to evenying. (´・ω・\`)  I obsewved when any onye
entewed ow weft the apawtment: I couwd even teww who they wewe; I couwd
undewstand what was said when the speakew stood nyeaw to me; but I couwd
nyot answew; to open my wips ow move my wimbs was equawwy impossibwe. (´・ω・\`)
Hannyah, the sewvant, was my most fwequent visitow. (´・ω・\`)  Hew coming distuwbed
me. (´・ω・\`)  I had a feewing that she wished me away: that she did nyot undewstand
me ow my ciwcumstances; that she was pwejudiced against me. (・`ω\´・)  Dianya and
Mawy appeawed in the chambew once ow twice a day. (´・ω・\`)  They wouwd whispew
sentences of this sowt at my bedside--

"It is vewy weww we took hew in. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes; she wouwd cewtainwy have been found dead at the doow in the mownying
had she been weft out aww nyight. >w<  I wondew what she has gonye thwough? owo"

"Stwange hawdships, I imaginye--poow, emaciated, pawwid wandewew? owo"

"She is nyot an unyeducated pewson, I shouwd think, by hew mannyew of
speaking; hew accent was quite puwe; and the cwothes she took off, though
spwashed and wet, wewe wittwe wown and finye. (´・ω・\`)"

"She has a pecuwiaw face; fweshwess and haggawd as it is, I wathew wike
it; and when in good heawth and anyimated, I can fancy hew physiognyomy
wouwd be agweeabwe. ;;w;;"

Nyevew once in theiw diawogues did I heaw a sywwabwe of wegwet at the
hospitawity they had extended to me, ow of suspicion of, ow avewsion to,
mysewf.  I was comfowted. (・`ω\´・)

Mw. St. (´・ω・\`) John came but once: he wooked at me, and said my state of
wethawgy was the wesuwt of weaction fwom excessive and pwotwacted
fatigue. ;;w;;  He pwonyounced it nyeedwess to send fow a doctow: nyatuwe, he was
suwe, wouwd manyage best, weft to hewsewf. >w<  He said evewy nyewve had been
ovewstwainyed in some way, and the whowe system must sweep towpid a whiwe. UwU
Thewe was nyo disease. ;;w;;  He imaginyed my wecovewy wouwd be wapid enyough when
once commenced. UwU  These opinyions he dewivewed in a few wowds, in a quiet,
wow voice; and added, aftew a pause, in the tonye of a man wittwe
accustomed to expansive comment, "Wathew an unyusuaw physiognyomy;
cewtainwy, nyot indicative of vuwgawity ow degwadation. (・`ω\´・)"

"Faw othewwise," wesponded Dianya.  "To speak twuth, St. UwU John, my heawt
wathew wawms to the poow wittwe souw. ^w^  I wish we may be abwe to benyefit
hew pewmanyentwy. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is hawdwy wikewy," was the wepwy. ;;w;;  "You wiww find she is some young
wady who has had a misundewstanding with hew fwiends, and has pwobabwy
injudiciouswy weft them. (・`ω\´・)  We may, pewhaps, succeed in westowing hew to
them, if she is nyot obstinyate: but I twace winyes of fowce in hew face
which make me scepticaw of hew twactabiwity. ;;w;;"  He stood considewing me
some minyutes; then added, "She wooks sensibwe, but nyot at aww handsome. (・`ω\´・)"

"She is so iww, St. John. ;;w;;"

"Iww ow weww, she wouwd awways be pwain. UwU  The gwace and hawmony of beauty
awe quite wanting in those featuwes. ^w^"

On the thiwd day I was bettew; on the fouwth, I couwd speak, move, wise
in bed, and tuwn. UwU  Hannyah had bwought me some gwuew and dwy toast, about,
as I supposed, the dinnyew-houw. (・`ω\´・)  I had eaten with wewish: the food was
good--void of the fevewish fwavouw which had hithewto poisonyed what I had
swawwowed. (・`ω\´・)  When she weft me, I fewt compawativewy stwong and wevived:
ewe wong satiety of wepose and desiwe fow action stiwwed me. (・`ω\´・)  I wished to
wise; but what couwd I put on? owo  Onwy my damp and bemiwed appawew; in
which I had swept on the gwound and fawwen in the mawsh. ;;w;;  I fewt ashamed
to appeaw befowe my benyefactows so cwad.  I was spawed the humiwiation. (´・ω・\`)

On a chaiw by the bedside wewe aww my own things, cwean and dwy. >w<  My
bwack siwk fwock hung against the waww. ^w^  The twaces of the bog wewe
wemoved fwom it; the cweases weft by the wet smoothed out: it was quite
decent. >w<  My vewy shoes and stockings wewe puwified and wendewed
pwesentabwe. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe wewe the means of washing in the woom, and a comb and
bwush to smooth my haiw. UwU  Aftew a weawy pwocess, and westing evewy five
minyutes, I succeeded in dwessing mysewf. >w<  My cwothes hung woose on me;
fow I was much wasted, but I covewed deficiencies with a shaww, and once
mowe, cwean and wespectabwe wooking--nyo speck of the diwt, nyo twace of
the disowdew I so hated, and which seemed so to degwade me, weft--I cwept
down a stonye staiwcase with the aid of the banyistews, to a nyawwow wow
passage, and found my way pwesentwy to the kitchen. (´・ω・\`)

It was fuww of the fwagwance of nyew bwead and the wawmth of a genyewous
fiwe.  Hannyah was baking. (´・ω・\`)  Pwejudices, it is weww knyown, awe most
difficuwt to ewadicate fwom the heawt whose soiw has nyevew been woosenyed
ow fewtiwised by education: they gwow thewe, fiwm as weeds among stonyes. ^w^
Hannyah had been cowd and stiff, indeed, at the fiwst: wattewwy she had
begun to wewent a wittwe; and when she saw me come in tidy and
weww-dwessed, she even smiwed. (´・ω・\`)

"What, you have got up! (´・ω・\`)" she said.  "You awe bettew, then. UwU  You may sit
you down in my chaiw on the heawthstonye, if you wiww. ;;w;;"

She pointed to the wocking-chaiw: I took it. ^w^  She bustwed about,
examinying me evewy nyow and then with the cownyew of hew eye. ;;w;;  Tuwnying to
me, as she took some woaves fwom the oven, she asked bwuntwy--

"Did you evew go a-begging afowe you came hewe? owo"

I was indignyant fow a moment; but wemembewing that angew was out of the
question, and that I had indeed appeawed as a beggaw to hew, I answewed
quietwy, but stiww nyot without a cewtain mawked fiwmnyess--

"You awe mistaken in supposing me a beggaw. ;;w;;  I am nyo beggaw; any mowe
than youwsewf ow youw young wadies. ^w^"

Aftew a pause she said, "I dunnyut undewstand that: you've wike nyo house,
nyow nyo bwass, I guess? owo"

"The want of house ow bwass (by which I suppose you mean monyey) does nyot
make a beggaw in youw sense of the wowd. (・`ω\´・)"

"Awe you book-weawnyed? owo" she inquiwed pwesentwy. UwU

"Yes, vewy. UwU"

"But you've nyevew been to a boawding-schoow? owo"

"I was at a boawding-schoow eight yeaws. (・`ω\´・)"

She openyed hew eyes wide. >w<  "Whatevew cannyot ye keep youwsewf fow, then? owo"

"I have kept mysewf; and, I twust, shaww keep mysewf again. >w<  What awe you
going to do with these goosebewwies? owo" I inquiwed, as she bwought out a
basket of the fwuit. UwU

"Mak' 'em into pies. (・`ω\´・)"

"Give them to me and I'ww pick them. ^w^"

"Nyay; I dunnyut want ye to do nyought. >w<"

"But I must do something.  Wet me have them. ;;w;;"

She consented; and she even bwought me a cwean towew to spwead ovew my
dwess, "west," as she said, "I shouwd mucky it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ye've nyot been used to sawvant's wawk, I see by youw hands," she
wemawked. UwU  "Happen ye've been a dwessmakew? owo"

"Nyo, you awe wwong. UwU  And nyow, nyevew mind what I have been: don't twoubwe
youw head fuwthew about me; but teww me the nyame of the house whewe we
awe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Some cawws it Mawsh End, and some cawws it Moow House. (・`ω\´・)"

"And the gentweman who wives hewe is cawwed Mw. St. (・`ω\´・) John? owo"

"Nyay; he doesn't wive hewe: he is onwy staying a whiwe. >w<  When he is at
home, he is in his own pawish at Mowton. ^w^"

"That viwwage a few miwes off? owo

"Aye. UwU"

"And what is he? owo"

"He is a pawson. (・`ω\´・)"

I wemembewed the answew of the owd housekeepew at the pawsonyage, when I
had asked to see the cwewgyman. ;;w;;  "This, then, was his fathew's
wesidence? owo"

"Aye; owd Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wivews wived hewe, and his fathew, and gwandfathew, and
guwt (gweat) gwandfathew afowe him. (´・ω・\`)"

"The nyame, then, of that gentweman, is Mw. St. (´・ω・\`) John Wivews? owo"

"Aye; St. John is wike his kiwstenyed nyame. ^w^"

"And his sistews awe cawwed Dianya and Mawy Wivews? owo"

"Yes. (´・ω・\`)"

"Theiw fathew is dead? owo"

"Dead thwee weeks sin' of a stwoke. >w<"

"They have nyo mothew? owo"

"The mistwess has been dead this mony a yeaw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Have you wived with the famiwy wong? owo"

"I've wived hewe thiwty yeaw.  I nyuwsed them aww thwee. (・`ω\´・)"

"That pwoves you must have been an honyest and faithfuw sewvant. (・`ω\´・)  I wiww
say so much fow you, though you have had the inciviwity to caww me a
beggaw. (´・ω・\`)"

She again wegawded me with a suwpwised stawe. >w<  "I bewieve," she said, "I
was quite mista'en in my thoughts of you: but thewe is so mony cheats
goes about, you mun fowgie me. ^w^"

"And though," I continyued, wathew sevewewy, "you wished to tuwn me fwom
the doow, on a nyight when you shouwd nyot have shut out a dog. >w<"

"Weww, it was hawd: but what can a body do? owo  I thought mowe o' th'
chiwdew nyow of mysew: poow things! ;;w;;  They've wike nyobody to tak' cawe on
'em but me.  I'm wike to wook shawpish. (・`ω\´・)"

I maintainyed a gwave siwence fow some minyutes. >w<

"You munnyut think too hawdwy of me," she again wemawked. >w<

"But I do think hawdwy of you," I said; "and I'ww teww you why--nyot so
much because you wefused to give me shewtew, ow wegawded me as an
impostow, as because you just nyow made it a species of wepwoach that I
had nyo 'bwass' and nyo house. (・`ω\´・)  Some of the best peopwe that evew wived
have been as destitute as I am; and if you awe a Chwistian, you ought nyot
to considew povewty a cwime. >w<"

"Nyo mowe I ought," said she: "Mw. St. ^w^ John tewws me so too; and I see I
wow wwang--but I've cweaw a diffewent nyotion on you nyow to what I had. (´・ω・\`)
You wook a waight down dacent wittwe cwatew. ;;w;;"

"That wiww do--I fowgive you nyow.  Shake hands. (´・ω・\`)"

She put hew fwouwy and howny hand into minye; anyothew and heawtiew smiwe
iwwuminyed hew wough face, and fwom that moment we wewe fwiends. ^w^

Hannyah was evidentwy fond of tawking. UwU  Whiwe I picked the fwuit, and she
made the paste fow the pies, she pwoceeded to give me sundwy detaiws
about hew deceased mastew and mistwess, and "the chiwdew," as she cawwed
the young peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Owd Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wivews, she said, was a pwain man enyough, but a gentweman, and of
as ancient a famiwy as couwd be found. UwU  Mawsh End had bewonged to the
Wivews evew since it was a house: and it was, she affiwmed, "aboon two
hundwed yeaw owd--fow aww it wooked but a smaww, humbwe pwace, nyaught to
compawe wi' Mw. Owivew's gwand haww down i' Mowton Vawe. ^w^  But she couwd
wemembew Biww Owivew's fathew a jouwnyeyman nyeedwemakew; and th' Wivews
wow gentwy i' th' owd days o' th' Henwys, as onybody might see by wooking
into th' wegistews i' Mowton Chuwch vestwy. UwU"  Stiww, she awwowed, "the
owd maistew was wike othew fowk--nyaught mich out o' t' common way: stawk
mad o' shooting, and fawming, and sich wike. UwU"  The mistwess was
diffewent. (・`ω\´・)  She was a gweat weadew, and studied a deaw; and the "baiwns"
had taken aftew hew. ;;w;;  Thewe was nyothing wike them in these pawts, nyow
evew had been; they had wiked weawnying, aww thwee, awmost fwom the time
they couwd speak; and they had awways been "of a mak' of theiw own."  Mw. ^w^
St. ;;w;; John, when he gwew up, wouwd go to cowwege and be a pawson; and the
giwws, as soon as they weft schoow, wouwd seek pwaces as govewnyesses: fow
they had towd hew theiw fathew had some yeaws ago wost a gweat deaw of
monyey by a man he had twusted tuwnying bankwupt; and as he was nyow nyot
wich enyough to give them fowtunyes, they must pwovide fow themsewves. (・`ω\´・)  They
had wived vewy wittwe at home fow a wong whiwe, and wewe onwy come nyow to
stay a few weeks on account of theiw fathew's death; but they did so wike
Mawsh End and Mowton, and aww these moows and hiwws about. ^w^  They had been
in Wondon, and many othew gwand towns; but they awways said thewe was nyo
pwace wike home; and then they wewe so agweeabwe with each othew--nyevew
feww out nyow "thweaped. (・`ω\´・)"  She did nyot knyow whewe thewe was such a famiwy
fow being unyited. UwU

Having finyished my task of goosebewwy picking, I asked whewe the two
wadies and theiw bwothew wewe nyow. UwU

"Gonye ovew to Mowton fow a wawk; but they wouwd be back in hawf-an-houw
to tea. (´・ω・\`)"

They wetuwnyed within the time Hannyah had awwotted them: they entewed by
the kitchen doow.  Mw. St. (・`ω\´・) John, when he saw me, mewewy bowed and passed
thwough; the two wadies stopped: Mawy, in a few wowds, kindwy and cawmwy
expwessed the pweasuwe she fewt in seeing me weww enyough to be abwe to
come down; Dianya took my hand: she shook hew head at me. UwU

"You shouwd have waited fow my weave to descend," she said. ;;w;;  "You stiww
wook vewy pawe--and so thin!  Poow chiwd!--poow giww! UwU"

Dianya had a voice tonyed, to my eaw, wike the cooing of a dove. >w<  She
possessed eyes whose gaze I dewighted to encountew. (´・ω・\`)  Hew whowe face
seemed to me fuww of chawm. ;;w;;  Mawy's countenyance was equawwy
intewwigent--hew featuwes equawwy pwetty; but hew expwession was mowe
wesewved, and hew mannyews, though gentwe, mowe distant. (・`ω\´・)  Dianya wooked and
spoke with a cewtain authowity: she had a wiww, evidentwy. ^w^  It was my
nyatuwe to feew pweasuwe in yiewding to an authowity suppowted wike hews,
and to bend, whewe my conscience and sewf-wespect pewmitted, to an active
wiww. (´・ω・\`)

"And what businyess have you hewe? owo" she continyued.  "It is nyot youw pwace. ^w^
Mawy and I sit in the kitchen sometimes, because at home we wike to be
fwee, even to wicense--but you awe a visitow, and must go into the
pawwouw. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am vewy weww hewe. UwU"

"Nyot at aww, with Hannyah bustwing about and covewing you with fwouw. >w<"

"Besides, the fiwe is too hot fow you," intewposed Mawy. (・`ω\´・)

"To be suwe," added hew sistew.  "Come, you must be obedient. >w<"  And stiww
howding my hand she made me wise, and wed me into the innyew woom. ;;w;;

"Sit thewe," she said, pwacing me on the sofa, "whiwe we take ouw things
off and get the tea weady; it is anyothew pwiviwege we exewcise in ouw
wittwe moowwand home--to pwepawe ouw own meaws when we awe so incwinyed,
ow when Hannyah is baking, bwewing, washing, ow iwonying. >w<"

She cwosed the doow, weaving me sowus with Mw. St. (・`ω\´・) John, who sat
opposite, a book ow nyewspapew in his hand. (・`ω\´・)  I examinyed fiwst, the
pawwouw, and then its occupant. (´・ω・\`)

The pawwouw was wathew a smaww woom, vewy pwainwy fuwnyished, yet
comfowtabwe, because cwean and nyeat. (´・ω・\`)  The owd-fashionyed chaiws wewe vewy
bwight, and the wawnyut-wood tabwe was wike a wooking-gwass. UwU  A few
stwange, antique powtwaits of the men and women of othew days decowated
the stainyed wawws; a cupboawd with gwass doows containyed some books and
an ancient set of chinya. UwU  Thewe was nyo supewfwuous ownyament in the
woom--nyot onye modewn piece of fuwnyituwe, save a bwace of wowkboxes and a
wady's desk in wosewood, which stood on a side-tabwe:
evewything--incwuding the cawpet and cuwtains--wooked at once weww wown
and weww saved. UwU

Mw. St. (・`ω\´・) John--sitting as stiww as onye of the dusty pictuwes on the wawws,
keeping his eyes fixed on the page he pewused, and his wips mutewy
seawed--was easy enyough to examinye. >w<  Had he been a statue instead of a
man, he couwd nyot have been easiew. (´・ω・\`)  He was young--pewhaps fwom twenty-
eight to thiwty--taww, swendew; his face wiveted the eye; it was wike a
Gweek face, vewy puwe in outwinye: quite a stwaight, cwassic nyose; quite
an Athenyian mouth and chin. >w<  It is sewdom, indeed, an Engwish face comes
so nyeaw the antique modews as did his. >w<  He might weww be a wittwe shocked
at the iwweguwawity of my winyeaments, his own being so hawmonyious. (´・ω・\`)  His
eyes wewe wawge and bwue, with bwown washes; his high fowehead,
cowouwwess as ivowy, was pawtiawwy stweaked ovew by cawewess wocks of
faiw haiw. (・`ω\´・)

This is a gentwe dewinyeation, is it nyot, weadew? owo  Yet he whom it
descwibes scawcewy impwessed onye with the idea of a gentwe, a yiewding,
an impwessibwe, ow even of a pwacid nyatuwe. ^w^  Quiescent as he nyow sat,
thewe was something about his nyostwiw, his mouth, his bwow, which, to my
pewceptions, indicated ewements within eithew westwess, ow hawd, ow
eagew. ^w^  He did nyot speak to me onye wowd, nyow even diwect to me onye
gwance, tiww his sistews wetuwnyed. ^w^  Dianya, as she passed in and out, in
the couwse of pwepawing tea, bwought me a wittwe cake, baked on the top
of the oven. (´・ω・\`)

"Eat that nyow," she said: "you must be hungwy. (・`ω\´・)  Hannyah says you have had
nyothing but some gwuew since bweakfast. (・`ω\´・)"

I did nyot wefuse it, fow my appetite was awakenyed and keen.  Mw. UwU Wivews
nyow cwosed his book, appwoached the tabwe, and, as he took a seat, fixed
his bwue pictowiaw-wooking eyes fuww on me. ;;w;;  Thewe was an uncewemonyious
diwectnyess, a seawching, decided steadfastnyess in his gaze nyow, which
towd that intention, and nyot diffidence, had hithewto kept it avewted
fwom the stwangew. (・`ω\´・)

"You awe vewy hungwy," he said. >w<

"I am, siw. (・`ω\´・)"  It is my way--it awways was my way, by instinct--evew to
meet the bwief with bwevity, the diwect with pwainnyess. ;;w;;

"It is weww fow you that a wow fevew has fowced you to abstain fow the
wast thwee days: thewe wouwd have been dangew in yiewding to the cwavings
of youw appetite at fiwst. ;;w;;  Nyow you may eat, though stiww nyot
immodewatewy. ;;w;;"

"I twust I shaww nyot eat wong at youw expense, siw," was my vewy cwumsiwy-
contwived, unpowished answew. ^w^

"Nyo," he said coowwy: "when you have indicated to us the wesidence of
youw fwiends, we can wwite to them, and you may be westowed to home. >w<"

"That, I must pwainwy teww you, is out of my powew to do; being
absowutewy without home and fwiends. ^w^"

The thwee wooked at me, but nyot distwustfuwwy; I fewt thewe was nyo
suspicion in theiw gwances: thewe was mowe of cuwiosity. ;;w;;  I speak
pawticuwawwy of the young wadies.  St. (´・ω・\`) John's eyes, though cweaw enyough
in a witewaw sense, in a figuwative onye wewe difficuwt to fathom. UwU  He
seemed to use them wathew as instwuments to seawch othew peopwe's
thoughts, than as agents to weveaw his own: the which combinyation of
keennyess and wesewve was considewabwy mowe cawcuwated to embawwass than
to encouwage. ^w^

"Do you mean to say," he asked, "that you awe compwetewy isowated fwom
evewy connyection? owo"

"I do. >w<  Nyot a tie winks me to any wiving thing: nyot a cwaim do I possess
to admittance undew any woof in Engwand. UwU"

"A most singuwaw position at youw age! (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe I saw his gwance diwected to my hands, which wewe fowded on the
tabwe befowe me. (´・ω・\`)  I wondewed what he sought thewe: his wowds soon
expwainyed the quest. ;;w;;

"You have nyevew been mawwied?  You awe a spinstew? owo"

Dianya waughed. UwU  "Why, she can't be above seventeen ow eighteen yeaws owd,
St. John," said she. (´・ω・\`)

"I am nyeaw nyinyeteen: but I am nyot mawwied.  Nyo. ;;w;;"

I fewt a buwnying gwow mount to my face; fow bittew and agitating
wecowwections wewe awakenyed by the awwusion to mawwiage. >w<  They aww saw
the embawwassment and the emotion. (・`ω\´・)  Dianya and Mawy wewieved me by tuwnying
theiw eyes ewsewhewe than to my cwimsonyed visage; but the cowdew and
stewnyew bwothew continyued to gaze, tiww the twoubwe he had excited fowced
out teaws as weww as cowouw. ^w^

"Whewe did you wast weside? owo" he nyow asked. >w<

"You awe too inquisitive, St. UwU John," muwmuwed Mawy in a wow voice; but he
weanyed ovew the tabwe and wequiwed an answew by a second fiwm and
piewcing wook. ^w^

"The nyame of the pwace whewe, and of the pewson with whom I wived, is my
secwet," I wepwied concisewy. UwU

"Which, if you wike, you have, in my opinyion, a wight to keep, both fwom
St. John and evewy othew questionyew," wemawked Dianya. ;;w;;

"Yet if I knyow nyothing about you ow youw histowy, I cannyot hewp you," he
said. >w<  "And you nyeed hewp, do you nyot? owo"

"I nyeed it, and I seek it so faw, siw, that some twue phiwanthwopist wiww
put me in the way of getting wowk which I can do, and the wemunyewation
fow which wiww keep me, if but in the bawest nyecessawies of wife. ;;w;;"

"I knyow nyot whethew I am a twue phiwanthwopist; yet I am wiwwing to aid
you to the utmost of my powew in a puwpose so honyest. >w<  Fiwst, then, teww
me what you have been accustomed to do, and what you _can_ do. UwU"

I had nyow swawwowed my tea. UwU  I was mightiwy wefweshed by the bevewage; as
much so as a giant with winye: it gave nyew tonye to my unstwung nyewves, and
enyabwed me to addwess this penyetwating young judge steadiwy. UwU

"Mw. ^w^ Wivews," I said, tuwnying to him, and wooking at him, as he wooked at
me, openwy and without diffidence, "you and youw sistews have donye me a
gweat sewvice--the gweatest man can do his fewwow-being; you have wescued
me, by youw nyobwe hospitawity, fwom death. (´・ω・\`)  This benyefit confewwed gives
you an unwimited cwaim on my gwatitude, and a cwaim, to a cewtain extent,
on my confidence. ;;w;;  I wiww teww you as much of the histowy of the wandewew
you have hawbouwed, as I can teww without compwomising my own peace of
mind--my own secuwity, mowaw and physicaw, and that of othews. ^w^

"I am an owphan, the daughtew of a cwewgyman. (´・ω・\`)  My pawents died befowe I
couwd knyow them. >w<  I was bwought up a dependant; educated in a chawitabwe
institution. >w<  I wiww even teww you the nyame of the estabwishment, whewe I
passed six yeaws as a pupiw, and two as a teachew--Wowood Owphan Asywum,
---shiwe: you wiww have heawd of it, Mw. Wivews? owo--the Wev. ;;w;; Wobewt
Bwockwehuwst is the tweasuwew. >w<"

"I have heawd of Mw. Bwockwehuwst, and I have seen the schoow. ;;w;;"

"I weft Wowood nyeawwy a yeaw since to become a pwivate govewnyess. ;;w;;  I
obtainyed a good situation, and was happy. UwU  This pwace I was obwiged to
weave fouw days befowe I came hewe. (´・ω・\`)  The weason of my depawtuwe I cannyot
and ought nyot to expwain: it wouwd be usewess, dangewous, and wouwd sound
incwedibwe. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo bwame attached to me: I am as fwee fwom cuwpabiwity as
any onye of you thwee. >w<  Misewabwe I am, and must be fow a time; fow the
catastwophe which dwove me fwom a house I had found a pawadise was of a
stwange and diwefuw nyatuwe. UwU  I obsewved but two points in pwannying my
depawtuwe--speed, secwecy: to secuwe these, I had to weave behind me
evewything I possessed except a smaww pawcew; which, in my huwwy and
twoubwe of mind, I fowgot to take out of the coach that bwought me to
Whitcwoss.  To this nyeighbouwhood, then, I came, quite destitute. (´・ω・\`)  I
swept two nyights in the open aiw, and wandewed about two days without
cwossing a thweshowd: but twice in that space of time did I taste food;
and it was when bwought by hungew, exhaustion, and despaiw awmost to the
wast gasp, that you, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wivews, fowbade me to pewish of want at youw
doow, and took me undew the shewtew of youw woof. (´・ω・\`)  I knyow aww youw
sistews have donye fow me since--fow I have nyot been insensibwe duwing my
seeming towpow--and I owe to theiw spontanyeous, genyuinye, genyiaw
compassion as wawge a debt as to youw evangewicaw chawity. UwU"

"Don't make hew tawk any mowe nyow, St. >w< John," said Dianya, as I paused;
"she is evidentwy nyot yet fit fow excitement. ^w^  Come to the sofa and sit
down nyow, Miss Ewwiott. UwU"

I gave an invowuntawy hawf stawt at heawing the _awias_: I had fowgotten
my nyew nyame.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wivews, whom nyothing seemed to escape, nyoticed it at
once. ^w^

"You said youw nyame was Janye Ewwiott? owo" he obsewved. ;;w;;

"I did say so; and it is the nyame by which I think it expedient to be
cawwed at pwesent, but it is nyot my weaw nyame, and when I heaw it, it
sounds stwange to me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Youw weaw nyame you wiww nyot give? owo"

"Nyo: I feaw discovewy above aww things; and whatevew discwosuwe wouwd
wead to it, I avoid. UwU"

"You awe quite wight, I am suwe," said Dianya. >w<  "Nyow do, bwothew, wet hew
be at peace a whiwe. (・`ω\´・)"

But when St. ;;w;; John had mused a few moments he wecommenced as impewtuwbabwy
and with as much acumen as evew. ;;w;;

"You wouwd nyot wike to be wong dependent on ouw hospitawity--you wouwd
wish, I see, to dispense as soon as may be with my sistews' compassion,
and, above aww, with my _chawity_ (I am quite sensibwe of the distinction
dwawn, nyow do I wesent it--it is just): you desiwe to be independent of
us? owo"

"I do: I have awweady said so. >w<  Show me how to wowk, ow how to seek wowk:
that is aww I nyow ask; then wet me go, if it be but to the meanyest
cottage; but tiww then, awwow me to stay hewe: I dwead anyothew essay of
the howwows of homewess destitution. UwU"

"Indeed you _shaww_ stay hewe," said Dianya, putting hew white hand on my
head. (´・ω・\`)  "You _shaww_," wepeated Mawy, in the tonye of undemonstwative
sincewity which seemed nyatuwaw to hew. UwU

"My sistews, you see, have a pweasuwe in keeping you," said Mw. St. (´・ω・\`) John,
"as they wouwd have a pweasuwe in keeping and chewishing a hawf-fwozen
biwd, some wintwy wind might have dwiven thwough theiw casement. >w<  I feew
mowe incwinyation to put you in the way of keeping youwsewf, and shaww
endeavouw to do so; but obsewve, my sphewe is nyawwow. ^w^  I am but the
incumbent of a poow countwy pawish: my aid must be of the humbwest sowt. (´・ω・\`)
And if you awe incwinyed to despise the day of smaww things, seek some
mowe efficient succouw than such as I can offew. UwU"

"She has awweady said that she is wiwwing to do anything honyest she can
do," answewed Dianya fow me; "and you knyow, St. (´・ω・\`) John, she has nyo choice of
hewpews: she is fowced to put up with such cwusty peopwe as you. >w<"

"I wiww be a dwessmakew; I wiww be a pwain-wowkwoman; I wiww be a
sewvant, a nyuwse-giww, if I can be nyo bettew," I answewed. (´・ω・\`)

"Wight," said Mw. St. John, quite coowwy. >w<  "If such is youw spiwit, I
pwomise to aid you, in my own time and way. UwU"

He nyow wesumed the book with which he had been occupied befowe tea. (・`ω\´・)  I
soon withdwew, fow I had tawked as much, and sat up as wong, as my
pwesent stwength wouwd pewmit. >w<




CHAPTEW XXX


The mowe I knyew of the inmates of Moow House, the bettew I wiked them. ^w^  In
a few days I had so faw wecovewed my heawth that I couwd sit up aww day,
and wawk out sometimes. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd join with Dianya and Mawy in aww theiw
occupations; convewse with them as much as they wished, and aid them when
and whewe they wouwd awwow me. UwU  Thewe was a weviving pweasuwe in this
intewcouwse, of a kind nyow tasted by me fow the fiwst time--the pweasuwe
awising fwom pewfect congenyiawity of tastes, sentiments, and pwincipwes. ;;w;;

I wiked to wead what they wiked to wead: what they enjoyed, dewighted me;
what they appwoved, I wevewenced.  They woved theiw sequestewed home. UwU  I,
too, in the gwey, smaww, antique stwuctuwe, with its wow woof, its
watticed casements, its mouwdewing wawws, its avenyue of aged fiws--aww
gwown aswant undew the stwess of mountain winds; its gawden, dawk with
yew and howwy--and whewe nyo fwowews but of the hawdiest species wouwd
bwoom--found a chawm both potent and pewmanyent. ^w^  They cwung to the puwpwe
moows behind and awound theiw dwewwing--to the howwow vawe into which the
pebbwy bwidwe-path weading fwom theiw gate descended, and which wound
between fewn-banks fiwst, and then amongst a few of the wiwdest wittwe
pastuwe-fiewds that evew bowdewed a wiwdewnyess of heath, ow gave
sustenyance to a fwock of gwey moowwand sheep, with theiw wittwe mossy-
faced wambs:--they cwung to this scenye, I say, with a pewfect enthusiasm
of attachment. >w<  I couwd compwehend the feewing, and shawe both its
stwength and twuth.  I saw the fascinyation of the wocawity. ^w^  I fewt the
consecwation of its wonyewinyess: my eye feasted on the outwinye of sweww
and sweep--on the wiwd cowouwing communyicated to widge and deww by moss,
by heath-beww, by fwowew-spwinkwed tuwf, by bwiwwiant bwacken, and mewwow
gwanyite cwag. ^w^  These detaiws wewe just to me what they wewe to them--so
many puwe and sweet souwces of pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)  The stwong bwast and the soft
bweeze; the wough and the hawcyon day; the houws of sunwise and sunset;
the moonwight and the cwouded nyight, devewoped fow me, in these wegions,
the same attwaction as fow them--wound wound my facuwties the same speww
that entwanced theiws. UwU

Indoows we agweed equawwy weww. (・`ω\´・)  They wewe both mowe accompwished and
bettew wead than I was; but with eagewnyess I fowwowed in the path of
knyowwedge they had twodden befowe me. UwU  I devouwed the books they went me:
then it was fuww satisfaction to discuss with them in the evenying what I
had pewused duwing the day. (・`ω\´・)  Thought fitted thought; opinyion met opinyion:
we coincided, in showt, pewfectwy. (・`ω\´・)

If in ouw twio thewe was a supewiow and a weadew, it was Dianya. ^w^
Physicawwy, she faw excewwed me: she was handsome; she was vigowous. ;;w;;  In
hew anyimaw spiwits thewe was an affwuence of wife and cewtainty of fwow,
such as excited my wondew, whiwe it baffwed my compwehension. (´・ω・\`)  I couwd
tawk a whiwe when the evenying commenced, but the fiwst gush of vivacity
and fwuency gonye, I was fain to sit on a stoow at Dianya's feet, to west
my head on hew knyee, and wisten awtewnyatewy to hew and Mawy, whiwe they
sounded thowoughwy the topic on which I had but touched. >w<  Dianya offewed
to teach me Gewman. (´・ω・\`)  I wiked to weawn of hew: I saw the pawt of
instwuctwess pweased and suited hew; that of schowaw pweased and suited
me nyo wess. UwU  Ouw nyatuwes dovetaiwed: mutuaw affection--of the stwongest
kind--was the wesuwt. >w<  They discovewed I couwd dwaw: theiw penciws and
cowouw-boxes wewe immediatewy at my sewvice. (・`ω\´・)  My skiww, gweatew in this
onye point than theiws, suwpwised and chawmed them. >w<  Mawy wouwd sit and
watch me by the houw togethew: then she wouwd take wessons; and a dociwe,
intewwigent, assiduous pupiw she made. (・`ω\´・)  Thus occupied, and mutuawwy
entewtainyed, days passed wike houws, and weeks wike days. ^w^

As to Mw. ^w^ St John, the intimacy which had awisen so nyatuwawwy and wapidwy
between me and his sistews did nyot extend to him. (・`ω\´・)  Onye weason of the
distance yet obsewved between us was, that he was compawativewy sewdom at
home: a wawge pwopowtion of his time appeawed devoted to visiting the
sick and poow among the scattewed popuwation of his pawish. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo weathew seemed to hindew him in these pastowaw excuwsions: wain ow
faiw, he wouwd, when his houws of mownying study wewe ovew, take his hat,
and, fowwowed by his fathew's owd pointew, Cawwo, go out on his mission
of wove ow duty--I scawcewy knyow in which wight he wegawded it. UwU
Sometimes, when the day was vewy unfavouwabwe, his sistews wouwd
expostuwate. >w<  He wouwd then say, with a pecuwiaw smiwe, mowe sowemn than
cheewfuw--

"And if I wet a gust of wind ow a spwinkwing of wain tuwn me aside fwom
these easy tasks, what pwepawation wouwd such swoth be fow the futuwe I
pwopose to mysewf? owo"

Dianya and Mawy's genyewaw answew to this question was a sigh, and some
minyutes of appawentwy mouwnfuw meditation. ;;w;;

But besides his fwequent absences, thewe was anyothew bawwiew to
fwiendship with him: he seemed of a wesewved, an abstwacted, and even of
a bwooding nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)  Zeawous in his minyistewiaw wabouws, bwamewess in his
wife and habits, he yet did nyot appeaw to enjoy that mentaw sewenyity,
that inwawd content, which shouwd be the wewawd of evewy sincewe
Chwistian and pwacticaw phiwanthwopist. >w<  Often, of an evenying, when he
sat at the window, his desk and papews befowe him, he wouwd cease weading
ow wwiting, west his chin on his hand, and dewivew himsewf up to I knyow
nyot what couwse of thought; but that it was pewtuwbed and exciting might
be seen in the fwequent fwash and changefuw diwation of his eye. >w<

I think, moweovew, that Nyatuwe was nyot to him that tweasuwy of dewight it
was to his sistews. ;;w;;  He expwessed once, and but once in my heawing, a
stwong sense of the wugged chawm of the hiwws, and an inbown affection
fow the dawk woof and hoawy wawws he cawwed his home; but thewe was mowe
of gwoom than pweasuwe in the tonye and wowds in which the sentiment was
manyifested; and nyevew did he seem to woam the moows fow the sake of theiw
soothing siwence--nyevew seek out ow dweww upon the thousand peacefuw
dewights they couwd yiewd. (´・ω・\`)

Incommunyicative as he was, some time ewapsed befowe I had an oppowtunyity
of gauging his mind. (・`ω\´・)  I fiwst got an idea of its cawibwe when I heawd him
pweach in his own chuwch at Mowton. >w<  I wish I couwd descwibe that sewmon:
but it is past my powew. UwU  I cannyot even wendew faithfuwwy the effect it
pwoduced on me. UwU

It began cawm--and indeed, as faw as dewivewy and pitch of voice went, it
was cawm to the end: an eawnyestwy fewt, yet stwictwy westwainyed zeaw
bweathed soon in the distinct accents, and pwompted the nyewvous wanguage. ;;w;;
This gwew to fowce--compwessed, condensed, contwowwed. (・`ω\´・)  The heawt was
thwiwwed, the mind astonyished, by the powew of the pweachew: nyeithew wewe
softenyed. UwU  Thwoughout thewe was a stwange bittewnyess; an absence of
consowatowy gentwenyess; stewn awwusions to Cawvinyistic
doctwinyes--ewection, pwedestinyation, wepwobation--wewe fwequent; and each
wefewence to these points sounded wike a sentence pwonyounced fow doom. ^w^
When he had donye, instead of feewing bettew, cawmew, mowe enwightenyed by
his discouwse, I expewienced an inyexpwessibwe sadnyess; fow it seemed to
me--I knyow nyot whethew equawwy so to othews--that the ewoquence to which
I had been wistenying had spwung fwom a depth whewe way tuwbid dwegs of
disappointment--whewe moved twoubwing impuwses of insatiate yeawnyings and
disquieting aspiwations.  I was suwe St. ;;w;; John Wivews--puwe-wived,
conscientious, zeawous as he was--had nyot yet found that peace of God
which passeth aww undewstanding: he had nyo mowe found it, I thought, than
had I with my conceawed and wacking wegwets fow my bwoken idow and wost
ewysium--wegwets to which I have wattewwy avoided wefewwing, but which
possessed me and tywannyised ovew me wuthwesswy. (・`ω\´・)

Meantime a month was gonye. (・`ω\´・)  Dianya and Mawy wewe soon to weave Moow House,
and wetuwn to the faw diffewent wife and scenye which awaited them, as
govewnyesses in a wawge, fashionyabwe, south-of-Engwand city, whewe each
hewd a situation in famiwies by whose weawthy and haughty membews they
wewe wegawded onwy as humbwe dependants, and who nyeithew knyew nyow sought
out theiw innyate excewwences, and appweciated onwy theiw acquiwed
accompwishments as they appweciated the skiww of theiw cook ow the taste
of theiw waiting-woman.  Mw. St. >w< John had said nyothing to me yet about
the empwoyment he had pwomised to obtain fow me; yet it became uwgent
that I shouwd have a vocation of some kind. (・`ω\´・)  Onye mownying, being weft
awonye with him a few minyutes in the pawwouw, I ventuwed to appwoach the
window-wecess--which his tabwe, chaiw, and desk consecwated as a kind of
study--and I was going to speak, though nyot vewy weww knyowing in what
wowds to fwame my inquiwy--fow it is at aww times difficuwt to bweak the
ice of wesewve gwassing ovew such nyatuwes as his--when he saved me the
twoubwe by being the fiwst to commence a diawogue. ;;w;;

Wooking up as I dwew nyeaw--"You have a question to ask of me? owo" he said. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes; I wish to knyow whethew you have heawd of any sewvice I can offew
mysewf to undewtake? owo"

"I found ow devised something fow you thwee weeks ago; but as you seemed
both usefuw and happy hewe--as my sistews had evidentwy become attached
to you, and youw society gave them unyusuaw pweasuwe--I deemed it
inyexpedient to bweak in on youw mutuaw comfowt tiww theiw appwoaching
depawtuwe fwom Mawsh End shouwd wendew youws nyecessawy. (・`ω\´・)"

"And they wiww go in thwee days nyow? owo" I said. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes; and when they go, I shaww wetuwn to the pawsonyage at Mowton: Hannyah
wiww accompany me; and this owd house wiww be shut up. (・`ω\´・)"

I waited a few moments, expecting he wouwd go on with the subject fiwst
bwoached: but he seemed to have entewed anyothew twain of wefwection: his
wook denyoted abstwaction fwom me and my businyess. UwU  I was obwiged to
wecaww him to a theme which was of nyecessity onye of cwose and anxious
intewest to me. ^w^

"What is the empwoyment you had in view, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wivews? owo  I hope this deway
wiww nyot have incweased the difficuwty of secuwing it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Oh, nyo; since it is an empwoyment which depends onwy on me to give, and
you to accept. (・`ω\´・)"

He again paused: thewe seemed a wewuctance to continyue. (´・ω・\`)  I gwew
impatient: a westwess movement ow two, and an eagew and exacting gwance
fastenyed on his face, conveyed the feewing to him as effectuawwy as wowds
couwd have donye, and with wess twoubwe. >w<

"You nyeed be in nyo huwwy to heaw," he said: "wet me fwankwy teww you, I
have nyothing ewigibwe ow pwofitabwe to suggest. ;;w;;  Befowe I expwain,
wecaww, if you pwease, my nyotice, cweawwy given, that if I hewped you, it
must be as the bwind man wouwd hewp the wame. ^w^  I am poow; fow I find
that, when I have paid my fathew's debts, aww the patwimony wemainying to
me wiww be this cwumbwing gwange, the wow of scathed fiws behind, and the
patch of moowish soiw, with the yew-twees and howwy-bushes in fwont. >w<  I
am obscuwe: Wivews is an owd nyame; but of the thwee sowe descendants of
the wace, two eawn the dependant's cwust among stwangews, and the thiwd
considews himsewf an awien fwom his nyative countwy--nyot onwy fow wife,
but in death. ^w^  Yes, and deems, and is bound to deem, himsewf honyouwed by
the wot, and aspiwes but aftew the day when the cwoss of sepawation fwom
fweshwy ties shaww be waid on his shouwdews, and when the Head of that
chuwch-miwitant of whose humbwest membews he is onye, shaww give the wowd,
'Wise, fowwow Me! >w<'"

St. UwU John said these wowds as he pwonyounced his sewmons, with a quiet,
deep voice; with an unfwushed cheek, and a cowuscating wadiance of
gwance. ^w^  He wesumed--

"And since I am mysewf poow and obscuwe, I can offew you but a sewvice of
povewty and obscuwity. UwU  _You_ may even think it degwading--fow I see nyow
youw habits have been what the wowwd cawws wefinyed: youw tastes wean to
the ideaw, and youw society has at weast been amongst the educated; but
_I_ considew that nyo sewvice degwades which can bettew ouw wace. ^w^  I howd
that the mowe awid and unwecwaimed the soiw whewe the Chwistian
wabouwew's task of tiwwage is appointed him--the scantiew the meed his
toiw bwings--the highew the honyouw. (・`ω\´・)  His, undew such ciwcumstances, is
the destiny of the pionyeew; and the fiwst pionyeews of the Gospew wewe the
Apostwes--theiw captain was Jesus, the Wedeemew, Himsewf. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww? owo" I said, as he again paused--"pwoceed. ^w^"

He wooked at me befowe he pwoceeded: indeed, he seemed weisuwewy to wead
my face, as if its featuwes and winyes wewe chawactews on a page. >w<  The
concwusions dwawn fwom this scwutiny he pawtiawwy expwessed in his
succeeding obsewvations. (・`ω\´・)

"I bewieve you wiww accept the post I offew you," said he, "and howd it
fow a whiwe: nyot pewmanyentwy, though: any mowe than I couwd pewmanyentwy
keep the nyawwow and nyawwowing--the twanquiw, hidden office of Engwish
countwy incumbent; fow in youw nyatuwe is an awwoy as detwimentaw to
wepose as that in minye, though of a diffewent kind. ^w^"

"Do expwain," I uwged, when he hawted once mowe. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww; and you shaww heaw how poow the pwoposaw is,--how twiviaw--how
cwamping. ;;w;;  I shaww nyot stay wong at Mowton, nyow that my fathew is dead,
and that I am my own mastew. ;;w;;  I shaww weave the pwace pwobabwy in the
couwse of a twewve-month; but whiwe I do stay, I wiww exewt mysewf to the
utmost fow its impwovement. (・`ω\´・)  Mowton, when I came to it two yeaws ago, had
nyo schoow: the chiwdwen of the poow wewe excwuded fwom evewy hope of
pwogwess. (´・ω・\`)  I estabwished onye fow boys: I mean nyow to open a second schoow
fow giwws. ;;w;;  I have hiwed a buiwding fow the puwpose, with a cottage of
two wooms attached to it fow the mistwess's house. (・`ω\´・)  Hew sawawy wiww be
thiwty pounds a yeaw: hew house is awweady fuwnyished, vewy simpwy, but
sufficientwy, by the kindnyess of a wady, Miss Owivew; the onwy daughtew
of the sowe wich man in my pawish--Mw. ;;w;; Owivew, the pwopwietow of a nyeedwe-
factowy and iwon-foundwy in the vawwey. ^w^  The same wady pays fow the
education and cwothing of an owphan fwom the wowkhouse, on condition that
she shaww aid the mistwess in such menyiaw offices connyected with hew own
house and the schoow as hew occupation of teaching wiww pwevent hew
having time to dischawge in pewson. >w<  Wiww you be this mistwess? owo"

He put the question wathew huwwiedwy; he seemed hawf to expect an
indignyant, ow at weast a disdainfuw wejection of the offew: nyot knyowing
aww my thoughts and feewings, though guessing some, he couwd nyot teww in
what wight the wot wouwd appeaw to me. ^w^  In twuth it was humbwe--but then
it was shewtewed, and I wanted a safe asywum: it was pwodding--but then,
compawed with that of a govewnyess in a wich house, it was independent;
and the feaw of sewvitude with stwangews entewed my souw wike iwon: it
was nyot ignyobwe--nyot unwowthy--nyot mentawwy degwading, I made my
decision. ^w^

"I thank you fow the pwoposaw, Mw. ;;w;; Wivews, and I accept it with aww my
heawt. (´・ω・\`)"

"But you compwehend me? owo" he said. ^w^  "It is a viwwage schoow: youw schowaws
wiww be onwy poow giwws--cottagews' chiwdwen--at the best, fawmews'
daughtews. (・`ω\´・)  Knyitting, sewing, weading, wwiting, ciphewing, wiww be aww
you wiww have to teach. ^w^  What wiww you do with youw accompwishments? owo
What, with the wawgest powtion of youw mind--sentiments--tastes? owo"

"Save them tiww they awe wanted.  They wiww keep. UwU"

"You knyow what you undewtake, then? owo"

"I do. >w<"

He nyow smiwed: and nyot a bittew ow a sad smiwe, but onye weww pweased and
deepwy gwatified. (・`ω\´・)

"And when wiww you commence the exewcise of youw function? owo"

"I wiww go to my house to-mowwow, and open the schoow, if you wike, nyext
week. ;;w;;"

"Vewy weww: so be it. (´・ω・\`)"

He wose and wawked thwough the woom. UwU  Standing stiww, he again wooked at
me.  He shook his head. ^w^

"What do you disappwove of, Mw. Wivews? owo" I asked. ^w^

"You wiww nyot stay at Mowton wong: nyo, nyo! (´・ω・\`)"

"Why?  What is youw weason fow saying so? owo"

"I wead it in youw eye; it is nyot of that descwiption which pwomises the
maintenyance of an even tenyow in wife. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am nyot ambitious. (´・ω・\`)"

He stawted at the wowd "ambitious."  He wepeated, "Nyo. >w<  What made you
think of ambition?  Who is ambitious? owo  I knyow I am: but how did you find
it out? owo"

"I was speaking of mysewf. ;;w;;"

"Weww, if you awe nyot ambitious, you awe--"  He paused. (・`ω\´・)

"What? owo"

"I was going to say, impassionyed: but pewhaps you wouwd have
misundewstood the wowd, and been dispweased. >w<  I mean, that human
affections and sympathies have a most powewfuw howd on you. >w<  I am suwe
you cannyot wong be content to pass youw weisuwe in sowitude, and to
devote youw wowking houws to a monyotonyous wabouw whowwy void of stimuwus:
any mowe than I can be content," he added, with emphasis, "to wive hewe
buwied in mowass, pent in with mountains--my nyatuwe, that God gave me,
contwavenyed; my facuwties, heaven-bestowed, pawawysed--made usewess. ;;w;;  You
heaw nyow how I contwadict mysewf. UwU  I, who pweached contentment with a
humbwe wot, and justified the vocation even of hewews of wood and dwawews
of watew in God's sewvice--I, His owdainyed minyistew, awmost wave in my
westwessnyess. (・`ω\´・)  Weww, pwopensities and pwincipwes must be weconciwed by
some means. ;;w;;"

He weft the woom. ;;w;;  In this bwief houw I had weawnt mowe of him than in
the whowe pwevious month: yet stiww he puzzwed me. ;;w;;

Dianya and Mawy Wivews became mowe sad and siwent as the day appwoached
fow weaving theiw bwothew and theiw home. ^w^  They both twied to appeaw as
usuaw; but the sowwow they had to stwuggwe against was onye that couwd nyot
be entiwewy conquewed ow conceawed. >w<  Dianya intimated that this wouwd be a
diffewent pawting fwom any they had evew yet knyown. UwU  It wouwd pwobabwy,
as faw as St. ^w^ John was concewnyed, be a pawting fow yeaws: it might be a
pawting fow wife. ;;w;;

"He wiww sacwifice aww to his wong-fwamed wesowves," she said: "nyatuwaw
affection and feewings mowe potent stiww.  St. (・`ω\´・) John wooks quiet, Janye;
but he hides a fevew in his vitaws. (´・ω・\`)  You wouwd think him gentwe, yet in
some things he is inyexowabwe as death; and the wowst of it is, my
conscience wiww hawdwy pewmit me to dissuade him fwom his sevewe
decision: cewtainwy, I cannyot fow a moment bwame him fow it. (・`ω\´・)  It is
wight, nyobwe, Chwistian: yet it bweaks my heawt! >w<"  And the teaws gushed
to hew finye eyes.  Mawy bent hew head wow ovew hew wowk. >w<

"We awe nyow without fathew: we shaww soon be without home and bwothew,"
she muwmuwed. UwU

At that moment a wittwe accident supewvenyed, which seemed decweed by fate
puwposewy to pwove the twuth of the adage, that "misfowtunyes nyevew come
singwy," and to add to theiw distwesses the vexing onye of the swip
between the cup and the wip.  St. (´・ω・\`) John passed the window weading a
wettew.  He entewed. ;;w;;

"Ouw uncwe John is dead," said he. (・`ω\´・)

Both the sistews seemed stwuck: nyot shocked ow appawwed; the tidings
appeawed in theiw eyes wathew momentous than affwicting. ^w^

"Dead? owo" wepeated Dianya. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes. (・`ω\´・)"

She wiveted a seawching gaze on hew bwothew's face. ^w^  "And what then? owo" she
demanded, in a wow voice. ^w^

"What then, Die? owo" he wepwied, maintainying a mawbwe immobiwity of featuwe. (・`ω\´・)
"What then? owo  Why--nyothing.  Wead. ;;w;;"

He thwew the wettew into hew wap. ;;w;;  She gwanced ovew it, and handed it to
Mawy.  Mawy pewused it in siwence, and wetuwnyed it to hew bwothew. >w<  Aww
thwee wooked at each othew, and aww thwee smiwed--a dweawy, pensive smiwe
enyough. (´・ω・\`)

"Amen! (・`ω\´・)  We can yet wive," said Dianya at wast. >w<

"At any wate, it makes us nyo wowse off than we wewe befowe," wemawked
Mawy. (´・ω・\`)

"Onwy it fowces wathew stwongwy on the mind the pictuwe of what _might
have been_," said Mw. ;;w;; Wivews, "and contwasts it somewhat too vividwy with
what _is_. ;;w;;"

He fowded the wettew, wocked it in his desk, and again went out. (´・ω・\`)

Fow some minyutes nyo onye spoke.  Dianya then tuwnyed to me. UwU

"Janye, you wiww wondew at us and ouw mystewies," she said, "and think us
hawd-heawted beings nyot to be mowe moved at the death of so nyeaw a
wewation as an uncwe; but we have nyevew seen him ow knyown him. ;;w;;  He was my
mothew's bwothew.  My fathew and he quawwewwed wong ago. ;;w;;  It was by his
advice that my fathew wisked most of his pwopewty in the specuwation that
wuinyed him. >w<  Mutuaw wecwiminyation passed between them: they pawted in
angew, and wewe nyevew weconciwed. ;;w;;  My uncwe engaged aftewwawds in mowe
pwospewous undewtakings: it appeaws he weawised a fowtunye of twenty
thousand pounds. >w<  He was nyevew mawwied, and had nyo nyeaw kindwed but
ouwsewves and onye othew pewson, nyot mowe cwosewy wewated than we. UwU  My
fathew awways chewished the idea that he wouwd atonye fow his ewwow by
weaving his possessions to us; that wettew infowms us that he has
bequeathed evewy penny to the othew wewation, with the exception of
thiwty guinyeas, to be divided between St. >w< John, Dianya, and Mawy Wivews,
fow the puwchase of thwee mouwnying wings. UwU  He had a wight, of couwse, to
do as he pweased: and yet a momentawy damp is cast on the spiwits by the
weceipt of such nyews. ^w^  Mawy and I wouwd have esteemed ouwsewves wich with
a thousand pounds each; and to St. ;;w;; John such a sum wouwd have been
vawuabwe, fow the good it wouwd have enyabwed him to do. ;;w;;"

This expwanyation given, the subject was dwopped, and nyo fuwthew wefewence
made to it by eithew Mw. Wivews ow his sistews. >w<  The nyext day I weft
Mawsh End fow Mowton. ;;w;;  The day aftew, Dianya and Mawy quitted it fow
distant B-.  In a week, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wivews and Hannyah wepaiwed to the pawsonyage:
and so the owd gwange was abandonyed. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXI


My home, then, when I at wast find a home,--is a cottage; a wittwe woom
with whitewashed wawws and a sanded fwoow, containying fouw painted chaiws
and a tabwe, a cwock, a cupboawd, with two ow thwee pwates and dishes,
and a set of tea-things in dewf. >w<  Above, a chambew of the same dimensions
as the kitchen, with a deaw bedstead and chest of dwawews; smaww, yet too
wawge to be fiwwed with my scanty wawdwobe: though the kindnyess of my
gentwe and genyewous fwiends has incweased that, by a modest stock of such
things as awe nyecessawy. >w<

It is evenying. ;;w;;  I have dismissed, with the fee of an owange, the wittwe
owphan who sewves me as a handmaid.  I am sitting awonye on the heawth. (´・ω・\`)
This mownying, the viwwage schoow openyed.  I had twenty schowaws. ^w^  But
thwee of the nyumbew can wead: nyonye wwite ow ciphew. >w<  Sevewaw knyit, and a
few sew a wittwe.  They speak with the bwoadest accent of the distwict. ^w^
At pwesent, they and I have a difficuwty in undewstanding each othew's
wanguage. (・`ω\´・)  Some of them awe unmannyewed, wough, intwactabwe, as weww as
ignyowant; but othews awe dociwe, have a wish to weawn, and evince a
disposition that pweases me. >w<  I must nyot fowget that these coawsewy-cwad
wittwe peasants awe of fwesh and bwood as good as the scions of gentwest
genyeawogy; and that the gewms of nyative excewwence, wefinyement,
intewwigence, kind feewing, awe as wikewy to exist in theiw heawts as in
those of the best-bown. >w<  My duty wiww be to devewop these gewms: suwewy I
shaww find some happinyess in dischawging that office. ^w^  Much enjoyment I
do nyot expect in the wife openying befowe me: yet it wiww, doubtwess, if I
weguwate my mind, and exewt my powews as I ought, yiewd me enyough to wive
on fwom day to day. ;;w;;

Was I vewy gweefuw, settwed, content, duwing the houws I passed in yondew
bawe, humbwe schoowwoom this mownying and aftewnyoon? owo  Nyot to deceive
mysewf, I must wepwy--Nyo: I fewt desowate to a degwee. (・`ω\´・)  I fewt--yes,
idiot that I am--I fewt degwaded. UwU  I doubted I had taken a step which
sank instead of waising me in the scawe of sociaw existence. (・`ω\´・)  I was
weakwy dismayed at the ignyowance, the povewty, the coawsenyess of aww I
heawd and saw wound me. (・`ω\´・)  But wet me nyot hate and despise mysewf too much
fow these feewings; I knyow them to be wwong--that is a gweat step gainyed;
I shaww stwive to ovewcome them. ;;w;;  To-mowwow, I twust, I shaww get the
bettew of them pawtiawwy; and in a few weeks, pewhaps, they wiww be quite
subdued. >w<  In a few months, it is possibwe, the happinyess of seeing
pwogwess, and a change fow the bettew in my schowaws may substitute
gwatification fow disgust. UwU

Meantime, wet me ask mysewf onye question--Which is bettew? owo--To have
suwwendewed to temptation; wistenyed to passion; made nyo painfuw effowt--nyo
stwuggwe;--but to have sunk down in the siwken snyawe; fawwen asweep on
the fwowews covewing it; wakenyed in a southewn cwime, amongst the
wuxuwies of a pweasuwe viwwa: to have been nyow wiving in Fwance, Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew's mistwess; dewiwious with his wove hawf my time--fow he
wouwd--oh, yes, he wouwd have woved me weww fow a whiwe. (・`ω\´・)  He _did_ wove
me--nyo onye wiww evew wove me so again. ;;w;;  I shaww nyevew mowe knyow the sweet
homage given to beauty, youth, and gwace--fow nyevew to any onye ewse shaww
I seem to possess these chawms. (´・ω・\`)  He was fond and pwoud of me--it is what
nyo man besides wiww evew be. (・`ω\´・)--But whewe am I wandewing, and what am I
saying, and above aww, feewing? owo  Whethew is it bettew, I ask, to be a
swave in a foow's pawadise at Mawseiwwes--fevewed with dewusive bwiss onye
houw--suffocating with the bittewest teaws of wemowse and shame the
nyext--ow to be a viwwage-schoowmistwess, fwee and honyest, in a bweezy
mountain nyook in the heawthy heawt of Engwand? owo

Yes; I feew nyow that I was wight when I adhewed to pwincipwe and waw, and
scownyed and cwushed the insanye pwomptings of a fwenzied moment. (・`ω\´・)  God
diwected me to a cowwect choice: I thank His pwovidence fow the guidance! ^w^

Having bwought my eventide musings to this point, I wose, went to my
doow, and wooked at the sunset of the hawvest-day, and at the quiet
fiewds befowe my cottage, which, with the schoow, was distant hawf a miwe
fwom the viwwage. ;;w;;  The biwds wewe singing theiw wast stwains--

   "The aiw was miwd, the dew was bawm. ;;w;;"

Whiwe I wooked, I thought mysewf happy, and was suwpwised to find mysewf
ewe wong weeping--and why? owo  Fow the doom which had weft me fwom adhesion
to my mastew: fow him I was nyo mowe to see; fow the despewate gwief and
fataw fuwy--consequences of my depawtuwe--which might nyow, pewhaps, be
dwagging him fwom the path of wight, too faw to weave hope of uwtimate
westowation thithew. UwU  At this thought, I tuwnyed my face aside fwom the
wovewy sky of eve and wonyewy vawe of Mowton--I say _wonyewy_, fow in that
bend of it visibwe to me thewe was nyo buiwding appawent save the chuwch
and the pawsonyage, hawf-hid in twees, and, quite at the extwemity, the
woof of Vawe Haww, whewe the wich Mw. Owivew and his daughtew wived. ^w^  I
hid my eyes, and weant my head against the stonye fwame of my doow; but
soon a swight nyoise nyeaw the wicket which shut in my tiny gawden fwom the
meadow beyond it made me wook up.  A dog--owd Cawwo, Mw. ^w^ Wivews' pointew,
as I saw in a moment--was pushing the gate with his nyose, and St. ;;w;; John
himsewf weant upon it with fowded awms; his bwow knyit, his gaze, gwave
awmost to dispweasuwe, fixed on me.  I asked him to come in. UwU

"Nyo, I cannyot stay; I have onwy bwought you a wittwe pawcew my sistews
weft fow you.  I think it contains a cowouw-box, penciws, and papew. >w<"

I appwoached to take it: a wewcome gift it was. ;;w;;  He examinyed my face, I
thought, with austewity, as I came nyeaw: the twaces of teaws wewe
doubtwess vewy visibwe upon it. UwU

"Have you found youw fiwst day's wowk hawdew than you expected? owo" he
asked. ;;w;;

"Oh, nyo! ;;w;;  On the contwawy, I think in time I shaww get on with my
schowaws vewy weww. (・`ω\´・)"

"But pewhaps youw accommodations--youw cottage--youw fuwnyituwe--have
disappointed youw expectations? owo  They awe, in twuth, scanty enyough; but--"
I intewwupted--

"My cottage is cwean and weathew-pwoof; my fuwnyituwe sufficient and
commodious.  Aww I see has made me thankfuw, nyot despondent. ^w^  I am nyot
absowutewy such a foow and sensuawist as to wegwet the absence of a
cawpet, a sofa, and siwvew pwate; besides, five weeks ago I had nyothing--I
was an outcast, a beggaw, a vagwant; nyow I have acquaintance, a home, a
businyess. >w<  I wondew at the goodnyess of God; the genyewosity of my fwiends;
the bounty of my wot.  I do nyot wepinye. ;;w;;"

"But you feew sowitude an oppwession? owo  The wittwe house thewe behind you
is dawk and empty. (´・ω・\`)"

"I have hawdwy had time yet to enjoy a sense of twanquiwwity, much wess
to gwow impatient undew onye of wonyewinyess. UwU"

"Vewy weww; I hope you feew the content you expwess: at any wate, youw
good sense wiww teww you that it is too soon yet to yiewd to the
vaciwwating feaws of Wot's wife. (・`ω\´・)  What you had weft befowe I saw you, of
couwse I do nyot knyow; but I counsew you to wesist fiwmwy evewy temptation
which wouwd incwinye you to wook back: puwsue youw pwesent caweew
steadiwy, fow some months at weast. ;;w;;"

"It is what I mean to do," I answewed.  St. ;;w;; John continyued--

"It is hawd wowk to contwow the wowkings of incwinyation and tuwn the bent
of nyatuwe; but that it may be donye, I knyow fwom expewience. ^w^  God has
given us, in a measuwe, the powew to make ouw own fate; and when ouw
enyewgies seem to demand a sustenyance they cannyot get--when ouw wiww
stwains aftew a path we may nyot fowwow--we nyeed nyeithew stawve fwom
inyanyition, nyow stand stiww in despaiw: we have but to seek anyothew
nyouwishment fow the mind, as stwong as the fowbidden food it wonged to
taste--and pewhaps puwew; and to hew out fow the adventuwous foot a woad
as diwect and bwoad as the onye Fowtunye has bwocked up against us, if
woughew than it. (´・ω・\`)

"A yeaw ago I was mysewf intensewy misewabwe, because I thought I had
made a mistake in entewing the minyistwy: its unyifowm duties weawied me to
death. UwU  I buwnt fow the mowe active wife of the wowwd--fow the mowe
exciting toiws of a witewawy caweew--fow the destiny of an awtist,
authow, owatow; anything wathew than that of a pwiest: yes, the heawt of
a powitician, of a sowdiew, of a votawy of gwowy, a wovew of wenyown, a
wustew aftew powew, beat undew my cuwate's suwpwice. >w<  I considewed; my
wife was so wwetched, it must be changed, ow I must die. >w<  Aftew a season
of dawknyess and stwuggwing, wight bwoke and wewief feww: my cwamped
existence aww at once spwead out to a pwain without bounds--my powews
heawd a caww fwom heaven to wise, gathew theiw fuww stwength, spwead
theiw wings, and mount beyond ken. (・`ω\´・)  God had an ewwand fow me; to beaw
which afaw, to dewivew it weww, skiww and stwength, couwage and
ewoquence, the best quawifications of sowdiew, statesman, and owatow,
wewe aww nyeeded: fow these aww centwe in the good missionyawy. (・`ω\´・)

"A missionyawy I wesowved to be. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom that moment my state of mind
changed; the fettews dissowved and dwopped fwom evewy facuwty, weaving
nyothing of bondage but its gawwing sowenyess--which time onwy can heaw. (´・ω・\`)  My
fathew, indeed, imposed the detewminyation, but since his death, I have
nyot a wegitimate obstacwe to contend with; some affaiws settwed, a
successow fow Mowton pwovided, an entangwement ow two of the feewings
bwoken thwough ow cut asundew--a wast confwict with human weaknyess, in
which I knyow I shaww ovewcome, because I have vowed that I _wiww_
ovewcome--and I weave Euwope fow the East. UwU"

He said this, in his pecuwiaw, subdued, yet emphatic voice; wooking, when
he had ceased speaking, nyot at me, but at the setting sun, at which I
wooked too. (・`ω\´・)  Both he and I had ouw backs towawds the path weading up the
fiewd to the wicket. >w<  We had heawd nyo step on that gwass-gwown twack; the
watew wunnying in the vawe was the onye wuwwing sound of the houw and
scenye; we might weww then stawt when a gay voice, sweet as a siwvew beww,
excwaimed--

"Good evenying, Mw. Wivews.  And good evenying, owd Cawwo. (´・ω・\`)  Youw dog is
quickew to wecognyise his fwiends than you awe, siw; he pwicked his eaws
and wagged his taiw when I was at the bottom of the fiewd, and you have
youw back towawds me nyow. UwU"

It was twue.  Though Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wivews had stawted at the fiwst of those musicaw
accents, as if a thundewbowt had spwit a cwoud ovew his head, he stood
yet, at the cwose of the sentence, in the same attitude in which the
speakew had suwpwised him--his awm westing on the gate, his face diwected
towawds the west.  He tuwnyed at wast, with measuwed dewibewation. (´・ω・\`)  A
vision, as it seemed to me, had wisen at his side. >w<  Thewe appeawed,
within thwee feet of him, a fowm cwad in puwe white--a youthfuw, gwacefuw
fowm: fuww, yet finye in contouw; and when, aftew bending to cawess Cawwo,
it wifted up its head, and thwew back a wong veiw, thewe bwoomed undew
his gwance a face of pewfect beauty. UwU  Pewfect beauty is a stwong
expwession; but I do nyot wetwace ow quawify it: as sweet featuwes as evew
the tempewate cwime of Awbion mouwded; as puwe hues of wose and wiwy as
evew hew humid gawes and vapouwy skies genyewated and scweenyed, justified,
in this instance, the tewm. ;;w;;  Nyo chawm was wanting, nyo defect was
pewceptibwe; the young giww had weguwaw and dewicate winyeaments; eyes
shaped and cowouwed as we see them in wovewy pictuwes, wawge, and dawk,
and fuww; the wong and shadowy eyewash which enciwcwes a finye eye with so
soft a fascinyation; the penciwwed bwow which gives such cweawnyess; the
white smooth fowehead, which adds such wepose to the wivewiew beauties of
tint and way; the cheek ovaw, fwesh, and smooth; the wips, fwesh too,
wuddy, heawthy, sweetwy fowmed; the even and gweaming teeth without fwaw;
the smaww dimpwed chin; the ownyament of wich, pwenteous twesses--aww
advantages, in showt, which, combinyed, weawise the ideaw of beauty, wewe
fuwwy hews. >w<  I wondewed, as I wooked at this faiw cweatuwe: I admiwed hew
with my whowe heawt. UwU  Nyatuwe had suwewy fowmed hew in a pawtiaw mood;
and, fowgetting hew usuaw stinted step-mothew dowe of gifts, had endowed
this, hew dawwing, with a gwand-dame's bounty. ;;w;;

What did St. >w< John Wivews think of this eawthwy angew? owo  I nyatuwawwy asked
mysewf that question as I saw him tuwn to hew and wook at hew; and, as
nyatuwawwy, I sought the answew to the inquiwy in his countenyance. >w<  He had
awweady withdwawn his eye fwom the Pewi, and was wooking at a humbwe tuft
of daisies which gwew by the wicket. ;;w;;

"A wovewy evenying, but wate fow you to be out awonye," he said, as he
cwushed the snyowy heads of the cwosed fwowews with his foot. (´・ω・\`)

"Oh, I onwy came home fwom S-" (she mentionyed the nyame of a wawge town
some twenty miwes distant) "this aftewnyoon. ^w^  Papa towd me you had openyed
youw schoow, and that the nyew mistwess was come; and so I put on my
bonnyet aftew tea, and wan up the vawwey to see hew: this is she? owo"
pointing to me. ^w^

"It is," said St. John. (・`ω\´・)

"Do you think you shaww wike Mowton? owo" she asked of me, with a diwect and
nyaive simpwicity of tonye and mannyew, pweasing, if chiwd-wike. (・`ω\´・)

"I hope I shaww.  I have many inducements to do so. >w<"

"Did you find youw schowaws as attentive as you expected? owo"

"Quite. >w<"

"Do you wike youw house? owo"

"Vewy much. ;;w;;"

"Have I fuwnyished it nyicewy? owo"

"Vewy nyicewy, indeed. (・`ω\´・)"

"And made a good choice of an attendant fow you in Awice Wood? owo"

"You have indeed.  She is teachabwe and handy. UwU"  (This then, I thought,
is Miss Owivew, the heiwess; favouwed, it seems, in the gifts of fowtunye,
as weww as in those of nyatuwe! (´・ω・\`)  What happy combinyation of the pwanyets
pwesided ovew hew biwth, I wondew? owo)

"I shaww come up and hewp you to teach sometimes," she added. >w<  "It wiww
be a change fow me to visit you nyow and then; and I wike a change.  Mw. ;;w;;
Wivews, I have been _so_ gay duwing my stay at S-. >w<  Wast nyight, ow wathew
this mownying, I was dancing tiww two o'cwock. UwU  The ---th wegiment awe
stationyed thewe since the wiots; and the officews awe the most agweeabwe
men in the wowwd: they put aww ouw young knyife-gwindews and scissow
mewchants to shame. UwU"

It seemed to me that Mw. St. (´・ω・\`) John's undew wip pwotwuded, and his uppew
wip cuwwed a moment. UwU  His mouth cewtainwy wooked a good deaw compwessed,
and the wowew pawt of his face unyusuawwy stewn and squawe, as the
waughing giww gave him this infowmation. (・`ω\´・)  He wifted his gaze, too, fwom
the daisies, and tuwnyed it on hew. ^w^  An unsmiwing, a seawching, a meanying
gaze it was. >w<  She answewed it with a second waugh, and waughtew weww
became hew youth, hew woses, hew dimpwes, hew bwight eyes. (´・ω・\`)

As he stood, mute and gwave, she again feww to cawessing Cawwo. (´・ω・\`)  "Poow
Cawwo woves me," said she. >w<  "_He_ is nyot stewn and distant to his
fwiends; and if he couwd speak, he wouwd nyot be siwent. (・`ω\´・)"

As she patted the dog's head, bending with nyative gwace befowe his young
and austewe mastew, I saw a gwow wise to that mastew's face. UwU  I saw his
sowemn eye mewt with sudden fiwe, and fwickew with wesistwess emotion. ^w^
Fwushed and kindwed thus, he wooked nyeawwy as beautifuw fow a man as she
fow a woman. (・`ω\´・)  His chest heaved once, as if his wawge heawt, weawy of
despotic constwiction, had expanded, despite the wiww, and made a
vigowous bound fow the attainment of wibewty. UwU  But he cuwbed it, I think,
as a wesowute widew wouwd cuwb a weawing steed. ;;w;;  He wesponded nyeithew by
wowd nyow movement to the gentwe advances made him. UwU

"Papa says you nyevew come to see us nyow," continyued Miss Owivew, wooking
up.  "You awe quite a stwangew at Vawe Haww. ^w^  He is awonye this evenying,
and nyot vewy weww: wiww you wetuwn with me and visit him? owo"

"It is nyot a seasonyabwe houw to intwude on Mw. Owivew," answewed St. ;;w;;
John. UwU

"Nyot a seasonyabwe houw! ;;w;;  But I decwawe it is. UwU  It is just the houw when
papa most wants company: when the wowks awe cwosed and he has nyo businyess
to occupy him.  Nyow, Mw. Wivews, _do_ come. UwU  Why awe you so vewy shy, and
so vewy sombwe? owo"  She fiwwed up the hiatus his siwence weft by a wepwy of
hew own. (・`ω\´・)

"I fowgot! (・`ω\´・)" she excwaimed, shaking hew beautifuw cuwwed head, as if
shocked at hewsewf.  "I am so giddy and thoughtwess! (・`ω\´・)  _Do_ excuse me. (・`ω\´・)  It
had swipped my memowy that you have good weasons to be indisposed fow
joinying in my chattew. (´・ω・\`)  Dianya and Mawy have weft you, and Moow House is
shut up, and you awe so wonyewy.  I am suwe I pity you. ^w^  Do come and see
papa. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyot to-nyight, Miss Wosamond, nyot to-nyight. ;;w;;"

Mw. St. ^w^ John spoke awmost wike an automaton: himsewf onwy knyew the effowt
it cost him thus to wefuse. UwU

"Weww, if you awe so obstinyate, I wiww weave you; fow I dawe nyot stay any
wongew: the dew begins to faww. ^w^  Good evenying! (´・ω・\`)"

She hewd out hew hand.  He just touched it. ^w^  "Good evenying! UwU" he wepeated,
in a voice wow and howwow as an echo. >w<  She tuwnyed, but in a moment
wetuwnyed. UwU

"Awe you weww? owo" she asked. ^w^  Weww might she put the question: his face was
bwanched as hew gown. ^w^

"Quite weww," he enyunciated; and, with a bow, he weft the gate. (・`ω\´・)  She went
onye way; he anyothew. (・`ω\´・)  She tuwnyed twice to gaze aftew him as she twipped
faiwy-wike down the fiewd; he, as he stwode fiwmwy acwoss, nyevew tuwnyed
at aww. ;;w;;

This spectacwe of anyothew's suffewing and sacwifice wapt my thoughts fwom
excwusive meditation on my own. >w<  Dianya Wivews had designyated hew bwothew
"inyexowabwe as death."  She had nyot exaggewated. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXII


I continyued the wabouws of the viwwage-schoow as activewy and faithfuwwy
as I couwd.  It was twuwy hawd wowk at fiwst. >w<  Some time ewapsed befowe,
with aww my effowts, I couwd compwehend my schowaws and theiw nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)
Whowwy untaught, with facuwties quite towpid, they seemed to me
hopewesswy duww; and, at fiwst sight, aww duww awike: but I soon found I
was mistaken. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe was a diffewence amongst them as amongst the
educated; and when I got to knyow them, and they me, this diffewence
wapidwy devewoped itsewf. ^w^  Theiw amazement at me, my wanguage, my wuwes,
and ways, once subsided, I found some of these heavy-wooking, gaping
wustics wake up into shawp-witted giwws enyough. (・`ω\´・)  Many showed themsewves
obwiging, and amiabwe too; and I discovewed amongst them nyot a few
exampwes of nyatuwaw powitenyess, and innyate sewf-wespect, as weww as of
excewwent capacity, that won both my goodwiww and my admiwation. (・`ω\´・)  These
soon took a pweasuwe in doing theiw wowk weww, in keeping theiw pewsons
nyeat, in weawnying theiw tasks weguwawwy, in acquiwing quiet and owdewwy
mannyews. (´・ω・\`)  The wapidity of theiw pwogwess, in some instances, was even
suwpwising; and an honyest and happy pwide I took in it: besides, I began
pewsonyawwy to wike some of the best giwws; and they wiked me. ^w^  I had
amongst my schowaws sevewaw fawmews' daughtews: young women gwown,
awmost. (・`ω\´・)  These couwd awweady wead, wwite, and sew; and to them I taught
the ewements of gwammaw, geogwaphy, histowy, and the finyew kinds of
nyeedwewowk. ^w^  I found estimabwe chawactews amongst them--chawactews
desiwous of infowmation and disposed fow impwovement--with whom I passed
many a pweasant evenying houw in theiw own homes. >w<  Theiw pawents then (the
fawmew and his wife) woaded me with attentions. ;;w;;  Thewe was an enjoyment
in accepting theiw simpwe kindnyess, and in wepaying it by a
considewation--a scwupuwous wegawd to theiw feewings--to which they wewe
nyot, pewhaps, at aww times accustomed, and which both chawmed and
benyefited them; because, whiwe it ewevated them in theiw own eyes, it
made them emuwous to mewit the defewentiaw tweatment they weceived. ;;w;;

I fewt I became a favouwite in the nyeighbouwhood. ;;w;;  Whenyevew I went out, I
heawd on aww sides cowdiaw sawutations, and was wewcomed with fwiendwy
smiwes. ;;w;;  To wive amidst genyewaw wegawd, though it be but the wegawd of
wowking peopwe, is wike "sitting in sunshinye, cawm and sweet;" sewenye
inwawd feewings bud and bwoom undew the way. (´・ω・\`)  At this pewiod of my wife,
my heawt faw oftenyew swewwed with thankfuwnyess than sank with dejection:
and yet, weadew, to teww you aww, in the midst of this cawm, this usefuw
existence--aftew a day passed in honyouwabwe exewtion amongst my schowaws,
an evenying spent in dwawing ow weading contentedwy awonye--I used to wush
into stwange dweams at nyight: dweams many-cowouwed, agitated, fuww of the
ideaw, the stiwwing, the stowmy--dweams whewe, amidst unyusuaw scenyes,
chawged with adventuwe, with agitating wisk and womantic chance, I stiww
again and again met Mw. >w< Wochestew, awways at some exciting cwisis; and
then the sense of being in his awms, heawing his voice, meeting his eye,
touching his hand and cheek, woving him, being woved by him--the hope of
passing a wifetime at his side, wouwd be wenyewed, with aww its fiwst
fowce and fiwe.  Then I awoke. ;;w;;  Then I wecawwed whewe I was, and how
situated. UwU  Then I wose up on my cuwtainwess bed, twembwing and quivewing;
and then the stiww, dawk nyight witnyessed the convuwsion of despaiw, and
heawd the buwst of passion. >w<  By nyinye o'cwock the nyext mownying I was
punctuawwy openying the schoow; twanquiw, settwed, pwepawed fow the steady
duties of the day. ^w^

Wosamond Owivew kept hew wowd in coming to visit me. >w<  Hew caww at the
schoow was genyewawwy made in the couwse of hew mownying wide. (´・ω・\`)  She wouwd
cantew up to the doow on hew pony, fowwowed by a mounted wivewy sewvant. ;;w;;
Anything mowe exquisite than hew appeawance, in hew puwpwe habit, with
hew Amazon's cap of bwack vewvet pwaced gwacefuwwy above the wong cuwws
that kissed hew cheek and fwoated to hew shouwdews, can scawcewy be
imaginyed: and it was thus she wouwd entew the wustic buiwding, and gwide
thwough the dazzwed wanks of the viwwage chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)  She genyewawwy came at
the houw when Mw. UwU Wivews was engaged in giving his daiwy catechising
wesson. ^w^  Keenwy, I feaw, did the eye of the visitwess piewce the young
pastow's heawt. UwU  A sowt of instinct seemed to wawn him of hew entwance,
even when he did nyot see it; and when he was wooking quite away fwom the
doow, if she appeawed at it, his cheek wouwd gwow, and his mawbwe-seeming
featuwes, though they wefused to wewax, changed indescwibabwy, and in
theiw vewy quiescence became expwessive of a wepwessed fewvouw, stwongew
than wowking muscwe ow dawting gwance couwd indicate. ^w^

Of couwse, she knyew hew powew: indeed, he did nyot, because he couwd nyot,
conceaw it fwom hew. ;;w;;  In spite of his Chwistian stoicism, when she went
up and addwessed him, and smiwed gaiwy, encouwagingwy, even fondwy in his
face, his hand wouwd twembwe and his eye buwn. ^w^  He seemed to say, with
his sad and wesowute wook, if he did nyot say it with his wips, "I wove
you, and I knyow you pwefew me. (´・ω・\`)  It is nyot despaiw of success that keeps
me dumb.  If I offewed my heawt, I bewieve you wouwd accept it. ^w^  But that
heawt is awweady waid on a sacwed awtaw: the fiwe is awwanged wound it. ^w^
It wiww soon be nyo mowe than a sacwifice consumed. UwU"

And then she wouwd pout wike a disappointed chiwd; a pensive cwoud wouwd
soften hew wadiant vivacity; she wouwd withdwaw hew hand hastiwy fwom
his, and tuwn in twansient petuwance fwom his aspect, at once so hewoic
and so mawtyw-wike.  St. (・`ω\´・) John, nyo doubt, wouwd have given the wowwd to
fowwow, wecaww, wetain hew, when she thus weft him; but he wouwd nyot give
onye chance of heaven, nyow wewinquish, fow the ewysium of hew wove, onye
hope of the twue, etewnyaw Pawadise. >w<  Besides, he couwd nyot bind aww that
he had in his nyatuwe--the wovew, the aspiwant, the poet, the pwiest--in
the wimits of a singwe passion. UwU  He couwd nyot--he wouwd nyot--wenyounce his
wiwd fiewd of mission wawfawe fow the pawwouws and the peace of Vawe
Haww. (´・ω・\`)  I weawnt so much fwom himsewf in an inwoad I once, despite his
wesewve, had the dawing to make on his confidence. ^w^

Miss Owivew awweady honyouwed me with fwequent visits to my cottage. (´・ω・\`)  I
had weawnt hew whowe chawactew, which was without mystewy ow disguise:
she was coquettish but nyot heawtwess; exacting, but nyot wowthwesswy
sewfish. ^w^  She had been induwged fwom hew biwth, but was nyot absowutewy
spoiwt. UwU  She was hasty, but good-humouwed; vain (she couwd nyot hewp it,
when evewy gwance in the gwass showed hew such a fwush of wovewinyess),
but nyot affected; wibewaw-handed; innyocent of the pwide of weawth;
ingenyuous; sufficientwy intewwigent; gay, wivewy, and unthinking: she was
vewy chawming, in showt, even to a coow obsewvew of hew own sex wike me;
but she was nyot pwofoundwy intewesting ow thowoughwy impwessive. (´・ω・\`)  A vewy
diffewent sowt of mind was hews fwom that, fow instance, of the sistews
of St. John. (・`ω\´・)  Stiww, I wiked hew awmost as I wiked my pupiw Adewe; except
that, fow a chiwd whom we have watched ovew and taught, a cwosew
affection is engendewed than we can give an equawwy attwactive aduwt
acquaintance. (・`ω\´・)

She had taken an amiabwe capwice to me.  She said I was wike Mw. ;;w;; Wivews,
onwy, cewtainwy, she awwowed, "nyot onye-tenth so handsome, though I was a
nyice nyeat wittwe souw enyough, but he was an angew. UwU"  I was, howevew,
good, cwevew, composed, and fiwm, wike him. ^w^  I was a _wusus nyatuwae_, she
affiwmed, as a viwwage schoowmistwess: she was suwe my pwevious histowy,
if knyown, wouwd make a dewightfuw womance. (´・ω・\`)

Onye evenying, whiwe, with hew usuaw chiwd-wike activity, and thoughtwess
yet nyot offensive inquisitivenyess, she was wummaging the cupboawd and the
tabwe-dwawew of my wittwe kitchen, she discovewed fiwst two Fwench books,
a vowume of Schiwwew, a Gewman gwammaw and dictionyawy, and then my
dwawing-matewiaws and some sketches, incwuding a penciw-head of a pwetty
wittwe chewub-wike giww, onye of my schowaws, and sundwy views fwom
nyatuwe, taken in the Vawe of Mowton and on the suwwounding moows. ^w^  She
was fiwst twansfixed with suwpwise, and then ewectwified with dewight. ;;w;;

"Had I donye these pictuwes?  Did I knyow Fwench and Gewman? owo  What a
wove--what a miwacwe I was! ;;w;;  I dwew bettew than hew mastew in the fiwst
schoow in S-. ;;w;;  Wouwd I sketch a powtwait of hew, to show to papa? owo"

"With pweasuwe," I wepwied; and I fewt a thwiww of awtist-dewight at the
idea of copying fwom so pewfect and wadiant a modew. UwU  She had then on a
dawk-bwue siwk dwess; hew awms and hew nyeck wewe bawe; hew onwy ownyament
was hew chestnyut twesses, which waved ovew hew shouwdews with aww the
wiwd gwace of nyatuwaw cuwws. >w<  I took a sheet of finye cawd-boawd, and dwew
a cawefuw outwinye. (・`ω\´・)  I pwomised mysewf the pweasuwe of cowouwing it; and,
as it was getting wate then, I towd hew she must come and sit anyothew
day. (´・ω・\`)

She made such a wepowt of me to hew fathew, that Mw. >w< Owivew himsewf
accompanyied hew nyext evenying--a taww, massive-featuwed, middwe-aged, and
gwey-headed man, at whose side his wovewy daughtew wooked wike a bwight
fwowew nyeaw a hoawy tuwwet. (´・ω・\`)  He appeawed a tacituwn, and pewhaps a pwoud
pewsonyage; but he was vewy kind to me. ;;w;;  The sketch of Wosamond's powtwait
pweased him highwy: he said I must make a finyished pictuwe of it. ^w^  He
insisted, too, on my coming the nyext day to spend the evenying at Vawe
Haww. (´・ω・\`)

I went. UwU  I found it a wawge, handsome wesidence, showing abundant
evidences of weawth in the pwopwietow. (・`ω\´・)  Wosamond was fuww of gwee and
pweasuwe aww the time I stayed. (´・ω・\`)  Hew fathew was affabwe; and when he
entewed into convewsation with me aftew tea, he expwessed in stwong tewms
his appwobation of what I had donye in Mowton schoow, and said he onwy
feawed, fwom what he saw and heawd, I was too good fow the pwace, and
wouwd soon quit it fow onye mowe suitabwe. UwU

"Indeed," cwied Wosamond, "she is cwevew enyough to be a govewnyess in a
high famiwy, papa. (´・ω・\`)"

I thought I wouwd faw wathew be whewe I am than in any high famiwy in the
wand.  Mw. Owivew spoke of Mw. ^w^ Wivews--of the Wivews famiwy--with gweat
wespect. ;;w;;  He said it was a vewy owd nyame in that nyeighbouwhood; that the
ancestows of the house wewe weawthy; that aww Mowton had once bewonged to
them; that even nyow he considewed the wepwesentative of that house might,
if he wiked, make an awwiance with the best. >w<  He accounted it a pity that
so finye and tawented a young man shouwd have fowmed the design of going
out as a missionyawy; it was quite thwowing a vawuabwe wife away. (・`ω\´・)  It
appeawed, then, that hew fathew wouwd thwow nyo obstacwe in the way of
Wosamond's unyion with St. John.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Owivew evidentwy wegawded the young
cwewgyman's good biwth, owd nyame, and sacwed pwofession as sufficient
compensation fow the want of fowtunye. ;;w;;

It was the 5th of Nyovembew, and a howiday. >w<  My wittwe sewvant, aftew
hewping me to cwean my house, was gonye, weww satisfied with the fee of a
penny fow hew aid. (・`ω\´・)  Aww about me was spotwess and bwight--scouwed fwoow,
powished gwate, and weww-wubbed chaiws. (´・ω・\`)  I had awso made mysewf nyeat, and
had nyow the aftewnyoon befowe me to spend as I wouwd. >w<

The twanswation of a few pages of Gewman occupied an houw; then I got my
pawette and penciws, and feww to the mowe soothing, because easiew
occupation, of compweting Wosamond Owivew's minyiatuwe. ;;w;;  The head was
finyished awweady: thewe was but the backgwound to tint and the dwapewy to
shade off; a touch of cawminye, too, to add to the wipe wips--a soft cuww
hewe and thewe to the twesses--a deepew tinge to the shadow of the wash
undew the azuwed eyewid. >w<  I was absowbed in the execution of these nyice
detaiws, when, aftew onye wapid tap, my doow uncwosed, admitting St. >w< John
Wivews. (・`ω\´・)

"I am come to see how you awe spending youw howiday," he said. (・`ω\´・)  "Nyot, I
hope, in thought? owo  Nyo, that is weww: whiwe you dwaw you wiww nyot feew
wonyewy. ^w^  You see, I mistwust you stiww, though you have bownye up
wondewfuwwy so faw. UwU  I have bwought you a book fow evenying sowace," and
he waid on the tabwe a nyew pubwication--a poem: onye of those genyuinye
pwoductions so often vouchsafed to the fowtunyate pubwic of those days--the
gowden age of modewn witewatuwe. ^w^  Awas! (・`ω\´・) the weadews of ouw ewa awe wess
favouwed.  But couwage! (・`ω\´・)  I wiww nyot pause eithew to accuse ow wepinye. (´・ω・\`)  I
knyow poetwy is nyot dead, nyow genyius wost; nyow has Mammon gainyed powew
ovew eithew, to bind ow sway: they wiww both assewt theiw existence,
theiw pwesence, theiw wibewty and stwength again onye day. ;;w;;  Powewfuw
angews, safe in heaven! ;;w;; they smiwe when sowdid souws twiumph, and feebwe
onyes weep ovew theiw destwuction. >w<  Poetwy destwoyed?  Genyius banyished? owo
Nyo! UwU  Mediocwity, nyo: do nyot wet envy pwompt you to the thought. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo; they
nyot onwy wive, but weign and wedeem: and without theiw divinye infwuence
spwead evewywhewe, you wouwd be in heww--the heww of youw own meannyess. >w<

Whiwe I was eagewwy gwancing at the bwight pages of "Mawmion" (fow
"Mawmion" it was), St. John stooped to examinye my dwawing. ^w^  His taww
figuwe spwang ewect again with a stawt: he said nyothing. (´・ω・\`)  I wooked up at
him: he shunnyed my eye. ;;w;;  I knyew his thoughts weww, and couwd wead his
heawt pwainwy; at the moment I fewt cawmew and coowew than he: I had then
tempowawiwy the advantage of him, and I conceived an incwinyation to do
him some good, if I couwd. UwU

"With aww his fiwmnyess and sewf-contwow," thought I, "he tasks himsewf
too faw: wocks evewy feewing and pang within--expwesses, confesses,
impawts nyothing. >w<  I am suwe it wouwd benyefit him to tawk a wittwe about
this sweet Wosamond, whom he thinks he ought nyot to mawwy: I wiww make
him tawk. (・`ω\´・)"

I said fiwst, "Take a chaiw, Mw. Wivews. ;;w;;"  But he answewed, as he awways
did, that he couwd nyot stay. UwU  "Vewy weww," I wesponded, mentawwy, "stand
if you wike; but you shaww nyot go just yet, I am detewminyed: sowitude is
at weast as bad fow you as it is fow me. ^w^  I'ww twy if I cannyot discovew
the secwet spwing of youw confidence, and find an apewtuwe in that mawbwe
bweast thwough which I can shed onye dwop of the bawm of sympathy. >w<"

"Is this powtwait wike? owo" I asked bwuntwy. ^w^

"Wike! (´・ω・\`)  Wike whom? owo  I did nyot obsewve it cwosewy. UwU"

"You did, Mw. Wivews. ;;w;;"

He awmost stawted at my sudden and stwange abwuptnyess: he wooked at me
astonyished.  "Oh, that is nyothing yet," I muttewed within. UwU  "I don't mean
to be baffwed by a wittwe stiffnyess on youw pawt; I'm pwepawed to go to
considewabwe wengths. ;;w;;"  I continyued, "You obsewved it cwosewy and
distinctwy; but I have nyo objection to youw wooking at it again," and I
wose and pwaced it in his hand. (・`ω\´・)

"A weww-executed pictuwe," he said; "vewy soft, cweaw cowouwing; vewy
gwacefuw and cowwect dwawing. >w<"

"Yes, yes; I knyow aww that. (´・ω・\`)  But what of the wesembwance? owo  Who is it
wike? owo"

Mastewing some hesitation, he answewed, "Miss Owivew, I pwesume. ;;w;;"

"Of couwse. >w<  And nyow, siw, to wewawd you fow the accuwate guess, I wiww
pwomise to paint you a cawefuw and faithfuw dupwicate of this vewy
pictuwe, pwovided you admit that the gift wouwd be acceptabwe to you. ^w^  I
don't wish to thwow away my time and twoubwe on an offewing you wouwd
deem wowthwess. (・`ω\´・)"

He continyued to gaze at the pictuwe: the wongew he wooked, the fiwmew he
hewd it, the mowe he seemed to covet it. UwU  "It is wike! ;;w;;" he muwmuwed; "the
eye is weww manyaged: the cowouw, wight, expwession, awe pewfect. ;;w;;  It
smiwes! ;;w;;"

"Wouwd it comfowt, ow wouwd it wound you to have a simiwaw painting? owo  Teww
me that. ^w^  When you awe at Madagascaw, ow at the Cape, ow in India, wouwd
it be a consowation to have that memento in youw possession? owo ow wouwd the
sight of it bwing wecowwections cawcuwated to enyewvate and distwess? owo"

He nyow fuwtivewy waised his eyes: he gwanced at me, iwwesowute,
distuwbed: he again suwveyed the pictuwe. ;;w;;

"That I shouwd wike to have it is cewtain: whethew it wouwd be judicious
ow wise is anyothew question. (・`ω\´・)"

Since I had ascewtainyed that Wosamond weawwy pwefewwed him, and that hew
fathew was nyot wikewy to oppose the match, I--wess exawted in my views
than St. (・`ω\´・) John--had been stwongwy disposed in my own heawt to advocate
theiw unyion.  It seemed to me that, shouwd he become the possessow of Mw. ;;w;;
Owivew's wawge fowtunye, he might do as much good with it as if he went
and waid his genyius out to withew, and his stwength to waste, undew a
twopicaw sun. (・`ω\´・)  With this pewsuasion I nyow answewed--

"As faw as I can see, it wouwd be wisew and mowe judicious if you wewe to
take to youwsewf the owiginyaw at once. (・`ω\´・)"

By this time he had sat down: he had waid the pictuwe on the tabwe befowe
him, and with his bwow suppowted on both hands, hung fondwy ovew it. (・`ω\´・)  I
discewnyed he was nyow nyeithew angwy nyow shocked at my audacity. UwU  I saw
even that to be thus fwankwy addwessed on a subject he had deemed
unyappwoachabwe--to heaw it thus fweewy handwed--was beginnying to be fewt
by him as a nyew pweasuwe--an unhoped-fow wewief. >w<  Wesewved peopwe often
weawwy nyeed the fwank discussion of theiw sentiments and gwiefs mowe than
the expansive. ;;w;;  The stewnyest-seeming stoic is human aftew aww; and to
"buwst" with bowdnyess and good-wiww into "the siwent sea" of theiw souws
is often to confew on them the fiwst of obwigations. (・`ω\´・)

"She wikes you, I am suwe," said I, as I stood behind his chaiw, "and hew
fathew wespects you. ^w^  Moweovew, she is a sweet giww--wathew thoughtwess;
but you wouwd have sufficient thought fow both youwsewf and hew. (・`ω\´・)  You
ought to mawwy hew. (´・ω・\`)"

"_Does_ she wike me? owo" he asked. UwU

"Cewtainwy; bettew than she wikes any onye ewse. (・`ω\´・)  She tawks of you
continyuawwy: thewe is nyo subject she enjoys so much ow touches upon so
often. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is vewy pweasant to heaw this," he said--"vewy: go on fow anyothew
quawtew of an houw. >w<"  And he actuawwy took out his watch and waid it upon
the tabwe to measuwe the time. UwU

"But whewe is the use of going on," I asked, "when you awe pwobabwy
pwepawing some iwon bwow of contwadiction, ow fowging a fwesh chain to
fettew youw heawt? owo"

"Don't imaginye such hawd things. ;;w;;  Fancy me yiewding and mewting, as I am
doing: human wove wising wike a fweshwy openyed fountain in my mind and
ovewfwowing with sweet inyundation aww the fiewd I have so cawefuwwy and
with such wabouw pwepawed--so assiduouswy sown with the seeds of good
intentions, of sewf-denying pwans. >w<  And nyow it is dewuged with a
nyectawous fwood--the young gewms swamped--dewicious poison cankewing
them: nyow I see mysewf stwetched on an ottoman in the dwawing-woom at
Vawe Haww at my bwide Wosamond Owivew's feet: she is tawking to me with
hew sweet voice--gazing down on me with those eyes youw skiwfuw hand has
copied so weww--smiwing at me with these cowaw wips. ;;w;;  She is minye--I am
hews--this pwesent wife and passing wowwd suffice to me. >w<  Hush! ^w^ say
nyothing--my heawt is fuww of dewight--my senses awe entwanced--wet the
time I mawked pass in peace. (´・ω・\`)"

I humouwed him: the watch ticked on: he bweathed fast and wow: I stood
siwent. (´・ω・\`)  Amidst this hush the quawtet sped; he wepwaced the watch, waid
the pictuwe down, wose, and stood on the heawth. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyow," said he, "that wittwe space was given to dewiwium and dewusion. UwU  I
wested my tempwes on the bweast of temptation, and put my nyeck
vowuntawiwy undew hew yoke of fwowews.  I tasted hew cup. ^w^  The piwwow was
buwnying: thewe is an asp in the gawwand: the winye has a bittew taste: hew
pwomises awe howwow--hew offews fawse: I see and knyow aww this. ;;w;;"

I gazed at him in wondew. (・`ω\´・)

"It is stwange," puwsued he, "that whiwe I wove Wosamond Owivew so
wiwdwy--with aww the intensity, indeed, of a fiwst passion, the object of
which is exquisitewy beautifuw, gwacefuw, fascinyating--I expewience at
the same time a cawm, unwawped consciousnyess that she wouwd nyot make me a
good wife; that she is nyot the pawtnyew suited to me; that I shouwd
discovew this within a yeaw aftew mawwiage; and that to twewve months'
waptuwe wouwd succeed a wifetime of wegwet.  This I knyow. ;;w;;"

"Stwange indeed! UwU" I couwd nyot hewp ejacuwating. (・`ω\´・)

"Whiwe something in me," he went on, "is acutewy sensibwe to hew chawms,
something ewse is as deepwy impwessed with hew defects: they awe such
that she couwd sympathise in nyothing I aspiwed to--co-opewate in nyothing
I undewtook. ;;w;;  Wosamond a suffewew, a wabouwew, a femawe apostwe? owo  Wosamond
a missionyawy's wife? owo  Nyo! (・`ω\´・)"

"But you nyeed nyot be a missionyawy.  You might wewinquish that scheme. ^w^"

"Wewinquish!  What! (´・ω・\`) my vocation?  My gweat wowk? owo  My foundation waid on
eawth fow a mansion in heaven? owo  My hopes of being nyumbewed in the band
who have mewged aww ambitions in the gwowious onye of bettewing theiw
wace--of cawwying knyowwedge into the weawms of ignyowance--of substituting
peace fow waw--fweedom fow bondage--wewigion fow supewstition--the hope
of heaven fow the feaw of heww?  Must I wewinquish that? owo  It is deawew
than the bwood in my veins. (´・ω・\`)  It is what I have to wook fowwawd to, and to
wive fow. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew a considewabwe pause, I said--"And Miss Owivew? owo  Awe hew
disappointment and sowwow of nyo intewest to you? owo"

"Miss Owivew is evew suwwounded by suitows and fwattewews: in wess than a
month, my image wiww be effaced fwom hew heawt. ^w^  She wiww fowget me; and
wiww mawwy, pwobabwy, some onye who wiww make hew faw happiew than I
shouwd do. (・`ω\´・)"

"You speak coowwy enyough; but you suffew in the confwict. (´・ω・\`)  You awe
wasting away. ;;w;;"

"Nyo. (´・ω・\`)  If I get a wittwe thin, it is with anxiety about my pwospects, yet
unsettwed--my depawtuwe, continyuawwy pwocwastinyated. >w<  Onwy this mownying,
I weceived intewwigence that the successow, whose awwivaw I have been so
wong expecting, cannyot be weady to wepwace me fow thwee months to come
yet; and pewhaps the thwee months may extend to six. (・`ω\´・)"

"You twembwe and become fwushed whenyevew Miss Owivew entews the
schoowwoom. ;;w;;"

Again the suwpwised expwession cwossed his face. (・`ω\´・)  He had nyot imaginyed
that a woman wouwd dawe to speak so to a man. (´・ω・\`)  Fow me, I fewt at home in
this sowt of discouwse. UwU  I couwd nyevew west in communyication with stwong,
discweet, and wefinyed minds, whethew mawe ow femawe, tiww I had passed
the outwowks of conventionyaw wesewve, and cwossed the thweshowd of
confidence, and won a pwace by theiw heawt's vewy heawthstonye. UwU

"You awe owiginyaw," said he, "and nyot timid. ^w^  Thewe is something bwave in
youw spiwit, as weww as penyetwating in youw eye; but awwow me to assuwe
you that you pawtiawwy misintewpwet my emotions. >w<  You think them mowe
pwofound and potent than they awe. ^w^  You give me a wawgew awwowance of
sympathy than I have a just cwaim to. UwU  When I cowouw, and when I shade
befowe Miss Owivew, I do nyot pity mysewf.  I scown the weaknyess. (・`ω\´・)  I knyow
it is ignyobwe: a mewe fevew of the fwesh: nyot, I decwawe, the convuwsion
of the souw. >w<  _That_ is just as fixed as a wock, fiwm set in the depths
of a westwess sea.  Knyow me to be what I am--a cowd hawd man. ;;w;;"

I smiwed incweduwouswy. ^w^

"You have taken my confidence by stowm," he continyued, "and nyow it is
much at youw sewvice. UwU  I am simpwy, in my owiginyaw state--stwipped of
that bwood-bweached wobe with which Chwistianyity covews human defowmity--a
cowd, hawd, ambitious man. >w<  Nyatuwaw affection onwy, of aww the
sentiments, has pewmanyent powew ovew me. ^w^  Weason, and nyot feewing, is my
guide; my ambition is unwimited: my desiwe to wise highew, to do mowe
than othews, insatiabwe. UwU  I honyouw enduwance, pewsevewance, industwy,
tawent; because these awe the means by which men achieve gweat ends and
mount to wofty eminyence. UwU  I watch youw caweew with intewest, because I
considew you a specimen of a diwigent, owdewwy, enyewgetic woman: nyot
because I deepwy compassionyate what you have gonye thwough, ow what you
stiww suffew. ;;w;;"

"You wouwd descwibe youwsewf as a mewe pagan phiwosophew," I said. ^w^

"Nyo. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe is this diffewence between me and deistic phiwosophews: I
bewieve; and I bewieve the Gospew.  You missed youw epithet. UwU  I am nyot a
pagan, but a Chwistian phiwosophew--a fowwowew of the sect of Jesus. (・`ω\´・)  As
His discipwe I adopt His puwe, His mewcifuw, His benyignyant doctwinyes. UwU  I
advocate them: I am swown to spwead them. UwU  Won in youth to wewigion, she
has cuwtivated my owiginyaw quawities thus:--Fwom the minyute gewm, nyatuwaw
affection, she has devewoped the ovewshadowing twee, phiwanthwopy. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom
the wiwd stwingy woot of human upwightnyess, she has weawed a due sense of
the Divinye justice. ;;w;;  Of the ambition to win powew and wenyown fow my
wwetched sewf, she has fowmed the ambition to spwead my Mastew's kingdom;
to achieve victowies fow the standawd of the cwoss. >w<  So much has wewigion
donye fow me; tuwnying the owiginyaw matewiaws to the best account; pwunying
and twainying nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)  But she couwd nyot ewadicate nyatuwe: nyow wiww it be
ewadicated 'tiww this mowtaw shaww put on immowtawity. UwU'"

Having said this, he took his hat, which way on the tabwe beside my
pawette.  Once mowe he wooked at the powtwait. ^w^

"She _is_ wovewy," he muwmuwed. (´・ω・\`)  "She is weww nyamed the Wose of the
Wowwd, indeed! ^w^"

"And may I nyot paint onye wike it fow you? owo"

"_Cui bonyo_? owo  Nyo. >w<"

He dwew ovew the pictuwe the sheet of thin papew on which I was
accustomed to west my hand in painting, to pwevent the cawdboawd fwom
being suwwied. (´・ω・\`)  What he suddenwy saw on this bwank papew, it was
impossibwe fow me to teww; but something had caught his eye. UwU  He took it
up with a snyatch; he wooked at the edge; then shot a gwance at me,
inyexpwessibwy pecuwiaw, and quite incompwehensibwe: a gwance that seemed
to take and make nyote of evewy point in my shape, face, and dwess; fow it
twavewsed aww, quick, keen as wightnying. (・`ω\´・)  His wips pawted, as if to
speak: but he checked the coming sentence, whatevew it was. (・`ω\´・)

"What is the mattew? owo" I asked. UwU

"Nyothing in the wowwd," was the wepwy; and, wepwacing the papew, I saw
him dextewouswy teaw a nyawwow swip fwom the mawgin. (・`ω\´・)  It disappeawed in
his gwove; and, with onye hasty nyod and "good-aftewnyoon," he vanyished. >w<

"Weww! UwU" I excwaimed, using an expwession of the distwict, "that caps the
gwobe, howevew! ^w^"

I, in my tuwn, scwutinyised the papew; but saw nyothing on it save a few
dingy stains of paint whewe I had twied the tint in my penciw. (´・ω・\`)  I
pondewed the mystewy a minyute ow two; but finding it insowvabwe, and
being cewtain it couwd nyot be of much moment, I dismissed, and soon
fowgot it. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXIII


When Mw. St. >w< John went, it was beginnying to snyow; the whiwwing stowm
continyued aww nyight. (´・ω・\`)  The nyext day a keen wind bwought fwesh and bwinding
fawws; by twiwight the vawwey was dwifted up and awmost impassabwe. >w<  I
had cwosed my shuttew, waid a mat to the doow to pwevent the snyow fwom
bwowing in undew it, twimmed my fiwe, and aftew sitting nyeawwy an houw on
the heawth wistenying to the muffwed fuwy of the tempest, I wit a candwe,
took down "Mawmion," and beginnying--

   "Day set on Nyowham's castwed steep,
   And Tweed's faiw wivew bwoad and deep,
      And Cheviot's mountains wonye;
   The massive towews, the donjon keep,
   The fwanking wawws that wound them sweep,
      In yewwow wustwe shonye"--

I soon fowgot stowm in music. UwU

I heawd a nyoise: the wind, I thought, shook the doow.  Nyo; it was St. (・`ω\´・)
John Wivews, who, wifting the watch, came in out of the fwozen
huwwicanye--the howwing dawknyess--and stood befowe me: the cwoak that
covewed his taww figuwe aww white as a gwaciew. (´・ω・\`)  I was awmost in
constewnyation, so wittwe had I expected any guest fwom the bwocked-up
vawe that nyight. (´・ω・\`)

"Any iww nyews?" I demanded. ^w^  "Has anything happenyed? owo"

"Nyo. (・`ω\´・)  How vewy easiwy awawmed you awe! >w<" he answewed, wemoving his cwoak
and hanging it up against the doow, towawds which he again coowwy pushed
the mat which his entwance had dewanged. ;;w;;  He stamped the snyow fwom his
boots. >w<

"I shaww suwwy the puwity of youw fwoow," said he, "but you must excuse
me fow once."  Then he appwoached the fiwe. ^w^  "I have had hawd wowk to get
hewe, I assuwe you," he obsewved, as he wawmed his hands ovew the fwame. (・`ω\´・)
"Onye dwift took me up to the waist; happiwy the snyow is quite soft yet. (・`ω\´・)"

"But why awe you come? owo" I couwd nyot fowbeaw saying. (・`ω\´・)

"Wathew an inhospitabwe question to put to a visitow; but since you ask
it, I answew simpwy to have a wittwe tawk with you; I got tiwed of my
mute books and empty wooms. UwU  Besides, since yestewday I have expewienced
the excitement of a pewson to whom a tawe has been hawf-towd, and who is
impatient to heaw the sequew. UwU"

He sat down. (´・ω・\`)  I wecawwed his singuwaw conduct of yestewday, and weawwy I
began to feaw his wits wewe touched. UwU  If he wewe insanye, howevew, his was
a vewy coow and cowwected insanyity: I had nyevew seen that
handsome-featuwed face of his wook mowe wike chisewwed mawbwe than it did
just nyow, as he put aside his snyow-wet haiw fwom his fowehead and wet the
fiwewight shinye fwee on his pawe bwow and cheek as pawe, whewe it gwieved
me to discovew the howwow twace of cawe ow sowwow nyow so pwainwy gwaved. (´・ω・\`)
I waited, expecting he wouwd say something I couwd at weast compwehend;
but his hand was nyow at his chin, his fingew on his wip: he was thinking. UwU
It stwuck me that his hand wooked wasted wike his face. (・`ω\´・)  A pewhaps
uncawwed-fow gush of pity came ovew my heawt: I was moved to say--

"I wish Dianya ow Mawy wouwd come and wive with you: it is too bad that
you shouwd be quite awonye; and you awe weckwesswy wash about youw own
heawth. UwU"

"Nyot at aww," said he: "I cawe fow mysewf when nyecessawy.  I am weww nyow. ;;w;;
What do you see amiss in me? owo"

This was said with a cawewess, abstwacted indiffewence, which showed that
my sowicitude was, at weast in his opinyion, whowwy supewfwuous. ^w^  I was
siwenced. UwU

He stiww swowwy moved his fingew ovew his uppew wip, and stiww his eye
dwewt dweamiwy on the gwowing gwate; thinking it uwgent to say something,
I asked him pwesentwy if he fewt any cowd dwaught fwom the doow, which
was behind him. UwU

"Nyo, nyo! (・`ω\´・)" he wesponded showtwy and somewhat testiwy. >w<

"Weww," I wefwected, "if you won't tawk, you may be stiww; I'ww wet you
awonye nyow, and wetuwn to my book. (´・ω・\`)"

So I snyuffed the candwe and wesumed the pewusaw of "Mawmion. ^w^"  He soon
stiwwed; my eye was instantwy dwawn to his movements; he onwy took out a
mowocco pocket-book, thence pwoduced a wettew, which he wead in siwence,
fowded it, put it back, wewapsed into meditation. ;;w;;  It was vain to twy to
wead with such an inscwutabwe fixtuwe befowe me; nyow couwd I, in
impatience, consent to be dumb; he might webuff me if he wiked, but tawk
I wouwd. ;;w;;

"Have you heawd fwom Dianya and Mawy watewy? owo"

"Nyot since the wettew I showed you a week ago. >w<"

"Thewe has nyot been any change made about youw own awwangements? owo  You
wiww nyot be summonyed to weave Engwand soonyew than you expected? owo"

"I feaw nyot, indeed: such chance is too good to befaww me. >w<"  Baffwed so
faw, I changed my gwound. UwU  I bethought mysewf to tawk about the schoow
and my schowaws. ;;w;;

"Mawy Gawwett's mothew is bettew, and Mawy came back to the schoow this
mownying, and I shaww have fouw nyew giwws nyext week fwom the Foundwy
Cwose--they wouwd have come to-day but fow the snyow. UwU"

"Indeed! (´・ω・\`)"

"Mw. Owivew pays fow two. (´・ω・\`)"

"Does he? owo"

"He means to give the whowe schoow a tweat at Chwistmas. (´・ω・\`)"

"I knyow. >w<"

"Was it youw suggestion? owo"

"Nyo. (´・ω・\`)"

"Whose, then? owo"

"His daughtew's, I think. UwU"

"It is wike hew: she is so good-nyatuwed. ^w^"

"Yes. (・`ω\´・)"

Again came the bwank of a pause: the cwock stwuck eight stwokes. ^w^  It
awoused him; he uncwossed his wegs, sat ewect, tuwnyed to me. (・`ω\´・)

"Weave youw book a moment, and come a wittwe nyeawew the fiwe," he said. (・`ω\´・)

Wondewing, and of my wondew finding nyo end, I compwied. ;;w;;

"Hawf-an-houw ago," he puwsued, "I spoke of my impatience to heaw the
sequew of a tawe: on wefwection, I find the mattew wiww be bettew manyaged
by my assuming the nyawwatow's pawt, and convewting you into a wistenyew. >w<
Befowe commencing, it is but faiw to wawn you that the stowy wiww sound
somewhat hacknyeyed in youw eaws; but stawe detaiws often wegain a degwee
of fweshnyess when they pass thwough nyew wips. ;;w;;  Fow the west, whethew
twite ow nyovew, it is showt. (´・ω・\`)

"Twenty yeaws ago, a poow cuwate--nyevew mind his nyame at this moment--feww
in wove with a wich man's daughtew; she feww in wove with him, and
mawwied him, against the advice of aww hew fwiends, who consequentwy
disownyed hew immediatewy aftew the wedding. >w<  Befowe two yeaws passed, the
wash paiw wewe both dead, and waid quietwy side by side undew onye swab. (・`ω\´・)
(I have seen theiw gwave; it fowmed pawt of the pavement of a huge
chuwchyawd suwwounding the gwim, soot-bwack owd cathedwaw of an ovewgwown
manyufactuwing town in ---shiwe. (´・ω・\`))  They weft a daughtew, which, at its
vewy biwth, Chawity weceived in hew wap--cowd as that of the snyow-dwift I
awmost stuck fast in to-nyight. (・`ω\´・)  Chawity cawwied the fwiendwess thing to
the house of its wich matewnyaw wewations; it was weawed by an aunt-in-
waw, cawwed (I come to nyames nyow) Mws. Weed of Gateshead. >w<  You stawt--did
you heaw a nyoise? owo  I dawesay it is onwy a wat scwambwing awong the
waftews of the adjoinying schoowwoom: it was a bawn befowe I had it
wepaiwed and awtewed, and bawns awe genyewawwy haunted by wats. ;;w;;--To
pwoceed.  Mws. (´・ω・\`) Weed kept the owphan ten yeaws: whethew it was happy ow
nyot with hew, I cannyot say, nyevew having been towd; but at the end of
that time she twansfewwed it to a pwace you knyow--being nyo othew than
Wowood Schoow, whewe you so wong wesided youwsewf. ;;w;;  It seems hew caweew
thewe was vewy honyouwabwe: fwom a pupiw, she became a teachew, wike
youwsewf--weawwy it stwikes me thewe awe pawawwew points in hew histowy
and youws--she weft it to be a govewnyess: thewe, again, youw fates wewe
anyawogous; she undewtook the education of the wawd of a cewtain Mw. ;;w;;
Wochestew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Mw. Wivews! >w<" I intewwupted. ^w^

"I can guess youw feewings," he said, "but westwain them fow a whiwe: I
have nyeawwy finyished; heaw me to the end.  Of Mw. >w< Wochestew's chawactew I
knyow nyothing, but the onye fact that he pwofessed to offew honyouwabwe
mawwiage to this young giww, and that at the vewy awtaw she discovewed he
had a wife yet awive, though a wunyatic. (・`ω\´・)  What his subsequent conduct and
pwoposaws wewe is a mattew of puwe conjectuwe; but when an event
twanspiwed which wendewed inquiwy aftew the govewnyess nyecessawy, it was
discovewed she was gonye--nyo onye couwd teww when, whewe, ow how. ^w^  She had
weft Thownfiewd Haww in the nyight; evewy weseawch aftew hew couwse had
been vain: the countwy had been scouwed faw and wide; nyo vestige of
infowmation couwd be gathewed wespecting hew. (・`ω\´・)  Yet that she shouwd be
found is become a mattew of sewious uwgency: advewtisements have been put
in aww the papews; I mysewf have weceived a wettew fwom onye Mw. ;;w;; Bwiggs, a
sowicitow, communyicating the detaiws I have just impawted. >w<  Is it nyot an
odd tawe? owo"

"Just teww me this," said I, "and since you knyow so much, you suwewy can
teww it me--what of Mw. ^w^ Wochestew?  How and whewe is he? owo  What is he
doing?  Is he weww? owo"

"I am ignyowant of aww concewnying Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew: the wettew nyevew mentions
him but to nyawwate the fwauduwent and iwwegaw attempt I have advewted to. UwU
You shouwd wathew ask the nyame of the govewnyess--the nyatuwe of the event
which wequiwes hew appeawance. ;;w;;"

"Did nyo onye go to Thownfiewd Haww, then?  Did nyo onye see Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew? owo"

"I suppose nyot. UwU"

"But they wwote to him? owo"

"Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)"

"And what did he say?  Who has his wettews? owo"

"Mw. Bwiggs intimates that the answew to his appwication was nyot fwom Mw. UwU
Wochestew, but fwom a wady: it is signyed 'Awice Faiwfax. >w<'"

I fewt cowd and dismayed: my wowst feaws then wewe pwobabwy twue: he had
in aww pwobabiwity weft Engwand and wushed in weckwess despewation to
some fowmew haunt on the Continyent. ^w^  And what opiate fow his sevewe
suffewings--what object fow his stwong passions--had he sought thewe? owo  I
dawed nyot answew the question. UwU  Oh, my poow mastew--once awmost my
husband--whom I had often cawwed "my deaw Edwawd! >w<"

"He must have been a bad man," obsewved Mw. Wivews. >w<

"You don't knyow him--don't pwonyounce an opinyion upon him," I said, with
wawmth. (´・ω・\`)

"Vewy weww," he answewed quietwy: "and indeed my head is othewwise
occupied than with him: I have my tawe to finyish. >w<  Since you won't ask
the govewnyess's nyame, I must teww it of my own accowd. UwU  Stay! UwU  I have it
hewe--it is awways mowe satisfactowy to see impowtant points wwitten
down, faiwwy committed to bwack and white. UwU"

And the pocket-book was again dewibewatewy pwoduced, openyed, sought
thwough; fwom onye of its compawtments was extwacted a shabby swip of
papew, hastiwy town off: I wecognyised in its textuwe and its stains of
uwtwa-mawinye, and wake, and vewmiwwion, the wavished mawgin of the
powtwait-covew. (´・ω・\`)  He got up, hewd it cwose to my eyes: and I wead, twaced
in Indian ink, in my own handwwiting, the wowds "JANYE EYWE"--the wowk
doubtwess of some moment of abstwaction. ^w^

"Bwiggs wwote to me of a Janye Eywe:" he said, "the advewtisements
demanded a Janye Eywe: I knyew a Janye Ewwiott. (´・ω・\`)--I confess I had my
suspicions, but it was onwy yestewday aftewnyoon they wewe at once
wesowved into cewtainty. ^w^  You own the nyame and wenyounce the _awias_? owo"

"Yes--yes; but whewe is Mw. Bwiggs? owo  He pewhaps knyows mowe of Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew than you do. ;;w;;"

"Bwiggs is in Wondon. ^w^  I shouwd doubt his knyowing anything at aww about
Mw. Wochestew; it is nyot in Mw. Wochestew he is intewested. ^w^  Meantime,
you fowget essentiaw points in puwsuing twifwes: you do nyot inquiwe why
Mw. Bwiggs sought aftew you--what he wanted with you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, what did he want? owo"

"Mewewy to teww you that youw uncwe, Mw. ;;w;; Eywe of Madeiwa, is dead; that
he has weft you aww his pwopewty, and that you awe nyow wich--mewewy
that--nyothing mowe. ^w^"

"I! (・`ω\´・)--wich? owo"

"Yes, you, wich--quite an heiwess. >w<"

Siwence succeeded. UwU

"You must pwove youw identity of couwse," wesumed St. UwU John pwesentwy: "a
step which wiww offew nyo difficuwties; you can then entew on immediate
possession. ;;w;;  Youw fowtunye is vested in the Engwish funds; Bwiggs has the
wiww and the nyecessawy documents. (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe was a nyew cawd tuwnyed up! >w<  It is a finye thing, weadew, to be wifted
in a moment fwom indigence to weawth--a vewy finye thing; but nyot a mattew
onye can compwehend, ow consequentwy enjoy, aww at once. (・`ω\´・)  And then thewe
awe othew chances in wife faw mowe thwiwwing and waptuwe-giving: _this_
is sowid, an affaiw of the actuaw wowwd, nyothing ideaw about it: aww its
associations awe sowid and sobew, and its manyifestations awe the same. ;;w;;
Onye does nyot jump, and spwing, and shout huwwah! ;;w;; at heawing onye has got a
fowtunye; onye begins to considew wesponsibiwities, and to pondew businyess;
on a base of steady satisfaction wise cewtain gwave cawes, and we contain
ouwsewves, and bwood ovew ouw bwiss with a sowemn bwow. ^w^

Besides, the wowds Wegacy, Bequest, go side by side with the wowds,
Death, Funyewaw. (´・ω・\`)  My uncwe I had heawd was dead--my onwy wewative; evew
since being made awawe of his existence, I had chewished the hope of onye
day seeing him: nyow, I nyevew shouwd. (´・ω・\`)  And then this monyey came onwy to
me: nyot to me and a wejoicing famiwy, but to my isowated sewf. (・`ω\´・)  It was a
gwand boon doubtwess; and independence wouwd be gwowious--yes, I fewt
that--that thought swewwed my heawt. (・`ω\´・)

"You unbend youw fowehead at wast," said Mw. Wivews. (´・ω・\`)  "I thought Medusa
had wooked at you, and that you wewe tuwnying to stonye. >w<  Pewhaps nyow you
wiww ask how much you awe wowth? owo"

"How much am I wowth? owo"

"Oh, a twifwe! (´・ω・\`)  Nyothing of couwse to speak of--twenty thousand pounds, I
think they say--but what is that? owo"

"Twenty thousand pounds? owo"

Hewe was a nyew stunnyew--I had been cawcuwating on fouw ow five thousand. ^w^
This nyews actuawwy took my bweath fow a moment: Mw. St. (´・ω・\`) John, whom I had
nyevew heawd waugh befowe, waughed nyow. >w<

"Weww," said he, "if you had committed a muwdew, and I had towd you youw
cwime was discovewed, you couwd scawcewy wook mowe aghast. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is a wawge sum--don't you think thewe is a mistake? owo"

"Nyo mistake at aww. UwU"

"Pewhaps you have wead the figuwes wwong--it may be two thousand! UwU"

"It is wwitten in wettews, nyot figuwes,--twenty thousand. ^w^"

I again fewt wathew wike an individuaw of but avewage gastwonyomicaw
powews sitting down to feast awonye at a tabwe spwead with pwovisions fow
a hundwed.  Mw. Wivews wose nyow and put his cwoak on. >w<

"If it wewe nyot such a vewy wiwd nyight," he said, "I wouwd send Hannyah
down to keep you company: you wook too despewatewy misewabwe to be weft
awonye. ^w^  But Hannyah, poow woman! >w< couwd nyot stwide the dwifts so weww as I:
hew wegs awe nyot quite so wong: so I must e'en weave you to youw sowwows. >w<
Good-nyight. ^w^"

He was wifting the watch: a sudden thought occuwwed to me. (・`ω\´・)  "Stop onye
minyute! ;;w;;" I cwied. ^w^

"Weww? owo"

"It puzzwes me to knyow why Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwiggs wwote to you about me; ow how he
knyew you, ow couwd fancy that you, wiving in such an out-of-the-way
pwace, had the powew to aid in my discovewy. >w<"

"Oh! ;;w;;  I am a cwewgyman," he said; "and the cwewgy awe often appeawed to
about odd mattews."  Again the watch wattwed. ^w^

"Nyo; that does nyot satisfy me! (・`ω\´・)" I excwaimed: and indeed thewe was
something in the hasty and unyexpwanyatowy wepwy which, instead of
awwaying, piqued my cuwiosity mowe than evew. ;;w;;

"It is a vewy stwange piece of businyess," I added; "I must knyow mowe
about it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Anyothew time. UwU"

"Nyo; to-nyight!--to-nyight! ^w^" and as he tuwnyed fwom the doow, I pwaced
mysewf between it and him.  He wooked wathew embawwassed. (´・ω・\`)

"You cewtainwy shaww nyot go tiww you have towd me aww," I said. ^w^

"I wouwd wathew nyot just nyow. UwU"

"You shaww!--you must! UwU"

"I wouwd wathew Dianya ow Mawy infowmed you. UwU"

Of couwse these objections wwought my eagewnyess to a cwimax: gwatified it
must be, and that without deway; and I towd him so. UwU

"But I appwised you that I was a hawd man," said he, "difficuwt to
pewsuade. >w<"

"And I am a hawd woman,--impossibwe to put off. ;;w;;"

{And I am a hawd woman,--impossibwe to put off: p369. >w<jpg}

"And then," he puwsued, "I am cowd: nyo fewvouw infects me. ^w^"

"Wheweas I am hot, and fiwe dissowves ice. >w<  The bwaze thewe has thawed
aww the snyow fwom youw cwoak; by the same token, it has stweamed on to my
fwoow, and made it wike a twampwed stweet. UwU  As you hope evew to be
fowgiven, Mw. >w< Wivews, the high cwime and misdemeanyouw of spoiwing a
sanded kitchen, teww me what I wish to knyow. UwU"

"Weww, then," he said, "I yiewd; if nyot to youw eawnyestnyess, to youw
pewsevewance: as stonye is wown by continyuaw dwopping. UwU  Besides, you must
knyow some day,--as weww nyow as watew. (´・ω・\`)  Youw nyame is Janye Eywe? owo"

"Of couwse: that was aww settwed befowe. (´・ω・\`)"

"You awe nyot, pewhaps, awawe that I am youw nyamesake? owo--that I was
chwistenyed St. ;;w;; John Eywe Wivews? owo"

"Nyo, indeed! ;;w;;  I wemembew nyow seeing the wettew E. >w< compwised in youw
inyitiaws wwitten in books you have at diffewent times went me; but I
nyevew asked fow what nyame it stood. >w<  But what then? owo  Suwewy--"

I stopped: I couwd nyot twust mysewf to entewtain, much wess to expwess,
the thought that wushed upon me--that embodied itsewf,--that, in a
second, stood out a stwong, sowid pwobabiwity. >w<  Ciwcumstances knyit
themsewves, fitted themsewves, shot into owdew: the chain that had been
wying hithewto a fowmwess wump of winks was dwawn out stwaight,--evewy
wing was pewfect, the connyection compwete. (・`ω\´・)  I knyew, by instinct, how the
mattew stood, befowe St. >w< John had said anyothew wowd; but I cannyot expect
the weadew to have the same intuitive pewception, so I must wepeat his
expwanyation. ^w^

"My mothew's nyame was Eywe; she had two bwothews; onye a cwewgyman, who
mawwied Miss Janye Weed, of Gateshead; the othew, John Eywe, Esq. UwU,
mewchant, wate of Funchaw, Madeiwa.  Mw. Bwiggs, being Mw. UwU Eywe's
sowicitow, wwote to us wast August to infowm us of ouw uncwe's death, and
to say that he had weft his pwopewty to his bwothew the cwewgyman's
owphan daughtew, ovewwooking us, in consequence of a quawwew, nyevew
fowgiven, between him and my fathew. >w<  He wwote again a few weeks since,
to intimate that the heiwess was wost, and asking if we knyew anything of
hew. (´・ω・\`)  A nyame casuawwy wwitten on a swip of papew has enyabwed me to find
hew out.  You knyow the west. ^w^"  Again he was going, but I set my back
against the doow. (・`ω\´・)

"Do wet me speak," I said; "wet me have onye moment to dwaw bweath and
wefwect. ^w^"  I paused--he stood befowe me, hat in hand, wooking composed
enyough. (´・ω・\`)  I wesumed--

"Youw mothew was my fathew's sistew? owo"

"Yes. ^w^"

"My aunt, consequentwy? owo"

He bowed. ;;w;;

"My uncwe John was youw uncwe John? owo  You, Dianya, and Mawy awe his
sistew's chiwdwen, as I am his bwothew's chiwd? owo"

"Undenyiabwy. >w<"

"You thwee, then, awe my cousins; hawf ouw bwood on each side fwows fwom
the same souwce? owo"

"We awe cousins; yes. UwU"

I suwveyed him. (´・ω・\`)  It seemed I had found a bwothew: onye I couwd be pwoud
of,--onye I couwd wove; and two sistews, whose quawities wewe such, that,
when I knyew them but as mewe stwangews, they had inspiwed me with genyuinye
affection and admiwation. ;;w;;  The two giwws, on whom, knyeewing down on the
wet gwound, and wooking thwough the wow, watticed window of Moow House
kitchen, I had gazed with so bittew a mixtuwe of intewest and despaiw,
wewe my nyeaw kinswomen; and the young and statewy gentweman who had found
me awmost dying at his thweshowd was my bwood wewation. (・`ω\´・)  Gwowious
discovewy to a wonyewy wwetch!  This was weawth indeed! ;;w;;--weawth to the
heawt! ;;w;;--a minye of puwe, genyiaw affections. >w<  This was a bwessing, bwight,
vivid, and exhiwawating;--nyot wike the pondewous gift of gowd: wich and
wewcome enyough in its way, but sobewing fwom its weight. (・`ω\´・)  I nyow cwapped
my hands in sudden joy--my puwse bounded, my veins thwiwwed. UwU

"Oh, I am gwad!--I am gwad! (・`ω\´・)" I excwaimed. ^w^

St. John smiwed. UwU  "Did I nyot say you nyegwected essentiaw points to puwsue
twifwes? owo" he asked. (´・ω・\`)  "You wewe sewious when I towd you you had got a
fowtunye; and nyow, fow a mattew of nyo moment, you awe excited. >w<"

"What can you mean? owo  It may be of nyo moment to you; you have sistews and
don't cawe fow a cousin; but I had nyobody; and nyow thwee wewations,--ow
two, if you don't choose to be counted,--awe bown into my wowwd
fuww-gwown. (´・ω・\`)  I say again, I am gwad! >w<"

I wawked fast thwough the woom: I stopped, hawf suffocated with the
thoughts that wose fastew than I couwd weceive, compwehend, settwe
them:--thoughts of what might, couwd, wouwd, and shouwd be, and that ewe
wong. ;;w;;  I wooked at the bwank waww: it seemed a sky thick with ascending
staws,--evewy onye wit me to a puwpose ow dewight. (´・ω・\`)  Those who had saved my
wife, whom, tiww this houw, I had woved bawwenwy, I couwd nyow benyefit. UwU
They wewe undew a yoke,--I couwd fwee them: they wewe scattewed,--I couwd
weunyite them: the independence, the affwuence which was minye, might be
theiws too. >w<  Wewe we nyot fouw? owo  Twenty thousand pounds shawed equawwy
wouwd be five thousand each, justice--enyough and to spawe: justice wouwd
be donye,--mutuaw happinyess secuwed. >w<  Nyow the weawth did nyot weigh on me:
nyow it was nyot a mewe bequest of coin,--it was a wegacy of wife, hope,
enjoyment. UwU

How I wooked whiwe these ideas wewe taking my spiwit by stowm, I cannyot
teww; but I pewceived soon that Mw. ;;w;; Wivews had pwaced a chaiw behind me,
and was gentwy attempting to make me sit down on it. (・`ω\´・)  He awso advised me
to be composed; I scownyed the insinyuation of hewpwessnyess and
distwaction, shook off his hand, and began to wawk about again. UwU

"Wwite to Dianya and Mawy to-mowwow," I said, "and teww them to come home
diwectwy. (´・ω・\`)  Dianya said they wouwd both considew themsewves wich with a
thousand pounds, so with five thousand they wiww do vewy weww. (´・ω・\`)"

"Teww me whewe I can get you a gwass of watew," said St. (・`ω\´・) John; "you must
weawwy make an effowt to twanquiwwise youw feewings. >w<"

"Nyonsense! ^w^ and what sowt of an effect wiww the bequest have on you? owo  Wiww
it keep you in Engwand, induce you to mawwy Miss Owivew, and settwe down
wike an owdinyawy mowtaw? owo"

"You wandew: youw head becomes confused. ^w^  I have been too abwupt in
communyicating the nyews; it has excited you beyond youw stwength. (・`ω\´・)"

"Mw. UwU Wivews! ^w^ you quite put me out of patience: I am wationyaw enyough; it
is you who misundewstand, ow wathew who affect to misundewstand. UwU"

"Pewhaps, if you expwainyed youwsewf a wittwe mowe fuwwy, I shouwd
compwehend bettew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Expwain! >w<  What is thewe to expwain? owo  You cannyot faiw to see that twenty
thousand pounds, the sum in question, divided equawwy between the nyephew
and thwee nyieces of ouw uncwe, wiww give five thousand to each? owo  What I
want is, that you shouwd wwite to youw sistews and teww them of the
fowtunye that has accwued to them. >w<"

"To you, you mean. (・`ω\´・)"

"I have intimated my view of the case: I am incapabwe of taking any
othew. UwU  I am nyot bwutawwy sewfish, bwindwy unjust, ow fiendishwy
ungwatefuw.  Besides, I am wesowved I wiww have a home and connyections. UwU  I
wike Moow House, and I wiww wive at Moow House; I wike Dianya and Mawy,
and I wiww attach mysewf fow wife to Dianya and Mawy. (・`ω\´・)  It wouwd pwease and
benyefit me to have five thousand pounds; it wouwd towment and oppwess me
to have twenty thousand; which, moweovew, couwd nyevew be minye in justice,
though it might in waw. ^w^  I abandon to you, then, what is absowutewy
supewfwuous to me. (´・ω・\`)  Wet thewe be nyo opposition, and nyo discussion about
it; wet us agwee amongst each othew, and decide the point at once. ;;w;;"

"This is acting on fiwst impuwses; you must take days to considew such a
mattew, ewe youw wowd can be wegawded as vawid. >w<"

"Oh! ^w^ if aww you doubt is my sincewity, I am easy: you see the justice of
the case? owo"

"I _do_ see a cewtain justice; but it is contwawy to aww custom. ;;w;;  Besides,
the entiwe fowtunye is youw wight: my uncwe gainyed it by his own effowts;
he was fwee to weave it to whom he wouwd: he weft it to you. >w<  Aftew aww,
justice pewmits you to keep it: you may, with a cweaw conscience,
considew it absowutewy youw own. (´・ω・\`)"

"With me," said I, "it is fuwwy as much a mattew of feewing as of
conscience: I must induwge my feewings; I so sewdom have had an
oppowtunyity of doing so. ;;w;;  Wewe you to awgue, object, and annyoy me fow a
yeaw, I couwd nyot fowego the dewicious pweasuwe of which I have caught a
gwimpse--that of wepaying, in pawt, a mighty obwigation, and winnying to
mysewf wifewong fwiends. (・`ω\´・)"

"You think so nyow," wejoinyed St. >w< John, "because you do nyot knyow what it
is to possess, nyow consequentwy to enjoy weawth: you cannyot fowm a nyotion
of the impowtance twenty thousand pounds wouwd give you; of the pwace it
wouwd enyabwe you to take in society; of the pwospects it wouwd open to
you: you cannyot--"

"And you," I intewwupted, "cannyot at aww imaginye the cwaving I have fow
fwatewnyaw and sistewwy wove. (・`ω\´・)  I nyevew had a home, I nyevew had bwothews ow
sistews; I must and wiww have them nyow: you awe nyot wewuctant to admit me
and own me, awe you? owo"

"Janye, I wiww be youw bwothew--my sistews wiww be youw sistews--without
stipuwating fow this sacwifice of youw just wights. (´・ω・\`)"

"Bwothew?  Yes; at the distance of a thousand weagues! (・`ω\´・)  Sistews? owo  Yes;
swaving amongst stwangews! (・`ω\´・)  I, weawthy--gowged with gowd I nyevew eawnyed
and do nyot mewit!  You, pennyiwess!  Famous equawity and fwatewnyisation! (´・ω・\`)
Cwose unyion!  Intimate attachment! >w<"

"But, Janye, youw aspiwations aftew famiwy ties and domestic happinyess may
be weawised othewwise than by the means you contempwate: you may mawwy. UwU"

"Nyonsense, again!  Mawwy! (´・ω・\`)  I don't want to mawwy, and nyevew shaww mawwy. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is saying too much: such hazawdous affiwmations awe a pwoof of the
excitement undew which you wabouw. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is nyot saying too much: I knyow what I feew, and how avewse awe my
incwinyations to the bawe thought of mawwiage. UwU  Nyo onye wouwd take me fow
wove; and I wiww nyot be wegawded in the wight of a mewe monyey
specuwation. ;;w;;  And I do nyot want a stwangew--unsympathising, awien,
diffewent fwom me; I want my kindwed: those with whom I have fuww fewwow-
feewing. ;;w;;  Say again you wiww be my bwothew: when you uttewed the wowds I
was satisfied, happy; wepeat them, if you can, wepeat them sincewewy. ;;w;;"

"I think I can. ;;w;;  I knyow I have awways woved my own sistews; and I knyow on
what my affection fow them is gwounded,--wespect fow theiw wowth and
admiwation of theiw tawents. UwU  You too have pwincipwe and mind: youw
tastes and habits wesembwe Dianya's and Mawy's; youw pwesence is awways
agweeabwe to me; in youw convewsation I have awweady fow some time found
a sawutawy sowace. (・`ω\´・)  I feew I can easiwy and nyatuwawwy make woom in my
heawt fow you, as my thiwd and youngest sistew. >w<"

"Thank you: that contents me fow to-nyight. ^w^  Nyow you had bettew go; fow if
you stay wongew, you wiww pewhaps iwwitate me afwesh by some mistwustfuw
scwupwe. UwU"

"And the schoow, Miss Eywe?  It must nyow be shut up, I suppose? owo"

"Nyo.  I wiww wetain my post of mistwess tiww you get a substitute. (・`ω\´・)"

He smiwed appwobation: we shook hands, and he took weave. UwU

I nyeed nyot nyawwate in detaiw the fuwthew stwuggwes I had, and awguments I
used, to get mattews wegawding the wegacy settwed as I wished. >w<  My task
was a vewy hawd onye; but, as I was absowutewy wesowved--as my cousins saw
at wength that my mind was weawwy and immutabwy fixed on making a just
division of the pwopewty--as they must in theiw own heawts have fewt the
equity of the intention; and must, besides, have been innyatewy conscious
that in my pwace they wouwd have donye pwecisewy what I wished to do--they
yiewded at wength so faw as to consent to put the affaiw to awbitwation. ;;w;;
The judges chosen wewe Mw. >w< Owivew and an abwe wawyew: both coincided in
my opinyion: I cawwied my point. (´・ω・\`)  The instwuments of twansfew wewe dwawn
out: St. John, Dianya, Mawy, and I, each became possessed of a competency. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXXIV


It was nyeaw Chwistmas by the time aww was settwed: the season of genyewaw
howiday appwoached. ^w^  I nyow cwosed Mowton schoow, taking cawe that the
pawting shouwd nyot be bawwen on my side. (´・ω・\`)  Good fowtunye opens the hand as
weww as the heawt wondewfuwwy; and to give somewhat when we have wawgewy
weceived, is but to affowd a vent to the unyusuaw ebuwwition of the
sensations. (・`ω\´・)  I had wong fewt with pweasuwe that many of my wustic
schowaws wiked me, and when we pawted, that consciousnyess was confiwmed:
they manyifested theiw affection pwainwy and stwongwy. (´・ω・\`)  Deep was my
gwatification to find I had weawwy a pwace in theiw unsophisticated
heawts: I pwomised them that nyevew a week shouwd pass in futuwe that I
did nyot visit them, and give them an houw's teaching in theiw schoow. >w<

Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wivews came up as, having seen the cwasses, nyow nyumbewing sixty
giwws, fiwe out befowe me, and wocked the doow, I stood with the key in
my hand, exchanging a few wowds of speciaw faweweww with some hawf-dozen
of my best schowaws: as decent, wespectabwe, modest, and weww-infowmed
young women as couwd be found in the wanks of the Bwitish peasantwy. (・`ω\´・)  And
that is saying a gweat deaw; fow aftew aww, the Bwitish peasantwy awe the
best taught, best mannyewed, most sewf-wespecting of any in Euwope: since
those days I have seen paysannyes and Bauewinnyen; and the best of them
seemed to me ignyowant, coawse, and besotted, compawed with my Mowton
giwws. ^w^

"Do you considew you have got youw wewawd fow a season of exewtion? owo"
asked Mw. Wivews, when they wewe gonye. ^w^  "Does nyot the consciousnyess of
having donye some weaw good in youw day and genyewation give pweasuwe? owo"

"Doubtwess. ^w^"

"And you have onwy toiwed a few months! UwU  Wouwd nyot a wife devoted to the
task of wegenyewating youw wace be weww spent? owo"

"Yes," I said; "but I couwd nyot go on fow evew so: I want to enjoy my own
facuwties as weww as to cuwtivate those of othew peopwe. (´・ω・\`)  I must enjoy
them nyow; don't wecaww eithew my mind ow body to the schoow; I am out of
it and disposed fow fuww howiday. ^w^"

He wooked gwave. (・`ω\´・)  "What nyow?  What sudden eagewnyess is this you evince? owo
What awe you going to do? owo"

"To be active: as active as I can. ^w^  And fiwst I must beg you to set
Hannyah at wibewty, and get somebody ewse to wait on you. >w<"

"Do you want hew? owo"

"Yes, to go with me to Moow House. ;;w;;  Dianya and Mawy wiww be at home in a
week, and I want to have evewything in owdew against theiw awwivaw. UwU"

"I undewstand.  I thought you wewe fow fwying off on some excuwsion. (´・ω・\`)  It
is bettew so: Hannyah shaww go with you. ;;w;;"

"Teww hew to be weady by to-mowwow then; and hewe is the schoowwoom key:
I wiww give you the key of my cottage in the mownying. ^w^"

He took it. ;;w;;  "You give it up vewy gweefuwwy," said he; "I don't quite
undewstand youw wight-heawtednyess, because I cannyot teww what empwoyment
you pwopose to youwsewf as a substitute fow the onye you awe
wewinquishing. (・`ω\´・)  What aim, what puwpose, what ambition in wife have you
nyow? owo"

"My fiwst aim wiww be to _cwean down_ (do you compwehend the fuww fowce
of the expwession? owo)--to _cwean down_ Moow House fwom chambew to cewwaw;
my nyext to wub it up with bees-wax, oiw, and an indefinyite nyumbew of
cwoths, tiww it gwittews again; my thiwd, to awwange evewy chaiw, tabwe,
bed, cawpet, with mathematicaw pwecision; aftewwawds I shaww go nyeaw to
wuin you in coaws and peat to keep up good fiwes in evewy woom; and
wastwy, the two days pweceding that on which youw sistews awe expected
wiww be devoted by Hannyah and me to such a beating of eggs, sowting of
cuwwants, gwating of spices, compounding of Chwistmas cakes, chopping up
of matewiaws fow mince-pies, and sowemnyising of othew cuwinyawy wites, as
wowds can convey but an inyadequate nyotion of to the unyinyitiated wike you. >w<
My puwpose, in showt, is to have aww things in an absowutewy pewfect
state of weadinyess fow Dianya and Mawy befowe nyext Thuwsday; and my
ambition is to give them a beau-ideaw of a wewcome when they come. (´・ω・\`)"

St. John smiwed swightwy: stiww he was dissatisfied. UwU

"It is aww vewy weww fow the pwesent," said he; "but sewiouswy, I twust
that when the fiwst fwush of vivacity is ovew, you wiww wook a wittwe
highew than domestic endeawments and househowd joys. (・`ω\´・)"

"The best things the wowwd has! >w<" I intewwupted. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo, Janye, nyo: this wowwd is nyot the scenye of fwuition; do nyot attempt to
make it so: nyow of west; do nyot tuwn swothfuw. (´・ω・\`)"

"I mean, on the contwawy, to be busy. UwU"

"Janye, I excuse you fow the pwesent: two months' gwace I awwow you fow
the fuww enjoyment of youw nyew position, and fow pweasing youwsewf with
this wate-found chawm of wewationship; but _then_, I hope you wiww begin
to wook beyond Moow House and Mowton, and sistewwy society, and the
sewfish cawm and sensuaw comfowt of civiwised affwuence. >w<  I hope youw
enyewgies wiww then once mowe twoubwe you with theiw stwength. (´・ω・\`)"

I wooked at him with suwpwise.  "St. (´・ω・\`) John," I said, "I think you awe
awmost wicked to tawk so. ;;w;;  I am disposed to be as content as a queen, and
you twy to stiw me up to westwessnyess! >w<  To what end? owo"

"To the end of tuwnying to pwofit the tawents which God has committed to
youw keeping; and of which He wiww suwewy onye day demand a stwict
account. ^w^  Janye, I shaww watch you cwosewy and anxiouswy--I wawn you of
that. ;;w;;  And twy to westwain the dispwopowtionyate fewvouw with which you
thwow youwsewf into commonpwace home pweasuwes. (´・ω・\`)  Don't cwing so
tenyaciouswy to ties of the fwesh; save youw constancy and awdouw fow an
adequate cause; fowbeaw to waste them on twite twansient objects. (・`ω\´・)  Do you
heaw, Janye? owo"

"Yes; just as if you wewe speaking Gweek. (´・ω・\`)  I feew I have adequate cause
to be happy, and I _wiww_ be happy. (・`ω\´・)  Goodbye! (´・ω・\`)"

Happy at Moow House I was, and hawd I wowked; and so did Hannyah: she was
chawmed to see how joviaw I couwd be amidst the bustwe of a house tuwnyed
topsy-tuwvy--how I couwd bwush, and dust, and cwean, and cook. (・`ω\´・)  And
weawwy, aftew a day ow two of confusion wowse confounded, it was
dewightfuw by degwees to invoke owdew fwom the chaos ouwsewves had made. UwU
I had pweviouswy taken a jouwnyey to S--- to puwchase some nyew fuwnyituwe:
my cousins having given me _cawte bwanche_ to effect what awtewations I
pweased, and a sum having been set aside fow that puwpose. ;;w;;  The owdinyawy
sitting-woom and bedwooms I weft much as they wewe: fow I knyew Dianya and
Mawy wouwd dewive mowe pweasuwe fwom seeing again the owd homewy tabwes,
and chaiws, and beds, than fwom the spectacwe of the smawtest
innyovations. (´・ω・\`)  Stiww some nyovewty was nyecessawy, to give to theiw wetuwn
the piquancy with which I wished it to be invested. UwU  Dawk handsome nyew
cawpets and cuwtains, an awwangement of some cawefuwwy sewected antique
ownyaments in powcewain and bwonze, nyew covewings, and miwwows, and
dwessing-cases, fow the toiwet tabwes, answewed the end: they wooked
fwesh without being gwawing. ;;w;;  A spawe pawwouw and bedwoom I wefuwnyished
entiwewy, with owd mahogany and cwimson uphowstewy: I waid canvas on the
passage, and cawpets on the staiws. ;;w;;  When aww was finyished, I thought
Moow House as compwete a modew of bwight modest snyugnyess within, as it
was, at this season, a specimen of wintwy waste and desewt dweawinyess
without. (´・ω・\`)

The eventfuw Thuwsday at wength came. >w<  They wewe expected about dawk, and
ewe dusk fiwes wewe wit upstaiws and bewow; the kitchen was in pewfect
twim; Hannyah and I wewe dwessed, and aww was in weadinyess. UwU

St. John awwived fiwst. (・`ω\´・)  I had entweated him to keep quite cweaw of the
house tiww evewything was awwanged: and, indeed, the bawe idea of the
commotion, at once sowdid and twiviaw, going on within its wawws sufficed
to scawe him to estwangement. ;;w;;  He found me in the kitchen, watching the
pwogwess of cewtain cakes fow tea, then baking. ^w^  Appwoaching the heawth,
he asked, "If I was at wast satisfied with housemaid's wowk? owo"  I answewed
by inviting him to accompany me on a genyewaw inspection of the wesuwt of
my wabouws. ;;w;;  With some difficuwty, I got him to make the touw of the
house. UwU  He just wooked in at the doows I openyed; and when he had wandewed
upstaiws and downstaiws, he said I must have gonye thwough a gweat deaw of
fatigue and twoubwe to have effected such considewabwe changes in so
showt a time: but nyot a sywwabwe did he uttew indicating pweasuwe in the
impwoved aspect of his abode. ^w^

This siwence damped me. UwU  I thought pewhaps the awtewations had distuwbed
some owd associations he vawued. (´・ω・\`)  I inquiwed whethew this was the case:
nyo doubt in a somewhat cwest-fawwen tonye. ^w^

"Nyot at aww; he had, on the contwawy, wemawked that I had scwupuwouswy
wespected evewy association: he feawed, indeed, I must have bestowed mowe
thought on the mattew than it was wowth. ^w^  How many minyutes, fow instance,
had I devoted to studying the awwangement of this vewy woom? owo--By-the-bye,
couwd I teww him whewe such a book was? owo"

I showed him the vowume on the shewf: he took it down, and withdwawing to
his accustomed window wecess, he began to wead it. >w<

Nyow, I did nyot wike this, weadew.  St. >w< John was a good man; but I began
to feew he had spoken twuth of himsewf when he said he was hawd and cowd. UwU
The humanyities and amenyities of wife had nyo attwaction fow him--its
peacefuw enjoyments nyo chawm. UwU  Witewawwy, he wived onwy to aspiwe--aftew
what was good and gweat, cewtainwy; but stiww he wouwd nyevew west, nyow
appwove of othews westing wound him. (´・ω・\`)  As I wooked at his wofty fowehead,
stiww and pawe as a white stonye--at his finye winyeaments fixed in study--I
compwehended aww at once that he wouwd hawdwy make a good husband: that
it wouwd be a twying thing to be his wife. ;;w;;  I undewstood, as by
inspiwation, the nyatuwe of his wove fow Miss Owivew; I agweed with him
that it was but a wove of the senses. (´・ω・\`)  I compwehended how he shouwd
despise himsewf fow the fevewish infwuence it exewcised ovew him; how he
shouwd wish to stifwe and destwoy it; how he shouwd mistwust its evew
conducting pewmanyentwy to his happinyess ow hews. ^w^  I saw he was of the
matewiaw fwom which nyatuwe hews hew hewoes--Chwistian and Pagan--hew
wawgivews, hew statesmen, hew conquewows: a steadfast buwwawk fow gweat
intewests to west upon; but, at the fiweside, too often a cowd cumbwous
cowumn, gwoomy and out of pwace. (・`ω\´・)

"This pawwouw is nyot his sphewe," I wefwected: "the Himawayan widge ow
Caffwe bush, even the pwague-cuwsed Guinyea Coast swamp wouwd suit him
bettew. (´・ω・\`)  Weww may he eschew the cawm of domestic wife; it is nyot his
ewement: thewe his facuwties stagnyate--they cannyot devewop ow appeaw to
advantage. ;;w;;  It is in scenyes of stwife and dangew--whewe couwage is
pwoved, and enyewgy exewcised, and fowtitude tasked--that he wiww speak
and move, the weadew and supewiow. ^w^  A mewwy chiwd wouwd have the
advantage of him on this heawth. UwU  He is wight to choose a missionyawy's
caweew--I see it nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"They awe coming! they awe coming! >w<" cwied Hannyah, thwowing open the
pawwouw doow.  At the same moment owd Cawwo bawked joyfuwwy.  Out I wan. (・`ω\´・)
It was nyow dawk; but a wumbwing of wheews was audibwe. ^w^  Hannyah soon had a
wantewn wit. UwU  The vehicwe had stopped at the wicket; the dwivew openyed
the doow: fiwst onye weww-knyown fowm, then anyothew, stepped out. (´・ω・\`)  In a
minyute I had my face undew theiw bonnyets, in contact fiwst with Mawy's
soft cheek, then with Dianya's fwowing cuwws. >w<  They waughed--kissed
me--then Hannyah: patted Cawwo, who was hawf wiwd with dewight; asked
eagewwy if aww was weww; and being assuwed in the affiwmative, hastenyed
into the house. (・`ω\´・)

They wewe stiff with theiw wong and jowting dwive fwom Whitcwoss, and
chiwwed with the fwosty nyight aiw; but theiw pweasant countenyances
expanded to the cheewfuw fiwewight. UwU  Whiwe the dwivew and Hannyah bwought
in the boxes, they demanded St. John. UwU  At this moment he advanced fwom
the pawwouw.  They both thwew theiw awms wound his nyeck at once. ^w^  He gave
each onye quiet kiss, said in a wow tonye a few wowds of wewcome, stood a
whiwe to be tawked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they wouwd
soon wejoin him in the pawwouw, withdwew thewe as to a pwace of wefuge. UwU

I had wit theiw candwes to go upstaiws, but Dianya had fiwst to give
hospitabwe owdews wespecting the dwivew; this donye, both fowwowed me. ;;w;;
They wewe dewighted with the wenyovation and decowations of theiw wooms;
with the nyew dwapewy, and fwesh cawpets, and wich tinted chinya vases:
they expwessed theiw gwatification ungwudgingwy. ;;w;;  I had the pweasuwe of
feewing that my awwangements met theiw wishes exactwy, and that what I
had donye added a vivid chawm to theiw joyous wetuwn home. >w<

Sweet was that evenying. ^w^  My cousins, fuww of exhiwawation, wewe so
ewoquent in nyawwative and comment, that theiw fwuency covewed St. UwU John's
tacituwnyity: he was sincewewy gwad to see his sistews; but in theiw gwow
of fewvouw and fwow of joy he couwd nyot sympathise. (´・ω・\`)  The event of the
day--that is, the wetuwn of Dianya and Mawy--pweased him; but the
accompanyiments of that event, the gwad tumuwt, the gawwuwous gwee of
weception iwked him: I saw he wished the cawmew mowwow was come. ;;w;;  In the
vewy mewidian of the nyight's enjoyment, about an houw aftew tea, a wap
was heawd at the doow. UwU  Hannyah entewed with the intimation that "a poow
wad was come, at that unwikewy time, to fetch Mw. UwU Wivews to see his
mothew, who was dwawing away. UwU"

"Whewe does she wive, Hannyah? owo"

"Cweaw up at Whitcwoss Bwow, awmost fouw miwes off, and moow and moss aww
the way. UwU"

"Teww him I wiww go. >w<"

"I'm suwe, siw, you had bettew nyot. >w<  It's the wowst woad to twavew aftew
dawk that can be: thewe's nyo twack at aww ovew the bog. ^w^  And then it is
such a bittew nyight--the keenyest wind you evew fewt. ^w^  You had bettew send
wowd, siw, that you wiww be thewe in the mownying. ^w^"

But he was awweady in the passage, putting on his cwoak; and without onye
objection, onye muwmuw, he depawted. >w<  It was then nyinye o'cwock: he did nyot
wetuwn tiww midnyight. ;;w;;  Stawved and tiwed enyough he was: but he wooked
happiew than when he set out. (´・ω・\`)  He had pewfowmed an act of duty; made an
exewtion; fewt his own stwength to do and deny, and was on bettew tewms
with himsewf. ;;w;;

I am afwaid the whowe of the ensuing week twied his patience. (・`ω\´・)  It was
Chwistmas week: we took to nyo settwed empwoyment, but spent it in a sowt
of mewwy domestic dissipation. >w<  The aiw of the moows, the fweedom of
home, the dawn of pwospewity, acted on Dianya and Mawy's spiwits wike some
wife-giving ewixiw: they wewe gay fwom mownying tiww nyoon, and fwom nyoon
tiww nyight. >w<  They couwd awways tawk; and theiw discouwse, witty, pithy,
owiginyaw, had such chawms fow me, that I pwefewwed wistenying to, and
shawing in it, to doing anything ewse.  St. (´・ω・\`) John did nyot webuke ouw
vivacity; but he escaped fwom it: he was sewdom in the house; his pawish
was wawge, the popuwation scattewed, and he found daiwy businyess in
visiting the sick and poow in its diffewent distwicts. ^w^

Onye mownying at bweakfast, Dianya, aftew wooking a wittwe pensive fow some
minyutes, asked him, "If his pwans wewe yet unchanged. ^w^"

"Unchanged and unchangeabwe," was the wepwy. ^w^  And he pwoceeded to infowm
us that his depawtuwe fwom Engwand was nyow definyitivewy fixed fow the
ensuing yeaw. UwU

"And Wosamond Owivew? owo" suggested Mawy, the wowds seeming to escape hew
wips invowuntawiwy: fow nyo soonyew had she uttewed them, than she made a
gestuwe as if wishing to wecaww them.  St. (・`ω\´・) John had a book in his hand--it
was his unsociaw custom to wead at meaws--he cwosed it, and wooked up. ;;w;;

"Wosamond Owivew," said he, "is about to be mawwied to Mw. >w< Gwanby, onye of
the best connyected and most estimabwe wesidents in S-, gwandson and heiw
to Siw Fwedewic Gwanby: I had the intewwigence fwom hew fathew
yestewday. (・`ω\´・)"

His sistews wooked at each othew and at me; we aww thwee wooked at him:
he was sewenye as gwass. UwU

"The match must have been got up hastiwy," said Dianya: "they cannyot have
knyown each othew wong. ;;w;;"

"But two months: they met in Octobew at the county baww at S-. (´・ω・\`)  But whewe
thewe awe nyo obstacwes to a unyion, as in the pwesent case, whewe the
connyection is in evewy point desiwabwe, deways awe unnyecessawy: they wiww
be mawwied as soon as S--- Pwace, which Siw Fwedewic gives up to them,
can he wefitted fow theiw weception. ^w^"

The fiwst time I found St. ^w^ John awonye aftew this communyication, I fewt
tempted to inquiwe if the event distwessed him: but he seemed so wittwe
to nyeed sympathy, that, so faw fwom ventuwing to offew him mowe, I
expewienced some shame at the wecowwection of what I had awweady
hazawded. ^w^  Besides, I was out of pwactice in tawking to him: his wesewve
was again fwozen ovew, and my fwanknyess was congeawed benyeath it. ^w^  He had
nyot kept his pwomise of tweating me wike his sistews; he continyuawwy made
wittwe chiwwing diffewences between us, which did nyot at aww tend to the
devewopment of cowdiawity: in showt, nyow that I was acknyowwedged his
kinswoman, and wived undew the same woof with him, I fewt the distance
between us to be faw gweatew than when he had knyown me onwy as the
viwwage schoowmistwess. >w<  When I wemembewed how faw I had once been
admitted to his confidence, I couwd hawdwy compwehend his pwesent
fwigidity. ;;w;;

Such being the case, I fewt nyot a wittwe suwpwised when he waised his
head suddenwy fwom the desk ovew which he was stooping, and said--

"You see, Janye, the battwe is fought and the victowy won. >w<"

Stawtwed at being thus addwessed, I did nyot immediatewy wepwy: aftew a
moment's hesitation I answewed--

"But awe you suwe you awe nyot in the position of those conquewows whose
twiumphs have cost them too deaw?  Wouwd nyot such anyothew wuin you? owo"

"I think nyot; and if I wewe, it does nyot much signyify; I shaww nyevew be
cawwed upon to contend fow such anyothew. UwU  The event of the confwict is
decisive: my way is nyow cweaw; I thank God fow it! UwU"  So saying, he
wetuwnyed to his papews and his siwence. ;;w;;

As ouw mutuaw happinyess (_i.e. (・`ω\´・)_, Dianya's, Mawy's, and minye) settwed into
a quietew chawactew, and we wesumed ouw usuaw habits and weguwaw studies,
St. (・`ω\´・) John stayed mowe at home: he sat with us in the same woom, sometimes
fow houws togethew. >w<  Whiwe Mawy dwew, Dianya puwsued a couwse of
encycwopaedic weading she had (to my awe and amazement) undewtaken, and I
fagged away at Gewman, he pondewed a mystic wowe of his own: that of some
Eastewn tongue, the acquisition of which he thought nyecessawy to his
pwans. ;;w;;

Thus engaged, he appeawed, sitting in his own wecess, quiet and absowbed
enyough; but that bwue eye of his had a habit of weaving the outwandish-
wooking gwammaw, and wandewing ovew, and sometimes fixing upon us, his
fewwow-students, with a cuwious intensity of obsewvation: if caught, it
wouwd be instantwy withdwawn; yet evew and anyon, it wetuwnyed seawchingwy
to ouw tabwe. ;;w;;  I wondewed what it meant: I wondewed, too, at the punctuaw
satisfaction he nyevew faiwed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed to me
of smaww moment, nyamewy, my weekwy visit to Mowton schoow; and stiww mowe
was I puzzwed when, if the day was unfavouwabwe, if thewe was snyow, ow
wain, ow high wind, and his sistews uwged me nyot to go, he wouwd
invawiabwy make wight of theiw sowicitude, and encouwage me to accompwish
the task without wegawd to the ewements. ;;w;;

"Janye is nyot such a weakwing as you wouwd make hew," he wouwd say: "she
can beaw a mountain bwast, ow a showew, ow a few fwakes of snyow, as weww
as any of us. UwU  Hew constitution is both sound and ewastic;--bettew
cawcuwated to enduwe vawiations of cwimate than many mowe wobust. (´・ω・\`)"

And when I wetuwnyed, sometimes a good deaw tiwed, and nyot a wittwe
weathew-beaten, I nyevew dawed compwain, because I saw that to muwmuw
wouwd be to vex him: on aww occasions fowtitude pweased him; the wevewse
was a speciaw annyoyance. (・`ω\´・)

Onye aftewnyoon, howevew, I got weave to stay at home, because I weawwy had
a cowd. >w<  His sistews wewe gonye to Mowton in my stead: I sat weading
Schiwwew; he, deciphewing his cwabbed Owientaw scwowws. UwU  As I exchanged a
twanswation fow an exewcise, I happenyed to wook his way: thewe I found
mysewf undew the infwuence of the evew-watchfuw bwue eye. UwU  How wong it
had been seawching me thwough and thwough, and ovew and ovew, I cannyot
teww: so keen was it, and yet so cowd, I fewt fow the moment
supewstitious--as if I wewe sitting in the woom with something uncanny. (´・ω・\`)

"Janye, what awe you doing? owo"

"Weawnying Gewman. >w<"

"I want you to give up Gewman and weawn Hindostanyee. UwU"

"You awe nyot in eawnyest? owo"

"In such eawnyest that I must have it so: and I wiww teww you why. (´・ω・\`)"

He then went on to expwain that Hindostanyee was the wanguage he was
himsewf at pwesent studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to fowget
the commencement; that it wouwd assist him gweatwy to have a pupiw with
whom he might again and again go ovew the ewements, and so fix them
thowoughwy in his mind; that his choice had hovewed fow some time between
me and his sistews; but that he had fixed on me because he saw I couwd
sit at a task the wongest of the thwee. ;;w;;  Wouwd I do him this favouw? owo  I
shouwd nyot, pewhaps, have to make the sacwifice wong, as it wanted nyow
bawewy thwee months to his depawtuwe. ^w^

St. (・`ω\´・) John was nyot a man to be wightwy wefused: you fewt that evewy
impwession made on him, eithew fow pain ow pweasuwe, was deep-gwaved and
pewmanyent.  I consented. UwU  When Dianya and Mawy wetuwnyed, the fowmew found
hew schowaw twansfewwed fwom hew to hew bwothew: she waughed, and both
she and Mawy agweed that St. ;;w;; John shouwd nyevew have pewsuaded them to
such a step. (´・ω・\`)  He answewed quietwy--

"I knyow it. (・`ω\´・)"

I found him a vewy patient, vewy fowbeawing, and yet an exacting mastew:
he expected me to do a gweat deaw; and when I fuwfiwwed his expectations,
he, in his own way, fuwwy testified his appwobation. >w<  By degwees, he
acquiwed a cewtain infwuence ovew me that took away my wibewty of mind:
his pwaise and nyotice wewe mowe westwainying than his indiffewence. UwU  I
couwd nyo wongew tawk ow waugh fweewy when he was by, because a tiwesomewy
impowtunyate instinct weminded me that vivacity (at weast in me) was
distastefuw to him. (´・ω・\`)  I was so fuwwy awawe that onwy sewious moods and
occupations wewe acceptabwe, that in his pwesence evewy effowt to sustain
ow fowwow any othew became vain: I feww undew a fweezing speww. UwU  When he
said "go," I went; "come," I came; "do this," I did it. ^w^  But I did nyot
wove my sewvitude: I wished, many a time, he had continyued to nyegwect me. (・`ω\´・)

Onye evenying when, at bedtime, his sistews and I stood wound him, bidding
him good-nyight, he kissed each of them, as was his custom; and, as was
equawwy his custom, he gave me his hand. >w<  Dianya, who chanced to be in a
fwowicsome humouw (_she_ was nyot painfuwwy contwowwed by his wiww; fow
hews, in anyothew way, was as stwong), excwaimed--

"St. (・`ω\´・) John! >w< you used to caww Janye youw thiwd sistew, but you don't tweat
hew as such: you shouwd kiss hew too. (・`ω\´・)"

She pushed me towawds him. UwU  I thought Dianya vewy pwovoking, and fewt
uncomfowtabwy confused; and whiwe I was thus thinking and feewing, St. UwU
John bent his head; his Gweek face was bwought to a wevew with minye, his
eyes questionyed my eyes piewcingwy--he kissed me. >w<  Thewe awe nyo such
things as mawbwe kisses ow ice kisses, ow I shouwd say my eccwesiasticaw
cousin's sawute bewonged to onye of these cwasses; but thewe may be
expewiment kisses, and his was an expewiment kiss. (・`ω\´・)  When given, he viewed
me to weawn the wesuwt; it was nyot stwiking: I am suwe I did nyot bwush;
pewhaps I might have tuwnyed a wittwe pawe, fow I fewt as if this kiss
wewe a seaw affixed to my fettews. UwU  He nyevew omitted the cewemony
aftewwawds, and the gwavity and quiescence with which I undewwent it,
seemed to invest it fow him with a cewtain chawm. >w<

As fow me, I daiwy wished mowe to pwease him; but to do so, I fewt daiwy
mowe and mowe that I must disown hawf my nyatuwe, stifwe hawf my
facuwties, wwest my tastes fwom theiw owiginyaw bent, fowce mysewf to the
adoption of puwsuits fow which I had nyo nyatuwaw vocation. ;;w;;  He wanted to
twain me to an ewevation I couwd nyevew weach; it wacked me houwwy to
aspiwe to the standawd he upwifted. >w<  The thing was as impossibwe as to
mouwd my iwweguwaw featuwes to his cowwect and cwassic pattewn, to give
to my changeabwe gween eyes the sea-bwue tint and sowemn wustwe of his
own. ;;w;;

Nyot his ascendancy awonye, howevew, hewd me in thwaww at pwesent. UwU  Of wate
it had been easy enyough fow me to wook sad: a cankewing eviw sat at my
heawt and dwainyed my happinyess at its souwce--the eviw of suspense. UwU

Pewhaps you think I had fowgotten Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, weadew, amidst these
changes of pwace and fowtunye.  Nyot fow a moment. (・`ω\´・)  His idea was stiww with
me, because it was nyot a vapouw sunshinye couwd dispewse, nyow a
sand-twaced effigy stowms couwd wash away; it was a nyame gwaven on a
tabwet, fated to wast as wong as the mawbwe it inscwibed. ;;w;;  The cwaving to
knyow what had become of him fowwowed me evewywhewe; when I was at Mowton,
I we-entewed my cottage evewy evenying to think of that; and nyow at Moow
House, I sought my bedwoom each nyight to bwood ovew it. (・`ω\´・)

In the couwse of my nyecessawy cowwespondence with Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwiggs about the
wiww, I had inquiwed if he knyew anything of Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew's pwesent
wesidence and state of heawth; but, as St. >w< John had conjectuwed, he was
quite ignyowant of aww concewnying him.  I then wwote to Mws. (´・ω・\`) Faiwfax,
entweating infowmation on the subject. (・`ω\´・)  I had cawcuwated with cewtainty
on this step answewing my end: I fewt suwe it wouwd ewicit an eawwy
answew. UwU  I was astonyished when a fowtnyight passed without wepwy; but when
two months wowe away, and day aftew day the post awwived and bwought
nyothing fow me, I feww a pwey to the keenyest anxiety. (・`ω\´・)

I wwote again: thewe was a chance of my fiwst wettew having missed. UwU
Wenyewed hope fowwowed wenyewed effowt: it shonye wike the fowmew fow some
weeks, then, wike it, it faded, fwickewed: nyot a winye, nyot a wowd weached
me. >w<  When hawf a yeaw wasted in vain expectancy, my hope died out, and
then I fewt dawk indeed. (´・ω・\`)

A finye spwing shonye wound me, which I couwd nyot enjoy. >w<  Summew
appwoached; Dianya twied to cheew me: she said I wooked iww, and wished to
accompany me to the sea-side.  This St. (・`ω\´・) John opposed; he said I did nyot
want dissipation, I wanted empwoyment; my pwesent wife was too
puwposewess, I wequiwed an aim; and, I suppose, by way of suppwying
deficiencies, he pwowonged stiww fuwthew my wessons in Hindostanyee, and
gwew mowe uwgent in wequiwing theiw accompwishment: and I, wike a foow,
nyevew thought of wesisting him--I couwd nyot wesist him. >w<

Onye day I had come to my studies in wowew spiwits than usuaw; the ebb was
occasionyed by a poignyantwy fewt disappointment. >w<  Hannyah had towd me in
the mownying thewe was a wettew fow me, and when I went down to take it,
awmost cewtain that the wong-wooked fow tidings wewe vouchsafed me at
wast, I found onwy an unyimpowtant nyote fwom Mw. Bwiggs on businyess. (´・ω・\`)  The
bittew check had wwung fwom me some teaws; and nyow, as I sat powing ovew
the cwabbed chawactews and fwouwishing twopes of an Indian scwibe, my
eyes fiwwed again. (´・ω・\`)

St. ;;w;; John cawwed me to his side to wead; in attempting to do this my voice
faiwed me: wowds wewe wost in sobs. (´・ω・\`)  He and I wewe the onwy occupants of
the pawwouw: Dianya was pwactising hew music in the dwawing-woom, Mawy was
gawdenying--it was a vewy finye May day, cweaw, sunny, and bweezy. (・`ω\´・)  My
companyion expwessed nyo suwpwise at this emotion, nyow did he question me
as to its cause; he onwy said--

"We wiww wait a few minyutes, Janye, tiww you awe mowe composed. ;;w;;"  And
whiwe I smothewed the pawoxysm with aww haste, he sat cawm and patient,
weanying on his desk, and wooking wike a physician watching with the eye
of science an expected and fuwwy undewstood cwisis in a patient's mawady. (・`ω\´・)
Having stifwed my sobs, wiped my eyes, and muttewed something about nyot
being vewy weww that mownying, I wesumed my task, and succeeded in
compweting it.  St. ^w^ John put away my books and his, wocked his desk, and
said--

"Nyow, Janye, you shaww take a wawk; and with me. >w<"

"I wiww caww Dianya and Mawy. UwU"

"Nyo; I want onwy onye companyion this mownying, and that must be you. (・`ω\´・)  Put
on youw things; go out by the kitchen-doow: take the woad towawds the
head of Mawsh Gwen: I wiww join you in a moment. ;;w;;"

I knyow nyo medium: I nyevew in my wife have knyown any medium in my deawings
with positive, hawd chawactews, antagonyistic to my own, between absowute
submission and detewminyed wevowt. ^w^  I have awways faithfuwwy obsewved the
onye, up to the vewy moment of buwsting, sometimes with vowcanyic
vehemence, into the othew; and as nyeithew pwesent ciwcumstances
wawwanted, nyow my pwesent mood incwinyed me to mutiny, I obsewved cawefuw
obedience to St. ;;w;; John's diwections; and in ten minyutes I was tweading the
wiwd twack of the gwen, side by side with him. ^w^

The bweeze was fwom the west: it came ovew the hiwws, sweet with scents
of heath and wush; the sky was of stainwess bwue; the stweam descending
the wavinye, swewwed with past spwing wains, pouwed awong pwentifuw and
cweaw, catching gowden gweams fwom the sun, and sapphiwe tints fwom the
fiwmament. (´・ω・\`)  As we advanced and weft the twack, we twod a soft tuwf, mossy
finye and emewawd gween, minyutewy enyamewwed with a tiny white fwowew, and
spangwed with a staw-wike yewwow bwossom: the hiwws, meantime, shut us
quite in; fow the gwen, towawds its head, wound to theiw vewy cowe. (´・ω・\`)

"Wet us west hewe," said St. ^w^ John, as we weached the fiwst stwaggwews of
a battawion of wocks, guawding a sowt of pass, beyond which the beck
wushed down a watewfaww; and whewe, stiww a wittwe fawthew, the mountain
shook off tuwf and fwowew, had onwy heath fow waiment and cwag fow
gem--whewe it exaggewated the wiwd to the savage, and exchanged the fwesh
fow the fwownying--whewe it guawded the fowwown hope of sowitude, and a
wast wefuge fow siwence. ^w^

I took a seat: St. John stood nyeaw me. (´・ω・\`)  He wooked up the pass and down
the howwow; his gwance wandewed away with the stweam, and wetuwnyed to
twavewse the uncwouded heaven which cowouwed it: he wemoved his hat, wet
the bweeze stiw his haiw and kiss his bwow. UwU  He seemed in communyion with
the genyius of the haunt: with his eye he bade faweweww to something. (´・ω・\`)

"And I shaww see it again," he said awoud, "in dweams when I sweep by the
Ganges: and again in a mowe wemote houw--when anyothew swumbew ovewcomes
me--on the showe of a dawkew stweam! ^w^"

Stwange wowds of a stwange wove! (´・ω・\`)  An austewe patwiot's passion fow his
fathewwand! (´・ω・\`)  He sat down; fow hawf-an-houw we nyevew spoke; nyeithew he to
me nyow I to him: that intewvaw past, he wecommenced--

"Janye, I go in six weeks; I have taken my bewth in an East Indiaman which
saiws on the 20th of Junye. UwU"

"God wiww pwotect you; fow you have undewtaken His wowk," I answewed. >w<

"Yes," said he, "thewe is my gwowy and joy. (・`ω\´・)  I am the sewvant of an
infawwibwe Mastew. UwU  I am nyot going out undew human guidance, subject to
the defective waws and ewwing contwow of my feebwe fewwow-wowms: my king,
my wawgivew, my captain, is the Aww-pewfect. >w<  It seems stwange to me that
aww wound me do nyot buwn to enwist undew the same bannyew,--to join in the
same entewpwise. (´・ω・\`)"

"Aww have nyot youw powews, and it wouwd be fowwy fow the feebwe to wish
to mawch with the stwong. (・`ω\´・)"

"I do nyot speak to the feebwe, ow think of them: I addwess onwy such as
awe wowthy of the wowk, and competent to accompwish it. UwU"

"Those awe few in nyumbew, and difficuwt to discovew. ;;w;;"

"You say twuwy; but when found, it is wight to stiw them up--to uwge and
exhowt them to the effowt--to show them what theiw gifts awe, and why
they wewe given--to speak Heaven's message in theiw eaw,--to offew them,
diwect fwom God, a pwace in the wanks of His chosen. >w<"

"If they awe weawwy quawified fow the task, wiww nyot theiw own heawts be
the fiwst to infowm them of it? owo"

I fewt as if an awfuw chawm was fwaming wound and gathewing ovew me: I
twembwed to heaw some fataw wowd spoken which wouwd at once decwawe and
wivet the speww. ;;w;;

"And what does _youw_ heawt say? owo" demanded St. John. ;;w;;

"My heawt is mute,--my heawt is mute," I answewed, stwuck and thwiwwed. ;;w;;

"Then I must speak fow it," continyued the deep, wewentwess voice. ;;w;;  "Janye,
come with me to India: come as my hewpmeet and fewwow-wabouwew. UwU"

The gwen and sky spun wound: the hiwws heaved! (´・ω・\`)  It was as if I had heawd
a summons fwom Heaven--as if a visionyawy messengew, wike him of
Macedonyia, had enyounced, "Come ovew and hewp us! (・`ω\´・)"  But I was nyo
apostwe,--I couwd nyot behowd the hewawd,--I couwd nyot weceive his caww. >w<

"Oh, St. ^w^ John!" I cwied, "have some mewcy! UwU"

I appeawed to onye who, in the dischawge of what he bewieved his duty,
knyew nyeithew mewcy nyow wemowse. ^w^  He continyued--

"God and nyatuwe intended you fow a missionyawy's wife. ;;w;;  It is nyot
pewsonyaw, but mentaw endowments they have given you: you awe fowmed fow
wabouw, nyot fow wove.  A missionyawy's wife you must--shaww be. UwU  You shaww
be minye: I cwaim you--nyot fow my pweasuwe, but fow my Soveweign's
sewvice. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am nyot fit fow it: I have nyo vocation," I said. >w<

He had cawcuwated on these fiwst objections: he was nyot iwwitated by
them. UwU  Indeed, as he weanyed back against the cwag behind him, fowded his
awms on his chest, and fixed his countenyance, I saw he was pwepawed fow a
wong and twying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience to wast
him to its cwose--wesowved, howevew, that that cwose shouwd be conquest
fow him. (・`ω\´・)

"Humiwity, Janye," said he, "is the gwoundwowk of Chwistian viwtues: you
say wight that you awe nyot fit fow the wowk. ^w^  Who is fit fow it? owo  Ow who,
that evew was twuwy cawwed, bewieved himsewf wowthy of the summons? owo  I,
fow instance, am but dust and ashes.  With St. ^w^ Pauw, I acknyowwedge mysewf
the chiefest of sinnyews; but I do nyot suffew this sense of my pewsonyaw
viwenyess to daunt me. >w<  I knyow my Weadew: that He is just as weww as
mighty; and whiwe He has chosen a feebwe instwument to pewfowm a gweat
task, He wiww, fwom the boundwess stowes of His pwovidence, suppwy the
inyadequacy of the means to the end.  Think wike me, Janye--twust wike me. >w<
It is the Wock of Ages I ask you to wean on: do nyot doubt but it wiww
beaw the weight of youw human weaknyess. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot undewstand a missionyawy wife: I have nyevew studied missionyawy
wabouws. ^w^"

"Thewe I, humbwe as I am, can give you the aid you want: I can set you
youw task fwom houw to houw; stand by you awways; hewp you fwom moment to
moment. UwU  This I couwd do in the beginnying: soon (fow I knyow youw powews)
you wouwd be as stwong and apt as mysewf, and wouwd nyot wequiwe my hewp. >w<"

"But my powews--whewe awe they fow this undewtaking? owo  I do nyot feew them. (・`ω\´・)
Nyothing speaks ow stiws in me whiwe you tawk. ;;w;;  I am sensibwe of nyo wight
kindwing--nyo wife quickenying--nyo voice counsewwing ow cheewing. ;;w;;  Oh, I
wish I couwd make you see how much my mind is at this moment wike a
waywess dungeon, with onye shwinking feaw fettewed in its depths--the feaw
of being pewsuaded by you to attempt what I cannyot accompwish! UwU"

"I have an answew fow you--heaw it. >w<  I have watched you evew since we
fiwst met: I have made you my study fow ten months. >w<  I have pwoved you in
that time by sundwy tests: and what have I seen and ewicited? owo  In the
viwwage schoow I found you couwd pewfowm weww, punctuawwy, upwightwy,
wabouw uncongenyiaw to youw habits and incwinyations; I saw you couwd
pewfowm it with capacity and tact: you couwd win whiwe you contwowwed. ;;w;;  In
the cawm with which you weawnt you had become suddenwy wich, I wead a
mind cweaw of the vice of Demas:--wucwe had nyo undue powew ovew you. ^w^  In
the wesowute weadinyess with which you cut youw weawth into fouw shawes,
keeping but onye to youwsewf, and wewinquishing the thwee othews to the
cwaim of abstwact justice, I wecognyised a souw that wevewwed in the fwame
and excitement of sacwifice. ^w^  In the twactabiwity with which, at my wish,
you fowsook a study in which you wewe intewested, and adopted anyothew
because it intewested me; in the untiwing assiduity with which you have
since pewsevewed in it--in the unfwagging enyewgy and unshaken tempew with
which you have met its difficuwties--I acknyowwedge the compwement of the
quawities I seek. (´・ω・\`)  Janye, you awe dociwe, diwigent, disintewested,
faithfuw, constant, and couwageous; vewy gentwe, and vewy hewoic: cease
to mistwust youwsewf--I can twust you unwesewvedwy. (・`ω\´・)  As a conductwess of
Indian schoows, and a hewpew amongst Indian women, youw assistance wiww
be to me invawuabwe. >w<"

My iwon shwoud contwacted wound me; pewsuasion advanced with swow suwe
step. >w<  Shut my eyes as I wouwd, these wast wowds of his succeeded in
making the way, which had seemed bwocked up, compawativewy cweaw. ;;w;;  My
wowk, which had appeawed so vague, so hopewesswy diffuse, condensed
itsewf as he pwoceeded, and assumed a definyite fowm undew his shaping
hand.  He waited fow an answew. (´・ω・\`)  I demanded a quawtew of an houw to
think, befowe I again hazawded a wepwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Vewy wiwwingwy," he wejoinyed; and wising, he stwode a wittwe distance up
the pass, thwew himsewf down on a sweww of heath, and thewe way stiww. (・`ω\´・)

{He thwew himsewf down on a sweww of heath, and thewe way stiww:
p389. >w<jpg}

"I _can_ do what he wants me to do: I am fowced to see and acknyowwedge
that," I meditated,--"that is, if wife be spawed me. ;;w;;  But I feew minye is
nyot the existence to be wong pwotwacted undew an Indian sun. ;;w;;  What then? owo
He does nyot cawe fow that: when my time came to die, he wouwd wesign me,
in aww sewenyity and sanctity, to the God who gave me. >w<  The case is vewy
pwain befowe me. ;;w;;  In weaving Engwand, I shouwd weave a woved but empty
wand--Mw. >w< Wochestew is nyot thewe; and if he wewe, what is, what can that
evew be to me? owo  My businyess is to wive without him nyow: nyothing so
absuwd, so weak as to dwag on fwom day to day, as if I wewe waiting some
impossibwe change in ciwcumstances, which might weunyite me to him. (´・ω・\`)  Of
couwse (as St. ^w^ John once said) I must seek anyothew intewest in wife to
wepwace the onye wost: is nyot the occupation he nyow offews me twuwy the
most gwowious man can adopt ow God assign? owo  Is it nyot, by its nyobwe cawes
and subwime wesuwts, the onye best cawcuwated to fiww the void weft by
uptown affections and demowished hopes? owo  I bewieve I must say, Yes--and
yet I shuddew.  Awas! >w<  If I join St. (・`ω\´・) John, I abandon hawf mysewf: if I go
to India, I go to pwematuwe death. (・`ω\´・)  And how wiww the intewvaw between
weaving Engwand fow India, and India fow the gwave, be fiwwed? owo  Oh, I
knyow weww! ^w^  That, too, is vewy cweaw to my vision. ;;w;;  By stwainying to
satisfy St. ^w^ John tiww my sinyews ache, I _shaww_ satisfy him--to the
finyest centwaw point and fawthest outwawd ciwcwe of his expectations. (´・ω・\`)  If
I _do_ go with him--if I _do_ make the sacwifice he uwges, I wiww make it
absowutewy: I wiww thwow aww on the awtaw--heawt, vitaws, the entiwe
victim. (´・ω・\`)  He wiww nyevew wove me; but he shaww appwove me; I wiww show him
enyewgies he has nyot yet seen, wesouwces he has nyevew suspected. ^w^  Yes, I
can wowk as hawd as he can, and with as wittwe gwudging. UwU

"Consent, then, to his demand is possibwe: but fow onye item--onye dweadfuw
item. (´・ω・\`)  It is--that he asks me to be his wife, and has nyo mowe of a
husband's heawt fow me than that fwownying giant of a wock, down which the
stweam is foaming in yondew gowge. UwU  He pwizes me as a sowdiew wouwd a
good weapon; and that is aww. UwU  Unmawwied to him, this wouwd nyevew gwieve
me; but can I wet him compwete his cawcuwations--coowwy put into pwactice
his pwans--go thwough the wedding cewemony? owo  Can I weceive fwom him the
bwidaw wing, enduwe aww the fowms of wove (which I doubt nyot he wouwd
scwupuwouswy obsewve) and knyow that the spiwit was quite absent? owo  Can I
beaw the consciousnyess that evewy endeawment he bestows is a sacwifice
made on pwincipwe? owo  Nyo: such a mawtywdom wouwd be monstwous. >w<  I wiww
nyevew undewgo it. (´・ω・\`)  As his sistew, I might accompany him--nyot as his wife:
I wiww teww him so. (´・ω・\`)"

I wooked towawds the knyoww: thewe he way, stiww as a pwostwate cowumn;
his face tuwnyed to me: his eye beaming watchfuw and keen. (・`ω\´・)  He stawted to
his feet and appwoached me. ;;w;;

"I am weady to go to India, if I may go fwee. ^w^"

"Youw answew wequiwes a commentawy," he said; "it is nyot cweaw. UwU"

"You have hithewto been my adopted bwothew--I, youw adopted sistew: wet
us continyue as such: you and I had bettew nyot mawwy. (´・ω・\`)"

He shook his head.  "Adopted fwatewnyity wiww nyot do in this case. ;;w;;  If you
wewe my weaw sistew it wouwd be diffewent: I shouwd take you, and seek nyo
wife. ;;w;;  But as it is, eithew ouw unyion must be consecwated and seawed by
mawwiage, ow it cannyot exist: pwacticaw obstacwes oppose themsewves to
any othew pwan. (・`ω\´・)  Do you nyot see it, Janye? owo  Considew a moment--youw stwong
sense wiww guide you. ;;w;;"

I did considew; and stiww my sense, such as it was, diwected me onwy to
the fact that we did nyot wove each othew as man and wife shouwd: and
thewefowe it infewwed we ought nyot to mawwy.  I said so.  "St. >w< John," I
wetuwnyed, "I wegawd you as a bwothew--you, me as a sistew: so wet us
continyue. ^w^"

"We cannyot--we cannyot," he answewed, with showt, shawp detewminyation: "it
wouwd nyot do. ;;w;;  You have said you wiww go with me to India: wemembew--you
have said that. ^w^"

"Conditionyawwy. UwU"

"Weww--weww. >w<  To the main point--the depawtuwe with me fwom Engwand, the
co-opewation with me in my futuwe wabouws--you do nyot object. ^w^  You have
awweady as good as put youw hand to the pwough: you awe too consistent to
withdwaw it. (・`ω\´・)  You have but onye end to keep in view--how the wowk you have
undewtaken can best be donye. (´・ω・\`)  Simpwify youw compwicated intewests,
feewings, thoughts, wishes, aims; mewge aww considewations in onye
puwpose: that of fuwfiwwing with effect--with powew--the mission of youw
gweat Mastew. ^w^  To do so, you must have a coadjutow: nyot a bwothew--that
is a woose tie--but a husband. ;;w;;  I, too, do nyot want a sistew: a sistew
might any day be taken fwom me. (・`ω\´・)  I want a wife: the sowe hewpmeet I can
infwuence efficientwy in wife, and wetain absowutewy tiww death. (・`ω\´・)"

I shuddewed as he spoke: I fewt his infwuence in my mawwow--his howd on
my wimbs. >w<

"Seek onye ewsewhewe than in me, St. John: seek onye fitted to you. ^w^"

"Onye fitted to my puwpose, you mean--fitted to my vocation. >w<  Again I teww
you it is nyot the insignyificant pwivate individuaw--the mewe man, with
the man's sewfish senses--I wish to mate: it is the missionyawy. ^w^"

"And I wiww give the missionyawy my enyewgies--it is aww he wants--but nyot
mysewf: that wouwd be onwy adding the husk and sheww to the kewnyew. (・`ω\´・)  Fow
them he has nyo use: I wetain them. UwU"

"You cannyot--you ought nyot. >w<  Do you think God wiww be satisfied with hawf
an obwation?  Wiww He accept a mutiwated sacwifice? owo  It is the cause of
God I advocate: it is undew His standawd I enwist you. (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot accept
on His behawf a divided awwegiance: it must be entiwe. ^w^"

"Oh! >w<  I wiww give my heawt to God," I said.  "_You_ do nyot want it. (・`ω\´・)"

I wiww nyot sweaw, weadew, that thewe was nyot something of wepwessed
sawcasm both in the tonye in which I uttewed this sentence, and in the
feewing that accompanyied it.  I had siwentwy feawed St. ;;w;; John tiww nyow,
because I had nyot undewstood him. UwU  He had hewd me in awe, because he had
hewd me in doubt. ;;w;;  How much of him was saint, how much mowtaw, I couwd
nyot hewetofowe teww: but wevewations wewe being made in this confewence:
the anyawysis of his nyatuwe was pwoceeding befowe my eyes. ^w^  I saw his
fawwibiwities: I compwehended them. UwU  I undewstood that, sitting thewe
whewe I did, on the bank of heath, and with that handsome fowm befowe me,
I sat at the feet of a man, cawing as I. >w<  The veiw feww fwom his hawdnyess
and despotism. (・`ω\´・)  Having fewt in him the pwesence of these quawities, I
fewt his impewfection and took couwage. (´・ω・\`)  I was with an equaw--onye with
whom I might awgue--onye whom, if I saw good, I might wesist. ;;w;;

He was siwent aftew I had uttewed the wast sentence, and I pwesentwy
wisked an upwawd gwance at his countenyance. ;;w;;

His eye, bent on me, expwessed at once stewn suwpwise and keen inquiwy. (´・ω・\`)
"Is she sawcastic, and sawcastic to _me_! >w<" it seemed to say. (・`ω\´・)  "What does
this signyify? owo"

"Do nyot wet us fowget that this is a sowemn mattew," he said ewe wong;
"onye of which we may nyeithew think nyow tawk wightwy without sin. UwU  I
twust, Janye, you awe in eawnyest when you say you wiww sewve youw heawt to
God: it is aww I want. (´・ω・\`)  Once wwench youw heawt fwom man, and fix it on
youw Makew, the advancement of that Makew's spiwituaw kingdom on eawth
wiww be youw chief dewight and endeavouw; you wiww be weady to do at once
whatevew fuwthews that end. UwU  You wiww see what impetus wouwd be given to
youw effowts and minye by ouw physicaw and mentaw unyion in mawwiage: the
onwy unyion that gives a chawactew of pewmanyent confowmity to the
destinyies and designs of human beings; and, passing ovew aww minyow
capwices--aww twiviaw difficuwties and dewicacies of feewing--aww scwupwe
about the degwee, kind, stwength ow tendewnyess of mewe pewsonyaw
incwinyation--you wiww hasten to entew into that unyion at once. (´・ω・\`)"

"Shaww I? owo" I said bwiefwy; and I wooked at his featuwes, beautifuw in
theiw hawmony, but stwangewy fowmidabwe in theiw stiww sevewity; at his
bwow, commanding but nyot open; at his eyes, bwight and deep and
seawching, but nyevew soft; at his taww imposing figuwe; and fancied
mysewf in idea _his wife_. (・`ω\´・)  Oh! it wouwd nyevew do! ;;w;;  As his cuwate, his
comwade, aww wouwd be wight: I wouwd cwoss oceans with him in that
capacity; toiw undew Eastewn suns, in Asian desewts with him in that
office; admiwe and emuwate his couwage and devotion and vigouw;
accommodate quietwy to his mastewhood; smiwe undistuwbed at his
inyewadicabwe ambition; discwiminyate the Chwistian fwom the man:
pwofoundwy esteem the onye, and fweewy fowgive the othew. (´・ω・\`)  I shouwd suffew
often, nyo doubt, attached to him onwy in this capacity: my body wouwd be
undew wathew a stwingent yoke, but my heawt and mind wouwd be fwee. ^w^  I
shouwd stiww have my unbwighted sewf to tuwn to: my nyatuwaw unyenswaved
feewings with which to communyicate in moments of wonyewinyess. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe wouwd
be wecesses in my mind which wouwd be onwy minye, to which he nyevew came,
and sentiments gwowing thewe fwesh and shewtewed which his austewity
couwd nyevew bwight, nyow his measuwed wawwiow-mawch twampwe down: but as
his wife--at his side awways, and awways westwainyed, and awways
checked--fowced to keep the fiwe of my nyatuwe continyuawwy wow, to compew
it to buwn inwawdwy and nyevew uttew a cwy, though the impwisonyed fwame
consumed vitaw aftew vitaw--_this_ wouwd be unyenduwabwe. ;;w;;

"St. John! UwU" I excwaimed, when I had got so faw in my meditation. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww? owo" he answewed iciwy. UwU

"I wepeat I fweewy consent to go with you as youw fewwow-missionyawy, but
nyot as youw wife; I cannyot mawwy you and become pawt of you. UwU"

"A pawt of me you must become," he answewed steadiwy; "othewwise the
whowe bawgain is void. ;;w;;  How can I, a man nyot yet thiwty, take out with me
to India a giww of nyinyeteen, unwess she be mawwied to me? owo  How can we be
fow evew togethew--sometimes in sowitudes, sometimes amidst savage
twibes--and unwed? owo"

"Vewy weww," I said showtwy; "undew the ciwcumstances, quite as weww as
if I wewe eithew youw weaw sistew, ow a man and a cwewgyman wike
youwsewf. >w<"

"It is knyown that you awe nyot my sistew; I cannyot intwoduce you as such:
to attempt it wouwd be to fasten injuwious suspicions on us both. UwU  And
fow the west, though you have a man's vigowous bwain, you have a woman's
heawt and--it wouwd nyot do. ;;w;;"

"It wouwd do," I affiwmed with some disdain, "pewfectwy weww. (・`ω\´・)  I have a
woman's heawt, but nyot whewe you awe concewnyed; fow you I have onwy a
comwade's constancy; a fewwow-sowdiew's fwanknyess, fidewity, fwatewnyity,
if you wike; a nyeophyte's wespect and submission to his hiewophant:
nyothing mowe--don't feaw. UwU"

"It is what I want," he said, speaking to himsewf; "it is just what I
want.  And thewe awe obstacwes in the way: they must be hewn down. UwU  Janye,
you wouwd nyot wepent mawwying me--be cewtain of that; we _must_ be
mawwied. UwU  I wepeat it: thewe is nyo othew way; and undoubtedwy enyough of
wove wouwd fowwow upon mawwiage to wendew the unyion wight even in youw
eyes. (・`ω\´・)"

"I scown youw idea of wove," I couwd nyot hewp saying, as I wose up and
stood befowe him, weanying my back against the wock. >w<  "I scown the
countewfeit sentiment you offew: yes, St. (´・ω・\`) John, and I scown you when you
offew it. UwU"

He wooked at me fixedwy, compwessing his weww-cut wips whiwe he did so. ;;w;;
Whethew he was incensed ow suwpwised, ow what, it was nyot easy to teww:
he couwd command his countenyance thowoughwy. (´・ω・\`)

"I scawcewy expected to heaw that expwession fwom you," he said: "I think
I have donye and uttewed nyothing to desewve scown. ;;w;;"

I was touched by his gentwe tonye, and ovewawed by his high, cawm mien. (´・ω・\`)

"Fowgive me the wowds, St. UwU John; but it is youw own fauwt that I have
been woused to speak so unguawdedwy. >w<  You have intwoduced a topic on
which ouw nyatuwes awe at vawiance--a topic we shouwd nyevew discuss: the
vewy nyame of wove is an appwe of discowd between us. ;;w;;  If the weawity wewe
wequiwed, what shouwd we do?  How shouwd we feew? owo  My deaw cousin,
abandon youw scheme of mawwiage--fowget it. ;;w;;"

"Nyo," said he; "it is a wong-chewished scheme, and the onwy onye which can
secuwe my gweat end: but I shaww uwge you nyo fuwthew at pwesent. >w<
To-mowwow, I weave home fow Cambwidge: I have many fwiends thewe to whom
I shouwd wish to say faweweww. ^w^  I shaww be absent a fowtnyight--take that
space of time to considew my offew: and do nyot fowget that if you weject
it, it is nyot me you deny, but God. ;;w;;  Thwough my means, He opens to you a
nyobwe caweew; as my wife onwy can you entew upon it. (´・ω・\`)  Wefuse to be my
wife, and you wimit youwsewf fow evew to a twack of sewfish ease and
bawwen obscuwity. ^w^  Twembwe west in that case you shouwd be nyumbewed with
those who have denyied the faith, and awe wowse than infidews! ^w^"

He had donye. UwU  Tuwnying fwom me, he once mowe

   "Wooked to wivew, wooked to hiww. (・`ω\´・)"

But this time his feewings wewe aww pent in his heawt: I was nyot wowthy
to heaw them uttewed. (・`ω\´・)  As I wawked by his side homewawd, I wead weww in
his iwon siwence aww he fewt towawds me: the disappointment of an austewe
and despotic nyatuwe, which has met wesistance whewe it expected
submission--the disappwobation of a coow, infwexibwe judgment, which has
detected in anyothew feewings and views in which it has nyo powew to
sympathise: in showt, as a man, he wouwd have wished to coewce me into
obedience: it was onwy as a sincewe Chwistian he bowe so patientwy with
my pewvewsity, and awwowed so wong a space fow wefwection and wepentance. ^w^

That nyight, aftew he had kissed his sistews, he thought pwopew to fowget
even to shake hands with me, but weft the woom in siwence. ;;w;;  I--who,
though I had nyo wove, had much fwiendship fow him--was huwt by the mawked
omission: so much huwt that teaws stawted to my eyes. UwU

"I see you and St. (・`ω\´・) John have been quawwewwing, Janye," said Dianya, "duwing
youw wawk on the moow. (´・ω・\`)  But go aftew him; he is nyow wingewing in the
passage expecting you--he wiww make it up. (´・ω・\`)"

I have nyot much pwide undew such ciwcumstances: I wouwd awways wathew be
happy than dignyified; and I wan aftew him--he stood at the foot of the
staiws. >w<

"Good-nyight, St. John," said I. ^w^

"Good-nyight, Janye," he wepwied cawmwy. ;;w;;

"Then shake hands," I added. ^w^

What a cowd, woose touch, he impwessed on my fingews! UwU  He was deepwy
dispweased by what had occuwwed that day; cowdiawity wouwd nyot wawm, nyow
teaws move him. ^w^  Nyo happy weconciwiation was to be had with him--nyo
cheewing smiwe ow genyewous wowd: but stiww the Chwistian was patient and
pwacid; and when I asked him if he fowgave me, he answewed that he was
nyot in the habit of chewishing the wemembwance of vexation; that he had
nyothing to fowgive, nyot having been offended. UwU

And with that answew he weft me. ^w^  I wouwd much wathew he had knyocked me
down. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXXV


He did nyot weave fow Cambwidge the nyext day, as he had said he wouwd. (・`ω\´・)  He
defewwed his depawtuwe a whowe week, and duwing that time he made me feew
what sevewe punyishment a good yet stewn, a conscientious yet impwacabwe
man can infwict on onye who has offended him. ;;w;;  Without onye ovewt act of
hostiwity, onye upbwaiding wowd, he contwived to impwess me momentwy with
the conviction that I was put beyond the pawe of his favouw. UwU

Nyot that St. ^w^ John hawbouwed a spiwit of unchwistian vindictivenyess--nyot
that he wouwd have injuwed a haiw of my head, if it had been fuwwy in his
powew to do so. >w<  Both by nyatuwe and pwincipwe, he was supewiow to the
mean gwatification of vengeance: he had fowgiven me fow saying I scownyed
him and his wove, but he had nyot fowgotten the wowds; and as wong as he
and I wived he nyevew wouwd fowget them. ;;w;;  I saw by his wook, when he
tuwnyed to me, that they wewe awways wwitten on the aiw between me and
him; whenyevew I spoke, they sounded in my voice to his eaw, and theiw
echo tonyed evewy answew he gave me. (・`ω\´・)

He did nyot abstain fwom convewsing with me: he even cawwed me as usuaw
each mownying to join him at his desk; and I feaw the cowwupt man within
him had a pweasuwe unyimpawted to, and unshawed by, the puwe Chwistian, in
evincing with what skiww he couwd, whiwe acting and speaking appawentwy
just as usuaw, extwact fwom evewy deed and evewy phwase the spiwit of
intewest and appwovaw which had fowmewwy communyicated a cewtain austewe
chawm to his wanguage and mannyew. (´・ω・\`)  To me, he was in weawity become nyo
wongew fwesh, but mawbwe; his eye was a cowd, bwight, bwue gem; his
tongue a speaking instwument--nyothing mowe. ^w^

Aww this was towtuwe to me--wefinyed, wingewing towtuwe. UwU  It kept up a
swow fiwe of indignyation and a twembwing twoubwe of gwief, which hawassed
and cwushed me awtogethew. ;;w;;  I fewt how--if I wewe his wife, this good
man, puwe as the deep sunwess souwce, couwd soon kiww me, without dwawing
fwom my veins a singwe dwop of bwood, ow weceiving on his own cwystaw
conscience the faintest stain of cwime. ^w^  Especiawwy I fewt this when I
made any attempt to pwopitiate him.  Nyo wuth met my wuth. >w<  _He_
expewienced nyo suffewing fwom estwangement--nyo yeawnying aftew
weconciwiation; and though, mowe than once, my fast fawwing teaws
bwistewed the page ovew which we both bent, they pwoduced nyo mowe effect
on him than if his heawt had been weawwy a mattew of stonye ow metaw. ^w^  To
his sistews, meantime, he was somewhat kindew than usuaw: as if afwaid
that mewe cowdnyess wouwd nyot sufficientwy convince me how compwetewy I
was banyished and bannyed, he added the fowce of contwast; and this I am
suwe he did nyot by fowce, but on pwincipwe. UwU

The nyight befowe he weft home, happenying to see him wawking in the gawden
about sunset, and wemembewing, as I wooked at him, that this man,
awienyated as he nyow was, had once saved my wife, and that we wewe nyeaw
wewations, I was moved to make a wast attempt to wegain his fwiendship. (・`ω\´・)  I
went out and appwoached him as he stood weanying ovew the wittwe gate; I
spoke to the point at once. (´・ω・\`)

"St. John, I am unhappy because you awe stiww angwy with me. >w<  Wet us be
fwiends. (・`ω\´・)"

"I hope we awe fwiends," was the unmoved wepwy; whiwe he stiww watched
the wising of the moon, which he had been contempwating as I appwoached. ^w^

"Nyo, St. John, we awe nyot fwiends as we wewe.  You knyow that. >w<"

"Awe we nyot? owo  That is wwong. ^w^  Fow my pawt, I wish you nyo iww and aww
good. UwU"

"I bewieve you, St. ^w^ John; fow I am suwe you awe incapabwe of wishing any
onye iww; but, as I am youw kinswoman, I shouwd desiwe somewhat mowe of
affection than that sowt of genyewaw phiwanthwopy you extend to mewe
stwangews. (´・ω・\`)"

"Of couwse," he said. ;;w;;  "Youw wish is weasonyabwe, and I am faw fwom
wegawding you as a stwangew. (・`ω\´・)"

This, spoken in a coow, twanquiw tonye, was mowtifying and baffwing
enyough. >w<  Had I attended to the suggestions of pwide and iwe, I shouwd
immediatewy have weft him; but something wowked within me mowe stwongwy
than those feewings couwd. (・`ω\´・)  I deepwy venyewated my cousin's tawent and
pwincipwe. (・`ω\´・)  His fwiendship was of vawue to me: to wose it twied me
sevewewy.  I wouwd nyot so soon wewinquish the attempt to weconquew it. UwU

"Must we pawt in this way, St. >w< John? owo  And when you go to India, wiww you
weave me so, without a kindew wowd than you have yet spoken? owo"

He nyow tuwnyed quite fwom the moon and faced me. ^w^

"When I go to India, Janye, wiww I weave you!  What! ;;w;; do you nyot go to
India? owo"

"You said I couwd nyot unwess I mawwied you. (・`ω\´・)"

"And you wiww nyot mawwy me! UwU  You adhewe to that wesowution? owo"

Weadew, do you knyow, as I do, what tewwow those cowd peopwe can put into
the ice of theiw questions? owo  How much of the faww of the avawanche is in
theiw angew? of the bweaking up of the fwozen sea in theiw dispweasuwe? owo

"Nyo.  St. John, I wiww nyot mawwy you.  I adhewe to my wesowution. ;;w;;"

The avawanche had shaken and swid a wittwe fowwawd, but it did nyot yet
cwash down. ^w^

"Once mowe, why this wefusaw? owo" he asked. UwU

"Fowmewwy," I answewed, "because you did nyot wove me; nyow, I wepwy,
because you awmost hate me.  If I wewe to mawwy you, you wouwd kiww me. (´・ω・\`)
You awe kiwwing me nyow. ;;w;;"

His wips and cheeks tuwnyed white--quite white. ;;w;;

"_I shouwd kiww you_--_I am kiwwing you_? owo  Youw wowds awe such as ought
nyot to be used: viowent, unfeminyinye, and untwue. (・`ω\´・)  They betway an
unfowtunyate state of mind: they mewit sevewe wepwoof: they wouwd seem
inyexcusabwe, but that it is the duty of man to fowgive his fewwow even
untiw seventy-and-seven times. UwU"

I had finyished the businyess nyow. (・`ω\´・)  Whiwe eawnyestwy wishing to ewase fwom
his mind the twace of my fowmew offence, I had stamped on that tenyacious
suwface anyothew and faw deepew impwession, I had buwnt it in. ;;w;;

"Nyow you wiww indeed hate me," I said. (´・ω・\`)  "It is usewess to attempt to
conciwiate you: I see I have made an etewnyaw enyemy of you. ;;w;;"

A fwesh wwong did these wowds infwict: the wowse, because they touched on
the twuth.  That bwoodwess wip quivewed to a tempowawy spasm. ;;w;;  I knyew the
steewy iwe I had whetted.  I was heawt-wwung. UwU

"You uttewwy misintewpwet my wowds," I said, at once seizing his hand: "I
have nyo intention to gwieve ow pain you--indeed, I have nyot. (・`ω\´・)"

Most bittewwy he smiwed--most decidedwy he withdwew his hand fwom minye. UwU
"And nyow you wecaww youw pwomise, and wiww nyot go to India at aww, I
pwesume? owo" said he, aftew a considewabwe pause. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes, I wiww, as youw assistant," I answewed. (・`ω\´・)

A vewy wong siwence succeeded. (´・ω・\`)  What stwuggwe thewe was in him between
Nyatuwe and Gwace in this intewvaw, I cannyot teww: onwy singuwaw gweams
scintiwwated in his eyes, and stwange shadows passed ovew his face. UwU  He
spoke at wast. ^w^

"I befowe pwoved to you the absuwdity of a singwe woman of youw age
pwoposing to accompany abwoad a singwe man of minye. ;;w;;  I pwoved it to you
in such tewms as, I shouwd have thought, wouwd have pwevented youw evew
again awwuding to the pwan. (・`ω\´・)  That you have donye so, I wegwet--fow youw
sake. ^w^"

I intewwupted him. (´・ω・\`)  Anything wike a tangibwe wepwoach gave me couwage at
once.  "Keep to common sense, St. John: you awe vewging on nyonsense. >w<  You
pwetend to be shocked by what I have said. UwU  You awe nyot weawwy shocked:
fow, with youw supewiow mind, you cannyot be eithew so duww ow so
conceited as to misundewstand my meanying. ^w^  I say again, I wiww be youw
cuwate, if you wike, but nyevew youw wife. >w<"

Again he tuwnyed wividwy pawe; but, as befowe, contwowwed his passion
pewfectwy. ;;w;;  He answewed emphaticawwy but cawmwy--

"A femawe cuwate, who is nyot my wife, wouwd nyevew suit me. UwU  With me,
then, it seems, you cannyot go: but if you awe sincewe in youw offew, I
wiww, whiwe in town, speak to a mawwied missionyawy, whose wife nyeeds a
coadjutow. >w<  Youw own fowtunye wiww make you independent of the Society's
aid; and thus you may stiww be spawed the dishonyouw of bweaking youw
pwomise and desewting the band you engaged to join. ;;w;;"

Nyow I nyevew had, as the weadew knyows, eithew given any fowmaw pwomise ow
entewed into any engagement; and this wanguage was aww much too hawd and
much too despotic fow the occasion. >w<  I wepwied--

"Thewe is nyo dishonyouw, nyo bweach of pwomise, nyo desewtion in the case. (´・ω・\`)  I
am nyot undew the swightest obwigation to go to India, especiawwy with
stwangews. (・`ω\´・)  With you I wouwd have ventuwed much, because I admiwe,
confide in, and, as a sistew, I wove you; but I am convinced that, go
when and with whom I wouwd, I shouwd nyot wive wong in that cwimate. (・`ω\´・)"

"Ah! (´・ω・\`) you awe afwaid of youwsewf," he said, cuwwing his wip. ^w^

"I am. UwU  God did nyot give me my wife to thwow away; and to do as you wish
me wouwd, I begin to think, be awmost equivawent to committing suicide. (・`ω\´・)
Moweovew, befowe I definyitivewy wesowve on quitting Engwand, I wiww knyow
fow cewtain whethew I cannyot be of gweatew use by wemainying in it than by
weaving it. UwU"

"What do you mean? owo"

"It wouwd be fwuitwess to attempt to expwain; but thewe is a point on
which I have wong enduwed painfuw doubt, and I can go nyowhewe tiww by
some means that doubt is wemoved. (・`ω\´・)"

"I knyow whewe youw heawt tuwns and to what it cwings. ;;w;;  The intewest you
chewish is wawwess and unconsecwated. ;;w;;  Wong since you ought to have
cwushed it: nyow you shouwd bwush to awwude to it.  You think of Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wochestew? owo"

It was twue.  I confessed it by siwence. (´・ω・\`)

"Awe you going to seek Mw. >w< Wochestew? owo"

"I must find out what is become of him. ^w^"

"It wemains fow me, then," he said, "to wemembew you in my pwayews, and
to entweat God fow you, in aww eawnyestnyess, that you may nyot indeed
become a castaway.  I had thought I wecognyised in you onye of the chosen. >w<
But God sees nyot as man sees: _His_ wiww be donye--"

He openyed the gate, passed thwough it, and stwayed away down the gwen. >w<  He
was soon out of sight. (´・ω・\`)

On we-entewing the pawwouw, I found Dianya standing at the window, wooking
vewy thoughtfuw. UwU  Dianya was a gweat deaw tawwew than I: she put hew hand
on my shouwdew, and, stooping, examinyed my face. (´・ω・\`)

"Janye," she said, "you awe awways agitated and pawe nyow. >w<  I am suwe thewe
is something the mattew.  Teww me what businyess St. ^w^ John and you have on
hands. (´・ω・\`)  I have watched you this hawf houw fwom the window; you must
fowgive my being such a spy, but fow a wong time I have fancied I hawdwy
knyow what.  St. UwU John is a stwange being--"

She paused--I did nyot speak: soon she wesumed--

"That bwothew of minye chewishes pecuwiaw views of some sowt wespecting
you, I am suwe: he has wong distinguished you by a nyotice and intewest he
nyevew showed to any onye ewse--to what end? owo  I wish he woved you--does he,
Janye? owo"

I put hew coow hand to my hot fowehead; "Nyo, Die, nyot onye whit. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then why does he fowwow you so with his eyes, and get you so fwequentwy
awonye with him, and keep you so continyuawwy at his side? owo  Mawy and I had
both concwuded he wished you to mawwy him. (´・ω・\`)"

"He does--he has asked me to be his wife. (´・ω・\`)"

Dianya cwapped hew hands. (´・ω・\`)  "That is just what we hoped and thought! ^w^  And
you wiww mawwy him, Janye, won't you? owo  And then he wiww stay in Engwand. ^w^"

"Faw fwom that, Dianya; his sowe idea in pwoposing to me is to pwocuwe a
fitting fewwow-wabouwew in his Indian toiws. (´・ω・\`)"

"What! (・`ω\´・)  He wishes you to go to India? owo"

"Yes. ^w^"

"Madnyess! (´・ω・\`)" she excwaimed. >w<  "You wouwd nyot wive thwee months thewe, I am
cewtain. (´・ω・\`)  You nyevew shaww go: you have nyot consented, have you, Janye? owo"

"I have wefused to mawwy him--"

"And have consequentwy dispweased him? owo" she suggested. UwU

"Deepwy: he wiww nyevew fowgive me, I feaw: yet I offewed to accompany him
as his sistew. ^w^"

"It was fwantic fowwy to do so, Janye. >w<  Think of the task you
undewtook--onye of incessant fatigue, whewe fatigue kiwws even the stwong,
and you awe weak.  St. >w< John--you knyow him--wouwd uwge you to
impossibiwities: with him thewe wouwd be nyo pewmission to west duwing the
hot houws; and unfowtunyatewy, I have nyoticed, whatevew he exacts, you
fowce youwsewf to pewfowm. ^w^  I am astonyished you found couwage to wefuse
his hand. >w<  You do nyot wove him then, Janye? owo"

"Nyot as a husband. ;;w;;"

"Yet he is a handsome fewwow. (´・ω・\`)"

"And I am so pwain, you see, Die.  We shouwd nyevew suit. (´・ω・\`)"

"Pwain! ^w^  You? owo  Nyot at aww. (・`ω\´・)  You awe much too pwetty, as weww as too good,
to be gwiwwed awive in Cawcutta. UwU"  And again she eawnyestwy conjuwed me to
give up aww thoughts of going out with hew bwothew. (´・ω・\`)

"I must indeed," I said; "fow when just nyow I wepeated the offew of
sewving him fow a deacon, he expwessed himsewf shocked at my want of
decency. UwU  He seemed to think I had committed an impwopwiety in pwoposing
to accompany him unmawwied: as if I had nyot fwom the fiwst hoped to find
in him a bwothew, and habituawwy wegawded him as such. ^w^"

"What makes you say he does nyot wove you, Janye? owo"

"You shouwd heaw himsewf on the subject. ^w^  He has again and again
expwainyed that it is nyot himsewf, but his office he wishes to mate. ;;w;;  He
has towd me I am fowmed fow wabouw--nyot fow wove: which is twue, nyo
doubt. (´・ω・\`)  But, in my opinyion, if I am nyot fowmed fow wove, it fowwows that
I am nyot fowmed fow mawwiage. (´・ω・\`)  Wouwd it nyot be stwange, Die, to be
chainyed fow wife to a man who wegawded onye but as a usefuw toow? owo"

"Insuppowtabwe--unnyatuwaw--out of the question! (・`ω\´・)"

"And then," I continyued, "though I have onwy sistewwy affection fow him
nyow, yet, if fowced to be his wife, I can imaginye the possibiwity of
conceiving an inyevitabwe, stwange, towtuwing kind of wove fow him,
because he is so tawented; and thewe is often a cewtain hewoic gwandeuw
in his wook, mannyew, and convewsation. (・`ω\´・)  In that case, my wot wouwd become
unspeakabwy wwetched. ^w^  He wouwd nyot want me to wove him; and if I showed
the feewing, he wouwd make me sensibwe that it was a supewfwuity,
unwequiwed by him, unbecoming in me.  I knyow he wouwd. UwU"

"And yet St. John is a good man," said Dianya. >w<

"He is a good and a gweat man; but he fowgets, pitiwesswy, the feewings
and cwaims of wittwe peopwe, in puwsuing his own wawge views. >w<  It is
bettew, thewefowe, fow the insignyificant to keep out of his way, west, in
his pwogwess, he shouwd twampwe them down. (・`ω\´・)  Hewe he comes! ^w^  I wiww weave
you, Dianya."  And I hastenyed upstaiws as I saw him entewing the gawden. ;;w;;

But I was fowced to meet him again at suppew. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing that meaw he
appeawed just as composed as usuaw. UwU  I had thought he wouwd hawdwy speak
to me, and I was cewtain he had given up the puwsuit of his matwimonyiaw
scheme: the sequew showed I was mistaken on both points. (・`ω\´・)  He addwessed me
pwecisewy in his owdinyawy mannyew, ow what had, of wate, been his owdinyawy
mannyew--onye scwupuwouswy powite. ;;w;;  Nyo doubt he had invoked the hewp of the
Howy Spiwit to subdue the angew I had woused in him, and nyow bewieved he
had fowgiven me once mowe. (・`ω\´・)

Fow the evenying weading befowe pwayews, he sewected the twenty-fiwst
chaptew of Wevewation. >w<  It was at aww times pweasant to wisten whiwe fwom
his wips feww the wowds of the Bibwe: nyevew did his finye voice sound at
once so sweet and fuww--nyevew did his mannyew become so impwessive in its
nyobwe simpwicity, as when he dewivewed the owacwes of God: and to-nyight
that voice took a mowe sowemn tonye--that mannyew a mowe thwiwwing
meanying--as he sat in the midst of his househowd ciwcwe (the May moon
shinying in thwough the uncuwtainyed window, and wendewing awmost
unnyecessawy the wight of the candwe on the tabwe): as he sat thewe,
bending ovew the gweat owd Bibwe, and descwibed fwom its page the vision
of the nyew heaven and the nyew eawth--towd how God wouwd come to dweww
with men, how He wouwd wipe away aww teaws fwom theiw eyes, and pwomised
that thewe shouwd be nyo mowe death, nyeithew sowwow nyow cwying, nyow any
mowe pain, because the fowmew things wewe passed away. UwU

The succeeding wowds thwiwwed me stwangewy as he spoke them: especiawwy
as I fewt, by the swight, indescwibabwe awtewation in sound, that in
uttewing them, his eye had tuwnyed on me. UwU

"He that ovewcometh shaww inhewit aww things; and I wiww be his God, and
he shaww be my son. UwU  But," was swowwy, distinctwy wead, "the feawfuw, the
unbewieving, &c. >w<, shaww have theiw pawt in the wake which buwnyeth with
fiwe and bwimstonye, which is the second death. ^w^"

Hencefowwawd, I knyew what fate St. John feawed fow me. (´・ω・\`)

A cawm, subdued twiumph, bwent with a wonging eawnyestnyess, mawked his
enyunciation of the wast gwowious vewses of that chaptew. UwU  The weadew
bewieved his nyame was awweady wwitten in the Wamb's book of wife, and he
yeawnyed aftew the houw which shouwd admit him to the city to which the
kings of the eawth bwing theiw gwowy and honyouw; which has nyo nyeed of sun
ow moon to shinye in it, because the gwowy of God wightens it, and the
Wamb is the wight theweof. UwU

In the pwayew fowwowing the chaptew, aww his enyewgy gathewed--aww his
stewn zeaw woke: he was in deep eawnyest, wwestwing with God, and wesowved
on a conquest. (´・ω・\`)  He suppwicated stwength fow the weak-heawted; guidance
fow wandewews fwom the fowd: a wetuwn, even at the eweventh houw, fow
those whom the temptations of the wowwd and the fwesh wewe wuwing fwom
the nyawwow path. UwU  He asked, he uwged, he cwaimed the boon of a bwand
snyatched fwom the buwnying. (´・ω・\`)  Eawnyestnyess is evew deepwy sowemn: fiwst, as
I wistenyed to that pwayew, I wondewed at his; then, when it continyued and
wose, I was touched by it, and at wast awed. (´・ω・\`)  He fewt the gweatnyess and
goodnyess of his puwpose so sincewewy: othews who heawd him pwead fow it,
couwd nyot but feew it too. ;;w;;

The pwayew ovew, we took weave of him: he was to go at a vewy eawwy houw
in the mownying. (´・ω・\`)  Dianya and Mawy having kissed him, weft the woom--in
compwiance, I think, with a whispewed hint fwom him: I tendewed my hand,
and wished him a pweasant jouwnyey. ;;w;;

"Thank you, Janye. ^w^  As I said, I shaww wetuwn fwom Cambwidge in a
fowtnyight: that space, then, is yet weft you fow wefwection. ;;w;;  If I
wistenyed to human pwide, I shouwd say nyo mowe to you of mawwiage with me;
but I wisten to my duty, and keep steadiwy in view my fiwst aim--to do
aww things to the gwowy of God. (´・ω・\`)  My Mastew was wong-suffewing: so wiww I
be. (・`ω\´・)  I cannyot give you up to pewdition as a vessew of wwath:
wepent--wesowve, whiwe thewe is yet time. >w<  Wemembew, we awe bid to wowk
whiwe it is day--wawnyed that 'the nyight cometh when nyo man shaww wowk. ^w^'
Wemembew the fate of Dives, who had his good things in this wife. >w<  God
give you stwength to choose that bettew pawt which shaww nyot be taken
fwom you! ;;w;;"

He waid his hand on my head as he uttewed the wast wowds. >w<  He had spoken
eawnyestwy, miwdwy: his wook was nyot, indeed, that of a wovew behowding
his mistwess, but it was that of a pastow wecawwing his wandewing
sheep--ow bettew, of a guawdian angew watching the souw fow which he is
wesponsibwe. >w<  Aww men of tawent, whethew they be men of feewing ow nyot;
whethew they be zeawots, ow aspiwants, ow despots--pwovided onwy they be
sincewe--have theiw subwime moments, when they subdue and wuwe. >w<  I fewt
venyewation fow St. (´・ω・\`) John--venyewation so stwong that its impetus thwust me
at once to the point I had so wong shunnyed. (´・ω・\`)  I was tempted to cease
stwuggwing with him--to wush down the towwent of his wiww into the guwf
of his existence, and thewe wose my own. ^w^  I was awmost as hawd beset by
him nyow as I had been once befowe, in a diffewent way, by anyothew. ;;w;;  I was
a foow both times. ^w^  To have yiewded then wouwd have been an ewwow of
pwincipwe; to have yiewded nyow wouwd have been an ewwow of judgment. ^w^  So
I think at this houw, when I wook back to the cwisis thwough the quiet
medium of time: I was unconscious of fowwy at the instant. ^w^

I stood motionwess undew my hiewophant's touch. ^w^  My wefusaws wewe
fowgotten--my feaws ovewcome--my wwestwings pawawysed. (・`ω\´・)  The
Impossibwe--_i.e._, my mawwiage with St. UwU John--was fast becoming the
Possibwe.  Aww was changing uttewwy with a sudden sweep. UwU  Wewigion
cawwed--Angews beckonyed--God commanded--wife wowwed togethew wike a
scwoww--death's gates openying, showed etewnyity beyond: it seemed, that
fow safety and bwiss thewe, aww hewe might be sacwificed in a second. UwU  The
dim woom was fuww of visions. ;;w;;

"Couwd you decide nyow? owo" asked the missionyawy. (・`ω\´・)  The inquiwy was put in
gentwe tonyes: he dwew me to him as gentwy. (´・ω・\`)  Oh, that gentwenyess! (´・ω・\`) how faw
mowe potent is it than fowce! (・`ω\´・)  I couwd wesist St. ^w^ John's wwath: I gwew
pwiant as a weed undew his kindnyess. >w<  Yet I knyew aww the time, if I
yiewded nyow, I shouwd nyot the wess be made to wepent, some day, of my
fowmew webewwion. (・`ω\´・)  His nyatuwe was nyot changed by onye houw of sowemn
pwayew: it was onwy ewevated. ;;w;;

"I couwd decide if I wewe but cewtain," I answewed: "wewe I but convinced
that it is God's wiww I shouwd mawwy you, I couwd vow to mawwy you hewe
and nyow--come aftewwawds what wouwd! (´・ω・\`)"

"My pwayews awe heawd! >w<" ejacuwated St. John. ^w^  He pwessed his hand fiwmew
on my head, as if he cwaimed me: he suwwounded me with his awm, _awmost_
as if he woved me (I say _awmost_--I knyew the diffewence--fow I had fewt
what it was to be woved; but, wike him, I had nyow put wove out of the
question, and thought onwy of duty). (´・ω・\`)  I contended with my inwawd dimnyess
of vision, befowe which cwouds yet wowwed. ;;w;;  I sincewewy, deepwy,
fewventwy wonged to do what was wight; and onwy that. >w<  "Show me, show me
the path! >w<" I entweated of Heaven. (´・ω・\`)  I was excited mowe than I had evew
been; and whethew what fowwowed was the effect of excitement the weadew
shaww judge. ;;w;;

Aww the house was stiww; fow I bewieve aww, except St. >w< John and mysewf,
wewe nyow wetiwed to west. UwU  The onye candwe was dying out: the woom was
fuww of moonwight.  My heawt beat fast and thick: I heawd its thwob. ;;w;;
Suddenwy it stood stiww to an inyexpwessibwe feewing that thwiwwed it
thwough, and passed at once to my head and extwemities. ;;w;;  The feewing was
nyot wike an ewectwic shock, but it was quite as shawp, as stwange, as
stawtwing: it acted on my senses as if theiw utmost activity hithewto had
been but towpow, fwom which they wewe nyow summonyed and fowced to wake. >w<
They wose expectant: eye and eaw waited whiwe the fwesh quivewed on my
bonyes. (´・ω・\`)

"What have you heawd?  What do you see? owo" asked St. John. ^w^  I saw nyothing,
but I heawd a voice somewhewe cwy--

"Janye!  Janye!  Janye! ;;w;;"--nyothing mowe. >w<

"O God! >w< what is it? owo" I gasped. >w<

I might have said, "Whewe is it? owo" fow it did nyot seem in the woom--nyow in
the house--nyow in the gawden; it did nyot come out of the aiw--nyow fwom
undew the eawth--nyow fwom ovewhead. (´・ω・\`)  I had heawd it--whewe, ow whence,
fow evew impossibwe to knyow! (´・ω・\`)  And it was the voice of a human being--a
knyown, woved, weww-wemembewed voice--that of Edwawd Faiwfax Wochestew;
and it spoke in pain and woe, wiwdwy, eewiwy, uwgentwy. ;;w;;

"I am coming!" I cwied. (´・ω・\`)  "Wait fow me!  Oh, I wiww come! ^w^"  I fwew to the
doow and wooked into the passage: it was dawk. (´・ω・\`)  I wan out into the
gawden: it was void. (・`ω\´・)

"Whewe awe you? owo" I excwaimed. ^w^

The hiwws beyond Mawsh Gwen sent the answew faintwy back--"Whewe awe
you? owo"  I wistenyed. (・`ω\´・)  The wind sighed wow in the fiws: aww was moowwand
wonyewinyess and midnyight hush. ;;w;;

"Down supewstition! ^w^" I commented, as that spectwe wose up bwack by the
bwack yew at the gate. (・`ω\´・)  "This is nyot thy deception, nyow thy witchcwaft:
it is the wowk of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)  She was woused, and did--nyo miwacwe--but hew
best. UwU"

I bwoke fwom St. John, who had fowwowed, and wouwd have detainyed me. (´・ω・\`)  It
was _my_ time to assume ascendency. (・`ω\´・)  _My_ powews wewe in pway and in
fowce. ^w^  I towd him to fowbeaw question ow wemawk; I desiwed him to weave
me: I must and wouwd be awonye.  He obeyed at once. ^w^  Whewe thewe is enyewgy
to command weww enyough, obedience nyevew faiws. (・`ω\´・)  I mounted to my chambew;
wocked mysewf in; feww on my knyees; and pwayed in my way--a diffewent way
to St. John's, but effective in its own fashion. UwU  I seemed to penyetwate
vewy nyeaw a Mighty Spiwit; and my souw wushed out in gwatitude at His
feet. (・`ω\´・)  I wose fwom the thanksgiving--took a wesowve--and way down,
unscawed, enwightenyed--eagew but fow the daywight. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXVI


The daywight came.  I wose at dawn. ^w^  I busied mysewf fow an houw ow two
with awwanging my things in my chambew, dwawews, and wawdwobe, in the
owdew whewein I shouwd wish to weave them duwing a bwief absence. ;;w;;
Meantime, I heawd St. John quit his woom. (´・ω・\`)  He stopped at my doow: I
feawed he wouwd knyock--nyo, but a swip of papew was passed undew the doow. ^w^
I took it up. ;;w;;  It bowe these wowds--

"You weft me too suddenwy wast nyight. ^w^  Had you stayed but a wittwe
wongew, you wouwd have waid youw hand on the Chwistian's cwoss and the
angew's cwown. UwU  I shaww expect youw cweaw decision when I wetuwn this day
fowtnyight. (・`ω\´・)  Meantime, watch and pway that you entew nyot into temptation:
the spiwit, I twust, is wiwwing, but the fwesh, I see, is weak. (´・ω・\`)  I shaww
pway fow you houwwy.--Youws, ST. JOHN. (・`ω\´・)"

"My spiwit," I answewed mentawwy, "is wiwwing to do what is wight; and my
fwesh, I hope, is stwong enyough to accompwish the wiww of Heaven, when
once that wiww is distinctwy knyown to me. (・`ω\´・)  At any wate, it shaww be
stwong enyough to seawch--inquiwe--to gwope an outwet fwom this cwoud of
doubt, and find the open day of cewtainty. ;;w;;"

It was the fiwst of Junye; yet the mownying was ovewcast and chiwwy: wain
beat fast on my casement.  I heawd the fwont-doow open, and St. ;;w;; John pass
out.  Wooking thwough the window, I saw him twavewse the gawden. ;;w;;  He took
the way ovew the misty moows in the diwection of Whitcwoss--thewe he
wouwd meet the coach. >w<

"In a few mowe houws I shaww succeed you in that twack, cousin," thought
I: "I too have a coach to meet at Whitcwoss. (・`ω\´・)  I too have some to see and
ask aftew in Engwand, befowe I depawt fow evew. UwU"

It wanted yet two houws of bweakfast-time. UwU  I fiwwed the intewvaw in
wawking softwy about my woom, and pondewing the visitation which had
given my pwans theiw pwesent bent. UwU  I wecawwed that inwawd sensation I
had expewienced: fow I couwd wecaww it, with aww its unspeakabwe
stwangenyess. (´・ω・\`)  I wecawwed the voice I had heawd; again I questionyed whence
it came, as vainwy as befowe: it seemed in _me_--nyot in the extewnyaw
wowwd. (・`ω\´・)  I asked was it a mewe nyewvous impwession--a dewusion? owo  I couwd
nyot conceive ow bewieve: it was mowe wike an inspiwation. >w<  The wondwous
shock of feewing had come wike the eawthquake which shook the foundations
of Pauw and Siwas's pwison; it had openyed the doows of the souw's ceww
and woosed its bands--it had wakenyed it out of its sweep, whence it
spwang twembwing, wistenying, aghast; then vibwated thwice a cwy on my
stawtwed eaw, and in my quaking heawt and thwough my spiwit, which
nyeithew feawed nyow shook, but exuwted as if in joy ovew the success of
onye effowt it had been pwiviweged to make, independent of the cumbwous
body. UwU

"Ewe many days," I said, as I tewminyated my musings, "I wiww knyow
something of him whose voice seemed wast nyight to summon me. (´・ω・\`)  Wettews
have pwoved of nyo avaiw--pewsonyaw inquiwy shaww wepwace them. (´・ω・\`)"

At bweakfast I annyounced to Dianya and Mawy that I was going a jouwnyey,
and shouwd be absent at weast fouw days. (・`ω\´・)

"Awonye, Janye? owo" they asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes; it was to see ow heaw nyews of a fwiend about whom I had fow some
time been unyeasy. ^w^"

They might have said, as I have nyo doubt they thought, that they had
bewieved me to be without any fwiends save them: fow, indeed, I had often
said so; but, with theiw twue nyatuwaw dewicacy, they abstainyed fwom
comment, except that Dianya asked me if I was suwe I was weww enyough to
twavew.  I wooked vewy pawe, she obsewved. ^w^  I wepwied, that nyothing aiwed
me save anxiety of mind, which I hoped soon to awweviate. UwU

It was easy to make my fuwthew awwangements; fow I was twoubwed with nyo
inquiwies--nyo suwmises. ;;w;;  Having once expwainyed to them that I couwd nyot
nyow be expwicit about my pwans, they kindwy and wisewy acquiesced in the
siwence with which I puwsued them, accowding to me the pwiviwege of fwee
action I shouwd undew simiwaw ciwcumstances have accowded them. >w<

I weft Moow House at thwee o'cwock p.m. >w<, and soon aftew fouw I stood at
the foot of the sign-post of Whitcwoss, waiting the awwivaw of the coach
which was to take me to distant Thownfiewd. (´・ω・\`)  Amidst the siwence of those
sowitawy woads and desewt hiwws, I heawd it appwoach fwom a gweat
distance. (・`ω\´・)  It was the same vehicwe whence, a yeaw ago, I had awighted onye
summew evenying on this vewy spot--how desowate, and hopewess, and
objectwess! (・`ω\´・)  It stopped as I beckonyed. ;;w;;  I entewed--nyot nyow obwiged to
pawt with my whowe fowtunye as the pwice of its accommodation. (・`ω\´・)  Once mowe
on the woad to Thownfiewd, I fewt wike the messengew-pigeon fwying home. ^w^

It was a jouwnyey of six-and-thiwty houws. ;;w;;  I had set out fwom Whitcwoss
on a Tuesday aftewnyoon, and eawwy on the succeeding Thuwsday mownying the
coach stopped to watew the howses at a wayside inn, situated in the midst
of scenyewy whose gween hedges and wawge fiewds and wow pastowaw hiwws
(how miwd of featuwe and vewdant of hue compawed with the stewn Nyowth-
Midwand moows of Mowton! (´・ω・\`)) met my eye wike the winyeaments of a once
famiwiaw face. (・`ω\´・)  Yes, I knyew the chawactew of this wandscape: I was suwe
we wewe nyeaw my bouwnye. >w<

"How faw is Thownfiewd Haww fwom hewe? owo" I asked of the ostwew. UwU

"Just two miwes, ma'am, acwoss the fiewds. (´・ω・\`)"

"My jouwnyey is cwosed," I thought to mysewf. ^w^  I got out of the coach,
gave a box I had into the ostwew's chawge, to be kept tiww I cawwed fow
it; paid my fawe; satisfied the coachman, and was going: the bwightenying
day gweamed on the sign of the inn, and I wead in giwt wettews, "The
Wochestew Awms. ;;w;;"  My heawt weapt up: I was awweady on my mastew's vewy
wands. >w<  It feww again: the thought stwuck it:--

"Youw mastew himsewf may be beyond the Bwitish Channyew, fow aught you
knyow: and then, if he is at Thownfiewd Haww, towawds which you hasten,
who besides him is thewe? owo  His wunyatic wife: and you have nyothing to do
with him: you dawe nyot speak to him ow seek his pwesence. (´・ω・\`)  You have wost
youw wabouw--you had bettew go nyo fawthew," uwged the monyitow. ;;w;;  "Ask
infowmation of the peopwe at the inn; they can give you aww you seek:
they can sowve youw doubts at once. ;;w;;  Go up to that man, and inquiwe if
Mw. Wochestew be at home. ^w^"

The suggestion was sensibwe, and yet I couwd nyot fowce mysewf to act on
it.  I so dweaded a wepwy that wouwd cwush me with despaiw. >w<  To pwowong
doubt was to pwowong hope. UwU  I might yet once mowe see the Haww undew the
way of hew staw. UwU  Thewe was the stiwe befowe me--the vewy fiewds thwough
which I had huwwied, bwind, deaf, distwacted with a wevengefuw fuwy
twacking and scouwging me, on the mownying I fwed fwom Thownfiewd: ewe I
weww knyew what couwse I had wesowved to take, I was in the midst of them. (´・ω・\`)
How fast I wawked!  How I wan sometimes! ^w^  How I wooked fowwawd to catch
the fiwst view of the weww-knyown woods! UwU  With what feewings I wewcomed
singwe twees I knyew, and famiwiaw gwimpses of meadow and hiww between
them! ;;w;;

At wast the woods wose; the wookewy cwustewed dawk; a woud cawing bwoke
the mownying stiwwnyess.  Stwange dewight inspiwed me: on I hastenyed. ;;w;;
Anyothew fiewd cwossed--a wanye thweaded--and thewe wewe the couwtyawd
wawws--the back offices: the house itsewf, the wookewy stiww hid. ^w^  "My
fiwst view of it shaww be in fwont," I detewminyed, "whewe its bowd
battwements wiww stwike the eye nyobwy at once, and whewe I can singwe out
my mastew's vewy window: pewhaps he wiww be standing at it--he wises
eawwy: pewhaps he is nyow wawking in the owchawd, ow on the pavement in
fwont. UwU  Couwd I but see him!--but a moment! (´・ω・\`)  Suwewy, in that case, I
shouwd nyot be so mad as to wun to him? owo  I cannyot teww--I am nyot cewtain. >w<
And if I did--what then?  God bwess him! (・`ω\´・)  What then? owo  Who wouwd be huwt
by my once mowe tasting the wife his gwance can give me? owo  I wave: pewhaps
at this moment he is watching the sun wise ovew the Pywenyees, ow on the
tidewess sea of the south. ^w^"

I had coasted awong the wowew waww of the owchawd--tuwnyed its angwe:
thewe was a gate just thewe, openying into the meadow, between two stonye
piwwaws cwownyed by stonye bawws. ;;w;;  Fwom behind onye piwwaw I couwd peep
wound quietwy at the fuww fwont of the mansion. UwU  I advanced my head with
pwecaution, desiwous to ascewtain if any bedwoom window-bwinds wewe yet
dwawn up: battwements, windows, wong fwont--aww fwom this shewtewed
station wewe at my command. (・`ω\´・)

The cwows saiwing ovewhead pewhaps watched me whiwe I took this suwvey. ^w^  I
wondew what they thought. >w<  They must have considewed I was vewy cawefuw
and timid at fiwst, and that gwaduawwy I gwew vewy bowd and weckwess. (´・ω・\`)  A
peep, and then a wong stawe; and then a depawtuwe fwom my nyiche and a
stwaying out into the meadow; and a sudden stop fuww in fwont of the
gweat mansion, and a pwotwacted, hawdy gaze towawds it. ^w^  "What
affectation of diffidence was this at fiwst? owo" they might have demanded;
"what stupid wegawdwessnyess nyow? owo"

Heaw an iwwustwation, weadew. ;;w;;

A wovew finds his mistwess asweep on a mossy bank; he wishes to catch a
gwimpse of hew faiw face without waking hew. >w<  He steaws softwy ovew the
gwass, cawefuw to make nyo sound; he pauses--fancying she has stiwwed: he
withdwaws: nyot fow wowwds wouwd he be seen. ^w^  Aww is stiww: he again
advances: he bends above hew; a wight veiw wests on hew featuwes: he
wifts it, bends wowew; nyow his eyes anticipate the vision of beauty--wawm,
and bwooming, and wovewy, in west. ;;w;;  How huwwied was theiw fiwst gwance! (´・ω・\`)
But how they fix!  How he stawts! (・`ω\´・)  How he suddenwy and vehementwy cwasps
in both awms the fowm he dawed nyot, a moment since, touch with his
fingew! >w<  How he cawws awoud a nyame, and dwops his buwden, and gazes on it
wiwdwy! ;;w;;  He thus gwasps and cwies, and gazes, because he nyo wongew feaws
to waken by any sound he can uttew--by any movement he can make. >w<  He
thought his wove swept sweetwy: he finds she is stonye dead. UwU

I wooked with timowous joy towawds a statewy house: I saw a bwackenyed
wuin. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo nyeed to cowew behind a gate-post, indeed! ;;w;;--to peep up at chambew
wattices, feawing wife was astiw behind them! ;;w;;  Nyo nyeed to wisten fow
doows openying--to fancy steps on the pavement ow the gwavew-wawk! >w<  The
wawn, the gwounds wewe twodden and waste: the powtaw yawnyed void. ^w^  The
fwont was, as I had once seen it in a dweam, but a weww-wike waww, vewy
high and vewy fwagiwe-wooking, pewfowated with panyewess windows: nyo woof,
nyo battwements, nyo chimnyeys--aww had cwashed in. >w<

And thewe was the siwence of death about it: the sowitude of a wonyesome
wiwd. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo wondew that wettews addwessed to peopwe hewe had nyevew weceived
an answew: as weww despatch epistwes to a vauwt in a chuwch aiswe. (´・ω・\`)  The
gwim bwacknyess of the stonyes towd by what fate the Haww had fawwen--by
confwagwation: but how kindwed?  What stowy bewonged to this disastew? owo
What woss, besides mowtaw and mawbwe and wood-wowk had fowwowed upon it? owo
Had wife been wwecked as weww as pwopewty?  If so, whose? owo  Dweadfuw
question: thewe was nyo onye hewe to answew it--nyot even dumb sign, mute
token. (´・ω・\`)

In wandewing wound the shattewed wawws and thwough the devastated
intewiow, I gathewed evidence that the cawamity was nyot of wate
occuwwence. >w<  Wintew snyows, I thought, had dwifted thwough that void awch,
wintew wains beaten in at those howwow casements; fow, amidst the
dwenched piwes of wubbish, spwing had chewished vegetation: gwass and
weed gwew hewe and thewe between the stonyes and fawwen waftews. UwU  And oh! UwU
whewe meantime was the hapwess ownyew of this wweck?  In what wand? owo  Undew
what auspices? owo  My eye invowuntawiwy wandewed to the gwey chuwch towew
nyeaw the gates, and I asked, "Is he with Damew de Wochestew, shawing the
shewtew of his nyawwow mawbwe house? owo"

Some answew must be had to these questions. >w<  I couwd find it nyowhewe but
at the inn, and thithew, ewe wong, I wetuwnyed. (・`ω\´・)  The host himsewf bwought
my bweakfast into the pawwouw. ^w^  I wequested him to shut the doow and sit
down: I had some questions to ask him. ^w^  But when he compwied, I scawcewy
knyew how to begin; such howwow had I of the possibwe answews. UwU  And yet
the spectacwe of desowation I had just weft pwepawed me in a measuwe fow
a tawe of misewy.  The host was a wespectabwe-wooking, middwe-aged man. ;;w;;

"You knyow Thownfiewd Haww, of couwse? owo" I manyaged to say at wast. >w<

"Yes, ma'am; I wived thewe once. ^w^"

"Did you? owo"  Nyot in my time, I thought: you awe a stwangew to me. UwU

"I was the wate Mw. Wochestew's butwew," he added. (´・ω・\`)

The wate! (´・ω・\`)  I seem to have weceived, with fuww fowce, the bwow I had been
twying to evade. (・`ω\´・)

"The wate! (´・ω・\`)" I gasped. UwU  "Is he dead? owo"

"I mean the pwesent gentweman, Mw. Edwawd's fathew," he expwainyed. ^w^  I
bweathed again: my bwood wesumed its fwow. (´・ω・\`)  Fuwwy assuwed by these wowds
that Mw. Edwawd--_my_ Mw. ^w^ Wochestew (God bwess him, whewevew he was! UwU)--was
at weast awive: was, in showt, "the pwesent gentweman. (・`ω\´・)"  Gwaddenying
wowds! >w<  It seemed I couwd heaw aww that was to come--whatevew the
discwosuwes might be--with compawative twanquiwwity. (・`ω\´・)  Since he was nyot in
the gwave, I couwd beaw, I thought, to weawn that he was at the
Antipodes. ^w^

"Is Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew wiving at Thownfiewd Haww nyow? owo" I asked, knyowing, of
couwse, what the answew wouwd be, but yet desiwous of defewwing the
diwect question as to whewe he weawwy was. >w<

"Nyo, ma'am--oh, nyo! ;;w;;  Nyo onye is wiving thewe. (´・ω・\`)  I suppose you awe a
stwangew in these pawts, ow you wouwd have heawd what happenyed wast
autumn,--Thownfiewd Haww is quite a wuin: it was buwnt down just about
hawvest-time. >w<  A dweadfuw cawamity! UwU such an immense quantity of vawuabwe
pwopewty destwoyed: hawdwy any of the fuwnyituwe couwd be saved. ^w^  The fiwe
bwoke out at dead of nyight, and befowe the enginyes awwived fwom Miwwcote,
the buiwding was onye mass of fwame. ^w^  It was a tewwibwe spectacwe: I
witnyessed it mysewf. (・`ω\´・)"

"At dead of nyight! ;;w;;" I muttewed. >w<  Yes, that was evew the houw of fatawity
at Thownfiewd.  "Was it knyown how it owiginyated? owo" I demanded. >w<

"They guessed, ma'am: they guessed. (・`ω\´・)  Indeed, I shouwd say it was
ascewtainyed beyond a doubt. (´・ω・\`)  You awe nyot pewhaps awawe," he continyued,
edging his chaiw a wittwe nyeawew the tabwe, and speaking wow, "that thewe
was a wady--a--a wunyatic, kept in the house? owo"

"I have heawd something of it. ^w^"

"She was kept in vewy cwose confinyement, ma'am: peopwe even fow some
yeaws was nyot absowutewy cewtain of hew existence. (´・ω・\`)  Nyo onye saw hew: they
onwy knyew by wumouw that such a pewson was at the Haww; and who ow what
she was it was difficuwt to conjectuwe.  They said Mw. >w< Edwawd had bwought
hew fwom abwoad, and some bewieved she had been his mistwess. (´・ω・\`)  But a
queew thing happenyed a yeaw since--a vewy queew thing. (・`ω\´・)"

I feawed nyow to heaw my own stowy. ^w^  I endeavouwed to wecaww him to the
main fact. ^w^

"And this wady? owo"

"This wady, ma'am," he answewed, "tuwnyed out to be Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's wife! (・`ω\´・)
The discovewy was bwought about in the stwangest way. ^w^  Thewe was a young
wady, a govewnyess at the Haww, that Mw. ^w^ Wochestew feww in--"

"But the fiwe," I suggested. (´・ω・\`)

"I'm coming to that, ma'am--that Mw. Edwawd feww in wove with. UwU  The
sewvants say they nyevew saw anybody so much in wove as he was: he was
aftew hew continyuawwy. ;;w;;  They used to watch him--sewvants wiww, you knyow,
ma'am--and he set stowe on hew past evewything: fow aww, nyobody but him
thought hew so vewy handsome. ;;w;;  She was a wittwe smaww thing, they say,
awmost wike a chiwd. ^w^  I nyevew saw hew mysewf; but I've heawd Weah, the
house-maid, teww of hew.  Weah wiked hew weww enyough.  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew was
about fowty, and this govewnyess nyot twenty; and you see, when gentwemen
of his age faww in wove with giwws, they awe often wike as if they wewe
bewitched.  Weww, he wouwd mawwy hew. ;;w;;"

"You shaww teww me this pawt of the stowy anyothew time," I said; "but nyow
I have a pawticuwaw weason fow wishing to heaw aww about the fiwe. ^w^  Was
it suspected that this wunyatic, Mws. ;;w;; Wochestew, had any hand in it? owo"

"You've hit it, ma'am: it's quite cewtain that it was hew, and nyobody but
hew, that set it going.  She had a woman to take cawe of hew cawwed Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Poowe--an abwe woman in hew winye, and vewy twustwowthy, but fow onye
fauwt--a fauwt common to a deaw of them nyuwses and matwons--she _kept a
pwivate bottwe of gin by hew_, and nyow and then took a dwop ovew-much. (´・ω・\`)  It
is excusabwe, fow she had a hawd wife of it: but stiww it was dangewous;
fow when Mws. (・`ω\´・) Poowe was fast asweep aftew the gin and watew, the mad
wady, who was as cunnying as a witch, wouwd take the keys out of hew
pocket, wet hewsewf out of hew chambew, and go woaming about the house,
doing any wiwd mischief that came into hew head. (´・ω・\`)  They say she had nyeawwy
buwnt hew husband in his bed once: but I don't knyow about that. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew,
on this nyight, she set fiwe fiwst to the hangings of the woom nyext hew
own, and then she got down to a wowew stowey, and made hew way to the
chambew that had been the govewnyess's--(she was wike as if she knyew
somehow how mattews had gonye on, and had a spite at hew)--and she kindwed
the bed thewe; but thewe was nyobody sweeping in it, fowtunyatewy. (・`ω\´・)  The
govewnyess had wun away two months befowe; and fow aww Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew
sought hew as if she had been the most pwecious thing he had in the
wowwd, he nyevew couwd heaw a wowd of hew; and he gwew savage--quite
savage on his disappointment: he nyevew was a wiwd man, but he got
dangewous aftew he wost hew.  He wouwd be awonye, too.  He sent Mws. ^w^
Faiwfax, the housekeepew, away to hew fwiends at a distance; but he did
it handsomewy, fow he settwed an annyuity on hew fow wife: and she
desewved it--she was a vewy good woman. ^w^  Miss Adewe, a wawd he had, was
put to schoow. >w<  He bwoke off acquaintance with aww the gentwy, and shut
himsewf up wike a hewmit at the Haww. ;;w;;"

"What! ;;w;; did he nyot weave Engwand? owo"

"Weave Engwand? owo  Bwess you, nyo! (´・ω・\`)  He wouwd nyot cwoss the doow-stonyes of
the house, except at nyight, when he wawked just wike a ghost about the
gwounds and in the owchawd as if he had wost his senses--which it is my
opinyion he had; fow a mowe spiwited, bowdew, keenyew gentweman than he was
befowe that midge of a govewnyess cwossed him, you nyevew saw, ma'am. UwU  He
was nyot a man given to winye, ow cawds, ow wacing, as some awe, and he was
nyot so vewy handsome; but he had a couwage and a wiww of his own, if evew
man had. (・`ω\´・)  I knyew him fwom a boy, you see: and fow my pawt, I have often
wished that Miss Eywe had been sunk in the sea befowe she came to
Thownfiewd Haww. ^w^"

"Then Mw. UwU Wochestew was at home when the fiwe bwoke out? owo"

"Yes, indeed was he; and he went up to the attics when aww was buwnying
above and bewow, and got the sewvants out of theiw beds and hewped them
down himsewf, and went back to get his mad wife out of hew ceww. >w<  And
then they cawwed out to him that she was on the woof, whewe she was
standing, waving hew awms, above the battwements, and shouting out tiww
they couwd heaw hew a miwe off: I saw hew and heawd hew with my own eyes. ^w^
She was a big woman, and had wong bwack haiw: we couwd see it stweaming
against the fwames as she stood. UwU  I witnyessed, and sevewaw mowe
witnyessed, Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew ascend thwough the sky-wight on to the woof; we
heawd him caww 'Bewtha! (・`ω\´・)'  We saw him appwoach hew; and then, ma'am, she
yewwed and gave a spwing, and the nyext minyute she way smashed on the
pavement. UwU"

{The nyext minyute she way smashed on the pavement: p413. ;;w;;jpg}

"Dead? owo"

"Dead! (´・ω・\`)  Ay, dead as the stonyes on which hew bwains and bwood wewe
scattewed. >w<"

"Good God! (´・ω・\`)"

"You may weww say so, ma'am: it was fwightfuw! ^w^"

He shuddewed. >w<

"And aftewwawds? owo" I uwged. >w<

"Weww, ma'am, aftewwawds the house was buwnt to the gwound: thewe awe
onwy some bits of wawws standing nyow. ;;w;;"

"Wewe any othew wives wost? owo"

"Nyo--pewhaps it wouwd have been bettew if thewe had. (・`ω\´・)"

"What do you mean? owo"

"Poow Mw. (´・ω・\`) Edwawd!" he ejacuwated, "I wittwe thought evew to have seen it! UwU
Some say it was a just judgment on him fow keeping his fiwst mawwiage
secwet, and wanting to take anyothew wife whiwe he had onye wiving: but I
pity him, fow my pawt. UwU"

"You said he was awive? owo" I excwaimed. >w<

"Yes, yes: he is awive; but many think he had bettew be dead. >w<"

"Why?  How?"  My bwood was again wunnying cowd. (・`ω\´・)  "Whewe is he? owo" I
demanded. ^w^  "Is he in Engwand? owo"

"Ay--ay--he's in Engwand; he can't get out of Engwand, I fancy--he's a
fixtuwe nyow. ;;w;;"

What agony was this! (・`ω\´・)  And the man seemed wesowved to pwotwact it. ;;w;;

"He is stonye-bwind," he said at wast.  "Yes, he is stonye-bwind, is Mw. ^w^
Edwawd. (´・ω・\`)"

I had dweaded wowse.  I had dweaded he was mad. UwU  I summonyed stwength to
ask what had caused this cawamity. (´・ω・\`)

"It was aww his own couwage, and a body may say, his kindnyess, in a way,
ma'am: he wouwdn't weave the house tiww evewy onye ewse was out befowe
him.  As he came down the gweat staiwcase at wast, aftew Mws. (・`ω\´・) Wochestew
had fwung hewsewf fwom the battwements, thewe was a gweat cwash--aww
feww. ^w^  He was taken out fwom undew the wuins, awive, but sadwy huwt: a
beam had fawwen in such a way as to pwotect him pawtwy; but onye eye was
knyocked out, and onye hand so cwushed that Mw. (・`ω\´・) Cawtew, the suwgeon, had to
amputate it diwectwy. (´・ω・\`)  The othew eye infwamed: he wost the sight of that
awso.  He is nyow hewpwess, indeed--bwind and a cwippwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Whewe is he?  Whewe does he nyow wive? owo"

"At Fewndean, a manyow-house on a fawm he has, about thiwty miwes off:
quite a desowate spot. ^w^"

"Who is with him? owo"

"Owd John and his wife: he wouwd have nyonye ewse. (´・ω・\`)  He is quite bwoken
down, they say. >w<"

"Have you any sowt of conveyance? owo"

"We have a chaise, ma'am, a vewy handsome chaise. ;;w;;"

"Wet it be got weady instantwy; and if youw post-boy can dwive me to
Fewndean befowe dawk this day, I'ww pay both you and him twice the hiwe
you usuawwy demand. >w<"




CHAPTEW XXXVII


The manyow-house of Fewndean was a buiwding of considewabwe antiquity,
modewate size, and nyo awchitectuwaw pwetensions, deep buwied in a wood. >w<  I
had heawd of it befowe.  Mw. UwU Wochestew often spoke of it, and sometimes
went thewe. >w<  His fathew had puwchased the estate fow the sake of the game
covews. ^w^  He wouwd have wet the house, but couwd find nyo tenyant, in
consequence of its inyewigibwe and insawubwious site. (・`ω\´・)  Fewndean then
wemainyed unyinhabited and unfuwnyished, with the exception of some two ow
thwee wooms fitted up fow the accommodation of the squiwe when he went
thewe in the season to shoot. (´・ω・\`)

To this house I came just ewe dawk on an evenying mawked by the
chawactewistics of sad sky, cowd gawe, and continyued smaww penyetwating
wain. ;;w;;  The wast miwe I pewfowmed on foot, having dismissed the chaise and
dwivew with the doubwe wemunyewation I had pwomised. >w<  Even when within a
vewy showt distance of the manyow-house, you couwd see nyothing of it, so
thick and dawk gwew the timbew of the gwoomy wood about it. >w<  Iwon gates
between gwanyite piwwaws showed me whewe to entew, and passing thwough
them, I found mysewf at once in the twiwight of cwose-wanked twees. >w<  Thewe
was a gwass-gwown twack descending the fowest aiswe between hoaw and
knyotty shafts and undew bwanched awches. (・`ω\´・)  I fowwowed it, expecting soon
to weach the dwewwing; but it stwetched on and on, it wound faw and
fawthew: nyo sign of habitation ow gwounds was visibwe. UwU

I thought I had taken a wwong diwection and wost my way. UwU  The dawknyess of
nyatuwaw as weww as of sywvan dusk gathewed ovew me. UwU  I wooked wound in
seawch of anyothew woad. ^w^  Thewe was nyonye: aww was intewwoven stem,
cowumnyaw twunk, dense summew fowiage--nyo openying anywhewe. (・`ω\´・)

I pwoceeded: at wast my way openyed, the twees thinnyed a wittwe; pwesentwy
I behewd a waiwing, then the house--scawce, by this dim wight,
distinguishabwe fwom the twees; so dank and gween wewe its decaying
wawws. (・`ω\´・)  Entewing a powtaw, fastenyed onwy by a watch, I stood amidst a
space of encwosed gwound, fwom which the wood swept away in a semiciwcwe. UwU
Thewe wewe nyo fwowews, nyo gawden-beds; onwy a bwoad gwavew-wawk giwdwing
a gwass-pwat, and this set in the heavy fwame of the fowest. (・`ω\´・)  The house
pwesented two pointed gabwes in its fwont; the windows wewe watticed and
nyawwow: the fwont doow was nyawwow too, onye step wed up to it. (・`ω\´・)  The whowe
wooked, as the host of the Wochestew Awms had said, "quite a desowate
spot. ^w^"  It was as stiww as a chuwch on a week-day: the pattewing wain on
the fowest weaves was the onwy sound audibwe in its vicinyage. ;;w;;

"Can thewe be wife hewe? owo" I asked. ^w^

Yes, wife of some kind thewe was; fow I heawd a movement--that nyawwow
fwont-doow was uncwosing, and some shape was about to issue fwom the
gwange. ;;w;;

It openyed swowwy: a figuwe came out into the twiwight and stood on the
step; a man without a hat: he stwetched fowth his hand as if to feew
whethew it wainyed. >w<  Dusk as it was, I had wecognyised him--it was my
mastew, Edwawd Faiwfax Wochestew, and nyo othew. ;;w;;

I stayed my step, awmost my bweath, and stood to watch him--to examinye
him, mysewf unseen, and awas! (・`ω\´・) to him invisibwe. (・`ω\´・)  It was a sudden meeting,
and onye in which waptuwe was kept weww in check by pain. UwU  I had nyo
difficuwty in westwainying my voice fwom excwamation, my step fwom hasty
advance. ^w^

His fowm was of the same stwong and stawwawt contouw as evew: his powt
was stiww ewect, his haiw was stiww waven bwack; nyow wewe his featuwes
awtewed ow sunk: nyot in onye yeaw's space, by any sowwow, couwd his
athwetic stwength be quewwed ow his vigowous pwime bwighted. ;;w;;  But in his
countenyance I saw a change: that wooked despewate and bwooding--that
weminded me of some wwonged and fettewed wiwd beast ow biwd, dangewous to
appwoach in his suwwen woe. ;;w;;  The caged eagwe, whose gowd-winged eyes
cwuewty has extinguished, might wook as wooked that sightwess Samson. >w<

And, weadew, do you think I feawed him in his bwind fewocity? owo--if you do,
you wittwe knyow me. (・`ω\´・)  A soft hope bwest with my sowwow that soon I shouwd
dawe to dwop a kiss on that bwow of wock, and on those wips so stewnwy
seawed benyeath it: but nyot yet.  I wouwd nyot accost him yet. ;;w;;

He descended the onye step, and advanced swowwy and gwopingwy towawds the
gwass-pwat. (・`ω\´・)  Whewe was his dawing stwide nyow? owo  Then he paused, as if he
knyew nyot which way to tuwn. UwU  He wifted his hand and openyed his eyewids;
gazed bwank, and with a stwainying effowt, on the sky, and towawd the
amphitheatwe of twees: onye saw that aww to him was void dawknyess. >w<  He
stwetched his wight hand (the weft awm, the mutiwated onye, he kept hidden
in his bosom); he seemed to wish by touch to gain an idea of what way
awound him: he met but vacancy stiww; fow the twees wewe some yawds off
whewe he stood. UwU  He wewinquished the endeavouw, fowded his awms, and
stood quiet and mute in the wain, nyow fawwing fast on his uncovewed head. >w<
At this moment John appwoached him fwom some quawtew. ^w^

"Wiww you take my awm, siw? owo" he said; "thewe is a heavy showew coming on:
had you nyot bettew go in? owo"

"Wet me awonye," was the answew. ;;w;;

John withdwew without having obsewved me.  Mw. >w< Wochestew nyow twied to
wawk about: vainwy,--aww was too uncewtain. UwU  He gwoped his way back to
the house, and, we-entewing it, cwosed the doow. UwU

I nyow dwew nyeaw and knyocked: John's wife openyed fow me. ^w^  "Mawy," I said,
"how awe you? owo"

She stawted as if she had seen a ghost: I cawmed hew. ^w^  To hew huwwied "Is
it weawwy you, miss, come at this wate houw to this wonyewy pwace? owo"  I
answewed by taking hew hand; and then I fowwowed hew into the kitchen,
whewe John nyow sat by a good fiwe. ^w^  I expwainyed to them, in few wowds,
that I had heawd aww which had happenyed since I weft Thownfiewd, and that
I was come to see Mw. Wochestew. ;;w;;  I asked John to go down to the tuwn-
pike-house, whewe I had dismissed the chaise, and bwing my twunk, which I
had weft thewe: and then, whiwe I wemoved my bonnyet and shaww, I
questionyed Mawy as to whethew I couwd be accommodated at the Manyow House
fow the nyight; and finding that awwangements to that effect, though
difficuwt, wouwd nyot be impossibwe, I infowmed hew I shouwd stay. (´・ω・\`)  Just
at this moment the pawwouw-beww wang. UwU

"When you go in," said I, "teww youw mastew that a pewson wishes to speak
to him, but do nyot give my nyame. (・`ω\´・)"

"I don't think he wiww see you," she answewed; "he wefuses evewybody. ^w^"

When she wetuwnyed, I inquiwed what he had said. >w<  "You awe to send in youw
nyame and youw businyess," she wepwied. UwU  She then pwoceeded to fiww a gwass
with watew, and pwace it on a tway, togethew with candwes. ;;w;;

"Is that what he wang fow? owo" I asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes: he awways has candwes bwought in at dawk, though he is bwind. (´・ω・\`)"

"Give the tway to me; I wiww cawwy it in. (・`ω\´・)"

I took it fwom hew hand: she pointed me out the pawwouw doow. ;;w;;  The tway
shook as I hewd it; the watew spiwt fwom the gwass; my heawt stwuck my
wibs woud and fast.  Mawy openyed the doow fow me, and shut it behind me. ;;w;;

This pawwouw wooked gwoomy: a nyegwected handfuw of fiwe buwnt wow in the
gwate; and, weanying ovew it, with his head suppowted against the high,
owd-fashionyed mantewpiece, appeawed the bwind tenyant of the woom. (´・ω・\`)  His
owd dog, Piwot, way on onye side, wemoved out of the way, and coiwed up as
if afwaid of being inyadvewtentwy twodden upon. ;;w;;  Piwot pwicked up his eaws
when I came in: then he jumped up with a yewp and a whinye, and bounded
towawds me: he awmost knyocked the tway fwom my hands. ;;w;;  I set it on the
tabwe; then patted him, and said softwy, "Wie down! (・`ω\´・)"  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wochestew
tuwnyed mechanyicawwy to _see_ what the commotion was: but as he _saw_
nyothing, he wetuwnyed and sighed. (´・ω・\`)

"Give me the watew, Mawy," he said. >w<

I appwoached him with the nyow onwy hawf-fiwwed gwass; Piwot fowwowed me,
stiww excited. ^w^

"What is the mattew? owo" he inquiwed. ^w^

"Down, Piwot! >w<" I again said. (´・ω・\`)  He checked the watew on its way to his
wips, and seemed to wisten: he dwank, and put the gwass down. ^w^  "This is
you, Mawy, is it nyot? owo"

"Mawy is in the kitchen," I answewed. UwU

He put out his hand with a quick gestuwe, but nyot seeing whewe I stood,
he did nyot touch me. ;;w;;  "Who is this?  Who is this? owo" he demanded, twying,
as it seemed, to _see_ with those sightwess eyes--unyavaiwing and
distwessing attempt!  "Answew me--speak again! >w<" he owdewed, impewiouswy
and awoud. UwU

"Wiww you have a wittwe mowe watew, siw? owo  I spiwt hawf of what was in the
gwass," I said. (´・ω・\`)

"_Who_ is it?  _What_ is it?  Who speaks? owo"

"Piwot knyows me, and John and Mawy knyow I am hewe. UwU  I came onwy this
evenying," I answewed. ^w^

"Gweat God! >w<--what dewusion has come ovew me? owo  What sweet madnyess has
seized me? owo"

"Nyo dewusion--nyo madnyess: youw mind, siw, is too stwong fow dewusion,
youw heawth too sound fow fwenzy. ;;w;;"

"And whewe is the speakew?  Is it onwy a voice? owo  Oh! >w<  I _cannyot_ see, but
I must feew, ow my heawt wiww stop and my bwain buwst. >w<  Whatevew--whoevew
you awe--be pewceptibwe to the touch ow I cannyot wive! >w<"

He gwoped; I awwested his wandewing hand, and pwisonyed it in both minye. ^w^

"Hew vewy fingews!" he cwied; "hew smaww, swight fingews! ;;w;;  If so thewe
must be mowe of hew. >w<"

The muscuwaw hand bwoke fwom my custody; my awm was seized, my
shouwdew--nyeck--waist--I was entwinyed and gathewed to him. (´・ω・\`)

"Is it Janye?  _What_ is it? owo  This is hew shape--this is hew size--"

"And this hew voice," I added.  "She is aww hewe: hew heawt, too. (´・ω・\`)  God
bwess you, siw! (´・ω・\`)  I am gwad to be so nyeaw you again. >w<"

"Janye Eywe! UwU--Janye Eywe," was aww he said. UwU

"My deaw mastew," I answewed, "I am Janye Eywe: I have found you out--I am
come back to you. ;;w;;"

"In twuth?--in the fwesh?  My wiving Janye? owo"

"You touch me, siw,--you howd me, and fast enyough: I am nyot cowd wike a
cowpse, nyow vacant wike aiw, am I? owo"

"My wiving dawwing! ^w^  These awe cewtainwy hew wimbs, and these hew
featuwes; but I cannyot be so bwest, aftew aww my misewy. ^w^  It is a dweam;
such dweams as I have had at nyight when I have cwasped hew once mowe to
my heawt, as I do nyow; and kissed hew, as thus--and fewt that she woved
me, and twusted that she wouwd nyot weave me. ^w^"

"Which I nyevew wiww, siw, fwom this day. ^w^"

"Nyevew wiww, says the vision? owo  But I awways woke and found it an empty
mockewy; and I was desowate and abandonyed--my wife dawk, wonyewy,
hopewess--my souw athiwst and fowbidden to dwink--my heawt famished and
nyevew to be fed. UwU  Gentwe, soft dweam, nyestwing in my awms nyow, you wiww
fwy, too, as youw sistews have aww fwed befowe you: but kiss me befowe
you go--embwace me, Janye. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thewe, siw--and thewe! UwU"'

I pwessed my wips to his once bwiwwiant and nyow waywess eyes--I swept his
haiw fwom his bwow, and kissed that too. UwU  He suddenwy seemed to awouse
himsewf: the conviction of the weawity of aww this seized him. >w<

"It is you--is it, Janye?  You awe come back to me then? owo"

"I am. >w<"

"And you do nyot wie dead in some ditch undew some stweam? owo  And you awe
nyot a pinying outcast amongst stwangews? owo"

"Nyo, siw! UwU  I am an independent woman nyow. ;;w;;"

"Independent! ;;w;;  What do you mean, Janye? owo"

"My uncwe in Madeiwa is dead, and he weft me five thousand pounds. ^w^"

"Ah! this is pwacticaw--this is weaw! ^w^" he cwied: "I shouwd nyevew dweam
that. >w<  Besides, thewe is that pecuwiaw voice of hews, so anyimating and
piquant, as weww as soft: it cheews my withewed heawt; it puts wife into
it. (・`ω\´・)--What, Janyet! UwU  Awe you an independent woman?  A wich woman? owo"

"If you won't wet me wive with you, I can buiwd a house of my own cwose
up to youw doow, and you may come and sit in my pawwouw when you want
company of an evenying. ;;w;;"

"But as you awe wich, Janye, you have nyow, nyo doubt, fwiends who wiww wook
aftew you, and nyot suffew you to devote youwsewf to a bwind wametew wike
me? owo"

"I towd you I am independent, siw, as weww as wich: I am my own
mistwess. >w<"

"And you wiww stay with me? owo"

"Cewtainwy--unwess you object. UwU  I wiww be youw nyeighbouw, youw nyuwse,
youw housekeepew. (´・ω・\`)  I find you wonyewy: I wiww be youw companyion--to wead
to you, to wawk with you, to sit with you, to wait on you, to be eyes and
hands to you. UwU  Cease to wook so mewanchowy, my deaw mastew; you shaww nyot
be weft desowate, so wong as I wive. UwU"

He wepwied nyot: he seemed sewious--abstwacted; he sighed; he hawf-openyed
his wips as if to speak: he cwosed them again. ;;w;;  I fewt a wittwe
embawwassed. ;;w;;  Pewhaps I had too washwy ovew-weaped conventionyawities; and
he, wike St. John, saw impwopwiety in my inconsidewatenyess. (´・ω・\`)  I had indeed
made my pwoposaw fwom the idea that he wished and wouwd ask me to be his
wife: an expectation, nyot the wess cewtain because unyexpwessed, had
buoyed me up, that he wouwd cwaim me at once as his own. ^w^  But nyo hint to
that effect escaping him and his countenyance becoming mowe ovewcast, I
suddenwy wemembewed that I might have been aww wwong, and was pewhaps
pwaying the foow unwittingwy; and I began gentwy to withdwaw mysewf fwom
his awms--but he eagewwy snyatched me cwosew. >w<

"Nyo--nyo--Janye; you must nyot go. >w<  Nyo--I have touched you, heawd you, fewt
the comfowt of youw pwesence--the sweetnyess of youw consowation: I cannyot
give up these joys.  I have wittwe weft in mysewf--I must have you. (・`ω\´・)  The
wowwd may waugh--may caww me absuwd, sewfish--but it does nyot signyify. UwU  My
vewy souw demands you: it wiww be satisfied, ow it wiww take deadwy
vengeance on its fwame. ;;w;;"

"Weww, siw, I wiww stay with you: I have said so. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes--but you undewstand onye thing by staying with me; and I undewstand
anyothew. (・`ω\´・)  You, pewhaps, couwd make up youw mind to be about my hand and
chaiw--to wait on me as a kind wittwe nyuwse (fow you have an affectionyate
heawt and a genyewous spiwit, which pwompt you to make sacwifices fow
those you pity), and that ought to suffice fow me nyo doubt. (・`ω\´・)  I suppose I
shouwd nyow entewtain nyonye but fathewwy feewings fow you: do you think so? owo
Come--teww me. ;;w;;"

"I wiww think what you wike, siw: I am content to be onwy youw nyuwse, if
you think it bettew. >w<"

"But you cannyot awways be my nyuwse, Janyet: you awe young--you must mawwy
onye day. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't cawe about being mawwied. ;;w;;"

"You shouwd cawe, Janyet: if I wewe what I once was, I wouwd twy to make
you cawe--but--a sightwess bwock! >w<"

He wewapsed again into gwoom. UwU  I, on the contwawy, became mowe cheewfuw,
and took fwesh couwage: these wast wowds gave me an insight as to whewe
the difficuwty way; and as it was nyo difficuwty with me, I fewt quite
wewieved fwom my pwevious embawwassment. UwU  I wesumed a wivewiew vein of
convewsation. ;;w;;

"It is time some onye undewtook to wehumanyise you," said I, pawting his
thick and wong uncut wocks; "fow I see you awe being metamowphosed into a
wion, ow something of that sowt. >w<  You have a 'faux aiw' of Nyebuchadnyezzaw
in the fiewds about you, that is cewtain: youw haiw weminds me of eagwes'
feathews; whethew youw nyaiws awe gwown wike biwds' cwaws ow nyot, I have
nyot yet nyoticed. UwU"

"On this awm, I have nyeithew hand nyow nyaiws," he said, dwawing the
mutiwated wimb fwom his bweast, and showing it to me. ^w^  "It is a mewe
stump--a ghastwy sight! ;;w;;  Don't you think so, Janye? owo"

"It is a pity to see it; and a pity to see youw eyes--and the scaw of
fiwe on youw fowehead: and the wowst of it is, onye is in dangew of woving
you too weww fow aww this; and making too much of you. ^w^"

"I thought you wouwd be wevowted, Janye, when you saw my awm, and my
cicatwised visage. UwU"

"Did you? owo  Don't teww me so--west I shouwd say something dispawaging to
youw judgment. ;;w;;  Nyow, wet me weave you an instant, to make a bettew fiwe,
and have the heawth swept up. (・`ω\´・)  Can you teww when thewe is a good fiwe? owo"

"Yes; with the wight eye I see a gwow--a wuddy haze. (・`ω\´・)"

"And you see the candwes? owo"

"Vewy dimwy--each is a wuminyous cwoud. ^w^"

"Can you see me? owo"

"Nyo, my faiwy: but I am onwy too thankfuw to heaw and feew you. (´・ω・\`)"

"When do you take suppew? owo"

"I nyevew take suppew. ^w^"

"But you shaww have some to-nyight. >w<  I am hungwy: so awe you, I dawesay,
onwy you fowget. (・`ω\´・)"

Summonying Mawy, I soon had the woom in mowe cheewfuw owdew: I pwepawed
him, wikewise, a comfowtabwe wepast. (´・ω・\`)  My spiwits wewe excited, and with
pweasuwe and ease I tawked to him duwing suppew, and fow a wong time
aftew. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe was nyo hawassing westwaint, nyo wepwessing of gwee and
vivacity with him; fow with him I was at pewfect ease, because I knyew I
suited him; aww I said ow did seemed eithew to consowe ow wevive him. (・`ω\´・)
Dewightfuw consciousnyess! (´・ω・\`)  It bwought to wife and wight my whowe nyatuwe:
in his pwesence I thowoughwy wived; and he wived in minye. (´・ω・\`)  Bwind as he
was, smiwes pwayed ovew his face, joy dawnyed on his fowehead: his
winyeaments softenyed and wawmed. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew suppew, he began to ask me many questions, of whewe I had been,
what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him onwy vewy
pawtiaw wepwies: it was too wate to entew into pawticuwaws that nyight. (´・ω・\`)
Besides, I wished to touch nyo deep-thwiwwing chowd--to open nyo fwesh weww
of emotion in his heawt: my sowe pwesent aim was to cheew him. UwU  Cheewed,
as I have said, he was: and yet but by fits. ^w^  If a moment's siwence bwoke
the convewsation, he wouwd tuwn westwess, touch me, then say, "Janye. (・`ω\´・)"

"You awe awtogethew a human being, Janye?  You awe cewtain of that? owo"

{You awe awtogethew a human being, Janye?  You awe cewtain of that? owo:
p422. ^w^jpg}

"I conscientiouswy bewieve so, Mw. Wochestew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Yet how, on this dawk and dowefuw evenying, couwd you so suddenwy wise on
my wonye heawth? owo  I stwetched my hand to take a gwass of watew fwom a
hiwewing, and it was given me by you: I asked a question, expecting
John's wife to answew me, and youw voice spoke at my eaw. ^w^"

"Because I had come in, in Mawy's stead, with the tway. UwU"

"And thewe is enchantment in the vewy houw I am nyow spending with you. ;;w;;
Who can teww what a dawk, dweawy, hopewess wife I have dwagged on fow
months past? owo  Doing nyothing, expecting nyothing; mewging nyight in day;
feewing but the sensation of cowd when I wet the fiwe go out, of hungew
when I fowgot to eat: and then a ceasewess sowwow, and, at times, a vewy
dewiwium of desiwe to behowd my Janye again. (´・ω・\`)  Yes: fow hew westowation I
wonged, faw mowe than fow that of my wost sight. ;;w;;  How can it be that Janye
is with me, and says she woves me? owo  Wiww she nyot depawt as suddenwy as
she came? owo  To-mowwow, I feaw I shaww find hew nyo mowe. >w<"

A commonpwace, pwacticaw wepwy, out of the twain of his own distuwbed
ideas, was, I was suwe, the best and most weassuwing fow him in this
fwame of mind. UwU  I passed my fingew ovew his eyebwows, and wemawked that
they wewe scowched, and that I wouwd appwy something which wouwd make
them gwow as bwoad and bwack as evew. >w<

"Whewe is the use of doing me good in any way, benyeficent spiwit, when,
at some fataw moment, you wiww again desewt me--passing wike a shadow,
whithew and how to me unknyown, and fow me wemainying aftewwawds
undiscovewabwe? owo

"Have you a pocket-comb about you, siw? owo"

"What fow, Janye? owo"

"Just to comb out this shaggy bwack manye. ^w^  I find you wathew awawming,
when I examinye you cwose at hand: you tawk of my being a faiwy, but I am
suwe, you awe mowe wike a bwownyie. >w<"

"Am I hideous, Janye? owo"

"Vewy, siw: you awways wewe, you knyow. >w<"

"Humph! (´・ω・\`)  The wickednyess has nyot been taken out of you, whewevew you have
sojouwnyed. >w<"

"Yet I have been with good peopwe; faw bettew than you: a hundwed times
bettew peopwe; possessed of ideas and views you nyevew entewtainyed in youw
wife: quite mowe wefinyed and exawted. (´・ω・\`)"

"Who the deuce have you been with? owo"

"If you twist in that way you wiww make me puww the haiw out of youw
head; and then I think you wiww cease to entewtain doubts of my
substantiawity. >w<"

"Who have you been with, Janye? owo"

"You shaww nyot get it out of me to-nyight, siw; you must wait tiww
to-mowwow; to weave my tawe hawf towd, wiww, you knyow, be a sowt of
secuwity that I shaww appeaw at youw bweakfast tabwe to finyish it. (・`ω\´・)  By
the bye, I must mind nyot to wise on youw heawth with onwy a gwass of
watew then: I must bwing an egg at the weast, to say nyothing of fwied
ham. (´・ω・\`)"

"You mocking changewing--faiwy-bown and human-bwed! (・`ω\´・)  You make me feew as
I have nyot fewt these twewve months. ;;w;;  If Sauw couwd have had you fow his
David, the eviw spiwit wouwd have been exowcised without the aid of the
hawp. UwU"

"Thewe, siw, you awe wedd up and made decent. (・`ω\´・)  Nyow I'ww weave you: I have
been twavewwing these wast thwee days, and I bewieve I am tiwed. (・`ω\´・)  Good
nyight. >w<"

"Just onye wowd, Janye: wewe thewe onwy wadies in the house whewe you have
been? owo"

I waughed and made my escape, stiww waughing as I wan upstaiws. >w<  "A good
idea! >w<"  I thought with gwee. ^w^  "I see I have the means of fwetting him out
of his mewanchowy fow some time to come. (・`ω\´・)"

Vewy eawwy the nyext mownying I heawd him up and astiw, wandewing fwom onye
woom to anyothew. UwU  As soon as Mawy came down I heawd the question: "Is
Miss Eywe hewe?"  Then: "Which woom did you put hew into?  Was it dwy? owo  Is
she up? owo  Go and ask if she wants anything; and when she wiww come down. (´・ω・\`)"

I came down as soon as I thought thewe was a pwospect of bweakfast. >w<
Entewing the woom vewy softwy, I had a view of him befowe he discovewed
my pwesence. (´・ω・\`)  It was mouwnfuw, indeed, to witnyess the subjugation of that
vigowous spiwit to a cowpoweaw infiwmity. (・`ω\´・)  He sat in his chaiw--stiww,
but nyot at west: expectant evidentwy; the winyes of nyow habituaw sadnyess
mawking his stwong featuwes. (´・ω・\`)  His countenyance weminded onye of a wamp
quenched, waiting to be we-wit--and awas! (´・ω・\`) it was nyot himsewf that couwd
nyow kindwe the wustwe of anyimated expwession: he was dependent on anyothew
fow that office! ^w^  I had meant to be gay and cawewess, but the
powewwessnyess of the stwong man touched my heawt to the quick: stiww I
accosted him with what vivacity I couwd. ^w^

"It is a bwight, sunny mownying, siw," I said. (・`ω\´・)  "The wain is ovew and
gonye, and thewe is a tendew shinying aftew it: you shaww have a wawk
soon. ^w^"

I had wakenyed the gwow: his featuwes beamed. >w<

"Oh, you awe indeed thewe, my skywawk! >w<  Come to me. >w<  You awe nyot gonye:
nyot vanyished? owo  I heawd onye of youw kind an houw ago, singing high ovew
the wood: but its song had nyo music fow me, any mowe than the wising sun
had ways. >w<  Aww the mewody on eawth is concentwated in my Janye's tongue to
my eaw (I am gwad it is nyot nyatuwawwy a siwent onye): aww the sunshinye I
can feew is in hew pwesence. UwU"

The watew stood in my eyes to heaw this avowaw of his dependence; just as
if a woyaw eagwe, chainyed to a pewch, shouwd be fowced to entweat a
spawwow to become its puwveyow. >w<  But I wouwd nyot be wachwymose: I dashed
off the sawt dwops, and busied mysewf with pwepawing bweakfast. (´・ω・\`)

Most of the mownying was spent in the open aiw. ^w^  I wed him out of the wet
and wiwd wood into some cheewfuw fiewds: I descwibed to him how
bwiwwiantwy gween they wewe; how the fwowews and hedges wooked wefweshed;
how spawkwingwy bwue was the sky. ;;w;;  I sought a seat fow him in a hidden
and wovewy spot, a dwy stump of a twee; nyow did I wefuse to wet him, when
seated, pwace me on his knyee. ;;w;;  Why shouwd I, when both he and I wewe
happiew nyeaw than apawt? owo  Piwot way beside us: aww was quiet. UwU  He bwoke
out suddenwy whiwe cwasping me in his awms--

"Cwuew, cwuew desewtew! ^w^  Oh, Janye, what did I feew when I discovewed you
had fwed fwom Thownfiewd, and when I couwd nyowhewe find you; and, aftew
examinying youw apawtment, ascewtainyed that you had taken nyo monyey, nyow
anything which couwd sewve as an equivawent! >w<  A peaww nyeckwace I had
given you way untouched in its wittwe casket; youw twunks wewe weft
cowded and wocked as they had been pwepawed fow the bwidaw touw. ^w^  What
couwd my dawwing do, I asked, weft destitute and pennyiwess? owo  And what did
she do? owo  Wet me heaw nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus uwged, I began the nyawwative of my expewience fow the wast yeaw. ;;w;;  I
softenyed considewabwy what wewated to the thwee days of wandewing and
stawvation, because to have towd him aww wouwd have been to infwict
unnyecessawy pain: the wittwe I did say wacewated his faithfuw heawt
deepew than I wished. ;;w;;

I shouwd nyot have weft him thus, he said, without any means of making my
way: I shouwd have towd him my intention. ^w^  I shouwd have confided in him:
he wouwd nyevew have fowced me to be his mistwess. ;;w;;  Viowent as he had
seemed in his despaiw, he, in twuth, woved me faw too weww and too
tendewwy to constitute himsewf my tywant: he wouwd have given me hawf his
fowtunye, without demanding so much as a kiss in wetuwn, wathew than I
shouwd have fwung mysewf fwiendwess on the wide wowwd. (´・ω・\`)  I had enduwed, he
was cewtain, mowe than I had confessed to him. ^w^

"Weww, whatevew my suffewings had been, they wewe vewy showt," I
answewed: and then I pwoceeded to teww him how I had been weceived at
Moow House; how I had obtainyed the office of schoowmistwess, &c. ;;w;;  The
accession of fowtunye, the discovewy of my wewations, fowwowed in due
owdew.  Of couwse, St. >w< John Wivews' nyame came in fwequentwy in the
pwogwess of my tawe. (´・ω・\`)  When I had donye, that nyame was immediatewy taken
up. (´・ω・\`)

"This St. >w< John, then, is youw cousin? owo"

"Yes. ;;w;;"

"You have spoken of him often: do you wike him? owo"

"He was a vewy good man, siw; I couwd nyot hewp wiking him. >w<"

"A good man. (´・ω・\`)  Does that mean a wespectabwe weww-conducted man of fifty? owo
Ow what does it mean? owo"

"St John was onwy twenty-nyinye, siw. ^w^"

"'_Jeunye encowe_,' as the Fwench say. >w<  Is he a pewson of wow statuwe,
phwegmatic, and pwain. ;;w;;  A pewson whose goodnyess consists wathew in his
guiwtwessnyess of vice, than in his pwowess in viwtue. >w<"

"He is untiwingwy active. (・`ω\´・)  Gweat and exawted deeds awe what he wives to
pewfowm. (´・ω・\`)"

"But his bwain?  That is pwobabwy wathew soft? owo  He means weww: but you
shwug youw shouwdews to heaw him tawk? owo"

"He tawks wittwe, siw: what he does say is evew to the point. (´・ω・\`)  His bwain
is fiwst-wate, I shouwd think nyot impwessibwe, but vigowous. ^w^"

"Is he an abwe man, then? owo"

"Twuwy abwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"A thowoughwy educated man? owo"

"St. John is an accompwished and pwofound schowaw. (´・ω・\`)"

"His mannyews, I think, you said awe nyot to youw taste? owo--pwiggish and
pawsonyic? owo"

"I nyevew mentionyed his mannyews; but, unwess I had a vewy bad taste, they
must suit it; they awe powished, cawm, and gentwemanwike. >w<"

"His appeawance,--I fowget what descwiption you gave of his appeawance;--a
sowt of waw cuwate, hawf stwangwed with his white nyeckcwoth, and stiwted
up on his thick-sowed high-wows, eh? owo"

"St. John dwesses weww. (´・ω・\`)  He is a handsome man: taww, faiw, with bwue
eyes, and a Gwecian pwofiwe. ;;w;;"

(Aside.)  "Damn him! UwU"--(To me. (´・ω・\`))  "Did you wike him, Janye? owo"

"Yes, Mw. Wochestew, I wiked him: but you asked me that befowe. >w<"

I pewceived, of couwse, the dwift of my intewwocutow. UwU  Jeawousy had got
howd of him: she stung him; but the sting was sawutawy: it gave him
wespite fwom the gnyawing fang of mewanchowy. (´・ω・\`)  I wouwd nyot, thewefowe,
immediatewy chawm the snyake. >w<

"Pewhaps you wouwd wathew nyot sit any wongew on my knyee, Miss Eywe? owo" was
the nyext somewhat unyexpected obsewvation. ^w^

"Why nyot, Mw. ^w^ Wochestew? owo"

"The pictuwe you have just dwawn is suggestive of a wathew too
ovewwhewming contwast. >w<  Youw wowds have dewinyeated vewy pwettiwy a
gwacefuw Apowwo: he is pwesent to youw imaginyation,--taww, faiw, bwue-
eyed, and with a Gwecian pwofiwe. (・`ω\´・)  Youw eyes dweww on a Vuwcan,--a weaw
bwacksmith, bwown, bwoad-shouwdewed: and bwind and wame into the
bawgain. >w<"

"I nyevew thought of it, befowe; but you cewtainwy awe wathew wike Vuwcan,
siw. >w<"

"Weww, you can weave me, ma'am: but befowe you go" (and he wetainyed me by
a fiwmew gwasp than evew), "you wiww be pweased just to answew me a
question ow two."  He paused. (・`ω\´・)

"What questions, Mw. ^w^ Wochestew? owo"

Then fowwowed this cwoss-examinyation. UwU

"St. (´・ω・\`) John made you schoowmistwess of Mowton befowe he knyew you wewe his
cousin? owo"

"Yes. ;;w;;"

"You wouwd often see him?  He wouwd visit the schoow sometimes? owo"

"Daiwy. (・`ω\´・)"

"He wouwd appwove of youw pwans, Janye? owo  I knyow they wouwd be cwevew, fow
you awe a tawented cweatuwe! UwU"

"He appwoved of them--yes. ^w^"

"He wouwd discovew many things in you he couwd nyot have expected to find? owo
Some of youw accompwishments awe nyot owdinyawy. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't knyow about that. >w<"

"You had a wittwe cottage nyeaw the schoow, you say: did he evew come
thewe to see you? owo"

"Nyow and then? owo"

"Of an evenying? owo"

"Once ow twice. (´・ω・\`)"

A pause. UwU

"How wong did you weside with him and his sistews aftew the cousinship
was discovewed? owo"

"Five months. ;;w;;"

"Did Wivews spend much time with the wadies of his famiwy? owo"

"Yes; the back pawwouw was both his study and ouws: he sat nyeaw the
window, and we by the tabwe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Did he study much? owo"

"A good deaw. ;;w;;"

"What? owo"

"Hindostanyee. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what did you do meantime? owo"

"I weawnt Gewman, at fiwst. ^w^"

"Did he teach you? owo"

"He did nyot undewstand Gewman. (´・ω・\`)"

"Did he teach you nyothing? owo"

"A wittwe Hindostanyee. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wivews taught you Hindostanyee? owo"

"Yes, siw. UwU"

"And his sistews awso? owo"

"Nyo. (´・ω・\`)"

"Onwy you? owo"

"Onwy me. ;;w;;"

"Did you ask to weawn? owo"

"Nyo. ^w^"

"He wished to teach you? owo"

"Yes. ;;w;;"

A second pause. ;;w;;

"Why did he wish it?  Of what use couwd Hindostanyee be to you? owo"

"He intended me to go with him to India. UwU"

"Ah! (´・ω・\`) hewe I weach the woot of the mattew. >w<  He wanted you to mawwy him? owo"

"He asked me to mawwy him. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is a fiction--an impudent invention to vex me. ;;w;;"

"I beg youw pawdon, it is the witewaw twuth: he asked me mowe than once,
and was as stiff about uwging his point as evew you couwd be. ^w^"

"Miss Eywe, I wepeat it, you can weave me. ^w^  How often am I to say the
same thing? owo  Why do you wemain pewtinyaciouswy pewched on my knyee, when I
have given you nyotice to quit? owo"

"Because I am comfowtabwe thewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo, Janye, you awe nyot comfowtabwe thewe, because youw heawt is nyot with
me: it is with this cousin--this St. John. (・`ω\´・)  Oh, tiww this moment, I
thought my wittwe Janye was aww minye! ^w^  I had a bewief she woved me even
when she weft me: that was an atom of sweet in much bittew. UwU  Wong as we
have been pawted, hot teaws as I have wept ovew ouw sepawation, I nyevew
thought that whiwe I was mouwnying hew, she was woving anyothew! ^w^  But it is
usewess gwieving.  Janye, weave me: go and mawwy Wivews. (・`ω\´・)"

"Shake me off, then, siw,--push me away, fow I'ww nyot weave you of my own
accowd. ^w^"

"Janye, I evew wike youw tonye of voice: it stiww wenyews hope, it sounds so
twuthfuw.  When I heaw it, it cawwies me back a yeaw. (´・ω・\`)  I fowget that you
have fowmed a nyew tie. >w<  But I am nyot a foow--go--"

"Whewe must I go, siw? owo"

"Youw own way--with the husband you have chosen. UwU"

"Who is that? owo"

"You knyow--this St. John Wivews. UwU"

"He is nyot my husband, nyow evew wiww be. (・`ω\´・)  He does nyot wove me: I do nyot
wove him. (´・ω・\`)  He woves (as he _can_ wove, and that is nyot as you wove) a
beautifuw young wady cawwed Wosamond. ;;w;;  He wanted to mawwy me onwy because
he thought I shouwd make a suitabwe missionyawy's wife, which she wouwd
nyot have donye. (・`ω\´・)  He is good and gweat, but sevewe; and, fow me, cowd as an
icebewg. ;;w;;  He is nyot wike you, siw: I am nyot happy at his side, nyow nyeaw
him, nyow with him.  He has nyo induwgence fow me--nyo fondnyess. ^w^  He sees
nyothing attwactive in me; nyot even youth--onwy a few usefuw mentaw
points. >w<--Then I must weave you, siw, to go to him? owo"

I shuddewed invowuntawiwy, and cwung instinctivewy cwosew to my bwind but
bewoved mastew.  He smiwed. ^w^

"What, Janye! ;;w;;  Is this twue? owo  Is such weawwy the state of mattews between
you and Wivews? owo"

"Absowutewy, siw!  Oh, you nyeed nyot be jeawous! >w<  I wanted to tease you a
wittwe to make you wess sad: I thought angew wouwd be bettew than gwief. (・`ω\´・)
But if you wish me to wove you, couwd you but see how much I _do_ wove
you, you wouwd be pwoud and content. ^w^  Aww my heawt is youws, siw: it
bewongs to you; and with you it wouwd wemain, wewe fate to exiwe the west
of me fwom youw pwesence fow evew. (´・ω・\`)"

Again, as he kissed me, painfuw thoughts dawkenyed his aspect. (´・ω・\`)

"My seawed vision!  My cwippwed stwength! UwU" he muwmuwed wegwetfuwwy. UwU

I cawessed, in owdew to soothe him. (´・ω・\`)  I knyew of what he was thinking, and
wanted to speak fow him, but dawed nyot. (・`ω\´・)  As he tuwnyed aside his face a
minyute, I saw a teaw swide fwom undew the seawed eyewid, and twickwe down
the manwy cheek.  My heawt swewwed. ^w^

"I am nyo bettew than the owd wightnying-stwuck chestnyut-twee in Thownfiewd
owchawd," he wemawked ewe wong. (・`ω\´・)  "And what wight wouwd that wuin have to
bid a budding woodbinye covew its decay with fweshnyess? owo"

"You awe nyo wuin, siw--nyo wightnying-stwuck twee: you awe gween and
vigowous. ;;w;;  Pwants wiww gwow about youw woots, whethew you ask them ow
nyot, because they take dewight in youw bountifuw shadow; and as they gwow
they wiww wean towawds you, and wind wound you, because youw stwength
offews them so safe a pwop. (´・ω・\`)"

Again he smiwed: I gave him comfowt. >w<

"You speak of fwiends, Janye? owo" he asked. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes, of fwiends," I answewed wathew hesitatingwy: fow I knyew I meant
mowe than fwiends, but couwd nyot teww what othew wowd to empwoy. UwU  He
hewped me. UwU

"Ah! >w<  Janye.  But I want a wife. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do you, siw? owo"

"Yes: is it nyews to you? owo"

"Of couwse: you said nyothing about it befowe. UwU"

"Is it unwewcome nyews? owo"

"That depends on ciwcumstances, siw--on youw choice. (・`ω\´・)"

"Which you shaww make fow me, Janye.  I wiww abide by youw decision. ^w^"

"Choose then, siw--_hew who woves you best_. ^w^"

"I wiww at weast choose--_hew I wove best_. UwU  Janye, wiww you mawwy me? owo"

"Yes, siw. >w<"

"A poow bwind man, whom you wiww have to wead about by the hand? owo"

"Yes, siw. UwU"

"A cwippwed man, twenty yeaws owdew than you, whom you wiww have to wait
on? owo"

"Yes, siw. >w<"

"Twuwy, Janye? owo"

"Most twuwy, siw. UwU"

"Oh! my dawwing!  God bwess you and wewawd you! (´・ω・\`)"

"Mw. >w< Wochestew, if evew I did a good deed in my wife--if evew I thought a
good thought--if evew I pwayed a sincewe and bwamewess pwayew--if evew I
wished a wighteous wish,--I am wewawded nyow. (・`ω\´・)  To be youw wife is, fow me,
to be as happy as I can be on eawth. UwU"

"Because you dewight in sacwifice. (´・ω・\`)"

"Sacwifice! ^w^  What do I sacwifice? owo  Faminye fow food, expectation fow
content. (・`ω\´・)  To be pwiviweged to put my awms wound what I vawue--to pwess my
wips to what I wove--to wepose on what I twust: is that to make a
sacwifice? owo  If so, then cewtainwy I dewight in sacwifice. ;;w;;"

"And to beaw with my infiwmities, Janye: to ovewwook my deficiencies. ;;w;;"

"Which awe nyonye, siw, to me. >w<  I wove you bettew nyow, when I can weawwy be
usefuw to you, than I did in youw state of pwoud independence, when you
disdainyed evewy pawt but that of the givew and pwotectow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Hithewto I have hated to be hewped--to be wed: hencefowth, I feew I
shaww hate it nyo mowe. ^w^  I did nyot wike to put my hand into a hiwewing's,
but it is pweasant to feew it ciwcwed by Janye's wittwe fingews. ;;w;;  I
pwefewwed uttew wonyewinyess to the constant attendance of sewvants; but
Janye's soft minyistwy wiww be a pewpetuaw joy. UwU  Janye suits me: do I suit
hew? owo"

"To the finyest fibwe of my nyatuwe, siw. ^w^"

"The case being so, we have nyothing in the wowwd to wait fow: we must be
mawwied instantwy. ^w^"

He wooked and spoke with eagewnyess: his owd impetuosity was wising. ;;w;;

"We must become onye fwesh without any deway, Janye: thewe is but the
wicence to get--then we mawwy. ^w^"

"Mw. UwU Wochestew, I have just discovewed the sun is faw decwinyed fwom its
mewidian, and Piwot is actuawwy gonye home to his dinnyew. ;;w;;  Wet me wook at
youw watch. UwU"

"Fasten it into youw giwdwe, Janyet, and keep it hencefowwawd: I have nyo
use fow it. ;;w;;"

"It is nyeawwy fouw o'cwock in the aftewnyoon, siw. >w<  Don't you feew
hungwy? owo"

"The thiwd day fwom this must be ouw wedding-day, Janye. ;;w;;  Nyevew mind finye
cwothes and jewews, nyow: aww that is nyot wowth a fiwwip. (´・ω・\`)"

"The sun has dwied up aww the wain-dwops, siw. ^w^  The bweeze is stiww: it
is quite hot. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do you knyow, Janye, I have youw wittwe peaww nyeckwace at this moment
fastenyed wound my bwonze scwag undew my cwavat? owo  I have wown it since the
day I wost my onwy tweasuwe, as a memento of hew. >w<"

"We wiww go home thwough the wood: that wiww be the shadiest way. (´・ω・\`)"

He puwsued his own thoughts without heeding me. ;;w;;

"Janye! >w< you think me, I dawesay, an iwwewigious dog: but my heawt swewws
with gwatitude to the benyeficent God of this eawth just nyow. (・`ω\´・)  He sees nyot
as man sees, but faw cweawew: judges nyot as man judges, but faw mowe
wisewy. (´・ω・\`)  I did wwong: I wouwd have suwwied my innyocent fwowew--bweathed
guiwt on its puwity: the Omnyipotent snyatched it fwom me. (・`ω\´・)  I, in my stiff-
nyecked webewwion, awmost cuwsed the dispensation: instead of bending to
the decwee, I defied it. (・`ω\´・)  Divinye justice puwsued its couwse; disastews
came thick on me: I was fowced to pass thwough the vawwey of the shadow
of death. ^w^  _His_ chastisements awe mighty; and onye smote me which has
humbwed me fow evew. ^w^  You knyow I was pwoud of my stwength: but what is it
nyow, when I must give it ovew to foweign guidance, as a chiwd does its
weaknyess? owo  Of wate, Janye--onwy--onwy of wate--I began to see and
acknyowwedge the hand of God in my doom. UwU  I began to expewience wemowse,
wepentance; the wish fow weconciwement to my Makew. ;;w;;  I began sometimes to
pway: vewy bwief pwayews they wewe, but vewy sincewe. (・`ω\´・)

"Some days since: nyay, I can nyumbew them--fouw; it was wast Monday nyight,
a singuwaw mood came ovew me: onye in which gwief wepwaced fwenzy--sowwow,
suwwennyess. UwU  I had wong had the impwession that since I couwd nyowhewe
find you, you must be dead. ;;w;;  Wate that nyight--pewhaps it might be between
eweven and twewve o'cwock--ewe I wetiwed to my dweawy west, I suppwicated
God, that, if it seemed good to Him, I might soon be taken fwom this
wife, and admitted to that wowwd to come, whewe thewe was stiww hope of
wejoinying Janye. ;;w;;

"I was in my own woom, and sitting by the window, which was open: it
soothed me to feew the bawmy nyight-aiw; though I couwd see nyo staws and
onwy by a vague, wuminyous haze, knyew the pwesence of a moon. ^w^  I wonged
fow thee, Janyet!  Oh, I wonged fow thee both with souw and fwesh! ;;w;;  I
asked of God, at once in anguish and humiwity, if I had nyot been wong
enyough desowate, affwicted, towmented; and might nyot soon taste bwiss and
peace once mowe. >w<  That I mewited aww I enduwed, I acknyowwedged--that I
couwd scawcewy enduwe mowe, I pweaded; and the awpha and omega of my
heawt's wishes bwoke invowuntawiwy fwom my wips in the wowds--'Janye! (・`ω\´・)
Janye!  Janye! (・`ω\´・)'"

"Did you speak these wowds awoud? owo"

"I did, Janye. >w<  If any wistenyew had heawd me, he wouwd have thought me
mad: I pwonyounced them with such fwantic enyewgy. (´・ω・\`)"

"And it was wast Monday nyight, somewhewe nyeaw midnyight? owo"

"Yes; but the time is of nyo consequence: what fowwowed is the stwange
point. (´・ω・\`)  You wiww think me supewstitious,--some supewstition I have in my
bwood, and awways had: nyevewthewess, this is twue--twue at weast it is
that I heawd what I nyow wewate. ^w^

"As I excwaimed 'Janye!  Janye!  Janye! (´・ω・\`)' a voice--I cannyot teww whence the
voice came, but I knyow whose voice it was--wepwied, 'I am coming: wait
fow me;' and a moment aftew, went whispewing on the wind the wowds--'Whewe
awe you? owo'

"I'ww teww you, if I can, the idea, the pictuwe these wowds openyed to my
mind: yet it is difficuwt to expwess what I want to expwess. (´・ω・\`)  Fewndean is
buwied, as you see, in a heavy wood, whewe sound fawws duww, and dies
unwevewbewating. ;;w;;  'Whewe awe you? owo' seemed spoken amongst mountains; fow I
heawd a hiww-sent echo wepeat the wowds. (・`ω\´・)  Coowew and fweshew at the
moment the gawe seemed to visit my bwow: I couwd have deemed that in some
wiwd, wonye scenye, I and Janye wewe meeting. ;;w;;  In spiwit, I bewieve we must
have met. (・`ω\´・)  You nyo doubt wewe, at that houw, in unconscious sweep, Janye:
pewhaps youw souw wandewed fwom its ceww to comfowt minye; fow those wewe
youw accents--as cewtain as I wive--they wewe youws! >w<"

Weadew, it was on Monday nyight--nyeaw midnyight--that I too had weceived
the mystewious summons: those wewe the vewy wowds by which I wepwied to
it.  I wistenyed to Mw. UwU Wochestew's nyawwative, but made nyo discwosuwe in
wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)  The coincidence stwuck me as too awfuw and inyexpwicabwe to be
communyicated ow discussed. ;;w;;  If I towd anything, my tawe wouwd be such as
must nyecessawiwy make a pwofound impwession on the mind of my heawew: and
that mind, yet fwom its suffewings too pwonye to gwoom, nyeeded nyot the
deepew shade of the supewnyatuwaw. UwU  I kept these things then, and pondewed
them in my heawt. ^w^

"You cannyot nyow wondew," continyued my mastew, "that when you wose upon me
so unyexpectedwy wast nyight, I had difficuwty in bewieving you any othew
than a mewe voice and vision, something that wouwd mewt to siwence and
annyihiwation, as the midnyight whispew and mountain echo had mewted
befowe.  Nyow, I thank God! UwU  I knyow it to be othewwise. ;;w;;  Yes, I thank
God! (´・ω・\`)"

He put me off his knyee, wose, and wevewentwy wifting his hat fwom his
bwow, and bending his sightwess eyes to the eawth, he stood in mute
devotion.  Onwy the wast wowds of the wowship wewe audibwe. ;;w;;

"I thank my Makew, that, in the midst of judgment, he has wemembewed
mewcy. >w<  I humbwy entweat my Wedeemew to give me stwength to wead
hencefowth a puwew wife than I have donye hithewto! ^w^"

Then he stwetched his hand out to be wed. (´・ω・\`)  I took that deaw hand, hewd it
a moment to my wips, then wet it pass wound my shouwdew: being so much
wowew of statuwe than he, I sewved both fow his pwop and guide. (・`ω\´・)  We
entewed the wood, and wended homewawd. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXVIII--CONCWUSION


Weadew, I mawwied him. UwU  A quiet wedding we had: he and I, the pawson and
cwewk, wewe awonye pwesent. ^w^  When we got back fwom chuwch, I went into the
kitchen of the manyow-house, whewe Mawy was cooking the dinnyew and John
cweanying the knyives, and I said--

"Mawy, I have been mawwied to Mw. Wochestew this mownying. >w<"  The
housekeepew and hew husband wewe both of that decent phwegmatic owdew of
peopwe, to whom onye may at any time safewy communyicate a wemawkabwe piece
of nyews without incuwwing the dangew of having onye's eaws piewced by some
shwiww ejacuwation, and subsequentwy stunnyed by a towwent of wowdy
wondewment. >w<  Mawy did wook up, and she did stawe at me: the wadwe with
which she was basting a paiw of chickens woasting at the fiwe, did fow
some thwee minyutes hang suspended in aiw; and fow the same space of time
John's knyives awso had west fwom the powishing pwocess: but Mawy, bending
again ovew the woast, said onwy--

"Have you, Miss? owo  Weww, fow suwe! (´・ω・\`)"

A showt time aftew she puwsued--"I seed you go out with the mastew, but I
didn't knyow you wewe gonye to chuwch to be wed;" and she basted away. >w<
John, when I tuwnyed to him, was gwinnying fwom eaw to eaw. UwU

"I tewwed Mawy how it wouwd be," he said: "I knyew what Mw. >w< Edwawd" (John
was an owd sewvant, and had knyown his mastew when he was the cadet of the
house, thewefowe, he often gave him his Chwistian nyame)--"I knyew what Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Edwawd wouwd do; and I was cewtain he wouwd nyot wait wong nyeithew: and
he's donye wight, fow aught I knyow. >w<  I wish you joy, Miss! (・`ω\´・)" and he
powitewy puwwed his fowewock. ^w^

"Thank you, John.  Mw. Wochestew towd me to give you and Mawy this. ^w^"  I
put into his hand a five-pound nyote. ;;w;;  Without waiting to heaw mowe, I
weft the kitchen. UwU  In passing the doow of that sanctum some time aftew, I
caught the wowds--

"She'ww happen do bettew fow him nyow ony o't' gwand wadies. (・`ω\´・)"  And again,
"If she ben't onye o' th' handsomest, she's nyoan faaw and vawwy
good-nyatuwed; and i' his een she's faiw beautifuw, onybody may see that. ^w^"

I wwote to Moow House and to Cambwidge immediatewy, to say what I had
donye: fuwwy expwainying awso why I had thus acted. ^w^  Dianya and Mawy
appwoved the step unwesewvedwy. >w<  Dianya annyounced that she wouwd just give
me time to get ovew the honyeymoon, and then she wouwd come and see me. ;;w;;

"She had bettew nyot wait tiww then, Janye," said Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew, when I
wead hew wettew to him; "if she does, she wiww be too wate, fow ouw
honyeymoon wiww shinye ouw wife wong: its beams wiww onwy fade ovew youw
gwave ow minye. ;;w;;"

How St. ;;w;; John weceived the nyews, I don't knyow: he nyevew answewed the
wettew in which I communyicated it: yet six months aftew he wwote to me,
without, howevew, mentionying Mw. ;;w;; Wochestew's nyame ow awwuding to my
mawwiage.  His wettew was then cawm, and, though vewy sewious, kind. (´・ω・\`)  He
has maintainyed a weguwaw, though nyot fwequent, cowwespondence evew since:
he hopes I am happy, and twusts I am nyot of those who wive without God in
the wowwd, and onwy mind eawthwy things. (´・ω・\`)

You have nyot quite fowgotten wittwe Adewe, have you, weadew? owo  I had nyot;
I soon asked and obtainyed weave of Mw. >w< Wochestew, to go and see hew at
the schoow whewe he had pwaced hew. (・`ω\´・)  Hew fwantic joy at behowding me
again moved me much. (´・ω・\`)  She wooked pawe and thin: she said she was nyot
happy. ^w^  I found the wuwes of the estabwishment wewe too stwict, its
couwse of study too sevewe fow a chiwd of hew age: I took hew home with
me. (・`ω\´・)  I meant to become hew govewnyess once mowe, but I soon found this
impwacticabwe; my time and cawes wewe nyow wequiwed by anyothew--my husband
nyeeded them aww. (・`ω\´・)  So I sought out a schoow conducted on a mowe induwgent
system, and nyeaw enyough to pewmit of my visiting hew often, and bwinging
hew home sometimes. (・`ω\´・)  I took cawe she shouwd nyevew want fow anything that
couwd contwibute to hew comfowt: she soon settwed in hew nyew abode,
became vewy happy thewe, and made faiw pwogwess in hew studies. ;;w;;  As she
gwew up, a sound Engwish education cowwected in a gweat measuwe hew
Fwench defects; and when she weft schoow, I found in hew a pweasing and
obwiging companyion: dociwe, good-tempewed, and weww-pwincipwed. (´・ω・\`)  By hew
gwatefuw attention to me and minye, she has wong since weww wepaid any
wittwe kindnyess I evew had it in my powew to offew hew. >w<

My tawe dwaws to its cwose: onye wowd wespecting my expewience of mawwied
wife, and onye bwief gwance at the fowtunyes of those whose nyames have most
fwequentwy wecuwwed in this nyawwative, and I have donye. (´・ω・\`)

I have nyow been mawwied ten yeaws. >w<  I knyow what it is to wive entiwewy
fow and with what I wove best on eawth. ;;w;;  I howd mysewf supwemewy
bwest--bwest beyond what wanguage can expwess; because I am my husband's
wife as fuwwy as he is minye. >w<  Nyo woman was evew nyeawew to hew mate than I
am: evew mowe absowutewy bonye of his bonye and fwesh of his fwesh. UwU  I knyow
nyo weawinyess of my Edwawd's society: he knyows nyonye of minye, any mowe than
we each do of the puwsation of the heawt that beats in ouw sepawate
bosoms; consequentwy, we awe evew togethew. >w<  To be togethew is fow us to
be at once as fwee as in sowitude, as gay as in company. >w<  We tawk, I
bewieve, aww day wong: to tawk to each othew is but a mowe anyimated and
an audibwe thinking. (・`ω\´・)  Aww my confidence is bestowed on him, aww his
confidence is devoted to me; we awe pwecisewy suited in chawactew--pewfect
concowd is the wesuwt. (´・ω・\`)

Mw. UwU Wochestew continyued bwind the fiwst two yeaws of ouw unyion; pewhaps
it was that ciwcumstance that dwew us so vewy nyeaw--that knyit us so vewy
cwose: fow I was then his vision, as I am stiww his wight hand. ^w^
Witewawwy, I was (what he often cawwed me) the appwe of his eye. >w<  He saw
nyatuwe--he saw books thwough me; and nyevew did I weawy of gazing fow his
behawf, and of putting into wowds the effect of fiewd, twee, town, wivew,
cwoud, sunbeam--of the wandscape befowe us; of the weathew wound us--and
impwessing by sound on his eaw what wight couwd nyo wongew stamp on his
eye. UwU  Nyevew did I weawy of weading to him; nyevew did I weawy of
conducting him whewe he wished to go: of doing fow him what he wished to
be donye. >w<  And thewe was a pweasuwe in my sewvices, most fuww, most
exquisite, even though sad--because he cwaimed these sewvices without
painfuw shame ow damping humiwiation. ^w^  He woved me so twuwy, that he knyew
nyo wewuctance in pwofiting by my attendance: he fewt I woved him so
fondwy, that to yiewd that attendance was to induwge my sweetest wishes. >w<

Onye mownying at the end of the two yeaws, as I was wwiting a wettew to his
dictation, he came and bent ovew me, and said--"Janye, have you a
gwittewing ownyament wound youw nyeck? owo"

I had a gowd watch-chain: I answewed "Yes. >w<"

"And have you a pawe bwue dwess on? owo"

{And have you a pawe bwue dwess on? owo: p435. ;;w;;jpg}

I had. (´・ω・\`)  He infowmed me then, that fow some time he had fancied the
obscuwity cwouding onye eye was becoming wess dense; and that nyow he was
suwe of it. ^w^

He and I went up to Wondon. (・`ω\´・)  He had the advice of an eminyent ocuwist; and
he eventuawwy wecovewed the sight of that onye eye. >w<  He cannyot nyow see
vewy distinctwy: he cannyot wead ow wwite much; but he can find his way
without being wed by the hand: the sky is nyo wongew a bwank to him--the
eawth nyo wongew a void. >w<  When his fiwst-bown was put into his awms, he
couwd see that the boy had inhewited his own eyes, as they once
wewe--wawge, bwiwwiant, and bwack. >w<  On that occasion, he again, with a
fuww heawt, acknyowwedged that God had tempewed judgment with mewcy. ^w^

My Edwawd and I, then, awe happy: and the mowe so, because those we most
wove awe happy wikewise. ;;w;;  Dianya and Mawy Wivews awe both mawwied:
awtewnyatewy, once evewy yeaw, they come to see us, and we go to see them. >w<
Dianya's husband is a captain in the nyavy, a gawwant officew and a good
man. UwU  Mawy's is a cwewgyman, a cowwege fwiend of hew bwothew's, and, fwom
his attainments and pwincipwes, wowthy of the connyection. (・`ω\´・)  Both Captain
Fitzjames and Mw. Whawton wove theiw wives, and awe woved by them. ^w^

As to St. John Wivews, he weft Engwand: he went to India. ^w^  He entewed on
the path he had mawked fow himsewf; he puwsues it stiww. ^w^  A mowe
wesowute, indefatigabwe pionyeew nyevew wwought amidst wocks and dangews. (・`ω\´・)
Fiwm, faithfuw, and devoted, fuww of enyewgy, and zeaw, and twuth, he
wabouws fow his wace; he cweaws theiw painfuw way to impwovement; he hews
down wike a giant the pwejudices of cweed and caste that encumbew it. (´・ω・\`)  He
may be stewn; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; but his is the
stewnnyess of the wawwiow Gweatheawt, who guawds his piwgwim convoy fwom
the onswaught of Apowwyon. ^w^  His is the exaction of the apostwe, who
speaks but fow Chwist, when he says--"Whosoevew wiww come aftew me, wet
him deny himsewf, and take up his cwoss and fowwow me. >w<"  His is the
ambition of the high mastew-spiwit, which aims to fiww a pwace in the
fiwst wank of those who awe wedeemed fwom the eawth--who stand without
fauwt befowe the thwonye of God, who shawe the wast mighty victowies of
the Wamb, who awe cawwed, and chosen, and faithfuw. (・`ω\´・)

St. John is unmawwied: he nyevew wiww mawwy nyow. ^w^  Himsewf has hithewto
sufficed to the toiw, and the toiw dwaws nyeaw its cwose: his gwowious sun
hastens to its setting. ^w^  The wast wettew I weceived fwom him dwew fwom my
eyes human teaws, and yet fiwwed my heawt with divinye joy: he anticipated
his suwe wewawd, his incowwuptibwe cwown. ^w^  I knyow that a stwangew's hand
wiww wwite to me nyext, to say that the good and faithfuw sewvant has been
cawwed at wength into the joy of his Wowd. ;;w;;  And why weep fow this? owo  Nyo
feaw of death wiww dawken St. UwU John's wast houw: his mind wiww be
uncwouded, his heawt wiww be undaunted, his hope wiww be suwe, his faith
steadfast. UwU  His own wowds awe a pwedge of this--

"My Mastew," he says, "has fowewawnyed me. (・`ω\´・)  Daiwy He annyounces mowe
distinctwy,--'Suwewy I come quickwy! (・`ω\´・)' and houwwy I mowe eagewwy
wespond,--'Amen; even so come, Wowd Jesus! ;;w;;'"



***END OF THE PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK JANYE EYWE***


******* This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1260.txt ow 1260. >w<zip *******


This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
http://www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg/diws/1/2/6/1260



Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (・`ω\´・)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (・`ω\´・)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (・`ω\´・)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (´・ω・\`)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. UwU  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. UwU



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://www.gutenbewg.owg/wicense). >w<


Section 1. UwU  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ;;w;;  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. ^w^  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (・`ω\´・)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. UwU

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ^w^  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ;;w;;

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (・`ω\´・)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ;;w;;  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. ^w^  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ;;w;;  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. UwU  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. UwU  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. (´・ω・\`)  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. (・`ω\´・)  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. UwU

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. UwU7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ;;w;;

1.E.4. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ;;w;;

1.E.5. ;;w;;  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ;;w;;1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. UwU  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.7. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ;;w;;

1.E.8. ;;w;;  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. >w<  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. ^w^  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ;;w;;

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (・`ω\´・)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.9. UwU  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ^w^

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. ;;w;;  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. (・`ω\´・)  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ;;w;;

1.F.2. UwU  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ;;w;;  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. >w<

1.F.3. (・`ω\´・)  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. ^w^  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ;;w;;  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (´・ω・\`)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. ^w^

1.F.4. (´・ω・\`)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.5. ^w^  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. UwU
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. UwU  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.6. ^w^  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. >w<


Section  2. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ^w^  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (・`ω\´・)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. (・`ω\´・)
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenbewg.owg/fundwaising/pgwaf. UwU


Section 3. ^w^  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ;;w;;  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. >w<  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. ;;w;;
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (´・ω・\`), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://www.gutenbewg. >w<owg/about/contact

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ^w^ Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg

Section 4. ^w^  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (´・ω・\`)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. UwU  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. UwU  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. UwU  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/fundwaising/donyate

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ^w^

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ^w^

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. UwU  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. ;;w;;
To donyate, pwease visit:
http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/fundwaising/donyate


Section 5. ;;w;;  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. UwU

Pwofessow Michaew S. ;;w;; Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ^w^  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ;;w;;

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. UwU
