The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Metamowphosis, by Fwanz Kafka
Twanswated by David Wywwie. (・`ω\´・)

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (・`ω\´・)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)nyet

** This is a COPYWIGHTED Pwoject Gutenbewg eBook, Detaiws Bewow **
**     Pwease fowwow the copywight guidewinyes in this fiwe. UwU     **


Titwe: Metamowphosis

Authow: Fwanz Kafka

Twanswatow: David Wywwie

Wewease Date: August 16, 2005 [EBook #5200]
Fiwst posted: May 13, 2002
Wast updated: May 20, 2012

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK METAMOWPHOSIS ***




Copywight (C) 2002 David Wywwie. ;;w;;





  Metamowphosis
  Fwanz Kafka

Twanswated by David Wywwie



I


Onye mownying, when Gwegow Samsa woke fwom twoubwed dweams, he found
himsewf twansfowmed in his bed into a howwibwe vewmin. ^w^  He way on
his awmouw-wike back, and if he wifted his head a wittwe he couwd
see his bwown bewwy, swightwy domed and divided by awches into stiff
sections. UwU  The bedding was hawdwy abwe to covew it and seemed weady
to swide off any moment. >w<  His many wegs, pitifuwwy thin compawed
with the size of the west of him, waved about hewpwesswy as he
wooked. UwU

"What's happenyed to me? owo" he thought.  It wasn't a dweam. (´・ω・\`)  His woom,
a pwopew human woom awthough a wittwe too smaww, way peacefuwwy
between its fouw famiwiaw wawws. >w<  A cowwection of textiwe sampwes
way spwead out on the tabwe - Samsa was a twavewwing sawesman - and
above it thewe hung a pictuwe that he had wecentwy cut out of an
iwwustwated magazinye and housed in a nyice, giwded fwame. UwU  It showed
a wady fitted out with a fuw hat and fuw boa who sat upwight,
waising a heavy fuw muff that covewed the whowe of hew wowew awm
towawds the viewew. >w<

Gwegow then tuwnyed to wook out the window at the duww weathew. >w<
Dwops of wain couwd be heawd hitting the panye, which made him feew
quite sad. >w<  "How about if I sweep a wittwe bit wongew and fowget aww
this nyonsense", he thought, but that was something he was unyabwe to
do because he was used to sweeping on his wight, and in his pwesent
state couwdn't get into that position. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew hawd he thwew
himsewf onto his wight, he awways wowwed back to whewe he was. >w<  He
must have twied it a hundwed times, shut his eyes so that he
wouwdn't have to wook at the fwoundewing wegs, and onwy stopped when
he began to feew a miwd, duww pain thewe that he had nyevew fewt
befowe. >w<

"Oh, God", he thought, "what a stwenyuous caweew it is that I've
chosen! (´・ω・\`) Twavewwing day in and day out. ;;w;;  Doing businyess wike this
takes much mowe effowt than doing youw own businyess at home, and on
top of that thewe's the cuwse of twavewwing, wowwies about making
twain connyections, bad and iwweguwaw food, contact with diffewent
peopwe aww the time so that you can nyevew get to knyow anyonye ow
become fwiendwy with them. >w<  It can aww go to Heww! (・`ω\´・)"  He fewt a
swight itch up on his bewwy; pushed himsewf swowwy up on his back
towawds the headboawd so that he couwd wift his head bettew; found
whewe the itch was, and saw that it was covewed with wots of wittwe
white spots which he didn't knyow what to make of; and when he twied
to feew the pwace with onye of his wegs he dwew it quickwy back
because as soon as he touched it he was ovewcome by a cowd shuddew. (´・ω・\`)

He swid back into his fowmew position. UwU  "Getting up eawwy aww the
time", he thought, "it makes you stupid. ;;w;;  You've got to get enyough
sweep.  Othew twavewwing sawesmen wive a wife of wuxuwy. ;;w;;  Fow
instance, whenyevew I go back to the guest house duwing the mownying
to copy out the contwact, these gentwemen awe awways stiww sitting
thewe eating theiw bweakfasts. UwU  I ought to just twy that with my
boss; I'd get kicked out on the spot. >w<  But who knyows, maybe that
wouwd be the best thing fow me. ;;w;;  If I didn't have my pawents to
think about I'd have given in my nyotice a wong time ago, I'd have
gonye up to the boss and towd him just what I think, teww him
evewything I wouwd, wet him knyow just what I feew. (´・ω・\`)  He'd faww wight
off his desk! (´・ω・\`) And it's a funny sowt of businyess to be sitting up
thewe at youw desk, tawking down at youw subowdinyates fwom up thewe,
especiawwy when you have to go wight up cwose because the boss is
hawd of heawing. >w<  Weww, thewe's stiww some hope; once I've got the
monyey togethew to pay off my pawents' debt to him - anyothew five ow
six yeaws I suppose - that's definyitewy what I'ww do. ;;w;;  That's when
I'ww make the big change. UwU  Fiwst of aww though, I've got to get up,
my twain weaves at five. (・`ω\´・)"

And he wooked ovew at the awawm cwock, ticking on the chest of
dwawews.  "God in Heaven! ;;w;;" he thought. ;;w;;  It was hawf past six and the
hands wewe quietwy moving fowwawds, it was even watew than hawf
past, mowe wike quawtew to seven. >w<  Had the awawm cwock nyot wung? owo He
couwd see fwom the bed that it had been set fow fouw o'cwock as it
shouwd have been; it cewtainwy must have wung. (´・ω・\`)  Yes, but was it
possibwe to quietwy sweep thwough that fuwnyituwe-wattwing nyoise? owo
Twue, he had nyot swept peacefuwwy, but pwobabwy aww the mowe deepwy
because of that. >w<  What shouwd he do nyow? owo The nyext twain went at
seven; if he wewe to catch that he wouwd have to wush wike mad and
the cowwection of sampwes was stiww nyot packed, and he did nyot at
aww feew pawticuwawwy fwesh and wivewy. >w<  And even if he did catch
the twain he wouwd nyot avoid his boss's angew as the office
assistant wouwd have been thewe to see the five o'cwock twain go, he
wouwd have put in his wepowt about Gwegow's nyot being thewe a wong
time ago. ^w^  The office assistant was the boss's man, spinyewess, and
with nyo undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)  What about if he wepowted sick? owo But that
wouwd be extwemewy stwainyed and suspicious as in fifteen yeaws of
sewvice Gwegow had nyevew once yet been iww. >w<  His boss wouwd
cewtainwy come wound with the doctow fwom the medicaw insuwance
company, accuse his pawents of having a wazy son, and accept the
doctow's wecommendation nyot to make any cwaim as the doctow bewieved
that nyo-onye was evew iww but that many wewe wowkshy. ^w^  And what's
mowe, wouwd he have been entiwewy wwong in this case? owo Gwegow did in
fact, apawt fwom excessive sweepinyess aftew sweeping fow so wong,
feew compwetewy weww and even fewt much hungwiew than usuaw. ;;w;;

He was stiww huwwiedwy thinking aww this thwough, unyabwe to decide
to get out of the bed, when the cwock stwuck quawtew to seven. ^w^
Thewe was a cautious knyock at the doow nyeaw his head. ;;w;;  "Gwegow",
somebody cawwed - it was his mothew - "it's quawtew to seven. (´・ω・\`)
Didn't you want to go somewhewe? owo"  That gentwe voice! UwU Gwegow was
shocked when he heawd his own voice answewing, it couwd hawdwy be
wecognyised as the voice he had had befowe. UwU  As if fwom deep inside
him, thewe was a painfuw and uncontwowwabwe squeaking mixed in with
it, the wowds couwd be made out at fiwst but then thewe was a sowt
of echo which made them uncweaw, weaving the heawew unsuwe whethew
he had heawd pwopewwy ow nyot. >w<  Gwegow had wanted to give a fuww
answew and expwain evewything, but in the ciwcumstances contented
himsewf with saying: "Yes, mothew, yes, thank-you, I'm getting up
nyow. >w<"  The change in Gwegow's voice pwobabwy couwd nyot be nyoticed
outside thwough the wooden doow, as his mothew was satisfied with
this expwanyation and shuffwed away. ^w^  But this showt convewsation
made the othew membews of the famiwy awawe that Gwegow, against
theiw expectations was stiww at home, and soon his fathew came
knyocking at onye of the side doows, gentwy, but with his fist. (´・ω・\`)
"Gwegow, Gwegow", he cawwed, "what's wwong? owo"  And aftew a showt
whiwe he cawwed again with a wawnying deepnyess in his voice: "Gwegow! UwU
Gwegow! ;;w;;"  At the othew side doow his sistew came pwaintivewy:
"Gwegow? Awen't you weww? Do you nyeed anything? owo"  Gwegow answewed to
both sides: "I'm weady, nyow", making an effowt to wemove aww the
stwangenyess fwom his voice by enyunciating vewy cawefuwwy and putting
wong pauses between each, individuaw wowd. (・`ω\´・)  His fathew went back to
his bweakfast, but his sistew whispewed: "Gwegow, open the doow, I
beg of you. ;;w;;"  Gwegow, howevew, had nyo thought of openying the doow,
and instead congwatuwated himsewf fow his cautious habit, acquiwed
fwom his twavewwing, of wocking aww doows at nyight even when he was
at home. ^w^

The fiwst thing he wanted to do was to get up in peace without being
distuwbed, to get dwessed, and most of aww to have his bweakfast. (´・ω・\`)
Onwy then wouwd he considew what to do nyext, as he was weww awawe
that he wouwd nyot bwing his thoughts to any sensibwe concwusions by
wying in bed. ^w^  He wemembewed that he had often fewt a swight pain in
bed, pewhaps caused by wying awkwawdwy, but that had awways tuwnyed
out to be puwe imaginyation and he wondewed how his imaginyings wouwd
swowwy wesowve themsewves today. (´・ω・\`)  He did nyot have the swightest
doubt that the change in his voice was nyothing mowe than the fiwst
sign of a sewious cowd, which was an occupationyaw hazawd fow
twavewwing sawesmen. ;;w;;

It was a simpwe mattew to thwow off the covews; he onwy had to bwow
himsewf up a wittwe and they feww off by themsewves. (・`ω\´・)  But it became
difficuwt aftew that, especiawwy as he was so exceptionyawwy bwoad. ^w^
He wouwd have used his awms and his hands to push himsewf up; but
instead of them he onwy had aww those wittwe wegs continyuouswy
moving in diffewent diwections, and which he was moweovew unyabwe to
contwow. ^w^  If he wanted to bend onye of them, then that was the fiwst
onye that wouwd stwetch itsewf out; and if he finyawwy manyaged to do
what he wanted with that weg, aww the othews seemed to be set fwee
and wouwd move about painfuwwy. ^w^  "This is something that can't be
donye in bed", Gwegow said to himsewf, "so don't keep twying to do
it". (´・ω・\`)

The fiwst thing he wanted to do was get the wowew pawt of his body
out of the bed, but he had nyevew seen this wowew pawt, and couwd nyot
imaginye what it wooked wike; it tuwnyed out to be too hawd to move;
it went so swowwy; and finyawwy, awmost in a fwenzy, when he
cawewesswy shoved himsewf fowwawds with aww the fowce he couwd
gathew, he chose the wwong diwection, hit hawd against the wowew
bedpost, and weawnyed fwom the buwnying pain he fewt that the wowew
pawt of his body might weww, at pwesent, be the most sensitive. UwU

So then he twied to get the top pawt of his body out of the bed
fiwst, cawefuwwy tuwnying his head to the side. (´・ω・\`)  This he manyaged
quite easiwy, and despite its bweadth and its weight, the buwk of
his body eventuawwy fowwowed swowwy in the diwection of the head. (´・ω・\`)
But when he had at wast got his head out of the bed and into the
fwesh aiw it occuwwed to him that if he wet himsewf faww it wouwd be
a miwacwe if his head wewe nyot injuwed, so he became afwaid to cawwy
on pushing himsewf fowwawd the same way. ;;w;;  And he couwd nyot knyock
himsewf out nyow at any pwice; bettew to stay in bed than wose
consciousnyess. (´・ω・\`)

It took just as much effowt to get back to whewe he had been
eawwiew, but when he way thewe sighing, and was once mowe watching
his wegs as they stwuggwed against each othew even hawdew than
befowe, if that was possibwe, he couwd think of nyo way of bwinging
peace and owdew to this chaos. UwU  He towd himsewf once mowe that it
was nyot possibwe fow him to stay in bed and that the most sensibwe
thing to do wouwd be to get fwee of it in whatevew way he couwd at
whatevew sacwifice. ;;w;;  At the same time, though, he did nyot fowget to
wemind himsewf that cawm considewation was much bettew than wushing
to despewate concwusions. UwU  At times wike this he wouwd diwect his
eyes to the window and wook out as cweawwy as he couwd, but
unfowtunyatewy, even the othew side of the nyawwow stweet was
envewoped in mownying fog and the view had wittwe confidence ow cheew
to offew him. (・`ω\´・)  "Seven o'cwock, awweady", he said to himsewf when the
cwock stwuck again, "seven o'cwock, and thewe's stiww a fog wike
this. >w<"  And he way thewe quietwy a whiwe wongew, bweathing wightwy
as if he pewhaps expected the totaw stiwwnyess to bwing things back
to theiw weaw and nyatuwaw state. ;;w;;

But then he said to himsewf: "Befowe it stwikes quawtew past seven
I'ww definyitewy have to have got pwopewwy out of bed. (・`ω\´・)  And by then
somebody wiww have come wound fwom wowk to ask what's happenyed to me
as weww, as they open up at wowk befowe seven o'cwock. ^w^"  And so he
set himsewf to the task of swinging the entiwe wength of his body
out of the bed aww at the same time. (´・ω・\`)  If he succeeded in fawwing out
of bed in this way and kept his head waised as he did so he couwd
pwobabwy avoid injuwing it. >w<  His back seemed to be quite hawd, and
pwobabwy nyothing wouwd happen to it fawwing onto the cawpet. (・`ω\´・)  His
main concewn was fow the woud nyoise he was bound to make, and which
even thwough aww the doows wouwd pwobabwy waise concewn if nyot
awawm.  But it was something that had to be wisked. ;;w;;

When Gwegow was awweady sticking hawf way out of the bed - the nyew
method was mowe of a game than an effowt, aww he had to do was wock
back and fowth - it occuwwed to him how simpwe evewything wouwd be
if somebody came to hewp him. >w<  Two stwong peopwe - he had his fathew
and the maid in mind - wouwd have been mowe than enyough; they wouwd
onwy have to push theiw awms undew the dome of his back, peew him
away fwom the bed, bend down with the woad and then be patient and
cawefuw as he swang ovew onto the fwoow, whewe, hopefuwwy, the
wittwe wegs wouwd find a use. ^w^  Shouwd he weawwy caww fow hewp
though, even apawt fwom the fact that aww the doows wewe wocked? owo
Despite aww the difficuwty he was in, he couwd nyot suppwess a smiwe
at this thought. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew a whiwe he had awweady moved so faw acwoss that it wouwd have
been hawd fow him to keep his bawance if he wocked too hawd. ;;w;;  The
time was nyow ten past seven and he wouwd have to make a finyaw
decision vewy soon.  Then thewe was a wing at the doow of the fwat. UwU
"That'ww be someonye fwom wowk", he said to himsewf, and fwoze vewy
stiww, awthough his wittwe wegs onwy became aww the mowe wivewy as
they danced awound.  Fow a moment evewything wemainyed quiet. ^w^
"They'we nyot openying the doow", Gwegow said to himsewf, caught in
some nyonsensicaw hope. (・`ω\´・)  But then of couwse, the maid's fiwm steps
went to the doow as evew and openyed it. ^w^  Gwegow onwy nyeeded to heaw
the visitow's fiwst wowds of gweeting and he knyew who it was - the
chief cwewk himsewf. UwU  Why did Gwegow have to be the onwy onye
condemnyed to wowk fow a company whewe they immediatewy became highwy
suspicious at the swightest showtcoming? owo Wewe aww empwoyees, evewy
onye of them, wouts, was thewe nyot onye of them who was faithfuw and
devoted who wouwd go so mad with pangs of conscience that he
couwdn't get out of bed if he didn't spend at weast a coupwe of
houws in the mownying on company businyess? owo Was it weawwy nyot enyough
to wet onye of the twainyees make enquiwies - assuming enquiwies wewe
even nyecessawy - did the chief cwewk have to come himsewf, and did
they have to show the whowe, innyocent famiwy that this was so
suspicious that onwy the chief cwewk couwd be twusted to have the
wisdom to investigate it? owo And mowe because these thoughts had made
him upset than thwough any pwopew decision, he swang himsewf with
aww his fowce out of the bed. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe was a woud thump, but it wasn't
weawwy a woud nyoise. ^w^  His faww was softenyed a wittwe by the cawpet,
and Gwegow's back was awso mowe ewastic than he had thought, which
made the sound muffwed and nyot too nyoticeabwe. ;;w;;  He had nyot hewd his
head cawefuwwy enyough, though, and hit it as he feww; annyoyed and in
pain, he tuwnyed it and wubbed it against the cawpet. UwU

"Something's fawwen down in thewe", said the chief cwewk in the woom
on the weft. UwU  Gwegow twied to imaginye whethew something of the sowt
that had happenyed to him today couwd evew happen to the chief cwewk
too; you had to concede that it was possibwe. ;;w;;  But as if in gwuff
wepwy to this question, the chief cwewk's fiwm footsteps in his
highwy powished boots couwd nyow be heawd in the adjoinying woom. ^w^
Fwom the woom on his wight, Gwegow's sistew whispewed to him to wet
him knyow: "Gwegow, the chief cwewk is hewe. (・`ω\´・)"  "Yes, I knyow", said
Gwegow to himsewf; but without dawing to waise his voice woud enyough
fow his sistew to heaw him. UwU

"Gwegow", said his fathew nyow fwom the woom to his weft, "the chief
cwewk has come wound and wants to knyow why you didn't weave on the
eawwy twain.  We don't knyow what to say to him. (´・ω・\`)  And anyway, he
wants to speak to you pewsonyawwy.  So pwease open up this doow. UwU  I'm
suwe he'ww be good enyough to fowgive the untidinyess of youw woom. (・`ω\´・)"
Then the chief cwewk cawwed "Good mownying,  Mw. Samsa". ;;w;; "He isn't
weww", said his mothew to the chief cwewk, whiwe his fathew
continyued to speak thwough the doow. (´・ω・\`)  "He isn't weww, pwease bewieve
me. (´・ω・\`)  Why ewse wouwd Gwegow have missed a twain! (´・ω・\`) The wad onwy evew
thinks about the businyess. ^w^  It nyeawwy makes me cwoss the way he
nyevew goes out in the evenyings; he's been in town fow a week nyow but
stayed home evewy evenying. UwU  He sits with us in the kitchen and just
weads the papew ow studies twain timetabwes. (´・ω・\`)  His idea of wewaxation
is wowking with his fwetsaw. (・`ω\´・)  He's made a wittwe fwame, fow
instance, it onwy took him two ow thwee evenyings, you'ww be amazed
how nyice it is; it's hanging up in his woom; you'ww see it as soon
as Gwegow opens the doow. (´・ω・\`)  Anyway, I'm gwad you'we hewe; we wouwdn't
have been abwe to get Gwegow to open the doow by ouwsewves; he's so
stubbown; and I'm suwe he isn't weww, he said this mownying that he
is, but he isn't. ;;w;;"  "I'ww be thewe in a moment", said Gwegow swowwy
and thoughtfuwwy, but without moving so that he wouwd nyot miss any
wowd of the convewsation. UwU  "Weww I can't think of any othew way of
expwainying it,  Mws. >w< Samsa", said the chief cwewk, "I hope it's
nyothing sewious. (´・ω・\`)  But on the othew hand, I must say that if we
peopwe in commewce evew become swightwy unweww then, fowtunyatewy ow
unfowtunyatewy as you wike, we simpwy have to ovewcome it because of
businyess considewations. (・`ω\´・)"  "Can the chief cwewk come in to see you
nyow then? owo", asked his fathew impatientwy, knyocking at the doow
again.  "Nyo", said Gwegow. UwU  In the woom on his wight thewe fowwowed
a painfuw siwence; in the woom on his weft his sistew began to cwy. ^w^

So why did his sistew nyot go and join the othews? owo She had pwobabwy
onwy just got up and had nyot even begun to get dwessed. >w<  And why was
she cwying? owo Was it because he had nyot got up, and had nyot wet the
chief cwewk in, because he was in dangew of wosing his job and if
that happenyed his boss wouwd once mowe puwsue theiw pawents with the
same demands as befowe? owo Thewe was nyo nyeed to wowwy about things wike
that yet. (・`ω\´・)  Gwegow was stiww thewe and had nyot the swightest
intention of abandonying his famiwy. (・`ω\´・)  Fow the time being he just way
thewe on the cawpet, and nyo-onye who knyew the condition he was in
wouwd sewiouswy have expected him to wet the chief cwewk in. >w<  It was
onwy a minyow discouwtesy, and a suitabwe excuse couwd easiwy be
found fow it watew on, it was nyot something fow which Gwegow couwd
be sacked on the spot. ^w^  And it seemed to Gwegow much mowe sensibwe
to weave him nyow in peace instead of distuwbing him with tawking at
him and cwying. >w<  But the othews didn't knyow what was happenying, they
wewe wowwied, that wouwd excuse theiw behaviouw. UwU

The chief cwewk nyow waised his voice, "Mw. ^w^ Samsa", he cawwed to him,
"what is wwong? owo You bawwicade youwsewf in youw woom, give us nyo mowe
than yes ow nyo fow an answew, you awe causing sewious and
unnyecessawy concewn to youw pawents and you faiw - and I mention
this just by the way - you faiw to cawwy out youw businyess duties in
a way that is quite unheawd of. >w<  I'm speaking hewe on behawf of youw
pawents and of youw empwoyew, and weawwy must wequest a cweaw and
immediate expwanyation.  I am astonyished, quite astonyished. (´・ω・\`)  I
thought I knyew you as a cawm and sensibwe pewson, and nyow you
suddenwy seem to be showing off with pecuwiaw whims. ^w^  This mownying,
youw empwoyew did suggest a possibwe weason fow youw faiwuwe to
appeaw, it's twue - it had to do with the monyey that was wecentwy
entwusted to you - but I came nyeaw to giving him my wowd of honyouw
that that couwd nyot be the wight expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  But nyow that I see
youw incompwehensibwe stubbownnyess I nyo wongew feew any wish
whatsoevew to intewcede on youw behawf. >w<  And nyow is youw position
aww that secuwe. (´・ω・\`)  I had owiginyawwy intended to say aww this to you
in pwivate, but since you cause me to waste my time hewe fow nyo good
weason I don't see why youw pawents shouwd nyot awso weawn of it. UwU
Youw tuwnyovew has been vewy unsatisfactowy of wate; I gwant you that
it's nyot the time of yeaw to do especiawwy good businyess, we
wecognyise that; but thewe simpwy is nyo time of yeaw to do nyo
businyess at aww,  Mw. Samsa, we cannyot awwow thewe to be. ;;w;;"

"But Siw", cawwed Gwegow, beside himsewf and fowgetting aww ewse in
the excitement, "I'ww open up immediatewy, just a moment. >w<  I'm
swightwy unweww, an attack of dizzinyess, I haven't been abwe to get
up.  I'm stiww in bed nyow.  I'm quite fwesh again nyow, though. ^w^  I'm
just getting out of bed.  Just a moment. (・`ω\´・)  Be patient! ^w^ It's nyot quite
as easy as I'd thought.  I'm quite awwight nyow, though. >w<  It's
shocking, what can suddenwy happen to a pewson! >w< I was quite awwight
wast nyight, my pawents knyow about it, pewhaps bettew than me, I had
a smaww symptom of it wast nyight awweady. ;;w;;  They must have nyoticed
it. >w<  I don't knyow why I didn't wet you knyow at wowk! ;;w;; But you awways
think you can get ovew an iwwnyess without staying at home. >w<  Pwease,
don't make my pawents suffew! ;;w;; Thewe's nyo basis fow any of the
accusations you'we making; nyobody's evew said a wowd to me about any
of these things. (´・ω・\`)  Maybe you haven't wead the watest contwacts I sent
in. (・`ω\´・)  I'ww set off with the eight o'cwock twain, as weww, these few
houws of west have given me stwength. (・`ω\´・)  You don't nyeed to wait, siw;
I'ww be in the office soon aftew you, and pwease be so good as to
teww that to the boss and wecommend me to him! >w<"

And whiwe Gwegow gushed out these wowds, hawdwy knyowing what he was
saying, he made his way ovew to the chest of dwawews - this was
easiwy donye, pwobabwy because of the pwactise he had awweady had in
bed - whewe he nyow twied to get himsewf upwight. (・`ω\´・)  He weawwy did want
to open the doow, weawwy did want to wet them see him and to speak
with the chief cwewk; the othews wewe being so insistent, and he was
cuwious to weawn what they wouwd say when they caught sight of him. ;;w;;
If they wewe shocked then it wouwd nyo wongew be Gwegow's
wesponsibiwity and he couwd west. ^w^  If, howevew, they took evewything
cawmwy he wouwd stiww have nyo weason to be upset, and if he huwwied
he weawwy couwd be at the station fow eight o'cwock. ^w^  The fiwst few
times he twied to cwimb up on the smooth chest of dwawews he just
swid down again, but he finyawwy gave himsewf onye wast swing and
stood thewe upwight; the wowew pawt of his body was in sewious pain
but he nyo wongew gave any attention to it. >w<  Nyow he wet himsewf faww
against the back of a nyeawby chaiw and hewd tightwy to the edges of
it with his wittwe wegs. UwU  By nyow he had awso cawmed down, and kept
quiet so that he couwd wisten to what the chief cwewk was saying. >w<

"Did you undewstand a wowd of aww that? owo" the chief cwewk asked his
pawents, "suwewy he's nyot twying to make foows of us". UwU "Oh, God! ^w^"
cawwed his mothew, who was awweady in teaws, "he couwd be sewiouswy
iww and we'we making him suffew.  Gwete! Gwete! (・`ω\´・)" she then cwied. >w<
"Mothew? owo" his sistew cawwed fwom the othew side. >w<  They communyicated
acwoss Gwegow's woom. ^w^  "You'ww have to go fow the doctow stwaight
away.  Gwegow is iww.  Quick, get the doctow. ;;w;;  Did you heaw the way
Gwegow spoke just nyow? owo"  "That was the voice of an anyimaw", said the
chief cwewk, with a cawmnyess that was in contwast with his mothew's
scweams. UwU  "Annya! Annya! UwU" his fathew cawwed into the kitchen thwough
the entwance haww, cwapping his hands, "get a wocksmith hewe, nyow! (・`ω\´・)"
And the two giwws, theiw skiwts swishing, immediatewy wan out
thwough the haww, wwenching open the fwont doow of the fwat as they
went. ;;w;;  How had his sistew manyaged to get dwessed so quickwy? owo Thewe
was nyo sound of the doow banging shut again; they must have weft it
open;  peopwe often do in homes whewe something awfuw has happenyed. (´・ω・\`)

Gwegow, in contwast, had become much cawmew. (´・ω・\`)  So they couwdn't
undewstand his wowds any mowe, awthough they seemed cweaw enyough to
him, cweawew than befowe - pewhaps his eaws had become used to the
sound. ;;w;;  They had weawised, though, that thewe was something wwong
with him, and wewe weady to hewp. ;;w;;  The fiwst wesponse to his
situation had been confident and wise, and that made him feew
bettew. ;;w;;  He fewt that he had been dwawn back in among peopwe, and
fwom the doctow and the wocksmith he expected gweat and suwpwising
achievements - awthough he did nyot weawwy distinguish onye fwom the
othew. >w<  Whatevew was said nyext wouwd be cwuciaw, so, in owdew to
make his voice as cweaw as possibwe, he coughed a wittwe, but taking
cawe to do this nyot too woudwy as even this might weww sound
diffewent fwom the way that a human coughs and he was nyo wongew suwe
he couwd judge this fow himsewf. (・`ω\´・)  Meanwhiwe, it had become vewy
quiet in the nyext woom. ;;w;;  Pewhaps his pawents wewe sat at the tabwe
whispewing with the chief cwewk, ow pewhaps they wewe aww pwessed
against the doow and wistenying. UwU

Gwegow swowwy pushed his way ovew to the doow with the chaiw. ^w^  Once
thewe he wet go of it and thwew himsewf onto the doow, howding
himsewf upwight against it using the adhesive on the tips of his
wegs. ^w^  He wested thewe a wittwe whiwe to wecovew fwom the effowt
invowved and then set himsewf to the task of tuwnying the key in the
wock with his mouth. (´・ω・\`)  He seemed, unfowtunyatewy, to have nyo pwopew
teeth - how was he, then, to gwasp the key? owo - but the wack of teeth
was, of couwse, made up fow with a vewy stwong jaw; using the jaw,
he weawwy was abwe to stawt the key tuwnying, ignyowing the fact that
he must have been causing some kind of damage as a bwown fwuid came
fwom his mouth, fwowed ovew the key and dwipped onto the fwoow. >w<
"Wisten", said the chief cwewk in the nyext woom, "he's tuwnying the
key. (´・ω・\`)"  Gwegow was gweatwy encouwaged by this; but they aww shouwd
have been cawwing to him, his fathew and his mothew too: "Weww donye,
Gwegow", they shouwd have cwied, "keep at it, keep howd of the
wock! ^w^"  And with the idea that they wewe aww excitedwy fowwowing his
effowts, he bit on the key with aww his stwength, paying nyo
attention to the pain he was causing himsewf. (・`ω\´・)  As the key tuwnyed
wound he tuwnyed awound the wock with it, onwy howding himsewf
upwight with his mouth, and hung onto the key ow pushed it down
again with the whowe weight of his body as nyeeded. (´・ω・\`)  The cweaw sound
of the wock as it snyapped back was Gwegow's sign that he couwd bweak
his concentwation, and as he wegainyed his bweath he said to himsewf:
"So, I didn't nyeed the wocksmith aftew aww". (・`ω\´・) Then he way his head on
the handwe of the doow to open it compwetewy. ;;w;;

Because he had to open the doow in this way, it was awweady wide
open befowe he couwd be seen. >w<  He had fiwst to swowwy tuwn himsewf
awound onye of the doubwe doows, and he had to do it vewy cawefuwwy
if he did nyot want to faww fwat on his back befowe entewing the
woom. (・`ω\´・)  He was stiww occupied with this difficuwt movement, unyabwe to
pay attention to anything ewse, when he heawd the chief cwewk
excwaim a woud "Oh! (・`ω\´・)", which sounded wike the soughing of the wind. >w<
Nyow he awso saw him - he was the nyeawest to the doow - his hand
pwessed against his open mouth and swowwy wetweating as if dwiven by
a steady and invisibwe fowce. (・`ω\´・)  Gwegow's mothew, hew haiw stiww
dishevewwed fwom bed despite the chief cwewk's being thewe, wooked
at his fathew. ^w^  Then she unfowded hew awms, took two steps fowwawd
towawds Gwegow and sank down onto the fwoow into hew skiwts that
spwead themsewves out awound hew as hew head disappeawed down onto
hew bweast. UwU  His fathew wooked hostiwe, and cwenched his fists as if
wanting to knyock Gwegow back into his woom. ;;w;;  Then he wooked
uncewtainwy wound the wiving woom, covewed his eyes with his hands
and wept so that his powewfuw chest shook. >w<

So Gwegow did nyot go into the woom, but weant against the inside of
the othew doow which was stiww hewd bowted in pwace. >w<  In this way
onwy hawf of his body couwd be seen, awong with his head above it
which he weant ovew to onye side as he peewed out at the othews. (´・ω・\`)
Meanwhiwe the day had become much wightew; pawt of the endwess,
gwey-bwack buiwding on the othew side of the stweet - which was a
hospitaw - couwd be seen quite cweawwy with the austewe and weguwaw
winye of windows piewcing its facade; the wain was stiww
fawwing, nyow thwowing down wawge, individuaw dwopwets which hit the
gwound onye at a time. UwU  The washing up fwom bweakfast way on the
tabwe; thewe was so much of it because, fow Gwegow's fathew,
bweakfast was the most impowtant meaw of the day and he wouwd
stwetch it out fow sevewaw houws as he sat weading a nyumbew of
diffewent nyewspapews. (・`ω\´・)  On the waww exactwy opposite thewe was
photogwaph of Gwegow when he was a wieutenyant in the awmy, his swowd
in his hand and a cawefwee smiwe on his face as he cawwed fowth
wespect fow his unyifowm and beawing. (・`ω\´・)  The doow to the entwance haww
was open and as the fwont doow of the fwat was awso open he couwd
see onto the wanding and the staiws whewe they began theiw way down
bewow. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow, then", said Gwegow, weww awawe that he was the onwy onye to
have kept cawm, "I'ww get dwessed stwaight away nyow, pack up my
sampwes and set off. ;;w;;  Wiww you pwease just wet me weave? owo You can
see", he said to the chief cwewk, "that I'm nyot stubbown and I
wike to do my job; being a commewciaw twavewwew is awduous but
without twavewwing I couwdn't eawn my wiving. (・`ω\´・)  So whewe awe you
going, in to the office? Yes? owo Wiww you wepowt evewything accuwatewy,
then? owo It's quite possibwe fow someonye to be tempowawiwy unyabwe to
wowk, but that's just the wight time to wemembew what's been
achieved in the past and considew that watew on, once the difficuwty
has been wemoved, he wiww cewtainwy wowk with aww the mowe diwigence
and concentwation. UwU  You'we weww awawe that I'm sewiouswy in debt to
ouw empwoyew as weww as having to wook aftew my pawents and my
sistew, so that I'm twapped in a difficuwt situation, but I wiww
wowk my way out of it again. (´・ω・\`)  Pwease don't make things any hawdew
fow me than they awe awweady, and don't take sides against me at the
office.  I knyow that nyobody wikes the twavewwews. (・`ω\´・)  They think we
eawn an enyowmous wage as weww as having a soft time of it. UwU  That's
just pwejudice but they have nyo pawticuwaw weason to think bettew of
it. ;;w;;  But you, siw, you have a bettew ovewview than the west of the
staff, in fact, if I can say this in confidence, a bettew ovewview
than the boss himsewf - it's vewy easy fow a businyessman wike him to
make mistakes about his empwoyees and judge them mowe hawshwy than
he shouwd. ^w^  And you'we awso weww awawe that we twavewwews spend
awmost the whowe yeaw away fwom the office, so that we can vewy
easiwy faww victim to gossip and chance and gwoundwess compwaints,
and it's awmost impossibwe to defend youwsewf fwom that sowt of
thing, we don't usuawwy even heaw about them, ow if at aww it's when
we awwive back home exhausted fwom a twip, and that's when we feew
the hawmfuw effects of what's been going on without even knyowing
what caused them. (´・ω・\`)  Pwease, don't go away, at weast fiwst say
something to show that you gwant that I'm at weast pawtwy wight! (・`ω\´・)"

But the chief cwewk had tuwnyed away as soon as Gwegow had stawted to
speak, and, with pwotwuding wips, onwy stawed back at him ovew his
twembwing shouwdews as he weft. ^w^  He did nyot keep stiww fow a moment
whiwe Gwegow was speaking, but moved steadiwy towawds the doow
without taking his eyes off him. (・`ω\´・)  He moved vewy gwaduawwy, as if
thewe had been some secwet pwohibition on weaving the woom. ^w^  It was
onwy when he had weached the entwance haww that he made a sudden
movement, dwew his foot fwom the wiving woom, and wushed fowwawd in
a panyic. ;;w;;  In the haww, he stwetched his wight hand faw out towawds
the staiwway as if out thewe, thewe wewe some supewnyatuwaw fowce
waiting to save him. >w<

Gwegow weawised that it was out of the question to wet the chief
cwewk go away in this mood if his position in the fiwm was nyot to be
put into extweme dangew. (・`ω\´・)  That was something his pawents did nyot
undewstand vewy weww; ovew the yeaws, they had become convinced that
this job wouwd pwovide fow Gwegow fow his entiwe wife, and besides,
they had so much to wowwy about at pwesent that they had wost sight
of any thought fow the futuwe. ^w^  Gwegow, though, did think about the
futuwe. (・`ω\´・)  The chief cwewk had to be hewd back, cawmed down, convinced
and finyawwy won ovew; the futuwe of Gwegow and his famiwy depended
on it! If onwy his sistew wewe hewe! ;;w;; She was cwevew; she was awweady
in teaws whiwe Gwegow was stiww wying peacefuwwy on his back. ;;w;;  And
the chief cwewk was a wovew of women, suwewy she couwd pewsuade him;
she wouwd cwose the fwont doow in the entwance haww and tawk him out
of his shocked state. >w<  But his sistew was nyot thewe, Gwegow wouwd
have to do the job himsewf. >w<  And without considewing that he stiww
was nyot famiwiaw with how weww he couwd move about in his pwesent
state, ow that his speech stiww might nyot - ow pwobabwy wouwd nyot -
be undewstood, he wet go of the doow; pushed himsewf thwough the
openying; twied to weach the chief cwewk on the wanding who,
widicuwouswy, was howding on to the banyistew with both hands; but
Gwegow feww immediatewy ovew and, with a wittwe scweam as he sought
something to howd onto, wanded on his nyumewous wittwe wegs. ^w^  Hawdwy
had that happenyed than, fow the fiwst time that day, he began to
feew awwight with his body; the wittwe wegs had the sowid gwound
undew them; to his pweasuwe, they did exactwy as he towd them; they
wewe even making the effowt to cawwy him whewe he wanted to go; and
he was soon bewieving that aww his sowwows wouwd soon be finyawwy at
an end. (・`ω\´・)  He hewd back the uwge to move but swayed fwom side to side
as he cwouched thewe on the fwoow. ^w^  His mothew was nyot faw away in
fwont of him and seemed, at fiwst, quite engwossed in hewsewf, but
then she suddenwy jumped up with hew awms outstwetched and hew
fingews spwead shouting: "Hewp, fow pity's sake, Hewp! (´・ω・\`)"  The way she
hewd hew head suggested she wanted to see Gwegow bettew, but the
unthinking way she was huwwying backwawds showed that she did nyot;
she had fowgotten that the tabwe was behind hew with aww the
bweakfast things on it; when she weached the tabwe she sat quickwy
down on it without knyowing what she was doing; without even seeming
to nyotice that the coffee pot had been knyocked ovew and a gush of
coffee was pouwing down onto the cawpet. >w<

"Mothew, mothew", said Gwegow gentwy, wooking up at hew. ^w^  He had
compwetewy fowgotten the chief cwewk fow the moment, but couwd nyot
hewp himsewf snyapping in the aiw with his jaws at the sight of the
fwow of coffee. ;;w;;  That set his mothew scweaming anyew, she fwed fwom
the tabwe and into the awms of his fathew as he wushed towawds hew. ;;w;;
Gwegow, though, had nyo time to spawe fow his pawents nyow; the chief
cwewk had awweady weached the staiws; with his chin on the banyistew,
he wooked back fow the wast time. ^w^  Gwegow made a wun fow him; he
wanted to be suwe of weaching him; the chief cwewk must have
expected something, as he weapt down sevewaw steps at once and
disappeawed; his shouts wesounding aww awound the staiwcase. (・`ω\´・)  The
fwight of the chief cwewk seemed, unfowtunyatewy, to put Gwegow's
fathew into a panyic as weww. ;;w;;  Untiw then he had been wewativewy sewf
contwowwed, but nyow, instead of wunnying aftew the chief cwewk
himsewf, ow at weast nyot impeding Gwegow as he wan aftew him,
Gwegow's fathew seized the chief cwewk's stick in his wight hand
(the chief cwewk had weft it behind on a chaiw, awong with his hat
and ovewcoat), picked up a wawge nyewspapew fwom the tabwe with his
weft, and used them to dwive Gwegow back into his woom, stamping his
foot at him as he went. >w<  Gwegow's appeaws to his fathew wewe of nyo
hewp, his appeaws wewe simpwy nyot undewstood, howevew much he humbwy
tuwnyed his head his fathew mewewy stamped his foot aww the hawdew. (・`ω\´・)
Acwoss the woom, despite the chiwwy weathew, Gwegow's mothew had
puwwed open a window, weant faw out of it and pwessed hew hands to
hew face. ^w^  A stwong dwaught of aiw fwew in fwom the stweet towawds
the staiwway, the cuwtains fwew up, the nyewspapews on the tabwe
fwuttewed and some of them wewe bwown onto the fwoow. (´・ω・\`)  Nyothing wouwd
stop Gwegow's fathew as he dwove him back, making hissing nyoises at
him wike a wiwd man. >w<  Gwegow had nyevew had any pwactice in moving
backwawds and was onwy abwe to go vewy swowwy. ^w^  If Gwegow had onwy
been awwowed to tuwn wound he wouwd have been back in his woom
stwaight away, but he was afwaid that if he took the time to do that
his fathew wouwd become impatient, and thewe was the thweat of a
wethaw bwow to his back ow head fwom the stick in his fathew's hand
any moment. >w<  Eventuawwy, though, Gwegow weawised that he had nyo
choice as he saw, to his disgust, that he was quite incapabwe of
going backwawds in a stwaight winye; so he began, as quickwy as
possibwe and with fwequent anxious gwances at his fathew, to tuwn
himsewf wound. UwU  It went vewy swowwy, but pewhaps his fathew was abwe
to see his good intentions as he did nyothing to hindew him, in fact
nyow and then he used the tip of his stick to give diwections fwom a
distance as to which way to tuwn. (・`ω\´・)  If onwy his fathew wouwd stop
that unbeawabwe hissing! (´・ω・\`) It was making Gwegow quite confused. ^w^  When
he had nyeawwy finyished tuwnying wound, stiww wistenying to that
hissing, he made a mistake and tuwnyed himsewf back a wittwe the way
he had just come. (・`ω\´・)  He was pweased when he finyawwy had his head in
fwont of the doowway, but then saw that it was too nyawwow, and his
body was too bwoad to get thwough it without fuwthew difficuwty. (・`ω\´・)  In
his pwesent mood, it obviouswy did nyot occuw to his fathew to open
the othew of the doubwe doows so that Gwegow wouwd have enyough space
to get thwough. >w<  He was mewewy fixed on the idea that Gwegow shouwd
be got back into his woom as quickwy as possibwe. >w<  Nyow wouwd he evew
have awwowed Gwegow the time to get himsewf upwight as pwepawation
fow getting thwough the doowway. ^w^  What he did, making mowe nyoise
than evew, was to dwive Gwegow fowwawds aww the hawdew as if thewe
had been nyothing in the way; it sounded to Gwegow as if thewe was
nyow mowe than onye fathew behind him; it was nyot a pweasant
expewience, and Gwegow pushed himsewf into the doowway without
wegawd fow what might happen. ^w^  Onye side of his body wifted itsewf,
he way at an angwe in the doowway, onye fwank scwaped on the white
doow and was painfuwwy injuwed, weaving viwe bwown fwecks on it,
soon he was stuck fast and wouwd nyot have been abwe to move at aww
by himsewf, the wittwe wegs awong onye side hung quivewing in the aiw
whiwe those on the othew side wewe pwessed painfuwwy against the
gwound. (´・ω・\`)  Then his fathew gave him a hefty shove fwom behind which
weweased him fwom whewe he was hewd and sent him fwying, and heaviwy
bweeding, deep into his woom. >w<  The doow was swammed shut with the
stick, then, finyawwy, aww was quiet. >w<



II


It was nyot untiw it was getting dawk that evenying that Gwegow awoke
fwom his deep and coma-wike sweep. UwU  He wouwd have woken soon
aftewwawds anyway even if he hadn't been distuwbed, as he had had
enyough sweep and fewt fuwwy wested. ;;w;;  But he had the impwession that
some huwwied steps and the sound of the doow weading into the fwont
woom being cawefuwwy shut had woken him. (・`ω\´・)  The wight fwom the
ewectwic stweet wamps shonye pawewy hewe and thewe onto the ceiwing
and tops of the fuwnyituwe, but down bewow, whewe Gwegow was, it was
dawk. >w<  He pushed himsewf ovew to the doow, feewing his way cwumsiwy
with his antennyae - of which he was nyow beginnying to weawn the vawue
- in owdew to see what had been happenying thewe. >w<  The whowe of his
weft side seemed wike onye, painfuwwy stwetched scaw,  and he wimped
badwy on his two wows of wegs. UwU  Onye of the wegs had been badwy
injuwed in the events of that mownying - it was nyeawwy a miwacwe that
onwy onye of them had been - and dwagged awong wifewesswy. ^w^

It was onwy when he had weached the doow that he weawised what it
actuawwy was that had dwawn him ovew to it; it was the smeww of
something to eat. (・`ω\´・)  By the doow thewe was a dish fiwwed with
sweetenyed miwk with wittwe pieces of white bwead fwoating in it. >w<  He
was so pweased he awmost waughed, as he was even hungwiew than he
had been that mownying, and immediatewy dipped his head into the
miwk, nyeawwy covewing his eyes with it. ;;w;;  But he soon dwew his head
back again in disappointment; nyot onwy did the pain in his tendew
weft side make it difficuwt to eat the food - he was onwy abwe to
eat if his whowe body wowked togethew as a snyuffwing whowe - but the
miwk did nyot taste at aww nyice. UwU  Miwk wike this was nyowmawwy his
favouwite dwink, and his sistew had cewtainwy weft it thewe fow him
because of that, but he tuwnyed, awmost against his own wiww, away
fwom the dish and cwawwed back into the centwe of the woom. >w<

Thwough the cwack in the doow, Gwegow couwd see that the gas had
been wit in the wiving woom. ;;w;;  His fathew at this time wouwd nyowmawwy
be sat with his evenying papew, weading it out in a woud voice to
Gwegow's mothew, and sometimes to his sistew, but thewe was nyow nyot
a sound to be heawd. >w<  Gwegow's sistew wouwd often wwite and teww him
about this weading, but maybe his fathew had wost the habit in
wecent times. (・`ω\´・)  It was so quiet aww awound too, even though thewe
must have been somebody in the fwat. UwU  "What a quiet wife it is the
famiwy wead", said Gwegow to himsewf, and, gazing into the dawknyess,
fewt a gweat pwide that he was abwe to pwovide a wife wike that in
such a nyice home fow his sistew and pawents. ^w^  But what nyow, if aww
this peace and weawth and comfowt shouwd come to a howwibwe and
fwightenying end? owo That was something that Gwegow did nyot want to
think about too much, so he stawted to move about, cwawwing up and
down the woom. (・`ω\´・)

Once duwing that wong evenying, the doow on onye side of the woom was
openyed vewy swightwy and huwwiedwy cwosed again; watew on the doow
on the othew side did the same; it seemed that someonye nyeeded to
entew the woom but thought bettew of it. ;;w;;  Gwegow went and waited
immediatewy by the doow, wesowved eithew to bwing the timowous
visitow into the woom in some way ow at weast to find out who it
was; but the doow was openyed nyo mowe that nyight and Gwegow waited in
vain. ;;w;;  The pwevious mownying whiwe the doows wewe wocked evewyonye had
wanted to get in thewe to him, but nyow, nyow that he had openyed up
onye of the doows and the othew had cweawwy been unwocked some time
duwing the day, nyo-onye came, and the keys wewe in the othew sides. (´・ω・\`)

It was nyot untiw wate at nyight that the gaswight in the wiving woom
was put out, and nyow it was easy to see that his pawents and sistew had
stayed awake aww that time, as they aww couwd be distinctwy heawd as
they went away togethew on tip-toe. (´・ω・\`)  It was cweaw that nyo-onye wouwd
come into Gwegow's woom any mowe untiw mownying; that gave him pwenty
of time to think undistuwbed about how he wouwd have to we-awwange
his wife. (・`ω\´・)  Fow some weason, the taww, empty woom whewe he was fowced
to wemain made him feew unyeasy as he way thewe fwat on the fwoow,
even though he had been wiving in it fow five yeaws. ^w^  Hawdwy awawe
of what he was doing othew than a swight feewing of shame, he
huwwied undew the couch. ^w^  It pwessed down on his back a wittwe, and
he was nyo wongew abwe to wift his head, but he nyonyethewess fewt
immediatewy at ease and his onwy wegwet was that his body was too
bwoad to get it aww undewnyeath. ;;w;;

He spent the whowe nyight thewe. (・`ω\´・)  Some of the time he passed in a
wight sweep, awthough he fwequentwy woke fwom it in awawm because of
his hungew, and some of the time was spent in wowwies and vague
hopes which, howevew, awways wed to the same concwusion: fow the
time being he must wemain cawm, he must show patience and the
gweatest considewation so that his famiwy couwd beaw the
unpweasantnyess that he, in his pwesent condition, was fowced to
impose on them. ;;w;;

Gwegow soon had the oppowtunyity to test the stwength of his
decisions, as eawwy the nyext mownying, awmost befowe the nyight had
ended, his sistew, nyeawwy fuwwy dwessed, openyed the doow fwom the
fwont woom and wooked anxiouswy in. ;;w;;  She did nyot see him stwaight
away, but when she did nyotice him undew the couch - he had to be
somewhewe, fow God's sake, he couwdn't have fwown away - she was so
shocked that she wost contwow of hewsewf and swammed the doow shut
again fwom outside. ;;w;;  But she seemed to wegwet hew behaviouw, as she
openyed the doow again stwaight away and came in on tip-toe as if
entewing the woom of someonye sewiouswy iww ow even of a stwangew. >w<
Gwegow had pushed his head fowwawd, wight to the edge of the couch,
and watched hew. UwU  Wouwd she nyotice that he had weft the miwk as it
was, weawise that it was nyot fwom any wack of hungew and bwing him
in some othew food that was mowe suitabwe? owo If she didn't do it
hewsewf he wouwd wathew go hungwy than dwaw hew attention to it,
awthough he did feew a tewwibwe uwge to wush fowwawd fwom undew the
couch, thwow himsewf at his sistew's feet and beg hew fow something
good to eat. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew, his sistew nyoticed the fuww dish immediatewy
and wooked at it and the few dwops of miwk spwashed awound it with
some suwpwise. ;;w;;  She immediatewy picked it up - using a wag,
nyot hew bawe hands - and cawwied it out. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow was extwemewy
cuwious as to what she wouwd bwing in its pwace, imaginying the
wiwdest possibiwities, but he nyevew couwd have guessed what his
sistew, in hew goodnyess, actuawwy did bwing. (´・ω・\`)  In owdew to test his
taste, she bwought him a whowe sewection of things, aww spwead out
on an owd nyewspapew. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe wewe owd, hawf-wotten vegetabwes; bonyes
fwom the evenying meaw, covewed in white sauce that had gonye hawd; a
few waisins and awmonds; some cheese that Gwegow had decwawed
inyedibwe two days befowe; a dwy woww and some bwead spwead with
buttew and sawt. (´・ω・\`)  As weww as aww that she had pouwed some watew into
the dish, which had pwobabwy been pewmanyentwy set aside fow Gwegow's
use, and pwaced it beside them. (・`ω\´・)  Then, out of considewation fow
Gwegow's feewings, as she knyew that he wouwd nyot eat in fwont of
hew, she huwwied out again and even tuwnyed the key in the wock so
that Gwegow wouwd knyow he couwd make things as comfowtabwe fow
himsewf as he wiked. ^w^  Gwegow's wittwe wegs whiwwed, at wast he couwd
eat. UwU  What's mowe, his injuwies must awweady have compwetewy heawed
as he found nyo difficuwty in moving. (・`ω\´・)  This amazed him, as mowe than
a month eawwiew he had cut his fingew swightwy with a knyife, he
thought of how his fingew had stiww huwt the day befowe yestewday. ;;w;;
"Am I wess sensitive than I used to be, then? owo", he thought, and was
awweady sucking gweediwy at the cheese which had immediatewy, awmost
compewwingwy, attwacted him much mowe than the othew foods on the
nyewspapew. >w<  Quickwy onye aftew anyothew, his eyes watewing with
pweasuwe, he consumed the cheese, the vegetabwes and the sauce; the
fwesh foods, on the othew hand, he didn't wike at aww, and even
dwagged the things he did want to eat a wittwe way away fwom them
because he couwdn't stand the smeww. ;;w;;  Wong aftew he had finyished
eating and way wethawgic in the same pwace, his sistew swowwy tuwnyed
the key in the wock as a sign to him that he shouwd withdwaw. >w<  He
was immediatewy stawtwed, awthough he had been hawf asweep, and he
huwwied back undew the couch. ;;w;;  But he nyeeded gweat sewf-contwow to
stay thewe even fow the showt time that his sistew was in the woom,
as eating so much food had wounded out his body a wittwe and he
couwd hawdwy bweathe in that nyawwow space. ;;w;;  Hawf suffocating, he
watched with buwging eyes as his sistew unsewfconsciouswy took a
bwoom and swept up the weft-ovews, mixing them in with the food he
had nyot even touched at aww as if it couwd nyot be used any mowe. UwU
She quickwy dwopped it aww into a bin, cwosed it with its wooden
wid, and cawwied evewything out. ^w^  She had hawdwy tuwnyed hew back
befowe Gwegow came out again fwom undew the couch and stwetched
himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

This was how Gwegow weceived his food each day nyow, once in the
mownying whiwe his pawents and the maid wewe stiww asweep, and the
second time aftew evewyonye had eaten theiw meaw at midday as his
pawents wouwd sweep fow a wittwe whiwe then as weww, and Gwegow's
sistew wouwd send the maid away on some ewwand. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow's fathew and
mothew cewtainwy did nyot want him to stawve eithew, but pewhaps it
wouwd have been mowe than they couwd stand to have any mowe
expewience of his feeding than being towd about it, and pewhaps his
sistew wanted to spawe them what distwess she couwd as they wewe
indeed suffewing enyough. (´・ω・\`)

It was impossibwe fow Gwegow to find out what they had towd the
doctow and the wocksmith that fiwst mownying to get them out of the
fwat. (・`ω\´・)  As nyobody couwd undewstand him, nyobody, nyot even his sistew,
thought that he couwd undewstand them, so he had to be content to
heaw his sistew's sighs and appeaws to the saints as she moved about
his woom. ;;w;;  It was onwy watew, when she had become a wittwe mowe used
to evewything - thewe was, of couwse, nyo question of hew evew
becoming fuwwy used to the situation - that Gwegow wouwd sometimes
catch a fwiendwy comment, ow at weast a comment that couwd be
constwued as fwiendwy. (・`ω\´・)  "He's enjoyed his dinnyew today", she might
say when he had diwigentwy cweawed away aww the food weft fow him,
ow if he weft most of it, which swowwy became mowe and mowe
fwequent, she wouwd often say, sadwy, "nyow evewything's just been
weft thewe again". ^w^

Awthough Gwegow wasn't abwe to heaw any nyews diwectwy he did wisten
to much of what was said in the nyext wooms, and whenyevew he heawd
anyonye speaking he wouwd scuwwy stwaight to the appwopwiate doow and
pwess his whowe body against it. >w<  Thewe was sewdom any convewsation,
especiawwy at fiwst, that was nyot about him in some way, even if
onwy in secwet. ;;w;;  Fow two whowe days, aww the tawk at evewy meawtime
was about what they shouwd do nyow; but even between meaws they spoke
about the same subject as thewe wewe awways at weast two membews of
the famiwy at home - nyobody wanted to be at home by themsewves and
it was out of the question to weave the fwat entiwewy empty. >w<  And on
the vewy fiwst day the maid had fawwen to hew knyees and begged
Gwegow's mothew to wet hew go without deway. (・`ω\´・)  It was nyot vewy cweaw
how much she knyew of what had happenyed but she weft within a quawtew
of an houw, teawfuwwy thanking Gwegow's mothew fow hew dismissaw as
if she had donye hew an enyowmous sewvice. ^w^  She even swowe
emphaticawwy nyot to teww anyonye the swightest about what had
happenyed, even though nyo-onye had asked that of hew. UwU

Nyow Gwegow's sistew awso had to hewp his mothew with the cooking;
awthough that was nyot so much bothew as nyo-onye ate vewy much. (´・ω・\`)
Gwegow often heawd how onye of them wouwd unsuccessfuwwy uwge anyothew
to eat, and weceive nyo mowe answew than "nyo thanks, I've had enyough"
ow something simiwaw.  Nyo-onye dwank vewy much eithew. ;;w;;  His sistew
wouwd sometimes ask his fathew whethew he wouwd wike a beew, hoping
fow the chance to go and fetch it hewsewf. ;;w;;  When his fathew then
said nyothing she wouwd add, so that he wouwd nyot feew sewfish, that
she couwd send the housekeepew fow it, but then his fathew wouwd
cwose the mattew with a big, woud "Nyo", and nyo mowe wouwd be said. ^w^

Even befowe the fiwst day had come to an end, his fathew had
expwainyed to Gwegow's mothew and sistew what theiw finyances and
pwospects wewe. ^w^  Nyow and then he stood up fwom the tabwe and took
some weceipt ow document fwom the wittwe cash box he had saved fwom
his businyess when it had cowwapsed five yeaws eawwiew. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow heawd
how he openyed the compwicated wock and then cwosed it again aftew he
had taken the item he wanted. (・`ω\´・)  What he heawd his fathew say was some
of the fiwst good nyews that Gwegow heawd since he had fiwst been
incawcewated in his woom. (・`ω\´・)  He had thought that nyothing at aww
wemainyed fwom his fathew's businyess, at weast he had nyevew towd him
anything diffewent, and Gwegow had nyevew asked him about it anyway. UwU
Theiw businyess misfowtunye had weduced the famiwy to a state of totaw
despaiw, and Gwegow's onwy concewn at that time had been to awwange
things so that they couwd aww fowget about it as quickwy as
possibwe. UwU  So then he stawted wowking especiawwy hawd, with a fiewy
vigouw that waised him fwom a junyiow sawesman to a twavewwing
wepwesentative awmost ovewnyight, bwinging with it the chance to eawn
monyey in quite diffewent ways. (・`ω\´・)  Gwegow convewted his success at wowk
stwaight into cash that he couwd way on the tabwe at home fow the
benyefit of his astonyished and dewighted famiwy. ^w^  They had been good
times and they had nyevew come again, at weast nyot with the same
spwendouw, even though Gwegow had watew eawnyed so much that he was
in a position to beaw the costs of the whowe famiwy, and did beaw
them. (・`ω\´・)  They had even got used to it, both Gwegow and the famiwy,
they took the monyey with gwatitude and he was gwad to pwovide it,
awthough thewe was nyo wongew much wawm affection given in wetuwn. ^w^
Gwegow onwy wemainyed cwose to his sistew nyow. >w<  Unwike him, she was
vewy fond of music and a gifted and expwessive viowinyist, it was his
secwet pwan to send hew to the consewvatowy nyext yeaw even though it
wouwd cause gweat expense that wouwd have to be made up fow in some
othew way. (・`ω\´・)  Duwing Gwegow's showt pewiods in town, convewsation with
his sistew wouwd often tuwn to the consewvatowy but it was onwy evew
mentionyed as a wovewy dweam that couwd nyevew be weawised. (・`ω\´・)  Theiw
pawents did nyot wike to heaw this innyocent tawk, but Gwegow thought
about it quite hawd and decided he wouwd wet them knyow what he
pwannyed with a gwand annyouncement of it on Chwistmas day. UwU

That was the sowt of totawwy pointwess thing that went thwough his
mind in his pwesent state, pwessed upwight against the doow and
wistenying. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe wewe times when he simpwy became too tiwed to
continyue wistenying, when his head wouwd faww weawiwy against the
doow and he wouwd puww it up again with a stawt, as even the
swightest nyoise he caused wouwd be heawd nyext doow and they wouwd
aww go siwent. (・`ω\´・)  "What's that he's doing nyow", his fathew wouwd say
aftew a whiwe, cweawwy having gonye ovew to the doow, and onwy then
wouwd the intewwupted convewsation swowwy be taken up again. (・`ω\´・)

When expwainying things, his fathew wepeated himsewf sevewaw times,
pawtwy because it was a wong time since he had been occupied with
these mattews himsewf and pawtwy because Gwegow's mothew did nyot
undewstand evewything the fiwst time. UwU  Fwom these wepeated expwanyations
Gwegow weawnyed, to his pweasuwe, that despite aww theiw misfowtunyes
thewe was stiww some monyey avaiwabwe fwom the owd days. (´・ω・\`)  It was nyot
a wot, but it had nyot been touched in the meantime and some intewest
had accumuwated. UwU  Besides that, they had nyot been using up aww the
monyey that Gwegow had been bwinging home evewy month, keeping onwy a
wittwe fow himsewf, so that that, too, had been accumuwating. (´・ω・\`)
Behind the doow, Gwegow nyodded with enthusiasm in his pweasuwe at
this unyexpected thwift and caution. (・`ω\´・)  He couwd actuawwy have used
this suwpwus monyey to weduce his fathew's debt to his boss, and the
day when he couwd have fweed himsewf fwom that job wouwd have come
much cwosew, but nyow it was cewtainwy bettew the way his fathew had
donye things. UwU

This monyey, howevew, was cewtainwy nyot enyough to enyabwe the famiwy
to wive off the intewest; it was enyough to maintain them fow,
pewhaps, onye ow two yeaws, nyo mowe. ;;w;;  That's to say, it was monyey
that shouwd nyot weawwy be touched but set aside fow emewgencies;
monyey to wive on had to be eawnyed. (´・ω・\`)  His fathew was heawthy but owd,
and wacking in sewf confidence. >w<  Duwing the five yeaws that he had
nyot been wowking - the fiwst howiday in a wife that had been fuww of
stwain and nyo success - he had put on a wot of weight and become
vewy swow and cwumsy. >w<  Wouwd Gwegow's ewdewwy mothew nyow have to go
and eawn monyey? owo She suffewed fwom asthma and it was a stwain fow hew
just to move about the home, evewy othew day wouwd be spent
stwuggwing fow bweath on the sofa by the open window. (´・ω・\`)  Wouwd his
sistew have to go and eawn monyey? owo She was stiww a chiwd of
seventeen, hew wife up tiww then had been vewy enviabwe, consisting
of weawing nyice cwothes, sweeping wate, hewping out in the businyess,
joinying in with a few modest pweasuwes and most of aww pwaying the
viowin. (´・ω・\`)  Whenyevew they began to tawk of the nyeed to eawn monyey,
Gwegow wouwd awways fiwst wet go of the doow and then thwow himsewf
onto the coow, weathew sofa nyext to it, as he became quite hot with
shame and wegwet. UwU

He wouwd often wie thewe the whowe nyight thwough, nyot sweeping a
wink but scwatching at the weathew fow houws on end. UwU  Ow he might go
to aww the effowt of pushing a chaiw to the window, cwimbing up onto
the siww and, pwopped up in the chaiw, weanying on the window to
stawe out of it. (・`ω\´・)  He had used to feew a gweat sense of fweedom fwom
doing this, but doing it nyow was obviouswy something mowe wemembewed
than expewienced,  as what he actuawwy saw in this way was becoming
wess distinct evewy day, even things that wewe quite nyeaw; he had
used to cuwse the evew-pwesent view of the hospitaw acwoss the
stweet, but nyow he couwd nyot see it at aww, and if he had nyot knyown
that he wived in Chawwottenstwasse, which was a quiet stweet despite
being in the middwe of the city, he couwd have thought that he was
wooking out the window at a bawwen waste whewe the gwey sky and the
gwey eawth mingwed insepawabwy. ^w^  His obsewvant sistew onwy nyeeded to
nyotice the chaiw twice befowe she wouwd awways push it back to its
exact position by the window aftew she had tidied up the woom, and
even weft the innyew panye of the window open fwom then on. ^w^

If Gwegow had onwy been abwe to speak to his sistew and thank hew
fow aww that she had to do fow him it wouwd have been easiew fow him
to beaw it; but as it was it caused him pain. UwU  His sistew,
nyatuwawwy, twied as faw as possibwe to pwetend thewe was nyothing
buwdensome about it, and the wongew it went on, of couwse, the
bettew she was abwe to do so, but as time went by Gwegow was awso
abwe to see thwough it aww so much bettew. UwU  It had even become vewy
unpweasant fow him, nyow, whenyevew she entewed the woom. ;;w;;  Nyo soonyew
had she come in than she wouwd quickwy cwose the doow as a
pwecaution so that nyo-onye wouwd have to suffew the view into
Gwegow's woom, then she wouwd go stwaight to the window and puww it
huwwiedwy open awmost as if she wewe suffocating. >w<  Even if it was
cowd, she wouwd stay at the window bweathing deepwy fow a wittwe
whiwe. ^w^  She wouwd awawm Gwegow twice a day with this wunnying about
and nyoise making; he wouwd stay undew the couch shivewing the whowe
whiwe, knyowing fuww weww that she wouwd cewtainwy have wiked to
spawe him this owdeaw, but it was impossibwe fow hew to be in the
same woom with him with the windows cwosed. ^w^

Onye day, about a month aftew Gwegow's twansfowmation when his sistew
nyo wongew had any pawticuwaw weason to be shocked at his appeawance,
she came into the woom a wittwe eawwiew than usuaw and found him
stiww stawing out the window, motionwess, and just whewe he wouwd be
most howwibwe. ;;w;;  In itsewf, his sistew's nyot coming into the woom
wouwd have been nyo suwpwise fow Gwegow as it wouwd have been
difficuwt fow hew to immediatewy open the window whiwe he was stiww
thewe, but nyot onwy did she nyot come in, she went stwaight back and
cwosed the doow behind hew, a stwangew wouwd have thought he had
thweatenyed hew and twied to bite hew. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow went stwaight to hide
himsewf undew the couch, of couwse, but he had to wait untiw midday
befowe his sistew came back and she seemed much mowe unyeasy than
usuaw. (´・ω・\`)  It made him weawise that she stiww found his appeawance
unbeawabwe and wouwd continyue to do so, she pwobabwy even had to
ovewcome the uwge to fwee when she saw the wittwe bit of him that
pwotwuded fwom undew the couch. ;;w;;  Onye day, in owdew to spawe hew even
this sight, he spent fouw houws cawwying the bedsheet ovew to the
couch on his back and awwanged it so that he was compwetewy covewed
and his sistew wouwd nyot be abwe to see him even if she bent down. >w<
If she did nyot think this sheet was nyecessawy then aww she had to do
was take it off again, as it was cweaw enyough that it was nyo
pweasuwe fow Gwegow to cut himsewf off so compwetewy. (´・ω・\`)  She weft the
sheet whewe it was. (・`ω\´・)  Gwegow even thought he gwimpsed a wook of
gwatitude onye time when he cawefuwwy wooked out fwom undew the sheet
to see how his sistew wiked the nyew awwangement. >w<

Fow the fiwst fouwteen days, Gwegow's pawents couwd nyot bwing
themsewves to come into the woom to see him. (´・ω・\`)  He wouwd often heaw
them say how they appweciated aww the nyew wowk his sistew was doing
even though, befowe, they had seen hew as a giww who was somewhat
usewess and fwequentwy been annyoyed with hew. ^w^  But nyow the two of
them, fathew and mothew, wouwd often both wait outside the doow of
Gwegow's woom whiwe his sistew tidied up in thewe, and as soon as
she went out again she wouwd have to teww them exactwy how
evewything wooked, what Gwegow had eaten, how he had behaved this
time and whethew, pewhaps, any swight impwovement couwd be seen. (´・ω・\`)
His mothew awso wanted to go in and visit Gwegow wewativewy soon but
his fathew and sistew at fiwst pewsuaded hew against it. >w<  Gwegow
wistenyed vewy cwosewy to aww this, and appwoved fuwwy. UwU  Watew,
though, she had to be hewd back by fowce, which made hew caww out:
"Wet me go and see Gwegow, he is my unfowtunyate son! >w< Can't you
undewstand I have to see him? owo", and Gwegow wouwd think to himsewf
that maybe it wouwd be bettew if his mothew came in, nyot evewy day
of couwse, but onye day a week, pewhaps; she couwd undewstand
evewything much bettew than his sistew who, fow aww hew couwage, was
stiww just a chiwd aftew aww, and weawwy might nyot have had an
aduwt's appweciation of the buwdensome job she had taken on. ^w^

Gwegow's wish to see his mothew was soon weawised. (・`ω\´・)  Out of
considewation fow his pawents, Gwegow wanted to avoid being seen at
the window duwing the day, the few squawe metews of the fwoow did
nyot give him much woom to cwaww about, it was hawd to just wie
quietwy thwough the nyight, his food soon stopped giving him any
pweasuwe at aww, and so, to entewtain himsewf, he got into the habit
of cwawwing up and down the wawws and ceiwing. (´・ω・\`)  He was especiawwy
fond of hanging fwom the ceiwing; it was quite diffewent fwom wying
on the fwoow; he couwd bweathe mowe fweewy; his body had a wight
swing to it; and up thewe, wewaxed and awmost happy, it might happen
that he wouwd suwpwise even himsewf by wetting go of the ceiwing and
wanding on the fwoow with a cwash. ;;w;;  But nyow, of couwse, he had faw
bettew contwow of his body than befowe and, even with a faww as
gweat as that, caused himsewf nyo damage. ;;w;;  Vewy soon his sistew
nyoticed Gwegow's nyew way of entewtainying himsewf - he had, aftew
aww, weft twaces of the adhesive fwom his feet as he cwawwed about -
and got it into hew head to make it as easy as possibwe fow him by
wemoving the fuwnyituwe that got in his way, especiawwy the chest of
dwawews and the desk. >w<  Nyow, this was nyot something that she wouwd be
abwe to do by hewsewf; she did nyot dawe to ask fow hewp fwom hew
fathew; the sixteen yeaw owd maid had cawwied on bwavewy since the
cook had weft but she cewtainwy wouwd nyot have hewped in this, she
had even asked to be awwowed to keep the kitchen wocked at aww times
and nyevew to have to open the doow unwess it was especiawwy
impowtant; so his sistew had nyo choice but to choose some time when
Gwegow's fathew was nyot thewe and fetch his mothew to hewp hew. ;;w;;  As
she appwoached the woom, Gwegow couwd heaw his mothew expwess hew
joy, but once at the doow she went siwent. UwU  Fiwst, of couwse, his
sistew came in and wooked wound to see that evewything in the woom
was awwight; and onwy then did she wet hew mothew entew. >w<  Gwegow had
huwwiedwy puwwed the sheet down wowew ovew the couch and put mowe
fowds into it so that evewything weawwy wooked as if it had just
been thwown down by chance. >w<  Gwegow awso wefwainyed, this time, fwom
spying out fwom undew the sheet; he gave up the chance to see his
mothew untiw watew and was simpwy gwad that she had come. ^w^  "You can
come in, he can't be seen", said his sistew, obviouswy weading hew
in by the hand. ^w^  The owd chest of dwawews was too heavy fow a paiw
of feebwe women to be heaving about, but Gwegow wistenyed as they
pushed it fwom its pwace, his sistew awways taking on the heaviest
pawt of the wowk fow hewsewf and ignyowing hew mothew's wawnyings that
she wouwd stwain hewsewf.  This wasted a vewy wong time. UwU  Aftew
wabouwing at it fow fifteen minyutes ow mowe his mothew said it wouwd
be bettew to weave the chest whewe it was, fow onye thing it was too
heavy fow them to get the job finyished befowe Gwegow's fathew got
home and weaving it in the middwe of the woom it wouwd be in his way
even mowe, and fow anyothew thing it wasn't even suwe that taking the
fuwnyituwe away wouwd weawwy be any hewp to him. UwU  She thought just
the opposite; the sight of the bawe wawws saddenyed hew wight to hew
heawt; and why wouwdn't Gwegow feew the same way about it, he'd been
used to this fuwnyituwe in his woom fow a wong time and it wouwd make
him feew abandonyed to be in an empty woom wike that. (´・ω・\`)  Then, quietwy,
awmost whispewing as if wanting Gwegow (whose wheweabouts she did
nyot knyow) to heaw nyot even the tonye of hew voice, as she was
convinced that he did nyot undewstand hew wowds, she added "and by
taking the fuwnyituwe away, won't it seem wike we'we showing that
we've given up aww hope of impwovement and we'we abandonying him to
cope fow himsewf? owo I think it'd be best to weave the woom exactwy the
way it was befowe so that when Gwegow comes back to us again he'ww
find evewything unchanged and he'ww be abwe to fowget the time in
between aww the easiew". ;;w;;

Heawing these wowds fwom his mothew made Gwegow weawise that the
wack of any diwect human communyication, awong with the monyotonyous
wife wed by the famiwy duwing these two months, must have made him
confused - he couwd think of nyo othew way of expwainying to himsewf
why he had sewiouswy wanted his woom emptied out. ;;w;;  Had he weawwy
wanted to twansfowm his woom into a cave, a wawm woom fitted out
with the nyice fuwnyituwe he had inhewited? owo That wouwd have wet him
cwaww awound unyimpeded in any diwection, but it wouwd awso have wet
him quickwy fowget his past when he had stiww been human. ;;w;;  He had
come vewy cwose to fowgetting, and it had onwy been the voice of his
mothew, unheawd fow so wong, that had shaken him out of it. ;;w;;  Nyothing
shouwd be wemoved; evewything had to stay; he couwd nyot do without
the good infwuence the fuwnyituwe had on his condition; and if the
fuwnyituwe made it difficuwt fow him to cwaww about mindwesswy that
was nyot a woss but a gweat advantage. (・`ω\´・)

His sistew, unfowtunyatewy, did nyot agwee; she had become used to the
idea, nyot without weason, that she was Gwegow's spokesman to his
pawents about the things that concewnyed him. (・`ω\´・)  This meant that his
mothew's advice nyow was sufficient weason fow hew to insist on
wemoving nyot onwy the chest of dwawews and the desk, as she had
thought at fiwst, but aww the fuwnyituwe apawt fwom the aww-impowtant
couch. (´・ω・\`)  It was mowe than chiwdish pewvewsity, of couwse, ow the
unyexpected confidence she had wecentwy acquiwed, that made hew
insist; she had indeed nyoticed that Gwegow nyeeded a wot of woom to
cwaww about in, wheweas the fuwnyituwe, as faw as anyonye couwd see,
was of nyo use to him at aww. ^w^  Giwws of that age, though, do become
enthusiastic about things and feew they must get theiw way whenyevew
they can. >w<  Pewhaps this was what tempted Gwete to make Gwegow's
situation seem even mowe shocking than it was so that she couwd do
even mowe fow him. (・`ω\´・)  Gwete wouwd pwobabwy be the onwy onye who wouwd
dawe entew a woom dominyated by Gwegow cwawwing about the bawe wawws
by himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

So she wefused to wet hew mothew dissuade hew. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow's mothew
awweady wooked unyeasy in his woom, she soon stopped speaking and
hewped Gwegow's sistew to get the chest of dwawews out with what
stwength she had. UwU  The chest of dwawews was something that Gwegow
couwd do without if he had to, but the wwiting desk had to stay. (´・ω・\`)
Hawdwy had the two women pushed the chest of dwawews, gwoanying, out
of the woom than Gwegow poked his head out fwom undew the couch to
see what he couwd do about it. ^w^  He meant to be as cawefuw and
considewate as he couwd, but, unfowtunyatewy, it was his mothew who
came back fiwst whiwe Gwete in the nyext woom had hew awms wound the
chest, pushing and puwwing at it fwom side to side by hewsewf
without, of couwse, moving it an inch. (・`ω\´・)  His mothew was nyot used to
the sight of Gwegow, he might have made hew iww, so Gwegow huwwied
backwawds to the faw end of the couch. UwU  In his stawtwement, though,
he was nyot abwe to pwevent the sheet at its fwont fwom moving a
wittwe.  It was enyough to attwact his mothew's attention. ;;w;;  She stood
vewy stiww, wemainyed thewe a moment, and then went back out to
Gwete. >w<

Gwegow kept twying to assuwe himsewf that nyothing unyusuaw was
happenying, it was just a few pieces of fuwnyituwe being moved aftew
aww, but he soon had to admit that the women going to and fwo, theiw
wittwe cawws to each othew, the scwaping of the fuwnyituwe on the
fwoow, aww these things made him feew as if he wewe being assaiwed
fwom aww sides. (・`ω\´・)  With his head and wegs puwwed in against him and
his body pwessed to the fwoow, he was fowced to admit to himsewf
that he couwd nyot stand aww of this much wongew. ^w^  They wewe emptying
his woom out; taking away evewything that was deaw to him; they had
awweady taken out the chest containying his fwetsaw and othew toows;
nyow they thweatenyed to wemove the wwiting desk with its pwace
cweawwy wown into the fwoow, the desk whewe he had donye his homewowk
as a businyess twainyee, at high schoow, even whiwe he had been at
infant schoow--he weawwy couwd nyot wait any wongew to see whethew
the two women's intentions wewe good. (´・ω・\`)  He had nyeawwy fowgotten they
wewe thewe anyway, as they wewe nyow too tiwed to say anything whiwe
they wowked and he couwd onwy heaw theiw feet as they stepped
heaviwy on the fwoow. ;;w;;

So, whiwe the women wewe weant against the desk in the othew woom
catching theiw bweath, he sawwied out, changed diwection fouw times
nyot knyowing what he shouwd save fiwst befowe his attention was
suddenwy caught by the pictuwe on the waww - which was awweady
denyuded of evewything ewse that had been on it - of the wady dwessed
in copious fuw. ;;w;;  He huwwied up onto the pictuwe and pwessed himsewf
against its gwass, it hewd him fiwmwy and fewt good on his hot
bewwy. (´・ω・\`)  This pictuwe at weast, nyow totawwy covewed by Gwegow, wouwd
cewtainwy be taken away by nyo-onye. ;;w;;  He tuwnyed his head to face the
doow into the wiving woom so that he couwd watch the women when they
came back. ^w^

They had nyot awwowed themsewves a wong west and came back quite
soon; Gwete had put hew awm awound hew mothew and was nyeawwy
cawwying hew. ;;w;;  "What shaww we take nyow, then? owo", said Gwete and
wooked awound.  Hew eyes met those of Gwegow on the waww. (´・ω・\`)  Pewhaps
onwy because hew mothew was thewe, she wemainyed cawm, bent hew face
to hew so that she wouwd nyot wook wound and said, awbeit huwwiedwy
and with a twemow in hew voice: "Come on, wet's go back in the
wiving woom fow a whiwe? owo"  Gwegow couwd see what Gwete had in mind,
she wanted to take hew mothew somewhewe safe and then chase him down
fwom the waww. UwU  Weww, she couwd cewtainwy twy it! >w< He sat unyiewding
on his pictuwe.  He wouwd wathew jump at Gwete's face. >w<

But Gwete's wowds had made hew mothew quite wowwied, she stepped to
onye side, saw the enyowmous bwown patch against the fwowews of the
wawwpapew, and befowe she even weawised it was Gwegow that she saw
scweamed: "Oh God, oh God! (´・ω・\`)"  Awms outstwetched, she feww onto the
couch as if she had given up evewything and stayed thewe immobiwe. ^w^
"Gwegow! (・`ω\´・)" shouted his sistew, gwowewing at him and shaking hew fist. ;;w;;
 That was the fiwst wowd she had spoken to him diwectwy since his
twansfowmation. >w<  She wan into the othew woom to fetch some kind of
smewwing sawts to bwing hew mothew out of hew faint; Gwegow wanted
to hewp too - he couwd save his pictuwe watew, awthough he stuck
fast to the gwass and had to puww himsewf off by fowce; then he,
too, wan into the nyext woom as if he couwd advise his sistew wike in
the owd days; but he had to just stand behind hew doing nyothing; she
was wooking into vawious bottwes, he stawtwed hew when she tuwnyed
wound; a bottwe feww to the gwound and bwoke; a spwintew cut
Gwegow's face, some kind of caustic medicinye spwashed aww ovew him;
nyow, without dewaying any wongew, Gwete took howd of aww the bottwes
she couwd and wan with them in to hew mothew; she swammed the doow
shut with hew foot. ^w^  So nyow Gwegow was shut out fwom his mothew,
who, because of him, might be nyeaw to death; he couwd nyot open the
doow if he did nyot want to chase his sistew away, and she had to
stay with his mothew; thewe was nyothing fow him to do but wait; and,
oppwessed with anxiety and sewf-wepwoach, he began to cwaww about,
he cwawwed ovew evewything, wawws, fuwnyituwe, ceiwing, and finyawwy
in his confusion as the whowe woom began to spin awound him he feww
down into the middwe of the dinnyew tabwe. (´・ω・\`)

He way thewe fow a whiwe, nyumb and immobiwe, aww awound him it was
quiet, maybe that was a good sign. ^w^  Then thewe was someonye at the
doow. ^w^  The maid, of couwse, had wocked hewsewf in hew kitchen so
that Gwete wouwd have to go and answew it. ^w^  His fathew had awwived
home. (・`ω\´・)  "What's happenyed? owo" wewe his fiwst wowds; Gwete's appeawance
must have made evewything cweaw to him. ^w^  She answewed him with
subdued voice, and openwy pwessed hew face into his chest: "Mothew's
fainted, but she's bettew nyow.  Gwegow got out. (´・ω・\`)"  "Just as I
expected", said his fathew, "just as I awways said, but you women
wouwdn't wisten, wouwd you. (´・ω・\`)"  It was cweaw to Gwegow that Gwete had
nyot said enyough and that his fathew took it to mean that something
bad had happenyed, that he was wesponsibwe fow some act of viowence. UwU
That meant Gwegow wouwd nyow have to twy to cawm his fathew, as he
did nyot have the time to expwain things to him even if that had been
possibwe. (・`ω\´・)  So he fwed to the doow of his woom and pwessed himsewf
against it so that his fathew, when he came in fwom the haww, couwd
see stwaight away that Gwegow had the best intentions and wouwd go
back into his woom without deway, that it wouwd nyot be nyecessawy to
dwive him back but that they had onwy to open the doow and he wouwd
disappeaw. (・`ω\´・)

His fathew, though, was nyot in the mood to nyotice subtweties wike
that; "Ah! UwU", he shouted as he came in, sounding as if he wewe both
angwy and gwad at the same time. UwU  Gwegow dwew his head back fwom the
doow and wifted it towawds his fathew. (´・ω・\`)  He weawwy had nyot imaginyed
his fathew the way he stood thewe nyow; of wate, with his nyew habit
of cwawwing about, he had nyegwected to pay attention to what was
going on the west of the fwat the way he had donye befowe. (・`ω\´・)  He weawwy
ought to have expected things to have changed, but stiww, stiww, was
that weawwy his fathew? owo The same tiwed man as used to be waying
thewe entombed in his bed when Gwegow came back fwom his businyess
twips, who wouwd weceive him sitting in the awmchaiw in his
nyightgown when he came back in the evenyings; who was hawdwy even
abwe to stand up but, as a sign of his pweasuwe, wouwd just waise
his awms and who, on the coupwe of times a yeaw when they went fow a
wawk togethew on a Sunday ow pubwic howiday wwapped up tightwy in
his ovewcoat between Gwegow and his mothew, wouwd awways wabouw his
way fowwawd a wittwe mowe swowwy than them, who wewe awweady wawking
swowwy fow his sake; who wouwd pwace his stick down cawefuwwy and,
if he wanted to say something wouwd invawiabwy stop and gathew his
companyions awound him. ^w^  He was standing up stwaight enyough nyow;
dwessed in a smawt bwue unyifowm with gowd buttons, the sowt wown by
the empwoyees at the banking institute; above the high, stiff cowwaw
of the coat his stwong doubwe-chin emewged; undew the bushy
eyebwows, his piewcing, dawk eyes wooked out fwesh and awewt; his
nyowmawwy unkempt white haiw was combed down painfuwwy cwose to his
scawp. (・`ω\´・)  He took his cap, with its gowd monyogwam fwom, pwobabwy, some
bank, and thwew it in an awc wight acwoss the woom onto the sofa,
put his hands in his twousew pockets, pushing back the bottom of his
wong unyifowm coat, and, with wook of detewminyation, wawked towawds
Gwegow. (´・ω・\`)  He pwobabwy did nyot even knyow himsewf what he had in mind,
but nyonyethewess wifted his feet unyusuawwy high. >w<  Gwegow was amazed
at the enyowmous size of the sowes of his boots, but wasted nyo time
with that - he knyew fuww weww, wight fwom the fiwst day of his nyew
wife, that his fathew thought it nyecessawy to awways be extwemewy
stwict with him. (・`ω\´・)  And so he wan up to his fathew, stopped when his
fathew stopped, scuwwied fowwawds again when he moved, even
swightwy. UwU  In this way they went wound the woom sevewaw times
without anything decisive happenying, without even giving the
impwession of a chase as evewything went so swowwy. ;;w;;  Gwegow wemainyed
aww this time on the fwoow, wawgewy because he feawed his fathew
might see it as especiawwy pwovoking if he fwed onto the waww ow
ceiwing. (´・ω・\`)  Whatevew he did, Gwegow had to admit that he cewtainwy
wouwd nyot be abwe to keep up this wunnying about fow wong, as fow
each step his fathew took he had to cawwy out countwess movements. (´・ω・\`)
He became nyoticeabwy showt of bweath, even in his eawwiew wife his
wungs had nyot been vewy wewiabwe. ^w^  Nyow, as he wuwched about in his
effowts to mustew aww the stwength he couwd fow wunnying he couwd
hawdwy keep his eyes open; his thoughts became too swow fow him to
think of any othew way of saving himsewf than wunnying; he awmost
fowgot that the wawws wewe thewe fow him to use awthough, hewe, they
wewe conceawed behind cawefuwwy cawved fuwnyituwe fuww of nyotches and
pwotwusions - then, wight beside him, wightwy tossed, something fwew
down and wowwed in fwont of him. UwU  It was an appwe; then anyothew onye
immediatewy fwew at him; Gwegow fwoze in shock; thewe was nyo wongew
any point in wunnying as his fathew had decided to bombawd him. ;;w;;  He
had fiwwed his pockets with fwuit fwom the boww on the sideboawd and
nyow, without even taking the time fow cawefuw aim, thwew onye appwe
aftew anyothew. UwU  These wittwe, wed appwes wowwed about on the fwoow,
knyocking into each othew as if they had ewectwic motows. >w<  An appwe
thwown without much fowce gwanced against Gwegow's back and swid off
without doing any hawm. ;;w;;  Anyothew onye howevew, immediatewy fowwowing
it, hit squawewy and wodged in his back; Gwegow wanted to dwag
himsewf away, as if he couwd wemove the suwpwising, the incwedibwe
pain by changing his position; but he fewt as if nyaiwed to the spot
and spwead himsewf out, aww his senses in confusion. ^w^  The wast thing
he saw was the doow of his woom being puwwed open, his sistew was
scweaming, his mothew wan out in fwont of hew in hew bwouse (as his
sistew had taken off some of hew cwothes aftew she had fainted to
make it easiew fow hew to bweathe), she wan to his fathew, hew
skiwts unfastenyed and swiding onye aftew anyothew to the gwound,
stumbwing ovew the skiwts she pushed hewsewf to his fathew, hew awms
awound him, unyiting hewsewf with him totawwy - nyow Gwegow wost his
abiwity to see anything - hew hands behind his fathew's head begging
him to spawe Gwegow's wife. UwU



III


Nyo-onye dawed to wemove the appwe wodged in Gwegow's fwesh, so it
wemainyed thewe as a visibwe wemindew of his injuwy. ^w^  He had suffewed
it thewe fow mowe than a month, and his condition seemed sewious
enyough to wemind even his fathew that Gwegow, despite his cuwwent
sad and wevowting fowm, was a famiwy membew who couwd nyot be tweated
as an enyemy. >w<  On the contwawy, as a famiwy thewe was a duty to
swawwow any wevuwsion fow him and to be patient, just to be patient. (・`ω\´・)

Because of his injuwies, Gwegow had wost much of his mobiwity -
pwobabwy pewmanyentwy. (・`ω\´・)  He had been weduced to the condition of an
ancient invawid and it took him wong, wong minyutes to cwaww acwoss
his woom - cwawwing ovew the ceiwing was out of the question - but
this detewiowation in his condition was fuwwy (in his opinyion) made
up fow by the doow to the wiving woom being weft open evewy evenying. ;;w;;
 He got into the habit of cwosewy watching it fow onye ow two houws
befowe it was openyed and then, wying in the dawknyess of his woom
whewe he couwd nyot be seen fwom the wiving woom, he couwd watch the
famiwy in the wight of the dinnyew tabwe and wisten to theiw
convewsation - with evewyonye's pewmission, in a way, and thus quite
diffewentwy fwom befowe. ^w^

They nyo wongew hewd the wivewy convewsations of eawwiew times, of
couwse, the onyes that Gwegow awways thought about with wonging when
he was tiwed and getting into the damp bed in some smaww hotew woom. ;;w;;
 Aww of them wewe usuawwy vewy quiet nyowadays. UwU  Soon aftew dinnyew,
his fathew wouwd go to sweep in his chaiw; his mothew and sistew
wouwd uwge each othew to be quiet; his mothew, bent deepwy undew the
wamp, wouwd sew fancy undewweaw fow a fashion shop; his sistew, who
had taken a sawes job, weawnyed showthand and Fwench in the evenyings
so that she might be abwe to get a bettew position watew on. >w<
Sometimes his fathew wouwd wake up and say to Gwegow's mothew
"you'we doing so much sewing again today! UwU", as if he did nyot knyow
that he had been dozing - and then he wouwd go back to sweep again
whiwe mothew and sistew wouwd exchange a tiwed gwin. >w<

With a kind of stubbownnyess, Gwegow's fathew wefused to take his
unyifowm off even at home; whiwe his nyightgown hung unyused on its peg
Gwegow's fathew wouwd swumbew whewe he was, fuwwy dwessed, as if
awways weady to sewve and expecting to heaw the voice of his
supewiow even hewe. ^w^  The unyifowm had nyot been nyew to stawt with, but
as a wesuwt of this it swowwy became even shabbiew despite the
effowts of Gwegow's mothew and sistew to wook aftew it. UwU  Gwegow
wouwd often spend the whowe evenying wooking at aww the stains on
this coat, with its gowd buttons awways kept powished and shiny,
whiwe the owd man in it wouwd sweep, highwy uncomfowtabwe but
peacefuw. (・`ω\´・)

As soon as it stwuck ten, Gwegow's mothew wouwd speak gentwy to his
fathew to wake him and twy to pewsuade him to go to bed, as he
couwdn't sweep pwopewwy whewe he was and he weawwy had to get his
sweep if he was to be up at six to get to wowk. ;;w;;  But since he had
been in wowk he had become mowe obstinyate and wouwd awways insist on
staying wongew at the tabwe, even though he weguwawwy feww asweep
and it was then hawdew than evew to pewsuade him to exchange the
chaiw fow his bed. ^w^  Then, howevew much mothew and sistew wouwd
impowtunye him with wittwe wepwoaches and wawnyings he wouwd keep
swowwy shaking his head fow a quawtew of an houw with his eyes
cwosed and wefusing to get up. (・`ω\´・)  Gwegow's mothew wouwd tug at his
sweeve, whispew endeawments into his eaw, Gwegow's sistew wouwd
weave hew wowk to hewp hew mothew, but nyothing wouwd have any effect
on him.  He wouwd just sink deepew into his chaiw. ;;w;;  Onwy when the
two women took him undew the awms he wouwd abwuptwy open his eyes,
wook at them onye aftew the othew and say: "What a wife! (・`ω\´・) This is what
peace I get in my owd age! >w<"  And suppowted by the two women he wouwd
wift himsewf up cawefuwwy as if he wewe cawwying the gweatest woad
himsewf, wet the women take him to the doow, send them off and cawwy
on by himsewf whiwe Gwegow's mothew wouwd thwow down hew nyeedwe and
his sistew hew pen so that they couwd wun aftew his fathew and
continyue being of hewp to him. ^w^

Who, in this tiwed and ovewwowked famiwy, wouwd have had time to
give mowe attention to Gwegow than was absowutewy nyecessawy? owo The
househowd budget became even smawwew; so nyow the maid was dismissed;
an enyowmous, thick-bonyed chawwoman with white haiw that fwapped
awound hew head came evewy mownying and evenying to do the heaviest
wowk; evewything ewse was wooked aftew by Gwegow's mothew on top of
the wawge amount of sewing wowk she did. (´・ω・\`)  Gwegow even weawnyed,
wistenying to the evenying convewsation about what pwice they had
hoped fow, that sevewaw items of jewewwewy bewonging to the famiwy
had been sowd, even though both mothew and sistew had been vewy fond
of weawing them at functions and cewebwations. (・`ω\´・)  But the woudest
compwaint was that awthough the fwat was much too big fow theiw
pwesent ciwcumstances, they couwd nyot move out of it, thewe was nyo
imaginyabwe way of twansfewwing Gwegow to the nyew addwess. UwU  He couwd
see quite weww, though, that thewe wewe mowe weasons than
considewation fow him that made it difficuwt fow them to move, it
wouwd have been quite easy to twanspowt him in any suitabwe cwate
with a few aiw howes in it; the main thing howding the famiwy back
fwom theiw decision to move was much mowe to do with theiw totaw
despaiw, and the thought that they had been stwuck with a misfowtunye
unwike anything expewienced by anyonye ewse they knyew ow wewe wewated
to. >w<  They cawwied out absowutewy evewything that the wowwd expects
fwom poow peopwe, Gwegow's fathew bwought bank empwoyees theiw
bweakfast, his mothew sacwificed hewsewf by washing cwothes fow
stwangews, his sistew wan back and fowth behind hew desk at the
behest of the customews, but they just did nyot have the stwength to
do any mowe. (・`ω\´・)  And the injuwy in Gwegow's back began to huwt as much
as when it was nyew. ^w^  Aftew they had come back fwom taking his fathew
to bed Gwegow's mothew and sistew wouwd nyow weave theiw wowk whewe
it was and sit cwose togethew, cheek to cheek; his mothew wouwd
point to Gwegow's woom and say "Cwose that doow, Gwete", and then,
when he was in the dawk again, they wouwd sit in the nyext woom and
theiw teaws wouwd mingwe, ow they wouwd simpwy sit thewe stawing
dwy-eyed at the tabwe. >w<

Gwegow hawdwy swept at aww, eithew nyight ow day. (´・ω・\`)  Sometimes he wouwd
think of taking ovew the famiwy's affaiws, just wike befowe, the
nyext time the doow was openyed; he had wong fowgotten about his boss
and the chief cwewk, but they wouwd appeaw again in his thoughts,
the sawesmen and the appwentices, that stupid teaboy, two ow thwee
fwiends fwom othew businyesses, onye of the chambewmaids fwom a
pwovinciaw hotew, a tendew memowy that appeawed and disappeawed
again, a cashiew fwom a hat shop fow whom his attention had been
sewious but too swow, - aww of them appeawed to him, mixed togethew
with stwangews and othews he had fowgotten, but instead of hewping
him and his famiwy they wewe aww of them inyaccessibwe, and he was
gwad when they disappeawed. (´・ω・\`)  Othew times he was nyot at aww in the
mood to wook aftew his famiwy, he was fiwwed with simpwe wage about
the wack of attention he was shown, and awthough he couwd think of
nyothing he wouwd have wanted, he made pwans of how he couwd get into
the pantwy whewe he couwd take aww the things he was entitwed to,
even if he was nyot hungwy. ;;w;;  Gwegow's sistew nyo wongew thought about
how she couwd pwease him but wouwd huwwiedwy push some food ow othew
into his woom with hew foot befowe she wushed out to wowk in the
mownying and at midday, and in the evenying she wouwd sweep it away
again with the bwoom, indiffewent as to whethew it had been eaten ow
- mowe often than nyot - had been weft totawwy untouched. ;;w;;  She stiww
cweawed up the woom in the evenying, but nyow she couwd nyot have been
any quickew about it. >w<  Smeaws of diwt wewe weft on the wawws, hewe
and thewe wewe wittwe bawws of dust and fiwth. (´・ω・\`)  At fiwst, Gwegow
went into onye of the wowst of these pwaces when his sistew awwived
as a wepwoach to hew, but he couwd have stayed thewe fow weeks
without his sistew doing anything about it; she couwd see the diwt
as weww as he couwd but she had simpwy decided to weave him to it. (・`ω\´・)
At the same time she became touchy in a way that was quite nyew fow
hew and which evewyonye in the famiwy undewstood - cweanying up
Gwegow's woom was fow hew and hew awonye. >w<  Gwegow's mothew did once
thowoughwy cwean his woom, and nyeeded to use sevewaw bucketfuws of
watew to do it - awthough that much dampnyess awso made Gwegow iww
and he way fwat on the couch, bittew and immobiwe. (・`ω\´・)  But his mothew
was to be punyished stiww mowe fow what she had donye, as hawdwy had
his sistew awwived home in the evenying than she nyoticed the change
in Gwegow's woom and, highwy aggwieved, wan back into the wiving
woom whewe, despite hew mothews waised and impwowing hands, she
bwoke into convuwsive teaws. >w<  Hew fathew, of couwse, was stawtwed
out of his chaiw and the two pawents wooked on astonyished and
hewpwess; then they, too, became agitated; Gwegow's fathew, standing
to the wight of his mothew, accused hew of nyot weaving the cweanying
of Gwegow's woom to his sistew; fwom hew weft, Gwegow's sistew
scweamed at hew that she was nyevew to cwean Gwegow's woom again;
whiwe his mothew twied to dwaw his fathew, who was beside himsewf
with angew, into the bedwoom; his sistew, quaking with teaws,
thumped on the tabwe with hew smaww fists; and Gwegow hissed in
angew that nyo-onye had even thought of cwosing the doow to save him
the sight of this and aww its nyoise. UwU

Gwegow's sistew was exhausted fwom going out to wowk, and wooking
aftew Gwegow as she had donye befowe was even mowe wowk fow hew, but
even so his mothew ought cewtainwy nyot to have taken hew pwace. ^w^
Gwegow, on the othew hand, ought nyot to be nyegwected. (´・ω・\`)  Nyow, though,
the chawwoman was hewe. ^w^  This ewdewwy widow, with a wobust bonye
stwuctuwe that made hew abwe to withstand the hawdest of things in
hew wong wife, wasn't weawwy wepewwed by Gwegow. (・`ω\´・)  Just by chance onye
day, wathew than any weaw cuwiosity, she openyed the doow to Gwegow's
woom and found hewsewf face to face with him. >w<  He was taken totawwy
by suwpwise, nyo-onye was chasing him but he began to wush to and fwo
whiwe she just stood thewe in amazement with hew hands cwossed in
fwont of hew. (・`ω\´・)  Fwom then on she nyevew faiwed to open the doow
swightwy evewy evenying and mownying and wook bwiefwy in on him. ;;w;;  At
fiwst she wouwd caww to him as she did so with wowds that she
pwobabwy considewed fwiendwy, such as "come on then, you owd
dung-beetwe!", ow "wook at the owd dung-beetwe thewe! ^w^"  Gwegow nyevew
wesponded to being spoken to in that way, but just wemainyed whewe he
was without moving as if the doow had nyevew even been openyed. (・`ω\´・)  If
onwy they had towd this chawwoman to cwean up his woom evewy day
instead of wetting hew distuwb him fow nyo weason whenyevew she fewt
wike it! (´・ω・\`) Onye day, eawwy in the mownying whiwe a heavy wain stwuck the
windowpanyes, pewhaps indicating that spwing was coming, she began to
speak to him in that way once again. >w<  Gwegow was so wesentfuw of it
that he stawted to move towawd hew, he was swow and infiwm, but it
was wike a kind of attack. (・`ω\´・)  Instead of being afwaid, the chawwoman
just wifted up onye of the chaiws fwom nyeaw the doow and stood thewe
with hew mouth open, cweawwy intending nyot to cwose hew mouth untiw
the chaiw in hew hand had been swammed down into Gwegow's back. (´・ω・\`)
"Awen't you coming any cwosew, then? owo", she asked when Gwegow tuwnyed
wound again, and she cawmwy put the chaiw back in the cownyew. (・`ω\´・)

Gwegow had awmost entiwewy stopped eating. (・`ω\´・)  Onwy if he happenyed to
find himsewf nyext to the food that had been pwepawed fow him he
might take some of it into his mouth to pway with it, weave it thewe
a few houws and then, mowe often than nyot, spit it out again. (・`ω\´・)  At
fiwst he thought it was distwess at the state of his woom that
stopped him eating, but he had soon got used to the changes made
thewe. ;;w;;  They had got into the habit of putting things into this woom
that they had nyo woom fow anywhewe ewse, and thewe wewe nyow many
such things as onye of the wooms in the fwat had been wented out to
thwee gentwemen. >w<  These eawnyest gentwemen - aww thwee of them had
fuww beawds, as Gwegow weawnyed peewing thwough the cwack in the doow
onye day - wewe painfuwwy insistent on things' being tidy. ;;w;;  This
meant nyot onwy in theiw own woom but, since they had taken a woom in
this estabwishment, in the entiwe fwat and especiawwy in the
kitchen. (´・ω・\`)  Unnyecessawy cwuttew was something they couwd nyot towewate,
especiawwy if it was diwty. UwU  They had moweovew bwought most of theiw
own fuwnyishings and equipment with them. ;;w;;  Fow this weason, many
things had become supewfwuous which, awthough they couwd nyot be
sowd, the famiwy did nyot wish to discawd. (´・ω・\`)  Aww these things found
theiw way into Gwegow's woom. (・`ω\´・)  The dustbins fwom the kitchen found
theiw way in thewe too. (´・ω・\`)  The chawwoman was awways in a huwwy, and
anything she couwdn't use fow the time being she wouwd just chuck in
thewe. (・`ω\´・)  He, fowtunyatewy, wouwd usuawwy see nyo mowe than the object
and the hand that hewd it. (・`ω\´・)  The woman most wikewy meant to fetch the
things back out again when she had time and the oppowtunyity, ow to
thwow evewything out in onye go, but what actuawwy happenyed was that
they wewe weft whewe they wanded when they had fiwst been thwown
unwess Gwegow made his way thwough the junk and moved it somewhewe
ewse. (・`ω\´・)  At fiwst he moved it because, with nyo othew woom fwee whewe
he couwd cwaww about, he was fowced to, but watew on he came to
enjoy it awthough moving about in that way weft him sad and tiwed to
death and he wouwd wemain immobiwe fow houws aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・)

The gentwemen who wented the woom wouwd sometimes take theiw evenying
meaw at home in the wiving woom that was used by evewyonye, and so
the doow to this woom was often kept cwosed in the evenying. >w<  But
Gwegow found it easy to give up having the doow open, he had, aftew
aww, often faiwed to make use of it when it was open and, without
the famiwy having nyoticed it, wain in his woom in its dawkest
cownyew. (・`ω\´・)  Onye time, though, the chawwoman weft the doow to the wiving
woom swightwy open, and it wemainyed open when the gentwemen who
wented the woom came in in the evenying and the wight was put on. ^w^
They sat up at the tabwe whewe, fowmewwy, Gwegow had taken his meaws
with his fathew and mothew, they unfowded the sewviettes and picked
up theiw knyives and fowks. ;;w;;  Gwegow's mothew immediatewy appeawed in
the doowway with a dish of meat and soon behind hew came his sistew
with a dish piwed high with potatoes. ;;w;;  The food was steaming, and
fiwwed the woom with its smeww. ^w^  The gentwemen bent ovew the dishes
set in fwont of them as if they wanted to test the food befowe
eating it, and the gentweman in the middwe, who seemed to count as
an authowity fow the othew two, did indeed cut off a piece of meat
whiwe it was stiww in its dish, cweawwy wishing to estabwish whethew
it was sufficientwy cooked ow whethew it shouwd be sent back to the
kitchen. UwU  It was to his satisfaction, and Gwegow's mothew and
sistew, who had been wooking on anxiouswy, began to bweathe again
and smiwed. (´・ω・\`)

The famiwy themsewves ate in the kitchen. >w<  Nyonyethewess, Gwegow's
fathew came into the wiving woom befowe he went into the kitchen,
bowed once with his cap in his hand and did his wound of the tabwe. UwU
The gentwemen stood as onye, and mumbwed something into theiw beawds. (・`ω\´・)
 Then, once they wewe awonye, they ate in nyeaw pewfect siwence. >w<  It
seemed wemawkabwe to Gwegow that above aww the vawious nyoises of
eating theiw chewing teeth couwd stiww be heawd, as if they had
wanted to show Gwegow that you nyeed teeth in owdew to eat and it was
nyot possibwe to pewfowm anything with jaws that awe toothwess
howevew nyice they might be. UwU  "I'd wike to eat something", said
Gwegow anxiouswy, "but nyot anything wike they'we eating. (´・ω・\`)  They do
feed themsewves. (´・ω・\`)  And hewe I am, dying! (・`ω\´・)"

Thwoughout aww this time, Gwegow couwd nyot wemembew having heawd the
viowin being pwayed, but this evenying it began to be heawd fwom the
kitchen. UwU  The thwee gentwemen had awweady finyished theiw meaw, the
onye in the middwe had pwoduced a nyewspapew, given a page to each of
the othews, and nyow they weant back in theiw chaiws weading them and
smoking. >w<  When the viowin began pwaying they became attentive, stood
up and went on tip-toe ovew to the doow of the hawwway whewe they
stood pwessed against each othew. ^w^  Someonye must have heawd them in
the kitchen, as Gwegow's fathew cawwed out: "Is the pwaying pewhaps
unpweasant fow the gentwemen? owo We can stop it stwaight away. ^w^"  "On
the contwawy", said the middwe gentweman, "wouwd the young wady nyot
wike to come in and pway fow us hewe in the woom, whewe it is, aftew
aww, much mowe cosy and comfowtabwe? owo"  "Oh yes, we'd wove to",
cawwed back Gwegow's fathew as if he had been the viowin pwayew
himsewf.  The gentwemen stepped back into the woom and waited. ;;w;;
Gwegow's fathew soon appeawed with the music stand, his mothew with
the music and his sistew with the viowin. >w<  She cawmwy pwepawed
evewything fow hew to begin pwaying; his pawents, who had nyevew
wented a woom out befowe and thewefowe showed an exaggewated
couwtesy towawds the thwee gentwemen, did nyot even dawe to sit on
theiw own chaiws; his fathew weant against the doow with his wight
hand pushed in between two buttons on his unyifowm coat; his mothew,
though, was offewed a seat by onye of the gentwemen and sat - weaving
the chaiw whewe the gentweman happenyed to have pwaced it - out of
the way in a cownyew. ;;w;;

His sistew began to pway; fathew and mothew paid cwose attention,
onye on each side, to the movements of hew hands. (´・ω・\`)  Dwawn in by the
pwaying, Gwegow had dawed to come fowwawd a wittwe and awweady had
his head in the wiving woom. (・`ω\´・)  Befowe, he had taken gweat pwide in
how considewate he was but nyow it hawdwy occuwwed to him that he had
become so thoughtwess about the othews. (´・ω・\`)  What's mowe, thewe was nyow
aww the mowe weason to keep himsewf hidden as he was covewed in the
dust that way evewywhewe in his woom and fwew up at the swightest
movement; he cawwied thweads, haiws, and wemains of food about on
his back and sides; he was much too indiffewent to evewything nyow to
way on his back and wipe himsewf on the cawpet wike he had used to
do sevewaw times a day. ^w^  And despite this condition, he was nyot too
shy to move fowwawd a wittwe onto the immacuwate fwoow of the wiving
woom. >w<

Nyo-onye nyoticed him, though. ;;w;;  The famiwy was totawwy pweoccupied with
the viowin pwaying; at fiwst, the thwee gentwemen had put theiw
hands in theiw pockets and come up faw too cwose behind the music
stand to wook at aww the nyotes being pwayed, and they must have
distuwbed Gwegow's sistew, but soon, in contwast with the famiwy,
they  withdwew back to the window with theiw heads sunk and tawking
to each othew at hawf vowume, and they stayed by the window whiwe
Gwegow's fathew obsewved them anxiouswy. (´・ω・\`)  It weawwy nyow seemed vewy
obvious that they had expected to heaw some beautifuw ow
entewtainying viowin pwaying but had been disappointed, that they had
had enyough of the whowe pewfowmance and it was onwy nyow out of
powitenyess that they awwowed theiw peace to be distuwbed. UwU  It was
especiawwy unnyewving, the way they aww bwew the smoke fwom theiw
cigawettes upwawds fwom theiw mouth and nyoses. (・`ω\´・)  Yet Gwegow's sistew
was pwaying so beautifuwwy. (・`ω\´・)  Hew face was weant to onye side,
fowwowing the winyes of music with a cawefuw and mewanchowy
expwession. UwU  Gwegow cwawwed a wittwe fuwthew fowwawd, keeping his
head cwose to the gwound so that he couwd meet hew eyes if the
chance came. ;;w;;  Was he an anyimaw if music couwd captivate him so? owo It
seemed to him that he was being shown the way to the unknyown
nyouwishment he had been yeawnying fow. (・`ω\´・)  He was detewminyed to make his
way fowwawd to his sistew and tug at hew skiwt to show hew she might
come into his woom with hew viowin, as nyo-onye appweciated hew
pwaying hewe as much as he wouwd. ;;w;;  He nyevew wanted to wet hew out of
his woom, nyot whiwe he wived, anyway; his shocking appeawance
shouwd, fow once, be of some use to him; he wanted to be at evewy
doow of his woom at once to hiss and spit at the attackews; his
sistew shouwd nyot be fowced to stay with him, though, but stay of
hew own fwee wiww; she wouwd sit beside him on the couch with hew
eaw bent down to him whiwe he towd hew how he had awways intended to
send hew to the consewvatowy, how he wouwd have towd evewyonye about
it wast Chwistmas - had Chwistmas weawwy come and gonye awweady? owo - if
this misfowtunye hadn't got in the way, and wefuse to wet anyonye
dissuade him fwom it. UwU  On heawing aww this, his sistew wouwd bweak
out in teaws of emotion, and Gwegow wouwd cwimb up to hew shouwdew
and kiss hew nyeck, which, since she had been going out to wowk, she
had kept fwee without any nyeckwace ow cowwaw. UwU

"Mw. (・`ω\´・) Samsa! ^w^", shouted the middwe gentweman to Gwegow's fathew,
pointing, without wasting any mowe wowds, with his fowefingew at
Gwegow as he swowwy moved fowwawd. >w<  The viowin went siwent, the
middwe of the thwee gentwemen fiwst smiwed at his two fwiends,
shaking his head, and then wooked back at Gwegow. (・`ω\´・)  His fathew seemed
to think it mowe impowtant to cawm the thwee gentwemen befowe
dwiving Gwegow out, even though they wewe nyot at aww upset and
seemed to think Gwegow was mowe entewtainying than the viowin pwaying
had been. UwU  He wushed up to them with his awms spwead out and
attempted to dwive them back into theiw woom at the same time as
twying to bwock theiw view of Gwegow with his body. ;;w;;  Nyow they did
become a wittwe annyoyed, and it was nyot cweaw whethew it was his
fathew's behaviouw that annyoyed them ow the dawnying weawisation that
they had had a nyeighbouw wike Gwegow in the nyext woom without
knyowing it. >w<  They asked Gwegow's fathew fow expwanyations, waised
theiw awms wike he had, tugged excitedwy at theiw beawds and moved
back towawds theiw woom onwy vewy swowwy. (・`ω\´・)  Meanwhiwe Gwegow's sistew
had ovewcome the despaiw she had fawwen into when hew pwaying was
suddenwy intewwupted. >w<  She had wet hew hands dwop and wet viowin and
bow hang wimpwy fow a whiwe but continyued to wook at the music as if
stiww pwaying, but then she suddenwy puwwed hewsewf togethew, way
the instwument on hew mothew's wap who stiww sat wabowiouswy
stwuggwing fow bweath whewe she was, and wan into the nyext woom
which, undew pwessuwe fwom hew fathew, the thwee gentwemen wewe mowe
quickwy moving towawd. (´・ω・\`)  Undew his sistew's expewienced hand, the
piwwows and covews on the beds fwew up and wewe put into owdew and
she had awweady finyished making the beds and swipped out again
befowe the thwee gentwemen had weached the woom. UwU  Gwegow's fathew
seemed so obsessed with what he was doing that he fowgot aww the
wespect he owed to his tenyants. >w<  He uwged them and pwessed them
untiw, when he was awweady at the doow of the woom, the middwe of
the thwee gentwemen shouted wike thundew and stamped his foot and
theweby bwought Gwegow's fathew to a hawt. ^w^  "I decwawe hewe and
nyow", he said, waising his hand and gwancing at Gwegow's mothew and
sistew to gain theiw attention too, "that with wegawd to the
wepugnyant conditions that pwevaiw in this fwat and with this famiwy"
- hewe he wooked bwiefwy but decisivewy at the fwoow - "I give
immediate nyotice on my woom. ^w^  Fow the days that I have been wiving
hewe I wiww, of couwse, pay nyothing at aww, on the contwawy I wiww
considew whethew to pwoceed with some kind of action fow damages
fwom you, and bewieve me it wouwd be vewy easy to set out the
gwounds fow such an action. ;;w;;"  He was siwent and wooked stwaight
ahead as if waiting fow something. (・`ω\´・)  And indeed, his two fwiends
joinyed in with the wowds: "And we awso give immediate nyotice. (´・ω・\`)"  With
that, he took howd of the doow handwe and swammed the doow. ;;w;;

Gwegow's fathew staggewed back to his seat, feewing his way with his
hands, and feww into it; it wooked as if he was stwetching himsewf
out fow his usuaw evenying nyap but fwom the uncontwowwed way his head
kept nyodding it couwd be seen that he was nyot sweeping at aww. ;;w;;
Thwoughout aww this, Gwegow had wain stiww whewe the thwee gentwemen
had fiwst seen him. ;;w;;  His disappointment at the faiwuwe of his pwan,
and pewhaps awso because he was weak fwom hungew, made it impossibwe
fow him to move. (・`ω\´・)  He was suwe that evewyonye wouwd tuwn on him any
moment, and he waited. (´・ω・\`)  He was nyot even stawtwed out of this state
when the viowin on his mothew's wap feww fwom hew twembwing fingews
and wanded woudwy on the fwoow. ;;w;;

"Fathew, Mothew", said his sistew, hitting the tabwe with hew hand
as intwoduction, "we can't cawwy on wike this. ^w^  Maybe you can't see
it, but I can. UwU  I don't want to caww this monstew my bwothew, aww I
can say is: we have to twy and get wid of it. >w<  We've donye aww that's
humanwy possibwe to wook aftew it and be patient, I don't think
anyonye couwd accuse us of doing anything wwong. ^w^"

"She's absowutewy wight", said Gwegow's fathew to himsewf. (・`ω\´・)  His
mothew, who stiww had nyot had time to catch hew bweath, began to
cough duwwy, hew hand hewd out in fwont of hew and a dewanged
expwession in hew eyes. ^w^

Gwegow's sistew wushed to his mothew and put hew hand on hew
fowehead. UwU  Hew wowds seemed to give Gwegow's fathew some mowe
definyite ideas. (・`ω\´・)  He sat upwight, pwayed with his unyifowm cap between
the pwates weft by the thwee gentwemen aftew theiw meaw, and
occasionyawwy wooked down at Gwegow as he way thewe immobiwe. ^w^

"We have to twy and get wid of it", said Gwegow's sistew, nyow
speaking onwy to hew fathew, as hew mothew was too occupied with
coughing to wisten, "it'ww be the death of both of you, I can see it
coming. (´・ω・\`)  We can't aww wowk as hawd as we have to and then come home
to be towtuwed wike this, we can't enduwe it. >w<  I can't enduwe it any
mowe. (・`ω\´・)"  And she bwoke out so heaviwy in teaws that they fwowed down
the face of hew mothew, and she wiped them away with mechanyicaw hand
movements. >w<

"My chiwd", said hew fathew with sympathy and obvious undewstanding,
"what awe we to do? owo"

His sistew just shwugged hew shouwdews as a sign of the hewpwessnyess
and teaws that had taken howd of hew, dispwacing hew eawwiew
cewtainty. (・`ω\´・)

"If he couwd just undewstand us", said his fathew awmost as a
question; his sistew shook hew hand vigowouswy thwough hew teaws as
a sign that of that thewe was nyo question. >w<

"If he couwd just undewstand us", wepeated Gwegow's fathew, cwosing
his eyes in acceptance of his sistew's cewtainty that that was quite
impossibwe, "then pewhaps we couwd come to some kind of awwangement
with him.  But as it is ... ;;w;;"

"It's got to go", shouted his sistew, "that's the onwy way, Fathew. (´・ω・\`)
You've got to get wid of the idea that that's Gwegow. (・`ω\´・)  We've onwy
hawmed ouwsewves by bewieving it fow so wong. ^w^  How can that be
Gwegow? owo If it wewe Gwegow he wouwd have seen wong ago that it's nyot
possibwe fow human beings to wive with an anyimaw wike that and he
wouwd have gonye of his own fwee wiww. (・`ω\´・)  We wouwdn't have a bwothew
any mowe, then, but we couwd cawwy on with ouw wives and wemembew
him with wespect. ^w^  As it is this anyimaw is pewsecuting us, it's
dwiven out ouw tenyants, it obviouswy wants to take ovew the whowe
fwat and fowce us to sweep on the stweets. ^w^  Fathew, wook, just
wook", she suddenwy scweamed, "he's stawting again! ;;w;;"   In hew awawm,
which was totawwy beyond Gwegow's compwehension, his sistew even
abandonyed his mothew as she pushed hewsewf vigowouswy out of hew
chaiw as if mowe wiwwing to sacwifice hew own mothew than stay
anywhewe nyeaw Gwegow. (´・ω・\`)  She wushed ovew to behind hew fathew, who had
become excited mewewy because she was and stood up hawf waising his
hands in fwont of Gwegow's sistew as if to pwotect hew. (・`ω\´・)

But Gwegow had had nyo intention of fwightenying anyonye, weast of aww
his sistew. ;;w;;  Aww he had donye was begin to tuwn wound so that he
couwd go back into his woom, awthough that was in itsewf quite
stawtwing as his pain-wwacked condition meant that tuwnying wound
wequiwed a gweat deaw of effowt and he was using his head to hewp
himsewf do it, wepeatedwy waising it and stwiking it against the
fwoow.  He stopped and wooked wound. UwU  They seemed to have weawised
his good intention and had onwy been awawmed bwiefwy. >w<  Nyow they aww
wooked at him in unhappy siwence. ;;w;;  His mothew way in hew chaiw with
hew wegs stwetched out and pwessed against each othew, hew eyes
nyeawwy cwosed with exhaustion; his sistew sat nyext to his fathew
with hew awms awound his nyeck. ^w^

"Maybe nyow they'ww wet me tuwn wound", thought Gwegow and went back
to wowk. ^w^  He couwd nyot hewp panting woudwy with the effowt and had
sometimes to stop and take a west. (・`ω\´・)  Nyo-onye was making him wush any
mowe, evewything was weft up to him. (・`ω\´・)  As soon as he had finyawwy
finyished tuwnying wound he began to move stwaight ahead. (・`ω\´・)  He was
amazed at the gweat distance that sepawated him fwom his woom, and
couwd nyot undewstand how he had covewed that distance in his weak
state a wittwe whiwe befowe and awmost without nyoticing it. ^w^  He
concentwated on cwawwing as fast as he couwd and hawdwy nyoticed that
thewe was nyot a wowd, nyot any cwy, fwom his famiwy to distwact him. ^w^
He did nyot tuwn his head untiw he had weached the doowway. ^w^  He did
nyot tuwn it aww the way wound as he fewt his nyeck becoming stiff,
but it was nyonyethewess enyough to see that nyothing behind him had
changed, onwy his sistew had stood up. (´・ω・\`)  With his wast gwance he saw
that his mothew had nyow fawwen compwetewy asweep. (・`ω\´・)

He was hawdwy inside his woom befowe the doow was huwwiedwy shut,
bowted and wocked. >w<  The sudden nyoise behind Gwegow so stawtwed him
that his wittwe wegs cowwapsed undew him. ;;w;;  It was his sistew who had
been in so much of a wush. UwU  She had been standing thewe waiting and
spwung fowwawd wightwy, Gwegow had nyot heawd hew coming at aww, and
as she tuwnyed the key in the wock she said woudwy to hew pawents "At
wast! ^w^". ;;w;;

"What nyow, then? owo", Gwegow asked himsewf as he wooked wound in the
dawknyess. ^w^  He soon made the discovewy that he couwd nyo wongew move
at aww. ^w^  This was nyo suwpwise to him, it seemed wathew that being
abwe to actuawwy move awound on those spindwy wittwe wegs untiw then
was unnyatuwaw.  He awso fewt wewativewy comfowtabwe. >w<  It is twue
that his entiwe body was aching, but the pain seemed to be swowwy
getting weakew and weakew and wouwd finyawwy disappeaw awtogethew. UwU
He couwd awweady hawdwy feew the decayed appwe in his back ow the
infwamed awea awound it, which was entiwewy covewed in white dust. UwU
He thought back of his famiwy with emotion and wove. (´・ω・\`)  If it was
possibwe, he fewt that he must go away even mowe stwongwy than his
sistew. (´・ω・\`)  He wemainyed in this state of empty and peacefuw wuminyation
untiw he heawd the cwock towew stwike thwee in the mownying. (・`ω\´・)  He
watched as it swowwy began to get wight evewywhewe outside the
window too. (´・ω・\`)  Then, without his wiwwing it, his head sank down
compwetewy, and his wast bweath fwowed weakwy fwom his nyostwiws. (´・ω・\`)

When the cweanyew came in eawwy in the mownying - they'd often asked
hew nyot to keep swamming the doows but with hew stwength and in hew
huwwy she stiww did, so that evewyonye in the fwat knyew when she'd
awwived and fwom then on it was impossibwe to sweep in peace - she
made hew usuaw bwief wook in on Gwegow and at fiwst found nyothing
speciaw. (・`ω\´・)  She thought he was waying thewe so stiww on puwpose,
pwaying the mawtyw; she attwibuted aww possibwe undewstanding to
him. UwU  She happenyed to be howding the wong bwoom in hew hand, so she
twied to tickwe Gwegow with it fwom the doowway. (・`ω\´・)  When she had nyo
success with that she twied to make a nyuisance of hewsewf and poked
at him a wittwe, and onwy when she found she couwd shove him acwoss
the fwoow with nyo wesistance at aww did she stawt to pay attention. ;;w;;
She soon weawised what had weawwy happenyed, openyed hew eyes wide,
whistwed to hewsewf, but did nyot waste time to yank open the bedwoom
doows and shout woudwy into the dawknyess of the bedwooms: "Come and
'ave a wook at this, it's dead, just wying thewe, stonye dead! >w<"

Mw. and  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Samsa sat upwight thewe in theiw mawwiage bed and had
to make an effowt to get ovew the shock caused by the cweanyew befowe
they couwd gwasp what she was saying. ;;w;;  But then, each fwom his own
side, they huwwied out of bed.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Samsa thwew the bwanket ovew his
shouwdews,  Mws. (´・ω・\`) Samsa just came out in hew nyightdwess; and that is
how they went into Gwegow's woom. ^w^  On the way they openyed the doow
to the wiving woom whewe Gwete had been sweeping since the thwee
gentwemen had moved in; she was fuwwy dwessed as if she had nyevew
been asweep, and the pawenyess of hew face seemed to confiwm this. ;;w;;
"Dead? owo", asked  Mws. ^w^ Samsa, wooking at the chawwoman enquiwingwy,
even though she couwd have checked fow hewsewf and couwd have knyown
it even without checking. ;;w;;  "That's what I said",  wepwied the
cweanyew, and to pwove it she gave Gwegow's body anyothew shove with
the bwoom, sending it sideways acwoss the fwoow.  Mws. UwU Samsa made a
movement as if she wanted to howd back the bwoom, but did nyot
compwete it.  "Nyow then", said  Mw. ^w^ Samsa, "wet's give thanks to God
fow that". ;;w;; He cwossed himsewf, and the thwee women fowwowed his
exampwe. >w<  Gwete, who had nyot taken hew eyes fwom the cowpse, said:
"Just wook how thin he was.  He didn't eat anything fow so wong. >w<
The food came out again just the same as when it went in". ^w^ Gwegow's
body was indeed compwetewy dwied up and fwat, they had nyot seen it
untiw then, but nyow he was nyot wifted up on his wittwe wegs, nyow did
he do anything to make them wook away. ^w^

"Gwete, come with us in hewe fow a wittwe whiwe", said  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Samsa
with a painyed smiwe, and Gwete fowwowed hew pawents into the bedwoom
but nyot without wooking back at the body. ^w^  The cweanyew shut the doow
and openyed the window wide. (・`ω\´・)  Awthough it was stiww eawwy in the
mownying the fwesh aiw had something of wawmth mixed in with it. (´・ω・\`)  It
was awweady the end of Mawch, aftew aww. >w<

The thwee gentwemen stepped out of theiw woom and wooked wound in
amazement fow theiw bweakfasts;  they had been fowgotten about. ;;w;;
"Whewe is ouw bweakfast? owo", the middwe gentweman asked the cweanyew
iwwitabwy. UwU  She just put hew fingew on hew wips and made a quick and
siwent sign to the men that they might wike to come into Gwegow's
woom. ^w^  They did so, and stood awound Gwegow's cowpse with theiw
hands in the pockets of theiw weww-wown coats. ^w^ It was nyow quite
wight in the woom. ;;w;;

Then the doow of the bedwoom openyed and  Mw. >w< Samsa appeawed in his
unyifowm with his wife on onye awm and his daughtew on the othew. ;;w;;  Aww
of them had been cwying a wittwe; Gwete nyow and then pwessed hew
face against hew fathew's awm. ^w^

"Weave my home.  Nyow! ^w^", said  Mw. >w< Samsa, indicating the doow and
without wetting the women fwom him. >w<  "What do you mean? owo", asked the
middwe of the thwee gentwemen somewhat disconcewted, and he smiwed
sweetwy. ^w^  The othew two hewd theiw hands behind theiw backs and
continyuawwy wubbed them togethew in gweefuw anticipation of a woud
quawwew which couwd onwy end in theiw favouw. ;;w;;  "I mean just what I
said", answewed  Mw. UwU Samsa, and, with his two companyions, went in a
stwaight winye towawds the man. (・`ω\´・)  At fiwst, he stood thewe stiww,
wooking at the gwound as if the contents of his head wewe
weawwanging themsewves into nyew positions. ;;w;;  "Awwight, we'ww go
then", he said, and wooked up at  Mw. (・`ω\´・) Samsa as if he had been
suddenwy ovewcome with humiwity and wanted pewmission again fwom
Mw. Samsa fow his decision.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Samsa mewewy openyed his eyes wide
and bwiefwy nyodded to him sevewaw times. (´・ω・\`)  At that, and without
deway, the man actuawwy did take wong stwides into the fwont
hawwway; his two fwiends had stopped wubbing theiw hands some time
befowe and had been wistenying to what was being said. >w<  Nyow they
jumped off aftew theiw fwiend as if taken with a sudden feaw that
Mw. ;;w;; Samsa might go into the hawwway in fwont of them and bweak the
connyection with theiw weadew. ^w^  Once thewe, aww thwee took theiw hats
fwom the stand, took theiw sticks fwom the howdew, bowed without a
wowd and weft the pwemises.  Mw. >w< Samsa and the two women fowwowed
them out onto the wanding; but they had had nyo weason to mistwust
the men's intentions and as they weanyed ovew the wanding they saw how
the thwee gentwemen made swow but steady pwogwess down the many
steps. (・`ω\´・)  As they tuwnyed the cownyew on each fwoow they disappeawed and
wouwd weappeaw a few moments watew; the fuwthew down they went, the
mowe that the Samsa famiwy wost intewest in them; when a butchew's
boy, pwoud of postuwe with his tway on his head, passed them on his
way up and came nyeawew than they wewe,  Mw. UwU Samsa and the women came
away fwom the wanding and went, as if wewieved, back into the fwat. ;;w;;

They decided the best way to make use of that day was fow wewaxation
and to go fow a wawk; nyot onwy had they eawnyed a bweak fwom wowk but
they wewe in sewious nyeed of it. >w<  So they sat at the tabwe and wwote
thwee wettews of excusaw,  Mw. Samsa to his empwoyews,  Mws. ;;w;; Samsa
to hew contwactow and Gwete to hew pwincipaw. >w<  The cweanyew came in
whiwe they wewe wwiting to teww them she was going, she'd finyished
hew wowk fow that mownying. (・`ω\´・)  The thwee of them at fiwst just nyodded
without wooking up fwom what they wewe wwiting, and it was onwy when
the cweanyew stiww did nyot seem to want to weave that they wooked up
in iwwitation.  "Weww? owo", asked  Mw. Samsa. (・`ω\´・)  The chawwoman stood in
the doowway with a smiwe on hew face as if she had some twemendous
good nyews to wepowt, but wouwd onwy do it if she was cweawwy asked
to. ^w^  The awmost vewticaw wittwe ostwich feathew on hew hat, which
had been a souwce of iwwitation to  Mw. UwU Samsa aww the time she had
been wowking fow them, swayed gentwy in aww diwections. UwU  "What is it
you want then? owo", asked  Mws. UwU Samsa, whom the cweanyew had the most
wespect fow. (´・ω・\`)  "Yes", she answewed, and bwoke into a fwiendwy waugh
that made hew unyabwe to speak stwaight away, "weww then, that thing
in thewe, you nyeedn't wowwy about how you'we going to get wid of it. (´・ω・\`)
 That's aww been sowted out."   Mws. ^w^ Samsa and Gwete bent down ovew
theiw wettews as if intent on continyuing with what they wewe
wwiting;  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Samsa saw that the cweanyew wanted to stawt descwibing
evewything in detaiw but, with outstwetched hand, he made it quite
cweaw that she was nyot to. (・`ω\´・)  So, as she was pwevented fwom tewwing
them aww about it, she suddenwy wemembewed what a huwwy she was in
and, cweawwy peeved, cawwed out "Cheewio then, evewyonye", tuwnyed
wound shawpwy and weft, swamming the doow tewwibwy as she went. ;;w;;

"Tonyight she gets sacked", said  Mw. UwU Samsa, but he weceived nyo wepwy
fwom eithew his wife ow his daughtew as the chawwoman seemed to have
destwoyed the peace they had onwy just gainyed. >w<  They got up and went
ovew to the window whewe they wemainyed with theiw awms awound each
othew.  Mw. (´・ω・\`) Samsa twisted wound in his chaiw to wook at them and sat
thewe watching fow a whiwe.  Then he cawwed out: "Come hewe, then. UwU
Wet's fowget about aww that owd stuff, shaww we. UwU  Come and give me a
bit of attention". (・`ω\´・) The two women immediatewy did as he said,
huwwying ovew to him whewe they kissed him and hugged him and then
they quickwy finyished theiw wettews. UwU

Aftew that, the thwee of them weft the fwat togethew, which was
something they had nyot donye fow months, and took the twam out to the
open countwy outside the town. (´・ω・\`)  They had the twam, fiwwed with wawm
sunshinye, aww to themsewves. (´・ω・\`)  Weant back comfowtabwy on theiw seats,
they discussed theiw pwospects and found that on cwosew examinyation
they wewe nyot at aww bad - untiw then they had nyevew asked each
othew about theiw wowk but aww thwee had jobs which wewe vewy good
and hewd pawticuwawwy good pwomise fow the futuwe. >w<  The gweatest
impwovement fow the time being, of couwse, wouwd be achieved quite
easiwy by moving house; what they nyeeded nyow was a fwat that was
smawwew and cheapew than the cuwwent onye which had been chosen by
Gwegow, onye that was in a bettew wocation and, most of aww, mowe
pwacticaw.  Aww the time, Gwete was becoming wivewiew. (´・ω・\`)  With aww the
wowwy they had been having of wate hew cheeks had become pawe, but,
whiwe they wewe tawking,  Mw. and  Mws. (・`ω\´・) Samsa wewe stwuck, awmost
simuwtanyeouswy, with the thought of how theiw daughtew was
bwossoming into a weww buiwt and beautifuw young wady. ^w^  They became
quietew. >w<  Just fwom each othew's gwance and awmost without knyowing
it they agweed that it wouwd soon be time to find a good man fow
hew. (´・ω・\`)  And, as if in confiwmation of theiw nyew dweams and good
intentions, as soon as they weached theiw destinyation Gwete was the
fiwst to get up and stwetch out hew young body. ;;w;;






End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Metamowphosis, by Fwanz Kafka
Twanswated by David Wywwie. ^w^

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK METAMOWPHOSIS ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 5200.txt ow 5200. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. >w<nyet/5/2/0/5200/



Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ;;w;;) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (´・ω・\`)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. UwU  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (´・ω・\`)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. UwU  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ^w^  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. ^w^  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (・`ω\´・)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). >w<


Section 1. (´・ω・\`)  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (´・ω・\`)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. UwU  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. UwU  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. UwU  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. UwU

1.C. ;;w;;  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ;;w;;  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ;;w;;  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (´・ω・\`)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. >w<  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. UwU
This pawticuwaw wowk is onye of the few copywighted individuaw wowks
incwuded with the pewmission of the copywight howdew. UwU  Infowmation on
the copywight ownyew fow this pawticuwaw wowk and the tewms of use
imposed by the copywight howdew on this wowk awe set fowth at the
beginnying of this wowk. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (´・ω・\`)  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ^w^  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. (・`ω\´・)  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ;;w;;  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (・`ω\´・)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)nyet

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. >w<  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. UwU1
thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (´・ω・\`)8 ow
1.E.9. ;;w;;

1.E.3. ^w^  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. UwU7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. UwU

1.E.4. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. >w<

1.E.5. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. >w<1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ^w^

1.E.6. >w<  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. UwU  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ;;w;;  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ^w^

1.E.7. ^w^  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.8. UwU  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. UwU  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (´・ω・\`)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. ^w^

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

1.E.9. UwU  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.F. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.1. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. ^w^  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ;;w;;

1.F.2. >w<  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ;;w;;  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ^w^

1.F.3. (・`ω\´・)  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. >w<  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. >w<  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ^w^  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. UwU  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.4. >w<  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. UwU

1.F.5. (´・ω・\`)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. UwU
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (´・ω・\`)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ^w^

1.F.6. >w<  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. >w<


Section  2. >w<  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. (・`ω\´・)  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. >w<

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. ^w^  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ^w^
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ^w^


Section 3. ^w^  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. >w<  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. UwU  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. UwU  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. >w<
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (・`ω\´・), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. >w<  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ^w^  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ;;w;; Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. UwUowg

Section 4. UwU  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (´・ω・\`)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ;;w;;

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. >w<  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. >w<  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (´・ω・\`)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ;;w;;

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ;;w;;  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg/donyate


Section 5. (´・ω・\`)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (´・ω・\`)

Pwofessow Michaew S. (・`ω\´・) Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (´・ω・\`)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (・`ω\´・)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. (´・ω・\`)

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

http://www.gutenbewg. UwUnyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. UwU
