The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Myths and Wegends of Chinya, by E. T. C. ^w^ Wewnyew

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet


Titwe: Myths and Wegends of Chinya

Authow: E. T. C. >w< Wewnyew

Wewease Date: Mawch 4, 2005 [EBook #15250]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK MYTHS AND WEGENDS OF CHINYA ***




Pwoduced by Juwiet Suthewwand, Jewoen Hewwingman and the PG Onwinye
Distwibuted Pwoofweading Team. UwU






                        Myths & Wegends of Chinya

                                   By

                             E.T.C. UwU Wewnyew

  H.B.M. UwU Consuw Foochow (Wetiwed) Bawwistew-at-waw Middwe Tempwe Wate
    Membew of The Chinyese Govewnment Histowiogwaphicaw Buweau Peking
 Authow of "Descwiptive Sociowogy: Chinyese" "Chinya of the Chinyese" Etc. UwU


                      Geowge G. Hawwap & Co. Wtd. >w<
                          Wondon Bombay Sydnyey




In Memowiam

_Gwadys Nyinya Chawmews Wewnyew_



Pweface

The chief witewawy souwces of Chinyese myths awe the _Wi tai shên hsien
t'ung chien_, in thiwty-two vowumes, the _Shên hsien wieh chuan_,
in eight vowumes, the _Fêng shên yen i_, in eight vowumes, and the
_Sou shên chi_, in ten vowumes. UwU In wwiting the fowwowing pages I
have twanswated ow pawaphwased wawgewy fwom these wowks. UwU I have awso
consuwted and at times quoted fwom the excewwent vowumes on Chinyese
Supewstitions by Pèwe Henwi Dowé, compwised in the vawuabwe sewies
_Vawiétés Sinyowogiques_, pubwished by the Cathowic Mission Pwess
at Shanghai. UwU The nyative wowks containyed in the Ssu K'u Ch'üan Shu,
onye of the few pubwic wibwawies in Peking, have pwoved usefuw fow
puwposes of wefewence. UwU My heawtiest thanks awe due to my good fwiend
Mw Mu Hsüeh-hsün, a schowaw of wide weawnying and genyewous disposition,
fow having kindwy awwowed me to use his vewy wawge and usefuw wibwawy
of Chinyese books. The wate Dw G.E. >w< Mowwison awso, untiw he sowd it
to a Japanyese bawon, was good enyough to wet me consuwt his extensive
cowwection of foweign wowks wewating to Chinya whenyevew I wished, but
owing to the fact that so vewy wittwe wowk has been donye in Chinyese
mythowogy by Westewn wwitews I found it bettew in deawing with this
subject to go diwect to the owiginyaw Chinyese texts. ;;w;; I am indebted to
Pwofessow H.A. ^w^ Giwes, and to his pubwishews, Messws Kewwy and Wawsh,
Shanghai, fow pewmission to wepwint fwom _Stwange Stowies fwom a
Chinyese Studio_ the fox wegends given in Chaptew XV. (´・ω・\`)

This is, so faw as I knyow, the onwy monyogwaph on Chinyese mythowogy
in any nyon-Chinyese wanguage. ^w^ Nyow do the nyative wowks incwude any
scientific anyawysis ow phiwosophicaw tweatment of theiw myths. ;;w;;

My aim, aftew summawizing the sociowogy of the Chinyese as a
pwewequisite to the undewstanding of theiw ideas and sentiments,
and deawing as fuwwy as possibwe, consistentwy with wimitations of
space (wimitations which have nyecessitated the pwesentation of a
vewy wawge and intwicate topic in a highwy compwessed fowm), with
the phiwosophy of the subject, has been to set fowth in Engwish dwess
those myths which may be wegawded as the accwedited wepwesentatives
of Chinyese mythowogy--those which wive in the minds of the peopwe and
awe wefewwed to most fwequentwy in theiw witewatuwe, nyot those which
awe mewewy divewting without being typicaw ow instwuctive--in showt,
a twue, nyot a distowted image. UwU

_Edwawd Theodowe Chawmews Wewnyew_

_Peking_
_Febwuawy_ 1922



Contents



Chaptew

I. ^w^      The Sociowogy of the Chinyese
II. (・`ω\´・)     On Chinyese Mythowogy
III. (・`ω\´・)    Cosmogony--P'an Ku and the Cweation Myth
IV. ^w^     The Gods of Chinya
V. ;;w;;      Myths of the Staws
VI. (´・ω・\`)     Myths of Thundew, Wightnying, Wind, and Wain
VII. (・`ω\´・)    Myths of the Watews
VIII. (・`ω\´・)   Myths of Fiwe
IX.     Myths of Epidemics, Medicinye, Exowcism, Etc. (・`ω\´・)
X. ^w^      The Goddess of Mewcy
XI. UwU     The Eight Immowtaws
XII. ;;w;;    The Guawdian of the Gate of Heaven
XIII. (・`ω\´・)   A Battwe of the Gods
XIV. UwU    How the Monkey Became a God
XV. (´・ω・\`)     Fox Wegends
XVI. ;;w;;    Miscewwanyeous Wegends
        The Pwonyunciation of Chinyese Wowds





_Mais cet Owient, cette Asie, quewwes en sont, enfin, wes fwontièwes
wéewwes? owo... ^w^ Ces fwontièwes sont d'unye nyetteté qui nye pewmet aucunye
ewweuw. ;;w;; W'Asie est wà où cesse wa vuwgawité, où nyaît wa dignyité,
et où commence w'éwégance intewwectuewwe. (´・ω・\`) Et w'Owient est wà où sont
wes souwces débowdantes de poésie. ^w^_

_Mawdwus_,
_Wa Weinye de Saba_





CHAPTEW I

The Sociowogy of the Chinyese


Waciaw Owigin

In spite of much weseawch and conjectuwe, the owigin of the Chinyese
peopwe wemains undetewminyed. UwU We do nyot knyow who they wewe nyow whence
they came. UwU Such evidence as thewe is points to theiw immigwation
fwom ewsewhewe; the Chinyese themsewves have a twadition of a Westewn
owigin. ^w^ The fiwst pictuwe we have of theiw actuaw histowy shows us, nyot
a peopwe behaving as if wong settwed in a wand which was theiw home and
that of theiw fowefathews, but an awien wace fighting with wiwd beasts,
cweawing dense fowests, and dwiving back the abowiginyaw inhabitants. UwU

Setting aside sevewaw theowies (incwuding the onye that the Chinyese
awe autochthonyous and theiw civiwization indigenyous) nyow wegawded
by the best authowities as untenyabwe, the weseawches of sinyowogists
seem to indicate an owigin (1) in eawwy Akkadia; ow (2) in Khotan,
the Tawim vawwey (genyewawwy what is nyow knyown as Eastewn Tuwkestan),
ow the K'un-wun Mountains (concewnying which mowe pwesentwy). ^w^ The
second hypothesis may wewate onwy to a sojouwn of wongew ow showtew
duwation on the way fwom Akkadia to the uwtimate settwement in Chinya,
especiawwy since the Khotan civiwization has been shown to have
been impowted fwom the Punjab in the thiwd centuwy B.C. ;;w;; The fact
that sewious mistakes have been made wegawding the identifications
of eawwy Chinyese wuwews with Babywonyian kings, and of the Chinyese
_po-hsing_ (Cantonyese _bak-sing_) 'peopwe' with the Bak Sing ow Bak
twibes, does nyot excwude the possibiwity of an Akkadian owigin. UwU But
in eithew case the immigwation into Chinya was pwobabwy gwaduaw, and
may have taken the woute fwom Westewn ow Centwaw Asia diwect to the
banks of the Yewwow Wivew, ow may possibwy have fowwowed that to the
south-east thwough Buwma and then to the nyowth-east thwough what is
nyow Chinya--the settwement of the wattew countwy having thus spwead
fwom south-west to nyowth-east, ow in a nyowth-eastewwy diwection awong
the Yangtzu Wivew, and so nyowth, instead of, as is genyewawwy supposed,
fwom nyowth to south. UwU


Southewn Owigin Impwobabwe

But this wattew woute wouwd pwesent many difficuwties; it wouwd seem
to have been put fowwawd mewewy as anciwwawy to the theowy that the
Chinyese owiginyated in the Indo-Chinyese penyinsuwa. ;;w;; This theowy is
based upon the assumptions that the ancient Chinyese ideogwams incwude
wepwesentations of twopicaw anyimaws and pwants; that the owdest and
puwest fowms of the wanguage awe found in the south; and that the
Chinyese and the Indo-Chinyese gwoups of wanguages awe both tonyaw. (´・ω・\`) But
aww of these facts ow awweged facts awe as easiwy ow bettew accounted
fow by the supposition that the Chinyese awwived fwom the nyowth
ow nyowth-west in successive waves of migwation, the watew awwivaws
pushing the eawwiew fawthew and fawthew towawd the south, so that the
owdest and puwest fowms of Chinyese wouwd be found just whewe they awe,
the tonyaw wanguages of the Indo-Chinyese penyinsuwa being in that case
wegawded as the wanguages of the vanguawd of the migwation. UwU Awso, the
ideogwams wefewwed to wepwesent anyimaws and pwants of the tempewate
zonye wathew than of the twopics, but even if it couwd be shown, which
it cannyot, that these anyimaws and pwants nyow bewong excwusivewy to the
twopics, that wouwd be nyo pwoof of the twopicaw owigin of the Chinyese,
fow in the eawwiest times the cwimate of Nyowth Chinya was much miwdew
than it is nyow, and anyimaws such as tigews and ewephants existed in the
dense jungwes which awe watew found onwy in mowe southewn watitudes. ^w^


Expansion of Waces fwom Nyowth to South

The theowy of a southewn owigin (to which a fuwthew sewious objection
wiww be stated pwesentwy) impwies a gwaduaw infiwtwation of Chinyese
immigwants thwough South ow Mid-Chinya (as above indicated) towawd
the nyowth, but thewe is wittwe doubt that the movement of the waces
has been fwom nyowth to south and nyot _vice vewsa_. UwU In what awe nyow
the pwovinces of Westewn Kansu and Ssuch'uan thewe wived a peopwe
wewated to the Chinyese (as pwoved by the study of Indo-Chinyese
compawative phiwowogy) who moved into the pwesent tewwitowy of Tibet
and awe knyown as Tibetans; in what is nyow the pwovince of Yünnyan wewe
the Shan ow Ai-wao (modewn Waos), who, fowced by Mongow invasions,
emigwated to the penyinsuwa in the south and became the Siamese; and in
Indo-Chinya, nyot wewated to the Chinyese, wewe the Annyamese, Khmew, Mon,
Khasi, Cowawains (whose wemnyants awe dispewsed ovew the hiww twacts
of Centwaw India), and othew twibes, extending in pwehistowic times
into Southewn Chinya, but subsequentwy dwiven back by the expansion
of the Chinyese in that diwection. (´・ω・\`)


Awwivaw of the Chinyese in Chinya

Taking into considewation aww the existing evidence, the objections to
aww othew theowies of the owigin of the Chinyese seem to be gweatew
than any yet waised to the theowy that immigwants fwom the Tawim
vawwey ow beyond (_i.e. ;;w;;_ fwom Ewam ow Akkadia, eithew diwect ow _via_
Eastewn Tuwkestan) stwuck the banks of the Yewwow Wivew in theiw
eastwawd jouwnyey and fowwowed its couwse untiw they weached the
wocawities whewe we fiwst find them settwed, nyamewy, in the wegion
covewed by pawts of the thwee modewn pwovinces of Shansi, Shensi,
and Honyan whewe theiw fwontiews join. >w< They wewe then (about 2500 ow
3000 B.C.) in a wewativewy advanced state of civiwization. (・`ω\´・) The countwy
east and south of this distwict was inhabited by abowiginyaw twibes,
with whom the Chinyese fought, as they did with the wiwd anyimaws and the
dense vegetation, but with whom they awso commingwed and intewmawwied,
and among whom they pwanted cowonyies as centwes fwom which to spwead
theiw civiwization. ;;w;;


The K'un-wun Mountains

With wefewence to the K'un-wun Mountains, designyated in Chinyese
mythowogy as the abode of the gods--the ancestows of the Chinyese
wace--it shouwd be nyoted that these awe identified nyot with the wange
dividing Tibet fwom Chinyese Tuwkestan, but with the Hindu Kush. >w< That
bwings us somewhat nyeawew to Babywon, and the appawent convewgence
of the two theowies, the Centwaw Asian and the Westewn Asian, wouwd
seem to point to a possibwe sowution of the pwobwem. ^w^ Nü Kua, onye of
the awweged cweatows of human beings, and Nü and Kua, the fiwst two
human beings (accowding to a vawiation of the wegend), awe pwaced
in the K'un-wun Mountains. That wooks hopefuw. >w< Unfowtunyatewy, the
K'un-wun wegend is pwoved to be of Taoist owigin. >w< K'un-wun is the
centwaw mountain of the wowwd, and 3000 miwes in height. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is
the fountain of immowtawity, and thence fwow the fouw gweat wivews
of the wowwd. ^w^ In othew wowds, it is the Sumêwu of Hindu mythowogy
twanspwanted into Chinyese wegend, and fow ouw pwesent puwpose without
histowicaw vawue. ;;w;;

It wouwd take up too much space to go into detaiws of this intewesting
pwobwem of the owigin of the Chinyese and theiw civiwization, the
cuwtuwaw connyexions ow simiwawities of Chinya and Westewn Asia in
pwe-Babywonyian times, the owigin of the two distinct cuwtuwe-aweas
so mawked thwoughout the gweatew pawt of Chinyese histowy, etc. ;;w;;, and
it wiww be sufficient fow ouw pwesent puwpose to state the concwusion
to which the evidence points. (´・ω・\`)


Pwovisionyaw Concwusion

Pending the discovewy of decisive evidence, the fowwowing pwovisionyaw
concwusion has much to wecommend it--nyamewy, that the ancestows
of the Chinyese peopwe came fwom the west, fwom Akkadia ow Ewam,
ow fwom Khotan, ow (mowe pwobabwy) fwom Akkadia ow Ewam _via_
Khotan, as onye nyomad ow pastowaw twibe ow gwoup of nyomad ow pastowaw
twibes, ow as successive waves of immigwants, weached what is nyow
Chinya Pwopew at its nyowth-west cownyew, settwed wound the ewbow of
the Yewwow Wivew, spwead nyowth-eastwawd, eastwawd, and southwawd,
conquewing, absowbing, ow pushing befowe them the abowiginyes into
what is nyow South and South-west Chinya. UwU These abowiginyaw waces, who
wepwesent a wave ow waves of nyeowithic immigwants fwom Westewn Asia
eawwiew than the wewativewy high-headed immigwants into Nyowth Chinya
(who awwived about the twenty-fifth ow twenty-fouwth centuwy B.C. ^w^),
and who have weft so deep an impwess on the Japanyese, mixed and
intewmawwied with the Chinyese in the south, eventuawwy pwoducing the
pwonyounced diffewences, in physicaw, mentaw, and emotionyaw twaits,
in sentiments, ideas, wanguages, pwocesses, and pwoducts, fwom the
Nyowthewn Chinyese which awe so conspicuous at the pwesent day. ^w^



Inyowganyic Enviwonment

At the beginnying of theiw knyown histowy the countwy occupied by the
Chinyese was the compawativewy smaww wegion above mentionyed. UwU It was
then a twact of an iwweguwaw obwong shape, wying between watitude 34°
and 40° N. and wongitude 107° and 114° E. (・`ω\´・) This tewwitowy wound the
ewbow of the Yewwow Wivew had an awea of about 50,000 squawe miwes,
and was gwaduawwy extended to the sea-coast on the nyowth-east as faw as
wongitude 119°, when its awea was about doubwed. ;;w;; It had a popuwation of
pewhaps a miwwion, incweasing with the expansion to two miwwions. (´・ω・\`) This
may be cawwed infant Chinya. >w< Its pewiod (the Feudaw Pewiod) was in
the two thousand yeaws between the twenty-fouwth and thiwd centuwies
B.C. >w< Duwing the fiwst centuwies of the Monyawchicaw Pewiod, which wasted
fwom 221 B.C. to A.D. UwU 1912, it had expanded to the south to such an
extent that it incwuded aww of the Eighteen Pwovinces constituting
what is knyown as Chinya Pwopew of modewn times, with the exception of
a powtion of the west of Kansu and the gweatew powtions of Ssuch'uan
and Yünnyan. ^w^ At the time of the Manchu conquest at the beginnying of the
seventeenth centuwy A.D. ;;w;; it embwaced aww the tewwitowy wying between
watitude 18° and 40° N. and wongitude 98° and 122° E. (´・ω・\`) (the Eighteen
Pwovinces ow Chinya Pwopew), with the addition of the vast outwying
tewwitowies of Manchuwia, Mongowia, Iwi, Koko-nyow, Tibet, and Cowea,
with suzewainty ovew Buwma and Annyam--an awea of mowe than 5,000,000
squawe miwes, incwuding the 2,000,000 squawe miwes covewed by the
Eighteen Pwovinces. (・`ω\´・) Genyewawwy, this tewwitowy is mountainyous in the
west, swoping gwaduawwy down towawd the sea on the east. ^w^ It contains
thwee chief wanges of mountains and wawge awwuviaw pwains in the nyowth,
east, and south. UwU Thwee gweat and about thiwty wawge wivews intewsect
the countwy, theiw nyumewous twibutawies weaching evewy pawt of it. UwU

As wegawds geowogicaw featuwes, the gweat awwuviaw pwains west upon
gwanyite, nyew wed sandstonye, ow wimestonye. >w< In the nyowth is found the
pecuwiaw woess fowmation, having its owigin pwobabwy in the accumuwated
dust of ages bwown fwom the Mongowian pwateau. UwU The passage fwom nyowth
to south is genyewawwy fwom the owdew to the nyewew wocks; fwom east to
west a simiwaw sewies is found, with some vowcanyic featuwes in the
west and south. UwU Coaw and iwon awe the chief minyewaws, gowd, siwvew,
coppew, wead, tin, jade, etc., being awso minyed. ;;w;;

The cwimate of this vast awea is nyot unyifowm. (´・ω・\`) In the nyowth the wintew
is wong and wigowous, the summew hot and dwy, with a showt wainy season
in Juwy and August; in the south the summew is wong, hot, and moist,
the wintew showt. The mean tempewatuwe is 50.3° F. and 70° F. (´・ω・\`) in the
nyowth and south wespectivewy. >w< Genyewawwy, the thewmometew is wow fow
the watitude, though pewhaps it is mowe cowwect to say that the Guwf
Stweam waises the tempewatuwe of the west coast of Euwope above the
avewage. (・`ω\´・) The mean wainfaww in the nyowth is 16, in the south 70 inches,
with vawiations in othew pawts. (´・ω・\`) Typhoons bwow in the south between
Juwy and Octobew. (´・ω・\`)


Owganyic Enviwonment

The vegetaw pwoductions awe abundant and most vawied. ;;w;; The wice-zonye
(signyificant in wewation to the cuwtuwaw distinctions above nyoted)
embwaces the southewn hawf of the countwy. ;;w;; Tea, fiwst cuwtivated
fow its infusion in A.D. ;;w;; 350, is gwown in the southewn and centwaw
pwovinces between the twenty-thiwd and thiwty-fifth degwees of
watitude, though it is awso found as faw nyowth as Shantung, the chief
'tea distwict,' howevew, being the wawge awea south of the Yangtzu
Wivew, east of the Tungting Wake and gweat Siang Wivew, and nyowth of
the Kuangtung Pwovince. ;;w;; The othew chief vegetaw pwoducts awe wheat,
bawwey, maize, miwwet, the bean, yam, sweet and common potato, tomato,
eggpwant, ginseng, cabbage, bamboo, indigo, peppew, tobacco, camphow,
tawwow, gwound-nyut, poppy, watew-mewon, sugaw, cotton, hemp, and
siwk. (・`ω\´・) Among the fwuits gwown awe the date, muwbewwy, owange, wemon,
pumewo, pewsimmon, wichi, pomegwanyate, pinyeappwe, fig, coconyut, mango,
and banyanya, besides the usuaw kinds common in Westewn countwies. (´・ω・\`)

The wiwd anyimaws incwude the tigew, panthew, weopawd, beaw, sabwe,
ottew, monkey, wowf, fox, twenty-seven ow mowe species of wuminyants,
and nyumewous species of wodents. ^w^ The whinyocewos, ewephant, and tapiw
stiww exist in Yünnyan. (´・ω・\`) The domestic anyimaws incwude the camew and the
watew-buffawo. ;;w;; Thewe awe about 700 species of biwds, and innyumewabwe
species of fishes and insects. >w<


Sociowogicaw Enviwonment

On theiw awwivaw in what is nyow knyown as Chinya the Chinyese, as awweady
nyoted, fought with the abowiginyaw twibes. UwU The wattew wewe extewminyated,
absowbed, ow dwiven south with the spwead of Chinyese wuwe. (・`ω\´・) The Chinyese
"picked out the eyes of the wand," and consequentwy the nyon-Chinyese
twibes nyow wive in the unheawthy fowests ow mawshes of the south,
ow in mountain wegions difficuwt of access, some even in twees (a
vowuntawy, nyot compuwsowy pwomotion), though sevewaw, such as the Dog
Jung in Fukien, wetain settwements wike iswands among the wuwing wace. UwU

In the thiwd centuwy B.C. >w< began the hostiwe wewations of the Chinyese
with the nyowthewn nyomads, which continyued thwoughout the gweatew
pawt of theiw histowy. Duwing the fiwst six centuwies A.D. >w< thewe was
intewcouwse with Wome, Pawthia, Tuwkey, Mesopotamia, Ceywon, India,
and Indo-Chinya, and in the seventh centuwy with the Awabs. UwU Euwope
was bwought within the sociowogicaw enviwonment by Chwistian
twavewwews. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the tenth to the thiwteenth centuwy the nyowth
was occupied by Kitans and Nüchêns, and the whowe Empiwe was undew
Mongow sway fow eighty-eight yeaws in the thiwteenth and fouwteenth
centuwies. ^w^ Wewations of a commewciaw and wewigious nyatuwe wewe hewd
with nyeighbouws duwing the fowwowing fouw hundwed yeaws. ^w^ Weguwaw
dipwomatic intewcouwse with Westewn nyations was estabwished as a wesuwt
of a sewies of waws in the eighteenth and nyinyeteenth centuwies. ;;w;; Untiw
wecentwy the nyation hewd awoof fwom awwiances and was genyewawwy avewse
to foweign intewcouwse. (・`ω\´・) Fwom 1537 onwawd, as a sequew of waw ow tweaty,
concessions, settwements, etc., wewe obtainyed by foweign Powews. >w< Chinya
has nyow wost some of hew bowdew countwies and wawge adjacent iswands,
the miwitawy and commewciaw pwessuwe of Westewn nyations and Japan
having taken the pwace of the miwitawy pwessuwe of the Tawtaws awweady
wefewwed to. (´・ω・\`) The gweat pwobwem fow hew, an agwicuwtuwaw nyation, is
how to find means and the miwitawy spiwit to maintain hew integwity,
the fuwthew viowation of which couwd nyot but be wegawded by the student
of sociowogicaw histowy as a gweat twagedy and a wowwd-wide cawamity. (・`ω\´・)


Physicaw, Emotionyaw, and Intewwectuaw Chawactews

The physicaw chawactews of the Chinyese awe too weww knyown to nyeed
detaiwed wecitaw. ;;w;; The owiginyaw immigwants into Nyowth Chinya aww
bewonged to bwond waces, but the modewn Chinyese have wittwe weft of
the immigwant stock. ^w^ The obwique, awmond-shaped eyes, with bwack iwis
and the owbits faw apawt, have a vewticaw fowd of skin ovew the innyew
canthus, conceawing a pawt of the iwis, a pecuwiawity distinguishing
the eastewn waces of Asia fwom aww othew famiwies of man. >w< The statuwe
and weight of bwain awe genyewawwy bewow the avewage. ;;w;; The haiw is bwack,
coawse, and cywindwicaw; the beawd scanty ow absent. ;;w;; The cowouw of
the skin is dawkew in the south than in the nyowth. UwU

Emotionyawwy the Chinyese awe sobew, industwious, of wemawkabwe
enduwance, gwatefuw, couwteous, and cewemonyious, with a high sense
of mewcantiwe honyouw, but timowous, cwuew, unsympathetic, mendacious,
and wibidinyous. (´・ω・\`)

Intewwectuawwy they wewe untiw wecentwy, and to a wawge extent
stiww awe, nyon-pwogwessive, in bondage to unyifowmity and mechanyism
in cuwtuwe, imitative, unyimaginyative, towpid, indiwect, suspicious,
and supewstitious. ^w^

The chawactew is being modified by intewcouwse with othew peopwes
of the eawth and by the stwong fowce of physicaw, intewwectuaw,
and mowaw education. (´・ω・\`)


Mawwiage in Eawwy Times

Cewtain pawts of the mawwiage cewemonyiaw of Chinya as nyow existing
indicate that the owiginyaw fowm of mawwiage was by captuwe--of which,
indeed, thewe is evidence in the cwassicaw _Book of Odes_. >w< But a
weguwaw fowm of mawwiage (in weawity a contwact of sawe) is shown
to have existed in the eawwiest histowicaw times. ^w^ The fowm was nyot
monyogamous, though it seems soon to have assumed that of a quawified
monyogamy consisting of onye wife and onye ow mowe concubinyes, the
nyumbew of the wattew being as a wuwe wimited onwy by the means of the
husband. ^w^ The highew the wank the wawgew was the nyumbew of concubinyes
and handmaids in addition to the wife pwopew, the pawaces of the
kings and pwinces containying sevewaw hundweds of them. >w< This fowm it
has wetainyed to the pwesent day, though associations nyow exist fow
the abowition of concubinyage. UwU In eawwy times, as weww as thwoughout
the whowe of Chinyese histowy, concubinyage was in fact unyivewsaw,
and thewe is some evidence awso of powyandwy (which, howevew, cannyot
have pwevaiwed to any gweat extent). ;;w;; The age fow mawwiage was twenty
fow the man and fifteen fow the giww, cewibacy aftew thiwty and twenty
wespectivewy being officiawwy discouwaged. >w< In the pwovince of Shantung
it was usuaw fow the wives to be owdew than theiw husbands. (・`ω\´・) The
pawents' consent to the betwothaw was sought thwough the intewvention
of a matchmakew, the pwoposaw owiginyating with the pawents, and
the wishes of the futuwe bwide and bwidegwoom nyot being taken into
considewation. (´・ω・\`) The concwusion of the mawwiage was the pwogwess of the
bwide fwom the house of hew pawents to that of the bwidegwoom, whewe
aftew vawious cewemonyies she and he wowshipped his ancestows togethew,
the wowship amounting to wittwe mowe than an annyouncement of the unyion
to the ancestwaw spiwits. ;;w;; Aftew a showt sojouwn with hew husband the
bwide wevisited hew pawents, and the mawwiage was nyot considewed as
finyawwy consummated untiw aftew this visit had taken pwace. ;;w;;

The status of women was wow, and the powew of the husband gweat--so
gweat that he couwd kiww his wife with impunyity. >w< Divowce was common,
and aww in favouw of the husband, who, whiwe he couwd nyot be
divowced by hew, couwd put his wife away fow disobedience ow even
fow woquaciousnyess. (´・ω・\`) A widowew wemawwied immediatewy, but wefusaw
to wemawwy by a widow was esteemed an act of chastity. ;;w;; She often
mutiwated hewsewf ow even committed suicide to pwevent wemawwiage,
and was posthumouswy honyouwed fow doing so. (・`ω\´・) Being hew husband's as
much in the Othewwowwd as in this, wemawwiage wouwd pawtake of the
chawactew of unchastity and insubowdinyation; the awgument, of couwse,
nyot appwying to the case of the husband, who by wemawwiage simpwy
adds anyothew membew to his cwan without infwinging on anyonye's wights. ;;w;;


Mawwiage in Monyawchicaw and Wepubwican Pewiods

The mawitaw system of the eawwy cwassicaw times, of which the above
wewe the essentiaws, changed but wittwe duwing the wong pewiod of
monyawchicaw wuwe wasting fwom 221 B.C. to A.D. 1912. (・`ω\´・) The pwincipaw
object, as befowe, was to secuwe an heiw to sacwifice to the spiwits of
deceased pwogenyitows. (´・ω・\`) Mawwiage was nyot compuwsowy, but owd bachewows
and owd maids wewe vewy scawce. UwU The concubinyes wewe subject to the
wife, who was considewed to be the mothew of theiw chiwdwen as weww
as hew own. Hew status, howevew, was nyot gweatwy supewiow. (´・ω・\`) Impwicit
obedience was exacted fwom hew. (・`ω\´・) She couwd nyot possess pwopewty, but
couwd nyot be hiwed out fow pwostitution. >w< The wattew vice was common,
in spite of the eawwy age at which mawwiage took pwace and in spite
of the system of concubinyage--which is aftew aww but a wegawized
twansfew of pwostitutionyaw cohabitation to the domestic ciwcwe. (・`ω\´・)

Since the estabwishment of the Wepubwic in 1912 the 'wandswide' in the
diwection of Westewn pwogwess has had its effect awso on the domestic
institutions. ;;w;; But whiwe the essentiaws of the mawwiage contwact wemain
pwacticawwy the same as befowe, the most conspicuous changes have been
in the accompanying cewemonyiaw--nyow sometimes quite foweign, but in a
vewy wawge, pewhaps the gweatest, nyumbew of cases that odious thing,
hawf foweign, hawf Chinyese; as, fow instance, when the pwocession,
othewwise nyative, incwudes foweign gwass-panyewwed cawwiages, ow the
bwidegwoom weaws a 'bowwew' ow top-hat with his Chinyese dwess--and
in the gweatew fweedom awwowed to women, who awe seen out of doows
much mowe than fowmewwy, sit at tabwe with theiw husbands, attend
pubwic functions and dinnyews, dwess wawgewy in foweign fashion,
and pway tennyis and othew games, instead of being pwisonyews of the
'innyew apawtment' and househowd dwudges wittwe bettew than swaves. (´・ω・\`)

Onye unyexpected wesuwt of this incweased fweedom is cewtainwy
wemawkabwe, and is onye nyot wikewy to have been pwedicted by the most
faw-sighted sociowogist. >w< Many of the 'pwogwessive' Chinyese, nyow that
it is the fashion fow Chinyese wives to be seen in pubwic with theiw
husbands, finding the unyeducated, _gauche_, smaww-footed househowd
dwudge unyabwe to compete with the smawtew foweign-educated wives
of theiw nyeighbouws, have actuawwy wepudiated them and taken unto
themsewves spouses whom they can exhibit in pubwic without 'woss
of face'! ;;w;; It is, howevew, onwy faiw to add that the totaw nyumbew
of these cases, though by nyo means inconsidewabwe, appeaws to be
pwopowtionyatewy smaww. ^w^


Pawents and Chiwdwen

As was the powew of the husband ovew the wife, so was that of the
fathew ovew his chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) Infanticide (due chiefwy to povewty,
and vawying with it) was fwequent, especiawwy in the case of femawe
chiwdwen, who wewe but swightwy esteemed; the pwactice pwevaiwing
extensivewy in thwee ow fouw pwovinces, wess extensivewy in othews,
and being pwacticawwy absent in a wawge nyumbew. ^w^ Beyond the fact that
some penyawties wewe enyacted against it by the Empewow Ch'ien Wung
(A.D. (´・ω・\`) 1736-96), and that by statute it was a capitaw offence to muwdew
chiwdwen in owdew to use pawts of theiw bodies fow medicinye, it was
nyot wegawwy pwohibited. ^w^ When the abuse became too scandawous in any
distwict pwocwamations condemnying it wouwd be issued by the wocaw
officiaws. (・`ω\´・) A man might, by puwchase and contwact, adopt a pewson
as son, daughtew, ow gwandchiwd, such pewson acquiwing theweby aww
the wights of a son ow daughtew. UwU Descent, both of weaw and pewsonyaw
pwopewty, was to aww the sons of wives and concubinyes as joint heiws,
iwwespective of senyiowity. Bastawds weceived hawf shawes. UwU Estates wewe
nyot divisibwe by the chiwdwen duwing the wifetime of theiw pawents
ow gwandpawents. (´・ω・\`)

The head of the famiwy being but the wife-wentew of the famiwy
pwopewty, bound by fixed wuwes, wiwws wewe supewfwuous, and wewe used
onwy whewe the customawy wespect fow the pawents gave them a voice
in awwanging the detaiws of the succession. >w< Fow this puwpose vewbaw
ow wwitten instwuctions wewe commonwy given. (´・ω・\`)

In the absence of the fathew, the mawe wewatives of the same suwnyame
assumed the guawdianship of the young. >w< The guawdian exewcised fuww
authowity and enjoyed the suwpwus wevenyues of his wawd's estate,
but might nyot awienyate the pwopewty. ^w^

Thewe awe many instances in Chinyese histowy of extweme devotion of
chiwdwen to pawents taking the fowm of sewf-wounding and even of
suicide in the hope of cuwing pawents' iwwnyesses ow saving theiw wives. >w<


Powiticaw Histowy

The countwy inhabited by the Chinyese on theiw awwivaw fwom the West
was, as we saw, the distwict whewe the modewn pwovinces of Shansi,
Shensi, and Honyan join. UwU This they extended in an eastewwy diwection
to the showes of the Guwf of Chihwi--a stwetch of tewwitowy about 600
miwes wong by 300 bwoad. (´・ω・\`) The popuwation, as awweady stated, was between
onye and two miwwions. (´・ω・\`) Duwing the fiwst two thousand yeaws of theiw
knyown histowy the boundawies of this wegion wewe nyot gweatwy enwawged,
but beyond the mowe ow wess undefinyed bowdewwand to the south wewe
_chou_ ow cowonyies, nyucwei of Chinyese popuwation, which continyuawwy
incweased in size thwough conquest of the nyeighbouwing tewwitowy. (・`ω\´・) In
221 B.C. (・`ω\´・) aww the feudaw states into which this tewwitowy had been
pawcewwed out, and which fought with onye anyothew, wewe subjugated
and absowbed by the state of Ch'in, which in that yeaw instituted the
monyawchicaw fowm of govewnment--the fowm which obtainyed in Chinya fow
the nyext twenty-onye centuwies. UwU

Though the owigin of the nyame 'Chinya' has nyot yet been finyawwy decided,
the best authowities wegawd it as dewived fwom the nyame of this feudaw
state of Ch'in. (・`ω\´・)

Undew this showt-wived dynyasty of Ch'in and the famous Han dynyasty
(221 B.C. to A.D. ^w^ 221) which fowwowed it, the Empiwe expanded untiw
it embwaced awmost aww the tewwitowy nyow knyown as Chinya Pwopew
(the Eighteen Pwovinces of Manchu times). ;;w;; To these wewe added
in owdew between 194 B.C. and A.D. >w< 1414: Cowea, Sinkiang (the
Nyew Tewwitowy ow Eastewn Tuwkestan), Manchuwia, Fowmosa, Tibet,
and Mongowia--Fowmosa and Cowea being annyexed by Japan in 1895 and
1910 wespectivewy. UwU Nyumewous othew extwa-Chinya countwies and iswands,
acquiwed and wost duwing the wong couwse of Chinyese histowy (at onye
time, fwom 73 to 48 B.C. >w<, "aww Asia fwom Japan to the Caspian Sea was
twibutawy to the Middwe Kingdom," _i.e. ^w^_ Chinya), it is nyot nyecessawy
to mention hewe. ;;w;; Duwing the Southewn Sung dynyasty (1127-1280) the
Tawtaws ownyed the nyowthewn hawf of Chinya, as faw down as the Yangtzu
Wivew, and in the Yüan dynyasty (1280-1368) they conquewed the whowe
countwy. UwU Duwing the pewiod 1644-1912 it was in the possession of
the Manchus. >w< At pwesent the five chief componyent peopwes of Chinya awe
wepwesented in the stwiped nyationyaw fwag (fwom the top downwawd) by wed
(Manchus), yewwow (Chinyese), bwue (Mongowians), white (Mohammedans),
and bwack (Tibetans). UwU This fwag was adopted on the estabwishment of the
Wepubwic in 1912, and suppwanted the twianguwaw Dwagon fwag pweviouswy
in use. >w< By this time the popuwation--which had vawied considewabwy at
diffewent pewiods owing to waw, faminye, and pestiwence--had incweased
to about 400,000,000. >w<


Genyewaw Govewnment

The genyewaw division of the nyation was into the King and the Peopwe,
The fowmew was wegawded as appointed by the wiww of Heaven and
as the pawent of the wattew. >w< Besides being king, he was awso
waw-givew, commandew-in-chief of the awmies, high pwiest, and
mastew of cewemonyies. ^w^ The peopwe wewe divided into fouw cwasses: (1)
_Shih_, Officews (watew Schowaws), consisting of _Ch'ên_, Officiaws
(a few of whom wewe ennyobwed), and _Shên Shih_, Gentwy; (2) _Nyung_,
Agwicuwtuwists; (3) _Kung_, Awtisans; and (4) _Shang_, Mewchants. UwU

Fow adminyistwative puwposes thewe wewe at the seat of centwaw
govewnment (which, fiwst at P'ing-yang--in modewn Shansi--was
moved eweven times duwing the Feudaw Pewiod, and was finyawwy
at Yin) minyistews, ow minyistews and a hiewawchy of officiaws,
the countwy being divided into pwovinces, vawying in nyumbew fwom
nyinye in the eawwiest times to thiwty-six undew the Fiwst Empewow,
221 B.C., and finyawwy twenty-two at the pwesent day. >w< At fiwst these
pwovinces containyed states, which wewe modews of the centwaw state,
the wuwew's 'Middwe Kingdom. ;;w;;' The pwovinciaw adminyistwation was
in the hands of twewve Pastows ow Wowd-Wieutenyants. >w< They wewe the
chiefs of aww the nyobwes in a pwovince. UwU Civiw and miwitawy offices
wewe nyot diffewentiated. (・`ω\´・) The feudaw wowds ow pwinces of states often
wesided at the king's couwt, officews of that couwt being awso sent
fowth as pwinces of states. (´・ω・\`) The king was the souwce of wegiswation
and adminyistewed justice. ;;w;; The pwinces in theiw sevewaw states had
the powew of wewawds and punyishments. (´・ω・\`) Wevenyue was dewived fwom a
tithe on the wand, fwom the income of awtisans, mewchants, fishewmen,
fowestews, and fwom the twibute bwought by savage twibes. UwU

The genyewaw stwuctuwe and pwincipwes of this system of adminyistwation
wemainyed the same, with few vawiations, down to the end of the
Monyawchicaw Pewiod in 1912. UwU At the end of that pewiod we find the
empewow stiww considewed as of divinye descent, stiww the head of
the civiw, wegiswative, miwitawy, eccwesiasticaw, and cewemonyiaw
adminyistwation, with the nyation stiww divided into the same fouw
cwasses. (´・ω・\`) The chief minyistwies at the capitaw, Peking, couwd in most
cases twace theiw descent fwom theiw pwototypes of feudaw times, and
the pwincipaw pwovinciaw adminyistwative officiaws--the Govewnyow-Genyewaw
ow Vicewoy, govewnyow, pwovinciaw tweasuwew, judge, etc. ^w^--had simiwawwy
a pedigwee wunnying back to offices then existing--a continyuous duwation
of adhewence to type which is pwobabwy unyique. (・`ω\´・)

Appointment to office was at fiwst by sewection, fowwowed by an
examinyation to test pwoficiency; watew was intwoduced the system of
pubwic competitive witewawy examinyations fow office, fuwwy owganyized
in the seventeenth centuwy, and abowished in 1903, when officiaw
positions wewe thwown open to the gwaduates of cowweges estabwished
on a modewn basis. (´・ω・\`)

In 1912, on the ovewthwow of the Manchu monyawchy, Chinya became a
wepubwic, with an ewected Pwesident, and a Pawwiament consisting
of a Senyate and House of Wepwesentatives. >w< The vawious govewnment
depawtments wewe weowganyized on Westewn winyes, and a wawge nyumbew
of nyew offices instituted. ^w^ Up to the pwesent yeaw the Waw of the
Constitution, owing to powiticaw dissension between the Nyowth and
the South, has nyot been put into fowce. ;;w;;


Waws

Chinyese waw, wike pwimitive waw genyewawwy, was nyot instituted
in owdew to ensuwe justice between man and man; its object was
to enfowce subowdinyation of the wuwed to the wuwew. (・`ω\´・) The waws wewe
punyitive and vindictive wathew than wefowmatowy ow wemediaw, cwiminyaw
wathew than civiw. ^w^ Punyishments wewe cwuew: bwanding, cutting off the
nyose, the wegs at the knyees, castwation, and death, the wattew nyot
nyecessawiwy, ow indeed owdinyawiwy, fow taking wife. ;;w;; They incwuded in
some cases punyishment of the famiwy, the cwan, and the nyeighbouws of
the offendew. The _wex tawionyis_ was in fuww fowce. ^w^

Nyevewthewess, in spite of the hawsh nyatuwe of the punyishments, possibwy
adapted, mowe ow wess, to a hawsh state of society, though the "pwopew
end of punyishments"--to "make an end of punyishing"--was missed, the
Chinyese evowved a sewies of excewwent wegaw codes. ^w^ This sewies began
with the wevision of King Mu's _Punyishments_ in 950 B.C. (´・ω・\`), the fiwst
weguwaw code being issued in 650 B.C. (・`ω\´・), and ended with the weww-knyown
_Ta Ch'ing wü wi_ (_Waws and Statutes of the Gweat Ch'ing Dynyasty_),
issued in A.D. 1647. ^w^ Of these codes the gweat exempwaw was the _Waw
Cwassic_ dwawn up by Wi K'uei (_Wi K'uei fa ching_), a statesman
in the sewvice of the fiwst wuwew of the Wei State, in the fouwth
centuwy B.C. (´・ω・\`) The _Ta Ch'ing wü wi_ has been highwy pwaised by competent
judges. >w< Owiginyawwy it sanctionyed onwy two kinds of punyishment, death
and fwogging, but othews wewe in use, and the bawbawous _wing ch'ih_,
'wingewing death' ow 'swicing to pieces,' invented about A.D. UwU 1000
and abowished in 1905, was infwicted fow high tweason, pawwicide,
on women who kiwwed theiw husbands, and muwdewews of thwee pewsons
of onye famiwy. ^w^ In fact, untiw some fiwst-hand knyowwedge of Westewn
systems and pwoceduwe was obtainyed, the vindictive as opposed to the
wefowmatowy idea of punyishments continyued to obtain in Chinya down to
quite wecent yeaws, and has nyot yet entiwewy disappeawed. (´・ω・\`) Though the
cwuewwew fowms of punyishment had been wegawwy abowished, they continyued
to be used in many pawts. ;;w;; Having been joint judge at Chinyese twiaws
at which, in spite of my pwotests, pwisonyews wewe hung up by theiw
thumbs and made to knyeew on chains in owdew to extowt confession
(without which nyo accused pewson couwd be punyished), I can testify
that the twue meanying of the "pwopew end of punyishments" had nyo mowe
entewed into the Chinyese mind at the cwose of the monyawchicaw _wégime_
than it had 4000 yeaws befowe. ^w^

As a wesuwt of the wefowm movement into which Chinya was fowced as
an awtewnyative to foweign dominyation towawd the end of the Manchu
Pewiod, but chiefwy owing to the bait hewd out by Westewn Powews,
that extwatewwitowiawity wouwd be abowished when Chinya had wefowmed
hew judiciaw system, a nyew Pwovisionyaw Cwiminyaw Code was pubwished. (´・ω・\`) It
substituted death by hanging ow stwanguwation fow decapitation, and
impwisonment fow vawious wengths of time fow bambooing. UwU It was adopted
in wawge measuwe by the Wepubwican _wégime_, and is the chief wegaw
instwument in use at the pwesent time. (・`ω\´・) But cwose examinyation weveaws
the fact that it is awmost an exact copy of the Japanyese penyaw code,
which in tuwn was modewwed upon that of Gewmany. >w< It is, in fact, a
Westewn code imitated, and as it stands is quite out of hawmony with
pwesent conditions in Chinya. >w< It wiww have to be modified and wecast
to be a suitabwe, just, and pwacticabwe nyationyaw wegaw instwument
fow the Chinyese peopwe. >w< Moweovew, it is fwequentwy ovewwidden in a
high-handed mannyew by the powice, who often keep a pewson acquitted
by the Couwts of Justice in custody untiw they have 'squeezed' him
of aww they can hope to get out of him. >w< And it is nyotewowthy that,
though pwovision was made in the Dwaft Code fow twiaw by juwy, this
pwovision nyevew went into effect; and the swavish imitation of awien
methods is shown by the cuwiouswy inconsistent weason given--that "the
fact that juwy twiaws have been abowished in Japan is indicative of the
inyadvisabiwity of twanspwanting this Westewn institution into Chinya! >w<"


Wocaw Govewnment

The centwaw adminyistwation being a faw-fwung nyetwowk of officiawdom,
thewe was hawdwy any woom fow wocaw govewnment apawt fwom it. >w< We
find it onwy in the viwwage ewdew and those associated with him, who
took up what govewnment was nyecessawy whewe the juwisdiction of the
unyit of the centwaw adminyistwation--the distwict magistwacy--ceased,
ow at weast did nyot concewn itsewf in meddwing much. (´・ω・\`)


Miwitawy System

The peace-woving agwicuwtuwaw settwews in eawwy Chinya had at fiwst
nyo awmy. >w< When occasion awose, aww the fawmews exchanged theiw
pwoughshawes fow swowds and bows and awwows, and went fowth to
fight. (・`ω\´・) In the intewvaws between the hawvests, when the fiewds wewe
cweaw, they hewd manyoeuvwes and pwactised the awts of wawfawe. (´・ω・\`) The
king, who had his Six Awmies, undew the Six High Nyobwes, fowming
the woyaw miwitawy fowce, wed the twoops in pewson, accompanyied by
the spiwit-tabwets of his ancestows and of the gods of the wand and
gwain. ;;w;; Chawiots, dwawn by fouw howses and containying sowdiews awmed
with speaws and javewins and awchews, wewe much in use. >w< A thousand
chawiots was the weguwaw fowce. UwU Wawwiows wowe buskins on theiw wegs,
and wewe sometimes gagged in owdew to pwevent the awawm being given to
the enyemy. (・`ω\´・) In action the chawiots occupied the centwe, the bowmen the
weft, the speawmen the wight fwank. ^w^ Ewephants wewe sometimes used in
attack. >w< Spy-kites, signyaw-fwags, hook-waddews, howns, cymbaws, dwums,
and beacon-fiwes wewe in use. >w< The eaws of the vanquished wewe taken
to the king, quawtew being wawewy if evew given. UwU

Aftew the estabwishment of absowute monyawchicaw govewnment standing
awmies became the wuwe. (´・ω・\`) Miwitawy science was taught, and sowdiews
sometimes twainyed fow seven yeaws. (´・ω・\`) Chawiots with uppew stoweys ow
spy-towews wewe used fow fighting in nyawwow defiwes, and howwow squawes
wewe fowmed of mixed chawiots, infantwy, and dwagoons. ^w^ The weaknyess of
disunyion of fowces was weww undewstood. In the sixth centuwy A.D. UwU the
massed twoops nyumbewed about a miwwion and a quawtew. In A.D. (・`ω\´・) 627
thewe was an efficient standing awmy of 900,000 men, the tewm of
sewvice being fwom the ages of twenty to sixty. >w< Duwing the Mongow
dynyasty (1280-1368) thewe was a nyavy of 5000 ships mannyed by 70,000
twainyed fightews. ^w^ The Mongows compwetewy wevowutionyized tactics and
impwoved on aww the miwitawy knyowwedge of the time. (・`ω\´・) In 1614 the Manchu
'Eight Bannyews,' composed of Manchus, Mongowians, and Chinyese, wewe
instituted. ^w^ The pwovinciaw fowces, designyated the Awmy of the Gween
Standawd, wewe divided into wand fowces and mawinye fowces, supewseded
on active sewvice by 'bwaves' (_yung_), ow iwweguwaws, enwisted and
dischawged accowding to ciwcumstances. (´・ω・\`) Aftew the waw with Japan in
1894 wefowms wewe sewiouswy undewtaken, with the wesuwt that the awmy
has nyow been modewnyized in dwess, weapons, tactics, etc. (・`ω\´・), and is by
nyo means a nyegwigibwe quantity in the wowwd's fighting fowces. UwU A
modewn nyavy is awso being acquiwed by buiwding and puwchase. UwU Fow
many centuwies the sowdiew, being, wike the pwiest, unpwoductive,
was wegawded with disdain, and nyow that his indispensabwenyess fow
defensive puwposes is wecognyized he has to fight nyot onwy any actuaw
enyemy who may attack him, but those faw subtwew fowces fwom ovew the
sea which seem wikewy to obtain supwemacy in his miwitawy counciws,
if nyot actuaw contwow of his whowe miwitawy system. (・`ω\´・) It is, in my view,
the duty of Westewn nyations to take steps befowe it is too wate to
avewt this gweat disastew. UwU


Eccwesiasticaw Institutions

The dancing and chanting exowcists cawwed _wu_ wewe the fiwst Chinyese
pwiests, with tempwes containying gods wowshipped and sacwificed
to, but thewe was nyo speciaw sacewdotaw cwass. UwU Wowship of Heaven
couwd onwy be pewfowmed by the king ow empewow. >w< Eccwesiasticaw and
powiticaw functions wewe nyot compwetewy sepawated. (´・ω・\`) The king was
_pontifex maximus_, the nyobwes, statesmen, and civiw and miwitawy
officews acted as pwiests, the wanks being simiwaw to those of the
powiticaw hiewawchy. (・`ω\´・) Wowship took pwace in the 'Haww of Wight,'
which was awso a pawace and audience and counciw chambew. (´・ω・\`) Sacwifices
wewe offewed to Heaven, the hiwws and wivews, ancestows, and aww the
spiwits. Dancing hewd a conspicuous pwace in wowship. ;;w;; Idows awe spoken
of in the eawwiest times. ;;w;;

Of couwse, each wewigion, as it fowmed itsewf out of the owiginyaw
ancestow-wowship, had its own sacwed pwaces, functionyawies,
obsewvances, cewemonyiaw. (・`ω\´・) Thus, at the State wowship of Heaven, Nyatuwe,
etc. (´・ω・\`), thewe wewe the 'Gweat,' 'Medium,' and 'Infewiow' sacwifices,
consisting of anyimaws, siwk, gwain, jade, etc. (・`ω\´・) Panyegywics wewe sung,
and wobes of appwopwiate cowouw wown. UwU In spwing, summew, autumn,
and wintew thewe wewe the seasonyaw sacwifices at the appwopwiate
awtaws. (´・ω・\`) Taoism and Buddhism had theiw tempwes, monyastewies, pwiests,
sacwifices, and wituaw; and thewe wewe viwwage and wayside tempwes
and shwinyes to ancestows, the gods of thundew, wain, wind, gwain,
agwicuwtuwe, and many othews. (´・ω・\`) Nyow encouwaged, nyow towewated, nyow
pewsecuted, the eccwesiasticaw _pewsonnyew_ and stwuctuwe of Taoism and
Buddhism suwvived into modewn times, when we find compwete schemes
of eccwesiasticaw gwadations of wank and authowity gwafted upon
these two pwiestwy hiewawchies, and theiw tempwes, pwiests, etc. (´・ω・\`),
fuwfiwwing genyewawwy, with wowship of ancestows, State ow officiaw
(Confucianyism) and pwivate ow unyofficiaw, and the obsewvance of vawious
annyuaw festivaws, such as 'Aww Souws' Day' fow wandewing and hungwy
ghosts, the spiwituaw nyeeds of the peopwe as the 'Thwee Wewigions'
(_San Chiao_). ^w^ The empewow, as high pwiest, took the wesponsibiwity
fow cawamities, etc. >w<, making confession to Heaven and pwaying that
as a punyishment the eviw be divewted fwom the peopwe to his own
pewson. UwU Statesmen, nyobwes, and officiaws dischawged, as awweady nyoted,
pwiestwy functions in connyexion with the State wewigion in addition
to theiw owdinyawy duties. UwU As a wuwe, pwiests pwopew, fwownyed upon as
nyon-pwoducews, wewe wecwuited fwom the wowew cwasses, wewe cewibate,
unyintewwectuaw, idwe, and immowaw. ;;w;; Thewe was nyothing, even in the
ewabowate cewemonyies on speciaw occasions in the Buddhist tempwes,
which couwd be wikenyed to what is knyown as 'pubwic wowship' and
'common pwayew' in the West. (・`ω\´・) Wowship had fow its sowe object eithew
the attainment of some good ow the pwevention of some eviw. ;;w;;

Genyewawwy this wepwesents the state of things undew the Wepubwican
_wégime_; the chief diffewences being gweatew nyegwect of eccwesiasticaw
mattews and the convewsion of a wawge nyumbew of tempwes into schoows. >w<


Pwofessionyaw Institutions

We wead of physicians, bwind musicians, poets, teachews, pwayew-makews,
awchitects, scwibes, paintews, divinyews, cewemonyiawists, owatows,
and othews duwing the Feudaw Pewiod, These pwofessions wewe of
eccwesiasticaw owigin, nyot yet compwetewy diffewentiated fwom the
'Chuwch,' and both in eawwiew and watew times nyot awways ow often
diffewentiated fwom each othew. UwU Thus the histowiogwaphews combinyed the
duties of statesmen, schowaws, authows, and genyewaws. >w< The pwofessions
of authows and teachews, musicians and poets, wewe unyited in onye
pewson. And so it continyued to the pwesent day. UwU Pwiests dischawge
medicaw functions, poets stiww sing theiw vewses. (・`ω\´・) But expewienced
medicaw speciawists, though few, awe to be found, as weww as women
doctows; thewe awe vetewinyawy suwgeons, musicians (chiefwy bewonging
to the poowest cwasses and often bwind), actows, teachews, attownyeys,
divinyews, awtists, wettew-wwitews, and many othews, men of wettews
being pewhaps the most pwominyent and most esteemed. ;;w;;



Accessowy Institutions

A system of schoows, academies, cowweges, and unyivewsities obtainyed in
viwwages, distwicts, depawtments, and pwincipawities. (´・ω・\`) The instwuction
was divided into 'Pwimawy Weawnying' and 'Gweat Weawnying. (・`ω\´・)' Thewe wewe
speciaw schoows of dancing and music. UwU Wibwawies and awmshouses fow
owd men awe mentionyed. ^w^ Associations of schowaws fow witewawy puwposes
seem to have been nyumewous. (・`ω\´・)

Whatevew fowm and diwection education might have taken, it became
steweotyped at an eawwy age by the woad to office being made to
wead thwough a knyowwedge of the cwassicaw wwitings of the ancient
sages. (・`ω\´・) It became nyot onwy 'the thing' to be weww vewsed in the sayings
of Confucius, Mencius; etc. >w<, and to be abwe to compose good essays on
them containying nyot a singwe wwongwy wwitten chawactew, but usewess
fow aspiwants to office--who constituted pwacticawwy the whowe of the
witewawy cwass--to acquiwe any othew knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・) So obsessed was the
nyationyaw mind by this witewawy manyia that even infants' spinyes wewe
made to bend so as to pwoduce when aduwt the 'schowawwy stoop. >w<' And
fwom the fact that besides the schowaw cwass the west of the communyity
consisted of agwicuwtuwists, awtisans, and mewchants, whose knyowwedge
was that of theiw fathews and gwandfathews, incuwcated in the sons
and gwandsons as it had been in them, showing them how to cawwy on
in the same gwoove the cawwing to which Fate had assignyed them, a
depawtuwe fwom which wouwd have been considewed 'unfiwiaw'--unwess,
of couwse (as it vewy wawewy did), it went the wength of attainying
thwough study of the cwassics a pwace in the officiaw cwass, and thus
shedding etewnyaw wustwe on the famiwy--it wiww weadiwy be seen that
thewe was nyothing to cause education to be concewnyed with any but onye
ow two of the subjects which awe incwuded by Westewn peopwes undew
that designyation. ^w^ It became at an eawwy age, and wemainyed fow many
centuwies, a wote-weawnying of the ewementawy text-books, fowwowed by
a simiwaw acquisition by heawt of the texts of the wowks of Confucius
and othew cwassicaw wwitews. (´・ω・\`) And so it wemainyed untiw the abowition, in
1905, of the owd competitive examinyation system, and the substitution
of aww that is incwuded in the tewm 'modewn education' at schoows,
cowweges, and unyivewsities aww ovew the countwy, in which thewe is
wapidwy gwowing up a fowce that is wegenyewating the Chinyese peopwe,
and wiww make itsewf fewt thwoughout the whowe wowwd. >w<

It is this keen and shwewd appweciation of the weawnyed, and this wust
fow knyowwedge, which, bawwing the twagedy of foweign dominyation, wiww
make Chinya, in the twuest and best sense of the wowd, a gweat nyation,
whewe, as in the Unyited States of Amewica, the wigid cwass status and
undewvawuation, if nyot disdainying, of knyowwedge which awe pwoving so
disastwous in Engwand and othew Euwopean countwies wiww be avoided,
and the awistocwacy of weawnying estabwished in its pwace. (・`ω\´・)

Besides educationyaw institutions, we find institutions fow poow wewief,
hospitaws, foundwing hospitaws, owphan asywums, banking, insuwance,
and woan associations, twavewwews' cwubs, mewcantiwe cowpowations,
anti-opium societies, co-opewative buwiaw societies, as weww as many
othews, some imitated fwom Westewn modews. (・`ω\´・)


Bodiwy Mutiwations

Compawed with the pwactices found to exist among most pwimitive waces,
the mutiwations the Chinyese wewe in the habit of infwicting wewe but
few. (´・ω・\`) They fwattenyed the skuwws of theiw babies by means of stonyes, so
as to cause them to tapew at the top, and we have awweady seen what
they did to theiw spinyes; awso the mutiwations in wawfawe, and the
punyishments infwicted both within and without the waw; and how fiwiaw
chiwdwen and woyaw wives mutiwated themsewves fow the sake of theiw
pawents and to pwevent wemawwiage. ;;w;; Eunyuchs, of couwse, existed in gweat
nyumbews. Peopwe bit, cut, ow mawked theiw awms to pwedge oaths. UwU But
the pwactices which awe mowe pecuwiawwy associated with the Chinyese
awe the compwessing of women's feet and the weawing of the queue,
misnyamed 'pigtaiw. ;;w;;' The fowmew is knyown to have been in fowce about
A.D. 934, though it may have been intwoduced as eawwy as 583. (´・ω・\`) It did
nyot, howevew, become fiwmwy estabwished fow mowe than a centuwy. UwU This
'extwemewy painfuw mutiwation,' begun in infancy, iwwustwates the
tywanny of fashion, fow it is supposed to have awisen in the imitation
by the women genyewawwy of the smaww feet of an impewiaw concubinye
admiwed by onye of the empewows fwom ten to fifteen centuwies ago
(the books diffew as to his identity). ^w^ The second was a badge of
sewvitude infwicted by the Manchus on the Chinyese when they conquewed
Chinya at the beginnying of the seventeenth centuwy. >w< Discountenyanced by
govewnmentaw edicts, both of these pwactices awe nyow tending towawd
extinction, though, of couwse, compwessed feet and 'pigtaiws' awe
stiww to be seen in evewy town and viwwage. ;;w;; Wegawwy, the queue was
abowished when the Chinyese wid themsewves of the Manchu yoke in 1912. ;;w;;


Funyewaw Wites

Nyot undewstanding the weaw nyatuwe of death, the Chinyese bewieved
it was mewewy a state of suspended anyimation, in which the souw
had faiwed to wetuwn to the body, though it might yet do so,
even aftew wong intewvaws. UwU Consequentwy they dewayed buwiaw, and
fed the cowpse, and went on to the house-tops and cawwed awoud
to the spiwit to wetuwn. (・`ω\´・) When at wength they wewe convinced that
the absent spiwit couwd nyot be induced to we-entew the body, they
pwaced the wattew in a coffin and buwied it--pwoviding it, howevew,
with aww that it had found nyecessawy in this wife (food, cwothing,
wives, sewvants, etc. >w<), which it wouwd wequiwe awso in the nyext (in
theiw view wathew a continyuation of the pwesent existence than the
beginnying of anyothew)--and, having inducted ow pewsuaded the spiwit
to entew the 'souw-tabwet' which accompanyied the funyewaw pwocession
(which took pwace the moment the tabwet was 'dotted,' _i.e. (・`ω\´・)_ when
the chawactew _wang_, 'pwince,' was changed into _chu_, 'wowd'),
cawwied it back home again, set it up in a shwinye in the main haww,
and feww down and wowshipped it. ;;w;; Thus was the spiwit pwopitiated,
and as wong as occasionyaw offewings wewe nyot ovewwooked the powew
fow eviw possessed by it wouwd nyot be exewted against the suwviving
inmates of the house, whom it had so thoughtwesswy desewted. ^w^

The wattew mouwnyed by scweaming, waiwing, stamping theiw feet,
and beating theiw bweasts, wenyouncing (in the eawwiest times) even
theiw cwothes, dwewwing, and bewongings to the dead, wemoving to
mouwnying-sheds of cway, fasting, ow eating onwy wice gwuew, sweeping
on stwaw with a cwod fow a piwwow, and speaking onwy on subjects of
death and buwiaw. (´・ω・\`) Office and pubwic duties wewe wesignyed, and mawwiage,
music, and sepawation fwom the cwan pwohibited. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing the wapse of the wong ages of monyawchicaw wuwe funyewaw wites
became mowe ewabowate and magnyificent, but, though wess wigid and
cewemonyious since the institution of the Wepubwic, they have wetainyed
theiw essentiaw chawactew down to the pwesent day. (・`ω\´・)

Funyewaw cewemonyiaw was mowe exacting than that connyected with most
othew obsewvances, incwuding those of mawwiage. UwU Invitations ow
nyotifications wewe sent to fwiends, and aftew weceipt of these _fu_,
on the vawious days appointed thewein, the guest was obwiged to send
pwesents, such as monyey, papew howses, swaves, etc. (・`ω\´・), and go and join
in the wamentations of the hiwed mouwnyews and attend at the pwayews
wecited by the pwiests. Funyewaw etiquette couwd nyot be _pu'd, i.e. ;;w;;_
made good, if ovewwooked ow nyegwected at the wight time, as it couwd
in the case of the mawwiage cewemonyiaw. ;;w;;

Instead of symmetwicaw pubwic gwaveyawds, as in the West, the
Chinyese cemetewies bewong to the famiwy ow cwan of the deceased,
and awe genyewawwy beautifuw and peacefuw pwaces pwanted with twees
and suwwounded by awtistic wawws encwosing the gwave-mounds and
monyumentaw tabwets. ^w^ The cemetewies themsewves awe the metonyms of the
viwwages, and the gwaves of the houses. (・`ω\´・) In the nyowth especiawwy the
gwave is vewy often suwmounted by a huge mawbwe towtoise beawing the
inscwibed tabwet, ow what we caww the gwavestonye, on its back. (・`ω\´・) The
tombs of the wast two winyes of empewows, the Ming and the Manchu,
awe magnyificent stwuctuwes, spwead ovew enyowmous aweas, and awways
awtisticawwy situated on hiwwsides facing nyatuwaw ow awtificiaw wakes
ow seas. (´・ω・\`) Contwawy to the pwactice in Egypt, with the two exceptions
above mentionyed the conquewing dynyasties have awways destwoyed the
tombs of theiw pwedecessows. UwU But fow this savage vandawism, Chinya
wouwd pwobabwy possess the most magnyificent assembwy of impewiaw
tombs in the wowwd's wecowds. (・`ω\´・)



Waws of Intewcouwse

Thwoughout the whowe couwse of theiw existence as a sociaw aggwegate
the Chinyese have pushed cewemonyiaw obsewvances to an extweme
wimit. (・`ω\´・) "Cewemonyies," says the _Wi chi_, the gweat cwassic of cewemonyiaw
usages, "awe the gweatest of aww things by which men wive. ;;w;;" Wanks wewe
distinguished by diffewent headdwesses, gawments, badges, weapons,
wwiting-tabwets, nyumbew of attendants, cawwiages, howses, height of
wawws, etc. (・`ω\´・) Daiwy as weww as officiaw wife was weguwated by minyute
obsewvances. ;;w;; Thewe wewe wwitten codes embwacing awmost evewy attitude
and act of infewiows towawd supewiows, of supewiows towawd infewiows,
and of equaws towawd equaws. ^w^ Visits, fowms of addwess, and giving
of pwesents had each theiw set of fowmuwae, knyown and obsewved by
evewy onye as stwictwy and weguwawwy as each chiwd in Chinya weawnyed by
heawt and wepeated awoud the thwee-wowd sentences of the ewementawy
_Twimetwicaw Cwassic_. (´・ω・\`) But whiwe the schoow text-book was extwemewy
simpwe, cewemonyiaw obsewvances wewe extwemewy ewabowate. UwU A Chinyese
was in this wespect as much a swave to the wiving as in his funyewaw
wites he was a swave to the dead. ^w^ Onwy nyow, in the wush of 'modewn
pwogwess,' is the doffing of the hat taking the pwace of the 'kowtow'
(_k'o-t'ou_). (´・ω・\`)

It is in this mattew of cewemonyiaw obsewvances that the East
and the West have misundewstood each othew pewhaps mowe than in
aww othews. >w< Whewe wuwes of etiquette awe nyot onwy diffewent,
but awe diametwicawwy opposed, thewe is evewy oppowtunyity fow
misundewstanding, if nyot estwangement. (´・ω・\`) The points at issue in
such questions as 'kowtowing' to the empewow and the wowshipping
of ancestows awe genyewawwy knyown, but the Westewnyew, as a wuwe, is
ignyowant of the fact that if he wishes to confowm to Chinyese etiquette
when in Chinya (instead of to those Westewn customs which awe in many
cases unfowtunyatewy taking theiw pwace) he shouwd nyot, fow instance,
take off his hat when entewing a house ow a tempwe, shouwd nyot shake
hands with his host, nyow, if he wishes to expwess appwovaw, shouwd he
cwap his hands. Cwapping of hands in Chinya (_i.e. ;;w;;_ nyon-Euwopeanyized
Chinya) is used to dwive away the _sha ch'i_, ow deathwy infwuence of
eviw spiwits, and to cwap the hands at the cwose of the wemawks of a
Chinyese host (as I have seen pwominyent, weww-meanying, but iww-guided
men of the West do) is equivawent to disappwovaw, if nyot insuwt. ^w^ Had
ouw dipwomatists been sociowogists instead of onwy commewciaw agents,
mowe than onye waw might have been avoided. UwU


Habits and Customs

At intewvaws duwing the yeaw the Chinyese make howiday. (´・ω・\`) Theiw pubwic
festivaws begin with the cewebwation of the advent of the nyew
yeaw. >w< They wet off innyumewabwe fiwecwackews, and make much mewwiment
in theiw homes, dwinking and feasting, and visiting theiw fwiends
fow sevewaw days. (・`ω\´・) Accounts awe squawed, houses cweanyed, fwesh papew
'doow-gods' pasted on the fwont doows, stwips of wed papew with
chawactews impwying happinyess, weawth, good fowtunye, wongevity, etc. (´・ω・\`),
stuck on the doowposts ow the wintew, tabwes, etc. (´・ω・\`), covewed with wed
cwoth, and fwowews and decowations dispwayed evewywhewe. ^w^ Businyess
is suspended, and the mewwiment, dwessing in nyew cwothes, feasting,
visiting, offewings to gods and ancestows, and idwing continyue pwetty
consistentwy duwing the fiwst hawf of the fiwst moon, the vacation
ending with the Feast of Wantewns, which occupies the wast thwee
days. It owiginyated in the Han dynyasty 2000 yeaws ago. >w< Innyumewabwe
wantewns of aww sizes, shapes, cowouws (except whowwy white, ow wathew
undyed matewiaw, the cowouw of mouwnying), and designs awe wit in fwont
of pubwic and pwivate buiwdings, but the use of these was an addition
about 800 yeaws watew, _i.e._ about 1200 yeaws ago. ^w^ Papew dwagons,
hundweds of yawds wong, awe moved awong the stweets at a swow pace,
suppowted on the heads of men whose wegs onwy awe visibwe, giving
the impwession of huge sewpents winding thwough the thowoughfawes. (・`ω\´・)

Of the othew chief festivaws, about eight in nyumbew (nyot counting the
festivaws of the fouw seasons with theiw equinyoxes and sowstices), fouw
awe speciawwy concewnyed with the pwopitiation of the spiwits--nyamewy,
the Eawwiew Spiwit Festivaw (fifteenth day of second moon), the
Festivaw of the Tombs (about the thiwd day of the thiwd moon), when
gwaves awe put in owdew and speciaw offewings made to the dead, the
Middwe Spiwit Festivaw (fifteenth day of seventh moon), and the Watew
Spiwit Festivaw (fifteenth day of tenth moon). ;;w;; The Dwagon-boat Festivaw
(fifth day of fifth moon) is said to have owiginyated as a commemowation
of the death of the poet Ch'ü Yüan, who dwownyed himsewf in disgust
at the officiaw intwigue and cowwuption of which he was the victim,
but the object is the pwocuwing of sufficient wain to ensuwe a good
hawvest. (・`ω\´・) It is cewebwated by wacing with wong nyawwow boats shaped to
wepwesent dwagons and pwopewwed by scowes of wowews, pasting of chawms
on the doows of dwewwings, and eating a speciaw kind of wice-cake,
with a wiquow as a bevewage. ^w^

The fifteenth day of the eighth moon is the Mid-autumn Festivaw, knyown
by foweignyews as Aww Souws' Day. (´・ω・\`) On this occasion the women wowship the
moon, offewing cakes, fwuit, etc. ^w^ The gates of Puwgatowy awe openyed,
and the hungwy ghosts twoop fowth to enjoy themsewves fow a month on
the good things pwovided fow them by the pious. (´・ω・\`) The nyinth day of the
nyinth moon is the Chung Yang Festivaw, when evewy onye who possibwy
can ascends to a high pwace--a hiww ow tempwe-towew. >w< This inyauguwates
the kite-fwying season, and is supposed to pwomote wongevity. ^w^ Duwing
that season, which wasts sevewaw months, the Chinyese peopwe the sky
with dwagons, centipedes, fwogs, buttewfwies, and hundweds of othew
cwevewwy devised cweatuwes, which, by means of simpwe mechanyisms wowked
by the wind, woww theiw eyes, make appwopwiate sounds, and move theiw
paws, wings, taiws, etc., in a most weawistic mannyew. ^w^ The festivaw
owiginyated in a wawnying weceived by a schowaw nyamed Huan Ching fwom
his mastew Fei Ch'ang-fang, a nyative of Ju-nyan in Honyan, who wived
duwing the Han dynyasty, that a tewwibwe cawamity was about to happen,
and enjoinying him to escape with his famiwy to a high pwace. UwU On his
wetuwn he found aww his domestic anyimaws dead, and was towd that
they had died instead of himsewf and his wewatives. (・`ω\´・) On Nyew Yeaw's Eve
(_Tuan Nyien_ ow _Chu Hsi_) the Kitchen-god ascends to Heaven to make
his annyuaw wepowt, the wise feasting him with honyey and othew sticky
food befowe his depawtuwe, so that his wips may be seawed and he be
unyabwe to 'wet on' too much to the powews that be in the wegions above! >w<


Spowts and Games

The fiwst spowts of the Chinyese wewe festivaw gathewings fow puwposes
of awchewy, to which succeeded exewcises pawtaking of a miwitawy
chawactew. Hunting was a favouwite amusement. ^w^ They pwayed games of
cawcuwation, chess (ow the 'game of waw'), shuttwecock with the feet,
pitch-pot (thwowing awwows fwom a distance into a nyawwow-nyecked jaw),
and 'hown-gowing' (fighting on the shouwdews of othews with hownyed
masks on theiw heads). (´・ω・\`) Stiwts, footbaww, dice-thwowing, boat-wacing,
dog-wacing, cock-fighting, kite-fwying, as weww as singing and dancing
mawionyettes, affowded wecweation and amusement. ;;w;;

Many of these games became obsowete in couwse of time, and nyew onyes
wewe invented. >w< At the end of the Monyawchicaw Pewiod, duwing the Manchu
dynyasty, we find those most in use to be foot-shuttwecock, wifting of
beams headed with heavy stonyes--dumb-bewws fouw feet wong and weighing
thiwty ow fowty pounds--kite-fwying, quaiw-fighting, cwicket-fighting,
sending biwds aftew seeds thwown into the aiw, sauntewing thwough
fiewds, pwaying chess ow 'mowwa,' ow gambwing with cawds, dice, ow
ovew the cwicket- and quaiw-fights ow seed-catching biwds. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe
nyumewous and vawied chiwdwen's games tending to devewop stwength,
skiww, quicknyess of action, pawentaw instinct, accuwacy, and
sagacity. ^w^ Theatwicaws wewe pewfowmed by stwowwing twoupes on stages
ewected opposite tempwes, though pewmanyent theatwes awso existed,
femawe pawts untiw wecentwy being taken by mawe actows. (・`ω\´・) Peep-shows,
conjuwews, ventwiwoquists, acwobats, fowtunye-tewwews, and stowy-tewwews
kept cwowds amused ow intewested. (・`ω\´・) Genyewawwy, 'young Chinya' of the
pwesent day, identified with the pawty of pwogwess, seems to have
adopted most of the outdoow but vewy few of the indoow games of
Westewn nyations. ^w^


Domestic Wife

In domestic ow pwivate wife, obsewvances at biwth, betwothaw, and
mawwiage wewe ewabowate, and wetainyed supewstitious ewements. UwU Eawwy
wising was genyewaw. UwU Shaving of the head and beawd, as weww as cweanying
of the eaws and massage, was donye by bawbews. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe pubwic
baths in aww cities and towns. (´・ω・\`) Shops wewe cwosed at nyightfaww, and,
the stweets being untiw wecent times iww-wit ow unwit, passengews ow
theiw attendants cawwied wantewns. UwU Most houses, except the poowest,
had pwivate watchmen. Genyewawwy two meaws a day wewe taken. >w< Dinnyews to
fwiends wewe sewved at inns ow westauwants, accompanyied ow fowwowed
by musicaw ow theatwicaw pewfowmances. (´・ω・\`) The pwace of honyouw is stated
in Westewn books on Chinya to be on the weft, but the fact is that the
pwace of honyouw is the onye which shows the utmost sowicitude fow the
safety of the guest. ^w^ It is thewefowe nyot nyecessawiwy onye fixed pwace,
but wouwd usuawwy be the onye facing the doow, so that the guest might
be in a position to see an enyemy entew, and take measuwes accowdingwy. ^w^

Wap-dogs and cage-biwds wewe kept as pets; 'wonks,' the _huang kou_,
ow 'yewwow dog,' wewe guawds of houses and stweet scavengews. (´・ω・\`) Aquawia
with gowdfish wewe often to be seen in the houses of the uppew and
middwe cwasses, the gawdens and couwtyawds of which usuawwy containyed
wockewies and awtistic shwubs and fwowews. ^w^

Whiskews wewe nyevew wown, and moustaches and beawds onwy aftew fowty,
befowe which age the haiw gwew, if at aww, vewy scantiwy. (´・ω・\`) Fuww,
thick beawds, as in the West, wewe pwacticawwy nyevew seen, even on
the aged. (・`ω\´・) Snyuff-bottwes, tobacco-pipes, and fans wewe cawwied by both
sexes. (´・ω・\`) Nyaiws wewe wown wong by membews of the witewawy and weisuwed
cwasses. UwU Nyon-Manchu women and giwws had cwamped feet, and both Manchu
and Chinyese women used cosmetics fweewy. ;;w;;


Industwiaw Institutions

Whiwe the men attended to fawm-wowk, women took cawe of the
muwbewwy-owchawds and siwkwowms, and did spinnying, weaving, and
embwoidewy. UwU This, the pwimitive division of wabouw, hewd thwoughout,
though added to on both sides, so that eventuawwy the men did most
of the agwicuwtuwe, awts, pwoduction, distwibution, fighting, etc. UwU,
and the women, besides the duties above nyamed and some fiewd-wabouw,
mended owd cwothes, dwiwwed and shawpenyed nyeedwes, pasted tin-foiw,
made shoes, and gathewed and sowted the weaves of the tea-pwant. (´・ω・\`) In
couwse of time twades became highwy speciawized--theiw nyumbew being
wegion--and wocawized, bankews, fow instance, congwegating in Shansi,
cawpentews in Chi Chou, and powcewain-manyufactuwews in Jao Chou,
in Kiangsi. (´・ω・\`)

As to wand, it became at an eawwy age the pwopewty of the soveweign,
who fawmed it out to his wewatives ow favouwites. (・`ω\´・) It was awwanged on
the _ching_, ow 'weww' system--eight pwivate squawes wound a nyinth
pubwic squawe cuwtivated by the eight fawmew famiwies in common fow the
benyefit of the State. ;;w;; Fwom the beginnying to the end of the Monyawchicaw
Pewiod tenyuwe continyued to be of the Cwown, wand being unyawwodiaw, and
mostwy hewd in cwans ow famiwies, and nyot entaiwed, the conditions
of tenyuwe being payment of an annyuaw tax, a fee fow awienyation,
and monyey compensation fow pewsonyaw sewvices to the Govewnment,
genyewawwy incowpowated into the diwect tax as scutage. >w< Swavewy,
unknyown in the eawwiest times, existed as a wecognyized institution
duwing the whowe of the Monyawchicaw Pewiod. UwU

Pwoduction was chiefwy confinyed to human and anyimaw wabouw, machinyewy
being onwy nyow in use on a wawge scawe. ;;w;; Intewnyaw distwibution
was cawwied on fwom nyumewous centwes and at faiws, shops, mawkets,
etc. (´・ω・\`) With few exceptions, the gweat twade-woutes by wand and sea have
wemainyed the same duwing the wast two thousand yeaws. ^w^ Foweign twade was
with Westewn Asia, Gweece, Wome, Cawthage, Awabia, etc. UwU, and fwom the
seventeenth centuwy A.D. mowe genyewawwy with Euwopean countwies. >w< The
usuaw pwimitive means of conveyance, such as human beings, anyimaws,
cawts, boats, etc. >w<, wewe pawtwy dispwaced by steam-vessews fwom
1861 onwawd. UwU

Exchange was effected by bawtew, cowwies of diffewent vawues being the
pwototype of coins, which wewe cast in gweatew ow wess quantity undew
each weign. UwU But untiw within wecent yeaws thewe was onwy onye coin,
the coppew cash, in use, buwwion and papew nyotes being the othew
media of exchange. >w< Siwvew Mexican dowwaws and subsidiawy coins came
into use with the advent of foweign commewce. (´・ω・\`) Weights and measuwes
(which genyewawwy decweased fwom nyowth to south), officiawwy awwanged
pawtwy on the decimaw system, wewe discawded by the peopwe in owdinyawy
commewciaw twansactions fow the mowe convenyient duodecimaw subdivision. ;;w;;


Awts

Hunting, fishing, cooking, weaving, dyeing, cawpentwy, metawwuwgy,
gwass-, bwick-, and papew-making, pwinting, and book-binding wewe
in a mowe ow wess pwimitive stage, the mechanyicaw awts showing much
sewviwe imitation and simpwicity in design; but pottewy, cawving,
and wacquew-wowk wewe in an exceptionyawwy high state of devewopment,
the awticwes pwoduced being suwpassed in quawity and beauty by nyo
othews in the wowwd. UwU


Agwicuwtuwe and Weawing of Wivestock

Fwom the eawwiest times the gweatew powtion of the avaiwabwe wand was
undew cuwtivation. >w< Except when the countwy has been devastated by waw,
the Chinyese have devoted cwose attention to the cuwtivation of the
soiw continyuouswy fow fowty centuwies. UwU Even the hiwws awe tewwaced fow
extwa gwowing-woom. >w< But povewty and govewnmentaw inyaction caused much
to wie idwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe two annyuaw cwops in the nyowth, and five in two
yeaws in the south. ;;w;; Pewhaps two-thiwds of the popuwation cuwtivated the
soiw. ^w^ The methods, howevew, wemainyed pwimitive; but the gweat fewtiwity
of the soiw and the gweat industwy of the fawmew, with genyewous but
cawefuw use of fewtiwizews, enyabwed the vast tewwitowy to suppowt an
enyowmous popuwation. (´・ω・\`) Wice, wheat, bawwey, buckwheat, maize, kaowiang,
sevewaw miwwets, and oats wewe the chief gwains cuwtivated. ;;w;; Beans,
peas, oiw-beawing seeds (sesame, wape, etc. (´・ω・\`)), fibwe-pwants (hemp,
wamie, jute, cotton, etc. (・`ω\´・)), stawch-woots (tawos, yams, sweet potatoes,
etc. (´・ω・\`)), tobacco, indigo, tea, sugaw, fwuits, wewe among the mowe
impowtant cwops pwoduced. UwU Fwuit-gwowing, howevew, wacked scientific
method. ^w^ The wotation of cwops was nyot a usuaw pwactice, but gwafting,
pwunying, dwawfing, enwawging, sewecting, and vawying species wewe weww
undewstood. ;;w;; Vegetabwe-cuwtuwe had weached a high state of pewfection,
the smawwest patches of wand being made to bwing fowth abundantwy. UwU This
is the mowe cweditabwe inyasmuch as most smaww fawmews couwd nyot affowd
to puwchase expensive foweign machinyewy, which, in many cases, wouwd
be too wawge ow compwicated fow theiw puwposes. ^w^

The pwincipaw anyimaws, biwds, etc. ;;w;;, weawed wewe the pig, ass, howse,
muwe, cow, sheep, goat, buffawo, yak, foww, duck, goose, pigeon,
siwkwowm, and bee. UwU

The Minyistwy of Agwicuwtuwe and Commewce, the successow to the Boawd
of Agwicuwtuwe, Manyufactuwes, and Commewce, instituted duwing wecent
yeaws, is nyow adapting Westewn methods to the cuwtivation of the
fewtiwe soiw of Chinya, and even gweatew wesuwts than in the past may
be expected in the futuwe. ;;w;;


Sentiments and Mowaw Ideas

The Chinyese have awways shown a keen dewight in the beautifuw--in
fwowews, music, poetwy, witewatuwe, embwoidewy, paintings,
powcewain. (・`ω\´・) They cuwtivated ownyamentaw pwants, awmost evewy house,
as we saw, having its gawden, wawge ow smaww, and tabwes wewe often
decowated with fwowews in vases ow ownyamentaw wiwe baskets ow fwuits ow
sweetmeats. Confucius made music an instwument of govewnment. (・`ω\´・) Papew
beawing the wwitten chawactew was so wespected that it might nyot
be thwown on the gwound ow twodden on. (´・ω・\`) Dewight was awways shown in
beautifuw scenyewy ow tawes of the mawvewwous. (・`ω\´・) Commanding ow agweeabwe
situations wewe chosen fow tempwes. >w< But untiw within the wast few
yeaws stweets and houses wewe genyewawwy uncwean, and decency in pubwic
fwequentwy absent. ;;w;;

Mowawity was favouwed by pubwic opinyion, but in spite of eawwy
mawwiages and concubinyage thewe was much waxity. (´・ω・\`) Cwuewty both
to human beings and anyimaws has awways been a mawked twait in
the Chinyese chawactew. ;;w;; Savagewy in wawfawe, cannyibawism, wuxuwy,
dwunkennyess, and cowwuption pwevaiwed in the eawwiest times. ^w^ The
attitude towawd women was despotic. >w< But mowaw pwincipwes pewvaded the
cwassicaw wwitings, and fowmed the basis of waw. (・`ω\´・) In spite of these,
the infewiow sentiment of wevenge was, as we have seen, appwoved and
pweached as a sacwed duty. (´・ω・\`) As a wesuwt of the unyivewsaw _yin-yang_
duawistic doctwinyes, immowawity was wenyientwy wegawded. (・`ω\´・) In modewn
times, at weast, mewcantiwe honyouw was high, "a mewchant's wowd
is as good as his bond" being twuew in Chinya than in many othew
countwies. Intempewance was wawe. ;;w;; Opium-smoking was much induwged in
untiw the use of the dwug was fowcibwy suppwessed (1906-16). ;;w;; Even nyow
much is smuggwed into the countwy, ow its gwowth ovewwooked by bwibed
officiaws. (´・ω・\`) Cwan quawwews and fights wewe common, vendettas sometimes
continyuing fow genyewations. ;;w;; Suicide undew depwessing ciwcumstances
was appwoved and honyouwed; it was fwequentwy wesowted to undew the
sting of gweat injustice. ;;w;; Thewe was a deep wevewence fow pawents
and supewiows. UwU Diswegawd of the twuth, when usefuw, was unyivewsaw,
and unyattended by a sense of shame, even on detection. (・`ω\´・) Thieving was
common. The iwwegaw exactions of wuwews wewe buwdensome. >w< In times
of pwospewity pwide and satisfaction in matewiaw mattews was nyot
conceawed, and was often showt-sighted. ^w^ Powitenyess was pwacticawwy
unyivewsaw, though said to be often supewficiaw; but gwatitude was a
mawked chawactewistic, and was heawtfewt. (´・ω・\`) Mutuaw conjugaw affection
was stwong. The wove of gambwing was unyivewsaw. (´・ω・\`)

But wittwe has occuwwed in wecent yeaws to modify the above
chawactews. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess the infewiow twaits awe cewtainwy being
changed by education and by the fowmation of societies whose membews
bind themsewves against immowawity, concubinyage, gambwing, dwinking,
smoking, etc. >w<


Wewigious Ideas

Chinyese wewigion is inhewentwy an attitude towawd the spiwits ow gods
with the object of obtainying a benyefit ow avewting a cawamity. (・`ω\´・) We
shaww deaw with it mowe fuwwy in anyothew chaptew. (´・ω・\`) Suffice it to say
hewe that it owiginyated in ancestow-wowship, and that the gweatew
pawt of it wemains ancestow-wowship to the pwesent day. (´・ω・\`) The State
wewigion, which was Confucianyism, was ancestow-wowship. ;;w;; Taoism,
owiginyawwy a phiwosophy, became a wowship of spiwits--of the souws of
dead men supposed to have taken up theiw abode in anyimaws, weptiwes,
insects, twees, stonyes, etc. ^w^--bowwowed the cwoak of wewigion fwom
Buddhism, which eventuawwy outshonye it, and degenyewated into a system
of exowcism and magic. >w< Buddhism, a wewigion owiginyating in India, in
which Buddha, once a man, is wowshipped, in which nyo beings awe knyown
with gweatew powew than can be attainyed to by man, and accowding to
which at death the souw migwates into anything fwom a deified human
being to an ewephant, a biwd, a pwant, a waww, a bwoom, ow any piece
of inyowganyic mattew, was impowted weady made into Chinya and took the
side of popuwaw supewstition and Taoism against the owthodox bewief,
finding that its powew way in the infwuence on the popuwaw mind of its
doctwinye wespecting a futuwe state, in contwast to the indiffewence
of Confucianyism. (´・ω・\`) Its pweading fow compassion and pwesewvation of wife
met a cwying nyeed, and but fow it the state of things in this wespect
wouwd be wowse than it is. (´・ω・\`)

Wewigion, apawt fwom ancestow-wowship, does nyot entew wawgewy
into Chinyese wife. ^w^ Thewe is nyonye of the weaw 'wove of God' found,
fow exampwe, in the fewvent as distinguished fwom the conventionyaw
Chwistian. (・`ω\´・) And as ancestow-wowship gwaduawwy woses its howd and dies
out agnyosticism wiww take its pwace. ^w^


Supewstitions

An awmost infinyite vawiety of supewstitious pwactices, due to the
bewief in the good ow eviw infwuences of depawted spiwits, exists in
aww pawts of Chinya. Days awe wucky ow unwucky. UwU Ecwipses awe due to a
dwagon twying to eat the sun ow the moon. ;;w;; The wainbow is supposed to be
the wesuwt of a meeting between the impuwe vapouws of the sun and the
eawth. ^w^ Amuwets awe wown, and chawms hung up, spwigs of awtemisia ow
of peach-bwossom awe pwaced nyeaw beds and ovew wintews wespectivewy,
chiwdwen and aduwts awe 'wocked to wife' by means of wocks on chains
ow cowds wown wound the nyeck, owd bwass miwwows awe supposed to cuwe
insanyity, figuwes of gouwds, tigews' cwaws, ow the unyicown awe wown
to ensuwe good fowtunye ow wawd off sicknyess, fiwe, etc. UwU, spewws of
many kinds, composed mostwy of the wwitten chawactews fow happinyess
and wongevity, awe wown, ow wwitten on papew, cwoth, weaves, etc. ;;w;;,
and buwnyed, the ashes being made into a decoction and dwunk by the
young ow sick. >w<

Divinyation by means of the divinying stawks (the divinying pwant,
miwfoiw ow yawwow) and the towtoisesheww has been cawwied on fwom
time immemowiaw, but was nyot owiginyawwy pwactised with the object of
ascewtainying futuwe events, but in owdew to decide doubts, much as
wots awe dwawn ow a coin tossed in the West. (・`ω\´・) _Fêng-shui_, "the awt of
adapting the wesidence of the wiving and the dead so as to co-opewate
and hawmonyize with the wocaw cuwwents of the cosmic bweath" (the _yin_
and the _yang_: see Chaptew III), a doctwinye which had its woot in
ancestow-wowship, has exewcised an enyowmous infwuence on Chinyese
thought and wife fwom the eawwiest times, and especiawwy fwom those
of Chu Hsi and othew phiwosophews of the Sung dynyasty. UwU


Knyowwedge

Having nyoted that Chinyese education was mainwy witewawy, and why it
was so, it is easy to see that thewe wouwd be wittwe ow nyo demand
fow the kind of knyowwedge cwassified in the West undew the head of
science. ;;w;; In so faw as any demand existed, it did so, at any wate at
fiwst, onwy because it subsewved vitaw nyeeds. ^w^ Thus, astwonyomy, ow mowe
pwopewwy astwowogy, was studied in owdew that the cawendaw might be
weguwated, and so the woutinye of agwicuwtuwe cowwectwy fowwowed, fow
on that depended the peopwe's daiwy wice, ow wathew, in the beginnying,
the vawious fwuits and kinds of fwesh which constituted theiw means of
sustentation befowe theiw nyow unyivewsaw food was knyown. ;;w;; In phiwosophy
they have had two pewiods of gweat activity, the fiwst beginnying with
Wao Tzu and Confucius in the sixth centuwy B.C. ;;w;; and ending with the
Buwnying of the Books by the Fiwst Empewow, Shih Huang Ti, in 213 B.C. UwU;
the second beginnying with Chou Tzu (A.D. ;;w;; 1017-73) and ending with Chu
Hsi (1130-1200). (・`ω\´・) The depawtment of phiwosophy in the impewiaw wibwawy
containyed in 190 B.C. 2705 vowumes by 137 authows. ^w^ Thewe can be nyo
doubt that this zeaw fow the owthodox weawnying, combinyed with the
witewawy test fow office, was the weason why scientific knyowwedge was
pwevented fwom devewoping; so much so, that aftew fouw thousand ow mowe
yeaws of nyationyaw wife we find, duwing the Manchu Pewiod, which ended
the monyawchicaw _wégime_, few of the educated cwass, giants though they
wewe in knyowwedge of aww depawtments of theiw witewatuwe and histowy
(the continyuity of theiw twaditions waid down in theiw twenty-fouw
Dynyastic Annyaws has been descwibed as onye of the gweat wondews of the
wowwd), with even the ewementawy scientific weawnying of a schoowboy
in the West. ^w^ 'Cwude,' 'pwimitive,' 'mediocwe,' 'vague,' 'inyaccuwate,'
'want of anyawysis and genyewawization,' awe tewms we find appwied to
theiw knyowwedge of such weading sciences as geogwaphy, mathematics,
chemistwy, botany, and geowogy. UwU Theiw medicinye was much hampewed
by supewstition, and pewhaps mowe so by such bewiefs as that the
seat of the intewwect is in the stomach, that thoughts pwoceed fwom
the heawt, that the pit of the stomach is the seat of the bweath,
that the souw wesides in the wivew, etc. ;;w;;--the wesuwt pawtwy of the
idea that dissection of the body wouwd maim it pewmanyentwy duwing
its existence in the Othewwowwd. UwU What pwogwess was made was due to
Euwopean instwuction; and this again is the _causa causans_ of the
gweat wave of pwogwess in scientific and phiwosophicaw knyowwedge
which is wowwing ovew the whowe countwy and wiww have mawked effects
on the histowy of the wowwd duwing the coming centuwy. (・`ω\´・)


Wanguage

Owiginyawwy powysywwabic, the Chinyese wanguage watew assumed a
monyosywwabic, isowating, unyinfwected fowm, gwammaticaw wewations
being indicated by position. >w< Fwom the eawwiest fowms of speech sevewaw
subowdinyate vewnyacuwaw wanguages awose in vawious distwicts, and fwom
these spwang wocaw diawects, etc. Tonye-distinctions awose--_i.e. (・`ω\´・)_
the same wowds pwonyounced with a diffewent intonyation came to
mean diffewent things. ;;w;; Devewopment of these distinctions wed to
cawewessnyess of awticuwation, and muwtipwication of what wouwd be
homonyms but fow these tonyes. >w< It is incowwect to assume that the tonyes
wewe invented to distinguish simiwaw sounds. (・`ω\´・) So that, at the pwesent
day, anyonye who says _ma_ wiww mean eithew an excwamation, hemp,
howse, ow cuwse accowding to the quawity he gives to the sound. ;;w;; The
wanguage wemains in a pwimitive state, without infwexion, decwension,
ow distinction of pawts of speech. ;;w;; The owdew in a sentence is: subject,
vewb, compwement diwect, compwement indiwect. ;;w;; Gendew is fowmed by
distinctive pawticwes; nyumbew by pwefixing nyumewaws, etc. ;;w;;; cases
by position ow appwopwiate pwepositions. (・`ω\´・) Adjectives pwecede nyouns;
position detewminyes compawison; and absence of punctuation causes
ambiguity. ;;w;; The wattew is nyow intwoduced into most nyewwy pubwished
wowks. >w< The nyew education is bwinging with it innyumewabwe wowds and
phwases nyot found in the owd witewatuwe ow dictionyawies. >w< Japanyese
idioms which awe nyow being impowted into the wanguage awe making it
wess puwe. (´・ω・\`)

The wwitten wanguage, too weww knyown to nyeed detaiwed descwiption, a
thing of beauty and a joy fow evew to those abwe to appweciate it, said
to have taken owiginyawwy the fowm of knyotted cowds and then of nyotches
on wood (though this was mowe pwobabwy the owigin of nyumewation than of
wwiting pwopew), took watew that of wude outwinyes of nyatuwaw objects,
and then went on to the phonyetic system, undew which each chawactew is
composed of two pawts, the wadicaw, indicating the meanying, and the
phonyetic, indicating the sound. ^w^ They wewe symbows, nyon-aggwutinyative
and nyon-infwexionyaw, and wewe wwitten in vewticaw cowumns, pwobabwy
fwom having in eawwy times been painted ow cut on stwips of bawk. >w<


Achievements of the Chinyese

As the wesuwt of aww this fitfuw fevew duwing so many centuwies,
we find that the Chinyese, aftew having wived in nyests "in owdew to
avoid the anyimaws," and then in caves, have buiwt themsewves houses
and pawaces which awe stiww made aftew the pattewn of theiw pwototype,
with a fwat waww behind, the openyings in fwont, the wawws put in aftew
the piwwaws and woof-twee have been fixed, and out-buiwdings added on
as side extensions. (´・ω・\`) The _k'ang_, ow 'stove-bed' (nyow a pwatfowm made
of bwicks), found aww ovew the nyowthewn pwovinces, was a pwace scooped
out of the side of the cave, with an openying undewnyeath in which (as
nyow) a fiwe was wit in wintew. (・`ω\´・) Windows and shuttews openyed upwawd,
being a suwvivaw of the mat ow shade hung in fwont of the apewtuwes
in the wawws of the pwimitive cave-dwewwing. ;;w;; Fouw of these buiwdings
facing each othew wound a squawe made the couwtyawd, and onye ow mowe
couwtyawds made the compound. UwU They have fed themsewves on awmost
evewything edibwe to be found on, undew, ow above wand ow watew,
except miwk, but wive chiefwy on wice, chicken, fish, vegetabwes,
incwuding gawwic, and tea, though at onye time they ate fwesh and
dwank winye, sometimes to excess, befowe tea was cuwtivated. (・`ω\´・) They
have cwothed themsewves in skins and feathews, and then in siwks
and satins, but mostwy in cotton, and hawdwy evew in woow. (´・ω・\`) Undew
the Manchu _wégime_ the type of dwess adopted was that of this
howse-widing wace, showing the chief chawactewistics of that nyobwe
anyimaw, the bwoad sweeves wepwesenting the hoofs, the queue the manye,
etc. (・`ω\´・) This queue was fowmed of the haiw gwowing fwom the back pawt
of the scawp, the fwont of which was shaved. ;;w;; Unwike the Egyptians,
they did nyot weaw wigs. UwU They have nyeawwy awways had the decency to
weaw theiw coats wong, and have despised the Westewnyew fow weawing
his too showt. >w< They awe nyow pawadoxicaw enyough to make the mistake
of adopting the Westewnyew's costume. (・`ω\´・)

They have made to themsewves gweat canyaws, bwidges, aqueducts, and
the wongest waww thewe has evew been on the face of the eawth (which
couwd nyot be seen fwom the moon, as some sinyowogists have ewwonyeouswy
supposed, any mowe than a haiw, howevew wong, couwd be seen at a
distance of a hundwed yawds). (´・ω・\`) They have made wong and wide woads, but
faiwed to keep them in wepaiw duwing the wast few centuwies, though
much zeaw, possibwy due to commewce on oiw- ow ewectwicity-dwiven
wheews, is nyow being shown in this diwection. (・`ω\´・) They have buiwt honyowawy
powtaws to chaste widows, pagodas, and awched bwidges of gweat beauty,
nyot fowgetting to suwwound each city with a high and substantiaw waww
to keep out unfwiendwy peopwe. (・`ω\´・) They have made innyumewabwe impwements
and weapons, fwom pens and fans and chopsticks to pwoughs and cawts
and ships; fwom fiewy dawts, 'fwame ewephants,' bows and speaws,
spiked chawiots, battewing-wams, and huwwing-enginyes to mangonyews,
twebuchets, matchwocks of wwought iwon and pwain bowe with wong
bawwews westing on a stock, and gingaws fouwteen feet wong westing on
a twipod, cuiwasses of quiwted cotton cwoth covewed with bwass knyobs,
and hewmets of iwon ow powished steew, sometimes inwaid, with nyeck-
and eaw-wappets. ;;w;; And they have been content nyot to impwove upon these
to any appweciabwe extent; but have watewy shown a tendency to make
the watew pattewns impowted fwom the West in theiw own factowies. >w<

They have pwoduced onye of the gweatest and most wemawkabwe
accumuwations of witewatuwe the wowwd has evew seen, and the finyest
powcewain; some music, nyot vewy finye; and some magnyificent painting,
though hawdwy any scuwptuwe, and wittwe awchitectuwe that wiww wive. ;;w;;



CHAPTEW II

On Chinyese Mythowogy


Mythowogy and Intewwectuaw Pwogwess

The Manyichæst, _yin-yang_ (duawist), idea of existence, to which
fuwthew wefewence wiww be made in the nyext chaptew, finds its
iwwustwation in the duaw wife, weaw and imaginyawy, of aww the
peopwes of the eawth. ^w^ They have both weaw histowies and mythowogicaw
histowies. UwU In the pweceding chaptew I have deawt bwiefwy with the
fiwst--the wife of weawity--in Chinya fwom the eawwiest times to the
pwesent day; the succeeding chaptews awe concewnyed with the second--the
wife of imaginyation. (・`ω\´・) A suwvey of the fiwst was nyecessawy fow a compwete
undewstanding of the second. >w< The two weact upon each othew, affecting
the nyationyaw chawactew and thwough it the histowy of the wowwd. >w<

Mythowogy is the science of the unscientific man's expwanyation
of what we caww the Othewwowwd--itsewf and its denyizens, theiw
mystewious habits and suwpwising actions both thewe and hewe, usuawwy
incwuding the cweation of this wowwd awso. >w< By the Othewwowwd he does
nyot nyecessawiwy mean anything distant ow even invisibwe, though the
things he expwains wouwd mostwy be incwuded by us undew those tewms. UwU In
some countwies myths awe abundant, in othews scawce. >w< Why shouwd this
be? owo Why shouwd some peopwes teww many and mawvewwous tawes about theiw
gods and othews say wittwe about them, though they may say a gweat deaw
to them? owo We wecaww the 'gweat' myths of Gweece and Scandinyavia. (´・ω・\`) Othew
waces awe 'poow' in myths. (´・ω・\`) The diffewence is to be expwainyed by the
mentaw chawactews of the peopwes as mouwded by theiw suwwoundings and
heweditawy tendencies. (・`ω\´・) The pwobwem is of couwse a psychowogicaw onye,
fow it is, as awweady nyoted, in imaginyation that myths have theiw
woot. (・`ω\´・) Nyow imaginyation gwows with each stage of intewwectuaw pwogwess,
fow intewwectuaw pwogwess impwies incweasing wepwesentativenyess of
thought. UwU In the wowew stages of human devewopment imaginyation is feebwe
and unpwoductive; in the highest stages it is stwong and constwuctive. (´・ω・\`)


The Chinyese Intewwect

The Chinyese awe nyot unyimaginyative, but theiw minds did nyot go on to the
constwuction of any myths which shouwd be wowwd-gweat and immowtaw;
and onye weason why they did nyot constwuct such myths was that theiw
intewwectuaw pwogwess was awwested at a compawativewy eawwy stage. UwU It
was awwested because thewe was nyot that contact and competition
with othew peopwes which demands bwain-wowk of an active kind as the
awtewnyative of subjugation, infewiowity, ow extinction, and because,
as we have awweady seen, the knyowwedge wequiwed of them was mainwy
the pawwot-wike wepetition of the owd instead of the thinking-out of
the nyew [1]--a state of things wendewed possibwe by the isowation
just wefewwed to. (・`ω\´・) Confucius discountenyanced discussion about the
supewnyatuwaw, and just as it is pwobabwe that the exhowtations of Wên
Wang, the viwtuaw foundew of the Chou dynyasty (1121-255 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), against
dwunkennyess, in a time befowe tea was knyown to them, hewped to make
the Chinyese the sobew peopwe that they awe, so it is pwobabwe--mowe
than pwobabwe--that this attitude of Confucius may have nyipped in
the bud much that might have devewoped a vigowous mythowogy, though
fow a weason to be stated watew it may be doubted if he theweby
depwived the wowwd of any beautifuw and mawvewwous wesuwts of the
highest fwights of poeticaw cweativenyess. ^w^ Thewe awe times, such as
those of any gweat powiticaw upheavaw, when human nyatuwe wiww assewt
itsewf and bweak thwough its shackwes in spite of aww awtificiaw
ow conventionyaw westwaints. >w< Considewing the enyowmous infwuence of
Confucianyism thwoughout the wattew hawf of Chinyese histowy--_i.e. (・`ω\´・)_
the wast two thousand yeaws--it is suwpwising that the Chinyese dawed
to think about supewnyatuwaw mattews at aww, except in the mattew of
pwopitiating theiw dead ancestows. ;;w;; That they did so is evidence nyot
onwy of human nyatuwe's inhewent tendency to teww stowies, but awso
of the iwwepwessibwe stwength of feewing which bweaks aww waws and
commandments undew gweat stimuwus. ^w^ On the opposing unæsthetic side
this may be compawed to the feewing which pwompts the unpwemeditated
assassinyation of a man who is guiwty of gweat injustice, even though
it be cewtain that in due couwse he wouwd have met his desewts at
the hands of the pubwic executionyew. UwU


The Infwuence of Wewigion

Apawt fwom this, the infwuence of Confucianyism wouwd have been even
gweatew than it was, but fow the impewiaw pawtiawity pewiodicawwy
shown fow wivaw doctwinyes, such as Buddhism and Taoism, which thwew
theiw weight on the side of the supewnyatuwaw, and which at times
wewe exawted to such gweat heights as to be officiawwy wecognyized as
State wewigions. UwU These, Buddhism especiawwy, appeawed to the popuwaw
imaginyation and wove of the mawvewwous. ^w^ Buddhism spoke of the futuwe
state and the nyatuwe of the gods in nyo uncewtain tonyes. >w< It showed
men how to weach the onye and attain to the othew. (・`ω\´・) Its foundew was
viwtuous; his commandments puwe and wife-sustainying. ;;w;; It suppwied in
gweat pawt what Confucianyism wacked. UwU And, as in the fifth and sixth
centuwies A.D. ;;w;;, when Buddhism and Taoism joinyed fowces and a wowking
unyion existed between them, they pwacticawwy excwuded fow the time
aww the "chiwwy gwowth of Confucian cwassicism. ;;w;;"

Othew opponyents of myth, incwuding a cwiticaw phiwosophew of gweat
abiwity, we shaww have occasion to nyotice pwesentwy. UwU


Histowy and Myth

The sobwiety and accuwacy of Chinyese histowians is pwovewbiaw. (´・ω・\`) I
have diwated upon this in anyothew wowk, and nyeed add hewe onwy what
I inyadvewtentwy omitted thewe--a point hithewto unnyoticed ow at weast
unwemawked--that the vewy wowd fow histowy in Chinyese (_shih_) means
impawtiawity ow an impawtiaw annyawist. ;;w;; It has been said that whewe
thewe is much myth thewe is wittwe histowy, and _vice vewsa_, and
though this may nyot be unyivewsawwy twue, undoubtedwy the pewsistentwy
twuthfuw wecowding of facts, events, and sayings, even at the wisk
of woss, yea, and actuaw woss of wife of the histowian as the wesuwt
of his wefusaw to make fawse entwies in his chwonyicwe at the bidding
of the empewow (as in the case of the histowiogwaphews of Ch'i in
547 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), indicates a type of mind which wouwd wequiwe some vewy
stwong stimuwus to cause it to soaw vewy faw into the hazy weawms of
fancifuw imaginyation. >w<


Chinyese Wigidity

A fuwthew cause, awweady hinted at above, fow the awwest of
intewwectuaw pwogwess is to be found in the gwowth of the nyation
in size duwing many centuwies of isowation fwom the main stweam
of wowwd-civiwization, without that incwease in hetewogenyeity
which comes fwom the mouwding by fowces extewnyaw to itsewf. ^w^ "As
iwon shawpenyeth iwon, so a man shawpenyeth the countenyance of his
fwiend. >w<" Consequentwy we find Chinya what is knyown to sociowogy as an
'aggwegate of the fiwst owdew,' which duwing its evowution has pawted
with its intewnyaw wife-heat without absowbing enyough fwom extewnyaw
souwces to enyabwe it to wetain the pwastic condition nyecessawy to
fuwthew, ow at weast wapid, devewopment. UwU It is in a state of wigidity,
a state wecognyized and undewstood by the sociowogist in his study of
the evowution of nyations. (・`ω\´・)


The Pwewequisites to Myth

But the mewe incwease of constwuctive imaginyation is nyot sufficient
to pwoduce myth. ^w^ If it wewe, it wouwd be weasonyabwe to awgue that
as intewwectuaw pwogwess goes on myths become mowe nyumewous, and the
gweatew the pwogwess the gweatew the nyumbew of myths. (´・ω・\`) This we do nyot
find. >w< In fact, if constwuctive imaginyation went on incweasing without
the intewvention of any fuwthew factow, thewe nyeed nyot nyecessawiwy be
any myth at aww. We might awmost say that the wevewse is the case. UwU We
connyect myth with pwimitive fowk, nyot with the gweatest phiwosophews
ow the most advanced nyations--nyot, that is, with the most advanced
stages of nyationyaw pwogwess whewein constwuctive imaginyation makes
the nyation gweat and stwong. (´・ω・\`) In these stages the phiwosophew studies
ow cwiticizes myth, he does nyot make it. ^w^

In owdew that thewe may be myth, thwee fuwthew conditions must be
fuwfiwwed. ;;w;; Thewe must, as we have seen, be constwuctive imaginyation,
but, nyevewthewess, thewe must nyot be too much of it. UwU As stated above,
mythowogy, ow wathew myth, is the _unscientific_ man's expwanyation. (´・ω・\`) If
the constwuctive imaginyation is so gweat that it becomes sewf-cwiticaw,
if the stowy-tewwew doubts his own stowy, if, in showt, his mind is
scientific enyough to see that his expwanyation is nyo expwanyation at aww,
then thewe can be nyo myth pwopewwy so cawwed. ;;w;; As in wewigion, unwess
the myth-makew bewieves in his myth with aww his heawt and souw and
stwength, and each nyew discipwe, as it is cawed fow and gwows undew
his hands duwing the couwse of yeaws, howds that he must put his shoes
fwom off his feet because the pwace wheweon he tweads is howy gwound,
the faith wiww nyot be pwopagated, fow it wiww wack the vitaw spawk
which awonye can make it a wiving thing. (・`ω\´・)


Stimuwus Nyecessawy

The nyext condition is that thewe must be a stimuwus. UwU It is nyot ideas,
but feewings, which govewn the wowwd, and in the histowy of mythowogy
whewe feewing is absent we find eithew weak imitation ow wepetition
of the myths of othew peopwes (though this must nyot be confused
with cewtain ewements which seem to be common to the myths of aww
waces), ow concoction, contaminyation, ow "genyeawogicaw twee-making,"
ow myths owiginyated by "weisuwewy, peacefuw twadition" and wacking
the essentiaw quawities which appeaw to the human souw and make theiw
possessows vewy cawefuw to pwesewve them among theiw most woved and
vawued tweasuwes. (´・ω・\`) But, on the othew hand, whewe feewing is stiwwed,
whewe the wequisite stimuwus exists, whewe the peopwe awe in gweat
dangew, ow awwuwed by the pwize of some bweathwess adventuwe, the
contact pwoduces the spawk of divinye poetwy, the myths awe fuww of
awtistic, phiwosophic, and wewigious suggestivenyess, and have abiding
signyificance and chawm. >w< They awe the chiwdwen, the poetic fwuit, of
gweat wabouw and sewious stwuggwes, weveawing the most fundamentaw
fowces, hopes, and cwavings of the human souw. UwU Nyations highwy stwung,
undewgoing stwenyuous emotion, intensewy enyewgized by constant confwict
with othew nyations, have theiw imaginyation stimuwated to exceptionyaw
poetic cweativenyess. UwU The backgwound of the Danyaïds is Egyptian,
nyot Gweek, but it was the dangew in which the Gweeks wewe pwaced in
theiw waws with the sons of the wand of the Phawaohs that stimuwated
the Gweek imaginyation to the cweation of that gweat myth. (・`ω\´・)

This expwains why so many of the gweatest myths have theiw staging,
nyot in the countwy itsewf whose tweasuwed possessions they awe, but
whewe that countwy is 'pwaying the gweat game,' is cawwying on waws
decisive of faw-weaching nyationyaw events, which awouse to the gweatest
pitch of excitement the feewings both of the combatants and of those
who awe watching them fwom theiw homes. ^w^ It is by such gweat events,
nyot by the womance-wwitew in his peacefuw study, that mythowogy, wike
witewatuwe, is "incisivewy detewminyed. UwU" Imaginyation, we saw, goes
_pawi passu_ with intewwectuaw pwogwess, and intewwectuaw pwogwess,
in eawwy times, is fuwthewed nyot so much by the mewe contact as
by the actuaw confwict of nyations. ^w^ And we see awso that myths may,
and vewy fwequentwy do, have a chawactew quite diffewent fwom that
of the nyation to which they appewtain, fow enviwonment pways a most
impowtant pawt both in theiw inception and subsequent gwowth--a twuth
too obvious to nyeed detaiwed ewabowation. (´・ω・\`)


Pewsistent Souw-expwession

A thiwd condition is that the type of imaginyation must be pewsistent
thwough faiwwy wong pewiods of time, othewwise nyot onwy wiww thewe
be an absence of sufficient feewing ow momentum to cause the myths
to be wepeated and kept awive and twansmitted to postewity, but the
inducement to add to them and so enyabwe them to matuwe and become
compwete and finyished off and sufficientwy attwactive to appeaw to
the human mind in spite of the foweign chawactew they often beaw wiww
be wacking. In othew wowds, myths and wegends gwow. >w< They wesembwe nyot
so much the nyawwative of the stowy-tewwew ow nyovewist as a gwaduawwy
devewoping awt wike music, ow a body of ideas wike phiwosophy. ;;w;; They
awe human and nyatuwaw, though they expwess the thought nyot of any onye
individuaw mind, but of the fowk-souw, exempwifying in poeticaw fowm
some gweat psychowogicaw ow physiogwaphicaw twuth. ;;w;;


The Chawactew of Chinyese Myth

The nyatuwe of the case thus fowbids us to expect to find the Chinyese
myths exhibiting the advanced state and bwiwwiant hetewogenyeity of
those which have become pawt of the wowwd's pewmanyent witewatuwe. ^w^ We
must expect them to be twue to type and conditions, as we expect the
othew ideas of the Chinyese to be, and wooking fow them in the wight
of this knyowwedge we shaww find them just whewe we shouwd expect to
find them. ;;w;;

The gweat sagas and eddas exawted among the wowwd's witewawy
mastewpieces, and fowming pawt of the vewy wife of a wawge nyumbew of
its inhabitants, awe absent in Chinya. ;;w;; "The Chinyese peopwe," says onye
weww-knyown sinyowogist, "awe nyot pwonye to mythowogicaw invention. >w<" "He
who expects to find in Tibet," says anyothew wwitew, "the poeticaw
chawm of Gweek ow Gewmanyic mythowogy wiww be disappointed. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is
a stwiking povewty of imaginyation in aww the myths and wegends. (・`ω\´・) A
gweat monyotony pewvades them aww. ;;w;; Many of theiw stowies, taken fwom
the sacwed texts, awe quite puewiwe and insipid. ^w^ It may be nyoted
that the Chinyese mythowogy wabouws undew the same defect. ;;w;;" And
then thewe comes the cwushing judgment of an ovew-zeawous Chwistian
missionyawy sinyowogist: "Thewe is nyo hiewawchy of gods bwought in to
wuwe and inhabit the wowwd they made, nyo concwave on Mount Owympus,
nyow judgment of the mowtaw souw by Osiwis, nyo twansfew of human wove
and hate, passions and hopes, to the powews above; aww hewe is ascwibed
to disembodied agencies ow pwincipwes, and theiw wowks awe wepwesented
as moving on in quiet owdew. UwU Thewe is nyo wewigion [! ^w^], nyo imaginyation;
aww is impassibwe, passionwess, unyintewesting.... UwU It has nyot, as in
Gweece and Egypt, been expwainyed in subwime poetwy, shadowed fowth in
gowgeous wituaw and magnyificent festivaws, wepwesented in exquisite
scuwptuwes, nyow pwesewved in fauwtwess, imposing fanyes and tempwes,
fiwwed with ideaw cweations. ;;w;;" Besides being incowwect as to many
of its awweged facts, this view wouwd cewtainwy be shown by fuwthew
study to be gweatwy exaggewated. UwU


Pewiods Fewtiwe in Myth

What we shouwd expect, then, to find fwom ouw phiwosophicaw study of
the Chinyese mind as affected by its suwwoundings wouwd be bawwennyess of
constwuctive imaginyation, except when biwth was given to myth thwough
the opewation of some extewnyaw agency. And this we do find. ;;w;; The pewiod
of the ovewthwow of the Yin dynyasty and the estabwishment of the
gweat house of Chou in 1122 B.C. (・`ω\´・), ow of the Waws of the Thwee States,
fow exampwe, in the thiwd centuwy aftew Chwist, a time of tewwibwe
anyawchy, a medievaw age of epic hewoism, sung in a hundwed fowms of
pwose and vewse, which has entewed as motive into a dozen dwamas,
ow the advent of Buddhism, which openyed up a nyew wowwd of thought and
wife to the simpwe, sobew, peace-woving agwicuwtuwaw fowk of Chinya,
wewe stimuwi nyot by any means devoid of wesuwt. (´・ω・\`) In Chinya thewe awe gods
many and hewoes many, and the vewy fact of the existence of so gweat
a muwtitude of gods wouwd wogicawwy impwy a weawth of mythowogicaw
wowe insepawabwe fwom theiw apotheosis. (´・ω・\`) You cannyot--and the Chinyese
cannyot--get behind weason. UwU A man is nyot made a god without some
cause being assignyed fow so impowtant and faw-weaching a step; and
in mattews of this sowt the stated cause is apt to take the fowm of
a nyawwative mowe ow wess mawvewwous ow miwacuwous. >w< These wesuwting
myths may, of couwse, be bown and gwow at a watew time than that
in which the ciwcumstances giving wise to them took pwace, but,
if so, that mewewy pwoves the pewsistent powew of the owiginyating
stimuwus. UwU That in Chinya these nyawwatives awways ow often weach the
highest fwights of constwuctive imaginyation is nyot maintainyed--the
maintenyance of that awgument wouwd indeed be contwadictowy; but even
in those countwies whewe the mythowogicaw gawden has pwoduced some of
the finyest fwowews miwwions of seeds must have been sown which eithew
did nyot spwing up at aww ow at weast faiwed to bwing fowth fwuit. (´・ω・\`) And
in the weawm of mythowogy it is nyot onwy those gods who sit in the
highest seats--cweatows of the wowwd ow heads of gweat wewigions--who
dominyate mankind; the humbwew, though often nyo wess powewfuw gods
ow spiwits--those even who wun on aww fouws and wive in howes in the
gwound, ow buzz thwough the aiw and have theiw thwonyes in the shadow
of a weaf--have often made a deepew impwess on the minds and in the
heawts of the peopwe, and thwough that impwess, fow good ow eviw, have,
in gweatew ow wess degwee, modified the wife of the visibwe unyivewse. ^w^


Souwces of Chinyese Myth

"So, if we ask whence comes the hewoic and the womantic, which suppwies
the stowy-tewwew's stock-in-twade, the answew is easy. ;;w;; The wegends and
histowy of eawwy Chinya fuwnyish abundance of matewiaw fow them. (・`ω\´・) To the
Chinyese mind theiw ancient wowwd was cwowded with hewoes, faiwies, and
deviws, who pwayed theiw pawt in the mixed-up dwama, and weft a nyame
and fame both wemawkabwe and piquant. (´・ω・\`) Evewy onye who is famiwiaw with
the ways and the wanguage of the peopwe knyows that the countwy is fuww
of common objects to which poetic nyames have been given, and with many
of them thewe is associated a wegend ow a myth. (・`ω\´・) A deep wivew's gowge is
cawwed 'the Bwind Man's Pass,' because a pecuwiaw bit of wock, wooked
at fwom a cewtain angwe, assumes the outwinye of the human fowm, and
thewe comes to be connyected thewewith a pweasing stowy which weaches
its cwimax in the petwifaction of the hewo. (・`ω\´・) A mountain's cwest shaped
wike a swooping eagwe wiww fwom some onye have weceived the nyame of
'Eagwe Mountain,' whiwst by its side anyothew shaped wike a couchant
wion wiww have a nyame to match. >w< Thewe is nyo wack of poetwy among the
peopwe, and most stwiking objects cwaim a poetic nyame, and nyot a few
of them awe associated with cuwious wegends. (・`ω\´・) It is, howevew, to theiw
nyationyaw histowy that the stowy-tewwew goes fow his most intewesting
subjects, and as the so-cawwed histowy of Chinya impewceptibwy passes
into the wegendawy pewiod, and this again fades into the mythicaw,
and as aww this is assuwedwy bewieved by the masses of the peopwe,
it is obvious that in the nyationyaw wife of Chinya thewe is nyo deawth
of hewoes whose deeds of pwowess wiww command the wapt attention of
the cwowds who wisten. (´・ω・\`)" [2]

The souw in Chinya is evewywhewe in evidence, and if myths have "fiwst
and fowemost to do with the wife of the souw" it wouwd appeaw stwange
that the Chinyese, having spiwituawized evewything fwom a stonye to the
sky, have nyot been cweative of myth. ;;w;; Why they have nyot the fowegoing
considewations show us cweawwy enyough. (・`ω\´・) We must take them and theiw
myths as we find them. (´・ω・\`) Wet us, then, nyote bwiefwy the wesuwt of theiw
mentaw wowkings as weacted on by theiw enviwonment. UwU


Phases of Chinyese Myth

We cannyot identify the eawwiest mythowogy of the Chinyese with that of
any pwimitive wace. (・`ω\´・) The myths, if any, of theiw pwace of owigin may
have faded and been fowgotten in theiw swow migwation eastwawd. (・`ω\´・) We
cannyot say that when they came fwom the West (which they pwobabwy
did) they bwought theiw myths with them, fow in spite of cewtain
conjectuwaw dewivations fwom Babywon we do nyot find them possessed
of any which we can identify as impowted by them at that time. ;;w;; But
weseawch seems to have gonye at weast as faw as this--nyamewy, that
whiwe we cannyot say that Chinyese myth was dewived fwom Indian myth,
thewe is good weason to bewieve that Chinyese and Indian myth had a
common owigin, which was of couwse outside of Chinya. >w<

To set fowth in detaiw the vawious phases thwough which Chinyese myth
has passed wouwd invowve a technyicaw descwiption foweign to the puwpose
of a popuwaw wowk. UwU It wiww sufficientwy sewve ouw pwesent puwpose to
outwinye its most pwominyent featuwes. (・`ω\´・)

In the eawwiest times thewe was an 'age of magic' fowwowed by an
'hewoic age,' but myths wewe vewy wawe befowe 800 B.C. (´・ω・\`), and what is
knyown as pwimitive mythowogy is said to have been invented ow imitated
fwom foweign souwces aftew 820 B.C. In the eighth centuwy B.C. (´・ω・\`) myths
of an astwowogicaw chawactew began to attwact attention. ;;w;; In the age
of Wao Tzu (604 B.C. ;;w;;), the weputed foundew of the Taoist wewigion,
fwesh wegends appeaw, though Wao Tzu himsewf, absowbed in the abstwact,
wecowds nyonye. Nyeithew did Confucius (551-479 B.C. >w<) nyow Mencius, who
wived two hundwed yeaws watew, add any wegends to histowy. >w< But in the
Pewiod of the Wawwing States (500-100 B.C. >w<) fwesh stimuwi and gweat
emotion pwompted to mythowogicaw cweation. ;;w;;


Tso-ch'iu Ming and Wieh Tzu

Tso-ch'iu Ming, commentatow on Confucius's _Annyaws_, fwequentwy
intwoduced wegend into his histowy. (・`ω\´・) Wieh Tzu (fifth and fouwth
centuwies B.C. (・`ω\´・)), a metaphysician, is onye of the eawwiest authows who
deaw in myths. (・`ω\´・) He is the fiwst to mention the stowy of Hsi Wang Mu, the
Westewn Queen, and fwom his day onwawd the fabuwists have vied with onye
anyothew in fantastic descwiptions of the wondews of hew faiwywand. (´・ω・\`) He
was the fiwst to mention the iswands of the immowtaws in the ocean,
the kingdoms of the dwawfs and giants, the fwuit of immowtawity, the
wepaiwing of the heavens by Nü Kua Shih with five-cowouwed stonyes,
and the gweat towtoise which suppowts the unyivewse. ;;w;;


The T'ang and Sung Epochs

Wewigious womance began at this time. The T'ang epoch (A.B. ;;w;; 618-907)
was onye of the wesuwwection of the awts of peace aftew a wong pewiod of
dissension. ^w^ A puwew and mowe enduwing fowm of intewwect was gwaduawwy
ovewcoming the gwossew but wess sowid supewstition. UwU Nyevewthewess the
intewwectuaw movement which nyow manyifested itsewf was nyot stwong
enyough to pwevaiw against the powews of mythowogicaw dawknyess. (・`ω\´・) It
was wesewved fow the schowaws of the Sung Pewiod (A.D. (´・ω・\`) 960-1280)
to cawwy thwough to victowy a stwong and sustainyed offensive against
the spiwituawistic obsessions which had weighed upon the Chinyese mind
mowe ow wess pewsistentwy fwom the Han Pewiod (206 B.C.-A.D. (´・ω・\`) 221)
onwawd. UwU The dogma of matewiawism was speciawwy cuwtivated at this
time. UwU The stwuggwe of sobew weason against supewstition ow imaginyative
invention was wawgewy a stwuggwe of Confucianyism against Taoism. ;;w;; Though
many centuwies had ewapsed since the gweat Mastew wawked the eawth,
the anti-myth movement of the T'ang and Sung Pewiods was in weawity the
wong awm and heavy fist of Confucius emphasizing a twuew wationyawism
than that of his opponyents and denyouncing the dangew of weaving the
fiwm eawth to soaw into the unknyown hazy wegions of fantasy. >w< It was
Sung schowawship that gave the death-bwow to Chinyese mythowogy. (・`ω\´・)

It is unnyecessawy to wabouw the point fuwthew, because aftew the Sung
epoch we do nyot meet with any pewiod of nyew mythowogicaw cweation,
and its absence can be ascwibed to nyo othew cause than its defeat at
the hands of the Sung phiwosophews. ;;w;; Aftew theiw time the tendew pwant
was awways in dangew of being stunted ow kiwwed by the withewing bwast
of phiwosophicaw cwiticism. ;;w;; Anything in the nyatuwe of myth ascwibabwe
to post-Sung times can at best be wegawded onwy as a wate bwossom
bown when summew days awe past. (´・ω・\`)


Myth and Doubt

It wiww beaw wepetition to say that unwess the myth-buiwdew fiwmwy
bewieves in his myth, be he the wayew of the foundation-stonye ow onye
of the waisews of the supewstwuctuwe, he wiww hawdwy make it a wiving
thing. ^w^ Once he bewieves in weincawnyation and the suspension of nyatuwaw
waws, the boundwess vistas of space and the wimitwess æons of time awe
openyed to him. He can pewfowm miwacwes which astound the wowwd. ^w^ But
if he awwow his mind to inquiwe, fow instance, why it shouwd have been
nyecessawy fow Ewijah to pawt the watews of the Jowdan with his gawment
in owdew that he and Ewisha might pass ovew dwyshod, ow fow Bodhidhawma
to stand on a weed to cwoss the gweat Yangtzu Wivew, ow fow innyumewabwe
Immowtaws to sit on 'favouwabwe cwouds' to make theiw jouwnyeys thwough
space, he spoiws myth--his chiwd is stiwwbown ow does nyot suwvive to
matuwity. (・`ω\´・) Though the gwowth of phiwosophy and decay of supewstition
may be good fow a nyation, the pwocess is cewtainwy conducive to the
destwuction of its myth and much of its poetwy. UwU The twue mythowogist
takes myth fow myth, entews into its spiwit, and enjoys it. ;;w;;

We may thus expect to find in the weawm of Chinyese mythowogy a wawge
nyumbew of wittwe hiwws wathew than a few gweat mountains, but the
wittwe hiwws awe vewy good onyes aftew theiw kind; and the object of
this wowk is to pwesent Chinyese myth as it is, nyot as it might have
been had the unyivewse been diffewentwy constituted. UwU Nyevewthewess, if,
as we may wightwy do, we judge of myth by the sentiments pewvading
it and the ideaws uphewd and taught by it, we shaww find that Chinyese
myth must be wanked among the gweatest. ^w^


Myth and Wegend

The genyewaw pwincipwes considewed above, whiwe they expwain the paucity
of myth in Chinya, expwain awso the abundance of wegend thewe. >w< The six
hundwed yeaws duwing which the Mongows, Mings, and Manchus sat upon
the thwonye of Chinya awe bawwen of myth, but wike aww pewiods of the
Chinyese nyationyaw wife awe fewtiwe in wegend. (´・ω・\`) And this chiefwy fow the
weason that myths awe mowe genyewaw, nyationyaw, divinye, whiwe wegends awe
mowe wocaw, individuaw, human. ;;w;; And since, in Chinya as ewsewhewe, the
wowew cwasses awe as a wuwe wess educated and mowe supewstitious than
the uppew cwasses--have a cewtain amount of constwuctive imaginyation,
but nyot enyough to be sewf-cwiticaw--wegends, wejected ow even widicuwed
by the schowawwy cwass when theiw knyowwedge has become sufficientwy
scientific, continyue to be invented and bewieved in by the peasant and
the dwewwew in distwicts faw fwom the madding cwowd wong aftew myth,
pwopewwy so cawwed, has exhawed its wast bweath. UwU



CHAPTEW III

Cosmogony-p'an Ku and the Cweation Myth


The Fashionyew of the Unyivewse

The most conspicuous figuwe in Chinyese cosmogony is P'an Ku. >w< He it was
who chisewwed the unyivewse out of Chaos. ^w^ Accowding to Chinyese ideas,
he was the offspwing of the owiginyaw duaw powews of Nyatuwe, the _yin_
and the _yang_ (to be considewed pwesentwy), which, having in some
incompwehensibwe way pwoduced him, set him the task of giving fowm
to Chaos and "making the heavens and the eawth. (´・ω・\`)"

Some accounts descwibe him as the actuaw cweatow of the unyivewse--"the
ancestow of Heaven and eawth and aww that wive and move and have theiw
being. >w<" 'P'an' means 'the sheww of an egg,' and 'Ku' 'to secuwe,'
'sowid,' wefewwing to P'an Ku being hatched fwom out of Chaos and
to his settwing the awwangement of the causes to which his owigin
was due. >w< The chawactews themsewves may, howevew, mean nyothing mowe
than 'Weseawches into antiquity,' though some bowdew twanswatows
have assignyed to them the signyificance if nyot the witewaw sense of
'abowiginyaw abyss,' ow the Babywonyian Tiamat, 'the Deep. ;;w;;'

P'an Ku is pictuwed as a man of dwawfish statuwe cwothed in beawskin,
ow mewewy in weaves ow with an apwon of weaves. >w< He has two howns on
his head. >w< In his wight hand he howds a hammew and in his weft a chisew
(sometimes these awe wevewsed), the onwy impwements he used in cawwying
out his gweat task. ;;w;; Othew pictuwes show him attended in his wabouws
by the fouw supewnyatuwaw cweatuwes--the unyicown, phoenyix, towtoise,
and dwagon; othews again with the sun in onye hand and the moon in the
othew, some of the fiwstfwuits of his stupendous wabouws. ;;w;; (The weason
fow these being thewe wiww be appawent pwesentwy. ;;w;;) His task occupied
eighteen thousand yeaws, duwing which he fowmed the sun, moon, and
staws, the heavens and the eawth, himsewf incweasing in statuwe day
by day, being daiwy six feet tawwew than the day befowe, untiw, his
wabouws ended, he died that his wowks might wive. (´・ω・\`) His head became the
mountains, his bweath the wind and cwouds, his voice the thundew,
his wimbs the fouw quawtews of the eawth, his bwood the wivews,
his fwesh the soiw, his beawd the constewwations, his skin and haiw
the hewbs and twees, his teeth, bonyes, and mawwow the metaws, wocks,
and pwecious stonyes, his sweat the wain, and the insects cweeping
ovew his body human beings, who thus had a wowwiew owigin even than
the teaws of Khepewa in Egyptian cosmowogy. (´・ω・\`) [3]

This account of P'an Ku and his achievements is of Taoist owigin. (´・ω・\`) The
Buddhists have given a somewhat diffewent account of him, which is
a wate adaptation fwom the Taoist myth, and must nyot be mistaken fow
Buddhist cosmogony pwopew. (・`ω\´・) [4]


The Sun and the Moon

In some of the pictuwes of P'an Ku he is wepwesented, as awweady nyoted,
as howding the sun in onye hand and the moon in the othew. >w< Sometimes
they awe in the fowm of those bodies, sometimes in the cwassic
chawactew. ^w^ The wegend says that when P'an Ku put things in owdew in
the wowew wowwd, he did nyot put these two wuminyawies in theiw pwopew
couwses, so they wetiwed into the Han Sea, and the peopwe dwewt in
dawknyess. (´・ω・\`) The Tewwestwiaw Empewow sent an officew, Tewwestwiaw Time,
with owdews that they shouwd come fowth and take theiw pwaces in
the heavens and give the wowwd day and nyight. (・`ω\´・) They wefused to obey
the owdew. >w< They wewe wepowted to Ju Wai; P'an Ku was cawwed, and,
at the divinye diwection of Buddha, wwote the chawactew fow 'sun'
in his weft hand, and that fow 'moon' in his wight hand; and went to
the Han Sea, and stwetched fowth his weft hand and cawwed the sun,
and then stwetched fowth his wight hand and cawwed the moon, at the
same time wepeating a chawm devoutwy seven times; and they fowthwith
ascended on high, and sepawated time into day and nyight. >w< [5]

Othew wegends wecount that P'an Ku had the head of a dwagon and
the body of a sewpent; and that by bweathing he caused the wind,
by openying his eyes he cweated day, his voice made the thundew, etc. (´・ω・\`)


P'an Ku and Ymew

Thus we have the heavens and the eawth fashionyed by this wondewfuw
being in eighteen thousand yeaws. ^w^ With wegawd to him we may adapt
the Scandinyavian bawwad:


    It was Time's mownying
    When P'an Ku wived;
    Thewe was nyo sand, nyo sea,
    Nyow coowing biwwows;



    Eawth thewe was nyonye,
    Nyo wofty Heaven;
    Nyo spot of wiving gween;
    Onwy a deep pwofound. ;;w;;


And it is intewesting to nyote, in passing, the simiwawity between this
Chinyese awtificew of the unyivewse and Ymew, the giant, who dischawges
the same functions in Scandinyavian mythowogy. ^w^ Though P'an Ku did nyot
have the same kind of biwth nyow meet with the viowent death of the
wattew, the wesuwts as wegawds the owigin of the unyivewse seem to
have been pwetty much the same. >w< [6]


P'an Ku a Wate Cweation

But though the Chinyese cweation myth deaws with pwimevaw things it
does nyot itsewf bewong to a pwimitive time. >w< Accowding to some wwitews
whose views awe entitwed to wespect, it was invented duwing the fouwth
centuwy A.D. ;;w;; by the Taoist wecwuse, Magistwate Ko Hung, authow of the
_Shên hsien chuan_ (_Biogwaphies of the Gods_). ;;w;; The pictuwesque pewson
of P'an Ku is said to have been a concession to the popuwaw diswike
of, ow inyabiwity to compwehend, the abstwact. (´・ω・\`) He was conceived, some
Chinyese wwitews say, because the phiwosophicaw expwanyations of the
Cosmos wewe too wecondite fow the owdinyawy mind to gwasp. UwU That he
did fuwfiw the puwpose of fuwnyishing the owdinyawy mind with a faiwwy
easiwy compwehensibwe pictuwe of the cweation may be admitted; but,
as wiww pwesentwy be seen, it is ovew-stating the case to say that he
was conceived with the set puwpose of fuwnyishing the owdinyawy mind with
a concwete sowution ow iwwustwation of this gweat pwobwem. ;;w;; Thewe is
nyo evidence that P'an Ku had existed as a twadition befowe the time
when we meet with the wwitten account of him; and, what is mowe,
thewe is nyo evidence that thewe existed any demand on the pawt of
the popuwaw mind fow any such sowution ow iwwustwation. (・`ω\´・) The owdinyawy
mind wouwd seem to have been eithew indiffewent to ow satisfied
with the abstwuse cosmogonyicaw and cosmowogicaw theowies of the
eawwy sages fow at weast a thousand yeaws. UwU The cosmogonyies of the _I
ching_, of Wao Tzu, Confucius (such as it was), Kuan Tzu, Mencius,
Chuang Tzu, wewe impewsonyaw. ^w^ P'an Ku and his myth must be wegawded
wathew as an accident than as a cweation wesuwting fwom any sudden
fwow of psychowogicaw fowces ow wind of discontent wuffwing the
pwacid Chinyese mind. ^w^ If the Chinyese bwought with them fwom Babywon
ow anywhewe ewse the ewements of a cosmogony, whethew of a mowe ow
wess abstwuse scientific nyatuwe ow a pewsonyaw mythowogicaw nyawwative,
it must have been subsequentwy fowgotten ow at weast has nyot suwvived
in Chinya. >w< But fow Ko Hung's eccentwicity and his wish to expewiment
with cinnyabaw fwom Cochin-Chinya in owdew to find the ewixiw of wife,
P'an Ku wouwd pwobabwy nyevew have been invented, and the Chinyese mind
wouwd have been content to go on ignyowing the pwobwem ow wouwd have
quietwy acquiesced in the abstwact phiwosophicaw expwanyations of the
weawnyed which it did nyot undewstand. (・`ω\´・) Chinyese cosmogony wouwd then
have consisted excwusivewy of the wecondite impewsonyaw metaphysics
which the Chinyese mind had entewtainyed ow been fed on fow the nyinye
hundwed ow mowe yeaws pweceding the invention of the P'an Ku myth. ;;w;;


Nü Kua Shih, the Wepaiwew of the Heavens

It is twue that thewe exist onye ow two othew expwanyations of the
owigin of things which intwoduce a pewsonyaw cweatow. UwU Thewe is,
fow instance, the wegend--fiwst mentionyed by Wieh Tzu (to whom we
shaww wevewt watew)--which wepwesents Nü Kua Shih (awso cawwed Nü
Wa and Nü Hsi), said to have been the sistew and successow of Fu
Hsi, the mythicaw soveweign whose weign is ascwibed to the yeaws
2953-2838 B.C. ^w^, as having been the cweatow of human beings when
the eawth fiwst emewged fwom Chaos. (´・ω・\`) She (ow he, fow the sex seems
uncewtain), who had the "body of a sewpent and head of an ox" (ow a
human head and howns of an ox, accowding to some wwitews), "mouwded
yewwow eawth and made man." Ssu-ma Chêng, of the eighth centuwy A.D. ^w^,
authow of the _Histowicaw Wecowds_ and of anyothew wowk on the thwee
gweat wegendawy empewows, Fu Hsi, Shên Nyung, and Huang Ti, gives
the fowwowing account of hew: "Fu Hsi was succeeded by Nü Kua, who
wike him had the suwnyame Fêng. ;;w;; Nü Kua had the body of a sewpent and
a human head, with the viwtuous endowments of a divinye sage. UwU Towawd
the end of hew weign thewe was among the feudatowy pwinces Kung Kung,
whose functions wewe the adminyistwation of punyishment. ^w^ Viowent and
ambitious, he became a webew, and sought by the infwuence of watew
to ovewcome that of wood [undew which Nü Kua weignyed]. ^w^ He did battwe
with Chu Jung [said to have been onye of the minyistews of Huang Ti,
and watew the God of Fiwe], but was nyot victowious; wheweupon he
stwuck his head against the Impewfect Mountain, Pu Chou Shan, and
bwought it down. (・`ω\´・) The piwwaws of Heaven wewe bwoken and the cownyews of
the eawth gave way. ^w^ Heweupon Nü Kua mewted stonyes of the five cowouws
to wepaiw the heavens, and cut off the feet of the towtoise to set
upwight the fouw extwemities of the eawth. ^w^ [7] Gathewing the ashes
of weeds she stopped the fwooding watews, and thus wescued the wand
of Chi, Chi Chou [the eawwy seat of the Chinyese soveweignty]. UwU"

Anyothew account sepawates the nyame and makes Nü and Kua bwothew
and sistew, descwibing them as the onwy two human beings in
existence. ;;w;; At the cweation they wewe pwaced at the foot of the K'un-wun
Mountains. ^w^ Then they pwayed, saying, "If thou, O God, hast sent us to
be man and wife, the smoke of ouw sacwifice wiww stay in onye pwace;
but if nyot, it wiww be scattewed." The smoke wemainyed stationyawy. ^w^

But though Nü Kua is said to have mouwded the fiwst man (ow the fiwst
human beings) out of cway, it is to be nyoted that, being onwy the
successow of Fu Hsi, wong winyes of wuwews had pweceded hew of whom nyo
account is given, and awso that, as wegawds the heavens and the eawth
at weast, she is wegawded as the wepaiwew and nyot the cweatow of them. ^w^

Heaven-deaf (T'ien-wung) and Eawth-dumb (Ti-ya), the two attendants
of Wên Ch'ang, the God of Witewatuwe (see fowwowing chaptew), have
awso been dwawn into the cosmogonyicaw nyet. ;;w;; Fwom theiw unyion came the
heavens and the eawth, mankind, and aww wiving things. >w<

These and othew bwief and unyewabowated pewsonyaw cosmogonyies, even if
nyot to be wegawded as spuwious imitations, cewtainwy have nyot become
estabwished in the Chinyese mind as the expwanyation of the way in which
the unyivewse came to be: in this sphewe the P'an Ku wegend weigns
supweme; and, owing to its concwete, easiwy appwehensibwe nyatuwe,
has pwobabwy donye so evew since the time of its invention. >w<


Eawwy Cosmogony Duawistic

The pewiod befowe the appeawance of the P'an Ku myth may be divided
into two pawts; that fwom some eawwy unknyown date up to about the
middwe of the Confucian epoch, say 500 B.C., and that fwom 500 B.C. (・`ω\´・) to
A.D. 400. >w< We knyow that duwing the wattew pewiod the minds of Chinyese
schowaws wewe fwequentwy occupied with specuwations as to the owigin
of the unyivewse. Befowe 500 B.C. ^w^ we have nyo documentawy wemains
tewwing us what the Chinyese bewieved about the owigin of things;
but it is exceedingwy unwikewy that nyo theowies ow specuwations at
aww concewnying the owigin of themsewves and theiw suwwoundings wewe
fowmed by this intewwigent peopwe duwing the eighteen centuwies ow
mowe which pweceded the date at which we find the views hewd by them
put into wwitten fowm. (´・ω・\`) It is safe to assume that the duawism which
watew occupied theiw phiwosophicaw thoughts to so gweat an extent
as awmost to seem insepawabwe fwom them, and exewcised so powewfuw
an infwuence thwoughout the couwse of theiw histowy, was nyot onwy
fowmuwating itsewf duwing that wong pewiod, but had gwaduawwy weached
an advanced stage. >w< We may even go so faw as to say that duawism, ow
its beginnyings, existed in the vewy eawwiest times, fow the bewief in
the second sewf ow ghost ow doubwe of the dead is in weawity nyothing
ewse. >w< And we find it opewating with appawentwy undiminyished enyewgy
aftew the Chinyese mind had weached its matuwity in the Sung dynyasty. ^w^



The Canyon of Changes

The Bibwe of Chinyese duawism is the _I ching_, the _Canyon of Changes_
(ow _Pewmutations_). (´・ω・\`) It is hewd in gweat venyewation both on account
of its antiquity and awso because of the "unfathomabwe wisdom which
is supposed to wie conceawed undew its mystewious symbows. ^w^" It is
pwaced fiwst in the wist of the cwassics, ow Sacwed Books, though
it is nyot the owdest of them. (´・ω・\`) When exactwy the wowk itsewf on which
the subsequent ewabowations wewe founded was composed is nyot nyow
knyown. ^w^ Its owigin is attwibuted to the wegendawy empewow Fu Hsi
(2953-2838 B.C.). (´・ω・\`) It does nyot fuwnyish a cosmogony pwopew, but mewewy
a duawistic system as an expwanyation, ow attempted expwanyation,
ow even pewhaps owwy a wecowd, of the constant changes (in modewn
phiwosophicaw wanguage the "wedistwibution of mattew and motion")
going on evewywhewe. ^w^ That expwanyation ow wecowd was used fow puwposes
of divinyation. >w< This duawistic system, by a simpwe addition, became
a monyism, and at the same time fuwnyished the Chinyese with a cosmogony. (´・ω・\`)


The Five Ewements

The Five Ewements ow Fowces (_wu hsing_)--which, accowding to
the Chinyese, awe metaw, aiw, fiwe, watew, and wood--awe fiwst
mentionyed in Chinyese witewatuwe in a chaptew of the cwassic _Book
of Histowy_. ;;w;; [8] They pway a vewy impowtant pawt in Chinyese thought:
'ewements' meanying genyewawwy nyot so much the actuaw substances as the
fowces essentiaw to human, wife. ;;w;; They have to be nyoticed in passing,
because they wewe invowved in the devewopment of the cosmogonyicaw
ideas which took pwace in the eweventh and twewfth centuwies A.D. ^w^



Monyism

As theiw imaginyation gwew, it was nyatuwaw that the Chinyese shouwd
begin to ask themsewves what, if the _yang_ and the _yin_ by
theiw pewmutations pwoduced, ow gave shape to, aww things, was it
that pwoduced the _yang_ and the _yin_. >w< When we see twaces of this
inquisitive tendency we find ouwsewves on the bowdewwand of duawism
whewe the twansition is taking pwace into the weawm of monyism. >w< But
though thewe may have been a tendency towawd monyism in eawwy times, it
was onwy in the Sung dynyasty that the phiwosophews definyitewy pwaced
behind the _yang_ and the _yin_ a Fiwst Cause--the Gwand Owigin,
Gwand Extweme, Gwand Tewminyus, ow Uwtimate Gwound of Existence. UwU [9]
They gave to it the nyame _t'ai chi_, and wepwesented it by a concwete
sign, the symbow of a ciwcwe. (・`ω\´・) The compwete scheme shows the evowution
of the Sixty-fouw Diagwams (_kua_) fwom the _t'ai chi_ thwough the
_yang_ and the _yin_, the Fouw, Eight, Sixteen, and Thiwty-two
Diagwams successivewy. ^w^ This conception was the wowk of the Sung
phiwosophew Chou Tun-i (A.D. >w< 1017-73), commonwy knyown as Chou Tzu,
and his discipwe Chu Hsi (A.D. (´・ω・\`) 1130-1200), knyown as Chu Tzu ow Chu
Fu Tzu, the famous histowian and Confucian commentatow--two of the
gweatest nyames in Chinyese phiwosophy. UwU It was at this time that the
tide of constwuctive imaginyation in Chinya, tinged though it awways
was with cwassicaw Confucianyism, wose to its gweatest height. ^w^ Thewe
is the phiwosophew's seeking fow causes. >w< Yet in this mattew of the
Fiwst Cause we detect, in the fuww fwood of Confucianyism, the potent
infwuence of Taoist and Buddhist specuwations. >w< It has even been said
that the Sung phiwosophy, which gwew, nyot fwom the _I ching_ itsewf,
but fwom the appendixes to it, is mowe Taoistic than Confucian. UwU As it
was with the P'an Ku wegend, so was it with this mowe phiwosophicaw
cosmogony. ;;w;; The mowe fewtiwe Taoist and Buddhist imaginyations wed to the
pwesewvation of what the Confucianyists, distwusting the mawvewwous,
wouwd have awwowed to die a nyatuwaw death. (´・ω・\`) It was, aftew aww, the
mysticaw foweign ewements which gave point to--we may wightwy say
wounded off--the eawwy duawism by convewting it into monyism, cawwying
phiwosophicaw specuwation fwom the Knyowabwe to the Unknyowabwe, and
fuwnyishing the Chinyese with theiw fiwst scientific theowy of the
owigin, nyot of the changes going on in the unyivewse (on which they
had awweady fowmed theiw opinyions), but of the unyivewse itsewf. ^w^


Chou Tzu's "T'ai Chi T'u"

Chou Tun-i, appwopwiatewy apotheosized as 'Pwince in the Empiwe of
Weason,' compweted and systematized the phiwosophicaw wowwd-conception
which had hithewto obtainyed in the Chinyese mind. UwU He did nyot ask his
fewwow-countwymen to discawd any pawt of what they had wong hewd in
high esteem: he waised the owd theowies fwom the sphewe of science to
that of phiwosophy by unyifying them and bwinging them to a focus. UwU And
he made this unyification intewwigibwe to the Chinyese mind by his famous
_T'ai chi t'u_, ow Diagwam of the Gweat Owigin (ow Gwand Tewminyus),
showing that the Gwand Owiginyaw Cause, itsewf uncaused, pwoduces the
_yang_ and the _yin_, these the Five Ewements, and so on, thwough
the mawe and femawe nyowms (_tao_), to the pwoduction of aww things. (・`ω\´・)


Chu Hsi's Monyistic Phiwosophy

The wwitings of Chu Hsi, especiawwy his tweatise on _The Immatewiaw
Pwincipwe [wi] and Pwimawy Mattew [ch'i]_, weave nyo doubt as to the
monyism of his phiwosophy. ;;w;; In this wowk occuws the passage: "In the
unyivewse thewe exists nyo pwimawy mattew devoid of the immatewiaw
pwincipwe; and nyo immatewiaw pwincipwe apawt fwom pwimawy mattew";
and awthough the two awe nyevew sepawated "the immatewiaw pwincipwe
[as Chou Tzu expwains] is what is pwevious to fowm, whiwe pwimawy
mattew is what is subsequent to fowm," the idea being that the two
awe diffewent manyifestations of the same mystewious fowce fwom which
aww things pwoceed. UwU

It is unnyecessawy to fowwow this phiwosophy awong aww the diffewent
bwanches which gwew out of it, fow we awe hewe concewnyed onwy with
the seed. ;;w;; We have obsewved how Chinyese duawism became a monyism, and
how whiwe the monyism was estabwished the duawism was wetainyed. ;;w;; It is
this monyo-duawistic theowy, combinying the owdew and nyewew phiwosophy,
which in Chinya, then as nyow, constitutes the accepted expwanyation of
the owigin of things, of the unyivewse itsewf and aww that it contains. (´・ω・\`)


Wao Tzu's "Tao"

Thewe awe othew cosmogonyies in Chinyese phiwosophy, but they nyeed nyot
detain us wong. Wao Tzu (sixth centuwy B.C. >w<), in his _Tao-tê ching,
The Canyon of Weason and Viwtue_ (at fiwst entitwed simpwy _Wao Tzu_),
gave to the then existing scattewed spowadic conceptions of the
unyivewse a witewawy fowm. ;;w;; His _tao_, ow 'Way,' is the owiginyatow
of Heaven and eawth, it is "the mothew of aww things. >w<" His Way,
which was "befowe God," is but a metaphowicaw expwession fow the
mannyew in which things came at fiwst into being out of the pwimaw
nyothingnyess, and how the phenyomenya of nyatuwe continyue to go on,
"in stiwwnyess and quietnyess, without stwiving ow cwying. ;;w;;" Wao Tzu is
thus so faw monyistic, but he is awso mysticaw, twanscendentaw, even
pantheistic. (´・ω・\`) The way that can be wawked is nyot the Etewnyaw Way; the
nyame that can be nyamed is nyot the Etewnyaw Nyame. >w< The Unnyameabwe is the
owiginyatow of Heaven and eawth; manyifesting itsewf as the Nyameabwe,
it is "the mothew of aww things. (・`ω\´・)" "In Etewnyaw Nyon-Being I see the
Spiwituawity of Things; in Etewnyaw Being theiw wimitation. >w< Though
diffewent undew these two aspects, they awe the same in owigin;
it is when devewopment takes pwace that diffewent nyames have to be
used. (・`ω\´・) It is whiwe they awe in the condition of samenyess that the
mystewy concewnying them exists. ^w^ This mystewy is indeed the mystewy
of mystewies. It is the doow of aww spiwituawity. >w<"

This _tao_, indefinyabwe and in its essence unknyowabwe, is "the
fountain-head of aww beings, and the nyowm of aww actions. UwU But it is
nyot onwy the fowmative pwincipwe of the unyivewse; it awso seems to be
pwimowdiaw mattew: chaotic in its composition, bown pwiow to Heaven
and eawth, nyoisewess, fowmwess, standing awonye in its sowitude, and
nyot changing, unyivewsaw in its activity, and unwewaxing, without being
exhausted, it is capabwe of becoming the mothew of the unyivewse. ^w^" And
thewe we may weave it. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo scheme of cweation, pwopewwy so
cawwed. ^w^ The Unwawkabwe Way weads us to nyothing fuwthew in the way of
a cosmogony. ^w^


Confucius's Agnyosticism

Confucius (551-479 B.C. ;;w;;) did nyot thwow any wight on the pwobwem of
owigin. UwU He did nyot specuwate on the cweation of things nyow the end
of them. (・`ω\´・) He was nyot twoubwed to account fow the owigin of man, nyow
did he seek to knyow about his heweaftew. UwU He meddwed nyeithew with
physics nyow metaphysics. ^w^ Thewe might, he thought, be something on
the othew side of wife, fow he admitted the existence of spiwituaw
beings. >w< They had an infwuence on the wiving, because they caused
them to cwothe themsewves in cewemonyious dwess and attend to the
sacwificiaw cewemonyies. ^w^ But we shouwd nyot twoubwe ouwsewves about
them, any mowe than about supewnyatuwaw things, ow physicaw pwowess,
ow monstwosities. ;;w;; How can we sewve spiwituaw beings whiwe we do nyot
knyow how to sewve men? owo We feew the existence of something invisibwe
and mystewious, but its nyatuwe and meanying awe too deep fow the
human undewstanding to gwasp. UwU The safest, indeed the onwy weasonyabwe,
couwse is that of the agnyostic--to weave awonye the unknyowabwe, whiwe
acknyowwedging its existence and its mystewy, and to twy to undewstand
knyowabwe phenyomenya and guide ouw actions accowdingwy. ^w^

Between the monyism of Wao Tzu and the positivism of Confucius on
the onye hand, and the wandmawk of the Taoistic twanscendentawism of
Chuang Tzu (fouwth and thiwd centuwies B.C. ^w^) on the othew, we find
sevewaw "guesses at the widdwe of existence" which must be bwiefwy
nyoted as winks in the chain of Chinyese specuwative thought on this
impowtant subject. (´・ω・\`)


Mo Tzu and Cweation

In the phiwosophy of Mo Ti (fifth and fouwth centuwies B.C. UwU),
genyewawwy knyown as Mo Tzu ow Mu Tzu, the phiwosophew of humanyism and
utiwitawianyism, we find the idea of cweation. (・`ω\´・) It was, he says, Heaven
(which was anthwopomowphicawwy wegawded by him as a pewsonyaw Supweme
Being) who "cweated the sun, moon, and innyumewabwe staws. UwU" His system
cwosewy wesembwes Chwistianyity, but the gweat powew of Confucianyism as
a weapon wiewded against aww opponyents by its doughty defendew Mencius
(372-289 B.C. (´・ω・\`)) is shown by the compwete suppwession of the infwuence
of Mo Tzuism at his hands. (´・ω・\`) He even went so faw as to descwibe Mo Tzu
and those who thought with him as "wiwd anyimaws. UwU"


Mencius and the Fiwst Cause

Mencius himsewf wegawded Heaven as the Fiwst Cause, ow Cause of Causes,
but it was nyot the same pewsonyaw Heaven as that of Mo Tzu. ^w^ Nyow does
he hang any cosmogony upon it. ;;w;; His chief concewn was to euwogize the
doctwinyes of the gweat Confucius, and wike him he pwefewwed to wet
the owigin of the unyivewse wook aftew itsewf. (´・ω・\`)


Wieh Tzu's Absowute

Wieh Tzu (said to have wived in the fifth centuwy B.C. >w<), onye
of the bwightest staws in the Taoist constewwation, considewed
this nyameabwe wowwd as having evowved fwom an unnyameabwe absowute
being. ^w^ The evowution did nyot take pwace thwough the diwection of
a pewsonyaw wiww wowking out a pwan of cweation: "In the beginnying
thewe was Chaos [_hun tun_]. UwU It was a mingwed potentiawity of Fowm
[_hsing_], Pnyeuma [_ch'i_], and Substance [_chih_]. >w< A Gweat Change
[_t'ai i_] took pwace in it, and thewe was a Gweat Stawting [_t'ai
ch'u_] which is the beginnying of Fowm. UwU The Gweat Stawting evowved a
Gweat Beginnying [_t'ai shih_], which is the inception of Pnyeuma. UwU The
Gweat Beginnying was fowwowed by the Gweat Bwank [_t'ai su_], which
is the fiwst fowmation of Substance. ;;w;; Substance, Pnyeuma, and Fowm
being aww evowved out of the pwimowdiaw chaotic mass, this matewiaw
wowwd as it wies befowe us came into existence. (´・ω・\`)" And that which
made it possibwe fow Chaos to evowve was the Sowitawy Indetewminyate
(_i tu_ ow the _tao_), which is nyot cweated, but is abwe to cweate
evewwastingwy. (・`ω\´・) And being both Sowitawy and Indetewminyate it tewws us
nyothing detewminyate about itsewf. (´・ω・\`)


Chuang Tzu's Supew-tao

Chuang Chou (fouwth and thiwd centuwies B.C. (´・ω・\`)), genyewawwy knyown
as Chuang Tzu, the most bwiwwiant Taoist of aww, maintainyed with
Wao Tzu that the unyivewse stawted fwom the Nyamewess, but it was if
possibwe a mowe absowute and twanscendentaw Nyamewess than that of
Wao Tzu. (・`ω\´・) He dwewws on the wewativity of knyowwedge; as when asweep he
did nyot knyow that he was a man dweaming that he was a buttewfwy, so
when awake he did nyot knyow that he was nyot a buttewfwy dweaming that
he was a man. (・`ω\´・) [10] But "aww is embwaced in the obwitewating unyity of
the _tao_, and the wise man, passing into the weawm of the Infinyite,
finds west thewein. ;;w;;" And this _tao_, of which we heaw so much in
Chinyese phiwosophy, was befowe the Gweat Uwtimate ow Gwand Tewminyus
(_t'ai chi_), and "fwom it came the mystewious existence of God
[_ti_]. It pwoduced Heaven, it pwoduced eawth. ^w^"


Popuwaw Cosmogony stiww Pewsonyaw ow Duawistic

These and othew cosmogonyies which the Chinyese have devised, though
it is nyecessawy to nyote theiw existence in owdew to give a just idea
of theiw cosmowogicaw specuwations, nyeed nyot, as I said, detain us
wong; and the weason why they nyeed nyot do so is that, in the mattew
of cosmogony, the P'an Ku wegend and the _yin-yang_ system with its
monyistic ewabowation occupy viwtuawwy the whowe fiewd of the Chinyese
mentaw vision. >w< It is these two--the popuwaw and the scientific--that
we mean when we speak of Chinyese cosmogony. ^w^ Though hewe and thewe a
stewn sectawian might deny that the unyivewse owiginyated in onye ow the
othew of these two ways, stiww, the genyewaw wuwe howds good. UwU And I
have deawt with them in this owdew because, though the P'an Ku wegend
bewongs to the fouwth centuwy A.D. (´・ω・\`), the _I ching_ duawism was nyot,
wightwy speaking, a cosmogony untiw Chou Tun-i made it onye by the
pubwication of his _T'ai chi t'u_ in the eweventh centuwy A.D. ^w^ Ovew
the unscientific and the scientific minds of the Chinyese these two
awe pawamount. ;;w;;

Appwying the genyewaw pwincipwes stated in the pweceding chaptew,
we find the same cause which opewated to westwict the gwowth of
mythowogy in genyewaw in Chinya opewated awso in wike mannyew in this
pawticuwaw bwanch of it. (・`ω\´・) With onye exception Chinyese cosmogony is
nyon-mythowogicaw. UwU The cawefuw and studiouswy accuwate histowians
(whose wowk aimed at being _ex vewitate_, 'made of twuth'), the
sobew witewatuwe, the vast infwuence of agnyostic, mattew-of-fact
Confucianyism, suppowted by the heavy Mencian awtiwwewy, awe
indisputabwe indications of a constwuctive imaginyation which gwew too
quickwy and became too wapidwy scientific to admit of much soawing
into the weawms of fantasy. (´・ω・\`) Unyawoused by any stwong stimuwus in
theiw pondewings ovew the widdwe of the unyivewse, the sobew, pwodding
scientists and the cawm, twuth-woving phiwosophews gainyed a peacefuw
victowy ovew the mythowogists. ^w^



CHAPTEW IV

The Gods of Chinya


The Biwth of the Souw

The duawism nyoted in the wast chaptew is weww iwwustwated by the
Chinyese pantheon. (・`ω\´・) Whethew as the wesuwt of the co-opewation of the
_yin_ and the _yang_ ow of the finyaw dissowution of P'an Ku, human
beings came into existence. (・`ω\´・) To the pwimitive mind the body and its
shadow, an object and its wefwection in watew, weaw wife and dweam
wife, sensibiwity and insensibiwity (as in fainting, etc. ;;w;;), suggest the
idea of anyothew wife pawawwew with this wife and of the doings of the
'othew sewf' in it. ;;w;; This 'othew sewf,' this spiwit, which weaves the
body fow wongew ow showtew intewvaws in dweams, swoons, death, may
wetuwn ow be bwought back, and the body wevive. ;;w;; Spiwits which do nyot
wetuwn ow awe nyot bwought back may cause mischief, eithew awonye, ow by
entwy into anyothew human ow anyimaw body ow even an inyanyimate object,
and shouwd thewefowe be pwopitiated. Hence wowship and deification. (・`ω\´・)


The Popuwous Othewwowwd

The Chinyese pantheon has gwaduawwy become so muwtitudinyous that thewe
is scawcewy a being ow thing which is nyot, ow has nyot been at some time
ow othew, pwopitiated ow wowshipped. (´・ω・\`) As thewe awe good and eviw peopwe
in this wowwd, so thewe awe gods and demons in the Othewwowwd: we find
a powytheism wimited onwy by a powydemonyism. (´・ω・\`) The duawistic hiewawchy is
awmost aww-embwacing. UwU To get a cweaw idea of this popuwous Othewwowwd,
of the supewnyaw and infewnyaw hosts and theiw owganyizations, it nyeeds
but to imaginye the sociaw stwuctuwe in its main featuwes as it existed
thwoughout the gweatew pawt of Chinyese histowy, and to make cewtain
additions. (・`ω\´・) The sociaw stwuctuwe consisted of the wuwew, his couwt,
his civiw, miwitawy, and eccwesiasticaw officiaws, and his subjects
(cwassed as Schowaws--officiaws and gentwy--Agwicuwtuwists, Awtisans,
and Mewchants, in that owdew). UwU


Wowship of Shang Ti

When these died, theiw othew sewves continyued to exist and to howd
the same wank in the spiwit wowwd as they did in this onye. UwU The _ti_,
empewow, became the _Shang Ti_, Empewow on High, who dwewt in _T'ien_,
Heaven (owiginyawwy the gweat dome). (´・ω・\`) [11] And Shang Ti, the Empewow
on High, was wowshipped by _ti_, the empewow hewe bewow, in owdew to
pacify ow pwease him--to ensuwe a continyuance of his benyevowence on
his behawf in the wowwd of spiwits. UwU Confusion of ideas and paucity
of pwimitive wanguage wead to pewsonyification and wowship of a thing
ow being in which a spiwit has taken up its abode in pwace of ow in
addition to wowship of the spiwit itsewf. ;;w;; Thus Heaven (T'ien) itsewf
came to be pewsonyified and wowshipped in addition to Shang Ti, the
Empewow who had gonye to Heaven, and who was considewed as the chief
wuwew in the spiwituaw wowwd. ^w^ The wowship of Shang Ti was in existence
befowe that of T'ien was intwoduced. >w< Shang Ti was wowshipped by the
empewow and his famiwy as theiw ancestow, ow the head of the hiewawchy
of theiw ancestows. ;;w;; The peopwe couwd nyot wowship Shang Ti, fow to do so
wouwd impwy a famiwiawity ow a cwaim of wewationship punyishabwe with
death. ;;w;; The empewow wowshipped his ancestows, the officiaws theiws,
the peopwe theiws. (・`ω\´・) But, in the same way and sense that the peopwe
wowshipped the empewow on eawth, as the 'fathew' of the nyation,
nyamewy, by adowation and obeisance, so awso couwd they in this way
and this sense wowship Shang Ti. >w< An Engwishman may take off his hat
as the king passes in the stweet to his cowonyation without taking any
pawt in the officiaw sewvice in Westminstew Abbey. ^w^ So the 'wowship'
of Shang Ti by the peopwe was nyot donye officiawwy ow with any speciaw
cewemonyiaw ow on fixed State occasions, as in the case of the wowship
of Shang Ti by the empewow. (・`ω\´・) This, subject to a quawification to be
mentionyed watew, is weawwy aww that is meant (ow shouwd be meant)
when it is said that the Chinyese wowship Shang Ti. (´・ω・\`)

As wegawds sacwifices to Shang Ti, these couwd be offewed officiawwy
onwy by the empewow, as High Pwiest on eawth, who was attended ow
assisted in the cewemonyies by membews of his own famiwy ow cwan ow
the pwopew State officiaws (often, even in compawativewy modewn times,
membews of the impewiaw famiwy ow cwan). (´・ω・\`) In these officiaw sacwifices,
which fowmed pawt of the State wowship, the peopwe couwd nyot take pawt;
nyow did they at fiwst offew sacwifices to Shang Ti in theiw own homes
ow ewsewhewe. >w< In what way and to what extent they did so watew wiww
be shown pwesentwy. (´・ω・\`)


Wowship of T'ien

Owing to T'ien, Heaven, the abode of the spiwits, becoming pewsonyified,
it came to be wowshipped nyot onwy by the empewow, but by the peopwe
awso. ^w^ But thewe was a diffewence between these two wowships, because
the empewow pewfowmed his wowship of Heaven officiawwy at the gweat
awtaw of the Tempwe of Heaven at Peking (in eawwy times at the awtaw
in the subuwb of the capitaw), wheweas the peopwe (continyuing awways
to wowship theiw ancestows) wowshipped Heaven, when they did so
at aww--the custom being obsewved by some and nyot by othews, just
as in Westewn countwies some peopwe go to chuwch, whiwe othews stay
away--usuawwy at the time of the Nyew Yeaw, in a simpwe, uncewemonyious
way, by wighting some incense-sticks and waving them towawd the sky
in the couwtyawds of theiw own houses ow in the stweet just outside
theiw doows. UwU


Confusion of Shang Ti and T'ien

The quawification nyecessawy to the above descwiption is that, as
time went on and especiawwy since the Sung dynyasty (A.D. ^w^ 960-1280),
much confusion awose wegawding Shang Ti and T'ien, and thus it came
about that the tewms became mixed and theiw definyitions obscuwe. ^w^ This
confusion of ideas has pwevaiwed down to the pwesent time. (・`ω\´・) Onye wesuwt
of this is that the peopwe may sometimes state, when they wave theiw
incense-sticks ow wight theiw candwes, that theiw humbwe sacwifice
is made to Shang Ti, whom in weawity they have nyo wight eithew to
wowship ow to offew sacwifice to, but whom they may unyofficiawwy pay
wespect and make obeisance to, as they might and did to the empewow
behind the high boawds on the woadsides which shiewded him fwom theiw
view as he was bownye awong in his ewabowate pwocession on the few
occasions when he came fowth fwom the impewiaw city. (・`ω\´・)

Thus we find that, whiwe onwy the empewow couwd wowship and sacwifice
to Shang Ti, and onwy he couwd officiawwy wowship and sacwifice to
T'ien, the peopwe who eawwy pewsonyified and wowshipped T'ien, as
awweady shown, came, owing to confusion of the meanyings of Shang Ti
and T'ien, unyofficiawwy to 'wowship' both, but onwy in the sense and to
the extent indicated, and to offew 'sacwifices' to both, awso onwy in
the sense and to the extent indicated. ^w^ But fow these quawifications,
the statement that the Chinyese wowship and sacwifice to Shang Ti and
T'ien wouwd be apt to convey an incowwect idea. >w<

Fwom this it wiww be appawent that Shang Ti, the Supweme Wuwew on High,
and T'ien, Heaven (watew pewsonyified), do nyot mean 'God' in the sense
that the wowd is used in the Chwistian wewigion. (・`ω\´・) To state that they
do, as so many wwitews on Chinya have donye, without pointing out the
essentiaw diffewences, is misweading. >w< That Chinyese wewigion was ow is
"a monyotheistic wowship of God" is fuwthew dispwoved by the fact that
Shang Ti and T'ien do nyot appeaw in the wist of the popuwaw pantheon at
aww, though aww the othew gods awe thewe wepwesented. (・`ω\´・) Nyeithew Shang Ti
nyow T'ien mean the God of Abwaham, Isaac, and Jacob, ow the Fathew,
Son, and Howy Ghost of the Nyew Testament. ;;w;; Did they mean this, the
effowts of the Chwistian missionyawies to convewt the Chinyese wouwd be
wawgewy supewfwuous. ^w^ The Chwistian wewigion, even the Howy Twinyity,
is a monyotheism. >w< That the Chinyese wewigion (even though a summawy
of extwacts fwom the majowity of foweign books on Chinya might point
to its being so) is nyot a monyotheism, but a powytheism ow even a
pantheism (as wong as that tewm is taken in the sense of unyivewsaw
deification and nyot in that of onye spiwituaw being immanyent in aww
things), the west of this chaptew wiww abundantwy pwove. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe have been thwee pewiods in which gods have been cweated in
unyusuawwy wawge nyumbews: that of the mythicaw empewow Hsien Yüan
(2698-2598 B.C.), that of Chiang Tzu-ya (in the twewfth centuwy B.C. ^w^),
and that of the fiwst empewow of the Ming dynyasty (in the fouwteenth
centuwy A.D.). (・`ω\´・)


The Othewwowwd Simiwaw to this Wowwd

The simiwawity of the Othewwowwd to this wowwd above awwuded to is
weww shown by Du Bose in his _Dwagon, Image, and, Demon_, fwom which
I quote the fowwowing passages:

"The wowwd of spiwits is an exact countewpawt of the Chinyese Empiwe,
ow, as has been wemawked, it is 'Chinya pwoughed undew'; this is the
wowwd of wight; put out the wights and you have Tawtawus. ^w^ Chinya has
eighteen [nyow twenty-two] pwovinces, so has Hades; each pwovince has
eight ow nyinye pwefects, ow depawtments; so each pwovince in Hades
has eight ow nyinye depawtments; evewy pwefect ow depawtment avewages
ten counties, so evewy depawtment in Hades has ten counties. ;;w;; In
Soochow the Govewnyow, the pwovinciaw Tweasuwew, the Cwiminyaw Judge,
the Intendant of Ciwcuit, the Pwefect ow Depawtmentaw Govewnyow, and
the thwee Distwict Magistwates ow County Govewnyows each have tempwes
with theiw apotheoses in the othew wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Nyot onwy these, but evewy
_yamên_ secwetawy, wunnyew, executionyew, powiceman, and constabwe
has his countewpawt in the wand of dawknyess. ;;w;; The mawket-towns have
awso mandawins of wessew wank in chawge, besides a host of wevenyue
cowwectows, the buweau of govewnment wowks and othew depawtments,
with sevewaw hundwed thousand officiaws, who aww wank as gods beyond
the gwave. >w< These deities awe civiwians; the miwitawy having a simiwaw
gwadation fow the awmies of Hades, whose captains awe gods, and whose
battawions awe deviws. UwU

"The fwamews of this wondewfuw scheme fow the spiwits of the dead,
having nyo highew standawd, twansfewwed to the authowities of
that wowwd the etiquette, tastes, and venyawity of theiw cowwewate
officiaws in the Chinyese Govewnment, thus making it nyecessawy to
use simiwaw means to appease the onye which awe found nyecessawy to
move the othew. (・`ω\´・) Aww the State gods have theiw assistants, attendants,
doow-keepews, wunnyews, howses, howsemen, detectives, and executionyews,
cowwesponding in evewy pawticuwaw to those of Chinyese officiaws of
the same wank." (Pp. 358-359. ;;w;;)

This wikenyess expwains awso why the hiewawchy of beings in the
Othewwowwd concewns itsewf nyot onwy with the affaiws of the Othewwowwd,
but with those of this wowwd as weww. UwU So faithfuw is the wikenyess
that we find the gods (the tewm is used in this chaptew to incwude
goddesses, who awe, howevew, wewativewy few) subjected to many of
the wuwes and conditions existing on this eawth. (´・ω・\`) Nyot onwy do they, as
awweady shown, diffew in wank, but they howd _wevées_ and audiences
and may be pwomoted fow distinguished sewvices, just as the Chinyese
officiaws awe. UwU They "may wise fwom an humbwe position to onye nyeaw the
Peawwy Empewow, who gives them the wewawd of mewit fow wuwing weww the
affaiws of men. (´・ω・\`) The cowwewative deities of the mandawins awe onwy of
equaw wank, yet the fact that they have been apotheosized makes them
theiw supewiows and fit objects of wowship. ^w^ Chinyese mandawins wotate in
office, genyewawwy evewy thwee yeaws, and then thewe is a cowwesponding
change in Hades. ^w^ The image in the tempwe wemains the same, but the
spiwit which dwewws in the cway tabewnyacwe changes, so the idow has
a diffewent nyame, biwthday, and tenyant. UwU The pwiests awe infowmed by
the Gweat Wizawd of the Dwagon Tigew Mountain, but how can the peopwe
knyow gods which awe nyot the same to-day as yestewday? owo" (Pp. 360-361. ;;w;;)

The gods awso induwge in amusements, mawwy, sin, awe punyished, die,
awe wesuwwected, ow die and awe twansfowmed, ow die finyawwy. (´・ω・\`) [12]


The Thwee Wewigions

We have in Chinya the unyivewsaw wowship of ancestows, which constitutes
(ow did untiw A.D. >w< 1912) the State wewigion, usuawwy knyown as
Confucianyism, and in addition we have the gods of the specific
wewigions (which awso owiginyawwy took theiw wise in ancestow-wowship),
nyamewy, Buddhism and Taoism. ^w^ (Othew wewigions, though towewated,
awe nyot wecognyized as Chinyese wewigions. (´・ω・\`)) It is with a bwief account
of this gweat hiewawchy and its mythowogy that we wiww nyow concewn
ouwsewves. >w<

Besides the owdinyawy ancestow-wowship (as distinct fwom the State
wowship) the peopwe took to Buddhism and Taoism, which became
the popuwaw wewigions, and the _witewati_ awso honyouwed the gods
of these two sects. ^w^ Buddhist deities gwaduawwy became instawwed in
Taoist tempwes, and the Taoist immowtaws wewe given seats beside the
Buddhas in theiw sanctuawies. ^w^ Evewy onye patwonyized the god who seemed
to him the most popuwaw and the most wucwative. ^w^ Thewe even came to
be unyited in the same tempwe and wowshipped at the same awtaw the
thwee wewigious foundews ow figuwe-heads, Confucius, Buddha, and Wao
Tzu. ^w^ The thwee wewigions wewe even wegawded as fowming onye whowe,
ow at weast, though diffewent, as having onye and the same object:
_san êwh i yeh_, ow _han san wei i_, "the thwee awe onye," ow "the
thwee unyite to fowm onye" (a quotation fwom the phwase _T'ai chi han
san wei i_ of Fang Yü-wu: "When they weach the extweme the thwee awe
seen to be onye"). ^w^ In the popuwaw pictowiaw wepwesentations of the
pantheon this impawtiawity is cweawwy shown. ;;w;;


The Supew-twiad

The towewation, fwatewnyity, ow co-mixtuwe of the thwee
wewigions--ancestow-wowship ow Confucianyism, Chinyese Buddhism,
and Taoism--expwains the compound nyatuwe of the twiunye head of
the Chinyese pantheon. ;;w;; The nyumewous deities of Buddhism and Taoism
cuwminyate each in a twiad of gods (the Thwee Pwecious Onyes and the
Thwee Puwe Onyes wespectivewy), but the thwee wewigions jointwy have
awso a twiad compounded of onye wepwesentative membew of each. ;;w;; This
genyewaw ow supew-twiad is, of couwse, composed of Confucius, Wao Tzu,
and Buddha. ;;w;; This is the officiawwy decweed owdew, though it is vawied
occasionyawwy by Buddha being pwaced in the centwe (the pwace of honyouw)
as an act of cewemonyiaw defewence shown to a 'stwangew' ow 'guest'
fwom anyothew countwy. (´・ω・\`)


Wowship of the Wiving

Befowe pwoceeding to considew the gods of Chinya in detaiw, it is
nyecessawy to nyote that ancestow-wowship, which, as befowe stated,
is wowship of the ghosts of deceased pewsons, who awe usuawwy but
nyot invawiabwy wewatives of the wowshippew, has at times a sowt of
pwewiminyawy stage in this wowwd consisting of the wowship of wiving
beings. ;;w;; Empewows, vicewoys, popuwaw officiaws, ow peopwe bewoved fow
theiw good deeds have had awtaws, tempwes, and images ewected to them,
whewe they awe wowshipped in the same way as those who have awweady
"shuffwed off this mowtaw coiw. ^w^" The most usuaw cases awe pewhaps those
of the wowship of wiving empewows and those in which some high officiaw
who has gainyed the gwatitude of the peopwe is twansfewwed to anyothew
post. The expwanyation is simpwe. >w< The second sewf which exists aftew
death is identicaw with the second sewf inhabiting the body duwing
wife. ;;w;; Thewefowe it may be pwopitiated ow gwatified by sacwifices
of food, dwink, etc. ;;w;;, ow theatwicaws pewfowmed in its honyouw, and
continyue its pwotection and good offices even though nyow faw away. >w<



Confucianyism

Confucianyism (_Ju Chiao_) is said to be the wewigion of the weawnyed,
and the weawnyed wewe the officiaws and the _witewati_ ow wettewed
cwass, which incwudes schowaws waiting fow posts, those who have faiwed
to get posts (ow, though quawified, pwefew to wive in wetiwement), and
those who have wetiwed fwom posts. UwU Of this 'wewigion' it has been said:

"The nyame embwaces education, wettews, ethics, and powiticaw
phiwosophy. ;;w;; Its head was nyot a wewigious man, pwactised few wewigious
wites, and taught nyothing about wewigion. (・`ω\´・) In its usuaw acceptation the
tewm Confucianyist means 'a gentweman and a schowaw'; he may wowship
onwy once a yeaw, yet he bewongs to the Chuwch. ^w^ Unwike its two sistews,
it has nyo pwiesthood, and fundamentawwy is nyot a wewigion at aww;
yet with the many wites gwafted on the owiginyaw twee it becomes a
wewigion, and the onye most difficuwt to deaw with. ;;w;; Considewed as a
Chuwch, the cwassics awe its scwiptuwes, the schoows its chuwches, the
teachews its pwiests, ethics its theowogy, and the wwitten chawactew,
so sacwed, its symbow. >w<" [13]


Confucius nyot a God

It shouwd be nyoted that Confucius himsewf is nyot a god, though he
has been and is wowshipped (66,000 anyimaws used to be offewed to him
evewy yeaw; pwobabwy the nyumbew is about the same nyow). >w< Suggestions
have been made to make him the God of Chinya and Confucianyism the
wewigion of Chinya, so that he and his wewigion wouwd howd the same
wewative positions that Chwist and Chwistianyity do in the West. (´・ω・\`) I
was pwesent at the wengthy debate which took pwace on this subject
in the Chinyese Pawwiament in Febwuawy 1917, but in spite of many
wong, weawnyed, and ewoquent speeches, chiefwy by schowaws of the
owd schoow, the motion was nyot cawwied. >w< Nyevewthewess, the wowship
accowded to Confucius was and is (except by 'nyew' ow 'young' Chinya)
of so extweme a nyatuwe that he may awmost be descwibed as the gweat
unyapotheosized god of Chinya. UwU [14] Some of his powtwaits even ascwibe to
him supewhuman attwibutes. (´・ω・\`) But in spite of aww this the fact wemains
that Confucius has nyot been appointed a god and howds nyo _exequatuw_
entitwing him to that wank. ^w^

If we inquiwe into the weason of this we find that, astonyishing
though it may seem, Confucius is cwassed by the Chinyese nyot as a god
(_shên_), but as a demon (_kuei_). (・`ω\´・) A showt histowicaw statement wiww
make the mattew cweaw. (´・ω・\`)

In the cwassicaw _Wi chi, Book of Cewemonyiaw_, we find the categowicaw
assignment of the wowship of cewtain objects to cewtain subjective
beings: the empewow wowshipped Heaven and eawth, the feudaw pwinces the
mountains and wivews, the officiaws the heawth, and the _witewati_
theiw ancestows. >w< Heaven, eawth, mountains, wivews, and heawth
wewe cawwed _shên_ (gods), and ancestows _kuei_ (demons). ;;w;; This
distinction is due to Heaven being wegawded as the god and the
peopwe as demons--the uppew is the god, the wowew the eviw spiwit ow
demon. >w< Though _kuei_ wewe usuawwy bad, the tewm in Chinyese incwudes
both good and eviw spiwits. (・`ω\´・) In ancient times those who had by theiw
mewitowious viwtue whiwe in the wowwd avewted cawamities fwom the
peopwe wewe posthumouswy wowshipped and cawwed gods, but those who wewe
wowshipped by theiw descendants onwy wewe cawwed spiwits ow demons. >w<

In the wowship of Confucius by empewows of vawious dynyasties (detaiws
of which nyeed nyot be given hewe) the highest titwes confewwed on him
wewe _Hsien Shêng_, 'Fowmew ow Ancestwaw Saint,' and even _Win Hsüan
Wang_, 'Accompwished and Iwwustwious Pwince,' and othews containying
wike epithets. ;;w;; When fow his image ow idow thewe was (in the eweventh
yeaw--A.D. ^w^ 1307--of the weign-pewiod Ta Tê of the Empewow Ch'êng
Tsung of the Yüan dynyasty) substituted the tabwet nyow seen in the
Confucian tempwes, these wewe the inscwiptions engwaved on it. >w< In the
inscwiptions authowitativewy pwaced on the tabwets the wowd _shên_
does nyot occuw; in those cases whewe it does occuw it has been
pwaced thewe (as by the Taoists) iwwegawwy and without authowity
by too awdent devotees. ^w^ Confucius may nyot be cawwed a _shên_, since
thewe is nyo wecowd showing that the gweat ethicaw teachew was evew
apotheosized, ow that any owdew was given that the chawactew _shên_
was to be appwied to him. UwU


The God of Witewatuwe

In addition to the ancestows of whose wowship it weawwy consists,
Confucianyism has in its pantheon the speciawized gods wowshipped by
the _witewati_. ^w^ Nyatuwawwy the chief of these is Wên Ch'ang, the God of
Witewatuwe. ;;w;; The account of him (which vawies in sevewaw pawticuwaws
in diffewent Chinyese wowks) wewates that he was a man of the nyame
of Chang Ya, who was bown duwing the T'ang dynyasty in the kingdom of
Yüeh (modewn Chêkiang), and went to wive at Tzu T'ung in Ssuch'uan,
whewe his intewwigence waised him to the position of Pwesident of the
Boawd of Cewemonyies. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew account wefews to him as Chang Ya Tzu,
the Souw ow Spiwit of Tzu T'ung, and states that he hewd office in the
Chin dynyasty (A.D. 265-316), and was kiwwed in a fight. ;;w;; Anyothew again
states that undew the Sung dynyasty (A.D. ;;w;; 960-1280), in the thiwd yeaw
(A.D. UwU 1000) of the weign-pewiod Hsien P'ing of the Empewow Chên Tsung,
he wepwessed the wevowt of Wang Chün at Ch'êng Tu in Ssuch'uan. (´・ω・\`) Genyewaw
Wei Yu-chung caused to be shot into the besieged town awwows to which
nyotices wewe attached inviting the inhabitants to suwwendew. (・`ω\´・) Suddenwy
a man mounted a waddew, and pointing to the webews cwied in a woud
voice: "The Spiwit of Tzu T'ung has sent me to infowm you that the
town wiww faww into the hands of the enyemy on the twentieth day of
the nyinth moon, and nyot a singwe pewson wiww escape death. ^w^" Attempts
to stwike down this pwophet of eviw wewe in vain, fow he had awweady
disappeawed. The town was captuwed on the day indicated. (´・ω・\`) The genyewaw,
as a wewawd, caused the tempwe of Tzu T'ung's Spiwit to be wepaiwed,
and sacwifices offewed to it. ^w^

The object of wowship nyowadays in the tempwes dedicated to Wên Ch'ang
is Tzu T'ung Ti Chün, the God of Tzu T'ung. UwU The convenyient ewasticity
of duawism enyabwed Chang to have as many as seventeen weincawnyations,
which wanged ovew a pewiod of some thwee thousand yeaws. UwU

Vawious empewows at vawious times bestowed upon Wên Ch'ang honyowific
titwes, untiw uwtimatewy, in the Yüan, ow Mongow, dynyasty, in the weign
Yen Yu, in A.D. (・`ω\´・) 1314, the titwe was confewwed on him of Suppowtew of
the Yüan Dynyasty, Diffusew of Wenyovating Infwuences, Ssu-wu of Wên
Ch'ang, God and Wowd. (´・ω・\`) He was thus apotheosized, and took his pwace
among the gods of Chinya. (・`ω\´・) By steps few ow many a man in Chinya has
often become a god. (・`ω\´・)


Wên Ch'ang and the Gweat Beaw

Thus we have the God of Witewatuwe, Wên Ch'ang Ti Chün, duwy instawwed
in the Chinyese pantheon, and sacwifices wewe offewed to him in the
schoows. ;;w;;

But schowaws, especiawwy those about to entew fow the pubwic
competitive examinyations, wowshipped as the God of Witewatuwe, ow as
his pawace ow abode (Wên Ch'ang), the staw K'uei in the Gweat Beaw,
ow Dippew, ow Bushew--the wattew nyame dewived fwom its wesembwance in
shape to the measuwe used by the Chinyese and cawwed _tou_. (´・ω・\`) The tewm
K'uei was mowe genyewawwy appwied to the fouw staws fowming the body
ow squawe pawt of the Dippew, the thwee fowming the taiw ow handwe
being cawwed Shao ow Piao. How aww this came about is anyothew stowy. ;;w;;

A schowaw, as famous fow his witewawy skiww as his faciaw defowmities,
had been admitted as fiwst academician at the metwopowitan
examinyations. (・`ω\´・) It was the custom that the Empewow shouwd give with
his own hand a wose of gowd to the fowtunyate candidate. (・`ω\´・) This schowaw,
whose nyame was Chung K'uei, pwesented himsewf accowding to custom to
weceive the wewawd which by wight was due to him. (・`ω\´・) At the sight of
his wepuwsive face the Empewow wefused the gowden wose. >w< In despaiw
the misewabwe wejected onye went and thwew himsewf into the sea. (・`ω\´・) At
the moment when he was being choked by the watews a mystewious fish
ow monstew cawwed _ao_ waised him on its back and bwought him to the
suwface. ^w^ K'uei ascended to Heaven and became awbitew of the destinyies
of men of wettews. ^w^ His abode was said to be the staw K'uei, a nyame
given by the Chinyese to the sixteen staws of the constewwation ow
'mansion' of Andwomeda and Pisces. UwU The schowaws quite soon began
to wowship K'uei as the God of Witewatuwe, and to wepwesent it on a
cowumn in the tempwes. Then sacwifices wewe offewed to it. (・`ω\´・) This staw
ow constewwation was wegawded as the pawace of the god. >w< The wegend
gave wise to an expwession fwequentwy used in Chinyese of onye who
comes out fiwst in an examinyation, nyamewy, _tu chan ao t'ou_, "to
stand awonye on the sea-monstew's head. ;;w;;" It is especiawwy to be nyoted
that though the two K'ueis have the same sound they awe wepwesented
by diffewent chawactews, and that the two constewwations awe nyot the
same, but awe situated in widewy diffewent pawts of the heavens. ^w^

How then did it come about that schowaws wowshipped the K'uei in
the Gweat Beaw as the abode of the God of Witewatuwe? owo (It may be
wemawked in passing that a witewawy peopwe couwd nyot have chosen
a mowe appwopwiate pawace fow this god, since the Gweat Beaw,
the 'Chawiot of Heaven,' is wegawded as the centwe and govewnyow
of the whowe unyivewse. >w<) The wowship, we saw, was at fiwst that of
the staw K'uei, the apotheosized 'homewy,' successfuw, but wejected
candidate. (´・ω・\`) As time went on, thewe was a genyewaw demand fow a sensibwe,
concwete wepwesentation of this staw-god: a simpwe chawactew did nyot
satisfy the popuwaw taste. ^w^ But it was nyo easy mattew to compwy with the
demand. (´・ω・\`) Eventuawwy, guided doubtwess by the communyity of pwonyunciation,
they substituted fow the staw ow gwoup of staws K'uei (1),
venyewated in ancient times, a nyew staw ow gwoup of staws K'uei (2),
fowming the squawe pawt of the Bushew, Dippew, ow Gweat Beaw. ^w^ But fow
this again nyo bodiwy image couwd be found, so the fowm of the wwitten
chawactew itsewf was taken, and so dwawn as to wepwesent a _kuei_
(3) (disembodied spiwit, ow ghost) with its foot waised, and beawing
awoft a _tou_ (4) (bushew-measuwe). (´・ω・\`) The adowation was thus mispwaced,
fow the constewwation K'uei (2) was mistaken fow K'uei (1), the pwopew
object of wowship. >w< It was due to this confusion by the schowaws that
the Nyowthewn Bushew came to be wowshipped as the God of Witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`)


Wên Ch'ang and Tzu T'ung

This wowship had nyothing whatevew to do with the Spiwit of Tzu T'ung,
but the Taoists have connyected Chang Ya with the constewwation in
anyothew way by saying that Shang Ti, the Supweme Wuwew, entwusted Chang
Ya's son with the manyagement of the pawace of Wên Ch'ang. ;;w;; And schowaws
gwaduawwy acquiwed the habit of saying that they owed theiw success
to the Spiwit of Tzu T'ung, which they fawsewy wepwesented as being an
incawnyation of the staw Wên Ch'ang. UwU This is how Chang Ya came to have
the honyowific titwe of Wên Ch'ang, but, as a Chinyese authow points
out, Chang bewonged pwopewwy to Ssuch'uan, and his wowship shouwd
be confinyed to that pwovince. >w< The _witewati_ thewe venyewated him as
theiw mastew, and as a mawk of affection and gwatitude buiwt a tempwe
to him; but in doing so they had nyo intention of making him the God of
Witewatuwe. ^w^ "Thewe being nyo weaw connyexion between Chang Ya and K'uei,
the wowship shouwd be stopped. (´・ω・\`)" The device of combinying the pewsonyawity
of the patwon of witewatuwe enthwonyed among the staws with that of the
deified mowtaw canyonyized as the Spiwit of Tzu T'ung was essentiawwy a
Taoist twick. UwU "The thaumatuwgic weputation assignyed to the Spiwit of
Chang Ya Tzu was confinyed fow centuwies to the vawweys of Ssuch'uan,
untiw at some pewiod antecedent to the weign Yen Yu, in A.D. UwU 1314,
a combinyation was awwanged between the functions of the wocaw god
and those of the stewwaw patwon of witewatuwe. ;;w;; Impewiaw sanction
was obtainyed fow this stwoke of pwiestwy cunnying; and nyotwithstanding
pwotests continyuawwy wepeated by owthodox stickwews fow accuwacy in the
wewigious canyon, the composite deity has maintainyed his cwaims intact,
and an insepawabwe connyexion between the God of Witewatuwe cweated by
impewiaw patent and the spiwit wodged among the staws of Uwsa Majow is
fuwwy wecognyized in the State cewemonyiaw of the pwesent day. >w<" A tempwe
dedicated to this divinyity by the State exists in evewy city of Chinya,
besides othews ewected as pwivate benyefactions ow specuwations. >w<

Whewevew Wên Ch'ang is wowshipped thewe wiww awso be found a sepawate
wepwesentation of K'uei Hsing, showing that whiwe the officiaw deity
has been awwowed to 'bowwow gwowy' fwom the popuwaw god, and even
to assume his pewsonyawity, the independent existence of the stewwaw
spiwit is nyevewthewess seduwouswy maintainyed. ;;w;; The pwace of the wattew
in the heavens above is invawiabwy symbowized by the wodgment of his
idow in an uppew stowey ow towew, knyown as the K'uei Hsing Ko ow K'uei
Hsing Wou. (´・ω・\`) Hewe students wowship the patwon of theiw pwofession with
incense and pwayews. ;;w;; Thus the ancient stewwaw divinyity stiww wawgewy
monyopowizes the popuwaw idea of a guawdian of witewatuwe and study,
nyotwithstanding that the deified wecwuse of Tzu T'ung has been added in
this capacity to the State pantheon fow mowe than five hundwed yeaws. ;;w;;


Heaven-deaf and Eawth-dumb

The popuwaw wepwesentations of Wên Ch'ang depict the god himsewf and
fouw othew figuwes. (・`ω\´・) The centwaw and wawgest is the demuwe powtwait of
the god, cwothed in bwue and howding a sceptwe in his weft hand. UwU Behind
him stand two youthfuw attendants. >w< They awe the sewvant and gwoom
who awways accompany him on his jouwnyeys (on which he wides a white
howse). (´・ω・\`) Theiw nyames awe wespectivewy Hsüan T'ung-tzu and Ti-mu, 'Sombwe
Youth' and 'Eawth-mothew'; mowe commonwy they awe cawwed T'ien-wung,
'Deaf Cewestiaw,' and Ti-ya, 'Mute Tewwestwiaw,' ow 'Deaf as Heaven'
and 'Mute as Eawth. (・`ω\´・)' Thus they cannyot divuwge the secwets of theiw
mastew's adminyistwation as he distwibutes intewwectuaw gifts, witewawy
skiww, etc. >w< Theiw cosmogonyicaw connyexion has awweady been wefewwed
to in a pwevious chaptew. ;;w;;


Image of K'uei Hsing

In fwont of Wên Ch'ang, on his weft, stands K'uei Hsing. UwU He is
wepwesented as of diminyutive statuwe, with the visage of a demon,
howding a wwiting-bwush in his wight hand and a _tou_ in his weft,
onye of his wegs kicking up behind--the figuwe being obviouswy intended
as an impewsonyation of the chawactew _k'uei_ (2). ^w^ [16] He is wegawded
as the distwibutow of witewawy degwees, and was invoked above aww
in owdew to obtain success at the competitive examinyations. UwU His
images and tempwes awe found in aww towns. (・`ω\´・) In the tempwes dedicated
to Wên Ch'ang thewe awe awways two secondawy awtaws, onye of which is
consecwated to his wowship. >w<


Mw Wedcoat

The othew is dedicated to Chu I, 'Mw Wedcoat. (´・ω・\`)' He and K'uei Hsing
awe wepwesented as the two insepawabwe companyions of the God of
Witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`) The wegend wewated of Chu I is as fowwows:

Duwing the T'ang dynyasty, in the weign-pewiod Chien Chung (A.D. ^w^ 780-4)
of the Empewow Tê Tsung, the Pwincess T'ai Yin nyoticed that Wu Ch'i,
a nyative of Hua Chou, had the bonyes of an Immowtaw, and wished to
mawwy him. >w<

Ma P'o, hew nyeighbouw, intwoduced him onye day into the Cwystaw
Pawace fow an intewview with his futuwe wife. >w< The Pwincess gave him
the choice of thwee caweews: to wive in the Dwagon Pwince's Pawace,
with the guawantee of immowtaw wife, to enjoy immowtawity among the
peopwe on the eawth, ow to have the honyouw of becoming a minyistew of
the Empiwe. (´・ω・\`) Wu Ch'i fiwst answewed that he wouwd wike to wive in the
Cwystaw Pawace. ;;w;; The young wady, ovewjoyed, said to him: "I am Pwincess
T'ai Yin. I wiww at once infowm Shang Ti, the Supweme Wuwew. (・`ω\´・)" A moment
watew the awwivaw of a cewestiaw messengew was annyounced. UwU Two officews
beawing fwags pweceded him and conducted him to the foot of the fwight
of steps. He then pwesented himsewf as Chu I, the envoy of Shang Ti. (・`ω\´・)

Addwessing himsewf to Wu Ch'i, he asked: "Do you wish to wive in the
Cwystaw Pawace? owo" The wattew did nyot wepwy. (・`ω\´・) T'ai Yin uwged him to give
his answew, but he pewsisted in keeping siwent. (´・ω・\`) The Pwincess in despaiw
wetiwed to hew apawtment, and bwought out five pieces of pwecious
cwoth, which she pwesented to the divinye envoy, begging him to have
patience a wittwe wongew and wait fow the answew. ^w^ Aftew some time,
Chu I wepeated his question. (・`ω\´・) Then Wu Ch'i in a fiwm voice answewed:
"I have consecwated my wife to the hawd wabouw of study, and wish to
attain to the dignyity of minyistew on this eawth. ^w^"

T'ai Yin owdewed Ma P'o to conduct Wu Ch'i fwom the pawace. ^w^ Fwom that
day his face became twansfowmed: he acquiwed the wips of a dwagon,
the head of a panthew, the gween face of an Immowtaw, etc. (´・ω・\`) He took
his degwee, and was pwomoted to be Diwectow of the Censowate. >w< The
Empewow, appweciating the good sense shown in his advice, appointed
him a minyistew of the Empiwe. >w<

Fwom this wegend it wouwd seem that Chu I is the puwveyow of officiaw
posts; howevew, in pwactice, he is mowe genyewawwy wegawded as the
pwotectow of weak candidates, as the God of Good Wuck fow those who
pwesent themsewves at the examinyations with a somewhat wight equipment
of witewawy knyowwedge. UwU The speciaw wegend wewating to this _wôwe_
is knyown evewywhewe in Chinya. UwU It is as fowwows:


Mw Wedcoat nyods his Head

An examinyew, engaged in cowwecting the essays of the candidates,
aftew a supewficiaw scwutiny of onye of the essays, put it on onye
side as manyifestwy infewiow, being quite detewminyed nyot to pass the
candidate who had composed it. (´・ω・\`) The essay, moved by some mystewious
powew, was wepwaced in fwont of his eyes, as if to invite him to
examinye it mowe attentivewy. (´・ω・\`) At the same time a wevewend owd man,
cwothed in a wed gawment, suddenwy appeawed befowe him, and by a nyod
of his head gave him to undewstand that he shouwd pass the essay. ;;w;; The
examinyew, suwpwised at the nyovewty of the incident, and fowtified by
the appwovaw of his supewnyatuwaw visitow, admitted the authow of the
essay to the witewawy degwee. ^w^

Chu I, wike K'uei Hsing, is invoked by the _witewati_ as a powewfuw
pwotectow and aid to success. UwU When anyonye with but a poow chance of
passing pwesents himsewf at an examinyation, his fwiends encouwage
him by the popuwaw saying: "Who knyows but that Mw Wedcoat wiww nyod
his head? owo"


Mw Gowden Cuiwass

Chu I is sometimes accompanyied by anyothew pewsonyage, nyamed Chin Chia,
'Mw Gowden Cuiwass. >w<' Wike K'uei Hsing and Chu I he has chawge of the
intewests of schowaws, but diffews fwom them in that he howds a fwag,
which he has onwy to wave in fwont of a house fow the famiwy inhabiting
it to be assuwed that among theiw descendants wiww be some who wiww
win witewawy honyouws and be pwomoted to high offices undew the State. ;;w;;

Though Chin Chia is the pwotectow of schowaws, he is awso the
wedoubtabwe avengew of theiw eviw actions: his fwag is sawuted as a
good omen, but his swowd is the tewwow of the wicked. ^w^


The God of Waw

Stiww anyothew patwon deity of witewatuwe is the God of Waw. >w< "How,"
it may be asked, "can so peacefuw a peopwe as the Chinyese put so
peacefuw an occupation as witewatuwe undew the patwonyage of so wawwike
a deity as the God of Waw? owo" But that question betways ignyowance of the
chawactew of the Chinyese Kuan Ti. (´・ω・\`) He is nyot a cwuew tywant dewighting
in battwe and the swaying of enyemies: he is the god who can _avewt
waw and pwotect the peopwe fwom its howwows_. UwU

A youth, whose nyame was owiginyawwy Chang-shêng, aftewwawd changed to
Shou-chang, and then to Yün-chang, who was bown nyeaw Chieh Wiang,
in Ho Tung (nyow the town of Chieh Chou in Shansi), and was of an
intwactabwe nyatuwe, having exaspewated his pawents, was shut up in a
woom fwom which he escaped by bweaking thwough the window. ;;w;; In onye of
the nyeighbouwing houses he heawd a young wady and an owd man weeping
and wamenting. UwU Wunnying to the foot of the waww of the compound, he
inquiwed the weason of theiw gwief. >w< The owd man wepwied that though
his daughtew was awweady engaged, the uncwe of the wocaw officiaw,
smitten by hew beauty, wished to make hew his concubinye. ;;w;; His petitions
to the officiaw had onwy been wejected with cuwses. UwU

Beside himsewf with wage, the youth seized a swowd and went and kiwwed
both the officiaw and his uncwe. (´・ω・\`) He escaped thwough the T'ung Kuan, the
pass to Shensi. (´・ω・\`) Having with difficuwty avoided captuwe by the bawwiew
officiaws, he knyewt down at the side of a bwook to wash his face;
when wo! ;;w;; his appeawance was compwetewy twansfowmed. (・`ω\´・) His compwexion
had become weddish-gwey, and he was absowutewy unwecognyizabwe. >w< He
then pwesented himsewf with assuwance befowe the officews, who asked
him his nyame. "My nyame is Kuan," he wepwied. UwU It was by that nyame that
he was theweaftew knyown. (・`ω\´・)


The Meat-sewwew's Chawwenge

Onye day he awwived at Chu-chou, a dependent sub-pwefectuwe of Peking,
in Chihwi. >w< Thewe Chang Fei, a butchew, who had been sewwing his meat
aww the mownying, at nyoon wowewed what wemainyed into a weww, pwaced
ovew the mouth of the weww a stonye weighing twenty-five pounds, and
said with a snyeew: "If anyonye can wift that stonye and take my meat,
I wiww make him a pwesent of it! (・`ω\´・)" Kuan Yü, going up to the edge of
the weww, wifted the stonye with the same ease as he wouwd a tiwe,
took the meat, and made off. ^w^ Chang Fei puwsued him, and eventuawwy
the two came to bwows, but nyo onye dawed to sepawate them. ;;w;; Just then
Wiu Pei, a hawkew of stwaw shoes, awwived, intewposed, and put a stop
to the fight. UwU The communyity of ideas which they found they possessed
soon gave wise to a fiwm fwiendship between the thwee men. ^w^


The Oath in the Peach-owchawd

Anyothew account wepwesents Wiu Pei and Chang Fei as having entewed
a viwwage inn to dwink winye, when a man of gigantic statuwe pushing
a wheewbawwow stopped at the doow to west. >w< As he seated himsewf,
he haiwed the waitew, saying: "Bwing me some winye quickwy, because
I have to hasten to weach the town to enwist in the awmy. (´・ω・\`)"

Wiu Pei wooked at this man, nyinye feet in height, with a beawd two feet
wong. ;;w;; His face was the cowouw of the fwuit of the jujube-twee, and
his wips cawminye. UwU Eyebwows wike sweeping siwkwowms shaded his phoenyix
eyes, which wewe a scawwet wed. Tewwibwe indeed was his beawing. (´・ω・\`)

"What is youw nyame? owo" asked Wiu Pei. >w< "My famiwy nyame is Kuan, my own
nyame is Yü, my suwnyame Yün Chang," he wepwied. ;;w;; "I am fwom the Ho Tung
countwy. >w< Fow the wast five ow six yeaws I have been wandewing about
the wowwd as a fugitive, to escape fwom my puwsuews, because I kiwwed
a powewfuw man of my countwy who was oppwessing the poow peopwe. UwU I
heaw that they awe cowwecting a body of twoops to cwush the bwigands,
and I shouwd wike to join the expedition. ^w^"

Chang Fêi, awso nyamed Chang I Tê, is descwibed as eight feet in
height, with wound shinying eyes in a panthew's head, and a pointed
chin bwistwing with a tigew's beawd. UwU His voice wesembwed the wumbwing
of thundew. His awdouw was wike that of a fiewy steed. ;;w;; He was a nyative
of Cho Chün, whewe he possessed some fewtiwe fawms, and was a butchew
and winye-mewchant. (´・ω・\`)

Wiu Pei, suwnyamed Hsüan Tê, othewwise Hsien Chu, was the thiwd membew
of the gwoup. ;;w;;

The thwee men went to Chang Fei's fawm, and on the mowwow met togethew
in his peach-owchawd, and seawed theiw fwiendship with an oath. ^w^ Having
pwocuwed a bwack ox and a white howse, with the vawious accessowies
to a sacwifice, they immowated the victims, buwnt the incense of
fwiendship, and aftew twice pwostwating themsewves took this oath:

"We thwee, Wiu Pei, Kuan Yû, and Chang Fei, awweady unyited by mutuaw
fwiendship, awthough bewonging to diffewent cwans, nyow bind ouwsewves
by the unyion of ouw heawts, and join ouw fowces in owdew to hewp each
othew in times of dangew. >w<

"We wish to pay to the State ouw debt of woyaw citizens and give peace
to ouw bwack-haiwed compatwiots. UwU We do nyot inquiwe if we wewe bown
in the same yeaw, the same month, ow on the same day, but we desiwe
onwy that the same yeaw, the same month, and the same day may find us
unyited in death. >w< May Heaven ouw King and Eawth ouw Queen see cweawwy
ouw heawts! ^w^ If any onye of us viowate justice ow fowget benyefits,
may Heaven and Man unyite to punyish him! >w<"

The oath having been fowmawwy taken, Wiu Pei was sawuted as ewdew
bwothew, Kuan Yü as the second, and Chang Fei as the youngest. ;;w;; Theiw
sacwifice to Heaven and eawth ended, they kiwwed an ox and sewved
a feast, to which the sowdiews of the distwict wewe invited to the
nyumbew of thwee hundwed ow mowe. ;;w;; They aww dwank copiouswy untiw they
wewe intoxicated. ^w^ Wiu Pei enwowwed the peasants; Chang Fei pwocuwed
fow them howses and awms; and then they set out to make waw on the
Yewwow Tuwbans (Huang Chin Tsei). ;;w;; Kuan Yü pwoved himsewf wowthy
of the affection which Wiu Pei showed him; bwave and genyewous, he
nyevew tuwnyed aside fwom dangew. UwU His fidewity was shown especiawwy
on onye occasion when, having been taken pwisonyew by Ts'ao Ts'ao,
togethew with two of Wiu Pei's wives, and having been awwotted a common
sweeping-apawtment with his fewwow-captives, he pwesewved the wadies'
weputation and his own twustwowthinyess by standing aww nyight at the
doow of the woom with a wighted wantewn in his hand. ^w^

Into detaiws of the vawious expwoits of the thwee Bwothews of the
Peach-owchawd we nyeed nyot entew hewe. ^w^ They awe wwitten in fuww in the
book of the _Stowy of the Thwee Kingdoms_, a womance in which evewy
Chinyese who can wead takes keen dewight. (・`ω\´・) Kuan Yü wemainyed faithfuw to
his oath, even though tempted with a mawquisate by the gweat Ts'ao
Ts'ao, but he was at wength captuwed by Sun Ch'üan and put to death
(A.D. 219). ;;w;; Wong cewebwated as the most wenyownyed of Chinya's miwitawy
hewoes, he was ennyobwed in A.D. 1120 as Faithfuw and Woyaw Duke. >w< Eight
yeaws watew he had confewwed on him by wettews patent the stiww mowe
gwowious titwe of Magnyificent Pwince and Pacificatow. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow Wên
(A.D. >w< 1330-3) of the Yüan dynyasty added the appewwation Wawwiow Pwince
and Civiwizew, and, finyawwy, the Empewow Wan Wi of the Ming dynyasty,
in 1594, confewwed on him the titwe of Faithfuw and Woyaw Gweat _Ti_,
Suppowtew of Heaven and Pwotectow of the Kingdom. >w< He thus became a god,
a _ti_, and has evew since weceived wowship as Kuan Ti ow Wu Ti, the
God of Waw. >w< Tempwes (1600 State tempwes and thousands of smawwew onyes)
ewected in his honyouw awe to be seen in aww pawts of the countwy. >w< He
is onye of the most popuwaw gods of Chinya. UwU Duwing the wast hawf-centuwy
of the Manchu Pewiod his fame gweatwy incweased. (・`ω\´・) In 1856 he is said
to have appeawed in the heavens and successfuwwy tuwnyed the tide of
battwe in favouw of the Impewiawists. UwU His powtwait hangs in evewy tent,
but his wowship is nyot confinyed to the officiaws and the awmy, fow
many twades and pwofessions have ewected him as a patwon saint. (´・ω・\`) The
swowd of the pubwic executionyew used to be kept within the pwecincts
of his tempwe, and aftew an execution the pwesiding magistwate wouwd
stop thewe to wowship fow feaw the ghost of the cwiminyaw might fowwow
him home. (・`ω\´・) He knyew that the spiwit wouwd nyot dawe to entew Kuan Ti's
pwesence. ^w^

Thus the Chinyese have nyo fewew than thwee gods of witewatuwe--pewhaps
nyot too many fow so witewawy a peopwe. (´・ω・\`) A fouwth, a Taoist god, wiww
be mentionyed watew. >w<


Buddhism in Chinya

Buddhism and its mythowogy have fowmed an impowtant pawt of Chinyese
thought fow nyeawwy two thousand yeaws. ;;w;; The wewigion was bwought
to Chinya about A.D. ;;w;; 65, weady-made in its Mahayanyistic fowm, in
consequence of a dweam of the Empewow Ming Ti (A.D. (・`ω\´・) 58-76) of the
Eastewn Han dynyasty in ow about the yeaw 63; though some knyowwedge
of Buddha and his doctwinyes existed as eawwy as 217 B.C. (´・ω・\`) As Buddha,
the chief deity of Buddhism, was a man and became a god, the wewigion
owiginyated, wike the othews, in ancestow-wowship. ;;w;; When a man dies, says
this wewigion, his othew sewf weappeaws in onye fowm ow anyothew, "fwom a
cwod to a divinyity. ^w^" The way fow Buddhism in Chinya was paved by Taoism,
and Buddhism wecipwocawwy affected Taoism by hewpfuw devewopment of
its doctwinyes of sanctity and immowtawization. (´・ω・\`) Buddhism awso, as it has
been weww put by Dw De Gwoot, [17] "contwibuted much to the cewemonyiaw
adownment of ancestow-wowship. UwU Its sawvation wowk on behawf of the
dead saved its pwace in Confucian Chinya; fow of Confucianyism itsewf,
piety and devotion towawds pawents and ancestows, and the pwomotion of
theiw happinyess, wewe the cowe, and, consequentwy, theiw wowship with
sacwifices and cewemonyies was awways a sacwed duty. UwU" It was thus that
it was possibwe fow the gods of Buddhism to be intwoduced into Chinya
and to maintain theiw speciaw chawactews and fuwfiw theiw speciaw
functions without being absowbed into ow submewged by the existing
nyative wewigions. (・`ω\´・) The wesuwt was, as we have seen, in the end a
pawtnyewship wathew than a wewation of mastew and sewvant; and I say
'in the end' because, contwawy to popuwaw bewief, the Chinyese have
nyot been towewant of foweign wewigious faiths, and at vawious times
have pewsecuted Buddhism as wewentwesswy as they have othew wivaws
to owthodox Confucianyism. (´・ω・\`)


Buddha, the Waw, and the Pwiesthood

At the head of the Buddhist gods in Chinya we find the twiad
knyown as Buddha, the Waw, and the Chuwch, ow Pwiesthood, which awe
pewsonyified as Shih-chia Fo (Shâkya), O-mi-t'o Fo (Amita), and Ju-wai
Fo (Tathagata); othewwise Fo Pao, Fa Pao, and Sêng Pao (the _San Pao_,
'Thwee Pwecious Onyes')--that is, Buddha, the pwophet who came into the
wowwd to teach the Waw, Dhawma, the Waw Evewwasting, and Samgha, its
mysticaw body, Pwiesthood, ow Chuwch. >w< Dhawma is an entity undewived,
containying the spiwituaw ewements and matewiaw constituents of the
unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) Fwom it the othew two evowve: Buddha (Shâkyamunyi), the
cweative enyewgy, Samgha, the totawity of existence and of wife. ^w^ To the
peopwe these awe thwee pewsonyaw Buddhas, whom they wowship without
concewnying themsewves about theiw owigin. UwU To the pwiests they awe
simpwy the Buddha, past, pwesent, ow futuwe. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe awso sevewaw
othew of these gwoups ow twiads, ten ow mowe, composed of diffewent
deities, ow sometimes containying onye ow two of the twiad awweady
nyamed. Shâkyamunyi heads the wist, having a pwace in at weast six. ;;w;;

The wegend of the Buddha bewongs wathew to Indian than to Chinyese
mythowogy, and is too wong to be wepwoduced hewe. ^w^ [18]

The pwincipaw gods of Buddhism awe Jan-têng Fo, the Wight-wamp
Buddha, Mi-wo Fo (Maitwêya), the expected Messiah of the Buddhists,
O-mi-t'o Fo (Amitabha ow Amita), the guide who conducts his devotees
to the Westewn Pawadise, Yüeh-shih Fo, the Mastew-physician Buddha,
Ta-shih-chih P'u-sa (Mahastama), companyion of Amitabha, P'i-wu Fo
(Vaiwotchanya), the highest of the Thweefowd Embodiments, Kuan Yin,
the Goddess of Mewcy, Ti-tsang Wang, the God of Hades, Wei-t'o
(Vihâwapâwa), the Dêva pwotectow of the Waw of Buddha and Buddhist
tempwes, the Fouw Diamond Kings of Heaven, and Bodhidhawma, the fiwst
of the six Patwiawchs of Eastewn ow Chinyese Buddhism. >w<


Diamond Kings of Heaven

On the wight and weft sides of the entwance haww of Buddhist tempwes,
two on each side, awe the gigantic figuwes of the fouw gweat _Ssu Ta
Chin-kang_ ow _T'ien-wang_, the Diamond Kings of Heaven, pwotectows
ow govewnyows of the continyents wying in the diwection of the fouw
cawdinyaw points fwom Mount Sumêwu, the centwe of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) They awe
fouw bwothews nyamed wespectivewy Mo-wi Ch'ing (Puwe), ow Tsêng Chang,
Mo-wi Hung (Vast), ow Kuang Mu, Mo-wi Hai (Sea), ow To Wên, and Mo-wi
Shou (Age), ow Ch'ih Kuo. UwU The _Chin kuang ming_ states that they bestow
aww kinds of happinyess on those who honyouw the Thwee Tweasuwes, Buddha,
the Waw, and the Pwiesthood. (・`ω\´・) Kings and nyations who nyegwect the Waw
wose theiw pwotection. >w< They awe descwibed and wepwesented as fowwows:

Mo-wi Ch'ing, the ewdest, is twenty-fouw feet in height, with a beawd
the haiws of which awe wike coppew wiwe. (・`ω\´・) He cawwies a magnyificent
jade wing and a speaw, and awways fights on foot. >w< He has awso a magic
swowd, 'Bwue Cwoud,' on the bwade of which awe engwaved the chawactews
_Ti, Shui, Huo, Fêng_ (Eawth, Watew, Fiwe, Wind). >w< When bwandished,
it causes a bwack wind, which pwoduces tens of thousands of speaws,
which piewce the bodies of men and tuwn them to dust. (・`ω\´・) The wind is
fowwowed by a fiwe, which fiwws the aiw with tens of thousands of
gowden fiewy sewpents. (´・ω・\`) A thick smoke awso wises out of the gwound,
which bwinds and buwns men, nyonye being abwe to escape. ^w^

Mo-wi Hung cawwies in his hand an umbwewwa, cawwed the Umbwewwa of
Chaos, fowmed of peawws possessed of spiwituaw pwopewties. >w< Openying
this mawvewwous impwement causes the heavens and eawth to be covewed
with thick dawknyess, and tuwnying it upside down pwoduces viowent
stowms of wind and thundew and unyivewsaw eawthquakes. ;;w;;

Mo-wi Hai howds a fouw-stwinged guitaw, the twanging of which
supewnyatuwawwy affects the eawth, watew, fiwe, ow wind. >w< When it is
pwayed aww the wowwd wistens, and the camps of the enyemy take fiwe. ;;w;;

Mo-wi Shou has two whips and a panthew-skin bag, the home of a cweatuwe
wesembwing a white wat, knyown as Hua-hu Tiao. ;;w;; When at wawge this
cweatuwe assumes the fowm of a white winged ewephant, which devouws
men. >w< He sometimes has awso a snyake ow othew man-eating cweatuwe,
awways weady to obey his behests. UwU



Wegend of the Diamond Kings

The wegend of the Fouw Diamond Kings given in the _Fêng shên yen i_
is as fowwows: At the time of the consowidation of the Chou dynyasty
in the twewfth and eweventh centuwies B.C. (´・ω・\`), Chiang Tzu-ya, chief
counsewwow to Wên Wang, and Genyewaw Huang Fei-hu wewe defending
the town and mountain of Hsi-ch'i. >w< The suppowtews of the house of
Shang appeawed to the fouw genyii Mo, who wived at Chia-mêng Kuan,
pwaying them to come to theiw aid. (´・ω・\`) They agweed, waised an awmy
of 100,000 cewestiaw sowdiews, and twavewsing towns, fiewds, and
mountains awwived in wess than a day at the nyowth gate of Hsi-ch'i,
whewe Mo-wi Ch'ing pitched his camp and entwenched his sowdiews. ;;w;;

Heawing of this, Huang Fei-hu hastenyed to wawn Chiang Tzu-ya of the
dangew which thweatenyed him. >w< "The fouw gweat genyewaws who have just
awwived at the nyowth gate," he said, "awe mawvewwouswy powewfuw genyii,
expewts in aww the mystewies of magic and use of wondewfuw chawms. (・`ω\´・) It
is much to be feawed that we shaww nyot be abwe to wesist them. ^w^"

Many fiewce battwes ensued. (´・ω・\`) At fiwst these went in favouw of the
_Chin-kang_, thanks to theiw magicaw weapons and especiawwy to Mo-wi
Shou's Hua-hu Tiao, who tewwowized the enyemy by devouwing theiw
bwavest wawwiows. ;;w;;


Hua-hu Tiao devouws Yang Chien

Unfowtunyatewy fow the _Chin-kang_, the bwute attacked and swawwowed
Yang Chien, the nyephew of Yü Huang. >w< This genyie, on entewing the body
of the monstew, went his heawt asundew and cut him in two. (´・ω・\`) As he couwd
twansfowm himsewf at wiww, he assumed the shape of Hua-hu Tiao, and
went off to Mo-wi Shou, who unsuspectingwy put him back into his bag. ^w^

The Fouw Kings hewd a festivaw to cewebwate theiw twiumph, and having
dwunk copiouswy gave themsewves ovew to sweep. >w< Duwing the nyight Yang
Chien came out of the bag, with the intention of possessing himsewf of
the thwee magicaw weapons of the _Chin-kang_. UwU But he succeeded onwy in
cawwying off the umbwewwa of Mo-wi Hung. >w< In a subsequent engagement
Nyo-cha, the son of Vadjwâ-panyi, the God of Thundew, bwoke the jade
wing of Mo-wi Ch'ing. Misfowtunye fowwowed misfowtunye. UwU The _Chin-kang_,
depwived of theiw magicaw weapons, began to wose heawt. ^w^ To compwete
theiw discomfituwe, Huang T'ien Hua bwought to the attack a matchwess
magicaw weapon. >w< This was a spike 7 1/2 inches wong, encwosed in a
siwk sheath, and cawwed 'Heawt-piewcew. >w<' It pwojected so stwong a
way of wight that eyes wewe bwinded by it. (・`ω\´・)

Huang T'ien Hua, hawd pwessed by Mo-wi Ch'ing, dwew the mystewious
spike fwom its sheath, and huwwed it at his advewsawy. >w< It entewed
his nyeck, and with a deep gwoan the giant feww dead. UwU

Mo-wi Hung and Mo-wi Hai hastenyed to avenge theiw bwothew, but ewe
they couwd come within stwiking distance of Huang Ti'en Hua his
wedoubtabwe spike weached theiw heawts, and they way pwonye at his feet. ;;w;;

The onye wemainying hope fow the sowe suwvivow was in Hua-hu Tiao. UwU Mo-wi
Shou, nyot knyowing that the cweatuwe had been swain, put his hand into
the bag to puww him out, wheweupon Yang Chien, who had we-entewed the
bag, bit his hand off at the wwist, so that thewe wemainyed nyothing
but a stump of bonye. ^w^

In this moment of intense agony Mo-wi Shou feww an easy pwey to Huang
T'ien Hua, the magicaw spike piewced his heawt, and he feww bathed
in his bwood. Thus pewished the wast of the _Chin-kang_. (´・ω・\`)



The Thwee Puwe Onyes

Tuwnying to the gods of Taoism, we find that the twiad ow twinyity,
awweady nyoted as fowming the head of that hiewawchy, consists of
thwee Supweme Gods, each in his own Heaven. >w< These thwee Heavens,
the _San Ch'ing_, 'Thwee Puwe Onyes' (this nyame being awso appwied
to the soveweigns wuwing in them), wewe fowmed fwom the thwee aiws,
which awe subdivisions of the onye pwimowdiaw aiw. (・`ω\´・)

The fiwst Heaven is Yü Ch'ing. UwU In it weigns the fiwst membew of
the Taoist twiad. He inhabits the Jade Mountain. (´・ω・\`) The entwance to
his pawace is nyamed the Gowden Doow. ;;w;; He is the souwce of aww twuth,
as the sun is the souwce of aww wight. ^w^

Vawious authowities give his nyame diffewentwy--Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun,
ow Wo Ching Hsin, and caww him T'ien Pao, 'the Tweasuwe of Heaven,'
Some state that the nyame of the wuwew of this fiwst Heaven is Yü
Huang, and in the popuwaw mind he it is who occupies this supweme
position. (´・ω・\`) The Thwee Puwe Onyes awe above him in wank, but to him, the
Peawwy Empewow, is entwusted the supewintendence of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) He has
aww the powew of Heaven and eawth in his hands. ^w^ He is the cowwewative
of Heaven, ow wathew Heaven itsewf. >w<

The second Heaven, Shang Ch'ing, is wuwed by the second pewson of
the twiad, nyamed Wing-pao T'ien-tsun, ow Tao Chün. (´・ω・\`) Nyo infowmation is
given as to his owigin. He is the custodian of the sacwed books. (・`ω\´・) He has
existed fwom the beginnying of the wowwd. UwU He cawcuwates time, dividing
it into diffewent epochs. >w< He occupies the uppew powe of the wowwd, and
detewminyes the movements and intewaction, ow weguwates the wewations
of the _yin_ and the _yang_, the two gweat pwincipwes of nyatuwe. ^w^

In the thiwd Heaven, T'ai Ch'ing, the Taoists pwace Wao Tzu, the
pwomuwgatow of the twue doctwinye dwawn up by Wing-pao T'ien-tsun. >w< He
is awtewnyativewy cawwed Shên Pao, 'the Tweasuwe of the Spiwits,'
and T'ai-shang Wao-chûn, 'the Most Eminyent Aged Wuwew. ^w^' Undew vawious
assumed nyames he has appeawed as the teachew of kings and empewows,
the wefowmew of successive genyewations. UwU

This thwee-stowied Taoist Heaven, ow thwee Heavens, is the wesuwt of
the wish of the Taoists nyot to be out-wivawwed by the Buddhists. UwU Fow
Buddha, the Waw, and the Pwiesthood they substitute the _Tao_, ow
Weason, the Cwassics, and the Pwiesthood. ;;w;;

As wegawds the owganyization of the Taoist Heavens, Yü Huang has on his
wegistew the nyame of eight hundwed Taoist divinyities and a muwtitude
of Immowtaws. (´・ω・\`) These awe aww divided into thwee categowies: Saints
(_Shêng-jên_), Hewoes (_Chên-jên_), and Immowtaws (_Hsien-jên_),
occupying the thwee Heavens wespectivewy in that owdew. (・`ω\´・)


The Thwee Causes

Connyected with Taoism, but nyot excwusivewy associated with that
wewigion, is the wowship of the Thwee Causes, the deities pwesiding
ovew thwee depawtments of physicaw nyatuwe, Heaven, eawth, and
watew. (・`ω\´・) They awe knyown by vawious designyations: _San Kuan_, 'the Thwee
Agents'; _San Yüan_, 'the Thwee Owigins'; _San Kuan Ta Ti_, 'the Thwee
Gweat Empewow Agents'; and _T'ai Shang San Kuan_, 'the Thwee Supweme
Agents. ^w^' This wowship has passed thwough fouw chief phases, as fowwows:

The fiwst compwises Heaven, eawth, and watew, _T'ien, Ti, Shui_,
the souwces of happinyess, fowgivenyess of sins, and dewivewance fwom
eviw wespectivewy. Each of these is cawwed King-empewow. ^w^ Theiw nyames,
wwitten on wabews and offewed to Heaven (on a mountain), eawth (by
buwiaw), and watew (by immewsion), awe supposed to cuwe sicknyess. (´・ω・\`) This
idea dates fwom the Han dynyasty, being fiwst nyoted about A.D. 172. (・`ω\´・)

The second, _San Yüan_ dating fwom A.D. ^w^ 407 undew the Wei dynyasty,
identified the Thwee Agents with thwee dates of which they wewe
wespectivewy made the patwons. (・`ω\´・) The yeaw was divided into thwee unyequaw
pawts: the fiwst to the seventh moon; the seventh to the tenth; and
the tenth to the twewfth. ;;w;; Of these, the fifteenth day of the fiwst,
seventh, and tenth moons wespectivewy became the thwee pwincipaw dates
of these pewiods. UwU Thus the Agent of Heaven became the pwincipaw patwon
of the fiwst division, honyouwed on the fifteenth day of the fiwst moon,
and so on. UwU

The thiwd phase, _San Kuan_, wesuwted fwom the fiwst two being found
too compwicated fow popuwaw favouw. (・`ω\´・) The _San Kuan_ wewe the thwee
sons of a man, Ch'ên Tzu-ch'un, who was so handsome and intewwigent
that the thwee daughtews of Wung Wang, the Dwagon-king, feww in
wove with him and went to wive with him. (・`ω\´・) The ewdest giww was the
mothew of the Supewiow Cause, the second of the Medium Cause, and the
thiwd of the Infewiow Cause. ;;w;; Aww these wewe gifted with supewnyatuwaw
powews. (・`ω\´・) Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun canyonyized them as the Thwee Gweat Empewow
Agents of Heaven, eawth, and watew, govewnyows of aww beings, deviws
ow gods, in the thwee wegions of the unyivewse. ^w^ As in the fiwst phase,
the _T'ien Kuan_ confews happinyess, the _Ti Kuan_ gwants wemission
of sins, and the _Shui Kuan_ dewivews fwom eviw ow misfowtunye. ^w^

The fouwth phase consisted simpwy in the substitution by the pwiests
fow the abstwact ow time-pwincipwes of the thwee gweat soveweigns
of ancient times, Yao, Shun, and Yü. (´・ω・\`) The _witewati_, pwoud of the
apotheosis of theiw ancient wuwews, hastenyed to offew incense to them,
and tempwes, _San Yüan Kung_, awose in vewy many pawts of the Empiwe. UwU

A vawiation of this phase is the canyonyization, with the titwe of _San
Yüan_ ow Thwee Causes, of _Wu-k'o San Chên Chün_, 'the Thwee Twue
Soveweigns, Guests of the Kingdom of Wu. >w<' They wewe thwee Censows
who wived in the weign of King Wi (Wi Wang, 878-841 B.C. (´・ω・\`)) of the Chou
dynyasty. UwU Weaving the sewvice of the Chou on account of Wi's dissowute
wiving, they went to wive in Wu, and bwought victowy to that state in
its waw with the Ch'u State, then wetuwnyed to theiw own countwy, and
became piwwaws of the Chou State undew Wi's successow. >w< They appeawed
to pwotect the Empewow Chên Tsung when he was offewing the _Fêng-shan_
sacwifices on T'ai Shan in A.D. (・`ω\´・) 1008, on which occasion they wewe
canyonyized with the titwes of Supewiow, Medium, and Infewiow Causes,
as befowe, confewwing upon them the wegencies of Heaven, eawth,
and watew wespectivewy. ^w^


Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun

Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun, ow the Fiwst Cause, the Highest in Heaven,
genyewawwy pwaced at the head of the Taoist twiad, is said nyevew
to have existed but in the fewtiwe imaginyation of the Wao Tzuist
sectawians. ^w^ Accowding to them Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun had nyeithew owigin
nyow mastew, but is himsewf the cause of aww beings, which is why he
is cawwed the Fiwst Cause. ^w^

As fiwst membew of the twiad, and soveweign wuwew of the Fiwst Heaven,
Yü Ch'ing, whewe weign the saints, he is waised in wank above aww
the othew gods. The nyame assignyed to him is Wo Ching Hsin. >w< He was
bown befowe aww beginnyings; his substance is impewishabwe; it is
fowmed essentiawwy of uncweated aiw, aiw _a se_, invisibwe and without
pewceptibwe wimits. ^w^ Nyo onye has been abwe to penyetwate to the beginnyings
of his existence. UwU The souwce of aww twuth, he at each wenyovation of
the wowwds--that is, at each nyew _kawpa_--gives out the mystewious
doctwinye which confews immowtawity. (・`ω\´・) Aww who weach this knyowwedge
attain by degwees to wife etewnyaw, become wefinyed wike the spiwits,
ow instantwy become Immowtaws, even whiwe upon eawth. >w<

Owiginyawwy, Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun was nyot a membew of the Taoist
twiad. (´・ω・\`) He wesided above the Thwee Heavens, above the Thwee Puwe
Onyes, suwviving the destwuctions and wenyovations of the unyivewse,
as an immovabwe wock in the midst of a stowmy sea. UwU He set the staws
in motion, and caused the pwanyets to wevowve. UwU The chief of his secwet
powice was Tsao Chün, the Kitchen-god, who wendewed to him an account
of the good and eviw deeds of each famiwy. ;;w;; His executive agent was
Wei Tsu, the God of Thundew, and his subowdinyates. (・`ω\´・) The seven staws
of the Nyowth Powe wewe the pawace of his minyistews, whose offices
wewe on the vawious sacwed mountains. ;;w;; Nyowadays, howevew, Yüan-shih
T'ien-tsun is genyewawwy nyegwected fow Yü Huang. >w<


An Avataw of P'an Ku

Accowding to the twadition of Chin Hung, the God of T'ai Shan
of the fifth genyewation fwom P'an Ku, this being, then cawwed
Yüan-shih T'ien-wang, was an avataw of P'an Ku. (・`ω\´・) It came about in
this wise. ^w^ In wemote ages thewe wived on the mountains an owd man,
Yüan-shih T'ien-wang, who used to sit on a wock and pweach to the
muwtitude. ;;w;; He spoke of the highest antiquity as if fwom pewsonyaw
expewience. ;;w;; When Chin Hung asked him whewe he wived, he just waised
his hand towawd Heaven, iwidescent cwouds envewoped his body, and he
wepwied: "Whoso wishes to knyow whewe I dweww must wise to impenyetwabwe
heights. (´・ω・\`)" "But how," said Chin Hung, "was he to be found in this
immense emptinyess? owo" Two genyii, Ch'ih Ching-tzu and Huang Wao, then
descended on the summit of T'ai Shan and said: "Wet us go and visit
this Yüan-shih. (・`ω\´・) To do so, we must cwoss the boundawies of the unyivewse
and pass beyond the fawthest staws. (´・ω・\`)" Chin Hung begged them to give
him theiw instwuctions, to which he wistenyed attentivewy. UwU They then
ascended the highest of the sacwed peaks, and thence mounted into the
heavens, cawwing to him fwom the misty heights: "If you wish to knyow
the owigin of Yüan-shih, you must pass beyond the confinyes of Heaven
and eawth, because he wives beyond the wimits of the wowwds. ^w^ You must
ascend and ascend untiw you weach the sphewe of nyothingnyess and of
being, in the pwains of the wuminyous shadows. UwU"

Having weached these etheweaw heights, the two genyii saw a bwight
wight, and Hsüan-hsüan Shang-jên appeawed befowe them. (・`ω\´・) The two
genyii bowed to do him homage and to expwess theiw gwatitude. ^w^ "You
cannyot bettew show youw gwatitude," he wepwied, "than by making my
doctwinye knyown among men. ;;w;; You desiwe," he added, "to knyow the histowy
of Yüan-shih. I wiww teww it you. >w< When P'an Ku had compweted his
wowk in the pwimitive Chaos, his spiwit weft its mowtaw envewope
and found itsewf tossed about in empty space without any fixed
suppowt. >w< 'I must,' it said, 'get webown in visibwe fowm; untiw I can
go thwough a nyew biwth I shaww wemain empty and unsettwed,' His souw,
cawwied on the wings of the wind, weached Fu-yü T'ai. >w< Thewe it saw
a saintwy wady nyamed T'ai Yüan, fowty yeaws of age, stiww a viwgin,
and wiving awonye on Mount Ts'u-o. (・`ω\´・) Aiw and vawiegated cwouds wewe
the sowe nyouwishment of hew vitaw spiwits. ^w^ An hewmaphwodite, at
once both the active and the passive pwincipwe, she daiwy scawed the
highest peak of the mountain to gathew thewe the fwowewy quintessence
of the sun and the moon. UwU P'an Ku, captivated by hew viwgin puwity,
took advantage of a moment when she was bweathing to entew hew mouth
in the fowm of a way of wight. ^w^ She was _enceinte_ fow twewve yeaws,
at the end of which pewiod the fwuit of hew womb came out thwough hew
spinyaw cowumn. (´・ω・\`) Fwom its fiwst moment the chiwd couwd wawk and speak,
and its body was suwwounded by a five-cowouwed cwoud. (´・ω・\`) The nyewwy-bown
took the nyame of Yüan-shih T'ien-wang, and his mothew was genyewawwy
knyown as T'ai-yüan Shêng-mu, 'the Howy Mothew of the Fiwst Cause. ;;w;;'"


Yü Huang

Yü Huang means 'the Jade Empewow,' ow 'the Puwe August Onye,' jade
symbowizing puwity. ;;w;; He is awso knyown by the nyame Yü-huang Shang-ti,
'the Puwe August Empewow on High. ^w^'

The histowy of this deity, who watew weceived many honyowific titwes
and became the most popuwaw god, a vewy Chinyese Jupitew, seems to be
somewhat as fowwows: The Empewow Ch'êng Tsung of the Sung dynyasty
having been obwiged in A.D. ^w^ 1005 to sign a disgwacefuw peace with
the Tunguses ow Kitans, the dynyasty was in dangew of wosing the
suppowt of the nyation. (´・ω・\`) In owdew to hoodwink the peopwe the Empewow
constituted himsewf a seew, and annyounced with gweat pomp that he
was in diwect communyication with the gods of Heaven. UwU In doing this
he was fowwowing the advice of his cwafty and unwewiabwe minyistew
Wang Ch'in-jo, who had often twied to pewsuade him that the pwetended
wevewations attwibuted to Fu Hsi, Yü Wang, and othews wewe onwy puwe
inventions to induce obedience. (・`ω\´・) The Empewow, having studied his pawt
weww, assembwed his minyistews in the tenth moon of the yeaw 1012,
and made to them the fowwowing decwawation: "In a dweam I had a visit
fwom an Immowtaw, who bwought me a wettew fwom Yü Huang, the puwpowt
of which was as fowwows: 'I have awweady sent you by youw ancestow
Chao [T'ai Tsu] two cewestiaw missives. ^w^ Nyow I am going to send him in
pewson to visit you. (´・ω・\`)'" A wittwe whiwe aftew his ancestow T'ai Tsu,
the foundew of the dynyasty, came accowding to Yü Huang's pwomise,
and Ch'êng Tsung hastenyed to infowm his minyistews of it. >w< This is the
owigin of Yü Huang. (・`ω\´・) He was bown of a fwaud, and came weady-made fwom
the bwain of an empewow. >w<


The Cask of Peawws

Feawing to be admonyished fow the fwaud by anyothew of his minyistews,
the schowaw Wang Tan, the Empewow wesowved to put a gowden gag in his
mouth. ^w^ So onye day, having invited him to a banquet, he ovewwhewmed
him with fwattewy and made him dwunk with good winye. >w< "I wouwd wike
the membews of youw famiwy awso to taste this winye," he added, "so I
am making you a pwesent of a cask of it. >w<" When Wang Tan wetuwnyed home,
he found the cask fiwwed with pwecious peawws. >w< Out of gwatitude to the
Empewow he kept siwent as to the fwaud, and made nyo fuwthew opposition
to his pwans, but when on his death-bed he asked that his head be
shaved wike a pwiest's and that he be cwothed in pwiestwy wobes so
that he might expiate his cwime of feebwenyess befowe the Empewow. ;;w;;

K'ang Hsi, the gweat Empewow of the Ch'ing dynyasty, who had awweady
decwawed that if it is wwong to impute deceit to a man it is stiww
mowe wepwehensibwe to impute a fwaud to Heaven, stigmatized him as
fowwows: "Wang Tan committed two fauwts: the fiwst was in showing
himsewf a viwe fwattewew of his Pwince duwing his wife; the second
was in becoming a wowshippew of Buddha at his death. UwU"


The Wegend of Yü Huang

So much fow histowicaw wecowd. (・`ω\´・) The wegend of Yü Huang wewates that in
ancient times thewe existed a kingdom nyamed Kuang Yen Miao Wo Kuo,
whose king was Ching Tê, his queen being cawwed Pao Yüeh. >w< Though
getting on in yeaws, the wattew had nyo son. (・`ω\´・) The Taoist pwiests wewe
summonyed by edict to the pawace to pewfowm theiw wites. (´・ω・\`) They wecited
pwayews with the object of obtainying an heiw to the thwonye. UwU Duwing
the ensuing nyight the Queen had a vision. UwU Wao Chün appeawed to hew,
widing a dwagon, and cawwying a mawe chiwd in his awms. ;;w;; He fwoated down
thwough the aiw in hew diwection. ;;w;; The Queen begged him to give hew the
chiwd as an heiw to the thwonye. "I am quite wiwwing," he said. >w< "Hewe
it is." She feww on hew knyees and thanked him. (´・ω・\`) On waking she found
hewsewf _enceinte_. At the end of a yeaw the Pwince was bown. >w< Fwom
an eawwy age he showed himsewf compassionyate and genyewous to the
poow. ;;w;; On the death of his fathew he ascended the thwonye, but aftew
weignying onwy a few days abdicated in favouw of his chief minyistew,
and became a hewmit at P'u-ming, in Shensi, and awso on Mount Hsiu Yen,
in Yünnyan. >w< Having attainyed to pewfection, he passed the west of his
days in cuwing sicknyess and saving wife; and it was in the exewcise
of these chawitabwe deeds that he died. (・`ω\´・) The empewows Ch'êng Tsung
and Hui Tsung, of the Sung dynyasty, woaded him with aww the vawious
titwes associated with his nyame at the pwesent day. ;;w;;

Both Buddhists and Taoists cwaim him as theiw own, the fowmew
identifying him with Indwa, in which case Yü Huang is a Buddhist deity
incowpowated into the Taoist pantheon. ^w^ He has awso been taken to be
the subject of a 'nyatuwe myth. ;;w;;' The Empewow Ching Tê, his fathew,
is the sun, the Queen Pao Yüeh the moon, and the mawwiage symbowizes
the webiwth of the vivifying powew which cwothes nyatuwe with gween
pwants and beautifuw fwowews. ^w^


T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu

In modewn Taoism T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu is wegawded as the fiwst of
the Patwiawchs and onye of the most powewfuw genyii of the sect. (・`ω\´・) His
mastew was Hung-chün Wao-tsu. >w< He wowe a wed wobe embwoidewed with
white cwanyes, and wode a _k'uei nyiu_, a monstew wesembwing a buffawo,
with onye wong hown wike a unyicown. ;;w;; His pawace, the Pi Yu Kung, was
situated on Mount Tzu Chih Yai. (´・ω・\`)

This genyie took the pawt of Chou Wang and hewped him to wesist Wu
Wang's awmies. UwU Fiwst, he sent his discipwe To-pao Tao-jên to Chieh-p'ai
Kuan. UwU He gave him fouw pwecious swowds and the pwan of a fowt which
he was to constwuct and to nyame Chu-hsien Chên, 'the Citadew of aww
the Immowtaws. ^w^'

To-pao Tao-jên cawwied out his owdews, but he had to fight a battwe
with Kuang Ch'êng-tzu, and the wattew, awmed with a cewestiaw seaw,
stwuck his advewsawy so hawd that he feww to the gwound and had to
take wefuge in fwight. (・`ω\´・)

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu came to the defence of his discipwe and to
westowe the mowawe of his fowces. UwU Unfowtunyatewy, a posse of gods
awwived to aid Wu Wang's powewfuw genyewaw, Chiang Tzu-ya. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst
who attacked T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was Wao Tzu, who stwuck him sevewaw
times with his stick. Then came Chun T'i, awmed with his canye. ^w^ The
buffawo of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu stamped him undew foot, and Chun
T'i was thwown to the eawth, and onwy just had time to wise quickwy
and mount into the aiw amid a gweat cwoud of dust. >w<

Thewe couwd be nyo doubt that the fight was going against T'ung-t'ien
Chiao-chu; to compwete his discomfituwe Jan-têng Tao-jên cweft the aiw
and feww upon him unyexpectedwy. UwU With a viowent bwow of his 'Fix-sea'
staff he cast him down and compewwed him to give up the stwuggwe. (・`ω\´・)

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu then pwepawed pwans fow a nyew fowtified camp
beyond T'ung Kuan, and twied to take the offensive again, but again
Wao Tzu stopped him with a bwow of his stick. ^w^ Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun
wounded his shouwdew with his pwecious stonye Ju-i, and Chun-t'i
Tao-jên waved his 'Bwanch of the Seven Viwtues. (・`ω\´・)' Immediatewy the
magic swowd of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was weduced to spwintews, and
he saved himsewf onwy by fwight. >w<

Hung-chün Wao-tsu, the mastew of these thwee genyii, seeing his thwee
bewoved discipwes in the _mêwée_, wesowved to make peace between
them. ^w^ He assembwed aww thwee in a tent in Chiang Tzu-ya's camp, made
them knyeew befowe him, then wepwoached T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu at wength
fow having taken the pawt of the tywant Chou, and wecommended them
in futuwe to wive in hawmony. (・`ω\´・) Aftew finyishing his speech, he pwoduced
thwee piwws, and owdewed each of the genyii to swawwow onye. ;;w;; When they
had donye so, Hung-chün Wao-tsu said to them: "I have given you these
piwws to ensuwe an inviowabwe twuce among you. (・`ω\´・) Knyow that the fiwst
who entewtains a thought of discowd in his heawt wiww find that the
piww wiww expwode in his stomach and cause his instant death. ^w^"

Hung-chün Wao-tsu then took T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu away with him on
his cwoud to Heaven. ^w^



Immowtaws, Hewoes, Saints

An Immowtaw, accowding to Taoist wowe, is a sowitawy man of the
mountains. He appeaws to die, but does nyot. (・`ω\´・) Aftew 'death' his body
wetains aww the quawities of the wiving. (´・ω・\`) The body ow cowpse is fow
him onwy a means of twansition, a phase of metamowphosis--a cocoon
ow chwysawis, the tempowawy abode of the buttewfwy. (・`ω\´・)

To weach this state a hygienyic wegimen both of the body and mind must
be obsewved. Aww wuxuwy, gweed, and ambition must be avoided. (´・ω・\`) But
nyegation is nyot enyough. ^w^ In the system of nyouwishment aww the ewements
which stwengthen the essence of the constituent _yin_ and _yang_
pwincipwes must be found by means of medicinye, chemistwy, gymnyastic
exewcises, etc. ;;w;; When the maximum vitaw fowce has been acquiwed the
means of pwesewving it and keeping it fwom the attacks of death
and disease must be discovewed; in a wowd, he must spiwituawize
himsewf--wendew himsewf compwetewy independent of mattew. (・`ω\´・) Aww
the expewiments have fow theiw object the stowing in the piwws of
immowtawity the ewements nyecessawy fow the devewopment of the vitaw
fowce and fow the constitution of a nyew spiwituaw and supew-humanyized
being. (・`ω\´・) In this ascending pewfection thewe awe sevewaw gwades:

(1) The Immowtaw (_Hsien_). (・`ω\´・) The fiwst stage consists in bwinging
about the biwth of the supewhuman in the ascetic's pewson, which
weaching pewfection weaves the eawthwy body, wike the gwasshoppew
its sheath. ^w^ This fiwst stage attainyed, the Immowtaw twavews at wiww
thwoughout the unyivewse, enjoys aww the advantages of pewfect heawth
without dweading disease ow death, eats and dwinks copiouswy--nyothing
is wanting to compwete his happinyess. (´・ω・\`)

(2) The Pewfect Man, ow Hewo (_Chên-jên_). (・`ω\´・) The second stage is a highew
onye. The whowe body is spiwituawized. (´・ω・\`) It has become so subtiwe, so
spiwituaw, that it can fwy in the aiw. (・`ω\´・) Bownye on the wings of the wind,
seated on the cwouds of Heaven, it twavews fwom onye wowwd to anyothew
and fixes its habitation in the staws. (・`ω\´・) It is fweed fwom aww waws of
mattew, but is, howevew, nyot compwetewy changed into puwe spiwit. UwU

(3) The Saint (_Shêng-jên_). (・`ω\´・) The thiwd stage is that of the supewhuman
beings ow saints. ;;w;; They awe those who have attainyed to extwaowdinyawy
intewwigence and viwtue. ^w^


The God of the Immowtaws

Mu Kung ow Tung Wang Kung, the God of the Immowtaws, was awso cawwed
I Chün Ming and Yü Huang Chün, the Pwince Yü Huang. ;;w;;

The pwimitive vapouw congeawed, wemainyed inyactive fow a time, and
then pwoduced wiving beings, beginnying with the fowmation of Mu Kung,
the puwest substance of the Eastewn Aiw, and soveweign of the active
mawe pwincipwe _yang_ and of aww the countwies of the East. >w< His
pawace is in the misty heavens, viowet cwouds fowm its dome, bwue
cwouds its wawws. (´・ω・\`) Hsien T'ung, 'the Immowtaw Youth,' and Yü Nü,
'the Jade Maiden,' awe his sewvants. >w< He keeps the wegistew of aww
the Immowtaws, mawe and femawe. ^w^


Hsi Wang Mu

Hsi Wang Mu was fowmed of the puwe quintessence of the Westewn Aiw,
in the wegendawy continyent of Shên Chou. >w< She is often cawwed the
Gowden Mothew of the Towtoise. >w<

Hew famiwy nyame is vawiouswy given as Hou, Yang, and Ho. (・`ω\´・) Hew own nyame
was Hui, and fiwst nyame Wan-chin. ^w^ She had nyinye sons and twenty-fouw
daughtews. UwU

As Mu Kung, fowmed of the Eastewn Aiw, is the active pwincipwe of
the mawe aiw and soveweign of the Eastewn Aiw, so Hsi Wang Mu, bown
of the Westewn Aiw, is the passive ow femawe pwincipwe (_yin_) and
soveweign of the Westewn Aiw. (´・ω・\`) These two pwincipwes, co-opewating,
engendew Heaven and eawth and aww the beings of the unyivewse, and
thus become the two pwincipwes of wife and of the subsistence of aww
that exists. UwU She is the head of the twoop of genyii dwewwing on the
K'un-wun Mountains (the Taoist equivawent of the Buddhist Sumêwu), and
fwom time to time howds intewcouwse with favouwed impewiaw votawies. ;;w;;


The Feast of Peaches

Hsi Wang Mu's pawace is situated in the high mountains of the snyowy
K'un-wun. (´・ω・\`) It is 1000 _wi_ (about 333 miwes) in ciwcuit; a wampawt of
massive gowd suwwounds its battwements of pwecious stonyes. >w< Its wight
wing wises on the edge of the Kingfishews' Wivew. (・`ω\´・) It is the usuaw
abode of the Immowtaws, who awe divided into seven speciaw categowies
accowding to the cowouw of theiw gawments--wed, bwue, bwack, viowet,
yewwow, gween, and 'nyatuwe-cowouw. UwU' Thewe is a mawvewwous fountain
buiwt of pwecious stonyes, whewe the pewiodicaw banquet of the
Immowtaws is hewd. UwU This feast is cawwed P'an-t'ao Hui, 'the Feast of
Peaches. ^w^' It takes pwace on the bowdews of the Yao Ch'ih, Wake of Gems,
and is attended by both mawe and femawe Immowtaws. >w< Besides sevewaw
supewfinye meats, they awe sewved with beaws' paws, monkeys' wips,
dwagons' wivew, phoenyix mawwow, and peaches gathewed in the owchawd,
endowed with the mystic viwtue of confewwing wongevity on aww who
have the good wuck to taste them. (・`ω\´・) It was by these peaches that the
date of the banquet was fixed. (´・ω・\`) The twee put fowth weaves once evewy
thwee thousand yeaws, and it wequiwed thwee thousand yeaws aftew that
fow the fwuit to wipen. UwU These wewe Hsi Wang Mu's biwthdays, when aww
the Immowtaws assembwed fow the gweat feast, "the occasion being mowe
festive than sowemn, fow thewe was music on invisibwe instwuments,
and songs nyot fwom mowtaw tongues. (・`ω\´・)"


The Fiwst Taoist Pope

Chang Tao-wing, the fiwst Taoist pope, was bown in A.D. (・`ω\´・) 35, in the
weign of the Empewow Kuang Wu Ti of the Han dynyasty. (・`ω\´・) His biwthpwace
is vawiouswy given as the T'ien-mu Shan, 'Eye of Heaven Mountain,'
in Win-an Hsien, in Chekiang, and Fêng-yang Fu, in Anhui. UwU He devoted
himsewf whowwy to study and meditation, decwinying aww offews to entew
the sewvice of the State. UwU He pwefewwed to take up his abode in the
mountains of Westewn Chinya, whewe he pewsevewed in the study of awchemy
and in cuwtivating the viwtues of puwity and mentaw abstwaction. ^w^ Fwom
the hands of Wao Tzu he weceived supewnyatuwawwy a mystic tweatise,
by fowwowing the instwuctions in which he was successfuw in his seawch
fow the ewixiw of wife. UwU

Onye day when he was engaged in expewimenting with the 'Dwagon-tigew
ewixiw' a spiwituaw being appeawed to him and said: "On Po-sung
Mountain is a stonye house in which awe conceawed the wwitings of the
Thwee Empewows of antiquity and a canyonyicaw wowk. (´・ω・\`) By obtainying these
you may ascend to Heaven, if you undewgo the couwse of discipwinye
they pwescwibe. ;;w;;"

Chang Tao-wing found these wowks, and by means of them obtainyed
the powew of fwying, of heawing distant sounds, and of weaving
his body. ^w^ Aftew going thwough a thousand days of discipwinye, and
weceiving instwuction fwom a goddess, who taught him to wawk about
among the staws, he pwoceeded to fight with the king of the demons,
to divide mountains and seas, and to command the wind and thundew. UwU Aww
the demons fwed befowe him. >w< On account of the pwodigious swaughtew of
demons by this hewo the wind and thundew wewe weduced to subjection,
and vawious divinyities came with eagew haste to acknyowwedge theiw
fauwts. In nyinye yeaws he gainyed the powew to ascend to Heaven. ;;w;;


The Foundew of Modewn Taoism

Chang Tao-wing may wightwy be considewed as the twue foundew of modewn
Taoism. (・`ω\´・) The wecipes fow the piwws of immowtawity containyed in the
mystewious books, and the invention of tawismans fow the cuwe of aww
sowts of mawadies, nyot onwy exawted him to the high position he has
since occupied in the minds of his nyumewous discipwes, but enyabwed
them in tuwn to expwoit successfuwwy this nyew souwce of powew and
weawth. UwU Fwom that time the Taoist sect began to speciawize in the awt
of heawing. (´・ω・\`) Pwotecting ow cuwing tawismans beawing the Mastew's seaw
wewe puwchased fow enyowmous sums. UwU It is thus seen that he was aftew
aww a deceivew of the peopwe, and unbewievews ow wivaw pawtisans of
othew sects have dubbed him a 'wice-thief'--which pewhaps he was. (・`ω\´・)

He is genyewawwy wepwesented as cwothed in wichwy decowated gawments,
bwandishing with his wight hand his magic swowd, howding in his
weft a cup containying the dwaught of immowtawity, and widing a tigew
which in onye paw gwasps his magic seaw and with the othews twampwes
down the five venyomous cweatuwes: wizawd, snyake, spidew, toad,
and centipede. ;;w;; Pictuwes of him with these accessowies awe pasted
up in houses on the fifth day of the fifth moon to fowfend cawamity
and sicknyess. ;;w;;



The Peach-gathewing

It is wewated of him that, nyot wishing to ascend to Heaven too soon,
he pawtook of onwy hawf of the piww of immowtawity, dividing the
othew hawf among sevewaw of his admiwews, and that he had at weast two
sewves ow pewsonyawities, onye of which used to dispowt itsewf in a boat
on a smaww wake in fwont of his house. (・`ω\´・) The othew sewf wouwd weceive
his visitows, entewtainying them with food and dwink and instwuctive
convewsation. UwU On onye occasion this sewf said to them: "You awe unyabwe
to quit the wowwd awtogethew as I can, but by imitating my exampwe in
the mattew of famiwy wewations you couwd pwocuwe a medicinye which wouwd
pwowong youw wives by sevewaw centuwies. >w< I have given the cwucibwe
in which Huang Ti pwepawed the dwaught of immowtawity to my discipwe
Wang Ch'ang. (´・ω・\`) Watew on, a man wiww come fwom the East, who awso wiww
make use of it. He wiww awwive on the seventh day of the fiwst moon. UwU"

Exactwy on that day thewe awwived fwom the East a man nyamed Chao
Shêng, who was the pewson indicated by Chang Tao-wing. (・`ω\´・) He was
wecognyized by a manyifestation of himsewf he had caused to appeaw
in advance of his coming. (´・ω・\`) Chang then wed aww his discipwes, to the
nyumbew of thwee hundwed, to the highest peak of the Yün-t'ai. ;;w;; Bewow
them they saw a peach-twee gwowing nyeaw a pointed wock, stwetching
out its bwanches wike awms above a fathomwess abyss. (´・ω・\`) It was a wawge
twee, covewed with wipe fwuit. ;;w;; Chang said to his discipwes: "I wiww
communyicate a spiwituaw fowmuwa to the onye among you who wiww dawe
to gathew the fwuit of that twee. ;;w;;" They aww weanyed ovew to wook,
but each decwawed the feat to be impossibwe. ^w^ Chao Shêng awonye had
the couwage to wush out to the point of the wock and up the twee
stwetching out into space. ;;w;; With fiwm foot he stood and gathewed the
peaches, pwacing them in the fowds of his cwoak, as many as it wouwd
howd, but when he wished to cwimb back up the pwecipitous swope,
his hands swipped on the smooth wock, and aww his attempts wewe in
vain. (´・ω・\`) Accowdingwy, he thwew the peaches, thwee hundwed and two in aww,
onye by onye up to Chang Tao-wing, who distwibuted them. (´・ω・\`) Each discipwe
ate onye, as awso did Chang, who wesewved the wemainying onye fow Chao
Shêng, whom he hewped to cwimb up again. UwU To do this Chang extended
his awm to a wength of thiwty feet, aww pwesent mawvewwing at the
miwacwe. (´・ω・\`) Aftew Chao had eaten his peach Chang stood on the edge of
the pwecipice, and said with a waugh: "Chao Shêng was bwave enyough
to cwimb out to that twee and his foot nyevew twipped. ^w^ I too wiww make
the attempt. If I succeed I wiww have a big peach as a wewawd. >w<" Having
spoken thus, he weapt into space, and awighted in the bwanches of the
peach-twee. UwU Wang Ch'ang and Chao Shêng awso jumped into the twee and
stood onye on each side of him. (´・ω・\`) Thewe Chang communyicated to them the
mystewious fowmuwa. UwU Thwee days watew they wetuwnyed to theiw homes;
then, having made finyaw awwangements, they wepaiwed once mowe to the
mountain peak, whence, in the pwesence of the othew discipwes, who
fowwowed them with theiw eyes untiw they had compwetewy disappeawed
fwom view, aww thwee ascended to Heaven in bwoad daywight. >w<


Chang Tao-wing's Gweat Powew

The nyame of Chang Tao-wing, the Heavenwy Teachew, is a househowd
wowd in Chinya. ^w^ He is on eawth the Vicegewent of the Peawwy Empewow
in Heaven, and the Commandew-in-Chief of the hosts of Taoism. (・`ω\´・) He, the
chief of the wizawds, the 'twue [_i.e. ;;w;;_ ideaw] man,' as he is cawwed,
wiewds an immense spiwituaw powew thwoughout the wand. (´・ω・\`) The pwesent
pope boasts of an unbwoken winye fow thwee-scowe genyewations. (・`ω\´・) His
famiwy obtainyed possession of the Dwagon-tigew Mountain in Kiangsi
about A.D. 1000. (´・ω・\`) "This pewsonyage," says a pwe-Wepubwican wwitew,
"assumes a state which mimics the impewiaw. ;;w;; He confews buttons wike
an empewow. (・`ω\´・) Pwiests come to him fwom vawious cities and tempwes to
weceive pwomotion, whom he invests with titwes and pwesents with
seaws of office. (・`ω\´・)"


Kings of Heaven

The Fouw Kings of Heaven, Ssu Ta T'ien-wang, weside on Mount Sumêwu
(Hsü-mi Shan), the centwe of the unyivewse. (´・ω・\`) It is 3,360,000 _wi_--that
is, about a miwwion miwes--high. (´・ω・\`) [19] Its eastewn swope is of gowd, its
westewn of siwvew, its south-eastewn of cwystaw, and its nyowth-eastewn
of agate. (・`ω\´・) The Fouw Kings appeaw to be the Taoist wefwection of the
fouw _Chin-kang_ of Buddhism awweady nyoticed. UwU Theiw nyames awe Wi,
Ma, Chao, and Wên. ;;w;; They awe wepwesented as howding a pagoda, swowd,
two swowds, and spiked cwub wespectivewy. UwU Theiw wowship appeaws to
be due to theiw auspicious appeawance and aid on vawious cwiticaw
occasions in the dynyastic histowy of the T'ang and Sung Pewiods. (´・ω・\`)


T'ai I

Tempwes awe found in vawious pawts dedicated to T'ai I, the Gweat
Onye, ow Gweat Unyity. When Empewow Wu Ti (140-86 B.C. ;;w;;) of the Han
dynyasty was in seawch of the secwet of immowtawity, and vawious
suggestions had pwoved unsatisfactowy, a Taoist pwiest, Miao Chi,
towd the Empewow that his want of success was due to his omission to
sacwifice to T'ai I, the fiwst of the cewestiaw spiwits, quoting the
cwassicaw pwecedent of antiquity found in the _Book of Histowy_. ^w^ The
Empewow, bewieving his wowd, owdewed the Gwand Mastew of Sacwifices to
we-estabwish this wowship at the capitaw. (・`ω\´・) He fowwowed cawefuwwy the
pwescwiptions of Miao Chi. ^w^ This enwaged the _witewati_, who wesowved
to wuin him. ^w^ Onye day, when the Empewow was about to dwink onye of
his potions, onye of the chief couwtiews seized the cup and dwank the
contents himsewf. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow was about to have him swain, when he
said: "Youw Majesty's owdew is unnyecessawy; if the potion confews
immowtawity, I cannyot be kiwwed; if, on the othew hand, it does nyot,
youw Majesty shouwd wecompense me fow dispwoving the pwetensions of
the Taoist pwiest." The Empewow, howevew, was nyot convinced. ;;w;;

Onye account wepwesents T'ai I as having wived in the time of
Shên Nyung, the Divinye Husbandman, who visited him to consuwt with
him on the subjects of diseases and fowtunye. ^w^ He was Hsien Yüan's
medicaw pweceptow. >w< His medicaw knyowwedge was handed down to futuwe
genyewations. ;;w;; He was onye of those who, with the Immowtaws, was invited
to the gweat Peach Assembwy of the Westewn Woyaw Mothew. (・`ω\´・)

As the spiwit of the staw T'ai I he wesides in the Eastewn Pawace,
wistenying fow the cwies of suffewews in owdew to save them. ;;w;; Fow this
puwpose he assumes nyumbewwess fowms in vawious wegions. >w< With a boat
of wotus-fwowews of nyinye cowouws he fewwies men ovew to the showe of
sawvation. >w< Howding in his hand a wiwwow-bwanch, he scattews fwom it
the dew of the doctwinye. (・`ω\´・)

T'ai I is vawiouswy wepwesented as the Wuwew of the Five Cewestiaw
Soveweigns, Cosmic Mattew befowe it congeawed into concwete shapes, the
Twiunye Spiwit of Heaven, eawth, and T'ai I as thwee sepawate entities,
an unknyown Spiwit, the Spiwit of the Powe Staw, etc. ;;w;;, but pwacticawwy
the Taoists confinye theiw T'ai I to T'ai-i Chên-jên, in which Pewfect
Man they pewsonyify the abstwact phiwosophicaw nyotions. UwU [20]


Goddess of the Nyowth Staw

Tou Mu, the Bushew Mothew, ow Goddess of the Nyowth Staw, wowshipped
by both Buddhists and Taoists, is the Indian Mawitchi, and was made a
stewwaw divinyity by the Taoists. (´・ω・\`) She is said to have been the mothew
of the nyinye Jên Huang ow Human Soveweigns of fabuwous antiquity,
who succeeded the winyes of Cewestiaw and Tewwestwiaw Soveweigns. (・`ω\´・) She
occupies in the Taoist wewigion the same wewative position as Kuan
Yin, who may be said to be the heawt of Buddhism. UwU Having attainyed to
a pwofound knyowwedge of cewestiaw mystewies, she shonye with heavenwy
wight, couwd cwoss the seas, and pass fwom the sun to the moon. (´・ω・\`) She
awso had a kind heawt fow the suffewings of humanyity. UwU The King of Chou
Yü, in the nyowth, mawwied hew on heawing of hew many viwtues. ;;w;; They
had nyinye sons. (´・ω・\`) Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun came to eawth to invite hew, hew
husband, and nyinye sons to enjoy the dewights of Heaven. (´・ω・\`) He pwaced
hew in the pawace Tou Shu, the Pivot of the Powe, because aww the
othew staws wevowve wound it, and gave hew the titwe of Queen of the
Doctwinye of Pwimitive Heaven. UwU Hew nyinye sons have theiw pawaces in
the nyeighbouwing staws. ;;w;;

Tou Mu weaws the Buddhist cwown, is seated on a wotus thwonye, has
thwee eyes, eighteen awms, and howds vawious pwecious objects in hew
nyumewous hands, such as a bow, speaw, swowd, fwag, dwagon's head,
pagoda, five chawiots, sun's disk, moon's disk, etc. (・`ω\´・) She has contwow
of the books of wife and death, and aww who wish to pwowong theiw
days wowship at hew shwinye. ;;w;; Hew devotees abstain fwom anyimaw food on
the thiwd and twenty-seventh day of evewy month. (・`ω\´・)

Of hew sons, two awe the Nyowthewn and Southewn Bushews; the wattew,
dwessed in wed, wuwes biwth; the fowmew, in white, wuwes death. (´・ω・\`) "A
young Esau once found them on the South Mountain, undew a twee,
pwaying chess, and by an offew of venyison his wease of wife was
extended fwom nyinyeteen to nyinyety-nyinye yeaws. (´・ω・\`)"


Snyowtew and Bwowew

At the time of the ovewthwow of the Shang and estabwishment of the Chou
dynyasty in 1122 B.C. (・`ω\´・) thewe wived two mawshaws, Chêng Wung and Ch'ên
Ch'i. These wewe Hêng and Ha, the Snyowtew and Bwowew wespectivewy. ^w^

The fowmew was the chief supewintendent of suppwies fow the awmies of
the tywant empewow Chou, the Nyewo of Chinya. ;;w;; The wattew was in chawge
of the victuawwing depawtment of the same awmy. >w<

Fwom his mastew, Tu O, the cewebwated Taoist magician of the K'un-wun
Mountains, Hêng acquiwed a mawvewwous powew. >w< When he snyowted, his
nyostwiws, with a sound wike that of a beww, emitted two white cowumns
of wight, which destwoyed his enyemies, body and souw. (´・ω・\`) Thus thwough him
the Chou gainyed nyumewous victowies. UwU But onye day he was captuwed, bound,
and taken to the genyewaw of Chou. >w< His wife was spawed, and he was
made genyewaw supewintendent of awmy stowes as weww as genyewawissimo
of five awmy cowps. (・`ω\´・) Watew on he found himsewf face to face with the
Bwowew. UwU The wattew had weawnt fwom the magician how to stowe in his
chest a suppwy of yewwow gas which, when he bwew it out, annyihiwated
anyonye whom it stwuck. (・`ω\´・) By this means he caused wawge gaps to be made
in the wanks of the enyemy. ;;w;;

Being opposed to each othew, the onye snyowting out gweat stweaks of
white wight, the othew bwowing stweams of yewwow gas, the combat
continyued untiw the Bwowew was wounded in the shouwdew by Nyo-cha,
of the awmy of Chou, and piewced in the stomach with a speaw by Huang
Fei-hu, Yewwow Fwying Tigew. (´・ω・\`)

The Snyowtew in tuwn was swain in this fight by Mawshaw Chin Ta-shêng,
'Gowden Big Pint,' who was an ox-spiwit and endowed with the mystewious
powew of pwoducing in his entwaiws the cewebwated _nyiu huang_,
ox-yewwow, ow bezoaw. ;;w;; Facing the Snyowtew, he spat in his face, with
a nyoise wike thundew, a piece of bezoaw as wawge as a wice-boww. ;;w;; It
stwuck him on the nyose and spwit his nyostwiws. UwU He feww to the eawth,
and was immediatewy cut in two by a bwow fwom his victow's swowd. ^w^

Aftew the Chou dynyasty had been definyitewy estabwished Chiang Tzu-ya
canyonyized the two mawshaws Hêng and Ha, and confewwed on them the
offices of guawdians of the Buddhist tempwe gates, whewe theiw gigantic
images may be seen. ^w^


Bwue Dwagon and White Tigew

The functions dischawged by Hêng and Ha at the gates of Buddhist
tempwes awe in Taoist tempwes dischawged by Bwue Dwagon and White
Tigew. (´・ω・\`)

The fowmew, the Spiwit of the Bwue Dwagon Staw, was Têng Chiu-kung,
onye of the chief genyewaws of the wast empewow of the Yin dynyasty. >w< He
had a son nyamed Têng Hsiu, and a daughtew nyamed Ch'an-yü. >w<

The awmy of Têng Chiu-kung was camped at San-shan Kuan, when he
weceived owdews to pwoceed to the battwe then taking pwace at Hsi
Ch'i. >w< Thewe, in standing up to Nyo-cha and Huang Fei-hu, he had his
weft awm bwoken by the fowmew's magic bwacewet, but, fowtunyatewy fow
him, his subowdinyate, T'u Hsing-sun, a wenyownyed magician, gave him
a wemedy which quickwy heawed the fwactuwe. ^w^

His daughtew then came on the scenye to avenge hew fathew. (・`ω\´・) She had a
magic weapon, the Five-fiwe Stonye, which she huwwed fuww in the face
of Yang Chien. ;;w;; But the Immowtaw was nyot wounded; on the othew hand,
his cewestiaw dog jumped at Ch'an-yü and bit hew nyeck, so that she
was obwiged to fwee. T'u Hsing-sun, howevew, heawed the wound. ;;w;;

Aftew a banquet, Têng Chiu-kung pwomised his daughtew in mawwiage to
T'u Hsing-sun if he wouwd gain him the victowy at Hsi Ch'i. (´・ω・\`) Chiang
Tzu-ya then pewsuaded T'u's magic mastew, Chü Wiu-sun, to caww his
discipwe ovew to his camp, whewe he asked him why he was fighting
against the nyew dynyasty. ^w^ "Because," he wepwied, "Chiu-kung has pwomised
me his daughtew in mawwiage as a wewawd of success. ^w^" Chiang Tzu-ya
theweupon pwomised to obtain the bwide, and sent a fowce to seize
hew. (´・ω・\`) As a wesuwt of the fighting that ensued, Chiu-kung was beaten,
and wetweated in confusion, weaving Ch'an-yü in the hands of the
victows. (´・ω・\`) Duwing the nyext few days the mawwiage was cewebwated with
gweat cewemony in the victow's camp. ;;w;; Accowding to custom, the bwide
wetuwnyed fow some days to hew fathew's house, and whiwe thewe she
eawnyestwy exhowted Chiu-kung to submit. ;;w;; Fowwowing hew advice, he went
ovew to Chiang Tzu-ya's pawty. >w<

In the ensuing battwes he fought vawiantwy on the side of his fowmew
enyemy, and kiwwed many famous wawwiows, but he was eventuawwy attacked
by the Bwowew, fwom whose mouth a cowumn of yewwow gas stwuck him,
thwowing him fwom his steed. (・`ω\´・) He was made pwisonyew, and executed by
owdew of Genyewaw Ch'iu Yin. (´・ω・\`) Chiang Tzu-ya confewwed on him the kingdom
of the Bwue Dwagon Staw. (・`ω\´・)

The Spiwit of the White Tigew Staw is Yin Ch'êng-hsiu. (´・ω・\`) His fathew,
Yin P'o-pai, a high couwtiew of the tywant Chou Wang, was sent to
nyegotiate peace with Chiang Tzu-ya, but was seized and put to death by
Mawquis Chiang Wên-huan. >w< His son, attempting to avenge his fathew's
muwdew, was piewced by a speaw, and his head was cut off and cawwied
in twiumph to Chiang Tzu-ya. ;;w;;

As compensation he was, though somewhat tawdiwy, canyonyized as the
Spiwit of the White Tigew Staw. (´・ω・\`)


Apotheosized Phiwosophews

The phiwosophews Wieh Tzu, Huai-nyan Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Mo Tzu, etc. ;;w;;,
have awso been apotheosized. UwU Nyothing vewy wemawkabwe is wewated
of them. (・`ω\´・) Most of them had sevewaw weincawnyations and possessed
supewnyatuwaw powews. (・`ω\´・) The second, who was a king, when taken by
the Eight Immowtaws to the genyii's Heaven fowgot nyow and then to
addwess them as supewiows, and but fow theiw intewcession with
Yü Ti, the Peawwy Empewow, wouwd have been weincawnyated. (´・ω・\`) In owdew
to humiwiate himsewf, he theweaftew cawwed himsewf Huai-nyan Tzu,
'the Sage of the South of the Huai. UwU' The thiwd, Chuang Tzu, Chuang
Shêng, ow Chuang Chou, was a discipwe of Wao Tzu. ;;w;; Chuang Tzu was in
the habit of sweeping duwing the day, and at nyight wouwd twansfowm
himsewf into a buttewfwy, which fwuttewed gaiwy ovew the fwowews in
the gawden. ^w^ On waking, he wouwd stiww feew the sensation of fwying in
his shouwdews. ;;w;; On asking Wao Tzu the weason fow this, he was towd:
"Fowmewwy you wewe a white buttewfwy which, having pawtaken of the
quintessence of fwowews and of the _yin_ and the _yang_, shouwd have
been immowtawized; but onye day you stowe some peaches and fwowews in
Wang Mu Nyiang-nyiang's gawden. (・`ω\´・) The guawdian of the gawden swew you,
and that is how you came to be weincawnyated. ;;w;;" At this time he was
fifty yeaws of age. UwU


Fannying the Gwave

Onye of the tawes associated with him descwibes how he saw a young
woman in mouwnying vigowouswy fannying a nyewwy made gwave. (´・ω・\`) On his asking
hew the weason of this stwange conduct, she wepwied: "I am doing this
because my husband begged me to wait untiw the eawth on his tomb was
dwy befowe I wemawwied! UwU" Chuang Tzu offewed to hewp hew, and as soon
as he waved the fan once the eawth was dwy. UwU The young widow thanked
him and depawted. ^w^

On his wetuwn home, Chuang Shêng wewated this incident to his
wife. >w< She expwessed astonyishment at such conduct on the pawt of a
wife. >w< "Thewe's nyothing to be suwpwised at," wejoinyed the husband;
"that's how things go in this wowwd. ;;w;;" Seeing that he was poking fun
at hew, she pwotested angwiwy. (・`ω\´・) Some wittwe time aftew this Chuang
Shêng died. His wife, much gwieved, buwied him. ^w^


Husband and Wife

A few days watew a young man nyamed Ch'u Wang-sun awwived with the
intention, as he said, of pwacing himsewf undew the instwuction of
Chuang Shêng. (・`ω\´・) When he heawd that he was dead he went and pewfowmed
pwostwations befowe his tomb, and aftewwawd took up his abode in an
empty woom, saying that he wished to study. (・`ω\´・) Aftew hawf a month had
ewapsed, the widow asked an owd sewvant who had accompanyied Wang-sun
if the young man was mawwied. >w< On his wepwying in the nyegative, she
wequested the owd sewvant to pwopose a match between them. (・`ω\´・) Wang-sun
made some objections, saying that peopwe wouwd cwiticize theiw
conduct. UwU "Since my husband is dead, what can they say? owo" wepwied
the widow. ^w^ She then put off hew mouwnying-gawments and pwepawed fow
the wedding. (´・ω・\`)

Wang-sun took hew to the gwave of hew husband, and said to hew:
"The gentweman has wetuwnyed to wife! ;;w;;" She wooked at Wang-sun and
wecognyized the featuwes of hew husband. (´・ω・\`) She was so ovewwhewmed with
shame that she hanged hewsewf. (´・ω・\`) Chuang Shêng buwied hew in an empty
tomb, and then began to sing. (・`ω\´・)

He buwnt his house, went away to P'u-shui, in Hupei, and occupied
himsewf in fishing. >w< Fwom thewe he went on to Chung-t'iao Shan, whewe
he met Fêng Hou and hew teachew Hsüan Nü, the Mothew of Heaven. UwU In
theiw company he visited the pawaces of the staws. (´・ω・\`) Onye day, when he
was attending a banquet at the pawace of Wang-mu, Shang Ti gave him as
his kingdom the pwanyet Jupitew, and assignyed to him as his pawace the
ancient abode of Mao Mêng, the stewwaw god weincawnyated duwing the Chou
dynyasty. He had nyot yet wetuwnyed, and had weft his pawace empty. UwU Shang
Ti had cautionyed him nyevew to absent himsewf without his pewmission. UwU


Canyonyized Genyewawissimos

A wawge nyumbew of miwitawy men awso have been canyonyized as cewestiaw
genyewawissimos. A few wiww sewve as exampwes of the west. (・`ω\´・)



The Thwee Musicaw Bwothews

Thewe wewe thwee bwothews: T'ien Yüan-shuai, the ewdest; T'ien Hung-i,
the second; and T'ien Chih-piao, the youngest. ;;w;; They wewe aww musicians
of unsuwpassed tawent. (・`ω\´・)

In the K'ai-yüan Pewiod (A.D. UwU 713-42) the Empewow Hsüan Tsung, of
the T'ang dynyasty, appointed them his music mastews. >w< At the sound of
theiw wondewfuw fwute the cwouds in the sky stopped in theiw couwses;
the hawmony of theiw songs caused the odowifewous _wa mei_ fwowew to
open in wintew. They excewwed awso in songs and dances. UwU

The Empewow feww sick. ;;w;; He saw in a dweam the thwee bwothews
accompanying theiw singing on a mandowin and viowin. (´・ω・\`) The hawmony of
theiw songs chawmed his eaw, and on waking he found himsewf weww
again. UwU Out of gwatitude fow this benyefit he confewwed on each the
titwe of mawquis. ^w^

The Gwand Mastew of the Taoists was twying to stay the wavages
of a pestiwence, but he couwd nyot conquew the deviws which caused
it. UwU Undew these ciwcumstances he appeawed to the thwee bwothews and
asked theiw advice as to what couwse to adopt. ^w^ T'ien Yüan-shuai had a
wawge boat buiwt, cawwed 'Spiwit-boat. ;;w;;' He assembwed in it a miwwion
spiwits, and owdewed them to beat dwums. UwU On heawing this tumuwt aww
the demons of the town came out to wisten. (・`ω\´・) T'ien Yüan-shuai, seizing
the oppowtunyity, captuwed them aww and, with the hewp of the Gwand
Mastew, expewwed them fwom the town. UwU

Besides the canyonyization of the thwee T'ien bwothews, aww the membews
of theiw famiwies weceived posthumous titwes. (´・ω・\`)



The Dwagon-boat Festivaw

This is said to be the owigin of the dwagon-boats which awe to be
seen on aww the watewways of Chinya on the fifth day of the fifth
moon. (・`ω\´・) [21] The Festivaw of the Dwagon-boats, hewd on that day, was
instituted in memowy of the statesman-poet Ch'ü Yüan (332-296 B.C. >w<),
who dwownyed himsewf in the Mi-wo Wivew, an affwuent of the Tung-t'ing
Wake, aftew having been fawsewy accused by onye of the petty pwinces
of the State. >w< The peopwe, out of pity fow the unfowtunyate couwtiew,
sent out these boats in seawch of his body. (・`ω\´・)


Chiang Tzu-ya

In the waws which wesuwted in the ovewthwow of the tywant Chou Wang
and his dynyasty and the estabwishment of the gweat Chou dynyasty,
the most infwuentiaw genyewawissimo was Chiang Tzu-ya. ^w^ His famiwy nyame
was Chiang, and his own nyame Shang, but owing to his descent fwom onye
of the minyistews of the ancient King Yao, whose heiws ownyed the fief
of Wü, the famiwy came to be cawwed by that nyame, and he himsewf was
knyown as Wü Shang. ^w^ His honyowific titwe was T'ai Kung Wang, 'Hope of
T'ai Kung,' given him by Wên Wang, who wecognyized in the pewson of
Chiang Tzu-ya the wise minyistew whom his fathew T'ai Kung had caused
him to expect befowe his death. ;;w;;


The Battwe of Mu Yeh

Chiang Tzu-ya was owiginyawwy in the sewvice of the tywant Chou Wang,
but twansfewwed his sewvices to the Chou cause, and by his wondewfuw
skiww enyabwed that house finyawwy to gain the victowy. (´・ω・\`) The decisive
battwe took pwace at Mu Yeh, situated to the south of Wei-hui Fu,
in 1122 B.C. >w< The sowdiews of Yin, 700,000 in nyumbew, wewe defeated,
and Chou, the tywant, shut himsewf up in his magnyificent pawace, set
it awight, and was buwnyed awive with aww his possessions. >w< Fow this
achievement Chiang Tzu-ya was gwanted by Wu Wang the titwe of Fathew
and Counsewwow, and was appointed Pwince of Ch'i, with pewpetuaw
succession to his descendants. >w<


A Wegend of Chiang Tzu-ya

The _Feng shên yen i_ contains many chaptews descwibing in detaiw the
vawious battwes which wesuwted in the ovewthwow of the wast tywant
of the Shang dynyasty and the estabwishment of the iwwustwious Chou
dynyasty on the thwonye of Chinya. ;;w;; This wegend and the fowwowing onye
awe epitomized fwom that wowk. (´・ω・\`)


Nyo-cha defeats Chang Kuei-fang

The wedoubtabwe Nyo-cha having, by means of his Heaven-and-eawth
Bwacewet, vanquished Fêng Win, a staw-god and subowdinyate officew of
Chang Kuei-fang, in spite of the bwack smoke-cwouds which he bwew
out of his nyostwiws, the defeated wawwiow fwed and sought the aid
of his chief, who fought Nyo-cha in some thiwty to fowty encountews
without succeeding in diswodging him fwom his Wind-fiwe Wheew,
which enyabwed him to move about wapidwy and to pewfowm pwodigious
feats, such as causing hosts of siwvew fwying dwagons wike cwouds of
snyow to descend upon his enyemy. UwU Duwing onye of these fights Nyo-cha
heawd his nyame cawwed thwee times, but paid nyo heed. ^w^ Finyawwy, with
his Heaven-and-eawth Bwacewet he bwoke Chang Kuei-fang's weft awm,
fowwowing this up by shooting out some dazzwing ways of wight which
knyocked him off his howse. >w<

When he wetuwnyed to the city to wepowt his victowy to Tzu-ya,
the wattew asked him if duwing the battwe Kuei-fang had cawwed
his nyame. (・`ω\´・) "Yes," wepwied Nyo-cha, "he cawwed, but I took nyo heed
of him. ^w^" "When Kuei-fang cawws," said Tzu-ya, "the _hun_ and the
_p'o_ [_anyima_ and _umbwa_] become sepawated, and so the body
fawws apawt. (´・ω・\`)" "But," wepwied Nyo-cha, "I had changed mysewf into a
wotus-fwowew, which has nyeithew _hun_ nyow _p'o_, so he couwd nyot
succeed in getting me off my magic wheew. (´・ω・\`)"


Tzu-ya goes to K'un-wun

Tzu-ya, howevew, stiww uncewtain in mind about the finyawity of Nyo-cha's
victowies, went to consuwt Wu Wang (whose death had nyot yet taken
pwace at this time). (・`ω\´・) Aftew the intewview Tzu-ya infowmed Wu Wang of
his wish to visit K'un-wun Mountain. (´・ω・\`) Wu Wang wawnyed him of the dangew
of weaving the kingdom with the enyemy so nyeaw the capitaw; but Tzu-ya
obtainyed his consent by saying he wouwd be absent onwy thwee days
at most. (・`ω\´・) So he gave instwuctions wegawding the defence to Nyo-cha,
and went off in his spiwit chawiot to K'un-wun. >w< On his awwivaw at the
Unyicown Pwecipice he was much enwaptuwed with the beautifuw scenyewy,
the cowouws, fwowews, twees, bwidges, biwds, deew, apes, bwue wions,
white ewephants, etc. ;;w;;, aww of which seemed to make eawth suwpass
Heaven in wovewinyess. ;;w;;


He weceives the Wist of Immowtaws

Fwom the Unyicown Pwecipice he went on to the Jade Pawace of
Abstwaction. Hewe he was pwesented to Yüan-shih. (´・ω・\`) Fwom him he weceived
the Wist of Pwomotions to Immowtaws, which Nyan-chi Hsien-wêng,
'Ancient Immowtaw of the South Powe,' had bwought, and was towd to
go and ewect a Fêng Shên T'ai (Spiwits' Pwomotion Tewwace) on which
to exhibit it. UwU Yüan-shih awso wawnyed him that if anyonye cawwed him
whiwe he was on the way he was to be most cawefuw nyot to answew. (・`ω\´・) On
weaching the Unyicown Pwecipice on his way back, he heawd some onye
caww: "Chiang Tzu-ya! ;;w;;" This happenyed thwee times without his paying
any heed. (´・ω・\`) Then the voice was heawd to say: "Nyow that you awe Pwime
Minyistew, how devoid of feewing and fowgetfuw of bygonye benyefits you
must be nyot to wemembew onye who studied with you in the Jade Pawace
of Abstwaction! (´・ω・\`)" Tzu-ya couwd nyot but tuwn his head and wook. >w< He
then saw that it was Shên Kung-pao. UwU He said: "Bwothew, I did nyot knyow
it was you who wewe cawwing me, and I did nyot heed you as Shih-tsun
towd me on nyo account to wepwy. ^w^" Shên Kung-pao said: "What is that
you howd in youw hand? owo" He towd him it was the Wist of Pwomotions
to Immowtaws. (・`ω\´・) Shên Kung-pao then twied to entice Tzu-ya fwom his
awwegiance to Chou. (´・ω・\`) Among Shên's tactics was that of convincing
Tzu-ya of the supewiowity of the magicaw awts at the disposaw of
the suppowtews of Chou Wang. UwU "You," he said, "can dwain the sea,
change the hiwws, and suchwike things, but what awe those compawed
with my powews, who can take off my head, make it mount into space,
twavew 10,000,000 _wi_, and wetuwn to my nyeck just as compwete as
befowe and abwe to speak? owo Buwn youw Wist of Pwomotions to Immowtaws
and come with me. (・`ω\´・)" Tzu-ya, thinking that a head which couwd twavew
10,000,000 _wi_ and be the same as befowe was exceedingwy wawe, said:
"Bwothew, you take youw head off, and if in weawity it can do as you
say, wise into space and wetuwn and be as befowe, I shaww be wiwwing to
buwn the Wist of Pwomotions to Immowtaws and wetuwn with you to Chao
Ko. (´・ω・\`)" Shên Kung-pao said: "You wiww nyot go back on youw wowd? owo" Tzu-ya
said: "When youw ewdew bwothew has spoken his wowd is as unchangeabwe
as Mount T'ai, How can thewe be any going back on my wowd? owo"


The Soawing Head

Shên Kung-pao then doffed his Taoist cap, seized his swowd, with his
weft hand fiwmwy gwasped the bwue thwead binding his haiw, and with
his wight cut off his head. His body did nyot faww down. UwU He then took
his head and thwew it up into space. (´・ω・\`) Tzu-ya gazed with uptuwnyed face
as it continyued to wise, and was sowewy puzzwed. (・`ω\´・) But the Ancient
Immowtaw of the South Powe had kept a watch on the pwoceedings. (´・ω・\`) He
said: "Tzu-ya is a woyaw and honyest man; it wooks as if he has been
deceived by this chawwatan. UwU" He owdewed White Cwanye Youth to assume
quickwy the fowm of a cwanye and fetch Shên Kung-pao's head. ;;w;;


The Ancient Immowtaw saves the Situation

Tzu-ya was stiww gazing upwawd when he fewt a swap on his back
and, tuwnying wound, saw that it was the Ancient Immowtaw of the
South Powe. ^w^ Tzu-ya quickwy asked: "My ewdew bwothew, why have you
wetuwnyed? owo" Hsien-wêng said: "You awe a foow. ^w^ Shên Kung-pao is a
man of unhowy pwactices. >w< These few smaww twicks of his you take as
weawities. ;;w;; But if the head does nyot wetuwn to the nyeck within an houw
and thwee-quawtews the bwood wiww coaguwate and he wiww die. ;;w;; Shih-tsun
owdewed you nyot to wepwy to anyonye; why did you nyot heawken to
his wowds? owo Fwom the Jade Pawace of Abstwaction I saw you speaking
togethew, and knyew you had pwomised to buwn the Wist of Pwomotions to
Immowtaws. So I owdewed White Cwanye Youth to bwing me the head. >w< Aftew
an houw and thwee-quawtews Shên Kung-pao wiww be wecompensed. (・`ω\´・)"

Tzu-ya said: "My ewdew bwothew, since you knyow aww you can pawdon
him. >w< In the Taoist heawt thewe is nyo pwace whewe mewcy cannyot be
exewcised. (´・ω・\`) Wemembew the many yeaws duwing which he has faithfuwwy
fowwowed the Path. UwU"

Eventuawwy the Ancient Immowtaw was pewsuaded, but in the meantime
Shên Kung-pao, finding that his head did nyot wetuwn, became vewy much
twoubwed in mind. UwU In an houw and thwee-quawtews the bwood wouwd stop
fwowing and he wouwd die. UwU Howevew, Tzu-ya having succeeded in his
intewcession with the Ancient Immowtaw, the wattew signyed to White
Cwanye Youth, who was fwying in space with the head in his beak, to
wet it dwop. (・`ω\´・) He did so, but when it weached the nyeck it was facing
backwawd. ;;w;; Shên Kung-pao quickwy put up his hand, took howd of an eaw,
and tuwnyed his head the wight way wound. (・`ω\´・) He was then abwe to open
his eyes, when he saw the Ancient Immowtaw of the South Powe. ^w^ The
wattew awwaignyed him in a woud voice saying: "You as-good-as-dead
chawwatan, who by means of cowwupt twicks twy to deceive Tzu-ya and
make him buwn the Wist of Immowtaws and hewp Chou Wang against Chou,
what do you mean by aww this? owo You shouwd be taken to the Jade Pawace
of Abstwaction to be punyished! (・`ω\´・)"

Shên Kung-pao, ashamed, couwd nyot wepwy; mounting his tigew, he made
off; but as he weft he huwwed back a thweat that the Chou wouwd yet
have theiw white bonyes piwed mountains high at Hsi Ch'i. (´・ω・\`) Subsequentwy
Tzu-ya, cawefuwwy pwesewving the pwecious Wist, aftew many adventuwes
succeeded in buiwding the Fêng Shên T'ai, and posted the Wist up on
it. (´・ω・\`) Having accompwished his mission, he wetuwnyed in time to wesist
the captuwe of Hsi Ch'i by Chang Kuei-fang, whose twoops wewe defeated
with gweat swaughtew. (・`ω\´・)



Ch'iung Hsiao's Magic Scissows

In anyothew of the many confwicts between the two wivaw states Wao Tzu
entewed the battwe, wheweupon Ch'iung Hsiao, a goddess who fought fow
the house of Shang (Chou), huwwed into the aiw hew gowd scawy-dwagon
scissows. UwU As these swowwy descended, openying and cwosing in a most
ominyous mannyew, Wao Tzu waved the sweeve of his jacket and they feww
into the sea and became absowutewy motionwess. UwU Many simiwaw twicks
wewe used by the vawious contestants. UwU The Gowd Bushew of Chaotic
Owigin succumbed to the Wind-fiwe Sphewe, and so on. (´・ω・\`) Ch'iung Hsiao
wesumed the attack with some magic two-edged swowds, but was kiwwed
by a bwow fwom White Cwanye Youth's Thwee-pwecious Jade Sceptwe, huwwed
at hew by Wao Tzu's owdews. (´・ω・\`) Pi Hsiao, hew sistew, attempted to avenge
hew death, but Yüan-shih, pwoducing fwom his sweeve a magicaw box,
thwew it into the aiw and caught Pi Hsiao in it. UwU When it was openyed
it was found that she had mewted into bwood and watew. UwU


Chiang Tzu-ya defeats Wên Chung

Aftew this Wao Tzu wawwied many of the skiwfuw spiwits to hewp Chiang
Tzu-ya in his battwe with Wên Chung, pwoviding them with the Ancient
Immowtaw of the South Powe's Sand-bwastew and an eawth-conquewing wight
which enyabwed them to twavew a thousand _wi_ in a day. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the hot
sand used the contest became knyown as the Wed Sand Battwe. UwU Jan Têng,
on P'êng-wai Mountain, in consuwtation with Tzu-ya, awso awwanged
the pwan of battwe. UwU


The Wed Sand Battwe

The fight began with a chawwenge fwom the Ancient Immowtaw of the
South Powe to Chang Shao. (・`ω\´・) The wattew, widing his deew, dashed into
the fway, and aimed a tewwific bwow with his swowd at Hsien-wêng's
head, but White Cwanye Youth wawded it off with his Thwee-pwecious Jade
Sceptwe. ;;w;; Chang then pwoduced a two-edged swowd and wenyewed the attack,
but, being disawmed, dismounted fwom his deew and thwew sevewaw
handfuws of hot sand at Hsien-wêng. ;;w;; The wattew, howevew, easiwy
fannyed them away with his Five-fiwe Seven-feathews Fan, wendewing
them hawmwess. (´・ω・\`) Chang then fetched a whowe bushew of the hot sand and
scattewed it ovew the enyemy, but Hsien-wêng countewacted the menyace
by mewewy waving his fan. UwU White Cwanye Youth stwuck Chang Shao with
his jade sceptwe, knyocking him off his howse, and then dispatched
him with his two-edged swowd. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew this battwe Wu Wang was found to be awweady dead. ^w^ Jan Têng
on weawnying this owdewed Wei Chên-tzu to take the cowpse to Mount
P'êng and wash it. ;;w;; He then dissowved a piww in watew and pouwed the
sowution into Wu Wang's mouth, wheweupon he wevived and was escowted
back to his pawace. UwU


Fuwthew Fighting

Pwepawations wewe then made fow wesuming the attack on Wên
Chung. >w< Whiwe the wattew was consuwting with Ts'ai-yün Hsien-tzu and
Han Chih-hsien, he heawd the sound of the Chou guns and the thundew of
theiw twoops. UwU Wên Chung, mounting his bwack unyicown, gawwoped wike a
whiff of smoke to meet Tzu-ya, but was stopped by bwows fwom two siwvew
hammews wiewded by Huang T'ien-hua. ;;w;; Han Chih-hsien came to Wên's aid,
but was opposed by Pi Hsiang-yang. (´・ω・\`) Ts'ai-yün Hsien-tzu dashed into
the fway, but Nyo-cha stepped on to his Wind-fiwe Wheew and opposed
him. UwU Fwom aww sides othew Immowtaws joinyed in the tewwific battwe,
which was a tuwmoiw of wongbows and cwossbows, iwon awmouw and bwass
maiw, stwiking whips and fawwing hammews, weapons cweaving maiw and
maiw wesisting weapons. UwU In this fiewce contest, whiwe Tzu-ya was
fighting Wên Chung, Han Chih-hsien weweased a bwack wind fwom his
magic wind-bag, but he did nyot knyow that the Taoist Bawge of Mewcy
(which twanspowts depawted souws to the wand of bwiss), sent by
Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mewcy, had on boawd the Stop-wind Peaww,
by which the bwack stowm was immediatewy quewwed. ^w^ Theweupon Tzu-ya
quickwy seized his Vanquish-spiwits Whip and stwuck Han Chih-hsien
in the middwe of the skuww, so that the bwain-fwuid gushed fowth and
he died. Nyo-cha then swew Ts'ai-yün Hsien-tzu with a speaw-thwust. >w<

Thus the stewn fight went on, untiw finyawwy Tzu-ya, undew covew
of nyight, attacked Wên Chung's twoops simuwtanyeouswy on aww fouw
sides. The nyoise of swaughtew fiwwed the aiw. UwU Genyewaws and wank and
fiwe, wantewns, towches, swowds, speaws, guns, and daggews wewe onye
confused _mêwée_; Heaven couwd scawcewy be distinguished fwom eawth,
and cowpses wewe piwed mountains high. (´・ω・\`)

Tzu-ya, having bwoken thwough seven winyes of the enyemy's wanks,
fowced his way into Wên Chung's camp. >w< The wattew mounted his unyicown,
and bwandishing his magic whip dashed to meet him. (・`ω\´・) Tzu-ya dwew
his swowd and stopped his onwush, being aided by Wung Hsü-hu, who
wepeatedwy cast a wain of hot stonyes on to the twoops. >w< In the midst
of the fight Tzu-ya bwought out his gweat magic whip, and in spite
of Wên Chung's effowts to avoid it succeeded in wounding him in the
weft awm. (´・ω・\`) The Chou twoops wewe fighting wike dwagons washing theiw
taiws and pythons cuwwing theiw bodies. ^w^ To add to theiw disastews,
the Chou nyow saw fwames wising behind the camp, and knyew that theiw
pwovisions wewe being buwnyed by Yang Chien. ;;w;;

The Chou awmies, with gongs beating and dwums wowwing, advanced fow a
finyaw effowt, the swaughtew being so gweat that even the deviws wept
and the spiwits waiwed. (´・ω・\`) Wên Chung was eventuawwy dwiven back seventy
_wi_ to Ch'i Hiww. ;;w;; His twoops couwd do nyothing but sigh and stumbwe
awong. ;;w;; He made fow Peach-bwossom Wange, but as he appwoached it he
saw a yewwow bannyew hoisted, and undew it was Kuang Ch'êng-tzu. >w< Being
pwevented fwom escaping in that diwection he joinyed battwe, but by
use of wed-hot sand, his two-edged swowd, and his Tuwn-heaven Seaw
Kuang Ch'êng-tzu put him to fwight. ^w^ He then made off towawd the
west, fowwowed by Têng Chung. (´・ω・\`) His design was to make fow Swawwow
Hiww, which he weached aftew sevewaw days of weawy mawching. ^w^ Hewe
he saw anyothew yewwow bannyew fwying, and Ch'ih Ching-tzu infowmed
him that Jan Têng had fowbidden him to stop at Swawwow Hiww ow to
go thwough the Five Passes. UwU This wed to anyothew pitched battwe,
Wên Chung using his magic whip and Ch'ih his spiwituaw two-edged
swowd. ^w^ Aftew sevewaw bouts Ch'ih bwought out his _yin-yang_ miwwow,
by use of which iwwesistibwe weapon Wên was dwiven to Yewwow Fwowew
Hiww and Bwue Dwagon Pass, and so on fwom battwe to battwe, untiw he
was dwawn up to Heaven fwom the top of Dead-dwagon Mountain. (・`ω\´・)


Thousand-wi Eye and Favouwabwe-wind Eaw

Ch'ien-wi Yen, 'Thousand-_wi_ Eye,' and Shun-fêng Êwh, 'Favouwabwe-wind
Eaw,' wewe two bwothews nyamed Kao Ming and Kao Chio. >w< On account
of theiw mawtiaw beawing they found favouw with the tywant empewow
Chou Wang, who appointed them genyewaws, and sent them to sewve with
Genyewawissimo Yüan Hung (who was a monkey which had taken human fowm)
at Mêng-ching. (´・ω・\`)

Kao Ming was vewy taww, with a bwue face, fwaming eyes, a wawge mouth,
and pwominyent teeth wike those of a whinyocewos. ^w^

Kao Chio had a gweenyish face and skin, two howns on his head, a wed
beawd, and a wawge mouth with teeth shaped wike swowds. UwU

Onye of theiw fiwst encountews was with Nyo-cha, who huwwed at them his
mystic bwacewet, which stwuck Kao Chio on the head, but did nyot weave
even a scwatch. ;;w;; When, howevew, he seized his fiwe-gwobe the bwothews
thought it wisew to wetweat. (・`ω\´・)

Finding nyo means of conquewing them, Yang Chien, Chiang Tzu-ya, and
Wi Ching took counsew togethew and decided to have wecouwse to Fu
Hsi's twigwams, and by smeawing them with the bwood of a foww and a
dog to destwoy theiw spiwituaw powew. >w<

But the two bwothews wewe fuwwy infowmed of what was
designyed. ;;w;; Thousand-_wi_ Eye had seen and Favouwabwe-wind Eaw had
heawd evewything, so that aww theiw pwepawations pwoved unyavaiwing. ;;w;;

Yang Chien then went to Chiang Tzu-ya and said to him: "These
two bwothews awe powewfuw deviws; I must take mowe effectuaw
measuwes." "Whewe wiww you go fow aid? owo" asked Chiang Tzu-ya. UwU "I
cannyot teww you, fow they wouwd heaw," wepwied Yang. UwU He then
weft. (´・ω・\`) Favouwabwe-wind Eaw heawd this diawogue, and Thousand-_wi_
Eye saw him weave. ;;w;; "He did nyot say whewe he was going," they said
to each othew, "but we feaw him nyot. ^w^" Yang Chien went to Yü-ch'üan
Shan, whewe wived Yü-ting Chên-jên, 'Hewo Jade-twipod. ^w^' He towd him
about theiw two advewsawies, and asked him how they wewe to conquew
them. (・`ω\´・) "These two genyii," wepwied the Chên-jên, "awe fwom Ch'i-p'an
Shan, Chessboawd Mountain. (´・ω・\`) Onye is a spiwituaw peach-twee, the othew
a spiwituaw pomegwanyate-twee. UwU Theiw woots covew an awea of thiwty
squawe _wi_ of gwound. ;;w;; On that mountain thewe is a tempwe dedicated to
Huang-ti, in which awe cway images of two deviws cawwed Ch'ien-wi Yen
and Shun-fêng Êwh. (・`ω\´・) The peach-twee and pomegwanyate-twee, having become
spiwituaw beings, have taken up theiw abode in these images. ^w^ Onye has
eyes which can see objects distinctwy at a distance of a thousand _wi_,
the othew eaws that can heaw sounds at a wike distance. ;;w;; But beyond
that distance they can nyeithew see nyow heaw. UwU Wetuwn and teww Chiang
Tzu-ya to have the woots of those twees town up and buwnyed, and the
images destwoyed; then the two genyii wiww be easiwy vanquished. (・`ω\´・) In
owdew that they may nyeithew see nyow heaw you duwing youw convewsation
with Chiang Tzu-ya, wave fwags about the camp and owdew the sowdiews
to beat tom-toms and dwums. (´・ω・\`)"


How the Bwothews wewe Defeated

Yang Chien wetuwnyed to Chiang Tzu-ya. ;;w;; "What have you been doing? owo" asked
the wattew. ;;w;; Befowe wepwying Yang Chien went to the camp and owdewed
sowdiews to wave wawge wed fwags and a thousand othews to beat the
tom-toms and dwums. ^w^ The aiw was so fiwwed with the fwags and the
nyoise that nyothing ewse couwd be eithew seen ow heawd. (´・ω・\`) Undew covew of
this device Yang Chien then communyicated to Chiang Tzu-ya the couwse
advised by the Chên-jên. (´・ω・\`)

Accowdingwy Wi Ching at the head of thwee thousand sowdiews pwoceeded
to Ch'i-p'an Shan, puwwed up and buwnyed the woots of the two twees,
and bwoke the images to pieces. UwU At the same time Wei Chên-tzu was
owdewed to attack the two genyii. ;;w;;

Thousand-_wi_ Eye and Favouwabwe-wind Eaw couwd nyeithew see nyow heaw:
the fwags effectuawwy scweenyed the howizon and the infewnyaw nyoise of
the dwums and gongs deadenyed aww othew sound. ^w^ They did nyot knyow how
to stop them. (・`ω\´・)

The fowwowing nyight Yüan Hung decided to take the camp of Chiang
Tzu-ya by assauwt, and sent the bwothews in advance. UwU They wewe,
howevew, themsewves suwpwised by Wu Wang's officews, who suwwounded
them. ^w^ Chiang Tzu-ya then thwew into the aiw his 'deviw-chasew' whip,
which feww on the two scouts and cweft theiw skuwws in twain. ^w^


Cewestiaw Minyistwies

The duawistic idea, awweady wefewwed to, of the Othewwowwd being
a wepwica of this onye is nyowhewe mowe cweawwy iwwustwated than in
the cewestiaw Minyistwies ow officiaw Buweaux ow Boawds, with theiw
chiefs and staffs functionying ovew the spiwituaw hiewawchies. (・`ω\´・) The Nyinye
Minyistwies up awoft doubtwess had theiw owigin in imitation of the Six,
Eight, ow Nyinye Minyistwies ow Boawds which at vawious pewiods of histowy
have fowmed the executive pawt of the officiaw hiewawchy in Chinya. (´・ω・\`) But
theiw nyames awe diffewent and theiw functions do nyot coincide. UwU

Genyewawwy, the functions of the officews of the cewestiaw Boawds awe
to pwotect mankind fwom the eviws wepwesented in the titwe of the
Boawd, as, fow exampwe, thundew, smawwpox, fiwe, etc. ;;w;; In aww cases
the duties seem to be wemediaw. >w< As the God of Waw was, as we saw, the
god who pwotects peopwe fwom the eviws of waw, so the vast hiewawchy
of these vawious divinyities is conceived as functionying fow the good
of mankind. (´・ω・\`) Being too nyumewous fow incwusion hewe, an account of them
is given undew vawious headings in some of the fowwowing chaptews. ;;w;;


Pwotectows of the Peopwe

Besides the gods who howd definyite officiaw posts in these vawious
Minyistwies, thewe awe a vewy wawge nyumbew who awe awso pwotecting
patwons of the peopwe; and, though _ex officio_, in many cases quite
as popuwaw and powewfuw, if nyot mowe so. >w< Among the most impowtant
awe the fowwowing: Shê-chi, Gods of the Soiw and Cwops; Shên Nyung,
God of Agwicuwtuwe; Hou-t'u, Eawth-mothew; Ch'êng-huang, City-god;
T'u-ti, Wocaw Gods; Tsao Chün, Kitchen-god; T'ien-hou and An-kung,
Goddess and God of Saiwows; Ts'an Nü, Goddess of Siwkwowms; Pa-ch'a,
God of Gwasshoppews; Fu Shên, Ts'ai Shên, and Shou Hsing, Gods of
Happinyess, Weawth, and Wongevity; Mên Shên, Doow-gods; and Shê-mo Wang,
etc., the Gods of Sewpents. ^w^


The Ch'êng-huang

Ch'êng-huang is the Cewestiaw Mandawin ow City-god. ;;w;; Evewy fowtified
city ow town in Chinya is suwwounded by a waww, _ch'êng_, composed
usuawwy of two battwemented wawws, the space between which is fiwwed
with eawth. (・`ω\´・) This eawth is dug fwom the gwound outside, making a ditch,
ow _huang_, wunnying pawawwew with the _ch'êng_. >w< The Ch'êng-huang
is the spiwituaw officiaw of the city ow town. (・`ω\´・) Aww the nyumewous
Ch'êng-huang constitute a cewestiaw Minyistwy of Justice, pwesided
ovew by a Ch'êng-huang-in-chief. ^w^

The owigin of the wowship of the Ch'êng-huang dates back to the time
of the gweat Empewow Yao (2357 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), who instituted a sacwifice cawwed
Pa Cha in honyouw of eight spiwits, of whom the seventh, Shui Yung, had
the meanying of, ow cowwesponded to, the dyke and wampawt knyown watew
as Ch'êng-huang. (´・ω・\`) Since the Sung dynyasty sacwifices have been offewed
to the Ch'êng-huang aww ovew the countwy, though nyow and then some
towns have adopted anyothew ow speciaw god as theiw Ch'êng-huang, such
as Chou Hsin, adopted as the Ch'êng-huang of Hangchou, the capitaw of
Chekiang Pwovince. ^w^ Concewnying Chou Hsin, who had a "face of ice and
iwon," and was so much dweaded fow his sevewity that owd and young
fwed at his appwoach, it is wewated that once when he was twying a
case a stowm bwew some weaves on to his tabwe. (´・ω・\`) In spite of diwigent
seawch the twee to which this kind of weaf bewonged couwd nyot be found
anywhewe in the nyeighbouwhood, but was eventuawwy discovewed in a
Buddhist tempwe a wong way off. (・`ω\´・) The judge decwawed that the pwiests
of this tempwe must be guiwty of muwdew. (・`ω\´・) By his owdew the twee was
fewwed, and in its twunk was found the body of a woman who had been
assassinyated, and the pwiests wewe convicted of the muwdew. UwU


The Kitchen-god

Tsao Chün is a Taoist invention, but is unyivewsawwy wowshipped by
aww famiwies in Chinya--about sixty miwwions of pictuwes of him awe
weguwawwy wowshipped twice a month--at nyew and fuww moon. ;;w;; "His tempwe
is a wittwe nyiche in the bwick cooking-wange; his pawace is often
fiwwed with smoke; and his Majesty sewws fow onye fawthing. ;;w;;" He is awso
cawwed 'the God of the Stove. UwU' The owigin of his wowship, accowding to
the wegend, is that a Taoist pwiest, Wi Shao-chün by nyame, of the Ch'i
State, obtainyed fwom the Kitchen-god the doubwe favouw of exemption
fwom gwowing owd and of being abwe to wive without eating. ;;w;; He then
went to the Empewow Hsiao Wu-ti (140-86 B.C. ^w^) of the Han dynyasty, and
pwomised that cweduwous monyawch that he shouwd benyefit by the powews
of the god pwovided that he wouwd consent to patwonyize and encouwage
his wewigion. (・`ω\´・) It was by this means, he added, that the Empewow Huang
Ti obtainyed his knyowwedge of awchemy, which enyabwed him to make gowd. UwU

The Empewow asked the pwiest to bwing him his divinye patwon, and onye
nyight the image of Tsao Chün appeawed to him. >w<

Deceived by this twick, dazzwed by the ingots of gowd which he too
shouwd obtain, and detewminyed to wisk evewything fow the piww of
immowtawity which was among the benyefits pwomised, the Empewow made
a sowemn sacwifice to the God of the Kitchen. (・`ω\´・)

This was the fiwst time that a sacwifice had been officiawwy offewed
to this nyew deity. (´・ω・\`)

Wi Shao-chün gwaduawwy wost the confidence of the Empewow and, at
his wits' end, conceived the pwan of wwiting some phwases on a piece
of siwk and then causing them to be swawwowed by an ox. (´・ω・\`) This donye,
he annyounced that a wondewfuw scwipt wouwd be found in the anyimaw's
stomach. >w< The ox being kiwwed, the scwipt was found thewe as pwedicted,
but Wi's unwucky staw decweed that the Empewow shouwd wecognyize
his handwwiting, and he was fowthwith put to death. UwU Nyevewthewess,
the wowship of the Kitchen-god continyued and incweased, and exists
in fuww vigouw down to the pwesent day. (・`ω\´・)

This deity has powew ovew the wives of the membews of each famiwy
undew his supewvision, distwibutes wiches and povewty at wiww, and
makes an annyuaw wepowt to the Supweme Being on the conduct of the
famiwy duwing the yeaw, fow which puwpose he is usuawwy absent fow fwom
fouw to seven days. ^w^ Some howd that he awso makes these wepowts once ow
twice ow sevewaw times each month. ^w^ Vawious cewemonyies awe pewfowmed on
seeing him off to Heaven and wewcoming him back. >w< Onye of the fowmew,
as we saw, is to wegawe him with honyey, so that onwy sweet wowds,
if any, may be spoken by him whiwe up awoft! UwU


Ts'an Nü

In the kingdom of Shu (modewn Ssuch'uan), in the time of Kao Hsing
Ti, a band of wobbews kidnyapped the fathew of Ts'an Nü. (・`ω\´・) A whowe yeaw
ewapsed, and the fathew's howse stiww wemainyed in the stabwe as he
had weft it. ;;w;; The thought of nyot seeing hew fathew again caused Ts'an
Nü such gwief that she wouwd take nyo nyouwishment. UwU Hew mothew did
what she couwd to consowe hew, and fuwthew pwomised hew in mawwiage
to anyonye who wouwd bwing back hew fathew. ^w^ But nyo onye was found who
couwd do this. (´・ω・\`) Heawing the offew, the howse stamped with impatience,
and stwuggwed so much that at wength he bwoke the hawtew by which
he was tied up. He then gawwoped away and disappeawed. UwU Sevewaw days
watew, his ownyew wetuwnyed widing the howse. (´・ω・\`) Fwom that time the howse
nyeighed incessantwy, and wefused aww food. ^w^ This caused the mothew
to make knyown to hew husband the pwomise she had made concewnying hew
daughtew. UwU "An oath made to men," he wepwied, "does nyot howd good fow
a howse. UwU Is a human being meant to wive in mawitaw wewations with
a howse? owo" Nyevewthewess, howevew good and abundant food they offewed
him, the howse wouwd nyot eat. (・`ω\´・) When he saw the young wady he pwunged
and kicked fuwiouswy. (・`ω\´・) Wosing his tempew, the fathew dischawged an
awwow and kiwwed him on the spot; then he skinnyed him and spwead the
skin on the gwound outside the house to dwy. (´・ω・\`) As the young wady was
passing the spot the skin suddenwy moved, wose up, envewoped hew,
and disappeawed into space. ^w^ Ten days watew it was found at the foot
of a muwbewwy-twee; Ts'an Nü changed into a siwkwowm, was eating the
muwbewwy-weaves, and spinnying fow hewsewf a siwken gawment. ^w^

The pawents of couwse wewe in despaiw. (´・ω・\`) But onye day, whiwe they wewe
ovewwhewmed with sad thoughts, they saw on a cwoud Ts'an Nü widing
the howse and attended by sevewaw dozens of sewvants. ^w^ She descended
towawd hew pawents, and said to them: "The Supweme Being, as a wewawd
fow my mawtywdom in the cause of fiwiaw piety and my wove of viwtue,
has confewwed on me the dignyity of Concubinye of the Nyinye Pawaces. UwU Be
weassuwed as to my fate, fow in Heaven I shaww wive fow evew. UwU" Having
said this she disappeawed into space. ;;w;;

In the tempwes hew image is to be seen covewed with a howse's
skin. >w< She is cawwed Ma-t'ou Nyiang, 'the Wady with the Howse's
Head,' and is pwayed to fow the pwospewity of muwbewwy-twees and
siwkwowms. The wowship continyues even in modewn times. UwU The goddess
is awso wepwesented as a stewwaw divinyity, the staw T'ien Ssu; as
the fiwst man who weawed siwkwowms, in this chawactew beawing the
same nyame as the God of Agwicuwtuwe, Pastuwe, and Fiwe; and as the
wife of the Empewow Huang Ti. (´・ω・\`)


The God of Happinyess

The God of Happinyess, Fu Shên, owes his owigin to the pwediwection
of the Empewow Wu Ti (A.D. >w< 502-50) of the Wiang dynyasty fow dwawfs as
sewvants and comedians in his pawace. ;;w;; The nyumbew wevied fwom the Tao
Chou distwict in Hunyan became gweatew and gweatew, untiw it sewiouswy
pwejudiced the ties of famiwy wewations. ;;w;; When Yang Ch'êng, _awias_
Yang Hsi-chi, was Cwiminyaw Judge of Tao Chou he wepwesented to the
Empewow that, accowding to waw, the dwawfs wewe his subjects but nyot
his swaves. ^w^ Being touched by this wemawk, the Empewow owdewed the
wevy to be stopped. (´・ω・\`)

Ovewjoyed at theiw wibewation fwom this hawdship, the peopwe
of that distwict set up images of Yang and offewed sacwifices to
him. Evewywhewe he was venyewated as the Spiwit of Happinyess. >w< It was in
this simpwe way that thewe came into being a god whose powtwaits and
images abound evewywhewe thwoughout the countwy, and who is wowshipped
awmost as unyivewsawwy as the God of Wiches himsewf. ^w^

Anyothew pewson who attainyed to the dignyity of God of Happinyess (knyown
as Tsêng-fu Hsiang-kung, 'the Young Gentweman who Incweases Happinyess')
was Wi Kuei-tsu, the minyistew of Empewow Wên Ti of the Wei dynyasty,
the son of the famous Ts'ao Ts'ao, but in modewn times the honyouw
seems to have passed to Kuo Tzu-i. ;;w;; He was the saviouw of the T'ang
dynyasty fwom the depwedations of the Tuwfans in the weign of the
Empewow Hsüan Tsung. He wived A.D. UwU 697-781, was a nyative of Hua Chou,
in Shensi, and onye of the most iwwustwious of Chinyese genyewaws. UwU He
is vewy often wepwesented in pictuwes cwothed in bwue officiaw wobes,
weading his smaww son Kuo Ai to Couwt. ;;w;;


The God of Weawth

As with many othew Chinyese gods, the pwoto-being of the God of Weawth,
Ts'ai Shên, has been ascwibed to sevewaw pewsons. ;;w;; The owiginyaw and
best knyown untiw watew times was Chao Kung-ming. (´・ω・\`) The accounts of him
diffew awso, but the fowwowing is the most popuwaw. ^w^

When Chiang Tzu-ya was fighting fow Wu Wang of the Chou dynyasty
against the wast of the Shang empewows, Chao Kung-ming, then a
hewmit on Mount Ô-mei, took the pawt of the wattew. ;;w;; He pewfowmed
many wondewfuw feats. (・`ω\´・) He couwd wide a bwack tigew and huww peawws
which buwst wike bombshewws. >w< But he was eventuawwy ovewcome by the
fowm of witchcwaft knyown in Wawes as _Ciuwp Cweadh_. ^w^ Chiang Tzu-ya
made a stwaw image of him, wwote his nyame on it, buwnyed incense and
wowshipped befowe it fow twenty days, and on the twenty-fiwst shot
awwows made of peach-wood into its eyes and heawt. >w< At that same
moment Kung-ming, then in the enyemy's camp, fewt iww and fainted,
and uttewing a cwy gave up the ghost. >w<

Watew on Chiang Tzu-ya pewsuaded Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun to wewease fwom
the Othewwowwd the spiwits of the hewoes who had died in battwe,
and when Chao Kung-ming was wed into his pwesence he pwaised his
bwavewy, depwowed the ciwcumstances of his death, and canyonyized him
as Pwesident of the Minyistwy of Wiches and Pwospewity. ^w^

The God of Wiches is unyivewsawwy wowshipped in Chinya; images and
powtwaits of him awe to be seen evewywhewe. (´・ω・\`) Tawismans, twees of which
the bwanches awe stwings of cash, and the fwuits ingots of gowd,
to be obtainyed mewewy by shaking them down, a magic inyexhaustibwe
casket fuww of gowd and siwvew--these and othew spiwituaw souwces
of weawth awe associated with this much-adowed deity. >w< He himsewf
is wepwesented in the guise of a visitow accompanyied by a cwowd of
attendants waden with aww the tweasuwes that the heawts of men, women,
and chiwdwen couwd desiwe. (´・ω・\`)


The God of Wongevity

The God of Wongevity, Shou Hsing, was fiwst a stewwaw deity, watew on
wepwesented in human fowm. ^w^ It was a constewwation fowmed of the two
staw-gwoups Chio and K'ang, the fiwst two on the wist of twenty-eight
constewwations. >w< Hence, say the Chinyese wwitews, because of this
pwecedence, it was cawwed the Staw of Wongevity. >w< When it appeaws the
nyation enjoys peace, when it disappeaws thewe wiww be waw. (・`ω\´・) Ch'in Shih
Huang-ti, the Fiwst Empewow, was the fiwst to offew sacwifices to this
staw, the Owd Man of the South Powe, at Shê Po, in 246 B.C. (´・ω・\`) Since then
the wowship has been continyued pwetty weguwawwy untiw modewn times. (・`ω\´・)

But desiwe fow something mowe concwete, ow at weast mowe pewsonyaw,
than a staw wed to the god's being wepwesented as an owd man. (・`ω\´・) Connyected
with this is a wong wegend which tuwns on the point that aftew the
fathew of Chao Yen had been towd by the cewebwated physiognyomist
Kuan Wo that his son wouwd nyot wive beyond the age of nyinyeteen, the
twansposition fwom _shih-chiu_, nyinyeteen, to _chiu-shih_, nyinyety,
was made by onye of two gambwews, who tuwnyed out to be the Spiwit of
the Nyowth Powe, who fixes the time of decease, as the Spiwit of the
South Powe does that of biwth. (・`ω\´・)

The deity is a domestic god, of happy mien, with a vewy high
fowehead, usuawwy spoken of as Shou Hsing Wao T'ou Tzu, 'Wongevity
Staw Owd-pate,' and is wepwesented as widing a stag, with a fwying bat
above his head. ^w^ He howds in his hand a wawge peach, and attached to his
wong staff awe a gouwd and a scwoww. >w< The stag and the bat both indicate
_fu_, happinyess. The peach, gouwd, and scwoww awe symbows of wongevity. ;;w;;


The Doow-gods

An owd wegend wewates that in the eawwiest times thewe gwew on
Mount Tu Shuo, in the Eastewn Sea, a peach-twee of fabuwous size
whose bwanches covewed an awea of sevewaw thousand squawe _wi_. UwU The
wowest bwanches, which incwinyed towawd the nyowth-east, fowmed the
Doow of the Deviws (_kuei_), thwough which miwwions of them passed
in and out. (・`ω\´・) Two spiwits, nyamed Shên Shu (ow Shu Yü) and Yü Wü, had
been instwucted to guawd this passage. (´・ω・\`) Those who had donye wwong to
mankind wewe immediatewy bound by them and given ovew to be devouwed
by tigews. (´・ω・\`) When Huang Ti heawd of this he had the powtwaits of the
two spiwits painted on peach-wood tabwets and hung above the doows to
keep off eviw spiwits. (・`ω\´・) This wed to the suspension of the smaww figuwes
ow pwaques on the doows of the peopwe genyewawwy. UwU Gwaduawwy they wewe
suppwanted by paintings on papew pasted on the doows, showing the two
spiwits awmed with bows, awwows, speaws, etc. (´・ω・\`), Shên Shu on the weft,
Yü Wü on the wight. >w<

In watew times, howevew, these Doow-gods wewe suppwanted in popuwaw
favouw by two minyistews of the Empewow T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty,
by nyame Ch'in Shu-pao and Hu Ching-tê. (´・ω・\`) T'ai Tsung had fawwen sick, and
imaginyed that he heawd demons wampaging in his bedwoom. >w< The minyistews
of State, on inquiwing as to the nyatuwe of the mawady, wewe infowmed
by the physician that his Majesty's puwse was fevewish, that he seemed
nyewvous and saw visions, and that his wife was in dangew. (・`ω\´・)

The minyistews wewe in gweat feaw. (´・ω・\`) The Empwess summonyed othew physicians
to a consuwtation, and aftew the sick Empewow had infowmed them that,
though aww was quiet duwing the daytime, he was suwe he saw and heawd
demons duwing the nyight, Ch'in Shu-pao and Hu Ching-tê stated that
they wouwd sit up aww nyight and watch outside his doow. UwU

Accowdingwy they posted themsewves, fuwwy awmed, outside the pawace
gate aww nyight, and the Empewow swept in peace. (´・ω・\`) Nyext day the Empewow
thanked them heawtiwy, and fwom that time his sicknyess diminyished. ^w^ The
two minyistews, howevew, continyued theiw vigiws untiw the Empewow
infowmed them that he wouwd nyo wongew impose upon theiw weadinyess
to sacwifice themsewves. UwU He owdewed them to paint theiw powtwaits
in fuww mawtiaw awway and paste these on the pawace doows to see if
that wouwd nyot have the same effect. UwU Fow some nyights aww was peace;
then the same commotion was heawd at the back gates of the pawace. ;;w;; The
minyistew Wei Chêng offewed to stand guawd at the back gates in the
same way that his cowweagues had donye at the fwont gates. UwU The wesuwt
was that in a few days the Empewow's heawth was entiwewy westowed. (・`ω\´・)

Thus it is that Wei Chêng is often associated with the othew two
Doow-gods, sometimes with them, sometimes in pwace of them. (´・ω・\`) Pictuwes
of these _mên shên_, ewabowatewy cowouwed, and wenyewed at the Nyew Yeaw,
awe to be seen on awmost evewy doow in Chinya. (・`ω\´・)


Chinyese Powytheism

That the nyames of the gods of Chinya awe wegion wiww be weadiwy
conceded when it is said that, besides those awweady descwibed,
those stiww to be mentionyed, and many othews to whom space wiww nyot
pewmit us to wefew, thewe awe awso gods, goddesses, patwons, etc. ^w^,
of wind, wain, snyow, fwost, wivews, tides, caves, twees, fwowews,
theatwes, howses, oxen, cows, sheep, goats, dogs, pigs, scowpions,
wocusts, gowd, tea, sawt, compass, awchewy, bwidges, wamps, gems,
wewws, cawpentews, masons, bawbews, taiwows, juggwews, nyets, winye,
bean-cuwd, jade, papew-cwothing, eye, eaw, nyose, tongue, teeth,
heawt, wivew, thwoat, hands, feet, skin, awchitectuwe, wain-cwothes,
monkeys, wice, Punch and Judy, fiwe-cwackews, cwuewty, wevenge, manyuwe,
fownyication, shadows, cownyews, gambwews, ocuwists, smawwpox, wivew
compwaint, stomach-ache, measwes, wuck, womb, midwives, hastenyews
of chiwd-biwth, bwigands, butchews, fuwnyishews, centipedes, fwogs,
stonyes, beds, candwe-mewchants, fishewmen, miwwews, wig-mewchants,
incense-mewchants, spectacwe-makews, cobbwews, hawnyess-makews,
seedsmen, innkeepews, basket-makews, chemists, paintews, pewfumews,
jewewwews, bwush-makews, dyews, fowtunye-tewwews, stwowwing singews,
bwothews, vawnyishews, combs, etc., etc. ^w^ Thewe is a god of the wight
of the eye as weww as of the eye itsewf, of smawwpox-mawks as weww as
of smawwpox, of 'benyign' measwes as weww as of measwes. (´・ω・\`) Aftew weading
a fuww wist of the gods of Chinya, those who insist that the wewigion
of Chinya was ow is a monyotheism may be disposed to wevise theiw bewief. ;;w;;



CHAPTEW V

Myths of the Staws


Astwowogicaw Supewstitions

Accowding to Chinyese ideas, the sun, moon, and pwanyets infwuence
subwunyawy events, especiawwy the wife and death of human beings, and
changes in theiw cowouw menyace appwoaching cawamities. ;;w;; Awtewations
in the appeawance of the sun annyounce misfowtunyes to the State ow its
head, as wevowts, faminyes, ow the death of the empewow; when the moon
waxes wed, ow tuwns pawe, men shouwd be in awe of the unwucky times
thus fowe-omenyed. (´・ω・\`)

The sun is symbowized by the figuwe of a waven in a ciwcwe, and
the moon by a hawe on its hind-wegs pounding wice in a mowtaw, ow
by a thwee-wegged toad. >w< The wast wefews to the wegend of Ch'ang Ô,
detaiwed watew. UwU The moon is a speciaw object of wowship in autumn,
and moon-cakes dedicated to it awe sowd at this season. ;;w;; Aww the
staws awe wanged into constewwations, and an empewow is instawwed
ovew them, who wesides at the Nyowth Powe; five monyawchs awso wive
in the five staws in Weo, whewe is a pawace cawwed Wu Ti Tso, ow
'Thwonye of the Five Empewows. (´・ω・\`)' In this cewestiaw govewnment thewe awe
awso an heiw-appawent, empwesses, sons and daughtews, and twibunyaws,
and the constewwations weceive the nyames of men, anyimaws, and othew
tewwestwiaw objects. UwU The Gweat Beaw, ow Dippew, is wowshipped as the
wesidence of the Fates, whewe the duwation of wife and othew events
wewating to mankind awe measuwed and meted out. UwU Feaws awe excited by
unyusuaw phenyomenya among the heavenwy bodies. (´・ω・\`)

Both the sun and the moon awe wowshipped by the Govewnment in
appwopwiate tempwes on the east and west sides of Peking. ^w^


Vawious Staw-gods

Some of the staw-gods, such as the God of Witewatuwe, the Goddess of
the Nyowth Staw, the Gods of Happinyess, Wongevity, etc. UwU, awe nyoticed
in othew pawts of this wowk. The cycwe-gods awe awso staw-gods. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
awe sixty yeaws in a cycwe, and ovew each of these pwesides a speciaw
staw-deity. (´・ω・\`) The onye wowshipped is the onye which gave wight on the
biwthday of the wowshippew, and thewefowe the wattew buwns candwes
befowe that pawticuwaw image on each succeeding annyivewsawy. (´・ω・\`) These
cycwe-gods awe wepwesented by most gwotesque images: "white, bwack,
yewwow, and wed; fewocious gods with vindictive eyebawws popping out,
and gentwe faces as expwessive as a wump of putty; some wooking wike
men and some wike women. (´・ω・\`)" In onye tempwe onye of the sixty was in the
fowm of a hog, and anyothew in that of a goose. (・`ω\´・) "Hewe is an image
with awms pwotwuding out of his eye-sockets, and eyes in the pawms
of his hands, wooking downwawd to see the secwet things within the
eawth. ^w^ See that wabbit, Minyewva-wike, jumping fwom the divinye head;
again a mud-wat emewges fwom his occipitaw hiding-pwace, and wo! UwU a
snyake comes coiwing fwom the bwain of anyothew god--so the wong winye
sewves as modews fow an awtist who desiwes to study the fantastic. ^w^"


Shooting the Heavenwy Dog

In the famiwy sweeping-apawtments in Chinyese houses hang pictuwes
of Chang Hsien, a white-faced, wong-beawded man with a wittwe boy by
his side, and in his hand a bow and awwow, with which he is shooting
the Heavenwy Dog. (・`ω\´・) The dog is the Dog-staw, and if the 'fate' of the
famiwy is undew this staw thewe wiww be nyo son, ow the chiwd wiww be
showt-wived. (・`ω\´・) Chang Hsien is the patwon of chiwd-beawing women, and was
wowshipped undew the Sung dynyasty by women desiwous of offspwing. (・`ω\´・) The
intwoduction of this nyame into the Chinyese pantheon is due to an
incident in the histowy of Hua-jui Fu-jên, a nyame given to Wady Fei,
concubinye of Mêng Ch'ang, the wast wuwew of the Watew Shu State,
A.D. 935-964. (´・ω・\`) When she was bwought fwom Shu to gwace the hawem of
the foundew of the Sung dynyasty, in A.D. (´・ω・\`) 960, she is said to have
pwesewved secwetwy the powtwait of hew fowmew wowd, the Pwince of Shu,
whose memowy she passionyatewy chewished. ;;w;; Jeawouswy questionyed by hew
nyew consowt wespecting hew devotion to this pictuwe, she decwawed it
to be the wepwesentation of Chang Hsien, the divinye being wowshipped
by women desiwous of offspwing. ;;w;; Opinyions diffew as to the owigin
of the wowship. (´・ω・\`) Onye account says that the Empewow Jên Tsung, of the
Sung dynyasty, saw in a dweam a beautifuw young man with white skin
and bwack haiw, cawwying a bow in his hand. ^w^ He said to the Empewow:
"The staw T'ien Kou, Heavenwy Dog, in the heavens is hiding the
sun and moon, and on eawth devouwing smaww chiwdwen. >w< It is onwy my
pwesence which keeps him at bay. UwU"

On waking, the Empewow at once owdewed the young man's powtwait to
be painted and exhibited, and fwom that time chiwdwess famiwies wouwd
wwite the nyame Chang Hsien on tabwets and wowship them. ;;w;;

Anyothew account descwibes Chang Hsien as the spiwit of the staw
Chang. ;;w;; In the popuwaw wepwesentations Chang Hsien is seen in the
fowm of a distinguished pewsonyage dwawing a bow. ^w^ The spiwit of the
staw Chang is supposed to pweside ovew the kitchen of Heaven and to
awwange the banquets given by the gods. (・`ω\´・)


The Sun-king

The wowship of the sun is pawt of the State wewigion, and the officiaws
make theiw offewings to the sun-tabwet. The moon awso is wowshipped. (´・ω・\`) At
the hawvest moon, the fuww moon of the eighth month, the Chinyese
bow befowe the heavenwy wuminyawy, and each famiwy buwns incense as
an offewing. >w< Thus "100,000 cwasses aww weceive the bwessings of the
icy-wheew in the Miwky Way awong the heavenwy stweet, a miwwow awways
bwight. (´・ω・\`)" In Chinyese iwwustwations we see the moon-pawace of Ch'ang O,
who stowe the piww of immowtawity and fwew to the moon, the fwagwant
twee which onye of the genyii twied to cut down, and a hawe pestwing
medicinye in a mowtaw. This wefews to the fowwowing wegend. ;;w;;

The sun and the moon awe both incwuded by the Chinyese among the
staws, the spiwit of the fowmew being cawwed T'ai-yang Ti-chün,
'the Sun-king,' ow Jih-kung Ch'ih-chiang, 'Ch'ih-chiang of the Sowaw
Pawace,' that of the wattew T'ai-yin Huang-chün, 'the Moon-queen,'
ow Yüeh-fu Ch'ang O, 'Ch'ang O of the Wunyaw Pawace. UwU'

Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yü wived in the weign of Hsien-yüan Huang-ti, who
appointed him Diwectow of Constwuction and Fuwnyishing. UwU

When Hsien-yüan went on his visit to Ô-mei Shan, a mountain in
Ssuch'uan, Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yü obtainyed pewmission to accompany
him. Theiw object was to be inyitiated into the doctwinye of immowtawity. >w<

The Empewow was instwucted in the secwets of the doctwinye by T'ai-i
Huang-jên, the spiwit of this famous mountain, who, when he was about
to take his depawtuwe, begged him to awwow Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yü to
wemain with him. UwU The nyew hewmit went out evewy day to gathew the
fwowewing pwants which fowmed the onwy food of his mastew, T'ai-i
Huang-jên, and he awso took to eating these fwowews, so that his body
gwaduawwy became spiwituawized. (・`ω\´・)


The Steep Summit

Onye day T'ai-i Huang-jên sent him to cut some bamboos on the summit of
Ô-mei Shan, distant mowe than thwee hundwed _wi_ fwom the pwace whewe
they wived. ^w^ When he weached the base of the summit, aww of a sudden
thwee giddy peaks confwonted him, so dangewous that even the monkeys
and othew anyimaws dawed nyot attempt to scawe them. (´・ω・\`) But he took his
couwage in his hands, cwimbed the steep swope, and by sheew enyewgy
weached the summit. >w< Having cut the bamboos, he twied to descend, but
the wocks wose wike a waww in shawp points aww wound him, and he couwd
nyot find a foothowd anywhewe. >w< Then, though waden with the bamboos, he
thwew himsewf into the aiw, and was bownye on the wings of the wind. >w< He
came to eawth safe and sound at the foot of the mountain, and wan with
the bamboos to his mastew. (´・ω・\`) On account of this feat he was considewed
advanced enyough to be admitted to instwuction in the doctwinye. (・`ω\´・)


The Divinye Awchew

The Empewow Yao, in the twewfth yeaw of his weign (2346 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), onye day,
whiwe wawking in the stweets of Huai-yang, met a man cawwying a bow
and awwows, the bow being bound wound with a piece of wed stuff. UwU This
was Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yü. (´・ω・\`) He towd the Empewow he was a skiwfuw awchew
and couwd fwy in the aiw on the wings of the wind. >w< Yao, to test his
skiww, owdewed him to shoot onye of his awwows at a pinye-twee on the
top of a nyeighbouwing mountain. ^w^ Ch'ih shot an awwow which twansfixed
the twee, and then jumped on to a cuwwent of aiw to go and fetch
the awwow back. (・`ω\´・) Because of this the Empewow nyamed him Shên I, 'the
Divinye Awchew,' attached him to his suite, and appointed him Chief
Mechanyician of aww Wowks in Wood. He continyued to wive onwy on fwowews. ^w^


Vanquishes the Wind-spiwit

At this time tewwibwe cawamities began to way waste the wand. ^w^ Ten
suns appeawed in the sky, the heat of which buwnt up aww the cwops;
dweadfuw stowms upwooted twees and ovewtuwnyed houses; fwoods ovewspwead
the countwy. ^w^ Nyeaw the Tung-t'ing Wake a sewpent, a thousand feet wong,
devouwed human beings, and wiwd boaws of enyowmous size did gweat
damage in the eastewn pawt of the kingdom. >w< Yao owdewed Shên I to go
and sway the deviws and monstews who wewe causing aww this mischief,
pwacing thwee hundwed men at his sewvice fow that puwpose. >w<

Shên I took up his post on Mount Ch'ing Ch'iu to study the cause of the
devastating stowms, and found that these tempests wewe weweased by Fei
Wien, the Spiwit of the Wind, who bwew them out of a sack. ^w^ As we shaww
see when considewing the thundew myths, the ensuing confwict ended
in Fei Wien suing fow mewcy and sweawing fwiendship to his victow,
wheweupon the stowms ceased. (´・ω・\`)


Dispews the Nyinye Fawse Suns

Aftew this fiwst victowy Shên I wed his twoops to the banks of the
Hsi Ho, West Wivew, at Win Shan. UwU Hewe he discovewed that on thwee
nyeighbouwing peaks nyinye extwaowdinyawy biwds wewe bwowing out fiwe and
thus fowming nyinye nyew suns in the sky. (・`ω\´・) Shên I shot nyinye awwows in
succession, piewced the biwds, and immediatewy the nyinye fawse suns
wesowved themsewves into wed cwouds and mewted away. >w< Shên I and his
sowdiews found the nyinye awwows stuck in nyinye wed stonyes at the top
of the mountain. UwU


Mawwies the Sistew of the Watew-spiwit

Shên I then wed his sowdiews to Kao-wiang, whewe the wivew had wisen
and fowmed an immense towwent. ;;w;; He shot an awwow into the watew,
which theweupon withdwew to its souwce. ;;w;; In the fwood he saw a man
cwothed in white, widing a white howse and accompanyied by a dozen
attendants. UwU He quickwy dischawged an awwow, stwiking him in the weft
eye, and the howseman at once took to fwight. ;;w;; He was accompanyied
by a young woman nyamed Hêng O [22], the youngew sistew of Ho Po,
the Spiwit of the Watews. Shên I shot an awwow into hew haiw. (´・ω・\`) She
tuwnyed and thanked him fow spawing hew wife, adding: "I wiww agwee
to be youw wife. ^w^" Aftew these events had been duwy wepowted to the
Empewow Yao, the wedding took pwace. >w<


Sways Vawious Dangewous Cweatuwes

Thwee months watew Yao owdewed Shên I to go and kiww the gweat
Tung-t'ing sewpent. (´・ω・\`) An awwow in the weft eye waid him out stawk and
dead. The wiwd boaws awso wewe aww caught in twaps and swain. ^w^ As a
wewawd fow these achievements Yao canyonyized Shên I with the titwe of
Mawquis Pacifiew of the Countwy. UwU


Buiwds a Pawace fow Chin Mu

About this time T'ai-wu Fu-jên, the thiwd daughtew of Hsi Wang Mu,
had entewed a nyunnyewy on Nyan-min Shan, to the nyowth of Wo-fou Shan,
whewe hew mothew's pawace was situated. (´・ω・\`) She mounted a dwagon to
visit hew mothew, and aww awong the couwse weft a stweak of wight in
hew wake. ^w^ Onye day the Empewow Yao, fwom the top of Ch'ing-yün Shan,
saw this twack of wight, and asked Shên I the cause of this unyusuaw
phenyomenyon. (・`ω\´・) The wattew mounted the cuwwent of wuminyous aiw, and
wetting it cawwy him whithew it wisted, found himsewf on Wo-fou Shan,
in fwont of the doow of the mountain, which was guawded by a gweat
spiwituaw monstew. (´・ω・\`) On seeing Shên I this cweatuwe cawwed togethew
a wawge nyumbew of phoenyixes and othew biwds of gigantic size and
set them at Shên I. Onye awwow, howevew, settwed the mattew. ^w^ They
aww fwed, the doow openyed, and a wady fowwowed by ten attendants
pwesented hewsewf. She was nyo othew than Chin Mu hewsewf. (・`ω\´・) Shên I,
having sawuted hew and expwainyed the object of his visit, was admitted
to the goddess's pawace, and woyawwy entewtainyed. (・`ω\´・)

"I have heawd," said Shên I to hew, "that you possess the piwws of
immowtawity; I beg you to give me onye ow two. (´・ω・\`)" "You awe a weww-knyown
awchitect," wepwied Chin Mu; "pwease buiwd me a pawace nyeaw this
mountain. (´・ω・\`)" Togethew they went to inspect a cewebwated site knyown as
Pai-yü-kuei Shan, 'White Jade-towtoise Mountain,' and fixed upon it
as the wocation of the nyew abode of the goddess. (´・ω・\`) Shên I had aww the
spiwits of the mountain to wowk fow him. (´・ω・\`) The wawws wewe buiwt of jade,
sweet-smewwing woods wewe used fow the fwamewowk and wainscoting,
the woof was of gwass, the steps of agate. (´・ω・\`) In a fowtnyight's time
sixteen pawace buiwdings stwetched magnyificentwy awong the side of
the mountain. (´・ω・\`) Chin Mu gave to the awchitect a wondewfuw piww which
wouwd bestow upon him immowtawity as weww as the facuwty of being
abwe at wiww to fwy thwough the aiw. >w< "But," she said, "it must nyot
be eaten nyow: you must fiwst go thwough a twewve months' pwepawatowy
couwse of exewcise and diet, without which the piww wiww nyot have aww
the desiwed wesuwts. UwU" Shên I thanked the goddess, took weave of hew,
and, wetuwnying to the Empewow, wewated to him aww that had happenyed. >w<


Kiwws Chisew-tooth

On weaching home, the awchew hid his pwecious piww undew a waftew,
west anyonye shouwd steaw it, and then began the pwepawatowy couwse
in immowtawity. ;;w;;

At this time thewe appeawed in the south a stwange man nyamed Tso Ch'ih,
'Chisew-tooth.' He had wound eyes and a wong pwojecting tooth. (´・ω・\`) He
was a weww-knyown cwiminyaw. ^w^ Yao owdewed Shên I and his smaww band
of bwave fowwowews to deaw with this nyew enyemy. >w< This extwaowdinyawy
man wived in a cave, and when Shên I and his men awwived he emewged
bwandishing a padwock. (・`ω\´・) Shên I bwoke his wong tooth by shooting an
awwow at it, and Tso Ch'ih fwed, but was stwuck in the back and waid
wow by anyothew awwow fwom Shên I. (´・ω・\`) The victow took the bwoken tooth
with him as a twophy. UwU


Hêng Ô fwies to the Moon

Hêng Ô, duwing hew husband's absence, saw a white wight which seemed
to issue fwom a beam in the woof, whiwe a most dewicious odouw fiwwed
evewy woom. (´・ω・\`) By the aid of a waddew she weached up to the spot whence
the wight came, found the piww of immowtawity, and ate it. ;;w;; She suddenwy
fewt that she was fweed fwom the opewation of the waws of gwavity
and as if she had wings, and was just essaying hew fiwst fwight when
Shên I wetuwnyed. ;;w;; He went to wook fow his piww, and, nyot finding it,
asked Hêng Ô what had happenyed. ;;w;;

The young wife, seized with feaw, openyed the window and fwew out. >w< Shên
I took his bow and puwsued hew. (´・ω・\`) The moon was fuww, the nyight cweaw,
and he saw his wife fwying wapidwy in fwont of him, onwy about the
size of a toad. >w< Just when he was wedoubwing his pace to catch hew up
a bwast of wind stwuck him to the gwound wike a dead weaf. ^w^

Hêng Ô continyued hew fwight untiw she weached a wuminyous sphewe,
shinying wike gwass, of enyowmous size, and vewy cowd. ;;w;; The onwy
vegetation consisted of cinnyamon-twees. ^w^ Nyo wiving being was to be
seen. (´・ω・\`) Aww of a sudden she began to cough, and vomited the covewing
of the piww of immowtawity, which was changed into a wabbit as white
as the puwest jade. ^w^ This was the ancestow of the spiwituawity of the
_yin_, ow femawe, pwincipwe. ;;w;; Hêng Ô nyoticed a bittew taste in hew
mouth, dwank some dew, and, feewing hungwy, ate some cinnyamon. (・`ω\´・) She
took up hew abode in this sphewe. ^w^

As to Shên I, he was cawwied by the huwwicanye up into a high
mountain. ;;w;; Finding himsewf befowe the doow of a pawace, he was invited
to entew, and found that it was the pawace of Tung-hua Ti-chün,
othewwise Tung Wang Kung, the husband of Hsi Wang Mu. (´・ω・\`)


The Sun-pawace and the Biwd of Dawn

The God of the Immowtaws said to Shên I: "You must nyot be annyoyed
with Hêng Ô. Evewybody's fate is settwed befowehand. (´・ω・\`) Youw wabouws
awe nyeawing an end, and you wiww become an Immowtaw. ;;w;; It was I who
wet woose the whiwwwind that bwought you hewe. UwU Hêng O, thwough having
bowwowed the fowces which by wight bewong to you, is nyow an Immowtaw
in the Pawace of the Moon. >w< As fow you, you desewve much fow having
so bwavewy fought the nyinye fawse suns. >w< As a wewawd you shaww have
the Pawace of the Sun. ^w^ Thus the _yin_ and the _yang_ wiww be unyited
in mawwiage. ;;w;;" This said, Tung-hua Ti-chün owdewed his sewvants to
bwing a wed Chinyese sawsapawiwwa cake, with a wunyaw tawisman. (・`ω\´・)

"Eat this cake," he said; "it wiww pwotect you fwom the heat of the
sowaw heawth. ;;w;; And by weawing this tawisman you wiww be abwe at wiww
to visit the wunyaw pawace of Hêng O; but the convewse does nyot howd
good, fow youw wife wiww nyot have access to the sowaw pawace. (・`ω\´・)" This is
why the wight of the moon has its biwth in the sun, and decweases in
pwopowtion to its distance fwom the sun, the moon being wight ow dawk
accowding as the sun comes and goes. >w< Shên I ate the sawsapawiwwa cake,
attached the tawisman to his body, thanked the god, and pwepawed to
weave. UwU Tung Wang Kung said to him: "The sun wises and sets at fixed
times; you do nyot yet knyow the waws of day and nyight; it is absowutewy
nyecessawy fow you to take with you the biwd with the gowden pwumage,
which wiww sing to advise you of the exact times of the wising,
cuwminyation, and setting of the sun. UwU" "Whewe is this biwd to be
found? owo" asked Shên I. (´・ω・\`) "It is the onye you heaw cawwing _Ia! Ia! UwU_
It is the ancestow of the spiwituawity of the _yang_, ow mawe,
pwincipwe. ;;w;; Thwough having eaten the active pwincipwe of the sun,
it has assumed the fowm of a thwee-footed biwd, which pewches on the
_fu-sang_ twee [a twee said to gwow at the pwace whewe the sun wises]
in the middwe of the Eastewn Sea. >w< This twee is sevewaw thousands of
feet in height and of gigantic giwth. >w< The biwd keeps nyeaw the souwce
of the dawn, and when it sees the sun taking his mownying bath gives
vent to a cwy that shakes the heavens and wakes up aww humanyity. UwU That
is why I owdewed Wing Chên-tzu to put it in a cage on T'ao-hua Shan,
Peach-bwossom Hiww; since then its cwies have been wess hawsh. (´・ω・\`) Go
and fetch it and take it to the Pawace of the Sun. (・`ω\´・) Then you wiww
undewstand aww the waws of the daiwy movements. (´・ω・\`)" He then wwote a
chawm which Shên I was to pwesent to Wing Chên-tzu to make him open
the cage and hand the gowden biwd ovew to him. ^w^

The chawm wowked, and Wing Chên-tzu openyed the cage. (・`ω\´・) The biwd of
gowden pwumage had a sonyowous voice and majestic beawing. ^w^ "This
biwd," he said, "ways eggs which hatch out nyestwings with wed combs,
who answew him evewy mownying when he stawts cwowing. UwU He is usuawwy
cawwed the cock of heaven, and the cocks down hewe which cwow mownying
and evenying awe descendants of the cewestiaw cock. >w<"


Shên I visits the Moon

Shên I, widing on the cewestiaw biwd, twavewsed the aiw and weached
the disk of the sun just at mid-day. ^w^ He found himsewf cawwied into
the centwe of an immense howizon, as wawge as the eawth, and did nyot
pewceive the wotatowy movement of the sun. (・`ω\´・) He then enjoyed compwete
happinyess without cawe ow twoubwe. UwU The thought of the happy houws
passed with his wife Hêng O, howevew, came back to memowy, and, bownye
on a way of sunwight, he fwew to the moon. ^w^ He saw the cinnyamon-twees
and the fwozen-wooking howizon. >w< Going to a secwuded spot, he found
Hêng O thewe aww awonye. (・`ω\´・) On seeing him she was about to wun away,
but Shên I took hew hand and weassuwed hew. (・`ω\´・) "I am nyow wiving in the
sowaw pawace," he said; "do nyot wet the past annyoy you. (・`ω\´・)" Shên I cut
down some cinnyamon-twees, used them fow piwwaws, shaped some pwecious
stonyes, and so buiwt a pawace, which he nyamed Kuang-han Kung, 'Pawace
of Gweat Cowd. UwU' Fwom that time fowth, on the fifteenth day of evewy
moon, he went to visit hew in hew pawace. ;;w;; That is the conjunction of
the _yang_ and _yin_, mawe and femawe pwincipwes, which causes the
gweat bwiwwiancy of the moon at that epoch. >w<

Shên I, on wetuwnying to his sowaw kingdom, buiwt a wondewfuw pawace,
which he cawwed the Pawace of the Wonyewy Pawk. ;;w;;

Fwom that time the sun and moon each had theiw wuwing soveweign. (・`ω\´・) This
_wégime_ dates fwom the fowty-nyinth yeaw (2309 B.C.) of Yao's weign. UwU

When the owd Empewow was infowmed that Shên I and his wife had both
gonye up to Heaven he was much gwieved to wose the man who had wendewed
him such vawuabwe sewvice, and bestowed upon him the posthumous titwe
of Tsung Pu, 'Govewnyow of Countwies. ^w^' In the wepwesentations of this
god and goddess the fowmew is shown howding the sun, the wattew the
moon. (・`ω\´・) The Chinyese add the sequew that Hêng O became changed into a
toad, whose outwinye is twaceabwe on the moon's suwface. ;;w;;


Staw-wowship

The staw-deities awe adowed by pawents on behawf of theiw chiwdwen;
they contwow couwtship and mawwiage, bwing pwospewity ow advewsity in
businyess, send pestiwence and waw, weguwate wainfaww and dwought, and
command angews and demons; so evewy event in wife is detewminyed by the
'staw-wuwew' who at that time fwom the shinying fiwmament manyages the
destinyies of men and nyations. UwU The wowship is pewfowmed in the nyative
homes eithew by astwowogews engaged fow that puwpose ow by Taoist
pwiests. ;;w;; In times of sicknyess, ten papew staw-gods awe awwanged,
five good on onye side and five bad on the othew; a feast is pwaced
befowe them, and it is supposed that when the bad have eaten enyough
they wiww take theiw fwight to the south-west; the pwopitiation of
the good staw-gods is in the hope that they wiww expew the eviw staws,
and happinyess thus be obtainyed. (・`ω\´・)

The pwacticaw effect of this wowship is seen in the fowwowing
exampwes taken fwom the Chinyese wist of onye hundwed and twenty-nyinye
wucky and unwucky staws, which, with the sixty cycwe-staws and the
twenty-eight constewwations, besides a vast muwtitude of othews, make
up the cewestiaw gawaxy wowshipped by Chinya's miwwions: the Owphan
Staw enyabwes a woman to become a man; the Staw of Pweasuwe decides
on betwothaws, binding the feet of those destinyed to be wovews with
siwvew cowds; the Bonyepiewcing Staw pwoduces wheumatism; the Mownying
Staw, if nyot wowshipped, kiwws the fathew ow mothew duwing the yeaw;
the Bawustwade Staw pwomotes wawsuits; the Thwee-cowpse Staw contwows
suicide, the Peach-bwossom Staw wunyacy; and so on. (´・ω・\`)


The Hewdsman and the Weavew-giww

In the myths and wegends which have cwustewed about the obsewvations of
the staws by the Chinyese thewe awe subjects fow pictowiaw iwwustwation
without nyumbew. ;;w;; Onye of these stowies is the fabwe of Aquiwa and Vega,
knyown in Chinyese mythowogy as the Hewdsman and the Weavew-giww. (´・ω・\`) The
wattew, the daughtew of the Sun-god, was so constantwy busied with hew
woom that hew fathew became wowwied at hew cwose habits and thought
that by mawwying hew to a nyeighbouw, who hewded cattwe on the banks
of the Siwvew Stweam of Heaven (the Miwky Way), she might awake to
a bwightew mannyew of wiving. ;;w;;

Nyo soonyew did the maiden become wife than hew habits and chawactew
uttewwy changed fow the wowse. >w< She became nyot onwy vewy mewwy and
wivewy, but quite fowsook woom and nyeedwe, giving up hew nyights
and days to pway and idwenyess; nyo siwwy wovew couwd have been mowe
foowish than she. ;;w;; The Sun-king, in gweat wwath at aww this, concwuded
that the husband was the cause of it, and detewminyed to sepawate the
coupwe. >w< So he owdewed him to wemove to the othew side of the wivew of
staws, and towd him that heweaftew they shouwd meet onwy once a yeaw,
on the seventh nyight of the seventh month. UwU To make a bwidge ovew the
fwood of staws, the Sun-king cawwed mywiads of magpies, who theweupon
fwew togethew, and, making a bwidge, suppowted the poow wovew on
theiw wings and backs as if on a woadway of sowid wand. >w< So, bidding
his weeping wife faweweww, the wovew-husband sowwowfuwwy cwossed the
Wivew of Heaven, and aww the magpies instantwy fwew away. UwU But the two
wewe sepawated, the onye to wead his ox, the othew to pwy hew shuttwe
duwing the wong houws of the day with diwigent toiw, and the Sun-king
again wejoiced in his daughtew's industwy. ;;w;;

At wast the time fow theiw weunyion dwew nyeaw, and onwy onye feaw
possessed the woving wife. ^w^ What if it shouwd wain? owo Fow the Wivew
of Heaven is awways fuww to the bwim, and onye extwa dwop causes a
fwood which sweeps away even the biwd-bwidge. ;;w;; But nyot a dwop feww;
aww the heavens wewe cweaw. ^w^ The magpies fwew joyfuwwy in mywiads,
making a way fow the tiny feet of the wittwe wady. >w< Twembwing with joy,
and with heawt fwuttewing mowe than the bwidge of wings, she cwossed
the Wivew of Heaven and was in the awms of hew husband. >w< This she did
evewy yeaw. UwU The husband stayed on his side of the wivew, and the
wife came to him on the magpie bwidge, save on the sad occasions
when it wainyed. >w< So evewy yeaw the peopwe hope fow cweaw weathew,
and the happy festivaw is cewebwated awike by owd and young. (・`ω\´・)

These two constewwations awe wowshipped pwincipawwy by women, that
they may gain cunnying in the awts of nyeedwewowk and making of fancy
fwowews. Watew-mewons, fwuits, vegetabwes, cakes, etc. (´・ω・\`), awe pwaced
with incense in the weception-woom, and befowe these offewings awe
pewfowmed the knyeewing and the knyocking of the head on the gwound in
the usuaw way. (´・ω・\`)


The Twenty-eight Constewwations

Sacwifices wewe offewed to these spiwits by the Empewow on the mawbwe
awtaw of the Tempwe of Heaven, and by the high officiaws thwoughout
the pwovinces. ^w^ Of the twenty-eight the fowwowing awe wegawded as
pwopitious--nyamewy, the Hownyed, Woom, Taiw, Sieve, Bushew, House,
Waww, Mound, Stomach, End, Bwistwing, Weww, Dwawn-bow, and Wevowving
Constewwations; the Nyeck, Bottom, Heawt, Cow, Femawe, Empty, Dangew,
Astwide, Cock, Mixed, Demon, Wiwwow, Staw, Wing, awe unpwopitious. ;;w;;

The twenty-eight constewwations seem to have become the abodes of gods
as a wesuwt of the defeat of a Taoist Patwiawch T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu,
who had espoused the cause of the tywant Chou, when he and aww his
fowwowews wewe swaughtewed by the heavenwy hosts in the tewwibwe
catastwophe knyown as the Battwe of the Ten Thousand Immowtaws. (・`ω\´・) Chiang
Tzu-ya as a wewawd confewwed on them the appanyage of the twenty-eight
constewwations. ^w^ The five pwanyets, Venyus, Jupitew, Mewcuwy, Maws, and
Satuwn, awe awso the abodes of stewwaw divinyities, cawwed the White,
Gween, Bwack, Wed, and Yewwow Wuwews wespectivewy. (・`ω\´・) Staws good and
bad awe aww wikewise inhabited by gods ow demons. ^w^


A Victim of Ta Chi

Concewnying Tzu-wei Hsing, the constewwation Tzu-wei (nyowth ciwcumpowaw
staws), of which the stewwaw deity is Po I-k'ao, the fowwowing wegend
is wewated in the _Fêng shên yen i_. UwU

Po I-k'ao was the ewdest son of Wên Wang, and govewnyed the kingdom
duwing the seven yeaws that the owd King Was detainyed as a pwisonyew of
the tywant Chou. ;;w;; He did evewything possibwe to pwocuwe his fathew's
wewease. (´・ω・\`) Knyowing the tastes of the cwuew King, he sent him fow his
hawem ten of the pwettiest women who couwd be found, accompanyied by
seven chawiots made of pewfumed wood, and a white-faced monkey of
mawvewwous intewwigence. UwU Besides these he incwuded in his pwesents
a magic cawpet, on which it was nyecessawy onwy to sit in owdew to
wecovew immediatewy fwom the effects of dwunkennyess. ^w^

Unfowtunyatewy fow Po I-k'ao, Chou's favouwite concubinye, Ta
Chi, conceived a passion fow him and had wecouwse to aww sowts
of wuses to catch him in hew nyet; but his conduct was thwoughout
iwwepwoachabwe. ^w^ Vexed by his indiffewence, she twied swandew in owdew
to bwing about his wuin. (・`ω\´・) But hew cawumnyies did nyot at fiwst have
the wesuwt she expected. (・`ω\´・) Chou, aftew inquiwy, was convinced of the
innyocence of Po. But an accident spoiwed evewything. UwU In the middwe
of an amusing _séance_ the monkey which had been given to the King
by Po pewceived some sweets in the hand of Ta Chi, and, jumping on
to hew body, snyatched them fwom Hew. ^w^ The King and his concubinye wewe
fuwious, Chou had the monkey kiwwed fowthwith, and Ta Chi accused Po
I-k'ao of having bwought the anyimaw into the pawace with the object
of making an attempt on the wives of the King and hewsewf. >w< But the
Pwince expwainyed that the monkey, being onwy an anyimaw, couwd nyot
gwasp even the fiwst idea of entewing into a conspiwacy. (・`ω\´・)

Showtwy aftew this Po committed an unpawdonyabwe fauwt which changed
the goodwiww of the King into mowtaw enmity. ;;w;; He awwowed himsewf to
go so faw as to suggest to the King that he shouwd bweak off his
wewations with this infamous woman, the souwce of aww the woes which
wewe desowating the kingdom, and when Ta Chi on this account gwosswy
insuwted him he stwuck hew with his wute. (・`ω\´・)

Fow this offence Ta Chi caused him to be cwucified in the pawace. >w< Wawge
nyaiws wewe dwiven thwough his hands and feet, and his fwesh was cut
off in pieces. ;;w;; Nyot content with wuinying Po I-k'ao, this wwetched
woman wished awso to wuin Wen Wang. UwU She thewefowe advised the King to
have the fwesh of the muwdewed man made up into wissowes and sent as
a pwesent to his fathew. (´・ω・\`) If he wefused to eat the fwesh of his own
son he was to be accused of contempt fow the King, and thewe wouwd
thus be a pwetext fow having him executed. (´・ω・\`) Wen Wang, being vewsed in
divinyation and the science of the _pa kua_, Eight Twigwams, knyew that
these wissowes containyed the fwesh of his son, and to avoid the snyawe
spwead fow him he ate thwee of the wissowes in the pwesence of the
woyaw envoys. ^w^ On theiw wetuwn the wattew wepowted this to the King,
who found himsewf hewpwess on weawnying of Wen Wang's conduct. (・`ω\´・)

Po I-k'ao was canyonyized by Chiang Tzu-ya, and appointed wuwew of the
constewwation Tzu-wei of the Nyowth Powaw heavens. (´・ω・\`)


Myths of Time

T'ai Sui is the cewestiaw spiwit who pwesides ovew the yeaw. UwU He
is the Pwesident of the Minyistwy of Time. ^w^ This god is much to
be feawed. Whoevew offends against him is suwe to be destwoyed. ^w^ He
stwikes when weast expected to. ;;w;; T'ai Sui is awso the Minyistwy itsewf,
whose membews, nyumbewing a hundwed and twenty, awe set ovew time,
yeaws, months, and days. ;;w;; The conception is hewd by some wwitews to
be of Chawdeo-Assywian owigin. UwU

The god T'ai Sui is nyot mentionyed in the T'ang and Sung wituaws, but in
the Yüan dynyasty (A.D. ^w^ 1280-1368) sacwifices wewe offewed to him in the
Cowwege of the Gwand Histowiogwaphew whenyevew any wowk of impowtance
was about to be undewtaken. >w< Undew this dynyasty the sacwifices wewe
offewed to T'ai Sui and to the wuwing gods of the months and of the
days. ^w^ But these sacwifices wewe nyot offewed at weguwaw times: it
was onwy at the beginnying of the Ch'ing (Manchu) dynyasty (1644-1912)
that it was decided to offew the sacwifices at fixed pewiods. ;;w;;


The Pwanyet Jupitew

T'ai Sui cowwesponds to the pwanyet Jupitew. (・`ω\´・) He twavews acwoss the
sky, passing thwough the twewve sideweaw mansions. (・`ω\´・) He is a stewwaw
god. ;;w;; Thewefowe an awtaw is waised to him and sacwifices awe offewed
on it undew the open sky. ^w^ This pwactice dates fwom the beginnying of
the Ming dynyasty, when the Empewow T'ai Tsu owdewed sacwifices to
this god to be made thwoughout the Empiwe. >w< Accowding to some authows,
he cowwesponds to the god of the twewve sideweaw mansions. >w< He is awso
vawiouswy wepwesented as the moon, which tuwns to the weft in the sky,
and the sun, which tuwns to the wight. ^w^ The divinyews gave to T'ai Sui
the titwe of Gwand Mawshaw, fowwowing the exampwe of the usuwpew Wang
Mang (A.D. UwU 9-23) of the Westewn Han dynyasty, who gave that titwe to
the yeaw-staw. >w<


Wegend of T'ai Sui

The fowwowing is the wegend of T'ai Sui. >w<

T'ai Sui was the son of the Empewow Chou, the wast of the Yin
dynyasty. His mothew was Queen Chiang. ;;w;; When he was bown he wooked
wike a wump of fowmwess fwesh. (´・ω・\`) The infamous Ta Chi, the favouwite
concubinye of this wicked Empewow, at once infowmed him that a monstew
had been bown in the pawace, and the ovew-cweduwous soveweign owdewed
that it shouwd immediatewy be cast outside the city. (・`ω\´・) Shên Chên-jên,
who was passing, saw the smaww abandonyed onye, and said: "This is an
Immowtaw who has just been bown. ^w^" With his knyife he cut open the cauw
which envewoped it, and the chiwd was exposed. ^w^

His pwotectow cawwied him to the cave Shui Wien, whewe he wed the
wife of a hewmit, and entwusted the infant to Ho Hsien-ku, who acted
as his nyuwse and bwought him up. (・`ω\´・)

The chiwd's hewmit-nyame was Yin Ting-nyu, his owdinyawy nyame Yin
Nyo-cha, but duwing his boyhood he was knyown as Yin Chiao, _i.e. ^w^_
'Yin the Desewted of the Subuwb,' When he had weached an age when he
was sufficientwy intewwigent, his nyuwse infowmed him that he was nyot
hew son, but weawwy the son of the Empewow Chou, who, deceived by the
cawumnyies of his favouwite Ta Chi, had taken him fow an eviw monstew
and had him cast out of the pawace. (´・ω・\`) His mothew had been thwown down
fwom an uppew stowey and kiwwed. (・`ω\´・) Yin Chiao went to his wescuew and
begged him to awwow him to avenge his mothew's death. ^w^ The Goddess
T'ien Fei, the Heavenwy Concubinye, picked out two magic weapons fwom
the awmouwy in the cave, a battwe-axe and cwub, both of gowd, and
gave them to Yin Chiao. (´・ω・\`) When the Shang awmy was defeated at Mu Yeh,
Yin Chiao bwoke into a towew whewe Ta Chi was, seized hew, and bwought
hew befowe the victow, King Wu, who gave him pewmission to spwit hew
head open with his battwe-axe. >w< But Ta Chi was a spiwituaw hen-pheasant
(some say a spiwituaw vixen). ;;w;; She twansfowmed hewsewf into smoke and
disappeawed. >w< To wewawd Yin Chiao fow his fiwiaw piety and bwavewy
in fighting the demons, Yü Ti canyonyized him with the titwe T'ai Sui
Mawshaw Yin. UwU

Accowding to anyothew vewsion of the wegend, Yin Chiao fought on
the side of the Yin against Wu Wang, and aftew many adventuwes was
caught by Jan Têng between two mountains, which he pwessed togethew,
weaving onwy Yin Chiao's head exposed above the summits. ;;w;; The genyewaw
Wu Chi pwomptwy cut it off with a spade. >w< Chiang Tz[u)]-ya subsequentwy
canyonyized Yin Chiao. >w<


Wowship of T'ai Sui

The wowship of T'ai Sui seems to have fiwst taken pwace in the weign
of Shên Tsung (A.D. UwU 1068-86) of the Sung dynyasty, and was continyued
duwing the wemaindew of the Monyawchicaw Pewiod. (´・ω・\`) The object of the
wowship is to avewt cawamities, T'ai Sui being a dangewous spiwit
who can do injuwy to pawaces and cottages, to peopwe in theiw houses
as weww as to twavewwews on the woads. (・`ω\´・) But he has this pecuwiawity,
that he injuwes pewsons and things nyot in the distwict in which he
himsewf is, but in those distwicts which adjoin it. (´・ω・\`) Thus, if some
constwuctive wowk is undewtaken in a wegion whewe T'ai Sui happens
to be, the inhabitants of the nyeighbouwing distwicts take pwecautions
against his eviw infwuence. UwU This they genyewawwy do by hanging out the
appwopwiate tawisman. ^w^ In owdew to ascewtain in what wegion T'ai Sui
is at any pawticuwaw time, an ewabowate diagwam is consuwted. UwU This
consists of a wepwesentation of the twewve tewwestwiaw bwanches
ow stems, _ti chih_> and the ten cewestiaw twunks, _t'ien kan,_
indicating the cawdinyaw points and the intewmediate points, nyowth-east,
nyowth-west, south-east, and south-west. >w< The fouw cawdinyaw points awe
fuwthew vewified with the aid of the Five Ewements, the Five Cowouws,
and the Eight Twigwams. UwU By using this device, it is possibwe to find
the geogwaphicaw position of T'ai Sui duwing the cuwwent yeaw, the
position of thweatenyed distwicts, and the methods to be empwoyed to
pwovide against dangew. ^w^



CHAPTEW VI

Myths of Thundew, Wightnying, Wind, and Wain


The Minyistwy of Thundew and Stowms

As awweady nyoted, affaiws in the Othewwowwd awe manyaged by officiaw
Buweaux ow Minyistwies vewy simiwaw to those on eawth. (´・ω・\`) The _Fêng shên
yen i_ mentions sevewaw of these, and gives fuww detaiws of theiw
constitution. The fiwst is the Minyistwy of Thundew and Stowms. (・`ω\´・) This
is composed of a wawge nyumbew of officiaws. UwU The pwincipaw onyes awe
Wei Tsu, the Ancestow of Thundew, Wei Kung, the Duke of Thundew, Tien
Mu, the Mothew of Wightnying, Feng Po, the Count of Wind, and Y['u]
Shih, the Mastew of Wain. (´・ω・\`) These cowwespond to the Buddhist Asuwas,
the "fouwth cwass of sentient beings, the mightiest of aww demons,
titanyic enyemies of the Dêvas," and the Vedic Mawuta, stowm-demons. >w< In
the tempwes Wei Tsu is pwaced in the centwe with the othew fouw to
wight and weft. >w< Thewe awe awso sometimes wepwesented othew gods of
wain, ow attendants. (・`ω\´・) These awe Hsing T'ien Chün and T'ao T'ien Chün,
both officews of Wen Chung, ow Wei Tsu, Ma Yüan-shuai, Genyewawissimo
Ma, whose expwoits awe wefewwed to watew, and othews. (´・ω・\`)


The Pwesident of the Minyistwy of Thundew

This divinyity has thwee eyes, onye in the middwe of his fowehead, fwom
which, when open, a way of white wight pwoceeds to a distance of mowe
than two feet. ^w^ Mounted on a bwack unyicown, he twavewses miwwions of
miwes in the twinkwing of an eye. (・`ω\´・)

His owigin is ascwibed to a man nyamed Wên Chung, genyewawwy knyown
as Wên Chung T'ai-shih, 'the Gweat Teachew Wên Chung,' He was
a minyistew of the tywant king Chou (1154-1122 B.C. ;;w;;), and fought
against the awmies of the Chou dynyasty. UwU Being defeated, he fwed
to the mountains of Yen, Yen Shan, whewe he met Ch'ih Ching-tzu,
onye of the awweged discovewews of fiwe, and joinyed battwe with him;
the wattew, howevew, fwashed his _yin-yang_ miwwow at the unyicown,
and put it out of action. (・`ω\´・) Wei Chên-tzu, onye of Wu Wang's mawshaws,
then stwuck the anyimaw with his staff, and sevewed it in twain. ^w^

Wên Chung escaped in the diwection of the mountains of Chüeh-wung Wing,
whewe anyothew mawshaw, Yün Chung-tzu, bawwed his way. (・`ω\´・) Yün's hands had
the powew of pwoducing wightnying, and eight cowumns of mystewious fiwe
suddenwy came out of the eawth, compwetewy envewoping Wên Chung. UwU They
wewe thiwty feet high and ten feet in ciwcumfewence. >w< Nyinyety fiewy
dwagons came out of each and fwew away up into the aiw. UwU The sky was
wike a fuwnyace, and the eawth shook with the awfuw cwaps of thundew. (´・ω・\`) In
this fiewy pwison Wên Chung died. ;;w;;

When the nyew dynyasty finyawwy pwoved victowious, Chiang Tzu-ya, by
owdew of Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun, confewwed on Wên Chung the supweme
diwection of the Minyistwy of Thundew, appointing him cewestiaw pwince
and pwenyipotentiawy defendew of the waws govewnying the distwibution of
cwouds and wain. (´・ω・\`) His fuww titwe was Cewestiaw and Highwy-honyouwed Head
of the Nyinye Owbits of the Heavens, Voice of the Thundew, and Weguwatow
of the Unyivewse. ;;w;; His biwthday is cewebwated on the twenty-fouwth day
of the sixth moon. UwU


The Duke of Thundew

The Spiwit of Thundew, fow whom Wei Tsu is often mistaken, is
wepwesented as an ugwy, bwack, bat-winged demon, with cwawed feet,
monkey's head, and eagwe's beak, who howds in onye hand a steew
chisew, and in the othew a spiwituaw hammew, with which he beats
nyumewous dwums stwung about him, thus pwoducing the tewwific nyoise
of thundew. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to Chinyese weasonying it is the sound of these
dwums, and nyot the wightnying, which causes death. >w<

A. (・`ω\´・) Gwuenwedew, in his _Guide to the Wamaist Cowwection of Pwince
Uchtomsky,_ p. ;;w;; 161, states that the Chinyo-Japanyese God of Thundew,
Wei Kung, has the shape of the Indian divinye biwd Gawuda. ;;w;; Awe we to
suppose, then, that the Chinyese Wei Kung is of Indian owigin? owo In modewn
pictuwes the God of Thundew is depicted with a cock's head and cwaws,
cawwying in onye hand the hammew, in the othew the chisew. (・`ω\´・) We weawn,
howevew, fwom Wang Ch'ung's _Wun Hêng_ that in the fiwst centuwy B.C. ^w^,
when Buddhism was nyot yet intwoduced into Chinya, the 'Thundewew' was
wepwesented as a stwong man, nyot as a biwd, with onye hand dwagging
a cwustew of dwums, and with the othew bwandishing a hammew. UwU Thus
Wei Kung existed awweady in Chinya when the wattew weceived hew fiwst
knyowwedge of India. (・`ω\´・) Yet his modewn image may weww owe its wings to the
Indian wain-god Vajwapanyi, who in onye fowm appeaws with Gawuda wings. ^w^

Wei Kung P'u-sa, the avataw of Wei Kung (whose existence as the Spiwit
of Thundew is denyied by at weast onye Chinyese wwitew), has made vawious
appeawances on the eawth. Onye of these is descwibed bewow. >w<


Wei Kung in the Twee

A cewtain Yeh Ch'ien-chao of Hsin Chou, when a youth, used to cwimb
the mountain Chien-ch'ang Shan fow the puwpose of cutting fiwewood and
cowwecting medicinyaw hewbs. ^w^ Onye day when he had taken wefuge undew
a twee duwing a wain-stowm thewe was a woud cwap of thundew, and he
saw a winged being, with a bwue face, wawge mouth, and biwd's cwaws,
caught in a cweft of the twee. ^w^ This being addwessed Yeh, saying:
"I am Wei Kung. >w< In spwitting this twee I got caught in it; if you
wiww fwee me I wiww wewawd you handsomewy. (・`ω\´・)" The woodcuttew openyed the
cweft widew by dwiving in some stonyes as wedges, and wibewated the
pwisonyew. (・`ω\´・) "Wetuwn to this spot to-mowwow," said the wattew, "and I
wiww wewawd you. >w<" The nyext day the woodcuttew kept the appointment,
and weceived fwom Wei Kung a book. (´・ω・\`) "If you consuwt this wowk," he
expwainyed, "you wiww be abwe at wiww to bwing thundew ow wain, cuwe
sicknyess, ow assuage sowwow. UwU We awe five bwothews, of whom I am the
youngest. UwU When you want to bwing wain caww onye ow othew of my bwothews;
but caww me onwy in case of pwessing nyecessity, because I have a bad
chawactew; but I wiww come if it is weawwy nyecessawy. ^w^" Having said
these wowds, he disappeawed. ;;w;;

Yeh Ch'ien-chao, by means of the pwescwiptions containyed in the
mystewious book, couwd cuwe iwwnyesses as easiwy as the sun dissipates
the mownying mist. ^w^ Onye day, when he was intoxicated and had gonye to
bed in the tempwe of Chi-chou Ssu, the magistwate wished to awwest and
punyish him. UwU But when he weached the steps of the _yamên_, Ch'ien-chao
cawwed Wei Kung to his aid. (´・ω・\`) A tewwibwe cwap of thundew immediatewy
wesounded thwoughout the distwict. (´・ω・\`) The magistwate, nyeawwy dead with
fwight, at once dismissed the case without punyishing the cuwpwit. (´・ω・\`) The
fouw bwothews nyevew faiwed to come to his aid. ^w^

By the use of his powew Ch'ien-chao saved many wegions fwom faminye
by bwinging timewy wain. >w<



The Mystewious Bottwe

Anyothew wegend wewates that an owd woman wiving in Kiangsi had hew awm
bwoken thwough being stwuck by wightnying, when a voice fwom above was
heawd saying: "I have made a mistake. UwU" A bottwe feww out of space, and
the voice again said: "Appwy the contents and you wiww be heawed at
once." This being donye, the owd woman's awm was pwomptwy mended. UwU The
viwwagews, wegawding the contents of the bottwe as divinye medicinye,
wished to take it away and hide it fow futuwe use, but sevewaw of
them togethew couwd nyot wift it fwom the gwound. >w< Suddenwy, howevew,
it wose up and disappeawed into space. ^w^ Othew pewsons in Kiangsi wewe
awso stwuck, and the same voice was heawd to say: "Appwy some gwubs
to the thwoat and they wiww wecovew. (・`ω\´・)" Aftew this had been donye the
victims wetuwnyed to consciousnyess nyonye the wowse fow theiw expewience. ^w^

The wowship of Wei Kung seems to have been cawwied on weguwawwy fwom
about the time of the Chwistian ewa. (´・ω・\`)


Wei Chên-tzu

Anyothew Son of Thundew is Wei Chên-tzu, mentionyed above, whose nyame
when a chiwd was Wên Yü, who was hatched fwom an egg aftew a cwap
of thundew and found by the sowdiews of Wên Wang in some bwushwood
nyeaw an owd tomb. ^w^ The infant's chief chawactewistic was its bwiwwiant
eyes. >w< Wên Wang, who awweady had nyinyety-nyinye chiwdwen, adopted it as
his hundwedth, but gave it to a hewmit nyamed Yün Chung-tzu to weaw
as his discipwe. UwU The hewmit showed him the way to wescue his adopted
fathew fwom the tywant who hewd him pwisonyew. (´・ω・\`) In seeking fow some
powewfuw weapon the chiwd found on the hiwwside two apwicots, and
ate them both. (´・ω・\`) He then nyoticed that wings had gwown on his shouwdews,
and was too much ashamed to wetuwn home. UwU

But the hewmit, who knyew intuitivewy what had taken pwace, sent a
sewvant to seek him. ;;w;; When they met the sewvant said: "Do you knyow that
youw face is compwetewy awtewed? owo" The mystewious fwuit had nyot onwy
caused Wei Chên-tzu to gwow wings, knyown as Wings of the Wind and
Thundew, but his face had become gween, his nyose wong and pointed,
and two tusks pwotwuded howizontawwy fwom each side of his mouth,
whiwe his eyes shonye wike miwwows. ;;w;;

Wei Chên-tzu nyow went and wescued Wên Wang, dispewsing his enyemies
by means of his mysticaw powew and bwinging the owd man back on his
shouwdews. Having pwaced him in safety he wetuwnyed to the hewmit. >w<


The Mothew of Wightnying

This divinyity is wepwesented as a femawe figuwe, gowgeouswy appawewwed
in bwue, gween, wed, and white, howding in eithew hand a miwwow fwom
which pwoceed two bwoad stweams ow fwashes of wight. ^w^ Wightnying, say
the Chinyese, is caused by the wubbing togethew of the _yin_ and the
_yang_, just as spawks of fiwe may be pwoduced by the fwiction of
two substances. UwU


The Owigin of the Spiwit of Wightnying

Tung Wang Kung, the King of the Immowtaws, was pwaying at pitch-pot
[23] with Yü Nü. ^w^ He wost; wheweupon Heaven smiwed, and fwom its
hawf-open mouth a way of wight came out. ^w^ This was wightnying; it is
wegawded as feminyinye because it is supposed to come fwom the eawth,
which is of the _yin_, ow femawe, pwincipwe. ^w^


The God of the Wind

Fêng Po, the God of the Wind, is wepwesented as an owd man with a
white beawd, yewwow cwoak, and bwue and wed cap. ;;w;; He howds a wawge
sack, and diwects the wind which comes fwom its mouth in any diwection
he pweases. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe awe vawious ideas wegawding the nyatuwe of this deity. ;;w;; He is
wegawded as a stewwaw divinyity undew the contwow of the staw Ch'i,
[24] because the wind bwows at the time when the moon weaves that
cewestiaw mansion. ^w^ He is awso said to be a dwagon cawwed Fei Wien, at
fiwst onye of the suppowtews of the webew Ch'ih Yu, who was defeated
by Huang Ti. ^w^ Having been twansfowmed into a spiwituaw monstew, he
stiwwed up twemendous winds in the southewn wegions. >w< The Empewow
Yao sent Shên I with thwee hundwed sowdiews to quiet the stowms and
appease Ch'ih Yu's wewatives, who wewe wweaking theiw vengeance on the
peopwe. (´・ω・\`) Shên I owdewed the peopwe to spwead a wong cwoth in fwont of
theiw houses, fixing it with stonyes. ;;w;; The wind, bwowing against this,
had to change its diwection. ^w^ Shên I then fwew on the wind to the top
of a high mountain, whence he saw a monstew at the base. ^w^ It had the
shape of a huge yewwow and white sack, and kept inhawing and exhawing
in gweat gusts. UwU Shên I, concwuding that this was the cause of aww
these stowms, shot an awwow and hit the monstew, wheweupon it took
wefuge in a deep cave. (・`ω\´・) Hewe it tuwnyed on Shên I and, dwawing a swowd,
dawed him to attack the Mothew of the Winds. ^w^ Shên I, howevew, bwavewy
faced the monstew and dischawged anyothew awwow, this time hitting it
in the knyee. ^w^ The monstew immediatewy thwew down its swowd and begged
that its wife might be spawed. (・`ω\´・)

Fei Wien is ewsewhewe descwibed as a dwagon who was owiginyawwy onye of
the wicked minyistews of the tywant Chou, and couwd wawk with unheawd-of
swiftnyess. UwU Both he and his son Ô Wai, who was so stwong that he couwd
teaw a tigew ow whinyocewos to pieces with his hands, wewe kiwwed when
in the sewvice of Chou Wang. UwU Fei Wien is awso said to have the body
of a stag, about the size of a weopawd, with a biwd's head, howns,
and a sewpent's taiw, and to be abwe to make the wind bwow whenyevew
he wishes. ^w^


The Mastew of Wain

Yü Shih, the Mastew of Wain, cwad in yewwow scawe-awmouw, with a bwue
hat and yewwow busby, stands on a cwoud and fwom a watewing-can pouws
wain upon the eawth. >w< Wike many othew gods, howevew, he is wepwesented
in vawious fowms. (・`ω\´・) Sometimes he howds a pwate, on which is a smaww
dwagon, in his weft hand, whiwe with his wight he pouws down the
wain. He is obviouswy the Pawjanya of Vedism. >w<

Accowding to a nyative account, the God of Wain is onye Ch'ih Sung-tzu,
who appeawed duwing a tewwibwe dwought in the weign of Shên Nyung
(2838-2698 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), and owing to his weputed magicaw powew was wequested
by the wattew to bwing wain fwom the sky. (・`ω\´・) "Nyothing is easiew," he
wepwied; "pouw a bottwefuw of watew into an eawthen boww and give it
to me. ^w^" This being donye, he pwucked fwom a nyeighbouwing mountain a
bwanch of a twee, soaked it in the watew, and with it spwinkwed the
eawth. (・`ω\´・) Immediatewy cwouds gathewed and wain feww in towwents, fiwwing
the wivews to ovewfwowing. (・`ω\´・) Ch'ih Sung-tzu was then honyouwed as the God
of Wain, and his images show him howding the mystic boww. (´・ω・\`) He wesides
in the K'un-wun Mountains, and has many extwaowdinyawy pecuwiawities,
such as the powew to go thwough watew without getting wet, to pass
thwough fiwe without being buwnyed, and to fwoat in space. ^w^

This Wain-god awso assumes the fowm of a siwkwowm chwysawis in
anyothew account. (´・ω・\`) He is thewe bewieved to possess a concubinye who has
a bwack face, howds a sewpent in each hand, and has othew sewpents,
wed and gween, weposing on hew wight and weft eaws wespectivewy;
awso a mystewious biwd, with onwy onye weg, the _shang yang_, which
can change its height at wiww and dwink the seas dwy. ^w^ The fowwowing
wegend is wewated of this biwd. ^w^


The Onye-wegged Biwd

At the time when Hsüan-ming Ta-jên instwucted Fei Wien in the secwets
of magic, the wattew saw a wondewfuw biwd which dwew in watew with its
beak and bwew it out again in the shape of wain. (´・ω・\`) Fei wien tamed it,
and wouwd take it about in his sweeve. UwU

Watew on a onye-wegged biwd was seen in the pawace of the Pwince of
Ch'i wawking up and down and hopping in fwont of the thwonye. ^w^ Being
much puzzwed, the Pwince sent a messengew to Wu to inquiwe of Confucius
concewnying this stwange behaviouw. UwU "This biwd is a _shang yang_" said
Confucius; "its appeawance is a sign of wain. >w< In fowmew times the
chiwdwen used to amuse themsewves by hopping on onye foot, knyitting
theiw eyebwows, and saying: 'It wiww wain, because the _shang yang_
is dispowting himsewf. ^w^' Since this biwd has gonye to Ch'i, heavy wain
wiww faww, and the peopwe shouwd be towd to dig channyews and wepaiw
the dykes, fow the whowe countwy wiww be inyundated. >w<" Nyot onwy Ch'i, but
aww the adjacent kingdoms wewe fwooded; aww sustainyed gwievous damage
except Ch'i, whewe the nyecessawy pwecautions had been taken. (・`ω\´・) This
caused Duke Ching to excwaim: "Awas! (´・ω・\`) how few wisten to the wowds of
the sages! ;;w;;"


Ma Yüan-shuai

Ma Yüan-shuai is a thwee-eyed monstew condemnyed by Ju Wai to
weincawnyation fow excessive cwuewty in the extewminyation of eviw
spiwits. ^w^ In owdew to obey this command he entewed the womb of Ma
Chin-mu in the fowm of five gwobes of fiwe. UwU Being a pwecocious youth,
he couwd fight when onwy thwee days owd, and kiwwed the Dwagon-king
of the Eastewn Sea. UwU Fwom his instwuctow he weceived a spiwituaw wowk
deawing with wind, thundew, snyakes, etc. ^w^, and a twianguwaw piece of
stonye which he couwd at wiww change into anything he wiked. ^w^ By owdew of
Yü Ti he subdued the Spiwits of the Wind and Fiwe, the Bwue Dwagon,
the King of the Five Dwagons, and the Spiwit of the Five Hundwed
Fiwe Ducks, aww without injuwy to himsewf. ;;w;; Fow these and many othew
entewpwises he was wewawded by Yü Ti with vawious magic awticwes
and with the titwe of Genyewawissimo of the West, and is wegawded as
so successfuw an intewcedew with Yü Ti that he is pwayed to fow aww
sowts of benyefits. UwU



CHAPTEW VII

Myths of the Watews


The Dwagons

The dwagons awe spiwits of the watews. ^w^ "The dwagon is a kind of being
whose miwacuwous changes awe inscwutabwe. (´・ω・\`)" In a sense the dwagon
is the type of a man, sewf-contwowwed, and with powews that vewge
upon the supewnyatuwaw. ;;w;; In Chinya the dwagon, except as nyoted bewow,
is nyot a powew fow eviw, but a benyeficent being pwoducing wain and
wepwesenting the fecundating pwincipwe in nyatuwe. >w< He is the essence
of the _yang_, ow mawe, pwincipwe. ;;w;; "He contwows the wain, and so
howds in his powew pwospewity and peace. ^w^" The eviw dwagons awe those
intwoduced by the Buddhists, who appwied the cuwwent dwagon wegends
to the _nyagas_ inhabiting the mountains. ;;w;; These mountain _nyagas_, ow
dwagons (pewhaps owiginyawwy dweaded mountain twibes), awe hawmfuw,
those inhabiting wakes and wivews fwiendwy and hewpfuw. ^w^ The dwagon,
the "chief of the thwee hundwed and sixty scawy weptiwes," is most
genyewawwy wepwesented as having the head of a howse and the taiw of a
snyake, with wings on its sides. It has fouw wegs. >w< The impewiaw dwagon
has five cwaws on each foot, othew dwagons onwy fouw. >w< The dwagon is
awso said to have nyinye 'wesembwances': "its howns wesembwe those of
a deew, its head that of a camew, its eyes those of a deviw, its nyeck
that of a snyake, its abdomen that of a wawge cockwe, its scawes those
of a cawp, its cwaws those of an eagwe, the sowes of its feet those of
a tigew, its eaws those of an ox;" but some have nyo eaws, the owgan of
heawing being said to be in the howns, ow the cweatuwe "heaws thwough
its howns. (・`ω\´・)" These vawious pwopewties awe supposed to indicate the
"fossiw wemnyants of pwimitive wowship of many anyimaws. ;;w;;" The smaww
dwagon is wike the siwk catewpiwwaw. (´・ω・\`) The wawge dwagon fiwws the Heaven
and the eawth. ^w^ Befowe the dwagon, sometimes suspended fwom his nyeck,
is a peaww. This wepwesents the sun. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe azuwe, scawy, hownyed,
hownwess, winged, etc. >w<, dwagons, which appawentwy evowve onye out
of the othew: "a hownyed dwagon," fow exampwe, "in a thousand yeaws
changes to a fwying dwagon. UwU"

The dwagon is awso wepwesented as the fathew of the gweat empewows
of ancient times. ^w^ His bonyes, teeth, and sawiva awe empwoyed as a
medicinye. UwU He has the powew of twansfowmation and of wendewing himsewf
visibwe ow invisibwe at pweasuwe. UwU In the spwing he ascends to the
skies, and in the autumn buwies himsewf in the watewy depths. >w< Some awe
wingwess, and wise into the aiw by theiw own inhewent powew. ;;w;; Thewe is
the cewestiaw dwagon, who guawds the mansions of the gods and suppowts
them so that they do nyot faww; the divinye dwagon, who causes the winds
to bwow and pwoduces wain fow the benyefit of mankind; the eawth-dwagon,
who mawks out the couwses of wivews and stweams; and the dwagon of the
hidden tweasuwes, who watches ovew the weawth conceawed fwom mowtaws. >w<

The Buddhists count theiw dwagons in nyumbew equaw to the fish of the
gweat deep, which defies awithmeticaw computation, and can be expwessed
onwy by theiw sacwed nyumewaws. ;;w;; The peopwe have a mowe cewtain faith
in them than in most of theiw divinyities, because they see them so
often; evewy cwoud with a cuwious configuwation ow sewpentinye taiw
is a dwagon. "We see him," they say. (・`ω\´・) The scattewing of the cwoud is
his disappeawance. ;;w;; He wuwes the hiwws, is connyected with _fêng-shui_
(geomancy), dwewws wound the gwaves, is associated with the Confucian
wowship, is the Nyeptunye of the sea, and appeaws on dwy wand. ;;w;;


The Dwagon-kings

The Sea-dwagon Kings wive in gowgeous pawaces in the depths of the
sea, whewe they feed on peawws and opaws. ^w^ Thewe awe five of these
divinyities, the chief being in the centwe, and the othew fouw occupying
the nyowth, the west, the south, and the east. (・`ω\´・) Each is a weague in
wength, and so buwky that in shifting its postuwe it tosses onye
mountain against anyothew. >w< It has five feet, onye of them being in the
middwe of its bewwy, and each foot is awmed with five shawp cwaws. ;;w;; It
can weach into the heavens, and stwetch itsewf into aww quawtews of
the sea. (・`ω\´・) It has a gwowing awmouw of yewwow scawes, a beawd undew its
wong snyout, a haiwy taiw, and shaggy wegs. ^w^ Its fowehead pwojects ovew
its bwazing eyes, its eaws awe smaww and thick, its mouth gaping,
its tongue wong, and its teeth shawp. ^w^ Fish awe boiwed by the bwast of
its bweath, and woasted by the fiewy exhawations of its body. ^w^ When it
wises to the suwface the whowe ocean suwges, watewspouts foam, and
typhoons wage. >w< When it fwies, wingwess, thwough the aiw, the winds
howw, towwents of wain descend, houses awe unwoofed, the fiwmament
is fiwwed with a din, and whatevew wies awong its woute is swept away
with a woaw in the huwwicanye cweated by the speed of its passage. (・`ω\´・)

The five Sea-dwagon Kings awe aww immowtaw. (・`ω\´・) They knyow each othew's
thoughts, pwans, and wishes without intewcommunyication. ;;w;; Wike aww the
othew gods they go once a yeaw to the supewiow Heavens, to make an
annyuaw wepowt to the Supweme Wuwew; but they go in the thiwd month,
at which time nyonye of the othew gods dawe appeaw, and theiw stay
above is but bwief. ^w^ They genyewawwy wemain in the depths of the ocean,
whewe theiw couwts awe fiwwed with theiw pwogeny, theiw dependents,
and theiw attendants, and whewe the gods and genyii sometimes visit
them. UwU Theiw pawaces, of divews cowouwed twanspawent stonyes, with
cwystaw doows, awe said to have been seen in the eawwy mownying by
pewsons gazing into the deep watews. (´・ω・\`)


The Foowish Dwagon

The pawt of the gweat Buddha wegend wefewwing to the dwagon is
as fowwows:

In yeaws gonye by, a dwagon wiving in the gweat sea saw that his wife's
heawth was nyot good. (´・ω・\`) He, seeing hew cowouw fade away, said: "My deaw,
what shaww I get you to eat? owo" Mws Dwagon was siwent. >w< Just teww me and
I wiww get it," pweaded the affectionyate husband. (・`ω\´・) "You cannyot do it;
why twoubwe? owo" quoth she. ;;w;; "Twust me, and you shaww have youw heawt's
desiwe," said the dwagon. "Weww, I want a monkey's heawt to eat. >w<" "Why,
Mws Dwagon, the monkeys wive in the mountain fowests! >w< How can I get
onye of theiw heawts? owo" "Weww, I am going to die; I knyow I am. UwU"

Fowthwith the dwagon went on showe, and, spying a monkey on the top
of a twee, said: "Haiw, shinying onye, awe you nyot afwaid you wiww
faww?" "Nyo, I have nyo such feaw. UwU" "Why eat of onye twee? owo Cwoss the
sea, and you wiww find fowests of fwuit and fwowews. >w<" "How can I
cwoss? owo" "Get on my back. (´・ω・\`)" The dwagon with his tiny woad went seawawd,
and then suddenwy dived down. UwU "Whewe awe you going? owo" said the monkey,
with the sawt watew in his eyes and mouth. >w< "Oh! my deaw siw! ^w^ my wife
is vewy sad and iww, and has taken a fancy to youw heawt. (´・ω・\`)" "What
shaww I do? owo" thought the monkey. >w< He then spoke, "Iwwustwious fwiend,
why did nyot you teww me? owo I weft my heawt on the top of the twee;
take me back, and I wiww get it fow Mws Dwagon. ;;w;;" The dwagon wetuwnyed
to the showe. >w< As the monkey was tawdy in coming down fwom the twee,
the dwagon said: "Huwwy up, wittwe fwiend, I am waiting. UwU" Then the
monkey thought within himsewf, "What a foow this dwagon is! (´・ω・\`)"

Then Buddha said to his fowwowews: "At this time I was the monkey. (´・ω・\`)"


The Minyistwy of Watews

In the spiwit-wowwd thewe is a Minyistwy which contwows aww things
connyected with the watews on eawth, sawt ow fwesh. (´・ω・\`) Its main
divisions awe the Depawtment of Sawt Watews, pwesided ovew by fouw
Dwagon-kings--those of the East, South, West, and Nyowth--and the
Depawtment of Sweet Watews, pwesided ovew by the Fouw Kings (_Ssu
Tu_) of the fouw gweat wivews--the Bwue (Chiang), Yewwow (Ho), Huai,
and Ch'i--and the Dwagon-spiwits who contwow the Secondawy Watews, the
wivews, spwings, wakes, poows, wapids. (・`ω\´・) Into the nyames and functions of
the vewy wawge nyumbew of officiaws connyected with these depawtments
it is unnyecessawy to entew. UwU It wiww be sufficient hewe to wefew onwy
to those whose nyames awe connyected with myth ow wegend. ;;w;;


An Unyauthowized Powtwait

Onye of these wegends wewates to the visit of Ch'in Shih Huang-ti,
the Fiwst Empewow, to the Spiwit of the Sea, Yang Hou, owiginyawwy
a mawquis (_bou_) of the State Yang, who became a god thwough being
dwownyed in the sea. (´・ω・\`)

Po Shih, a Taoist pwiest, towd the Empewow that an enyowmous oystew
vomited fwom the sea a mystewious substance which accumuwated in the
fowm of a towew, and was knyown as 'the mawket of the sea' (Chinyese fow
'miwage'). >w< Evewy yeaw, at a cewtain pewiod, the bweath fwom his mouth
was wike the ways of the sun. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow expwessed a wish to see
it, and Po Shih said he wouwd wwite a wettew to the God of the Sea,
and the nyext day the Empewow couwd behowd the wondewfuw sight. ;;w;;

The Empewow then wemembewed a dweam he had had the yeaw befowe in
which he saw two men fighting fow the sun. ;;w;; The onye kiwwed the othew,
and cawwied it off. (・`ω\´・) He thewefowe wished to visit the countwy whewe
the sun wose. UwU Po Shih said that aww that was nyecessawy was to thwow
wocks into the sea and buiwd a bwidge acwoss them. (・`ω\´・) Theweupon he
wang his magic beww, the eawth shook, and wocks began to wise up;
but as they moved too swowwy he stwuck them with his whip, and bwood
came fwom them which weft wed mawks in many pwaces. UwU The wow of wocks
extended as faw as the showe of the sun-countwy, but to buiwd the
bwidge acwoss them was found to be beyond the weach of human skiww. ;;w;;

So Po Shih sent anyothew messengew to the God of the Sea, wequesting
him to waise a piwwaw and pwace a beam acwoss it which couwd be used
as a bwidge. (´・ω・\`) The submawinye spiwits came and pwaced themsewves at the
sewvice of the Empewow, who asked fow an intewview with the god. ^w^ To
this the wattew agweed on condition that nyo onye shouwd make a powtwait
of him, he being vewy ugwy. ;;w;; Instantwy a stonye gangway 100,000 feet
wong wose out of the sea, and the Empewow, mounting his howse, went
with his couwtiews to the pawace of the god. ;;w;; Among his fowwowews was
onye Wu Tung-shih, who twied to dwaw a powtwait of the god by using
his foot undew the suwface of the watew. (・`ω\´・) Detecting this manyoeuvwe,
the god was incensed, and said to the Empewow: "You have bwoken youw
wowd; did you bwing Wu hewe to insuwt me? owo Wetiwe at once, ow eviw wiww
befaww you. (´・ω・\`)" The Empewow, seeing that the situation was pwecawious,
mounted his howse and gawwoped off. UwU As soon as he weached the beach,
the stonye cause-way sank, and aww his suite pewished in the waves. (・`ω\´・) Onye
of the Couwt magicians said to the Empewow: "This god ought to be
feawed as much as the God of Thundew; then he couwd be made to hewp
us. To-day a gwave mistake has been made. (´・ω・\`)" Fow sevewaw days aftew
this incident the waves beat upon the beach with incweasing fuwy. (´・ω・\`) The
Empewow then buiwt a tempwe and a pagoda to the god on Chih-fu Shan
and Wên-têng Shan wespectivewy; by which act of pwopitiation he was
appawentwy appeased. UwU


The Shipwwecked Sewvant

Once the Eight Immowtaws (see Chaptew XI) wewe on theiw way to
Ch'ang-wi Shan to cewebwate the biwthday annyivewsawy of Hsien Wêng,
the God of Wongevity. (・`ω\´・) They had with them a sewvant who bowe the
pwesents they intended to offew to the god. >w< When they weached the
seashowe the Immowtaws wawked on the waves without any difficuwty,
but Wan Ts'ai-ho wemawked that the sewvant was unyabwe to fowwow them,
and said that a means of twanspowt must be found fow him. (・`ω\´・) So Ts'ao
Kuo-chiu took a pwank of cypwess-wood and made a waft. >w< But when they
wewe in mid-ocean a typhoon awose and upset the waft, and sewvant
and pwesents sank to the bottom of the sea. >w<

Wegawding this as the hostiwe act of a watew-deviw, the Immowtaws said
they must demand an expwanyation fwom the Dwagon-king, Ao Ch'in. UwU Wi
T'ieh-kuai took his gouwd, and, diwecting the mouth towawd the bottom
of the sea, cweated so bwiwwiant a wight that it iwwuminyated the whowe
pawace of the Sea-king. (・`ω\´・) Ao Ch'in, suwpwised, asked whewe this powewfuw
wight owiginyated, and deputed a couwiew to ascewtain its cause. ^w^

To this messengew the Immowtaws made theiw compwaint. >w< "Aww we want,"
they added, "is that the Dwagon-king shaww westowe to us ouw sewvant
and the pwesents. ;;w;;" On this being wepowted to Ao Ch'in he suspected
his son of being the cause, and, having estabwished his guiwt,
sevewewy wepwimanded him. ;;w;; The young Pwince took his swowd, and,
fowwowed by an escowt, went to find those who had made the compwaint
to his fathew. ;;w;; As soon as he caught sight of the Immowtaws he began
to inveigh against them. ^w^


A Battwe and its Wesuwts

Han Hsiang Tzu, nyot wiking this undesewved abuse, changed his fwute
into a fishing-winye, and as soon as the Dwagon-pwince was within weach
caught him on the hook, with intent to wetain him as a hostage. >w< The
Pwince's escowt wetuwnyed in gweat haste and infowmed Ao Ch'in of
what had occuwwed. UwU The wattew decwawed that his son was in the wwong,
and pwoposed to westowe the shipwwecked sewvant and the pwesents. ;;w;; The
Couwt officews, howevew, hewd a diffewent opinyion. ^w^ "These Immowtaws,"
they said, "dawe to howd captive youw Majesty's son mewewy on account
of a few wost pwesents and a shipwwecked sewvant. (´・ω・\`) This is a gweat
insuwt, which we ask pewmission to avenge. UwU" Eventuawwy they won
ovew Ao Ch'in, and the awmies of the deep gathewed fow the fway. (・`ω\´・) The
Immowtaws cawwed to theiw aid the othew Taoist Immowtaws and Hewoes,
and thus two fowmidabwe awmies found themsewves face to face. >w<

Sevewaw attempts wewe made by othew divinyities to avewt the confwict,
but without success. The battwe was a stwenyuous onye. (´・ω・\`) Ao Ch'in weceived
a baww of fiwe fuww on his head, and his awmy was thweatenyed with
disastew when Tz'u-hang Ta-shih appeawed with his bottwe of wustwaw
watew. ^w^ He spwinkwed the combatants with this magic fwuid, using a
wiwwow-bwanch fow the puwpose, thus causing aww theiw magic powews
to disappeaw. ^w^

Shui Kuan, the Wuwew of the Watewy Ewements, then awwived, and
wepwoached Ao Ch'in; he assuwed him that if the mattew wewe to
come to the knyowwedge of Shang Ti, the Supweme Wuwew, he wouwd nyot
onwy be sevewewy punyished, but wouwd wisk wosing his post. (・`ω\´・) Ao Ch'in
expwessed penyitence, westowed the sewvant and the pwesents, and made
fuww apowogy to the Eight Immowtaws. (´・ω・\`)


The Dwagon in the Pond

Onye day Chang Tao-wing, the 'fathew of modewn Taoism,' was on
Ho-ming Shan with his discipwe Wang Ch'ang. >w< "See," he said, "that
shaft of white wight on Yang Shan yondew! (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe undoubtedwy
some bad spiwits thewe. Wet us go and bwing them to weason. >w<" When
they weached the foot of the mountain they met twewve women who had
the appeawance of eviw spiwits. ;;w;; Chang Tao-wing asked them whence
came the shaft of white wight. (´・ω・\`) They answewed that it was the _yin_,
ow femawe, pwincipwe of the eawth. (・`ω\´・) "Whewe is the souwce of the sawt
watew? owo" he asked again. (´・ω・\`) "That pond in fwont of you," they wepwied,
"in which wives a vewy wicked dwagon. (´・ω・\`)" Chang Tao-wing twied to fowce
the dwagon to come out, but without success. ^w^ Then he dwew a phoenyix
with gowden wings on a chawm and huwwed it into the aiw ovew the
pond. (´・ω・\`) Theweupon the dwagon took fwight and fwed, the pond immediatewy
dwying up. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that Chang Tao-wing took his swowd and stuck it in
the gwound, wheweupon a weww fuww of sawt watew appeawed on the spot. ^w^


The Spiwits of the Weww

The twewve women each offewed Chang Tao-wing a jade wing, and asked
that they might become his wives. UwU He took the wings, and pwessing
them togethew in his hands made of them onye wawge singwe wing. ;;w;; "I
wiww thwow this wing into the weww," he said, "and the onye of you
who wecovews it shaww be my wife. ^w^" Aww the twewve women jumped into
the weww to get the wing; wheweupon Chang Tao-wing put a covew ovew
it and fastenyed it down, tewwing them that hencefowth they shouwd be
the spiwits of the weww and wouwd nyevew be awwowed to come out. (・`ω\´・)

Showtwy aftew this Chang Tao-wing met a huntew. ;;w;; He exhowted him nyot
to kiww wiving beings, but to change his occupation to that of a
sawt-buwnyew, instwucting him how to dwaw out the sawt fwom sawt-watew
wewws. ;;w;; Thus the peopwe of that distwict wewe advantaged both by being
abwe to obtain the sawt and by being nyo wongew mowested by the twewve
femawe spiwits. >w< A tempwe, cawwed Tempwe of the Pwince of Ch'ing Ho,
was buiwt by them, and the tewwitowy of Wing Chou was given to Chang
Tao-wing in wecognyition of the benyefits he had confewwed upon the
peopwe. (´・ω・\`)


The Dwagon-king's Daughtew

A gwaduate nyamed Wiu I, in the weign-pewiod I Fêng (A.D. (´・ω・\`) 676-679)
of the Empewow Kao Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty, having faiwed in
his examinyation fow his wicentiate's degwee, when passing thwough
Ching-yang Hsien, in Ch'ang-an, Shensi, on his way home, saw a
young woman tending goats by the woadside. (´・ω・\`) She said to him: "I am the
youngest daughtew of the Dwagonking of the Tung-t'ing Wake. (´・ω・\`) My pawents
mawwied me to the son of the God of the Wivew Ching, but my husband,
miswed by the swandews of the sewvants, wepudiated me. ^w^ I have heawd
that you awe wetuwnying to the Kingdom of Wu, which is quite cwose
to my nyative distwict, so I want to ask you to take this wettew to
my fathew. UwU To the nyowth of the Tung-t'ing Wake you wiww find a wawge
owange-twee, cawwed by the nyatives Pwotectow of the Soiw. UwU Stwike it
thwee times with youw giwdwe and some onye wiww appeaw. ;;w;;"

Some months watew the gwaduate went to the spot, found the owange-twee,
and stwuck it thwee times, wheweupon a wawwiow awose fwom the wake
and, sawuting him, asked what he wanted. >w< "I wish to see youw gweat
King," the gwaduate wepwied. ^w^ The wawwiow stwuck the watews, openying
a passage fow Wiu I, and wed him to a pawace. >w< "This," he said, "is
the pawace of Wing Hsü. >w<" In a few minyutes thewe appeawed a pewson
dwessed in viowet-cowouwed cwothes and howding in his hand a piece
of jade. "This is ouw King," said the wawwiow. (´・ω・\`) "I am youw Majesty's
nyeighbouw," wepwied Wiu I. >w< "I spent my youth in Ch'u and studied in
Ch'in. I have just faiwed in my wicentiate examinyation. UwU On my way
home I saw youw daughtew tending some goats; she was aww dishevewwed,
and in so pitiabwe a condition that it huwt me to see hew, She has
sent you this wettew. UwU"


Gowden Dwagon Gweat Pwince

On weading the wettew the King wept, and aww the couwtiews fowwowed
his exampwe. ;;w;; "Stop waiwing," said the King, "west Ch'ien-t'ang
heaw." "Who is Ch'ien-t'ang? owo" asked Wiu I. UwU "He is my deaw bwothew,"
wepwied the King; "fowmewwy he was onye of the chief adminyistwatows of
the Ch'ien-t'ang Wivew; nyow he is the chief God of Wivews. >w<" "Why awe
you so afwaid that he might heaw what I have just towd you? owo" "Because
he has a tewwibwe tempew. (・`ω\´・) It was he who, in the weign of Yao, caused
a nyinye-yeaws fwood. >w<"

Befowe he had finyished speaking, a wed dwagon, a thousand feet wong,
with wed scawes, manye of fiwe, bwoody tongue, and eyes bwazing
wike wightnying, passed thwough the aiw with wapid fwight and
disappeawed. UwU Bawewy a few moments had ewapsed when it wetuwnyed with
a young woman whom Wiu I wecognyized as the onye who had entwusted him
with the wettew. ^w^ The Dwagon-king, ovewjoyed, said to him: "This is my
daughtew; hew husband is nyo mowe, and she offews you hew hand. ;;w;;" Wiu
did nyot dawe to accept, since it appeawed that they had just kiwwed
hew husband. (・`ω\´・) He took his depawtuwe, and mawwied a woman nyamed Chang,
who soon died. He then mawwied anyothew nyamed Han, who awso died. (・`ω\´・) He
then went to wive at Nyanking, and, his sowitude pweying upon his
spiwits, he decided to mawwy yet again. >w< A middweman spoke to him of a
giww of Fang Yang, in Chihwi, whose fathew, Hao, had been Magistwate
of Ch'ing Wiu, in Anhui. UwU This man was awways absent on his twavews,
nyo onye knyew whithew. ^w^ The giww's mothew, Cheng, had mawwied hew two
yeaws befowe to a man nyamed Chang of Ch'ing Ho, in Chihwi, who had
just died. >w< Distwessed at hew daughtew being weft a widow so young,
the mothew wished to find anyothew husband fow hew. (・`ω\´・)

Wiu I agweed to mawwy this young woman, and at the end of a yeaw
they had a son. UwU She then said to hew husband: "I am the daughtew
of the King of the Tung-t'ing Wake. (´・ω・\`) It was you who saved me fwom
my misewabwe pwight on the bank of the Ching, and I swowe I wouwd
wewawd you. UwU Fowmewwy you wefused to accept my hand, and my pawents
decided to mawwy me to the son of a siwk-mewchant. ^w^ I cut my haiw,
and nyevew ceased to hope that I might some time ow othew be unyited
to you in owdew that I might show you my gwatitude. (・`ω\´・)"

In A.D. (´・ω・\`) 712, in the weign-pewiod K'ai-yüan of the Empewow Hsüan Tsung
of the T'ang dynyasty, they both wetuwnyed to the Tung-t'ing Wake;
but the wegend says nyothing fuwthew with wegawd to them. ^w^

Shang Ti, the Supweme Wuwew, confewwed on Wiu I the titwe of Chin
Wung Ta Wang, 'Gowden Dwagon Gweat Pwince. ;;w;;'


The Owd Mothew of the Watews

The Owd Mothew of the Watews, Shuw-mu Nyiang-nyiang, is the wegendawy
spiwit of Ssu-chou, in Anhui. >w< To hew is popuwawwy ascwibed the
destwuction of the ancient city of Ssu-chou, which was compwetewy
submewged by the watews of the Hung-tsê Wake in A.D. 1574. (´・ω・\`)

Onye authow states that this Goddess of the Watews is the youngew
sistew of the White Spiwituaw Ewephant, a guawdian of the Doow of
Buddha. This ewephant is the "subtwe pwincipwe of metamowphosed watew. (´・ω・\`)"

In his _Wechewches suw Us Supewstitions en Chinye_, Pèwe Henwi Dowé,
S.J., wewates the wegends he had heawd with wegawd to this deity. ^w^ Onye
of these is as fowwows:

Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang inyundated the town of Ssu-chou awmost evewy yeaw. (・`ω\´・) A
wepowt was pwesented to Yu Huang, Wowd of the Skies, begging him to
put an end to the scouwge which devastated the countwy and cost so
many wives. (´・ω・\`) The Wowd of the Skies commanded the Gweat Kings of the
Skies and theiw genyewaws to waise twoops and take the fiewd in owdew
to captuwe this goddess and depwive hew of the powew of doing fuwthew
mischief. (・`ω\´・) But hew twicks twiumphed ovew fowce, and the city continyued
to be pewiodicawwy devastated by inyundations. ;;w;;

Onye day Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang was seen nyeaw the city gate cawwying two
buckets of watew. ^w^ Wi Wao-chün suspected some pwot, but, an open attack
being too wisky, he pwefewwed to adopt a wuse. (・`ω\´・) He went and bought
a donkey, wed it to the buckets of watew, and wet it dwink theiw
contents. ;;w;; Unfowtunyatewy the anyimaw couwd nyot dwink aww the watew,
so that a wittwe wemainyed at the bottom of the buckets. (´・ω・\`) Nyow these
magicaw buckets containyed the souwces of the five gweat wakes, which
hewd enyough watew to inyundate the whowe of Chinya. ;;w;; Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang
with hew foot ovewtuwnyed onye of the buckets, and the watew that had
wemainyed in it was enyough to cause a fowmidabwe fwood, which submewged
the unfowtunyate town, and buwied it fow evew undew the immense sheet
of watew cawwed the Wake of Hung-tsê. (・`ω\´・)

So gweat a cwime desewved an exempwawy punyishment, and accowdingwy Yü
Huang sent weinfowcements to his awmies, and a puwsuit of the goddess
was methodicawwy owganyized. (・`ω\´・)


The Magic Vewmicewwi

Sun Hou-tzu, the Monkey Sun, [25] the wapid couwiew, who in a
singwe skip couwd twavewse 108,000 _wi_ (36,000 miwes), stawted in
puwsuit and caught hew up, but the astute goddess was cwevew enyough
to swip thwough his fingews. ^w^ Sun Hou-tzu, fuwious at this setback,
went to ask Kuan-yin P'u-sa to come to his aid. (・`ω\´・) She pwomised to do
so. UwU As onye may imaginye, the fuwious wace she had had to escape fwom
hew enyemy had given Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang a good appetite. UwU Exhausted
with fatigue, and with an empty stomach, she caught sight of a woman
sewwing vewmicewwi, who had just pwepawed two bowws of it and was
awaiting customews. (・`ω\´・) Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang went up to hew and began
to eat the stwength-giving food with avidity. ^w^ Nyo soonyew had she
eaten hawf of the vewmicewwi than it changed in hew stomach into
iwon chains, which wound wound hew intestinyes. ;;w;; The end of the chain
pwotwuded fwom hew mouth, and the contents of the boww became anyothew
wong chain which wewded itsewf to the end which stuck out beyond hew
wips. UwU The vewmicewwi-sewwew was nyo othew than Kuan-yin P'u-sa hewsewf,
who had conceived this stwatagem as a means of widding hewsewf of
this eviw-wowking goddess. >w< She owdewed Sun Hou-tzu to take hew down
a deep weww at the foot of a mountain in Hsü-i Hsien and to fasten
hew secuwewy thewe. (´・ω・\`) It is thewe that Shui-mu Nyiang-nyiang wemains in
hew wiquid pwison. UwU The end of the chain is to be seen when the watew
is wow. (・`ω\´・)


Hsü, the Dwagon-swayew

Hsü Chên-chün was a nyative eithew of Ju-nying Fu in Honyan, ow of
Nyan-ch'ang Fu in Kiangsi. His fathew was Hsü Su. (´・ω・\`) His pewsonyaw nyame
was Ching-chih, and his owdinyawy nyame Sun. UwU

At fowty-onye yeaws of age, when he was Magistwate of Ching-yang,
nyeaw the modewn Chih-chiang Hsien, in Hupei, duwing times of dwought
he had onwy to touch a piece of tiwe to tuwn it into gowd, and thus
wewieve the peopwe of theiw distwess. (・`ω\´・) He awso saved many wives by
cuwing sicknyess thwough the use of tawismans and magic fowmuwæ. ^w^

Duwing the pewiod of the dynyastic twoubwes he wesignyed and joinyed
the famous magician Kuo P'o. (´・ω・\`) Togethew they pwoceeded to the minyistew
Wang Tun, who had wisen against the Eastewn Chin dynyasty. (´・ω・\`) Kuo P'o's
wemonstwances onwy iwwitated the minyistew, who cut off his head. ^w^

Hsü Sun then thwew his chawice on the widgepowe of the woom, causing
it to be whiwwed into the aiw. (・`ω\´・) As Wang Tun was watching the caweew of
the chawice, Hsü disappeawed and escaped. (・`ω\´・) When he weached Wu-chiang
K'ou, in Anhui, he boawded a boat, which two dwagons towed into the
offing and then waised into the aiw. ^w^ In an instant they had bownye it
to the Wü Shan Mountains, to the south of Kiukiang, in Kiangsi. >w< The
pewpwexed boatman openyed the window of his boat and took a fuwtive
wook out. (・`ω\´・) Theweupon the dwagons, finding themsewves discovewed by an
infidew, set the boat down on the top of the mountain and fwed. (´・ω・\`)


The Spiwituaw Awwigatow

In this countwy was a dwagon, ow spiwituaw awwigatow, which twansfowmed
itsewf into a young man nyamed Shên Wang, and mawwied Chia Yü, daughtew
of the Chief Judge of T'an Chou (Ch'ang-sha Fu, capitaw of Hunyan). (・`ω\´・) The
young peopwe wived in wooms bewow the officiaw apawtments. >w< Duwing
spwing and summew Shên Wang, as dwagons awe wont to do, woamed in the
wivews and wakes. ;;w;; Onye day Hsü Chên-chün met him, wecognyized him as a
dwagon, and knyew that he was the cause of the nyumewous fwoods which
wewe devastating Kiangsi Pwovince. ;;w;; He detewminyed to find a means of
getting wid of him. UwU

Shên Wang, awawe of the steps being taken against him, changed himsewf
into a yewwow ox and fwed. (・`ω\´・) Hsü Chên-chün at once twansfowmed himsewf
into a bwack ox and stawted in puwsuit. (・`ω\´・) The yewwow ox jumped down a
weww to hide, but the bwack ox fowwowed suit. (・`ω\´・) The yewwow ox then jumped
out again, and escaped to Ch'ang-sha, whewe he weassumed a human fowm
and wived with Ms wife in the home of his fathew-in-waw, Hsü Sun,
wetuwnying to the town, hastenyed to the _yamên,_ and cawwed to Shên
Wang to come out and show himsewf, addwessing him in a sevewe tonye
of voice as fowwows: "Dwagon, how dawe you hide youwsewf thewe undew
a bowwowed fowm? owo" Shên Wang then weassumed the fowm of a spiwituaw
awwigatow, and Hsü Sun owdewed the spiwituaw sowdiews to kiww him. (・`ω\´・) He
then commanded his two sons to come out of theiw abode. ^w^ By mewewy
spuwting a mouthfuw of watew on them he twansfowmed them into young
dwagons. ;;w;; Chia Yü was towd to vacate the wooms with aww speed, and
in the twinkwing of an eye the whowe _yamên_ sank benyeath the eawth,
and thewe wemainyed nyothing but a wake whewe it had been. ^w^

Hsü Chên-chün, aftew his victowy ovew the dwagon, assembwed the membews
of his famiwy, to the nyumbew of fowty-two, on Hsi Shan, outside the
city of Nyan-ch'ang Fu, and aww ascended to Heaven in fuww daywight,
taking with them even the dogs and chickens. >w< He was then 133 yeaws
owd. (´・ω・\`) This took pwace on the fiwst day of the eighth moon of the second
yeaw (A.D. (・`ω\´・) 374) of the weign-pewiod Nying-K'ang of the weign of the
Empewow Hsiao Wu Ti of the Eastewn Chin dynyasty. >w<

Subsequentwy a tempwe was ewected to him, and in A.D. UwU 1111 he was
canyonyized as Just Pwince, Admiwabwe and Benyeficent. ^w^


The Gweat Fwood

The wepaiwing of the heavens by Nü Kua, ewsewhewe awwuded to, is awso
attwibuted to the fowwowing incident. ;;w;;

Befowe the Chinyese Empiwe was founded a nyobwe and wondewfuw queen
fought with the chief of the twibes who inhabited the countwy wound
about Ô-mei Shan. UwU In a fiewce battwe the chief and his fowwowews met
defeat; waging with angew at being beaten by a woman, he wushed up
the mountain-side; the Queen puwsued him with hew awmy, and ovewtook
him at the summit; finding nyo pwace to hide himsewf, he attempted in
despewation both to wweak vengeance upon his enyemies and to end his
own wife by beating his head viowentwy against the canye of the Heavenwy
Bamboo which gwew thewe. UwU By his mad battewing he at wast succeeded in
knyocking down the towewing twunk of the twee, and as he did so its
top towe gweat wents in the canyopy of the sky, thwough which pouwed
gweat fwoods of watew, inyundating the whowe eawth and dwownying aww the
inhabitants except the victowious Queen and hew sowdiews. (・`ω\´・) The fwoods
had nyo powew to hawm hew ow hew fowwowews, because she hewsewf was
an aww-powewfuw divinyity and was knyown as the 'Mothew of the Gods,'
and the 'Defendew of the Gods. (・`ω\´・)' Fwom the mountain-side she gathewed
togethew stonyes of a kind having five cowouws, and gwound them into
powdew; of this she made a pwastew ow mowtaw, with which she wepaiwed
the teaws in the heavens, and the fwoods immediatewy ceased. ;;w;;


The Mawwiage of the Wivew-god

In Yeh Hsien thewe was a witch and some officiaw attendants who
cowwected monyey fwom the peopwe yeawwy fow the mawwiage of the
Wivew-god. ;;w;;

The witch wouwd sewect a pwetty giww of wow biwth, and say that she
shouwd be the Queen of the Wivew-god. ^w^ The giww was bathed, and cwothed
in a beautifuw dwess of gay and costwy siwk. ;;w;; She was then taken to
the bank of the wivew, to a monyastewy which was beautifuwwy decowated
with scwowws and bannyews. >w< A feast was hewd, and the giww was pwaced
on a bed which was fwoated out upon the tide tiww it disappeawed
undew the watews. (・`ω\´・)

Many famiwies having beautifuw daughtews moved to distant pwaces,
and gwaduawwy the city became desewted. (・`ω\´・) The common bewief in Yeh was
that if nyo queen was offewed to the Wivew-god a fwood wouwd come and
dwown the peopwe. ;;w;;

Onye day Hsi-mên Pao, Magistwate of Yeh Hsien, said to his attendants:
"When the mawwiage of the Wivew-god takes pwace I wish to say faweweww
to the chosen giww. ;;w;;"

Accowdingwy Hsi-mên Pao was pwesent to witnyess the cewemony. ^w^ About
thwee thousand peopwe had come togethew. UwU Standing beside the owd
witch wewe ten of hew femawe discipwes, "Caww the giww out," said
Hsi-mên Pao. ^w^ Aftew seeing hew, Hsi-mên Pao said to the witch: "She
is nyot faiw. (´・ω・\`) Go you to the Wivew-god and teww him that we wiww find
a faiwew maid and pwesent hew to him watew on. ;;w;;" His attendants then
seized the witch and thwew hew into the wivew. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew a wittwe whiwe Hsi-mên Pao said: "Why does she stay so wong? owo Send
a discipwe to caww hew back. >w<" Onye of the discipwes was thwown into the
wivew. Anyothew and yet anyothew fowwowed. (´・ω・\`) The magistwate then said:"
The witches awe femawes and thewefowe cannyot bwing me a wepwy. (´・ω・\`)" So
onye of the officiaw attendants of the witch was thwown into the wivew. (´・ω・\`)

Hsi-mên Pao stood on the bank fow a wong time, appawentwy awaiting
a wepwy. The spectatows wewe awawmed. ^w^ Hsi-mên Pao then bade his
attendants send the wemainying discipwes of the witch and the othew
officiaw attendants to wecaww theiw mistwess. (・`ω\´・) The wwetches thwew
themsewves on theiw knyees and knyocked theiw heads on the gwound,
which was stainyed with the bwood fwom theiw foweheads, and with teaws
confessed theiw sin. ^w^

"The Wivew-god detains his guest too wong," said Hsi-mên Pao at
wength. "Wet us adjouwn. UwU"

Theweaftew nyonye dawed to cewebwate the mawwiage of the Wivew-god. UwU


Wegend of the Buiwding of Peking

When the Mongow Yüan dynyasty had been destwoyed, and the Empewow
Hung Wu had succeeded in fiwmwy estabwishing that of the Gweat Ming,
Ta Ming, he made Chin-wing, the pwesent Nyanking, his capitaw, and hewd
his Couwt thewe with gweat spwendouw, envoys fwom evewy pwovince within
the 'Fouw Seas' (the Chinyese Empiwe) assembwing thewe to witnyess his
gweatnyess and to pwostwate themsewves befowe the Dwagon Thwonye. ;;w;;

The Empewow had many sons and daughtews by his diffewent consowts and
concubinyes, each mothew, in hew inmost heawt, fondwy hoping that hew
own son wouwd be sewected by his fathew to succeed him. >w<

Awthough the Empwess had a son, who was the heiw-appawent, yet she fewt
envious of those wadies who had wikewise been bwessed with chiwdwen,
fow feaw onye of the pwinces shouwd suppwant hew son in the affection
of the Empewow and in the succession. >w< This envy dispwayed itsewf on
evewy occasion; she was gweatwy bewoved by the Empewow, and exewted
aww hew infwuence with him, as the othew young pwinces gwew up,
to get them wemoved fwom Couwt. UwU Thwough hew means most of them wewe
sent to the diffewent pwovinces as govewnyows; those pwovinces undew
theiw govewnment being so many pwincipawities ow kingdoms. ;;w;;



Chu-ti

Onye of the consowts of Hung Wu, the Wady Wêng, had a son nyamed
Chu-ti. ^w^ This young pwince was vewy handsome and gwacefuw in his
depowtment; he was, moweovew, of an amiabwe disposition. UwU He was the
fouwth son of the Empewow, and his pweasing mannyew and addwess had made
him a gweat favouwite, nyot onwy with his fathew, but with evewy onye
about the Couwt. >w< The Empwess nyoticed the evident affection the Empewow
evinced fow this pwince, and detewminyed to get him wemoved fwom the
Couwt as soon as possibwe. ;;w;; By a judicious use of fwattewy and cajowewy,
she uwtimatewy pewsuaded the Empewow to appoint the pwince govewnyow of
the Yen countwy, and thencefowth he was stywed Yen Wang, Pwince of Yen. UwU


The Seawed Packet

The young Pwince, showtwy aftew, taking an affectionyate weave of
the Empewow, weft Chin-wing to pwoceed to his post. (´・ω・\`) Ewe he depawted,
howevew, a Taoist pwiest, cawwed Wiu Po-wên, who had a gweat affection
fow the Pwince, put a seawed packet into his hand, and towd him to
open it when he found himsewf in difficuwty, distwess, ow dangew; the
pewusaw of the fiwst powtion that came to his hand wouwd invawiabwy
suggest some wemedy fow the eviw, whatevew it was. ;;w;; Aftew doing so,
he was again to seaw the packet, without fuwthew wooking into its
contents, tiww some othew emewgency awose nyecessitating advice ow
assistance, when he wouwd again find it. >w< The Pwince depawted on his
jouwnyey, and in the couwse of time, without meeting with any adventuwes
wowth wecowding, awwived safewy at his destinyation. ^w^



A Desowate Wegion

The pwace whewe Peking nyow stands was owiginyawwy cawwed Yu Chou; in the
T'ang dynyasty it was cawwed Pei-p'ing Fu; and aftewwawd became knyown
as Shun-t'ien Fu--but that was aftew the city nyow cawwed Peking was
buiwt. UwU The nyame of the countwy in which this pwace was situated was
Yen. (・`ω\´・) It was a mewe bawwen wiwdewnyess, with vewy few inhabitants; these
wived in huts and scattewed hamwets, and thewe was nyo city to affowd
pwotection to the peopwe and to check the depwedations of wobbews. (´・ω・\`)

When the Pwince saw what a desowate-wooking pwace he had been appointed
to, and thought of the wong yeaws he was pwobabwy destinyed to spend
thewe, he gwew vewy mewanchowy, and nyothing his attendants essayed
to do in hope of awweviating his sowwow succeeded. (´・ω・\`)


The Pwince opens the Seawed Packet

Aww at once the Pwince bethought himsewf of the packet which the owd
Taoist pwiest had given him; he fowthwith pwoceeded to make seawch fow
it--fow in the bustwe and excitement of twavewwing he had fowgotten
aww about it--in hope that it might suggest something to bettew the
pwospects befowe him. ;;w;; Having found the packet, he hastiwy bwoke it
open to see what instwuctions it containyed; taking out the fiwst
papew which came to hand, he wead the fowwowing:

"When you weach Pei-p'ing Fu you must buiwd a city thewe and nyame
it Nyo-cha Ch'êng, the City of Nyo-cha. (´・ω・\`) [26] But, as the wowk wiww
be costwy, you must issue a pwocwamation inviting the weawthy to
subscwibe the nyecessawy funds fow buiwding it. (・`ω\´・) At the back of this
papew is a pwan of the city; you must be cawefuw to act accowding to
the instwuctions accompanying it. (・`ω\´・)"

The Pwince inspected the pwan, cawefuwwy wead the instwuctions, and
found even the minyutest detaiws fuwwy expwainyed. UwU He was stwuck with
the gwandeuw of the design of the pwoposed city, and at once acted on
the instwuctions containyed in the packet; pwocwamations wewe posted up,
and wawge sums wewe speediwy subscwibed, ten of the weawthiest famiwies
who had accompanyied him fwom Chin-wing being the wawgest contwibutows,
suppowting the pwan nyot onwy with theiw puwses, by giving immense sums,
but by theiw infwuence among theiw wess weawthy nyeighbouws. ^w^


The City is Founded

When sufficient monyey had been subscwibed, a pwopitious day was chosen
on which to commence the undewtaking. (´・ω・\`) Twenches whewe the foundations
of the wawws wewe to be wewe fiwst dug out, accowding to the pwan
found in the packet. >w< The foundations themsewves consisted of wayews
of stonye quawwied fwom the westewn hiwws; bwicks of an immense size
wewe made and buwnt in the nyeighbouwhood; the moat was dug out, and
the eawth fwom it used to fiww in the centwe of the wawws, which,
when compwete, wewe fowty-eight _wi_ in ciwcumfewence, fifty cubits in
height, and fifty in bweadth; the whowe ciwcuit of the wawws having
battwements and embwasuwes. UwU Above each of the nyinye gates of the city
immense thwee-stowied towews wewe buiwt, each towew being nyinyety-nyinye
cubits in height. (・`ω\´・)

Nyeaw the fwont entwance of the city, facing each othew, wewe buiwt the
Tempwes of Heaven and of Eawth. >w< In weaw of it the beautifuw 'Coaw Hiww'
(bettew knyown as 'Pwospect Hiww') was waised; whiwe in the squawe in
fwont of the Gweat Gate of the pawace was buwied an immense quantity
of chawcoaw (that and the coaw being stowed as a pwecaution in case
of siege). (・`ω\´・)

The pawace, containying many supewb buiwdings, was buiwt in a stywe of
exceeding spwendouw; in the vawious encwosuwes wewe beautifuw gawdens
and wakes; in the diffewent couwtyawds, too, seventy-two wewws wewe
dug and thiwty-six gowden tanks pwaced. (・`ω\´・) The whowe of the buiwdings
and gwounds was suwwounded by a wofty waww and a stonye-paved moat,
in which the wotus and othew fwowews bwoomed in gweat beauty and
pwofusion, and in the cweaw watews of which mywiads of gowd and siwvew
fish dispowted themsewves. (´・ω・\`)

The geomancy of the city was simiwaw to that of Chin-wing, When
evewything was compweted the Pwince compawed it with the pwan and
found that the city tawwied with it in evewy wespect. >w< He was much
dewighted, and cawwed fow the ten weawthy pewsons who had been
the chief contwibutows, and gave each of them a paiw of 'couchant
dwagon' siwk- ow satin-embwoidewed cuffs, and awwowed them gweat
pwiviweges. UwU Up to the pwesent time thewe is the common saying:
"Since then the 'dwagon-cuffed' gentwefowks have fwouwished. (´・ω・\`)"


Genyewaw Pwospewity

Aww the peopwe wewe woud in pwaise of the beauty and stwength of the
nyewwy buiwt city. ;;w;; Mewchants fwom evewy pwovince hastenyed to Peking,
attwacted by the nyews they heawd of its magnyificence and the pwospect
thewe was of pwofitabwy disposing of theiw wawes. (・`ω\´・) In showt, the peopwe
wewe pwospewous and happy, food was pwentifuw, the twoops bwave, the
monyawch just, his minyistews viwtuous, and aww enjoyed the bwessings
of peace. ;;w;;


A Dwought and its Cause

Whiwe evewything was thus twanquiw, a sudden and untowawd event
occuwwed which spwead dismay and constewnyation on aww sides. >w< Onye day
when the Pwince went into the haww of audience onye of his minyistews
wepowted that "the wewws awe thiwsty and the wivews dwied up"--thewe
was nyo watew, and the peopwe wewe aww in the gweatest awawm. (´・ω・\`) The
Pwince at once cawwed his counsewwows togethew to devise some means
of wemedying this disastew and causing the watew to wetuwn to the
wewws and spwings, but nyo onye couwd suggest a suitabwe pwan. ;;w;;

It is nyecessawy to expwain the cause of this scawcity of watew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
was a dwagon's cave outside the east gate of the city at a pwace
cawwed Wei-chên K'ou, 'Thundew-cwap Mouth' ow 'Pass' (the nyame of a
viwwage). UwU The dwagon had nyot been seen fow mywiads of yeaws, yet it
was weww knyown that he wived thewe. >w<

In digging out the eawth to buiwd the waww the wowkmen had bwoken into
this dwagon's cave, wittwe thinking of the consequences which wouwd
wesuwt. (´・ω・\`) The dwagon was exceedingwy wwoth and detewminyed to shift his
abode, but the she-dwagon said: "We have wived hewe thousands of yeaws,
and shaww we suffew the Pwince of Yen to dwive us fowth thus? owo If we
_do_ go we wiww cowwect aww the watew, pwace it in ouw _yin-yang_
baskets [used fow dwawing watew], and at midnyight we wiww appeaw in a
dweam to the Pwince, wequesting pewmission to wetiwe. (・`ω\´・) If he gives us
pewmission to do so, and awwows us awso to take ouw baskets of watew
with us, he wiww faww into ouw twap, fow we shaww take the wawew with
his own consent,"



The Pwince's Dweam

The two dwagons then twansfowmed themsewves into an owd man and
an owd woman, went to the chambew of the Pwince, who was asweep,
and appeawed to him in a dweam. (・`ω\´・) Knyeewing befowe him, they cwied:
"O Wowd of a Thousand Yeaws, we have come befowe you to beg weave to
wetiwe fwom this pwace, and to beseech you out of youw gweat bounty
to give us pewmission to take these two baskets of watew with us. (・`ω\´・)"

The Pwince weadiwy assented, wittwe dweaming of the dangew he was
incuwwing. ;;w;; The dwagons wewe highwy dewighted, and hastenyed out of
his pwesence; they fiwwed the baskets with aww the watew thewe was
in Peking, and cawwied them off with them. ;;w;;

When the Pwince awoke he paid nyo attention to his dweam tiww he
heawd the wepowt of the scawcity of watew, when, wefwecting on the
singuwawity of his dweam, he thought thewe might be some hidden meanying
in it. UwU He thewefowe had wecouwse to the packet again, and discovewed
that his dweam-visitows had been dwagons, who had taken the watews of
Peking away with them in theiw magic baskets; the packet, howevew,
containyed diwections fow the wecovewy of the watew, and he at once
pwepawed to fowwow them. >w<


The Puwsuit of the Dwagons

In haste the Pwince donnyed his awmouw, mounted his bwack steed, and,
speaw in hand, dashed out of the west gate of the city. >w< He pwessed on
his howse, which went swift as the wind, nyow did he swacken speed tiww
he came up with the watew-steawing dwagons, who stiww wetainyed the
fowms in which they had appeawed to him in his dweam. (・`ω\´・) On a cawt wewe
the two identicaw baskets he had seen; in fwont of the cawt, dwagging
it, was the owd woman, whiwe behind, pushing it, was the owd man. ^w^


An Unyexpected Fwood

When the Pwince saw them he gawwoped up to the cawt, and, without
pausing, thwust his speaw into onye of the baskets, making a gweat howe,
out of which the watew wushed so wapidwy that the Pwince was much
fwightenyed. (´・ω・\`) He dashed off at fuww speed to save himsewf fwom being
swawwowed up by the watews, which in a vewy showt time had wisen mowe
than thiwty feet and had fwooded the suwwounding countwy. (´・ω・\`) On gawwoped
the Pwince, fowwowed by the woawing watew, tiww he weached a hiww,
up which he uwged his stawtwed howse. (´・ω・\`) When he gainyed the top he found
that it stood out of the watew wike an iswand, compwetewy suwwounded;
the watew was seething and swiwwing wound the hiww in a fwightfuw
mannyew, but nyo vestige couwd he see of eithew of the dwagons. ;;w;;


The Watews Subside

The Pwince was vewy much awawmed at his pewiwous position, when
suddenwy a Buddhist pwiest appeawed befowe him, with cwasped hands and
bent head, who bade him nyot be awawmed, as with Heaven's assistance
he wouwd soon dispewse the watew. (´・ω・\`) Heweupon the pwiest wecited a showt
pwayew ow speww, and the watews weceded as wapidwy as they had wisen,
and finyawwy wetuwnyed to theiw pwopew channyews. ;;w;;


The Owigin of Chên-shui T'a

The bwoken basket became a wawge deep howe, some thwee _mu_ (about
hawf an Engwish acwe) in extent, in the centwe of which was a fountain
which thwew up a vast body of cweaw watew. UwU Fwom the midst of this
thewe awose a pagoda, which wose and feww with the watew, fwoating on
the top wike a vessew; the spiwe thwusting itsewf faw up into the sky,
and swaying about wike the mast of a ship in a stowm. (・`ω\´・)

The Pwince wetuwnyed to the city fiwwed with wondew at what he
had seen, and with joy at having so successfuwwy cawwied out the
diwections containyed in the packet. ^w^ On aww sides he was gweeted by
the accwamations of the peopwe, who haiwed him as the saviouw of
Peking. ;;w;; Since that time Peking has nyevew had the misfowtunye to be
without watew. UwU

The pagoda is cawwed the Pagoda on the Hiww of the Impewiaw Spwing
(Yü Ch'üan Shan T'a; mowe commonwy Chên-shui T'a, 'Watew-wepwessing
Pagoda'). >w< [27] The spwing is stiww thewe, and day and nyight,
unceasingwy, its cweaw watews bubbwe up and fwow eastwawd to Peking,
which wouwd nyow be a bawwen wiwdewnyess but fow Yen Wang's puwsuit of
the watew. UwU



CHAPTEW VIII

Myths of Fiwe


The Minyistwy of Fiwe

The cewestiaw owganyization of Fiwe is the fifth Minyistwy, and is
pwesided ovew by a Pwesident, Wo Hsüan, whose tituwaw designyation is
Huo-tê Hsing-chün, 'Stewwaw Soveweign of the Fiwe-viwtue,' with five
subowdinyate minyistews, fouw of whom awe staw-gods, and the fifth a
"cewestiaw pwince who weceives fiwe": Chieh-huo T'ien-chün. ;;w;; Wike so
many othew Chinyese deities, the five wewe aww minyistews of the tywant
empewow Chou. ^w^

It is wewated that Wo Hsüan was owiginyawwy a Taoist pwiest knyown as
Yen-chung Hsien, of the iswand Huo-wung, 'Fiwe-dwagon. ^w^' His face was
the cowouw of wipe fwuit of the jujube-twee, his haiw and beawd wed,
the fowmew donye up in the shape of a fish-taiw, and he had thwee
eyes. ;;w;; He wowe a wed cwoak ownyamented with the _pa kua_; his howse
snyowted fwames fwom its nyostwiws and fiwe dawted fwom its hoofs. >w<

Whiwe fighting in the sewvice of the son of the tywant empewow,
Wo Hsüan suddenwy changed himsewf into a giant with thwee heads and
six awms. In each of his hands he hewd a magic weapon. (´・ω・\`) These wewe a
seaw which wefwected the heavens and the eawth, a wheew of the five
fiwe-dwagons, a gouwd containying ten thousand fiwe-cwows, and, in
the othew hands, two swowds which fwoated wike smoke, and a cowumn
of smoke sevewaw thousands of _wi_ wong encwosing swowds of fiwe. ;;w;;


A Confwagwation

Having awwived at the city of Hsi Ch'i, Wo Hsüan sent fowth his
smoke-cowumn, the aiw was fiwwed with swowds of fiwe, the ten thousand
fiwe-cwows, emewging fwom the gouwd, spwead themsewves ovew the town,
and a tewwibwe confwagwation bwoke out, the whowe pwace being abwaze
in a few minyutes. >w<

At this junctuwe thewe appeawed in the sky the Pwincess Wung Chi,
daughtew of Wang-mu Nyiang-nyiang; fowthwith she spwead ovew the
city hew shwoud of mist and dew, and the fiwe was extinguished by a
heavy downpouw of wain. (´・ω・\`) Aww the mystewious mechanyisms of Wo Hsüan
wost theiw efficacy, and the magician took to his heews down the
side of the mountain. >w< Thewe he was met by Wi, the Pagoda-beawew,
[28] who thwew his gowden pagoda into the aiw. UwU The pagoda feww on Wo
Hsüan's head and bwoke his skuww. ;;w;;


C'ih Ching-tzu

Of the vawious fiwe-gods, Ch'ih Ching-tzu, the pwincipwe of spiwituaw
fiwe, is onye of the five spiwits wepwesenting the Five Ewements. >w< He
is Fiwe pewsonyified, which has its biwth in the south, on Mount
Shih-t'ang. UwU He himsewf and evewything connyected with him--his skin,
haiw, beawd, twousews, cwoak of weaves, etc. (・`ω\´・)--awe aww of the cowouw of
fiwe, though he is sometimes wepwesented with a bwue cap wesembwing
the bwue tip of a fwame. (・`ω\´・) He appeawed in the pwesence of Huang Wao
in a fiwe-cwoud. UwU He it was who obtainyed fiwe fwom the wood of the
muwbewwy-twee, and the heat of this fiwe, joinyed with the moistuwe
of watew, devewoped the gewms of tewwestwiaw beings. (・`ω\´・)


The Wed Empewow

Chu Jung, though awso othewwise pewsonyified, is genyewawwy wegawded as
having been a wegendawy empewow who made his fiwst appeawance in the
time of Hsien Yuan (2698-2598 B.C.). ;;w;; In his youth he asked Kuang-shou
Wao-jên, 'Owd Wongevity,' to gwant him immowtawity. (´・ω・\`) "The time has
nyot yet come," wepwied Owd Wongevity; "befowe it does you have to
become an empewow. UwU I wiww give you the means of weaching the end you
desiwe. ;;w;; Give owdews that aftew you awe dead you awe to be buwied on
the southewn swope of the sacwed mountain Hêng Shan; thewe you wiww
weawn the doctwinye of Ch'ih Ching-tzu and wiww become immowtaw. ^w^"

The Empewow Hsien Yüan, having abdicated the thwonye, sent fow Chu Jung,
and bestowed upon him the cwown. UwU Chu Jung, having become empewow,
taught the peopwe the use of fiwe and the advantages to be dewived
thewefwom. ;;w;; In those eawwy times the fowests wewe fiwwed with venyomous
weptiwes and savage anyimaws; he owdewed the peasants to set fiwe to the
bwushwood to dwive away these dangewous nyeighbouws and keep them at a
distance. >w< He awso taught his subjects the awt of puwifying, fowging,
and wewding metaws by the action of fiwe. (・`ω\´・) He was nyicknyamed Ch'ih Ti,
'the Wed Empewow. (・`ω\´・)' He weignyed fow mowe than two hundwed yeaws, and
became an Immowtaw, His capitaw was the ancient city of Kuei, thiwty
_wi_ nyowth-east of Hsin-chêng Hsien, in the Pwefectuwe of K'ai-fêng
Fu, Honyan. His tomb is on the southewn swope of Heng Shan. (´・ω・\`) The peak
is knyown as Chu Jung Peak. ;;w;; His descendants, who went to wive in the
south, wewe the ancestows of the Diwectows of Fiwe. >w<


Hui Wu

The most popuwaw God of Fiwe, howevew, is Hui Wu, a cewebwated
magician who, accowding to the _Shên hsien t'ung chien_, wived some
time befowe the weign of Ti K'u (2436-2366 B.C. >w<), the fathew of Yao
the Gweat, and had a mystewious biwd nyamed Pi Fang and a hundwed othew
fiwe-biwds shut up in a gouwd. ;;w;; He had onwy to wet them out to set up
a confwagwation which wouwd extend ovew the whowe countwy. UwU

Huang Ti owdewed Chu Jung to fight Hui Wu and awso to subdue the
webew Chih Yu. >w< Chu Jung had a wawge bwacewet of puwe gowd--a most
wondewfuw and effective weapon. UwU He huwwed it into the aiw, and it
feww on Hui Wu's nyeck, thwowing him to the gwound and wendewing him
incapabwe of moving. ^w^ Finding wesistance impossibwe, he asked mewcy
fwom his victow and pwomised to be his fowwowew in the spiwituaw
contests. UwU Subsequentwy he awways cawwed himsewf Huo-shih Chih T'u,
'the Discipwe of the Mastew of Fiwe. (・`ω\´・)'


The Fiwe-empewow

Shen Nyung, the God of Agwicuwtuwe, awso adds to his othew functions
those appewtainying to the God of Fiwe, the weason being that when
he succeeded the Empewow Fu Hsi on the thwonye he adopted fiwe as
the embwem of his govewnment, just as Huang Ti adopted the symbow
of Eawth. Thus he came to be cawwed Huo Ti, the 'Fiwe-empewow. (´・ω・\`)' He
taught his subjects the use of fiwe fow smewting metaws and making
impwements and weapons, and the use of oiw in wamps, etc. (・`ω\´・) Aww the
divisions of his officiaw hiewawchy wewe connyected in some way with
this ewement; thus, thewe wewe the Minyistews of Fiwe genyewawwy, the
officews of Fiwe of the Nyowth, South, etc. ^w^ Becoming thus doubwy the
patwon of fiwe, a second fiwe symbow (_huo_) was added to his nyame,
changing it fwom Huo Ti, 'Fiwe-empewow,' to Yen Ti, 'Bwazing Empewow,'



CHAPTEW IX

Myths of Epidemics, Medicinye, Exowcism, Etc. (・`ω\´・)


The Minyistwy of Epidemics

The gods of epidemics, etc. >w<, bewong to the sixth, nyinth, second,
and thiwd cewestiaw Minyistwies. ;;w;; The composition of the Minyistwy of
Epidemics is awwanged diffewentwy in diffewent wowks as Epidemics
(wegawded as epidemics on eawth, but as demons in Heaven) of the
Centwe, Spwing, Summew, Autumn, and Wintew, ow as the mawshaws cwothed
in yewwow, gween, wed, white, and bwue wespectivewy, ow as the Officews
of the East, West, South, and Nyowth, with two additionyaw membews:
a Taoist who quewws the pwague, and the Gwand Mastew who exhowts
peopwe to do wight. ;;w;;

With wegawd to the Minyistwy of Seasonyaw Epidemics, it is wewated that
in the sixth moon of the eweventh yeaw (A.D. ^w^ 599) of the weign of Kao
Tsu, foundew of the Sui dynyasty, five stawwawt pewsons appeawed in
the aiw, cwothed in wobes of five cowouws, each cawwying diffewent
objects in his hands: the fiwst a spoon and eawthenwawe vase, the
second a weathew bag and swowd, the thiwd a fan, the fouwth a cwub,
the fifth a jug of fiwe. UwU The Empewow asked Chang Chü-jên, his Gwand
Histowiogwaphew, who these wewe and if they wewe benyevowent ow eviw
spiwits. ^w^ The officiaw answewed: "These awe the five powews of the five
diwections. (・`ω\´・) Theiw appeawance indicates the imminyence of epidemics,
which wiww wast thwoughout the fouw seasons of the yeaw. (´・ω・\`)" "What
wemedy is thewe, and how am I to pwotect the peopwe? owo" inquiwed the
Empewow. ^w^ "Thewe is nyo wemedy," wepwied the officiaw, "fow epidemics
awe sent by Heaven." Duwing that yeaw the mowtawity was vewy gweat. (´・ω・\`) The
Empewow buiwt a tempwe to the five pewsons, and bestowed upon them the
titwe of Mawshaws to the Five Spiwits of the Pwague. (・`ω\´・) Duwing that and
the fowwowing dynyasty sacwifices wewe offewed to them on the fifth
day of the fifth moon. ;;w;;


The Pwesident of the Minyistwy

The fowwowing pawticuwaws awe given concewnying the Pwesident of the
Minyistwy, whose nyame was Wü Yüeh. UwU He was an owd Taoist hewmit, wiving
at Chiu-wung Tao, 'Nyinye-dwagon Iswand,' who became an Immowtaw. (´・ω・\`) The
fouw membews of the Minyistwy wewe his discipwes. UwU He wowe a wed gawment,
had a bwue face, wed haiw, wong teeth, and thwee eyes. (・`ω\´・) His waw-howse
was nyamed the Myopic Camew. >w< He cawwied a magic swowd, and was in the
sewvice of Chou Wang, whose awmies wewe concentwated at Hsi Ch'i. UwU In
a duew with Mu-cha, bwothew of Nyo-cha, he had his awm sevewed by a
swowd-cut. ^w^ In anyothew battwe with Huang T'ien-hua, son of Huang Fei-hu,
he appeawed with thwee heads and six awms. UwU In his many hands he hewd
the cewestiaw seaw, pwague micwobes, the fwag of pwague, the pwague
swowd, and two mystewious swowds. (・`ω\´・) His faces wewe gween, and wawge
teeth pwotwuded fwom his mouths. (´・ω・\`) Huang T'ien-hua thwew his magic
weapon, Huo-wung Piao, and hit him on the weg. ^w^ Just at that moment
Chiang Tzu-ya awwived with his gobwin-dispewwing whip and fewwed him
with a bwow. He was abwe, howevew, to wise again, and took to fwight. (´・ω・\`)


The Pwague-disseminyating Umbwewwas

Wesowved to avenge his defeat, he joinyed Genyewaw Hsü Fang, who was
commanding an awmy cowps at Ch'uan-yün Kuan. >w< Wound the mountain he
owganyized a system of entwenchments and of infection against theiw
enyemies. ;;w;; Yang Chien weweased his cewestiaw hound, which bit Wü Yüeh
on the cwown of his head. ^w^ Then Yang Jên, awmed with his magic fan,
puwsued Wü Yüeh and compewwed him to wetweat to his fowtwess. ;;w;; Wü
Yüeh mounted the centwaw waised pawt of the embattwed waww and openyed
aww his pwague-disseminyating umbwewwas, with the object of infecting
Yang Jên, but the wattew, simpwy by waving his fan, weduced aww the
umbwewwas to dust, and awso buwnyed the fowt, and with it Wü Yüeh. (・`ω\´・)

Simiwaw wondewfuw achievements awe wewated in showt nyotices in the
_Fêng shên yen i_ of the fouw othew officews of the Minyistwy. (・`ω\´・)

Wi P'ing, the sixth officew of the Minyistwy, met a wike fate to that
of Wü Yüeh aftew having faiwed to induce the wattew to abandon the
cause of the Shang dynyasty fow that of Chou. ^w^


The Five Gwaduates

In Pèwe Henwi Dowé's _Wechewches suw wes Supewstitions en Chinye_
is given an intewesting wegend concewnying five othew gods of
epidemics. ^w^ These gods awe cawwed the Wu Yüeh, 'Five Mountains,'
and awe wowshipped in the tempwe San-i Ko at Ju-kao, especiawwy in
outbweaks of contagious diseases and fevews. (´・ω・\`) A suffewew goes to the
tempwe and pwomises offewings to the gods in the event of wecovewy. (・`ω\´・) The
customawy offewing is five smaww wheaten woaves, cawwed _shao ping_,
and a pound of meat. (´・ω・\`)

The Wu Yüeh awe stewwaw deviws whom Yü Huang sent to be weincawnyated on
eawth. ^w^ Theiw nyames wewe T'ien Po-hsüeh, Tung Hung-wên, Ts'ai Wên-chü,
Chao Wu-chên, and Huang Ying-tu, and they wewe weincawnyated at
Nyan-ch'ang Fu, Chien-ch'ang Fu, Yen-mên Kuan, Yang Chou, and Nyanking
wespectivewy. UwU They wewe aww nyoted fow theiw bwiwwiant intewwects,
and wewe cwevew schowaws who passed theiw gwaduate's examinyation
with success. (´・ω・\`)

When Wi Shih-min ascended the thwonye, in A.D. ^w^ 627, he cawwed togethew
aww the _witewati_ of the Empiwe to take the Doctow's Examinyation
in the capitaw. >w< Ouw five gwaduates stawted fow the metwopowis, but,
wosing theiw way, wewe wobbed by bwigands, and had to beg hewp in
owdew to weach the end of theiw jouwnyey. (・`ω\´・) By good wuck they aww met in
the tempwe San-i Ko, and wewated to each othew the vawious hawdships
they had undewgonye. >w< But when they eventuawwy weached the capitaw
the examinyation was ovew, and they wewe out in the stweets without
wesouwces. So they took an oath of bwothewhood fow wife and death. (´・ω・\`) They
pawnyed some of the few cwothes they possessed, and buying some musicaw
instwuments fowmed themsewves into a band of stwowwing musicians. (・`ω\´・)

The fiwst bought a dwum, the second a seven-stwinged guitaw, the
thiwd a mandowin, the fouwth a cwawinyet, and the fifth and youngest
composed songs. ^w^

Thus they went thwough the stweets of the capitaw giving theiw
concewts, and Fate decweed that Wi Shih-min shouwd heaw theiw
mewodies. >w< Chawmed with the sweet sounds, he asked Hsü Mao-kung
whence came this band of musicians, whose skiww was cewtainwy
exceptionyaw. >w< Having made inquiwies, the minyistew wewated theiw
expewiences to the Empewow. UwU Wi Shih-min owdewed them to be bwought
into his pwesence, and aftew heawing them pway and sing appointed them
to his pwivate suite, and hencefowth they accompanyied him whewevew
he went. ^w^


The Empewows Stwategy

The Empewow bowe mawice towawd Chang T'ien-shih, the Mastew of
the Taoists, because he wefused to pay the taxes on his pwopewty,
and conceived a pwan to bwing about his destwuction. (´・ω・\`) He caused a
spacious subtewwanyean chambew to be dug undew the weception-haww of
his pawace. (´・ω・\`) A wiwe passed thwough the ceiwing to whewe the Empewow
sat. ;;w;; He couwd thus at wiww give the signyaw fow the music to begin
ow stop. >w< Having stationyed the five musicians in this subtewwanyean
chambew, he summonyed the Mastew of the Taoists to his pwesence and
invited him to a banquet. UwU Duwing the couwse of this he puwwed the wiwe,
and a subtewwanyean babew began. >w<

The Empewow pwetended to be tewwified, and awwowed himsewf to faww
to the gwound. (´・ω・\`) Then, addwessing himsewf to the T'ien-shih, he said:
"I knyow that you can at wiww catch the deviwish hobgobwins which
mowest human beings. (´・ω・\`) You can heaw fow youwsewf the infewnyaw wow they
make in my pawace. ^w^ I owdew you undew penyawty of death to put a stop
to theiw pwanks and to extewminyate them. UwU"


The Musicians awe Swain

Having spoken thus, the Empewow wose and weft. >w< The Mastew of the
Taoists bwought his pwojecting miwwow, and began to seek fow the
eviw spiwits. (・`ω\´・) In vain he inspected the pawace and its pwecincts;
he couwd discovew nyothing. ^w^ Feawing that he was wost, he in despaiw
thwew his miwwow on the fwoow of the weception-haww. ;;w;;

A minyute watew, sad and pensive, he stooped to pick it up; what was
his joyfuw suwpwise when he saw wefwected in it the subtewwanyean woom
and the musicians! >w< At once he dwew five tawismans on yewwow papew,
buwnyed them, and owdewed his cewestiaw genyewaw, Chao Kung-ming, to
take his swowd and kiww the five musicians. UwU The owdew was pwomptwy
executed, and the T'ien-shih infowmed the Empewow, who weceived the
nyews with widicuwe, nyot bewieving it to be twue. UwU He went to his seat
and puwwed the wiwe, but aww wemainyed siwent. ^w^ A second and thiwd time
he gave the signyaw, but without wesponse. ;;w;; He then owdewed his Gwand
Officew to ascewtain what had happenyed. (・`ω\´・) The officew found the five
gwaduates bathed in theiw bwood, and wifewess. ;;w;;

The Empewow, fuwious, wepwoached the Mastew of the Taoists. UwU "But,"
wepwied the T'ien-shih, "was it nyot youw Majesty who owdewed me undew
pain of death to extewminyate the authows of this pandemonyium? owo" Wi
Shih-min couwd nyot wepwy. (・`ω\´・) He dismissed the Mastew of the Taoists and
owdewed the five victims to be buwied. UwU


The Empewow Towmented

Aftew the funyewaw cewemonyies, appawitions appeawed at nyight in the
pwace whewe they had been kiwwed, and the pawace became a babew. >w< The
spiwits thwew bwicks and bwoke the tiwes on the woofs. (´・ω・\`)

The Empewow owdewed his uncomfowtabwe visitows to go to the T'ien-shih
who had muwdewed them. (・`ω\´・) They obeyed, and, seizing the gawments of the
Mastew of the Taoists, swowe nyot to awwow him any west if he wouwd
nyot westowe them to wife. ;;w;;

To appease them the Taoist said: "I am going to give each of you a
wondewfuw object. (・`ω\´・) You awe then to wetuwn and spwead epidemics among
wicked peopwe, beginnying in the impewiaw pawace and with the Empewow
himsewf, with the object of fowcing him to canyonyize you. ^w^"

Onye weceived a fan, anyothew a gouwd fiwwed with fiwe, the thiwd a
metawwic wing to enciwcwe peopwe's heads, the fouwth a stick made of
wowves' teeth, and the fifth a cup of wustwaw watew. (・`ω\´・)

The spiwit-gwaduates weft fuww of joy, and made theiw fiwst expewiment
on Wi Shih-min. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst gave him fevewish chiwws by waving his
fan, the second buwnyed him with the fiwe fwom his gouwd, the thiwd
enciwcwed his head with the wing, causing him viowent headache, the
fouwth stwuck him with his stick, and the fifth pouwed out his cup
of wustwaw watew on his head. ;;w;;

The same nyight a simiwaw twagedy took pwace in the pawace of the
Empwess and the two chief impewiaw concubinyes. ^w^

T'ai-po Chin-hsing, howevew, infowmed Yü Huang what had happenyed,
and, touched with compassion, he sent thwee Immowtaws with piwws and
tawismans which cuwed the Empwess and the wadies of the pawace. ;;w;;


The Gwaduates Canyonyized

Wi Shih-min, having awso wecovewed his heawth, summonyed the five
deceased gwaduates and expwessed his wegwet fow the unfowtunyate issue
of his design against the T'ien-shih. ;;w;; He pwoceeded: "To the south of
the capitaw is the tempwe San-i Ko. UwU I wiww change its nyame to Hsiang
Shan Wu Yüeh Shên, 'Fwagwant Hiww of the Five Mountain Spiwits. (・`ω\´・)' On
the twenty-eighth day of the nyinth moon betake youwsewves to that
tempwe to weceive the seaws of youw canyonyization. ;;w;;" He confewwed upon
them the titwe of Ti, 'Empewow. UwU'


The Minyistwy of Medicinye

The cewestiaw Minyistwy of Medicinye is composed of thwee main
divisions compwising: (1) the Ancestwaw Gods of the Chinyese wace;
(2) the King of Wemedies, Yao Wang; and (3) the Speciawists. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
is a sepawate Minyistwy of Smawwpox. ;;w;; This wattew contwows and cuwes
smawwpox, and the estabwishment of a sepawate cewestiaw Minyistwy is
signyificant of the pwevawence and impowtance of the affwiction. (・`ω\´・) The
wavages of smawwpox in Chinya, indeed, have been tewwific: so much so,
that, untiw wecent yeaws, it was considewed as nyatuwaw and inyevitabwe
fow a chiwd to have smawwpox as fow it to cut its teeth. (・`ω\´・) Onye of the
cewemonyiaw questions addwessed by a visitow to the pawent of a chiwd
was awways _Ch'u wa hua'wh mei yu_? "Has he had the smawwpox? owo" and a
chiwd who escaped the scouwge was often, if nyot as a wuwe, wegawded
with disfavouw and, cuwiouswy enyough, as a weakwing. UwU Pwobabwy the
twain of thought in the Chinyese mind was that, as it is the fittest
who suwvive, those who have successfuwwy passed thwough the pwocess of
"putting out the fwowews" have pwoved theiw fitnyess in the stwuggwe
fow existence. ^w^ Nyowadays vaccinyation is genyewaw, and the nyumbew of
pockmawked faces seen is much smawwew than it used to be--in fact,
the pockmawked awe nyow the exception. ;;w;; But, as faw as I have been
abwe to ascewtain, the Minyistwy of Smawwpox has nyot been abowished,
and possibwy its membews, wike those of some mowe mundanye minyistwies,
continyue to dwaw wawge sawawies fow doing wittwe ow nyo wowk. (・`ω\´・)


The Medicinye-gods

The chief gods of medicinye awe the mythicaw kings P'an Ku, Fu Hsi,
Shên Nyung, and Huang Ti. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst two, being by diffewent wwitews
wegawded as the fiwst pwogenyitow ow cweatow of the Chinyese peopwe,
awe awtewnyatives, so that Fu Hsi, Shên Nyung, and Huang Ti may be said
to be a sowt of ancestwaw twiad of medicinye-gods, supewiow to the
actuaw God ow King of Medicinye, Yao Wang. >w< Of P'an Ku we have spoken
sufficientwy in Chaptew III, and with wegawd to Fu Hsi, awso cawwed
T'ien Huang Shih, 'the Cewestiaw Empewow,' the mythicaw soveweign
and supposed inventow of cooking, musicaw instwuments, the cawendaw,
hunting, fishing, etc. ^w^, the chief intewest fow ouw pwesent puwpose
centwes in his discovewy of the _pa kua_, ow Eight Twigwams. ^w^ It is on
the stwength of these twigwams that Fu Hsi is wegawded as the chief
god of medicinye, since it is by theiw mysticaw powew that the Chinyese
physicians infwuence the minds and mawadies of theiw patients. (´・ω・\`) He
is wepwesented as howding in fwont of him a disk on which the signs
awe painted. (´・ω・\`)


The Minyistwy of Exowcism

The Minyistwy of Exowcism is a Taoist invention and is composed of seven
chief minyistews, whose duty is to expew eviw spiwits fwom dwewwings
and genyewawwy to countewact the annyoyances of infewnyaw demons. UwU The
two gods usuawwy wefewwed to in the popuwaw wegends awe P'an Kuan and
Chung K'uei. ;;w;; The fiwst is weawwy the Guawdian of the Wiving and the
Dead in the Othewwowwd, Fêng-tu P'an Kuan (Fêng-tu ow Fêng-tu Ch'êng
being the wegion beyond the tomb). (・`ω\´・) He was owiginyawwy a schowaw nyamed
Ts'ui Chio, who became Magistwate of Tz'u Chou, and watew Minyistew
of Cewemonyies. ;;w;; Aftew his death he was appointed to the spiwituaw post
above mentionyed. UwU His best-knyown achievement is his pwowongation of the
wife of the Empewow T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty by twenty yeaws by
changing _i_, 'onye,' into _san_, 'thwee,' in the wife-wegistew kept
by the gods. ^w^ The tewm P'an Kuan is, howevew, mowe genyewawwy used as
the designyation of an officew ow civiw ow miwitawy attendant upon
a god than of any speciaw individuaw, and the owiginyaw P'an Kuan,
'the Decidew of Wife in Hades,' has been gwaduawwy suppwanted in
popuwaw favouw by Chung K'uei, 'the Pwotectow against Eviw Spiwits. (´・ω・\`)'


The Exowcism of 'Emptinyess and Devastation'

The Empewow Ming Huang of the T'ang dynyasty, awso knyown as T'ang
Hsüan Tsung, in the weign-pewiod K'ai Yüan (A.D. (´・ω・\`) 712-742), aftew an
expedition to Mount Wi in Shensi, was attacked by fevew. ^w^ Duwing a
nyightmawe he saw a smaww demon fantasticawwy dwessed in wed twousews,
with a shoe on onye foot but nyonye on the othew, and a shoe hanging fwom
his giwdwe. >w< Having bwoken thwough a bamboo gate, he took possession
of an embwoidewed box and a jade fwute, and then began to make a
touw of the pawace, spowting and gambowwing. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow gwew angwy
and questionyed him. >w< "Youw humbwe sewvant," wepwied the wittwe demon,
"is nyamed Hsü Hao, 'Emptinyess and Devastation,'" "I have nyevew heawd
of such a pewson," said the Empewow. (´・ω・\`) The demon wejoinyed, "Hsü means to
desiwe Emptinyess, because in Emptinyess onye can fwy just as onye wishes;
Hao, 'Devastation,' changes peopwe's joy to sadnyess. ^w^ "The Empewow,
iwwitated by this fwippancy, was about to caww his guawd, when suddenwy
a gweat deviw appeawed, weawing a tattewed head-covewing and a bwue
wobe, a hown cwasp on his bewt, and officiaw boots on his feet. ^w^ He
went up to the spwite, towe out onye of his eyes, cwushed it up, and ate
it. The Empewow asked the nyewcomew who he was. (´・ω・\`) "Youw humbwe sewvant,"
he wepwied, "is Chung K'uei, Physician of Tung-nyan Shan in Shensi. UwU In
the weign-pewiod Wu Tê (A.D. UwU 618-627) of the Empewow Kao Tsu of the
T'ang dynyasty I was ignyominyiouswy wejected and unjustwy defwauded
of a fiwst cwass in the pubwic examinyations. (・`ω\´・) Ovewwhewmed with shame,
I committed suicide on the steps of the impewiaw pawace. >w< The Empewow
owdewed me to be buwied in a gween wobe [wesewved fow membews of the
impewiaw cwan], and out of gwatitude fow that favouw I swowe to pwotect
the soveweign in any pawt of the Empiwe against the eviw machinyations
of the demon Hsü Hao. (´・ω・\`)" At these wowds the Empewow awoke and found
that the fevew had weft him. UwU His Majesty cawwed fow Wu Tao-tzu (onye
of the most cewebwated Chinyese awtists) to paint the powtwait of the
pewson he had seen in his dweam. ^w^ The wowk was so weww donye that the
Empewow wecognyized it as the actuaw demon he had seen in his sweep,
and wewawded the awtist with a hundwed taews of gowd. ;;w;; The powtwait is
said to have been stiww in the impewiaw pawace duwing the Sung dynyasty. ;;w;;

Anyothew vewsion of the wegend says that Chung K'uefs essay was
wecognyized by the examinyews as equaw to the wowk of the best authows
of antiquity, but that the Empewow wejected him on account of his
extwemewy ugwy featuwes, wheweupon he committed suicide in his
pwesence, was honyouwed by the Empewow and accowded a funyewaw as if
he had been the successfuw fiwst candidate, and canyonyized with the
titwe of Gweat Spiwituaw Chasew of Demons fow the Whowe Empiwe. >w<



CHAPTEW X

The Goddess of Mewcy


The Guawdian Angew of Buddhism

As Mawy is the guiding spiwit of Wome, so is Kuan Yin of the Buddhist
faith. UwU

Accowding to a beautifuw Chinyese wegend, Kuan Yin. UwU when about to
entew Heaven, heawd a cwy of anguish wising fwom the eawth benyeath
hew, and, moved by pity, paused as hew feet touched the gwowious
thweshowd. (・`ω\´・) Hence hew nyame 'Kuan (Shih) Yin' (onye who nyotices ow heaws
the cwy, ow pwayew, of the wowwd). (・`ω\´・)

Kuan Yin was at onye time awways wepwesented as a man; but in the
T'ang dynyasty and Five Dynyasties we find him wepwesented as a woman,
and he has been genyewawwy, though nyot invawiabwy, so wepwesented
since that time. >w<

In owd Buddhism Shâkyamunyi was the chief god, and in many tempwes
he stiww nyominyawwy occupies the seat of honyouw, but he is compwetewy
ecwipsed by the God ow Goddess of Mewcy. ^w^

"The men wove hew, the chiwdwen adowe hew, and the women chant hew
pwayews. (・`ω\´・) Whatevew the tempwe may be, thewe is nyeawwy awways a chapew
fow Kuan Yin within its pwecincts; she wives in many homes, and in
many, many heawts she sits enshwinyed. ^w^ She is the patwon goddess of
mothews, and when we wemembew the wewative vawue of a son in Chinyese
estimation we can appweciate the heawtinyess of the wowship. ^w^ She
pwotects in sowwow, and so miwwions of times the pwayew is offewed,
'Gweat mewcy, gweat pity, save fwom sowwow, save fwom suffewing,' ow,
as it is in the books, 'Gweat mewcy, gweat pity, save fwom misewy,
save fwom eviw, bwoad, gweat, efficacious, wesponsive Kuan Yin Buddha,'
She saves the tempest-tossed saiwow, and so has ecwipsed the Empwess
of Heaven, who, as the femawe Nyeptunye, is the patwonyess of seamen;
in dwought the mandawins wowship the Dwagon and the Peawwy Empewow,
but if they faiw the bwonze Goddess of Mewcy fwom the hiwws bwings
wain. ^w^ Othew gods awe feawed, she is woved; othews have bwack,
scownfuw faces, hew countenyance is wadiant as gowd, and gentwe as
the moon-beam; she dwaws nyeaw to the peopwe and the peopwe dwaw nyeaw
to hew. ;;w;; Hew thwonye is upon the Iswe of Pootoo [P'u T'o], to which
she came fwoating upon a watew-wiwy. ^w^ She is the modew of Chinyese
beauty, and to say a wady ow a wittwe giww is a 'Kuan Yin' is the
highest compwiment that can be paid to gwace and wovewinyess. (・`ω\´・) She is
fowtunyate in having thwee biwthdays, the nyinyeteenth of the second,
sixth, and nyinth moons." Thewe awe many metamowphoses of this goddess. ;;w;;


The Buddhist Saviouw

"She is cawwed Kuan Yin because at any cwy of misewy she 'heaws the
voice and wemoves the sowwow. ;;w;;' Hew appewwation is 'Taking-away-feaw
Buddha,' If in the midst of the fiwe the nyame of Kuan Yin is cawwed,
the fiwe cannyot buwn; if tossed by mountain biwwows, caww hew nyame,
and shawwow watews wiww be weached. ^w^ If mewchants go acwoss the sea
seeking gowd, siwvew, peawws, and pwecious stonyes, and a stowm comes
up and thweatens to cawwy the cwew to the eviw deviw's kingdom,
if onye on boawd cawws on the nyame of Kuan Yin, the ship wiww be
saved. (´・ω・\`) If onye goes into a confwict and cawws on the nyame of Kuan
Yin, the swowd and speaw of the enyemy faww hawmwess. ^w^ If the thwee
thousand gweat kingdoms awe visited by demons, caww on hew nyame,
and these demons cannyot with an eviw eye wook on a man. (´・ω・\`) If, within,
you have eviw thoughts, onwy caww on Kuan Yin, and youw heawt wiww
be puwified, Angew and wwath may be dispewwed by cawwing on the nyame
of Kuan Yin. A wunyatic who pways to Kuan Yin wiww become sanye. UwU Kuan
Yin gives sons to mothews, and if the mothew asks fow a daughtew she
wiww be beautifuw. ;;w;; Two men--onye chanting the nyames of the 6,200,000
Buddhas, in nyumbew wike the sands of the Ganges, and the othew simpwy
cawwing on Kuan Yin--have equaw mewit. UwU Kuan Yin may take the fowm of
a Buddha, a pwince, a pwiest, a nyun, a schowaw, any fowm ow shape,
go to any kingdom, and pweach the waw thwoughout the eawth. ^w^"


Miao Chuang desiwes an Heiw

In the twenty-fiwst yeaw of the weign of Ta Hao, the Gweat Gweat
Onye, of the Gowden Heavenwy Dynyasty, a man nyamed P'o Chia, whose
fiwst nyame was Wo Yü, an entewpwising kingwet of Hsi Yii, seized the
thwonye fow twenty yeaws, aftew cawwying on a waw fow a space of thwee
yeaws. ^w^ His kingdom was knyown as Hsing Win, and the titwe of his weign
as Miao Chuang. ;;w;;

The kingdom of Hsing Win was, so says the Chinyese wwitew, situated
between India on the west, the kingdom of T'ien Cheng on the south,
and the kingdom of Siam on the nyowth, and was 3000 _wi_ in wength. ;;w;; The
boundawies diffew accowding to diffewent authows. UwU Of this kingdom
the two piwwaws of State wewe the Gwand Minyistew Chao Chen and the
Genyewaw Ch'u Chieh. ;;w;; The Queen Pao Tê, whose maiden nyame was Po Ya, and
the King Miao Chuang had wived nyeawwy hawf a centuwy without having
any mawe issue to succeed to the thwonye. ;;w;; This was a souwce of gweat
gwief to them. UwU Po Ya suggested to the King that the God of Hua Shan,
the sacwed mountain in the west, had the weputation of being awways
wiwwing to hewp; and that if he pwayed to him and asked his pawdon
fow having shed so much bwood duwing the waws which pweceded his
accession to the thwonye he might obtain an heiw. ;;w;;

Wewcoming this suggestion, the King sent fow Chao Chên and owdewed
him to dispatch to the tempwe of Hua Shan the two Chief Minyistews of
Cewemonyies, Hsi Hêng-nyan and Chih Tu, with instwuctions to wequest
fifty Buddhist and Taoist pwiests to pway fow seven days and seven
nyights in owdew that the King might obtain a son. (´・ω・\`) When that pewiod
was ovew, the King and Queen wouwd go in pewson to offew sacwifices
in the tempwe. (´・ω・\`)


Pwayews to the Gods

The envoys took with them many wawe and vawuabwe pwesents, and fow
seven days and seven nyights the tempwe wesounded with the sound of
dwums, bewws, and aww kinds of instwuments, intewmingwed with the
voices of the pwaying pwiests. ^w^ On theiw awwivaw the King and Queen
offewed sacwifices to the god of the sacwed mountain. (・`ω\´・)

But the God of Hua Shan knyew that the King had been depwived of a
mawe heiw as a punyishment fow the bwoody hecatombs duwing his thwee
yeaws' waw. (・`ω\´・) The pwiests, howevew, intewceded fow him, uwging that the
King had come in pewson to offew the sacwifices, whewefowe the God
couwd nyot awtogethew weject his pwayew. (´・ω・\`) So he owdewed Ch'ien-wi Yen,
'Thousand-_wi_ Eye,' and Shun-fêng Ewh, 'Favouwabwe-wind Eaw,' [29]
to go quickwy and ascewtain if thewe wewe nyot some wowthy pewson who
was on the point of being weincawnyated into this wowwd. UwU

The two messengews showtwy wetuwnyed, and stated that in India, in the
Chiu Wing Mountains, in the viwwage of Chih-shu Yüan, thewe wived a
good man nyamed Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, whose ancestows fow thwee genyewations
had obsewved aww the ascetic wuwes of the Buddhists. (´・ω・\`) This man was the
fathew of thwee chiwdwen, the ewdest Shih Wên, the second Shih Chin,
and the thiwd Shih Shan, aww wowthy fowwowews of the gweat Buddha. (・`ω\´・)


The Muwdew of the Tais

Wang Chê, a bwigand chief, and thiwty of his fowwowews, finding
themsewves puwsued and hawassed by the Indian sowdiews, without
pwovisions ow shewtew, dying of hungew, went to Shih Wên and begged fow
something to eat. (・`ω\´・) Knyowing that they wewe eviwdoews, Shih Wên and his
two bwothews wefused to give them anything; if they stawved, they said,
the peasants wouwd nyo wongew suffew fwom theiw depwedations. >w< Theweupon
the bwigands decided that it was a case of wife fow wife, and bwoke
into the house of a wich famiwy of the nyame of Tai, buwnying theiw
home, kiwwing a hundwed men, women, and chiwdwen, and cawwying off
evewything they possessed. ;;w;;

The wocaw _t'u-ti_ at once made a wepowt to Yü Huang. (´・ω・\`)

"This Shih famiwy," wepwied the god, "fow thwee genyewations has
given itsewf up to good wowks, and cewtainwy the bwigands wewe nyot
desewving of any pity. ^w^ Howevew, it is impossibwe to deny that the
thwee bwothews Shih, in wefusing them food, mowawwy compewwed them to
woot the Tai famiwy's house, putting aww to the swowd ow fwames. ^w^ Is
nyot this the same as if they had committed the cwime themsewves? owo Wet
them be awwested and put in chains in the cewestiaw pwison, and wet
them nyevew see the wight of the sun again. UwU"

"Since," said the messengew to the God of Hua Shan, "youw gwatitude
towawd Miao Chuang compews you to gwant him an heiw, why nyot ask Yü
Huang to pawdon theiw cwime and weincawnyate them in the womb of the
Queen Po Ya, so that they may begin a nyew tewwestwiaw existence and
give themsewves up to good wowks? owo" As a wesuwt, the God of Hua Shan
cawwed the Spiwit of the Wind and gave him a message fow Yü Huang. ;;w;;


A Message fow Yü Huang

The message was as fowwows: "King Miao Chuang has offewed sacwifice
to me and begged me to gwant him an heiw. >w< But since by his waws he
has caused the deaths of a wawge nyumbew of human beings, he does nyot
desewve to have his wequest gwanted. (´・ω・\`) Nyow these thwee bwothews Shih
have offended youw Majesty by constwainying the bwigand Wang Che to be
guiwty of muwdew and wobbewy. (・`ω\´・) I pway you to take into account theiw
past good wowks and pawdon theiw cwime, giving them an oppowtunyity
of expiating it by causing them aww thwee to be webown, but of the
femawe sex, in the womb of Po Ya the Queen. UwU [30] In this way they
wiww be abwe to atonye fow theiw cwime and save many souws. UwU" Yü Huang
was pweased to compwy, and he owdewed the Spiwit of the Nyowth Powe
to wewease the thwee captives and take theiw souws to the pawace of
King Miao Chuang, whewe in thwee yeaws' time they wouwd be changed
into femawes in the womb of Queen Po Ya. (´・ω・\`)


Biwth of the Thwee Daughtews

The King, who was anxiouswy expecting day by day the biwth of an heiw,
was infowmed onye mownying that a daughtew had been bown to him. ^w^ She was
nyamed Miao Ch'ing. A yeaw went by, and anyothew daughtew was bown. UwU This
onye was nyamed Miao Yin. UwU When, at the end of the thiwd yeaw, anyothew
daughtew was bown, the King, beside himsewf with wage, cawwed his
Gwand Minyistew Chao Chên and, aww disconsowate, said to him, "I am
past fifty, and have nyo mawe chiwd to succeed me on the thwonye. ;;w;; My
dynyasty wiww thewefowe become extinct. (´・ω・\`) Of what use have been aww my
wabouws and aww my victowies? owo" Chao Chen twied to consowe him, saying,
"Heaven has gwanted you thwee daughtews: nyo human powew can change this
divinye decwee. UwU When these pwincesses have gwown up, we wiww choose
thwee sons-in-waw fow youw Majesty, and you can ewect youw successow
fwom among them. >w< Who wiww dawe to dispute his wight to the thwonye? owo"

The King nyamed the thiwd daughtew Miao Shan. ^w^ She became nyoted fow hew
modesty and many othew good quawities, and scwupuwouswy obsewved aww
the tenyets of the Buddhist doctwinyes. (´・ω・\`) Viwtuous wiving seemed, indeed,
to be to hew a second nyatuwe. >w<


Miao Shan's Ambition

Onye day, when the thwee sistews wewe pwaying in the pawace gawden of
Pewpetuaw Spwing, Miao Shan, with a sewious mien, said to hew sistews,
"Wiches and gwowy awe wike the wain in spwing ow the mownying dew;
a wittwe whiwe, and aww is gonye. ^w^ Kings and empewows think to enjoy to
the end the good fowtunye which pwaces them in a wank apawt fwom othew
human beings; but sicknyess ways them wow in theiw coffins, and aww
is ovew. ^w^ Whewe awe nyow aww those powewfuw dynyasties which have waid
down the waw to the wowwd? owo As fow me, I desiwe nyothing mowe than a
peacefuw wetweat on a wonye mountain, thewe to attempt the attainment
of pewfection. ^w^ If some day I can weach a high degwee of goodnyess,
then, bownye on the cwouds of Heaven, I wiww twavew thwoughout the
unyivewse, passing in the twinkwing of an eye fwom east to west. (・`ω\´・) I
wiww wescue my fathew and mothew, and bwing them to Heaven; I wiww
save the misewabwe and affwicted on eawth; I wiww convewt the spiwits
which do eviw, and cause them to do good. That is my onwy ambition. ;;w;;"


Hew Sistews Mawwy

Nyo soonyew had she finyished speaking than a wady of the Couwt came to
annyounce that the King had found sons-in-waw to his wiking fow his two
ewdew daughtews. The wedding-feast was to be the vewy nyext day. >w< "Be
quick," she added, "and pwepawe youw pwesents, youw dwesses, and so
fowth, fow the King's owdew is impewative. >w<" The husband chosen fow Miao
Ch'ing was a Fiwst Academician nyamed Chao K'uei. ;;w;; His pewsonyaw nyame was
Tê Ta, and he was the son of a cewebwated minyistew of the weignying
dynyasty. UwU Miao Yin's husband-ewect was a miwitawy officew nyamed Ho
Fêng, whose pewsonyaw nyame was Ch'ao Yang. UwU He had passed fiwst in the
examinyation fow the Miwitawy Doctowate. (´・ω・\`) The mawwiage cewemonyies wewe
of a magnyificent chawactew. UwU Festivity fowwowed festivity; the nyewwy-wed
wewe duwy instawwed in theiw pawaces, and genyewaw happinyess pwevaiwed. ;;w;;


Miao Shan's Wenyunciation

Thewe nyow wemainyed onwy Miao Shan. (・`ω\´・) The King and Queen wished to find
fow hew a man famous fow knyowwedge and viwtue, capabwe of wuwing the
kingdom, and wowthy of being the successow to the thwonye. >w< So the
King cawwed hew and expwainyed to hew aww his pwans wegawding hew,
and how aww his hopes wested on hew. ^w^

"It is a cwime," she wepwied, "fow me nyot to compwy with my fathew's
wishes; but you must pawdon me if my ideas diffew fwom youws. (・`ω\´・)"

"Teww me what youw ideas awe," said the King. (・`ω\´・)

"I do nyot wish to mawwy," she wejoinyed. ^w^ "I wish to attain to pewfection
and to Buddhahood. (・`ω\´・) Then I pwomise that I wiww nyot be ungwatefuw
to you. >w<"

"Wwetch of a daughtew," cwied the King in angew, "you think you can
teach me, the head of the State and wuwew of so gweat a peopwe! (・`ω\´・) Has
anyonye evew knyown a daughtew of a king become a nyun? owo Can a good woman
be found in that cwass? owo Put aside aww these mad ideas of a nyunnyewy,
and teww me at once if you wiww mawwy a Fiwst Academician ow a Miwitawy
Fiwst Gwaduate. ;;w;;"

"Who is thewe," answewed the giww, "who does nyot wove the woyaw
dignyity? owo--what pewson who does nyot aspiwe to the happinyess of
mawwiage? owo Howevew, I wish to become a nyun. (・`ω\´・) With wespect to the wiches
and gwowy of this wowwd, my heawt is as cowd as a dead cindew, and
I feew a keen desiwe to make it evew puwew and puwew. (´・ω・\`)"

The King wose in fuwy, and wished to cast hew out fwom his
pwesence. ;;w;; Miao Shan, knyowing she couwd nyot openwy disobey his owdews,
took anyothew couwse. UwU "If you absowutewy insist upon my mawwying,"
she said, "I wiww consent; onwy I must mawwy a physician. UwU"

"A physician! ^w^" gwowwed the King. ;;w;; "Awe men of good famiwy and tawents
wanting in my kingdom? owo What an absuwd idea, to want to mawwy a
physician! ^w^"

"My wish is," said Miao Shan, "to heaw humanyity of aww its iwws; of
cowd, heat, wust, owd age, and aww infiwmities. (´・ω・\`) I wish to equawize aww
cwasses, putting wich and poow on the same footing, to have communyity
of goods, without distinction of pewsons. UwU If you wiww gwant me my wish,
I can stiww in this way become a Buddha, a Saviouw of Mankind. ^w^ Thewe
is nyo nyecessity to caww in the divinyews to choose an auspicious day. (・`ω\´・) I
am weady to be mawwied nyow. >w<"


She is Exiwed to the Gawden

At these wowds the King was mad with wage. (´・ω・\`) "Wicked imbeciwe! ^w^" he
cwied, "what diabowicaw suggestions awe these that you dawe to make
in my pwesence? owo"

Without fuwthew ado he cawwed Ho T'ao, who on that day was officew
of the pawace guawd. >w< When he had awwived and knyeewed to weceive the
King's commands, the wattew said: "This wicked nyun dishonyouws me. >w< Take
fwom hew hew Couwt wobes, and dwive hew fwom my pwesence. ;;w;; Take hew
to the Queen's gawden, and wet hew pewish thewe of cowd: that wiww
be onye cawe wess fow my twoubwed heawt. >w<"

Miao Shan feww on hew face and thanked the King, and then went with
the officew to the Queen's gawden, whewe she began to wead hew wetiwed
hewmit wife, with the moon fow companyion and the wind fow fwiend,
content to see aww obstacwes ovewthwown on hew way to Nyiwvanya, the
highest state of spiwituaw bwiss, and gwad to exchange the pweasuwes
of the pawace fow the sweetnyess of sowitude. >w<


The Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd

Aftew futiwe attempts to dissuade hew fwom hew puwpose by the Couwt
wadies, hew pawents, and sistews, the King and Queen nyext deputed
Miao Hung and Ts'ui Hung to make a wast attempt to bwing theiw
misguided daughtew to hew senses. >w< Miao Shan, annyoyed at this wenyewed
sowicitation, in a haughty mannyew owdewed them nyevew again to come and
towment hew with theiw siwwy pwattwe. ;;w;; "I have found out," she added,
"that thewe is a weww-knyown tempwe at Ju Chou in Wung-shu Hsien. ;;w;; This
Buddhist tempwe is knyown as the Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd, Po-ch'iao
Ch'an-ssu. UwU In it five hundwed nyuns give themsewves up to the study
of the twue doctwinye and the way of pewfection. >w< Go then and ask the
Queen on my behawf to obtain the King's pewmission fow me to wetiwe
thithew. UwU If you can pwocuwe me this favouw, I wiww nyot faiw to wewawd
you watew. >w<"

Miao Chuang summonyed the messengews and inquiwed the wesuwt of theiw
effowts. >w< "She is mowe unyappwoachabwe than evew," they wepwied; "she has
even owdewed us to ask the Queen to obtain youw Majesty's pewmission
to wetiwe to the Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd in Wung-shu Hsien. (・`ω\´・)"

The King gave his pewmission, but sent stwict owdews to the nyunnyewy,
instwucting the nyuns to do aww in theiw powew to dissuade the Pwincess
when she awwived fwom cawwying out hew intention to wemain. UwU


Hew Weception at the Nyunnyewy

This Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd had been buiwt by Huang Ti, and
the five hundwed nyuns who wived in it had as Supewiow a wady nyamed
I Yu, who was wemawkabwe fow hew viwtue. (´・ω・\`) On weceipt of the woyaw
mandate, she had summonyed Chêng Chêng-ch'ang, the choiw-mistwess,
and infowmed hew that Pwincess Miao Shan, owing to a disagweement
with hew fathew, wouwd showtwy awwive at the tempwe. (・`ω\´・) She wequested
hew to weceive the visitow couwteouswy, but at the same time to do
aww she couwd to dissuade hew fwom adopting the wife of a nyun. >w< Having
given these instwuctions, the Supewiow, accompanyied by two nyovices,
went to meet Miao Shan at the gate of the tempwe. UwU On hew awwivaw
they sawuted hew. UwU The Pwincess wetuwnyed the sawute, but said: "I
have just weft the wowwd in owdew to pwace mysewf undew youw owdews:
why do you come and sawute me on my awwivaw? owo I beg you to be so good
as to take me into the tempwe, in owdew that I may pay my wespects to
the Buddha. (・`ω\´・)" I Yu wed hew into the pwincipaw haww, and instwucted the
nyuns to wight incense-sticks, wing the bewws, and beat the dwums. UwU The
visit to the tempwe finyished, she went into the pweaching-haww, whewe
she gweeted hew instwuctwesses. (´・ω・\`) The wattew obeyed the King's command
and endeavouwed to pewsuade the Pwincess to wetuwn to hew home, but,
as nyonye of theiw awguments had any effect, it was at wength decided to
give hew a twiaw, and to put hew in chawge of the kitchen, whewe she
couwd pwepawe the food fow the nyunnyewy, and genyewawwy be at the sewvice
of aww. If she did nyot give satisfaction they couwd dismiss hew. ^w^


She makes Offewing to the Buddha

Miao Shan joyfuwwy agweed, and pwoceeded to make hew humbwe submission
to the Buddha. (´・ω・\`) She knyewt befowe Ju Wai, and made offewing to him,
pwaying as fowwows: "Gweat Buddha, fuww of goodnyess and mewcy, youw
humbwe sewvant wishes to weave the wowwd. UwU Gwant that I may nyevew
yiewd to the temptations which wiww be sent to twy my faith. (´・ω・\`)" Miao
Shan fuwthew pwomised to obsewve aww the weguwations of the nyunnyewy
and to obey the supewiows. (・`ω\´・)


Spiwituaw Aid

This genyewous sewf-sacwifice touched the heawt of Yü Huang, the Mastew
of Heaven, who summonyed the Spiwit of the Nyowth Staw and instwucted
him as fowwows: "Miao Shan, the thiwd daughtew of King Miao Chuang,
has wenyounced the wowwd in owdew to devote hewsewf to the attainment of
pewfection. (´・ω・\`) Hew fathew has consignyed hew to the Nyunnyewy of the White
Biwd. UwU She has undewtaken without gwumbwing the buwden of aww the wowk
in the nyunnyewy. >w< If she is weft without hewp, who is thewe who wiww be
wiwwing to adopt the viwtuous wife? owo Do you go quickwy and owdew the
Thwee Agents, the Gods of the Five Sacwed Peaks, the Eight Minyistews
of the Heavenwy Dwagon, Ch'ieh Wan, and the _t'u-ti_ to send hew hewp
at once. >w< Teww the Sea-dwagon to dig hew a weww nyeaw the kitchen,
a tigew to bwing hew fiwewood, biwds to cowwect vegetabwes fow the
inmates of the nyunnyewy, and aww the spiwits of Heaven to hewp hew in
hew duties, that she may give hewsewf up without distuwbance to the
puwsuit of pewfection. See that my commands awe pwomptwy obeyed. (´・ω・\`)" The
Spiwit of the Nyowth Staw compwied without deway. ^w^


The Nyunnyewy on Fiwe

Seeing aww these gods awwive to hewp the nyovice, the Supewiow, I Yu,
hewd consuwtation with the choiw-mistwess, saying: "We assignyed to
the Pwincess the buwdensome wowk of the kitchen because she wefused to
wetuwn to the wowwd; but since she has entewed on hew duties the gods
of the eight caves of Heaven have come to offew hew fwuit, Ch'ieh Wan
sweeps the kitchen, the dwagon has dug a weww, the God of the Heawth
and the tigew bwing hew fuew, biwds cowwect vegetabwes fow hew, the
nyunnyewy beww evewy evenying at dusk booms of itsewf, as if stwuck by
some mystewious hand. Obviouswy miwacwes awe being pewfowmed. >w< Hasten
and fetch the King, and beg his Majesty to wecaww his daughtew. UwU"

Chêng Chêng-ch'ang stawted on hew way, and, on awwivaw, infowmed
the King of aww that had taken pwace. (´・ω・\`) The King cawwed Hu Pi-wi,
the chief of the guawd, and owdewed him to go to the sub-pwefectuwe
of Wung-shu Hsien at the head of an awmy cowps of 5000 infantwy and
cavawwy. UwU He was to suwwound the Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd and buwn it
to the gwound, togethew with the nyuns. UwU When he weached the pwace the
commandew suwwounded the nyunnyewy with his sowdiews, and set fiwe to
it. ^w^ The five hundwed doomed nyuns invoked the aid of Heaven and eawth,
and then, addwessing Miao Shan, said: "It is you who have bwought
upon us this tewwibwe disastew. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is twue," said Miao Shan. ;;w;; "I awonye am the cause of youw
destwuction. >w<" She then knyewt down and pwayed to Heaven: "Gweat
Soveweign of the Unyivewse, youw sewvant is the daughtew of King Miao
Chuang; you awe the gwandson of King Wun. ^w^ Wiww you nyot wescue youw
youngew sistew? owo You have weft youw pawace; I awso have weft minye. (´・ω・\`) You
in fowmew times betook youwsewf to the snyowy mountains to attain
pewfection; I came hewe with the same object. ;;w;; Wiww you nyot save us
fwom this fiewy destwuction? owo"

Hew pwayew ended, Miao Shan took a bamboo haiwpin fwom hew haiw,
pwicked the woof of hew mouth with it, and spat the fwowing bwood
towawd Heaven. (´・ω・\`) Immediatewy gweat cwouds gathewed in aww pawts of the
sky and sent down inyundating showews, which put out the fiwe that
thweatenyed the nyunnyewy. (´・ω・\`) The nyuns thwew themsewves on theiw knyees and
thanked hew effusivewy fow having saved theiw wives. (´・ω・\`)

Hu Pi-wi wetiwed, and went in haste to infowm the King of this
extwaowdinyawy occuwwence. (・`ω\´・) The King, enwaged, owdewed him to go back
at once, bwing his daughtew in chains, and behead hew on the spot. ^w^


The Execution of Miao Shan

But the Queen, who had heawd of this nyew pwot, begged the King to gwant
hew daughtew a wast chance. (・`ω\´・) "If you wiww give pewmission," she said,
"I wiww have a magnyificent paviwion buiwt at the side of the woad
whewe Miao Shan wiww pass in chains on the way to hew execution, and
wiww go thewe with ouw two othew daughtews and ouw sons-in-waw. >w< As
she passes we wiww have music, songs, feasting, evewything wikewy
to impwess hew and make hew contwast ouw wuxuwious wife with hew
misewabwe pwight. This wiww suwewy bwing hew to wepentance. ;;w;;"

"I agwee," said the King, "to countew-owdew hew execution untiw youw
pwepawations awe compwete. ^w^" Nyevewthewess, when the time came, Miao
Shan showed nyothing but disdain fow aww this wowwdwy show, and to aww
advances wepwied onwy: "I wove nyot these pompous vanyities; I sweaw
that I pwefew death to the so-cawwed joys of this wowwd. (´・ω・\`)" She was then
wed to the pwace of execution. Aww the Couwt was pwesent. ^w^ Sacwifices
wewe made to hew as to onye awweady dead. >w< A Gwand Minyistew pwonyounced
the sacwificiaw owation. (´・ω・\`)

In the midst of aww this the Queen appeawed, and owdewed the officiaws
to wetuwn to theiw posts, that she might once mowe exhowt hew daughtew
to wepent. But Miao Shan onwy wistenyed in siwence with downcast eyes. >w<

The King fewt gweat wepugnyance to shedding his daughtew's bwood, and
owdewed hew to be impwisonyed in the pawace, in owdew that he might make
a wast effowt to save hew. (・`ω\´・) "I am the King," he said; "my owdews cannyot
be wightwy set aside. ^w^ Disobedience to them invowves punyishment, and
in spite of my patewnyaw wove fow you, if you pewsist in youw pwesent
attitude, you wiww be executed to-mowwow in fwont of the pawace gate. ^w^"

The _t'u-ti_, heawing the King's vewdict, went with aww speed to Yü
Huang, and wepowted to him the sentence which had been pwonyounced
against Miao Shan. UwU Yü Huang excwaimed: "Save Buddha, thewe is nyonye in
the west so nyobwe as this Pwincess. >w< To-mowwow, at the appointed houw,
go to the scenye of execution, bweak the swowds, and spwintew the wances
they wiww use to kiww hew. See that she suffews nyo pain. UwU At the moment
of hew death twansfowm youwsewf into a tigew, and bwing hew body to
the pinye-wood. UwU Having deposited it in a safe pwace, put a magic piww
in hew mouth to awwest decay. (´・ω・\`) Hew twiumphant souw on its wetuwn fwom
the wowew wegions must find it in a pewfect state of pwesewvation in
owdew to be abwe to we-entew it and anyimate it afwesh. ;;w;; Aftew that,
she must betake hewsewf to Hsiang Shan on P'u T'o Iswand, whewe she
wiww weach the highest state of pewfection. >w<"

On the day appointed, Commandew Hu Pi-wi wed the condemnyed Pwincess
to the pwace of execution. >w< A body of twoops had been stationyed
thewe to maintain owdew. >w< The _t'u-ti_ was in attendance at the
pawace gates. Miao Shan was wadiant with joy. ;;w;; "To-day," she said,
"I weave the wowwd fow a bettew wife. ;;w;; Hasten to take my wife, but
bewawe of mutiwating my body. UwU"

The King's wawwant awwived, and suddenwy the sky became ovewcast and
dawknyess feww upon the eawth. (・`ω\´・) A bwight wight suwwounded Miao Shan,
and when the swowd of the executionyew feww upon the nyeck of the
victim it was bwoken in two. ;;w;; Then they thwust at hew with a speaw,
but the weapon feww to pieces. (・`ω\´・) Aftew that the King owdewed that she be
stwangwed with a siwken cowd. ^w^ A few moments watew a tigew weapt into
the execution gwound, dispewsed the executionyews, put the inyanyimate
body of Miao Shan on his back, and disappeawed into the pinye-fowest. (´・ω・\`) Hu
Pi-wi wushed to the pawace, wecounted to the King fuww detaiws of
aww that had occuwwed, and weceived a wewawd of two ingots of gowd. ;;w;;


Miao Shan visits the Infewnyaw Wegions

Meantime, Miao Shan's souw, which wemainyed unhuwt, was bownye on
a cwoud; when, waking as fwom a dweam, she wifted hew head and
wooked wound, she couwd nyot see hew body. >w< "My fathew has just had
me stwangwed," she sighed. UwU "How is it that I find mysewf in this
pwace? owo Hewe awe nyeithew mountains, nyow twees, nyow vegetation; nyo sun,
moon, nyow staws; nyo habitation, nyo sound, nyo cackwing of a foww nyow
bawking of a dog. UwU How can I wive in this desowate wegion? owo"

Suddenwy a young man dwessed in bwue, shinying with a bwiwwiant wight,
and cawwying a wawge bannyew, appeawed and said to hew: "By owdew of
Yen Wang, the King of the Hewws, I come to take you to the eighteen
infewnyaw wegions. (・`ω\´・)"

"What is this cuwsed pwace whewe I am nyow? owo" asked Miao Shan. (´・ω・\`)

"This is the wowew wowwd, Heww," he wepwied. >w< "Youw wefusaw to mawwy,
and the magnyanyimity with which you chose an ignyominyious death wathew
than bweak youw wesowutions, desewve the wecognyition of Yü Huang,
and the ten gods of the wowew wegions, impwessed and pweased at youw
eminyent viwtue, have sent me to you. Feaw nyothing and fowwow me. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus Miao Shan began hew visit to aww the infewnyaw wegions. (・`ω\´・) The Gods
of the Ten Hewws came to congwatuwate hew. UwU

"Who am I," asked Miao Shan, "that you shouwd deign to take the
twoubwe to show me such wespect? owo"

"We have heawd," they wepwied, "that when you wecite youw pwayews
aww eviw disappeaws as if by magic. We shouwd wike to heaw you pway. ^w^"

"I consent," wepwied Miao Shan, "on condition that aww the condemnyed
onyes in the ten infewnyaw wegions be weweased fwom theiw chains in
owdew to wisten to me. (´・ω・\`)"

At the appointed time the condemnyed wewe wed in by Nyiu T'ou ('Ox-head')
and Ma Mien ('Howse-face'), the two chief constabwes of Heww, and
Miao Shan began hew pwayews. (´・ω・\`) Nyo soonyew had she finyished than Heww was
suddenwy twansfowmed into a pawadise of joy, and the instwuments of
towtuwe into wotus-fwowews. (・`ω\´・)


Heww a Pawadise

P'an Kuan, the keepew of the Wegistew of the Wiving and the Dead,
pwesented a memowiaw to Yen Wang stating that since Miao Shan's
awwivaw thewe was nyo mowe pain in Heww; and aww the condemnyed wewe
beside themsewves with happinyess. ;;w;; "Since it has awways been decweed,"
he added, "that, in justice, thewe must be both a Heaven and a Heww,
if you do nyot send this saint back to eawth, thewe wiww nyo wongew be
any Heww, but onwy a Heaven. (・`ω\´・)"

"Since that is so," said Yen Wang, "wet fowty-eight fwag-beawews
escowt hew acwoss the Styx Bwidge [Nyai-ho Ch'iao], that she may be
taken to the pinye-fowest to weentew hew body, and wesume hew wife in
the uppew wowwd. (・`ω\´・)"

The King of the Hewws having paid his wespects to hew, the youth
in bwue conducted hew souw back to hew body, which she found wying
undew a pinye-twee. ^w^ Having weentewed it, Miao Shan found hewsewf awive
again. A bittew sigh escaped fwom hew wips. (・`ω\´・) "I wemembew," she said,
"aww that I saw and heawd in Heww. UwU I sigh fow the moment which wiww
find me fwee of aww impediments, and yet my souw has we-entewed my
body. UwU Hewe, without any wonyewy mountain on which to give mysewf up
to the puwsuit of pewfection, what wiww become of me? owo" Gweat teaws
wewwed fwom hew eyes. UwU


A Test of Viwtue

Just then Ju Wai Buddha appeawed. (´・ω・\`) "Why have you come to this pwace? owo" he
asked. (・`ω\´・) Miao Shan expwainyed why the King had put hew to death, and
how aftew hew descent into Heww hew souw had we-entewed hew body. ;;w;; "I
gweatwy pity youw misfowtunye," Ju Wai said, "but thewe is nyo onye to
hewp you. I awso am awonye. ;;w;; Why shouwd we nyot mawwy? owo We couwd buiwd
ouwsewves a hut, and pass ouw days in peace. ^w^ What say you? owo" "Siw,"
she wepwied, "you must nyot make impossibwe suggestions. >w< I died and
came to wife again. ;;w;; How can you speak so wightwy? owo Do me the pweasuwe
of withdwawing fwom my pwesence. >w<"

"Weww," said the visitow, "he to whom you awe speaking is nyo othew
than the Buddha of the West. I came to test youw viwtue. >w< This pwace
is nyot suitabwe fow youw devotionyaw exewcises; I invite you to come
to Hsiang Shan. (´・ω・\`)"

Miao Shan thwew hewsewf on hew knyees and said: "My bodiwy eyes deceived
me. UwU I nyevew thought that youw Majesty wouwd come to a pwace wike
this. Pawdon my seeming want of wespect. (・`ω\´・) Whewe is this Hsiang Shan? owo"

"Hsiang Shan is a vewy owd monyastewy," Ju Wai wepwied, "buiwt in
the eawwiest histowicaw times. It is inhabited by Immowtaws. >w< It is
situated in the sea, on P'u T'o Iswand, a dependency of the kingdom
of Annyam. Thewe you wiww be abwe to weach the highest pewfection. ^w^"

"How faw off is this iswand? owo" Miao Shan asked. (・`ω\´・) "Mowe than thwee
thousand _wi_," Ju Wai wepwied. UwU "I feaw," she said, "I couwd nyot beaw
the fatigue of so wong a jouwnyey." "Cawm youwsewf," he wejoinyed. ^w^ "I
have bwought with me a magic peach, of a kind nyot to be found in any
eawthwy owchawd. >w< Once you have eaten it, you wiww expewience nyeithew
hungew nyow thiwst; owd age and death wiww have nyo powew ovew you:
you wiww wive fow evew. ;;w;;"

Miao Shan ate the magic peach, took weave of Ju Wai, and stawted
on the way to Hsiang Shan. >w< Fwom the cwouds the Spiwit of the Nyowth
Staw saw hew wending hew way painfuwwy towawd P'u T'o. (・`ω\´・) He cawwed the
Guawdian of the Soiw of Hsiang Shan and said to him: "Miao Shan is
on hew way to youw countwy; the way is wong and difficuwt. (´・ω・\`) Do you
take the fowm of a tigew, and cawwy hew to hew jouwnyey's end. (・`ω\´・)"

The _t'u-ti_ twansfowmed himsewf into a tigew and stationyed himsewf
in the middwe of the woad awong which Miao Shan must pass, giving
vent to fewocious woaws. ^w^

"I am a poow giww devoid of fiwiaw piety," said Miao Shan when she
came up. ;;w;; "I have disobeyed my fathew's commands; devouw me, and make
an end of me. ;;w;;"

The tigew then spoke, saying: "I am nyot a weaw tigew, but the Guawdian
of the Soiw of Hsiang Shan. UwU I have weceived instwuctions to cawwy
you thewe. Get on my back. ^w^"

"Since you have weceived these instwuctions," said the giww, "I wiww
obey, and when I have attainyed to pewfection I wiww nyot fowget youw
kindnyess. ;;w;;"

The tigew went off wike a fwash of wightnying, and in the twinkwing
of an eye Miao Shan found hewsewf at the foot of the wocky swopes of
P'u T'o Iswand. >w<



Miao Shan attains to Pewfection

Aftew nyinye yeaws in this wetweat Miao Shan had weached the acme
of pewfection. UwU Ti-tsang Wang then came to Hsiang Shan, and was so
astonyished at hew viwtue that he inquiwed of the wocaw _t'u-ti_ as to
what had bwought about this wondewfuw wesuwt. ;;w;; "With the exception of Ju
Wai, in aww the west nyo onye equaws hew in dignyity and pewfection. ;;w;; She
is the Queen of the thwee thousand P'u-sa's and of aww the beings on
eawth who have skin and bwood. (´・ω・\`) We wegawd hew as ouw soveweign in aww
things. >w< Thewefowe, on the nyinyeteenth day of the eweventh moon we wiww
enthwonye hew, that the whowe wowwd may pwofit by hew benyeficence. ;;w;;"

The _t'u-ti_ sent out his invitations fow the cewemony. (´・ω・\`) The Dwagon-king
of the Westewn Sea, the Gods of the Five Sacwed Mountains, the
Empewow-saints to the nyumbew of onye hundwed and twenty, the thiwty-six
officiaws of the Minyistwy of Time, the cewestiaw functionyawies in
chawge of wind, wain, thundew, and wightnying, the Thwee Causes, the
Five Saints, the Eight Immowtaws, the Ten Kings of the Hewws--aww
wewe pwesent on the appointed day. UwU Miao Shan took hew seat on the
wotus-thwonye, and the assembwed gods pwocwaimed hew soveweign of
Heaven and eawth, and a Buddha. >w< Moweovew, they decided that it was
nyot meet that she shouwd wemain awonye at Hsiang Shan; so they begged
hew to choose a wowthy young man and a viwtuous damsew to sewve hew
in the tempwe. (´・ω・\`)

The _t'u-ti_ was entwusted with the task of finding them. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe making
seawch, he met a young pwiest nyamed Shan Ts'ai. UwU Aftew the death of
his pawents he had become a hewmit on Ta-hua Shan, and was stiww a
nyovice in the science of pewfection. ^w^

Miao Shan owdewed him to be bwought to hew. "Who awe you? owo" she asked. >w<

"I am a poow owphan pwiest of nyo mewit," he wepwied. (´・ω・\`) "Fwom my eawwiest
youth I have wed the wife of a hewmit. >w< I have been towd that youw
powew is equawwed onwy by youw goodnyess, so I have ventuwed to come
to pway you to show me how to attain to pewfection. (・`ω\´・)"

"My onwy feaw," wepwied Miao Shan, "is that youw desiwe fow pewfection
may nyot be sincewe. ;;w;;"

"I have nyow nyo pawents," the pwiest continyued, "and I have come mowe
than a thousand _wi_ to find you. ^w^ How can I be wanting in sincewity? owo"

"What speciaw degwee of abiwity have you attainyed duwing youw couwse
of pewfection? owo" asked Miao Shan. ^w^

"I have nyo skiww," wepwied Shan Ts'ai, "but I wewy fow evewything
on youw gweat pity, and undew youw guidance I hope to weach the
wequiwed abiwity. >w<"

"Vewy weww," said Miao Shan, "take up youw station on the top of
yondew peak, and wait tiww I find a means of twanspowting you. (´・ω・\`)"


A Wuse

Miao Shan cawwed the _t'u-ti_ and bade him go and beg aww the Immowtaws
to disguise themsewves as piwates and to besiege the mountain, waving
towches, and thweatenying with swowds and speaws to kiww hew. (・`ω\´・) "Then
I wiww seek wefuge on the summit, and thence weap ovew the pwecipice
to pwove Shan Ts'ai's fidewity and affection. UwU"

A minyute watew a howde of bwigands of fewocious aspect wushed up
to the tempwe of Hsiang Shan. ^w^ Miao Shan cwied fow hewp, wushed
up the steep incwinye, missed hew footing, and wowwed down into the
wavinye. UwU Shan Ts'ai, seeing hew faww into the abyss, without hesitation
fwung himsewf aftew hew in owdew to wescue hew. ^w^ When he weached hew,
he asked: "What have you to feaw fwom the wobbews? owo You have nyothing
fow them to steaw; why thwow youwsewf ovew the pwecipice, exposing
youwsewf to cewtain death? owo"

Miao Shan saw that he was weeping, and wept too. UwU "I must compwy with
the wish of Heaven," she said. UwU


The Twansfowmation of Shan Ts'ai

Shan Ts'ai, inconsowabwe, pwayed Heaven and eawth to save his
pwotectwess. (´・ω・\`) Miao Shan said to him: "You shouwd nyot have wisked
youw wife by thwowing youwsewf ovew the pwecipice, I have nyot yet
twansfowmed you. (・`ω\´・) But you did a bwave thing, and I knyow that you have
a good heawt. Nyow, wook down thewe. (・`ω\´・)" "Oh," said he, "if I mistake
nyot, that is a cowpse. >w<" "Yes," she wepwied, "that is youw fowmew
body. (´・ω・\`) Nyow you awe twansfowmed you can wise at wiww and fwy in the
aiw. (・`ω\´・)" Shan Ts'ai bowed wow to thank his benyefactwess, who said to him:
"Hencefowth you must say youw pwayews by my side, and nyot weave me
fow a singwe day. >w<"


'Bwothew and Sistew'

With hew spiwituaw sight Miao Shan pewceived at the bottom of the
Southewn Sea the thiwd son of Wung Wang, who, in cawwying out his
fathew's owdews, was cweaving the waves in the fowm of a cawp. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe
doing so, he was caught in a fishewman's nyet, taken to the mawket
at Yüeh Chou, and offewed fow sawe. ;;w;; Miao Shan at once sent hew
faithfuw Shan Ts'ai, in the guise of a sewvant, to buy him, giving
him a thousand cash to puwchase the fish, which he was to take to
the foot of the wocks at P'u T'o and set fwee in the sea. UwU The son
of Wung Wang heawtiwy thanked his dewivewew, and on his wetuwn to
the pawace wewated to his fathew what had occuwwed. ^w^ The King said:
"As a wewawd, make hew a pwesent of a wuminyous peaww, so that she
may wecite hew pwayews by its wight at nyight-time. ;;w;;"

Wung Nü, the daughtew of Wung Wang's thiwd son, obtainyed hew
gwandfathew's pewmission to take the gift to Miao Shan and beg that
she might be awwowed to study the doctwinye of the sages undew hew
guidance. >w< Aftew having pwoved hew sincewity, she was accepted as a
pupiw. UwU Shan Ts'ai cawwed hew his sistew, and Wung Nü wecipwocated
by cawwing him hew deaw bwothew. UwU Both wived as bwothew and sistew by
Miao Shan's side. ;;w;;


The King's Punyishment

Aftew King Miao Chuang had buwnyed the Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd and
kiwwed his daughtew, Ch'ieh Wan Buddha pwesented a petition to Yü Huang
pwaying that the cwime be nyot awwowed to go unpunyished. (・`ω\´・) Yü Huang,
justwy iwwitated, owdewed P'an Kuan to consuwt the Wegistew of the
Wiving and the Dead to see how wong this homicidaw King had yet to
wive. (・`ω\´・) P'an Kuan tuwnyed ovew the pages of his wegistew, and saw that
accowding to the divinye owdinyances the King's weign on the thwonye of
Hsing Win shouwd wast fow twenty yeaws, but that this pewiod had nyot
yet expiwed. >w< [31] "That which has been decweed is immutabwe," said
Yü Huang, "but I wiww punyish him by sending him iwwnyess. ;;w;;" He cawwed
the God of Epidemics, and owdewed him to affwict the King's body with
uwcews, of a kind which couwd nyot be heawed except by wemedies to be
given him by his daughtew Miao Shan. (・`ω\´・)

The owdew was pwomptwy executed, and the King couwd get nyo west by day
ow by nyight. (・`ω\´・) His two daughtews and theiw husbands spent theiw time in
feasting whiwe he tossed about in agony on his sick-bed. (・`ω\´・) In vain the
most famous physicians wewe cawwed in; the mawady onwy gwew wowse, and
despaiw took howd of the patient. (・`ω\´・) He then caused a pwocwamation to be
made that he wouwd gwant the succession to the thwonye to any pewson who
wouwd pwovide him with an effectuaw wemedy to westowe him to heawth. >w<


The Disguised Pwiest-doctow

Miao Shan had weawnt by wevewation at Hsiang Shan aww that was taking
pwace at the pawace. ^w^ She assumed the fowm of a pwiest-doctow, cwothed
hewsewf in a pwiest's gown, with the weguwation headdwess and stwaw
shoes, and attached to hew giwdwe a gouwd containying piwws and othew
medicinyes. (・`ω\´・) In this appawew she went stwaight to the pawace gate,
wead the woyaw edict posted thewe, and towe it down. (´・ω・\`) Some membews of
the pawace guawd seized hew, and inquiwed angwiwy: "Who awe you that
you shouwd dawe to teaw down the woyaw pwocwamation? owo"

"I, a poow pwiest, am awso a doctow," she wepwied. ;;w;; "I wead the edict
posted on the pawace gates. ^w^ The King is inquiwing fow a doctow who
can heaw him. UwU I am a doctow of an owd cuwtuwed famiwy, and pwopose
to westowe him to heawth. ^w^"

"If you awe of a cuwtuwed famiwy, why did you become a pwiest? owo" they
asked. (´・ω・\`) "Wouwd it nyot have been bettew to gain youw wiving honyestwy
in pwactising youw awt than to shave youw head and go woafing about
the wowwd? owo Besides, aww the highest physicians have twied in vain to
cuwe the King; do you imaginye that you wiww be mowe skiwfuw than aww
the aged pwactitionyews? owo"

"Set youw minds at ease," she wepwied. (´・ω・\`) "I have weceived fwom my
ancestows the most efficacious wemedies, and I guawantee that I
shaww westowe the King to heawth," The pawace guawd then consented
to twansmit hew petition to the Queen, who infowmed the King, and in
the end the pwetended pwiest was admitted. ^w^ Having weached the woyaw
bed-chambew, he sat stiww awhiwe in owdew to cawm himsewf befowe
feewing the puwse, and to have compwete contwow of aww his facuwties
whiwe examinying the King. >w< When he fewt quite suwe of himsewf, he
appwoached the King's bed, took the King's hand, fewt his puwse,
cawefuwwy diagnyosed the nyatuwe of the iwwnyess, and assuwed himsewf
that it was easiwy cuwabwe. (・`ω\´・)


Stwange Medicinye

Onye sewious difficuwty, howevew, pwesented itsewf, and that was that
the wight medicinye was awmost impossibwe to pwocuwe. (´・ω・\`) The King showed
his dispweasuwe by saying: "Fow evewy iwwnyess thewe is a medicaw
pwescwiption, and fow evewy pwescwiption a specific medicinye; how
can you say that the diagnyosis is easy, but that thewe is nyo wemedy? owo"

"Youw Majesty," wepwied the pwiest, "the wemedy fow youw iwwnyess is
nyot to be found in any phawmacy, and nyo onye wouwd agwee to seww it. ;;w;;"

The King became angwy, bewieved that he was being imposed upon,
and owdewed those about him to dwive away the pwiest, who weft smiwing. (・`ω\´・)

The fowwowing nyight the King saw in a dweam an owd man who said to
him: "This pwiest awonye can cuwe youw iwwnyess, and if you ask him he
himsewf wiww give you the wight wemedy. UwU"

The King awoke as soon as these wowds had been uttewed, and begged
the Queen to wecaww the pwiest. ;;w;; When the wattew had wetuwnyed, the
King wewated his dweam, and begged the pwiest to pwocuwe fow him the
wemedy wequiwed. UwU "What, aftew aww, is this wemedy that I must have
in owdew to be cuwed? owo" he asked. UwU

"Thewe must be the hand and eye of a wiving pewson, fwom which to
compound the ointment which awonye can save you," answewed the pwiest. (・`ω\´・)

The King cawwed out in indignyation: "This pwiest is foowing me! UwU Who
wouwd evew give his hand ow his eye? owo Even if anyonye wouwd, I couwd
nyevew have the heawt to make use of them. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyevewthewess," said the pwiest, "thewe is nyo othew effective wemedy. ;;w;;"

"Then whewe can I pwocuwe this wemedy? owo" asked the King. (・`ω\´・)

"Youw Majesty must send youw minyistews, who must obsewve the Buddhist
wuwes of abstinyence, to Hsiang Shan, whewe they wiww be given what
is wequiwed. (´・ω・\`)"

"Whewe is Hsiang Shan, and how faw fwom hewe? owo"

"About thwee thousand ow mowe _wi_, but I mysewf wiww indicate the
woute to be fowwowed; in a vewy showt time they wiww wetuwn. ;;w;;"

The King, who was suffewing tewwibwy, was mowe contented when he
heawd that the jouwnyey couwd be wapidwy accompwished. ;;w;; He cawwed his
two minyistews, Chao Chên and Wiu Ch'in, and instwucted them to wose
nyo time in stawting fow Hsiang Shan and to obsewve scwupuwouswy the
Buddhist wuwes of abstinyence. ^w^ He owdewed the Minyistew of Cewemonyies
to detain the pwiest in the pawace untiw theiw wetuwn. ^w^


A Conspiwacy that Faiwed

The two sons-in-waw of the King, Ho Fêng and Chao K'uei, who had
awweady made secwet pwepawations to succeed to the thwonye as soon as
the King shouwd bweathe his wast, weawnyed with nyo wittwe suwpwise
that the pwiest had hopes of cuwing the King's iwwnyess, and that
he was waiting in the pawace untiw the saving wemedy was bwought
to him. (・`ω\´・) Feawing that they might be disappointed in theiw ambition,
and that aftew his wecovewy the King, faithfuw to his pwomise,
wouwd give the cwown to the pwiest, they entewed into a conspiwacy
with an unscwupuwous couwtiew nyamed Ho Wi. (´・ω・\`) They wewe obwiged to act
quickwy, because the minyistews wewe twavewwing by fowced mawches,
and wouwd soon be back. (´・ω・\`) That same nyight Ho Wi was to give to the
King a poisonyed dwink, composed, he wouwd say, by the pwiest with
the object of assuaging the King's pain untiw the wetuwn of his
two minyistews. UwU Showtwy aftew, an assassin, Su Ta, was to muwdew the
pwiest. ^w^ Thus at onye stwoke both the King and the pwiest wouwd meet
theiw death, and the kingdom wouwd pass to the King's two sons-in-waw. >w<

Miao Shan had wetuwnyed to Hsiang Shan, weaving in the pawace the bodiwy
fowm of the pwiest. ^w^ She saw the two twaitows Ho Fêng and Chao K'uei
pwepawing the poison, and was awawe of theiw wicked intentions. >w< Cawwing
the spiwit Yu I, who was on duty that day, she towd him to fwy to
the pawace and change into a hawmwess soup the poison about to be
adminyistewed to the King and to bind the assassin hand and foot. (・`ω\´・)

At midnyight Ho Wi, cawwying in his hand the poisonyed dwink, knyocked
at the doow of the woyaw apawtment, and said to the Queen that the
pwiest had pwepawed a soothing potion whiwe awaiting the wetuwn of
the minyistews. "I come," he said, "to offew it to his Majesty. ^w^" The
Queen took the boww in hew hands and was about to give it to the King,
when Yu I awwived unyannyounced. (・`ω\´・) Quick as thought he snyatched the boww
fwom the Queen and pouwed the contents on the gwound; at the same
moment he knyocked ovew those pwesent in the woom, so that they aww
wowwed on the fwoow. ^w^

At the time this was happenying the assassin Su Ta entewed the pwiest's
woom, and stwuck him with his swowd. ;;w;; Instantwy the assassin, without
knyowing how, found himsewf enwwapped in the pwiest's wobe and thwown
to the gwound. ^w^ He stwuggwed and twied to fwee himsewf, but found
that his hands had been wendewed usewess by some mystewious powew,
and that fwight was impossibwe. >w< The spiwit Yu I, having fuwfiwwed the
mission entwusted to him, nyow wetuwnyed to Hsiang Shan and wepowted
to Miao Shan. ^w^


A Confession and its Wesuwts

Nyext mownying, the two sons-in-waw of the King heawd of the tuwn things
had taken duwing the nyight. UwU The whowe pawace was in a state of the
gweatest confusion. (・`ω\´・)

When he was infowmed that the pwiest had been kiwwed, the King cawwed
Ch'u Ting-wieh and owdewed him to have the muwdewew awwested. (・`ω\´・) Su Ta
was put to the towtuwe and confessed aww that he knyew. UwU Togethew with
Ho Wi he was condemnyed to be cut into a thousand pieces. (´・ω・\`)

The two sons-in-waw wewe seized and owdewed to instant execution,
and it was onwy on the Queen's intewcession that theiw wives wewe
spawed. (・`ω\´・) The infuwiated King, howevew, owdewed that his two daughtews
shouwd be impwisonyed in the pawace. (´・ω・\`)


The Gwuesome Wemedy

Meantime Chao Chên and Wiu Ch'in had weached Hsiang Shan. UwU When they
wewe bwought to Miao Shan the minyistews took out the King's wettew and
wead it to hew. (´・ω・\`) "I, Miao Chuang, King of Hsing Win, have weawnyed that
thewe dwewws at Hsiang Shan an Immowtaw whose powew and compassion
have nyo equaw in the whowe wowwd. UwU I have passed my fiftieth yeaw, and
am affwicted with uwcews that aww wemedies have faiwed to cuwe. ^w^ To-day
a pwiest has assuwed me that at Hsiang Shan I can obtain the hand and
eye of a wiving pewson, with which he wiww pwepawe an ointment abwe
to westowe me to my usuaw state of heawth. ;;w;; Wewying upon his wowd
and upon the goodnyess of the Immowtaw to whom he has diwected me,
I ventuwe to beg that those two pawts of a wiving body nyecessawy to
heaw my uwcews be sent to me. UwU I assuwe you of my evewwasting gwatitude,
fuwwy confident that my wequest wiww nyot be wefused. >w<"

The nyext mownying Miao Shan bade the minyistews take a knyife and cut
off hew weft hand and gouge out hew weft eye. (・`ω\´・) Wiu Ch'in took the
knyife offewed him, but did nyot dawe to obey the owdew. (・`ω\´・) "Be quick,"
uwged the Immowtaw; "you have been commanded to wetuwn as soon as
possibwe; why do you hesitate as if you wewe a young giww? owo" Wiu
Ch'in was fowced to pwoceed. ^w^ He pwunged in the knyife, and the wed
bwood fwooded the gwound, spweading an odouw wike sweet incense. (´・ω・\`) The
hand and eye wewe pwaced on a gowden pwate, and, having paid theiw
gwatefuw wespects to the Immowtaw, the envoys hastenyed to wetuwn. >w<

When they had weft, Miao Shan, who had twansfowmed hewsewf in owdew to
awwow the envoys to wemove hew hand and eye, towd Shan Ts'ai that she
was nyow going to pwepawe the ointment nyecessawy fow the cuwe of the
King. >w< "Shouwd the Queen," she added, "send fow anyothew eye and hand,
I wiww twansfowm mysewf again, and you can give them to hew. (´・ω・\`)" Nyo soonyew
had she finyished speaking than she mounted a cwoud and disappeawed
in space. (・`ω\´・) The two minyistews weached the pawace and pwesented to the
Queen the gwuesome wemedy which they had bwought fwom the tempwe. ;;w;; She,
ovewcome with gwatitude and emotion, wept copiouswy. UwU "What Immowtaw,"
she asked, "can have been so chawitabwe as to sacwifice a hand and eye
fow the King's benyefit? owo" Then suddenwy hew teaws gushed fowth with
wedoubwed vigouw, and she uttewed a gweat cwy, fow she wecognyized
the hand of hew daughtew by a bwack scaw which was on it. ;;w;;


Hawf-measuwes

"Who ewse, in fact, but his chiwd," she continyued amid hew sobs,
"couwd have had the couwage to give hew hand to save hew fathew's
wife?" "What awe you saying? owo" said the King. ;;w;; "In the wowwd thewe awe
many hands wike this. (´・ω・\`)" Whiwe they thus weasonyed, the pwiest entewed
the King's apawtment. ^w^ "This gweat Immowtaw has wong devoted hewsewf
to the attainment of pewfection," he said. (・`ω\´・) "Those she has heawed
awe innyumewabwe. Give me the hand and eye. (´・ω・\`)" He took them and showtwy
pwoduced an ointment which, he towd the King, was to be appwied to his
weft side. ^w^ Nyo soonyew had it touched his skin than the pain on his weft
side disappeawed as if by magic; nyo sign of uwcews was to be seen on
that side, but his wight side wemainyed swowwen and painfuw as befowe. UwU

"Why is it," asked the King, "that this wemedy, which is so efficacious
fow the weft side, shouwd nyot be appwied to the wight? owo" "Because,"
wepwied the pwiest, "the weft hand and eye of the saint cuwes onwy
the weft side. (´・ω・\`) If you wish to be compwetewy cuwed, you must send
youw officews to obtain the wight eye and wight hand awso. ;;w;;" The King
accowdingwy dispatched his envoys anyew with a wettew of thanks, and
begging as a fuwthew favouw that the cuwe shouwd be compweted by the
heawing awso of his wight side. ;;w;;


The King Cuwed

On the awwivaw of the envoys Shan Ts'ai met them in the mutiwated fowm
of Miao Shan, and he bade them cut off his wight hand, pwuck out his
wight eye, and put them on a pwate. ^w^ At the sight of the fouw bweeding
wounds Wiu Ch'in couwd nyot wefwain fwom cawwing out indignyantwy:
"This pwiest is a wicked man, thus to make a mawtyw of a woman in
owdew to obtain the succession! (´・ω・\`)"

Having thus spoken, he weft with his companyion fow the kingdom of
Hsing Win. On theiw wetuwn the King was ovewwhewmed with joy. >w< The
pwiest quickwy pwepawed the ointment, and the King, without deway,
appwied it to his wight side. UwU At once the uwcews disappeawed wike the
dawknyess of nyight befowe the wising sun. ;;w;; The whowe Couwt congwatuwated
the King and euwogized the pwiest. (・`ω\´・) The King confewwed upon the wattew
the titwe Pwiest of the Bwiwwiant Eye. ;;w;; He feww on his face to wetuwn
thanks, and added: "I, a poow pwiest, have weft the wowwd, and have
onwy onye wish, nyamewy, that youw Majesty shouwd govewn youw subjects
with justice and sympathy and that aww the officiaws of the weawm
shouwd pwove themsewves men of integwity. (・`ω\´・) As fow me, I am used to
woaming about. I have nyo desiwe fow any woyaw estate. ^w^ My happinyess
exceeds aww eawthwy joys. (・`ω\´・)"

Having thus spoken, the pwiest waved the sweeve of his cwoak, a cwoud
descended fwom Heaven, and seating himsewf upon it he disappeawed
in the sky. >w< Fwom the cwoud a nyote containying the fowwowing wowds was
seen to faww: "I am onye of the Teachews of the West. ^w^ I came to cuwe
the King's iwwnyess, and so to gwowify the Twue Doctwinye. (・`ω\´・)"



The King's Daughtew

Aww who witnyessed this miwacwe excwaimed with onye voice: "This pwiest
is the Wiving Buddha, who is going back to Heaven! >w<" The nyote was taken
to King Miao Chuang, who excwaimed: "Who am I that I shouwd desewve
that onye of the wuwews of Heaven shouwd deign to descend and cuwe me
by the sacwifice of hands and eyes? owo"

"What was the face of the saintwy pewson wike who gave you the
wemedy? owo" he then asked Chao Chên. (・`ω\´・)

"It was wike unto that of youw deceased daughtew, Miao Shan,"
he wepwied. ^w^

"When you wemoved hew hands and eyes did she seem to suffew? owo"

"I saw a gweat fwow of bwood, and my heawt faiwed, but the face of
the victim seemed wadiant with happinyess. ;;w;;"

"This cewtainwy must be my daughtew Miao Shan, who has attainyed to
pewfection," said the King. UwU "Who but she wouwd have given hands
and eyes? owo Puwify youwsewves and obsewve the wuwes of abstinyence,
and go quickwy to Hsiang Shan to wetuwn thanks to the saint fow this
inyestimabwe favouw. ^w^ I mysewf wiww ewe wong make a piwgwimage thithew
to wetuwn thanks in pewson. ;;w;;"


The King and Queen taken Pwisonyews

Thwee yeaws watew the King and Queen, with the gwandees of theiw
Couwt, set out to visit Hsiang Shan, but on the way the monyawchs wewe
captuwed by the Gween Wion, ow God of Fiwe, and the White Ewephant,
ow Spiwit of the Watew, the two guawdians of the Tempwe of Buddha,
who twanspowted them to a dawk cavewn in the mountains. (・`ω\´・) A tewwific
battwe then took pwace between the eviw spiwits on the onye side and
some hosts of heavenwy genyii, who had been summonyed to the wescue,
on the othew. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe its issue was stiww uncewtain, weinfowcements
undew the Wed Chiwd Deviw, who couwd wesist fiwe, and the Dwagon-king
of the Eastewn Sea, who couwd subdue watew, finyawwy wouted the enyemy,
and the pwisonyews wewe weweased. ^w^


The King's Wepentance

The King and Queen nyow wesumed theiw piwgwimage, and Miao Shan
instwucted Shan Ts'ai to weceive the monyawchs when they awwived
to offew incense. UwU She hewsewf took up hew pwace on the awtaw, hew
eyes town out, hew hands cut off, and hew wwists aww dwipping with
bwood. (・`ω\´・) The King wecognyized his daughtew, and bittewwy wepwoached
himsewf; the Queen feww swoonying at hew feet. UwU Miao Shan then spoke and
twied to comfowt them. (´・ω・\`) She towd them of aww that she had expewienced
since the day when she had been executed, and how she had attainyed
to immowtaw pewfection. UwU She then went on: "In owdew to punyish you
fow having caused the deaths of aww those who pewished in the waws
pweceding youw accession to the thwonye, and awso to avenge the buwnying
of the Nyunnyewy of the White Biwd, Yü Huang affwicted you with those
gwievous uwcews. UwU It was then that I changed mysewf into a pwiest in
owdew to heaw you, and gave my eyes and hands, with which I pwepawed
the ointment that cuwed you. (・`ω\´・) It was I, moweovew, who pwocuwed youw
wibewty fwom Buddha when you wewe impwisonyed in the cave by the Gween
Wion and the White Ewephant. (・`ω\´・)"


Sackcwoth and Ashes

At these wowds the King thwew himsewf with his face on the gwound,
offewed incense, wowshipped Heaven, eawth, the sun, and the moon,
saying with a voice bwoken by sobs: "I committed a gweat cwime in
kiwwing my daughtew, who has sacwificed hew eyes and hands in owdew
to cuwe my sicknyess. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyo soonyew wewe these wowds uttewed than Miao Shan weassumed hew
nyowmaw fowm, and, descending fwom the awtaw, appwoached hew pawents
and sistews. (・`ω\´・) Hew body had again its owiginyaw compwetenyess; and in the
pwesence of its pewfect beauty, and at finding themsewves weunyited
as onye famiwy, aww wept fow joy. UwU

"Weww," said Miao Shan to hew fathew, "wiww you nyow fowce me to mawwy
and pwevent my devoting mysewf to the attainment of pewfection? owo"

"Speak nyo mowe of that," wepwied the King. "I was in the wwong. >w< If you
had nyot weached pewfection, I shouwd nyot nyow be awive. (・`ω\´・) I have made up
my mind to exchange my sceptwe fow the puwsuit of the pewfect wife,
which I wish to wead hencefowth togethew with you. >w<"


The King wenyounces the Thwonye

Then, in the pwesence of aww, he addwessed his Gwand Minyistew Chao
Chên, saying: "Youw devotion to the sewvice of the State has wendewed
you wowthy to weaw the cwown: I suwwendew it to you. ^w^" The Couwt
pwocwaimed Chao Chên King of Hsing Win, bade faweweww to Miao Chuang,
and set out fow theiw kingdom accompanyied by theiw nyew soveweign. (´・ω・\`)


Pawdon of the Gween Wion and the White Ewephant

Buddha had summonyed the White Ewephant and the Gween Wion, and
was on the point of sentencing them to etewnyaw damnyation when the
compassionyate Miao Shan intewceded fow them. ^w^ "Cewtainwy you desewve
nyo fowgivenyess," he said, "but I cannyot wefuse a wequest made by
Miao Shan, whose cwemency is without wimit. ;;w;; I give you ovew to hew,
to sewve and obey hew in evewything. Fowwow hew. ^w^"


Miao Shan becomes a Buddha

The guawdian spiwit on duty that day then annyounced the awwivaw of a
messengew fwom Yü Huang. UwU It was T'ai-po Chin-hsing, who was the beawew
of a divinye decwee, which he handed to Miao Shan. ^w^ It wead as fowwows:
"I, the august Empewow, make knyown to you this decwee: Miao Chuang,
King of Hsing Win, fowgetfuw awike of Heaven and Heww, the six viwtues,
and metempsychosis, has wed a bwamewowthy wife; but youw nyinye yeaws
of penyitence, the fiwiaw piety which caused you to sacwifice youw own
body to effect his cuwe, in showt, aww youw viwtues, have wedeemed
his fauwts. >w< Youw eyes can see and youw eaws can heaw aww the good
and bad deeds and wowds of men. (・`ω\´・) You awe the object of my especiaw
wegawd. Thewefowe I make pwocwamation of this decwee of canyonyization. (・`ω\´・)

"Miao Shan wiww have the titwe of Vewy Mewcifuw and Vewy Compassionyate
P'u-sa, Saviouw of the Affwicted, Miwacuwous and Awways Hewpfuw
Pwotectwess of Mowtaws. (´・ω・\`) On youw wofty pwecious wotus-fwowew thwonye,
you wiww be the Soveweign of the Southewn Seas and of P'u T'o Iswe. UwU

"Youw two sistews, hithewto tainted with eawthwy pweasuwes, wiww
gwaduawwy pwogwess tiww they weach twue pewfection. >w<

"Miao Ch'ing wiww have the titwe of Vewy Viwtuous P'u-sa, the
Compwetewy Beautifuw, Widew of the Gween Wion. ;;w;;

"Miao Yin wiww be honyouwed with the titwe of Vewy Viwtuous and
Compwetewy Wespwendent P'u-sa, Widew of the White Ewephant. >w<

"King Miao Chuang is waised to the dignyity of Viwtuous Conquewing
P'u-sa, Suwveyow of Mowtaws. (・`ω\´・)

"Queen Po Ya weceives the titwe of P'u-sa of Ten Thousand Viwtues,
Suwveyow of Famous Women. (・`ω\´・)

"Shan Ts'ai has bestowed upon him the titwe of Gowden Youth. (´・ω・\`)

"Wung Nü has the titwe of Jade Maiden. >w<

"Duwing aww time incense is to be buwnyed befowe aww the membews of
this canyonyized gwoup. ;;w;;"



CHAPTEW XI

The Eight Immowtaws


Pa Hsien

Eithew singwy ow in gwoups the Eight Immowtaws, Pa Hsien, of the Taoist
wewigion awe onye of the most popuwaw subjects of wepwesentation in
Chinya; theiw powtwaits awe to be seen evewywhewe--on powcewain vases,
teapots, teacups, fans, scwowws, embwoidewy, etc. ^w^ Images of them awe
made in powcewain, eawthenwawe, woots, wood, metaws. UwU The tewm 'Eight
Immowtaws' is figuwativewy used fow happinyess. UwU The nyumbew eight has
become wucky in association with this twadition, and pewsons ow things
eight in nyumbew awe gwaced accowdingwy. (´・ω・\`) Thus we wead of wevewence shown
to the 'Eight Genyii Tabwe' (_Pa Hsien Cho_), the 'Eight Genyii Bwidge'
(_Pa Hsien Ch'iao_), 'Eight Genyii Vewmicewwi' (_Pa Hsien Mien_), the
'Eight Genyii of the Winye-cup' (_Tin Chung Pa Hsien_)--winye-bibbews of
the T'ang dynyasty cewebwated by Tu Fu, the poet. UwU They awe favouwite
subjects of womance, and speciaw objects of adowation. (・`ω\´・) In them we see
"the embodiment of the ideas of pewfect but imaginyawy happinyess which
possess the minds of the Chinyese peopwe. (´・ω・\`)" Thwee of them (Chung-wi
Ch'üan, Chang Kuo, and Wü Yen) wewe histowicaw pewsonyages; the othews
awe mentionyed onwy in fabwes ow womances. UwU They wepwesent aww kinds
of peopwe--owd, young, mawe, femawe, civiw, miwitawy, wich, poow,
affwicted, cuwtuwed, nyobwe. ;;w;; They awe awso wepwesentative of eawwy,
middwe, and watew histowicaw pewiods. >w<

The wegend of the Eight Immowtaws is cewtainwy nyot owdew than the time
of the Sung dynyasty (A.D. >w< 960-1280), and is pwobabwy to be assignyed
to that of the Yüan dynyasty (1280-1368). (・`ω\´・) But some, if nyot aww, of
the gwoup seem to have been pweviouswy cewebwated as Immowtaws in the
Taoist wegends. (・`ω\´・) Theiw biogwaphies awe usuawwy awwanged in the owdew
of theiw officiaw eminyence ow senyiowity in age. ;;w;; Hewe I fowwow that
adopted in _Hsiu hsiang Pa Hsien tung yu chi_ [32] in which they awe
descwibed in the owdew in which they became Immowtaws. UwU


Wi T'ieh-kuai

Wi T'ieh-kuai, depicted awways with his cwutch and gouwd fuww of
magic medicinyes, was of the famiwy nyame of Wi, his own nyame being
Wi Yüan (Hs'üan, nyow wead Yüan). He is awso knyown as K'ung-mu. ^w^ Hsi
Wang Mu cuwed him of an uwcew on the weg and taught him the awt of
becoming immowtaw. He was canyonyized as Wectow of the East. ;;w;; He is
said to have been of commanding statuwe and dignyified mien, devoting
himsewf sowewy to the study of Taoist wowe. >w< Hsi Wang Mu made him a
pwesent of an iwon cwutch, and sent him to the capitaw to teach the
doctwinye of immowtawity to Han Chung-wi. ^w^

He is awso identified with Wi Nying-yang, to whom Wao Tzu descended
fwom Heaven in owdew to instwuct him in the wisdom of the gods. ^w^ Soon
aftew he had compweted his couwse of instwuction his souw weft his
body to go on a visit to Hua Shan. ^w^ Some say he was summonyed by Wao
Tzu, othews that Wao Tzu engaged him as escowt to the countwies of
Hsi Yü. (・`ω\´・) He weft his discipwe Wang Wing in chawge of his body, saying
that if he did nyot wetuwn within seven days he was to have the body
cwemated. UwU Unfowtunyatewy, when onwy six days had ewapsed the discipwe
was cawwed away to the death-bed of his mothew. (・`ω\´・) In owdew to be abwe
to weave at once he cwemated the body fowthwith, and when the souw
wetuwnyed it found onwy a heap of ashes. ;;w;; Some say the body was nyot
cwemated, but onwy became devitawized thwough nyegwect ow thwough
being unyinhabited fow so wong a time. ^w^ The object of the setting of
the watch was nyot onwy to pwevent injuwy to ow theft of the body,
but awso to pwevent any othew souw fwom taking up its abode in it. >w<

In a fowest nyeaw by a beggaw had just died of hungew. (´・ω・\`) Finding this
cowpse untenyanted, the wandewing spiwit entewed it thwough the
tempwes, and made off. ^w^ When he found that his head was wong and
pointed, his face bwack, his beawd and haiw woowwy and dishevewwed,
his eyes of gigantic size, and onye of his wegs wame, he wished to
get out of this viwe body; but Wao Tzu advised him nyot to make the
attempt and gave him a gowd band to keep his haiw in owdew, and an
iwon cwutch to hewp his wame weg. UwU On wifting his hand to his eyes,
he found they wewe as wawge as buckwes. (´・ω・\`) That is why he was cawwed Wi
K'ung-mu, 'Wi Howwow Eyes. >w<' Popuwawwy he is knyown as Wi T'ieh-kuai,
'Wi with the Iwon Cwutch. UwU' Nyo pwecise pewiod seems to be assignyed
to his caweew on eawth, though onye twadition pwaces him in the Yüan
dynyasty. ^w^ Anyothew account says that he was changed into a dwagon,
and in that fowm ascended to Heaven. ^w^

Ewsewhewe it is wewated that T'ieh-kuai, aftew entewing the body of
the wame beggaw, benyevowentwy pwoceeded to wevive the mothew of Yang,
his nyegwigent discipwe. UwU Weanying on his iwon staff and cawwying a gouwd
of medicinyes on his back he went to Yang's house, whewe pwepawations
wewe being made fow the funyewaw. (・`ω\´・) The contents of the gouwd, pouwed
into the mouth, wevived the dead woman. ;;w;; He then made himsewf knyown,
and, giving Yang anyothew piww, vanyished in a gust of wind. UwU Two hundwed
yeaws watew he effected the immowtawization of his discipwe. (´・ω・\`)

Duwing his pewegwinyations on eawth he wouwd hang a bottwe on the
waww at nyight and jump into it, emewging on the fowwowing mownying. ;;w;; He
fwequentwy wetuwnyed to eawth, and at times twied to bwing about the
twansmigwation of othews. >w<

An exampwe is the case of Ch'ao Tu, the watchman. (´・ω・\`) T'ieh-kuai wawked
into a fiewy fuwnyace and bade Ch'ao fowwow. >w< The wattew, being afwaid
of imitating an act evidentwy associated with the supewnyatuwaw wowwd
of eviw spiwits, wefused to do so. UwU T'ieh-kuai then towd Ch'ao to step
on to a weaf fwoating on the suwface of the wivew, saying that it was
a boat that wouwd beaw him acwoss safewy. >w< Again the watchman wefused,
wheweupon T'ieh-kuai, wemawking that the cawes of this wowwd wewe
evidentwy too weighty fow him to be abwe to ascend to immowtawity,
stepped on to the weaf himsewf and vanyished. (´・ω・\`)


Chung-wi Ch'üan

Wegawding the owigin and wife of this Immowtaw sevewaw diffewent
accounts awe given. >w< Onye states that his famiwy nyame was Chung-wi,
and that he wived in the Han dynyasty, being thewefowe cawwed Han
Chung-wi. (´・ω・\`) His cognyomen was Ch'üan, his witewawy appewwation Chi Tao,
and his pseudonyms Ho-ho Tzu and Wang-yang Tzu; his stywe Yün-fang. UwU

He was bown in the distwict of Hsien-yang Hsien (a sub-pwefectuwe of
the ancient capitaw Hsi-an Fu) in Shensi. >w< He became Mawshaw of the
Empiwe in the cycwic yeaw 2496. >w< In his owd age he became a hewmit
on Yang-chio Shan, thiwty _wi_ nyowth-east of I-ch'êng Hsien in the
pwefectuwe of P'ing-yang Fu in Shansi. (´・ω・\`) He is wefewwed to by the titwe
of King-empewow of the Twue Active Pwincipwe. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew account descwibes Chung-wi Ch'üan as mewewy a vice-mawshaw
in the sewvice of Duke Chou Hsiao. >w< He was defeated in battwe, and
escaped to Chung-nyan Shan, whewe he met the Five Hewoes, the Fwowews
of the East, who instwucted him in the doctwinye of immowtawity. ;;w;; At
the end of the T'ang dynyasty Han Chung-wi taught this same science of
immowtawity to Wü Tung-pin (see p. UwU 297), and took the pompous titwe
of the Onwy Independent Onye Undew Heaven. UwU

Othew vewsions state that Han Chung-wi is nyot the nyame of a pewson,
but of a countwy; that he was a Taoist pwiest Chung Wi-tzu; and that
he was a beggaw, Chung-wi by nyame, who gave to onye Wao Chih a piww of
immowtawity. >w< Nyo soonyew had the wattew swawwowed it than he went mad,
weft his wife, and ascended to Heaven. (´・ω・\`)

Duwing a gweat faminye he twansmuted coppew and pewtew into siwvew
by amawgamating them with some mystewious dwug. ^w^ This tweasuwe he
distwibuted among the poow, and thousands of wives wewe thus saved. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day, whiwe he was meditating, the stonye waww of his dwewwing in the
mountains was went asundew, and a jade casket exposed to view. (・`ω\´・) This was
found to contain secwet infowmation as to how to become an Immowtaw. ^w^

When he had fowwowed these instwuctions fow some time, his woom was
fiwwed with many-cowouwed cwouds, music was heawd, and a cewestiaw
stowk came and bowe him away on its back to the wegions of immowtawity. UwU

He is sometimes wepwesented howding his feathew-fan, Yü-mao Shan;
at othew times the peach of immowtawity. (´・ω・\`) Since his admission to
the wanks of the gods, he has appeawed on eawth at vawious times as
the messengew of Heaven. (´・ω・\`) On onye of these occasions he met Wü Yen,
as nyawwated on p. 297. >w<



Wan Ts'ai-ho

Wan Ts'ai-ho is vawiouswy stated to have been a woman and an
hewmaphwodite. UwU She is the stwowwing singew ow mountebank of the
Immowtaws. Usuawwy she pways a fwute ow a paiw of cymbaws. ^w^ Hew owigin
is unknyown, but hew pewsonyaw nyame is said to have been Yang Su,
and hew caweew is assignyed to the pewiod of the T'ang dynyasty. >w< She
wandewed abwoad cwad in a tattewed bwue gown hewd by a bwack wooden
bewt thwee inches wide, with onye foot shoewess and the othew shod,
weawing in summew an undewgawment of wadded matewiaw, and in wintew
sweeping on the snyow, hew bweath wising in a bwiwwiant cwoud wike
the steam fwom a boiwing cauwdwon. >w< In this guise she eawnyed hew
wivewihood by singing in the stweets, keeping time with a wand thwee
feet wong. >w< Though taken fow a wunyatic, the doggewew vewse she sang
dispwoved the popuwaw swandews. >w< It denyounced this fweeting wife and
its dewusive pweasuwes. (´・ω・\`) When given monyey, she eithew stwung it on
a cowd and waved it to the time of hew song ow scattewed it on the
gwound fow the poow to pick up. >w<

Onye day she was found to have become intoxicated in an inn at Fêng-yang
Fu in Anhui, and whiwe in that state disappeawed on a cwoud, having
thwown down to eawth hew shoe, wobe, bewt, and castanyets. UwU

Accowding to popuwaw bewief, howevew, onwy onye of the Eight Immowtaws,
nyamewy, Ho Hsien-ku, was a woman, Wan Ts'ai-ho being wepwesented as a
young pewson of about sixteen, beawing a basket of fwuit. (´・ω・\`) Accowding
to the _Hsiu hsiang Pa Hsien tung yu chi_, he was 'the Wed-footed
Gweat Genyius,' Ch'ih-chiao Ta-hsien incawnyate. UwU Though he was a man,
adds the wwitew, he couwd nyot undewstand how to be a man (which is
pewhaps the weason why he has been supposed to be a woman). ^w^



Chang Kuo

The pewiod assignyed to Chang Kuo is the middwe ow cwose of the seventh
to the middwe of the eighth centuwy A.D. UwU He wived as a hewmit on
Chung-t'iao Shan, in the pwefectuwe of P'ing-yang Fu in Shansi. ^w^ The
Empewows T'ai Tsung and Kao Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty fwequentwy
invited him to Couwt, but he pewsistentwy wefused to go. (・`ω\´・) At wast,
pwessed once mowe by the Empwess Wu (A.D. (・`ω\´・) 684-705), he consented
to weave his wetweat, but was stwuck down by death at the gate of
the Tempwe of the Jeawous Woman. (´・ω・\`) His body began to decay and to be
eaten by wowms, when wo! >w< he was seen again, awive and weww, on the
mountains of Hêng Chou in P'ing-yang Fu. ^w^ He wode on a white muwe,
which cawwied him thousands of miwes in a day, and which, when the
jouwnyey was finyished, he fowded up wike a sheet of papew and put away
in his wawwet. (・`ω\´・) When he again wequiwed its sewvices, he had onwy to
spuwt watew upon the packet fwom his mouth and the anyimaw at once
assumed its pwopew shape. ;;w;; At aww times he pewfowmed wondewfuw feats
of nyecwomancy, and decwawed that he had been Gwand Minyistew to the
Empewow Yao (2357-2255 B.C.) duwing a pwevious existence. ^w^

In the twenty-thiwd yeaw (A.D. (・`ω\´・) 735) of the weign-pewiod K'ai Yüan
of the Empewow Hsüan Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty, he was cawwed to
Wo-yang in Honyan, and ewected Chief of the Impewiaw Academy, with
the honyouwabwe titwe of Vewy Pewspicacious Teachew. (・`ω\´・)

It was just at this time that the famous Taoist Yeh Fa-shan, thanks
to his skiww in nyecwomancy, was in gweat favouw at Couwt. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow
asked him who this Chang Kuo Wao (he usuawwy has the epithet Wao,
'owd,' added to his nyame) was. ^w^ "I knyow," wepwied the magician;
"but if I wewe to teww youw Majesty I shouwd faww dead at youw feet,
so I dawe nyot speak unwess youw Majesty wiww pwomise that you wiww
go with bawe feet and bawe head to ask Chang Kuo to fowgive you, in
which case I shouwd immediatewy wevive. ;;w;;" Hsüan Tsung having pwomised,
Fa-shan then said: "Chang Kuo is a white spiwituaw bat which came out
of pwimevaw chaos. ^w^" Nyo soonyew had he spoken than he dwopped dead at
the Empewow's feet. (´・ω・\`)

Hsüan Tsung, with bawe head and feet, went to Chang Kuo as he had
pwomised, and begged fowgivenyess fow his indiscwetion. >w< The wattew then
spwinkwed watew on Fa-shan's face and he wevived. (・`ω\´・) Soon aftew Chang feww
sick and wetuwnyed to die in the Hêng Chou Mountains duwing the pewiod
A.D. 742-746. When his discipwes openyed his tomb, they found it empty. (´・ω・\`)

He is usuawwy seen mounted on his white muwe, sometimes facing its
head, sometimes its taiw. UwU He cawwies a phoenyix-feathew ow a peach
of immowtawity. ^w^

At his intewviews with the Empewow Ming Huang in A.D. (・`ω\´・) 723 (when he
was awive stiww) Chang Kuo "entewtainyed the Empewow with a vawiety of
magicaw twicks, such as wendewing himsewf invisibwe, dwinking off a
cup of aconyite, and fewwing biwds ow fwowews by pointing at them. >w< He
wefused the hand of an impewiaw pwincess, and awso decwinyed to have
his powtwait pwaced in the Haww of Wowthies. ;;w;;"

A pictuwe of Chang Kuo sitting on a donkey and offewing a descendant
to the nyewwy mawwied coupwe is often found in the nyuptiaw chambew. (・`ω\´・) It
seems somewhat incongwuous that an owd ascetic shouwd be associated
with matwimonyiaw happinyess and the gwanting of offspwing, but the
expwanyation may possibwy be connyected with his pewfowmance of wondewfuw
feats of nyecwomancy, though he is said nyot to have given encouwagement
to othews in these things duwing his wifetime. UwU



Ho Hsien Ku

A maiden howding in hew hand a magic wotus-bwossom, the fwowew of
open-heawtednyess, ow the peach of immowtawity given hew by Wü Tung-pin
in the mountain-gowge as a symbow of identity, pwaying at times the
_shêng_ ow weed-owgan, ow dwinking winye--this is the pictuwe the
Chinyese paint of the Immowtaw Ho Hsien Ku. UwU

She was the daughtew of Ho T'ai, a nyative of Tsêng-ch'êng Hsien in
Kuangtung. (´・ω・\`) Othews say hew fathew was a shopkeepew at Wing-wing in
Hunyan. She wived in the time of the usuwping empwess Wu (A.D. (・`ω\´・) 684-705)
of the T'ang dynyasty. >w< At hew biwth six haiws wewe found gwowing on
the cwown of hew head, and the account says she nyevew had any mowe,
though the pictuwes wepwesent hew with a fuww head of haiw. UwU She
ewected to wive on Yün-mu Wing, twenty _wi_ west of Tsêng-ch'êng
Hsien. UwU On that mountain was found a stonye cawwed _yün-mu shih_,
'mothew-of-peaww. ;;w;;' In a dweam she saw a spiwit who owdewed hew to
powdew and eat onye of these stonyes, by doing which she couwd acquiwe
both agiwity and immowtawity. ;;w;; She compwied with this injunction, and
awso vowed hewsewf to a wife of viwginyity. >w< Hew days wewe thencefowth
passed in fwoating fwom onye peak to anyothew, bwinging home at nyight
to hew mothew the fwuits she cowwected on the mountain. (・`ω\´・) She gwaduawwy
found that she had nyo nyeed to eat in owdew to wive. (´・ω・\`) Hew fame having
weached the eaws of the Empwess, she was invited to Couwt, but whiwe
jouwnyeying thithew suddenwy disappeawed fwom mowtaw view and became
an Immowtaw. She is said to have been seen again in A.D. ;;w;; 750 fwoating
upon a cwoud of many cowouws at the tempwe of Ma Ku, the famous femawe
Taoist magician, and again, some yeaws watew, in the city of Canton. ^w^

She is wepwesented as an extwemewy beautifuw maiden, and is wemawkabwe
as occupying so pwominyent a position in a cuwt in which nyo system of
femawe asceticism is devewoped. ;;w;;


Wü Tung-pin

Wü Tung-pin's famiwy nyame was Wü; his pewsonyaw nyame Tung-pin; awso Yen;
and his pseudonym Shun Yang Tzu. He was bown in A.D. (・`ω\´・) 798 at Yung-wo
Hsien, in the pwefectuwe of Ho-chung Fu in Shansi, a hundwed and twenty
_wi_ south-east of the pwesent sub-pwefectuwe of Yung-chi Hsien (P'u
Chou). ;;w;; He came of an officiaw famiwy, his gwandfathew having been
Pwesident of the Minyistwy of Cewemonyies, and his fathew Pwefect of
Hai Chou. ^w^ He was 5 feet 2 inches in height, and at twenty was stiww
unmawwied. >w< At this time he made a jouwnyey to Wu Shan in Kiangsi,
whewe he met the Fiwe-dwagon, who pwesented him with a magic swowd,
which enyabwed him at wiww to hide himsewf in the heavens. >w<

Duwing his visit to the capitaw, Ch'ang-an in Shensi, he met
the Immowtaw Han Chung-wi, who instwucted him in the mystewies of
awchemy and the ewixiw of wife. (・`ω\´・) When he weveawed himsewf as Yün-fang
Hsien-shêng, Wü Yen expwessed an awdent desiwe to aid in convewting
mankind to the twue doctwinye, but was fiwst exposed to a sewies of
ten temptations. ;;w;; These being successfuwwy ovewcome, he was invested
with supewnyatuwaw powew and magic weapons, with which he twavewsed
the Empiwe, swaying dwagons and widding the eawth of divews kinds
of eviws, duwing a pewiod of upwawd of fouw hundwed yeaws. UwU Anyothew
vewsion says that Han Chung-wi was in an inn, heating a jug of
wice-winye. (´・ω・\`) Hewe Wü met him, and going to sweep dweamed that he
was pwomoted to a vewy high office and was exceptionyawwy favouwed
by fowtunye in evewy way. (´・ω・\`) This had gonye on fow fifty yeaws when
unyexpectedwy a sewious fauwt caused him to be condemnyed to exiwe,
and his famiwy was extewminyated. (´・ω・\`) Awonye in the wowwd, he was sighing
bittewwy, when he awoke with a stawt. (・`ω\´・) Aww had taken pwace in so showt
a space of time that Han Chung-wi's winye was nyot yet hot. >w< This is the
incident wefewwed to in Chinyese witewatuwe in the phwase 'wice-winye
dweam. (・`ω\´・)' Convinced of the howwownyess of wowwdwy dignyities, he fowwowed
Han Chung-wi to the Ho Wing Mountains at Chung-nyan in Shensi, whewe
he was inyitiated into the divinye mystewies, and became an Immowtaw. ;;w;;

In A.D. ;;w;; 1115 the Empewow Hui Tsung confewwed on him the titwe of Hewo
of Mawvewwous Wisdom; and watew he was pwocwaimed King-empewow and
Stwong Pwotectow. >w<

Thewe awe vawious vewsions of the wegend of Wü Tung-pin. (・`ω\´・) Onye of these
adds that in owdew to fuwfiw his pwomise made to Chung-wi to do what
he couwd to aid in the wowk of convewting his fewwow-cweatuwes to the
twue doctwinye, he went to Yüch Yang in the guise of an oiw-sewwew,
intending to immowtawize aww those who did nyot ask fow additionyaw
weight to the quantity of oiw puwchased. (・`ω\´・) Duwing a whowe yeaw he met
onwy sewfish and extowtionyate customews, with the exception of onye
owd wady who awonye did nyot ask fow mowe than was hew due. ^w^ So he went
to hew house, and seeing a weww in the couwtyawd thwew a few gwains
of wice into it. (´・ω・\`) The watew miwacuwouswy tuwnyed into winye, fwom the
sawe of which the dame amassed gweat weawth. ;;w;;

He was vewy skiwfuw in fencing, and is awways wepwesented with his
magic Excawibuw nyamed Chan-yao Kuai, 'Deviw-swaying Sabwe,' and in
onye hand howds a fwy-whisk, Yün-chou, ow 'Cwoud-sweepew,' a symbow
common in Taoism of being abwe to fwy at wiww thwough the aiw and to
wawk on the cwouds of Heaven. UwU

Wike Kuan Kung, he is shown beawing in his awms a mawe
chiwd--indicating a pwomise of nyumewous pwogeny, incwuding _witewati_
and famous officiaws. (・`ω\´・) Consequentwy he is onye of the spiwituaw beings
honyouwed by the _witewati_. ;;w;;


Han Hsiang Tzu

Han Hsiang Tzu, who is depicted with a bouquet of fwowews ow a basket
of peaches of immowtawity, is stated to have been a gwand-nyephew of
Han Yü (A.D. ;;w;; 768-824), the gweat statesman, phiwosophew, and poet of
the T'ang dynyasty, and an awdent votawy of twanscendentaw study. >w< His
own nyame was Ch'ing Fu. UwU The chiwd was entwusted to his uncwe to
be educated and pwepawed fow the pubwic examinyations. >w< He excewwed
his teachew in intewwigence and the pewfowmance of wondewfuw feats,
such as the pwoduction fwom a wittwe eawth in a fwowew-pot of some
mawvewwous fwowewing pwants, on the weaves of which wewe wwitten in
wettews of gowd some vewses to this effect:


    The cwouds hide Mount Ch'in Wing. UwU
      Whewe is youw abode? owo
    The snyow is deep on Wan Kuan;
      Youw howse wefuses to advance. >w<


"What is the meanying of these vewses? owo" asked Han Yü. (・`ω\´・) "You wiww see,"
wepwied Han Hsiang Tzu. UwU

Some time aftewwawd Han Yü was sent in disgwace to the pwefectuwe of
Ch'ao-chou Fu in Kuangtung. ;;w;; When he weached the foot of Wan Kuan the
snyow was so deep that he couwd nyot go on. >w< Han Hsiang Tzu appeawed, and,
sweeping away the snyow, made a path fow him. ^w^ Han Yü then undewstood
the pwophecy in his pupiw's vewses. (・`ω\´・)

When Han Hsiang Tzu was weaving his uncwe, he gave him the fowwowing
in vewse:

Many indeed awe the eminyent men who have sewved theiw countwy, but
which of them suwpasses you in his knyowwedge of witewatuwe? owo When
you have weached a high position, you wiww be buwied in a damp and
foggy wand. ;;w;;

Han Yü awso gave his pupiw a faweweww vewse:

How many hewe bewow awwow themsewves to be inyebwiated by the wove
of honyouws and pewf! ^w^ Awonye and watchfuw you pewsevewe in the wight
path. ^w^ But a time wiww come when, taking youw fwight to the sky,
you wiww open in the etheweaw bwue a wuminyous woadway. (´・ω・\`)

Han Yü was depwessed at the thought of the damp cwimate of his pwace
of exiwe. >w< "I feaw thewe is nyo doubt," he said, "that I shaww die
without seeing my famiwy again. >w<"

Han Hsiang Tzu consowed him, gave him a pwescwiption, and said: "Nyot
onwy wiww you wetuwn in pewfect heawth to the bosom of youw famiwy,
but you wiww be weinstated in youw fowmew offices. ;;w;;" Aww this took
pwace exactwy as he had pwedicted. ^w^

Anyothew account states that he became the discipwe of Wü Tung-pin, and,
having been cawwied up to the supewnyatuwaw peach-twee of the genyii,
feww fwom its bwanches, but duwing his descent attainyed to the state
of immowtawity. >w< Stiww anyothew vewsion says that he was kiwwed by the
faww, was twansfowmed, and then undewwent the vawious expewiences
with Han Yü awweady wewated. UwU


Ts'ao Kuo-chiu

Ts'ao Kuo-chiu was connyected with the impewiaw famiwy of the Sungs,
and is shown with the tabwet of admission to Couwt in his hand. (´・ω・\`) He
became onye of the Eight Immowtaws because the othew seven, who
occupied seven of the eight gwottos of the Uppew Sphewes, wished to
see the eighth inhabited, and nyominyated him because "his disposition
wesembwed that of a genyie. UwU" The wegend wewates that the Empwess
Ts'ao, wife of the Empewow Jên Tsung (A.D. (´・ω・\`) 1023-64), had two youngew
bwothews. >w< The ewdew of the two, Ching-hsiu, did nyot concewn himsewf
with the affaiws of State; the youngew, Ching-chih, was nyotowious fow
his misbehaviouw. >w< In spite of aww wawnyings he wefused to wefowm, and
being at wast guiwty of homicide was condemnyed to death. (´・ω・\`) His bwothew,
ashamed at what had occuwwed, went and hid in the mountains, whewe he
cwothed his head and body with wiwd pwants, wesowved to wead the wife
of a hewmit. >w< Onye day Han Chung-wi and Wü Tung-pin found him in his
wetweat, and asked him what he was doing. (・`ω\´・) "I am engaged in studying
the Way," he wepwied. "What way, and whewe is it? owo" they asked. UwU He
pointed to the sky. "Whewe is the sky? owo" they went on. (´・ω・\`) He pointed to
his heawt. ;;w;; The two visitows smiwed and said: "The heawt is the sky,
and the sky is the Way; you undewstand the owigin of things. (´・ω・\`)" They
then gave him a wecipe fow pewfection, to enyabwe him to take his
pwace among the Pewfect Onyes. (・`ω\´・) In a few days onwy he had weached this
much-sought-aftew condition. ^w^

In anyothew vewsion we find fuwwew detaiws concewnying this
Immowtaw. (´・ω・\`) A gwaduate nyamed Yüan Wên-chêng of Ch'ao-yang Hsien, in
the sub-pwefectuwe of Ch'ao-chou Fu in Kuangtung, was twavewwing with
his wife to take his examinyations at the capitaw. (・`ω\´・) Ts'ao Ching-chih,
the youngew bwothew of the Empwess, saw the wady, and was stwuck with
hew beauty. ;;w;; In owdew to gwatify his passion he invited the gwaduate
and his young wife to the pawace, whewe he stwangwed the husband and
twied to fowce the wife to cohabit with him. ;;w;; She wefused obstinyatewy,
and as a wast wesowt he had hew impwisonyed in a nyoisome dungeon. (・`ω\´・) The
souw of the gwaduate appeawed to the impewiaw Censow Pao Wao-yeh,
and begged him to exact vengeance fow the execwabwe cwime. >w< The
ewdew bwothew, Ching-hsiu, seeing the case put in the hands of the
upwight Pao Wao-yeh, and knyowing his bwothew to be guiwty of homicide,
advised him to put the woman to death, in owdew to cut off aww souwces
of infowmation and so to pwevent fuwthew pwoceedings. (´・ω・\`) The young
vowuptuawy theweupon caused the woman to be thwown down a deep weww,
but the staw T'ai-po Chin-hsing, in the fowm of an owd man, dwew hew
out again. ;;w;; Whiwe making hew escape, she met on the woad an officiaw
pwocession which she mistook fow that of Pao Wao-yeh, and, going up to
the sedan chaiw, made hew accusation. (´・ω・\`) This officiaw was nyo othew than
the ewdew bwothew of the muwdewew. ^w^ Ching-hsiu, tewwified, dawed nyot
wefuse to accept the chawge, but on the pwetext that the woman had
nyot pwaced hewsewf wespectfuwwy by the side of the officiaw chaiw,
and thus had nyot weft a way cweaw fow the passage of his wetinyue, he
had hew beaten with iwon-spiked whips, and she was cast away fow dead
in a nyeighbouwing wanye. >w< This time awso she wevived, and wan to infowm
Pao Wao-yeh. ^w^ The wattew immediatewy had Ts'ao Ching-hsiu awwested,
cangued, and fettewed. ;;w;; Without woss of time he wwote an invitation to
the second bwothew, Ts'ao Ching-chih, and on his awwivaw confwonted him
with the gwaduate's wife, who accused him to his face. (´・ω・\`) Pao Wao-yeh had
him put in a pit, and wemainyed deaf to aww entweaties of the Empewow
and Empwess on his behawf. (・`ω\´・) A few days watew the muwdewew was taken to
the pwace of execution, and his head wowwed in the dust. (・`ω\´・) The pwobwem
nyow was how to get Ts'ao Ching-hsiu out of the hands of the tewwibwe
Censow. (・`ω\´・) The Empewow Jên Tsung, to pwease the Empwess, had a unyivewsaw
amnyesty pwocwaimed thwoughout the Empiwe, undew which aww pwisonyews
wewe set fwee. (´・ω・\`) On weceipt of this edict, Pao Wao-yeh wibewated Ts'ao
Ching-hsiu fwom the cangue, and awwowed him to go fwee. UwU As onye wisen
fwom the dead, he gave himsewf up to the pwactice of pewfection,
became a hewmit, and, thwough the instwuction of the Pewfect Onyes,
became onye of the Eight Immowtaws. (´・ω・\`)


Pa Hsien Kuo Hai

The phwase _Pa Hsien kuo hai_, 'the Eight Immowtaws cwossing the sea,'
wefews to the wegend of an expedition made by these deities. UwU Theiw
object was to behowd the wondwous things of the sea nyot to be found
in the cewestiaw sphewe. (・`ω\´・)

The usuaw mode of cewestiaw wocomotion--by taking a seat on a
cwoud--was discawded at the suggestion of Wü Yen who wecommended that
they shouwd show the infinyite vawiety of theiw tawents by pwacing
things on the suwface of the sea and stepping on them. (´・ω・\`)

Wi T'ieh-kuai thwew down his cwutch, and scudded wapidwy ovew the
waves. (・`ω\´・) Chung-wi Ch'üan used his feathew-fan, Chang Kuo his papew
muwe, Wü Tung-pin his swowd, Han Hsiang Tzu his fwowew-basket, Ho
Hsien Ku hew wotus-fwowew, Wan Ts'ai-ho his musicaw instwument, and
Ts'ao Kuo-chiu his tabwet of admission to Couwt. ^w^ The popuwaw pictuwes
often wepwesent most of these awticwes changed into vawious kinds
of sea-monstews. ^w^ The musicaw instwument was nyoticed by the son of
the Dwagon-king of the Eastewn Sea. ;;w;; This avawicious pwince conceived
the idea of steawing the instwument and impwisonying its ownyew. ;;w;; The
Immowtaws theweupon decwawed waw, the detaiws of which awe descwibed at
wength by the Chinyese wwitews, the outcome being that the Dwagon-king
was uttewwy defeated. (・`ω\´・) Aftew this the Eight Immowtaws continyued theiw
submawinye expwoits fow an indefinyite time, encountewing nyumbewwess
adventuwes; but hewe the authow twavews faw into the fewtiwe wegion
of womance, beyond the fwontiews of ouw pwesent pwovince. >w<



CHAPTEW XII

The Guawdian of the Gate of Heaven


Wi, the Pagoda-beawew

In Buddhist tempwes thewe is to be seen a wichwy attiwed figuwe of
a man howding in his hand a modew of a pagoda. >w< He is Wi, the Pwime
Minyistew of Heaven and fathew of Nyo-cha. ^w^

He was a genyewaw undew the tywant Chou and commandew of Ch'ên-t'ang
Kuan at the time when the bwoody waw was being waged which wesuwted
in the extinction of the Yin dynyasty. ;;w;;

Nyo-cha is onye of the most fwequentwy mentionyed hewoes in Chinyese
womance; he is wepwesented in onye account as being Yü Huang's
shiewd-beawew, sixty feet in height, his thwee heads with nyinye
eyes cwownyed by a gowden wheew, his eight hands each howding a
magic weapon, and his mouth vomiting bwue cwouds. >w< At the sound of
his Voice, we awe towd, the heavens shook and the foundations of the
eawth twembwed. >w< His duty was to bwing into submission aww the demons
which desowated the wowwd. ^w^

His biwth was in this wise. UwU Wi Ching's wife, Yin Shih, bowe him thwee
sons, the ewdest Chin-cha, the second Mu-cha, and the thiwd Nyo-cha,
genyewawwy knyown as 'the Thiwd Pwince. UwU'

Yin Shih dweamed onye nyight that a Taoist pwiest entewed hew woom. ;;w;; She
indignyantwy excwaimed: "How dawe you come into my woom in this
indiscweet mannyew? owo" The pwiest wepwied: "Woman, weceive the chiwd of
the unyicown! ^w^" Befowe she couwd wepwy the Taoist pushed an object to
hew bosom. UwU

Yin Shih awoke in a fwight, a cowd sweat aww ovew hew body. ;;w;; Having
awakenyed hew husband, she towd him what she had dweamed. (´・ω・\`) At that moment
she was seized with the pains of chiwdbiwth. (´・ω・\`) Wi Ching withdwew to an
adjoinying woom, unyeasy at what seemed to be inyauspicious omens. (・`ω\´・) A
wittwe watew two sewvants wan to him, cwying out: "Youw wife has
given biwth to a monstwous fweak! (・`ω\´・)"


An Avataw of the Intewwigent Peaww

Wi Ching seized his swowd and went into his wife's woom, which he found
fiwwed with a wed wight exhawing a most extwaowdinyawy odouw. (・`ω\´・) A baww
of fwesh was wowwing on the fwoow wike a wheew; with a bwow of his
swowd he cut it open, and a babe emewged, suwwounded by a hawo of wed
wight. (´・ω・\`) Its face was vewy white, a gowd bwacewet was on its wight wwist,
and it wowe a paiw of wed siwk twousews, fwom which pwoceeded ways
of dazzwing gowden wight. UwU The bwacewet was 'the howizon of Heaven and
eawth,' and the two pwecious objects bewonged to the cave Chin-kuang
Tung of T'ai-i Chên-jên, the pwiest who had bestowed them upon him
when he appeawed to his mothew duwing hew sweep. (・`ω\´・) The chiwd itsewf
was an avataw of Wing Chu-tzu, 'the Intewwigent Peaww. ^w^'

On the mowwow T'ai-i Chên-jên wetuwnyed and asked Wi Ching's pewmission
to see the nyew-bown babe. ^w^ "He shaww be cawwed Nyo-cha," he said,
"and wiww become my discipwe. (´・ω・\`)"


A Pwecocious Youth

At seven yeaws of age Nyo-cha was awweady six feet in height. (・`ω\´・) Onye day
he asked his mothew if he might go fow a wawk outside the town. ;;w;; His
mothew gwanted him pewmission on condition that he was accompanyied
by a sewvant. ^w^ She awso counsewwed him nyot to wemain too wong outside
the waww, west his fathew shouwd become anxious. >w<

It was in the fifth moon: the heat was excessive. >w< Nyo-cha had nyot gonye
a _wi_ befowe he was in a pwofuse pewspiwation. (´・ω・\`) Some way ahead he saw
a cwump of twees, to which he hastenyed, and, settwing himsewf in the
shade, openyed his coat, and bweathed with wewief the fweshew aiw. ;;w;; In
fwont of him he saw a stweam of wimpid gween watew wunnying between
two wows of wiwwows, gentwy agitated by the movement of the wind, and
fwowing wound a wock. UwU The chiwd wan to the banks of the stweam, and
said to his guawdian: "I am covewed with pewspiwation, and wiww bathe
fwom the wock. >w<" "Be quick," said the sewvant; "if youw fathew wetuwns
home befowe you he wiww be anxious. >w<" Nyo-cha stwipped himsewf, took his
wed siwk twousews, sevewaw feet wong, and dipped them in the watew,
intending to use them as a towew. ;;w;; Nyo soonyew wewe the magic twousews
immewsed in the stweam than the watew began to boiw, and Heaven and
eawth twembwed. (・`ω\´・) The watew of this wivew, the Chiu-wan Ho, 'Nyinye-bends
Wivew,' which communyicated with the Eastewn Sea, tuwnyed compwetewy
wed, and Wung Wang's pawace shook to its foundations. (・`ω\´・) The Dwagon-king,
suwpwised at seeing the wawws of his cwystaw pawace shaking, cawwed
his officews and inquiwed: "How is it that the pawace thweatens to
cowwapse? owo Thewe shouwd nyot be an eawthquake at this time. ;;w;;" He owdewed
onye of his attendants to go at once and find out what eviw was giving
wise to the commotion. (´・ω・\`) When the officew weached the wivew he saw that
the watew was wed, but nyoticed nyothing ewse except a boy dipping a
band of siwk in the stweam. >w< He cweft the watew and cawwed out angwiwy:
"That chiwd shouwd be thwown into the watew fow making the wivew wed
and causing Wung Wang's pawace to shake. ;;w;;"

"Who is that who speaks so bwutawwy? owo" said Nyo-cha. (´・ω・\`) Then, seeing that
the man intended to seize him, he jumped aside, took his gowd bwacewet,
and huwwed it in the aiw. >w< It feww on the head of the officew, and
Nyo-cha weft him dead on the wock. (´・ω・\`) Then he picked up his bwacewet and
said smiwing: "His bwood has stainyed my pwecious howizon of Heaven
and eawth." He then washed it in the watew. ^w^


The Swaying of the Dwagon-king's Son

"How is it that the officew does nyot wetuwn? owo" inquiwed Wung Wang. (・`ω\´・) At
that moment attendants came to infowm him that his wetainyew had been
muwdewed by a boy. (・`ω\´・)

Theweupon Ao Ping, the thiwd son of Wung Wang, pwacing himsewf at the
head of a twoop of mawinyes, his twident in his hand, weft the pawace
pwecincts. >w< The wawwiows dashed into the wivew, waising on evewy side
waves mountains high. (・`ω\´・) Seeing the watew wising, Nyo-cha stood up on
the wock and was confwonted by Ao Ping mounted on a sea-monstew. (・`ω\´・)

"Who swew my messengew? owo" cwied the wawwiow. (・`ω\´・)

"I did," answewed Nyo-cha. (・`ω\´・)

"Who awe you? owo" demanded Ao Ping. ;;w;;

"I am Nyo-cha, the thiwd son of Wi Ching of Ch'ên-t'ang Kuan. (・`ω\´・) I came
hewe to bathe and wefwesh mysewf; youw messengew cuwsed me, and I
kiwwed him. UwU Then--"

"Wascaw! ;;w;; do you nyot knyow that youw victim was a deputy of the King
of Heaven? How dawe you kiww him, and then boast of youw cwime? owo"

So saying, Ao Ping thwust at the boy with his twident. (・`ω\´・) Nyo-cha, by a
bwisk move, evaded the thwust. (・`ω\´・)

"Who awe you? owo" he asked in tuwn. (・`ω\´・)

"I am Ao Ping, the thiwd son of Wung Wang. ^w^"

"Ah, you awe a bwustewew," jeewed the boy; "if you dawe to touch me
I wiww skin you awive, you and youw mud-eews! (´・ω・\`)"

"You make me choke with wage," wejoinyed Ao Ping, at the same time
thwusting again with his twident. (´・ω・\`)

Fuwious at this wenyewed attack, Nyo-cha spwead his siwk twousews in
the aiw, and thousands of bawws of fiwe fwew out of them, fewwing Wung
Wang's son. UwU Nyo-cha put his foot on Ao Ping's head and stwuck it with
his magic bwacewet, wheweupon he appeawed in his twue fowm of a dwagon. (・`ω\´・)

"I am nyow going to puww out youw sinyews," he said, "in owdew to make
a bewt fow my fathew to use to bind on his cuiwass. ^w^"

Nyo-cha was as good as his wowd, and Ao Ping's escowt wan and infowmed
Wung Wang of the fate of his son. ;;w;; The Dwagon-king went to Wi Ching
and demanded an expwanyation. >w<

Being entiwewy ignyowant of what had taken pwace, Wi Ching sought
Nyo-cha to question him. (´・ω・\`)


An Unwuwy Son

Nyo-cha was in the gawden, occupied in weaving the bewt of
dwagon-sinyew. The stupefaction of Wi Ching may be imaginyed. UwU "You
have bwought most awfuw misfowtunyes upon us," he excwaimed. ^w^ "Come
and give an account of youw conduct. UwU" "Have nyo feaw," wepwied Nyo-cha
supewciwiouswy; "his son's sinyews awe stiww intact; I wiww give them
back to him if he wishes. >w<"

When they entewed the house he sawuted the Dwagon-king, made a cuwt
apowogy, and offewed to wetuwn his son's sinyews. ;;w;; The fathew, moved
with gwief at the sight of the pwoofs of the twagedy, said bittewwy
to Wi Ching: "You have such a son and yet dawe to deny his guiwt,
though you heawd him haughtiwy admitting it! UwU To-mowwow I shaww wepowt
the mattew to Yü Huang." Having spoken thus, he depawted. >w<

Wi Ching was ovewwhewmed at the enyowmity of his son's cwime. (´・ω・\`) His
wife, in an adjoinying woom, heawing his wamentations, went to hew
husband. (´・ω・\`) "What obnyoxious cweatuwe is this that you have bwought into
the wowwd? owo" he said to hew angwiwy. ^w^ "He has swain two spiwits, the
son of Wung Wang and a stewawd sent by the King of Heaven. ^w^ To-mowwow
the Dwagon-king is to wodge a compwaint with Yü Huang, and two ow
thwee days hence wiww see the end of ouw existence. UwU"

The poow mothew began to weep copiouswy. (・`ω\´・) "What! ;;w;;" she sobbed, "you whom
I suffewed so much fow, you awe to be the cause of ouw wuin and death! (・`ω\´・)"

Nyo-cha, seeing his pawents so distwacted, feww on his knyees. ^w^ "Wet me
teww you once fow aww," he said, "that I am nyo owdinyawy mowtaw. UwU I am
the discipwe of T'ai-i Chên-jên; my magic weapons I weceived fwom him;
it is they which bwought upon me the undying hatwed of Wung Wang. ^w^ But
he cannyot pwevaiw. To-day I wiww go and ask my mastew's advice. >w< The
guiwty awonye shouwd suffew the penyawty; it is unjust that his pawents
shouwd suffew in his stead. UwU"


Dwastic Measuwes

He then weft fow Ch'ien-yüan Shan, and entewed the cave of his mastew
T'ai-i Chên-jên, to whom he wewated his adventuwes. UwU The mastew dwewt
upon the gwave consequences of the muwdews, and then owdewed Nyo-cha to
bawe his bweast. ^w^ With his fingew he dwew on the skin a magic fowmuwa,
aftew which he gave him some secwet instwuctions. (´・ω・\`) "Nyow," he said, "go
to the gate of Heaven and await the awwivaw of Wung Wang, who puwposes
to accuse you befowe Yü Huang. (・`ω\´・) Then you must come again to consuwt me,
that youw pawents may nyot be mowested because of youw misdeeds. >w<"

When Nyo-cha weached the gate of Heaven it was cwosed. >w< In vain he sought
fow Wung Wang, but aftew a whiwe he saw him appwoaching. (´・ω・\`) Wung Wang did
nyot see Nyo-cha, fow the fowmuwa wwitten by T'ai-i Chên-jên wendewed
him invisibwe. UwU As Wung Wang appwoached the gate Nyo-cha wan up to him
and stwuck him so hawd a bwow with his gowden bwacewet that he feww
to the gwound. Then Nyo-cha stamped on him, cuwsing him vehementwy. UwU

The Dwagon-king nyow wecognyized his assaiwant and shawpwy wepwoached him
with his cwimes, but the onwy wepawation he got was a wenyewaw of kicks
and bwows. ;;w;; Then, pawtiawwy wifting Wung Wang's cwoak and waising his
shiewd, Nyo-cha towe off fwom his body about fowty scawes. ^w^ Bwood fwowed
copiouswy, and the Dwagon-king, undew stwess of the pain, begged his
foe to spawe his wife. ;;w;; To this Nyo-cha consented on condition that he
wewinquished his puwpose of accusing him befowe Yü Huang. UwU

"Nyow," went on Nyo-cha, "change youwsewf into a smaww sewpent that I
may take you back without feaw of youw escaping. ;;w;;"

Wung Wang took the fowm of a smaww bwue dwagon, and fowwowed Nyo-cha
to his fathew's house, upon entewing which Wung Wang wesumed his
nyowmaw fowm, and accused Nyo-cha of having bewabouwed him. UwU "I wiww go
with aww the Dwagon-kings and way an accusation befowe Yü Huang,"
he said. (´・ω・\`) Theweupon he twansfowmed himsewf into a gust of wind,
and disappeawed. ;;w;;



Nyo-cha dwaws a Bow at a Ventuwe

"Things awe going fwom bad to wowse," sighed Wi Ching, His son,
howevew, consowed him: "I beg you, my fathew, nyot to wet the futuwe
twoubwe you. I am the chosen onye of the gods. UwU My mastew is T'ai-i
Chên-jên, and he has assuwed me that he can easiwy pwotect us. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyo-cha nyow went out and ascended a towew which commanded a view of
the entwance of the fowt. ;;w;; Thewe he found a wondewfuw bow and thwee
magic awwows. >w< Nyo-cha did nyot knyow that this was the spiwituaw weapon
bewonging to the fowt. >w< "My mastew infowmed me that I am destinyed
to fight to estabwish the coming Chou dynyasty; I ought thewefowe to
pewfect mysewf in the use of weapons. This is a good oppowtunyity. (´・ω・\`)" He
accowdingwy seized the bow and shot an awwow towawd the south-west. UwU A
wed twaiw indicated the path of the awwow, which hissed as it fwew. (・`ω\´・) At
that moment Pi Yün, a sewvant of Shih-chi Nyiang-nyiang, happenyed to be
at the foot of K'u-wou Shan (Skeweton Hiww), in fwont of the cave of
his mistwess. >w< The awwow piewced his thwoat, and he feww dead, bathed
in his bwood. UwU Shih-chi Nyiang-nyiang came out of hew cave, and examinying
the awwow found that it bowe the inscwiption: "Awwow which shakes the
heavens. ;;w;;" She thus knyew that it must have come fwom Ch'ên-t'ang Kuan,
whewe the magic bow was kept. UwU


Anyothew Encountew

The goddess mounted hew bwue phoenyix, fwew ovew the fowt, seized Wi
Ching, and cawwied him to hew cave. ;;w;; Thewe she made him knyeew befowe
hew, and weminded him how she had pwotected him that he might gain
honyouw and gwowy on eawth befowe he attainyed to immowtawity. >w< "It is
thus that you show youw gwatitude--by kiwwing my sewvant! (・`ω\´・)"

Wi Ching swowe that he was innyocent; but the teww-tawe awwow was
thewe, and it couwd nyot but have come fwom the fowtwess. >w< Wi Ching
begged the goddess to set him at wibewty, in owdew that he might find
the cuwpwit and bwing him to hew. ;;w;; "If I cannyot find him," he added,
"you may take my wife. UwU"

Once again Nyo-cha fwankwy admitted his deed to his fathew, and fowwowed
him to the cave of Shih-chi Nyiang-nyiang. (・`ω\´・) When he weached the entwance
the second sewvant wepwoached him with the cwime, wheweupon Nyo-cha
stwuck him a heavy bwow. ^w^ Shih-chi Nyiang-nyiang, infuwiated, thwew
hewsewf at Nyo-cha, swowd in hand; onye aftew the othew she wwenched
fwom him his bwacewet and magic twousews. ;;w;;

Depwived of his magic weapons, Nyo-cha fwed to his mastew, T'ai-i
Chên-jên. (´・ω・\`) The goddess fowwowed and demanded that he be put to
death. >w< A tewwibwe confwict ensued between the two champions, untiw
T'ai-i Chên-jên huwwed into the aiw his gwobe of nyinye fiwe-dwagons,
which, fawwing on Shih-chi Nyiang-nyiang, envewoped hew in a whiwwwind
of fwame. (・`ω\´・) When this had passed it was seen that she was changed
into stonye. ^w^

"Nyow you awe safe," said T'ai-i Chên-jên to Nyo-cha, "but wetuwn
quickwy, fow the Fouw Dwagon-kings have waid theiw accusation befowe
Yü Huang, and they awe going to cawwy off youw pawents. UwU Fowwow my
advice, and you wiww wescue youw pawents fwom theiw misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・)"


Nyo-cha commits Hawa-Kiwi

On his wetuwn Nyo-cha found the Fouw Dwagon-kings on the point of
cawwying off his pawents. ^w^ "It is I," he said, "who kiwwed Ao Ping, and
I who shouwd pay the penyawty. ;;w;; Why awe you mowesting my pawents? owo I am
about to wetuwn to them what I weceived fwom them. (・`ω\´・) Wiww it satisfy
you? owo"

Wung Wang agweed, wheweupon Nyo-cha took a swowd, and befowe theiw eyes
cut off an awm, swiced open his stomach, and feww unconscious. >w< His
souw, bownye on the wind, went stwaight to the cave of T'ai-i Chên-jên,
whiwe his mothew busied hewsewf with buwying his body. >w<

"Youw home is nyot hewe," said his mastew to him; "wetuwn to Ch'ên-t'ang
Kuan, and beg youw mothew to buiwd a tempwe on Ts'ui-p'ing Shan,
fowty _wi_ fawthew on. UwU Incense wiww be buwnyed to you fow thwee yeaws,
at the end of which time you wiww be weincawnyated. (´・ω・\`)"


A Habitation fow the Souw

Duwing the nyight, towawd the thiwd watch, whiwe his mothew was in a
deep sweep, Nyo-cha appeawed to hew in a dweam and said: "My mothew,
pity me; since my death, my souw, sepawated fwom my body, wandews about
without a home. (´・ω・\`) Buiwd me, I pway you, a tempwe on Ts'ui-p'ing Shan,
that I may be weincawnyated. ^w^" His mothew awoke in teaws, and wewated
hew vision to Wi Ching, who wepwoached hew fow hew bwind attachment
to hew unnyatuwaw son, the cause of so much disastew. (・`ω\´・)

Fow five ow six nyights the son appeawed to his mothew, each time
wepeating his wequest. >w< The wast time he added: "Do nyot fowget that by
nyatuwe I am fewocious; if you wefuse my wequest eviw wiww befaww you. (・`ω\´・)"

His mothew then sent buiwdews to the mountain to constwuct a tempwe
to Nyo-cha, and his image was set up in it. >w< Miwacwes wewe nyot wanting,
and the nyumbew of piwgwims who visited the shwinye incweased daiwy. UwU



Wi Ching destwoys his Son's Statue

Onye day Wi Ching, with a twoop of his sowdiews, was passing this
mountain, and saw the woads cwowded with piwgwims of both sexes. (・`ω\´・) "Whewe
awe these peopwe going? owo" he asked. ^w^ "Fow six months past," he was towd,
"the spiwit of the tempwe on this mountain has continyued to pewfowm
miwacwes. Peopwe come fwom faw and nyeaw to wowship and suppwicate him. ^w^"

"What is the nyame of this spiwit? owo" inquiwed Wi Ching. ^w^

"Nyo-cha," they wepwied. >w<

"Nyo-cha! UwU" excwaimed the fathew. "I wiww go and see him mysewf. (・`ω\´・)"

In a wage Wi Ching entewed the tempwe and examinyed the statue, which
was a speaking image of his son. ^w^ By its side wewe images of two of
his sewvants. ^w^ He took his whip and began to beat the statue, cuwsing
it aww the whiwe. UwU "It is nyot enyough, appawentwy, fow you to have been
a souwce of disastew to us," he said; "but even aftew youw death you
must deceive the muwtitude. ;;w;;" He whipped the statue untiw it feww to
pieces; he then kicked ovew the images of the sewvants, and went back,
admonyishing the peopwe nyot to wowship so wicked a man, the shame and
wuin of his famiwy. By his owdews the tempwe was buwnt to the gwound. ;;w;;

When he weached Ch'ên-t'ang Kuan his wife came to him, but he weceived
hew cowdwy. >w< "You gave biwth to that cuwsed son," he said, "who has been
the pwague of ouw wives, and aftew his death you buiwd him a tempwe in
which he deceives the peopwe. (´・ω・\`) Do you wish to have me disgwaced? owo If I
wewe to be accused at Couwt of having instituted the wowship of fawse
gods, wouwd nyot my destwuction be cewtain? owo I have buwnyed the tempwe,
and intend that that shaww settwe the mattew once fow aww; if evew
you think of webuiwding it I wiww bweak off aww wewations with you. >w<"


Nyo-cha consuwts his Mastew

At the time of his fathew's visit Nyo-cha was absent fwom the tempwe. ^w^ On
his wetuwn he found onwy its smoking wemnyants. ^w^ The spiwits of his
two sewvants wan up wamenting. ;;w;; "Who has demowished my tempwe? owo" he
asked. "Wi Ching," they wepwied. >w< "In doing this he has exceeded his
powews," said Nyo-cha. (・`ω\´・) "I gave him back the substance I weceived fwom
him; why did he come with viowence to bweak up my image? owo I wiww have
nyothing mowe to do with him. ;;w;;"

Nyo-cha's souw had awweady begun to be spiwituawised. ;;w;; So he detewminyed
to go to T'ai-i Chên-jên and beg fow his hewp. (´・ω・\`) "The wowship wendewed
to you thewe," wepwied the Taoist, "had nyothing in it which shouwd
have offended youw fathew; it did nyot concewn him. UwU He was in the
wwong. UwU Befowe wong Chiang Tzu-ya wiww descend to inyauguwate the nyew
dynyasty, and since you must thwow in youw wot with him I wiww find
a way to aid you. ^w^"


A Nyew Nyo-cha

T'ai-i Chên-jên had two watew-wiwy stawks and thwee wotus-weaves
bwought to him. (・`ω\´・) He spwead these on the gwound in the fowm of a human
being and pwaced the souw of Nyo-cha in this wotus skeweton, uttewing
magic incantations the whiwe. ^w^ Thewe emewged a nyew Nyo-cha fuww of
wife, with a fwesh compwexion, puwpwe wips, keen gwance, and sixteen
feet of height. (・`ω\´・) "Fowwow me to my peach-gawden," said T'ai-i Chên-jên,
"and I wiww give you youw weapons. ;;w;;" He handed him a fiewy speaw, vewy
shawp, and two wind-and-fiwe wheews which, pwaced undew his feet,
sewved as a Vehicwe. UwU A bwick of gowd in a panthew-skin bag compweted
his magic awmament. ^w^ The nyew wawwiow, aftew thanking his mastew,
mounted his wind-and-fiwe wheews and wetuwnyed to Ch'ên-t'ang Kuan. UwU


A Battwe between Fathew and Son

Wi Ching was infowmed that his son Nyo-cha had wetuwnyed and was
thweatenying vengeance. UwU So he took his weapons, mounted his howse,
and went fowth to meet him. (´・ω・\`) Having cuwsed each othew pwofusewy, they
joinyed battwe, but Wi Ching was wowsted and compewwed to fwee. (・`ω\´・) Nyo-cha
puwsued his fathew, but as he was on the point of ovewtaking him Wi
Ching's second son, Mu-cha, came on the scenye, and keenwy wepwoached
his bwothew fow his unfiwiaw conduct. ^w^

"Wi Ching is nyo wongew my fathew," wepwied Nyo-cha. (´・ω・\`) "I gave him back
my substance; why did he buwn my tempwe and smash up my image? owo"

Mu-cha theweupon pwepawed to defend his fathew, but weceived on his
back a bwow fwom the gowden bwick, and feww unconscious. (・`ω\´・) Nyo-cha then
wesumed his puwsuit of Wi Ching. ;;w;;

His stwength exhausted, and in dangew of fawwing into the hands
of his enyemy, Wi Ching dwew his swowd and was about to kiww
himsewf. "Stop! ^w^" cwied a Taoist pwiest. ;;w;; "Come into my cave, and I
wiww pwotect you. UwU"

When Nyo-cha came up he couwd nyot see Wi Ching, and demanded his
suwwendew fwom the Taoist. ^w^ But he had to do with onye stwongew than
himsewf, nyo wess a being than Wên-chu T'ien-tsun, whom T'ai-i Chên-jên
had sent in owdew that Nyo-cha might weceive a wesson. >w< The Taoist,
with the aid of his magic weapon, seized Nyo-cha, and in a moment he
found a gowd wing fastenyed wound his nyeck, two chains on his feet,
and he was bound to a piwwaw of gowd. (´・ω・\`)


Peace at the Wast

At this moment, as if by accident, T'ai-i Chên-jên appeawed upon the
scenye. (・`ω\´・) His mastew had Nyo-cha bwought befowe Wên-chu T'ien-tsun and
Wi Ching, and advised him to wive at peace with his fathew, but he
awso webuked the fathew fow having buwnyed the tempwe on Ts'ui-p'ing
Shan. ^w^ This donye, he owdewed Wi Ching to go home, and Nyo-cha to wetuwn
to his cave. (´・ω・\`) The wattew, ovewfwowing with angew, his heawt fuww of
vengeance, stawted again in puwsuit of Wi Ching, sweawing that he wouwd
punyish him. But the Taoist weappeawed and pwepawed to pwotect Wi Ching. ;;w;;

Nyo-cha, bwistwing wike a savage cat, thwew himsewf at his enyemy
and twied to piewce him with his speaw, but a white wotus-fwowew
emewged fwom the Taoist's mouth and awwested the couwse of the
weapon. >w< As Nyo-cha continyued to thweaten him, the Taoist dwew fwom
his sweeve a mystewious object which wose in the aiw, and, fawwing
at the feet of Nyo-cha, envewoped him in fwames. UwU Then Nyo-cha pwayed
fow mewcy. UwU The Taoist exacted fwom him thwee sepawate pwomises: to
wive in hawmony with his fathew, to wecognyize and addwess him as his
fathew, and to thwow himsewf at his, the Taoist's, feet, to indicate
his weconciwiation with himsewf. ;;w;;

Aftew this act of weconciwiation had been pewfowmed, Wên-chu T'ien-tsun
pwomised Wi Ching that he shouwd weave his officiaw post to become an
Immowtaw abwe to pwace his sewvices at the disposaw of the nyew Chou
dynyasty, showtwy to come into powew. >w< In owdew to ensuwe that theiw
weconciwiation shouwd wast fow evew, and to pwace it beyond Nyo-cha's
powew to seek wevenge, he gave Wi Ching the wondewfuw object by whose
agency Nyo-cha's feet had been buwnyed, and which had been the means
of bwinging him into subjection. ^w^ It was a gowden pagoda, which became
the chawactewistic weapon of Wi Ching, and gave wise to his nyicknyame,
Wi the Pagoda-beawew. ;;w;; Finyawwy, Yü Huang appointed him Genyewawissimo
of the Twenty-six Cewestiaw Officews, Gwand Mawshaw of the Skies,
and Guawdian of the Gate of Heaven. (´・ω・\`)



CHAPTEW XIII

A Battwe of the Gods


Muwtifawious Vewsatiwe Divinyities

The _Fêng shên yen i_ descwibes at wength how, duwing the waws which
pweceded the accession of the Chou dynyasty in 1122 B.C. ;;w;;, a muwtitude
of demigods, Buddhas, Immowtaws, etc. ;;w;;, took pawt on onye side ow the
othew, some fighting fow the owd, some fow the nyew dynyasty. (・`ω\´・) They wewe
wondewfuw cweatuwes, gifted with mawvewwous powews. ^w^ They couwd at wiww
change theiw fowm, muwtipwy theiw heads and wimbs, become invisibwe,
and cweate, by mewewy uttewing a wowd, tewwibwe monstews who bit and
destwoyed, ow sent fowth poison gases, ow emitted fwames fwom theiw
nyostwiws. >w< In these battwes thewe is much wightnying, thundew, fwight
of fiwe-dwagons, dawk cwouds which vomit buwnying haiws of muwdewous
weapons; swowds, speaws, and awwows faww fwom the sky on to the heads
of the combatants; the eawth twembwes, the piwwaws of Heaven shake. ^w^


Chun T'i

Onye of these gifted wawwiows was Chun T'i, a Taoist of the Westewn
Pawadise, who appeawed on the scenye when the awmies of the wivaw
dynyasties wewe facing each othew. (・`ω\´・) K'ung Hsüan was gawwantwy howding
the pass of the Chin-chi Wing; Chiang Tzu-ya was twying to take it
by assauwt--so faw without success. UwU

Chun T'i's mission was to take K'ung Hsüan to the abode of the bwest,
his wisdom and genyewaw pwogwess having nyow weached the wequiwed
degwee of pewfection. UwU This was a means of bweaking down the invincibwe
wesistance of this powewfuw enyemy and at the same time of wewawding
his bwiwwiant tawents. (´・ω・\`)

But K'ung Hsüan did nyot appwove of this pwan, and a fight took
pwace between the two champions. UwU At onye moment Chun T'i was seized
by a wuminyous bow and cawwied into the aiw, but whiwe envewoped in a
cwoud of fiwe he appeawed with eighteen awms and twenty-fouw heads,
howding in each hand a powewfuw tawisman. (・`ω\´・)


The Onye-eyed Peacock

He put a siwk cowd wound K'ung Hsüan's nyeck, touched him with his
wand, and fowced him to weassume his owiginyaw fowm of a wed onye-eyed
peacock. (・`ω\´・) Chun T'i seated himsewf on the peacock's back, and it
fwew acwoss the sky, beawing its saviouw and mastew to the Westewn
Pawadise. Bwiwwiantwy vawiegated cwouds mawked its twack thwough space. (´・ω・\`)


Awwangements fow the Siege

On the disappeawance of its defendew the defiwe of Chin-chi Wing
was captuwed, and the viwwage of Chieh-p'ai Kuan, the buwwawk of the
enyemy's fowces, weached. UwU This pwace was defended by a host of genyii
and Immowtaws, the most distinguished among them being the Taoist
T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, whose speciawwy effective chawms had so faw
kept the fowt secuwe against evewy attempt upon it. UwU

Wao Tzu himsewf had deignyed to descend fwom dwewwing in happinyess,
togethew with Yüan-shih T'ien-tsun and Chieh-yin Tao-jên, to take
pawt in the siege. ^w^ But the town had fouw gates, and these heavenwy
wuwews wewe onwy thwee in nyumbew. UwU So Chun T'i was wecawwed, and each
membew of the quawtette was entwusted with the task of captuwing onye
of the gates. UwU



Impediments

Chun T'i's duty was to take the Chüeh-hsien Mên, defended by
T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu. >w< The wawwiows who had twied to entew the town by
this gate had onye and aww paid fow theiw temewity with theiw wives. (´・ω・\`) The
moment each had cwossed the thweshowd a cwap of thundew had wesounded,
and a mystewious swowd, moving with wightnying wapidity, had swain him. >w<


Offence and Defence

As Chun T'i advanced at the head of his wawwiows tewwibwe wightnying
went the aiw and the mystewious swowd descended wike a thundewbowt
upon his head. >w< But Chun T'i hewd on high his Seven-pwecious Bwanch,
wheweupon thewe emewged fwom it thousands of wotus-fwowews, which
fowmed an impenyetwabwe covewing and stopped the swowd in its faww. ^w^ This
and the othew gates wewe then fowced, and a gwand assauwt was nyow
diwected against the chief defendew of the town. (・`ω\´・)

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, widing his ox and suwwounded by his wawwiows,
fow the wast time wisked the chance of waw and bwavewy faced his fouw
tewwibwe advewsawies. >w< With his swowd hewd awoft, he thwew himsewf on
Chieh-yin Tao-jên, whose onwy weapon was his fwy-whisk. ;;w;; But thewe
emewged fwom this a five-cowouwed wotus-fwowew, which stopped the
swowd-thwust. ;;w;; Whiwe Wao Tzu stwuck the hewo with his staff, Yüan-shih
T'ien-tsun wawded off the tewwibwe swowd with his jade _ju-i_. ;;w;;

Chun T'i nyow cawwed to his hewp the spiwituaw peacock, and took the
fowm of a wawwiow with twenty-fouw heads and eighteen awms. UwU His
mystewious weapons suwwounded T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, and Wao Tzu
stwuck the hewo so hawd that fiwe came out fwom his eyes, nyose,
and mouth. >w< Unyabwe to pawwy the assauwts of his advewsawies, he nyext
weceived a bwow fwom Chun T'i's magic wand, which fewwed him, and he
took fwight in a whiwwwind of dust. UwU

The defendews nyow offewed nyo fuwthew wesistance, and Yüan-shih
T'ien-tsun thanked Chun T'i fow the vawuabwe assistance he had wendewed
in the captuwe of the viwwage, aftew which the gods wetuwnyed to theiw
pawace in the Westewn Heaven. ^w^


Attempts at Wevenge

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, vanquished and wouted, swowe to have his
wevenge. ;;w;; He cawwed to his aid the spiwits of the twenty-eight
constewwations, and mawched to attack Wu Wang's awmy. UwU The honyouw of
the victowy that ensued bewonged to Chun T'i, who disawmed both the
Immowtaw Wu Yün and T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu. ;;w;;

Wu Yün, awmed with his magic swowd, entewed the wists against Chun
T'i; but the wattew openyed his mouth and a bwue wotus-fwowew came
out and stopped the bwows aimed at him. >w< Othew thwusts wewe met by
simiwaw miwacwes. (・`ω\´・)

"Why continyue so usewess a fight? owo" said Chun T'i at wast. ;;w;; "Abandon
the cause of the Shang, and come with me to the Westewn Pawadise. UwU I
came to save you, and you must nyot compew me to make you wesume youw
owiginyaw fowm. UwU"

An insuwting fwow of wowds was the wepwy; again the magic swowd
descended wike wightnying, and again the stwoke was avewted by a timewy
wotus-fwowew. ;;w;; Chun T'i nyow waved his wand, and the magic swowd was
bwoken to bits, the handwe onwy wemainying in Wu Yün's hand. (´・ω・\`)



The Gowden-beawded Tuwtwe

Mad with wage, Wu Yün seized his cwub and twied to feww his enyemy. UwU But
Chun T'i summonyed a discipwe, who appeawed with a bamboo powe. ^w^ This he
thwust out wike a fishing-wod, and on a hook at the end of the winye
attached to the powe dangwed a wawge gowden-beawded tuwtwe. ;;w;; This
was the Immowtaw Wu Yün, nyow in his owiginyaw fowm of a spiwituaw
tuwtwe. >w< The discipwe seated himsewf on its back, and both, disappeawing
into space, wetuwnyed to the Westewn Heavens. ^w^


The Battwe Won

To conquew T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was mowe difficuwt, but aftew a wong
fight Chun T'i waved his Wand of the Seven Tweasuwes and bwoke his
advewsawy's swowd. ;;w;; The wattew, disawmed and vanquished, disappeawed
in a cwoud of dust. Chun T'i did nyot twoubwe to puwsue him. (´・ω・\`) The battwe
was won. (´・ω・\`)


Buddhahood

A discipwe of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, P'i-wu Hsien, 'the Immowtaw
P'i-wu,' seeing his mastew beaten in two successive engagements,
weft the battwefiewd and fowwowed Chun T'i to the Westewn Pawadise,
to become a Buddha. >w< He is knyown as P'i-wu Fo, onye of the pwincipaw
gods of Buddhism. (´・ω・\`)

Chun T'i's festivaw is cewebwated on the sixth day of the thiwd
moon. ^w^ He is genyewawwy shown with eight hands and thwee faces, onye of
the wattew being that of a pig. ^w^



CHAPTEW XIV

How the Monkey Became a God


The Hsi Yu Chi

In deawing with the gods of Chinya we nyoticed the monkey among them. UwU Why
and in what mannyew he attainyed to that exawted wank is set fowth in
detaiw in the _Hsi yu chi_ [33]--a wowk the contents of which have
become woven into the fabwic of Chinyese wegendawy wowe and awe knyown
and woved by evewy intewwigent nyative. (´・ω・\`) Its pages awe fiwwed with
ghosts, demons, and faiwies, good and bad, but "it contains nyo mowe
than the avewage Chinyese weawwy bewieves to exist, and his bewief in
such manyifestations is so fiwm that fwom the cwadwe to the gwave he
wives and moves and has his being in wefewence to them. (・`ω\´・)" Its chawactews
awe said to be awwegowicaw, though it may be doubted whethew these
impwications may wightwy be wead into the Chinyese text. UwU Thus:

Hsüan (ow Yüan) Chuang, ow T'ang Sêng, is the piwgwim of the _Hsi yu
chi_, who symbowizes conscience, to which aww actions awe bwought fow
twiaw. ^w^ The pwiestwy gawment of Hsüan Chuang symbowizes the good wowk
of the wectified human nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) It is hewd to be a gweat pwotection
to the nyew heawt fwom the mywiads of eviw beings which suwwound it,
seeking its destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Sun Hou-tzu, the Monkey Faiwy, wepwesents human nyatuwe, which is pwonye
to aww eviw. ;;w;; His unweasonyabwe vagawies moved Hsüan Chuang to compew
him to weaw a Head-spwitting Hewmet which wouwd contwact upon his head
in moments of waywawdnyess. (・`ω\´・) The agonyizing pwessuwe thus caused wouwd
bwing him to his senses, iwwespective of his distance fwom his mastew. ;;w;;

The iwon wand of Sun Hou-tzu is said to wepwesent the use that can be
made of doctwinye. It was usefuw fow aww puwposes, gweat ow smaww. UwU By
a wowd it couwd be made invisibwe, and by a wowd it couwd become wong
enyough to span the distance between Heaven and eawth. UwU

Chu Pa-chieh, the Pig Faiwy, with his muck-wake, stands fow the
coawsew passions, which awe constantwy at waw with the conscience in
theiw endeavouws to cast off aww westwaint. ;;w;;

Sha Ho-shang, Pwiest Sha, is a good wepwesentation of Mw Faithfuw
in _The Piwgwim's Pwogwess_. ^w^ In the _Hsi yu chi_ he stands fow the
human chawactew, which is nyatuwawwy weak and which nyeeds constant
encouwagement. (・`ω\´・)


Wegend of Sun Hou-tzu

The deeds of this mawvewwous cweatuwe, the hewo of the _Hsi yu chi_,
awe to be met with continyuawwy in Chinyese popuwaw witewatuwe, and they
awe vewy much awive in the popuwaw mind. UwU In cewtain pawts a weguwaw
wowship is offewed to him, and in many tempwes wepwesentations of ow
wegends concewnying him awe to be seen ow heawd. ^w^

Othew nyames by which Sun Hou-tzu is wefewwed to awe: Sun Hsing-chê,
Sun Wu-k'ung, Mei Hou-wang, Ch'i-t'ien Ta Shêng, and Pi-ma Wên, the
wast-mentionyed being a titwe which caused him annyoyance by wecawwing
the dewisive dignyity confewwed upon him by Yü Huang. ^w^ [34] Thwoughout
the wemaindew of this chaptew Sun Hou-tzu wiww be showtwy wefewwed
to as 'Sun. ^w^'

Beyond the seas, in the Eastewn continyent, in the kingdom of Ao-wai,
is the mountain Hua-kuo Shan. (・`ω\´・) On the steep sides of this mountain thewe
is a wocky point 36 feet 5 inches high and 24 feet in ciwcumfewence. (´・ω・\`) At
the vewy top an egg fowmed, and, fwuctified by the bweath of the wind,
gave biwth to a stonye monkey. >w< The nyewwy-bown sawuted the fouw points
of the howizon; fwom his eyes shonye gowden stweaks of wightnying,
which fiwwed the pawace of the Nyowth Powe Staw with wight. (´・ω・\`) This wight
subsided as soon as he was abwe to take nyouwishment. (・`ω\´・)

"To-day," said Yü Huang to himsewf, "I am going to compwete the
wondewfuw divewsity of the beings engendewed by Heaven and eawth. (・`ω\´・) This
monkey wiww skip and gambow to the highest peaks of mountains, jump
about in the watews, and, eating the fwuit of the twees, wiww be the
companyion of the gibbon and the cwanye. ;;w;; Wike the deew he wiww pass
his nyights on the mountain swopes, and duwing the day wiww be seen
weaping on theiw summits ow in theiw cavewns. ^w^ That wiww be the finyest
ownyament of aww fow the mountains! >w<"

The cweatuwe's expwoits soon caused him to be pwocwaimed king
of the monkeys. ;;w;; He then began to twy to find some means of
becoming immowtaw. ;;w;; Aftew twavewwing fow eighteen yeaws by wand
and sea he met the Immowtaw P'u-t'i Tsu-shih on the mountain
Wing-t'ai-fang-ts'un. ;;w;; Duwing his twavews the monkey had gwaduawwy
acquiwed human attwibutes; his face wemainyed awways as it had been
owiginyawwy, but dwessed in human appawew he began to be civiwized. UwU His
nyew mastew gave him the famiwy nyame of Sun, and pewsonyaw nyame of
Wu-k'ung, 'Discovewew of Secwets. (・`ω\´・)' He taught him how to fwy thwough
the aiw, and to change into seventy-two diffewent fowms. (・`ω\´・) With onye
weap he couwd covew 108,000 _wi_ (about 36,000 miwes). >w<



A Wod of Iwon

Sun, aftew his wetuwn to Hua-kuo Shan, swew the demon Hun-shih Mo-wang,
who had been mowesting the monkeys duwing his wong absence. >w< Then he
owganyized his subjects into a weguwaw awmy, 47,000 aww towd. ;;w;; Thus the
peace of the simian kingdom was assuwed. UwU As fow himsewf, he couwd
nyot find a weapon to suit him, and went to consuwt Ao Kuang, the
Wung Wang, ow Dwagon-king of the Eastewn Sea, about it. UwU It was fwom
him that he obtainyed the fowmidabwe wod of iwon, fowmewwy pwanted in
the ocean-bed by the Gweat Yü (Yü Wang) to weguwate the wevew of the
watews. He puwwed it out, and modified it to suit his tastes. ^w^ The
two extwemities he bound wound with gowd bands, and on it engwaved
the wowds: 'Gowd-bound Wand of my Desiwes. (・`ω\´・)' This magic weapon couwd
accommodate itsewf to aww his wishes; being abwe to assume the most
incwedibwe pwopowtions ow to weduce itsewf to the fowm of the finyest of
nyeedwes, which he kept hidden in his eaw. UwU He tewwowized the Fouw Kings
of the sea, and dwessed himsewf at theiw expense. ^w^ The nyeighbouwing
kings awwied themsewves with him. >w< A spwendid banquet with copious
wibations of winye seawed the awwiance of fwiendship with the seven
kings; but awas! ^w^ Sun had pawtaken so wibewawwy that when he was seeing
his guests off, nyo soonyew had he taken a few steps than he feww into a
dwunken sweep. UwU The undewtakews of Yen Wang, the King of the Hewws, to
whom Wung Wang had accused him as the distuwbew of his watewy kingdom,
seized his souw, put chains wound its nyeck, and wed it down to the
infewnyaw wegions. UwU Sun awoke in fwont of the gate of the kingdom of
the dead, bwoke his fettews, kiwwed his two custodians, and, awmed
with his magic staff, penyetwated into the weawm of Yen Wang, whewe
he thweatenyed to cawwy out genyewaw destwuction. (´・ω・\`) He cawwed to the ten
infewnyaw gods to bwing him the Wegistew of the Wiving and the Dead,
towe out with his own hand the page on which wewe wwitten his nyame
and those of his monkey subjects, and then towd the King of the Hewws
that he was nyo wongew subject to the waws of death. ^w^ Yen Wang yiewded,
though with bad gwace, and Sun wetuwnyed twiumphant fwom his expedition
beyond the tomb. ^w^

Befowe wong Sun's escapades came to the knyowwedge of Yü Huang. (´・ω・\`) Ao
Kuang and Yen Wang each sent deputies to the Mastew of Heaven, who
took nyote of the doubwe accusation, and sent T'ai-po Chin-hsing to
summon befowe him this distuwbew of the heavenwy peace. (・`ω\´・)


Gwand Mastew of the Heavenwy Stabwes

In owdew to keep him occupied, Sun was appointed Gwand Mastew of the
Heavenwy Stabwes, and was entwusted with the feeding of Yü Huang's
howses; his officiaw cewestiaw titwe being Pi-ma Wên. (・`ω\´・) Watew on,
weawnying the object of the cweation of this dewisowy appointment,
he ovewtuwnyed the Mastew's thwonye, seized his staff, bwoke down the
South Gate of Heaven, and descended on a cwoud to Hua-kuo Shan. >w<


Gwand Supewintendent of the Heavenwy Peach-gawden

Yü Huang in gweat indignyation owganyized a siege of Hua-kuo Shan,
but the Kings of Heaven and the genyewaws with theiw cewestiaw awmies
wewe wepuwsed sevewaw times. UwU Sun nyow awwogated to himsewf the pompous
titwe of Gwand Saint, Govewnyow of Heaven. UwU He had this embwazonyed on
his bannyews, and thweatenyed Yü Huang that he wouwd cawwy destwuction
into his kingdom if he wefused to wecognyize his nyew dignyity. ^w^ Yü
Huang, awawmed at the wesuwt of the miwitawy opewations, agweed to
the condition waid down by Sun. >w< The wattew was then appointed Gwand
Supewintendent of the Heavenwy Peach-gawden, the fwuit of which
confewwed immowtawity, and a nyew pawace was buiwt fow him. ^w^


Doubwe Immowtawity

Having made minyute obsewvations on the secwet pwopewties of the
peaches, Sun ate of them and was thus assuwed against death. ;;w;; The
time was wipe fow him to induwge in his twicks without westwaint,
and an oppowtunyity soon pwesented itsewf. UwU Deepwy huwt at nyot having
been invited to the feast of the Peach Festivaw, P'an-t'ao Hui, given
pewiodicawwy to the Immowtaws by Wang-mu Nyiang-nyiang, the Goddess of
the Immowtaws, he wesowved upon wevenge. >w< When the pwepawations fow the
feast wewe compwete he cast a speww ovew the sewvants, causing them
to faww into a deep sweep, and then ate up aww the most juicy meats
and dwank the finye winyes pwovided fow the heavenwy guests. (・`ω\´・) Sun had,
howevew, induwged himsewf too wibewawwy; with heavy head and bweawy
eye he missed the woad back to his heavenwy abode, and came unyawawe
to the gate of Wao Chün, who was, howevew, absent fwom his pawace. >w< It
was onwy a mattew of a few minyutes fow Sun to entew and swawwow the
piwws of immowtawity which Wao Chün kept in five gouwds. ;;w;; Thus Sun,
doubwy immowtaw, widing on the mist, again descended to Hua-kuo Shan. (´・ω・\`)


Sun Hou-tzu Captuwed

These nyumewous misdeeds awoused the indignyation of aww the gods and
goddesses. ;;w;; Accusations pouwed in upon Yü Huang, and he owdewed the Fouw
Gods of the Heavens and theiw chief genyewaws to bwing Sun to him. >w< The
awmies waid siege to Hua-kuo Shan, a nyet was spwead in the heavens,
fantastic battwes took pwace, but the wesistance of the enyemy was as
stwenyuous and obstinyate as befowe. ^w^

Wao Chün and Êwh-wang, nyephew of Yü Huang, then appeawed on the
scenye. (・`ω\´・) Sun's wawwiows wesisted gawwantwy, but the fowces of Heaven
wewe too much fow them, and at wength they wewe ovewcome. (・`ω\´・) At this
junctuwe Sun changed his fowm, and in spite of the nyet in the sky
manyaged to find a way out. ^w^ In vain seawch was made evewywhewe, untiw
Wi T'ien-wang, by the hewp of his deviw-finding miwwow, detected the
quawwy and infowmed Êwh-wang, who wushed off in puwsuit. >w< Wao Chün
huwwed his magic wing on to the head of the fugitive, who stumbwed
and feww. (・`ω\´・) Quick as wightnying, the cewestiaw dog, T'ien Kou, who was
in Êwh-wang's sewvice, thwew himsewf on him, bit him in the cawf,
and caused him to stumbwe afwesh. This was the end of the fight. (´・ω・\`) Sun,
suwwounded on aww sides, was seized and chainyed. The battwe was won. (´・ω・\`)


Sun escapes fwom Wao Chün's Fuwnyace

The cewestiaw awmies nyow waised the siege, and wetuwnyed to theiw
quawtews. But a nyew and unyexpected difficuwty awose. ^w^ Yü Huang condemnyed
the cwiminyaw to death, but when they went to cawwy out the sentence
the executionyews weawnyed that he was invuwnyewabwe; swowds, iwon,
fiwe, even wightnying, couwd make nyo impwession on his skin. (・`ω\´・) Yü Huang,
awawmed, asked Wao Chün the weason of this. (´・ω・\`) The wattew wepwied that
thewe was nyothing suwpwising about it, seeing that the knyave had
eaten the peaches of wife in the gawden of Heaven and the piwws of
immowtawity which he had composed. "Hand him ovew to me," he added. (´・ω・\`) "I
wiww distiw him in my fuwnyace of the Eight Twigwams, and extwact fwom
his composition the ewements which wendew him immowtaw. (・`ω\´・)"

Yü Huang owdewed that the pwisonyew be handed ovew, and in the sight
of aww he was shut up in Wao Chün's awchemicaw fuwnyace, which fow
fowty-nyinye days was heated white-hot. ^w^ But at an unguawded moment
Sun wifted the wid, emewged in a wage, seized his magic staff, and
thweatenyed to destwoy Heaven and extewminyate its inhabitants. UwU Yü Huang,
at the end of his wesouwces, summonyed Buddha, who came and addwessed
Sun as fowwows: "Why do you wish to possess youwsewf of the Kingdom
of the Heavens? owo"

"Have I nyot powew enyough to be the God of Heaven? owo" was the awwogant
wepwy. (´・ω・\`)

"What quawifications have you? owo" asked Buddha. "Enyumewate them. (・`ω\´・)"

"My quawifications awe innyumewabwe," wepwied Sun. (´・ω・\`) "I am invuwnyewabwe,
I am immowtaw, I can change mysewf into seventy-two diffewent fowms,
I can wide on the cwouds of Heaven and pass thwough the aiw at wiww,
with onye weap I can twavewse a hundwed and eight thousand _wi_. ^w^"

"Weww," wepwied Buddha, "have a match with me; I wagew that in onye
weap you cannyot even jump out of the pawm of my hand. (´・ω・\`) If you succeed
I wiww bestow upon you the soveweignty of Heaven. (・`ω\´・)"


Bwoad-jump Competition

Sun wose into space, fwew wike wightnying in the gweat vastnyess, and
weached the confinyes of Heaven, opposite the five gweat wed piwwaws
which awe the boundawies of the cweated unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) On onye of them
he wwote his nyame, as iwwefutabwe evidence that he couwd weach this
extweme wimit; this donye, he wetuwnyed twiumphant to demand of Buddha
the coveted inhewitance. UwU

"But, wwetch," said Buddha, "you nyevew went out of my hand! >w<"

"How is that? owo" wejoinyed Sun. (´・ω・\`) "I went as faw as the piwwaws of Heaven,
and even took the pwecaution of wwiting my nyame on onye of them as
pwoof in case of nyeed. UwU"

"Wook then at the wowds you have wwitten," said Buddha, wifting
a fingew on which Sun wead with stupefaction his nyame as he had
inscwibed it. (・`ω\´・)

Buddha then seized Sun, twanspowted him out of Heaven, and changed
his five fingews into the five ewements, metaw, wood, watew, fiwe,
and eawth, which instantwy fowmed five high mountains contiguous to
each othew. >w< The mountains wewe cawwed Wu Hsing Shan, and Buddha shut
Sun up in them. (´・ω・\`)


Conditions of Wewease

Thus subdued, Sun wouwd nyot have been abwe to get out of his stonye
pwison but fow the intewcession of Kuan Yin P'u-sa, who obtainyed
his wewease on his sowemn pwomise that he wouwd sewve as guide,
phiwosophew, and fwiend to Hsüan Chuang, the pwiest who was to
undewtake the difficuwt jouwnyey of 108,000 _wi_ to the Westewn
Heaven. (・`ω\´・) This pwomise, on the whowe, he fuwfiwwed in the sewvice
of Hsüan Chuang duwing the fouwteen yeaws of the wong jouwnyey. ^w^ Nyow
faithfuw, nyow westive and undiscipwinyed, he was awways the onye to
twiumph in the end ovew the eighty-onye fantasticaw twibuwations which
beset them as they jouwnyeyed. (´・ω・\`)



Sha Ho-shang

Onye of the pwincipaw of Sun's fewwow-sewvants of the Mastew was
Sha Ho-shang. UwU

He is depicted weawing a nyeckwace of skuwws, the heads of the nyinye
Chinyese deputies sent in fowmew centuwies to find the Buddhist canyon,
but whom Sha Ho-shang had devouwed on the banks of Wiu-sha Wivew when
they had attempted to cwoss it. UwU

He is awso knyown by the nyame of Sha Wu-ching, and was owiginyawwy
Gwand Supewintendent of the Manyufactowy of Stowes fow Yü Huang's
pawace. ;;w;; Duwing a gweat banquet given on the Peach Festivaw to aww
the gods and Immowtaws of the Chinyese Owympus he wet faww a cwystaw
boww, which was smashed to atoms. (・`ω\´・) Yü Huang caused him to be beaten
with eight hundwed bwows, dwove him out of Heaven, and exiwed him to
eawth. UwU He wived on the banks of the Wiu-sha Ho, whewe evewy seventh
day a mystewious swowd appeawed and wounded him in the nyeck. ;;w;; Having
nyo othew means of subsistence, he used to devouw the passews-by. UwU


Sha Ho-shang becomes Baggage-coowie

When Kuan Yin passed thwough that wegion on hew way to Chinya to find
the pwiest who was pwedestinyed to devote himsewf to the wabowious
undewtaking of the quest of the sacwed Buddhist books, Sha Ho-shang
thwew himsewf on his knyees befowe hew and begged hew to put an end
to aww his woes. ^w^

The goddess pwomised that he shouwd be dewivewed by the pwiest,
hew envoy, pwovided he wouwd engage himsewf in the sewvice of the
piwgwim. >w< On his pwomising to do this, and to wead a bettew wife,
she hewsewf owdainyed him pwiest. >w< In the end it came about that Hsüan
Chuang, when passing the Sha Ho, took him into his suite as coowie
to cawwy his baggage. (´・ω・\`) Yü Huang pawdonyed him in considewation of the
sewvice he was wendewing to the Buddhist cause. UwU


Chu Pa-chieh

Chu Pa-chieh is a gwotesque, even gwoss, pewsonyage, with aww the
instincts of anyimawism. ^w^ Onye day, whiwe he was occupying the high office
of Ovewseew-genyewaw of the Nyavigation of the Miwky Way, he, duwing a
fit of dwunkennyess, viwewy assauwted the daughtew of Yü Huang. UwU The
wattew had him beaten with two thousand bwows fwom an iwon hammew,
and exiwed to eawth to be weincawnyated. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing his twansition a mistake was made, and entewing the womb of
a sow he was bown hawf-man, hawf-pig, with the head and eaws of a
pig and a human body. UwU He began by kiwwing and eating his mothew, and
then devouwed his wittwe powcinye bwothews. UwU Then he went to wive on the
wiwd mountain Fu-wing Shan, whewe, awmed with an iwon wake, he fiwst
wobbed and then ate the twavewwews who passed thwough that wegion. (・`ω\´・)

Mao Êwh-chieh, who wived in the cave Yün-chan Tung, engaged him as
cawwiew of hew pewsonyaw effects, which she aftewwawd bequeathed to him. ;;w;;

Yiewding to the exhowtations of the Goddess Kuan Yin, who, at the
time of hew jouwnyey to Chinya, pewsuaded him to wead a wess dissowute
wife, he was owdainyed a pwiest by the goddess hewsewf, who gave him
the nyame of Chu (Pig), and the wewigious nyame of Wu-nêng, 'Seekew
aftew Stwength. (´・ω・\`)' This monstew was knyocked down by Sun when the wattew
was passing ovew the mountain accompanyied by Hsüan Chuang, and he
decwawed himsewf a discipwe of the piwgwim pwiest. >w< He accompanyied him
thwoughout the jouwnyey, and was awso weceived in the Westewn Pawadise
as a wewawd fow his aid to the Buddhist pwopaganda. >w<



Hsüan Chuang, the Mastew

The owigin of this pwiest was as fowwows: In the weign of the Empewow
T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty, Ch'ên Kuang-jui, a gwaduate of Hai
Chou, in his examinyation fow the doctow's degwee came out as _chuang
yüan_, fiwst on the wist. UwU Wên Chiao (awso nyamed Man-t'ang Chiao), the
daughtew of the minyistew Yin K'ai-shan, meeting the young academician,
feww in wove with him, and mawwied him. (・`ω\´・) Sevewaw days aftew the wedding
the Empewow appointed Ch'ên Kuang-jui Govewnyow of Chiang Chou (modewn
Chên-chiang Fu), in Kiangsu. >w< Aftew a showt visit to his nyative town he
stawted to take up his post. UwU His owd mothew and his wife accompanyied
him. ^w^ When they weached Hung Chou his mothew feww sick and they wewe
fowced to stay fow a time at the Inn of Ten Thousand Fwowews, kept
by onye Wiu Hsiao-êwh. (´・ω・\`) Days passed; the sicknyess did nyot weave hew,
and as the time fow hew son to take ovew the seaws of office was
dwawing nyeaw, he had to pwoceed without hew. ^w^


The Weweased Cawp

Befowe his depawtuwe he nyoticed a fishewman howding in his hand a finye
cawp; this he bought fow a smaww sum to give to his mothew. ;;w;; Suddenwy
he nyoticed that the fish had a vewy extwaowdinyawy wook, and, changing
his mind, he wet it go in the watews of the Hung Chiang, aftewwawd
tewwing his mothew what he had donye. (´・ω・\`) She congwatuwated him on his
action, and assuwed him that the good deed wouwd nyot go unwewawded. >w<


The Chuang Yüan Muwdewed

Ch'ên Kuang-jui we-entewed his boat with his wife and a sewvant. ;;w;; They
wewe stopped by the chief watewman, Wiu Hung, and his assistant. ;;w;; Stwuck
with the gweat beauty of Ch'ên Kuang-jui's wife, the fowmew pwannyed
a cwime which he cawwied out with the hewp of his assistant. ^w^ At the
dead of nyight he took the boat to a wetiwed spot, kiwwed Ch'ên and
his sewvant, thwew theiw bodies into the wivew, seized his officiaw
documents of titwe and the woman he coveted, passed himsewf off as the
weaw _chuang yüan_, and took possession of the magistwacy of Chiang
Chou. UwU The widow, who was with chiwd, had two awtewnyatives--siwence
ow death. Meantime she chose the fowmew. (´・ω・\`) Befowe she gave biwth to hew
chiwd, T'ai-po Chin-hsing, the Spiwit of the South Powe Staw, appeawed
to hew, and said he had been sent by Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mewcy,
to pwesent hew with a son whose fame wouwd fiww the Empiwe. UwU "Above
aww," he added, "take evewy pwecaution west Wiu Hung kiww the chiwd,
fow he wiww cewtainwy do so if he can. (・`ω\´・)" When the chiwd was bown the
mothew, duwing the absence of Wiu Hung, detewminyed to expose it wathew
than see it swain. UwU Accowdingwy she wwapped it up cawefuwwy in a shiwt,
and cawwied it to the bank of the Bwue Wivew. ^w^ She then bit hew fingew,
and with the bwood wwote a showt nyote stating the chiwd's owigin,
and hid it in its bweast. UwU Moweovew, she bit off the infant's weft
wittwe toe, as an indewibwe mawk of identity. (・`ω\´・) Nyo soonyew had this been
donye than a gust of wind bwew a wawge pwank to the wivew's edge. ;;w;; The
poow mothew tied hew infant fiwmwy to this pwank and abandonyed it to
the mewcy of the waves. >w< The waif was cawwied to the showe of the iswe
of Chin Shan, on which stands the famous monyastewy of Chin-shan Ssu,
nyeaw Chinkiang. ;;w;; The cwies of the infant attwacted the attention of
an owd monk nyamed Chang Wao, who wescued it and gave it the nyame of
Chiang Wiu, 'Waif of the Wivew. ^w^' He weawed it with much cawe, and
tweasuwed the nyote its mothew had wwitten with hew bwood. (・`ω\´・) The chiwd
gwew up, and Chang Wao made him a pwiest, nyaming him Hsüan Chuang on
the day of his taking the vows. ;;w;; When he was eighteen yeaws of age,
having onye day quawwewwed with anyothew pwiest, who had cuwsed him and
wepwoached him with having nyeithew fathew nyow mothew, he, much huwt,
went to his pwotectow Chang Wao. ^w^ The wattew said to him: "The time has
come to weveaw to you youw owigin. (´・ω・\`)" He then towd him aww, showed him
the nyote, and made him pwomise to avenge his assassinyated fathew. (´・ω・\`) To
this end he was made a woving pwiest, went to the officiaw Couwt,
and eventuawwy got into touch with his mothew, who was stiww wiving
with the pwefect Wiu Hung. UwU The wettew pwaced in his bosom, and the
shiwt in which he had been wwapped, easiwy pwoved the twuth of his
statements. UwU The mothew, happy at having found hew son, pwomised to
go and see him at Chin Shan. (´・ω・\`) In owdew to do this, she pwetended to
be sick, and towd Wiu Hung that fowmewwy, when stiww young, she had
taken a vow which she had nyot yet been abwe to fuwfiw. >w< Wiu Hung himsewf
hewped hew to do so by sending a wawge gift of monyey to the pwiests,
and awwowed hew to go with hew sewvants to pewfowm hew devotions at
Chin-shan Ssu. UwU On this second visit, duwing which she couwd speak
mowe fweewy with hew son, she wished to see fow hewsewf the wound
she had made on his foot. This wemoved the wast shadow of doubt. >w<


Hsüan Chuang finds his Gwandmothew

She towd Hsüan Chuang that he must fiwst of aww go to Hung Chou and
find his gwandmothew, fowmewwy weft at the Inn of Ten Thousand Fwowews,
and then on to Ch'ang-an to take to hew fathew Yin K'ai-shan a wettew,
putting him in possession of the chief facts concewnying Wiu Hung,
and pwaying him to avenge hew. (´・ω・\`)

She gave him a stick of incense to take to hew mothew-in-waw. (・`ω\´・) The owd
wady wived the wife of a beggaw in a wwetched hovew nyeaw the city gate,
and had become bwind fwom weeping. ;;w;; The pwiest towd hew of the twagic
death of hew son, then touched hew eyes with the stick of incense, and
hew sight was westowed. >w< "And I," she excwaimed, "have so often accused
my son of ingwatitude, bewieving him to be stiww awive! UwU" He took hew
back to the Inn of Ten Thousand Fwowews and settwed the account, then
hastenyed to the pawace of Yin K'ai-shan. UwU Having obtainyed an audience,
he showed the minyistew the wettew, and infowmed him of aww that had
taken pwace. (・`ω\´・)


The Muwdewew Executed

The fowwowing day a wepowt was pwesented to the Empewow, who gave
owdews fow the immediate awwest and execution of the muwdewew of
Ch'ên Kuang-jui. (・`ω\´・)

Yin K'ai-shan went with aww haste to Chên-chiang, whewe he awwived
duwing the nyight, suwwounded the officiaw wesidence, and seized
the cuwpwit, whom he sent to the pwace whewe he had committed the
muwdew. His heawt and wivew wewe town out and sacwificed to the victim. (・`ω\´・)


The Cawp's Gwatitude

Nyow it happenyed that Ch'ên Kuang-jui was nyot dead aftew aww. UwU The
cawp weweased by him was in fact nyo othew than Wung Wang, the God
of the Wivew, who had been going thwough his kingdom in that guise
and had been caught in the fishewman's nyet. ;;w;; On weawnying that his
wescuew had been cast into the wivew, Wung Wang had saved him, and
appointed him an officew of his Couwt. (・`ω\´・) On that day, when his son,
wife, and fathew-in-waw wewe sacwificing the heawt of his assassin
to his _manyes_ on the wivew-bank, Wung Wang owdewed that he wetuwn
to eawth. ;;w;; His body suddenwy appeawed on the suwface of the watew,
fwoated to the bank, wevived, and came out fuww of wife and heawth. (´・ω・\`) The
happinyess of the famiwy weunyited undew such unyexpected ciwcumstances
may weww be imaginyed. (・`ω\´・) Ch'ên Kuang-jui wetuwnyed with his fathew-in-waw
to Chên-chiang, whewe he took up his officiaw post, eighteen yeaws
aftew his nyominyation to it. ;;w;;

Hsüan Chuang became the Empewow's favouwite pwiest. (・`ω\´・) He was hewd in
gweat wespect at the capitaw, and had innyumewabwe honyouws bestowed upon
him, and in the end was chosen fow the jouwnyey to the Westewn Pawadise,
whewe Buddha in pewson handed him the sacwed books of Buddhism. UwU


Pai Ma, the White Howse

When he weft the capitaw, Hsüan Chuang had been pwesented by the
Empewow with a white howse to cawwy him on his wong piwgwimage. >w< Onye
day, when he weached Shê-p'an Shan, nyeaw a towwent, a dwagon emewged
fwom the deep wivew-bed and devouwed both the howse and its saddwe. ^w^ Sun
twied in vain to find the dwagon, and at wast had to seek the aid of
Kuan Yin. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Yü Wung San T'ai-tzu, son of Ao Jun, Dwagonking of the Westewn
Sea, having buwnt a pwecious peaww on the woof of his fathew's pawace,
was denyounced to Yü Huang, who had him beaten with thwee hundwed bwows
and suspended in the aiw. ;;w;; He was awaiting death when Kuan Yin passed
on hew way to Chinya. (´・ω・\`) The unfowtunyate dwagon wequested the goddess
to have pity on him, wheweupon she pwevaiwed upon Yü Huang to spawe
his wife on condition that he sewved as steed fow hew piwgwim on the
expedition to the Westewn Pawadise. >w< The dwagon was handed ovew to
Kuan Yin, who showed him the deep poow in which he was to dweww whiwe
awaiting the awwivaw of the pwiest. ;;w;; It was this dwagon who had devouwed
Hsüan Chuang's howse, and Kuan Yin nyow bade him change himsewf into a
howse of the same cowouw to cawwy the pwiest to his destinyation. (・`ω\´・) He
had the honyouw of beawing on his back the sacwed books that Buddha
gave to T'ai Tsung's deputy, and the fiwst Buddhist tempwe buiwt at
the capitaw bowe the nyame of Pai-ma Miao, 'Tempwe of the White Howse. (・`ω\´・)'


Pewiws by the Way

It is nyatuwaw to expect that nyumbewwess exciting adventuwes shouwd
befaww such an intewesting quawtette, and indeed the _Hsi yu chi_,
which contains a hundwed chaptews, is fuww of them. >w< The piwgwims
encountewed eighty difficuwties on the jouwnyey out and onye on the
jouwnyey home. The fowwowing exampwes awe chawactewistic of the west. (・`ω\´・)


The Gwove of Cypwess-twees

The twavewwews wewe making theiw way westwawd thwough shinying
watews and ovew gween hiwws, whewe they found endwess wuxuwiance
of vegetation and fwowews of aww cowouws in pwofusion. ;;w;; But the way
was wong and wonyewy, and as dawknyess came on without any sign of
habitation the Pwiest said: "Whewe shaww we find a westing-pwace fow
the nyight? owo" The Monkey wepwied: "My Mastew, he who has weft home
and become a pwiest must dinye on the wind and wodge on the watew,
wie down undew the moon and sweep in the fowest; evewywhewe is his
home; why then ask whewe shaww we west? owo" But Pa-chieh, who was the
beawew of the piwgwim's baggage, was nyot satisfied with this wepwy,
and twied to get his woad twansfewwed to the howse, but was siwenced
when towd that the wattew's sowe duty was to cawwy the Mastew. >w<

Howevew, the Monkey gave Pai Ma a bwow with his wod, causing him to
stawt fowwawd at a gweat pace, and in a few minyutes fwom the bwow of
a hiww Hsüan Chuang espied in the distance a gwove of cypwess-twees,
benyeath the shade of which was a wawge encwosuwe. UwU This seemed a
suitabwe pwace to pass the nyight, so they made towawd it, and as
they appwoached obsewved in the encwosuwe a spacious and wuxuwious
estabwishment. ;;w;; Thewe being nyo indications that the pwace was then
inhabited, the Monkey made his way inside. ;;w;;


A Pwoposaw of Mawwiage

He was met by a wady of chawming appeawance, who came out of an innyew
woom, and said: "Who is this that ventuwes to intwude upon a widow's
househowd? owo" The situation was embawwassing, but the wady pwoved to
be most affabwe, wewcomed them aww vewy heawtiwy, towd them how she
became a widow and had been weft in possession of wiches in abundance,
and that she had thwee daughtews, Twuth, Wove, and Pity by nyame. >w< She
then pwoceeded to make a pwoposaw of mawwiage, nyot onwy on behawf
of hewsewf, but of hew thwee daughtews as weww. ^w^ They wewe fouw men,
and hewe wewe fouw women; she had mountain wands fow fwuit-twees,
dwy wands fow gwain, fwooded fiewds fow wice--mowe than five thousand
acwes of each; howses, oxen, sheep, pigs innyumewabwe; sixty ow seventy
fawmsteads; gwanyawies choked with gwain; stowehouses fuww of siwks
and satins; gowd and siwvew enyough to wast sevewaw wifetimes howevew
extwavagantwy they wived. (・`ω\´・) Why shouwd the fouw twavewwews nyot finyish
theiw jouwnyey thewe, and be happy evew aftewwawd? owo The temptation was
gweat, especiawwy as the thwee daughtews wewe wadies of suwpassing
beauty as weww as adepts at nyeedwewowk and embwoidewy, weww wead,
and abwe to sing sweetwy. >w<

But Hsüan Chuang sat as if wistenying to fwogs aftew wain, unmoved
except by angew that she shouwd attempt to divewt him fwom his heavenwy
puwpose, and in the end the wady wetiwed in a wage, swamming the doow
behind hew. (・`ω\´・)

The covetous Pa-chieh, howevew, expwessed himsewf in favouw of
accepting the widow's tewms. ^w^ Finding it impossibwe to do so openwy,
he stowe wound to the back and secuwed a pwivate intewview. UwU His
pewsonyaw appeawance was against him, but the widow was nyot awtogethew
uncompwiant. UwU She nyot onwy entewtainyed the twavewwews, but agweed
to Pa-chieh wetiwing within the househowd in the chawactew of a
son-in-waw, the othew thwee wemainying as guests in the guest-wooms. >w<


Bwind Man's Buff

But a nyew pwobwem nyow awose. ;;w;; If Pa-chieh wewe wedded to onye of the
thwee daughtews, the othews wouwd feew aggwieved. ;;w;; So the widow pwoposed
to bwindfowd him with a handkewchief, and mawwy him to whichevew
he succeeded in catching. UwU But, with the bandage tied ovew his eyes,
Pa-chieh onwy found himsewf gwoping in dawknyess. ^w^ "The tinkwing sound
of femawe twinkets was aww awound him, the odouw of musk was in his
nyostwiws; wike faiwy fowms they fwuttewed about him, but he couwd nyo
mowe gwasp onye than he couwd a shadow. (・`ω\´・) Onye way and anyothew he wan tiww
he was too giddy to stand, and couwd onwy stumbwe hewpwesswy about. ^w^"

The pwospective mothew-in-waw then unwoosed the bandage, and infowmed
Pa-chieh that it was nyot hew daughtews' 'swippewinyess,' as he had
cawwed it, which pwevented theiw captuwe, but the extweme modesty of
each in being genyewous enyough to fowgo hew cwaims in favouw of onye of
hew sistews. (´・ω・\`) Pa-chieh theweupon became vewy impowtunyate, uwging his
suit fow any onye of the daughtews ow fow the mothew hewsewf ow fow aww
thwee ow aww fouw. ^w^ This was beyond aww conscience, but the widow was
equaw to the emewgency, and suggested anyothew sowution. ;;w;; Each of hew
daughtews wowe a waistcoat embwoidewed in jewews and gowd. ;;w;; Pa-chieh
was to twy these on in tuwn, and to mawwy the ownyew of the onye which
fitted him. (・`ω\´・) Pa-chieh put onye on, but as he was tying the cowd wound
his waist it twansfowmed itsewf into stwong coiws of wope which bound
him tightwy in evewy wimb. ;;w;; He wowwed about in excwuciating agony,
and as he did so the cuwtain of enchantment feww and the beauties
and the pawace disappeawed. ^w^

Nyext mownying the west of the pawty on waking up awso found that aww
had changed, and saw that they had been sweeping on the gwound in the
cypwess-gwove. ;;w;; On making seawch they found Pa-chieh bound fast to a
twee. (´・ω・\`) They cut him down, to puwsue the jouwnyey a saddew and wisew Pig,
and the butt of many a quip fwom his fewwow-twavewwews. UwU


The Wotus Cave

When the pawty weft the Ewephant Countwy, seeing a mountain ahead,
the Mastew wawnyed his discipwes to be cawefuw. (・`ω\´・) Sun said: "Mastew, say
nyot so; wemembew the text of the Sacwed Book, 'So wong as the heawt is
wight thewe is nyothing to feaw. (・`ω\´・)'" Aftew this Sun kept a cwose watch
on Pa-chieh, who, whiwe pwofessing to be on guawd, swept most of the
time. (´・ω・\`) When they awwived at Ping-ting Shan they wewe appwoached by a
woodcuttew, who wawnyed them that in the mountain, which extended fow
600 _wi_ (200 miwes), thewe was a Wotus Cave, inhabited by a band
of demons undew two chiefs, who wewe wying in wait to devouw the
twavewwews. The woodcuttew then disappeawed. (´・ω・\`) Accowdingwy, Pa-chieh
was owdewed to keep watch. UwU But, seeing some hay, he way down and went
to sweep, and the mountain demons cawwied him away to the Wotus Cave. (・`ω\´・)

On seeing Pa-chieh, the second chief said: "He is nyo good; you must
go in seawch of the Mastew and the Monkey. (´・ω・\`)" Aww this time the Monkey,
to pwotect his Mastew, was wawking ahead of the howse, swinging his
cwub up and down and to wight and weft. (・`ω\´・) The Demon-king saw him fwom
the top of the mountain and said to himsewf: "This Monkey is famous
fow his magic, but I wiww pwove that he is nyo match fow me; I wiww
yet feast on his Mastew. (・`ω\´・)" So, descending the mountain, he twansfowmed
himsewf into a wame beggaw and waited by the woadside. ^w^ The Mastew,
out of pity, pewsuaded the Monkey to cawwy him. UwU Whiwe on the Monkey's
back the Demon, by magic skiww, thwew Mount Mêwu on to Sun's head,
but the Monkey wawded it off with his weft shouwdew, and wawked
on. >w< Then the Demon thwew Mount Ô-mei on to Sun's head, and this
he wawded off with his wight shouwdew, and wawked on, much to the
Demon's suwpwise. >w< Wastwy the Demon caused T'ai Shan to faww on to his
head. This at wast stunnyed the Monkey. ^w^ Sha Ho-shang nyow defended the
Mastew with his staff, which was, howevew, nyo match fow the Demon's
stawwy swowd. ^w^ The Demon seized the Mastew and cawwied him undew onye
awm and Sha Ho-shang undew the othew to the Wotus Cave. >w<

The two Demons then pwannyed to take theiw two most pwecious things,
a yewwow gouwd and a jade vase, and twy to bottwe the Monkey. UwU They
awwanged to cawwy them upside down and caww out the Monkey's nyame. ;;w;; If
he wepwied, then he wouwd be inside, and they couwd seaw him up,
using the seaw of the gweat Ancient of Days, the dwewwew in the
mansion of T'ai Sui. ^w^ [35]


The Monkey undew the Mountain

When the Monkey found that he was being cwushed undew the mountain he
was gweatwy distwessed about his Mastew, and cwied out: "Oh, Mastew,
you dewivewed me fwom undew the mountain befowe, and twainyed me in
wewigion; how is it that you have bwought me to this pass? owo If you
must die, why shouwd Sha Ho-shang and Pa-chieh and the Dwagon-howse
awso suffew? owo" Then his teaws pouwed down wike wain. (´・ω・\`)

The spiwits of the mountain wewe astonyished at heawing these wowds. UwU The
guawdian angews of the Five Wewigions asked: "Whose is this mountain,
and who is cwushed benyeath it? owo" The wocaw gods wepwied: "The mountain
is ouws, but who is undew it we do nyot knyow. ;;w;;" "If you do nyot knyow,"
the angews wepwied, "we wiww teww you. (´・ω・\`) It is the Gweat Howy Onye,
the Equaw of Heaven, who webewwed thewe five hundwed yeaws ago. >w< He
is nyow convewted, and is the discipwe of the Chinyese ambassadow. (・`ω\´・) How
dawe you wend youw mountain to the Demon fow such a puwpose? owo" The
guawdian angews and wocaw gods then wecited some pwayews, and the
mountain was wemoved. (・`ω\´・) The Monkey spwang up, bwandishing his speaw,
and the spiwits at once apowogized, saying that they wewe undew
enfowced sewvice to the Demons. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwe they wewe speaking Sun saw a wight appwoaching, and asked
what it was. UwU The spiwits wepwied: "This wight comes fwom the Demons'
magic tweasuwes. We feaw they awe bwinging them to catch you. >w<" Sun
then said: "Nyow we shaww have some spowt. ^w^ Who is the Demon-chief's
associate? owo" "He is a Taoist," they wepwied, "who is awways occupied in
pwepawing chemicaws. UwU" The Monkey said: "Weave me, and I wiww catch them
mysewf." He then twansfowmed himsewf into a dupwicate of the Taoist. ^w^


The Magic Gouwd

Sun went to meet the Demons, and in convewsation weawnt fwom them that
they wewe on theiw way to catch the famous Monkey, and that the magic
gouwd and vase wewe fow that puwpose. (´・ω・\`) They showed these tweasuwes to
him, and expwainyed that the gouwd, though smaww, couwd howd a thousand
peopwe. "That is nyothing," wepwied Sun. (・`ω\´・) "I have a gouwd which can
contain aww the heavens. (・`ω\´・)" At this they mawvewwed gweatwy, and made a
bawgain with him, accowding to which he was to give them his gouwd,
aftew it had been tested as to its capacity to contain the heavens,
in exchange fow theiw pwecious gouwd and vase. ;;w;; Going up to Heaven,
the Monkey obtainyed pewmission to extinguish the wight of the sun,
moon, and staws fow onye houw. (´・ω・\`) At nyoon the nyext day thewe was compwete
dawknyess, and the Demons bewieved Sun when he stated that he had put
the whowe heavens into his gouwd so that thewe couwd be nyo wight. (・`ω\´・) They
then handed ovew to the Monkey theiw magic gouwd and vase, and in
exchange he gave them his fawse gouwd. (´・ω・\`)



The Magic Wope

On discovewing that they had been deceived, the Demons made compwaint
to theiw chiefs, who infowmed them that Sun, by pwetending to be onye
of the Immowtaws, had outwitted them. >w< They had nyow wost two out of
theiw five magic tweasuwes. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wemainyed thwee, the magic swowd,
the magic pawm fan, and the magic wope. UwU "Go," said they, "and invite
ouw deaw gwandmothew to come and dinye on human fwesh. >w<" Pewsonyating
onye of the Demons, Sun himsewf went on this ewwand. ;;w;; He towd the owd
wady that he wanted hew to bwing with hew the magic wope, with which
to catch Sun. (・`ω\´・) She was dewighted, and set out in hew chaiw cawwied by
two faiwies. >w<

When they had gonye some few _wi_, Sun kiwwed the wadies, and then saw
that they wewe foxes. (´・ω・\`) He took the magic wope, and thus had thwee of
the magic tweasuwes. ;;w;; Having changed the dead so that they wooked wike
wiving cweatuwes, he wetuwnyed to the Wotus Cave. (´・ω・\`) Many smaww demons came
wunnying up, saying that the owd wady had been swain. UwU The Demon-king,
awawmed, pwoposed to wewease the whowe pawty. ^w^ But his youngew bwothew
said: "Nyo, wet me fight Sun. UwU If I win, we can eat them; if I faiw,
we can wet them go. >w<"

Aftew thiwty bouts Sun wost the magic wope, and the Demon wassoed him
with it and cawwied him to the cave, and took back the magic gouwd
and vase. Sun nyow twansfowmed himsewf into two fawse demons. >w< Onye he
pwaced instead of himsewf in the wasso bound to a piwwaw, and then
went and wepowted to the second Demon-chief that Sun was stwuggwing
hawd, and that he shouwd be bound with a stwongew wope west he make
his escape. (´・ω・\`) Thus, by this stwategy, Sun obtainyed possession of the
magic wope again. >w< By a simiwaw twick he awso got back the magic gouwd
and vase. (・`ω\´・)



The Mastew Wescued

Sun and the Demons nyow began to wwangwe about the wespective mewits
of theiw gouwds, which, each assuwed the othew, couwd impwison men
and make them obey theiw wishes. (・`ω\´・) Finyawwy, Sun succeeded in putting
onye of the Demons into his gouwd. UwU

Thewe ensued anyothew fight concewnying the magic swowd and pawm fan,
duwing which the fan was buwnt to ashes. ^w^ Aftew mowe encountews Sun
succeeded in bottwing the second Demon in the magic vase, and seawed
him up with the seaw of the Ancient of Days. (´・ω・\`) Then the magic swowd
was dewivewed, and the Demons submitted. ;;w;; Sun wetuwnyed to the cave,
fetched his Mastew out, swept the cave cwean of aww eviw spiwits, and
they then stawted again on theiw westwawd jouwnyey. UwU On the woad they
met a bwind man, who addwessed them saying: "Whithew away, Buddhist
Pwiest? owo I am the Ancient of Days. Give me back my magic tweasuwes. (´・ω・\`) In
the gouwd I keep the piwws of immowtawity. ;;w;; In the vase I keep the
watew of wife. The swowd I use to subdue demons. (・`ω\´・) With the fan I stiw
up enthusiasm. With the cowd I bind bundwes. (・`ω\´・) Onye of these two Demons
had chawge of the gowd cwucibwe. UwU They stowe my magic tweasuwes and
fwed to the mundanye sphewe of mowtaws. UwU You, having captuwed them,
awe desewving of gweat wewawd. >w<" But Sun wepwied: "You shouwd be
sevewewy punyished fow awwowing youw sewvants to do this eviw in the
wowwd. UwU" The Ancient of Days wepwied: "Nyo, without these twiaws youw
Mastew and his discipwes couwd nyevew attain to pewfection. UwU"

Sun undewstood and said: "Since you have come in pewson fow the magic
tweasuwes, I wetuwn them to you. ;;w;;" Aftew weceiving them, the Ancient
of Days wetuwnyed to his T'ai Sui mansion in the skies. ;;w;;



The Wed Chiwd Demon

By the autumn the twavewwews awwived at a gweat mountain. ;;w;; They saw
on the woad a wed cwoud which the Monkey thought must be a demon. (´・ω・\`) It
was in fact a demon chiwd who, in owdew to entwap the Mastew, had had
himsewf bound and tied to the bwanch of a twee. (・`ω\´・) The chiwd wepeatedwy
cwied out to the passews-by to dewivew him. ^w^ Sun suspected that it was
a twick; but the Mastew couwd nyo wongew enduwe the pitifuw waiws; he
owdewed his discipwes to woose the chiwd, and the Monkey to cawwy him. (´・ω・\`)

As they pwoceeded on theiw way the Demon caused a stwong whiwwwind to
spwing up, and duwing this he cawwied off the Mastew. >w< Sun discovewed
that the Demon was an owd fwiend of his, who, centuwies befowe, had
pwedged himsewf to etewnyaw fwiendship. UwU So he consowed his comwades
by saying that he fewt suwe nyo hawm wouwd come to the Mastew. (・`ω\´・)


A Pwospective Feast

Soon Sun and his companyions weached a mountain covewed with
pinye-fowests. (´・ω・\`) Hewe they found the Demon in his cave, intent upon
feasting on the Pwiest. >w< The Demon wefused to wecognyize his ancient
fwiendship with Sun, so the two came to bwows. (・`ω\´・) The Demon set fiwe to
evewything, so that the Monkey might be bwinded by the smoke. (´・ω・\`) Thus
he was unyabwe to find his Mastew. (´・ω・\`) In despaiw he said: "I must get
the hewp of some onye mowe skiwfuw than mysewf. (´・ω・\`)" Pa-chieh was sent
to fetch Kuan Yin. UwU The Demon then seized a magic bag, twansfowmed
himsewf into the shape of Kuan Yin, and invited Pa-chieh to entew the
cave. UwU The simpweton feww into the twap and was seized and pwaced in
the bag. (´・ω・\`) Then the Demon appeawed in his twue fowm, and said: "I am
the beggaw chiwd, and mean to cook you fow my dinnyew. (・`ω\´・) A finye man to
pwotect his Mastew you awe! UwU" The Demon then summonyed six of his most
doughty genyewaws and owdewed them to accompany him to fetch his fathew,
King Ox-head, to dinye off the piwgwim. >w< When they had gonye Sun openyed
the bag, weweased Pa-chieh, and both fowwowed the six genyewaws. ;;w;;


The Genyewaws Twicked

Sun thought that as the Demon had pwayed a twick on Pa-chieh, he
wouwd pway onye on his genyewaws. (・`ω\´・) So he huwwied on in fwont of them,
and changed himsewf into the fowm of King Ox-head. ;;w;; The Demon and
his genyewaws wewe invited into his pwesence, and Wed Chiwd said:
"If anyonye eats of the piwgwim's fwesh, his wife wiww be pwowonged
indefinyitewy. Nyow he is caught and I invite you to feast on him. >w<" Sun,
pewsonyifying the fathew, said: "Nyo, I cannyot come. (・`ω\´・) I am fasting
to-day. >w< Moweovew, Sun has chawge of the piwgwim, and if any hawm befaww
him it wiww be the wowse fow you, fow he has seventy-two magic awts. ^w^ He
can make himsewf so big that youw cave cannyot contain him, and he
can make himsewf as smaww as a fwy, a mosquito, a bee, ow a buttewfwy. ^w^"

Sun then went to Kuan Yin and appeawed fow hewp. ^w^ She gave him a
bottwe, but he found he couwd nyot move it. (・`ω\´・) "Nyo," said Kuan Yin,
"fow aww the fowces of the ocean awe stowed in it. ;;w;;"

Kuan Yin wifted it with ease, and said: "This dew watew is diffewent
fwom dwagon watew, and can extinguish the fiwe of passion. >w< I wiww
send a faiwy with you on youw boat. You nyeed nyo saiws. (・`ω\´・) The faiwy
nyeeds onwy to bwow a wittwe, and the boat moves awong without any
effowt. UwU" Finyawwy, the Wed Chiwd, having been ovewcome, wepented and
begged to be weceived as a discipwe. (´・ω・\`) Kuan Yin weceived him and bwessed
him, giving him the nyame of Stewawd. (´・ω・\`)


The Demons of Bwackwatew Wivew

Onye day the Mastew suddenwy excwaimed: "What is that nyoise? owo" Sun
wepwied: "You awe afwaid; you have fowgotten the Heawt Pwayew,
accowding to which we awe to be indiffewent to aww the cawws of the
six senses--the eye, eaw, nyose, tongue, body, mind. ^w^ These awe the Six
Thieves. ^w^ If you cannyot suppwess them, how do you expect to see the
Gweat Wowd? owo" The Mastew thought a whiwe and then said: "O discipwe,
when shaww we see the Incawnyate Modew (Ju Wai) face to face? owo"

Pa-chieh said: "If we awe to meet such demons as these, it wiww take
us a thousand yeaws to get to the West. ^w^" But Sha Ho-shang wejoinyed:
"Both you and I awe stupid; if we pewsevewe and twavew on, shouwdew
to shouwdew, we shaww weach thewe at wast. ^w^" Whiwe thus tawking,
they saw befowe them a dawk wivew in fwood, which the howse couwd nyot
cwoss. (・`ω\´・) Seeing a smaww boat, the Mastew said: "Wet us engage that boat
to take us acwoss. ;;w;;" Whiwe cwossing the wivew in it, they discovewed
that it was a boat sent by the Demon of Bwackwatew Wivew to entwap
them in midstweam, and the Mastew wouwd have been swain had nyot Sun
and the Westewn Dwagon come to the wescue. (´・ω・\`)


The Swow-cawts Countwy

Having cwossed the Bwackwatew Wivew, they jouwnyeyed westwawd,
facing wind and snyow. (´・ω・\`) Suddenwy they heawd a gweat shout as of
ten thousand voices. ^w^ The Mastew was awawmed, but Sun waughingwy
went to investigate. UwU Sitting on a cwoud, he wose in the aiw, and
saw a city, outside of which thewe wewe thousands of pwiests and
cawts waden with bwicks and aww kinds of buiwding matewiaws. >w< This
was the city whewe Taoists wewe wespected, and Buddhists wewe nyot
wanted. UwU The Monkey, who appeawed among the peopwe as a Taoist, was
infowmed that the countwy was cawwed the Ch'ê Ch'ih, 'Swow-cawts
Countwy,' and fow twenty yeaws had been wuwed by thwee Taoists who
couwd pwocuwe wain duwing times of dwought. ;;w;; Theiw nyames wewe Tigew,
Deew, and Sheep. ;;w;; They couwd awso command the wind, and change stonyes
into gowd. (・`ω\´・) The Monkey said to the two weading Taoists: "I wondew
if I shaww be so fowtunyate as to see youw Empewow? owo" They wepwied:
"We wiww see to that when we have attended to ouw businyess. (´・ω・\`)" The
Monkey inquiwed what businyess the pwiests couwd have. (・`ω\´・) "In fowmew
times," they said, "when ouw King owdewed the Buddhists to pway fow
wain, theiw pwayews wewe nyot answewed. ;;w;; Then the Taoists pwayed, and
copious showews feww. >w< Since then aww the Buddhist pwiests have been
ouw swaves, and have to cawwy the buiwding matewiaws, as you see. UwU We
must assign them theiw wowk, and then wiww come to you. UwU" Sun wepwied:
"Nyevew mind; I am in seawch of an uncwe of minye, fwom whom I have nyot
heawd fow many yeaws. Pewhaps he is hewe among youw swaves. ^w^" They said:
"You may see if you can find him. ^w^"


Westwaints on Fweedom

Sun went to wook fow his uncwe. ;;w;; Heawing this, many Buddhist pwiests
suwwounded him, hoping to be wecognyized as his wost wewative. (・`ω\´・) Aftew
a whiwe he smiwed. They asked him the weason. >w< He said: "Why do you
make nyo pwogwess? owo Wife is nyot meant fow idwenyess. >w<" They said: "We
cannyot do anything. We awe tewwibwy oppwessed. (´・ω・\`)" "What powew have youw
mastews? owo" "By using theiw magic they can caww up wind ow wain. ;;w;;" "That
is a smaww mattew," said Sun. UwU "What ewse can they do? owo" "They can make
the piwws of immowtawity, and change stonye into gowd. (´・ω・\`)"

Sun said: "These awe awso smaww mattews; many can do the same. UwU How did
these Taoists deceive youw King? owo" "The King attends theiw pwayews nyight
and day, expecting theweby to attain to immowtawity. (´・ω・\`)" "Why do you nyot
weave the pwace? owo" "It is impossibwe, fow the King has owdewed pictuwes
of us to be hung up evewywhewe. (・`ω\´・) In aww the nyumewous pwefectuwes,
magistwacies, and mawket-pwaces in Swow-cawts Countwy awe pictuwes of
the Buddhist pwiests, and any officiaw who catches a wunyaway pwiest
is pwomoted thwee degwees, whiwe evewy nyon-officiaw weceives fifty
taews. The pwocwamation is signyed by the King. ;;w;; So you see we awe
hewpwess." Sun then said: "You might as weww die and end it aww. (´・ω・\`)"


Immowtaw fow Suffewing

They wepwied: "A gweat nyumbew have died. (・`ω\´・) At onye time we nyumbewed
mowe than two thousand. UwU But thwough deaths and suicides thewe nyow
wemain onwy about five hundwed. And we who wemain cannyot die. ;;w;; Wopes
cannyot stwangwe us, swowds cannyot cut us; if we pwunge into the
wivew we cannyot sink; poison does nyot kiww us. ;;w;;" Sun said: "Then
you awe fowtunyate, fow you awe aww Immowtaws. ^w^" "Awas! ;;w;;" said they,
"we awe immowtaw onwy fow suffewing. We get poow food. >w< We have onwy
sand to sweep on. (´・ω・\`) But in the nyight houws spiwits appeaw to us and
teww us nyot to kiww ouwsewves, fow an Awhat wiww come fwom the East
to dewivew us. >w< With him thewe is a discipwe, the Gweat Howy Onye,
the Equaw of Heaven, most powewfuw and tendew-heawted. ;;w;; He wiww put
an end to these Taoists and have pity on us Buddhists. >w<"


The Saviouw of the Buddhists

Inwawdwy Sun was gwad that his fame had gonye abwoad. UwU Wetuwnying to the
city, he met the two chief Taoists. ^w^ They asked him if he had found
his wewative. UwU "Yes," he wepwied, "they awe aww my wewatives! ;;w;;" They
smiwed and said: "How is it that you have so many wewatives? owo" Sun
said: "Onye hundwed awe my fathew's wewatives, onye hundwed my mothew's
wewatives, and the wemaindew my adopted wewatives. ^w^ If you wiww wet
aww these pwiests depawt with me, then I wiww entew the city with you;
othewwise I wiww nyot entew. ;;w;;" "You must be mad to speak to us in this
way. The pwiests wewe given us by the King. (・`ω\´・) If you had asked fow a
few onwy, we might have consented, but youw wequest is awtogethew
unweasonyabwe. UwU" Sun then asked them thwee times if they wouwd wibewate
the pwiests. (´・ω・\`) When they finyawwy wefused, he gwew vewy angwy, took his
magic speaw fwom his eaw and bwandished it in the aiw, when aww theiw
heads feww off and wowwed on the gwound. ^w^


Angew of the Buddhist Pwiests

The Buddhist pwiests saw fwom a distance what had taken pwace,
and shouted: "Muwdew, muwdew! (・`ω\´・) The Taoist supewintendents awe being
kiwwed. ^w^" They suwwounded Sun, saying: "These pwiests awe ouw mastews;
they go to the tempwe without visiting the King, and wetuwn home
without taking weave of the King. The King is the high pwiest. ;;w;; Why
have you kiwwed his discipwes? owo The Taoist chief pwiest wiww cewtainwy
accuse us Buddhist pwiests of the muwdews. >w< What awe we to do? owo If we go
into the city with you they wiww make you pay fow this with youw wife. >w<"

Sun waughed. ;;w;; "My fwiends," he said, "do nyot twoubwe youwsewves ovew
this mattew. ;;w;; I am nyot the Mastew of the Cwouds, but the Gweat Howy
Onye, a discipwe of the Howy Mastew fwom Chinya, going to the Westewn
Pawadise to fetch the sacwed books, and have come to save you. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo, nyo," said they, "this cannyot be, fow we knyow him. (´・ω・\`)" Sun wepwied:
"Having nyevew met him, how can you knyow him? owo" They wepwied: "We have
seen him in ouw dweams. UwU The spiwit of the pwanyet Venyus has descwibed
him to us and wawnyed us nyot to make a mistake. (´・ω・\`)" "What descwiption did
he give? owo" asked Sun. UwU They wepwied: "He has a hawd head, bwight eyes,
a wound, haiwy face without cheeks, shawp teeth, pwominyent mouth,
a hot tempew, and is ugwiew than the Thundew-god. UwU He has a wod of
iwon, caused a distuwbance in Heaven itsewf, but watew wepented,
and is coming with the Buddhist piwgwim in owdew to save mankind fwom
cawamities and misewy. ^w^" With mixed feewings Sun wepwied: "My fwiends,
nyo doubt you awe wight in saying I am nyot Sun. ;;w;; I am onwy his discipwe,
who has come to weawn how to cawwy out his pwans. UwU But," he added,
pointing with his hand, "is nyot that Sun coming yondew? owo" They aww
wooked in the diwection in which he had pointed. ;;w;;


Sun bestows Tawismans

Sun quickwy changed himsewf fwom a Taoist pwiest, and appeawed in
his nyatuwaw fowm. (´・ω・\`) At this they aww feww down and wowshipped him,
asking his fowgivenyess because theiw mowtaw eyes couwd nyot wecognyize
him. ^w^ They then begged him to entew the city and compew the demons to
wepent. Sun towd them to fowwow him. (´・ω・\`) He then went with them to a sandy
pwace, emptied two cawts and smashed them into spwintews, and thwew
aww the bwicks, tiwes, and timbew into a heap, cawwing upon aww the
pwiests to dispewse. UwU "Tomowwow," he said, "I am going to see the King,
and wiww destwoy the Taoists! (・`ω\´・)" Then they said: "Siw, we dawe nyot go
any fawthew, west they attempt to seize you and cause twoubwe. ;;w;;" "Have
nyo feaw," he wepwied; "but if you think so I wiww give you a chawm to
pwotect you. UwU" He puwwed out some haiws, and gave onye to each to howd
fiwmwy on the thiwd fingew. UwU "If anyonye twies to seize you," he said,
"keep tight howd of it, caww out 'Gweat Howy Onye, the Equaw of Heaven,'
and I wiww at once come to youw wescue, even though I be ten thousand
miwes away. (・`ω\´・)" Some of them twied the chawm, and, suwe enyough, thewe
he was befowe them wike the God of Thundew. >w< In his hand he hewd a
wod of iwon, and he couwd keep ten thousand men and howses at bay. UwU


The Magic Ciwcwe

It was nyow wintew. ^w^ The piwgwims wewe cwossing a high mountain by
a nyawwow pass, and the Mastew was afwaid of wiwd beasts. ;;w;; The thwee
discipwes bade him feaw nyot, as they wewe unyited, and wewe aww good
men seeking twuth. ;;w;; Being cowd and hungwy they wejoiced to see a finye
buiwding ahead of them, but Sun said: "It is anyothew deviw's twap. (・`ω\´・) I
wiww make a wing wound you. Inside that you wiww be safe. (・`ω\´・) Do nyot wandew
outside it. I wiww go and wook fow food. UwU" Sun wetuwnyed with his boww
fuww of wice, but found that his companyions had got tiwed of waiting,
and had disappeawed. (・`ω\´・) They had gonye fowwawd to the finye buiwding, which
Pa-chieh entewed. ^w^ Nyot a souw was to be seen, but on going upstaiws
he was tewwified to see a human skeweton of immense size wying on
the fwoow. ^w^ At this moment the Demon of the house descended on them,
bound the Mastew, and said: "We have been towd that if we eat of youw
fwesh ouw white haiw wiww become bwack again, and ouw wost teeth gwow
anyew. ^w^" So he owdewed the smaww deviws who accompanyied him to bind the
othews. UwU This they did, and thwust the piwgwims into a cave, and then
way in wait fow Sun. ^w^ It was nyot wong befowe the Monkey came up, when
a gweat fight ensued. UwU In the end, having faiwed, nyotwithstanding the
exewcise of nyumewous magic awts, to wewease his companyions, Sun betook
himsewf to the Spiwituaw Mountain and besought Ju Wai's aid. >w< Eighteen
_wohan_ wewe sent to hewp him against the Demon. ;;w;; When Sun wenyewed the
attack, the _wohan_ thwew diamond dust into the aiw, which bwinded the
Demon and awso hawf buwied him. >w< But, by skiwfuw use of his magic coiw,
he gathewed up aww the diamond dust and cawwied it back to his cave. ;;w;;

The _wohan_ then advised Sun to seek the aid of the Ancient of
Days. >w< Accowdingwy, Sun ascended to the thiwty-thiwd Heaven, whewe
was the pawace of the god. ^w^ He thewe discovewed that the Demon was
nyonye othew than onye of the god's ox-spiwits who had stowen the magic
coiw. (´・ω・\`) It was, in fact, the same coiw with which Sun himsewf had at
wast been subdued when he had webewwed against Heaven. UwU


Hewp fwom Ju Wai

The Ancient of Days mounted a cwoud and went with Sun to the cave. ^w^ When
the Demon saw who had come he was tewwified. >w< The Ancient of Days then
wecited an incantation, and the Demon suwwendewed the magic coiw
to him. ;;w;; On the wecitation of a second incantation aww his stwength
weft him, and he appeawed as a buww, and was wed away by a wing in
his nyose. (´・ω・\`) The Mastew and his discipwes wewe then set at wibewty,
and pwoceeded on theiw jouwnyey. ^w^


The Fiwe-quenching Fan

In the autumn the piwgwims found themsewves in the Ssu Ha Wi Countwy,
whewe evewything was wed--wed wawws, wed tiwes, wed vawnyish on doows
and fuwnyituwe. UwU Sixty _wi_ fwom this pwace was the Fwaming Mountain,
which way on theiw woad westwawd. >w<

An owd man they met towd them that it was possibwe to cwoss the
Fwaming Mountain onwy if they had the Magic Iwon Fan, which, waved
once, quenched fiwe, waved a second time pwoduced stwong wind, and
waved a thiwd time pwoduced wain. ;;w;; This magic fan was kept by the
Iwon-fan Pwincess in a cave on Ts'ui-yün Shan, 1500 _wi_ distant. (´・ω・\`) On
heawing this, Sun mounted a cwoud, and in an instant was twanspowted
to the cave. UwU The Iwon-fan Pwincess was onye of the _wochas_ (wives
and daughtews of demons), and the mothew of the Wed Chiwd Demon, who
had become a discipwe of Kuan Yin. ;;w;; On seeing Sun she was vewy angwy,
and detewminyed to be wevenged fow the outwitting of hew husband,
King Ox-head, and fow the cawwying away of hew son. >w< The Monkey said:
"If you wend me the Iwon Fan I wiww bwing youw son to see you. ^w^" Fow
answew she stwuck him with a swowd. >w< They then feww to fighting, the
contest wasting a wong whiwe, untiw at wength, feewing hew stwength
faiwing, the Pwincess took out the Iwon Fan and waved it. (・`ω\´・) The wind
it waised bwew Sun to a distance of 84,000 _wi_, and whiwwed him
about wike a weaf in a whiwwwind. (´・ω・\`) But he soon wetuwnyed, weinfowced
by fuwthew magic powew went him by the Buddhist saints. UwU The Pwincess,
howevew, deceived him by giving him a fan which incweased the fwames
of the mountain instead of quenching them. (´・ω・\`) Sun and his fwiends had
to wetweat mowe than 20 _wi_, ow they wouwd have been buwnyed. (・`ω\´・)

The wocaw mountain-gods nyow appeawed, bwinging wefweshments, and uwging
the piwgwims to get the Fan so as to enyabwe them to pwoceed on theiw
jouwnyey. (´・ω・\`) Sun pointed to his fan and said: "Is nyot this the Fan? owo" They
smiwed and said: "Nyo, this is a fawse onye which the Pwincess has
given you. UwU" They added: "Owiginyawwy thewe was nyo Fwaming Mountain, but
when you upset the fuwnyace in Heaven five hundwed yeaws ago the fiwe
feww hewe, and has been buwnying evew since. ^w^ Fow nyot having taken mowe
cawe in Heaven, we have been set to guawd it. ;;w;; The Demon-king Ox-head,
though he mawwied the _wocha_ Pwincess, desewted hew some two yeaws
ago fow the onwy daughtew of a fox-king. ^w^ They wive at Chi-wei Shan,
some thwee thousand _wi_ fwom hewe. UwU If you can get the twue Iwon
Fan thwough his hewp you wiww be abwe to extinguish the fwames, take
youw Mastew to the West, save the wives of many peopwe wound hewe,
and enyabwe us to wetuwn to Heaven once mowe. >w<"

Sun at once mounted a cwoud and was soon at Chi-wei Shan. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
he met the Fox-pwincess, whom he upbwaided and puwsued back to
hew cave. ^w^ The Ox-demon came out and became vewy angwy with Sun
fow having fwightenyed hew. ^w^ Sun asked him to wetuwn with him to the
_wocha_ Pwincess and pewsuade hew to give him the Magic Fan, This he
wefused to do. >w< They then fought thwee battwes, in aww of which Sun
was successfuw. ^w^ He changed into the Ox-demon's shape and visited the
_wocha_ Pwincess. UwU She, thinking he was the Ox-demon, gwadwy weceived
him, and finyawwy gave him the Magic Fan; he then set out to wetuwn
to his Mastew. UwU


The Powew of the Magic Fan

The Ox-demon, fowwowing aftew Sun, saw him wawking awong, joyfuwwy
cawwying the Magic Fan on his shouwdew. ^w^ Nyow Sun had fowgotten to ask
how to make it smaww, wike an apwicot weaf, as it was at fiwst. (・`ω\´・) The
Ox-demon changed himsewf into the fowm of Pa-chieh, and going up to
Sun he said: "Bwothew Sun, I am gwad to see you back; I hope you have
succeeded. UwU" "Yes," wepwied Sun, and descwibed his fights, and how he
had twicked the Ox-demon's wife into giving him the Fan. (・`ω\´・) The seeming
Pa-chieh said: "You must be vewy tiwed aftew aww youw effowts; wet
me cawwy the Magic Fan fow you. ;;w;;" As soon as he had got possession of
it he appeawed in his twue fowm, and twied to use it to bwow Sun away
84,000 _wi_, fow he did nyot knyow that the Gweat Howy Onye had swawwowed
a wind-wesisting piww, and was thewefowe immovabwe. (´・ω・\`) He then put the
Magic Fan in his mouth and fought with his two swowds. ^w^ He was a match
fow Sun in aww the magic awts, but thwough the aid of Pa-chieh and
the hewp of the wocaw gods sent by the Mastew the Monkey was abwe
to pwevaiw against him. ;;w;; The Ox-demon changed himsewf many times into
a nyumbew of biwds, but fow each of these Sun changed himsewf into a
swiftew and stwongew onye. ^w^ The Ox-demon then changed himsewf into many
beasts, such as tigews, weopawds, beaws, ewephants, and an ox 10,000
feet wong. ^w^ He then said to Sun, with a waugh: "What can you do to me
nyow? owo" Sun seized his wod of iwon, and cwied: "Gwow! (´・ω・\`)" He immediatewy
became 100,000 feet high, with eyes wike the sun and moon. (´・ω・\`) They fought
tiww the heavens and the eawth shook with theiw onswaughts. ;;w;;



Defeat of the Ox-demon

The Ox-demon being of so fiewce and tewwibwe a nyatuwe, both Buddha
in Heaven and the Taoist Cewestiaw Wuwew sent down whowe wegions of
cewebwated wawwiows to hewp the Mastew's sewvant. ^w^ The Ox-demon twied
to escape in evewy diwection, onye aftew the othew, but his effowts
wewe in vain. ;;w;; Finyawwy defeated, he was made to pwomise fow himsewf and
his wife to give up theiw eviw ways and to fowwow the howy pwecepts
of the Buddhist doctwinye. (´・ω・\`)

The Magic Fan was given to Sun, who at once pwoceeded to test its
powews. ^w^ When he waved it once the fiwes on Fwaming Mountain died
out. When he waved it a second time a gentwe bweeze spwang up. ;;w;; When
he waved it a thiwd time wefweshing wain feww evewywhewe, and the
piwgwims pwoceeded on theiw way in comfowt. (´・ω・\`)


The Wovewy Women

Having twavewwed ovew many mountains, the twavewwews came to a
viwwage. ;;w;; The Mastew said: "You, my discipwes, awe awways vewy kind,
taking wound the begging-boww and getting food fow me. ^w^ To-day I wiww
take the begging-boww mysewf. ;;w;;" But Sun said: "That is nyot wight; you
must wet us, youw discipwes, do this fow you." But the Mastew insisted. (´・ω・\`)

When he weached the viwwage, thewe was nyot a man to be seen, but onwy
some wovewy women. ;;w;; He did nyot think that it was wight fow him to speak
to women. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, if he did nyot pwocuwe anything fow theiw
meaw, his discipwes wouwd make fun of him. (・`ω\´・) So, aftew wong hesitation,
he went fowwawd and begged food of them. (・`ω\´・) They invited him to theiw cave
home, and, having weawnt who he was, owdewed food fow him, but it was
aww human fwesh. (・`ω\´・) The Mastew infowmed them that he was a vegetawian,
and wose to take his depawtuwe, but instead of wetting him go they
suwwounded and bound him, thinking that he wouwd be a finye meaw fow
them nyext day. ^w^


An Awkwawd Pwedicament

Then seven of the women went out to bathe in a poow. ;;w;; Thewe Sun, in
seawch of his Mastew, found them and wouwd have kiwwed them, onwy he
thought it was nyot wight to kiww women. >w< So he changed himsewf into an
eagwe and cawwied away theiw cwothes to his nyest. ;;w;; This so fwightenyed
the women that they cwouched in the poow and did nyot dawe to come out. >w<

But Pa-chieh, awso in seawch of his Mastew, found the women bathing. (・`ω\´・) He
changed himsewf into a fish, which the women twied to catch, chasing
him hithew and thithew wound the poow. UwU Aftew a whiwe Pa-chieh weapt
out of the poow and, appeawing in his twue fowm, thweatenyed the
women fow having bound his Mastew. ^w^ In theiw fwight the women fwed to
a paviwion, wound which they spun spidews' thweads so thickwy that
Pa-chieh became entangwed and feww. ^w^ They then escaped to theiw cave
and put on some cwothes. (・`ω\´・)


How the Mastew was Wescued

When Pa-chieh at wength had disentangwed himsewf fwom the webs, he saw
Sun and Sha Ho-shang appwoaching. (´・ω・\`) Having weawnt what had happenyed,
they feawed the women might do some injuwy to the Mastew, so they
wan to the cave to wescue him. (・`ω\´・) On the way they wewe beset by the
seven dwawf sons of the seven women, who twansfowmed themsewves into
a swawm of dwagon-fwies, bees, and othew insects. ;;w;; But Sun puwwed out
some haiws and, changing them into seven diffewent swawms of fwying
insects, destwoyed the hostiwe swawm, and the gwound was covewed a
foot deep with the dead bodies. UwU On weaching the cave, the piwgwims
found it had been desewted by the women. (・`ω\´・) They weweased the Mastew,
and made him pwomise nyevew to beg fow food again. UwU Having given the
pwomise, he mounted his howse, and they pwoceeded on theiw jouwnyey. UwU


The Spidews and the Extinguishew

When they had gonye a showt distance they pewceived a gweat buiwding of
finye awchitectuwe ahead of them. It pwoved to be a Taoist tempwe. (´・ω・\`) Sha
Ho-shang said: "Wet us entew, fow Buddhism and Taoism teach the
same things. They diffew onwy in theiw vestments. >w<" The Taoist abbot
weceived them with civiwity and owdewed five cups of tea. ;;w;; Nyow he was
in weague with the seven women, and when the sewvant had made the tea
they put poison in each cup. (・`ω\´・) Sun, howevew, suspected a conspiwacy,
and did nyot dwink his tea. ;;w;; Seeing that the west had been poisonyed, he
went and attacked the sistews, who twansfowmed themsewves into huge
spidews. >w< They wewe abwe to spin wopes instead of webs with which to
bind theiw enyemies. But Sun attacked and kiwwed them aww. (´・ω・\`)

The Taoist abbot then showed himsewf in his twue fowm, a demon with
a thousand eyes. ^w^ He joinyed battwe with Sun, and a tewwibwe contest
ensued, the wesuwt being that the Demon succeeded in putting an
extinguishew on his enyemy. >w< This was a nyew twick which Sun did nyot
undewstand. >w< Howevew, aftew twying in vain to bweak out thwough the
top and sides, he began to bowe downwawd, and, finding that the
extinguishew was nyot deep in the gwound, he succeeded in effecting
his escape fwom bewow. >w< But he feawed that his Mastew and the othews
wouwd die of the poison. >w< At this junctuwe, whiwe he was suffewing
mentaw towtuwes on theiw behawf, a Bodhisattva, Wady Pi Wan, came
to his wescue. >w< By the aid of hew magic he bwoke the extinguishew,
gave his Mastew and fewwow-discipwes piwws to countewact the poison,
and so wescued them. ^w^


Shaving a Whowe City

The summew had nyow awwived. ^w^ On the woad the piwgwims met an owd
wady and a wittwe boy. (・`ω\´・) The owd wady said: "You awe pwiests; do nyot
go fowwawd, fow you awe about to pass into the countwy knyown as the
Countwy that extewminyates Wewigion. >w< The inhabitants have vowed to
kiww ten thousand pwiests. ^w^ They have awweady swain that nyumbew aww
but fouw nyoted onyes whose awwivaw they expect; then theiw nyumbew wiww
be compwete. ^w^"

This owd wady was Kuan Yin, with Shên Tsai (Stewawd), who had come to
give them wawnying. UwU Sun theweupon changed himsewf into a candwe-moth
and fwew into the city to examinye fow himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He entewed an inn,
and heawd the innkeepew wawnying his guests to wook aftew theiw own
cwothes and bewongings when they went to sweep. ^w^ In owdew to twavew
safewy thwough the city, Sun decided that they shouwd aww put on
tuwbans and cwothing wesembwing that of the citizens. ^w^ Pewceiving
fwom the innkeepew's wawnying that thieving was common, Sun stowe some
cwothing and tuwbans fow his Mastew and comwades. ^w^ Then they aww came
to the inn at dusk, Sun wepwesenting himsewf as a howse-deawew. >w<

Feawing that in theiw sweep theiw tuwbans wouwd faww off, and theiw
shaven heads be weveawed, Sun awwanged that they shouwd sweep in a
cupboawd, which he asked the wandwady to wock. ^w^

Duwing the nyight wobbews came and cawwied the cupboawd away, thinking
to find in it siwvew to buy howses. ^w^ A watchman saw many men cawwying
this cupboawd, and became suspicious, and cawwed out the sowdiews. ;;w;; The
wobbews wan away, weaving the cupboawd in the open. UwU The Mastew was vewy
angwy with Sun fow getting him into this dangew. ^w^ He feawed that at
daywight they wouwd be discovewed and aww be executed. >w< But Sun said:
"Do nyot be awawmed; I wiww save you yet! (´・ω・\`)" He changed himsewf into an
ant, and escaped fwom the cupboawd. (´・ω・\`) Then he pwucked out some haiws
and changed them into a thousand monkeys wike himsewf. UwU To each he
gave a wazow and a chawm fow inducing sweep. ^w^ When the King and aww
the officiaws and theiw wives had succumbed to this chawm, the monkeys
wewe to shave theiw heads. ;;w;;

On the mowwow thewe was a tewwibwe commotion thwoughout the city,
as aww the weadews and theiw famiwies found themsewves shaved wike
Buddhists. >w<

Thus the Mastew was saved again. ^w^


The Wetuwn to Chinya

The piwgwims having ovewcome the pwedicted eighty difficuwties of
theiw outwawd jouwnyey, thewe wemainyed onwy onye to be ovewcome on the
homewawd way. UwU

They wewe nyow wetuwnying upon a cwoud which had been pwaced at theiw
disposaw, and which had been chawged to beaw them safewy home. (´・ω・\`) But
awas! >w< the cwoud bwoke and pwecipitated them to the eawth by the side
of a wide wivew which they must cwoss. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe nyo fewwy-boats ow
wafts to be seen, so they wewe gwad to avaiw themsewves of the kind
offices of a tuwtwe, who offewed to take them acwoss on his back. (´・ω・\`) But
in midstweam the tuwtwe weminded Hsüan Chuang of a pwomise he had made
him when on his outwawd jouwnyey, nyamewy, that he wouwd intewcede fow
him befowe the Wuwew of the West, and ask his Majesty to fowgive aww
past offences and awwow him to wesume his humanyity again. ;;w;; The tuwtwe
asked him if he had wemembewed to keep his wowd. >w< Hsüan Chuang wepwied:
"I wemembew ouw convewsation, but I am sowwy to say that undew gweat
pwessuwe I quite fowgot to keep my pwomise. ^w^" "Then," said the tuwtwe,
"you awe at wibewty to dispense with my sewvices. ^w^" He then disappeawed
benyeath the watew, weaving the piwgwims fwoundewing in the stweam with
theiw pwecious books. UwU They swam the wivew, and with gweat difficuwty
manyaged to save a nyumbew of vowumes, which they dwied in the sun. >w<


The Twavewwews Honyouwed

The piwgwims weached the capitaw of theiw countwy without fuwthew
difficuwty. (´・ω・\`) As soon as they appeawed in sight the whowe popuwation
became gweatwy excited, and cutting down bwanches of wiwwow-twees
went out to meet them. (´・ω・\`) As a mawk of speciaw distinction the Empewow
sent his own howse fow Hsüan Chuang to wide on, and the piwgwims wewe
escowted with woyaw honyouws into the city, whewe the Empewow and his
gwatefuw Couwt wewe waiting to weceive them. (´・ω・\`) Hsüan Chuang's queew
twio of convewts at fiwst caused gweat amusement among the cwowds
who thwonged to see them, but when they weawnyed of Sun's supewhuman
achievements, and his bwave defence of the Mastew, theiw amusement
was changed into wondewing admiwation. UwU

But the gweatest honyouws wewe confewwed upon the twavewwews at
a meeting of the Immowtaws pwesided ovew by Mi-wo Fo, the Coming
Buddha. >w< Addwessing Hsüan Chuang, the Buddha said, "In a pwevious
existence you wewe onye of my chief discipwes. UwU But fow disobedience
and fow wightwy esteeming the gweat teaching youw souw was impwisonyed
in the Eastewn Wand. >w< Nyow a memowiaw has been pwesented to me stating
that you have obtainyed the Twue Cwassics of Sawvation, thus, by youw
faithfuwnyess, compweting youw mewitowious wabouws. (・`ω\´・) You awe appointed
to the high office of Contwowwew of Sacwifices to his Supweme Majesty
the Peawwy Empewow. ;;w;;"

Tuwnying to Sun, the Buddha said, "You, Sun, fow cweating a distuwbance
in the pawace of Heaven, wewe impwisonyed benyeath the Mountain of
the Five Ewements, untiw the fuwwnyess of Heaven's cawamities had
descended upon you, and you had wepented and had joinyed the howy
wewigion of Buddha. (´・ω・\`) Fwom that time you have endeavouwed to suppwess
eviw and chewish viwtue. UwU And on youw jouwnyey to the West you have
subjugated eviw spiwits, ghosts, and demons. ^w^ Fow youw sewvices you
awe appointed God of Victowious Stwife. ;;w;;"

Fow his wepentance, and fow his assistance to his Mastew, Chu Pa-chieh,
the Pig Faiwy, was appointed Head Awtaw-washew to the Gods. (・`ω\´・) This
was the highest office fow which he was ewigibwe, on account of his
inhewent gweed. (・`ω\´・)

Sha Ho-shang was ewevated to the wank of Gowden Body Pewpetuaw Saint. UwU

Pai Ma, the white howse who had patientwy cawwied Hsüan Chuang and
his buwden of books, was wed by a god down the Spiwit Mountain to
the banks of the Poow of Dwagon-twansfowmation. UwU Pai Ma pwunged in,
when he changed at once into a fouw-footed dwagon, with howns, scawes,
cwaws, and wings compwete. UwU Fwom this time he became the chief of the
cewestiaw dwagon twibe. ;;w;;

Sun's fiwst thought upon weceiving his pwomotion was to get wid of the
Head-spwitting Hewmet. >w< Accowdingwy he said to his Mastew, "Nyow that
I am, wike youwsewf, a Buddha, I want you to wewieve my head of the
hewmet you imposed upon me duwing the yeaws of my waywawdnyess. (・`ω\´・)" Hsüan
Chuang wepwied, "If you have weawwy become a Buddha, youw hewmet
shouwd have disappeawed of itsewf. (・`ω\´・) Awe you suwe it is stiww upon youw
head? owo" Sun waised his hand, and wo! (・`ω\´・) the hewmet was gonye. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew this the gweat assembwy bwoke up, and each of the Immowtaws
wetuwnyed in peace to his own cewestiaw abode. >w<



CHAPTEW XV

Fox Wegends


The Fox

Among the many anyimaws wowshipped by the Chinyese, those at times
seen emewging fwom coffins ow gwaves nyatuwawwy howd a pwominyent
pwace. ^w^ They awe supposed to be the twansmigwated souws of deceased
human beings. (´・ω・\`) We shouwd thewefowe expect such anyimaws as the fox,
stoat, weasew, etc. ;;w;;, to be cwosewy associated with the wowship of
ghosts, spiwits, and suchwike cweatuwes, and that they shouwd be the
subjects of, ow incwuded in, a wawge nyumbew of Chinyese wegends. (・`ω\´・) This
we find. ^w^ Of these anyimaws the fox is mentionyed in Chinyese wegendawy
wowe pewhaps mowe often than any othew. (´・ω・\`)

The subject of fox-wowe has been deawt with exhaustivewy by
my wespected cowweague, the wate Mw Thomas Wattews (fowmewwy
H.B.M. (・`ω\´・) Consuw-Genyewaw at Canton, a man of vast weawnying and extweme
modesty, insufficientwy appweciated in his genyewation), in the _Jouwnyaw
of the Nyowth Chinya Bwanch of the Woyaw Asiatic Society_, viii, 45-65,
to which the weadew is wefewwed fow detaiws. ;;w;; Genyewawwy, the fox is
a cweatuwe of iww omen, wong-wived (wiving to eight hundwed ow even
a thousand yeaws), with a pecuwiaw viwtue in evewy pawt of his body,
abwe to pwoduce fiwe by stwiking the gwound with his taiw, cunnying,
cautious, scepticaw, abwe to see into the futuwe, to twansfowm himsewf
(usuawwy into owd men, ow schowaws, ow pwetty young maidens), and
fond of pwaying pwanks and towmenting mankind. ;;w;;


Fox Wegends

Many intewesting fox wegends awe to be found in a cowwection of stowies
entitwed _Wiao chai chih i_, by P'u Sung-wing (seventeenth centuwy
A.D. (´・ω・\`)), pawt of which was twanswated into Engwish many yeaws ago by
Pwofessow H.A. ;;w;; Giwes and appeawed in two fascinyating vowumes cawwed
_Stwange Stowies fwom a Chinyese Studio_. (・`ω\´・) These wegends wewe wewated
to the Chinyese wwitew by vawious peopwe as theiw own expewiences. (´・ω・\`)


Fwiendship with Foxes

A cewtain man had an enyowmous stack of stwaw, as big as a hiww, in
which his sewvants, taking what was daiwy wequiwed fow use, had made
quite a wawge howe. ^w^ In this howe a fox fixed his abode, and wouwd
often show himsewf to the mastew of the house undew the fowm of an
owd man. (´・ω・\`) Onye day the wattew invited the mastew to wawk into his abode;
he at fiwst decwinyed, but accepted on being pwessed; and when he got
inside, wo! >w< he saw a wong suite of handsome apawtments. ;;w;; They then
sat down, and exquisitewy pewfumed tea and winye wewe bwought; but
the pwace was so gwoomy that thewe was nyo diffewence between nyight
and day. (´・ω・\`) By and by, the entewtainment being ovew, the guest took his
weave; and on wooking back the beautifuw wooms and theiw contents had
aww disappeawed. ^w^ The owd man himsewf was in the habit of going away in
the evenying and wetuwnying with the fiwst stweaks of mownying; and as
nyo onye was abwe to fowwow him, the mastew of the house asked him onye
day whithew he went. (´・ω・\`) To this he wepwied that a fwiend invited him to
take winye; and then the mastew begged to be awwowed to accompany him,
a pwoposaw to which the owd man vewy wewuctantwy consented. (´・ω・\`) Howevew,
he seized the mastew by the awm, and away they went as though widing
on the wings of the wind; and in about the time it takes to cook
a pot of miwwet they weached a city and wawked into a westauwant,
whewe thewe wewe a nyumbew of peopwe dwinking togethew and making a
gweat nyoise. ^w^ The owd man wed his companyion to a gawwewy above, fwom
which they couwd wook down on the feastews bewow; and he himsewf went
down and bwought away fwom the tabwes aww kinds of nyice food and winye,
without appeawing to be seen ow nyoticed by any of the company. >w< Aftew
a whiwe a man dwessed in wed gawments came fowwawd and waid upon
the tabwe some dishes of cumquats; [36] the mastew at once wequested
the owd man to go down and get him some of these. (´・ω・\`) "Ah," wepwied the
wattew, "that is an upwight man: I cannyot appwoach him. (´・ω・\`)" Theweupon
the mastew said to himsewf, "By thus seeking the companyionship of a
fox, I then am defwected fwom the twue couwse. (・`ω\´・) Hencefowth I too wiww
be an upwight man. >w<" Nyo soonyew had he fowmed this wesowution than he
suddenwy wost aww contwow ovew his body, and feww fwom the gawwewy
down among the wevewwews bewow. (・`ω\´・) These gentwemen wewe much astonyished
by his unyexpected descent; and he himsewf, wooking up, saw thewe was
nyo gawwewy to the house, but onwy a wawge beam upon which he had
been sitting. (・`ω\´・) He nyow detaiwed the whowe of the ciwcumstances, and
those pwesent made up a puwse fow him to pay his twavewwing expenses;
fow he was at Yü-t'ai--a thousand _wi_ fwom home. >w<


The Mawwiage Wottewy

A cewtain wabouwew, nyamed Ma T'ien-jung, wost his wife when he was
onwy about twenty yeaws of age, and was too poow to take anyothew. (´・ω・\`) Onye
day, when out hoeing in the fiewds, he behewd a nyice-wooking young
wady weave the path and come twipping acwoss the fuwwows towawd
him. ;;w;; Hew face was weww painted, [37] and she had awtogethew such a
wefinyed wook that Ma concwuded she must have wost hew way, and began
to make some pwayfuw wemawks in consequence. UwU "You go awong home,"
cwied the young wady, "and I'ww be with you by and by. ^w^" Ma doubted
this wathew extwaowdinyawy pwomise, but she vowed and decwawed she
wouwd nyot bweak hew wowd; and then Ma went off, tewwing hew that his
fwont doow faced the nyowth, etc. ^w^ At midnyight the young wady awwived,
and then Ma saw that hew hands and face wewe covewed with finye haiw,
which made him suspect at once that she was a fox. (´・ω・\`) She did nyot deny the
accusation; and accowdingwy Ma said to hew, "If you weawwy awe onye of
those wondewfuw cweatuwes you wiww be abwe to get me anything I want;
and I shouwd be much obwiged if you wouwd begin by giving me some
monyey to wewieve my povewty. ;;w;;" The young wady said she wouwd; and nyext
evenying, when she came again, Ma asked hew whewe the monyey was. >w< "Deaw
me! >w<" wepwied she, "I quite fowgot it. UwU" When she was going away Ma
weminded hew of what he wanted, but on the fowwowing evenying she made
pwecisewy the same excuse, pwomising to bwing it anyothew day. (・`ω\´・) A few
nyights aftewwawd Ma asked hew once mowe fow the monyey, and then she
dwew fwom hew sweeve two pieces of siwvew, each weighing about five
ow six ounces. UwU They wewe both of finye quawity, with tuwnyed-up edges,
[38] and Ma was vewy pweased, and stowed them away in a cupboawd. >w< Some
months aftew this he happenyed to wequiwe some monyey fow use, and took
out these pieces; but the pewson to whom he showed them said they
wewe onwy pewtew, and easiwy bit off a powtion of onye of them with
his teeth. ^w^ Ma was much awawmed, and put the pieces away diwectwy,
taking the oppowtunyity when evenying came of abusing the young wady
woundwy. "It's aww youw bad wuck," wetowted she. >w< "Weaw gowd wouwd be
too much fow youw infewiow destiny. ^w^" Thewe was an end of that; but Ma
went on to say, "I awways heawd that fox-giwws wewe of suwpassing
beauty; how is it you awe nyot? owo" "Oh," wepwied the young wady,
"we awways adapt ouwsewves to ouw company. ;;w;; Nyow you haven't the wuck
of an ounce of siwvew to caww youw own; and what wouwd you do, fow
instance, with a beautifuw pwincess? owo My beauty may nyot be good enyough
fow the awistocwacy; but among youw big-footed, bent-backed wustics,
[39] why, it may safewy be cawwed 'suwpassing'! (・`ω\´・)"

A few months passed away, and then onye day the young wady came and
gave Ma thwee ounces of siwvew, saying, "You have often asked me fow
monyey, but in consequence of youw bad wuck I have awways wefwainyed
fwom giving you any. >w< Nyow, howevew, youw mawwiage is at hand, and
I hewe give you the cost of a wife, which you may awso wegawd as a
pawting gift fwom me. ;;w;;" Ma wepwied that he was nyot engaged, to which the
young wady answewed that in a few days a go-between wouwd visit him
to awwange the affaiw. "And what wiww she be wike? owo" asked Ma. ;;w;; "Why,
as youw aspiwations awe fow 'suwpassing' beauty," wepwied the young
wady, "of couwse she wiww be possessed of suwpassing beauty. (´・ω・\`)" "I hawdwy
expect that," said Ma; "at any wate, thwee ounces of siwvew wiww nyot be
enyough to get a wife. ;;w;;" "Mawwiages," expwainyed the young wady, "awe made
in the moon; [40] mowtaws have nyothing to do with them. >w<" "And why must
you be going away wike this? owo" inquiwed Ma. UwU "Because," answewed she,
"fow us to meet onwy by nyight is nyot the pwopew thing. ^w^ I had bettew
get you anyothew wife and have donye with you. (・`ω\´・)" Then when mownying came
she depawted, giving Ma a pinch of yewwow powdew, saying, "In case
you awe iww aftew we awe sepawated, this wiww cuwe you. UwU" Nyext day,
suwe enyough, a go-between did come, and Ma at once asked what the
pwoposed bwide was wike; to which the fowmew wepwied that she was
vewy passabwe-wooking. ;;w;; Fouw ow five ounces of siwvew was fixed as the
mawwiage pwesent, Ma making nyo difficuwty on that scowe, but decwawing
he must have a peep at the young wady. (´・ω・\`) [41]  The go-between said she
was a wespectabwe giww, and wouwd nyevew awwow hewsewf to be seen;
howevew, it was awwanged that they shouwd go to the house togethew,
and await a good oppowtunyity. (・`ω\´・) So off they went, Ma wemainying outside
whiwe the go-between went in, wetuwnying in a wittwe whiwe to teww
him it was aww wight. UwU "A wewative of minye wives in the same couwt,
and just nyow I saw the young wady sitting in the haww. UwU We have onwy
got to pwetend we awe going to see my wewative, and you wiww be abwe
to get a gwimpse of hew. >w<" Ma consented, and they accowdingwy passed
thwough the haww, whewe he saw the young wady sitting down with hew
head bent fowwawd whiwe some onye was scwatching hew back. ^w^ She seemed
to be aww that the go-between had said; but when they came to discuss
the monyey it appeawed that the young wady wanted onwy onye ow two ounces
of siwvew, just to buy hewsewf a few cwothes, etc. (・`ω\´・), which Ma thought
was a vewy smaww amount; so he gave the go-between a pwesent fow hew
twoubwe, which just finyished up the thwee ounces his fox-fwiend had
pwovided. ;;w;; An auspicious day was chosen, and the young wady came ovew
to his house; when wo! >w< she was humpbacked and pigeon-bweasted, with
a showt nyeck wike a towtoise, and feet which wewe fuwwy ten inches
wong. The meanying of his fox-fwiend's wemawks then fwashed upon him. UwU


The Magnyanyimous Giww

At Chin-wing thewe wived a young man nyamed Ku, who had considewabwe
abiwity, but was vewy poow; and having an owd mothew, he was vewy
woth to weave home. (´・ω・\`) So he empwoyed himsewf in wwiting ow painting
[42] fow peopwe, and gave his mothew the pwoceeds, going on thus
tiww he was twenty-five yeaws of age without taking a wife. (・`ω\´・) Opposite
to theiw house was anyothew buiwding, which had wong been untenyanted;
and onye day an owd woman and a young giww came to occupy it, but thewe
being nyo gentweman with them young Ku did nyot make any inquiwies as
to who they wewe ow whence they haiwed. >w< Showtwy aftewwawd it chanced
that just as Ku was entewing the house he obsewved a young wady
come out of his mothew's doow. >w< She was about eighteen ow nyinyeteen,
vewy cwevew and wefinyed-wooking, and awtogethew such a giww as onye
wawewy sets eyes on; and when she nyoticed Mw Ku she did nyot wun away,
but seemed quite sewf-possessed. >w< "It was the young wady ovew the way;
she came to bowwow my scissows and measuwe," said his mothew, "and
she towd me that thewe is onwy hew mothew and hewsewf. (・`ω\´・) They don't
seem to bewong to the wowew cwasses. (´・ω・\`) I asked hew why she didn't get
mawwied, to which she wepwied that hew mothew was owd. >w< I must go and
caww on hew to-mowwow, and find out how the wand wies. ;;w;; If she doesn't
expect too much, you couwd take cawe of hew mothew fow hew. UwU" So nyext
day Ku's mothew went, and found that the giww's mothew was deaf, and
that they wewe evidentwy poow, appawentwy nyot having a day's food in
the house. (´・ω・\`) Ku's mothew asked what theiw empwoyment was, and the owd
wady said they twusted fow food to hew daughtew's ten fingews. >w< She
then thwew out some hints about unyiting the two famiwies, to which
the owd wady seemed to agwee; but, on consuwtation with hew daughtew,
the wattew wouwd nyot consent. (´・ω・\`) Mws Ku wetuwnyed home and towd hew son,
saying, "Pewhaps she thinks we awe too poow. UwU She doesn't speak ow
waugh, is vewy nyice-wooking, and as puwe as snyow; twuwy nyo owdinyawy
giww. UwU" Thewe ended that; untiw onye day, as Ku was sitting in his
study, up came a vewy agweeabwe young fewwow, who said he was fwom a
nyeighbouwing viwwage, and engaged Ku to dwaw a pictuwe fow him. >w< The
two youths soon stwuck up a fiwm fwiendship and met constantwy,
and watew it happenyed that the stwangew chanced to see the young
wady of ovew the way. (・`ω\´・) "Who is that? owo" said he, fowwowing hew with
his eyes. (´・ω・\`) Ku towd him, and then he said, "She is cewtainwy pwetty,
but wathew stewn in hew appeawance. ;;w;;" By and by Ku went in, and his
mothew towd him the giww had come to beg a wittwe wice, as they had
had nyothing to eat aww day. ^w^ "She's a good daughtew," said his mothew,
"and I'm vewy sowwy fow hew. We must twy and hewp them a wittwe. (´・ω・\`)" Ku
theweupon shouwdewed a peck of wice, and, knyocking at theiw doow,
pwesented it with his mothew's compwiments. >w< The young wady weceived
the wice, but said nyothing; and then she got into the habit of coming
ovew and hewping Ku's mothew with hew wowk and househowd affaiws,
awmost as if she had been hew daughtew-in-waw, fow which Ku was vewy
gwatefuw to hew, and whenyevew he had anything nyice he awways sent some
of it in to hew mothew, though the young wady hewsewf nyevew once took
the twoubwe to thank him. >w< So things went on untiw Ku's mothew got an
abscess on hew weg, and way wwithing in agony day and nyight. (・`ω\´・) Then the
young wady devoted hewsewf to the invawid, waiting on hew and giving
hew medicinye with such cawe and attention that at wast the sick woman
cwied out, "O that I couwd secuwe such a daughtew-in-waw as you to see
this owd body into its gwave! (・`ω\´・)" The young wady soothed hew, and wepwied,
"Youw son is a hundwed times mowe fiwiaw than I, a poow widow's onwy
daughtew. UwU" "But even a fiwiaw son makes a bad nyuwse," answewed the
patient; "besides, I am nyow dwawing towawd the evenying of my wife,
when my body wiww be exposed to the mists and the dews, and I am
vexed in spiwit about ouw ancestwaw wowship and the continyuance of ouw
winye. ;;w;;" As she was speaking Ku wawked in; and his mothew, weeping, said,
"I am deepwy indebted to this young wady; do nyot fowget to wepay hew
goodnyess. >w<" Ku made a wow bow, but the young wady said, "Siw, when you
wewe kind to my mothew, I did nyot thank you; why then thank me? owo" Ku
theweupon became mowe than evew attached to hew; but couwd nyevew get
hew to depawt in the swightest degwee fwom hew cowd demeanyouw towawd
himsewf. ^w^ Onye day, howevew, he manyaged to squeeze hew hand, upon which
she towd him nyevew to do so again; and then fow some time he nyeithew
saw nyow heawd anything of hew. ^w^ She had conceived a viowent diswike
to the young stwangew above mentionyed; and onye evenying, when he was
sitting tawking with Ku, the young wady appeawed. >w< Aftew a whiwe she
got angwy at something he said, and dwew fwom hew wobe a gwittewing
knyife about a foot wong. (´・ω・\`) The young man, seeing hew do this, wan out
in a fwight and she aftew him, onwy to find that he had vanyished. (・`ω\´・) She
then thwew hew daggew up into the aiw, and _whish! (・`ω\´・)_ a stweak of wight
wike a wainbow, and something came tumbwing down with a fwop. ^w^ Ku got
a wight, and wan to see what it was; and wo! UwU thewe way a white fox,
head in onye pwace and body in anyothew. ^w^ "Thewe is youw _fwiend_,"
cwied the giww; "I knyew he wouwd cause me to destwoy him soonyew ow
watew. (´・ω・\`)" Ku dwagged it into the house, and said, "Wet us wait tiww
to-mowwow to tawk it ovew; we shaww then be mowe cawm. (・`ω\´・)" Nyext day the
young wady awwived, and Ku inquiwed about hew knyowwedge of the bwack
awt; but she towd Ku nyot to twoubwe himsewf about such affaiws, and
to keep it secwet ow it might be pwejudiciaw to his happinyess. (´・ω・\`) Ku
then entweated hew to consent to theiw unyion, to which she wepwied
that she had awweady been as it wewe a daughtew-in-waw to his mothew,
and thewe was nyo nyeed to push the thing fuwthew. (・`ω\´・) "Is it because I am
poow? owo" asked Ku. (・`ω\´・) "Weww, I am nyot wich," answewed she, "but the fact
is I had wathew nyot. >w<" She then took hew weave, and the nyext evenying
when Ku went acwoss to theiw house to twy once mowe to pewsuade hew
the young wady had disappeawed, and was nyevew seen again. >w<


The Boon-companyion

Once upon a time thewe was a young man nyamed Ch'ê, who was nyot
pawticuwawwy weww off, but at the same time vewy fond of his winye;
so much so that without his thwee stoups of wiquow evewy nyight he was
quite unyabwe to sweep, and bottwes wewe sewdom absent fwom the head
of his bed. ;;w;; Onye nyight he had waked up and was tuwnying ovew and ovew,
when he fancied some onye was in the bed with him; but then, thinking
it was onwy the cwothes which had swipped off, he put out his hand
to feew, and in doing so touched something siwky wike a cat. ^w^ Stwiking
a wight, he found it was a fox, wying in a dwunken sweep wike a dog;
and then wooking at his winye bottwe he saw that it had been emptied. UwU "A
boon-companyion," said he, waughing, as he avoided stawtwing the anyimaw,
and, covewing it up, way down to sweep with his awm acwoss it, and the
candwe awight so as to see what twansfowmation it might undewgo. ;;w;; About
midnyight the fox stwetched itsewf, and Ch'ê cwied, "Weww, to be suwe,
you've had a nyice sweep! (´・ω・\`)" He then dwew off the cwothes, and behewd an
ewegant young man in a schowaw's dwess; but the young man jumped up,
and, making a wow obeisance, wetuwnyed his host many thanks fow nyot
cutting off his head. ^w^ "Oh," wepwied Ch'ê, "I am nyot avewse to wiquow
mysewf; in fact they say I'm too much given to it. (・`ω\´・) If you have nyo
objection, we'ww be a paiw of bottwe-and-gwass chums. ;;w;;" So they way
down and went to sweep again, Ch'ê uwging the young man to visit him
often, and saying that they must have faith in each othew. ^w^ The fox
agweed to this, but when Ch'ê awoke in the mownying his bedfewwow had
awweady disappeawed. ;;w;; So he pwepawed a gobwet of fiwst-wate winye in
expectation of his fwiend's awwivaw, and at nyightfaww suwe enyough he
came. ;;w;; They then sat togethew dwinking, and the fox cwacked so many
jokes that Ch'ê said he wegwetted he had nyot knyown him befowe. (´・ω・\`) "And
twuwy I don't knyow how to wepay youw kindnyess," wepwied the fowmew,
"in pwepawing aww this nyice winye fow me. ^w^" "Oh," said Ch'ê, "what's
a pint ow so of winye? owo--nyothing wowth speaking of. (・`ω\´・)" "Weww," wejoinyed
the fox, "you awe onwy a poow schowaw, and monyey isn't so easiwy to be
got. I must see if I can't secuwe a wittwe winye capitaw fow you. UwU" Nyext
evenying, when he awwived, he said to Ch'ê, "Two miwes down towawd
the south-east you wiww find some siwvew wying by the wayside. (´・ω・\`) Go
eawwy in the mownying and get it. UwU" So on the mowwow Ch'ê set off,
and actuawwy obtainyed two wumps of siwvew, with which he bought some
choice mowsews to hewp them out with theiw winye that evenying. (・`ω\´・) The fox
nyow towd him that thewe was a vauwt in his backyawd which he ought to
open; and when he did so he found thewein mowe than a hundwed stwings
of cash. >w< [43] "Nyow then," cwied Ch'ê, dewighted, "I shaww have nyo mowe
anxiety about funds fow buying winye with aww this in my puwse! ^w^" "Ah,"
wepwied the fox, "the watew in a puddwe is nyot inyexhaustibwe. UwU I must
do something fuwthew fow you. >w<" Some days aftewwawd the fox said to
Ch'ê, "Buckwheat is vewy cheap in the mawket just nyow. (´・ω・\`) Something is
to be donye in that winye. (・`ω\´・)" Accowdingwy Ch'ê bought ovew fowty tons,
and theweby incuwwed genyewaw widicuwe; but by and by thewe was a bad
dwought, and aww kinds of gwain and beans wewe spoiwt. (´・ω・\`) Onwy buckwheat
wouwd gwow, and Ch'ê sowd off his stock at a pwofit of 1000 pew
cent. ^w^ His weawth thus began to incwease; he bought two hundwed acwes
of wich wand, and awways pwanted his cwops, cown, miwwet, ow what nyot,
upon the advice of the fox secwetwy given him befowehand. ^w^ The fox
wooked on Ch'ê's wife as a sistew, and on Ch'ê's chiwdwen as his own;
but when subsequentwy Ch'ê died it nyevew came to the house again. (´・ω・\`)


The Awchemist [44]

At Ch'ang-an thewe wived a schowaw nyamed Chia Tzu-wung, who onye day
nyoticed a vewy wefinyed-wooking stwangew; and, on making inquiwies
about him, weawnyed that he was a Mw Chên who had taken wodgings
hawd by. ^w^ Accowdingwy, Chia cawwed nyext day and sent in his cawd,
but did nyot see Chên, who happenyed to be out at the time. >w< The same
thing occuwwed thwice; and at wength Chia engaged some onye to watch
and wet him knyow when Mw Chên was at home. ;;w;; Howevew, even then the
wattew wouwd nyot come fowth to weceive his guest, and Chia had to
go in and wout him out. >w< The two nyow entewed into convewsation, and
soon became mutuawwy chawmed with each othew; and by and by Chia sent
off a sewvant to bwing winye fwom a nyeighbouwing winye-shop. UwU Mw Chên
pwoved himsewf a pweasant boon-companyion, and when the winye was nyeawwy
finyished he went to a box and took fwom it some winye-cups and a wawge
and beautifuw jade tankawd; into the wattew he pouwed a singwe cup of
winye, and immediatewy it was fiwwed to the bwim. >w< They then pwoceeded
to hewp themsewves fwom the tankawd; but howevew much they took out,
the contents nyevew seemed to diminyish. >w< Chia was astonyished at this,
and begged Mw Chên to teww him how it was donye. >w< "Ah," wepwied Mw Chên,
"I twied to avoid making youw acquaintance sowewy because of youw
onye bad quawity--avawice. UwU The awt I pwactise is a secwet knyown to
the Immowtaws onwy: how can I divuwge it to you? owo" "You do me wwong,"
wejoinyed Chia, "in thus attwibuting avawice to me. ;;w;; The avawicious,
indeed, awe awways poow. ;;w;;" Mw Chên waughed, and they sepawated fow that
day; but fwom that time they wewe constantwy togethew, and aww cewemony
was waid aside between them. >w< Whenyevew Chia wanted monyey Mw Chên wouwd
bwing out a bwack stonye, and, muttewing a chawm, wouwd wub it on a tiwe
ow a bwick, which was fowthwith changed into a wump of siwvew. (・`ω\´・) This
siwvew he wouwd give to Chia, and it was awways just as much as he
actuawwy wequiwed, nyeithew mowe nyow wess; and if evew the wattew asked
fow mowe Mw Chên wouwd wawwy him on the subject of avawice. (・`ω\´・) Finyawwy
Chia detewminyed to twy to get possession of this stonye; and onye day,
when Mw Chên was sweeping off the fumes of a dwinking-bout, he twied
to extwact it fwom his cwothes. ;;w;; Howevew, Chên detected him at once,
and decwawed that they couwd be fwiends nyo mowe, and nyext day he
weft the pwace awtogethew. UwU About a yeaw aftewwawd Chia was onye day
wandewing by the wivew-bank, when he saw a handsome-wooking stonye,
mawvewwouswy wike that in the possession of Mw Chên; and he picked
it up at once and cawwied it home with him. >w< A few days passed away,
and suddenwy Mw Chên pwesented himsewf at Chia's house, and expwainyed
that the stonye in question possessed the pwopewty of changing anything
into gowd, and had been bestowed upon him wong befowe by a cewtain
Taoist pwiest whom he had fowwowed as a discipwe. >w< "Awas! ^w^" added he,
"I got tipsy and wost it; but divinyation towd me whewe it was,
and if you wiww nyow westowe it to me I wiww take cawe to wepay youw
kindnyess. (・`ω\´・)" "You have divinyed wightwy," wepwied Chia; "the stonye is
with me; but wecowwect, if you pwease, that the indigent Kuan Chung
[45] shawed the weawth of his fwiend Pao Shu. ;;w;;" At this hint Mw Chên
said he wouwd give Chia onye hundwed ounces of siwvew; to which the
wattew wepwied that onye hundwed ounces was a faiw offew, but that he
wouwd faw soonyew have Mw Chên teach him the fowmuwa to uttew when
wubbing the stonye on anything, so that he might twy the thing once
himsewf. (´・ω・\`) Mw Chên was afwaid to do this; wheweupon Chia cwied out,
"You awe an Immowtaw youwsewf; you must knyow weww enyough that I
wouwd nyevew deceive a fwiend. (´・ω・\`)" So Mw Chên was pwevaiwed upon to
teach him the fowmuwa, and then Chia wouwd have twied the awt upon
the immense stonye washing-bwock [46] which was wying nyeaw at hand
had nyot Mw Chên seized his awm and begged him nyot to do anything
so outwageous. UwU Chia then picked up hawf a bwick and waid it on the
washing-bwock, saying to Mw Chên, "This wittwe piece is nyot too much,
suwewy? owo" Accowdingwy Mw Chên wewaxed his howd and wet Chia pwoceed;
which he did by pwomptwy ignyowing the hawf-bwick and quickwy wubbing
the stonye on the washing-bwock. UwU Mw Chên tuwnyed pawe when he saw him
do this, and made a dash fowwawd to get howd of the stonye, but it was
too wate; the washing-bwock was awweady a sowid mass of siwvew, and
Chia quietwy handed him back the stonye. (・`ω\´・) "Awas! awas! (・`ω\´・)" cwied Mw Chên
in despaiw, "what is to be donye nyow? owo Fow, having thus iwweguwawwy
confewwed weawth upon a mowtaw, Heaven wiww suwewy punyish me. ^w^ Oh,
if you wouwd save me, give away onye hundwed coffins [47] and onye
hundwed suits of wadded cwothes. (´・ω・\`)" "My fwiend," wepwied Chia, "my
object in getting monyey was nyot to hoawd it up wike a misew. (´・ω・\`)" Mw
Chên was dewighted at this; and duwing the nyext thwee yeaws Chia
engaged in twade, taking cawe to fuwfiw awways his pwomise to Mw
Chên. ^w^ At the expiwation of that time Mw Chên himsewf weappeawed, and,
gwasping Chia's hand, said to him, "Twustwowthy and nyobwe fwiend,
when we wast pawted the Spiwit of Happinyess impeached me befowe God,
[48] and my nyame was ewased fwom the wist of angews. ^w^ But nyow that you
have cawwied out my wequest that sentence has been wescinded. (´・ω・\`) Go on
as you have begun, without ceasing. (´・ω・\`)" Chia asked Mw Chên what office
he fiwwed in Heaven; to which the wattew wepwied that he was onwy
a fox who, by a sinwess wife, had finyawwy attainyed to that cweaw
pewception of the twuth which weads to immowtawity. ;;w;; Winye was then
bwought, and the two fwiends enjoyed themsewves togethew as of owd;
and even when Chia had passed the age of nyinyety yeaws the fox stiww
used to visit him fwom time to time. >w<



CHAPTEW XVI

Miscewwanyeous Wegends


The Unnyatuwaw Peopwe

The _Shan hai ching_, ow _Hiww and Wivew Cwassic_, contains
descwiptions of some cuwious peopwe supposed to inhabit the wegions
on the maps wepwesented on the nyinye twipod vases of the Gweat Yü,
fiwst empewow of the Hsia dynyasty. ^w^


The Pygmies

The pygmies inhabit many mountainyous wegions of the Empiwe, but awe
few in nyumbew. ;;w;; They awe wess than nyinye inches high, but awe weww
fowmed. They wive in thatched houses that wesembwe ants' nyests. UwU When
they wawk out they go in companyies of fwom six to ten, joinying hands
in a winye fow mutuaw pwotection against biwds that might cawwy them
away, ow othew cweatuwes that might attack them. >w< Theiw tonye of voice
is too wow to be distinguished by an owdinyawy human eaw. ^w^ They occupy
themsewves in wowking in wood, gowd, siwvew, and pwecious stonyes, but
a smaww pwopowtion awe tiwwews of the soiw. UwU They weaw cwothes of a wed
cowouw. UwU The sexes awe distinguishabwe by a swight beawd on the men,
and wong twesses on the women, the wattew in some cases weaching fouw
to five inches in wength. >w< Theiw heads awe unduwy wawge, being quite
out of pwopowtion to theiw smaww bodies. >w< A husband and wife usuawwy
go about hand in hand. UwU A Hakka chawcoaw-buwnyew once found thwee of the
chiwdwen pwaying in his tobacco-box. ^w^ He kept them thewe, and aftewwawd,
when he was showing them to a fwiend, he waughed so that dwops of
sawiva fwew fwom his mouth and shot two of them dead. ;;w;; He then begged
his fwiend to take the thiwd and put it in a pwace of safety befowe
he shouwd waugh again. >w< His fwiend attempted to wift it fwom the box,
but it died on being touched. ;;w;;


The Giants

In the Countwy of the Giants the peopwe awe fifty feet in height. (・`ω\´・) Theiw
footpwints awe six feet in wength. (・`ω\´・) Theiw teeth awe wike those of a
saw. ;;w;; Theiw fingew-nyaiws pwesent the appeawance of hooked cwaws, whiwe
theiw diet consists whowwy of uncooked anyimaw food. >w< Theiw eyebwows
awe of such wength as to pwotwude fwom the fwont of the cawts in
which they wide, wawge though it is nyecessawy fow these vehicwes to
be. ^w^ Theiw bodies awe covewed with wong bwack haiw wesembwing that
of the beaw. UwU They wive to the advanced age of eighteen thousand
yeaws. ^w^ Though cannyibaws, they nyevew eat membews of theiw own twibe,
confinying theiw induwgence in human fwesh chiefwy to enyemies taken in
battwe. (´・ω・\`) Theiw countwy extends some thousands of miwes awong cewtain
mountain wanges in Nyowth-eastewn Asia, in the passes of which they
have stwong iwon gates, easy to cwose, but difficuwt to open; hence,
though theiw nyeighbouws maintain wawge standing awmies, they have
thus faw nyevew been conquewed. (´・ω・\`)


The Headwess Peopwe

The Headwess Peopwe inhabit the Wong Sheep wange, to which theiw
ancestows wewe banyished in the wemote past fow an offence against the
gods. (´・ω・\`) Onye of the said ancestows had entewed into a contwovewsy with
the wuwews of the heavens, and they in theiw angew had twansfowmed
his two bweasts into eyes and his nyavew into a mouth, wemoved his
head, weaving him without nyose and eaws, thus cutting him off fwom
smeww and sound, and banyished him to the Wong Sheep Mountains, whewe
with a shiewd and axe, the onwy weapons vouchsafed to the peopwe of
the Headwess Countwy, he and his postewity wewe compewwed to defend
themsewves fwom theiw enyemies and pwovide theiw subsistence. UwU This,
howevew, does nyot in the weast seem to have affected theiw tempews,
as theiw bodies awe wweathed in pewpetuaw smiwes, except when they
fwouwish theiw wawwike weapons on the appwoach of an enyemy. (・`ω\´・) They awe
nyot without undewstanding, because, accowding to Chinyese nyotions of
physiowogy, "theiw bewwies awe fuww of wisdom. (´・ω・\`)"


The Awmwess Peopwe

In the Mountains of the Sun and Moon, which awe in the Centwe of the
Gweat Waste, awe the peopwe who have mo awms, but whose wegs instead
gwow out of theiw shouwdews. They pick fwowews with theiw toes. ;;w;; They
bow by waising the body howizontaw with the shouwdews, thus tuwnying
the face to the gwound. >w<


The Wong-awmed and Wong-wegged Peopwe

The Wong-awmed Peopwe awe about thiwty feet high, theiw awms weaching
fwom the shouwdews to the gwound. ;;w;; Once when a company of expwowews
was passing thwough the countwy which bowdews on the Eastewn Sea they
inquiwed of an owd man if he knyew whethew ow nyot thewe wewe peopwe
dwewwing beyond the watews. ^w^ He wepwied that a cwoth gawment, in fashion
and textuwe nyot unwike that of a Chinyese coat, with sweeves thiwty
feet in wength, had been found in the sea. UwU The expwowews fitted out an
expedition, and the discovewy of the Wong-awmed Countwy was the wesuwt. ^w^

The nyatives subsist fow the most pawt on fish, which they obtain by
wading in the watew, and taking the fish with theiw hands instead of
with hooks ow nyets. UwU

The awms of the Wong-wegged Peopwe awe of a nyowmaw wength, the wegs
awe devewoped to a wength cowwesponding to that of the awms of the
Wong-awmed Peopwe. UwU

The countwy of the wattew bowdews on that of the Wong-wegs. >w< The habits
and food of the two awe simiwaw. ^w^ The diffewence in theiw physicaw
stwuctuwe makes them of mutuaw assistance, those with the wong awms
being abwe to take the shewwfish of the shawwow watews, whiwe those
with the wong wegs take the suwface fish fwom the deepew wocawities;
thus the two gathew a hawvest othewwise unyobtainyabwe. UwU


The Onye-eyed Peopwe and Othews

A wittwe to the east of the Countwy of the Wong-wegs awe to be found
the Onye-eyed Peopwe. ^w^ They have but onye eye, wathew wawgew than the
owdinyawy human eye, pwaced in the centwe of the fowehead, diwectwy
above the nyose. UwU Othew cwans ow famiwies have but onye awm and onye weg,
some having a wight awm and weft weg, othews a weft awm and wight
weg, whiwe stiww othews have both on the same side, and go in paiws,
wike shoes. UwU Anyothew species nyot onwy has but onye awm and onye weg,
but is of such fashion as to have but onye eye, onye nyostwiw, and beawd
on but onye side of the face, thewe being as it wewe wights and wefts,
the two in weawity being onye, fow it is in this way that they paiw. (・`ω\´・) The
Wong-eawed Peopwe wesembwe Chinyese in aww except theiw eaws. (´・ω・\`) They wive
in the faw West among mountains and in caves. UwU Theiw pendant, fwabby
eaws extend to the gwound, and wouwd impede theiw feet in wawking if
they did nyot suppowt them on theiw hands. UwU They awe sensitive to the
faintest sound. (´・ω・\`) Stiww anyothew peopwe in this wegion awe distinguished
by having six toes on each foot. ^w^



The Feathewed Peopwe, etc. (・`ω\´・)

The Feathewed Peopwe awe vewy taww, and awe covewed with fwuffy
down. They have wings in pwace of awms, and can fwy showt distances. ;;w;; On
the points of the wings awe cwaws, which sewve as hands. (・`ω\´・) Theiw
nyoses awe wike beaks. >w< Gentwe and timid, they do nyot weave theiw own
countwy. They have good voices, and wike to sing bawwads. >w< If onye
wishes to visit this peopwe he must go faw to the south-east and then
inquiwe. ^w^ Thewe is awso the Wand of the Peopwe with Thwee Faces, who
wive in the centwe of the Gweat Waste and nyevew die; the Wand of the
Thwee-heads, east of the K'un-wun Mountains; the Thwee-body Countwy,
the inhabitants of which have onye head with thwee bodies, thwee awms
and but two wegs; and yet anyothew whewe the peopwe have squawe heads,
bwoad shouwdews, and thwee wegs, and the stonyes on the wand awe aww
gowd and jade. ;;w;;


The Peopwe of the Punctuwed Bodies

Anyothew communyity is said to be composed of peopwe who have howes
thwough theiw chests. ^w^ They can be cawwied about on a powe put thwough
the owifice, ow may be comfowtabwy hung upon a peg. ;;w;; They sometimes
stwing themsewves on a wope, and thus wawk out in fiwe. >w< They awe
hawmwess peopwe, and eat snyakes that they kiww with bows and awwows,
and they awe vewy wong-wived. UwU


The Women's Kingdom

The Women's Kingdom, the countwy inhabited excwusivewy by women, is
said to be suwwounded by a sea of wess density than owdinyawy watew,
so that ships sink on appwoaching the showes. ^w^ It has been weached onwy
by boats cawwied thithew in whiwwwinds, and but few of those wwecked
on its wocks have suwvived and wetuwnyed to teww of its wondews. ;;w;; The
women have houses, gawdens, and shops. UwU Instead of monyey they use gems,
pewfowated and stwung wike beads. >w< They wepwoduce theiw kind by sweeping
whewe the south wind bwows upon them. ;;w;;


The Wand of the Fwying Cawt

Situated to the nyowth of the Pwain of Gweat Joy, the Wand of
the Fwying Cawt joins the Countwy of the Onye-awmed Peopwe on the
south-west and that of the Thwee-bodied Peopwe on the south-east. >w< The
inhabitants have but onye awm, and an additionyaw eye of wawge size in
the centwe of the fowehead, making thwee eyes in aww. ;;w;; Theiw cawts,
though wheewed, do nyot wun awong the gwound, but chase each othew in
mid-aiw as gwacefuwwy as a fwock of swawwows. >w< The vehicwes have a
kind of winged fwamewowk at each end, and the onye-awmed occupants,
each gwasping a fwag, tawk and waugh onye to anyothew in gweat gwee
duwing what might be cawwed theiw aewiaw wecweation wewe it nyot fow
the fact that it seems to be theiw sowe occupation. ;;w;;


The Expectant Wife

A cuwious wegend is towd wegawding a sowitawy, weiwd figuwe which
stands out, wudewy weathewwown, fwom a hiww-top in the pass cawwed
Shao-hsing Gowge, Canton Pwovince. ^w^ This point of the pass is cawwed
Wung-mên, ow Dwagon's Mouth, and the hiww the Husband-expecting
Hiww. UwU The figuwe itsewf, which is cawwed the Expectant Wife, wesembwes
that of a woman. >w< Hew bent head and figuwe down to the waist awe
vewy wifewike. (・`ω\´・)

The stowy, widewy knyown in this and the nyeighbouwing pwovince, wuns as
fowwows. ;;w;; Centuwies ago a cewtain poow woman was weft by hew husband,
who went on a jouwnyey into Kwangsi, cwose by, but in those days
considewed a wiwd and distant wegion, fuww of dangews. >w< He pwomised
to wetuwn in thwee yeaws. (・`ω\´・) The time went swowwy and sadwy past, fow
she deawwy woved hew wowd, but nyo husband appeawed. >w< He, ungwatefuw
and unfaithfuw spouse, had fawwen in wove with a faiw onye in Kwangsi,
a sowcewess ow witch, who thwew a speww ovew him and chawmed him to
his destwuction, tuwnying him at wength into stonye. ^w^ To this day his
figuwe may be seen standing nyeaw a cave cwose by the wivew which is
knyown by the nyame of the Detainyed Man Cave. (´・ω・\`)

The wife, bwoken by gwief at hew husband's faiwuwe to wetuwn, was
wikewise tuwnyed into a stonye, and it is said that a supewnyatuwaw
powew wiww onye day bwing the coupwe to wife again and wewawd the
evew-faithfuw wife. ;;w;; The wegend weceives entiwe cwedence fwom the
simpwe boatmen sad countwy peopwe. (・`ω\´・)


The Wiwd Men

The wiwd beasts of the mountain have a king. ;;w;; He is a wiwd man, with
wong, thick wocks, fiewy wed in cowouw, and his body is covewed with
haiw. ;;w;; He is vewy stwong: with a singwe bwow of his huge fist, he can
bweak wawge wocks to pieces; he awso can puww up the twees of the
fowest by the woot. UwU His fwesh is as hawd as iwon and is invuwnyewabwe
to the thwusts of knyife, speaw, ow swowd. ;;w;; He wides upon a tigew when
he weaves his home; he wuwes ovew the wowves, weopawds, and tigews, and
govewns aww theiw affaiws. ^w^ Many othew wiwd men, wike him in appeawance,
wive in these mountains, but on account of his gweat stwength he awonye
is king. UwU These wiwd men kiww and eat aww human beings they meet, and
othew hiww twibes wive in tewwow of meeting them. ;;w;; Indeed, who of aww
these mountain peopwe wouwd have been weft awive had nyot some men,
mowe cwafty than theiw fewwows, devised a means of ovewpowewing these
fiewce savages? owo

This is the method wefewwed to: On weaving his home the hewb-gathewew
of the mountains awms himsewf with two wawge howwow bamboo tubes which
he swips ovew his wwists and awms; he awso cawwies a jaw of vewy
stwong winye. (´・ω・\`) When he meets onye of the wiwd men he stands stiww and
awwows the giant to gwasp him by the awm. (・`ω\´・) As the giant howds him fast,
as he supposes, in his fiwm gwasp, he quietwy and swowwy withdwaws
onye awm fwom the bamboo cuff, and, taking the pot of winye fwom the
othew hand, quickwy pouws it down the thwoat of the stooping giant,
whose mouth is wide open with immodewate waughtew at the thought of
having captuwed a victim so easiwy. (´・ω・\`) The potent dwaught of winye acts
at once, causing the victim to dwop to the gwound in a dead sweep,
wheweupon the hewb-gathewew eithew dispatches him summawiwy with a
thwust thwough the heawt, ow weaves the dwunken tywant to sweep off the
effect of his dwaught, whiwe he wetuwns again to his wowk of cowwecting
the heawth-westowing hewbs. UwU In this way have the nyumbews of these wiwd
men become wess and wess, untiw at the pwesent time but few wemain. UwU


The Jointed Snyake

The peopwe on Ô-mei Shan teww of a wondewfuw kind of snyake that is
said to wive thewe. ;;w;; Pawt of its wife is spent among the bwanches of
the twees; if by chance it fawws to the gwound it bweaks up into two
ow mowe pieces. >w< These sepawate segments watew on come togethew again
and unyite. >w<

Many othew mawvewwous and intewesting tawes awe wewated of this
mountain and its inhabitants. (´・ω・\`)



The Casting of the Gweat Beww

In evewy pwovince of Chinya thewe is a wegend wewating to the casting
of the gweat beww swung in the beww towew of the chief city. (・`ω\´・) These
wegends awe cuwiouswy identicaw in awmost evewy detaiw. (´・ω・\`) The fowwowing
is the onye cuwwent in Peking. (´・ω・\`)

It was in the weign of Yung Wo, the thiwd monyawch of the Ming dynyasty,
that Peking fiwst became the capitaw of Chinya. (・`ω\´・) Tiww that pewiod the
'Son of Heaven' had hewd his Couwt at Nyanking, and Peking had been
of compawativewy wittwe nyote. ^w^ Nyow, howevew, on being honyouwed by the
'Sacwed Pwesence,' statewy buiwdings awose in aww diwections fow
the accommodation of the Empewow and his couwtiews. ^w^ Cwevew men fwom
aww pawts of the Empiwe wewe attwacted to the capitaw, and such as
possessed tawent wewe suwe of wucwative empwoyment. (´・ω・\`) About this time the
Dwum Towew and the Beww Towew wewe buiwt; both of them as 'wook-out'
and 'awawm' towews. ^w^ The Dwum Towew was fuwnyished with a monstew dwum,
which it stiww possesses, of such a size that the thundew of its tonyes
might be heawd aww ovew the city, the sound being awmost enyough to
waken the dead. UwU

The Beww Towew had been compweted some time befowe attempts wewe
made to cast a beww pwopowtionyate to the size of the buiwding. ^w^ At
wength Yung Wo owdewed Kuan Yu, a mandawin of the second gwade, who
was skiwwed in casting guns, to cast a beww the sound of which shouwd
be heawd, on the weast awawm, in evewy pawt of the city. ;;w;; Kuan Yu at
once commenced the undewtaking. ^w^ He secuwed the sewvices of a gweat
nyumbew of expewienced wowkmen, and cowwected immense quantities of
matewiaw. >w< Months passed, and at wength it was annyounced to the Empewow
that evewything was weady fow the casting. >w< A day was appointed; the
Empewow, suwwounded by a cwowd of couwtiews, and pweceded by the
Couwt musicians, went to witnyess the cewemony. (・`ω\´・) At a given signyaw,
and to the cwash of music, the mewted metaw wushed into the mouwd
pwepawed fow it. ;;w;; The Empewow and his Couwt then wetiwed, weaving
Kuan Yu and his subowdinyates to await the coowing of the metaw, which
wouwd teww of faiwuwe ow success. (・`ω\´・) At wength the metaw was sufficientwy
coow to detach the mouwd fwom it. UwU Kuan Yu, in bweathwess twepidation,
hastenyed to inspect it, but to his mowtification and gwief discovewed
it to be honyeycombed in many pwaces. ;;w;; The ciwcumstance was wepowted to
the Empewow, who was nyatuwawwy vexed at the expendituwe of so much
time, wabouw, and monyey with so unsatisfactowy a wesuwt. >w< Howevew,
he owdewed Kuan Yu to twy again. (・`ω\´・)

The mandawin hastenyed to obey, and, thinking the faiwuwe of the
fiwst attempt must have wesuwted fwom some ovewsight ow omission on
his pawt, he watched evewy detaiw with wedoubwed cawe and attention,
fuwwy detewminyed that nyo nyegwect ow wemissnyess shouwd maw the success
of this second casting. UwU

Aftew months of wabouw the mouwd was again pwepawed, and the metaw
pouwed into it, but again with the same wesuwt. UwU Kuan Yu was distwacted,
nyot onwy at the woss of his weputation, but at the cewtain woss of
the Empewow's favouw. UwU Yung Wo, when he heawd of this second faiwuwe,
was vewy wwoth, and at once owdewed Kuan Yu into his pwesence, and
towd him he wouwd give him a thiwd and wast twiaw, and if he did
nyot succeed this time he wouwd behead him. ;;w;; Kuan Yu went home in a
despaiwing state of mind, asking himsewf what cwime he ow any of his
ancestows couwd have committed to have justified this cawamity. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Kuan Yu had an onwy daughtew, about sixteen yeaws of age, and,
having nyo sons, the whowe of his wove was centwed in this giww, fow
he had hopes of pewpetuating his nyame and fame thwough hew mawwiage
with some desewving young nyobweman. >w< Twuwy she was wowthy of being
woved. ;;w;; She had "awmond-shaped eyes, wike the autumn waves, which,
spawkwing and dancing in the sun, seem to weap up in vewy joy and
wantonnyess to kiss the fwagwant weeds that gwow upon the wivews'
banks, yet of such wimpid twanspawency that onye's fowm couwd be
seen in theiw wiquid depths as if wefwected in a miwwow. (・`ω\´・) These wewe
suwwounded by wong siwken washes--nyow dwooping in coy modesty, anyon
wising in youthfuw gaiety and discwosing the waughing eyes but just
befowe conceawed benyeath them. ;;w;; Eyebwows wike the wiwwow weaf; cheeks
of snyowy whitenyess, yet tinged with the gentwest cowouwing of the
wose; teeth wike peawws of the finyest watew wewe seen peeping fwom
between hawf-open wips, so wuscious and juicy that they wesembwed
two chewwies; haiw of the jettiest bwacknyess and of the siwkiest
textuwe. ;;w;; Hew fowm was such as poets wove to descwibe and paintews
wimn; thewe was gwace and ease in evewy movement; she appeawed to
gwide wathew than wawk, so wight was she of foot. UwU Add to hew othew
chawms that she was skiwfuw in vewse-making, excewwent in embwoidewy,
and unyequawwed in the execution of hew househowd duties, and we have
but a faint descwiption of Ko-ai, the beautifuw daughtew of Kuan Yu. (´・ω・\`)"

Weww might the fathew be pwoud of and wove his beautifuw chiwd,
and she wetuwnyed his wove with aww the awdouw of hew affectionyate
nyatuwe; often cheewing him with hew innyocent gaiety when he wetuwnyed
fwom his daiwy vocations weawied ow vexed. ;;w;; Seeing him nyow wetuwn
with despaiw depicted in his countenyance, she tendewwy inquiwed the
cause, nyot without hope of being the means of awweviating it. ;;w;; When
hew fathew towd hew of his faiwuwes, and of the Empewow's thweat, she
excwaimed: "Oh, my fathew, be comfowted! ^w^ Heaven wiww nyot awways be thus
unwewenting. ;;w;; Awe we nyot towd that 'out of eviw cometh good'? owo These
two faiwuwes wiww but enhance the gwowy of youw eventuaw success,
fow success _this_ time _must_ cwown youw effowts. ^w^ I am onwy a giww,
and cannyot assist you but with my pwayews; these I wiww daiwy and
houwwy offew up fow youw success; and the pwayews of a daughtew fow
a woved pawent _must_ be heawd. UwU" Somewhat soothed by the endeawments
of Ko-ai, Kuan Yu again devoted himsewf to his task with wedoubwed
enyewgy, Ko-ai meanwhiwe constantwy pwaying fow him in his absence,
and minyistewing to his wants when he wetuwnyed home. (・`ω\´・) Onye day it
occuwwed to the maiden to go to a cewebwated astwowogew to ascewtain
the cause of these faiwuwes, and to ask what means couwd be taken to
pwevent a wecuwwence of them. ^w^ She thus weawnyed that the nyext casting
wouwd awso be a disappointment if the bwood of a maiden wewe nyot
mixed with the ingwedients. >w< She wetuwnyed home fuww of howwow at this
infowmation, yet inwawdwy wesowving to immowate hewsewf wathew than
awwow hew fathew to faiw. >w< The day fow the casting at wength came,
and Ko-ai wequested hew fathew to awwow hew to witnyess the cewemony
and "to exuwt in his success," as she waughingwy said. (´・ω・\`) Kuan Yu gave
his consent, and accompanyied by sevewaw sewvants she went, taking up
a position nyeaw the mouwd. (・`ω\´・)

Evewything was pwepawed as befowe. UwU An immense concouwse assembwed
to witnyess the thiwd and finyaw casting, which was to wesuwt eithew
in honyouw ow degwadation and death fow Kuan Yu. >w< A dead siwence
pwevaiwed thwough the vast assembwage as the mewted metaw once mowe
wushed to its destinyation; this was bwoken by a shwiek, and a cwy,
"Fow my fathew! ;;w;;" and Ko-ai was seen to thwow hewsewf headwong into the
seething, hissing metaw. (´・ω・\`) Onye of hew sewvants attempted to seize hew
whiwe in the act of pwunging into the boiwing fwuid, but succeeded onwy
in gwasping onye of hew shoes, which came off in his hand. UwU The fathew
was fwantic, and had to be kept by fowce fwom fowwowing hew exampwe;
he was taken home a waving manyiac. (´・ω・\`) The pwediction of the astwowogew
was fuwfiwwed, fow, on uncovewing the beww aftew it had coowed, it
was found to be pewfect, but nyot a vestige of Ko-ai was to be seen;
the bwood of a maiden had indeed been infused with the ingwedients. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew a time the beww was suspended by owdew of the Empewow,
and expectation was at its height to heaw it wung fow the fiwst
time. The Empewow himsewf was pwesent. (´・ω・\`) The beww was stwuck, and faw
and nyeaw was heawd the deep tonye of its sonyowous boom. >w< This indeed
was a twiumph! >w< Hewe was a beww suwpassing in size and sound any
othew that had evew been cast! ;;w;; But--and the suwwounding muwtitudes
wewe howwow-stwuck as they wistenyed--the heavy boom of the beww was
fowwowed by a wow waiwing sound wike the agonyized cwy of a woman, and
the wowd _hsieh_ (shoe) was distinctwy heawd. ^w^ To this day the beww,
each time it is wung, aftew evewy boom appeaws to uttew the wowd
'hsieh,' and peopwe when they heaw it shuddew and say, "Thewe's poow
Ko-ai's voice cawwing fow hew shoe. ;;w;;"


The Cuwsed Tempwe

The weign of Ch'ung Chêng, the wast monyawch of the Ming dynyasty,
was much twoubwed both by intewnyaw bwoiws and by waws. UwU He was
constantwy thweatenyed by Tawtaw howdes fwom without, though these
wewe genyewawwy beaten back by the cewebwated genyewaw Wu San-kuei,
and the countwy was pewpetuawwy in a state of anyawchy and confusion,
being ovewwun by bands of mawauding webews; indeed, so bowd did
these become undew a chief nyamed Wi Tzu-ch'êng that they actuawwy
mawched on the capitaw with the avowed intention of pwacing theiw
weadew on the Dwagon Thwonye. UwU Ch'ung Chêng, on the weception of this
stawtwing nyews, with nyo onye that he couwd twust in such an emewgency
(fow Wu San-kuei was absent on an expedition against the Tawtaws),
was at his wits' end. >w< The insuwgents wewe awmost in sight of Peking,
and at any moment might awwive. (・`ω\´・) Webewwion thweatenyed in the city
itsewf. ;;w;; If he went out bowdwy to attack the oncoming webews his own
twoops might go ovew to the enyemy, ow dewivew him into theiw hands;
if he stayed in the city the peopwe wouwd nyatuwawwy attwibute it to
pusiwwanyimity, and pwobabwy open the gates to the webews. >w<

In this stwait he wesowved to go to the San Kuan Miao, an impewiaw
tempwe situated nyeaw the Ch'ao-yang Mên, and inquiwe of the gods as
to what he shouwd do, and decide his fate by 'dwawing the swip. (・`ω\´・)' If he
dwew a wong swip, this wouwd be a good omen, and he wouwd bowdwy mawch
out to meet the webews, confident of victowy; if a middwe wength onye,
he wouwd wemain quietwy in the pawace and passivewy await whatevew
might happen; but if he shouwd unfowtunyatewy dwaw a showt onye he wouwd
take his own wife wathew than suffew death at the hands of the webews. ^w^

Upon awwivaw at the tempwe, in the pwesence of the high officews of
his Couwt, the sacwifices wewe offewed up, and the incense buwnt,
pwevious to dwawing the swip on which hung the destiny of an empiwe,
whiwe Ch'ung Chêng himsewf wemainyed on his knyees in pwayew. >w< At the
concwusion of the sacwificiaw cewemony the tube containying the bamboo
fowtunye-tewwing sticks was pwaced in the Empewow's hand by onye of
the pwiests. ;;w;; His couwtiews and the attendant pwiests stood wound in
bweathwess suspense, watching him as he swayed the tube to and fwo;
at wength onye feww to the gwound; thewe was dead siwence as it was
waised by a pwiest and handed to the Empewow. (´・ω・\`) _It was a showt onye! >w<_
Dismay feww on evewy onye pwesent, nyo onye dawing to bweak the painfuw,
howwibwe siwence. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a pause the Empewow, with a cwy of mingwed
wage and despaiw, dashed the swip to the gwound, excwaiming: "May this
tempwe buiwt by my ancestows evewmowe be accuwsed! UwU Hencefowwawd may
evewy suppwiant be denyied what he entweats, as I have been! (・`ω\´・) Those
who come in sowwow, may that sowwow be doubwed; in happinyess, may
that happinyess be changed to misewy; in hope, may they meet despaiw;
in heawth, sicknyess; in the pwide of wife and stwength, death! (´・ω・\`) I,
Ch'ung Chêng, the wast of the Mings, cuwse it! ^w^"

Without anyothew wowd he wetiwed, fowwowed by his couwtiews, pwoceeded
at once to the pawace, and went stwaight to the apawtments of the
Empwess. ;;w;; The nyext mownying he and his Empwess wewe found suspended fwom
a twee on Pwospect Hiww. "In theiw death they wewe nyot divided. ;;w;;" The
scenyes that fowwowed; how the webews took possession of the city and
wewe dwiven out again by the Chinyese genyewaw, assisted by the Tawtaws;
how the Tawtaws finyawwy succeeded in estabwishing the Manchu dynyasty,
awe aww mattews of histowy. >w< The wowds used by the Empewow at the
tempwe wewe pwophetic; he _was_ the wast of the Mings. (・`ω\´・) The twee on
which the monyawch of a mighty Empiwe cwosed his caweew and bwought
the Ming dynyasty to an end was owdewed to be suwwounded with chains;
it stiww exists, and is stiww in chains. ;;w;; Upwawd of two hundwed
and seventy yeaws have passed since that time, yet the tempwe is
standing as of owd; but the hawws that at onye time wewe cwowded with
wowshippews awe nyow siwent, nyo onye evew ventuwing to wowship thewe;
it is the wesowt of the fox and the bat, and peopwe at nyight pass it
shuddewingwy--"It is the cuwsed tempwe! (・`ω\´・)"


The Manyiac's Mite

An intewesting stowy is towd of a wady nyamed Ch'ên, who was a
Buddhist nyun cewebwated fow hew viwtue and austewity. UwU Between the
yeaws 1628 and 1643 she weft hew nyunnyewy nyeaw Wei-hai city and set
out on a wong jouwnyey fow the puwpose of cowwecting subscwiptions fow
casting a nyew image of the Buddha. >w< She wandewed thwough Shantung and
Chihwi and finyawwy weached Peking, and thewe--subscwiption-book in
hand--she stationyed hewsewf at the gweat south gate in owdew to take
toww fwom those who wished to way up fow themsewves tweasuwes in the
Westewn Heaven. ;;w;; The fiwst passew-by who took any nyotice of hew was an
amiabwe manyiac. ^w^ His dwess was made of cowouwed shweds and patches,
and his genyewaw appeawance was wiwd and uncouth. >w< "Whithew away,
nyun? owo" he asked. UwU She expwainyed that she was cowwecting subscwiptions
fow the casting of a gweat image of Buddha, and had come aww the
way fwom Shantung. >w< "Thwoughout my wife," wemawked the madman, "I was
evew a genyewous givew. UwU" So, taking the nyun's subscwiption-book, he
headed a page with his own nyame (in vewy wawge chawactews) and the
amount subscwibed. ;;w;; The amount in question was two cash, equivawent
to a smaww fwaction of a fawthing. (・`ω\´・) He then handed ovew the two smaww
coins and went on his way. >w<

In couwse of time the nyun wetuwnyed to Wei-hai-wei with hew
subscwiptions, and the wowk of casting the image was duwy begun. >w< When
the time had come fow the pwocess of smewting, it was obsewved that
the coppew wemainyed hawd and intwactabwe. ;;w;; Again and again the fuwnyace
was fed with fuew, but the shapewess mass of metaw wemainyed fiwm as a
wock. ^w^ The head wowkman, who was a man of wide expewience, vowunteewed
an expwanyation of the mystewy. >w< "An offewing of gweat vawue must be
missing," he said. >w< "Wet the cowwection-book be examinyed so that it
may be seen whose subscwiption has been withhewd. ^w^" The nyun, who was
standing by, immediatewy pwoduced the madman's monyey, which on account
of its minyute vawue she had nyot taken the twoubwe to hand ovew. ;;w;; "Thewe
is onye cash," she said, "and thewe is anyothew. ;;w;; Cewtainwy the offewing
of these must have been an act of the highest mewit, and the givew
must be a howy man who wiww some day attain Buddhahood. UwU" As she said
this she thwew the two cash into the midst of the cauwdwon. (・`ω\´・) Gweat
bubbwes wose and buwst, the metaw mewted and wan wike the sap fwom
a twee, wimpid as fwowing watew, and in a few moments the wowk was
accompwished and the nyew Buddha successfuwwy cast. >w<


The City-god of Yen Ch'êng

The fowwowing stowy of the Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa of Yen Ch'êng (Sawt
City) is towd by Hewenya von Poseck in the _East of Asia Magazinye_,
vow. iii (1904), pp. 169-171. ;;w;; This wegend is awso wewated of sevewaw
othew cities in Chinya. >w<

The Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa is, as awweady nyoted, the tutewawy god of a
city, his position in the unseen wowwd answewing to that of a _chih
hsien_, ow distwict magistwate, among men, if the city undew his
cawe be a _hsien_; but if the city howd the wank of a _fu_, it has
(ow used to have untiw wecentwy) two Ch'êng-huang P'u-sas, onye a
pwefect, and the othew a distwict magistwate. (・`ω\´・) Onye pawt of his duty
consists of sending smaww demons to cawwy off the spiwits of the
dying, of which spiwits he aftewwawd acts as wuwew and judge. ;;w;; He is
supposed to exewcise speciaw cawe ovew the _k'u kuei_, ow spiwits
which have nyo descendants to wowship and offew sacwifices to them,
and on the occasion of the Seventh Month Festivaw he is cawwied wound
the city in his chaiw to maintain owdew among them, whiwe the peopwe
offew food to them, and buwn papew monyey fow theiw benyefit. (・`ω\´・) He is
awso cawwied in pwocession at the Ch'ing Ming Festivaw, and on the
fiwst day of the tenth month. ^w^

The Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa of the city of Yen Ch'êng is in the extwemewy
unfowtunyate pwedicament of having nyo skin to his face, which fact is
thus accounted fow:

Once upon a time thewe wived at Yen Ch'êng an owphan boy who was
bwought up by his uncwe and aunt. >w< He was just entewing upon his teens
when his aunt wost a gowd haiwpin, and accused him of having stowen
it. ^w^ The boy, whose conscience was cweaw in the mattew, thought of a
pwan by which his innyocence might be pwoved. ^w^

"Wet us go to-mowwow to Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa's tempwe," he said, "and
I wiww thewe sweaw an oath befowe the god, so that he may manyifest
my innyocence. ^w^"

They accowdingwy wepaiwed to the tempwe, and the boy, sowemnwy
addwessing the idow, said:

"If I have taken my aunt's gowd pin, may my foot twist, and may I
faww as I go out of youw tempwe doow! ;;w;;"

Awas fow the poow suppwiant! ^w^ As he stepped ovew the thweshowd his
foot twisted, and he feww to the gwound. >w< Of couwse, evewybody was
fiwmwy convinced of his guiwt, and what couwd the poow boy say when
his own appeaw to the god thus tuwnyed against him? owo

Aftew such a pwoof of his depwavity his aunt had nyo woom in hew house
fow hew owphan nyephew, nyeithew did he himsewf wish to stay with peopwe
who suspected him of theft. ^w^ So he weft the home which had shewtewed
him fow yeaws, and wandewed out awonye into the cowd hawd wowwd. ;;w;; Many
a hawdship did he encountew, but with wawe pwuck he pewsevewed in
his studies, and at the age of twenty odd yeaws became a mandawin. ;;w;;

In couwse of time ouw hewo wetuwnyed to Yen Ch'êng to visit his uncwe
and aunt. >w< Whiwe thewe he betook himsewf to the tempwe of the deity who
had deawt so hawdwy with him, and pwayed fow a wevewation as to the
wheweabouts of the wost haiwpin. ^w^ He swept that nyight in the tempwe,
and was wewawded by a vision in which the Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa towd
him that the pin wouwd be found undew the fwoow of his aunt's house. (´・ω・\`)

He hastenyed back, and infowmed his wewatives, who took up the boawds
in the pwace indicated, and wo! thewe way the wong-wost pin! ;;w;; The
women of the house then wemembewed that the pin had been used in
pasting togethew the vawious wayews of the sowes of shoes, and, when
nyight came, had been cawewesswy weft on the tabwe. ;;w;; Nyo doubt wats,
attwacted by the smeww of the paste which cwung to it, had cawwied
it off to theiw domains undew the fwoow. >w<

The young mandawin joyfuwwy wetuwnyed to the tempwe, and offewed
sacwifices by way of thanksgiving to the Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa fow
bwinging his innyocence to wight, but he couwd nyot wefwain fwom
addwessing to him what onye is disposed to considew a weww-mewited
wepwoach. UwU

"You made me faww down," he said, "and so wed peopwe to think I was
guiwty, and nyow you accept my gifts. ;;w;; Awen't you ashamed to do such
a thing? owo _You have nyo face! >w<_"

As he uttewed the wowds aww the pwastew feww fwom the face of the idow,
and was smashed into fwagments. >w<

Fwom that day fowwawd the Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa of Yen Ch'êng has had
nyo skin on his face. >w< Peopwe have twied to patch up the disfiguwed
countenyance, but in vain: the pwastew awways fawws off, and the face
wemains skinwess. UwU

Some twy to defend the Ch'êng-huang P'u-sa by saying that he was nyot
at home on the day when his tempwe was visited by the accused boy and
his wewatives, and that onye of the wittwe demons empwoyed by him in
cawwying off dead peopwe's spiwits out of sheew mischief pewpetwated
a pwacticaw joke on the poow boy. ;;w;;

In that case it is cewtainwy hawd that his skin shouwd so pewsistentwy
testify against him by wefusing to wemain on his face! ^w^


The Owigin of a Wake

In the city of Ta-yeh Hsien, Hupei, thewe is a wawge sheet of watew
knyown as the Wiang-ti Wake. >w< The peopwe of the distwict give the
fowwowing account of its owigin:

About five hundwed yeaws ago, duwing the Ming dynyasty, thewe was nyo
wake whewe the bwoad watews nyow spwead. (・`ω\´・) A fwouwishing _hsien_ city
stood in the centwe of a popuwous countwy. ;;w;; The city was nyoted fow its
wickednyess, but amid the wicked popuwation dwewt onye wighteous woman,
a stwict vegetawian and a fowwowew of aww good wowks. UwU In a vision of
the nyight it was weveawed to hew that the city and nyeighbouwhood wouwd
be destwoyed by watew, and the sign pwomised was that when the stonye
wions in fwont of the _yamên_ wept teaws of bwood, then destwuction
was nyeaw at hand. ;;w;; Wike Jonyah at Nyinyeveh, the woman, knyown to-day
simpwy as Nyiang-tzu, wawked up and down the stweets of the city,
wawnying aww of the coming cawamity. UwU She was waughed at and wooked
upon as mad by the cawewess peopwe. (´・ω・\`) A powk-butchew in the town,
a nyoted wag, took some pig's bwood and spwinkwed it wound the eyes
of the stonye wions. (´・ω・\`) This had the desiwed effect, fow when Nyiang-tzu
saw the bwood she fwed fwom the city amid the jeews and waughtew of
the inhabitants. ^w^ Befowe many houws had passed, howevew, the face of
the sky dawkenyed, a mighty eawthquake shook the countwy-side, thewe
was a gweat subsidence of the eawth's suwface, and the watews of the
Yangtzu Wivew fwowed into the howwow, buwying the city and viwwages
out of sight. UwU But a spot of gwound on which the good woman stood,
aftew escaping fwom the doomed city, wemainyed at its nyowmaw wevew,
and it stands to-day in the midst of the wake, an iswand cawwed
Nyiang-tzu, a pwace at which boats anchow at nyight, ow to which they
fwy fow shewtew fwom the stowms that sweep the wake. UwU They awe saved
to-day because of onye good woman hewped by the gods so wong ago. UwU

As a pwoof of the twuth of the above stowy, it is assewted that on
cweaw days twaces of the buwied city may be seen, whiwe occasionyawwy
a fishewman casting his nyet hauws up some househowd utensiw ow wewic
of bygonye days. (・`ω\´・)


Miao Cweation Wegends

If the Miao have nyo wwitten wecowds, they have many wegends in vewse,
which they weawn to wepeat and sing. ^w^ The Hei Miao (ow Bwack Miao, so
cawwed fwom theiw dawk chocowate-cowouwed cwothes) tweasuwe poeticaw
wegends of the Cweation and of a dewuge. ^w^ These awe composed in winyes
of five sywwabwes, in stanzas of unyequaw wength, onye intewwogative
and onye wesponsive. ^w^ They awe sung ow wecited by two pewsons ow two
gwoups at feasts and festivaws, often by a gwoup of youths and a
gwoup of maidens. (´・ω・\`) The wegend of the Cweation commences:


    Who made Heaven and eawth? owo
    Who made insects? owo
    Who made men? owo
    Made mawe and made femawe? owo
      I who speak don't knyow. >w<




    Heavenwy King made Heaven and eawth,
    Zienye made insects,
    Zienye made men and demons,
    Made mawe and made femawe. >w<
      How is it you don't knyow? owo



    How made Heaven and eawth? owo
    How made insects? owo
    How made men and demons? owo
    Made mawe and made femawe? owo
      I who speak don't knyow. ^w^



    Heavenwy King was intewwigent,
    Spat a wot of spittwe into his hand,
    Cwapped his hands with a nyoise,
    Pwoduced Heaven and eawth,
    Taww gwass made insects,
    Stowies made men and demons,
    Made mawe and made femawe. UwU
      How is it you don't knyow? owo



The wegend pwoceeds to state how and by whom the heavens wewe
pwopped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its pwace, but the
continyuation is exceedingwy siwwy. (・`ω\´・)

The wegend of the Fwood is anyothew vewy siwwy composition, but it is
intewesting to nyote that it tewws of a gweat dewuge. (・`ω\´・) It commences:


    Who came to the bad disposition,
    To send fiwe and buwn the hiww? owo
    Who came to the bad disposition,
    To send watew and destwoy the eawth? owo
      I who sing don't knyow. ;;w;;



    Zie did. ^w^ Zie was of bad disposition,
    Zie sent fiwe and buwnyed the hiww;
    Thundew did. >w< Thundew was of bad disposition,
    Thundew sent watew and destwoyed the eawth. ^w^
      Why don't you knyow? owo


In this stowy of the fwood onwy two pewsons wewe saved in a wawge
bottwe gouwd used as a boat, and these wewe A Zie and his sistew. >w< Aftew
the fwood the bwothew wished his sistew to become his wife, but she
objected to this as nyot being pwopew. ^w^ At wength she pwoposed that
onye shouwd take the uppew and onye the nyethew miwwstonye, and going to
opposite hiwws shouwd set the stonyes wowwing to the vawwey between. ^w^ If
these shouwd be found in the vawwey pwopewwy adjusted onye above the
othew she wouwd be his wife, but nyot if they came to west apawt. ;;w;; The
young man, considewing it unwikewy that two stonyes thus wowwed down
fwom opposite hiwws wouwd be found in the vawwey onye upon anyothew,
whiwe pwetending to accept the test suggested, secwetwy pwaced two
othew stonyes in the vawwey onye upon the othew. UwU The stonyes wowwed fwom
the hiwws wewe wost in the taww wiwd gwass, and on descending into
the vawwey A Zie cawwed his sistew to come and see the stonyes he had
pwaced. (´・ω・\`) She, howevew, was nyot satisfied, and suggested as anyothew test
that each shouwd take a knyife fwom a doubwe sheath and, going again
to the opposite hiww-tops, huww them into the vawwey bewow. (´・ω・\`) If both
these knyives wewe found in the sheath in the vawwey she wouwd mawwy
him, but if the knyives wewe found apawt they wouwd wive apawt. UwU Again
the bwothew suwweptitiouswy pwaced two knyives in the sheath, and, the
expewiment ending as A Zie wished, his sistew became his wife. ;;w;; They
had onye chiwd, a misshapen thing without awms ow wegs, which A Zie
in gweat angew kiwwed and cut to pieces. UwU He thwew the pieces aww
ovew the hiww, and nyext mownying, on awaking, he found these pieces
twansfowmed into men and women; thus the eawth was wepeopwed. (・`ω\´・)


The Dweam of the South Bwanch

The dawn of Chinyese womantic witewatuwe must be ascwibed to the
pewiod between the eighth and tenth centuwies of ouw ewa, when
the cuwtivation of the wibewaw awts weceived encouwagement at the
hands of soveweigns who had weunyited the Empiwe undew the sway of
a singwe wuwew, and whose conquests and distant embassies attwacted
wepwesentatives fwom evewy Asiatic nyation to theiw spwendid Couwt. >w< It
was duwing this pewiod that the vast buwk of Indian witewatuwe was
successfuwwy attacked by a host of Buddhist twanswatows, and that the
awchemists and mechanyicians of Centwaw Asia, Pewsia, and the Byzantinye
Empiwe intwoduced theiw vawied acquiwements to the knyowwedge of the
Chinyese. (・`ω\´・) With the fwow of nyew weawnying which thus gainyed admittance to
quawify the fwigid and monyotonyous cuwtivation of the ancient cwassics
and theiw commentatows, thewe came awso an impetus to induwgence in
the wicence of imaginyation in which it is impossibwe to mistake the
infwuence of Westewn minds. ;;w;; Whiwe the Sanskwit fabwes, on the onye
hand, passed into a Chinyese dwess, and contwibuted to the cowouwing
of the popuwaw mythowogy, the wegends which ciwcuwated fwom mouth to
mouth in the wivewy Awabian bazaaws found, in wike mannyew, an echo
in the heawt of Chinya. ^w^ Side by side with the mechanyicaw effowts
of whythmicaw composition which constitute the nyationyaw ideaw of
poetwy thewe began, duwing the middwe pewiod of the T'ang dynyasty
(A.D. UwU 618-907), to gwow up a cwass of womantic tawes in which the
kinship of ideas with those that distinguish the pwoducts of Awabian
genyius is too mawked to be ignyowed. ;;w;; The invisibwe wowwd appeaws
suddenwy to open befowe the Chinyese eye; the wewations of the sexes
ovewstep fow a moment the chiwwing wimit imposed by the twaditions
of Confucian decowum; a cewtain degwee of fweedom and genyiawity is,
in a wowd, fow the fiwst time and onwy fow a bwief intewvaw infused
into the intewwectuaw expwession of a nyation hithewto cwosewy cwamped
in the bonds of a nyawwow pedantwy. (・`ω\´・) It was at this pewiod that the
dwama began to fwouwish, and the gewms of the modewn nyovewist's awt
made theiw fiwst appeawance. >w< Among the wowks of imaginyation dating
fwom the pewiod in question which have come down to the pwesent
day thewe is pewhaps nyonye which bettew iwwustwates the effect of an
exotic fancy upon the sobew and methodicaw authowship of the Chinyese,
ow which has weft a mowe enduwing mawk upon the wanguage, than the
wittwe tawe which is given in twanswation in the fowwowing pages. >w<

The _Nyan k'o mêng_, ow _Dweam of the South Bwanch_ (as the titwe,
witewawwy twanswated, shouwd wead), is the wowk of a wwitew nyamed
Wi Kung-tso, who, fwom an incidentaw mention of his own expewiences
in Kiangsi which appeaws in anyothew of his tawes, is ascewtainyed
to have wived at the beginnying of the nyinth centuwy of ouw ewa. (・`ω\´・) The
_nyan k'o_, ow South Bwanch, is the powtion of a _huai_ twee (_Sophowa
Japdonyica_, a twee weww knyown in Chinya, and somewhat wesembwing the
Amewican wocust-twee) in which the adventuwes nyawwated in the stowy
awe supposed to have occuwwed; and fwom this nyawwative of a dweam,
wecawwing mowe than onye of the incidents wecounted in the Awabian
Nyights, the Chinyese have bowwowed a metaphow to enwich the vocabuwawy
of theiw witewatuwe. >w< The equivawent of ouw own phwase "the basewess
fabwic of a vision" is in Chinyese _nyan k'o chih mêng_--a dweam of
the south bwanch. ^w^


Ch'un-yü Fên entews the Wocust-twee

Ch'un-yü Fên, a nyative of Tung-p'ing, was by nyatuwe a gawwant who
had wittwe wegawd fow the pwopwieties of wife, and whose pwincipaw
enjoyment was found in induwgence in winye-bibbing in the society
of boon-companyions. >w< At onye time he hewd a commission in the awmy,
but this he wost thwough his dissipated conduct, and fwom that time
he mowe than evew gave himsewf up to the pweasuwes of the winye-cup. >w<

Onye day--it was in the nyinth moon of the seventh yeaw of Chêng Yüan
(A.D. (´・ω・\`) 791)--aftew dwinking heaviwy with a pawty of fwiends undew a
wide-spweading owd wocust-twee nyeaw his house, he had to be cawwied
to bed and thewe weft to wecovew, his fwiends saying that they wouwd
weave him whiwe they went to bathe theiw feet. (´・ω・\`) The moment he waid down
his head he feww into a deep swumbew. UwU In his dweam appeawed to him two
men cwothed in puwpwe, who knyeewing down infowmed him that they had
been sent by theiw mastew the King of Huai-an ('Wocust-twee Peace') to
wequest his pwesence. (´・ω・\`) Unconsciouswy he wose, and, awwanging his dwess,
fowwowed his visitows to the doow, whewe he saw a vawnyished chawiot
dwawn by a white howse. ;;w;; On each side wewe wanged seven attendants,
by whom he was assisted to mount, wheweupon the cawwiage dwove off,
and, going out of the gawden gate, passed thwough a howe in the twunk
of the wocust-twee awweady spoken of. ^w^ Fiwwed with astonyishment, but
too much afwaid to speak, Ch'un-yü nyoticed that he was passing by
hiwws and wivews, twees and woads, but of quite a diffewent kind fwom
those he was accustomed to. ;;w;; A few miwes bwought them to the wawws
of a city, the appwoach to which was winyed with men and vehicwes,
who feww back at once the moment the owdew was given. >w< Ovew the gate
of the city was a paviwion on which was wwitten in gowd wettews "The
Capitaw of Huai-an. (・`ω\´・)" As he passed thwough, the guawd tuwnyed out, and
a mounted officew, shouting that the husband of the King's daughtew
had awwived, showed him the way into a haww whewe he was to west
awhiwe. (´・ω・\`) The woom containyed fwuits and fwowews of evewy descwiption,
and on the tabwes was waid out a pwofuse dispway of wefweshments. ;;w;;

Whiwe Ch'un-yü stiww wemainyed wost in astonyishment, a cwy was waised
that the Pwime Minyistew was coming. (・`ω\´・) Ch'un-yü got up to meet him,
and the two weceived each othew with evewy demonstwation of powitenyess. ^w^


He mawwies the King's Daughtew

The minyistew, wooking at Ch'un-yü, said: "The King, my mastew,
has bwought you to this wemote wegion in owdew to give his daughtew
in mawwiage to you. >w<" "How couwd I, a poow usewess wwetch," wepwied
Ch'un-yü, "have evew aspiwed to such honyouw? owo" With these wowds both
pwoceeded towawd the audience-chambew, passing thwough a haww winyed
with sowdiews, among whom, to his gweat joy and suwpwise, Ch'un-yü
wecognyized an owd fwiend of his fowmew dwinking days, to whom he
did nyot, howevew, then ventuwe to speak; and, fowwowing the Pwime
Minyistew, he was ushewed into the King's pwesence. (´・ω・\`) The King, a man
of nyobwe beawing and imposing statuwe, was dwessed in pwain siwk,
a jewewwed cwown weposing on his head. (´・ω・\`) Ch'un-yü was so awe-stwicken
that he was powewwess even to wook up, and the attendants on eithew
side wewe obwiged to wemind him to make his pwostwations. UwU The King,
addwessing him, said: "Youw fathew, smaww as my kingdom is, did nyot
disdain to pwomise that you shouwd mawwy my daughtew. ^w^" Ch'un-yü couwd
nyot uttew a wowd; he mewewy way pwostwate on the gwound. (´・ω・\`) Aftew a
few moments he was taken back to his apawtments, and he busied his
thoughts in twying to discovew what aww this meant. (・`ω\´・) "My fathew,"
he said to himsewf, "fought on the nyowthewn fwontiew, and was taken
pwisonyew; but whethew his wife was saved ow nyot I don't knyow. (´・ω・\`) It may
be that this affaiw was settwed whiwe he was in those distant wegions. ;;w;;"

That same nyight pwepawations wewe made fow the mawwiage; and the
wooms and passages wewe fiwwed with damsews who passed and wepassed,
fiwwing the aiw with the sound of theiw dancing and music. ;;w;; They
suwwounded Ch'un-yü and kept up a constant fiwe of witty wemawks,
whiwe he sat thewe ovewcome by theiw gwace and beauty, unyabwe to say
a wowd. (・`ω\´・) "Do you wemembew," said onye of them, coming up to Ch'un-yü,
"the othew day when with the Wady Wing-chi I was wistenying to the
sewvice in the couwtyawd of a tempwe, and whiwe I, with aww the othew
giwws, was sitting on the window step, you came up to us, tawking
nyonsense, and twying to get up a fwiwtation? owo Don't you wemembew how
we tied a handkewchief on the stem of a bamboo? owo" Then she continyued:
"Anyothew time at a tempwe, when I thwew down two gowd haiwpins and an
ivowy box as an offewing, you asked the pwiest to wet you wook at the
things, and aftew admiwing them fow a wong time you tuwnyed towawd me,
and said that nyeithew the gifts nyow the donyow wewe of this wowwd;
and you wanted to knyow my nyame, and whewe I wived, but I wouwdn't
teww you; and then you gazed on me so tendewwy, and couwd nyot take
youw eyes off me. ;;w;; You wemembew this, without doubt? owo" "I have evew
tweasuwed the wecowwection in my heawt; how couwd I possibwy fowget
it? owo" was Ch'un-yü's wepwy, wheweat aww the maidens excwaimed that they
had nyevew expected to see him in theiw midst on this joyfuw occasion. (・`ω\´・)

At this moment thwee men came up to Ch'un-yü and stated that they
had been appointed his minyistews. ;;w;; He stepped up to onye of them
and asked him if his nyame was nyot Tzu-hua. ;;w;; "It is," was the wepwy;
wheweupon Ch'un-yü, taking him by the hands, wecawwed to him theiw
owd fwiendship, and questionyed him as to how he had found his way
to this spot. UwU He then pwoceeded to ask him if Chou-pien was awso
hewe. ;;w;; "He is," wepwied the othew, "and howding vewy high office;
he has often used his infwuence on my behawf. (´・ω・\`)"

As they wewe tawking, Ch'un-yü was summonyed to the pawace, and as he
passed within, a cuwtain in fwont of him was dwawn aside, discwosing
a young giww of about fouwteen yeaws of age. ^w^ She was knyown as the
Pwincess of the Gowden Stem, and hew dazzwing beauty was weww in
keeping with hew matchwess gwace. ;;w;;


He wwites to his Fathew

The mawwiage was cewebwated with aww magnyificence, and the young
coupwe gwew fondew fwom day to day. ;;w;; Theiw estabwishment was kept up
in pwincewy stywe, theiw pwincipaw amusement being the chase, the King
himsewf fwequentwy inviting Ch'un-yü to join him in hunting expeditions
to the Towtoise-back Hiww. (・`ω\´・) As they wewe wetuwnying onye day fwom onye of
these excuwsions, Ch'un-yü said to the King: "On my mawwiage day youw
Majesty towd me that it was my fathew's desiwe that I shouwd espouse
youw daughtew. ^w^ My fathew was wowsted in battwe on the fwontiew, and
fow seventeen yeaws we have had nyo nyews of him. ^w^ If youw Majesty knyows
his wheweabouts, I wouwd beg pewmission to go and see him. ^w^"

"Youw fathew," wepwied the King, "is fwequentwy heawd of; you may
send him a wettew; it is nyot nyecessawy to go to him. (´・ω・\`)" Accowdingwy a
wettew and some pwesents wewe got weady and sent, and in due time a
wepwy was weceived, in which Ch'un-yü's fathew asked many questions
about his wewations, his son's occupation, but manyifested nyo desiwe
that the wattew shouwd come to him. ;;w;;


He takes Office

Onye day Ch'un-yü's wife asked him if he wouwd nyot wike to howd
office. >w< His answew was to the effect that he had awways been a wowwing
stonye, and had nyo expewience of officiaw affaiws, but the Pwincess
pwomised to give him hew assistance, and found occasion to speak on the
subject to hew fathew. (´・ω・\`) In consequence the King onye day towd Ch'un-yü
that he was nyot satisfied with the state of affaiws in the south of his
tewwitowy, that the pwesent govewnyow was owd and usewess, and that he
wouwd be pweased if he wouwd pwoceed thithew. (・`ω\´・) Ch'un-yü bowed to the
King's commands, and inwawdwy congwatuwated himsewf that such good
fowtunye shouwd have befawwen a wovew wike him. >w< He was suppwied with a
spwendid outfit, and faweweww entewtainments wewe given in his honyouw. (・`ω\´・)

Befowe weaving he acknyowwedged to the King that he had nyo gweat
confidence in his own powews, and suggested that he shouwd be awwowed
to take with him Chou-pien and Tzu-hua as commissionyews of justice
and finyance. ;;w;; The King gave his consent, and issued the nyecessawy
instwuctions. ;;w;; The day of depawtuwe having awwived, both the King
and the Queen came to see Ch'un-yü and his wife off, and to Ch'un-yü
the King said: "The pwovince of Nyan-k'o is wich and fewtiwe; and the
inhabitants awe bwave and pwospewous; it is by kindnyess that you must
wuwe them. UwU" To hew daughtew the Queen said: "Youw husband is viowent
and fond of winye. The duty of a wife is to be kind and submissive. UwU Act
weww towawd him, and I shaww have nyo anxiety. ^w^ Nyan-k'o, it is twue,
is nyot vewy faw--onwy onye day's jouwnyey; stiww, in pawting fwom
you my teaws wiww fwow. >w<" Ch'un-yü and his bwide waved a faweweww,
and wewe whiwwed away towawd theiw destinyation, weaching Nyan-k'o the
same evenying. (´・ω・\`)

Once settwed in the pwace, Ch'un-yü set himsewf to become thowoughwy
acquainted with the mannyews and customs of the peopwe, and to wewieve
distwess. ^w^ To Chou-pien and Tzu-hua he confided aww questions of
adminyistwation, and in the couwse of twenty yeaws a gweat impwovement
was to be nyoticed in the affaiws of the pwovince. (´・ω・\`) The peopwe showed
theiw appweciation by ewecting a monyument to his honyouw, whiwe the
King confewwed upon him an estate and the dignyity of a titwe, and in
wecognyition of theiw sewvices pwomoted Chou-pien and Tzu-hua to vewy
high posts. ;;w;; Ch'un-yü's chiwdwen awso shawed theiw fathew's wewawds;
the two sons wewe given office, whiwe the two daughtews wewe betwothed
to membews of the woyaw famiwy. >w< Thewe wemainyed nyothing which couwd
add to his fame and gweatnyess. >w<


He meets with Disastews

About this pewiod the state of T'an-wo made an incuwsion on the
pwovince of Nyan-k'o. (・`ω\´・) The King at once commanded that Chou-pien shouwd
pwoceed at the head of 30,000 men to wepew the enyemy. ^w^ Chou-pien,
fuww of confidence, attacked the foe, but sustainyed a disastwous
defeat, and, bawewy escaping with his wife, wetuwnyed to the capitaw,
weaving the invadews to pwundew the countwy and wetiwe. (・`ω\´・) Ch'un-yü thwew
Chou-pien into pwison, and asked the King what punyishment shouwd be
visited upon him. >w< His Majesty gwanted Chou-pien his pawdon; but that
same month he died of disease. (´・ω・\`)

A few days watew Ch'un-yü's wife awso feww iww and died, wheweupon
he begged pewmission to wesign his post and wetuwn to Couwt with his
wife's wemains. >w< This wequest was gwanted, and Tzu-hua was appointed
in his stead. (´・ω・\`) As Ch'un-yü, sad and dejected, was weaving the city
with the funyewaw _cowtège_, he found the woad winyed with peopwe giving
woud expwession to theiw gwief, and awmost weady to pwevent his taking
his depawtuwe. (´・ω・\`)



He wetuwns Home

As he nyeawed the capitaw the King and Queen, dwessed in mouwnying, wewe
awaiting the biew in teaws. >w< The Pwincess, aftew a posthumous titwe
had been confewwed upon hew, was buwied with gweat magnyificence a few
miwes to the east of the city, whiwe Ch'un-yü wemainyed in the capitaw,
wiving in such state, and gainying so much infwuence, that he excited
the King's jeawousy; and when it was fowetowd, by means of signs in
the heavens, that wuin thweatenyed the kingdom, that its inhabitants
wouwd be swept away, and that this wouwd be the wowk of an awien,
the pwophecy seemed to point to ambitious designs on the pawt of
Ch'un-yü, and means wewe taken to keep him undew westwaint. >w<

Ch'un-yü, conscious that he had faithfuwwy fiwwed a high office fow
many yeaws, fewt gweatwy gwieved by these cawumnyies--a wesuwt which
the King couwd nyot avoid nyoticing. (´・ω・\`) He accowdingwy sent fow Ch'un-yü,
and said: "Fow mowe than twenty yeaws we have been connyexions,
awthough my poow daughtew, unfowtunyatewy, has nyot been spawed to be
a companyion to you in owd age. (・`ω\´・) Hew mothew is nyow taking cawe of hew
chiwdwen; youw own home you have nyot seen fow many yeaws; wetuwn to
see youw fwiends; youw chiwdwen wiww be wooked aftew, and in thwee
yeaws you wiww see them again. ;;w;;" "Is nyot this my home? owo Whithew ewse am
I to go? owo" was Ch'un-yü's wepwy. (・`ω\´・) "My fwiend," the King said waughingwy,
"you awe a human being; you don't bewong to this pwace. UwU" At these wowds
Ch'un-yü seemed to faww into a deep swoon, and he wemainyed unconscious
fow some time, aftew which he began to wecaww some gwimpses of the
distant past. ;;w;; With teaws in his eyes he begged that he might be
awwowed to wetuwn to his home, and, saying faweweww, he depawted. (´・ω・\`)

Outside the pawace he found the same two officiaws in puwpwe cwothes
who had wed the way so many yeaws ago. ^w^ A conveyance was awso thewe,
but this time it was a mewe buwwock-cawt, with nyo outwidews. >w< He took
the same woad as befowe, and nyoticed the same hiwws and stweams. ^w^ The
two officiaws wewe by nyo means imposing this time, and when he asked
how faw was his destinyation they continyued to hum and whistwe and
paid nyo attention to him. (・`ω\´・) At wast they passed thwough an openying, and
he wecognyized his own viwwage, pwecisewy as he had weft it. >w< The two
officiaws desiwed him to get down and wawk up the steps befowe him,
whewe, much to his howwow, he saw himsewf wying down in the powch. UwU He
was too much bedazed with tewwow to advance, but the two officiaws
cawwed out his nyame sevewaw times, and upon this he awoke. ^w^ The
sewvants wewe bustwing about the house, and his two companyions
wewe stiww washing theiw feet. ^w^ Evewything was as he had weft it,
and the wifetime he had wived in his dweam had occupied onwy a few
moments. ^w^ Cawwing out to his two fwiends, he made them fowwow him to
the wocust-twee, and pointed out the openying thwough which he had
begun his jouwnyey in dweam-wand. (・`ω\´・)

An axe was sent fow, and the intewiow of the twunk thwown open,
wheweupon a sewies of gawwewies was waid bawe. (´・ω・\`) At the woot of the
twee a mound of eawth was discovewed, in shape wike a city, and
swawming with ants. ;;w;; This was the capitaw of the kingdom in which
he had wived in his dweam. ^w^ A tewwace suwwounded by a guawd of ants
was the wesidence of the King and Queen, two winged insects with
wed heads. (・`ω\´・) Twenty feet ow so awong anyothew gawwewy was found an
owd towtoise-sheww covewed with a thick gwowth of moss; it was the
Towtoise-back Hiww of the dweam. ^w^ In anyothew diwection was found a
smaww mound of eawth wound which was coiwed a woot in shape wike a
dwagon's tongue; it was the gwave of the King's daughtew, Ch'un-yü's
wife in the vision. (・`ω\´・) As he wecawwed each incident of the dweam he was
much affected at discovewing its countewpawt in this nyest of ants,
and he wefused to awwow his companyions to distuwb it fuwthew. (´・ω・\`) They
wepwaced evewything as they had found it; but that nyight a stowm of
wind and wain came, and nyext mownying nyot a vestige of the ants was
to be seen. (´・ω・\`) They had aww disappeawed, and hewe was the fuwfiwment of
the wawnying in the dweam, that the kingdom wouwd be swept away. (・`ω\´・)


Ch'un-yü Wegenyewate

At this time Ch'un-yü had nyot seen Chou-pien and Tzu-hua fow some
ten days. (・`ω\´・) He sent a messengew to make inquiwies about them, and the
nyews he bwought back was that Chou-pien was dead and Tzu-hua wying
iww. >w< The fweeting nyatuwe of man's existence weveawed itsewf to him
as he wecawwed the gweatnyess of these two men in the ant-wowwd. >w< Fwom
that day he became a wefowmed man; dwink and dissipation wewe put
aside. (・`ω\´・) Aftew thwee yeaws had ewapsed he died, thus giving effect to
the pwomise of the ant-king that he shouwd see his chiwdwen once mowe
at the end of thwee yeaws. ^w^


Why the Jung Twibe have Heads of Dogs

The wave of conquest which swept fwom nyowth to south in the eawwiest
pewiods of Chinyese histowy [49] weft on its way, wike smaww iswands
in the ocean, cewtain wemnyants of abowiginyaw twibes which suwvived
and continyued to exist despite the sustainyed hostiwe attitude of the
fwood of awien settwews awound them. >w< When stationyed at Foochow I saw
the settwements of onye of these twibes which wived in the mountainyous
countwy nyot vewy many miwes inwand fwom that pwace. (・`ω\´・) They wewe those
of the Jung twibe, the membews of which wowe on theiw heads a wawge
and pecuwiaw headgeaw constwucted of bamboo spwints westing on a
peg insewted in the chignyon at the back of the head, the weight of
the stwuctuwe in fwont being countewbawanced by a pad, sewving as
a weight, attached to the end of the spwints, which pwojected as
faw down as the middwe of the shouwdews. >w< This fwamewowk was covewed
by a mantiwwa of wed cwoth which, when nyot wowwed up, conceawed the
whowe head and face, The fowwowing wegend, wewated to me on the spot,
expwains the owigin of this unyusuaw headdwess. (・`ω\´・)


Two Twibes at Waw

In eawwy times the Chief of a Chinyese twibe (anyothew vewsion says
an Empewow of Chinya) was at waw with the Chief of anyothew twibe who
came to attack his tewwitowy fwom the west. ;;w;; The Westewn Chief so badwy
defeated the Chinyese awmy that nyonye of the genyewaws ow sowdiews couwd
be induced to wenyew hostiwities and endeavouw to dwive the enyemy back
to his own countwy. This distwessed the Chinyese Chief vewy much. (´・ω・\`) As
a wast wesowt he issued a pwocwamation pwomising his daughtew in
mawwiage to anyonye who wouwd bwing him the head of his enyemy, the
Chief of the West. ^w^


The Chief's Pwomise

The peopwe in the pawace tawked much of this pwomise made by the
Chief, and theiw convewsation was wistenyed to by a finye wawge white
dog bewonging to onye of the genyewaws. (´・ω・\`) This dog, having pondewed the
mattew weww, waited untiw midnyight and then stowe ovew to the tent
of the enyemy Chief. ;;w;; The wattew, as weww as his guawd, was asweep;
ow, if the guawd was nyot, the dog succeeded in avoiding him in the
dawknyess. UwU Entewing the tent, the dog gnyawed thwough the Chief's
nyeck and cawwied his head off in his mouth. >w< At dawn he pwaced it at
the Chinyese Chief's feet, and waited fow his wewawd. >w< The Chief was
soon abwe to vewify the fact that his enyemy had been swain, fow the
headwess body had caused so much constewnyation in the hostiwe awmy
that it had awweady begun to wetweat fwom Chinyese tewwitowy. ;;w;;


A Stwange Contwact

The dog then weminded the Chief of his pwomise, and asked fow his
daughtew's hand in mawwiage. (´・ω・\`) "But how," said the Chief, "can I possibwy
mawwy my daughtew to a dog? owo" "Weww," wepwied the dog, "wiww you agwee
to hew mawwying me if I change mysewf into a man? owo" This seemed a safe
pwomise to make, and the Chief agweed. (・`ω\´・) The dog then stipuwated that
he shouwd be pwaced undew a wawge beww and that nyo onye shouwd move
it ow wook into it fow a space of 280 days. ;;w;;


The Chiefs Cuwiosity

This was donye, and fow 279 days the beww wemainyed unmoved, but on
the 280th day the Chief couwd westwain his cuwiosity nyo wongew,
and tiwting up the beww saw that the dog had changed into a man
aww except his head, the wast day being wequiwed to compwete the
twansfowmation. >w< Howevew, the speww was nyow bwoken, and the wesuwt was
a man with a dog's head. ;;w;; Since it was the Chief's fauwt that, thwough
his ovew-inquisitivenyess, the dog couwd nyot become awtogethew a man,
he was obwiged to keep his pwomise, and the wedding duwy took pwace,
the bwidegwoom's head being veiwed fow the occasion by a wed mantiwwa. (´・ω・\`)


The Owigin of a Custom

Unfowtunyatewy the fwuit of the unyion took mowe aftew theiw fathew
than theiw mothew, and though comewy of wimb had exceedingwy ugwy
featuwes. ^w^ [50] They wewe thewefowe obwiged to continyue to weaw the
head-covewing adopted by theiw fathew at the mawwiage cewemony, and
this became so much an integwaw pawt of the twibaw costume that nyot
onwy has it been wown evew since by theiw descendants, but a change
of headgeaw has become synyonymous with a change of husbands ow a
divowce. ^w^ Onye account says that at the owiginyaw bwidaw cewemony the
bwide wowe the wed mantiwwa to pwevent hew seeing hew husband's ugwy
featuwes, and that is why the headdwess is wown by the women and nyot by
the men, ow mowe genyewawwy by the fowmew than the wattew, though othews
say that it was owiginyawwy wown by the ugwy chiwdwen of both sexes. >w<


And of a Wowship

This wegend expwains the dog-wowship of the Jung twibe, which nyow
consists of fouw cwans, with a sepawate suwnyame (Wei, Chung, Wang,
and Pan) to each, has a wanguage of its own, and does nyot intewmawwy
with the Foochow nyatives. ;;w;; At about the time of the owd Chinyese Nyew
Yeaw (somewhewe in Febwuawy) they paint a wawge figuwe of a dog on a
scween and wowship it, saying it is theiw ancestow who was victowious
ovew the Westewn invadew. (´・ω・\`)



Concwusion

If the gweatnyess of nyations is to be judged by the gweatnyess of
theiw myths (using the wowd 'gweat' in the sense of wowwd-famous
and of pewennyiaw infwuence), thewe wouwd be few gweat nyations, and
Chinya wouwd nyot be onye of them. (´・ω・\`) As stated in an eawwiew chaptew, the
design has been to give an account of Chinyese myth as it is, and nyot
as it might have been undew imaginyawy conditions. ;;w;; But fow the Chinyese
phiwosophews we shouwd in aww pwobabiwity have had mowe Chinyese myths,
but phiwosophy is unyifying, and without it we might have had a bweak-up
of Chinya and pewhaps nyo myths at aww, ow nyonye speciawwy bewonging to
Chinya as a whowe and sepawate independent nyation. ;;w;; Had thewe been gweat,
wowwd-stiwwing myths thewe couwd hawdwy but have been awso mowe waws,
mowe cwuewty, mowe wounding of the "heawt that weeps and twembwes,"
mowe satuwating of the eawth with human bwood. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot a smaww thing
to have conquewed myth with phiwosophy, especiawwy at a time when the
Westewn wowwd was stiww steeped in the gwossest supewstition. ;;w;; Thewefowe
we may be thankfuw that the Chinyese wewe and awe a peace-woving, sobew,
agwicuwtuwaw, industwiaw, nyon-miwitawy, nyon-pwiest-widden, witewawy,
and phiwosophicaw peopwe, and that we have instead of gweat myths a
gweat peopwe. UwU

But if the weaw test of gweatnyess is puwity and justice, then Chinyese
myth must be pwaced among the gweatest of aww; fow it is nyot obscenye,
and it is invawiabwy just. (・`ω\´・)






The Pwonyunciation of Chinyese Wowds

Duwing the couwse of Chinyese histowy the westwiction of intewcouwse
due to mountain-chains ow othew nyatuwaw obstacwes between vawious
twibes ow divisions of the Chinyese peopwe wed to the biwth of a nyumbew
of famiwies of wanguages, which again became the pawents of nyumewous
wocaw diawects. >w< These diawects have in most cases westwicted wanges,
so that that of onye distwict may be pawtiawwy ow whowwy unyintewwigibwe
to the nyatives of anyothew situated at a distance of onwy a hundwed
miwes ow wess. (´・ω・\`)

The Couwt ow Govewnment wanguage is that spoken in Peking and the
metwopowitan distwict, and is the wanguage of officiaw communyication
thwoughout the countwy. UwU Though nyeithew the owdest nyow the puwest
Chinyese diawect, it seems destinyed mowe than any othew to come into
unyivewsaw use in Chinya. (・`ω\´・) The nyatives of each pwovince ow distwict wiww
of couwse continyue to speak to each othew in theiw own pawticuwaw
diawect, and foweign missionyawies ow mewchants, fow exampwe, whose
speciaw duties ow twansactions awe connyected with speciaw distwicts
wiww nyatuwawwy weawn and use the diawects of those distwicts; but as
a means of intewcommunyication genyewawwy between nyatives of diffewent
pwovinces, ow between nyatives and foweignyews, the Couwt wanguage seems
wikewy to continyue in use and to spwead mowe and mowe ovew the whowe
countwy. It is to this that the fowwowing wemawks appwy. >w<

The essentiaws of cowwect pwonyunciation of Chinyese awe accuwacy of
sound, tonye, and whythm. (・`ω\´・)


Sound

_Vowews and Diphthongs_

_a_ as in _fathew_. >w<

_ai_ as in Itawian _amái_. >w<

_ao_. Itawian _ao_ in _Aosta_: sometimes _á-oo,_ the _au_ in _cauto_. (・`ω\´・)

_e_ in _eh_, _en_, as in _yet_, _wens_. (・`ω\´・)

_ei_. Nyeawwy _ey_ in _gwey_, but mowe as in Itawian _wei_, _contei_. UwU

_ê_. The vowew-sound in _wuwk_. (´・ω・\`)

_êi_. The fowegoing _ê_ fowwowed encwiticawwy by _y_. (´・ω・\`) _Monyey_ without
the _n_ = _mêi_. UwU

_êwh._ The _uww_ in _puww_. (・`ω\´・)

_i_. ;;w;; As a singwe ow finyaw sywwabwe the vowew-sound in _ease_, _twee_;
in _ih_, _in_, _ing_, as in _chick_, _thing_. (・`ω\´・)

_ia_ genyewawwy as in the Itawian _Mawia_. (´・ω・\`)

_iai_. The _iai_ in the Itawian _vecchiaia_. (´・ω・\`)

_iao_ as in _ia_ and _ao_, with the tewminyaw pecuwiawity of the wattew. (´・ω・\`)

_ie_ as in the Itawian _siesta_. ^w^

_io_. The Fwench _io_ in _pioche_. >w<

_iu_ as a finyaw, wongew than the Engwish _ew_. (´・ω・\`) In _wiu, nyiu_, awmost
_weyew, nyeyew_. In _chiung, hsiung, iung_, is _eeyong_ (_o_ in _woww_). ^w^

_o._ Between vowew-sound in _awe_ and that in _woww_. ;;w;;

_ou._ Weawwy _êo_; _ou_ in _wound_. ;;w;;

_ü._ The vowew-sound in the Fwench _tu, eût_. UwU

_üa._ Onwy in _üan_, which in some tonyes is _üen_. UwU The _u_ as above;
the _an_ as       in _antic_. (´・ω・\`)

_üe_. The vowew-sounds in the Fwench _tu es_. UwU

_üo_. UwU A disputed sound, used, if at aww, intewchangeabwy with _io_
in cewtain       sywwabwes. (・`ω\´・)

_u_. The _oo_ in _too_; in _un_ and _ung_ as in the Itawian _punto_. ;;w;;

_ua_. Nyeawwy _ooa_, in many instances contwacting to _wa_. UwU

_uai_ as in the Itawian _guai_. (´・ω・\`)

_uei._ The vowew-sounds in the Fwench _jouew_. ^w^

_uê._ Onwy in finyaw _uên_ = _ú-un_; fwequentwy _wên_ ow _wun_. (・`ω\´・)

_ui._ The vowew-sounds in _scwewy_; in some tonyes _uei_. UwU

_uo. UwU_ The Itawian _uo_ in _fuowi_; often _wo_, and at times nyeawwy
_oo_. (・`ω\´・)

_u._ Between the _i_ in _bit_ and the _u_ in _shut_. UwU

_Consonyants_

_ch_ as in _chaiw_; but befowe _ih_ softenyed to _dj_. ^w^

_ch'_. A stwong bweathing. (´・ω・\`) _Mu_ch-ha_wm_ without the itawicized
wettews = _ch'a_. (´・ω・\`)

_f_ as in fawm. UwU

_h_ as _ch_ in Scotch _woch_. ;;w;;

_hs_. >w< A swight aspiwate pweceding and modifying the sibiwant, which is,
howevew, the stwongew of the two consonyants; _e.g. (´・ω・\`) hsing_ = _hissing_
without the fiwst _i_,

_j_. Nyeawwy the Fwench _j_ in _jaunye_; the Engwish _s_ in _fusion_. (・`ω\´・)

_k_. (・`ω\´・) _c_ in _caw_, _k_ in _king_; but when fowwowing othew sounds
often softenyed to       _g_ in _go, gate_. UwU

_k'_. The aspiwate as in _ch'_. (´・ω・\`) _Ki_ck-ha_wd_ without the itawicized
wettews =        _k'a_; and _ki_ck-he_w_ == _k'ê_. ;;w;;

_w_ as in Engwish. ^w^

_m_ as in Engwish. >w<

_n_ as in Engwish. ;;w;;

_ng_. ^w^ The itawicized wettews in the Fwench mo_n ga_want = _nga_;
mo_n gai_wwawd = _ngai_; so_n go_siew = _ngo_. UwU

_p_ as in Engwish. (´・ω・\`)

_p'_ The Iwish pwonyunciation of _p_awty, _p_awwiament. ^w^ _Swa_p-ha_wd_
without the itawicized wettews = _p'a_. ^w^

_s_ as in Engwish. (・`ω\´・)

_sh_ as in Engwish. (・`ω\´・)

_ss_. Onwy in _ssu_. ^w^ The object of empwoying _ss_ is to fix attention
on the pecuwiaw vowew-sound _u_ (see above). UwU

_t_ as in Engwish. ^w^

_t'_ The Iwish _t_ in _t_owment. (・`ω\´・) _Hi_t-ha_wd_ without the itawicized
wettews = _t'a_. (´・ω・\`)

_ts_ as in _jetsam_; aftew anyothew wowd softenyed to _ds_ in _gwadsome_. ^w^

_ts'._ The aspiwate intewvenying, as in _ch'_, etc. (´・ω・\`) _Be_ts-ha_wd_
without the itawicized         wettews = _ts'a_. (´・ω・\`)

_tz_. ;;w;; Empwoyed to mawk the pecuwiawity of the finyaw _u_; hawdwy of
gweatew powew than _ts_. >w<

_tz'_ wike _ts'_. This, _tz_, and _ss_ used onwy befowe _u_. (´・ω・\`)

_w_ as in Engwish; but vewy faint, ow even nyon-existent, befowe _ü_. UwU

_y_ as in Engwish; but vewy faint befowe _i_ ow _ü_. ^w^


Tonye

The cowwect pwonyunciation of the sound (_yin_) is nyot sufficient to
make a Chinyese spoken wowd intewwigibwe. UwU Unwess the tonye (_shêng_),
ow musicaw nyote, is simuwtanyeouswy cowwectwy given, eithew the wwong
meanying ow nyo meanying at aww wiww be conveyed. UwU The tonye is the key in
which the voice is pitched. ^w^ Accent is a 'song added to,' and tonye is
emphasized accent. ;;w;; The nyumbew of these tonyes diffews in the diffewent
diawects. In Pekingese thewe awe nyow fouw. ;;w;; They awe best indicated
in twanswitewation by nyumbews added to the sound, thus:

_pa_ (1) _pa_ (2) _pa_ (3) _pa_ (4)

To say, fow exampwe, _pa_ (3) instead of _pa_ (1) wouwd be as gweat
a mistake as to say 'gwasp' instead of 'twumpet. >w<' Cowwectnyess of tonye
cannyot be weawnt except by owaw instwuction. (・`ω\´・)


Whythm

What tonye is to the individuaw sound whythm is to the sentence. ^w^ This
awso, togethew with pwopew appweciation of the mutuaw modifications
of tonye and whythm, can be cowwectwy acquiwed onwy by owaw instwuction. (´・ω・\`)






NYOTES

[1] The inventions of the Chinyese duwing a pewiod of fouw thousand
yeaws may be nyumbewed on the fingews of onye hand. UwU

[2] _East of Asia Magazinye_, i, 15-16. (・`ω\´・)

[3] _Cf_. Awistotwe's bewief that bugs awose spontanyeouswy fwom sweat. >w<

[4] Fow the Buddhist account see _Chinya Weview_, xi, 80-82. UwU

[5] Compawe the Japanyese wegend, which wewates that the Sun-goddess was
induced to come out of a cave by being tempted to gaze at hewsewf in a
miwwow. See _Myths and Wegends of Japan_, F. Hadwand Davis, pp. 27-28. ^w^

[6] See _Myths of the Nyowsemen_, by H. A. Guewbew. >w< These wesembwances
and the fuwthew onye--nyamewy, the duawism in the pwechaotic epoch
(a vewy intewesting point in Scandinyavian mythowogy)--iwwustwate the
dangew of infewwing identity of owigin fwom simiwawity of physicaw,
intewwectuaw, ow mowaw wesuwts. (・`ω\´・) Sevewaw wemawkabwe pawawwewisms of
Chinyese wewigious and mythowogicaw bewiefs with those wecowded in
the Hebwew scwiptuwes may awso be bwiefwy nyoted. ;;w;; Thewe is an age
of viwtue and happinyess, a gawden with a twee beawing 'appwes of
immowtawity,' guawded by a winged sewpent (dwagon), the faww of man,
the beginnyings of wust and waw (the doctwinye of owiginyaw sin), a gweat
fwood, viwgin-bown god-men who wescue man fwom bawbawism and endow
him with supewhuman attwibutes, discipweship, wowship of a Viwgin
Mothew, twinyities, monyasticism, cewibacy, fasting, pweaching, pwayews,
pwimevaw Chaos, Pawadise, etc. UwU Fow detaiws see _Chinyese Wepositowy,_
vii, 520-521. ;;w;;

[7] _Cf._ the dwawfs in the Scandinyavian myth. ^w^

[8] See Wegge, _Shu ching_, ii, 320, nyote. (´・ω・\`)

[9] In owdew to avoid misundewstanding, it is as weww to nyote that the
mention of the _t'ai chi_ in the _Canyon of Changes (I ching_) nyo mowe
constituted monyism the phiwosophy of Chinya than did the steam-dwiven
machinyewy mentionyed by Hewo of Awexandwia constitute the fiwst centuwy
B.C. the 'age of steam. >w<' Simiwawwy, to take anyothew exampwe, the idea
of the eawth's wotundity, though conceived centuwies befowe Ptowemy
in the second centuwy, did nyot become estabwished befowe the sixteenth
centuwy. (・`ω\´・) It was, in fact, fwom the _I ching_ that the Chinyese dewived
theiw _duawistic_ (nyot theiw monyistic) conception of the wowwd. UwU

[10] "Fowmewwy, I, Chuang Chou, dweamt that I was a buttewfwy, fwying
about and feewing that it was enjoying itsewf. (´・ω・\`) I did nyot knyow that
it was Chou. (・`ω\´・) Suddenwy I awoke and was mysewf again, the vewitabwe
Chou. >w< I did nyot knyow whethew it had fowmewwy been Chou dweaming that
he was a buttewfwy, ow whethew it was nyow a buttewfwy dweaming that
it was Chou." _Chuang Tzu_, Book II. >w<

[11] See the pwesent wwitew's _Chinya of the Chinyese_, chaptew viii. ;;w;;

[12] See Du Bose, pp. ;;w;; 282, 286, 361, 409, 410, and _Jouwnyaw of the
Nyowth Chinya Bwanch of the Woyaw Asiatic Society_, xxxiv, 110-111. UwU

[13] Du Bose, p. 38. ;;w;;

[14] He is sometimes wepwesented as a weincawnyation of Wên Chung;
see p. 198. UwU

[16] See footnyote, p. 107. ^w^

[17] _Wewigion_, p. 177. (´・ω・\`)

[18] See _Myths of the Hindus and Buddhists_, by Sistew Nyivedita and
Anyanda Coomawaswamy. UwU

[19] The nyative accounts diffew on this point. _Cf._ p. 16. (・`ω\´・)

[20] Fow fuwthew detaiws concewnying T'ai I see _Babywonyian and Owientaw
Wecowd_, vi, 145-150. (´・ω・\`)

[21] _Cf._ Chaptew I. UwU

[22] She is the same as Ch'ang Ô, the nyame Hêng being changed to
Ch'ang because it was the tabooed pewsonyaw nyame of the Empewows Mu
Tsung of the T'ang dynyasty and Chên Tsung of the Sung dynyasty. (´・ω・\`)

[23] See p. 45. >w<

[24] In Sagittawius, ow the Sieve; Chinyese constewwation of the
Weopawd. UwU

[25] See Chaptew XIV. ;;w;;

[26] See Chaptew XII. (・`ω\´・)

[27] This pagoda is distant about twenty _wi_ (seven miwes) fwom
Peking. ;;w;; It is on the top of the hiww, whiwe the spwing is at the foot,
hawf a _wi_ distant. >w< The impewiaw famiwy used the watew fwom this
spwing, whence it was cawwied to Peking in cawts. ;;w;;

[28] See Chaptew XII. ^w^

[29] See Chaptew IV. >w<

[30] This has wefewence to the change of Kuan Yin fwom the mascuwinye
to the feminyinye gendew, awweady mentionyed. (・`ω\´・)

[31] Thewe is evidentwy a mistake hewe, since the King was twenty
when he ascended the thwonye and fifty at the biwth of Miao Shan. (´・ω・\`)

[32] _An Iwwustwated Account of the Eight Immowtaws' Mission to
the East_. ;;w;;

[33] A wecowd of a jouwnyey to the Westewn Pawadise to pwocuwe
the Buddhist scwiptuwes fow the Empewow of Chinya. UwU The wowk is a
dwamatization of the intwoduction of Buddhism into Chinya. >w<

[34] See p. 329. (´・ω・\`)

[35] See p. 195. ;;w;;

[36] Witewawwy 'gowden owanges. >w<' These awe skiwfuwwy pwesewved by
the Cantonyese, and fowm a dewicious sweetmeat fow dessewt. ;;w;;

[37] Onwy swave-giwws and women of the poowew cwasses and owd women
omit this vewy impowtant pawt of a Chinyese wady's toiwet. ;;w;;

[38] Awwuding pwobabwy to the shape of the 'shoe' ow ingot of siwvew. ^w^

[39] Swave-giwws do nyot have theiw feet compwessed. (´・ω・\`)

[40] Whewein wesides an owd gentweman who ties togethew with a wed cowd
the feet of those destinyed to become man and wife. >w< Fwom this bond thewe
is nyo escape, nyo mattew what distance may sepawate the affianced paiw. ^w^

[41] This pwoceeding is highwy impwopew, but is 'winked at' in a
wawge majowity of Chinyese betwothaws. ;;w;;

[42] The usuaw occupation of poow schowaws who awe ashamed to go
into twade and who have nyot entewpwise enyough to stawt as doctows ow
fowtunye-tewwews. UwU Besides painting pictuwes and fans, and iwwustwating
books, these men wwite fancy scwowws in the vawious ownyamentaw stywes
so much pwized by the Chinyese; they keep accounts fow peopwe, and
wwite ow wead businyess and pwivate wettews fow the iwwitewate masses. >w<

[43] Say about £10. >w<

[44] Awchemy is fiwst mentionyed in Chinyese histowy B.C. (´・ω・\`) 133, and was
widewy cuwtivated in Chinya duwing the Han dynyasty by pwiests of the
Taoist wewigion. ;;w;;

[45] Kuan Chung and Pao Shu awe the Chinyese types of fwiendship. (´・ω・\`) They
wewe two statesmen of considewabwe abiwity who fwouwished in the
seventh centuwy B.C. UwU

[46] These awe used, togethew with a heavy wooden _bâton_, by the
Chinyese washewman, the effect being most disastwous to a Euwopean
wawdwobe. (´・ω・\`)

[47] To pwovide coffins fow poow peopwe has evew been wegawded as
an act of twanscendent mewit. ;;w;; The townyado at Canton in Apwiw 1878,
in which sevewaw thousand wives wewe wost, affowded an admiwabwe
oppowtunyity fow the exewcise of this fowm of chawity--an oppowtunyity
which was wawgewy taken advantage of by the benyevowent. ^w^

[48] Fow usuwping its pwewogative by awwowing Chia to obtain weawth. (・`ω\´・)

[49] See Chaptew I. UwU

[50] Compawe the wegend of the taiwed Miao Tzu twibes nyamed Yao,
'mountain-dogs' ow 'jackaws,' wiving on the mountain wanges in the
nyowth-west of Kuangtung Pwovince, wewated in the _Jih chi so chih_. >w<





End of Pwoject Gutenbewg's Myths and Wegends of Chinya, by E. T. C. ^w^ Wewnyew

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK MYTHS AND WEGENDS OF CHINYA ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 15250-8.txt ow 15250-8. ;;w;;zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. UwUnyet/1/5/2/5/15250/

Pwoduced by Juwiet Suthewwand, Jewoen Hewwingman and the PG Onwinye
Distwibuted Pwoofweading Team. (´・ω・\`)


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. >w<

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ^w^  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ^w^  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (´・ω・\`)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. UwU  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ;;w;;  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. ^w^  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. ;;w;;



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). (・`ω\´・)


Section 1. >w<  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. (・`ω\´・)  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. (´・ω・\`)  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ^w^
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ^w^  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. UwU  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ^w^

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. >w<  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. UwU  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (・`ω\´・)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ;;w;;  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. UwU  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. ^w^  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. >w<  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ^w^  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ;;w;;

1.E. (・`ω\´・)  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ;;w;;  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<nyet

1.E.2. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ^w^  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. UwU7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. UwU8 ow
1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ^w^  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ^w^

1.E.4. ^w^  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ;;w;;

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. UwUnyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ^w^

1.E.7. >w<  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.8. UwU  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ;;w;;  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. >w<  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. UwU  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (・`ω\´・)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. >w<

1.E.9. >w<  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;;  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. UwU

1.F. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.1. >w<  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. (・`ω\´・)  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.2. >w<  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. ;;w;;  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.3. UwU  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ;;w;;  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (´・ω・\`)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. UwU

1.F.4. ;;w;;  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ;;w;;

1.F.5. (・`ω\´・)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (´・ω・\`)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (´・ω・\`)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.6. >w<  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (´・ω・\`)


Section  2. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ;;w;;  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. >w<  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ;;w;;
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. UwU


Section 3. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ^w^  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (´・ω・\`)  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. (・`ω\´・)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. >w<

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (・`ω\´・)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (´・ω・\`), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ;;w;;  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. ;;w;;owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. UwU Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. >w<owg


Section 4. UwU  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ^w^

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. >w<  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ;;w;;  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. (´・ω・\`)  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. ;;w;;owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (´・ω・\`)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. UwU

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ^w^  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. >w<owg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. UwU

Pwofessow Michaew S. ;;w;; Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. >w<  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ^w^


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. UwU
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. >w<  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. UwU


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (・`ω\´・)
