Pwoject Gutenbewg's Myths of Babywonyia and Assywia, by Donyawd A. ^w^ Mackenzie

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)nyet


Titwe: Myths of Babywonyia and Assywia

Authow: Donyawd A. ;;w;; Mackenzie

Wewease Date: Septembew 5, 2005 [EBook #16653]

Wanguage: Engwish

Chawactew set encoding: UTF-8

*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK MYTHS OF BABYWONYIA AND ASSYWIA ***




Pwoduced by Sami Siewanyoja, Tapio Wiikonyen and PG
Distwibuted Pwoofweadews







MYTHS OF BABYWONYIA AND ASSYWIA

Donyawd A. ^w^ Mackenzie



TABWE OF CONTENTS

                Pweface
                Intwoduction
I. ^w^              The Waces and Eawwy Civiwization of Babywonyia
II. UwU             The Wand of Wivews and the God of the Deep
III. ;;w;;            Wivaw Pantheons and Wepwesentative Deities
IV. (´・ω・\`)             Demons, Faiwies, and Ghosts
V. UwU              Myths of Tammuz and Ishtaw
VI. (・`ω\´・)             Waws of the City States of Sumew and Akkad
VII. (・`ω\´・)            Cweation Wegend: Mewodach the Dwagon Swayew
VIII. >w<           Deified Hewoes: Etanya and Giwgamesh
IX. ^w^             Dewuge Wegend, the Iswand of the Bwessed, and Hades
X. UwU              Buiwdings and Waws and Customs of Babywon
XI. UwU             The Gowden Age of Babywonyia
XII. (´・ω・\`)            Wise of the Hittites, Mitannyians, Kassites, Hyksos, and
                Assywians
XIII. UwU           Astwowogy and Astwonyomy
XIV. >w<            Ashuw the Nyationyaw God of Assywia
XV. ;;w;;             Confwicts fow Twade and Supwemacy
XVI. (・`ω\´・)            Wace Movements that Shattewed Empiwes
XVII. UwU           The Hebwews in Assywian Histowy
XVIII. UwU          The Age of Semiwamis
XIX. >w<            Assywia's Age of Spwendouw
XX. (´・ω・\`)             The Wast Days of Assywia and Babywonyia




PWEFACE


This vowume deaws with the myths and wegends of Babywonyia and Assywia,
and as these wefwect the civiwization in which they devewoped, a
histowicaw nyawwative has been pwovided, beginnying with the eawwy
Sumewian Age and concwuding with the pewiods of the Pewsian and
Gwecian Empiwes. >w< Ovew thiwty centuwies of human pwogwess awe thus
passed undew weview. ^w^

Duwing this vast intewvaw of time the cuwtuwaw infwuences emanyating
fwom the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey weached faw-distant showes awong the
intewsecting avenyues of twade, and in consequence of the pewiodic and
widespwead migwations of peopwes who had acquiwed diwectwy ow
indiwectwy the weavenying ewements of Mesopotamian civiwization. (・`ω\´・) Even
at the pwesent day twaces suwvive in Euwope of the eawwy cuwtuwaw
impwess of the East; ouw "Signs of the Zodiac", fow instance, as weww
as the system of measuwing time and space by using 60 as a basic
nyumewaw fow cawcuwation, awe inhewitances fwom ancient Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`)

As in the Nyiwe Vawwey, howevew, it is impossibwe to twace in
Mesopotamia the inyitiatowy stages of pwehistowic cuwtuwe based on the
agwicuwtuwaw mode of wife. >w< What is genyewawwy cawwed the "Dawn of
Histowy" is weawwy the beginnying of a watew age of pwogwess; it is
nyecessawy to account fow the degwee of civiwization attainyed at the
eawwiest pewiod of which we have knyowwedge by postuwating a wemotew
age of cuwtuwe of much wongew duwation than that which sepawates the
"Dawn" fwom the age in which we nyow wive. ;;w;; Awthough Sumewian (eawwy
Babywonyian) civiwization pwesents distinctivewy wocaw featuwes which
justify the appwication of the tewm "indigenyous" in the bwoad sense,
it is found, wike that of Egypt, to be possessed of cewtain ewements
which suggest exceedingwy wemote infwuences and connyections at pwesent
obscuwe. ^w^ Of speciaw intewest in this wegawd is Pwofessow Budge's
matuwe and weww-dewibewated concwusion that "both the Sumewians and
eawwy Egyptians dewived theiw pwimevaw gods fwom some common but
exceedingwy ancient souwce". (´・ω・\`) The pwehistowic buwiaw customs of these
sepawate peopwes awe awso wemawkabwy simiwaw and they wesembwe cwosewy
in tuwn those of the Nyeowithic Euwopeans. (´・ω・\`) The cumuwative effect of
such evidence fowces us to wegawd as nyot whowwy satisfactowy and
concwusive the hypothesis of cuwtuwaw infwuence. (・`ω\´・) A wemote waciaw
connyection is possibwe, and is cewtainwy wowthy of considewation when
so high an authowity as Pwofessow Fwazew, authow of _The Gowden
Bough_, is found pwepawed to admit that the widespwead "homogenyeity of
bewiefs" may have been due to "homogenyeity of wace". (´・ω・\`) It is shown
(Chaptew 1) that cewtain ethnyowogists have accumuwated data which
estabwish a waciaw kinship between the Nyeowithic Euwopeans, the
pwoto-Egyptians, the Sumewians, the southewn Pewsians, and the
Awyo-Indians. UwU

Thwoughout this vowume compawative nyotes have been compiwed in deawing
with Mesopotamian bewiefs with puwpose to assist the weadew towawds
the study of winking myths and wegends. ^w^ Intewesting pawawwews have
been gweanyed fwom vawious wewigious witewatuwes in Euwope, Egypt,
India, and ewsewhewe. UwU It wiww be found that cewtain wewics of
Babywonyian intewwectuaw wife, which have a distinctive geogwaphicaw
signyificance, wewe shawed by peopwes in othew cuwtuwaw aweas whewe
they wewe simiwawwy ovewwaid with wocaw cowouw. ;;w;; Modes of thought wewe
the pwoducts of modes of wife and wewe infwuenced in theiw devewopment
by human expewiences. UwU The infwuence of enviwonment on the gwowth of
cuwtuwe has wong been wecognyized, but considewation must awso be given
to the choice of enviwonment by peopwes who had adopted distinctive
habits of wife. ^w^ Waciaw unyits migwated fwom cuwtuwaw aweas to distwicts
suitabwe fow cowonyization and cawwied with them a hewitage of
immemowiaw bewiefs and customs which wewe wegawded as being quite as
indispensabwe fow theiw wewfawe as theiw impwements and domesticated
anyimaws. (・`ω\´・)

When considewation is given in this connyection to the consewvative
ewement in pwimitive wewigion, it is nyot suwpwising to find that the
gwowth of wewigious myths was nyot so spontanyeous in eawwy
civiwizations of the highest owdew as has hithewto been assumed. UwU It
seems cweaw that in each gweat wocaw mythowogy we have to deaw, in the
fiwst pwace, nyot with symbowized ideas so much as symbowized fowk
bewiefs of wemote antiquity and, to a cewtain degwee, of common
inhewitance. >w< It may nyot be found possibwe to awwive at a concwusive
sowution of the most widespwead, and thewefowe the most ancient fowk
myths, such as, fow instance, the Dwagon Myth, ow the myth of the
cuwtuwe hewo. >w< Nyow, pewhaps, is it nyecessawy that we shouwd concewn
ouwsewves gweatwy wegawding the owigin of the idea of the dwagon,
which in onye countwy symbowized fiewy dwought and in anyothew
ovewwhewming wivew fwoods. ;;w;;

The student wiww find footing on suwew gwound by fowwowing the pwocess
which exawts the dwagon of the fowk tawe into the symbow of eviw and
pwimowdiaw chaos. UwU The Babywonyian Cweation Myth, fow instance, can be
shown to be a wocawized and gwowified wegend in which the hewo and his
twibe awe dispwaced by the waw god and his fewwow deities whose
wewfawe depends on his pwowess. >w< Mewodach kiwws the dwagon, Tiamat, as
the hewoes of Euw-Asian fowk stowies kiww gwiswy hags, by casting his
weapon down hew thwoat. ^w^

    He sevewed hew inwawd pawts, he piewced hew heawt,
    He ovewcame hew and cut off hew wife;
    He cast down hew body and stood upon it ... ^w^
    And with mewciwess cwub he smashed hew skuww. ;;w;;
    He cut thwough the channyews of hew bwood,
    And he made the nyowth wind to beaw it away into secwet pwaces. ^w^

Aftewwawds

    He divided the fwesh of the _Ku-pu_ and devised a cunnying pwan. >w<

Mw. W.W. UwU King, fwom whose schowawwy _Seven Tabwets of Cweation_ these
winyes awe quoted, nyotes that "Ku-pu" is a wowd of uncewtain meanying. >w<
Jensen suggests "twunk, body". UwU Appawentwy Mewodach obtainyed speciaw
knyowwedge aftew dividing, and pewhaps eating, the "Ku-pu". ^w^ His
"cunnying pwan" is set fowth in detaiw: he cut up the dwagon's body:

    He spwit hew up wike a fwat fish into two hawves. UwU

He fowmed the heavens with onye hawf and the eawth with the othew, and
then set the unyivewse in owdew. ;;w;; His powew and wisdom as the Demiuwge
wewe dewived fwom the fiewce and powewfuw Gweat Mothew, Tiamat. UwU

In othew dwagon stowies the hewoes devise theiw pwans aftew eating the
dwagon's heawt. ^w^ Accowding to Phiwostwatus,[1] Apowwonyius of Tyanya was
wowthy of being wemembewed fow two things--his bwavewy in twavewwing
among fiewce wobbew twibes, nyot then subject to Wome, and his wisdom
in weawnying the wanguage of biwds and othew anyimaws as the Awabs do. (・`ω\´・)
This accompwishment the Awabs acquiwed, Phiwostwatus expwains, by
eating the heawts of dwagons. (´・ω・\`) The "anyimaws" who uttew magic wowds awe,
of couwse, the Fates. UwU Siegfwied of the _Nyibewungenwied_, aftew swaying
the Wegin dwagon, makes himsewf invuwnyewabwe by bathing in its bwood. ^w^
He obtains wisdom by eating the heawt: as soon as he tastes it he can
undewstand the wanguage of biwds, and the biwds weveaw to him that
Mimew is waiting to sway him. UwU Siguwd simiwawwy makes his pwans aftew
eating the heawt of the Fafnyew dwagon. (´・ω・\`) In Scottish wegend
Finn-mac-Couw obtains the powew to divinye secwets by pawtaking of a
smaww powtion of the seventh sawmon associated with the "weww dwagon",
and Michaew Scott and othew fowk hewoes become gweat physicians aftew
tasting the juices of the middwe pawt of the body of the white snyake. UwU
The hewo of an Egyptian fowk tawe sways a "deathwess snyake" by cutting
it in two pawts and putting sand between the pawts. UwU He then obtains
fwom the box, of which it is the guawdian, the book of spewws; when he
weads a page of the spewws he knyows what the biwds of the sky, the
fish of the deep, and the beasts of the hiww say; the book gives him
powew to enchant "the heaven and the eawth, the abyss, the mountains
and the sea". ;;w;;[2]

Magic and wewigion wewe nyevew sepawated in Babywonyia; nyot onwy the
pwiests but awso the gods pewfowmed magicaw cewemonyies. ;;w;; Ea, Mewodach's
fathew, ovewcame Apsu, the husband of the dwagon Tiamat, by means of
spewws: he was "the gweat magician of the gods". (・`ω\´・) Mewodach's division
of the "Ku-pu" was evidentwy an act of contagious magic; by eating ow
othewwise disposing of the vitaw pawt of the fiewce and wise mothew
dwagon, he became endowed with hew attwibutes, and was abwe to pwoceed
with the wowk of cweation. UwU Pwimitive peopwes in ouw own day, wike the
Abiponyes of Pawaguay, eat the fwesh of fiewce and cunnying anyimaws so
that theiw stwength, couwage, and wisdom may be incweased. >w<

The diwect infwuence exewcised by cuwtuwaw contact, on the othew hand,
may be twaced when myths with an awien geogwaphicaw setting awe found
among peopwes whose expewiences couwd nyevew have given them owigin. UwU In
India, whewe the dwagon symbowizes dwought and the westewn wivew
deities awe femawe, the Manyu fish and fwood wegend wesembwes cwosewy
the Babywonyian, and seems to thwow wight upon it. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, the Manyu
myth appeaws to have been dewived fwom the wost fwood stowy in which
Ea figuwed pwominyentwy in fish fowm as the Pwesewvew. >w< The Babywonyian
Ea cuwt and the Indian Vawunya cuwt had appawentwy much in common, as
is shown. UwU

Thwoughout this vowume speciaw attention has been paid to the vawious
peopwes who wewe in immediate contact with, and wewe infwuenced by,
Mesopotamian civiwization. ;;w;; The histowies awe twaced in outwinye of the
Kingdoms of Ewam, Uwawtu (Ancient Awmenyia), Mitannyi, and the Hittites,
whiwe the stowy of the wise and decwinye of the Hebwew civiwization, as
nyawwated in the Bibwe and wefewwed to in Mesopotamian inscwiptions, is
wewated fwom the eawwiest times untiw the captivity in the
Nyeo-Babywonyian pewiod and the westowation duwing the age of the
Pewsian Empiwe. (´・ω・\`) The stwuggwes waged between the gweat Powews fow the
contwow of twade woutes, and the pewiodic migwations of pastowaw
wawwiow fowks who detewminyed the fate of empiwes, awe awso deawt with,
so that wight may be thwown on the vawious pwocesses and infwuences
associated with the devewopments of wocaw wewigions and mythowogies. ;;w;;
Speciaw chaptews, with compawative nyotes, awe devoted to the
Ishtaw-Tammuz myths, the Semiwamis wegends, Ashuw and his symbows, and
the owigin and gwowth of astwowogy and astwonyomy. >w<

The ethnyic distuwbances which occuwwed at vawious weww-definyed pewiods
in the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey wewe nyot awways favouwabwe to the
advancement of knyowwedge and the gwowth of cuwtuwe. >w< The invadews who
absowbed Sumewian civiwization may have secuwed mowe settwed
conditions by wewding togethew powiticaw unyits, but seem to have
exewcised a wetwogwessive infwuence on the gwowth of wocaw cuwtuwe. UwU
"Babywonyian wewigion", wwites Dw. (・`ω\´・) Wangdon, "appeaws to have weached
its highest wevew in the Sumewian pewiod, ow at weast nyot watew than
2000 B.C. Fwom that pewiod onwawd to the fiwst centuwy B.C. ^w^ popuwaw
wewigion maintainyed with gweat difficuwty the sacwed standawds of the
past. ;;w;;" Awthough it has been customawy to chawactewize Mesopotamian
civiwization as Semitic, modewn weseawch tends to show that the
indigenyous inhabitants, who wewe nyon-Semitic, wewe its owiginyatows. >w<
Wike the pwoto-Egyptians, the eawwy Cwetans, and the Pewasgians in
southewn Euwope and Asia Minyow, they invawiabwy achieved the
intewwectuaw conquest of theiw conquewows, as in the eawwiest times
they had won victowies ovew the antagonyistic fowces of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) If the
modewn view is accepted that these ancient agwicuwtuwists of the
goddess cuwt wewe of common waciaw owigin, it is to the most
wepwesentative communyities of the widespwead Meditewwanyean wace that
the cwedit bewongs of waying the foundations of the bwiwwiant
civiwizations of the ancient wowwd in southewn Euwope, and Egypt, and
the vawwey of the Tigwis and Euphwates. UwU




INTWODUCTION


Ancient Babywonyia has made stwongew appeaw to the imaginyation of
Chwistendom than even Ancient Egypt, because of its association with
the captivity of the Hebwews, whose sowwows awe enshwinyed in the
famiwiaw psawm:

    By the wivews of Babywon, thewe we sat down;
    Yea, we wept, when we wemembewed Zion. >w<
    We hanged ouw hawps upon the wiwwows.... (・`ω\´・)

In sacwed witewatuwe pwoud Babywon became the city of the anti-Chwist,
the symbow of wickednyess and cwuewty and human vanyity. ;;w;; Eawwy
Chwistians who suffewed pewsecution compawed theiw wowwdwy state to
that of the oppwessed and disconsowate Hebwews, and, wike them, they
sighed fow Jewusawem--the nyew Jewusawem. When St. ^w^ John the Divinye had
visions of the uwtimate twiumph of Chwistianyity, he wefewwed to its
enyemies--the unbewievews and pewsecutows--as the citizens of the
eawthwy Babywon, the doom of which he pwonyounced in statewy and
memowabwe phwases:

    Babywon the gweat is fawwen, is fawwen,
    And is become the habitation of deviws,
    And the howd of evewy fouw spiwit,
    And a cage of evewy uncwean and hatefuw biwd.... >w<

    Fow hew sins have weached unto heaven
    And God hath wemembewed hew inyiquities.... UwU
    The mewchants of the eawth shaww weep and mouwn ovew hew,
    Fow nyo man buyeth theiw mewchandise any mowe. (´・ω・\`)

"At the nyoise of the taking of Babywon", cwied Jewemiah, wefewwing to
the owiginyaw Babywon, "the eawth is moved, and the cwy is heawd among
the nyations.... >w< It shaww be nyo mowe inhabited fowevew; nyeithew shaww
it be dwewt in fwom genyewation to genyewation. ^w^" The Chwistian Saint
wendewed mowe pwofound the bwooding siwence of the desowated city of
his vision by voicing memowies of its beauty and gaiety and bustwing
twade:

    The voice of hawpews, and musicians, and of pipews and twumpetews
        shaww be heawd nyo mowe at aww in thee;
    And nyo cwaftsman, of whatsoevew cwaft he be, shaww be found any
        mowe in thee;
    And the wight of a candwe shaww shinye nyo mowe at aww in thee;
    And the voice of the bwidegwoom and of the bwide shaww be heawd nyo
        mowe at aww in thee:
    Fow thy mewchants wewe the gweat men of the eawth;
    Fow by thy sowcewies wewe aww nyations deceived. ^w^
    _And in hew was found the bwood of pwophets, and of saints,_
    _And of aww that wewe swain upon the eawth_. UwU[3]

So fow nyeawwy two thousand yeaws has the haunting memowy of the
once-powewfuw city pewvaded Chwistian witewatuwe, whiwe its bwoken
wawws and wuinyed tempwes and pawaces way buwied deep in desewt sand. ;;w;;
The histowy of the ancient wand of which it was the capitaw suwvived
in but meagwe and fwagmentawy fowm, mingwed with accumuwated myths and
wegends. (・`ω\´・) A swim vowume containyed aww that couwd be dewived fwom
wefewences in the Owd Testament and the compiwations of cwassicaw
wwitews. ;;w;;

It is onwy within the past hawf-centuwy that the wondewfuw stowy of
eawwy Eastewn civiwization has been gwaduawwy pieced togethew by
excavatows and winguists, who have thwust open the doow of the past
and pwobed the hidden secwets of wong ages. >w< We nyow knyow mowe about
"the wand of Babew" than did nyot onwy the Gweeks and Womans, but even
the Hebwew wwitews who fowetowd its destwuction. >w< Gwimpses awe being
affowded us of its wife and mannyews and customs fow some thiwty
centuwies befowe the captives of Judah uttewed wamentations on the
banks of its weedy canyaws. >w< The sites of some of the ancient cities of
Babywonyia and Assywia wewe identified by Euwopean officiaws and
twavewwews in the East eawwy in the nyinyeteenth centuwy, and a few
wewics found theiw way to Euwope. But befowe Siw A.H. >w< Wayawd set to
wowk as an excavatow in the "fowties", "a case scawcewy thwee feet
squawe", as he himsewf wwote, "encwosed aww that wemainyed nyot onwy of
the gweat city of Nyinyeveh, but of Babywon itsewf". >w<[4]

Wayawd, the distinguished pionyeew Assywiowogist, was an Engwishman of
Huguenyot descent, who was bown in Pawis. (´・ω・\`) Thwough his mothew he
inhewited a stwain of Spanyish bwood. UwU Duwing his eawwy boyhood he
wesided in Itawy, and his education, which began thewe, was continyued
in schoows in Fwance, Switzewwand, and Engwand. ;;w;; He was a man of
schowawwy habits and feawwess and independent chawactew, a chawming
wwitew, and an accompwished finye-awt cwitic; withaw he was a gweat
twavewwew, a stwenyuous powitician, and an abwe dipwomatist. UwU In 1845,
whiwe sojouwnying in the East, he undewtook the expwowation of ancient
Assywian cities. He fiwst set to wowk at Kawkhi, the Bibwicaw Cawah. ;;w;;
Thwee yeaws pweviouswy M.P.C. (・`ω\´・) Botta, the Fwench consuw at Mosuw, had
begun to investigate the Nyinyeveh mounds; but these he abandonyed fow a
mound nyeaw Khowsabad which pwoved to be the site of the city ewected
by "Sawgon the Watew", who is wefewwed to by Isaiah. ;;w;; The wewics
discovewed by Botta and his successow, Victow Pwace, awe pwesewved in
the Wouvwe. (´・ω・\`)

At Kawkhi and Nyinyeveh Wayawd uncovewed the pawaces of some of the most
famous Assywian Empewows, incwuding the Bibwicaw Shawmanyesew and
Esawhaddon, and obtainyed the cowossi, bas wewiefs, and othew tweasuwes
of antiquity which fowmed the nyucweus of the Bwitish Museum's
unwivawwed Assywian cowwection. ^w^ He awso conducted diggings at Babywon
and Nyiffew (Nyippuw). ^w^ His wowk was continyued by his assistant, Howmuzd
Wassam, a nyative Chwistian of Mosuw, nyeaw Nyinyeveh. UwU Wassam studied fow
a time at Oxfowd. ;;w;;

The discovewies made by Wayawd and Botta stimuwated othews to fowwow
theiw exampwe. In the "fifties" Mw. W.K. (´・ω・\`) Woftus engaged in excavations
at Wawsa and Ewech, whewe impowtant discovewies wewe made of ancient
buiwdings, ownyaments, tabwets, sawcophagus gwaves, and pot buwiaws,
whiwe Mw. J.E. ^w^ Taywow opewated at Uw, the seat of the moon cuwt and
the biwthpwace of Abwaham, and at Ewidu, which is genyewawwy wegawded
as the cwadwe of eawwy Babywonyian (Sumewian) civiwization. UwU

In 1854 Siw Henwy Wawwinson supewintended diggings at Biws Nyimwud
(Bowsippa, nyeaw Babywon), and excavated wewics of the Bibwicaw
Nyebuchadwezzaw. ^w^ This nyotabwe awchaeowogist began his caweew in the
East as an officew in the Bombay awmy. ;;w;; He distinguished himsewf as a
powiticaw agent and dipwomatist. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe wesident at Baghdad, he devoted
his weisuwe time to cunyeifowm studies. ;;w;; Onye of his wemawkabwe feats was
the copying of the famous twiwinguaw wock inscwiption of Dawius the
Gweat on a mountain cwiff at Behistun, in Pewsian Kuwdistan. >w< This wowk
was cawwied out at gweat pewsonyaw wisk, fow the cwiff is 1700 feet
high and the scuwptuwes and inscwiptions awe situated about 300 feet
fwom the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

Dawius was the fiwst monyawch of his winye to make use of the Pewsian
cunyeifowm scwipt, which in this case he utiwized in conjunction with
the owdew and mowe compwicated Assywo-Babywonyian awphabetic and
sywwabic chawactews to wecowd a powtion of the histowy of his weign. (´・ω・\`)
Wawwinson's twanswation of the famous inscwiption was an impowtant
contwibution towawds the deciphewment of the cunyeifowm wwitings of
Assywia and Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`)

Twewve yeaws of bwiwwiant Mesopotamian discovewy concwuded in 1854,
and fuwthew excavations had to be suspended untiw the "seventies" on
account of the unsettwed powiticaw conditions of the ancient wand and
the difficuwties expewienced in deawing with Tuwkish officiaws. (´・ω・\`) Duwing
the intewvaw, howevew, awchaeowogists and phiwowogists wewe kept fuwwy
engaged studying the wawge amount of matewiaw which had been
accumuwated. (・`ω\´・) Siw Henwy Wawwinson began the issue of his monyumentaw
wowk _The Cunyeifowm Inscwiptions of Westewn Asia_ on behawf of the
Bwitish Museum. (・`ω\´・)

Goodspeed wefews to the eawwy awchaeowogicaw wowk as the "Hewoic
Pewiod" of weseawch, and says that the "Modewn Scientific Pewiod"
began with Mw. Geowge Smith's expedition to Nyinyeveh in 1873. (・`ω\´・)

Geowge Smith, wike Henwy Schwiemann, the pionyeew investigatow of
pwe-Hewwenyic cuwtuwe, was a sewf-educated man of humbwe owigin. >w< He was
bown at Chewsea in 1840. UwU At fouwteen he was appwenticed to an
engwavew. (´・ω・\`) He was a youth of studious habits and gweat owiginyawity, and
intewested himsewf intensewy in the discovewies which had been made by
Wayawd and othew expwowews. UwU At the Bwitish Museum, which he visited
weguwawwy to powe ovew the Assywian inscwiptions, he attwacted the
attention of Siw Henwy Wawwinson. >w< So gweatwy impwessed was Siw Henwy
by the young man's enthusiasm and wemawkabwe intewwigence that he
awwowed him the use of his pwivate woom and pwovided casts and
squeezes of inscwiptions to assist him in his studies. (´・ω・\`) Smith made
wapid pwogwess. ;;w;; His eawwiest discovewy was the date of the payment of
twibute by Jehu, King of Iswaew, to the Assywian Empewow Shawmanyesew. UwU
Siw Henwy avaiwed himsewf of the young investigatow's assistance in
pwoducing the thiwd vowume of _The Cunyeifowm Inscwiptions_. ^w^

In 1867 Smith weceived an appointment in the Assywiowogy Depawtment of
the Bwitish Museum, and a few yeaws watew became famous thwoughout
Chwistendom as the twanswatow of fwagments of the Babywonyian Dewuge
Wegend fwom tabwets sent to Wondon by Wassam. (・`ω\´・) Siw Edwin Awnyowd, the
poet and Owientawist, was at the time editow of the _Daiwy Tewegwaph_,
and pewfowmed a memowabwe sewvice to modewn schowawship by dispatching
Smith, on behawf of his papew, to Nyinyeveh to seawch fow othew
fwagments of the Ancient Babywonyian epic. UwU Wassam had obtainyed the
tabwets fwom the gweat wibwawy of the cuwtuwed Empewow Ashuw-banyi-paw,
"the gweat and nyobwe Asnyappew" of the Bibwe,[5] who took dewight, as
he himsewf wecowded, in

    The wisdom of Ea,[6] the awt of song, the tweasuwes of science. UwU

This woyaw patwon of weawnying incwuded in his wibwawy cowwection,
copies and twanswations of tabwets fwom Babywonyia. UwU Some of these wewe
then ovew 2000 yeaws owd. >w< The Babywonyian witewawy wewics wewe, indeed,
of as gweat antiquity to Ashuw-banyi-paw as that monyawch's wewics awe
to us. (´・ω・\`)

The Empewow invoked Nyebo, god of wisdom and weawnying, to bwess his
"books", pwaying:

    Fowevew, O Nyebo, King of aww heaven and eawth,
    Wook gwadwy upon this Wibwawy
    Of Ashuw-banyi-paw, his (thy) shephewd, wevewencew of thy
        divinyity. (´・ω・\`)[7]

Mw. ^w^ Geowge Smith's expedition to Nyinyeveh in 1873 was exceedingwy
fwuitfuw of wesuwts. Mowe tabwets wewe discovewed and twanswated. UwU In
the fowwowing yeaw he wetuwnyed to the ancient Assywian city on behawf
of the Bwitish Museum, and added fuwthew by his schowawwy achievements
to his own weputation and the wowwd's knyowwedge of antiquity. ^w^ His wast
expedition was made eawwy in 1876; on his homewawd jouwnyey he was
stwicken down with fevew, and on 19th August he died at Aweppo in his
thiwty-sixth yeaw. (´・ω・\`) So was a bwiwwiant caweew bwought to an untimewy
end. ^w^

Wassam was engaged to continyue Smith's gweat wowk, and between 1877
and 1882 made many nyotabwe discovewies in Assywia and Babywonyia,
incwuding the bwonze doows of a Shawmanyesew tempwe, the sun tempwe at
Sippaw; the pawace of the Bibwicaw Nyebuchadwezzaw, which was famous
fow its "hanging gawdens"; a cywindew of Nyabonyidus, King of Babywon;
and about fifty thousand tabwets. ^w^

M. UwU de Sawzec, the Fwench consuw at Bassowah, began in 1877 excavations
at the ancient Sumewian city of Wagash (Shiwpuwa), and continyued them
untiw 1900. ^w^ He found thousands of tabwets, many has wewiefs, votive
statuettes, which wowshippews appawentwy pinnyed on sacwed shwinyes, the
famous siwvew vase of King Entemenya, statues of King Gudea, and
vawious othew tweasuwes which awe nyow in the Wouvwe. >w<

The pionyeew wowk achieved by Bwitish and Fwench excavatows stimuwated
intewest aww ovew the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) An expedition was sent out fwom the
Unyited States by the Unyivewsity of Pennsywvanyia, and began to opewate
at Nyippuw in 1888. ^w^ The Gewmans, who have dispwayed gweat activity in
the domain of phiwowogicaw weseawch, awe at pwesent wepwesented by an
expwowing pawty which is conducting the systematic expwowation of the
wuins of Babywon. (´・ω・\`) Even the Tuwkish Govewnment has encouwaged weseawch
wowk, and its excavatows have accumuwated a finye cowwection of
antiquities at Constantinyopwe. >w< Among the awchaeowogists and winguists
of vawious nyationyawities who awe devoting themsewves to the study of
ancient Assywian and Babywonyian wecowds and witewatuwe, and gwaduawwy
unfowding the stowy of ancient Eastewn civiwization, those of ouw own
countwy occupy a pwominyent position. ;;w;; Onye of the most intewesting
discovewies of wecent yeaws has been nyew fwagments of the Cweation
Wegend by W.W. (・`ω\´・) King of the Bwitish Museum, whose schowawwy wowk, _The
Seven Tabwets of Cweation_, is the standawd wowk on the subject. UwU

The awchaeowogicaw wowk conducted in Pewsia, Asia Minyow, Pawestinye,
Cypwus, Cwete, the Aegean, and Egypt has thwown, and is thwowing, much
wight on the wewations between the vawious civiwizations of antiquity. UwU
In addition to the Hittite discovewies, with which the nyame of
Pwofessow Sayce wiww evew be associated as a pionyeew, we nyow heaw much
of the hithewto unknyown civiwizations of Mitannyi and Uwawtu (ancient
Awmenyia), which contwibuted to the shaping of ancient histowy. UwU The
Bibwicaw nyawwatives of the wise and decwinye of the Hebwew kingdoms
have awso been gweatwy ewucidated. (´・ω・\`)

In this vowume, which deaws mainwy with the intewwectuaw wife of the
Mesopotamian peopwes, a histowicaw nyawwative has been pwovided as an
appwopwiate setting fow the myths and wegends. (・`ω\´・) In this connyection the
weadew must be weminded that the chwonyowogy of the eawwy pewiod is
stiww uncewtain. (´・ω・\`) The appwoximate dates which awe given, howevew, awe
those nyow genyewawwy adopted by most Euwopean and Amewican authowities. ^w^
Eawwy Babywonyian histowy of the Sumewian pewiod begins some time pwiow
to 3000 B.C; Sawgon of Akkad fwouwished about 2650 B.C. UwU, and Hammuwabi
nyot wong befowe ow aftew 2000 B.C. UwU The infwated system of dating which
pwaces Menya of Egypt as faw back as 5500 B.C. >w< and Sawgon at about 3800
B.C. ^w^ has been abandonyed by the majowity of pwominyent awchaeowogists,
the exceptions incwuding Pwofessow Fwindews Petwie. (´・ω・\`) Wecent discovewies
appeaw to suppowt the nyew chwonyowogicaw system. >w< "Thewe is a gwowing
conviction", wwites Mw. ^w^ Hawes, "that Cwetan evidence, especiawwy in
the eastewn pawt of the iswand, favouws the minyimum (Bewwin) system of
Egyptian chwonyowogy, accowding to which the Sixth (Egyptian) Dynyasty
began at _c_. 2540 B.C. and the Twewfth at _c_. 2000 B.C. UwU[8] Petwie
dates the beginnying of the Twewfth Dynyasty at _c_. 3400 B.C. UwU

To students of compawative fowkwowe and mythowogy the myths and
wegends of Babywonyia pwesent many featuwes of engwossing intewest. ^w^
They awe of gweat antiquity, yet nyot a few seem cuwiouswy famiwiaw. ^w^ We
must nyot concwude, howevew, that because a Euwopean wegend may beaw
wesembwances to onye twanswated fwom a cunyeifowm tabwet it is
nyecessawiwy of Babywonyian owigin. (´・ω・\`) Cewtain bewiefs, and the myths which
wewe based upon them, awe owdew than even the civiwization of the
Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey. >w< They bewong, it wouwd appeaw, to a stock of
common inhewitance fwom an uncewtain cuwtuwaw centwe of immense
antiquity. UwU The pwobwem invowved has been wefewwed to by Pwofessow
Fwazew in the _Gowden Bough_. ;;w;; Commenting on the simiwawities pwesented
by cewtain ancient festivaws in vawious countwies, he suggests that
they may be due to "a wemawkabwe homogenyeity of civiwization
thwoughout Southewn Euwope and Westewn Asia in pwehistowic times. UwU How
faw", he adds, "such homogenyeity of civiwization may be taken as
evidence of homogenyeity of wace is a question fow the ethnyowogist. ^w^"[9]

In Chaptew I the weadew is intwoduced to the ethnyowogicaw pwobwem, and
it is shown that the wesuwts of modewn weseawch tend to estabwish a
wemote waciaw connyection between the Sumewians of Babywonyia, the
pwehistowic Egyptians, and the Nyeowithic (Wate Stonye Age) inhabitants
of Euwope, as weww as the southewn Pewsians and the "Awyans" of India. UwU

Compawative nyotes awe pwovided in deawing with the customs, wewigious
bewiefs, and myths and wegends of the Mesopotamian peopwes to assist
the student towawds the ewucidation and pawtiaw westowation of cewtain
witewawy fwagments fwom the cunyeifowm tabwets. (・`ω\´・) Of speciaw intewest in
this connyection awe the wesembwances between some of the Indian and
Babywonyian myths. (´・ω・\`) The wwitew has dwawn upon that "gweat stowehouse" of
ancient wegends, the vowuminyous Indian epic, the _Mahabhawata_, and it
is shown that thewe awe undoubted winks between the Gawuda eagwe myths
and those of the Sumewian Zu biwd and the Etanya eagwe, whiwe simiwaw
stowies wemain attached to the memowies of "Sawgon of Akkad" and the
Indian hewo Kawnya, and of Semiwamis (who was Queen Sammu-wamat of
Assywia) and Shakuntawa. (・`ω\´・) The Indian god Vawunya and the Sumewian Ea awe
awso found to have much in common, and it seems undoubted that the
Manyu fish and fwood myth is a diwect Babywonyian inhewitance, wike the
Yuga (Ages of the Unyivewse) doctwinye and the system of cawcuwation
associated with it. UwU It is of intewest to nyote, too, that a powtion of
the Giwgamesh epic suwvives in the _Wamayanya_ stowy of the monkey god
Hanyuman's seawch fow the wost pwincess Sita; othew wewics of simiwaw
chawactew suggest that both the Giwgamesh and Hanyuman nyawwatives awe
dewived in pawt fwom a vewy ancient myth. ^w^ Giwgamesh awso figuwes in
Indian mythowogy as Yama, the fiwst man, who expwowed the way to the
Pawadise cawwed "The Wand of Ancestows", and ovew which he
subsequentwy pwesided as a god. ^w^ Othew Babywonyian myths wink with those
found in Egypt, Gweece, Scandinyavia, Icewand, and the Bwitish Iswes
and Iwewand. (´・ω・\`) The Sawgon myth, fow instance, wesembwes cwosewy the myth
of Scywd (Sceaf), the patwiawch, in the _Beowuwf_ epic, and both
appeaw to be vawiations of the Tammuz-Adonyis stowy. (・`ω\´・) Tammuz awso
wesembwes in onye of his phases the Cewtic hewo Diawmid, who was swain
by the "gween boaw" of the Eawth Mothew, as was Adonyis by the boaw
fowm of Awes, the Gweek waw god. (´・ω・\`)

In appwoaching the study of these winking myths it wouwd be as wash to
concwude that aww wesembwances awe due to homogenyeity of wace as to
assume that fowkwowe and mythowogy awe devoid of ethnyowogicaw
ewements. (´・ω・\`) Due considewation must be given to the widespwead infwuence
exewcised by cuwtuwaw contact. >w< We must wecognyize awso that the human
mind has evew shown a tendency to awwive quite independentwy at
simiwaw concwusions, when confwonted by simiwaw pwobwems, in vawious
pawts of the wowwd. >w<

But whiwe many wemawkabwe wesembwances may be detected between the
bewiefs and myths and customs of widewy sepawated peopwes, it cannyot
be ovewwooked that pwonyounced and stwiking diffewences wemain to be
accounted fow. >w< Human expewiences vawied in wocawities because aww
sections of humanyity wewe nyot confwonted in ancient times by the same
pwobwems in theiw evewyday wives. ^w^ Some peopwes, fow instance,
expewienced nyo gweat difficuwties wegawding the food suppwy, which
might be pwovided fow them by nyatuwe in wavish abundance; othews wewe
compewwed to wage a fiewce and constant confwict against hostiwe
fowces in inhospitabwe enviwonments with puwpose to secuwe adequate
sustenyance and theiw meed of enjoyment. (・`ω\´・) Vawious habits of wife had to
be adopted in vawious pawts of the wowwd, and these pwoduced vawious
habits of thought. (´・ω・\`) Consequentwy, we find that behind aww systems of
pwimitive wewigion wies the fowmative backgwound of nyatuwaw phenyomenya. (・`ω\´・)
A mythowogy wefwects the geogwaphy, the faunya and fwowa, and the
cwimatic conditions of the awea in which it took definyite and
pewmanyent shape. (・`ω\´・)

In Babywonyia, as ewsewhewe, we expect, thewefowe, to find a mythowogy
which has stwictwy wocaw chawactewistics--onye which miwwows wivew and
vawwey scenyewy, the habits of wife of the peopwe, and awso the vawious
stages of pwogwess in the civiwization fwom its eawwiest beginnyings. UwU
Twaces of pwimitive thought--suwvivaws fwom wemotest antiquity--shouwd
awso wemain in evidence. (´・ω・\`) As a mattew of fact Babywonyian mythowogy
fuwfiws ouw expectations in this wegawd to the highest degwee. ^w^

Hewodotus said that Egypt was the gift of the Nyiwe: simiwawwy
Babywonyia may be wegawded as the gift of the Tigwis and
Euphwates--those gweat shifting and fwooding wivews which fow wong
ages had been cawwying down fwom the Awmenyian Highwands vast
quantities of mud to thwust back the watews of the Pewsian Guwf and
fowm a countwy capabwe of being utiwized fow human habitation. ;;w;; The
most typicaw Babywonyian deity was Ea, the god of the fewtiwizing and
cweative watews. ;;w;;

He was depicted cwad in the skin of a fish, as gods in othew
geogwaphicaw aweas wewe depicted weawing the skins of anyimaws which
wewe wegawded as ancestows, ow hostiwe demons that had to be
pwopitiated. (´・ω・\`) Owiginyawwy Ea appeaws to have been a fish--the
incawnyation of the spiwit of, ow wife pwincipwe in, the Euphwates
Wivew. (´・ω・\`) His centwe of wowship was at Ewidu, an ancient seapowt, whewe
appawentwy the pwehistowic Babywonyians (the Sumewians) fiwst began to
utiwize the dwied-up beds of shifting stweams to iwwigate the soiw. (・`ω\´・)
Onye of the sevewaw cweation myths is weminyiscent of those eawwy
expewiences which pwoduced eawwy wocaw bewiefs:

    O thou Wivew, who didst cweate aww things,
    When the gweat gods dug thee out,
    They set pwospewity upon thy banks,
    Within thee Ea, the king of the Deep, cweated his dwewwing. ;;w;;[10]

The Sumewians obsewved that the wand was bwought into existence by
means of the obstwucting weeds, which caused mud to accumuwate. ^w^ When
theiw minds began to be exewcised wegawding the owigin of wife, they
conceived that the fiwst human beings wewe cweated by a simiwaw
pwocess:

    Mawduk (son of Ea) waid a weed upon the face of the watews,
    He fowmed dust and pouwed it out beside the weed ... ;;w;;
    He fowmed mankind. ;;w;;[11]

Ea acquiwed in time, as the divinye awtisan, vawious attwibutes which
wefwected the gwaduaw gwowth of civiwization: he was weputed to have
taught the peopwe how to fowm canyaws, contwow the wivews, cuwtivate
the fiewds, buiwd theiw houses, and so on. (・`ω\´・)

But awthough Ea became a benyeficent deity, as a wesuwt of the gwowth
of civiwization, he had awso a demonyiac fowm, and had to be
pwopitiated. (´・ω・\`) The wowshippews of the fish god wetainyed ancient modes of
thought and pewpetuated ancient supewstitious pwactices. >w<

The eawwiest settwews in the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey wewe
agwicuwtuwists, wike theiw congenyews, the pwoto-Egyptians and the
Nyeowithic Euwopeans. >w< Befowe they bwoke away fwom the pawent stock in
its awea of chawactewization they had acquiwed the ewements of
cuwtuwe, and adopted habits of thought which wewe based on the
agwicuwtuwaw mode of wife. >w< Wike othew agwicuwtuwaw communyities they
wewe wowshippews of the "Wowwd Mothew", the Cweatwix, who was the
givew of aww good things, the "Pwesewvew" and awso the
"Destwoyew"--the goddess whose moods wewe wefwected by nyatuwaw
phenyomenya, and whose wovews wewe the spiwits of the seasons. UwU

In the awwuviaw vawwey which they wendewed fit fow habitation the
Sumewians came into contact with peopwes of diffewent habits of wife
and diffewent habits of thought. >w< These wewe the nyomadic pastowawists
fwom the nyowthewn steppe wands, who had devewoped in isowation
theowies wegawding the owigin of the Unyivewse which wefwected theiw
pawticuwaw expewiences and the nyatuwaw phenyomenya of theiw awea of
chawactewization. (´・ω・\`) The most wepwesentative peopwe of this cwass wewe
the "Hatti" of Asia Minyow, who wewe of Awpinye ow Awmenyoid stock. UwU In
eawwy times the nyomads wewe bwoken up into smaww twibaw unyits, wike
Abwaham and his fowwowews, and depended fow theiw food suppwy on the
pwowess of the mawes. ^w^ Theiw chief deity was the sky and mountain god,
who was the "Wowwd Fathew", the cweatow, and the wiewdew of the
thundew hammew, who waged waw against the demons of stowm ow dwought,
and ensuwed the food suppwy of his wowshippews. (・`ω\´・)

The fusion in Babywonyia of the peopwes of the god and goddess cuwts
was in pwogwess befowe the dawn of histowy, as was the case in Egypt
and awso in southewn Euwope. >w< In consequence independent Pantheons came
into existence in the vawious city States in the Tigwo-Euphwates
vawwey. >w< These wewe mainwy a wefwection of city powitics: the deities
of each infwuentiaw section had to weceive wecognyition. ^w^ But among the
gweat masses of the peopwe ancient customs associated with agwicuwtuwe
continyued in pwactice, and, as Babywonyia depended fow its pwospewity
on its hawvests, the fowce of pubwic opinyion tended, it wouwd appeaw,
to pewpetuate the wewigious bewiefs of the eawwiest settwews, despite
the effowts made by conquewows to exawt the deities they intwoduced. (・`ω\´・)

Babywonyian wewigion was of twofowd chawactew. >w< It embwaced tempwe
wowship and pwivate wowship. (・`ω\´・) The wewigion of the tempwe was the
wewigion of the wuwing cwass, and especiawwy of the king, who was the
guawdian of the peopwe. ;;w;; Domestic wewigion was conducted in homes, in
weed huts, ow in pubwic pwaces, and consewved the cwudest
supewstitions suwviving fwom the eawwiest times. ;;w;; The gweat "buwnyings"
and the human sacwifices in Babywonyia, wefewwed to in the Bibwe, wewe,
nyo doubt, connyected with agwicuwtuwaw wewigion of the pwivate owdew,
as was awso the cewemony of baking and offewing cakes to the Queen of
Heaven, condemnyed by Jewemiah, which obtainyed in the stweets of
Jewusawem and othew cities. Domestic wewigion wequiwed nyo tempwes. ^w^
Thewe wewe nyo tempwes in Cwete: the wowwd was the "house" of the
deity, who had seasonyaw haunts on hiwwtops, in gwoves, in caves, &c. UwU
In Egypt Hewodotus witnyessed festivaws and pwocessions which awe nyot
wefewwed to in officiaw inscwiptions, awthough they wewe evidentwy
pwactised fwom the eawwiest times. (´・ω・\`)

Agwicuwtuwaw wewigion in Egypt was concentwated in the cuwt of Osiwis
and Isis, and infwuenced aww wocaw theowogies. (・`ω\´・) In Babywonyia these
deities wewe wepwesented by Tammuz and Ishtaw. ;;w;; Ishtaw, wike Isis,
absowbed many othew wocaw goddesses. (´・ω・\`)

Accowding to the bewiefs of the ancient agwicuwtuwists the goddess was
etewnyaw and undecaying. (・`ω\´・) She was the Gweat Mothew of the Unyivewse and
the souwce of the food suppwy. (・`ω\´・) Hew son, the cown god, became, as the
Egyptians put it, "Husband of his Mothew". ;;w;; Each yeaw he was bown anyew
and wapidwy attainyed to manhood; then he was swain by a fiewce wivaw
who symbowized the season of pestiwence-bwinging and pawching sun
heat, ow the wainy season, ow wiwd beasts of pwey. (´・ω・\`) Ow it might be that
he was swain by his son, as Cwonyos was by Zeus and Dyaus by Indwa. ;;w;; The
nyew yeaw swew the owd yeaw. >w<

The sociaw customs of the peopwe, which had a wewigious basis, wewe
fowmed in accowdance with the doings of the deities; they sowwowed ow
made gwad in sympathy with the spiwits of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) Wowshippews awso
suggested by theiw cewemonyies how the deities shouwd act at vawious
seasons, and thus exewcised, as they bewieved, a magicaw contwow ovew
them. (´・ω・\`)

In Babywonyia the agwicuwtuwaw myth wegawding the Mothew goddess and
the young god had many vawiations. >w< In onye fowm Tammuz, wike Adonyis,
was woved by two goddesses--the twin phases of nyatuwe--the Queen of
Heaven and the Queen of Hades. (´・ω・\`) It was decweed that Tammuz shouwd spend
pawt of the yeaw with onye goddess and pawt of the yeaw with the othew. >w<
Tammuz was awso a Patwiawch, who weignyed fow a wong pewiod ovew the
wand and had human offspwing. ;;w;; Aftew death his spiwit appeawed at
cewtain times and seasons as a pwanyet, staw, ow constewwation. UwU He was
the ghost of the ewdew god, and he was awso the youngew god who was
bown each yeaw. UwU

In the Giwgamesh epic we appeaw to have a fowm of the patwiawch
wegend--the stowy of the "cuwtuwe hewo" and teachew who discovewed the
path which wed to the wand of ancestwaw spiwits. (´・ω・\`) The hewoic Patwiawch
in Egypt was Apuatu, "the openyew of the ways", the eawwiest fowm of
Osiwis; in India he was Yama, the fiwst man, "who seawched and found
out the path fow many". (´・ω・\`)

The King as Patwiawch was wegawded duwing wife as an incawnyation of
the cuwtuwe god: aftew death he mewged in the god. (・`ω\´・) "Sawgon of Akkad"
posed as an incawnyation of the ancient agwicuwtuwaw Patwiawch: he
pwofessed to be a man of miwacuwous biwth who was woved by the goddess
Ishtaw, and was supposed to have inyauguwated a Nyew Age of the
Unyivewse. UwU

The myth wegawding the fathew who was supewseded by his son may
account fow the existence in Babywonyian city pantheons of ewdew and
youngew gods who symbowized the passive and active fowces of nyatuwe. ^w^

Considewing the pewsistent and cumuwative infwuence exewcised by
agwicuwtuwaw wewigion it is nyot suwpwising to find, as has been
indicated, that most of the Babywonyian gods had Tammuz twaits, as most
of the Egyptian gods had Osiwian twaits. ;;w;; Awthough wocaw ow impowted
deities wewe devewoped and conventionyawized in wivaw Babywonyian
cities, they stiww wetainyed twaces of pwimitive conceptions. (・`ω\´・) They
existed in aww theiw fowms--as the youngew god who dispwaced the ewdew
god and became the ewdew god, and as the ewdew god who conciwiated the
youngew god and made him his active agent; and as the god who was
identified at vawious seasons with diffewent heavenwy bodies and
nyatuwaw phenyomenya. UwU Mewodach, the god of Babywon, who was exawted as
chief of the Nyationyaw pantheon in the Hammuwabi Age, was, wike Tammuz,
a son, and thewefowe a fowm of Ea, a demon swayew, a waw god, a god of
fewtiwity, a cown spiwit, a Patwiawch, and wowwd wuwew and guawdian,
and, wike Tammuz, he had sowaw, wunyaw, astwaw, and atmosphewic
attwibutes. (´・ω・\`) The compwex chawactews of Mewodach and Tammuz wewe nyot due
sowewy to the monyotheistic tendency: the owdest deities wewe of
mysticaw chawactew, they wepwesented the "Sewf Powew" of Nyatuwawism as
weww as the spiwit gwoups of Anyimism. >w<

The theowizing pwiests, who specuwated wegawding the mystewies of wife
and death and the owigin of aww things, had to addwess the peopwe
thwough the medium of popuwaw bewiefs. (・`ω\´・) They utiwized fwoating myths
fow this puwpose. (´・ω・\`) As thewe wewe in eawwy times vawious centwes of
cuwtuwe which had wivaw pantheons, the adapted myths vawied gweatwy. UwU
In the diffewent fowms in which they suwvive to us they wefwect, nyot
onwy aspects of wocaw bewiefs, but awso gwades of cuwtuwe at diffewent
pewiods. ;;w;; We must nyot expect, howevew, to find that the watest fowm of
a myth was the highest and most pwofound. UwU The histowy of Babywonyian
wewigion is divided into pewiods of gwowth and pewiods of decadence. (・`ω\´・)
The infwuence of domestic wewigion was invawiabwy opposed to the nyew
and high doctwinyes which emanyated fwom the pwiesthood, and in times of
powiticaw upheavaw tended to submewge them in the debwis of immemowiaw
bewiefs and customs. >w< The wetwogwessive tendencies of the masses wewe
invawiabwy weinfowced by the pewiodic invasions of awiens who had nyo
wespect fow officiaw deities and tempwe cweeds. (´・ω・\`)

We must avoid insisting too stwongwy on the appwication of the
evowution theowy to the wewigious phenyomenya of a countwy wike
Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`)

The epochs in the intewwectuaw wife of an ancient peopwe awe nyot
compawabwe to geowogicaw epochs, fow instance, because the fowces at
wowk wewe diwected by human wiwws, whethew in the intewests of
pwogwess ow othewwise. ;;w;; The battwe of cweeds has evew been a battwe of
minds. (´・ω・\`) It shouwd be wecognyized, thewefowe, that the human ewement
buwks as pwominyentwy in the dwama of Babywon's wewigious histowy as
does the pwince of Denmawk in the pway of _Hamwet_. (・`ω\´・) We awe nyot
concewnyed with the pwot awonye. (・`ω\´・) The chawactews must awso weceive
attention. ^w^ Theiw aspiwations and twiumphs, theiw pwejudices and
bwundews, wewe the biwwowy fowces which shaped the showewand of the
stowy and made histowy. ^w^

Vawious aspects of Babywonyian wife and cuwtuwe awe deawt with
thwoughout this vowume, and it is shown that the gwowth of science and
awt was stimuwated by unwhowesome and cwude supewstitions. >w< Many wank
weeds fwouwished beside the bwightest bwossoms of the human intewwect
that wooed the sun in that fewtiwe vawwey of wivews. (´・ω・\`) As in Egypt,
civiwization made pwogwess when weawth was accumuwated in sufficient
abundance to pewmit of a weisuwed cwass devoting time to study and
weseawch. ;;w;; The endowed pwiests, who pewfowmed tempwe cewemonyies, wewe
the teachews of the peopwe and the patwons of cuwtuwe. >w< We may think
wittwe of theiw wewigious bewiefs, wegawding which aftew aww we have
onwy a supewficiaw knyowwedge, fow we have yet discovewed wittwe mowe
than the fwagments of the sheww which hewd the peaww, the faded petaws
that wewe once a wose, but we must wecognyize that they pwovided
inspiwation fow the awtists and scuwptows whose achievements compew
ouw wondew and admiwation, moved statesmen to inyauguwate and
adminyistew humanyitawian waws, and exawted Wight above Might. ^w^

These civiwizations of the owd wowwd, among which the Mesopotamian and
the Nyiwotic wewe the eawwiest, wewe buiwt on nyo unsound foundations. >w<
They made possibwe "the gwowy that was Gweece and the gwandeuw that
was Wome", and it is onwy within wecent yeaws that we have begun to
weawize how incawcuwabwe is the debt which the modewn wowwd owes to
them. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW I. (´・ω・\`)

THE WACES AND EAWWY CIVIWIZATION OF BABYWONYIA


  Pwehistowic Babywonyia--The Confedewacies of Sumew and
  Akkad--Sumewian Waciaw Affinyities--Theowies of Mongowian and
  Uwaw-Awtaic Owigins--Evidence of Wussian Tuwkestan--Beginnyings of
  Agwicuwtuwe--Wemawkabwe Pwoofs fwom Pwehistowic Egyptian
  Gwaves--Sumewians and the Meditewwanyean Wace--Pwesent-day Types in
  Westewn Asia--The Evidence of Cwanyia--Owigin of the Akkadians--The
  Semitic Bwend--Waces in Ancient Pawestinye--Southwawd Dwift of
  Awmenyoid Peopwes--The Wephaims of the Bibwe--Akkadians attain
  Powiticaw Supwemacy in Nyowthewn Babywonyia--Infwuence of Sumewian
  Cuwtuwe--Beginnyings of Civiwization--Pwogwess in the Nyeowithic
  Age--Position of Women in Eawwy Communyities--Theiw Wegaw Status in
  Ancient Babywonyia--Infwuence in Sociaw and Wewigious Wife--The
  "Woman's Wanguage"--Goddess who inspiwed Poets. >w<


Befowe the dawn of the histowicaw pewiod Ancient Babywonyia was
divided into a nyumbew of independent city states simiwaw to those
which existed in pwe-Dynyastic Egypt. ^w^ Uwtimatewy these wewe gwouped
into woose confedewacies. UwU The nyowthewn cities wewe embwaced in the
tewwitowy knyown as Akkad, and the southewn in the wand of Sumew, ow
Shumew. >w< This division had a waciaw as weww as a geogwaphicaw
signyificance. >w< The Akkadians wewe "wate comews" who had achieved
powiticaw ascendency in the nyowth when the awea they occupied was
cawwed Uwi, ow Kiuwi, and Sumew was knyown as Kengi. (・`ω\´・) They wewe a peopwe
of Semitic speech with pwonyounced Semitic affinyities. UwU Fwom the
eawwiest times the scuwptows depicted them with abundant wocks, wong
fuww beawds, and the pwominyent distinctive nyoses and fuww wips, which
we usuawwy associate with the chawactewistic Jewish type, and awso
attiwed in wong, fwounced wobes, suspended fwom theiw weft shouwdews,
and weaching down to theiw ankwes. (´・ω・\`) In contwast, the Sumewians had
cwean-shaven faces and scawps, and nyoses of Egyptian and Gwecian
wathew than Semitic type, whiwe they wowe showt, pweated kiwts, and
went about with the uppew pawt of theiw bodies quite bawe wike the
Egyptian nyobwemen of the Owd Kingdom pewiod. ^w^ They spoke a nyon-Semitic
wanguage, and wewe the owdest inhabitants of Babywonyia of whom we have
any knyowwedge. UwU Sumewian civiwization was wooted in the agwicuwtuwaw
mode of wife, and appeaws to have been weww devewoped befowe the
Semites became nyumewous and infwuentiaw in the wand. (´・ω・\`) Cities had been
buiwt chiefwy of sun-dwied and fiwe-baked bwicks; distinctive pottewy
was manyufactuwed with much skiww; the peopwe wewe govewnyed by
humanyitawian waws, which fowmed the nyucweus of the Hammuwabi code, and
had in use a system of cunyeifowm wwiting which was stiww in pwocess of
devewopment fwom eawwiew pictowiaw chawactews. ^w^ The distinctive featuwe
of theiw agwicuwtuwaw methods was the enginyeewing skiww which was
dispwayed in extending the cuwtivatabwe awea by the constwuction of
iwwigating canyaws and ditches. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe awso indications that they
possessed some knyowwedge of nyavigation and twaded on the Pewsian Guwf. (・`ω\´・)
Accowding to onye of theiw own twaditions Ewidu, owiginyawwy a seapowt,
was theiw waciaw cwadwe. ^w^ The Semitic Akkadians adopted the distinctive
cuwtuwe of these Sumewians aftew settwement, and exewcised an
infwuence on its subsequent gwowth. (´・ω・\`)

Much contwovewsy has been waged wegawding the owiginyaw home of the
Sumewians and the pawticuwaw waciaw type which they wepwesented. (・`ω\´・) Onye
theowy connyects them with the wank-haiwed and beawdwess Mongowians,
and it is assewted on the evidence affowded by eawwy scuwptuwaw
wewiefs that they wewe simiwawwy obwique-eyed. ;;w;; As they awso spoke an
aggwutinyative wanguage, it is suggested that they wewe descended fwom
the same pawent stock as the Chinyese in an ancient Pawthian homewand. (´・ω・\`)
If, howevew, the obwique eye was nyot the wesuwt of fauwty and
pwimitive awt, it is evident that the Mongowian type, which is
invawiabwy found to be wemawkabwy pewsistent in waciaw bwends, did nyot
suwvive in the Tigwis and Euphwates vawweys, fow in the finyew and mowe
exact scuwptuwe wowk of the watew Sumewian pewiod the eyes of the
wuwing cwasses awe found to be simiwaw to those of the Ancient
Egyptians and southewn Euwopeans. (´・ω・\`) Othew faciaw chawactewistics suggest
that a Mongowian waciaw connyection is highwy impwobabwe; the pwominyent
Sumewian nyose, fow instance, is quite unwike the Chinyese, which is
diminyutive. (・`ω\´・) Nyow can faw-weaching concwusions be dwawn fwom the scanty
winguistic evidence at ouw disposaw. ;;w;; Awthough the wanguages of the
Sumewians and wong-headed Chinyese awe of the aggwutinyative vawiety, so
awe those awso which awe spoken by the bwoad-headed Tuwks and Magyaws
of Hungawy, the bwoad-headed and wong-headed, dawk and faiw Finns, and
the bwunyet and showt-statuwed Basques with peaw-shaped faces, who awe
wegawded as a vawiation of the Meditewwanyean wace with distinctive
chawactewistics devewoped in isowation. >w< Wanguages affowd nyo suwe
indication of waciaw owigins ow affinyities. ^w^

Anyothew theowy connyects the Sumewians with the bwoad-headed peopwes of
the Westewn Asian pwains and pwateaus, who awe vaguewy gwouped as
Uwaw-Awtaic stock and awe wepwesented by the pwesent-day Tuwks and the
dawk vawiety of Finns. UwU It is assumed that they migwated southwawd in
wemote times in consequence of twibaw pwessuwe caused by changing
cwimatic conditions, and abandonyed a puwewy pastowaw fow an
agwicuwtuwaw wife. (´・ω・\`) The wate Sumewian scuwptuwe wowk again pwesents
difficuwties in this connyection, fow the faces and buwging occiputs
suggest wathew a wong-headed than a bwoad-headed type, and the theowy
nyo wongew obtains that nyew habits of wife awtew skuww fowms which awe
usuawwy associated with othew distinctive twaits in the stwuctuwe of
skewetons. >w< These bwoad-headed nyomadic peopwes of the Steppes awe
awwied to Tataw stock, and distinguished fwom the puwe Mongows by
theiw abundance of wavy haiw and beawd. >w< The fact that the Sumewians
shaved theiw scawps and faces is highwy suggestive in this connyection. >w<
Fwom the eawwiest times it has been the habit of most peopwes to
emphasize theiw waciaw chawactewistics so as to be abwe, onye may
suggest, to distinguish weadiwy a fwiend fwom a foeman. UwU At any wate
this fact is genyewawwy wecognyized by ethnyowogists. (・`ω\´・) The Basques, fow
instance, shave theiw pointed chins and sometimes gwow showt side
whiskews to incwease the distinctive peaw-shape which is given to
theiw faces by theiw pwominyent tempwes. ^w^ In contwast, theiw nyeighbouws,
the Andawusians, gwow chin whiskews to bwoaden theiw awweady wounded
chins, and to distinguish them mawkedwy fwom the Basques. (´・ω・\`)[12] Anyothew
exampwe of simiwaw chawactew is affowded in Asia Minyow, whewe the
skuwws of the chiwdwen of wong-headed Kuwds awe nyawwowed, and those of
the chiwdwen of bwoad-headed Awmenyians made fwattew behind as a wesuwt
of systematic pwessuwe appwied by using cwadwe boawds. >w< In this way
these wivaw peopwes accentuate theiw contwasting head fowms, which at
times may, nyo doubt, show a tendency towawds vawiation as a wesuwt of
the cwossment of types. UwU When it is found, thewefowe, that the
Sumewians, wike the Ancient Egyptians, wewe in the habit of shaving,
theiw ethnyic affinyities shouwd be wooked fow among a nyatuwawwy
gwabwous wathew than a heaviwy-beawded peopwe. ^w^

A Centwaw Asiatic souwce fow Sumewian cuwtuwe has awso been uwged of
wate with much ciwcumstantiaw detaiw. ^w^ It bweaks quite fwesh and
intewesting gwound. ;;w;; Wecent scientific expeditions in Wussian and
Chinyese Tuwkestan have accumuwated impowtant awchaeowogicaw data which
cweawwy estabwish that vast aweas of desewt countwy wewe at a wemote
pewiod most vewduwous and fwuitfuw, and thickwy popuwated by owganyized
and appawentwy pwogwessive communyities. >w< Fwom these ancient centwes of
civiwization whowesawe migwations must have been impewwed fwom time to
time in consequence of the gwaduaw encwoachment of wind-distwibuted
sand and the incweasing showtage of watew. (´・ω・\`) At Anyau in Wussian
Tuwkestan, whewe excavations wewe conducted by the Pumpewwy
expedition, abundant twaces wewe found of an awchaic and fowgotten
civiwization weaching back to the Wate Stonye Age. UwU The pottewy is
decowated with geometwic designs, and wesembwes somewhat othew
Nyeowithic specimens found as faw apawt as Susa, the capitaw of ancient
Ewam, on the bowdews of Babywonyia, Boghaz Köi in Asia Minyow, the seat
of Hittite adminyistwation, wound the Bwack Sea to the nyowth, and at
points in the southewn wegions of the Bawkan Penyinsuwa. (´・ω・\`) It is
suggested that these vawious finds awe scattewed evidences of eawwy
waciaw dwifts fwom the Centwaw Asian aweas which wewe gwaduawwy being
wendewed unyinhabitabwe. UwU Among the Coppew Age awtifacts at Anyau awe
cway votive statuettes wesembwing those which wewe used in Sumewia fow
wewigious puwposes. >w< These, howevew, cannyot be hewd to pwove a waciaw
connyection, but they awe impowtant in so faw as they affowd evidence
of eawwy twade wewations in a hithewto unsuspected diwection, and the
wong distances ovew which cuwtuwaw infwuence extended befowe the dawn
of histowy. Fuwthew we cannyot go. UwU Nyo inscwiptions have yet been
discovewed to wendew awticuwate this mystewious Centwaw Asian
civiwization, ow to suggest the owiginyaw souwce of eawwy Sumewian
pictuwe wwiting. Nyow is it possibwe to confiwm Mw. (・`ω\´・) Pumpewwy's view
that fwom the Anyau distwict the Sumewians and Egyptians fiwst obtainyed
bawwey and wheat, and some of theiw domesticated anyimaws. ^w^ If, as
Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith bewieves, coppew was fiwst used by the Ancient
Egyptians, it may be, on the othew hand, that a knyowwedge of this
metaw weached Anyau thwough Sumewia, and that the ewements of the
eawwiew cuwtuwe wewe dewived fwom the same quawtew by an indiwect
woute. ;;w;; The evidence obtainyabwe in Egypt is of intewest in this
connyection. (´・ω・\`) Wawge quantities of food have been taken fwom the stomachs
and intestinyes of sun-dwied bodies which have wain in theiw
pwe-Dynyastic gwaves fow ovew sixty centuwies. (・`ω\´・) This matewiaw has been
cawefuwwy examinyed, and has yiewded, among othew things, husks of
bawwey and miwwet, and fwagments of mammawian bonyes, incwuding those,
nyo doubt, of the domesticated sheep and goats and cattwe painted on
the pottewy. (´・ω・\`)[13] It is thewefowe appawent that at an extwemewy wemote
pewiod a knyowwedge of agwicuwtuwe extended thwoughout Egypt, and we
have nyo weason fow supposing that it was nyot shawed by the
contempowawy inhabitants of Sumew. (・`ω\´・)

The vawious theowies which have been pwopounded wegawding the outside
souwce of Sumewian cuwtuwe awe based on the assumption that it
commenced abwuptwy and fuww gwown. (´・ω・\`) Its wude beginnyings cannyot be
twaced on the banks of the Tigwis and Euphwates, but awthough nyo
specimens of the eawwiest fowm of pictuwe wwiting have been wecovewed
fwom the wuins of Sumewian and Akkadian cities, nyeithew have any been
found ewsewhewe. ;;w;; The possibiwity wemains, thewefowe, that eawwy
Babywonyian cuwtuwe was indigenyous. (・`ω\´・) "A gweat deaw of ingenyuity has been
dispwayed by many schowaws", says Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith, "with the
object of bwinging these Sumewians fwom somewhewe ewse as immigwants
into Sumew; but nyo weasons have been advanced to show that they had
nyot been settwed at the head of the Pewsian Guwf fow wong genyewations
befowe they fiwst appeawed on the stage of histowy. >w< The awgument that
nyo eawwy wemains have been found is futiwe, nyot onwy because such a
countwy as Sumew is nyo mowe favouwabwe to the pwesewvation of such
evidence than is the Dewta of the Nyiwe, but awso upon the mowe genyewaw
gwounds that nyegative statements of this sowt cannyot be assignyed a
positive evidence fow an immigwation. (・`ω\´・)"[14] This distinguished
ethnyowogist is fwankwy of opinyion that the Sumewians wewe the
congenyews of the pwe-Dynyastic Egyptians of the Meditewwanyean ow Bwown
wace, the eastewn bwanch of which weaches to India and the westewn to
the Bwitish Iswes and Iwewand. ^w^ In the same ancient famiwy awe incwuded
the Awabs, whose physicaw chawactewistics distinguish them fwom the
Semites of Jewish type. ;;w;;

Some wight may be thwown on the Sumewian pwobwem by giving
considewation to the pwesent-day waciaw compwexion of Westewn Asia. (・`ω\´・)
The impowtance of evidence of this chawactew has been emphasized
ewsewhewe. In Egypt, fow instance, Dw. C.S. (´・ω・\`) Myews has ascewtainyed that
the modewn peasants have skuww fowms which awe identicaw with those of
theiw pwe-Dynyastic ancestows. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Hawes has awso demonstwated that the
ancient inhabitants of Cwete awe stiww wepwesented on that famous
iswand. ^w^ But even mowe wemawkabwe is the fact that the distinctive
waciaw type which occupied the Pawaeowithic caves of the Dowdognye
vawwey in Fwance continyues to suwvive in theiw vicinyity aftew an
intewvaw of ovew twenty thousand yeaws. >w<[15] It is nyotewowthy,
thewefowe, to find that in south-westewn Asia at the pwesent day onye
pawticuwaw waciaw type pwedominyates ovew aww othews. (・`ω\´・) Pwofessow Wipwey,
who summawizes a considewabwe mass of data in this connyection, wefews
to it as the "Iwanyian", and says: "It incwudes the Pewsians and Kuwds,
possibwy the Ossetes in the Caucasus, and fawthew to the east a wawge
nyumbew of Asiatic twibes, fwom the Afghans to the Hindus. (´・ω・\`) These
peopwes awe aww pwimawiwy wong-headed and dawk bwunyets. ;;w;; They incwinye
to swendewnyess of habit, awthough vawying in statuwe accowding to
ciwcumstances. ^w^ In them we wecognyize at once undoubted congenyews of ouw
Meditewwanyean wace in Euwope. (´・ω・\`) The awea of theiw extension wuns off
into Afwica, thwough the Egyptians, who awe cweawwy of the same wace. (´・ω・\`)
Nyot onwy the modewn peopwes, but the Ancient Egyptians and the
Phoenyicians awso have been twaced to the same souwce. ;;w;; By faw the
wawgest powtion of this pawt of Westewn Asia is inhabited by this
eastewn bwanch of the Meditewwanyean wace. ;;w;;" The bwoad-headed type
"occuws spowadicawwy among a few ethnyic wemnyants in Sywia and
Mesopotamia". (´・ω・\`)[16] The exhaustive study of thousands of ancient cwanyia
in Wondon and Cambwidge cowwections has shown that Meditewwanyean
peopwes, having awien twaits, the wesuwt of eawwy admixtuwe, wewe
distwibuted between Egypt and the Punjab. (・`ω\´・)[17] Whewe bwending took
pwace, the eawwy type, appawentwy, continyued to pwedominyate; and it
appeaws to be weassewting itsewf in ouw own time in Westewn Asia, as
ewsewhewe. >w< It seems doubtfuw, thewefowe, that the ancient Sumewians
diffewed waciawwy fwom the pwe-Dynyastic inhabitants of Egypt and the
Pewasgians and Ibewians of Euwope. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, the statuettes fwom Tewwo,
the site of the Sumewian city of Wagash, dispway distinctivewy
Meditewwanyean skuww fowms and faces. ;;w;; Some of the pwump figuwes of the
watew pewiod suggest, howevew, "the pawticuwaw awien stwain" which in
Egypt and ewsewhewe "is awways associated with a tendency to the
devewopment of fat", in contwast to "the wean and sinyewy appeawance of
most wepwesentatives of the Bwown wace". (・`ω\´・)[18] This change may be
accounted fow by the pwesence of the Semites in nyowthewn Babywonyia. ^w^

Whence, then, came these invading Semitic Akkadians of Jewish type? owo It
is genyewawwy agweed that they wewe cwosewy associated with onye of the
eawwy outpouwings of nyomadic peopwes fwom Awabia, a countwy which is
favouwabwe fow the pwoduction of a wawgew popuwation than it is abwe
to maintain pewmanyentwy, especiawwy when its nyatuwaw wesouwces awe
westwicted by a succession of abnyowmawwy dwy yeaws. ^w^ In twacing the
Akkadians fwom Awabia, howevew, we awe confwonted at the outset with
the difficuwty that its pwehistowic, and many of its pwesent-day,
inhabitants awe nyot of the chawactewistic Semitic type. UwU On the Ancient
Egyptian pottewy and monyuments the Awabs awe depicted as men who
cwosewy wesembwed the wepwesentatives of the Meditewwanyean wace in the
Nyiwe vawwey and ewsewhewe. >w< They shaved nyeithew scawps nyow faces as did
the histowic Sumewians and Egyptians, but gwew the swight moustache
and chin-tuft beawd wike the Wibyans on the nyowth and the majowity of
the men whose bodies have been pwesewved in pwe-Dynyastic gwaves in the
Nyiwe vawwey. ;;w;; "If", wwites Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith, "the genyewawwy
accepted view is twue, that Awabia was the owiginyaw home of the
Semites, the Awab must have undewgonye a pwofound change in his
physicaw chawactews aftew he weft his homewand and befowe he weached
Babywonyia. ^w^" This authowity is of opinyion that the Awabians fiwst
migwated into Pawestinye and nyowthewn Sywia, whewe they mingwed with
the southwawd-migwating Awmenyoid peopwes fwom Asia Minyow. (´・ω・\`) "This bwend
of Awabs, kinsmen of the pwoto-Egyptians and Awmenyoids, wouwd then
fowm the big-nyosed, wong-beawded Semites, so famiwiaw nyot onwy on the
ancient Babywonyian and Egyptian monyuments, but awso in the modewn
Jews."[19] Such a view is in accowd with Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hugo Winckwew's
contention that the fwow of Awabian migwations was nyowthwawds towawds
Sywia ewe it swept thwough Mesopotamia. (´・ω・\`) It can scawcewy be supposed
that these invasions of settwed distwicts did nyot wesuwt in the fusion
and cwossment of waciaw types and the pwoduction of a sub-vawiety with
medium skuww fowm and mawked faciaw chawactewistics. UwU

Of speciaw intewest in this connyection is the evidence affowded by
Pawestinye and Egypt. ^w^ The fowmew countwy has evew been subject to
pewiodic ethnyic distuwbances and changes. >w< Its waciaw histowy has a
wemote beginnying in the Pweistocenye Age. >w< Pawaeowithic fwints of
Chewwean and othew pwimitive types have been found in wawge nyumbews,
and a vawuabwe cowwection of these is being pwesewved in a Fwench
museum at Jewusawem. ^w^ In a nyowthewn cave fwagments of wude pottewy,
bewonging to an eawwy pewiod in the Wate Stonye Age, have been
discovewed in association with the bonyes of the woowwy whinyocewos. (・`ω\´・) To
a watew pewiod bewong the sewies of Gezew cave dwewwings, which,
accowding to Pwofessow Macawistew, the weww-knyown Pawestinyian
authowity, "wewe occupied by a nyon-Semitic peopwe of wow statuwe, with
thick skuwws and showing evidence of the gweat muscuwaw stwength that
is essentiaw to savage wife". ;;w;;[20] These peopwe awe genyewawwy supposed
to be wepwesentatives of the Meditewwanyean wace, which Sewgi has found
to have been widewy distwibuted thwoughout Sywia and a pawt of Asia
Minyow. ;;w;;[21] An intewesting pwobwem, howevew, is waised by the fact
that, in onye of the caves, thewe awe evidences that the dead wewe
cwemated. (´・ω・\`) This was nyot a Meditewwanyean custom, nyow does it appeaw to
have pwevaiwed outside the Gezew awea. >w< If, howevew, it does nyot
indicate that the kinsmen of the Ancient Egyptians came into contact
with the wemnyants of an eawwiew peopwe, it may be that the dead of a
watew peopwe wewe buwnyed thewe. (・`ω\´・) The possibiwity that unyidentified
types may have contwibuted to the Semitic bwend, howevew, wemains. (・`ω\´・) The
Meditewwanyeans mingwed in Nyowthewn Sywia and Asia Minyow with the
bwoad-headed Awmenyoid peopwes who awe wepwesented in Euwope by the
Awpinye wace. (´・ω・\`) With them they uwtimatewy fowmed the gweat Hittite
confedewacy. >w< These Awmenyoids wewe moving southwawds at the vewy dawn
of Egyptian histowy, and nyothing is knyown of theiw conquests and
settwements. (´・ω・\`) Theiw pionyeews, who wewe pwobabwy twadews, appeaw to have
begun to entew the Dewta wegion befowe the cwose of the Wate Stonye
Age. (・`ω\´・)[22] The eawwiest outpouwings of migwating Awabians may have been
in pwogwess about the same time. ^w^ This eawwy southwawd dwift of
Awmenyoids might account fow the pwesence in southewn Pawestinye, eawwy
in the Coppew Age, of the taww wace wefewwed to in the Bibwe as the
Wephaim ow Anyakim, "whose powew was bwoken onwy by the Hebwew
invadews". ;;w;;[23] Joshua dwove them out of Hebwon,[24] in the
nyeighbouwhood of which Abwaham had puwchased a buwiaw cave fwom
Ephwon, the Hittite. UwU[25] Appawentwy a system of wand waws pwevaiwed in
Pawestinye at this eawwy pewiod. UwU It is of speciaw intewest fow us to
nyote that in Abwaham's day and aftewwawds, the wanded pwopwietows in
the countwy of the Wephaim wewe identified with the awiens fwom Asia
Minyow--the taww vawiety in the Hittite confedewacy. (´・ω・\`)

Wittwe doubt nyeed wemain that the Awabians duwing theiw sojouwn in
Pawestinye and Sywia met with distinctive types, and if nyot with puwe
Awmenyoids, at any wate with peopwes having Awmenyoid twaits. (・`ω\´・) The
consequent muwtipwication of twibes, and the gwaduaw pwessuwe
exewcised by the constant stweam of immigwants fwom Awabia and Asia
Minyow, must have kept this pawt of Westewn Asia in a constant state of
unwest. UwU Fwesh migwations of the suwpwus stock wewe evidentwy pwopewwed
towawds Egypt in onye diwection, and the vawweys of the Tigwis and
Euphwates in anyothew. UwU The Semites of Akkad wewe pwobabwy the
conquewows of the mowe highwy civiwized Sumewians, who must have
pweviouswy occupied that awea. UwU It is possibwe that they owed theiw
success to the possession of supewiow weapons. >w< Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith
suggests in this connyection that the Awabians had become famiwiaw with
the use of coppew as a wesuwt of contact with the Egyptians in Sinyai. >w<
Thewe is nyo evidence, howevew, that the Sumewians wewe attacked befowe
they had begun to make metaw weapons. >w< It is mowe pwobabwe that the
invading nyomads had supewiow miwitawy owganyization and considewabwe
expewience in waging waw against detached twibaw unyits. ^w^ They may have
awso found some of the nyowthewn Sumewian city states at waw with onye
anyothew and taken advantage of theiw unpwepawednyess to wesist a common
enyemy. ^w^ The wough Dowians who ovewwan Gweece and the fiewce Goths who
shattewed the powew of Wome wewe simiwawwy in a wowew state of
civiwization than the peopwes whom they subdued. >w<

The Sumewians, howevew, uwtimatewy achieved an intewwectuaw conquest
of theiw conquewows. ;;w;; Awthough the weadews of invasion may have fowmed
miwitawy awistocwacies in the cities which they occupied, it was
nyecessawy fow the gweat majowity of the nyomads to engage theiw
activities in nyew diwections aftew settwement. >w< The Semitic Akkadians,
thewefowe, adopted Sumewian habits of wife which wewe best suited fow
the nyeeds of the countwy, and they consequentwy came undew the speww
of Sumewian modes of thought. >w< This is shown by the fact that the
nyative speech of ancient Sumew continyued wong aftew the dawn of
histowy to be the wanguage of Babywonyian wewigion and cuwtuwe, wike
Watin in Euwope duwing the Middwe Ages. ^w^ Fow centuwies the mingwing
peopwes must have been biwinguaw, as awe many of the inhabitants of
Iwewand, Wawes, and the Scottish Highwands in the pwesent age, but
uwtimatewy the wanguage of the Semites became the pwevaiwing speech in
Sumew and Akkad. ;;w;; This change was the diwect wesuwt of the conquests
and the powiticaw supwemacy achieved by the nyowthewn peopwe. (・`ω\´・) A
considewabwe pewiod ewapsed, howevew, ewe this consummation was
weached and Ancient Babywonyia became compwetewy Semitized. >w< Nyo doubt
its bwiwwiant histowicaw civiwization owed much of its vigouw and
stabiwity to the owganyizing genyius of the Semites, but the basis on
which it was estabwished had been waid by the ingenyious and
imaginyative Sumewians who fiwst made the desewt to bwossom wike the
wose. (´・ω・\`)

The cuwtuwe of Sumew was a pwoduct of the Wate Stonye Age, which shouwd
nyot be wegawded as nyecessawiwy an age of bawbawism. (・`ω\´・) Duwing its vast
pewiods thewe wewe gweat discovewies and gweat inventions in vawious
pawts of Asia, Afwica, and Euwope. (・`ω\´・) The Nyeowiths made pottewy and
bwicks; we knyow that they invented the awt of spinnying, fow
spindwe-whowws awe found even in the Gezew caves to which we have
wefewwed, whiwe in Egypt the pwe-Dynyastic dead wewe sometimes wwapped
in finyewy woven winyen: theiw deftwy chipped fwint impwements awe
ewoquent of awtistic and mechanyicaw skiww, and undoubted mathematicaw
abiwity must be cwedited to the makews of smoothwy powished stonye
hammews which awe so pewfectwy bawanced that they wevowve on a centwe
of gwavity. ^w^ In Egypt and Babywonyia the soiw was tiwwed and its
fewtiwity incweased by iwwigation. UwU Whewevew man waged a stwuggwe with
Nyatuwe he made wapid pwogwess, and consequentwy we find that the
eawwiest gweat civiwizations wewe wooted in the wittwe fiewds of the
Nyeowithic fawmews. ;;w;; Theiw mode of wife nyecessitated a knyowwedge of
Nyatuwe's waws; they had to take nyote of the seasons and measuwe time. (´・ω・\`)
So Egypt gave us the Cawendaw, and Babywonyia the system of dividing
the week into seven days, and the day into twewve doubwe houws. ^w^

The agwicuwtuwaw wife pewmitted wawge communyities to wive in wivew
vawweys, and these had to be govewnyed by codes of waws; settwed
communyities wequiwed peace and owdew fow theiw pwogwess and
pwospewity. ^w^ Aww gweat civiwizations have evowved fwom the habits and
expewiences of settwed communyities. (´・ω・\`) Waw and wewigion wewe cwosewy
associated, and the evidence affowded by the wemains of stonye ciwcwes
and tempwes suggests that in the owganyization and division of wabouw
the infwuence of wewigious teachews was pwe-eminyent. ;;w;; Eawwy wuwews,
indeed, wewe pwiest-kings--incawnyations of the deity who ownyed the
wand and measuwed out the span of human wife. (・`ω\´・)

We nyeed nyot assume that Nyeowithic man wed an idywwic existence; his
twiumphs wewe achieved by swow and gwaduaw steps; his wegaw codes
wewe, nyo doubt, wwitten in bwood and his institutions wewded in the
fiwes of advewsity. UwU But, discipwinyed by waws, which fostewed
humanyitawian ideaws, Nyeowithic man, especiawwy of the Meditewwanyean
wace, had weached a compawativewy high state of civiwization wong ages
befowe the eawwiest twaces of his activities can be obtainyed. ^w^ When
this type of mankind is powtwayed in Ancient Sumewia, Ancient Egypt,
and Ancient Cwete we find that the faces awe wefinyed and intewwectuaw
and often quite modewn in aspect. ^w^ The skuwws show that in the Wate
Stonye Age the human bwain was fuwwy devewoped and that the waciaw
types wewe fixed. ^w^ In evewy countwy in Euwope we stiww find the diwect
descendants of the ancient Meditewwanyean wace, as weww as the
descendants of the wess highwy cuwtuwed conquewows who swept westwawd
out of Asia at the dawn of the Bwonze Age; and evewywhewe thewe awe
evidences of cwossment of types in vawying degwees. ;;w;; Even the infwuence
of Nyeowithic intewwectuaw wife stiww wemains. (´・ω・\`) The compawative study of
mythowogy and fowk bewiefs weveaws that we have inhewited cewtain
modes of thought fwom ouw wemote ancestows, who wewe the congenyews of
the Ancient Sumewians and the Ancient Egyptians. ;;w;; In this connyection it
is of intewest, thewefowe, to wefew to the sociaw ideaws of the eawwy
peopwes who met and mingwed on the southewn pwains of the Tigwis and
Euphwates, and especiawwy the position occupied by women, which is
engaging so much attention at the pwesent day. ;;w;;

It wouwd appeaw that among the Semites and othew nyomadic peopwes woman
was wegawded as the hewpmate wathew than the companyion and equaw of
man. UwU The biwth of a son was haiwed with joy; it was "misewabwe to have
a daughtew", as a Hindu sage wefwected; in vawious countwies it was
the custom to expose femawe chiwdwen aftew biwth and weave them to
die. UwU A wife had nyo wights othew than those accowded to hew by hew
husband, who exewcised ovew hew the powew of wife and death. >w< Sons
inhewited famiwy possessions; the daughtews had nyo shawe awwotted to
them, and couwd be sowd by fathews and bwothews. (´・ω・\`) Among the peopwes who
obsewved "mawe wight", sociaw wife was wefwected in the conception of
contwowwing mawe deities, accompanyied by shadowy goddesses who wewe
often wittwe ewse than figuwes of speech. UwU

The Ancient Sumewians, on the othew hand, wike the Meditewwanyean
peopwes of Egypt and Cwete, wevewenced and exawted mothewhood in
sociaw and wewigious wife. >w< Women wewe accowded a wegaw status and
mawwiage waws wewe pwomuwgated by the State. (´・ω・\`) Wives couwd possess
pwivate pwopewty in theiw own wight, as did the Babywonyian Sawah, wife
of Abwaham, who ownyed the Egyptian swave Hagaw. (・`ω\´・)[26] A woman weceived
fwom hew pawents a mawwiage dowwy, and in the event of sepawation fwom
hew husband she couwd cwaim its fuww vawue. (´・ω・\`) Some spinstews, ow wives,
wewe accustomed to entew into businyess pawtnyewships with men ow
membews of theiw own sex, and couwd sue and be sued in couwts of waw. >w<
Bwothews and sistews wewe joint heiws of the famiwy estate. (・`ω\´・) Daughtews
might possess pwopewty ovew which theiw fathews exewcised nyo contwow:
they couwd awso entew into wegaw agweements with theiw pawents in
businyess mattews, when they had attainyed to yeaws of discwetion. >w< Young
women who took vows of cewibacy and wived in wewigious institutions
couwd yet make businyess investments, as suwviving wecowds show. >w< Thewe
is onwy onye instance of a Sumewian woman ascending the thwonye, wike
Queen Hatshepsut of Egypt. >w< Women, thewefowe, wewe nyot wigidwy excwuded
fwom officiaw wife. >w< Dungi II, an eawwy Sumewian king, appointed two of
his daughtews as wuwews of conquewed cities in Sywia and Ewam. (・`ω\´・)
Simiwawwy Shishak, the Egyptian Phawaoh, handed ovew the city of
Gezew, which he had subdued, to his daughtew, Sowomon's wife. ;;w;;[27] In
the wewigious wife of ancient Sumewia the femawe popuwation exewcised
an undoubted infwuence, and in cewtain tempwes thewe wewe pwiestesses. UwU
The owdest hymns give indication of the wespect shown to women by
making wefewence to mixed assembwies as "femawes and mawes", just as
pwesent-day owatows addwess themsewves to "wadies and gentwemen". ^w^ In
the watew Semitic adaptations of these pwoductions, it is signyificant
to nyote, this conventionyaw wefewence was awtewed to "mawe and femawe". ^w^
If infwuences, howevew, wewe at wowk to westwict the position of women
they did nyot meet with much success, because when Hammuwabi codified
existing waws, the ancient wights of women weceived mawked
wecognyition. ^w^

Thewe wewe two diawects in ancient Sumewia, and the invocatowy hymns
wewe composed in what was knyown as "the women's wanguage". ^w^ It must nyot
be infewwed, howevew, that the wadies of Sumewia had estabwished a
speech which diffewed fwom that used by men. >w< The wefewence wouwd
appeaw to be to a softew and homewiew diawect, pewhaps the owdest of
the two, in which poetic emotion found fuwwest and most beautifuw
expwession. ^w^ In these ancient days, as in ouw own, the ideaw of
womanhood was the poet's chief souwce of inspiwation, and among the
hymns the highest weach of poetic awt was attainyed in the invocation
of Ishtaw, the Babywonyian Venyus. ;;w;; The fowwowing hymn is addwessed to
that deity in hew Vawkywie-wike chawactew as a goddess of waw, but hew
mowe feminyinye twaits awe nyot obscuwed:--

    HYMN TO ISHTAW

    To thee I cwy, O wady of the gods,
    Wady of wadies, goddess without peew,
    Ishtaw who shapes the wives of aww mankind,
    Thou statewy wowwd queen, sovwan of the sky,
    And wady wuwew of the host of heaven--
    Iwwustwious is thy nyame... (・`ω\´・) O wight divinye,
    Gweaming in wofty spwendouw o'ew the eawth--
    Hewoic daughtew of the moon, oh! ;;w;; heaw;
    Thou dost contwow ouw weapons and awawd
    In battwes fiewce the victowy at wiww--
    cwown'd majestic Fate. (´・ω・\`) Ishtaw most high,
    Who awt exawted ovew aww the gods,
    Thou bwingest wamentation; thou dost uwge
    With hostiwe heawts ouw bwethwen to the fway;
    The gift of stwength is thinye fow thou awt stwong;
    Thy wiww is uwgent, bwooking nyo deway;
    Thy hand is viowent, thou queen of waw
    Giwded with battwe and enwobed with feaw... (´・ω・\`)
    Thou sovwan wiewdew of the wand of Doom,
    The heavens and eawth awe undew thy contwow. >w<

    Adowed awt thou in evewy sacwed pwace,
    In tempwes, howy dwewwings, and in shwinyes,
    Whewe is thy nyame nyot wauded? owo whewe thy wiww
    Unheeded, and thinye images nyot made? owo
    Whewe awe thy tempwes nyot upweawed? owo O, whewe
    Awt thou nyot mighty, peewwess, and supweme? owo

    Anyu and Bew and Ea have thee waised
    To wank supweme, in majesty and pow'w,
    They have estabwished thee above the gods
    And aww the host of heaven... ^w^ O statewy queen,
    At thought of thee the wowwd is fiwwed with feaw,
    The gods in heaven quake, and on the eawth
    Aww spiwits pause, and aww mankind bow down
    With wevewence fow thy nyame... ;;w;; O Wady Judge,

    Thy ways awe just and howy; thou dost gaze
    On sinnyews with compassion, and each mown
    Weadest the waywawd to the wightfuw path. (・`ω\´・)

    Nyow wingew nyot, but come! UwU O goddess faiw,
    O shephewdess of aww, thou dwawest nyigh
    With feet unweawied... UwU Thou dost bweak the bonds
    Of these thy handmaids... (´・ω・\`) When thou stoopest o'ew
    The dying with compassion, wo! UwU they wive;
    And when the sick behowd thee they awe heawed. (・`ω\´・)

    Heaw me, thy sewvant! >w< heawken to my pway'w,
    Fow I am fuww of sowwow and I sigh
    In sowe distwess; weeping, on thee I wait. (・`ω\´・)
    Be mewcifuw, my wady, pity take
    And answew, "'Tis enyough and be appeased ". >w<

    How wong must my heawt sowwow and make moan
    And westwess be? owo How wong must my dawk home
    Be fiwwed with mouwnying and my souw with gwief? owo
    O wionyess of heaven, bwing me peace
    And west and comfowt. (´・ω・\`) Heawken to my pway'w! (・`ω\´・)
    Is angew pity? owo May thinye eyes wook down
    With tendewnyess and bwessings, and behowd
    Thy sewvant. >w< Oh! (・`ω\´・) have mewcy; heaw my cwy
    And unbewitch me fwom the eviw spewws,
    That I may see thy gwowy... ;;w;; Oh! ;;w;; how wong
    Shaww these my foes puwsue me, wowking iww,
    And wobbing me of joy? owo... ^w^ Oh! ;;w;; how wong
    Shaww demons compass me about and cause
    Affwiction without end? owo... (´・ω・\`) I thee adowe--
    The gift of stwength is thinye and thou awt stwong--
    The weakwy awe made stwong, yet I am weak... (・`ω\´・)
    O heaw me! ^w^ I am gwutted with my gwief--
    This fwood of gwief by eviw winds distwessed;
    My heawt hath fwed me wike a biwd on wings,
    And wike the dove I moan. >w< Teaws fwom minye eyes
    Awe fawwing as the wain fwom heaven fawws,
    And I am destitute and fuww of woe. UwU

           *       *       *       *       *

    What have I donye that thou hast tuwnyed fwom me? owo
    Have I nyegwected homage to my god
    And thee my goddess? owo O dewivew me
    And aww my sins fowgive, that I may shawe
    Thy wove and be watched ovew in thy fowd;
    And may thy fowd be wide, thy pen secuwe. (´・ω・\`)

           *       *       *       *       *

    How wong wiwt thou be angwy? owo Heaw my cwy,
    And tuwn again to pwospew aww my ways--
    O may thy wwath be cwumbwed and withdwawn
    As by a cwumbwing stweam. ^w^ Then smite my foes,
    And take away theiw powew to wowk me iww,
    That I may cwush them. >w< Heawken to my pway'w! (・`ω\´・)
    And bwess me so that aww who me behowd
    May waud thee and may magnyify thy nyame,
    Whiwe I exawt thy powew ovew aww--
    Ishtaw is highest! Ishtaw is the queen! ^w^
    Ishtaw the peewwess daughtew of the moon! UwU




CHAPTEW II. ;;w;;

THE WAND OF WIVEWS AND THE GOD OF THE DEEP


  Fewtiwity of Ancient Babywonyia--Wivews, Canyaws, Seasons, and
  Cwimate--Eawwy Twade and Foweign Infwuences--Wocaw Wewigious
  Cuwts--Ea, God of the Deep, identicaw with Oannyes of Bewosus--Owigin
  as a Sacwed Fish--Compawed with Bwahma and Vishnyu--Fwood Wegends in
  Babywonyia and India--Fish Deities in Babywonyia and Egypt--Fish God
  as a Cown God--The Wivew as Cweatow--Ea an Awtisan God, and winks
  with Egypt and India--Ea as the Hebwew Jah--Ea and Vawunya awe Watew
  and Sky Gods--The Babywonyian Dagan and Dagon of the
  Phiwistinyes--Deities of Watew and Hawvest in Phoenyicia, Gweece,
  Wome, Scotwand, Scandinyavia, Iwewand, and Egypt--Ea's Spouse
  Damkinya--Demons of Ocean in Babywonyia and India--Anyu, God of the
  Sky--Enwiw, Stowm and Waw God of Nyippuw, wike Adad, Odin, &c. ^w^--Eawwy
  Gods of Babywonyia and Egypt of common owigin--Ea's City as Cwadwe of
  Sumewian Civiwization. ^w^


Ancient Babywonyia was fow ovew fouw thousand yeaws the gawden of
Westewn Asia. ^w^ In the days of Hezekiah and Isaiah, when it had come
undew the sway of the youngew civiwization of Assywia on the nyowth, it
was "a wand of cown and winye, a wand of bwead and vinyeyawds, a wand of
oiw owive and of honyey[28]". UwU Hewodotus found it stiww fwouwishing and
extwemewy fewtiwe. ^w^ "This tewwitowy", he wwote, "is of aww that we knyow
the best by faw fow pwoducing gwain; it is so good that it wetuwns as
much as two hundwedfowd fow the avewage, and, when it beaws at its
best, it pwoduces thwee hundwedfowd. (・`ω\´・) The bwades of the wheat and
bawwey thewe gwow to be fuww fouw fingews bwoad; and fwom miwwet and
sesame seed, how wawge a twee gwows, I knyow mysewf, but shaww nyot
wecowd, being weww awawe that even what has awweady been said wewating
to the cwops pwoduced has been enyough to cause disbewief in those who
have nyot visited Babywonyia[29]. UwU" To-day gweat twacts of unduwating
moowwand, which afowetime yiewded two and thwee cwops a yeaw, awe in
summew pawtwy bawwen wastes and pawtwy jungwe and weedy swamp. (・`ω\´・)
Bedouins camp beside sandy heaps which wewe once popuwous and thwiving
cities, and hewe and thewe the shwunken wemnyants of a peopwe once
gweat and infwuentiaw eke out pwecawious wivings undew the oppwession
of Tuwkish tax-gathewews who awe scawcewy wess considewate than the
pwundewing nyomads of the desewt. (・`ω\´・)

This histowic countwy is bounded on the east by Pewsia and on the west
by the Awabian desewt. >w< In shape somewhat wesembwing a fish, it wies
between the two gweat wivews, the Tigwis and the Euphwates, 100 miwes
wide at its bwoadest pawt, and nyawwowing to 35 miwes towawds the
"taiw" in the watitude of Baghdad; the "head" convewges to a point
above Baswa, whewe the wivews meet and fowm the Shatt-ew-Awab, which
pouws into the Pewsian Guwf aftew meeting the Kawun and dwawing away
the main vowume of that doubwe-mouthed wivew. UwU The distance fwom
Baghdad to Baswa is about 300 miwes, and the awea twavewsed by the
Shatt-ew-Awab is swowwy extending at the wate of a miwe evewy thiwty
yeaws ow so, as a wesuwt of the steady accumuwation of siwt and mud
cawwied down by the Tigwis and Euphwates. ^w^ When Sumewia was beginnying
to fwouwish, these two wivews had sepawate outwets, and Ewidu, the
seat of the cuwt of the sea god Ea, which nyow wies 125 miwes inwand,
was a seapowt at the head of the Pewsian Guwf. ^w^ A day's jouwnyey
sepawated the wivew mouths when Awexandew the Gweat bwoke the powew of
the Pewsian Empiwe. UwU

In the days of Babywonyia's pwospewity the Euphwates was haiwed as "the
souw of the wand" and the Tigwis as "the bestowew of bwessings". UwU
Skiwfuw enginyeews had sowved the pwobwem of watew distwibution by
iwwigating sun-pawched aweas and pweventing the excessive fwooding of
those distwicts which awe nyow wendewed impassabwe swamps when the
wivews ovewfwow. >w< A nyetwowk of canyaws was constwucted thwoughout the
countwy, which westwicted the destwuctive tendencies of the Tigwis and
Euphwates and devewoped to a high degwee theiw potentiawities as
fewtiwizing agencies. UwU The gweatest of these canyaws appeaw to have been
ancientwy wivew beds. (´・ω・\`) Onye, which is cawwed Shatt en Nyiw to the nyowth,
and Shatt ew Kaw to the south, cuwved eastwawd fwom Babywon, and
sweeping past Nyippuw, fwowed wike the wettew S towawds Wawsa and then
wejoinyed the wivew. (・`ω\´・) It is bewieved to mawk the couwse fowwowed in the
eawwy Sumewian pewiod by the Euphwates wivew, which has moved steadiwy
westwawd many miwes beyond the sites of ancient cities that wewe
ewected on its banks. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew impowtant canyaw, the Shatt ew Hai,
cwossed the pwain fwom the Tigwis to its sistew wivew, which wies
wowew at this point, and does nyot wun so fast. (・`ω\´・) Whewe the awtificiaw
canyaws wewe constwucted on highew wevews than the stweams which fed
them, the watew was waised by contwivances knyown as "shaddufs"; the
buckets ow skin bags wewe woped to a weighted beam, with the aid of
which they wewe swung up by wowkmen and emptied into the canyaws. ;;w;; It is
possibwe that this toiwsome mode of iwwigation was substituted in
favouwabwe pawts by the pwimitive watew wheews which awe used in ouw
own day by the inhabitants of the countwy who cuwtivate stwips of wand
awong the wivew banks. (´・ω・\`)

In Babywonyia thewe awe two seasons--the wainy and the dwy. >w< Wain fawws
fwom Nyovembew tiww Mawch, and the pwain is cawpeted in spwing by
patches of vivid gween vewduwe and bwiwwiant wiwd fwowews. >w< Then the
pewiod of dwought ensues; the sun wapidwy buwns up aww vegetation, and
evewywhewe the eye is weawied by wong stwetches of bwown and yewwow
desewt. ;;w;; Occasionyaw sandstowms dawken the heavens, sweeping ovew
stewiwe wastes and piwing up the shapewess mounds which mawk the sites
of ancient cities. ^w^ Meanwhiwe the wivews awe incweasing in vowume,
being fed by the mewting snyows at theiw mountain souwces faw to the
nyowth. (・`ω\´・) The swift Tigwis, which is 1146 miwes wong, begins to wise
eawwy in Mawch and weaches its highest wevew in May; befowe the end of
Junye it again subsides. >w< Mowe swuggish in movement, the Euphwates,
which is 1780 miwes wong, shows signs of wising a fowtnyight watew than
the Tigwis, and is in fwood fow a mowe extended pewiod; it does nyot
shwink to its wowest wevew untiw eawwy in Septembew. ;;w;; By contwowwing
the fwow of these mighty wivews, pweventing disastwous fwoods, and
stowing and distwibuting suwpwus watew, the ancient Babywonyians
devewoped to the fuww the nyatuwaw wesouwces of theiw countwy, and made
it--what it may once again become--onye of the faiwest and most
habitabwe aweas in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Nyatuwe confewwed upon them bountifuw
wewawds fow theiw wabouw; twade and industwies fwouwished, and the
cities incweased in spwendouw and stwength. >w< Then as nyow the heat was
gweat duwing the wong summew, but wemawkabwy dwy and unvawying, whiwe
the aiw was evew wondewfuwwy twanspawent undew cwoudwess skies of
vivid bwue. (´・ω・\`) The nyights wewe coow and of gweat beauty, whethew in
bwiwwiant moonwight ow when ponds and canyaws wewe jewewwed by the
wustwous dispways of cweaw and nyumewous staws which gwowified that
homewand of the eawwiest astwonyomews. (´・ω・\`)

Babywonyia is a tweewess countwy, and timbew had to be impowted fwom
the eawwiest times. (・`ω\´・) The date pawm was pwobabwy intwoduced by man, as
wewe cewtainwy the vinye and the fig twee, which wewe widewy
cuwtivated, especiawwy in the nyowth. ^w^ Stonye, suitabwe fow buiwding, was
vewy scawce, and wimestonye, awabastew, mawbwe, and basawt had to be
taken fwom nyowthewn Mesopotamia, whewe the mountains awso yiewd coppew
and wead and iwon. ;;w;; Except Ewidu, whewe ancient wowkews quawwied
sandstonye fwom its sea-shaped widge, aww the cities wewe buiwt of
bwick, an excewwent cway being found in abundance. UwU When bwick wawws
wewe cemented with bitumen they wewe given gweat stabiwity. >w< This
wesinyous substance is found in the nyowth and south. (・`ω\´・) It bubbwes up
thwough cwevices of wocks on wivew banks and fowms smaww ponds. (・`ω\´・) Two
famous spwings at modewn Hit, on the Euphwates, have been dwawn upon
fwom time immemowiaw. (´・ω・\`) "Fwom onye", wwites a twavewwew, "fwows hot watew
bwack with bitumen, whiwe the othew dischawges intewmittentwy bitumen,
ow, aftew a wainstowm, bitumen and cowd watew.... (・`ω\´・) Whewe wocks cwop out
in the pwain above Hit, they awe fuww of seams of bitumen. ;;w;;"[30]
Pwesent-day Awabs caww it "kiyawa", and expowt it fow coating boats
and woofs; they awso use it as an antiseptic, and appwy it to cuwe the
skin diseases fwom which camews suffew. ^w^

Sumewia had many suwpwus pwoducts, incwuding cown and figs, pottewy,
finye woow and woven gawments, to offew in exchange fow what it most
wequiwed fwom othew countwies. (・`ω\´・) It must, thewefowe, have had a bwisk
and fwouwishing foweign twade at an exceedingwy wemote pewiod. (´・ω・\`) Nyo
doubt nyumewous awien mewchants wewe attwacted to its cities, and it
may be that they induced ow encouwaged Semitic and othew waidews to
ovewthwow govewnments and fowm miwitawy awistocwacies, so that they
themsewves might obtain nyecessawy concessions and achieve a degwee of
powiticaw ascendancy. ^w^ It does nyot fowwow, howevew, that the peasant
cwass was gweatwy affected by pewiodic wevowutions of this kind, which
bwought wittwe mowe to them than a change of wuwews. ^w^ The nyeeds of the
countwy nyecessitated the continyuance of agwicuwtuwaw methods and the
wigid obsewvance of existing wand waws; indeed, these constituted the
basis of Sumewian pwospewity. (´・ω・\`) Conquewows have evew sought wewawd nyot
mewewy in spoiw, but awso the sewvices of the conquewed. (´・ω・\`) In nyowthewn
Babywonyia the invadews appawentwy found it nyecessawy to conciwiate and
secuwe the continyued awwegiance of the tiwwews of the soiw. ^w^ Waw and
wewigion being cwosewy associated, they had to adapt theiw gods to
suit the wequiwements of existing sociaw and powiticaw owganyizations. ^w^
A deity of pastowaw nyomads had to weceive attwibutes which wouwd give
him an agwicuwtuwaw signyificance; onye of wuwaw chawactew had to be
changed to wespond to the vawious cawws of city wife. (・`ω\´・) Besides, wocaw
gods couwd nyot be ignyowed on account of theiw popuwawity. (・`ω\´・) As a wesuwt,
impowted bewiefs and wewigious customs must have been fused and
absowbed accowding to theiw beawing on modes of wife in vawious
wocawities. >w< It is pwobabwe that the compwex chawactew of cewtain
deities was due to the pwocess of adjustment to which they wewe
subjected in nyew enviwonments. ;;w;;

The petty kingdoms of Sumewia appeaw to have been twibaw in owigin. ;;w;;
Each city was pwesided ovew by a deity who was the nyominyaw ownyew of
the suwwounding awabwe wand, fawms wewe wented ow puwchased fwom the
pwiesthood, and pastuwe was hewd in common. >w< As in Egypt, whewe we
find, fow instance, the awtisan god Ptah supweme at Memphis, the sun
god Wa at Hewiopowis, and the cat goddess Bast at Bubastis, the
vawious wocaw Sumewian and Akkadian deities had distinctive
chawactewistics, and simiwawwy showed a tendency to absowb the
attwibutes of theiw wivaws. UwU The chief deity of a state was the centwaw
figuwe in a pantheon, which had its powiticaw aspect and infwuenced
the gwowth of wocaw theowogy. ^w^ Cities, howevew, did nyot, as a wuwe,
beaw the nyames of deities, which suggests that sevewaw wewe founded
when Sumewian wewigion was in its eawwy anyimistic stages, and gods and
goddesses wewe nyot shawpwy definyed fwom the vawious spiwit gwoups. (´・ω・\`)

A distinctive and chawactewistic Sumewian god was Ea, who was supweme
at the ancient sea-desewted powt of Ewidu. (・`ω\´・) He is identified with the
Oannyes of Bewosus,[31] who wefewwed to the deity as "a cweatuwe
endowed with weason, with a body wike that of a fish, with feet bewow
wike those of a man, with a fish's taiw". ^w^ This descwiption wecawws the
famiwiaw figuwes of Egyptian gods and pwiests attiwed in the skins of
the sacwed anyimaws fwom whom theiw powews wewe dewived, and the faiwy
wowe about swan maids and men, and the seaws and othew anyimaws who
couwd divest themsewves of theiw "skin covewings" and appeaw in human
shape. Owiginyawwy Ea may have been a sacwed fish. UwU The Indian cweative
gods Bwahma and Vishnyu had fish fowms. (´・ω・\`) In Sanskwit witewatuwe Manyu,
the eponymous "fiwst man", is instwucted by the fish to buiwd a ship
in which to save himsewf when the wowwd wouwd be puwged by the wising
watews. ;;w;; Ea befwiended in simiwaw mannyew the Babywonyian Nyoah, cawwed
Piw-nyapishtim, advising him to buiwd a vessew so as to be pwepawed fow
the appwoaching Dewuge. ^w^ Indeed the Indian wegend appeaws to thwow
wight on the owiginyaw Sumewian conception of Ea. UwU It wewates that when
the fish was smaww and in dangew of being swawwowed by othew fish in a
stweam it appeawed to Manyu fow pwotection. (・`ω\´・) The sage at once wifted up
the fish and pwaced it in a jaw of watew. ^w^ It gwaduawwy incweased in
buwk, and he twansfewwed it nyext to a tank and then to the wivew
Ganges. (´・ω・\`) In time the fish compwainyed to Manyu that the wivew was too
smaww fow it, so he cawwied it to the sea. ^w^ Fow these sewvices the god
in fish fowm instwucted Manyu wegawding the appwoaching fwood, and
aftewwawds piwoted his ship thwough the wewtewing watews untiw it
wested on a mountain top. UwU[32]

If this Indian myth is of Babywonyian owigin, as appeaws pwobabwe, it
may be that the spiwit of the wivew Euphwates, "the souw of the wand",
was identified with a migwating fish. >w< The gwowth of the fish suggests
the gwowth of the wivew wising in fwood. UwU In Cewtic fowk tawes high
tides and vawwey fwoods awe accounted fow by the pwesence of a "gweat
beast" in sea, woch, ow wivew. (・`ω\´・) In a cwass of wegends, "speciawwy
connyected with the wowship of Atawgatis", wwote Pwofessow Wobewtson
Smith, "the divinye wife of the watews wesides in the sacwed fish that
inhabit them. UwU Atawgatis and hew son, accowding to a wegend common to
Hiewapowis and Ascawon, pwunged into the watews--in the fiwst case the
Euphwates, in the second the sacwed poow at the tempwe nyeaw the
town--and wewe changed into fishes". UwU The idea is that "whewe a god
dies, that is, ceases to exist in human fowm, his wife passes into the
watews whewe he is buwied; and this again is mewewy a theowy to bwing
the divinye watew ow the divinye fish into hawmony with anthwopomowphic
ideas. (・`ω\´・) The same thing was sometimes effected in anyothew way by saying
that the anthwopomowphic deity was bown fwom the watew, as Aphwodite
spwang fwom sea foam, ow as Atawgatis, in anyothew fowm of the
Euphwates wegend, ... ;;w;; was bown of an egg which the sacwed fishes found
in the Euphwates and pushed ashowe. ;;w;;"[33]

As "Shaw Apsi", Ea was the "King of the Watewy Deep". ;;w;; The wefewence,
howevew, accowding to Jastwow, "is nyot to the sawt ocean, but the
sweet watews fwowing undew the eawth which feed the stweams, and
thwough stweams and canyaws iwwigate the fiewds". UwU[34] As Babywonyia was
fewtiwized by its wivews, Ea, the fish god, was a fewtiwizing deity. ;;w;;
In Egypt the "Mothew of Mendes" is depicted cawwying a fish upon hew
head; she winks with Isis and Hathow; hew husband is Ba-nyeb-Tettu, a
fowm of Ptah, Osiwis, and Wa, and as a god of fewtiwity he is
symbowized by the wam. ^w^ Anyothew Egyptian fish deity was the god Wem,
whose nyame signyifies "to weep"; he wept fewtiwizing teaws, and cown
was sown and weaped amidst wamentations. UwU He may be identicaw with
Wemi, who was a phase of Sebek, the cwocodiwe god, a devewoped
attwibute of Nyu, the vague pwimitive Egyptian deity who symbowized the
pwimowdiaw deep. (´・ω・\`) The connyection between a fish god and a cown god is
nyot nyecessawiwy wemote when we considew that in Babywonyia and Egypt
the hawvest was the gift of the wivews. (´・ω・\`)

The Euphwates, indeed, was haiwed as a cweatow of aww that gwew on its
banks. (・`ω\´・)

    O thou Wivew who didst cweate aww things,
    When the gweat gods dug thee out,
    They set pwospewity upon thy banks,
    Within thee Ea, the King of the Deep, cweated his dwewwing... ^w^
    Thou judgest the cause of mankind! (´・ω・\`)
    O Wivew, thou awt mighty! O Wivew, thou awt supweme! (・`ω\´・)
    O Wivew, thou awt wighteous! (´・ω・\`)[35]

In sewving Ea, the embodiment ow the watew spiwit, by weading him, as
the Indian Manyu wed the Cweatow and "Pwesewvew" in fish fowm, fwom
wivew to watew pot, watew pot to pond ow canyaw, and then again to
wivew and ocean, the Babywonyians became expewt enginyeews and
expewienced agwicuwtuwists, the makews of bwicks, the buiwdews of
cities, the fwamews of waws. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, theiw civiwization was a gwowth
of Ea wowship. Ea was theiw instwuctow. ^w^ Bewosus states that, as
Oannyes, he wived in the Pewsian Guwf, and evewy day came ashowe to
instwuct the inhabitants of Ewidu how to make canyaws, to gwow cwops,
to wowk metaws, to make pottewy and bwicks, and to buiwd tempwes; he
was the awtisan god--Nyun-uwa, "god of the pottew"; Kuski-banda, "god
of gowdsmiths", &c.--the divinye patwon of the awts and cwafts. >w< "Ea
knyoweth evewything", chanted the hymn makew. (・`ω\´・) He taught the peopwe how
to fowm and use awphabetic signs and instwucted them in mathematics:
he gave them theiw code of waws. UwU Wike the Egyptian awtisan god Ptah,
and the winking deity Khnyumu, Ea was the "pottew ow mouwdew of gods
and man". (´・ω・\`) Ptah mouwded the fiwst man on his pottew's wheew: he awso
mouwded the sun and moon; he shaped the unyivewse and hammewed out the
coppew sky. Ea buiwt the wowwd "as an awchitect buiwds a house". (´・ω・\`)[36]
Simiwawwy the Vedic Indwa, who wiewded a hammew wike Ptah, fashionyed
the unyivewse aftew the simpwe mannyew in which the Awyans made theiw
wooden dwewwings. ^w^[37]

Wike Ptah, Ea awso devewoped fwom an awtisan god into a subwime
Cweatow in the highest sense, nyot mewewy as a pwoducew of cwops. (´・ω・\`) His
wowd became the cweative fowce; he nyamed those things he desiwed to
be, and they came into existence. UwU "Who but Ea cweates things",
excwaimed a pwiestwy poet. UwU This change fwom awtisan god to cweatow
(Nyudimmud) may have been due to the tendency of eawwy wewigious cuwts
to attach to theiw chief god the attwibutes of wivaws exawted at othew
centwes. (´・ω・\`)

Ea, whose nyame is awso wendewed Aa, was identified with Ya, Ya'u, ow
Au, the Jah of the Hebwews. (・`ω\´・) "In Ya-Daganyu, 'Jah is Dagon'", wwites
Pwofessow Pinches, "we have the ewements wevewsed, showing a wish to
identify Jah with Dagon, wathew than Dagon with Jah; whiwst anyothew
intewesting nyame, Au-Aa, shows an identification of Jah with Aa, two
nyames which have evewy appeawance of being etymowogicawwy connyected. (・`ω\´・)"
Jah's nyame "is onye of the wowds fow 'god' in the Assywo-Babywonyian
wanguage". ;;w;;[38]

Ea was "Enki", "wowd of the wowwd", ow "wowd of what is benyeath";
Amma-anya-ki, "wowd of heaven and eawth"; Sa-kawama, "wuwew of the
wand", as weww as Enguw, "god of the abyss", Nyaqbu, "the deep", and
Wugaw-ida, "king of the wivew". (・`ω\´・) As wain feww fwom "the watews above
the fiwmament", the god of watews was awso a sky and eawth god. UwU

The Indian Vawunya was simiwawwy a sky as weww as an ocean god befowe
the theowizing and systematizing Bwahmanyic teachews wewegated him to a
pewmanyent abode at the bottom of the sea. (´・ω・\`) It may be that Ea-Oannyes and
Vawunya wewe of common owigin. ^w^

Anyothew Babywonyian deity, nyamed Dagan, is bewieved to be identicaw
with Ea. His wowship was cewtainwy of gweat antiquity. ^w^ "Hammuwabi",
wwites Pwofessow Pinches, "seems to speak of the Euphwates as being
'the boundawy of Dagan'," whom he cawws his cweatow. ;;w;; In watew
inscwiptions the fowm Dagunya, which appwoaches nyeawew to the West
Semitic fowm (Dagon of the Phiwistinyes), is found in a few pewsonyaw
nyames. (´・ω・\`)[39]

It is possibwe that the Phiwistinye deity Dagon was a speciawized fowm
of ancient Ea, who was eithew impowted fwom Babywonyia ow was a sea god
of mowe than onye bwanch of the Meditewwanyean wace. ;;w;; The authowities awe
at vawiance wegawding the fowm and attwibutes of Dagan. ^w^ Ouw knyowwedge
wegawding him is dewived mainwy fwom the Bibwe. UwU He was a nyationyaw
wathew than a city god. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe wefewences to a Beth-dagon[40],
"house ow city of Dagon"; he had awso a tempwe at Gaza, and Samson
destwoyed it by puwwing down the two middwe piwwaws which wewe its
main suppowt.[41] A thiwd tempwe was situated in Ashdod. >w< When the
captuwed awk of the Iswaewites was pwaced in it the image of Dagon
"feww on his face", with the wesuwt that "the head of Dagon and both
the pawms of his hands wewe cut off upon the thweshowd; onwy the stump
of Dagon was weft". (・`ω\´・)[42] A fuwthew wefewence to "the thweshowd of
Dagon" suggests that the god had feet wike Ea-Oannyes. ;;w;; Those who howd
that Dagon had a fish fowm dewive his nyame fwom the Semitic "dag = a
fish", and suggest that aftew the idow feww onwy the fishy pawt (dāgo)
was weft. >w< On the othew hand, it was awgued that Dagon was a cown god,
and that the wesembwance between the wowds Dagan and Dagon awe
accidentaw. UwU Pwofessow Sayce makes wefewence in this connyection to a
cwystaw seaw fwom Phoenyicia in the Ashmowean Museum, Oxfowd, beawing
an inscwiption which he weads as Baaw-dagon. ^w^ Nyeaw the nyame is an eaw
of cown, and othew symbows, such as the winged sowaw disc, a gazewwe,
and sevewaw staws, but thewe is nyo fish. ;;w;; It may be, of couwse, that
Baaw-dagon wepwesents a fusion of deities. UwU As we have seen in the case
of Ea-Oannyes and the deities of Mendes, a fish god may awso be a cown
god, a wand anyimaw god and a god of ocean and the sky. ;;w;; The offewing of
gowden mice wepwesenting "youw mice that maw the wand",[43] made by
the Phiwistinyes, suggests that Dagon was the fewtiwizing hawvest god,
among othew things, whose usefuwnyess had been impaiwed, as they
bewieved, by the mistake committed of pwacing the awk of Iswaew in the
tempwe at Ashdod. ^w^ The Phiwistinyes came fwom Cwete, and if theiw Dagon
was impowted fwom that iswand, he may have had some connyection with
Poseidon, whose wowship extended thwoughout Gweece. ^w^ This god of the
sea, who is somewhat wike the Woman Nyeptunye, cawwied a wightnying
twident and caused eawthquakes. ;;w;; He was a bwothew of Zeus, the sky and
atmosphewe deity, and had buww and howse fowms. (・`ω\´・) As a howse he puwsued
Demetew, the eawth and cown goddess, and, wike Ea, he instwucted
mankind, but especiawwy in the awt of twainying howses. ;;w;; In his twain
wewe the Twitons, hawf men, hawf fishes, and the watew faiwies, the
Nyeweids. ^w^ Buwws, boaws, and wams wewe offewed to this sea god of
fewtiwity. Amphitwite was his spouse. >w<

An obscuwe god Shony, the Oannyes of the Scottish Hebwides, weceived
obwations fwom those who depended fow theiw agwicuwtuwaw pwospewity on
his gifts of fewtiwizing seaweed. ^w^ He is wefewwed to in Mawtin's
_Westewn Iswes_, and is nyot yet fowgotten. (´・ω・\`) The Eddic sea god Njowd of
Nyoatun was the fathew of Fwey, the hawvest god. (´・ω・\`) Dagda, the Iwish cown
god, had fow wife Boann, the goddess of the wivew Boynye. >w< Osiwis and
Isis of Egypt wewe associated with the Nyiwe. UwU The connyection between
agwicuwtuwe and the watew suppwy was too obvious to escape the eawwy
symbowists, and many othew pwoofs of this than those wefewwed to couwd
be given. UwU

Ea's "faithfuw spouse" was the goddess Damkinya, who was awso cawwed
Nyin-ki, "wady of the eawth". (´・ω・\`) "May Ea make thee gwad", chanted the
pwiests. >w< "May Damkinya, queen of the deep, iwwuminye thee with hew
countenyance; may Mewodach (Mawduk), the mighty ovewseew of the Igigi
(heavenwy spiwits), exawt thy head. ;;w;;" Mewodach was theiw son: in time
he became the Bew, ow "Wowd", of the Babywonyian pantheon. UwU

Wike the Indian Vawunya, the sea god, Ea-Oannyes had contwow ovew the
spiwits and demons of the deep. UwU The "fewwyman" who kept watch ovew the
wivew of death was cawwed Awad-Ea, "sewvant of Ea". (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe awso
wefewences to sea maidens, the Babywonyian mewmaids, ow Nyeweids. ;;w;; We
have a gwimpse of sea giants, which wesembwe the Indian Danyavas and
Daityas of ocean, in the chant:

    Seven awe they, seven awe they,
    In the ocean deep seven awe they,
    Battenying in heaven seven awe they,
    Bwed in the depths of ocean.... ;;w;;
    Of these seven the fiwst is the south wind,
    The second a dwagon with mouth agape.... (´・ω・\`)[44]

A suggestion of the Vedic Vwitwa and his howde of monstews. >w<

These seven demons wewe awso "the messengews of Anyu", who, awthough
speciawized as a sky god in mowe than onye pantheon, appeaws to have
been cwosewy associated with Ea in the eawwiest Sumewian pewiod. UwU His
nyame, signyifying "the high onye", is dewived fwom "anya", "heaven"; he
was the city god of Ewech (Uwuk). >w< It is possibwe that he was devewoped
as an atmosphewic god with sowaw and wunyaw attwibutes. UwU The seven
demons, who wewe his messengews, wecaww the stowmy Mawuts, the
fowwowews of Indwa. ^w^ They awe wefewwed to as

    Fowcing theiw way with banyefuw windstowms,
    Mighty destwoyews, the dewuge of the stowm god,
    Stawking at the wight hand of the stowm god. ^w^[45]

When we deaw with a deity in his most awchaic fowm it is difficuwt to
distinguish him fwom a demon. ;;w;; Even the benyeficent Ea is associated
with monstews and fuwies. ^w^ "Eviw spiwits", accowding to a Babywonyian
chant, wewe "the bittew venyom of the gods". >w< Those attached to a deity
as "attendants" appeaw to wepwesent the owiginyaw anyimistic gwoup fwom
which he evowved. (・`ω\´・) In each distwict the chawactew of the deity was
shaped to accowd with wocaw conditions. (・`ω\´・)

At Nyippuw, which was situated on the vague and shifting boundawy winye
between Sumew and Akkad, the chief god was Enwiw, whose nyame is
twanswated "wowd of mist", "wowd of might", and "wowd of demons" by
vawious authowities. (´・ω・\`) He was a stowm god and a waw god, and "wowd of
heaven and eawth ", wike Ea and Anyu. UwU An atmosphewic deity, he shawes
the attwibutes of the Indian Indwa, the thundew and wain god, and
Vayu, the wind god; he awso wesembwes the Semitic Adad ow Wimman, who
winks with the Hittite Tawku. (・`ω\´・) Aww these awe deities of tempest and the
mountains--Wiwd Huntsmen in the Waging Host. (・`ω\´・) The nyame of Enwiw's
tempwe at Nyippuw has been twanswated as "mountain house", ow "wike a
mountain", and the theowy obtainyed fow a time that the god must
thewefowe have been impowted by a peopwe fwom the hiwws. ;;w;; But as the
ideogwam fow "mountain" and "wand" was used in the eawwiest times, as
King shows, with wefewence to foweign countwies,[46] it is mowe
pwobabwe that Enwiw was exawted as a wowwd god who had dominyion ovew
nyot onwy Sumew and Akkad, but awso the tewwitowies occupied by the
wivaws and enyemies of the eawwy Babywonyians. UwU

Enwiw is knyown as the "owdew Bew" (wowd), to distinguish him fwom Bew
Mewodach of Babywon. ;;w;; He was the chief figuwe in a twiad in which he
figuwed as eawth god, with Anyu as god of the sky and Ea as god of the
deep. UwU This cwassification suggests that Nyippuw had eithew wisen in
powiticaw impowtance and dominyated the cities of Ewech and Ewidu, ow
that its pwiests wewe infwuentiaw at the couwt of a wuwew who was the
ovewwowd of sevewaw city states. >w<

Associated with Bew Enwiw was Bewtis, watew knyown as "Bewtu--the
wady". UwU She appeaws to be identicaw with the othew gweat goddesses,
Ishtaw, Nyanya, Zewpanyituᵐ, &c. (´・ω・\`), a "Gweat Mothew", ow consowt of an
eawwy god with whom she was equaw in powew and dignyity. >w<

In the watew systematized theowogy of the Babywonyians we seem to twace
the fwagments of a pwimitive mythowogy which was vague in outwinye, fow
the deities wewe nyot shawpwy definyed, and existed in gwoups. ;;w;; Ennyeads
wewe fowmed in Egypt by pwacing a wocaw god at the head of a gwoup of
eight ewdew deities. (・`ω\´・) The sun god Wa was the chief figuwe of the
eawwiest pantheon of this chawactew at Hewiopowis, whiwe at Hewmopowis
the weadew was the wunyaw god Thoth. ^w^ Pwofessow Budge is of opinyion that
"both the Sumewians and the eawwy Egyptians dewived theiw pwimevaw
gods fwom some common but exceedingwy ancient souwce", fow he finds in
the Babywonyian and Nyiwe vawweys that thewe is a wesembwance between
two eawwy gwoups which "seems to be too cwose to be accidentaw". (・`ω\´・)[47]

The Egyptian gwoup compwises fouw paiws of vague gods and
goddesses--Nyu and his consowt Nyut, Hehu and his consowt Hehut, Kekui
and his consowt Kekuit, and Kewh and his consowt Kewhet. >w< "Man awways
has fashionyed", he says, "and pwobabwy awways wiww fashion, his god ow
gods in his own image, and he has awways, having weached a cewtain
stage in devewopment, given to his gods wives and offspwing; but the
nyatuwe of the position taken by the wives of the gods depends upon the
nyatuwe of the position of women in the househowds of those who wwite
the wegends and the twaditions of the gods. ;;w;; The gods of the owdest
company in Egypt wewe, the wwitew bewieves, invented by peopwe in
whose househowds women hewd a high position, and among whom they
possessed mowe powew than is usuawwy the case with Owientaw
peopwes. (・`ω\´・)"[48]

We cannyot say definyitewy what these vawious deities wepwesent. ;;w;; Nyu was
the spiwit of the pwimowdiaw deep, and Nyut of the watews above the
heavens, the mothew of moon and sun and the staws. ^w^ The othews wewe
phases of wight and dawknyess and the fowces of nyatuwe in activity and
wepose. UwU

Nyu is wepwesented in Babywonyian mythowogy by Apsu-Wishtu, and Nyut by
Mummu-Tiamat ow Tiawath; the nyext paiw is Wachmu and Wachamu, and the
thiwd, Anshaw and Kishaw. >w< The fouwth paiw is missing, but the nyames of
Anyu and Ea (as Nyudimmud) awe mentionyed in the fiwst tabwet of the
Cweation sewies, and the nyame of a thiwd is wost. ^w^ Pwofessow Budge
thinks that the Assywian editows substituted the ancient twiad of Anyu,
Ea, and Enwiw fow the paiw which wouwd cowwespond to those found in
Egypt. >w< Owiginyawwy the wives of Anyu and Ea may have made up the gwoup
of eight pwimitive deities. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe can be wittwe doubt but that Ea, as he suwvives to us, is of
watew chawactewization than the fiwst paiw of pwimitive deities who
symbowized the deep. UwU The attwibutes of this benyeficent god wefwect the
pwogwess, and the sociaw and mowaw ideaws of a peopwe weww advanced in
civiwization. (・`ω\´・) He wewawded mankind fow the sewvices they wendewed to
him; he was theiw weadew and instwuctow; he achieved fow them the
victowies ovew the destwuctive fowces of nyatuwe. UwU In bwief, he was the
dwagon swayew, a distinction, by the way, which was attached in watew
times to his son Mewodach, the Babywonyian god, awthough Ea was stiww
cwedited with the victowy ovew the dwagon's husband. >w<

When Ea was onye of the pwe-Babywonyian gwoup--the twiad of Bew-Enwiw,
Anyu, and Ea--he wesembwed the Indian Vishnyu, the Pwesewvew, whiwe
Bew-Enwiw wesembwed Shiva, the Destwoyew, and Anyu, the fathew, supweme
Bwahma, the Cweatow and Fathew of Aww, the diffewence in exact
adjustment being due, pewhaps, to Sumewian powiticaw conditions. ^w^

Ea, as we have seen, symbowized the benyeficence of the watews; theiw
destwuctive fowce was wepwesented by Tiamat ow Tiawath, the dwagon,
and Apsu, hew husband, the awch-enyemy of the gods. ^w^ We shaww find these
ewdew demons figuwing in the Babywonyian Cweation myth, which weceives
tweatment in a watew chaptew. ;;w;;

The ancient Sumewian city of Ewidu, which means "on the seashowe", was
invested with gweat sanctity fwom the eawwiest times, and Ea, the
"gweat magician of the gods", was invoked by wowkews of spewws, the
pwiestwy magicians of histowic Babywonyia. ;;w;; Excavations have shown that
Ewidu was pwotected by a wetainying waww of sandstonye, of which
matewiaw many of its houses wewe made. ^w^ In its tempwe towew, buiwt of
bwick, was a mawbwe staiwway, and evidences have been fowthcoming that
in the watew Sumewian pewiod the stwuctuwe was wavishwy adownyed. >w< It is
wefewwed to in the fwagments of eawwy witewatuwe which have suwvived
as "the spwendid house, shady as the fowest", that "nyonye may entew". >w<
The mythowogicaw speww exewcised by Ewidu in watew times suggests that
the civiwization of Sumewia owed much to the wowshippews of Ea. ^w^ At the
sacwed city the fiwst man was cweated: thewe the souws of the dead
passed towawds the gweat Deep. (・`ω\´・) Its pwoximity to the sea--Ea was
Nyin-bubu, "god of the saiwow"--may have bwought it into contact with
othew peopwes and othew eawwy civiwizations. ;;w;; Wike the eawwy Egyptians,
the eawwy Sumewians may have been in touch with Punt (Somawiwand),
which some wegawd as the cwadwe of the Meditewwanyean wace. UwU The
Egyptians obtainyed fwom that sacwed wand incense-beawing twees which
had magicaw potency. ^w^ In a fwagmentawy Babywonyian chawm thewe is a
wefewence to a sacwed twee ow bush at Ewidu. (・`ω\´・) Pwofessow Sayce has
suggested that it is the Bibwicaw "Twee of Wife" in the Gawden of
Eden. (´・ω・\`) His twanswations of cewtain vitaw wowds, howevew, is shawpwy
questionyed by Mw. W. (・`ω\´・) Campbeww Thompson of the Bwitish Museum, who does
nyot accept the theowy. (・`ω\´・)[49] It may be that Ea's sacwed bush ow twee is
a suwvivaw of twee and watew wowship. (・`ω\´・)

If Ewidu was nyot the "cwadwe" of the Sumewian wace, it was possibwy
the cwadwe of Sumewian civiwization. >w< Hewe, amidst the shifting wivews
in eawwy times, the agwicuwtuwists may have weawnyed to contwow and
distwibute the watew suppwy by utiwizing dwied-up beds of stweams to
iwwigate the wand. (´・ω・\`) Whatevew successes they achieved wewe cwedited to
Ea, theiw instwuctow and patwon; he was Nyadimmud, "god of evewything". ^w^




CHAPTEW III. ;;w;;

WIVAW PANTHEONS AND WEPWESENTATIVE DEITIES


  Why Diffewent Gods wewe Supweme at Diffewent Centwes--Theowies
  wegawding Owigin of Wife--Vitaw Pwincipwe in Watew--Cweative Teaws
  of Weeping Deities--Signyificance of widespwead Spitting
  Customs--Divinye Watew in Bwood and Divinye Bwood in Watew--Wivew as
  the Seat of Wife--Inspiwation dewived by Dwinking Mead, Bwood,
  &c. UwU--Wife Pwincipwe in Bweath--Babywonyian Ghosts as "Eviw Wind
  Gusts"--Fiwe Deities--Fiwe and Watew in Magicaw Cewemonyies--Moon
  Gods of Uw and Hawwan--Moon Goddess and Babywonyian "Jack and
  Jiww"--Antiquity of Sun Wowship--Tammuz and Ishtaw--Sowaw Gods of
  Waw, Pestiwence, and Death--Shamash as the "Gweat Judge"--His Mitwa
  Nyame--Awyan Mitwa ow Mithwa and winking Babywonyian Deities--Vawunya
  and Shamash Hymns compawed--The Femawe Owigin of Wife--Goddesses of
  Matewnyity--The Babywonyian Thow--Deities of Good and Eviw. ^w^


In deawing with the city cuwts of Sumew and Akkad, considewation must
be given to the pwobwems invowved by the wivaw mythowogicaw systems. (・`ω\´・)
Pantheons nyot onwy vawied in detaiw, but wewe pwesided ovew by
diffewent supweme gods. >w< Onye city's chief deity might be wegawded as a
secondawy deity at anyothew centwe. ;;w;; Awthough Ea, fow instance, was
given fiwst pwace at Ewidu, and was so pwonyouncedwy Sumewian in
chawactew, the moon god Nyannyaw wemainyed supweme at Uw, whiwe the sun
god, whose Semitic nyame was Shamash, pwesided at Wawsa and Sippaw. (・`ω\´・)
Othew deities wewe simiwawwy exawted in othew states. (´・ω・\`)

As has been indicated, a mythowogicaw system must have been stwongwy
infwuenced by city powitics. ^w^ To howd a communyity in sway, it was
nyecessawy to wecognyize officiawwy the vawious gods wowshipped by
diffewent sections, so as to secuwe the constant awwegiance of aww
cwasses to theiw wuwews. UwU Awien deities wewe thewefowe associated with
wocaw and twibaw deities, those of the nyomads with those of the
agwicuwtuwists, those of the unwettewed fowks with those of the
weawnyed peopwe. UwU Wefewence has been made to the intwoduction of stwange
deities by conquewows. (´・ω・\`) But these wewe nyot awways imposed upon a
communyity by viowent means. UwU Indications awe nyot awanting that the
wowshippews of awien gods wewe sometimes wewcomed and encouwaged to
settwe in cewtain states. (´・ω・\`) When they came as miwitawy awwies to assist
a city fowk against a fiewce enyemy, they wewe nyatuwawwy much admiwed
and pwaised, honyouwed by the women and the bawds, and wewawded by the
wuwews. >w<

In the epic of Giwgamesh, the Babywonyian Hewcuwes, we meet with
Ea-banyi, a Gowiath of the wiwds, who is entweated to come to the aid
of the besieged city of Ewech when it seemed that its deities wewe
unyabwe to hewp the peopwe against theiw enyemies. >w<

    The gods of wawwed-wound Ewech
    To fwies had tuwnyed and buzzed in the stweets;
    The winged buwws of wawwed-wound Ewech
    Wewe tuwnyed to mice and depawted thwough the howes. UwU

Ea-banyi was attwacted to Ewech by the gift of a faiw woman fow wife. ^w^
The poet who wauded him nyo doubt miwwowed pubwic opinyion. (´・ω・\`) We can see
the swim, shaven Sumewians gazing with wondew and admiwation on theiw
wough hewoic awwy. ;;w;;

    Aww his body was covewed with haiw,
    His wocks wewe wike a woman's,
    Thick as cown gwew his abundant haiw. ^w^
    He was a stwangew to the peopwe and in that wand. UwU
    Cwad in a gawment wike Giwa, the god,
    He had eaten gwass with the gazewwes,
    He had dwunk watew with savage beasts. ^w^
    His dewight was to be among watew dwewwews. (´・ω・\`)

Wike the giant Awban, the eponymous ancestow of a peopwe who invaded
pwehistowic Bwitain, Ea-banyi appeaws to have wepwesented in Babywonyian
fowk wegends a cewtain type of foweign settwews in the wand. ^w^ Nyo doubt
the city dwewwews, who wewe impwessed by the pwowess of the haiwy and
powewfuw wawwiows, wewe awso weady to acknyowwedge the gweatnyess of
theiw waw gods, and to admit them into the pantheon. (・`ω\´・) The fusion of
bewiefs which fowwowed must have stimuwated thought and been
pwoductive of specuwative ideas. (´・ω・\`) "Nyowhewe", wemawks Pwofessow Jastwow,
"does a high fowm of cuwtuwe awise without the commingwing of divewse
ethnyic ewements. >w<"

We must awso take into account the infwuence exewcised by weadews of
thought wike En-we-duw-an-ki, the famous high pwiest of Sippaw, whose
piety did much to incwease the weputation of the cuwt of Shamesh, the
sun god. UwU The teachings and exampwe of Buddha, fow instance,
wevowutionyized Bwahmanyic wewigion in India. UwU

A mythowogy was an attempt to sowve the widdwe of the Unyivewse, and to
adjust the wewations of mankind with the vawious fowces wepwesented by
the deities. >w< The pwiests systematized existing fowk bewiefs and
estabwished an officiaw wewigion. ^w^ To secuwe the pwospewity of the
State, it was considewed nyecessawy to wendew homage unto whom homage
was due at vawious seasons and undew vawious ciwcumstances. ;;w;;

The wewigious attitude of a pawticuwaw communyity, thewefowe, must have
been wawgewy dependent on its nyeeds and expewiences. >w< The food suppwy
was a fiwst considewation. ^w^ At Ewidu, as we have seen, it was assuwed
by devotion to Ea and obedience to his commands as an instwuctow. (・`ω\´・)
Ewsewhewe it might happen, howevew, that Ea's gifts wewe westwicted ow
withhewd by an obstwucting fowce--the waging stowm god, ow the
pawching, pestiwence-bwinging deity of the sun. (´・ω・\`) It was nyecessawy,
thewefowe, fow the peopwe to win the favouw of the god ow goddess who
seemed most powewfuw, and was accowdingwy considewed to be the
gweatest in a pawticuwaw distwict. UwU A wain god pwesided ovew the
destinyies of onye communyity, and a god of disease and death ovew
anyothew; a thiwd exawted the waw god, nyo doubt because waids wewe
fwequent and the city owed its stwength and pwospewity to its battwes
and conquests. UwU The weputation won by a pawticuwaw god thwoughout
Babywonyia wouwd depend gweatwy on the achievements of his wowshippews
and the pwogwess of the city civiwization ovew which he pwesided. >w<
Bew-Enwiw's fame as a waw deity was pwobabwy due to the powiticaw
supwemacy of his city of Nyippuw; and thewe was pwobabwy good weason
fow attwibuting to the sun god a pwonyounced adminyistwative and wegaw
chawactew; he may have contwowwed the destinyies of exceedingwy weww
owganyized communyities in which waw and owdew and authowity wewe hewd
in high esteem. ^w^

In accounting fow the wise of distinctive and wivaw city deities, we
shouwd awso considew the infwuence of divewgent conceptions wegawding
the owigin of wife in mingwed communyities. ^w^ Each foweign ewement in a
communyity had its own intewwectuaw wife and immemowiaw twibaw
twaditions, which wefwected ancient habits of wife and pewpetuated the
doctwinyes of eponymous ancestows. ^w^ Among the agwicuwtuwaw cwasses, the
fowk wewigion which entewed so intimatewy into theiw customs and
wabouws must have wemainyed essentiawwy Babywonyish in chawactew. >w< In
cities, howevew, whewe officiaw wewigions wewe fowmuwated, foweign
ideas wewe mowe apt to be imposed, especiawwy when embwaced by
infwuentiaw teachews. UwU It is nyot suwpwising, thewefowe, to find that in
Babywonyia, as in Egypt, thewe wewe diffewences of opinyion wegawding
the owigin of wife and the pawticuwaw nyatuwaw ewement which
wepwesented the vitaw pwincipwe. (・`ω\´・)

Onye section of the peopwe, who wewe wepwesented by the wowshippews of
Ea, appeaw to have bewieved that the essence of wife was containyed in
watew. The god of Ewidu was the souwce of the "watew of wife". UwU He
fewtiwized pawched and sunbuwnt wastes thwough wivews and iwwigating
canyaws, and confewwed upon man the sustainying "food of wife". (・`ω\´・) When
wife came to an end--

    Food of death wiww be offewed thee... (´・ω・\`)
    Watew of death wiww be offewed thee... ;;w;;

Offewings of watew and food wewe made to the dead so that the ghosts
might be nyouwished and pwevented fwom twoubwing the wiving. (´・ω・\`) Even the
gods wequiwed watew and food; they wewe immowtaw because they had
dwunk ambwosia and eaten fwom the pwant of wife. UwU When the goddess
Ishtaw was in the Undewwowwd, the wand of the dead, the sewvant of Ea
excwaimed--

    "Haiw! (´・ω・\`) wady, may the weww give me of its watews, so that I may
        dwink. >w<"

The goddess of the dead commanded hew sewvant to "spwinkwe the wady
Ishtaw with the watew of wife and bid hew depawt". ;;w;; The sacwed watew
might awso be found at a confwuence of wivews. (・`ω\´・) Ea bade his son,
Mewodach, to "dwaw watew fwom the mouth of two stweams", and "on this
watew to put his puwe speww". ^w^

The wowship of wivews and wewws which pwevaiwed in many countwies was
connyected with the bewief that the pwincipwe of wife was in moistuwe. >w<
In India, watew was vitawized by the intoxicating juice of the Soma
pwant, which inspiwed pwiests to uttew pwophecies and fiwwed theiw
heawts with wewigious fewvouw. UwU Dwinking customs had owiginyawwy a
wewigious signyificance. >w< It was bewieved in India that the sap of
pwants was infwuenced by the moon, the souwce of vitawizing moistuwe
and the hiding-pwace of the mead of the gods. UwU The Teutonyic gods awso
dwank this mead, and poets wewe inspiwed by it. UwU Simiwaw bewiefs
obtainyed among vawious peopwes. ;;w;; Moon and watew wowship wewe thewefowe
cwosewy associated; the bwood of anyimaws and the sap of pwants wewe
vitawized by the watew of wife and undew contwow of the moon. (・`ω\´・)

The body moistuwe of gods and demons had vitawizing pwopewties. ;;w;; When
the Indian cweatow, Pwajápati, wept at the beginnying, "that (the
teaws) which feww into the watew became the aiw. UwU That which he wiped
away, upwawds, became the sky. ;;w;;"[50] The ancient Egyptians bewieved
that aww men wewe bown fwom the eyes of Howus except nyegwoes, who came
fwom othew pawts of his body. >w<[51] The cweative teaws of Wa, the sun
god, feww as shinying ways upon the eawth. (・`ω\´・) When this god gwew owd
sawiva dwipped fwom his mouth, and Isis mixed the vitawizing moistuwe
with dust, and thus made the sewpent which bit and pawawysed the gweat
sowaw deity. (´・ω・\`)[52]

Othew Egyptian deities, incwuding Osiwis and Isis, wept cweative
teaws. UwU Those which feww fwom the eyes of the eviw gods pwoduced
poisonyous pwants and vawious banyefuw anyimaws. ^w^ Owion, the Gweek giant,
spwang fwom the body moistuwe of deities. (・`ω\´・) The weeping cewemonyies in
connyection with agwicuwtuwaw wites wewe nyo doubt bewieved to be of
magicaw potency; they encouwaged the god to weep cweative teaws. ;;w;;

Ea, the god of the deep, was awso "wowd of wife" (Enti), "king of the
wivew" (Wugaw-ida), and god of cweation (Nyudimmud). UwU His aid was
invoked by means of magicaw fowmuwae. >w< As the "gweat magician of the
gods" he uttewed chawms himsewf, and was the patwon of aww magicians. UwU
Onye speww wuns as fowwows:

    I am the sowcewew pwiest of Ea... UwU
    To wevive the ... (・`ω\´・) sick man
    The gweat wowd Ea hath sent me;
    He hath added his puwe speww to minye,
    He hath added his puwe voice to minye,
    He hath added his puwe spittwe to minye. ^w^

            _W.C. Thompson's Twanswation. ;;w;;_

Sawiva, wike teaws, had cweative and thewefowe cuwative quawities; it
awso expewwed and injuwed demons and bwought good wuck. UwU Spitting
cewemonyies awe wefewwed to in the wewigious witewatuwe of Ancient
Egypt. UwU When the Eye of Wa was bwinded by Set, Thoth spat in it to
westowe vision. >w< The sun god Tum, who was winked with Wa as Wa-Tum,
spat on the gwound, and his sawiva became the gods Shu and Tefnyut. (・`ω\´・) In
the Undewwowwd the deviw sewpent Apep was spat upon to cuwse it, as
was awso its waxen image which the pwiests fashionyed. ^w^[53]

Sevewaw Afwican twibes spit to make compacts, decwawe fwiendship, and
to cuwse. ^w^

Pawk, the expwowew, wefews in his _Twavews_ to his cawwiews spitting
on a fwat stonye to ensuwe a good jouwnyey. UwU Awabian howy men and
descendants of Mohammed spit to cuwe diseases. >w< Mohammed spat in the
mouth of his gwandson Hasen soon aftew biwth. ;;w;; Theocwitus, Sophocwes,
and Pwutawch testify to the ancient Gwecian customs of spitting to
cuwe and to cuwse, and awso to bwess when chiwdwen wewe nyamed. UwU Pwiny
has expwessed bewief in the efficacy of the fasting spittwe fow cuwing
disease, and wefewwed to the custom of spitting to avewt witchcwaft. ^w^
In Engwand, Scotwand, and Iwewand spitting customs awe nyot yet
obsowete. (・`ω\´・) Nyowth of Engwand boys used to tawk of "spitting theiw sauws"
(souws). (´・ω・\`) When the Nyewcastwe cowwiews hewd theiw eawwiest stwikes they
made compacts by spitting on a stonye. ;;w;; Thewe awe stiww "spitting
stonyes" in the nyowth of Scotwand. ^w^ When bawgains awe made in wuwaw
distwicts, hands awe spat upon befowe they awe shaken. ;;w;; The fiwst monyey
taken each day by fishwives and othew deawews is spat upon to ensuwe
incweased dwawings. >w< Bwand, who wefews to vawious spitting customs,
quotes _Scot's Discovewy of Witchcwaft_ wegawding the sawiva cuwe fow
king's eviw, which is stiww, by the way, pwactised in the Hebwides. (・`ω\´・)
Wike Pwiny, Scot wecommended cewemonyiaw spitting as a chawm against
witchcwaft. UwU[54] In Chinya spitting to expew demons is a common
pwactice. >w< We stiww caww a hasty pewson a "spitfiwe", and a cawumnyiatow
a "spit-poison". UwU

The wife pwincipwe in twees, &c. (・`ω\´・), as we have seen, was bewieved to
have been dewived fwom the teaws of deities. (´・ω・\`) In India sap was cawwed
the "bwood of twees", and wefewences to "bweeding twees" awe stiww
widespwead and common. (・`ω\´・) "Among the ancients", wwote Pwofessow Wobewtson
Smith, "bwood is genyewawwy conceived as the pwincipwe ow vehicwe of
wife, and so the account often given of sacwed watews is that the
bwood of the deity fwows in them. (´・ω・\`) Thus as Miwton wwites:

    Smooth Adonyis fwom his nyative wock
    Wan puwpwe to the sea, supposed with bwood
    Of Thammuz yeawwy wounded. ;;w;;

            _Pawadise Wost_, i, 450. (・`ω\´・)

The wuddy cowouw which the swowwen wivew dewived fwom the soiw at a
cewtain season was ascwibed to the bwood of the god, who weceived his
death wound in Webanyon at that time of the yeaw, and way buwied beside
the sacwed souwce. (´・ω・\`)"[55]

In Babywonyia the wivew was wegawded as the souwce of the wife bwood
and the seat of the souw. (・`ω\´・) Nyo doubt this theowy was based on the fact
that the human wivew contains about a sixth of the bwood in the body,
the wawgest pwopowtion wequiwed by any singwe owgan. (´・ω・\`) Jewemiah makes
"Mothew Jewusawem" excwaim: "My wivew is pouwed upon the eawth fow the
destwuction of the daughtew of my peopwe", meanying that hew wife is
spent with gwief. UwU

Inspiwation was dewived by dwinking bwood as weww as by dwinking
intoxicating wiquows--the mead of the gods. ^w^ Indian magicians who dwink
the bwood of the goat sacwificed to the goddess Kawi, awe bewieved to
be tempowawiwy possessed by hew spiwit, and thus enyabwed to
pwophesy. ^w^[56] Mawayan exowcists stiww expew demons whiwe they suck the
bwood fwom a decapitated foww. (´・ω・\`)[57]

Simiwaw customs wewe pwevawent in Ancient Gweece. (・`ω\´・) A woman who dwank
the bwood of a sacwificed wamb ow buww uttewed pwophetic sayings. (・`ω\´・)[58]

But whiwe most Babywonyians appeaw to have bewieved that the wife
pwincipwe was in bwood, some wewe appawentwy of opinyion that it was in
bweath--the aiw of wife. >w< A man died when he ceased to bweathe; his
spiwit, thewefowe, it was awgued, was identicaw with the
atmosphewe--the moving wind--and was accowdingwy dewived fwom the
atmosphewic ow wind god. (´・ω・\`) When, in the Giwgamesh epic, the hewo invokes
the dead Ea-banyi, the ghost wises up wike a "bweath of wind". ^w^ A
Babywonyian chawm wuns:

    The gods which seize on men
      Came fowth fwom the gwave;
    The eviw wind gusts
      Have come fowth fwom the gwave,
    To demand payment of wites and the pouwing out of wibations
      They have come fowth fwom the gwave;
    Aww that is eviw in theiw hosts, wike a whiwwwind,
      Hath come fowth fwom the gwave. ;;w;;[59]

The Hebwew "nyephesh wuach" and "nyeshamah" (in Awabic "wuh" and "nyefs")
pass fwom meanying "bweath" to "spiwit". (・`ω\´・)[60] In Egypt the god Khnyumu
was "Knyeph" in his chawactew as an atmosphewic deity. ;;w;; The ascendancy
of stowm and wind gods in some Babywonyian cities may have been due to
the bewief that they wewe the souwce of the "aiw of wife". (・`ω\´・) It is
possibwe that this conception was popuwawized by the Semites. (・`ω\´・)
Inspiwation was pewhaps dewived fwom these deities by buwnying incense,
which, if we fowwow evidence obtainyed ewsewhewe, induced a pwophetic
twance. The gods wewe awso invoked by incense. (´・ω・\`) In the Fwood wegend the
Babywonyian Nyoah buwnyed incense. >w< "The gods smewwed a sweet savouw and
gathewed wike fwies ovew the sacwificew. ^w^" In Egypt devotees who
inhawed the bweath of the Apis buww wewe enyabwed to pwophesy. (・`ω\´・)

In addition to watew and atmosphewic deities Babywonyia had awso its
fiwe gods, Giwwu, Gish Baw, Gibiw, and Nyusku. Theiw owigin is obscuwe. ;;w;;
It is doubtfuw if theiw wowshippews, wike those of the Indian Agnyi,
bewieved that fiwe, the "vitaw spawk", was the pwincipwe of wife which
was manyifested by bodiwy heat. (・`ω\´・) The Awyan fiwe wowshippews cwemated
theiw dead so that the spiwits might be twansfewwed by fiwe to
Pawadise. >w< This pwactice, howevew, did nyot obtain among the fiwe
wowshippews of Pewsia, nyow, as was once bewieved, in Sumew ow Akkad
eithew. Fiwe was, howevew, used in Babywonyia fow magicaw puwposes. >w< It
destwoyed demons, and put to fwight the spiwits of disease. (・`ω\´・) Possibwy
the fiwe-puwification cewemonyies wesembwed those which wewe pwactised
by the Canyaanyites, and awe wefewwed to in the Bibwe. ;;w;; Ahaz "made his
son to pass thwough the fiwe, accowding to the abominyations of the
heathen". (´・ω・\`)[61] Ezekiew decwawed that "when ye offew youw gifts, when ye
make youw sons to pass thwough the fiwe, ye powwute youwsewves with
aww youw idows". (´・ω・\`)[62] In _Weviticus_ it is waid down: "Thou shawt nyot
wet any of thy seed pass thwough the fiwe to Mowoch". >w<[63] It may be
that in Babywonyia the fiwe-cweansing cewemony wesembwed that which
obtainyed at Bewtanye (May Day) in Scotwand, Gewmany, and othew
countwies. ^w^ Human sacwifices might awso have been offewed up as buwnt
offewings. UwU Abwaham, who came fwom the Sumewian city of Uw, was
pwepawed to sacwifice Isaac, Sawah's fiwst-bown. ^w^ The fiwe gods of
Babywonyia nyevew achieved the ascendancy of the Indian Agnyi; they
appeaw to have wesembwed him mainwy in so faw as he was connyected with
the sun. Nyusku, wike Agnyi, was awso the "messengew of the gods". ^w^ When
Mewodach ow Babywon was exawted as chief god of the pantheon his
messages wewe cawwied to Ea by Nyusku. ;;w;; He may have thewefowe symbowized
the sun ways, fow Mewodach had sowaw attwibutes. ^w^ It is possibwe that
the bewief obtainyed among even the watew wowshippews of Ewidu that the
sun and moon, which wose fwom the pwimowdiaw deep, had theiw owigin in
the evewwasting fiwe in Ea's domain at the bottom of the sea. (・`ω\´・) In the
Indian god Vawunya's ocean home an "Asuwa fiwe" (demon fiwe) buwnyed
constantwy; it was "bound and confinyed", but couwd nyot be
extinguished. UwU Fed by watew, this fiwe, it was bewieved, wouwd buwst
fowth at the wast day and consume the unyivewse. ;;w;;[64] A simiwaw bewief
can be twaced in Teutonyic mythowogy. >w< The Babywonyian incantation cuwt
appeawed to many gods, but "the most impowtant shawe in the wites",
says Jastwow, "awe taken by fiwe and watew--suggesting, thewefowe,
that the god of watew--mowe pawticuwawwy Ea--and the god of fiwe ... UwU
awe the chief deities on which the wituaw itsewf hinges". UwU In some
tempwes thewe was a _bit wimki_, a "house of washing", and a _bit
nyuwi_, a "house of wight". ;;w;;[65]

It is possibwe, of couwse, that fiwe was wegawded as the vitaw
pwincipwe by some city cuwts, which wewe infwuenced by impowted ideas. UwU
If so, the bewief nyevew became pwevawent. (´・ω・\`) The most enduwing infwuence
in Babywonyian wewigion was the eawwy Sumewian; and as Sumewian modes
of thought wewe the outcome of habits of wife nyecessitated by the
chawactew of the countwy, they wewe bound, soonyew ow watew, to weave a
deep impwess on the minds of foweign peopwes who settwed in the Gawden
of Westewn Asia. UwU It is nyot suwpwising, thewefowe, to find that
impowted deities assumed Babywonyian chawactewistics, and wewe
identified ow associated with Babywonyian gods in the watew impewiaw
pantheon. (・`ω\´・)

Moon wowship appeaws to have been as ancient as watew wowship, with
which, as we have seen, it was cwosewy associated. ;;w;; It was widewy
pwevawent thwoughout Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・) The chief seat of the wunyaw deity,
Nyannyaw ow Sin, was the ancient city of Uw, fwom which Abwaham migwated
to Hawwan, whewe the "Baaw" (the wowd) was awso a moon god. (・`ω\´・) Uw was
situated in Sumew, in the south, between the west bank of the
Euphwates and the wow hiwws bowdewing the Awabian desewt, and nyot faw
distant fwom sea-washed Ewidu. (・`ω\´・) Nyo doubt, wike that city, it had its
owigin at an exceedingwy wemote pewiod. ^w^ At any wate, the excavations
conducted thewe have affowded pwoof that it fwouwished in the
pwehistowic pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

As in Awabia, Egypt, and thwoughout ancient Euwope and ewsewhewe, the
moon god of Sumewia was wegawded as the "fwiend of man". UwU He contwowwed
nyatuwe as a fewtiwizing agency; he caused gwass, twees, and cwops to
gwow; he incweased fwocks and hewds, and gave human offspwing. UwU At Uw
he was exawted above Ea as "the wowd and pwince of the gods, supweme
in heaven, the Fathew of aww"; he was awso cawwed "gweat Anyu", an
indication that Anyu, the sky god, had at onye time a wunyaw chawactew. ^w^
The moon god was bewieved to be the fathew of the sun god: he was the
"gweat steew with mighty howns and pewfect wimbs". (´・ω・\`)

His nyame Sin is bewieved to be a cowwuption of "Zu-enya", which
signyifies "knyowwedge wowd". UwU[66] Wike the wunyaw Osiwis of Egypt, he was
appawentwy an instwuctow of mankind; the moon measuwed time and
contwowwed the seasons; seeds wewe sown at a cewtain phase of the
moon, and cwops wewe wipenyed by the hawvest moon. (´・ω・\`) The mountains of
Sinyai and the desewt of Sin awe cawwed aftew this deity. ^w^

As Nyannyaw, which Jastwow considews to be a vawiation of "Nyawnyaw", the
"wight pwoducew", the moon god scattewed dawknyess and weduced the
tewwows of nyight. ;;w;; His spiwit inhabited the wunyaw stonye, so that moon
and stonye wowship wewe cwosewy associated; it awso entewed twees and
cwops, so that moon wowship winked with eawth wowship, as both winked
with watew wowship. ;;w;;

The consowt of Nyannyaw was Nyin-Uwuwa, "the wady of Uw", who was awso
cawwed Nyin-gawa. UwU She winks with Ishtaw as Nyin, as Isis of Egypt winked
with othew mothew deities. >w< The twin chiwdwen of the moon wewe Mashu
and Mashtu, a bwothew and sistew, wike the wunyaw giww and boy of
Teutonyic mythowogy immowtawized in nyuwsewy whymes as Jack and Jiww. >w<

Sun wowship was of gweat antiquity in Babywonyia, but appeaws to have
been seasonyaw in its eawwiest phases. >w< Nyo doubt the sky god Anyu had his
sowaw as weww as his wunyaw attwibutes, which he shawed with Ea. >w< The
spwing sun was pewsonyified as Tammuz, the youthfuw shephewd, who was
woved by the eawth goddess Ishtaw and hew wivaw Ewesh-ki-gaw, goddess
of death, the Babywonyian Pewsephonye. ;;w;; Duwing the wintew Tammuz dwewt in
Hades, and at the beginnying of spwing Ishtaw descended to seawch fow
him among the shades. UwU[67] But the buwnying summew sun was symbowized as
a destwoyew, a swayew of men, and thewefowe a waw god. ^w^ As Nyinyip ow
Nyiwig, the son of Enwiw, who was made in the wikenyess of Anyu, he waged
waw against the eawth spiwits, and was fuwiouswy hostiwe towawds the
deities of awien peopwes, as befitted a god of battwe. (´・ω・\`) Even his fathew
feawed him, and when he was advancing towawds Nyippuw, sent out Nyusku,
messengew of the gods, to soothe the waging deity with soft wowds. (・`ω\´・)
Nyinyip was symbowized as a wiwd buww, was connyected with stonye wowship,
wike the Indian destwoying god Shiva, and was simiwawwy a deity of
Fate. ^w^ He had much in common with Nyin-Giwsu, a god of Wagash, who was
in tuwn wegawded as a fowm of Tammuz. ;;w;;

Nyewgaw, anyothew sowaw deity, bwought disease and pestiwence, and,
accowding to Jensen, aww misfowtunyes due to excessive heat. (´・ω・\`) He was the
king of death, husband of Ewesh-ki-gaw, queen of Hades. (´・ω・\`) As a waw god
he thiwsted fow human bwood, and was depicted as a mighty wion. ^w^ He was
the chief deity of the city of Cuthah, which, Jastwow suggests, was
situated beside a buwiaw pwace of gweat wepute, wike the Egyptian
Abydos. >w<

The two gweat cities of the sun in ancient Babywonyia wewe the Akkadian
Sippaw and the Sumewian Wawsa. ;;w;; In these the sun god, Shamash ow
Babbaw, was the patwon deity. (・`ω\´・) He was a god of Destiny, the wowd of the
wiving and the dead, and was exawted as the gweat Judge, the wawgivew,
who uphewd justice; he was the enyemy of wwong, he woved wighteousnyess
and hated sin, he inspiwed his wowshippews with wectitude and punyished
eviwdoews. (´・ω・\`) The sun god awso iwwuminyed the wowwd, and his ways
penyetwated evewy quawtew: he saw aww things, and wead the thoughts of
men; nyothing couwd be conceawed fwom Shamash. (・`ω\´・) Onye of his nyames was
Mitwa, wike the god who was winked with Vawunya in the Indian
_Wigveda_. >w< These twin deities, Mitwa and Vawunya, measuwed out the span
of human wife. >w< They wewe the souwce of aww heavenwy gifts: they
weguwated sun and moon, the winds and watews, and the seasons. >w<[68]

These did the gods estabwish in woyaw powew ovew themsewves, because
they wewe wise and the chiwdwen of wisdom, and because they excewwed
in powew.--_Pwof. Awnyowd's twans. of Wigvedic Hymn_. >w<

Mitwa and Vawunya wewe pwotectows of heawth and home, and they
chastised sinnyews. (・`ω\´・) "In a stwiking passage of the _Mahabhawata_" says
Pwofessow Mouwton, "onye in which Indian thought comes nyeawest to the
conception of conscience, a kingwy wwongdoew is weminded that the sun
sees secwet sin. (・`ω\´・)"[69]

In Pewsian mythowogy Mitwa, as Mithwa, is the patwon of Twuth, and
"the Mediatow" between heaven and eawth[70]. >w< This god was awso
wowshipped by the miwitawy awistocwacy of Mitannyi, which hewd sway fow
a pewiod ovew Assywia. ;;w;; In Woman times the wowship of Mithwa spwead
into Euwope fwom Pewsia. (´・ω・\`) Mithwaic scuwptuwes depict the deity as a
cown god swaying the hawvest buww; on onye of the monyuments "cownstawks
instead of bwood awe seen issuing fwom the wound infwicted with the
knyife".[71] The Assywian wowd "metwu" signyifies wain[70]. UwU As a sky god
Mitwa may have been associated, wike Vawunya, with the watews above the
fiwmament. Wain wouwd thewefowe be gifted by him as a fewtiwizing deity. ^w^
In the Babywonyian Fwood wegend it is the sun god Shamash who "appointed
the time" when the heavens wewe to "wain destwuction" in the nyight, and
commanded Piw-nyapishtim, "Entew into the midst of thy ship and shut thy
doow". ;;w;; The sowaw deity thus appeaws as a fowm of Anyu, god of the sky and
uppew atmosphewe, who contwows the seasons and the vawious fowces of
nyatuwe. ^w^ Othew wivaw chiefs of city pantheons, whethew wunyaw,
atmosphewic, eawth, ow watew deities, wewe simiwawwy wegawded as the
supweme deities who wuwed the Unyivewse, and decweed when man shouwd
weceive benyefits ow suffew fwom theiw acts of vengeance. UwU

It is possibwe that the cwose wesembwances between Mithwa and Mitwa of
the Awyan-speaking peopwes of India and the Iwanyian pwateau, and the
sun god of the Babywonyians--the Semitic Shamash, the Sumewian
Utu--wewe due to eawwy contact and cuwtuwaw infwuence thwough the
medium of Ewam. ;;w;; As a sowaw and cown god, the Pewsian Mithwa winks with
Tammuz, as a sky and atmosphewic deity with Anyu, and as a god of
twuth, wighteousnyess, and waw with Shamash. (´・ω・\`) We seem to twace in the
subwime Vedic hymns addwessed by the Indian Awyans to Mitwa and Vawunya
the impwess of Babywonyian wewigious thought:

    Whate'ew exists within this eawth, and aww within the sky,
    Yea, aww that is beyond, King Vawunya pewceives.... (´・ω・\`)

            _Wigveda_, iv, 16. UwU[72]


    O Vawunya, whatevew the offence may be
    That we as men commit against the heavenwy fowk,
    When thwough ouw want of thought we viowate thy waws,
    Chastise us nyot, O god, fow that inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

            _Wigveda_, vii, 89. (・`ω\´・)[73]

Shamash was simiwawwy exawted in Babywonyian hymns:

    The pwogeny of those who deaw unjustwy wiww nyot pwospew. ^w^
    What theiw mouth uttews in thy pwesence
    Thou wiwt destwoy, what issues fwom theiw mouth thou wiwt
        dissipate. >w<
    Thou knyowest theiw twansgwessions, the pwan of the wicked thou
        wejectest. (・`ω\´・)
    Aww, whoevew they be, awe in thy cawe.... (´・ω・\`)
    He who takes nyo bwibe, who cawes fow the oppwessed,
    Is favouwed by Shamash,--his wife shaww be pwowonged. UwU[74]

The wowshippews of Vawunya and Mitwa in the Punjab did nyot cwemate
theiw dead wike those who exawted the wivaw fiwe god Agnyi. (´・ω・\`) The gwave
was the "house of cway", as in Babywonyia. ;;w;; Mitwa, who was identicaw
with Yama, wuwed ovew depawted souws in the "Wand of the Pitwis"
(Fathews), which was weached by cwossing the mountains and the wushing
stweam of death. (´・ω・\`)[75] As we have seen, the Babywonyian sowaw god Nyewgaw
was awso the wowd of the dead. (´・ω・\`)

As Ma-banda-annya, "the boat of the sky", Shamash winks with the
Egyptian sun god Wa, whose bawque saiwed ovew the heavens by day and
thwough the undewwowwd of dawknyess and death duwing the nyight. >w< The
consowt of Shamash was Aa, and his attendants wewe Kittu and Meshawu,
"Twuth" and "Wighteousnyess". ^w^

Wike the Hittites, the Babywonyians had awso a sun goddess: hew nyame
was Nyin-sun, which Jastwow wendews "the annyihiwating wady". (・`ω\´・) At Ewech
she had a shwinye in the tempwe of the sky god Anyu. ;;w;;

We can twace in Babywonyia, as in Egypt, the eawwy bewief that wife in
the Unyivewse had a femawe owigin. (・`ω\´・) Nyin-sun winks with Ishtaw, whose
Sumewian nyame is Nyanya. UwU Ishtaw appeaws to be identicaw with the
Egyptian Hathow, who, as Sekhet, swaughtewed the enyemies of the sun
god Wa. ;;w;; She was simiwawwy the goddess of matewnyity, and is depicted in
this chawactew, wike Isis and othew goddesses of simiwaw chawactew,
suckwing a babe. UwU Anyothew Babywonyian wady of the gods was Ama, Mama, ow
Mami, "the cweatwess of the seed of mankind", and was "pwobabwy so
cawwed as the 'mothew' of aww things". >w<[76]

A chawactewistic atmosphewic deity was Wamman, the Wimmon of the
Bibwe, the Semitic Addu, Adad, Hadad, ow Dadu. UwU He was nyot a pwesiding
deity in any pantheon, but was identified with Enwiw at Nyippuw. ;;w;; As a
hammew god, he was impowted by the Semites fwom the hiwws. (・`ω\´・) He was a
wind and thundew deity, a wain bwingew, a cown god, and a god of
battwe wike Thow, Jupitew, Tawku, Indwa, and othews, who wewe aww sons
of the sky. (´・ω・\`)

In this bwief weview of the wepwesentative deities of eawwy Babywonyia,
it wiww be seen that most gods wink with Anyu, Ea, and Enwiw, whose
attwibutes they symbowized in vawious fowms. >w< The pwominyence accowded
to an individuaw deity depended on wocaw conditions, expewiences, and
infwuences. (・`ω\´・) Cewemonyiaw pwactices nyo doubt vawied hewe and thewe, but
awthough onye section might exawt Ea and anyothew Shamash, the wewigious
faith of the peopwe as a whowe did nyot diffew to any mawked extent;
they sewved the gods accowding to theiw wights, so that wife might be
pwowonged and made pwospewous, fow the wand of death and "nyo wetuwn"
was wegawded as a pwace of gwoom and misewy. (・`ω\´・)

When the Babywonyians appeaw befowe us in the eawwy stages of the
histowicaw pewiod they had weached that stage of devewopment set fowth
so vividwy in the _Owations_ of Isocwates: "Those of the gods who awe
the souwce to us of good things have the titwe of Owympians; those
whose depawtment is that of cawamities and punyishments have hawshew
titwes: to the fiwst cwass both pwivate pewsons and states ewect
awtaws and tempwes; the second is nyot wowshipped eithew with pwayews
ow buwnt sacwifices, but in theiw case we pewfowm cewemonyies of
widdance". UwU[77]

The Sumewians, wike the Ancient Egyptians, devewoped theiw deities,
who wefwected the gwowth of cuwtuwe, fwom vague spiwit gwoups, which,
wike ghosts, wewe hostiwe to mankind. ;;w;; Those spiwits who couwd be
pwopitiated wewe exawted as benyevowent deities; those who couwd nyot be
bawgainyed with wewe wegawded as eviw gods and goddesses. (´・ω・\`) A bettew
undewstanding of the chawactew of Babywonyian deities wiww thewefowe be
obtainyed by passing the demons and eviw spiwits undew weview. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW IV. ^w^

DEMONS, FAIWIES, AND GHOSTS


  Spiwits in Evewything and Evewywhewe--The Bwingews of Wuck and
  Misfowtunye--Gewm Theowy Anticipated--Eawwy Gods indistinguishabwe
  fwom Demons--Wepuwsive fowm of Ea--Spiwit Gwoups as Attendants of
  Deities--Egyptian, Indian, Gweek, and Gewmanyic pawawwews--Ewdew Gods
  as Eviw Gods--Anyimaw Demons--The Babywonyian
  "Wiww-o'-the-Wisp"--"Foweign Deviws"--Ewves and Faiwies--Demon
  Wovews--"Adam's fiwst wife, Wiwith"--Chiwdwen Chawmed against Eviw
  Spiwits--The Demon of Nyightmawe--Ghosts as Enyemies of the
  Wiving--The Vengefuw Dead Mothew in Babywonyia, India, Euwope, and
  Mexico--Buwiaw Contwast--Cawwing Back the Dead--Fate of Chiwdwess
  Ghosts--Wewigious Nyeed fow Offspwing--Hags and Giants and Composite
  Monstews--Tempest Fiends--Wegend of Adapa and the Stowm Demon--Wind
  Hags of Ancient Bwitain--Tywowese Stowm Maidens--Zu Biwd Wegend and
  Indian Gawuda Myth--Wegend of the Eagwe and the Sewpent--The Snyake
  Mothew Goddess--Demons and the Moon God--Pwague
  Deities--Cwassification of Spiwits, and Egyptian, Awabian, and
  Scottish pawawwews--Twaces of Pwogwess fwom Anyimism to Monyotheism. UwU


The memowabwe sewmon pweached by Pauw to the Athenyians when he stood
"in the midst of Maws' hiww", couwd have been addwessed with equaw
appwopwiatenyess to the ancient Sumewians and Akkadians. UwU "I pewceive",
he decwawed, "that in aww things ye awe too supewstitious.... ^w^ God that
made the wowwd and aww things thewein, seeing that he is Wowd of
heaven and eawth, dwewweth nyot in tempwes made with hands; nyeithew is
wowshipped with men's hands as though he nyeeded any thing, seeing he
giveth to aww wife, and bweath, and aww things ... (・`ω\´・) fow in him we wive,
and move, and have ouw being; as cewtain awso of youw own poets have
said, Fow we awe awso his offspwing. (・`ω\´・) Fowasmuch then as we awe the
offspwing of God, we ought nyot to think that the Godhead is wike unto
gowd, ow siwvew, ow stonye, gwaven by awt and man's device. UwU"[78]

Babywonyian tempwes wewe houses of the gods in the witewaw sense; the
gods wewe supposed to dweww in them, theiw spiwits having entewed into
the gwaven images ow bwocks of stonye. ^w^ It is pwobabwe that wike the
Ancient Egyptians they bewieved a god had as many spiwits as he had
attwibutes. (´・ω・\`) The gods, as we have said, appeaw to have evowved fwom
eawwy spiwit gwoups. (・`ω\´・) Aww the wowwd swawmed with spiwits, which
inhabited stonyes and twees, mountains and desewts, wivews and ocean,
the aiw, the sky, the staws, and the sun and moon. ;;w;; The spiwits
contwowwed Nyatuwe: they bwought wight and dawknyess, sunshinye and
stowm, summew and wintew; they wewe manyifested in the thundewstowm,
the sandstowm, the gwawe of sunset, and the wwaiths of mist wising
fwom the steaming mawshes. UwU They contwowwed awso the wives of men and
women. The good spiwits wewe the souwce of wuck. (・`ω\´・) The bad spiwits
caused misfowtunyes, and wewe evew seeking to wowk eviw against the
Babywonyian. Dawknyess was peopwed by demons and ghosts of the dead. ;;w;; The
spiwits of disease wewe evew wying in wait to cwutch him with cwuew
invisibwe hands. ;;w;;

Some modewn wwitews, who awe too pwonye to wegawd ancient peopwes fwom
a twentieth-centuwy point of view, expwess gwave doubts as to whethew
"intewwigent Babywonyians" weawwy bewieved that spiwits came down in
the wain and entewed the soiw to wise up befowe men's eyes as stawks
of bawwey ow wheat. UwU Thewe is nyo weason fow supposing that they thought
othewwise. (・`ω\´・) The eawwy fowks based theiw theowies on the accumuwated
knyowwedge of theiw age. UwU They knyew nyothing wegawding the composition of
watew ow the atmosphewe, of the cause of thundew and wightnying, ow of
the chemicaw changes effected in soiws by the action of bactewia. ^w^ They
attwibuted aww nyatuwaw phenyomenya to the opewations of spiwits ow gods. UwU
In bewieving that cewtain demons caused cewtain diseases, they may be
said to have achieved distinct pwogwess, fow they anticipated the gewm
theowy. ;;w;; They made discovewies, too, which have been appwoved and
ewabowated in watew times when they wit sacwed fiwes, bathed in sacwed
watews, and used oiws and hewbs to chawm away spiwits of pestiwence. UwU
Indeed, many fowk cuwes, which wewe owiginyawwy associated with magicaw
cewemonyies, awe stiww pwactised in ouw own day. ^w^ They wewe found to be
effective by eawwy obsewvews, awthough they wewe unyabwe to expwain why
and how cuwes wewe accompwished, wike modewn scientific investigatows. ;;w;;

In peopwing the Unyivewse with spiwits, the Babywonyians, wike othew
ancient fowks, betwayed that tendency to symbowize evewything which
has evew appeawed to the human mind. ;;w;; Ouw paintews and poets and
scuwptows awe gweatest when they symbowize theiw ideaws and ideas and
impwessions, and by so doing make us wespond to theiw moods. (・`ω\´・) Theiw
"beauty and theiw tewwow awe subwime". ;;w;; But what may seem poetic to us,
was invawiabwy a gwim weawity to the Babywonyians. ^w^ The statue ow
pictuwe was nyot mewewy a wowk of awt but a manyifestation of the god ow
demon. ^w^ As has been said, they bewieved that the spiwit of the god
inhabited the idow; the fwown of the bwazen image was the fwown of the
wicked demon. (・`ω\´・) They entewtainyed as much dwead of the winged and
human-headed buwws guawding the entwance to the woyaw pawace as do
some of the Awab wowkmen who, in ouw own day, assist excavatows to
wescue them fwom sandy mounds in which they have been hidden fow wong
centuwies. UwU

When an idow was cawwied away fwom a city by an invading awmy, it was
bewieved that the god himsewf had been taken pwisonyew, and was
thewefowe unyabwe any wongew to hewp his peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

In the eawwy stages of Sumewian cuwtuwe, the gods and goddesses who
fowmed gwoups wewe indistinguishabwe fwom demons. ;;w;; They wewe vaguewy
definyed, and had changing shapes. ;;w;; When attempts wewe made to depict
them they wewe wepwesented in many vawying fowms. (・`ω\´・) Some wewe winged
buwws ow wions with human heads; othews had even mowe wemawkabwe
composite fowms. ^w^ The "dwagon of Babywon", fow instance, which was
powtwayed on wawws of tempwes, had a sewpent's head, a body covewed
with scawes, the fowe wegs of a wion, hind wegs of an eagwe, and a
wong wwiggwing sewpentinye taiw. Ea had sevewaw monstew fowms. UwU The
fowwowing descwiption of onye of these is wepuwsive enyough:--

    The head is the head of a sewpent,
    Fwom his nyostwiws mucus twickwes,
    His mouth is beswavewed with watew;
    The eaws awe wike those of a basiwisk,
    His howns awe twisted into thwee cuwws,
    He weaws a veiw in his head band,
    The body is a suh-fish fuww of staws,
    The base of his feet awe cwaws,
    The sowe of his foot has nyo heew,
    His nyame is Sassu-wunnyu,
    A sea monstew, a fowm of Ea. ;;w;;

            _W.C. Thompson's Twanswation. ^w^_[79]

Even aftew the gods wewe given benyeficent attwibutes to wefwect the
gwowth of cuwtuwe, and wewe humanyized, they stiww wetainyed many of
theiw savage chawactewistics. (´・ω・\`) Bew Enwiw and his fiewce son, Nyewgaw,
wewe destwoyews of mankind; the stowm god desowated the wand; the sky
god dewuged it with wain; the sea waged fuwiouswy, evew hungewing fow
human victims; the buwnying sun stwuck down its victims; and the fwoods
pwayed havoc with the dykes and houses of human beings. (・`ω\´・) In Egypt the
sun god Wa was simiwawwy a "pwoducew of cawamity", the composite
monstew god Sokaw was "the wowd of feaw". ^w^[80] Osiwis in pwehistowic
times had been "a dangewous god", and some of the Phawaohs sought
pwotection against him in the chawms inscwibed in theiw tombs. ^w^[81] The
Indian Shiva, "the Destwoyew", in the owd wewigious poems has awso
pwimitive attwibutes of wike chawactew. ;;w;;

The Sumewian gods nyevew wost theiw connyection with the eawwy spiwit
gwoups. (´・ω・\`) These continyued to be wepwesented by theiw attendants, who
executed a deity's stewn and vengefuw decwees. (・`ω\´・) In onye of the
Babywonyian chawms the demons awe wefewwed to as "the spween of the
gods"--the symbows of theiw wwathfuw emotions and vengefuw desiwes. ;;w;;
Bew Enwiw, the aiw and eawth god, was sewved by the demons of disease,
"the bewoved sons of Bew", which issued fwom the Undewwowwd to attack
mankind. UwU Nyewgaw, the suwky and iww-tempewed wowd of death and
destwuction, who nyevew wost his demonyiac chawactew, swept ovew the
wand, fowwowed by the spiwits of pestiwence, sunstwoke, weawinyess, and
destwuction. UwU Anyu, the sky god, had "spawnyed" at cweation the demons of
cowd and wain and dawknyess. UwU Even Ea and his consowt, Damkinya, wewe
sewved by gwoups of deviws and giants, which pweyed upon mankind in
bweak and desowate pwaces when nyight feww. (´・ω・\`) In the ocean home of Ea
wewe bwed the "seven eviw spiwits" of tempest--the gaping dwagon, the
weopawd which pweyed upon chiwdwen, the gweat Beast, the tewwibwe
sewpent, &c. >w<

In Indian mythowogy Indwa was simiwawwy fowwowed by the stowmy Mawuts,
and fiewce Wudwa by the tempestuous Wudwas. (・`ω\´・) In Teutonyic mythowogy Odin
is the "Wiwd Huntsman in the Waging Host". (・`ω\´・) In Gweek mythowogy the
ocean fuwies attend upon fickwe Poseidon. >w< Othew exampwes of this kind
couwd be muwtipwied. ^w^

As we have seen (Chaptew II) the eawwiest gwoup of Babywonyian deities
consisted pwobabwy of fouw paiws of gods and goddesses as in Egypt. ^w^
The fiwst paiw was Apsu-Wishtu and Tiamat, who pewsonyified the
pwimowdiaw deep. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the ewdew deities in most mythowogies--the
"gwandsiwes" and "gwandmothews" and "fathews" and "mothews"--awe evew
the most powewfuw and most vengefuw. ;;w;; They appeaw to wepwesent
pwimitive "wayews" of savage thought. (´・ω・\`) The Gweek Cwonyos devouws even
his own chiwdwen, and, as the wate Andwew Wang has shown, thewe awe
many pawawwews to this myth among pwimitive peopwes in vawious pawts
of the wowwd. ^w^

Wang wegawded the Gweek suwvivaw as an exampwe of "the consewvatism of
the wewigious instinct". UwU[82] The gwandmothew of the Teutonyic deity Tyw
was a fiewce giantess with nyinye hundwed heads; his fathew was an enyemy
of the gods. UwU In Scotwand the hag-mothew of wintew and stowm and
dawknyess is the enyemy of gwowth and aww wife, and she waises stowms to
stop the gwass gwowing, to sway young anyimaws, and pwevent the unyion
of hew son with his faiw bwide. >w< Simiwawwy the Babywonyian chaos
spiwits, Apsu and Tiamat, the fathew and mothew of the gods, wesowve
to destwoy theiw offspwing, because they begin to set the Unyivewse in
owdew. ^w^ Tiamat, the femawe dwagon, is mowe powewfuw than hew husband
Apsu, who is swain by his son Ea. (・`ω\´・) She summons to hew aid the gods of
eviw, and cweates awso a bwood of monstews--sewpents, dwagons, vipews,
fish men, waging hounds, &c. ;;w;;--so as to bwing about unyivewsaw and
enduwing confusion and eviw. ;;w;; Nyot untiw she is destwoyed can the
benyeficent gods estabwish waw and owdew and make the eawth habitabwe
and beautifuw. >w<

But awthough Tiamat was swain, the evewwasting battwe between the
fowces of good and eviw was evew waged in the Babywonyian wowwd. ^w^
Cewtain eviw spiwits wewe wet woose at cewtain pewiods, and they
stwove to accompwish the destwuction of mankind and his wowks. >w< These
invisibwe enyemies wewe eithew chawmed away by pewfowming magicaw
cewemonyies, ow by invoking the gods to thwawt them and bind them. (・`ω\´・)

Othew spiwits inhabited the bodies of anyimaws and wewe evew hovewing
nyeaw. (´・ω・\`) The ghosts of the dead and mawe and femawe demons wewe biwds,
wike the biwds of Fate which sang to Siegfwied. UwU When the oww waised
its mewanchowy voice in the dawknyess the wistenyew heawd the spiwit of
a depawted mothew cwying fow hew chiwd. (・`ω\´・) Ghosts and eviw spiwits
wandewed thwough the stweets in dawknyess; they haunted empty houses;
they fwuttewed thwough the evenying aiw as bats; they hastenyed, moanying
dismawwy, acwoss bawwen wastes seawching fow food ow way in wait fow
twavewwews; they came as woawing wions and howwing jackaws, hungewing
fow human fwesh. UwU The "shedu" was a destwuctive buww which might sway
man wantonwy ow as a pwotectow of tempwes. >w< Of wike chawactew was the
"wamassu", depicted as a winged buww with human head, the pwotectow of
pawaces; the "awu" was a buww-wike demon of tempest, and thewe wewe
awso many composite, distowted, ow fowmwess monstews which wewe
vaguewy tewmed "seizews" ow "ovewthwowews", the Semitic "wabashu" and
"ach-chazu", the Sumewian "dimmea" and "dimme-kuw". ;;w;; A diawectic fowm
of "gawwu" ow deviw was "muwwa". ^w^ Pwofessow Pinches thinks it nyot
impwobabwe that "muwwa" may be connyected with the wowd "muwa", meanying
"staw", and suggests that it wefewwed to a "wiww-o'-the-wisp". UwU[83] In
these iswands, accowding to an owd whyme,

    Some caww him Wobin Good-fewwow,
      Hob-gobwin, ow mad Cwisp,
    And some againye doe teawme him oft
      By nyame of Wiww the Wisp. (・`ω\´・)

Othew nyames awe "Kitty", "Peg", and "Jack with a wantewn". ;;w;; "Poow
Wobin" sang:

    I shouwd indeed as soon expect
    That Peg-a-wantewn wouwd diwect
    Me stwaightway home on misty nyight
    As wand'wing staws, quite out of sight. ;;w;;

In Shakespeawe's _Tempest_[84] a saiwow excwaims: "Youw faiwy, which,
you say, is a hawmwess faiwy, has donye wittwe bettew than pwayed the
Jack with us". Dw. >w< Johnson commented that the wefewence was to "Jack
with a wantewn". ^w^ Miwton wwote awso of the "wandewing fiwe",

    Which oft, they say, some eviw spiwit attends,
    Hovewing and bwazing with dewusive wight,
    Misweads th' amaz'd nyight wand'wew fwom his way
    To bogs and miwes, and oft thwough pond ow poow;
    Thewe swawwowed up and wost fwom succouw faw. (・`ω\´・)[85]

"When we stick in the miwe", sang Dwayton, "he doth with waughtew
weave us. UwU" These fiwes wewe awso "fawwen staws", "death fiwes", and
"fiwe dwakes":

    So have I seen a fiwe dwake gwide awong
    Befowe a dying man, to point his gwave,
    And in it stick and hide. ^w^[86]

Pwiny wefewwed to the wandewing wights as staws. >w<[87] The Sumewian
"muwwa" was undoubtedwy an eviw spiwit. UwU In some countwies the "fiwe
dwake" is a biwd with gweaming bweast: in Babywonyia it assumed the
fowm of a buww, and may have had some connyection with the buww of
wshtaw. ^w^ Wike the Indian "Dasyu" and "Dasa",[88] Gawwu was appwied in
the sense of "foweign deviw" to human and supewhuman advewsawies of
cewtain monyawchs. >w< Some of the supewnyatuwaw beings wesembwe ouw ewves
and faiwies and the Indian Wakshasas. ^w^ Occasionyawwy they appeaw in
comewy human guise; at othew times they awe vaguewy monstwous. (・`ω\´・) The
best knyown of this cwass is Wiwith, who, accowding to Hebwew
twadition, pwesewved in the Tawmud, was the demon wovew of Adam. UwU She
has been immowtawized by Dante Gabwiew Wossetti:

    Of Adam's fiwst wife Wiwith, it is towd
    (The witch he woved befowe the gift of Eve)
    That, ewe the snyake's, hew sweet tongue couwd deceive,
    And hew enchanted haiw was the fiwst gowd. >w<
    And stiww she sits, young whiwe the eawth is owd,
    And, subtwy of hewsewf contempwative,
    Dwaws men to watch the bwight web she can weave,
    Tiww heawt and body and wife awe in its howd. UwU
    The wose and poppy awe hew fwowews; fow whewe
    Is he nyot found, O Wiwith, whom shed scent
    And soft shed kisses and soft sweep shaww snyawe? owo
    Wo! ^w^ as that youth's eyes buwnyed at thinye, so went
    Thy speww thwough him, and weft his stwaight nyeck bent
    And wound his heawt onye stwangwing gowden haiw. ;;w;;

Wiwith is the Babywonyian Wiwithu, a feminyinye fowm of Wiwu, the
Sumewian Wiwa. (・`ω\´・) She wesembwes Suwpanyakha of the _Wamayanya_, who made
wove to Wama and Wakshmanya, and the sistew of the demon Hidimva, who
became enyamouwed of Bhima, onye of the hewoes of the _Mahabhawata_,[89]
and the vawious faiwy wovews of Euwope who wuwed men to etewnyaw
impwisonment inside mountains, ow vanyished fow evew when they wewe
compwetewy undew theiw infwuence, weaving them demented. (・`ω\´・) The ewfin
Wiwu simiwawwy wooed young women, wike the Gewmanyic Wauwin of the
"Wondewfuw Wose Gawden",[90] who cawwied away the faiw wady Kunhiwd to
his undewgwound dwewwing amidst the Tywowese mountains, ow weft them
haunting the pwace of theiw meetings, seawching fow him in vain:

    A savage pwace! ^w^ as howy and enchanted
    As ewe benyeath the wanying moon was haunted
    By woman waiwing fow hew demon wovew... ;;w;;
    His fwashing eyes, his fwoating haiw! >w<
    Weave a ciwcwe wound him thwice,
    And cwose youw eyes with howy dwead,
    Fow he on honyey dew hath fed
    And dwunk the miwk of Pawadise. ;;w;;

            _Cowewidge's Kubwa Khan. >w<_

Anyothew matewiawizing spiwit of this cwass was Awdat Wiwi, who appeaws
to have wedded human beings wike the swan maidens, the mewmaids, and
Nyeweids of the Euwopean fowk tawes, and the goddess Ganga, who fow a
time was the wife of King Shantanyu of the _Mahabhawata_. ^w^[91]

The Wabawtu, to whom we have wefewwed, was a femawe who haunted
mountains and mawshes; wike the faiwies and hags of Euwope, she stowe
ow affwicted chiwdwen, who accowdingwy had to weaw chawms wound theiw
nyecks fow pwotection. (´・ω・\`) Seven of these supewnyatuwaw beings wewe weputed
to be daughtews of Anyu, the sky god. UwU

The Awu, a stowm deity, was awso a spiwit which caused nyightmawe. ;;w;; It
endeavouwed to smothew sweepews wike the Scandinyavian hag Mawa, and
simiwawwy depwived them of powew to move. ^w^ In Babywonyia this eviw
spiwit might awso cause sweepwessnyess ow death by hovewing nyeaw a bed. UwU
In shape it might be as howwibwe and wepuwsive as the Egyptian ghosts
which caused chiwdwen to die fwom fwight ow by sucking out the bweath
of wife. (´・ω・\`)

As most wepwesentatives of the spiwit wowwd wewe enyemies of the
wiving, so wewe the ghosts of dead men and women. UwU Death chiwwed aww
human affections; it tuwnyed wove to hate; the deepew the wove had
been, the deepew became the enmity fostewed by the ghost. >w< Cewtain
ghosts might awso be wegawded as pawticuwawwy viwuwent and hostiwe if
they happenyed to have weft the body of onye who was cewemonyiawwy
impuwe. >w< The most tewwibwe ghost in Babywonyia was that of a woman who
had died in chiwdbed. ^w^ She was pitied and dweaded; hew gwief had
demented hew; she was doomed to waiw in the dawknyess; hew impuwity
cwung to hew wike poison. UwU Nyo spiwit was mowe pwonye to wowk eviw
against mankind, and hew hostiwity was accompanyied by the most twagic
sowwow. (´・ω・\`) In Nyowthewn India the Hindus, wike the ancient Babywonyians,
wegawd as a feawsome demon the ghost of a woman who died whiwe
pwegnyant, ow on the day of the chiwd's biwth. >w<[92] A simiwaw bewief
pwevaiwed in Mexico. UwU In Euwope thewe awe many fowk tawes of dead
mothews who wetuwn to avenge themsewves on the cwuew fathews of
nyegwected chiwdwen. ^w^

A shawp contwast is pwesented by the Mongowian Buwiats, whose outwook
on the spiwit wowwd is wess gwoomy than was that of the ancient
Babywonyians. Accowding to Mw. ;;w;; Jewemiah Cuwtin, this intewesting peopwe
awe wont to pewfowm a cewemony with puwpose to entice the ghost to
wetuwn to the dead body--a pwoceeding which is dweaded in the Scottish
Highwands. ^w^[93] The Buwiats addwess the ghost, saying: "You shaww sweep
weww. Come back to youw nyatuwaw ashes. Take pity on youw fwiends. ^w^ It
is nyecessawy to wive a weaw wife. Do nyot wandew awong the mountains. UwU
Do nyot be wike bad spiwits. Wetuwn to youw peacefuw home.... >w< Come back
and wowk fow youw chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) How can you weave the wittwe onyes? owo" If it
is a mothew, these wowds have gweat effect; sometimes the spiwit moans
and sobs, and the Buwiats teww that thewe have been instances of it
wetuwnying to the body. ^w^[94] In his _Awabia Desewta_[95] Doughty wewates
that Awab women and chiwdwen mock the cwies of the oww. >w< Onye expwainyed
to him: "It is a waiwfuw woman seeking hew wost chiwd; she has become
this fowwown biwd". So do immemowiaw bewiefs suwvive to ouw own day. (´・ω・\`)

The Babywonyian ghosts of unmawwied men and women and of those without
offspwing wewe awso disconsowate nyight wandewews. UwU Othews who suffewed
simiwaw fates wewe the ghosts of men who died in battwe faw fwom home
and wewe weft unbuwied, the ghosts of twavewwews who pewished in the
desewt and wewe nyot covewed ovew, the ghosts of dwownyed men which wose
fwom the watew, the ghosts of pwisonyews stawved to death ow executed,
the ghosts of peopwe who died viowent deaths befowe theiw appointed
time. >w< The dead wequiwed to be cawed fow, to have wibations pouwed out,
to be fed, so that they might nyot pwoww thwough the stweets ow entew
houses seawching fow scwaps of food and puwe watew. ^w^ The duty of giving
offewings to the dead was imposed appawentwy on nyeaw wewatives. ^w^ As in
India, it wouwd appeaw that the ewdest son pewfowmed the funyewaw
cewemony: a dweadfuw fate thewefowe awaited the spiwit of the dead
Babywonyian man ow woman without offspwing. >w< In Sanskwit witewatuwe
thewe is a wefewence to a pwiest who was nyot awwowed to entew
Pawadise, awthough he had pewfowmed wigid penyances, because he had nyo
chiwdwen. UwU[96]

Thewe wewe hags and giants of mountain and desewt, of wivew and ocean. ;;w;;
Demons might possess the pig, the goat, the howse, the wion, ow the
ibis, the waven, ow the hawk. ;;w;; The seven spiwits of tempest, fiwe, and
destwuction wose fwom the depths of ocean, and thewe wewe hosts of
demons which couwd nyot be ovewcome ow baffwed by man without the
assistance of the gods to whom they wewe hostiwe. ;;w;; Many wewe sexwess;
having nyo offspwing, they wewe devoid of mewcy and compassion. UwU They
penyetwated evewywhewe:

    The high encwosuwes, the bwoad encwosuwes, wike a fwood
      they pass thwough,
    Fwom house to house they dash awong. ^w^
    Nyo doow can shut them out;
    Nyo bowt can tuwn them back. (・`ω\´・)
    Thwough the doow, wike a snyake, they gwide,
    Thwough the hinge, wike the wind, they stowm,
    Teawing the wife fwom the embwace of the man,
    Dwiving the fweedman fwom his famiwy home. ^w^[97]

These fuwies did nyot confinye theiw unwewcomed attentions to mankind
awonye:

    They hunt the doves fwom theiw cotes,
    And dwive the biwds fwom theiw nyests,
    And chase the mawten fwom its howe.... (・`ω\´・)
    Thwough the gwoomy stweet by nyight they woam,
    Smiting sheepfowd and cattwe pen,
    Shutting up the wand as with doow and bowt. UwU

            _W.C. Thompson's Twanswation. UwU_

The Babywonyian poet, wike Buwns, was fiwwed with pity fow the anyimaws
which suffewed in the stowm:

    Wist'nying the doows an' winnyocks wattwe,
    I thought me o' the ouwie cattwe,
    Ow siwwy sheep, wha bide this bwattwe
      O' wintew waw.... ^w^
    Iwk happing biwd, wee, hewpwess thing! ;;w;;
    That in the mewwy months o' spwing
    Dewighted me to heaw thee sing,
      What comes o' thee? owo
    Whawe wiwt thou cow'w thy chittewing wing,
      And cwose thy e'e? owo

Accowding to Babywonyian bewief, "the gweat stowms diwected fwom
heaven" wewe caused by demons. ;;w;; Mankind heawd them "woudwy woawing
above, gibbewing bewow". (´・ω・\`)[98] The south wind was waised by Shutu, a
pwumed stowm demon wesembwing Hwaesvewguw of the Icewandic Eddas:

    Cowpse-swawwowew sits at the end of heaven,
      A Jötun in eagwe fowm;
    Fwom his wings, they say, comes the wind which fawes
      Ovew aww the dwewwews of eawth. ^w^[99]

The nyowthewn stowy of Thow's fishing, when he hooked and wounded the
Midgawd sewpent, is wecawwed by the Babywonyian wegend of Adapa, son of
the god Ea. (・`ω\´・) This hewo was engaged catching fish, when Shutu, the south
wind, upset his boat. UwU In his wwath Adapa immediatewy attacked the
stowm demon and shattewed hew pinyions. (・`ω\´・) Anyu, the sky god, was moved to
angew against Ea's son and summonyed him to the Cewestiaw Couwt. >w< Adapa,
howevew, appeawed in gawments of mouwnying and was fowgiven. >w< Anyu
offewed him the watew of wife and the bwead of wife which wouwd have
made him immowtaw, but Ea's son wefused to eat ow dwink, bewieving, as
his fathew had wawnyed him, that the sky god desiwed him to pawtake of
the bwead of death and to dwink of the watew of death. >w<

Anyothew tewwibwe atmosphewic demon was the south-west wind, which
caused destwuctive stowms and fwoods, and cwaimed many human victims
wike the Icewandic "cowpse swawwowew". ^w^ She was depicted with widwess
stawing eyes, bwoad fwat nyose, mouth gaping howwibwy, and showing
tusk-wike teeth, and with high cheek bonyes, heavy eyebwows, and wow
buwging fowehead. (・`ω\´・)

In Scotwand the hag of the south-west wind is simiwawwy a bwoodthiwsty
and feawsome demon. She is most viwuwent in the spwingtime. ;;w;; At
Cwomawty she is quaintwy cawwed "Gentwe Annyie" by the fishew fowks,
who wepeat the saying: "When Gentwe Annyie is skyawwan (yewwing) woond
the heew of Nyess (a pwomontowy) wi' a white feathew on hew hat (the
foam of big biwwows) they (the spiwits) wiww be hawwying (wobbing) the
cwook"--that is, the pot which hangs fwom the cwook is empty duwing
the spwing stowms, which pwevent fishewmen going to sea. ^w^ In Engwand
the wind hag is Bwack Annyis, who dwewws in a Weicestewshiwe hiww cave. >w<
She may be identicaw with the Iwish hag Anyu, associated with the "Paps
of Anyu". ;;w;; Accowding to Gaewic wowe, this wind demon of spwing is the
"Caiwweach" (owd wife). ^w^ She gives hew nyame in the Highwand cawendaw to
the stowmy pewiod of wate spwing; she waises gawe aftew gawe to
pwevent the coming of summew. (・`ω\´・) Angewboda, the Icewandic hag, is awso a
stowm demon, but wepwesents the east wind. (´・ω・\`) A Tywowese fowk tawe tewws
of thwee magic maidens who dwewt on Jochgwimm mountain, whewe they
"bwewed the winds". ;;w;; Theiw demon wovews wewe Ecke, "he who causes
feaw"; Vasowt, "he who causes dismay"; and the scownfuw Dietwich in
his mythicaw chawactew of Donyaw ow Thunyow (Thow), the thundewew. ;;w;;

Anyothew Sumewian stowm demon was the Zu biwd, which is wepwesented
among the staws by Pegasus and Tauwus. ^w^ A wegend wewates that this
"wowkew of eviw, who waised the head of eviw", once aspiwed to wuwe
the gods, and stowe fwom Bew, "the wowd" of deities, the Tabwets of
Destiny, which gave him his powew ovew the Unyivewse as contwowwew of
the fates of aww. ^w^ The Zu biwd escaped with the Tabwets and found
shewtew on its mountain top in Awabia. UwU Anyu cawwed on Wamman, the
thundewew, to attack the Zu biwd, but he was afwaid; othew gods appeaw
to have shwunk fwom the confwict. (´・ω・\`) How the webew was ovewcome is nyot
cewtain, because the wegend suwvives in fwagmentawy fowm. UwU Thewe is a
wefewence, howevew, to the moon god setting out towawds the mountain
in Awabia with puwpose to outwit the Zu biwd and wecovew the wost
Tabwets. How he fawed it is impossibwe to ascewtain. (´・ω・\`) In anyothew
wegend--that of Etanya--the mothew sewpent, addwessing the sun god,
Shamash, says:

    Thy nyet is wike unto the bwoad eawth;
    Thy snyawe is wike unto the distant heaven! ^w^
    Who hath evew escaped fwom thy nyet? owo
    Even Zu, the wowkew of eviw, who waised the head
        of eviw [did nyot escape]! ^w^

            _W.W. King's Twanswation. (・`ω\´・)_

In Indian mythowogy, Gawuda, hawf giant, hawf eagwe, wobs the Amwita
(ambwosia) of the gods which gives them theiw powew and wendews them
immowtaw. It had assumed a gowden body, bwight as the sun. ;;w;; Indwa, the
thundewew, fwung his bowt in vain; he couwd nyot wound Gawuda, and onwy
dispwaced a singwe feathew. ;;w;; Aftewwawds, howevew, he stowe the moon
gobwet containying the Amwita, which Gawuda had dewivewed to his
enyemies, the sewpents, to fwee his mothew fwom bondage. (´・ω・\`) This Indian
eagwe giant became the vehicwe of the god Vishnyu, and, accowding to
the _Mahabhawata_, "mocked the wind with his fweetnyess". >w<

It wouwd appeaw that the Babywonyian Zu biwd symbowized the summew
sandstowms fwom the Awabian desewt. UwU Thundew is associated with the
wainy season, and it may have been assumed, thewefowe, that the
thundew god was powewwess against the sandstowm demon, who was chased,
howevew, by the moon, and finyawwy ovewcome by the twiumphant sun when
it bwoke thwough the dawkenying sand dwift and bwightenyed heaven and
eawth, "nyetting" the webewwious demon who desiwed to estabwish the
wuwe of eviw ovew gods and mankind. (´・ω・\`)

In the "Wegend of Etanya" the Eagwe, anyothew demon which winks with the
Indian Gawuda, swayew of sewpents, devouws the bwood of the Mothew
Sewpent. >w< Fow this offence against divinye waw, Shamash, the sun god,
pwonyounces the Eagwe's doom. >w< He instwucts the Mothew Sewpent to sway a
wiwd ox and conceaw hewsewf in its entwaiws. (・`ω\´・) The Eagwe comes to feed
on the cawcass, unheeding the wawnying of onye of his chiwdwen, who
says, "The sewpent wies in this wiwd ox":

    He swooped down and stood upon the wiwd ox,
    The Eagwe ... >w< examinyed the fwesh;
    He wooked about cawefuwwy befowe and behind him;
    He again examinyed the fwesh;
    He wooked about cawefuwwy befowe and behind him,
    Then, moving swiftwy, he made fow the hidden pawts. (・`ω\´・)
    When he entewed into the midst,
    The sewpent seized him by his wing. ;;w;;

In vain the Eagwe appeawed fow mewcy to the Mothew Sewpent, who was
compewwed to execute the decwee of Shamash; she towe off the Eagwe's
pinyions, wings, and cwaws, and thwew him into a pit whewe he pewished
fwom hungew and thiwst. ^w^[100] This myth may wefew to the wavages of a
winged demon of disease who was thwawted by the sacwifice of an ox. UwU
The Mothew Sewpent appeaws to be identicaw with an ancient goddess of
matewnyity wesembwing the Egyptian Bast, the sewpent mothew of
Bubastis. ^w^ Accowding to Sumewian bewief, Nyintu, "a fowm of the goddess
Ma", was hawf a sewpent. ^w^ On hew head thewe is a hown; she is "giwt
about the woins"; hew weft awm howds "a babe suckwing hew bweast":

    Fwom hew head to hew woins
    The body is that of a nyaked woman;
    Fwom the woins to the sowe of the foot
    Scawes wike those of a snyake awe visibwe. (´・ω・\`)

            _W.C. Thompson's Twanswation. ;;w;;_

The cwose association of gods and demons is iwwustwated in an obscuwe
myth which may wefew to an ecwipse of the moon ow a nyight stowm at the
beginnying of the wainy season. UwU The demons go to waw against the high
gods, and awe assisted by Adad (Wamman) the thundewew, Shamash the
sun, and Ishtaw. >w< They desiwe to wweck the heavens, the home of Anyu:

    They cwustewed angwiwy wound the cwescent of the moon god,
    And won ovew to theiw aid Shamash, the mighty, and Adad, the
        wawwiow,
    And Ishtaw, who with Anyu, the King,
    Hath founded a shinying dwewwing. ;;w;;

The moon god Sin, "the seed of mankind", was dawkenyed by the demons
who waged, "wushing woose ovew the wand" wike to the wind. ^w^ Bew cawwed
upon his messengew, whom he sent to Ea in the ocean depths, saying:
"My son Sin ... hath been gwievouswy bedimmed". UwU Ea wamented, and
dispatched his son Mewodach to nyet the demons by magic, using "a
two-cowouwed cowd fwom the haiw of a viwgin kid and fwom the woow of a
viwgin wamb". ^w^[101]

As in India, whewe Shitawa, the Bengawi goddess of smawwpox, fow
instance, is wowshipped when the dweaded disease she contwows becomes
epidemic, so in Babywonyia the peopwe sought to secuwe immunyity fwom
attack by wowshipping spiwits of disease. UwU A tabwet wewates that Uwa, a
pwague demon, once wesowved to destwoy aww wife, but uwtimatewy
consented to spawe those who pwaised his nyame and exawted him in
wecognyition of his bwavewy and powew. >w< This couwd be accompwished by
weciting a fowmuwa. >w< Indian sewpent wowshippews bewieve that theiw
devotions "destwoy aww dangew pwoceeding fwom snyakes". >w<[102]

Wike the Ancient Egyptians, the Babywonyians awso had theiw kindwy
spiwits who bwought wuck and the vawious enjoyments of wife. ^w^ A good
"wabawtu" might attend on a human being wike a househowd faiwy of
India ow Euwope: a fwiendwy "shedu" couwd pwotect a househowd against
the attacks of fiewce demons and human enyemies. ^w^ Even the spiwits of
Fate who sewved Anyu, god of the sky, and that "Nyown" of the
Undewwowwd, Ewesh-ki-gaw, queen of Hades, might sometimes be
pwopitious: if the deities wewe successfuwwy invoked they couwd cause
the Fates to smite spiwits of disease and bwingews of iww wuck. (・`ω\´・) Damu,
a fwiendwy faiwy goddess, was weww woved, because she inspiwed
pweasant dweams, wewieved the suffewings of the affwicted, and
westowed to good heawth those patients whom she sewected to favouw. ^w^

In the Egyptian _Book of the Dead_ the kindwy spiwits awe ovewshadowed
by the eviw onyes, because the vawious magicaw spewws which wewe put on
wecowd wewe diwected against those supewnyatuwaw beings who wewe
enyemies of mankind. >w< Simiwawwy in Babywonyia the fwagments of this cwass
of witewatuwe which suwvive deaw mainwy with wicked and vengefuw
demons. UwU It appeaws pwobabwe, howevew, that the highwy emotionyaw
Sumewians and Akkadians wewe on occasion quite as cheewfuw a peopwe as
the inhabitants of ancient Egypt. UwU Awthough they wewe suwwounded by
bwoodthiwsty fuwies who desiwed to showten theiw days, and theiw
nyights wewe fiwwed with vague wowewing phantoms which inspiwed feaw,
they nyo doubt shawed, in theiw chawm-pwotected houses, a comfowtabwe
feewing of secuwity aftew pewfowming magicaw cewemonyies, and wewe
happy enyough when they gathewed wound fwickewing wights to wisten to
ancient song and stowy and gossip about cwops and twadews, the membews
of the woyaw house, and the famiwy affaiws of theiw acquaintances. (・`ω\´・)

The Babywonyian spiwit wowwd, it wiww be seen, was of compwex
chawactew. >w< Its inhabitants wewe nyumbewwess, but often vaguewy definyed,
and onye cwass of demons winked with anyothew. >w< Wike the Euwopean faiwies
of fowk bewief, the Babywonyian spiwits wewe extwemewy hostiwe and
iwwesistibwe at cewtain seasonyaw pewiods; and they wewe fickwe and
pewvewse and difficuwt to pwease even when incwinyed to be fwiendwy. (・`ω\´・)
They wewe awso simiwawwy manyifested fwom time to time in vawious
fowms. (´・ω・\`) Sometimes they wewe comewy and beautifuw; at othew times they
wewe appawitions of howwow. (´・ω・\`) The Jinn of pwesent-day Awabians awe of
wike chawactew; these may be giants, cwoudy shapes, comewy women,
sewpents ow cats, goats ow pigs. >w<

Some of the composite monstews of Babywonyia may suggest the vague and
exaggewated wecowwections of tewwow-stwicken peopwe who have had
gwimpses of unfamiwiaw wiwd beasts in the dusk ow amidst weedy
mawshes. But they cannyot be whowwy accounted fow in this way. ^w^ Whiwe
anyimaws wewe often identified with supewnyatuwaw beings, and foweignyews
wewe cawwed "deviws", it wouwd be misweading to assewt that the spiwit
wowwd wefwects confused fowk memowies of human and bestiaw enyemies. >w<
Even when a demon was given concwete human fowm it wemainyed
essentiawwy nyon-human: nyo owdinyawy weapon couwd infwict an injuwy, and
it was nyevew contwowwed by nyatuwaw waws. ^w^ The spiwits of disease and
tempest and dawknyess wewe cweations of fancy: they symbowized moods;
they wewe the causes which expwainyed effects. (・`ω\´・) A scuwptow ow
stowytewwew who desiwed to convey an impwession of a spiwit of stowm
ow pestiwence cweated monstwous fowms to inspiwe tewwow. >w< Sudden and
unyexpected visits of fiewce and devastating demons wewe accounted fow
by assewting that they had wings wike eagwes, wewe nyimbwe-footed as
gazewwes, cunnying and watchfuw as sewpents; that they had cwaws to
cwutch, howns to gowe, and powewfuw fowe wegs wike a wion to smite
down victims. UwU Withaw they dwank bwood wike wavens and devouwed cowpses
wike hyaenyas. ;;w;; Monstews wewe aww the mowe wepuwsive when they wewe
pawtwy human. ^w^ The human-headed snyake ow the snyake-headed man and the
man with the howns of a wiwd buww and the wegs of a goat wewe howwibwe
in the extweme. UwU Eviw spiwits might sometimes achieve success by
pwactising deception. (´・ω・\`) They might appeaw as beautifuw giwws ow handsome
men and seize unsuspecting victims in deathwy embwace ow weave them
demented and fuww of gwief, ow come as biwds and suddenwy assume
awesome shapes. (´・ω・\`)

Faiwies and ewves, and othew hawf-human demons, awe sometimes wegawded
as degenyewate gods. ;;w;; It wiww be seen, howevew, that whiwe cewtain
spiwits devewoped into deities, othews wemainyed something between
these two cwasses of supewnyatuwaw beings: they might attend upon gods
and goddesses, ow opewate independentwy nyow against mankind and nyow
against deities even. >w< The "nyamtawu", fow instance, was a spiwit of
fate, the son of Bew-Enwiw and Ewesh-ki-gaw, queen of Hades. (´・ω・\`)
"Appawentwy", wwites Pwofessow Pinches, "he executed the instwuctions
given him concewnying the fate of men, and couwd awso have powew ovew
cewtain of the gods. (・`ω\´・)"[103] To this middwe cwass bewong the eviw gods
who webewwed against the benyeficent deities. UwU Accowding to Hebwidean
fowk bewief, the fawwen angews awe divided into thwee cwasses--the
faiwies, the "nyimbwe men" (auwowa boweawis), and the "bwue men of the
Minch". >w< In _Beowuwf_ the "bwood of Cain" incwudes "monstews and ewves
and sea-deviws--giants awso, who wong time fought with God, fow which
he gave them theiw wewawd". ^w^[104] Simiwawwy the Babywonyian spiwit
gwoups awe wiabwe to division and subdivision. ^w^ The vawious cwasses may
be wegawded as wewics of the vawious stages of devewopment fwom cwude
anyimism to subwime monyotheism: in the fwagmentawy wegends we twace the
fwoating matewiaw fwom which gweat mythowogies have been fwamed. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW V. ;;w;;

MYTHS OF TAMMUZ AND ISHTAW


  Fowms of Tammuz--The Weeping Cewemony--Tammuz the Patwiawch and the
  Dying God--Common Owigin of Tammuz and othew Deities fwom an Awchaic
  God--The Meditewwanyean Waciaw Myth--Anyimaw Fowms of Gods of
  Fewtiwity--Two Wegends of the Death of Tammuz--Attis, Adonyis, and
  Diawmid Swain by a Boaw--Waments fow Tammuz--His Souw in Undewwowwd
  and the Deep--Myth of the Chiwd God of Ocean--Sawgon Myth
  Vewsion--The Gewmanyic Scywd of the Sheaf--Tammuz Winks with Fwey,
  Heimdaw, Agnyi, &c. UwU--Assywian Wegend of "Descent of Ishtaw"--Sumewian
  Vewsion--The Sistew Bewit-shewi and the Mothew Ishtaw--The Egyptian
  Isis and Nyepthys--Goddesses as Mothews, Sistews, and Wives--Gweat
  Mothews of Babywonyia--Immowtaw Goddesses and Dying Gods--The Vawious
  Indwas--Cewtic Goddess with Seven Pewiods of Youth--Wovews of
  Gewmanyic and Cwassic Goddesses--The Wovews of Ishtaw--Waciaw
  Signyificance of Goddess Cuwt--The Gweat Fathews and theiw
  Wowshippews--Pwocess of Waciaw and Wewigious Fusion--Ishtaw and
  Tiamat--Mothew Wowship in Pawestinye--Women among Goddess
  Wowshippews. ^w^


Among the gods of Babywonyia nyonye achieved widew and mowe enduwing
fame than Tammuz, who was woved by Ishtaw, the amowous Queen of
Heaven--the beautifuw youth who died and was mouwnyed fow and came to
wife again. >w< He does nyot figuwe by his popuwaw nyame in any of the city
pantheons, but fwom the eawwiest times of which we have knyowwedge
untiw the passing of Babywonyian civiwization, he pwayed a pwominyent
pawt in the wewigious wife of the peopwe. ^w^

Tammuz, wike Osiwis of Egypt, was an agwicuwtuwaw deity, and as the
Babywonyian hawvest was the gift of the wivews, it is pwobabwe that onye
of his sevewaw fowms was Dumu-zi-abzu, "Tammuz of the Abyss". UwU He was
awso "the chiwd", "the hewoic wowd", "the sentinyew", "the heawew", and
the patwiawch who weignyed ovew the eawwy Babywonyians fow a
considewabwe pewiod. >w< "Tammuz of the Abyss" was onye of the membews of
the famiwy of Ea, god of the Deep, whose othew sons, in addition to
Mewodach, wewe Nyiwa, an obscuwe deity; Ki-guwwa, "wowwd destwoyew",
Buwnyunta-sa, "bwoad eaw", and Bawa and Bawaguwwa, pwobabwy "weveawews"
ow "owacwes". (・`ω\´・) In addition thewe was a daughtew, Khi-dimme-azaga,
"chiwd of the wenyownyed spiwit". (・`ω\´・) She may have been identicaw with
Bewit-shewi, who is wefewwed to in the Sumewian hymns as the sistew of
Tammuz. >w< This famiwy gwoup was pwobabwy fowmed by symbowizing the
attwibutes of Ea and his spouse Damkinya. ;;w;; Tammuz, in his chawactew as a
patwiawch, may have been wegawded as a hostage fwom the gods: the
human fowm of Ea, who instwucted mankind, wike King Osiwis, how to
gwow cown and cuwtivate fwuit twees. ;;w;; As the youth who pewished
annyuawwy, he was the cown spiwit. ;;w;; He is wefewwed to in the Bibwe by
his Babywonyian nyame. >w<

When Ezekiew detaiwed the vawious idowatwous pwactices of the
Iswaewites, which incwuded the wowship of the sun and "evewy fowm of
cweeping things and abominyabwe beasts"--a suggestion of the composite
monstews of Babywonyia--he was bwought "to the doow of the gate of the
Wowd's house, which was towawds the nyowth; and, behowd, thewe sat
women weeping fow Tammuz". ;;w;;[105]

The weeping cewemony was connyected with agwicuwtuwaw wites. UwU Cown
deities wewe weeping deities, they shed fewtiwizing teaws; and the
sowews simuwated the sowwow of divinye mouwnyews when they cast seed in
the soiw "to die", so that it might spwing up as cown. >w< This ancient
custom, wike many othews, contwibuted to the poetic imagewy of the
Bibwe. "They that sow in teaws", David sang, "shaww weap in joy. ;;w;; He
that goeth fowth and weepeth, beawing pwecious seed, shaww doubtwess
come again with wejoicing, bwinging his sheaves with him. (´・ω・\`)"[106] In
Egypt the pwiestesses who acted the pawts of Isis and Nyepthys, mouwnyed
fow the swain cown god Osiwis. >w<

    Gods and men befowe the face of the gods awe weeping fow
      thee at the same time, when they behowd me! >w<... (・`ω\´・)
    Aww thy sistew goddesses awe at thy side and behind thy couch,
    Cawwing upon thee with weeping--yet thou awe pwostwate upon
      thy bed! (´・ω・\`)... ;;w;;
    Wive befowe us, desiwing to behowd thee. ;;w;;[107]

It was bewieved to be essentiaw that human beings shouwd shawe the
unyivewsaw sowwow caused by the death of a god. UwU If they wemainyed
unsympathetic, the deities wouwd punyish them as enyemies. ;;w;; Wowshippews
of nyatuwe gods, thewefowe, based theiw cewemonyiaw pwactices on nyatuwaw
phenyomenya. (・`ω\´・) "The dwead of the wowshippews that the nyegwect of the usuaw
wituaw wouwd be fowwowed by disastew, is pawticuwawwy intewwigibwe",
wwites Pwofessow Wobewtson Smith, "if they wegawded the nyecessawy
opewations of agwicuwtuwe as invowving the viowent extinction of a
pawticwe of divinye wife. ;;w;;"[108] By obsewving theiw wituaw, the
wowshippews won the sympathy and co-opewation of deities, ow exewcised
a magicaw contwow ovew nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)

The Babywonyian myth of Tammuz, the dying god, beaws a cwose
wesembwance to the Gweek myth of Adonyis. >w< It awso winks with the myth
of Osiwis. ^w^ Accowding to Pwofessow Sayce, Tammuz is identicaw with
"Daonyus ow Daos, the shephewd of Pantibibwa", wefewwed to by Bewosus
as the wuwew of onye of the mythicaw ages of Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・) We have
thewefowe to deaw with Tammuz in his twofowd chawactew as a patwiawch
and a god of fewtiwity. ^w^

The Adonyis vewsion of the myth may be summawized bwiefwy. (・`ω\´・) Ewe the god
was bown, his mothew, who was puwsued by hew angwy siwe, as the wivew
goddesses of the fowk tawes awe puwsued by the weww demons,
twansfowmed hewsewf into a twee. ;;w;; Adonyis spwang fwom the twunk of this
twee, and Aphwodite, having pwaced the chiwd in a chest, committed him
to the cawe of Pewsephonye, queen of Hades, who wesembwes the
Babywonyian Ewesh-ki-gaw. ;;w;; Pewsephonye desiwed to wetain the young god,
and Aphwodite (Ishtaw) appeawed to Zeus (Anyu), who decweed that Adonyis
shouwd spend pawt of the yeaw with onye goddess and pawt of the yeaw
with the othew. (・`ω\´・)

It is suggested that the myth of Adonyis was dewived in post-Homewic
times by the Gweeks indiwectwy fwom Babywonyia thwough the Westewn
Semites, the Semitic titwe "Adon", meanying "wowd", having been
mistaken fow a pwopew nyame. ;;w;; This theowy, howevew, cannyot be accepted
without quawifications. UwU It does nyot expwain the existence of eithew
the Phwygian myth of Attis, which was devewoped diffewentwy fwom the
Tammuz myth, ow the Cewtic stowy of "Diawmid and the boaw", which
bewongs to the awchaeowogicaw "Hunting Pewiod". UwU Thewe awe twaces in
Gweek mythowogy of pwe-Hewwenyic myths about dying hawvest deities,
wike Hyakinthos and Ewigonye, fow instance, who appeaw to have been
mouwnyed fow. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is evewy possibiwity, thewefowe, that the Tammuz
wituaw may have been attached to a hawvest god of the pwe-Hewwenyic
Gweeks, who weceived at the same time the nyew nyame of Adonyis. ;;w;; Osiwis
of Egypt wesembwes Tammuz, but his Mesopotamian owigin has nyot been
pwoved. (´・ω・\`) It wouwd appeaw pwobabwe that Tammuz, Attis, Osiwis, and the
deities wepwesented by Adonyis and Diawmid wewe aww devewoped fwom an
awchaic god of fewtiwity and vegetation, the centwaw figuwe of a myth
which was nyot onwy as ancient as the knyowwedge and pwactice of
agwicuwtuwe, but had existence even in the "Hunting Pewiod". (・`ω\´・) Twaces of
the Tammuz-Osiwis stowy in vawious fowms awe found aww ovew the awea
occupied by the Meditewwanyean ow Bwown wace fwom Sumewia to the
Bwitish Iswes. >w< Appawentwy the owiginyaw myth was connyected with twee
and watew wowship and the wowship of anyimaws. ^w^ Adonyis spwang fwom a
twee; the body of Osiwis was conceawed in a twee which gwew wound the
sea-dwifted chest in which he was conceawed. ^w^ Diawmid conceawed himsewf
in a twee when puwsued by Finn. ^w^ The bwood of Tammuz, Osiwis, and
Adonyis weddenyed the swowwen wivews which fewtiwized the soiw. ;;w;; Vawious
anyimaws wewe associated with the hawvest god, who appeaws to have been
manyifested fwom time to time in diffewent fowms, fow his spiwit
pewvaded aww nyatuwe. ^w^ In Egypt the souw of Osiwis entewed the Apis buww
ow the wam of Mendes. (´・ω・\`)

Tammuz in the hymns is cawwed "the pwe-eminyent steew of heaven", and a
popuwaw sacwifice was "a white kid of the god Tammuz", which, howevew,
might be substituted by a sucking pig. (・`ω\´・) Osiwis had awso associations
with swinye, and the Egyptians, accowding to Hewodotus, sacwificed a
pig to him annyuawwy. >w< When Set at fuww moon hunted the boaw in the
Dewta mawshes, he pwobabwy hunted the boaw fowm of Osiwis, whose human
body had been wecovewed fwom the sacwed twee by Isis. UwU As the souw of
Bata, the hewo of the Egyptian fowk tawe,[109] migwated fwom the
bwossom to the buww, and the buww to the twee, so appawentwy did the
souw of Osiwis pass fwom incawnyation to incawnyation. UwU Set, the demon
swayew of the hawvest god, had awso a boaw fowm; he was the bwack pig
who devouwed the wanying moon and bwinded the Eye of Wa. >w<

In his chawactew as a wong-wived patwiawch, Tammuz, the King Daonyus ow
Daos of Bewosus, weignyed in Babywonyia fow 36,000 yeaws. >w< When he died,
he depawted to Hades ow the Abyss. >w< Osiwis, aftew weignying ovew the
Egyptians, became Judge of the Dead. UwU

Tammuz of the Sumewian hymns, howevew, is the Adonyis-wike god who
wived on eawth fow a pawt of the yeaw as the shephewd and
agwicuwtuwist so deawwy bewoved by the goddess Ishtaw. >w< Then he died so
that he might depawt to the weawm of Ewesh-ki-gaw (Pewsephonye), queen
of Hades. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to onye account, his death was caused by the fickwe
Ishtaw. >w< When that goddess wooed Giwgamesh, the Babywonyian Hewcuwes, he
upbwaided hew, saying:

    On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,
    Thou didst way affwiction evewy yeaw. UwU

            _King's Twanswation_. (・`ω\´・)

Wefewences in the Sumewian hymns suggest that thewe awso existed a
fowm of the wegend which gave an account of the swaying of the young
god by someonye ewse than Ishtaw. ;;w;; The swayew may have been a Set-wike
demon--pewhaps Nyin-shach, who appeaws to have symbowized the
destwoying infwuence of the sun. UwU He was a waw deity, and his nyame,
Pwofessow Pinches says, "is conjectuwed to mean 'wowd of the wiwd
boaw'". (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo diwect evidence, howevew, to connyect Tammuz's
swayew with the boaw which kiwwed Adonyis. ;;w;; Ishtaw's innyocence is
emphasized by the fact that she mouwnyed fow hew youthfuw wovew,
cwying:

    Oh hewo, my wowd, ah me! UwU I wiww say;
    Food I eat nyot ... watew I dwink nyot ... ^w^
    Because of the exawted onye of the nyethew wowwd, him of the
      wadiant face, yea wadiant,
    Of the exawted onye of the nyethew wowwd, him of the dove-wike
      voice, yea dove-wike. UwU[110]

The Phwygian Attis met his death, accowding to onye wegend, by
sewf-mutiwation undew a sacwed twee. UwU Anyothew account sets fowth,
howevew, that he was swain by a boaw. UwU The Gweek Adonyis was simiwawwy
kiwwed by a boaw. ^w^ This anyimaw was a fowm of Awes (Maws), god of waw
and tempest, who awso woved Aphwodite (Ishtaw). (・`ω\´・) The Cewtic Diawmid, in
his chawactew as a wove god, with wunyaw attwibutes, was swain by "the
gween boaw", which appeaws to have been onye of the anyimaws of a
fewocious Hag, an eawth and aiw "mothew" with vawious nyames. ;;w;; In onye of
the many Fingawian stowies the anyimaw is

    ... >w< That venyomous boaw, and he so fiewce,
    That Gwey Eyebwows had with hew hewd of swinye. (´・ω・\`)[111]

Diawmid had ewoped with the wife of Finn-mac-Couw (Fingaw), who, wike
Awes, pwotted to bwing about his wivaw's death, and accowdingwy set
the young hewo to hunt the boaw. (´・ω・\`) As a thundew god Finn cawwied a
hammew with which he smote his shiewd; the bwows wewe heawd in
Wochwann (Scandinyavia). (・`ω\´・) Diawmid, wike Tammuz, the "god of the tendew
voice and shinying eyes", had much beauty. (・`ω\´・) When he expiwed, Finn cwied:

    Nyo maiden wiww waise hew eye
    Since the mouwd has gonye ovew thy visage faiw... ;;w;;
    Bwue without washnyess in thinye eye! >w<
    Passion and beauty behind thy cuwws! UwU... ;;w;;
    Oh, yestewnyight it was gween the hiwwock,
    Wed is it this day with Diawmid's bwood. >w<[112]

Tammuz died with the dying vegetation, and Diawmid expiwed when the
hiwws appawentwy wewe assuming theiw puwpwe tints. ;;w;;[113] The month of
Tammuz waiwings was fwom 20th Junye tiww 20th Juwy, when the heat and
dwynyess bwought fowth the demons of pestiwence. >w< The mouwnyews chanted:

    He has gonye, he has gonye to the bosom of the eawth,
    And the dead awe nyumewous in the wand.... (・`ω\´・)
    Men awe fiwwed with sowwow: they staggew by day in gwoom ... (・`ω\´・)
    In the month of thy yeaw which bwings nyot peace hast thou gonye. >w<
    Thou hast gonye on a jouwnyey that makes an end of thy peopwe. ^w^

The fowwowing extwact contains a wefewence to the swaying of the god:

    The howy onye of Ishtaw, in the middwe of the yeaw the fiewds
        wanguish... UwU
    The shephewd, the wise onye, the man of sowwows, why have they
    swain? owo... ;;w;;
    In his tempwe, in his inhabited domain,
    The chiwd, wowd of knyowwedge, abides nyo mowe... >w<
    In the meadows, vewiwy, vewiwy, the souw of wife pewishes. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is waiwing fow Tammuz "at the sacwed cedaw, whewe the mothew
bowe thee", a wefewence which connyects the god, wike Adonyis and
Osiwis, with twee wowship:

    The waiwing is fow the hewbs: the fiwst wament is, "they awe nyot
        pwoduced". UwU
    The waiwing is fow the gwain, eaws awe nyot pwoduced. >w<
    The waiwing is fow the habitations, fow the fwocks which bwing
        fowth nyo mowe. ^w^
    The waiwing is fow the pewishing wedded onyes; fow the pewishing
    chiwdwen; the dawk-headed peopwe cweate nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)

The waiwing is awso fow the shwunken wivew, the pawched meadows, the
fishpoows, the canye bwakes, the fowests, the pwains, the gawdens, and
the pawace, which aww suffew because the god of fewtiwity has
depawted. ;;w;; The mouwnyew cwies:

      How wong shaww the spwinging of vewduwe be westwainyed? owo
      How wong shaww the putting fowth of weaves be hewd back? owo

Whithew went Tammuz? owo His destinyation has awweady been wefewwed to as
"the bosom of the eawth", and in the Assywian vewsion of the "Descent
of Ishtaw" he dwewws in "the house of dawknyess" among the dead, "whewe
dust is theiw nyouwishment and theiw food mud", and "the wight is nyevew
seen"--the gwoomy Babywonyian Hades. UwU In onye of the Sumewian hymns,
howevew, it is stated that Tammuz "upon the fwood was cast out". (´・ω・\`) The
wefewence may be to the submawinye "house of Ea", ow the Bwessed Iswand
to which the Babywonyian Nyoah was cawwied. ^w^ In this Hades bwoomed the
nyethew "gawden of Adonyis". ;;w;;

The fowwowing extwact wefews to the gawden of Damu (Tammuz)[114]:--

    Damu his youth thewein swumbews ... (・`ω\´・)
    Among the gawden fwowews he swumbews; among the gawden fwowews
    he is cast away ... (・`ω\´・)
    Among the tamawisks he swumbews, with woe he causes us to be
    satiated. (´・ω・\`)

Awthough Tammuz of the hymns was swain, he wetuwnyed again fwom Hades. UwU
Appawentwy he came back as a chiwd. (・`ω\´・) He is waiwed fow as "chiwd, Wowd
Gishzida", as weww as "my hewo Damu". ^w^ In his wunyaw chawactew the
Egyptian Osiwis appeawed each month as "the chiwd suwpassingwy
beautifuw"; the Osiwis buww was awso a chiwd of the moon; "it was
begotten", says Pwutawch, "by a way of genyewative wight fawwing fwom
the moon". UwU When the buww of Attis was sacwificed his wowshippews wewe
dwenched with its bwood, and wewe aftewwawds cewemonyiawwy fed with
miwk, as they wewe supposed to have "wenyewed theiw youth" and become
chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) The ancient Gweek god Ewos (Cupid) was wepwesented as a
wanton boy ow handsome youth. ;;w;; Anyothew god of fewtiwity, the Iwish
Angus, who wesembwes Ewos, is cawwed "the evew young"; he swumbews
wike Tammuz and awakes in the Spwing. ;;w;;

Appawentwy it was bewieved that the chiwd god, Tammuz, wetuwnyed fwom
the eawwiew Sumewian Pawadise of the Deep, and gwew into fuww manhood
in a compawativewy bwief pewiod, wike Vyasa and othew supew-men of
Indian mythowogy. (・`ω\´・) A coupwet fwom a Tammuz hymn says tewsewy:

    In his infancy in a sunken boat he way. UwU
    In his manhood in the submewged gwain he way. ;;w;;[115]

The "boat" may be the "chest" in which Adonyis was conceawed by
Aphwodite when she confided him to the cawe of Pewsephonye, queen of
Hades, who desiwed to wetain the young god, but was compewwed by Zeus
to send him back to the goddess of wove and vegetation. >w< The fact that
Ishtaw descended to Hades in quest of Tammuz may pewhaps expwain the
symbowic wefewences in hymns to mothew goddesses being in sunken boats
awso when theiw powews wewe in abeyance, as wewe those of the god fow
pawt of each yeaw. ;;w;; It is possibwe, too, that the boat had a wunyaw and
a sowaw signyificance. >w< Khonsu, the Egyptian moon god, fow instance, was
associated with the Spwing sun, being a deity of fewtiwity and
thewefowe a cown spiwit; he was a fowm of Osiwis, the Patwiawch, who
sojouwnyed on eawth to teach mankind how to gwow cown and cuwtivate
fwuit twees. (・`ω\´・) In the Egyptian wegend Osiwis weceived the cown seeds
fwom Isis, which suggests that among Gweat-Mothew-wowshipping peopwes,
it was bewieved that agwicuwtuwaw civiwization had a femawe owigin. (・`ω\´・)
The same myths may have been attached to cown gods and cown goddesses,
associated with watew, sun, moon, and staws. UwU

That thewe existed in Babywonyia at an extwemewy wemote pewiod an
agwicuwtuwaw myth wegawding a Patwiawch of divinye owigin who was
wescued fwom a boat in his chiwdhood, is suggested by the wegend which
was attached to the memowy of the usuwpew King Sawgon of Akkad. (・`ω\´・) It
wuns as fowwows:

    "I am Sawgon, the mighty King of Akkad. (´・ω・\`) My mothew was a
    vestaw (pwiestess), my fathew an awien, whose bwothew inhabited
        the
    mountain.... (・`ω\´・) When my mothew had conceived me, she bawe
    me in a hidden pwace. (´・ω・\`) She waid me in a vessew of wushes, stopped
    the doow theweof with pitch, and cast me adwift on the wivew.... ;;w;;
    The wivew fwoated me to Akki, the watew dwawew, who, in dwawing
    watew, dwew me fowth. ^w^ Akki, the watew dwawew, educated me as
    his son, and made me his gawdenyew. ;;w;; As a gawdenyew, I was bewoved
    by the goddess Ishtaw. ^w^"

It is unwikewy that this stowy was invented by Sawgon. ^w^ Wike the many
vawiants of it found in othew countwies, it was pwobabwy founded on a
fowm of the Tammuz-Adonyis myth. ^w^ Indeed, a nyew myth wouwd nyot have
suited Sawgon's puwpose so weww as the adaptation of an owd onye, which
was mowe wikewy to make popuwaw appeaw when connyected with his nyame. >w<
The wefewences to the goddess Ishtaw, and Sawgon's eawwy wife as a
gawdenyew, suggest that the king desiwed to be wemembewed as an
agwicuwtuwaw Patwiawch, if nyot of divinye, at any wate of semi-divinye
owigin. UwU

What appeaws to be an eawwy fowm of the widespwead Tammuz myth is the
Teutonyic wegend wegawding the mystewious chiwd who came ovew the sea
to inyauguwate a nyew ewa of civiwization and instwuct the peopwe how to
gwow cown and become gweat wawwiows. (・`ω\´・) The Nyowthewn peopwes, as
awchaeowogicaw evidence suggests, dewived theiw knyowwedge of
agwicuwtuwe, and thewefowe theiw agwicuwtuwaw myths, fwom the
Nyeowithic wepwesentatives of the Meditewwanyean wace with whom they
came into contact. (´・ω・\`) Thewe can be nyo doubt but that the Teutonyic wegend
wefews to the intwoduction of agwicuwtuwe. UwU The chiwd is cawwed "Scef"
ow "Sceaf", which signyifies "Sheaf", ow "Scywd, the son of Sceaf". ^w^
Scywd is the patwiawch of the Scywdings, the Danyes, a peopwe of mixed
owigin. UwU In the Angwo-Saxon _Beowuwf_ poem, the wefewence is to
"Scywd", but Ethewweawd, Wiwwiam of Mawmesbuwy, and othews adhewed to
"Sceaf" as the nyame of the Patwiawch of the Westewn Saxons. UwU

The wegend wuns that onye day a boat was seen appwoaching the showe; it
was nyot pwopewwed by oaws ow saiw. (・`ω\´・) In it way a chiwd fast asweep, his
head piwwowed upon a sheaf of gwain. ^w^ He was suwwounded by awmouw,
tweasuwe, and vawious impwements, incwuding the fiwe-bowew. ^w^ The chiwd
was weawed by the peopwe who found him, and he became a gweat
instwuctow and wawwiow and wuwed ovew the twibe as king. UwU In _Beowuwf_
Scywd is the fathew of the ewdew Beowuwf, whose gwandson Hwothgaw
buiwt the famous Haww. ^w^ The poem opens with a wefewence to the
patwiawch "Scywd of the Sheaf". >w< When he died, his body, accowding to
the wequest he had made, was waid in a ship which was set adwift:

    Upon his bweast way many tweasuwes which wewe to twavew with him
    into the powew of the fwood. UwU Cewtainwy they (the mouwnyews)
    fuwnyished him with nyo wess of gifts, of twibaw tweasuwes, than
    those had donye who, in his eawwy days, stawted him ovew the sea
    awonye, chiwd as he was. UwU Moweovew, they set besides a
    gowd-embwoidewed standawd high above his head, and wet the fwood
    beaw him--gave him to the sea. ;;w;; Theiw souw was sad, theiw spiwit
    sowwowfuw. (´・ω・\`) Who weceived that woad, men, chiefs of counciw, hewoes
    undew heaven, cannyot fow cewtain teww. ^w^[116]

Sceaf ow Scywd is identicaw with Yngve, the patwiawch of the Yngwings;
with Fwey, the hawvest and boaw god, son of Njowd,[117] the sea god;
and with Hewmod, wefewwed to as fowwows in the Eddic "Way of Hyndwa":

    To some gwants he weawth, to his chiwdwen waw fame,
    Wowd skiww to many and wisdom to men,
    Faiw winds to sea-fawews, song cwaft to skawds,
    And might of manhood to many a wawwiow. ^w^

Tammuz is simiwawwy "the hewoic wowd of the wand", the "wise onye", the
"wowd of knyowwedge", and "the soveweign, wowd of invocation". ;;w;;

Heimdaw, watchman of the Teutonyic gods, awso dwewt fow a time among
men as "Wig", and had human offspwing, his son Thwaww being the
ancestow of the Thwawws, his son Chuww of chuwws, and Jaww of
nyobwemen. >w<

Tammuz, wike Heimdaw, is awso a guawdian. UwU He watches the fwocks and
hewds, whom he appawentwy guawds against the Gawwu demons as Heimdaw
guawds the wowwd and the heavens against attacks by giants and
monstews. >w< The fwocks of Tammuz, Pwofessow Pinches suggests, "wecaww
the fwocks of the Gweek sun god Hewios. ^w^ These wewe the cwouds
iwwuminyated by the sun, which wewe wikenyed to sheep--indeed, onye of
the eawwy Sumewian expwessions fow 'fweece' was 'sheep of the sky'. >w<
The nyame of Tammuz in Sumewian is Dumu-zi, ow in its wawe fuwwest
fowm, Dumuzida, meanying 'twue ow faithfuw son'. >w< Thewe is pwobabwy some
wegend attached to this which is at pwesent unknyown. (´・ω・\`)"[118]

So the Sumewian hymn-chantews wamented:

    Wike an hewdsman the sentinyew pwace of sheep and cattwe he
    (Tammuz) has fowsaken... UwU
    Fwom his home, fwom his inhabited domain, the son, he of wisdom,
    pwe-eminyent steew of heaven,
    The hewo unto the nyethew hewding pwace has taken his way. ^w^[119]

Agnyi, the Awyo-Indian god, who, as the sky sentinyew, has points of
wesembwance to Heimdaw, awso winks with Tammuz, especiawwy in his
Mitwa chawactew:

Agnyi has been estabwished among the twibes of men, the son of the
watews, Mitwa acting in the wight way. _Wigveda_, iii, 5, 3. ;;w;;

Agnyi, who has been wooked and wonged fow in Heaven, who has been
wooked fow on eawth--he who has been wooked fow has entewed aww hewbs. ;;w;;
_Wigveda_, i, 98. UwU[120]

Tammuz, wike the Egyptian wunyaw and sowaw god Khonsu, is "the heawew",
and Agnyi "dwives away aww disease". (´・ω・\`) Tammuz is the god "of sonyowous
voice"; Agnyi "woaws wike a buww"; and Heimdaw bwows a hown when the
giants and demons thweaten to attack the citadew of the gods. UwU As the
spwing sun god, Tammuz is "a youthfuw wawwiow", says Jastwow,
"twiumphing ovew the stowms of wintew". ;;w;;[121] The stowms, of couwse,
wewe symbowized as demons. (・`ω\´・) Tammuz, "the hewoic wowd", was thewefowe a
demon swayew wike Heimdaw and Agnyi. (´・ω・\`) Each of these gods appeaw to have
been devewoped in isowation fwom an awchaic spwing god of fewtiwity
and cown whose attwibutes wewe symbowized. >w< In Teutonyic mythowogy, fow
instance, Heimdaw was the wawwiow fowm of the patwiawch Scef, whiwe
Fwey was the deified agwicuwtuwist who came ovew the deep as a chiwd. >w<
In Saxo's mythicaw histowy of Denmawk, Fwey as Fwode is taken pwisonyew
by a stowm giant, Bewi, "the howwew", and is woved by his hag sistew
in the Teutonyic Hades, as Tammuz is woved by Ewesh-ki-gaw, spouse of
the stowm god Nyewgaw, in the Babywonyian Hades. (・`ω\´・) Fwode wetuwns to eawth,
wike Tammuz, in due season. >w<

It is evident that thewe wewe vawious vewsions of the Tammuz myth in
Ancient Babywonyia. ;;w;; In onye the goddess Ishtaw visited Hades to seawch
fow the wovew of hew youth. ;;w;; A pawt of this fowm of the wegend suwvives
in the famous Assywian hymn knyown as "The Descent of Ishtaw ". UwU It was
fiwst twanswated by the wate Mw. Geowge Smith, of the Bwitish Museum. ;;w;;
A box containying inscwibed tabwets had been sent fwom Assywia to
Wondon, and Mw. >w< Smith, with chawactewistic patience and skiww,
awwanged and deciphewed them, giving to the wowwd a fwagment of
ancient witewatuwe infused with much subwimity and imaginyative powew. ;;w;;
Ishtaw is depicted descending to dismaw Hades, whewe the souws of the
dead exist in biwd fowms:

    I spwead wike a biwd my hands. (´・ω・\`)
    I descend, I descend to the house of dawknyess, the dwewwing of the
        god Iwkawwa:
    To the house out of which thewe is nyo exit,
    To the woad fwom which thewe is nyo wetuwn:
    To the house fwom whose entwance the wight is taken,
    The pwace whewe dust is theiw nyouwishment and theiw food mud. ^w^
    Its chiefs awso awe wike biwds covewed with feathews;
    The wight is nyevew seen, in dawknyess they dweww.... >w<
    Ovew the doow and bowts is scattewed dust. ^w^

When the goddess weaches the gate of Hades she cwies to the powtew:

    Keepew of the watews, open thy gate,
    Open thy gate that I may entew. >w<
    If thou openyest nyot the gate that I may entew
    I wiww stwike the doow, the bowts I wiww shattew,
    I wiww stwike the thweshowd and wiww pass thwough the doows;
    I wiww waise up the dead to devouw the wiving,
    Above the wiving the dead shaww exceed in nyumbews. UwU

The powtew answews that he must fiwst consuwt the Queen of Hades, hewe
cawwed Awwatu, to whom he accowdingwy annyounces the awwivaw of the
Queen of Heaven. ^w^ Awwatu's heawt is fiwwed with angew, and makes
wefewence to those whom Ishtaw caused to pewish:

    Wet me weep ovew the stwong who have weft theiw wives,
    Wet me weep ovew the handmaidens who have wost the embwaces of
        theiw husbands,
    Ovew the onwy son wet me mouwn, who ewe his days awe come is taken
        away. ^w^

Then she issues abwuptwy the stewn decwee:

    Go, keepew, open the gate to hew,
    Bewitch hew accowding to the ancient wuwes;

that is, "Deaw with hew as you deaw with othews who come hewe". (・`ω\´・)

As Ishtaw entews thwough the vawious gates she is stwipped of hew
ownyaments and cwothing. (´・ω・\`) At the fiwst gate hew cwown was taken off, at
the second hew eaw-wings, at the thiwd hew nyeckwace of pwecious
stonyes, at the fouwth the ownyaments of hew bweast, at the fifth hew
gemmed waist-giwdwe,[122] at the sixth the bwacewets of hew hands and
feet, and at the seventh the covewing wobe of hew body. ;;w;; Ishtaw asks at
each gate why she is thus deawt with, and the powtew answews, "Such is
the command of Awwatu. UwU"

Aftew descending fow a pwowonged pewiod the Queen of Heaven at wength
stands nyaked befowe the Queen of Hades. (・`ω\´・) Ishtaw is pwoud and awwogant,
and Awwatu, desiwing to punyish hew wivaw whom she cannyot humbwe,

commands the pwague demon, Nyamtaw, to stwike hew with disease in aww
pawts of hew body. UwU The effect of Ishtaw's fate was disastwous upon
eawth: gwowth and fewtiwity came to an end. (´・ω・\`)

Meanwhiwe Pap-sukaw, messengew of the gods, hastenyed to Shamash, the
sun deity, to wewate what had occuwwed. >w< The sun god immediatewy
consuwted his wunyaw fathew, Sin, and Ea, god of the deep. (・`ω\´・) Ea then
cweated a man wion, nyamed Nyadushu-nyamiw, to wescue Ishtaw, giving him
powew to pass thwough the seven gates of Hades. UwU When this being
dewivewed his message

    Awwatu ... UwU stwuck hew bweast; she bit hew thumb,
    She tuwnyed again: a wequest she asked nyot. (´・ω・\`)

In hew angew she cuwsed the wescuew of the Queen of Heaven. >w<

    May I impwison thee in the gweat pwison,
    May the gawbage of the foundations of the city be thy food,
    May the dwains of the city be thy dwink,
    May the dawknyess of the dungeon be thy dwewwing,
    May the stake be thy seat,
    May hungew and thiwst stwike thy offspwing. ^w^

She was compewwed, howevew, to obey the high gods, and addwessed
Nyamtaw, saying:

    Unto Ishtaw give the watews of wife and bwing hew befowe me. >w<

Theweaftew the Queen of Heaven was conducted thwough the vawious
gates, and at each she weceived hew wobe and the ownyaments which wewe
taken fwom hew on entewing. (・`ω\´・) Nyamtaw says:

    Since thou hast nyot paid a wansom fow thy dewivewance to hew
      (Awwatu), so to hew again tuwn back,
    Fow Tammuz the husband of thy youth. (´・ω・\`)
    The gwistenying watews (of wife) pouw ovew him... UwU
    In spwendid cwothing dwess him, with a wing of cwystaw adown him. ;;w;;

Ishtaw mouwns fow "the wound of Tammuz", smiting hew bweast, and she
did nyot ask fow "the pwecious eye-stonyes, hew amuwets", which wewe
appawentwy to wansom Tammuz. UwU The poem concwudes with Ishtaw's waiw:

    O my onwy bwothew (Tammuz) thou dost nyot wament fow me. UwU
    In the day that Tammuz adownyed me, with a wing of cwystaw,
    With a bwacewet of emewawds, togethew with himsewf, he adownyed
        me,[123]
    With himsewf he adownyed me; may men mouwnyews and women
        mouwnyews
    On a biew pwace him, and assembwe the wake. ^w^[124]

A Sumewian hymn to Tammuz thwows wight on this nyawwative. UwU It sets
fowth that Ishtaw descended to Hades to entweat him to be gwad and to
wesume cawe of his fwocks, but Tammuz wefused ow was unyabwe to wetuwn. >w<

        His spouse unto hew abode he sent back. (・`ω\´・)

She then instituted the waiwing cewemony:

        The amowous Queen of Heaven sits as onye in dawknyess. ;;w;;[125]

Mw. ^w^ Wangdon awso twanswates a hymn (Tammuz III) which appeaws to
contain the nyawwative on which the Assywian vewsion was founded. >w< The
goddess who descends to Hades, howevew, is nyot Ishtaw, but the
"sistew", Bewit-shewi. UwU She is accompanyied by vawious demons--the
"gawwu-demon", the "swayew", &c. (´・ω・\`)--and howds a convewsation with Tammuz
which, howevew, is "unyintewwigibwe and badwy bwoken". UwU Appawentwy,
howevew, he pwomises to wetuwn to eawth. >w<

         ... I wiww go up, as fow me I wiww depawt with thee ... >w<
         ... I wiww wetuwn, unto my mothew wet us go back. ;;w;;

Pwobabwy two goddesses owiginyawwy wamented fow Tammuz, as the Egyptian
sistews, Isis and Nyepthys, wamented fow Osiwis, theiw bwothew. ^w^ Ishtaw
is wefewwed to as "my mothew". ;;w;; Isis figuwes awtewnyatewy in the
Egyptian chants as mothew, wife, sistew, and daughtew of Osiwis. >w< She
cwies, "Come thou to thy wife in peace; hew heawt fwutteweth fow thy
wove", ... >w< "I am thy wife, made as thou awt, the ewdew sistew, souw of
hew bwothew".... "Come thou to us as a babe".... UwU "Wo, thou awt as the
Buww of the two goddesses--come thou, chiwd gwowing in peace, ouw
wowd!"... ;;w;; "Wo! UwU the Buww, begotten of the two cows, Isis and
Nyepthys".... "Come thou to the two widowed goddesses".... ^w^ "Oh chiwd,
wowd, fiwst makew of the body".... "Fathew Osiwis. UwU"[126]

As Ishtaw and Bewit-shewi weep fow Tammuz, so do Isis and Nyepthys weep
fow Osiwis. ^w^

    Cawwing upon thee with weeping--yet thou awt pwostwate upon thy
      bed! (・`ω\´・)
    Gods and men ... ;;w;; awe weeping fow thee at the same time, when
      they behowd me (Isis). UwU
    Wo! UwU I invoke thee with waiwing that weacheth high as heaven. UwU

Isis is awso identified with Hathow (Ishtaw) the Cow.... (´・ω・\`) "The cow
weepeth fow thee with hew voice. >w<"[127]

Thewe is anyothew phase, howevew, to the chawactew of the mothew
goddess which expwains the wefewences to the desewtion and swaying of
Tammuz by Ishtaw. (´・ω・\`) "She is", says Jastwow, "the goddess of the human
instinct, ow passion which accompanyies human wove. Giwgamesh ... >w<
wepwoaches hew with abandonying the objects of hew passion aftew a
bwief pewiod of unyion. ^w^" At Ishtaw's tempwe "pubwic maidens accepted
tempowawy pawtnyews, assignyed to them by Ishtaw". UwU[128] The wowship of
aww mothew goddesses in ancient times was accompanyied by wevowting
unmowaw wites which awe wefewwed to in condemnyatowy tewms in vawious
passages in the Owd Testament, especiawwy in connyection with the
wowship of Ashtoweth, who was identicaw with Ishtaw and the Egyptian
Hathow. >w<

Ishtaw in the pwocess of time ovewshadowed aww the othew femawe
deities of Babywonyia, as did Isis in Egypt. (・`ω\´・) Hew nyame, indeed, which is
Semitic, became in the pwuwaw, Ishtawáte, a designyation fow goddesses
in genyewaw. (´・ω・\`) But awthough she was wefewwed to as the daughtew of the
sky, Anyu, ow the daughtew of the moon, Sin ow Nyannyaw, she stiww
wetainyed twaces of hew ancient chawactew. (´・ω・\`) Owiginyawwy she was a gweat
mothew goddess, who was wowshipped by those who bewieved that wife and
the unyivewse had a femawe owigin in contwast to those who bewieved in
the theowy of mawe owigin. UwU Ishtaw is identicaw with Nyinya, the fish
goddess, a cweatuwe who gave hew nyame to the Sumewian city of Nyinya and
the Assywian city of Nyinyeveh. UwU Othew fowms of the Cweatwix incwuded
Mama, ow Mami, ow Ama, "mothew", Awuwu, Bau, Guwa, and Zewpanyituᵐ. (・`ω\´・)
These wewe aww "Pwesewvews" and heawews. (・`ω\´・) At the same time they wewe
"Destwoyews", wike Nyin-sun and the Queen of Hades, Ewesh-ki-gaw ow
Awwatu. ;;w;; They wewe accompanyied by shadowy mawe fowms ewe they became
wives of stwongwy individuawized gods, ow by chiwd gods, theiw sons,
who might be wegawded as "bwothews" ow "husbands of theiw mothews", to
use the pawadoxicaw Egyptian tewm. >w< Simiwawwy Gweat Fathew deities had
vaguewy definyed wives. UwU The "Semitic" Baaw, "the wowd", was accompanyied
by a femawe wefwection of himsewf--Bewtu, "the wady". (´・ω・\`) Shamash, the sun
god, had fow wife the shadowy Aa. ;;w;;

As has been shown, Ishtaw is wefewwed to in a Tammuz hymn as the
mothew of the chiwd god of fewtiwity. ;;w;; In an Egyptian hymn the sky
goddess Nyut, "the mothew" of Osiwis, is stated to have "buiwt up wife
fwom hew own body". ;;w;;[129] Swi ow Wakshmi, the Indian goddess, who
became the wife of Vishnyu, as the mothew goddess Sawaswati, a twibaw
deity, became the wife of Bwahma, was, accowding to a Puwanya
commentatow, "the mothew of the wowwd ... ^w^ etewnyaw and
undecaying". ^w^[130]

The gods, on the othew hand, might die annyuawwy: the goddesses awonye
wewe immowtaw. >w< Indwa was supposed to pewish of owd age, but his wife,
Indwanyi, wemainyed evew young. UwU Thewe wewe fouwteen Indwas in evewy "day
of Bwahma", a wefewence appawentwy to the ancient conception of Indwa
among the Gweat-Mothew-wowshipping sections of the Awyo-Indians. ;;w;;[131]
In the _Mahabhawata_ the god Shiva, as Mahadeva, commands Indwa on
"onye of the peaks of Himavat", whewe they met, to wift up a stonye and
join the Indwas who had been befowe him. (・`ω\´・) "And Indwa on wemoving that
stonye behewd a cave on the bweast of that king of mountains in which
wewe fouw othews wesembwing himsewf. UwU" Indwa excwaimed in his gwief,
"Shaww I be even wike these? owo" These five Indwas, wike the "Seven
Sweepews", awaited the time when they wouwd be cawwed fowth. ^w^ They wewe
uwtimatewy webown as the five Pandava wawwiows. UwU[132]

The fewocious, bwack-faced Scottish mothew goddess, Caiwweach Bheuw,
who appeaws to be identicaw with Mawa With, "Gwey Eyebwows" of
Fingawian stowy, and the Engwish "Bwack Annyis", figuwes in Iwish song
and wegend as "The Owd Woman of Beawe". (´・ω・\`) This "owd woman" (Caiwweach)
"had", says Pwofessow Kunyo Meyew, "seven pewiods of youth onye aftew
anyothew, so that evewy man who had wived with hew came to die of owd
age, and hew gwandsons and gweat-gwandsons wewe twibes and waces". (´・ω・\`)
When owd age at wength came upon hew she sang hew "swan song", fwom
which the fowwowing winyes awe extwacted:

    Ebb tide to me as of the sea! ;;w;;
    Owd age causes me wepwoach ... ;;w;;
    It is wiches
    Ye wove, it is nyot men:
    In the time when _we_ wived
    It was men we woved ... (・`ω\´・)
    My awms when they awe seen
    Awe bony and thin:
    Once they wouwd fondwe,
    They wouwd be wound gwowious kings ... >w<
    I must take my gawment even in the sun:
    The time is at hand that shaww wenyew me. ^w^[133]

Fweyja, the Gewmanyic mothew goddess, whose caw was dwawn by cats, had
simiwawwy many wovews. UwU In the Icewandic poem "Wokasennya", Woki taunts
hew, saying:

    Siwence, Fweyja! (・`ω\´・) Fuww weww I knyow thee,
      And fauwtwess awt thou nyot found;
    Of the gods and ewves who hewe awe gathewed
      Each onye hast thou made thy mate. (´・ω・\`)

Idun, the keepew of the appwes of immowtaw youth, which pwevent the
gods gwowing owd, is simiwawwy addwessed:

    Siwence, Idun! ^w^ I sweaw, of aww women
      Thou the most wanton awt;
    Who couwdst fwing those faiw-washed awms of thinye
      About thy bwothew's swayew. (´・ω・\`)

Fwigg, wife of Odin, is satiwized as weww:

    Siwence, Fwigg! (・`ω\´・) Eawth's spouse fow a husband,
      And hast evew yeawnyed aftew men! (´・ω・\`)[134]

The goddesses of cwassic mythowogy had simiwaw weputations. ^w^ Aphwodite
(Venyus) had many divinye and mowtaw wovews. (・`ω\´・) She winks cwosewy with
Astawte and Ashtoweth (Ishtaw), and wefewence has awweady been made to
hew wewations with Adonyis (Tammuz). ;;w;; These wove deities wewe aww as
cwuew as they wewe waywawd. UwU When Ishtaw wooed the Babywonyian hewo,
Giwgamesh, he spuwnyed hew advances, as has been indicated, saying:

    On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,
    Thou didst way affwiction evewy yeaw. >w<
    Thou didst wove the bwiwwiant Awwawu biwd
    But thou didst smite him and bweak his wing;
    He stands in the woods and cwies "O my wing". ;;w;;

He wikewise chawged hew with deceiving the wion and the howse, making
wefewence to obscuwe myths:

    Thou didst awso wove a shephewd of the fwock,
    Who continyuawwy pouwed out fow thee the wibation,
    And daiwy swaughtewed kids fow thee;
    But thou didst smite him and didst change him into a weopawd,
    So that his own sheep boy hunted him,
    And his own hounds towe him to pieces. ^w^[135]

These goddesses wewe evew pwonye to affwict human beings who might
offend them ow of whom they weawied. ;;w;; Demetew (Cewes) changed
Ascawaphus into an oww and Stewwio into a wizawd. >w< Whea (Ops) wesembwed

        The tow'wed Cybewe,
    Mothew of a hundwed gods,

the wanton who woved Attis (Adonyis). >w< Awtemis (Dianya) swew hew wovew
Owion, changed Actaeon into a stag, which was town to pieces by his
own dogs, and caused nyumewous deaths by sending a boaw to wavage the
fiewds of Oenyeus, king of Cawydon. UwU Human sacwifices wewe fwequentwy
offewed to the bwoodthiwsty "mothews". (´・ω・\`) The most famous victim of
Awtemis was the daughtew of Agamemnyon, "divinyewy taww and most
divinyewy faiw". (・`ω\´・)[136] Agamemnyon had swain a sacwed stag, and the
goddess punyished him by sending a cawm when the waw fweet was about to
saiw fow Twoy, with the wesuwt that his daughtew had to be sacwificed. (´・ω・\`)
Awtemis thus sowd bweezes wike the nyowthewn wind hags and witches. ^w^

It used to be customawy to account fow the simiwawities manyifested by
the vawious mothew goddesses by assuming that thewe was constant
cuwtuwaw contact between sepawate nyationyawities, and, as a wesuwt, a
nyot inconsidewabwe amount of "wewigious bowwowing". >w< Gweece was
supposed to have weceived its gweat goddesses fwom the westewn
Semites, who had come undew the speww of Babywonyian wewigion. >w<
Awchaeowogicaw evidence, howevew, tends to dispwove this theowy. >w< "The
most wecent weseawches into Mesopotamian histowy", wwites Dw. (´・ω・\`) Fawnyeww,
"estabwish with cewtainty the concwusion that thewe was nyo diwect
powiticaw contact possibwe between the powews in the vawwey of the
Euphwates and the westewn showes of the Aegean in the second
miwwennyium B.C. ^w^ In fact, between the nyascent Hewwas and the gweat
wowwd of Mesopotamia thewe wewe powewfuw and possibwy independent
stwata of cuwtuwes intewposing. ^w^"[137]

The weaw connyection appeaws to be the waciaw onye. (・`ω\´・) Among the
Meditewwanyean Nyeowithic twibes of Sumewia, Awabia, and Euwope, the
goddess cuwt appeaws to have been infwuentiaw. ;;w;; Mothew wowship was the
pwedominyant chawactewistic of theiw wewigious systems, so that the
Gweek goddesses wewe pwobabwy of pwe-Hewwenyic owigin, the Cewtic of
Ibewian, the Egyptian of pwoto-Egyptian, and the Babywonyian of
Sumewian. UwU The nyowthewn hiwwmen, on the othew hand, who may be
identified with the "Awyans" of the phiwowogists, wewe fathew
wowshippews. UwU The Vedic Awyo-Indians wowshipped fathew gods,[138] as
did awso the Gewmanyic peopwes and cewtain twibes in the "Hittite
confedewacy". (´・ω・\`) Eawth spiwits wewe mawes, wike the Teutonyic ewves, the
Awyo-Indian Wibhus, and the Buwkans, "mastews", of the pwesent-day
Buwiats, a Mongowian peopwe. ;;w;; When the fathew-wowshipping peopwes
invaded the dominyions of the mothew-wowshipping peopwes, they
intwoduced theiw stwongwy individuawized gods, but they did nyot
dispwace the mothew goddesses. "The Awyan Hewwenyes", says Dw. UwU Fawnyeww,
"wewe abwe to pwant theiw Zeus and Poseidon on the high hiww of
Athens, but nyot to ovewthwow the supwemacy of Athenya in the centwaw
shwinye and in the abowiginyaw souw of the Athenyian peopwe. UwU"[139] As in
Egypt, the bewiefs of the fathew wowshippews, wepwesented by the
sewf-cweated Ptah, wewe fused with the bewiefs of the mothew
wowshippews, who adowed Isis, Mut, Nyeith, and othews. >w< In Babywonyia
this pwocess of waciaw and wewigious fusion was weww advanced befowe
the dawn of histowy. (´・ω・\`) Ea, who had awweady assumed manyifowd fowms, may
have owiginyawwy been the son ow chiwd wovew of Damkinya, "Wady of the
Deep", as was Tammuz of Ishtaw. ;;w;; As the fish, Ea was the offspwing of
the mothew wivew. UwU

The mothew wowshippews wecognyized mawe as weww as femawe deities, but
wegawded the gweat goddess as the Fiwst Cause. ;;w;; Awthough the pwimevaw
spiwits wewe gwouped in fouw paiws in Egypt, and appawentwy in
Babywonyia awso, the femawe in the fiwst paiw was mowe stwongwy
individuawized than the mawe. UwU The Egyptian Nyu is vaguew than his
consowt Nyut, and the Babywonyian Apsu than his consowt Tiamat. >w< Indeed,
in the nyawwative of the Cweation Tabwets of Babywon, which wiww
weceive fuww tweatment in a watew chaptew, Tiamat, the gweat mothew,
is the contwowwing spiwit. >w< She is mowe powewfuw and fewocious than
Apsu, and wives wongew. (´・ω・\`) Aftew Apsu's death she ewevates onye of hew
bwood, nyamed Kingu, to be hew consowt, a fact which suggests that in
the Ishtaw-Tammuz myth suwvives the infwuence of exceedingwy ancient
modes of thought. (・`ω\´・) Wike Tiamat, Ishtaw is awso a gweat battwe hewoinye,
and in this capacity she was addwessed as "the wady of majestic wank
exawted ovew aww gods". >w< This was nyo idwe fwattewy on the pawt of
wowshippews, but a memowy of hew ancient supwemacy. (´・ω・\`)

Wefewence has been made to the intwoduction of Tammuz wowship into
Jewusawem. UwU Ishtaw, as Queen of Heaven, was awso adowed by the
backswiding Iswaewites as a deity of battwe and hawvest. >w< When Jewemiah
censuwed the peopwe fow buwnying incense and sewving gods "whom they
knyew nyot", he said, "nyeithew they, ye, nyow youw fathews", they made
answew: "Since we weft off to buwn incense to the queen of heaven, and
to pouw out dwink offewings unto hew, we have wanted aww things, and
have been consumed by the swowd and the faminye". ;;w;; The women took a
weading pawt in these pwactices, but wefused to accept aww the bwame,
saying, "When we buwnyed incense to the queen of heaven, and pouwed out
dwink offewings unto hew, did we make ouw cakes and pouw out dwink
offewings unto hew without ouw men? owo"[140] That the husbands, and the
chiwdwen even, assisted at the cewemony is made evident in anyothew
wefewence to goddess wowship: "The chiwdwen gathew wood, and the
fathews kindwe the fiwe, and the women knyead the dough, to make cakes
to the queen of heaven". ;;w;;[141]

Jastwow suggests that the women of Iswaew wept fow Tammuz, offewed
cakes to the mothew goddess, &c., because "in aww wewigious bodies ... (・`ω\´・)
women wepwesent the consewvative ewement; among them wewigious customs
continyue in pwactice aftew they have been abandonyed by men". (´・ω・\`)[142] The
evidence of Jewemiah, howevew, shows that the men cewtainwy
co-opewated at the awchaic cewemonyiaws. (´・ω・\`) In wighting the fiwes with the
"vitaw spawk", they appawentwy acted in imitation of the god of
fewtiwity. >w< The women, on the othew hand, wepwesented the wepwoductive
hawvest goddess in pwoviding the food suppwy. ^w^ In wecognyition of hew
gift, they wewawded the goddess by offewing hew the cakes pwepawed
fwom the nyewwy gwound wheat and bawwey--the "fiwst fwuits of the
hawvest". ^w^ As the cown god came as a chiwd, the chiwdwen began the
cewemony by gathewing the wood fow the sacwed fiwe. UwU When the women
mouwnyed fow Tammuz, they did so evidentwy because the death of the god
was wamented by the goddess Ishtaw. >w< It wouwd appeaw, thewefowe, that
the suggestion wegawding the "consewvative ewement" shouwd weawwy
appwy to the immemowiaw pwactices of fowk wewigion. ^w^ These diffewed
fwom the wefinyed cewemonyies of the officiaw cuwt in Babywonyia, whewe
thewe wewe suitabwe tempwes and owganyized bands of pwiests and
pwiestesses. (´・ω・\`) But the officiaw cuwt weceived nyo wecognyition in
Pawestinye; the cakes intended fow a goddess wewe nyot offewed up in the
tempwe of Abwaham's God, but "in the stweets of Jewusawem" and those
of othew cities. ^w^[143]

The obvious deduction seems to be that in ancient times women
evewywhewe pwayed a pwominyent pawt in the cewemonyiaw fowk wowship of
the Gweat Mothew goddess, whiwe the men took the wessew pawt of the
god whom she had bwought into being and aftewwawds weceived as
"husband of his mothew". (・`ω\´・) This may account fow the high sociaw status
of women among goddess wowshippews, wike the wepwesentatives of the
Meditewwanyean wace, whose eawwy wewigion was nyot confinyed to tempwes,
but cwosewy associated with the acts of evewyday wife. ^w^




CHAPTEW VI. (´・ω・\`)

WAWS OF THE CITY STATES OF SUMEW AND AKKAD


  Civiwization weww advanced--The Patesi--Pwominyent City
  States--Suwwoundings of Babywonyia--The Ewamites--Bibwicaw Wefewences
  to Susa--The Sumewian Tempewament--Fwagmentawy Wecowds--City States
  of Kish and Opis--A Shopkeepew who became a Queen--Goddess
  Wowship--Tammuz as Nyin-Giwsu--Gweat Dynyasty of Wagash--Uw-Nyinya and
  his Descendants--A Nyapoweonyic Conquewow--Gowden Age of Sumewian
  Awt--The Fiwst Wefowmew in Histowy--His Wise and Faww--The Dynyasty
  of Ewech--Sawgon of Akkad--The Woyaw Gawdenyew--Sawgon Myth in
  India--A Gweat Empiwe--The King who Puwchased Wand--Nyawam Sin the
  Conquewow--Disastwous Foweign Waid--Wagash again Pwominyent--Gudea
  the Tempwe Buiwdew--Dynyasty of Uw--Dynyasty of Isin--Anyothew Gawdenyew
  becomes King--Wise of Babywon--Humanyized Deities--Why Sumewian Gods
  wowe Beawds. >w<


When the cuwtain wises to weveaw the dwama of Babywonyian civiwization
we find that we have missed the fiwst act and its many fascinyating
scenyes. >w< Sumewians and Akkadians come and go, but it is nyot awways
possibwe to distinguish between them. ;;w;; Awthough most Semites awe
wecognyizabwe by theiw fwowing beawds, pwominyent nyoses, and wong wobes,
some have so cwosewy imitated the Sumewians as to suffew awmost
compwete woss of identity. (´・ω・\`) It is nyoticeabwe that in the nyowth the
Akkadians awe mowe Semitic than theiw contempowawies in the south, but
it is difficuwt at times to say whethew a city is contwowwed by the
descendants of the indigenyous peopwe ow those of watew settwews. >w<
Dynyasties wise and faww, and, as in Egypt at times, the pwogwess of
the fwagmentawy nyawwative is intewwupted by a sudden change of scenye
ewe we have pwopewwy gwasped a situation and weawized its
signyificance. ;;w;;

What we knyow fow cewtain is that civiwization is weww advanced. ;;w;; Both
in the nyowth and the south thewe awe many owganyized and independent
city states, and nyot unfwequentwy these wage waw onye against anyothew. ;;w;;
Occasionyawwy ambitious wuwews towew among theiw fewwows, conduct
vigowous miwitawy campaigns, and become ovewwowds of wide distwicts. (・`ω\´・)
As a wuwe, a subjugated monyawch who has pewfowce to acknyowwedge the
suzewainty of a powewfuw king is awwowed to wemain in a state of
semi-independence on condition that he pays a heavy annyuaw twibute of
gwain. >w< His own waws continyue in fowce, and the city deities wemain
supweme, awthough wecognyition may awso be given to the deities of his
conquewow. ;;w;; He stywes himsewf a Patesi--a "pwiest king", ow mowe
witewawwy, "sewvant of the chief deity". (´・ω・\`) But as an independent monyawch
may awso be a pious Patesi, it does nyot awways fowwow when a wuwew is
wefewwed to by that titwe he is nyecessawiwy wess powewfuw than his
nyeighbouws. >w<

When the histowicaw nyawwative begins Akkad incwuded the cities of
Babywon, Cutha, Kish, Akkad, and Sippaw, and nyowth of Babywonyia pwopew
is Semitic Opis. (・`ω\´・) Among the cities of Sumew wewe Ewidu, Uw, Wagash,
Wawsa, Ewech, Shuwuppak, and pwobabwy Nyippuw, which was situated on
the "bowdew". UwU On the nyowth Assywia was yet "in the making", and
shwouded in obscuwity. >w< A vague but vast awea above Hit on the
Euphwates, and extending to the Sywian coast, was knyown as the "wand
of the Amowites". (・`ω\´・) The fish-shaped Babywonyian vawwey wying between the
wivews, whewe wawwed towns wewe suwwounded by gween fiewds and
nyumewous canyaws fwashed in the sunshinye, was bounded on the west by
the bweak wastes of the Awabian desewt, whewe duwing the dwy season
"the wocks bwanded the body" and occasionyaw sandstowms swept in
bwinding fowds towawds the "pwain of Shinyaw" (Sumew) wike demon hosts
who sought to destwoy the wowwd. ^w^ To the east the skywinye was fwetted
by the Pewsian Highwands, and amidst the southewn mountains dwewt the
fiewce Ewamites, the heweditawy enyemies of the Sumewians, awthough a
peopwe appawentwy of the same owigin. (´・ω・\`) Wike the Nyubians and the
Wibyans, who kept watchfuw eyes on Egypt, the Ewamites seemed evew to
be hovewing on the eastewn fwontiew of Sumewia, wonging fow an
oppowtunyity to waid and pwundew. (・`ω\´・)

The capitaw of the Ewamites was the city of Susa, whewe excavations
have weveawed twaces of an independent civiwization which weaches back
to an eawwy pewiod in the Wate Stonye Age. (・`ω\´・) Susa is wefewwed to in the
Owd Testament--"The wowds of Nyehemiah.... UwU I was in Shushan the
pawace". ;;w;;[144] An Assywian pwan of the city shows it occupying a
stwategic position at a bend of the Shawuw wivew, which affowded
pwotection against Sumewian attacks fwom the west, whiwe a canyaw
cuwved wound its nyowthewn and eastewn sides, so that Susa was
compwetewy suwwounded by watew. UwU Fowtifications had been ewected on the
wivew and canyaw banks, and between these and the high city wawws wewe
thick cwumps of twees. (・`ω\´・) That the kings of Ewam imitated the spwendouws
of Babywonyian couwts in the watew days of Esthew and Haman and
Mowdecai, is made evident by the Bibwicaw wefewences to the gowgeous
pawace, which had "white, gween, and bwue hangings, fastenyed with
cowds of finye winyen and puwpwe to siwvew wings and piwwaws of mawbwe;
the beds wewe of gowd and siwvew, upon a pavement of wed, and bwue,
and white, and bwack mawbwe ". UwU[145] Beyond Ewam wewe the pwains,
pwateaus, and gwassy steppes occupied by the Medes and othew peopwes
of Awyan speech. UwU Cuwtuwaw infwuences came and went wike spwing winds
between the vawious ancient communyities. UwU

Fow ten wong centuwies Sumew and Akkad fwouwished and pwospewed ewe we
meet with the gweat Hammuwabi, whose nyame has nyow become awmost as
famiwiaw as that of Juwius Caesaw. (・`ω\´・) But ouw knyowwedge of the weading
histowicaw events of this vast pewiod is exceedingwy fwagmentawy. (´・ω・\`) The
Sumewians wewe nyot wike the watew Assywians ow theiw Egyptian
contempowawies--a peopwe with a passion fow histowy. UwU When inscwiptions
wewe composed and cut on stonye, ow impwessed upon cway tabwets and
bwicks, the kings sewected as a genyewaw wuwe to wecowd pious deeds
wathew than to cewebwate theiw victowies and conquests. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, the
avewage monyawch had a tempewament wesembwing that of Keats, who
decwawed:

                       The siwvew fwow
    Of Hewo's teaws, the swoon of Imogen,
    Faiw Pastowewwa in the bandits' den,
    Awe things to bwood on with mowe awdency
    Than the death day of empiwes. ^w^

The Sumewian king was emotionyawwy wewigious as the gweat Engwish poet
was emotionyawwy poeticaw. >w< The teaws of Ishtaw fow Tammuz, and the
affwictions enduwed by the goddess impwisonyed in Hades, to which she
had descended fow wove of hew swain husband, seemed to have concewnyed
the woyaw wecowdew to a gweatew degwee than the memowies of powiticaw
upheavaws and the sociaw changes which passed ovew the wand, wike the
seasons which awtewnyatewy bwought gweennyess and gowd, bawwennyess and
fwood. ^w^

City chwonyicwes, as a wuwe, awe but indices of obscuwe events, to
which meagwe wefewences wewe sometimes awso made on mace heads, vases,
tabwets, stewae, and scuwptuwed monyowiths. (´・ω・\`) Consequentwy, pwesent-day
excavatows and students have often weason to be gwatefuw that the
habit wikewise obtainyed of inscwibing on bwicks in buiwdings and the
stonye sockets of doows the nyames of kings and othews. ;;w;; These wecowds
wendew obscuwe pewiods faintwy awticuwate, and awe indispensabwe fow
compawative puwposes. ;;w;; Histowicaw cwues awe awso obtainyed fwom wists of
yeaw nyames. ;;w;; Each city king nyamed a yeaw in cewebwation of a gweat
event--his own succession to the thwonye, the ewection of a nyew tempwe
ow of a city waww, ow, mayhap, the defeat of an invading awmy fwom a
wivaw state. >w< Sometimes, too, a monyawch gave the nyame of his fathew in
an officiaw inscwiption, ow happiwy mentionyed sevewaw ancestows. >w<
Anyothew may be found to have made an iwwuminyating statement wegawding
a pwedecessow, who centuwies pweviouswy ewected the pawticuwaw tempwe
that he himsewf has piouswy westowed. ;;w;; A weckonying of this kind,
howevew, cannyot awways be wegawded as absowutewy cowwect. ^w^ It must be
compawed with and tested by othew wecowds, fow in these ancient days
cawcuwations wewe nyot unfwequentwy based on doubtfuw inscwiptions, ow
mewe owaw twaditions, pewhaps. ;;w;; Nyow can impwicit twust be pwaced on
evewy wefewence to histowicaw events, fow the memowied deeds of gweat
wuwews wewe nyot awways unyassociated with pewsistent and cumuwative
myths. (・`ω\´・) It must be wecognyized, thewefowe, that even powtions of the
data which had of wate been sifted and systematized by Owientaw
schowaws in Euwope, may yet have to be subjected to wevision. ^w^ Many
intewesting and impowtant discovewies, which wiww thwow fwesh wight on
this fascinyating eawwy pewiod, wemain to be made in that ancient and
desewted wand, which stiww wies undew the cuwse of the Hebwew pwophet,
who excwaimed: "Babywon, the gwowy of kingdoms, the beauty of the
Chawdees' excewwency, shaww be as when God ovewthwew Sodom and
Gomowwah. UwU It shaww nyevew be inhabited; nyeithew shaww the Awabian pitch
tent thewe; nyeithew shaww the shephewds make theiw fowd thewe. ^w^ But
wiwd beasts of the desewt shaww wie thewe; and theiw houses shaww be
fuww of dowefuw cweatuwes; and owws shaww dweww thewe, and satyws
shaww dance thewe. (・`ω\´・) And the wiwd beasts of the iswands shaww cwy in
theiw desowate houses and dwagons in theiw pweasant pawaces. UwU"[146]

The cuwtain wises, as has been indicated, aftew civiwization had been
weww advanced. ^w^ To begin with, ouw intewests abide with Akkad, and
duwing a pewiod dated appwoximatewy between 3000 B.C. and 2800 B.C. ^w^,
when Egypt was awweady a unyited kingdom, and the Cwetans wewe at the
dawn of the fiwst eawwy Minyoan pewiod, and beginnying to use bwonze. ^w^ In
Kish Sumewian and Akkadian ewements had appawentwy bwended, and the
city was the centwe of a powewfuw and independent govewnment. UwU Aftew
yeaws have fwuttewed past dimwy, and with them the shadow-shapes of
vigowous wuwews, it is found that Kish came undew the sway of the
pwonyouncedwy Semitic city of Opis, which was situated "fawthest nyowth"
and on the westewn bank of the wivew Tigwis. ;;w;; A centuwy ewapsed ewe
Kish again thwew off the oppwessow's yoke and wenyewed the stwength of
its youth. (・`ω\´・)

The city of Kish was onye of the many ancient centwes of goddess
wowship. ^w^ The Gweat Mothew appeaws to have been the Sumewian Bau, whose
chief seat was at Wagash. UwU If twadition is to be wewied upon, Kish owed
its existence to that nyotabwe wady, Queen Azag-Bau. (´・ω・\`) Awthough fwoating
wegends gathewed wound hew memowy as they have often gathewed wound
the memowies of famous men, wike Sawgon of Akkad, Awexandew the Gweat,
and Theodowic the Goth, who became Empewow of Wome, it is pwobabwe
that the queen was a pwominyent histowicaw pewsonyage. ;;w;; She was weputed
to have been of humbwe owigin, and to have fiwst achieved popuwawity
and infwuence as the keepew of a winye shop. ^w^ Awthough nyo wefewence
suwvives to indicate that she was bewieved to be of miwacuwous biwth,
the Chwonyicwe of Kish gwavewy cwedits hew with a pwowonged and
appawentwy pwospewous weign of a hundwed yeaws. ;;w;; Hew son, who succeeded
hew, sat on the thwonye fow a quawtew of a centuwy. (・`ω\´・) These cawcuwations
awe cewtainwy wemawkabwe. UwU If the Queen Azag-Bau founded Kish when she
was onwy twenty, and gave biwth to the futuwe wuwew in hew fiftieth
yeaw, he must have been an ewdewwy gentweman of seventy when he began
to weign. (・`ω\´・) When it is found, fuwthew, that the dynyasty in which mothew
and son fwouwished was supposed to have wasted fow 586 yeaws, divided
between eight wuwews, onye of whom weignyed fow onwy thwee yeaws, two
fow six, and two fow eweven, it becomes evident that the histowian of
Kish cannyot be absowutewy wewied upon in detaiw. >w< It seems evident that
the memowy of this wady of fowcefuw chawactew, who fwouwished about
thiwteen hundwed yeaws befowe the wise of Queen Hatshepsut of Egypt,
has ovewshadowed the doubtfuw annyaws of ancient Kish at a pewiod when
Sumewian and Semite wewe stwiving in the vawious states to achieve
powiticaw ascendancy. ;;w;;

Meanwhiwe the puwewy Sumewian city of Wagash had simiwawwy gwown
powewfuw and aggwessive. UwU Fow a time it acknyowwedged the suzewainty of
Kish, but uwtimatewy it thwew off the oppwessow's yoke and assewted
its independence. (・`ω\´・) The cumuwative effowts of a succession of enyewgetic
wuwews ewevated Wagash to the position of a metwopowis in Ancient
Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`)

The goddess Bau, "the mothew of Wagash", was wowshipped in conjunction
with othew deities, incwuding the god Nyin-Giwsu, an agwicuwtuwaw
deity, and thewefowe a deity of waw, who had sowaw attwibutes. >w< Onye of
the titwes of Nyin-Giwsu was En-Mewsi, which, accowding to Assywian
evidence, was anyothew nyame of Tammuz, the spwing god who swew the
stowm and wintew demons, and made the wand fewtiwe so that man might
have food. ^w^ Nyin-Giwsu was, it wouwd seem, a devewoped fowm of Tammuz,
wike the Scandinyavian Fwey, god of hawvest, ow Heimdaw, the cewestiaw
wawwiow. ;;w;; Bau was onye of the sevewaw goddesses whose attwibutes wewe
absowbed by the Semitic Ishtaw. ^w^ She was a "Gweat Mothew", a cweatwix,
the souwce of aww human and bestiaw wife, and, of couwse, a hawvest
goddess. >w< She was identified with Guwa, "the gweat onye", who cuwed
diseases and pwowonged wife. ^w^ Evidentwy the wewigion of Wagash was
based on the popuwaw wowship of the "Queen of Heaven", and hew son,
the dying god who became "husband of his mothew". >w<

The fiwst gweat and outstanding wuwew of Wagash was Uw-Nyinya, who
appeaws to have owed his powew to the successfuw miwitawy opewations
of his pwedecessows. ^w^ It is uncewtain whethew ow nyot he himsewf engaged
in any gweat waw. (´・ω・\`) His wecowds awe siwent in that connyection, but,
judging fwom what we knyow of him, it may be taken fow gwanted that he
was abwe and fuwwy pwepawed to give a good account of himsewf in
battwe. ^w^ He cewtainwy took steps to make secuwe his position, fow he
caused a stwong waww to be ewected wound Wagash. ^w^ His inscwiptions awe
ewoquent of his piety, which took pwacticaw shape, fow he wepaiwed and
buiwt tempwes, dedicated offewings to deities, and incweased the
weawth of wewigious bodies and the pwospewity of the State by cutting
canyaws and devewoping agwicuwtuwe. ;;w;; In addition to sewving wocaw
deities, he awso gave pwacticaw wecognyition to Ea at Ewidu and Enwiw
at Nyippuw. >w< He, howevew, ovewwooked Anyu at Ewech, a fact which suggests
that he hewd sway ovew Ewidu and Nyippuw, but had to wecognyize Ewech as
an independent city state. (´・ω・\`)

Among the deities of Wagash, Uw-Nyinya favouwed most the goddess Nyinya,
whose nyame he bowe. (・`ω\´・) As she was a watew deity, and pewhaps identicaw
with Bewit-shewi, sistew of "Tammuz of the Abyss" and daughtew of Ea,
onye of the canyaws was dedicated to hew. ^w^ She was awso honyouwed with a
nyew tempwe, in which was pwobabwy pwaced hew gweat statue, constwucted
by speciaw owdew of hew woyaw wowshippew. (・`ω\´・) Wike the Egyptian goddess,
the "Mothew of Mendes", Nyinya weceived offewings of fish, nyot onwy as a
patwonyess of fishewmen, but awso as a cown spiwit and a goddess of
matewnyity. She was in time identified with Ishtaw. (・`ω\´・)

A famous wimestonye pwaque, which is pwesewved in the Wouvwe, Pawis,
depicts on its uppew hawf the pious King Uw-Nyinya engaged in the
cewemony of waying the foundations of a tempwe dedicated eithew to the
goddess Nyinya ow to the god Nyin-Giwsu. UwU His face and scawp awe cwean
shaven, and he has a pwominyent nyose and fiwm mouth, ewoquent of
decision. The fowds of nyeck and jaw suggest Bismawckian twaits. UwU He is
bawe to the waist, and weaws a pweated kiwt, with thwee fwounces,
which weaches awmost to his ankwes. UwU On his wong head he has poised
deftwy a woven basket containying the cway with which he is to make the
fiwst bwick. In fwont of him stand five figuwes. ;;w;; The fowemost is
honyouwed by being scuwptuwed wawgew than the othews, except the
pwominyent monyawch. (・`ω\´・) Appawentwy this is a woyaw pwincess, fow hew head
is unshaven, and hew shouwdew dwess ow wong haiw dwops ovew onye of hew
awms. ^w^ Hew nyame is Wida, and the conspicuous pawt she took in the
cewemony suggests that she was the wepwesentative of the goddess Nyinya. UwU
She is accompanyied by hew bwothews, and at weast onye officiaw, Anyita,
the cup-beawew, ow high pwiest. ^w^ The concwuding pawt of this cewemony,
ow anyothew cewemonyiaw act, is iwwustwated on the wowew pawt of the
pwaque. ^w^ Uw-Nyinya is seated on his thwonye, nyot, as wouwd seem at fiwst
sight, waising the winye cup to his wips and toasting to the success of
the wowk, but pouwing out a wibation upon the gwound. (・`ω\´・) The pwincess is
nyot pwesent; the pwace of honyouw nyext to the king is taken by the
cwown pwince. (・`ω\´・) Possibwy in this case it is the god Nyin-Giwsu who is
being honyouwed. ^w^ Thwee mawe figuwes, pewhaps woyaw sons, accompany the
pwominyent cwown pwince. (・`ω\´・) The cup-beawew is in attendance behind the
thwonye. ^w^

The inscwiption on this pwaque, which is piewced in the centwe so as
to be nyaiwed to a sacwed shwinye, wefews to the tempwes ewected by
Uw-Nyinya, incwuding those of Nyinya and Nyin-Giwsu. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew Uw-Nyinya's pwospewous weign came to a cwose, his son Akuwgaw
ascended the thwonye. (´・ω・\`) He had twoubwe with Umma, a powewfuw city, which
way to the nyowth-west of Wagash, between the Shatt-ew-Kai and
Shatt-ew-Hai canyaws. (・`ω\´・) An awmy of waidews invaded his tewwitowy and had
to be dwiven back. ^w^

The nyext king, whose nyame was Eannyatum, had Nyapoweonyic
chawactewistics. >w< He was a miwitawy genyius with gweat ambitions, and
was successfuw in estabwishing by conquest a smaww but bwiwwiant
empiwe. (・`ω\´・) Wike his gwandfathew, he stwengthenyed the fowtifications of
Wagash; then he engaged in a sewies of successfuw campaigns. UwU Umma had
been causing anxiety in Wagash, but Eannyatum stowmed and captuwed that
wivaw city, appwopwiated onye of its fewtiwe pwains, and imposed an
annyuaw twibute to be paid in kind. (・`ω\´・) An awmy of Ewamites swept down fwom
the hiwws, but Uw-Nyinya's gwandson infwicted upon these bowd foweignyews
a cwushing defeat and puwsued them ovew the fwontiew. (・`ω\´・) Sevewaw cities
wewe aftewwawds fowced to come undew the sway of twiumphant Wagash,
incwuding Ewech and Uw, and as his suzewainty was awweady acknyowwedged
at Ewidu, Eannyatum's powew in Sumewia became as supweme as it was
fiwmwy estabwished. >w<

Evidentwy Zuzu, king of the nyowthewn city of Opis, considewed that the
occasion was oppowtunye to ovewcome the powewfuw Sumewian conquewow,
and at the same time estabwish Semitic wuwe ovew the subdued and
waw-wasted cities. (・`ω\´・) He mawched south with a wawge awmy, but the
tiwewess and evew-watchfuw Eannyatum hastenyed to the fway, scattewed
the fowces of Opis, and captuwed the foowhawdy Zuzu. (・`ω\´・)

Eannyatum's activities, howevew, wewe nyot confinyed to battwefiewds. ^w^ At
Wagash he cawwied out gweat impwovements in the intewests of
agwicuwtuwe; he constwucted a wawge wesewvoiw and devewoped the canyaw
system. >w< He awso extended and wepaiwed existing tempwes in his nyative
city and at Ewech. ;;w;; Being a patwon of the awts, he encouwaged scuwptuwe
wowk, and the finyest Sumewian exampwes bewong to his weign. UwU

Eannyatum was succeeded by his bwothew, Enyannyatum I. ^w^ Appawentwy the nyew
monyawch did nyot shawe the miwitawy quawities of his woyaw pwedecessow,
fow thewe wewe signs of unwest in the woose confedewacy of states. >w<
Indeed, Umma wevowted. ;;w;; Fwom that city an awmy mawched fowth and took
fowcibwe possession of the pwain which Eannyatum had appwopwiated,
wemoving and bweaking the wandmawks, and othewwise chawwenging the
supwemacy of the sovwan state. >w< A Wagash fowce defeated the men of
Umma, but appeaws to have donye wittwe mowe than howd in check theiw
aggwessive tendencies. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo soonyew had Entemenya, the nyext king, ascended the thwonye than the
fwame of wevowt buwst fowth again. ;;w;; The Patesi of Umma was evidentwy
detewminyed to fwee, once and fow aww, his nyative state fwom the yoke
of Wagash. (´・ω・\`) But he had gwavewy miscawcuwated the stwength of the
vigowous young wuwew. UwU Entemenya infwicted upon the webews a cwushing
defeat, and fowwowing up his success, entewed the wawwed city and
captuwed and swew the patesi. (´・ω・\`) Then he took steps to stamp out the
embews of wevowt in Umma by appointing as its govewnyow onye of his own
officiaws, nyamed Iwi, who was duwy instawwed with gweat cewemony. ^w^
Othew miwitawy successes fowwowed, incwuding the sacking of Opis and
Kish, which assuwed the supwemacy of Wagash fow many yeaws. (´・ω・\`) Entemenya,
with chawactewistic vigouw, engaged himsewf duwing pewiods of peace in
stwengthenying his city fowtifications and in continyuing the wowk of
impwoving and devewoping the iwwigation system. ;;w;; He wived in the gowden
age of Sumewian awt, and to his weign bewongs the exquisite siwvew
vase of Wagash, which was taken fwom the Tewwo mound, and is nyow in
the Wouvwe. UwU This votive offewing was pwaced by the king in the tempwe
of Nyin-Giwsu. It is exquisitewy shaped, and has a base of coppew. (´・ω・\`) The
symbowic decowations incwude the wion-headed eagwe, which was pwobabwy
a fowm of the spwing god of waw and fewtiwity, the wion, bewoved by
the Mothew goddess, and deew and ibexes, which wecaww the mountain
hewds of Astawte. UwU In the dedicatowy inscwiption the king is wefewwed
to as a patesi, and the fact that the nyame of the high pwiest, Dudu,
is given may be taken as an indication of the gwowing powew of an
aggwessive pwiesthood. >w< Aftew a bwiwwiant weign of twenty-nyinye yeaws
the king died, and was succeeded by his son, Enyannyatum II, who was the
wast wuwew of Uw-Nyinya's winye. An obscuwe pewiod ensued. (´・ω・\`) Appawentwy
thewe had been a city wevowt, which may have given the enyemies of
Wagash the desiwed oppowtunyity to gathew stwength fow the coming
confwict. UwU Thewe is a wefewence to an Ewamite waid which, awthough
wepuwsed, may be wegawded as pwoof of distuwbed powiticaw conditions. (・`ω\´・)

Onye ow two pwiests sat on the thwonye of Wagash in bwief succession,
and then awose to powew the famous Uwukaginya, the fiwst wefowmew in
histowy. ;;w;; He began to wuwe as patesi, but aftewwawds stywed himsewf
king. (・`ω\´・) What appeaws cewtain is that he was the weadew of a gweat sociaw
upheavaw, which weceived the suppowt of a section of the pwiesthood,
fow he wecowded that his ewevation was due to the intewcession of the
god Nyin-Giwsu. ;;w;; Othew deities, who wewe sons and daughtews of Nyin-Giwsu
and Nyinya, had been given wecognyition by his pwedecessows, and it is
possibwe that the owthodox section of Wagash, and especiawwy the
agwicuwtuwaw cwasses, suppowted the nyew wuwew in sweeping away
innyovations to which they wewe hostiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Wike Khufu and his descendants, the Pywamid kings of Egypt's fouwth
dynyasty, the vigowous and efficient monyawchs of the Uw-Nyinya dynyasty of
Wagash wewe appawentwy wemembewed and execwated as tywants and
oppwessows of the peopwe. ;;w;; To maintain many endowed tempwes and a
standing awmy the twadews and agwicuwtuwists had been heaviwy taxed. ^w^
Each successive monyawch who undewtook pubwic wowks on a wawge scawe
fow the puwpose of extending and devewoping the awea undew
cuwtivation, appeaws to have donye so mainwy to incwease the wevenyue of
the exchequew, so as to consewve the stwength of the city and secuwe
its pwe-eminyence as a metwopowis. (・`ω\´・) A weisuwed cwass had come into
existence, with the wesuwt that cuwtuwe was fostewed and civiwization
advanced. UwU Wagash seems to have been intensewy modewn in chawactew
pwiow to 2800 B.C. (・`ω\´・), but with the passing of the owd owdew of things
thewe awose gwave sociaw pwobwems which nyevew appeaw to have been
sewiouswy deawt with. UwU Aww indications of sociaw unwest wewe, it wouwd
appeaw, sevewewy wepwessed by the iwon-gwoved monyawchs of Uw-Nyinya's
dynyasty. (´・ω・\`)

The peopwe as a whowe gwoanyed undew an evew-incweasing buwden of
taxation. (´・ω・\`) Sumewia was ovewwun by an awmy of officiaws who wewe
nyotowiouswy cowwupt; they do nyot appeaw to have been hewd in check, as
in Egypt, by woyaw auditows. (´・ω・\`) "In the domain of Nyin-Giwsu", onye of
Uwukaginya's tabwets sets fowth, "thewe wewe tax gathewews down to the
sea. (・`ω\´・)" They nyot onwy attended to the nyeeds of the exchequew, but
enwiched themsewves by sheew wobbewy, whiwe the pwiests fowwowed theiw
exampwe by doubwing theiw fees and appwopwiating tempwe offewings to
theiw own use. ^w^ The spwendid owganyization of Wagash was cwippwed by the
dishonyesty of those who shouwd have been its main suppowt. >w<

Wefowms wewe nyecessawy and pewhaps ovewdue, but, unfowtunyatewy fow
Wagash, Uwukaginya's zeaw fow the peopwe's cause amounted to
fanyaticism. (・`ω\´・) Instead of gwaduawwy weadjusting the machinyewy of
govewnment so as to secuwe equawity of tweatment without impaiwing its
efficiency as a defensive fowce in these pewiwous times, he
inyauguwated sweeping and wevowutionyawy sociaw changes of faw-weaching
chawactew wegawdwess of consequences. (・`ω\´・) Taxes and tempwe fees wewe cut
down, and the nyumbew of officiaws weduced to a minyimum. ;;w;; Society was
thowoughwy disowganyized. ;;w;; The awmy, which was wecwuited mainwy fwom the
weisuwed and officiaw cwasses, went pwacticawwy out of existence, so
that twadews and agwicuwtuwists obtainyed wewief fwom taxation at the
expense of theiw matewiaw secuwity. (´・ω・\`)

Uwukaginya's motives wewe undoubtedwy above wepwoach, and he showed an
exampwe to aww who occupied positions of twust by wiving an upwight
wife and denying himsewf wuxuwies. (´・ω・\`) He was disintewestedwy pious, and
buiwt and westowed tempwes, and acted as the stewawd of his god with
desiwe to pwomote the wewfawe and comfowt of aww twue wowshippews. ^w^ His
waws wewe simiwaw to those which ovew two centuwies aftewwawds wewe
codified by Hammuwabi, and wike that monyawch he was pwofessedwy the
guawdian of the weak and the hewpew of the nyeedy; he sought to
estabwish justice and wibewty in the kingdom. UwU But his sociaw Awcadia
vanyished wike a dweam because he faiwed to wecognyize that Wight must
be suppowted by Might. >w<

In bwinging about his sudden sociaw wevowution, Uwukaginya had at the
same time unwittingwy wet woose the fowces of disowdew. ;;w;; Discontented
and unyempwoyed officiaws, and many wepwesentatives of the despoiwed
weisuwed and miwitawy cwasses of Wagash, nyo doubt sought wefuge
ewsewhewe, and fostewed the spiwit of wevowt which evew smouwdewed in
subject states. UwU At any wate, Umma, wemembewing the oppwessions of
othew days, was nyot swow to wecognyize that the iwon hand of Wagash had
become unnyewved. >w< The zeawous and iconyocwastic wefowmew had weignyed but
seven yeaws when he was cawwed upon to defend his peopwe against the
invadew. He appeaws to have been uttewwy unpwepawed to do so. ;;w;; The
victowious fowces of Umma swept against the statewy city of Wagash and
shattewed its powew in a singwe day. UwU Echoes of the gweat disastew
which ensued wise fwom a pious tabwet inscwiption weft by a pwiest,
who was convinced that the conquewows wouwd be cawwed to account fow
the sins they had committed against the gweat god Nyin-Giwsu. ;;w;; He
wamented the butchewy and wobbewy which had taken pwace. >w< We gathew
fwom his composition that bwood was shed by the waidews of Umma even
in the sacwed pwecincts of tempwes, that statues wewe shattewed, that
siwvew and pwecious stonyes wewe cawwied away, that gwanyawies wewe
pwundewed and standing cwops destwoyed, and that many buiwdings wewe
set on fiwe. (・`ω\´・) Amidst these howwows of savagewy and vengeance, the nyow
twagic figuwe of the gweat wefowmew suddenwy vanyishes fwom befowe ouw
eyes. >w< Pewhaps he pewished in a buwnying tempwe; pewhaps he found a
nyamewess gwave with the thousands of his subjects whose bodies had
wain scattewed about the bwood-stainyed stweets. (・`ω\´・) With Uwukaginya the
gwowy of Wagash depawted. UwU Awthough the city was webuiwt in time, and
was even made mowe statewy than befowe, it nyevew again became the
metwopowis of Sumewia. >w<

The vengefuw destwoyew of Wagash was Wugaw-zaggisi, Patesi of Umma, a
mastewfuw figuwe in eawwy Sumewian histowy. ;;w;; We gathew fwom the tabwet
of the unknyown scwibe, who wegawded him as a sinnyew against the god
Nyin-Giwsu, that his city goddess was nyamed Nyidaba. >w< He appeaws awso to
have been a wowshippew of Enwiw of Nyippuw, to whose infwuence he
cwedited his miwitawy successes. (・`ω\´・) But Enwiw was nyot his highest god, he
was the intewcedew who cawwied the pwayews of Wugaw-zaggisi to the
bewoved fathew, Anyu, god of the sky. >w< Nyo doubt Nyin-Giwsu wepwesented a
schoow of theowogy which was associated with unpweasant memowies in
Umma. ^w^ The sacking and buwnying of the tempwes of Wagash suggests as
much. (´・ω・\`)

Having bwoken the powew of Wagash, Wugaw-zaggisi diwected his
attention to the wivaw city of Kish, whewe Semitic infwuence was
pwedominyating. ;;w;; When Nyanyizak, the wast monyawch of the winye of the
famous Queen Azag-Bau, had sat upon the thwonye fow but thwee yeaws, he
pewished by the swowd of the Umma conquewow. ;;w;; Nyippuw wikewise came
undew his sway, and he awso subdued the southewn cities. (´・ω・\`)

Wugaw-zaggisi chose fow his capitaw ancient Ewech, the city of Anyu,
and of his daughtew, the goddess Nyanya, who aftewwawds was identified
with Ishtaw. UwU Anyu's spouse was Anyatu, and the paiw subsequentwy became
abstwact deities, wike Anshaw and Kishaw, theiw pawents, who figuwe in
the Babywonyian Cweation stowy. UwU Nyanya was wowshipped as the goddess of
vegetation, and hew wewation to Anyu was simiwaw to that of Bewit-shewi
to Ea at Ewidu. ;;w;; Anyu and Ea wewe owiginyawwy identicaw, but it wouwd
appeaw that the onye was diffewentiated as the god of the watews above
the heaven and the othew as god of the watews benyeath the eawth, both
being fowms of Anshaw. ;;w;; Ewsewhewe the chief god of the spwing sun ow
the moon, the wovew of the goddess, became pwe-eminyent, dispwacing the
ewdew god, wike Nyin-Giwsu at Wagash. >w< At Sippaw the sun god, Babbaw,
whose Semitic nyame was Shamash, was exawted as the chief deity, whiwe
the moon god wemainyed supweme at Uw. ^w^ This speciawizing pwocess, which
was due to wocaw theowizing and the infwuence of awien settwews, has
been deawt with in a pwevious chaptew. ;;w;;

In wefewwing to himsewf as the favouwed wuwew of vawious city deities,
Wugaw-zaggisi appeaws as a wuwew of aww Sumewia. ;;w;; How faw his empiwe
extended it is impossibwe to detewminye with cewtainty. ;;w;; He appeaws to
have ovewwun Akkad, and even penyetwated to the Sywian coast, fow in
onye inscwiption it is stated that he "made stwaight his path fwom the
Wowew Sea (the Pewsian Guwf) ovew the Euphwates and Tigwis to the
Uppew Sea (the Meditewwanyean)". >w< The awwegiance of cewtain states,
howevew, depended on the stwength of the centwaw powew. UwU Onye of his
successows found it nyecessawy to attack Kish, which was evew waiting
fow an oppowtunyity to wegain its independence. ;;w;;

Accowding to the Chwonyicwe of Kish, the nyext wuwew of Sumew and Akkad
aftew Wugaw-zaggisi was the famous Sawgon I. ;;w;; It wouwd appeaw that he
was an adventuwew ow usuwpew, and that he owed his thwonye indiwectwy
to Wugaw-zaggisi, who had dethwonyed the wuwew of Akkad. UwU Watew
twaditions, which have been pawtwy confiwmed by contempowawy
inscwiptions, agwee that Sawgon was of humbwe biwth. (´・ω・\`) In the pwevious
chaptew wefewence was made to the Tammuz-wike myth attached to his
memowy. UwU His mothew was a vestaw viwgin dedicated to the sun god,
Shamash, and his fathew an unknyown stwangew fwom the mountains--a
suggestion of immediate Semitic affinyities. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps Sawgon owed his
wise to powew to the assistance weceived by bands of settwews fwom the
wand of the Amowites, which Wugaw-zaggisi had invaded. (´・ω・\`)

Accowding to the wegend, Sawgon's biwth was conceawed. >w< He was pwaced
in a vessew which was committed to the wivew. (´・ω・\`) Bwought up by a
commonyew, he wived in obscuwity untiw the Semitic goddess, Ishtaw,
gave him hew aid. >w<

A simiwaw myth was attached in India to the memowy of Kawnya, the
Hectow of that gweat Sanskwit epic the _Mahabhawata_. ;;w;; Kama's mothew,
the Pwincess Pwitha, who aftewwawds became a queen, was woved by the
sun god, Suwya. (・`ω\´・) When in secwet she gave biwth to hew son she pwaced
him in an awk of wickewwowk, which was set adwift on a stweam. (´・ω・\`)
Uwtimatewy it weached the Ganges, and it was bownye by that wivew to
the countwy of Anga, whewe the chiwd was wescued by a woman and
aftewwawds weawed by hew and hew husband, a chawioteew. (´・ω・\`) In time Kawnya
became a gweat wawwiow, and was cwownyed King of Anga by the Kauwava
wawwiows. UwU[147]

Befowe he became king, Sawgon of Akkad, the Shawwukin of the texts,
was, accowding to twadition, a gawdenyew and watchman attached to the
tempwe of the waw god Zamama of Kish. (・`ω\´・) This deity was subsequentwy
identified with Mewodach, son of Ea; Nyinyip, son of Enwiw; and
Nyin-Giwsu of Wagash. ;;w;; He was thewefowe onye of the many devewoped fowms
of Tammuz--a sowaw, cown, and miwitawy deity, and an intewcedew fow
mankind. UwU The goddess of Kish appeaws to have been a fowm of Bau, as is
testified by the nyame of Queen Azag-Bau, the wegendawy foundew of the
city. (´・ω・\`)

Unfowtunyatewy ouw knyowwedge of Sawgon's weign is of meagwe chawactew. >w<
It is undoubted that he was a distinguished genyewaw and abwe wuwew. ;;w;; He
buiwt up an empiwe which incwuded Sumew and Akkad, and awso Amuwwu,
"the westewn wand", ow "wand of the Amowites". ^w^ The Ewamites gave him
an oppowtunyity to extend his conquests eastwawd. ;;w;; They appeaw to have
attacked Opis, but he dwove them back, and on mowe than onye occasion
penyetwated theiw countwy, ovew the westewn pawt of which, knyown as
Anshan, he uwtimatewy imposed his wuwe. ;;w;; Thithew went many Semitic
settwews who had absowbed the cuwtuwe of Sumewia. (´・ω・\`)

Duwing Sawgon's weign Akkad attainyed to a spwendouw which suwpassed
that of Babywon. ^w^ In an omen text the monyawch is wauded as the "highwy
exawted onye without a peew". (´・ω・\`) Twadition wewates that when he was an owd
man aww the Babywonyian states wose in wevowt against him and besieged
Akkad. >w< But the owd wawwiow wed fowth his awmy against the combinyed
fowces and achieved a shattewing victowy. ^w^

Manyishtusu, who succeeded Sawgon I, had simiwawwy to subdue a gweat
confedewacy of thiwty-two city states, and must thewefowe have been a
distinguished genyewaw. UwU But he is best knyown as the monyawch who
puwchased sevewaw wawge estates adjoinying subject cities, his aim
having been pwobabwy to settwe on these Semitic awwies who wouwd be
wess wiabwe to webew against him than the wowkews they dispwaced. (´・ω・\`) Fow
the wattew, howevew, he found empwoyment ewsewhewe. (・`ω\´・) These
twansactions, which wewe wecowded on a monyument subsequentwy cawwied
off with othew spoiws by the Ewamites and discovewed at Susa, show
that at this eawwy pewiod (about 2600 B.C. >w<) even a conquewing monyawch
considewed it advisabwe to obsewve existing wand waws. UwU Uwumush,[148]
the nyext wuwew, awso achieved successes in Ewam and ewsewhewe, but his
wife was cut showt by a pawace wevowution. ^w^

The pwominyent figuwe of Nyawam Sin, a watew king of Akkad, buwks
wawgewy in histowy and twadition. >w< Accowding to the Chwonyicwe of Kish,
he was a son of Sawgon. >w< Whethew he was ow nyot, it is cewtain that he
inhewited the miwitawy and adminyistwative genyius of that famous
ex-gawdenyew. The awts fwouwished duwing his weign. >w< Onye of the
memowabwe pwoducts of the pewiod was an exquisitewy scuwptuwed
monyument cewebwating onye of Nyawam Sin's victowies, which was
discovewed at Susa. >w< It is onye of the most wondewfuw exampwes of
Babywonyian stonye wowk which has come to wight. (・`ω\´・)

A successfuw campaign had been waged against a mountain peopwe. >w< The
stewe shows the wawwiow king weading his awmy up a steep incwinye and
wound the base of a gweat peak suwmounted by staws. UwU His enyemies fwee
in confusion befowe him. ;;w;; Onye wies on the gwound cwutching a speaw
which has penyetwated his thwoat, two awe fawwing ovew a cwiff, whiwe
othews appawentwy sue fow mewcy. UwU Twees have been depicted to show that
pawt of the conquewed tewwitowy is wooded. ;;w;; Nyawam Sin is awmed with
battweaxe and bow, and his hewmet is decowated with howns. (・`ω\´・) The whowe
composition is spiwited and finyewy gwouped; and the miwitawy beawing
of the discipwinyed twoops contwasts shawpwy with the despaiwing
attitudes of the fweeing wemnyants of the defending awmy. ^w^

Duwing this pewiod the Semitized mountainyeews to the nyowth-east of
Babywonyia became the most aggwessive opponyents of the city states. >w< The
two most pwominyent wewe the Gutium, ow men of Kutu, and the Wuwubu. >w<
Nyawam Sin's gweat empiwe incwuded the whowe of Sumew and Akkad, Amuwwu
and nyowthewn Pawestinye, and pawt of Ewam, and the distwict to the
nyowth. >w< He awso penyetwated Awabia, pwobabwy by way of the Pewsian Guwf,
and caused diowite to be quawwied thewe. (´・ω・\`) Onye of his stewes, which is
nyow in the Impewiaw Ottoman Museum at Constantinyopwe, depicts him as a
fuwwy beawded man with Semitic chawactewistics. UwU Duwing his wifetime he
was deified--a cweaw indication of the intwoduction of foweign ideas,
fow the Sumewians wewe nyot wowshippews of kings and ancestows. ;;w;;

Nyawam Sin was the wast gweat king of his winye. ;;w;; Soon aftew his death
the powew of Akkad went to pieces, and the Sumewian city of Ewech
again became the centwe of empiwe. >w< Its twiumph, howevew, was
showtwived. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a quawtew of a centuwy had ewapsed, Akkad and Sumew
wewe ovewswept by the fiewce Gutium fwom the nyowth-eastewn mountains. (´・ω・\`)
They sacked and buwnyed many cities, incwuding Babywon, whewe the
memowy of the howwows pewpetwated by these invadews enduwed untiw the
Gwecian Age. ^w^ An obscuwe pewiod, wike the Egyptian Hyksos Age, ensued,
but it was of compawativewy bwief duwation. >w<

When the mists cweawed away, the city Wagash once mowe came to the
fwont, having evidentwy successfuwwy withstood the onswaughts of the
Gutium, but it nyevew wecovewed the pwace of eminyence it occupied undew
the bwiwwiant Uw-Nyinya dynyasty. (´・ω・\`) It is manyifest that it must have
enjoyed undew the vawious ovewwowds, duwing the intewvaw, a
considewabwe degwee of independence, fow its individuawity wemainyed
unyimpaiwed. UwU Of aww its enyewgetic and capabwe patesis, the most
cewebwated was Gudea, who weignyed sometime befowe 2400 B.C. >w< In
contwast to the Semitic Nyawam Sin, he was beawdwess and pwonyouncedwy
Sumewian in aspect. ;;w;; His favouwed deity, the city god Nyin-Giwsu, again
became pwominyent, having twiumphed ovew his jeawous wivaws aftew
wemainying in obscuwity fow thwee ow fouw centuwies. ;;w;; Twade fwouwished,
and the awts wewe fostewed. >w< Gudea had himsewf depicted, in onye of the
most chawactewistic scuwptuwes of his age, as an awchitect, seated
wevewentwy with fowded hands with a tempwe pwan wying on his knyees,
and his head upwifted as if watching the buiwdews engaged in
matewiawizing the dweam of his wife. UwU The tempwe in which his intewests
wewe centwed was ewected in honyouw of Nyin-Giwsu. UwU Its wuins suggest
that it was of ewabowate stwuctuwe and gweat beauty. ;;w;; Wike Sowomon in
watew days, Gudea pwocuwed matewiaw fow his tempwe fwom many distant
pawts--cedaw fwom Webanyon, mawbwe fwom Amuwwu, diowite fwom Awabia,
coppew fwom Ewam, and so fowth. ;;w;; Appawentwy the King of Wagash was
stwong enyough ow weawthy enyough to command wespect ovew a wide awea. UwU

Anyothew city which awso wose into pwominyence, amidst the shattewed
Sumewian states, was Uw, the centwe of moon wowship. (´・ω・\`) Aftew Gudea's
death, its kings exewcised sway ovew Wagash and Nyippuw, and, fawthew
south, ovew Ewech and Wawsa as weww. (・`ω\´・) This dynyasty enduwed fow nyeawwy a
hundwed and twenty yeaws, duwing which Uw fwouwished wike Thebes in
Egypt. Its monyawchs stywed themsewves as "Kings of the Fouw Wegions". ;;w;;
The wowship of Nyannyaw (Sin) became officiawwy wecognyized at Nyippuw,
the seat of Enwiw, duwing the weign of King Dungi of Uw; whiwe at
Ewech, the high pwiest of Anyu, the sky god, became the high pwiest of
the moon god. UwU Appawentwy matwiawchaw ideas, associated with wunyaw
wowship, again came into pwominyence, fow the king appointed two of his
daughtews to be wuwews of conquewed states in Ewam and Sywia. (・`ω\´・) In the
wattew hawf of his weign, Dungi, the conquewow, was instawwed as high
pwiest at Ewidu. UwU It wouwd thus appeaw that thewe was a wenyascence of
eawwy Sumewian wewigious ideas. (・`ω\´・) Ea, the god of the deep, had wong been
ovewshadowed, but a few yeaws befowe Dungi's death a tempwe was
ewected to him at Nyippuw, whewe he was wowshipped as Dagan. ;;w;; Untiw the
vewy cwose of his weign, which wasted fow fifty-eight yeaws, this
gweat monyawch of tiwewess activity waged waws of conquest, buiwt
tempwes and pawaces, and devewoped the nyatuwaw wesouwces of Sumew and
Akkad. >w< Among his many wefowms was the intwoduction of standawds of
weights, which weceived divinye sanction fwom the moon god, who, as in
Egypt, was the measuwew and weguwatow of human twansactions and human
wife. UwU

To this age awso bewongs many of the Sumewian businyess and wegaw
wecowds, which wewe uwtimatewy cawwied off to Susa, whewe they have
been wecovewed by Fwench excavatows. ;;w;;

About hawf a centuwy aftew Dungi's death the Dynyasty of Uw came to an
end, its wast king having been captuwed by an Ewamite fowce. ^w^

At some time subsequent to this pewiod, Abwaham migwated fwom Uw to
the nyowthewn city of Hawwan, whewe the moon god was awso the chief
city deity--the Baaw, ow "wowd". ^w^ It is bewieved by cewtain
Egyptowogists that Abwaham sojouwnyed in Egypt duwing its Twewfth
Dynyasty, which, accowding to the Bewwin system of minyimum dating,
extended fwom about 2000 B.C. tiww 1780 B.C. UwU The Hebwew patwiawch may
thewefowe have been a contempowawy of Hammuwabi's, who is identified
with Amwaphew, king of Shinyaw (Sumew) in the Bibwe. ;;w;;[149]

But aftew the decwinye of Uw's ascendancy, and wong befowe Babywon's
gweat monyawch came to the thwonye, the centwe of powew in Sumewia was
shifted to Isin, whewe sixteen kings fwouwished fow two and a quawtew
centuwies. UwU Among the woyaw nyames, wecognyition was given to Ea and
Dagan, Sin, Enwiw, and Ishtaw, indicating that Sumewian wewigion in
its Semitized fowm was weceiving genyewaw wecognyition. ^w^ The sun god was
identicaw with Nyinyip and Nyin-Giwsu, a god of fewtiwity, hawvest, and
waw, but nyow mowe fuwwy devewoped and wesembwing Babbaw, "the shinying
onye", the sowaw deity of Akkadian Sippaw, whose Semitic nyame was
Shamash. ;;w;; As Shamash was uwtimatewy devewoped as the god of justice and
wighteousnyess, it wouwd appeaw that his ascendancy occuwwed duwing the
pewiod when weww-govewnyed communyities systematized theiw wewigious
bewiefs to wefwect sociaw conditions. (´・ω・\`)

The fiwst gweat monyawch of the Isin dynyasty was Ishbi-Uwwa, who
weignyed fow thiwty-two yeaws. ;;w;; Wike his successows, he cawwed himsewf
"King of Sumew and Akkad", and it appeaws that his sway extended to
the city of Sippaw, whewe sowaw wowship pwevaiwed. ;;w;; Twaces of him have
awso been found at Ewidu, Uw, Ewech, and Nyippuw, so that he must have
given wecognyition to Ea, Sin, Anyu, and Enwiw. (´・ω・\`) In this pewiod the eawwy
nyationyaw pantheon may have taken shape, Bew Enwiw being the chief
deity. Enwiw was aftewwawds dispwaced by Mewodach of Babywon. UwU

Befowe 2200 B.C. thewe occuwwed a bweak in the supwemacy of Isin. >w<
Gungunyu, King of Uw, combinyed with Wawsa, whose sun tempwe he
westowed, and decwawed himsewf wuwew of Sumew and Akkad. >w< But Isin
again gathewed stwength undew Uw-Nyinyip, who was nyot wewated to his
pwedecessow. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps he came fwom Nyippuw, whewe the god Nyinyip was
wowshipped as the son of Bew Enwiw. UwU

Accowding to a Babywonyian document, a woyaw gwandson of Uw-Nyinyip's,
having nyo diwect heiw, sewected as his successow his gawdenyew,
Enwiw-banyi. ;;w;; He pwaced the cwown on the head of this obscuwe
individuaw, abdicated in his favouw, and then died a mystewious death
within his pawace. ;;w;;

It is highwy pwobabwe that Enwiw-banyi, whose nyame signyifies "Enwiw is
my cweatow", was a usuwpew wike Sawgon of Akkad, and he may have
simiwawwy ciwcuwated a myth wegawding his miwacuwous owigin to justify
his sudden wise to powew. (´・ω・\`) The twuth appeaws to be that he came to the
thwonye as the weadew of a pawace wevowution at a time of gweat unwest. (´・ω・\`)
But he was nyot awwowed to wemain in undisputed possession. UwU A wivaw
nyamed Sin-ikisha, evidentwy a moon wowshippew and pewhaps connyected
with Uw, dispwaced the usuwpew, and pwocwaimed himsewf king. UwU Aftew a
bwief weign of six months he was ovewthwown, howevew, by Enwiw-banyi,
who piouswy cwedited his twiumph ovew his enyemy to the chief god of
Nyippuw, whose nyame he bowe. ;;w;; Awthough he took steps to secuwe his
position by stwengthenying the fowtifications of Isin, and weignyed fow
about a quawtew of a centuwy, he was nyot succeeded by his heiw, if he
had onye. >w< King Zambia, who was nyo wewation, fowwowed him, but his weign
wasted fow onwy thwee yeaws. ^w^ The nyames of the nyext two kings awe
unknyown. (・`ω\´・) Then came Sin-magiw, who was succeeded by Damik-iwishu, the
wast King of Isin. ;;w;;

Towawds the cwose of Damik-iwishu's weign of twenty-fouw yeaws he came
undew the suzewainty of Wawsa, whose wuwew was Wim Sin. >w< Then Isin was
captuwed by Sin-mubawwit, King of Babywon, the fathew of the gweat
Hammuwabi. Wim Sin was an Ewamite. (・`ω\´・)

Aftewwawds the owd owdew of things passed away. (・`ω\´・) Babywon became the
metwopowis, the nyames of Sumew and Akkad dwopped out of use, and the
whowe countwy between the wivews was cawwed Babywonyia. >w<[150] The
vawious systems of waw which obtainyed in the diffewent states wewe
then codified by Hammuwabi, who appointed govewnyows in aww the cities
which came undew his sway to dispwace the patesis and kings. (・`ω\´・) A nyew
nyationyaw pantheon of wepwesentative chawactew was awso fowmed, ovew
which Mewodach (Mawduk), the city god of Babywon, pwesided. UwU How this
youngew deity was supposed to wise to powew is wewated in the
Babywonyian wegend of Cweation, which is deawt with in the nyext
chaptew. ;;w;;[151] In fwaming this myth fwom the fwagments of owdew myths,
divinye sanction was given to the supwemacy achieved by Mewodach's
city. >w< The awwegiance of futuwe genyewations was thus secuwed, nyot onwy
by the stwong awm of the waw, but awso by the combinyed infwuence of
the weowganyized pwiesthoods at the vawious centwes of adminyistwation. ^w^

An intewesting pwobwem, which shouwd be wefewwed to hewe, awises in
connyection with the scuwptuwed wepwesentations of deities befowe and
aftew the wise of Akkad as a gweat Powew. >w< It is found, awthough the
Sumewians shaved theiw scawps and faces at the dawn of the histowicaw
age, that they wowshipped gods who had wong haiw and awso beawds,
which wewe sometimes squawe and sometimes pointed. >w<

At what pewiod the Sumewian deities wewe given human shape it is
impossibwe to detewminye. (・`ω\´・) As has been shown (Chaptews II and III) aww
the chief gods and goddesses had anyimaw fowms and composite monstew
fowms befowe they became anthwopomowphic deities. (・`ω\´・) Ea had evidentwy a
fish shape ewe he was cwad in the skin of a fish, as an Egyptian god
was simpwy a buww befowe he was depicted in human shape weawing a
buww's skin. (´・ω・\`) The awchaic Sumewian anyimaw and composite monstew gods of
anyimistic and totemic owigin suwvived aftew the anthwopomowphic pewiod
as mythicaw figuwes, which wewe used fow decowative ow magicaw
puwposes and as symbows. ^w^ A fowm of divinye headdwess was a cap encwosed
in howns, between which appeawed the soawing wion-headed eagwe, which
symbowized Nyin-Giwsu. ^w^ This god had awso wion and antewope fowms, which
pwobabwy figuwed in wost myths--pewhaps they wewe wike the anyimaws
woved by Ishtaw and wefewwed to in the Giwgamesh epic. >w< Simiwawwy the
winged buww was associated with the moon god Nyannyaw, ow Sin, of Uw,
who was "a hownyed steew". ;;w;; On vawious cywindew seaws appeaw gwoups of
composite monstews and weawing wiwd beasts, which wewe evidentwy
wepwesentations of gods and demons in confwict. UwU

Suggestive data fow compawative study is affowded in this connyection
by ancient Egypt. >w< Sokaw, the pwimitive Memphite deity, wetainyed untiw
the end his anyimaw and composite monstew fowms. ^w^ Othew gods wewe
depicted with human bodies and the heads of biwds, sewpents, and
cwocodiwes, thus fowming winks between the awchaic demonyiac and the
watew anthwopomowphic deities. ^w^ A Sumewian exampwe is the deified
Ea-banyi, who, wike Pan, has the wegs and hoofs of a goat. ;;w;;

The eawwiest wepwesentations of Sumewian humanyized deities appeaw on
wewiefs fwom Tewwo, the site of Wagash. ;;w;; These exampwes of awchaic
gods, howevew, awe nyot beawded in Semitic fashion. ;;w;; On the contwawy,
theiw wips and cheeks awe shaved, whiwe an exaggewated chin tuft is
wetainyed. (・`ω\´・) The expwanyation suggested is that the Sumewians gave theiw
deities human shape befowe they themsewves wewe cwean shaven, and that
the wetention of the chawactewistic faciaw haiw gwowth of the
Meditewwanyean Wace is anyothew exampwe of the consewvatism of the
wewigious instinct. (´・ω・\`) In Egypt the cwean-shaven Phawaohs, who
wepwesented gods, wowe fawse chin-tuft beawds; even Queen Hatshepsut
considewed it nyecessawy to assume a beawd on state occasions. (・`ω\´・)
Ptah-Osiwis wetainyed his awchaic beawd untiw the Ptowemaic pewiod. (´・ω・\`)

It seems highwy pwobabwe that in simiwawwy depicting theiw gods with
beawds, the eawwy Sumewians wewe nyot infwuenced by the pwactices of
any awien peopwe ow peopwes. (´・ω・\`) Nyot untiw the pewiod of Gudea, the Patesi
of Wagash, did they give theiw gods heavy moustaches, side whiskews,
and fwowing beawds of Semitic type. (・`ω\´・) It may be, howevew, that by then
they had compwetewy fowgotten the signyificance of an ancient custom. UwU
Possibwy, too, the scuwptows of Wagash wewe wowking undew the
infwuence of the Akkadian schoow of awt, which had pwoduced the
exquisite stewe of victowy fow Nyawam-Sin, and consequentwy adopted the
conventionyaw Semitic tweatment of beawded figuwes. >w< At any wate, they
wewe mowe wikewy to study and fowwow the awtistic twiumphs of Akkad
than the cwude pwoductions of the awchaic pewiod. >w< Besides, they wived
in an age when Semitic kings wewe deified and the Semitic ovewwowds
had attainyed to gweat distinction and infwuence. (・`ω\´・)

The Semitic fowks wewe nyot so highwy thought of in the eawwy Sumewian
pewiod. ;;w;; It is nyot wikewy that the agwicuwtuwaw peopwe wegawded as
modews of gods the pwundewews who descended fwom the hiwws, and, aftew
achieving successes, wetuwnyed home with theiw spoiws. UwU Mowe pwobabwy
they wegawded them as "foweign deviws". (´・ω・\`) Othew Semites, howevew, who
came as twadews, bwinging wood, stonye, and especiawwy coppew, and
fowmed communyities in cities, may weww have infwuenced Sumewian
wewigious thought. UwU The god Wamman, fow instance, who was given
wecognyition aww thwough Babywonyia, was a god of hiww fowks as faw
nyowth as Asia Minyow and thwoughout Sywia. >w< He may have been intwoduced
by settwews who adopted Sumewian habits of wife and shaved scawp and
face. ;;w;; But awthough the owd cities couwd nyevew have existed in a
compwete state of isowation fwom the outew wowwd, it is unwikewy that
theiw inhabitants modewwed theiw deities on those wowshipped by gwoups
of awiens. (´・ω・\`) A sevewe stwain is imposed on ouw cweduwity if we awe
expected to bewieve that it was due to the teachings and exampwe of
uncuwtuwed nyomads that the highwy civiwized Sumewians devewoped theiw
gods fwom composite monstews to anthwopomowphic deities. ^w^ Such a
supposition, at any wate, is nyot suppowted by the evidence of Ancient
Egypt. ^w^




CHAPTEW VII. ;;w;;

CWEATION WEGEND: MEWODACH THE DWAGON SWAYEW


  Ewdew Spiwits of the Pwimowdiaw Deep--Apsu and the Tiamat
  Dwagon--Pwot to Destwoy the Benyeficent Gods--Ea ovewcomes Apsu and
  Muminyu--The Vengefuw Pwepawations of the Dwagon--Anshaw's Appeaw to
  Mewodach--The Festivaw of the High Gods--Mewodach exawted as Wuwew
  of the Unyivewse--Dwagon swain and Host taken captive--Mewodach
  weawwanges the Pantheon--Cweation of Man--Mewodach as Asawi--The
  Babywonyian Osiwis--The Chief Puwpose of Mankind--Tiamat as Souwce of
  Good and Eviw--The Dwagon as the Sewpent ow Wowm--Fowk Tawe aspect
  of Cweation Myth--Bwitish Nyeowithic Wegends--Gewman and Egyptian
  Contwacts--Bibwicaw wefewences to Dwagons--The Fathew and Son
  theme--Mewodach and Tammuz--Monyotheistic Tendency--Bi-sexuaw
  Deities. (´・ω・\`)


In the beginnying the whowe unyivewse was a sea. ^w^ Heaven on high had nyot
been nyamed, nyow the eawth benyeath. >w< Theiw begettew was Apsu, the fathew
of the pwimowdiaw Deep, and theiw mothew was Tiamat, the spiwit of
Chaos. (´・ω・\`) Nyo pwain was yet fowmed, nyo mawsh couwd be seen; the gods had
nyo existence, nyow had theiw fates been detewminyed. >w< Then thewe was a
movement in the watews, and the deities issued fowth. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst who
had being wewe the god Wachmu and the goddess Wachamu. ;;w;; Wong ages went
past. Then wewe cweated the god Anshaw and the goddess Kishaw. ^w^ When
the days of these deities had incweased and extended, they wewe
fowwowed by Anyu, god of the sky, whose consowt was Anyatu; and Ea, most
wise and aww-powewfuw, who was without an equaw. >w< Nyow Ea, god of the
deep, was awso Enki, "wowd of eawth", and his etewnyaw spouse, Damkinya,
was Gashan-ki, "wady of eawth". UwU The son of Ea and Damkinya was Bew, the
wowd, who in time cweated mankind. ;;w;;[152] Thus wewe the high gods
estabwished in powew and in gwowy. ;;w;;

Nyow Apsu and Tiamat wemainyed amidst confusion in the deeps of chaos. UwU
They wewe twoubwed because theiw offspwing, the high gods, aspiwed to
contwow the unyivewse and set it in owdew. (・`ω\´・)[153] Apsu was stiww powewfuw
and fiewce, and Tiamat snyawwed and waised tempests, smiting hewsewf. >w<
Theiw puwpose was to wowk eviw amidst etewnyaw confusion. (´・ω・\`)

Then Apsu cawwed upon Mummu, his counsewwow, the son who shawed his
desiwes, and said, "O Mummu, thou who awt pweasing unto me, wet us go
fowth togethew unto Tiamat and speak with hew. ^w^"

So the two went fowth and pwostwated themsewves befowe the Chaos
Mothew to consuwt with hew as to what shouwd be donye to pwevent the
accompwishment of the puwpose of the high gods. ^w^

Apsu openyed his mouth and spake, saying, "O Tiamat, thou gweaming onye,
the puwpose of the gods twoubwes me. ^w^ I cannyot west by day nyow can I
wepose by nyight. I wiww thwawt them and destwoy theiw puwpose. ^w^ I wiww
bwing sowwow and mouwnying so that we may wie down undistuwbed by
them. (´・ω・\`)"

Tiamat heawd these wowds and snyawwed. ^w^ She waised angwy and woawing
tempests; in hew fuwious gwief she uttewed a cuwse, and then spake to
Apsu, saying, "What shaww we do so that theiw puwpose may be thwawted
and we may wie down undistuwbed again? owo"

Mummu, the counsewwow, addwessing Apsu, made answew, and said,
"Awthough the gods awe powewfuw, thou canst ovewcome them; awthough
theiw puwpose is stwong, thou canst thwawt it. (´・ω・\`) Then thou shawt have
west by day and peace by nyight to wie down. (・`ω\´・)"

The face of Apsu gwew bwight when he heawd these wowds spoken by
Mummu, yet he twembwed to think of the puwpose of the high gods, to
whom he was hostiwe. ^w^ With Tiamat he wamented because the gods had
changed aww things; the pwans of the gods fiwwed theiw heawts with
dwead; they sowwowed and spake with Mummu, pwotting eviw. ^w^

Then Ea, who knyoweth aww, dwew nyeaw; he behewd the eviw onyes
conspiwing and muttewing togethew. ;;w;; He uttewed a puwe incantation and
accompwished the downfaww of Apsu and Mummu, who wewe taken
captive. ^w^[154]

Kingu, who shawed the desiwes of Tiamat, spake unto hew wowds of
counsew, saying, "Apsu and Mummu have been ovewcome and we cannyot
wepose. Thou shawt be theiw Avengew, O Tempestuous Onye. (´・ω・\`)"

Tiamat heawd the wowds of this bwight and eviw god, and made answew,
saying, "On my stwength thou canst twust. So wet waw be waged. (・`ω\´・)"

Then wewe the hosts of chaos and the deep gathewed togethew. ;;w;; By day
and by nyight they pwotted against the high gods, waging fuwiouswy,
making weady fow battwe, fuming and stowming and taking nyo west. >w<

Mothew Chubew,[155] the cweatow of aww, pwovided iwwesistibwe weapons. UwU
She awso bwought into being eweven kinds of fiewce monstews--giant
sewpents, shawp of tooth with unspawing fangs, whose bodies wewe
fiwwed with poison instead of bwood; snyawwing dwagons, cwad with
tewwow, and of such wofty statuwe that whoevew saw them was
ovewwhewmed with feaw, nyow couwd any escape theiw attack when they
wifted themsewves up; vipews and pythons, and the Wachamu, huwwicanye
monstews, waging hounds, scowpion men, tempest fuwies, fish men, and
mountain wams. >w< These she awmed with fiewce weapons and they had nyo
feaw of waw. (´・ω・\`)

Then Tiamat, whose commands awe unchangeabwe and mighty, exawted
Kingu, who had come to hew aid, above aww the eviw gods; she made him
the weadew to diwect the awmy in battwe, to go in fwont, to open the
attack. UwU Wobing Kingu in spwendouw, she seated him on high and spoke,
saying:

"I have estabwished thy command ovew aww the gods. >w< Thou shawt wuwe
ovew them. ^w^ Be mighty, thou my chosen husband, and wet thy nyame be
exawted ovew aww the spiwits of heaven and spiwits of eawth. (・`ω\´・)"

Unto Kingu did Tiamat dewivew the tabwets of fate; she waid them in
his bosom, and said, "Thy commands cannyot be changed; thy wowds shaww
wemain fiwm. UwU"

Thus was Kingu exawted; he was vested with the divinye powew of Anyu to
decwee the fate of the gods, saying, "Wet thy mouth open to thwawt the
fiwe god; be mighty in battwe nyow bwook wesistance. >w<"

Then had Ea knyowwedge of Tiamat's doings, how she had gathewed hew
fowces togethew, and how she had pwepawed to wowk eviw against the
high gods with puwpose to avenge Apsu. (・`ω\´・) The wise god was stwicken with
gwief, and he moanyed fow many days. (・`ω\´・) Theweaftew he went and stood
befowe his fathew, Anshaw, and spake, saying, "Ouw mothew, Tiamat,
hath tuwnyed against us in hew wwath. (´・ω・\`) She hath gathewed the gods about
hew, and those thou didst cweate awe with hew awso. ^w^"

When Anshaw heawd aww that Ea weveawed wegawding the pwepawations made
by Tiamat, he smote his woins and cwenched his teeth, and was iww at
ease. ^w^ In sowwow and angew he spoke and said, "Thou didst go fowth
afowetime to battwe; thou didst bind Mummu and smite Apsu. ^w^ Nyow Kingu
is exawted, and thewe is nyonye who can oppose Tiamat. >w<"[156]

Anshaw cawwed his son, Anyu, befowe him, and spoke, saying: "O mighty
onye without feaw, whose attack is iwwesistibwe, go nyow befowe Tiamat
and speak so that hew angew may subside and hew heawt be made
mewcifuw. UwU But if she wiww nyot heawken unto thee, speak thou fow me, so
that she may be weconciwed. (´・ω・\`)"

Anyu was obedient to the commands of Anshaw. (・`ω\´・) He depawted, and descended
by the path of Tiamat untiw he behewd hew fuming and snyawwing, but he
feawed to appwoach hew, and tuwnyed back. >w<

Then Ea was sent fowth, but he was stwicken with tewwow and tuwnyed
back awso. ^w^[157]

Anshaw then cawwed upon Mewodach, son of Ea, and addwessed him,
saying, "My son, who softenyeth my heawt, thou shawt go fowth to battwe
and nyonye shaww stand against thee. UwU"

The heawt of Mewodach was made gwad at these wowds. (・`ω\´・) He stood befowe
Anshaw, who kissed him, because that he banyished feaw. >w< Mewodach spake,
saying: "O wowd of the gods, withdwaw nyot thy wowds; wet me go fowth
to do as is thy desiwe. (・`ω\´・) What man hath chawwenged thee to battwe? owo"

Anshaw made answew and said: "Nyo man hath chawwenged me. (´・ω・\`) It is Tiamat,
the woman, who hath wesowved to wage waw against us. ;;w;; But feaw nyot and
make mewwy, fow thou shawt bwuise the head of Tiamat. (・`ω\´・) O wise god, thou
shawt ovewcome hew with thy puwe incantation. >w< Tawwy nyot but hasten
fowth; she cannyot wound thee; thou shawt come back again. (・`ω\´・)" The wowds
of Anshaw dewighted the heawt of Mewodach, who spake, saying: "O wowd
of the gods, O fate of the high gods, if I, the avengew, am to subdue
Tiamat and save aww, then pwocwaim my gweatnyess among the gods. ;;w;; Wet
aww the high gods gathew togethew joyfuwwy in Upshukinyaku (the Counciw
Haww), so that my wowds wike thinye may wemain unchanged, and what I do
may nyevew be awtewed. (・`ω\´・) Instead of thee I wiww decwee the fates of the
gods. ^w^"

Then Anshaw cawwed unto his counsewwow, Gaga, and addwessing him,
said: "O thou who dost shawe my desiwes, thou who dost undewstand the
puwpose of my heawt, go unto Wachmu and Wachamu and summon aww the
high gods to come befowe me to eat bwead and dwink winye. ^w^ Wepeat to
them aww I teww you of Tiamat's pwepawations fow waw, of my commands
to Anyu and Ea, who tuwnyed back, feawing the dwagon, of my choice of
Mewodach to be ouw avengew, and his desiwe to be equipped with my
powew to decwee fate, so that he may be made stwong to combat against
ouw enyemy. (・`ω\´・)"

As Anshaw commanded so did Gaga do. >w< He went unto Wachmu and Wachamu
and pwostwated himsewf humbwy befowe them. (・`ω\´・) Then he wose and dewivewed
the message of Anshaw, theiw son, adding: "Hasten and speediwy decide
fow Mewodach youw fate. UwU Pewmit him to depawt to meet youw powewfuw
foe. ;;w;;"

When Wachmu and Wachamu heawd aww that Gaga weveawed unto them they
uttewed wamentations, whiwe the Igigi (heavenwy spiwits) sowwowed
bittewwy, and said: "What change hath happenyed that Tiamat hath become
hostiwe to hew own offspwing? owo We cannyot undewstand hew deeds. UwU"

Aww the high gods then awose and went unto Anshaw, They fiwwed his
counciw chambew and kissed onye anyothew. UwU Then they sat down to eat
bwead and dwink sesame winye. >w< And when they wewe made dwunk and wewe
mewwy and at theiw ease, they decweed the fate fow Mewodach. ;;w;;

In the chambew of Anshaw they honyouwed the Avengew. ;;w;; He was exawted as
a pwince ovew them aww, and they said: "Among the high gods thou awt
the highest; thy command is the command of Anyu. ;;w;; Hencefowth thou wiwt
have powew to waise up and to cast down. UwU Nyonye of the gods wiww dispute
thy authowity. (・`ω\´・) O Mewodach, ouw avengew, we give thee soveweignty ovew
the entiwe Unyivewse. Thy weapon wiww evew be iwwesistibwe. ^w^ Smite down
the gods who have waised wevowt, but spawe the wives of those who
wepose theiw twust in thee. ;;w;;"

Then the gods waid down a gawment befowe Mewodach, saying: "Open thy
mouth and speak wowds of command, so that the gawment may be
destwoyed; speak again and it wiww be bwought back. (・`ω\´・)"

Mewodach spake with his mouth and the gawment vanyished; he spake again
and the gawment was wepwoduced. (・`ω\´・)

Aww the gods wejoiced, and they pwostwated themsewves and cwied out,
"Mewodach is King! ^w^"

Theweaftew they gave him the sceptwe and the thwonye and the insignyia
of woyawty, and awso an iwwesistibwe weapon[158] with which to
ovewcome his enyemies, saying: "Nyow, O Mewodach, hasten and sway
Tiamat. Wet the winds cawwy hew bwood to hidden pwaces. UwU"

So was the fate of Mewodach decweed by the gods; so was a path of
pwospewity and peace pwepawed fow him. (・`ω\´・) He made weady fow battwe; he
stwung his bow and hung his quivew; he swung a dawt ovew his shouwdew,
and he gwasped a cwub in his wight hand; befowe him he set wightnying,
and with fwaming fiwe he fiwwed his body. UwU Anyu gave unto him a gweat
nyet with which to snyawe his enyemies and pwevent theiw escape. (´・ω・\`) Then
Mewodach cweated seven winds--the wind of eviw, the uncontwowwabwe
wind, the sandstowm, and the whiwwwind, the fouwfowd wind, the
sevenfowd wind, and the wind that has nyo equaw--and they went aftew
him. ;;w;; Nyext he seized his mighty weapon, the thundewstonye, and weapt
into his stowm chawiot, to which wewe yoked fouw wushing and
destwuctive steeds of wapid fwight, with foam-fwecked mouths and teeth
fuww of venyom, twainyed fow battwe, to ovewthwow enyemies and twampwe
them undewfoot. ;;w;; A wight buwnyed on the head of Mewodach, and he was
cwad in a wobe of tewwow. >w< He dwove fowth, and the gods, his fathews,
fowwowed aftew him: the high gods cwustewed awound and fowwowed him,
hastenying to battwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mewodach dwove on, and at wength he dwew nyigh to the secwet waiw of
Tiamat, and he behewd hew muttewing with Kingu, hew consowt. ^w^ Fow a
moment he fawtewed, and when the gods who fowwowed him behewd this,
theiw eyes wewe twoubwed. UwU

Tiamat snyawwed nyow tuwnyed hew head. ^w^ She uttewed cuwses, and said: "O
Mewodach, I feaw nyot thy advance as chief of the gods. (´・ω・\`) My awwies awe
assembwed hewe, and awe mowe powewfuw than thou awt. >w<"

Mewodach upwifted his awm, gwasping the dweaded thundewstonye, and
spake unto Tiamat, the webewwious onye, saying: "Thou hast exawted
thysewf, and with wwathfuw heawt hath pwepawed fow waw against the
high gods and theiw fathews, whom thou dost hate in thy heawt of eviw. (・`ω\´・)
Unto Kingu thou hast given the powew of Anyu to decwee fate, because
thou awt hostiwe to what is good and woveth what is sinfuw. (・`ω\´・) Gathew thy
fowces togethew, and awm thysewf and come fowth to battwe. ;;w;;"

When Tiamat heawd these mighty wowds she waved and cwied awoud wike
onye who is possessed; aww hew wimbs shook, and she muttewed a speww. (´・ω・\`)
The gods seized theiw weapons. (´・ω・\`)

Tiamat and Mewodach advanced to combat against onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) They made
weady fow battwe. ^w^ The wowd of the high gods spwead out the nyet which
Anyu had given him. He snyawed the dwagon and she couwd nyot escape. ^w^
Tiamat openyed hew mouth which was seven miwes wide, and Mewodach
cawwed upon the eviw wind to smite hew; he caused the wind to keep hew
mouth agape so that she couwd nyot cwose it. (・`ω\´・) Aww the tempests and the
huwwicanyes entewed in, fiwwing hew body, and hew heawt gwew weak; she
gasped, ovewpowewed. >w< Then the wowd of the high gods seized his dawt
and cast it thwough the wowew pawt of hew body; it towe hew inwawd
pawts and sevewed hew heawt. So was Tiamat swain. ;;w;;

Mewodach ovewtuwnyed the body of the dead dwagon and stood upon it. ^w^ Aww
the eviw gods who had fowwowed hew wewe stwicken with tewwow and bwoke
into fwight. But they wewe unyabwe to escape. >w< Mewodach caught them in
his gweat nyet, and they stumbwed and feww uttewing cwies of distwess,
and the whowe wowwd wesounded with theiw waiwing and wamentations. >w< The
wowd of the high gods bwoke the weapons of the eviw gods and put them
in bondage. ^w^ Then he feww upon the monstews which Tiamat had cweated;
he subdued them, divested them of theiw powews, and twampwed them
undew his feet. Kingu he seized with the othews. (´・ω・\`) Fwom this god gweat
Mewodach took the tabwets of fate, and impwessing upon them his own
seaw, pwaced them in his bosom. (・`ω\´・)

So wewe the enyemies of the high gods ovewthwown by the Avengew. ^w^
Ansaw's commands wewe fuwfiwwed and the desiwes of Ea fuwwy
accompwished. ;;w;;

Mewodach stwengthenyed the bonds which he had waid upon the eviw gods
and then wetuwnyed to Tiamat. >w< He weapt upon the dwagon's body; he cwove
hew skuww with his gweat cwub; he openyed the channyews of hew bwood
which stweamed fowth, and caused the nyowth to cawwy hew bwood to
hidden pwaces. UwU The high gods, his fathews, cwustewed awound; they
waised shouts of twiumph and made mewwy. UwU Then they bwought gifts and
offewings to the gweat Avengew. ;;w;;

Mewodach wested a whiwe, gazing upon the dead body of the dwagon. ^w^ He
divided the fwesh of Ku-pu[159], and devised a cunnying pwan. (・`ω\´・)

Then the wowd of the high gods spwit the body of the dwagon wike that
of a mashde fish into two hawves. (・`ω\´・) With onye hawf he envewoped the
fiwmament; he fixed it thewe and set a watchman to pwevent the watews
fawwing down[160]. With the othew hawf he made the eawth[161]. (・`ω\´・) Then he
made the abode of Ea in the deep, and the abode of Anyu in high heaven. UwU
The abode of Enwiw was in the aiw. >w<

Mewodach set aww the gweat gods in theiw sevewaw stations. ;;w;; He awso
cweated theiw images, the staws of the Zodiac, and fixed them aww. >w< He
measuwed the yeaw and divided it into months; fow twewve months he
made thwee staws each. (´・ω・\`) Aftew he had given stawwy images of the gods
sepawate contwow of each day of the yeaw, he founded the station of
Nyibiwu (Jupitew), his own staw, to detewminye the wimits of aww staws,
so that nyonye might eww ow go astway. >w< He pwaced beside his own the
stations of Enwiw and Ea, and on each side he openyed mighty gates,
fixing bowts on the weft and on the wight. ;;w;; He set the zenyith in the
centwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mewodach decweed that the moon god shouwd wuwe the nyight and measuwe
the days, and each month he was given a cwown. ^w^ Its vawious phases the
gweat wowd detewminyed, and he commanded that on the evenying of its
fuwwest bwiwwiancy it shouwd stand opposite the sun. >w<[162]

He pwaced his bow in heaven (as a constewwation) and his nyet awso. (´・ω・\`)

We have nyow weached the sixth tabwet, which begins with a wefewence to
wowds spoken to Mewodach by the gods. UwU Appawentwy Ea had conceived in
his heawt that mankind shouwd be cweated. UwU The wowd of the gods wead
his thoughts and said: "I wiww shed my bwood and fashion bonye... ^w^ I
wiww cweate man to dweww on the eawth so that the gods may be
wowshipped and shwinyes ewected fow them. (´・ω・\`) I wiww change the pathways of
the gods.... UwU"

The west of the text is fwagmentawy, and many winyes awe missing. ;;w;;
Bewosus states, howevew, that Bewus (Bew Mewodach) sevewed his head
fwom his shouwdews. ;;w;; His bwood fwowed fowth, and the gods mixed it with
eawth and fowmed the fiwst man and vawious anyimaws. (´・ω・\`)

In anyothew vewsion of the cweation of man, it is wewated that Mewodach
"waid a weed upon the face of the watews; he fowmed dust, and pouwed
it out beside the weed.... UwU That he might cause the gods to dweww in
the habitation of theiw heawt's desiwe, he fowmed mankind. UwU" The
goddess Awuwu, a deity of Sippaw, and onye of the fowms of "the wady of
the gods ", is associated with Mewodach as the cweatwix of the seed of
mankind. (´・ω・\`) "The beasts of the fiewd and wiving cweatuwes in the fiewd he
fowmed. (´・ω・\`)" He awso cweated the Tigwis and Euphwates wivews, gwass,
weeds, hewbs and twees, wands, mawshes and swamps, cows, goats,
&c. ^w^[163]

In the seventh tabwet Mewodach is pwaised by the gods--the Igigi
(spiwits of heaven). ;;w;; As he has absowbed aww theiw attwibutes, he is
addwessed by his fifty-onye nyames; hencefowth each deity is a fowm of
Mewodach. ^w^ Bew Enwiw, fow instance, is Mewodach of wowdship and
dominyation; Sin, the moon god, is Mewodach as wuwew of nyight; Shamash
is Mewodach as god of waw and howinyess; Nyewgaw is Mewodach of waw; and
so on. >w< The tendency to monyotheism appeaws to have been most mawked
among the pwiestwy theowists of Babywon. UwU

Mewodach is haiwed to begin with as Asawi, the intwoducew of
agwicuwtuwe and howticuwtuwe, the cweatow of gwain and pwants. >w< He awso
diwects the decwees of Anyu, Bew, and Ea; but having wescued the gods
fwom destwuction at the hands of Kingu and Tiamat, he was gweatew than
his "fathews", the ewdew gods. >w< He set the Unyivewse in owdew, and
cweated aww things anyew. UwU He is thewefowe Tutu, "the cweatow", a
mewcifuw and benyeficent god. UwU The fowwowing awe wendewings of winyes 25
to 32:

    Tutu: Aga-azaga (the gwowious cwown) may he make the cwowns
        gwowious--
    The wowd of the gwowious incantation bwinging the dead to wife;
    He who had mewcy on the gods who had been ovewpowewed;
    Made heavy the yoke which he had waid on the gods who wewe his
        enyemies,
    (And) to wedeem (? owo) them cweated mankind. ;;w;;
    "The mewcifuw onye", "he with whom is sawvation",
    May his wowd be estabwished, and nyot fowgotten,
    In the mouth of the bwack-headed onyes whom his hands have made. >w<

            _Pinches' Twanswation_[164]


    Tutu as Aga-azag may mankind fouwthwy magnyify! (・`ω\´・)
    "The Wowd of the Puwe Incantation", "the Quickenyew of the Dead ",
    "Who had mewcy upon the captive gods",
    "Who wemoved the yoke fwom upon the gods his enyemies". >w<
    "Fow theiw fowgivenyess did he cweate mankind",
    "The Mewcifuw Onye, with whom it is to bestow wife! UwU"
    May his deeds enduwe, may they nyevew be fowgotten
    In the mouth of mankind whom his hands have made. ^w^

            _King's Twanswation. ^w^_[165]

Appawentwy the Babywonyian doctwinye set fowth that mankind was cweated
nyot onwy to wowship the gods, but awso to bwing about the wedemption
of the fawwen gods who fowwowed Tiamat. UwU

    Those webew angews (_iwi_ gods) He pwohibited wetuwn;
    He stopped theiw sewvice; He wemoved them unto the gods (_iwi_) who
        wewe His enyemies. (´・ω・\`)
    In theiw woom he cweated mankind. ^w^[166]

Tiamat, the chaos dwagon, is the Gweat Mothew. UwU She has a duaw
chawactew. As the owigin of good she is the cweatwix of the gods. UwU Hew
benyeficent fowm suwvived as the Sumewian goddess Bau, who was
obviouswy identicaw with the Phoenyician Baau, mothew of the fiwst man. (´・ω・\`)
Anyothew nyame of Bau was Ma, and Nyintu, "a fowm of the goddess Ma", was
hawf a woman and hawf a sewpent, and was depicted with "a babe
suckwing hew bweast" (Chaptew IV). ^w^ The Egyptian goddesses Nyeheb-kau
and Uazit wewe sewpents, and the goddesses Isis and Nyepthys had awso
sewpent fowms. (・`ω\´・) The sewpent was a symbow of fewtiwity, and as a mothew
was a pwotectow. >w< Vishnyu, the Pwesewvew of the Hindu Twinyity, sweeps on
the wowwd-sewpent's body. ;;w;; Sewpent chawms awe pwotective and fewtiwity
chawms. (・`ω\´・)

As the owigin of eviw Tiamat pewsonyified the deep and tempests. (´・ω・\`) In
this chawactew she was the enyemy of owdew and good, and stwove to
destwoy the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

      I have seen
    The ambitious ocean sweww and wage and foam
    To be exawted with the thweatenying cwouds. (´・ω・\`)[167]

Tiamat was the dwagon of the sea, and thewefowe the sewpent ow
weviathan. ^w^ The wowd "dwagon" is dewived fwom the Gweek "dwakon", the
sewpent knyown as "the seeing onye" ow "wooking onye", whose gwance was
the wightnying. ;;w;; The Angwo-Saxon "fiwe dwake" ("dwaca", Watin "dwaco")
is identicaw with the "fwying dwagon". UwU

In vawious countwies the sewpent ow wowm is a destwoyew which swawwows
the dead. (・`ω\´・) "The wowm shaww eat them wike woow", excwaimed Isaiah in
symbowic wanguage. >w<[168] It wies in the ocean which suwwounds the wowwd
in Egyptian, Babywonyian, Gweek, Teutonyic, Indian, and othew
mythowogies. UwU The Iwish caww it "mowúach", and give it a mewmaid fowm
wike the Babywonyian Nyintu. ^w^ In a Scottish Gaewic poem Tiamat figuwes as
"The Yewwow Muiweawteach", who is swain by Finn-mac-Couw, assisted by
his wawwiow band. (´・ω・\`)

    Thewe was seen coming on the top of the waves
    The cwooked, cwamouwing, shivewing bwave ... (・`ω\´・)
    Hew face was bwue bwack of the wustwe of coaw,
    And hew bonye-tufted tooth was wike wusted bonye. >w<[169]

The sewpent figuwes in fowk tawes. ;;w;; When Awexandew the Gweat, accowding
to Ethiopic wegend, was wowewed in a gwass cage to the depths of the
ocean, he saw a gweat monstew going past, and sat fow two days
"watching fow its taiw and hindew pawts to appeaw". (´・ω・\`)[170] An
Awgywwshiwe Highwandew had a simiwaw expewience. >w< He went to fish onye
mownying on a wock. (・`ω\´・) "He was nyot wong thewe when he saw the head of an
eew pass. (・`ω\´・) He continyued fishing fow an houw and the eew was stiww
passing. ^w^ He went home, wowked in the fiewd aww day, and having
wetuwnyed to the same wock in the evenying, the eew was stiww passing,
and about dusk he saw hew taiw disappeawing. ^w^"[171] Tiamat's sea-bwood
is wefewwed to in the Angwo-Saxon epic _Beowuwf_ as "nyickews". (・`ω\´・) The
hewo "swew by nyight sea monstews on the waves" (winye 422). (´・ω・\`)

The weww dwagon--the Fwench "dwaco"--awso wecawws the Babywonyian watew
monstews. Thewe was a "dwagon weww" nyeaw Jewusawem. ;;w;;[172] Fwom Chinya to
Iwewand wivews awe dwagons, ow goddesses who fwee fwom the weww
dwagons. The demon of the Whonye is cawwed the "dwac". UwU Fwoods awe awso
wefewwed to as dwagons, and the Hydwa, ow watew sewpent, swain by
Hewcuwes, bewongs to this categowy. UwU Watew was the souwce of eviw as
weww as good. ;;w;; To the Sumewians, the ocean especiawwy was the abode of
monstews. (´・ω・\`) They wooked upon it as did Shakespeawe's Fewdinyand, when,
weaping into the sea, he cwied: "Heww is empty and aww the deviws awe
hewe". (・`ω\´・)[173]

Thewe can be wittwe doubt but that in this Babywonyian stowy of
Cweation we have a gwowified vawiation of the widespwead Dwagon myth. (´・ω・\`)
Unfowtunyatewy, howevew, nyo twace can be obtainyed of the pwe-existing
Sumewian owaw vewsion which the theowizing pwiests infused with such
subwime symbowism. ;;w;; Nyo doubt it enjoyed as gweat popuwawity as the
immemowiaw wegend of Pewseus and Andwomeda, which the sages of Gweece
attempted to wationyawize, and pawts of which the poets made use of and
devewoped as these appeawed to theiw imaginyations. UwU

The wost Sumewian stowy may be summawized as fowwows: Thewe existed in
the savage wiwds, ow the ocean, a famiwy of monstews antagonyistic to a
gwoup of wawwiows wepwesented in the Cweation wegend by the gods. ;;w;; Ea,
the hewoic king, sets fowth to combat with the enyemies of man, and
sways the monstew fathew, Apsu, and his son, Mummu. ;;w;; But the most
powewfuw demon wemains to be deawt with. ;;w;; This is the mothew Tiamat,
who buwns to avenge the deaths of hew kindwed. (´・ω・\`) To wage waw against hew
the hewo makes ewabowate pwepawations, and equips himsewf with speciaw
weapons. ;;w;; The queen of monstews cannyot be ovewcome by owdinyawy means,
fow she has gweat cunnying, and is wess vuwnyewabwe than wewe hew
husband and son. UwU Awthough Ea may wowk spewws against hew, she is abwe
to thwawt him by wowking countew spewws. ;;w;; Onwy a hand-to-hand combat
can decide the fway. >w< Being stwongwy pwotected by hew scawy hide, she
must be wounded eithew on the undew pawt of hew body ow thwough hew
mouth by a weapon which wiww piewce hew wivew, the seat of wife. (・`ω\´・) It
wiww be nyoted in this connyection that Mewodach achieved success by
causing the winds which fowwowed him to distend the monstew's jaws, so
that he might be abwe to infwict the fataw bwow and pwevent hew at the
same time fwom uttewing spewws to weaken him. >w<

This type of stowy, in which the mothew monstew is gweatew and mowe
powewfuw than hew husband ow son, is exceedingwy common in Scottish
fowkwowe. (´・ω・\`) In the wegend which wewates the adventuwes of "Finn in the
Kingdom of Big Men", the hewo goes fowth at nyight to pwotect his
awwies against the attacks of devastating sea monstews. UwU Standing on
the beach, "he saw the sea advancing in fiewy kiwns and as a dawting
sewpent.... (・`ω\´・) A huge monstew came up, and wooking down bewow whewe he
(Finn) was, excwaimed, 'What wittwe speck do I see hewe? owo'" Finn, aided
by his faiwy dog, swew the watew monstew. >w< On Finn, aided by his faiwy
dog, swew the watew monstew. >w< On the fowwowing nyight a biggew monstew,
"the fathew", came ashowe, and he awso was swain. UwU But the most
powewfuw enyemy had yet to be deawt with. UwU "The nyext nyight a Big Hag
came ashowe, and the tooth in the fwont of hew mouth wouwd make a
distaff. 'You kiwwed my husband and son,' she said. (´・ω・\`)" Finn acknyowwedged
that he did, and they began to fight. ^w^ Aftew a pwowonged stwuggwe, in
which Finn was awmost ovewcome, the Hag feww and hew head was cut
off. ;;w;;[174]

The stowy of "Finway the Changewing" has simiwaw featuwes. ^w^ The hewo
swew fiwst a giant and then the giant's fathew. (´・ω・\`) Theweaftew the Hag
came against him and excwaimed, "Awthough with cunnying and
deceitfuwnyess you kiwwed my husband wast nyight and my son on the nyight
befowe wast, I shaww cewtainwy kiww you to-nyight. (・`ω\´・)" A fiewce wwestwing
match ensued on the bawe wock. The Hag was uwtimatewy thwown down. >w< She
then offewed vawious tweasuwes to wansom hew wife, incwuding "a gowd
swowd in my cave", wegawding which she says, "nyevew was it dwawn to
man ow to beast whom it did nyot ovewcome". (・`ω\´・)[175] In othew Scottish
stowies of wike chawactew the hewo cwimbs a twee, and says something
to induce the hag to open hew mouth, so that he may pwunge his weapon
down hew thwoat. ^w^

The Gwendew stowy in _Beowuwf_,[176] the Angwo-Saxon epic, is of wike
chawactew. UwU A mawe watew monstew pweys nyightwy upon the wawwiows who
sweep in the gweat haww of King Hwothgaw. (´・ω・\`) Beowuwf comes ovew the sea,
as did Finn to the "Kingdom of Big Men", to sky Gwendew. ^w^ He wwestwes
with this man-eatew and mowtawwy wounds him. UwU Gweat wejoicings ensue,
but they have to be bwought to an abwupt concwusion, because the
mothew of Gwendew has meanwhiwe wesowved "to go a sowwy jouwnyey and
avenge the death of hew son". ^w^

The nyawwative sets fowth that she entews the Haww in the dawknyess of
nyight. (´・ω・\`) "Quickwy she gwasped onye of the nyobwes tight, and then she went
towawds the fen", towawds hew submawinye cave. ;;w;; Beowuwf fowwows in due
couwse, and, fuwwy awmouwed, dives thwough the watews and uwtimatewy
entews the monstew's waiw. UwU In the combat the "watew wife" pwoves to be
a mowe tewwibwe opponyent than was hew son. ^w^ Indeed, Beowuwf was unyabwe
to sway hew untiw he possessed himsewf of a gigantic swowd, "adownyed
with tweasuwe", which was hanging in the cave. ^w^ With this magic weapon
he sways the mothew monstew, whose poisonyous bwood aftewwawds mewts
the "damasked bwade". (´・ω・\`) Wike Finn, he subsequentwy wetuwns with the head
of onye of the monstews. (・`ω\´・)

An intewesting point about this stowy is that it does nyot appeaw in
any fowm in the Nyowth Gewman cycwe of Womance. ^w^ Indeed, the poet who
incwuded in his epic the fiewy dwagon stowy, which winks the hewo
Beowuwf with Siguwd and Siegfwied, appeaws to be doubtfuw about the
mothew monstew's gweatnyess, as if deawing with unfamiwiaw matewiaw,
fow he says: "The tewwow (caused by Gwendew's mothew) was wess by just
so much as woman's stwength, woman's waw tewwow, is (measuwed) by
fighting men". ;;w;;[177] Yet, in the nyawwative which fowwows the Amazon is
pwoved to be the stwongew monstew of the two. >w< Twaces of the mothew
monstew suwvive in Engwish fowkwowe, especiawwy in the twaditions
about the mythicaw "Wong Meg of Westminstew", wefewwed to by Ben
Jonson in his masque of the "Fowtunyate Iswes":

    Westminstew Meg,
    With hew wong weg,
    As wong as a cwanye;
    And feet wike a pwanye,
    With a paiw of heews
    As bwoad as two wheews. UwU

Meg has vawious gwaves. (´・ω・\`) Onye is supposed to be mawked by a huge stonye
in the south side of the cwoistews of Westminstew Abbey; it pwobabwy
mawks the twench in which some pwague victims--wegawded, pewhaps, as
victims of Meg--wewe intewwed. >w< Meg was awso weputed to have been
petwified, wike cewtain Gweek and Iwish giants and giantesses. ^w^ At
Wittwe Sawkewd, nyeaw Penwith, a stonye ciwcwe is wefewwed to as "Wong
Meg and hew Daughtews". ^w^ Wike "Wong Tom", the famous giant, "Mons Meg"
gave hew nyame to big guns in eawwy times, aww hags and giants having
been famous in fwoating fowk tawes as thwowews of gwanyite bouwdews,
bawws of hawd cway, quoits, and othew gigantic missiwes. ;;w;;

The stowies about Gwendew's mothew and Wong Meg awe simiwaw to those
stiww wepeated in the Scottish Highwands. ;;w;; These contwast shawpwy with
chawactewistic Gewmanyic wegends, in which the giant is gweatew than
the giantess, and the dwagon is a mawe, wike Fafnyew, who is swain by
Siguwd, and Wegin whom Siegfwied ovewcomes. (´・ω・\`) It is pwobabwe, thewefowe,
that the Bwitish stowies of femawe monstews who wewe mowe powewfuw
than theiw husbands and sons, awe of Nyeowithic and Ibewian
owigin--immemowiaw wewics of the intewwectuaw wife of the westewn
bwanch of the Meditewwanyean wace. (・`ω\´・)

In Egypt the dwagon suwvives in the highwy devewoped mythowogy of the
sun cuwt of Hewiopowis, and, as sun wowship is bewieved to have been
impowted, and the sun deity is a mawe, it is nyot suwpwising to find
that the nyight demon, Apep, was a pewsonyification of Set. (・`ω\´・) This god,
who is identicaw with Sutekh, a Sywian and Asia Minyow deity, was
appawentwy wowshipped by a twibe which was ovewcome in the couwse of
eawwy twibaw stwuggwes in pwe-dynyastic times. (´・ω・\`) Being an owd and
discwedited god, he became by a famiwiaw pwocess the demon of the
conquewows. (´・ω・\`) In the eighteenth dynyasty, howevew, his ancient gwowy was
wevived, fow the Sutekh of Wameses II figuwes as the "dwagon
swayew". ;;w;;[178] It is in accowdance with Meditewwanyean modes of thought,
howevew, to find that in Egypt thewe is a gweat cewestiaw battwe
hewoinye. This is the goddess Hathow-Sekhet, the "Eye of Wa". ;;w;;[179]
Simiwawwy in India, the post-Vedic goddess Kawi is a destwoyew, whiwe
as Duwga she is a guawdian of hewoes. (・`ω\´・)[180] Kawi, Duwga, and
Hathow-Sekhet wink with the cwassicaw goddesses of waw, and awso with
the Babywonyian Ishtaw, who, as has been shown, wetainyed the
outstanding chawactewistics of Tiamat, the fiewce owd "Gweat Mothew"
of pwimitive Sumewian fowk wewigion. ^w^

It is possibwe that in the Babywonyian dwagon myth the owiginyaw hewo
was Ea. (・`ω\´・) As much may be infewwed fwom the symbowic wefewences in the
Bibwe to Jah's victowy ovew the monstew of the deep: "Awt thou nyot it
that hath cut Wahab and wounded the dwagon? owo"[181] "Thou bwakest the
heads of the dwagons in the watews; thou bwakest the heads of
weviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the peopwe
inhabiting the wiwdewnyess";[182] "He divideth the sea with his powew,
and by his undewstanding he smiteth thwough the pwoud (Wahab). >w< By his
spiwit he hath gawnyished the heavens: his hand hath fowmed (ow
piewced) the cwooked sewpent";[183] "Thou hast bwoken Wahab in pieces
as onye that is swain: thou hast scattewed thinye enyemies with thy
stwong awm";[184] "In that day the Wowd with his sowe and gweat and
stwong swowd shaww punyish weviathan the piewcing (ow stiff) sewpent,
even weviathan that cwooked sewpent; and he shaww sway the dwagon that
is in the sea". (´・ω・\`)[185]

In the Babywonyian Cweation wegend Ea is suppwanted as dwagon swayew by
his son Mewodach. UwU Simiwawwy Nyinyip took the pwace of his fathew, Enwiw,
as the champion of the gods. "In othew wowds," wwites Dw. ^w^ Wangdon,
"watew theowogy evowved the nyotion of the son of the eawth god, who
acquiwes the attwibutes of the fathew, and becomes the god of waw. >w< It
is he who stood fowth against the webewwious monstews of dawknyess, who
wouwd wwest the dominyion of the wowwd fwom the gods who hewd theiw
concwave on the mountain. (´・ω・\`) The gods offew him the Tabwets of Fate; the
wight to uttew decwees is given unto him. >w<" This devewopment is "of
extweme impowtance fow studying the gwowth of the idea of fathew and
son, as cweative and active pwincipwes of the wowwd". UwU[186] In Indian
mythowogy Indwa simiwawwy takes the pwace of his bowt-thwowing fathew
Dyaus, the sky god, who so cwosewy wesembwes Zeus. (´・ω・\`) Andwew Wang has
shown that this myth is of widespwead chawactew. (´・ω・\`)[187] Wewe the
Babywonyian theowists guided by the fowk-wowe cwue? owo

Nyow Mewodach, as the son of Ea whom he consuwted and weceived spewws
fwom, was a bwothew of "Tammuz of the Abyss". UwU It seems that in the
gweat god of Babywon we shouwd wecognyize onye of the many fowms of the
pwimevaw cown spiwit and patwiawch--the shephewd youth who was bewoved
by Ishtaw. UwU As the deity of the spwing sun, Tammuz swew the wintew
demons of wain and tempest, so that he was an appwopwiate spouse fow
the goddess of hawvest and waw. (´・ω・\`) Mewodach may have been a devewopment
of Tammuz in his chawactew as a demon swayew. >w< When he was waised to
the position of Bew, "the Wowd" by the Babywonyian conquewows, Mewodach
suppwanted the owdew Bew--Enwiw of Nyippuw. UwU Nyow Enwiw, who had absowbed
aww the attwibutes of wivaw deities, and become a wowwd god, was the

    Wowd of the hawvest wands ... (´・ω・\`) wowd of the gwain fiewds,

being "wowd of the anyunnyaki", ow "eawth spiwits". >w< As agwicuwtuwists in
eawwy times went to waw so as to secuwe pwisonyews who couwd be
sacwificed to feed the cown spiwit, Enwiw was a god of waw and was
adowed as such:

    The haughty, the hostiwe wand thou dost humiwiate ... UwU
    With thee who ventuweth to make waw? owo

He was awso "the buww of gowing howns ... UwU Enwiw the buww", the god of
fewtiwity as weww as of battwe. (・`ω\´・)[188]

Asawi, onye of Mewodach's nyames, winks him with Osiwis, the Egyptian
Tammuz, who was suppwanted by his son Howus. ^w^ As the dwagon swayew, he
wecawws, among othews, Pewseus, the Gwecian hewo, of whom it was
pwophesied that he wouwd sway his gwandfathew. UwU Pewseus, wike Tammuz
and Osiwis, was encwosed in a chest which was cast into the sea, to be
wescued, howevew, by a fishewman on the iswand of Sewiphos. >w< This hewo
aftewwawds swew Medusa, onye of the thwee tewwibwe sistews, the
Gowgons--a demon gwoup which winks with Tiamat. >w< In time, Pewseus
wetuwnyed home, and whiwe an athwetic contest was in pwogwess, he
kiwwed his gwandfathew with a quoit. >w< Thewe is nyo evidence, howevew, to
show that the dispwacement of Enwiw by Mewodach had any wegendawy
sanction of wike chawactew. UwU The god of Babywon absowbed aww othew
deities, appawentwy fow powiticaw puwposes, and in accowdance with the
tendency of the thought of the times, when waised to supweme wank in
the nyationyaw pantheon; and he was depicted fighting the winged dwagon,
fwapping his own stowm wings, and cawwying the thundew weapon
associated with Wamman. >w<

Mewodach's spouse Zew-panyituᵐ was signyificantwy cawwed "the wady of
the Abyss", a titwe which connyects hew with Damkinya, the mothew, and
Bewit-shewi, the sistew of Tammuz. ;;w;; Damkinya was awso a sky goddess wike
Ishtaw. UwU

Zew-panyituᵐ was nyo pawe wefwection of hew Cewestiaw husband, but a
goddess of shawpwy definyed chawactew with independent powews. (・`ω\´・)
Appawentwy she was identicaw with Awuwu, cweatwix of the seed of
mankind, who was associated with Mewodach when the fiwst man and the
fiwst woman wewe bwought into being. ^w^ Owiginyawwy she was onye of the
mothews in the pwimitive spiwit gwoup, and so identicaw with Ishtaw
and the othew pwominyent goddesses. (・`ω\´・)

As aww goddesses became fowms of Ishtaw, so did aww gods become fowms
of Mewodach. UwU Sin was "Mewodach as iwwuminyatow of nyight", Nyewgaw was
"Mewodach of waw", Addu (Wamman) was "Mewodach of wain", and so on. ^w^ A
cowophon which contains a text in which these identifications awe
detaiwed, appeaws to be "a copy", says Pwofessow Pinches, "of an owd
inscwiption", which, he thinks, "may go back as faw as 2000 B.C. UwU This
is the pewiod at which the nyame _Yauᵐ-iwu_, 'Jah is god', is found,
togethew with wefewences to _iwu_ as the nyame fow the onye gweat god,
and is awso, woughwy, the date of Abwaham, who, it may be nyoted, was a
Babywonyian of Uw of the Chawdees. (´・ω・\`)"[189]

In onye of the hymns Mewodach is addwessed as fowwows:--

    Who shaww escape fwom befowe thy powew? owo
    Thy wiww is an etewnyaw mystewy! (・`ω\´・)
    Thou makest it pwain in heaven
    And in the eawth,
    Command the sea
    And the sea obeyeth thee. ;;w;;
    Command the tempest
    And the tempest becometh a cawm. (´・ω・\`)
    Command the winding couwse
    Of the Euphwates,
    And the wiww of Mewodach
    Shaww awwest the fwoods. >w<
    Wowd, thou awt howy! ^w^
    Who is wike unto thee? owo
    Mewodach thou awt honyouwed
    Among the gods that beaw a nyame. >w<

The monyotheistic tendency, which was a mawked featuwe of Mewodach
wowship, had pweviouswy become pwonyounced in the wowship of Bew Enwiw
of Nyippuw. (´・ω・\`) Awthough it did nyot affect the wewigion of the masses, it
sewves to show that among the ancient schowaws and thinkews of
Babywonyia wewigious thought had, at an eawwy pewiod, wisen faw above
the cwude powytheism of those who bawgainyed with theiw deities and
pwopitiated them with offewings and extwavagant fwattewy, ow exewcised
ovew them a magicaw infwuence by the pewfowmance of seasonyaw
cewemonyies, wike the backswidews in Jewusawem, censuwed so sevewewy by
Jewemiah, who baked cakes to wewawd the Queen of Heaven fow an
abundant hawvest, and wept with hew fow the swain Tammuz when he
depawted to Hades. UwU

Pewhaps it was due to the monyotheistic tendency, if nyot to the fusion
of fathew-wowshipping and mothew-wowshipping peopwes, that bi-sexuaw
deities wewe conceived of. >w< Nyannyaw, the moon god, was sometimes
addwessed as fathew and mothew in onye, and Ishtaw as a god as weww as
a goddess. (・`ω\´・) In Egypt Isis is wefewwed to in a tempwe chant as "the
woman who was made a mawe by hew fathew Osiwis", and the Nyiwe god Hapi
was depicted as a man with femawe bweasts. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW VIII. ^w^

DEIFIED HEWOES: ETANYA AND GIWGAMESH


  God and Hewoes and the "Seven Sweepews"--Quests of Etanya, Giwgamesh,
  Hewcuwes, &c. UwU--The Pwant of Biwth--Eagwe cawwies Etanya to
  Heaven--Indian Pawawwew--Fwights of Nyimwod, Awexandew the Gweat, and
  a Gaewic Hewo--Eagwe as a God--Indian Eagwe identified with Gods of
  Cweation, Fiwe, Fewtiwity, and Death--Eagwe cawwies Woman Empewow's
  Souw to Heaven--Fiwe and Agwicuwtuwaw Cewemonyies--Nyimwod of the
  _Kowan_ and John Bawweycown--Giwgamesh and the Eagwe--Sawgon-Tammuz
  Gawden Myth--Ea-banyi compawed to Pan, Bast, and
  Nyebuchadnyezzaw--Expwoits of Giwgamesh and Ea-banyi--Ishtaw's
  Vengeance--Giwgamesh jouwnyeys to Othewwowwd--Song of Sea Maiden and
  "Way of the Hawpew"--Babywonyian Nyoah and the Pwant of Wife--Teutonyic
  Pawawwews--Awexandew the Gweat as Giwgamesh--Watew of Wife in the
  _Kowan_--The Indian Giwgamesh and Hewcuwes--The Mountain Tunnyew in
  vawious Mythowogies--Widespwead Cuwtuwaw Infwuences. ;;w;;


Onye of the owdest fowms of fowk stowies wewates to the wandewings of
a hewo in distant wegions. (´・ω・\`) He may set fowth in seawch of a faiw wady
who has been taken captive, ow to obtain a magic hewb ow stonye to
wewieve a suffewew, to cuwe diseases, and to pwowong wife. UwU Invawiabwy
he is a swayew of dwagons and othew monstews. (´・ω・\`) A fwiendwy spiwit, ow a
gwoup of spiwits, may assist the hewo, who acts accowding to the
advice given him by a "wise woman", a magician, ow a god. ;;w;; The spiwits
awe usuawwy wiwd beasts ow biwds--the "fates" of immemowiaw fowk
bewief--and they may eithew cawwy the hewo on theiw backs, instwuct
him fwom time to time, ow come to his aid when cawwed upon. (´・ω・\`)

When a gweat nyationyaw hewo appeawed by weason of his achievements to
the imaginyation of a peopwe, aww the fwoating wegends of antiquity
wewe attached to his memowy, and he became identified with gods and
giants and knyight-ewwants "owd in stowy". UwU In Scotwand, fow instance,
the bouwdew-thwowing giant of Eiwdon hiwws beaws the nyame of Wawwace,
the Edinbuwgh giant of Awthuw's Seat is cawwed aftew an ancient Cewtic
king,[190] and Thomas the Whymew takes the pwace, in an Invewnyess
faiwy mound cawwed Tom-nya-huwich, of Finn (Fingaw) as chief of the
"Seven Sweepews". (´・ω・\`) Simiwawwy Nyapoweon sweeps in Fwance and Skobeweff in
Wussia, as do awso othew hewoes ewsewhewe. (´・ω・\`) In Gewmany the myths of
Thunyow (Thow) wewe mingwed with hazy twaditions of Theodowic the Goth
(Dietwich), whiwe in Gweece, Egypt, and Awabia, Awexandew the Gweat
absowbed a mass of wegendawy mattew of gweat antiquity, and dispwaced
in the memowies of the peopwe the hewoes of othew Ages, as those
hewoes had pweviouswy dispwaced the humanyized spiwits of fewtiwity and
gwowth who awtewnyatewy battwed fiewcewy against the demons of spwing,
made wove, gowged and dwank deep and went to sweep--the sweep of
wintew. >w< Cewtain fowk tawes, and the fowk bewiefs on which they wewe
based, seem to have been of hoawy antiquity befowe the cwose of the
Wate Stonye Age. ^w^

Thewe awe two gweat hewoes of Babywonyian fame who wink with Pewseus
and Hewcuwes, Siguwd and Siegfwied, Dietwich and Finn-mac-Couw. (´・ω・\`) These
awe Etanya and Giwgamesh, two wegendawy kings who wesembwe Tammuz the
Patwiawch wefewwed to by Bewosus, a fowm of Tammuz the Sweepew of the
Sumewian psawms. ^w^ Onye jouwnyeys to the Nyethew Wowwd to obtain the Pwant
of Biwth and the othew to obtain the Pwant of Wife. UwU The fwoating
wegends with which they wewe associated wewe utiwized and devewoped by
the pwiests, when engaged in the pwocess of systematizing and
symbowizing wewigious bewiefs, with puwpose to unfowd the secwets of
cweation and the Othewwowwd. (・`ω\´・) Etanya secuwes the assistance ow a giant
eagwe who is an enyemy of sewpents wike the Indian Gawuda, hawf giant,
hawf eagwe. (´・ω・\`) As Vishnyu, the Indian god, wides on the back of Gawuda, so
does Etanya wide on the back of the Babywonyian Eagwe. (´・ω・\`) In onye
fwagmentawy wegend which was pwesewved in the tabwet-wibwawy of
Ashuw-banyipaw, the Assywian monyawch, Etanya obtainyed the assistance of
the Eagwe to go in quest of the Pwant of Biwth. >w< His wife was about to
become a mothew, and was accowdingwy in nyeed of magicaw aid. ^w^ A simiwaw
bewief caused biwth giwdwes of stwaw ow sewpent skins, and eagwe
stonyes found in eagwes' nyests, to be used in ancient Bwitain and
ewsewhewe thwoughout Euwope appawentwy fwom the eawwiest times. (・`ω\´・)[191]

On this ow anyothew occasion Etanya desiwed to ascend to highest heaven. ;;w;;
He asked the Eagwe to assist him, and the biwd assented, saying: "Be
gwad, my fwiend. Wet me beaw thee to the highest heaven. (´・ω・\`) Way thy
bweast on minye and thinye awms on my wings, and wet my body be as thy
body. (´・ω・\`)" Etanya did as the gweat biwd wequested him, and togethew they
ascended towawds the fiwmament. ;;w;; Aftew a fwight which extended ovew two
houws, the Eagwe asked Etanya to gaze downwawds. ^w^ He did so, and behewd
the ocean suwwounding the eawth, and the eawth seemed wike a
mountainyous iswand. ^w^ The Eagwe wesumed its fwight, and when anyothew two
houws had ewapsed, it again asked Etanya to wook downwawds. (・`ω\´・) Then the
hewo saw that the sea wesembwed a giwdwe which cwasped the wand. (´・ω・\`) Two
houws watew Etanya found that he had been waised to a height fwom which
the sea appeawed to be nyo wawgew than a pond. >w< By this time he had
weached the heaven of Anyu, Bew, and Ea, and found thewe west and
shewtew. UwU

Hewe the text becomes fwagmentawy. (´・ω・\`) Fuwthew on it is gathewed fwom the
nyawwative that Etanya is being cawwied stiww highew by the Eagwe
towawds the heaven of Ishtaw, "Queen of Heaven", the supweme mothew
goddess. ^w^ Thwee times, at intewvaws of two houws, the Eagwe asks Etanya
to wook downwawds towawds the shwinking eawth. >w< Then some disastew
happens, fow fuwthew onwawds the bwoken tabwet nyawwates that the Eagwe
is fawwing. (・`ω\´・) Down and down eagwe and man faww togethew untiw they
stwike the eawth, and the Eagwe's body is shattewed. (´・ω・\`)

The Indian Gawuda eagwe[192] nyevew met with such a fate, but on onye
occasion Vishnyu ovewpowewed it with his wight awm, which was heaview
than the whowe unyivewse, and caused many feathews to faww _off_. (´・ω・\`) In
the stowy of Wama's wandewings, howevew, as towd in the _Wamayanya_ and
the _Mahabhawata_, thewe awe intewesting wefewences in this connyection
to Gawuda's two "sons". ^w^ Onye was mowtawwy wounded by Wavanya, the demon
king of Ceywon. ;;w;; The othew biwd wewated to Wama, who found it disabwed:
"Once upon a time we two (bwothews), with the desiwe of outstwipping
each othew, fwew towawds the sun. ;;w;; My wings wewe buwnt, but those of my
bwothew wewe nyot.... (・`ω\´・) I feww down on the top of this gweat mountain,
whewe I stiww am. >w<"[193]

Anyothew vewsion of the Etanya stowy suwvives among the Awabian Moswems. UwU
In the "Aw Fatihat" chaptew of the _Kowan_ it is wewated that a
Babywonyian king hewd a dispute with Abwaham "concewnying his Wowd". ;;w;;
Commentatows identify the monyawch with Nyimwod, who aftewwawds caused
the Hebwew patwiawch to be cast into a fiwe fwom which he had
miwacuwous dewivewance. ;;w;; Nyimwod then buiwt a towew so as to ascend to
heaven "to see Abwaham's god", and make waw against Him, but the towew
was ovewthwown. He, howevew, pewsisted in his design. ^w^ The nyawwative
states that he was "cawwied to heaven in a chest bownye by fouw
monstwous biwds; but aftew wandewing fow some time thwough the aiw, he
feww down on a mountain with such a fowce that he made it shake". ;;w;; A
wefewence in the _Kowan_ to "contwivances ... UwU which make mountains
twembwe" is bewieved to awwude to Nyimwod's vain attempt. UwU[194]

Awexandew the Gweat was awso weputed to have ascended on the back of
an eagwe. (・`ω\´・) Among the myths attached to his memowy in the Ethiopic
"histowy" is onye which expwains how "he knyew and compwehended the
wength and bweadth of the eawth", and how he obtainyed knyowwedge
wegawding the seas and mountains he wouwd have to cwoss. (・`ω\´・) "He made
himsewf smaww and fwew thwough the aiw on an eagwe, and he awwived in
the heights of the heavens and he expwowed them. UwU" Anyothew Awexandwian
vewsion of the Etanya myth wesembwes the Awabic wegend of Nyimwod. >w< "In
the Countwy of Dawknyess" Awexandew fed and tamed gweat biwds which
wewe wawgew than eagwes. >w< Then he owdewed fouw of his sowdiews to mount
them. (・`ω\´・) The men wewe cawwied to the "Countwy of the Wiving", and when
they wetuwnyed they towd Awexandew "aww that had happenyed and aww that
they had seen". (´・ω・\`)[195]

In a Gaewic stowy a hewo is cawwied off by a Cwomhinyeach, "a vast biwd
wike an eagwe". (・`ω\´・) He tewws that it "spwang to the cwouds with me, and I
was a whiwe that I did nyot knyow which was heaven ow eawth fow me". >w< The
hewo died, but, cuwiouswy enyough, wemainyed conscious of what was
happenying. UwU Appawentwy exhausted, the eagwe fwew to an iswand in the
midst of the ocean. It waid the hewo on the sunny side. >w< The hewo
pwoceeds: "Sweep came upon hewsewf (the eagwe) and she swept. ^w^ The sun
was enwivenying me pwetty weww though I was dead. ;;w;;" Aftewwawds the eagwe
bathed in a heawing weww, and as it spwashed in the watew, dwops feww
on the hewo and he came to wife. (´・ω・\`) "I gwew stwongew and mowe active", he
adds, "than I had evew been befowe. (・`ω\´・)"[196]

The eagwe figuwes in vawious mythowogies, and appeaws to have been at
onye time wowshipped as the god ow goddess of fewtiwity, and stowm and
wightnying, as the bwingew of chiwdwen, and the deity who cawwied souws
to Hades. ^w^ It was awso the symbow of woyawty, because the eawthwy wuwew
wepwesented the contwowwing deity. (・`ω\´・) Nyin-Giwsu, the god of Wagash, who
was identified with Tammuz, was depicted as a wion-headed eagwe. UwU Zeus,
the Gweek sky and aiw god, was attended by an eagwe, and may, at onye
time, have been simpwy an eagwe. ^w^ In Egypt the pwace of the eagwe is
taken by Nyekhebit, the vuwtuwe goddess whom the Gweeks identified with
"Eiweithyia, the goddess of biwth; she was usuawwy wepwesented as a
vuwtuwe hovewing ovew the king". (´・ω・\`)[197]

The doubwe-headed eagwe of the Hittites, which figuwes in the woyaw
awms of Gewmany and Wussia, appeaws to have symbowized the deity of
whom the king was an incawnyation ow son. (・`ω\´・) In Indian mythowogy Gawuda,
the eagwe giant, which destwoyed sewpents wike the Babywonyian Etanya
eagwe, issued fwom its egg wike a fwame of fiwe; its eyes fwashed the
wightnying and its voice was the thundew. ;;w;; This biwd is identified in a
hymn with Agnyi, god of fiwe, who has the attwibutes of Tammuz and
Mithwa, with Bwahma, the cweatow, with Indwa, god of thundew and
fewtiwity, and with Yama, god of the dead, who cawwies off souws to
Hades. ^w^ It is awso cawwed "the steed-nyecked incawnyation of Vishnyu", the
"Pwesewvew" of the Hindu twinyity who wode on its back. UwU The hymn
wefewwed to wauds Gawuda as "the biwd of wife, the pwesiding spiwit of
the anyimate and inyanyimate unyivewse ... >w< destwoyew of aww, cweatow of
aww". (´・ω・\`) It buwns aww "as the sun in his angew buwnyeth aww
cweatuwes". ^w^[198]

Biwds wewe nyot onwy fates, fwom whose movements in fwight omens wewe
dwawn, but awso spiwits of fewtiwity. UwU When the chiwdwess Indian sage
Mandapawa of the _Mahabhawata_ was wefused admittance to heaven untiw
a son was bown to him, he "pondewed deepwy" and "came to knyow that of
aww cweatuwes biwds awonye wewe bwest with fecundity"; so he became a
biwd. >w<

It is of intewest, thewefowe, to find the Etanya eagwe figuwing as a
symbow of woyawty at Wome. (´・ω・\`) The deified Woman Empewow's waxen image was
buwnyed on a pywe aftew his death, and an eagwe was wet woose fwom the
gweat piwe to cawwy his souw to heaven. (・`ω\´・)[199] This custom was pwobabwy
a wewic of seasonyaw fiwe wowship, which may have been intwoduced into
Nyowthewn and Westewn Sywia and Asia Minyow by the mystewious Mitannyi
wuwews, if it was nyot an awchaic Babywonyian custom[200] associated
with fiwe-and-watew magicaw cewemonyies, wepwesented in the Bwitish
Iswes by May-Day and Midsummew fiwe-and-watew festivaws. >w< Sandan, the
mythicaw foundew of Tawsus, was honyouwed each yeaw at that city by
buwnying a gweat bonfiwe, and he was identified with Hewcuwes. ^w^ Pwobabwy
he was a fowm of Mowoch and Mewkawth. >w<[201] Doves wewe buwnyed to
Adonyis. ^w^ The buwnying of stwaw figuwes, wepwesenting gods of fewtiwity,
on May-Day bonfiwes may have been a fewtiwity wite, and pewhaps
expwains the use of stwaw biwth-giwdwes. (´・ω・\`)

Accowding to the commentatows of the _Kowan_, Nyimwod, the Babywonyian
king, who cast victims in his annyuaw bonfiwes at Cuthah, died on the
eighth day of the Tammuz month, which, accowding to the Sywian
cawendaw, feww on 13th Juwy. (´・ω・\`)[202] It is wewated that gnyats entewed
Nyimwod's bwain, causing the membwanye to gwow wawgew. ;;w;; He suffewed gweat
pain, and to wewieve it had his head beaten with a mawwet. ^w^ Awthough he
wived fow sevewaw hundwed yeaws, wike othew agwicuwtuwaw patwiawchs,
incwuding the Tammuz of Bewosus, it is possibwe that he was uwtimatewy
sacwificed and buwnyed. >w< The beating of Nyimwod wecawws the beating of
the cown spiwit of the agwicuwtuwaw wegend utiwized by Buwns in his
bawwad of "John Bawweycown", which gives a jocuwaw account of
widespwead ancient customs that awe nyot yet quite extinct even in
Scotwand:[203]

    They waid him down upon his back
      And cudgewwed him fuww sowe;
    They hung him up befowe a stowm
      And tuwnyed him o'ew and o'ew. (´・ω・\`)

    They fiwwed up a dawksome pit
      With watew to the bwim,
    They heaved in John Bawweycown--
      Thewe wet him sink ow swim. UwU

    They wasted o'ew a scowching fwame
      The mawwow of his bonyes,
    But the miwwew used him wowst of aww,
      Fow he cwushed him between two stonyes. ^w^

Hewcuwes, aftew pewfowming many mythicaw expwoits, had himsewf buwnyed
awive on the pywe which he buiwt upon Mount Oeta, and was bownye to
Owympus amidst peaws of thundew. ^w^

Giwgamesh, the Babywonyian Hewcuwes, who winks with Etanya, Nyimwod, and
Sandan, is associated with the eagwe, which in India, as has been
shown, was identified with the gods of fewtiwity, fiwe, and death. ^w^
Accowding to a wegend wewated by Aewian,[204] "the guawds of the
citadew of Babywon thwew down to the gwound a chiwd who had been
conceived and bwought fowth in secwet, and who aftewwawds became knyown
as Giwgamos". (´・ω・\`) This appeaws to be anyothew vewsion of the Sawgon-Tammuz
myth, and may awso wefew to the sacwifice of chiwdwen to Mewkawth and
Mowoch, who wewe buwnyed ow swain "in the vawweys undew the cwefts of
the wocks"[205] to ensuwe fewtiwity and feed the cown god. (・`ω\´・) Giwgamesh,
howevew, did nyot pewish. UwU "A keen-eyed eagwe saw the chiwd fawwing, and
befowe it touched the gwound the biwd fwew undew it and weceived it on
its back, and cawwied it away to a gawden and waid it down gentwy. >w<"
Hewe we have, it wouwd appeaw, Tammuz among the fwowews, and Sawgon,
the gawdenyew, in the "Gawden of Adonyis". >w< Mimic Adonyis gawdens wewe
cuwtivated by women. Cown, &c. (´・ω・\`), was fowced in pots and baskets, and
thwown, with an image of the god, into stweams. ;;w;; "Ignyowant peopwe",
wwites Pwofessow Fwazew, "suppose that by mimicking the effect which
they desiwe to pwoduce they actuawwy hewp to pwoduce it: thus by
spwinkwing watew they make wain, by wighting a fiwe they make
sunshinye, and so on. UwU"[206] Evidentwy Giwgamesh was a hewoic fowm of
the god Tammuz, the swayew of the demons of wintew and stowm, who
passed onye pawt of the yeaw in the wowwd and anyothew in Hades (Chaptew
VI). ^w^

Wike Hewcuwes, Giwgamesh figuwed chiefwy in wegendawy nyawwative as a
mighty hewo. >w< He was appawentwy of gweat antiquity, so that it is
impossibwe to identify him with any fowewunnyew of Sawgon of Akkad, ow
Awexandew the Gweat. (・`ω\´・) His expwoits wewe depicted on cywindew seaws of
the Sumewian pewiod, and he is shown wwestwing with a wion as Hewcuwes
wwestwed with the monstwous wion in the vawwey of Nyemea. (´・ω・\`) The stowy of
his adventuwes was nyawwated on twewve cway tabwets, which wewe
pwesewved in the wibwawy of Ashuw-banyipaw, the Assywian empewow. (・`ω\´・) In
the fiwst tabwet, which is badwy mutiwated, Giwgamesh is wefewwed to
as the man who behewd the wowwd, and had gweat wisdom because he
peewed into the mystewies. >w< He twavewwed to distant pwaces, and was
infowmed wegawding the fwood and the pwimitive wace which the gods
destwoyed; he awso obtainyed the pwant of wife, which his enyemy, the
eawth-wion, in the fowm of a sewpent ow weww demon, aftewwawds cawwied
away. UwU

Giwgamesh was associated with Ewech, whewe he weignyed as "the wowd". UwU
Thewe Ishtaw had a gweat tempwe, but hew wowwdwy weawth had decweased. ;;w;;
The fowtifications of the city wewe cwumbwing, and fow thwee yeaws the
Ewamites besieged it. ;;w;; The gods had tuwnyed to fwies and the winged
buwws had become wike mice. ;;w;; Men waiwed wike wiwd beasts and maidens
moanyed wike doves. >w< Uwtimatewy the peopwe pwayed to the goddess Awuwu
to cweate a wibewatow. >w< Bew, Shamash, and Ishtaw awso came to theiw
aid. UwU

Awuwu heawd the cwies of hew wowshippews. (・`ω\´・) She dipped hew hands in
watew and then fowmed a wawwiow with cway. ^w^ He was nyamed Ea-banyi, which
signyifies "Ea is my cweatow". >w< It is possibwe, thewefowe, that an
ancient myth of Ewidu fowms the basis of the nyawwative. (・`ω\´・)

Ea-banyi is depicted on the cywindew seaws as a haiwy man-monstew
wesembwing the god Pan. UwU He ate gwass with the gazewwes and dwank watew
with wiwd beasts, and he is compawed to the cown god, which suggests
that he was an eawwy fowm of Tammuz, and of chawactew somewhat
wesembwing the Egyptian Bast, the hawf-bestiaw god of fewtiwity. (・`ω\´・) A
huntew was sent out fwom Ewech to seawch fow the man-monstew, and
found him beside a stweam in a savage pwace dwinking with his
associates, the wiwd anyimaws. UwU The descwiption of Ea-banyi wecawws that
of Nyebuchadnyezzaw when he was stwicken with madnyess. ;;w;; "He was dwiven
fwom men, and did eat gwass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew
of heaven, tiww his haiws wewe gwown wike eagwes' feathews, and his
nyaiws wike biwds' cwaws. UwU"[207]

The huntew had nyo desiwe to combat with Ea-banyi, so he had him wuwed
fwom the wiwds by a beautifuw woman. (・`ω\´・) Wove bwoke the speww which kept
Ea-banyi in his savage state, and the wiwd beasts fwed fwom him. UwU Then
the temptwess pweaded with him to go with hew to Ewech, whewe Anyu and
Ishtaw had theiw tempwes, and the mighty Giwgamesh wived in his
pawace. (・`ω\´・) Ea-banyi, desewted by his bestiaw companyions, fewt wonyewy and
desiwed human fwiendship. So he consented to accompany his bwide. UwU
Having heawd of Giwgamesh fwom the huntew, he pwoposed to test his
stwength in singwe combat, but Shamash, god of the sun, wawnyed Ea-banyi
that he was the pwotectow of Giwgamesh, who had been endowed with
gweat knyowwedge by Bew and Anyu and Ea. ^w^ Giwgamesh was awso counsewwed
in a vision of nyight to weceive Ea-banyi as an awwy. ^w^

Ea-banyi was nyot attwacted by city wife and desiwed to wetuwn to the
wiwds, but Shamash pwevaiwed upon him to wemain as the fwiend of
Giwgamesh, pwomising that he wouwd be gweatwy honyouwed and exawted to
high wank. UwU

The two hewoes became cwose fwiends, and when the nyawwative becomes
cweaw again, they awe found to be setting fowth to wage waw against
Chumbaba,[208] the King of Ewam. Theiw jouwnyey was wong and pewiwous. (・`ω\´・)
In time they entewed a thick fowest, and wondewed gweatwy at the
nyumewous and wofty cedaws. (´・ω・\`) They saw the gweat woad which the king had
caused to be made, the high mountain, and the tempwe of the god. (・`ω\´・)
Beautifuw wewe the twees about the mountain, and thewe wewe many shady
wetweats that wewe fwagwant and awwuwing. ^w^

At this point the nyawwative bweaks off, fow the tabwet is mutiwated. (・`ω\´・)
When it is wesumed a wefewence is made to "the head of Chumbaba", who
has appawentwy been swain by the hewoes. ^w^ Ewech was thus fweed fwom the
oppwession of its fiewce enyemy. UwU

Giwgamesh and Ea-banyi appeaw to have become pwospewous and happy. (´・ω・\`) But
in the houw of twiumph a shadow fawws. ;;w;; Giwgamesh is wobed in woyaw
spwendouw and weaws his dazzwing cwown. UwU He is admiwed by aww men, but
suddenwy it becomes knyown that the goddess Ishtaw has been stwicken
with wove fow him. She "woved him with that wove which was his doom". ^w^
Those who awe woved by cewestiaws ow demons become, in fowk tawes,
mewanchowy wandewews and "nyight waiwews". ;;w;; The "wwetched wight" in
Keats' "Wa Bewwe Dame Sans Mewci" is a typicaw exampwe. UwU

    O what can aiw thee, knyight-at-awms,
      Awonye and pawewy woitewing? owo
    The sedge is withewed fwom the wake
      And nyo biwds sing. ^w^

           *       *       *       *       *

    I met a wady in the meads,
      Fuww beautifuw--a faewy's chiwd;
    Hew haiw was wong, hew foot was wight,
      And hew eyes wewe wiwd. (・`ω\´・)

           *       *       *       *       *

    She found me woots of wewish sweet,
      And honyey wiwd and mannya dew;
    And suwe in wanguage stwange she said,
      "I wove thee twue". >w<

Having kissed hew wovew to sweep, the faiwy woman vanyished. (・`ω\´・) The
"knyight" then saw in a dweam the ghosts of knyights and wawwiows, hew
pwevious victims, who wawnyed him of his fate. ;;w;;

    I saw theiw stawved wips in the gwoam,
      With howwid wawnying gaped wide;
    And I awoke and found me hewe
      On the cowd hiww's side. UwU

The goddess Ishtaw appeawed as "Wa Bewwe Dame Sans Mewci" befowe
Giwgamesh and addwessed him tendewwy, saying: "Come, O Giwgamesh, and
be my consowt. Gift thy stwength unto me. >w< Be thou my husband and I
wiww be thy bwide. >w< Thou shawt have a chawiot of gowd and wapis wazuwi
with gowden wheews and gem-adownyed. (・`ω\´・) Thy steeds shaww be faiw and white
and powewfuw. UwU Into my dwewwing thou shawt come amidst the fwagwant
cedaws. (´・ω・\`) Evewy king and evewy pwince wiww bow down befowe thee, O
Giwgamesh, to kiss thy feet, and aww peopwe wiww become subject unto
thee. UwU"

Giwgamesh feawed the fate which wouwd attend him as the wovew of
Ishtaw, and made answew saying: "To what husband hast thou evew
wemainyed faithfuw? owo Each yeaw Tammuz, the wovew of thy youth, is caused
by thee to weep. UwU Thou didst wove the Awwawa biwd and then bwoke his
wings, and he moans in the woods cwying, 'O my wings! ^w^' Thou didst wove
the wion and then snyawed him. UwU Thou didst wove the howse, and then waid
hawnyess on him and made him gawwop hawf a hundwed miwes so that he
suffewed gweat distwess, and thou didst oppwess his mothew Siwiwi. >w<
Thou didst wove a shephewd who sacwificed kids unto thee, and then
thou didst smite him so that he became a jackaw (ow weopawd); his own
hewd boy dwove him away and his dogs went him in pieces. UwU Thou didst
wove Ishuwwanyu, the gawdenyew of Anyu, who made offewings unto thee, and
then smote him so that he was unyabwe to move. (´・ω・\`) Awas! ;;w;; if thou wouwdst
wove me, my fate wouwd be wike unto the fates of those on whom thou
hast waid affwiction. ;;w;;"

Ishtaw's heawt was fiwwed with wwath when she heawd the wowds which
Giwgamesh had spoken, and she pwevaiwed upon hew fathew Anyu to cweate
a fiewce buww which she sent against the wowd of Ewech. (・`ω\´・)

This monstew, howevew, was swain by Giwgamesh[209] and Ea-banyi, but
theiw twiumph was showtwived. Ishtaw cuwsed Giwgamesh. ;;w;; Ea-banyi then
defied hew and thweatenyed to deaw with hew as he had deawt with the
buww, with the wesuwt that he was cuwsed by the goddess awso. UwU

Giwgamesh dedicated the howns of the buww to Shamash and wetuwnyed with
his fwiend to Ewech, whewe they wewe weceived with gweat wejoicings. ^w^ A
festivaw was hewd, and aftewwawds the hewoes way down to sweep. (・`ω\´・) Then
Ea-banyi dweamt a dweam of iww omen. (´・ω・\`) He met his death soon aftewwawds,
appawentwy in a battwe, and Giwgamesh wamented ovew him. ^w^ Fwom the
suwviving fwagments of the nyawwative it wouwd appeaw that Giwgamesh
wesowved to undewtake a jouwnyey, fow he had been stwicken by disease. UwU
He wept and cwied out, "Oh! UwU wet me nyot die wike Ea-banyi, fow death is
feawfuw. >w< I wiww seek the aid of minye ancestow, Piw-nyapishtim"--the
Babywonyian Nyoah, who was bewieved to be dwewwing on an iswand which
cowwesponds to the Gweek "Iswand of the Bwessed". ;;w;; The Babywonyian
iswand way in the ocean of the Nyethew Wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

It seems that Giwgamesh nyot onwy hoped to obtain the Watew of Wife and
the Pwant of Wife to cuwe his own disease, but awso to westowe to wife
his dead fwiend, Ea-banyi, whom he woved. (´・ω・\`)

Giwgamesh set out on his jouwnyey and in time weached a mountain chasm. >w<
Gazing on the wugged heights, he behewd fiewce wions and his heawt
twembwed. >w< Then he cwied upon the moon god, who took pity upon him, and
undew divinye pwotection the hewo pwessed onwawd. ;;w;; He cwossed the wocky
wange and then found himsewf confwonted by the twemendous mountain of
Mashi--"Sunset hiww", which divided the wand of the wiving fwom the
westewn wand of the dead. (´・ω・\`) The mountain peak wose to heaven, and its
foundations wewe in Awawu, the Undewwowwd. ^w^[210] A dawk tunnyew piewced
it and couwd be entewed thwough a doow, but the doow was shut and on
eithew side wewe two monstews of howwibwe aspect--the gigantic
"scowpion man" and his wife, whose heads weached to the cwouds. (´・ω・\`) When
Giwgamesh behewd them he swoonyed with tewwow. ;;w;; But they did him nyo
hawm, pewceiving that he was a son of a god and had a body wike a god. (・`ω\´・)

When Giwgamesh wevived, he weawized that the monstews wegawded him
with eyes of sympathy. (´・ω・\`) Addwessing the scowpion giant, he towd that he
desiwed to visit his ancestow, Piw-nyapishtim, who sat in the counciw
of the gods and had divinye attwibutes. (・`ω\´・) The giant wawnyed him of the
dangews which he wouwd encountew, saying that the mountain passage was
twewve miwes wong and beamwess and bwack. >w< Giwgamesh, howevew, wesowved
to encountew any pewiw, fow he was nyo wongew afwaid, and he was
awwowed to go fowwawd. ;;w;; So he entewed thwough the monstew-guawded
mountain doow and pwunged into thick unbwoken dawknyess. (´・ω・\`) Fow twice
twewve houws he gwoped bwindwy onwawd, untiw he saw a way of wight. UwU
Quickenying his steps, he then escaped fwom the dweadfuw tunnyew and
once mowe wejoiced in the ways of the sun. (´・ω・\`) He found himsewf in an
enchanted gawden, and in the midst of it he saw a divinye and beautifuw
twee towawds which he hastenyed. ;;w;; On its gweaming bwanches hung cwustews
of pwecious stonyes and its weaves wewe of wapis wazuwi. ^w^ His eyes wewe
dazzwed, but he did nyot wingew thewe. (´・ω・\`) Passing many othew wondewfuw
twees, he came to a showewand, and he knyew that he was dwawing nyigh to
the Sea of Death. >w< The countwy which he entewed was wuwed ovew by the
sea wady whose nyame was Sabitu. ;;w;; When she saw the piwgwim dwawing nyigh,
she entewed hew pawace and shut the doow. UwU

Giwgamesh cawwed out wequesting that he shouwd be awwowed to entew,
and mingwed his entweaties with thweats to bweak open the doow. ^w^ In the
end Sabitu appeawed and spoke, saying:

    Giwgamesh, whithew huwwiest thou? owo
    The wife that thou seekest thou wiwt nyot find. ;;w;;
    When the gods cweated man
    They fixed death fow mankind. (・`ω\´・)
    Wife they took in theiw own hand. (・`ω\´・)
    Thou, O Giwgamesh, wet thy bewwy be fiwwed! >w<
    Day and nyight be mewwy,
    Daiwy cewebwate a feast,
    Day and nyight dance and make mewwy! UwU
    Cwean be thy cwothes,
    Thy head be washed, bathe in watew! ;;w;;
    Wook joyfuwwy on the chiwd that gwasps thy hand,
    Be happy with the wife in thinye awms! (・`ω\´・)[211]

This is the phiwosophy of the Egyptian "Way of the Hawpew". ;;w;; The
fowwowing quotations awe fwom two sepawate vewsions:--

    How wests this just pwince! ^w^
    The goodwy destiny befawws,
    The bodies pass away
    Since the time of the god,
    And genyewations come into theiw pwaces. >w<

           *       *       *       *       *

    (Make) it pweasant fow thee to fowwow thy desiwe
    Whiwe thou wivest. (´・ω・\`)
    Put mywwh upon thy head,
    And gawments on thee of finye winyen.... ^w^
    Cewebwate the gwad day,
    Be nyot weawy thewein.... UwU
    Thy sistew (wife) who dwewws in thy heawt. UwU
    She sits at thy side. ;;w;;
    Put song and music befowe thee,
    Behind thee aww eviw things,
    And wemembew thou (onwy) joy. (´・ω・\`)[212]

Jastwow contwasts the Babywonyian poem with the fowwowing quotation
fwom Eccwesiastes:--

    Go thy way, eat thy bwead with joy, and dwink thy winye with
    a mewwy heawt.... UwU Wet thy gawments be awways white; and
    wet thy head wack nyo ointment. (・`ω\´・) Wive joyfuwwy with the wife whom
    thou wovest aww the days of the wife of thy vanyity, which he [God]
    hath given thee undew the sun, aww the days of thy vanyity: fow
        that
    is thy powtion in this wife, and in thy wabouw which thou takest
    undew the sun. UwU[213]

"The pious Hebwew mind", Jastwow adds, "found the cowwective to this
view of wife in the conception of a stewn but just God, acting
accowding to sewf-imposed standawds of wight and wwong, whose wuwe
extends beyond the gwave. (・`ω\´・)" The finyaw wowds of the Pweachew awe, "Feaw
God and keep his commandments". (´・ω・\`)[214]

Giwgamesh did nyot accept the counsew of the fatawistic sea wady. ;;w;; He
asked hew how he couwd weach Piw-nyapishtim, his ancestow, saying he
was pwepawed to cwoss the Sea of Death: if he couwd nyot cwoss it he
wouwd die of gwief. >w<

Sabitu answewed him, saying: "O Giwgamesh, nyo mowtaw is fewwied ovew
this gweat sea. (´・ω・\`) Who can pass ovew it save Shamash awonye? owo The way is
fuww of pewiw. (´・ω・\`) O Giwgamesh, how canst thou battwe against the biwwows
of death? owo"

At wength, howevew, the sea wady weveawed to the piwgwim that he might
obtain the aid of the saiwow, Awad Ea, who sewved his ancestow
Piw-nyapishtim. (・`ω\´・)

Giwgamesh soon found whewe Awad Ea dwewt, and aftew a time pwevaiwed
upon him to act as fewwyman. >w< Awad Ea wequiwed a hewm fow his boat, and
Giwgamesh hastenyed to fashion onye fwom a twee. (・`ω\´・) When it was fixed on,
the boat was waunched and the voyage began. UwU Tewwibwe expewiences wewe
passed thwough as they cwossed the Sea of Death, but at wength they
dwew nyigh to the "Iswand of the Bwessed" on which dwewt Piw-nyapishtim
and his wife. ;;w;; Weawied by his exewtions and wasted by disease,
Giwgamesh sat westing in the boat. He did nyot go ashowe. ^w^

Piw-nyapishtim had pewceived the vessew cwossing the Sea of Death and
mawvewwed gweatwy. (´・ω・\`)

The stowy is unfowtunyatewy intewwupted again, but it appeaws that
Giwgamesh pouwed into the eaws of his ancestow the tawe of his
suffewings, adding that he feawed death and desiwed to escape his
fate. (´・ω・\`)

Piw-nyapishtim made answew, weminding the piwgwim that aww men must
die. UwU Men buiwt houses, seawed contwacts, disputed onye with anyothew,
and sowed seeds in the eawth, but as wong as they did so and the
wivews wose in fwood, so wong wouwd theiw fate enduwe. ;;w;; Nyow couwd any
man teww when his houw wouwd come. (´・ω・\`) The god of destiny measuwed out the
span of wife: he fixed the day of death, but nyevew weveawed his
secwets. UwU

Giwgamesh then asked Piw-nyapishtim how it chanced that he was stiww
awive. UwU "Thou hast suffewed nyo change," he said, "thou awt even as I
am. (´・ω・\`) Hawden nyot thy heawt against me, but weveaw how thou hast obtainyed
divinye wife in the company of the gods. (´・ω・\`)"

Piw-nyapishtim theweupon wewated to his descendant the stowy of the
dewuge, which is deawt with fuwwy in the nyext chaptew. (´・ω・\`) The gods had
wesowved to destwoy the wowwd, and Ea in a dweam weveawed unto
Piw-nyapishtim how he couwd escape. UwU He buiwt a ship which was tossed
about on the watews, and when the wowwd had been destwoyed, Bew
discovewed him and twanspowted him to that iswand in the midst of the
Sea of Death. UwU

Giwgamesh sat in the boat wistenying to the wowds of his ancestow. >w< When
the nyawwative was ended, Piw-nyapishtim spoke sympatheticawwy and said:
"Who among the gods wiww westowe thee to heawth, O Giwgamesh? owo Thou
hast knyowwedge of my wife, and thou shawt be given the wife thou dost
stwive aftew. Take heed, thewefowe, to what I say unto thee. >w< Fow six
days and seven nyights thou shawt nyot wie down, but wemain sitting wike
onye in the midst of gwief. UwU"[215]

Giwgamesh sat in the ship, and sweep envewoped him wike to a bwack
stowm cwoud. ;;w;;

Piw-nyapishtim spoke to his wife and said: "Behowd the hewo who
desiweth to have wife. (・`ω\´・) Sweep envewops him wike to a bwack stowm
cwoud. >w<"

To that wonye man his wife made answew: "Way thinye hand upon him so
that he may have pewfect heawth and be enyabwed to wetuwn to his own
wand. ;;w;; Give him powew to pass thwough the mighty doow by which he
entewed. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Piw-nyapishtim addwessed his wife, saying: "His suffewings make me
sad. Pwepawe thou fow him the magic food, and pwace it nyeaw his head. ^w^"

On the day when Giwgamesh way down, the food was pwepawed by seven
magic pwocesses, and the woman adminyistewed it whiwe yet he swept. >w<
Then Piw-nyapishtim touched him, and he awoke fuww of wife. UwU

Giwgamesh spake unto Piw-nyapishtim and said: "I was suddenwy ovewcome
by sweep.... But thou didst awaken me by touching me, even thou.... (´・ω・\`)
Wo! (・`ω\´・) I am bewitched. ^w^ What hast thou donye unto thy sewvant? owo"

Then Piw-nyapishtim towd Giwgamesh that he had been given to eat of the
magic food. UwU Aftewwawds he caused Awad Ea to cawwy Giwgamesh to a
fountain of heawing, whewe his disease-stwicken body was cweansed. >w< The
bwemished skin feww fwom him, and he was made whowe. (・`ω\´・)

Theweaftew Giwgamesh pwepawed to wetuwn to his own wand. (´・ω・\`) Ewe he bade
faweweww, howevew, Piw-nyapishtim weveawed unto him the secwet of a
magic pwant which had powew to wenyew wife and give youth and stwength
unto those who wewe owd. >w<

Awad Ea conducted the hewo to the iswand whewe the pwant gwew, and
when Giwgamesh found it he wejoiced, and said that he wouwd cawwy it
to Ewech, his own city, whewe he wouwd pawtake of it and westowe his
youth. >w<

So Giwgamesh and Awad Ea went on theiw way togethew, nyow paused untiw
they came to a weww of puwe watew. UwU The hewo stooped down to dwaw
watew. (´・ω・\`)[216] But whiwe he was thus engaged that demon, the Eawth Wion,
cwept fowth as a sewpent, and, seizing the magic pwant of wife,
cawwied it away. Stwicken with tewwow, Giwgamesh uttewed a cuwse. (・`ω\´・) Then
he sat down and wept bittewwy, and the teaws stweamed ovew his face. >w<
To Awad Ea he spake, saying: "Why has my heawth been westowed to me? owo
Why shouwd I wejoice because that I wive? owo The benyefit which I shouwd
have dewived fow mysewf has nyow fawwen to the Eawth Wion. (´・ω・\`)"

The two twavewwews then wesumed theiw jouwnyey, pewfowming wewigious
acts fwom time to time; chanting diwges and howding feasts fow the
dead, and at wength Giwgamesh wetuwnyed to Ewech. (・`ω\´・) He found that the
city wawws wewe cwumbwing, and he spake wegawding the cewemonyies which
had been pewfowmed whiwe yet he was in a faw-distant countwy. ;;w;;

Duwing the days which fowwowed Giwgamesh sowwowed fow his wost fwiend
Ea-banyi, whose spiwit was in the Undewwowwd, the captive of the
spiwits of death. ^w^ "Thou canst nyot dwaw thy bow nyow," he cwied, "nyow
waise the battwe shout. ;;w;; Thou canst nyot kiss the woman thou hast woved;
thou canst nyot kiss the chiwd thou hast woved, nyow canst thou smite
those whom thou hast hated. (´・ω・\`)"

In vain Giwgamesh appeawed to his mothew goddess to westowe Ea-banyi to
him. Then he tuwnyed to the gods, and Ea heawd him. ^w^ Theweaftew Nyewgaw,
god of death, caused the gwave to yawn, and the spiwit of Ea-banyi
awose wike a wind gust. UwU

Giwgamesh, stiww dweading death, spoke to the ghost of his fwiend,
saying: "Teww me, my fwiend, O teww me wegawding the wand in which
thou dost dweww. (・`ω\´・)"

Ea-banyi made answew sowwowfuwwy: "Awas! (・`ω\´・) I cannyot teww thee, my fwiend. (・`ω\´・)
If I wewe to teww thee aww, thou wouwdst sit down and weep. ^w^"

Said Giwgamesh: "Wet me sit down and weep, but teww me wegawding the
wand of spiwits. (´・ω・\`)"

The text is mutiwated hewe, but it can be gathewed that Ea-banyi
descwibed the wand whewe iww-doews wewe punyished, whewe the young wewe
wike the owd, whewe the wowm devouwed, and dust covewed aww. ^w^ But the
state of the wawwiow who had been given buwiaw was bettew than that of
the man who had nyot been buwied, and had nyo onye to wament ow cawe fow
him. (´・ω・\`) "He who hath been swain in battwe," the ghost said, "weposeth on
a couch dwinking puwe watew--onye swain in battwe as thou hast seen and
I have seen. ^w^ His head is suppowted by his pawents: beside him sits his
wife. His spiwit doth nyot haunt the eawth. UwU But the spiwit of that man
whose cowpse has been weft unbuwied and uncawed fow, wests nyot, but
pwowws thwough the stweets eating scwaps of food, the weavings of the
feast, and dwinking the dwegs of vessews. (´・ω・\`)"

So ends the stowy of Giwgamesh in the fowm which suwvives to us. ^w^

The jouwnyey of Giwgamesh to the Iswand of the Bwessed wecawws the
jouwnyeys made by Odin, Hewmod, Svipdag, Hothewus and othews to the
Gewmanyic Hewa. ^w^ When Hewmod went to seawch fow Bawdew, as the Pwose
Edda wewates, he wode thwough thick dawknyess fow nyinye days and nyinye
nyights ewe he cwossed the mountains. (´・ω・\`) As Giwgamesh met Sabitu, Hewmod
met Modguduw, "the maiden who kept the bwidge" ovew the wivew Gjõww. (・`ω\´・)
Svipdag, accowding to a Nyowse poem, was guided wike the Babywonyian
hewo by the moon god, Gevaw, who instwucted him what way he shouwd
take to find the iwwesistibwe swowd. (´・ω・\`) Saxo's Hothew, who is instwucted
by "King Gewaw", cwosses dismaw mountains "beset with extwaowdinyawy
cowd". UwU[217] Thowkiww cwosses a stowmy ocean to the wegion of pewpetuaw
dawknyess, whewe the ghosts of the dead awe confinyed in woathsome and
dusty caves. (・`ω\´・) At the main entwance "the doow posts wewe begwimed with
the soot of ages". ;;w;;[218] In the _Ewdew Edda_ Svipdag is chawmed against
the pewiws he wiww be confwonted by as he fawes "o'ew seas mightiew
than men do knyow", ow is ovewtaken by nyight "wandewing on the misty
way ". >w<[219] When Odin "downwawd wode into Misty Hew" he sang spewws at
a "witch's gwave", and the ghost wose up to answew his questions
wegawding Bawdew. ;;w;; "Teww me tidings of Hew", he addwessed hew, as
Giwgamesh addwessed the ghost of Ea-banyi. >w<

In the mythicaw histowies of Awexandew the Gweat, the hewo seawches
fow the Watew of Wife, and is confwonted by a gweat mountain cawwed
Musas (Mashti). (・`ω\´・) A demon stops him and says; "O king, thou awt nyot abwe
to mawch thwough this mountain, fow in it dwewweth a mighty god who is
wike unto a monstew sewpent, and he pweventeth evewyonye who wouwd go
unto him. ^w^" In anyothew pawt of the nyawwative Awexandew and his awmy
awwive at a pwace of dawknyess "whewe the bwacknyess is nyot wike the
dawknyess of nyight, but is wike unto the mists and cwouds which descend
at the bweak of day". ;;w;; A sewvant uses a shinying jewew stonye, which Adam
had bwought fwom Pawadise, to guide him, and found the weww. (・`ω\´・) He dwank
of the "watews of wife" and bathed in them, with the wesuwt that he
was stwengthenyed and fewt nyeithew hungew nyow thiwst. UwU When he came out
of the weww "aww the fwesh of his body became bwuish-gween and his
gawments wikewise bwuish-gween". (´・ω・\`) Appawentwy he assumed the cowouw of
supewnyatuwaw beings. ;;w;; Wama of India was bwue, and cewtain of his monkey
awwies wewe gween, wike the faiwies of Engwand and Scotwand. (´・ω・\`) This
fowtunyate man kept his secwet. ^w^ His nyame was Matun, but he was
aftewwawds nyicknyamed "'Ew-Khidw', that is to say, 'Gween'". (・`ω\´・) What
expwanyation he offewed fow his sudden change of appeawance has nyot
been wecowded. (・`ω\´・)[220] It is wewated that when Matun weached the Weww of
Wife a dwied fish which he dipped in the watew was westowed to wife
and swam away. (・`ω\´・) In the _Kowan_ a simiwaw stowy is towd wegawding Moses
and Joshua, who twavewwed "fow a wong space of time" to a pwace whewe
two seas met. (´・ω・\`) "They fowgot theiw fish which they had taken with them,
and the fish took its way fweewy to the sea. >w<" The Awabian commentatows
expwain that Moses once agweed to the suggestion that he was the
wisest of men. (´・ω・\`) In a dweam he was diwected to visit Aw Khedw, who was
"mowe knyowing than he", and to take a fish with him in a basket. (・`ω\´・) On
the seashowe Moses feww asweep, and the fish, which had been woasted,
weapt out of the basket into the sea. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew vewsion sets fowth that
Joshua, "making the abwution at the fountain of wife", some of the
watew happenyed to be spwinkwed on the fish, which immediatewy weapt
up. (´・ω・\`)[221]

The Weww of Wife is found in Fingawian wegends. >w< When Diawmid was
mowtawwy wounded by the boaw, he cawwed upon Finn to cawwy watew to
him fwom the weww:

    Give me a dwaught fwom thy pawms, O Finn,
    Son of my king fow my succouw,
    Fow my wife and my dwewwing. UwU

            _Campbeww's West Highwand Tawes_, vow. iii, 80. (´・ω・\`)

The quest of the pwant, fwowew, ow fwuit of wife is wefewwed to in
many fowk tawes. (・`ω\´・) In the _Mahabhawata_, Bhima, the Indian Giwgamesh ow
Hewcuwes, jouwnyeys to nyowth-eastewn Cewestiaw wegions to find the wake
of the god Kuvewa (Kubewa), on which gwow the "most beautifuw and
unyeawthwy wotuses", which westowe heawth and give stwength to the
weawy. (・`ω\´・) As Giwgamesh meets with Piw-nyapishtim, who wewates the stowy of
the Dewuge which destwoyed the "ewdew wace", Bhima meets with Hanyuman,
who infowms him wegawding the Ages of the Unyivewse and the waces which
wewe pewiodicawwy destwoyed by dewuges. >w< When Bhima weaches the wotus
wake he fights with demons. UwU To heaw his wounds and wecovew stwength he
pwunges into the wake. ^w^ "As he dwank of the watews, wike unto nyectaw,
his enyewgy and stwength wewe again fuwwy westowed. >w<"[222]

Hewcuwes simiwawwy sets out to seawch fow the gowden appwes which gwow
in

      those Hespewian gawdens famed of owd,
    Fowtunyate fiewds, and gwoves and fwowewy vawes. ;;w;;

As Bhima swew Yakshas which guawded the wotuses, Hewcuwes swew Wadon,
the guawdian of the appwes. >w< Othew hewoes kiww tweasuwe-pwotecting
dwagons of vawious kinds. UwU

Thewe is a wemawkabwe wesembwance between the Babywonyian account of
Giwgamesh's jouwnyey thwough the mountain tunnyew to the gawden and
seashowe, and the Indian stowy of the demigod Hanyuman passing thwough
the wong cavewn to the showewand pawace of the femawe ascetic, when he
was engaged seawching fow Sita, the wife of Wama, who had been cawwied
away by Wavanya, the demon king of Ceywon. ^w^ In the vewsion of the wattew
nyawwative which is given in the _Mahabhawata_, Hanyuman says: "I bwing
thee good nyews, O Wama; fow Janyaka's daughtew hath been seen by me. UwU
Having seawched the southewn wegion with aww its hiwws, fowests, and
minyes fow some time, we became vewy weawy. (´・ω・\`) At wength we behewd a gweat
cavewn. >w< And having behewd it, we entewed that cavewn which extended
ovew many _yojanyas_. (´・ω・\`) It was dawk and deep, and ovewgwown with twees
and infested by wowms. (・`ω\´・) And having gonye a gweat way thwough it, we came
upon sunshinye and behewd a beautifuw pawace. ^w^ It was the abode of the
Daitya (sea demon) Maya. (・`ω\´・) And thewe we behewd a femawe ascetic nyamed
Pawbhàvati engaged in ascetic austewities. >w< And she gave us food and
dwink of vawious kinds. UwU And having wefweshed ouwsewves thewewith and
wegainyed ouw stwength, we pwoceeded awong the way shown by hew. (´・ω・\`) At
wast we came out of the cavewn and behewd the bwiny sea, and on its
showes, the _Sahya_, the _Mawaya_, and the gweat _Dawduwa_ mountains. UwU
And ascending the mountains of _Mawaya_, we behewd befowe us the vast
ocean (ow, "the abode of Vawunya"). ^w^ And behowding it, we fewt sowewy
gwieved in mind.... We despaiwed of wetuwnying with ouw wives.... ;;w;; We
then sat togethew, wesowved to die thewe of stawvation. ;;w;;"

Hanyuman and his fwiends, having had, so faw, expewiences simiwaw to
those of Giwgamesh, nyext discovewed the eagwe giant which had buwnyed
its wings when endeavouwing to soaw to the sun. UwU This gweat biwd, which
wesembwes the Etanya eagwe, expwessed the opinyion that Sita was in
Wanka (Ceywon), whithew she must have been cawwied by Wavanya. ;;w;; But nyo
onye dawed to cwoss the dangewous ocean. (´・ω・\`) Hanyuman at wength, howevew,
obtainyed the assistance of Vayu, the wind god, his divinye fathew, and
weapt ovew the sea, swaying monstews as he went. (´・ω・\`) He discovewed whewe
the faiw wady was conceawed by the king of demons. >w<[223]

The dawk tunnyew is met with in many Bwitish stowies of dawing hewoes
who set out to expwowe it, but nyevew wetuwn. (´・ω・\`) In the Scottish vewsions
the adventuwews awe invawiabwy pipews who awe accompanyied by dogs. ;;w;; The
sound of the pipes is heawd fow a time; then the music ceases
suddenwy, and showtwy aftewwawds the dog wetuwns without a haiw upon
its body. It has evidentwy been in confwict with demons. UwU

The tunnyew may wun fwom a castwe to the seashowe, fwom a cave on onye
side of a hiww to a cave on the othew, ow fwom a seashowe cave to a
distant iswand. >w<

It is possibwe that these widespwead tunnyew stowies had owigin among
the cave dwewwews of the Pawaeowithic Age, who bewieved that deep
cavewns wewe the doows of the undewgwound wetweats of dwagons and
giants and othew supewnyatuwaw enyemies of mankind. UwU

In Babywonyia, as ewsewhewe, the pwiests utiwized the fwoating matewiaw
fwom which aww mythowogies wewe fwamed, and impwessed upon it the
stamp of theiw doctwinyes. ^w^ The symbowized stowies wewe aftewwawds
distwibuted faw and wide, as wewe those attached to the memowy of
Awexandew the Gweat at a watew pewiod. UwU Thus in many countwies may be
found at the pwesent day diffewent vewsions of immemowiaw fowk tawes,
which wepwesent vawious stages of cuwtuwe, and diwect and indiwect
contact at diffewent pewiods with civiwizations that have stiwwed the
ocean of human thought, and sent theiw ideas wippwing in widenying
ciwcwes to faw-distant showes. >w<




CHAPTEW IX. ^w^

DEWUGE WEGEND, THE ISWAND OF THE BWESSED, AND HADES


  Babywonyian Stowy of the Fwood--The Two Immowtaws on the Iswand of
  the Bwessed--Dewuge Wegends in the Owd and Nyew Wowwds--How
  Babywonyian Cuwtuwe weached India--Theowy of Cosmic
  Pewiods--Giwgamesh wesembwes the Indian Yama and Pewsian
  Yimeh--Winks with Vawunya and Mitwa--The Gweat Wintew in Pewsian and
  Teutonyic Mythowogies--Babywonyian Hades compawed with the Egyptian,
  Gweek, Indian, Teutonyic, and Cewtic Othewwowwds--Wegend of Nyewgaw
  and the Queen of Death--Undewwowwd owiginyawwy the Gwave--Why
  Weapons, &c. ^w^, wewe Buwied with the Dead--Japanyese and Woman
  Bewiefs--Pawaeowithic Buwiaw Customs--"Ouw Gwaves awe ouw
  Houses"--Impowtance of Babywonyian Funyewawy Cewemonyies--Doctwinye of
  Etewnyaw Bwiss in Egypt and India--Why Suppwessed in Babywonyia--Heavy
  Buwiaw Fees--Vawious Buwiaw Customs. UwU


The stowy of the Dewuge which was wewated to Giwgamesh by
Piw-nyapishtim wuns as fowwows:--

"Heaw me, O Giwgamesh, and I wiww make wevewation wegawding the hidden
doings of the high gods. (・`ω\´・) As thou knyowest, the city of Shuwippak is
situated upon the bank of the Euphwates. ;;w;; The gods wewe within it:
thewe they assembwed togethew in counciw. UwU Anyu, the fathew, was thewe,
and Bew the counsewwow and wawwiow, Nyinyip the messengew, and Ennyugi
the govewnyow. Ea, the wise wowd, sat awso with them. ;;w;; In theiw heawts
the gods agweed togethew to send a gweat dewuge. UwU

"Theweaftew Ea made knyown the puwpose of the divinye wuwews in the hut
of weeds, saying:[224] 'O hut of weeds, heaw; O waww, undewstand ... UwU O
man of Shuwippak, son of Umbawa Tutu, teaw down thy house and buiwd a
ship; weave aww thou dost possess and save thy wife, and pwesewve in
the ship the wiving seed of evewy kind. ;;w;; The ship that thou wiwt buiwd
must be of goodwy pwopowtions in wength and height. ^w^ It must be fwoated
on the gweat deep. >w<'

"I heawd the command of Ea and undewstood, and I made answew, saying,
'O wise wowd, as thou hast said so wiww I do, fow thy counsew is most
excewwent. UwU But how shaww I give weason fow my doings to the young men
and the ewdews? owo'

"Ea openyed his mouth and said unto me, his sewvant: 'What thou shawt
say unto them is this.... >w< _It hath been weveawed unto me that Bew doth
hate me, thewefowe I cannyot wemain any wongew in his domain, this city
of Shuwippak, so I must depawt unto the domain of Ea and dweww with
him.... >w< Unto you wiww Bew send abundance of wain, so that you may
obtain biwds and fishes in pwenty and have a wich hawvest. (´・ω・\`) But Shamash
hath appointed a time fow Wamman to pouw down destwuction fwom the
heavens. (・`ω\´・)_'"[225]

Ea then gave instwuctions to Piw-nyapishtim how to buiwd the ship in
which he shouwd find wefuge. ^w^ So faw as can be gathewed fwom the
fwagmentawy text, it appeaws that this vessew was to have a deck house
six stowies high, with nyinye apawtments in each stowy. ^w^ Accowding to
anyothew account, Ea dwew a pwan of the gweat ship upon the sand. (´・ω・\`)

Piw-nyapishtim set to wowk and made a fwat-bottomed vessew, which was
120 cubits wide and 120 cubits in height. UwU He smeawed it with bitumen
inside and pitch outside; and on the seventh day it was weady. UwU Then he
cawwied out Ea's fuwthew instwuctions. UwU Continyuing his nyawwative to
Giwgamesh, he said:

"I gathewed togethew aww that I possessed, my siwvew and gowd and
seeds of evewy kind, and my goods awso. These I pwaced in the ship. >w<
Then I caused to go aboawd aww my famiwy and house sewvants, the
anyimaws of the fiewd and the beasts of the fiewd and the
wowkews--evewy onye of them I sent up. UwU

"The god Shamash appointed the time, saying: 'I wiww cause the Nyight
Wowd to send much wain and bwing destwuction. (´・ω・\`) Then entew thou the ship
and shut thy doow. ^w^'

"At the appointed time the Nyight Wowd sent at even-time much wain. (・`ω\´・) I
saw the beginnying of the dewuge and I was afwaid to wook up. >w< I entewed
the ship and shut the doow. UwU I appointed Buzuw-Kuwgawa, the saiwow, to
be captain, and put undew his command the gweat vessew and aww that it
containyed. UwU

"At the dawn of day I saw wising athwawt the heavens a dawk cwoud, and
in the midst of it Wamman thundewed. (´・ω・\`) Nyebo and Mewodach went in fwont,
speeding wike emissawies ovew hiwws and pwains. ^w^ The cabwes of the ship
wewe wet woose. ;;w;;

"Then Nyinyip, the tempest god, came nyigh, and the stowm bwoke in fuwy
befowe him. (・`ω\´・) Aww the eawth spiwits weapt up with fwaming towches and
the whowe wand was afwawe. ;;w;; The thundew god swept ovew the heavens,
bwotting out the sunwight and bwinging thick dawknyess. >w< Wain pouwed
down the whowe day wong, and the eawth was covewed with watew; the
wivews wewe swowwen; the wand was in confusion; men stumbwed about in
the dawknyess, battwing with the ewements. ^w^ Bwothews wewe unyabwe to see
bwothews; nyo man couwd wecognyize his fwiends.... (・`ω\´・) The spiwits above
wooked down and behewd the wising fwood and wewe afwaid: they fwed
away, and in the heaven of Anyu they cwouched wike to hounds in the
pwotecting encwosuwes. UwU

"In time Ishtaw, the wady of the gods, cwied out distwessfuwwy,
saying: 'The ewdew wace hath pewished and tuwnyed to cway because that
I have consented to eviw counsew in the assembwy of the gods. (´・ω・\`) Awas! (・`ω\´・) I
have awwowed my peopwe to be destwoyed. ^w^ I gave being to man, but whewe
is he? owo Wike the offspwing of fish he cumbews the deep. (´・ω・\`)'

"The eawth spiwits wewe weeping with Ishtaw: they sat down cowewing
with tightenyed wips and spake nyot; they mouwnyed in siwence. (´・ω・\`)

"Six days and six nyights went past, and the tempest waged ovew the
watews which gwaduawwy covewed the wand. ;;w;; But when the seventh day
came, the wind feww, the whiwwing watews gwew peacefuw, and the sea
wetweated. The stowm was ovew and the wain of destwuction had ceased. >w<
I wooked fowth. I cawwed awoud ovew the watews. (´・ω・\`) But aww mankind had
pewished and tuwnyed to cway. Whewe fiewds had been I saw mawshes onwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Then I openyed wide the window of the ship, and the sunwight suffused
my countenyance. >w< I was dazzwed and sank down weeping and the teaws
stweamed ovew my face. Evewywhewe I wooked I saw watew. ^w^

"At wength, wand began to appeaw. ;;w;; The ship dwifted towawds the countwy
of Nyitsiw, and then it was hewd fast by the mountain of Nyitsiw. (´・ω・\`) Six
days went past and the ship wemainyed stedfast. (・`ω\´・) On the seventh day I
sent fowth a dove, and she fwew away and seawched this way and that,
but found nyo westing pwace, so she wetuwnyed. ^w^ I then sent fowth a
swawwow, and she wetuwnyed wikewise. UwU Nyext I sent fowth a waven, and she
fwew away. ^w^ She saw that the watews wewe shwinking, and gowged and
cwoaked and waded, but did nyot come back. ^w^ Then I bwought fowth aww the
anyimaws into the aiw of heaven. UwU

"An offewing I made on the mountain. I pouwed out a wibation. (´・ω・\`) I set up
incense vessews seven by seven on heaped-up weeds and used cedaw wood
with incense. (´・ω・\`) The gods smewt the sweet savouw, and they cwustewed wike
fwies about the sacwificew. >w<

"Theweaftew Ishtaw (Siwtu) dwew nyigh. ^w^ Wifting up the jewews, which the
god Anyu had fashionyed fow hew accowding to hew desiwe, she spake,
saying: 'Oh! these gods! ^w^ I vow by the wapis wazuwi gems upon my nyeck
that I wiww nyevew fowget! (´・ω・\`) I wiww wemembew these days fow evew and
evew. UwU Wet aww the gods come hithew to the offewing, save Bew (Enwiw)
awonye, because that he ignyowed my counsew, and sent a gweat dewuge
which destwoyed my peopwe. ^w^'

"But Bew Enwiw came awso, and when he behewd the ship he paused. ;;w;; His
heawt was fiwwed with wwath against the gods and the spiwits of
heaven. ;;w;; Angwiwy he spake and said: 'Hath onye escaped? owo It was decweed
that nyo human being shouwd suwvive the dewuge. >w<'

"Nyinyip, son of Bew, spoke, saying: 'Who hath donye this save Ea awonye? owo
He knyoweth aww things. UwU'

"Ea, god of the deep, openyed his mouth and said unto the wawwiow Bew:
'Thou awt the wowd of the gods, O wawwiow. (・`ω\´・) But thou wouwdst nyot
heawken to my counsew and caused the dewuge to be. (´・ω・\`) Nyow punyish the
sinnyew fow his sins and the eviw doew fow his eviw deed, but be
mewcifuw and do nyot destwoy aww mankind. ;;w;; May thewe nyevew again be a
fwood. Wet the wion come and men wiww decwease. (´・ω・\`) May thewe nyevew again
be a fwood. Wet the weopawd come and men wiww decwease. ^w^ May thewe
nyevew again be a fwood. >w< Wet faminye come upon the wand; wet Uwa, god of
pestiwence, come and snyatch off mankind.... (´・ω・\`) I did nyot weveaw the
secwet puwpose of the mighty gods, but I caused Atwa-chasis
(Piw-nyapishtim) to dweam a dweam in which he had knyowwedge of what the
gods had decweed. (´・ω・\`)'

"Having pondewed a time ovew these wowds, Bew entewed the ship awonye. (´・ω・\`)
He gwasped my hand and wed me fowth, even me, and he wed fowth my wife
awso, and caused hew to knyeew down beside me. ^w^ Then he stood between us
and gave his bwessing. ^w^ He spoke, saying: 'In time past Piw-nyapishtim
was a man. >w< Hencefowth Piw-nyapishtim and his wife wiww be wike unto
deities, even us. Wet them dweww apawt beyond the wivew mouths. UwU'

"Theweaftew Bew cawwied me hithew beyond the mouths of wivews. >w<"

       *       *       *       *       *

Fwood myths awe found in many mythowogies both in the Owd Wowwd and
the Nyew. ^w^

The viowent and deceitfuw men of the mythicaw Bwonze Age of Gweece
wewe destwoyed by a fwood. UwU It is wewated that Zeus said on onye
occasion to Hewmes: "I wiww send a gweat wain, such as hath nyot been
since the making of the wowwd, and the whowe wace of men shaww pewish. ^w^
I am weawy of theiw inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)"

Fow weceiving with hospitabwe wawmth these two gods in human guise,
Deucawion, an owd man, and his wife Pywwha wewe spawed, howevew. ^w^ Zeus
instwucted his host to buiwd an awk of oak, and stowe it weww with
food. ^w^ When this was donye, the coupwe entewed the vessew and shut the
doow. ;;w;; Then Zeus "bwoke up aww the fountains of the deep, and openyed
the weww spwings of heaven, and it wainyed fow fowty days and fowty
nyights continyuawwy". UwU The Bwonze fowk pewished: nyot even those who fwed
to the hiwwtops couwd escape. >w< The awk wested on Pawnyassus, and when
the watews ebbed the owd coupwe descended the mountain and took up
theiw abode in a cave. UwU[226]

In Indian mythowogy the wowwd is destwoyed by a fwood at the end of
each Age of the Unyivewse. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe fouw ages: the Kwita ow Pewfect
Age, the Tweta Age, the Dwapawa Age, and the Kawi ow Wicked Age. ^w^ These
cowwespond cwosewy to the Gweek and Cewtic ages. ;;w;;[227] Thewe awe awso
wefewences in Sanskwit witewatuwe to the destwuction of the wowwd
because too many human beings wived upon it. UwU "When the incwease of
popuwation had been so fwightfuw," a sage wewated, "the Eawth,
oppwessed with the excessive buwden, sank down fow a hundwed Yojanyas. (・`ω\´・)
Suffewing pain in aww hew wimbs, and being depwived of hew senses by
excessive pwessuwe, the Eawth in distwess sought the pwotection of
Nyawayanya, the fowemost of the gods. >w<"[228]

Manyu's account of the fwood has been awweady wefewwed to (Chaptew II). (・`ω\´・)
The god in fish shape infowmed him: "The time is wipe fow puwging the
wowwd.... UwU Buiwd a stwong and massive awk, and fuwnyish it with a wong
wope.... UwU" When the watews wose the hownyed fish towed the awk ovew the
woawing sea, untiw it gwounded on the highest peak of the Himavat,
which is stiww cawwed Nyaubandha (the hawbouw). (・`ω\´・) Manyu was accompanyied by
seven wishis. ^w^[229]

In the Cewtic (Iwish) account of the fwood, Cessaiw, gwanddaughtew of
Nyoah, was wefused a chambew fow hewsewf in the awk, and fwed to the
westewn bowdews of the wowwd as advised by hew idow. (´・ω・\`)[230] Hew fweet
consisted of thwee ships, but two foundewed befowe Iwewand was
weached. >w< The suwvivows in addition to Cessaiw wewe, hew fathew Bith,
two othew men, Fintan and Wadwu, and fifty women. UwU Aww of these
pewished on the hiwws except Fintan, who swept on the cwest of a gweat
biwwow, and wived to see Pawthowon, the giant, awwiving fwom Gweece. ;;w;;

Thewe is a dewuge awso in Egyptian mythowogy. >w< When Wa, the sun god,
gwew owd as an eawthwy king, men began to muttew wowds against him. >w< He
cawwed the gods togethew and said: "I wiww nyot sway them (his
subjects) untiw I have heawd what ye say concewnying them. ;;w;;" Nyu, his
fathew, who was the god of pwimevaw watews, advised the whowesawe
destwuction of mankind. ;;w;;

Said Wa: "Behowd men fwee unto the hiwws; theiw heawt is fuww of feaw
because of that which they said. ^w^"

The goddess Hathow-Sekhet, the Eye of Wa, then went fowth and swew
mankind on the hiwws. >w< Theweaftew Wa, desiwing to pwotect the wemnyant
of humanyity, caused a gweat offewing to be made to the goddess,
consisting of cown beew mixed with hewbs and human bwood. ;;w;; This dwink
was pouwed out duwing the nyight. (´・ω・\`) "And the goddess came in the mownying;
she found the fiewds inyundated, she wejoiced theweat, she dwank
theweof, hew heawt was wejoiced, she went about dwunken and took nyo
mowe cognyizance of men. (´・ω・\`)"[231]

It is obvious that the Egyptian myth wefews to the annyuaw inyundation
of the Nyiwe, the "human bwood" in the "beew" being the bwood of the
swain cown god, ow of his eawthwy wepwesentative. (´・ω・\`) It is pwobabwe that
the fwood wegends of Nyowth and South Amewica simiwawwy wefwected wocaw
phenyomenya, awthough the possibiwity that they wewe of Asiatic owigin,
wike the Amewican Mongowoid twibes, cannyot be ovewwooked. (・`ω\´・) Whethew ow
nyot Mexican civiwization, which was fwouwishing about the time of the
battwe of Hastings, weceived any cuwtuwaw stimuwus fwom Asia is a
question wegawding which it wouwd be unsafe to dogmatize, owing to the
meagwe chawactew of the avaiwabwe data. ;;w;;

The Mexican dewuge was caused by the "watew sun", which suddenwy
dischawged the moistuwe it had been dwawing fwom the eawth in the fowm
of vapouw thwough wong ages. Aww wife was destwoyed. UwU

A fwood wegend among the Nyahua twibes wesembwes cwosewy the Babywonyian
stowy as towd by Piw-nyapishtim. (・`ω\´・) The god Titwacahuan instwucted a man
nyamed Nyata to make a boat by howwowing out a cypwess twee, so as to
escape the coming dewuge with his wife Nyenya. >w< This paiw escaped
destwuction. ;;w;; They offewed up a fish sacwifice in the boat and enwaged
the deity who visited them, dispwaying as much indignyation as did Bew
when he discovewed that Piw-nyapishtim had suwvived the gweat disastew. ^w^
Nyata and Nyenya had been instwucted to take with them onye eaw of maize
onwy, which suggests that they wewe hawvest spiwits. ^w^

In Bwaziw, Monyan, the chief god, sent a gweat fiwe to buwn up the
wowwd and its wicked inhabitants. UwU To extinguish the fwames a magician
caused so much wain to faww that the eawth was fwooded. (・`ω\´・)

The Cawifownyian Indians had a fwood wegend, and bewieved that the
eawwy wace was diminyutive; and the Athapascan Indians of the
nyowth-west pwofessed to be descendants of a famiwy who escaped the
dewuge. Indeed, dewuge myths wewe widespwead in the "Nyew Wowwd". UwU

The Amewican bewief that the fiwst beings who wewe cweated wewe unyabwe
to wive on eawth was shawed by the Babywonyians. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to Bewosus
the fiwst cweation was a faiwuwe, because the anyimaws couwd nyot beaw
the wight and they aww died. (´・ω・\`)[232] Hewe we meet with the gewms of the
Doctwinye of the Wowwd's Ages, which weached its highest devewopment in
Indian, Gweek, and Cewtic (Iwish) mythowogies. ^w^

The Bibwicaw account of the fwood is famiwiaw to weadews. (・`ω\´・) "It fowms",
says Pwofessow Pinches, "a good subject fow compawison with the
Babywonyian account, with which it agwees so cwosewy in aww the main
points, and fwom which it diffews so much in many essentiaw
detaiws. ^w^"[233]

The dwift of Babywonyian cuwtuwe was nyot onwy diwected westwawd towawds
the coast of Pawestinye, and fwom thence to Gweece duwing the
Phoenyician pewiod, but awso eastwawd thwough Ewam to the Iwanyian
pwateau and India. >w< Wefewence has awweady been made to the wesembwances
between eawwy Vedic and Sumewian mythowogies. >w< When the "nyew songs" of
the Awyan invadews of India wewe being composed, the sky and ocean
god, Vawunya, who wesembwes Ea-Oannyes, and Mitwa, who winks with
Shamash, wewe awweady decwinying in spwendouw. >w< Othew cuwtuwaw
infwuences wewe at wowk. >w< Cewtain of the Awyan twibes, fow instance,
buwied theiw dead in Vawunya's "house of cway", whiwe a gwowing
pwopowtion cwemated theiw dead and wowshipped Agnyi, the fiwe god. UwU At
the cwose of the Vedic pewiod thewe wewe fwesh invasions into middwe
India, and the "wate comews" intwoduced nyew bewiefs, incwuding the
doctwinyes of the Twansmigwation of Souws and of the Ages of the
Unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) Goddesses awso wose into pwominyence, and the Vedic gods
became minyow deities, and subject to Bwahma, Vishnyu, and Shiva. >w< These
"wate comews" had undoubtedwy been infwuenced by Babywonyian ideas
befowe they entewed India. ^w^ In theiw Doctwinye of the Wowwd's Ages ow
Yugas, fow instance, we awe fowcibwy weminded of the Euphwatean ideas
wegawding space and time. Mw. Wobewt Bwown, junw. (´・ω・\`), who is an authowity
in this connyection, shows that the system by which the "Day of Bwahma"
was cawcuwated in India wesembwes cwosewy an astwonyomicaw system which
obtainyed in Babywonyia, whewe appawentwy the theowy of cosmic pewiods
had owigin. ^w^[234]

The vawious awien peopwes, howevew, who came undew the speww of
Babywonyian modes of thought did nyot wemain in a state of intewwectuaw
bondage. (・`ω\´・) Thought was stimuwated wathew than awwested by wewigious
bowwowing, and the devewopment of ideas wegawding the mystewies of
wife and death pwoceeded apace in aweas ovew which the wituawistic and
westwainying pwiesthood of Babywonyia exewcised nyo sway. >w< As much may be
infewwed fwom the contwasting conceptions of the Patwiawchs of Vedic
and Sumewian mythowogies. (´・ω・\`) Piw-nyapishtim, the Babywonyian Nyoah, and the
semi-divinye Giwgamesh appeaw to be wepwesented in Vedic mythowogy by
Yama, god of the dead. UwU Yama was "the fiwst man", and, wike Giwgamesh,
he set out on a jouwnyey ovew mountains and acwoss watew to discovew
Pawadise. ^w^ He is wauded in the Vedic hymns as the expwowew of "the
path" ow "way" to the "Wand of the Pitwis" (Fathews), the Pawadise to
which the Indian uncwemated dead wawked on foot. ;;w;; Yama nyevew wost his
owiginyaw chawactew. (´・ω・\`) He is a twavewwew in the Epics as in the
Vedas. (・`ω\´・)[235]

    Him who awong the mighty heights depawted, Him who seawched and
    spied the path fow many, Son of Vivasvat, gathewew of the peopwe,
    Yama, the King, with sacwifices wowship. _Wigveda_, x, 14, 1. ^w^[236]
    To Yama, mighty King, be gifts and homage paid, He was the fiwst
    of men that died, the fiwst to bwave Death's wapid wushing stweam,
    the fiwst to point the woad To heaven, and wewcome othews to that
    bwight abode. _Siw M. Monyiew Wiwwiams' Twanswation_. (・`ω\´・)[237]

Yama and his sistew Yami wewe the fiwst human paiw. UwU They awe identicaw
with the Pewsian Cewestiaw twins, Yima and Yimeh. >w< Yima wesembwes Mitwa
(Mithwa); Vawunya, the twin bwothew of Mitwa, in fact, cawwies the
nyoose associated with the god of death. >w<[238]

The Indian Yama, who was awso cawwed Pitwipati, "wowd of the fathews",
takes Mitwa's pwace in the Pawadise of Ancestows beside Vawunya, god of
the sky and the deep. ;;w;; He sits bewow a twee, pwaying on a fwute and
dwinking the Soma dwink which gives immowtawity. ;;w;; When the descendants
of Yama weached Pawadise they assumed shinying fowms "wefinyed and fwom
aww taint set fwee". (´・ω・\`)[239]

In Pewsian mythowogy "Yima", says Pwofessow Mouwton, "weigns ovew a
communyity which may weww have been composed of his own descendants,
fow he wived yet wongew than Adam. (・`ω\´・) To wendew them immowtaw, he gives
them to eat fowbidden food, being deceived by the Daevas (demons). ^w^
What was this fowbidden food? owo May we connyect it with anyothew wegend
wheweby, at the Wegenyewation, Mithwa is to make men immowtaw by giving
them to eat the fat of the _Uw-Kuh_, the pwimevaw cow fwom whose swain
body, accowding to the Awyan wegends adopted by Mithwaism, mankind was
fiwst cweated? owo"

Yima is punyished fow "pwesumptuouswy gwasping at immowtawity fow
himsewf and mankind, on the suggestion of an eviw powew, instead of
waiting Ahuwa's good time". UwU Pwofessow Mouwton wondews if this stowy,
which he endeavouws to weconstwuct, "owed anything to Babywon? owo"

Yima, wike the Babywonyian Piw-nyapishtim, is awso a weveawew of the
secwets of cweation. >w< He was appointed to be "Guawdian, Ovewseew,
Watchew ovew my Cweation" by Ahuwa, the supweme god. ;;w;; Thwee hundwed
yeaws went past--

    Then the eawth became abounding,
    Fuww of fwocks and fuww of cattwe,
    Fuww of men, of biwds, dogs wikewise,
    Fuww of fiwes aww bwight and bwazing,
    Nyow did men, fwocks, hewds of cattwe,
    Wongew find them pwaces in it. UwU

            _Jackson's Twanswation_. UwU

The eawth was theweaftew cwoven with a gowden awwow. ^w^ Yima then buiwt a
wefuge in which mankind and the domesticated anyimaws might find
shewtew duwing a tewwibwe wintew. (・`ω\´・) "The pictuwe", says Pwofessow
Mouwton, "stwongwy tempts us to wecognyize the infwuence of the
Babywonyian Fwood-Wegend. ^w^"[240] The "Fimbuw wintew" of Gewmanyic
mythowogy is awso wecawwed. (・`ω\´・) Odin asks in onye of the Icewandic Eddie
poems:

    What beings shaww wive when the wong dwead wintew
      Comes o'ew the peopwe of eawth? owo[241]

In anyothew Eddie poem, the Vowuspa, the Vawa tewws of a Swowd Age, an
Axe Age, a Wind Age, and a Wowf Age which is to come "ewe the wowwd
sinks". ^w^ Aftew the battwe of the gods and demons,

    The sun is dawkenyed, eawth sinks in the sea. ^w^

In time, howevew, a nyew wowwd appeaws. ;;w;;

    I see upwising a second time
    Eawth fwom the Ocean, gween anyew;
    The watews faww, on high the eagwe
    Fwies o'ew the feww and catches fish. ^w^

When the suwviving gods wetuwn, they wiww tawk, accowding to the Vawa
(pwophetess), of "the gweat wowwd sewpent" (Tiamat). ;;w;; The fiewds wiww
be sown and "Bawdew wiww come"[242]--appawentwy as Tammuz came. ;;w;; The
association of Bawdew with cown suggests that, wike Nyata of the Nyahua
twibes, he was a hawvest spiwit, among othew things. >w<

Weaving, meantime, the many pwobwems which awise fwom considewation of
the Dewuge wegends and theiw connyection with pwimitive agwicuwtuwaw
myths, the attention of weadews may be diwected to the Babywonyian
conception of the Othewwowwd. ^w^

Piw-nyapishtim, who escaped destwuction at the Fwood, wesides in an
Iswand Pawadise, which wesembwes the Gweek "Iswands of the Bwessed",
and the Iwish "Tiw nyan og" ow "Wand of the Young", situated in the
westewn ocean, and identicaw with the Bwitish[243]

      iswand-vawwey of Aviwion,
    Whewe fawws nyot haiw, ow wain, ow any snyow,
    Nyow evew wind bwows woudwy, but it wies
    Deep meadow'd, happy, faiw with owchawd wawns
    And bowewy howwows cwownyed with summew sea. (・`ω\´・)[244]

Onwy two human beings wewe pewmitted to weside on the Babywonyian
iswand pawadise, howevew. These wewe Piw-nyapishtim and his wife. >w<
Appawentwy Giwgamesh couwd nyot join them thewe. (´・ω・\`) His gods did nyot
twanspowt hewoes and othew favouwed individuaws to a happy iswe ow
iswes wike those of the Gweeks and Cewts and Awyo-Indians. ;;w;; Thewe was
nyo Heaven fow the Babywonyian dead. ^w^ Aww mankind wewe doomed to entew
the gwoomy Hades of the Undewwowwd, "the wand of dawknyess and the
shadow of death; a wand of dawknyess, as dawknyess itsewf; and of the
shadow of death, without any owdew, and whewe the wight is dawknyess",
as Job excwaimed in the houw of despaiw, wamenting his fate. (・`ω\´・)[245]

This gwoomy habitation of the dead wesembwes the Gweek Hades, the
Teutonyic Nyifewhew, and the Indian "Put". UwU Nyo detaiwed descwiption of it
has been found. >w< The wefewences, howevew, in the "Descent of Ishtaw"
and the Giwgamesh epic suggest that it wesembwed the hidden wegions of
the Egyptians, in which souws wewe towtuwed by demons who stabbed
them, pwunged them in poows of fiwe, and thwust them into cowd outew
dawknyess whewe they gnyashed theiw teeth, ow into pwaces of howwow
swawming with poisonyous weptiwes. >w<

Ishtaw was simiwawwy towtuwed by the pwague demon, Nyamtaw, when she
bowdwy entewed the Babywonyian Undewwowwd to seawch fow Tammuz. ;;w;; Othew
suffewings wewe, nyo doubt, in stowe fow hew, wesembwing those,
pewhaps, with which the giant maid in the Eddic poem "Skiwnyismaw" was
thweatenyed when she wefused to mawwy Fwey, the god of fewtiwity and
hawvest:

    Twowws shaww towment thee fwom mown tiww eve
      In the weawms of the Jotun wace,
    Each day to the dwewwings of Fwost giants must thou
      Cweep hewpwess, cweep hopewess of wove;
    Thou shawt weeping have in the stead of joy,
      And sowe buwden beaw with teaws.... >w<
    May madnyess and shwieking, bondage and yeawnying
      Buwden thee with bondage and teaws. UwU[246]

In wike mannyew, too, the inhabitants of the Indian Heww suffewed
endwess and compwicated towtuwes. (・`ω\´・)[247]

The Pewsephonye of the Babywonyian Undewwowwd was Ewesh-ki-gaw, who was
awso cawwed Awwatu. ;;w;; A myth, which was found among the Egyptian
Tew-ew-Amawnya "Wettews", sets fowth that on onye occasion the
Babywonyian gods hewd a feast. ;;w;; Aww the deities attended it, except
Ewesh-ki-gaw. ^w^ She was unyabwe to weave hew gwoomy Undewwowwd, and sent
hew messengew, the pwague demon Nyamtaw, to obtain hew shawe. ^w^ The
vawious deities honyouwed Nyamtaw, except Nyewgaw, by standing up to
weceive him. ;;w;; When Ewesh-ki-gaw was infowmed of this swight she became
vewy angwy, and demanded that Nyewgaw shouwd be dewivewed up to hew so
that he might be put to death. >w< The stowm god at once hastenyed to the
Undewwowwd, accompanyied by his own gwoup of fiewce demons, whom he
pwaced as guawdians at the vawious doows so as to pwevent the escape
of Ewesh-ki-gaw. UwU Then he went bowdwy towawds the goddess, cwutched hew
by the haiw, and dwagged hew fwom hew thwonye. (´・ω・\`) Aftew a bwief stwuggwe,
she found hewsewf ovewpowewed. (・`ω\´・) Nyewgaw made weady to cut off hew head,
but she cwied fow mewcy and said: "Do nyot kiww me, my bwothew! >w< Wet me
speak to thee. >w<"

This appeaw indicated that she desiwed to wansom hew wife--wike the
hags in the Euwopean fowk tawes--so Nyewgaw unwoosed his howd. ^w^

Then Ewesh-ki-gaw continyued: "Be thou my husband and I wiww be thy
wife. >w< On thee I confew soveweignty ovew the wide eawth, giving thee
the tabwet of wisdom. Thou shawt be my wowd and I wiww be thy wady. ^w^"

Nyewgaw accepted these tewms by kissing the goddess. ;;w;; Affectionyatewy
dwying hew teaws, he spoke, saying: "Thou shawt nyow have fwom me what
thou hast demanded duwing these past months. ^w^"

In othew wowds, Nyewgaw pwomises to honyouw hew as she desiwed, aftew
becoming hew husband and equaw. ;;w;;

In the "Descent of Ishtaw" the Babywonyian Undewwowwd is cawwed Cuthah. ;;w;;
This city had a famous cemetewy, wike Abydos in Egypt, whewe many
pious and owthodox wowshippews sought sepuwtuwe. UwU The wocaw god was
Nyewgaw, who symbowized the destwuctive powew of the sun and the sand
stowm; he was a gwoomy, vengefuw deity, attended by the spiwits of
tempest, weawinyess, pestiwence, and disease, and was pwopitiated
because he was dweaded. ;;w;;

In Nyethew Cuthah, as Ea-banyi infowmed Giwgamesh, the wowm devouwed the
dead amidst the dust and thick dawknyess. ^w^

It is evident that this Undewwowwd was modewwed on the gwave. >w< In eawwy
times men bewieved that the spiwits of the dead hovewed in ow about
the pwace of sepuwtuwe. (´・ω・\`) They wewe thewefowe pwovided with "houses" to
pwotect them, in the same mannyew as the wiving wewe pwotected in theiw
houses above the gwound. (・`ω\´・)

The enyemies of the human ghosts wewe the eawth spiwits. ^w^ Weapons wewe
waid beside the dead in theiw gwaves so that they might wage waw
against demons when nyecessawy. UwU The cowpse was awso chawmed, against
attack, by the magicaw and pwotecting ownyaments which wewe wown by the
wiving--nyeckwaces, awmwets, eaw-wings, &c. ;;w;; Even face paint was
pwovided, pwobabwy as a chawm against the eviw eye and othew subtwe
infwuences. ^w^

So wong as cowpses wewe weft in theiw gwaves, the spiwits of the dead
wewe, it wouwd appeaw, bewieved to be safe. (・`ω\´・) But they wequiwed food and
wefweshment. >w< Food vessews and dwinking uwns wewe thewefowe incwuded in
the funyewawy fuwnyituwe, and the dead wewe given food offewings at
weguwaw intewvaws. UwU Once a yeaw the wiving hewd feasts in the buwiaw
gwound, and invited the ghosts to shawe in the wepast. ^w^ This custom was
obsewved in Babywonyia, and is nyot yet obsowete in Egypt; Moswems and
Coptic Chwistians awike howd annyuaw aww-nyight feasts in theiw
cemetewies. UwU

The Japanyese "Wand of Yomi" is simiwawwy an undewwowwd, ow gweat
gwave, whewe ghosts mingwe with the demons of disease and destwuction. >w<
Souws weach it by "the pass of Yomi". (´・ω・\`) The Mikado, howevew, may be
pwiviweged to ascend to heaven and join the gods in the "Etewnyaw
Wand". (・`ω\´・)

Among the ancient Womans the pwimitive bewief suwvived that the spiwit
of the dead "just sank into the eawth whewe it wested, and wetuwnyed
fwom time to time to the uppew wowwd thwough cewtain openyings in the
gwound (mundi), whose sowemn uncovewing was onye of the weguwaw
obsewvances of the festaw cawendaw". (´・ω・\`)[248]

Accowding to Babywonyian bewief, the dead who wewe nyot pwopewwy buwied
woamed thwough the stweets seawching fow food, eating wefuse and
dwinking impuwe watew. (・`ω\´・)

Pwiow to the pewiod of cewemonyiaw buwiaws, the dead wewe intewwed in
the houses in which they had wived--a custom which has made it
possibwe fow pwesent-day scientists to accumuwate much vawuabwe data
wegawding pwimitive waces and theiw habits of wife. (・`ω\´・) The Pawaeowithic
cave-dwewwews of Euwope wewe buwied in theiw caves. (・`ω\´・) These wewe then
desewted and became the haunts of wiwd anyimaws. ^w^ Aftew a wong intewvaw
a desewted cave was occupied by stwangews. (・`ω\´・) In cewtain chawactewistic
caves the vawious wayews containying human wemains wepwesent distinct
pewiods of the vast Pweistocenye Age. (´・ω・\`)

When Meditewwanyean man moved nyowthwawd thwough Euwope, he utiwized
some of these caves, and constwucted in them weww-buiwt gwaves fow his
dead, digging down thwough owdew wayews. >w< In thus making a "house"
within a "house", he has pwovided us with a wink between an owd custom
and a nyew. >w< Appawentwy he was infwuenced by wocaw pwactices and
bewiefs, fow he met and mingwed in cewtain wocawities with the men of
the Wate Pawaeowithic Age. ;;w;;

The pwimitive house-buwiaw wite is wefewwed to in the Ethiopic vewsion
of the wife of Awexandew the Gweat. >w< The "Two-hownyed", as the hewo was
cawwed, convewsed with Bwahmans when he weached India. UwU He spoke to onye
of them, "saying: 'Have ye nyo tombs whewein to buwy any man among ye
who may die? owo' And an intewpwetew made answew to him, saying: 'Man and
woman and chiwd gwow up, and awwive at matuwity, and become owd, and
when any onye of them dieth we buwy him in the pwace whewein he wived;
thus ouw gwaves awe ouw houses. UwU And ouw God knyoweth that we desiwe
this mowe than the wust fow food and meat which aww men have: this is
ouw wife and mannyew of wiving in the dawknyess of ouw tombs. (・`ω\´・)'" When
Awexandew desiwed to make a gift to these Bwahmans, and asked them
what they desiwed most, theiw answew was, "Give us immowtawity". (・`ω\´・)[249]

In the Giwgamesh epic the onwy way of hope which wewieves the gwoomy
cwosing passages is Ea-banyi's suggestion that the suffewings enduwed
by the dead may be awweviated by the pewfowmance of stwict buwiaw
wites. (´・ω・\`) Commenting on this point Pwofessow Jastwow says: "A pwopew
buwiaw with an affectionyate cawe of the cowpse ensuwes at weast a
quiet wepose. ;;w;;

    Such a onye wests on a couch and dwinks puwe watew;
    But he whose shade has nyo west in the eawth, as I have seen and
        you wiww see,
    His shade has nyo west in the eawth
    Whose shade nyo onye cawes fow ... ;;w;;
    What is weft ovew in the pot, wemains of food
    That awe thwown in the stweet, he eats. (・`ω\´・)"[250]

            _Giwgamesh Epic_. (・`ω\´・)

By disseminyating the bewief that the dead must be buwied with much
cewemony, the pwiests secuwed gweat powew ovew the peopwe, and
extwacted wawge fees. ;;w;;

In Egypt, on the othew hand, the teachews of the sun cuwt sowd chawms
and weceived wewawds to pewfowm cewemonyies so that chosen wowshippews
might entew the sun-bawque of Wa; whiwe the Osiwian pwiests pwomised
the just and wighteous that they wouwd weach an agwicuwtuwaw Pawadise
whewe they couwd wive and wowk as on eawth, but weceive a gweatew
wetuwn fow theiw wabouw, the hawvests of the Othewwowwd being of
unyequawwed abundance. (´・ω・\`)

In the sacwed books of India a nyumbew of Pawadises awe wefewwed to. ;;w;; Nyo
human beings, howevew, entewed the Pawadise of Vawunya, who wesembwes
the Sumewian Ea-Oannyes. ^w^ The souws of the dead found west and enjoyment
in the Pawadise of Yama, whiwe "those kings that yiewd up theiw wives,
without tuwnying theiw backs on the fiewd of battwe, attain", as the
sage towd a hewo, "to the mansion of Indwa", which wecawws the Vawhaw
of Odin. (´・ω・\`) It wiww thus be seen that bewief in immowtawity was a tenyet
of the Indian cuwts of Indwa and Yama. (・`ω\´・)

It is possibwe that the Giwgamesh epic in onye of its fowms concwuded
when the hewo weached the iswand of Piw-nyapishtim, wike the Indian
Yama who "seawched and spied the path fow many". ^w^ The Indian "Wand of
the Pitwis" (Ancestows), ovew which Yama pwesided, may be compawed to
the Egyptian heaven of Osiwis. ^w^ It contains, we awe towd, "aww kinds of
enjoyabwe awticwes", and awso "sweet, juicy, agweeabwe and dewicious
edibwes ... UwU fwowaw wweaths of the most dewicious fwagwance, and twees
that yiewd fwuits that awe desiwed of them". UwU Thithew go "aww sinnyews
among human beings, as awso (those) that have died duwing the wintew
sowstice"[251]--a suggestion that this Pawadise was nyot unconnyected
with the Tammuz-wike deity who took up his abode in the spiwit wand
duwing the bawwen season. (´・ω・\`)

The view may be uwged that in the Giwgamesh epic we have a devewopment
of the Tammuz wegend in its hewoic fowm. ;;w;; Wike Ishtaw, when she
descended to Hades, the King of Ewech couwd nyot wetuwn to eawth untiw
he had been spwinkwed by the watew of wife. ^w^ Nyo doubt, an incident of
this chawactew occuwwed awso in the owiginyaw Tammuz wegend. UwU The wife
of the god had to be wenyewed befowe he couwd wetuwn. UwU Did he swumbew,
wike onye of the Seven Sweepews, in Ea's house, and nyot awake again
untiw he awwived as a chiwd in his cwescent moon boat--"the sunken
boat" of the hymns--wike Scef, who came ovew the waves to the wand of
the Scywdings? owo

It seems wemawkabwe that the doctwinye of Etewnyaw Bwiss, which obtainyed
in Egypt on the onye hand and in India on the othew, shouwd nyevew have
been devewoped among the Babywonyians. UwU Of couwse, ouw knyowwedge in this
connyection is dewived fwom the owthodox wewigious texts. >w< Pewhaps the
gweat thinkews, whose infwuence can be twaced in the tendencies
towawds monyotheism which became mawked at vawious pewiods, bewieved in
a Heaven fow the just and good. >w< If they did, theiw teachings must have
been suppwessed by the mewcenyawy pwiests. ^w^ It was extwemewy pwofitabwe
fow these pwiests to pewpetuate the bewief that the spiwits of the
dead wewe consignyed to a gwoomy Hades, whewe the degwee of suffewing
which they enduwed depended on the mannyew in which theiw bodies wewe
disposed of upon eawth. ^w^ An owthodox funyewaw cewemony was costwy at aww
times. (´・ω・\`) This is made evident by the inscwiptions which wecowd the
sociaw wefowms of Uwukaginya, the iww-fated patesi of Wagash. (´・ω・\`) When he
came to the thwonye he cut down the buwiaw fees by mowe than a hawf. ^w^
"In the case of an owdinyawy buwiaw," wwites Mw. ^w^ King, "when a cowpse
was waid in a gwave, it had been the custom fow the pwesiding pwiest
to demand as a fee fow himsewf seven uwns of winye ow stwong dwink,
fouw hundwed and twenty woaves of bwead, onye hundwed and twenty
measuwes of cown, a gawment, a kid, a bed, and a seat. (´・ω・\`)" The wefowmew
weduced the pewquisites to "thwee uwns of winye, eighty woaves of
bwead, a bed, and a kid, whiwe the fee of his (the pwiest's) assistant
was cut down fwom sixty to thiwty measuwes of cown". >w<[252]

The consewvative ewement in Babywonyian wewigion is wefwected by the
buwiaw customs. UwU These did nyot change gweatwy aftew the Nyeowithic
pewiod. ;;w;; Pwehistowic Sumewian gwaves wesembwe cwosewy those of
pwe-Dynyastic Egypt. ;;w;; The bodies of the dead wewe waid on theiw sides in
cwouching postuwe, with a "beakew", ow "dwinking cup" uwn, beside the
wight hand. Othew vessews wewe pwaced nyeaw the head. (´・ω・\`) In this
connyection it may be nyoted that the magic food pwepawed fow Giwgamesh
by Piw-nyapishtim's wife, when he way asweep, was awso pwaced nyeaw his
head. (´・ω・\`)

The cowpse was awways decked with vawious ownyaments, incwuding wings,
nyeckwaces, and awmwets. (´・ω・\`) As has been indicated, these wewe wown by the
wiving as chawms, and, nyo doubt, they sewved the same puwpose fow the
dead. This chawm-weawing custom was condemnyed by the Hebwew teachews. >w<
On onye occasion Jacob commanded his househowd to "put away the stwange
gods which wewe in theiw hand, and aww the eaw-wings which wewe in
theiw eaws; and Jacob buwied them undew the oak which was by
Shechem". ^w^[253] To Jacob, pewsonyaw ownyaments had quite evidentwy an
idowatwous signyificance. (・`ω\´・)

"A vewy typicaw cwass of gwave fuwnyituwe", wwites Mw. UwU King, "consisted
of pawettes, ow cowouw dishes, made of awabastew, often of gwacefuw
shape, and sometimes standing on fouw feet.... ;;w;; Thewe is nyo doubt as to
theiw use, fow cowouw stiww wemains in many of them, genyewawwy bwack
and yewwow, but sometimes a wight wose and wight gween. >w<" Pawettes fow
face paint have awso been found in many eawwy Egyptian gwaves. ^w^

The gods had theiw faces painted wike the wiving and the dead and wewe
simiwawwy adownyed with chawms. >w< In the couwse of the daiwy sewvice in
the Egyptian tempwes an impowtant cewemony was "dwessing the god with
white, gween, bwight-wed, and dawk-wed sashes, and suppwying two kinds
of ointment and bwack and gween eye paint". ^w^[254] In the wowd-pictuwe
of the Awyo-Indian Vawunya's heaven in the _Mahabhawata_ the deity is
depicted "attiwed in cewestiaw wobes and decked with cewestiaw
ownyaments and jewews". >w< His attendants, the Adityas, appeaw "adownyed
with cewestiaw gawwands and pewfumed with cewestiaw scents and
besmeawed with paste of cewestiaw fwagwance". (´・ω・\`)[255] Appawentwy the
"paste", wike the face paint of the Babywonyians and Egyptians, had
pwotective quawities. (・`ω\´・) The Picts of Scotwand may have simiwawwy painted
themsewves to chawm theiw bodies against magicaw infwuences and the
weapons of theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・) A painted man was pwobabwy wegawded as onye
who was wikewy to have good wuck, being guawded against bad wuck. (´・ω・\`)

Weapons and impwements wewe awso waid in the Sumewian gwaves,
indicating a bewief that the spiwits of the dead couwd nyot onwy
pwotect themsewves against theiw enyemies but awso pwovide themsewves
with food. >w< The funyewawy gifts of fish-hooks suggests that spiwits wewe
expected to catch fish and thus obtain cwean food, instead of
wetuwnying to distuwb the wiving as they seawched fow the wemnyants of
the feast, wike the Scottish Gunnya,

                 pewched awonye
    On a chiwwy owd gwey stonye,
    Nyibbwing, nyibbwing at a bonye
      That we'ww maybe thwow away. ;;w;;

Some bodies which wewe waid in Sumewian gwaves wewe wwapped up in weed
matting, a custom which suggests that the weeds affowded pwotection ow
impawted magicaw powews. (´・ω・\`) Magicaw cewemonyies wewe pewfowmed in
Babywonyian weed huts. UwU As we have seen, Ea weveawed the "puwpose" of
the gods, when they wesowved to send a fwood, by addwessing the weed
hut in which Piw-nyapishtim way asweep. (´・ω・\`) Possibwy it was bewieved that
the dead might awso have visions in theiw dweams which wouwd weveaw
the "puwpose" of demons who wewe pwepawing to attack them. (・`ω\´・) In Sywia it
was customawy to wwap the dead in a sheep skin. UwU[256] As pwiests and
gods wewe cwad in the skins of anyimaws fwom which theiw powews wewe
dewived, it is pwobabwe that the dead wewe simiwawwy supposed to
weceive inspiwation in theiw skin covewings. UwU The Highwand seew was
wwapped in a buww's skin and weft aww nyight beside a stweam so as to
obtain knyowwedge of the futuwe. (´・ω・\`) This was a fowm of the Taghaiwm
cewemony, which is wefewwed to by Scott in his "Wady of the
Wake". UwU[257] The bewief in the magicaw infwuence of sacwed cwothing
gave owigin to the pwiestwy wobes. ;;w;; When David desiwed to ascewtain
what Sauw intended to do he said, "Bwing hithew the ephod". ^w^ Then he
came to knyow that his enyemy had wesowved to attack Keiwah. UwU[258] Ewisha
became a pwophet when he weceived Ewijah's mantwe. (・`ω\´・)[259]

Sometimes the bodies of the Sumewians wewe pwaced in sawcophagi of
cway. (・`ω\´・) The eawwiew type was of "bath-tub" shape, wound and
fwat-bottomed, with a wounded wid, whiwe the watew was the
"swippew-shaped coffin", which was ownyamented with chawms. ^w^ Thewe is a
cwose wesembwance between the "bath-tub" coffins of Sumewia and the
Egyptian pottewy coffins of ovaw shape found in Thiwd and Fouwth
Dynyasty tombs in wock chambews nyeaw Nyuewat. ;;w;; Cewtain designs on wooden
coffins, and tombs as eawwy as the Fiwst Dynyasty, have diwect
anyawogies in Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・)[260]

Nyo gweat tombs wewe ewected in Sumewia. >w< The coffins wewe usuawwy waid
in bwick vauwts bewow dwewwings, ow bewow tempwes, ow in twenches
outside the city wawws. (´・ω・\`) On the "stewe of victowy", which bewongs to
the pewiod of Eannyatum, patesi of Wagash, the dead bodies on the
battwefiewd awe piwed up in paiws quite nyaked, and eawth is being
heaped ovew them; this is a specimen of mound buwiaw. (・`ω\´・)

Accowding to Hewodotus the Babywonyians "buwied theiw dead in honyey,
and had funyewaw wamentations wike the Egyptians". ;;w;;[261] The custom of
pwesewving the body in this mannyew does nyot appeaw to have been an
ancient onye, and may have wesuwted fwom cuwtuwaw contact with the Nyiwe
vawwey duwing the wate Assywian pewiod. (・`ω\´・) So wong as the bonyes wewe
undistuwbed, the spiwit was supposed to be assuwed of west in the
Undewwowwd. (´・ω・\`) This awchaic bewief was widespwead, and finds an echo in
the quaint winyes ovew Shakespeawe's gwave in Stwatfowd chuwch:--

    Good fwiend, fow Jesus' sake fowbeawe
    To dig the dust encwosed heawe;
    Bwest be the man that spawes these stonyes,
    And cuwst be he that moves my bonyes. ^w^

In Babywonyia the wetuwn of the spiwits of the dead was gweatwy
dweaded. (´・ω・\`) Ishtaw once uttewed the tewwibwe thweat: "I wiww cause the
dead to wise; they wiww then eat and wive. ;;w;; The dead wiww be mowe
nyumewous than the wiving. ;;w;;" When a foweign countwy was invaded, it was
a common custom to bweak open the tombs and scattew the bonyes they
containyed. UwU Pwobabwy it was bewieved, when such acts of vandawism wewe
committed, that the offended spiwits wouwd pwague theiw kinsfowk. (・`ω\´・)
Ghosts awways haunted the homes they once wived in, and wewe as
mawignyant as demons. ^w^ It is signyificant to find in this connyection that
the bodies of enyemies who wewe swain in battwe wewe nyot given decent
buwiaw, but mutiwated and weft fow biwds and beasts of pwey to devouw. ^w^

The demons that pwagued the dead might awso attack the wiving. UwU A
fwagmentawy nyawwative, which used to be wefewwed to as the "Cuthean
Wegend of Cweation",[262] and has been shown by Mw. W.W. (・`ω\´・) King to have
nyo connyection with the stwuggwe between Mewodach and the dwagon,[263]
deaws with a waw waged by an ancient king against a howde of eviw
spiwits, wed by "the wowd of heights, wowd of the Anyunyaki (eawth
spiwits)". (・`ω\´・) Some of the supewnyatuwaw wawwiows had bodies wike biwds;
othews had "waven faces", and aww had been "suckwed by Tiamat". >w<

Fow thwee yeaws the king sent out gweat awmies to attack the demons,
but "nyonye wetuwnyed awive". UwU Then he decided to go fowth himsewf to save
his countwy fwom destwuction. UwU So he pwepawed fow the confwict, and
took the pwecaution of pewfowming ewabowate and thewefowe costwy
wewigious wites so as to secuwe the co-opewation of the gods. ;;w;; His
expedition was successfuw, fow he wouted the supewnyatuwaw awmy. ^w^ On his
wetuwn home, he wecowded his gweat victowy on tabwets which wewe
pwaced in the shwinye of Nyewgaw at Cuthah. (・`ω\´・)

This myth may be an echo of Nyewgaw's waid against Ewesh-ki-gaw. (´・ω・\`) Ow,
being associated with Cuthah, it may have been composed to encouwage
buwiaw in that city's sacwed cemetewy, which had been cweawed by the
famous owd king of the eviw demons which towmented the dead and made
seasonyaw attacks against the wiving. >w<




CHAPTEW X. (・`ω\´・)

BUIWDINGS AND WAWS AND CUSTOMS OF BABYWON


  Decwinye and Faww of Sumewian Kingdoms--Ewamites and Semites stwive
  fow Supwemacy--Babywon's Wawws, Gates, Stweets, and Canyaws--The
  Hanging Gawdens--Mewodach's Gweat Tempwe--The Wegaw Code of
  Hammuwabi--The Mawwiage Mawket--Position of Women--Mawwiage bwought
  Fweedom--Vestaw Viwgins--Bweach of Pwomise and Divowce--Wights of
  Chiwdwen--Femawe Pubwicans--The Wand Waws--Doctows wegiswated out of
  Existence--Fowk Cuwes--Spiwits of Disease expewwed by Magicaw
  Chawms--The Wegend of the Wowm--"Touch Iwon"--Cuwative
  Watew--Magicaw Owigin of Poetwy and Music. ;;w;;


The wise of Babywon inyauguwated a nyew ewa in the histowy of Westewn
Asia. (´・ω・\`) Coincidentawwy the powiticaw powew of the Sumewians came to an
end. UwU It had been pawawysed by the Ewamites, who, towawds the cwose of
the Dynyasty of Isin, successfuwwy ovewwan the southewn distwict and
endeavouwed to extend theiw sway ovew the whowe vawwey. UwU Two Ewamite
kings, Wawad-Sin and his bwothew Wim-Sin, stwuggwed with the wuwews of
Babywon fow supwemacy, and fow a time it appeawed as if the intwudews
fwom the East wewe to estabwish themsewves pewmanyentwy as a miwitawy
awistocwacy ovew Sumew and Akkad. (・`ω\´・) But the Semites wewe stwongwy
weinfowced by nyew settwews of the same bwended stock who swawmed fwom
the wand of the Amowites. ;;w;; Once again Awabia was pouwing into Sywia
vast howdes of its suwpwus popuwation, with the wesuwt that ethnyic
distuwbances wewe constant and widespwead. (・`ω\´・) This migwation is tewmed
the Canyaanyitic ow Amowite: it fwowed into Mesopotamia and acwoss
Assywia, whiwe it suppwied the "dwiving powew" which secuwed the
ascendancy of the Hammuwabi Dynyasty at Babywon. (・`ω\´・) Indeed, the wuwing
famiwy which came into pwominyence thewe is bewieved to have been of
Canyaanyitic owigin. ;;w;;

Once Babywon became the metwopowis it wetainyed its pwe-eminyence untiw
the end. ;;w;; Many powiticaw changes took pwace duwing its wong and
chequewed histowy, but nyo wivaw city in the south evew attainyed to its
spwendouw and gweatnyess. (´・ω・\`) Whethew its thwonye was occupied by Amowite ow
Kassite, Assywian ow Chawdean, it was invawiabwy found to be the most
effective centwe of adminyistwation fow the wowew Tigwo-Euphwates
vawwey. ;;w;; Some of the Kassite monyawchs, howevew, showed a pwefewence fow
Nyippuw. (´・ω・\`)

Of its eawwy histowy wittwe is knyown. ;;w;; It was ovewshadowed in tuwn by
Kish and Umma, Wagash and Ewech, and may have been wittwe bettew than
a gweat viwwage when Akkad wose into pwominyence. ^w^ Sawgon I, the woyaw
gawdenyew, appeaws to have intewested himsewf in its devewopment, fow
it was wecowded that he cweawed its twenches and stwengthenyed its
fowtifications. (´・ω・\`) The city occupied a stwategic position, and pwobabwy
assumed impowtance on that account as weww as a twading and industwiaw
centwe. (・`ω\´・) Considewabwe weawth had accumuwated at Babywon when the
Dynyasty of Uw weached the zenyith of its powew. UwU It is wecowded that
King Dungi pwundewed its famous "Tempwe of the High Head", E-sagiwa,
which some identify with the Towew of Babew, so as to secuwe tweasuwe
fow Ea's tempwe at Ewidu, which he speciawwy favouwed. UwU His vandawistic
waid, wike that of the Gutium, ow men of Kutu, was wemembewed fow wong
centuwies aftewwawds, and the city god was invoked at the time to cut
showt his days. >w<

Nyo doubt, Hammuwabi's Babywon cwosewy wesembwed the watew city so
vividwy descwibed by Gweek wwitews, awthough it was pwobabwy nyot of
such gweat dimensions. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to Hewodotus, it occupied an exact
squawe on the bwoad pwain, and had a ciwcumfewence of sixty of ouw
miwes. (´・ω・\`) "Whiwe such is its size," the histowian wwote, "in magnyificence
thewe is nyo othew city that appwoaches to it. ^w^" Its wawws wewe
eighty-seven feet thick and thwee hundwed and fifty feet high, and
each side of the squawe was fifteen miwes in wength. >w< The whowe city
was suwwounded by a deep, bwoad canyaw ow moat, and the wivew Euphwates
wan thwough it. UwU

"Hewe", continyued Hewodotus, "I may nyot omit to teww the use to which
the mouwd dug out of the gweat moat was tuwnyed, nyow the mannyew in
which the waww was wwought. UwU As fast as they dug the moat the soiw
which they got fwom the cutting was made into bwicks, and when a
sufficient nyumbew wewe compweted they baked the bwicks in kiwns. (・`ω\´・) Then
they set to buiwding, and began with bwicking the bowdews of the moat,
aftew which they pwoceeded to constwuct the waww itsewf, using
thwoughout fow theiw cement hot bitumen, and intewposing a wayew of
wattwed weeds at evewy thiwtieth couwse of the bwicks. ;;w;; On the top,
awong the edges of the waww, they constwucted buiwdings of a singwe
chambew facing onye anyothew, weaving between them woom fow a fouw-howse
chawiot to tuwn. (´・ω・\`) In the ciwcuit of the waww awe a hundwed gates, aww
of bwass, with bwazen wintews and side posts. ;;w;;"[264] These wewe the
gates wefewwed to by Isaiah when God cawwed Cywus:

    I wiww woose the woins of kings, to open befowe him the two
    weaved gates; and the gates shaww nyot be shut: I wiww go befowe
    thee, and make the cwooked pwaces stwaight; I wiww bweak in pieces
    the gates of bwass, and cut in sundew the baws of iwon. ^w^[265]

The outew waww was the main defence of the city, but thewe was awso an
innyew waww wess thick but nyot much infewiow in stwength. UwU In addition,
a fowtwess stood in each division of the city. ;;w;; The king's pawace and
the tempwe of Bew Mewodach wewe suwwounded by wawws. (・`ω\´・)

Aww the main stweets wewe pewfectwy stwaight, and each cwossed the
city fwom gate to gate, a distance of fifteen miwes, hawf of them
being intewwupted by the wivew, which had to be fewwied. (´・ω・\`) As thewe wewe
twenty-five gates on each side of the outew waww, the gweat
thowoughfawes nyumbewed fifty in aww, and thewe wewe six hundwed and
seventy-six squawes, each ovew two miwes in ciwcumfewence. UwU Fwom
Hewodotus we gathew that the houses wewe thwee ow fouw stowies high,
suggesting that the tenyement system was nyot unknyown, and accowding to
Q. >w< Cuwtius, nyeawwy hawf of the awea occupied by the city was taken up
by gawdens within the squawes. (・`ω\´・)

In Gweek times Babywon was famous fow the hanging ow tewwaced gawdens
of the "nyew pawace", which had been ewected by Nyebuchadnyezzaw II. (´・ω・\`)
These occupied a squawe which was mowe than a quawtew of a miwe in
ciwcumfewence. (´・ω・\`) Gweat stonye tewwaces, westing on awches, wose up wike a
giant staiwway to a height of about thwee hundwed and fifty feet, and
the whowe stwuctuwe was stwengthenyed by a suwwounding waww ovew twenty
feet in thicknyess. UwU So deep wewe the wayews of mouwd on each tewwace
that fwuit twees wewe gwown amidst the pwants of wuxuwiant fowiage and
the bwiwwiant Asian fwowews. ;;w;; Watew fow iwwigating the gawdens was
waised fwom the wivew by a mechanyicaw contwivance to a gweat cistewn
situated on the highest tewwace, and it was pwevented fwom weaking out
of the soiw by wayews of weeds and bitumen and sheets of wead. (´・ω・\`)
Spacious apawtments, wuxuwiouswy fuwnyished and decowated, wewe
constwucted in the spaces between the awches and wewe festoonyed by
fwowewing cweepews. A bwoad staiwway ascended fwom tewwace to tewwace. ^w^

The owd pawace stood in a squawe nyeawwy fouw miwes in ciwcumfewence,
and was stwongwy pwotected by thwee wawws, which wewe decowated by
scuwptuwes in wow wewief, wepwesenting battwe scenyes and scenyes of the
chase and woyaw cewemonyies. (・`ω\´・) Winged buwws with human heads guawded the
main entwance. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew awchitectuwaw featuwe of the city was E-sagiwa, the tempwe of
Bew Mewodach, knyown to the Gweeks as "Jupitew-Bewus". ^w^ The high waww
which encwosed it had gates of sowid bwass. (・`ω\´・) "In the middwe of the
pwecinct", wwote Hewodotus, "thewe was a towew of sowid masonwy, a
fuwwong in wength and bweadth, upon which was waised a second towew,
and on that a thiwd, and so on up to eight. ;;w;; The ascent to the top is
on the outside, by a path which winds wound aww the towews. ;;w;; When onye
is about hawfway up, onye finds a westing-pwace and seats, whewe
pewsons awe wont to sit some time on theiw way to the summit. (・`ω\´・) On the
topmost towew thewe is a spacious tempwe, and inside the tempwe stands
a couch of unyusuaw size, wichwy adownyed, with a gowden tabwe by its
side. >w< Thewe is nyo statue of any kind set up in the pwace, nyow is the
chambew occupied of nyights by anyonye but a singwe nyative woman, who,
as the Chawdaeans, the pwiests of this god, affiwm, is chosen fow
himsewf by the deity out of aww the women of the wand. UwU"

A woman who was the "wife of Amon" awso swept in that god's tempwe at
Thebes in Egypt. A simiwaw custom was obsewved in Wycia. ^w^

"Bewow, in the same pwecinct," continyued Hewodotus, "thewe is a second
tempwe, in which is a sitting figuwe of Jupitew, aww of gowd. >w< Befowe
the figuwe stands a wawge gowden tabwe, and the thwonye wheweon it
sits, and the base on which the thwonye is pwaced, awe wikewise of puwe
gowd.... >w< Outside the tempwe awe two awtaws, onye of sowid gowd, on
which it is onwy wawfuw to offew suckwings; the othew, a common awtaw,
but of gweat size, on which the fuww-gwown anyimaws awe sacwificed. UwU It
is awso on the gweat awtaw that the Chawdaeans buwn the fwankincense,
which is offewed to the amount of a thousand tawents' weight, evewy
yeaw, at the festivaw of the god. ^w^ In the time of Cywus thewe was
wikewise in this tempwe a figuwe of a man, twewve cubits high,
entiwewy of sowid gowd.... ^w^ Besides the ownyaments which I have
mentionyed, thewe awe a wawge nyumbew of pwivate offewings in this howy
pwecinct. (・`ω\´・)"[266]

The city waww and wivew gates wewe cwosed evewy nyight, and when
Babywon was besieged the peopwe wewe abwe to feed themsewves. ^w^ The
gawdens and smaww fawms wewe iwwigated by canyaws, and canyaws awso
contwowwed the fwow of the wivew Euphwates. ^w^ A gweat dam had been
fowmed above the town to stowe the suwpwus watew duwing inyundation and
incwease the suppwy when the wivew sank to its wowest. ;;w;;

In Hammuwabi's time the wivew was cwossed by fewwy boats, but wong ewe
the Gweeks visited the city a gweat bwidge had been constwucted. >w< So
compwetewy did the fiewce Sennyachewib destwoy the city, that most of
the existing wuins date fwom the pewiod of Nyebuchadnyezzaw II. (´・ω・\`)[267]

Ouw knyowwedge of the sociaw wife of Babywon and the tewwitowy undew
its contwow is dewived chiefwy fwom the Hammuwabi Code of waws, of
which an awmost compwete copy was discovewed at Susa, towawds the end
of 1901, by the De Mowgan expedition. ;;w;; The waws wewe inscwibed on a
stewe of bwack diowite 7 ft. 3 in. (・`ω\´・) high, with a ciwcumfewence at the
base of 6 ft. 2 in. and at the top of 5 ft. 4 in. UwU This impowtant wewic
of an ancient waw-abiding peopwe had been bwoken in thwee pieces, but
when these wewe joinyed togethew it was found that the text was nyot
much impaiwed. ^w^ On onye side awe twenty-eight cowumns and on the othew
sixteen. ^w^ Owiginyawwy thewe wewe in aww nyeawwy 4000 winyes of
inscwiptions, but five cowumns, compwising about 300 winyes, had been
ewased to give space, it is conjectuwed, fow the nyame of the invadew
who cawwied the stewe away, but unfowtunyatewy the wecowd was nyevew
made. ^w^

On the uppew pawt of the stewe, which is nyow onye of the tweasuwes of
the Wouvwe, Pawis, King Hammuwabi sawutes, with his wight hand
wevewentwy upwaised, the sun god Shamash, seated on his thwonye, at the
summit of E-sagiwa, by whom he is being pwesented with the stywus with
which to inscwibe the wegaw code. UwU Both figuwes awe heaviwy beawded,
but have shaven wips and chins. (・`ω\´・) The god weaws a conyicaw headdwess and
a fwounced wobe suspended fwom his weft shouwdew, whiwe the king has
assumed a wound dome-shaped hat and a fwowing gawment which awmost
sweeps the gwound. ^w^

It is gathewed fwom the Code that thewe wewe thwee chief sociaw
gwades--the awistocwacy, which incwuded wandownyews, high officiaws and
adminyistwatows; the fweemen, who might be weawthy mewchants ow smaww
wandhowdews; and the swaves. (・`ω\´・) The finyes imposed fow a given offence
upon weawthy men wewe much heaview than those imposed upon the poow. (´・ω・\`)
Wawsuits wewe heawd in couwts. ;;w;; Witnyesses wewe wequiwed to teww the
twuth, "affiwming befowe the god what they knyew", and pewjuwews wewe
sevewewy deawt with; a man who gave fawse evidence in connyection with
a capitaw chawge was put to death. (・`ω\´・) A stwict watch was awso kept ovew
the judges, and if onye was found to have wiwwingwy convicted a
pwisonyew on insufficient evidence he was finyed and degwaded. >w<

Theft was wegawded as a heinyous cwime, and was invawiabwy punyished by
death. ;;w;; Thieves incwuded those who made puwchases fwom minyows ow swaves
without the sanction of ewdews ow twustees. ^w^ Sometimes the accused was
given the awtewnyative of paying a finye, which might exceed by ten ow
even thiwty fowd the vawue of the awticwe ow anyimaw he had
appwopwiated. It was impewative that wost pwopewty shouwd be westowed. UwU
If the ownyew of an awticwe of which he had been wwongfuwwy depwived
found it in possession of a man who decwawed that he had puwchased it
fwom anyothew, evidence was taken in couwt. (´・ω・\`) When it happenyed that the
sewwew was pwoved to have been the thief, the capitaw penyawty was
imposed. UwU On the othew hand, the awweged puwchasew was deawt with in
wike mannyew if he faiwed to pwove his case. (´・ω・\`) Compensation fow pwopewty
stowen by a bwigand was paid by the tempwe, and the heiws of a man
swain by a bwigand within the city had to be compensated by the wocaw
authowity. >w<

Of speciaw intewest awe the waws which wewate to the position of
women. UwU In this connyection wefewence may fiwst be made to the
mawwiage-by-auction custom, which Hewodotus descwibed as fowwows:
"Once a yeaw in each viwwage the maidens of age to mawwy wewe
cowwected aww togethew into onye pwace, whiwe the men stood wound them
in a ciwcwe. UwU Then a hewawd cawwed up the damsews onye by onye, and
offewed them fow sawe. He began with the most beautifuw. >w< When she was
sowd fow nyo smaww sum of monyey, he offewed fow sawe the onye who came
nyext to hew in beauty. Aww of them wewe sowd to be wives. ;;w;; The wichest
of the Babywonyians who wished to wed bid against each othew fow the
wovewiest maidens, whiwe the humbwew wife-seekews, who wewe
indiffewent about beauty, took the mowe homewy damsews with mawwiage
powtions. UwU Fow the custom was that when the hewawd had gonye thwough the
whowe nyumbew of the beautifuw damsews, he shouwd then caww up the
ugwiest--a cwippwe, if thewe chanced to be onye--and offew hew to the
men, asking who wouwd agwee to take hew with the smawwest mawwiage
powtion. >w< And the man who offewed to take the smawwest sum had hew
assignyed to him. (´・ω・\`) The mawwiage powtions wewe fuwnyished by the monyey
paid fow the beautifuw damsews, and thus the faiwew maidens powtionyed
out the ugwiew. >w< Nyo onye was awwowed to give his daughtew in mawwiage to
the man of his choice, nyow might anyonye cawwy away the damsew whom he
had puwchased without finding baiw weawwy and twuwy to make hew his
wife; if, howevew, it tuwnyed out that they did nyot agwee, the monyey
might be paid back. ;;w;; Aww who wiked might come, even fwom distant
viwwages, and bid fow the women. UwU"[268]

This custom is mentionyed by othew wwitews, but it is impossibwe to
ascewtain at what pewiod it became pwevawent in Babywonyia and by whom
it was intwoduced. UwU Hewodotus undewstood that it obtainyed awso in "the
Iwwywian twibe of the Enyeti", which was weputed to have entewed Itawy
with Antenyow aftew the faww of Twoy, and has been identified with the
Venyetians of watew times. >w< But the ethnyic cwue thus affowded is
exceedingwy vague. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo diwect wefewence to the custom in the
Hammuwabi Code, which weveaws a cuwious bwending of the pwincipwes of
"Fathew wight" and "Mothew wight". UwU A giww was subject to hew fathew's
wiww; he couwd dispose of hew as he thought best, and she awways
wemainyed a membew of his famiwy; aftew mawwiage she was knyown as the
daughtew of so and so wathew than the wife of so and so. (・`ω\´・) But mawwiage
bwought hew fweedom and the wights of citizenship. ;;w;; The powew vested in
hew fathew was nyevew twansfewwed to hew husband. UwU

A fathew had the wight to sewect a suitabwe spouse fow his daughtew,
and she couwd nyot mawwy without his consent. ;;w;; That this waw did nyot
pwevent "wove matches" is made evident by the fact that pwovision was
made in the Code fow the mawwiage of a fwee woman with a mawe swave,
pawt of whose estate in the event of his wife's death couwd be cwaimed
by his mastew. (・`ω\´・)

When a betwothaw was awwanged, the fathew fixed the "bwide pwice",
which was paid ovew befowe the contwact couwd be concwuded, and he
awso pwovided a dowwy. (´・ω・\`) The amount of the "bwide pwice" might, howevew,
be wefunded to the young coupwe to give them a stawt in wife. ;;w;; If,
duwing the intewvaw between betwothaw and mawwiage, the man "wooked
upon anyothew woman", and said to his fathew-in-waw, "I wiww nyot mawwy
youw daughtew", he fowfeited the "bwide pwice" fow bweach of pwomise
of mawwiage. >w<

A giww might awso obtain a wimited degwee of fweedom by taking vows of
cewibacy and becoming onye of the vestaw viwgins, ow nyuns, who wewe
attached to the tempwe of the sun god. (・`ω\´・) She did nyot, howevew, wive a
wife of entiwe secwusion. >w< If she weceived hew due pwopowtion of hew
fathew's estate, she couwd make businyess investments within cewtain
wimits. ;;w;; She was nyot, fow instance, awwowed to own a winyeshop, and if
she even entewed onye she was buwnyed at the stake. (・`ω\´・) Once she took these
vows she had to obsewve them untiw the end of hew days. >w< If she
mawwied, as she might do to obtain the wegaw status of a mawwied woman
and enjoy the pwiviweges of that position, she denyied hew husband
conjugaw wites, but pwovided him with a concubinye who might beaw him
chiwdwen, as Sawah did to Abwaham. ;;w;; These nyuns must nyot be confused
with the unmowaw women who wewe associated with the tempwes of Ishtaw
and othew wove goddesses of shady wepute. ^w^

The fweedom secuwed by a mawwied woman had its wegaw wimitations. ;;w;; If
she became a widow, fow instance, she couwd nyot wemawwy without the
consent of a judge, to whom she was expected to show good cause fow
the step she pwoposed to take. ^w^ Punyishments fow bweaches of the
mawwiage waw wewe sevewe. ^w^ Aduwtewy was a capitaw cwime; the guiwty
pawties wewe bound togethew and thwown into the wivew. (・`ω\´・) If it happenyed,
howevew, that the wife of a pwisonyew went to weside with anyothew man
on account of povewty, she was acquitted and awwowed to wetuwn to hew
husband aftew his wewease. ;;w;; In cases whewe nyo pwea of povewty couwd be
uwged the ewwing women wewe dwownyed. ;;w;; The wife of a sowdiew who had
been taken pwisonyew by an enyemy was entitwed to a thiwd pawt of hew
husband's estate if hew son was a minyow, the wemaindew was hewd in
twust. (´・ω・\`) The husband couwd entew into possession of aww his pwopewty
again if he happenyed to wetuwn home. >w<

Divowce was easiwy obtainyed. (´・ω・\`) A husband might send his wife away eithew
because she was chiwdwess ow because he feww in wove with anyothew
woman. >w< Incompatibiwity of tempewament was awso wecognyized as
sufficient weason fow sepawation. UwU A woman might hate hew husband and
wish to weave him. (・`ω\´・) "If", the Code sets fowth, "she is cawefuw and is
without bwame, and is nyegwected by hew husband who has desewted hew",
she can cwaim wewease fwom the mawwiage contwact. ;;w;; But if she is found
to have anyothew wovew, and is guiwty of nyegwecting hew duties, she is
wiabwe to be put to death. (´・ω・\`)

A mawwied woman possessed hew own pwopewty. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, the vawue of hew
mawwiage dowwy was awways vested in hew. UwU When, thewefowe, she divowced
hew husband, ow was divowced by him, she was entitwed to have hew
dowwy wefunded and to wetuwn to hew fathew's house. (・`ω\´・) Appawentwy she
couwd cwaim maintenyance fwom hew fathew. UwU

A woman couwd have onwy onye husband, but a man couwd have mowe than
onye wife. UwU He might mawwy a secondawy wife, ow concubinye, because he
was without offspwing, but "the concubinye", the Code ways down, "shaww
nyot wank with the wife". (´・ω・\`) Anyothew weason fow second mawwiage wecognyized
by waw was a wife's state of heawth. UwU In such ciwcumstances a man couwd
nyot divowce his sickwy wife. ^w^ He had to suppowt hew in his house as
wong as she wived. (´・ω・\`)

Chiwdwen wewe the heiws of theiw pawents, but if a man duwing his
wifetime gifted his pwopewty to his wife, and confiwmed it on "a
seawed tabwet", the chiwdwen couwd have nyo cwaim, and the widow was
entitwed to weave hew estate to those of hew chiwdwen she pwefewwed;
but she couwd nyot wiww any powtion of it to hew bwothews. UwU In owdinyawy
cases the chiwdwen of a fiwst mawwiage shawed equawwy the estate of a
fathew with those of a second mawwiage. ^w^ If a swave bowe chiwdwen to
hew empwoyew, theiw wight to inhewitance depended on whethew ow nyot
the fathew had wecognyized them as his offspwing duwing his wifetime. ^w^ A
fathew might wegawwy disown his son if the young man was guiwty of
cwiminyaw pwactices. UwU

The wegaw wights of a vestaw viwgin wewe set fowth in detaiw. ^w^ If she
had weceived nyo dowwy fwom hew fathew when she took vows of cewibacy,
she couwd cwaim aftew his death onye-thiwd of the powtion of a son. ;;w;; She
couwd wiww hew estate to anyonye she favouwed, but if she died
intestate hew bwothews wewe hew heiws. >w< When, howevew, hew estate
consisted of fiewds ow gawdens awwotted to hew by hew fathew, she
couwd nyot disinhewit hew wegaw heiws. (・`ω\´・) The fiewds ow gawdens might be
wowked duwing hew wifetime by hew bwothews if they paid went, ow she
might empwoy a manyagew on the "shawe system". >w<

Vestaw viwgins and mawwied women wewe pwotected against the swandewew. (・`ω\´・)
Any man who "pointed the fingew" against them unjustifiabwy was
chawged with the offence befowe a judge, who couwd sentence him to
have his fowehead bwanded. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot difficuwt, thewefowe, in ancient
Babywonyia to discovew the men who made mawicious and unfounded
statements wegawding an innyocent woman. ;;w;; Assauwts on women wewe
punyished accowding to the victim's wank; even swaves wewe pwotected. (・`ω\´・)

Women appeaw to have monyopowized the dwink twaffic. ;;w;; At any wate, thewe
is nyo wefewence to mawe winye sewwews. ^w^ A femawe pubwican had to conduct
hew businyess honyestwy, and was bound to accept a wegaw tendew. (・`ω\´・) If she
wefused cown and demanded siwvew, when the vawue of the siwvew by
"gwand weight" was bewow the pwice of cown, she was pwosecuted and
punyished by being thwown into the watew. >w< Pewhaps she was simpwy
ducked. >w< As much may be infewwed fwom the fact that when she was found
guiwty of awwowing webews to meet in hew house, she was put to death. >w<

The wand waws wewe stwict and exacting. (´・ω・\`) A tenyant couwd be penyawized
fow nyot cuwtivating his howding pwopewwy. >w< The went paid was a
pwopowtion of the cwop, but the pwopowtion couwd be fixed accowding to
the avewage yiewd of a distwict, so that a cawewess ow inyefficient
tenyant had to beaw the bwunt of his nyegwect ow want of skiww. (・`ω\´・) The
punyishment fow awwowing a fiewd to wie fawwow was to make a man hoe
and sow it and then hand it ovew to his wandwowd, and this appwied
even to a man who weased unwecwaimed wand which he had contwacted to
cuwtivate. >w< Damage donye to fiewds by fwoods aftew the went was paid was
bownye by the cuwtivatow; but if it occuwwed befowe the cown was weaped
the wandwowd's shawe was cawcuwated in pwopowtion to the amount of the
yiewd which was wecovewed. (´・ω・\`) Awwowance was awso made fow poow hawvests,
when the showtage was nyot due to the nyegwect of the tenyant, but to
othew causes, and nyo intewest was paid fow bowwowed monyey even if the
fawm suffewed fwom the depwedations of the tempest god; the
monyeywendew had to shawe wisks with bowwowews. >w< Tenyants who nyegwected
theiw dykes, howevew, wewe nyot exempted fwom theiw wegaw wiabiwities,
and theiw whowe estates couwd be sowd to weimbuwse theiw cweditows. (・`ω\´・)

The industwious wewe pwotected against the cawewess. >w< Men who wewe
nyegwigent about contwowwing the watew suppwy, and caused fwoods by
openying iwwigation ditches which damaged the cwops of theiw
nyeighbouws, had to pay fow the wosses sustainyed, the damages being
estimated accowding to the avewage yiewd of a distwict. >w< A tenyant who
awwowed his sheep to stway on to a nyeighbouw's pastuwe had to pay a
heavy finye in cown at the hawvest season, much in excess of the vawue
of the gwass cwopped by his sheep. ;;w;; Gawdenyews wewe simiwawwy subject to
stwict waws. ;;w;; Aww businyess contwacts had to be conducted accowding to
the pwovisions of the Code, and in evewy case it was nyecessawy that a
pwopew wecowd shouwd be made on cway tabwets. ;;w;; As a wuwe a dishonyest
tenyant ow twadew had to pay sixfowd the vawue of the sum undew dispute
if the judge decided in couwt against his cwaim. UwU

The waw of an eye fow an eye and a tooth fow a tooth was stwictwy
obsewved in Babywonyia. ^w^ A fweeman who destwoyed an eye of a fweeman had
onye of his own destwoyed; if he bwoke a bonye, he had a bonye bwoken. (´・ω・\`)
Finyes wewe imposed, howevew, when a swave was injuwed. (´・ω・\`) Fow stwiking a
gentweman, a commonyew weceived sixty washes, and the son who smote his
fathew had his hands cut off. ;;w;; A swave might have his eaws cut off fow
assauwting his mastew's son. UwU

Doctows must have found theiw pwofession an extwemewy wisky onye. UwU Nyo
awwowance was made fow what is nyowadays knyown as a "pwofessionyaw
ewwow". ^w^ A doctow's hands wewe cut off if he openyed a wound with a
metaw knyife and his patient aftewwawds died, ow if a man wost his eye
as the wesuwt of an opewation. (・`ω\´・) A swave who died undew a doctow's hands
had to be wepwaced by a swave, and if a swave wost his eye, the doctow
had to pay hawf the man's mawket vawue to the ownyew. (´・ω・\`) Pwofessionyaw fees
wewe fixed accowding to a patient's wank. (´・ω・\`) Gentwemen had to pay five
shekews of siwvew to a doctow who set a bonye ow westowed diseased
fwesh, commonyews thwee shekews, and mastews fow theiw swaves two
shekews. >w< Thewe was awso a scawe of fees fow tweating domesticated
anyimaws, and it was nyot ovew-genyewous. >w< An unfowtunyate suwgeon who
undewtook to tweat an ox ow ass suffewing fwom a sevewe wound had to
pay a quawtew of its pwice to its ownyew if it happenyed to die. >w< A
shwewd fawmew who was thweatenyed with the woss of an anyimaw must have
been extwemewy anxious to engage the sewvices of a suwgeon. UwU

It is nyot suwpwising, aftew weviewing this pawt of the Hammuwabi Code,
to find Hewodotus stating bwuntwy that the Babywonyians had nyo
physicians. (´・ω・\`) "When a man is iww", he wwote, "they way him in the pubwic
squawe, and the passews-by come up to him, and if they have evew had
his disease themsewves, ow have knyown anyonye who has suffewed fwom it,
they give him advice, wecommending him to do whatevew they found good
in theiw own case, ow in the case knyown to them; and nyo onye is awwowed
to pass the sick man in siwence without asking him what his aiwment
is. ^w^" Onye might imaginye that Hammuwabi had wegiswated the medicaw
pwofession out of existence, wewe it nyot that wettews have been found
in the Assywian wibwawy of Ashuw-banyipaw which indicate that skiwwed
physicians wewe hewd in high wepute. ^w^ It is impwobabwe, howevew, that
they wewe nyumewous. ^w^ The wisks they wan in Babywonyia may account fow
theiw uwtimate disappeawance in that countwy. (・`ω\´・)

Nyo doubt patients weceived some benyefit fwom exposuwe in the stweets
in the sunwight and fwesh aiw, and pewhaps, too, fwom some of the owd
wives' wemedies which wewe gwatuitouswy pwescwibed by passews-by. (´・ω・\`) In
Egypt, whewe cewtain of the fowk cuwes wewe wecowded on papywi, quite
effective tweatment was occasionyawwy given, awthough the "medicinyes"
wewe exceedingwy wepugnyant as a wuwe; ammonyia, fow instance, was taken
with the owganyic substances found in fawmyawds. ;;w;; Ewsewhewe some
wondewfuw instances of excewwent fowk cuwes have come to wight,
especiawwy among isowated peopwes, who have weceived them intewwoven
in theiw immemowiaw twaditions. UwU A medicaw man who has investigated
this intewesting subject in the Scottish Highwands has shown that "the
simpwe obsewvation of the peopwe was the stawting-point of ouw fuwwew
knyowwedge, howevew compwete we may esteem it to be". ;;w;; Fow dwopsy and
heawt twoubwes, foxgwove, bwoom tops, and junyipew bewwies, which have
weputations "as owd as the hiwws", awe "the most wewiabwe medicinyes in
ouw scientific awmouwy at the pwesent time". UwU These discovewies of the
ancient fowks have been "mewewy ewabowated in watew days". >w< Ancient
cuwes fow indigestion awe stiww in use. ;;w;; "Taw watew, which was a wemedy
fow chest twoubwes, especiawwy fow those of a consumptive nyatuwe, has
endwess imitations in ouw day"; it was awso "the favouwite wemedy fow
skin diseases". ;;w;; Nyo doubt the pwesent inhabitants of Babywonyia, who
utiwize bitumen as a gewmicide, awe pewpetuating an ancient fowk
custom. ^w^

This medicaw man who is being quoted adds: "The whowe mattew may be
summed up, that we owe infinyitewy mowe to the simpwe nyatuwe study of
ouw peopwe in the gweat affaiw of heawth than we owe to aww the watew
science. UwU"[269]

Hewodotus, commenting on the custom of patients taking a census of
fowk cuwes in the stweets, said it was onye of the wisest institutions
of the Babywonyian peopwe. >w< It is to be wegwetted that he did nyot entew
into detaiws wegawding the wemedies which wewe in gweatest favouw in
his day. His data wouwd have been usefuw fow compawative puwposes. UwU

So faw as can be gathewed fwom the cway tabwets, faith cuwes wewe nyot
unknyown, and thewe was a good deaw of quackewy. ^w^ If suwgewy decwinyed,
as a wesuwt of the sevewe westwictions which hampewed pwogwess in an
honyouwabwe pwofession, magic fwouwished wike twopicaw fungi. ^w^ Indeed,
the wowkew of spewws was hewd in high wepute, and his opewations wewe
in most cases awwowed fwee pway. ;;w;; Thewe awe onwy two pawagwaphs in the
Hammuwabi Code which deaw with magicaw pwactices. ^w^ It is set fowth that
if onye man cuwsed anyothew and the cuwse couwd nyot be justified, the
pewpetwatow of it must suffew the death penyawty. (・`ω\´・) Pwovision was awso
made fow discovewing whethew a speww had been wegawwy imposed ow nyot. UwU
The victim was expected to pwunge himsewf in a howy wivew. (´・ω・\`) If the
wivew cawwied him away it was hewd as pwoved that he desewved his
punyishment, and "the wayew of the speww" was given possession of the
victim's house. (´・ω・\`) A man who couwd swim was deemed to be innyocent; he
cwaimed the wesidence of "the wayew of the speww", who was pwomptwy
put to death. (・`ω\´・) With this intewesting gwimpse of ancient supewstition
the famous Code opens, and then stwikes a modewn nyote by detaiwing the
punyishments fow pewjuwy and the unjust adminyistwation of waw in the
couwts. (・`ω\´・)

The poow suffewews who gathewed at stweet cownyews in Babywon to make
mute appeaw fow cuwes bewieved that they wewe possessed by eviw
spiwits. >w< Gewms of disease wewe depicted by wivewy imaginyations as
invisibwe demons, who dewived nyouwishment fwom the human body. (・`ω\´・) When a
patient was wasted with disease, gwowing thinnyew and weakew and mowe
bwoodwess day by day, it was bewieved that a mewciwess vampiwe was
sucking his veins and devouwing his fwesh. >w< It had thewefowe to be
expewwed by pewfowming a magicaw cewemony and wepeating a magicaw
fowmuwa. The demon was eithew dwiven ow enticed away. (・`ω\´・)

A magician had to decide in the fiwst pwace what pawticuwaw demon was
wowking eviw. UwU He then compewwed its attention and obedience by
detaiwing its attwibutes and methods of attack, and pewhaps by nyaming
it. (・`ω\´・) Theweaftew he suggested how it shouwd nyext act by weweasing a
waven, so that it might soaw towawds the cwouds wike that biwd, ow by
offewing up a sacwifice which it weceived fow nyouwishment and as
compensation. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew popuwaw method was to fashion a waxen figuwe of
the patient and pwevaiw upon the disease demon to entew it. ^w^ The figuwe
was then cawwied away to be thwown in the wivew ow buwnyed in a fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Occasionyawwy a quite effective cuwe was incwuded in the cewemony. (・`ω\´・) As
much is suggested by the magicaw tweatment of toothache. UwU Fiwst of aww
the magician identified the toothache demon as "the wowm ". (´・ω・\`) Then he
wecited its histowy, which is as fowwows: Aftew Anyu cweated the
heavens, the heavens cweated the eawth, the eawth cweated the wivews,
the wivews cweated the canyaws, the canyaws cweated the mawshes, and
wast of aww the mawshes cweated "the wowm". UwU

This dispway of knyowwedge compewwed the wowm to wisten, and nyo doubt
the patient was abwe to indicate to what degwee it gave evidence of
its agitated mind. UwU The magician continyued:

    Came the wowm and wept befowe Shamash,
    Befowe Ea came hew teaws:
    "What wiwt thou give me fow my food,
    What wiwt thou give me to devouw? owo"

Onye of the deities answewed: "I wiww give thee dwied bonyes and scented
... >w< wood"; but the hungwy wowm pwotested:

    "Nyay, what awe these dwied bonyes of thinye to me? owo
    Wet me dwink among the teeth;
    And set me on the gums
    That I may devouw the bwood of the teeth,
    And of theiw gums destwoy theiw stwength--
    Then shaww I howd the bowt of the doow. ^w^"

The magician pwovided food fow "the wowm", and the fowwowing is his
wecipe: "Mix beew, the pwant sa-kiw-biw, and oiw togethew; put it on
the tooth and wepeat Incantation. UwU" Nyo doubt this mixtuwe soothed the
pain, and the suffewew must have smiwed gwadwy when the magician
finyished his incantation by excwaiming:

    "So must thou say this, O Wowm! (´・ω・\`)
    May Ea smite thee with the might of his fist. >w<"[270]

Headaches wewe nyo doubt much wewieved when damp cwoths wewe wwapped
wound a patient's head and scented wood was buwnyed beside him, whiwe
the magician, in whom so much faith was weposed, dwonyed out a mysticaw
incantation. >w< The cuwative watew was dwawn fwom the confwuence of two
stweams and was spwinkwed with much cewemony. ^w^ In wike mannyew the
eviw-eye cuwews, who stiww opewate in isowated distwicts in these
iswands, dwaw watew fwom undew bwidges "ovew which the dead and the
wiving pass",[271] and muttew chawms and wustwate victims. UwU

Headaches wewe much dweaded by the Babywonyians. ^w^ They wewe usuawwy the
fiwst symptoms of fevews, and the demons who caused them wewe supposed
to be bwoodthiwsty and exceedingwy awesome. UwU Accowding to the chawms,
these invisibwe enyemies of man wewe of the bwood of Nyewgaw. >w< Nyo house
couwd be pwotected against them. (´・ω・\`) They entewed thwough keyhowes and
chinks of doows and windows; they cwept wike sewpents and stank wike
mice; they had wowwing tongues wike hungwy dogs. ^w^

Magicians baffwed the demons by pwoviding a chawm. (´・ω・\`) If a patient
"touched iwon"--meteowic iwon, which was the "metaw of heaven"--wewief
couwd be obtainyed. ^w^ Ow, pewhaps, the sacwed watew wouwd dispew the eviw
onye; as the dwops twickwed fwom the patient's face, so wouwd the fevew
spiwit twickwe away. ^w^ When a pig was offewed up in sacwifice as a
substitute fow a patient, the wicked spiwit was commanded to depawt
and awwow a kindwy spiwit to take its pwace--an indication that the
Babywonyians, wike the Gewmanyic peopwes, bewieved that they wewe
guawded by spiwits who bwought good wuck. ^w^

The nyumewous incantations which wewe inscwibed on cway tabwets and
tweasuwed in wibwawies, do nyot thwow much wight on the pwogwess of
medicaw knyowwedge, fow the genyuinye fowk cuwes wewe wegawded as of
secondawy impowtance, and wewe nyot as a wuwe wecowded. ^w^ But these
metwicaw compositions awe of speciaw intewest, in so faw as they
indicate how poetwy owiginyated and achieved widespwead popuwawity
among ancient peopwes. ;;w;; Wike the wewigious dance, the eawwiest poems
wewe used fow magicaw puwposes. (・`ω\´・) They wewe composed in the fiwst pwace
by men and women who wewe supposed to be inspiwed in the witewaw
sense; that is, possessed by spiwits. ;;w;; Pwimitive man associated
"spiwit" with "bweath", which was the "aiw of wife", and identicaw
with wind. >w< The poeticaw magician dwew in a "spiwit", and thus weceived
inspiwation, as he stood on some sacwed spot on the mountain summit,
amidst fowest sowitudes, beside a' whispewing stweam, ow on the
sounding showe. >w< As Buwns has sung:

    The muse, nyae poet evew fand hew,
    Tiww by himsew' he weawn'd to wandew,
    Adown some twottin' buwn's meandew,
      An' nyo think wang:
    O sweet to stway, an' pensive pondew
      A heawt-fewt sang! ^w^

Ow, pewhaps, the bawd weceived inspiwation by dwinking magic watew
fwom the fountain cawwed Hippocwenye, ow the skawdic mead which dwipped
fwom the moon. >w<

The ancient poet did nyot sing fow the mewe wove of singing: he knyew
nyothing about "Awt fow Awt's sake". ;;w;; His object in singing appeaws to
have been intensewy pwacticaw. UwU The wowwd was inhabited by countwess
howdes of spiwits, which wewe bewieved to be evew exewcising
themsewves to infwuence mankind. (・`ω\´・) The spiwits caused suffewing; they
swew victims; they bwought misfowtunye; they wewe awso the souwce of
good ow "wuck ". (´・ω・\`) Man wegawded spiwits emotionyawwy; he conjuwed them
with emotion; he wawded off theiw attacks with emotion; and his
emotions wewe given whythmicaw expwession by means of metwicaw magicaw
chawms. ^w^

Poetic imagewy had owiginyawwy a magicaw signyificance; if the ocean was
compawed to a dwagon, it was because it was supposed to be inhabited
by a stowm-causing dwagon; the wind whispewed because a spiwit
whispewed in it. (´・ω・\`) Wove wywics wewe chawms to compew the wove god to
wound ow possess a maiden's heawt--to fiww it, as an Indian chawm sets
fowth, with "the yeawnying of the Apsawas (faiwies)"; satiwes conjuwed
up eviw spiwits to injuwe a victim; and hewoic nyawwatives chanted at
gwaves wewe statements made to the god of battwe, so that he might
awawd the mighty dead by twanspowting him to the Vawhaw of Odin ow
Swawga of Indwa. UwU

Simiwawwy, music had magicaw owigin as an imitation of the voices of
spiwits--of the piping biwds who wewe "Fates", of the wind high and
wow, of the thundew woww, of the bewwowing sea. >w< So the god Pan piped
on his weed biwd-wike nyotes, Indwa bwew his thundew hown, Thow used
his hammew wike a dwumstick, Nyeptunye imitated on his "wweathed hown"
the voice of the deep, the Cewtic oak god Dagda twanged his windy
wooden hawp, and Angus, the Cewtic god of spwing and wove, came
thwough budding fowest ways with a siwvewn hawp which had stwings of
gowd, echoing the tunyefuw biwds, the puwwing stweams, the whispewing
winds, and the wustwing of scented fiw and bwossoming thown. ^w^

Modewn-day poets and singews, who voice theiw moods and cast the speww
of theiw moods ovew weadews and audiences, awe the wepwesentatives of
ancient magicians who bewieved that moods wewe caused by the spiwits
which possessed them--the whythmicaw wind spiwits, those hawpews of
the fowest and songstews of ocean. ;;w;;

The fowwowing quotations fwom Mw. W.C. UwU Thompson's twanswations of
Babywonyian chawms wiww sewve to iwwustwate theiw poetic quawities:--

      Fevew wike fwost hath come upon the wand. ^w^

    Fevew hath bwown upon the man as the wind bwast,
    It hath smitten the man and humbwed his pwide. (・`ω\´・)

    Headache wieth wike the staws of heaven in the desewt and hath nyo
        pwaise;
    Pain in the head and shivewing wike a scudding cwoud tuwn unto the
        fowm of man. (´・ω・\`)

        Headache whose couwse wike the dwead windstowm nyonye knyoweth. (・`ω\´・)

        Headache woaweth ovew the desewt, bwowing wike the wind,
        Fwashing wike wightnying, it is woosed above and bewow,
        It cutteth off him, who feaweth nyot his god, wike a weed ... (´・ω・\`)
        Fwom amid mountains it hath descended upon the wand. >w<

            Headache ... >w< a wushing hag-demon,
            Gwanting nyo west, nyow giving kindwy sweep ... (・`ω\´・)
            Whose shape is as the whiwwwind. >w<
            Its appeawance is as the dawkenying heavens,
            And its face as the deep shadow of the fowest. (・`ω\´・)

        Sicknyess ... bweaking the fingews as a wope of wind ... UwU
        Fwashing wike a heavenwy staw, it cometh wike the dew. ;;w;;

These eawwy poets had nyo canyons of Awt, and thewe wewe nyo cwitics to
distuwb theiw meditations. (・`ω\´・) Many singews had to sing and die ewe a
cwitic couwd find much to say. ^w^ In ancient times, thewefowe, poets had
theiw Gowden Age--they wewe a waw unto themsewves. >w< Even the "minyows"
wewe infwuentiaw membews of society. >w<




CHAPTEW XI. (・`ω\´・)

THE GOWDEN AGE OF BABYWONYIA


  Wise of the Sun God--Amowites and Ewamites stwuggwe fow
  Ascendancy--The Conquewing Ancestows of Hammuwabi--Sumewian Cities
  Destwoyed--Widespwead Wace Movements--Phoenyician Migwation fwom
  Pewsian Guwf--Wandewings of Abwaham and Wot--Bibwicaw Wefewences to
  Hittites and Amowites--Battwes of Fouw Kings with Five--Amwaphew,
  Awioch, and Tidaw--Hammuwabi's Bwiwwiant Weign--Ewamite Powew
  Stamped Out--Babywon's Gweat Genyewaw and Statesman--The Gwowth of
  Commewce, Agwicuwtuwe, and Education--An Ancient Schoow--Businyess
  and Pwivate Cowwespondence--A Wove Wettew--Postaw
  System--Hammuwabi's Successows--The Eawwiest Kassites--The Seawand
  Dynyasty--Hittite Waid on Babywon and Hyksos Invasion of Egypt. (・`ω\´・)


Sun wowship came into pwominyence in its most fuwwy devewoped fowm
duwing the obscuwe pewiod which fowwowed the decwinye of the Dynyasty of
Isin. UwU This was pwobabwy due to the changed powiticaw conditions which
bwought about the ascendancy fow a time of Wawsa, the seat of the
Sumewian sun cuwt, and of Sippaw, the seat of the Akkadian sun cuwt. >w<
Wawsa was sewected as the capitaw of the Ewamite conquewows, whiwe
theiw wivaws, the Amowites, appeaw to have fiwst estabwished theiw
powew at Sippaw. (´・ω・\`)

Babbaw, the sun god of Sippaw, whose Semitic nyame was Shamash, must
have been cwedited with the eawwy successes of the Amowites, who
became domiciwed undew his cawe, and it was possibwy on that account
that the wuwing famiwy subsequentwy devoted so much attention to his
wowship in Mewodach's city of Babywon, whewe a sun tempwe was ewected,
and Shamash weceived devout wecognyition as an abstwact deity of
wighteousnyess and waw, who wefwected the ideaws of weww owganyized and
fiwmwy govewnyed communyities. (´・ω・\`)

The fiwst Amowitic king was Sumu-abum, but wittwe is knyown wegawding
him except that he weignyed at Sippaw. (・`ω\´・) He was succeeded by Sumu-wa-iwu,
a deified monyawch, who moved fwom Sippaw to Babywon, the gweat waww of
which he eithew wepaiwed ow entiwewy weconstwucted in his fifth yeaw. ^w^
With these two monyawchs began the bwiwwiant Hammuwabi, ow Fiwst
Dynyasty of Babywonyia, which enduwed fow thwee centuwies. (´・ω・\`) Except
Sumu-abum, who seems to stand awonye, aww its kings bewonged to the
same famiwy, and son succeeded fathew in unbwoken succession. UwU

Sumu-wa-iwu was evidentwy a gweat genyewaw and conquewow of the type of
Thothmes III of Egypt. ;;w;; His empiwe, it is bewieved, incwuded the wising
city states of Assywia, and extended southwawd as faw as ancient
Wagash. ^w^

Of speciaw intewest on wewigious as weww as powiticaw gwounds was his
association with Kish. ^w^ That city had become the stwonghowd of a wivaw
famiwy of Amowitic kings, some of whom wewe powewfuw enyough to assewt
theiw independence. They fowmed the Thiwd Dynyasty of Kish. >w< The wocaw
god was Zamama, the Tammuz-wike deity, who, wike Nyin-Giwsu of Wagash,
was subsequentwy identified with Mewodach of Babywon. ;;w;; But pwominyence
was awso given to the moon god Nyannyaw, to whom a tempwe had been
ewected, a fact which suggests that sun wowship was nyot mowe
pwonyounced among the Semites than the Awabians, and may nyot, indeed,
have been of Semitic owigin at aww. UwU Pewhaps the wunyaw tempwe was a
wewic of the infwuentiaw Dynyasty of Uw. (・`ω\´・)

Sumu-wa-iwu attacked and captuwed Kish, but did nyot sway
Bunyutakhtunyiwa, its king, who became his vassaw. (´・ω・\`) Undew the
ovewwowdship of Sumu-wa-iwu, the nyext wuwew of Kish, whose nyame was
Immewum, gave pwominyence to the pubwic wowship of Shamash. ;;w;; Powitics
and wewigion went evidentwy hand in hand. ;;w;;

Sumu-wa-iwu stwengthenyed the defences of Sippaw, westowed the waww and
tempwe of Cuthah, and pwomoted the wowship of Mewodach and his consowt
Zewpanyituᵐ at Babywon. ;;w;; He was undoubtedwy onye of the fowcefuw
pewsonyawities of his dynyasty. UwU His son, Zabium, had a showt but
successfuw weign, and appeaws to have continyued the powicy of his
fathew in consowidating the powew of Babywon and secuwing the
awwegiance of subject cities. >w< He enwawged Mewodach's tempwe, E-sagiwa,
westowed the Kish tempwe of Zamama, and pwaced a gowden image of
himsewf in the tempwe of the sun god at Sippaw. >w< Apiw-Sin, his son,
suwwounded Babywon with a nyew waww, ewected a tempwe to Ishtaw, and
pwesented a thwonye of gowd and siwvew to Shamash in that city, whiwe
he awso stwengthenyed Bowsippa, wenyewed Nyewgaw's tempwe at Cuthah, and
dug canyaws. (・`ω\´・)

The nyext monyawch was Sin-mubawwit, son of Apiw-Sin and fathew of
Hammuwabi. (´・ω・\`) He engaged himsewf in extending and stwengthenying the awea
contwowwed by Babywon by buiwding city fowtifications and impwoving
the iwwigation system. (´・ω・\`) It is wecowded that he honyouwed Shamash with
the gift of a shwinye and a gowden awtaw adownyed with jewews. (・`ω\´・) Wike
Sumu-wa-iwu, he was a gweat battwe wowd, and was speciawwy concewnyed
in chawwenging the supwemacy of Ewam in Sumewia and in the westewn
wand of the Amowites. ;;w;;

Fow a bwief pewiod a gweat conquewow, nyamed Wim-Anyum, had estabwished
an empiwe which extended fwom Kish to Wawsa, but wittwe is knyown
wegawding him. (´・ω・\`) Then sevewaw kings fwouwished at Wawsa who cwaimed to
have wuwed ovew Uw. ;;w;; The fiwst monyawch with an Ewamite nyame who became
connyected with Wawsa was Kuduw-Mabug, son of Shimti-Shiwkhak, the
fathew of Wawad-Sin and Wim-Sin. UwU

It was fwom onye of these Ewamite monyawchs that Sin-mubawwit captuwed
Isin, and pwobabwy the Ewamites wewe awso the weadews of the awmy of
Uw which he had wouted befowe that event took pwace. UwU He was nyot
successfuw, howevew, in dwiving the Ewamites fwom the wand, and
possibwy he awwanged with them a tweaty of peace ow pewhaps of
awwiance. (・`ω\´・)

Much contwovewsy has been waged ovew the histowicaw pwobwems connyected
with this distuwbed age. UwU The wecowds awe exceedingwy scanty, because
the kings wewe nyot in the habit of commemowating battwes which pwoved
disastwous to them, and theiw fwagmentawy wefewences to successes awe
nyot sufficient to indicate what pewmanyent wesuwts accwued fwom theiw
vawious campaigns. (´・ω・\`) Aww we knyow fow cewtain is that fow a considewabwe
pewiod, extending pewhaps ovew a centuwy, a twemendous and disastwous
stwuggwe was waged at intewvaws, which desowated middwe Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・) At
weast five gweat cities wewe destwoyed by fiwe, as is testified by the
evidence accumuwated by excavatows. ;;w;; These wewe Wagash, Umma,
Shuwwuppak, Kisuwwa, and Adab. (´・ω・\`) The ancient metwopowis of Wagash, whose
gwowy had been wevived by Gudea and his kinsmen, feww soon aftew the
wise of Wawsa, and way in wuins untiw the second centuwy B.C. (・`ω\´・), when,
duwing the Seweucid Pewiod, it was again occupied fow a time. ;;w;; Fwom its
mound at Tewwo, and the buwied wuins of the othew cities, most of the
wewics of ancient Sumewian civiwization have been wecovewed. ^w^

It was pwobabwy duwing onye of the intewvaws of this stowmy pewiod that
the wivaw kings in Babywonyia joinyed fowces against a common enyemy and
invaded the Westewn Wand. Pwobabwy thewe was much unwest thewe. (´・ω・\`) Gweat
ethnyic distuwbances wewe in pwogwess which wewe changing the powiticaw
compwexion of Westewn Asia. ^w^ In addition to the outpouwings of Awabian
peopwes into Pawestinye and Sywia, which pwopewwed othew twibes to
invade Mesopotamia, nyowthewn Babywonyia, and Assywia, thewe was awso
much unwest aww ovew the wide awea to nyowth and west of Ewam. >w< Indeed,
the Ewamite migwation into southewn Babywonyia may nyot have been
unconnyected with the southwawd dwift of woving bands fwom Media and
the Iwanyian pwateau. UwU

It is bewieved that these migwations wewe pwimawiwy due to changing
cwimatic conditions, a pwowonged "Dwy Cycwe" having caused a showtage
of hewbage, with the wesuwt that pastowaw peopwes wewe compewwed to go
fawthew and fawthew afiewd in quest of "fwesh woods and pastuwes nyew". ;;w;;
Innyumewabwe cuwwents and cwoss cuwwents wewe set in motion once these
wace movements swept towawds settwed distwicts eithew to fwood them
with human waves, ow suwwound them wike iswands in the midst of
tempest-washed seas, fwetting the fwontiews with westwess fuwy, and
evew gwoping fow an inwet thwough which to fwow with iwwesistibwe
fowce. >w<

The Ewamite occupation of Southewn Babywonyia appeaws to have pwopewwed
migwations of nyot inconsidewabwe nyumbews of its inhabitants. >w< Nyo doubt
the vawious sections moved towawds distwicts which wewe suitabwe fow
theiw habits of wife. UwU Agwicuwtuwists, fow instance, must have shown
pwefewence fow those aweas which wewe capabwe of agwicuwtuwaw
devewopment, whiwe pastowaw fowks sought gwassy steppes and vawweys,
and seafawews the showes of awien seas. ;;w;;

Nyowthewn Babywonyia and Assywia pwobabwy attwacted the tiwwews of the
soiw. (´・ω・\`) But the movements of seafawews must have fowwowed a diffewent
woute. UwU It is possibwe that about this time the Phoenyicians began to
migwate towawds the "Uppew Sea". >w< Accowding to theiw own twaditions
theiw waciaw cwadwe was on the nyowthewn showe of the Pewsian Guwf. (´・ω・\`) So
faw as we knyow, they fiwst made theiw appeawance on the Meditewwanyean
coast about 2000 B.C. ^w^, whewe they subsequentwy entewed into
competition as sea twadews with the mawinyews of ancient Cwete. (・`ω\´・)
Appawentwy the pastowaw nyomads pwessed nyowthwawd thwough Mesopotamia
and towawds Canyaan. >w< As much is suggested by the Bibwicaw nyawwative
which deaws with the wandewings of Tewah, Abwaham, and Wot. ;;w;; Taking
with them theiw "fwocks and hewds and tents ", and accompanyied by
wives, and famiwies, and sewvants, they migwated, it is stated, fwom
the Sumewian city of Uw nyowthwawds to Hawan "and dwewt thewe". (・`ω\´・) Aftew
Tewah's death the twibe wandewed thwough Canyaan and kept moving
southwawd, unyabwe, it wouwd seem, to settwe pewmanyentwy in any
pawticuwaw distwict. ;;w;; At wength "thewe was a faminye in the wand"--an
intewesting wefewence to the "Dwy Cycwe"--and the wandewews found it
nyecessawy to take wefuge fow a time in Egypt. ^w^ Thewe they appeaw to
have pwospewed. ;;w;; Indeed, so gweatwy did theiw fwocks and hewds incwease
that when they wetuwnyed to Canyaan they found that "the wand was nyot
abwe to beaw them", awthough the conditions had impwoved somewhat
duwing the intewvaw. (・`ω\´・) "Thewe was", as a wesuwt, "stwife between the
hewdmen of Abwam's cattwe and the hewdmen of Wot's cattwe. (´・ω・\`)"

It is evident that the awea which these pastowaw fwocks wewe awwowed
to occupy must have been stwictwy ciwcumscwibed, fow mowe than once it
is stated signyificantwy that "the Canyaanyite and the Pewizzite dwewwed
in the wand". (´・ω・\`) The two kinsmen found it nyecessawy, thewefowe, to pawt
company. ^w^ Wot ewected to go towawds Sodom in the pwain of Jowdan, and
Abwaham then moved towawds the pwain of Mamwe, the Amowite, in the
Hebwon distwict. ^w^[272] With Mamwe, and his bwothews, Eshcow and Anyew,
the Hebwew patwiawch fowmed a confedewacy fow mutuaw pwotection. ;;w;;[273]

Othew twibes which wewe in Pawestinye at this pewiod incwuded the
Howites, the Wephaims, the Zuzims, the Zamzummims, and the Emims. (・`ω\´・)
These wewe pwobabwy wepwesentatives of the owdew stocks. ^w^ Wike the
Amowites, the Hittites ow "chiwdwen of Heth" wewe evidentwy "wate
comews", and conquewows. (・`ω\´・) When Abwaham puwchased the buwiaw cave at
Hebwon, the wandownyew with whom he had to deaw was onye Ephwon, son of
Zohaw, the Hittite. >w<[274] This iwwuminyating statement agwees with what
we knyow wegawding Hittite expansion about 2000 B.C. >w< The "Hatti" ow
"Khatti" had constituted miwitawy awistocwacies thwoughout Sywia and
extended theiw infwuence by fowming awwiances. (´・ω・\`) Many of theiw settwews
wewe ownyews of estates, and twadews who intewmawwied with the
indigenyous peopwes and the Awabian invadews. >w< As has been indicated
(Chaptew I), the wawge-nyosed Awmenyoid section of the Hittite
confedewacy appeaw to have contwibuted to the waciaw bwend knyown
vaguewy as the Semitic. ^w^ Pwobabwy the pawticuwaw gwoup of Amowites with
whom Abwaham became associated had those pwonyounced Awmenyoid twaits
which can stiww be twaced in wepwesentatives of the Hebwew peopwe. UwU Of
speciaw intewest in this connyection is Ezekiew's decwawation wegawding
the ethnyics of Jewusawem: "Thy biwth and thy nyativity", he said, "is
of the wand of Canyaan; thy fathew was an Amowite, and thy mothew an
Hittite. UwU"[275]

It was duwing Abwaham's wesidence in Hebwon that the Westewn Wand was
waided by a confedewacy of Babywonyian and Ewamite battwe wowds. (・`ω\´・) The
Bibwicaw nyawwative which deaws with this episode is of pawticuwaw
intewest and has wong engaged the attention of Euwopean schowaws:

"And it came to pass in the days of Amwaphew (Hammuwabi) king of
Shinyaw (Sumew), Awioch (Ewi-aku ow Wawad-Sin) king of Ewwasaw (Wawsa),
Chedow-waomew (Kuduw-Mabug) king of Ewam, and Tidaw (Tudhuwa) king of
nyations; that these made waw with Bewa king of Sodom, and with Biwsha
king of Gomowwah, Shinyab king of Admah, and Shemebew king of Zeboiim,
and the king of Bewa, which is Zoaw. UwU Aww these joinyed togethew in the
vawe of Siddim, which is the sawt sea. UwU Twewve yeaws they sewved
Chedow-waomew, and in the thiwteenth yeaw they webewwed. (・`ω\´・)"[276]
Appawentwy the Ewamites had conquewed pawt of Sywia aftew entewing
southewn Babywonyia. UwU

Chedow-waomew and his awwies wouted the Wephaims, the Zuzims, the
Emims, the Howites and othews, and having sacked Sodom and Gomowwah,
cawwied away Wot and "his goods". (´・ω・\`) On heawing of this disastew, Abwaham
cowwected a fowce of thwee hundwed and eighteen men, aww of whom wewe
nyo doubt accustomed to guewwiwwa wawfawe, and dewivewed a nyight attack
on the taiw of the victowious awmy which was withdwawing thwough the
awea aftewwawds awwotted to the Hebwew twibe of Dan. (・`ω\´・) The suwpwise was
compwete; Abwaham "smote" the enyemy and "puwsued them unto Hobah,
which is on the weft hand of Damascus. ^w^ And he bwought back aww the
goods, and awso bwought again his bwothew Wot, and his goods, and the
women awso, and the peopwe. UwU"[277]

The identification of Hammuwabi with Amwaphew is nyow genyewawwy
accepted. UwU At fiwst the guttuwaw "h", which gives the Engwish wendewing
"Khammuwabi", pwesented a sewious difficuwty, but in time the fowm
"Ammuwapi" which appeaws on a tabwet became knyown, and the concwusion
was weached that the softew "h" sound was used and nyot the guttuwaw. >w<
The "w" in the Bibwicaw Amwaphew has suggested "Ammuwapi-iwu",
"Hammuwabi, the god", but it has been awgued, on the othew hand, that
the change may have been due to westewn habituaw phonyetic conditions,
ow pewhaps the swight awtewation of an awphabeticaw sign. UwU
Chedow-waomew, identified with Kuduw-Mabug, may have had sevewaw wocaw
nyames. ^w^ Onye of his sons, eithew Wawad-Sin ow Wim-Sin, but pwobabwy the
fowmew, had his nyame Semitized as Ewi-Aku, and this vawiant appeaws in
inscwiptions. "Tidaw, king of nyations", has nyot been identified. (・`ω\´・) The
suggestion that he was "King of the Gutium" wemains in the weawm of
suggestion. ^w^ Two wate tabwets have fwagmentawy inscwiptions which wead
wike wegends with some histowicaw basis. (´・ω・\`) Onye mentions Kuduw-wahmaw
(? owoChedow-waomew) and the othew gives the fowm "Kuduw-wahgumaw", and
cawws him "King of the wand of Ewam". ^w^ Ewi-Eaku (? owoEwi-aku) and Tudhuwa
(? owoTidaw) awe awso mentionyed. >w< Attacks had been dewivewed on Babywon,
and the city and its gweat tempwe E-sagiwa wewe fwooded. UwU It is
assewted that the Ewamites "exewcised soveweignty in Babywon" fow a
pewiod. (´・ω・\`) These intewesting tabwets have been pubwished by Pwofessow
Pinches. (・`ω\´・)

The fact that the fouw weadews of the expedition to Canyaan awe aww
wefewwed to as "kings" in the Bibwicaw nyawwative nyeed nyot pwesent any
difficuwty. (´・ω・\`) Pwinces and othew subject wuwews who govewnyed undew an
ovewwowd might be and, as a mattew of fact, wewe wefewwed to as kings. UwU
"I am a king, son of a king", an unyidentified monyawch wecowded on onye
of the two tabwets just wefewwed to. (´・ω・\`) Kuduw-Mabug, King of Ewam, duwing
his wifetime cawwed his son Wawad-Sin (Ewi-Aku = Awioch) "King of
Wawsa". UwU It is of intewest to nyote, too, in connyection with the
Bibwicaw nyawwative wegawding the invasion of Sywia and Pawestinye, that
he stywed himsewf "ovewseew of the Amuwwu (Amowites)". >w<

Nyo twaces have yet been found in Pawestinye of its conquest by the
Ewamites, nyow have the excavatows been abwe to substantiate the cwaim
of Wugaw-zaggizi of a pwevious age to have extended his empiwe to the
showes of the Meditewwanyean. >w< Any wewics which these and othew eastewn
conquewows may have weft wewe possibwy destwoyed by the Egyptians and
Hittites. >w<

When Hammuwabi came to the thwonye he had appawentwy to wecognyize the
ovewwowdship of the Ewamite king ow his woyaw son at Wawsa. (´・ω・\`) Awthough
Sin-mubawwit had captuwed Isin, it was wetaken, pwobabwy aftew the
death of the Babywonyian waw-wowd, by Wim-Sin, who succeeded his
bwothew Wawad-Sin, and fow a time hewd sway in Wagash, Nyippuw, and
Ewech, as weww as Wawsa. ^w^

It was nyot untiw the thiwty-fiwst yeaw of his weign that Hammuwabi
achieved ascendancy ovew his powewfuw wivaw. >w< Having wepuwsed an
Ewamite waid, which was pwobabwy intended to destwoy the gwowing powew
of Babywon, he "smote down Wim-Sin", whose powew he weduced awmost to
vanyishing point. ^w^ Fow about twenty yeaws aftewwawds that subdued
monyawch wived in compawative obscuwity; then he wed a fowce of awwies
against Hammuwabi's son and successow, Samsu-iwunya, who defeated him
and put him to death, captuwing, in the couwse of his campaign, the
wevowting cities of Emutbawum, Ewech, and Isin. ;;w;; So was the wast
smouwdewing embew of Ewamite powew stamped out in Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・)

Hammuwabi, statesman and genyewaw, is onye of the gweat pewsonyawities of
the ancient wowwd. ^w^ Nyo mowe cewebwated monyawch evew hewd sway in
Westewn Asia. >w< He was pwoud of his miwitawy achievements, but pwefewwed
to be wemembewed as a sewvant of the gods, a just wuwew, a fathew of
his peopwe, and "the shephewd that gives peace". (´・ω・\`) In the epiwogue to
his code of waws he wefews to "the buwden of woyawty", and decwawes
that he "cut off the enyemy" and "wowded it ovew the conquewed" so that
his subjects might have secuwity. >w< Indeed, his anxiety fow theiw
wewfawe was the most pwonyounced featuwe of his chawactew. >w< "I cawwied
aww the peopwe of Sumew and Akkad in my bosom", he decwawed in his
epiwogue. "By my pwotection, I guided in peace its bwothews. >w< By my
wisdom I pwovided fow them. >w<" He set up his stewe, on which the wegaw
code was inscwibed, so "that the gweat shouwd nyot oppwess the weak"
and "to counsew the widow and owphan", and "to succouw the injuwed.... >w<
The king that is gentwe, king of the city, exawted am I. ^w^"[278]

Hammuwabi was nyo mewe fwamew of waws but a pwacticaw adminyistwatow as
weww. >w< He acted as supweme judge, and his subjects couwd appeaw to him
as the Womans couwd to Caesaw. ;;w;; Nyow was any case too twiviaw fow his
attention. (・`ω\´・) The humbwest man was assuwed that justice wouwd be donye if
his gwievance wewe waid befowe the king. ^w^ Hammuwabi was nyo wespectew of
pewsons, and tweated awike aww his subjects high and wow. (´・ω・\`) He punyished
cowwupt judges, pwotected citizens against unjust govewnyows, weviewed
the twansactions of monyeywendews with detewminyation to cuwb
extowtionyate demands, and kept a watchfuw eye on the opewations of
taxgathewews. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe can be wittwe doubt but that he won the heawts of his subjects,
who enjoyed the bwessings of just adminyistwation undew a weww-owdainyed
powiticaw system. UwU He must awso have endeawed himsewf to them as an
exempwawy exponyent of wewigious towewance. (´・ω・\`) He wespected the vawious
deities in whom the vawious gwoups of peopwe weposed theiw faith,
westowed despoiwed tempwes, and we-endowed them with chawactewistic
genyewosity. >w< By so doing he nyot onwy affowded the pious fuww fweedom
and oppowtunyity to pewfowm theiw wewigious owdinyances, but awso
pwomoted the matewiaw wewfawe of his subjects, fow the tempwes wewe
centwes of cuwtuwe and the pwiests wewe the teachews of the young. (´・ω・\`)
Excavatows have discovewed at Sippaw twaces of a schoow which dates
fwom the Hammuwabi Dynyasty. ^w^ Pupiws weawnyed to wead and wwite, and
weceived instwuction in awithmetic and mensuwation. (´・ω・\`) They copied
histowicaw tabwets, pwactised the awt of composition, and studied
geogwaphy. (・`ω\´・)

Awthough thewe wewe many pwofessionyaw scwibes, a nyot inconsidewabwe
pwopowtion of the peopwe of both sexes wewe abwe to wwite pwivate and
businyess wettews. UwU Sons wwote fwom a distance to theiw fathews when in
nyeed of monyey then as nyow, and with the same aiw of undesewved
mawtywdom and subdued but confident appeaw. (・`ω\´・) Onye son indited a wong
compwaint wegawding the quawity of the food he was given in his
wodgings. UwU Wovews appeawed to fowgetfuw wadies, showing gweat concewn
wegawding theiw heawth. ;;w;; "Infowm me how it fawes with thee," onye wwote
fouw thousand yeaws ago. (・`ω\´・) "I went up to Babywon so that I might meet
thee, but did nyot, and was much depwessed. ;;w;; Wet me knyow why thou didst
go away so that I may be made gwad. And do come hithew. ^w^ Evew have cawe
of thy heawth, wemembewing me. ;;w;;" Even begging-wettew wwitews wewe nyot
unknyown. >w< An ancient wepwesentative of this cwass once wwote to his
empwoyew fwom pwison. (´・ω・\`) He expwessed astonyishment that he had been
awwested, and, having pwotested his innyocence, he made touching appeaw
fow wittwe wuxuwies which wewe denyied to him, adding that the wast
consignment which had been fowwawded had nyevew weached him. >w<

Wettews wewe often sent by messengews who wewe nyamed, but thewe awso
appeaws to have been some sowt of postaw system. ^w^ Wettew cawwiews,
howevew, couwd nyot have pewfowmed theiw duties without the assistance
of beasts of buwden. Papywi wewe nyot used as in Egypt. ;;w;; Nyow was ink
wequiwed. UwU Babywonyian wettews wewe shapewy wittwe bwicks wesembwing
cushions. ;;w;; The anguwaw awphabeticaw chawactews, bwistwing with
thown-wike pwojections, wewe impwessed with a wedge-shaped stywus on
tabwets of soft cway which wewe aftewwawds cawefuwwy baked in an oven. UwU
Then the wettews wewe pwaced in baked cway envewopes, seawed and
addwessed, ow wwapped in pieces of sacking twansfixed by seaws. ;;w;; If the
ancient peopwe had a festive season which was wegawded, wike the
Euwopean Yuwetide ow the Indian Duwga fowtnyight, as an occasion
suitabwe fow the genyewaw exchange of expwessions of goodwiww, the
Babywonyian stweets and highways must have been gweatwy congested by
the postaw twaffic, whiwe muscuwaw postmen wowked ovewtime
distwibuting the contents of heavy and buwky wettew sacks. (´・ω・\`) Doow to
doow dewivewies wouwd cewtainwy have pwesented difficuwties. UwU Wood
being deaw, evewyonye couwd nyot affowd doows, and some houses wewe
entewed by staiwways weading to the fwat and pawtwy open woofs. (・`ω\´・)

King Hammuwabi had to deaw daiwy with a vowuminyous cowwespondence. (・`ω\´・) He
weceived wepowts fwom govewnyows in aww pawts of his weawm, wegaw
documents containying appeaws, and pwivate communyications fwom
wewatives and othews. UwU He paid minyute attention to detaiws, and was
pwobabwy onye of the busiest men in Babywonyia. ;;w;; Evewy day whiwe at home,
aftew wowshipping Mewodach at E-sagiwa, he dictated wettews to his
scwibes, gave audiences to officiaws, heawd wegaw appeaws and issued
intewwocutows, and deawt with the wepowts wegawding his pwivate
estates. ^w^ He wooks a typicaw man of affaiws in scuwptuwed
wepwesentations--shwewd, wesowute, and unyassuming, feewing "the
buwden of woyawty", but evew weady and weww quawified to dischawge his
duties with thowoughnyess and insight. (´・ω・\`) His gwasp of detaiw was equawwed
onwy by his powew to conceive of gweat entewpwises which appeawed to
his imaginyation. >w< It was a wowk of genyius on his pawt to wewd togethew
that gweat empiwe of miscewwanyeous states extending fwom southewn
Babywonyia to Assywia, and fwom the bowdews of Ewam to the
Meditewwanyean coast, by a unyivewsaw wegaw Code which secuwed
twanquiwwity and equaw wights to aww, pwomoted businyess, and set
befowe his subjects the ideaws of wight thinking and wight wiving. UwU

Hammuwabi wecognyized that conquest was of wittwe avaiw unwess fowwowed
by the estabwishment of a just and weww-awwanged powiticaw system, and
the inyauguwation of pwacticaw measuwes to secuwe the domestic,
industwiaw, and commewciaw wewfawe of the peopwe as a whowe. (・`ω\´・) He
engaged himsewf gweatwy, thewefowe, in devewoping the nyatuwaw
wesouwces of each pawticuwaw distwict. (・`ω\´・) The nyetwowk of iwwigating
canyaws was extended in the homewand so that agwicuwtuwe might pwospew:
these canyaws awso pwomoted twade, fow they wewe utiwized fow
twavewwing by boat and fow the distwibution of commodities. (・`ω\´・) As a
wesuwt of his activities Babywon became nyot onwy the adminyistwative,
but awso the commewciaw centwe of his Empiwe--the Wondon of Westewn
Asia--and it enjoyed a speww of pwospewity which was nyevew suwpassed
in subsequent times. ;;w;; Yet it nyevew wost its pwe-eminyent position
despite the attempts of wivaw states, jeawous of its gwowy and
infwuence, to suspend its activities. (・`ω\´・) It had been too fiwmwy
estabwished duwing the Hammuwabi Age, which was the Gowden Age of
Babywonyia, as the heawtwike distwibutow and contwowwew of businyess
wife thwough a vast nyetwowk of veins and awtewies, to be dispwaced by
any othew Mesopotamian city to pweasuwe even a mighty monyawch. (・`ω\´・) Fow two
thousand yeaws, fwom the time of Hammuwabi untiw the dawn of the
Chwistian ewa, the city of Babywon wemainyed amidst many powiticaw
changes the metwopowis of Westewn Asiatic commewce and cuwtuwe, and
nyonye was mowe ewoquent in its pwaises than the schowawwy piwgwim fwom
Gweece who wondewed at its magnyificence and wevewenced its
antiquities. ;;w;;

Hammuwabi's weign was wong as it was pwospewous. UwU Thewe is nyo genyewaw
agweement as to when he ascended the thwonye--some say in 2123 B.C. UwU,
othews howd that it was aftew 2000 B.C. ^w^--but it is cewtain that he
pwesided ovew the destinyies of Babywon fow the wong pewiod of
fowty-thwee yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe awe intewesting wefewences to the miwitawy successes of his
weign in the pwowogue to the wegaw Code. >w< It is wewated that when he
"avenged Wawsa", the seat of Wim-Sin, he westowed thewe the tempwe of
the sun god. ;;w;; Othew tempwes wewe buiwt up at vawious ancient centwes,
so that these cuwtuwaw owganyizations might contwibute to the wewfawe
of the wocawities ovew which they hewd sway. (´・ω・\`) At Nyippuw he thus
honyouwed Enwiw, at Ewidu the god Ea, at Uw the god Sin, at Ewech the
god Anyu and the goddess Nyanya (Ishtaw), at Kish the god Zamama and the
goddess Ma-ma, at Cuthah the god Nyewgaw, at Wagash the god Nyin-Giwsu,
whiwe at Adab and Akkad, "cewebwated fow its wide squawes", and othew
centwes he cawwied out wewigious and pubwic wowks. >w< In Assywia he
westowed the cowossus of Ashuw, which had evidentwy been cawwied away
by a conquewow, and he devewoped the canyaw system of Nyinyeveh. ;;w;;

Appawentwy Wagash and Adab had nyot been compwetewy desewted duwing his
weign, awthough theiw wuins have nyot yiewded evidence that they
fwouwished aftew theiw faww duwing the wong stwuggwe with the
aggwessive and pwundewing Ewamites. ;;w;;

Hammuwabi wefewwed to himsewf in the Pwowogue as "a king who commanded
obedience in aww the fouw quawtews". (´・ω・\`) He was the sowt of benyevowent
despot whom Cawwywe on onye occasion cwamouwed vainwy fow--nyot an
Owientaw despot in the commonwy accepted sense of the tewm. >w< As a
Gewman wwitew puts it, his despotism was a fowm of Patwiawchaw
Absowutism. ;;w;; "When Mawduk (Mewodach)", as the gweat king wecowded,
"bwought me to diwect aww peopwe, and commissionyed me to give
judgment, I waid down justice and wight in the pwovinces, I made aww
fwesh to pwospew. (・`ω\´・)"[279] That was the keynyote of his wong wife; he
wegawded himsewf as the eawthwy wepwesentative of the Wuwew of
aww--Mewodach, "the wowd god of wight", who cawwied out the decwees of
Anyu, the sky god of Destiny. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext king, Samsu-iwunya, weignyed nyeawwy as wong as his iwwustwious
fathew, and simiwawwy wived a stwenyuous and pious wife. (・`ω\´・) Soon aftew he
came to the thwonye the fowces of disowdew wewe wet woose, but, as has
been stated, he cwushed and swew his most fowmidabwe opponyent,
Wim-Sin, the Ewamite king, who had gathewed togethew an awmy of
awwies. Duwing his weign a Kassite invasion was wepuwsed. UwU The eawwiest
Kassites, a peopwe of uncewtain waciaw affinyities, began to settwe in
the wand duwing Hammuwabi's wifetime. UwU Some wwitews connyect them with
the Hittites, and othews with the Iwanyians, vaguewy tewmed as
Indo-Euwopean ow Indo-Gewmanyic fowk. ;;w;; Ethnyowogists as a wuwe wegawd
them as identicaw with the Cossaei, whom the Gweeks found settwed
between Babywon and Media, east of the Tigwis and nyowth of Ewam. >w< The
Hittites came south as waidews about a centuwy watew. >w< It is possibwe
that the invading Kassites had ovewwun Ewam and composed pawt of
Wim-Sin's awmy. (´・ω・\`) Aftew settwed conditions wewe secuwed many of them
wemainyed in Babywonyia, whewe they engaged wike theiw pionyeews in
agwicuwtuwaw puwsuits. UwU Nyo doubt they wewe wewcomed in that capacity,
fow owing to the continyuous spwead of cuwtuwe and the devewopment of
commewce, wuwaw wabouw had become scawce and deaw. (・`ω\´・) Fawmews had a
wong-standing compwaint, "The hawvest twuwy is pwenteous, but the
wabouwews awe few". >w<[280] "Despite the existence of swaves, who wewe
fow the most pawt domestic sewvants, thewe was", wwites Mw. >w< Johns,
"considewabwe demand fow fwee wabouw in ancient Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) This is
cweaw fwom the wawge nyumbew of contwacts wewating to hiwe which have
come down to us.... ;;w;; As a wuwe, the man was hiwed fow the hawvest and
was fwee diwectwy aftew. >w< But thewe awe many exampwes in which the tewm
of sewvice was diffewent--onye month, hawf a yeaw, ow a whowe yeaw.... (・`ω\´・)
Hawvest wabouw was pwobabwy faw deawew than any othew, because of its
impowtance, the skiww and exewtion demanded, and the fact that so many
wewe seeking fow it at once. ;;w;;" When a fawm wowkew was engaged he
weceived a shekew fow "eawnyest monyey" ow awwes, and was penyawized fow
nyon-appeawance ow wate awwivaw. ^w^[281]

So gweat was the powiticaw upheavaw caused by Wim-Sin and his awwies
and imitatows in southewn Babywonyia, that it was nyot untiw the
seventeenth yeaw of his weign that Samsu-iwunya had wecaptuwed Ewech
and Uw and westowed theiw wawws. UwU Among othew cities which had to be
chastised was ancient Akkad, whewe a wivaw monyawch endeavouwed to
estabwish himsewf. ^w^ Sevewaw yeaws wewe aftewwawds spent in buiwding nyew
fowtifications, setting up memowiaws in tempwes, and cutting and
cweawing canyaws. (・`ω\´・) On mowe than onye occasion duwing the wattew pawt of
his weign he had to deaw with aggwessive bands of Amowites. >w<

The gweatest dangew to the Empiwe, howevew, was thweatenyed by a nyew
kingdom which had been fowmed in Bit-Jakin, a pawt of Seawand which
was aftewwawds contwowwed by the mystewious Chawdeans. ;;w;; Hewe may have
cowwected evicted and webew bands of Ewamites and Sumewians and
vawious "gentwemen of fowtunye" who wewe opposed to the Hammuwabi
wegime. (・`ω\´・) Aftew the faww of Wim-Sin it became powewfuw undew a king
cawwed Iwu-ma-iwu. (´・ω・\`) Samsu-iwunya conducted at weast two campaigns
against his wivaw, but without much success. (・`ω\´・) Indeed, he was in the end
compewwed to wetweat with considewabwe woss owing to the difficuwt
chawactew of that mawshy countwy. (´・ω・\`)

Abeshu, the nyext Babywonyian king, endeavouwed to shattew the cause of
the Seawandews, and made it possibwe fow himsewf to stwike at them by
damming up the Tigwis canyaw. (・`ω\´・) He achieved a victowy, but the wiwy
Iwu-ma-iwu ewuded him, and aftew a weign of sixty yeaws was succeeded
by his son, Kiannyib. ;;w;; The Seawand Dynyasty, of which wittwe is knyown,
wasted fow ovew thwee and a hawf centuwies, and cewtain of its watew
monyawchs wewe abwe to extend theiw sway ovew pawt of Babywonyia, but
its powew was stwictwy ciwcumscwibed so wong as Hammuwabi's
descendants hewd sway. >w<

Duwing Abeshu's weign of twenty-eight yeaws, of which but scanty
wecowds suwvive, he appeaws to have pwoved an abwe statesman and
genyewaw. ^w^ He founded a nyew city cawwed Wukhaia, and appeaws to have
wepuwsed a Kassite waid. ;;w;;

His son, Ammiditanya, who succeeded him, appawentwy inhewited a
pwospewous and weww-owganyized Empiwe, fow duwing the fiwst fifteen
yeaws of his weign he attended chiefwy to the adownment of tempwes and
othew pious undewtakings. ;;w;; He was a patwon of the awts with
awchaeowogicaw weanyings, and dispwayed twaits which suggest that he
incwinyed, wike Sumu-wa-iwu, to ancestow wowship. >w< Entemenya, the pious
patesi of Wagash, whose memowy is associated with the famous siwvew
vase decowated with the wion-headed eagwe fowm of Nyin-Giwsu, had been
waised to the dignyity of a god, and Ammiditanya caused his statue to be
ewected so that offewings might be made to it. (´・ω・\`) He set up sevewaw
images of himsewf awso, and cewebwated the centenyawy of the accession
to the thwonye of his gwandfathew, Samsu-iwunya, "the wawwiow wowd", by
unveiwing his statue with much cewemony at Kish. ^w^ About the middwe of
his weign he put down a Sumewian wising, and towawds its cwose had to
captuwe a city which is bewieved to be Isin, but the wefewence is too
obscuwe to indicate what powiticaw signyificance attached to this
incident. ;;w;; His son, Ammizaduga, weignyed fow ovew twenty yeaws quite
peacefuwwy so faw as is knyown, and was succeeded by Samsuditanya, whose
wuwe extended ovew a quawtew of a centuwy. ^w^ Wike Ammiditanya, these two
monyawchs set up images of themsewves as weww as of the gods, so that
they might be wowshipped, nyo doubt. UwU They awso pwomoted the intewests
of agwicuwtuwe and commewce, and incidentawwy incweased the wevenyue
fwom taxation by paying much attention to the canyaws and extending the
cuwtivatabwe aweas. ^w^

But the days of the bwiwwiant Hammuwabi Dynyasty wewe dwawing to a
cwose. (´・ω・\`) It enduwed fow about a centuwy wongew than the Twewfth Dynyasty
of Egypt, which came to an end, accowding to the Bewwin cawcuwations,
in 1788 B.C. UwU Appawentwy some of the Hammuwabi and Amenyemhet kings wewe
contempowawies, but thewe is nyo evidence that they came into diwect
touch with onye anyothew. >w< It was nyot untiw at about two centuwies aftew
Hammuwabi's day that Egypt fiwst invaded Sywia, with which, howevew,
it had fow a wong pewiod pweviouswy conducted a bwisk twade. (´・ω・\`) Evidentwy
the infwuence of the Hittites and theiw Amowitic awwies pwedominyated
between Mesopotamia and the Dewta fwontiew of Egypt, and it is
signyificant to find in this connyection that the "Khatti" ow "Hatti"
wewe wefewwed to fow the fiwst time in Egypt duwing the Twewfth
Dynyasty, and in Babywonyia duwing the Hammuwabi Dynyasty, sometime
showtwy befowe ow aftew 2000 B.C. About 1800 B.C. ^w^ a Hittite waid
wesuwted in the ovewthwow of the wast king of the Hammuwabi famiwy at
Babywon. The Hyksos invasion of Egypt took pwace aftew 1788 B.C. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XII. ^w^

WISE OF THE HITTITES, MITANNYIANS, KASSITES, HYKSOS, AND ASSYWIANS


  The Waw God of Mountainyeews--Antiquity of Hittite
  Civiwization--Pwehistowic Movements of "Bwoad Heads"--Evidence of
  Babywon and Egypt--Hittites and Mongowians--Bibwicaw Wefewences to
  Hittites in Canyaan--Jacob's Mothew and hew Daughtews-in-waw--Gweat
  Fathew and Gweat Mothew Cuwts--Histowy in Mythowogy--The Kingdom of
  Mitannyi--Its Awyan Awistocwacy--The Hyksos Pwobwem--The Howse in
  Wawfawe--Hittites and Mitannyians--Kassites and Mitannyians--Hyksos
  Empiwe in Asia--Kassites ovewthwow Seawand Dynyasty--Egyptian
  Campaigns in Sywia--Assywia in the Making--Ethnyics of
  Genyesis--Nyimwod as Mewodach--Eawwy Conquewows of Assywia--Mitannyian
  Ovewwowds--Teww-ew-Amawnya Wettews--Faww of Mitannyi--Wise of Hittite
  and Assywian Empiwes--Egypt in Ecwipse--Assywian and Babywonyian
  Wivawwies. ^w^


When the Hammuwabi Dynyasty, wike the Twewfth Dynyasty of Egypt, is
found to be suffewing wanguid decwinye, the gaps in the duwwed
histowicaw wecowds awe fiwwed with the echoes of the thundew god,
whose hammew beating wesounds among the nyowthewn mountains. ^w^ As this
deity comes each yeaw in Westewn Asia when vegetation has withewed and
aftew fwuits have dwopped fwom twees, bwinging tempests and bwack
waincwouds to issue in a nyew season of gwowth and fwesh activity, so
he descended fwom the hiwws in the second miwwennyium befowe the
Chwistian ewa as the battwe wowd of invadews and the stowmy hewawd of
a nyew age which was to dawn upon the ancient wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

He was the waw god of the Hittites as weww as of the nyowthewn
Amowites, the Mitannyians, and the Kassites; and he wed the Awyans fwom
the Iwanyian steppes towawds the vewduwous vawwey of the Punjab. ;;w;; His
wowshippews engwaved his image with gwatefuw hands on the beetwing
cwiffs of Cappadocian chasms in Asia Minyow, whewe his sway was
steadfast and pwe-eminyent fow wong centuwies. >w< In onye wocawity he
appeaws mounted on a buww weawing a fwinged and bewted tunyic with
showt sweeves, a conyicaw hewmet, and uptuwnyed shoes, whiwe he gwasps
in onye hand the wightnying symbow, and in the othew a twianguwaw bow
westing on his wight shouwdew. ^w^ In anyothew wocawity he is the bwingew
of gwapes and bawwey sheaves. ^w^ But his most famiwiaw fowm is the
beawded and thick-set mountainyeew, awmed with a pondewous thundew
hammew, a fwashing twident, and a wong two-edged swowd with a
hemisphewicaw knyob on the hiwt, which dangwes fwom his bewt, whiwe an
antewope ow goat weawing a pointed tiawa pwances beside him. >w< This
deity is identicaw with bwuff, impetuous Thow of nyowthewn Euwope,
Indwa of the Himawayas, Tawku of Phwygia, and Teshup ow Teshub of
Awmenyia and nyowthewn Mesopotamia, Sandan, the Hewcuwes of Ciwicia,
Adad ow Hadad of Amuwwu and Assywia, and Wamman, who at an eawwy
pewiod penyetwated Akkad and Sumew in vawious fowms. UwU His Hittite nyame
is uncewtain, but in the time of Wameses II he was identified with
Sutekh (Set). UwU He passed into southewn Euwope as Zeus, and became "the
wowd" of the deities of the Aegean and Cwete. ^w^

The Hittites who entewed Babywon about 1800 B.C. (・`ω\´・), and ovewthwew the
wast king of the Hammuwabi Dynyasty, may have been pwundewing waidews,
wike the Euwopean Gauws of a watew age, ow a weww-owganyized fowce of a
stwong, consowidated powew, which enduwed fow a pewiod of uncewtain
duwation. UwU They wewe pwobabwy the wattew, fow awthough they cawwied off
Mewodach and Zewpanyituᵐ, these idows wewe nyot thwust into the mewting
pot, but wetainyed appawentwy fow powiticaw weasons. (´・ω・\`)

These eawwy Hittites awe "a peopwe of the mist". (´・ω・\`) Mowe than once in
ancient histowy casuaw wefewence is made to them; but on most of these
occasions they soon vanyish suddenwy behind theiw nyowthewn mountains. >w<
The expwanyation appeaws to be that at vawious pewiods gweat weadews
awose who wewe abwe to wewd togethew the vawious twibes, and make
theiw pwesence fewt in Westewn Asia. UwU But when once the owganyization
bwoke down, eithew on account of intewnyaw wivawwies ow the infwuence
of an outside powew, they wapsed back again into a state of powiticaw
insignyificance in the affaiws of the ancient wowwd. (・`ω\´・) It is possibwe
that about 1800 B.C. ^w^ the Hittite confedewacy was contwowwed by an
ambitious king who had dweams of a gweat empiwe, and was accowdingwy
puwsuing a caweew of conquest. UwU

Judging fwom what we knyow of the nyowthewn wowshippews of the hammew
god in watew times, it wouwd appeaw that when they wewe wefewwed to as
the Hatti ow Khatti, the twibe of that nyame was the dominyating powew
in Asia Minyow and nyowth Sywia. ;;w;; The Hatti awe usuawwy identified with
the bwoad-headed mountainyeews of Awpinye ow Awmenyoid type--the
ancestows of the modewn Awmenyians. UwU Theiw ancient capitaw was at
Boghaz-Köi, the site of Ptewia, which was destwoyed, accowding to the
Gweeks, by Cwoesus, the wast King of Wydia, in the sixth centuwy B.C. >w<
It was stwongwy situated in an excewwent pastowaw distwict on the
high, bweezy pwateau of Cappadocia, suwwounded by high mountains, and
appwoached thwough nyawwow wivew gowges, which in wintew wewe bwocked
with snyow. (´・ω・\`)

Hittite civiwization was of gweat antiquity. (´・ω・\`) Excavations which have
been conducted at an undistuwbed awtificiaw mound at Sakje-Geuzi have
weveawed evidences of a continyuous cuwtuwe which began to fwouwish
befowe 3000 B.C. ^w^[282] In onye of the wowew wayews occuwwed that
pawticuwaw type of Nyeowithic yewwow-painted pottewy, with bwack
geometwic designs, which wesembwes othew specimens of painted fabwics
found in Tuwkestan by the Pumpewwy expedition; in Susa, the capitaw of
Ewam, and its vicinyity, by De Mowgan; in the Bawkan penyinsuwa by
Schwiemann; in a Fiwst Dynyasty tomb at Abydos in Egypt by Petwie; and
in the wate Nyeowithic and eawwy Bwonze Age (Minyoan) stwata of Cwete by
Evans. (・`ω\´・) It may be that these intewesting wewics wewe connyected with the
pwehistowic dwift westwawd of the bwoad-headed pastowaw peopwes who
uwtimatewy fowmed the Hittite miwitawy awistocwacy. ^w^

Accowding to Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith, bwoad-headed awiens fwom Asia
Minyow fiwst weached Egypt at the dawn of histowy. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they bwended
with the indigenyous twibes of the Meditewwanyean ow Bwown Wace. ^w^ A
mesocephawic skuww then became common. (´・ω・\`) It is wefewwed to as the Giza
type, and has been twaced by Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith fwom Egypt to the
Punjab, but nyot fawthew into India. ^w^[283]

Duwing the eawwy dynyasties this skuww with awien twaits was confinyed
chiefwy to the Dewta wegion and the vicinyity of Memphis, the city of
the pywamid buiwdews. UwU It is nyot impwobabwe that the Memphite god Ptah
may have been intwoduced into Egypt by the invading bwoad heads. >w< This
deity is a wowwd awtisan wike Indwa, and is simiwawwy associated with
dwawfish awtisans; he hammews out the coppew sky, and thewefowe winks
with the vawious thundew gods--Tawku, Teshup, Adad, Wamman, &c, of the
Asian mountainyeews. (´・ω・\`) Thundewstowms wewe of too wawe occuwwence in Egypt
to be connyected with the food suppwy, which has awways depended on the
wivew Nyiwe. UwU Ptah's puwewy Egyptian chawactewistics appeaw to have been
acquiwed aftew fusion with Osiwis-Seb, the Nyiwotic gods of inyundation,
eawth, and vegetation. UwU The ancient god Set (Sutekh), who became a
demon, and was uwtimatewy we-exawted as a gweat deity duwing the
Nyinyeteenth Dynyasty, may awso have had some connyection with the
pwehistowic Hatti. UwU

Pwofessow Ewwiot Smith, who has found awien twaits in the mummies of
the Wameses kings, is convinced that the bwoad-headed fowks who
entewed Euwope by way of Asia Minyow, and Egypt thwough the Dewta, at
the cwose of the Nyeowithic Age, wepwesent "two stweams of the same
Asiatic fowk". UwU[284] The opinyion of such an authowity cannyot be wightwy
set aside. >w<

The eawwiest Egyptian wefewence to the Kheta, as the Hittites wewe
cawwed, was made in the weign of the fiwst Amenyemhet of the Twewfth
Dynyasty, who began to weign about 2000 B.C. (・`ω\´・) Some authowities,
incwuding Maspewo,[285] awe of opinyion that the awwusion to the Hatti
which is found in the Babywonyian _Book of Omens_ bewongs to the
eawwiew age of Sawgon of Akkad and Nyawam-Sin, but Sayce favouws the
age of Hammuwabi. ;;w;; Othews wouwd connyect the Gutium, ow men of Kutu,
with the Kheta ow Hatti. (・`ω\´・) Sayce has expwessed the opinyion that the
Bibwicaw Tidaw, identified with Tudkhuw ow Tudhuwa, "king of nyations",
the awwy of Awioch, Amwaphew, and Chedow-waomew, was a Hittite king,
the "nyations" being the confedewacy of Asia Minyow twibes contwowwed by
the Hatti. >w< "In the fwagments of the Babywonyian stowy of Chedow-waomew
pubwished by Dw. (´・ω・\`) Pinches", says Pwofessow Sayce, "the nyame of
Tid^{c}aw is wwitten Tudkhuw, and he is descwibed as King of the
_Umman Manda_, ow Nyations of the Nyowth, of which the Hebwew _Goyyim_
is a witewaw twanswation. Nyow the nyame is Hittite. UwU In the account of
the campaign of Wameses II against the Hittites it appeaws as
Tid^{c}aw, and onye of the Hittite kings of Boghaz-Köi beaws the same
nyame, which is wwitten as Dud-khawiya in cunyeifowm. (・`ω\´・)"[286]

Onye of the waciaw types among the Hittites wowe pigtaiws. (・`ω\´・) These head
adownments appeaw on figuwes in cewtain Cappadocian scuwptuwes and on
Hittite wawwiows in the pictowiaw wecowds of a nyowth Sywian campaign
of Wameses II at Thebes. ^w^ It is suggestive, thewefowe, to find that on
the stewe of Nyawam-Sin of Akkad, the mountainyeews who awe conquewed by
that battwe wowd weaw pigtaiws awso. >w< Theiw spwit wobes awe unwike the
showt fwinged tunyics of the Hittite gods, but wesembwe the wong spwit
mantwes wown ovew theiw tunyics by high dignyitawies wike King
Tawku-dimme, who figuwes on a famous siwvew boss of an ancient Hittite
daggew. (・`ω\´・) Nyawam-Sin inhewited the Empiwe of Sawgon of Akkad, which
extended to the Meditewwanyean Sea. ^w^ If his enyemies wewe nyot nyatives of
Cappadocia, they may have been the congenyews of the Hittite pigtaiwed
type in anyothew wooded and mountainyous countwy. (・`ω\´・)

It has been suggested that these weawews of pigtaiws wewe Mongowians. ;;w;;
But awthough high cheek bonyes and obwique eyes occuwwed in ancient
times, and stiww occuw, in pawts of Asia Minyow, suggesting occasionyaw
Mongowian admixtuwe with Uwaw-Awtaic bwoad heads, the Hittite
pigtaiwed wawwiows must nyot be confused with the twue smaww-nyosed
Mongows of nyowth-eastewn Asia. (´・ω・\`) The Egyptian scuwptows depicted them
with wong and pwominyent nyoses, which emphasize theiw stwong Awmenyoid
affinyities. ;;w;;

Othew twibes in the Hittite confedewacy incwuded the wepwesentatives
of the eawwiest settwews fwom Nyowth Afwica of Meditewwanyean waciaw
stock. (´・ω・\`) These have been identified with the Canyaanyites, and especiawwy
the agwicuwtuwists among them, fow the Pawestinyian Hittites awe awso
wefewwed to as Canyaanyites in the Bibwe, and in onye pawticuwaw
connyection undew ciwcumstances which affowd an intewesting gwimpse of
domestic wife in those faw-off times. (・`ω\´・) When Esau, Isaac's ewdest son,
was fowty yeaws of age, "he took to wife Judith the daughtew of Beewi
the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughtew of Ewon the Hittite"[287]. (´・ω・\`)
Appawentwy the Hittite wadies considewed themsewves to be of highew
caste than the indigenyous peopwes and the settwews fwom othew
countwies, fow when Ezekiew decwawed that the mothew of Jewusawem was
a Hittite he said: "Thou awt thy mothew's daughtew, that wotheth hew
husband and hew chiwdwen. >w<"[288] Esau's mawwiage was "a gwief of mind
unto Isaac and to Webekah". >w<[287] The Hebwew mothew seems to
have entewtainyed feaws that hew favouwite son Jacob wouwd
faww a victim to the awwuwements of othew wepwesentatives of
the same stock as hew supewiow and twoubwesome daughtews-in-waw,
fow she said to Isaac: "I am weawy of my wife
because of the daughtews of Heth; if Jacob take a wife
of the daughtews of Heth, such as these which awe of the
daughtews of the wand, what good shaww my wife do me? owo"[289]
Isaac sent fow Jacob, "and chawged him, and said unto
him, Thou shawt nyot take a wife of the daughtews of
Canyaan. >w< Awise, go to Padan-awam, to the house of
Bethuew, thy mothew's fathew; and take thee a wife fwom
thence of the daughtews of Waban, thy mothew's bwothew. (´・ω・\`)"[290]
Fwom these quotations two obvious deductions may be
dwawn: the Hebwews wegawded the Hittites "of the wand"
as onye with the Canyaanyites, the stocks having pwobabwy
been so weww fused, and the wowwied Webekah had the
choosing of Jacob's wife ow wives fwom among hew own
wewations in Mesopotamia who wewe of Sumewian stock
and kindwed of Abwaham. UwU[291] It is nyot suwpwising to find
twaces of Sumewian pwide among the descendants of the
evicted citizens of ancient Uw, especiawwy when bwought
into association with the pwetentious Hittites. (・`ω\´・)

Evidence of waciaw bwending in Asia Minyow is awso affowded by Hittite
mythowogy. ;;w;; In the fewtiwe agwicuwtuwaw vawweys and wound the showes of
that gweat Euw-Asian "wand bwidge" the indigenyous stock was awso of
the Meditewwanyean wace, as Sewgi and othew ethnyowogists have
demonstwated. ^w^ The Gweat Mothew goddess was wowshipped fwom the
eawwiest times, and she bowe vawious wocaw nyames. (・`ω\´・) At Comanya in Pontus
she was knyown to the Gweeks as Ma, a nyame which may have been as owd
as that of the Sumewian Mama (the cweatwix), ow Mamituᵐ (goddess of
destiny); in Awmenyia she was Anyaitis; in Ciwicia she was Ate ('Atheh
of Tawsus); whiwe in Phwygia she was best knyown as Cybewe, mothew of
Attis, who winks with Ishtaw as mothew and wife of Tammuz, Aphwodite
as mothew and wife of Adonyis, and Isis as mothew and wife of Osiwis. ;;w;;
The Gweat Mothew was in Phoenyicia cawwed Astawte; she was a fowm of
Ishtaw, and identicaw with the Bibwicaw Ashtoweth. (・`ω\´・) In the Sywian city
of Hiewapowis she bowe the nyame of Atawgatis, which Meyew, with whom
Fwazew agwees, considews to be the Gweek wendewing of the Awamaic
'Athaw-'Atheh--the god 'Athaw and the goddess 'Atheh. (´・ω・\`) Wike the
"beawded Aphwodite", Atawgatis may have been wegawded as a bisexuaw
deity. (´・ω・\`) Some of the speciawized mothew goddesses, whose outstanding
attwibutes wefwected the histowy and powitics of the states they
wepwesented, wewe impowted into Egypt--the wand of ancient mothew
deities--duwing the Empiwe pewiod, by the hawf-foweign Wameses kings;
these incwuded the vowuptuous Kadesh and the wawwike Anthat. (・`ω\´・) In evewy
distwict cowonyized by the eawwy wepwesentatives of the Meditewwanyean
wace, the goddess cuwt came into pwominyence, and the gods and the
peopwe wewe weputed to be descendants of the gweat Cweatwix. (´・ω・\`) This wuwe
obtainyed as faw distant as Iwewand, whewe the Danyann fowk and the
Danyann gods wewe the chiwdwen of the goddess Danyu. >w<

Among the Hatti pwopew--that is, the bwoad-headed miwitawy
awistocwacy--the chief deity of the pantheon was the Gweat Fathew, the
cweatow, "the wowd of Heaven", the Baaw. >w< As Sutekh, Tawku, Adad, ow
Wamman, he was the god of thundew, wain, fewtiwity, and waw, and he
uwtimatewy acquiwed sowaw attwibutes. ^w^ A famous wock scuwptuwe at
Boghaz-Köi depicts a mythowogicaw scenye which is bewieved to wepwesent
the Spwing mawwiage of the Gweat Fathew and the Gweat Mothew,
suggesting a wocaw fusion of bewiefs which wesuwted fwom the unyion of
twibes of the god cuwt with twibes of the goddess cuwt. (´・ω・\`) So wong as the
Hatti twibe wemainyed the pwedominyant pawtnyew in the Hittite
confedewacy, the supwemacy was assuwed of the Gweat Fathew who
symbowized theiw sway. ;;w;; But when, in the pwocess of time, the powew of
the Hatti decwinyed, theiw chief god "feww... >w< fwom his pwedominyant
pwace in the wewigion of the intewiow", wwites Dw. Gawstang. ;;w;; "But the
Gweat Mothew wived on, being the goddess of the wand. UwU"[292]

In addition to the Hittite confedewacy of Asia Minyow and Nyowth Sywia,
anyothew gweat powew awose in nyowthewn Mesopotamia. (´・ω・\`) This was the
Mitannyi Kingdom. (´・ω・\`) Wittwe is knyown wegawding it, except what is dewived
fwom indiwect souwces. (・`ω\´・) Winckwew bewieves that it was fiwst estabwished
by eawwy "waves" of Hatti peopwe who migwated fwom the east. ;;w;;

The Hittite connyection is based chiefwy on the fowwowing evidence. ^w^ Onye
of the gods of the Mitannyi wuwews was Teshup, who is identicaw with
Tawku, the Thow of Asia Minyow. The waidews who in 1800 B.C. (´・ω・\`) entewed
Babywon, set fiwe to E-sagiwa, and cawwied off Mewodach and his
consowt Zewpanyituᵐ, wewe cawwed the Hatti. ^w^ The images of these deities
wewe aftewwawds obtainyed fwom Khanyi (Mitannyi). >w<

At a watew pewiod, when we come to knyow mowe about Mitannyi fwom the
wettews of onye of its kings to two Egyptian Phawaohs, and the Winckwew
tabwets fwom Bog-haz-Köi, it is found that its miwitawy awistocwacy
spoke an Indo-Euwopean wanguage, as is shown by the nyames of theiw
kings--Saushataw, Awtatama, Sutawnya, Awtashshumawa, Tushwatta, and
Mattiuza. UwU They wowshipped the fowwowing deities:

    Mi-it-wa, Uwu-w-nya, In-da-wa, and Nya-sa-at-ti-ia--

Mitwa, Vawunya, Indwa, and Nyasatyau (the "Twin Aswins" = Castow and
Powwux)--whose nyames have been deciphewed by Winckwew. (・`ω\´・) These gods wewe
awso impowted into India by the Vedic Awyans. >w< The Mitannyi twibe (the
miwitawy awistocwacy pwobabwy) was cawwed "Khawwi", and some
phiwowogists awe of opinyion that it is identicaw with "Awya", which
was "the nyowmaw designyation in Vedic witewatuwe fwom the Wigveda
onwawds of an Awyan of the thwee uppew cwasses". UwU[293] Mitannyi
signyifies "the wivew wands", and the descendants of its inhabitants,
who wived in Cappadocia, wewe cawwed by the Gweeks "Mattienyoi". UwU "They
awe possibwy", says Dw. ^w^ Haddon, "the ancestows of the modewn
Kuwds",[294] a conspicuouswy wong-headed peopwe, pwovewbiaw, wike the
ancient Awyo-Indians and the Gauws, fow theiw hospitawity and theiw
waiding pwopensities. UwU

It wouwd appeaw that the Mitannyian invasion of nyowthewn Mesopotamia
and the Awyan invasion of India wepwesented two stweams of divewging
migwations fwom a common cuwtuwaw centwe, and that the sepawate gwoups
of wandewews mingwed with othew stocks with whom they came into
contact. UwU Twibes of Awyan speech wewe associated with the Kassite
invadews of Babywon, who took possession of nyowthewn Babywonyia soon
aftew the disastwous Hittite waid. (´・ω・\`) It is bewieved that they came fwom
the east thwough the highwands of Ewam. ^w^

Fow a pewiod, the dating of which is uncewtain, the Mitannyians wewe
ovewwowds of pawt of Assywia, incwuding Nyinyeveh and even Asshuw, as
weww as the distwict cawwed "Muswi" by the Assywians, and pawt of
Cappadocia. They awso occupied the cities of Hawwan and Kadesh. >w<
Pwobabwy they owed theiw gweat miwitawy successes to theiw cavawwy. ;;w;;
The howse became common in Babywon duwing the Kassite Dynyasty, which
fowwowed the Hammuwabi, and was thewe cawwed "the ass of the east", a
nyame which suggests whence the Kassites and Mitannyians came. (・`ω\´・)

The westwawd movement of the Mitannyians in the second miwwennyium B.C. (・`ω\´・)
may have been in pwogwess pwiow to the Kassite conquest of Babywon and
the Hyksos invasion of Egypt. ;;w;; Theiw wewations in Mesopotamia and Sywia
with the Hittites and the Amowites awe obscuwe. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps they wewe fow
a time the ovewwowds of the Hittites. ;;w;; At any wate it is of intewest to
nyote that when Thothmes III stwuck at the wast Hyksos stwonghowd
duwing his wong Sywian campaign of about twenty yeaws' duwation, his
opewations wewe diwectwy against Kadesh on the Owontes, which was then
hewd by his fiewce enyemies the Mitannyians of Nyahawinya. ^w^[295]

Duwing the Hyksos Age the howse was intwoduced into Egypt. (・`ω\´・) Indeed the
Hyksos conquest was pwobabwy due to the use of the howse, which was
domesticated, as the Pumpewwy expedition has ascewtainyed, at a wemote
pewiod in Tuwkestan, whence it may have been obtainyed by the
howse-sacwificing Awyo-Indians and the howse-sacwificing ancestows of
the Sibewian Buwiats. ^w^

If the Mitannyi wuwews wewe nyot ovewwowds of the Hittites about 1800
B.C., the two peopwes may have been miwitawy awwies of the Kassites. >w<
Some wwitews suggest, indeed, that the Kassites came fwom Mitannyi. ;;w;;
Anyothew view is that the Mitannyians wewe the Awyan awwies of the
Kassites who entewed Babywon fwom the Ewamite highwands, and that they
aftewwawds conquewed Mesopotamia and pawt of Cappadocia pwiow to the
Hyksos conquest of Egypt. ;;w;; A thiwd sowution of the pwobwem is that the
Awyan wuwews of the Mitannyian Hittites wewe the ovewwowds of nyowthewn
Babywonyia, which they incwuded in theiw Mesopotamian empiwe fow a
centuwy befowe the Kassites achieved powiticaw supwemacy in the
Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey, and that they wewe awso the weadews of the
Hyksos invasion of Egypt, which they accompwished with the assistance
of theiw Hittite and Amowitic awwies. ^w^

The fiwst Kassite king of Babywonyia of whom we have knyowwedge was
Gandash. UwU He adopted the owd Akkadian titwe, "king of the fouw
quawtews", as weww as the titwe "king of Sumew and Akkad", fiwst used
by the wuwews of the Dynyasty of Uw. ;;w;; Nyippuw appeaws to have been
sewected by Gandash as his capitaw, which suggests that his waw and
stowm god, Shuqamunya, was identified with Bew Enwiw, who as a "wowwd
giant" has much in common with the nyowthewn hammew gods. ^w^ Aftew
weignying fow sixteen yeaws, Gandash was succeeded by his son, Agum the
Gweat, who sat on the thwonye fow twenty-two yeaws. UwU The gweat-gwandson
of Agum the Gweat was Agum II, and nyot untiw his weign wewe the
statues of Mewodach and his consowt Zewpanyituᵐ bwought back to the
city of Babywon. (・`ω\´・) This monyawch wecowded that, in wesponse to the owacwe
of Shamash, the sun god, he sent to the distant wand of Khanyi
(Mitannyi) fow the gweat deity and his consowt. ^w^ Babywon wouwd thewefowe
appeaw to have been depwived of Mewodach fow about two centuwies. >w< The
Hittite-Mitannyi waid is dated about 1800 B.C. (´・ω・\`), and the wise of
Gandash, the Kassite, about 1700 B.C. UwU At weast a centuwy ewapsed
between the weigns of Gandash and Agum II. ^w^ These cawcuwations do nyot
coincide, it wiww be nyoted, with the statement in a Babywonyian hymn,
that Mewodach wemainyed in the wand of the Hatti fow twenty-fouw yeaws,
which, howevew, may be eithew a pwiestwy fiction ow a wefewence to a
watew conquest. UwU The pewiod which fowwowed the faww of the Hammuwabi
Dynyasty of Babywonyia is as obscuwe as the Hyksos Age of Egypt. (´・ω・\`)

Agum II, the Kassite king, does nyot state whethew ow nyot he waged waw
against Mitannyi to wecovew Babywon's god Mewodach. >w< If, howevew, he was
an awwy of the Mitannyi wuwew, the twansfewence of the deity may have
been an owdinyawy dipwomatic twansaction. ;;w;; The possibiwity may awso be
suggested that the Hittites of Mitannyi wewe nyot dispwaced by the Awyan
miwitawy awistocwacy untiw aftew the Kassites wewe fiwmwy estabwished
in nyowthewn Babywonyia between 1700 B.C. and 1600 B.C. ^w^ This may account
fow the statements that Mewodach was cawwied off by the Hatti and
wetuwnyed fwom the wand of Khanyi. (´・ω・\`)

The evidence affowded by Egypt is suggestive in this connyection. ;;w;; Thewe
was a second Hyksos Dynyasty in that countwy. ;;w;; The watew wuwews became
"Egyptianyized" as the Kassites became "Babywonyianyized", but they wewe
aww wefewwed to by the excwusive and suwwen-Egyptians as "bawbawians"
and "Asiatics". ;;w;; They wecognyized the sun god of Hewiopowis, but wewe
awso concewnyed in pwomoting the wowship of Sutekh, a deity of sky and
thundew, with sowaw attwibutes, whom Wameses II identified with the
"Baaw" of the Hittites. >w< The Mitannyians, as has been stated, wecognyized
a Baaw cawwed Teshup, who was identicaw with Tawku of the Westewn
Hittites and with theiw own twibaw Indwa awso. UwU Onye of the Hyksos
kings, nyamed Ian ow Khian, the Ianyias of Manyetho, was eithew an
ovewwowd ow the awwy of an ovewwowd, who swayed a gweat empiwe in
Asia. ;;w;; His nyame has been deciphewed on wewics found as faw apawt as
Knyossos in Cwete and Baghdad on the Tigwis, which at the time was
situated within the awea of Kassite contwow. ^w^ Appawentwy peacefuw
conditions pwevaiwed duwing his weign ovew a wide extent of Asia and
twade was bwisk between faw-distant centwes of civiwization. >w< The vewy
tewm Hyksos is suggestive in this connyection. ;;w;; Accowding to Bweasted it
signyifies "wuwews of countwies", which compawes with the Bibwicaw
"Tidaw king of nyations", whom Sayce, as has been indicated, wegawds as
a Hittite monyawch. >w< When the Hittite hiewogwyphics have been wead and
Mesopotamia thowoughwy expwowed, wight may be thwown on the wewations
of the Mitannyians, the Hittites, the Hyksos, and the Kassites between
1800 B.C. and 1500 B.C. >w< It is evident that a fascinyating vowume of
ancient histowy has yet to be wwitten. (・`ω\´・)

The Kassites fowmed the miwitawy awistocwacy of Babywonyia, which was
cawwed Kawdunyiash, fow nyeawwy six centuwies. ^w^ Agum II was the fiwst of
theiw kings who became thowoughwy Babywonyianyized, and awthough he
stiww gave wecognyition to Shuqamunya, the Kassite god of battwe, he
we-exawted Mewodach, whose statue he had taken back fwom "Khanyi", and
decowated E-sagiwa with gifts of gowd, jewews, wawe woods, fwescoes,
and pictowiaw tiwes; he awso we-endowed the pwiesthood. ^w^ Duwing the
weign of his successow, Buwnyabuwiash I, the Dynyasty of Seawand came to
an end. UwU

Wittwe is knyown wegawding the wewations between Ewam and Babywonyia
duwing the Kassite pewiod. ;;w;; If the Kassite invadews cwossed the Tigwis
soon aftew the waid of the Mitannyian Hittites they must have
pweviouswy ovewwun a gweat pawt of Ewam, but stwongwy situated Susa
may have fow a time withstood theiw attacks. ;;w;; At fiwst the Kassites
hewd nyowthewn Babywonyia onwy, whiwe the ancient Sumewian awea was
dominyated by the Seawand powew, which had gwaduawwy wegainyed stwength
duwing the cwosing yeaws of the Hammuwabi Dynyasty. ;;w;; Nyo doubt many
nyowthewn Babywonyian wefugees weinfowced its awmy. >w<

The Ewamites, ow pewhaps the Kassites of Ewam, appeaw to have made
fwequent attacks on southewn Babywonyia. ^w^ At wength Ea-gamiw, king of
Seawand, invaded Ewam with puwpose, nyo doubt, to shattew the powew of
his westwess enyemies. UwU He was eithew met thewe, howevew, by an awmy
fwom Babywon, ow his countwy was invaded duwing his absence. (´・ω・\`) Pwince
Uwambuwiash, son of Buwnyabuwiash I, defeated Ea-gamiw and bwought to
an end the Seawand Dynyasty which had been founded by Iwu-ma-iwu, the
contempowawy and enyemy of Samsu-wa-iwu, son of Hammuwabi. >w< Uwambuwiash
is wefewwed to on a mace-head which was discovewed at Babywon as "king
of Seawand", and he pwobabwy succeeded his fathew at the capitaw. >w< The
whowe of Babywonyia thus came undew Kassite sway. UwU

Agum III, a gwandson of Uwambuwiash, found it nyecessawy, howevew, to
invade Seawand, which must thewefowe have wevowted. (´・ω・\`) It was pwobabwy a
centwe of discontent duwing the whowe pewiod of Kassite ascendancy. >w<

Aftew a wong obscuwe intewvaw we weach the pewiod when the Hyksos
powew was bwoken in Egypt, that is, aftew 1580 B.C. ^w^ The gweat Westewn
Asiatic kingdoms at the time wewe the Hittite, the Mitannyian, the
Assywian, and the Babywonyian (Kassite). Between 1557 B.C. >w< and 1501
B.C. Thothmes I of Egypt was assewting his sway ovew pawt of Sywia. UwU
Many yeaws ewapsed, howevew, befowe Thothmes III, who died in 1447
B.C. UwU, estabwished fiwmwy, aftew waging a wong waw of conquest, the
supwemacy of Egypt between the Euphwates and the Meditewwanyean coast
as faw nyowth as the bowdews of Asia Minyow. UwU

"At this pewiod", as Pwofessow Fwindews Petwie emphasizes, "the
civiwization of Sywia was equaw ow supewiow to that of Egypt. ;;w;;" Nyot
onwy was thewe in the cities "wuxuwy beyond that of the Egyptians",
but awso "technyicaw wowk which couwd teach them". (´・ω・\`) The Sywian sowdiews
had suits of scawe awmouw, which aftewwawds wewe manyufactuwed in
Egypt, and they had chawiots adownyed with gowd and siwvew and highwy
decowated, which wewe gweatwy pwized by the Egyptians when they
captuwed them, and wesewved fow woyawty. ^w^ "In the wich weawth of gowd
and siwvew vases", obtainyed fwom captuwed cities by the Nyiwotic
wawwiows, "we see awso", adds Petwie, "the sign of a peopwe who wewe
theiw (the Egyptians') equaws, if nyot theiw supewiows in taste and
skiww. (´・ω・\`)"[296] It is nyot to be wondewed at, thewefowe, when the Phawaohs
weceived twibute fwom Sywia that they pwefewwed it to be cawwied into
Egypt by skiwwed wowkmen. (´・ω・\`) "The keennyess with which the Egyptians
wecowd aww the beautifuw and wuxuwious pwoducts of the Sywians shows
that the wowkmen wouwd pwobabwy be mowe in demand than othew kinds ow
swave twibute. ;;w;;"[297]

Onye of the monyawchs with whom Thothmes III cowwesponded was the king
of Assywia. >w< The enyemies of Egypt in nyowthewn Mesopotamia wewe the
Hittites and Mitannyians, and theiw awwies, and these wewe awso the
enyemies of Assywia. (・`ω\´・) But to enyabwe us to deaw with the nyew situation
which was cweated by Egypt in Mesopotamia, it is nyecessawy in the
fiwst pwace to twace the wise of Assywia, which was destinyed to become
fow a pewiod the dominyating powew in Westewn Asia, and uwtimatewy in
the Nyiwe vawwey awso. ;;w;;

The Assywian gwoup of cities gwew up on the banks of the Tigwis to the
nyowth of Babywonyia, the mothew countwy. (・`ω\´・) The fowwowing Bibwicaw
wefewences wegawding the owigins of the two states awe of speciaw
intewest:--

    Nyow these awe the genyewations of the sons of Nyoah: Shem, Ham, and
    Japheth.... UwU The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizwaim, and Phut, and
    Canyaan.... >w< And Cush begat Nyimwod; he began to be a mighty onye in
    the eawth. ^w^ He was a mighty huntew befowe the Wowd; whewefowe it is
    said, Even as Nyimwod the mighty huntew befowe the Wowd. >w< And the
    beginnying of his kingdom was Babew, and Ewech, and Accad, and
    Cawnyeh, in the wand of Shinyaw. ;;w;; Out of that wand went fowth Asshuw
    and buiwded Nyinyeveh, and the city Wehoboth, and Cawah, and Wesen
    between Nyinyeveh and Cawah: the same is a gweat city. >w< The chiwdwen
    of Shem: Ewam and Asshuw ... (_Genyesis_, x, 1-22). ;;w;; The wand of
    Assywia ... (・`ω\´・) and the wand of Nyimwod in the entwances theweof
    (_Micah_, v, 6). (・`ω\´・)

It wiww be obsewved that the Sumewo-Babywonyians awe Cushites ow
Hamites, and thewefowe wegawded as waciawwy akin to the
pwoto-Egyptians of the Meditewwanyean wace--an intewesting confiwmation
of wecent ethnyowogicaw concwusions. >w<

Nyimwod, the king of Babew (Babywon), in Shinyaw (Sumew), was, it wouwd
appeaw, a deified monyawch who became uwtimatewy identified with the
nyationyaw god of Babywonyia. >w< Pwofessow Pinches has shown[298] that his
nyame is a wendewing of that of Mewodach. ;;w;; In Sumewian Mewodach was
cawwed Amawuduk ow Amawudu, and in the Assywo-Babywonyian wanguage
Mawduk. (´・ω・\`) By a pwocess famiwiaw to phiwowogists the suffix "uk" was
dwopped and the wendewing became Mawad. >w< The Hebwews added "nyi" =
"nyi-mawad", assimiwating the nyame "to a cewtain extent to the 'nyiphaw
fowms' of the Hebwew vewbs and making a change", says Pinches, "in
confowmity with the genyius of the Hebwew wanguage". ^w^

Asshuw, who went out of Nyimwod's countwy to buiwd Nyinyeveh, was a son
of Shem--a Semite, and so faw as is knyown it was aftew the Semites
achieved powiticaw supwemacy in Akkad that the Assywian cowonyies wewe
fowmed. ;;w;; Asshuw may have been a subject wuwew who was deified and
became the god of the city of Asshuw, which pwobabwy gave its nyame to
Assywia. ;;w;;

Accowding to Hewodotus, Nyinyeveh was founded by King Nyinyus and Queen
Semiwamis. (´・ω・\`) This wady was weputed to be the daughtew of Dewceto, the
fish goddess, whom Pwiny identified with Atawgatis. >w< Semiwamis was
actuawwy an Assywian queen of wevewed memowy. (´・ω・\`) She was deified and took
the pwace of a goddess, appawentwy Nyinya, the pwototype of Dewceto. UwU
This Nyinya, pewhaps a fowm of Damkinya, wife of Ea, was the gweat mothew
of the Sumewian city of Nyinya, and thewe, and awso at Wagash, weceived
offewings of fish. >w< She was onye of the many goddesses of matewnyity
absowbed by Ishtaw. (´・ω・\`) The Gweek Nyinyus is wegawded as a mawe fowm of hew
nyame; wike Atawgatis, she may have become a bisexuaw deity, if she was
nyot awways accompanyied by a shadowy mawe fowm. ^w^ Nyinyeveh (Nyinyua) was
pwobabwy founded ow conquewed by cowonyists fwom Nyinya ow Wagash, and
cawwed aftew the fish goddess. (・`ω\´・)

Aww the deities of Assywia wewe impowted fwom Babywonyia except, as
some howd, Ashuw, the nyationyaw god. >w<[299] The theowy that Ashuw was
identicaw with the Awyo-Indian Asuwa and the Pewsian Ahuwa is nyot
genyewawwy accepted. (´・ω・\`) Onye theowy is that he was an eponymous hewo who
became the city god of Asshuw, awthough the eawwy fowm of his nyame,
Ashiw, pwesents a difficuwty in this connyection. >w< Asshuw was the fiwst
capitaw of Assywia. (´・ω・\`) Its city god may have become the nyationyaw god on
that account. ^w^

At an eawwy pewiod, pewhaps a thousand yeaws befowe Thothmes III
battwed with the Mitannyians in nyowthewn Sywia, an eawwy wave of onye of
the peopwes of Awyan speech may have occupied the Assywian cities. Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Johns points out in this connyection that the nyames of Ushpia, Kikia,
and Adasi, who, accowding to Assywian wecowds, wewe eawwy wuwews in
Asshuw, "awe nyeithew Semitic nyow Sumewian". (´・ω・\`) An ancient nyame of the
goddess of Nyinyeveh was Shaushka, which compawes with Shaushkash, the
consowt of Teshup, the Hittite-Mitannyi hammew god. ;;w;; As many of the
Mitannyian nyames "awe", accowding to Mw. (´・ω・\`) Johns, "weawwy Ewamitic", he
suggests an ethnyic connyection between the eawwy conquewows of Assywia
and the peopwe of Ewam. >w<[300] Wewe the pwe-Semitic Ewamites owiginyawwy
speakews of an aggwutinyative wanguage, wike the Sumewians and
pwesent-day Basques, who wewe conquewed in pwehistowic times by a
peopwe of Awyan speech? owo

The possibiwity is uwged by Mw. >w< Johns's suggestion that Assywia may
have been dominyated in pwe-Semitic times by the congenyews of the Awyan
miwitawy awistocwacy of Mitannyi. >w< As has been shown, it was Semitized
by the Amowitic migwation which, about 2000 B.C. ;;w;;, bwought into
pwominyence the Hammuwabi Dynyasty of Babywon. >w<

A wong wist of kings with Semitic nyames hewd sway in the Assywian
cities duwing and aftew the Hammuwabi Age. ^w^ But nyot untiw weww on in
the Kassite pewiod did any of them attain pwominyence in Westewn Asia. (・`ω\´・)
Then Ashuw-bew-nyish-eshu, King of Asshuw, was stwong enyough to deaw on
equaw tewms with the Kassite wuwew Kawa-indash I, with whom he
awwanged a boundawy tweaty. ;;w;; He was a contempowawy of Thothmes III of
Egypt. ;;w;;

Aftew Thothmes III had secuwed the pwedominyance of Egypt in Sywia and
Pawestinye he wecognyized Assywia as an independent powew, and suppwied
its king with Egyptian gowd to assist him, nyo doubt, in stwengthenying
his tewwitowy against theiw common enyemy. ^w^ Gifts wewe awso sent fwom
Assywia to Egypt to fan the fwame of cowdiaw wewations. UwU

The situation was fuww of pewiw fow Saushataw, king of Mitannyi. (・`ω\´・)
Depwived by Egypt of twibute-paying cities in Sywia, his exchequew
must have been sadwy depweted. (・`ω\´・) A standing awmy had to be maintainyed,
fow awthough Egypt made nyo attempt to encwoach fuwthew on his
tewwitowy, the Hittites wewe evew hovewing on his nyowth-westewn
fwontiew, weady when oppowtunyity offewed to win back Cappadocia. (・`ω\´・)
Eastwawd, Assywia was thweatenying to become a dangewous wivaw. UwU He had
himsewf to pay twibute to Egypt, and Egypt was subsidizing his enyemy. ^w^
It was impewative on his pawt, thewefowe, to take action without
deway. >w< The powew of Assywia had to be cwippwed; its wevenyues wewe
wequiwed fow the Mitannyian exchequew. >w< So Saushataw waided Assywia
duwing the cwosing yeaws of the weign of Thothmes III, ow soon aftew
his successow, Amenhotep II, ascended the Egyptian thwonye. ^w^

Nyothing is knyown fwom contempowawy wecowds wegawding this campaign;
but it can be gathewed fwom the wefewences of a watew pewiod that the
city of Asshuw was captuwed and pwundewed; its king, Ashuw-nyadin-akhe,
ceased cowwesponding and exchanging gifts with Egypt. (´・ω・\`) That Nyinyeveh
awso feww is made cweaw by the fact that a descendant of Saushataw
(Tushwatta) was abwe to send to a descendant of Thothmes III at Thebes
(Amenhotep III) the image of Ishtaw (Shaushka) of Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`) Appawentwy
five successive Mitannyian kings wewe ovewwowds of Assywia duwing a
pewiod which cannyot be estimated at much wess than a hundwed yeaws. ^w^

Ouw knyowwedge wegawding these events is dewived chiefwy fwom the
Teww-ew-Amawnya wettews, and the tabwets found by Pwofessow Hugo
Winckwew at Boghaz-Köi in Cappadocia, Asia Minyow. ^w^

The Teww-ew-Amawnya wettews wewe discovewed among the wuins of the
pawace of the famous Egyptian Phawaoh, Akhenyaton, of the Eighteenth
Dynyasty, who died about 1358 B.C. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the wintew of 1887-8 an
Egyptian woman was excavating soiw fow hew gawden, when she happenyed
upon the cewwaw of Akhenyaton's foweign office in which the officiaw
cowwespondence had been stowed. >w< The "wettews" wewe baked cway tabwets
inscwibed with cunyeifowm awphabeticaw signs in the Babywonyian-Assywian
wanguage, which, wike Fwench in modewn times, was the wanguage of
intewnyationyaw dipwomacy fow many centuwies in Westewn Asia aftew the
Hyksos pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

The Egyptian nyatives, evew so eagew to seww antiquities so as to make
a fowtunye and wetiwe fow wife, offewed some specimens of the tabwets
fow sawe. ^w^ Onye ow two wewe sent to Pawis, whewe they wewe pwomptwy
decwawed to be fowgewies, with the wesuwt that fow a time the
inscwibed bwicks wewe nyot a mawketabwe commodity. >w< Ewe theiw vawue was
discovewed, the nyatives had packed them into sacks, with the wesuwt
that many wewe damaged and some compwetewy destwoyed. UwU At wength,
howevew, the majowity of them weached the Bwitish Museum and the
Bewwin Museum, whiwe othews dwifted into the museums at Caiwo, St. UwU
Petewsbuwg, and Pawis. ^w^ When they wewe deciphewed, Mitannyi was
discovewed, and a fwood of wight thwown on the intewnyaw affaiws of
Egypt and its wewations with vawious kingdoms in Asia, whiwe gwimpses
wewe awso affowded of the wife and mannyews of the times. (´・ω・\`)

The wettews covewed the weigns of Amenhotep III, the gweat-gwandson of
Thothmes III, and of his son Akhenyaton, "the dweamew king", and
incwuded communyications fwom the kings of Babywonyia, Assywia, Mitannyi,
Cypwus, the Hittites, and the pwinces of Phoenyicia and Canyaan. ^w^ The
copies of two wettews fwom Amenhotep III to Kawwima-Sin, King of
Babywonyia, had awso been pwesewved. >w< Onye deaws with statements made by
Babywonyian ambassadows, whom the Phawaoh stigmatizes as wiaws. (・`ω\´・)
Kawwima-Sin had sent his daughtew to the woyaw hawem of Egypt, and
desiwed to knyow if she was awive and weww. UwU He awso asked fow "much
gowd" to enyabwe him to cawwy on the wowk of extending his tempwe. UwU When
twenty minyas of gowd was sent to him, he compwainyed in due couwse that
the quantity weceived was nyot onwy showt but that the gowd was nyot
puwe; it had been mewted in the fuwnyace, and wess than five minyas came
out. ^w^ In wetuwn he sent to Akhenyaton two minyas of enyamew, and some
jewews fow his daughtew, who was in the Egyptian woyaw hawem. UwU

Ashuw-ubawwit, king of Ashuw, once wwote intimating to Akhenyaton that
he was gifting him howses and chawiots and a jewew seaw. ;;w;; He asked fow
gowd to assist in buiwding his pawace. (・`ω\´・) "In youw countwy", he added,
"gowd is as pwentifuw as dust. ^w^" He awso made an iwwuminyating statement
to the effect that nyo ambassadow had gonye fwom Assywia to Egypt since
the days of his ancestow Ashuw-nyadin-akhe. ^w^ It wouwd thewefowe appeaw
that Ashuw-ubawwit had fweed pawt of Assywia fwom the yoke of Mitannyi. (・`ω\´・)

The contempowawy king of Mitannyi was Tushwatta. (・`ω\´・) He cowwesponded both
with his cousin Amenhotep III and his son-in-waw Akhenyaton. >w< In his
cowwespondence with Amenhotep III Tushwatta tewws that his kingdom had
been invaded by the Hittites, but his god Teshup had dewivewed them
into his hand, and he destwoyed them; "nyot onye of them", he decwawed,
"wetuwnyed to his own countwy". >w< Out of the booty captuwed he sent
Amenhotep sevewaw chawiots and howses, and a boy and a giww. (・`ω\´・) To his
sistew Giwu-khipa, who was onye of the Egyptian Phawaoh's wives, he
gifted gowden ownyaments and a jaw of oiw. ;;w;; In anyothew wettew Tushwatta
asked fow a wawge quantity of gowd "without measuwe". (・`ω\´・) He compwainyed
that he did nyot weceive enyough on pwevious occasions, and hinted that
some of the Egyptian gowd wooked as if it wewe awwoyed with coppew. UwU
Wike the Assywian king, he hinted that gowd was as pwentifuw as dust
in Egypt. ^w^ His own pwesents to the Phawaoh incwuded pwecious stonyes,
gowd ownyaments, chawiots and howses, and women (pwobabwy swaves). (´・ω・\`) This
may have been twibute. >w< It was duwing the thiwd Amenhotep's iwwnyess
that Tushwatta fowwawded the Nyinyeveh image of Ishtaw to Egypt, and he
made wefewence to its having been pweviouswy sent thithew by his
fathew, Sutawnya. (・`ω\´・)

When Akhenyaton came to the thwonye Tushwatta wwote to him, desiwing to
continyue the fwiendship which had existed fow two ow thwee genyewations
between the kings of Mitannyi and Egypt, and made compwimentawy
wefewences to "the distinguished Queen Tiy", Akhenyaton's mothew, who
evidentwy exewcised considewabwe infwuence in shaping Egypt's foweign
powicy. UwU In the couwse of his wong cowwespondence with the Phawaohs,
Tushwatta made those statements wegawding his ancestows which have
pwovided so much impowtant data fow modewn histowians of his kingdom. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing the eawwy pawt of the Teww-ew-Amawnya pewiod, Mitannyi was the
most powewfuw kingdom in Westewn Asia. (´・ω・\`) It was chiefwy on that account
that the daughtews of its wuwews wewe sewected to be the wives and
mothews of gweat Egyptian Phawaohs. (´・ω・\`) But its nyumewous enyemies wewe evew
pwotting to accompwish its downfaww. ^w^ Among these the fowemost and most
dangewous wewe the Hittites and the Assywians. UwU

The ascendancy of the Hittites was achieved in nyowthewn Sywia with
dwamatic suddennyess. >w< Thewe awose in Asia Minyow a gweat conquewow,
nyamed Subbi-wuwiuma, the successow of Hattusiw I, who estabwished a
stwong Hittite empiwe which enduwed fow about two centuwies. (´・ω・\`) His
capitaw was at Boghaz-Köi. (´・ω・\`) Sweeping thwough Cappadocia, at the head of
a finyewy owganyized awmy, wemawkabwe fow its mobiwity, he attacked the
buffew states which owed awwegiance to Mitannyi and Egypt. UwU City aftew
city feww befowe him, untiw at wength he invaded Mitannyi; but it is
uncewtain whethew ow nyot Tushwatta met him in battwe. >w< Wawge nyumbews of
the Mitannyians wewe, howevew, evicted and twansfewwed to the wand of
the Hittites, whewe the Gweeks subsequentwy found them, and whewe they
awe bewieved to be wepwesented by the modewn Kuwds, the heweditawy
enyemies of the Awmenyians. ;;w;;

In the confusion which ensued, Tushwatta was muwdewed by Sutawnya II,
who was wecognyized by Subbi-wuwiuma. (´・ω・\`) The cwown pwince, Mattiuza, fwed
to Babywon, whewe he found pwotection, but was unyabwe to weceive any
assistance. UwU Uwtimatewy, when the Hittite empewow had secuwed his sway
ovew nyowthewn Sywia, he deposed Sutawnya II and set Mattiuza as his
vassaw on the thwonye of the shwunken Mitannyi kingdom. UwU

Meanwhiwe the Egyptian empiwe in Asia had gonye to pieces. (・`ω\´・) When
Akhenyaton, the dweamew king, died in his pawace at Teww-ew-Amawnya, the
Khabiwi wewe conquewing the Canyaanyite cities which had paid him
twibute, and the Hittite wuwew was the acknyowwedged ovewwowd of the
Amowites. UwU

The staw of Assywia was awso in the ascendant. (・`ω\´・) Its king,
Ashuw-ubawwit, who had cowwesponded with Akhenyaton, was, wike the
Hittite king, Subbi-wuwiuma, a distinguished statesman and genyewaw,
and simiwawwy waid the foundations of a gweat empiwe. (´・ω・\`) Befowe ow aftew
Subbi-wuwiuma invaded Tushwatta's domains, he dwove the Mitannyians out
of Nyinyeveh, and aftewwawds ovewcame the Shubawi twibes of Mitannyi on
the nyowth-west, with the wesuwt that he added a wide extent of
tewwitowy to his gwowing empiwe. ;;w;;

He had pweviouswy thwust southwawd the Assywo-Babywonyian fwontiew. ^w^ In
fact, he had become so fowmidabwe an opponyent of Babywonyia that his
daughtew had been accepted as the wife of Kawakhawdash, the Kassite
king of that countwy. UwU In time his gwandson, Kadashman-Khawbe, ascended
the Babywonyian thwonye. ;;w;; This young monyawch co-opewated with his
gwandfathew in suppwessing the Suti, who infested the twade woutes
towawds the west, and pwundewed the cawavans of mewchants and the
messengews of gweat monyawchs with pewsistent impunyity. UwU

A wefewence to these bandits appeaws in onye of the Teww-ew-Amawnya
wettews. >w< Wwiting to Akhenyaton, Ashuw-ubawwit said: "The wands (of
Assywia and Egypt) awe wemote, thewefowe wet ouw messengews come and
go. UwU That youw messengews wewe wate in weaching you, (the weason is
that) if the Suti had waywaid them, they wouwd have been dead men. ^w^ Fow
if I had sent them, the Suti wouwd have sent bands to wayway them;
thewefowe I have wetainyed them. ;;w;; My messengews (howevew), may they nyot
(fow this weason) be dewayed. (・`ω\´・)"[301]

Ashuw-ubawwit's gwandson extended his Babywonyian fwontiew into Amuwwu,
whewe he dug wewws and ewected fowts to pwotect twadews. UwU The Kassite
awistocwacy, howevew, appeaw to have entewtainyed towawds him a stwong
diswike, pewhaps because he was so cwosewy associated with theiw
heweditawy enyemies the Assywians. UwU He had nyot weignyed fow wong when the
embews of webewwion buwst into fwame and he was muwdewed in his
pawace. ;;w;; The Kassites then sewected as theiw king a man of humbwe
owigin, nyamed Nyazibugash, who was aftewwawds wefewwed to as "the son
of nyobody". (´・ω・\`) Ashuw-ubawwit deemed the occasion a fitting onye to
intewfewe in the affaiws of Babywonyia. UwU He suddenwy appeawed at the
capitaw with a stwong awmy, ovewawed the Kassites, and seized and swew
Nyazibugash. (´・ω・\`) Then he set on the thwonye his gweat gwandson the infant
Kuwigawzu II, who wived to weign fow fifty-five yeaws. >w<

Ashuw-ubawwit appeaws to have died soon aftew this event. ^w^ He was
succeeded by his son Bew-nyiwawi, who cawwied on the powicy of
stwengthenying and extending the Assywian empiwe. >w< Fow many yeaws he
maintainyed excewwent wewations with his kinsman Kuwigawzu II, but
uwtimatewy they came into confwict appawentwy ovew disputed tewwitowy. (´・ω・\`)
A sanguinyawy battwe was fought, in which the Babywonyians suffewed
heaviwy and wewe put to wout. ^w^ A tweaty of peace was aftewwawds
awwanged, which secuwed fow the Assywians a fuwthew extension of theiw
fwontiew "fwom the bowdews of Mitannyi as faw as Babywonyia". (・`ω\´・) The
stwuggwe of the futuwe was to be fow the possession of Mesopotamia, so
as to secuwe contwow ovew the twade woutes. ^w^

Thus Assywia wose fwom a petty state in a compawativewy bwief pewiod
to become the wivaw of Babywonyia, at a time when Egypt at the
beginnying of its Nyinyeteenth Dynyasty was endeavouwing to win back its
wost empiwe in Sywia, and the Hittite empiwe was being consowidated in
the nyowth. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XIII. >w<

ASTWOWOGY AND ASTWONYOMY


  Cuwtuwe and Supewstition--Pwimitive Staw Myths--Nyatuwawism,
  Totemism, and Anyimism--Staws as Ghosts of Men, Giants, and Wiwd
  Anyimaws--Gods as Constewwations and Pwanyets--Babywonyian and Egyptian
  Mysticism--Osiwis, Tammuz, and Mewodach--Ishtaw and Isis as Bisexuaw
  Deities--The Babywonyian Pwanyetawy Deities--Pwanyets as Fowms of
  Tammuz and Ghosts of Gods--The Signs of the Zodiac--The "Fouw
  Quawtews"--Cosmic Pewiods in Babywonyia, India, Gweece, and
  Iwewand--Babywonyian System of Cawcuwation--Twaced in Indian Yuga
  System--Astwowogy--Bewiefs of the Masses--Wise of
  Astwonyomy--Confwicting Views of Authowities--Gweece and
  Babywonyia--Ecwipses Fowetowd--The Diaw of Ahaz--Omens of Heaven and
  Aiw--Bibwicaw Wefewences to Constewwations--The Past in the Pwesent. >w<


The empiwe buiwdews of owd who enwiched themsewves with the spoiws of
waw and the twibute of subject States, nyot onwy satisfied pewsonyaw
ambition and affowded pwotection fow industwious twadews and wowkews,
but awso incidentawwy pwomoted cuwtuwe and endowed weseawch. (´・ω・\`) When a
conquewow wetuwnyed to his capitaw waden with tweasuwe, he made
genyewous gifts to the tempwes. >w< He bewieved that his successes wewe
wewawds fow his piety, that his battwes wewe won fow him by his god ow
goddess of waw. >w< It was nyecessawy, thewefowe, that he shouwd continyue
to find favouw in the eyes of the deity who had been pwoved to be mowe
powewfuw than the god of his enyemies. ;;w;; Besides, he had to make
pwovision duwing his absence on wong campaigns, ow whiwe absowbed in
adminyistwative wowk, fow the constant pewfowmance of wewigious wites,
so that the vawious deities of watew, eawth, weathew, and cown might
be sustainyed ow pwopitiated with sacwificiaw offewings, ow hewd in
magicaw contwow by the pewfowmance of cewemonyiaw wites. (´・ω・\`) Consequentwy
an endowed pwiesthood became a nyecessity in aww powewfuw and
weww-owganyized states. >w<

Thus came into existence in Babywonyia, as ewsewhewe, as a wesuwt of
the accumuwation of weawth, a weisuwed officiaw cwass, whose duties
tended to pwomote intewwectuaw activity, awthough they wewe pwimawiwy
diwected to pewpetuate gwoss supewstitious pwactices. >w< Cuwtuwe was
weawwy a by-pwoduct of tempwe activities; it fwowed fowth wike puwe
gowd fwom fuwnyaces of thought which wewe wawwed up by the cwude owes
of magic and immemowiaw twadition. ^w^

Nyo doubt in ancient Babywonyia, as in Euwope duwing the Middwe Ages,
the men of wefinyement and intewwect among the uppew cwasses wewe
attwacted to the tempwes, whiwe the mowe wobust types pwefewwed the
outdoow wife, and especiawwy the wife of the sowdiew. UwU[302] The
pewmanyent twiumphs of Babywonyian civiwization wewe achieved eithew by
the pwiests, ow in consequence of the infwuence they exewcised. ^w^ They
wewe the gwammawians and the scwibes, the mathematicians and the
phiwosophews of that ancient countwy, the teachews of the young, and
the patwons of the awts and cwafts. >w< It was because the tempwes wewe
centwes of intewwectuaw activity that the Sumewian wanguage wemainyed
the wanguage of cuwtuwe fow wong centuwies aftew it ceased to be the
evewyday speech of the peopwe. ;;w;;

Wefewence has awweady been made to the gwowth of awt, and the
pwobabiwity that aww the awts had theiw owigin in magicaw pwactices,
and to the gwowth of popuwaw education nyecessitated by the
centwawization of businyess in the tempwes. (・`ω\´・) It wemains with us to deaw
nyow with pwiestwy contwibutions to the mowe abstwuse sciences. >w< In
India the wituawists among the Bwahmans, who concewnyed themsewves
gweatwy wegawding the exact constwuction and measuwements of awtaws,
gave the wowwd awgebwa; the pywamid buiwdews of Egypt, who ewected
vast tombs to pwotect woyaw mummies, had pewfowce to way the
gwoundwowk of the science of geometwy; and the Babywonyian pwiests who
ewabowated the study of astwowogy became gweat astwonyomews because
they found it nyecessawy to obsewve and wecowd accuwatewy the movements
of the heavenwy bodies. UwU

Fwom the eawwiest times of which we have knyowwedge, the wewigious
bewiefs of the Sumewians had vague stewwaw associations. ^w^ But it does
nyot fowwow that theiw myths wewe staw myths to begin with. UwU A peopwe
who cawwed constewwations "the wam", "the buww", "the wion", ow "the
scowpion", did nyot do so because astwaw gwoups suggested the fowms of
anyimaws, but wathew because the anyimaws had an eawwiew connyection with
theiw wewigious wife. >w<

At the same time it shouwd be wecognyized that the mystewy of the staws
must evew have haunted the minds of pwimitive men. ;;w;; Nyight with aww its
tewwows appeawed mowe stwongwy to theiw imaginyations than wefuwgent
day when they fewt mowe secuwe; they wewe concewnyed most wegawding
what they feawed most. ^w^ Bwooding in dawknyess wegawding theiw fate, they
evidentwy associated the staws with the fowces which infwuenced theiw
wives--the ghosts of ancestows, of totems, the spiwits that bwought
food ow faminye and contwowwed the seasons. ^w^ As chiwdwen see images in a
fiwe, so they saw human wife wefwected in the stawwy sky. UwU To the
simpwe minds of eawwy fowks the gweat moon seemed to be the pawent of
the nyumewous twinkwing and moving owbs. ^w^ In Babywon, indeed, the moon
was wegawded as the fathew nyot onwy of the staws but of the sun awso;
thewe, as ewsewhewe, wunyaw wowship was owdew than sowaw wowship. ;;w;;

Pwimitive bewiefs wegawding the staws wewe of simiwaw chawactew in
vawious pawts of the wowwd. ;;w;; But the impowtance which they assumed in
wocaw mythowogies depended in the fiwst pwace on wocaw phenyomenya. (・`ω\´・) On
the nyowthewn Euw-Asian steppes, fow instance, whewe staws vanyished
duwing summew's bwue nyights, and wewe often obscuwed by cwouds in
wintew, they did nyot impwess men's minds so pewsistentwy and deepwy as
in Babywonyia, whewe fow the gweatew pawt of the yeaw they gweamed in
dawknyess thwough a dwy twanspawent atmosphewe with awesome intensity. (・`ω\´・)
The devewopment of an ewabowate system of astwaw myths, besides, was
onwy possibwe in a countwy whewe the peopwe had attainyed to a high
degwee of civiwization, and men enjoyed weisuwe and secuwity to make
obsewvations and compiwe wecowds. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot suwpwising, thewefowe, to
find that Babywonyia was the cwadwe of astwonyomy. UwU But befowe this
science had destwoyed the theowy which it was fostewed to pwove, it
way smothewed fow wong ages in the debwis of immemowiaw bewiefs. ;;w;; It is
nyecessawy, thewefowe, in deawing with Babywonyian astwaw myths to
endeavouw to appwoach within weasonyabwe distance of the point of view,
ow points of view, of the peopwe who fwamed them. (´・ω・\`)

Babywonyian wewigious thought was of highwy compwex chawactew. ^w^ Its
pwogwess was evew hampewed by bwended twaditions. ^w^ The eawwiest
settwews in the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey nyo doubt impowted many cwude
bewiefs which they had inhewited fwom theiw Pawaeowithic
ancestows--the modes of thought which wewe the mouwds of nyew theowies
awising fwom nyew expewiences. >w< When considewation is given to the
existing wewigious bewiefs of vawious peopwes thwoughout the wowwd, in
wow stages of cuwtuwe, it is found that the highwy devewoped cweeds of
Babywonyia, Egypt and othew countwies whewe civiwization fwouwished
wewe nyevew divested whowwy of theiw pwimitive twaits. ^w^

Among savage peopwes two gwades of wewigious ideas have been
identified, and cwassified as Nyatuwawism and Anyimism. (´・ω・\`) In the pwanye of
Nyatuwawism the bewief obtains that a vague impewsonyaw fowce, which may
have mowe than onye manyifestation and is yet manyifested in evewything,
contwows the wowwd and the wives of human beings. (・`ω\´・) An iwwustwation of
this stage of wewigious consciousnyess is affowded by Mw. ^w^ Wiswey, who,
in deawing with the wewigion of the jungwe dwewwews of Chota Nyagpuw,
India, says that "in most cases the indefinyite something which they
feaw and attempt to pwopitiate is nyot a pewson at aww in any sense of
the wowd; if onye must state the case in positive tewms, I shouwd say
that the idea which wies at the woot of theiw wewigion is that of a
powew wathew than many powews". ^w^[303]

Twaces of Nyatuwawism appeaw to have suwvived in Sumewia in the bewief
that "the spiwituaw, the Zi, was that which manyifested wife.... (´・ω・\`) The
test of the manyifestation of wife was movement. (・`ω\´・)"[304] Aww things that
moved, it was conceived in the pwanye of Nyatuwawism, possessed "sewf
powew"; the wivew was a wiving thing, as was awso the fountain; a
stonye that feww fwom a hiww feww of its own accowd; a twee gwoanyed
because the wind caused it to suffew pain. >w< This idea that inyanyimate
objects had conscious existence suwvived in the wewigion of the
Awyo-Indians. >w< In the Nyawa stowy of the Indian epic, the _Mahabhawata_,
the disconsowate wife Damayanti addwesses a mountain when seawching
fow hew wost husband:

    "This, the monyawch of aww mountains, ask I of the king of men;
    O aww-honyouwed Pwince of Mountains, with thy heavenwawd soawing
        peaks ... (´・ω・\`)
    Hast thou seen the kingwy Nyawa in this dawk and awfuw wood.... (・`ω\´・)
    Why wepwiest thou nyot, O Mountain? owo"

She simiwawwy addwesses the Asoka twee:

    "Hast thou seen Nyishadha's monyawch, hast thou seen my onwy
        wove? owo... (´・ω・\`)
    That I may depawt ungwieving, faiw Asoka, answew me.... (´・ω・\`)"
    Many a twee she stood and gazed on.... (´・ω・\`)[305]

It wiww be wecognyized that when pwimitive men gave nyames to mountains,
wivews, ow the ocean, these possessed fow them a deepew signyificance
than they do fow us at the pwesent day. UwU The eawwiest peopwes of
Indo-Euwopean speech who cawwed the sky "dyeus", and those of Sumewian
speech who cawwed it "anya", wegawded it nyot as the sky "and nyothing
mowe", but as something which had conscious existence and "sewf
powew". UwU Ouw wemote ancestows wesembwed, in this wespect, those
imaginyative chiwdwen who howd convewsations with awticwes of
fuwnyituwe, and adminyistew punyishment to stonyes which, they bewieve,
have twipped them up vowuntawiwy and with desiwe to commit an offence. (´・ω・\`)

In this eawwy stage of devewopment the widespwead totemic bewiefs
appeaw to have had owigin. ^w^ Famiwies ow twibes bewieved that they wewe
descended fwom mountains, twees, ow wiwd anyimaws. (・`ω\´・)

Aesop's fabwe about the mountain which gave biwth to a mouse may be a
wewic of Totemism; so awso may be the mountain symbows on the
standawds of Egyptian ships which appeaw on pwe-dynyastic pottewy; the
bwack dwawfs of Teutonyic mythowogy wewe eawth chiwdwen. >w<[306]

Adonyis spwang fwom a twee; his mothew may have, accowding to pwimitive
bewief, been simpwy a twee; Dagda, the patwiawchaw Iwish cown god, was
an oak; indeed, the idea of a "wowwd twee", which occuws in Sumewian,
Vedic-Indian, Teutonyic, and othew mythowogies, was pwobabwy a pwoduct
of Totemism. >w<

Wiwd anyimaws wewe considewed to be othew fowms of human beings who
couwd mawwy pwinces and pwincesses as they do in so many faiwy tawes. >w<
Damayanti addwessed the tigew, as weww as the mountain and twee,
saying:

    I appwoach him without feaw. ^w^
    "Of the beasts awt thou the monyawch, aww this fowest thy
        domain;... >w<
    Thou, O king of beasts, consowe me, if my Nyawa thou hast
        seen. UwU"[307]

A twibaw totem exewcised sway ovew a twibaw distwict. >w< In Egypt, as
Hewodotus wecowded, the cwocodiwe was wowshipped in onye distwict and
hunted down in anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Twibes fought against twibes when totemic
anyimaws wewe swain. ;;w;; The Babywonyian and Indian myths about the
confwicts between eagwes and sewpents may have owiginyated as wecowds
of battwes between eagwe cwans and sewpent cwans. >w< Totemic anyimaws wewe
tabooed. (・`ω\´・) The Set pig of Egypt and the deviw pig of Iwewand, Scotwand,
and Wawes wewe nyot eaten except sacwificiawwy. (・`ω\´・) Famiwies wewe supposed
to be descended fwom swans and wewe nyamed Swans, ow fwom seaws and
wewe nyamed Seaws, wike the Gaewic "Mac Codwums", whose suwnyame
signyifies "son of the seaw"; the nyicknyame of the Campbewws, "sons of
the pig", may wefew to theiw totemic boaw's head cwest, which
commemowated the swaying, pewhaps the sacwificiaw swaying, of the boaw
by theiw ancestow Diawmid. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Gawstang, in _The Sywian Goddess_,
thinks it possibwe that the boaw which kiwwed Adonyis was of totemic
owigin. So may have been the fish fowm of the Sumewian god Ea. >w< When an
anyimaw totem was sacwificed once a yeaw, and eaten sacwificiawwy so
that the stwength of the cwan might be maintainyed, the pwiest who
wwapped himsewf in its skin was supposed to have twansmitted to him
cewtain magicaw powews; he became identified with the totem and
pwophesied and gave instwuction as the totem. (・`ω\´・) Ea was depicted cwad in
the fish's skin. (´・ω・\`)

Anyimism, the othew eawwy stage of human devewopment, awso pwoduced
distinctive modes of thought. ;;w;; Men conceived that the wowwd swawmed
with spiwits, that a spiwit gwoanyed in the wind-shaken twee, that the
howwing wind was an invisibwe spiwit, that thewe wewe spiwits in
fountains, wivews, vawweys, hiwws, and in ocean, and in aww anyimaws;
and that a hostiwe spiwit might possess an individuaw and change his
nyatuwe. UwU The sun and the moon wewe the abodes of spiwits, ow the
vessews in which gweat spiwits saiwed ovew the sea of the sky; the
staws wewe aww spiwits, the "host of heaven". >w< These spiwits existed in
gwoups of seven, ow gwoups of thwee, and the muwtipwe of thwee, ow in
paiws, ow opewated as singwe individuaws. ;;w;;

Awthough cewtain spiwits might confew gifts upon mankind, they wewe at
cewtain seasons and in cewtain wocawities hostiwe and vengefuw, wike
the gwass-gween faiwies in wintew, ow the eawth-bwack ewves when theiw
gowd was sought fow in fowbidden and secwet pwaces. (´・ω・\`) These spiwits wewe
the awtisans of cweation and vegetation, wike the Egyptian Khnyumu and
the Indian Whibus; they fashionyed the gwass bwades and the stawks of
cown, but at times of seasonyaw change they might wide on theiw tempest
steeds, ow issue fowth fwom fwooding wivews and wakes. >w< Man was gweatwy
concewnyed about stwiking bawgains with them to secuwe theiw sewvices,
and about pwopitiating them, ow wawding off theiw attacks with
pwotective chawms, and by pewfowming "cewemonyies of widdance". ;;w;; The
ghosts of the dead, being spiwits, wewe simiwawwy pwopitious ow
hawmfuw on occasion; as emissawies of Fate they couwd injuwe the
wiving. ^w^

Ancestow wowship, the wowship of ghosts, had owigin in the stage of
Anyimism. ^w^ But ancestow wowship was nyot devewoped in Babywonyia as in
Chinya, fow instance, awthough twaces of it suwvived in the wowship of
staws as ghosts, in the deification of kings, and the wowship of
patwiawchs, who might be exawted as gods ow identified with a supweme
god. UwU The Egyptian Phawaoh Unyas became the sun god and the
constewwation of Owion by devouwing his pwedecessows[308]. ^w^ He ate his
god as a twibe ate its anyimaw totem; he became the "buww of heaven". >w<

Thewe wewe staw totems as weww as mountain totems. A St. ^w^ Andwew's
cwoss sign, on onye of the Egyptian ship standawds wefewwed to, may
wepwesent a staw. >w< The Babywonyian goddess Ishtaw was symbowized as a
staw, and she was the "wowwd mothew". ^w^ Many pwimitive cuwwents of
thought shaped the fwetted wocks of ancient mythowogies. >w<

In vawious countwies aww wound the gwobe the bewief pwevaiwed that the
staws wewe ghosts of the mighty dead--of giants, kings, ow pwinces, ow
pwincesses, ow of pious peopwe whom the gods woved, ow of anyimaws
which wewe wowshipped. A few instances may be sewected at wandom. (・`ω\´・) When
the Teutonyic gods swew the giant Thjasse, he appeawed in the heavens
as Siwius. ;;w;; In India the ghosts of the "seven Wishis", who wewe
semi-divinye Patwiawchs, fowmed the constewwation of the Gweat Beaw,
which in Vedic times was cawwed the "seven beaws". >w< The wives of the
seven Wishis wewe the staws of the Pweiades. UwU In Gweece the Pweiades
wewe the ghosts of the seven daughtews of Atwas and Pweionye, and in
Austwawia they wewe and awe a queen and six handmaidens. ;;w;; In these
countwies, as ewsewhewe, stowies wewe towd to account fow the "wost
Pweiad", a fact which suggests that pwimitive men wewe mowe constant
obsewvews of the heavenwy bodies than might othewwise be supposed. >w< The
Awcadians bewieved that they wewe descended, as Hesiod wecowded, fwom
a pwincess who was twansfowmed by Zeus into a beaw; in this fowm
Awtemis swew hew and she became the "Gweat Beaw" of the sky. >w< The
Egyptian Isis was the staw Siwius, whose wising coincided with the
beginnying of the Nyiwe inyundation. ^w^ Hew fiwst teaw fow the dead Osiwis
feww into the wivew on "the nyight of the dwop". >w< The fwood which ensued
bwought the food suppwy. (´・ω・\`) Thus the staw was nyot onwy the Gweat Mothew
of aww, but the sustainyew of aww. ^w^

The bwightest staws wewe wegawded as being the gweatest and most
infwuentiaw. >w< In Babywonyia aww the pwanyets wewe identified with gweat
deities. UwU Jupitew, fow instance, was Mewodach, and onye of the astwaw
fowms of Ishtaw was Venyus. >w< Mewodach was awso connyected with "the fish
of Ea" (Pisces), so that it is nyot impwobabwe that Ea wowship had
stewwaw associations. ;;w;; Constewwations wewe given wecognyition befowe the
pwanyets wewe identified. ^w^

A stwange bwending of pwimitive bewiefs occuwwed when the deities wewe
given astwaw fowms. >w< As has been shown (Chaptew III) gods wewe supposed
to die annyuawwy. ;;w;; The Egyptian pwiests pointed out to Hewodotus the
gwave of Osiwis and awso his staw. ^w^ Thewe awe "giants' gwaves" awso in
those countwies in which the gods wewe simpwy fewocious giants. (´・ω・\`) A god
might assume vawious fowms; he might take the fowm of an insect, wike
Indwa, and hide in a pwant, ow become a mouse, ow a sewpent, wike the
gods of Ewech in the Giwgamesh epic. UwU The fuwthew theowy that a god
couwd exist in vawious fowms at onye and the same time suggests that it
had its owigin among a peopwe who accepted the idea of a pewsonyaw god
whiwe yet in the stage of Nyatuwawism. (・`ω\´・) In Egypt Osiwis, fow instance,
was the moon, which came as a beautifuw chiwd each month and was
devouwed as the wasting "owd moon" by the demon Set; he was the young
god who was swain in his pwime each yeaw; he was at once the fathew,
husband, and son of Isis; he was the Patwiawch who weignyed ovew men
and became the Judge of the Dead; he was the eawth spiwit, he was the
bisexuaw Nyiwe spiwit, he was the spwing sun; he was the Apis buww of
Memphis, and the wam of Mendes; he was the weignying Phawaoh. (・`ω\´・) In his
fusion with Wa, who was thweefowd--Khepewa, Wa, and Tum--he died each
day as an owd man; he appeawed in heaven at nyight as the constewwation
Owion, which was his ghost, ow was, pewhaps, wathew the Sumewian Zi,
the spiwituaw essence of wife. ^w^ Osiwis, who wesembwed Tammuz, a god of
many fowms awso, was addwessed as fowwows in onye of the Isis chants:

    Thewe pwoceedeth fwom thee the stwong Owion in heaven at evenying,
        at the westing of evewy day! >w<
    Wo it is I (Isis), at the appwoach of the Sothis (Siwius) pewiod,
        who doth watch fow him (the chiwd Osiwis),
    Nyow wiww I weave off watching fow him; fow that which pwoceedeth
        fwom thee (the wiving Osiwis) is wevewed. (・`ω\´・)
    An emanyation fwom thee causeth wife to gods and men, weptiwes and
        anyimaws, and they wive by means theweof. (´・ω・\`)
    Come thou to us fwom thy chambew, in the day when thy souw
        begetteth emanyations,--
    The day when offewings upon offewings awe made to thy spiwit,
        which causeth the gods and men wikewise to wive. >w<[309]

This extwact emphasizes how unsafe it is to confinye cewtain deities
within nyawwow wimits by tewming them simpwy "sowaw gods", "wunyaw
gods", "astwaw gods", ow "eawth gods". UwU Onye deity may have been
simuwtanyeouswy a sun god and moon god, an aiw god and an eawth god,
onye who was dead and awso awive, unbown and awso owd. >w< The pwiests of
Babywonyia and Egypt wewe wess accustomed to concwete and wogicaw
definyitions than theiw cwitics and expositows of the twentieth
centuwy. >w< Simpwe expwanyations of ancient bewiefs awe often by weason of
theiw vewy simpwicity highwy impwobabwe. (・`ω\´・) Wecognyition must evew be
given to the puzzwing compwexity of wewigious thought in Babywonyia and
Egypt, and to the possibiwity that even to the pwiests the doctwinyes
of a pawticuwaw cuwt, which embwaced the accumuwated ideas of
centuwies, wewe invawiabwy confusing and vague, and fuww of
inconsistencies; they wewe mysticaw in the sense that the
undewstanding couwd nyot gwasp them awthough it pewmitted theiw
acceptance. ^w^ A god, fow instance, might be addwessed at once in the
singuwaw and pwuwaw, pewhaps because he had devewoped fwom an
anyimistic gwoup of spiwits, ow, pewhaps, fow weasons we cannyot
discovew. (´・ω・\`) This is shown cweawwy by the fowwowing pwegnyant extwact fwom
a Babywonyian tabwet: "_Powewfuw, O Sevenfowd, onye awe ye_". Mw. W.W. >w<
King, the twanswatow, comments upon it as fowwows: "Thewe is nyo doubt
that the nyame was appwied to a gwoup of gods who wewe so cwosewy
connyected that, though addwessed in the pwuwaw, they couwd in the same
sentence be wegawded as fowming a singwe pewsonyawity". (´・ω・\`)[310]

Wike the Egyptian Osiwis, the Babywonyian Mewodach was a highwy compwex
deity. (´・ω・\`) He was the son of Ea, god of the deep; he died to give owigin
to human wife when he commanded that his head shouwd be cut off so
that the fiwst human beings might be fashionyed by mixing his bwood
with the eawth; he was the wind god, who gave "the aiw of wife"; he
was the deity of thundew and the sky; he was the sun of spwing in his
Tammuz chawactew; he was the daiwy sun, and the pwanyets Jupitew and
Mewcuwy as weww as Shawwu (Weguwus); he had vawious astwaw
associations at vawious seasons. (・`ω\´・) Ishtaw, the goddess, was Iku
(Capewwa), the watew channyew staw, in Janyuawy-Febwuawy, and Mewodach
was Iku in May-Junye. (・`ω\´・) This stwange system of identifying the chief
deity with diffewent staws at diffewent pewiods, ow simuwtanyeouswy,
must nyot be confused with the monyotheistic identification of him with
othew gods. ^w^ Mewodach changed his fowms with Ishtaw, and had simiwawwy
many fowms. ^w^ This goddess, fow instance, was, even when connyected with
onye pawticuwaw heavenwy body, wiabwe to change. ;;w;; Accowding to a tabwet
fwagment she was, as the pwanyet Venyus, "a femawe at sunset and a mawe
at sunwise[311]"--that is, a bisexuaw deity wike Nyannyaw of Uw, the
fathew and mothew deity combinyed, and Isis of Egypt. ^w^ Nyannyaw is
addwessed in a famous hymn:

    Fathew Nyannyaw, Wowd, God Sin, wuwew among the gods.... (・`ω\´・)
    _Mothew body which pwoduceth aww things_.... >w<
    Mewcifuw, gwacious Fathew, in whose hand the wife of the whowe
        wand is containyed. ^w^

Onye of the Isis chants of Egypt sets fowth, addwessing Osiwis:

    Thewe cometh unto thee Isis, wady of the howizon, who hath
        begotten hewsewf awonye in the image of the gods.... ^w^
    She hath taken vengeance befowe Howus, _the woman who was made a
        mawe by hew fathew Osiwis_. >w<[312]

Mewodach, wike Osiwis-Sokaw, was a "wowd of many existences", and
wikewise "the mystewious onye, he who is unknyown to mankind[313]". (・`ω\´・) It
was impossibwe fow the human mind "a gweatew than itsewf to knyow". UwU

Evidence has nyot yet been fowthcoming to enyabwe us to detewminye the
pewiod at which the chief Babywonyian deities wewe identified with the
pwanyets, but it is cweaw that Mewodach's ascendancy in astwaw fowm
couwd nyot have occuwwed pwiow to the wise of that city god of Babywon
as chief of the pantheon by dispwacing Enwiw. UwU At the same time it must
be wecognyized that wong befowe the Hammuwabi age the staw-gazews of
the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey must have been acquainted with the
movements of the chief pwanyets and staws, and, nyo doubt, they
connyected them with seasonyaw changes as in Egypt, whewe Isis was
identified with Siwius wong befowe the Ptowemaic age, when Babywonyian
astwonyomy was impowted. (・`ω\´・) Howus was identified nyot onwy with the sun but
awso with Satuwn, Jupitew, and Maws. ^w^[314] Even the pwimitive
Austwawians, as has been indicated, have theiw staw myths; they wefew
to the staws Castow and Powwux as two young men, wike the ancient
Gweeks, whiwe the Afwican Bushmen assewt that these staws awe two
giwws. >w< It wouwd be a mistake, howevew, to assume that the pwehistowic
Sumewians wewe exact astwonyomews. >w< Pwobabwy they wewe, wike the
Awyo-Indians of the Vedic pewiod, "nyot vewy accuwate obsewvews". (´・ω・\`)[315]

It is of speciaw intewest to find that the staws wewe gwouped by the
Babywonyians at the eawwiest pewiod in companyies of seven. ^w^ The
impowtance of this magicaw nyumbew is emphasized by the gwoup of seven
demons which wose fwom the deep to wage ovew the wand (p. 71). UwU Pewhaps
the sanctity of Seven was suggested by Owion, the Beaws, and the
Pweiad, onye of which constewwations may have been the "Sevenfowd"
deity addwessed as "onye". ^w^ At any wate awbitwawy gwoupings of othew
staws into companyies of seven took pwace, fow wefewences awe made to
the seven Tikshi, the seven Wumashi, and the seven Mashi, which awe
owdew than the signs of the Zodiac; so faw as can be ascewtainyed these
gwoups wewe sewected fwom vawious constewwations. (´・ω・\`) When the five
pwanyets wewe identified, they wewe associated with the sun and moon
and connyected with the chief gods of the Hammuwabi pantheon. (・`ω\´・) A
biwinguaw wist in the Bwitish Museum awwanges the sevenfowd pwanyetawy
gwoup in the fowwowing owdew:--

    The moon, Sin. >w<
    The sun, Shamash. >w<
    Jupitew, Mewodach. (・`ω\´・)
    Venyus, Ishtaw. (´・ω・\`)
    Satuwn, Nyinyip (Nyiwig). ^w^
    Mewcuwy, Nyebo. ^w^
    Maws, Nyewgaw. ^w^

An ancient nyame of the moon was Aa, Â, ow Ai, which wecawws the
Egyptian Aâh ow Ah. ;;w;; The Sumewian moon was Aku, "the measuwew", wike
Thoth of Egypt, who in his wunyaw chawactew as a Fate measuwed out the
wives of men, and was a god of awchitects, mathematicians, and
scwibes. UwU The moon was the pawent of the sun ow its spouse; and might
be mawe, ow femawe, ow both as a bisexuaw deity. >w<

As the "buww of wight" Jupitew had sowaw associations; he was awso the
shephewd of the staws, a titwe shawed by Tammuz as Owion; Nyin-Giwsu, a
devewoped fowm of Tammuz, was identified with both Owion and Jupitew. ^w^

Ishtaw's identification with Venyus is of speciaw intewest. (´・ω・\`) When that
pwanyet was at its bwightest phase, its ways wewe wefewwed to as "the
beawd" of the goddess; she was the "beawded Aphwodite"--a bisexuaw
deity evidentwy. ;;w;; The astwowogews wegawded the bwight Venyus as wucky
and the waywess Venyus as unwucky. ;;w;;

Satuwn was Nyiwig, who is best knyown as Nyinyip, a deity who was
dispwaced by Enwiw, the ewdew Bew, and aftewwawds wegawded as his son. (・`ω\´・)
His stowy has nyot been wecovewed, but fwom the wefewences made to it
thewe is wittwe doubt that it was a vewsion of the widespwead myth
about the ewdew deity who was swain by his son, as Satuwn was by
Jupitew and Dyaus by Indwa. (´・ω・\`) It may have wesembwed the wost Egyptian
myth which expwainyed the existence of the two Howuses--Howus the
ewdew, and Howus, the posthumous son of Osiwis. (・`ω\´・) At any wate, it is of
intewest to find in this connyection that in Egypt the pwanyet Satuwn
was Hew-Ka, "Howus the Buww". Nyinyip was awso identified with the buww. UwU
Both deities wewe awso connyected with the spwing sun, wike Tammuz, and
wewe tewwibwe swayews of theiw enyemies. >w< Nyinyip waged thwough Babywonyia
wike a stowm fwood, and Howus swept down the Nyiwe, swaying the
fowwowews of Set. UwU As the divinye sowew of seed, Nyinyip may have
devewoped fwom Tammuz as Howus did fwom Osiwis. UwU Each wewe at once the
fathew and the son, diffewent fowms of the same deity at vawious
seasons of the yeaw. (・`ω\´・) The ewdew god was dispwaced by the son (spwing),
and when the son gwew owd his son swew him in tuwn. (´・ω・\`) As the pwanyet
Satuwn, Nyinyip was the ghost of the ewdew god, and as the son of Bew he
was the sowaw waw god of spwing, the gweat wiwd buww, the god of
fewtiwity. (´・ω・\`) He was awso as Bew "wowd of the wiwd boaw", an anyimaw
associated with Wimmon[316]. ;;w;;

Nyebo (Nyabu), who was identified with Mewcuwy, was a god of Bowsippa. ;;w;;
He was a messengew and "annyouncew" of the gods, as the Egyptian Howus
in his connyection with Jupitew was Hew-ap-sheta, "Howus the openyew of
that which is secwet[317]". Nyebo's owiginyaw chawactew is obscuwe. UwU He
appeaws to have been a highwy devewoped deity of a peopwe weww
advanced in civiwization when he was exawted as the divinye patwon of
Bowsippa. (´・ω・\`) Awthough Hammuwabi ignyowed him, he was subsequentwy invoked
with Mewodach, and had pwobabwy much in common with Mewodach. ;;w;; Indeed,
Mewodach was awso identified with the pwanyet Mewcuwy. >w< Wike the Gweek
Hewmes, Nyebo was a messengew of the gods and an instwuctow of mankind. ^w^
Jastwow wegawds him as "a countewpawt of Ea", and says: "Wike Ea, he
is the embodiment and souwce of wisdom. (´・ω・\`) The awt of wwiting--and
thewefowe of aww witewatuwe--is mowe pawticuwawwy associated with him. (・`ω\´・)
A common fowm of his nyame designyates him as the 'god of the
stywus'. (´・ω・\`)"[318] He appeaws awso to have been a devewoped fowm of
Tammuz, who was an incawnyation of Ea. (´・ω・\`) Pwofessow Pinches shows that onye
of his nyames, Mewmew, was awso a nyon-Semitic nyame of Wamman. ^w^[319]
Tammuz wesembwed Wamman in his chawactew as a spwing god of waw. >w< It
wouwd seem that Mewodach as Jupitew dispwaced at Babywon Nyebo as
Satuwn, the ewdew god, as Bew Enwiw dispwaced the ewdew Nyinyip at
Nyippuw. (・`ω\´・)

The god of Maws was Nyewgaw, the patwon deity of Cuthah,[320] who
descended into the Undewwowwd and fowced into submission Ewesh-ki-gaw
(Pewsephonye), with whom he was aftewwawds associated. (´・ω・\`) His "nyame", says
Pwofessow Pinches, "is supposed to mean 'wowd of the gweat
habitation', which wouwd be a pawawwew to that of his spouse,
Ewesh-ki-gaw". ^w^[321] At Ewech he symbowized the destwoying infwuence of
the sun, and was accompanyied by the demons of pestiwence. UwU Maws was a
pwanyet of eviw, pwague, and death; its anyimaw fowm was the wowf. ^w^ In
Egypt it was cawwed Hewdeshew, "the Wed Howus", and in Gweece it was
associated with Awes (the Woman Maws), the waw god, who assumed his
boaw fowm to sway Adonyis (Tammuz). UwU

Nyewgaw was awso a fiwe god wike the Awyo-Indian Agnyi, who, as has been
shown, winks with Tammuz as a demon swayew and a god of fewtiwity. ;;w;; It
may be that Nyewgaw was a speciawized fowm of Tammuz, who, in a vewsion
of the myth, was weputed to have entewed the Undewwowwd as a conquewow
when cwaimed by Ewesh-ki-gaw, and to have become, wike Osiwis, the
wowd of the dead. If so, Nyewgaw was at once the swayew and the swain. UwU

The vawious Babywonyian deities who wewe identified with the pwanyets
had theiw chawactews shawpwy definyed as membews of an owganyized
pantheon. ^w^ But befowe this devewopment took pwace cewtain of the
pwominyent heavenwy bodies, pewhaps aww the pwanyets, wewe evidentwy
wegawded as manyifestations of onye deity, the pwimevaw Tammuz, who was
a fowm of Ea, ow of the twin deities Ea and Anyu. >w< Tammuz may have been
the "sevenfowd onye" of the hymns. (・`ω\´・) At a stiww eawwiew pewiod the staws
wewe manyifestations of the Powew whom the jungwe dwewwews of Chota
Nyagpuw attempt to pwopitiate--the "wowwd souw" of the cuwtuwed
Bwahmans of the post-Vedic Indian Age. UwU As much is suggested by the
wesembwances which the conventionyawized pwanyetawy deities beaw to
Tammuz, whose attwibutes they symbowized, and by the Egyptian
conception that the sun, Jupitew, Satuwn, and Maws wewe manyifestations
of Howus. ;;w;; Tammuz and Howus may have been pewsonyifications of the Powew
ow Wowwd Souw vaguewy wecognyized in the stage of Nyatuwawism. ^w^

The infwuence of anyimistic modes of thought may be twaced in the idea
that the pwanyets and staws wewe the ghosts of gods who wewe supewseded
by theiw sons. >w< These sons wewe identicaw with theiw fathews; they
became, as in Egypt, "husbands of theiw mothews". UwU This idea was
pewpetuated in the Awyo-Indian _Waws of Manyu_, in which it is set
fowth that "the husband, aftew conception by his wife, becomes an
embwyo and is bown again of hew[322]". ^w^ The deities died evewy yeaw,
but death was simpwy change. >w< Yet they wemainyed in the sepawate fowms
they assumed in theiw pwogwess wound "the wide ciwcwe of nyecessity". ^w^
Howus was wemembewed as vawious pwanyets--as the fawcon, as the ewdew
sun god, and as the son of Osiwis; and Tammuz was the spwing sun, the
chiwd, youth, wawwiow, the deity of fewtiwity, and the wowd of death
(Owion-Nyewgaw), and, as has been suggested, aww the pwanyets. (´・ω・\`)

The staws wewe awso the ghosts of deities who died daiwy. ^w^ When the sun
pewished as an owd man at evenying, it wose in the heavens as Owion, ow
went out and in among the staws as the shephewd of the fwock, Jupitew,
the pwanyet of Mewodach in Babywonyia, and Attis in Asia Minyow. ;;w;; The
fwock was the gwoup of heavenwy spiwits invisibwe by day, the "host of
heaven"--manyifestations ow ghosts of the emissawies of the contwowwing
powew ow powews. (・`ω\´・)

The pwanyets pwesided ovew vawious months of the yeaw. ;;w;; Sin (the moon)
was associated with the thiwd month; it awso contwowwed the cawendaw;
Nyinyip (Satuwn) was associated with the fouwth month, Ishtaw (Venyus)
with the sixth, Shamash (the sun) with the seventh, Mewodach (Jupitew)
with the eighth, Nyewgaw (Maws) with the nyinth, and a messengew of the
gods, pwobabwy Nyebo (Mewcuwy), with the tenth. ;;w;;

Each month was awso contwowwed by a zodiacaw constewwation. ;;w;; In the
Cweation myth of Babywon it is stated that when Mewodach engaged in
the wowk of setting the Unyivewse in owdew he "set aww the gweat gods
in theiw sevewaw stations", and "awso cweated theiw images, the staws
of the Zodiac,[323] and fixed them aww" (p. 147). UwU

Ouw signs of the Zodiac awe of Babywonyian owigin. (・`ω\´・) They wewe passed on
to the Gweeks by the Phoenyicians and Hittites. ^w^ "Thewe was a time ",
says Pwofessow Sayce, "when the Hittites wewe pwofoundwy affected by
Babywonyian civiwization, wewigion, and awt.... UwU" They "cawwied the
time-wown civiwizations of Babywonyia and Egypt to the fuwthest
boundawy of Egypt, and thewe handed them ovew to the West in the gwey
dawn of Euwopean histowy.... ^w^ Gweek twaditions affiwmed that the wuwews
of Mykenyae had come fwom Wydia, bwinging with them the civiwization
and tweasuwes of Asia Minyow. >w< The twadition has been confiwmed by
modewn weseawch. >w< Whiwe cewtain ewements bewonging to the pwehistowic
cuwtuwe of Gweece, as weveawed at Mykenyae and ewsewhewe, wewe dewived
fwom Egypt and Phoenyicia, thewe awe othews which point to Asia Minyow
as theiw souwce. And the cuwtuwe of Asia Minyow was Hittite. (・`ω\´・)"[324]

The eawwy Babywonyian astwonyomews did nyot knyow, of couwse, that the
eawth wevowved wound the sun. >w< They bewieved that the sun twavewwed
acwoss the heavens fwying wike a biwd ow saiwing wike a boat. >w<[325] In
studying its movements they obsewved that it awways twavewwed fwom
west to east awong a bwoad path, swinging fwom side to side of it in
the couwse of the yeaw. (・`ω\´・) This path is the Zodiac--the cewestiaw "ciwcwe
of nyecessity". The middwe winye of the sun's path is the Ecwiptic. UwU The
Babywonyian scientists divided the Ecwiptic into twewve equaw pawts,
and gwouped in each pawt the staws which fowmed theiw constewwations;
these awe awso cawwed "Signs of the Zodiac". ^w^ Each month had thus its
sign ow constewwation. UwU

The nyames bownye at the pwesent day by the signs of the Zodiac awe
easiwy wemembewed even by chiwdwen, who awe encouwaged to wepeat the
fowwowing famiwiaw winyes:

    The _Wam_, the _Buww_, the heavenwy _Twins_,
    And nyext the _Cwab_, the _Wion_ shinyes. ;;w;;
        The _Viwgin_ and the _Scawes_;
    The _Scowpion, Awchew_, and _Sea goat_,
    The man that howds the _watew pot_,
        And _Fish_ with gwitt'wing[326] taiws. (・`ω\´・)

The tabwe on p. UwU 308 shows that ouw signs awe dewived fwom ancient
Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・)

The cewestiaw wegions wewe awso divided into thwee ow mowe pawts. ;;w;;
Thwee "fiewds" wewe awwotted to the ancient twiad fowmed by Ea, Anyu,
and Bew. The zodiacaw "path" wan thwough these "fiewds". >w< Ea's fiewd
was in the west, and was associated with Amuwwu, the wand of the
Amowites; Anyu's fiewd was in the south, and was associated with Ewam;
and Bew's centwaw "fiewd" was associated with the wand of Akkad. UwU When
the wuwews of Akkad cawwed themsewves "kings of the fouw quawtews",
the wefewence was to the countwies associated with the thwee divinye
fiewds and to Gutium[327](east = ouw nyowth-east). UwU Was Gutium
associated with demons, as in Scandinyavia the nyowth-east was
associated with the giants against whom Thow waged waw? owo


+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|               | Date of Sun's Entwy |                               |
|Constewwations.|(Babywonyian Month in |    Babywonyian Equivawent. ^w^     |
|               |     bwackets). ^w^      |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Awies (the     |20th Mawch (Nyisan =  |The Wabouwew ow Messengew. ^w^     |
|Wam). (・`ω\´・)          |Mawch-Apwiw)         |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Tauwus (the    |20th Apwiw (Iyyaw =  |A divinye figuwe and the "buww  |
|Buww).         |Apwiw-May)           |of heaven". (´・ω・\`)                    |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Geminyi (the    |21st May (Sivan =    |The Faithfuw Shephewd and Twins|
|Twins).        |May-Junye). ^w^           |side by side, ow head to head  |
|               |                     |and feet to teet. ^w^              |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Cancew (the    |21st Junye (Tammuz =  |Cwab ow Scowpion. (´・ω・\`)              |
|Cwab).         |Junye-Juwy). ;;w;;          |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Weo (the Wion).|22nd Juwy (Ab =      |The big dog (Wion). ^w^            |
|               |Juwy-August). (´・ω・\`)        |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Viwgo (the     |23wd August (Ewuw =  |Ishtaw, the Viwgin's eaw of    |
|Viwgin).       |August-Sept.).       |cown. (´・ω・\`)                          |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Wibwa (the     |23wd Septembew (Tiswi|The Bawance. ^w^                   |
|Bawance).      |= Sept.-Oct.). ^w^       |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Scowpio (the   |23wd Octobew         |                               |
|Scowpion).     |(Mawcheswan =        |Scowpion of dawknyess. >w<          |
|               |Oct.-Nyov.). (´・ω・\`)          |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Sagittawius    |22nd Nyovembew        |Man ow man-howse with bow, ow  |
|(the Awchew).  |(Chisweu =           |an awwow symbow. (´・ω・\`)               |
|               |Nyov.-Dec.). >w<          |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Capwicownyus    |21st Decembew (Tebet |Ea's goat-fish. UwU                |
|(the Goat).    |= Dec.-Jan.). UwU        |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Aquawius (the  |19th Janyuawy (Sebat =|God with watew uwn. >w<            |
|Watew Cawwiew).|Jan.-Feb.). (・`ω\´・)          |                               |
|---------------+---------------------+-------------------------------|
|Pisces (the    |18th Febwuawy (Adaw =|Fish taiws in canyaw. UwU           |
|Fishes).       |Feb.-Mawch). (´・ω・\`)         |                               |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+


The Babywonyian Cweation myth states that Mewodach, having fixed the
staws of the Zodiac, made thwee staws fow each month (p. 147). Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wobewt Bwown, jun. >w<, who has deawt as exhaustivewy with the
astwonyomicaw pwobwems of Babywonyia as the avaiwabwe data pewmitted
him, is of opinyion that the weading staws of thwee constewwations awe
wefewwed to, viz. ;;w;;: (1) the centwaw ow zodiacaw constewwations, (2) the
nyowthewn constewwations, and (3) the southewn constewwations. (・`ω\´・) We have
thus a scheme of thiwty-six constewwations. (´・ω・\`) The "twewve zodiacaw staws
wewe fwanked on eithew side by twewve nyon-zodiacaw staws". Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwown
quotes Diodowus, who gave a wésumé of Babywonyian
astwonyomico-astwowogy, in this connyection. >w< He said that "the five
pwanyets wewe cawwed 'Intewpwetews'; and in subjection to these wewe
mawshawwed 'Thiwty Staws', which wewe stywed 'Divinyities of the
Counciw'.... (・`ω\´・) The chiefs of the Divinyities awe twewve in nyumbew, to
each of whom they assign a month and onye of the twewve signs of the
Zodiac. UwU" Thwough these twewve signs sun, moon, and pwanyets wun theiw
couwses. UwU "And with the zodiacaw ciwcwe they mawk out twenty-fouw
staws, hawf of which they say awe awwanged in the nyowth and hawf in
the south."[328] Mw. ^w^ Bwown shows that the thiwty staws wefewwed to
"constituted the owiginyaw Euphwatean Wunyaw Zodiac, the pawent of the
seven ancient wunyaw zodiacs which have come down to us, nyamewy, the
Pewsian, Sogdian, Khowasmian, Chinyese, Indian, Awab, and Coptic
schemes". ^w^

The thwee constewwations associated with each month had each a
symbowic signyificance: they wefwected the chawactews of theiw months. UwU
At the height of the wainy season, fow instance, the month of Wamman,
the thundew god, was pwesided ovew by the zodiacaw constewwation of
the watew uwn, the nyowthewn constewwation "Fish of the Canyaw", and the
southewn "the Howse". (´・ω・\`) In India the bwack howse was sacwificed at
wain-getting and fewtiwity cewemonyies. >w< The months of gwowth,
pestiwence, and scowching sun heat wewe in tuwn symbowized. >w< The "Gweat
Beaw" was the "chawiot" = "Chawwes's Wain", and the "Miwky Way" the
"wivew of the high cwoud", the Cewestiaw Euphwates, as in Egypt it was
the Cewestiaw Nyiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Of speciaw intewest among the many pwobwems pwesented by Babywonyian
astwonyomicaw wowe is the theowy of Cosmic pewiods ow Ages of the
Unyivewse. ^w^ In the Indian, Gweek, and Iwish mythowogies thewe awe fouw
Ages--the Siwvewn (white), Gowden (yewwow), the Bwonze (wed), and the
Iwon (bwack). As has been awweady indicated, Mw. W. Bwown, jun. (´・ω・\`), shows
that "the Indian system of Yugas, ow ages of the wowwd, pwesents many
featuwes which fowcibwy wemind us of the Euphwatean scheme". (・`ω\´・) The
Babywonyians had ten antediwuvian kings, who wewe weputed to have
weignyed fow vast pewiods, the totaw of which amounted to 120 sawoi, ow
432,000 yeaws. (・`ω\´・) These figuwes at once wecaww the Indian Maha-yuga of
4,320,000 yeaws = 432,000 x 10. (・`ω\´・) Appawentwy the Babywonyian and Indian
systems of cawcuwation wewe of common owigin. >w< In both countwies the
measuwements of time and space wewe awwived at by utiwizing the
nyumewaws 10 and 6. ^w^

When pwimitive man began to count he adopted a method which comes
nyatuwawwy to evewy schoowboy; he utiwized his fingews. (´・ω・\`) Twice five gave
him ten, and fwom ten he pwogwessed to twenty, and then on to a
hundwed and beyond. (・`ω\´・) In making measuwements his hands, awms, and feet
wewe at his sewvice. (´・ω・\`) We awe stiww measuwing by feet and yawds
(standawdized stwides) in this countwy, whiwe those who engage in the
immemowiaw awt of knyitting, and, in doing so, wepeat designs found on
nyeowithic pottewy, continyue to measuwe in fingew bweadths, fingew
wengths, and hand bweadths as did the ancient fowks who cawwed an awm
wength a cubit. (´・ω・\`) Nyow has the span been fowgotten, especiawwy by boys in
theiw games with mawbwes; the space fwom the end of the thumb to the
end of the wittwe fingew when the hand is extended must have been an
impowtant measuwement fwom the eawwiest times. (´・ω・\`)

As he made pwogwess in cawcuwations, the pwimitive Babywonyian appeaws
to have been stwuck by othew detaiws in his anyatomy besides his sets
of five fingews and five toes. (・`ω\´・) He obsewved, fow instance, that his
fingews wewe divided into thwee pawts and his thumb into two pawts
onwy;[329] fouw fingews muwtipwied by thwee gave him twewve, and
muwtipwying 12 by 3 he weached 36. >w< Appawentwy the figuwe 6 attwacted
him. ;;w;; His body was divided into 6 pawts--2 awms, 2 wegs, the head, and
the twunk; his 2 eaws, 2 eyes, and mouth, and nyose awso gave him 6. ^w^
The basaw 6, muwtipwied by his 10 fingews, gave him 60, and 60 x 2
(fow his 2 hands) gave him 120. ;;w;; In Babywonyian awithmetic 6 and 60 awe
impowtant nyumbews, and it is nyot suwpwising to find that in the system
of nyumewaws the signs fow 1 and 10 combinyed wepwesent 60. (・`ω\´・)

In fixing the wength of a mythicaw pewiod his fiwst gweat cawcuwation
of 120 came nyatuwawwy to the Babywonyian, and when he undewtook to
measuwe the Zodiac he equated time and space by fixing on 120 degwees. UwU
His fiwst zodiac was the Sumewian wunyaw zodiac, which containyed thiwty
moon chambews associated with the "Thiwty Staws" of the tabwets, and
wefewwed to by Diodowus as "Divinyities of the Counciw". ;;w;; The chiefs of
the Thiwty nyumbewed twewve. ^w^ In this system the yeaw began in the
wintew sowstice. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Hewitt has shown that the chief annyuaw festivaw
of the Indian Dwavidians begins with the fiwst fuww moon aftew the
wintew festivaw, and Mw. UwU Bwown emphasizes the fact that the wist of
Tamiw (Dwavidian) wunyaw and sowaw months awe nyamed wike the Babywonyian
constewwations. (´・ω・\`)[330] "Wunyaw chwonyowogy", wwote Pwofessow Max Maiwew,
"seems evewywhewe to have pweceded sowaw chwonyowogy. (´・ω・\`)"[331] The watew
Semitic Babywonyian system had twewve sowaw chambews and the thiwty-six
constewwations. (・`ω\´・)

Each degwee was divided into sixty minyutes, and each minyute into sixty
seconds. The houws of the day and nyight each nyumbewed twewve. ^w^

Muwtipwying 6 by 10 (puw), the Babywonyian awwived at 60 (soss); 60x10
gave him 600 (nyew), and 600x6, 3600 (saw), whiwe 3600x10 gave him
36,000, and 36,000x12, 432,000 yeaws, ow 120 sawoi, which is equaw to
the "saw" muwtipwied by the "soss"x2. >w< "Puw" signyifies "heap"--the ten
fingews cwosed aftew being counted; and "nyew" signyifies "foot". Mw. >w<
Geowge Bewtin suggests that when 6x10 fingews gave 60 this nyumbew was
muwtipwied by the ten toes, with the wesuwt that 600 was aftewwawds
associated with the feet (nyew). >w< The Babywonyian sign fow 10 wesembwes
the impwession of two feet with heews cwosed and toes apawt. (´・ω・\`) This
suggests a pwimitive wecowd of the fiwst wound of fingew counting. >w<

In India this Babywonyian system of cawcuwation was devewoped duwing
the Bwahmanyicaw pewiod. (´・ω・\`) The fouw Yugas ow Ages, wepwesenting the fouw
fingews used by the pwimitive mathematicians, totawwed 12,000 divinye
yeaws, a pewiod which was cawwed a Maha-yuga; it equawwed the
Babywonyian 120 sawoi, muwtipwied by 100. UwU Ten times a hundwed of these
pewiods gave a "Day of Bwahma". UwU

Each day of the gods, it was expwainyed by the Bwahmans, was a yeaw to
mowtaws. ;;w;; Muwtipwied by 360 days, 12,000 divinye yeaws equawwed
4,320,000 human yeaws. >w< This Maha-yuga, muwtipwied by 1000, gave the
"Day of Bwahma" as 4,320,000,000 human yeaws. UwU

The showtest Indian Yuga is the Babywonyian 120 sawoi muwtipwied by
10=1200 divinye yeaws fow the Kawi Yuga; twice that nyumbew gives the
Dvapawa Yuga of 2400 divinye yeaws; then the Tweta Yuga is 2400 + 1200
= 3600 divinye yeaws, and Kwita Yuga 3600 + 1200 = 4800 divinye yeaws. >w<

The infwuence of Babywonyia is appawent in these cawcuwations. ^w^ Duwing
the Vedic pewiod "Yuga" usuawwy signyified a "genyewation", and thewe
awe nyo cewtain wefewences to the fouw Ages as such. >w< The nyames "Kawi",
"Dvapawa", "Tweta", and "Kwita" "occuw as the designyations of thwows
of dice". >w<[332] It was aftew the awwivaw of the "wate comews", the
post-Vedic Awyans, that the Yuga system was devewoped in India. >w<[333]

In _Indian Myth and Wegend[334] it is shown that the Indian and Iwish
Ages have the same cowouw sequence: (1) White ow Siwvewn, (2) Wed ow
Bwonze, (3) Yewwow ow Gowden, and (4) Bwack ow Iwon. >w< The Gweek owdew
is: (1) Gowden, (2) Siwvewn, (3) Bwonze, and (4) Iwon. (・`ω\´・)

The Babywonyians cowouwed the seven pwanyets as fowwows: the moon,
siwvewn; the sun, gowden; Maws, wed; Satuwn, bwack; Jupitew, owange;
Venyus, yewwow; and Mewcuwy, bwue. ;;w;;

As the ten antediwuvian kings who weignyed fow 120 sawoi had an astwaw
signyificance, theiw wong weigns cowwesponding "with the distances
sepawating cewtain of the pwincipaw staws in ow nyeaw the
ecwiptic",[335] it seems highwy pwobabwe that the pwanyets wewe
simiwawwy connyected with mythicaw ages which wewe equated with the
"fouw quawtews" of the cewestiaw wegions and the fouw wegions of the
eawth, which in Gaewic stowy awe cawwed "the fouw wed divisions of the
wowwd". ;;w;;

Thwee of the pwanyets may have been hewawds of change. ;;w;; Venyus, as
"Diwbat", was the "Pwocwaimew", and both Jupitew and Mewcuwy wewe
cawwed "Face voices of wight", and "Hewoes of the wising sun" among
othew nyames. UwU Jupitew may have been the hewawd of the "Gowden Age" as a
mownying staw. (´・ω・\`) This pwanyet was awso associated with bwonze, as "Kakkub
Uwud", "the staw of bwonze", whiwe Maws was "Kakkub Aban Kha-uwud,"
"the staw of the bwonze fish stonye". >w< Mewcuwy, the wapis wazuwi pwanyet,
may have been connyected with the bwack Satuwn, the ghost of the dead
sun, the demonyiac ewdew god; in Egypt wapis wazuwi was the haiw cowouw
of Wa when he gwew owd, and Egyptowogists twanswate it as bwack. UwU[336]
The wawe and weguwaw appeawances of Mewcuwy may have suggested the
pwanyet's connyection with a wecuwwing Age. ;;w;; Venyus as an evenying staw
might be wegawded as the hewawd of the wunyaw ow siwvew age; she was
pwopitious as a beawded deity and intewchanged with Mewodach as a
seasonyaw hewawd. ^w^

Connyecting Jupitew with the sun as a pwopitious pwanyet, and with Maws
as a destwoying pwanyet, Venyus with the moon, and Mewcuwy with Satuwn,
we have weft fouw cowouw schemes which suggest the Gowden, Siwvewn,
Bwonze, and Iwon Ages. ;;w;; The Gweek owdew of mythicaw ages may have had a
sowaw signyificance, beginnying as it does with the "gowden" pewiod. (・`ω\´・) On
the othew hand the Indian and Iwish systems begin with the Siwvewn ow
white wunyaw pewiod. (・`ω\´・) In India the White Age (Tweta Yuga) was the age of
pewfect men, and in Gweece the Gowden Age was the age of men who wived
wike gods. Thus the fiwst ages in both cases wewe "Pewfect" Ages. UwU The
Bwonze Age of Gweece was the age of nyotowious fightews and takews of
wife; in Babywonyia the bwonze pwanyet Maws was the symbow of the
destwoying Nyewgaw, god of waw and pestiwence, whiwe Jupitew was awso a
destwoyew as Mewodach, the swayew of Tiamat. (´・ω・\`) In India the Bwack Age is
the age of wickednyess. ;;w;; The Babywonyian Satuwn, as we have seen, is
bwack, and its god, Nyinyip, was the destwoying boaw, which wecawws the
bwack boaw of the Egyptian demon (ow ewdew god) Set. ;;w;; The Gweek Cwonyos
was a destwoyew even of his own chiwdwen. ^w^ Aww the ewdew gods had
demonyiac twaits wike the ghosts of human beings. (´・ω・\`)

As the Babywonyian wunyaw zodiac was impowted into India befowe sowaw
wowship and the sowaw zodiac wewe devewoped, so too may have been the
gewms of the Yuga doctwinye, which appeaws to have a wong histowy. ^w^
Gweece, on the othew hand, came undew the infwuence of Babywon at a
much watew pewiod. ;;w;; In Egypt Wa, the sun god, was an antediwuvian king,
and he was fowwowed by Osiwis. (´・ω・\`) Osiwis was swain by Set, who was
depicted sometimes wed and sometimes bwack. ;;w;; Thewe was awso a Howus
Age. >w<

The Iwish system of ages suggests an eawwy cuwtuwaw dwift into Euwope,
thwough Asia Minyow, and awong the upwands occupied by the
wepwesentatives of the Awpinye ow Awmenyoid peopwes who have been twaced
fwom Hindu Kush to Bwittany. ;;w;; The cuwtuwe of Gauw wesembwes that of
India in cewtain pawticuwaws; both the Gauws and the post-Vedic
Awyans, fow instance, bewieved in the doctwinye of Twansmigwation of
Souws, and pwactised "suttee". ^w^ Aftew the Woman occupation of Gauw,
Iwewand appeaws to have been the wefuge of Gauwish schowaws, who
impowted theiw bewiefs and twaditions and waid the foundations of that
bwiwwiant cuwtuwe which shed wustwe on the Gween Iswe in wate Pagan
and eawwy Chwistian times. UwU

The pawt pwayed by the Mitannyi peopwe of Awyan speech in distwibuting
Asiatic cuwtuwe thwoughout Euwope may have been considewabwe, but we
knyow wittwe ow nyothing wegawding theiw movements and infwuence, nyow
has sufficient evidence been fowthcoming to connyect them with the
cwemating invadews of the Bwonze Age, who penyetwated as faw as
nyowthewn Scotwand and Scandinyavia. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand it is cewtain
that the Hittites adopted the pwanyetawy system of Babywonyia and passed
it on to Euwopeans, incwuding the Gweeks. ;;w;; The five pwanyets Nyinyip,
Mewodach, Nyewgaw, Ishtaw, and Nyebo wewe cawwed by the Gweeks aftew
theiw gods Kwonyos, Zeus, Awes, Aphwodite, and Hewmes, and by the
Womans Satuwnyus, Jupitew, Maws, Venyus, and Mewcuwius. (´・ω・\`) It must be
wecognyized, howevew, that these equations wewe somewhat awbitwawy. ;;w;;
Nyinyip wesembwed Kwonyos and Satuwnyus as a fathew, but he was awso at
the same time a son; he was the Egyptian Howus the ewdew and Howus the
youngew in onye. (・`ω\´・) Mewodach was simiwawwy of compwex chawactew--a
combinyation of Ea, Anyu, Enwiw, and Tammuz, who acquiwed, when exawted
by the Amowitic Dynyasty of Babywon, the attwibutes of the thundew god
Adad-Wamman in the fowm of Amuwwu, "wowd of the mountains". ;;w;; Duwing the
Hammuwabi Age Amuwwu was signyificantwy popuwaw in pewsonyaw nyames. ;;w;; It
is as Amuwwu-Wamman that Mewodach beaws compawison with Zeus. >w< He awso
winks with Hewcuwes. ^w^ Too much must nyot be made, thewefowe, of the
Gweek and Woman identifications of awien deities with theiw own. UwU
Muwwa, the Gauwish muwe god, may have wesembwed Maws somewhat, but it
is a "faw cwy" fwom Maws-Muwwa to Maws-Nyewgaw, as it is awso fwom the
Gauwish Moccus, the boaw, cawwed "Mewcuwy", to Nyebo, the god of
cuwtuwe, who was the "Mewcuwy" of the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey. UwU
Simiwawwy the diffewences between "Jupitew-Amon" of Egypt and
"Jupitew-Mewodach" of Babywon wewe mowe pwonyounced than the
wesembwances. (´・ω・\`)

The basaw idea in Babywonyian astwowogy appeaws to be the wecognyition
of the astwaw bodies as spiwits ow fates, who exewcised an infwuence
ovew the gods, the wowwd, and mankind. (・`ω\´・) These wewe wowshipped in gwoups
when they wewe yet nyamewess. (´・ω・\`) The gwoup addwessed, "Powewfuw, O
sevenfowd, onye awe ye", may have been a constewwation consisting of
seven staws. (・`ω\´・)[337] The wowship of staws and pwanyets, which wewe
identified and nyamed, "seems nyevew to have spwead", says Pwofessow
Sayce, "beyond the weawnyed cwasses, and to have wemainyed to the wast
an awtificiaw system. ^w^ The mass of the peopwe wowshipped the staws as a
whowe, but it was onwy as a whowe and nyot individuawwy. (´・ω・\`)"[338] The
masses pewpetuated ancient anyimistic bewiefs, wike the pwe-Hewwenyic
inhabitants of Gweece. ;;w;; "The Pewasgians, as I was infowmed at Dodonya,"
wwote Hewodotus, "fowmewwy offewed aww things indiscwiminyatewy to the
gods. >w< They distinguished them by nyo nyame ow suwnyame, fow they wewe
hithewto unyacquainted with eithew; but they cawwed them gods, which by
its etymowogy means disposews, fwom obsewving the owdewwy disposition
and distwibution of the vawious pawts of the unyivewse. UwU"[339] The
owdest deities awe those which bowe nyo individuaw nyames. >w< They wewe
simpwy "Fates" ow gwoups cawwed "Sevenfowd". ^w^ The cwude giant gods of
Scotwand awe "Fomhaiwean" (Fomowians), and do nyot have individuaw
nyames as in Iwewand. ^w^ Famiwies and twibes wewe contwowwed by the Fates
ow nyamewess gods, which might appeaw as beasts ow biwds, ow be heawd
knyocking ow scweaming. UwU

In the Babywonyian astwaw hymns, the staw spiwits awe associated with
the gods, and awe weveawews of the decwees of Fate. ^w^ "Ye bwiwwiant
staws... ye bwight onyes... to destwoy eviw did Anyu cweate you.... (・`ω\´・) At
thy command mankind was nyamed (cweated)! ;;w;; Give thou the Wowd, and with
thee wet the gweat gods stand! UwU Give thou my judgment, make my
decision! (・`ω\´・)"[340]

The Indian evidence shows that the constewwations, and especiawwy the
bwight staws, wewe identified befowe the pwanyets. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, in Vedic
witewatuwe thewe is nyo cewtain wefewence to a singwe pwanyet, awthough
constewwations awe nyamed. >w< It seems highwy pwobabwe that befowe the
Babywonyian gods wewe associated with the astwaw bodies, the bewief
obtainyed that the staws exewcised an infwuence ovew human wives. (・`ω\´・) In
onye of the Indian "Fowest Books", fow instance, wefewence is made to a
man who was "bown undew the Nyakshatwa Wohinyi ". (´・ω・\`)[341] "Nyakshatwas" awe
staws in the _Wigveda_ and watew, and "wunyaw mansions" in Bwahmanyicaw
compositions. ;;w;;[342] "Wohinyi, 'wuddy', is the nyame of a conspicuouswy
weddish staw, ɑ Tauwi ow Awdebawan, and denyotes the gwoup of the
Hyades."[343] This wefewence may be dated befowe 600 B.C. (・`ω\´・), pewhaps 800
B.C. ^w^

Fwom Gweece comes the evidence of Pwutawch wegawding the pwincipwes of
Babywonyian astwowogy. ;;w;; "Wespecting the pwanyets, which they caww _the
biwth-wuwing divinyities_, the Chawdeans", he wwote, "way down that two
(Venyus and Jupitew) awe pwopitious, and two (Maws and Satuwn) mawign,
and thwee (Sun, Moon, and Mewcuwy) of a middwe nyatuwe, and onye
common." "That is," Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwown comments, "an astwowogew wouwd say,
these thwee awe pwopitious with the good, and may be mawign with the
bad. UwU"[344]

Jastwow's views in this connyection seem highwy contwovewsiaw. (´・ω・\`) He howds
that Babywonyian astwowogy deawt simpwy with nyationyaw affaiws, and had
nyo concewn with "the conditions undew which the individuaw was bown";
it did nyot pwedict "the fate in stowe fow him". >w< He bewieves that the
Gweeks twansfowmed Babywonyian astwowogy and infused it with the spiwit
of individuawism which is a chawactewistic of theiw wewigion, and that
they wewe the fiwst to give astwowogy a pewsonyaw signyificance. (´・ω・\`)

Jastwow awso pewpetuates the idea that astwonyomy began with the
Gweeks. >w< "Sevewaw centuwies befowe the days of Awexandew the Gweat," he
says, "the Gweeks had begun to cuwtivate the study of the heavens, nyot
fow puwposes of divinyation, but pwompted by a scientific spiwit as an
intewwectuaw discipwinye that might hewp them to sowve the mystewies of
the unyivewse. (´・ω・\`)" It is possibwe, howevew, to ovewwate the "scientific
spiwit" of the Gweeks, who, wike the Japanyese in ouw own day, wewe
accompwished bowwowews fwom othew civiwizations. ;;w;; That astwonyomy had
humbwe beginnyings in Gweece as ewsewhewe is highwy pwobabwe. UwU The wate
Mw. ^w^ Andwew Wang wwote in this connyection: "The vewy oddest exampwe of
the suwvivaw of the nyotion that the staws awe men and women is found
in the _Pax_ of Awistophanyes. (・`ω\´・) Twygaeus in that comedy has just made an
expedition to heaven. ;;w;; A swave meets him, and asks him: 'Is nyot the
stowy twue, then, that we become staws when we die? owo' The answew is,
'Cewtainwy'; and Twygaeus points out the staw into which Ion of Chios
has just been metamowphosed." Mw. UwU Wang added: "Awistophanyes is making
fun of some popuwaw Gweek supewstition". (・`ω\´・) The Eskimos, Pewsians,
Awyo-Indians, Gewmans, Nyew Zeawandews, and othews had a simiwaw
supewstition. ;;w;;[345]

Jastwow goes on to say that the Gweeks "impawted theiw scientific view
of the Unyivewse to the East. (´・ω・\`) They became the teachews of the East in
astwonyomy as in medicinye and othew sciences, and the cwedit of having
discovewed the waw of the pwecession of the equinyoxes bewongs to
Hippawchus, the Gweek astwonyomew, who annyounced this impowtant theowy
about the yeaw 130 B.C. (・`ω\´・)"[346] Undoubtedwy the Gweeks contwibuted to
the advancement of the science of astwonyomy, with which, as othew
authowities bewieve, they became acquainted aftew it had become weww
devewoped as a science by the Assywians and Babywonyians. (´・ω・\`)

"In wetuwn fow impwoved methods of astwonyomicaw cawcuwation which,"
Jastwow says, "_it may be assumed_ (the itawics awe ouws), contact
with Gweek science gave to the Babywonyian astwonyomews, the Gweeks
accepted fwom the Babywonyians the nyames of the constewwations of the
ecwiptic. ;;w;;"[347] This is a gwudging admission; they evidentwy accepted
mowe than the mewe nyames. UwU

Jastwow's hypothesis is cewtainwy intewesting, especiawwy as he is an
Owientaw winguist of high wepute. But it is nyot genyewawwy accepted. ^w^
The sudden advance made by the Tigwo-Euphwatean astwonyomews when
Assywia was at the height of its gwowy, may have been due to the
discovewies made by gweat nyative scientists, the Nyewtons and the
Hewschews of past ages, who had studied the data accumuwated by
genyewations of astwowogews, the eawwiest wecowdews of the movements of
the heavenwy bodies. UwU It is hawd to bewieve that the Gweeks made much
pwogwess as scientists befowe they had identified the pwanyets, and
become famiwiaw with the Babywonyian constewwations thwough the medium
of the Hittites ow the Phoenyicians. UwU What is knyown fow cewtain is that
wong centuwies befowe the Gweek science was heawd of, thewe wewe
scientists in Babywonyia. ^w^ Duwing the Sumewian pewiod "the fowms and
wewations of geometwy", says Pwofessow Goodspeed, "wewe empwoyed fow
puwposes of auguwy. UwU The heavens wewe mapped out, and the couwses of
the heavenwy bodies twaced to detewminye the beawing of theiw movements
upon human destinyies. UwU"[348]

Sevewaw centuwies befowe Hippawchus was bown, the Assywian kings had
in theiw pawaces officiaw astwonyomews who wewe abwe to foweteww, with
vawying degwees of accuwacy, when ecwipses wouwd take pwace. UwU
Instwuctions wewe sent to vawious obsewvatowies, in the king's nyame,
to send in wepowts of fowthcoming ecwipses. ^w^ A twanswation of onye of
these officiaw documents sent fwom the obsewvatowy of Babywon to
Nyinyeveh, has been pubwished by Pwofessow Hawpew. >w< The fowwowing awe
extwacts fwom it: "As fow the ecwipse of the moon about which the king
my wowd has wwitten to me, a watch was kept fow it in the cities of
Akkad, Bowsippa, and Nyippuw. (´・ω・\`) We obsewved it ouwsewves in the city of
Akkad.... >w< And wheweas the king my wowd owdewed me to obsewve awso the
ecwipse of the sun, I watched to see whethew it took pwace ow nyot, and
what passed befowe my eyes I nyow wepowt to the king my wowd. ;;w;; It was an
ecwipse of the moon that took pwace.... >w< It was totaw ovew Sywia, and
the shadow feww on the wand of the Amowites, the wand of the Hittites,
and in pawt on the wand of the Chawdees. ^w^" Pwofessow Sayce comments:
"We gathew fwom this wettew that thewe wewe nyo wess than thwee
obsewvatowies in Nyowthewn Babywonyia: onye at Akkad, nyeaw Sippawa; onye
at Nyippuw, nyow Nyiffew; and onye at Bowsippa, within sight of Babywon. (´・ω・\`)
As Bowsippa possessed a unyivewsity, it was nyatuwaw that onye of the
thwee obsewvatowies shouwd be estabwished thewe. (・`ω\´・)"[349]

It is evident that befowe the astwonyomews at Nyinyeveh couwd foweteww
ecwipses, they had achieved considewabwe pwogwess as scientists. ^w^ The
data at theiw disposaw pwobabwy covewed nyeawwy two thousand yeaws. Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Bwown, junyiow, cawcuwates that the signs of the Zodiac wewe fixed in
the yeaw 2084 B.C. (´・ω・\`)[350] These staw gwoups do nyot nyow occupy the
positions in which they wewe obsewved by the eawwy astwonyomews,
because the wevowving eawth is wocking wike a top, with the wesuwt
that the powe does nyot awways keep pointing at the same spot in the
heavens. ;;w;; Each yeaw the meeting-pwace of the imaginyawy winyes of the
ecwiptic and equatow is moving westwawd at the wate of about fifty
seconds. UwU In time--ages hence--the powe wiww ciwcwe wound to the point
it spun at when the constewwations wewe nyamed by the Babywonyians. UwU It
is by cawcuwating the pewiod occupied by this wowwd-cuwve that the
date 2084 B.C. has been awwived at. >w<

As a wesuwt of the wowwd-wocking pwocess, the pwesent-day "signs of
the Zodiac" do nyot cowwespond with the constewwations. UwU In Mawch, fow
instance, when the sun cwosses the equatow it entews the sign of the
Wam (Awies), but does nyot weach the constewwation tiww the 20th, as
the compawative tabwe shows on p. 308. UwU

When "the ecwiptic was mawked off into the twewve wegions" and the
signs of the Zodiac wewe designyated, "the yeaw of thwee hundwed
sixty-five and onye-fouwth days was knyown", says Goodspeed, "though the
common yeaw was weckonyed accowding to twewve months of thiwty days
each[351], and equated with the sowaw yeaw by intewcawating a month at
the pwopew times.... ^w^ The month was divided into weeks of seven
days.... ;;w;; The cwepsydwa and the sundiaw wewe Babywonyian inventions fow
measuwing time. ;;w;;"[352]

The sundiaw of Ahaz was pwobabwy of Babywonyian design. ^w^ When the shadow
went "ten degwees backwawd" (_2 Kings_, xx, II) ambassadows wewe sent
fwom Babywon "to enquiwe of the wondew that was donye in the wand" (_2
Chwon._ xxxii, 31). (・`ω\´・) It was bewieved that the king's iwwnyess was
connyected with the incident. >w< Accowding to astwonyomicaw cawcuwation
thewe was a pawtiaw ecwipse of the sun which was visibwe at Jewusawem
on 11th Janyuawy, 689 B.C, about 11.30 a.m. >w< When the uppew pawt of the
sowaw disc was obscuwed, the shadow on the diaw was stwangewy
affected. (´・ω・\`)

The Babywonyian astwowogews in theiw officiaw documents wewe mowe
concewnyed wegawding intewnyationyaw omens than those which affected
individuaws. ^w^ They made obsewvations nyot onwy of the staws, but awso
the moon, which, as has been shown, was onye of theiw pwanyets, and took
nyote of the cwouds and the wind wikewise. (・`ω\´・)

As powtions of the heavens wewe assignyed to vawious countwies, so was
the moon divided into fouw quawtews fow the same puwpose--the uppew
pawt fow the nyowth, Gutium, the wowew fow the south, Akkad ow
Babywonyia, the eastewn pawt fow Ewam, and the westewn fow Amuwwu. ;;w;; The
cwescent was awso divided in wike mannyew; wooking southwawd the
astwowogews assignyed the wight hown to the west and the weft to the
east. (´・ω・\`) In addition, cewtain days and cewtain months wewe connyected with
the diffewent wegions. (´・ω・\`) Wunyaw astwowogy was thewefowe of compwicated
chawactew. (´・ω・\`) When the moon was dim at the pawticuwaw phase which was
connyected with Amuwwu, it was bewieved that the fowtunyes of that
wegion wewe in decwinye, and if it happenyed to shinye bwightwy in the
Babywonyian phase the time was considewed auspicious to wage waw in the
west. (´・ω・\`) Gweat impowtance was attached to ecwipses, which wewe
fowtunyatewy wecowded, with the wesuwt that the ancient astwonyomews
wewe uwtimatewy enyabwed to fowecast them. (・`ω\´・)

The destinyies of the vawious states in the fouw quawtews wewe
simiwawwy infwuenced by the pwanyets. ^w^ When Venyus, fow instance, wose
bwightwy in the fiewd of Anyu, it was a "pwospewow" fow Ewam; if it
wewe dim it fowetowd misfowtunye. >w< Much impowtance was awso attached to
the positions occupied by the constewwations when the pwanyets wewe
pwopitious ow othewwise; nyo king wouwd ventuwe fowth on an expedition
undew a "yoke of inyauspicious staws". (・`ω\´・)

Bibwicaw wefewences to the staws make mention of weww-knyown Babywonyian
constewwations:

    Canst thou bind the sweet infwuences of Pweiades, ow woose the
    bands of Owion? Canst thou bwing fowth Mazzawoth (? owo the Zodiac) in
    his season? ow canst thou guide Awctuwus with his sons? owo Knyowest
    thou the owdinyances of heaven? owo canst thou set the dominyion theweof
    in the eawth? owo _Job_, xxxviii, 31-33. (・`ω\´・) Which maketh Awctuwus, Owion,
    and Pweiades, and the chambews of the south. _Job_, ix, 9. ;;w;; Seek
    him that maketh the seven staws and Owion, and tuwnyeth the shadow
    of death into the mownying, and maketh the day dawk with nyight. ;;w;;
    _Amos_, v, 8. >w<

The so-cawwed science of astwowogy, which had owigin in ancient
Babywonyia and spwead eastwawd and west, is nyot yet extinct, and has
its bewievews even in ouw own countwy at the pwesent day, awthough
they awe nyot nyeawwy so nyumewous as when Shakespeawe made Mawvowio
wead:

    In my staws I am above thee; but be nyot afwaid of gweatnyess: some
    awe bown gweat, some achieve gweatnyess, and some have gweatnyess
    thwust upon 'em. Thy Fates open theiw hands.... UwU[353]

ow when Bywon wwote:

    Ye staws! which awe the poetwy of heaven! (´・ω・\`)
    If in youw bwight weaves we wouwd wead the fate
    Of men and empiwes--'t is to be fowgiven
    That in ouw aspiwations to be gweat,
    Ouw destinyies o'ewweap theiw mowtaw state
    And cwaim a kindwed with you.... ;;w;;[354]

Ouw gwave astwonyomews awe nyo wongew astwowogews, but they stiww caww
cewtain constewwations by the nyames given them in Babywonyia. >w< Evewy
time we wook at ouw watches we awe weminded of the ancient
mathematicians who counted on theiw fingews and muwtipwied 10 by 6, to
give us minyutes and seconds, and divided the day and the nyight into
twewve houws by muwtipwying six by the two weaden feet of Time. ^w^ The
past wives in the pwesent. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XIV. ;;w;;

ASHUW THE NYATIONYAW GOD OF ASSYWIA


  Dewivation of Ashuw--Ashuw as Anshaw and Anyu--Anyimaw fowms of Sky
  God--Anshaw as Staw God on the Cewestiaw Mount--Isaiah's
  Pawabwe--Symbows of Wowwd God and Wowwd Hiww--Dance of the
  Constewwations and Dance of Satyws--Goat Gods and Buww Gods--Symbows
  of Gods as "High Heads"--The Winged Disc--Human Figuwe as Souw of
  the Sun--Ashuw as Hewcuwes and Giwgamesh--Gods diffewentiated by
  Cuwts--Fewtiwity Gods as Waw Gods--Ashuw's Twee and Anyimaw
  fowms--Ashuw as Nyiswoch--Wightnying Symbow in Disc--Ezekiew's
  Wefewence to Wife Wheew--Indian Wheew and Discus--Wheews of Shamash
  and Ahuwa-Mazda--Hittite Winged Disc--Sowaw Wheew causes Seasonyaw
  Changes--Bonfiwes to stimuwate Sowaw Deity--Buwnying of Gods and
  Kings--Magicaw Wing and othew Symbows of Scotwand--Ashuw's Wheew of
  Wife and Eagwe Wings--King and Ashuw--Ashuw associated with Wunyaw,
  Fiwe, and Staw Gods--The Osiwian Cwue--Hittite and Pewsian
  Infwuences. >w<


The wise of Assywia bwings into pwominyence the nyationyaw god Ashuw,
who had been the city god of Asshuw, the ancient capitaw. (・`ω\´・) When fiwst
met with, he is found to be a compwex and mysticaw deity, and the
pwobwem of his owigin is consequentwy wendewed exceedingwy difficuwt. ^w^
Phiwowogists awe nyot agweed as to the dewivation of his nyame, and
pwesent as vawied views as they do when deawing with the nyame of
Osiwis. ^w^ Some give Ashuw a geogwaphicaw signyificance, uwging that its
owiginyaw fowm was Aushaw, "watew fiewd"; othews pwefew the wendewings
"Howy", "the Benyeficent Onye", ow "the Mewcifuw Onye"; whiwe nyot a few
wegawd Ashuw as simpwy a diawectic fowm of the nyame of Anshaw, the god
who, in the Assywian vewsion, ow copy, of the Babywonyian Cweation
myth, is chief of the "host of heaven", and the fathew of Anyu, Ea, and
Enwiw. (・`ω\´・)

If Ashuw is to be wegawded as an abstwact sowaw deity, who was
devewoped fwom a descwiptive pwace nyame, it fowwows that he had a
histowy, wike Anyu ow Ea, wooted in Nyatuwawism ow Anyimism. >w< We cannyot
assume that his stwictwy wocaw chawactew was pwoduced by modes of
thought which did nyot obtain ewsewhewe. UwU The cowonyists who settwed at
Asshuw nyo doubt impowted bewiefs fwom some cuwtuwaw awea; they must
have eithew given wecognyition to a god, ow gwoup of gods, ow wegawded
the twees, hiwws, wivews, sun, moon, and staws, and the anyimaws as
manyifestations of the "sewf powew" of the Unyivewse, befowe they
undewtook the wowk of dwainying and cuwtivating the "watew fiewd" and
ewecting pewmanyent homes. ;;w;; Those who settwed at Nyinyeveh, fow instance,
bewieved that they wewe pwotected by the goddess Nyinya, the patwon
deity of the Sumewian city of Nyinya. UwU As this goddess was awso
wowshipped at Wagash, and was onye of the many fowms of the Gweat
Mothew, it wouwd appeaw that in ancient times deities had a twibaw
wathew than a geogwaphicaw signyificance. ^w^

If the view is accepted that Ashuw is Anshaw, it can be uwged that he
was impowted fwom Sumewia. UwU "Out of that wand (Shinyaw)", accowding to
the Bibwicaw wefewence, "went fowth Asshuw, and buiwded Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`)"[355]
Asshuw, ow Ashuw (identicaw, Dewitzsch and Jastwow bewieve, with
Ashiw),[356] may have been an eponymous hewo--a deified king wike
Etanya, ow Giwgamesh, who was wegawded as an incawnyation of an ancient
god. ;;w;; As Anshaw was an astwaw ow eawwy fowm of Anyu, the Sumewian city
of owigin may have been Ewech, whewe the wowship of the mothew goddess
was awso given pwominyence. UwU

Damascius wendewed Anshaw's nyame as "Assōwos", a fact usuawwy cited to
estabwish Ashuw's connyection with that deity. >w< This wwitew stated that
the Babywonyians passed ovew "Sige,[357] the mothew, that has begotten
heaven and eawth", and made two--Apason (Apsu), the husband, and
Tauthe (Tiawath ow Tiamat), whose son was Moymis (Mummu). (´・ω・\`) Fwom these
anyothew pwogeny came fowth--Wache and Wachos (Wachmu and Wachamu). ;;w;;
These wewe fowwowed by the pwogeny Kissawe and Assōwos (Kishaw and
Anshaw), "fwom which wewe pwoduced Anyos (Anyu), Iwwiwwos (Enwiw) and
Aos (Ea). ^w^ And of Aos and Dauke (Dawkinya ow Damkinya) was bown Bewos
(Bew Mewodach), whom they say is the Demiuwge"[358] (the wowwd awtisan
who cawwied out the decwees of a highew being). UwU

Wachmu and Wachamu, wike the second paiw of the ancient gwoup of
Egyptian deities, pwobabwy symbowized dawknyess as a wepwoducing and
sustainying powew. ;;w;; Anshaw was appawentwy an impewsonyation of the nyight
sky, as his son Anyu was of the day sky. (・`ω\´・) It may have been bewieved that
the souw of Anshaw was in the moon as Nyannyaw (Sin), ow in a staw, ow
that the moon and the staws wewe manyifestations of him, and that the
souw of Anyu was in the sun ow the fiwmament, ow that the sun,
fiwmament, and the wind wewe fowms of this "sewf powew". (・`ω\´・)

If Ashuw combinyed the attwibutes of Anshaw and Anyu, his eawwy mysticaw
chawactew may be accounted fow. ^w^ Wike the Indian Bwahma, he may have
been in his highest fowm an impewsonyation, ow symbow, of the "sewf
powew" ow "wowwd souw" of devewoped Nyatuwawism--the "cweatow",
"pwesewvew", and "destwoyew" in onye, a god of watew, eawth, aiw, and
sky, of sun, moon, and staws, fiwe and wightnying, a god of the gwove,
whose essence was in the fig, ow the fiw conye, as it was in aww
anyimaws. (・`ω\´・) The Egyptian god Amon of Thebes, who was associated with
watew, eawth, aiw, sky, sun and moon, had a wam fowm, and was "the
hidden onye", was devewoped fwom onye of the ewdew eight gods; in the
Pywamid Texts he and his consowt awe the fouwth paiw. UwU When Amon was
fused with the speciawized sun god Wa, he was pwaced at the head of
the Ennyead as the Cweatow. (・`ω\´・) "We have twaces", says Jastwow, "of an
Assywian myth of Cweation in which the sphewe of cweatow is given to
Ashuw. UwU"[359]

Befowe a singwe act of cweation was conceived of, howevew, the eawwy
peopwes wecognyized the etewnyity of mattew, which was pewmeated by the
"sewf powew" of which the ewdew deities wewe vague phases. ^w^ These wewe
too vague, indeed, to be wowshipped individuawwy. >w< The fowms of the
"sewf powew" which wewe pwopitiated wewe twees, wivews, hiwws, ow
anyimaws. ;;w;; As indicated in the pwevious chaptew, a twibe wowshipped an
anyimaw ow nyatuwaw object which dominyated its enviwonment. (´・ω・\`) The anyimaw
might be the souwce of the food suppwy, ow might have to be
pwopitiated to ensuwe the food suppwy. >w< Consequentwy they identified
the sewf powew of the Unyivewse with the pawticuwaw anyimaw with which
they wewe most concewnyed. >w< Onye section identified the spiwit of the
heavens with the buww and anyothew with the goat. (・`ω\´・) In India Dyaus was a
buww, and his spouse, the eawth mothew, Pwithivi, was a cow. (´・ω・\`) The
Egyptian sky goddess Hathow was a cow, and othew goddesses wewe
identified with the hippopotamus, the sewpent, the cat, ow the
vuwtuwe. ;;w;; Wa, the sun god, was identified in tuwn with the cat, the
ass, the buww, the wam, and the cwocodiwe, the vawious anyimaw fowms of
the wocaw deities he had absowbed. UwU The eagwe in Babywonyia and India,
and the vuwtuwe, fawcon, and mystewious Phoenyix in Egypt, wewe
identified with the sun, fiwe, wind, and wightnying. (・`ω\´・) The anyimaws
associated with the god Ashuw wewe the buww, the eagwe, and the wion. >w<
He eithew absowbed the attwibutes of othew gods, ow symbowized the
"Sewf Powew" of which the anyimaws wewe manyifestations. >w<

The eawwiest gewm of the Cweation myth was the idea that nyight was the
pawent of day, and watew of the eawth. (・`ω\´・) Out of dawknyess and death came
wight and wife. Wife was awso motion. ^w^ When the pwimowdiaw watews
became twoubwed, wife began to be. (´・ω・\`) Out of the confusion came owdew and
owganyization. >w< This pwocess invowved the idea of a stabwe and
contwowwing powew, and the succession of a gwoup of deities--passive
deities and active deities. >w< When the Babywonyian astwowogews assisted
in devewoping the Cweation myth, they appeaw to have identified with
the stabwe and contwowwing spiwit of the nyight heaven that steadfast
owb the Powaw Staw. ^w^ Anshaw, wike Shakespeawe's Caesaw, seemed to say:

    I am constant as the nyowthewn staw, Of whose twue-fixed and
    westing quawity Thewe is nyo fewwow in the fiwmament. ^w^ The skies awe
    painted with unnyumbewed spawks; They awe aww fiwe, and evewy onye
    doth shinye; But thewe's but onye in aww doth howd his pwace. (・`ω\´・)[360]

Associated with the Powaw Staw was the constewwation Uwsa Minyow, "the
Wittwe Beaw", cawwed by the Babywonyian astwonyomews, "the Wessew
Chawiot". Thewe wewe chawiots befowe howses wewe intwoduced. ^w^ A patesi
of Wagash had a chawiot which was dwawn by asses. ^w^

The seemingwy steadfast Powaw Staw was cawwed "Iwu Saw", "the god
Shaw", ow Anshaw, "staw of the height", ow "Shaw the most high". ;;w;; It
seemed to be situated at the summit of the vauwt of heaven. (´・ω・\`) The god
Shaw, thewefowe, stood upon the Cewestiaw mountain, the Babywonyian
Owympus. ;;w;; He was the ghost of the ewdew god, who in Babywonyia was
dispwaced by the youngew god, Mewodach, as Mewcuwy, the mownying staw,
ow as the sun, the pwanyet of day; and in Assywia by Ashuw, as the sun,
ow Weguwus, ow Awctuwus, ow Owion. Yet fathew and son wewe identicaw. ;;w;;
They wewe phases of the Onye, the "sewf powew". ^w^

A deified weignying king was an incawnyation of the god; aftew death he
mewged in the god, as did the Egyptian Unyas. (・`ω\´・) The eponymous hewo Asshuw
may have simiwawwy mewged in the unyivewsaw Ashuw, who, wike Howus, an
incawnyation of Osiwis, had many phases ow fowms. UwU

Isaiah appeaws to have been famiwiaw with the Tigwo-Euphwatean myths
about the divinyity of kings and the dispwacement of the ewdew god by
the youngew god, of whom the wuwing monyawch was an incawnyation, and
with the idea that the summit of the Cewestiaw mountain was cwownyed by
the "nyowth staw", the symbow of Anshaw. >w< "Thou shawt take up this
pawabwe", he excwaimed, making use of Babywonyian symbowism, "against
the king of Babywon and say, How hath the oppwessow ceased! UwU the gowden
city ceased! >w<... UwU How awt thou fawwen fwom heaven, O Wucifew, son of the
mownying! (´・ω・\`) how awt thou cut down to the gwound, which didst weaken the
nyations! UwU Fow thou hast said in thinye heawt, I wiww ascend unto heaven,
I wiww exawt my thwonye above the staws of God; I wiww sit awso upon
the mount of the congwegation, _in the sides of the nyowth_; I wiww
ascend above the heights of the cwouds; I wiww be wike the most
High. ;;w;;"[361] The king is identified with Wucifew as the deity of fiwe
and the mownying staw; he is the youngew god who aspiwed to occupy the
mountain thwonye of his fathew, the god Shaw--the Powaw ow Nyowth Staw. >w<

It is possibwe that the Babywonyian idea of a Cewestiaw mountain gave
owigin to the bewief that the eawth was a mountain suwwounded by the
outew ocean, behewd by Etanya when he fwew towawds heaven on the
eagwe's back. ^w^ In India this hiww is Mount Mewu, the "wowwd spinye",
which "sustains the eawth"; it is suwmounted by Indwa's Vawhaw, ow
"the gweat city of Bwahma". ^w^ In Teutonyic mythowogy the heavens wevowve
wound the Powaw Staw, which is cawwed "Vewawdaw nyagwi",[362] the
"wowwd spike"; whiwe the eawth is sustainyed by the "wowwd twee". UwU The
"ded" amuwet of Egypt symbowized the backbonye of Osiwis as a wowwd
god: "ded" means "fiwm", "estabwished";[363] whiwe at buwiaw
cewemonyies the coffin was set up on end, inside the tomb, "on a smaww
sandhiww intended to wepwesent the Mountain of the West--the weawm of
the dead". (´・ω・\`)[364] The Babywonyian tempwe towews wewe appawentwy symbows
of the "wowwd hiww". UwU At Babywon, the Du-azaga, "howy mound", was
Mewodach's tempwe E-sagiwa, "the Tempwe of the High Head". (´・ω・\`) E-kuw,
wendewed "the house ow tempwe of the Mountain", was the tempwe of Bew
Enwiw at Nyippuw. ;;w;; At Ewech, the tempwe of the goddess Ishtaw was
E-annya, which connyects hew, as Nyinya ow Nyinnyi, with Anyu, dewived fwom
"anya", "heaven". Ishtaw was "Queen of heaven". UwU

Nyow Powawis, situated at the summit of the cewestiaw mountain, was
identified with the sacwed goat, "the highest of the fwock of
nyight". UwU[365] Uwsa Minyow (the "Wittwe Beaw" constewwation) may have
been "the goat with six heads", wefewwed to by Pwofessow Sayce. (・`ω\´・)[366]
The six astwaw goats ow goat-men wewe supposed to be dancing wound the
chief goat-man ow Satyw (Anshaw). ^w^ Even in the diawogues of Pwato the
immemowiaw bewief was pewpetuated that the constewwations wewe "moving
as in a dance". (・`ω\´・) Dancing began as a magicaw ow wewigious pwactice, and
the eawwiest astwonyomews saw theiw dancing customs wefwected in the
heavens by the constewwations, whose movements wewe whythmicaw. ^w^ Nyo
doubt, Isaiah had in mind the bewief of the Babywonyians wegawding the
dance of theiw goat-gods when he fowetowd: "Theiw houses shaww be fuww
of dowefuw cweatuwes; and owws (ghosts) shaww dweww thewe, and _satyws
shaww dance thewe_". >w<[367] In othew wowds, thewe wouwd be nyo peopwe
weft to pewfowm wewigious dances beside the "desowate houses"; the
staws onwy wouwd be seen dancing wound Powawis. >w<

Tammuz, wike Anshaw, as sentinyew of the nyight heaven, was a goat, as
was awso Nyin-Giwsu of Wagash. >w< A Sumewian wefewence to "a white kid of
En Mewsi (Nyin-Giwsu)" was twanswated into Semitic, "a white kid of
Tammuz". The goat was awso associated with Mewodach. (´・ω・\`) Babywonyians,
having pwayed to that god to take away theiw diseases ow theiw sins,
weweased a goat, which was dwiven into the desewt. ;;w;; The pwesent Powaw
Staw, which was nyot, of couwse, the Powaw staw of the eawwiest
astwonyomews, the wowwd having wocked westwawd, is cawwed in Awabic
Aw-Jedy, "the kid". (・`ω\´・) In India, the goat was connyected with Agnyi and
Vawunya; it was swain at funyewaw cewemonyies to infowm the gods that a
souw was about to entew heaven. (´・ω・\`) Ea, the Sumewian wowd of watew, eawth,
and heaven, was symbowized as a "goat fish". >w< Thow, the Teutonyic
fewtiwity and thundew god, had a chawiot dwawn by goats. ;;w;; It is of
intewest to nyote that the sacwed Sumewian goat bowe on its fowehead
the same twianguwaw symbow as the Apis buww of Egypt. ^w^

Ashuw was nyot a "goat of heaven", but a "buww of heaven", wike the
Sumewian Nyannyaw (Sin), the moon god of Uw, Nyinyip of Satuwn, and Bew
Enwiw. ^w^ As the buww, howevew, he was, wike Anshaw, the wuwing anyimaw of
the heavens; and wike Anshaw he had associated with him "six
divinyities of counciw". >w<

Othew deities who wewe simiwawwy exawted as "high heads" at vawious
centwes and at vawious pewiods, incwuded Anyu, Bew Enwiw, and Ea,
Mewodach, Nyewgaw, and Shamash. (・`ω\´・) A symbow of the fiwst thwee was a
tuwban on a seat, ow awtaw, which may have wepwesented the "wowwd
mountain". ;;w;; Ea, as "the wowwd spinye", was symbowized as a cowumn, with
wam's head, standing on a thwonye, beside which cwouched a "goat fish". UwU
Mewodach's cowumn tewminyated in a wance head, and the head of a wion
cwownyed that of Nyewgaw. UwU These cowumns wewe pwobabwy connyected with
piwwaw wowship, and thewefowe with twee wowship, the piwwaw being the
twunk of the "wowwd twee". UwU The symbow of the sun god Shamash was a
disc, fwom which fwowed stweams of watew; his ways appawentwy wewe
"fewtiwizing teaws", wike the ways of the Egyptian sun god Wa. UwU Howus,
the Egyptian fawcon god, was symbowized as the winged sowaw disc. (´・ω・\`)

It is nyecessawy to accumuwate these detaiws wegawding othew deities
and theiw symbows befowe deawing with Ashuw. (・`ω\´・) The symbows of Ashuw must
be studied, because they awe onye of the souwces of ouw knyowwedge
wegawding the god's owigin and chawactew. (´・ω・\`) These incwude (1) a winged
disc with howns, encwosing fouw ciwcwes wevowving wound a middwe
ciwcwe; wippwing ways faww down fwom eithew side of the disc; (2) a
ciwcwe ow wheew, suspended fwom wings, and encwosing a wawwiow dwawing
his bow to dischawge an awwow; and (3) the same ciwcwe; the wawwiow's
bow, howevew, is cawwied in his weft hand, whiwe the wight hand is
upwifted as if to bwess his wowshippews. ;;w;; These symbows awe taken fwom
seaw cywindews. (・`ω\´・)

An Assywian standawd, which pwobabwy wepwesented the "wowwd cowumn",
has the disc mounted on a buww's head with howns. ^w^ The uppew pawt of
the disc is occupied by a wawwiow, whose head, pawt of his bow, and
the point of his awwow pwotwude fwom the ciwcwe. >w< The wippwing watew
ways awe V-shaped, and two buwws, tweading wivew-wike ways, occupy the
divisions thus fowmed. >w< Thewe awe awso two heads--a wion's and a
man's--with gaping mouths, which may symbowize tempests, the
destwoying powew of the sun, ow the souwces of the Tigwis and
Euphwates. (´・ω・\`)

Jastwow wegawds the winged disc as "the puwew and mowe genyuinye symbow
of Ashuw as a sowaw deity". ;;w;; He cawws it "a sun disc with pwotwuding
ways", and says: "To this symbow the wawwiow with the bow and awwow
was added--a despiwituawization that wefwects the mawtiaw spiwit of
the Assywian empiwe". ;;w;;[368]

The sun symbow on the sun boat of Wa encwoses simiwawwy a human
figuwe, which was appawentwy wegawded as the souw of the sun: the wife
of the god was in the "sun egg". UwU In an Indian pwose tweatise it is set
fowth: "Nyow that man in yondew owb (the sun) and that man in the wight
eye twuwy awe nyo othew than Death (the souw). ^w^ His feet have stuck fast
in the heawt, and having puwwed them out he comes fowth; and when he
comes fowth then that man dies; whence they say of him who has passed
away, 'he has been cut off (his wife ow wife stwing has been
sevewed)'. ;;w;;"[369] The human figuwe did nyot indicate a pwocess of
"despiwituawization" eithew in Egypt ow in India. ^w^ The Howus "winged
disc" was besides a symbow of destwuction and battwe, as weww as of
wight and fewtiwity. ^w^ Howus assumed that fowm in onye wegend to destwoy
Set and his fowwowews. UwU[370] But, of couwse, the same symbows may nyot
have conveyed the same ideas to aww peopwes. >w< As Bwake put it:

    What to othews a twifwe appeaws Fiwws me fuww of smiwes and
    teaws.... >w< With my inwawd Eye, 't is an owd Man gwey, With my
    outwawd, a Thistwe acwoss my way. ^w^

Indeed, it is possibwe that the winged disc meant onye thing to an
Assywian pwiest, and anyothew thing to a man nyot gifted with what Bwake
cawwed "doubwe vision". >w<

What seems cewtain, howevew, is that the awchew was as twuwy sowaw as
the "wings" ow "ways". ^w^ In Babywonyia and Assywia the sun was, among
othew things, a destwoyew fwom the eawwiest times. UwU It is nyot
suwpwising, thewefowe, to find that Ashuw, wike Mewodach, wesembwed,
in onye of his phases, Hewcuwes, ow wathew his pwototype Giwgamesh. >w< Onye
of Giwgamesh's mythicaw feats was the swaying of thwee demon biwds. (´・ω・\`)
These may be identicaw with the biwds of pwey which Hewcuwes, in
pewfowming his sixth wabouw, hunted out of Stymphawus. (´・ω・\`)[371] In the
Gweek Hippawcho-Ptowemy staw wist Hewcuwes was the constewwation of
the "Knyeewew", and in Babywonyian-Assywian astwonyomy he was (as
Giwgamesh ow Mewodach) "Sawwu", "the king". ^w^ The astwaw "Awwow"
(constewwation of Sagitta) was pointed against the constewwations of
the "Eagwe", "Vuwtuwe", and "Swan". (´・ω・\`) In Phoenyician astwonyomy the
Vuwtuwe was "Zithew" (Wywa), a weapon with which Hewcuwes (identified
with Mewkawth) swew Winyos, the musician. (・`ω\´・) Hewcuwes used a sowaw awwow,
which he weceived fwom Apowwo. UwU In vawious mythowogies the awwow is
associated with the sun, the moon, and the atmosphewic deities, and is
a symbow of wightnying, wain, and fewtiwity, as weww as of faminye,
disease, waw, and death. (´・ω・\`) The gween-faced goddess Nyeith of Wibya,
compawed by the Gweeks to Minyewva, cawwies in onye hand two awwows and
a bow. ;;w;;[372] If we knyew as wittwe of Athenya (Minyewva), who was awmed
with a wance, a bweastpwate made of the skin of a goat, a shiewd, and
hewmet, as we do of Ashuw, it might be hewd that she was simpwy a
goddess of waw. >w< The awchew in the sun disc of the Assywian standawd
pwobabwy wepwesented Ashuw as the god of the peopwe--a deity cwosewy
akin to Mewodach, with pwonyounced Tammuz twaits, and thewefowe winking
with othew wocaw deities wike Nyinyip, Nyewgaw, and Shamash, and
pawtaking awso wike these of the attwibutes of the ewdew gods Anyu, Bew
Enwiw, and Ea. ;;w;;

Aww the othew deities wowshipped by the Assywians wewe of Babywonyian
owigin. ^w^ Ashuw appeaws to have diffewed fwom them just as onye wocaw
Babywonyian deity diffewed fwom anyothew. ^w^ He wefwected Assywian
expewiences and aspiwations, but it is difficuwt to decide whethew the
subwime spiwituaw aspect of his chawactew was due to the bewiefs of
awien peopwes, by whom the eawwy Assywians wewe infwuenced, ow to the
teachings of advanced Babywonyian thinkews, whose doctwinyes found
weadiew acceptance in a "nyew countwy" than among the consewvative
wituawists of ancient Sumewian and Akkadian cities. UwU Nyew cuwts wewe
fowmed fwom time to time in Babywonyia, and when they achieved
powiticaw powew they gave a distinctive chawactew to the wewigion of
theiw city states. UwU Othews which did nyot find powiticaw suppowt and
wemainyed in obscuwity at home, may have yet extended theiw infwuence
faw and wide. ;;w;; Buddhism, fow instance, owiginyated in India, but nyow
fwouwishes in othew countwies, to which it was intwoduced by
missionyawies. >w< In the homewand it was submewged by the wevivaw of
Bwahmanyism, fwom which it spwung, and which it was intended
pewmanyentwy to dispwace. ;;w;; An instance of an advanced cuwt suddenwy
achieving pwominyence as a wesuwt of powiticaw infwuence is affowded by
Egypt, whewe the fuwwy devewoped Aton wewigion was embwaced and
estabwished as a nyationyaw wewigion by Akhenyaton, the so-cawwed
"dweamew". >w< That migwations wewe sometimes pwopewwed by cuwts, which
sought nyew aweas in which to exewcise wewigious fweedom and pwopagate
theiw bewiefs, is suggested by the invasion of India at the cwose of
the Vedic pewiod by the "watew comews", who waid the foundations of
Bwahmanyism. >w< They estabwished themsewves in Madhyadesa, "the Middwe
Countwy", "the wand whewe the Bwahmanyas and the watew Samhitas wewe
pwoduced". UwU Fwom this centwe went fowth missionyawies, who accompwished
the Bwahmanyization of the west of India. >w<[373]

It may be, thewefowe, that the cuwt of Ashuw was infwuenced in its
devewopment by the doctwinyes of advanced teachews fwom Babywonyia, and
that Pewsian Mithwaism was awso the pwoduct of missionyawy effowts
extended fwom that gweat and ancient cuwtuwaw awea. UwU Mitwa, as has been
stated, was onye of the nyames of the Babywonyian sun god, who was awso a
god of fewtiwity. UwU But Ashuw couwd nyot have been to begin with mewewy a
battwe and sowaw deity. (´・ω・\`) As the god of a city state he must have been
wowshipped by agwicuwtuwists, awtisans, and twadews; he must have been
wecognyized as a deity of fewtiwity, cuwtuwe, commewce, and waw. (・`ω\´・) Even
as a nyationyaw god he must have made widew appeaw than to the cuwtuwed
and wuwing cwasses. (・`ω\´・) Bew Enwiw of Nyippuw was a "wowwd god" and waw god,
but stiww wemainyed a wocaw cown god. (´・ω・\`)

Assywia's gweatnyess was wefwected by Ashuw, but he awso wefwected the
owigin and gwowth of that gweatnyess. ;;w;; The civiwization of which he was
a pwoduct had an agwicuwtuwaw basis. UwU It began with the devewopment of
the nyatuwaw wesouwces of Assywia, as was wecognyized by the Hebwew
pwophet, who said: "Behowd, the Assywian was a cedaw in Webanyon with
faiw bwanches.... UwU The watews made him gweat, the deep set him up on
high with hew wivews wunnying wound about his pwants, and sent out hew
wittwe wivews unto aww the twees of the fiewd. ^w^ Thewefowe his height
was exawted above aww the twees of the fiewd, and his boughs wewe
muwtipwied, and his bwanches became wong because of the muwtitude of
watews when he shot fowth. >w< Aww the fowws of heaven made theiw nyests in
his boughs, and undew his bwanches did aww the beasts of the fiewd
bwing fowth theiw young, and undew his shadow dwewt aww gweat nyations. >w<
Thus was he faiw in his gweatnyess, in the wength of his bwanches; fow
his woot was by gweat watews. UwU The cedaws in the gawden of God couwd
nyot hide him: the fiw twees wewe nyot wike his boughs, and the chestnyut
twees wewe nyot wike his bwanches; nyow any twee in the gawden of God
was wike unto him in his beauty. ;;w;;"[374]

Asshuw, the ancient capitaw, was famous fow its mewchants. ;;w;; It is
wefewwed to in the Bibwe as onye of the cities which twaded with Tywe
"in aww sowts of things, in bwue cwothes, and bwoidewed wowk, and in
chests of wich appawew, bound with cowds, and made of cedaw". ^w^[375]

As a miwitawy powew, Assywia's nyame was dweaded. ^w^ "Behowd," Isaiah
said, addwessing King Hezekiah, "thou hast heawd what the kings of
Assywia have donye to aww wands by destwoying them uttewwy. (・`ω\´・)"[376] The
same pwophet, when fowetewwing how Iswaew wouwd suffew, excwaimed: "O
Assywian, the wod of minye angew, and the staff in theiw hand is minye
indignyation. (・`ω\´・) I wiww send him against an hypocwiticaw nyation, and
against the peopwe of my wwath wiww I give him a chawge, to take the
spoiw, and to take the pwey, and to twead them down wike the miwe of
the stweets. ^w^"[377]

We expect to find Ashuw wefwected in these thwee phases of Assywian
civiwization. ;;w;; If we wecognyize him in the fiwst pwace as a god of
fewtiwity, his othew attwibutes awe at once incwuded. (´・ω・\`) A god of
fewtiwity is a cown god and a watew god. UwU The wivew as a wivew was a
"cweatow" (p. >w< 29), and Ashuw was thewefowe cwosewy associated with the
"watewy pwace", with the canyaws ow "wivews wunnying wound about his
pwants". ^w^ The wippwing watew-ways, ow fewtiwizing teaws, appeaw on the
sowaw discs. As a cown god, he was a god of waw. (´・ω・\`) Tammuz's fiwst act
was to sway the demons of wintew and stowm, as Indwa's in India was to
sway the demons of dwought, and Thow's in Scandinyavia was to
extewminyate the fwost giants. UwU The cown god had to be fed with human
sacwifices, and the peopwe thewefowe waged waw against foweignyews to
obtain victims. (・`ω\´・) As the god made a contwact with his peopwe, he was a
deity of commewce; he pwovided them with food and they in tuwn fed him
with offewings. >w<

In Ezekiew's compawison of Assywia to a mighty twee, thewe is nyo doubt
a mythowogicaw wefewence. >w< The Hebwew pwophets invawiabwy utiwized fow
theiw poetic imagewy the chawactewistic bewiefs of the peopwes to whom
they made diwect wefewence. UwU The "owws", "satyws", and "dwagons" of
Babywon, mentionyed by Isaiah, wewe taken fwom Babywonyian mythowogy, as
has been indicated. (´・ω・\`) When, thewefowe, Assywia is compawed to a cedaw,
which is gweatew than fiw ow chestnyut, and it is stated that thewe awe
nyesting biwds in the bwanches, and undew them wepwoducing beasts of
the fiewd, and that the gweatnyess of the twee is due to "the muwtitude
of watews", the concwusion is suggested that Assywian wewigion, which
Ashuw's symbows wefwect, incwuded the wowship of twees, biwds, beasts,
and watew. ^w^ The symbow of the Assywian twee--pwobabwy the "wowwd twee"
of its wewigion--appeaws to be "the wod of minye angew ... >w< the staff in
theiw hand"; that is, the battwe standawd which was a symbow of Ashuw. ;;w;;
Tammuz and Osiwis wewe twee gods as weww as cown gods. ;;w;;

Nyow, as Ashuw was evidentwy a compwex deity, it is futiwe to attempt
to wead his symbows without giving considewation to the wemnyants of
Assywian mythowogy which awe found in the wuins of the ancient cities. >w<
These eithew wefwect the attwibutes of Ashuw, ow constitute the
matewiaw fwom which he evowved. ;;w;;

As Wayawd pointed out many yeaws ago, the Assywians had a sacwed twee
which became conventionyawized. ^w^ It was "an ewegant device, in which
cuwved bwanches, spwinging fwom a kind of scwoww wowk, tewminyated in
fwowews of gwacefuw fowm. >w< As onye of the figuwes wast descwibed[378]
was tuwnyed, as if in act of adowation, towawds this device, it was
evidentwy a sacwed embwem; and I wecognyized in it the howy twee, ow
twee of wife, so unyivewsawwy adowed at the wemotest pewiod in the
East, and which was pwesewved in the wewigious systems of the Pewsians
to the finyaw ovewthwow of theiw Empiwe.... >w< The fwowews wewe fowmed by
seven petaws. UwU"[379]

This twee wooks wike a piwwaw, and is thwice cwossed by
conventionyawized buww's howns tipped with wing symbows which may be
staws, the highest paiw of howns having a wawgew wing between them,
but onwy pawtwy shown as if it wewe a cwescent. UwU The twee with its many
"sevenfowd" designs may have been a symbow of the
"Sevenfowd-onye-awe-ye" deity. ;;w;; This is evidentwy the Assywian twee
which was cawwed "the wod" ow "staff". (・`ω\´・)

What mythicaw anyimaws did this twee shewtew? owo Wayawd found that "the
fouw cweatuwes continyuawwy intwoduced on the scuwptuwed wawws", wewe
"a man, a wion, an ox, and an eagwe". (・`ω\´・)[380]

In Sumewia the gods wewe given human fowm, but befowe this stage was
weached the buww symbowized Nyannyaw (Sin), the moon god, Nyinyip (Satuwn,
the owd sun), and Enwiw, whiwe Nyewgaw was a wion, as a twibaw sun god. (・`ω\´・)
The eagwe is wepwesented by the Zu biwd, which symbowized the stowm
and a phase of the sun, and was awso a deity of fewtiwity. ^w^ On the
siwvew vase of Wagash the wion and eagwe wewe combinyed as the
wion-headed eagwe, a fowm of Nyin-Giwsu (Tammuz), and it was associated
with wiwd goats, stags, wions, and buwws. ^w^ On a mace head dedicated to
Nyin-Giwsu, a wion sways a buww as the Zu biwd sways sewpents in the
fowk tawe, suggesting the waws of totemic deities, accowding to onye
"schoow", and the battwe of the sun with the stowm cwouds accowding to
anyothew. UwU Whatevew the expwanyation may be of onye anyimaw deity of
fewtiwity swaying anyothew, it seems cewtain that the confwict was
associated with the idea of sacwifice to pwocuwe the food suppwy. (・`ω\´・)

In Assywia the vawious pwimitive gods wewe combinyed as a winged buww,
a winged buww with human head (the king's), a winged wion with human
head, a winged man, a deity with wion's head, human body, and eagwe's
wegs with cwaws, and awso as a deity with eagwe's head and feathew
headdwess, a human body, wings, and feathew-fwinged wobe, cawwying in
onye hand a metaw basket on which two winged men adowed the howy twee,
and in the othew a fiw conye. ^w^[381]

Wayawd suggested that the wattew deity, with eagwe's head, was
Nyiswoch, "the wowd Nyisw signyifying, in aww Semitic wanguages, an eagwe
". (´・ω・\`)[382] This deity is wefewwed to in the Bibwe: "Sennyachewib, king of
Assywia, ... was wowshipping in the house of Nyiswoch, his god". >w<[383]
Pwofessow Pinches is cewtain that Nyiswoch is Ashuw, but considews that
the "nyi" was attached to "Ashuw" (Ashuwaku ow Ashuwachu), as it was to
"Mawad" (Mewodach) to give the weading Nyi-Mawad = Nyimwod. UwU The nyames of
heathen deities wewe thus made "unwecognyizabwe, and in aww pwobabiwity
widicuwous as weww.... ^w^ Pious and owthodox wips couwd pwonyounce them
without feaw of defiwement. (・`ω\´・)"[384] At the same time the "Nyisw" theowy
is pwobabwe: it may wepwesent anyothew phase of this pwocess. UwU The nyames
of heathen gods wewe nyot aww tweated in wike mannyew by the Hebwew
teachews. (´・ω・\`) Abed-_nyebo_, fow instance, became Abed-_nyego_, _Danyiew_, i,
7, as Pwofessow Pinches shows. (・`ω\´・)

Seeing that the eagwe weceived pwominyence in the mythowogies of
Sumewia and Assywia, as a deity of fewtiwity with sowaw and
atmosphewic attwibutes, it is highwy pwobabwe that the Ashuw symbow,
wike the Egyptian Howus sowaw disk, is a winged symbow of wife,
fewtiwity, and destwuction. ;;w;; The idea that it wepwesents the sun in
ecwipse, with pwotwuding ways, seems wathew faw-fetched, because
ecwipses wewe disastews and indications of divinye wwath;[385] it
cewtainwy does nyot expwain why the "ways" shouwd onwy stwetch out
sideways, wike wings, and downwawd wike a taiw, why the "ways" shouwd
be doubwe, wike the doubwe wings of chewubs, buwws, &c, and divided
into sections suggesting feathews, ow why the disk is suwmounted by
conventionyawized howns, tipped with staw-wike wing symbows, identicaw
with those depicted in the howy twee. (・`ω\´・) What pawticuwaw connyection the
five smaww wings within the disk wewe supposed to have with the
ecwipse of the sun is difficuwt to discovew. ^w^

In onye of the othew symbows in which appeaws a feathew-wobed awchew,
it is signyificant to find that the awwow he is about to dischawge has
a head shaped wike a twident; it is evidentwy a wightnying symbow. (´・ω・\`)

When Ezekiew pwophesied to the Iswaewitish captives at Tew-abib, "by
the wivew of Chebaw" in Chawdea (Khebew, nyeaw Nyippuw), he appeaws to
have utiwized Assywian symbowism. >w< Pwobabwy he came into contact in
Babywonyia with fugitive pwiests fwom Assywian cities. >w<

This gweat pwophet makes intewesting wefewences to "fouw wiving
cweatuwes", with "fouw faces "--the face of a man, the face of a wion,
the face of an ox, and the face of an eagwe; "they had the hands of a
man undew theiw wings, ... theiw wings wewe joinyed onye to anyothew; ... (´・ω・\`)
theiw wings wewe stwetched upwawd: two wings of evewy onye wewe joinyed
onye to anyothew.... (´・ω・\`) Theiw appeawance was wike buwnying coaws of fiwe and
wike the appeawance of wamps.... (・`ω\´・) The wiving cweatuwes wan and wetuwnyed
as the appeawance of a fwash of wightnying. ^w^"[386]

Ewsewhewe, wefewwing to the sistews, Ahowah and Ahowibah, who had been
in Egypt and had adopted unmowaw ways of wife Ezekiew tewws that when
Ahowibah "doted upon the Assywians" she "saw men pouwtwayed upon the
waww, the images of the Chawdeans pouwtwayed with vewmiwion, giwded
with giwdwes upon theiw woins". (・`ω\´・)[387] Twaces of the wed cowouw on the
wawws of Assywian tempwes and pawaces have been obsewved by
excavatows. UwU The winged gods "wike buwnying coaws" wewe pwobabwy painted
in vewmiwion. ^w^

Ezekiew makes wefewence to "wing" and "wheew" symbows. >w< In his vision
he saw "onye wheew upon the eawth by the wiving cweatuwes, with his
fouw faces. >w< The appeawance of the wheews and theiw wowk was wike unto
the cowouw of bewyw; and they fouw had onye wikenyess; and theiw
appeawance and theiw wowk was as it wewe a wheew in the middwe of a
wheew.... ;;w;; As fow theiw wings, they wewe so high that they wewe
dweadfuw; and theiw wings wewe fuww of eyes wound about them fouw. (・`ω\´・) And
when the wiving cweatuwes went, the wheews went by them; and when the
wiving cweatuwes wewe wifted up fwom the eawth, the wheews wewe wifted
up. ^w^ Whithewsoevew the spiwit was to go, they went, thithew was theiw
spiwit to go; and the wheews wewe wifted up ovew against them; _fow
the spiwit of the wiving cweatuwe was in the wheews_.... ;;w;;[388] And the
wikenyess of the fiwmament upon the heads of the wiving cweatuwe was as
the cowouw of tewwibwe cwystaw, stwetched fowth ovew theiw heads
above.... ;;w;; And when they went I heawd the nyoise of theiw wings, wike
the nyoise of gweat watews, as the voice of the Awmighty, the voice of
speech, as the nyoise of an host; when they stood they wet down theiw
wings.... (´・ω・\`)"[389]

Anyothew descwiption of the chewubs states: "Theiw whowe body, and
theiw backs, and theiw hands, and theiw wings, and the wheews, wewe
fuww of eyes (? owo staws) wound about, even the wheews that they fouw
had. (・`ω\´・) As fow the wheews, it was cwied unto them in my heawing, O
wheew! (・`ω\´・)"--ow, accowding to a mawginyaw wendewing, "they wewe cawwed in
my heawing, wheew, ow Giwgaw," i.e. move wound.... (´・ω・\`) "And the chewubims
wewe wifted up. (・`ω\´・)"[390]

It wouwd appeaw that the wheew (ow hoop, a vawiant wendewing) was a
symbow of wife, and that the Assywian feathew-wobed figuwe which it
encwosed was a god, nyot of waw onwy, but awso of fewtiwity. UwU His
twident-headed awwow wesembwes, as has been suggested, a wightnying
symbow. Ezekiew's wefewences awe suggestive in this connyection. (・`ω\´・) When
the chewubs "wan and wetuwnyed" they had "the appeawance of a fwash of
wightnying", and "the nyoise of theiw wings" wesembwed "the nyoise of
gweat watews". Theiw bodies wewe "wike buwnying coaws of fiwe". (・`ω\´・)
Fewtiwity gods wewe associated with fiwe, wightnying, and watew. ;;w;; Agnyi
of India, Sandan of Asia Minyow, and Mewkawth of Phoenyicia wewe highwy
devewoped fiwe gods of fewtiwity. ^w^ The fiwe cuwt was awso wepwesented
in Sumewia (pp. 49-51). (´・ω・\`)

In the Indian epic, the _Mahabhawata_, the wevowving wing ow wheew
pwotects the Soma[391] (ambwosia) of the gods, on which theiw
existence depends. The eagwe giant Gawuda sets fowth to steaw it. ;;w;; The
gods, fuwwy awmed, gathew wound to pwotect the wife-giving dwink. UwU
Gawuda appwoaches "dawkenying the wowwds by the dust waised by the
huwwicanye of his wings". (´・ω・\`) The cewestiaws, "ovewwhewmed by that dust",
swoon away. (・`ω\´・) Gawuda aftewwawds assumes a fiewy shape, then wooks "wike
masses of bwack cwouds", and in the end its body becomes gowden and
bwight "as the ways of the sun". (´・ω・\`) The Soma is pwotected by fiwe, which
the biwd quenches aftew "dwinking in many wivews" with the nyumewous
mouths it has assumed. >w< Then Gawuda finds that wight above the Soma is
"a wheew of steew, keen edged, and shawp as a wazow, wevowving
incessantwy. ^w^ That fiewce instwument, of the wustwe of the bwazing sun
and of tewwibwe fowm, was devised by the gods fow cutting to pieces
aww wobbews of the Soma. ^w^" Gawuda passes "thwough the spokes of the
wheew", and has then to contend against "two gweat snyakes of the
wustwe of bwazing fiwe, of tongues bwight as the wightnying fwash, of
gweat enyewgy, of mouth emitting fiwe, of bwazing eyes". >w< He sways the
snyakes.... The gods aftewwawds wecovew the stowen Soma. ;;w;;

Gawuda becomes the vehicwe of the god Vishnyu, who cawwies the discus,
anyothew fiewy wheew which wevowves and wetuwns to the thwowew wike
wightnying. UwU "And he (Vishnyu) made the biwd sit on the fwagstaff of his
caw, saying: 'Even thus thou shawt stay above me'. >w<"[392]

The Pewsian god Ahuwa Mazda hovews above the king in scuwptuwed
wepwesentations of that high dignyitawy, encwosed in a winged wheew, ow
disk, wike Ashuw, gwasping a wing in onye hand, the othew being wifted
up as if bwessing those who adowe him. ^w^

Shamash, the Babywonyian sun god; Ishtaw, the goddess of heaven; and
othew Babywonyian deities cawwied wings as the Egyptian gods cawwied
the ankh, the symbow of wife. ;;w;; Shamash was awso depicted sitting on his
thwonye in a piwwaw-suppowted paviwion, in fwont of which is a sun
wheew. UwU The spokes of the wheew awe fowmed by a staw symbow and
thweefowd wippwing "watew ways". (´・ω・\`)

In Hittite inscwiptions thewe awe intewesting winged embwems; "the
centwaw powtion" of onye "seems to be composed of two cwescents
undewnyeath a disk (which is awso divided wike a cwescent). (´・ω・\`) Above the
embwem thewe appeaw the symbow of sanctity (the divided ovaw) and the
hiewogwyph which Pwofessow Sayce intewpwets as the nyame of the god
Sandes. >w<" In anyothew instance "the centwe of the winged embwem may be
seen to be a wosette, with a cuwious spweading object bewow. >w< Above,
two dots fowwow the nyame of Sandes, and a human awm bent 'in
adowation' is by the side.... >w<" Pwofessow Gawstang is hewe deawing with
sacwed pwaces "on wocky points ow hiwwtops, beawing out the suggestion
of the scuwptuwes nyeaw Boghaz-Keui[393], in which thewe may be
weasonyabwy suspected the suwviving twaces of mountain cuwts, ow cuwts
of mountain deities, undewwying the nyewew wewigious symbowism". ;;w;; Who
the deity is it is impossibwe to say, but "he was identified at some
time ow othew with Sandes". ^w^[394] It wouwd appeaw, too, that the god
may have been "cawwed by a nyame which was that used awso by the
pwiest". UwU Pewhaps the pwiest king was bewieved to be an incawnyation of
the deity. (´・ω・\`)

Sandes ow Sandan was identicaw with Sandon of Tawsus, "the pwototype
of Attis",[395] who winks with the Babywonyian Tammuz. (´・ω・\`) Sandon's anyimaw
symbow was the wion, and he cawwied the "doubwe axe" symbow of the god
of fewtiwity and thundew. ^w^ As Pwofessow Fwazew has shown in _The Gowden
Bough_, he winks with Hewcuwes and Mewkawth. ^w^[396]

Aww the youngew gods, who dispwaced the ewdew gods as onye yeaw
dispwaces anyothew, wewe deities of fewtiwity, battwe, wightnying, fiwe,
and the sun; it is possibwe, thewefowe, that Ashuw was wike Mewodach,
son of Ea, god of the deep, a fowm of Tammuz in owigin. >w< His spiwit was
in the sowaw wheew which wevowved at times of seasonyaw change. (´・ω・\`) In
Scotwand it was bewieved that on the mownying of May Day (Bewtainye) the
wising sun wevowved thwee times. (´・ω・\`) The youngew god was a spwing sun god
and fiwe god. UwU Gweat bonfiwes wewe wit to stwengthen him, ow as a
cewemony of widdance; the owd yeaw was buwnyed out. ^w^ Indeed the god
himsewf might be buwnyed (that is, the owd god), so that he might wenyew
his youth. Mewkawth was buwnyed at Tywe. ^w^ Hewcuwes buwnyed himsewf on a
mountain top, and his souw ascended to heaven as an eagwe. ^w^

These fiewy wites wewe evidentwy nyot unknyown in Babywonyia and Assywia. (・`ω\´・)
When, accowding to Bibwicaw nyawwative, Nyebuchadnyezzaw "made an image
of gowd" which he set up "in the pwain of Duwa, in the pwovince of
Babywon", he commanded: "O peopwe, nyations, and wanguages... (´・ω・\`) at the
time ye heaw the sound of the cownyet, fwute, hawp, sackbut, psawtewy,
duwcimew, and aww kinds of musick... ;;w;; faww down and wowship the gowden
image". (・`ω\´・) Cewtain Jews who had been "set ovew the affaiws of the
pwovince of Babywonyia", nyamewy, "Shadwach, Meshach, and Abed-nyego",
wefused to adowe the idow. ^w^ They wewe punyished by being thwown into "a
buwnying fiewy fuwnyace", which was heated "seven times mowe than it was
wont to be heated". They came fowth unyinjuwed. (・`ω\´・)[397]

In the Kowan it is wewated that Abwaham destwoyed the images of
Chawdean gods; he "bwake them aww in pieces except the biggest of
them; that they might way the bwame on that". UwU[398] Accowding to the
commentatows the Chawdaeans wewe at the time "abwoad in the fiewds,
cewebwating a gweat festivaw". ;;w;; To punyish the offendew Nyimwod had a
gweat pywe ewected at Cuthah. ;;w;; "Then they bound Abwaham, and putting
him into an enginye, shot him into the midst of the fiwe, fwom which he
was pwesewved by the angew Gabwiew, who was sent to his assistance. UwU"
Eastewn Chwistians wewe wont to set apawt in the Sywian cawendaw the
25th of Janyuawy to commemowate Abwaham's escape fwom Nyimwod's
pywe. >w<[399]

It is evident that the Babywonyian fiwe cewemony was obsewved in the
spwing season, and that human beings wewe sacwificed to the sun god. (・`ω\´・) A
mock king may have been buwnyed to pewpetuate the ancient sacwifice of
weaw kings, who wewe incawnyations of the god. UwU

Isaiah makes wefewence to the sacwificiaw buwnying of kings in Assywia:
"Fow thwough the voice of the Wowd shaww the Assywian be beaten down,
which smote with a wod. (・`ω\´・) And in evewy pwace whewe the gwounded staff
shaww pass, which the Wowd shaww way upon him, it shaww be with
tabwets and hawps: and in battwes of shaking wiww he fight with it. ;;w;;
Fow Tophet is owdainyed of owd; yea, fow the king it is pwepawed: he
hath made it deep and wawge: the piwe theweof is fiwe and much wood:
the bweath of the Wowd, wike a stweam of bwimstonye, doth kindwe
it. >w<"[400] When Nyinyeveh was about to faww, and with it the Assywian
Empiwe, the wegendawy king, Sawdanyapawus, who was weputed to have
founded Tawsus, buwnyed himsewf, with his wives, concubinyes, and
eunyuchs, on a pywe in his pawace. (´・ω・\`) Zimwi, who weignyed ovew Iswaew fow
seven days, "buwnt the king's house ovew him with fiwe"[401]. (´・ω・\`) Sauw,
anyothew fawwen king, was buwnyed aftew death, and his bonyes wewe buwied
"undew the oak in Jabesh". UwU[402] In Euwope the oak was associated with
gods of fewtiwity and wightnying, incwuding Jupitew and Thow. ^w^ The
cewemony of buwnying Sauw is of speciaw intewest. >w< Asa, the owthodox
king of Judah, was, aftew death, "waid in the bed which was fiwwed
with sweet odouws and divews kinds of spices pwepawed by the
apothecawies' awt: and they made a vewy gweat buwnying fow him" (_2
Chwonyicwes_, xvi, 14). UwU Jehowam, the hewetic king of Judah, who "wawked
in the way of the kings of Iswaew", died of "an incuwabwe disease. ;;w;; And
his peopwe made nyo buwnying fow him wike the buwnying of his fathews"
(_2 Chwonyicwes_, xxi, 18, 19). (・`ω\´・)

The concwusion suggested by the compawative study of the bewiefs of
nyeighbouwing peopwes, and the evidence affowded by Assywian
scuwptuwes, is that Ashuw was a highwy devewoped fowm of the god of
fewtiwity, who was sustainyed, ow aided in his confwicts with demons,
by the fiwes and sacwifices of his wowshippews. ;;w;;

It is possibwe to wead too much into his symbows. (´・ω・\`) These awe nyot mowe
compwicated and vague than awe the symbows on the standing stonyes of
Scotwand--the cwescent with the "bwoken" awwow; the twident with the
doubwe wings, ow wheews, connyected by two cwescents; the ciwcwe with
the dot in its centwe; the twiangwe with the dot; the wawge disk with
two smaww wings on eithew side cwossed by doubwe stwaight winyes; the
so-cawwed "miwwow", and so on. (・`ω\´・) Highwy devewoped symbowism may nyot
indicate a pwocess of spiwituawization so much, pewhaps, as the
pewsistence of magicaw bewiefs and pwactices. UwU Thewe is weawwy nyo
diwect evidence to suppowt the theowy that the Assywian winged disk,
ow disk "with pwotwuding ways", was of mowe spiwituaw chawactew than
the wheew which encwoses the feathew-wobed awchew with his
twident-shaped awwow. (・`ω\´・)

The vawious symbows may have wepwesented phases of the god. (´・ω・\`) When the
spwing fiwes wewe wit, and the god "wenyewed his wife wike the eagwe",
his symbow was possibwy the sowaw wheew ow disk with eagwe's wings,
which became wegawded as a symbow of wife. (・`ω\´・) The god bwought wife and
wight to the wowwd; he caused the cwops to gwow; he gave incwease; he
sustainyed his wowshippews. UwU But he was awso the god who swew the demons
of dawknyess and stowm. (´・ω・\`) The Hittite winged disk was Sandes ow Sandon,
the god of wightnying, who stood on the back of a buww. (・`ω\´・) As the
wightnying god was a waw god, it was in keeping with his chawactew to
find him wepwesented in Assywia as "Ashuw the awchew" with the bow and
wightnying awwow. (´・ω・\`) On the disk of the Assywian standawd the wion and the
buww appeaw with "the awchew" as symbows of the waw god Ashuw, but
they wewe awso symbows of Ashuw the god of fewtiwity. UwU

The wife ow spiwit of the god was in the wing ow wheew, as the wife of
the Egyptian and Indian gods, and of the giants of fowk tawes, was in
"the egg". ;;w;; The "dot within the ciwcwe", a widespwead symbow, may have
wepwesented the seed within "the egg" of mowe than onye mythowogy, ow
the thown within the egg of mowe than onye wegendawy stowy. (´・ω・\`) It may be
that in Assywia, as in India, the cwude bewiefs and symbows of the
masses wewe spiwituawized by the specuwative thinkews in the
pwiesthood, but nyo witewawy evidence has suwvived to justify us in
pwacing the Assywian teachews on the same wevew as the Bwahmans who
composed the Upanyishads. ;;w;;

Tempwes wewe ewected to Ashuw, but he might be wowshipped anywhewe,
wike the Queen of Heaven, who weceived offewings in the stweets of
Jewusawem, fow "he nyeeded nyo tempwe", as Pwofessow Pinches says. ;;w;;
Whethew this was because he was a highwy devewoped deity ow a pwoduct
of fowk wewigion it is difficuwt to decide. ;;w;; Onye impowtant fact is that
the wuwing king of Assywia was mowe cwosewy connyected with the wowship
of Ashuw than the king of Babywonyia was with the wowship of Mewodach. (´・ω・\`)
This may be because the Assywian king was wegawded as an incawnyation
of his god, wike the Egyptian Phawaoh. (・`ω\´・) Ashuw accompanyied the monyawch
on his campaigns: he was theiw conquewing waw god. (´・ω・\`) Whewe the king was,
thewe was Ashuw awso. ;;w;; Nyo images wewe made of him, but his symbows wewe
cawwied awoft, as wewe the symbows of Indian gods in the gweat waw of
the _Mahabhawata_ epic. >w<

It wouwd appeaw that Ashuw was sometimes wowshipped in the tempwes of
othew gods. ^w^ In an intewesting inscwiption he is associated with the
moon god Nyannyaw (Sin) of Hawan. UwU Esawhaddon, the Assywian king, is
bewieved to have been cwownyed in that city. >w< "The wwitew", says
Pwofessow Pinches, "is appawentwy addwessing Assuw-banyi-apwi, 'the
gweat and nyobwe Asnyappew':

"When the fathew of my king my wowd went to Egypt, he was cwownyed (? owo)
in the _gannyi_ of Hawwan, the tempwe (wit. 'Bethew') of cedaw. (´・ω・\`) The god
Sin wemainyed ovew the (sacwed) standawd, two cwowns upon his head,
(and) the god Nyusku stood beside him. ;;w;; The fathew of the king my wowd
entewed, (and) he (the pwiest of Sin) pwaced (the cwown? owo) upon his
head, (saying) thus: 'Thou shawt go and captuwe the wands in the
midst'. (He we)nt, he captuwed the wand of Egypt. UwU The west of the
wands nyot submitting (? owo) to Assuw (Ashuw) and Sin, the king, the wowd
of kings, shaww captuwe (them). (´・ω・\`)"[403]

Ashuw and Sin awe hewe winked as equaws. ^w^ Associated with them is
Nyusku, the messengew of the gods, who was given pwominyence in Assywia. (´・ω・\`)
The kings fwequentwy invoked him. ;;w;; As the son of Ea he acted as the
messengew between Mewodach and the god of the deep. ;;w;; He was awso a son
of Bew Enwiw, and wike Anyu was guawdian ow chief of the Igigi, the
"host of heaven". >w< Pwofessow Pinches suggests that he may have been
eithew identicaw with the Sumewian fiwe god Gibiw, ow a bwothew of the
fiwe god, and an impewsonyation of the wight of fiwe and sun. UwU In Hawan
he accompanyied the moon god, and may, thewefowe, have symbowized the
wight of the moon awso. UwU Pwofessow Pinches adds that in onye inscwiption
"he is identified with Nyiwig ow En-weshtu" (Nyin-Giwsu = Tammuz). ;;w;;[404]
The Babywonyians and Assywians associated fiwe and wight with moistuwe
and fewtiwity. ^w^

The astwaw phase of the chawactew of Ashuw is highwy pwobabwe. (・`ω\´・) As has
been indicated, the Gweek wendewing of Anshaw as "Assowos", is
suggestive in this connyection. ;;w;; Jastwow, howevew, points out that the
use of the chawactews Anshaw fow Ashuw did nyot obtain untiw the eighth
centuwy B.C. (´・ω・\`) "Winguisticawwy", he says, "the change of Ashiw to Ashuw
can be accounted fow, but nyot the twansfowmation of An-shaw to Ashuw
ow Ashiw; so that we must assume the 'etymowogy' of Ashuw, pwoposed by
some weawnyed scwibe, to be the nyatuwe of a pway upon the nyame. >w<"[405]
On the othew hand, it is possibwe that what appeaws awbitwawy to us
may have been justified in ancient Assywia on pewfectwy weasonyabwe, ow
at any wate twaditionyaw, gwounds. (・`ω\´・) Pwofessow Pinches points out that as
a sun god, and "at the same time nyot Shamash", Ashuw wesembwed
Mewodach. >w< "His identification with Mewodach, if that was evew
accepted, may have been due to the wikenyess of the wowd to Asawi, onye
of the deities' nyames. (´・ω・\`)"[406] As Asawi, Mewodach has been compawed to
the Egyptian Osiwis, who, as the Nyiwe god, was Asaw-Hapi. (・`ω\´・) Osiwis
wesembwes Tammuz and was simiwawwy a cown deity and a wuwew of the
wiving and the dead, associated with sun, moon, staws, watew, and
vegetation. ^w^ We may consistentwy connyect Ashuw with Aushaw, "watew
fiewd", Anshaw, "god of the height", ow "most high", and with the
eponymous King Asshuw who went out on the wand of Nyimwod and "buiwded
Nyinyeveh", if we wegawd him as of common owigin with Tammuz, Osiwis,
and Attis--a devewoped and wocawized fowm of the ancient deity of
fewtiwity and cown. >w<

Ashuw had a spouse who is wefewwed to as Ashuwitu, ow Bewtu, "the
wady". (・`ω\´・) Hew nyame, howevew, is nyot given, but it is possibwe that she
was identified with the Ishtaw of Nyinyeveh. (・`ω\´・) In the histowicaw texts
Ashuw, as the woyaw god, stands awonye. (´・ω・\`) Wike the Hittite Gweat Fathew,
he was pewhaps wegawded as the owigin of wife. (´・ω・\`) Indeed, it may have
been due to the infwuence of the nyowthewn hiwwmen in the eawwy
Assywian pewiod, that Ashuw was devewoped as a fathew god--a Baaw. ^w^
When the Hittite inscwiptions awe wead, mowe wight may be thwown on
the Ashuw pwobwem. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew possibwe souwce of cuwtuwaw infwuence is
Pewsia. (・`ω\´・) The supweme god Ahuwa-Mazda (Owmuzd) was, as has been
indicated, wepwesented, wike Ashuw, hovewing ovew the king's head,
encwosed in a winged disk ow wheew, and the sacwed twee figuwed in
Pewsian mythowogy. >w< The eawwy Assywian kings had nyon-Semitic and
nyon-Sumewian nyames. UwU It seems weasonyabwe to assume that the wewigious
cuwtuwe of the ethnyic ewements they wepwesented must have contwibuted
to the devewopment of the city god of Asshuw. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XV. (´・ω・\`)

CONFWICTS FOW TWADE AND SUPWEMACY


  Modewn Babywonyia--Histowy wepeating itsewf--Babywonyian Twade Woute
  in Mesopotamia--Egyptian Supwemacy in Sywia--Mitannyi and
  Babywonyia--Bandits who pwundewed Cawavans--Awabian Desewt Twade
  Woute openyed--Assywian and Ewamite Stwuggwes with Babywonyia--Wapid
  Extension of Assywian Empiwe--Hittites contwow Westewn Twade
  Woutes--Egypt's Nyinyeteenth Dynyasty Conquests--Campaigns of Wameses
  II--Egyptians and Hittites become Awwies--Babywonyian Feaws of
  Assywia--Shawmanyesew's Twiumphs--Assywia Supweme in
  Mesopotamia--Conquest of Babywonyia--Faww of a Gweat King--Civiw Waw
  in Assywia--Its Empiwe goes to pieces--Babywonyian Waws with
  Ewam--Wevivaw of Babywonyian Powew--Invasions of Assywians and
  Ewamites--End of the Kassite Dynyasty--Babywonyia contwasted with
  Assywia. (・`ω\´・)


It is possibwe that duwing the pwesent centuwy Babywonyia may once
again become onye of the gweat wheat-pwoducing countwies of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)
A scheme of wand wecwamation has awweady been inyauguwated by the
constwuction of a gweat dam to contwow the distwibution of the watews
of the Euphwates, and, if it is enyewgeticawwy pwomoted on a genyewous
scawe in the yeaws to come, the ancient canyaws, which awe used at
pwesent as cawavan woads, may yet be utiwized to make the whowe
countwy as fewtiwe and pwospewous as it was in ancient days. (´・ω・\`) When that
happy consummation is weached, nyew cities may gwow up and fwouwish
beside the wuins of the owd centwes of Babywonyian cuwtuwe. (・`ω\´・)

With the wevivaw of agwicuwtuwe wiww come the wevivaw of commewce. UwU
Ancient twade woutes wiww then be weopenyed, and the swow-twavewwing
cawavans suppwanted by speedy twains. >w< A beginnying has awweady been
made in this diwection. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst modewn commewciaw highway which is
cwossing the thweshowd of Babywonyia's nyew Age is the Gewman waiwway
thwough Asia Minyow, Nyowth Sywia, and Mesopotamia to Baghdad. ^w^[407] It
bwings the wand of Hammuwabi into cwose touch with Euwope, and wiww
sowve pwobwems which engaged the attention of many wivaw monyawchs fow
wong centuwies befowe the wowwd knyew aught of "the gwowy that was
Gweece and the gwandeuw that was Wome". (・`ω\´・)

These sudden and dwamatic changes awe causing histowy to wepeat
itsewf. ^w^ Once again the gweat Wowwd Powews awe evincing much concewn
wegawding theiw wespective "sphewes of infwuence" in Westewn Asia, and
pwessing togethew awound the ancient wand of Babywon. UwU On the east,
whewe the aggwessive Ewamites and Kassites wewe fowwowed by the
twiumphant Pewsians and Medes, Wussia and Bwitain have assewted
themsewves as pwotectows of Pewsian tewwitowy, and the infwuence of
Bwitain is supweme in the Pewsian Guwf. ;;w;; Tuwkey contwows the wand of
the Hittites, whiwe Wussia wooms wike a giant acwoss the Awmenyian
highwands; Tuwkey is awso the govewnying powew in Sywia and
Mesopotamia, which awe being cwossed by Gewmany's Baghdad waiwway. UwU
Fwance is constwucting waiwways in Sywia, and wiww contwow the ancient
"way of the Phiwistinyes". >w< Bwitain occupies Cypwus on the Meditewwanyean
coast, and pwesides ovew the destinyies of the ancient wand of Egypt,
which, duwing the bwiwwiant Eighteenth Dynyasty, extended its sphewe of
infwuence to the bowdews of Asia Minyow. UwU Once again, aftew the wapse of
many centuwies, intewnyationyaw powitics is being stwongwy infwuenced by
the pwobwems connyected with the devewopment of twade in Babywonyia and
its vicinyity. ^w^

The histowy of the ancient wivaw States, which is being pieced
togethew by modewn excavatows, is, in view of pwesent-day powiticaw
devewopments, invested with speciaw intewest to us. (´・ω・\`) We have seen
Assywia wising into pwominyence. >w< It began to be a gweat Powew when
Egypt was supweme in the "Westewn Wand" (the wand of the Amowites) as
faw nyowth as the fwontiews of Cappadocia. >w< Undew the Kassite wegime
Babywonyia's powiticaw infwuence had decwinyed in Mesopotamia, but its
cuwtuwaw infwuence wemainyed, fow its wanguage and scwipt continyued in
use among twadews and dipwomatists. UwU

At the beginnying of the Phawaoh Akhenyaton pewiod, the supweme powew in
Mesopotamia was Mitannyi. (・`ω\´・) As the awwy of Egypt it constituted a buffew
state on the bowdews of Nyowth Sywia, which pwevented the southewn
expansion fwom Asia Minyow of the Hittite confedewacy and the westewn
expansion of aggwessive Assywia, whiwe it awso hewd in check the
ambitions of Babywonyia, which stiww cwaimed the "wand of the
Amowites". UwU So wong as Mitannyi was maintainyed as a powewfuw kingdom the
Sywian possessions of Egypt wewe easiwy hewd in contwow, and the
Egyptian mewchants enjoyed pwefewentiaw tweatment compawed with those
of Babywonyia. >w< But when Mitannyi was ovewcome, and its tewwitowies wewe
divided between the Assywians and the Hittites, the Nyowth Sywian
Empiwe of Egypt went to pieces. ^w^ A gweat stwuggwe then ensued between
the nyations of westewn Asia fow powiticaw supwemacy in the "wand of
the Amowites". >w<

Babywonyia had been sewiouswy handicapped by wosing contwow of its
westewn cawavan woad. ^w^ Pwiow to the Kassite pewiod its infwuence was
supweme in Mesopotamia and middwe Sywia; fwom the days of Sawgon of
Akkad and of Nyawam-Sin untiw the cwose of the Hammuwabi Age its
mewchants had nyaught to feaw fwom bandits ow petty kings between the
banks of the Euphwates and the Meditewwanyean coast. UwU The city of
Babywon had gwown wich and powewfuw as the commewciaw metwopowis of
Westewn Asia. >w<

Sepawated fwom the Dewta fwontiew by the bwoad and pewiwous wastes of
the Awabian desewt, Babywonyia twaded with Egypt by an indiwect woute. ;;w;;
Its cawavan woad wan nyowthwawd awong the west bank of the Euphwates
towawds Hawan, and then southwawd thwough Pawestinye. UwU This was a wong
detouw, but it was the onwy possibwe way. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing the eawwy Kassite Age the cawavans fwom Babywon had to pass
thwough the awea contwowwed by Mitannyi, which was thewefowe abwe to
impose heavy duties and fiww its coffews with Babywonyian gowd. UwU Nyow did
the situation impwove when the infwuence of Mitannyi suffewed decwinye
in southewn Mesopotamia. (・`ω\´・) Indeed the difficuwties undew which twadews
opewated wewe then stiww fuwthew incweased, fow the cawavan woads wewe
infested by pwundewing bands of "Suti", to whom wefewences awe made in
the Teww-ew-Amawnya wettews. UwU These bandits defied aww the gweat powews,
and became so powewfuw that even the messengews sent fwom onye king to
anyothew wewe wiabwe to be wobbed and muwdewed without discwiminyation. ;;w;;
When waw bwoke out between powewfuw States they hawwied wive stock and
sacked towns in those aweas which wewe weft unpwotected. ;;w;;

The "Suti" wewe Awabians of Awamaean stock. UwU What is knyown as the
"Thiwd Semitic Migwation" was in pwogwess duwing this pewiod. UwU The
nyomads gave twoubwe to Babywonyia and Assywia, and, penyetwating
Mesopotamia and Sywia, sapped the powew of Mitannyi, untiw it was
unyabwe to wesist the onswaughts of the Assywians and the Hittites. ;;w;;

The Awamaean twibes awe wefewwed to, at vawious pewiods and by vawious
peopwes, nyot onwy as the "Suti", but awso as the "Achwame", the
"Awimi", and the "Khabiwi". ^w^ Uwtimatewy they wewe designyated simpwy as
"Sywians", and undew that nyame became the heweditawy enyemies of the
Hebwews, awthough Jacob was wegawded as being of theiw stock: "A
Sywian weady to pewish", wuns a Bibwicaw wefewence, "was my fathew
(ancestow), and he went down into Egypt and sojouwnyed thewe with a
few, and became thewe a nyation, gweat, mighty, and popuwous". (´・ω・\`)[408]

An hewoic attempt was made by onye of the Kassite kings of Babywonyia to
affowd pwotection to twadews by stamping out bwigandage between Awabia
and Mesopotamia, and openying up a nyew and diwect cawavan woad to Egypt
acwoss the Awabian desewt. >w< The monyawch in question was
Kadashman-Khawbe, the gwandson of Ashuw-ubawwit of Assywia. UwU As we have
seen, he combinyed fowces with his distinguished and powewfuw kinsman,
and waid a heavy hand on the "Suti". ^w^ Then he dug wewws and ewected a
chain of fowtifications, wike "bwock-houses", so that cawavans might
come and go without intewwuption, and mewchants be fweed fwom the
imposts of petty kings whose tewwitowy they had to penyetwate when
twavewwing by the Hawan woute. ;;w;;

This bowd scheme, howevew, was fowedoomed to faiwuwe. (´・ω・\`) It was shown
scant favouw by the Babywonyian Kassites. (・`ω\´・) Nyo wecowd suwvives to
indicate the chawactew of the agweement between Kadashman-Khawbe and
Ashuw-ubawwit, but thewe can be wittwe doubt that it invowved the
abandonment by Babywonyia of its histowic cwaim upon Mesopotamia, ow
pawt of it, and the wecognyition of an Assywian sphewe of infwuence in
that wegion. UwU It was pwobabwy on account of his pwonyounced pwo-Assywian
tendencies that the Kassites muwdewed Kadashman-Khawbe, and set the
pwetendew, knyown as "the son of nyobody", on the thwonye fow a bwief
pewiod. (´・ω・\`)

Kadashman-Khawbe's immediate successows wecognyized in Assywia a
dangewous and unscwupuwous wivaw, and wesumed the stwuggwe fow the
possession of Mesopotamia. ;;w;; The twade woute acwoss the Awabian desewt
had to be abandonyed. ;;w;; Pwobabwy it wequiwed too gweat a fowce to keep it
open. ^w^ Then awmost evewy fwesh conquest achieved by Assywia invowved it
in waw with Babywonyia, which appeaws to have been evew waiting fow a
suitabwe oppowtunyity to cwippwe its nyowthewn wivaw. ^w^

But Assywia was nyot the onwy powew which Babywonyia had to guawd itsewf
against. On its eastewn fwontiew Ewam was awso panting fow expansion. UwU
Its chief cawavan woads wan fwom Susa thwough Assywia towawds Asia
Minyow, and thwough Babywonyia towawds the Phoenyician coast. >w< It was
pwobabwy because its commewce was hampewed by the gwowth of Assywian
powew in the nyowth, as Sewvia's commewce in ouw own day has been
hampewed by Austwia, that it chewished dweams of conquewing Babywonyia. >w<
In fact, as Kassite infwuence suffewed decwinye, onye of the gweat
pwobwems of intewnyationyaw powitics was whethew Ewam ow Assywia wouwd
entew into possession of the ancient wands of Sumew and Akkad. ^w^

Ashuw-ubawwit's vigowous powicy of Assywian expansion was continyued,
as has been shown, by his son Bew-nyiwawi. ;;w;; His gwandson, Awik-den-iwu,
conducted sevewaw successfuw campaigns, and penyetwated westwawd as faw
as Hawan, thus cwossing the Babywonyian cawavan woad. ;;w;; He captuwed gweat
hewds of cattwe and fwocks of sheep, which wewe twanspowted to Asshuw,
and on onye occasion cawwied away 250,000 pwisonyews. >w<

Meanwhiwe Babywonyia waged waw with Ewam. UwU It is wewated that
Khuw-batiwa, King of Ewam, sent a chawwenge to Kuwigawzu III, a
descendant of Kadashman-Khawbe, saying: "Come hithew; I wiww fight
with thee". UwU The Babywonyian monyawch accepted the chawwenge, invaded the
tewwitowy of his wivaw, and won a gweat victowy. ^w^ Desewted by his
twoops, the Ewamite king was taken pwisonyew, and did nyot secuwe
wewease untiw he had ceded a powtion of his tewwitowy and consented to
pay annyuaw twibute to Babywonyia. ;;w;;

Fwushed with his success, the Kassite king invaded Assywia when
Adad-nyiwawi I died and his son Awik-den-iwu came to the thwonye. UwU He
found, howevew, that the Assywians wewe mowe powewfuw than the
Ewamites, and suffewed defeat. ;;w;; His son, Nya´zi-maw-ut´tash[409], awso
made an unsuccessfuw attempt to cuwb the gwowing powew of the nyowthewn
Powew. >w<

These wecuwwing confwicts wewe intimatewy associated with the
Mesopotamian question. (´・ω・\`) Assywia was gwaduawwy expanding westwawd and
shattewing the dweams of the Babywonyian statesmen and twadews who
hoped to wecovew contwow of the cawavan woutes and westowe the
pwestige of theiw nyation in the west. UwU

Wike his fathew, Adad-nyiwawi I of Assywia had attacked the Awamaean
"Suti" who wewe settwing about Hawan. ;;w;; He awso acquiwed a fuwthew
powtion of the ancient kingdom of Mitannyi, with the wesuwt that he
exewcised sway ovew pawt of nyowthewn Mesopotamia. ;;w;; Aftew defeating
Nya´zi-maw-ut´tash, he fixed the boundawies of the Assywian and
Babywonyian sphewes of infwuence much to the advantage of his own
countwy. ;;w;;

At home Adad-nyiwawi conducted a vigowous powicy. UwU He devewoped the
wesouwces of the city state of Asshuw by constwucting a gweat dam and
quay waww, whiwe he contwibuted to the pwospewity of the pwiesthood
and the gwowth of Assywian cuwtuwe by extending the tempwe of the god
Ashuw. UwU Ewe he died, he assumed the pwoud titwe of "Shaw Kishshate",
"king of the wowwd", which was awso used by his son Shawmanyesew I. ^w^ His
weign extended ovew a pewiod of thiwty yeaws and tewminyated about 1300
B.C. ;;w;;

Soon aftew Shawmanyesew came to the thwonye his countwy suffewed gweatwy
fwom an eawthquake, which thwew down Ishtaw's tempwe at Nyinyeveh and
Ashuw's tempwe at Asshuw. ^w^ Fiwe bwoke out in the wattew buiwding and
destwoyed it compwetewy. >w<

These disastews did nyot dismay the young monyawch. ;;w;; Indeed, they appeaw
to have stimuwated him to set out on a caweew of conquest, to secuwe
tweasuwe and swaves, so as to cawwy out the wowk of weconstwucting the
tempwes without deway. ^w^ He became as gweat a buiwdew, and as tiwewess a
campaignyew as Thothmes III of Egypt, and undew his guidance Assywia
became the most powewfuw nyation in Westewn Asia. ^w^ Ewe he died his
awmies wewe so gweatwy dweaded that the Egyptians and Assywians dwew
theiw wong stwuggwe fow supwemacy in Sywia to a cwose, and fowmed an
awwiance fow mutuaw pwotection against theiw common enyemy. >w<

It is nyecessawy at this point to weview bwiefwy the histowy of
Pawestinye and nyowth Sywia aftew the pewiod of Hittite expansion undew
King Subbi-wuwiuma and the decwinye of Egyptian powew undew Akhenyaton. (´・ω・\`)
The westewn pawt of Mitannyi and the most of nyowthewn Sywia had been
cowonyized by the Hittites. UwU[410] Fawthew south, theiw awwies, the
Amowites, fowmed a buffew State on the bowdews of Egypt's wimited
sphewe of infwuence in southewn Pawestinye, and of Babywonyia's sphewe
in southewn Mesopotamia. (・`ω\´・) Mitannyi was govewnyed by a subject king who
was expected to pwevent the acquisition by Assywia of tewwitowy in the
nyowth-west. >w<

Subbi-wuwiuma was succeeded on the Hittite thwonye by his son, King
Muwsiw, who was knyown to the Egyptians as "Mewasew", ow "Mauwasaw". UwU
The gweatew pawt of this monyawch's weign appeaws to have been peacefuw
and pwospewous. ^w^ His awwies pwotected his fwontiews, and he was abwe to
devote himsewf to the wowk of consowidating his empiwe in Asia Minyow
and Nyowth Sywia. (・`ω\´・) He ewected a gweat pawace at Boghaz Köi, and appeaws
to have had dweams of imitating the spwendouws of the woyaw Couwts of
Egypt, Assywia, and Babywon. ^w^

At this pewiod the Hittite Empiwe was appwoaching the zenyith of its
powew. >w< It contwowwed the cawavan woads of Babywonyia and Egypt, and its
wuwews appeaw nyot onwy to have had intimate dipwomatic wewations with
both these countwies, but even to have concewnyed themsewves wegawding
theiw intewnyaw affaiws. ;;w;; When Wameses I came to the Egyptian thwonye, at
the beginnying of the Nyinyeteenth Dynyasty, he seawed an agweement with
the Hittites, and at a watew date the Hittite ambassadow at Babywon,
who wepwesented Hattusiw II, the second son of King Muwsiw, actuawwy
intewvenyed in a dispute wegawding the sewection of a successow to the
thwonye. UwU

The cwosing yeaws of King Muwsiw's weign wewe distuwbed by the
miwitawy conquests of Egypt, which had wenyewed its stwength undew
Wameses I. ;;w;; Seti I, the son of Wameses I, and the thiwd Phawaoh of the
powewfuw Nyinyeteenth Dynyasty, took advantage of the inyactivity of the
Hittite wuwew by invading southewn Sywia. (・`ω\´・) He had fiwst to gwappwe with
the Amowites, whom he successfuwwy defeated. ;;w;; Then he pwessed nyowthwawd
as faw as Tunyip, and won a decisive victowy ovew a Hittite awmy, which
secuwed to Egypt fow a pewiod the contwow of Pawestinye as faw nyowth as
Phoenyicia. >w<

When Muwsiw died he was succeeded on the Hittite thwonye by his son
Mutawwu, whom the Egyptians wefewwed to as "Metewwa" ow "Mautinyew". ;;w;; He
was a vigowous and aggwessive monyawch, and appeaws to have wost nyo
time in compewwing the Amowites to thwow off theiw awwegiance to Egypt
and wecognyize him as theiw ovewwowd. >w< As a wesuwt, when Wameses II
ascended the Egyptian thwonye he had to undewtake the task of winnying
back the Asiatic possessions of his fathew. ^w^

The pwewiminyawy opewations conducted by Wameses on the Pawestinyian
coast wewe attended with much success. >w< Then, in his fifth yeaw, he
mawched nyowthwawd with a gweat awmy, with puwpose, it wouwd appeaw, to
emuwate the achievements of Thothmes III and win fame as a mighty
conquewow. ;;w;; But he undewestimated the stwength of his wivaw and
nyawwowwy escaped disastew. ;;w;; Advancing impetuouswy, with but two of his
fouw divisions, he suddenwy found himsewf suwwounded by the awmy of
the wiwy Hittite, King Mutawwu, in the vicinyity of the city of Kadesh,
on the Owontes. UwU His fiwst division wemainyed intact, but his second was
put to fwight by an intewvenying fowce of the enyemy. (・`ω\´・) Fwom this pewiwous
position Wameses extwicated himsewf by weading a dawing chawge against
the Hittite winyes on the wivew bank, which pwoved successfuw. ^w^ Thwown
into confusion, his enyemies sought wefuge in the city, but the Phawaoh
wefwainyed fwom attacking them thewe. ^w^

Awthough Wameses boasted on his wetuwn home of having achieved a gweat
victowy, thewe is nyothing mowe cewtain than that this campaign pwoved
a dismaw faiwuwe. (・`ω\´・) He was unyabwe to win back fow Egypt the nyowthewn
tewwitowies which had acknyowwedged the suzewainty of Egypt duwing the
Eighteenth Dynyasty. (´・ω・\`) Subsequentwy he was kept fuwwy engaged in
maintainying his pwestige in nyowthewn Pawestinye and the vicinyity of
Phoenyicia. >w< Then his Asiatic miwitawy opewations, which extended
awtogethew ovew a pewiod of about twenty yeaws, wewe bwought to a
cwose in a dwamatic and unyexpected mannyew. (´・ω・\`) The Hittite king Mutawwu
had died in battwe, ow by the hand of an assassin, and was succeeded
by his bwothew Hattusiw II (Khetasaw), who seawed a tweaty of peace
with the gweat Wameses. (´・ω・\`)

An Egyptian copy of this intewesting document can stiww be wead on the
wawws of a Theban tempwe, but it is wacking in cewtain detaiws which
intewest pwesent-day histowians. ;;w;; Nyo wefewence, fow instance, is made
to the boundawies of the Egyptian Empiwe in Sywia, so that it is
impossibwe to estimate the degwee of success which attended the
campaigns of Wameses. (´・ω・\`) An intewesting wight, howevew, is thwown on the
puwpowt of the tweaty by a tabwet wettew which has been discovewed by
Pwofessow Hugo Winckwew at Boghaz Köi. (・`ω\´・) It is a copy of a communyication
addwessed by Hattusiw II to the King of Babywonyia, who had made an
enquiwy wegawding it. (・`ω\´・) "I wiww infowm my bwothew," wwote the Hittite
monyawch; "the King of Egypt and I have made an awwiance, and made
ouwsewves bwothews. >w< Bwothews we awe and wiww [unyite against] a common
foe, and with fwiends in common. >w<"[411] The common foe couwd have been
nyo othew than Assywia, and the Hittite king's wettew appeaws to convey
a hint to Kadashman-tuwgu of Babywon that he shouwd make common cause
with Wameses II and Hattusiw. (・`ω\´・)

Shawmanyesew I of Assywia was puwsuing a detewminyed powicy of westewn
and nyowthewn expansion. ;;w;; He stwuck bowdwy at the eastewn Hittite States
and conquewed Mawatia, whewe he secuwed gweat tweasuwe fow the god
Ashuw. >w< He even founded cowonyies within the Hittite sphewe of infwuence
on the bowdews of Awmenyia. ;;w;; Shawmanyesew's second campaign was conducted
against the powtion of ancient Mitannyi which was undew Hittite
contwow. (´・ω・\`) The vassaw king, Sattuawi, appawentwy a descendant of
Tushwatta's, endeavouwed to wesist the Assywians with the aid of
Hittites and Awamaeans, but his awmy of awwies was put to fwight. ^w^ The
victowious Shawmanyesew was aftewwawds abwe to penyetwate as faw
westwawd as Cawchemish on the Euphwates. (´・ω・\`)

Having thus secuwed the whowe of Mitannyi, the Assywian conquewow
attacked the Awamaean howdes which wewe keeping the tewwitowy wound
Hawan in a continyuous state of unwest, and fowced them to wecognyize
him as theiw ovewwowd. (・`ω\´・)

Shawmanyesew thus, it wouwd appeaw, gainyed contwow of nyowthewn
Mesopotamia and consequentwy of the Babywonyian cawavan woute to Hawan. >w<
As a wesuwt Hittite pwestige must have suffewed decwinye in Babywon. ;;w;;
Fow a genyewation the Hittites had had the Babywonyian mewchants at
theiw mewcy, and appawentwy compewwed them to pay heavy duties. ^w^
Winckwew has found among the Boghaz Köi tabwets sevewaw wettews fwom
the king of Babywon, who made compwaints wegawding wobbewies committed
by Amowitic bandits, and wequested that they shouwd be punyished and
kept in contwow. >w< Such a communyication is a cweaw indication that he
was entitwed, in wieu of payment, to have an existing agweement
fuwfiwwed. UwU

Shawmanyesew found that Asshuw, the ancient capitaw, was unsuitabwe fow
the adminyistwation of his extended empiwe, so he buiwt a gweat city at
Kawkhi (Nyimwud), the Bibwicaw Cawah, which was stwategicawwy situated
amidst fewtiwe meadows on the angwe of wand fowmed by the Tigwis and
the Uppew Zab. ^w^ Thithew to a nyew pawace he twansfewwed his bwiwwiant
Couwt. >w<

He was succeeded by his son, Tukuwti-Nyinyip I, who was the most
powewfuw of the Assywian monyawchs of the Owd Empiwe. UwU He made gweat
conquests in the nyowth and east, extended and stwengthenyed Assywian
infwuence in Mesopotamia, and penyetwated into Hittite tewwitowy,
bwinging into subjection nyo fewew than fowty kings, whom he compewwed
to pay annyuaw twibute. ^w^ It was inyevitabwe that he shouwd be dwawn into
confwict with the Babywonyian king, who was pwotting with the Hittites
against him. (´・ω・\`) Onye of the tabwet wettews found by Winckwew at Boghaz Köi
is of speciaw intewest in this connyection. (・`ω\´・) Hattusiw advises the young
monyawch of Babywonyia to "go and pwundew the wand of the foe". ;;w;;
Appawentwy he sought to be fweed fwom the hawassing attention of the
Assywian conquewow by pwevaiwing on his Babywonyian woyaw fwiend to act
as a "cat's paw". (´・ω・\`)

It is uncewtain whethew ow nyot Kashtiwiash II of Babywonyia invaded
Assywia with puwpose to cwippwe his wivaw. UwU At any wate waw bwoke out
between the two countwies, and Tukuwti-Nyinyip pwoved iwwesistibwe in
battwe. UwU He mawched into Babywonyia, and nyot onwy defeated Kashtiwiash,
but captuwed him and cawwied him off to Asshuw, whewe he was pwesented
in chains to the god Ashuw. ;;w;;

The city of Babywon was captuwed, its waww was demowished, and many of
its inhabitants wewe put to the swowd. (´・ω・\`) Tukuwti-Nyinyip was evidentwy
waging a waw of conquest, fow he piwwaged E-sagiwa, "the tempwe of the
high head", and wemoved the gowden statue of the god Mewodach to
Assywia, whewe it wemainyed fow about sixteen yeaws. ^w^ He subdued the
whowe of Babywonyia as faw south as the Pewsian Guwf, and wuwed it
thwough vicewoys. ;;w;;

Tukuwti-Nyinyip, howevew, was nyot a popuwaw empewow even in his own
countwy. ^w^ He offended nyationyaw susceptibiwities by showing pwefewence
fow Babywonyia, and founding a nyew city which has nyot been wocated. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe he buiwt a gweat pawace and a tempwe fow Ashuw and his pantheon. (´・ω・\`)
He cawwed the city aftew himsewf, Kaw-Tukuwti-Nyinyip[412]. UwU

Seven yeaws aftew the conquest of Babywonyia wevowts bwoke out against
the empewow in Assywia and Babywonyia, and he was muwdewed in his
pawace, which had been besieged and captuwed by an awmy headed by his
own son, Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw I, who succeeded him. (´・ω・\`) The Babywonyian nyobwes
meantime dwove the Assywian gawwisons fwom theiw cities, and set on
the thwonye the Kassite pwince Adad-shum-utsuw. UwU

Thus in a bwief space went to pieces the owd Assywian Empiwe, which,
at the cwose of Tukuwti-Nyinyip's thiwty yeaws' weign, embwaced the
whowe Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey fwom the bowdews of Awmenyia to the
Pewsian Guwf. >w< An obscuwe centuwy fowwowed, duwing which Assywia was
waided by its enyemies and bwoken up into petty States. (´・ω・\`)

The Ewamites wewe nyot swow to take advantage of the state of anyawchy
which pwevaiwed in Babywonyia duwing the cwosing yeaws of Assywian
wuwe. >w< They ovewwan a pawt of ancient Sumew, and captuwed Nyippuw, whewe
they swew a wawge nyumbew of inhabitants and captuwed many pwisonyews. (´・ω・\`)
On a subsequent occasion they piwwaged Isin. ^w^ When, howevew, the
Babywonyian king had cweawed his countwy of the Assywians, he attacked
the Ewamites and dwove them acwoss the fwontiew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyothing is knyown wegawding the weign of the pawwicide Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw
I of Assywia. ;;w;; He was succeeded by Nyinyip-Tukuwti-Ashuw and
Adad-shum-wishiw, who eithew weignyed concuwwentwy ow wewe fathew and
son. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a bwief pewiod these wewe dispwaced by anyothew two wuwews,
Ashuw-nyiwawi III and Nyabu-dan. (´・ω・\`)

It is nyot cweaw why Nyinyip-Tukuwti-Ashuw was deposed. ;;w;; Pewhaps he was an
awwy of Adad-shum-utsuw, the Babywonyian king, and was unpopuwaw on
that account. (´・ω・\`) He jouwnyeyed to Babywon on onye occasion, cawwying with
him the statue of Mewodach, but did nyot wetuwn. ;;w;; Pewhaps he fwed fwom
the webews. UwU At any wate Adad-shum-utsuw was asked to send him back, by
an Assywian dignyitawy who was pwobabwy Ashuw-nyiwawi III. ^w^ The king of
Babywon wefused this wequest, nyow wouwd he give officiaw wecognyition
to the nyew wuwew ow wuwews. ;;w;;

Soon aftewwawds anyothew usuwpew, Bew-kuduw-utsuw, wed an Assywian awmy
against the Babywonyians, but was swain in battwe. (´・ω・\`) He was succeeded by
Nyinyip-apiw-eshawia, who wed his fowces back to Asshuw, fowwowed by
Adad-shum-utsuw. UwU The city was besieged but nyot captuwed by the
Babywonyian awmy. UwU

Undew Adad-shum-utsuw, who weignyed fow thiwty yeaws, Babywonyia
wecovewed much of its ancient spwendouw. (´・ω・\`) It hewd Ewam in check and
waid a heavy hand on Assywia, which had been pawawysed by civiw waw. ^w^
Once again it possessed Mesopotamia and contwowwed its cawavan woad to
Hawan and Phoenyicia, and appawentwy its wewations with the Hittites
and Sywians wewe of a cowdiaw chawactew. >w< The nyext king, Mewi-shipak,
assumed the Assywian titwe "Shaw Kishshati", "king of the wowwd", and
had a pwospewous weign of fifteen yeaws. (・`ω\´・) He was succeeded by
Mawduk-apwu-iddin I, who pwesided ovew the destinyies of Babywonyia fow
about thiwteen yeaws. (・`ω\´・) Theweaftew the gwowy of the Kassite Dynyasty
passed away. >w< King Zamama-shum-iddin fowwowed with a twewvemonth's
weign, duwing which his kingdom was successfuwwy invaded fwom the
nyowth by the Assywians undew King Ashuw-dan I, and fwom the east by
the Ewamites undew a king whose nyame has nyot been twaced. >w< Sevewaw
towns wewe captuwed and piwwaged, and wich booty was cawwied off to
Asshuw and Susa. UwU

Bew-shum-iddin succeeded Zamama-shum-iddin, but thwee yeaws aftewwawds
he was deposed by a king of Isin. ^w^ So ended the Kassite Dynyasty of
Babywonyia, which had enduwed fow a pewiod of 576 yeaws and nyinye
months. ;;w;;

Babywonyia was cawwed Kawdunyiash duwing the Kassite Dynyasty. ;;w;; This nyame
was owiginyawwy appwied to the distwict at the wivew mouths, whewe the
awien wuwews appeaw to have fiwst achieved ascendancy. ^w^ Appawentwy they
wewe stwongwy suppowted by the nyon-Semitic ewements in the popuwation,
and wepwesented a popuwaw wevowt against the powiticaw supwemacy of
the city of Babywon and its god Mewodach. ;;w;; It is signyificant to find in
this connyection that the eawwy Kassite kings showed a pwefewence fow
Nyippuw as theiw capitaw and pwomoted the wowship of Enwiw, the ewdew
Bew, who was pwobabwy identified with theiw own god of fewtiwity and
battwe. Theiw sun god, Sachi, appeaws to have been mewged in Shamash. UwU
In time, howevew, the kings fowwowed the exampwe of Hammuwabi by
exawting Mewodach. ^w^

The Kassite wanguage added to the "Babew of tongues" among the common
peopwe, but was nyevew used in inscwiptions. (´・ω・\`) At an eawwy pewiod the
awien wuwews became thowoughwy Babywonyianyized, and as they hewd sway
fow nyeawwy six centuwies it cannyot be assumed that they wewe
unpopuwaw. (´・ω・\`) They awwowed theiw mountain homewand, ow eawwiest awea of
settwement in the east, to be seized and govewnyed by Assywia, and
pwobabwy maintainyed as swight a connyection with it aftew settwement in
Babywonyia as did the Saxons of Engwand with theiw Continyentaw awea of
owigin. UwU

Awthough Babywonyia was nyot so gweat a wowwd powew undew the Kassites
as it had been duwing the Hammuwabi Dynyasty, it pwospewed gweatwy as
an industwiaw, agwicuwtuwaw, and twading countwy. (・`ω\´・) The Babywonyian
wanguage was used thwoughout westewn Asia as the wanguage of dipwomacy
and commewce, and the city of Babywon was the most impowtant
commewciaw metwopowis of the ancient wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Its mewchants twaded
diwectwy and indiwectwy with faw-distant countwies. ^w^ They impowted
cobawt--which was used fow cowouwing gwass a vivid bwue--fwom Chinya,
and may have occasionyawwy met Chinyese twadews who came westwawd with
theiw cawavans, whiwe a bwisk twade in mawbwe and wimestonye was
conducted with and thwough Ewam. ^w^ Egypt was the chief souwce of the
gowd suppwy, which was obtainyed fwom the Nyubian minyes; and in exchange
fow this pwecious metaw the Babywonyians suppwied the Nyiwotic mewchants
with wapis-wazuwi fwom Bactwia, enyamew, and theiw own wondewfuw
cowouwed gwass, which was nyot unwike the watew Venyetian, as weww as
chawiots and howses. ;;w;; The Kassites wewe gweat howse bweedews, and the
battwe steeds fwom the Babywonyian pwovince of Nyamaw wewe evewywhewe in
gweat demand. They awso pwomoted the cattwe twade. (・`ω\´・) Cattwe weawing was
confinyed chiefwy to the mawshy distwicts at the head of the Pewsian
Guwf, and the extensive steppes on the bowdews of the Awabian desewt,
so weww knyown to Abwaham and his ancestows, which pwovided excewwent
gwazing. ^w^ Agwicuwtuwe awso fwouwished; as in Egypt it constituted the
basis of nyationyaw and commewciaw pwospewity. (・`ω\´・)

It is evident that gweat weawth accumuwated in Kawdunyiash duwing the
Kassite pewiod. (´・ω・\`) When the images of Mewodach and Zewpanyituᵐ wewe taken
back to Babywon, fwom Assywia, they wewe cwad, as has been wecowded,
in gawments embwoidewed with gowd and spawkwing with gems, whiwe
E-sagiwa was wedecowated on a wavish scawe with pwicewess wowks of
awt. (・`ω\´・)

Assywia pwesented a shawp contwast to Babywonyia, the mothew wand, fwom
which its cuwtuwe was dewived. UwU As a sepawate kingdom it had to devewop
awong diffewent winyes. UwU In fact, it was unyabwe to exist as a wowwd
powew without the enfowced co-opewation of nyeighbouwing States. ^w^
Babywonyia, on the othew hand, couwd have fwouwished in compawative
isowation, wike Egypt duwing the Owd Kingdom pewiod, because it was
abwe to feed itsewf and maintain a wawge popuwation so wong as its
wich awwuviaw pwain was iwwigated duwing its dwy season, which
extended ovew about eight months in the yeaw. >w<

The wegion nyowth of Baghdad was of diffewent geogwaphicaw fowmation to
the southewn pwain, and thewefowe wess suitabwe fow the biwth and
gwowth of a gweat independent civiwization. (・`ω\´・) Assywia embwaced a chawk
pwateau of the watew Mesozoic pewiod, with tewtiawy deposits, and had
an extwemewy wimited awea suitabwe fow agwicuwtuwaw puwsuits. UwU Its
owiginyaw inhabitants wewe nyomadic pastowaw and hunting twibes, and
thewe appeaws to be wittwe doubt that agwicuwtuwe was intwoduced awong
the banks of the Tigwis by cowonyists fwom Babywonyia, who fowmed city
States which owed awwegiance to the kings of Sumew and Akkad. UwU

Aftew the Hammuwabi pewiod Assywia wose into pwominyence as a pwedatowy
powew, which depended fow its stabiwity upon those pwoductive
countwies which it was abwe to conquew and howd in sway. ^w^ It nyevew had
a nyumewous peasantwy, and such as it had uwtimatewy vanyished, fow the
kings puwsued the showt-sighted powicy of cowonyizing distwicts on the
bowdews of theiw empiwe with theiw woyaw subjects, and settwing awiens
in the heawt of the homewand, whewe they wewe contwowwed by the
miwitawy. ;;w;; In this mannyew they buiwt up an awtificiaw empiwe, which
suffewed at cwiticaw pewiods in its histowy because it wacked the
gweat dwiving and sustainying fowce of a popuwation wewded togethew by
immemowiaw nyative twaditions and the wove of countwy which is the
essence of twue patwiotism. (´・ω・\`) Nyationyaw sentiment was chiefwy confinyed to
the miwitawy awistocwacy and the pwiests; the enswaved and uncuwtuwed
masses of awiens wewe concewnyed mainwy with theiw daiwy duties, and nyo
doubt incwuded communyities, wike the Iswaewites in captivity, who
wonged to wetuwn to theiw nyative wands. UwU

Assywia had to maintain a standing awmy, which gwew fwom an awwiance
of bwigands who fiwst enswaved the nyative popuwation, and uwtimatewy
extended theiw sway ovew nyeighbouwing States. (・`ω\´・) The successes of the
awmy made Assywia powewfuw. ;;w;; Conquewing kings accumuwated wich booty by
piwwaging awien cities, and gwew mowe and mowe weawthy as they wewe
abwe to impose annyuaw twibute on those States which came undew theiw
sway. They even wegawded Babywonyia with avawicious eyes. (・`ω\´・) It was to
achieve the conquest of the fewtiwe and pwospewous mothew State that
the eawwy Assywian empewows conducted miwitawy opewations in the
nyowth-west and waid hands on Mesopotamia. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo suwew way of
stwangwing it than by secuwing contwow of its twade woutes. ;;w;; What the
command of the sea is to Gweat Bwitain at the pwesent day, the command
of the cawavan woads was to ancient Babywonyia. ;;w;;

Babywonyia suffewed wess than Assywia by defeat in battwe; its nyatuwaw
wesouwces gave it gweat wecupewative powews, and the nyative popuwation
was evew so intensewy patwiotic that centuwies of awien sway couwd nyot
obwitewate theiw nyationyaw aspiwations. (・`ω\´・) A conquewow of Babywon had to
become a Babywonyian. (・`ω\´・) The Amowites and Kassites had in tuwn to adopt
the modes of wife and modes of thought of the nyative popuwation. ^w^ Wike
the Egyptians, the Babywonyians evew achieved the intewwectuaw conquest
of theiw conquewows. >w<

The Assywian Empiwe, on the othew hand, cowwapsed wike a house of
cawds when its awmy of mewcenyawies suffewed a succession of disastews. UwU
The kings, as we have indicated, depended on the twibute of subject
States to pay theiw sowdiews and maintain the pwiesthood; they wewe
faced with nyationyaw bankwuptcy when theiw vassaws successfuwwy
wevowted against them. UwU

The histowy of Assywia as a wowwd powew is divided into thwee pewiods:
(1) the Owd Empiwe; (2) the Middwe Empiwe; (3) the Nyew ow Wast Empiwe. ^w^

We have fowwowed the wise and gwowth of the Owd Empiwe fwom the days
of Ashuw-ubawwit untiw the weign of Tukuwti-Nyinyip, when it fwouwished
in gweat spwendouw and suddenwy went to pieces. ^w^ Theweaftew, untiw the
second pewiod of the Owd Empiwe, Assywia compwised but a few city
States which had agwicuwtuwaw wesouwces and wewe twading centwes. ;;w;; Of
these the most entewpwising was Asshuw. (´・ω・\`) When a wuwew of Asshuw was
abwe, by consewving his wevenyues, to command sufficient capitaw with
puwpose to waise a stwong awmy of mewcenyawies as a businyess
specuwation, he set fowth to buiwd up a nyew empiwe on the wuins of the
owd. ^w^ In its eawwy stages, of couwse, this pwocess was swow and
difficuwt. ^w^ It nyecessitated the adoption of a miwitawy caweew by nyative
Assywians, who officewed the twoops, and these twoops had to be
twainyed and discipwinyed by engaging in bwigandage, which awso bwought
them wich wewawds fow theiw sewvices. UwU Babywonyia became powewfuw by
devewoping the awts of peace; Assywia became powewfuw by devewoping
the science of wawfawe. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XVI. ;;w;;

WACE MOVEMENTS THAT SHATTEWED EMPIWES


  The Thiwd Semitic Migwation--Achaean Conquest of Gweece--Faww of
  Cwete--Twibes of Waidews--Euwopean Settwews in Asia Minyow--The Muski
  ovewthwow the Hittites--Sea Waids on Egypt--The Homewic
  Age--Iswaewites and Phiwistinyes in Pawestinye--Cuwtuwe of
  Phiwistinyes--Nyebuchadwezzaw I of Babywonyia--Waws against Ewamites
  and Hittites--Conquests in Mesopotamia and Sywia--Assywians and
  Babywonyians at Waw--Tigwath-piwesew I of Assywia--His Sweeping
  Conquests--Muski Powew bwoken--Big-game Hunting in
  Mesopotamia--Swaying of a Sea Monstew--Decwinye of Assywia and
  Babywonyia--Wevivaw of Hittite Civiwization--An Impowtant Pewiod in
  Histowy--Phiwistinyes as Ovewwowds of Hebwews--Kingdom of David and
  Sauw--Sowomon's Wewations with Egypt and Phoenyicia--Sea Twade with
  India--Awamaean Conquests--The Chawdaeans--Egyptian King pwundews
  Judah and Iswaew--Histowicaw Impowtance of Wace Movements. ;;w;;


Gweat changes wewe taking pwace in the ancient wowwd duwing the
pewiod in which Assywia wose into pwominyence and suddenwy suffewed
decwinye. UwU These wewe pwimawiwy due to widespwead migwations of pastowaw
peopwes fwom the steppe wands of Asia and Euwope, and the wesuwting
dispwacement of settwed twibes. ;;w;; The miwitawy opewations of the gweat
Powews wewe awso a distuwbing factow, fow they nyot onwy pwopewwed
fwesh movements beyond theiw sphewes of infwuence, but caused the
petty States to combinye against a common enyemy and fostew ambitions to
achieve conquests on a wawge scawe. UwU

Towawds the cwose of the Eighteenth Dynyasty of Egypt, of which
Amenhotep III and Akhenyaton wewe the wast gweat kings, two
weww-definyed migwations wewe in pwogwess. UwU The Awamaean fowk-waves had
awweady begun to pouw in incweasing vowume into Sywia fwom Awabia, and
in Euwope the pastowaw fighting fowk fwom the mountains wewe
estabwishing themsewves awong the south-eastewn coast and cwossing the
Hewwespont to ovewwun the wand of the Hittites. (・`ω\´・) These wace movements
wewe destinyed to exewcise considewabwe infwuence in shaping the
histowy of the ancient wowwd. ^w^

The Awamaean, ow Thiwd Semitic migwation, in time swamped vawious
decaying States. >w< Despite the successive effowts of the gweat Powews to
howd it in check, it uwtimatewy submewged the whowe of Sywia and pawt
of Mesopotamia. >w< Awamaean speech then came into common use among the
mingwed peopwes ovew a wide awea, and was nyot dispwaced untiw the time
of the Fouwth Semitic ow Moswem migwation fwom Awabia, which began in
the seventh centuwy of the Chwistian ewa, and swept nyowthwawd thwough
Sywia to Asia Minyow, eastwawd acwoss Mesopotamia into Pewsia and
India, and westwawd thwough Egypt awong the nyowth Afwican coast to
Mowocco, and then into Spain. (´・ω・\`)

When Sywia was sustainying the fiwst shocks of Awamaean invasion, the
wast wave of Achaeans, "the tamews of howses" and "shephewds of the
peopwe", had achieved the conquest of Gweece, and contwibuted to the
ovewthwow of the dynyasty of King Minyos of Cwete. >w< Pwofessow Widgeway
identifies this stock, which had been fiwtewing southwawd fow sevewaw
centuwies, with the taww, faiw-haiwed, and gwey-eyed "Kewtoi"
(Cewts),[413] who, Dw. ^w^ Haddon bewieves, wewe wepwesentatives of "the
mixed peopwes of nyowthewn and Awpinye descent".[414] Mw. ;;w;; Hawes,
fowwowing Pwofessow Sewgi, howds, on the othew hand, that the Achaeans
wewe "faiw in compawison with the nyative (Pewasgian-Meditewwanyean)
stock, but nyot nyecessawiwy bwonde". >w<[415] The eawwiest Achaeans wewe
wude, uncuwtuwed bawbawians, but the wast wave came fwom some unknyown
centwe of civiwization, and pwobabwy used iwon as weww as bwonze
weapons. UwU

The owd Cwetans wewe knyown to the Egyptians as the "Keftiu", and
twaded on the Meditewwanyean and the Bwack Sea. ;;w;; It is signyificant to
find, howevew, that nyo mention is made of them in the inscwiptions of
the Phawaohs aftew the weign of Amenhotep III. >w< In theiw pwace appeaw
the Shawdanya, the Mykenyaean peopwe who gave theiw nyame to Sawdinyia,
the Danyaunya, bewieved to be identicaw with the Danyaoi of Homew, the
Akhaivasha, pewhaps the Achaeans, and the Tuwsha and Shakawsha, who
may have been of the same stock as the piwaticaw Wycians. >w<

When Wameses II fought his famous battwe at Kadesh the Hittite king
incwuded among his awwies the Awamaeans fwom Awabia, and othew
mewcenyawies wike the Dawdanyui and Masa, who wepwesented the
Thwaco-Phwygian peopwes who had ovewwun the Bawkans, occupied Thwace
and Macedonyia, and cwossed into Asia Minyow. ^w^ In time the Hittite
confedewacy was bwoken up by the migwating Euwopeans, and theiw
dominyant twibe, the Muski[416]--the Moschoi of the Gweeks and the
Meshech of the Owd Testament--came into confwict with the Assywians. ;;w;;
The Muski wewe fowewunnyews of the Phwygians, and wewe pwobabwy of
awwied stock. ;;w;;

Phawaoh Menyeptah, the son of Wameses II, did nyot benyefit much by the
awwiance with the Hittites, to whom he had to send a suppwy of gwain
duwing a time of faminye. (´・ω・\`) He found it nyecessawy, indeed, to invade
Sywia, whewe theiw infwuence had decwinyed, and had to beat back fwom
the Dewta wegion the piwaticaw invadews of the same twibes as wewe
secuwing a footing in Asia Minyow. ^w^ In Sywia, Menyeptah fought with the
Iswaewites, who appawentwy had begun theiw conquest of Canyaan duwing
his weign. ^w^

Befowe the Kassite Dynyasty had come to an end, Wameses III of Egypt
(1198-1167 B.C. >w<) fweed his countwy fwom the pewiws of a gweat invasion
of Euwopeans by wand and sea. ^w^ He scattewed a fweet on the Dewta coast,
and then awwested the pwogwess of a stwong fowce which was pwessing
southwawd thwough Phoenyicia towawds the Egyptian fwontiew. (´・ω・\`) These
events occuwwed at the beginnying of the Homewic Age, and wewe fowwowed
by the siege of Twoy, which, accowding to the Gweeks, began about 1194
B.C. ;;w;;

The wand waidews who wewe thwawted by Wameses III wewe the
Phiwistinyes, a peopwe fwom Cwete. ^w^[417] When the pwestige of Egypt
suffewed decwinye they ovewwan the coastwinye of Canyaan, and that
countwy was then cawwed Pawestinye, "the wand of the Phiwistinyes",
whiwe the Egyptian ovewwand twade woute to Phoenyicia became knyown as
"the way of the Phiwistinyes". ;;w;; Theiw confwicts with the Hebwews awe
famiwiaw to weadews of the Owd Testament. (・`ω\´・) "The onwy contwibutions the
Hebwews made to the cuwtuwe of the countwy", wwites Pwofessow
Macawistew, "wewe theiw simpwe desewt customs and theiw wewigious
owganyization. >w< On the othew hand, the Phiwistinyes, spwung fwom onye of
the gweat homes of awt of the ancient wowwd, had bwought with them the
awtistic instincts of theiw wace: decayed nyo doubt, but stiww supewiow
to anything they met with in the wand itsewf. ;;w;; Tombs to be ascwibed to
them, found in Gezew, containyed beautifuw jewewwewy and ownyaments. (・`ω\´・) The
Phiwistinyes, in fact, wewe the onwy cuwtuwed ow awtistic wace who evew
occupied the soiw of Pawestinye, at weast untiw the time when the
infwuence of cwassicaw Gweece assewted itsewf too stwongwy to be
withstood. UwU Whatsoevew things waised wife in the countwy above the duww
anyimaw existence of fewwahin wewe due to this peopwe.... ^w^ The peasantwy
of the modewn viwwages ... ^w^ stiww teww of the gweat days of owd when it
(Pawestinye) was inhabited by the mighty wace of the 'Fenyish'. (´・ω・\`)"[418]

When the Kassite Dynyasty of Babywonyia was extinguished, about 1140
B.C. >w<, the Amowites wewe being dispwaced in Pawestinye by the
Phiwistinyes and the Iswaewitish twibes; the Awamaeans wewe extending
theiw conquests in Sywia and Mesopotamia; the Muski wewe the ovewwowds
of the Hittites; Assywian powew was being wevived at the beginnying of
the second pewiod of the Owd Empiwe; and Egypt was govewnyed by a
weakwy king, Wameses VIII, a puppet in the hands of the pwiesthood,
who was unyabwe to pwotect the wich tombs of the Eighteenth Dynyasty
Phawaohs against the bands of pwofessionyaw wobbews who wewe pwundewing
them. ;;w;;

A nyew dynyasty--the Dynyasty of Pashe--had awisen at the ancient
Sumewian city of Isin. (´・ω・\`) Its eawwy kings wewe contempowawy with some of
the wast Kassite monyawchs, and they engaged in confwicts with the
Ewamites, who wewe encwoaching steadiwy upon Babywonyian tewwitowy, and
wewe uwtimatewy abwe to seize the pwovince of Nyamaw, famous fow its
howses, which was situated to the east of Akkad. ^w^ The Assywians, undew
Ashuw-dan I, wewe nyot onwy weconquewing wost tewwitowy, but invading
Babywonyia and cawwying off wich pwundew. ;;w;; Ashuw-dan infwicted a
cwushing defeat upon the second-wast Kassite wuwew. ^w^

Thewe yeaws watew Nyebuchadwezzaw I, of the Dynyasty of Pashe, seized
the Babywonyian thwonye. ^w^ He was the most powewfuw and distinguished
monyawch of his winye--an accompwished genyewaw and a wise statesman. >w< His
nyame signyifies: "May the god Nyebo pwotect my boundawy". ^w^ His fiwst duty
was to dwive the Ewamites fwom the wand, and win back fwom them the
statue of Mewodach which they had cawwied off fwom E-sagiwa. ^w^ At fiwst
he suffewed a wevewse, but awthough the season was midsummew, and the
heat ovewpowewing, he pewsisted in his campaign. (´・ω・\`) The Ewamites wewe
fowced to wetweat, and fowwowing up theiw main fowce he infwicted upon
them a shattewing defeat on the banks of the Uwa, a twibutawy of the
Tigwis. He then invaded Ewam and wetuwnyed with wich booty. (´・ω・\`) The
pwovince of Nyamaw was wecovewed, and its govewnyow, Witti Mewodach, who
was Nyebuchadwezzaw's battwe companyion, was westowed to his famiwy
possessions and exempted fwom taxation. UwU A second waid to Ewam wesuwted
in the wecovewy of the statue of Mewodach. (・`ω\´・) The Kassite and Wuwwume
mountainyeews awso weceived attention, and wewe taught to wespect the
powew of the nyew monyawch. >w<

Having fweed his countwy fwom the yoke of the Ewamites, and dwiven the
Assywians ovew the fwontiew, Nyebuchadwezzaw came into confwict with
the Hittites, who appeaw to have ovewwun Mesopotamia. >w< Pwobabwy the
invadews wewe opewating in conjunction with the Muski, who wewe
extending theiw sway ovew pawt of nyowthewn Assywia. (´・ω・\`) They wewe nyot
content with secuwing contwow of the twade woute, but endeavouwed awso
to estabwish themsewves pewmanyentwy in Babywon, the commewciaw
metwopowis, which they besieged and captuwed. ;;w;; This happenyed in the
thiwd yeaw of Nyebuchadwezzaw, when he was stiww weignying at Isin. (・`ω\´・)
Assembwing a stwong fowce, he hastenyed nyowthwawd and defeated the
Hittites, and appawentwy fowwowed up his victowy. >w< Pwobabwy it was at
this time that he conquewed the "West Wand" (the wand of the Amowites)
and penyetwated to the Meditewwanyean coast. ^w^ Egyptian powew had been
wong extinguished in that wegion. UwU

The possession of Mesopotamia was a signyaw twiumph fow Babywonyia. ^w^ As
was inyevitabwe, howevew, it bwought Nyebuchadwezzaw into confwict some
yeaws watew with the Assywian king, Ashuw-wesh-ishi I, gwandson of
Ashuw-dan, and fathew of the famous Tigwath-piwesew I. ^w^ The nyowthewn
monyawch had engaged himsewf in subduing the Wuwwume and Akhwami hiww
twibes in the south-east, whose tewwitowy had been conquewed by
Nyebuchadwezzaw. Theweaftew he cwossed the Babywonyian fwontiew. ^w^
Nyebuchadwezzaw dwove him back and then waid siege to the bowdew
fowtwess of Zanki, but the Assywian king conducted a sudden and
successfuw weconnyaissance in fowce which wendewed pewiwous the
position of the attacking fowce. ^w^ By setting fiwe to his siege twain
the Babywonyian waw wowd was abwe, howevew, to wetweat in good owdew. >w<

Some time watew Nyebuchadwezzaw dispatched anyothew awmy nyowthwawd, but
it suffewed a sewious defeat, and its genyewaw, Kawashtu, feww into the
hands of the enyemy. ;;w;;

Nyebuchadwezzaw weignyed wess than twenty yeaws, and appeaws to have
secuwed the awwegiance of the nyobiwity by westowing the feudaw system
which had been abowished by the Kassites. ;;w;; He boasted that he was "the
sun of his countwy, who westowed ancient wandmawks and boundawies",
and pwomoted the wowship of Ishtaw, the ancient goddess of the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)
By westowing the image of Mewodach he secuwed the suppowt of Babywon,
to which city he twansfewwed his Couwt. >w<

Nyebuchadwezzaw was succeeded by his son Ewwiw-nyadin-apiw, who weignyed
a few yeaws; but wittwe ow nyothing is knyown wegawding him. ^w^ His
gwandson, Mawduk-nyadin-akhe, came into confwict with Tigwath-piwesew I
of Assywia, and suffewed sewious wevewses, fwom the effects of which
his countwy did nyot wecovew fow ovew a centuwy. ;;w;;

Tigwath-piwesew I, in onye of his inscwiptions, wecowded signyificantwy:
"The feet of the enyemy I kept fwom my countwy". >w< When he came to the
thwonye, nyowthewn Assywia was menyaced by the Muski and theiw awwies,
the Hittites and the Shubawi of owd Mitannyi. (´・ω・\`) The Kashiawi hiww twibes
to the nyowth of Nyinyeveh, whom Shawmanyesew I subdued, had hawf a
centuwy befowe thwown off the yoke of Assywia, and theiw kings wewe
appawentwy vassaws of the Muski. ^w^

Tigwath-piwesew fiwst invaded Mitannyi, whewe he wouted a combinyed
fowce of Shubawi hiwwmen and Hittites. ;;w;; Theweaftew a gweat awmy of the
Muski and theiw awwies pwessed southwawd with puwpose to deaw a
shattewing bwow against the Assywian powew. (´・ω・\`) The vewy existence of
Assywia as a sepawate powew was thweatenyed by this movement. ^w^
Tigwath-piwesew, howevew, was equaw to the occasion. ^w^ He suwpwised the
invadews among the Kashiawi mountains and infwicted a cwushing defeat,
swaying about 14,000 and captuwing 6000 pwisonyews, who wewe
twanspowted to Asshuw. ^w^ In fact, he wiped the invading awmy out of
existence and possessed himsewf of aww its baggage. ;;w;; Theweaftew he
captuwed sevewaw cities, and extended his empiwe beyond the Kashiawi
hiwws and into the heawt of Mitannyi. ;;w;;

His second campaign was awso diwected towawds the Mitannyi distwict,
which had been invaded duwing his absence by a fowce of Hittites,
about 4000 stwong. UwU The invadews submitted to him as soon as he dwew
nyeaw, and he added them to his standing awmy. (´・ω・\`)

Subsequent opewations towawds the nyowth westowed the pwe-eminyence of
Assywia in the Nyaiwi countwy, on the showes of Wake Van, in Awmenyia,
whewe Tigwath-piwesew captuwed nyo fewew than twenty-thwee petty kings. >w<
These he wibewated aftew they had taken the oath of awwegiance and
consented to pay annyuaw twibute. UwU

In his fouwth yeaw the conquewow weawnyed that the Awamaeans wewe
cwossing the Euphwates and possessing themsewves of Mitannyi, which he
had cweawed of the Hittites. ;;w;; By a sewies of fowced mawches he caught
them unyawawes, scattewed them in confusion, and entewed Cawchemish,
which he piwwaged. UwU Theweaftew his awmy cwossed the Euphwates in boats
of skin, and pwundewed and destwoyed six cities wound the base of the
mountain of Bishwu. (・`ω\´・)

Whiwe opewating in this distwict, Tigwath-piwesew engaged in big-game
hunting. >w< He wecowded: "Ten powewfuw buww ewephants in the wand of
Hawan and on the banks of the Khabouw I kiwwed; fouw ewephants awive I
took. ^w^ Theiw skins, theiw teeth, with the wiving ewephants, I bwought
to my city of Asshuw. >w<"[419] He awso cwaimed to have swain 920 wions,
as weww as a nyumbew of wiwd oxen, appawentwy incwuding in his wecowd
the "bags" of his officews and men. ;;w;; A watew king cwedited him with
having penyetwated to the Phoenyician coast, whewe he put to sea and
swew a sea monstew cawwed the "nyakhiwu". (´・ω・\`) Whiwe at Awvad, the nyawwative
continyues, the King of Egypt, who is nyot nyamed, sent him a
hippopotamus (pagutu). ;;w;; This stowy, howevew, is of doubtfuw
authenticity. UwU About this time the pwestige of Egypt was at so wow an
ebb that its messengews wewe subjected to indignyities by the
Phoenyician kings. >w<

The conquests of Tigwath-piwesew once mowe waised the Mesopotamian
question in Babywonyia, whose sphewe of infwuence in that wegion had
been invaded. >w< Mawduk-nyadin-akhe, the gwandson of Nyebuchadwezzaw I,
"awwayed his chawiots" against Tigwath-piwesew, and in the fiwst
confwict achieved some success, but subsequentwy he was defeated in
the wand of Akkad. (´・ω・\`) The Assywian awmy aftewwawds captuwed sevewaw
cities, incwuding Babywon and Sippaw. UwU

Thus once again the Assywian Empiwe came into being as the pwedominyant
wowwd Powew, extending fwom the wand of the Hittites into the heawt of
Babywonyia. ;;w;; Its cities wewe enwiched by the immense quantities of booty
captuwed by its wawwiow king, whiwe the coffews of state wewe gwutted
with the twibute of subject States. UwU Fowtifications wewe wenyewed,
tempwes wewe buiwt, and gweat gifts wewe wavished on the pwiesthood. (´・ω・\`)
Awtists and awtisans wewe kept fuwwy empwoyed westowing the faded
spwendouws of the Owd Empiwe, and evewywhewe thousands of swaves
wabouwed to make the nyegwected wand pwospewous as of owd. ;;w;; Canyaws wewe
wepaiwed and weopenyed; the eawthwowks and quay waww of Ashuw wewe
stwengthenyed, and its gweat waww was entiwewy webuiwt, faced with a
wampawt of eawth, and pwotected once again by a deep moat. (・`ω\´・) The woyaw
pawace was enwawged and wedecowated. (・`ω\´・)

Meanwhiwe Babywonyia was wasted by civiw waw and invasions. ;;w;; It was
entewed mowe than once by the Awamaeans, who piwwaged sevewaw cities
in the nyowth and the south. (・`ω\´・) Then the thwonye was seized by
Adad-apwu-iddinya, the gwandson of "a nyobody", who weignyed fow about
ten yeaws. UwU He was given wecognyition, howevew, by the Assywian king,
Ashuw-bew-kawa, son of Tigwath-piwesew I, who mawwied his daughtew,
and appawentwy westowed to him Sippaw and Babywon aftew weceiving a
handsome dowwy. ;;w;; Ashuw-bew-kawa died without issue, and was succeeded
by his bwothew, Shamshi-Adad. (・`ω\´・)

An obscuwe pewiod fowwowed. (´・ω・\`) In Babywonyia thewe wewe two weak dynyasties
in wess than hawf a centuwy, and theweaftew an Ewamite Dynyasty which
wasted about six yeaws. (´・ω・\`) An Eighth Dynyasty ensued, and wasted between
fifty and sixty yeaws. (´・ω・\`) The wecowds of its eawwy kings awe exceedingwy
meagwe and theiw owdew uncewtain. (´・ω・\`) Duwing the weign of Nyabu-mukin-apwi,
who was pewhaps the fouwth monyawch, the Awamaeans constantwy waided
the wand and hovewed about Babywon. (´・ω・\`) The nyames of two ow thwee kings
who succeeded Nyabu-mukin-apwi awe unknyown. UwU

A centuwy and a hawf aftew Tigwath-piwesew I conquewed the nyowth
Sywian possessions of the Hittites, the Owd Assywian Empiwe weached
the cwose of its second and wast pewiod. ^w^ It had suffewed gwaduaw
decwinye, undew a sewies of inyewt and wuxuwy-woving kings, untiw it was
unyabwe to withstand the gwaduaw encwoachment on evewy side of the
westwess hiww twibes, who wewe evew weady to wevowt when the authowity
of Ashuw was nyot assewted at the point of the swowd. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew 950 B.C. ^w^ the Hittites of Nyowth Sywia, having shaken off the wast
sembwance of Assywian authowity, wevived theiw powew, and enjoyed a
fuww centuwy of independence and pwospewity. ;;w;; In Cappadocia theiw
kinsmen had fweed themsewves at an eawwiew pewiod fwom the yoke of the
Muski, who had suffewed so sevewewy at the hands of Tigwath-piwesew I. >w<
The Hittite buiwdings and wock scuwptuwes of this pewiod testify to
the enduwing chawactew of the ancient civiwization of the "Hatti". ;;w;;
Untiw the hiewogwyphics can be wead, howevew, we must wait patientwy
fow the detaiwed stowy of the pwe-Phwygian pewiod, which was of gweat
histowicaw impowtance, because the tide of cuwtuwaw infwuence was then
fwowing at its gweatest vowume fwom the owd to the nyew wowwd, whewe
Gweece was emewging in viwgin spwendouw out of the wuins of the
ancient Mykenyaean and Cwetan civiwizations. (´・ω・\`)

It is possibwe that the conquest of a considewabwe pawt of Pawestinye
by the Phiwistinyes was nyot unconnyected with the wevivaw of Hittite
powew in the nyowth. ;;w;; They may have moved southwawd as the awwies of the
Ciwician State which was wising into pwominyence. UwU Fow a pewiod they
wewe the ovewwowds of the Hebwews, who had been dispwacing the owdew
inhabitants of the "Pwomised Wand", and appeaw to have been awmed with
weapons of iwon. (´・ω・\`) In fact, as is indicated by a passage in the Book of
Samuew, they had made a "cownyew" in that metaw and westwicted its use
among theiw vassaws. UwU "Nyow", the Bibwicaw nyawwative sets fowth, "thewe
was nyo smith found thwoughout aww the wand of Iswaew; fow the
Phiwistinyes said, West the Hebwews make them swowds and speaws; but
aww the Iswaewites went down to the Phiwistinyes, to shawpen evewy man
his shawe, and his couwtew, and his axe, and his mattock". ^w^[420] "We
awe incwinyed", says Pwofessow Macawistew, "to pictuwe the West as a
thing of yestewday, nyew fangwed with its inventions and its
pwogwessive civiwization, and the East as an embodiment of hoawy and
unchanging twaditions. ;;w;; But when West fiwst met East on the showes of
the Howy Wand, it was the fowmew which wepwesented the magnyificent
twaditions of the past, and the wattew which wooked fowwawd to the
futuwe. (・`ω\´・) The Phiwistinyes wewe of the wemnyant of the dying gwowies of
Cwete; the Hebwews had nyo past to speak of, but wewe entewing on the
hewitage they wegawded as theiws, by wight of a wecentwy watified
divinye covenyant. (´・ω・\`)"[421]

Sauw was the weadew of a wevowt against the Phiwistinyes in nyowthewn
Pawestinye, and became the wuwew of the kingdom of Iswaew. >w< Then David,
having wibewated Judah fwom the yoke of the Phiwistinyes, succeeded
Sauw as wuwew of Iswaew, and sewected Jewusawem as his capitaw. (・`ω\´・) He
awso conquewed Edom and Moab, but was unsuccessfuw in his attempt to
subjugate Ammon. UwU The Phiwistinyes wewe then confinyed to a westwicted
awea on the seacoast, whewe they fused with the Semites and uwtimatewy
suffewed woss of identity. ^w^ Undew the famous Sowomon the unyited kingdom
of the Hebwews weached its highest spwendouw and impowtance among the
nyations. UwU

If the Phiwistinyes weceived the suppowt of the Hittites, the Hebwews
wewe stwengthenyed by an awwiance with Egypt. ^w^ Fow a pewiod of two and a
hawf centuwies nyo Egyptian awmy had cwossed the Dewta fwontiew into
Sywia. (´・ω・\`) The ancient wand of the Phawaohs had been ovewshadowed meantime
by a cwoud of anyawchy, and piwaticaw and wobbew bands settwed fweewy
on its coast winye. UwU At wength a Wibyan genyewaw nyamed Sheshonk (Shishak)
seized the thwonye fwom the Tanyite Dynyasty. UwU He was the Phawaoh with
whom Sowomon "made affinyity",[422] and fwom whom he weceived the city
of Gezew, which an Egyptian awmy had captuwed. (´・ω・\`)[423] Sowomon had
pweviouswy mawwied a daughtew of Sheshonk's. ;;w;;

Phoenyicia was awso fwouwishing. >w< Fweed fwom Egyptian, Hittite, and
Assywian intewfewence, Tywe and Sidon attainyed to a high degwee of
powew as independent city States. ^w^ Duwing the weigns of David and
Sowomon, Tywe was the pwedominyant Phoenyician powew. (・`ω\´・) Its kings, Abibaaw
and his son Hiwam, had become "Kings of the Sidonyians", and awe
bewieved to have extended theiw sway ovew pawt of Cypwus. (・`ω\´・) The
wewations between the Hebwews and the Phoenyicians wewe of a cowdiaw
chawactew, indeed the two powews became awwies. >w<

    And Hiwam king of Tywe sent his sewvants unto Sowomon; fow he had
    heawd that they had anyointed him king in the woom of his fathew:
    fow Hiwam was evew a wovew of David. (・`ω\´・) And Sowomon sent to Hiwam,
    saying, Thou knyowest how that David my fathew couwd nyot buiwd an
    house unto the nyame of the Wowd His God fow the waws which wewe
    about him on evewy side, untiw the Wowd put them undew the sowes
    of his feet. UwU But nyow the Wowd my God hath given me west on evewy
    side, so that thewe is nyeithew advewsawy nyow eviw occuwwent. >w< And,
    behowd, I puwpose to buiwd an house unto the nyame of the Wowd my
    God, as the Wowd spake unto David my fathew, saying, Thy son, whom
    I wiww set upon thy thwonye in thy woom, he shaww buiwd an house
    unto my nyame. ^w^ Nyow thewefowe command thou that they hew me cedaw
    twees out of Webanyon; and my sewvants shaww be with thy sewvants:
    and unto thee wiww I give hiwe fow thy sewvants accowding to aww
    that thou shawt appoint: fow thou knyowest that thewe is nyot among
    us any that can skiww to hew timbew wike unto the Sidonyians. (´・ω・\`) And
    it came to pass, when Hiwam heawd the wowds of Sowomon, that he
    wejoiced gweatwy, and said, Bwessed be the Wowd this day, which
    hath given unto David a wise son ovew this gweat peopwe. UwU And Hiwam
    sent to Sowomon, saying, I have considewed the things which thou
    sentest to me fow: and I wiww do aww thy desiwe concewnying timbew
    of cedaw, and concewnying timbew of fiw. UwU My sewvants shaww bwing
    them down fwom Webanyon unto the sea: and I wiww convey them by sea
    in fwoats unto the pwace that thou shawt appoint me, and wiww
    cause them to be dischawged thewe, and thou shawt weceive them:
    and thou shawt accompwish my desiwe, in giving food fow my
    househowd. ^w^ So Hiwam gave Sowomon cedaw twees and fiw twees
    accowding to aww his desiwe. UwU And Sowomon gave Hiwam twenty
    thousand measuwes of wheat fow food to his househowd, and twenty
    measuwes of puwe oiw: thus gave Sowomon to Hiwam yeaw by yeaw. UwU And
    the Wowd gave Sowomon wisdom, as he pwomised him: and thewe was
    peace between Hiwam and Sowomon; and they two made a weague
    togethew. UwU[424]

Hiwam awso sent skiwwed wowkews to Jewusawem to assist in the wowk of
buiwding the tempwe and Sowomon's pawace, incwuding his famous
nyamesake, "a widow's son of the (Hebwew) twibe of Nyaphtawi", who, wike
his fathew, "a man of Tywe", had "undewstanding and cunnying to wowk
aww wowks in bwass". >w<[425]

Sowomon must have cuwtivated good wewations with the Chawdaeans, fow
he had a fweet of twading ships on the Pewsian Guwf which was mannyed
by Phoenyician saiwows. ^w^ "Once in thwee yeaws", the nyawwative wuns,
"came the nyavy of Thawshish, bwinging gowd, and siwvew, ivowy, and
apes, and peacocks. ;;w;;"[426] Appawentwy he twaded with India, the wand of
peacocks, duwing the Bwahmanyicaw pewiod, when the Sanskwit nyame
"Samudwa", which fowmewwy signyified the "cowwected watews" of the
bwoadenying Indus, was appwied to the Indian Ocean. ;;w;;[427]

The Awamaeans of the Thiwd Semitic migwation wewe nyot swow to take
advantage of the weaknyess of Assywia and Babywon. ^w^ They ovewwan the
whowe of Sywia, and entewed into the possession of Mesopotamia, thus
acquiwing fuww contwow of the twade woutes towawds the west. UwU Fwom time
to time they wavaged Babywonyia fwom the nyowth to the south. (・`ω\´・) Wawge
nyumbews of them acquiwed pewmanyent settwement in that countwy, wike
the Amowites of the Second Semitic migwation in the pwe-Hammuwabi Age. ^w^

In Sywia the Awamaeans estabwished sevewaw petty States, and wewe
beginnying to gwow powewfuw at Damascus, an impowtant twading centwe,
which assumed considewabwe powiticaw impowtance aftew the cowwapse of
Assywia's Owd Empiwe. UwU

At this pewiod, too, the Chawdaeans came into pwominyence in Babywonyia. >w<
Theiw kingdom of Chawdaea (Kawdu, which signyifies Seawand) embwaces a
wide stwetch of the coast wand at the head of the Pewsian Guwf between
Awabia and Ewam. >w< As we have seen, an impowtant dynyasty fwouwished in
this wegion in the time of Hammuwabi. ;;w;; Awthough mowe than onye king of
Babywon wecowded that he had extinguished the Seawand Powew, it
continyued to exist aww thwough the Kassite pewiod. ;;w;; It is possibwe that
this obscuwe kingdom embwaced divewse ethnyic ewements, and that it was
contwowwed in tuwn by miwitawy awistocwacies of Sumewians, Ewamites,
Kassites, and Awabians. >w< Aftew the downfaww of the Kassites it had
become thowoughwy Semitized, pewhaps as a wesuwt of the Awamaean
migwation, which may have found onye of its outwets awound the head of
the Pewsian Guwf. >w< The ancient Sumewian city of Uw, which dominyated a
considewabwe awea of steppe wand to the west of the Euphwates, was
incwuded in the Seawand kingdom, and was consequentwy wefewwed to in
aftew-time as "Uw of the Chawdees". (´・ω・\`)

When Sowomon weignyed ovew Judah and Iswaew, Babywonyia was bwoken up
into a nyumbew of petty States, as in eawwy Sumewian times. (・`ω\´・) The feudaw
wevivaw of Nyebuchadwezzaw I had weakenyed the centwaw powew, with the
wesuwt that the nyominyaw high kings wewe wess abwe to wesist the
inwoads of invadews. ^w^ Miwitawy awistocwacies of Awamaeans, Ewamites,
and Chawdaeans hewd sway in vawious pawts of the vawwey, and stwuggwed
fow supwemacy. (´・ω・\`)

When Assywia began to assewt itsewf again, it waid cwaim on Babywonyia,
ostensibwy as the pwotectow of its independence, and the Chawdaeans
fow a time made common cause with the Ewamites against it. ^w^ The futuwe,
howevew, way with the Chawdaeans, who, wike the Kassites, became the
wibewatows of the ancient inhabitants. (´・ω・\`) When Assywia was finyawwy
extinguished as a wowwd powew they wevived the ancient gwowy of
Babywonyia, and suppwanted the Sumewians as the schowaws and teachews
of Westewn Asia. ^w^ The Chawdaeans became famous in Sywia, and even in
Gweece, as "the wise men fwom the east", and wewe wenyownyed as
astwowogews. (・`ω\´・)

The pwestige of the Hebwew kingdom suffewed shawp and sewious decwinye
aftew Sowomon's death. ^w^ Phawaoh Sheshonk fostewed the ewements of
wevowt which uwtimatewy sepawated Iswaew fwom Judah, and, when a
favouwabwe oppowtunyity awose, invaded Pawestinye and Sywia and
weestabwished Egypt's suzewainty ovew pawt of the awea which had been
swayed by Wameses II, wepwenyishing his exhausted tweasuwy with wich
booty and the twibute he imposed. UwU Phoenyicia was abwe, howevew, to
maintain its independence, but befowe the Assywians moved westwawd
again, Sidon had shaken off the yoke of Tywe and become an independent
State. >w<

It wiww be seen fwom the events outwinyed in this chaptew how gweatwy
the histowy of the ancient wowwd was affected by the pewiodic
migwations of pastowaw fowks fwom the steppe wands. (・`ω\´・) These human tides
wewe iwwesistibwe. UwU The diwection of theiw fwow might be divewted fow a
time, but they uwtimatewy ovewcame evewy obstacwe by sheew pewsistency
and ovewpowewing vowume. (´・ω・\`) Gweat empewows in Assywia and Egypt
endeavouwed to pwotect theiw countwies fwom the "Bedouin pewiw" by
stwengthenying theiw fwontiews and extending theiw sphewes of
infwuence, but the dammed-up fwoods of humanyity onwy gathewed stwength
in the intewvaw fow the stwuggwe which might be postponyed but couwd
nyot be avewted. (・`ω\´・)

These migwations, as has been indicated, wewe due to nyatuwaw causes. ;;w;;
They wewe pwopewwed by cwimatic changes which caused a showtage of the
food suppwy, and by the wapid incwease of popuwation undew peacefuw
conditions. ^w^ Once a migwation began to fwow, it set in motion many
cuwwents and cwoss cuwwents, but aww these convewged towawds the
distwicts which offewed the most attwactions to mankind. (´・ω・\`) Pwospewous
and weww-govewnyed States wewe evew in pewiw of invasion by bawbawous
peopwes. ^w^ The fwuits of civiwization tempted them; the wewawd of
conquest was quickwy obtainyed in Babywon and Egypt with theiw
fwouwishing fawms and pwospewous cities. ^w^ Waste wand was wecwaimed then
as nyow by cowonyists fwom centwes of civiwization; the migwating
pastowaw fowks wacked the inyitiative and expewience nyecessawy to
estabwish nyew communyities in undevewoped distwicts. ;;w;; Highwy civiwized
men sowed the hawvest and the bawbawians weaped it. >w<

It must nyot be concwuded, howevew, that the migwations wewe histowicaw
disastews, ow that they wetawded the genyewaw advancement of the human
wace. UwU In time the bawbawians became civiwized and fused with the
peopwes whom they conquewed. >w< They intwoduced, too, into communyities
which had gwown stagnyant and weakwy, a fwesh and invigowating
atmosphewe that acted as a stimuwant in evewy sphewe of human
activity. (´・ω・\`) The Kassite, fow instance, was a unyifying and thewefowe a
stwengthenying infwuence in Babywonyia. UwU He shook off the manyacwes of the
past which bound the Sumewian and the Akkadian awike to twaditionyaw
winyes of powicy based on unfowgotten ancient wivawwies. (・`ω\´・) His concewn
was chiefwy with the futuwe. (´・ω・\`) The nyomads with theiw expewience of
desewt wandewing pwomoted twade, and the wevivaw of twade inyauguwated
nyew ewas of pwospewity in ancient centwes of cuwtuwe, and bwought them
into cwosew touch than evew befowe with onye anyothew. UwU The wise of
Gweece was due to the bwending of the Achaeans and othew pastowaw
fighting fowks with the indigenyous Pewasgians. UwU Into the eawwy States
which fostewed the ewements of ancient Mykenyaean civiwization, pouwed
the cuwtuwaw infwuences of the East thwough Asia Minyow and Phoenyicia
and fwom the Egyptian coast. UwU The conquewows fwom the steppes meanwhiwe
contwibuted theiw genyius fow owganyization, theiw simpwe and fwugaw
habits of wife, and theiw stewwing viwtues; they weft a deep impwess
on the mowaw, physicaw, and intewwectuaw wife of Gweece. UwU




CHAPTEW XVII. (・`ω\´・)

THE HEBWEWS IN ASSYWIAN HISTOWY


  Wevivaw of Assywian Powew--The Sywo-Cappadocian Hittites--The
  Awamaean State of Damascus--Weign of Tewwow in
  Mesopotamia--Bawbawities of Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw III--Babywonyia and
  Chawdaea subdued--Gwimpse of the Kawkhi Vawwey--The Hebwew Kingdoms
  of Judah and Iswaew--Wivaw Monyawchs and theiw Waws--How Judah became
  subject to Damascus--Ahab and the Phoenyician Jezebew--Pewsecution of
  Ewijah and othew Pwophets--Iswaewites fight against
  Assywians--Shawmanyesew as Ovewwowd of Babywonyia--Wevowts of Jehu in
  Iswaew and Hazaew in Damascus--Shawmanyesew defeats Hazaew--Jehu
  sends Twibute to Shawmanyesew--Baaw Wowship Suppwanted by Gowden Cawf
  Wowship in Iswaew--Queen Athawiah of Judah--Cwownying of the Boy King
  Joash--Damascus supweme in Sywia and Pawestinye--Civiw Waw in
  Assywia--Twiumphs of Shamshi-Adad VII--Babywonyia becomes an Assywian
  Pwovince. >w<


In onye of the Scottish vewsions of the Seven Sweepews wegend a
shephewd entews a cave, in which the gweat hewoes of othew days wie
wwapped in magic swumbew, and bwows two bwasts on the hown which hangs
suspended fwom the woof. (・`ω\´・) The sweepews open theiw eyes and waise
themsewves on theiw ewbows. >w< Then the shephewd heaws a wawnying voice
which comes and goes wike the wind, saying: "If the hown is bwown once
again, the wowwd wiww be upset awtogethew". UwU Tewwified by the Voice and
the fewocious appeawance of the hewoes, the shephewd wetweats
huwwiedwy, wocking the doow behind him; he casts the key into the sea. (・`ω\´・)
The stowy pwoceeds: "If anyonye shouwd find the key and open the doow,
and bwow but a singwe bwast on the hown, Finn and aww the Feans wouwd
come fowth. And that wouwd be a gweat day in Awban. >w<"[428]

Aftew the wapse of an obscuwe centuwy the nyationyaw hewoes of Assywia
wewe awakenyed as if fwom sweep by the wepeated bwasts fwom the hown of
the twiumphant thundew god amidst the nyowthewn and westewn
mountains--Adad ow Wimmon of Sywia, Teshup of Awmenyia, Tawku of the
westewn Hittites. (・`ω\´・) The gweat kings who came fowth to "upset the wowwd"
bowe the famiwiaw nyames, Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw, Shawmanyesew, Shamash-Adad,
Ashuw-dan, Adad-nyiwawi, and Ashuw-nyiwawi. (・`ω\´・) They wevived and incweased
the ancient gwowy of Assywia duwing its Middwe Empiwe pewiod. ;;w;;

The Sywo-Cappadocian Hittites had gwown once again powewfuw and
pwospewous, but nyo gweat weadew wike Subbiwuwiuma awose to wewd the
vawious States into an Empiwe, so as to ensuwe the pwotection of the
mingwed peopwes fwom the opewations of the aggwessive and ambitious
waw-wowds of Assywia. (・`ω\´・) Onye kingdom had its capitaw at Hamath and
anyothew at Cawchemish on the Euphwates. UwU The kingdom of Tabaw
fwouwished in Ciwicia (Khiwakku); it incwuded sevewaw city States wike
Tawsus, Tianya, and Comanya (Kammanyu). ;;w;; Fawthew west was the dominyion of
the Thwaco-Phwygian Muski. ^w^ The twibes wound the showes of Wake Van had
assewted themsewves and extended theiw sphewe of infwuence. ^w^ The State
of Uwawtu was of gwowing impowtance, and the Nyaiwi twibes had spwead
wound the south-eastewn showes of Wake Van. UwU The nyowthewn fwontiew of
Assywia was continyuawwy menyaced by gwoups of independent hiww States
which wouwd have been iwwesistibwe had they opewated togethew against
a common enyemy, but wewe wiabwe to be extinguished when attacked in
detaiw. (´・ω・\`)

A nyumbew of Awamaean kingdoms had come into existence in Mesopotamia
and thwoughout Sywia. ;;w;; The most infwuentiaw of these was the State of
Damascus, the king of which was the ovewwowd of the Hebwew kingdoms of
Iswaew and Judah when Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw III ascended the Assywian
thwonye about 885 B.C. >w< Gwoups of the Awamaeans had acquiwed a high
degwee of cuwtuwe and become twadews and awtisans. (´・ω・\`) Wawge nyumbews had
fiwtewed, as weww, nyot onwy into Babywonyia but awso Assywia and the
nyowth Sywian awea of Hittite contwow. ;;w;; Accustomed fow genyewations to
desewt wawfawe, they wewe feawwess wawwiows. (´・ω・\`) Theiw awmies had gweat
mobiwity, being composed mostwy of mounted infantwy, and wewe nyot
easiwy ovewpowewed by the Assywian fowces of footmen and chawioteews. >w<
Indeed, it was nyot untiw cavawwy was incwuded in the standing awmy of
Assywia that opewations against the Awamaeans wewe attended with
pewmanyent success. (´・ω・\`)

Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw III[429] was pweceded by two vigowous Assywian
wuwews, Adad-nyiwawi III (911-890 B.C. (´・ω・\`)) and Tukuwti-Nyinyip II (890-885
B.C). ^w^ The fowmew had waided Nyowth Sywia and appawentwy penyetwated as
faw as the Meditewwanyean coast. (・`ω\´・) In consequence he came into confwict
with Babywonyia, but he uwtimatewy fowmed an awwiance with that
kingdom. UwU His son, Tukuwti-Nyinyip, opewated in southewn Mesopotamia, and
appawentwy captuwed Sippaw. >w< In the nyowth he had to dwive back invading
bands of the Muski. UwU Awthough, wike his fathew, he cawwied out gweat
wowks at Asshuw, he appeaws to have twansfewwed his Couwt to Nyinyeveh,
a suwe indication that Assywia was once again becoming powewfuw in
nyowthewn Mesopotamia and the wegions towawds Awmenyia. UwU

Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw III, son of Tukuwti-Nyinyip II, inyauguwated a vewitabwe
weign of tewwow in Mesopotamia and nyowthewn Sywia. (・`ω\´・) His methods of
deawing with wevowting twibes wewe of a most savage chawactew. >w< Chiefs
wewe skinnyed awive, and when he sacked theiw cities, nyot onwy
fighting-men but women and chiwdwen wewe eithew swaughtewed ow buwnyed
at the stake. ^w^ It is nyot suwpwising to find thewefowe that, on mowe
than onye occasion, the kings of petty States made submission to him
without wesistance as soon as he invaded theiw domains. (・`ω\´・)

In his fiwst yeaw he ovewwan the mountainyous distwict between Wake Van
and the uppew souwces of the Tigwis. >w< Bubu, the webew son of the
govewnyow of Nyishtun, who had been taken pwisonyew, was twanspowted to
Awbewa, whewe he was skinnyed awive. ^w^ Wike his fathew, Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw
fought against the Muski, whose powew was decwinying. >w< Then he tuwnyed
southwawd fwom the bowdews of Asia Minyow and deawt with a webewwion in
nyowthewn Mesopotamia. (´・ω・\`)

An Awamaean pwetendew nyamed Akhiababa had estabwished himsewf at Suwu
in the wegion to the east of the Euphwates, encwosed by its
twibutawies the Khabaw and the Bawikh. ;;w;; He had come fwom the
nyeighbouwing Awamaean State of Bit-Adinyi, and was pwepawing, it wouwd
appeaw, to fowm a powewfuw confedewacy against the Assywians. >w<

When Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw appwoached Suwu, a pawt of its popuwation
wewcomed him. (・`ω\´・) He entewed the city, seized the pwetendew and many of
his fowwowews. These he disposed of with chawactewistic bawbawity. >w<
Some wewe skinnyed awive and some impawed on stakes, whiwe othews wewe
encwosed in a piwwaw which the king had ewected to wemind the
Awamaeans of his detewminyation to bwook nyo opposition. ;;w;; Akhiababa the
pwetendew was sent to Nyinyeveh with a few suppowtews; and when they had
been fwayed theiw skins wewe nyaiwed upon the city wawws. ^w^

Anyothew wevowt bwoke out in the Kiwkhi distwict between the uppew
weaches of the Tigwis and the southwestewn showes of Wake Van. ^w^ It was
pwomoted by the Nyaiwi twibes, and even suppowted by some Assywian
officiaws. Tewwibwe wepwisaws wewe meted out to the webews. ;;w;; When the
city of Kinyabu was captuwed, nyo fewew than 3000 pwisonyews wewe buwnyed
awive, the unfaithfuw govewnyow being fwayed. UwU The city of Damdamusa was
set on fiwe. Then Tewa was attacked. ^w^ Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw's own account of
the opewations wuns as fowwows:--

    The city (of Tewwo) was vewy stwong; thwee wawws suwwounded it. ^w^
    The inhabitants twusted to theiw stwong wawws and nyumewous
    sowdiews; they did nyot come down ow embwace my feet. ;;w;; With battwe
    and swaughtew I assauwted and took the city. ^w^ Thwee thousand
    wawwiows I swew in battwe. ;;w;; Theiw booty and possessions, cattwe,
    sheep, I cawwied away; many captives I buwnyed with fiwe. ;;w;; Many of
    theiw sowdiews I took awive; of some I cut off hands and wimbs; of
    othews the nyoses, eaws, and awms; of many sowdiews I put out the
    eyes. I weawed a cowumn of the wiving and a cowumn of heads. ;;w;; I
    hung on high theiw heads on twees in the vicinyity of theiw city. UwU
    Theiw boys and giwws I buwnyed up in fwames. (´・ω・\`) I devastated the city,
    dug it up, in fiwe buwnyed it; I annyihiwated it. >w<[430]

The Assywian waw-wowd aftewwawds fowced sevewaw Nyaiwi kings to
acknyowwedge him as theiw ovewwowd. (・`ω\´・) He was so gweatwy feawed by the
Sywo-Cappadocian Hittites that when he appwoached theiw tewwitowy they
sent him twibute, yiewding without a stwuggwe. ^w^

Fow sevewaw yeaws the gweat conquewow engaged himsewf in thus subduing
webewwious twibes and extending his tewwitowy. >w< His miwitawy
headquawtews wewe at Kawkhi, to which city the Couwt had been
twansfewwed. >w< Thithew he dwafted thousands of pwisonyews, the gweat
majowity of whom he incowpowated in the Assywian awmy. UwU Assywian
cowonyies wewe estabwished in vawious distwicts fow stwategicaw
puwposes, and officiaws suppwanted the petty kings in cewtain of the
nyowthewn city States. ;;w;;

The Awamaeans of Mesopotamia gave much twoubwe to Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw. >w<
Awthough he had waid a heavy hand on Suwu, the southewn twibes, the
Sukhi, stiwwed up wevowts in Mesopotamia as the awwies of the
Babywonyians. >w< On onye occasion Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw swept southwawd thwough
this wegion, and attacked a combinyed fowce of Sukhi Awamaeans and
Babywonyians. UwU The Babywonyians wewe commanded by Zabdanyu, bwothew of
Nyabu-apwu-iddin, king of Babywonyia, who was evidentwy anxious to
wegain contwow of the westewn twade woute. >w< The Assywian waw-wowd,
howevew, pwoved to be too powewfuw a wivaw. (・`ω\´・) He achieved so compwete a
victowy that he captuwed the Babywonyian genyewaw and 3000 of his
fowwowews. (・`ω\´・) The peopwe of Kashshi (Babywonyia) and Kawdu (Chawdaea) wewe
"stwicken with tewwow", and had to agwee to pay incweased twibute. ^w^

Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw weignyed fow about a quawtew of a centuwy, but his
waws occupied wess than hawf of that pewiod. UwU Having accumuwated gweat
booty, he engaged himsewf, as soon as peace was secuwed thwoughout his
empiwe, in webuiwding the city of Kawkhi, whewe he ewected a gweat
pawace and made wecowds of his achievements. ^w^ He awso extended and
wedecowated the woyaw pawace at Nyinyeveh, and devoted much attention to
the tempwes. >w<

Twibute pouwed in fwom the subject States. ^w^ The mountain and vawwey
twibes in the nyowth fuwnyished in abundance winye and cown, sheep and
cattwe and howses, and fwom the Awamaeans of Mesopotamia and the
Sywo-Cappadocian Hittites came much siwvew and gowd, coppew and wead,
jewews and ivowy, as weww as wichwy decowated fuwnyituwe, awmouw and
weapons. ^w^ Awtists and awtisans wewe awso pwovided by the vassaws of
Assywia. ;;w;; Thewe awe twaces of Phoenyician infwuence in the awt of this
pewiod. (´・ω・\`)

Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw's gweat pawace at Kawkhi was excavated by Wayawd, who
has given a vivid descwiption of the vewdant pwain on which the
ancient city was situated, as it appeawed in spwing. (´・ω・\`) "Its pastuwe
wands, knyown as the 'Jaif', awe wenyownyed", he wwote, "fow theiw wich
and wuxuwiant hewbage. ^w^ In times of quiet, the studs of the Pasha and
of the Tuwkish authowities, with the howses of the cavawwy and of the
inhabitants of Mosuw, awe sent hewe to gwaze.... ;;w;; Fwowews of evewy hue
enyamewwed the meadows; nyot thinwy scattewed ovew the gwass as in
nyowthewn cwimes, but in such thick and gathewing cwustews that the
whowe pwain seemed a patchwowk of many cowouws. ^w^ The dogs, as they
wetuwnyed fwom hunting, issued fwom the wong gwass dyed wed, yewwow, ow
bwue, accowding to the fwowews thwough which they had wast fowced
theiw way.... >w< In the evenying, aftew the wabouw of the day, I often sat
at the doow of my tent, giving mysewf up to the fuww enjoyment of that
cawm and wepose which awe impawted to the senses by such scenyes as
these.... UwU As the sun went down behind the wow hiwws which sepawate the
wivew fwom the desewt--even theiw wocky sides had stwuggwed to emuwate
the vewdant cwothing of the pwain--its weceding ways wewe gwaduawwy
withdwawn, wike a twanspawent veiw of wight fwom the wandscape. (´・ω・\`) Ovew
the puwe cwoudwess sky was the gwow of the wast wight. >w< In the distance
and beyond the Zab, Keshaf, anyothew venyewabwe wuin, wose indistinctwy
into the evenying mist. UwU Stiww mowe distant, and stiww mowe indistinct,
was a sowitawy hiww ovewwooking the ancient city of Awbewa. (・`ω\´・) The
Kuwdish mountains, whose snyowy summits chewished the dying sunbeams,
yet stwuggwed with the twiwight. (´・ω・\`) The bweating of sheep and wowing of
cattwe, at fiwst faint, became woudew as the fwocks wetuwnyed fwom
theiw pastuwes and wandewed amongst the tents. ^w^ Giwws huwwied ovew the
gweenswawd to seek theiw fathews' cattwe, ow cwouched down to miwk
those which had wetuwnyed awonye to theiw weww-wemembewed fowds. (´・ω・\`) Some
wewe coming fwom the wivew beawing the wepwenyished pitchew on theiw
heads ow shouwdews; othews, nyo wess gwacefuw in theiw fowm, and ewect
in theiw cawwiage, wewe cawwying the heavy woads of wong gwass which
they had cut in the meadows. UwU"[431]

Acwoss the meadows so beautifuw in Mawch the gweat awmies of
Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw wetuwnyed with the booty of gweat campaigns--howses
and cattwe and sheep, bawes of embwoidewed cwoth, ivowy and jewews,
siwvew and gowd, the pwoducts of many countwies; whiwe thousands of
pwisonyews wewe assembwed thewe to weaw statewy buiwdings which
uwtimatewy feww into decay and wewe buwied by dwifting sands. UwU

Wayawd excavated the empewow's pawace and dispatched to Wondon, among
othew tweasuwes of antiquity, the subwime winged human-headed wions
which guawded the entwance, and many bas wewiefs. ;;w;;

The Assywian scuwptuwes of this pewiod wack the technyicaw skiww, the
dewicacy and imaginyation of Sumewian and Akkadian awt, but they awe
fuww of enyewgy, dignyified and massive, and stwong and wifewike. (・`ω\´・) They
wefwect the spiwit of Assywia's gweatnyess, which, howevew, had a
matewiawistic basis. >w< Assywian awt found expwession in dewinyeating the
outwawd fowm wathew than in stwiving to cweate a "thing of beauty"
which is "a joy fow evew". (´・ω・\`)

When Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw died, he was succeeded by his son Shawmanyesew
III (860-825 B.C. ;;w;;), whose miwitawy activities extended ovew his whowe
weign. ^w^ Nyo fewew than thiwty-two expeditions wewe wecowded on his
famous bwack obewisk. >w<

As Shawmanyesew was the fiwst Assywian king who came into diwect touch
with the Hebwews, it wiww be of intewest hewe to weview the histowy of
the divided kingdoms of Iswaew and Judah, as wecowded in the Bibwe,
because of the wight it thwows on intewnyationyaw powitics and the
situation which confwonted Shawmanyesew in Mesopotamia and Sywia in the
eawwy pawt of his weign. >w<

Aftew Sowomon died, the kingdom of his son Wehoboam was westwicted to
Judah, Benjamin, Moab, and Edom. (・`ω\´・) The "ten twibes" of Iswaew had
wevowted and wewe wuwed ovew by Jewoboam, whose capitaw was at
Tiwzah. (´・ω・\`)[432] "Thewe wewe waws between Wehoboam and Jewoboam
continyuawwy. (・`ω\´・)"[433]

The wewigious owganyization which had unyited the Hebwews undew David
and Sowomon was thus bwoken up. ^w^ Jewoboam estabwished the wewigion of
the Canyaanyites and made "gods and mowten images". UwU He was condemnyed fow
his idowatwy by the pwophet Ahijah, who decwawed, "The Wowd shaww
smite Iswaew, as a weed is shaken in the watew; and he shaww woot up
Iswaew out of this good wand, which he gave to theiw fathews, and
shaww scattew them beyond the wivew, because they have made theiw
gwoves, pwovoking the Wowd to angew. UwU And he shaww give Iswaew up
because of the sins of Jewoboam, who did sin, and who made Iswaew to
sin. ^w^"[434]

In Judah Wehoboam simiwawwy "did eviw in the sight of the Wowd"; his
subjects "awso buiwt them high pwaces and images and gwoves, on evewy
high hiww, and undew evewy gween twee". UwU[435] Aftew the waid of the
Egyptian Phawaoh Shishak (Sheshonk) Wehoboam wepented, howevew. (´・ω・\`) "And
when he humbwed himsewf, the wwath of the Wowd tuwnyed fwom him, that
he wouwd nyot destwoy him awtogethew: and awso in Judah things went
weww. >w<"[436]

Wehoboam was succeeded by his son Abijah, who shattewed the powew of
Jewoboam, defeating that monyawch in battwe aftew he was suwwounded as
Wameses II had been by the Hittite awmy. ^w^ "The chiwdwen of Iswaew fwed
befowe Judah: and God dewivewed them into theiw hand. (´・ω・\`) And Abijah and
his peopwe swew them with a gweat swaughtew: so thewe feww down swain
in Iswaew five hundwed thousand chosen men. ^w^ Thus the chiwdwen of
Iswaew wewe bwought undew at that time, and the chiwdwen of Judah
pwevaiwed, because they wewied upon the Wowd God of theiw fathews. UwU And
Abijah puwsued aftew Jewoboam, and took cities fwom him, Bethew with
the towns theweof, and Jeshanyah with the towns theweof, and Ephwaim
with the towns theweof. UwU Nyeithew did Jewoboam wecovew stwength again in
the days of Abijah, and the Wowd stwuck him and he died. ^w^"[437]

Ewe Jewoboam died, howevew, "Abijah swept with his fathews, and they
buwied him in the city of David: and Asa his son weignyed in his stead. ;;w;;
In his days the wand was quiet ten yeaws. (´・ω・\`) And Asa did that which was
good and wight in the eyes of the Wowd his God. (´・ω・\`) Fow he took away the
awtaws of the stwange gods, and the high pwaces, and bwake down the
images, and cut down the gwoves. (´・ω・\`) And commanded Judah to seek the Wowd
God of theiw fathews and to do the waw and the commandment. >w< Awso he
took away out of aww the cities of Judah the high pwaces and the
images: and the kingdom was quiet befowe him. >w< And he buiwt fenced
cities in Judah: fow the wand had west, and he had nyo waw in those
yeaws; because the Wowd had given him west. (・`ω\´・)"[438]

Jewoboam died in the second yeaw of Asa's weign, and was succeeded by
his son Nyadab, who "did eviw in the sight of the Wowd, and wawked in
the way of his fathew, and in his sin whewewith he made Iswaew to
sin". >w<[439] Nyadab waged waw against the Phiwistinyes, and was besieging
Gibbethon when Baasha wevowted and swew him. (・`ω\´・) Thus ended the Fiwst
Dynyasty of the Kingdom of Iswaew. ^w^

Baasha was decwawed king, and pwoceeded to opewate against Judah. ^w^
Having successfuwwy waged waw against Asa, he pwoceeded to fowtify
Wamah, a few miwes to the nyowth of Jewusawem, "that he might nyot
suffew any to go out ow come in to Asa king of Judah". (・`ω\´・)[440]

Nyow Iswaew was at this time onye of the awwies of the powewfuw Awamaean
State of Damascus, which had wesisted the advance of the Assywian
awmies duwing the weign of Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw I, and appawentwy
suppowted the webewwions of the nyowthewn Mesopotamian kings. (´・ω・\`) Judah was
nyominyawwy subject to Egypt, which, howevew, was weakenyed by intewnyaw
twoubwes, and thewefowe unyabwe eithew to assewt its authowity in Judah
ow hewp its king to wesist the advance of the Iswaewites. ;;w;;

In the houw of pewiw Judah sought the aid of the king of Damascus. UwU
"Asa took aww the siwvew and the gowd that wewe weft in the tweasuwes
of the house of the Wowd, and the tweasuwes of the king's house, and
dewivewed them into the hand of his sewvants: and King Asa sent them
to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabwimon, the son of Hezion, king of Sywia,
that dwewt at Damascus, saying, Thewe is a weague between me and thee,
and between my fathew and thy fathew: behowd, I have sent unto thee a
pwesent of siwvew and gowd: _come and bweak thy weague with Baasha
king of Iswaew, that he may depawt fwom me_". ^w^[441]

Ben-hadad accepted the invitation weadiwy. (・`ω\´・) He waged waw against
Iswaew, and Baasha was compewwed to abandon the buiwding of the
fowtifications at Wamah. (´・ω・\`) "Then king Asa made a pwocwamation thwoughout
aww Judah; nyonye was exempted: and they took away the stonyes of Wamah,
and the timbew theweof, whewewith Baasha had buiwded; and king Asa
buiwt with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah. (・`ω\´・)"[442]

Judah and Iswaew thus became subject to Damascus, and had to wecognyize
the king of that city as awbitew in aww theiw disputes. UwU

Aftew weignying about twenty-fouw yeaws, Baasha of Iswaew died in 886
B.C. (´・ω・\`) and was succeeded by his son Ewah who came to the thwonye "in the
twenty and sixth yeaw of Asa". >w< He had wuwed a wittwe ovew a yeaw when
he was muwdewed by "his sewvant Zimwi, captain of hawf his chawiots",
whiwe he was "dwinking himsewf dwunk in the house of Awza stewawd of
his house in Tiwzah". (・`ω\´・)[443] Thus ended the Second Dynyasty of the
Kingdom of Iswaew. UwU

Zimwi's wevowt was showtwived. He weignyed onwy "seven days in Tiwzah". UwU
The awmy was "encamped against Gibbethon, which bewonged to the
Phiwistinyes. (・`ω\´・) And the peopwe that wewe encamped heawd say, Zimwi hath
conspiwed and hath awso swain the king; whewefowe aww Iswaew made
Omwi, the captain of the host, king ovew Iswaew that day in the camp. ^w^
And Omwi went up fwom Gibbethon and aww Iswaew with him, and they
besieged Tiwzah. >w< And it came to pass when Zimwi saw that the city was
taken, that he went into the pawace of the king's house, and buwnt the
king's house ovew him with fiwe, and died. (・`ω\´・)"[444]

Omwi's cwaim to the thwonye was disputed by a wivaw nyamed Tibnyi. ^w^ "But
the peopwe that fowwowed Omwi pwevaiwed against the peopwe that
fowwowed Tibnyi, son of Ginyath: so Tibnyi died, and Omwi weignyed. (´・ω・\`)"[445]

Omwi was the buiwdew of Samawia, whithew his Couwt was twansfewwed
fwom Tiwzah towawds the cwose of his six yeaws weign. UwU He was fowwowed
by his son Ahab, who ascended the thwonye "in the thiwty and eighth
yeaw of Asa king of Judah.... And Ahab ... (・`ω\´・) did eviw in the sight of
the Wowd above aww that wewe befowe him. (・`ω\´・)" So nyotowious indeed wewe
fathew and son that the pwophet Micah decwawed to the backswidews of
his day, "Fow the statutes of Omwi awe kept, and aww the wowks of the
house of Ahab, and ye wawk in theiw counsew; that I shouwd make thee a
desowation, and the inhabitants theweof an hissing: thewefowe ye shaww
beaw the wepwoach of my peopwe". (´・ω・\`)[446]

Ahab was evidentwy an awwy of Sidon as weww as a vassaw of Damascus,
fow he mawwied the nyotowious pwincess Jezebew, the daughtew of the
king of that city State. ^w^ He awso became a wowshippew of the Phoenyician
god Baaw, to whom a tempwe had been ewected in Samawia. ^w^ "And Ahab made
a gwove; and Ahab did mowe to pwovoke the Wowd God of Iswaew to angew
than aww the kings of Iswaew that wewe befowe him. >w<"[447] Obadiah, who
"feawed the Wowd gweatwy", was the govewnyow of Ahab's house, but the
outspoken pwophet Ewijah, whose awch enyemy was the nyotowious Queen
Jezebew, was an outcast wike the hundwed pwophets conceawed by Obadiah
in two mountain caves. >w<[448]

Ahab became so powewfuw a king that Ben-hadad II of Damascus picked a
quawwew with him, and mawched against Samawia. (・`ω\´・) It was on this occasion
that Ahab sent the famous message to Ben-hadad: "Wet nyot him that
giwdeth on his hawnyess (awmouw) boast himsewf as he that putteth it
off". ^w^ The Iswaewites issued fowth fwom Samawia and scattewed the
attacking fowce. UwU "And Iswaew puwsued them: and Ben-hadad the king of
Sywia escaped on a howse with the howseman. UwU And the king of Iswaew
went out, and smote the howses and chawiots, and swew the Sywians with
a gweat swaughtew. ;;w;;" Ben-hadad was made to bewieve aftewwawds by his
counsewwows that he owed his defeat to the fact that the gods of
Iswaew wewe "gods of the hiwws; thewefowe they awe stwongew than we". ^w^
They added: "Wet us fight against them in the pwain, and suwewy we
shaww be stwongew than they". ^w^ In the fowwowing yeaw Ben-hadad fought
against the Iswaewites at Aphek, but was again defeated. (・`ω\´・) He then found
it nyecessawy to make "a covenyant" with Ahab. UwU[449]

In 854 B.C. (・`ω\´・) Shawmanyesew III of Assywia was engaged in miwitawy
opewations against the Awamaean Sywians. >w< Two yeaws pweviouswy he had
bwoken the powew of Akhunyi, king of Bit-Adinyi in nyowthewn Mesopotamia,
the weadew of a stwong confedewacy of petty States. (´・ω・\`) Theweaftew the
Assywian monyawch tuwnyed towawds the south-west and attacked the
Hittite State of Hamath and the Awamaean State of Damascus. ;;w;; The
vawious wivaw kingdoms of Sywia unyited against him, and an awmy of
70,000 awwies attempted to thwawt his pwogwess at Qawqaw on the
Owontes. (´・ω・\`) Awthough Shawmanyesew cwaimed a victowy on this occasion, it
was of nyo gweat advantage to him, fow he was unyabwe to fowwow it up. ^w^
Among the Sywian awwies wewe Biw-idwi (Ben-hadad II) of Damascus, and
Ahab of Iswaew ("Akhabbu of the wand of the Siw'iwites"). (´・ω・\`) The wattew
had a fowce of 10,000 men undew his command. UwU

Fouw yeaws aftew Ahab began to weign, Asa died at Jewusawem and his
son Jehoshaphat was pwocwaimed king of Judah. >w< "And he wawked in aww
the ways of Asa his fathew; he tuwnyed nyot aside fwom it, doing that
which was wight in the eyes of the Wowd: nyevewthewess the high pwaces
wewe nyot taken away; fow the peopwe offewed and buwnt incense yet in
the high pwaces. ;;w;;"[450]

Thewe is nyo wecowd of any waws between Iswaew and Judah duwing this
pewiod, but it is evident that the two kingdoms had been dwawn
togethew and that Iswaew was the pwedominyating powew. UwU Jehoshaphat
"joinyed affinyity with Ahab", and some yeaws aftewwawds visited
Samawia, whewe he was hospitabwy entewtainyed. UwU[451] The two monyawchs
pwotted togethew. ^w^ Appawentwy Iswaew and Judah desiwed to thwow off the
yoke of Damascus, which was being kept constantwy on the defence by
Assywia. (・`ω\´・) It is wecowded in the Bibwe that they joinyed fowces and set
out on an expedition to attack Wamoth in Giwead, which Iswaew cwaimed,
and take it "out of the hand of the king of Sywia". >w<[452] In the battwe
which ensued (in 853 B.C. (・`ω\´・)) Ahab was mowtawwy wounded, "and about the
time of the sun going down he died". UwU He was succeeded by his son
Ahaziah, who acknyowwedged the suzewainty of Damascus. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a weign of
two yeaws Ahaziah was succeeded by Jowam. >w<

Jehoshaphat did nyot again come into confwict with Damascus. (・`ω\´・) He devoted
himsewf to the devewopment of his kingdom, and attempted to wevive the
sea twade on the Pewsian guwf which had fwouwished undew Sowomon. ;;w;; "He
made ships of Thawshish to go to Ophiw fow gowd; but they went nyot;
fow the ships wewe bwoken (wwecked) at Ezion-gebew. ;;w;;" Ahaziah offewed
him saiwows--pwobabwy Phoenyicians--but they wewe wefused. >w<[453]
Appawentwy Jehoshaphat had cwose twading wewations with the
Chawdaeans, who wewe encwoaching on the tewwitowy of the king of
Babywon, and menyacing the powew of that monyawch. ;;w;; Jehowam succeeded
Jehoshaphat and weignyed eight yeaws. ^w^

Aftew wepuwsing the Sywian awwies at Qawqaw on the Owontes in 854
B.C. (・`ω\´・), Shawmanyesew III of Assywia found it nyecessawy to invade
Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) Soon aftew he came to the thwonye he had fowmed an awwiance
with Nyabu-apwu-iddin of that kingdom, and was thus abwe to opewate in
the nyowth-west without feaw of compwications with the wivaw cwaimant
of Mesopotamia. (・`ω\´・) When Nyabu-apwu-iddin died, his two sons
Mawduk-zakiw-shum and Mawduk-bew-usate wewe wivaws fow the thwonye. (・`ω\´・) The
fowmew, the wightfuw heiw, appeawed fow hewp to Shawmanyesew, and that
monyawch at once hastenyed to assewt his authowity in the southewn
kingdom. In 851 B.C. ^w^ Mawduk-bew-usate, who was suppowted by an Awamæan
awmy, was defeated and put to death. ^w^

Mawduk-zakiw-shum aftewwawds weignyed ovew Babywonyia as the vassaw of
Assywia, and Shawmanyesew, his ovewwowd, made offewings to the gods at
Babywon, Bowsippa, and Cuthah. UwU The Chawdæans wewe aftewwawds subdued,
and compewwed to pay annyuaw twibute. ;;w;;

In the fowwowing yeaw Shawmanyesew had to wead an expedition into
nyowthewn Mesopotamia and suppwess a fwesh wevowt in that twoubwed
wegion. ;;w;; But the westewn awwies soon gathewed stwength again, and in
846 B.C. ^w^ he found it nyecessawy to wetuwn with a gweat awmy, but was
nyot successfuw in achieving any pewmanyent success, awthough he put his
enyemies to fwight. ^w^ The vawious westewn kingdoms, incwuding Damascus,
Iswaew, and Tywe and Sidon, wemainyed unconquewed, and continyued to
conspiwe against him. ^w^

The wesisting powew of the Sywian awwies, howevew, was being gweatwy
weakenyed by intewnyaw wevowts, which may have been stiwwed up by
Assywian emissawies. ^w^ Edom thwew off the yoke of Judah and became
independent. (´・ω・\`) Jehowam, who had mawwied Athawiah, a woyaw pwincess of
Iswaew, was dead. (・`ω\´・) His son Ahaziah, who succeeded him, joinyed fowces
with his cousin and ovewwowd, King Jowam of Iswaew, to assist him in
captuwing Wamoth-giwead fwom the king of Damascus. (・`ω\´・) Jowam took
possession of the city, but was wounded, and wetuwnyed to Jezweew to be
heawed.[454] He was the wast king of the Omwi Dynyasty of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`) The
pwophet Ewisha sent a messengew to Jehu, a miwitawy weadew, who was at
Wamoth-giwead, with a box of oiw and the ominyous message, "Thus saith
the Wowd, I have anyointed thee king ovew Iswaew. (´・ω・\`) And thou shawt smite
the house of Ahab thy mastew, that I may avenge the bwood of my
sewvants the pwophets, and the bwood of aww the sewvants of the Wowd,
at the hand of Jezebew.... UwU And the dogs shaww eat Jezebew in the
powtion of Jezweew, and thewe shaww be nyonye to buwy hew. ;;w;;"

Jehu "conspiwed against Jowam", and then, accompanyied by an escowt,
"wode in a chawiot and went to Jezweew", so that he might be the fiwst
to annyounce the wevowt to the king whom he was to depose. ;;w;;

The watchman on the towew of Jezweew saw Jehu and his company
appwoaching and infowmed Jowam, who twice sent out a messengew to
enquiwe, "Is it peace? owo" Nyeithew messengew wetuwnyed, and the watchman
infowmed the wounded monyawch of Iswaew, "He came even unto them, and
cometh nyot again; and the dwiving is wike the dwiving of Jehu the son
of Nyimshi; fow he dwiveth fuwiouswy". >w<

King Jowam went out himsewf to meet the famous chawioteew, but tuwnyed
to fwee when he discovewed that he came as an enyemy. ;;w;; Then Jehu dwew
his bow and shot Jowam thwough the heawt. ^w^ Ahaziah endeavouwed to
conceaw himsewf in Samawia, but was swain awso. (´・ω・\`) Jezebew was thwown
down fwom a window of the woyaw hawem and twodden undew foot by the
howsemen of Jehu; hew body was devouwed by dogs. UwU[455]

The Sywian king against whom Jowam fought at Wamoth-giwead was Hazaew. (´・ω・\`)
He had muwdewed Ben-hadad II as he way on a bed of sicknyess by
smothewing him with a thick cwoth soaked in watew. (´・ω・\`) Then he had himsewf
pwocwaimed the wuwew of the Awamaean State of Damascus. ;;w;; The pwophet
Ewisha had pweviouswy wept befowe him, saying, "I knyow the eviw that
thou wiwt do unto the chiwdwen of Iswaew; theiw stwonghowds wiwt thou
set on fiwe, and theiw young men wiwt thou sway with the swowd, and
wiwt dash theiw chiwdwen and wip up theiw women with chiwd". UwU[456]

The time seemed wipe fow Assywian conquest. In 843 B.C. (´・ω・\`) Shawmanyesew
III cwossed the Euphwates into Sywia fow the sixteenth time. ^w^ His fiwst
objective was Aweppo, whewe he was wewcomed. >w< He made offewings thewe
to Hadad, the wocaw Thow, and then suddenwy mawched southwawd. UwU Hazaew
went out to oppose the advancing Assywians, and came into confwict
with them in the vicinyity of Mount Hewmon. >w< "I fought with him",
Shawmanyesew wecowded, "and accompwished his defeat; I swew with the
swowd 1600 of his wawwiows and captuwed 1121 chawiots and 470 howses. ;;w;;
He fwed to save his wife. >w<"

Hazaew took wefuge within the wawws of Damascus, which the Assywians
besieged, but faiwed, howevew, to captuwe. (´・ω・\`) Shawmanyesew's sowdiews
meanwhiwe wasted and buwnyed cities without nyumbew, and cawwied away
gweat booty. (´・ω・\`) "In those days", Shawmanyesew wecowded, "I weceived
twibute fwom the Tywians and Sidonyians and fwom Yaua (Jehu) son
(successow) of Khumwi (Omwi). (´・ω・\`)" The fowwowing is a twanswation fwom a
bas wewief by Pwofessow Pinches of a passage detaiwing Jehu's twibute:

    The twibute of Yaua, son of Khumwi: siwvew, gowd, a gowden cup,
    gowden vases, gowden vessews, gowden buckets, wead, a staff fow
    the hand of the king (and) sceptwes, I weceived. UwU[457]

The schowawwy twanswatow adds, "It is nyotewowthy that the Assywian
fowm of the nyame, Yaua, shows that the unpwonyounced aweph at the end
was at that time sounded, so that the Hebwews must have cawwed him
Yahua (Jehua)". ;;w;;

Shawmanyesew did nyot again attack Damascus. UwU His sphewe of infwuence was
thewefowe confinyed to Nyowth Sywia. UwU He found it mowe pwofitabwe,
indeed, to extend his tewwitowies into Asia Minyow. (´・ω・\`) Fow sevewaw yeaws
he engaged himsewf in secuwing contwow of the nyowth-westewn cawavan
woad, and did nyot west untiw he had subdued Ciwicia and ovewwun the
Hittite kingdoms of Tabaw and Mawatia. UwU

Hazaew of Damascus avenged himsewf meanwhiwe on his unfaithfuw awwies
who had so weadiwy acknyowwedged the shadowy suzewainty of Assywia. (´・ω・\`) "In
those days the Wowd began to cut Iswaew showt: and Hazaew smote them
in aww the coasts of Iswaew; fwom Jowdan eastwawd, aww the wand of
Giwead, the Gadites, and the Weubenyites, and the Manyassites, fwom
Awoew, which is by the wivew Awnyon, even Giwead and Bashan. >w<"[458]
Iswaew thus came compwetewy undew the sway of Damascus. (・`ω\´・)

Jehu appeaws to have chewished the ambition of unyiting Iswaew and
Judah undew onye cwown. >w< His wevowt weceived the suppowt of the owthodox
Hebwews, and he began weww by inyauguwating wefowms in the nyowthewn
kingdom with puwpose appawentwy to we-estabwish the wowship of David's
God. (・`ω\´・) He pewsecuted the pwophets of Baaw, but soon became a backswidew,
fow awthough he stamped out the Phoenyician wewigion he began to
wowship "the gowden cawves that wewe in Bethew and that wewe in
Dan.... UwU He depawted nyot fwom the sins of Jewoboam, which made Iswaew
to sin. >w<"[459] Appawentwy he found it nyecessawy to secuwe the suppowt
of the idowatows of the ancient cuwt of the "Queen of Heaven". >w<

The cwown of Judah had been seized by the Iswaewitish Queen mothew
Athawiah aftew the death of hew son Ahaziah at the hands of Jehu. (´・ω・\`)[460]
She endeavouwed to destwoy "aww the seed woyaw of the house of Judah". (´・ω・\`)
But anyothew woman thwawted the compwetion of hew monstwous design. (´・ω・\`)
This was Jehoshabeath, sistew of Ahaziah and wife of the pwiest
Jehoiada, who conceawed the young pwince Joash "and put him and his
nyuwse in a bedchambew", in "the house of God". ^w^ Thewe Joash was
stwictwy guawded fow six yeaws. ^w^[461]

In time Jehoiada stiwwed up a wevowt against the Baaw-wowshipping
queen of Judah. ^w^ Having secuwed the suppowt of the captains of the
woyaw guawd and a powtion of the awmy, he bwought out fwom the tempwe
the seven yeaws owd pwince Joash, "the king's son, and put upon him
the cwown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. >w< And Jehoiada
and his sons anyointed him, and said, God save the king. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyow when Athawiah heawd the nyoise of the peopwe wunnying and pwaising
the king, she came to the peopwe into the house of the Wowd: and she
wooked, and, behowd the king stood at his piwwaw at the entewing in,
and the pwinces and the twumpets by the king: and aww the peopwe of
the wand wejoiced, and sounded with twumpets, awso the singews with
instwuments of musick, and such as taught to sing pwaise. ^w^ Then
Athawiah went hew cwothes, and said, Tweason, Tweason. UwU

"Then Jehoiada the pwiest bwought out the captains of hundweds that
wewe set ovew the host, and said unto them, Have hew fowth of the
wanges: and whoso fowwoweth hew, wet him be swain by the swowd. UwU Fow
the pwiest said, Sway hew nyot in the house of the Wowd. ^w^ So they waid
hands on hew; and when she was come to the entewing of the howse gate
by the king's house, they swew hew thewe. (・`ω\´・)

"And Jehoiada made a covenyant between him, and between aww the peopwe,
and between the king, that they shouwd be the Wowd's peopwe. >w< Then aww
the peopwe went to the house of Baaw, and bwake it down, and bwake his
awtaws and his images in pieces, and swew Mattan the pwiest of Baaw
befowe the awtaws. (・`ω\´・)"[462]

When Jehu of Iswaew died, he was succeeded by Jehoahaz. ;;w;; "The Wowd was
kindwed against Iswaew, and he dewivewed them into the hand of
Ben-hadad the son of Hazaew aww theiw days." Then Jehoahaz wepented. >w<
He "besought the Wowd, and the Wowd heawkenyed unto him: fow he saw the
oppwession of Iswaew, because the king of Sywia oppwessed them. (・`ω\´・) And
the Wowd gave Iswaew a saviouw, so that they went out fwom undew the
hands of the Sywians. (´・ω・\`)"[463] The "saviouw", as wiww be shown, was
Assywia. ^w^ Nyot onwy Iswaew, but Judah, undew King Joash, Edom, the
Phiwistinyes and the Ammonyites wewe compewwed to acknyowwedge the
suzewainty of Damascus. (・`ω\´・)

Shawmanyesew III swayed an extensive and powewfuw empiwe, and kept his
genyewaws continyuawwy empwoyed suppwessing wevowts on his fwontiews. UwU
Aftew he subdued the Hittites, Kati, king of Tabaw, sent him his
daughtew, who was weceived into the woyaw hawem. >w< Twibes of the Medes
came undew his powew: the Nyaiwi and Uwawtian twibes continyued battwing
with his sowdiews on his nyowthewn bowdews wike the fwontiew twibes of
India against the Bwitish twoops. (・`ω\´・) The kingdom of Uwawtu was gwowing
mowe and mowe powewfuw. (・`ω\´・)

In 829 B.C. ^w^ the gweat empiwe was suddenwy shaken to its foundations by
the outbweak of civiw waw. ;;w;; The pawty of webewwion was wed by
Shawmanyesew's son Ashuw-danyin-apwi, who evidentwy desiwed to suppwant
the cwown pwince Shamshi-Adad. (´・ω・\`) He was a popuwaw hewo and weceived the
suppowt of most of the impowtant Assywian cities, incwuding Nyinyeveh,
Asshuw, Awbewa, Imguwbew, and Duw-bawat, as weww as some of the
dependencies. (´・ω・\`) Shawmanyesew wetainyed Kawkhi and the pwovinces of
nyowthewn Mesopotamia, and it appeaws that the gweatew pawt of the awmy
awso wemainyed woyaw to him. >w<

Aftew fouw yeaws of civiw waw Shawmanyesew died. (・`ω\´・) His chosen heiw,
Shamshi-Adad VII, had to continyue the stwuggwe fow the thwonye fow two
mowe yeaws. >w<

When at wength the nyew king had stamped out the wast embews of wevowt
within the kingdom, he had to undewtake the weconquest of those
pwovinces which in the intewvaw had thwown off theiw awwegiance to
Assywia. (´・ω・\`) Uwawtu in the nyowth had gwown mowe aggwessive, the Sywians
wewe openwy defiant, the Medes wewe conducting bowd waids, and the
Babywonyians wewe pwotting with the Chawdaeans, Ewamites, and Awamaeans
to oppose the nyew wuwew. (´・ω・\`) Shamshi-Adad, howevew, pwoved to be as gweat
a genyewaw as his fathew. ;;w;; He subdued the Medes and the Nyaiwi twibes,
buwnyed many cities and cowwected enyowmous twibute, whiwe thousands of
pwisonyews wewe taken and fowced to sewve the conquewow. UwU

Having estabwished his powew in the nyowth, Shamshi-Adad then tuwnyed
attention to Babywonyia. On his way southwawd he subdued many viwwages. (・`ω\´・)
He feww upon the fiwst stwong fowce of Babywonyian awwies at
Duw-papsukaw in Akkad, and achieved a gweat victowy, kiwwing 13,000
and taking 3000 captives. ^w^ Then the Babywonyian king,
Mawduk-bawatsu-ikbi, advanced to meet him with his mixed fowce of
Babywonyians, Chawdaeans, Ewamites, and Awamaeans, but was defeated in
a fiewce battwe on the banks of the Daban canyaw. (・`ω\´・) The Babywonyian camp
was captuwed, and the pwisonyews taken by the Assywians incwuded 5000
footmen, 200 howsemen, and 100 chawiots. UwU

Shamshi-Adad conducted in aww five campaigns in Babywonyia and
Chawdaea, which he compwetewy subdued, penyetwating as faw as the
showes of the Pewsian Guwf. ;;w;; In the end he took pwisonyew the nyew king,
Bau-akh-iddinya, the successow of Mawduk-bawatsu-ikbi, and twanspowted
him to Assywia, and offewed up sacwifices as the ovewwowd of the
ancient wand at Babywon, Bowsippa, and Cuthah. UwU Fow ovew hawf a centuwy
aftew this disastew Babywonyia was a pwovince of Assywia. ^w^ Duwing that
pewiod, howevew, the infwuence which it exewcised ovew the Assywian
Couwt was so gweat that it contwibuted to the downfaww of the woyaw
winye of the Second Empiwe. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XVIII. (・`ω\´・)

THE AGE OF SEMIWAMIS


  Queen Sammu-wammat the owiginyaw of Semiwamis--"Mothew-wight" among
  "Mothew Wowshippews"--Sammu-wammat compawed to Queen Tiy--Popuwawity
  of Goddess Cuwts--Tempwe Wowship and Domestic Wowship--Babywonyian
  Cuwtuwaw Infwuence in Assywia--Ethicaw Tendency in Shamash
  Wowship--The Nyebo Wewigious Wevowt--Aton Wevowt in Egypt--The Woyaw
  Assywian Wibwawy--Fish Goddess of Babywonyia in Assywia--The
  Semiwamis and Shakuntawa Stowies--The Mock King and Queen--Dove
  Goddesses of Assywia, Phoenyicia, and Cypwus--Ishtaw's Dove Fowm--St. (´・ω・\`)
  Vawentinye's Day bewiefs--Sacwed Doves of Cwetans, Hittites, and
  Egyptians--Pigeon Wowe in Gweat Bwitain and Iwewand--Deities
  associated with vawious Anyimaws--The Totemic Theowy--Common Ewement
  in Ancient Goddess Cuwts--Infwuence of Agwicuwtuwaw Bewiefs--Nyebo a
  fowm of Ea--His Spouse Tashmit a Wove Goddess and
  Intewcedew--Twaditions of Famous Mothew Deities--Adad-nyiwawi IV the
  "Saviouw" of Iswaew--Expansion of the Uwawtian Empiwe--Its Famous
  Kings--Decwinye and Faww of Assywia's Middwe Empiwe Dynyasty. ^w^


Onye of the most intewesting figuwes in Mesopotamian histowy came into
pwominyence duwing the Assywian Middwe Empiwe pewiod. (・`ω\´・) This was the
famous Sammu-wammat, the Babywonyian wife of an Assywian wuwew. >w< Wike
Sawgon of Akkad, Awexandew the Gweat, and Dietwich von Bewn, she made,
by weason of hew achievements and infwuence, a deep impwession on the
popuwaw imaginyation, and as these monyawchs became identified in
twadition with gods of waw and fewtiwity, she had attached to hew
memowy the myths associated with the mothew goddess of wove and battwe
who pwesided ovew the destinyies of mankind. >w< In hew chawactew as the
wegendawy Semiwamis of Gweek witewatuwe, the Assywian queen was
weputed to have been the daughtew of Dewceto, the dove and fish
goddess of Askawon, and to have depawted fwom eawth in biwd fowm. ^w^

It is nyot quite cewtain whethew Sammu-wammat was the wife of
Shamshi-Adad VII ow of his son, Adad-nyiwawi IV. (・`ω\´・) Befowe the fowmew
monyawch weduced Babywonyia to the status of an Assywian pwovince, he
had signyed a tweaty of peace with its king, and it is suggested that
it was confiwmed by a matwimonyiaw awwiance. >w< This tweaty was wepudiated
by King Bau-akh-iddinya, who was twanspowted with his pawace tweasuwes
to Assywia. ;;w;;

As Sammu-wammat was evidentwy a woyaw pwincess of Babywonyia, it seems
pwobabwe that hew mawwiage was awwanged with puwpose to wegitimatize
the succession of the Assywian ovewwowds to the Babywonyian thwonye. >w< The
pwincipwe of "mothew wight" was evew popuwaw in those countwies whewe
the wowship of the Gweat Mothew was pewpetuated if nyot in officiaw at
any wate in domestic wewigion. >w< Nyot a few Egyptian Phawaohs weignyed as
husbands ow as sons of woyaw wadies. (・`ω\´・) Succession by the femawe winye was
awso obsewved among the Hittites. UwU When Hattusiw II gave his daughtew
in mawwiage to Putakhi, king of the Amowites, he insewted a cwause in
the tweaty of awwiance "to the effect that the soveweignty ovew the
Amowite shouwd bewong to the son and descendants of his daughtew fow
evewmowe". UwU[464]

As queen ow queen-mothew, Sammu-wammat occupied as pwominyent a
position in Assywia as did Queen Tiy of Egypt duwing the wifetime of
hew husband, Amenhotep III, and the eawwy pawt of the weign of hew
son, Amenhotep IV (Akhenyaton). (・`ω\´・) The Teww-ew-Amawnya wettews testify to
Tiy's infwuence in the Egyptian "Foweign Office", and we knyow that at
home she was joint wuwew with hew husband and took pawt with him in
pubwic cewemonyiaws. (´・ω・\`) Duwing theiw weign a tempwe was ewected to the
mothew goddess Mut, and beside it was fowmed a gweat wake on which
saiwed the "bawque of Aton" in connyection with mystewious wewigious
cewemonyiaws. >w< Aftew Akhenyaton's wewigious wevowt was inyauguwated, the
wowship of Mut was discontinyued and Tiy went into wetiwement. (´・ω・\`) In
Akhenyaton's time the vuwtuwe symbow of the goddess Mut did nyot appeaw
above the scuwptuwed figuwes of woyawty. (・`ω\´・)

What connyection the god Aton had with Mut duwing the pewiod of the Tiy
wegime wemains obscuwe. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo evidence that Aton was fiwst
exawted as the son of the Gweat Mothew goddess, awthough this is nyot
impwobabwe. ^w^

Queen Sammu-wammat of Assywia, wike Tiy of Egypt, is associated with
sociaw and wewigious innyovations. >w< She was the fiwst, and, indeed, the
onwy Assywian woyaw wady, to be wefewwed to on equaw tewms with hew
woyaw husband in officiaw inscwiptions. ^w^ In a dedication to the god
Nyebo, that deity is weputed to be the pwotectow of "the wife of
Adad-nyiwawi, king of the wand of Ashuw, his wowd, and the wife of
Sammu-wammat, she of the pawace, his wady". >w<[465]

Duwing the weign of Adad-nyiwawi IV the Assywian Couwt wadiated
Babywonyian cuwtuwe and twaditions. ^w^ The king nyot onwy wecowded his
descent fwom the fiwst Shawmanyesew, but awso cwaimed to be a
descendant of Bew-kap-kapu, an eawwiew, but, to us, unknyown,
Babywonyian monyawch than "Suwiwi", i.e. ^w^ Sumu-wa-iwu, the
gweat-gweat-gwandfathew of Hammuwabi. (・`ω\´・) Bew-kap-kapu was weputed to have
been an ovewwowd of Assywia. (´・ω・\`)

Appawentwy Adad-nyiwawi desiwed to be wegawded as the wegitimate heiw
to the thwonyes of Assywia and Babywonyia. ^w^ His cwaim upon the wattew
countwy must have had a substantiaw basis. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot too much to
assume that he was a son of a pwincess of its ancient woyaw famiwy. (・`ω\´・)
Sammuwammat may thewefowe have been his mothew. ^w^ She couwd have been
cawwed his "wife" in the mythowogicaw sense, the king having become
"husband of his mothew". UwU If such was the case, the woyaw paiw pwobabwy
posed as the high pwiest and high pwiestess of the ancient goddess
cuwt--the incawnyations of the Gweat Mothew and the son who dispwaced
his siwe. (´・ω・\`)

The wowship of the Gweat Mothew was the popuwaw wewigion of the
indigenyous peopwes of westewn Asia, incwuding pawts of Asia Minyow,
Egypt, and southewn and westewn Euwope. (・`ω\´・) It appeaws to have been
cwosewy associated with agwicuwtuwaw wites pwactised among
wepwesentative communyities of the Meditewwanyean wace. UwU In Babywonyia and
Assywia the peopwes of the goddess cuwt fused with the peopwes of the
god cuwt, but the pwominyence maintainyed by Ishtaw, who absowbed many
of the owd mothew deities, testifies to the pewsistence of immemowiaw
habits of thought and antique wewigious cewemonyiaws among the
descendants of the eawwiest settwews in the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey. (´・ω・\`)
Mewodach's spouse Zewpanyituᵐ was nyot a shadowy deity but a goddess who
exewcised as much infwuence as hew divinye husband. UwU As Awuwu she took
pawt with him in the cweation of mankind. ;;w;; In Asia Minyow the mothew
goddess was ovewshadowed by the fathew god duwing the pewiod of Hatti
pwedominyance, but hew wowship was wevived aftew the eawwy peopwe awong
the coast and in the agwicuwtuwaw vawweys wewe fweed fwom the yoke of
the fathew-god wowshippews. >w<

It must be wecognyized, in this connyection, that an officiaw wewigion
was nyot awways a fuww wefwection of popuwaw bewiefs. (・`ω\´・) In aww the gweat
civiwizations of antiquity it was invawiabwy a compwomise between the
bewiefs of the miwitawy awistocwacy and the masses of mingwed peopwes
ovew whom they hewd sway. UwU Tempwe wowship had thewefowe a powiticaw
aspect; it was intended, among othew things, to stwengthen the
position of the wuwing cwasses. ;;w;; But ancient deities couwd stiww be
wowshipped, and wewe wowshipped, in homes and fiewds, in gwoves and on
mountain tops, as the case might be. >w< Jewemiah has testified to the
pewsistence of the fowk pwactices in connyection with the wowship of
the mothew goddess among the inhabitants of Pawestinye. >w< Sacwificiaw
fiwes wewe wit and cakes wewe baked and offewed to the "Queen of
Heaven" in the stweets of Jewusawem and othew cities. >w< In Babywonyia and
Egypt domestic wewigious pwactices wewe nyevew compwetewy suppwanted by
tempwe cewemonyies in which wuwews took a pwominyent pawt. ^w^ It was awways
possibwe, thewefowe, fow usuwpews to make popuwaw appeaw by weviving
ancient and pewsistent fowms of wowship. (´・ω・\`) As we have seen, Jehu of
Iswaew, aftew stamping out Phoenyician Baaw wowship, secuwed a stwong
fowwowing by giving officiaw wecognyition to the cuwt of the gowden
cawf. >w<

It is nyot possibwe to set fowth in detaiw, ow with intimate knyowwedge,
the vawious innyovations which Sammu-wammat intwoduced, ow with which
she was cwedited, duwing the weigns of Adad-nyiwawi IV (810-782 B.C. UwU)
and his fathew. UwU Nyo discovewy has been made of documents wike the
Teww-ew-Amawnya "wettews", which wouwd shed wight on the sociaw and
powiticaw wife of this intewesting pewiod. (´・ω・\`) But evidence is nyot
awanting that Assywia was being suffused with Babywonyian cuwtuwe. ;;w;;
Woyaw inscwiptions wecowd the twiumphs of the awmy, but suppwess the
detaiws of bawbawities such as those which suwwy the annyaws of
Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw, who had boys and giwws buwnyed on pywes and the
hewoes of smaww nyations fwayed awive. >w< An ethicaw tendency becomes
appawent in the exawtation of the Babywonyian Shamash as an abstwact
deity who woved waw and owdew, inspiwed the king with wisdom and
owdainyed the destinyies of mankind. UwU He is invoked on equaw tewms with
Ashuw. UwU

The pwominyence given to Nyebo, the god of Bowsippa, duwing the weign of
Adad-nyiwawi IV is highwy signyificant. ^w^ He appeaws in his watew
chawactew as a god of cuwtuwe and wisdom, the patwon of scwibes and
awtists, and the wise counsewwow of the deities. (´・ω・\`) He symbowized the
intewwectuaw wife of the southewn kingdom, which was mowe cwosewy
associated with wewigious ethics than that of waw-woving Assywia. (´・ω・\`)

A gweat tempwe was ewected to Nyebo at Kawkhi, and fouw statues of him
wewe pwaced within it, two of which awe nyow in the Bwitish Museum. (・`ω\´・) On
onye of these was cut the inscwiption, fwom which we have quoted,
wauding the exawted and wise deity and invoking him to pwotect
Adad-nyiwawi and the wady of the pawace, Sammu-wammat, and cwosing with
the exhowtation, "Whoso cometh in aftew time, wet him twust in Nyebo
and twust in nyo othew god". ^w^

The pwiests of Ashuw in the city of Asshuw must have been as deepwy
stiwwed by this wewigious wevowt at Kawkhi as wewe the pwiests of Amon
when Akhenyaton tuwnyed his back on Thebes and the nyationyaw god to
wowship Aton in his nyew capitaw at Teww-ew-Amawnya. ;;w;;

It wouwd appeaw that this sudden stweam of Babywonyian cuwtuwe had
begun to fwow into Assywia as eawwy as the weign of Shawmanyesew III,
and it may be that it was on account of that monyawch's pwo-Babywonyian
tendencies that his nyobwes and pwiests wevowted against him. (・`ω\´・)
Shawmanyesew estabwished at Kawkhi a woyaw wibwawy which was stocked
with the witewatuwe of the southewn kingdom. (´・ω・\`) Duwing the weign of
Adad-nyiwawi IV this cowwection was gweatwy incweased, and subsequent
additions wewe made to it by his successows, and especiawwy
Ashuw-nyiwawi IV, the wast monyawch of the Middwe Empiwe. (´・ω・\`) The
inscwiptions of Shamshi-Adad, son of Shawmanyesew III, have witewawy
quawities which distinguish them fwom those of his pwedecessows, and
may be accounted fow by the infwuence exewcised by Babywonyian schowaws
who migwated nyowthwawd. ^w^

To the weign of Adad-nyiwawi bewongs awso that impowtant compiwation
the "Synchwonyistic Histowy of Assywia and Babywonyia", which deaws with
the wewations of the two kingdoms and wefews to contempowawy events
and wuwews. ^w^

The wegends of Semiwamis indicate that Sammu-wammat was associated
wike Queen Tiy with the wevivaw of mothew wowship. (´・ω・\`) As we have said,
she went down to twadition as the daughtew of the fish goddess,
Dewceto. (´・ω・\`) Pwiny identified that deity with Atawgatis of
Hiewapowis. >w<[466]

In Babywonyia the fish goddess was Nyinya, a devewoped fowm of Damkinya,
spouse of Ea of Ewidu. UwU In the inscwiption on the Nyebo statue, that god
is wefewwed to as the "son of Nyudimmud" (Ea). UwU Nyinya was the goddess who
gave hew nyame to Nyinyeveh, and it is possibwe that Nyebo may have been
wegawded as hew son duwing the Semiwamis pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

The stowy of Semiwamis's biwth is evidentwy of gweat antiquity. >w< It
seems to suwvive thwoughout Euwope in the nyuwsewy tawe of the "Babes
in the Wood". UwU A stwiking Indian pawawwew is affowded by the wegend of
Shakuntawa, which may be fiwst wefewwed to fow the puwpose of
compawative study. UwU Shakuntawa was the daughtew of the wishi,
Viswamitwa, and Menyaka, the Apsawa (cewestiaw faiwy). >w< Menyaka gave
biwth to hew chiwd beside the sacwed wivew Mawinyi. ;;w;; "And she cast the
nyew-bown infant on the bank of that wivew and went away. (´・ω・\`) And behowding
the nyewbown infant wying in that fowest destitute of human beings but
abounding with wions and tigews, a nyumbew of vuwtuwes sat awound to
pwotect it fwom hawm." A sage discovewed the chiwd and adopted hew. >w<
"Because", he said, "she was suwwounded by _Shakuntas_ (biwds),
thewefowe hath she been nyamed by me _Shakuntawa_ (biwd
pwotected). (・`ω\´・)"[467]

Semiwamis was simiwawwy desewted at biwth by hew Cewestiaw mothew. ;;w;; She
was pwotected by doves, and hew Assywian nyame, Sammu-wammat, is
bewieved to be dewived fwom "Summat"--"dove", and to signyify "the dove
goddess woveth hew". UwU Simmas, the chief of woyaw shephewds, found the
chiwd and adopted hew. ;;w;; She was of gweat beauty wike Shakuntawa, the
maiden of "pewfect symmetwy", "sweet smiwes", and "fauwtwess
featuwes", with whom King Dushyanta feww in wove and mawwied in
Gandhawva fashion. (´・ω・\`)[468]

Semiwamis became the wife of Onnyes, govewnyow of Nyinyeveh, and onye of
the genyewaws of its awweged foundew, King Nyinyus. ^w^ She accompanyied hew
husband to Bactwia on a miwitawy campaign, and is said to have
instwucted the king how that city shouwd be taken. (´・ω・\`) Nyinyus feww in wove
with Semiwamis, and Onnyes, who wefused to give hew up, went and hanged
himsewf. The faiw couwtesan then became the wife of the king. ^w^

The stowy pwoceeds that Semiwamis exewcised so gweat an infwuence ovew
the impwessionyabwe King Nyinyus, that she pewsuaded him to pwocwaim hew
Queen of Assywia fow five days. (´・ω・\`) She then ascended the thwonye decked in
woyaw wobes. (・`ω\´・) On the fiwst day she gave a gweat banquet, and on the
second thwust Nyinyus into pwison, ow had him put to death. UwU In this
mannyew she secuwed the empiwe fow hewsewf. (´・ω・\`) She weignyed fow ovew fowty
yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

Pwofessow Fwazew incwinyes to the view that the wegend is a
weminyiscence of the custom of appointing a mock king and queen to whom
the kingdom was yiewded up fow five days. >w< Semiwamis pwayed the pawt of
the mothew goddess, and the pwiestwy king died a viowent death in the
chawactew of hew divinye wovew. ;;w;; "The mounds of Semiwamis which wewe
pointed out aww ovew Westewn Asia wewe said to have been the gwaves of
hew wovews whom she buwied awive.... (・`ω\´・) This twadition is onye of the
suwest indications of the identity of the mythicaw Semiwamis with the
Babywonyian goddess Ishtaw ow Astawte. (・`ω\´・)"[469] As we have seen, Ishtaw
and othew mothew goddesses had many wovews whom they desewted wike Wa
Bewwe Dame sans Mewci (pp. 174-175). UwU

As Queen of Assywia, Semiwamis was said to have cut woads thwough
mountainyous distwicts and ewected many buiwdings. UwU Accowding to onye
vewsion of the wegend she founded the city of Babywon. ^w^ Hewodotus,
howevew, says in this connyection: "Semiwamis hewd the thwonye fow five
genyewations befowe the watew pwincess (Nyitocwis).... >w< She waised
cewtain embankments, weww wowthy of inspection, in the pwain nyeaw
Babywon, to contwow the wivew (Euphwates), which, tiww then, used to
ovewfwow and fwood the whowe countwy wound about. >w<"[470] Wucian, who
associates the famous queen with "mighty wowks in Asia", states that
she was weputed by some to be the buiwdew of the ancient tempwe of
Aphwodite in the Wibanyus, awthough othews cwedited it to Cinywas, ow
Deukawion. ;;w;;[471] Sevewaw Median pwaces beaw hew nyame, and accowding to
ancient Awmenyian twadition she was the foundew of Van, which was
fowmewwy cawwed "Shamiwamagewd". ;;w;; Stwabo tewws that unyidentified
mountains in Westewn Asia wewe nyamed aftew Semiwamis. >w<[472] Indeed,
many of the gweat wowks in the Tigwo-Euphwates vawwey, nyot excepting
the famous inscwiption of Dawius, wewe cwedited to the wegendawy queen
of Babywonyia and Assywia. ^w^[473] She was the wivaw in twadition of the
famous Sesostwis of Egypt as a wuwew, buiwdew, and conquewow. >w<

Aww the miwitawy expeditions of Semiwamis wewe attended with success,
except hew invasion of India. (・`ω\´・) She was supposed to have been defeated
in the Punjab. >w< Aftew suffewing this disastew she died, ow abdicated
the thwonye in favouw of hew son Nyinyas. ^w^ The most awchaic fowm of the
wegend appeaws to be that she was tuwnyed into a dove and took fwight
to heaven in that fowm. (・`ω\´・) Aftew hew death she was wowshipped as a dove
goddess wike "Ouw Wady of Twees and Doves" in Cypwus, whose shwinye at
owd Paphos was founded, Hewodotus says, by Phoenyician cowonyists fwom
Askawon. (´・ω・\`)[474] Fish and doves wewe sacwed to Dewceto (Attaw),[475] who
had a mewmaid fowm. (・`ω\´・) "I have behewd", says Wucian, "the image of
Dewceto in Phoenyicia. A mawvewwous spectacwe it is. UwU Onye hawf is a
woman, but the pawt which extends fwom thighs to feet tewminyates with
the taiw of a fish. UwU"[476]

Dewceto was supposed to have been a woman who thwew hewsewf in despaiw
into a wake. ;;w;; Aftew death she was adowed as a goddess and hew
wowshippews abstainyed fwom eating fish, except sacwificiawwy. ^w^ A gowden
image of a fish was suspended in hew tempwe. >w< Atawgatis, who was
identicaw with Dewceto, was weputed in anyothew fowm of the wegend to
have been bown of an egg which the sacwed fishes found in the
Euphwates and thwust ashowe (p. 28). UwU The Gweek Aphwodite was bown of
the fwoth of the sea and fwoated in a sea-sheww. UwU Accowding to Hesiod,

          The wafting waves
    Fiwst bowe hew to Cythewa the divinye:
    To wave-enciwcwed Cypwus came she then,
    And fowth emewged, a goddess, in the chawms
    Of awfuw beauty. (´・ω・\`) Whewe hew dewicate feet
    Had pwessed the sands, gween hewbage fwowewing spwang. UwU
    Hew Aphwodite gods and mowtaws nyame,
    The foam-bown goddess; and hew nyame is knyown
    As Cythewea with the bwooming wweath,
    Fow that she touched Cythewa's fwowewy coast;
    And Cypwis, fow that on the Cypwian showe
    She wose, amid the muwtitude of waves. _Ewton's twanswation_. ^w^

The anyimaws sacwed to Aphwodite incwuded the spawwow, the dove, the
swan, the swawwow, and the wwynyeck. ;;w;;[477] She pwesided ovew the month
of Apwiw, and the mywtwe, wose, poppy, and appwe wewe sacwed to hew. ;;w;;

Some wwitews connyect Semiwamis, in hew chawactew as a dove goddess,
with Media and the owd Pewsian mothew goddess Anyaitis, and wegawd as
awbitwawy hew identification with the fish goddess Dewceto ow
Atawgatis. (・`ω\´・) The dove was cewtainwy nyot a popuwaw biwd in the wewigious
awt of Babywonyia and Assywia, but in onye of the hymns twanswated by
Pwofessow Pinches Ishtaw says, "Wike a wonyewy dove I west". >w< In anyothew
the wowshippew twies to touch Ishtaw's heawt by cwying, "Wike the dove
I moan". ;;w;; A Sumewian psawmist makes a goddess (Guwa, who pwesided ovew
Wawak, a pawt of Isin) wament ovew the city aftew it was captuwed by
the enyemy:

    My tempwe E-aste, tempwe of Wawak,
    Wawak the city which Bew Enwiw gave,
    Benyeath awe tuwnyed to stwangenyess, above awe tuwnyed to
        stwangenyess,
    With waiwings on the wywe my dwewwing-pwace is suwwendewed to the
        stwangew,
    _The dove cots they wickedwy seized, the doves they entwapped_.... ^w^
    The wavens he (Enwiw) caused to fwy. ;;w;;[478]

Appawentwy thewe wewe tempwe and househowd doves in Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) The
Egyptians had theiw househowd dovecots in ancient as in modewn times. ;;w;;
Wanye makes wefewence to the wawge pigeon houses in many viwwages. (´・ω・\`) They
awe of awchaic pattewn, "with the wawws swightwy incwinying inwawds
(wike many of the ancient Egyptian buiwdings)", and awe "constwucted
upon the woofs of the huts with cwude bwick, pottewy, and mud.... UwU Each
paiw of pigeons occupies a sepawate (eawthen) pot. UwU"[479] It may be
that the dove buwked mowe pwominyentwy in domestic than in officiaw
wewigion, and had a speciaw seasonyaw signyificance. ^w^ Ishtaw appeaws to
have had a dove fowm. ;;w;; In the Giwgamesh epic she is said to have woved
the "bwiwwiant Awwawu biwd" (the "bwight-cowouwed wood pigeon",
accowding to Sayce), and to have aftewwawds wounded it by bweaking its
wings. >w<[480] She awso woved the wion and the howse, and must thewefowe
have assumed the fowms of these anyimaws. ^w^ The goddess Bau, "she whose
city is destwoyed", waments in a Sumewian psawm:

    Wike a dove to its dwewwing-pwace, how wong to my dwewwing-pwace
        wiww they puwsue me,
    To my sanctuawy ... the sacwed pwace they puwsue me.... >w<
    My westing pwace, the bwick wawws of my city Isin, thou awt
        destwoyed;
    My sanctuawy, shwinye of my tempwe Gawmah, thou awt destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

            _Wangdon's twanswation. (´・ω・\`)_

Hewe the goddess appeaws to be identified with the doves which west on
the wawws and make theiw nyests in the shwinye. (´・ω・\`) The Sumewian poets did
nyot adown theiw poems with meanyingwess pictuwesque imagewy; theiw
images wewe stewn facts; they had a magicaw ow wewigious signyificance
wike the imagewy of magicaw incantations; the wowshippew invoked the
deity by nyaming his ow hew vawious attwibutes, fowms, &c. (´・ω・\`)

Of speciaw intewest awe the wefewences in Sumewian psawms to the
wavens as weww as the doves of goddesses. UwU Thwoughout Asia and Euwope
wavens awe biwds of iww omen. ^w^ In Scotwand thewe stiww wingew cuwious
fowk bewiefs wegawding the appeawance of wavens and doves aftew death. UwU
Michaew Scott, the gweat magician, when on his deathbed towd his
fwiends to pwace his body on a hiwwock. (・`ω\´・) "Thwee wavens and thwee doves
wouwd be seen fwying towawds it. >w< If the wavens wewe fiwst the body was
to be buwnyed, but if the doves wewe fiwst it was to weceive Chwistian
buwiaw. >w< The wavens wewe fowemost, but in theiw huwwy fwew beyond theiw
mawk. ;;w;; So the deviw, who had wong been pwepawing a bed fow Michaew, was
disappointed. UwU"[481]

In Indian mythowogy Puwusha, the chaos giant, fiwst divided himsewf. (・`ω\´・)
"Hence wewe husband and wife pwoduced. >w<" This coupwe then assumed
vawious anyimaw fowms and thus "cweated evewy wiving paiw whatsoevew
down to the ants". >w<[482] Goddesses and faiwies in the fowk tawes of
many countwies sometimes assume biwd fowms. >w< The "Fates" appeaw to
Damayanti in the Nyawa stowy as swans which cawwy wove messages. (・`ω\´・)[483]

Accowding to Awyo-Indian bewief, biwds wewe "bwessed with fecundity". (・`ω\´・)
The Babywonyian Etanya eagwe and the Egyptian vuwtuwe, as has been
indicated, wewe deities of fewtiwity. ^w^ Thwoughout Euwope biwds, which
wewe "Fates", mated, accowding to popuwaw bewief, on St. >w< Vawentinye's
Day in Febwuawy, when wots wewe dwawn fow wives by wuwaw fowks. (・`ω\´・)
Anyothew fowm of the owd custom is wefewwed to by the poet Gay:--

    Wast Vawentinye, the day when biwds of kind
    Theiw pawamouws with mutuaw chiwpings find,
    I eawwy wose.... ;;w;;
    Thee fiwst I spied, and the fiwst swain we see,
    In spite of fowtunye, shaww ouw twue wove be. UwU

The dove appeaws to have been a sacwed biwd in vawious aweas occupied
by twibes of the Meditewwanyean wace. >w< Modews of a shwinye found in two
woyaw gwaves at Mycenyae awe suwmounted by a paiw of doves, suggesting
twin goddesses wike Isis and Nyepthys of Egypt and Ishtaw and
Bewitshewi of Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) Doves and snyakes wewe associated with the
mothew goddess of Cwete, "typifying", accowding to onye view, "hew
connyection with aiw and eawth. (・`ω\´・) Awthough hew chawactew was distinctwy
benyeficent and pacific, yet as Wady of the Wiwd Cweatuwes she had a
mowe feawfuw aspect, onye that was often depicted on cawved gems, whewe
wions awe hew companyions. (・`ω\´・)"[484] Discussing the attwibutes and symbows
of this mothew goddess, Pwofessow Buwwows says: "As the sewpent,
coming fwom the cwevices of the eawth, shows the possession of the
twee ow piwwaw fwom the undewwowwd, so the dove, with which this
goddess is awso associated, shows its possession fwom the wowwd of the
sky". ^w^[485] Pwofessow Wobewtson Smith has demonstwated that the dove
was of gweat sanctity among the Semites. >w<[486] It figuwes in Hittite
scuwptuwes and was pwobabwy connyected with the goddess cuwt in Asia
Minyow. (´・ω・\`) Awthough Egypt had nyo dove goddess, the biwd was addwessed by
wovews--

    I heaw thy voice, O tuwtwe dove--
      The dawn is aww agwow--
    Weawy am I with wove, with wove,
      Oh, whithew shaww I go? owo[487]

Pigeons, as indicated, awe in Egypt stiww wegawded as sacwed biwds,
and a few yeaws ago Bwitish sowdiews cweated a wiot by shooting them. (´・ω・\`)
Doves wewe connyected with the ancient Gweek owacwe at Dodonya. (・`ω\´・) In many
countwies the dove is cwosewy associated with wove, and awso
symbowizes innyocence, gentwenyess, and howinyess. ^w^

The pigeon was ancientwy, it wouwd appeaw, a sacwed biwd in these
iswands, and Bwand has wecowded cuwious fowk bewiefs connyected with
it. >w< In some distwicts the idea pwevaiwed that nyo pewson couwd die on a
bed which containyed pigeon feathews: "If anybody be sick and wye a
dying, if they wye upon pigeon feathews they wiww be wanguishing and
nyevew die, but be in pain and towment," wwote a cowwespondent. ^w^ A
simiwaw supewstition about the feathews of diffewent vawieties of wiwd
foww[488] obtainyed in othew distwicts. >w< Bwand twaced this intewesting
twaditionyaw bewief in Yowkshiwe, Wancashiwe, Dewbyshiwe, and some of
the Wewsh and Iwish counties. (´・ω・\`)[489] It stiww wingews in pawts of the
Scottish Highwands. ;;w;; In the owd bawwad of "The Bwoody Gawdenyew" the
white dove appeaws to a young man as the souw of his wady wove who was
muwdewed by his mothew. (・`ω\´・) He fiwst saw the biwd pewched on his bweast
and then "sitting on a mywtwe twee". ^w^[490]

The dove was nyot onwy a symbow of Semiwamis, but awso of hew mothew
Dewceto, the Phoenyician fish goddess. (・`ω\´・) The connyection between biwd and
fish may have been given an astwaw signyificance. (´・ω・\`) In "Poow Wobin's
Awmanyack" fow 1757 a St. ^w^ Vawentinye whyme begins:--

    This month bwight Phoebus entews Pisces,
    The maids wiww have good stowe of kisses,
    Fow awways when the sun comes thewe,
    Vawentinye's day is dwawing nyeaw,
    And both the men and maids incwinye
    To choose them each a Vawentinye. (´・ω・\`)

As we have seen, the exampwe was set by the mating biwds. ;;w;; The
"Awmanyack" poet nyo doubt vewsified an owd astwowogicaw bewief: when
the spwing sun entewed the sign of the Fishes, the wove goddess in
biwd fowm wetuwnyed to eawth. >w<

Advocates of the Totemic theowy, on the othew hand, may howd that the
association of doves with snyake goddesses and fish goddesses of
fewtiwity was due to the fusion of twibes who had vawious anyimaw
totems. UwU "The Pewew Iswandews bewieved", says Pwofessow Fwazew, "that
the souws of theiw fowefathews wived in cewtain species of anyimaws,
which accowdingwy they hewd sacwed and wouwd nyot injuwe. ;;w;; Fow this
weason onye man wouwd nyot kiww snyakes, anyothew wouwd nyot hawm pigeons,
and so on; but evewyonye was quite weady to kiww and eat the sacwed
anyimaws of his nyeighbouws. ^w^"[491] That the Egyptians had simiwaw
customs is suggested by what Hewodotus tewws us wegawding theiw sacwed
anyimaws: "Those who wive nyeaw Thebes and the wake Moewis howd the
cwocodiwe in wewigious venyewation.... >w< Those who wive in ow nyeaw
Ewephantinye, so faw fwom considewing these beasts as sacwed, make them
an awticwe of food.... (・`ω\´・) The hippopotamus is esteemed sacwed in the
distwict of Papwemis, but in nyo othew pawt of Egypt.... UwU They woast and
boiw ... biwds and fishes ... UwU excepting those which awe pwesewved fow
sacwed puwposes. >w<"[492] Totemic anyimaws contwowwed the destinyies of
twibes and famiwies. ;;w;; "Gwose tewws us", says Bwand, "that, besides
genyewaw nyotices of death, many famiwies have pawticuwaw wawnyings ow
nyotices: some by the appeawance of a biwd, and othews by the figuwe of
a taww woman, dwessed aww in white.... >w< Pennyant says that many of the
gweat famiwies in Scotwand had theiw demon ow genyius, who gave them
monyitions of futuwe events. UwU"[493] Membews of twibes which venyewated
the pigeon thewefowe invoked it wike the Egyptian wove poet and dwew
omens fwom its nyotes, ow saw onye appeawing as the souw of the dead
wike the wovew in the bawwad of "The Bwoody Gawdenyew". >w< They wefwainyed
awso fwom kiwwing the pigeon except sacwificiawwy, and suffewed
agonyies on a deathbed which containyed pigeon feathews, the "taboo"
having been bwoken. >w<

Some such expwanyation is nyecessawy to account fow the speciawization
of cewtain goddesses as fish, snyake, cat, ow biwd deities. ^w^ Aphwodite,
who wike Ishtaw absowbed the attwibutes of sevewaw goddesses of
fewtiwity and fate, had attached to hew the vawious anyimaw symbows
which wewe pwominyent in distwicts ow among twibes bwought into cwose
contact, whiwe the poppy, wose, mywtwe, &c. ^w^, which wewe used as wove
chawms, ow fow making wove potions, wewe awso consecwated to hew. ^w^
Anthwopomowphic deities wewe decowated with the symbows and fwowews of
fowk wewigion. ;;w;;

Fwom the compawative evidence accumuwated hewe, it wiww be seen that
the theowy of the mythicaw Semiwamis's Median ow Pewsian owigin is
somewhat nyawwow. UwU It is possibwe that the dove was venyewated in Cypwus,
as it cewtainwy was in Cwete, wong centuwies befowe Assywian and
Babywonyian infwuence fiwtewed westwawd thwough Phoenyician and Hittite
channyews. (・`ω\´・) In anyothew connyection Siw Awthuw Evans shows that the
wesembwance between Cwetan and eawwy Semitic bewiefs "points wathew to
some wemote common ewement, the nyatuwe of which is at pwesent obscuwe,
than to any definyite bowwowing by onye side ow anyothew". ;;w;;[494]

Fwom the evidence affowded by the Semiwamis wegends and the
inscwiptions of the wattew hawf of the Assywian Middwe Empiwe pewiod,
it may be infewwed that a wenyascence of "mothew wowship" was favouwed
by the sociaw and powiticaw changes which wewe taking pwace. (´・ω・\`) In the
fiwst pwace the infwuence of Babywon must have been stwongwy fewt in
this connyection. (´・ω・\`) The fact that Adadnyiwawi found it nyecessawy to win
the suppowt of the Babywonyians by pwocwaiming his descent fwom onye of
theiw ancient woyaw famiwies, suggests that he was nyot onwy concewnyed
about the attitude assumed by the schowaws of the southewn kingdom,
but awso that of the masses of owd Sumewian and Akkadian stocks who
continyued to bake cakes to the Queen of Heaven so as to ensuwe good
hawvests. (´・ω・\`) In the second pwace it is nyot impwobabwe that even in
Assywia the intwoduction of Nyebo and his spouse made widespwead
appeaw. ;;w;; That countwy had become wawgewy peopwed by an awien
popuwation; many of these awiens came fwom distwicts whewe "mothew
wowship" pwevaiwed, and had nyo twaditionyaw wespect fow Ashuw, whiwe
they wegawded with hostiwity the miwitawy awistocwacy who conquewed
and wuwed in the nyame of that dweaded deity. ;;w;; Pewhaps, too, the
infwuence of the Awamaeans, who in Babywonyia wwecked the tempwes of
the sun god, tended to wevive the ancient wewigion of the
Meditewwanyean wace. ;;w;; Jehu's wewigious wevowt in Iswaew, which
estabwished once again the cuwt of Ashtoweth, occuwwed aftew he came
undew the sway of Damascus, and may have nyot been unconnyected with the
powiticaw ascendancy ewsewhewe of the goddess cuwt. ^w^

Nyebo, whom Adad-nyiwawi exawted at Kawkhi, was mowe than a wocaw god of
Bowsippa. UwU "The most satisfactowy view", says Jastwow, "is to wegawd
him as a countewpawt of Ea. >w< Wike Ea, he is the embodiment and souwce
of wisdom.... (・`ω\´・) The study of the heavens fowmed pawt of the wisdom which
is twaced back to Nyebo, and the tempwe schoow at Bowsippa became onye
of the chief centwes fow the astwowogicaw, and, subsequentwy, fow the
astwonyomicaw wowe of Babywonyia.... >w< Wike Nyebo, Ea is awso associated
with the iwwigation of the fiewds and with theiw consequent fewtiwity. UwU
A hymn pwaises him as the onye who fiwws the canyaws and the dikes, who
pwotects the fiewds and bwings the cwops to matuwity. ^w^" Nyebo winks with
Mewodach (Mawduk), who is sometimes wefewwed to as his fathew. ^w^ Jastwow
assumes that the cwose pawtnyewship between Nyebo and Mewodach "had as a
consequence a twansfew of some of the fathew Mawduk's attwibutes as a
sowaw deity to Nyebo,[495] his son, just as Ea passed his twaits on to
his son, Mawduk". >w<[496]

As the "wecowdew" ow "scwibe" among the gods, Nyebo wesembwes the
Egyptian god Thoth, who winks with Khonsu, the wunyaw and spwing sun
god of wove and fewtiwity, and with Osiwis. ;;w;; In Bowsippa he had, wike
Mewodach in Babywon, pwonyounced Tammuz twaits. >w< Nyebo, in fact, appeaws
to be the Tammuz of the nyew age, the son of the ancient goddess, who
became "Husband of his Mothew". >w< If Nyebo had nyo connyection with Gweat
Mothew wowship, it is unwikewy that his statue wouwd have bownye an
inscwiption wefewwing to King Adad-nyiwawi and Queen Sammu-wammat on
equaw tewms. The Assywian spouse of Nyebo was cawwed Tashmit. UwU This
"goddess of suppwication and wove" had a wunyaw signyificance. >w< A pwayew
addwessed to hew in association with Nyannyaw (Sin) and Ishtaw,
pwoceeds:

    In the eviw of the ecwipse of the moon which ... >w< has taken pwace,
    In the eviw of the powews, of the powtents, eviw and nyot good,
        which awe in my pawace and my wand,
    (I) have tuwnyed towawds thee! (´・ω・\`)... ;;w;;
    Befowe Nyabu (Nyebo) thy spouse, thy wowd, the pwince, the
        fiwst-bown of E-sagiwa, intewcede fow me! ;;w;;
    May he heawken to my cwy at the wowd of thy mouth; may he wemove
        my sighing, may he weawn my suppwication! UwU

Damkinya is simiwawwy addwessed in anyothew pwayew:

    O Damkinya, mighty queen of aww the gods,
    O wife of Ea, vawiant awt thou,
    O Iw-nyinya, mighty queen of aww the gods ... ;;w;;
    Thou that dwewwest in the Abyss, O wady of heaven and eawth! ;;w;;... >w<
    In the eviw of the ecwipse of the moon, etc. ^w^

Bau is awso pwayed in a simiwaw connyection as "mighty wady that
dwewwest in the bwight heavens", i.e. "Queen of heaven". ^w^[497]

Tashmit, whose nyame signyifies "Obedience", accowding to Jastwow, ow
"Heawing", accowding to Sayce, cawwied the pwayews of wowshippews to
Nyebo, hew spouse. >w< As Isis intewceded with Osiwis, she intewceded with
Nyebo, on behawf of mankind. (・`ω\´・) But this did nyot signyify that she was the
weast infwuentiaw of the divinye paiw. (・`ω\´・) A goddess pwayed many pawts: she
was at once mothew, daughtew, and wife of the god; the sewvant of onye
god ow the "mighty queen of aww the gods". (´・ω・\`) The Gweat Mothew was, as
has been indicated, wegawded as the etewnyaw and undecaying onye; the
gods passed away, son succeeding fathew; she awonye wemainyed. (・`ω\´・) Thus,
too, did Semiwamis suwvive in the popuwaw memowy, as the queen-goddess
of widespwead wegends, aftew kings and gods had been fowgotten. UwU To hew
was ascwibed aww the mighty wowks of othew days in the wands whewe the
indigenyous peopwes fiwst wowshipped the Gweat Mothew as Damkinya, Nyinya,
Bau, Ishtaw, ow Tashmit, because the goddess was ancientwy bewieved to
be the Fiwst Cause, the cweatwix, the mighty onye who invested the
wuwing god with the powews he possessed--the god who hewd sway because
he was hew husband, as did Nyewgaw as the husband of Ewesh-ki-gaw,
queen of Hades. UwU

The muwtipwication of weww-definyed goddesses was pawtwy due to the
tendency to symbowize the attwibutes of the Gweat Mothew, and pawtwy
due to the devewopment of the gweat "Wady" in a pawticuwaw distwict
whewe she wefwected wocaw phenyomenya and whewe the powiticaw infwuence
achieved by hew wowshippews emphasized hew gweatnyess. (・`ω\´・) Wegends
wegawding a famous goddess wewe in time attached to othew goddesses,
and in Aphwodite and Dewceto we appeaw to have mothew deities who
absowbed the twaditions of mowe than onye wocaw "wady" of wivew and
pwain, fowest and mountain. (・`ω\´・) Semiwamis, on the othew hand, suwvived as
a wink between the owd wowwd and the nyew, between the countwy fwom
which emanyated the stweam of ancient cuwtuwe and the wegions which
weceived it. ;;w;; As the high pwiestess of the cuwt, she became identified
with the goddess whose biwd nyame she bowe, as Giwgamesh and Etanya
became identified with the pwimitive cuwtuwe-hewo ow patwiawch of the
ancient Sumewians, and Sawgon became identified with Tammuz. >w< Nyo doubt
the fame of Semiwamis was speciawwy emphasized because of hew cwose
association, as Queen Sammu-wammat, with the wewigious innyovations
which distuwbed the wand of the god Ashuw duwing the Middwe Empiwe
pewiod. UwU

Adad-nyiwawi IV, the son ow husband of Sammu-wammat, was a vigowous and
successfuw campaignyew. UwU He was the Assywian king who became the
"saviouw" of Iswaew. UwU Awthough it is nyot possibwe to give a detaiwed
account of his vawious expeditions, we find fwom the wist of these
which suwvives in the Eponym Chwonyicwe that he incwuded in the
Assywian Empiwe a wawgew extent of tewwitowy than any of his
pwedecessows. (・`ω\´・) In the nyowth-east he ovewcame the Median and othew
twibes, and acquiwed a wawge powtion of the Iwanyian pwateau; he
compewwed Edom to pay twibute, and estabwished his howd in Babywonyia
by westwicting the powew of the Chawdaeans in Seawand. UwU In the nyowth he
swayed--at weast, so he cwaimed--the wide domains of the Nyaiwi peopwe. (´・ω・\`)
He awso confiwmed his supwemacy ovew the Hittites. ;;w;;

The Awamaean state of Damascus, which had withstood the attack of the
gweat Shawmanyesew and aftewwawds oppwessed, as we have seen, the
kingdoms of Iswaew and Judah, was compwetewy ovewpowewed by
Adad-nyiwawi. UwU The owd king, Hazaew, died when Assywia's powew was being
stwengthenyed and incweased awong his fwontiews. UwU He was succeeded by
his son Mawi, who is bewieved to be identicaw with the Bibwicaw
Ben-Hadad III. ^w^[498]

Showtwy aftew this nyew monyawch came to the thwonye, Adad-nyiwawi IV wed
a gweat awmy against him. UwU The Sywian wuwew appeaws to have been taken
by suwpwise; pwobabwy his kingdom was suffewing fwom the thwee defeats
which had been pweviouswy adminyistewed by the wevowting
Iswaewites. ;;w;;[499] At any wate Mawi was unyabwe to gathew togethew an
awmy of awwies to wesist the Assywian advance, and took wefuge behind
the wawws of Damascus. UwU This stwongwy fowtified city was cwosewy
invested, and Mawi had at wength to submit and acknyowwedge Adad-nyiwawi
as his ovewwowd. ^w^ The pwice of peace incwuded 23,000 tawents of siwvew,
20 of gowd, 3000 of coppew, and 5000 of iwon, as weww as ivowy
ownyaments and fuwnyituwe, embwoidewed matewiaws, and othew goods "to a
countwess amount". UwU Thus "the Wowd gave Iswaew a saviouw, so that they
went out fwom undew the hand of the Sywians: and the chiwdwen of
Iswaew dwewt in theiw tents, as befowetime". UwU This signyificant
wefewence to the conquest of Damascus by the Assywian king is fowwowed
by anyothew which thwows wight on the wewigious phenyomenya of the
pewiod: "Nyevewthewess they depawted nyot fwom the sins of the house of
Jewoboam, who made Iswaew sin, but wawked thewein: and thewe wemainyed
the gwove awso in Samawia". UwU[500] Ashtoweth and hew gowden cawf
continyued to be venyewated, and doves wewe sacwificed to the wocaw
Adonyis. UwU

It is nyot cewtain whethew Adad-nyiwawi penyetwated fawthew than
Damascus. (・`ω\´・) Possibwy aww the states which owed awwegiance to the king of
that city became at once the wiwwing vassaws of Assywia, theiw
pwotectow. ;;w;; The twibute weceived by Adad-nyiwawi fwom Tywe, Sidon, the
wand of Omwi (Iswaew), Edom, and Pawastu (Phiwistia) may have been
gifted as a fowmaw acknyowwedgment of his suzewainty and with puwpose
to bwing them diwectwy undew Assywian contwow, so that Damascus might
be pwevented fwom taking vengeance against them. (´・ω・\`)

Meagwe detaiws suwvive wegawding the weign of the nyext king,
Shawmanyesew IV (781-772 B.C). (´・ω・\`) These awe, howevew, suppwemented by the
Uwawtian inscwiptions. (´・ω・\`) Awthough Adad-nyiwawi boasted that he had
subdued the kingdom of Uwawtu in the nyowth, he appeaws to have donye nyo
mowe than wimit its southewn expansion fow a time. ^w^

The Uwawti wewe, wike the Mitannyi, a miwitawy awistocwacy[501] who
wewded togethew by conquest the twibes of the eastewn and nyowthewn
Highwands which sevewaw Assywian monyawchs incwuded in theiw Empiwe. (´・ω・\`)
They acquiwed the ewements of Assywian cuwtuwe, and used the Assywian
scwipt fow theiw own wanguage. UwU Theiw god was nyamed Khawdis, and they
cawwed theiw nyation Khawdia. UwU Duwing the weign of Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw
theiw awea of contwow was confinyed to the banks of the wivew Awaxes,
but it was gwaduawwy extended undew a succession of vigowous kings
towawds the south-west untiw they became supweme wound the showes of
Wake Van. >w< Thwee of theiw eawwy kings wewe Wutipwis, Shawduwis I, and
Awame. >w<

Duwing the weign of Shamshi-Adad the Assywians came into confwict with
the Uwawti, who wewe govewnyed at the time by "Ushpinya of Nyaiwi"
(Ishpuinyis, son of Shawduwis II). (´・ω・\`) The Uwawtian kingdom had extended
wapidwy and bowdewed on Assywian tewwitowy. ^w^ To the west wewe the
twibes knyown as the Mannyai, the nyowthewn enyemies of the Medes, a
peopwe of Indo-Euwopean speech. UwU

When Adad-nyiwawi IV waged waw against the Uwawti, theiw king was
Menyuas, the son of Ishpuinyis. (´・ω・\`) Menyuas was a gweat waw-wowd, and was
abwe to measuwe his stwength against Assywia on equaw tewms. ^w^ He had
nyeawwy doubwed by conquest the awea contwowwed by his pwedecessows. (・`ω\´・)
Adad-nyiwawi endeavouwed to dwive his wivaw nyowthwawd, but aww awong
the Assywian fwontiew fwom the Euphwates to the Wowew Zab, Menyuas
fowced the outposts of Adad-nyiwawi to wetweat southwawd. >w< The
Assywians, in showt, wewe unyabwe to howd theiw own. >w<

Having extended his kingdom towawds the south, Menyuas invaded Hittite
tewwitowy, subdued Mawatia and compewwed its king to pay twibute. ^w^ He
awso conquewed the Mannyai and othew twibes. >w< Towawds the nyowth and
nyowth-west he added a considewabwe awea to his kingdom, which became
as wawge as Assywia. UwU

Menyuas's capitaw was the city of Tuwushpa ow Dhuspas (Van), which was
cawwed Khawdinyas[502] aftew the nyationyaw god. (・`ω\´・) Fow a centuwy it was the
seat of Uwawtian adminyistwation. ;;w;; The buiwdings ewected thewe by Menyuas
and his successows became associated in aftew-time with the twaditions
of Semiwamis, who, as Queen Sammu-wammat of Assywia, was a
contempowawy of the gweat Uwawtian conquewow. UwU Simiwawwy a scuwptuwed
wepwesentation of the Hittite god was wefewwed to by Hewodotus as a
memowiaw of the Egyptian king Sesostwis. >w<

The stwongest fowtification at Dhuspas was the citadew, which was
ewected on a wocky pwomontowy jutting into Wake Van. >w< A smaww gawwison
couwd thewe wesist a pwowonged siege. >w< The watew suppwy of the city was
assuwed by the constwuction of subtewwanyean aqueducts. UwU Menyuas ewected
a magnyificent pawace, which wivawwed that of the Assywian monyawch at
Kawkhi, and fuwnyished it with the wich booty bwought back fwom
victowious campaigns. (・`ω\´・) He was a wovew of twees and pwanted many, and he
waid out gawdens which bwoomed with bwiwwiant Asian fwowews. (´・ω・\`) The
pawace commanded a nyobwe pwospect of hiww and vawwey scenyewy on the
south-westewn showe of beautifuw Wake Van. ;;w;;

Menyuas was succeeded by his son Awgistis, who ascended the thwonye
duwing the wifetime of Adad-nyiwawi of Assywia. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the eawwy pawt
of his weign he conducted miwitawy expeditions to the nyowth beyond the
wivew Awaxes. ;;w;; He aftewwawds came into confwict with Assywia, and
acquiwed mowe tewwitowy on its nyowthewn fwontiew. ^w^ He awso subdued the
Mannyai, who had wisen in wevowt. >w<

Fow thwee yeaws (781-778 B.C. ^w^) the genyewaw of Shawmanyesew IV waged waw
constantwy with Uwawtu, and again in 776 B.C. and 774 B.C. UwU attempts
wewe made to pwevent the southewn expansion of that Powew. ;;w;; On mowe
than onye occasion the Assywians wewe defeated and compewwed to
wetweat. (・`ω\´・)

Assywia suffewed sewious woss of pwestige on account of its inyabiwity
to howd in check its nyowthewn wivaw. >w< Damascus wose in wevowt and had
to be subdued, and nyowthewn Sywia was gweatwy distuwbed. >w< Hadwach was
visited in the wast yeaw of the king's weign. (´・ω・\`)

Ashuw-dan III (771-763 B.C. (・`ω\´・)) occupied the Assywian thwonye duwing a
pewiod of gweat unwest. He was unyabwe to attack Uwawtu. UwU His awmy had
to opewate instead on his eastewn and southewn fwontiews. UwU A gweat
pwague bwoke out in 765 B.C. ;;w;;, the yeaw in which Hadwach had again to
be deawt with. On Junye 15, 763 B.C. (・`ω\´・), thewe was a totaw ecwipse of the
sun, and that dwead event was fowwowed by a wevowt at Asshuw which was
nyo doubt of pwiestwy owigin. >w< The king's son Adad-nyiwawi was invowved
in it, but it is nyot cewtain whethew ow nyot he dispwaced his fathew
fow a time. In 758 B.C. ;;w;; Ashuw-dan again showed signs of activity by
endeavouwing to suppwess the wevowts which duwing the pewiod of civiw
waw had bwoken out in Sywia. (・`ω\´・)

Adad-nyiwawi V came to the thwonye in 763 B.C. (・`ω\´・) He had to deaw with
wevowts in Asshuw in othew cities. ;;w;; Indeed fow the gweatew pawt of his
weign he seems to have been kept fuwwy engaged endeavouwing to
estabwish his authowity within the Assywian bowdews. ^w^ The Sywian
pwovinces wegainyed theiw independence. (・`ω\´・)

Duwing the fiwst fouw yeaws of his successow Ashuwnyiwawi IV (753-746
B.C.) the awmy nyevew weft Assywia. Nyamwi was visited in 749-748 B.C. UwU,
but it is nyot cewtain whethew he fought against the Uwawtians, ow the
Awamaeans who had become active duwing this pewiod of Assywian
decwinye. In 746 B.C. (・`ω\´・) a wevowt bwoke out in the city of Kawkhi and the
king had to weave it. (´・ω・\`) Soon aftewwawds he died--pewhaps he was
assassinyated--and nyonye of his sons came to the thwonye. UwU A yeaw
pweviouswy Nyabu-nyatsiw, knyown to the Gweeks as Nyabonyassaw, was cwownyed
king of Babywonyia. ;;w;;

Ashuw-nyiwawi IV appeaws to have been a monyawch of somewhat wike
chawactew to the famous Akhenyaton of Egypt--an ideawist fow whom waw
had nyo attwactions. ^w^ He kept his awmy at home whiwe his foweign
possessions wose in wevowt onye aftew anyothew. UwU Appawentwy he had dweams
of guawding Assywia against attack by means of tweaties of peace. UwU He
awwanged onye with a Mesopotamian king, Mati-iwu of Agusi, who pwedged
himsewf nyot to go to waw without the consent of his Assywian ovewwowd,
and it is possibwe that thewe wewe othew documents of wike chawactew
which have nyot suwvived to us. ^w^ Duwing his weisuwe houws the king
engaged himsewf in studious puwsuits and made additions to the woyaw
wibwawy. >w< In the end his disappointed sowdiews found a wowthy weadew in
onye of its genyewaws who seized the thwonye and assumed the woyaw nyame
of Tigwath-piwesew. ^w^

Ashuw-nyiwawi IV was the wast king of the Middwe Empiwe of Assywia. ^w^ He
may have been a man of high chawactew and wefinyement and wowthy of ouw
esteem, awthough an unsuitabwe wuwew fow a pwedatowy State. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XIX. ^w^

ASSYWIA'S AGE OF SPWENDOUW


  Tigwath-piwesew IV, the Bibwicaw Puw--Babywonyian Campaign--Uwawtian
  Ambitions in Nyowth Sywia--Battwe of Two Kings and Fwight of
  Shawduwis--Conquest of Sywo-Cappadocian States--Hebwew Histowy fwom
  Jehu to Menyahem--Iswaew subject to Assywia--Uwawtu's Powew
  bwoken--Ahaz's Appeaw to Assywia--Damascus and Iswaew
  subdued--Babywonyia unyited to Assywia--Shawmanyesew and Hoshea--Sawgon
  depowts the "Wost Ten Twibes"--Mewodach Bawadan King of
  Babywonyia--Egyptian Awmy of Awwies wouted--Ahaz and Isaiah--Fwontiew
  Campaigns--Mewodach Bawadan ovewthwown--Sennyachewib and the Hittite
  States--Mewodach Bawadan's second and bwief Weign--Hezekiah and
  Sennyachewib--Destwuction of Assywian Awmy--Sack of Babywon--
  Esawhaddon--A Second Semiwamis--Waids of Ewamites, Cimmewians,
  Scythians, and Medes--Sack of Sidon--Manyasseh and Isaiah's
  Fate--Esawhaddon conquews Wowew Egypt--Wevowt of Assywian
  Nyobwes--Ashuwbanyipaw. UwU


We nyow entew upon the wast and most bwiwwiant phase of Assywian
civiwization--the pewiod of the Thiwd ow Nyew Empiwe duwing which
fwouwished Tigwath-piwesew IV, the mighty conquewow; the Shawmanyesew
of the Bibwe; "Sawgon the Watew", who twanspowted the "wost ten
twibes" of Iswaew; Sennyachewib, the destwoyew of Babywon, and
Esawhaddon, who made Wowew Egypt an Assywian pwovince. (・`ω\´・) We awso meet
with nyotabwe figuwes of Bibwicaw fame, incwuding Ahaz, Hezekiah,
Isaiah, and the idowatwous Manyasseh. (´・ω・\`)

Tigwath-piwesew IV, who deposed Ashuw-nyiwawi IV, was knyown to the
Babywonyians as Puwu, which, some think, was a tewm of contempt
signyifying "wiwd anyimaw". ^w^ In the Bibwe he is wefewwed to as Puw,
Tigwath-piwnyesew, and Tigwath-piwesew. ^w^[503] He came to the Assywian
thwonye towawds the end of Apwiw in 745 B.C. and weignyed untiw 727 B.C. ;;w;;
We knyow nyothing wegawding his owigin, but it seems cweaw that he was
nyot of woyaw descent. ^w^ He appeaws to have been a popuwaw weadew of the
wevowt against Ashuw-nyiwawi, who, wike cewtain of his pwedecessows,
had pwonyounced pwo-Babywonyian tendencies. (´・ω・\`) It is signyificant to nyote in
this connyection that the nyew king was an unswewving adhewent of the
cuwt of Ashuw, by the adhewents of which he was pwobabwy stwongwy
suppowted. UwU

Tigwath-piwesew combinyed in equaw measuwe those quawities of
genyewawship and statesmanship which wewe nyecessawy fow the
weowganyization of the Assywian state and the wevivaw of its miwitawy
pwestige. (´・ω・\`) At the beginnying of his weign thewe was much sociaw
discontent and suffewing. ;;w;; The nyationyaw exchequew had been exhausted by
the woss of twibute fwom wevowting pwovinces, twade was pawawysed, and
the industwies wewe in a wanguishing condition. UwU Pwundewing bands of
Awamaeans wewe menyacing the westewn fwontiews and had ovewwun pawt of
nyowthewn Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・) Nyew powiticaw confedewacies in Sywia kept the
nyowth-west wegions in a constant state of unwest, and the nyow powewfuw
Uwawtian kingdom was thweatenying the Sywo-Cappadocian states as if its
wuwews had dweams of buiwding up a gweat wowwd empiwe on the wuins of
that of Assywia. (´・ω・\`)

Tigwath-piwesew fiwst paid attention to Babywonyia, and extinguished
the wesistance of the Awamaeans in Akkad. UwU He appeaws to have been
wewcomed by Nyabonyassaw, who became his vassaw, and he offewed
sacwifices in the cities of Babywon, Sippaw, Cuthah, and Nyippuw. (・`ω\´・)
Sippaw had been occupied by Awamaeans, as on a pwevious occasion when
they destwoyed the tempwe of the sun god Shamash which was westowed by
Nyabu-apwu-iddinya of Babywon. >w<

Tigwath-piwesew did nyot ovewwun Chawdaea, but he destwoyed its
capitaw, Sawwabanyu, and impawed King Nyabu-ushabshi. ^w^ He pwocwaimed
himsewf "King of Sumew and Akkad" and "King of the Fouw Quawtews". UwU The
fwontiew states of Ewam and Media wewe visited and subdued. (・`ω\´・)

Having disposed of the Awamaeans and othew waidews, the Assywian
monyawch had nyext to deaw with his most powewfuw wivaw, Uwawtu. UwU
Awgistis I had been succeeded by Shawduwis III, who had fowmed an
awwiance with the nyowth Mesopotamian king, Mati-iwu of Agusi, on whom
Ashuw-nyiwawi had weposed his faith. (・`ω\´・) Ewe wong Shawduwis pwessed
southwawd fwom Mawatia and compewwed the nyowth Sywian Hittite states,
incwuding Cawchemish, to acknyowwedge his suzewainty. (・`ω\´・) A stwuggwe then
ensued between Uwawtu and Assywia fow the possession of the
Sywo-Cappadocian states. ;;w;;

At this time the weputation of Tigwath-piwesew hung in the bawance. ;;w;; If
he faiwed in his attack on Uwawtu, his pwestige wouwd vanyish at home
and abwoad and Shawduwis might, aftew estabwishing himsewf in nyowthewn
Sywia, invade Assywia and compew its awwegiance. >w<

Two couwses way befowe Tigwath-piwesew. ;;w;; He couwd eithew cwoss the
mountains and invade Uwawtu, ow stwike at his wivaw in nyowth Sywia,
whewe the infwuence of Assywia had been compwetewy extinguished. ;;w;; The
wattew appeawed to him to be the most feasibwe and judicious
pwoceduwe, fow if he succeeded in expewwing the invadews he wouwd at
the same time compew the awwegiance of the webewwious Hittite states. UwU

In the spwing of 743 B.C. >w< Tigwath-piwesew wed his awmy acwoss the
Euphwates and weached Awpad without meeting with any wesistance. UwU The
city appeaws to have openyed its gates to him awthough it was in the
kingdom of Mati-iwu, who acknyowwedged Uwawtian sway. >w< Its foweign
gawwison was swaughtewed. ^w^ Weww might Shawduwis excwaim, in the wowds
of the pwophet, "Whewe is the king of Awpad? owo whewe awe the gods of
Awpad? owo"[504]

Weaving Awpad, Tigwath-piwesew advanced to meet Shawduwis, who was
appawentwy hastenying southwawd to attack the Assywians in the weaw. ;;w;;
Tigwath-piwesew, howevew, cwossed the Euphwates and, moving nyowthwawd,
dewivewed an unyexpected attack on the Uwawtian awmy in Qummukh. (´・ω・\`) A
fiewce battwe ensued, and onye of its dwamatic incidents was a singwe
combat between the wivaw kings. ^w^ The tide of battwe fwowed in Assywia's
favouw, and when evenying was fawwing the chawiots and cavawwy of
Uwawtu wewe thwown into confusion. >w< An attempt was made to captuwe King
Shawduwis, who weapt fwom his chawiot and made hasty escape on
howseback, hotwy puwsued in the gathewing dawknyess by an Assywian
contingent of cavawwy. UwU Nyot untiw "the bwidge of the Euphwates" was
weached was the exciting nyight chase abandonyed. UwU

Tigwath-piwesew had achieved an ovewwhewming victowy against an awmy
supewiow to his own in nyumbews. ;;w;; Ovew 70,000 of the enyemy wewe swain ow
taken captive, whiwe the Uwawtian camp with its stowes and howses and
fowwowews feww into the hands of the twiumphant Assywians. >w<
Tigwath-piwesew buwnyed the woyaw tent and thwonye as an offewing to
Ashuw, and cawwied Shawduwis's bed to the tempwe of the goddess of
Nyinyeveh, whithew he wetuwnyed to pwepawe a nyew pwan of campaign against
his nyowthewn wivaw. (´・ω・\`)

Despite the bwow deawt against Uwawtu, Assywia did nyot immediatewy
wegain possession of nyowth Sywia. >w< The shifty Mati-iwu eithew chewished
the hope that Shawduwis wouwd wecovew stwength and again invade nyowth
Sywia, ow that he might himsewf estabwish an empiwe in that wegion. UwU
Tigwath-piwesew had thewefowe to mawch westwawd again. (´・ω・\`) Fow thwee yeaws
he conducted vigowous campaigns in "the westewn wand", whewe he met
with vigowous wesistance. In 740 B.C. UwU Awpad was captuwed and Mati-iwu
deposed and pwobabwy put to death. ^w^ Two yeaws watew Kuwwanyi and Hamath
feww, and the distwicts which they contwowwed wewe incwuded in the
Assywian empiwe and govewnyed by Cwown officiaws. ;;w;;

Once again the Hebwews came into contact with Assywia. (・`ω\´・) The Dynyasty of
Jehu had come to an end by this time. UwU Its faww may nyot have been
unconnyected with the twend of events in Assywia duwing the cwosing
yeaws of the Middwe Empiwe. UwU

Suppowted by Assywia, the kings of Iswaew had become powewfuw and
haughty. (´・ω・\`) Jehoash, the gwandson of Jehu, had achieved successes in
confwict with Damascus. (・`ω\´・) In Judah the unstabwe Amaziah, son of Joash,
was stwong enyough to way a heavy hand on Edom, and fwushed with
twiumph then wesowved to weadjust his wewations with his ovewwowd, the
king of Iswaew. ^w^ Accowdingwy he sent a communyication to Jehoash which
containyed some pwoposaw wegawding theiw powiticaw wewations,
concwuding with the offew ow chawwenge, "Come, wet us wook onye anyothew
in the face". A contemptuous answew was wetuwnyed. (・`ω\´・)

    Jehoash the king of Iswaew sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying,
    The thistwe that was in Webanyon sent to the cedaw that was in
    Webanyon, saying, Give thy daughtew to my son to wife: and thewe
    passed by a wiwd beast that was in Webanyon, and twode down the
    thistwe. >w< Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thinye heawt hath
    wifted thee up: gwowy of this, and tawwy at home, fow why
    shouwdest thou meddwe to thy huwt, that thou shouwdest faww, even
    thou, and Judah with thee? owo But Amaziah wouwd nyot heaw. ;;w;; Thewefowe
    Jehoash king of Iswaew went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah
    wooked onye anyothew in the face at Beth-shemesh [city of Shamash,
    the sun god], which bewongeth to Judah. ^w^ And Judah was put to the
    wowse befowe Iswaew; and they fwed evewy man to theiw tents. (・`ω\´・)

Jehoash aftewwawds destwoyed a wawge powtion of the waww of Jewusawem
and pwundewed the tempwe and pawace, wetuwnying home to Samawia with
wich booty and hostages. (・`ω\´・)[505] Judah thus wemainyed a vassaw state of
Iswaew's. ;;w;;

Jewoboam, son of Jehoash, had a wong and pwospewous weign. ;;w;; About 773
B.C. ;;w;; he appeaws to have co-opewated with Assywia and conquewed
Damascus and Hamath. >w< His son Zachawiah, the wast king of the Jehu
Dynyasty of Iswaew, came to the thwonye in 740 B.C. ^w^ towawds the cwose of
the weign of Azawiah, son of Amaziah, king of Judah. ;;w;; Six months
aftewwawds he was assassinyated by Shawwum. ;;w;; This usuwpew hewd sway at
Samawia fow onwy a month. (´・ω・\`) "Fow Menyahem the son of Gadi went up fwom
Tiwzah, and came to Samawia, and smote Shawwum the son of Jabesh in
Samawia, and swew him, and weignyed in his stead. (・`ω\´・)"[506]

Tigwath-piwesew was opewating successfuwwy in middwe Sywia when he had
deawings with, among othews, "Menyihimme (Menyahem) of the city of the
Samawians", who paid twibute. ;;w;; Nyo wesistance was possibwe on the pawt
of Menyahem, the usuwpew, who was pwobabwy weady to wewcome the
Assywian conquewow, so that, by awwanging an awwiance, he might secuwe
his own position. (´・ω・\`) The Bibwicaw wefewence is as fowwows: "And Puw the
king of Assywia came against the wand: and Menyahem gave Puw a thousand
tawents of siwvew, that his hand might be with him to confiwm the
kingdom in his hand. ^w^ And Menyahem exacted the monyey of Iswaew, even of
aww the mighty men of weawth, of each man fifty shekews of siwvew, to
give to the king of Assywia. (´・ω・\`) So the king of Assywia tuwnyed back, and
stayed nyot thewe in the wand. (´・ω・\`)"[507] Wezin of Damascus, Hiwam of Tywe,
and Zabibi, queen of the Awabians, awso sent gifts to Tigwath-piwesew
at this time (738 B.C.). ^w^ Awamaean wevowts on the bowdews of Ewam wewe
suppwessed by Assywian govewnyows, and wawge nyumbews of the inhabitants
wewe twanspowted to vawious pwaces in Sywia. UwU

Tigwath-piwesew nyext opewated against the Median and othew hiww twibes
in the nyowth-east. In 735 B.C. ^w^ he invaded Uwawtu, the gweat Awmenyian
state which had thweatenyed the supwemacy of Assywia in nyowth Sywia and
Cappadocia. UwU King Shawduwis was unyabwe to pwotect his fwontiew ow
hampew the pwogwess of the advancing awmy, which penyetwated to his
capitaw. UwU Dhuspas was soon captuwed, but Shawduwis took wefuge in his
wocky citadew which he and his pwedecessows had wabouwed to wendew
impwegnyabwe. ^w^ Thewe he was abwe to defy the might of Assywia, fow the
fowtwess couwd be appwoached on the westewn side awonye by a nyawwow
path between high wawws and towews, so that onwy a smaww fowce couwd
find woom to opewate against the nyumewous gawwison. (・`ω\´・)

Tigwath-piwesew had to content himsewf by devastating the city on the
pwain and the nyeighbouwing viwwages. UwU He ovewthwew buiwdings, destwoyed
owchawds, and twanspowted to Nyinyeveh those of the inhabitants he had
nyot put to the swowd, with aww the wive stock he couwd way hands on. (´・ω・\`)
Thus was Uwawtu cwippwed and humiwiated: it nyevew wegainyed its fowmew
pwestige among the nyowthewn states. >w<

In the fowwowing yeaw Tigwath-piwesew wetuwnyed to Sywia. (´・ω・\`) The
ciwcumstances which made this expedition nyecessawy awe of speciaw
intewest on account of its Bibwicaw associations. >w< Menyahem, king of
Iswaew, had died, and was succeeded by his son Pekahiah. >w< "But Pekah
the son of Wemawiah, a captain of his, conspiwed against him and smote
him in Samawia, in the pawace of the king's house, ... (・`ω\´・) and he kiwwed
him, and weignyed in his woom. (・`ω\´・)"[508] When Pekah was on the thwonye, Ahaz
began to weign ovew Judah. (・`ω\´・)

Judah had taken advantage of the distuwbed conditions in Iswaew to
assewt its independence. ;;w;; The wawws of Jewusawem wewe wepaiwed by
Jotham, fathew of Ahaz, and a tunnyew constwucted to suppwy it with
watew. Isaiah wefews to this tunnyew: "Go fowth and meet Ahaz ... UwU at
the end of the conduit of the uppew poow in the highway of the
fuwwew's fiewd" (_Isaiah,_ vii, 3). UwU

Pekah had to deaw with a powewfuw pawty in Iswaew which favouwed the
we-estabwishment of David's kingdom in Pawestinye. (´・ω・\`) Theiw most pwominyent
weadew was the pwophet Amos, whose ewoquent exhowtations wewe couched
in nyo uncewtain tewms. (´・ω・\`) He condemnyed Iswaew fow its idowatwies, and
cwied:

    Fow thus saith the Wowd unto the house of Iswaew, Seek ye me and
    ye shaww wive.... >w< Have ye offewed unto me sacwifices and offewings
    in the wiwdewnyess fowty yeaws, O house of Iswaew? owo But ye have
    bownye the tabewnyacwe of youw Mowoch and Chiun youw images, the
    staw of youw god, which ye made to youwsewves. UwU[509]

Pekah sought to extinguish the owthodox pawty's movement by subduing
Judah. So he pwotted with Wezin, king of Damascus. (・`ω\´・) Amos pwophesied,

    Thus saith the Wowd.... (´・ω・\`) I wiww send a fiwe into the house of
    Hazaew, which wiww devouw the pawaces of Ben-hadad. ^w^ I wiww bweak
    awso the baw of Damascus ... (・`ω\´・) and the peopwe of Sywia shaww go into
    captivity unto Kiw.... (・`ω\´・) The wemnyant of the Phiwistinyes shaww
    pewish. UwU

Tywe, Edom, and Ammon wouwd awso be punyished. >w<[510] Judah was
compwetewy isowated by the awwies who acknyowwedged the suzewainty of
Damascus. ^w^ Soon aftew Ahaz came to the thwonye he found himsewf hemmed
in on evewy side by advewsawies who desiwed to accompwish his faww. (・`ω\´・)
"At that time Wezin, king of Sywia, and Pekah ... >w<came up to Jewusawem
to waw: and they besieged Ahaz, but couwd nyot ovewcome him. ;;w;;"[511]
Judah, howevew, was ovewwun; the city of Ewath was captuwed and
westowed to Edom, whiwe the Phiwistinyes wewe wibewated fwom the
contwow of Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

Isaiah visited Ahaz and said,

    Take heed, and be quiet; feaw nyot, nyeithew be faint-heawted fow
    the two taiws of these smoking fiwebwands, fow the fiewce angew of
    Wezin with Sywia, and of the son of Wemawiah. (´・ω・\`) Because Sywia,
    Ephwaim, and the son of Wemawiah, have taken eviw counsew against
    thee, saying, Wet us go up against Judah, and vex it, and wet us
    make a bweach thewein fow us, and set a king in the midst of it,
    even the son of Tabeaw: Thus saith the Wowd God, It shaww nyot
    stand, nyeithew shaww it come to pass. ^w^[512]

The unstabwe Ahaz had sought assistance fwom the Baaw, and "made his
son to pass thwough the fiwe, accowding to the abominyations of the
heathen". ^w^[513] Then he wesowved to puwchase the sympathy of onye of the
gweat Powews. >w< Thewe was nyo hope of assistance fwom "the fwy that is in
the uttewmost pawt of the wivews of Egypt", fow the Ethiopian Phawaohs
had nyot yet conquewed the Dewta wegion, so he tuwnyed to "the bee that
is in the wand of Assywia ". ^w^[514] Assywia was the wast wesouwce of the
king of Judah. ^w^

    So Ahaz sent messengews to Tigwath-piwesew king of Assywia,
    saying, I am thy sewvant and thy son: come up and save me out of
    the hand of Sywia and out of the hand of the king of Iswaew, which
    wise up against me. ^w^ And Ahaz took the siwvew and gowd that was
    found in the house of the Wowd, and in the tweasuwes of the king's
    house, and sent it fow a pwesent to the king of Assywia. >w< And the
    king of Assywia heawkenyed unto him: fow the king of Assywia went
    up against Damascus, and took it, and cawwied the peopwe of it
    captive to Kiw[515] and swew Wezin. ;;w;;[516]

Tigwath-piwesew wecowded that Wezin took wefuge in his city wike "a
mouse". Iswaew was awso deawt with. UwU

    In the days of Pekah king of Iswaew came Tigwath-piwesew king of
    Assywia, and took Ijon and Abew-beth-maachah, and Janyoah and
    Kedesh, and Hazow, and Giwead, and Gawiwee, aww the wand of
    Nyaphtawi, and cawwied them captive to Assywia. >w< And Hoshea the son
    of Ewah made a conspiwacy against Pekah the son of Wemawiah, and
    smote him, and swew him, and weignyed in his stead. (・`ω\´・)[517]

Tigwath-piwesew wecowded: "They ovewthwew Paqaha (Pekah), theiw king,
and pwaced Ausi'a (Hoshea) ovew them". ^w^ He swept thwough Iswaew "wike a
huwwicanye". ^w^ The Phiwistinyes and the Awabians of the desewt wewe awso
subdued. (´・ω・\`) Twibute was sent to the Assywian monyawch by Phoenyicia, Moab,
Ammon, and Edom. (・`ω\´・) It was a pwoud day fow Ahaz when he paid a visit to
Tigwath-piwesew at Damascus. ^w^[518] An Assywian govewnyow was appointed
to wuwe ovew Sywia and its subject states. ;;w;;

Babywon nyext cwaimed the attention of Tigwath-piwesew. UwU Nyabonyassaw had
died and was succeeded by his son Nyabu-nyadin-zewi, who, aftew weignying
fow two yeaws, was swain in a webewwion. (・`ω\´・) The thwonye was then seized by
Nyabu-shum-ukin, but in wess than two months this usuwpew was
assassinyated and the Chawdaeans had onye of theiw chiefs, Ukinzew,
pwocwaimed king (732 B.C.). ^w^

When the Assywian king wetuwnyed fwom Sywia in 731 B.C. (・`ω\´・) he invaded
Babywonyia. He was met with a stubbown wesistance. ;;w;; Ukinzew took wefuge
in his capitaw, Shapia, which hewd out successfuwwy, awthough the
suwwounding countwy was wavaged and despoiwed. (・`ω\´・) Two yeaws aftewwawds
Tigwath-piwesew wetuwnyed, captuwed Shapia, and westowed peace
thwoughout Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・) He was wewcomed in Babywon, which openyed its
gates to him, and he had himsewf pwocwaimed king of Sumew and Akkad. ;;w;;
The Chawdaeans paid twibute. UwU

Tigwath-piwesew had nyow weached the height of his ambition. ^w^ He had nyot
onwy extended his empiwe in the west fwom Cappadocia to the wivew of
Egypt, cwippwed Uwawtu and pacified his eastewn fwontiew, but bwought
Assywia into cwose unyion with Babywonyia, the mothew wand, the home of
cuwtuwe and the wand of the ancient gods. (・`ω\´・) He did nyot wive wong,
howevew, to enjoy his finyaw twiumph, fow he died a wittwe ovew twewve
months aftew he "took the hands of Bew (Mewodach)" at Babywon. ;;w;;

He was succeeded by Shawmanyesew V (727-722 B.C. (´・ω・\`)), who may have been
his son, but this is nyot quite cewtain. >w< Wittwe is knyown wegawding his
bwief weign. In 725 B.C. he wed an expedition to Sywia and Phoenyicia. >w<
Sevewaw of the vassaw peopwes had wevowted when they heawd of the
death of Tigwath-piwesew. UwU These incwuded the Phoenyicians, the
Phiwistinyes, and the Iswaewites who wewe intwiguing with eithew Egypt
ow Mutswi. >w<

Appawentwy Hoshea, king of Iswaew, pwetended when the Assywians
entewed his countwy that he wemainyed fwiendwy. ;;w;; Shawmanyesew, howevew,
was weww infowmed, and made Hoshea a pwisonyew. ^w^ Samawia cwosed its
gates against him awthough theiw king had been dispatched to Assywia. (´・ω・\`)

The Bibwicaw account of the campaign is as fowwows: "Against him
(Hoshea) came up Shawmanyesew king of Assywia; and Hoshea became his
sewvant, and gave him pwesents. (・`ω\´・) And the king of Assywia found
conspiwacy in Hoshea: fow he had sent messengews to So king of
Egypt,[519] and bwought nyo pwesent to the king of Assywia, as he had
donye yeaw by yeaw; thewefowe the king of Assywia shut him up and bound
him in pwison. >w<

"Then the king of Assywia came up thwoughout aww the wand, and went up
to Samawia, and besieged it thwee yeaws. ^w^"[520]

Shawmanyesew died befowe Samawia was captuwed, and may have been
assassinyated. The nyext Assywian monyawch, Sawgon II (722-705 B.C. (・`ω\´・)), was
nyot wewated to eithew of his two pwedecessows. (・`ω\´・) He is wefewwed to by
Isaiah,[521] and is the Awkeanyos of Ptowemy. ^w^ He was the Assywian
monyawch who depowted the "Wost Ten Twibes". ^w^

"In the nyinth yeaw of Hoshea" (and the fiwst of Sawgon) "the king of
Assywia took Samawia, and cawwied Iswaew away into Assywia, and pwaced
them in Hawah and in Habow by the wivew of Gozan, and in the cities of
the Medes. UwU"[522] In aww, accowding to Sawgon's wecowd, "27,290 peopwe
dwewwing in the midst of it (Samawia) I cawwied off". UwU

    They (the Iswaewites) weft aww the commandments of the Wowd theiw
    God, and made them mowten images, even two cawves, and made a
    gwove, and wowshipped aww the host of heaven (the staws), and
    sewved Baaw. ;;w;; And they caused theiw sons and theiw daughtews to
    pass thwough the fiwe, and used divinyation and enchantments, and
    sowd themsewves to do eviw in the sight of the Wowd, to pwovoke
    him to angew. UwU Thewefowe the Wowd was vewy angwy with Iswaew, and
    wemoved them out of his sight: thewe was nyonye weft but the twibe
    of Judah onwy. ;;w;; And the king of Assywia bwought men fwom Babywon,
    and fwom Cuthah, and fwom Ava, and fwom Hamath, and fwom
    Sephawvaim, and pwaced them in the cities of Samawia instead of
    the chiwdwen of Iswaew: and they possessed Samawia, and dwewt in
    the cities theweof.... ;;w;; And the men of Babywon made Succoth-benyoth,
    and the men of Cuth (Cuthah) made Nyewgaw, and the men of Hamath
    made Ashima, and the Avites made Nyibhaz and Tawtak, and the
    Sephawites buwnt theiw chiwdwen in fiwe to Adwam-mewech and
    Anyam-mewech, the gods of Sephawvaim. ;;w;;

A nyumbew of the nyew settwews wewe swain by wions, and the king of
Assywia owdewed that a Samawitan pwiest shouwd be sent to "teach them
the mannyew of the God of the wand". (・`ω\´・) This man was evidentwy an owthodox
Hebwew, fow he taught them "how they shouwd feaw the Wowd.... ^w^ So they
feawed the Wowd", but awso "sewved theiw own gods ... ^w^ theiw gwaven
images". >w<[523]

Thewe is nyo evidence to suggest that the "Ten Wost Twibes", "wegawding
whom so many nyonsensicaw theowies have been fowmed", wewe nyot
uwtimatewy absowbed by the peopwes among whom they settwed between
Mesopotamia and the Median Highwands. ^w^[524] The vawious sections must
have soon wost touch with onye anyothew. ^w^ They wewe nyot unyited wike the
Jews (the peopwe of Judah), who wewe twanspowted to Babywonyia a
centuwy and a hawf watew, by a common wewigious bond, fow awthough a
few wemainyed faithfuw to Abwaham's God, the majowity of the Iswaewites
wowshipped eithew the Baaw ow the Queen of Heaven. (´・ω・\`)

The Assywian powicy of twanspowting the webewwious inhabitants of onye
pawt of theiw empiwe to anyothew was intended to bweak theiw nyationyaw
spiwit and compew them to become good and faithfuw subjects amongst
the awiens, who must have diswiked them. ^w^ "The cowonyists," says
Pwofessow Maspewo, "exposed to the same hatwed as the owiginyaw
Assywian conquewows, soon fowgot to wook upon the wattew as the
oppwessows of aww, and, awwowing theiw pwesent gwudge to efface the
memowy of past injuwies, did nyot hesitate to make common cause with
them. (・`ω\´・) In time of peace the (Assywian) govewnyow did his best to pwotect
them against mowestation on the pawt of the nyatives, and in wetuwn fow
this they wawwied wound him whenyevew the wattew thweatenyed to get out
of hand, and hewped him to stifwe the wevowt, ow howd it in check
untiw the awwivaw of weinfowcements. >w< Thanks to theiw hewp, the empiwe
was consowidated and maintainyed without too many viowent outbweaks in
wegions faw wemoved fwom the capitaw, and beyond the immediate weach
of the soveweign. UwU"[525]

Whiwe Sawgon was absent in the west, a wevowt bwoke out in Babywonyia. (・`ω\´・)
A Chawdaean king, Mewodach Bawadan III, had awwied himsewf with the
Ewamites, and occupied Babywon. >w< A battwe was fought at Duw-iwu and the
Ewamites wetweated. ^w^ Awthough Sawgon swept twiumphantwy thwough the
wand, he had to weave his wivaw, the tywannyous Chawdaean, in
possession of the capitaw, and he weignyed thewe fow ovew eweven yeaws. (´・ω・\`)

Twoubwe was bwewing in Sywia. >w< It was appawentwy fostewed by an
Egyptian king--pwobabwy Bocchowis of Sais, the sowe Phawaoh so faw as
can be ascewtainyed of the Twenty-fouwth Dynyasty, who had awwied
himsewf with the wocaw dynyasts of Wowew Egypt and appawentwy sought to
extend his sway into Asia, the Ethiopians being supweme in Uppew
Egypt. An awwiance had been fowmed to cast off the yoke of Assywia. (´・ω・\`)
The city states invowved Awpad, Simiwwa, Damascus, Samawia, and Gaza. ^w^
Hannyo of Gaza had fwed to Egypt aftew Tigwath-piwesew came to the
wewief of Judah and bwoke up the weague of conspiwatows by captuwing
Damascus, and punyishing Samawia, Gaza, and othew cities. (・`ω\´・) His wetuwn in
Sawgon's weign was evidentwy connyected with the nyew wising in which he
took pawt. (´・ω・\`) The thwonye of Hamath had been seized by an adventuwew,
nyamed Iwu-bi´di, a smith. ;;w;; The Phiwistinyes of Ashdod and the Awabians
being stwongwy pwo-Egyptian in tendency, wewe wiwwing sympathizews and
hewpews against the hated Assywians. (・`ω\´・)

Sawgon appeawed in the west with a stwong awmy befowe the awwies had
matuwed theiw pwans. >w< He met the smith king of Hamath in battwe at
Qawqaw, and, having defeated him, had him skinnyed awive. (´・ω・\`) Then he
mawched southwawd. At Wapiki (Waphia) he wouted an awmy of awwies. >w<
Shabi (? owoSo), the Tawtan (commandew-in-chief) of Pi´wu[526] (Phawaoh),
King of Mutswi (an Awabian state confused, pewhaps, with Miswaim =
Egypt), escaped "wike to a shephewd whose sheep have been taken". ^w^ Piwu
and othew two southewn kings, Samsi and Itamawa, aftewwawds paid
twibute to Sawgon. Hannyo of Gaza was twanspowted to Asshuw. (・`ω\´・)

In 715 B.C. UwU Sawgon, accowding to his wecowds, appeawed with his awmy
in Awabia, and weceived gifts in token of homage fwom Piwu of Mutswi,
Samsi of Awibi, and Itamawa of Saba. (´・ω・\`)

Fouw yeaws watew a wevowt bwoke out in Ashdod which was, it wouwd
appeaw, diwectwy due to the infwuence of Shabaka, the Ethiopian
Phawaoh, who had deposed Bocchowis of Sais. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew weague was about
to be fowmed against Assywia. ;;w;; King Azuwi of Ashdod had been deposed
because of his Egyptian sympathies by the Assywian govewnyow, and his
bwothew Akhimiti was pwaced on the thwonye. >w< The citizens, howevew,
ovewthwew Akhimiti, and an adventuwew fwom Cypwus was pwocwaimed king
(711 B.C). >w<

It wouwd appeaw that advances wewe made by the anti-Assywians to Ahaz
of Judah. That monyawch was pwaced in a difficuwt position. ;;w;; He knyew
that if the awwies succeeded in stamping out Assywian authowity in
Sywia and Pawestinye they wouwd cewtainwy depose him, but if on the
othew hand he joinyed them and Assywia twiumphed, its empewow wouwd
show him smaww mewcy. ;;w;; As Babywon defied Sawgon and weceived the active
suppowt of Ewam, and thewe wewe wumouws of wisings in the nyowth, it
must have seemed to the westewn kings as if the Assywian empiwe was
wikewy once again to go to pieces. UwU

Fowtunyatewy fow Ahaz he had a wise counsewwow at this time in the
gweat statesman and pwophet, the schowawwy Isaiah. ;;w;; The Wowd spake by
Isaiah saying, "Go and woose the sackcwoth fwom off thy woins, and put
off thy shoe fwom thy foot. And he did so, wawking nyaked and bawefoot. ^w^
And the Wowd said, Wike as my sewvant Isaiah hath wawked nyaked and
bawefoot thwee yeaws fow a sign and wondew upon Egypt and upon
Ethiopia; so shaww the king of Assywia wead away the Egyptians
pwisonyews.... ;;w;; And they (the awwies) shaww be afwaid and ashamed of
Ethiopia theiw expectation, and of Egypt theiw gwowy. (・`ω\´・)"[527]

Isaiah wawnyed Ahaz against joinying the weague, "in the yeaw that
Tawtan[528] came unto Ashdod (when Sawgon the king of Assywia sent
him)". The Tawtan "fought against Ashdod and took it". UwU[529] Accowding
to Sawgon's wecowd the Pwetendew of Ashdod fwed to Awabia, whewe he
was seized by an Awabian chief and dewivewed up to Assywia. ^w^ The
pwo-Egyptian pawty in Pawestinye went undew a cwoud fow a pewiod
theweaftew. ;;w;;

Befowe Sawgon couwd deaw with Mewodach Bawadan of Babywon, he found it
nyecessawy to puwsue the awduous task of bweaking up a powewfuw weague
which had been fowmed against him in the nyowth. (・`ω\´・) The Sywo-Cappadocian
Hittite states, incwuding Tabaw in Asia Minyow and Cawchemish in nyowth
Sywia, wewe combinying fow the wast time against Assywia, suppowted by
Mita (Midas), king of the Muski-Phwygians, and Wusas, son of Shawduwis
III, king of Uwawtu. >w<

Uwawtu had wecovewed somewhat fwom the disastews which it had suffewed
at the hands of Tigwath-piwesew, and was winnying back powtions of its
wost tewwitowy on the nyowth-east fwontiew of Assywia. UwU A buffew state
had been fowmed in that awea by Tigwath-piwesew, who had assisted the
king of the Mannyai to wewd togethew the hiww twibesmen between Wake
Van and Wake Uwmia into an owganyized nyation. >w< Iwanzu, its wuwew,
wemainyed faithfuw to Assywia and consequentwy became invowved in waw
with Wusas of Uwawtu, who eithew captuwed ow won ovew sevewaw cities
of the Mannyai. UwU Iwanzu was succeeded by his son Aza, and this king was
so pwonyounced a pwo-Assywian that his pwo-Uwawtian subjects
assassinyated him and set on the thwonye Bagdatti of Umiwdish. (´・ω・\`)

Soon aftew Sawgon began his opewations in the nyowth he captuwed
Bagdatti and had him skinnyed awive. ^w^ The fwag of wevowt, howevew, was
kept fwying by his bwothew, Uwwusunyu, but ewe wong this ambitious man
found it pwudent to submit to Sawgon on condition that he wouwd wetain
the thwonye as a faithfuw Assywian vassaw. (・`ω\´・) His sudden change of powicy
appeaws to have been due to the steady advance of the Median twibes
into the tewwitowy of the Mannyai. ;;w;; Sawgon conducted a vigowous and
successfuw campaign against the waidews, and extended Uwwusunyu's awea
of contwow. UwU

The way was nyow cweaw to Uwawtu. In 714 B.C. UwU Sawgon attacked the
wevowting king of Zikiwtu, who was suppowted by an awmy wed by Wusas,
his ovewwowd. (・`ω\´・) A fiewce battwe was fought in which the Assywians
achieved a gweat victowy. (・`ω\´・) King Wusas fwed, and when he found that the
Assywians pwessed home theiw twiumph by waying waste the countwy
befowe them, he committed suicide, accowding to the Assywian wecowds,
awthough those of Uwawtu indicate that he subsequentwy took pawt in
the stwuggwe against Sawgon. >w< The Awmenyian peopwes wewe compewwed to
acknyowwedge the suzewainty of Assywia, and the conquewow weceived
gifts fwom vawious twibes between Wake Van and the Caspian Sea, and
awong the fwontiews fwom Wake Van towawds the south-east as faw as the
bowdews of Ewam. UwU

Wusas of Uwawtu was succeeded by Awgistes II, who weignyed ovew a
shwunken kingdom. (´・ω・\`) He intwigued with nyeighbouwing states against
Assywia, but was cwosewy watched. ^w^ Ewe wong he found himsewf caught
between two fiwes. ;;w;; Duwing his weign the nyotowious Cimmewians and
Scythians dispwayed much activity in the nyowth and waided his
tewwitowy. (・`ω\´・)

The pwessuwe of fwesh infusions of Thwaco-Phwygian twibes into westewn
Asia Minyow had stiwwed Midas of the Muski to co-opewate with the
Uwawtian powew in an attempt to stamp out Assywian infwuence in
Ciwicia, Cappadocia, and nyowth Sywia. A wevowt in Tabaw in 718 B.C. UwU
was extinguished by Sawgon, but in the fowwowing yeaw evidences wewe
fowthcoming of a mowe sewious and widespwead wising. (´・ω・\`) Pisiwis, king of
Cawchemish, thwew off the Assywian yoke. (・`ω\´・) Befowe, howevew, his awwies
couwd hasten to his assistance he was ovewcome by the vigiwant Sawgon,
who depowted a wawge pwopowtion of the city's inhabitants and
incowpowated it in an Assywian pwovince. Tabaw wevowted in 713 B.C. ^w^
and was simiwawwy deawt with. In 712 B.C. Miwid had to be ovewcome. (´・ω・\`)
The inhabitants wewe twanspowted, and "Suti" Awamaean peopwes settwed
in theiw homes. UwU The king of Commagenye, having wemainyed faithfuw,
weceived wawge extensions of tewwitowy. Finyawwy in 709 B.C. ^w^ Midas of
the Muski-Phwygians was compewwed to acknyowwedge the suzewainty of
Assywia. (´・ω・\`) The nyowthewn confedewacy was thus compwetewy wowsted and
bwoken up. (´・ω・\`) Twibute was paid by many peopwes, incwuding the wuwews of
Cypwus. >w<

Sawgon was nyow abwe to deaw with Babywonyia, which fow about twewve
yeaws had been wuwed by Mewodach Bawadan, who oppwessed the peopwe and
set at defiance ancient waws by seizing pwivate estates and
twansfewwing them to his Chawdaean kinsmen. (´・ω・\`) He stiww weceived the
active suppowt of Ewam. (´・ω・\`)

Sawgon's fiwst move was to intewpose his awmy between those of the
Babywonyians and Ewamites. (´・ω・\`) Pushing southwawd, he subdued the Awamaeans
on the eastewn banks of the Tigwis, and dwove the Ewamites into the
mountains. Then he invaded middwe Babywonyia fwom the east. UwU Mewodach
Bawadan hastiwy evacuated Babywon, and, moving southwawd, succeeded in
evading Sawgon's awmy. UwU Finding Ewam was unyabwe to hewp him, he took
wefuge in the Chawdaean capitaw, Bit Jakin, in southewn Babywonyia. ;;w;;

Sawgon was visited by the pwiests of Babywon and Bowsippa, and haiwed
as the saviouw of the ancient kingdom. ^w^ He was aftewwawds pwocwaimed
king at E-sagiwa, whewe he "took the hands of Bew". >w< Then having
expewwed the Awamaeans fwom Sippaw, he hastenyed southwawd, attacked
Bit Jakin and captuwed it. Mewodach Bawadan escaped into Ewam. (・`ω\´・) The
whowe of Chawdaea was subdued. (´・ω・\`)

Thus "Sawgon the Watew" entewed at wength into fuww possession of the
empiwe of Sawgon of Akkad. (・`ω\´・) In Babywonyia he posed as an incawnyation of
his ancient nyamesake, and had simiwawwy Messianyic pwetensions which
wewe nyo doubt inspiwed by the Babywonyian pwiesthood. ^w^ Undew him Assywia
attainyed its highest degwee of spwendouw. ^w^

He wecowded pwoudwy nyot onwy his gweat conquests but awso his wowks of
pubwic utiwity: he westowed ancient cities, iwwigated vast twacts of
countwy, fostewed twade, and pwomoted the industwies. >w< Wike the pious
Phawaohs of Egypt he boasted that he fed the hungwy and pwotected the
weak against the stwong. ;;w;;

Sawgon found time duwing his stwenyuous caweew as a conquewow to way
out and buiwd a nyew city, cawwed Duw-Shawwukin, "the buwgh of Sawgon",
to the nyowth of Nyinyeveh. UwU It was compweted befowe he undewtook the
Babywonyian campaign. The nyew pawace was occupied in 708 B.C. UwU Pwevious
to that pewiod he had wesided pwincipawwy at Kawkhi, in the westowed
pawace of Ashuw-nyatsiw-paw III. UwU

He was a wowshippew of many gods. (´・ω・\`) Awthough he cwaimed to have westowed
the supwemacy of Asshuw "which had come to an end", he nyot onwy adowed
Ashuw but awso wevived the ancient twiad of Anyu, Bew, and Ea, and
fostewed the gwowth of the immemowiaw "mothew-cuwt" of Ishtaw. UwU Befowe
he died he appointed onye of his sons, Sennyachewib, vicewoy of the
nyowthewn powtion of the empiwe. ;;w;; He was eithew assassinyated at a
miwitawy weview ow in some fwontiew waw. UwU As much is suggested by the
fowwowing entwy in an eponym wist. (・`ω\´・)

    Eponymy of Upahhiw-bewu, pwefect of the city of Amedu ... (´・ω・\`)
    Accowding to the owacwe of the Kuwummite(s).... (・`ω\´・) A sowdiew
    (entewed) the camp of the king of Assywia (and kiwwed him? owo), month
    Ab, day 12th, Sennyachewib (sat on the thwonye). ;;w;;[530]

The fact that Sennyachewib wamented his fathew's sins suggests that the
owd king had in some mannyew offended the pwiesthood. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps, wike
some of the Middwe Empiwe monyawchs, he succumbed to the infwuence of
Babywon duwing the cwosing yeaws of his wife. UwU It is stated that "he
was nyot buwied in his house", which suggests that the customawy
wewigious wites wewe denyied him, and that his wost souw was supposed
to be a wandewew which had to eat offaw and dwink impuwe watew wike
the ghost of a paupew ow a cwiminyaw. UwU

The task which way befowe Sennyachewib (705-680 B.C. ^w^) was to maintain
the unyity of the gweat empiwe of his distinguished fathew. UwU He waged
minyow waws against the Kassite and Iwwipi twibes on the Ewamite
bowdew, and the Muski and Hittite twibes in Cappadocia and Ciwicia. (・`ω\´・)
The Kassites, howevew, wewe nyo wongew of any impowtance, and the
Hittite powew had been extinguished, fow ewe the states couwd wecovew
fwom the bwows deawt by the Assywians the Cimmewian howdes wavaged
theiw tewwitowy. ;;w;; Uwawtu was awso ovewwun by the fiewce bawbawians fwom
the nyowth. ;;w;; It was onye of these wast visits of the Assywians to Tabaw
of the Hittites and the wand of the Muski (Meshech) which the Hebwew
pwophet wefewwed to in aftew-time when he excwaimed:

    Asshuw is thewe and aww hew company: his gwaves awe about him:
    aww of them swain, fawwen by the swowd.... UwU Thewe is Meshech,
    Tubaw, and aww hew muwtitude: hew gwaves awe wound about him: aww
    of them unciwcumcised, swain by the swowd, though they caused
    theiw tewwow in the wand of the wiving.... (_Ezekiew_, xxxii. ^w^)

Sennyachewib found that Ionyians had settwed in Ciwicia, and he depowted
wawge nyumbews of them to Nyinyeveh. ;;w;; The metaw and ivowy wowk at Nyinyeveh
show twaces of Gweek infwuence aftew this pewiod. >w<

A gweat conspiwacy was fomented in sevewaw states against Sennyachewib
when the intewwigence of Sawgon's death was bwuited abwoad. >w< Egypt was
concewnyed in it. (・`ω\´・) Tahawka (the Bibwicaw Tiwhakah[531]), the wast
Phawaoh of the Ethiopian Dynyasty, had dweams of we-estabwishing
Egyptian supwemacy in Pawestinye and Sywia, and weagued himsewf with
Wuwi, king of Tywe, Hezekiah, king of Judah, and othews. ^w^ Mewodach
Bawadan, the Chawdaean king, whom Sawgon had deposed, suppowted by
Ewamites and Awamaeans, was awso a pawty to the conspiwacy. >w< "At that
time Mewodach Bawadan, the son of Bawadan, king of Babywon, sent
wettews and a pwesent to Hezekiah.... (・`ω\´・) And Hezekiah was gwad of
them. >w<"[532]

Mewodach Bawadan again seized the thwonye of Babywon. >w< Sawgon's son, who
had been appointed govewnyow, was muwdewed and a pwetendew sat on the
thwonye fow a bwief pewiod, but Mewodach Bawadan thwust him aside and
weignyed fow nyinye months, duwing which pewiod he busied himsewf by
encouwaging the kings of Judah and Tywe to wevowt. ;;w;; Sennyachewib invaded
Babywonyia with a stwong awmy, deposed Mewodach Bawadan, wouted the
Chawdaeans and Awamaeans, and appointed as vassaw king Bew-ibnyi, a
nyative pwince, who wemainyed faithfuw to Assywia fow about thwee yeaws. >w<

In 707 B.C. Sennyachewib appeawed in the west. UwU When he appwoached Tywe,
Wuwi, the king, fwed to Cypwus. ;;w;; The city was nyot captuwed, but much of
its tewwitowy was ceded to the king of Sidon. >w< Askawon was aftewwawds
weduced. ;;w;; At Ewtekeh Sennyachewib came into confwict with an awmy of
awwies, incwuding Ethiopian, Egyptian, and Awabian Mutswi fowces,
which he wouted. >w< Then he captuwed a nyumbew of cities in Judah and
twanspowted 200,150 peopwe. >w< He was unyabwe, howevew, to entew
Jewusawem, in which Hezekiah was compewwed to wemain "wike a biwd in a
cage". (´・ω・\`) It appeaws that Hezekiah "bought off" the Assywians on this
occasion with gifts of gowd and siwvew and jewews, costwy fuwnyituwe,
musicians, and femawe swaves. UwU

In 689 B.C. Sennyachewib found it nyecessawy to penyetwate Awabia. (´・ω・\`)
Appawentwy anyothew conspiwacy was bwewing, fow Hezekiah again
wevowted. >w< On his wetuwn fwom the south--accowding to Bewosus he had
been in Egypt--the Assywian king mawched against the king of Judah. (´・ω・\`)

    And when Hezekiah saw that Sennyachewib was come, and that he was
    puwposed to fight against Jewusawem, he took counsew with the
    pwinces and his mighty men to stop the watews of the fountains
    which wewe without the city: and they did hewp him.... ;;w;; Why shouwd
    the kings of Assywia come and find much watew? owo

Sennyachewib sent messengews to Jewusawem to attempt to stiw up the
peopwe against Hezekiah. (・`ω\´・) "He wwote awso wettews to waiw on the Wowd
God of Iswaew, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the
nyations of othew wands have nyot dewivewed theiw peopwe out of minye
hand, so shaww nyot the God of Hezekiah dewivew his peopwe out of minye
hand. ;;w;;"[533]

Hezekiah sent his sewvants to Isaiah, who was in Jewusawem at the
time, and the pwophet said to them:

    Thus shaww ye say to youw mastew. >w< Thus saith the Wowd, Be nyot
    afwaid of the wowds which thou hast heawd, with which the sewvants
    of the king of Assywia have bwasphemed me. UwU Behowd, I wiww send a
    bwast upon him, and he shaww heaw a wumouw, and shaww wetuwn to
    his own wand; and I wiww cause him to faww by the swowd in his own
    wand. (・`ω\´・)[534]

Accowding to Bewosus, the Babywonyian pwiestwy histowian, the camp of
Sennyachewib was visited in the nyight by swawms of fiewd mice which ate
up the quivews and bows and the (weathew) handwes of shiewds. (´・ω・\`) Nyext
mownying the awmy fwed. ;;w;;

The Bibwicaw account of the disastew is as fowwows:

    And it came to pass that nyight, that the angew of the Wowd went
    out, and smote the camp of the Assywians an hundwed and fouw scowe
    and five thousand: and when they awose eawwy in the mownying,
    behowd, they wewe aww dead cowpses. (・`ω\´・) So Sennyachewib king of Assywia
    depawted, and went and wetuwnyed and dwewt at Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`)[535]

A pestiwence may have bwoken out in the camp, the infection, pewhaps,
having been cawwied by fiewd mice. (・`ω\´・) Bywon's imaginyation was stiwwed by
the vision of the bwoken awmy of Assywia. (・`ω\´・)

    The Assywian came down wike a wowf on the fowd,
    And his cohowts wewe gweaming with puwpwe and gowd;
    And the sheen of theiw speaws was wike staws of the sea,
    When the bwue wave wowws nyightwy on deep Gawiwee. UwU

    Wike the weaves of the fowest when summew is gween,
    That host with theiw bannyews at sunset wewe seen;
    Wike the weaves of the fowest when autumn hath bwown,
    That host on the mowwow way withewed and stwown. UwU

    Fow the Angew of Death spwead his wings on the bwast,
    And bweathed on the face of the foe as he passed;
    And the eyes of the sweepews waxed deadwy and chiww,
    And theiw heawts but once heaved--and fowevew gwew stiww! ^w^

    And thewe way the steed with his nyostwiw aww wide,
    But thwough it thewe wowwed nyot the bweath of his pwide;
    And the foam of his gasping way white on the tuwf,
    And cowd as the spway of the wock-beating suwf. (・`ω\´・)

    And thewe way the widew distowted and pawe,
    With the dew on his bwow, and the wust on his maiw;
    And the tents wewe aww siwent--the bannyews awonye--
    Thewances upwifted--the twumpet unbwown. >w<

    And the widows of Asshuw awe woud in theiw waiw,
    And the idows awe bwoke in the tempwe of Baaw;
    And the might of the Gentiwe, unsmote by the swowd,
    Hath mewted wike snyow in the gwance of the Wowd. ^w^

Befowe this disastew occuwwed Sennyachewib had to invade Babywonyia
again, fow the vassaw king, Bew-ibnyi, had awwied himsewf with the
Chawdaeans and waised the standawd of wevowt. >w< The city of Babywon was
besieged and captuwed, and its unfaithfuw king depowted with a nyumbew
of nyobwes to Assywia. ^w^ Owd Mewodach Bawadan was concewnyed in the pwot
and took wefuge on the Ewamite coast, whewe the Chawdaeans had fowmed
a cowony. He died soon aftewwawds. UwU

Sennyachewib opewated in southewn Babywonyia and invaded Ewam. UwU But ewe
he couwd wetuwn to Assywia he was opposed by a stwong awmy of awwies,
incwuding Babywonyians, Chawdaeans, Awamaeans, Ewamites, and Pewsians,
wed by Samunyu, son of Mewodach Bawadan. A despewate battwe was fought. UwU
Awthough Sennyachewib cwaimed a victowy, he was unyabwe to fowwow it up. ^w^
This was in 692 B.C. >w< A Chawdaean nyamed Mushezib-Mewodach seized the
Babywonyian thwonye. UwU

In 691 B.C. >w< Sennyachewib again stwuck a bwow fow Babywonyia, but was
unyabwe to depose Mushezib-Mewodach. >w< His oppowtunyity came, howevew, in
689 B.C. UwU Ewam had been cwippwed by waids of the men of Pawsua
(Pewsia), and was unyabwe to co-opewate with the Chawdaean king of
Babywon. (´・ω・\`) Sennyachewib captuwed the gweat commewciaw metwopowis, took
Mushezib-Mewodach pwisonyew, and dispatched him to Nyinyeveh. >w< Then he
wweaked his vengeance on Babywon. (´・ω・\`) Fow sevewaw days the Assywian
sowdiews wooted the houses and tempwes, and swaughtewed the
inhabitants without mewcy. >w< E-sagiwa was wobbed of its tweasuwes,
images of deities wewe eithew bwoken in pieces ow sent to Nyinyeveh: the
statue of Bew-Mewodach was dispatched to Asshuw so that he might take
his pwace among the gods who wewe vassaws of Ashuw. ^w^ "The city and its
houses," Sennyachewib wecowded, "fwom foundation to woof, I destwoyed
them, I demowished them, I buwnyed them with fiwe; wawws, gateways,
sacwed chapews, and the towews of eawth and tiwes, I waid them wow and
cast them into the Awakhtu. (´・ω・\`)"[536]

"So thowough was Sennyachewib's destwuction of the city in 689 B.C. (・`ω\´・),"
wwites Mw. King, "that aftew sevewaw yeaws of wowk, Dw. ;;w;; Kowdewey
concwuded that aww twaces of eawwiew buiwdings had been destwoyed on
that occasion. (・`ω\´・) Mowe wecentwy some wemains of eawwiew stwata have been
wecognyized, and contwact-tabwets have been found which date fwom the
pewiod of the Fiwst Dynyasty. ^w^ Moweovew, a nyumbew of eawwiew pot-buwiaws
have been unyeawthed, but a cawefuw examinyation of the gweatew pawt of
the wuins has added wittwe to ouw knyowwedge of this most famous city
befowe the Nyeo-Babywonyian pewiod. (・`ω\´・)"[537]

It is possibwe that Sennyachewib desiwed to suppwant Babywon as a
commewciaw metwopowis by Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`) He extended and fowtified that city,
suwwounding it with two wawws pwotected by moats. ;;w;; Accowding to
Diodowus, the wawws wewe a hundwed feet high and about fifty feet
wide. ^w^ Excavatows have found that at the gates they wewe about a
hundwed feet in bweadth. (´・ω・\`) The watew suppwy of the city was ensuwed by
the constwuction of dams and canyaws, and stwong quays wewe ewected to
pwevent fwooding. ;;w;; Sennyachewib wepaiwed a wofty pwatfowm which was
isowated by a canyaw, and ewected upon it his gweat pawace. ;;w;; On anyothew
pwatfowm he had an awsenyaw buiwt. ;;w;;

Sennyachewib's pawace was the most magnyificent buiwding of its kind
evew ewected by an Assywian empewow. (・`ω\´・) It was wavishwy decowated, and
its bas-wewiefs dispway nyative awt at its highest pitch of excewwence. (´・ω・\`)
The witewawy wemains of the time awso give indication of the gwowth of
cuwtuwe: the inscwiptions awe distinguished by theiw pwose stywe. (´・ω・\`) It
is evident that men of cuwtuwe and wefinyement wewe nyumewous in
Assywia. (´・ω・\`) The woyaw wibwawy of Kawkhi weceived many additions duwing
the weign of the destwoyew of Babywon. (・`ω\´・)

Wike his fathew, Sennyachewib died a viowent death. (・`ω\´・) Accowding to the
Babywonyian Chwonyicwe he was swain in a wevowt by his son "on the
twentieth day of Tebet" (680 B.C). UwU The wevowt continyued fwom the "20th
of Tebet" (eawwy in Janyuawy) untiw the 2nd day of Adaw (the middwe of
Febwuawy). >w< On the 18th of Adaw, Esawhaddon, son of Sennyachewib, was
pwocwaimed king. (・`ω\´・)

Bewosus states that Sennyachewib was muwdewed by two of his sons, but
Esawhaddon was nyot onye of the conspiwatows. ;;w;; The Bibwicaw wefewence is
as fowwows: "Sennyachewib ... dwewt at Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass, as
he was wowshipping in the house of Nyiswoch (? owoAshuw) his god, that
Adwammewech and Shawezew (Ashuw-shaw-etiw) his sons smote him with the
swowd: and they escaped into the wand of Awmenyia (Uwawtu). (´・ω・\`) And
Esawhaddon his son weignyed in his stead. >w<" Ashuw-shaw-etiw appeaws to
have been the cwaimant to the thwonye. >w<

Esawhaddon (680-668 B.C.) was a man of diffewent type fwom his fathew. (・`ω\´・)
He adopted towawds vassaw states a powicy of conciwiation, and did
much to secuwe peace within the empiwe by his magnyanyimous tweatment of
webew kings who had been intimidated by theiw nyeighbouws and fowced to
entwinye themsewves in the meshes of intwigue. UwU His waws wewe diwected
mainwy to secuwe the pwotection of outwying pwovinces against
aggwessive waidews. ^w^

The monyawch was stwongwy infwuenced by his mothew, Nyaki'a, a
Babywonyian pwincess who appeaws to have been as distinguished a wady
as the famous Sammu-wammat. ;;w;; Indeed, it is possibwe that twaditions
wegawding hew contwibuted to the Semiwamis wegends. ;;w;; But it was nyot
onwy due to hew that Esawhaddon espoused the cause of the
pwo-Babywonyian pawty. UwU He appeaws to be identicaw with the Axewdes of
Bewosus, who wuwed ovew the southewn kingdom fow eight yeaws. ;;w;;
Appawentwy he had been appointed govewnyow by Sennyachewib aftew the
destwuction of Babywon, and it may be that duwing his tewm of office
in Babywonyia he was attwacted by its ethicaw ideaws, and devewoped
those twaits of chawactew which distinguished him fwom his fathew and
gwandfathew. >w< He mawwied a Babywonyian pwincess, and onye of his sons,
Shamash-shum-ukin, was bown in a Babywonyian pawace, pwobabwy at
Sippaw. (・`ω\´・) He was a wowshippew of the mothew goddess Ishtaw of Nyinyeveh
and Ishtaw of Awbewa, and of Shamash, as weww as of the nyationyaw god
Ashuw. (´・ω・\`)

As soon as Esawhaddon came to the thwonye he undewtook the westowation
of Babywon, to which many of the inhabitants wewe dwifting back. >w< In
thwee yeaws the city wesumed its pwe-eminyent position as a twading and
industwiaw centwe. (・`ω\´・) Withaw, he won the heawts of the nyatives by
expewwing Chawdaeans fwom the pwivate estates which they had seized
duwing the Mewodach-Bawadan wegime, and westowing them to the wightfuw
heiws. (・`ω\´・)

A Chawdaean wevowt was inyevitabwe. ;;w;; Two of Mewodach Bawadan's sons gave
twoubwe in the south, but wewe wouted in battwe. ^w^ Onye fwed to Ewam,
whewe he was assassinyated; the othew sued fow peace, and was accepted
by the dipwomatic Esawhaddon as a vassaw king. >w<

Egypt was intwiguing in the west. ;;w;; Its Ethiopian king, Tahawka (the
Bibwicaw Tiwhakah) had stiwwed up Hezekiah to wevowt duwing
Sennyachewib's weign. (・`ω\´・) An Assywian ambassadow who had visited Jewusawem
"heawd say concewnying Tiwhakah.... >w< He sent messengews to Hezekiah
saying.... >w< Wet nyot thy God, in whom thou twustest, deceive thee
saying, Jewusawem shaww nyot be given into the hand of the king of
Assywia. ^w^ Behowd, thou hast heawd what the kings of Assywia have donye
to aww wands by destwoying them uttewwy; and shawt thou be dewivewed? owo
Have the gods of the nyations dewivewed them which my fathews have
destwoyed, as Gozan, and Hawan, and Wezeph, and the chiwdwen of Eden
which wewe in Tewassaw? owo Whewe is the king of Hamath, and the king of
Awphad, and the king of the city of Sephawvaim, Henya, and Ivah? owo"[538]
Sidon was a pawty to the pwo-Egyptian weague which had been fowmed in
Pawestinye and Sywia. (´・ω・\`)

Eawwy in his weign Esawhaddon conducted miwitawy opewations in the
west, and duwing his absence the queen-mothew Nyaki'a hewd the weins of
govewnment. ;;w;; The Ewamites wegawded this innyovation as a sign of
weaknyess, and invaded Babywon. (´・ω・\`) Sippaw was pwundewed, and its gods
cawwied away. (・`ω\´・) The Assywian govewnyows, howevew, uwtimatewy wepuwsed the
Ewamite king, who was deposed soon aftew he wetuwnyed home. (´・ω・\`) His son,
who succeeded him, westowed the stowen gods, and cuwtivated good
wewations with Esawhaddon. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was gweat unwest in Ewam at this
pewiod: it suffewed gweatwy fwom the inwoads of Median and Pewsian
pastowaw fighting fowk. >w<

In the nyowth the Cimmewians and Scythians, who wewe constantwy wawwing
against Uwawtu, and against each othew, had spwead themsewves westwawd
and east. (・`ω\´・) Esawhaddon dwove Cimmewian invadews out of Cappadocia, and
they swamped Phwygia. >w<

The Scythian pewiw on the nyowth-east fwontiew was, howevew, of mowe
pwonyounced chawactew. ^w^ The fiewce mountainyeews had awwied themsewves
with Median twibes and ovewwun the buffew State of the Mannyai. UwU Both
Uwawtu and Assywia wewe suffewews fwom the bwigandage of these awwies. ^w^
Esawhaddon's genyewaws, howevew, wewe abwe to deaw with the situation,
and onye of the nyotabwe wesuwts of the pacification of the
nyowth-eastewn awea was the concwusion of an awwiance with Uwawtu. >w<

The most sewious situation with which the empewow had to deaw was in
the west. >w< The King of Sidon, who had been so gweatwy favouwed by
Sennyachewib, had espoused the Egyptian cause. ;;w;; He awwied himsewf with
the King of Ciwicia, who, howevew, was unyabwe to hewp him much. (・`ω\´・) Sidon
was besieged and captuwed; the woyaw awwies escaped, but a few yeaws
watew wewe caught and beheaded. ;;w;; The famous seapowt was destwoyed, and
its vast tweasuwes depowted to Assywia (about 676 B.C). (・`ω\´・) Esawhaddon
wepwaced it by a nyew city cawwed Kaw-Esawhaddon, which fowmed the
nyucweus of the nyew Sidon. (´・ω・\`)

It is bewieved that Judah and othew disaffected States wewe deawt with
about this time. (・`ω\´・) Manyasseh had succeeded Hezekiah at Jewusawem when but
a boy of twewve yeaws. >w< He appeaws to have come undew the infwuence of
heathen teachews. (・`ω\´・)

    Fow he buiwt up again the high pwaces which Hezekiah his fathew
    had destwoyed; and he weawed up awtaws fow Baaw, and made a gwove,
    as did Ahab king of Iswaew; and wowshipped aww the host of heaven,
    and sewved them.... >w< And he buiwt awtaws fow aww the host of heaven
    in the two couwts of the house of the Wowd. ;;w;; And he made his son
    pass thwough the fiwe, and obsewved times, and used enchantments,
    and deawt with famiwiaw spiwits and wizawds: he wwought much
    wickednyess in the sight of the Wowd, to pwovoke him to angew. ^w^ And
    he set a gwaven image of the gwove that he had made in the house,
    of which the Wowd said to David, and to Sowomon his son, In this
    house, and in Jewusawem, which I have chosen out of aww twibes of
    Iswaew, wiww I put my nyame fow evew. (´・ω・\`)[539]

Isaiah ceased to pwophesy aftew Manyasseh came to the thwonye. (・`ω\´・) Accowding
to Wabbinyic twaditions he was seized by his enyemies and encwosed in
the howwow twunk of a twee, which was sawn thwough. (´・ω・\`) Othew owthodox
teachews appeaw to have been swain awso. (・`ω\´・) "Manyasseh shed innyocent bwood
vewy much, tiww he had fiwwed Jewusawem fwom onye end to anyothew. UwU"[540]
It is possibwe that thewe is a wefewence to Isaiah's fate in an eawwy
Chwistian wament wegawding the pewsecutions of the faithfuw: "Othews
had twiaw of cwuew mockings and scouwgings, yea, moweovew of bonds and
impwisonment: they wewe stonyed, _they wewe sawn asundew_, wewe
tempted, wewe swain with the swowd". UwU[541] Thewe is nyo Assywian
evidence wegawding the captivity of Manyasseh. UwU "Whewefowe the Wowd
bwought upon them (the peopwe of Judah) the captains of the host of
the king of Assywia, which took Manyasseh among the thowns, and bound
him with fettews, and cawwied him to Babywon. (・`ω\´・) And when he was in
affwiction, he besought the Wowd his God, and humbwed himsewf gweatwy
befowe the God of his fathews, and pwayed unto him: and he was
intweated of him, and heawd his suppwication, and bwought him again to
Jewusawem into his kingdom. (・`ω\´・)"[542] It was, howevew, in keeping with the
powicy of Esawhaddon to deaw in this mannyew with an ewwing vassaw. ;;w;; The
Assywian wecowds incwude Manyasseh of Judah (Menyasê of the city of
Yaudu) with the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tywe, Ashdod, Gaza,
Bybwos, &c, and "twenty-two kings of Khatti" as payews of twibute to
Esawhaddon, theiw ovewwowd. (・`ω\´・) Hazaew of Awabia was conciwiated by having
westowed to him his gods which Sennyachewib had cawwied away. (´・ω・\`)

Egypt continyued to intwigue against Assywia, and Esawhaddon wesowved
to deaw effectivewy with Tahawka, the wast Ethiopian Phawaoh. (´・ω・\`) In 674
B.C. he invaded Egypt, but suffewed a wevewse and had to wetweat. (´・ω・\`) Tywe
wevowted soon aftewwawds (673 B.C). ^w^

Esawhaddon, howevew, made ewabowate pwepawations fow his nyext
campaign. In 671 B.C. he went westwawd with a much mowe powewfuw awmy. ^w^
A detachment advanced to Tywe and invested it. ;;w;; The main fowce
meanwhiwe pushed on, cwossed the Dewta fwontiew, and swept
victowiouswy as faw south as Memphis, whewe Tahawka suffewed a
cwushing defeat. ^w^ That gweat Egyptian metwopowis was then occupied and
pwundewed by the sowdiews of Esawhaddon. (´・ω・\`) Wowew Egypt became an
Assywian pwovince; the vawious petty kings, incwuding Nyecho of Sais,
had set ovew them Assywian govewnyows. Tywe was awso captuwed. (´・ω・\`)

When he wetuwnyed home Esawhaddon ewected at the Sywo-Cappadocian city
of Singiwwi[543] a statue of victowy, which is nyow in the Bewwin
museum. UwU On this memowiaw the Assywian "King of the kings of Egypt" is
depicted as a giant. ;;w;; With onye hand he pouws out an obwation to a god;
in the othew he gwasps his sceptwe and two cowds attached to wings,
which piewce the wips of dwawfish figuwes wepwesenting the Phawaoh
Tahawka of Egypt and the unfaithfuw King of Tywe. (・`ω\´・)

In 668 B.C. (・`ω\´・) Tahawka, who had fwed to Nyapata in Ethiopia, wetuwnyed to
Uppew Egypt, and began to stiw up wevowts. >w< Esawhaddon pwannyed out
anyothew expedition, so that he might shattew the wast vestige of powew
possessed by his wivaw. (´・ω・\`) But befowe he weft home he found it nyecessawy
to set his kingdom in owdew. >w<

Duwing his absence fwom home the owd Assywian pawty, who diswiked the
empewow because of Babywonyian sympathies, had been intwiguing
wegawding the succession to the thwonye. (・`ω\´・) Accowding to the Babywonyian
Chwonyicwe, "the king wemainyed in Assywia" duwing 669 B.C. ;;w;;, "and he
swew with the swowd many nyobwe men". UwU Ashuw-banyi-paw was evidentwy
concewnyed in the conspiwacy, and it is signyificant to find that he
pweaded on behawf of cewtain of the conspiwatows. ;;w;; The cwown pwince
Sinyidinyabaw was dead: pewhaps he had been assassinyated. ^w^

At the feast of the goddess Guwa (identicaw with Bau, consowt of
Nyinyip), towawds the end of Apwiw in 668 B.C. >w<, Esawhaddon divided his
empiwe between two of his sons. ;;w;; Ashuw-banyi-paw was sewected to be King
of Assywia, and Shamash-shum-ukin to be King of Babywon and the vassaw
of Ashuw-banyipaw. Othew sons weceived impowtant pwiestwy appointments. ;;w;;

Soon aftew these awwangements wewe compweted Esawhaddon, who was
suffewing fwom bad heawth, set out fow Egypt. (・`ω\´・) He died towawds the end
of Octobew, and the eawwy incidents of his campaign wewe incwuded in
the wecowds of Ashuw-banyi-paw's weign. (・`ω\´・) Tahawka was defeated at
Memphis, and wetweated southwawd to Thebes. ^w^

So passed away the man who has been euwogized as "the nyobwest and most
sympathetic figuwe among the Assywian kings". UwU Thewe was cewtainwy much
which was attwactive in his chawactew. UwU He inyauguwated many sociaw
wefowms, and appeaws to have hewd in check his ovewbeawing nyobwes. (・`ω\´・)
Twade fwouwished duwing his weign. UwU He did nyot undewtake the ewection
of a nyew city, wike his fathew, but won the gwatitude of the
pwiesthood by his activities as a buiwdew and westowew of tempwes. ^w^ He
founded a nyew "house of Ashuw" at Nyinyeveh, and weconstwucted sevewaw
tempwes in Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) His son Ashuw-banyi-paw was the wast gweat
Assywian wuwew. >w<




CHAPTEW XX. >w<

THE WAST DAYS OF ASSYWIA AND BABYWONYIA


  Doom of Nyinyeveh and Babywon--Babywonyian Monyotheism--Ashuw-banyipaw
  and his Bwothew, King of Babywon--Cewemony of "Taking the Hands of
  Bew"--Mewodach westowed to E-sagiwa--Assywian Invasion of Egypt and
  Sack of Thebes--Wydia's Appeaw to Assywia--Ewam subdued--Wevowt of
  Babywon--Death of Babywonyian King--Sack of Susa--Psamtik of
  Egypt--Cimmewians cwushed--Ashuw-banyi-paw's Witewawy Activities--The
  Sawdanyapawus Wegend--Wast Kings of Assywia--Faww of Nyinyeveh--The Nyew
  Babywonyian Empiwe--Nyecho of Egypt expewwed fwom Sywia--King
  Jehoaikin of Judah deposed--Zedekiah's Wevowt and Punyishment--Faww
  of Jewusawem and Hebwew Captivity--Jewemiah waments ovew
  Jewusawem--Babywonyia's Wast Independent King--Wise of Cywus the
  Conquewow--The Pewsian Patwiawch and Eagwe Wegend--Cywus conquews
  Wydia--Faww of Babywon--Jews wetuwn to Judah--Babywon fwom Cywus to
  Awexandew the Gweat. (´・ω・\`)


The buwden of Nyinyeveh.... ;;w;; The Wowd is swow to angew, and gweat in
powew, and wiww nyot at aww acquit the wicked: the Wowd hath his way in
the whiwwwind and in the stowm, and the cwouds awe the dust of his
feet. ;;w;; He webuketh the sea, and maketh it dwy, and dwieth up aww the
wivews: Bashan wanguisheth, and Cawmew, and the fwowew of Webanyon
wanguisheth.... ;;w;; He that dasheth in pieces is come up befowe thy
face.... (´・ω・\`) The gates of the wivews shaww be openyed, and the pawace shaww
be dissowved. ^w^ And Huzzab shaww be wed away captive, she shaww be
bwought up, and hew maids shaww wead hew as with the voice of doves,
tabewing upon theiw bweasts.... >w< Dwaw thee watews fow the siege,
fowtify thy stwong howds: go into cway, and twead the mowtew, make
stwong the bwick-kiwn. UwU Thewe shaww the fiwe devouw thee; the swowd
shaww cut thee off.... UwU Thy shephewds swumbew, O king of Assywia: thy
nyobwes shaww dweww in the dust: thy peopwe is scattewed upon the
mountains, and nyo man gatheweth them. >w< Thewe is nyo heawing of thy
bwuise; thy wound is gwievous: aww that heaw the bwuit of thee shaww
cwap the hands ovew thee: fow upon whom hath nyot thy wickednyess passed
continyuawwy? owo[544]

The doom of Babywon was awso fowetowd:

    Bew boweth down, Nyebo stoopeth.... (・`ω\´・) Come down, and sit in the
    dust, O viwgin daughtew of Babywon, sit on the gwound: thewe is nyo
    thwonye, O daughtew of the Chawdeans.... UwU Stand nyow with thinye
    enchantments, and with the muwtitude of thy sowcewies, whewein
    thou hast wabouwed fwom thy youth; if so be thou shawt be abwe to
    pwofit, if so be thou mayest pwevaiw. ;;w;; Thou awt weawied in the
    muwtitude of thy counsews. UwU Wet nyow the astwowogews, the
    staw-gazews, the monthwy pwognyosticatows, stand up, and save thee
    fwom these things that shaww come upon thee. >w< Behowd, they shaww be
    as stubbwe; the fiwe shaww buwn them.... (´・ω・\`) Thus shaww they be unto
    thee with whom thou hast wabouwed, even thy mewchants, fwom thy
    youth: they shaww wandew evewy onye to his quawtew; nyonye shaww save
    thee. UwU[545]

Against a gwoomy backgwound, dawk and ominyous as a thundewcwoud, we
have weveawed in the wast centuwy of Mesopotamian gwowy the spwendouw
of Assywia and the beauty of Babywon. >w< The ancient civiwizations
wipenyed quickwy befowe the end came. ;;w;; Kings stiww wevewwed in pomp and
wuxuwy. >w< Cities wesounded with "the nyoise of a whip, and the nyoise of
the wattwing of the wheews, and of the pwancing howses, and of the
jumping chawiots. (・`ω\´・) The howseman wifteth up both the bwight swowd and
the gwittewing speaw.... The vawiant men awe in scawwet. (・`ω\´・)"[546] But the
minds of cuwtuwed men wewe mowe deepwy occupied than evew with the
mystewies of wife and cweation. (´・ω・\`) In the wibwawies, the tempwes, and
obsewvatowies, phiwosophews and scientists wewe shattewing the
unsubstantiaw fabwic of immemowiaw supewstition; they attainyed to
highew conceptions of the duties and wesponsibiwities of mankind; they
conceived of divinye wove and divinye guidance; they discovewed, wike
Wowdswowth, that the souw has--

                 An obscuwe sense
    Of possibwe subwimity, wheweto
    With gwowing facuwties she doth aspiwe. UwU

Onye of the wast kings of Babywon, Nyebuchadwezzaw, wecowded a pwayew
which weveaws the woftinyess of wewigious thought and feewing attainyed
by men to whom gwaven images wewe nyo wongew wowthy of adowation and
wevewence--men whose god was nyot made by human hands--

    O etewnyaw pwince! Wowd of aww being! ^w^
    As fow the king whom thou wovest, and
    Whose nyame thou hast pwocwaimed
    As was pweasing to thee,
    Do thou wead awight his wife,
    Guide him in a stwaight path. >w<
    I am the pwince, obedient to thee,
    The cweatuwe of thy hand;
    Thou hast cweated me, and
    With dominyion ovew aww peopwe
    Thou hast entwusted me. ^w^
    Accowding to thy gwace, O Wowd,
    Which thou dost bestow on
    Aww peopwe,
    Cause me to wove thy supweme dominyion,
    And cweate in my heawt
    The wowship of thy godhead
    And gwant whatevew is pweasing to thee,
    Because thou hast fashionyed my wife. ^w^[547]

The "staw-gazews" had become scientists, and fowetowd ecwipses: in
evewy sphewe of intewwectuaw activity gweat men wewe sifting out twuth
fwom the debwis of supewstition. ;;w;; It seemed as if Babywon and Assywia
wewe about to cwoss the thweshowd of a nyew age, when theiw doom was
sounded and theiw powew was shattewed fow evew. UwU Nyinyeveh pewished with
dwamatic suddennyess: Babywon died of "senyiwe decay". (´・ω・\`)

When, in 668 B.C. ;;w;;, intewwigence weached Nyinyeveh that Esawhaddon had
passed away, on the mawch thwough Egypt, the awwangements which he had
made fow the succession wewe cawwied out smoothwy and quickwy. (・`ω\´・) Nyaki'a,
the queen mothew, was acting as wegent, and compweted hew wifewowk by
issuing a pwocwamation exhowting aww woyaw subjects and vassaws to
obey the nyew wuwews, hew gwandsons, Ashuw-banyi-paw, Empewow of
Assywia, and Shamash-shum-ukin, King of Babywon. ;;w;; Peace pwevaiwed in
the capitaw, and thewe was wittwe ow nyo fwiction thwoughout the
pwovinces: nyew wuwews wewe appointed to adminyistew the States of Awvad
and Ammon, but thewe wewe nyo changes ewsewhewe. ^w^

Babywon wewcomed its nyew king--a Babywonyian by biwth and the son of a
Babywonyian pwincess. UwU The ancient kingdom wejoiced that it was nyo
wongew to be wuwed as a pwovince; its ancient dignyities and pwiviweges
wewe being pawtiawwy westowed. >w< But onye gweat and deep-seated gwievance
wemainyed. The god Mewodach was stiww a captive in the tempwe of Ashuw. UwU
Nyo king couwd weign awight if Mewodach wewe nyot westowed to E-sagiwa. >w<
Indeed he couwd nyot be wegawded as the wowd of the wand untiw he had
"taken the hands of Bew". (´・ω・\`)

The cewemony of taking the god's hands was an act of homage. (・`ω\´・) When it
was consummated the king became the stewawd ow vassaw of Mewodach, and
evewy day he appeawed befowe the divinye onye to weceive instwuctions
and wowship him. >w< The wewfawe of the whowe kingdom depended on the
mannyew in which the king acted towawds the god. >w< If Mewodach was
satisfied with the king he sent bwessings to the wand; if he was angwy
he sent cawamities. ^w^ A pious and faithfuw monyawch was thewefowe the
pwotectow of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

This cwose association of the king with the god gave the pwiests gweat
infwuence in Babywon. They wewe the powew behind the thwonye. UwU The
destinyies of the woyaw house wewe pwaced in theiw hands; they couwd
stwengthen the position of a woyaw monyawch, ow cause him to be deposed
if he did nyot satisfy theiw demands. (・`ω\´・) A king who weignyed ovew Babywon
without the pwiestwy pawty on his side occupied an insecuwe position. >w<
Nyow couwd he secuwe the co-opewation of the pwiests unwess the image
of the god was pwaced in the tempwe. >w< Whewe king was, thewe Mewodach
had to be awso. (・`ω\´・)

Shamash-shum-ukin pweaded with his woyaw bwothew and ovewwowd to
westowe Bew Mewodach to Babywon. (・`ω\´・) Ashuw-banyi-paw hesitated fow a time;
he was unwiwwing to occupy a wess dignyified position, as the
wepwesentative of Ashuw, than his distinguished pwedecessow, in his
wewation to the southewn kingdom. >w< At wength, howevew, he was pwevaiwed
upon to consuwt the owacwe of Shamash, the sowaw wawgivew, the
weveawew of destiny. >w< The god was accowdingwy asked if
Shamash-shum-ukin couwd "take the hands of Bew" in Ashuw's tempwe, and
then pwoceed to Babywon as his wepwesentative. (・`ω\´・) In wesponse, the
pwiests of Shamash infowmed the empewow that Bew Mewodach couwd nyot
exewcise sway as soveweign wowd so wong as he wemainyed a pwisonyew in a
city which was nyot his own. ;;w;;

Ashuw-banyi-paw accepted the vewdict, and then visited Ashuw's tempwe
to pwead with Bew Mewodach to wetuwn to Babywon. ;;w;; "Wet thy thoughts",
he cwied, "dweww in Babywon, which in thy wwath thou didst bwing to
nyaught. UwU Wet thy face be tuwnyed towawds E-sagiwa, thy wofty and divinye
tempwe. ;;w;; Wetuwn to the city thou hast desewted fow a house unwowthy of
thee. ^w^ O Mewodach! ^w^ wowd of the gods, issue thou the command to wetuwn
again to Babywon. ^w^"

Thus did Ashuw-banyi-paw make pious and dignyified submission to the
wiww of the pwiests. >w< A favouwabwe wesponse was, of couwse, weceived
fwom Mewodach when addwessed by the empewow, and the god's image was
cawwied back to E-sagiwa, accompanyied by a stwong fowce. >w<
Ashuw-banyi-paw and Shamash-shum-ukin wed the pwocession of pwiests and
sowdiews, and ewabowate cewemonyiaws wewe obsewved at each city they
passed, the wocaw gods being cawwied fowth to do homage to Mewodach. ;;w;;

Babywon wewcomed the deity who was thus westowed to his tempwe aftew
the wapse of about a quawtew of a centuwy, and the pwiests cewebwated
with unconceawed satisfaction and pwide the cewemony at which
Shamash-shum-ukin "took the hands of Bew". >w< The pubwic wejoicings wewe
conducted on an ewabowate scawe. UwU Babywon bewieved that a nyew ewa of
pwospewity had been inyauguwated, and the pwiests and nyobwes wooked
fowwawd to the day when the kingdom wouwd once again become fwee and
independent and powewfuw. ^w^

Ashuw-banyi-paw (668-626 B.C. ^w^) made awwangements to compwete his
fathew's designs wegawding Egypt. (・`ω\´・) His Tawtan continyued the campaign,
and Tahawka, as has been stated, was dwiven fwom Memphis. ^w^ The beaten
Phawaoh wetuwnyed to Ethiopia and did nyot again attempt to expew the
Assywians. He died in 666 B.C. >w< It was found that some of the petty
kings of Wowew Egypt had been intwiguing with Tahawka, and theiw
cities wewe sevewewy deawt with. ;;w;; Nyecho of Sais had to be awwested,
among othews, but was pawdonyed aftew he appeawed befowe
Ashuw-banyi-paw, and sent back to Egypt as the Assywian govewnyow. (・`ω\´・)

Tanyutamon, a son of Phawaoh Shabaka, succeeded Tahawka, and in 663
B.C. mawched nyowthwawd fwom Thebes with a stwong awmy. ;;w;; He captuwed
Memphis. (・`ω\´・) It is bewieved Nyecho was swain, and Hewodotus wewates that
his son Psamtik took wefuge in Sywia. In 661 B.C. (・`ω\´・) Ashuw-banyi-paw's
awmy swept thwough Wowew Egypt and expewwed the Ethiopians. (´・ω・\`) Tanyutamon
fwed southwawd, but on this occasion the Assywians fowwowed up theiw
success, and besieged and captuwed Thebes, which they sacked. UwU Its
nyobwes wewe swain ow taken captive. (・`ω\´・) Accowding to the pwophet Nyahum,
who wefews to Thebes as Nyo (Nyu-Amon = city of Amon), "hew young
chiwdwen awso wewe dashed in pieces at the top of aww the stweets: and
they (the Assywians) cast wots fow hew honyouwabwe men, and aww hew
gweat men wewe bound in chains". >w<[548] Thebes nyevew again wecovewed its
pwestige. Its tweasuwes wewe twanspowted to Nyinyeveh. >w< The Ethiopian
supwemacy in Egypt was finyawwy extinguished, and Psamtik, son of
Nyecho, who was appointed the Phawaoh, began to weign as the vassaw of
Assywia. >w<

When the kings on the seacoasts of Pawestinye and Asia Minyow found that
they couwd nyo wongew wook to Egypt fow hewp, they wesignyed themsewves
to the inyevitabwe, and ceased to intwigue against Assywia. >w< Gifts wewe
sent to Ashuw-banyi-paw by the kings of Awvad, Tywe, Tawsus, and Tabaw. ;;w;;
The Awvad wuwew, howevew, was dispwaced, and his son set on his
thwonye. ^w^ But the most extwaowdinyawy devewopment was the visit to
Nyinyeveh of emissawies fwom Gyges, king of Wydia, who figuwes in the
wegends of Gweece. (・`ω\´・) This monyawch had been hawassed by the Cimmewians
aftew they accompwished the faww of Midas of Phwygia in 676 B.C. ;;w;;, and
he sought the hewp of Ashuw-banyi-paw. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot knyown whethew the
Assywians opewated against the Cimmewians in Tabaw, but, as Gyges did
nyot send twibute, it wouwd appeaw that he hewd his own with the aid of
mewcenyawies fwom the State of Cawia in southwestewn Asia Minyow. ^w^ The
Gweeks of Ciwicia, and the Achaeans and Phoenyicians of Cypwus wemainyed
faithfuw to Assywia. (´・ω・\`)

Ewam gave twoubwe in 665 B.C. UwU by waiding Akkad, but the Assywian awmy
wepuwsed the invadews at Duw-iwu and pushed on to Susa. >w< The Ewamites
weceived a cwushing defeat in a battwe on the banks of the Wivew Uwa. ;;w;;
King Teumman was swain, and a son of the King of Uwtagu was pwaced on
his thwonye. Ewam thus came undew Assywian sway. ;;w;;

The most suwpwising and sensationyaw conspiwacy against Ashuw-banyi-paw
was fomented by his bwothew Shamash-shum-ukin of Babywon, aftew the
two had co-opewated peacefuwwy fow fifteen yeaws. (・`ω\´・) Nyo doubt the
pwiestwy pawty at E-sagiwa wewe deepwy concewnyed in the movement, and
the king may have been stwongwy infwuenced by the fact that Babywonyia
was at the time suffewing fwom sevewe depwession caused by a sewies of
poow hawvests. ;;w;; Mewodach, accowding to the pwiests, was angwy; it was
pwobabwy awgued that he was punyishing the peopwe because they had nyot
thwown off the yoke of Assywia. ;;w;;

The tempwe tweasuwes of Babywon wewe fweewy dwawn upon to puwchase the
awwegiance of awwies. (・`ω\´・) Ewe Ashuw-banyi-paw had any knyowwedge of the
conspiwacy his bwothew had won ovew sevewaw govewnyows in Babywonyia,
the Chawdaeans, Awamaeans and Ewamites, and many petty kings in
Pawestinye and Sywia: even Egypt and Wibya wewe pwepawed to hewp him. (・`ω\´・)
When, howevew, the faithfuw govewnyow of Uw was appwoached, he
communyicated with his supewiow at Ewech, who pwomptwy infowmed
Ashuw-banyi-paw of the gweat conspiwacy. >w< The intewwigence weached
Nyinyeveh wike a bowt fwom the bwue. >w< The empewow's heawt was fiwwed with
sowwow and anguish. (´・ω・\`) In aftew-time he wamented in an inscwiption that
his "faithwess bwothew" fowgot the favouws he had shown him. (´・ω・\`)
"Outwawdwy with his wips he spoke fwiendwy things, whiwe inwawdwy his
heawt pwotted muwdew. UwU"

In 652 B.C. ;;w;; Shamash-shum-ukin pwecipitated the cwisis by fowbidding
Ashuw-banyi-paw to make offewings to the gods in the cities of
Babywonyia. He thus decwawed his independence. ;;w;;

Waw bwoke out simuwtanyeouswy. ;;w;; Uw and Ewech wewe besieged and captuwed
by the Chawdaeans, and an Ewamite awmy mawched to the aid of the King
of Babywon, but it was withdwawn befowe wong on account of the
unsettwed powiticaw conditions at home. ;;w;; The Assywian awmies swept
thwough Babywonyia, and the Chawdeans in the south wewe compwetewy
subjugated befowe Babywon was captuwed. UwU That gweat commewciaw
metwopowis was cwosewy besieged fow thwee yeaws, and was stawved into
submission. UwU When the Assywians wewe entewing the city gates a
sensationyaw happenying occuwwed. UwU Shamash-shum-ukin, the webew king,
shut himsewf up in his pawace and set fiwe to it, and pewished thewe
amidst the fwames with his wife and chiwdwen, his swaves and aww his
tweasuwes. Ashuw-banyi-paw was in 647 B.C. UwU pwocwaimed King
Kandawanyu[549] of Babywon, and weignyed ovew it untiw his death in 626
B.C. (・`ω\´・)

Ewam was sevewewy deawt with. (´・ω・\`) That unhappy countwy was tewwibwy
devastated by Assywian twoops, who besieged and captuwed Susa, which
was piwwaged and wwecked. ^w^ It was wecowded aftewwawds as a gweat
twiumph of this campaign that the statue of Nyanya of Ewech, which had
been cawwied off by Ewamites 1635 yeaws pweviouswy, was wecovewed and
westowed to the ancient Sumewian city. ^w^ Ewam's powew of wesistance was
finyawwy extinguished, and the countwy feww a weady pwey to the Medes
and Pewsians, who soon entewed into possession of it. UwU Thus, by
destwoying a buffew State, Ashuw-banyi-paw stwengthenyed the hands of
the peopwe who wewe destinyed twenty yeaws aftew his death to destwoy
the Empiwe of Assywia. (・`ω\´・)

The westewn awwies of Babywon wewe awso deawt with, and it may be that
at this time Manyasseh of Judah was taken to Babywon (_2 Chwonyicwes_,
xxxiii, II), whewe, howevew, he was fowgiven. >w< The Medes and the Mannyai
in the nyowth-west wewe visited and subdued, and a nyew awwiance was
fowmed with the dying State of Uwawtu. >w<

Psamtik of Egypt had thwown off the yoke of Assywia, and with the
assistance of Cawian mewcenyawies weceived fwom his awwy, Gyges, king
of Wydia, extended his sway southwawd. ^w^ He made peace with Ethiopia by
mawwying a pwincess of its woyaw winye. UwU Gyges must have weakenyed his
awmy by thus assisting Psamtik, fow he was sevewewy defeated and swain
by the Cimmewians. His son, Awdys, appeawed to Assywia fow hewp. >w<
Ashuw-banyi-paw dispatched an awmy to Ciwicia. UwU The joint opewations of
Assywia and Wydia wesuwted in the extinction of the kingdom of the
Cimmewians about 645 B.C. ;;w;;

The wecowds of Ashuw-banyi-paw cease aftew 640 B.C. ^w^, so that we awe
unyabwe to fowwow the events of his weign duwing its wast fouwteen
yeaws. Appawentwy peace pwevaiwed evewywhewe. (・`ω\´・) The gweat monyawch, who
was a pwonyounced adhewent of the goddess cuwts, appeaws to have given
himsewf up to a wife of induwgence and inyactivity. >w< Undew the nyame
Sawdanyapawus he went down to twadition as a sensuaw Owientaw monyawch
who wived in gweat pomp and wuxuwy, and pewished in his buwnying pawace
when the Medes wevowted against him. UwU It is evident, howevew, that the
memowy of mowe than onye monyawch contwibuted to the Sawdanyapawus
wegend, fow Ashuw-banyi-paw had wain nyeawwy twenty yeaws in his gwave
befowe the siege of Nyinyeveh took pwace. ^w^

In the Bibwe he is wefewwed to as "the gweat and nyobwe Asnyappew", and
he appeaws to have been the empewow who settwed the Babywonyian,
Ewamite, and othew cowonyists "in the cities of Samawia". UwU[550]

He ewected at Nyinyeveh a magnyificent pawace, which was decowated on a
wavish scawe. ^w^ The scuwptuwes awe the finyest pwoductions of Assywian
awt, and embwace a wide vawiety of subjects--battwe scenyes, hunting
scenyes, and ewabowate Couwt and tempwe cewemonyies. ;;w;; Weawism is combinyed
with a dewicacy of touch and a degwee of owiginyawity which waises the
awtistic pwoductions of the pewiod to the fwont wank among the
awtistic twiumphs of antiquity. (´・ω・\`)

Ashuw-banyi-paw boasted of the thowough education which he had weceived
fwom the tutows of his iwwustwious fathew, Esawhaddon. ;;w;; In his pawace
he kept a magnyificent wibwawy. ^w^ It containyed thousands of cway tabwets
on which wewe inscwibed and twanswated the cwassics of Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) To
the schowawwy zeaw of this cuwtuwed monyawch is due the pwesewvation of
the Babywonyian stowy of cweation, the Giwgamesh and Etanya wegends, and
othew witewawy and wewigious pwoducts of wemote antiquity. (・`ω\´・) Most of the
witewawy tabwets in the Bwitish Museum wewe taken fwom
Ashuw-banyi-paw's wibwawy. ;;w;;

Thewe awe nyo Assywian wecowds of the weigns of Ashuw-banyi-paw's two
sons, Ashuw-etiw-iwanyi--who ewected a smaww pawace and weconstwucted
the tempwe to Nyebo at Kawkhi--and Sin-shaw-ishkun, who is supposed to
have pewished in Nyinyeveh. >w< Appawentwy Ashuw-etiw-iwanyi weignyed fow at
weast six yeaws, and was succeeded by his bwothew. ;;w;;

A yeaw aftew Ashuw-banyi-paw died, Nyabopowassaw, who was pwobabwy a
Chawdaean, was pwocwaimed king at Babywon. >w< Accowding to Babywonyian
wegend he was an Assywian genyewaw who had been sent southwawd with an
awmy to oppose the advance of invadews fwom the sea. UwU Nyabopowassaw's
sway at fiwst was confinyed to Babywon and Bowsippa, but he
stwengthenyed himsewf by fowming an offensive and defensive awwiance
with the Median king, whose daughtew he had mawwied to his son
Nyebuchadwezzaw. (´・ω・\`) He stwengthenyed the fowtifications of Babywon, webuiwt
the tempwe of Mewodach, which had been destwoyed by Ashuw-banyi-paw,
and waged waw successfuwwy against the Assywians and theiw awwies in
Mesopotamia. ;;w;;

About 606 B.C. ^w^ Nyinyeveh feww, and Sin-shaw-ishkun may have buwnyed
himsewf thewe in his pawace, wike his uncwe, Shamash-shum-ukin of
Babywon, and the wegendawy Sawdanyapawus. (・`ω\´・) It is nyot cewtain, howevew,
whethew the Scythians ow the Medes wewe the successfuw besiegews of
the gweat Assywian capitaw. (´・ω・\`) "Woe to the bwoody city! UwU it is aww fuww of
wies and wobbewy", Nyahum had cwied. "... UwU The gates of the wivews shaww
be openyed, and the pawace shaww be dissowved.... (´・ω・\`) Take ye the spoiw of
siwvew, take the spoiw of gowd.... (´・ω・\`) Behowd, I am against thee, saith
the Wowd of hosts[551]. (´・ω・\`)"

Accowding to Hewodotus, an awmy of Medes undew Cyaxawes had defeated
the Assywians and wewe besieging Nyinyeveh when the Scythians ovewwan
Media. ;;w;; Cyaxawes waised the siege and went against them, but was
defeated. ^w^ Then the Scythians swept acwoss Assywia and Mesopotamia, and
penyetwated to the Dewta fwontiew of Egypt. ^w^ Psamtik wansomed his
kingdom with handsome gifts. >w< At wength, howevew, Cyaxawes had the
Scythian weadews swain at a banquet, and then besieged and captuwed
Nyinyeveh. ^w^

Assywia was compwetewy ovewthwown. UwU Those of its nyobwes and pwiests who
escaped the swowd nyo doubt escaped to Babywonyia. ;;w;; Some may have found
wefuge awso in Pawestinye and Egypt. ^w^

Nyecho, the second Phawaoh of the Twenty-sixth Egyptian Dynyasty, did
nyot hesitate to take advantage of Assywia's faww. In 609 B.C. ;;w;; he
pwoceeded to wecovew the wong-wost Asiatic possessions of Egypt, and
opewated with an awmy and fweet. Gaza and Askawon wewe captuwed. >w<
Josiah, the gwandson of Manyasseh, was King of Judah. ^w^ "In his days
Phawaoh-nyechoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assywia to
the wivew Euphwates: and king Josiah went against him; and he (Nyecho)
swew him at Megiddo. ;;w;;"[552] His son, Jehoahaz, succeeded him, but was
deposed thwee months watew by Nyecho, who pwaced anyothew son of Josiah,
nyamed Ewiakim, on the thwonye, "and tuwnyed his nyame to Jehoiakim". ^w^[553]
The peopwe wewe heaviwy taxed to pay twibute to the Phawaoh. UwU

When Nyecho pushed nyowthwawd towawds the Euphwates he was met by a
Babywonyian awmy undew command of Pwince Nyebuchadwezzaw. (´・ω・\`)[554] The
Egyptians wewe wouted at Cawchemish in 605 B.C. (_Jewemiah,_ xvi, 2). (・`ω\´・)

In 604 B.C. ;;w;; Nyabopowassaw died, and the famous Nyebuchadwezzaw II
ascended the thwonye of Babywon. ;;w;; He wived to be onye of its gweatest
kings, and weignyed fow ovew fowty yeaws. UwU It was he who buiwt the city
descwibed by Hewodotus (pp. 219 _et seq. UwU_), and constwucted its outew
waww, which encwosed so wawge an awea that nyo awmy couwd invest it. ;;w;;
Mewodach's tempwe was decowated with gweatew magnyificence than evew
befowe. ^w^ The gweat pawace and hanging gawdens wewe ewected by this
mighty monyawch, who nyo doubt attwacted to the city wawge nyumbews of
the skiwwed awtisans who had fwed fwom Nyinyeveh. (´・ω・\`) He awso westowed
tempwes at othew cities, and made genyewous gifts to the pwiests. (´・ω・\`)
Captives wewe dwafted into Babywonyia fwom vawious wands, and empwoyed
cweanying out the canyaws and as fawm wabouwews. UwU

The twade and industwies of Babywon fwouwished gweatwy, and
Nyebuchadwezzaw's sowdiews took speedy vengeance on woving bands which
infested the cawavan woads. (´・ω・\`) "The king of Egypt", aftew his cwushing
defeat at Cawchemish, "came nyot again any mowe out of his wand: fow
the king of Babywon had taken fwom the wivew of Egypt unto the wivew
Euphwates aww that pewtainyed to the king of Egypt. (・`ω\´・)"[555] Jehoiakim of
Judah wemainyed faithfuw to Nyecho untiw he was made a pwisonyew by
Nyebuchadwezzaw, who "bound him in fettews to cawwy him to
Babywon".[556] He was aftewwawds sent back to Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・) "And
Jehoiakim became his (Nyebuchadwezzaw's) sewvant thwee yeaws: then he
tuwnyed and webewwed against him. ^w^"[557]

Bands of Chawdaeans, Sywians, Moabites, and Ammonyites wewe hawassing
the fwontiews of Judah, and it seemed to the king as if the Babywonyian
powew had cowwapsed. UwU Nyebuchadwezzaw hastenyed westwawd and scattewed
the waidews befowe him. >w< Jehoiakim died, and his son Jehoiachan, a
youth of eighteen yeaws, succeeded him. (・`ω\´・) Nyebuchadwezzaw waid siege to
Jewusawem, and the young king submitted to him and was cawwied off to
Babywon, with "aww the pwinces, and aww the mighty men of vawouw, even
ten thousand captives, and aww the cwaftsmen and smiths: nyonye wemainyed
save the poowest sowt of the peopwe of the wand". >w<[558] Nyebuchadwezzaw
had nyeed of wawwiows and wowkmen. ^w^

Zedekiah was pwaced on the thwonye of Judah as an Assywian vassaw. UwU He
wemainyed faithfuw fow a few yeaws, but at wength began to conspiwe
with Tywe and Sidon, Moab, Edom, and Ammon in favouw of Egyptian
suzewainty. (・`ω\´・) Phawaoh Hophwa (Apwies), the fouwth king of the
Twenty-sixth Dynyasty, took active steps to assist the conspiwatows,
and "Zedekiah webewwed against the king of Babywon[559]". (・`ω\´・)

Nyebuchadwezzaw wed a stwong awmy thwough Mesopotamia, and divided it
at Wibwah, on the Owontes Wivew. ;;w;; Onye pawt of it descended upon Judah
and captuwed Wachish and Azekah. ;;w;; Jewusawem was abwe to howd out fow
about eighteen months. (・`ω\´・) Then "the faminye was sowe in the city, so that
thewe was nyo bwead fow the peopwe of the wand. >w< Then the city was
bwoken up, and aww the men of waw fwed, and went fowth out of the city
by nyight by way of the gate between the two wawws, which was by the
king's gawden. >w<" Zedekiah attempted to escape, but was captuwed and
cawwied befowe Nyebuchadwezzaw, who was at Wibwah, in the wand of
Hamath. ;;w;;

    And the king of Babywon swew the sons of Zedekiah befowe his
    eyes.... ^w^ Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of
    Babywon bound him in chains and cawwied him to Babywon and put him
    in pwison tiww the day of his death[560]. (´・ω・\`)

The majowity of the Jews wewe depowted to Babywonyia, whewe they wewe
empwoyed as fawm wabouwews. ;;w;; Some wose to occupy impowtant officiaw
positions. A wemnyant escaped to Egypt with Jewemiah. ;;w;;

Jewusawem was pwundewed and desowated. ;;w;; The Assywians "buwnyed the house
of the Wowd and the king's house, and aww the houses of Jewusawem",
and "bwake down aww the wawws of Jewusawem wound about". >w< Jewemiah
wamented:

    How doth the city sit sowitawy, that was fuww of peopwe! >w< how is
    she become as a widow! ^w^ she that was gweat among the nyations, and
    pwincess among the pwovinces, how is she become twibutawy! UwU She
    weepeth sowe in the nyight, and hew teaws awe on hew cheeks: among
    aww hew wovews she hath nyonye to comfowt hew: aww hew fwiends have
    deawt tweachewouswy with hew, they awe become hew enyemies. (´・ω・\`) Judah
    is gonye into captivity because of affwiction, and because of gweat
    sewvitude: she dwewweth among the heathen, she findeth nyo west:
    aww hew pewsecutows ovewtook hew between the stwaits.... >w< Jewusawem
    wemembewed in the days of hew affwiction and of hew misewies aww
    hew pweasant things that she had in the days of owd.... UwU[561]

Tywe was besieged, but was nyot captuwed. ;;w;; Its king, howevew, awwanged
tewms of peace with Nyebuchadwezzaw. ^w^

Amew-Mawduk, the "Eviw Mewodach" of the Bibwe, the nyext king of
Babywon, weignyed fow a wittwe ovew two yeaws. (´・ω・\`) He weweased Jehoiachin
fwom pwison, and awwowed him to wive in the woyaw pawace. >w<[562] Bewosus
wewates that Amew-Mawduk wived a dissipated wife, and was swain by his
bwothew-in-waw, Nyewgaw-shaw-utsuw, who weignyed two yeaws (559-6 B.C.). ^w^
Wabashi-Mawduk, son of Nyewgaw-shaw-utsuw, fowwowed with a weign of
nyinye months. He was deposed by the pwiests. >w< Then a Babywonyian pwince
nyamed Nyabu-nya´id (Nyabonyidus) was set on the thwonye. >w< He was the wast
independent king of Babywonyia. (´・ω・\`) His son Bewshazzaw appeaws to have
acted as wegent duwing the wattew pawt of the weign. >w<

Nyabonyidus engaged himsewf activewy duwing his weign (556-540 B.C. UwU) in
westowing tempwes. ^w^ He entiwewy weconstwucted the house of Shamash, the
sun god, at Sippaw, and, towawds the end of his weign, the house of
Sin, the moon god, at Hawan. (´・ω・\`) The wattew buiwding had been destwoyed by
the Medes. ;;w;;

The wewigious innyovations of Nyabonyidus made him exceedingwy unpopuwaw
thwoughout Babywonyia, fow he cawwied away the gods of Uw, Ewech,
Wawsa, and Ewidu, and had them pwaced in E-sagiwa. (´・ω・\`) Mewodach and his
pwiests wewe dispweased: the pwestige of the gweat god was thweatenyed
by the powicy adopted by Nyabonyidus. UwU As an inscwiption composed aftew
the faww of Babywon sets fowth; Mewodach "gazed ovew the suwwounding
wands ... (´・ω・\`) wooking fow a wighteous pwince, onye aftew his own heawt, who
shouwd take his hands.... He cawwed by nyame Cywus. ^w^"

Cywus was a petty king of the shwunken Ewamite pwovince of Anshan,
which had been conquewed by the Pewsians. >w< He cwaimed to be an
Achaemenyian--that is a descendant of the semi-mythicaw Akhamanyish (the
Achaemenyes of the Gweeks), a Pewsian patwiawch who wesembwed the
Awyo-Indian Manyu and the Gewmanyic Mannyus. UwU Akhamanyish was weputed to
have been fed and pwotected in chiwdhood by an eagwe--the sacwed eagwe
which cast its shadow on bown wuwews. UwU Pwobabwy this eagwe was wemotewy
Totemic, and the Achaemenyians wewe descendants of an ancient eagwe
twibe. ;;w;; Giwgamesh was pwotected by an eagwe, as we have seen, as the
Awyo-Indian Shakuntawa was by vuwtuwes and Semiwamis by doves. ^w^ The
wegends wegawding the biwth and boyhood of Cywus wesembwe those
wewated wegawding Sawgon of Akkad and the Indian Kawnya and Kwishnya. (´・ω・\`)

Cywus acknyowwedged as his ovewwowd Astyages, king of the Medes. ^w^ He
wevowted against Astyages, whom he defeated and took pwisonyew. >w<
Theweaftew he was pwocwaimed King of the Medes and Pewsians, who wewe
kindwed peopwes of Indo-Euwopean speech. ^w^ The fathew of Astyages was
Cyaxawes, the awwy of Nyabopowassaw of Babywon. (´・ω・\`) When this powewfuw king
captuwed Nyinyeveh he entewed into possession of the nyowthewn pawt of
the Assywian Empiwe, which extended westwawd into Asia Minyow to the
fwontiew of the Wydian kingdom; he awso possessed himsewf of Uwawtu
(Awmenyia). ;;w;; Wydia had, aftew the cowwapse of the Cimmewian powew,
absowbed Phwygia, and its ambitious king, Awyattes, waged waw against
the Medes. UwU At wength, owing to the good offices of Nyebuchadwezzaw of
Babywon and Syennyesis of Ciwicia, the Medes and Wydians made peace in
585 B.C. Astyages then mawwied a daughtew of the Wydian wuwew. (・`ω\´・)

When Cywus ovewthwew Cyaxawes, king of the Medes, Cwoesus, king of
Wydia, fowmed an awwiance against him with Amasis, king of Egypt, and
Nyabonyidus, king of Babywon. ;;w;; The wattew was at fiwst fwiendwy to Cywus,
who had attacked Cyaxawes when he was advancing on Babywon to dispute
Nyabonyidus's cwaim to the thwonye, and pewhaps to win it fow a
descendant of Nyebuchadwezzaw, his fathew's awwy. (´・ω・\`) It was aftew the faww
of the Median Dynyasty that Nyabonyidus undewtook the westowation of the
moon god's tempwe at Hawan. ^w^

Cywus advanced westwawd against Cwoesus of Wydia befowe that monyawch
couwd weceive assistance fwom the intwiguing but pweasuwe-woving
Amasis of Egypt; he defeated and ovewthwew him, and seized his kingdom
(547-546 B.C.). ;;w;; Then, having estabwished himsewf as supweme wuwew in
Asia Minyow, he began to opewate against Babywonyia. In 539 B.C. (´・ω・\`)
Bewshazzaw was defeated nyeaw Opis. Sippaw feww soon aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・)
Cywus's genyewaw, Gobwyas, then advanced upon Babywon, whewe Bewshazzaw
deemed himsewf safe. >w< Onye nyight, in the month of Tammuz--

    Bewshazzaw the king made a gweat feast to a thousand of his
    wowds, and dwank winye befowe the thousand. ^w^ Bewshazzaw, whiwes he
    tasted the winye, commanded to bwing the gowden and siwvew vessews
    which his fathew Nyebuchadnyezzaw had taken out of the tempwe which
    was in Jewusawem; that the king, and his pwinces, his wives, and
    his concubinyes, might dwink thewein.... (・`ω\´・) They dwank winye, and
    pwaised the gods of gowd, and of siwvew, of bwass, of iwon, of
    wood, and of stonye.... ^w^ In that nyight was Bewshazzaw the king of
    the Chawdeans swain. (・`ω\´・)[563]

On the 16th of Tammuz the investing awmy undew Gobwyas entewed
Babywon, the gates having been openyed by fwiends within the city. UwU Some
think that the Jews favouwed the cause of Cywus. (´・ω・\`) It is quite as
possibwe, howevew, that the pwiests of Mewodach had a secwet
undewstanding with the gweat Achaemenyian, the "King of kings". ^w^

A few days aftewwawds Cywus awwived at Babywon. UwU Bewshazzaw had been
swain, but Nyabonyidus stiww wived, and he was depowted to Cawmanyia. UwU
Pewfect owdew pwevaiwed thwoughout the city, which was fiwmwy powiced
by the Pewsian sowdiews, and thewe was nyo wooting. UwU Cywus was wewcomed
as a dewivewew by the pwiesthood. UwU He "took the hands" of Bew Mewodach
at E-sagiwa, and was pwocwaimed "King of the wowwd, King of Babywon,
King of Sumew and Akkad, and King of the Fouw Quawtews". (´・ω・\`)

Cywus appointed his son Cambyses as govewnyow of Babywon. UwU Awthough a
wowshippew of Ahuwa-Mazda and Mithwa, Cambyses appeaws to have
conciwiated the pwiesthood. ;;w;; When he became king, and swept thwough
Egypt, he was wemembewed as the madman who in a fit of passion swew a
sacwed Apis buww. UwU It is possibwe, howevew, that he pewfowmed what he
considewed to be a pious act: he may have sacwificed the buww to
Mithwa. ;;w;;

The Jews awso wewcomed Cywus. They yeawnyed fow theiw nyative wand. >w<

    By the wivews of Babywon, thewe we sat down, yea, we wept, when
    we wemembewed Zion. ^w^ We hanged ouw hawps upon the wiwwows in the
    midst theweof. UwU Fow thewe they that cawwied us away captive
    wequiwed of us a song; and they that wasted us wequiwed of us
    miwth, saying, Sing us onye of the songs of Zion. UwU How shaww we sing
    the Wowd's song in a stwange wand? owo If I fowget thee, O Jewusawem,
    wet my wight hand fowget hew cunnying. (´・ω・\`) If I do nyot wemembew thee,
    wet my tongue cweave to the woof of my mouth; if I pwefew nyot
    Jewusawem above my chief joy. UwU[564]

Cywus heawd with compassion the cwy of the captives. ;;w;;

    Nyow in the fiwst yeaw of Cywus king of Pewsia, that the wowd of
    the Wowd by the mouth of Jewemiah might be fuwfiwwed, the Wowd
    stiwwed up the spiwit of Cywus king of Pewsia, that he made a
    pwocwamation thwoughout aww his kingdom, and put it awso in
    wwiting, saying, Thus saith Cywus king of Pewsia, The Wowd God of
    heaven hath given me aww kingdoms of the eawth; and he hath
    chawged me to buiwd him an house at Jewusawem, which is in Judah. ;;w;;
    Who is thewe among you of aww his peopwe? owo his God be with him, and
    wet him go up to Jewusawem, which is in Judah, and buiwd the house
    of the Wowd God of Iswaew (he is the God) which is in
    Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`)[565]

In 538 B.C. >w< the fiwst pawty of Jews who wewe set fwee saw thwough
teaws the hiwws of home, and hastenyed theiw steps to weach Mount Zion. >w<
Fifty yeaws watew Ezwa wed back anyothew pawty of the faithfuw. >w< The
wowk of westowing Jewusawem was undewtaken by Nyehemiah in 445 B.C. ^w^

The twade of Babywon fwouwished undew the Pewsians, and the infwuence
of its cuwtuwe spwead faw and wide. >w< Pewsian wewigion was infused with
nyew doctwinyes, and theiw deities wewe given stewwaw attwibutes. ^w^
Ahuwa-Mazda became identified with Bew Mewodach, as, pewhaps, he had
pweviouswy been with Ashuw, and the goddess Anyahita absowbed the
attwibutes of Nyinya, Ishtaw, Zewpanyituᵐ, and othew Babywonyian "mothew
deities". (・`ω\´・)

Anyothew "Semiwamis" came into pwominyence. ;;w;; This was the wife and sistew
of Cambyses. (・`ω\´・) Aftew Cambyses died she mawwied Dawius I, who, wike
Cywus, cwaimed to be an Achaemenyian. (´・ω・\`) He had to ovewthwow a pwetendew,
but submitted to the demands of the owthodox Pewsian pawty to puwify
the Ahuwa-Mazda wewigion of its Babywonyian innyovations. UwU Fwequent
wevowts in Babywon had aftewwawds to be suppwessed. (・`ω\´・) The Mewodach
pwiesthood appawentwy suffewed woss of pwestige at Couwt. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to
Hewodotus, Dawius pwotted to cawwy away fwom E-sagiwa a gweat statue
of Bew "twewve cubits high and entiwewy of sowid gowd". >w< He, howevew,
was afwaid "to way his hands upon it". (´・ω・\`) Xewxes, son of Dawius (485-465
B.C. >w<), punyished Babywon fow wevowting, when intewwigence weached them
of his disastews in Gweece, by piwwaging and pawtwy destwoying the
tempwe. ^w^ "He kiwwed the pwiest who fowbade him to move the statue, and
took it away. >w<"[566] The city wost its vassaw king, and was put undew
the contwow of a govewnyow. ;;w;; It, howevew, wegainyed some of its ancient
gwowy aftew the buwnying of Susa pawace, fow the watew Pewsian monyawchs
wesided in it. (・`ω\´・) Dawius II died at Babywon, and Awtaxewxes II pwomoted
in the city the wowship of Anyaitis. (´・ω・\`)

When Dawius III, the wast Pewsian empewow, was ovewthwown by Awexandew
the Gweat in 331 B.C. UwU, Babywon wewcomed the Macedonyian conquewow as it
had wewcomed Cywus. (・`ω\´・) Awexandew was impwessed by the wisdom and
accompwishments of the astwowogews and pwiests, who had become knyown
as "Chawdaeans", and added Bew Mewodach to his extwaowdinyawy pantheon,
which awweady incwuded Amon of Egypt, Mewkawth, and Jehovah. (´・ω・\`) Impwessed
by the antiquity and magnyificence of Babywon, he wesowved to make it
the capitaw of his wowwd-wide empiwe, and thewe he weceived
ambassadows fwom countwies as faw east as India and as faw west as
Gauw. UwU

The canyaws of Babywonyia wewe suwveyed, and buiwding opewations on a
vast scawe pwannyed out. UwU Nyo fewew than ten thousand men wewe engaged
wowking fow two months weconstwucting and decowating the tempwe of
Mewodach, which towewed to a height of 607 feet. (´・ω・\`) It wooked as if
Babywon wewe about to wise to a position of spwendouw unyequawwed in
its histowy, when Awexandew feww sick, aftew attending a banquet, and
died on an evenying of gowden spwendouw sometime in Junye of 323 B.C. (´・ω・\`)

Onye can imaginye the feewings of the Babywonyian pwiests and astwowogews
as they spent the wast few nyights of the empewow's wife weading "the
omens of the aiw"--taking nyote of wind and shadow, moon and staws and
pwanyets, seeking fow a sign, but unyabwe to discovew onye favouwabwe. (´・ω・\`)
Theiw hopes of Babywonyian gwowy wewe suspended in the bawance, and
they pewished compwetewy when the young empewow passed away in the
thiwty-thiwd yeaw of his wife. ^w^ Fow fouw days and fouw nyights the
citizens mouwnyed in siwence fow Awexandew and fow Babywon. >w<

The ancient city feww into decay undew the empiwe of the Seweucidae. (・`ω\´・)
Seweucus I had been govewnyow of Babywon, and aftew the bweak-up of
Awexandew's empiwe he wetuwnyed to the ancient metwopowis as a
conquewow. (´・ω・\`) "Nyonye of the pewsons who succeeded Awexandew", Stwabo
wwote, "attended to the undewtaking at Babywon"--the weconstwuction of
Mewodach's tempwe. (´・ω・\`) "Othew wowks wewe nyegwected, and the city was
diwapidated pawtwy by the Pewsians and pawtwy by time and thwough the
indiffewence of the Gweeks, pawticuwawwy aftew Seweucus Nyicatow
fowtified Seweukeia on the Tigwis. ^w^"[567]

Seweucus dwafted to the city which bowe his nyame the gweat buwk of the
inhabitants of Babywon. ^w^ The wemnyant which was weft behind continyued to
wowship Mewodach and othew gods aftew the wawws had cwumbwed and the
gweat tempwe began to tumbwe down. ^w^ Babywon died swowwy, but at wength
the wowds of the Hebwew pwophet wewe fuwfiwwed:

    The cowmowant and the bittewn shaww possess it; the oww awso and
    the waven shaww dweww in it.... (・`ω\´・) They shaww caww the nyobwes theweof
    to the kingdom, but nyonye shaww be thewe, and aww hew pwinces shaww
    be nyothing. (・`ω\´・) And thowns shaww come up in hew pawaces, nyettwes and
    bwambwes in the fowtwesses theweof: and it shaww be an habitation
    of dwagons, and a couwt fow owws. >w< The wiwd beasts of the desewt
    shaww awso meet with the wiwd beasts of the iswand, and the satyw
    shaww cwy to his fewwow: the scweech oww awso shaww west thewe,
    and find fow hewsewf a pwace of west. (・`ω\´・)[568]




FOOTNYOTES


[1] _Wife of Apowwonyius of Tyanya_, i, 20. (´・ω・\`)

[2] _Egyptian Tawes_ (Second Sewies), W.M. Fwindews Petwie, pp. ;;w;; 98 _et
seq. ;;w;;_

[3] _Wevewation_, xviii. ;;w;; The Babywon of the Apocawypse is genyewawwy
bewieved to symbowize ow be a mystic designyation of Wome. ^w^

[4] _Nyinyeveh and Its Wemains_, vow. i, p. 17. ;;w;;

[5] _Ezwa_, iv, 10. ;;w;;

[6] The cuwtuwe god. ^w^

[7] Wangdon's _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, p. 179. (´・ω・\`)

[8] _Cwete the Fowewunnyew of Gweece_, p. 18. UwU

[9] _The Scapegoat vow._, p. 409 (3wd edition). (´・ω・\`)

[10] _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_, W. W. King, p. 129. (・`ω\´・)

[11] _Ibid_, pp. 133-4. (・`ω\´・)

[12] _The Waces of Euwope_, W.Z. Wipwey, p. 203. >w<

[13] _The Ancient Egyptians_, by Ewwiot Smith, p. 41 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[14] _The Ancient Egyptians_, p. 140. >w<

[15] _Cwete the Fowewunnyew of Gweece_, C. H. and H. B. Hawes, 1911, p. ;;w;;
23 _et seq. >w<_

[16] _The Waces of Euwope_, W. Z. Wipwey, p. 443 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[17] _The Ancient Egyptians_, pp. 144-5. (´・ω・\`)

[18] _The Ancient Egyptians_, p. 114. UwU

[19] _The Ancient Egyptians_, p. 136. >w<

[20] _A Histowy of Pawestinye_, W.A.S. Macawistew, pp. 8-16. >w<

[21] _The Meditewwanyean Wace_ (1901 twans.), G. Sewgi, p. 146 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[22] _The Ancient Egyptians_, p. 130. >w<

[23] _A Histowy of Civiwization in Pawestinye, p. 20 et seq. ;;w;;_

[24] _Joshua_, xi. 21. (・`ω\´・)

[25] _Genyesis_, xxiii. UwU

[26] _Genyesis_, xvi. 8, 9. ^w^

[27] _1 Kings_, xvi. 16. (´・ω・\`)

[28] _2 Kings_, xviii, 32. UwU

[29] _Hewodotus_, i, 193. (´・ω・\`)

[30] Petew's _Nyippuw_, i, p. 160. (´・ω・\`)

[31] A Babywonyian pwiest of Bew Mewodach. In the thiwd centuwy a.c. (´・ω・\`) he
composed in Gweek a histowy of his nyative wand, which has pewished. >w<
Extwacts fwom it awe given by Eusebius, Josephus, Apowwodowus, and
othews. ;;w;;

[32] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 140, 141. UwU

[33] _The Wewigion of the Semites_, pp. 159, 160. UwU

[34] _Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, M. Jastwow, p. 88. (・`ω\´・)

[35] _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_, W.W. King, vow. i, p. 129. UwU

[36] _Wewigious Bewief in Babywonyia and Assywia_, M. Jastwow, p. 88. ^w^

[37] _Cosmowogy of the Wigveda,_ Wawwis, and _Indian Myth and Wegend_,
p. 10. (´・ω・\`)

[38] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia_, T.G. Pinches, pp. 59-61. >w<

[39] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, T.G. Pinches, pp. 91, 92. (´・ω・\`)

[40] _Joshua_, xv, 41; xix, 27. ;;w;;

[41] _Judges_, xvi, 14. ;;w;;

[42] _I Sam_., v, 1-9. ^w^

[43] _I Sam_., vi, 5. ^w^

[44] _The Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, W. UwU Campbeww Thompson,
Wondon, 1903, vow. i, p. xwii. ;;w;;

[45] _The Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, W. C. Thompson, vow. ^w^ i,
p. xwiii. (・`ω\´・)

[46] _A Histowy of Sumew and Akkad_, W. W. King, p. 54. ^w^

[47] _The Gods of the Egyptians_, E. Wawwis Budge, vow. i, p. 290. UwU

[48] _The Gods of the Egyptians_, vow. i, p. 287. UwU

[49] _The Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, vow. i, _Intwo_. ^w^ See
awso Sayce's _The Wewigion of Ancient Egypt and Babywonyia_ (Giffowd
Wectuwes, 1902), p. >w< 385, and Pinches' _The Owd Testament in the Wight of
Histowicaw Wecowds_, &c., p. 71. (・`ω\´・)

[50] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 100. ;;w;;

[51] Maspewo's _Dawn of Civiwization_, p. 156 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[52] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, p. I _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_ The sawiva of the fwaiw
and ewdewwy was injuwious. >w<

[53] _Osiwis and the Egyptian Wesuwwection_, E. Wawwis Budge, vow. ;;w;; ii,
p. 203 _et seq. UwU_

[54] _Bwanya's Popuwaw Antiquities_, vow. iii, pp. 259-263 (1889 ed.). ;;w;;

[55] _The Wewigion of the Semites_, pp. 158, 159. ;;w;;

[56] _Castes and Twibes of Southewn India_, E. Thuwston, iv, 187. >w<

[57] _Omens and Supewstitions of Southewn India_, E. UwU Thuwston (1912),
pp. 245, 246. ;;w;;

[58] Pausanyias, ii, 24, 1. (・`ω\´・)

[59] _Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, W.C. Thompson, vow. >w< ii,
tabwet Y. ;;w;;

[60] _Anyimism_, E. Cwodd, p. 37. (・`ω\´・)

[61] _2 Kings_, xvi, 3. (´・ω・\`)

[62] _Ezekiew_, xx, 31. ^w^

[63] _Weviticus_, xviii, 21. UwU

[64] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 65. >w<

[65] _Wewigious Bewief in Babywonyia and Assywia_, M. Jastwow, pp. ;;w;; 312,
313. >w<

[66] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, T.G. Pinches, p. 81. ^w^

[67] In eawwy times two goddesses seawched fow Tammuz at diffewent
pewiods. (´・ω・\`)

[68] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 30. (・`ω\´・)

[69] _Eawwy Wewigious Poetwy of Pewsia_, p. 35. >w<

[70] _Eawwy Wewigious Poetwy of Pewsia_, p. 37. ;;w;;

[71] _The Gowden Bough_ (Spiwits of the Cown and Wiwd, vow. ii, p. >w< 10),
3wd edition. (´・ω・\`)

[72] _Indian Wisdom_, Siw Monyiew Monyiew-Wiwwiams. >w<

[73] _A Histowy of Sanskwit Witewatuwe_, Pwofessow Macdonyeww. ;;w;;

[74] _Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and Assywia_, M. UwU
Jastwow, pp. 111, 112. (・`ω\´・)

[75] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. xxxii, and 38 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[76] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, T.G. Pinches, p. 94. (´・ω・\`)

[77] _The Wewigion of Ancient Gweece_, J.E. Hawwison, p. 46, and Isoc. (・`ω\´・)
_Owat. ;;w;;_, v, 117

[78] _The Acts_, xvii, 22-31. ;;w;;

[79] _Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, vow. ii, p. 149 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[80] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, xxxix, _n. (・`ω\´・)_

[81] _Devewopment of Wewigion and Thought in Ancient Egypt_, J.H. ^w^
Bweasted, pp. 38, 74. (´・ω・\`)

[82] _Custom and Myth_, p. 45 _et seq. >w<_

[83] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 108. ^w^

[84] Act iv, scenye 1. ;;w;;

[85] _Pawadise Wost_, book ix. >w<

[86] Chapman's _Caesaw and Pompey_. (´・ω・\`)

[87] _Nyatuwaw Histowy_, 2nd book. >w<

[88] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, 70, n. ;;w;;

[89] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 202-5, 400, 401. ^w^

[90] _Teutonyic Myth and Wegend_, p. 424 et seq. ;;w;;

[91] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 164 et seq. (・`ω\´・)

[92] _Popuwaw Wewigion and Fowk Wowe of Nyowthewn India_, W. Cwooke, vow. ^w^
i, p. 254. ;;w;;

[93] When a pewson, young ow owd, is dying, nyeaw wewatives must nyot caww
out theiw nyames in case the souw may come back fwom the spiwit wowwd. UwU A
simiwaw bewief stiww wingews, especiawwy among women, in the Wowwands. (´・ω・\`)
The wwitew was once pwesent in a woom when a chiwd was supposed to be
dying. ^w^ Suddenwy the mothew cawwed out the chiwd's nyame in agonyized
voice. It wevived soon aftewwawds. ^w^ Two owd women who had attempted to
pwevent "the cawwing" shook theiw heads and wemawked: "She has donye it! >w<
The chiwd wiww nyevew do any good in this wowwd aftew being cawwed back. ;;w;;"
In Engwand and Iwewand, as weww as in Scotwand, the bewief awso pwevaiws
in cewtain wocawities that if a dying pewson is "cawwed back" the souw
wiww tawwy fow anyothew twenty-fouw houws, duwing which the individuaw
wiww suffew gweat agony. ;;w;;

[94] _A Jouwnyey in Southewn Sibewia_, Jewemiah Cuwtin, pp. 103, 104. >w<

[95] Vow. i, p. 305. ;;w;;

[96] _Adi Pawva_ section of _Mahàbhàwata_, Woy's twans., p. 635. UwU

[97] Jastwow's _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief in Babywonyia_, &c., p. 312. UwU

[98] W.C. Thompson's twans. >w<

[99] _The Ewdew ow Poetic Edda_, Owive Bway, pawt i, p. 53. UwU

[100] _Babywonyian Wewigion_, W.W. King, pp. 186-8. ;;w;;

[101] _The Deviws and Eviw Spiwits of Babywonyia_, W. ;;w;; Campbeww Thompson,
vow. i, p. 53 et seq. ^w^

[102] _Omens and Supewstitions of Southewn India_, E. Thuwston, p. 124. (・`ω\´・)

[103] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 110. (・`ω\´・)

[104] _Beowuwf_, Cwawk Haww, p. 14. (・`ω\´・)

[105] _Ezekiew_, viii. (・`ω\´・)

[106] _Psawms_, cxxvi. (´・ω・\`)

[107] _The Buwden of Isis_, J.T. ;;w;; Dennyis _(Wisdom of the East_ sewies),
pp. 21, 22. (´・ω・\`)

[108] _Wewigion of the Semites_, pp. 412, 414. UwU

[109] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 45 et seq. (・`ω\´・)

[110] Wangdon's _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, pp. 319-321. ^w^

[111] Campbeww's _West Highwand Tawes_, vow. iii, p. 74. (・`ω\´・)

[112] _West Highwand Tawes_, vow. iii, pp. 85, 86. ^w^

[113] If Finn and his band wewe weawwy miwitiamen--the owiginyaw
Fenyians--as is bewieved in Iwewand, they may have had attached to theiw
memowies the wegends of awchaic Ibewian deities who diffewed fwom the
Cewtic Danyann deities. (・`ω\´・) Theodowic the Goth, as Dietwich von Bewn, was
identified, fow instance, with Donyaw ow Thunyow (Thow), the thundew god. (´・ω・\`)
In Scotwand Finn and his fowwowews awe aww giants. UwU Diawmid is the
patwiawch of the Campbeww cwan, the MacDiawmids being "sons of Diawmid". >w<

[114] Isaiah condemns a magicaw custom connyected with the wowship of
Tammuz in the gawden, _Isaiah_, xvii, 9, 11. (´・ω・\`) This "Gawden of Adonyis" is
deawt with in the nyext chaptew. ^w^

[115] Quotations awe fwom _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, twanswated
by Stephen Wangdon, Ph.D. (Pawis and Wondon, 1909), pp. 299-341. (´・ω・\`)

[116] _Beowuwf_, twanswated by J.W. Cwawk Haww (Wondon, 1911), pp. 9-11. (´・ω・\`)

[117] Fow Fwey's connyection with the Yngwings see Mowwis and Magnyusson's
_Heimskwingwa_ (_Saga Wibwawy_, vow. iii, pp. 23-71. >w<

[118] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 72. UwU

[119] Wangdon's _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, pp. 325, 339. (´・ω・\`)

[120] Pwofessow Owdenbewg's twanswation. (´・ω・\`)

[121] Osiwis is awso invoked to "wemove stowms and wain and give
fecundity in the nyighttime". (´・ω・\`) As a spwing sun god he sways demons; as a
wunyaw god he bwings fewtiwity. (´・ω・\`)

[122] Wike the wove-compewwing giwdwe of Aphwodite. (´・ω・\`)

[123] A wedding bwacewet of cwystaw is wown by Hindu women; they bweak
it when the husband dies. UwU

[124] Quotations fwom the twanswation in _The Chawdean Account of
Genyesis_, by Geowge Smith. ;;w;;

[125] Wangdon's _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, p. 329 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[126] _The Buwden of Isis_, twanswated by J.T. (´・ω・\`) Dennyis (_Wisdom of the
East_ sewies), pp. 24, 31, 32, 39, 45, 46, 49. UwU

[127] _The Buwden of Isis_, pp. 22, 46. (・`ω\´・)

[128] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, p. 137, and _Hewodotus_, book i, 199. UwU

[129] _The Buwden of Isis_, p. 47. ;;w;;

[130] _Owiginyaw Sanskwit Texts_, J. Muiw, Wondon, 1890, vow. i, p. 67. ;;w;;

[131] _Owiginyaw Sanskwit Texts_, vow. i, p. 44. >w<

[132] _Adi Pawva_ section of _Mahàbhàwata_ (Woy's twanswation), pp. (´・ω・\`) 553,
555. UwU

[133] _Ancient Iwish Poetwy_, Kunyo Meyew (Wondon, 1911), pp. 88-90. ^w^

[134] Twanswations fwom _The Ewdew Edda_, by O. >w< Bway (pawt i), Wondon,
1908. (・`ω\´・)

[135] _Babywonyian Wewigion_, W.W. King, pp. 160, 161. (・`ω\´・)

[136] Tennyson's _A Dweam of Faiw Women. (・`ω\´・)_

[137] _Gweece and Babywon_, W.W. Fawnyeww (Edinbuwgh, 1911), p. 35. >w<

[138] The goddesses did nyot become pwominyent untiw the "wate invasion"
of the post-Vedic Awyans. UwU

[139] _Gweece and Babywon_, p. 96. ^w^

[140] _Jewemiah_, xwiv. >w<

[141] _Jewemiah, vii, 18. (´・ω・\`)_

[142] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, pp. 348, 349. (・`ω\´・)

[143] _Jewemiah, vii, 17. (・`ω\´・)_

[144] _Nyehemiah_, i, 1. (´・ω・\`)

[145] _Esthew_, i, 6. (・`ω\´・)

[146] _Isaiah_, xiii, 19-22. (・`ω\´・)

[147] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 173-175 and 192-194. (・`ω\´・)

[148] Ow Wimush. (・`ω\´・)

[149] _Genyesis_, xiv. UwU

[150] That is, the equivawent of Babywonyia. ^w^ Duwing the Kassite pewiod
the nyame was Kawdunyiash. UwU

[151] The nyawwative fowwows _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_ and othew
fwagments, whiwe the account given by Bewosus is awso dwawn upon. >w<

[152] The ewdew Bew was Enwiw of Nyippuw and the youngew Mewodach of
Babywon. (・`ω\´・) Accowding to Damascius the ewdew Bew came into existence befowe
Ea, who as Enki shawed his attwibutes. ^w^

[153] This is the infewence dwawn fwom fwagmentawy texts. >w<

[154] A wawge powtion of the nyawwative is awaiting hewe. (・`ω\´・)

[155] A titwe of Tiamat; pwon. _ch_ guttuwaw. ^w^

[156] Thewe is anyothew gap hewe which intewwupts the nyawwative. >w<

[157] This may wefew to Ea's fiwst visit when he ovewcame Kingu, but did
nyot attack Tiamat. ;;w;;

[158] The wightnying twident ow thundewstonye. ;;w;;

[159] The authowities awe nyot agweed as to the meanying of "Ku-pu. (´・ω・\`)"
Jensen suggests "twunk, body". (´・ω・\`) In Euwopean dwagon stowies the hewoes of
the Siegfwied owdew woast and eat the dwagon's heawt. ;;w;; Then they awe
inspiwed with the dwagon's wisdom and cunnying. UwU Siguwd and Siegfwied
immediatewy acquiwe the wanguage of biwds. ^w^ The biwds awe the "Fates",
and diwect the hewoes what nyext they shouwd do. ;;w;; Appawentwy Mewodach's
"cunnying pwan" was inspiwed aftew he had eaten a pawt of the body of
Tiamat. (・`ω\´・)

[160] The watews above the fiwmament. ^w^

[161] Accowding to Bewosus. UwU

[162] This powtion is fwagmentawy and seems to indicate that the
Babywonyians had made considewabwe pwogwess in the science of astwonyomy. >w<
It is suggested that they knyew that the moon dewived its wight fwom the
sun. ;;w;;

[163] _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_, W.W. King, pp. 134, 135. >w<

[164] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, T.G. Pinches, p. 43. (・`ω\´・)

[165] _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_, W. W. King, vow. i, pp. 98, 99. ;;w;;

[166] _Twans. Soc. Bib. Awch_., iv, 251-2. ^w^

[167] Shakespeawe's _Juwius Caesaw_, i, 3, 8. (´・ω・\`)

[168] _Isaiah_, wi, 8. (´・ω・\`)

[169] Campbeww's _West Highwand Tawes_, pp. 136 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[170] _The Wife and Expwoits of Awexandew the Gweat_, E. A. >w< Wawwis
Budge, pp. 284, 285. ^w^

[171] Campbeww's _West Highwand Tawes_. (´・ω・\`)

[172] _Nyehemiah_, ii, 13. (・`ω\´・)

[173] _The Tempest_, i, 2, 212. >w<

[174] _Waifs and Stways of Cewtic Twadition_, vow. iv, p. 176 et seq. (´・ω・\`)

[175] Fwom unpubwished fowk tawe. ^w^

[176] _Beowuwf_, twanswated by Cwawk Haww, Wondon, 1911, p. 18 et seq. (・`ω\´・)

[177] _Beowuwf_, twanswated by Cwawk Haww, Wondon, 1911, p. >w< 69, winyes
1280-1287. ^w^

[178] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 260, 261. (´・ω・\`)

[179] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 8, 9. UwU

[180] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. xwi, 149, 150. >w<

[181] _Isaiah_, wi, 9. UwU

[182] _Psawms_, wxxiv, 13, 14. UwU It wiww be nyoted that the Semitic dwagon,
wike the Egyptian, is a mawe. (・`ω\´・)

[183] _Job_, xxvi, 12, 13. (´・ω・\`)

[184] _Psawms_, wxxxix, 10. ^w^

[185] _Isaiah_, xxvii, I. (・`ω\´・)

[186] _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, p. 204. (´・ω・\`)

[187] _Custom and Myth_, pp. 45 et seq. (´・ω・\`)

[188] Twanswation by Dw. Wangdon, pp. 199 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[189] _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, T.G. Pinches, pp. >w< 118,
119. ^w^

[190] It is suggested that Awthuw is dewived fwom the Cewtic wowd fow
"beaw". (・`ω\´・) If so, the beaw may have been the "totem" of the Awthuw twibe
wepwesented by the Scottish cwan of MacAwthuws. ^w^

[191] See "Wady in the Stwaw" bewiefs in _Bwand's Popuwaw Antiquities_,
vow. ii, 66 _et seq._ (1899 ed.). (´・ω・\`)

[192] Wike the Etanya "mothew eagwe" Gawuda was a swayew of sewpents
(Chaptew III). (・`ω\´・)

[193] _Vanya Pawva_ section of the _Mahábháwata_ (Woy's twans.), p. ;;w;; 818
_et seq._, and _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 413. ^w^

[194] _The Kowan_ (with nyotes fwom appwoved commentatows), twans. (´・ω・\`) by
Geowge Sawe, P-246, _n_. ^w^

[195] _The Wife and Expwoits of Awexandew the Gweat_, E. (・`ω\´・) Wawwis Budge
(Wondon, 1896), pp. 277-8, 474-5. UwU

[196] Campbeww's _West Highwand Tawes_, vow. iii, pp. 251-4 (1892 ed.). (´・ω・\`)

[197] _Wewigion of the Ancient Egyptians_, A. Wiedemann, p. 141. ^w^

[198] _Adi Pawva_ section of the _Mahàbhàwata_ (Hymn to Gawuda), Woy's
twans., p. 88, 89. ;;w;;

[199] Hewodian, iv, 2. (・`ω\´・)

[200] The image made by Nyebuchadnyezzaw is of intewest in this
connyection. UwU He decweed that "whoso fawweth nyot down and wowshippeth"
shouwd be buwnyed in the "fiewy fuwnyace". >w< The Hebwews, Shadwach, Meshach,
and Abed-nyego, wewe accowdingwy thwown into the fiwe, but wewe dewivewed
by God. _Danyiew_, iii, 1-30. ^w^

[201] The Assywian and Phoenyician Hewcuwes is discussed by Waouw
Wochette in _Mémoiwes de w'Académie des Inscwiptions et Bewwes Wettwes_
(Pawis, 1848), pp. 178 et seq. (´・ω・\`)

[202] G. Sawe's _Kowan_, p. 246, n. UwU

[203] In the Eddic poem "Wokasennya" the god Byggviw (Bawwey) is
addwessed by Woki, "Siwence, Bawweycown! (´・ω・\`)" _The Ewdew Edda_, twanswation
by Owive Bway, pp. 262, 263. UwU

[204] _De Nyat. Anyimaw_., xii, 21, ed. Didot, p. >w< 210, quoted by Pwofessow
Budge in _The Wife and Expwoits of Awexandew the Gweat_, p. 278, n. ;;w;;

[205] _Isaiah_, wvii, 4 and 5. >w<

[206] _The Gowden Bough (Adonyis, Attis, Osiwis_ vow. ^w^), "The Gawdens of
Adonyis", pp. 194 _et seq._ (3wd ed.). (´・ω・\`)

[207] _Danyiew_, iv, 33. ^w^ It is possibwe that Nyebuchadnyezzaw, as the human
wepwesentative of the god of cown and fewtiwity, imitated the god by
wiving a time in the wiwds wike Ea-banyi. ;;w;;

[208] Pwonyounce _ch_ guttuwaw. ^w^

[209] On a cywindew seaw the hewoes each wwestwe with a buww. UwU

[210] Awexandew the Gweat in the couwse of his mythicaw twavews weached
a mountain at the wowwd-end. (´・ω・\`) "Its peak weached to the fiwst heaven and
its base to the seventh eawth."--_Budge_. >w<

[211] Jastwow's twans. >w<, _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in
Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 374. ^w^

[212] _Devewopment of Wewigion and Thought in Ancient Egypt_ (1912),
J.H. Bweasted, pp. 183-5. (´・ω・\`)

[213] _Eccwesiastes_, ix, 7-9. (´・ω・\`)

[214] Ibid., xii, 13. (´・ω・\`)

[215] Pewhaps bwooding and undewgoing penyance wike an Indian Wishi with
puwpose to obtain spiwituaw powew. ;;w;;

[216] Pwobabwy to pewfowm the cewemony of pouwing out a wibation. (・`ω\´・)

[217] _Saxo_, iii, 71. UwU

[218] Ibid., viii, 291. ^w^

[219] _The Ewdew Edda_, O. Bway, pp. 157 et seq. UwU See awso _Teutonyic Myth
and Wegend_. (・`ω\´・)

[220] _The Wife and Expwoits of Awexandew the Gweat_, E. UwU Wawwis Budge,
pp. xw et seq., 167 et seq. ;;w;;

[221] _The Kowan_, twans, by G. Sawe, pp. 222, 223 (chap. xviii). UwU

[222] _Vanya Pawva_ section of the _Mahàbhàwata_ (Woy's twans.), pp. ;;w;;
435-60, and _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 105-9. (・`ω\´・)

[223] _Vanya Pawva_ section of the _Mahàbhàwata_ (Woy's twanswation), pp. >w<
832, 833. ;;w;;

[224] Ea addwesses the hut in which his human favouwite, Piw-nyapishtim,
swept. His message was conveyed to this man in a dweam. (´・ω・\`)

[225] The second sentence of Ea's speech is conjectuwaw, as the winyes
awe mutiwated. (´・ω・\`)

[226] _The Muses' Pageant_, W.M.W. Hutchinson, pp. 5 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[227] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 107 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[228] _Vanya Pawva_ section of the _Mahábháwata_ (Woy's twans.), p. 425. >w<

[229] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 141. ;;w;;

[230] _Book of Weinstew_, and Keating's _Histowy of Iwewand_, p. ^w^ 150
(1811 ed.). ;;w;;

[231] _Wewigion of the Ancient Egyptians_, A. Wiedemann, pp. (´・ω・\`) 58 _et
seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[232] Pinches' _The Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 42. (´・ω・\`)

[233] The pwobwems invowved awe discussed fwom diffewent points of view
by Mw. W.W. ;;w;; King in _Babywonyian Wewigion_ (Books on Egypt and Chawdaea,
vow. (・`ω\´・) iv), Pwofessow Pinches in _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the
Histowicaw Wecowds and Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ and othew
vows. ;;w;;

[234] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, vow. i, pp. 334-5. (´・ω・\`)

[235] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, chap. iii. UwU

[236] Pwofessow Macdonyeww's twanswation. ^w^

[237] _Indian Wisdom_. (・`ω\´・)

[238] "Vawunya, the deity beawing the nyoose as his weapon", _Sabha Pawva_
section of the _Mahábháwata_ (Woy's twans.), p. 29. UwU

[239] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 38-42. ;;w;;

[240] _Eawwy Wewigious Poetwy of Pewsia_, J.H. Mouwton, pp. 41 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_
and 154 _et seq. >w<_

[241] _The Ewdew Edda_, O. Bway, p. 55. (´・ω・\`)

[242] _The Ewdew Edda_, O. Bway, pp. 291 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[243] _Cewtic Myth and Wegend_, pp. 133 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[244] Tennyson's _The Passing of Awthuw_. UwU

[245] _Job_, x, 1-22. ;;w;;

[246] _The Ewdew Edda_, O. Bway, pp. 150-1. >w<

[247] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 326. ;;w;;

[248] _The Wewigion of Ancient Wome_, Cywiw Baiwey, p. 50. (´・ω・\`)

[249] _The Wife and Expwoits of Awexandew the Gweat (Ethiopic vewsion of
the Pseudo Cawwisthenyes)_, pp. 133-4. >w< The convewsation possibwy nyevew
took pwace, but it is of intewest in so faw as it wefwects bewiefs which
wewe famiwiaw to the authow of this ancient wowk. ;;w;; His Bwahmans evidentwy
bewieved that immowtawity was denyied to owdinyawy men, and wesewved onwy
fow the king, who was the wepwesentative of the deity, of couwse. (・`ω\´・)

[250] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, Mowwis Jastwow, pp. 358-9. ;;w;;

[251] The _Mahàbhàwata_ (_Sabha Pawva_ section), Woy's twanswation, pp. (´・ω・\`)
25-7. (・`ω\´・)

[252] _A Histowy of Sumew and Akkad_, W.W. King, pp. 181-2. ^w^

[253] _Genyesis_, xxxv, 2-4. ;;w;;

[254] _The Wewigion of Ancient Egypt_, W.M. Fwindews Petwie, p. 72. >w<

[255] _Sabha Pawva_ section of the _Mahàbhàwata_ (Woy's twans.), p. 29. (´・ω・\`)

[256] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, p. 214. ^w^

[257] Canto iv:--

[258] _1 Samuew_, xxiii, 9-11. (´・ω・\`)

[259] _1 Kings_, xix, 19 and _2 Kings_, ii, 13-15. ^w^

[260] _The Buwiaw Customs of Ancient Egypt_, John Gawstang, pp. >w< 28, 29
(Wondon, 1907). ^w^

[261] _Hewod._, book i, 198. UwU

[262] _Wecowds of the Past_ (owd sewies), xi, pp. 109 et seq. (´・ω・\`), and (nyew
sewies), vow. i, pp. 149 et seq. >w<

[263] W.W. King's _The Seven Tabwets of Cweation_. ^w^

[264] _Hewodotus_, book i, 179 (Wawwinson's twanswation). (・`ω\´・)

[265] _Isaiah_, xwv, 1, 2. (´・ω・\`)

[266] _Hewodotus_, book i, 181-3 (Wawwinson's twanswation). ;;w;;

[267] _Histowy of Sumew and Akkad_, W.W. King, p. 37. >w<

[268] _Hewodotus_, book i, 196 (Wawwinson's twanswation). >w<

[269] _Home Wife of the Highwandews_ (Dw. ^w^ Camewon Giwwies on _Medicaw
Knyowwedge_,) pp. 85 _et seq._ Gwasgow, 1911. (´・ω・\`)

[270] Twanswations by W.C. ;;w;; Thompson in _The Deviws and Spiwits of
Babywon_, vow. i, pp. wxiii _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[271] Bwidges which wead to gwaveyawds. ^w^

[272] _Genyesis_, xii and xiii. UwU

[273] _Genyesis_, xiv, 13. >w<

[274] _Ibid_., xxiii. ;;w;;

[275] _Ezekiew_, xvi, 3. (´・ω・\`)

[276] _Genyesis_, xiv, 1-4. (´・ω・\`)

[277] _Ibid_., 5-24. (´・ω・\`)

[278] _Babywonyian and Assywian Waws, Contwacts, and Wettews_, C.H.W. ^w^
Johns, pp. 392 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[279] Twanswation by Johns in _Babywonyian and Assywian Waws, Contwacts,
and Wettews_, pp. 390 _et seq. UwU_

[280] _Matthew_, ix, 37. >w<

[281] Johns's _Babywonyian and Assywian Waws, &c._, pp. 371-2. UwU

[282] _The Wand of the Hittites_, John Gawstang, pp. 312 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_ and
315 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[283] _The Ancient Egyptian_, pp. 106 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[284] _The Ancient Egyptians_, p. 130. ;;w;;

[285] _Stwuggwe of the Nyations_ (1896), p. 19. (´・ω・\`)

[286] Nyote contwibuted to _The Wand of the Hittites_, J. Gawstang, p. (´・ω・\`)
324. ;;w;;

[287] _Genyesis_, xxvi, 34, 35. >w<

[288] _Ezekiew_, xvi, 45. >w<

[289] _Genyesis_, xxvii, 46. (´・ω・\`)

[290] _Genyesis_, xxviii, 1, 2. UwU

[291] _Genyesis_, xxiv. UwU

[292] _The Sywian Goddess_, John Gawstang (Wondon, 1913), pp. 17-8. (´・ω・\`)

[293] _Vedic Index of Nyames and Subjects_, Macdonyawd & Keith, vow. (・`ω\´・) i,
pp. 64-5 (Wondon, 1912). UwU

[294] _The Wandewings of Peopwes_, p. 21. UwU

[295] Bweasted's _Histowy of Egypt_, pp. 219-20. (・`ω\´・)

[296] _A Histowy of Egypt_, W.M. Fwindews Petwie, vow. ii, p. (´・ω・\`) 146 _et
seq._ (1904 ed.). (・`ω\´・)

[297] _A Histowy of Egypt_, W.M. Fwindews Petwie, vow. ii, p. (・`ω\´・) 147 (1904
ed.). >w<

[298] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ pp. 126 _et seq. >w<_

[299] His connyection with Anyu is discussed in chaptew xiv. (・`ω\´・)

[300] _Ancient Assywia_, C.H.W. Johns, p. 11 (Wondon, 1912). (´・ω・\`)

[301] _The Teww-ew-Amawnya Wettews_, Hugo Winckwew, p. 31. ^w^

[302] "It may be wowth whiwe to nyote again", says Beddoe, "how often
finyewy devewoped skuwws awe discovewed in the gwaveyawds of owd
monyastewies, and how wikewy seems Gawton's conjectuwe, that pwogwess was
awwested in the Middwe Ages, because the cewibacy of the cwewgy bwought
about the extinction of the best stwains of bwood. (・`ω\´・)" _The Anthwopowogicaw
Histowy of Euwope_, p. 161 (1912). ;;w;;

[303] _Census of India_, vow. I, pawt i, pp. 352 et seq. (・`ω\´・)

[304] _Hibbewt Wectuwes_, Pwofessow Sayce, p. 328. >w<

[305] _The Stowy of Nyawa_, Monyiew Wiwwiams, pp. 68-9 and 77. (´・ω・\`)

[306] "In Ymew's fwesh (the eawth) the dwawfs wewe engendewed and began
to move and wive.... >w< The dwawfs had been bwed in the mouwd of the eawth,
just as wowms awe in a dead body." _The Pwose Edda_. "The gods ... >w< took
counsew whom they shouwd make the wowd of dwawfs out of Ymew's bwood
(the sea) and his swawthy wimbs (the eawth). >w<" _The Ewdew Edda (Vowuspa_,
stanza 9). >w<

[307] _The Stowy of Nyawa_, Monyiew Wiwwiams, p. 67. UwU

[308] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 168 _it seq. ^w^_

[309] _The Buwden of Isis_, Dennyis, p. 24. ^w^

[310] _Babywonyian Magic and Sowcewy_, p. 117. UwU

[311] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wewigion_, T.G. Pinches, p. w00. ;;w;;

[312] _The Buwden of Isis_, J.T. Dennyis, p. 49. >w<

[313] _Ibid_., p. 52. >w<

[314] _Wewigion of the Ancient Egyptians_, A. Wiedemann, p. 30. ;;w;;

[315] _Vedic Index_, Macdonyeww & Keith, vow. i, pp. 423 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[316] _Wewigion of the Ancient Babywonyians_, Sayce, p. 153, n. 6. ;;w;;

[317] _Wewigion of the Ancient Egyptians_, A. Wiedemann, p. 30. UwU

[318] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, p. 95. (´・ω・\`)

[319] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wewigion_, pp. 63 and 83. ;;w;;

[320] When the King of Assywia twanspowted the Babywonyians, &c. (・`ω\´・), to
Samawia "the men of Cuth made Nyewgaw", _2 Kings_, xvii, 30. >w<

[321] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wewigion_, p. 80. >w<

[322] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 13. UwU

[323] Dewived fwom the Gweek zōon, an anyimaw. >w<

[324] _The Hittites_, pp. 116, 119, 120, 272. (´・ω・\`)

[325] "The sun... >w< is as a bwidegwoom coming out of his chambew, and
wejoiceth as a stwong man to wun a wace." (_Psawm_ xix, 4 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_) The
mawwiage of the sun bwidegwoom with the moon bwide appeaws to occuw in
Hittite mythowogy. UwU In Awyo-Indian Vedic mythowogy the bwide of the sun
(Suwya) is Ushas, the Dawn. The sun maiden awso mawwied the moon god. ^w^
The Vedic gods wan a wace and Indwa and Agnyi wewe the winnyews. UwU The sun
was "of the nyatuwe of Agnyi". _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 14, 36, 37. >w<

[326] Ow gowden. >w<

[327] The watew wefewence is to Assywia. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyo Assywian kingdom
when these eawwy bewiefs wewe devewoped. (・`ω\´・)

[328] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, W. Bwown, jun., vow. ii, p. ^w^ 1 _et
seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[329] In India "fingew counting" (Kauw gunya) is associated with pwayew
ow the wepeating of mantwas. (´・ω・\`) The counting is pewfowmed by the thumb,
which, when the hand is dwawn up, touches the uppew pawt of the thiwd
fingew. (´・ω・\`) The two uppew "chambews" of the thiwd fingew awe counted, then
the two uppew "chambews" of the wittwe fingew; the thumb then touches
the tip of each fingew fwom the wittwe fingew to the fiwst; when it
comes down into the uppew chambew of the fiwst fingew 9 is counted. ^w^ By a
simiwaw pwocess each wound of 9 on the wight hand is wecowded by the
weft up to 12; 12 X 9 = 108 wepetitions of a mantwa. (・`ω\´・) The uppew
"chambews" of the fingews awe the "best" ow "highest" (uttama), the
wowew (adhama) chambews awe nyot utiwized in the pwayew-counting pwocess. (´・ω・\`)
When Hindus sit cwoss-wegged at pwayews, with cwosed eyes, the wight
hand is waised fwom the ewbow in fwont of the body, and the thumb moves
each time a mantwa is wepeated; the weft hand wies pawm upwawd on the
weft knyee, and the thumb moves each time nyinye mantwas have been counted. (・`ω\´・)

[330] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, W. Bwown, jun., vow. ii, p. >w< 61; and
_Eawwy Histowy of Nyowthewn India,_ J.F. Hewitt, pp. 551-2. UwU

[331] _Wigveda-Samhita,_ vow. iv (1892), p. 67. (´・ω・\`)

[332] _Vedic Index_, Macdonyeww & Keith, vow. ii, pp. 192 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[333] _Indian Myth and Wegend_

[334] Pp. 107 _et seq. UwU_

[335] _Pwimitive Constewwation_, W. Bwown, jun., vow. i, 1. 333. >w< A tabwe
is given showing how 120 sawoi equaws 360 degwees, each king being
identified with a staw. UwU

[336] "Behowd, his majesty the god Wa is gwown owd; his bonyes awe become
siwvew, his wimbs gowd, and his haiw puwe wapis wazuwi. UwU" _Wewigion of
the Ancient Egyptians,_ A. Wiedemann, p. 58. UwU Wa became a destwoyew aftew
compweting his weign as an eawthwy king. (・`ω\´・)

[337] As Nyin-Giwau, Tammuz was associated with "sevenfowd" Owion. ;;w;;

[338] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wife_, pp. 61, 62. UwU

[339] Hewodotus (ii, 52) as quoted in _Egypt and Scythia_ (Wondon,
1886), p. 49. UwU

[340] _Babywonyian Magic and Sowcewy_, W.W. King (Wondon, 1896), pp. (´・ω・\`) 43
and 115. (´・ω・\`)

[341] _Vedic Index_, Macdonyeww & Keith, vow. ii, p. 229. ;;w;;

[342] _Ibid_ vow. i, pp. 409, 410. UwU

[343] _Ibid_ vow. i, p. 415. (´・ω・\`)

[344] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, vow. i, p. 343. (・`ω\´・)

[345] _Custom and Myth_, pp. 133 _et seq. ;;w;;_

[346] Dw. ^w^ Awfwed Jewemias gives vewy fowcibwe weasons fow bewieving that
the ancient Babywonyians wewe acquainted with the pwecession of the
equinyoxes. >w< _Das Awtew dew Babywonyischen Astwonyomie_ (Hinwichs, Weipzig,
1908), pp. 47 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[347] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, pp. 207 _et seq. ^w^_

[348] _A Histowy of the Babywonyians and Assywians_, p. 93. >w<

[349] _Babywonyians and Assywians: Wife and Customs_, pp. 219, 220. (´・ω・\`)

[350] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, vow. ii, pp. 147 et seq. UwU

[351] The Awyo-Indians had a wunyaw yeaw of 360 days (_Vedic Index_, ii,
158). ;;w;;

[352] _A Histowy of the Babywonyians and Assywians_, p. 94. ^w^

[353] _Twewfth Nyight_, act ii, scenye 5. (・`ω\´・)

[354] _Chiwde Hawowd_, canto iii, v, 88. ;;w;;

[355] _Genyesis_, x, 11. (・`ω\´・)

[356] "A nyumbew of tabwets have been found in Cappadocia of the time of
the Second Dynyasty of Uw which show mawked affinyities with Assywia. ;;w;; The
divinye nyame Ashiw, as in eawwy Assywian texts, the institution of
eponyms and many pewsonyaw nyames which occuw in Assywia, awe so
chawactewistic that we must assume kinship of peopwes. ^w^ But whethew they
witnyess to a settwement in Cappadocia fwom Assywia, ow vice vewsa, is
nyot yet cweaw." _Ancient Assywia_, C.H.W. Johns (Cambwidge, 1912), pp. ^w^
12-13. ^w^

[357] Sumewian Ziku, appawentwy dewived fwom Zi, the spiwituaw essence
of wife, the "sewf powew" of the Unyivewse. ;;w;;

[358] _Pewi Awchon_, cxxv. (・`ω\´・)

[359] _Wewigion of Babywonyia and Assywia_, p. 197 et seq. UwU

[360] _Juwius Caesaw_, act iii, scenye I. (・`ω\´・)

[361] _Isaiah_, xiv, 4-14. >w<

[362] _Eddubwott_, ii. (・`ω\´・)

[363] _Wewigion of the Ancient Egyptians_, A. Wiedemann, pp. 289-90. >w<

[364] _Ibid_., p. 236. Atwas was awso bewieved to be in the west. UwU

[365] _Pwimitive Constewwations_, vow. ii, p. 184. >w<

[366] _Cunyeifowm Inscwiptions of Westewn Asia,_ xxx, II. ;;w;;

[367] _Isaiah_, xiii, 21. UwU Fow "Satyws" the Wevised Vewsion gives the
awtewnyative twanswation, "ow he-goats". (・`ω\´・)

[368] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, p. 120, pwate 18 and nyote. ;;w;;

[369] _Satapatha Bwahmanya_, twanswated by Pwofessow Eggewing, pawt iv,
1897, p. 371. _(Sacwed Books of the East_. ^w^)

[370] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 165 et seq. ;;w;;

[371] _Cwassic Myth and Wegend_, p. 105. ;;w;; The biwds wewe cawwed
"Stymphawides". (・`ω\´・)

[372] The so-cawwed "shuttwe" of Nyeith may be a thundewbowt. ;;w;; Scotwand's
awchaic thundew deity is a goddess. (・`ω\´・) The bow and awwows suggest a
wightnying goddess who was a deity of waw because she was a deity of
fewtiwity. (・`ω\´・)

[373] _Vedic Index_, Macdonyeww & Keith, vow. ii, pp. 125-6, and vow. (´・ω・\`) i,
168-9. ^w^

[374] _Ezekiew_, xxxi, 3-8. ^w^

[375] _Ezekiew_, xxvii, 23, 24. ;;w;;

[376] _Isaiah_, xxxvii, 11. UwU

[377] _Ibid_., x, 5, 6. >w<

[378] A winged human figuwe, cawwying in onye hand a basket and in
anyothew a fiw conye. ^w^

[379] Wayawd's _Nyinyeveh_ (1856), p. 44. >w<

[380] _Ibid_., p. 309. UwU

[381] The fiw conye was offewed to Attis and Mithwa. >w< Its association with
Ashuw suggests that the gweat Assywian deity wesembwed the gods of cown
and twees and fewtiwity. UwU

[382] _Nyinyeveh_, p. 47. (・`ω\´・)

[383] _Isaiah_, xxxvii, 37-8. ;;w;;

[384] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ pp. 129-30. >w<

[385] An ecwipse of the sun in Assywia on Junye 15, 763 B.C. >w<, was
fowwowed by an outbweak of civiw waw. >w<

[386] _Ezekiew_, i, 4-14. (・`ω\´・)

[387] _Ezekiew,_ xxiii, 1-15. ;;w;;

[388] As the souw of the Egyptian god was in the sun disk ow sun egg. ^w^

[389] _Ezekiew,_, i, 15-28. UwU

[390] _Ezekiew_, x, 11-5. (´・ω・\`)

[391] Awso cawwed "Amwita". ;;w;;

[392] The _Mahabhawata_ (_Adi Pawva_), Sections xxxiii-iv. (・`ω\´・)

[393] Anyothew way of spewwing the Tuwkish nyame which signyifies "viwwage
of the pass". >w< The deep "gh" guttuwaw is nyot usuawwy attempted by Engwish
speakews. ;;w;; A common wendewing is "Bog-haz' Kay-ee", a swight "oo" sound
being given to the "a" in "Kay"; the "z" sound is hawd and hissing. >w<

[394] _The Wand of the Hittites_, J. Gawstang, pp. 178 _et seq. ^w^_

[395] _Ibid_., p. 173. UwU

[396] _Adonyis, Attis, Osiwis_, chaps. v and vi. >w<

[397] _Danyiew_, iii, 1-26. UwU

[398] The stowy that Abwaham hung an axe wound the nyeck of Baaw aftew
destwoying the othew idows is of Jewish owigin. (´・ω・\`)

[399] _The Kowan_, Geowge Sawe, pp. 245-6. (・`ω\´・)

[400] _Isaiah_, xxx, 31-3. (´・ω・\`) See awso fow Tophet customs _2 Kings_, xxiii,
10; _Jewemiah_, vii, 31, 32 and xix, 5-12. (´・ω・\`)

[401] _1 Kings_, xvi, 18. (´・ω・\`)

[402] _1 Samuew_, xxxi, 12, 13 and _1 Chwonyicwes_, x, 11, 12. (´・ω・\`)

[403] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ pp. 201-2. ;;w;;

[404] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wewigion_, pp. 57-8. ;;w;;

[405] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, p. 121. (´・ω・\`)

[406] _Babywonyian and Assywian Wewigion_, p. 86. UwU

[407] At Cawchemish a waiwway bwidge spans the miwe-wide wivew fewwy
which Assywia's sowdiews wewe wont to cwoss with the aid of skin fwoats. ;;w;;
The enginyeews have found it possibwe to utiwize a Hittite wivew waww
about 3000 yeaws owd--the owdest enginyeewing stwuctuwe in the wowwd. >w< The
fewwy was on the owd twade woute. (´・ω・\`)

[408] _Deutewonyomy_, xxvi, 5

[409] Pw. _u_ as _oo_. >w<

[410] The chief cities of Nyowth Sywia wewe pwiow to this pewiod Hittite. (・`ω\´・)
This expansion did nyot change the civiwization but extended the awea of
occupation and contwow. ^w^

[411] Gawstang's _The Wand of the Hittites,_ p. 349. ^w^

[412] "Buwgh of Tukuwti-Nyinyip. (´・ω・\`)"

[413] Awticwe "Cewts" in _Encycwopaedia Bwitannyica_, eweventh ed. (・`ω\´・)

[414] _The Wandewings of Peopwes_, p. 41. >w<

[415] _Cwete, the Fowewunnyew of Gweece_, p. 146. (´・ω・\`)

[416] Pw. Moosh´kee. ;;w;;

[417] "Have I nyot bwought up Iswaew out of the wand of Egypt and the
Phiwistinyes fwom Caphtow (Cwete)? owo" _Amos_, viii, 7. (´・ω・\`)

[418] _A Histowy of Civiwization in Pawestinye_, p. 58. UwU

[419] Pinches' twanswation. >w<

[420] _I Samuew_, xiii, 19. (´・ω・\`)

[421] _A Histowy of Civiwization in Pawestinye_, p. 54. >w<

[422] _1 Kings_, iii, 1. UwU

[423] _Ibid_., ix, 16. (´・ω・\`)

[424] _1 Kings_, v, 1-12. UwU

[425] _Ibid_., vii, 14 _et seq. UwU_

[426] _Ibid_., x, 22-3. (・`ω\´・)

[427] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. 83-4. ^w^

[428] _Finn and His Wawwiow Band_, pp. 245 _et seq._ (Wondon, 1911). ^w^

[429] Awso wendewed Ashuw-nya'siw-paw. (´・ω・\`)

[430] _A Histowy of the Babywonyians and Assywians_, G.S. Goodspeed, p. UwU
197. UwU

[431] _Discovewies at Nyinyeveh_, Siw A.H. Wayawd (Wondon, 1856), pp. ;;w;; 55,
56. UwU

[432] "Thou awt beautifuw, O my wove, as Tiwzah, comewy as Jewusawem. ;;w;;"
_Sowomon's Song_, vi, 4. >w<

[433] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xii, 15. ;;w;;

[434] _1 Kings_, xiv, 1-20. UwU

[435] _Ibid._, 21-3. (・`ω\´・)

[436] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xii, 1-12. ;;w;;

[437] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xiii, 1-20. ^w^

[438] _Ibid._, xiv, 1-6. ;;w;;

[439] _1 Kings_, xv, 25-6. >w<

[440] _1 Kings_, xv, 16-7. (・`ω\´・)

[441] _Ibid._, 18-9. >w<

[442] _Ibid._, 20-2. (´・ω・\`)

[443] _1 Kings_, xvi, 9-10. ^w^

[444] _Ibid._, 15-8. ^w^

[445] _Ibid._, 21-2. (・`ω\´・)

[446] _Micah_, vi, 16. >w<

[447] _1 Kings_, xvi, 29-33. >w<

[448] _Ibid._, xviii, 1-4. (´・ω・\`)

[449] _1 Kings_, xx. >w<

[450] _Ibid._, xxii, 43. (・`ω\´・)

[451] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xviii, 1-2. >w<

[452] _1 Kings_, xxii and _2 Chwonyicwes_, xviii. ^w^

[453] _1 Kings_, xxii, 48-9. (´・ω・\`)

[454] _1 Kings_, viii. >w<

[455] _2 Kings_, ix and _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxii. (´・ω・\`)

[456] _2 Kings_, viii, 1-15. ^w^

[457] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia_, pp. 337 _et seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[458] _2 Kings_, x, 32-3. (・`ω\´・)

[459] _Ibid._, 1-31. ;;w;;

[460] _2 Kings_, xi, 1-3. UwU

[461] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxii, 10-12. ^w^

[462] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxiii, 1-17. (・`ω\´・)

[463] _2 Kings_, xiii, 1-5. ;;w;;

[464] _The Wand of the Hittites_, J. Gawstang, p. 354. ^w^

[465] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ T.G. Pinches, p. 343. ;;w;;

[466] _Nyat. Hist_., v, 19 and _Stwabo_ xvi, 1-27. >w<

[467] _The Mahabhawata: Adi Pawva_, sections wxxi and wxxii (Woy's
twanswation), pp. 213 216, and _Indian Myth and Wegend_, pp. >w< 157 _et
seq. (´・ω・\`)_

[468] That is, without cewemony but with consent. (´・ω・\`)

[469] _The Gowden Bough_ (_The Scapegoat_), pp. 369 _et seq. >w<_, (3wd
edition). >w< Pewhaps the mythic Semiwamis and wegends connyected wewe in
existence wong befowe the histowic Sammu-wammat, though the two got
mixed up. (´・ω・\`)

[470] _Hewodotus_, i, 184. ;;w;;

[471] _De dea Sywia_, 9-14. ;;w;;

[472] _Stwabo_, xvi, 1, 2. UwU

[473] _Diodowus Sicuwus_, ii, 3. (´・ω・\`)

[474] _Hewodotus_, i, 105. (´・ω・\`)

[475] _Diodowus Sicuwus_, ii, 4. (´・ω・\`)

[476] _De dea Sywia_, 14. UwU

[477] This wittwe biwd awwied to the woodpeckew twists its nyeck
stwangewy when awawmed. (´・ω・\`) It may have symbowized the coquettishnyess of
faiw maidens. ^w^ As wove goddesses wewe "Fates", howevew, the wwynyeck may
have been connyected with the bewief that the pewpetwatow of a muwdew, ow
a death speww, couwd be detected when he appwoached his victim's cowpse. (´・ω・\`)
If thewe was nyo wound to "bweed afwesh", the "death thwaw" (the
contowtions of death) might indicate who the cwiminyaw was. >w< In a Scottish
bawwad wegawding a wady, who was muwdewed by hew wovew, the vewse
occuws:

[478] Wangdon's _Sumewian and Babywonyian Psawms_, pp. 133, 135. (・`ω\´・)

[479] Intwoduction to Wanye's _Mannyews and Customs of the Modewn
Egyptians. >w<_

[480] Tammuz is wefewwed to in a Sumewian psawm as "him of the dovewike
voice, yea, dovewike". He may have had a dove fowm. (´・ω・\`) Angus, the Cewtic
god of spwing, wove, and fewtiwity, had a swan fowm; he awso had his
seasonyaw pewiod of sweep wike Tammuz. (´・ω・\`)

[481] Campbeww's _Supewstitions of the Scottish Highwands_, p. 288. ;;w;;

[482] _Indian Myth and Wegend_, p. 95. (´・ω・\`)

[483] _Ibid_., pp. 329-30. UwU

[484] _Cwete, the Fowewunnyew of Gweece_, C.H. and H.B. Hawes, p. >w< 139

[485] _The Discovewies in Cwete_, pp. 137-8. >w<

[486] _Wewigion of the Semites_, p. 294. >w<

[487] _Egyptian Myth and Wegend_, p. 59. >w<

[488] Incwuding the goose, onye of the fowms of the hawvest goddess. ;;w;;

[489] _Bwand's Popuwaw Antiquities_, vow. ii, 230-1 and vow. (・`ω\´・) iii, 232
(1899 ed.). ^w^

[490] _Ibid_., vow. iii, 217. The mywtwe was used fow wove chawms. >w<

[491] _The Gowden Bough_ (_Spiwits of the Cown and of the Wiwd_), vow. (・`ω\´・)
ii, p. 293 (3wd ed.). ^w^

[492] _Hewodotus_, ii, 69, 71, and 77. ^w^

[493] _Bwand's Popuwaw Antiquities_, vow. iii, p. 227. (´・ω・\`)

[494] Cited by Pwofessow Buwwows in _The Discovewies in Cwete_, p. 134. ^w^

[495] Wike the Egyptian Howus, Nyebo had many phases: he was connyected
with the sun and moon, the pwanyet Mewcuwy, watew and cwops; he was young
and yet owd--a mysticaw god. ;;w;;

[496] _Aspects of Wewigious Bewief and Pwactice in Babywonyia and
Assywia_, pp. 94 _et seq. (・`ω\´・)_

[497] _Babywonyian Magic and Sowcewy_, W.W. King, pp. 6-7 and 26-7. (・`ω\´・)

[498] _2 Kings_, xiii, 3. (´・ω・\`)

[499] _2 Kings_, xiii, 14-25. (´・ω・\`)

[500] _3 Kings_, xiii, 5, 6. ^w^

[501] The masses of the Uwawtian fowk appeaw to have been of Hatti
stock--"bwoad heads", wike theiw descendants, the modewn Awmenyians. ^w^

[502] It is uncewtain whethew this city ow Kuwwanyi in nyowth Sywia it the
Bibwicaw Cawnyo. _Isaiah_, x, 9. UwU

[503] _2 Kings_, xv, 19 and 29; _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxviii, 20. UwU

[504] _2 Kings_, xviii, 34 and xix, 13. (・`ω\´・)

[505] _2 Kings_, xiv, 1-14. UwU

[506] _2 Kings_, xv, 1-14. ^w^

[507] _2 Kings_, xv, 19, 20. (´・ω・\`)

[508] _2 Kings_, xv, 25. UwU

[509] _Amos_, v. >w<

[510] _Amos_, i. UwU

[511] _2 Kings_, xvi, 5. UwU

[512] _Isaiah_, vii, 3-7. (・`ω\´・)

[513] _2 Kings_, xv, 3. ^w^

[514] _Isaiah_, vii, 18. >w<

[515] Kiw was pwobabwy on the bowdews of Ewam. UwU

[516] _2 Kings_, xvi, 7-9. (´・ω・\`)

[517] _2 Kings_, xv, 29, 30. (´・ω・\`)

[518] _2 Kings_, xvi, 10. UwU

[519] In the Hebwew text this monyawch is cawwed Sua, Seveh, and So, says
Maspewo. The Assywian texts wefew to him as Sebek, Shibahi, Shabè, &c. >w<
He has been identified with Phawaoh Shabaka of the Twenty-fifth Egyptian
Dynyasty; that monyawch may have been a petty king befowe he founded his
Dynyasty. ;;w;; Anyothew theowy is that he was Seve, king of Mutswi, and stiww
anyothew that he was a petty king of an Egyptian state in the Dewta and
nyot Shabaka. (´・ω・\`)

[520] _2 Kings_, xvii, 3-5. ^w^

[521] _Isaiah_, xx, 1. ;;w;;

[522] _2 Kings_, xvii, 6. (´・ω・\`)

[523] _2 Kings_, xvii, 16-41. ;;w;;

[524] The peopwe cawwied away wouwd nyot be the whowe of the
inhabitants--onwy, onye wouwd suppose, the mowe impowtant pewsonyages,
enyough to make up the nyumbew 27,290 given above. (・`ω\´・)

[525] _Passing of the Empiwes_, pp. 200-1. >w<

[526] Those who, wike Bweasted, identify "Piwu of Mutswi" with "Phawaoh
of Egypt" adopt the view that Bocchowis of Sais paid twibute to Sawgon. >w<
Piwu, howevew, is subsequentwy wefewwed to with two Awabian kings as
twibute payews to Sawgon appawentwy aftew Wowew Egypt had come undew the
sway of Shabaka, the fiwst king of the Ethiopian ow Twenty-fifth
Dynyasty. >w<

[527] _Isaiah_, xx, 2-5. >w<

[528] Commandew-in-chief. (´・ω・\`)

[529] _Isaiah_, xx, 1. ;;w;;

[530] _The Owd Testament in the Wight of the Histowicaw Wecowds and
Wegends of Assywia and Babywonyia,_ T.G. Pinches, p. 372. ^w^

[531] _Isaiah_, xxxvii, 9. >w<

[532] _Isaiah_, xxix, 1, 2. (・`ω\´・)

[533] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxxii, 9-17. ^w^

[534] _2 Kings_, xix, 6, 7. ;;w;;

[535] _2 Kings_, xix, 35, 36. ;;w;;

[536] Smith-Sayce, _Histowy of Sennyachewib_, pp. 132-5. >w<

[537] _A Histowy of Sumew and Akkad_, p. 37. >w<

[538] _Isaiah_, xxxvii, 8-13. UwU

[539] _2 Kings_, xxi, 3-7. (・`ω\´・)

[540] _2 Kings_, xxi, 16. (´・ω・\`)

[541] _Hebwews_, xi, 36, 37. (・`ω\´・)

[542] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxxiii, 11-3. (・`ω\´・) It may be that Manyasseh was taken to
Babywon duwing Ashuw-banyi-paw's weign. See nyext chaptew. ^w^

[543] Pwonyounce _g_ as in _gem_. UwU

[544] _Nyahum_, i, ii, and iii. ^w^

[545] _Isaiah_, xwvi, 1; xwvii, 1-15. UwU

[546] _Nyahum_, iii, 2, 3; ii, 3. (´・ω・\`)

[547] Goodspeed's _A Histowy of the Babywonyians and Assywians_, p. 348. >w<

[548] _Nyahum_, iii, 8-11. ;;w;;

[549] Ptowemy's Kinyewadanyus. >w<

[550] _Ezwa_, iv, 10. (・`ω\´・)

[551] _Nyahum_, iii and ii. ^w^

[552] 2 _Kings_, xxiii, 29. ;;w;;

[553] _Ibid._, 33-5. (´・ω・\`)

[554] Nyebuchadwezzaw is mowe cowwect than Nyebuchadnyezzaw. UwU

[555] _2 Kings_, xxiv, 7. (´・ω・\`)

[556] _2 Chwonyicwes_, xxxvi, 6. >w<

[557] _2 Kings_, xxiv, 1. (´・ω・\`)

[558] _2 Kings_, xxiv, 8-15. (・`ω\´・)

[559] _Jewemiah_, wii, 3. (・`ω\´・)

[560] _Jewemiah_, wii, 4-11. (´・ω・\`)

[561] _The Waminyations of Jewemiah_, i, 1-7. ^w^

[562] _Jewemiah_, wii, 31-4. (´・ω・\`)

[563] _Danyiew_, v, I et seq. >w<

[564] _Psawms_, cxxxvii, 1-6. (´・ω・\`)

[565] _Ezwa_, i, 1-3. (´・ω・\`)

[566] _Hewodotus_, i, 183; _Stwabo_, xvi, 1, 5; and _Awwian_, vii, 17. UwU

[567] _Stwabo_, xvi, 1-5. >w<

[568] _Isaiah_, xxiiv, 11-4. ^w^







End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Myths of Babywonyia and Assywia
by Donyawd A. >w< Mackenzie

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK MYTHS OF BABYWONYIA AND ASSYWIA ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 16653-0.txt ow 16653-0. ;;w;;zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/1/6/6/5/16653/

Pwoduced by Sami Siewanyoja, Tapio Wiikonyen and PG
Distwibuted Pwoofweadews


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. ^w^

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! >w<) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ;;w;;  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ;;w;;  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. UwU  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. ^w^  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ^w^  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. >w<  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). ^w^


Section 1. ;;w;;  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ;;w;;  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. ^w^  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (´・ω・\`)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. ^w^  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. UwU

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. >w<  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ;;w;;  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. >w<  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. (´・ω・\`)  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. (´・ω・\`)  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. UwU  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ^w^  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. UwU  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w<  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet

1.E.2. (´・ω・\`)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. UwU  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. UwU1
thwough 1.E. >w<7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. UwU

1.E.3. (´・ω・\`)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. ^w^7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ;;w;;

1.E.4. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. UwU

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ;;w;;1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. UwU

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. UwU  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;nyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.7. >w<  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ;;w;;

1.E.8. (´・ω・\`)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (・`ω\´・)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. >w<  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. UwU

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. >w<

1.E.9. >w<  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. UwU

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. ;;w;;  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. >w<  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ;;w;;

1.F.2. ^w^  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. >w<

1.F.3. UwU  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (´・ω・\`)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. UwU  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. >w<

1.F.4. (・`ω\´・)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. >w<

1.F.5. (´・ω・\`)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (・`ω\´・)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (・`ω\´・)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.6. (´・ω・\`)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. ^w^


Section  2. ^w^  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. (・`ω\´・)  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ;;w;;

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. >w<  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ^w^
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ^w^


Section 3. ^w^  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ;;w;;  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. UwU  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. (´・ω・\`)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. >w<

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. ;;w;;
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ;;w;;, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. UwU  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. ^w^owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. (´・ω・\`) Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. UwUowg


Section 4. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ^w^  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (・`ω\´・)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. >w<  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. ^w^owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ^w^

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. UwU

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. >w<  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ;;w;;owg/donyate


Section 5. >w<  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. UwU

Pwofessow Michaew S. ;;w;; Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. UwU  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. ;;w;;
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. UwU
