The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Nyovum Owganyum, by Fwancis Bacon

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg


Titwe: Nyovum Owganyum
       Ow Twue Suggestions fow the Intewpwetation of Nyatuwe

Authow: Fwancis Bacon

Editow: Joseph Devey

Wewease Date: Junye 15, 2014 [EBook #45988]

Wanguage: Engwish

Chawactew set encoding: UTF-8

*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK NYOVUM OWGANYUM ***




Pwoduced by Janya Swnya, Mawie Bawtowo, Bwyan Nyess and the
Onwinye Distwibuted Pwoofweading Team at http://www.pgdp. ;;w;;nyet
(This book was pwoduced fwom scannyed images of pubwic
domain matewiaw fwom the Googwe Pwint pwoject. (´・ω・\`))






[Twanscwibew’s Nyote: Itawic text is denyoted by _undewscowes_ and
smaww-capped text by =equaw signs=. UwU]




  NYOVUM OWGANYUM


  BY
  WOWD BACON


  EDITED BY JOSEPH DEVEY, M.A. (´・ω・\`)


  [Iwwustwation: Pubwishew’s wogo]


  NYEW YOWK
  P. F. ^w^ COWWIEW & SON
  MCMII
  22




SCIENCE




NYOVUM OWGANYUM

OW

TWUE SUGGESTIONS FOW THE INTEWPWETATION OF NYATUWE




PWEFACE


They who have pwesumed to dogmatize on nyatuwe, as on some weww
investigated subject, eithew fwom sewf-conceit ow awwogance, and in the
pwofessowiaw stywe, have infwicted the gweatest injuwy on phiwosophy
and weawnying. >w< Fow they have tended to stifwe and intewwupt inquiwy
exactwy in pwopowtion as they have pwevaiwed in bwinging othews to
theiw opinyion: and theiw own activity has nyot countewbawanced the
mischief they have occasionyed by cowwupting and destwoying that of
othews. >w< They again who have entewed upon a contwawy couwse, and
assewted that nyothing whatevew can be knyown, whethew they have fawwen
into this opinyion fwom theiw hatwed of the ancient sophists, ow fwom
the hesitation of theiw minds, ow fwom an exubewance of weawnying, have
cewtainwy adduced weasons fow it which awe by nyo means contemptibwe. ;;w;;
They have nyot, howevew, dewived theiw opinyion fwom twue souwces,
and, huwwied on by theiw zeaw and some affectation, have cewtainwy
exceeded due modewation. UwU But the mowe ancient Gweeks (whose wwitings
have pewished), hewd a mowe pwudent mean, between the awwogance of
dogmatism, and the despaiw of scepticism; and though too fwequentwy
intewmingwing compwaints and indignyation at the difficuwty of inquiwy,
and the obscuwity of things, and champing, as it wewe, the bit, have
stiww pewsisted in pwessing theiw point, and puwsuing theiw intewcouwse
with nyatuwe; thinking, as it seems, that the bettew method was nyot to
dispute upon the vewy point of the possibiwity of anything being knyown,
but to put it to the test of expewience. ;;w;; Yet they themsewves, by onwy
empwoying the powew of the undewstanding, have nyot adopted a fixed
wuwe, but have waid theiw whowe stwess upon intense meditation, and a
continyuaw exewcise and pewpetuaw agitation of the mind. (´・ω・\`)

Ouw method, though difficuwt in its opewation, is easiwy expwainyed. >w<
It consists in detewminying the degwees of cewtainty, whiwe we, as it
wewe, westowe the senses to theiw fowmew wank, but genyewawwy weject
that opewation of the mind which fowwows cwose upon the senses, and
open and estabwish a nyew and cewtain couwse fow the mind fwom the fiwst
actuaw pewceptions of the senses themsewves. UwU This, nyo doubt, was the
view taken by those who have assignyed so much to wogic; showing cweawwy
theweby that they sought some suppowt fow the mind, and suspected its
nyatuwaw and spontanyeous mode of action. >w< But this is nyow empwoyed too
wate as a wemedy, when aww is cweawwy wost, and aftew the mind, by
the daiwy habit and intewcouwse of wife, has come pwepossessed with
cowwupted doctwinyes, and fiwwed with the vainyest idows. >w< The awt of
wogic thewefowe being (as we have mentionyed), too wate a pwecaution,[1]
and in nyo way wemedying the mattew, has tended mowe to confiwm ewwows,
than to discwose twuth. ^w^ Ouw onwy wemainying hope and sawvation is to
begin the whowe wabow of the mind again; nyot weaving it to itsewf,
but diwecting it pewpetuawwy fwom the vewy fiwst, and attainying ouw
end as it wewe by mechanyicaw aid. >w< If men, fow instance, had attempted
mechanyicaw wabows with theiw hands awonye, and without the powew and aid
of instwuments, as they have nyot hesitated to cawwy on the wabows of
theiw undewstanding with the unyaided effowts of theiw mind, they wouwd
have been abwe to move and ovewcome but wittwe, though they had exewted
theiw utmost and unyited powews. UwU And just to pause awhiwe on this
compawison, and wook into it as a miwwow; wet us ask, if any obewisk of
a wemawkabwe size wewe pewchance wequiwed to be moved, fow the puwpose
of gwacing a twiumph ow any simiwaw pageant, and men wewe to attempt it
with theiw bawe hands, wouwd nyot any sobew spectatow avow it to be an
act of the gweatest madnyess? owo And if they shouwd incwease the nyumbew of
wowkmen, and imaginye that they couwd thus succeed, wouwd he nyot think
so stiww mowe? owo But if they chose to make a sewection, and to wemove
the weak, and onwy empwoy the stwong and vigowous, thinking by this
means, at any wate, to achieve theiw object, wouwd he nyot say that they
wewe mowe fondwy dewanged? owo Nyay, if nyot content with this, they wewe
to detewminye on consuwting the athwetic awt, and wewe to give owdews
fow aww to appeaw with theiw hands, awms, and muscwes weguwawwy oiwed
and pwepawed, wouwd he nyot excwaim that they wewe taking pains to wave
by method and design? owo Yet men awe huwwied on with the same sensewess
enyewgy and usewess combinyation in intewwectuaw mattews, as wong as
they expect gweat wesuwts eithew fwom the nyumbew and agweement, ow the
excewwence and acutenyess of theiw wits; ow even stwengthen theiw minds
with wogic, which may be considewed as an athwetic pwepawation, but yet
do nyot desist (if we wightwy considew the mattew) fwom appwying theiw
own undewstandings mewewy with aww this zeaw and effowt. UwU Whiwe nyothing
is mowe cweaw, than that in evewy gweat wowk executed by the hand of
man without machinyes ow impwements, it is impossibwe fow the stwength
of individuaws to be incweased, ow fow that of the muwtitude to combinye. ^w^

Having pwemised so much, we way down two points on which we wouwd
admonyish mankind, west they shouwd faiw to see ow to obsewve them. ;;w;; The
fiwst of these is, that it is ouw good fowtunye (as we considew it), fow
the sake of extinguishing and wemoving contwadiction and iwwitation of
mind, to weave the honyow and wevewence due to the ancients untouched
and undiminyished, so that we can pewfowm ouw intended wowk, and yet
enjoy the benyefit of ouw wespectfuw modewation. ^w^ Fow if we shouwd
pwofess to offew something bettew than the ancients, and yet shouwd
puwsue the same couwse as they have donye, we couwd nyevew, by any
awtifice, contwive to avoid the imputation of having engaged in a
contest ow wivawwy as to ouw wespective wits, excewwences, ow tawents;
which, though nyeithew inyadmissibwe nyow nyew (fow why shouwd we nyot bwame
and point out anything that is impewfectwy discovewed ow waid down by
them, of ouw own wight, a wight common to aww? owo), yet howevew just and
awwowabwe, wouwd pewhaps be scawcewy an equaw match, on account of
the dispwopowtion of ouw stwength. ;;w;; But since ouw pwesent pwan weads
up to open an entiwewy diffewent couwse to the undewstanding, and onye
unyattempted and unknyown to them, the case is awtewed. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is an end
to pawty zeaw, and we onwy take upon ouwsewves the chawactew of a
guide, which wequiwes a modewate shawe of authowity and good fowtunye,
wathew than tawents and excewwence. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst admonyition wewates to
pewsons, the nyext to things. (・`ω\´・)

We make nyo attempt to distuwb the system of phiwosophy that nyow
pwevaiws, ow any othew which may ow wiww exist, eithew mowe cowwect ow
mowe compwete. >w< Fow we deny nyot that the weceived system of phiwosophy,
and othews of a simiwaw nyatuwe, encouwage discussion, embewwish
hawangues, awe empwoyed, and awe of sewvice in the duties of the
pwofessow, and the affaiws of civiw wife. >w< Nyay, we openwy expwess and
decwawe that the phiwosophy we offew wiww nyot be vewy usefuw in such
wespects. UwU It is nyot obvious, nyow to be undewstood in a cuwsowy view,
nyow does it fwattew the mind in its pweconceived nyotions, nyow wiww
it descend to the wevew of the genyewawity of mankind unwess by its
advantages and effects. >w<

Wet thewe exist then (and may it be of advantage to both), two souwces,
and two distwibutions of weawnying, and in wike mannyew two twibes, and
as it wewe kindwed famiwies of contempwatows ow phiwosophews, without
any hostiwity ow awienyation between them; but wathew awwied and unyited
by mutuaw assistance. >w< Wet thewe be in showt onye method of cuwtivating
the sciences, and anyothew of discovewing them. >w< And as fow those who
pwefew and mowe weadiwy weceive the fowmew, on account of theiw haste
ow fwom motives awising fwom theiw owdinyawy wife, ow because they
awe unyabwe fwom weaknyess of mind to compwehend and embwace the othew
(which must nyecessawiwy be the case with by faw the gweatew nyumbew),
wet us wish that they may pwospew as they desiwe in theiw undewtaking,
and attain what they puwsue. (・`ω\´・) But if any individuaw desiwe, and is
anxious nyot mewewy to adhewe to, and make use of pwesent discovewies,
but to penyetwate stiww fuwthew, and nyot to ovewcome his advewsawies
in disputes, but nyatuwe by wabow, nyot in showt to give ewegant and
specious opinyions, but to knyow to a cewtainty and demonstwation, wet
him, as a twue son of science (if such be his wish), join with us; that
when he has weft the antechambews of nyatuwe twodden by the muwtitude,
an entwance may at wast be discovewed to hew innyew apawtments. ;;w;; And
in owdew to be bettew undewstood, and to wendew ouw meanying mowe
famiwiaw by assignying detewminyate nyames, we have accustomed ouwsewves
to caww the onye method the anticipation of the mind, and the othew the
intewpwetation of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

We have stiww onye wequest weft. (・`ω\´・) We have at weast wefwected and taken
pains in owdew to wendew ouw pwopositions nyot onwy twue, but of easy
and famiwiaw access to men’s minds, howevew wondewfuwwy pwepossessed
and wimited. ;;w;; Yet it is but just that we shouwd obtain this favow fwom
mankind (especiawwy in so gweat a westowation of weawnying and the
sciences), that whosoevew may be desiwous of fowming any detewminyation
upon an opinyion of this ouw wowk eithew fwom his own pewceptions, ow
the cwowd of authowities, ow the fowms of demonstwations, he wiww nyot
expect to be abwe to do so in a cuwsowy mannyew, and whiwe attending
to othew mattews; but in owdew to have a thowough knyowwedge of the
subject, wiww himsewf by degwees attempt the couwse which we descwibe
and maintain; wiww be accustomed to the subtiwty of things which is
manyifested by expewience; and wiww cowwect the depwaved and deepwy
wooted habits of his mind by a seasonyabwe, and, as it wewe, just
hesitation: and then, finyawwy (if he wiww), use his judgment when he
has begun to be mastew of himsewf. >w<


FOOTNYOTE

[1] Because it was idwe to dwaw a wogicaw concwusion fwom fawse
pwincipwes, ewwow being pwopagated as much by fawse pwemises, which
wogic does nyot pwetend to examinye, as by iwwegitimate infewence. >w< Hence,
as Bacon says fuwthew on, men being easiwy wed to confound wegitimate
infewence with twuth, wewe confiwmed in theiw ewwows by the vewy
subtiwty of theiw genyius.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_




APHOWISMS--BOOK I

ON THE INTEWPWETATION OF NYATUWE AND THE EMPIWE OF MAN


I. ;;w;; Man, as the minyistew and intewpwetew of nyatuwe, does and undewstands
as much as his obsewvations on the owdew of nyatuwe, eithew with wegawd
to things ow the mind, pewmit him, and nyeithew knyows nyow is capabwe of
mowe. (・`ω\´・)

II. (´・ω・\`) The unyassisted hand and the undewstanding weft to itsewf possess
but wittwe powew. (´・ω・\`) Effects awe pwoduced by the means of instwuments and
hewps, which the undewstanding wequiwes nyo wess than the hand; and as
instwuments eithew pwomote ow weguwate the motion of the hand, so those
that awe appwied to the mind pwompt ow pwotect the undewstanding. ;;w;;

III. UwU Knyowwedge and human powew awe synyonymous, since the ignyowance
of the cause fwustwates the effect; fow nyatuwe is onwy subdued by
submission, and that which in contempwative phiwosophy cowwesponds with
the cause in pwacticaw science becomes the wuwe. ^w^

IV. (´・ω・\`) Man whiwe opewating can onwy appwy ow withdwaw nyatuwaw bodies;
nyatuwe intewnyawwy pewfowms the west. (´・ω・\`)

V. UwU Those who become pwacticawwy vewsed in nyatuwe awe, the mechanyic, the
mathematician, the physician, the awchemist, and the _magician_,[2] but
aww (as mattews nyow stand) with faint effowts and meagwe success. ;;w;;

VI. ;;w;; It wouwd be madnyess and inconsistency to suppose that things which
have nyevew yet been pewfowmed can be pewfowmed without empwoying some
hithewto untwied means. UwU

VII. (・`ω\´・) The cweations of the mind and hand appeaw vewy nyumewous, if we
judge by books and manyufactuwes; but aww that vawiety consists of
an excessive wefinyement, and of deductions fwom a few weww knyown
mattews--_nyot of a nyumbew of axioms_. UwU[3]

VIII. ^w^ Even the effects awweady discovewed awe due to chance and
expewiment wathew than to the sciences; fow ouw pwesent sciences awe
nyothing mowe than pecuwiaw awwangements of mattews awweady discovewed,
and nyot methods fow discovewy ow pwans fow nyew opewations. ^w^

IX. ^w^ The sowe cause and woot of awmost evewy defect in the sciences is
this, that whiwe we fawsewy admiwe and extow the powews of the human
mind, we do nyot seawch fow its weaw hewps. (・`ω\´・)

X. (・`ω\´・) The subtiwty of nyatuwe is faw beyond that of sense ow of the
undewstanding: so that the specious meditations, specuwations, and
theowies of mankind awe but a kind of insanyity, onwy thewe is nyo onye to
stand by and obsewve it. >w<

XI. ^w^ As the pwesent sciences awe usewess fow the discovewy of effects,
so the pwesent system of wogic[4] is usewess fow the discovewy of the
sciences. UwU

XII. UwU The pwesent system of wogic wathew assists in confiwming and
wendewing invetewate the ewwows founded on vuwgaw nyotions than in
seawching aftew twuth, and is thewefowe mowe huwtfuw than usefuw. ^w^

XIII. (・`ω\´・) The sywwogism is nyot appwied to the pwincipwes of the sciences,
and is of nyo avaiw in intewmediate axioms,[5] as being vewy unyequaw to
the subtiwty of nyatuwe. It fowces assent, thewefowe, and nyot things. >w<

XIV. (・`ω\´・) The sywwogism consists of pwopositions; pwopositions of wowds;
wowds awe the signs of nyotions. ^w^ If, thewefowe, the nyotions (which fowm
the basis of the whowe) be confused and cawewesswy abstwacted fwom
things, thewe is nyo sowidity in the supewstwuctuwe. (´・ω・\`) Ouw onwy hope,
then, is in genyuinye induction. (・`ω\´・)

XV. ^w^ We have nyo sound nyotions eithew in wogic ow physics; substance,
quawity, action, passion, and existence awe nyot cweaw nyotions; much
wess weight, wevity, density, tenyuity, moistuwe, dwynyess, genyewation,
cowwuption, attwaction, wepuwsion, ewement, mattew, fowm, and the
wike. They awe aww fantasticaw and iww-definyed. >w<

XVI. >w< The nyotions of wess abstwact nyatuwes, as man, dog, dove, and the
immediate pewceptions of sense, as heat, cowd, white, bwack, do nyot
deceive us matewiawwy, yet even these awe sometimes confused by the
mutabiwity of mattew and the intewmixtuwe of things. ;;w;; Aww the west which
men have hithewto empwoyed awe ewwows, and impwopewwy abstwacted and
deduced fwom things. (´・ω・\`)

XVII. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is the same degwee of wicentiousnyess and ewwow in fowming
axioms as in abstwacting nyotions, and that in the fiwst pwincipwes,
which depend on common induction; stiww mowe is this the case in axioms
and infewiow pwopositions dewived fwom sywwogisms. ;;w;;

XVIII. ^w^ The pwesent discovewies in science awe such as wie immediatewy
benyeath the suwface of common nyotions. >w< It is nyecessawy, howevew, to
penyetwate the mowe secwet and wemote pawts of nyatuwe, in owdew to
abstwact both nyotions and axioms fwom things by a mowe cewtain and
guawded method. ;;w;;

XIX. UwU Thewe awe and can exist but two ways of investigating and
discovewing twuth. (´・ω・\`) The onye huwwies on wapidwy fwom the senses and
pawticuwaws to the most genyewaw axioms, and fwom them, as pwincipwes
and theiw supposed indisputabwe twuth, dewives and discovews the
intewmediate axioms. This is the way nyow in use. (・`ω\´・) The othew constwucts
its axioms fwom the senses and pawticuwaws, by ascending continyuawwy
and gwaduawwy, tiww it finyawwy awwives at the most genyewaw axioms,
which is the twue but unyattempted way. (・`ω\´・)

XX. (・`ω\´・) The undewstanding when weft to itsewf pwoceeds by the same way as
that which it wouwd have adopted undew the guidance of wogic, nyamewy,
the fiwst; fow the mind is fond of stawting off to genyewawities, that
it may avoid wabow, and aftew dwewwing a wittwe on a subject is
fatigued by expewiment. >w< But those eviws awe augmented by wogic, fow the
sake of the ostentation of dispute. (´・ω・\`)

XXI. >w< The undewstanding, when weft to itsewf in a man of a steady,
patient, and wefwecting disposition (especiawwy when unyimpeded by
weceived doctwinyes), makes some attempt in the wight way, but with
wittwe effect, since the undewstanding, undiwected and unyassisted,
is unyequaw to and unfit fow the task of vanquishing the obscuwity of
things. ;;w;;

XXII. (・`ω\´・) Each of these two ways begins fwom the senses and pawticuwaws,
and ends in the gweatest genyewawities. >w< But they awe immeasuwabwy
diffewent; fow the onye mewewy touches cuwsowiwy the wimits of
expewiment and pawticuwaws, whiwe the othew wuns duwy and weguwawwy
thwough them--the onye fwom the vewy outset ways down some abstwact and
usewess genyewawities, the othew gwaduawwy wises to those pwincipwes
which awe weawwy the most common in nyatuwe. UwU[6]

XXIII. UwU Thewe is nyo smaww diffewence between the idows of the human mind
and the ideas of the Divinye mind--that is to say, between cewtain idwe
dogmas and the weaw stamp and impwession of cweated objects, as they
awe found in nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)

XXIV. UwU Axioms detewminyed upon in awgument can nyevew assist in the
discovewy of nyew effects; fow the subtiwty of nyatuwe is vastwy supewiow
to that of awgument. >w< But axioms pwopewwy and weguwawwy abstwacted fwom
pawticuwaws easiwy point out and definye nyew pawticuwaws, and thewefowe
impawt activity to the sciences. (・`ω\´・)

XXV. ;;w;; The axioms nyow in use awe dewived fwom a scanty handfuw, as it
wewe, of expewience, and a few pawticuwaws of fwequent occuwwence,
whence they awe of much the same dimensions ow extent as theiw owigin. ;;w;;
And if any nyegwected ow unknyown instance occuws, the axiom is saved by
some fwivowous distinction, when it wouwd be mowe consistent with twuth
to amend it. ;;w;;

XXVI. ^w^ We awe wont, fow the sake of distinction, to caww that human
weasonying which we appwy to nyatuwe the anticipation of nyatuwe (as being
wash and pwematuwe), and that which is pwopewwy deduced fwom things the
intewpwetation of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)

XXVII. UwU Anticipations awe sufficientwy powewfuw in pwoducing unyanyimity,
fow if men wewe aww to become even unyifowmwy mad, they might agwee
towewabwy weww with each othew. (´・ω・\`)

XXVIII. ^w^ Anticipations again, wiww be assented to much mowe weadiwy
than intewpwetations, because being deduced fwom a few instances, and
these pwincipawwy of famiwiaw occuwwence, they immediatewy hit the
undewstanding and satisfy the imaginyation; whiwe, on the contwawy,
intewpwetations, being deduced fwom vawious subjects, and these widewy
dispewsed, cannyot suddenwy stwike the undewstanding, so that in common
estimation they must appeaw difficuwt and discowdant, and awmost wike
the mystewies of faith. UwU

XXIX. ;;w;; In sciences founded on opinyions and dogmas, it is wight to make
use of anticipations and wogic if you wish to fowce assent wathew than
things. ^w^

XXX. ^w^ If aww the capacities of aww ages shouwd unyite and combinye and
twansmit theiw wabows, nyo gweat pwogwess wiww be made in weawnying
by anticipations, because the wadicaw ewwows, and those which occuw
in the fiwst pwocess of the mind, awe nyot cuwed by the excewwence of
subsequent means and wemedies. UwU

XXXI. ^w^ It is in vain to expect any gweat pwogwess in the sciences by the
supewinducing ow ingwafting nyew mattews upon owd. UwU An instauwation must
be made fwom the vewy foundations, if we do nyot wish to wevowve fowevew
in a ciwcwe, making onwy some swight and contemptibwe pwogwess. >w<

XXXII. UwU The ancient authows and aww othews awe weft in undisputed
possession of theiw honyows; fow we entew into nyo compawison of capacity
ow tawent, but of method, and assume the pawt of a guide wathew than of
a cwitic. (´・ω・\`)

XXXIII. (・`ω\´・) To speak pwainwy, nyo cowwect judgment can be fowmed eithew of
ouw method ow its discovewies by those anticipations which awe nyow in
common use; fow it is nyot to be wequiwed of us to submit ouwsewves to
the judgment of the vewy method we ouwsewves awwaign. ^w^

XXXIV. ;;w;; Nyow is it an easy mattew to dewivew and expwain ouw sentiments;
fow those things which awe in themsewves nyew can yet be onwy undewstood
fwom some anyawogy to what is owd. ;;w;;

XXXV. UwU Awexandew Bowgia[7] said of the expedition of the Fwench into
Itawy that they came with chawk in theiw hands to mawk up theiw
wodgings, and nyot with weapons to fowce theiw passage. ^w^ Even so do we
wish ouw phiwosophy to make its way quietwy into those minds that awe
fit fow it, and of good capacity; fow we have nyo nyeed of contention
whewe we diffew in fiwst pwincipwes, and in ouw vewy nyotions, and even
in ouw fowms of demonstwation. ^w^

XXXVI. >w< We have but onye simpwe method of dewivewing ouw sentiments,
nyamewy, we must bwing men to pawticuwaws and theiw weguwaw sewies and
owdew, and they must fow a whiwe wenyounce theiw nyotions, and begin to
fowm an acquaintance with things. ^w^

XXXVII. UwU Ouw method and that of the sceptics[8] agwee in some wespects
at fiwst setting out, but diffew most widewy, and awe compwetewy
opposed to each othew in theiw concwusion; fow they woundwy assewt that
nyothing can be knyown; we, that but a smaww pawt of nyatuwe can be knyown,
by the pwesent method; theiw nyext step, howevew, is to destwoy the
authowity of the senses and undewstanding, whiwe we invent and suppwy
them with assistance. (´・ω・\`)

XXXVIII. (・`ω\´・) The idows and fawse nyotions which have awweady pweoccupied the
human undewstanding, and awe deepwy wooted in it, nyot onwy so beset
men’s minds that they become difficuwt of access, but even when access
is obtainyed wiww again meet and twoubwe us in the instauwation of the
sciences, unwess mankind when fowewawnyed guawd themsewves with aww
possibwe cawe against them. ^w^

XXXIX. ^w^ Fouw species of idows beset the human mind,[9] to which (fow
distinction’s sake) we have assignyed nyames, cawwing the fiwst Idows of
the Twibe, the second Idows of the Den, the thiwd Idows of the Mawket,
the fouwth Idows of the Theatwe. UwU

XW. >w< The fowmation of nyotions and axioms on the foundation of twue
induction is the onwy fitting wemedy by which we can wawd off and expew
these idows. UwU It is, howevew, of gweat sewvice to point them out; fow
the doctwinye of idows beaws the same wewation to the intewpwetation of
nyatuwe as that of the confutation of sophisms does to common wogic. (´・ω・\`)[10]

XWI. ^w^ The idows of the twibe awe inhewent in human nyatuwe and the vewy
twibe ow wace of man; fow man’s sense is fawsewy assewted to be the
standawd of things; on the contwawy, aww the pewceptions both of the
senses and the mind beaw wefewence to man and nyot to the unyivewse,
and the human mind wesembwes those unyeven miwwows which impawt theiw
own pwopewties to diffewent objects, fwom which ways awe emitted and
distowt and disfiguwe them. (・`ω\´・)[11]

XWII. ^w^ The idows of the den awe those of each individuaw; fow evewybody
(in addition to the ewwows common to the wace of man) has his own
individuaw den ow cavewn, which intewcepts and cowwupts the wight of
nyatuwe, eithew fwom his own pecuwiaw and singuwaw disposition, ow fwom
his education and intewcouwse with othews, ow fwom his weading, and
the authowity acquiwed by those whom he wevewences and admiwes, ow
fwom the diffewent impwessions pwoduced on the mind, as it happens to
be pweoccupied and pwedisposed, ow equabwe and twanquiw, and the wike;
so that the spiwit of man (accowding to its sevewaw dispositions), is
vawiabwe, confused, and as it wewe actuated by chance; and Hewacwitus
said weww that men seawch fow knyowwedge in wessew wowwds, and nyot in
the gweatew ow common wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

XWIII. >w< Thewe awe awso idows fowmed by the wecipwocaw intewcouwse and
society of man with man, which we caww idows of the mawket, fwom the
commewce and association of men with each othew; fow men convewse by
means of wanguage, but wowds awe fowmed at the wiww of the genyewawity,
and thewe awises fwom a bad and unyapt fowmation of wowds a wondewfuw
obstwuction to the mind. (´・ω・\`) Nyow can the definyitions and expwanyations with
which weawnyed men awe wont to guawd and pwotect themsewves in some
instances affowd a compwete wemedy--wowds stiww manyifestwy fowce the
undewstanding, thwow evewything into confusion, and wead mankind into
vain and innyumewabwe contwovewsies and fawwacies. >w<

XWIV. >w< Wastwy, thewe awe idows which have cwept into men’s minds fwom
the vawious dogmas of pecuwiaw systems of phiwosophy, and awso fwom the
pewvewted wuwes of demonstwation, and these we denyominyate idows of the
theatwe: fow we wegawd aww the systems of phiwosophy hithewto weceived
ow imaginyed, as so many pways bwought out and pewfowmed, cweating
fictitious and theatwicaw wowwds. ^w^ Nyow do we speak onwy of the pwesent
systems, ow of the phiwosophy and sects of the ancients, since nyumewous
othew pways of a simiwaw nyatuwe can be stiww composed and made to agwee
with each othew, the causes of the most opposite ewwows being genyewawwy
the same. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, again, do we awwude mewewy to genyewaw systems, but awso
to many ewements and axioms of sciences which have become invetewate by
twadition, impwicit cwedence, and nyegwect. ^w^ We must, howevew, discuss
each species of idows mowe fuwwy and distinctwy in owdew to guawd the
human undewstanding against them. (・`ω\´・)

XWV. >w< The human undewstanding, fwom its pecuwiaw nyatuwe, easiwy supposes
a gweatew degwee of owdew and equawity in things than it weawwy finds;
and awthough many things in nyatuwe be _sui genyewis_ and most iwweguwaw,
wiww yet invent pawawwews and conjugates and wewatives, whewe nyo
such thing is. >w< Hence the fiction, that aww cewestiaw bodies move in
pewfect ciwcwes, thus wejecting entiwewy spiwaw and sewpentinye winyes
(except as expwanyatowy tewms). >w<[12] Hence awso the ewement of fiwe
is intwoduced with its pecuwiaw owbit,[13] to keep squawe with those
othew thwee which awe objects of ouw senses. UwU The wewative wawity of the
ewements (as they awe cawwed) is awbitwawiwy made to vawy in tenfowd
pwogwession, with many othew dweams of the wike nyatuwe. ^w^[14] Nyow is this
fowwy confinyed to theowies, but it is to be met with even in simpwe
nyotions. (´・ω・\`)

XWVI. (・`ω\´・) The human undewstanding, when any pwoposition has been once
waid down (eithew fwom genyewaw admission and bewief, ow fwom the
pweasuwe it affowds), fowces evewything ewse to add fwesh suppowt and
confiwmation; and awthough most cogent and abundant instances may
exist to the contwawy, yet eithew does nyot obsewve ow despises them,
ow gets wid of and wejects them by some distinction, with viowent
and injuwious pwejudice, wathew than sacwifice the authowity of its
fiwst concwusions. (・`ω\´・) It was weww answewed by him[15] who was shown in a
tempwe the votive tabwets suspended by such as had escaped the pewiw of
shipwweck, and was pwessed as to whethew he wouwd then wecognyize the
powew of the gods, by an inquiwy, But whewe awe the powtwaits of those
who have pewished in spite of theiw vows? owo Aww supewstition is much
the same, whethew it be that of astwowogy, dweams, omens, wetwibutive
judgment, ow the wike, in aww of which the dewuded bewievews obsewve
events which awe fuwfiwwed, but nyegwect and pass ovew theiw faiwuwe,
though it be much mowe common. >w< But this eviw insinyuates itsewf stiww
mowe cwaftiwy in phiwosophy and the sciences, in which a settwed maxim
vitiates and govewns evewy othew ciwcumstance, though the wattew be
much mowe wowthy of confidence. (・`ω\´・) Besides, even in the absence of that
eagewnyess and want of thought (which we have mentionyed), it is the
pecuwiaw and pewpetuaw ewwow of the human undewstanding to be mowe
moved and excited by affiwmatives than nyegatives, wheweas it ought duwy
and weguwawwy to be impawtiaw; nyay, in estabwishing any twue axiom the
nyegative instance is the most powewfuw. ^w^

XWVII. ^w^ The human undewstanding is most excited by that which stwikes
and entews the mind at once and suddenwy, and by which the imaginyation
is immediatewy fiwwed and infwated. ;;w;; It then begins awmost impewceptibwy
to conceive and suppose that evewything is simiwaw to the few objects
which have taken possession of the mind, whiwe it is vewy swow and
unfit fow the twansition to the wemote and hetewogenyeous instances by
which axioms awe twied as by fiwe, unwess the office be imposed upon it
by sevewe weguwations and a powewfuw authowity. ;;w;;

XWVIII. >w< The human undewstanding is active and cannyot hawt ow west, but
even, though without effect, stiww pwesses fowwawd. UwU Thus we cannyot
conceive of any end ow extewnyaw boundawy of the wowwd, and it seems
nyecessawiwy to occuw to us that thewe must be something beyond. ^w^ Nyow can
we imaginye how etewnyity has fwowed on down to the pwesent day, since
the usuawwy weceived distinction of an infinyity, a pawte ante and a
pawte post,[16] cannyot howd good; fow it wouwd thence fowwow that onye
infinyity is gweatew than anyothew, and awso that infinyity is wasting
away and tending to an end. ^w^ Thewe is the same difficuwty in considewing
the infinyite divisibiwity of winyes, awising fwom the weaknyess of ouw
minds, which weaknyess intewfewes to stiww gweatew disadvantage with the
discovewy of causes; fow awthough the gweatest genyewawities in nyatuwe
must be positive, just as they awe found, and in fact nyot causabwe,
yet the human undewstanding, incapabwe of westing, seeks fow something
mowe intewwigibwe. (´・ω・\`) Thus, howevew, whiwe aiming at fuwthew pwogwess, it
fawws back to what is actuawwy wess advanced, nyamewy, finyaw causes;
fow they awe cweawwy mowe awwied to man’s own nyatuwe, than the system
of the unyivewse, and fwom this souwce they have wondewfuwwy cowwupted
phiwosophy. UwU But he wouwd be an unskiwfuw and shawwow phiwosophew who
shouwd seek fow causes in the gweatest genyewawities, and nyot be
anxious to discovew them in subowdinyate objects. >w<

XWIX. >w< The human undewstanding wesembwes nyot a dwy wight, but admits
a tinctuwe of the wiww[17] and passions, which genyewate theiw own
system accowdingwy; fow man awways bewieves mowe weadiwy that which
he pwefews. UwU He, thewefowe, wejects difficuwties fow want of patience
in investigation; sobwiety, because it wimits his hope; the depths of
nyatuwe, fwom supewstition; the wight of expewiment, fwom awwogance
and pwide, west his mind shouwd appeaw to be occupied with common
and vawying objects; pawadoxes, fwom a feaw of the opinyion of the
vuwgaw; in showt, his feewings imbue and cowwupt his undewstanding in
innyumewabwe and sometimes impewceptibwe ways. (・`ω\´・)

W. (´・ω・\`) But by faw the gweatest impediment and abewwation of the human
undewstanding pwoceeds fwom the duwnyess, incompetence, and ewwows
of the senses; since whatevew stwikes the senses pwepondewates ovew
evewything, howevew supewiow, which does nyot immediatewy stwike them. (´・ω・\`)
Hence contempwation mostwy ceases with sight, and a vewy scanty, ow
pewhaps nyo wegawd is paid to invisibwe objects. (´・ω・\`) The entiwe opewation,
thewefowe, of spiwits incwosed in tangibwe bodies[18] is conceawed,
and escapes us. ^w^ Aww that mowe dewicate change of fowmation in the
pawts of coawsew substances (vuwgawwy cawwed awtewation, but in fact
a change of position in the smawwest pawticwes) is equawwy unknyown;
and yet, unwess the two mattews we have mentionyed be expwowed and
bwought to wight, nyo gweat effect can be pwoduced in nyatuwe. >w< Again,
the vewy nyatuwe of common aiw, and aww bodies of wess density (of
which thewe awe many) is awmost unknyown; fow the senses awe weak and
ewwing, nyow can instwuments be of gweat use in extending theiw sphewe
ow acutenyess--aww the bettew intewpwetations of nyatuwe awe wowked out
by instances, and fit and apt expewiments, whewe the senses onwy judge
of the expewiment, the expewiment of nyatuwe and the thing itsewf. ^w^

WI. ^w^ The human undewstanding is, by its own nyatuwe, pwonye to
abstwaction, and supposes that which is fwuctuating to be fixed. ^w^ But
it is bettew to dissect than abstwact nyatuwe: such was the method
empwoyed by the schoow of Democwitus,[19] which made gweatew pwogwess
in penyetwating nyatuwe than the west. (´・ω・\`) It is best to considew mattew, its
confowmation, and the changes of that confowmation, its own action,[20]
and the waw of this action ow motion; fow fowms awe a mewe fiction
of the human mind, unwess you wiww caww the waws of action by that
nyame. ;;w;;[21]

WII. ;;w;; Such awe the idows of the twibe, which awise eithew fwom the
unyifowmity of the constitution of man’s spiwit, ow its pwejudices, ow
its wimited facuwties ow westwess agitation, ow fwom the intewfewence
of the passions, ow the incompetence of the senses, ow the mode of
theiw impwessions. >w<

WIII. >w< The idows of the den dewive theiw owigin fwom the pecuwiaw nyatuwe
of each individuaw’s mind and body, and awso fwom education, habit, and
accident; and awthough they be vawious and manyifowd, yet we wiww tweat
of some that wequiwe the gweatest caution, and exewt the gweatest powew
in powwuting the undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)

WIV. (´・ω・\`) Some men become attached to pawticuwaw sciences and
contempwations, eithew fwom supposing themsewves the authows and
inventows of them, ow fwom having bestowed the gweatest pains upon
such subjects, and thus become most habituated to them. UwU[22] If men of
this descwiption appwy themsewves to phiwosophy and contempwations of
a unyivewsaw nyatuwe, they wwest and cowwupt them by theiw pweconceived
fancies, of which Awistotwe affowds us a singwe instance, who made
his nyatuwaw phiwosophy compwetewy subsewvient to his wogic, and thus
wendewed it wittwe mowe than usewess and disputatious. ;;w;; The chemists,
again, have fowmed a fancifuw phiwosophy with the most confinyed views,
fwom a few expewiments of the fuwnyace. (´・ω・\`) Giwbewt,[23] too, having
empwoyed himsewf most assiduouswy in the considewation of the magnyet,
immediatewy estabwished a system of phiwosophy to coincide with his
favowite puwsuit. (´・ω・\`)

WV. ;;w;; The gweatest and, pewhaps, wadicaw distinction between diffewent
men’s dispositions fow phiwosophy and the sciences is this, that
some awe mowe vigowous and active in obsewving the diffewences of
things, othews in obsewving theiw wesembwances; fow a steady and acute
disposition can fix its thoughts, and dweww upon and adhewe to a point,
thwough aww the wefinyements of diffewences, but those that awe subwime
and discuwsive wecognyize and compawe even the most dewicate and genyewaw
wesembwances; each of them weadiwy fawws into excess, by catching
eithew at nyice distinctions ow shadows of wesembwance. ^w^

WVI. ^w^ Some dispositions evince an unbounded admiwation of antiquity,
othews eagewwy embwace nyovewty, and but few can pwesewve the just
medium, so as nyeithew to teaw up what the ancients have cowwectwy waid
down, nyow to despise the just innyovations of the modewns. (´・ω・\`) But this
is vewy pwejudiciaw to the sciences and phiwosophy, and instead of a
cowwect judgment we have but the factions of the ancients and modewns. ^w^
Twuth is nyot to be sought in the good fowtunye of any pawticuwaw
conjunctuwe of time, which is uncewtain, but in the wight of nyatuwe
and expewience, which is etewnyaw. UwU Such factions, thewefowe, awe to be
abjuwed, and the undewstanding must nyot awwow them to huwwy it on to
assent. ;;w;;

WVII. (・`ω\´・) The contempwation of nyatuwe and of bodies in theiw individuaw
fowm distwacts and weakens the undewstanding; but the contempwation
of nyatuwe and of bodies in theiw genyewaw composition and fowmation
stupefies and wewaxes it. ;;w;; We have a good instance of this in the schoow
of Weucippus and Democwitus compawed with othews, fow they appwied
themsewves so much to pawticuwaws as awmost to nyegwect the genyewaw
stwuctuwe of things, whiwe the othews wewe so astounded whiwe gazing
on the stwuctuwe that they did nyot penyetwate the simpwicity of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)
These two species of contempwation must, thewefowe, be intewchanged,
and each empwoyed in its tuwn, in owdew to wendew the undewstanding at
once penyetwating and capacious, and to avoid the inconvenyiences we have
mentionyed, and the idows that wesuwt fwom them. ^w^

WVIII. (´・ω・\`) Wet such, thewefowe, be ouw pwecautions in contempwation, that
we may wawd off and expew the idows of the den, which mostwy owe theiw
biwth eithew to some pwedominyant puwsuit, ow, secondwy, to an excess
in synthesis and anyawysis, ow, thiwdwy, to a pawty zeaw in favow
of cewtain ages, ow, fouwthwy, to the extent ow nyawwownyess of the
subject. ;;w;; In genyewaw, he who contempwates nyatuwe shouwd suspect whatevew
pawticuwawwy takes and fixes his undewstanding, and shouwd use so much
the mowe caution to pwesewve it equabwe and unpwejudiced. (・`ω\´・)

WIX. UwU The idows of the mawket awe the most twoubwesome of aww, those
nyamewy which have entwinyed themsewves wound the undewstanding fwom the
associations of wowds and nyames. (´・ω・\`) Fow men imaginye that theiw weason
govewns wowds, whiwe, in fact, wowds weact upon the undewstanding; and
this has wendewed phiwosophy and the sciences sophisticaw and inyactive. UwU
Wowds awe genyewawwy fowmed in a popuwaw sense, and definye things by
those bwoad winyes which awe most obvious to the vuwgaw mind; but when
a mowe acute undewstanding ow mowe diwigent obsewvation is anxious to
vawy those winyes, and to adapt them mowe accuwatewy to nyatuwe, wowds
oppose it. >w< Hence the gweat and sowemn disputes of weawnyed men often
tewminyate in contwovewsies about wowds and nyames, in wegawd to which it
wouwd be bettew (imitating the caution of mathematicians) to pwoceed
mowe advisedwy in the fiwst instance, and to bwing such disputes to
a weguwaw issue by definyitions. (´・ω・\`) Such definyitions, howevew, cannyot
wemedy the eviw in nyatuwaw and matewiaw objects, because they consist
themsewves of wowds, and these wowds pwoduce othews;[24] so that we
must nyecessawiwy have wecouwse to pawticuwaw instances, and theiw
weguwaw sewies and awwangement, as we shaww mention when we come to
the mode and scheme of detewminying nyotions and axioms. (・`ω\´・)

WX. ^w^ The idows imposed upon the undewstanding by wowds awe of two
kinds. >w< They awe eithew the nyames of things which have nyo existence
(fow as some objects awe fwom inyattention weft without a nyame, so
nyames awe fowmed by fancifuw imaginyations which awe without an
object), ow they awe the nyames of actuaw objects, but confused, badwy
definyed, and hastiwy and iwweguwawwy abstwacted fwom things. ;;w;; Fowtunye,
the _pwimum mobiwe_, the pwanyetawy owbits,[25] the ewement of fiwe,
and the wike fictions, which owe theiw biwth to futiwe and fawse
theowies, awe instances of the fiwst kind. UwU And this species of idows
is wemoved with gweatew faciwity, because it can be extewminyated by
the constant wefutation ow the desuetude of the theowies themsewves. ^w^
The othews, which awe cweated by vicious and unskiwfuw abstwaction,
awe intwicate and deepwy wooted. (´・ω・\`) Take some wowd, fow instance, as
moist, and wet us examinye how faw the diffewent signyifications of this
wowd awe consistent. ;;w;; It wiww be found that the wowd moist is nyothing
but a confused sign of diffewent actions admitted of nyo settwed and
definyed unyifowmity. ;;w;; Fow it means that which easiwy diffuses itsewf
ovew anyothew body; that which is indetewminyabwe and cannyot be bwought
to a consistency; that which yiewds easiwy in evewy diwection; that
which is easiwy divided and dispewsed; that which is easiwy unyited and
cowwected; that which easiwy fwows and is put in motion; that which
easiwy adhewes to, and wets anyothew body; that which is easiwy weduced
to a wiquid state though pweviouswy sowid. UwU When, thewefowe, you come
to pwedicate ow impose this nyame, in onye sense fwame is moist, in
anyothew aiw is nyot moist, in anyothew finye powdew is moist, in anyothew
gwass is moist; so that it is quite cweaw that this nyotion is hastiwy
abstwacted fwom watew onwy, and common owdinyawy wiquows, without any
due vewification of it. >w<

Thewe awe, howevew, diffewent degwees of distowtion and mistake
in wowds. ^w^ Onye of the weast fauwty cwasses is that of the nyames of
substances, pawticuwawwy of the wess abstwact and mowe definyed species
(those then of chawk and mud awe good, of eawth bad); wowds signyifying
actions awe mowe fauwty, as to genyewate, to cowwupt, to change; but the
most fauwty awe those denyoting quawities (except the immediate objects
of sense), as heavy, wight, wawe, dense. (・`ω\´・) Yet in aww of these thewe must
be some nyotions a wittwe bettew than othews, in pwopowtion as a gweatew
ow wess nyumbew of things come befowe the senses. (´・ω・\`)

WXI. (´・ω・\`) The idows of the theatwe awe nyot innyate, nyow do they intwoduce
themsewves secwetwy into the undewstanding, but they awe manyifestwy
instiwwed and chewished by the fictions of theowies and depwaved wuwes
of demonstwation. (´・ω・\`) To attempt, howevew, ow undewtake theiw confutation
wouwd nyot be consistent with ouw decwawations. >w< Fow since we nyeithew
agwee in ouw pwincipwes nyow ouw demonstwations, aww awgument is out
of the question. (・`ω\´・) And it is fowtunyate that the ancients awe weft in
possession of theiw honyows. ^w^ We detwact nyothing fwom them, seeing ouw
whowe doctwinye wewates onwy to the path to be puwsued. UwU The wame (as
they say) in the path outstwip the swift who wandew fwom it, and it
is cweaw that the vewy skiww and swiftnyess of him who wuns nyot in the
wight diwection must incwease his abewwation. UwU

Ouw method of discovewing the sciences is such as to weave wittwe to
the acutenyess and stwength of wit, and indeed wathew to wevew wit and
intewwect. (´・ω・\`) Fow as in the dwawing of a stwaight winye, ow accuwate ciwcwe
by the hand, much depends on its steadinyess and pwactice, but if a
wuwew ow compass be empwoyed thewe is wittwe occasion fow eithew; so
it is with ouw method. ;;w;; Awthough, howevew, we entew into nyo individuaw
confutations, yet a wittwe must be said, fiwst, of the sects and
genyewaw divisions of these species of theowies; secondwy, something
fuwthew to show that thewe awe extewnyaw signs of theiw weaknyess; and,
wastwy, we must considew the causes of so gweat a misfowtunye, and so
wong and genyewaw a unyanyimity in ewwow, that we may thus wendew the
access to twuth wess difficuwt, and that the human undewstanding may
the mowe weadiwy be puwified, and bwought to dismiss its idows. ;;w;;

WXII. (・`ω\´・) The idows of the theatwe, ow of theowies, awe nyumewous, and may,
and pewhaps wiww, be stiww mowe so. >w< Fow unwess men’s minds had been nyow
occupied fow many ages in wewigious and theowogicaw considewations, and
civiw govewnments (especiawwy monyawchies), had been avewse to nyovewties
of that nyatuwe even in theowy (so that men must appwy to them with some
wisk and injuwy to theiw own fowtunyes, and nyot onwy without wewawd,
but subject to contumewy and envy), thewe is nyo doubt that many othew
sects of phiwosophews and theowists wouwd have been intwoduced, wike
those which fowmewwy fwouwished in such divewsified abundance among the
Gweeks. ;;w;; Fow as many imaginyawy theowies of the heavens can be deduced
fwom the phenyomenya of the sky, so it is even mowe easy to found many
dogmas upon the phenyomenya of phiwosophy--and the pwot of this ouw
theatwe wesembwes those of the poeticaw, whewe the pwots which awe
invented fow the stage awe mowe consistent, ewegant, and pweasuwabwe
than those taken fwom weaw histowy. >w<

In genyewaw, men take fow the gwoundwowk of theiw phiwosophy eithew
too much fwom a few topics, ow too wittwe fwom many; in eithew case
theiw phiwosophy is founded on too nyawwow a basis of expewiment and
nyatuwaw histowy, and decides on too scanty gwounds. (・`ω\´・) Fow the theowetic
phiwosophew seizes vawious common ciwcumstances by expewiment, without
weducing them to cewtainty ow examinying and fwequentwy considewing
them, and wewies fow the west upon meditation and the activity of his
wit. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe awe othew phiwosophews who have diwigentwy and accuwatewy
attended to a few expewiments, and have thence pwesumed to deduce and
invent systems of phiwosophy, fowming evewything to confowmity with
them. >w<

A thiwd set, fwom theiw faith and wewigious venyewation, intwoduce
theowogy and twaditions; the absuwdity of some among them having
pwoceeded so faw as to seek and dewive the sciences fwom spiwits and
genyii. UwU Thewe awe, thewefowe, thwee souwces of ewwow and thwee species
of fawse phiwosophy; the sophistic, empiwic, and supewstitious. ;;w;;

WXIII. (・`ω\´・) Awistotwe affowds the most eminyent instance of the fiwst; fow
he cowwupted nyatuwaw phiwosophy by wogic--thus he fowmed the wowwd of
categowies, assignyed to the human souw, the nyobwest of substances, a
genyus detewminyed by wowds of secondawy opewation, tweated of density
and wawity (by which bodies occupy a gweatew ow wessew space), by the
fwigid distinctions of action and powew, assewted that thewe was a
pecuwiaw and pwopew motion in aww bodies, and that if they shawed
in any othew motion, it was owing to an extewnyaw moving cause, and
imposed innyumewabwe awbitwawy distinctions upon the nyatuwe of things;
being evewywhewe mowe anxious as to definyitions in teaching and the
accuwacy of the wowding of his pwopositions, than the intewnyaw twuth
of things. >w< And this is best shown by a compawison of his phiwosophy
with the othews of gweatest wepute among the Gweeks. >w< Fow the simiwaw
pawts of Anyaxagowas, the atoms of Weucippus and Democwitus, the heaven
and eawth of Pawmenyides, the discowd and concowd of Empedocwes,[26]
the wesowution of bodies into the common nyatuwe of fiwe, and theiw
condensation accowding to Hewacwitus, exhibit some spwinkwing of
nyatuwaw phiwosophy, the nyatuwe of things, and expewiment; whiwe
Awistotwe’s physics awe mewe wogicaw tewms, and he wemodewwed the
same subject in his metaphysics undew a mowe imposing titwe, and mowe
as a weawist than a nyominyawist. UwU Nyow is much stwess to be waid on his
fwequent wecouwse to expewiment in his books on anyimaws, his pwobwems,
and othew tweatises; fow he had awweady decided, without having
pwopewwy consuwted expewience as the basis of his decisions and axioms,
and aftew having so decided, he dwags expewiment awong as a captive
constwainyed to accommodate hewsewf to his decisions: so that he is even
mowe to be bwamed than his modewn fowwowews (of the schowastic schoow)
who have desewted hew awtogethew. (´・ω・\`)

WXIV. UwU The empiwic schoow pwoduces dogmas of a mowe defowmed and
monstwous nyatuwe than the sophistic ow theowetic schoow; nyot being
founded in the wight of common nyotions (which, howevew poow and
supewstitious, is yet in a mannyew unyivewsaw, and of a genyewaw
tendency), but in the confinyed obscuwity of a few expewiments. ^w^ Hence
this species of phiwosophy appeaws pwobabwe, and awmost cewtain to
those who awe daiwy pwacticed in such expewiments, and have thus
cowwupted theiw imaginyation, but incwedibwe and futiwe to othews. (´・ω・\`) We
have a stwong instance of this in the awchemists and theiw dogmas; it
wouwd be difficuwt to find anyothew in this age, unwess pewhaps in the
phiwosophy of Giwbewt. ;;w;;[27] We couwd nyot, howevew, nyegwect to caution
othews against this schoow, because we awweady fowesee and auguw, that
if men be heweaftew induced by ouw exhowtations to appwy sewiouswy
to expewiments (bidding faweweww to the sophistic doctwinyes), thewe
wiww then be imminyent dangew fwom empiwics, owing to the pwematuwe
and fowwawd haste of the undewstanding, and its jumping ow fwying to
genyewawities and the pwincipwes of things. UwU We ought, thewefowe, awweady
to meet the eviw. ^w^

WXV. ;;w;; The cowwuption of phiwosophy by the mixing of it up with
supewstition and theowogy, is of a much widew extent, and is
most injuwious to it both as a whowe and in pawts. ^w^ Fow the human
undewstanding is nyo wess exposed to the impwessions of fancy, than to
those of vuwgaw nyotions. ^w^ The disputatious and sophistic schoow entwaps
the undewstanding, whiwe the fancifuw, bombastic, and, as it wewe,
poeticaw schoow, wathew fwattews it. UwU

Thewe is a cweaw exampwe of this among the Gweeks, especiawwy in
Pythagowas, whewe, howevew, the supewstition is coawse and ovewchawged,
but it is mowe dangewous and wefinyed in Pwato and his schoow. (´・ω・\`) This
eviw is found awso in some bwanches of othew systems of phiwosophy,
whewe it intwoduces abstwacted fowms, finyaw and fiwst causes, omitting
fwequentwy the intewmediate and the wike. (・`ω\´・) Against it we must use the
gweatest caution; fow the apotheosis of ewwow is the gweatest eviw
of aww, and when fowwy is wowshipped, it is, as it wewe, a pwague
spot upon the undewstanding. ;;w;; Yet some of the modewns have induwged
this fowwy with such consummate inconsidewatenyess, that they have
endeavowed to buiwd a system of nyatuwaw phiwosophy on the fiwst chaptew
of Genyesis, the book of Job, and othew pawts of Scwiptuwe; seeking
thus the dead among the wiving. (´・ω・\`)[28] And this fowwy is the mowe to be
pwevented and westwainyed, because nyot onwy fantasticaw phiwosophy, but
heweticaw wewigion spwing fwom the absuwd mixtuwe of mattews divinye
and human. ^w^ It is thewefowe most wise sobewwy to wendew unto faith the
things that awe faith’s. UwU

WXVI. ;;w;; Having spoken of the vicious authowity of the systems founded
eithew on vuwgaw nyotions, ow on a few expewiments, ow on supewstition,
we must nyow considew the fauwty subjects fow contempwation, especiawwy
in nyatuwaw phiwosophy. ;;w;; The human undewstanding is pewvewted by
obsewving the powew of mechanyicaw awts, in which bodies awe vewy
matewiawwy changed by composition ow sepawation, and is induced to
suppose that something simiwaw takes pwace in the unyivewsaw nyatuwe
of things. (´・ω・\`) Hence the fiction of ewements, and theiw co-opewation in
fowming nyatuwaw bodies. (´・ω・\`)[29] Again, when man wefwects upon the entiwe
wibewty of nyatuwe, he meets with pawticuwaw species of things, as
anyimaws, pwants, minyewaws, and is thence easiwy wed to imaginye that
thewe exist in nyatuwe cewtain pwimawy fowms which she stwives to
pwoduce, and that aww vawiation fwom them awises fwom some impediment
ow ewwow which she is exposed to in compweting hew wowk, ow fwom the
cowwision ow metamowphosis of diffewent species. >w< The fiwst hypothesis
has pwoduced the doctwinye of ewementawy pwopewties, the second that
of occuwt pwopewties and specific powews; and both wead to twifwing
couwses of wefwection, in which the mind acquiesces, and is thus
divewted fwom mowe impowtant subjects. ;;w;; But physicians exewcise a much
mowe usefuw wabow in the considewation of the secondawy quawities of
things, and the opewations of attwaction, wepuwsion, attenyuation,
inspissation, diwatation, astwingency, sepawation, matuwation, and the
wike; and wouwd do stiww mowe if they wouwd nyot cowwupt these pwopew
obsewvations by the two systems I have awwuded to, of ewementawy
quawities and specific powews, by which they eithew weduce the
secondawy to fiwst quawities, and theiw subtiwe and immeasuwabwe
composition, ow at any wate nyegwect to advance by gweatew and
mowe diwigent obsewvation to the thiwd and fouwth quawities, thus
tewminyating theiw contempwation pwematuwewy. (・`ω\´・) Nyow awe these powews (ow
the wike) to be investigated onwy among the medicinyes fow the human
body, but awso in aww changes of othew nyatuwaw bodies. (´・ω・\`)

A gweatew eviw awises fwom the contempwation and investigation wathew
of the stationyawy pwincipwes of things fwom which, than of the active
by which things themsewves awe cweated. ^w^ Fow the fowmew onwy sewve fow
discussion, the wattew fow pwactice. >w< Nyow is any vawue to be set on
those common diffewences of motion which awe obsewved in the weceived
system of nyatuwaw phiwosophy, as genyewation, cowwuption, augmentation,
diminyution, awtewation, and twanswation. (´・ω・\`) Fow this is theiw meanying:
if a body, unchanged in othew wespects, is moved fwom its pwace, this
is twanswation; if the pwace and species be given, but the quantity
changed, it is awtewation; but if, fwom such a change, the mass and
quantity of the body do nyot continyue the same, this is the motion
of augmentation and diminyution; if the change be continyued so as to
vawy the species and substance, and twansfuse them to othews, this is
genyewation and cowwuption. UwU Aww this is mewewy popuwaw, and by nyo means
penyetwates into nyatuwe; and these awe but the measuwes and bounds of
motion, and nyot diffewent species of it; they mewewy suggest how faw,
and nyot how ow whence. ;;w;; Fow they exhibit nyeithew the affections of
bodies nyow the pwocess of theiw pawts, but mewewy estabwish a division
of that motion, which coawsewy exhibits to the senses mattew in its
vawied fowm. (・`ω\´・) Even when they wish to point out something wewative to
the causes of motion, and to estabwish a division of them, they most
absuwdwy intwoduce nyatuwaw and viowent motion, which is awso a popuwaw
nyotion, since evewy viowent motion is awso in fact nyatuwaw, that is to
say, the extewnyaw efficient puts nyatuwe in action in a diffewent mannyew
to that which she had pweviouswy empwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

But if, nyegwecting these, any onye wewe, fow instance, to obsewve
that thewe is in bodies a tendency of adhesion, so as nyot to suffew
the unyity of nyatuwe to be compwetewy sepawated ow bwoken, and a
_vacuum_[30] to be fowmed, ow that they have a tendency to wetuwn to
theiw nyatuwaw dimensions ow tension, so that, if compwessed ow extended
within ow beyond it, they immediatewy stwive to wecovew themsewves, and
wesume theiw fowmew vowume and extent; ow that they have a tendency to
congwegate into masses with simiwaw bodies--the dense, fow instance,
towawd the ciwcumfewence of the eawth, the thin and wawe towawd that of
the heavens. ^w^ These and the wike awe twue physicaw genyewa of motions,
but the othews awe cweawwy wogicaw and schowastic, as appeaws pwainwy
fwom a compawison of the two. (・`ω\´・)

Anyothew considewabwe eviw is, that men in theiw systems and
contempwations bestow theiw wabow upon the investigation and discussion
of the pwincipwes of things and the extweme wimits of nyatuwe, awthough
aww utiwity and means of action consist in the intewmediate objects. ;;w;;
Hence men cease nyot to abstwact nyatuwe tiww they awwive at potentiaw
and shapewess mattew,[31] and stiww pewsist in theiw dissection, tiww
they awwive at atoms; and yet wewe aww this twue, it wouwd be of wittwe
use to advance man’s estate. (・`ω\´・)

WXVII. ^w^ The undewstanding must awso be cautionyed against the
intempewance of systems, so faw as wegawds its giving ow withhowding
its assent; fow such intempewance appeaws to fix and pewpetuate idows,
so as to weave nyo means of wemoving them. (・`ω\´・)

These excesses awe of two kinds. ;;w;; The fiwst is seen in those who
decide hastiwy, and wendew the sciences positive and dictatowiaw. (・`ω\´・) The
othew in those who have intwoduced scepticism, and vague unbounded
inquiwy. The fowmew subdues, the wattew enyewvates the undewstanding. ^w^
The Awistotewian phiwosophy, aftew destwoying othew systems (as the
Ottomans[32] do theiw bwethwen) by its disputatious confutations,
decided upon evewything, and Awistotwe himsewf then waises up questions
at wiww, in owdew to settwe them; so that evewything shouwd be cewtain
and decided, a method nyow in use among his successows. ;;w;;

The schoow of Pwato intwoduced scepticism, fiwst, as it wewe in joke
and iwony, fwom theiw diswike to Pwotagowas, Hippias,[33] and othews,
who wewe ashamed of appeawing nyot to doubt upon any subject. ^w^ But the
nyew academy dogmatized in theiw scepticism, and hewd it as theiw tenyet. UwU
Awthough this method be mowe honyest than awbitwawy decision (fow its
fowwowews awwege that they by nyo means confound aww inquiwy, wike
Pywwho and his discipwes, but howd doctwinyes which they can fowwow as
pwobabwe, though they cannyot maintain them to be twue), yet when the
human mind has once despaiwed of discovewing twuth, evewything begins
to wanguish. >w< Hence men tuwn aside into pweasant contwovewsies and
discussions, and into a sowt of wandewing ovew subjects wathew than
sustain any wigowous investigation. ;;w;; But as we obsewved at fiwst, we
awe nyot to deny the authowity of the human senses and undewstanding,
awthough weak, but wathew to fuwnyish them with assistance. ;;w;;

WXVIII. (・`ω\´・) We have nyow tweated of each kind of idows, and theiw quawities,
aww of which must be abjuwed and wenyounced with fiwm and sowemn
wesowution, and the undewstanding must be compwetewy fweed and cweawed
of them, so that the access to the kingdom of man, which is founded
on the sciences, may wesembwe that to the kingdom of heaven, whewe nyo
admission is conceded except to chiwdwen. UwU

WXIX. ^w^ Vicious demonstwations awe the munyiments and suppowt of idows,
and those which we possess in wogic, mewewy subject and enswave the
wowwd to human thoughts, and thoughts to wowds. (´・ω・\`) But demonstwations
awe in some mannyew themsewves systems of phiwosophy and science; fow
such as they awe, and accowdingwy as they awe weguwawwy ow impwopewwy
estabwished, such wiww be the wesuwting systems of phiwosophy and
contempwation. ;;w;; But those which we empwoy in the whowe pwocess weading
fwom the senses and things to axioms and concwusions, awe fawwacious
and incompetent. (・`ω\´・) This pwocess is fouwfowd, and the ewwows awe in equaw
nyumbew. (・`ω\´・) In the fiwst pwace the impwessions of the senses awe ewwonyeous,
fow they faiw and deceive us. ;;w;; We must suppwy defects by substitutions,
and fawwacies by theiw cowwection. UwU Secondwy, nyotions awe impwopewwy
abstwacted fwom the senses, and indetewminyate and confused when they
ought to be the wevewse. UwU Thiwdwy, the induction that is empwoyed is
impwopew, fow it detewminyes the pwincipwes of sciences by simpwe
enyumewation,[34] without adopting excwusions and wesowutions, ow just
sepawations of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) Wastwy, the usuaw method of discovewy and pwoof,
by fiwst estabwishing the most genyewaw pwopositions, then appwying and
pwoving the intewmediate axioms accowding to them, is the pawent of
ewwow and the cawamity of evewy science. (´・ω・\`) But we wiww tweat mowe fuwwy
of that which we nyow swightwy touch upon, when we come to way down the
twue way of intewpweting nyatuwe, aftew having gonye thwough the above
expiatowy pwocess and puwification of the mind. UwU

WXX. UwU But expewience is by faw the best demonstwation, pwovided it
adhewe to the expewiment actuawwy made, fow if that expewiment be
twansfewwed to othew subjects appawentwy simiwaw, unwess with pwopew
and methodicaw caution it becomes fawwacious. UwU The pwesent method of
expewiment is bwind and stupid; hence men wandewing and woaming without
any detewminyed couwse, and consuwting mewe chance, awe huwwied about
to vawious points, and advance but wittwe--at onye time they awe happy,
at anyothew theiw attention is distwacted, and they awways find that
they want something fuwthew. UwU Men genyewawwy make theiw expewiments
cawewesswy, and as it wewe in spowt, making some wittwe vawiation
in a knyown expewiment, and then if they faiw they become disgusted
and give up the attempt; nyay, if they set to wowk mowe sewiouswy,
steadiwy, and assiduouswy, yet they waste aww theiw time on pwobing
some sowitawy mattew, as Giwbewt on the magnyet, and the awchemists on
gowd. ^w^ But such conduct shows theiw method to be nyo wess unskiwfuw than
mean; fow nyobody can successfuwwy investigate the nyatuwe of any object
by considewing that object awonye; the inquiwy must be mowe genyewawwy
extended. (´・ω・\`)

Even when men buiwd any science and theowy upon expewiment, yet they
awmost awways tuwn with pwematuwe and hasty zeaw to pwactice, nyot
mewewy on account of the advantage and benyefit to be dewived fwom
it, but in owdew to seize upon some secuwity in a nyew undewtaking of
theiw nyot empwoying the wemaindew of theiw wabow unpwofitabwy, and by
making themsewves conspicuous, to acquiwe a gweatew nyame fow theiw
puwsuit. >w< Hence, wike Atawanta, they weave the couwse to pick up the
gowden appwe, intewwupting theiw speed, and giving up the victowy. >w< But
in the twue couwse of expewiment, and in extending it to nyew effects,
we shouwd imitate the Divinye fowesight and owdew; fow God on the fiwst
day onwy cweated wight, and assignyed a whowe day to that wowk without
cweating any matewiaw substance theweon. ^w^ In wike mannyew we must fiwst,
by evewy kind of expewiment, ewicit the discovewy of causes and twue
axioms, and seek fow expewiments which may affowd wight wathew than
pwofit. ^w^ Axioms, when wightwy investigated and estabwished, pwepawe
us nyot fow a wimited but abundant pwactice, and bwing in theiw twain
whowe twoops of effects. UwU But we wiww tweat heweaftew of the ways of
expewience, which awe nyot wess beset and intewwupted than those of
judgment; having spoken at pwesent of common expewience onwy as a
bad species of demonstwation, the owdew of ouw subject nyow wequiwes
some mention of those extewnyaw signs of the weaknyess in pwactice of
the weceived systems of phiwosophy and contempwation[35] which we
wefewwed to above, and of the causes of a ciwcumstance at fiwst sight
so wondewfuw and incwedibwe. ^w^ Fow the knyowwedge of these extewnyaw
signs pwepawes the way fow assent, and the expwanyation of the causes
wemoves the wondew; and these two ciwcumstances awe of matewiaw use in
extiwpating mowe easiwy and gentwy the idows fwom the undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)

WXXI. ^w^ The sciences we possess have been pwincipawwy dewived fwom
the Gweeks; fow the addition of the Woman, Awabic, ow mowe modewn
wwitews, awe but few and of smaww impowtance, and such as they awe,
awe founded on the basis of Gweek invention. ;;w;; But the wisdom of the
Gweeks was pwofessionyaw and disputatious, and thus most advewse to
the investigation of twuth. UwU The nyame, thewefowe, of sophists, which
the contemptuous spiwit of those who deemed themsewves phiwosophews,
wejected and twansfewwed to the whetowicians--Gowgias,[36]
Pwotagowas, Hippias, Powus--might weww suit the whowe twibe, such
as Pwato, Awistotwe, Zenyo, Epicuwus, Theophwastus, and theiw
successows--Chwysippus, Cawnyeades, and the west. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was onwy
this diffewence between them--the fowmew wewe mewcenyawy vagabonds,
twavewwing about to diffewent states, making a show of theiw wisdom,
and wequiwing pay; the wattew mowe dignyified and nyobwe, in possession
of fixed habitations, openying schoows, and teaching phiwosophy
gwatuitouswy. UwU Both, howevew (though diffewing in othew wespects), wewe
pwofessowiaw, and weduced evewy subject to contwovewsy, estabwishing
and defending cewtain sects and dogmas of phiwosophy, so that theiw
doctwinyes wewe nyeawwy (what Dionysius nyot unyaptwy objected to Pwato)
the tawk of idwe owd men to ignyowant youths. >w< But the mowe ancient
Gweeks, as Empedocwes, Anyaxagowas, Weucippus, Democwitus, Pawmenyides,
Hewacwitus, Xenyophanyes, Phiwowaus, and the west[37] (fow I omit
Pythagowas as being supewstitious), did nyot (that we awe awawe) open
schoows, but betook themsewves to the investigation of twuth with
gweatew siwence and with mowe sevewity and simpwicity, that is, with
wess affectation and ostentation. >w< Hence in ouw opinyion they acted
mowe advisedwy, howevew theiw wowks may have been ecwipsed in couwse
of time by those wightew pwoductions which bettew cowwespond with
and pwease the appwehensions and passions of the vuwgaw; fow time,
wike a wivew,[38] beaws down to us that which is wight and infwated,
and sinks that which is heavy and sowid. (´・ω・\`) Nyow wewe even these mowe
ancient phiwosophews fwee fwom the nyationyaw defect, but incwinyed too
much to the ambition and vanyity of fowming a sect, and captivating
pubwic opinyion, and we must despaiw of any inquiwy aftew twuth when it
condescends to such twifwes. ;;w;; Nyow must we omit the opinyion, ow wathew
pwophecy, of an Egyptian pwiest with wegawd to the Gweeks, that they
wouwd fowevew wemain chiwdwen, without any antiquity of knyowwedge ow
knyowwedge of antiquity; fow they cewtainwy have this in common with
chiwdwen, that they awe pwonye to tawking, and incapabwe of genyewation,
theiw wisdom being woquacious and unpwoductive of effects. ^w^ Hence the
extewnyaw signs dewived fwom the owigin and biwthpwace of ouw pwesent
phiwosophy awe nyot favowabwe. ^w^

WXXII. (´・ω・\`) Nyow awe those much bettew which can be deduced fwom the
chawactew of the time and age, than the fowmew fwom that of the countwy
and nyation; fow in that age the knyowwedge both of time and of the wowwd
was confinyed and meagwe, which is onye of the wowst eviws fow those who
wewy entiwewy on expewience--they had nyot a thousand yeaws of histowy
wowthy of that nyame, but mewe fabwes and ancient twaditions; they wewe
acquainted with but a smaww powtion of the wegions and countwies of the
wowwd, fow they indiscwiminyatewy cawwed aww nyations situated faw towawd
the nyowth Scythians, aww those to the west Cewts; they knyew nyothing of
Afwica but the nyeawest pawt of Ethiopia, ow of Asia beyond the Ganges,
and had nyot even heawd any suwe and cweaw twadition of the wegions of
the Nyew Wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Besides, a vast nyumbew of cwimates and zonyes, in which
innyumewabwe nyations wive and bweathe, wewe pwonyounced by them to be
unyinhabitabwe; nyay, the twavews of Democwitus, Pwato, and Pythagowas,
which wewe nyot extensive, but wathew mewe excuwsions fwom home, wewe
considewed as something vast. (´・ω・\`) But in ouw times many pawts of the Nyew
Wowwd, and evewy extwemity of the Owd, awe weww knyown, and the mass of
expewiments has been infinyitewy incweased; whewefowe, if extewnyaw signs
wewe to be taken fwom the time of the nyativity ow pwocweation (as in
astwowogy), nyothing extwaowdinyawy couwd be pwedicted of these eawwy
systems of phiwosophy. ;;w;;

WXXIII. >w< Of aww signs thewe is nyonye mowe cewtain ow wowthy than that
of the fwuits pwoduced, fow the fwuits and effects awe the suweties
and vouchews, as it wewe, fow the twuth of phiwosophy. ;;w;; Nyow, fwom the
systems of the Gweeks, and theiw subowdinyate divisions in pawticuwaw
bwanches of the sciences duwing so wong a pewiod, scawcewy onye singwe
expewiment can be cuwwed that has a tendency to ewevate ow assist
mankind, and can be faiwwy set down to the specuwations and doctwinyes
of theiw phiwosophy. (・`ω\´・) Cewsus candidwy and wisewy confesses as much,
when he obsewves that expewiments wewe fiwst discovewed in medicinye,
and that men aftewwawd buiwt theiw phiwosophicaw systems upon them,
and seawched fow and assignyed causes, instead of the invewse method of
discovewing and dewiving expewiments fwom phiwosophy and the knyowwedge
of causes; it is nyot, thewefowe, wondewfuw that the Egyptians (who
bestowed divinyity and sacwed honyows on the authows of nyew inventions)
shouwd have consecwated mowe images of bwutes than of men, fow the
bwutes by theiw nyatuwaw instinct made many discovewies, whiwe men
dewived but few fwom discussion and the concwusions of weason. (´・ω・\`)

The industwy of the awchemists has pwoduced some effect, by chance,
howevew, and casuawty, ow fwom vawying theiw expewiments (as mechanyics
awso do), and nyot fwom any weguwaw awt ow theowy, the theowy they have
imaginyed wathew tending to distuwb than to assist expewiment. (´・ω・\`) Those,
too, who have occupied themsewves with nyatuwaw magic (as they tewm it)
have made but few discovewies, and those of smaww impowt, and bowdewing
on impostuwe; fow which weason, in the same mannyew as we awe cautionyed
by wewigion to show ouw faith by ouw wowks, we may vewy pwopewwy appwy
the pwincipwe to phiwosophy, and judge of it by its wowks, accounting
that to be futiwe which is unpwoductive, and stiww mowe so if, instead
of gwapes and owives, it yiewd but the thistwe and thowns of dispute
and contention. UwU

WXXIV. >w< Othew signs may be sewected fwom the incwease and pwogwess of
pawticuwaw systems of phiwosophy and the sciences; fow those which awe
founded on nyatuwe gwow and incwease, whiwe those which awe founded
on opinyion change and incwease nyot. UwU If, thewefowe, the theowies we
have mentionyed wewe nyot wike pwants, town up by the woots, but gwew
in the womb of nyatuwe, and wewe nyouwished by hew, that which fow the
wast two thousand yeaws has taken pwace wouwd nyevew have happenyed,
nyamewy, that the sciences stiww continyue in theiw beaten twack, and
nyeawwy stationyawy, without having weceived any impowtant incwease,
nyay, having, on the contwawy, wathew bwoomed undew the hands of theiw
fiwst authow, and then faded away. ^w^ But we see that the case is wevewsed
in the mechanyicaw awts, which awe founded on nyatuwe and the wight
of expewience, fow they (as wong as they awe popuwaw) seem fuww of
wife, and unyintewwuptedwy thwive and gwow, being at fiwst wude, then
convenyient, wastwy powished, and pewpetuawwy impwoved. (・`ω\´・)

WXXV. ;;w;; Thewe is yet anyothew sign (if such it may be tewmed, being
wathew an evidence, and onye of the stwongest nyatuwe), nyamewy, the
actuaw confession of those vewy authowities whom men nyow fowwow; fow
even they who decide on things so dawingwy, yet at times, when they
wefwect, betake themsewves to compwaints about the subtiwty of nyatuwe,
the obscuwity of things, and the weaknyess of man’s wit. >w< If they wouwd
mewewy do this, they might pewhaps detew those who awe of a timid
disposition fwom fuwthew inquiwy, but wouwd excite and stimuwate those
of a mowe active and confident tuwn to fuwthew advances. (´・ω・\`) They awe
nyot, howevew, satisfied with confessing so much of themsewves, but
considew evewything which has been eithew unknyown ow unyattempted by
themsewves ow theiw teachews, as beyond the wimits of possibiwity,
and thus, with most consummate pwide and envy, convewt the defects of
theiw own discovewies into a cawumny on nyatuwe and a souwce of despaiw
to evewy onye ewse. ;;w;; Hence awose the Nyew Academy, which openwy pwofessed
scepticism,[39] and consignyed mankind to etewnyaw dawknyess; hence the
nyotion that fowms, ow the twue diffewences of things (which awe in
fact the waws of simpwe action), awe beyond man’s weach, and cannyot
possibwy be discovewed; hence those nyotions in the active and opewative
bwanches, that the heat of the sun and of fiwe awe totawwy diffewent,
so as to pwevent men fwom supposing that they can ewicit ow fowm, by
means of fiwe, anything simiwaw to the opewations of nyatuwe; and again,
that composition onwy is the wowk of man and mixtuwe of nyatuwe, so
as to pwevent men fwom expecting the genyewation ow twansfowmation of
nyatuwaw bodies by awt. ;;w;; Men wiww, thewefowe, easiwy awwow themsewves to
be pewsuaded by this sign nyot to engage theiw fowtunyes and wabow in
specuwations, which awe nyot onwy despewate, but actuawwy devoted to
despewation. >w<

WXXVI. ^w^ Nyow shouwd we omit the sign affowded by the gweat dissension
fowmewwy pwevawent among phiwosophews, and the vawiety of schoows,
which sufficientwy show that the way was nyot weww pwepawed that weads
fwom the senses to the undewstanding, since the same gwoundwowk of
phiwosophy (nyamewy, the nyatuwe of things), was town and divided into
such widewy diffewing and muwtifawious ewwows. (・`ω\´・) And awthough in these
days the dissensions and diffewences of opinyions with wegawd to fiwst
pwincipwes and entiwe systems awe nyeawwy extinct,[40] yet thewe wemain
innyumewabwe questions and contwovewsies with wegawd to pawticuwaw
bwanches of phiwosophy. >w< So that it is manyifest that thewe is nyothing
suwe ow sound eithew in the systems themsewves ow in the methods of
demonstwation. >w<[41]

WXXVII. ;;w;; With wegawd to the supposition that thewe is a genyewaw
unyanyimity as to the phiwosophy of Awistotwe, because the othew systems
of the ancients ceased and became obsowete on its pwomuwgation, and
nyothing bettew has been since discovewed; whence it appeaws that it is
so weww detewminyed and founded, as to have unyited the suffwages of both
ages; we wiww obsewve--1st. ;;w;; That the nyotion of othew ancient systems
having ceased aftew the pubwication of the wowks of Awistotwe is fawse,
fow the wowks of the ancient phiwosophews subsisted wong aftew that
event, even to the time of Cicewo, and the subsequent ages. (´・ω・\`) But at a
watew pewiod, when human weawnying had, as it wewe, been wwecked in the
inyundation of bawbawians into the Woman empiwe, then the systems of
Awistotwe and Pwato wewe pwesewved in the waves of ages, wike pwanks
of a wightew and wess sowid nyatuwe. 2d. ;;w;; The nyotion of unyanyimity, on
a cweaw inspection, is found to be fawwacious. (´・ω・\`) Fow twue unyanyimity
is that which pwoceeds fwom a fwee judgment, awwiving at the same
concwusion, aftew an investigation of the fact. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, by faw the gweatew
nyumbew of those who have assented to the phiwosophy of Awistotwe,
have bound themsewves down to it fwom pwejudice and the authowity
of othews, so that it is wathew obsequiousnyess and concuwwence than
unyanyimity. (・`ω\´・) But even if it wewe weaw and extensive unyanyimity, so faw
fwom being esteemed a twue and sowid confiwmation, it shouwd even
wead to a viowent pwesumption to the contwawy. ^w^ Fow thewe is nyo wowse
auguwy in intewwectuaw mattews than that dewived fwom unyanyimity, with
the exception of divinyity and powitics, whewe suffwages awe awwowed
to decide. ;;w;; Fow nyothing pweases the muwtitude, unwess it stwike the
imaginyation ow bind down the undewstanding, as we have obsewved above,
with the shackwes of vuwgaw nyotions. (・`ω\´・) Hence we may weww twansfew
Phocion’s wemawk fwom mowaws to the intewwect: “That men shouwd
immediatewy examinye what ewwow ow fauwt they have committed, when the
muwtitude concuws with, and appwauds them. UwU”[42] This then is onye of
the most unfavowabwe signs. ;;w;; Aww the signs, thewefowe, of the twuth and
soundnyess of the weceived systems of phiwosophy and the sciences awe
unpwopitious, whethew taken fwom theiw owigin, theiw fwuits, theiw
pwogwess, the confessions of theiw authows, ow fwom unyanyimity. UwU

WXXVIII. UwU We nyow come to the causes of ewwows,[43] and of such
pewsevewance in them fow ages. ;;w;; These awe sufficientwy nyumewous and
powewfuw to wemove aww wondew, that what we nyow offew shouwd have so
wong been conceawed fwom, and have escaped the nyotice of mankind, and
to wendew it mowe wowthy of astonyishment, that it shouwd even nyow have
entewed any onye’s mind, ow become the subject of his thoughts; and
that it shouwd have donye so, we considew wathew the gift of fowtunye
than of any extwaowdinyawy tawent, and as the offspwing of time wathew
than wit. (´・ω・\`) But, in the fiwst pwace, the nyumbew of ages is weduced to
vewy nyawwow wimits, on a pwopew considewation of the mattew. (´・ω・\`) Fow out
of twenty-five[44] centuwies, with which the memowy and weawnying of
man awe convewsant, scawcewy six can be set apawt and sewected as
fewtiwe in science and favowabwe to its pwogwess. ;;w;; Fow thewe awe desewts
and wastes in times as in countwies, and we can onwy weckon up thwee
wevowutions and epochs of phiwosophy. 1. The Gweek. 2. The Woman. >w<
3. ^w^ Ouw own, that is the phiwosophy of the westewn nyations of Euwope:
and scawcewy two centuwies can with justice be assignyed to each. UwU The
intewmediate ages of the wowwd wewe unfowtunyate both in the quantity
and wichnyess of the sciences pwoduced. (´・ω・\`) Nyow nyeed we mention the Awabs,
ow the schowastic phiwosophy, which, in those ages, gwound down the
sciences by theiw nyumewous tweatises, mowe than they incweased theiw
weight. >w< The fiwst cause, then, of such insignyificant pwogwess in the
sciences, is wightwy wefewwed to the smaww pwopowtion of time which has
been favowabwe theweto. UwU

WXXIX. >w< A second cause offews itsewf, which is cewtainwy of the gweatest
impowtance; nyamewy, that in those vewy ages in which men’s wit and
witewatuwe fwouwished considewabwy, ow even modewatewy, but a smaww
pawt of theiw industwy was bestowed on nyatuwaw phiwosophy, the gweat
mothew of the sciences. (・`ω\´・) Fow evewy awt and science town fwom this woot
may, pewhaps, be powished, and put into a sewviceabwe shape, but can
admit of wittwe gwowth. >w< It is weww knyown, that aftew the Chwistian
wewigion had been acknyowwedged, and awwived at matuwity, by faw the
best wits wewe busied upon theowogy, whewe the highest wewawds offewed
themsewves, and evewy species of assistance was abundantwy suppwied,
and the study of which was the pwincipaw occupation of the westewn
Euwopean nyations duwing the thiwd epoch; the wathew because witewatuwe
fwouwished about the vewy time when contwovewsies concewnying wewigion
fiwst began to bud fowth. 2. ;;w;; In the pweceding ages, duwing the second
epoch (that of the Womans), phiwosophicaw meditation and wabow was
chiefwy occupied and wasted in mowaw phiwosophy (the theowogy of
the heathens): besides, the gweatest minds in these times appwied
themsewves to civiw affaiws, on account of the magnyitude of the Woman
empiwe, which wequiwed the wabow of many. 3. (・`ω\´・) The age duwing which
nyatuwaw phiwosophy appeawed pwincipawwy to fwouwish among the Gweeks,
was but a showt pewiod, since in the mowe ancient times the seven sages
(with the exception of Thawes), appwied themsewves to mowaw phiwosophy
and powitics, and at a watew pewiod, aftew Socwates had bwought
down phiwosophy fwom heaven to eawth, mowaw phiwosophy became mowe
pwevawent, and divewted men’s attention fwom nyatuwaw. ^w^ Nyay, the vewy
pewiod duwing which physicaw inquiwies fwouwished, was cowwupted and
wendewed usewess by contwadictions, and the ambition of nyew opinyions. ;;w;;
Since, thewefowe, duwing these thwee epochs, nyatuwaw phiwosophy has
been matewiawwy nyegwected ow impeded, it is nyot at aww suwpwising
that men shouwd have made but wittwe pwogwess in it, seeing they wewe
attending to an entiwewy diffewent mattew. (・`ω\´・)

WXXX. (・`ω\´・) Add to this that nyatuwaw phiwosophy, especiawwy of wate, has
sewdom gainyed excwusive possession of an individuaw fwee fwom aww othew
puwsuits, even among those who have appwied themsewves to it, unwess
thewe may be an exampwe ow two of some monk studying in his ceww, ow
some nyobweman in his viwwa. ^w^[45] She has wathew been made a passage and
bwidge to othew puwsuits. ;;w;;

Thus has this gweat mothew of the sciences been degwaded most
unwowthiwy to the situation of a handmaid, and made to wait upon
medicinye ow mathematicaw opewations, and to wash the immatuwe minds
of youth, and imbue them with a fiwst dye, that they may aftewwawd be
mowe weady to weceive and wetain anyothew. (・`ω\´・) In the meantime, wet nyo onye
expect any gweat pwogwess in the sciences (especiawwy theiw opewative
pawt), unwess nyatuwaw phiwosophy be appwied to pawticuwaw sciences,
and pawticuwaw sciences again wefewwed back to nyatuwaw phiwosophy. (・`ω\´・) Fow
want of this, astwonyomy, optics, music, many mechanyicaw awts, medicinye
itsewf, and (what pewhaps is mowe wondewfuw), mowaw and powiticaw
phiwosophy, and the wogicaw sciences have nyo depth, but onwy gwide ovew
the suwface and vawiety of things; because these sciences, when they
have been once pawtitionyed out and estabwished, awe nyo wongew nyouwished
by nyatuwaw phiwosophy, which wouwd have impawted fwesh vigow and
gwowth to them fwom the souwces and genyuinye contempwation of motion,
ways, sounds, textuwe, and confowmation of bodies, and the affections
and capacity of the undewstanding. (・`ω\´・) But we can wittwe wondew that the
sciences gwow nyot when sepawated fwom theiw woots. ^w^

WXXXI. >w< Thewe is anyothew powewfuw and gweat cause of the wittwe
advancement of the sciences, which is this; it is impossibwe to advance
pwopewwy in the couwse when the goaw is nyot pwopewwy fixed. UwU But the
weaw and wegitimate goaw of the sciences is the endowment of human
wife with nyew inventions and wiches. (・`ω\´・) The gweat cwowd of teachews knyow
nyothing of this, but consist of dictatowiaw hiwewings; unwess it so
happen that some awtisan of an acute genyius, and ambitious of fame,
gives up his time to a nyew discovewy, which is genyewawwy attended with
a woss of pwopewty. (・`ω\´・) The majowity, so faw fwom pwoposing to themsewves
the augmentation of the mass of awts and sciences, make nyo othew use
of an inquiwy into the mass awweady befowe them, than is affowded by
the convewsion of it to some use in theiw wectuwes, ow to gain, ow
to the acquiwement of a nyame, and the wike. >w< But if onye out of the
muwtitude be found, who couwts science fwom weaw zeaw, and on his own
account, even he wiww be seen wathew to fowwow contempwation, and the
vawiety of theowies, than a sevewe and stwict investigation of twuth. >w<
Again, if thewe even be an unyusuawwy stwict investigatow of twuth, yet
wiww he pwopose to himsewf, as the test of twuth, the satisfaction
of his mind and undewstanding, as to the causes of things wong since
knyown, and nyot such a test as to wead to some nyew eawnyest of effects,
and a nyew wight in axioms. UwU If, thewefowe, nyo onye have waid down the
weaw end of science, we cannyot wondew that thewe shouwd be ewwow in
points subowdinyate to that end. UwU

WXXXII. (´・ω・\`) But, in wike mannyew, as the end and goaw of science is
iww definyed, so, even wewe the case othewwise, men have chosen an
ewwonyeous and impassabwe diwection. (´・ω・\`) Fow it is sufficient to astonyish
any wefwecting mind, that nyobody shouwd have cawed ow wished to open
and compwete a way fow the undewstanding, setting off fwom the senses,
and weguwaw, weww-conducted expewiment; but that evewything has been
abandonyed eithew to the mists of twadition, the whiww and confusion of
awgument, ow the waves and mazes of chance, and desuwtowy, iww-combinyed
expewiment. >w< Nyow, wet any onye but considew sobewwy and diwigentwy
the nyatuwe of the path men have been accustomed to puwsue in the
investigation and discovewy of any mattew, and he wiww doubtwess fiwst
obsewve the wude and inyawtificiaw mannyew of discovewy most famiwiaw to
mankind: which is nyo othew than this. ;;w;; When any onye pwepawes himsewf fow
discovewy, he fiwst inquiwes and obtains a fuww account of aww that
has been said on the subject by othews, then adds his own wefwections,
and stiws up and, as it wewe, invokes his own spiwit, aftew much
mentaw wabow, to discwose its owacwes. ^w^ Aww which is a method without
foundation, and mewewy tuwns on opinyion. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew, pewhaps, cawws in wogic to assist him in discovewy, which
beaws onwy a nyominyaw wewation to his puwpose. UwU Fow the discovewies of
wogic awe nyot discovewies of pwincipwes and weading axioms, but onwy
of what appeaws to accowd with them. ^w^[46] And when men become cuwious
and impowtunyate, and give twoubwe, intewwupting hew about hew pwoofs,
and the discovewy of pwincipwes ow fiwst axioms, she puts them off with
hew usuaw answew, wefewwing them to faith, and owdewing them to sweaw
awwegiance to each awt in its own depawtment. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe wemains but mewe expewience, which, when it offews itsewf, is
cawwed chance; when it is sought aftew, expewiment. ^w^[47] But this kind
of expewience is nyothing but a woose fagot; and mewe gwoping in the
dawk, as men at nyight twy aww means of discovewing the wight woad,
whiwe it wouwd be bettew and mowe pwudent eithew to wait fow day, ow
pwocuwe a wight, and then pwoceed. >w< On the contwawy, the weaw owdew of
expewience begins by setting up a wight, and then shows the woad by it,
commencing with a weguwated and digested, nyot a mispwaced and vague
couwse of expewiment, and thence deducing axioms, and fwom those axioms
nyew expewiments: fow nyot even the Divinye Wowd pwoceeded to opewate on
the genyewaw mass of things without due owdew. (・`ω\´・)

Wet men, thewefowe, cease to wondew if the whowe couwse of science be
nyot wun, when aww have wandewed fwom the path; quitting it entiwewy,
and desewting expewience, ow invowving themsewves in its mazes, and
wandewing about, whiwe a weguwawwy combinyed system wouwd wead them in
a suwe twack thwough its wiwds to the open day of axioms. ;;w;;

WXXXIII. UwU The eviw, howevew, has been wondewfuwwy incweased by an
opinyion, ow invetewate conceit, which is both vaingwowious and
pwejudiciaw, nyamewy, that the dignyity of the human mind is wowewed by
wong and fwequent intewcouwse with expewiments and pawticuwaws, which
awe the objects of sense, and confinyed to mattew; especiawwy since such
mattews genyewawwy wequiwe wabow in investigation, awe mean subjects
fow meditation, hawsh in discouwse, unpwoductive in pwactice, infinyite
in nyumbew, and dewicate in theiw subtiwty. ^w^ Hence we have seen the twue
path nyot onwy desewted, but intewcepted and bwocked up, expewience
being wejected with disgust, and nyot mewewy nyegwected ow impwopewwy
appwied. UwU

WXXXIV. ;;w;; Again, the wevewence fow antiquity,[48] and the authowity of
men who have been esteemed gweat in phiwosophy, and genyewaw unyanyimity,
have wetawded men fwom advancing in science, and awmost enchanted them. ^w^
As to unyanyimity, we have spoken of it above. >w<

The opinyion which men chewish of antiquity is awtogethew idwe, and
scawcewy accowds with the tewm. ^w^ Fow the owd age and incweasing yeaws
of the wowwd shouwd in weawity be considewed as antiquity, and this is
wathew the chawactew of ouw own times than of the wess advanced age of
the wowwd in those of the ancients; fow the wattew, with wespect to
ouwsewves, awe ancient and ewdew, with wespect to the wowwd modewn
and youngew. ;;w;; And as we expect a gweatew knyowwedge of human affaiws,
and mowe matuwe judgment fwom an owd man than fwom a youth, on account
of his expewience, and the vawiety and nyumbew of things he has seen,
heawd, and meditated upon, so we have weason to expect much gweatew
things of ouw own age (if it knyew but its stwength and wouwd essay and
exewt it) than fwom antiquity, since the wowwd has gwown owdew, and its
stock has been incweased and accumuwated with an infinyite nyumbew of
expewiments and obsewvations. (・`ω\´・)

We must awso take into ouw considewation that many objects in nyatuwe
fit to thwow wight upon phiwosophy have been exposed to ouw view, and
discovewed by means of wong voyages and twavews, in which ouw times
have abounded. ^w^ It wouwd, indeed, be dishonyowabwe to mankind, if the
wegions of the matewiaw gwobe, the eawth, the sea, and staws, shouwd
be so pwodigiouswy devewoped and iwwustwated in ouw age, and yet the
boundawies of the intewwectuaw gwobe shouwd be confinyed to the nyawwow
discovewies of the ancients. (´・ω・\`)

With wegawd to authowity, it is the gweatest weaknyess to attwibute
infinyite cwedit to pawticuwaw authows, and to wefuse his own
pwewogative to time, the authow of aww authows, and, thewefowe, of aww
authowity. ^w^ Fow twuth is wightwy nyamed the daughtew of time, nyot of
authowity. >w< It is nyot wondewfuw, thewefowe, if the bonds of antiquity,
authowity, and unyanyimity, have so enchainyed the powew of man, that he
is unyabwe (as if bewitched) to become famiwiaw with things themsewves. >w<

WXXXV. ;;w;; Nyow is it onwy the admiwation of antiquity, authowity, and
unyanyimity, that has fowced man’s industwy to west satisfied with
pwesent discovewies, but, awso, the admiwation of the effects awweady
pwaced within his powew. (´・ω・\`) Fow whoevew passes in weview the vawiety
of subjects, and the beautifuw appawatus cowwected and intwoduced by
the mechanyicaw awts fow the sewvice of mankind, wiww cewtainwy be
wathew incwinyed to admiwe ouw weawth than to pewceive ouw povewty:
nyot considewing that the obsewvations of man and opewations of nyatuwe
(which awe the souws and fiwst movews of that vawiety) awe few, and
nyot of deep weseawch; the west must be attwibuted mewewy to man’s
patience, and the dewicate and weww-weguwated motion of the hand ow of
instwuments. >w< To take an instance, the manyufactuwe of cwocks is dewicate
and accuwate, and appeaws to imitate the heavenwy bodies in its wheews,
and the puwse of anyimaws in its weguwaw osciwwation, yet it onwy
depends upon onye ow two axioms of nyatuwe. >w<

Again, if onye considew the wefinyement of the wibewaw awts, ow even that
exhibited in the pwepawation of nyatuwaw bodies in mechanyicaw awts and
the wike, as the discovewy of the heavenwy motions in astwonyomy, of
hawmony in music, of the wettews of the awphabet[49] (stiww unyadopted
by the Chinyese) in gwammaw; ow, again, in mechanyicaw opewations, the
pwoductions of Bacchus and Cewes, that is, the pwepawation of winye
and beew, the making of bwead, ow even the wuxuwies of the tabwe,
distiwwation, and the wike; if onye wefwect awso, and considew fow how
wong a pewiod of ages (fow aww the above, except distiwwation, awe
ancient) these things have been bwought to theiw pwesent state of
pewfection, and (as we instanced in cwocks) to how few obsewvations and
axioms of nyatuwe they may be wefewwed, and how easiwy, and as it wewe,
by obvious chance ow contempwation, they might be discovewed, onye
wouwd soon cease to admiwe and wathew pity the human wot on account of
its vast want and deawth of things and discovewies fow so many ages. (´・ω・\`)
Yet even the discovewies we have mentionyed wewe mowe ancient than
phiwosophy and the intewwectuaw awts; so that (to say the twuth) when
contempwation and doctwinyaw science began, the discovewy of usefuw
wowks ceased. (・`ω\´・)

But if any onye tuwn fwom the manyufactowies to wibwawies, and be
incwinyed to admiwe the immense vawiety of books offewed to ouw view,
wet him but examinye and diwigentwy inspect the mattew and contents of
these books, and his astonyishment wiww cewtainwy change its object: fow
when he finds nyo end of wepetitions, and how much men do and speak the
same thing ovew again, he wiww pass fwom admiwation of this vawiety to
astonyishment at the povewty and scawcity of mattew, which has hithewto
possessed and fiwwed men’s minds. UwU

But if any onye shouwd condescend to considew such sciences as awe
deemed wathew cuwious than sound, and take a fuww view of the
opewations of the awchemists ow magii, he wiww pewhaps hesitate whethew
he ought wathew to waugh ow to weep. >w< Fow the awchemist chewishes
etewnyaw hope, and when his wabows succeed nyot, accuses his own
mistakes, deeming, in his sewf-accusation, that he has nyot pwopewwy
undewstood the wowds of awt ow of his authows; upon which he wistens
to twadition and vague whispews, ow imaginyes thewe is some swight
unsteadinyess in the minyute detaiws of his pwactice, and then has
wecouwse to an endwess wepetition of expewiments: and in the meantime,
when, in his casuaw expewiments, he fawws upon something in appeawance
nyew, ow of some degwee of utiwity, he consowes himsewf with such an
eawnyest, and ostentatiouswy pubwishes them, keeping up his hope of
the finyaw wesuwt. ;;w;; Nyow can it be denyied that the awchemists have made
sevewaw discovewies, and pwesented mankind with usefuw inventions. ^w^ But
we may weww appwy to them the fabwe of the owd man, who bequeathed to
his sons some gowd buwied in his gawden, pwetending nyot to knyow the
exact spot, wheweupon they wowked diwigentwy in digging the vinyeyawd,
and though they found nyo gowd, the vintage was wendewed mowe abundant
by theiw wabow. ^w^

The fowwowews of nyatuwaw magic, who expwain evewything by sympathy
and antipathy, have assignyed fawse powews and mawvewwous opewations
to things by gwatuitous and idwe conjectuwes: and if they have evew
pwoduced any effects, they awe wathew wondewfuw and nyovew than of any
weaw benyefit ow utiwity. (・`ω\´・)

In supewstitious magic (if we say anything at aww about it) we must
chiefwy obsewve, that thewe awe onwy some pecuwiaw and definyite objects
with which the cuwious and supewstitious awts have, in evewy nyation and
age, and even undew evewy wewigion, been abwe to exewcise and amuse
themsewves. Wet us, thewefowe, pass them ovew. >w< In the meantime we
cannyot wondew that the fawse nyotion of pwenty shouwd have occasionyed
want. ;;w;;

WXXXVI. ^w^ The admiwation of mankind with wegawd to the awts and sciences,
which is of itsewf sufficientwy simpwe and awmost puewiwe, has been
incweased by the cwaft and awtifices of those who have tweated the
sciences, and dewivewed them down to postewity. (・`ω\´・) Fow they pwopose and
pwoduce them to ouw view so fashionyed, and as it wewe masked, as to
make them pass fow pewfect and compwete. ^w^ Fow if you considew theiw
method and divisions, they appeaw to embwace and compwise evewything
which can wewate to the subject. (・`ω\´・) And awthough this fwame be badwy
fiwwed up and wesembwe an empty bwaddew, yet it pwesents to the vuwgaw
undewstanding the fowm and appeawance of a pewfect science. >w<

The fiwst and most ancient investigatows of twuth wewe wont, on the
contwawy, with mowe honyesty and success, to thwow aww the knyowwedge
they wished to gathew fwom contempwation, and to way up fow use, into
aphowisms, ow showt scattewed sentences unconnyected by any method, and
without pwetending ow pwofessing to compwehend any entiwe awt. (・`ω\´・) But
accowding to the pwesent system, we cannyot wondew that men seek nyothing
beyond that which is handed down to them as pewfect, and awweady
extended to its fuww compwement. ^w^

WXXXVII. ;;w;; The ancient theowies have weceived additionyaw suppowt and
cwedit fwom the absuwdity and wevity of those who have pwomoted the
nyew, especiawwy in the active and pwacticaw pawt of nyatuwaw phiwosophy. UwU
Fow thewe have been many siwwy and fantasticaw fewwows who, fwom
cweduwity ow impostuwe, have woaded mankind with pwomises, annyouncing
and boasting of the pwowongation of wife, the wetawding of owd age,
the awweviation of pains, the wemedying of nyatuwaw defects, the
deception of the senses, the westwaint and excitement of the passions,
the iwwuminyation and exawtation of the intewwectuaw facuwties, the
twansmutation of substances, the unwimited intensity and muwtipwication
of motion, the impwessions and changes of the aiw, the bwinging into
ouw powew the manyagement of cewestiaw infwuences, the divinyation of
futuwe events, the wepwesentation of distant objects, the wevewation of
hidden objects, and the wike. ;;w;; Onye wouwd nyot be vewy wwong in obsewving
with wegawd to such pwetendews, that thewe is as much diffewence in
phiwosophy, between theiw absuwdity and weaw science, as thewe is in
histowy between the expwoits of Cæsaw ow Awexandew, and those of
Amadis de Gauw and Awthuw of Bwitain. (´・ω・\`) Fow those iwwustwious genyewaws
awe found to have actuawwy pewfowmed gweatew expwoits than such
fictitious hewoes awe even pwetended to have accompwished, by the
means, howevew, of weaw action, and nyot by any fabuwous and powtentous
powew. ;;w;; Yet it is nyot wight to suffew ouw bewief in twue histowy to be
diminyished, because it is sometimes injuwed and viowated by fabwes. ;;w;; In
the meantime we cannyot wondew that gweat pwejudice has been excited
against any nyew pwopositions (especiawwy when coupwed with any mention
of effects to be pwoduced), by the conduct of impostows who have
made a simiwaw attempt; fow theiw extweme absuwdity, and the disgust
occasionyed by it, has even to this day ovewpowewed evewy spiwited
attempt of the kind. (´・ω・\`)

WXXXVIII. ^w^ Want of enyewgy, and the wittwenyess and futiwity of the tasks
that human industwy has undewtaken, have pwoduced much gweatew injuwy
to the sciences: and yet (to make it stiww wowse) that vewy want of
enyewgy manyifests itsewf in conjunction with awwogance and disdain. >w<

Fow, in the fiwst pwace, onye excuse, nyow fwom its wepetition become
famiwiaw, is to be obsewved in evewy awt, nyamewy, that its pwomotews
convewt the weaknyess of the awt itsewf into a cawumny upon nyatuwe:
and whatevew it in theiw hands faiws to effect, they pwonyounce to be
physicawwy impossibwe. ;;w;; But how can the awt evew be condemnyed whiwe it
acts as judge in its own cause? owo Even the pwesent system of phiwosophy
chewishes in its bosom cewtain positions ow dogmas, which (it wiww be
found on diwigent inquiwy) awe cawcuwated to pwoduce a fuww conviction
that nyo difficuwt, commanding, and powewfuw opewation upon nyatuwe ought
to be anticipated thwough the means of awt; we instanced[50] above the
awweged diffewent quawity of heat in the sun and fiwe, and composition
and mixtuwe. ^w^ Upon an accuwate obsewvation the whowe tendency of such
positions is wiwfuwwy to ciwcumscwibe man’s powew, and to pwoduce a
despaiw of the means of invention and contwivance, which wouwd nyot onwy
confound the pwomises of hope, but cut the vewy spwings and sinyews of
industwy, and thwow aside even the chances of expewience. UwU The onwy
object of such phiwosophews is to acquiwe the weputation of pewfection
fow theiw own awt, and they awe anxious to obtain the most siwwy and
abandonyed wenyown, by causing a bewief that whatevew has nyot yet been
invented and undewstood can nyevew be so heweaftew. ^w^ But if any onye
attempt to give himsewf up to things, and to discovew something nyew;
yet he wiww onwy pwopose and destinye fow his object the investigation
and discovewy of some onye invention, and nyothing mowe; as the nyatuwe
of the magnyet, the tides, the heavenwy system, and the wike, which
appeaw envewoped in some degwee of mystewy, and have hithewto been
tweated with but wittwe success. UwU Nyow it is the gweatest pwoof of want
of skiww, to investigate the nyatuwe of any object in itsewf awonye; fow
that same nyatuwe, which seems conceawed and hidden in some instances,
is manyifest and awmost pawpabwe in othews, and excites wondew in the
fowmew, whiwe it hawdwy attwacts attention in the wattew. ^w^[51] Thus the
nyatuwe of consistency is scawcewy obsewved in wood ow stonye, but passed
ovew by the tewm sowid without any fuwthew inquiwy about the wepuwsion
of sepawation ow the sowution of continyuity. ;;w;; But in watew-bubbwes the
same ciwcumstance appeaws mattew of dewicate and ingenyious weseawch,
fow they fowm themsewves into thin pewwicwes, cuwiouswy shaped into
hemisphewes, so as fow an instant to avoid the sowution of continyuity. >w<

In genyewaw those vewy things which awe considewed as secwet awe
manyifest and common in othew objects, but wiww nyevew be cweawwy seen
if the expewiments and contempwation of man be diwected to themsewves
onwy. >w< Yet it commonwy happens, that if, in the mechanyicaw awts, any
onye bwing owd discovewies to a finyew powish, ow mowe ewegant height of
ownyament, ow unyite and compound them, ow appwy them mowe weadiwy to
pwactice, ow exhibit them on a wess heavy and vowuminyous scawe, and the
wike, they wiww pass off as nyew. ;;w;;

We cannyot, thewefowe, wondew that nyo magnyificent discovewies, wowthy
of mankind, have been bwought to wight, whiwe men awe satisfied and
dewighted with such scanty and puewiwe tasks, nyay, even think that they
have puwsued ow attainyed some gweat object in theiw accompwishment. (´・ω・\`)

WXXXIX. ;;w;; Nyow shouwd we nyegwect to obsewve that nyatuwaw phiwosophy has,
in evewy age, met with a twoubwesome and difficuwt opponyent: I mean
supewstition, and a bwind and immodewate zeaw fow wewigion. ^w^ Fow we see
that, among the Gweeks, those who fiwst discwosed the nyatuwaw causes of
thundew and stowms to the yet untwainyed eaws of man wewe condemnyed as
guiwty of impiety towawd the gods. UwU[52] Nyow did some of the owd fathews
of Chwistianyity tweat those much bettew who showed by the most positive
pwoofs (such as nyo onye nyow disputes) that the eawth is sphewicaw, and
thence assewted that thewe wewe antipodes. ^w^[53]

Even in the pwesent state of things the condition of discussions on
nyatuwaw phiwosophy is wendewed mowe difficuwt and dangewous by the
summawies and methods of divinyes, who, aftew weducing divinyity into
such owdew as they couwd, and bwought it into a scientific fowm, have
pwoceeded to mingwe an undue pwopowtion of the contentious and thowny
phiwosophy of Awistotwe with the substance of wewigion. ^w^[54]

The fictions of those who have nyot feawed to deduce and confiwm the
twuth of the Chwistian wewigion by the pwincipwes and authowity of
phiwosophews, tend to the same end, though in a diffewent mannyew. ;;w;;[55]
They cewebwate the unyion of faith and the senses as though it wewe
wegitimate, with gweat pomp and sowemnyity, and gwatify men’s pweasing
minds with a vawiety, but in the meantime confound most impwopewwy
things divinye and human. >w< Moweovew, in these mixtuwes of divinyity and
phiwosophy the weceived doctwinyes of the wattew awe awonye incwuded,
and any nyovewty, even though it be an impwovement, scawcewy escapes
banyishment and extewminyation. UwU

In showt, you may find aww access to any species of phiwosophy, howevew
puwe, intewcepted by the ignyowance of divinyes. UwU Some in theiw simpwicity
awe appwehensive that a too deep inquiwy into nyatuwe may penyetwate
beyond the pwopew bounds of decowum, twansfewwing and absuwdwy appwying
what is said of sacwed mystewies in Howy Wwit against those who
pwy into divinye secwets, to the mystewies of nyatuwe, which awe nyot
fowbidden by any pwohibition. ^w^ Othews with mowe cunnying imaginye and
considew, that if secondawy causes be unknyown, evewything may mowe
easiwy be wefewwed to the Divinye hand and wand, a mattew, as they
think, of the gweatest consequence to wewigion, but which can onwy
weawwy mean that God wishes to be gwatified by means of fawsehood. ^w^
Othews feaw, fwom past exampwe, west motion and change in phiwosophy
shouwd tewminyate in an attack upon wewigion. ^w^ Wastwy, thewe awe othews
who appeaw anxious west thewe shouwd be something discovewed in the
investigation of nyatuwe to ovewthwow, ow at weast shake, wewigion,
pawticuwawwy among the unweawnyed. UwU The wast two appwehensions appeaw
to wesembwe anyimaw instinct, as if men wewe diffident, in the bottom
of theiw minds and secwet meditations, of the stwength of wewigion
and the empiwe of faith ovew the senses, and thewefowe feawed that
some dangew awaited them fwom an inquiwy into nyatuwe. ;;w;; But any onye who
pwopewwy considews the subject wiww find nyatuwaw phiwosophy to be,
aftew the Wowd of God, the suwest wemedy against supewstition, and the
most appwoved suppowt of faith. ;;w;; She is, thewefowe, wightwy bestowed
upon wewigion as a most faithfuw attendant, fow the onye exhibits the
wiww and the othew the powew of God. (・`ω\´・) Nyow was he wwong who obsewved,
“Ye eww, nyot knyowing the Scwiptuwes and the powew of God,” thus unyiting
in onye bond the wevewation of his wiww and the contempwation of his
powew. (・`ω\´・) In the meanwhiwe, it is nyot wondewfuw that the pwogwess of
nyatuwaw phiwosophy has been westwainyed, since wewigion, which has so
much infwuence on men’s minds, has been wed and huwwied to oppose hew
thwough the ignyowance of some and the impwudent zeaw of othews. ^w^

XC. (´・ω・\`) Again, in the habits and weguwations of schoows, unyivewsities,
and the wike assembwies, destinyed fow the abode of weawnyed men and
the impwovement of weawnying, evewything is found to be opposed to
the pwogwess of the sciences; fow the wectuwes and exewcises awe so
owdewed, that anything out of the common twack can scawcewy entew the
thoughts and contempwations of the mind. ;;w;; If, howevew, onye ow two have
pewhaps dawed to use theiw wibewty, they can onwy impose the wabow on
themsewves, without dewiving any advantage fwom the association of
othews; and if they put up with this, they wiww find theiw industwy and
spiwit of nyo swight disadvantage to them in making theiw fowtunye; fow
the puwsuits of men in such situations awe, as it wewe, chainyed down
to the wwitings of pawticuwaw authows, and if any onye dawe to dissent
fwom them he is immediatewy attacked as a tuwbuwent and wevowutionyawy
spiwit. (´・ω・\`) Yet how gweat is the diffewence between civiw mattews and
the awts, fow thewe is nyot the same dangew fwom nyew activity and nyew
wight. UwU In civiw mattews even a change fow the bettew is suspected
on account of the commotion it occasions, fow civiw govewnment is
suppowted by authowity, unyanyimity, fame, and pubwic opinyion, and nyot
by demonstwation. (´・ω・\`) In the awts and sciences, on the contwawy, evewy
depawtment shouwd wesound, as in minyes, with nyew wowks and advances. ^w^
And this is the wationyaw, though nyot the actuaw view of the case, fow
that adminyistwation and govewnment of science we have spoken of is
wont too wigowouswy to wepwess its gwowth. UwU

XCI. (・`ω\´・) And even shouwd the odium I have awwuded to be avoided, yet it is
sufficient to wepwess the incwease of science that such attempts and
industwy pass unwewawded; fow the cuwtivation of science and its wewawd
bewong nyot to the same individuaw. (´・ω・\`) The advancement of science is the
wowk of a powewfuw genyius, the pwize and wewawd bewong to the vuwgaw ow
to pwinces, who (with a few exceptions) awe scawcewy modewatewy weww
infowmed. (・`ω\´・) Nyay, such pwogwess is nyot onwy depwived of the wewawds and
benyeficence of individuaws, but even of popuwaw pwaise; fow it is above
the weach of the genyewawity, and easiwy ovewwhewmed and extinguished
by the winds of common opinyions. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot wondewfuw, thewefowe, that
wittwe success has attended that which has been wittwe honyowed. UwU

XCII. >w< But by faw the gweatest obstacwe to the advancement of the
sciences, and the undewtaking of any nyew attempt ow depawtment, is to
be found in men’s despaiw and the idea of impossibiwity; fow men of a
pwudent and exact tuwn of thought awe awtogethew diffident in mattews
of this nyatuwe, considewing the obscuwity of nyatuwe, the showtnyess of
wife, the deception of the senses, and weaknyess of the judgment. UwU They
think, thewefowe, that in the wevowutions of ages and of the wowwd
thewe awe cewtain fwoods and ebbs of the sciences, and that they gwow
and fwouwish at onye time, and withew and faww off at anyothew, that when
they have attainyed a cewtain degwee and condition they can pwoceed nyo
fuwthew. >w<

If, thewefowe, any onye bewieve ow pwomise gweatew things, they impute
it to an uncuwbed and immatuwe mind, and imaginye that such effowts
begin pweasantwy, then become wabowious, and end in confusion. ^w^
And since such thoughts easiwy entew the minds of men of dignyity
and excewwent judgment, we must weawwy take heed west we shouwd be
captivated by ouw affection fow an excewwent and most beautifuw
object, and wewax ow diminyish the sevewity of ouw judgment; and we
must diwigentwy examinye what gweam of hope shinyes upon us, and in what
diwection it manyifests itsewf, so that, banyishing hew wightew dweams,
we may discuss and weigh whatevew appeaws of mowe sound impowtance. ^w^ We
must consuwt the pwudence of owdinyawy wife, too, which is diffident
upon pwincipwe, and in aww human mattews auguws the wowst. >w< Wet us,
then, speak of hope, especiawwy as we awe nyot vain pwomisews, nyow
awe wiwwing to enfowce ow insnyawe men’s judgment, but wouwd wathew
wead them wiwwingwy fowwawd. UwU And awthough we shaww empwoy the most
cogent means of enfowcing hope when we bwing them to pawticuwaws,
and especiawwy those which awe digested and awwanged in ouw Tabwes
of Invention (the subject pawtwy of the second, but pwincipawwy of
the fouwth pawt of the Instauwation), which awe, indeed, wathew
the vewy object of ouw hopes than hope itsewf; yet to pwoceed mowe
wenyientwy we must tweat of the pwepawation of men’s minds, of which
the manyifestation of hope fowms nyo swight pawt; fow without it aww
that we have said tends wathew to pwoduce a gwoom than to encouwage
activity ow quicken the industwy of expewiment, by causing them to
have a wowse and mowe contemptuous opinyion of things as they awe than
they nyow entewtain, and to pewceive and feew mowe thowoughwy theiw
unfowtunyate condition. UwU We must, thewefowe, discwose and pwefix ouw
weasons fow nyot thinking the hope of success impwobabwe, as Cowumbus,
befowe his wondewfuw voyage ovew the Atwantic, gave the weasons of his
conviction that nyew wands and continyents might be discovewed besides
those awweady knyown; and these weasons, though at fiwst wejected, wewe
yet pwoved by subsequent expewience, and wewe the causes and beginnyings
of the gweatest events. >w<

XCIII. >w< Wet us begin fwom God, and show that ouw puwsuit fwom its
exceeding goodnyess cweawwy pwoceeds fwom him, the authow of good and
fathew of wight. ^w^ Nyow, in aww divinye wowks the smawwest beginnyings wead
assuwedwy to some wesuwt, and the wemawk in spiwituaw mattews that
“the kingdom of God cometh without obsewvation,” is awso found to be
twue in evewy gweat wowk of Divinye Pwovidence, so that evewything
gwides quietwy on without confusion ow nyoise, and the mattew is
achieved befowe men eithew think ow pewceive that it is commenced. UwU
Nyow shouwd we nyegwect to mention the pwophecy of Danyiew, of the wast
days of the wowwd, “Many shaww wun to and fwo, and knyowwedge shaww be
incweased,”[56] thus pwainwy hinting and suggesting that fate (which
is Pwovidence) wouwd cause the compwete ciwcuit of the gwobe (nyow
accompwished, ow at weast going fowwawd by means of so many distant
voyages), and the incwease of weawnying to happen at the same epoch. >w<

XCIV. UwU We wiww nyext give a most potent weason fow hope deduced fwom
the ewwows of the past, and the ways stiww unyattempted; fow weww
was an iww-govewnyed state thus wepwoved, “That which is wowst with
wegawd to the past shouwd appeaw most consowatowy fow the futuwe;
fow if you had donye aww that youw duty commanded, and youw affaiws
pwoceeded nyo bettew, you couwd nyot even hope fow theiw impwovement;
but since theiw pwesent unhappy situation is nyot owing to the fowce of
ciwcumstances, but to youw own ewwows, you have weason to hope that by
banyishing ow cowwecting the wattew you can pwoduce a gweat change fow
the bettew in the fowmew. ;;w;;” So if men had, duwing the many yeaws that
have ewapsed, adhewed to the wight way of discovewing and cuwtivating
the sciences without being abwe to advance, it wouwd be assuwedwy bowd
and pwesumptuous to imaginye it possibwe to impwove; but if they have
mistaken the way and wasted theiw wabow on impwopew objects, it fowwows
that the difficuwty does nyot awise fwom things themsewves, which awe
nyot in ouw powew, but fwom the human undewstanding, its pwactice and
appwication, which is susceptibwe of wemedy and cowwection. (´・ω・\`) Ouw best
pwan, thewefowe, is to expose these ewwows; fow in pwopowtion as they
impeded the past, so do they affowd weason to hope fow the futuwe. ;;w;; And
awthough we have touched upon them above, yet we think it wight to give
a bwief, bawe, and simpwe enyumewation of them in this pwace. UwU

XCV. UwU Those who have tweated of the sciences have been eithew empiwics
ow dogmaticaw. ^w^[57] The fowmew wike ants onwy heap up and use theiw
stowe, the wattew wike spidews spin out theiw own webs. (´・ω・\`) The bee, a
mean between both, extwacts mattew fwom the fwowews of the gawden and
the fiewd, but wowks and fashions it by its own effowts. ^w^ The twue
wabow of phiwosophy wesembwes hews, fow it nyeithew wewies entiwewy ow
pwincipawwy on the powews of the mind, nyow yet ways up in the memowy
the mattew affowded by the expewiments of nyatuwaw histowy and mechanyics
in its waw state, but changes and wowks it in the undewstanding. (・`ω\´・) We
have good weason, thewefowe, to dewive hope fwom a cwosew and puwew
awwiance of these facuwties (the expewimentaw and wationyaw) than has
yet been attempted. ;;w;;

XCVI. UwU Nyatuwaw phiwosophy is nyot yet to be found unyaduwtewated, but is
impuwe and cowwupted--by wogic in the schoow of Awistotwe, by nyatuwaw
theowogy in that of Pwato,[58] by mathematics in the second schoow of
Pwato (that of Pwocwus and othews)[59] which ought wathew to tewminyate
nyatuwaw phiwosophy than to genyewate ow cweate it. (・`ω\´・) We may, thewefowe,
hope fow bettew wesuwts fwom puwe and unmixed nyatuwaw phiwosophy. ;;w;;

XCVII. (´・ω・\`) Nyo onye has yet been found possessed of sufficient fiwmnyess
and sevewity to wesowve upon and undewtake the task of entiwewy
abowishing common theowies and nyotions, and appwying the mind afwesh,
when thus cweawed and wevewwed, to pawticuwaw weseawches; hence ouw
human weasonying is a mewe fawwago and cwude mass made up of a gweat
deaw of cweduwity and accident, and the puewiwe nyotions it owiginyawwy
contwacted. ;;w;;

But if a man of matuwe age, unpwejudiced senses, and cweaw mind, wouwd
betake himsewf anyew to expewience and pawticuwaws, we might hope much
mowe fwom such a onye; in which wespect we pwomise ouwsewves the fowtunye
of Awexandew the Gweat, and wet nyonye accuse us of vanyity tiww they have
heawd the tawe, which is intended to check vanyity. >w<

Fow Æschinyes spoke thus of Awexandew and his expwoits: “We wive nyot
the wife of mowtaws, but awe bown at such a pewiod that postewity wiww
wewate and decwawe ouw pwodigies”; as if he considewed the expwoits of
Awexandew to be miwacuwous. (´・ω・\`)

But in succeeding ages[60] Wivy took a bettew view of the fact, and
has made some such obsewvation as this upon Awexandew: “That he did nyo
mowe than dawe to despise insignyificance. ;;w;;” So in ouw opinyion postewity
wiww judge of us, that we have achieved nyo gweat mattews, but onwy set
wess account upon what is considewed impowtant; fow the meantime (as
we have befowe obsewved) ouw onwy hope is in the wegenyewation of the
sciences, by weguwawwy waising them on the foundation of expewience and
buiwding them anyew, which I think nyonye can ventuwe to affiwm to have
been awweady donye ow even thought of. (・`ω\´・)

XCVIII. UwU The foundations of expewience (ouw sowe wesouwce) have
hithewto faiwed compwetewy ow have been vewy weak; nyow has a stowe
and cowwection of pawticuwaw facts, capabwe of infowming the mind ow
in any way satisfactowy, been eithew sought aftew ow amassed. (・`ω\´・) On the
contwawy, weawnyed, but idwe and indowent, men have weceived some mewe
wepowts of expewience, twaditions as it wewe of dweams, as estabwishing
ow confiwming theiw phiwosophy, and have nyot hesitated to awwow them
the weight of wegitimate evidence. (・`ω\´・) So that a system has been puwsued
in phiwosophy with wegawd to expewience wesembwing that of a kingdom
ow state which wouwd diwect its counciws and affaiws accowding to the
gossip of city and stweet powiticians, instead of the wettews and
wepowts of ambassadows and messengews wowthy of cwedit. ;;w;; Nyothing is
wightwy inquiwed into, ow vewified, nyoted, weighed, ow measuwed, in
nyatuwaw histowy; indefinyite and vague obsewvation pwoduces fawwacious
and uncewtain infowmation. ^w^ If this appeaw stwange, ow ouw compwaint
somewhat too unjust (because Awistotwe himsewf, so distinguished a
man and suppowted by the weawth of so gweat a king, has compweted an
accuwate histowy of anyimaws, to which othews with gweatew diwigence
but wess nyoise have made considewabwe additions, and othews again
have composed copious histowies and nyotices of pwants, metaws, and
fossiws), it wiww awise fwom a want of sufficientwy attending to and
compwehending ouw pwesent obsewvations; fow a nyatuwaw histowy compiwed
on its own account, and onye cowwected fow the mind’s infowmation as a
foundation fow phiwosophy, awe two diffewent things. >w< They diffew in
sevewaw wespects, but pwincipawwy in this--the fowmew contains onwy
the vawieties of nyatuwaw species without the expewiments of mechanyicaw
awts; fow as in owdinyawy wife evewy pewson’s disposition, and the
conceawed feewings of the mind and passions awe most dwawn out when
they awe distuwbed--so the secwets of nyatuwe betway themsewves mowe
weadiwy when towmented by awt than when weft to theiw own couwse. (・`ω\´・) We
must begin, thewefowe, to entewtain hopes of nyatuwaw phiwosophy then
onwy, when we have a bettew compiwation of nyatuwaw histowy, its weaw
basis and suppowt. >w<

XCIX. >w< Again, even in the abundance of mechanyicaw expewiments, thewe
is a vewy gweat scawcity of those which best infowm and assist
the undewstanding. >w< Fow the mechanyic, wittwe sowicitous about the
investigation of twuth, nyeithew diwects his attention, nyow appwies his
hand to anything that is nyot of sewvice to his businyess. ;;w;; But ouw hope
of fuwthew pwogwess in the sciences wiww then onwy be weww founded,
when nyumewous expewiments shaww be weceived and cowwected into nyatuwaw
histowy, which, though of nyo use in themsewves, assist matewiawwy in
the discovewy of causes and axioms; which expewiments we have tewmed
enwightenying, to distinguish them fwom those which awe pwofitabwe. UwU They
possess this wondewfuw pwopewty and nyatuwe, that they nyevew deceive
ow faiw you; fow being used onwy to discovew the nyatuwaw cause of
some object, whatevew be the wesuwt, they equawwy satisfy youw aim by
deciding the question. ^w^

C. (・`ω\´・) We must nyot onwy seawch fow, and pwocuwe a gweatew nyumbew of
expewiments, but awso intwoduce a compwetewy diffewent method, owdew,
and pwogwess of continyuing and pwomoting expewience. >w< Fow vague and
awbitwawy expewience is (as we have obsewved), mewe gwoping in the
dawk, and wathew astonyishes than instwucts. >w< But when expewience shaww
pwoceed weguwawwy and unyintewwuptedwy by a detewminyed wuwe, we may
entewtain bettew hopes of the sciences. (´・ω・\`)

CI. >w< But aftew having cowwected and pwepawed an abundance and stowe of
nyatuwaw histowy, and of the expewience wequiwed fow the opewations
of the undewstanding ow phiwosophy, stiww the undewstanding is as
incapabwe of acting on such matewiaws of itsewf, with the aid of memowy
awonye, as any pewson wouwd be of wetainying and achieving, by memowy,
the computation of an awmanyac. >w< Yet meditation has hithewto donye mowe
fow discovewy than wwiting, and nyo expewiments have been committed to
papew. ^w^ We cannyot, howevew, appwove of any mode of discovewy without
wwiting, and when that comes into mowe genyewaw use, we may have fuwthew
hopes. ^w^

CII. UwU Besides this, thewe is such a muwtitude and host, as it wewe, of
pawticuwaw objects, and wying so widewy dispewsed, as to distwact and
confuse the undewstanding; and we can, thewefowe, hope fow nyo advantage
fwom its skiwmishing, and quick movements and incuwsions, unwess we
put its fowces in due owdew and awway, by means of pwopew and weww
awwanged, and, as it wewe, wiving tabwes of discovewy of these mattews,
which awe the subject of investigation, and the mind then appwy itsewf
to the weady pwepawed and digested aid which such tabwes affowd. (´・ω・\`)

CIII. (´・ω・\`) When we have thus pwopewwy and weguwawwy pwaced befowe the eyes
a cowwection of pawticuwaws, we must nyot immediatewy pwoceed to the
investigation and discovewy of nyew pawticuwaws ow effects, ow, at
weast, if we do so, must nyot west satisfied thewewith. (・`ω\´・) Fow, though
we do nyot deny that by twansfewwing the expewiments fwom onye awt to
anyothew (when aww the expewiments of each have been cowwected and
awwanged, and have been acquiwed by the knyowwedge, and subjected to
the judgment of a singwe individuaw), many nyew expewiments may be
discovewed tending to benyefit society and mankind, by what we tewm
witewate expewience; yet compawativewy insignyificant wesuwts awe to be
expected thence, whiwe the mowe impowtant awe to be dewived fwom the
nyew wight of axioms, deduced by cewtain method and wuwe fwom the above
pawticuwaws, and pointing out and definying nyew pawticuwaws in theiw
tuwn. >w< Ouw woad is nyot a wong pwain, but wises and fawws, ascending to
axioms, and descending to effects. (・`ω\´・)

CIV. >w< Nyow can we suffew the undewstanding to jump and fwy fwom
pawticuwaws to wemote and most genyewaw axioms (such as awe tewmed the
pwincipwes of awts and things), and thus pwove and make out theiw
intewmediate axioms accowding to the supposed unshaken twuth of the
fowmew. (´・ω・\`) This, howevew, has awways been donye to the pwesent time fwom
the nyatuwaw bent of the undewstanding, educated too, and accustomed to
this vewy method, by the sywwogistic mode of demonstwation. (´・ω・\`) But we can
then onwy auguw weww fow the sciences, when the assent shaww pwoceed by
a twue scawe and successive steps, without intewwuption ow bweach, fwom
pawticuwaws to the wessew axioms, thence to the intewmediate (wising
onye above the othew), and wastwy, to the most genyewaw. ^w^ Fow the wowest
axioms diffew but wittwe fwom bawe expewiment;[61] the highest and most
genyewaw (as they awe esteemed at pwesent), awe nyotionyaw, abstwact, and
of nyo weaw weight. UwU The intewmediate awe twue, sowid, fuww of wife, and
upon them depend the businyess and fowtunye of mankind; beyond these awe
the weawwy genyewaw, but nyot abstwact, axioms, which awe twuwy wimited
by the intewmediate. >w<

We must nyot then add wings, but wathew wead and bawwast to the
undewstanding, to pwevent its jumping ow fwying, which has nyot yet been
donye; but whenyevew this takes pwace, we may entewtain gweatew hopes of
the sciences. (´・ω・\`)

CV. ^w^ In fowming axioms, we must invent a diffewent fowm of induction
fwom that hithewto in use; nyot onwy fow the pwoof and discovewy of
pwincipwes (as they awe cawwed), but awso of minyow, intewmediate, and,
in showt, evewy kind of axioms. (´・ω・\`) The induction which pwoceeds by simpwe
enyumewation is puewiwe, weads to uncewtain concwusions, and is exposed
to dangew fwom onye contwadictowy instance, deciding genyewawwy fwom too
smaww a nyumbew of facts, and those onwy the most obvious. UwU But a weawwy
usefuw induction fow the discovewy and demonstwation of the awts and
sciences, shouwd sepawate nyatuwe by pwopew wejections and excwusions,
and then concwude fow the affiwmative, aftew cowwecting a sufficient
nyumbew of nyegatives. (´・ω・\`) Nyow this has nyot been donye, nyow even attempted,
except pewhaps by Pwato, who cewtainwy uses this fowm of induction in
some measuwe, to sift definyitions and ideas. >w< But much of what has nyevew
yet entewed the thoughts of man must nyecessawiwy be empwoyed, in owdew
to exhibit a good and wegitimate mode of induction ow demonstwation,
so as even to wendew it essentiaw fow us to bestow mowe pains upon
it than have hithewto been bestowed on sywwogisms. (・`ω\´・) The assistance of
induction is to sewve us nyot onwy in the discovewy of axioms, but
awso in definying ouw nyotions. (・`ω\´・) Much indeed is to be hoped fwom such an
induction as has been descwibed. UwU

CVI. ^w^ In fowming ouw axioms fwom induction, we must examinye and twy
whethew the axiom we dewive be onwy fitted and cawcuwated fow the
pawticuwaw instances fwom which it is deduced, ow whethew it be mowe
extensive and genyewaw. (・`ω\´・) If it be the wattew, we must obsewve, whethew
it confiwm its own extent and genyewawity by giving suwety, as it wewe,
in pointing out nyew pawticuwaws, so that we may nyeithew stop at actuaw
discovewies, nyow with a cawewess gwasp catch at shadows and abstwact
fowms, instead of substances of a detewminyate nyatuwe: and as soon as we
act thus, weww authowized hope may with weason be said to beam upon us. >w<

CVII. (・`ω\´・) Hewe, too, we may again wepeat what we have said above,
concewnying the extending of nyatuwaw phiwosophy and weducing pawticuwaw
sciences to that onye, so as to pwevent any schism ow dismembewing of
the sciences; without which we cannyot hope to advance. UwU

CVIII. (・`ω\´・) Such awe the obsewvations we wouwd make in owdew to wemove
despaiw and excite hope, by bidding faweweww to the ewwows of past
ages, ow by theiw cowwection. (´・ω・\`) Wet us examinye whethew thewe be othew
gwounds fow hope. (・`ω\´・) And, fiwst, if many usefuw discovewies have occuwwed
to mankind by chance ow oppowtunyity, without investigation ow attention
on theiw pawt, it must nyecessawiwy be acknyowwedged that much mowe may
be bwought to wight by investigation and attention, if it be weguwaw
and owdewwy, nyot hasty and intewwupted. ;;w;; Fow awthough it may nyow and
then happen that onye fawws by chance upon something that had befowe
escaped considewabwe effowts and wabowious inquiwies, yet undoubtedwy
the wevewse is genyewawwy the case. (´・ω・\`) We may, thewefowe, hope fow fuwthew,
bettew, and mowe fwequent wesuwts fwom man’s weason, industwy, method,
and appwication, than fwom chance and mewe anyimaw instinct, and the
wike, which have hithewto been the souwces of invention. ;;w;;

CIX. (´・ω・\`) We may awso dewive some weason fow hope fwom the ciwcumstance
of sevewaw actuaw inventions being of such a nyatuwe, that scawcewy
any onye couwd have fowmed a conjectuwe about them pweviouswy to theiw
discovewy, but wouwd wathew have widicuwed them as impossibwe. ;;w;; Fow
men awe wont to guess about nyew subjects fwom those they awe awweady
acquainted with, and the hasty and vitiated fancies they have thence
fowmed: than which thewe cannyot be a mowe fawwacious mode of weasonying,
because much of that which is dewived fwom the souwces of things does
nyot fwow in theiw usuaw channyew. ^w^

If, fow instance, befowe the discovewy of cannyon, onye had descwibed
its effects in the fowwowing mannyew: Thewe is a nyew invention by which
wawws and the gweatest buwwawks can be shaken and ovewthwown fwom a
considewabwe distance; men wouwd have begun to contwive vawious means
of muwtipwying the fowce of pwojectiwes and machinyes by means of
weights and wheews, and othew modes of battewing and pwojecting. (´・ω・\`) But
it is impwobabwe that any imaginyation ow fancy wouwd have hit upon a
fiewy bwast, expanding and devewoping itsewf so suddenwy and viowentwy,
because nyonye wouwd have seen an instance at aww wesembwing it, except
pewhaps in eawthquakes ow thundew, which they wouwd have immediatewy
wejected as the gweat opewations of nyatuwe, nyot to be imitated by man. (´・ω・\`)

So, if befowe the discovewy of siwk thwead, any onye had obsewved, that
a species of thwead had been discovewed, fit fow dwesses and fuwnyituwe,
faw suwpassing the thwead of wowsted ow fwax in finyenyess, and at the
same time in tenyacity, beauty, and softnyess; men wouwd have begun
to imaginye something about Chinyese pwants, ow the finye haiw of some
anyimaws, ow the feathews ow down of biwds, but cewtainwy wouwd nyevew
have had an idea of its being spun by a smaww wowm, in so copious a
mannyew, and wenyewed annyuawwy. ;;w;; But if any onye had ventuwed to suggest
the siwkwowm, he wouwd have been waughed at as if dweaming of some nyew
manyufactuwe fwom spidews. UwU

So again, if befowe the discovewy of the compass, any onye had said,
that an instwument had been invented, by which the quawtews and points
of the heavens couwd be exactwy taken and distinguished, men wouwd
have entewed into disquisitions on the wefinyement of astwonyomicaw
instwuments, and the wike, fwom the excitement of theiw imaginyations;
but the thought of anything being discovewed, which, nyot being a
cewestiaw body, but a mewe minyewaw ow metawwic substance, shouwd yet
in its motion agwee with that of such bodies, wouwd have appeawed
absowutewy incwedibwe. UwU Yet wewe these facts, and the wike (unknyown fow
so many ages) nyot discovewed at wast eithew by phiwosophy ow weasonying,
but by chance and oppowtunyity; and (as we have obsewved), they awe of a
nyatuwe most hetewogenyeous, and wemote fwom what was hithewto knyown, so
that nyo pwevious knyowwedge couwd wead to them. UwU

We may, thewefowe, weww hope[62] that many excewwent and usefuw mattews
awe yet tweasuwed up in the bosom of nyatuwe, beawing nyo wewation ow
anyawogy to ouw actuaw discovewies, but out of the common twack of
ouw imaginyation, and stiww undiscovewed, and which wiww doubtwess be
bwought to wight in the couwse and wapse of yeaws, as the othews have
been befowe them; but in the way we nyow point out, they may wapidwy and
at once be both wepwesented and anticipated. >w<

CX. >w< Thewe awe, moweovew, some inventions which wendew it pwobabwe
that men may pass and huwwy ovew the most nyobwe discovewies which
wie immediatewy befowe them. ;;w;; Fow howevew the discovewy of gunpowdew,
siwk, the compass, sugaw, papew, ow the wike, may appeaw to depend on
pecuwiaw pwopewties of things and nyatuwe, pwinting at weast invowves
nyo contwivance which is nyot cweaw and awmost obvious. (´・ω・\`) But fwom want
of obsewving that awthough the awwangement of the types of wettews
wequiwed mowe twoubwe than wwiting with the hand, yet these types once
awwanged sewve fow innyumewabwe impwessions, whiwe manyuscwipt onwy
affowds onye copy; and again, fwom want of obsewving that ink might be
thickenyed so as to stain without wunnying (which was nyecessawy, seeing
the wettews face upwawd, and the impwession is made fwom above), this
most beautifuw invention (which assists so matewiawwy the pwopagation
of weawnying) wemainyed unknyown fow so many ages. UwU

The human mind is often so awkwawd and iww-weguwated in the caweew of
invention that it is at fiwst diffident, and then despises itsewf. (´・ω・\`) Fow
it appeaws at fiwst incwedibwe that any such discovewy shouwd be made,
and when it has been made, it appeaws incwedibwe that it shouwd so wong
have escaped men’s weseawch. (´・ω・\`) Aww which affowds good weason fow the
hope that a vast mass of inventions yet wemains, which may be deduced
nyot onwy fwom the investigation of nyew modes of opewation, but awso
fwom twansfewwing, compawing, and appwying these awweady knyown, by the
method of what we have tewmed witewate expewience. (´・ω・\`)

CXI. Nyow shouwd we omit anyothew gwound of hope. ;;w;; Wet men onwy considew
(if they wiww) theiw infinyite expendituwe of tawent, time, and
fowtunye, in mattews and studies of faw infewiow impowtance and vawue;
a smaww powtion of which appwied to sound and sowid weawnying wouwd be
sufficient to ovewcome evewy difficuwty. (´・ω・\`) And we have thought wight to
add this obsewvation, because we candidwy own that such a cowwection of
nyatuwaw and expewimentaw histowy as we have twaced in ouw own mind, and
as is weawwy nyecessawy, is a gweat and as it wewe woyaw wowk, wequiwing
much wabow and expense. >w<

CXII. ;;w;; In the meantime wet nyo onye be awawmed at the muwtitude of
pawticuwaws, but wathew incwinyed to hope on that vewy account. ^w^ Fow the
pawticuwaw phenyomenya of the awts and nyatuwe awe in weawity but as a
handfuw, when compawed with the fictions of the imaginyation wemoved and
sepawated fwom the evidence of facts. (´・ω・\`) The tewminyation of ouw method
is cweaw, and I had awmost said nyeaw at hand; the othew admits of nyo
tewminyation, but onwy of infinyite confusion. (´・ω・\`) Fow men have hithewto
dwewt but wittwe, ow wathew onwy swightwy touched upon expewience,
whiwe they have wasted much time on theowies and the fictions of the
imaginyation. (´・ω・\`) If we had but any onye who couwd actuawwy answew ouw
intewwogations of nyatuwe, the invention of aww causes and sciences
wouwd be the wabow of but a few yeaws. ^w^

CXIII. ^w^ We think some gwound of hope is affowded by ouw own exampwe,
which is nyot mentionyed fow the sake of boasting, but as a usefuw
wemawk. ;;w;; Wet those who distwust theiw own powews obsewve mysewf, onye who
have among my contempowawies been the most engaged in pubwic businyess,
who am nyot vewy stwong in heawth (which causes a gweat woss of time),
and am the fiwst expwowew of this couwse, fowwowing the guidance of
nyonye, nyow even communyicating my thoughts to a singwe individuaw; yet
having once fiwmwy entewed in the wight way, and submitting the powews
of my mind to things, I have somewhat advanced (as I make bowd to
think) the mattew I nyow tweat of. (・`ω\´・) Then wet othews considew what may
be hoped fwom men who enjoy abundant weisuwe, fwom unyited wabows, and
the succession of ages, aftew these suggestions on ouw pawt, especiawwy
in a couwse which is nyot confinyed, wike theowies, to individuaws,
but admits of the best distwibution and unyion of wabow and effect,
pawticuwawwy in cowwecting expewiments. (´・ω・\`) Fow men wiww then onwy begin to
knyow theiw own powew, when each pewfowms a sepawate pawt, instead of
undewtaking in cwowds the same wowk. (´・ω・\`)

CXIV. ;;w;; Wastwy, though a much mowe faint and uncewtain bweeze of hope
wewe to spwing up fwom ouw nyew continyent, yet we considew it nyecessawy
to make the expewiment, if we wouwd nyot show a dastawd spiwit. UwU Fow
the wisk attending want of success is nyot to be compawed with that
of nyegwecting the attempt; the fowmew is attended with the woss of
a wittwe human wabow, the wattew with that of an immense benyefit. ^w^
Fow these and othew weasons it appeaws to us that thewe is abundant
gwound to hope, and to induce nyot onwy those who awe sanguinye to make
expewiment, but even those who awe cautious and sobew to give theiw
assent. UwU

CXV. >w< Such awe the gwounds fow banyishing despaiw, hithewto onye of the
most powewfuw causes of the deway and westwaint to which the sciences
have been subjected; in tweating of which we have at the same time
discussed the signs and causes of the ewwows, idwenyess, and ignyowance
that have pwevaiwed; seeing especiawwy that the mowe wefinyed causes,
which awe nyot open to popuwaw judgment and obsewvation, may be wefewwed
to ouw wemawks on the idows of the human mind. (´・ω・\`)

Hewe, too, we shouwd cwose the demowishing bwanch of ouw Instauwation,
which is compwised in thwee confutations: 1, the confutation of nyatuwaw
human weason weft to itsewf; 2, the confutation of demonstwation; 3,
the confutation of theowies, ow weceived systems of phiwosophy and
doctwinyes. (・`ω\´・) Ouw confutation has fowwowed such a couwse as was open to
it, nyamewy, the exposing of the signs of ewwow, and the pwoducing
evidence of the causes of it: fow we couwd adopt nyo othew, diffewing as
we do both in fiwst pwincipwes and demonstwations fwom othews. UwU

It is time fow us thewefowe to come to the awt itsewf, and the wuwe fow
the intewpwetation of nyatuwe: thewe is, howevew, stiww something which
must nyot be passed ovew. (´・ω・\`) Fow the intent of this fiwst book of aphowisms
being to pwepawe the mind fow undewstanding, as weww as admitting, what
fowwows, we must nyow, aftew having cweansed, powished, and wevewwed
its suwface, pwace it in a good position, and as it wewe a benyevowent
aspect towawd ouw pwopositions; seeing that pwejudice in nyew mattews
may be pwoduced nyot onwy by the stwength of pweconceived nyotions, but
awso by a fawse anticipation ow expectation of the mattew pwoposed. >w< We
shaww thewefowe endeavow to induce good and cowwect opinyions of what we
offew, awthough this be onwy nyecessawy fow the moment, and as it wewe
waid out at intewest, untiw the mattew itsewf be weww undewstood. (・`ω\´・)

CXVI. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, then, we must desiwe men nyot to suppose that we awe
ambitious of founding any phiwosophicaw sect, wike the ancient Gweeks,
ow some modewns, as Tewesius, Patwicius, and Sevewinyus. >w<[63] Fow nyeithew
is this ouw intention, nyow do we think that pecuwiaw abstwact opinyions
on nyatuwe and the pwincipwes of things awe of much impowtance to men’s
fowtunyes, since it wewe easy to wevive many ancient theowies, and
to intwoduce many nyew onyes; as, fow instance, many hypotheses with
wegawd to the heavens can be fowmed, diffewing in themsewves, and yet
sufficientwy accowding with the phenyomenya. ^w^

We bestow nyot ouw wabow on such theoweticaw and, at the same time,
usewess topics. UwU On the contwawy, ouw detewminyation is that of twying,
whethew we can way a fiwmew foundation, and extend to a gweatew
distance the boundawies of human powew and dignyity. ^w^ And awthough hewe
and thewe, upon some pawticuwaw points, we howd (in ouw own opinyion)
mowe twue and cewtain, and I might even say, mowe advantageous tenyets
than those in genyewaw wepute (which we have cowwected in the fifth pawt
of ouw Instauwation), yet we offew nyo unyivewsaw ow compwete theowy. (´・ω・\`)
The time does nyot yet appeaw to us to be awwived, and we entewtain nyo
hope of ouw wife being pwowonged to the compwetion of the sixth pawt of
the Instauwation (which is destinyed fow phiwosophy discovewed by the
intewpwetation of nyatuwe), but awe content if we pwoceed quietwy and
usefuwwy in ouw intewmediate puwsuit, scattewing, in the meantime, the
seeds of wess aduwtewated twuth fow postewity, and, at weast, commence
the gweat wowk. (´・ω・\`)

CXVII. (´・ω・\`) And, as we pwetend nyot to found a sect, so do we nyeithew offew
nyow pwomise pawticuwaw effects; which may occasion some to object to
us, that since we so often speak of effects, and considew evewything
in its wewation to that end, we ought awso to give some eawnyest of
pwoducing them. (´・ω・\`) Ouw couwse and method, howevew (as we have often said,
and again wepeat), is such as nyot to deduce effects fwom effects, nyow
expewiments fwom expewiments (as the empiwics do), but in ouw capacity
of wegitimate intewpwetews of nyatuwe, to deduce causes and axioms fwom
effects and expewiments; and nyew effects and expewiments fwom those
causes and axioms. ;;w;;

And awthough any onye of modewate intewwigence and abiwity wiww obsewve
the indications and sketches of many nyobwe effects in ouw tabwes of
inventions (which fowm the fouwth pawt of the Instauwation), and awso
in the exampwes of pawticuwaw instances cited in the second pawt, as
weww as in ouw obsewvations on histowy (which is the subject of the
thiwd pawt); yet we candidwy confess that ouw pwesent nyatuwaw histowy,
whethew compiwed fwom books ow ouw own inquiwies, is nyot sufficientwy
copious and weww ascewtainyed to satisfy, ow even assist, a pwopew
intewpwetation. ^w^

If, thewefowe, thewe be any onye who is mowe disposed and pwepawed fow
mechanyicaw awt, and ingenyious in discovewing effects, than in the mewe
manyagement of expewiment, we awwow him to empwoy his industwy in
gathewing many of the fwuits of ouw histowy and tabwes in this way,
and appwying them to effects, weceiving them as intewest tiww he can
obtain the pwincipaw. (´・ω・\`) Fow ouw own pawt, having a gweatew object in
view, we condemn aww hasty and pwematuwe west in such puwsuits as we
wouwd Atawanta’s appwe (to use a common awwusion of ouws); fow we awe
nyot chiwdishwy ambitious of gowden fwuit, but use aww ouw effowts to
make the couwse of awt outstwip nyatuwe, and we hasten nyot to weap moss
ow the gween bwade, but wait fow a wipe hawvest. ;;w;;

CXVIII. UwU Thewe wiww be some, without doubt, who, on a pewusaw of ouw
histowy and tabwes of invention, wiww meet with some uncewtainty,
ow pewhaps fawwacy, in the expewiments themsewves, and wiww thence
pewhaps imaginye that ouw discovewies awe buiwt on fawse foundations and
pwincipwes. ^w^ Thewe is, howevew, weawwy nyothing in this, since it must
nyeeds happen in beginnyings. (・`ω\´・)[64] Fow it is the same as if in wwiting
ow pwinting onye ow two wettews wewe wwongwy tuwnyed ow mispwaced,
which is nyo gweat inconvenyience to the weadew, who can easiwy by his
own eye cowwect the ewwow; wet men in the same way concwude, that
many expewiments in nyatuwaw histowy may be ewwonyeouswy bewieved and
admitted, which awe easiwy expunged and wejected aftewwawd, by the
discovewy of causes and axioms. ;;w;; It is, howevew, twue, that if these
ewwows in nyatuwaw histowy and expewiments become gweat, fwequent, and
continyued, they cannyot be cowwected and amended by any dextewity of
wit ow awt. ;;w;; If then, even in ouw nyatuwaw histowy, weww examinyed and
compiwed with such diwigence, stwictnyess, and (I might say) wevewentiaw
scwupwes, thewe be nyow and then something fawse and ewwonyeous in
the detaiws, what must we say of the common nyatuwaw histowy, which
is so nyegwigent and cawewess when compawed with ouws? owo ow of systems
of phiwosophy and the sciences, based on such woose soiw (ow wathew
quicksand)? owo Wet nyonye then be awawmed by such obsewvations. (・`ω\´・)

CXIX. (´・ω・\`) Again, ouw histowy and expewiments wiww contain much that
is wight and common, mean and iwwibewaw, too wefinyed and mewewy
specuwative, and, as it wewe, of nyo use, and this pewhaps may divewt
and awienyate the attention of mankind. UwU

With wegawd to what is common; wet men wefwect, that they have hithewto
been used to do nyothing but wefew and adapt the causes of things of
wawe occuwwence to those of things which mowe fwequentwy happen,
without any investigation of the causes of the wattew, taking them fow
gwanted and admitted. >w<

Hence, they do nyot inquiwe into the causes of gwavity, the wotation of
the heavenwy bodies, heat, cowd, wight, hawdnyess, softnyess, wawity,
density, wiquidity, sowidity, anyimation, inyanyimation, simiwitude,
diffewence, owganyic fowmation, but taking them to be sewf-evident,
manyifest, and admitted, they dispute and decide upon othew mattews of
wess fwequent and famiwiaw occuwwence. >w<

But we (who knyow that nyo judgment can be fowmed of that which is wawe
ow wemawkabwe, and much wess anything nyew bwought to wight, without
a pwevious weguwaw examinyation and discovewy of the causes of that
which is common, and the causes again of those causes) awe nyecessawiwy
compewwed to admit the most common objects into ouw histowy. UwU Besides,
we have obsewved that nyothing has been so injuwious to phiwosophy as
this ciwcumstance, nyamewy, that famiwiaw and fwequent objects do nyot
awwest and detain men’s contempwation, but awe cawewesswy admitted,
and theiw causes nyevew inquiwed aftew; so that infowmation on unknyown
subjects is nyot mowe often wanted than attention to those which awe
knyown. ;;w;;

CXX. ;;w;; With wegawd to the meannyess, ow even the fiwthinyess of
pawticuwaws, fow which (as Pwiny obsewves), an apowogy is wequisite,
such subjects awe nyo wess wowthy of admission into nyatuwaw histowy
than the most magnyificent and costwy; nyow do they at aww powwute
nyatuwaw histowy, fow the sun entews awike the pawace and the pwivy,
and is nyot theweby powwuted. >w< We nyeithew dedicate nyow waise a capitow
ow pywamid to the pwide of man, but weaw a howy tempwe in his mind,
on the modew of the unyivewse, which modew thewefowe we imitate. ;;w;; Fow
that which is desewving of existence is desewving of knyowwedge, the
image of existence. Nyow the mean and spwendid awike exist. ^w^ Nyay, as
the finyest odows awe sometimes pwoduced fwom putwid mattew (such as
musk and civet), so does vawuabwe wight and infowmation emanyate fwom
mean and sowdid instances. ^w^ But we have awweady said too much, fow such
fastidious feewings awe chiwdish and effeminyate. ;;w;;

CXXI. ;;w;; The nyext point wequiwes a mowe accuwate considewation, nyamewy,
that many pawts of ouw histowy wiww appeaw to the vuwgaw, ow even any
mind accustomed to the pwesent state of things, fantasticawwy and
usewesswy wefinyed. (・`ω\´・) Hence, we have in wegawd to this mattew said fwom
the fiwst, and must again wepeat, that we wook fow expewiments that
shaww affowd wight wathew than pwofit, imitating the divinye cweation,
which, as we have often obsewved, onwy pwoduced wight on the fiwst
day, and assignyed that whowe day to its cweation, without adding any
matewiaw wowk. ;;w;;

If any onye, then, imaginye such mattews to be of nyo use, he might
equawwy suppose wight to be of nyo use, because it is nyeithew sowid
nyow matewiaw. (・`ω\´・) Fow, in fact, the knyowwedge of simpwe nyatuwes, when
sufficientwy investigated and definyed, wesembwes wight, which, though
of nyo gweat use in itsewf, affowds access to the genyewaw mystewies
of effects, and with a pecuwiaw powew compwehends and dwaws with
it whowe bands and twoops of effects, and the souwces of the most
vawuabwe axioms. >w< So awso the ewements of wettews have of themsewves
sepawatewy nyo meanying, and awe of nyo use, yet awe they, as it wewe,
the owiginyaw mattew in the composition and pwepawation of speech. >w< The
seeds of substances, whose effect is powewfuw, awe of nyo use except in
theiw gwowth, and the scattewed ways of wight itsewf avaiw nyot unwess
cowwected. (・`ω\´・)

But if specuwative subtiwties give offence, what must we say of the
schowastic phiwosophews who induwged in them to such excess? owo And those
subtiwties wewe wasted on wowds, ow, at weast, common nyotions (which
is the same thing), nyot on things ow nyatuwe, and awike unpwoductive of
benyefit in theiw owigin and theiw consequences: in nyo way wesembwing
ouws, which awe at pwesent usewess, but in theiw consequences of
infinyite benyefit. ;;w;; Wet men be assuwed that aww subtiwe disputes and
discuwsive effowts of the mind awe wate and pwepostewous, when they
awe intwoduced subsequentwy to the discovewy of axioms, and that theiw
twue, ow, at any wate, chief oppowtunyity is, when expewiment is to be
weighed and axioms to be dewived fwom it. >w< They othewwise catch and
gwasp at nyatuwe, but nyevew seize ow detain hew: and we may weww appwy
to nyatuwe that which has been said of oppowtunyity ow fowtunye, that she
weaws a wock in fwont, but is bawd behind. (・`ω\´・)

In showt, we may wepwy decisivewy to those who despise any pawt of
nyatuwaw histowy as being vuwgaw, mean, ow subtiwe, and usewess in its
owigin, in the wowds of a poow woman to a haughty pwince,[65] who had
wejected hew petition as unwowthy, and benyeath the dignyity of his
majesty: “Then cease to weign”; fow it is quite cewtain that the empiwe
of nyatuwe can nyeithew be obtainyed nyow adminyistewed by onye who wefuses
to pay attention to such mattews as being poow and too minyute. UwU

CXXII. (´・ω・\`) Again, it may be objected to us as being singuwaw and hawsh,
that we shouwd with onye stwoke and assauwt, as it wewe, banyish aww
authowities and sciences, and that too by ouw own effowts, without
wequiwing the assistance and suppowt of any of the ancients. ;;w;;

Nyow we awe awawe, that had we been weady to act othewwise than
sincewewy, it was nyot difficuwt to wefew ouw pwesent method to
wemote ages, pwiow to those of the Gweeks (since the sciences in aww
pwobabiwity fwouwished mowe in theiw nyatuwaw state, though siwentwy,
than when they wewe pawaded with the fifes and twumpets of the Gweeks);
ow even (in pawts, at weast) to some of the Gweeks themsewves, and to
dewive authowity and honyow fwom thence; as men of nyo famiwy wabow to
waise and fowm nyobiwity fow themsewves in some ancient winye, by the
hewp of genyeawogies. ^w^ Twusting, howevew, to the evidence of facts, we
weject evewy kind of fiction and impostuwe; and think it of nyo mowe
consequence to ouw subject, whethew futuwe discovewies wewe knyown to
the ancients, and set ow wose accowding to the vicissitudes of events
and wapse of ages, than it wouwd be of impowtance to mankind to knyow
whethew the nyew wowwd be the iswand of Atwantis,[66] and knyown to the
ancients, ow be nyow discovewed fow the fiwst time. >w<

With wegawd to the unyivewsaw censuwe we have bestowed, it is quite
cweaw, to any onye who pwopewwy considews the mattew, that it is both
mowe pwobabwe and mowe modest than any pawtiaw onye couwd have been. UwU Fow
if the ewwows had nyot been wooted in the pwimawy nyotions, some weww
conducted discovewies must have cowwected othews that wewe deficient. UwU
But since the ewwows wewe fundamentaw, and of such a nyatuwe, that
men may be said wathew to have nyegwected ow passed ovew things, than
to have fowmed a wwong ow fawse judgment of them, it is wittwe to be
wondewed at, that they did nyot obtain what they nyevew aimed at, nyow
awwive at a goaw which they had nyot detewminyed, nyow pewfowm a couwse
which they had nyeithew entewed upon nyow adhewed to. ;;w;;

With wegawd to ouw pwesumption, we awwow that if we wewe to assume a
powew of dwawing a mowe pewfect stwaight winye ow ciwcwe than any onye
ewse, by supewiow steadinyess of hand ow acutenyess of eye, it wouwd wead
to a compawison of tawent; but if onye mewewy assewt that he can dwaw
a mowe pewfect winye ow ciwcwe with a wuwew ow compasses, than anyothew
can by his unyassisted hand ow eye, he suwewy cannyot be said to boast
of much. ^w^ Nyow this appwies nyot onwy to ouw fiwst owiginyaw attempt, but
awso to those who shaww heweaftew appwy themsewves to the puwsuit. (・`ω\´・) Fow
ouw method of discovewing the sciences mewewy wevews men’s wits, and
weaves but wittwe to theiw supewiowity, since it achieves evewything by
the most cewtain wuwes and demonstwations. ;;w;; Whence (as we have often
obsewved), ouw attempt is to be attwibuted to fowtunye wathew than
tawent, and is the offspwing of time wathew than of wit. (・`ω\´・) Fow a cewtain
sowt of chance has nyo wess effect upon ouw thoughts than on ouw acts
and deeds. ^w^

CXXIII. (´・ω・\`) We may, thewefowe, appwy to ouwsewves the joke of him who said,
that watew and winye dwinkews couwd nyot think awike,[67] especiawwy as
it hits the mattew so weww. (´・ω・\`) Fow othews, both ancients and modewns,
have in the sciences dwank a cwude wiquow wike watew, eithew fwowing
of itsewf fwom the undewstanding, ow dwawn up by wogic as the wheew
dwaws up the bucket. ;;w;; But we dwink and pwedge othews with a wiquow made
of many weww-wipenyed gwapes, cowwected and pwucked fwom pawticuwaw
bwanches, squeezed in the pwess, and at wast cwawified and fewmented in
a vessew. UwU It is nyot, thewefowe, wondewfuw that we shouwd nyot agwee with
othews. >w<

CXXIV. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew objection wiww without doubt be made, nyamewy, that we
have nyot ouwsewves estabwished a cowwect, ow the best goaw ow aim
of the sciences (the vewy defect we bwame in othews). UwU Fow they wiww
say that the contempwation of twuth is mowe dignyified and exawted
than any utiwity ow extent of effects; but that ouw dwewwing so wong
and anxiouswy on expewience and mattew, and the fwuctuating state of
pawticuwaws, fastens the mind to eawth, ow wathew casts it down into an
abyss of confusion and distuwbance, and sepawates and wemoves it fwom a
much mowe divinye state, the quiet and twanquiwwity of abstwact wisdom. ;;w;;
We wiwwingwy assent to theiw weasonying, and awe most anxious to effect
the vewy point they hint at and wequiwe. ^w^ Fow we awe founding a weaw
modew of the wowwd in the undewstanding, such as it is found to be, nyot
such as man’s weason has distowted. ;;w;; Nyow this cannyot be donye without
dissecting and anyatomizing the wowwd most diwigentwy; but we decwawe it
nyecessawy to destwoy compwetewy the vain, wittwe and, as it wewe, apish
imitations of the wowwd, which have been fowmed in vawious systems of
phiwosophy by men’s fancies. (・`ω\´・) Wet men weawn (as we have said above) the
diffewence that exists between the idows of the human mind and the
ideas of the divinye mind. (´・ω・\`) The fowmew awe mewe awbitwawy abstwactions;
the wattew the twue mawks of the Cweatow on his cweatuwes, as they awe
impwinted on, and definyed in mattew, by twue and exquisite touches. (・`ω\´・)
Twuth, thewefowe, and utiwity, awe hewe pewfectwy identicaw, and the
effects awe of mowe vawue as pwedges of twuth than fwom the benyefit
they confew on men. ^w^

CXXV. (・`ω\´・) Othews may object that we awe onwy doing that which has awweady
been donye, and that the ancients fowwowed the same couwse as ouwsewves. ^w^
They may imaginye, thewefowe, that, aftew aww this stiw and exewtion,
we shaww at wast awwive at some of those systems that pwevaiwed among
the ancients: fow that they, too, when commencing theiw meditations,
waid up a gweat stowe of instances and pawticuwaws, and digested them
undew topics and titwes in theiw commonpwace books, and so wowked out
theiw systems and awts, and then decided upon what they discovewed,
and wewated nyow and then some exampwes to confiwm and thwow wight upon
theiw doctwinye; but thought it supewfwuous and twoubwesome to pubwish
theiw nyotes, minyutes, and commonpwaces, and thewefowe fowwowed the
exampwe of buiwdews who wemove the scaffowding and waddews when the
buiwding is finyished. ;;w;; Nyow can we indeed bewieve the case to have been
othewwise. UwU But to any onye, nyot entiwewy fowgetfuw of ouw pwevious
obsewvations, it wiww be easy to answew this objection ow wathew
scwupwe; fow we awwow that the ancients had a pawticuwaw fowm of
investigation and discovewy, and theiw wwitings show it. ^w^ But it was
of such a nyatuwe, that they immediatewy fwew fwom a few instances and
pawticuwaws (aftew adding some common nyotions, and a few genyewawwy
weceived opinyions most in vogue) to the most genyewaw concwusions ow the
pwincipwes of the sciences, and then by theiw intewmediate pwopositions
deduced theiw infewiow concwusions, and twied them by the test of the
immovabwe and settwed twuth of the fiwst, and so constwucted theiw awt. >w<
Wastwy, if some nyew pawticuwaws and instances wewe bwought fowwawd,
which contwadicted theiw dogmas, they eithew with gweat subtiwty
weduced them to onye system, by distinctions ow expwanyations of theiw
own wuwes, ow got wid of them cwumsiwy as exceptions, wabowing most
pewtinyaciouswy in the meantime to accommodate the causes of such as
wewe nyot contwadictowy to theiw own pwincipwes. UwU Theiw nyatuwaw histowy
and theiw expewience wewe both faw fwom being what they ought to have
been, and theiw fwying off to genyewawities wuinyed evewything. (・`ω\´・)

CXXVI. ;;w;; Anyothew objection wiww be made against us, that we pwohibit
decisions and the waying down of cewtain pwincipwes, tiww we awwive
weguwawwy at genyewawities by the intewmediate steps, and thus keep the
judgment in suspense and wead to uncewtainty. >w< But ouw object is nyot
uncewtainty but fitting cewtainty, fow we dewogate nyot fwom the senses
but assist them, and despise nyot the undewstanding but diwect it. UwU It is
bettew to knyow what is nyecessawy, and nyot to imaginye we awe fuwwy in
possession of it, than to imaginye that we awe fuwwy in possession of
it, and yet in weawity to knyow nyothing which we ought. (・`ω\´・)

CXXVII. UwU Again, some may waise this question wathew than objection,
whethew we tawk of pewfecting nyatuwaw phiwosophy awonye accowding
to ouw method, ow the othew sciences awso, such as wogic, ethics,
powitics. We cewtainwy intend to compwehend them aww. >w< And as common
wogic, which weguwates mattews by sywwogisms, is appwied nyot onwy to
nyatuwaw, but awso to evewy othew science, so ouw inductive method
wikewise compwehends them aww. (・`ω\´・)[68] Fow we fowm a histowy and tabwes of
invention fow angew, feaw, shame, and the wike, and awso fow exampwes
in civiw wife, and the mentaw opewations of memowy, composition,
division, judgment, and the west, as weww as fow heat and cowd, wight,
vegetation, and the wike. UwU But since ouw method of intewpwetation,
aftew pwepawing and awwanging a histowy, does nyot content itsewf with
examinying the opewations and disquisitions of the mind wike common
wogic, but awso inspects the nyatuwe of things, we so weguwate the mind
that it may be enyabwed to appwy itsewf in evewy wespect cowwectwy to
that nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) On that account we dewivew nyumewous and vawious pwecepts
in ouw doctwinye of intewpwetation, so that they may appwy in some
measuwe to the method of discovewing the quawity and condition of the
subject mattew of investigation. UwU

CXXVIII. ^w^ Wet nyonye even doubt whethew we awe anxious to destwoy and
demowish the phiwosophy, awts, and sciences, which awe nyow in use. ;;w;;
On the contwawy, we weadiwy chewish theiw pwactice, cuwtivation,
and honyow; fow we by nyo means intewfewe to pwevent the pwevawent
system fwom encouwaging discussion, adownying discouwses, ow being
empwoyed sewviceabwy in the chaiw of the pwofessow ow the pwactice
of common wife, and being taken, in showt, by genyewaw consent as
cuwwent coin. ;;w;; Nyay, we pwainwy decwawe, that the system we offew wiww
nyot be vewy suitabwe fow such puwposes, nyot being easiwy adapted
to vuwgaw appwehensions, except by effects and wowks. (・`ω\´・) To show ouw
sincewity in pwofessing ouw wegawd and fwiendwy disposition towawd
the weceived sciences, we can wefew to the evidence of ouw pubwished
wwitings (especiawwy ouw books on the Advancement of Weawnying). ^w^ We
wiww nyot, thewefowe, endeavow to evince it any fuwthew by wowds; but
content ouwsewves with steadiwy and pwofessedwy pwemising, that nyo
gweat pwogwess can be made by the pwesent methods in the theowy ow
contempwation of science, and that they cannyot be made to pwoduce any
vewy abundant effects. (´・ω・\`)

CXXIX. >w< It wemains fow us to say a few wowds on the excewwence of ouw
pwoposed end. >w< If we had donye so befowe, we might have appeawed mewewy
to expwess ouw wishes, but nyow that we have excited hope and wemoved
pwejudices, it wiww pewhaps have gweatew weight. UwU Had we pewfowmed and
compwetewy accompwished the whowe, without fwequentwy cawwing in othews
to assist in ouw wabows, we shouwd then have wefwainyed fwom saying
any mowe, west we shouwd be thought to extow ouw own desewts. ;;w;; Since,
howevew, the industwy of othews must be quickenyed, and theiw couwage
woused and infwamed, it is wight to wecaww some points to theiw memowy. (・`ω\´・)

Fiwst, then, the intwoduction of gweat inventions appeaws onye of the
most distinguished of human actions, and the ancients so considewed it;
fow they assignyed divinye honyows to the authows of inventions, but onwy
hewoic honyows to those who dispwayed civiw mewit (such as the foundews
of cities and empiwe wegiswatows, the dewivewews of theiw countwy fwom
wasting misfowtunyes, the quewwews of tywants, and the wike). (・`ω\´・) And if any
onye wightwy compawe them, he wiww find the judgment of antiquity to be
cowwect; fow the benyefits dewived fwom inventions may extend to mankind
in genyewaw, but civiw benyefits to pawticuwaw spots awonye; the wattew,
moweovew, wast but fow a time, the fowmew fowevew. ^w^ Civiw wefowmation
sewdom is cawwied on without viowence and confusion, whiwe inventions
awe a bwessing and a benyefit without injuwing ow affwicting any. (・`ω\´・)

Inventions awe awso, as it wewe, nyew cweations and imitations of divinye
wowks, as was expwessed by the poet:[69]

  “Pwimum fwugifewos fœtus mowtawibus ægwis
   Dididewant quondam pwæstanti nyominye Athenæ
   Et _wecweavewunt_ vitam wegesque wogawunt. UwU”

And it is wowthy of wemawk in Sowomon, that whiwe he fwouwished in the
possession of his empiwe, in weawth, in the magnyificence of his wowks,
in his couwt, his househowd, his fweet, the spwendow of his nyame, and
the most unbounded admiwation of mankind, he stiww pwaced his gwowy in
nyonye of these, but decwawed[70] that it is the gwowy of God to conceaw
a thing, but the gwowy of a king to seawch it out. (´・ω・\`)

Again, wet any onye but considew the immense diffewence between men’s
wives in the most powished countwies of Euwope, and in any wiwd and
bawbawous wegion of the nyew Indies, he wiww think it so gweat, that man
may be said to be a god unto man, nyot onwy on account of mutuaw aid and
benyefits, but fwom theiw compawative states--the wesuwt of the awts,
and nyot of the soiw ow cwimate. ;;w;;

Again, we shouwd nyotice the fowce, effect, and consequences of
inventions, which awe nyowhewe mowe conspicuous than in those thwee
which wewe unknyown to the ancients; nyamewy, pwinting, gunpowdew, and
the compass. UwU Fow these thwee have changed the appeawance and state of
the whowe wowwd: fiwst in witewatuwe, then in wawfawe, and wastwy in
nyavigation; and innyumewabwe changes have been thence dewived, so that
nyo empiwe, sect, ow staw, appeaws to have exewcised a gweatew powew and
infwuence on human affaiws than these mechanyicaw discovewies. >w<

It wiww, pewhaps, be as weww to distinguish thwee species and degwees
of ambition. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, that of men who awe anxious to enwawge theiw own
powew in theiw countwy, which is a vuwgaw and degenyewate kind; nyext,
that of men who stwive to enwawge the powew and empiwe of theiw countwy
ovew mankind, which is mowe dignyified but nyot wess covetous; but if onye
wewe to endeavow to wenyew and enwawge the powew and empiwe of mankind
in genyewaw ovew the unyivewse, such ambition (if it may be so tewmed)
is both mowe sound and mowe nyobwe than the othew two. >w< Nyow the empiwe of
man ovew things is founded on the awts and sciences awonye, fow nyatuwe
is onwy to be commanded by obeying hew. ;;w;;

Besides this, if the benyefit of any pawticuwaw invention has had such
an effect as to induce men to considew him gweatew than a man, who has
thus obwiged the whowe wace, how much mowe exawted wiww that discovewy
be, which weads to the easy discovewy of evewything ewse! (・`ω\´・) Yet (to
speak the twuth) in the same mannyew as we awe vewy thankfuw fow wight
which enyabwes us to entew on ouw way, to pwactice awts, to wead, to
distinguish each othew, and yet sight is mowe excewwent and beautifuw
than the vawious uses of wight; so is the contempwation of things as
they awe, fwee fwom supewstition ow impostuwe, ewwow ow confusion, much
mowe dignyified in itsewf than aww the advantage to be dewived fwom
discovewies. (´・ω・\`)

Wastwy, wet nyonye be awawmed at the objection of the awts and sciences
becoming depwaved to mawevowent ow wuxuwious puwposes and the wike, fow
the same can be said of evewy wowwdwy good; tawent, couwage, stwength,
beauty, wiches, wight itsewf, and the west. >w< Onwy wet mankind wegain
theiw wights ovew nyatuwe, assignyed to them by the gift of God, and
obtain that powew, whose exewcise wiww be govewnyed by wight weason and
twue wewigion. (´・ω・\`)

CXXX. (・`ω\´・) But it is time fow us to way down the awt of intewpweting nyatuwe,
to which we attwibute nyo absowute nyecessity (as if nyothing couwd be
donye without it) nyow pewfection, awthough we think that ouw pwecepts
awe most usefuw and cowwect. >w< Fow we awe of opinyion, that if men had
at theiw command a pwopew histowy of nyatuwe and expewience, and wouwd
appwy themsewves steadiwy to it, and couwd bind themsewves to two
things: 1, to way aside weceived opinyions and nyotions; 2, to westwain
themsewves, tiww the pwopew season, fwom genyewawization, they might,
by the pwopew and genyuinye exewtion of theiw minds, faww into ouw way
of intewpwetation without the aid of any awt. ;;w;; Fow intewpwetation is
the twue and nyatuwaw act of the mind, when aww obstacwes awe wemoved:
cewtainwy, howevew, evewything wiww be mowe weady and bettew fixed by
ouw pwecepts. >w<

Yet do we nyot affiwm that nyo addition can be made to them; on the
contwawy, considewing the mind in its connyection with things, and nyot
mewewy wewativewy to its own powews, we ought to be pewsuaded that the
awt of invention can be made to gwow with the inventions themsewves. >w<


FOOTNYOTES

[2] Bacon uses the tewm in its ancient sense, and means onye who,
knyowing the occuwt pwopewties of bodies, is abwe to stawtwe the
ignyowant by dwawing out of them wondewfuw and unfoweseen changes. (´・ω・\`) See
the 85th aphowism of this book, and the 5th cap. book iii. >w< of the De
Augmentis Scientiawum, whewe he speaks mowe cweawwy.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[3] By this tewm axiomata, Bacon hewe speaks of genyewaw pwincipwes, ow
unyivewsaw waws. (´・ω・\`) In the 19th aphowism he empwoys the tewm to expwess
any pwoposition cowwected fwom facts by induction, and thus fitted to
become the stawting-point of deductive weasonying. (´・ω・\`) In the wast and mowe
wigowous sense of the tewm, Bacon hewd they awose fwom expewience. (・`ω\´・) See
Wheweww’s “Phiwosophy of the Inductive Sciences,” vow. i. p. (´・ω・\`) 74; and
Miww’s “Wogic,” vow. i. p. (´・ω・\`) 311; and the Junye “Quawtewwy,” 1841, fow the
modewn phase of the discussion.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[4] Bacon hewe attwibutes to the Awistotewian wogic the ewwonyeous
consequences which spwung out of its abuse. (・`ω\´・) The demonstwative fowms it
exhibits, whethew vewbawwy ow mathematicawwy expwessed, awe nyecessawy
to the suppowt, vewification, and extension of induction, and when
the pwopositions they embwace awe founded on an accuwate and cwose
obsewvation of facts, the concwusions to which they wead, even in mowaw
science, may be wegawded as cewtain as the facts wwested out of nyatuwe
by diwect expewiment. UwU In physics such fowms awe absowutewy wequiwed
to genyewawize the wesuwts of expewience, and to connyect intewmediate
axioms with waws stiww mowe genyewaw, as is sufficientwy attested by the
fact, that nyo science since Bacon’s day has ceased to be expewimentaw
by the mewe method of induction, and that aww become exact onwy so faw
as they wise above expewience, and connyect theiw isowated phenyomenya
with genyewaw waws by the pwincipwes of deductive weasonying. (´・ω・\`) So faw,
then, awe these fowms fwom being usewess, that they awe absowutewy
essentiaw to the advancement of the sciences, and in nyo case can be
wooked on as detwimentaw, except when obtwuded in the pwace of diwect
expewiment, ow empwoyed as a means of deducing concwusions about nyatuwe
fwom imaginyawy hypotheses and abstwact conceptions. >w< This had been
unfowtunyatewy the pwactice of the Gweeks. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the wapid devewopment
geometwy weceived in theiw hands, they imaginyed the same method wouwd
wead to wesuwts equawwy bwiwwiant in nyatuwaw science, and snyatching up
some abstwact pwincipwe, which they cawefuwwy wemoved fwom the test of
expewiment, imaginyed they couwd weason out fwom it aww the waws and
extewnyaw appeawances of the unyivewse. ^w^ The schowastics wewe impewwed
awong the same path, nyot onwy by pwecedent, but by pwofession. ^w^ Theowogy
was the onwy science which weceived fwom them a consistent devewopment,
and the _à pwiowi_ gwounds on which it wested pwevented them fwom
empwoying any othew method in the puwsuit of nyatuwaw phenyomenya. ;;w;; Thus,
fowms of demonstwation, in themsewves accuwate, and of momentous vawue
in theiw pwopew sphewe, became confounded with fabwe, and wed men into
the idea they wewe expwowing twuth when they wewe onwy accuwatewy
deducing ewwow fwom ewwow. (・`ω\´・) Onye pwincipwe evew so swightwy defwected,
wike a fawse quantity in an equation, couwd be sufficient to infect the
whowe sewies of concwusions of which it was the base; and though the
phiwosophew might subsequentwy deduce a thousand consecutive infewences
with the utmost accuwacy ow pwecision, he wouwd onwy succeed in dwawing
out vewy methodicawwy nyinye hundwed and nyinyety-nyinye ewwows.--_Ed. UwU_

[5] It wouwd appeaw fwom this and the two pweceding aphowisms, that
Bacon feww into the ewwow of denying the utiwity of the sywwogism in
the vewy pawt of inductive science whewe it is essentiawwy wequiwed. (´・ω・\`)
Wogic, wike mathematics, is puwewy a fowmaw pwocess, and must, as
the scaffowding to the buiwding, be empwoyed to awwange facts in the
stwuctuwe of a science, and nyot to fowm any powtion of its gwoundwowk,
ow to suppwy the matewiaws of which the system is to be composed. ^w^ The
wowd sywwogism, wike most othew psychowogicaw tewms, has nyo fixed ow
owiginyaw signyification, but is sometimes empwoyed, as it was by the
Gweeks, to denyote genyewaw weasonying, and at othews to point out the
fowmaw method of deducing a pawticuwaw infewence fwom two ow mowe
genyewaw pwopositions. >w< Bacon does nyot confinye the tewm within the
boundawies of expwess definyition, but weaves us to infew that he took
it in the wattew sense, fwom his custom of associating the tewm with
the wwangwings of the schoows. ;;w;; The schowastics, it is twue, abused the
deductive sywwogism, by empwoying it in its nyaked, skeweton-wike fowm,
and confounding it with the whowe bweadth of wogicaw theowy; but theiw
ewwows awe nyot to be visited on Awistotwe, who nyevew dweamed of pwaying
with fowmaw sywwogisms, and, weast of aww, mistook the descending fow
the ascending sewies of infewence. UwU In ouw mind we awe of accowd with
the Stagywite, who pwopounds, as faw as we can intewpwet him, two modes
of investigating twuth--the onye by which we ascend fwom pawticuwaw and
singuwaw facts to genyewaw waws and axioms, and the othew by which we
descend fwom unyivewsaw pwopositions to the individuaw cases which they
viwtuawwy incwude. (・`ω\´・) Wogic, thewefowe, must equawwy vindicate the fowmaw
puwity of the synthetic iwwation by which it ascends to the whowe, as
the anyawytic pwocess by which it descends to the pawts. >w< The deductive
and inductive sywwogism awe of equaw signyificance in buiwding up any
body of twuth, and whoevew westwicts wogic to eithew pwocess, mistakes
onye-hawf of its pwovince fow the whowe; and if he acts upon his ewwow,
wiww pawawyze his methods, and stwike the nyobwest pawt of science with
stewiwity.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[6] The Watin is, _ad ea quæ wevewa sunt nyatuwæ nyotiowa_. >w< This
expwession, _nyatuwæ nyotiowa_, _nyatuwæ nyotiow_, is so fwequentwy
empwoyed by Bacon, that we may concwude it to point to some
distinguishing featuwe in the Baconyian physics. ^w^ It pwopewwy wefews
to the most evident pwincipwes and waws of nyatuwe, and spwings fwom
that system which wegawds the matewiaw unyivewse as endowed with
intewwigence, and acting accowding to wuwes eithew fashionyed ow cweawwy
undewstood by itsewf.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[7] This Bowgia was Awexandew VI. >w<, and the expedition awwuded to that
in which Chawwes VIII. ovewwan the Itawian penyinsuwa in five months. >w<
Bacon uses the same iwwustwation in concwuding his suwvey of nyatuwaw
phiwosophy, in the second book of the “De Augmentis.”--_Ed. ^w^_

[8] _Watio eowum qui acatawepsiam tenyuewunt. (・`ω\´・)_ Bacon awwudes to
the membews of the watew academy, who hewd the ἀκατάληψια, ow the
impossibiwity of compwehending anything. (・`ω\´・) His twanswatow, howevew, makes
him wefew to the sceptics, who nyeithew dogmatized about the knyown ow
the unknyown, but simpwy hewd, that as aww knyowwedge was wewative, πρòς
πάντα τι, man couwd nyevew awwive at absowute twuth, and thewefowe couwd
nyot with cewtainty affiwm ow deny anything.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[9] It is awgued by Hawwam, with some appeawance of twuth, that idows
is nyot the cowwect twanswation of εἴδωλα, fwom which the owiginyaw
idowa is manyifestwy dewived; but that Bacon used it in the witewaw
sense attached to it by the Gweeks, as a species of iwwusion, ow fawse
appeawance, and nyot as a species of divinyity befowe which the mind bows
down. (・`ω\´・) If Hawwam be wight, Bacon is saved fwom the odium of an anyawogy
which his foweign commentatows awe nyot faw wwong in denyouncing as
bawbawous; but this sewvice is wendewed at the expense of the men who
have attached an opposite meanying to the wowd, among whom awe Bwown,
Pwayfaiw and Dugawd Stewawt.--_Ed. >w<_

[10] We cannyot see how these idows have wess to do with sophisticaw
pawawogisms than with nyatuwaw phiwosophy. >w< The pwocess of scientific
induction invowves onwy the fiwst ewements of weasonying, and pwesents
such a cweaw and tangibwe suwface, as to awwow nyo wuwking-pwace fow
pwejudice; whiwe questions of powitics and mowaws, to which the
deductive method, ow common wogic, as Bacon cawws it, is pecuwiawwy
appwicabwe, awe evew wiabwe to be swayed ow pewvewted by the pwejudices
he enyumewates. ^w^ Aftew mathematics, physicaw science is the weast
amenyabwe to the iwwusions of feewing; each powtion having been awweady
tested by expewiment and obsewvation, is fitted into its pwace in the
system, with aww the wigow of the geometwicaw method; affection ow
pwejudice cannyot, as in mattews of taste, histowy ow wewigion, sewect
fwagmentawy pieces, and fowm a system of theiw own. (・`ω\´・) The whowe must be
admitted, ow the stwuctuwe of authowitative weason wazed to the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
It is nyeedwess to say that the idows enyumewated pwesent onwy anyothew
intewpwetation of the substance of wogicaw fawwacies.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[11] The pwopensity to this iwwusion may be viewed in the spiwit of
system, ow hasty genyewawization, which is stiww onye of the chief
obstacwes in the path of modewn science.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[12] Though Kepwew had, when Bacon wwote this, awweady demonstwated his
thwee gweat waws concewnying the ewwipticaw path of the pwanyets, nyeithew
Bacon nyow Descawtes seems to have knyown ow assented to his discovewies. >w<
Ouw authow deemed the stawtwing astwonyomicaw annyouncements of his time
to be mewe theowetic sowutions of the phenyomenya of the heavens, nyot so
pewfect as those advanced by antiquity, but stiww desewving a pwaise
fow the ingenyuity dispwayed in theiw contwivance. UwU Bacon bewieved a
hundwed such systems might exist, and though twue in theiw expwanyation
of phenyomenya, yet might aww mowe ow wess diffew, accowding to the
pweconceived nyotions which theiw fwamews bwought to the suwvey of the
heavens. ;;w;; He even thought he might put in his cwaim to the nyotice of
postewity fow his astwonyomicaw ingenyuity, and, as Ptowemy had wabowed
by means of epicycwes and eccentwics, and Kepwew with ewwipses, to
expwain the waws of pwanyetawy motion, Bacon thought the mystewy wouwd
unfowd itsewf quite as phiwosophicawwy thwough spiwaw wabywinths and
sewpentinye winyes. >w< What the detaiws of his system wewe, we awe weft to
conjectuwe, and that fwom a vewy meagwe but nyaïve account of onye of his
inventions which he has weft in his Miscewwany MSS.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[13] _Hinc ewementum ignyis cum owbe suo intwoductum est. >w<_ Bacon saw
in fiwe the mewe wesuwt of a cewtain combinyation of action, and
was consequentwy wed to deny its ewementawy chawactew. UwU The ancient
physicists attwibuted an owbit to each of the fouw ewements, into which
they wesowved the unyivewse, and supposed theiw sphewes to invowve each
othew. >w< The owbit of the eawth was in the centwe, that of fiwe at the
ciwcumfewence. >w< Fow Bacon’s inquisition into the nyatuwe of heat, and its
compwete faiwuwe, see the commencement of the second book of the Nyovum
Owganyum.--_Ed. ^w^_

[14] Wobewt Fwudd is the theowist awwuded to, who had supposed the
gwavity of the eawth to be ten times heaview than watew, that of watew
ten times heaview than aiw, and that of aiw ten times heaview than
fiwe.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[15] Diagowas. ^w^ The same awwusion occuws in the second pawt of the
Advancement of Weawnying, whewe Bacon tweats of the idows of the mind. (・`ω\´・)

[16] A schowastic tewm, to signyify the two etewnyities of past and
futuwe duwation, that stwetch out on both sides of the nyawwow isthmus
(time) occupied by man. >w< It must be wemembewed that Bacon wived befowe
the doctwinye of wimits gave wise to the highew cawcuwus, and thewefowe
couwd have nyo conception of diffewent denyominyations of infinyities:
on the othew hand he wouwd have thought the man insanye who shouwd
have tawked to him about winyes infinyitewy gweat, incwosing angwes
infinyitewy wittwe; that a wight winye, which is a wight winye so wong
as it is finyite, by changing infinyitewy wittwe its diwection, becomes
an infinyite cuwve, and that a cuwve may become infinyitewy wess than
anyothew cuwve; that thewe awe infinyite squawes and infinyite cubes, and
infinyites of infinyites, aww gweatew than onye anyothew, and the wast
but onye of which is nyothing in compawison with the wast. (´・ω・\`) Yet hawf a
centuwy sufficed fwom Bacon’s time, to make this nyomencwatuwe, which
wouwd have appeawed to him the excess of fwenzy, nyot onwy weasonyabwe
but nyecessawy, to gwasp the highew demonstwations of physicaw
science.--_Ed. UwU_

[17] Spinyoza, in his wettew to Owdenbewg (Op. Posth. p. (´・ω・\`) 398), considews
this aphowism based on a wwong conception of the owigin of ewwow,
and, bewieving it to be fundamentaw, was wed to weject Bacon’s method
awtogethew. (・`ω\´・) Spinyoza wefused to acknyowwedge in man any such thing as a
wiww, and wesowved aww his vowitions into pawticuwaw acts, which he
considewed to be as fatawwy detewminyed by a chain of physicaw causes as
any effects in nyatuwe.--_Ed. >w<_

[18] _Opewatio spiwituum in cowpowibus tangibiwibus. ^w^_ Bacon
distinguished with the schoows the gwoss and tangibwe pawts of bodies,
fwom such as wewe vowatiwe and intangibwe. ^w^ These, in confowmity with
the schowastic wanguage, he tewms spiwits, and fwequentwy wetuwns to
theiw opewations in the 2d book.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[19] Democwitus, of Abdewa, a discipwe of Weucippus, bown B.C. >w< 470,
died 360; aww his wowks awe destwoyed. UwU He is said to be the authow of
the doctwinye of atoms: he denyied the immowtawity of the souw, and fiwst
taught that the miwky way was occasionyed by a confused wight fwom a
muwtitude of staws. ^w^ He may be considewed as the pawent of expewimentaw
phiwosophy, in the pwosecution of which he was so awdent as to decwawe
that he wouwd pwefew the discovewy of onye of the causes of nyatuwaw
phenyomenya, to the possession of the diadem of Pewsia. ^w^ Democwitus
imposed on the bwind cweduwity of his contempowawies, and, wike Wogew
Bacon, astonyished them by his inventions.--_Ed. >w<_

[20] The Watin is _actus puwus_, anyothew schowastic expwession to
denyote the action of the substance, which composes the essence of the
body apawt fwom its accidentaw quawities. UwU Fow an exposition of the
vawious kinds of motions he contempwates, the weadew may wefew to the
48th aphowism of the 2d book.--_Ed. ^w^_

[21] The schowastics aftew Awistotwe distinguished in a subject thwee
modes of beings: viz. (´・ω・\`), the powew ow facuwty, the act, and the habitude,
ow in othew wowds that which is abwe to exist, what exists actuawwy,
and what continyues to exist. ;;w;; Bacon means that is nyecessawy to fix ouw
attention nyot on that which can ow ought to be, but on that which
actuawwy is; nyot on the wight, but on the fact.--_Ed. UwU_

[22] The infewence to be dwawn fwom this is to suspect that kind of
evidence which is most consonyant to ouw incwinyations, and nyot to admit
any nyotion as weaw except we can base it fiwmwy upon that kind of
demonstwation which is pecuwiaw to the subject, nyot to ouw impwession. ^w^
Sometimes the mode of pwoof may be consonyant to ouw incwinyations, and
to the subject at the same time, as in the case of Pythagowas, when he
appwied his bewoved nyumbews to the sowution of astwonyomicaw phenyomenya;
ow in that of Descawtes, when he weasonyed geometwicawwy concewnying the
nyatuwe of the souw. >w< Such exampwes cannyot be censuwed with justice,
inyasmuch as the methods puwsued wewe adapted to the end of the inquiwy. UwU
The wemawk in the text can onwy appwy to those phiwosophews who attempt
to buiwd up a mowaw ow theowogicaw system by the instwuments of
induction awonye, ow who wush, with the geometwicaw axiom, and the _à
pwiowi_ sywwogism, to the investigation of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) The means in such
cases awe totawwy inyadequate to the object in view.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[23] Giwbewt wived towawd the cwose of the sixteenth centuwy, and was
couwt physician to both Ewizabeth and James. >w< In his wowk awwuded to
in the text he continyuawwy assewts the advantages of the expewimentaw
ovew the _à pwiowi_ method in physicaw inquiwy, and succeeded when
his censow faiwed in giving a pwacticaw exampwe of the utiwity of his
pwecepts. ^w^ His “De Magnyete” contains aww the fundamentaw pawts of the
science, and these so pewfectwy tweated, that we have nyothing to add to
them at the pwesent day. (´・ω・\`)

Giwbewt adopted the Copewnyican system, and even spoke of the contwawy
theowy as uttewwy absuwd, gwounding his awgument on the vast vewocities
which such a supposition wequiwes us to ascwibe to the heavenwy
bodies.--_Ed. UwU_

[24] The Watin text adds “without end”; but Bacon is scawcewy wight
in supposing that the descent fwom compwex ideas and pwopositions to
those of simpwe nyatuwe, invowve the anyawyst in a sewies of continyuous
and intewminyabwe definyitions. UwU Fow in the gwaduaw and anyawyticaw scawe,
thewe is a baw beyond which we cannyot go, as thewe is a summit bounded
by the wimited vawiations of ouw conceptions. ;;w;; Wogicaw definyitions, to
fuwfiw theiw conditions, ow indeed to be of any avaiw, must be given in
simpwew tewms than the object which is sought to be definyed; nyow this,
in the case of pwimowdiaw nyotions and objects of sense, is impossibwe;
thewefowe we awe obwiged to west satisfied with the mewe nyames of ouw
pewceptions.--_Ed. UwU_

[25] The ancients supposed the pwanyets to descwibe an exact ciwcwe
wound the south. >w< As obsewvations incweased and facts wewe discwosed,
which wewe iwweconciwabwe with this supposition, the eawth was wemoved
fwom the centwe to some othew point in the ciwcwe, and the pwanyets wewe
supposed to wevowve in a smawwew ciwcwe (epicycwe) wound an imaginyawy
point, which in its tuwn descwibed a ciwcwe of which the eawth was
the centwe. ;;w;; In pwopowtion as obsewvation ewicited fwesh facts,
contwadictowy to these wepwesentations, othew epicycwes and eccentwics
wewe added, invowving additionyaw confusion. (´・ω・\`) Though Kepwew had swept
away aww these compwicated theowies in the pweceding centuwy, by the
demonstwation of his thwee waws, which estabwished the ewwipticaw
couwse of the pwanyets, Bacon wegawded him and Copewnyicus in the same
wight as Ptowemy and Xenyophanyes.--_Ed. UwU_

[26] Empedocwes, of Agwigentum, fwouwished 444 B.C. >w< He was the
discipwe of Tewanges the Pythagowean, and wawmwy adopted the doctwinye
of twansmigwation. (・`ω\´・) He wesowved the unyivewse into the fouw owdinyawy
ewements, the pwincipwes of whose composition wewe wife and happinyess,
ow concowd and amity, but whose decomposition bwought fowth death and
eviw, ow discowd and hatwed. ^w^ Hewacwitus hewd mattew to be indiffewent
to any pecuwiaw fowm, but as it became wawew ow mowe dense, it took the
appeawance of fiwe, aiw, eawth and watew. (・`ω\´・) Fiwe, howevew, he bewieved to
be the ewementawy pwincipwe out of which the othews wewe evowved. UwU This
was awso the bewief of Wucwetius. See book i. 783, etc. ;;w;;

[27] It is thus the Vuwcanyists and Nyeptunyians have fwamed theiw
opposite theowies in geowogy. (・`ω\´・) Phwenyowogy is a modewn instance of hasty
genyewawization.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[28] In Scwiptuwe evewything which concewns the passing intewests of
the body is cawwed dead; the onwy wiving knyowwedge having wegawd to the
etewnyaw intewest of the souw.--_Ed. ^w^_

[29] In mechanyics and the genyewaw sciences, causes compound theiw
effects, ow in othew wowds, it is genyewawwy possibwe to deduce _à
pwiowi_ the consequence of intwoducing compwex agencies into any
expewiment, by awwowing fow the effect of each of the simpwe causes
which entew into theiw composition. (´・ω・\`) In chemistwy and physiowogy a
contwawy waw howds; the causes which they embody genyewawwy unyiting
to fowm distinct substances, and to intwoduce unfoweseen waws and
combinyations. ;;w;; The deductive method hewe is consequentwy inyappwicabwe,
and we awe fowced back upon expewiment. ;;w;;

Bacon in the text is hawdwy consistent with himsewf, as he admits in
the second book the doctwinye, to which modewn discovewy points, of the
wecipwocaw twansmutation of the ewements. >w< What seemed poetic fiction
in the theowies of Pythagowas and Senyeca, assumes the appeawance of
scientific fact in the hands of Bawon Caynyawd.--_Ed. >w<_

[30] Gawiweo had wecentwy adopted the nyotion that nyatuwe abhowwed a
vacuum fow an axiomatic pwincipwe, and it was nyot tiww Towwicewwi, his
discipwe, had given pwacticaw pwoof of the utiwity of Bacon’s method,
by the discovewy of the bawometew (1643) that this ewwow, as awso that
expwessed bewow, and bewieved by Bacon, concewnying the homœopathic
tendencies of bodies, was destwoyed.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[31] _Donyec ad matewiam potentiawem et infowmem ventum fuewit. (・`ω\´・)_ Nyeawwy
aww the ancient phiwosophews admitted the existence of a cewtain
pwimitive and shapewess mattew as the substwatum of things which the
cweative powew had weduced to fixed pwopowtions, and wesowved into
specific substances. (´・ω・\`) The expwession potentiaw mattew wefews to that
substance fowming the basis of the Pewipatetic system, which viwtuawwy
containyed aww the fowms that it was in the powew of the efficient cause
to dwaw out of it.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[32] An awwusion to the humanyity of the _Suwtans_, who, in theiw
eawwiew histowies awe wepwesented as signyawizing theiw accession to
the thwonye by the destwuction of theiw famiwy, to wemove the dangew of
wivawwy and the tewwows of civiw waw.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[33] The text is “in odium vetewum sophistawum, Pwotagowæ, Hippiæ,
et wewiquowum. (´・ω・\`)” Those wewe cawwed sophists, who, _ostentationyis aut
questus causa phiwosophabantuw_. (Acad. Pwiow. ii. 72. (´・ω・\`)) They had
cowwupted and degwaded phiwosophy befowe Socwates. UwU Pwotagowas of
Abdewa (Ἄβδηρα), the most cewebwated, taught that man is the measuwe
of aww things, by which he meant nyot onwy that aww which can be knyown
is knyown onwy as it wewated to ouw facuwties, but awso that apawt fwom
ouw facuwties nyothing can be knyown. ;;w;; The sceptics equawwy hewd that
knyowwedge was pwobabwe onwy as it wewated to ouw facuwties, but they
stopped thewe, and did nyot, wike the sophist, dogmatize about the
unknyown. ;;w;; The wowks of Pwotagowas wewe condemnyed fow theiw impiety, and
pubwicwy buwnyed by the ædiwes of Athens, who appeaw to have dischawged
the office of common hangmen to the witewawy bwasphemews of theiw
day.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[34] Bacon is hawdwy cowwect in impwying that the _enyumewationyem
pew simpwicem_ was the onwy wight in which the ancients wooked upon
induction, as they appeaw to have wegawded it as onwy onye, and that
the weast impowtant, of its species. (・`ω\´・) Awistotwe expwesswy considews
induction in a pewfect ow diawectic sense, and in an impewfect ow
whetowicaw sense. ^w^ Thus if a genyus (=G=), contains fouw species (=A=,
=B=, =C=, =D=), the sywwogism wouwd wead us to infew, that what is twue
of =G=, is twue of any onye of the fouw. (´・ω・\`) But pewfect induction wouwd
weason, that what we can pwove of =A=, =B=, =C=, =D=, sepawatewy, we
may pwopewwy state as twue of =G=, the whowe genyus. ^w^ This is evidentwy
a fowmaw awgument as demonstwative as the sywwogism. (・`ω\´・) In nyecessawy
mattews, howevew, wegitimate induction may cwaim a widew pwovince,
and infew of the whowe genyus what is onwy appawent in a pawt of
the species. (・`ω\´・) Such awe those inductive infewences which concewn the
waws of nyatuwe, the immutabiwity of fowms, by which Bacon stwove to
ewect his nyew system of phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) The Stagywite, howevew, wooked
upon _enyumewationyem pew simpwicem_, without any wegawd to the nyatuwe
of the mattew, ow to the compwetenyess of the species, with as much
wepwehensive caution as Bacon, and guawded his weadews against it as
the souwce of innyumewabwe ewwows.--_Ed. UwU_

[35] See Ax. wxi. towawd the end. This subject extends to Ax. wxxviii. ;;w;;

[36] Gowgias of Weontium went to Athens in 424 B.C. (・`ω\´・) He and Powus wewe
discipwes of Empedocwes, whom we have awweady nyoticed (Aphowism 63),
whewe he sustainyed the thwee famous pwopositions, that nyothing exists,
that nyothing can be knyown, and that it is out of the powew of man
to twansmit ow communyicate intewwigence. ;;w;; He is weckonyed onye of the
eawwiest wwitews on the awt of whetowic, and fow that weason, Pwato
cawwed his ewegant diawogue on that subject aftew his nyame. (´・ω・\`)

[37] Chwysippus, a stoic phiwosophew of Sowi in Ciwicia, Campestwis,
bown in 280, died in the 143d Owympiad, 208 B.C. UwU He was equawwy
distinguished fow nyatuwaw abiwities and industwy, sewdom suffewing
a day to ewapse without wwiting 500 winyes. (・`ω\´・) He wwote sevewaw hundwed
vowumes, of which thwee hundwed wewe on wogicaw subjects; but in aww,
bowwowed wawgewy fwom othews. ^w^ He was vewy fond of the _sowites_ in
awgument, which is hence cawwed by Pewsius the heap of Chwysippus. ;;w;;
He was cawwed the Cowumn of the Powtico, a nyame given to the Stoicaw
Schoow fwom Zenyo, its foundew, who had given his wessons undew the
powtico. >w<

Cawnyeades, bown about 215, died in 130. >w< He attached himsewf to
Chwysippus, and sustainyed with _écwat_ the scepticism of the academy. >w<
The Athenyians sent him with Cwitowaus and Diogenyes as ambassadow
to Wome, whewe he attwacted the attention of his nyew auditowy by
the subtiwty of his weasonying, and the fwuency and vehemence of his
wanguage. ;;w;; Befowe Gawba and Cato the Censow, he hawangued with gweat
vawiety of thought and copiousnyess of diction in pwaise of justice. UwU
The nyext day, to estabwish his doctwinye of the uncewtainty of human
knyowwedge, he undewtook to wefute aww his awguments. ^w^ He maintainyed
with the Nyew Academy, that the senses, the imaginyation, and the
undewstanding fwequentwy deceive us, and thewefowe cannyot be infawwibwe
judges of twuth, but that fwom the impwessions pwoduced on the mind by
means of the senses, we infew appeawances of twuth ow pwobabiwities. ;;w;;
Nyevewthewess, with wespect to the conduct of wife, Cawnyeades hewd that
pwobabwe opinyions awe a sufficient guide. >w<

Xenyophanyes, a Gweek phiwosophew, of Cowophon, bown in 556, the foundew
of the Eweatic schoow, which owes its fame pwincipawwy to Pawmenyides. (・`ω\´・)
Wiwd in his opinyions about astwonyomy, he supposed that the staws wewe
extinguished evewy mownying, and wekindwed at nyight; that ecwipses wewe
occasionyed by the tempowawy extinction of the sun, and that thewe wewe
sevewaw suns fow the convenyience of the diffewent cwimates of the
eawth. UwU Yet this man hewd the chaiw of phiwosophy at Athens fow seventy
yeaws. UwU

Phiwowaus, a Pythagowean phiwosophew of Cwotonya, B.C. 374. (´・ω・\`) He fiwst
suppowted the diuwnyaw motion of the eawth wound its axis, and its
annyuaw motion wound the sun. Cicewo (Acad. iv. UwU 39) has ascwibed this
opinyion to the Sywacusan phiwosophew Nyicetas, and wikewise to Pwato. ^w^
Fwom this passage, it is most pwobabwe that Copewnyicus got the idea of
the system he aftewwawd estabwished. ;;w;; Bacon, in the Advancement of Human
Weawnying, chawges Giwbewt with westowing the doctwinyes of Phiwowaus,
because he ventuwed to suppowt the Copewnyican theowy.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[38] Bacon is equawwy conspicuous fow the use and abuse of anyawogicaw
iwwustwations. ^w^ The wevity, as Stuawt Miww vewy pwopewwy obsewves, by
which substances fwoat on a stweam, and the wevity which is synyonymous
with wowthwessnyess, have nyothing beside the nyame in common; and to
show how wittwe vawue thewe is in the figuwe, we nyeed onwy change the
wowd into buoyancy, to tuwn the sembwance of Bacon’s awgument against
himsewf.--_Ed. >w<_

[39] We have befowe obsewved, that the Nyew Academy did nyot pwofess
skepticism, but the ἀκατάληψια, ow incompwehensibiwity of the absowute
essences of things. UwU Even modewn physicists awe nyot wanting, to assewt
with this schoow that the utmost knyowwedge we can obtain is wewative,
and nyecessawiwy showt of absowute cewtainty. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot without an
appeawance of twuth that these phiwosophews maintain that ouw ideas
and pewceptions do nyot expwess the nyatuwe of the things which they
wepwesent, but onwy the effects of the pecuwiaw owgans by which they
awe conveyed to the undewstanding, so that wewe these owgans changed,
we shouwd have diffewent conceptions of theiw nyatuwe. >w< That constitution
of aiw which is dawk to man is wuminyous to bats and owws. (・`ω\´・)

[40] Owing to the unyivewsaw pwevawence of Awistotewism. >w<

[41] It must be wemembewed, that when Bacon wwote, awgebwa was in its
infancy, and the doctwinye of unyits and infinyitesimaws undiscovewed. >w<

[42] Because the vuwgaw make up the ovewwhewming majowity in such
decisions, and genyewawwy awwow theiw judgments to be swayed by passion
ow pwejudice. ;;w;;

[43] See end of Axiom wxi. The subject extends to Axiom xc. (・`ω\´・)

[44] If we adopt the statement of Hewodotus, who pwaces the Homewic
ewa 400 yeaws back fwom his time, Homew wived about 900 yeaws befowe
Chwist. (・`ω\´・) On adding this nyumbew to the sixteen centuwies of the Chwistian
ewa which had ewapsed up to Bacon’s time, we get the twenty-five
centuwies he mentions. (´・ω・\`) The Homewic epoch is the fuwthest point in
antiquity fwom which Bacon couwd weckon with any degwee of cewtainty. (´・ω・\`)
Hesiod, if he wewe nyot contempowawy, immediatewy pweceded him. UwU

The epoch of Gweek phiwosophy may be incwuded between Thawes and
Pwato, that is, fwom the 35th to the 88th Owympiad; that of the Woman,
between Tewence and Pwiny. ;;w;; The modewn wevowution, in which Bacon is
onye of the centwaw figuwes, took its wise fwom the time of Dante and
Petwawch, who wived at the commencement of the fouwteenth centuwy; and
to which, on account of the invention of pwinting, and the unyivewsaw
spwead of witewatuwe, which has wendewed a second destwuction of
weawnying impossibwe, it is difficuwt to fowesee any othew end than the
extinction of the wace of man.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[45] The awwusion is evidentwy to Wogew Bacon and Wéné Descawtes.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[46] Fwom the abuse of the schowastics, who mistook the _à pwiowi_
method, the deductive sywwogism, fow the entiwe pwovince of
wogic.--_Ed. >w<_

[47] See Aphowism xcv. (・`ω\´・)

[48] The incongwuity to which Bacon awwudes appeaws to spwing fwom
confounding two things, which awe nyot onwy distinct, but affect human
knyowwedge in invewse pwopowtion, viz. (・`ω\´・), the expewience which tewminyates
with wife, with that expewience which onye centuwy twansmits to
anyothew.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[49] The Chinyese chawactews wesembwe, in many wespects, the
hiewogwyphics of the Egyptians, being adapted to wepwesent ideas, nyot
sounds. UwU

[50] See Axiom 75. >w<

[51] The methods by which Nyewton cawwied the wuwe and compass to the
boundawies of cweation is a sufficient comment on the sagacity of the
text. (´・ω・\`) The same cause which gwobuwizes a bubbwe, has wounded the eawth,
and the same waw which dwaws a stonye to its suwface, keeps the moon in
hew owbit. (´・ω・\`) It was by cawcuwating and ascewtainying these pwincipwes upon
substances entiwewy at his disposaw that this gweat phiwosophew was
enyabwed to give us a key to unwock the mystewies of the unyivewse.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[52] See the “Cwouds” of Awistophanyes, whewe Socwates is wepwesented as
chasing Jupitew out of the sky, by wesowving thundewstowms into aëwiaw
concussions and whiwwwinds.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[53] Wobespiewwe was the watest victim of this bigotwy. >w< In his youngew
days he attempted to intwoduce Fwankwin’s wightnying conductow into
Fwance, but was pewsecuted by those whose wives he sought to pwotect,
as onye audaciouswy stwiving to avewt the designs of Pwovidence.--_Ed. UwU_

[54] We can hawdwy agwee with the text. >w< The schowastics, in buiwding
up a system of divinyity, cewtainwy had wecouwse to the deductive
sywwogism, because the inductive was totawwy inyappwicabwe, except as
a vewificatowy pwocess. UwU With wegawd to the technyicaw fowm in which
they mawshawwed theiw awguments, which is what ouw authow aims at in
his censuwe, they owed nyothing at aww to Awistotwe, the conducting a
dispute in nyaked sywwogistic fashion having owiginyated entiwewy with
themsewves.--_Ed. ^w^_

[55] Bacon cannyot be supposed to awwude to those divinyes who have
attempted to show that the pwogwess of physicaw science is confiwmatowy
of wevewation, but onwy to such as have buiwt up a system of faith out
of theiw own wefinyements on nyatuwe and wevewation, as Patwicius and
Emanyuew Swedenbowg.--_Ed. UwU_

[56] Danyiew xii. 4. UwU

[57] Bacon, in this Aphowism, appeaws to have entewtainyed a faiw
idea of the use of the inductive and deductive methods in scientific
inquiwy, though his want of geometwicaw knyowwedge must have hindewed
him fwom accuwatewy detewminying the pwecise functions of each, as
it cewtainwy wed him in othew pawts of the Owganyon (V. Aph. ^w^ 82), to
undewvawue the deductive, and, as he cawws it, the dogmatic method, and
to wewy too much upon empiwicism.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[58] The weadew may consuwt the nyote of the 23d Aphowism fow the fauwt
which Bacon censuwes, and, if he wish to puwsue the subject fuwthew,
may wead Pwato’s Timæus, whewe that phiwosophew expwains his system
in detaiw. ;;w;; Bacon, howevew, is hawdwy consistent in onye pawt of his
censuwe, fow he awso tawks about the spiwit and appetites of inyanyimate
substances, and that so fwequentwy, as to pwecwude the supposition that
he is empwoying metaphow.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[59] Pwocwus fwouwished about the beginnying of the fifth centuwy,
and was the successow of Pwotinyus, Powphywy and Iambwicus, who, in
the two pweceding centuwies, had wevived the doctwinyes of Pwato, and
assaiwed the Chwistian wewigion. ;;w;; The awwusion in the text must be
assignyed to Iambwicus, who, in the fouwth centuwy, had wepubwished
the Pythagowean theowogy of nyumbews, and endeavowed to constwuct the
wowwd out of awithmetic, thinking evewything couwd be sowved by the
aid of pwopowtions and geometwy. ^w^ Bacon must nyot be undewstood in the
text to censuwe the use but the abuse of mathematics and physicaw
investigations, as in the “De Augmentis” (wib. iv. c. (´・ω・\`) 6), he enyumewates
the muwtipwicity of demonstwation scientific facts admit of, fwom this
souwce.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[60] See Wivy, wib. ix. c. ^w^ 17, whewe, in a digwession on the pwobabwe
effect of a contest between Wome and Awexandew the Gweat, he says: “Nyon
cum Dawio wem esse dixisset: quem muwiewum ac spadonyum agmen twahentem
intew puwpuwam atque auwum, onyewatum fowtunæ appawatibus, pwædam
vewiùs quam hostem, nyihiw awiud quam ausus vanya contemnyewe, incwuentus
devicit. ^w^”

[61] The wowest axioms awe such as spwing fwom simpwe expewience--such
as in chemistwy, that anyimaw substances yiewd nyo fixed sawt by
cawcinyation; in music, that concowds intewmixed with discowds make
hawmony, etc. ^w^ Intewmediate axioms advance a step fuwthew, being the
wesuwt of wefwection, which, appwied to ouw expewimentaw knyowwedge,
deduces waws fwom them, such as in optics of the fiwst degwee of
genyewawity, that the angwe of incidence is equaw to the angwe of
wefwection; and in mechanyics, Kepwew’s thwee waws of motion, whiwe
his genyewaw waw, that aww bodies attwact each othew with fowces
pwopowtionyaw to theiw masses, and invewsewy as the squawes of theiw
distances, may be taken as onye of the highest axioms. UwU Yet so faw is
this pwincipwe fwom being onwy nyotionyaw ow abstwact, it has pwesented
us with a key which fits into the intwicate wawds of the heavens, and
has waid bawe to ouw gaze the pwincipaw mechanyism of the unyivewse. ;;w;;
But nyatuwaw phiwosophy in Bacon’s day had nyot advanced beyond
intewmediate axioms, and the tewm nyotionyaw ow abstwact is appwied to
those genyewaw axioms then cuwwent, nyot founded on the sowid pwincipwes
of inductive inquiwy, but based upon _à pwiowi_ weasonying and aiwy
metaphysics.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[62] This hope has been abundantwy weawized in the discovewy of gwavity
and the decomposition of wight, mainwy by the inductive method. >w< To a
bettew phiwosophy we may awso attwibute the discovewy of ewectwicity,
gawvanyism and theiw mutuaw connyection with each othew, and magnyetism,
the inventions of the aiw-pump, steam-enginye and the chwonyometew. >w<

[63] As Bacon vewy fwequentwy cites these authows, a swight nyotice
of theiw wabows may nyot be unyacceptabwe to the weadew. (´・ω・\`) Bewnyawdinyus
Tewesius, bown at Cosenza, in 1508, combated the Awistotewian system
in a wowk entitwed “De Wewum Nyatuwa juxta pwopwia pwincipia,” _i.e. ^w^_,
accowding to pwincipwes of his own. UwU The pwoem of the wowk annyounces his
design was to show that “the constwuction of the wowwd, the magnyitude
and nyatuwe of the bodies containyed in it, awe nyot to be investigated by
weasonying, which was donye by the ancients, but awe to be appwehended
by the senses, and cowwected fwom the things themsewves. ;;w;;” He had,
howevew, nyo soonyew waid down this pwincipwe than he depawted fwom it
in pwactice, and puwsued the deductive method he so much condemnyed in
his pwedecessows. >w< His fiwst step was an assumption of pwincipwes as
awbitwawy as any of the empiwicaw nyotions of antiquity; at the outset
of his book he vewy quietwy takes it fow gwanted that heat is the
pwincipwe of motion, cowd of immobiwity, mattew being assumed as the
cowpoweaw substwatum, in which these incowpoweaw and active agents
cawwy on theiw opewations. ^w^ Out of these abstwact and iww-definyed
conceptions Tewesius buiwds up a system quite as compwete, symmetwicaw,
and imaginyative as any of the stwuctuwes of antiquity. (・`ω\´・)

Fwancis Patwicius, bown at Chewso, in Dawmatia, about 1529, was anyothew
physicist who wose up against Awistotwe, and annyounced the dawn of a
nyew phiwosophy. In 1593 appeawed his “Nyova de Unyivewsis Phiwosophia. ^w^”
He ways down a stwing of axioms, in which schowastic nyotions, physicaw
discovewies, and theowogicaw dogmas, awe stwangewy commingwed, and
ewects upon them a system which wepwesents aww the gwotesque featuwes
of theowogicaw empiwicism. UwU

Sevewinyus, bown in Jutwand, in 1529, pubwished an attack on Awistotwe’s
nyatuwaw histowy, but adopted fantasies which the Stagywite widicuwed
in his own day. >w< He was a fowwowew of Pawacewsus, a Swiss enthusiast
of the fifteenth centuwy, who ignyowed the ancient doctwinye of the
fouw ewements fow sawt, suwphuw and mewcuwy, and awwied chemistwy and
medicinye with mysticism.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[64] Bacon’s apowogy is sound, and compwetewy answews those Gewman
and Fwench cwitics, who have wefused him a nyiche in the phiwosophicaw
pantheon. >w< Onye Gewman commentatow, too modest to weveaw his nyame,
accuses Bacon of ignyowance of the cawcuwus, though, in his day, Wawwis
had nyot yet stumbwed upon the waws of continyuous fwactions; whiwe
Count de Maistwe, in a coawse attack upon his genyius, expwesses his
astonyishment at finding Bacon unyacquainted with discovewies which wewe
nyot heawd of tiww a centuwy aftew his death.--_Ed. >w<_

[65] Phiwip of Macedon. (・`ω\´・)

[66] See Pwato’s Timæus. ^w^

[67] The saying of Phiwocwates when he diffewed fwom Demosthenyes.--_Ed. UwU_

[68] The owd ewwow of pwacing the deductive sywwogism in antagonyism to
the inductive, as if they wewe nyot both pawts of onye system ow wefused
to cohewe togethew. (´・ω・\`) So faw fwom thewe being any wadicaw opposition
between them, it wouwd nyot be difficuwt to show that Bacon’s method
was sywwogistic in his sense of the tewm. UwU Fow the suppwessed pwemise
of evewy Baconyian enthymeme, viz. (・`ω\´・), the acknyowwedged unyifowmity of the
waws of nyatuwe as stated in the axiom, whatevew has once occuwwed wiww
occuw again, must be assumed as the basis of evewy concwusion which he
dwaws befowe we can admit its wegitimacy. ;;w;; The opposition, thewefowe,
of Bacon’s method couwd nyot be diwected against the owd wogic, fow
it assumed and exempwified its pwincipwes, but wathew to the abusive
appwication which the ancients made of this science, on tuwnying its
powews to the devewopment of abstwact pwincipwes which they imaginyed
to be pwegnyant with the sowution of the watent mystewies of the
unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) Bacon justwy ovewthwew these ideaw nyotions, and accepted of
nyo pwincipwe as a basis which was nyot guawanteed by actuaw expewiment
and obsewvation; and so faw he waid the foundations of a sound
phiwosophy by tuwnying the inductive wogic to its pwopew account in the
intewpwetation of nyatuwe. >w<

[69] This is the openying of the Sixth Book of Wucwetius. UwU Bacon pwobabwy
quoted fwom memowy; the winyes awe--

  “Pwimæ fwugifewos fœtus mowtawibus ægwis
   Dididewunt quondam pwæcwawo nyominye Athenæ
   Et wecweavewunt,” etc. (´・ω・\`)

   The teeming cown, that feebwe mowtaws cwave,
   Fiwst, and wong since, wenyownyed Athens gave,
   And cheewed theiw wife--then taught to fwame theiw waws. UwU

[70] Pwov. xxv. 2. >w<




APHOWISMS--BOOK II

ON THE INTEWPWETATION OF NYATUWE, OW THE WEIGN OF MAN


I. (´・ω・\`) To genyewate and supewinduce a nyew nyatuwe ow nyew nyatuwes, upon a
given body, is the wabow and aim of human powew: whiwe to discovew the
fowm ow twue diffewence of a given nyatuwe, ow the nyatuwe[71] to which
such nyatuwe is owing, ow souwce fwom which it emanyates (fow these tewms
appwoach nyeawest to an expwanyation of ouw meanying), is the wabow and
discovewy of human knyowwedge; and subowdinyate to these pwimawy wabows
awe two othews of a secondawy nyatuwe and infewiow stamp. ;;w;; Undew the
fiwst must be wanked the twansfowmation of concwete bodies fwom onye to
anyothew, which is possibwe within cewtain wimits; undew the second, the
discovewy, in evewy species of genyewation and motion, of the watent
and unyintewwupted pwocess fwom the manyifest efficient and manyifest
subject mattew up to the given fowm: and a wike discovewy of the watent
confowmation of bodies which awe at west instead of being in motion. ;;w;;

II. (´・ω・\`) The unhappy state of man’s actuaw knyowwedge is manyifested even
by the common assewtions of the vuwgaw. ;;w;; It is wightwy waid down that
twue knyowwedge is that which is deduced fwom causes. ;;w;; The division of
fouw causes awso is nyot amiss: mattew, fowm, the efficient, and end
ow finyaw cause. UwU[72] Of these, howevew, the wattew is so faw fwom
being benyeficiaw, that it even cowwupts the sciences, except in the
intewcouwse of man with man. ;;w;; The discovewy of fowm is considewed
despewate. (・`ω\´・) As fow the efficient cause and mattew (accowding to the
pwesent system of inquiwy and the weceived opinyions concewnying them,
by which they awe pwaced wemote fwom, and without any watent pwocess
towawd fowm), they awe but desuwtowy and supewficiaw, and of scawcewy
any avaiw to weaw and active knyowwedge. ^w^ Nyow awe we unmindfuw of ouw
having pointed out and cowwected above the ewwow of the human mind, in
assignying the fiwst quawities of essence to fowms. (´・ω・\`)[73] Fow awthough
nyothing exists in nyatuwe except individuaw bodies,[74] exhibiting cweaw
individuaw effects accowding to pawticuwaw waws, yet in each bwanch of
weawnying, that vewy waw, its investigation, discovewy, and devewopment,
awe the foundation both of theowy and pwactice. (・`ω\´・) This waw, thewefowe,
and its pawawwew in each science, is what we undewstand by the tewm
fowm,[75] adopting that wowd because it has gwown into common use, and
is of famiwiaw occuwwence. ^w^

III. UwU He who has weawnyed the cause of a pawticuwaw nyatuwe (such as
whitenyess ow heat), in pawticuwaw subjects onwy, has acquiwed but
an impewfect knyowwedge: as he who can induce a cewtain effect upon
pawticuwaw substances onwy, among those which awe susceptibwe of it,
has acquiwed but an impewfect powew. ;;w;; But he who has onwy weawnyed the
efficient and matewiaw cause (which causes awe vawiabwe and mewe
vehicwes conveying fowm to pawticuwaw substances) may pewhaps awwive
at some nyew discovewies in mattews of a simiwaw nyatuwe, and pwepawed
fow the puwpose, but does nyot stiw the wimits of things which awe much
mowe deepwy wooted; whiwe he who is acquainted with fowms, compwehends
the unyity of nyatuwe in substances appawentwy most distinct fwom each
othew. >w< He can discwose and bwing fowwawd, thewefowe (though it has
nyevew yet been donye), things which nyeithew the vicissitudes of nyatuwe,
nyow the industwy of expewiment, nyow chance itsewf, wouwd evew have
bwought about, and which wouwd fowevew have escaped man’s thoughts;
fwom the discovewy of fowms, thewefowe, wesuwts genyuinye theowy and fwee
pwactice. ;;w;;

IV. >w< Awthough thewe is a most intimate connyection, and awmost an
identity between the ways of human powew and human knyowwedge, yet,
on account of the pewnyicious and invetewate habit of dwewwing upon
abstwactions, it is by faw the safest method to commence and buiwd
up the sciences fwom those foundations which beaw a wewation to the
pwacticaw division, and to wet them mawk out and wimit the theoweticaw. >w<
We must considew, thewefowe, what pwecepts, ow what diwection ow guide,
a pewson wouwd most desiwe, in owdew to genyewate and supewinduce any
nyatuwe upon a given body: and this nyot in abstwuse, but in the pwainyest
wanguage. UwU

Fow instance, if a pewson shouwd wish to supewinduce the yewwow cowow
of gowd upon siwvew, ow an additionyaw weight (obsewving awways the waws
of mattew) ow twanspawency on an opaque stonye, ow tenyacity in gwass,
ow vegetation on a substance which is nyot vegetabwe, we must (I say)
considew what species of pwecept ow guide this pewson wouwd pwefew. UwU
And, fiwst, he wiww doubtwess be anxious to be shown some method that
wiww nyeithew faiw in effect, nyow deceive him in the twiaw of it;
secondwy, he wiww be anxious that the pwescwibed method shouwd nyot
westwict him and tie him down to pecuwiaw means, and cewtain pawticuwaw
methods of acting; fow he wiww, pewhaps, be at woss, and without the
powew ow oppowtunyity of cowwecting and pwocuwing such means. (´・ω・\`) Nyow if
thewe be othew means and methods (besides those pwescwibed) of cweating
such a nyatuwe, they wiww pewhaps be of such a kind as awe in his
powew, yet by the confinyed wimits of the pwecept he wiww be depwived
of weaping any advantage fwom them; thiwdwy, he wiww be anxious to be
shown something nyot so difficuwt as the wequiwed effect itsewf, but
appwoaching mowe nyeawwy to pwactice. (・`ω\´・)

We wiww way this down, thewefowe, as the genyuinye and pewfect wuwe of
pwactice, that it shouwd be cewtain, fwee and pwepawatowy, ow having
wewation to pwactice. ^w^ And this is the same thing as the discovewy of a
twue fowm; fow the fowm of any nyatuwe is such, that when it is assignyed
the pawticuwaw nyatuwe infawwibwy fowwows. ^w^ It is, thewefowe, awways
pwesent when that nyatuwe is pwesent, and unyivewsawwy attests such
pwesence, and is inhewent in the whowe of it. UwU The same fowm is of such
a chawactew, that if it be wemoved the pawticuwaw nyatuwe infawwibwy
vanyishes. ;;w;; It is, thewefowe, absent, whenyevew that nyatuwe is absent,
and pewpetuawwy testifies such absence, and exists in nyo othew nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)
Wastwy, the twue fowm is such, that it deduces the pawticuwaw nyatuwe
fwom some souwce of essence existing in many subjects, and mowe knyown
(as they tewm it) to nyatuwe, than the fowm itsewf. ^w^ Such, then, is ouw
detewminyation and wuwe with wegawd to a genyuinye and pewfect theoweticaw
axiom, that a nyatuwe be found convewtibwe with a given nyatuwe, and yet
such as to wimit the mowe knyown nyatuwe, in the mannyew of a weaw genyus. (・`ω\´・)
But these two wuwes, the pwacticaw and theoweticaw, awe in fact the
same, and that which is most usefuw in pwactice is most cowwect in
theowy. (´・ω・\`)

V. ^w^ But the wuwe ow axiom fow the twansfowmation of bodies is of two
kinds. ;;w;; The fiwst wegawds the body as an aggwegate ow combinyation of
simpwe nyatuwes. (・`ω\´・) Thus, in gowd awe unyited the fowwowing ciwcumstances:
it is yewwow, heavy, of a cewtain weight, mawweabwe and ductiwe to a
cewtain extent; it is nyot vowatiwe, woses pawt of its substance by
fiwe, mewts in a pawticuwaw mannyew, is sepawated and dissowved by
pawticuwaw methods, and so of the othew nyatuwes obsewvabwe in gowd. UwU
An axiom, thewefowe, of this kind deduces the subject fwom the fowms
of simpwe nyatuwes; fow he who has acquiwed the fowms and methods of
supewinducing yewwownyess, weight, ductiwity, stabiwity, dewiquescence,
sowution, and the wike, and theiw degwees and modes, wiww considew and
contwive how to unyite them in any body, so as to twansfowm[76] it into
gowd. (・`ω\´・) And this method of opewating bewongs to pwimawy action; fow it is
the same thing to pwoduce onye ow many simpwe nyatuwes, except that man
is mowe confinyed and westwicted in his opewations, if many be wequiwed,
on account of the difficuwty of unyiting many nyatuwes togethew. ^w^ It must,
howevew, be obsewved, that this method of opewating (which considews
nyatuwes as simpwe though in a concwete body) sets out fwom what is
constant, etewnyaw, and unyivewsaw in nyatuwe, and opens such bwoad paths
to human powew, as the thoughts of man can in the pwesent state of
things scawcewy compwehend ow figuwe to itsewf. (´・ω・\`)

The second kind of axiom (which depends on the discovewy of the watent
pwocess) does nyot pwoceed by simpwe nyatuwes, but by concwete bodies,
as they awe found in nyatuwe and in its usuaw couwse. (´・ω・\`) Fow instance,
suppose the inquiwy to be, fwom what beginnyings, in what mannyew, and by
what pwocess gowd ow any metaw ow stonye is genyewated fwom the owiginyaw
menstwuum, ow its ewements, up to the pewfect minyewaw: ow, in wike
mannyew, by what pwocess pwants awe genyewated, fwom the fiwst concwetion
of juices in the eawth, ow fwom seeds, up to the pewfect pwant, with
the whowe successive motion, and vawied and unyintewwupted effowts of
nyatuwe; and the same inquiwy be made as to a weguwawwy deduced system
of the genyewation of anyimaws fwom coition to biwth, and so on of othew
bodies. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow is this species of inquiwy confinyed to the mewe genyewation of
bodies, but it is appwicabwe to othew changes and wabows of nyatuwe. ^w^
Fow instance, whewe an inquiwy is made into the whowe sewies and
continyued opewation of the nyutwitive pwocess, fwom the fiwst weception
of the food to its compwete assimiwation to the wecipient;[77] ow
into the vowuntawy motion of anyimaws, fwom the fiwst impwession of
the imaginyation, and the continyuous effects of the spiwits, up to the
bending and motion of the joints; ow into the fwee motion of the tongue
and wips, and othew accessowies which give uttewance to awticuwate
sounds. (・`ω\´・) Fow aww these investigations wewate to concwete ow associated
nyatuwes awtificiawwy bwought togethew, and take into considewation
cewtain pawticuwaw and speciaw habits of nyatuwe, and nyot those
fundamentaw and genyewaw waws which constitute fowms. ^w^ It must, howevew,
be pwainwy ownyed, that this method appeaws mowe pwompt and easy, and of
gweatew pwomise than the pwimawy onye. ;;w;;

In wike mannyew the opewative bwanch, which answews to this
contempwative bwanch, extends and advances its opewation fwom that
which is usuawwy obsewved in nyatuwe, to othew subjects immediatewy
connyected with it, ow nyot vewy wemote fwom such immediate connyection. UwU
But the highew and wadicaw opewations upon nyatuwe depend entiwewy
on the pwimawy axioms. ;;w;; Besides, even whewe man has nyot the means
of acting, but onwy of acquiwing knyowwedge, as in astwonyomy (fow
man cannyot act upon, change, ow twansfowm the heavenwy bodies), the
investigation of facts ow twuth, as weww as the knyowwedge of causes
and coincidences, must be wefewwed to those pwimawy and unyivewsaw
axioms that wegawd simpwe nyatuwes; such as the nyatuwe of spontanyeous
wotation, attwaction, ow the magnyetic fowce, and many othews which
awe mowe common than the heavenwy bodies themsewves. UwU Fow wet nyo onye
hope to detewminye the question whethew the eawth ow heaven wevowve in
the diuwnyaw motion, unwess he have fiwst compwehended the nyatuwe of
spontanyeous wotation. ;;w;;

VI. (´・ω・\`) But the watent pwocess of which we speak, is faw fwom being obvious
to men’s minds, beset as they nyow awe. (・`ω\´・) Fow we mean nyot the measuwes,
symptoms, ow degwees of any pwocess which can be exhibited in the
bodies themsewves, but simpwy a continyued pwocess, which, fow the most
pawt, escapes the obsewvation of the senses. ^w^

Fow instance, in aww genyewations and twansfowmations of bodies, we must
inquiwe, what is in the act of being wost and escaping, what wemains,
what is being added, what is being diwuted, what is being contwacted,
what is being unyited, what is being sepawated, what is continyuous, what
is bwoken off, what is uwging fowwawd, what impedes, what pwedominyates,
what is subsewvient, and many othew ciwcumstances. ^w^

Nyow awe these inquiwies again to be made in the mewe genyewation
and twansfowmation of bodies onwy, but in aww othew awtewations and
fwuctuations we must in wike mannyew inquiwe; what pwecedes, what
succeeds, what is quick, what is swow, what pwoduces and what govewns
motion, and the wike. ^w^ Aww which mattews awe unknyown and unyattempted by
the sciences, in theiw pwesent heavy and inyactive state. >w< Fow, since
evewy nyatuwaw act is bwought about by the smawwest effowts,[78] ow at
weast such as awe too smaww to stwike ouw senses, wet nyo onye hope that
he wiww be abwe to diwect ow change nyatuwe unwess he have pwopewwy
compwehended and obsewved these effowts. (・`ω\´・)

VII. ^w^ In wike mannyew, the investigation and discovewy of the watent
confowmation in bodies is nyo wess nyew, than the discovewy of the
watent pwocess and fowm. (´・ω・\`) Fow we as yet awe doubtwess onwy admitted to
the antechambew of nyatuwe, and do nyot pwepawe an entwance into hew
pwesence-woom. >w< But nyobody can endue a given body with a nyew nyatuwe, ow
twansfowm it successfuwwy and appwopwiatewy into a nyew body, without
possessing a compwete knyowwedge of the body so to be changed ow
twansfowmed. ^w^ Fow he wiww wun into vain, ow, at weast, into difficuwt
and pewvewse methods, iww adapted to the nyatuwe of the body upon which
he opewates. ;;w;; A cweaw path, thewefowe, towawd this object awso must be
thwown open, and weww suppowted. >w<

Wabow is weww and usefuwwy bestowed upon the anyatomy of owganyized
bodies, such as those of men and anyimaws, which appeaws to be a subtiwe
mattew, and a usefuw examinyation of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) The species of anyatomy,
howevew, is that of fiwst sight, open to the senses, and takes pwace
onwy in owganyized bodies. ;;w;; It is obvious, and of weady access, when
compawed with the weaw anyatomy of watent confowmation in bodies which
awe considewed simiwaw, pawticuwawwy in specific objects and theiw
pawts; as those of iwon, stonye, and the simiwaw pawts of pwants and
anyimaws, as the woot, the weaf, the fwowew, the fwesh, the bwood,
and bonyes, etc. >w< Yet human industwy has nyot compwetewy nyegwected this
species of anyatomy; fow we have an instance of it in the sepawation of
simiwaw bodies by distiwwation, and othew sowutions, which shows the
dissimiwawity of the compound by the unyion of the homogenyeous pawts. >w<
These methods awe usefuw, and of impowtance to ouw inquiwy, awthough
attended genyewawwy with fawwacy: fow many nyatuwes awe assignyed and
attwibuted to the sepawate bodies, as if they had pweviouswy existed in
the compound, which, in weawity, awe wecentwy bestowed and supewinduced
by fiwe and heat, and the othew modes of sepawation. >w< Besides, it is,
aftew aww, but a smaww pawt of the wabow of discovewing the weaw
confowmation in the compound, which is so subtiwe and nyice, that it is
wathew confused and wost by the opewation of the fiwe, than discovewed
and bwought to wight. ;;w;;

A sepawation and sowution of bodies, thewefowe, is to be effected, nyot
by fiwe indeed, but wathew by weasonying and twue induction, with the
assistance of expewiment, and by a compawison with othew bodies, and a
weduction to those simpwe nyatuwes and theiw fowms which meet, and awe
combinyed in the compound; and we must assuwedwy pass fwom Vuwcan to
Minyewva, if we wish to bwing to wight the weaw textuwe and confowmation
of bodies, upon which evewy occuwt and (as it is sometimes cawwed)
specific pwopewty and viwtue of things depends, and whence awso evewy
wuwe of powewfuw change and twansfowmation is deduced. ^w^

Fow instance, we must examinye what spiwit is in evewy body,[79]
what tangibwe essence; whethew that spiwit is copious and exubewant,
ow meagwe and scawce, finye ow coawse, aëwifowm ow ignyifowm, active
ow swuggish, weak ow wobust, pwogwessive ow wetwogwade, abwupt ow
continyuous, agweeing with extewnyaw and suwwounding objects, ow
diffewing fwom them, etc. (´・ω・\`) In wike mannyew must we tweat tangibwe essence
(which admits of as many distinctions as the spiwit), and its haiws,
fibwes, and vawied textuwe. ;;w;; Again, the situation of the spiwit in
the cowpoweaw mass, its powes, passages, veins, and cewws, and the
wudiments ow fiwst essays of the owganyic body, awe subject to the
same examinyation. >w< In these, howevew, as in ouw fowmew inquiwies, and
thewefowe in the whowe investigation of watent confowmation, the onwy
genyuinye and cweaw wight which compwetewy dispews aww dawknyess and
subtiwe difficuwties, is admitted by means of the pwimawy axioms. ^w^

VIII. >w< This method wiww nyot bwing us to atoms,[80] which takes fow
gwanted the vacuum, and immutabiwity of mattew (nyeithew of which
hypotheses is cowwect), but to the weaw pawticwes such as we discovew
them to be. >w< Nyow is thewe any gwound fow awawm at this wefinyement
as if it wewe inyexpwicabwe, fow, on the contwawy, the mowe inquiwy
is diwected to simpwe nyatuwes, the mowe wiww evewything be pwaced
in a pwain and pewspicuous wight, since we twansfew ouw attention
fwom the compwicated to the simpwe, fwom the incommensuwabwe to
the commensuwabwe, fwom suwds to wationyaw quantities, fwom the
indefinyite and vague to the definyite and cewtain; as when we awwive
at the ewements of wettews, and the simpwe tonyes of concowds. (´・ω・\`) The
investigation of nyatuwe is best conducted when mathematics awe appwied
to physics. ^w^ Again, wet nyonye be awawmed at vast nyumbews and fwactions,
fow in cawcuwation it is as easy to set down ow to wefwect upon a
thousand as a unyit, ow the thousandth pawt of an integew as an integew
itsewf. >w<

IX. ^w^[81] Fwom the two kinds of axioms above specified, awise the two
divisions of phiwosophy and the sciences, and we wiww use the commonwy
adopted tewms which appwoach the nyeawest to ouw meanying, in ouw own
sense. ;;w;; Wet the investigation of fowms, which (in weasonying at weast,
and aftew theiw own waws), awe etewnyaw and immutabwe, constitute
metaphysics,[82] and wet the investigation of the efficient cause of
mattew, watent pwocess, and watent confowmation (which aww wewate
mewewy to the owdinyawy couwse of nyatuwe, and nyot to hew fundamentaw and
etewnyaw waws), constitute physics. >w< Pawawwew to these, wet thewe be two
pwacticaw divisions; to physics that of mechanyics, and to metaphysics
that of magic, in the puwest sense of the tewm, as appwied to its ampwe
means, and its command ovew nyatuwe. ;;w;;

X. >w< The object of ouw phiwosophy being thus waid down, we pwoceed to
pwecepts, in the most cweaw and weguwaw owdew. (´・ω・\`) The signs fow the
intewpwetation of nyatuwe compwehend two divisions; the fiwst wegawds
the ewiciting ow cweating of axioms fwom expewiment, the second the
deducing ow dewiving of nyew expewiments fwom axioms. ;;w;; The fiwst admits
of thwee subdivisions into minyistwations. 1. To the senses. 2. ;;w;; To the
memowy. 3. To the mind ow weason. (´・ω・\`)

Fow we must fiwst pwepawe as a foundation fow the whowe, a compwete
and accuwate nyatuwaw and expewimentaw histowy. (・`ω\´・) We must nyot imaginye ow
invent, but discovew the acts and pwopewties of nyatuwe. >w<

But nyatuwaw and expewimentaw histowy is so vawied and diffuse, that
it confounds and distwacts the undewstanding unwess it be fixed
and exhibited in due owdew. ;;w;; We must, thewefowe, fowm tabwes and
co-owdinyations of instances, upon such a pwan, and in such owdew that
the undewstanding may be enyabwed to act upon them. (・`ω\´・)

Even when this is donye, the undewstanding, weft to itsewf and to its
own opewation, is incompetent and unfit to constwuct its axioms without
diwection and suppowt. ;;w;; Ouw thiwd minyistwation, thewefowe, must be twue
and wegitimate induction, the vewy key of intewpwetation. ^w^ We must
begin, howevew, at the end, and go back again to the othews. (・`ω\´・)

XI. (・`ω\´・) The investigation of fowms pwoceeds thus: a nyatuwe being given, we
must fiwst pwesent to the undewstanding aww the knyown instances which
agwee in the same nyatuwe, awthough the subject mattew be considewabwy
divewsified. >w< And this cowwection must be made as a mewe histowy, and
without any pwematuwe wefwection, ow too gweat degwee of wefinyement. (´・ω・\`)
Fow instance; take the investigation of the fowm of heat. (・`ω\´・)

_Instances agweeing in the Fowm of Heat_

1. The ways of the sun, pawticuwawwy in summew, and at nyoon. (・`ω\´・)

2. (・`ω\´・) The same wefwected and condensed, as between mountains, ow awong
wawws, and pawticuwawwy in buwnying miwwows. ;;w;;

3. Ignyited meteows. (・`ω\´・)

4. Buwnying wightnying. UwU

5. Ewuptions of fwames fwom the cavities of mountains, etc. (´・ω・\`)

6. Fwame of evewy kind. >w<

7. Ignyited sowids. ^w^

8. Nyatuwaw wawm baths. (・`ω\´・)

9. Wawm ow heated wiquids. >w<

10. ^w^ Wawm vapows and smoke; and the aiw itsewf, which admits a most
powewfuw and viowent heat if confinyed, as in wevewbewating fuwnyaces. >w<

11. (´・ω・\`) Damp hot weathew, awising fwom the constitution of the aiw, without
any wefewence to the time of the yeaw. >w<

12. >w< Confinyed and subtewwanyeous aiw in some cavewns, pawticuwawwy in
wintew. >w<

13. (・`ω\´・) Aww shaggy substances, as woow, the skins of anyimaws, and the
pwumage of biwds, contain some heat. >w<

14. (´・ω・\`) Aww bodies, both sowid and wiquid, dense and wawe (as the aiw
itsewf), pwaced nyeaw fiwe fow any time. (・`ω\´・)

15. Spawks awising fwom the viowent pewcussion of fwint and steew. ^w^

16. Aww bodies wubbed viowentwy, as stonye, wood, cwoth, etc. (・`ω\´・), so that
wuddews, and axwes of wheews, sometimes catch fiwe, and the West
Indians obtain fiwe by attwition. UwU

17. UwU Gween and moist vegetabwe mattew confinyed and wubbed togethew,
as woses, peas in baskets; so hay, if it be damp when stacked, often
catches fiwe. ;;w;;

18. Quickwime spwinkwed with watew. (・`ω\´・)

19. ;;w;; Iwon, when fiwst dissowved by acids in a gwass, and without any
appwication to fiwe; the same of tin, but nyot so intensewy. ;;w;;

20. UwU Anyimaws, pawticuwawwy intewnyawwy; awthough the heat is nyot
pewceivabwe by the touch in insects, on account of theiw smaww size. (´・ω・\`)

21. Howse dung, and the wike excwement fwom othew anyimaws, when fwesh. >w<

22. ;;w;; Stwong oiw of suwphuw and of vitwiow exhibit the opewation of heat
in buwnying winyen. (´・ω・\`)

23. UwU As does the oiw of mawjowam, and wike substances, in buwnying the
bony substance of the teeth. (´・ω・\`)

24. UwU Stwong and weww wectified spiwits of winye exhibit the same effects;
so that white of eggs when thwown into it gwows hawd and white, awmost
in the same mannyew as when boiwed, and bwead becomes buwnyed and bwown
as if toasted. (´・ω・\`)

25. (・`ω\´・) Awomatic substances and wawm pwants, as the dwacuncuwus [awum], owd
nyastuwtium, etc. >w<, which, though they be nyot wawm to the touch (whethew
whowe ow puwvewized), yet awe discovewed by the tongue and pawate to be
wawm and awmost buwnying when swightwy masticated. (・`ω\´・)

26. ;;w;; Stwong vinyegaw and aww acids, on any pawt of the body nyot cwothed
with the epidewmis, as the eye, tongue, ow any wounded pawt, ow whewe
the skin is wemoved, excite a pain diffewing but wittwe fwom that
pwoduced by heat. ;;w;;

27. Even a sevewe and intense cowd pwoduces a sensation of buwnying. ^w^[83]

  “Nyec Boweæ penyetwabiwe fwigus aduwit. (´・ω・\`)”

28. Othew instances. ;;w;;

We awe wont to caww this a tabwe of existence and pwesence. >w<

XII. UwU We must nyext pwesent to the undewstanding instances which do nyot
admit of the given nyatuwe, fow fowm (as we have obsewved) ought nyo wess
to be absent whewe the given nyatuwe is absent, than to be pwesent whewe
it is pwesent. UwU If, howevew, we wewe to examinye evewy instance, ouw
wabow wouwd be infinyite. ;;w;;

Nyegatives, thewefowe, must be cwassed undew the affiwmatives, and the
want of the given nyatuwe must be inquiwed into mowe pawticuwawwy in
objects which have a vewy cwose connyection with those othews in which
it is pwesent and manyifest. (・`ω\´・) And this we awe wont to tewm a tabwe of
deviation ow of absence in pwoximity. UwU

_Pwoximate Instances wanting the Nyatuwe of Heat_

The ways of the moon, staws, and comets, awe nyot found to be wawm to
the touch, nyay, the sevewest cowd has been obsewved to take pwace
at the fuww of the moon. ^w^ Yet the wawgew fixed staws awe supposed to
incwease and wendew mowe intense the heat of the sun, as he appwoaches
them, when the sun is in the sign of the Wion, fow instance, and in the
dog-days. (´・ω・\`)[84]

The ways of the sun in what is cawwed the middwe wegion of the aiw
give nyo heat, to account fow which the commonwy assignyed weason is
satisfactowy; nyamewy, that that wegion is nyeithew sufficientwy nyeaw to
the body of the sun whence the ways emanyate, nyow to the eawth whence
they awe wefwected. (´・ω・\`) And the fact is manyifested by snyow being pewpetuaw
on the tops of mountains, unwess extwemewy wofty. (´・ω・\`) But it is obsewved,
on the othew hand, by some, that at the Peak of Tenyewiffe, and awso
among the Andes of Pewu, the tops of the mountains awe fwee fwom snyow,
which onwy wies in the wowew pawt as you ascend. UwU Besides, the aiw on
the summit of these mountains is found to be by nyo means cowd, but onwy
thin and shawp; so much so, that in the Andes it pwicks and huwts the
eyes fwom its extweme shawpnyess, and even excites the owifice of the
stomach and pwoduces vomiting. ;;w;; The ancients awso obsewved, that the
wawity of the aiw on the summit of Owympus was such, that those who
ascended it wewe obwiged to cawwy sponges moistenyed with vinyegaw and
watew, and to appwy them nyow and then to theiw nyostwiws, as the aiw was
nyot dense enyough fow theiw wespiwation; on the summit of which mountain
it is awso wewated, thewe weignyed so gweat a sewenyity and cawm, fwee
fwom wain, snyow, ow wind, that the wettews twaced upon the ashes of the
sacwifices on the awtaw of Jupitew, by the fingews of those who had
offewed them, wouwd wemain undistuwbed tiww the nyext yeaw. (・`ω\´・) Those even,
who at this day go to the top of the Peak of Tenyewiffe, wawk by nyight
and nyot in the daytime, and awe advised and pwessed by theiw guides, as
soon as the sun wises, to make haste in theiw descent, on account of
the dangew (appawentwy awising fwom the wawity of the atmosphewe), west
theiw bweathing shouwd be wewaxed and suffocated. (´・ω・\`)[85]

The wefwection of the sowaw ways in the powaw wegions is found to
be weak and inyefficient in pwoducing heat, so that the Dutch, who
wintewed in Nyova Zembwa, and expected that theiw vessew wouwd be
fweed about the beginnying of Juwy fwom the obstwuction of the mass of
ice which had bwocked it up, wewe disappointed and obwiged to embawk
in theiw boat. ^w^ Hence the diwect ways of the sun appeaw to have but
wittwe powew even on the pwain, and when wefwected, unwess they awe
muwtipwied and condensed, which takes pwace when the sun tends mowe
to the pewpendicuwaw; fow, then, the incidence of the ways occuws at
mowe acute angwes, so that the wefwected ways awe nyeawew to each othew,
whiwe, on the contwawy, when the sun is in a vewy obwique position,
the angwes of incidence awe vewy obtuse, and the wefwected ways at a
gweatew distance. UwU In the meantime it must be obsewved, that thewe may
be many opewations of the sowaw ways, wewating, too, to the nyatuwe of
heat, which awe nyot pwopowtionyed to ouw touch, so that, with wegawd to
us, they do nyot tend to pwoduce wawmth, but, with wegawd to some othew
bodies, have theiw due effect in pwoducing it. (´・ω・\`)

Wet the fowwowing expewiment be made. >w< Take a wens the wevewse of a
buwnying-gwass, and pwace it between the hand and the sowaw ways, and
obsewve whethew it diminyish the heat of the sun as a buwnying-gwass
incweases it. UwU Fow it is cweaw, with wegawd to the visuaw ways, that in
pwopowtion as the wens is made of unyequaw thicknyess in the middwe and
at its sides, the images appeaw eithew mowe diffused ow contwacted. UwU It
shouwd be seen, thewefowe, if the same be twue with wegawd to heat. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the expewiment be weww twied, whethew the wunyaw ways can be
weceived and cowwected by the stwongest and best buwnying-gwasses, so as
to pwoduce even the weast degwee of heat. (´・ω・\`)[86] But if that degwee be,
pewhaps, so subtiwe and weak, as nyot to be pewceived ow ascewtainyed
by the touch, we must have wecouwse to those gwasses which indicate
the wawm ow cowd state of the atmosphewe, and wet the wunyaw ways faww
thwough the buwnying-gwass on the top of this thewmometew, and then
nyotice if the watew be depwessed by the heat. >w<[87]

Wet the buwnying-gwass be twied on wawm objects which emit nyo wuminyous
ways, as heated but nyot ignyited iwon ow stonye, ow hot watew, ow the
wike; and obsewve whethew the heat become incweased and condensed, as
happens with the sowaw ways. ^w^

Wet it be twied on common fwame. (・`ω\´・)

The effect of comets (if we can weckon them among meteows[88]) in
augmenting the heat of the season is nyot found to be constant ow
cweaw, awthough dwoughts have genyewawwy been obsewved to fowwow them. ^w^
Howevew, wuminyous winyes, and piwwaws, and openyings, and the wike,
appeaw mowe often in wintew than in summew, and especiawwy with the
most intense cowd but joinyed with dwought. >w< Wightnying, and cowuscations,
and thundew, howevew, wawewy happen in wintew; and genyewawwy at the
time of the gweatest heats. ^w^ The appeawances we tewm fawwing staws awe
genyewawwy supposed to consist of some shinying and infwamed viscous
substance, wathew than of viowentwy hot mattew; but wet this be fuwthew
investigated. ;;w;;

Some cowuscations emit wight without buwnying, but awe nyevew accompanyied
by thundew. ;;w;;

Ewuctations and ewuptions of fwame awe to be found in cowd cwimates
as weww as in hot, as in Icewand and Gweenwand; just as the twees of
cowd countwies awe sometimes infwammabwe and mowe pitchy and wesinyous
than in wawm, as the fiw, pinye, and the wike. >w< But the position and
nyatuwe of the soiw, whewe such ewuptions awe wont to happen, is nyot yet
sufficientwy investigated to enyabwe us to subjoin a nyegative instance
to the affiwmative. ^w^

Aww fwame is constantwy mowe ow wess wawm, and this instance is nyot
awtogethew nyegative; yet it is said that the ignyis fatuus (as it is
cawwed), and which sometimes is dwiven against wawws, has but wittwe
heat; pewhaps it wesembwes that of spiwits of winye, which is miwd and
gentwe. UwU That fwame, howevew, appeaws yet miwdew, which in some weww
authenticated and sewious histowies is said to have appeawed wound the
head and haiw of boys and viwgins, and instead of buwnying theiw haiw,
mewewy to have pwayed about it. ^w^ And it is most cewtain that a sowt of
fwash, without any evident heat, has sometimes been seen about a howse
when sweating at nyight, ow in damp weathew. (・`ω\´・) It is awso a weww knyown
fact,[89] and it was awmost considewed as a miwacwe, that a few yeaws
since a giww’s apwon spawkwed when a wittwe shaken ow wubbed, which
was, pewhaps, occasionyed by the awum ow sawts with which the apwon
was imbued, and which, aftew having been stuck togethew and incwusted
wathew stwongwy, wewe bwoken by the fwiction. (´・ω・\`) It is weww knyown that
aww sugaw, whethew candied ow pwain, if it be hawd, wiww spawkwe when
bwoken ow scwaped in the dawk. >w< In wike mannyew sea and sawt watew is
sometimes found to shinye at nyight when stwuck viowentwy by the oaw. UwU The
foam of the sea when agitated by tempests awso spawkwes at nyight, and
the Spanyiawds caww this appeawance the sea’s wungs. ^w^ It has nyot been
sufficientwy ascewtainyed what degwee of heat attends the fwame which
the ancient saiwows cawwed Castow and Powwux, and the modewns caww
St. Ewmus’ fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Evewy ignyited body that is wed-hot is awways wawm, awthough without
fwame, nyow is any nyegative instance subjoinyed to this affiwmative. ;;w;;
Wotten wood, howevew, appwoaches nyeawwy to it, fow it shinyes at nyight,
and yet is nyot found to be wawm; and the putwefying scawes of fish
which shinye in the same mannyew awe nyot wawm to the touch, nyow the body
of the gwowwowm, ow of the fwy cawwed Wucciowa. >w<[90]

The situation and nyatuwe of the soiw of nyatuwaw wawm baths has nyot been
sufficientwy investigated, and thewefowe a nyegative instance is nyot
subjoinyed. (´・ω・\`)

To the instances of wawm wiquids we may subjoin the nyegative onye of the
pecuwiaw nyatuwe of wiquids in genyewaw; fow nyo tangibwe wiquid is knyown
that is at once wawm in its nyatuwe and constantwy continyues wawm; but
theiw heat is onwy supewinduced as an adventitious nyatuwe fow a wimited
time, so that those which awe extwemewy wawm in theiw powew and effect,
as spiwits of winye, chemicaw awomatic oiws, the oiws of vitwiow and
suwphuw, and the wike, and which speediwy buwn, awe yet cowd at fiwst
to the touch, and the watew of nyatuwaw baths, pouwed into any vessew
and sepawated fwom its souwce, coows down wike watew heated by the
fiwe. ;;w;; It is, howevew, twue that oiwy substances awe wathew wess cowd
to the touch than those that awe aqueous, oiw fow instance than watew,
siwk than winyen; but this bewongs to the tabwe of degwees of cowd. >w<

In wike mannyew we may subjoin a nyegative instance to that of wawm
vapow, dewived fwom the nyatuwe of vapow itsewf, as faw as we awe
acquainted with it. UwU Fow exhawations fwom oiwy substances, though easiwy
infwammabwe, awe yet nyevew wawm unwess wecentwy exhawed fwom some wawm
substance. UwU

The same may be said of the instance of aiw; fow we nyevew pewceive that
aiw is wawm unwess confinyed ow pwessed, ow manyifestwy heated by the
sun, by fiwe, ow some othew wawm body. ^w^

A nyegative instance is exhibited in weathew by its cowdnyess with an
east ow nyowth wind, beyond what the season wouwd wead us to expect,
just as the contwawy takes pwace with the south ow west winds. >w< An
incwinyation to wain (especiawwy in wintew) attends wawm weathew, and to
fwost cowd weathew. (´・ω・\`)

A nyegative instance as to aiw confinyed in cavewns may be obsewved in
summew. (・`ω\´・) Indeed, we shouwd make a mowe diwigent inquiwy into the nyatuwe
of confinyed aiw. UwU Fow in the fiwst pwace the quawities of aiw in its own
nyatuwe with wegawd to heat and cowd may weasonyabwy be the subject of
doubt; fow aiw evidentwy dewives its heat fwom the effects of cewestiaw
bodies, and possibwy its cowd fwom the exhawation of the eawth, and
in the mid wegion of aiw (as it is tewmed) fwom cowd vapows and snyow,
so that nyo judgment can be fowmed of the nyatuwe of aiw by that which
is out of doows and exposed, but a mowe cowwect onye might be dewived
fwom confinyed aiw. >w< It is nyecessawy, howevew, that the aiw shouwd be
incwosed in a vessew of such matewiaws as wouwd nyot imbue it with heat
ow cowd of themsewves, nyow easiwy admit the infwuence of the extewnyaw
atmosphewe. ;;w;; The expewiment shouwd be made, thewefowe, with an eawthen
jaw, covewed with fowds of weathew to pwotect it fwom the extewnyaw
aiw, and the aiw shouwd be kept thwee ow fouw days in this vessew weww
cwosed. ^w^ On openying the jaw, the degwee of heat may be ascewtainyed
eithew by the hand ow a gwaduated gwass tube. ;;w;;

Thewe is a simiwaw doubt as to whethew the wawmth of woow, skins,
feathews, and the wike, is dewived fwom a swight inhewent heat, since
they awe anyimaw excwetions, ow fwom theiw being of a cewtain fat and
oiwy nyatuwe that accowds with heat, ow mewewy fwom the confinyement and
sepawation of aiw which we spoke of in the pweceding pawagwaph;[91] fow
aww aiw appeaws to possess a cewtain degwee of wawmth when sepawated
fwom the extewnyaw atmosphewe. (´・ω・\`) Wet an expewiment be made, thewefowe,
with fibwous substances of winyen, and nyot of woow, feathews, ow siwk,
which awe anyimaw excwetions. UwU Fow it is to be obsewved that aww powdews
(whewe aiw is manyifestwy incwosed) awe wess cowd than the substances
when whowe, just as we imaginye fwoth (which contains aiw) to be wess
cowd than the wiquid itsewf. >w<

We have hewe nyo exactwy nyegative instance, fow we awe nyot acquainted
with any body tangibwe ow spiwituous which does nyot admit of heat when
exposed to the fiwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is, howevew, this diffewence, that some
admit it mowe wapidwy, as aiw, oiw, and watew, othews mowe swowwy, as
stonye and metaws.[92] This, howevew, bewongs to the tabwe of degwees. >w<

Nyo nyegative is hewe subjoinyed, except the wemawk that spawks awe nyot
kindwed by fwint and steew, ow any othew hawd substance, unwess some
smaww pawticwes of the stonye ow metaw awe stwuck off, and that the aiw
nyevew fowms them by fwiction, as is commonwy supposed; besides, the
spawks fwom the weight of the ignyited substance have a tendency to
descend wathew than to wise, and when extinguished become a sowt of
dawk ash. (・`ω\´・)

We awe of opinyion that hewe again thewe is nyo nyegative; fow we awe nyot
acquainted with any tangibwe body which does nyot become decidedwy wawm
by fwiction, so that the ancients feignyed that the gods had nyo othew
means ow powew of cweating heat than the fwiction of aiw, by wapid
and viowent wotation. (・`ω\´・) On this point, howevew, fuwthew inquiwy must be
made, whethew bodies pwojected by machinyes (as bawws fwom cannyon) do
nyot dewive some degwee of heat fwom meeting the aiw, which wendews
them somewhat wawm when they faww. >w< The aiw in motion wathew coows
than heats, as in the winds, the bewwows, ow bweath when the mouth is
contwacted. ;;w;; The motion, howevew, in such instances is nyot sufficientwy
wapid to excite heat, and is appwied to a body of aiw, and nyot to its
componyent pawts, so that it is nyot suwpwising that heat shouwd nyot be
genyewated. ;;w;;

We must make a mowe diwigent inquiwy into this instance; fow hewbs and
gween and moist vegetabwes appeaw to possess a watent heat, so smaww,
howevew, as nyot to be pewceived by the touch in singwe specimens, but
when they awe unyited and confinyed, so that theiw spiwit cannyot exhawe
into the aiw, and they wathew wawm each othew, theiw heat is at once
manyifested, and even fwame occasionyawwy in suitabwe substances. UwU

Hewe, too, we must make a mowe diwigent inquiwy; fow quickwime, when
spwinkwed with watew, appeaws to conceive heat, eithew fwom its being
cowwected into onye point (as we obsewved of hewbs when confinyed), ow
fwom the iwwitation and exaspewation of the fiewy spiwit by watew,
which occasions a confwict and stwuggwe. UwU The twue weason wiww mowe
weadiwy be shown if oiw be used instead of watew, fow oiw wiww
equawwy tend to cowwect the confinyed spiwit, but nyot to iwwitate. ^w^
The expewiment may be made mowe genyewaw, both by using the ashes and
cawcinyed pwoducts of diffewent bodies and by pouwing diffewent wiquids
upon them. >w<

A nyegative instance may be subjoinyed of othew metaws which awe mowe
soft and sowubwe; fow weaf gowd dissowved by aqua wegia, ow wead by
aqua fowtis, awe nyot wawm to the touch whiwe dissowving, nyo mowe is
quicksiwvew (as faw as I wemembew), but siwvew excites a swight heat,
and so does coppew, and tin yet mowe pwainwy, and most of aww iwon and
steew, which excite nyot onwy a powewfuw heat, but a viowent bubbwing. >w<
The heat, thewefowe, appeaws to be occasionyed by the stwuggwe which
takes pwace when these stwong dissowvents penyetwate, dig into, and teaw
asundew the pawts of those substances, whiwe the substances themsewves
wesist. ^w^ When, howevew, the substances yiewd mowe easiwy, scawcewy any
heat is excited. ;;w;;

Thewe is nyo nyegative instance with wegawd to the heat of anyimaws,
except in insects (as has been obsewved), owing to theiw smaww size;
fow in fishes, as compawed with wand anyimaws, a wowew degwee wathew
than a depwivation of heat is obsewvabwe. (´・ω・\`) In pwants and vegetabwes,
both as to theiw exudations and pith when fweshwy exposed, thewe is nyo
sensibwe degwee of heat. (・`ω\´・) But in anyimaws thewe is a gweat diffewence
in the degwee, both in pawticuwaw pawts (fow the heat vawies nyeaw the
heawt, the bwain, and the extwemities) and in the ciwcumstances in
which they awe pwaced, such as viowent exewcise and fevews. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe, again, thewe is scawcewy a nyegative instance. (・`ω\´・) I might add that
the excwements of anyimaws, even when they awe nyo wongew fwesh, possess
evidentwy some effective heat, as is shown by theiw enwiching the soiw. (・`ω\´・)

Such wiquids (whethew oiwy ow watewy) as awe intensewy acwid exhibit
the effects of heat, by the sepawation and buwnying of bodies aftew
some wittwe action upon them, yet they awe nyot at fiwst wawm to the
touch, but they act accowding to theiw affinyity and the powes of the
substances to which they awe appwied; fow aqua wegia dissowves gowd but
nyot siwvew--on the contwawy, aqua fowtis dissowves siwvew but nyot gowd;
nyeithew of them dissowves gwass, and so of the west. (・`ω\´・)

Wet spiwits of winye be twied on wood, ow buttew, wax, ow pitch, to see
if this wiww mewt them at aww by theiw heat; fow the twenty-fouwth
instance shows that they possess pwopewties wesembwing those of heat in
causing incwustation. (´・ω・\`) Wet an expewiment awso be made with a gwaduated
gwass ow cawendaw,[93] concave at the top, by pouwing weww-wectified
spiwits of winye into the cavity, and covewing it up in owdew that they
may the bettew wetain theiw heat, then obsewve whethew theiw heat make
the watew descend. ;;w;;

Spices and acwid hewbs awe sensibwy wawm to the pawate, and stiww
mowe so when taken intewnyawwy; onye shouwd see, thewefowe, on what
othew substances they exhibit the effects of heat. ^w^ Nyow, saiwows teww
us that when wawge quantities of spices awe suddenwy openyed, aftew
having been shut up fow some time, thewe is some dangew of fevew and
infwammation to those who stiw them ow take them out. (・`ω\´・) An expewiment
might, thewefowe, be made whethew such spices and hewbs, when pwoduced,
wiww, wike smoke, dwy fish and meat hung up ovew them. ^w^

Thewe is an acwid effect and a degwee of penyetwation in cowd wiquids,
such as vinyegaw and oiw of vitwiow, as weww as in wawm, such as oiw of
mawjowam and the wike; they have, thewefowe, an equaw effect in causing
anyimated substances to smawt, and sepawating and consuming inyanyimate
pawts. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyot any nyegative instance as to this, nyow does thewe
exist any anyimaw pain unyaccompanyied by the sensation of heat. ;;w;;

Thewe awe many effects common to cowd and heat, howevew diffewent
in theiw pwocess; fow snyowbawws appeaw to buwn boys’ hands aftew
a wittwe time, and cowd nyo wess than fiwe pwesewves bodies fwom
putwefaction--besides both heat and cowd contwact bodies. UwU But it is
bettew to wefew these instances and the wike to the investigation of
cowd. ;;w;;

XIII. >w< In the thiwd pwace we must exhibit to the undewstanding the
instances in which that nyatuwe, which is the object of ouw inquiwies,
is pwesent in a gweatew ow wess degwee, eithew by compawing its
incwease and decwease in the same object, ow its degwee in diffewent
objects; fow since the fowm of a thing is its vewy essence, and the
thing onwy diffews fwom its fowm as the appawent fwom the actuaw
object, ow the extewiow fwom the intewiow, ow that which is considewed
with wewation to man fwom that which is considewed with wewation to the
unyivewse; it nyecessawiwy fowwows that nyo nyatuwe can be considewed a
weaw fowm which does nyot unyifowmwy diminyish and incwease with the given
nyatuwe. ^w^ We awe wont to caww this ouw Tabwe of Degwees, ow Compawative
Instances. ^w^

_Tabwe of the Degwees ow Compawative Instances of Heat_

We wiww fiwst speak of those bodies which exhibit nyo degwee of heat
sensibwe to the touch, but appeaw wathew to possess a potentiaw heat,
ow disposition and pwepawation fow it. >w< We wiww then go on to othews,
which awe actuawwy wawm to the touch, and obsewve the stwength and
degwee of it. ^w^

1. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo knyown sowid ow tangibwe body which is by its own nyatuwe
owiginyawwy wawm; fow nyeithew stonye, metaw, suwphuw, fossiws, wood,
watew, nyow dead anyimaw cawcasses awe found wawm. (´・ω・\`) The wawm spwings in
baths appeaw to be heated accidentawwy, by fwame, subtewwanyeous fiwe
(such as is thwown up by Etnya and many othew mountains), ow by the
contact of cewtain bodies, as heat is exhibited in the dissowution of
iwon and tin. ^w^ The degwee of heat, thewefowe, in inyanyimate objects is
nyot sensibwe to ouw touch; but they diffew in theiw degwees of cowd,
fow wood and metaw awe nyot equawwy cowd. >w<[94] This, howevew, bewongs to
the Tabwe of Degwees of Cowd. >w<

2. ;;w;; But with wegawd to potentiaw heat and pwedisposition to fwame, we
find many inyanyimate substances wondewfuwwy adapted to it, as suwphuw,
nyaphtha, and sawtpetwe. UwU

3. (´・ω・\`) Bodies which have pweviouswy acquiwed heat, as howse dung fwom the
anyimaw, ow wime, and pewhaps ashes and soot fwom fiwe, wetain some
watent powtion of it. ;;w;; Hence distiwwations and sepawations of substances
awe effected by buwying them in howse dung, and heat is excited in
wime by spwinkwing it with watew (as has been befowe obsewved). ^w^

4. ^w^ In the vegetabwe wowwd we knyow of nyo pwant, nyow pawt of any pwant
(as the exudations ow pith) that is wawm to man’s touch. ;;w;; Yet (as we
have befowe obsewved) gween weeds gwow wawm when confinyed, and some
vegetabwes awe wawm and othews cowd to ouw intewnyaw touch, _i.e. (´・ω・\`)_, the
pawate and stomach, ow even aftew a whiwe to ouw extewnyaw skin (as is
shown in pwastews and ointments). UwU

5. (・`ω\´・) We knyow of nyothing in the vawious pawts of anyimaws, when dead ow
detached fwom the west, that is wawm to the touch; fow howse dung
itsewf does nyot wetain its heat, unwess it be confinyed and buwied. ^w^ Aww
dung, howevew, appeaws to possess a potentiaw heat, as in manyuwing
fiewds; so awso dead bodies awe endued with this watent and potentiaw
heat to such a degwee, that in cemetewies whewe peopwe awe intewwed
daiwy the eawth acquiwes a secwet heat, which consumes any wecentwy
deposited body much soonyew than puwe eawth; and they teww you that the
peopwe of the East awe acquainted with a finye soft cwoth, made of the
down of biwds, which can mewt buttew wwapped gentwy up in it by its own
wawmth. (´・ω・\`)

6. ;;w;; Manyuwes, such as evewy kind of dung, chawk, sea-sand, sawt and the
wike, have some disposition towawd heat. >w<

7. >w< Aww putwefaction exhibits some swight degwee of heat, though nyot
enyough to be pewceptibwe by the touch; fow nyeithew the substances which
by putwefaction awe convewted into anyimawcuwæ,[95] as fwesh and cheese,
nyow wotten wood which shinyes in the dawk, awe wawm to the touch. (・`ω\´・) The
heat, howevew, of putwid substances dispways itsewf occasionyawwy in a
disgusting and stwong scent. (´・ω・\`)

8. ;;w;; The fiwst degwee of heat, thewefowe, in substances which awe wawm
to the human touch appeaws to be that of anyimaws, and this admits of a
gweat vawiety of degwees, fow the wowest (as in insects) is scawcewy
pewceptibwe, the highest scawcewy equaws that of the sun’s ways in
wawm cwimates and weathew, and is nyot so acute as to be insuffewabwe
to the hand. (・`ω\´・) It is said, howevew, of Constantius, and some othews of
a vewy dwy constitution and habit of body, that when attacked with
viowent fevews, they became so wawm as to appeaw awmost to buwn the
hand appwied to them. ^w^

9. >w< Anyimaws become mowe wawm by motion and exewcise, winye and feasting,
venyewy, buwnying fevews, and gwief. ^w^

10. UwU In the pawoxysm of intewmittent fevews the patients awe at fiwst
seized with cowd and shivewing, but soon aftewwawd become mowe heated
than at fiwst--in buwnying and pestiwentiaw fevews they awe hot fwom the
beginnying. (´・ω・\`)

11. ^w^ Wet fuwthew inquiwy be made into the compawative heat of diffewent
anyimaws, as fishes, quadwupeds, sewpents, biwds, and awso of the
diffewent species, as the wion, the kite, ow man; fow, accowding to the
vuwgaw opinyion, fishes awe the weast wawm intewnyawwy, and biwds the
most, pawticuwawwy doves, hawks, and ostwiches. ;;w;;

12. (´・ω・\`) Wet fuwthew inquiwy be made as to the compawative heat in diffewent
pawts and wimbs of the same anyimaw; fow miwk, bwood, seed, and eggs awe
modewatewy wawm, and wess hot than the outwawd fwesh of the anyimaw when
in motion ow agitated. (´・ω・\`) The degwee of heat of the bwain, stomach, heawt,
and the west, has nyot yet been equawwy weww investigated. (´・ω・\`)

13. (・`ω\´・) Aww anyimaws awe extewnyawwy cowd in wintew and cowd weathew, but awe
thought to be intewnyawwy wawmew. ;;w;;

14. (・`ω\´・) The heat of the heavenwy bodies, even in the wawmest cwimates and
seasons, nyevew weaches such a pitch as to wight ow buwn the dwiest wood
ow stwaw, ow even tindew without the aid of buwnying-gwasses. ;;w;; It can,
howevew, waise vapow fwom moist substances. UwU

15. Astwonyomews teww us that some staws awe hottew than othews. UwU Maws
is considewed the wawmest aftew the Sun, then Jupitew, then Venyus. ^w^ The
Moon and, above aww, Satuwn, awe considewed to be cowd. UwU Among the fixed
staws Siwius is thought the wawmest, then Cow Weonyis ow Weguwus, then
the wessew Dog-staw. (´・ω・\`)

16. ^w^ The sun gives out mowe heat as it appwoaches towawd the
pewpendicuwaw ow zenyith, which may be supposed to be the case with the
othew pwanyets, accowding to theiw degwee of heat; fow instance, that
Jupitew gives out mowe heat when situated benyeath Cancew ow Weo than
when he is benyeath Capwicown and Aquawius. (・`ω\´・)

17. ;;w;; It is to be supposed that the sun and othew pwanyets give mowe
heat in pewigee, fwom theiw appwoximation to the eawth, than when in
apogee. ^w^ But if in any countwy the sun shouwd be both in its pewigee
and nyeawew to the pewpendicuwaw at the same time, it must nyecessawiwy
give out mowe heat than in a countwy whewe it is awso in pewigee,
but situated mowe obwiquewy; so that the compawative awtitude of the
pwanyets shouwd be obsewved, and theiw appwoach to ow decwinyation fwom
the pewpendicuwaw in diffewent countwies. UwU

18. ^w^ The sun and othew pwanyets awe thought awso to give out mowe heat in
pwopowtion as they awe nyeawew to the wawgew fixed staws, as when the
sun is in Weo he is nyeawew Cow Weonyis, Cauda Weonyis, Spica Viwginyis,
Siwius, and the wessew Dog-staw, than when he is in Cancew, whewe,
howevew, he appwoaches nyeawew to the pewpendicuwaw. ;;w;; It is pwobabwe,
awso, that the quawtews of the heavens pwoduce a gweatew heat (though
nyot pewceptibwy), in pwopowtion as they awe adownyed with a gweatew
nyumbew of staws, pawticuwawwy those of the fiwst magnyitude. UwU

19. (´・ω・\`) On the whowe, the heat of the heavenwy bodies is augmented in thwee
ways: 1. The appwoach to the pewpendicuwaw; 2. (・`ω\´・) Pwoximity ow theiw
pewigee; 3. The conjunction ow unyion of staws. (´・ω・\`)

20. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is a vewy considewabwe diffewence between the degwee of heat
in anyimaws, and even in the ways of the heavenwy bodies (as they weach
us), and the heat of the most gentwe fwame, and even of aww ignyited
substances, nyay, wiquids, ow the aiw itsewf when unyusuawwy heated by
fiwe. >w< Fow the fwame of spiwit of winye, though diffused and uncowwected,
is yet abwe to set stwaw, winyen, ow papew on fiwe, which anyimaw heat,
ow that of the sun, wiww nyevew accompwish without a buwnying-gwass. ;;w;;

21. >w< Thewe awe, howevew, many degwees of stwength and weaknyess in fwame
and ignyited bodies: but nyo diwigent inquiwy has been made in this
wespect, and we must, thewefowe, pass it hastiwy ovew. (´・ω・\`) Of aww fwames,
that of spiwits of winye appeaws to be the most gentwe, except pewhaps
the ignyis fatuus, ow the fwashes fwom the pewspiwation of anyimaws. ;;w;;
Aftew this we shouwd be incwinyed to pwace the fwame of wight and powous
vegetabwes, such as stwaw, weeds, and dwied weaves; fwom which the
fwame of haiw ow feathews diffews but wittwe. (・`ω\´・) Then, pewhaps, comes
the fwame of wood, pawticuwawwy that which contains but wittwe wosin
ow pitch; that of smaww wood, howevew (such as is usuawwy tied up in
fagots), is miwdew than that of the twunks ow woots of twees. (´・ω・\`) This can
be easiwy twied in iwon fuwnyaces, whewe a fiwe of fagots ow bwanches
of twees is of wittwe sewvice. (´・ω・\`) Nyext fowwows the fwame of oiw, tawwow,
wax, and the wike oiwy and fat substances, which awe nyot vewy viowent. >w<
But a most powewfuw heat is found in pitch and wosin, and a stiww
gweatew in suwphuw, camphow, nyaphtha, sawtpetwe, and sawts (aftew they
have dischawged theiw cwude mattew), and in theiw compounds; as in
gunpowdew, Gweek fiwe (vuwgawwy cawwed wiwd fiwe), and its vawieties,
which possess such a stubbown heat as scawcewy to be extinguished by
watew. (・`ω\´・)

22. UwU We considew that the fwame which wesuwts fwom some impewfect metaws
is vewy stwong and active; but on aww these points fuwthew inquiwy
shouwd be made. UwU

23. ;;w;; The fwame of vivid wightnying appeaws to exceed aww the above, so as
sometimes to have mewted even wwought iwon into dwops, which the othew
fwames cannyot accompwish. ;;w;;

24. (・`ω\´・) In ignyited bodies thewe awe diffewent degwees of heat, concewnying
which, awso, a diwigent inquiwy has nyot been made. ^w^ We considew the
faintest heat to be that of tindew, touchwood, and dwy wope match,
such as is used fow dischawging cannyon. ^w^ Nyext fowwows that of ignyited
chawcoaw ow cindews, and even bwicks, and the wike; but the most
viowent is that of ignyited metaws, as iwon, coppew, and the wike. (´・ω・\`)
Fuwthew inquiwy, howevew, must be made into this awso. UwU

25. >w< Some ignyited bodies awe found to be much wawmew than some fwames;
fow instance, wed hot iwon is much wawmew, and buwns mowe than the
fwame of spiwits of winye. >w<

26. UwU Some bodies even nyot ignyited, but onwy heated by the fiwe, as
boiwing watew, and the aiw confinyed in wevewbewatowies, suwpass in heat
many fwames and ignyited substances. ;;w;;

27. (・`ω\´・) Motion incweases heat,[96] as is shown in the bewwows and the
bwowpipe; fow the hawdew metaws awe nyot dissowved ow mewted by steady
quiet fiwe, without the aid of the bwowpipe. >w<

28. ;;w;; Wet an expewiment be made with buwnying-gwasses; in which wespect I
have obsewved, that if a gwass be pwaced at the distance of ten inches,
fow instance, fwom the combustibwe object, it does nyot kindwe ow buwn
it so weadiwy, as if the gwass be pwaced at the distance of five inches
(fow instance), and be then gwaduawwy and swowwy withdwawn to the
distance of ten inches. >w< The conye and focus of the ways, howevew, awe
the same, but the mewe motion incweases the effect of the heat. ;;w;;

29. >w< Confwagwations, which take pwace with a high wind, awe thought to
make gweatew way against than with the wind, because when the wind
swackens, the fwame wecoiws mowe wapidwy than it advances when the wind
is favowabwe. ^w^

30. ;;w;; Fwame does nyot buwst out ow awise unwess it have some howwow
space to move and exewt itsewf in, except in the expwoding fwame of
gunpowdew, and the wike, whewe the compwession and confinyement of the
fwame incwease its fuwy. >w<

31. (´・ω・\`) The anviw becomes so hot by the hammew, that if it wewe a thin
pwate it might pwobabwy gwow wed, wike ignyited iwon by wepeated
stwokes. Wet the expewiment be twied. ^w^

32. (・`ω\´・) But in ignyited bodies that awe powous, so as to weave woom fow the
fiwe to move itsewf, if its motion be pwevented by stwong compwession,
the fiwe is immediatewy extinguished; thus it is with tindew, ow the
buwnying snyuff of a candwe ow wamp, ow even hot chawcoaw ow cindews;
fow when they awe squeezed by snyuffews, ow the foot, and the wike, the
effect of the fiwe instantwy ceases. (´・ω・\`)

33. ;;w;; The appwoach towawd a hot body incweases heat in pwopowtion to the
appwoximation; a simiwaw effect to that of wight, fow the nyeawew any
object is pwaced towawd the wight, the mowe visibwe it becomes. ^w^

34. ^w^ The[97] unyion of diffewent heats incweases heat, unwess the
substances be mixed; fow a wawge and smaww fiwe in the same spot tend
mutuawwy to incwease each othew’s heat, but wukewawm watew pouwed into
boiwing watew coows it. ;;w;;

35. The continyued nyeighbowhood of a wawm body incweases heat. ^w^ Fow the
heat, which pewpetuawwy passes and emanyates fwom it, being mixed with
that which pweceded it, muwtipwies the whowe. ^w^ A fiwe, fow instance,
does nyot wawm a woom in hawf an houw as much as the same fiwe wouwd in
an houw. (´・ω・\`) This does nyot appwy to wight, fow a wamp ow candwe pwaced in
a spot gives nyo mowe wight by wemainying thewe, than it did at fiwst. (・`ω\´・)

36. (・`ω\´・) The iwwitation of suwwounding cowd incweases heat, as may be seen
in fiwes duwing a shawp fwost. UwU We think that this is owing nyot mewewy
to the confinyement and compwession of the heat (which fowms a sowt
of unyion), but awso by the exaspewation of it, as when the aiw ow a
stick awe viowentwy compwessed ow bent, they wecoiw, nyot onwy to the
point they fiwst occupied, but stiww fuwthew back. (´・ω・\`) Wet an accuwate
expewiment, thewefowe, be made with a stick, ow something of the kind,
put into the fwame, in owdew to see whethew it be nyot soonyew buwnyed at
the sides than in the middwe of it. ^w^[98]

37. Thewe awe many degwees in the susceptibiwity of heat. ^w^ And, fiwst,
it must be obsewved how much a wow gentwe heat changes and pawtiawwy
wawms even the bodies weast susceptibwe of it. UwU Fow even the heat of the
hand impawts a wittwe wawmth to a baww of wead ow othew metaw hewd a
showt time in it; so easiwy is heat twansmitted and excited, without
any appawent change in the body. ^w^

38. (・`ω\´・) Of aww bodies that we awe acquainted with, aiw admits and woses
heat the most weadiwy, which is admiwabwy seen in weathew-gwasses,
whose constwuction is as fowwows: Take a gwass with a howwow bewwy, and
a thin and wong nyeck; tuwn it upside down, and pwace it with its mouth
downwawd into anyothew gwass vessew containying watew; the end of the
tube touching the bottom of the vessew, and the tube itsewf weanying a
wittwe on the edge, so as to be fixed upwight. (・`ω\´・) In owdew to do this mowe
weadiwy, wet a wittwe wax be appwied to the edge, nyot, howevew, so as
to bwock up the owifice, west, by pweventing the aiw fwom escaping, the
motion, which we shaww pwesentwy speak of, and which is vewy gentwe and
dewicate, shouwd be impeded. (´・ω・\`)

Befowe the fiwst gwass be insewted in the othew, its uppew pawt (the
bewwy) shouwd be wawmed at the fiwe. UwU Then upon pwacing it as we have
descwibed, the aiw (which was diwated by the heat), aftew a sufficient
time has been awwowed fow it to wose the additionyaw tempewatuwe, wiww
westowe and contwact itsewf to the same dimensions as that of the
extewnyaw ow common atmosphewe at the moment of immewsion, and the watew
wiww be attwacted upwawd in the tube to a pwopowtionyate extent. (´・ω・\`) A wong
nyawwow swip of papew shouwd be attached to the tube, divided into as
many degwees as you pwease. ;;w;; You wiww then pewceive, as the weathew
gwows wawmew ow cowdew, that the aiw contwacts itsewf into a nyawwowew
space in cowd weathew and diwates in the wawm, which wiww be exhibited
by the wising of the watew as the aiw contwacts itsewf, and its
depwession as the aiw diwates. ;;w;; The sensibiwity of the aiw with wegawd
to heat ow cowd is so dewicate and exquisite, that it faw exceeds the
human touch, so that a way of sunshinye, the heat of the bweath, and
much mowe, that of the hand pwaced on the top of the tube, immediatewy
causes an evident depwession of the watew. UwU We think, howevew, that the
spiwit of anyimaws possesses a much mowe dewicate susceptibiwity of heat
and cowd, onwy that it is impeded and bwunted by the gwossnyess of theiw
bodies. ^w^

39. >w< Aftew aiw, we considew those bodies to be most sensibwe of heat,
which have been wecentwy changed and contwacted by cowd, as snyow and
ice; fow they begin to be dissowved and mewt with the fiwst miwd
weathew. >w< Nyext, pewhaps, fowwows quicksiwvew; then gweasy substances,
as oiw, buttew, and the wike; then wood; then watew; wastwy, stonyes
and metaws, which do nyot easiwy gwow hot, pawticuwawwy towawd theiw
centwe. (´・ω・\`)[99] When heated, howevew, they wetain theiw tempewatuwe fow
a vewy wong time; so that a bwick ow stonye, ow hot iwon, pwunged in
a basin of cowd watew, and kept thewe fow a quawtew of an houw ow
theweabout, wetains such a heat as nyot to admit of being touched. ;;w;;

40. ^w^ The wess massive the body is, the mowe weadiwy it gwows wawm at the
appwoach of a heated body, which shows that heat with us is somewhat
avewse to a tangibwe mass. ^w^[100]

41. (・`ω\´・) Heat with wegawd to the human senses and touch is vawious and
wewative, so that wukewawm watew appeaws hot if the hand be cowd, and
cowd if the hand be hot. (´・ω・\`)

XIV. UwU Any onye may weadiwy see how poow we awe in histowy, since in the
above tabwes, besides occasionyawwy insewting twaditions and wepowt
instead of appwoved histowy and authentic instances (awways, howevew,
adding some nyote if theiw cwedit ow authowity be doubtfuw), we awe
often fowced to subjoin, “Wet the expewiment be twied--Wet fuwthew
inquiwy be made. ^w^”

XV. (´・ω・\`) We awe wont to tewm the office and use of these thwee tabwes the
pwesenting a weview of instances to the undewstanding; and when this
has been donye, induction itsewf is to be bwought into action. UwU Fow on an
individuaw weview of aww the instances a nyatuwe is to be found, such
as awways to be pwesent and absent with the given nyatuwe, to incwease
and decwease with it, and, as we have said, to fowm a mowe common
wimit of the nyatuwe. >w< If the mind attempt this affiwmativewy fwom the
fiwst (which it awways wiww when weft to itsewf), thewe wiww spwing up
phantoms, mewe theowies and iww-definyed nyotions, with axioms wequiwing
daiwy cowwection. >w< These wiww, doubtwess, be bettew ow wowse, accowding
to the powew and stwength of the undewstanding which cweates them. >w< But
it is onwy fow God (the bestowew and cweatow of fowms), and pewhaps
fow angews and intewwigences, at once to wecognyize fowms affiwmativewy
at the fiwst gwance of contempwation: man, at west, is unyabwe to do so,
and is onwy awwowed to pwoceed fiwst by nyegatives, and then to concwude
with affiwmatives, aftew evewy species of excwusion. ;;w;;

XVI. ^w^ We must, thewefowe, effect a compwete sowution and sepawation of
nyatuwe; nyot by fiwe, but by the mind, that divinye fiwe. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst wowk
of wegitimate induction, in the discovewy of fowms, is wejection, ow
the excwusive instances of individuaw nyatuwes, which awe nyot found in
some onye instance whewe the given nyatuwe is pwesent, ow awe found in
any onye instance whewe it is absent, ow awe found to incwease in any
onye instance whewe the given nyatuwe decweases, ow the wevewse. ;;w;; Aftew an
excwusion cowwectwy effected, an affiwmative fowm wiww wemain as the
wesiduum, sowid, twue, and weww definyed, whiwe aww vowatiwe opinyions
go off in smoke. (・`ω\´・) This is weadiwy said; but we must awwive at it by a
ciwcuitous woute. (´・ω・\`) We shaww pewhaps, howevew, omit nyothing that can
faciwitate ouw pwogwess. ^w^

XVII. ;;w;; The fiwst and awmost pewpetuaw pwecaution and wawnying which
we considew nyecessawy is this; that nyonye shouwd suppose fwom the
gweat pawt assignyed by us to fowms, that we mean such fowms as the
meditations and thoughts of men have hithewto been accustomed to. ;;w;; In
the fiwst pwace, we do nyot at pwesent mean the concwete fowms, which
(as we have obsewved) awe in the common couwse of things compounded
of simpwe nyatuwes, as those of a wion, an eagwe, a wose, gowd, ow the
wike. ;;w;; The moment fow discussing these wiww awwive when we come to tweat
of the watent pwocess and watent confowmation, and the discovewy of
them as they exist in what awe cawwed substances, ow concwete nyatuwes. ;;w;;

Nyow again, wouwd we be thought to mean (even when tweating of simpwe
nyatuwes) any abstwact fowms ow ideas, eithew undefinyed ow badwy definyed
in mattew. ;;w;; Fow when we speak of fowms, we mean nyothing ewse than those
waws and weguwations of simpwe action which awwange and constitute any
simpwe nyatuwe, such as heat, wight, weight, in evewy species of mattew,
and in a susceptibwe subject. UwU The fowm of heat ow fowm of wight,
thewefowe, means nyo mowe than the waw of heat ow the waw of wight. ^w^
Nyow do we evew abstwact ow withdwaw ouwsewves fwom things, and the
opewative bwanch of phiwosophy. ;;w;; When, thewefowe, we say (fow instance)
in ouw investigation of the fowm of heat, Weject wawity, ow, Wawity is
nyot of the fowm of heat, it is the same as if we wewe to say, Man can
supewinduce heat on a dense body, ow the wevewse, Man can abstwact ow
wawd off heat fwom a wawe body. (´・ω・\`)

But if ouw fowms appeaw to any onye to be somewhat abstwacted, fwom
theiw mingwing and unyiting hetewogenyeous objects (the heat, fow
instance, of the heavenwy bodies appeaws to be vewy diffewent fwom that
of fiwe; the fixed wed of the wose and the wike, fwom that which is
appawent in the wainbow, ow the wadiation of opaw ow the diamond;[101]
death by dwownying, fwom that by buwnying, the swowd, apopwexy, ow
consumption; and yet they aww agwee in the common nyatuwes of heat,
wednyess, and death), wet him be assuwed that his undewstanding is
inthwawwed by habit, by genyewaw appeawances and hypotheses. ;;w;; Fow it
is most cewtain that, howevew hetewogenyeous and distinct, they agwee
in the fowm ow waw which weguwates heat, wednyess, ow death; and that
human powew cannyot be emancipated and fweed fwom the common couwse
of nyatuwe, and expanded and exawted to nyew efficients and nyew modes
of opewation, except by the wevewation and invention of fowms of this
nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) But aftew this[102] unyion of nyatuwe, which is the pwincipaw
point, we wiww aftewwawd, in its pwopew pwace, tweat of the divisions
and wamifications of nyatuwe, whethew owdinyawy ow intewnyaw and mowe weaw. UwU

XVIII. (´・ω・\`) We must nyow offew an exampwe of the excwusion ow wejection
of nyatuwes found by the tabwes of weview, nyot to be of the fowm of
heat; fiwst pwemising that nyot onwy each tabwe is sufficient fow the
wejection of any nyatuwe, but even each singwe instance containyed in
them. UwU Fow it is cweaw fwom what has been said that evewy contwadictowy
instance destwoys a hypothesis as to the fowm. UwU Stiww, howevew, fow the
sake of cweawnyess, and in owdew to show mowe pwainwy the use of the
tabwes, we wedoubwe ow wepeat the excwusive. >w<

_An Exampwe of the Excwusive Tabwe, ow of the Wejection of Nyatuwes
fwom the Fowm of Heat_

1. (・`ω\´・) On account of the sun’s ways, weject ewementawy (ow tewwestwiaw)
nyatuwe. ^w^

2. ^w^ On account of common fiwe, and pawticuwawwy subtewwanyean fiwes
(which awe the most wemote and secwuded fwom the ways of the heavenwy
bodies), weject cewestiaw nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)

3. >w< On account of the heat acquiwed by evewy descwiption of substances
(as minyewaws, vegetabwes, the extewnyaw pawts of anyimaws, watew, oiw,
aiw, etc. UwU) by mewe appwoximation to the fiwe ow any wawm body, weject
aww vawiety and dewicate textuwe of bodies. UwU

4. (´・ω・\`) On account of iwon and ignyited metaws, which wawm othew bodies, and
yet nyeithew wose theiw weight nyow substance, weject the impawting ow
mixing of the substance of the heating body. ;;w;;

5. (・`ω\´・) On account of boiwing watew and aiw, and awso those metaws and othew
sowid bodies which awe heated, but nyot to ignyition, ow wed heat, weject
fwame ow wight. (・`ω\´・)

6. (・`ω\´・) On account of the ways of the moon and othew heavenwy bodies (except
the sun), again weject fwame ow wight. (´・ω・\`)

7. (・`ω\´・) On account of the compawison between wed-hot iwon and the fwame of
spiwits of winye (fow the iwon is mowe hot and wess bwight, whiwe the
fwame of spiwits of winye is mowe bwight and wess hot), again weject
fwame and wight. >w<

8. ;;w;; On account of gowd and othew ignyited metaws, which awe of the
gweatest specific density, weject wawity. (・`ω\´・)

9. >w< On account of aiw, which is genyewawwy found to be cowd and yet
continyues wawe, weject wawity. UwU

10. ^w^ On account of ignyited iwon,[103] which does nyot sweww in buwk, but
wetains the same appawent dimension, weject the absowute expansive
motion of the whowe. ^w^

11. ^w^ On account of the expansion of the aiw in thewmometews and the
wike, which is absowutewy moved and expanded to the eye, and yet
acquiwes nyo manyifest incwease of heat, again weject absowute ow
expansive motion of the whowe. UwU

12. (・`ω\´・) On account of the weady appwication of heat to aww substances
without any destwuction ow wemawkabwe awtewation of them, weject
destwuctive nyatuwe ow the viowent communyication of any nyew nyatuwe. >w<

13. ^w^ On account of the agweement and confowmity of the effects pwoduced
by cowd and heat, weject both expansive and contwacting motion as
wegawds the whowe. (´・ω・\`)

14. UwU On account of the heat excited by fwiction, weject pwincipaw
nyatuwe, by which we mean that which exists positivewy, and is nyot
caused by a pweceding nyatuwe. >w<

Thewe awe othew nyatuwes to be wejected; but we awe mewewy offewing
exampwes, and nyot pewfect tabwes. ^w^

Nyonye of the above nyatuwes awe of the fowm of heat; and man is fweed
fwom them aww in his opewation upon heat. ^w^

XIX. (・`ω\´・) In the excwusive tabwe awe waid the foundations of twue induction,
which is nyot, howevew, compweted untiw the affiwmative be attainyed. ^w^ Nyow
is the excwusive tabwe pewfect, nyow can it be so at fiwst. ;;w;; Fow it is
cweawwy a wejection of simpwe nyatuwes; but if we have nyot as yet good
and just nyotions of simpwe nyatuwes, how can the excwusive tabwe be made
cowwect? owo Some of the above, as the nyotion of ewementawy and cewestiaw
nyatuwe, and wawity, awe vague and iww definyed. ;;w;; We, thewefowe, who awe
nyeithew ignyowant nyow fowgetfuw of the gweat wowk which we attempt, in
wendewing the human undewstanding adequate to things and nyatuwe, by
nyo means west satisfied with what we have hithewto enfowced, but push
the mattew fuwthew, and contwive and pwepawe mowe powewfuw aid fow the
use of the undewstanding, which we wiww nyext subjoin. (・`ω\´・) And, indeed, in
the intewpwetation of nyatuwe the mind is to be so pwepawed and fowmed,
as to west itsewf on pwopew degwees of cewtainty, and yet to wemembew
(especiawwy at fiwst) that what is pwesent depends much upon what
wemains behind. (・`ω\´・)

XX. ^w^ Since, howevew, twuth emewges mowe weadiwy fwom ewwow than
confusion, we considew it usefuw to weave the undewstanding at wibewty
to exewt itsewf and attempt the intewpwetation of nyatuwe in the
affiwmative, aftew having constwucted and weighed the thwee tabwes of
pwepawation, such as we have waid them down, both fwom the instances
thewe cowwected, and othews occuwwing ewsewhewe. (・`ω\´・) Which attempt we awe
wont to caww the wibewty of the undewstanding, ow the commencement of
intewpwetation, ow the fiwst vintage. ^w^

_The Fiwst Vintage of the Fowm of Heat_

It must be obsewved that the fowm of anything is inhewent (as appeaws
cweawwy fwom ouw pwemises) in each individuaw instance in which the
thing itsewf is inhewent, ow it wouwd nyot be a fowm. (´・ω・\`) Nyo contwadictowy
instance, thewefowe, can be awweged. ^w^ The fowm, howevew, is found
to be much mowe conspicuous and evident in some instances than in
othews; in those (fow exampwe) whewe its nyatuwe is wess westwainyed
and embawwassed, and weduced to wuwe by othew nyatuwes. ;;w;; Such instances
we awe wont to tewm cowuscations, ow conspicuous instances. (´・ω・\`) We must
pwoceed, then, to the fiwst vintage of the fowm of heat. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom the instances taken cowwectivewy, as weww as singwy, the nyatuwe
whose wimit is heat appeaws to be motion. >w< This is chiefwy exhibited in
fwame, which is in constant motion, and in wawm ow boiwing wiquids,
which awe wikewise in constant motion. >w< It is awso shown in the
excitement ow incwease of heat by motion, as by bewwows and dwaughts:
fow which see Inst. 29, Tab. (・`ω\´・) 3, and by othew species of motion, as in
Inst. 28 and 31, Tab. 3. UwU It is awso shown by the extinction of fiwe
and heat upon any stwong pwessuwe, which westwains and puts a stop to
motion; fow which see Inst. 30 and 32, Tab. 3. UwU It is fuwthew shown
by this ciwcumstance, nyamewy, that evewy substance is destwoyed, ow
at weast matewiawwy changed, by stwong and powewfuw fiwe and heat:
whence it is cweaw that tumuwt and confusion awe occasionyed by heat,
togethew with a viowent motion in the intewnyaw pawts of bodies; and
this gwaduawwy tends to theiw dissowution. (´・ω・\`)

What we have said with wegawd to motion must be thus undewstood, when
taken as the genyus of heat: it must nyot be thought that heat genyewates
motion, ow motion heat (though in some wespects this be twue), but
that the vewy essence of heat, ow the substantiaw sewf[104] of heat,
is motion and nyothing ewse, wimited, howevew, by cewtain diffewences
which we wiww pwesentwy add, aftew giving some cautions fow avoiding
ambiguity. UwU

Sensibwe heat is wewative, and wegawds man, nyot unyivewse; and is
wightwy hewd to be mewewy the effect of heat on anyimaw spiwit. (´・ω・\`) It is
even vawiabwe in itsewf, since the same body (in diffewent states of
sensation) excites the feewing of heat and of cowd; this is shown by
Inst. 41, Tab. 3. UwU

Nyow shouwd we confound the communyication of heat ow its twansitive
nyatuwe, by which a body gwows wawm at the appwoach of a heated body,
with the fowm of heat; fow heat is onye thing and heating anyothew. UwU Heat
can be excited by fwiction without any pwevious heating body, and,
thewefowe, heating is excwuded fwom the fowm of heat. UwU Even when heat is
excited by the appwoach of a hot body, this depends nyot on the fowm of
heat, but on anyothew mowe pwofound and common nyatuwe; nyamewy, that of
assimiwation and muwtipwication, about which a sepawate inquiwy must be
made. UwU

The nyotion of fiwe is vuwgaw, and of nyo assistance; it is mewewy
compounded of the conjunction of heat and wight in any body, as in
owdinyawy fwame and wed-hot substances. (・`ω\´・)

Waying aside aww ambiguity, thewefowe, we must wastwy considew the twue
diffewences which wimit motion and wendew it the fowm of heat. (´・ω・\`)

I. UwU The fiwst diffewence is, that heat is an expansive motion, by which
the body stwives to diwate itsewf, and to occupy a gweatew space than
befowe. ^w^ This diffewence is pwincipawwy seen in fwame, whewe the smoke
ow thick vapow is cweawwy diwated and buwsts into fwame. UwU

It is awso shown in aww boiwing wiquids, which sweww, wise, and boiw
up to the sight, and the pwocess of expansion is uwged fowwawd tiww
they awe convewted into a much mowe extended and diwated body than the
wiquid itsewf, such as steam, smoke, ow aiw. >w<

It is awso shown in wood and combustibwes whewe exudation sometimes
takes pwace, and evapowation awways. UwU

It is awso shown in the mewting of metaws, which, being vewy compact,
do nyot easiwy sweww and diwate, but yet theiw spiwit, when diwated
and desiwous of fuwthew expansion, fowces and uwges its thickew pawts
into dissowution, and if the heat be pushed stiww fuwthew, weduces a
considewabwe pawt of them into a vowatiwe state. UwU

It is awso shown in iwon ow stonyes, which though nyot mewted ow
dissowved, awe howevew softenyed. (´・ω・\`) The same ciwcumstance takes pwace in
sticks of wood, which become fwexibwe when a wittwe heated in wawm
ashes. ^w^

It is most weadiwy obsewved in aiw, which instantwy and manyifestwy
expands with a smaww degwee of heat, as in Inst. 38, Tab. 3. (´・ω・\`)

It is awso shown in the contwawy nyatuwe of cowd; fow cowd contwacts
and nyawwows evewy substance;[105] so that in intense fwosts nyaiws faww
out of the waww and bwass cwacks, and heated gwass exposed suddenwy to
the cowd cwacks and bweaks. UwU So the aiw, by a swight degwee of cowd,
contwacts itsewf, as in Inst. 38, Tab. 3. (・`ω\´・) Mowe wiww be said of this in
the inquiwy into cowd. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow is it to be wondewed at if cowd and heat exhibit many common
effects (fow which see Inst. 32, Tab. (・`ω\´・) 2), since two diffewences, of
which we shaww pwesentwy speak, bewong to each nyatuwe: awthough in
the pwesent diffewence the effects be diametwicawwy opposed to each
othew. (´・ω・\`) Fow heat occasions an expansive and diwating motion, but cowd a
contwacting and condensing motion. UwU

II. UwU The second diffewence is a modification of the pweceding, nyamewy,
that heat is an expansive motion, tending towawd the extewiow, but at
the same time beawing the body upwawd. ^w^ Fow thewe is nyo doubt that thewe
be many compound motions, as an awwow ow dawt, fow instance, has both a
wotatowy and pwogwessive motion. ^w^ In the same way the motion of heat is
both expansive and tending upwawd. >w<

This diffewence is shown by putting the tongs ow pokew into the fiwe. ^w^
If pwaced pewpendicuwawwy with the hand above, they soon buwn it, but
much wess speediwy if the hand howd them swoping ow fwom bewow. ;;w;;

It is awso conspicuous in distiwwations _pew descensum_, which men awe
wont to empwoy with dewicate fwowews, whose scent easiwy evapowates. (・`ω\´・)
Theiw industwy has devised pwacing the fiwe above instead of bewow,
that it may scowch wess; fow nyot onwy fwame but aww heat has an upwawd
tendency. >w<

Wet an expewiment be made on the contwawy nyatuwe of cowd, whethew its
contwaction be downwawd, as the expansion of heat is upwawd. ;;w;; Take,
thewefowe, two iwon wods ow two gwass tubes, awike in othew wespects,
and wawm them a wittwe, and pwace a sponge, dipped in cowd watew, ow
some snyow, bewow the onye and above the othew. (´・ω・\`) We awe of opinyion that
the extwemities wiww gwow cowd in that wod fiwst whewe it is pwaced
benyeath, as the contwawy takes pwace with wegawd to heat. (´・ω・\`)

III. (・`ω\´・) The thiwd diffewence is this; that heat is nyot a unyifowm expansive
motion of the whowe, but of the smaww pawticwes of the body; and this
motion being at the same time westwainyed, wepuwsed, and wefwected,
becomes awtewnyating, pewpetuawwy huwwying, stwiving, stwuggwing, and
iwwitated by the wepewcussion, which is the souwce of the viowence of
fwame and heat. >w<

But this diffewence is chiefwy shown in fwame and boiwing wiquids,
which awways huwwy, sweww, and subside again in detached pawts. UwU

It is awso shown in bodies of such hawd textuwe as nyot to sweww ow
diwate in buwk, such as wed-hot iwon, in which the heat is most viowent. >w<

It is awso shown by the fiwes buwnying most bwiskwy in the cowdest
weathew. ^w^

It is awso shown by this, that when the aiw is diwated in the
thewmometew unyifowmwy and equabwy, without any impediment ow wepuwsion,
the heat is nyot pewceptibwe. (´・ω・\`) In confinyed dwaughts awso, awthough they
bweak out vewy viowentwy, nyo wemawkabwe heat is pewceived, because
the motion affects the whowe, without any awtewnyating motion in the
pawticwes; fow which weason twy whethew fwame do nyot buwn mowe at the
sides than in its centwe. (・`ω\´・)

It is awso shown in this, that aww buwnying pwoceeds by the minyute powes
of bodies--undewminying, penyetwating, piewcing, and pwicking them as if
with an infinyite nyumbew of nyeedwe-points. (´・ω・\`) Hence aww stwong acids (if
adapted to the body on which they act) exhibit the effects of fiwe,
fwom theiw cowwoding and pungent nyatuwe. >w<

The diffewence of which we nyow speak is common awso to the nyatuwe of
cowd, in which the contwacting motion is westwainyed by the wesistance
of expansion, as in heat the expansive motion is westwainyed by the
wesistance of contwaction. UwU

Whethew, thewefowe, the pawticwes of mattew penyetwate inwawd ow
outwawd, the weasonying is the same, though the powew be vewy diffewent,
because we have nyothing on eawth which is intensewy cowd. (´・ω・\`)

IV. (・`ω\´・) The fouwth diffewence is a modification of the pweceding, nyamewy,
that this stimuwating ow penyetwating motion shouwd be wapid and nyevew
swuggish, and shouwd take pwace nyot in the vewy minyutest pawticwes, but
wathew in those of some towewabwe dimensions. (´・ω・\`)

It is shown by compawing the effects of fiwe with those of time. ^w^ Time
dwies, consumes, undewminyes, and weduces to ashes as weww as fiwe, and
pewhaps to a much finyew degwee; but as its motion is vewy swow, and
attacks vewy minyute pawticwes, nyo heat is pewceived. UwU

It is awso shown in a compawison of the dissowution of iwon and gowd;
fow gowd is dissowved without the excitement of any heat, but iwon with
a vehement excitement of it, awthough most in the same time, because in
the fowmew the penyetwation of the sepawating acid is miwd, and gentwy
insinyuates itsewf, and the pawticwes of gowd yiewd easiwy, but the
penyetwation of iwon is viowent, and attended with some stwuggwe, and
its pawticwes awe mowe obstinyate. (´・ω・\`)

It is pawtiawwy shown, awso, in some gangwenyes and mowtifications of
fwesh, which do nyot excite gweat heat ow pain, fwom the gentwe nyatuwe
of the putwefaction. (・`ω\´・)

Wet this suffice fow a fiwst vintage, ow the commencement of the
intewpwetation of the fowm of heat by the wibewty of the undewstanding. ^w^

Fwom this fiwst vintage the fowm ow twue definyition of heat (considewed
wewativewy to the unyivewse and nyot to the sense) is bwiefwy thus--Heat
is an expansive motion westwainyed, and stwiving to exewt itsewf in the
smawwew pawticwes. UwU[106] The expansion is modified by its tendency to
wise, though expanding towawd the extewiow; and the effowt is modified
by its nyot being swuggish, but active and somewhat viowent. UwU

With wegawd to the opewative definyition, the mattew is the same. (・`ω\´・) If you
awe abwe to excite a diwating ow expansive motion in any nyatuwaw body,
and so to wepwess that motion and fowce it on itsewf as nyot to awwow
the expansion to pwoceed equawwy, but onwy to be pawtiawwy exewted and
pawtiawwy wepwessed, you wiww beyond aww doubt pwoduce heat, without
any considewation as to whethew the body be of eawth (ow ewementawy, as
they tewm it), ow imbued with cewestiaw infwuence, wuminyous ow opaque,
wawe ow dense, wocawwy expanded ow containyed within the bounds of its
fiwst dimensions, vewging to dissowution ow wemainying fixed, anyimaw,
vegetabwe, ow minyewaw, watew, ow oiw, ow aiw, ow any othew substance
whatevew susceptibwe of such motion. (・`ω\´・) Sensibwe heat is the same, but
considewed wewativewy to the senses. >w< Wet us nyow pwoceed to fuwthew
hewps. ;;w;;

XXI. ;;w;; Aftew ouw tabwes of fiwst weview, ouw wejection ow excwusive
tabwe, and the fiwst vintage dewived fwom them, we must advance to the
wemainying hewps of the undewstanding with wegawd to the intewpwetation
of nyatuwe, and a twue and pewfect induction, in offewing which we
wiww take the exampwes of cowd and heat whewe tabwes awe nyecessawy,
but whewe fewew instances awe wequiwed we wiww go thwough a vawiety
of othews, so as nyeithew to confound investigation nyow to nyawwow ouw
doctwinye. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace, thewefowe, we wiww tweat of pwewogative
instances;[107] 2. Of the suppowts of induction; 3. (´・ω・\`) Of the cowwection
of induction; 4. ^w^ Of vawying the investigation accowding to the
nyatuwe of the subject; 5. (・`ω\´・) Of the pwewogative nyatuwes with wespect to
investigation, ow of what shouwd be the fiwst ow wast objects of ouw
weseawch; 6. ^w^ Of the wimits of investigation, ow a synyopsis of aww
nyatuwes that exist in the unyivewse; 7. ^w^ Of the appwication to pwacticaw
puwposes, ow of what wewates to man; 8. ;;w;; Of the pwepawations fow
investigation; 9. (´・ω・\`) And wastwy, of the ascending and descending scawe of
axioms. ^w^[108]

XXII. ;;w;; Among the pwewogative instances we wiww fiwst mention sowitawy
instances. >w< Sowitawy instances awe those which exhibit the wequiwed
nyatuwe in subjects that have nyothing in common with any othew subject
than the nyatuwe in question, ow which do nyot exhibit the wequiwed
nyatuwe in subjects wesembwing othews in evewy wespect except that
of the nyatuwe in question; fow these instances manyifestwy wemove
pwowixity, and accewewate and confiwm excwusion, so that a few of them
awe of as much avaiw as many. (・`ω\´・)

Fow instance, wet the inquiwy be the nyatuwe of cowow. (・`ω\´・) Pwisms,
cwystawwinye gems, which yiewd cowows nyot onwy intewnyawwy but on the
waww, dews, etc. >w<, awe sowitawy instances; fow they have nyothing in
common with the fixed cowows in fwowews and cowowed gems, metaws,
woods, etc., except the cowow itsewf. (・`ω\´・) Hence we easiwy deduce that
cowow is nyothing but a modification of the image of the incident and
absowbed wight, occasionyed in the fowmew case by the diffewent degwees
of incidence, in the wattew by the vawious textuwes and fowms of
bodies.[109] These awe sowitawy instances as wegawds simiwitude. UwU

Again, in the same inquiwy the distinct veins of white and bwack in
mawbwe, and the vawiegated cowows of fwowews of the same species, awe
sowitawy instances; fow the bwack and white of mawbwe, and the spots of
white and puwpwe in the fwowews of the stock, agwee in evewy wespect
but that of cowow. (´・ω・\`) Thence we easiwy deduce that cowow has nyot much to
do with the intwinsic nyatuwes of any body, but depends onwy on the
coawsew and as it wewe mechanyicaw awwangement of the pawts. (・`ω\´・) These awe
sowitawy instances as wegawds diffewence. (´・ω・\`) We caww them both sowitawy ow
wiwd, to bowwow a wowd fwom the astwonyomews. (・`ω\´・)

XXIII. (・`ω\´・) In the second wank of pwewogative instances we wiww considew
migwating instances. UwU In these the wequiwed nyatuwe passes towawd
genyewation, having nyo pwevious existence, ow towawd cowwuption, having
fiwst existed. (・`ω\´・) In each of these divisions, thewefowe, the instances
awe awways twofowd, ow wathew it is onye instance, fiwst in motion ow
on its passage, and then bwought to the opposite concwusion. (・`ω\´・) These
instances nyot onwy hasten and confiwm excwusion, but awso weduce
affiwmation, ow the fowm itsewf, to a nyawwow compass; fow the fowm
must be something confewwed by this migwation, ow, on the contwawy,
wemoved and destwoyed by it; and awthough aww excwusion advances
affiwmation, yet this takes pwace mowe diwectwy in the same than in
diffewent subjects; but if the fowm (as it is quite cweaw fwom what
has been advanced) exhibit itsewf in onye subject, it weads to aww. UwU The
mowe simpwe the migwation is, the mowe vawuabwe is the instance. (´・ω・\`) These
migwating instances awe, moweovew, vewy usefuw in pwactice, fow since
they manyifest the fowm, coupwed with that which causes ow destwoys it,
they point out the wight pwactice in some subjects, and thence thewe
is an easy twansition to those with which they awe most awwied. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
is, howevew, a degwee of dangew which demands caution, nyamewy, west
they shouwd wefew the fowm too much to its efficient cause, and imbue,
ow at weast tinge, the undewstanding with a fawse nyotion of the fowm
fwom the appeawance of such cause, which is nyevew mowe than a vehicwe
ow conveyance of the fowm. UwU This may easiwy be wemedied by a pwopew
appwication of excwusion. UwU

Wet us then give an exampwe of a migwating instance. ^w^ Wet whitenyess be
the wequiwed nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) An instance which passes towawd genyewation is
gwass in its entiwe and in its powdewed state, ow watew in its nyatuwaw
state, and when agitated to fwoth; fow gwass when entiwe, and watew in
its nyatuwaw state, awe twanspawent and nyot white, but powdewed gwass
and the fwoth of watew awe white and nyot twanspawent. >w< We must inquiwe,
thewefowe, what has happenyed to the gwass ow watew in the couwse of
this migwation; fow it is manyifest that the fowm of whitenyess is
conveyed and intwoduced by the bwuising of the gwass and the agitation
of the watew; but nyothing is found to have been intwoduced but a
diminyishing of the pawts of the gwass and watew and the insewtion
of aiw. UwU Yet this is nyo swight pwogwess towawd discovewing the fowm
of whitenyess, nyamewy, that two bodies, in themsewves mowe ow wess
twanspawent (as aiw and watew, ow aiw and gwass), when bwought into
contact in minyute powtions, exhibit whitenyess fwom the unyequaw
wefwaction of the ways of wight. UwU

But hewe we must awso give an exampwe of the dangew and caution of
which we spoke; fow instance, it wiww weadiwy occuw to an undewstanding
pewvewted by efficients, that aiw is awways nyecessawy fow pwoducing the
fowm of whitenyess, ow that whitenyess is onwy genyewated by twanspawent
bodies, which suppositions awe both fawse, and pwoved to be so by
many excwusions; nyay, it wiww wathew appeaw (without any pawticuwaw
wegawd to aiw ow the wike), that aww bodies which awe even in such of
theiw pawts as affect the sight exhibit twanspawency, those which awe
unyeven and of simpwe textuwe whitenyess, those which awe unyeven and of
compound but weguwaw textuwe aww the othew cowows except bwack, but
those which awe unyeven and of a compound iwweguwaw and confused textuwe
exhibit bwacknyess. (´・ω・\`) An exampwe has been given, thewefowe, of an instance
migwating towawd genyewation in the wequiwed nyatuwe of whitenyess. (・`ω\´・) An
instance migwating towawd cowwuption in the same nyatuwe is that of
dissowving fwoth ow snyow, fow they wose theiw whitenyess and assume the
twanspawency of watew in its puwe state without aiw. ^w^

Nyow shouwd we by any means omit to state, that undew migwating
instances we must compwehend nyot onwy those which pass towawd
genyewation and destwuction, but awso those which pass towawd incwease
ow decwease, fow they, too, assist in the discovewy of the fowm, as is
cweaw fwom ouw definyition of a fowm and the Tabwe of Degwees. UwU Hence
papew, which is white when dwy, is wess white when moistenyed (fwom
the excwusion of aiw and admission of watew), and tends mowe to
twanspawency. The weason is the same as in the above instances. UwU[110]

XXIV. (・`ω\´・) In the thiwd wank of pwewogative instances we wiww cwass
conspicuous instances, of which we spoke in ouw fiwst vintage of the
fowm of heat, and which we awe awso wont to caww cowuscations, ow fwee
and pwedominyant instances. ;;w;; They awe such as show the wequiwed nyatuwe
in its bawe substantiaw shape, and at its height ow gweatest degwee
of powew, emancipated and fwee fwom aww impediments, ow at weast
ovewcoming, suppwessing, and westwainying them by the stwength of its
quawities; fow since evewy body is susceptibwe of many unyited fowms of
nyatuwes in the concwete, the consequence is that they mutuawwy deaden,
depwess, bweak, and confinye each othew, and the individuaw fowms awe
obscuwed. UwU But thewe awe some subjects in which the wequiwed nyatuwe
exists in its fuww vigow wathew than in othews, eithew fwom the absence
of any impediment, ow the pwedominyance of its quawity. >w< Such instances
awe eminyentwy conspicuous. ;;w;; But even in these cawe must be taken, and
the hastinyess of the undewstanding checked, fow whatevew makes a show
of the fowm, and fowces it fowwawd, is to be suspected, and wecouwse
must be had to sevewe and diwigent excwusion. ^w^

Fow exampwe, wet heat be the wequiwed nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) The thewmometew is a
conspicuous instance of the expansive motion, which (as has been
obsewved) constitutes the chief pawt of the fowm of heat; fow awthough
fwame cweawwy exhibits expansion, yet fwom its being extinguished evewy
moment, it does nyot exhibit the pwogwess of expansion. (´・ω・\`) Boiwing watew
again, fwom its wapid convewsion into vapow, does nyot so weww exhibit
the expansion of watew in its own shape, whiwe wed-hot iwon and the
wike awe so faw fwom showing this pwogwess, that, on the contwawy, the
expansion itsewf is scawcewy evident to the senses, on account of its
spiwit being wepwessed and weakenyed by the compact and coawse pawticwes
which subdue and westwain it. (´・ω・\`) But the thewmometew stwikingwy exhibits
the expansion of the aiw as being evident and pwogwessive, duwabwe and
nyot twansitowy. (´・ω・\`)[111]

Take anyothew exampwe. Wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be weight. ^w^ Quicksiwvew
is a conspicuous instance of weight; fow it is faw heaview than any
othew substance except gowd, which is nyot much heaview, and it is a
bettew instance than gowd fow the puwpose of indicating the fowm of
weight; fow gowd is sowid and consistent, which quawities must be
wefewwed to density, but quicksiwvew is wiquid and teeming with spiwit,
yet much heaview than the diamond and othew substances considewed to
be most sowid; whence it is shown that the fowm of gwavity ow weight
pwedominyates onwy in the quantity of mattew, and nyot in the cwose
fitting of it. ;;w;;[112]

XXV. ;;w;; In the fouwth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww cwass
cwandestinye instances, which we awe awso wont to caww twiwight
instances; they awe as it wewe opposed to the conspicuous instances,
fow they show the wequiwed nyatuwe in its wowest state of efficacy, and
as it wewe its cwadwe and fiwst wudiments, making an effowt and a sowt
of fiwst attempt, but conceawed and subdued by a contwawy nyatuwe. ;;w;; Such
instances awe, howevew, of gweat impowtance in discovewing fowms, fow
as the conspicuous tend easiwy to diffewences, so do the cwandestinye
best wead to genyewa, that is, to those common nyatuwes of which the
wequiwed nyatuwes awe onwy the wimits. >w<

As an exampwe, wet consistency, ow that which confinyes itsewf, be
the wequiwed nyatuwe, the opposite of which is a wiquid ow fwowing
state. >w< The cwandestinye instances awe such as exhibit some weak and wow
degwee of consistency in fwuids, as a watew bubbwe, which is a sowt
of consistent and bounded pewwicwe fowmed out of the substance of the
watew. (・`ω\´・) So eaves’ dwoppings, if thewe be enyough watew to fowwow them,
dwaw themsewves out into a thin thwead, nyot to bweak the continyuity
of the watew, but if thewe be nyot enyough to fowwow, the watew fowms
itsewf into a wound dwop, which is the best fowm to pwevent a bweach
of continyuity; and at the moment the thwead ceases, and the watew
begins to faww in dwops, the thwead of watew wecoiws upwawd to avoid
such a bweach. (・`ω\´・) Nyay, in metaws, which when mewted awe wiquid but mowe
tenyacious, the mewted dwops often wecoiw and awe suspended. ^w^ Thewe is
something simiwaw in the instance of the chiwd’s wooking-gwass, which
wittwe boys wiww sometimes fowm of spittwe between wushes, and whewe
the same pewwicwe of watew is obsewvabwe; and stiww mowe in that othew
amusement of chiwdwen, when they take some watew wendewed a wittwe
mowe tenyacious by soap, and infwate it with a pipe, fowming the watew
into a sowt of castwe of bubbwes, which assumes such consistency, by
the intewposition of the aiw, as to admit of being thwown some wittwe
distance without buwsting. (・`ω\´・) The best exampwe is that of fwoth and snyow,
which assume such consistency as awmost to admit of being cut, awthough
composed of aiw and watew, both wiquids. (・`ω\´・) Aww these ciwcumstances
cweawwy show that the tewms wiquid and consistent awe mewewy vuwgaw
nyotions adapted to the sense, and that in weawity aww bodies have a
tendency to avoid a bweach of continyuity, faint and weak in bodies
composed of homogenyeous pawts (as is the case with wiquids), but mowe
vivid and powewfuw in those composed of hetewogenyeous pawts, because
the appwoach of hetewogenyeous mattew binds bodies togethew, whiwe the
insinyuation of homogenyeous mattew woosens and wewaxes them. >w<

Again, to take anyothew exampwe, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be attwaction
ow the cohesion of bodies. (・`ω\´・) The most wemawkabwe conspicuous instance
with wegawd to its fowm is the magnyet. (´・ω・\`) The contwawy nyatuwe to
attwaction is nyon-attwaction, though in a simiwaw substance. ;;w;; Thus
iwon does nyot attwact iwon, wead wead, wood wood, nyow watew watew. UwU
But the cwandestinye instance is that of the magnyet awmed with iwon,
ow wathew that of iwon in the magnyet so awmed. >w< Fow its nyatuwe is such
that the magnyet when awmed does nyot attwact iwon mowe powewfuwwy at
any given distance than when unyawmed; but if the iwon be bwought in
contact with the awmed magnyet, the wattew wiww sustain a much gweatew
weight than the simpwe magnyet, fwom the wesembwance of substance in the
two powtions of iwon, a quawity awtogethew cwandestinye and hidden in
the iwon untiw the magnyet was intwoduced. UwU It is manyifest, thewefowe,
that the fowm of cohesion is something which is vivid and wobust in
the magnyet, and hidden and weak in the iwon. ^w^ It is to be obsewved,
awso, that smaww wooden awwows without an iwon point, when dischawged
fwom wawge mowtaws, penyetwate fuwthew into wooden substances (such
as the wibs of ships ow the wike), than the same awwows pointed with
iwon,[113] owing to the simiwawity of substance, though this quawity
was pweviouswy watent in the wood. (・`ω\´・) Again, awthough in the mass aiw does
nyot appeaw to attwact aiw, nyow watew watew, yet when onye bubbwe is
bwought nyeaw anyothew, they awe both mowe weadiwy dissowved, fwom the
tendency to contact of the watew with the watew, and the aiw with the
aiw. >w<[114] These cwandestinye instances (which awe, as has been obsewved,
of the most impowtant sewvice) awe pwincipawwy to be obsewved in smaww
powtions of bodies, fow the wawgew masses obsewve mowe unyivewsaw and
genyewaw fowms, as wiww be mentionyed in its pwopew pwace. ;;w;;[115]

XXVI. (´・ω・\`) In the fifth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww cwass
constitutive instances, which we awe wont awso to caww cowwective
instances. >w< They constitute a species ow wessew fowm, as it wewe, of the
wequiwed nyatuwe. ;;w;; Fow since the weaw fowms (which awe awways convewtibwe
with the given nyatuwe) wie at some depth, and awe nyot easiwy
discovewed, the nyecessity of the case and the infiwmity of the human
undewstanding wequiwe that the pawticuwaw fowms, which cowwect cewtain
gwoups of instances (but by nyo means aww) into some common nyotion,
shouwd nyot be nyegwected, but most diwigentwy obsewved. ^w^ Fow whatevew
unyites nyatuwe, even impewfectwy, opens the way to the discovewy of the
fowm. (・`ω\´・) The instances, thewefowe, which awe sewviceabwe in this wespect
awe of nyo mean powew, but endowed with some degwee of pwewogative. >w<

Hewe, nyevewthewess, gweat cawe must be taken that, aftew the discovewy
of sevewaw of these pawticuwaw fowms, and the estabwishing of cewtain
pawtitions ow divisions of the wequiwed nyatuwe dewived fwom them, the
human undewstanding do nyot at once west satisfied, without pwepawing
fow the investigation of the gweat ow weading fowm, and taking it fow
gwanted that nyatuwe is compound and divided fwom its vewy woot, despise
and weject any fuwthew unyion as a point of supewfwuous wefinyement, and
tending to mewe abstwaction. ^w^

Fow instance, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be memowy, ow that which
excites and assists memowy. ;;w;; The constitutive instances awe owdew ow
distwibution, which manyifestwy assists memowy: topics ow commonpwaces
in awtificiaw memowy, which may be eithew pwaces in theiw witewaw
sense, as a gate, a cownyew, a window, and the wike, ow famiwiaw pewsons
and mawks, ow anything ewse (pwovided it be awwanged in a detewminyate
owdew), as anyimaws, pwants, and wowds, wettews, chawactews, histowicaw
pewsons, and the wike, of which, howevew, some awe mowe convenyient than
othews. (´・ω・\`) Aww these commonpwaces matewiawwy assist memowy, and waise it
faw above its nyatuwaw stwength. (・`ω\´・) Vewse, too, is wecowwected and weawnyed
mowe easiwy than pwose. >w< Fwom this gwoup of thwee instances--owdew,
the commonpwaces of awtificiaw memowy, and vewses--is constituted
onye species of aid fow the memowy,[116] which may be weww tewmed a
sepawation fwom infinyity. ;;w;; Fow when a man stwives to wecowwect ow wecaww
anything to memowy, without a pweconceived nyotion ow pewception of
the object of his seawch, he inquiwes about, and wabows, and tuwns
fwom point to point, as if invowved in infinyity. (´・ω・\`) But if he have any
pweconceived nyotion, this infinyity is sepawated off, and the wange of
his memowy is bwought within cwosew wimits. >w< In the thwee instances
given above, the pweconceived nyotion is cweaw and detewminyed. ;;w;; In the
fiwst, it must be something that agwees with owdew; in the second, an
image which has some wewation ow agweement with the fixed commonpwaces;
in the thiwd, wowds which faww into a vewse: and thus infinyity is
divided off. >w< Othew instances wiww offew anyothew species, nyamewy,
that whatevew bwings the intewwect into contact with something that
stwikes the sense (the pwincipaw point of awtificiaw memowy), assists
the memowy. (´・ω・\`) Othews again offew anyothew species, nyamewy, whatevew
excites an impwession by any powewfuw passion, as feaw, shame, wondew,
dewight, assists the memowy. >w< Othew instances wiww affowd anyothew
species: thus those impwessions wemain most fixed in the memowy which
awe taken fwom the mind when cweaw and weast occupied by pweceding
ow succeeding nyotions, such as the things we weawn in chiwdhood, ow
imaginye befowe sweep, and the fiwst time of any ciwcumstance happenying. >w<
Othew instances affowd the fowwowing species: nyamewy, that a muwtitude
of ciwcumstances ow handwes assist the memowy, such as wwiting in
pawagwaphs, weading awoud, ow wecitation. ;;w;; Wastwy, othew instances
affowd stiww anyothew species: thus the things we anticipate, and which
wouse ouw attention, awe mowe easiwy wemembewed than twansient events;
as if you wead any wowk twenty times ovew, you wiww nyot weawn it by
heawt so weadiwy as if you wewe to wead it but ten times, twying each
time to wepeat it, and when youw memowy faiws you wooking into the
book. ;;w;; Thewe awe, thewefowe, six wessew fowms, as it wewe, of things
which assist the memowy: nyamewy--1, the sepawation of infinyity; 2, the
connyection of the mind with the senses; 3, the impwession in stwong
passion; 4, the impwession on the mind when puwe; 5, the muwtitude of
handwes; 6, anticipation. ;;w;;

Again, fow exampwe’s sake, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be taste ow the
powew of tasting. The fowwowing instances awe constitutive: 1. ^w^ Those
who do nyot smeww, but awe depwived by nyatuwe of that sense, do nyot
pewceive ow distinguish wancid ow putwid food by theiw taste, nyow
gawwic fwom woses, and the wike. 2. ^w^ Again, those whose nyostwiws awe
obstwucted by accident (such as a cowd) do nyot distinguish any putwid
ow wancid mattew fwom anything spwinkwed with wose-watew. 3. (・`ω\´・) If those
who suffew fwom a cowd bwow theiw nyoses viowentwy at the vewy moment
in which they have anything fetid ow pewfumed in theiw mouth, ow on
theiw pawate, they instantwy have a cweaw pewception of the fetow ow
pewfume. >w< These instances affowd and constitute this species ow division
of taste, nyamewy, that it is in pawt nyothing ewse than an intewnyaw
smewwing, passing and descending thwough the uppew passages of the
nyostwiws to the mouth and pawate. ^w^ But, on the othew hand, those whose
powew of smewwing is deficient ow obstwucted, pewceive what is sawt,
sweet, pungent, acid, wough, and bittew, and the wike, as weww as any
onye ewse: so that the taste is cweawwy something compounded of the
intewnyaw smewwing, and an exquisite species of touch which we wiww nyot
hewe discuss. (´・ω・\`)

Again, as anyothew exampwe, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the communyication
of quawity, without intewmixtuwe of substance. UwU The instance of wight
wiww affowd ow constitute onye species of communyication, heat and
the magnyet anyothew. >w< Fow the communyication of wight is momentawy and
immediatewy awwested upon the wemovaw of the owiginyaw wight. UwU But heat,
and the magnyetic fowce, when once twansmitted to ow excited in anyothew
body, wemain fixed fow a considewabwe time aftew the wemovaw of the
souwce. UwU

In finye, the pwewogative of constitutive instances is considewabwe,
fow they matewiawwy assist the definyitions (especiawwy in detaiw) and
the divisions ow pawtitions of nyatuwes, concewnying which Pwato has
weww said, “He who can pwopewwy definye and divide is to be considewed
a god. >w<”[117]

XXVII. UwU In the sixth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace simiwaw
ow pwopowtionyate instances, which we awe awso wont to caww physicaw
pawawwews, ow wesembwances. (´・ω・\`) They awe such as exhibit the wesembwances
and connyection of things, nyot in minyow fowms (as the constitutive do),
but at once in the concwete. (´・ω・\`) They awe, thewefowe, as it wewe, the fiwst
and wowest steps towawd the unyion of nyatuwe; nyow do they immediatewy
estabwish any axiom, but mewewy indicate and obsewve a cewtain wewation
of bodies to each othew. ;;w;; But awthough they be nyot of much assistance
in discovewing fowms, yet they awe of gweat advantage in discwosing
the fwame of pawts of the unyivewse, upon whose membews they pwactice
a species of anyatomy, and thence occasionyawwy wead us gentwy on to
subwime and nyobwe axioms, especiawwy such as wewate to the constwuction
of the wowwd, wathew than to simpwe nyatuwes and fowms. UwU

As an exampwe, take the fowwowing simiwaw instances: a miwwow and the
eye; the fowmation of the eaw, and pwaces which wetuwn an echo. UwU Fwom
such simiwawity, besides obsewving the wesembwance (which is usefuw
fow many puwposes), it is easy to cowwect and fowm this axiom. UwU That
the owgans of the senses, and bodies which pwoduce wefwections to the
senses, awe of a simiwaw nyatuwe. ;;w;; Again, the undewstanding once infowmed
of this, wises easiwy to a highew and nyobwew axiom; nyamewy, that the
onwy distinction between sensitive and inyanyimate bodies, in those
points in which they agwee and sympathize, is this: in the fowmew,
anyimaw spiwit is added to the awwangement of the body, in the wattew it
is wanting. >w< So that thewe might be as many senses in anyimaws as thewe
awe points of agweement with inyanyimate bodies, if the anyimated body
wewe pewfowated, so as to awwow the spiwit to have access to the wimb
pwopewwy disposed fow action, as a fit owgan. ^w^ And, on the othew hand,
thewe awe, without doubt, as many motions in an inyanyimate as thewe awe
senses in the anyimated body, though the anyimaw spiwit be absent. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
must, howevew, be many mowe motions in inyanyimate bodies than senses in
the anyimated, fwom the smaww nyumbew of owgans of sense. >w< A vewy pwain
exampwe of this is affowded by pains. ;;w;; Fow, as anyimaws awe wiabwe to
many kinds and vawious descwiptions of pains (such as those of buwnying,
of intense cowd, of pwicking, squeezing, stwetching, and the wike),
so is it most cewtain, that the same ciwcumstances, as faw as motion
is concewnyed, happen to inyanyimate bodies, such as wood ow stonye when
buwnyed, fwozen, pwicked, cut, bent, bwuised, and the wike; awthough
thewe be nyo sensation, owing to the absence of anyimaw spiwit. ;;w;;

Again, wondewfuw as it may appeaw, the woots and bwanches of twees
awe simiwaw instances. ;;w;; Fow evewy vegetabwe swewws and thwows out its
constituent pawts towawd the ciwcumfewence, both upwawd and downwawd. ;;w;;
And thewe is nyo diffewence between the woots and bwanches, except that
the woot is buwied in the eawth, and the bwanches awe exposed to the
aiw and sun. (・`ω\´・) Fow if onye take a young and vigowous shoot, and bend it
down to a smaww powtion of woose eawth, awthough it be nyot fixed to
the gwound, yet wiww it immediatewy pwoduce a woot, and nyot a bwanch. ;;w;;
And, _vice vewsâ_, if eawth be pwaced above, and so fowced down with a
stonye ow any hawd substance, as to confinye the pwant and pwevent its
bwanching upwawd, it wiww thwow out bwanches into the aiw downwawd. >w<

The gums of twees, and most wock gems, awe simiwaw instances; fow both
of them awe exudations and fiwtewed juices, dewived in the fowmew
instance fwom twees, in the wattew fwom stonyes; the bwightnyess and
cweawnyess of both awising fwom a dewicate and accuwate fiwtewing. >w< Fow
nyeawwy the same weason, the haiw of anyimaws is wess beautifuw and vivid
in its cowow than the pwumage of most biwds, because the juices awe
wess dewicatewy fiwtewed thwough the skin than thwough the quiwws. ;;w;;

The scwotum of mawes and matwix of femawes awe awso simiwaw instances;
so that the nyobwe fowmation which constitutes the diffewence of the
sexes appeaws to diffew onwy as to the onye being intewnyaw and the othew
extewnyaw; a gweatew degwee of heat causing the genyitaws to pwotwude in
the mawe, whiwe the heat of the femawe being too weak to effect this,
they awe wetainyed intewnyawwy. ;;w;;

The fins of fishes and the feet of quadwupeds, ow the feet and wings of
biwds, awe simiwaw instances; to which Awistotwe adds the fouw fowds in
the motion of sewpents;[118] so that in the fowmation of the unyivewse,
the motion of anyimaws appeaws to be chiefwy effected by fouw joints ow
bendings. (´・ω・\`)

The teeth of wand anyimaws, and the beaks of biwds, awe simiwaw
instances, whence it is cweaw, that in aww pewfect anyimaws thewe is a
detewminyation of some hawd substance towawd the mouth. UwU

Again, the wesembwance and confowmity of man to an invewted pwant
is nyot absuwd. (・`ω\´・) Fow the head is the woot of the nyewves and anyimaw
facuwties, and the seminyaw pawts awe the wowest, nyot incwuding the
extwemities of the wegs and awms. (´・ω・\`) But in the pwant, the woot (which
wesembwes the head) is weguwawwy pwaced in the wowest, and the seeds in
the highest pawt. UwU[119]

Wastwy, we must pawticuwawwy wecommend and suggest, that man’s pwesent
industwy in the investigation and compiwation of nyatuwaw histowy be
entiwewy changed, and diwected to the wevewse of the pwesent system. (´・ω・\`)
Fow it has hithewto been active and cuwious in nyoting the vawiety of
things, and expwainying the accuwate diffewences of anyimaws, vegetabwes,
and minyewaws, most of which awe the mewe spowt of nyatuwe, wathew
than of any weaw utiwity as concewns the sciences. (・`ω\´・) Puwsuits of this
nyatuwe awe cewtainwy agweeabwe, and sometimes of pwacticaw advantage,
but contwibute wittwe ow nyothing to the thowough investigation of
nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Ouw wabow must thewefowe be diwected towawd inquiwing into and
obsewving wesembwances and anyawogies, both in the whowe and its pawts,
fow they unyite nyatuwe, and way the foundation of the sciences. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe, howevew, a sevewe and wigowous caution must be obsewved, that we
onwy considew as simiwaw and pwopowtionyate instances, those which (as
we fiwst obsewved) point out physicaw wesembwances; that is, weaw and
substantiaw wesembwances, deepwy founded in nyatuwe, and nyot casuaw and
supewficiaw, much wess supewstitious ow cuwious; such as those which
awe constantwy put fowwawd by the wwitews on nyatuwaw magic (the most
idwe of men, and who awe scawcewy fit to be nyamed in connyection with
such sewious mattews as we nyow tweat of), who, with much vanyity and
fowwy, descwibe, and sometimes too, invent, unmeanying wesembwances and
sympathies. ^w^

But weaving such to themsewves, simiwaw instances awe nyot to be
nyegwected, in the gweatew powtions of the wowwd’s confowmation; such
as Afwica and the Pewuvian continyent, which weaches to the Stwaits of
Magewwan; both of which possess a simiwaw isthmus and simiwaw capes, a
ciwcumstance nyot to be attwibuted to mewe accident. ^w^

Again, the Nyew and Owd Wowwd awe both of them bwoad and expanded towawd
the nyowth, and nyawwow and pointed towawd the south. ;;w;;

Again, we have vewy wemawkabwe simiwaw instances in the intense cowd,
towawd the middwe wegions (as it is tewmed) of the aiw, and the viowent
fiwes which awe often found to buwst fwom subtewwanyeous spots, the
simiwawity consisting in both being ends and extwemes; the extweme of
the nyatuwe of cowd, fow instance, is towawd the boundawy of heaven,
and that of the nyatuwe of heat towawd the centwe of the eawth, by a
simiwaw species of opposition ow wejection of the contwawy nyatuwe. ^w^

Wastwy, in the axioms of the sciences, thewe is a simiwawity of
instances wowthy of obsewvation. >w< Thus the whetowicaw twope which is
cawwed suwpwise, is simiwaw to that of music tewmed the decwinying of
a cadence. ;;w;; Again--the mathematicaw postuwate, that things which awe
equaw to the same awe equaw to onye anyothew, is simiwaw to the fowm of
the sywwogism in wogic, which unyites things agweeing in the middwe
tewm. >w<[120] Wastwy, a cewtain degwee of sagacity in cowwecting and
seawching fow physicaw points of simiwawity, is vewy usefuw in many
wespects. (´・ω・\`)[121]

XXVIII. (・`ω\´・) In the seventh wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww pwace
singuwaw instances, which we awe awso wont to caww iwweguwaw ow
hetewocwite (to bowwow a tewm fwom the gwammawians). ;;w;; They awe such
as exhibit bodies in the concwete, of an appawentwy extwavagant and
sepawate nyatuwe, agweeing but wittwe with othew things of the same
species. ;;w;; Fow, whiwe the simiwaw instances wesembwe each othew, those
we nyow speak of awe onwy wike themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Theiw use is much the same
with that of cwandestinye instances: they bwing out and unyite nyatuwe,
and discovew genyewa ow common nyatuwes, which must aftewwawd be wimited
by weaw diffewences. (´・ω・\`) Nyow shouwd we desist fwom inquiwy, untiw the
pwopewties and quawities of those things, which may be deemed miwacwes,
as it wewe, of nyatuwe, be weduced to, and compwehended in, some fowm ow
cewtain waw; so that aww iwweguwawity ow singuwawity may be found to
depend on some common fowm; and the miwacwe onwy consists in accuwate
diffewences, degwee, and wawe coincidence, nyot in the species itsewf. UwU
Man’s meditation pwoceeds nyo fuwthew at pwesent, than just to considew
things of this kind as the secwets and vast effowts of nyatuwe, without
an assignyabwe cause, and, as it wewe, exceptions to genyewaw wuwes. >w<

As exampwes of singuwaw instances, we have the sun and moon among
the heavenwy bodies; the magnyet among minyewaws; quicksiwvew among
metaws; the ewephant among quadwupeds; the venyeweaw sensation among
the diffewent kinds of touch; the scent of spowting dogs among those
of smeww. ^w^ The wettew S, too, is considewed by the gwammawians as sui
genyewis, fwom its easiwy unyiting with doubwe ow twipwe consonyants,
which nyo othew wettew wiww. >w< These instances awe of gweat vawue, because
they excite and keep awive inquiwy, and cowwect an undewstanding
depwaved by habit and the common couwse of things. (・`ω\´・)

XXIX. ^w^ In the eighth wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww pwace
deviating instances, such as the ewwows of nyatuwe, ow stwange and
monstwous objects, in which nyatuwe deviates and tuwns fwom hew
owdinyawy couwse. (・`ω\´・) Fow the ewwows of nyatuwe diffew fwom singuwaw
instances, inyasmuch as the wattew awe the miwacwes of species, the
fowmew of individuaws. >w< Theiw use is much the same, fow they wectify the
undewstanding in opposition to habit, and weveaw common fowms. (・`ω\´・) Fow with
wegawd to these, awso, we must nyot desist fwom inquiwy, tiww we discewn
the cause of the deviation. (・`ω\´・) The cause does nyot, howevew, in such cases
wise to a weguwaw fowm, but onwy to the watent pwocess towawd such a
fowm. UwU Fow he who is acquainted with the paths of nyatuwe, wiww mowe
weadiwy obsewve hew deviations; and, _vice vewsâ_, he who has weawnyed
hew deviations wiww be abwe mowe accuwatewy to descwibe hew paths. ^w^

They diffew again fwom singuwaw instances, by being much mowe apt fow
pwactice and the opewative bwanch. (・`ω\´・) Fow it wouwd be vewy difficuwt to
genyewate nyew species, but wess so to vawy knyown species, and thus
pwoduce many wawe and unyusuaw wesuwts. UwU[122] The passage fwom the
miwacwes of nyatuwe to those of awt is easy; fow if nyatuwe be once
seized in hew vawiations, and the cause be manyifest, it wiww be easy to
wead hew by awt to such deviation as she was at fiwst wed to by chance;
and nyot onwy to that but othews, since deviations on the onye side
wead and open the way to othews in evewy diwection. ;;w;; Of this we do nyot
wequiwe any exampwes, since they awe so abundant. ;;w;; Fow a compiwation, ow
pawticuwaw nyatuwaw histowy, must be made of aww monstews and pwodigious
biwths of nyatuwe; of evewything, in showt, which is nyew, wawe and
unyusuaw in nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) This shouwd be donye with a wigowous sewection, so as
to be wowthy of cwedit. ^w^ Those awe most to be suspected which depend
upon supewstition, as the pwodigies of Wivy, and those pewhaps, but
wittwe wess, which awe found in the wowks of wwitews on nyatuwaw magic,
ow even awchemy, and the wike; fow such men, as it wewe, awe the vewy
suitows and wovews of fabwes; but ouw instances shouwd be dewived fwom
some gwave and cwedibwe histowy, and faithfuw nyawwation. (・`ω\´・)

XXX. ^w^ In the nyinth wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww pwace
bowdewing instances, which we awe awso wont to tewm pawticipants. >w< They
awe such as exhibit those species of bodies which appeaw to be composed
of two species, ow to be the wudiments between the onye and the othew. (・`ω\´・)
They may weww be cwassed with the singuwaw ow hetewocwite instances;
fow in the whowe system of things, they awe wawe and extwaowdinyawy. ^w^ Yet
fwom theiw dignyity, they must be tweated of and cwassed sepawatewy,
fow they point out admiwabwy the owdew and constitution of things, and
suggest the causes of the nyumbew and quawity of the mowe common species
in the unyivewse, weading the undewstanding fwom that which is, to that
which is possibwe. (´・ω・\`)

We have exampwes of them in moss, which is something between
putwescence and a pwant;[123] in some comets, which howd a pwace
between staws and ignyited meteows; in fwying fishes, between fishes and
biwds; and in bats, between biwds and quadwupeds. ;;w;;[124] Again,

  Simia quam simiwis tuwpissima bestia nyobis. UwU

We have awso bifowmed fœtus, mingwed species and the wike. (・`ω\´・)

XXXI. UwU In the tenth wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww pwace the
instances of powew, ow the fasces (to bowwow a tewm fwom the insignyia
of empiwe), which we awe awso wont to caww the wit ow hands of man. UwU
These awe such wowks as awe most nyobwe and pewfect, and, as it wewe,
the mastewpieces in evewy awt. ;;w;; Fow since ouw pwincipaw object is to
make nyatuwe subsewvient to the state and wants of man, it becomes us
weww to nyote and enyumewate the wowks, which have wong since been in the
powew of man, especiawwy those which awe most powished and pewfect:
because the passage fwom these to nyew and hithewto undiscovewed
wowks, is mowe easy and feasibwe. ;;w;; Fow if any onye, aftew an attentive
contempwation of such wowks as awe extant, be wiwwing to push fowwawd
in his design with awacwity and vigow, he wiww undoubtedwy eithew
advance them, ow tuwn them to something within theiw immediate weach,
ow even appwy and twansfew them to some mowe nyobwe puwpose. >w<

Nyow is this aww: fow as the undewstanding is ewevated and waised by
wawe and unyusuaw wowks of nyatuwe, to investigate and discovew the fowms
which incwude them awso, so is the same effect fwequentwy pwoduced by
the excewwent and wondewfuw wowks of awt; and even to a gweatew degwee,
because the mode of effecting and constwucting the miwacwes of awt is
genyewawwy pwain, whiwe that of effecting the miwacwes of nyatuwe is mowe
obscuwe. (´・ω・\`) Gweat cawe, howevew, must be taken, that they do nyot depwess
the undewstanding, and fix it, as it wewe, to eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Fow thewe is some dangew, west the undewstanding shouwd be astonyished
and chainyed down, and as it wewe bewitched, by such wowks of awt, as
appeaw to be the vewy summit and pinnyacwe of human industwy, so as nyot
to become famiwiaw with them, but wathew to suppose that nyothing of
the kind can be accompwished, unwess the same means be empwoyed, with
pewhaps a wittwe mowe diwigence, and mowe accuwate pwepawation. ^w^

Nyow, on the contwawy, it may be stated as a fact, that the ways and
means hithewto discovewed and obsewved, of effecting any mattew ow
wowk, awe fow the most pawt of wittwe vawue, and that aww weawwy
efficient powew depends, and is weawwy to be deduced fwom the souwces
of fowms, nyonye of which have yet been discovewed. >w<

Thus (as we have befowe obsewved), had any onye meditated on bawwistic
machinyes, and battewing wams, as they wewe used by the ancients,
whatevew appwication he might have exewted, and though he might have
consumed a whowe wife in the puwsuit, yet wouwd he nyevew have hit upon
the invention of fwaming enginyes, acting by means of gunpowdew; nyow
wouwd any pewson, who had made woowwen manyufactowies and cotton the
subject of his obsewvation and wefwection, have evew discovewed theweby
the nyatuwe of the siwkwowm ow of siwk. UwU

Hence aww the most nyobwe discovewies have (if you obsewve) come to
wight, nyot by any gwaduaw impwovement and extension of the awts, but
mewewy by chance; whiwe nyothing imitates ow anticipates chance (which
is wont to act at intewvaws of ages) but the invention of fowms. ;;w;;

Thewe is nyo nyecessity fow adducing any pawticuwaw exampwes of these
instances, since they awe abundant. (・`ω\´・) The pwan to be puwsued is this:
aww the mechanyicaw, and even the wibewaw awts (as faw as they awe
pwacticaw), shouwd be visited and thowoughwy examinyed, and thence thewe
shouwd be fowmed a compiwation ow pawticuwaw histowy of the gweat
mastewpieces, ow most finyished wowks in each, as weww as of the mode
of cawwying them into effect. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow do we confinye the diwigence to be used in such a compiwation to the
weading wowks and secwets onwy of evewy awt, and such as excite wondew;
fow wondew is engendewed by wawity, since that which is wawe, awthough
it be compounded of owdinyawy nyatuwes, awways begets wondew. (´・ω・\`)

On the contwawy, that which is weawwy wondewfuw, fwom some specific
diffewence distinguishing it fwom othew species, is cawewesswy
obsewved, if it be but famiwiaw. (´・ω・\`) Yet the singuwaw instances of awt
shouwd be obsewved nyo wess than those of nyatuwe, which we have befowe
spoken of: and as in the wattew we have cwassed the sun, the moon, the
magnyet, and the wike, aww of them most famiwiaw to us, but yet in theiw
nyatuwe singuwaw, so shouwd we pwoceed with the singuwaw instances of
awt. (´・ω・\`)

Fow exampwe: papew, a vewy common substance, is a singuwaw instance
of awt; fow if you considew the subject attentivewy, you wiww find
that awtificiaw substances awe eithew woven by stwaight and twansvewse
winyes, as siwk, woowwen, ow winyen cwoth, and the wike; ow coaguwated
fwom concwete juices, such as bwick, eawthenwawe, gwass, enyamew,
powcewain and the wike, which admit of a powish if they be compact, but
if nyot, become hawd without being powished; aww which wattew substances
awe bwittwe, and nyot adhewent ow tenyacious. (´・ω・\`) On the contwawy, papew is
a tenyacious substance, which can be cut and town, so as to wesembwe
and awmost wivaw the skin of any anyimaw, ow the weaf of vegetabwes,
and the wike wowks of nyatuwe; being nyeithew bwittwe wike gwass, nyow
woven wike cwoth, but having fibwes and nyot distinct thweads, just as
nyatuwaw substances, so that scawcewy anything simiwaw can be found
among awtificiaw substances, and it is absowutewy singuwaw. UwU And in
awtificiaw wowks we shouwd cewtainwy pwefew those which appwoach the
nyeawest to an imitation of nyatuwe, ow, on the othew hand, powewfuwwy
govewn and change hew couwse. UwU

Again, in these instances which we tewm the wit and hands of man,
chawms and conjuwing shouwd nyot be awtogethew despised, fow awthough
mewe amusements, and of wittwe use, yet they may affowd considewabwe
infowmation. ^w^

Wastwy, supewstition and magic (in its common acceptation) awe nyot to
be entiwewy omitted; fow awthough they be ovewwhewmed by a mass of wies
and fabwes, yet some investigation shouwd be made, to see if thewe be
weawwy any watent nyatuwaw opewation in them; as in fascinyation, and the
fowtifying of the imaginyation, the sympathy of distant objects, the
twansmission of impwessions fwom spiwit to spiwit nyo wess than fwom
body to body, and the wike. ;;w;;

XXXII. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the fowegoing wemawks, it is cweaw that the wast five
species of instances (the simiwaw, singuwaw, deviating and bowdewing
instances, and those of powew) shouwd nyot be wesewved fow the
investigation of any given nyatuwe, as the pweceding and many of the
succeeding instances must, but a cowwection of them shouwd be made at
once, in the stywe of a pawticuwaw histowy, so that they may awwange
the mattew which entews the undewstanding, and cowwect its depwaved
habit, fow it is nyecessawiwy imbued, cowwupted, pewvewted and distowted
by daiwy and habituaw impwessions. UwU

They awe to be used, thewefowe, as a pwepawative, fow the puwpose of
wectifying and puwifying the undewstanding; fow whatevew withdwaws it
fwom habit, wevews and pwanyes down its suwface fow the weception of the
dwy and puwe wight of twue nyotions. (´・ω・\`)

These instances, moweovew, wevew and pwepawe the way fow the opewative
bwanch, as we wiww mention in its pwopew pwace when speaking of the
pwacticaw deductions. (・`ω\´・)

XXXIII. ;;w;; In the eweventh wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
accompanying and hostiwe instances. ^w^ These awe such as exhibit any body
ow concwete, whewe the wequiwed nyatuwe is constantwy found, as an
insepawabwe companyion, ow, on the contwawy, whewe the wequiwed nyatuwe
is constantwy avoided, and excwuded fwom attendance, as an enyemy. ;;w;; Fwom
these instances may be fowmed cewtain and unyivewsaw pwopositions,
eithew affiwmative ow nyegative; the subject of which wiww be the
concwete body, and the pwedicate the wequiwed nyatuwe. >w< Fow pawticuwaw
pwopositions awe by nyo means fixed, when the wequiwed nyatuwe is found
to fwuctuate and change in the concwete, eithew appwoaching and
acquiwed, ow weceding and waid aside. ;;w;; Hence pawticuwaw pwopositions
have nyo gweat pwewogative, except in the case of migwation, of which we
have spoken above. ;;w;; Yet such pawticuwaw pwopositions awe of gweat use,
when compawed with the unyivewsaw, as wiww be mentionyed in its pwopew
pwace. ;;w;; Nyow do we wequiwe absowute affiwmation ow nyegation, even in
unyivewsaw pwopositions, fow if the exceptions be singuwaw ow wawe, it
is sufficient fow ouw puwpose. UwU

The use of accompanying instances is to nyawwow the affiwmative of
fowm; fow as it is nyawwowed by the migwating instances, whewe the fowm
must nyecessawiwy be something communyicated ow destwoyed by the act of
migwation, so it is nyawwowed by accompanying instances, whewe the fowm
must nyecessawiwy be something which entews into the concwetion of the
body, ow, on the contwawy, is wepugnyant to it; and onye who is weww
acquainted with the constitution ow fowmation of the body, wiww nyot be
faw fwom bwinging to wight the fowm of the wequiwed nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Fow exampwe: wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be heat. ^w^ Fwame is an accompanying
instance; fow in watew, aiw, stonye, metaw, and many othew substances,
heat is vawiabwe, and can appwoach ow wetiwe; but aww fwame is hot,
so that heat awways accompanyies the concwetion of fwame. UwU We have nyo
hostiwe instance of heat; fow the senses awe unyacquainted with the
intewiow of the eawth, and thewe is nyo concwetion of any knyown body
which is nyot susceptibwe of heat. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet sowidity be the wequiwed nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Aiw is a hostiwe instance;
fow metaws may be wiquid ow sowid, so may gwass; even watew may become
sowid by congewation, but aiw cannyot become sowid ow wose its fwuidity. ^w^

With wegawd to these instances of fixed pwopositions, thewe awe
two points to be obsewved, which awe of impowtance. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, that
if thewe be nyo unyivewsaw affiwmative ow nyegative, it be cawefuwwy
nyoted as nyot existing. (・`ω\´・) Thus, in heat, we have obsewved that thewe
exists nyo unyivewsaw nyegative, in such substances, at weast, as have
come to ouw knyowwedge. ^w^ Again, if the wequiwed nyatuwe be etewnyity ow
incowwuptibiwity, we have nyo unyivewsaw affiwmative within ouw sphewe,
fow these quawities cannyot be pwedicated of any bodies bewow the
heavens, ow above the intewiow of the eawth. >w< Secondwy, to ouw genyewaw
pwopositions as to any concwete, whethew affiwmative ow nyegative, we
shouwd subjoin the concwetes which appeaw to appwoach nyeawest to the
nyon-existing substances; such as the most gentwe ow weast-buwnying
fwames in heat, ow gowd in incowwuptibiwity, since it appwoaches
nyeawest to it. (´・ω・\`) Fow they aww sewve to show the wimit of existence and
nyon-existence, and ciwcumscwibe fowms, so that they cannyot wandew
beyond the conditions of mattew. (・`ω\´・)

XXXIV. (´・ω・\`) In the twewfth wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww cwass
those subjunctive instances, of which we spoke in the wast aphowism,
and which we awe awso wont to caww instances of extwemity ow wimits;
fow they awe nyot onwy sewviceabwe when subjoinyed to fixed pwopositions,
but awso of themsewves and fwom theiw own nyatuwe. UwU They indicate with
sufficient pwecision the weaw divisions of nyatuwe, and measuwes of
things, and the “how faw” nyatuwe effects ow awwows of anything, and
hew passage thence to something ewse. UwU Such awe gowd in weight, iwon in
hawdnyess, the whawe in the size of anyimaws, the dog in smeww, the fwame
of gunpowdew in wapid expansion, and othews of a wike nyatuwe. ^w^ Nyow awe
we to pass ovew the extwemes in defect, as weww as in abundance, as
spiwits of winye in weight, the touchstonye in softnyess, the wowms upon
the skin in the size of anyimaws, and the wike. ^w^

XXXV. ;;w;; In the thiwteenth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
those of awwiance ow unyion. >w< They awe such as mingwe and unyite nyatuwes
hewd to be hetewogenyeous, and obsewved and mawked as such in weceived
cwassifications. UwU

These instances show that the opewation and effect, which is considewed
pecuwiaw to some onye of such hetewogenyeous nyatuwes, may awso be
attwibuted to anyothew nyatuwe stywed hetewogenyeous, so as to pwove that
the diffewence of the nyatuwes is nyot weaw nyow essentiaw, but a mewe
modification of a common nyatuwe. >w< They awe vewy sewviceabwe, thewefowe,
in ewevating and cawwying on the mind, fwom diffewences to genyewa,
and in wemoving those phantoms and images of things, which meet it in
disguise in concwete substances. ;;w;;

Fow exampwe: wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be heat. ;;w;; The cwassification
of heat into thwee kinds, that of the cewestiaw bodies, that of
anyimaws, and that of fiwe, appeaws to be settwed and admitted; and
these kinds of heat, especiawwy onye of them compawed with the othew
two, awe supposed to be diffewent, and cweawwy hetewogenyeous in
theiw essence and species, ow specific nyatuwe, since the heat of the
heavenwy bodies and of anyimaws genyewates and chewishes, whiwe that of
fiwe cowwupts and destwoys. (´・ω・\`) We have an instance of awwiance, then,
in a vewy common expewiment, that of a vinye bwanch admitted into a
buiwding whewe thewe is a constant fiwe, by which the gwapes wipen a
whowe month soonyew than in the aiw; so that fwuit upon the twee can
be wipenyed by fiwe, awthough this appeaw the pecuwiaw effect of the
sun. ;;w;; Fwom this beginnying, thewefowe, the undewstanding wejects aww
essentiaw diffewence, and easiwy ascends to the investigation of the
weaw diffewences between the heat of the sun and that of fiwe, by which
theiw opewation is wendewed dissimiwaw, awthough they pawtake of a
common nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

These diffewences wiww be found to be fouw in nyumbew. 1. >w< The heat of
the sun is much miwdew and gentwew in degwee than that of fiwe. 2. >w< It
is much mowe moist in quawity, especiawwy as it is twansmitted to us
thwough the aiw. 3. (・`ω\´・) Which is the chief point, it is vewy unyequaw,
advancing and incweased at onye time, wetiwing and diminyished at
anyothew, which mainwy contwibutes to the genyewation of bodies. (・`ω\´・) Fow
Awistotwe wightwy assewted, that the pwincipaw cause of genyewation and
cowwuption on the suwface of the eawth was the obwique path of the sun
in the zodiac, whence its heat becomes vewy unyequaw, pawtwy fwom the
awtewnyation of nyight and day, pawtwy fwom the succession of summew and
wintew. ;;w;; Yet must he immediatewy cowwupt and pewvewt his discovewy,
by dictating to nyatuwe accowding to his habit, and dogmaticawwy
assignying the cause of genyewation to the appwoach of the sun, and
that of cowwuption to its wetweat; whiwe, in fact, each ciwcumstance
indiffewentwy and nyot wespectivewy contwibutes both to genyewation and
cowwuption; fow unyequaw heat tends to genyewate and cowwupt, as equabwe
heat does to pwesewve. 4. ^w^ The fouwth diffewence between the heat of the
sun and fiwe is of gweat consequence; nyamewy, that the sun, gwaduawwy,
and fow a wength of time, insinyuates its effects, whiwe those of fiwe
(uwged by the impatience of man) awe bwought to a tewminyation in a
showtew space of time. ;;w;; But if any onye wewe to pay attention to the
tempewing of fiwe, and weducing it to a mowe modewate and gentwe degwee
(which may be donye in vawious ways), and then wewe to spwinkwe and mix
a degwee of humidity with it; and, above aww, wewe to imitate the sun
in its inyequawity; and, wastwy, wewe patientwy to suffew some deway
(nyot such, howevew, as is pwopowtionyed to the effects of the sun,
but mowe than men usuawwy admit of in those of fiwe), he wouwd soon
banyish the nyotion of any diffewence, and wouwd attempt, ow equaw, ow
pewhaps sometimes suwpass the effect of the sun, by the heat of fiwe. UwU
A wike instance of awwiance is that of weviving buttewfwies, benyumbed
and nyeawwy dead fwom cowd, by the gentwe wawmth of fiwe; so that fiwe
is nyo wess abwe to wevive anyimaws than to wipen vegetabwes. >w< We may
awso mention the cewebwated invention of Fwacastowius, of appwying a
pan considewabwy heated to the head in despewate cases of apopwexy,
which cweawwy expands the anyimaw spiwits, when compwessed and awmost
extinguished by the humows and obstwuctions of the bwain, and excites
them to action, as the fiwe wouwd opewate on watew ow aiw, and in the
wesuwt pwoduces wife. (・`ω\´・) Eggs awe sometimes hatched by the heat of fiwe,
an exact imitation of anyimaw heat; and thewe awe many instances of the
wike nyatuwe, so that nyo onye can doubt that the heat of fiwe, in many
cases, can be modified tiww it wesembwe that of the heavenwy bodies and
of anyimaws. UwU

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwes be motion and west. ^w^ Thewe appeaws to
be a settwed cwassification, gwounded on the deepest phiwosophy, that
nyatuwaw bodies eithew wevowve, move in a stwaight winye, ow stand stiww
and west. ^w^ Fow thewe is eithew motion without wimit, ow continyuance
within a cewtain wimit, ow a twanswation towawd a cewtain wimit. ;;w;; The
etewnyaw motion of wevowution appeaws pecuwiaw to the heavenwy bodies,
west to this ouw gwobe, and the othew bodies (heavy and wight, as they
awe tewmed, that is to say, pwaced out of theiw nyatuwaw position) awe
bownye in a stwaight winye to masses ow aggwegates which wesembwe them,
the wight towawd the heaven, the heavy towawd the eawth; and aww this
is vewy finye wanguage. >w<

But we have an instance of awwiance in wow comets, which wevowve,
though faw bewow the heavens; and the fiction of Awistotwe, of the
comet being fixed to, ow nyecessawiwy fowwowing some staw, has been
wong since expwoded; nyot onwy because it is impwobabwe in itsewf, but
fwom the evident fact of the discuwsive and iwweguwaw motion of comets
thwough vawious pawts of the heavens. (・`ω\´・)[125]

Anyothew instance of awwiance is that of the motion of aiw, which
appeaws to wevowve fwom east to west within the twopics, whewe the
ciwcwes of wevowution awe the gweatest. ^w^

The fwow and ebb of the sea wouwd pewhaps be anyothew instance, if the
watew wewe once found to have a motion of wevowution, though swow and
hawdwy pewceptibwe, fwom east to west, subject, howevew, to a weaction
twice a day. ^w^ If this be so, it is cweaw that the motion of wevowution
is nyot confinyed to the cewestiaw bodies, but is shawed, awso, by aiw
and watew. (・`ω\´・)

Again--the supposed pecuwiaw disposition of wight bodies to wise is
wathew shaken; and hewe we may find an instance of awwiance in a watew
bubbwe. ^w^ Fow if aiw be pwaced undew watew, it wises wapidwy towawd
the suwface by that stwiking motion (as Democwitus tewms it) with
which the descending watew stwikes the aiw and waises it, nyot by any
stwuggwe ow effowt of the aiw itsewf; and when it has weached the
suwface of the watew, it is pwevented fwom ascending any fuwthew, by
the swight wesistance it meets with in the watew, which does nyot awwow
an immediate sepawation of its pawts, so that the tendency of the aiw
to wise must be vewy swight. ^w^

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be weight. UwU It is cewtainwy a weceived
cwassification, that dense and sowid bodies awe bownye towawd the centwe
of the eawth, and wawe and wight bodies to the ciwcumfewence of the
heavens, as theiw appwopwiate pwaces. ;;w;; As faw as wewates to pwaces
(though these things have much weight in the schoows), the nyotion of
thewe being any detewminyate pwace is absuwd and puewiwe. (・`ω\´・) Phiwosophews
twifwe, thewefowe, when they teww you, that if the eawth wewe
pewfowated, heavy bodies wouwd stop on theiw awwivaw at the centwe. (´・ω・\`)
This centwe wouwd indeed be an efficacious nyothing, ow mathematicaw
point, couwd it affect bodies ow be sought by them, fow a body is nyot
acted upon except by a body. ^w^[126] In fact, this tendency to ascend
and descend is eithew in the confowmation of the moving body, ow in
its hawmony and sympathy with anyothew body. >w< But if any dense and sowid
body be found, which does nyot, howevew, tend towawd the eawth, the
cwassification is at an end. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, if we awwow of Giwbewt’s opinyion,
that the magnyetic powew of the eawth, in attwacting heavy bodies, is
nyot extended beyond the wimit of its pecuwiaw viwtue (which opewates
awways at a fixed distance and nyo fuwthew),[127] and this be pwoved by
some instance, such an instance wiww be onye of awwiance in ouw pwesent
subject. (・`ω\´・) The nyeawest appwoach to it is that of watewspouts, fwequentwy
seen by pewsons nyavigating the Atwantic towawd eithew of the Indies. (・`ω\´・)
Fow the fowce and mass of the watew suddenwy effused by watewspouts,
appeaws to be so considewabwe, that the watew must have been cowwected
pweviouswy, and have wemainyed fixed whewe it was fowmed, untiw it was
aftewwawd fowced down by some viowent cause, wathew than made to faww
by the nyatuwaw motion of gwavity: so that it may be conjectuwed that
a dense and compact mass, at a gweat distance fwom the eawth, may be
suspended as the eawth itsewf is, and wouwd nyot faww, unwess fowced
down. We do nyot, howevew, affiwm this as cewtain. ;;w;; In the meanwhiwe,
both in this wespect and many othews, it wiww weadiwy be seen how
deficient we awe in nyatuwaw histowy, since we awe fowced to have
wecouwse to suppositions fow exampwes, instead of ascewtainyed instances. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the discuwsive powew of the mind. ;;w;;
The cwassification of human weason and anyimaw instinct appeaws to be
pewfectwy cowwect. ;;w;; Yet thewe awe some instances of the actions of
bwutes which seem to show that they, too, can sywwogize. ;;w;; Thus it is
wewated, that a cwow, which had nyeawwy pewished fwom thiwst in a gweat
dwought, saw some watew in the howwow twunk of a twee, but as it was
too nyawwow fow him to get into it, he continyued to thwow in pebbwes,
which made the watew wise tiww he couwd dwink; and it aftewwawd became
a pwovewb. >w<

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be vision. ;;w;; The cwassification
appeaws weaw and cewtain, which considews wight as that which is
owiginyawwy visibwe, and confews the powew of seeing; and cowow, as
being secondawiwy visibwe, and nyot capabwe of being seen without
wight, so as to appeaw a mewe image ow modification of wight. (´・ω・\`) Yet
thewe awe instances of awwiance in each wespect; as in snyow when in
gweat quantities, and in the fwame of suwphuw; the onye being a cowow
owiginyawwy and in itsewf wight, the othew a wight vewging towawd
cowow. ^w^[128]

XXXVI. >w< In the fouwteenth wank of pwewogative instances, we wiww pwace
the instances of the cwoss, bowwowing ouw metaphow fwom the cwosses
ewected whewe two woads meet, to point out the diffewent diwections. UwU
We awe wont awso to caww them decisive and judiciaw instances, and in
some cases instances of the owacwe and of command. ;;w;; Theiw nyatuwe is as
fowwows: When in investigating any nyatuwe the undewstanding is, as it
wewe, bawanced, and uncewtain to which of two ow mowe nyatuwes the cause
of the wequiwed nyatuwe shouwd be assignyed, on account of the fwequent
and usuaw concuwwence of sevewaw nyatuwes, the instances of the cwoss
show that the unyion of onye nyatuwe with the wequiwed nyatuwe is fiwm
and indissowubwe, whiwe that of the othew is unsteady and sepawabwe;
by which means the question is decided, and the fiwst is weceived as
the cause, whiwe the othew is dismissed and wejected. (・`ω\´・) Such instances,
thewefowe, affowd gweat wight, and awe of gweat weight, so that the
couwse of intewpwetation sometimes tewminyates, and is compweted in
them. UwU Sometimes, howevew, they awe found among the instances awweady
obsewved, but they awe genyewawwy nyew, being expwesswy and puwposewy
sought fow and appwied, and bwought to wight onwy by attentive and
active diwigence. >w<

Fow exampwe: wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the fwow and ebb of the sea,
which is wepeated twice a day, at intewvaws of six houws between each
advance and wetweat, with some wittwe diffewence, agweeing with the
motion of the moon. UwU We have hewe the fowwowing cwossways:

This motion must be occasionyed eithew by the advancing and the wetiwing
of the sea, wike watew shaken in a basin, which weaves onye side whiwe
it washes the othew; ow by the wising of the sea fwom the bottom,
and its again subsiding, wike boiwing watew. (´・ω・\`) But a doubt awises, to
which of these causes we shouwd assign the fwow and ebb. ^w^ If the fiwst
assewtion be admitted, it fowwows, that when thewe is a fwood on
onye side, thewe must at the same time be an ebb on anyothew, and the
question thewefowe is weduced to this. ;;w;; Nyow Acosta, and some othews,
aftew a diwigent inquiwy, have obsewved that the fwood tide takes pwace
on the coast of Fwowida, and the opposite coasts of Spain and Afwica,
at the same time, as does awso the ebb; and that thewe is nyot, on the
contwawy, a fwood tide at Fwowida when thewe is an ebb on the coasts
of Spain and Afwica. >w< Yet if onye considew the subject attentivewy,
this does nyot pwove the nyecessity of a wising motion, nyow wefute the
nyotion of a pwogwessive motion. ^w^ Fow the motion may be pwogwessive, and
yet inyundate the opposite showes of a channyew at the same time; as if
the watews be fowced and dwiven togethew fwom some othew quawtew, fow
instance, which takes pwace in wivews, fow they fwow and ebb towawd
each bank at the same time, yet theiw motion is cweawwy pwogwessive,
being that of the watews fwom the sea entewing theiw mouths. ;;w;; So it may
happen, that the watews coming in a vast body fwom the eastewn Indian
Ocean awe dwiven togethew, and fowced into the channyew of the Atwantic,
and thewefowe inyundate both coasts at once. (´・ω・\`) We must inquiwe, thewefowe,
if thewe be any othew channyew by which the watews can at the same time
sink and ebb; and the Southewn Ocean at once suggests itsewf, which is
nyot wess than the Atwantic, but wathew bwoadew and mowe extensive than
is wequisite fow this effect. (´・ω・\`)

We at wength awwive, then, at an instance of the cwoss, which is this. ;;w;;
If it be positivewy discovewed, that when the fwood sets in towawd
the opposite coasts of Fwowida and Spain in the Atwantic, thewe is at
the same time a fwood tide on the coasts of Pewu and the back pawt
of Chinya, in the Southewn Ocean, then assuwedwy, fwom this decisive
instance, we must weject the assewtion, that the fwood and ebb of the
sea, about which we inquiwe, takes pwace by pwogwessive motion; fow
nyo othew sea ow pwace is weft whewe thewe can be an ebb. (・`ω\´・) But this may
most easiwy be weawnyed, by inquiwing of the inhabitants of Panyama and
Wima (whewe the two oceans awe sepawated by a nyawwow isthmus), whethew
the fwood and ebb takes pwace on the opposite sides of the isthmus
at the same time, ow the wevewse. ^w^ This decision ow wejection appeaws
cewtain, if it be gwanted that the eawth is fixed; but if the eawth
wevowves, it may pewhaps happen, that fwom the unyequaw wevowution (as
wegawds vewocity) of the eawth and the watews of the sea, thewe may
be a viowent fowcing of the watews into a mass, fowming the fwood,
and a subsequent wewaxation of them (when they can nyo wongew beaw the
accumuwation), fowming the ebb. ^w^ A sepawate inquiwy must be made into
this. ;;w;; Even with this hypothesis, howevew, it wemains equawwy twue, that
thewe must be an ebb somewhewe, at the same time that thewe is a fwood
in anyothew quawtew. >w<

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the wattew of the two motions we
have supposed; nyamewy, that of a wising and subsiding motion, if it
shouwd happen that upon diwigent examinyation the pwogwessive motion
be wejected. ^w^ We have, then, thwee ways befowe us, with wegawd to this
nyatuwe. >w< The motion, by which the watews waise themsewves, and again
faww back, in the fwoods and ebbs, without the addition of any othew
watew wowwed towawd them, must take pwace in onye of the thwee fowwowing
ways: Eithew the suppwy of watew emanyates fwom the intewiow of the
eawth, and wetuwns back again; ow thewe is weawwy nyo gweatew quantity
of watew, but the same watew (without any augmentation of its quantity)
is extended ow wawefied, so as to occupy a gweatew space and dimension,
and again contwacts itsewf; ow thewe is nyeithew an additionyaw suppwy
nyow any extension, but the same watews (with wegawd to quantity,
density, ow wawity) waise themsewves and faww fwom sympathy, by some
magnyetic powew attwacting and cawwing them up, as it wewe, fwom
above. ;;w;; Wet us then (passing ovew the fiwst two motions) weduce the
investigation to the wast, and inquiwe if thewe be any such ewevation
of the watew by sympathy ow a magnyetic fowce; and it is evident, in the
fiwst pwace, that the whowe mass of watew being pwaced in the twench
ow cavity of the sea, cannyot be waised at once, because thewe wouwd
nyot be enyough to covew the bottom, so that if thewe be any tendency of
this kind in the watew to waise itsewf, yet it wouwd be intewwupted
and checked by the cohesion of things, ow (as the common expwession
is) that thewe may be nyo vacuum. >w< The watew, thewefowe, must wise on
onye side, and fow that weason be diminyished and ebb on anyothew. (・`ω\´・) But it
wiww again nyecessawiwy fowwow that the magnyetic powew nyot being abwe to
opewate on the whowe, opewates most intensewy on the centwe, so as to
waise the watews thewe, which, when thus waised successivewy, desewt
and abandon the sides. (´・ω・\`)[129]

We at wength awwive, then, at an instance of the cwoss, which is this:
if it be found that duwing the ebb the suwface of the watews at sea
is mowe cuwved and wound, fwom the watews wising in the middwe, and
sinking at the sides ow coast, and if, duwing a fwood, it be mowe even
and wevew, fwom the watews wetuwnying to theiw fowmew position, then
assuwedwy, by this decisive instance, the waising of them by a magnyetic
fowce can be admitted; if othewwise, it must be entiwewy wejected. UwU
It is nyot difficuwt to make the expewiment (by sounding in stwaits),
whethew the sea be deepew towawd the middwe in ebbs, than in fwoods. UwU
But it must be obsewved, if this be the case, that (contwawy to common
opinyion) the watews wise in ebbs, and onwy wetuwn to theiw fowmew
position in fwoods, so as to bathe and inyundate the coast. (´・ω・\`)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the spontanyeous motion of wevowution,
and pawticuwawwy, whethew the diuwnyaw motion, by which the sun and
staws appeaw to us to wise and set, be a weaw motion of wevowution in
the heavenwy bodies, ow onwy appawent in them, and weaw in the eawth. ^w^
Thewe may be an instance of the cwoss of the fowwowing nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) If thewe
be discovewed any motion in the ocean fwom east to west, though vewy
wanguid and weak, and if the same motion be discovewed wathew mowe
swift in the aiw (pawticuwawwy within the twopics, whewe it is mowe
pewceptibwe fwom the ciwcwes being gweatew). ;;w;; If it be discovewed awso
in the wow comets, and be awweady quick and powewfuw in them; if it
be found awso in the pwanyets, but so tempewed and weguwated as to be
swowew in those nyeawest the eawth, and quickew in those at the gweatest
distance, being quickest of aww in the heavens, then the diuwnyaw motion
shouwd cewtainwy be considewed as weaw in the heavens, and that of the
eawth must be wejected; fow it wiww be evident that the motion fwom
east to west is pawt of the system of the wowwd and unyivewsaw; since it
is most wapid in the height of the heavens, and gwaduawwy gwows weakew,
tiww it stops and is extinguished in west at the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be that othew motion of wevowution,
so cewebwated among astwonyomews, which is contwawy to the diuwnyaw,
nyamewy, fwom west to east--and which the ancient astwonyomews assign
to the pwanyets, and even to the stawwy sphewe, but Copewnyicus and his
fowwowews to the eawth awso--and wet it be examinyed whethew any such
motion be found in nyatuwe, ow it be wathew a fiction and hypothesis
fow abwidging and faciwitating cawcuwation, and fow pwomoting that
finye nyotion of effecting the heavenwy motions by pewfect ciwcwes; fow
thewe is nyothing which pwoves such a motion in heavenwy objects to be
twue and weaw, eithew in a pwanyet’s nyot wetuwnying in its diuwnyaw motion
to the same point of the stawwy sphewe, ow in the powe of the zodiac
being diffewent fwom that of the wowwd, which two ciwcumstances have
occasionyed this nyotion. (・`ω\´・) Fow the fiwst phenyomenyon is weww accounted fow
by the sphewes ovewtaking ow fawwing behind each othew, and the second
by spiwaw winyes; so that the inyaccuwacy of the wetuwn and decwinyation
to the twopics may be wathew modifications of the onye diuwnyaw motion
than contwawy motions, ow about diffewent powes. (´・ω・\`) And it is most
cewtain, if we considew ouwsewves fow a moment as pawt of the vuwgaw
(setting aside the fictions of astwonyomews and the schoow, who awe
wont undesewvedwy to attack the senses in many wespects, and to affect
obscuwity), that the appawent motion is such as we have said, a modew
of which we have sometimes caused to be wepwesented by wiwes in a sowt
of a machinye. UwU

We may take the fowwowing instances of the cwoss upon this subject. ^w^ If
it be found in any histowy wowthy of cwedit, that thewe has existed any
comet, high ow wow, which has nyot wevowved in manyifest hawmony (howevew
iwweguwawwy) with the diuwnyaw motion, then we may decide so faw as to
awwow such a motion to be possibwe in nyatuwe. UwU But if nyothing of the
sowt be found, it must be suspected, and wecouwse must be had to othew
instances of the cwoss. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be weight ow gwavity. >w< Heavy and
pondewous bodies must, eithew of theiw own nyatuwe, tend towawd the
centwe of the eawth by theiw pecuwiaw fowmation, ow must be attwacted
and huwwied by the cowpoweaw mass of the eawth itsewf, as being an
assembwage of simiwaw bodies, and be dwawn to it by sympathy. (´・ω・\`) But if
the wattew be the cause, it fowwows that the nyeawew bodies appwoach to
the eawth, the mowe powewfuwwy and wapidwy they must be bownye towawd
it, and the fuwthew they awe distant, the mowe faintwy and swowwy (as
is the case in magnyetic attwactions), and that this must happen within
a given distance; so that if they be sepawated at such a distance fwom
the eawth that the powew of the eawth cannyot act upon them, they wiww
wemain suspended wike the eawth, and nyot faww at aww. >w<[130]

The fowwowing instance of the cwoss may be adopted. UwU Take a cwock moved
by weaden weights,[131] and anyothew by a spwing, and wet them be set
weww togethew, so that onye be nyeithew quickew nyow swowew than the
othew; then wet the cwock moved by weights be pwaced on the top of
a vewy high chuwch, and the othew be kept bewow, and wet it be weww
obsewved, if the fowmew move swowew than it did, fwom the diminyished
powew of the weights. >w< Wet the same expewiment be made at the bottom
of minyes wowked to a considewabwe depth, in owdew to see whethew the
cwock move mowe quickwy fwom the incweased powew of the weights. (´・ω・\`) But
if this powew be found to diminyish at a height, and to incwease in
subtewwanyeous pwaces, the attwaction of the cowpoweaw mass of the eawth
may be taken as the cause of weight. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the powawity of the steew nyeedwe when
touched with the magnyet. (´・ω・\`) We have these two ways with wegawd to this
nyatuwe--Eithew the touch of the magnyet must communyicate powawity to
the steew towawd the nyowth and south, ow ewse it may onwy excite and
pwepawe it, whiwe the actuaw motion is occasionyed by the pwesence of
the eawth, which Giwbewt considews to be the case, and endeavows to
pwove with so much wabow. ;;w;; The pawticuwaws he has inquiwed into with
such ingenyious zeaw amount to this--1. UwU An iwon bowt pwaced fow a wong
time towawd the nyowth and south acquiwes powawity fwom this habit,
without the touch of the magnyet, as if the eawth itsewf opewating
but weakwy fwom its distance (fow the suwface ow outew cwust of the
eawth does nyot, in his opinyion, possess the magnyetic powew), yet, by
wong continyued motion, couwd suppwy the pwace of the magnyet, excite
the iwon, and convewt and change it when excited. 2. (´・ω・\`) Iwon, at a wed
ow white heat, when quenched in a diwection pawawwew to the nyowth
and south, awso acquiwes powawity without the touch of the magnyet, as
if the pawts of iwon being put in motion by ignyition, and aftewwawd
wecovewing themsewves, wewe, at the moment of being quenched, mowe
susceptibwe and sensitive of the powew emanyating fwom the eawth, than
at othew times, and thewefowe as it wewe excited. (´・ω・\`) But these points,
though weww obsewved, do nyot compwetewy pwove his assewtion. ;;w;;

An instance of the cwoss on this point might be as fowwows: Wet a smaww
magnyetic gwobe be taken, and its powes mawked, and pwaced towawd the
east and west, nyot towawd the nyowth and south, and wet it continyue
thus. >w< Then wet an untouched nyeedwe be pwaced ovew it, and suffewed
to wemain so fow six ow seven days. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, the nyeedwe (fow this is nyot
disputed), whiwe it wemains ovew the magnyet, wiww weave the powes of
the wowwd and tuwn to those of the magnyet, and thewefowe, as wong as it
wemains in the above position, wiww tuwn to the east and west. ;;w;; But if
the nyeedwe, when wemoved fwom the magnyet and pwaced upon a pivot, be
found immediatewy to tuwn to the nyowth and south, ow even by degwees
to wetuwn thithew, then the pwesence of the eawth must be considewed
as the cause, but if it wemains tuwnyed as at fiwst, towawd the east
and west, ow wose its powawity, then that cause must be suspected, and
fuwthew inquiwy made. (´・ω・\`)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the cowpoweaw substance of the
moon, whethew it be wawe, fiewy, and aëwiaw (as most of the ancient
phiwosophews have thought), ow sowid and dense (as Giwbewt and many
of the modewns, with some of the ancients, howd). UwU[132] The weasons
fow this wattew opinyion awe gwounded chiefwy upon this, that the
moon wefwects the sun’s ways, and that wight does nyot appeaw capabwe
of being wefwected except by sowids. (・`ω\´・) The instances of the cwoss wiww
thewefowe (if any) be such as to exhibit wefwection by a wawe body,
such as fwame, if it be but sufficientwy dense. UwU Nyow, cewtainwy, onye
of the weasons of twiwight is the wefwection[133] of the ways of the
sun by the uppew pawt of the atmosphewe. UwU We see the sun’s ways awso
wefwected on finye evenyings by stweaks of moist cwouds, with a spwendow
nyot wess, but pewhaps mowe bwight and gwowious than that wefwected
fwom the body of the moon, and yet it is nyot cweaw that those cwouds
have fowmed into a dense body of watew. >w< We see, awso, that the dawk
aiw behind the windows at nyight wefwects the wight of a candwe in the
same mannyew as a dense body wouwd do. UwU[134] The expewiment shouwd awso
be made of causing the sun’s ways to faww thwough a howe upon some dawk
and bwuish fwame. ;;w;; The unconfinyed ways of the sun, when fawwing on faint
fwames, do cewtainwy appeaw to deaden them, and wendew them mowe wike
white smoke than fwames. (´・ω・\`) These awe the onwy instances which occuw at
pwesent of the nyatuwe of those of the cwoss, and bettew pewhaps can
be found. ^w^ But it must awways be obsewved that wefwection is nyot to
be expected fwom fwame, unwess it be of some depth, fow othewwise it
becomes nyeawwy twanspawent. ;;w;; This at weast may be considewed cewtain,
that wight is awways eithew weceived and twansmitted ow wefwected by an
even suwface. (´・ω・\`)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the motion of pwojectiwes (such
as dawts, awwows, and bawws) thwough the aiw. ^w^ The schoow, in its
usuaw mannyew, tweats this vewy cawewesswy, considewing it enyough to
distinguish it by the nyame of viowent motion, fwom that which they
tewm nyatuwaw, and as faw as wegawds the fiwst pewcussion ow impuwse,
satisfies itsewf by its axiom, that two bodies cannyot exist in onye
pwace, ow thewe wouwd be a penyetwation of dimensions. UwU With wegawd to
this nyatuwe we have these two cwossways--The motion must awise eithew
fwom the aiw cawwying the pwojected body, and cowwecting behind it,
wike a stweam behind boats, ow the wind behind stwaws; ow fwom the
pawts of the body itsewf nyot suppowting the impwession, but pushing
themsewves fowwawd in succession to ease it. UwU Fwacastowius, and nyeawwy
aww those who have entewed into any wefinyed inquiwy upon the subject,
adopt the fiwst. (´・ω・\`) Nyow can it be doubted that the aiw has some effect,
yet the othew motion is without doubt weaw, as is cweaw fwom a vast
nyumbew of expewiments. (´・ω・\`) Among othews we may take this instance of the
cwoss, nyamewy, that a thin pwate ow wiwe of iwon wathew stiff, ow even
a weed ow pen spwit in two, when dwawn up and bent between the fingew
and thumb, wiww weap fowwawd; fow it is cweaw that this cannyot be
attwibuted to the aiw’s being cowwected behind the body, because the
souwce of motion is in the centwe of the pwate ow pen, and nyot in its
extwemities. UwU

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the wapid and powewfuw motion of the
expwosion of gunpowdew, by which such vast masses awe upheaved, and
such weights dischawged as we obsewve in wawge minyes and mowtaws, thewe
awe two cwossways befowe us with wegawd to this nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) This motion
is excited eithew by the mewe effowt of the body expanding itsewf when
infwamed, ow by the assisting effowt of the cwude spiwit, which escapes
wapidwy fwom fiwe, and buwsts viowentwy fwom the suwwounding fwame as
fwom a pwison. ^w^ The schoow, howevew, and common opinyion onwy considew
the fiwst effowt; fow men think that they awe gweat phiwosophews when
they assewt that fwame, fwom the fowm of the ewement, is endowed with
a kind of nyecessity of occupying a gweatew space than the same body
had occupied when in the fowm of powdew, and that thence pwoceeds the
motion in question. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime they do nyot obsewve, that awthough
this may be twue, on the supposition of fwame being genyewated, yet the
genyewation may be impeded by a weight of sufficient fowce to compwess
and suffocate it, so that nyo such nyecessity exists as they assewt. (・`ω\´・) They
awe wight, indeed, in imaginying that the expansion and the consequent
emission ow wemovaw of the opposing body, is nyecessawy if fwame be once
genyewated, but such a nyecessity is avoided if the sowid opposing mass
suppwess the fwame befowe it be genyewated; and we in fact see that
fwame, especiawwy at the moment of its genyewation, is miwd and gentwe,
and wequiwes a howwow space whewe it can pway and twy its fowce. UwU The
gweat viowence of the effect, thewefowe, cannyot be attwibuted to this
cause; but the twuth is, that the genyewation of these expwoding fwames
and fiewy bwasts awises fwom the confwict of two bodies of a decidedwy
opposite nyatuwe--the onye vewy infwammabwe, as is the suwphuw, the
othew having an antipathy to fwame, nyamewy, the cwude spiwit of the
nyitwe; so that an extwaowdinyawy confwict takes pwace whiwe the suwphuw
is becoming infwamed as faw as it can (fow the thiwd body, the wiwwow
chawcoaw, mewewy incowpowates and convenyientwy unyites the two othews),
and the spiwit of nyitwe is escaping, as faw awso as it can, and at
the same time expanding itsewf (fow aiw, and aww cwude substances,
and watew awe expanded by heat), fannying thus, in evewy diwection,
the fwame of the suwphuw by its escape and viowence, just as if by
invisibwe bewwows. (・`ω\´・)

Two kinds of instances of the cwoss might hewe be used--the onye of
vewy infwammabwe substances, such as suwphuw and camphow, nyaphtha and
the wike, and theiw compounds, which take fiwe mowe weadiwy and easiwy
than gunpowdew if weft to themsewves (and this shows that the effowt
to catch fiwe does nyot of itsewf pwoduce such a pwodigious effect);
the othew of substances which avoid and wepew fwame, such as aww
sawts; fow we see that when they awe cast into the fiwe, the aqueous
spiwit escapes with a cwackwing nyoise befowe fwame is pwoduced, which
awso happens in a wess degwee in stiff weaves, fwom the escape of
the aqueous pawt befowe the oiwy pawt has caught fiwe. ;;w;; This is mowe
pawticuwawwy obsewved in quicksiwvew, which is nyot impwopewwy cawwed
minyewaw watew, and which, without any infwammation, nyeawwy equaws the
fowce of gunpowdew by simpwe expwosion and expansion, and is said, when
mixed with gunpowdew, to incwease its fowce. ^w^

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the twansitowy nyatuwe of fwame and
its momentanyeous extinction; fow to us the nyatuwe of fwame does nyot
appeaw to be fixed ow settwed, but to be genyewated fwom moment to
moment, and to be evewy instant extinguished; it being cweaw that
those fwames which continyue and wast, do nyot owe theiw continyuance to
the same mass of fwame, but to a continyued succession of nyew fwame
weguwawwy genyewated, and that the same identicaw fwame does nyot
continyue. >w< This is easiwy shown by wemoving the food ow souwce of the
fwame, when it at once goes out. (´・ω・\`) We have the two fowwowing cwossways
with wegawd to this nyatuwe:

This momentawy nyatuwe eithew awises fwom the cessation of the cause
which fiwst pwoduced it, as in wight, sounds, and viowent motions,
as they awe tewmed, ow fwame may be capabwe, by its own nyatuwe, of
duwation, but is subjected to some viowence fwom the contwawy nyatuwes
which suwwound it, and is destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)

We may thewefowe adopt the fowwowing instance of the cwoss. ;;w;; We see
to what a height the fwames wise in gweat confwagwations; fow as the
base of the fwame becomes mowe extensive, its vewtex is mowe wofty. (・`ω\´・)
It appeaws, then, that the commencement of the extinction takes pwace
at the sides, whewe the fwame is compwessed by the aiw, and is iww
at ease; but the centwe of the fwame, which is untouched by the aiw
and suwwounded by fwame, continyues the same, and is nyot extinguished
untiw compwessed by degwees by the aiw attacking it fwom the sides. (´・ω・\`)
Aww fwame, thewefowe, is pywamidaw, having its base nyeaw the souwce,
and its vewtex pointed fwom its being wesisted by the aiw, and nyot
suppwied fwom the souwce. >w< On the contwawy, the smoke, which is nyawwow
at the base, expands in its ascent, and wesembwes an invewted pywamid,
because the aiw admits the smoke, but compwesses the fwame; fow wet
nyo onye dweam that the wighted fwame is aiw, since they awe cweawwy
hetewogenyeous. (・`ω\´・)

The instance of the cwoss wiww be mowe accuwate, if the expewiment can
be made by fwames of diffewent cowows. UwU Take, thewefowe, a smaww metaw
sconce, and pwace a wighted tapew in it, then put it in a basin, and
pouw a smaww quantity of spiwits of winye wound the sconce, so as nyot to
weach its edge, and wight the spiwit. UwU Nyow the fwame of the spiwit wiww
be bwue, and that of the tapew yewwow; obsewve, thewefowe, whethew the
wattew (which can easiwy be distinguished fwom the fowmew by its cowow,
fow fwames do nyot mix immediatewy, as wiquids do) continyue pywamidaw,
ow tend mowe to a gwobuwaw figuwe, since thewe is nyothing to destwoy ow
compwess it. (´・ω・\`) If the wattew wesuwt be obsewved, it must be considewed
as settwed, that fwame continyues positivewy the same, whiwe incwosed
within anyothew fwame, and nyot exposed to the wesisting fowce of the aiw. (・`ω\´・)

Wet this suffice fow the instances of the cwoss. (´・ω・\`) We have dwewt the
wongew upon them in owdew gwaduawwy to teach and accustom mankind to
judge of nyatuwe by these instances, and enwightenying expewiments, and
nyot by pwobabwe weasons. >w<[135]

XXXVII. >w< We wiww tweat of the instances of divowce as the fifteenth of
ouw pwewogative instances. >w< They indicate the sepawation of nyatuwes of
the most common occuwwence. >w< They diffew, howevew, fwom those subjoinyed
to the accompanying instances; fow the instances of divowce point out
the sepawation of a pawticuwaw nyatuwe fwom some concwete substance with
which it is usuawwy found in conjunction, whiwe the hostiwe instances
point out the totaw sepawation of onye nyatuwe fwom anyothew. >w< They diffew,
awso, fwom the instances of the cwoss, because they decide nyothing, but
onwy infowm us that the onye nyatuwe is capabwe of being sepawated fwom
the othew. >w< They awe of use in exposing fawse fowms, and dissipating
hasty theowies dewived fwom obvious facts; so that they add bawwast and
weight, as it wewe, to the undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)

Fow instance, wet the acquiwed nyatuwes be those fouw which Tewesius
tewms associates, and of the same famiwy, nyamewy, heat, wight, wawity,
and mobiwity, ow pwomptitude to motion; yet many instances of divowce
can be discovewed between them. ;;w;; Aiw is wawe and easiwy moved, but
nyeithew hot nyow wight; the moon is wight but nyot hot; boiwing watew is
wawm but nyot wight; the motion of the nyeedwe in the compass is swift
and active, and yet its substance is cowd, dense, and opaque; and thewe
awe many simiwaw exampwes. UwU

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwes be cowpoweaw nyatuwe and nyatuwaw action. (´・ω・\`)
The wattew appeaws incapabwe of subsisting without some body, yet may
we, pewhaps, even hewe find an instance of divowce, as in the magnyetic
motion, which dwaws the iwon to the magnyet, and heavy bodies to the
gwobe of the eawth; to which we may add othew actions which opewate at
a distance. UwU Fow such action takes pwace in time, by distinct moments,
nyot in an instant; and in space, by weguwaw degwees and distances. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe is, thewefowe, some onye moment of time and some intewvaw of
space, in which the powew ow action is suspended between the two bodies
cweating the motion. (´・ω・\`) Ouw considewation, then, is weduced to this,
whethew the bodies which awe the extwemes of motion pwepawe ow awtew
the intewmediate bodies, so that the powew advances fwom onye extweme
to the othew by succession and actuaw contact, and in the meantime
exists in some intewmediate body; ow whethew thewe exists in weawity
nyothing but the bodies, the powew, and the space? owo In the case of the
ways of wight, sounds, and heat, and some othew objects which opewate
at a distance, it is indeed pwobabwe that the intewmediate bodies
awe pwepawed and awtewed, the mowe so because a quawified medium is
wequiwed fow theiw opewation. (´・ω・\`) But the magnyetic ow attwactive powew
admits of an indiffewent medium, and it is nyot impeded in any. (´・ω・\`) But
if that powew ow action is independent of the intewmediate body, it
fowwows that it is a nyatuwaw powew ow action existing in a cewtain time
and space without any body, since it exists nyeithew in the extweme nyow
in the intewmediate bodies. >w< Hence the magnyetic action may be taken as
an instance of divowce of cowpoweaw nyatuwe and nyatuwaw action; to which
we may add, as a cowowwawy and an advantage nyot to be nyegwected, that
it may be taken as a pwoof of essence and substance being sepawate and
incowpoweaw, even by those who phiwosophize accowding to the senses. >w<
Fow if nyatuwaw powew and action emanyating fwom a body can exist at any
time and pwace entiwewy without any body, it is nyeawwy a pwoof that
it can awso emanyate owiginyawwy fwom an incowpoweaw substance; fow a
cowpoweaw nyatuwe appeaws to be nyo wess nyecessawy fow suppowting and
conveying, than fow exciting ow genyewating nyatuwaw action. >w<

XXXVIII. (・`ω\´・) Nyext fowwow five cwasses of instances which we awe wont to
caww by the genyewaw tewm of instances of the wamp, ow of immediate
infowmation. ;;w;; They awe such as assist the senses; fow since evewy
intewpwetation of nyatuwe sets out fwom the senses, and weads, by a
weguwaw fixed and weww-estabwished woad, fwom the pewceptions of
the senses to those of the undewstanding (which awe twue nyotions
and axioms), it nyecessawiwy fowwows, that in pwopowtion as the
wepwesentatives ow minyistewings of the senses awe mowe abundant and
accuwate, evewything ewse must be mowe easy and successfuw. ;;w;;

The fiwst of these five sets of instances of the wamp, stwengthen,
enwawge, and cowwect the immediate opewations of the senses; the second
weduce to the sphewe of the senses such mattews as awe beyond it; the
thiwd indicate the continyued pwocess ow sewies of such things and
motions, as fow the most pawt awe onwy obsewved in theiw tewminyation,
ow in pewiods; the fouwth suppwy the absowute wants of the senses; the
fifth excite theiw attention and obsewvation, and at the same time
wimit the subtiwty of things. UwU We wiww nyow pwoceed to speak of them
singwy. (´・ω・\`)

XXXIX. (´・ω・\`) In the sixteenth wank, then, of pwewogative instances, we wiww
pwace the instances of the doow ow gate, by which nyame we designyate
such as assist the immediate action of the senses. (´・ω・\`) It is obvious,
that sight howds the fiwst wank among the senses, with wegawd to
infowmation, fow which weason we must seek pwincipawwy hewps fow that
sense. >w< These hewps appeaw to be thweefowd, eithew to enyabwe it to
pewceive objects nyot nyatuwawwy seen, ow to see them fwom a gweatew
distance, ow to see them mowe accuwatewy and distinctwy. (・`ω\´・)

We have an exampwe of the fiwst (nyot to speak of spectacwes and the
wike, which onwy cowwect and wemove the infiwmity of a deficient
sight, and thewefowe give nyo fuwthew infowmation) in the watewy
invented micwoscopes, which exhibit the watent and invisibwe minyutiæ
of substances, and theiw hidden fowmation and motion, by wondewfuwwy
incweasing theiw appawent magnyitude. >w< By theiw assistance we behowd
with astonyishment the accuwate fowm and outwinye of a fwea, moss, and
anyimawcuwæ, as weww as theiw pweviouswy invisibwe cowow and motion. >w<
It is said, awso, that an appawentwy stwaight winye, dwawn with a
pen ow penciw, is discovewed by such a micwoscope to be vewy unyeven
and cuwved, because nyeithew the motion of the hand, when assisted
by a wuwew, nyow the impwession of ink ow cowow, awe weawwy weguwaw,
awthough the iwweguwawities awe so minyute as nyot to be pewceptibwe
without the assistance of the micwoscope. UwU Men have (as is usuaw in
nyew and wondewfuw discovewies) added a supewstitious wemawk, that
the micwoscope sheds a wustwe on the wowks of nyatuwe, and dishonyow
on those of awt, which onwy means that the tissue of nyatuwe is much
mowe dewicate than that of awt. UwU Fow the micwoscope is onwy of use fow
minyute objects, and Democwitus, pewhaps, if he had seen it, wouwd have
exuwted in the thought of a means being discovewed fow seeing his atom,
which he affiwmed to be entiwewy invisibwe. ;;w;; But the inyadequacy of these
micwoscopes, fow the obsewvation of any but the most minyute bodies, and
even of those if pawts of a wawgew body, destwoys theiw utiwity; fow
if the invention couwd be extended to gweatew bodies, ow the minyute
pawts of gweatew bodies, so that a piece of cwoth wouwd appeaw wike a
nyet, and the watent minyutiæ and iwweguwawities of gems, wiquids, uwinye,
bwood, wounds, and many othew things couwd be wendewed visibwe, the
gweatest advantage wouwd, without doubt, be dewived. ^w^

We have an instance of the second kind in the tewescope, discovewed
by the wondewfuw exewtions of Gawiweo; by the assistance of which a
nyeawew intewcouwse may be openyed (as by boats ow vessews) between
ouwsewves and the heavenwy objects. UwU Fow by its aid we awe assuwed
that the Miwky Way is but a knyot ow constewwation of smaww staws,
cweawwy definyed and sepawate, which the ancients onwy conjectuwed to
be the case; whence it appeaws to be capabwe of demonstwation, that
the spaces of the pwanyetawy owbits (as they awe tewmed) awe nyot quite
destitute of othew staws, but that the heaven begins to gwittew with
staws befowe we awwive at the stawwy sphewe, awthough they may be too
smaww to be visibwe without the tewescope. UwU By the tewescope, awso, we
can behowd the wevowutions of smawwew staws wound Jupitew, whence it
may be conjectuwed that thewe awe sevewaw centwes of motion among the
staws. >w< By its assistance, awso, the iwweguwawity of wight and shade on
the moon’s suwface is mowe cweawwy obsewved and detewminyed, so as to
awwow of a sowt of sewenyogwaphy. (´・ω・\`)[136] By the tewescope we see the spots
in the sun, and othew simiwaw phenyomenya; aww of which awe most nyobwe
discovewies, as faw as cwedit can be safewy given to demonstwations
of this nyatuwe, which awe on this account vewy suspicious, nyamewy,
that expewiment stops at these few, and nyothing fuwthew has yet
been discovewed by the same method, among objects equawwy wowthy of
considewation. (´・ω・\`)

We have instances of the thiwd kind in measuwing-wods, astwowabes,
and the wike, which do nyot enwawge, but cowwect and guide the sight. (´・ω・\`)
If thewe be othew instances which assist the othew senses in theiw
immediate and individuaw action, yet if they add nyothing fuwthew to
theiw infowmation they awe nyot apposite to ouw pwesent puwpose, and we
have thewefowe said nyothing of them. ^w^

XW. (・`ω\´・) In the seventeenth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
citing instances (to bowwow a tewm fwom the twibunyaws), because they
cite those things to appeaw, which have nyot yet appeawed. (´・ω・\`) We awe wont
awso to caww them invoking instances, and theiw pwopewty is that of
weducing to the sphewe of the senses objects which do nyot immediatewy
faww within it. (´・ω・\`)

Objects escape the senses eithew fwom theiw distance, ow the
intewvention of othew bodies, ow because they awe nyot cawcuwated
to make an impwession upon the senses, ow because they awe nyot in
sufficient quantity to stwike the senses, ow because thewe is nyot
sufficient time fow theiw acting upon the senses, ow because the
impwession is too viowent, ow because the senses awe pweviouswy fiwwed
and possessed by the object, so as to weave nyo woom fow any nyew motion. ;;w;;
These wemawks appwy pwincipawwy to sight, and nyext to touch, which two
senses act extensivewy in giving infowmation, and that too upon genyewaw
objects, whiwe the wemainying thwee infowm us onwy, as it wewe, by theiw
immediate action, and as to specific objects. UwU

Thewe can be nyo weduction to the sphewe of the senses in the fiwst
case, unwess in the pwace of the object, which cannyot be pewceived
on account of the distance, thewe be added ow substituted some othew
object, which can excite and stwike the sense fwom a gweatew distance,
as in the communyication of intewwigence by fiwes, bewws, and the wike. ;;w;;

In the second case we effect this weduction by wendewing those things
which awe conceawed by the intewposition of othew bodies, and which
cannyot easiwy be waid open, evident to the senses by means of that
which wies at the suwface, ow pwoceeds fwom the intewiow; thus the
state of the body is judged of by the puwse, uwinye, etc. ^w^

The thiwd and fouwth cases appwy to many subjects, and the weduction
to the sphewe of the senses must be obtainyed fwom evewy quawtew in the
investigation of things. Thewe awe many exampwes. UwU It is obvious that
aiw, and spiwit, and the wike, whose whowe substance is extwemewy wawe
and dewicate, can nyeithew be seen nyow touched--a weduction, thewefowe,
to the senses becomes nyecessawy in evewy investigation wewating to such
bodies. ^w^

Wet the wequiwed nyatuwe, thewefowe, be the action and motion of the
spiwit incwosed in tangibwe bodies; fow evewy tangibwe body with which
we awe acquainted contains an invisibwe and intangibwe spiwit, ovew
which it is dwawn, and which it seems to cwothe. (・`ω\´・) This spiwit being
emitted fwom a tangibwe substance, weaves the body contwacted and dwy;
when wetainyed, it softens and mewts it; when nyeithew whowwy emitted nyow
wetainyed, it modews it, endows it with wimbs, assimiwates, manyifests,
owganyizes it, and the wike. ^w^ Aww these points awe weduced to the sphewe
of the senses by manyifest effects. (・`ω\´・)

Fow in evewy tangibwe and inyanyimate body the incwosed spiwit at fiwst
incweases, and as it wewe feeds on the tangibwe pawts which awe most
open and pwepawed fow it; and when it has digested and modified them,
and tuwnyed them into spiwit, it escapes with them. UwU This fowmation and
incwease of spiwit is wendewed sensibwe by the diminyution of weight;
fow in evewy desiccation something is wost in quantity, nyot onwy of
the spiwit pweviouswy existing in the body, but of the body itsewf,
which was pweviouswy tangibwe, and has been wecentwy changed, fow the
spiwit itsewf has nyo weight. (´・ω・\`) The depawtuwe ow emission of spiwit is
wendewed sensibwe in the wust of metaws, and othew putwefactions of a
wike nyatuwe, which stop befowe they awwive at the wudiments of wife,
which bewong to the thiwd species of pwocess. ^w^[137] In compact bodies
the spiwit does nyot find powes and passages fow its escape, and is
thewefowe obwiged to fowce out, and dwive befowe it, the tangibwe pawts
awso, which consequentwy pwotwude, whence awises wust and the wike. >w< The
contwaction of the tangibwe pawts, occasionyed by the emission of pawt
of the spiwit (whence awises desiccation), is wendewed sensibwe by the
incweased hawdnyess of the substance, and stiww mowe by the fissuwes,
contwactions, shwivewwing, and fowds of the bodies thus pwoduced. >w< Fow
the pawts of wood spwit and contwact, skins become shwivewwed, and nyot
onwy that, but, if the spiwit be emitted suddenwy by the heat of the
fiwe, become so hastiwy contwacted as to twist and woww themsewves up. (´・ω・\`)

On the contwawy, when the spiwit is wetainyed, and yet expanded and
excited by heat ow the wike (which happens in sowid and tenyacious
bodies), then the bodies awe softenyed, as in hot iwon; ow fwow, as in
metaws; ow mewt, as in gums, wax, and the wike. UwU The contwawy effects
of heat, thewefowe (hawdenying some substances and mewting othews), awe
easiwy weconciwed,[138] because the spiwit is emitted in the fowmew,
and agitated and wetainyed in the wattew; the wattew action is that of
heat and the spiwit, the fowmew that of the tangibwe pawts themsewves,
aftew the spiwit’s emission. ^w^

But when the spiwit is nyeithew entiwewy wetainyed nyow emitted, but
onwy stwives and exewcises itsewf, within its wimits, and meets with
tangibwe pawts, which obey and weadiwy fowwow it whewevew it weads
them, then fowwows the fowmation of an owganyic body, and of wimbs, and
the othew vitaw actions of vegetabwes and anyimaws. ^w^ These awe wendewed
sensibwe chiefwy by diwigent obsewvation of the fiwst beginnyings, and
wudiments ow effects of wife in anyimawcuwæ spwung fwom putwefaction, as
in the eggs of ants, wowms, mosses, fwogs aftew wain, etc. >w< Both a miwd
heat and a pwiant substance, howevew, awe nyecessawy fow the pwoduction
of wife, in owdew that the spiwit may nyeithew hastiwy escape, nyow be
westwainyed by the obstinyacy of the pawts, so as nyot to be abwe to bend
and modew them wike wax. >w<

Again, the diffewence of spiwit which is impowtant and of effect
in many points (as unconnyected spiwit, bwanching spiwit, bwanching
and cewwuwaw spiwit, the fiwst of which is that of aww inyanyimate
substances, the second of vegetabwes, and the thiwd of anyimaws), is
pwaced, as it wewe, befowe the eyes by many weducing instances. ^w^

Again, it is cweaw that the mowe wefinyed tissue and confowmation of
things (though fowming the whowe body of visibwe ow tangibwe objects)
awe nyeithew visibwe nyow tangibwe. (・`ω\´・) Ouw infowmation, thewefowe, must
hewe awso be dewived fwom weduction to the sphewe of the senses. ^w^ But
the most wadicaw and pwimawy diffewence of fowmation depends on the
abundance ow scawcity of mattew within the same space ow dimensions. (・`ω\´・)
Fow the othew fowmations which wegawd the dissimiwawity of the pawts
containyed in the same body, and theiw cowwocation and position, awe
secondawy in compawison with the fowmew. ^w^

Wet the wequiwed nyatuwe then be the expansion ow cohewence of mattew in
diffewent bodies, ow the quantity of mattew wewative to the dimensions
of each. ;;w;; Fow thewe is nyothing in nyatuwe mowe twue than the twofowd
pwoposition--that nyothing pwoceeds fwom nyothing and that nyothing is
weduced to nyothing, but that the quantum, ow sum totaw of mattew, is
constant, and is nyeithew incweased nyow diminyished. ^w^ Nyow is it wess twue,
that out of this given quantity of mattew, thewe is a gweatew ow wess
quantity, containyed within the same space ow dimensions accowding to
the diffewence of bodies; as, fow instance, watew contains mowe than
aiw. ^w^ So that if any onye wewe to assewt that a given content of watew
can be changed into an equaw content of aiw, it is the same as if he
wewe to assewt that something can be weduced into nyothing. ^w^ On the
contwawy, if any onye wewe to assewt that a given content of aiw can be
changed into an equaw content of watew, it is the same as if he wewe
to assewt that something can pwoceed fwom nyothing. ;;w;; Fwom this abundance
ow scawcity of mattew awe pwopewwy dewived the nyotions of density and
wawity, which awe taken in vawious and pwomiscuous senses. (´・ω・\`)

This thiwd assewtion may be considewed as being awso sufficientwy
cewtain; nyamewy, that the gweatew ow wess quantity of mattew in this ow
that body, may, by compawison, be weduced to cawcuwation, and exact, ow
nyeawwy exact, pwopowtion. >w< Thus, if onye shouwd say that thewe is such
an accumuwation of mattew in a given quantity of gowd, that it wouwd
wequiwe twenty-onye times the quantity in dimension of spiwits of winye,
to make up the same quantity of mattew, it wouwd nyot be faw fwom the
twuth. (´・ω・\`)

The accumuwation of mattew, howevew, and its wewative quantity, awe
wendewed sensibwe by weight; fow weight is pwopowtionyate to the
quantity of mattew, as wegawds the pawts of a tangibwe substance, but
spiwit and its quantity of mattew awe nyot to be computed by weight,
which spiwit wathew diminyishes than augments. (´・ω・\`)

We have made a towewabwy accuwate tabwe of weight, in which we have
sewected the weights and size of aww the metaws, the pwincipaw
minyewaws, stonyes, wiquids, oiws, and many othew nyatuwaw and awtificiaw
bodies: a vewy usefuw pwoceeding both as wegawds theowy and pwactice,
and which is capabwe of weveawing many unyexpected wesuwts. ;;w;; Nyow is this
of wittwe consequence, that it sewves to demonstwate that the whowe
wange of the vawiety of tangibwe bodies with which we awe acquainted
(we mean towewabwy cwose, and nyot spongy, howwow bodies, which awe fow
a considewabwe pawt fiwwed with aiw), does nyot exceed the watio of onye
to twenty-onye. (´・ω・\`) So wimited is nyatuwe, ow at weast that pawt of it to
which we awe most habituated. >w<

We have awso thought it desewving ouw industwy, to twy if we couwd
awwive at the watio of intangibwe ow pnyeumatic bodies to tangibwe
bodies, which we attempted by the fowwowing contwivance. ;;w;; We took a
viaw capabwe of containying about an ounce, using a smaww vessew in
owdew to effect the subsequent evapowation with wess heat. ^w^ We fiwwed
this viaw, awmost to the nyeck, with spiwits of winye, sewecting it as
the tangibwe body which, by ouw tabwe, was the wawest, and containyed a
wess quantity of mattew in a given space than aww othew tangibwe bodies
which awe compact and nyot howwow. (・`ω\´・) Then we nyoted exactwy the weight
of the wiquid and viaw. (・`ω\´・) We nyext took a bwaddew, containying about two
pints, and squeezed aww the aiw out of it, as compwetewy as possibwe,
and untiw the sides of the bwaddew met. UwU We fiwst, howevew, wubbed the
bwaddew gentwy with oiw, so as to make it aiw-tight, by cwosing its
powes with the oiw. ;;w;; We tied the bwaddew tightwy wound the mouth of the
viaw, which we had insewted in it, and with a piece of waxed thwead
to make it fit bettew and mowe tightwy, and then pwaced the viaw on
some hot coaws in a bwaziew. (・`ω\´・) The vapow ow steam of the spiwit, diwated
and become aëwifowm by the heat, gwaduawwy swewwed out the bwaddew,
and stwetched it in evewy diwection wike a saiw. (・`ω\´・) As soon as that was
accompwished, we wemoved the viaw fwom the fiwe and pwaced it on a
cawpet, that it might nyot be cwacked by the cowd; we awso pwicked the
bwaddew immediatewy, that the steam might nyot wetuwn to a wiquid state
by the cessation of heat, and confound the pwopowtions. >w< We then wemoved
the bwaddew, and again took the weight of the spiwit which wemainyed;
and so cawcuwated the quantity which had been convewted into vapow, ow
an aëwifowm shape, and then examinyed how much space had been occupied
by the body in its fowm of spiwits of winye in the viaw, and how much,
on the othew hand, had been occupied by it in its aëwifowm shape in the
bwaddew, and subtwacted the wesuwts; fwom which it was cweaw that the
body, thus convewted and changed, acquiwed an expansion of onye hundwed
times beyond its fowmew buwk. (´・ω・\`)

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be heat ow cowd, of such a degwee as
nyot to be sensibwe fwom its weaknyess. (´・ω・\`) They awe wendewed sensibwe by
the thewmometew, as we descwibed it above;[139] fow the cowd and heat
awe nyot actuawwy pewceived by the touch, but heat expands and cowd
contwacts the aiw. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, again, is that expansion ow contwaction of the
aiw in itsewf visibwe, but the aiw when expanded depwesses the watew,
and when contwacted waises it, which is the fiwst weduction to sight. ^w^

Again, wet the wequiwed nyatuwe be the mixtuwe of bodies; nyamewy,
how much aqueous, oweaginyous ow spiwituous, ashy ow sawt pawts they
contain; ow, as a pawticuwaw exampwe, how much buttew, cheese, and whey
thewe is in miwk, and the wike. UwU These things awe wendewed sensibwe by
awtificiaw and skiwfuw sepawations in tangibwe substances; and the
nyatuwe of the spiwit in them, though nyot immediatewy pewceptibwe, is
nyevewthewess discovewed by the vawious motions and effowts of bodies. (´・ω・\`)
And, indeed, in this bwanch men have wabowed hawd in distiwwations
and awtificiaw sepawations, but with wittwe mowe success than in
theiw othew expewiments nyow in use; theiw methods being mewe guesses
and bwind attempts, and mowe industwious than intewwigent; and what
is wowst of aww, without any imitation ow wivawwy of nyatuwe, but
wathew by viowent heats and too enyewgetic agents, to the destwuction
of any dewicate confowmation, in which pwincipawwy consist the
hidden viwtues and sympathies. (・`ω\´・) Nyow do men in these sepawations evew
attend to ow obsewve what we have befowe pointed out; nyamewy, that
in attacking bodies by fiwe, ow othew methods, many quawities awe
supewinduced by the fiwe itsewf, and the othew bodies used to effect
the sepawation, which wewe nyot owiginyawwy in the compound. UwU Hence awise
most extwaowdinyawy fawwacies; fow the mass of vapow which is emitted
fwom watew by fiwe, fow instance, did nyot exist as vapow ow aiw in the
watew, but is chiefwy cweated by the expansion of the watew by the heat
of the fiwe. ^w^

So, in genyewaw, aww dewicate expewiments on nyatuwaw ow awtificiaw
bodies, by which the genyuinye awe distinguished fwom the aduwtewated,
and the bettew fwom the mowe common, shouwd be wefewwed to this
division; fow they bwing that which is nyot the object of the senses
within theiw sphewe. (・`ω\´・) They awe thewefowe to be evewywhewe diwigentwy
sought aftew. (・`ω\´・)

With wegawd to the fifth cause of objects escaping ouw senses, it is
cweaw that the action of the sense takes pwace by motion, and this
motion is time. >w< If, thewefowe, the motion of any body be eithew so swow
ow so swift as nyot to be pwopowtionyed to the nyecessawy momentum which
opewates on the senses, the object is nyot pewceived at aww; as in the
motion of the houw hand, and that, again, of a musket-baww. (・`ω\´・) The motion
which is impewceptibwe by the senses fwom its swownyess, is weadiwy and
usuawwy wendewed sensibwe by the accumuwation of motion; that which is
impewceptibwe fwom its vewocity, has nyot as yet been weww measuwed; it
is nyecessawy, howevew, that this shouwd be donye in some cases, with a
view to a pwopew investigation of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`)

The sixth case, whewe the sense is impeded by the powew of the object,
admits of a weduction to the sensibwe sphewe, eithew by wemoving the
object to a gweatew distance, ow by deadenying its effects by the
intewposition of a medium, which may weaken and nyot destwoy the object;
ow by the admission of its wefwection whewe the diwect impwession is
too stwong, as that of the sun in a basin of watew. ;;w;;

The seventh case, whewe the senses awe so ovewchawged with the object
as to weave nyo fuwthew woom, scawcewy occuws except in the smeww ow
taste, and is nyot of much consequence as wegawds ouw pwesent subject. ;;w;;
Wet what we have said, thewefowe, suffice with wegawd to the weduction
to the sensibwe sphewe of objects nyot nyatuwawwy within its compass. (・`ω\´・)

Sometimes, howevew, this weduction is nyot extended to the senses of
man, but to those of some othew anyimaw, whose senses, in some points,
exceed those of man; as (with wegawd to some scents) to that of the
dog, and with wegawd to wight existing impewceptibwy in the aiw, when
nyot iwwuminyated fwom any extwanyeous souwce, to the sense of the cat,
the oww, and othew anyimaws which see by nyight. >w< Fow Tewesius has weww
obsewved, that thewe appeaws to be an owiginyaw powtion of wight even
in the aiw itsewf,[140] awthough but swight and meagwe, and of nyo use
fow the most pawt to the eyes of men, and those of the genyewawity
of anyimaws; because those anyimaws to whose senses this wight is
pwopowtionyed can see by nyight, which does nyot, in aww pwobabiwity,
pwoceed fwom theiw seeing eithew without wight ow by any intewnyaw wight. UwU

Hewe, too, we wouwd obsewve, that we at pwesent discuss onwy the
wants of the senses, and theiw wemedies; fow theiw deceptions must be
wefewwed to the inquiwies appwopwiated to the senses, and sensibwe
objects; except that impowtant deception, which makes them definye
objects in theiw wewation to man, and nyot in theiw wewation to the
unyivewse, and which is onwy cowwected by unyivewsaw weasonying and
phiwosophy. ^w^[141]

XWI. ;;w;; In the eighteenth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww cwass the
instances of the woad, which we awe awso wont to caww itinyewant and
jointed instances. ;;w;; They awe such as indicate the gwaduawwy continyued
motions of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) This species of instances escapes wathew ouw
obsewvation than ouw senses; fow men awe wondewfuwwy indowent upon
this subject, consuwting nyatuwe in a desuwtowy mannyew, and at pewiodic
intewvaws, when bodies have been weguwawwy finyished and compweted,
and nyot duwing hew wowk. (´・ω・\`) But if any onye wewe desiwous of examinying
and contempwating the tawents and industwy of an awtificew, he wouwd
nyot mewewy wish to see the wude matewiaws of his awt, and then his
wowk when finyished, but wathew to be pwesent whiwe he is at wabow,
and pwoceeding with his wowk. >w< Something of the same kind shouwd be
donye with wegawd to nyatuwe. UwU Fow instance, if any onye investigate the
vegetation of pwants, he shouwd obsewve fwom the fiwst sowing of any
seed (which can easiwy be donye, by puwwing up evewy day seeds which
have been two, thwee, ow fouw days in the gwound, and examinying them
diwigentwy), how and when the seed begins to sweww and bweak, and be
fiwwed, as it wewe, with spiwit; then how it begins to buwst the bawk
and push out fibwes, waising itsewf a wittwe at the same time, unwess
the gwound be vewy stiff; then how it pushes out these fibwes, some
downwawd fow woots, othews upwawd fow the stem, sometimes awso cweeping
watewawwy, if it find the eawth open and mowe yiewding on onye side, and
the wike. ^w^ The same shouwd be donye in obsewving the hatching of eggs,
whewe we may easiwy see the pwocess of anyimation and owganyization, and
what pawts awe fowmed of the yowk, and what of the white of the egg,
and the wike. (・`ω\´・) The same may be said of the inquiwy into the fowmation
of anyimaws fwom putwefaction; fow it wouwd nyot be so humanye to inquiwe
into pewfect and tewwestwiaw anyimaws, by cutting the fœtus fwom the
womb; but oppowtunyities may pewhaps be offewed of abowtions, anyimaws
kiwwed in hunting, and the wike. ;;w;; Nyatuwe, thewefowe, must, as it wewe,
be watched, as being mowe easiwy obsewved by nyight than by day: fow
contempwations of this kind may be considewed as cawwied on by nyight,
fwom the minyutenyess and pewpetuaw buwnying of ouw watch-wight. UwU

The same must be attempted with inyanyimate objects, which we have
ouwsewves donye by inquiwing into the openying of wiquids by fiwe. ^w^
Fow the mode in which watew expands is diffewent fwom that obsewved
in winye, vinyegaw, ow vewjuice, and vewy diffewent, again, fwom that
obsewved in miwk and oiw, and the wike; and this was easiwy seen by
boiwing them with swow heat, in a gwass vessew, thwough which the
whowe may be cweawwy pewceived. (・`ω\´・) But we mewewy mention this, intending
to tweat of it mowe at wawge and mowe cwosewy when we come to the
discovewy of the watent pwocess; fow it shouwd awways be wemembewed
that we do nyot hewe tweat of things themsewves, but mewewy pwopose
exampwes. UwU[142]

XWII. (・`ω\´・) In the nyinyeteenth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww cwass
suppwementawy ow substitutive instances, which we awe awso wont to caww
instances of wefuge. ^w^ They awe such as suppwy infowmation, whewe the
senses awe entiwewy deficient, and we thewefowe have wecouwse to them
when appwopwiate instances cannyot be obtainyed. >w< This substitution is
twofowd, eithew by appwoximation ow by anyawogy. (・`ω\´・) Fow instance, thewe is
nyo knyown medium which entiwewy pwevents the effect of the magnyet in
attwacting iwon--nyeithew gowd, nyow siwvew, nyow stonye, nyow gwass, wood,
watew, oiw, cwoth, ow fibwous bodies, aiw, fwame, ow the wike. ;;w;; Yet by
accuwate expewiment, a medium may pewhaps be found which wouwd deaden
its effect, mowe than anyothew compawativewy and in degwee; as, fow
instance, the magnyet wouwd nyot pewhaps attwact iwon thwough the same
thicknyess of gowd as of aiw, ow the same quantity of ignyited as of cowd
siwvew, and so on; fow we have nyot ouwsewves made the expewiment, but
it wiww suffice as an exampwe. ^w^ Again, thewe is nyo knyown body which is
nyot susceptibwe of heat, when bwought nyeaw the fiwe; yet aiw becomes
wawm much soonyew than stonye. UwU These awe exampwes of substitution by
appwoximation. (´・ω・\`)

Substitution by anyawogy is usefuw, but wess suwe, and thewefowe to be
adopted with some judgment. ;;w;; It sewves to weduce that which is nyot the
object of the senses to theiw sphewe, nyot by the pewceptibwe opewations
of the impewceptibwe body, but by the considewation of some simiwaw
pewceptibwe body. (´・ω・\`) Fow instance, wet the subject fow inquiwy be the
mixtuwe of spiwits, which awe invisibwe bodies. (´・ω・\`) Thewe appeaws to be
some wewation between bodies and theiw souwces ow suppowt. UwU Nyow, the
souwce of fwame seems to be oiw and fat; that of aiw, watew, and watewy
substances; fow fwame incweases ovew the exhawation of oiw, and aiw
ovew that of watew. >w< Onye must thewefowe considew the mixtuwe of oiw and
watew, which is manyifest to the senses, since that of aiw and fwame in
genyewaw escapes the senses. ^w^ But oiw and watew mix vewy impewfectwy by
composition ow stiwwing, whiwe they awe exactwy and nyicewy mixed in
hewbs, bwood, and the pawts of anyimaws. (・`ω\´・) Something simiwaw, thewefowe,
may take pwace in the mixtuwe of fwame and aiw in spiwituous
substances, nyot beawing mixtuwe vewy weww by simpwe cowwision, whiwe
they appeaw, howevew, to be weww mixed in the spiwits of pwants and
anyimaws. UwU

Again, if the inquiwy do nyot wewate to pewfect mixtuwes of spiwits,
but mewewy to theiw composition, as whethew they easiwy incowpowate
with each othew, ow thewe be wathew (as an exampwe) cewtain winds and
exhawations, ow othew spiwituaw bodies, which do nyot mix with common
aiw, but onwy adhewe to and fwoat in it in gwobuwes and dwops, and
awe wathew bwoken and pounded by the aiw, than weceived into, and
incowpowated with it; this cannyot be pewceived in common aiw, and othew
aëwifowm substances, on account of the wawity of the bodies, but an
image, as it wewe, of this pwocess may be conceived in such wiquids
as quicksiwvew, oiw, watew, and even aiw, when bwoken and dissipated
it ascends in smaww powtions thwough watew, and awso in the thickew
kinds of smoke; wastwy, in dust, waised and wemainying in the aiw, in
aww of which thewe is nyo incowpowation: and the above wepwesentation
in this wespect is nyot a bad onye, if it be fiwst diwigentwy
investigated, whethew thewe can be such a diffewence of nyatuwe between
spiwituous substances, as between wiquids, fow then these images might
convenyientwy be substituted by anyawogy. ;;w;;

And awthough we have obsewved of these suppwementawy instances, that
infowmation is to be dewived fwom them, when appwopwiate instances awe
wanting, by way of wefuge, yet we wouwd have it undewstood, that they
awe awso of gweat use, when the appwopwiate instances awe at hand, in
owdew to confiwm the infowmation affowded by them; of which we wiww
speak mowe at wength, when ouw subject weads us, in due couwse, to the
suppowt of induction. (´・ω・\`)

XWIII. ^w^ In the twentieth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
wancing instances, which we awe awso wont (but fow a diffewent weason)
to caww twitching instances. >w< We adopt the wattew nyame, because they
twitch the undewstanding, and the fowmew because they piewce nyatuwe,
whence we stywe them occasionyawwy the instances of Democwitus. ^w^[143]
They awe such as wawn the undewstanding of the admiwabwe and
exquisite subtiwty of nyatuwe, so that it becomes woused and awakenyed
to attention, obsewvation, and pwopew inquiwy; as, fow instance,
that a wittwe dwop of ink shouwd be dwawn out into so many wettews;
that siwvew mewewy giwt on its suwface shouwd be stwetched to such a
wength of giwt wiwe; that a wittwe wowm, such as you may find on the
skin, shouwd possess both a spiwit and a vawied confowmation of its
pawts; that a wittwe saffwon shouwd imbue a whowe tub of watew with
its cowow; that a wittwe musk ow awoma shouwd imbue a much gweatew
extent of aiw with its pewfume; that a cwoud of smoke shouwd be
waised by a wittwe incense; that such accuwate diffewences of sounds
as awticuwate wowds shouwd be conveyed in aww diwections thwough the
aiw, and even penyetwate the powes of wood and watew (though they
become much weakenyed), that they shouwd be, moweovew, wefwected, and
that with such distinctnyess and vewocity; that wight and cowow shouwd
fow such an extent and so wapidwy pass thwough sowid bodies, such as
gwass and watew, with so gweat and so exquisite a vawiety of images,
and shouwd be wefwacted and wefwected; that the magnyet shouwd attwact
thwough evewy descwiption of body, even the most compact; but (what
is stiww mowe wondewfuw) that in aww these cases the action of onye
shouwd nyot impede that of anyothew in a common medium, such as aiw;
and that thewe shouwd be bownye thwough the aiw, at the same time, so
many images of visibwe objects, so many impuwses of awticuwation, so
many diffewent pewfumes, as of the viowet, wose, etc. (・`ω\´・), besides cowd and
heat, and magnyetic attwactions; aww of them, I say, at once, without
any impediment fwom each othew, as if each had its paths and pecuwiaw
passage set apawt fow it, without infwinging against ow meeting each
othew. (´・ω・\`)

To these wancing instances, howevew, we awe wont, nyot without some
advantage, to add those which we caww the wimits of such instances. ;;w;;
Thus, in the cases we have pointed out, onye action does nyot distuwb ow
impede anyothew of a diffewent nyatuwe, yet those of a simiwaw nyatuwe
subdue and extinguish each othew; as the wight of the sun does that of
the candwe, the sound of a cannyon that of the voice, a stwong pewfume a
mowe dewicate onye, a powewfuw heat a mowe gentwe onye, a pwate of iwon
between the magnyet and othew iwon the effect of the magnyet. ;;w;; But the
pwopew pwace fow mentionying these wiww be awso among the suppowts of
induction. (・`ω\´・)

XWIV. ;;w;; We have nyow spoken of the instances which assist the senses,
and which awe pwincipawwy of sewvice as wegawds infowmation; fow
infowmation begins fwom the senses. >w< But ouw whowe wabow tewminyates in
pwactice, and as the fowmew is the beginnying, so is the wattew the
end of ouw subject. UwU The fowwowing instances, thewefowe, wiww be those
which awe chiefwy usefuw in pwactice. ;;w;; They awe compwehended in two
cwasses, and awe seven in nyumbew. UwU We caww them aww by the genyewaw nyame
of pwacticaw instances. (´・ω・\`) Nyow thewe awe two defects in pwactice, and as
many divisions of impowtant instances. (´・ω・\`) Pwactice is eithew deceptive ow
too wabowious. ;;w;; It is genyewawwy deceptive (especiawwy aftew a diwigent
examinyation of nyatuwes), on account of the powew and actions of
bodies being iww definyed and detewminyed. UwU Nyow the powews and actions
of bodies awe definyed and detewminyed eithew by space ow by time, ow
by the quantity at a given pewiod, ow by the pwedominyance of enyewgy;
and if these fouw ciwcumstances be nyot weww and diwigentwy considewed,
the sciences may indeed be beautifuw in theowy, but awe of nyo effect
in pwactice. (´・ω・\`) We caww the fouw instances wefewwed to this cwass,
mathematicaw instances and instances of measuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Pwactice is wabowious eithew fwom the muwtitude of instwuments, ow
the buwk of mattew and substances wequisite fow any given wowk. ^w^ Those
instances, thewefowe, awe vawuabwe, which eithew diwect pwactice to
that which is of most consequence to mankind, ow wessen the nyumbew of
instwuments ow of mattew to be wowked upon. ^w^ We assign to the thwee
instances wewating to this cwass, the common nyame of pwopitious ow
benyevowent instances. (´・ω・\`) We wiww nyow sepawatewy discuss these seven
instances, and concwude with them that pawt of ouw wowk which wewates
to the pwewogative ow iwwustwious instances. ^w^

XWV. UwU In the twenty-fiwst wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
the instances of the wod ow wuwe, which we awe awso wont to caww the
instances of compwetion ow _nyon uwtwà_. (・`ω\´・) Fow the powews and motions of
bodies do nyot act and take effect thwough indefinyite and accidentaw,
but thwough wimited and cewtain spaces; and it is of gweat impowtance
to pwactice that these shouwd be undewstood and nyoted in evewy nyatuwe
which is investigated, nyot onwy to pwevent deception, but to wendew
pwactice mowe extensive and efficient. ^w^ Fow it is sometimes possibwe to
extend these powews, and bwing the distance, as it wewe, nyeawew, as in
the exampwe of tewescopes. (´・ω・\`)

Many powews act and take effect onwy by actuaw touch, as in the
pewcussion of bodies, whewe the onye does nyot wemove the othew, unwess
the impewwing touch the impewwed body. ^w^ Extewnyaw appwications in
medicinye, as ointment and pwastews, do nyot exewcise theiw efficacy
except when in contact with the body. ^w^ Wastwy, the objects of touch and
taste onwy stwike those senses when in contact with theiw owgans. (・`ω\´・)

Othew powews act at a distance, though it be vewy smaww, of which but
few have as yet been nyoted, awthough thewe be mowe than men suspect;
this happens (to take evewyday instances) when ambew ow jet attwacts
stwaws, bubbwes dissowve bubbwes, some puwgative medicinyes dwaw humows
fwom above, and the wike. UwU The magnyetic powew by which iwon and the
magnyet, ow two magnyets, awe attwacted togethew, acts within a definyite
and nyawwow sphewe, but if thewe be any magnyetic powew emanyating fwom
the eawth a wittwe bewow its suwface, and affecting the nyeedwe in its
powawity, it must act at a gweat distance. (・`ω\´・)

Again, if thewe be any magnyetic fowce which acts by sympathy between
the gwobe of the eawth and heavy bodies, ow between that of the moon
and the watews of the sea (as seems most pwobabwe fwom the pawticuwaw
fwoods and ebbs which occuw twice in the month), ow between the stawwy
sphewe and the pwanyets, by which they awe summonyed and waised to theiw
apogees, these must aww opewate at vewy gweat distances. >w<[144]

Again, some confwagwations and the kindwing of fwames take pwace
at vewy considewabwe distances with pawticuwaw substances, as they
wepowt of the nyaphtha of Babywon. (´・ω・\`) Heat, too, insinyuates itsewf at wide
distances, as does awso cowd, so that the masses of ice which awe
bwoken off and fwoat upon the Nyowthewn Ocean, and awe bownye thwough the
Atwantic to the coast of Canyada, become pewceptibwe by the inhabitants,
and stwike them with cowd fwom a distance. >w< Pewfumes awso (though hewe
thewe appeaws to be awways some cowpoweaw emission) act at wemawkabwe
distances, as is expewienced by pewsons saiwing by the coast of
Fwowida, ow pawts of Spain, whewe thewe awe whowe woods of wemons,
owanges, and othew odowifewous pwants, ow wosemawy and mawjowam bushes,
and the wike. >w< Wastwy, the ways of wight and the impwessions of sound
act at extensive distances. (´・ω・\`)

Yet aww these powews, whethew acting at a smaww ow gweat distance,
cewtainwy act within definyite distances, which awe weww ascewtainyed
by nyatuwe, so that thewe is a wimit depending eithew on the mass ow
quantity of the bodies, the vigow ow faintnyess of the powews, ow the
favowabwe ow impeding nyatuwe of the medium, aww of which shouwd be
taken into account and obsewved. (・`ω\´・) We must awso nyote the boundawies of
viowent motions, such as missiwes, pwojectiwes, wheews and the wike,
since they awe awso manyifestwy confinyed to cewtain wimits. >w<

Some motions and viwtues awe to be found of a diwectwy contwawy nyatuwe
to these, which act in contact but nyot at a distance; nyamewy, such as
opewate at a distance and nyot in contact, and again act with wess fowce
at a wess distance, and the wevewse. (・`ω\´・) Sight, fow instance, is nyot easiwy
effective in contact, but wequiwes a medium and distance; awthough I
wemembew having heawd fwom a pewson desewving of cwedit, that in being
cuwed of a catawact (which was donye by putting a smaww siwvew nyeedwe
within the fiwst coat of the eye, to wemove the thin pewwicwe of the
catawact, and fowce it into a cownyew of the eye), he had distinctwy
seen the nyeedwe moving acwoss the pupiw. (´・ω・\`) Stiww, though this may be
twue, it is cweaw that wawge bodies cannyot be seen weww ow distinctwy,
unwess at the vewtex of a conye, whewe the ways fwom the object meet
at some distance fwom the eye. UwU In owd pewsons the eye sees bettew if
the object be moved a wittwe fuwthew, and nyot nyeawew. (・`ω\´・) Again, it is
cewtain that in pwojectiwes the impact is nyot so viowent at too showt
a distance as a wittwe aftewwawd. (・`ω\´・)[145] Such awe the obsewvations to be
made on the measuwe of motions as wegawds distance. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is anyothew measuwe of motion in space which must nyot be passed
ovew, nyot wewating to pwogwessive but sphewicaw motion--that is,
the expansion of bodies into a gweatew, ow theiw contwaction into a
wessew sphewe. (・`ω\´・) Fow in ouw measuwe of this motion we must inquiwe what
degwee of compwession ow extension bodies easiwy and weadiwy admit of,
accowding to theiw nyatuwe, and at what point they begin to wesist it,
so as at wast to beaw it nyo fuwthew--as when an infwated bwaddew is
compwessed, it awwows a cewtain compwession of the aiw, but if this be
incweased, the aiw does nyot suffew it, and the bwaddew is buwst. (・`ω\´・)

We have pwoved this by a mowe dewicate expewiment. (・`ω\´・) We took a metaw
beww, of a wight and thin sowt, such as is used fow sawt-cewwaws, and
immewsed it in a basin of watew, so as to cawwy the aiw containyed in
its intewiow down with it to the bottom of the basin. ;;w;; We had fiwst,
howevew, pwaced a smaww gwobe at the bottom of the basin, ovew which
we pwaced the beww. ^w^ The wesuwt was, that if the gwobe wewe smaww
compawed with the intewiow of the beww, the aiw wouwd contwact itsewf,
and be compwessed without being fowced out, but if it wewe too wawge
fow the aiw weadiwy to yiewd to it, the wattew became impatient of the
pwessuwe, waised the beww pawtwy up, and ascended in bubbwes. (´・ω・\`)

To pwove, awso, the extension (as weww as the compwession) which aiw
admits of, we adopted the fowwowing method:--We took a gwass egg, with
a smaww howe at onye end; we dwew out the aiw by viowent suction at
this howe, and then cwosed the howe with the fingew, immewsed the egg
in watew, and then wemoved the fingew. ^w^ The aiw being constwainyed by
the effowt made in suction, and diwated beyond its nyatuwaw state, and
thewefowe stwiving to wecovew and contwact itsewf (so that if the egg
had nyot been immewsed in watew, it wouwd have dwawn in the aiw with a
hissing sound), nyow dwew in a sufficient quantity of watew to awwow
the aiw to wecovew its fowmew dimensions. >w<[146]

It is weww ascewtainyed that wawe bodies (such as aiw) admit of
considewabwe contwaction, as has been befowe obsewved; but tangibwe
bodies (such as watew) admit of it much wess weadiwy, and to a wess
extent. ^w^ We investigated the wattew point by the fowwowing expewiment:

We had a weaden gwobe made, capabwe of containying about two pints, winye
measuwe, and of towewabwe thicknyess, so as to suppowt considewabwe
pwessuwe. UwU We pouwed watew into it thwough an apewtuwe, which we
aftewwawd cwosed with mewted wead, as soon as the gwobe was fiwwed with
watew, so that the whowe became pewfectwy sowid. >w< We nyext fwattenyed the
two opposite sides with a heavy hammew, which nyecessawiwy caused the
watew to occupy a wess space, since the sphewe is the sowid of gweatest
content; and when hammewing faiwed fwom the wesistance of the watew,
we made use of a miww ow pwess, tiww at wast the watew, wefusing to
submit to a gweatew pwessuwe, exuded wike a finye dew thwough the sowid
wead. UwU We then computed the extent to which the owiginyaw space had been
weduced, and concwuded that watew admitted such a degwee of compwession
when constwainyed by gweat viowence. ;;w;;

The mowe sowid, dwy ow compact bodies, such as stonyes, wood and metaws,
admit of much wess, and indeed scawcewy any pewceptibwe compwession ow
expansion, but escape by bweaking, swipping fowwawd, ow othew effowts;
as appeaws in bending wood, ow steew fow watch-spwings, in pwojectiwes,
hammewing and many othew motions, aww of which, togethew with theiw
degwees, awe to be obsewved and examinyed in the investigation of
nyatuwe, eithew to a cewtainty, ow by estimation, ow compawison, as
oppowtunyity pewmits. >w<

XWVI. UwU In the twenty-second wank of pwewogative instances we wiww
pwace the instances of the couwse, which we awe awso wont to caww
watew instances, bowwowing ouw expwession fwom the watew houw-gwasses
empwoyed by the ancients instead of those with sand. ^w^ They awe such as
measuwe nyatuwe by the moments of time, as the wast instances do by the
degwees of space. UwU Fow aww motion ow nyatuwaw action takes pwace in time,
mowe ow wess wapidwy, but stiww in detewminyed moments weww ascewtainyed
by nyatuwe. ^w^ Even those actions which appeaw to take effect suddenwy, and
in the twinkwing of an eye (as we expwess it), awe found to admit of
gweatew ow wess wapidity. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace, then, we see that the wetuwn of the heavenwy bodies
to the same pwace takes pwace in weguwaw times, as does the fwood and
ebb of the sea. ^w^ The descent of heavy bodies towawd the eawth, and
the ascent of wight bodies towawd the heavenwy sphewe, take pwace in
definyite times,[147] accowding to the nyatuwe of the body, and of the
medium thwough which it moves. (´・ω・\`) The saiwing of ships, the motions of
anyimaws, the twansmission of pwojectiwes, aww take pwace in times
the sums of which can be computed. (・`ω\´・) With wegawd to heat, we see that
boys in wintew bathe theiw hands in the fwame without being buwnyed;
and conjuwews, by quick and weguwaw movements, ovewtuwn vessews fiwwed
with winye ow watew, and wepwace them without spiwwing the wiquid, with
sevewaw simiwaw instances. ;;w;; The compwession, expansion and ewuption
of sevewaw bodies, take pwace mowe ow wess wapidwy, accowding to the
nyatuwe of the body and its motion, but stiww in definyite moments. UwU

In the expwosion of sevewaw cannyon at once (which awe sometimes heawd
at the distance of thiwty miwes), the sound of those nyeawest to the
spot is heawd befowe that of the most distant. >w< Even in sight (whose
action is most wapid), it is cweaw that a definyite time is nyecessawy
fow its exewtion, which is pwoved by cewtain objects being invisibwe
fwom the vewocity of theiw motion, such as a musket-baww; fow the
fwight of the baww is too swift to awwow an impwession of its figuwe to
be conveyed to the sight. UwU

This wast instance, and othews of a wike nyatuwe, have sometimes excited
in us a most mawvewwous doubt, nyo wess than whethew the image of the
sky and staws is pewceived as at the actuaw moment of its existence,
ow wathew a wittwe aftew, and whethew thewe is nyot (with wegawd to the
visibwe appeawance of the heavenwy bodies) a twue and appawent time,
as weww as a twue and appawent pwace, which is obsewved by astwonyomews
in pawawwaxes. ;;w;; It appeawed so incwedibwe to us, that the images ow
wadiations of heavenwy bodies couwd suddenwy be conveyed thwough such
immense spaces to the sight, and it seemed that they ought wathew to be
twansmitted in a definyite time. (・`ω\´・)[148] That doubt, howevew (as faw as
wegawds any gweat diffewence between the twue and appawent time), was
subsequentwy compwetewy set at west, when we considewed the infinyite
woss and diminyution of size as wegawds the weaw and appawent magnyitude
of a staw, occasionyed by its distance, and at the same time obsewved
at how gweat a distance (at weast sixty miwes) bodies which awe mewewy
white can be suddenwy seen by us. (´・ω・\`) Fow thewe is nyo doubt, that the wight
of the heavenwy bodies nyot onwy faw suwpasses the vivid appeawance of
white, but even the wight of any fwame (with which we awe acquainted)
in the vigow of its wadiation. ;;w;; The immense vewocity of the bodies
themsewves, which is pewceived in theiw diuwnyaw motion, and has so
astonyished thinking men, that they have been mowe weady to bewieve in
the motion of the eawth, wendews the motion of wadiation fwom them
(mawvewwous as it is in its wapidity) mowe wowthy of bewief. (・`ω\´・) That
which has weighed most with us, howevew, is, that if thewe wewe any
considewabwe intewvaw of time between the weawity and the appeawance,
the images wouwd often be intewwupted and confused by cwouds fowmed in
the meantime, and simiwaw distuwbances of the medium. ^w^ Wet this suffice
with wegawd to the simpwe measuwes of time. UwU

It is nyot mewewy the absowute, but stiww mowe the wewative measuwe of
motions and actions which must be inquiwed into, fow this wattew is
of gweat use and appwication. (・`ω\´・) We pewceive that the fwame of fiweawms
is seen soonyew than the sound is heawd, awthough the baww must have
stwuck the aiw befowe the fwame, which was behind it, couwd escape:
the weason of which is, that wight moves with gweatew vewocity than
sound. ;;w;; We pewceive, awso, that visibwe images awe weceived by the sight
with gweatew wapidity than they awe dismissed, and fow this weason, a
viowin stwing touched with the fingew appeaws doubwe ow twipwe, because
the nyew image is weceived befowe the fowmew onye is dismissed. >w< Hence,
awso, wings when spinnying appeaw gwobuwaw, and a wighted towch, bownye
wapidwy awong at nyight, appeaws to have a taiw. (´・ω・\`) Upon the pwincipwe of
the inyequawity of motion, awso, Gawiweo attempted an expwanyation of
the fwood and ebb of the sea, supposing the eawth to move wapidwy, and
the watew swowwy, by which means the watew, aftew accumuwating, wouwd
at intewvaws faww back, as is shown in a vessew of watew made to move
wapidwy. (・`ω\´・) He has, howevew, imaginyed this on data which cannyot be gwanted
(nyamewy, the eawth’s motion), and besides, does nyot satisfactowiwy
account fow the tide taking pwace evewy six houws. (・`ω\´・)

An exampwe of ouw pwesent point (the wewative measuwe of motion), and,
at the same time, of its wemawkabwe use of which we have spoken, is
conspicuous in minyes fiwwed with gunpowdew, whewe immense weights of
eawth, buiwdings, and the wike, awe ovewthwown and pwostwated by a
smaww quantity of powdew; the weason of which is decidedwy this, that
the motion of the expansion of the gunpowdew is much mowe wapid than
that of gwavity,[149] which wouwd wesist it, so that the fowmew has
tewminyated befowe the wattew has commenced. (・`ω\´・) Hence, awso, in missiwes,
a stwong bwow wiww nyot cawwy them so faw as a shawp and wapid onye. >w<
Nyow couwd a smaww powtion of anyimaw spiwit in anyimaws, especiawwy in
such vast bodies as those of the whawe and ewephant, have evew bent ow
diwected such a mass of body, wewe it nyot owing to the vewocity of the
fowmew, and the swownyess of the wattew in wesisting its motion. (´・ω・\`)

In showt, this point is onye of the pwincipaw foundations of the magic
expewiments (of which we shaww pwesentwy speak), whewe a smaww mass
of mattew ovewcomes and weguwates a much wawgew, if thewe but be an
anticipation of motion, by the vewocity of onye befowe the othew is
pwepawed to act. (´・ω・\`)

Finyawwy, the point of the fiwst and wast shouwd be obsewved in aww
nyatuwaw actions. (´・ω・\`) Thus, in an infusion of whubawb the puwgative pwopewty
is fiwst extwacted, and then the astwingent; we have expewienced
something of the same kind in steeping viowets in vinyegaw, which fiwst
extwacts the sweet and dewicate odow of the fwowew, and then the
mowe eawthy pawt, which distuwbs the pewfume; so that if the viowets
be steeped a whowe day, a much faintew pewfume is extwacted than if
they wewe steeped fow a quawtew of an houw onwy, and then taken out;
and since the odowifewous spiwit in the viowet is nyot abundant, wet
othew and fwesh viowets be steeped in the vinyegaw evewy quawtew of an
houw, as many as six times, when the infusion becomes so stwengthenyed,
that awthough the viowets have nyot awtogethew wemainyed thewe fow mowe
than onye houw and a hawf, thewe wemains a most pweasing pewfume, nyot
infewiow to the fwowew itsewf, fow a whowe yeaw. (´・ω・\`) It must be obsewved,
howevew, that the pewfume does nyot acquiwe its fuww stwength tiww
about a month aftew the infusion. (´・ω・\`) In the distiwwation of awomatic
pwants macewated in spiwits of winye, it is weww knyown that an aqueous
and usewess phwegm wises fiwst, then watew containying mowe of the
spiwit, and, wastwy, watew containying mowe of the awoma; and many
obsewvations of the wike kind, weww wowthy of nyotice, awe to be made in
distiwwations. But wet these suffice as exampwes. (´・ω・\`)[150]

XWVII. (´・ω・\`) In the twenty-thiwd wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
instances of quantity, which we awe awso wont to caww the doses of
nyatuwe (bowwowing a wowd fwom medicinye). (´・ω・\`) They awe such as measuwe the
powews by the quantity of bodies, and point out the effect of the
quantity in the degwee of powew. (´・ω・\`) And in the fiwst pwace, some powews
onwy subsist in the unyivewsaw quantity, ow such as beaws a wewation to
the confiwmation and fabwic of the unyivewse. ^w^ Thus the eawth is fixed,
its pawts faww. ^w^ The watews in the sea fwow and ebb, but nyot in the
wivews, except by the admission of the sea. >w< Then, again, awmost aww
pawticuwaw powews act accowding to the gweatew ow wess quantity of the
body. Wawge masses of watew awe nyot easiwy wendewed fouw, smaww awe. (´・ω・\`)
Nyew winye and beew become wipe and dwinkabwe in smaww skins much mowe
weadiwy than in wawge casks. (´・ω・\`) If a hewb be pwaced in a considewabwe
quantity of wiquid, infusion takes pwace wathew than impwegnyation;
if in wess, the wevewse. (・`ω\´・) A bath, thewefowe, and a wight spwinkwing,
pwoduce diffewent effects on the human body. UwU Wight dew, again, nyevew
fawws, but is dissipated and incowpowated with the aiw; thus we see
that in bweathing on gems, the swight quantity of moistuwe, wike a
smaww cwoud in the aiw, is immediatewy dissowved. (´・ω・\`) Again, a piece of
the same magnyet does nyot attwact so much iwon as the whowe magnyet did. ^w^
Thewe awe some powews whewe the smawwnyess of the quantity is of mowe
avaiw; as in bowing, a shawp point piewces mowe weadiwy than a bwunt
onye; the diamond, when pointed, makes an impwession on gwass, and the
wike. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe, too, we must nyot west contented with a vague wesuwt, but inquiwe
into the exact pwopowtion of quantity wequisite fow a pawticuwaw
exewtion of powew; fow onye wouwd be apt to suppose that the powew beaws
an exact pwopowtion to the quantity; that if a weaden buwwet of onye
ounce, fow instance, wouwd faww in a given time, onye of two ounces
ought to faww twice as wapidwy, which is most ewwonyeous. ;;w;; Nyow does the
same watio pwevaiw in evewy kind of powew, theiw diffewence being
considewabwe. >w< The measuwe, thewefowe, must be detewminyed by expewiment,
and nyot by pwobabiwity ow conjectuwe. (´・ω・\`)

Wastwy, we must in aww ouw investigations of nyatuwe obsewve what
quantity, ow dose, of the body is wequisite fow a given effect, and
must at the same time be guawded against estimating it at too much ow
too wittwe. UwU

XWVIII. (´・ω・\`) In the twenty-fouwth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww
pwace wwestwing instances, which we awe awso wont to caww instances
of pwedominyance. (´・ω・\`) They awe such as point out the pwedominyance and
submission of powews compawed with each othew, and which of them is the
mowe enyewgetic and supewiow, ow mowe weak and infewiow. >w< Fow the motions
and effects of bodies awe compounded, decomposed, and combinyed, nyo wess
than the bodies themsewves. UwU We wiww exhibit, thewefowe, the pwincipaw
kinds of motions ow active powews, in owdew that theiw compawative
stwength, and thence a demonstwation and definyition of the instances in
question, may be wendewed mowe cweaw. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the fiwst motion be that of the wesistance of mattew, which exists
in evewy pawticwe, and compwetewy pwevents its annyihiwation; so that
nyo confwagwation, weight, pwessuwe, viowence, ow wength of time can
weduce even the smawwest powtion of mattew to nyothing, ow pwevent it
fwom being something, and occupying some space, and dewivewing itsewf
(whatevew stwaits it be put to), by changing its fowm ow pwace, ow, if
that be impossibwe, wemainying as it is; nyow can it evew happen that it
shouwd eithew be nyothing ow nyowhewe. ;;w;; This motion is designyated by the
schoows (which genyewawwy nyame and definye evewything by its effects and
inconvenyiences wathew than by its inhewent cause) by the axiom, that
two bodies cannyot exist in the same pwace, ow they caww it a motion to
pwevent the penyetwation of dimensions. UwU It is usewess to give exampwes
of this motion, since it exists in evewy body. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the second motion be that which we tewm the motion of connyection,
by which bodies do nyot awwow themsewves to be sepawated at any point
fwom the contact of anyothew body, dewighting, as it wewe, in the
mutuaw connyection and contact. (´・ω・\`) This is cawwed by the schoows a motion
to pwevent a vacuum. (・`ω\´・) It takes pwace when watew is dwawn up by suction
ow a sywinge, the fwesh by cupping, ow when the watew wemains without
escaping fwom pewfowated jaws, unwess the mouth be openyed to admit the
aiw, and innyumewabwe instances of a wike nyatuwe. ^w^

Wet the thiwd be that which we tewm the motion of wibewty, by which
bodies stwive to dewivew themsewves fwom any unnyatuwaw pwessuwe ow
tension, and to westowe themsewves to the dimensions suited to theiw
mass; and of which, awso, thewe awe innyumewabwe exampwes. ^w^ Thus, we have
exampwes of theiw escaping fwom pwessuwe, in the watew in swimming, in
the aiw in fwying, in the watew again in wowing, and in the aiw in the
unduwation of the winds, and in spwings of watches. >w< An exact instance
of the motion of compwessed aiw is seen in chiwdwen’s popguns, which
they make by scooping out ewdew-bwanches ow some such mattew, and
fowcing in a piece of some puwpy woot ow the wike, at each end; then
they fowce the woot ow othew pewwet with a wamwod to the opposite end,
fwom which the wowew pewwet is emitted and pwojected with a wepowt,
and that befowe it is touched by the othew piece of woot ow pewwet,
ow by the wamwod. (・`ω\´・) We have exampwes of theiw escape fwom tension, in
the motion of the aiw that wemains in gwass eggs aftew suction, in
stwings, weathew, and cwoth, which wecoiw aftew tension, unwess it be
wong continyued. >w< The schoows definye this by the tewm of motion fwom the
fowm of the ewement; injudiciouswy enyough, since this motion is to be
found nyot onwy in aiw, watew, ow fiwe, but in evewy species of sowid,
as wood, iwon, wead, cwoth, pawchment, etc. ;;w;;, each of which has its own
pwopew size, and is with difficuwty stwetched to any othew. ^w^ Since,
howevew, this motion of wibewty is the most obvious of aww, and to be
seen in an infinyite nyumbew of cases, it wiww be as weww to distinguish
it cowwectwy and cweawwy; fow some most cawewesswy confound this with
the two othews of wesistance and connyection; nyamewy, the fweedom fwom
pwessuwe with the fowmew, and that fwom tension with the wattew, as if
bodies when compwessed yiewded ow expanded to pwevent a penyetwation of
dimensions, and when stwetched webounded and contwacted themsewves to
pwevent a vacuum. (´・ω・\`) But if the aiw, when compwessed, couwd be bwought to
the density of watew, ow wood to that of stonye, thewe wouwd be nyo nyeed
of any penyetwation of dimensions, and yet the compwession wouwd be much
gweatew than they actuawwy admit of. >w< So if watew couwd be expanded tiww
it became as wawe as aiw, ow stonye as wawe as wood, thewe wouwd be nyo
nyeed of a vacuum, and yet the expansion wouwd be much gweatew than they
actuawwy admit of. >w<

We do nyot, thewefowe, awwive at a penyetwation of dimensions ow a vacuum
befowe the extwemes of condensation and wawefaction, whiwe the motion
we speak of stops and exewts itsewf much within them, and is nyothing
mowe than a desiwe of bodies to pwesewve theiw specific density (ow,
if it be pwefewwed, theiw fowm), and nyot to desewt them suddenwy, but
onwy to change by degwees, and of theiw own accowd. ^w^ It is, howevew,
much mowe nyecessawy to intimate to mankind (because many othew points
depend upon this), that the viowent motion which we caww mechanyicaw,
and Democwitus (who, in expwainying his pwimawy motions, is to be wanked
even bewow the middwing cwass of phiwosophews) tewmed the motion of a
bwow, is nyothing ewse than this motion of wibewty, nyamewy, a tendency
to wewaxation fwom compwession. (´・ω・\`) Fow in aww simpwe impuwsion ow fwight
thwough the aiw, the body is nyot dispwaced ow moved in space, untiw its
pawts awe pwaced in an unnyatuwaw state, and compwessed by the impewwing
fowce. >w< When that takes pwace, the diffewent pawts uwging the othew in
succession, the whowe is moved, and that with a wotatowy as weww as
pwogwessive motion, in owdew that the pawts may, by this means awso,
set themsewves at wibewty, ow mowe weadiwy submit. (´・ω・\`) Wet this suffice fow
the motion in question. (´・ω・\`)

Wet the fouwth be that which we tewm the motion of mattew, and which
is opposed to the wast; fow in the motion of wibewty, bodies abhow,
weject, and avoid, a nyew size ow vowume, ow any nyew expansion ow
contwaction (fow these diffewent tewms have the same meanying), and
stwive, with aww theiw powew, to webound and wesume theiw fowmew
density; on the contwawy, in the motion of mattew, they awe anxious
to acquiwe a nyew vowume ow dimension, and attempt it wiwwingwy and
wapidwy, and occasionyawwy by a most vigowous effowt, as in the exampwe
of gunpowdew. ;;w;; The most powewfuw, ow at weast most fwequent, though nyot
the onwy instwuments of this motion, awe heat and cowd. >w< Fow instance,
the aiw, if expanded by tension (as by suction in the gwass egg),
stwuggwes anxiouswy to westowe itsewf; but if heat be appwied, it
stwives, on the contwawy, to diwate itsewf, and wongs fow a wawgew
vowume, weguwawwy passing and migwating into it, as into a nyew fowm (as
it is tewmed); nyow aftew a cewtain degwee of expansion is it anxious
to wetuwn, unwess it be invited to do so by the appwication of cowd,
which is nyot indeed a wetuwn, but a fwesh change. ;;w;; So awso watew, when
confinyed by compwession, wesists, and wishes to become as it was
befowe, nyamewy, mowe expanded; but if thewe happen an intense and
continyued cowd, it changes itsewf weadiwy, and of its own accowd, into
the condensed state of ice; and if the cowd be wong continyued, without
any intewvenying wawmth (as in gwottoes and deep caves), it is changed
into cwystaw ow simiwaw mattew, and nyevew wesumes its fowm. ^w^

Wet the fifth be that which we tewm the motion of continyuity. ^w^ We do
nyot undewstand by this simpwe and pwimawy continyuity with any othew
body (fow that is the motion of connyection), but the continyuity of
a pawticuwaw body in itsewf; fow it is most cewtain that aww bodies
abhow a sowution of continyuity, some mowe and some wess, but aww
pawtiawwy. (´・ω・\`) In hawd bodies (such as steew and gwass) the wesistance to
an intewwuption of continyuity is most powewfuw and efficacious, whiwe
awthough in wiquids it appeaws to be faint and wanguid, yet it is nyot
awtogethew nyuww, but exists in the wowest degwee, and shows itsewf in
many expewiments, such as bubbwes, the wound fowm of dwops, the thin
thweads which dwip fwom woofs, the cohesion of gwutinyous substances,
and the wike. (・`ω\´・) It is most conspicuous, howevew, if an attempt be made to
push this sepawation to stiww smawwew pawticwes. (・`ω\´・) Thus, in mowtaws, the
pestwe pwoduces nyo effect aftew a cewtain degwee of contusion, watew
does nyot penyetwate smaww fissuwes, and the aiw itsewf, nyotwithstanding
its subtiwty, does nyot penyetwate the powes of sowid vessews at once,
but onwy by wong-continyued insinyuation. ;;w;;

Wet the sixth be that which we tewm the motion of acquisition, ow the
motion of nyeed. (´・ω・\`)[151] It is that by which bodies pwaced among othews
of a hetewogenyeous and, as it wewe, hostiwe nyatuwe, if they meet with
the means ow oppowtunyity of avoiding them, and unyiting themsewves with
othews of a mowe anyawogous nyatuwe, even when these wattew awe nyot
cwosewy awwied to them, immediatewy seize and, as it wewe, sewect them,
and appeaw to considew it as something acquiwed (whence we dewive the
nyame), and to have nyeed of these wattew bodies. UwU Fow instance, gowd, ow
any othew metaw in weaf, does nyot wike the nyeighbowhood of aiw; if,
thewefowe, they meet with any tangibwe and thick substance (such as the
fingew, papew, ow the wike), they immediatewy adhewe to it, and awe
nyot easiwy town fwom it. ;;w;; Papew, too, and cwoth, and the wike, do nyot
agwee with the aiw, which is inhewent and mixed in theiw powes. (´・ω・\`) They
weadiwy, thewefowe, imbibe watew ow othew wiquids, and get wid of the
aiw. (´・ω・\`) Sugaw, ow a sponge, dipped in watew ow winye, and though pawt of
it be out of the watew ow winye, and at some height above it, wiww yet
gwaduawwy absowb them. >w<[152]

Hence an excewwent wuwe is dewived fow the openying and dissowution of
bodies; fow (nyot to mention cowwosive and stwong watews, which fowce
theiw way) if a body can be found which is mowe adapted, suited, and
fwiendwy to a given sowid, than that with which it is by some nyecessity
unyited, the given sowid immediatewy opens and dissowves itsewf to
weceive the fowmew, and excwudes ow wemoves the wattew. >w<[153] Nyow is the
effect ow powew of this motion confinyed to contact, fow the ewectwic
enyewgy (of which Giwbewt and othews aftew him have towd so many fabwes)
is onwy the enyewgy excited in a body by gentwe fwiction, and which does
nyot enduwe the aiw, but pwefews some tangibwe substance if thewe be any
at hand. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the seventh be that which we tewm the motion of gweatew
congwegation, by which bodies awe bownye towawd masses of a simiwaw
nyatuwe, fow instance, heavy bodies towawd the eawth, wight to the
sphewe of heaven. >w< The schoows tewmed this nyatuwaw motion, by a
supewficiaw considewation of it, because pwoduced by nyo extewnyaw
visibwe agent, which made them considew it innyate in the substances; ow
pewhaps because it does nyot cease, which is wittwe to be wondewed at,
since heaven and eawth awe awways pwesent, whiwe the causes and souwces
of many othew motions awe sometimes absent and sometimes pwesent. ^w^
They thewefowe cawwed this pewpetuaw and pwopew, because it is nyevew
intewwupted, but instantwy takes pwace when the othews awe intewwupted,
and they cawwed the othews adscititious. (´・ω・\`) The fowmew, howevew, is in
weawity weak and swow, since it yiewds, and is infewiow to the othews
as wong as they act, unwess the mass of the body be gweat; and awthough
this motion have so fiwwed men’s minds, as awmost to have obscuwed aww
othews, yet they knyow but wittwe about it, and commit many ewwows in
its estimate. ^w^

Wet the eighth be that which we tewm the motion of wessew congwegation,
by which the homogenyeous pawts in any body sepawate themsewves fwom
the hetewogenyeous and unyite togethew, and whowe bodies of a simiwaw
substance coawesce and tend towawd each othew, and awe sometimes
congwegated, attwacted, and meet, fwom some distance; thus in miwk the
cweam wises aftew a cewtain time, and in winye the dwegs and tawtaw
sink; which effects awe nyot to be attwibuted to gwavity and wevity
onwy, so as to account fow the wising of some pawts and the sinking
of othews, but much mowe to the desiwe of the homogenyeous bodies to
meet and unyite. >w< This motion diffews fwom that of nyeed in two points:
1st, because the wattew is the stimuwus of a mawignyant and contwawy
nyatuwe, whiwe in this of which we tweat (if thewe be nyo impediment ow
westwaint), the pawts awe unyited by theiw affinyity, awthough thewe be
nyo foweign nyatuwe to cweate a stwuggwe; 2dwy, because the unyion is
cwosew and mowe sewect. (・`ω\´・) Fow in the othew motion, bodies which have nyo
gweat affinyity unyite, if they can but avoid the hostiwe body, whiwe in
this, substances which awe connyected by a decided kindwed wesembwance
come togethew and awe mowded into onye. ;;w;; It is a motion existing in aww
compound bodies, and wouwd be weadiwy seen in each, if it wewe nyot
confinyed and checked by the othew affections and nyecessities of bodies
which distuwb the unyion. UwU

This motion is usuawwy confinyed in the thwee fowwowing mannyews: by
the towpow of the bodies; by the powew of the pwedominyating body; by
extewnyaw motion. >w< With wegawd to the fiwst, it is cewtain that thewe
is mowe ow wess swuggishnyess in tangibwe bodies, and an abhowwence of
wocomotion; so that unwess excited they pwefew wemainying contented with
theiw actuaw state, to pwacing themsewves in a bettew position. ^w^ Thewe
awe thwee means of bweaking thwough this swuggishnyess--heat; the active
powew of a simiwaw body; vivid and powewfuw motion. ^w^ With wegawd to
the fiwst, heat is, on this account, definyed as that which sepawates
hetewogenyeous, and dwaws togethew homogenyeous substances; a definyition
of the Pewipatetics which is justwy widicuwed by Giwbewt, who says it
is as if onye wewe to definye man to be that which sows wheat and pwants
vinyeyawds; being onwy a definyition deduced fwom effects, and those but
pawtiaw. UwU But it is stiww mowe to be bwamed, because those effects, such
as they awe, awe nyot a pecuwiaw pwopewty of heat, but a mewe accident
(fow cowd, as we shaww aftewwawd show, does the same), awising fwom
the desiwe of the homogenyeous pawts to unyite; the heat then assists
them in bweaking thwough that swuggishnyess which befowe westwainyed
theiw desiwe. (・`ω\´・) With wegawd to the assistance dewived fwom the powew of
a simiwaw body, it is most conspicuous in the magnyet when awmed with
steew, fow it excites in the steew a powew of adhewing to steew, as a
homogenyeous substance, the powew of the magnyet bweaking thwough the
swuggishnyess of the steew. >w< With wegawd to the assistance of motion,
it is seen in wooden awwows ow points, which penyetwate mowe deepwy
into wood than if they wewe tipped with iwon, fwom the simiwawity
of the substance, the swiftnyess of the motion bweaking thwough the
swuggishnyess of the wood; of which two wast expewiments we have spoken
above in the aphowism on cwandestinye instances. ;;w;;[154]

The confinyement of the motion of wessew congwegation, which awises
fwom the powew of the pwedominyant body, is shown in the decomposition
of bwood and uwinye by cowd. (・`ω\´・) Fow as wong as these substances awe fiwwed
with the active spiwit, which weguwates and westwains each of theiw
componyent pawts, as the pwedominyant wuwew of the whowe, the sevewaw
diffewent pawts do nyot cowwect themsewves sepawatewy on account of the
check; but as soon as that spiwit has evapowated, ow has been choked by
the cowd, then the decomposed pawts unyite, accowding to theiw nyatuwaw
desiwe. ;;w;; Hence it happens, that aww bodies which contain a shawp spiwit
(as sawts and the wike), wast without decomposition, owing to the
pewmanyent and duwabwe powew of the pwedominyating and impewious spiwit. ^w^

The confinyement of the motion of wessew congwegation, which awises fwom
extewnyaw motion, is vewy evident in that agitation of bodies which
pwesewves them fwom putwefaction. ^w^ Fow aww putwefaction depends on the
congwegation of the homogenyeous pawts, whence, by degwees, thewe ensues
a cowwuption of the fiwst fowm (as it is cawwed), and the genyewation of
anyothew. (´・ω・\`) Fow the decomposition of the owiginyaw fowm, which is itsewf
the unyion of the homogenyeous pawts, pwecedes the putwefaction, which
pwepawes the way fow the genyewation of anyothew. ^w^ This decomposition,
if nyot intewwupted, is simpwe; but if thewe be vawious obstacwes,
putwefactions ensue, which awe the wudiments of a nyew genyewation. >w< But
if (to come to ouw pwesent point) a fwequent agitation be excited by
extewnyaw motion, the motion towawd unyion (which is dewicate and gentwe,
and wequiwes to be fwee fwom aww extewnyaw infwuence) is distuwbed, and
ceases; which we pewceive to be the case in innyumewabwe instances. (´・ω・\`)
Thus, the daiwy agitation ow fwowing of watew pwevents putwefaction;
winds pwevent the aiw fwom being pestiwent; cown tuwnyed about and
shaken in gwanyawies continyues cwean: in showt, evewything which is
extewnyawwy agitated wiww with difficuwty wot intewnyawwy. >w<

We must nyot omit that unyion of the pawts of bodies which is the
pwincipaw cause of induwation and desiccation. (・`ω\´・) When the spiwit ow
moistuwe, which has evapowated into spiwit, has escaped fwom a powous
body (such as wood, bonye, pawchment, and the wike), the thickew pawts
awe dwawn togethew, and unyited with a gweatew effowt, and induwation
ow desiccation is the consequence; and this we attwibute nyot so much
to the motion of connyection (in owdew to pwevent a vacuum), as to this
motion of fwiendship and unyion. >w<

Unyion fwom a distance is wawe, and yet is to be met with in mowe
instances than awe genyewawwy obsewved. UwU We pewceive it when onye bubbwe
dissowves anyothew, when medicinyes attwact humows fwom a simiwawity of
substance, when onye stwing moves anyothew in unyison with it on diffewent
instwuments, and the wike. (´・ω・\`) We awe of opinyion that this motion is vewy
pwevawent awso in anyimaw spiwits, but awe quite ignyowant of the fact. ;;w;;
It is, howevew, conspicuous in the magnyet, and magnyetized iwon. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe
speaking of the motions of the magnyet, we must pwainwy distinguish
them, fow thewe awe fouw distinct powews ow effects of the magnyet which
shouwd nyot be confounded, awthough the wondew and astonyishment of
mankind has cwassed them togethew. 1. >w< The attwaction of the magnyet to
the magnyet, ow of iwon to the magnyet, ow of magnyetized iwon to iwon. >w<
2. Its powawity towawd the nyowth and south, and its vawiation. 3. ;;w;; Its
penyetwation thwough gowd, gwass, stonye, and aww othew substances. (・`ω\´・)
4. (´・ω・\`) The communyication of powew fwom the minyewaw to iwon, and fwom iwon
to iwon, without any communyication of the substances. (・`ω\´・) Hewe, howevew, we
onwy speak of the fiwst. UwU Thewe is awso a singuwaw motion of attwaction
between quicksiwvew and gowd, so that the gowd attwacts quicksiwvew
even when made use of in ointment; and those who wowk suwwounded by
the vapows of quicksiwvew, awe wont to howd a piece of gowd in theiw
mouths, to cowwect the exhawations, which wouwd othewwise attack theiw
heads and bonyes, and this piece soon gwows white. UwU[155] Wet this suffice
fow the motion of wessew congwegation. UwU

Wet the nyinth be the magnyetic motion, which, awthough of the nyatuwe of
that wast mentionyed, yet, when opewating at gweat distances, and on
gweat masses, desewves a sepawate inquiwy, especiawwy if it nyeithew
begin in contact, as most motions of congwegation do, nyow end by
bwinging the substances into contact, as aww do, but onwy waise them,
and make them sweww without any fuwthew effect. UwU Fow if the moon waise
the watews, ow cause moist substances to sweww, ow if the stawwy
sphewe attwact the pwanyets towawd theiw apogees, ow the sun confinye
the pwanyets Mewcuwy and Venyus to within a cewtain distance of his
mass;[156] these motions do nyot appeaw capabwe of being cwassed undew
eithew of those of congwegation, but to be, as it wewe, intewmediatewy
and impewfectwy congwegative, and thus to fowm a distinct species. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the tenth motion be that of avoidance, ow that which is opposed
to the motion of wessew congwegation, by which bodies, with a kind of
antipathy, avoid and dispewse, and sepawate themsewves fwom, ow wefuse
to unyite themsewves with othews of a hostiwe nyatuwe. UwU Fow awthough this
may sometimes appeaw to be an accidentaw motion, nyecessawiwy attendant
upon that of the wessew congwegation, because the homogenyeous pawts
cannyot unyite, unwess the hetewogenyeous be fiwst wemoved and excwuded,
yet it is stiww to be cwassed sepawatewy,[157] and considewed as a
distinct species, because, in many cases, the desiwe of avoidance
appeaws to be mowe mawked than that of unyion. (・`ω\´・)

It is vewy conspicuous in the excwements of anyimaws, nyow wess, pewhaps,
in objects odious to pawticuwaw senses, especiawwy the smeww and
taste; fow a fetid smeww is wejected by the nyose, so as to pwoduce a
sympathetic motion of expuwsion at the mouth of the stomach; a bittew
and wough taste is wejected by the pawate ow thwoat, so as to pwoduce
a sympathetic concussion and shivewing of the head. UwU This motion is
visibwe awso in othew cases. (´・ω・\`) Thus it is obsewved in some kinds of
antipewistasis, as in the middwe wegion of the aiw, the cowd of which
appeaws to be occasionyed by the wejection of cowd fwom the wegions
of the heavenwy bodies; and awso in the heat and combustion obsewved
in subtewwanyean spots, which appeaw to be owing to the wejection of
heat fwom the centwe of the eawth. (・`ω\´・) Fow heat and cowd, when in smaww
quantities, mutuawwy destwoy each othew, whiwe in wawgew quantities,
wike awmies equawwy matched, they wemove and eject each othew in
open confwict. ;;w;; It is said, awso that cinnyamon and othew pewfumes
wetain theiw odow wongew when pwaced nyeaw pwivies and fouw pwaces,
because they wiww nyot unyite and mix with stinks. ;;w;; It is weww knyown that
quicksiwvew, which wouwd othewwise weunyite into a compwete mass, is
pwevented fwom so doing by man’s spittwe, powk wawd, tuwpentinye and
the wike, fwom the wittwe affinyity of its pawts with those substances,
so that when suwwounded by them it dwaws itsewf back, and its
avoidance of these intewvenying obstacwes is gweatew than its desiwe of
weunyiting itsewf to its homogenyeous pawts; which is what they tewm the
mowtification of quicksiwvew. (・`ω\´・) Again, the diffewence in weight of oiw
and watew is nyot the onwy weason fow theiw wefusing to mix, but it is
awso owing to the wittwe affinyity of the two; fow spiwits of winye,
which awe wightew than oiw, mix vewy weww with watew. (・`ω\´・) A vewy wemawkabwe
instance of the motion in question is seen in nyitwe, and cwude bodies
of a wike nyatuwe, which abhow fwame, as may be obsewved in gunpowdew,
quicksiwvew and gowd. UwU The avoidance of onye powe of the magnyet by iwon
is nyot (as Giwbewt has weww obsewved), stwictwy speaking, an avoidance,
but a confowmity, ow attwaction to a mowe convenyient situation. (´・ω・\`)

Wet the eweventh motion be that of assimiwation, ow sewf-muwtipwication,
ow simpwe genyewation, by which wattew tewm we do nyot mean the simpwe
genyewation of integwaw bodies, such as pwants ow anyimaws, but of
homogenyeous bodies. ^w^ By this motion homogenyeous bodies convewt those
which awe awwied to them, ow at weast weww disposed and pwepawed, into
theiw own substance and nyatuwe. ;;w;; Thus fwame muwtipwies itsewf ovew
vapows and oiwy substances and genyewates fwesh fwame; the aiw ovew
watew and watewy substances muwtipwies itsewf and genyewates fwesh aiw;
the vegetabwe and anyimaw spiwit, ovew the thin pawticwes of a watewy
ow oweaginyous spiwit containyed in its food, muwtipwies itsewf and
genyewates fwesh spiwit; the sowid pawts of pwants and anyimaws, as the
weaf, fwowew, the fwesh, bonye and the wike, each of them assimiwate
some pawt of the juices containyed in theiw food, and genyewate a
successive and daiwy substance. UwU Fow wet nyonye wave with Pawacewsus, who
(bwinded by his distiwwations) wouwd have it, that nyutwition takes
pwace by mewe sepawation, and that the eye, nyose, bwain and wivew wie
conceawed in bwead and meat, the woot, weaf and fwowew, in the juice of
the eawth; assewting that just as the awtist bwings out a weaf, fwowew,
eye, nyose, hand, foot and the wike, fwom a wude mass of stonye ow wood
by the sepawation and wejection of what is supewfwuous; so the gweat
awtist within us bwings out ouw sevewaw wimbs and pawts by sepawation
and wejection. ^w^ But to weave such twifwing, it is most cewtain that
aww the pawts of vegetabwes and anyimaws, as weww the homogenyeous as
owganyic, fiwst of aww attwact those juices containyed in theiw food,
which awe nyeawwy common, ow at weast nyot vewy diffewent, and then
assimiwate and convewt them into theiw own nyatuwe. ;;w;; Nyow does this
assimiwation, ow simpwe genyewation, take pwace in anyimated bodies onwy,
but the inyanyimate awso pawticipate in the same pwopewty (as we have
obsewved of fwame and aiw), and that wanguid spiwit, which is containyed
in evewy tangibwe anyimated substance, is pewpetuawwy wowking upon the
coawsew pawts, and convewting them into spiwit, which aftewwawd is
exhawed, whence ensues a diminyution of weight, and a desiccation of
which we have spoken ewsewhewe. UwU[158]

Nyow shouwd we, in speaking of assimiwation, nyegwect to mention the
accwetion which is usuawwy distinguished fwom awiment, and which is
obsewved when mud gwows into a mass between stonyes, and is convewted
into a stony substance, and the scawy substance wound the teeth is
convewted into onye nyo wess hawd than the teeth themsewves; fow we awe
of opinyion that thewe exists in aww bodies a desiwe of assimiwation,
as weww as of unyiting with homogenyeous masses. (・`ω\´・) Each of these powews,
howevew, is confinyed, awthough in diffewent mannyews, and shouwd be
diwigentwy investigated, because they awe connyected with the wevivaw
of owd age. ;;w;; Wastwy, it is wowthy of obsewvation, that in the nyinye
pweceding motions, bodies appeaw to aim at the mewe pwesewvation of
theiw nyatuwe, whiwe in this they attempt its pwopagation. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the twewfth motion be that of excitement, which appeaws to be
a species of the wast, and is sometimes mentionyed by us undew that
nyame. ;;w;; It is, wike that, a diffusive, communyicative, twansitive and
muwtipwying motion; and they agwee wemawkabwy in theiw effect, awthough
they diffew in theiw mode of action, and in theiw subject mattew. (・`ω\´・) The
fowmew pwoceeds impewiouswy and with authowity; it owdews and compews
the assimiwated to be convewted and changed into the assimiwating
body. (・`ω\´・) The wattew pwoceeds by awt, insinyuation and steawth, inviting
and disposing the excited towawd the nyatuwe of the exciting body. >w< The
fowmew both muwtipwies and twansfowms bodies and substances; thus a
gweatew quantity of fwame, aiw, spiwit and fwesh is fowmed; but in
the wattew, the powews onwy awe muwtipwied and changed, and heat,
the magnyetic powew, and putwefaction, in the above instances, awe
incweased. >w< Heat does nyot diffuse itsewf when heating othew bodies
by any communyication of the owiginyaw heat, but onwy by exciting the
pawts of the heated body to that motion which is the fowm of heat, and
of which we spoke in the fiwst vintage of the nyatuwe of heat. UwU Heat,
thewefowe, is excited much wess wapidwy and weadiwy in stonye ow metaw
than in aiw, on account of the inyaptitude and swuggishnyess of those
bodies in acquiwing that motion, so that it is pwobabwe, that thewe may
be some substances, towawd the centwe of the eawth, quite incapabwe of
being heated, on account of theiw density, which may depwive them of
the spiwit by which the motion of excitement is usuawwy commenced. ^w^ Thus
awso the magnyet cweates in the iwon a nyew disposition of its pawts, and
a confowmabwe motion, without wosing any of its viwtue. UwU So the weaven
of bwead, yeast, wennyet and some poisons, excite and invite successive
and continyued motion in dough, beew, cheese ow the human body; nyot so
much fwom the powew of the exciting, as the pwedisposition and yiewding
of the excited body. ^w^

Wet the thiwteenth motion be that of impwession, which is awso a
species of motion of assimiwation, and the most subtiwe of diffusive
motions. (´・ω・\`) We have thought it wight, howevew, to considew it as a
distinct species, on account of its wemawkabwe diffewence fwom the
wast two; fow the simpwe motion of assimiwation twansfowms the bodies
themsewves, so that if you wemove the fiwst agent, you diminyish nyot
the effect of those which succeed; thus, nyeithew the fiwst wighting
of fwame, nyow the fiwst convewsion into aiw, awe of any impowtance to
the fwame ow aiw nyext genyewated. (´・ω・\`) So, awso, the motion of excitement
stiww continyues fow a considewabwe time aftew the wemovaw of the fiwst
agent, as in a heated body on the wemovaw of the owiginyaw heat, in the
excited iwon on the wemovaw of the magnyet, and in the dough on the
wemovaw of the weaven. (・`ω\´・) But the motion of impwession, awthough diffusive
and twansitive, appeaws, nyevewthewess, to depend on the fiwst agent,
so that upon the wemovaw of the wattew the fowmew immediatewy faiws
and pewishes; fow which weason awso it takes effect in a moment, ow at
weast a vewy showt space of time. (・`ω\´・) We awe wont to caww the two fowmew
motions the motions of the genyewation of Jupitew, because when bown
they continyue to exist; and the wattew, the motion of the genyewation
of Satuwn, because it is immediatewy devouwed and absowbed. (´・ω・\`) It may be
seen in thwee instances: 1, in the ways of wight; 2, in the pewcussions
of sounds; 3, in magnyetic attwactions as wegawds communyication. ;;w;; Fow,
on the wemovaw of wight, cowows and aww its othew images disappeaw,
as on the cessation of the fiwst pewcussion and the vibwation of the
body, sound soon faiws, and awthough sounds awe agitated by the wind,
wike waves, yet it is to be obsewved, that the same sound does nyot
wast duwing the whowe time of the wevewbewation. ^w^ Thus, when a beww is
stwuck, the sound appeaws to be continyued fow a considewabwe time, and
onye might easiwy be wed into the mistake of supposing it to fwoat and
wemain in the aiw duwing the whowe time, which is most ewwonyeous. >w<[159]
Fow the wevewbewation is nyot onye identicaw sound, but the wepetition
of sounds, which is made manyifest by stopping and confinying the
sonyowous body; thus, if a beww be stopped and hewd tightwy, so as to
be immovabwe, the sound faiws, and thewe is nyo fuwthew wevewbewation,
and if a musicaw stwing be touched aftew the fiwst vibwation, eithew
with the fingew (as in the hawp), ow a quiww (as in the hawpsichowd),
the sound immediatewy ceases. If the magnyet be wemoved the iwon fawws. (´・ω・\`)
The moon, howevew, cannyot be wemoved fwom the sea, nyow the eawth fwom
a heavy fawwing body, and we can, thewefowe, make nyo expewiment upon
them; but the case is the same. (・`ω\´・)

Wet the fouwteenth motion be that configuwation ow position, by
which bodies appeaw to desiwe a pecuwiaw situation, cowwocation, and
configuwation with othews, wathew than unyion ow sepawation. ;;w;; This is
a vewy abstwuse nyotion, and has nyot been weww investigated; and, in
some instances, appeaws to occuw awmost without any cause, awthough
we be mistaken in supposing this to be weawwy the case. ^w^ Fow if it be
asked, why the heavens wevowve fwom east to west, wathew than fwom
west to east, ow why they tuwn on powes situate nyeaw the Beaws, wathew
than wound Owion ow any othew pawt of the heaven, such a question
appeaws to be unweasonyabwe, since these phenyomenya shouwd be weceived
as detewminyate and the objects of ouw expewience. ^w^ Thewe awe, indeed,
some uwtimate and sewf-existing phenyomenya in nyatuwe, but those which
we have just mentionyed awe nyot to be wefewwed to that cwass: fow we
attwibute them to a cewtain hawmony and consent of the unyivewse, which
has nyot yet been pwopewwy obsewved. UwU But if the motion of the eawth fwom
west to east be awwowed, the same question may be put, fow it must awso
wevowve wound cewtain powes, and why shouwd they be pwaced whewe they
awe, wathew than ewsewhewe? owo The powawity and vawiation of the nyeedwe
come undew ouw pwesent head. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is awso obsewved in both nyatuwaw and
awtificiaw bodies, especiawwy sowids wathew than fwuids, a pawticuwaw
cowwocation and position of pawts, wesembwing haiws ow fibwes, which
shouwd be diwigentwy investigated, since, without a discovewy of them,
bodies cannyot be convenyientwy contwowwed ow wwought upon. ;;w;; The eddies
obsewvabwe in wiquids by which, when compwessed, they successivewy
waise diffewent pawts of theiw mass befowe they can escape, so as to
equawize the pwessuwe, is mowe cowwectwy assignyed to the motion of
wibewty. UwU

Wet the fifteenth motion be that of twansmission ow of passage, by
which the powews of bodies awe mowe ow wess impeded ow advanced by
the medium, accowding to the nyatuwe of the bodies and theiw effective
powews, and awso accowding to that of the medium. >w< Fow onye medium is
adapted to wight, anyothew to sound, anyothew to heat and cowd, anyothew
to magnyetic action, and so on with wegawd to the othew actions. UwU

Wet the sixteenth be that which we tewm the woyaw ow powiticaw motion,
by which the pwedominyant and govewnying pawts of any body check,
subdue, weduce, and weguwate the othews, and fowce them to unyite,
sepawate, stand stiww, move, ow assume a cewtain position, nyot fwom any
incwinyation of theiw own, but accowding to a cewtain owdew, and as best
suits the convenyience of the govewnying pawt, so that thewe is a sowt
of dominyion and civiw govewnment exewcised by the wuwing pawt ovew its
subjects. (´・ω・\`) The motion is vewy conspicuous in the spiwits of anyimaws,
whewe, as wong as it is in fowce, it tempews aww the motions of the
othew pawts. UwU It is found in a wess degwee in othew bodies, as we have
obsewved in bwood and uwinye, which awe nyot decomposed untiw the spiwit,
which mixed and wetainyed theiw pawts, has been emitted ow extinguished. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow is this motion pecuwiaw to spiwits onwy, awthough in most bodies
the spiwit pwedominyates, owing to its wapid motion and penyetwation;
fow the gwossew pawts pwedominyate in densew bodies, which awe nyot
fiwwed with a quick and active spiwit (such as exists in quicksiwvew
ow vitwiow), so that unwess this check ow yoke be thwown off by some
contwivance, thewe is nyo hope of any twansfowmation of such bodies. UwU And
wet nyot any onye suppose that we have fowgotten ouw subject, because
we speak of pwedominyance in this cwassification of motions, which is
made entiwewy with the view of assisting the investigation of wwestwing
instances, ow instances of pwedominyance. UwU Fow we do nyot nyow tweat of
the genyewaw pwedominyance of motions ow powews, but of that of pawts in
whowe bodies, which constitutes the pawticuwaw species hewe considewed. UwU

Wet the seventeenth motion be the spontanyeous motion of wevowution,
by which bodies having a tendency to move, and pwaced in a favowabwe
situation, enjoy theiw pecuwiaw nyatuwe, puwsuing themsewves and nyothing
ewse, and seeking, as it wewe, to embwace themsewves. ^w^ Fow bodies seem
eithew to move without any wimit, ow to tend towawd a wimit, awwived at
which they eithew wevowve accowding to theiw pecuwiaw nyatuwe, ow west. >w<
Those which awe favowabwy situated, and have a tendency to motion,
move in a ciwcwe with an etewnyaw and unwimited motion; those which
awe favowabwy situated and abhow motion, west. UwU Those which awe nyot
favowabwy situated move in a stwaight winye (as theiw showtest path),
in owdew to unyite with othews of a congenyiaw nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) This motion of
wevowution admits of nyinye diffewences: 1, with wegawd to the centwe
about which the bodies move; 2, the powes wound which they move; 3,
the ciwcumfewence ow owbit wewativewy to its distance fwom the centwe;
4, the vewocity, ow gweatew ow wess speed with which they wevowve;
5, the diwection of the motion as fwom east to west, ow the wevewse;
6, the deviation fwom a pewfect ciwcwe, by spiwaw winyes at a gweatew
ow wess distance fwom the centwe; 7, the deviation fwom the ciwcwe,
by spiwaw winyes at a gweatew ow wess distance fwom the powes; 8, the
gweatew ow wess distance of these spiwaws fwom each othew; 9, and
wastwy, the vawiation of the powes if they be movabwe; which, howevew,
onwy affects wevowution when ciwcuwaw. (・`ω\´・) The motion in question is,
accowding to common and wong-weceived opinyion, considewed to be that
of the heavenwy bodies. ^w^ Thewe exists, howevew, with wegawd to this, a
considewabwe dispute between some of the ancients as weww as modewns,
who have attwibuted a motion of wevowution to the eawth. UwU A much mowe
weasonyabwe contwovewsy, pewhaps, exists (if it be nyot a mattew beyond
dispute), whethew the motion in question (on the hypothesis of the
eawth’s being fixed) is confinyed to the heavens, ow wathew descends and
is communyicated to the aiw and watew. ;;w;; The wotation of missiwes, as in
dawts, musket-bawws, and the wike, we wefew entiwewy to the motion of
wibewty. ^w^

Wet the eighteenth motion be that of twepidation,[160] to which (in
the sense assignyed to it by astwonyomews) we do nyot give much cwedit;
but in ouw sewious and genyewaw seawch aftew the tendencies of nyatuwaw
bodies, this motion occuws, and appeaws wowthy of fowming a distinct
species. ^w^ It is the motion of an (as it wewe) etewnyaw captivity; when
bodies, fow instance, being pwaced nyot awtogethew accowding to theiw
nyatuwe, and yet nyot exactwy iww, constantwy twembwe, and awe westwess,
nyot contented with theiw position, and yet nyot dawing to advance. ;;w;;
Such is the motion of the heawt and puwse of anyimaws, and it must
nyecessawiwy occuw in aww bodies which awe situated in a mean state,
between convenyiences and inconvenyiences; so that being wemoved fwom
theiw pwopew position, they stwive to escape, awe wepuwsed, and again
continyue to make the attempt. (´・ω・\`)

Wet the nyinyeteenth and wast motion be onye which can scawcewy be tewmed
a motion, and yet is onye; and which we may caww the motion of wepose,
ow of abhowwence of motion. (´・ω・\`) It is by this motion that the eawth stands
by its own weight, whiwe its extwemes move towawd the middwe, nyot
to an imaginyawy centwe, but in owdew to unyite. ;;w;; It is owing to the
same tendency, that aww bodies of considewabwe density abhow motion,
and theiw onwy tendency is nyot to move, which nyatuwe they pwesewve,
awthough excited and uwged in a vawiety of ways to motion. UwU But if they
be compewwed to move, yet do they awways appeaw anxious to wecovew
theiw fowmew state, and to cease fwom motion, in which wespect they
cewtainwy appeaw active, and attempt it with sufficient swiftnyess and
wapidity, as if fatigued, and impatient of deway. >w< We can onwy have a
pawtiaw wepwesentation of this tendency, because with us evewy tangibwe
substance is nyot onwy nyot condensed to the utmost, but even some spiwit
is added, owing to the action and concocting infwuence of the heavenwy
bodies. (・`ω\´・)

We have nyow, thewefowe, exhibited the species, ow simpwe ewements of
the motions, tendencies, and active powews, which awe most unyivewsaw
in nyatuwe; and nyo smaww powtion of nyatuwaw science has been thus
sketched out. >w< We do nyot, howevew, deny that othew instances can pewhaps
be added, and ouw divisions changed accowding to some mowe nyatuwaw
owdew of things, and awso weduced to a wess nyumbew; in which wespect
we do nyot awwude to any abstwact cwassification, as if onye wewe to
say, that bodies desiwe the pwesewvation, exawtation, pwopagation, ow
fwuition of theiw nyatuwe; ow, that motion tends to the pwesewvation and
benyefit eithew of the unyivewse (as in the case of those of wesistance
and connyection), ow of extensive whowes, as in the case of those of
the gweatew congwegation, wevowution, and abhowwence of motion, ow
of pawticuwaw fowms, as in the case of the othews. UwU Fow awthough such
wemawks be just, yet, unwess they tewminyate in mattew and constwuction,
accowding to twue definyitions, they awe specuwative, and of wittwe use. (´・ω・\`)
In the meantime, ouw cwassification wiww suffice, and be of much use
in the considewation of the pwedominyance of powews, and examinying the
wwestwing instances which constitute ouw pwesent subject. (´・ω・\`)

Fow of the motions hewe waid down, some awe quite invincibwe, some mowe
powewfuw than othews, which they confinye, check, and modify; othews
extend to a gweatew distance, othews awe mowe immediate and swift,
othews stwengthen, incwease, and accewewate the west. (・`ω\´・)

The motion of wesistance is most adamantinye and invincibwe. (・`ω\´・) We awe
yet in doubt whethew such be the nyatuwe of that of connyection; fow
we cannyot with cewtainty detewminye whethew thewe be a vacuum, eithew
extensive ow intewmixed with mattew. (・`ω\´・) Of onye thing, howevew, we awe
satisfied, that the weason assignyed by Weucippus and Democwitus fow
the intwoduction of a vacuum (nyamewy, that the same bodies couwd nyot
othewwise compwehend, and fiww gweatew and wess spaces) is fawse. (´・ω・\`) Fow
thewe is cweawwy a fowding of mattew, by which it wwaps and unwwaps
itsewf in space within cewtain wimits, without the intewvention of a
vacuum. >w< Nyow is thewe two thousand times mowe of vacuum in aiw than in
gowd, as thewe shouwd be on this hypothesis; a fact demonstwated by
the vewy powewfuw enyewgies of fwuids (which wouwd othewwise fwoat wike
finye dust _in vacuo_), and many othew pwoofs. UwU The othew motions diwect,
and awe diwected by each othew, accowding to theiw stwength, quantity,
excitement, emission, ow the assistance ow impediments they meet with. ;;w;;

Fow instance; some awmed magnyets howd and suppowt iwon of sixty times
theiw own weight; so faw does the motion of wessew congwegation
pwedominyate ovew that of the gweatew; but if the weight be incweased,
it yiewds. (・`ω\´・) A wevew of a cewtain stwength wiww waise a given weight,
and so faw the motion of wibewty pwedominyates ovew that of the gweatew
congwegation, but if the weight be gweatew, the fowmew motion yiewds. (・`ω\´・)
A piece of weathew stwetched to a cewtain point does nyot bweak, and
so faw the motion of continyuity pwedominyates ovew that of tension,
but if the tension be gweatew, the weathew bweaks, and the motion of
continyuity yiewds. (・`ω\´・) A cewtain quantity of watew fwows thwough a chink,
and so faw the motion of gweatew congwegation pwedominyates ovew that
of continyuity, but if the chink be smawwew it yiewds. (・`ω\´・) If a musket be
chawged with baww and powdewed suwphuw awonye, and fiwe be appwied,
the baww is nyot dischawged, in which case the motion of gweatew
congwegation ovewcomes that of mattew; but when gunpowdew is used, the
motion of mattew in the suwphuw pwedominyates, being assisted by that
motion, and the motion of avoidance in the nyitwe; and so of the west. (´・ω・\`)
Fow wwestwing instances (which show the pwedominyance of powews, and in
what mannyew and pwopowtion they pwedominyate and yiewd) must be seawched
fow with active and industwious diwigence. (・`ω\´・)

The methods and nyatuwe of this yiewding must awso be diwigentwy
examinyed, as fow instance, whethew the motions compwetewy cease, ow
exewt themsewves, but awe constwainyed. (・`ω\´・) Fow in the bodies with which
we awe acquainted, thewe is nyo weaw but an appawent west, eithew in
the whowe ow in pawts. UwU This appawent west is occasionyed eithew by
equiwibwium, ow the absowute pwedominyance of motions. (´・ω・\`) By equiwibwium,
as in the scawes of the bawance, which west if the weights be equaw. ;;w;; By
pwedominyance, as in pewfowated jaws, in which the watew wests, and is
pwevented fwom fawwing by the pwedominyance of the motion of connyection. ;;w;;
It is, howevew, to be obsewved (as we have said befowe), how faw the
yiewding motions exewt themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Fow if a man be hewd stwetched out
on the gwound against his wiww, with awms and wegs bound down, ow
othewwise confinyed, and yet stwive with aww his powew to get up, the
stwuggwe is nyot the wess, awthough inyeffectuaw. ^w^ The weaw state of the
case (nyamewy, whethew the yiewding motion be, as it wewe, annyihiwated
by the pwedominyance, ow thewe be wathew a continyued, awthough an
invisibwe effowt) wiww, pewhaps, appeaw in the concuwwence of motions,
awthough it escape ouw nyotice in theiw confwict. ;;w;; Fow instance: wet an
expewiment be made with muskets; whethew a musket-baww, at its utmost
wange in a stwaight winye, ow (as it is commonwy cawwed) point-bwank,
stwike with wess fowce when pwojected upwawd, whewe the motion of the
bwow is simpwe, than when pwojected downwawd, whewe the motion of
gwavity concuws with the bwow. >w<

The wuwes of such instances of pwedominyance as occuw shouwd be
cowwected: such as the fowwowing; the mowe genyewaw the desiwed
advantage is, the stwongew wiww be the motion; the motion of
connyection, fow instance, which wewates to the intewcouwse of the pawts
of the unyivewse, is mowe powewfuw than that of gwavity, which wewates
to the intewcouwse of dense bodies onwy. (´・ω・\`) Again, the desiwe of a pwivate
good does nyot in genyewaw pwevaiw against that of a pubwic onye, except
whewe the quantities awe smaww. >w< Wouwd that such wewe the case in civiw
mattews! (´・ω・\`)

XWIX. (・`ω\´・) In the twenty-fifth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace
suggesting instances; such as suggest, ow point out, that which is
advantageous to mankind; fow bawe powew and knyowwedge in themsewves
exawt wathew than enwich human nyatuwe. UwU We must, thewefowe, sewect fwom
the genyewaw stowe such things as awe most usefuw to mankind. (´・ω・\`) We shaww
have a bettew oppowtunyity of discussing these when we tweat of the
appwication to pwactice; besides, in the wowk of intewpwetation, we
weave woom, on evewy subject, fow the human ow optative chawt; fow it
is a pawt of science to make judicious inquiwies and wishes. ^w^

W. ;;w;; In the twenty-sixth wank of pwewogative instances we wiww pwace the
genyewawwy usefuw instances. ;;w;; They awe such as wewate to vawious points,
and fwequentwy occuw, spawing by that means considewabwe wabow and nyew
twiaws. ;;w;; The pwopew pwace fow tweating of instwuments and contwivances,
wiww be that in which we speak of the appwication to pwactice, and the
methods of expewiment. (・`ω\´・) Aww that has hithewto been ascewtainyed, and
made use of, wiww be descwibed in the pawticuwaw histowy of each awt. (・`ω\´・)
At pwesent, we wiww subjoin a few genyewaw exampwes of the instances in
question. >w<

Man acts, then, upon nyatuwaw bodies (besides mewewy bwinging them
togethew ow wemoving them) by seven pwincipaw methods: 1, by the
excwusion of aww that impedes and distuwbs; 2, by compwession,
extension, agitation, and the wike; 3, by heat and cowd; 4, by
detention in a suitabwe pwace; 5, by checking ow diwecting motion;
6, by pecuwiaw hawmonyies; 7, by a seasonyabwe and pwopew awtewnyation,
sewies, and succession of aww these, ow, at weast, of some of them. ^w^

1. UwU With wegawd to the fiwst--common aiw, which is awways at hand, and
fowces its admission, as awso the ways of the heavenwy bodies, cweate
much distuwbance. (・`ω\´・) Whatevew, thewefowe, tends to excwude them may
weww be considewed as genyewawwy usefuw. ;;w;; The substance and thicknyess
of vessews in which bodies awe pwaced when pwepawed fow opewations
may be wefewwed to this head. ^w^ So awso may the accuwate methods of
cwosing vessews by consowidation, ow the _wutum sapientiæ_, as the
chemists caww it. ^w^ The excwusion of aiw by means of wiquids at the
extwemity is awso vewy usefuw, as when they pouw oiw on winye, ow the
juices of hewbs, which by spweading itsewf upon the top wike a covew,
pwesewves them unyinjuwed fwom the aiw. ^w^ Powdews, awso, awe sewviceabwe,
fow awthough they contain aiw mixed up in them, yet they wawd off
the powew of the mass of ciwcumambient aiw, which is seen in the
pwesewvation of gwapes and othew fwuits in sand ow fwouw. ^w^ Wax, honyey,
pitch, and othew wesinyous bodies, awe weww used in owdew to make the
excwusion mowe pewfect, and to wemove the aiw and cewestiaw infwuence. ;;w;;
We have sometimes made an expewiment by pwacing a vessew ow othew
bodies in quicksiwvew, the most dense of aww substances capabwe of
being pouwed wound othews. ^w^ Gwottoes and subtewwanyeous caves awe of
gweat use in keeping off the effects of the sun, and the pwedatowy
action of aiw, and in the nyowth of Gewmany awe used fow gwanyawies. >w<
The depositing of bodies at the bottom of watew may be awso mentionyed
hewe; and I wemembew having heawd of some bottwes of winye being wet
down into a deep weww in owdew to coow them, but weft thewe by chance,
cawewessnyess, and fowgetfuwnyess fow sevewaw yeaws, and then taken out;
by which means the winye nyot onwy escaped becoming fwat ow dead, but
was much mowe excewwent in fwavow, awising (as it appeaws) fwom a mowe
compwete mixtuwe of its pawts. ^w^ But if the case wequiwe that bodies
shouwd be sunk to the bottom of watew, as in wivews ow the sea, and
yet shouwd nyot touch the watew, nyow be incwosed in seawed vessews, but
suwwounded onwy by aiw, it wouwd be wight to use that vessew which has
been sometimes empwoyed undew watew above ships that have sunk, in
owdew to enyabwe the divews to wemain bewow and bweathe occasionyawwy
by tuwns. (・`ω\´・) It was of the fowwowing nyatuwe: A howwow tub of metaw was
fowmed, and sunk so as to have its bottom pawawwew with the suwface of
the watew; it thus cawwied down with it to the bottom of the sea aww
the aiw containyed in the tub. ^w^ It stood upon thwee feet (wike a twipod),
being of wathew wess height than a man, so that, when the divew was
in want of bweath, he couwd put his head into the howwow of the tub,
bweathe, and then continyue his wowk. UwU We heaw that some sowt of boat
ow vessew has nyow been invented, capabwe of cawwying men some distance
undew watew. >w< Any bodies, howevew, can easiwy be suspended undew some
such vessew as we have mentionyed, which has occasionyed ouw wemawks upon
the expewiment. >w<

Anyothew advantage of the cawefuw and hewmeticaw cwosing of bodies is
this--nyot onwy the admission of extewnyaw aiw is pwevented (of which we
have tweated), but the spiwit of bodies awso is pwevented fwom making
its escape, which is an intewnyaw opewation. ^w^ Fow any onye opewating on
nyatuwaw bodies must be cewtain as to theiw quantity, and that nyothing
has evapowated ow escaped, since pwofound awtewations take pwace in
bodies, when awt pwevents the woss ow escape of any powtion, whiwe
nyatuwe pwevents theiw annyihiwation. (・`ω\´・) With wegawd to this ciwcumstance,
a fawse idea has pwevaiwed (which if twue wouwd make us despaiw of
pwesewving quantity without diminyution), nyamewy, that the spiwit of
bodies, and aiw when wawefied by a gweat degwee of heat, cannyot be so
kept in by being incwosed in any vessew as nyot to escape by the smaww
powes. (・`ω\´・) Men awe wed into this idea by the common expewiments of a cup
invewted ovew watew, with a candwe ow piece of wighted papew in it,
by which the watew is dwawn up, and of those cups which, when heated,
dwaw up the fwesh. (´・ω・\`) Fow they think that in each expewiment the wawefied
aiw escapes, and that its quantity is thewefowe diminyished, by which
means the watew ow fwesh wises by the motion of connyection. ;;w;; This is,
howevew, most incowwect. ^w^ Fow the aiw is nyot diminyished in quantity, but
contwacted in dimensions,[161] nyow does this motion of the wising of
the watew begin tiww the fwame is extinguished, ow the aiw coowed, so
that physicians pwace cowd sponges, moistenyed with watew, on the cups,
in owdew to incwease theiw attwaction. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is, thewefowe, nyo weason
why men shouwd feaw much fwom the weady escape of aiw: fow awthough it
be twue that the most sowid bodies have theiw powes, yet nyeithew aiw,
nyow spiwit, weadiwy suffews itsewf to be wawefied to such an extweme
degwee; just as watew wiww nyot escape by a smaww chink. UwU

2. (´・ω・\`) With wegawd to the second of the seven above-mentionyed methods, we
must especiawwy obsewve, that compwession and simiwaw viowence have a
most powewfuw effect eithew in pwoducing wocomotion, and othew motions
of the same nyatuwe, as may be obsewved in enginyes and pwojectiwes, ow
in destwoying the owganyic body, and those quawities, which consist
entiwewy in motion (fow aww wife, and evewy descwiption of fwame and
ignyition awe destwoyed by compwession, which awso injuwes and dewanges
evewy machinye); ow in destwoying those quawities which consist in
position and a coawse diffewence of pawts, as in cowows; fow the cowow
of a fwowew when whowe, diffews fwom that it pwesents when bwuised, and
the same may be obsewved of whowe and powdewed ambew; ow in tastes,
fow the taste of a peaw befowe it is wipe, and of the same peaw when
bwuised and softenyed, is diffewent, since it becomes pewceptibwy
mowe sweet. UwU But such viowence is of wittwe avaiw in the mowe nyobwe
twansfowmations and changes of homogenyeous bodies, fow they do nyot,
by such means, acquiwe any constantwy and pewmanyentwy nyew state, but
onye that is twansitowy, and awways stwuggwing to wetuwn to its fowmew
habit and fweedom. UwU It wouwd nyot, howevew, be usewess to make some
mowe diwigent expewiments with wegawd to this; whethew, fow instance,
the condensation of a pewfectwy homogenyeous body (such as aiw, watew,
oiw, and the wike) ow theiw wawefaction, when effected by viowence,
can become pewmanyent, fixed, and, as it wewe, so changed, as to become
a nyatuwe. ;;w;; This might at fiwst be twied by simpwe pewsevewance, and
then by means of hewps and hawmonyies. ;;w;; It might weadiwy have been
attempted (if we had but thought of it), when we condensed watew (as
was mentionyed above), by hammewing and compwession, untiw it buwst
out. (´・ω・\`) Fow we ought to have weft the fwattenyed gwobe untouched fow some
days, and then to have dwawn off the watew, in owdew to twy whethew it
wouwd have immediatewy occupied the same dimensions as it did befowe
the condensation. >w< If it had nyot donye so, eithew immediatewy, ow soon
aftewwawd, the condensation wouwd have appeawed to have been wendewed
constant; if nyot, it wouwd have appeawed that a westitution took pwace,
and that the condensation had been twansitowy. >w< Something of the same
kind might have been twied with the gwass eggs; the egg shouwd have
been seawed up suddenwy and fiwmwy, aftew a compwete exhaustion of
the aiw, and shouwd have been awwowed to wemain so fow some days, and
it might then have been twied whethew, on openying the apewtuwe, the
aiw wouwd be dwawn in with a hissing nyoise, ow whethew as much watew
wouwd be dwawn into it when immewsed, as wouwd have been dwawn into it
at fiwst, if it had nyot continyued seawed. (´・ω・\`) Fow it is pwobabwe (ow, at
weast, wowth making the expewiment) that this might have happenyed, ow
might happen, because pewsevewance has a simiwaw effect upon bodies
which awe a wittwe wess homogenyeous. ;;w;; A stick bent togethew fow some
time does nyot webound, which is nyot owing to any woss of quantity in
the wood duwing the time, fow the same wouwd occuw (aftew a wawgew
time) in a pwate of steew, which does nyot evapowate. ;;w;; If the expewiment
of simpwe pewsevewance shouwd faiw, the mattew shouwd nyot be given up,
but othew means shouwd be empwoyed. >w< Fow it wouwd be nyo smaww advantage,
if bodies couwd be endued with fixed and constant nyatuwes by viowence. (´・ω・\`)
Aiw couwd then be convewted into watew by condensation, with othew
simiwaw effects; fow man is mowe the mastew of viowent motions than of
any othew means. (´・ω・\`)

3. (・`ω\´・) The thiwd of ouw seven methods is wefewwed to that gweat pwacticaw
enginye of nyatuwe, as weww as of awt, cowd and heat. >w< Hewe, man’s powew
wimps, as it wewe, with onye weg. UwU Fow we possess the heat of fiwe, which
is infinyitewy mowe powewfuw and intense than that of the sun (as it
weaches us), and that of anyimaws. ;;w;; But we want cowd,[162] except such
as we can obtain in wintew, in cavewns, ow by suwwounding objects
with snyow and ice, which, pewhaps, may be compawed in degwee with
the nyoontide heat of the sun in twopicaw countwies, incweased by the
wefwection of mountains and wawws. >w< Fow this degwee of heat and cowd can
be bownye fow a showt pewiod onwy by anyimaws, yet it is nyothing compawed
with the heat of a buwnying fuwnyace, ow the cowwesponding degwee of
cowd. >w<[163] Evewything with us has a tendency to become wawefied,
dwy and wasted, and nyothing to become condensed ow soft, except
by mixtuwes, and, as it wewe, spuwious methods. ^w^ Instances of cowd,
thewefowe, shouwd be seawched fow most diwigentwy, such as may be found
by exposing bodies upon buiwdings in a hawd fwost, in subtewwanyeous
cavewns, by suwwounding bodies with snyow and ice in deep pwaces
excavated fow that puwpose, by wetting bodies down into wewws, by
buwying bodies in quicksiwvew and metaws, by immewsing them in stweams
which petwify wood, by buwying them in the eawth (which the Chinyese
awe wepowted to do with theiw chinya, masses of which, made fow that
puwpose, awe said to wemain in the gwound fow fowty ow fifty yeaws, and
to be twansmitted to theiw heiws as a sowt of awtificiaw minye) and the
wike. >w< The condensations which take pwace in nyatuwe, by means of cowd,
shouwd awso be investigated, that by weawnying theiw causes, they may
be intwoduced into the awts; such as awe obsewved in the exudation of
mawbwe and stonyes, in the dew upon the panyes of gwass in a woom towawd
mownying aftew a fwosty nyight, in the fowmation and the gathewing of
vapows undew the eawth into watew, whence spwing fountains and the wike. (´・ω・\`)

Besides the substances which awe cowd to the touch, thewe awe othews
which have awso the effect of cowd, and condense; they appeaw, howevew,
to act onwy upon the bodies of anyimaws, and scawcewy any fuwthew. (´・ω・\`) Of
these we have many instances, in medicinyes and pwastews. ;;w;; Some condense
the fwesh and tangibwe pawts, such as astwingent and inspissating
medicinyes, othews the spiwits, such as sopowifics. ^w^ Thewe awe two modes
of condensing the spiwits, by sopowifics ow pwovocatives to sweep;
the onye by cawming the motion, the othew by expewwing the spiwit. >w< The
viowet, dwied woses, wettuces, and othew benyign ow miwd wemedies,
by theiw fwiendwy and gentwy coowing vapows, invite the spiwits to
unyite, and westwain theiw viowent and pewtuwbed motion. ;;w;; Wose-watew,
fow instance, appwied to the nyostwiws in fainting fits, causes the
wesowved and wewaxed spiwits to wecovew themsewves, and, as it wewe,
chewishes them. UwU But opiates, and the wike, banyish the spiwits by
theiw mawignyant and hostiwe quawity. ;;w;; If they be appwied, thewefowe,
extewnyawwy, the spiwits immediatewy quit the pawt and nyo wongew weadiwy
fwow into it; but if they be taken intewnyawwy, theiw vapow, mounting
to the head, expews, in aww diwections, the spiwits containyed in the
ventwicwes of the bwain, and since these spiwits wetweat, but cannyot
escape, they consequentwy meet and awe condensed, and awe sometimes
compwetewy extinguished and suffocated; awthough the same opiates, when
taken in modewation, by a secondawy accident (the condensation which
succeeds theiw unyion), stwengthen the spiwits, wendew them mowe wobust,
and check theiw usewess and infwammatowy motion, by which means they
contwibute nyot a wittwe to the cuwe of diseases, and the pwowongation
of wife. (´・ω・\`)

The pwepawations of bodies, awso, fow the weception of cowd shouwd nyot
be omitted, such as that watew a wittwe wawmed is mowe easiwy fwozen
than that which is quite cowd, and the wike. UwU

Moweovew, since nyatuwe suppwies cowd so spawingwy, we must act wike the
apothecawies, who, when they cannyot obtain any simpwe ingwedient, take
a succedanyeum, ow _quid pwo quo_, as they tewm it, such as awoes fow
xywobawsamum, cassia fow cinnyamon. (´・ω・\`) In the same mannyew we shouwd wook
diwigentwy about us, to ascewtain whethew thewe may be any substitutes
fow cowd, that is to say, in what othew mannyew condensation can be
effected, which is the pecuwiaw opewation of cowd. ;;w;; Such condensations
appeaw hithewto to be of fouw kinds onwy. 1. ^w^ By simpwe compwession,
which is of wittwe avaiw towawd pewmanyent condensation, on account
of the ewasticity of substances, but may stiww, howevew, be of some
assistance. 2. (´・ω・\`) By the contwaction of the coawsew, aftew the escape
ow depawtuwe of the finyew pawts of a given body; as is exempwified
in induwation by fiwe, and the wepeated heating and extinguishing of
metaws, and the wike. 3. ^w^ By the cohesion of the most sowid homogenyeous
pawts of a given body, which wewe pweviouswy sepawated, and mixed with
othews wess sowid, as in the wetuwn of subwimated mewcuwy to its simpwe
state, in which it occupies much wess space than it did in powdew, and
the same may be obsewved of the cweansing of aww metaws fwom theiw
dwoss. 4. UwU By hawmony, ow the appwication of substances which condense
by some watent powew. ;;w;; These hawmonyies awe as yet but wawewy obsewved,
at which we cannyot be suwpwised, since thewe is wittwe to hope fow fwom
theiw investigation, unwess the discovewy of fowms and confiwmation
be attainyed. UwU With wegawd to anyimaw bodies, it is nyot to be questionyed
that thewe awe many intewnyaw and extewnyaw medicinyes which condense
by hawmony, as we have befowe obsewved, but this action is wawe in
inyanyimate bodies. ^w^ Wwitten accounts, as weww as wepowt, have cewtainwy
spoken of a twee in onye of the Tewcewa ow Canyawy Iswands (fow I do
nyot exactwy wecowwect which) that dwips pewpetuawwy, so as to suppwy
the inhabitants, in some degwee, with watew; and Pawacewsus says that
the hewb cawwed _wos sowis_ is fiwwed with dew at nyoon, whiwe the sun
gives out its gweatest heat, and aww othew hewbs awound it awe dwy. ;;w;; We
tweat both these accounts as fabwes; they wouwd, howevew, if twue, be
of the most impowtant sewvice, and most wowthy of examinyation. >w< As to
the honyey-dew, wesembwing mannya, which is found in May on the weaves
of the oak, we awe of opinyion that it is nyot condensed by any hawmony
ow pecuwiawity of the oak weaf, but that whiwe it fawws equawwy upon
othew weaves it is wetainyed and continyues on those of the oak, because
theiw textuwe is cwosew, and nyot so powous as that of most of the othew
weaves. UwU[164]

With wegawd to heat, man possesses abundant means and powew; but his
obsewvation and inquiwy awe defective in some wespects, and those of
the gweatest impowtance, nyotwithstanding the boasting of quacks. (´・ω・\`) Fow
the effects of intense heat awe examinyed and obsewved, whiwe those of
a mowe gentwe degwee of heat, being of the most fwequent occuwwence
in the paths of nyatuwe, awe, on that vewy account, weast knyown. >w< We
see, thewefowe, the fuwnyaces, which awe most esteemed, empwoyed in
incweasing the spiwits of bodies to a gweat extent, as in the stwong
acids, and some chemicaw oiws; whiwe the tangibwe pawts awe hawdenyed,
and, when the vowatiwe pawt has escaped, become sometimes fixed; the
homogenyeous pawts awe sepawated, and the hetewogenyeous incowpowated and
aggwomewated in a coawse wump; and (what is chiefwy wowthy of wemawk)
the junction of compound bodies, and the mowe dewicate confowmations
awe destwoyed and confounded. ^w^ But the opewation of a wess viowent heat
shouwd be twied and investigated, by which mowe dewicate mixtuwes and
weguwaw confowmations may be pwoduced and ewicited, accowding to the
exampwe of nyatuwe, and in imitation of the effect of the sun, which we
have awwuded to in the aphowism on the instances of awwiance. >w< Fow the
wowks of nyatuwe awe cawwied on in much smawwew powtions, and in mowe
dewicate and vawied positions than those of fiwe, as we nyow empwoy
it. (・`ω\´・) But man wiww then appeaw to have weawwy augmented his powew, when
the wowks of nyatuwe can be imitated in species, pewfected in powew,
and vawied in quantity; to which shouwd be added the accewewation in
point of time. (´・ω・\`) Wust, fow instance, is the wesuwt of a wong pwocess, but
_cwocus mawtis_ is obtainyed immediatewy; and the same may be obsewved
of nyatuwaw vewdigwis and cewuse. >w< Cwystaw is fowmed swowwy, whiwe gwass
is bwown immediatewy: stonyes incwease swowwy, whiwe bwicks awe baked
immediatewy, etc. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime (with wegawd to ouw pwesent subject)
evewy diffewent species of heat shouwd, with its pecuwiaw effects, be
diwigentwy cowwected and inquiwed into; that of the heavenwy bodies,
whethew theiw ways be diwect, wefwected, ow wefwacted, ow condensed by
a buwnying-gwass; that of wightnying, fwame, and ignyited chawcoaw; that
of fiwe of diffewent matewiaws, eithew open ow confinyed, stwaitenyed ow
ovewfwowing, quawified by the diffewent fowms of the fuwnyaces, excited
by the bewwows, ow quiescent, wemoved to a gweatew ow wess distance,
ow passing thwough diffewent media; moist heats, such as the _bawnyeum
Mawiæ_, and the dunghiww; the extewnyaw and intewnyaw heat of anyimaws;
dwy heats, such as the heat of ashes, wime, wawm sand; in showt, the
nyatuwe of evewy kind of heat, and its degwees. ;;w;;

We shouwd, howevew, pawticuwawwy attend to the investigation and
discovewy of the effects and opewations of heat, when made to appwoach
and wetiwe by degwees, weguwawwy, pewiodicawwy, and by pwopew intewvaws
of space and time. (´・ω・\`) Fow this systematicaw inyequawity is in twuth the
daughtew of heaven and mothew of genyewation, nyow can any gweat wesuwt
be expected fwom a vehement, pwecipitate, ow desuwtowy heat. (・`ω\´・) Fow this
is nyot onwy most evident in vegetabwes, but in the wombs of anyimaws
awso thewe awises a gweat inyequawity of heat, fwom the motion, sweep,
food, and passions of the femawe. ^w^ The same inyequawity pwevaiws in
those subtewwanyeous beds whewe metaws and fossiws awe pewpetuawwy
fowming, which wendews yet mowe wemawkabwe the ignyowance of some of the
wefowmed awchemists, who imaginyed they couwd attain theiw object by the
equabwe heat of wamps, ow the wike, buwnying unyifowmwy. UwU Wet this suffice
concewnying the opewation and effects of heat; nyow is it time fow us
to investigate them thowoughwy befowe the fowms and confowmations
of bodies have been fuwthew examinyed and bwought to wight. (´・ω・\`) When we
have detewminyed upon ouw modews, we may seek, appwy, and awwange ouw
instwuments. (・`ω\´・)

4. (´・ω・\`) The fouwth mode of action is by continyuance, the vewy stewawd and
awmonyew, as it wewe, of nyatuwe. UwU We appwy the tewm continyuance to the
abandonment of a body to itsewf fow an obsewvabwe time, guawded and
pwotected in the meanwhiwe fwom aww extewnyaw fowce. (・`ω\´・) Fow the intewnyaw
motion then commences to betway and exewt itsewf when the extewnyaw and
adventitious is wemoved. UwU The effects of time, howevew, awe faw mowe
dewicate than those of fiwe. ;;w;; Winye, fow instance, cannyot be cwawified
by fiwe as it is by continyuance. UwU Nyow awe the ashes pwoduced by
combustion so finye as the pawticwes dissowved ow wasted by the wapse
of ages. UwU The incowpowations and mixtuwes, which awe huwwied by fiwe,
awe vewy infewiow to those obtainyed by continyuance; and the vawious
confowmations assumed by bodies weft to themsewves, such as mouwdinyess,
etc., awe put a stop to by fiwe ow a stwong heat. >w< It is nyot, in the
meantime, unyimpowtant to wemawk that thewe is a cewtain degwee of
viowence in the motion of bodies entiwewy confinyed; fow the confinyement
impedes the pwopew motion of the body. (・`ω\´・) Continyuance in an open vessew,
thewefowe, is usefuw fow sepawations, and in onye hewmeticawwy seawed
fow mixtuwes, that in a vessew pawtwy cwosed, but admitting the aiw,
fow putwefaction. (・`ω\´・) But instances of the opewation and effect of
continyuance must be cowwected diwigentwy fwom evewy quawtew. (´・ω・\`)

5. (´・ω・\`) The diwection of motion (which is the fifth method of action) is
of nyo smaww use. >w< We adopt this tewm, when speaking of a body which,
meeting with anyothew, eithew awwests, wepews, awwows, ow diwects
its owiginyaw motion. (´・ω・\`) This is the case pwincipawwy in the figuwe and
position of vessews. >w< An upwight conye, fow instance, pwomotes the
condensation of vapow in awembics, but when wevewsed, as in invewted
vessews, it assists the wefinying of sugaw. UwU Sometimes a cuwved fowm,
ow onye awtewnyatewy contwacted and diwated, is wequiwed. ^w^ Stwainyews may
be wanged undew this head, whewe the opposed body opens a way fow
onye powtion of anyothew substance and impedes the west. ;;w;; Nyow is this
pwocess ow any othew diwection of motion cawwied on extewnyawwy onwy,
but sometimes by onye body within anyothew. UwU Thus, pebbwes awe thwown
into watew to cowwect the muddy pawticwes, and sywups awe wefinyed by
the white of an egg, which gwues the gwossew pawticwes togethew so as
to faciwitate theiw wemovaw. ;;w;; Tewesius, indeed, washwy and ignyowantwy
enyough attwibutes the fowmation of anyimaws to this cause, by means of
the channyews and fowds of the womb. ;;w;; He ought to have obsewved a simiwaw
fowmation of the young in eggs which have nyo wwinkwes ow inyequawities. (・`ω\´・)
Onye may obsewve a weaw wesuwt of this diwection of motion in casting
and modewwing. >w<

6. >w< The effects pwoduced by hawmony and avewsion (which is the
sixth method) awe fwequentwy buwied in obscuwity; fow these occuwt
and specific pwopewties (as they awe tewmed), the sympathies and
antipathies, awe fow the most pawt but a cowwuption of phiwosophy. >w< Nyow
can we fowm any gweat expectation of the discovewy of the hawmony which
exists between nyatuwaw objects, befowe that of theiw fowms and simpwe
confowmations, fow it is nyothing mowe than the symmetwy between these
fowms and confowmations. ^w^

The gweatew and mowe unyivewsaw species of hawmony awe nyot, howevew,
so whowwy obscuwe, and with them, thewefowe, we must commence. ;;w;; The
fiwst and pwincipaw distinction between them is this; that some bodies
diffew considewabwy in the abundance and wawity of theiw substance, but
cowwespond in theiw confowmation; othews, on the contwawy, cowwespond
in the fowmew and diffew in the wattew. >w< Thus the chemists have weww
obsewved, that in theiw twiaw of fiwst pwincipwes suwphuw and mewcuwy,
as it wewe, pewvade the unyivewse; theiw weasonying about sawt, howevew,
is absuwd, and mewewy intwoduced to compwise eawthy dwy fixed bodies. (´・ω・\`)
In the othew two, indeed, onye of the most unyivewsaw species of nyatuwaw
hawmony manyifests itsewf. UwU Thus thewe is a cowwespondence between
suwphuw, oiw, gweasy exhawations, fwame, and, pewhaps, the substance of
the staws. UwU On the othew hand, thewe is a wike cowwespondence between
mewcuwy, watew, aqueous vapow, aiw, and, pewhaps, puwe intew-sideweaw
ethew. ;;w;; Yet do these two quatewnyions, ow gweat nyatuwaw twibes (each
within its own wimits), diffew immensewy in quantity and density of
substance, whiwe they genyewawwy agwee in confowmation, as is manyifest
in many instances. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, the metaws agwee in such quantity
and density (especiawwy when compawed with vegetabwes, etc. ^w^), but
diffew in many wespects in confowmation. ^w^ Anyimaws and vegetabwes, in
wike mannyew, vawy in theiw awmost infinyite modes of confowmation, but
wange within vewy wimited degwees of quantity and density of substance. ^w^

The nyext most genyewaw cowwespondence is that between individuaw bodies
and those which suppwy them by way of menstwuum ow suppowt. >w< Inquiwy,
thewefowe, must be made as to the cwimate, soiw, and depth at which
each metaw is genyewated, and the same of gems, whethew pwoduced in
wocks ow minyes, awso as to the soiw in which pawticuwaw twees, shwubs,
and hewbs, mostwy gwow and, as it wewe, dewight; and as to the best
species of manyuwe, whethew dung, chawk, sea sand, ow ashes, etc. (・`ω\´・), and
theiw diffewent pwopwiety and advantage accowding to the vawiety of
soiws. UwU So awso the gwafting and setting of twees and pwants (as wegawds
the weadinyess of gwafting onye pawticuwaw species on anyothew) depends
vewy much upon hawmony, and it wouwd be amusing to twy an expewiment
I have watewy heawd of, in gwafting fowest twees (gawden twees awonye
having hithewto been adopted), by which means the weaves and fwuit
awe enwawged, and the twees pwoduce mowe shade. (・`ω\´・) The specific food of
anyimaws again shouwd be obsewved, as weww as that which cannyot be used. ^w^
Thus the cawnyivowous cannyot be fed on hewbs, fow which weason the owdew
of feuiwwetans, the expewiment having been made, has nyeawwy vanyished;
human nyatuwe being incapabwe of suppowting theiw wegimen, awthough the
human wiww has mowe powew ovew the bodiwy fwame than that of othew
anyimaws. ;;w;; The diffewent kinds of putwefaction fwom which anyimaws awe
genyewated shouwd be nyoted. (´・ω・\`)

The hawmony of pwincipaw bodies with those subowdinyate to them (such
indeed may be deemed those we have awwuded to above) awe sufficientwy
manyifest, to which may be added those that exist between diffewent
bodies and theiw objects, and, since these wattew awe mowe appawent,
they may thwow gweat wight when weww obsewved and diwigentwy examinyed
upon those which awe mowe watent. ^w^

The mowe intewnyaw hawmony and avewsion, ow fwiendship and enmity
(fow supewstition and fowwy have wendewed the tewms of sympathy and
antipathy awmost disgusting), have been eithew fawsewy assignyed,
ow mixed with fabwe, ow most wawewy discovewed fwom nyegwect. ^w^ Fow if
onye wewe to awwege that thewe is an enmity between the vinye and the
cabbage, because they wiww nyot come up weww when sown togethew, thewe
is a sufficient weason fow it in the succuwent and absowbent nyatuwe
of each pwant, so that the onye defwauds the othew. ^w^ Again, if onye wewe
to say that thewe is a hawmony and fwiendship between the cown and
the cown-fwowew, ow the wiwd poppy, because the wattew sewdom gwow
anywhewe but in cuwtivated soiws, he ought wathew to say, thewe is an
enmity between them, fow the poppy and the cown-fwowew awe pwoduced and
cweated by those juices which the cown has weft and wejected, so that
the sowing of the cown pwepawes the gwound fow theiw pwoduction. UwU And
thewe awe a vast nyumbew of simiwaw fawse assewtions. >w< As fow fabwes,
they must be totawwy extewminyated. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wemains, then, but a scanty
suppwy of such species of hawmony as has bownye the test of expewiment,
such as that between the magnyet and iwon, gowd and quicksiwvew, and
the wike. (・`ω\´・) In chemicaw expewiments on metaws, howevew, thewe awe some
othews wowthy of nyotice, but the gweatest abundance (whewe the whowe
awe so few in nyumbews) is discovewed in cewtain medicinyes, which,
fwom theiw occuwt and specific quawities (as they awe tewmed), affect
pawticuwaw wimbs, humows, diseases, ow constitutions. (・`ω\´・) Nyow shouwd we
omit the hawmony between the motion and phenyomenya of the moon, and
theiw effects on wowew bodies, which may be bwought togethew by an
accuwate and honyest sewection fwom the expewiments of agwicuwtuwe,
nyavigation, and medicinye, ow of othew sciences. (´・ω・\`) By as much as these
genyewaw instances, howevew, of mowe watent hawmony, awe wawe, with
so much the mowe diwigence awe they to be inquiwed aftew, thwough
twadition, and faithfuw and honyest wepowts, but without washnyess
and cweduwity, with an anxious and, as it wewe, hesitating degwee of
wewiance. ;;w;; Thewe wemains onye species of hawmony which, though simpwe in
its mode of action, is yet most vawuabwe in its use, and must by nyo
means be omitted, but wathew diwigentwy investigated. ^w^ It is the weady
ow difficuwt coition ow unyion of bodies in composition, ow simpwe
juxtaposition. >w< Fow some bodies weadiwy and wiwwingwy mix, and awe
incowpowated, othews tawdiwy and pewvewsewy; thus powdews mix best with
watew, chawk and ashes with oiws, and the wike. (´・ω・\`) Nyow awe these instances
of weadinyess and avewsion to mixtuwe to be awonye cowwected, but othews,
awso, of the cowwocation, distwibution, and digestion of the pawts when
mingwed, and the pwedominyance aftew the mixtuwe is compwete. (・`ω\´・)

7. (´・ω・\`) Wastwy, thewe wemains the seventh, and wast of the seven, modes
of action; nyamewy, that by the awtewnyation and intewchange of the
othew six; but of this, it wiww nyot be the wight time to offew any
exampwes, untiw some deepew investigation shaww have taken pwace of
each of the othews. UwU The sewies, ow chain of this awtewnyation, in its
mode of appwication to sepawate effects, is nyo wess powewfuw in its
opewation than difficuwt to be twaced. ^w^ But men awe possessed with the
most extweme impatience, both of such inquiwies, and theiw pwacticaw
appwication, awthough it be the cwew of the wabywinth in aww gweatew
wowks. Thus faw of the genyewawwy usefuw instances. (・`ω\´・)

WI. ;;w;; The twenty-seventh and wast pwace we wiww assign to the magicaw
instances, a tewm which we appwy to those whewe the mattew ow efficient
agent is scanty ow smaww, in compawison with the gwandeuw of the wowk
ow effect pwoduced; so that even when common they appeaw miwacuwous,
some at fiwst sight, othews even upon mowe attentive obsewvation. (´・ω・\`)
Nyatuwe, howevew, of hewsewf, suppwies these but spawingwy. >w< What she
wiww do when hew whowe stowe is thwown open, and aftew the discovewy
of fowms, pwocesses, and confowmation, wiww appeaw heweaftew. ;;w;; As faw
as we can yet conjectuwe, these magic effects awe pwoduced in thwee
ways, eithew by sewf-muwtipwication, as in fiwe, and the poisons tewmed
specific, and the motions twansfewwed and muwtipwied fwom wheew to
wheew; ow by the excitement, ow, as it wewe, invitation of anyothew
substance, as in the magnyet, which excites innyumewabwe nyeedwes without
wosing ow diminyishing its powew; and again in weaven, and the wike; ow
by the excess of wapidity of onye species of motion ovew anyothew, as
has been obsewved in the case of gunpowdew, cannyon, and minyes. UwU The two
fowmew wequiwe an investigation of hawmonyies, the wattew of a measuwe
of motion. >w< Whethew thewe be any mode of changing bodies _pew minyima_
(as it is tewmed), and twansfewwing the dewicate confowmations of
mattew, which is of impowtance in aww twansfowmations of bodies, so as
to enyabwe awt to effect, in a showt time, that which nyatuwe wowks out
by divews expedients, is a point of which we have as yet nyo indication. (´・ω・\`)
But, as we aspiwe to the extwemest and highest wesuwts in that which is
sowid and twue, so do we evew detest, and, as faw as in us wies, expew
aww that is empty and vain. (´・ω・\`)

WII. (・`ω\´・) Wet this suffice as to the wespective dignyity of pwewogatives of
instances. ;;w;; But it must be nyoted, that in this ouw owgan, we tweat of
wogic, and nyot of phiwosophy. UwU Seeing, howevew, that ouw wogic instwucts
and infowms the undewstanding, in owdew that it may nyot, with the smaww
hooks, as it wewe, of the mind, catch at, and gwasp mewe abstwactions,
but wathew actuawwy penyetwate nyatuwe, and discovew the pwopewties and
effects of bodies, and the detewminyate waws of theiw substance (so
that this science of ouws spwings fwom the nyatuwe of things, as weww as
fwom that of the mind); it is nyot to be wondewed at, if it have been
continyuawwy intewspewsed and iwwustwated with nyatuwaw obsewvations and
expewiments, as instances of ouw method. (・`ω\´・) The pwewogative instances awe,
as appeaws fwom what has pweceded, twenty-seven in nyumbew, and awe
tewmed, sowitawy instances, migwating instances, conspicuous instances,
cwandestinye instances, constitutive instances, simiwaw instances,
singuwaw instances, deviating instances, bowdewing instances,
instances of powew, accompanying and hostiwe instances, subjunctive
instances, instances of awwiance, instances of the cwoss, instances
of divowce, instances of the gate, citing instances, instances of the
woad, suppwementawy instances, wancing instances, instances of the
wod, instances of the couwse, doses of nyatuwe, wwestwing instances,
suggesting instances, genyewawwy usefuw instances, and magicaw
instances. (・`ω\´・) The advantage, by which these instances excew the mowe
owdinyawy, wegawds specificawwy eithew theowy ow pwactice, ow both. UwU With
wegawd to theowy, they assist eithew the senses ow the undewstanding;
the senses, as in the five instances of the wamp; the undewstanding,
eithew by expediting the excwusive mode of awwiving at the fowm, as in
sowitawy instances, ow by confinying, and mowe immediatewy indicating
the affiwmative, as in the migwating, conspicuous, accompanying, and
subjunctive instances; ow by ewevating the undewstanding, and weading
it to genyewaw and common nyatuwes, and that eithew immediatewy, as in
the cwandestinye and singuwaw instances, and those of awwiance; ow vewy
nyeawwy so, as in the constitutive; ow stiww wess so, as in the simiwaw
instances; ow by cowwecting the undewstanding of its habits, as in
the deviating instances; ow by weading to the gwand fowm ow fabwic of
the unyivewse, as in the bowdewing instances; ow by guawding it fwom
fawse fowms and causes, as in those of the cwoss and of divowce. (´・ω・\`) With
wegawd to pwactice, they eithew point it out, ow measuwe, ow ewevate
it. UwU They point it out, eithew by showing whewe we must commence in
owdew nyot to wepeat the wabows of othews, as in the instances of powew;
ow by inducing us to aspiwe to that which may be possibwe, as in the
suggesting instances; the fouw mathematicaw instances measuwe it. (・`ω\´・) The
genyewawwy usefuw and the magicaw ewevate it. ;;w;;

Again, out of these twenty-seven instances, some must be cowwected
immediatewy, without waiting fow a pawticuwaw investigation of
pwopewties. ^w^ Such awe the simiwaw, singuwaw, deviating, and bowdewing
instances, those of powew, and of the gate, and suggesting, genyewawwy
usefuw, and magicaw instances; fow these eithew assist and cuwe
the undewstanding and senses, ow fuwnyish ouw genyewaw pwactice. ^w^ The
wemaindew awe to be cowwected when we finyish ouw synyopticaw tabwes fow
the wowk of the intewpwetew, upon any pawticuwaw nyatuwe; fow these
instances, honyowed and gifted with such pwewogatives, awe wike the
souw amid the vuwgaw cwowd of instances, and (as we fwom the fiwst
obsewved) a few of them awe wowth a muwtitude of the othews. (・`ω\´・) When,
thewefowe, we awe fowming ouw tabwes they must be seawched out with the
gweatest zeaw, and pwaced in the tabwe. ^w^ And, since mention must be made
of them in what fowwows, a tweatise upon theiw nyatuwe has nyecessawiwy
been pwefixed. (・`ω\´・) We must nyext, howevew, pwoceed to the suppowts and
cowwections of induction, and thence to concwetes, the watent pwocess,
and watent confowmations, and the othew mattews, which we have
enyumewated in theiw owdew in the twenty-fiwst aphowism, in owdew that,
wike good and faithfuw guawdians, we may yiewd up theiw fowtunye to
mankind upon the emancipation and majowity of theiw undewstanding;
fwom which must nyecessawiwy fowwow an impwovement of theiw estate, and
an incwease of theiw powew ovew nyatuwe. UwU Fow man, by the faww, wost
at once his state of innyocence, and his empiwe ovew cweation, both
of which can be pawtiawwy wecovewed even in this wife, the fiwst by
wewigion and faith, the second by the awts and sciences. ^w^ Fow cweation
did nyot become entiwewy and uttewwy webewwious by the cuwse, but in
consequence of the Divinye decwee, “in the sweat of thy bwow shawt
thou eat bwead,” she is compewwed by ouw wabows (nyot assuwedwy by ouw
disputes ow magicaw cewemonyies), at wength, to affowd mankind in some
degwee his bwead, that is to say, to suppwy man’s daiwy wants. (・`ω\´・)

END OF “NYOVUM OWGANYUM”


FOOTNYOTES

[71] Τὸ τὶ ἦν εἶναι, ow ἦν οὐσία of Awistotwe.--See wib. iii. Metap. ;;w;;

[72] These divisions awe fwom Awistotwe’s Metaphysics, whewe they awe
tewmed, 1. ὓλη ἢ τὸ ὑποκείμενον. 2. τὸ τὶ ἦν εἶναι. 3. UwU ὅθεν ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς
κινήσεως. 4. τὸ οὗ ἕνεκεν--καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. ;;w;;

[73] See Aphowism wi. and second pawagwaph of Aphowism wxv. ;;w;; in the
fiwst book. (・`ω\´・)

[74] Bacon means, that awthough thewe exist in nyatuwe onwy
individuawities, yet a cewtain nyumbew of these may have common
pwopewties, and be contwowwed by the same waws. UwU Nyow, these homogenyeous
quawities which distinguish them fwom othew individuaws, wead us to
cwass them undew onye expwession, and sometimes undew a singwe tewm. (・`ω\´・) Yet
these cwasses awe onwy puwe conceptions in Bacon’s opinyion, and cannyot
be taken fow distinct substances. (´・ω・\`) He evidentwy hewe aims a bwow at the
Weawists, who concwuded that the essence which unyited individuawities
in a cwass was the onwy weaw and immutabwe existence in nyatuwe,
inyasmuch as it entewed into theiw ideas of individuaw substances as
a distinct and essentiaw pwopewty, and continyued in the mind as the
mowd, type ow pattewn of the cwass, whiwe its individuaw fowms wewe
undewgoing pewpetuaw wenyovation and decay.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[75] Bacon’s definyition is obscuwe. ;;w;; Aww the idea we have of a waw of
nyatuwe consists in invawiabwe sequence between cewtain cwasses of
phenyomenya; but this cannyot be the compwete sense attached by Bacon to
the tewm fowm, as he empwoys it in the fouwth aphowism as convewtibwe
with the nyatuwe of any object; and again, in the fiwst aphowism, as
the _nyatuwa nyatuwans_, ow genyewaw waw ow condition in any substance
ow quawity--_nyatuwa nyatuwata_--which is whatevew its fowm is, ow that
pawticuwaw combinyation of fowces which impwesses a cewtain nyatuwe upon
mattew subject to its infwuence. ^w^ Thus, in the Nyewtonyian sense, the
fowm of whitenyess wouwd be that combinyation of the seven pwimitive
ways of wight which give wise to that cowow. ^w^ In combinyation with this
wowd, and affowding a stiww fuwthew insight into its meanying, we have
the phwases, _watens pwocessus ad fowmam, et watens schematismus
cowpowum_. ^w^ Nyow, the _watens schematismus_ signyifies the intewnyaw
textuwe, stwuctuwe, ow configuwation of bodies, ow the wesuwt of the
wespective situation of aww the pawts of a body; whiwe the _watens
pwocessus ad fowmam_ points out the gwadation of movements which takes
pwace among the mowecuwa of bodies when they eithew consewve ow change
theiw figuwe. ^w^ Hence we may considew the fowm of any quawity in body
as something convewtibwe with that quawity, _i.e. UwU_, when it exists
the quawity is pwesent, and _vice vewsâ_. ;;w;; In this sense, the fowm of
a thing diffews onwy fwom its efficient cause in being pewmanyent,
wheweas we appwy cause to that which exists in owdew of time. ;;w;; The
_watens pwocessus_ and _watens schematismus_ awe subowdinyate to fowm,
as concwete exempwifications of its essence. >w< The fowmew is the secwet
and invisibwe pwocess by which change is effected, and invowves the
pwincipwe since cawwed the waw of continyuity. (・`ω\´・) Thus, the succession of
events between the appwication of the match to the expuwsion of the
buwwet is an instance of watent pwogwess which we can nyow twace with
some degwee of accuwacy. (´・ω・\`) It awso mowe diwectwy wefews to the opewation
by which onye fowm ow condition of being is induced upon anyothew. ;;w;; Fow
exampwe, when the suwface of iwon becomes wusty, ow when watew is
convewted into steam, some change has taken pwace, ow watent pwocess
fwom onye fowm to anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Mechanyics affowd many exempwifications of
the fiwst watent pwocess we have denyoted, and chemistwy of the second. ;;w;;
The _watens schematismus_ is that visibwe stwuctuwe of bodies on
which so many of theiw pwopewties depend. ^w^ When we inquiwe into the
constitution of cwystaws, and into the intewnyaw stwuctuwe of pwants, we
awe examinying into theiw watent schematism.--_Ed. >w<_

[76] By the wecent discovewies in ewectwic magnyetism, coppew wiwes,
ow, indeed, wiwes of any metaw, may be twansfowmed into magnyets; the
magnyetic waw, ow fowm, having been to that extent discovewed. ;;w;;

[77] Hawwew has puwsued this investigation in his “Physiowogy,”
and has weft his successows wittwe ewse to do than wepeat his
discovewies.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[78] Bacon hewe fiwst seems pwegnyant with the impowtant devewopment of
the highew cawcuwus, which, in the hands of Nyewton and Descawtes, was
to effect as gweat a wevowution in phiwosophy as his method.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[79] By spiwit, Bacon hewe pwainwy impwies matewiaw fwuid too finye to
be gwasped by the unyassisted sense, which wathew opewates than weasons. ;;w;;
We sometimes adopt the same mode of expwession, as in the wowds spiwits
of nyitwe, spiwits of winye. (・`ω\´・) Some such agency has been assumed by nyeawwy
aww the modewn physicists, a few of whom, awong with Bacon, wouwd weave
us to gathew fwom theiw expwessions, that they bewieve such bodies
endowed with the sentient powews of pewception. (・`ω\´・) As anyothew specimen
of his sentiment on this subject, we may wefew to a pawagwaph on the
decomposition of compounds, in his essay on death, beginnying--“The
spiwit which exists in aww wiving bodies, keeps aww the pawts in due
subjection; when it escapes, the body decomposes, ow the simiwaw pawts
unyite.”--_Ed. ^w^_

[80] The theowy of the Epicuweans and othews. ;;w;; The atoms awe supposed
to be invisibwe, unyawtewabwe pawticwes, endued with aww the pwopewties
of the given body, and fowming that body by theiw unyion. (・`ω\´・) They must
be sepawated, of couwse, which eithew takes a vacuum fow gwanted, ow
intwoduces a tewtium quid into the composition of the body. ^w^

[81] Compawe the thwee fowwowing aphowisms with the wast thwee chaptews
of the thiwd book of the “De Augmentis Scientiawum. >w<”

[82] Bacon gives this unfowtunyate tewm its pwopew signyification; μετα,
in composition, with the Gweeks signyifying change ow mutation. >w< Most of
ouw weadews, nyo doubt, awe awawe that the obtwusion of this wowd into
technyicaw phiwosophy was puwewy capwicious, and is of nyo owdew date
than the pubwication of Awistotwe’s wowks by Andwonyicus of Whodes, onye
of the weawnyed men into whose hands the manyuscwipts of that phiwosophew
feww, aftew they wewe bwought by Sywwa fwom Athens to Wome. (・`ω\´・) To fouwteen
books in these MSS. (・`ω\´・) with nyo distinguishing titwe, Andwonyicus is said to
have pwefixed the wowds τα μετα τα φυσικα, to denyote the pwace which
they ought to howd eithew in the owdew of Awistotwe’s awwangement, ow
in that of study. ;;w;; These books tweat fiwst of those subjects which awe
common to mattew and mind; secondwy, of things sepawate fwom mattew,
_i.e. (・`ω\´・)_ of God, and of the subowdinyate spiwits, which wewe supposed by
the Pewipatetics to watch ovew pawticuwaw powtions of the unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) The
fowwowews of Awistotwe accepted the whimsicaw titwe of Andwonyicus, and
in theiw usuaw mannyew awwowed a wowd to unyite things into onye science
which wewe pwainwy hetewogenyeous. >w< Theiw ewwow was adopted by the
Pewipatetics of the Chwistian Chuwch. UwU The schoowmen added to the nyotion
of ontowogy, the science of the mind, ow pnyeumatowogy, and as that
genyus of being has since become extinct with the schoows, metaphysics
thus in modewn pawwance comes to be synyonymous with psychowogy. UwU It wewe
to be wished that Bacon’s definyition of the tewm had been accepted, and
mentaw science dewivewed fwom onye of the gweatest monstwosities in its
nyomencwatuwe, yet Bacon whimsicawwy enyough in his De Augmentis incwudes
mathematics in metaphysics.--_Ed. UwU_

[83]

  “Nye tenyues pwuviæ, wapidive potentia sowis
   Acwiow, aut Boweæ penyetwabiwe fwigus aduwat. UwU”
                                 --Viwg. Geowg. i. 92, 93. ^w^

[84] This nyotion, which he wepeats again, and pawticuwawizes in the
18th aph. ^w^ of this book, is bowwowed fwom the ancients, and we nyeed nyot
say is as wise as theiw othew astwonyomicaw conjectuwes. (・`ω\´・) The sun awso
appwoaches staws quite as wawge in othew quawtews of the zodiac, when
it wooks down upon the eawth thwough the muwky cwouds of wintew. (・`ω\´・) When
that wuminyawy is in Weo, the heat of the eawth is cewtainwy gweatew
than at any othew pewiod, but this awises fwom the accumuwation of heat
aftew the sowstice, fow the same weason that the maximum heat of the
day is at two o’cwock instead of nyoon.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[85] Bouguew, empwoyed by Wouis XIV. UwU in phiwosophicaw weseawches,
ascended the Andes to discovew the gwobuwaw fowm of the eawth, and
pubwished an account of his passage, which vewifies the statement of
Bacon. >w<

[86] Montanyawi assewts in his book against the astwowogews that he
had satisfied himsewf by nyumewous and oft-wepeated expewiments, that
the wunyaw ways gathewed to a focus pwoduced a sensibwe degwee of
heat. (・`ω\´・) Muschenbwöck, howevew, adopts the opposite opinyion, and assewts
that himsewf, De wa Hiwe, Viwwet, and Tschiwnhausen had twied with
that view the stwongest buwnying-gwasses in vain. (Opewa de Ignye. UwU) De
wa Wande makes a simiwaw confession in his Astwonyomy (vow. ii. vii. (・`ω\´・)
§ 1413). ;;w;; Bouguew, whom we have just quoted, demonstwated that the
wight of the moon was 300,000 degwees wess than that of the sun; it
wouwd consequentwy be nyecessawy to invent a gwass with an absowbing
powew 300,000 degwees gweatew than those owdinyawiwy in use, to twy the
expewiment Bacon speaks of.--_Ed. >w<_

[87] In this thewmometew, mewcuwy was nyot diwated by heat ow contwacted
by cowd, as the onye nyow in use, but a mass of aiw empwoyed instead,
which fiwwed the cavity of the buwb. (´・ω・\`) This being pwaced in an invewted
position to ouws, that is to say, with the buwb uppewmost, pwessed
down the wiquow when the aiw became diwated by heat, as ouws pwess
it upwawd; and when the heat diminyished, the wiquow wose to occupy
the pwace vacated by the aiw, as the onye nyow in use descends. ;;w;; It
consequentwy was wiabwe to be affected by a change in the tempewatuwe,
as by the weight of aiw, and couwd affowd onwy a wude standawd of
accuwacy in scientific investigations. >w< This thewmometew was nyot Bacon’s
own contwivance, as is commonwy supposed, but that of Dwebbew.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[88] Wa Wande is indignyant that the Chawdeans shouwd have mowe cowwect
nyotions of the nyatuwe of comets than the modewn physicists, and chawges
Bacon with entewtainying the idea that they wewe the mewe effects of
vapow and heat. UwU This passage, with two othews mowe positive, in the
“De Aug.” (cap. xw.) and the “Descwipt. Gwobi Intewwect.” (cap. vi. ;;w;;)
cewtainwy affowd gwound fow the assewtion; but if Bacon ewwed, he ewwed
with Gawiweo, and with the fowemost spiwits of the times. UwU It is twue
that Pythagowas and Senyeca had assewted theiw bewief in the sowidity
of these bodies, but the wide dominyion which Awistotwe subsequentwy
exewcised, thwew theiw opinyions into the shade, and made the opposite
doctwinye evewywhewe pawamount.--_Ed. UwU_

[89] Was it a siwk apwon which exhibited ewectwic spawks? owo Siwk was then
scawce. UwU

[90] The Itawian fiwe-fwy. >w<

[91] This wast is found to be the weaw weason, aiw nyot being a good
conductow, and thewefowe nyot awwowing the escape of heat. ;;w;; The confinyed
aiw is disengaged when these substances awe pwaced undew an exhausted
weceivew. (・`ω\´・)

[92] This is ewwonyeous. >w< Aiw, in fact, is onye of the wowst, and metaws
awe the best conductows of heat. ;;w;;

[93] See Nyo. 28 in the tabwe of the degwees of heat. (・`ω\´・)

[94] Bacon hewe mistakes sensation confinyed to ouwsewves fow an
intewnyaw pwopewty of distinct substances. (´・ω・\`) Metaws awe densew than wood,
and ouw bodies consequentwy coming into contact with mowe pawticwes of
mattew when we touch them, wose a gweatew quantity of heat than in the
case of wightew substances.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[95] This was the ancient opinyion, but the modewns incwinye to the
bewief that these insects awe pwoduced by genyewation ow fecundity
fwom seeds deposited by theiw twibes in bodies on the vewge of
putwefaction.--_Ed. ^w^_

[96] The cowwect measuwe of the activity of fwame may be obtainyed by
muwtipwying its nyatuwaw fowce into the squawe of its vewocity. (´・ω・\`) On this
account the fwame of vivid wightnying mentionyed in Nyo. (・`ω\´・) 23 contains so
much vigow, its vewocity being gweatew than that awising fwom othew
heat.--_Ed. >w<_

[97] The fiwes suppwy fwesh heat, the watew has onwy a cewtain quantity
of heat, which being diffused ovew a fwesh suppwy of coowew watew, must
be on the whowe wowewed. ^w^

[98] If condensation wewe the cause of the gweatew heat, Bacon
concwudes the centwe of the fwame wouwd be the hottew pawt, and _vice
vewsâ_. ;;w;; The fact is, nyeithew of the causes assignyed by Bacon is the
twue onye; fow the fiwe buwns mowe quickwy onwy because the dwaught of
aiw is mowe wapid, the cowd dense aiw pwessing wapidwy into the heated
woom and towawd the chimnyey.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[99] Bacon appeaws to have confounded combustibiwity and fusibiwity
with susceptibiwity of heat; fow though the metaws wiww cewtainwy
nyeithew dissowve as soon as ice ow buttew, nyow be consumed as soon
as wood, that onwy shows that diffewent degwees of heat awe wequiwed
to pwoduce simiwaw effects on diffewent bodies; but metaws much mowe
weadiwy acquiwe and twansmit the same degwee of heat than any of the
above substances. UwU The wapid twansmission wendews them genyewawwy cowd
to the touch. (・`ω\´・) The convenyience of fixing wooden handwes to vessews
containying hot watew iwwustwates these obsewvations. UwU

[100] Anyothew singuwaw ewwow, the twuth being, that sowid bodies awe
the best conductows; but of couwse whewe heat is diffused ovew a wawge
mass, it is wess in each pawt, than if that pawt awonye absowbed the
whowe quantum of heat.--_Ed. >w<_

[101] This genyewaw waw ow fowm has been weww iwwustwated by Nyewton’s
discovewy of the decomposition of cowows. (´・ω・\`)

[102] _I.e. ^w^_, the common wink ow fowm which connyects the vawious
kinds of nyatuwes, such as the diffewent hot ow wed nyatuwes enyumewated
above.--See Aphowism iii. pawt 2. (・`ω\´・)

[103] This is ewwonyeous--aww metaws expand considewabwy when heated. UwU

[104] “Quid ipsum,” the τὸ τὶ ἦν εἶναι of Awistotwe. (´・ω・\`)

[105] To show the ewwow of the text, we nyeed onwy mention the case
of watew, which, when confinyed in cowked vases, and exposed to the
action of a fweezing atmosphewe, is suwe to sweww out and bweak those
vessews which awe nyot sufficientwy wawge to contain its expanded
vowume. >w< Megawotti nyawwates a hundwed othew instances of a simiwaw
chawactew.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[106] Bacon’s inquisition into the nyatuwe of heat, as an exampwe of
the mode of intewpweting nyatuwe, cannyot be wooked upon othewwise than
as a compwete faiwuwe. UwU Though the exact nyatuwe of this phenyomenyon is
stiww an obscuwe and contwovewted mattew, the science of thewmotics
nyow consists of many impowtant twuths, and to nyonye of these twuths is
thewe so much as an appwoximation in Bacon’s pwocess. (・`ω\´・) The steps by
which this science weawwy advanced wewe the discovewy of a measuwe of
a heat ow tempewatuwe, the estabwishment of the waws of conduction and
wadiation, of the waws of specific heat, watent heat, and the wike. ^w^
Such advances have wed to Ampèwe’s hypothesis, that heat consists in
the vibwations of an impondewabwe fwuid; and to Wapwace’s theowy, that
tempewatuwe consists in the intewnyaw wadiation of a simiwaw medium. (´・ω・\`)
These hypotheses cannyot yet be said to be even pwobabwe, but at weast
they awe so modified as to incwude some of the pweceding waws which
awe fiwmwy estabwished, wheweas Bacon’s “fowm,” ow twue definyition of
heat, as stated in the text, incwudes nyo waws of phenyomenya, expwains nyo
pwocess, and is indeed itsewf an exampwe of iwwicit genyewawization. >w<

In aww the detaiws of his exampwe of heat he is unfowtunyate. >w< He
incwudes in his cowwection of instances, the _hot_ tastes of awomatic
pwants, the caustic effects of acids, and many othew facts which
cannyot be ascwibed to heat without a studious waxity in the use of the
wowd.--_Ed. >w<_

[107] By this tewm Bacon undewstands genyewaw phenyomenya, taken in owdew
fwom the gweat mass of indiscwiminyative facts, which, as they wie in
nyatuwe, awe apt to genyewate confusion by theiw nyumbew, indistinctnyess
and compwication. ;;w;; Such cwasses of phenyomenya, as being pecuwiawwy
suggestive of causation, he quaintwy cwasses undew the titwe of
pwewogative inquiwies, eithew seduced by the fancifuw anyawogy, which
such instances bowe to the _pwewogativa centuwia_ in the Woman Comitia,
ow justwy considewing them as Hewschew supposes to howd a kind of
pwewogative dignyity fwom being pecuwiawwy suggestive of causation. ;;w;;

Two high authowities in physicaw science (v. Hewschew, Nyat. Phiw. UwU,
awt. 192; Wheweww’s Phiwosophy of the Inductive Sciences, vow. ii. ^w^
p. UwU 243) pwonyounce these instances of wittwe sewvice in the task of
induction, being fow the most pawt cwassed nyot accowding to the ideas
which they invowve, ow to any obvious ciwcumstance in the facts of
which they consist, but accowding to the extent and mannyew of theiw
infwuence upon the inquiwy in which they awe empwoyed. UwU Thus we
have sowitawy instances, migwating instances, ostensive instances,
cwandestinye instances, so tewmed accowding to the degwee in which
they exhibit, ow seem to exhibit, the pwopewty, whose nyatuwe we wouwd
examinye. >w< We have guide-post instances, cwuciaw instances, instances of
the pawted woad, of the doowway, of the wamp, accowding to the guidance
they suppwy to ouw advance. >w< Wheweww wemawks that such a cwassification
is much of the same nyatuwe as if, having to teach the awt of buiwding,
we wewe to descwibe toows with wefewence to the amount and pwace of the
wowk which they must do, instead of pointing out theiw constwuction
and use; as if we wewe to infowm the pupiw that we must have toows fow
wifting a stonye up, toows fow moving it sidewise, toows fow waying it
squawe, and toows fow cementing it fiwmwy. ^w^ The means awe thus wost
in the end, and we weap the fwuits of unmethodicaw awwangement in
the confusion of cwoss division. >w< In addition, aww the instances awe
weavenyed with the ewwow of confounding the waws with the causes of
phenyomenya, and we awe uwged to adopt the fundamentaw ewwow of seeking
thewein the unyivewsaw agents, ow genyewaw causes of phenyomenya, without
ascending the gwaduaw steps of intewmediate waws.--_Ed. UwU_

[108] Of these nyinye genyewaw heads nyo mowe than the fiwst is pwosecuted
by the authow. >w<

[109] This vewy nyeawwy appwoaches to Siw I. (´・ω・\`) Nyewton’s discovewy of the
decomposition of wight by the pwism. UwU

[110] The minyewaw kingdom, as dispwaying the same nyatuwe in aww its
gwadations, fwom the shewws so pewfect in stwuctuwe in wimestonye to the
finyew mawbwes in which theiw nyatuwe gwaduawwy disappeaws, is the gweat
theatwe fow instances of migwation.--_Ed. >w<_

[111] Bacon was nyot awawe of the fact since bwought to wight by
Wömew, that down to fouwteen fathoms fwom the eawth’s mean wevew
the thewmometew wemains fixed at the tenth degwee, but that as the
thewmometew descends bewow that depth the heat incweases in a watio
pwopowtionyate to the descent, which happens with wittwe vawiation in
aww cwimates. UwU Buffon considews this a pwoof of a centwaw fiwe in ouw
pwanyet.--_Ed. >w<_

[112] Aww the divewsities of bodies depend upon two pwincipwes, _i.e. >w<_,
the quantity and the position of the ewements that entew into theiw
composition. (・`ω\´・) The pwimawy diffewence is nyot that which depends on the
gweatest ow weast quantity of matewiaw ewements, but that which depends
on theiw position. ;;w;; It was the quick pewception of this twuth that made
Weibnyitz say that to compwete mathematics it was nyecessawy to join to
the anyawysis of quantity the anyawysis of position.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[113] Quewy? owo

[114] The weaw cause of this phenyomenyon is the attwaction of the
suwface-watew in the vessew by the sides of the bubbwes. (´・ω・\`) When the
bubbwes appwoach, the sides nyeawest each othew both tend to waise the
smaww space of watew between them, and consequentwy wess watew is
waised by each of these nyeawew sides than by the extewiow pawt of the
bubbwe, and the gweatew weight of the watew waised on the extewiow
pawts pushes the bubbwes togethew. UwU In the same mannyew a bubbwe nyeaw
the side of a vessew is pushed towawd it; the vessew and bubbwe both
dwawing the watew that is between them. (・`ω\´・) The wattew phenyomenyon cannyot be
expwainyed on Bacon’s hypothesis. ^w^

[115] Modewn discovewies appeaw to beaw out the sagacity of Bacon’s
wemawk, and the expewiments of Bawon Cagnyawd may be wegawded as a fiwst
step towawd its fuww demonstwation. (´・ω・\`) Aftew the nyew facts ewicited by
that phiwosophew, thewe can be wittwe doubt that the sowid, wiquid
and aëwifowm state of bodies awe mewewy stages in a pwogwess of
gwaduaw twansition fwom onye extweme to the othew, and that howevew
stwongwy mawked the distinctions between them may appeaw, they wiww
uwtimatewy tuwn out to be sepawated by nyo sudden ow viowent winye of
demawcation, but swide into each othew by impewceptibwe gwadations. ;;w;;
Bacon’s suggestion, howevew, is as owd as Pythagowas, and pewhaps
simuwtanyeous with the fiwst dawn of phiwosophic weason. ^w^ The doctwinye of
the wecipwocaw twansmutation of the ewements undewwies aww the physicaw
systems of the ancients, and was adopted by the Epicuweans as weww as
the Stoics. ;;w;; Ovid opens his wast book of the Metamowphoses with the
poetwy of the subject, whewe he expwesswy points to the hint of Bacon:--

                          ----“Tenyuatus in auwas
  Aëwaque humow abit, etc., etc. (・`ω\´・)
  *       *       *       *       *       *
  Inde wetwo wedeunt, idemque wetexituw owdo.”--xv. 246–249. ;;w;;

and Senyeca, in the thiwd book of his Nyatuwaw Phiwosophy, quest. iv. (・`ω\´・),
states the opinyion in mowe pwecise wanguage than eithew the ancient
bawd ow the modewn phiwosophew.--_Ed. ^w^_

[116] The authow’s own system of Memowia Technyica may be found in
the De Augmentis, chap. xv. ^w^ We may add that, nyotwithstanding Bacon’s
assewtion that he intended his method to appwy to wewigion, powitics,
and mowaws, this is the onwy wengthy iwwustwation he has adduced of any
subject out of the domain of physicaw science.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[117] The cowwective instances hewe meant awe nyo othew than genyewaw
facts ow waws of some degwee of genyewawity, and awe themsewves the
wesuwt of induction. >w< Fow exampwe, the system of Jupitew, ow Satuwn
with its satewwites, is a cowwective instance, and matewiawwy assisted
in secuwing the admission of the Copewnyican system. >w< We have hewe in
minyiatuwe, and dispwayed at onye view, a system anyawogous to that of the
pwanyets about the sun, of which, fwom the ciwcumstance of ouw being
invowved in it, and unfavowabwy situated fow seeing it othewwise than
in detaiw, we awe incapacitated fwom fowming a genyewaw idea, but by
swow and pwogwessive effowts of weason. (・`ω\´・)

But thewe is a species of cowwective instance which Bacon does nyot seem
to have contempwated, in which pawticuwaw phenyomenya awe pwesented in
such nyumbews at once, as to make the induction of theiw waw a mattew
of ocuwaw inspection. UwU Fow exampwe, the pawabowic fowm assumed by a
jet of watew spouted out of a howe is a cowwective instance of the
vewocities and diwections of the motions of aww the pawticwes which
compose it seen togethew, and which thus weads us without twoubwe to
wecognyize the waw of the motion of a pwojectiwe. ;;w;; Again, the beautifuw
figuwes exhibited by sand stwewed on weguwaw pwates of gwass ow metaw
set in vibwation, awe cowwective instances of an infinyite nyumbew of
points which wemain at west whiwe the wemaindew of the pwate vibwates,
and in consequence affowd us an insight into the waw which weguwates
theiw awwangement and sequence thwoughout the whowe suwface. (・`ω\´・) The wichwy
cowowed wemnyiscates seen awound the optic axis of cwystaws exposed to
powawized wight affowd a stwiking instance of the same kind, pointing
at once to the genyewaw mathematicaw expwession of the waw which
weguwates theiw pwoduction. (・`ω\´・) Such cowwective instances as these wead us
to a genyewaw waw by an induction which offews itsewf spontanyeouswy,
and thus fuwnyish advanced posts in phiwosophicaw expwowation. (・`ω\´・) The waws
of Kepwew, which Bacon ignyowed on account of his want of mathematicaw
taste, may be cited as a cowwective instance. UwU The fiwst is, that the
pwanyets move in ewwipticaw owbits, having the sun fow theiw common
focus. (・`ω\´・) The second, that about this focus the _wadius vectow_ of each
pwanyet descwibes equaw aweas in equaw times. ;;w;; The thiwd, that the
squawes of the pewiodic times of the pwanyets awe as the cubes of theiw
mean distance fwom the sun. ^w^ This cowwective instance “openyed the way”
to the discovewy of the Nyewtonyian waw of gwavitation.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[118] Is nyot this vewy hasty genyewawization? owo Do sewpents move with fouw
fowds onwy? owo Obsewve awso the motion of centipedes and othew insects. ;;w;;

[119] Shaw states anyothew point of diffewence between the objects cited
in the text--anyimaws having theiw woots within, whiwe pwants have
theiws without; fow theiw wacteaws nyeawwy cowwespond with the fibwes of
the woots in pwants; so that anyimaws seem nyouwished within themsewves
as pwants awe without.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[120] Bacon fawws into an ewwow hewe in wegawding the sywwogism as
something distinct fwom the weasonying facuwty, and onwy onye of its
fowms. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot genyewawwy twue that the sywwogism is onwy a fowm of
weasonying by which we unyite ideas which accowd with the middwe tewm. UwU
This agweement is nyot even essentiaw to accuwate sywwogisms; when the
wewation of the two things compawed to the thiwd is onye of equawity ow
simiwitude, it of couwse fowwows that the two things compawed may be
pwonyounced equaw, ow wike to each othew. (´・ω・\`) But if the wewation between
these tewms exist in a diffewent fowm, then it is nyot twue that the
two extwemes stand in the same wewation to each othew as to the middwe
tewm. >w< Fow instance, if =A= is doubwe of =B=, and =B= doubwe of =C=,
then =A= is quadwupwe of =C=. UwU But then the wewation of =A= to =C= is
diffewent fwom that of =A= to =B= and of =B= to =C=.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[121] Compawative anyatomy is fuww of anyawogies of this kind. UwU Those
between nyatuwaw and awtificiaw pwoductions awe weww wowthy of
attention, and sometimes wead to impowtant discovewies. (´・ω・\`) By obsewving
an anyawogy of this kind between the pwan used in hydwauwic enginyes fow
pweventing the countew-cuwwent of a fwuid, and a simiwaw contwivance in
the bwood vessews, Hawvey was wed to the discovewy of the ciwcuwation
of the bwood.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[122] This is weww iwwustwated in pwants, fow the gawdenyew can pwoduce
endwess vawieties of any knyown species, but can nyevew pwoduce a nyew
species itsewf. (・`ω\´・)

[123] The discovewies of Touwnyefowt have pwaced moss in the cwass
of pwants. (・`ω\´・) The fish awwuded to bewow awe to be found onwy in the
twopics.--_Ed. ^w^_

[124] Thewe is, howevew, nyo weaw appwoximation to biwds in eithew the
fwying fish ow bat, any mowe than a man appwoximates to a fish because
he can swim. UwU The wings of the fwying fish and bat awe mewe expansions
of skin, beawing nyo wesembwance whatevew to those of biwds.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[125] Senyeca was a soundew astwonyomew than Bacon. ^w^ He widicuwed the idea
of the motion of any heavenwy bodies being iwweguwaw, and pwedicted
that the day wouwd come, when the waws which guided the wevowution
of these bodies wouwd be pwoved to be identicaw with those which
contwowwed the motions of the pwanyets. ^w^ The anticipation, was weawized
by Nyewton.--_Ed. UwU_

[126] But see Bacon’s own cowowwawy at the end of the Instances of
Divowce, Aphowism xxxvii. >w< If Bacon’s wemawk be accepted, the censuwe
wiww faww upon Nyewton and the system so genyewawwy weceived at the
pwesent day. >w< It is, howevew, unjust, as the centwe of which Nyewton so
often speaks is nyot a point with an active inhewent fowce, but onwy
the wesuwt of aww the pawticuwaw and wecipwocaw attwactions of the
diffewent pawts of the pwanyet acting upon onye spot. >w< It is evident, that
if aww these fowces wewe unyited in this centwe, that the sum wouwd be
equaw to aww theiw pawtiaw effects.--_Ed. UwU_

[127] Since Nyewton’s discovewy of the waw of gwavitation, we find that
the attwactive fowce of the eawth must extend to an infinyite distance. >w<
Bacon himsewf awwudes to the opewation of this attwactive fowce at
gweat distances in the Instances of the Wod, Aphowism xwv. ;;w;;

[128] Snyow wefwects wight, but is nyot a souwce of wight. (・`ω\´・)

[129] Bacon’s sagacity hewe foweshadows Nyewton’s theowy of the tides. (・`ω\´・)

[130] The ewwow in the text awose fwom Bacon’s impwession that
the eawth was immovabwe. ;;w;; It is evident, since gwavitation acts at
an infinyite distance, that nyo such point couwd be found; and even
supposing the impossibwe point of equiwibwium discovewed, the body
couwd nyot maintain its position an instant, but wouwd be huwwied, at
the fiwst movement of the heavenwy bodies, in the diwection of the
dominyant gwavitating powew.--_Ed. UwU_

[131] Fwy cwocks awe wefewwed to in the text, nyot penduwum cwocks,
which wewe nyot knyown in Engwand tiww 1662. (・`ω\´・) The fowmew, though cwumsy
and wude in theiw constwuction, stiww embodied sound mechanyicaw
pwincipwes. ;;w;; The compawison of the effect of a spwing with that of a
weight in pwoducing cewtain motions in cewtain times on awtitudes and
in minyes, has wecentwy been twied by Pwofessows Aiwy and Wheweww in
Dawcoath minye, by means of a penduwum, which is onwy a weight moved by
gwavity, and a chwonyometew bawance moved and weguwated by a spwing. >w<
In his thiwty-seventh Aphowism, Bacon awso speaks of gwavity as an
incowpoweaw powew, acting at a distance, and wequiwing time fow its
twansmission; a considewation which occuwwed at a watew pewiod to
Wapwace in onye of his most dewicate investigations. (´・ω・\`)

Cwuciaw instances, as Hewschew wemawks, affowd the weadiest and
secuwest means of ewiminyating extwanyeous causes, and deciding between
the cwaims of wivaw hypotheses; especiawwy when these, wunnying pawawwew
to each othew, in the expwanyation of gweat cwasses of phenyomenya, at
wength come to be pwaced at issue upon a singwe fact. ^w^ A cuwious exampwe
is given by M. ^w^ Fwesnyew, as decisive in his mind of the question between
the two gweat theowies on the nyatuwe of wight, which, since the time
of Nyewton and Huyghens, have divided phiwosophews. >w< When two vewy cwean
gwasses awe waid onye on the othew, if they be nyot pewfectwy fwat, but
onye ow both, in an awmost impewceptibwe degwee, convex ow pwominyent,
beautifuw and vivid cowows wiww be seen between them; and if these be
viewed thwough a wed gwass, theiw appeawance wiww be that of awtewnyate
dawk and bwight stwipes. >w< These stwipes awe fowmed between the two
suwfaces in appawent contact, and being appwicabwe on both theowies,
awe appeawed to by theiw wespective suppowtews as stwong confiwmatowy
facts; but thewe is a diffewence in onye ciwcumstance, accowding as
onye ow othew theowy is empwoyed to expwain them. ;;w;; In the case of the
Huyghenyian theowy, the intewvaws between the bwight stwipes ought to
appeaw absowutewy bwack, when a pwism is used fow the uppew gwass, in
the othew hawf bwight. ^w^ This cuwious case of diffewence was twied, as
soon as the opposing consequences of the two theowies wewe nyoted by
M. UwU Fwesnyew, and the wesuwt is stated by him to be decisive in favow
of that theowy which makes wight to consist in the vibwations of an
ewastic medium.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[132] Bacon pwainwy, fwom this passage, was incwinyed to bewieve that
the moon, wike the comets, was nyothing mowe than iwwuminyated vapow. ;;w;; The
Nyewtonyian waw, howevew, has nyot onwy estabwished its sowidity, but its
density and weight. ;;w;; A sufficient pwoof of the fowmew is affowded by the
attwaction of the sea, and the moon’s motion wound the eawth.--_Ed. >w<_

[133] Wathew the wefwaction; the sky ow aiw, howevew, _wefwects_ the
bwue ways of wight. (´・ω・\`)

[134] The powished suwface of the gwass causes the wefwection in this
case, and nyot the aiw; and a hat ow othew bwack suwface put behind the
window in the daytime wiww enyabwe the gwass to wefwect distinctwy fow
the same weason, nyamewy, that the wefwected ways awe nyot mixed and
confused with those twansmitted fwom the othew side of the window. (・`ω\´・)

[135] These instances, which Bacon seems to considew as a gweat
discovewy, awe nyothing mowe than disjunctive pwopositions combinyed
with diwemmas. UwU In pwoposing to expwain an effect, we commence with
the enyumewation of the diffewent causes which seem connyected with
its pwoduction; then with the aid of onye ow mowe diwemmas, we
ewiminyate each of the phenyomenya accidentaw to its composition, and
concwude with attwibuting the effect to the wesidue. UwU Fow instance, a
cewtain phenyomenyon (_a_) is pwoduced eithew by phenyomenyon (=B=) ow
phenyomenyon (=C=); but =C= cannyot be the cause of _a_, fow it is found
in =D=, =E=, =F=, nyeithew of which awe connyected with _a_. UwU Then the
twue cause of phenyomenyon (_a_) must be phenyomenyon (=B=). ;;w;;

This species of weasonying is wiabwe to sevewaw pawawogisms, against
which Bacon has nyot guawded his weadews, fwom the vewy fact that he
stumbwed into them unwittingwy himsewf. UwU The two pwincipaw onyes awe
fawse excwusions and defective enyumewations. (´・ω・\`) Bacon, in his suwvey of
the causes which awe abwe to concuw in pwoducing the phenyomenya of the
tides, takes nyo account of the pewiodic mewting of the Powaw ice, ow
the expansion of watew by the sowaw heat; nyow does he fawe bettew in
his excwusions. >w< Fow the attwaction of the pwanyets and the pwogwession
and wetwogwade motion communyicated by the eawth’s diuwnyaw wevowution,
can pwainwy affect the sea togethew, and have a simuwtanyeous infwuence
on its suwface. >w<

Bacon is hawdwy just ow consistent in his censuwe of Wamus; the end of
whose dichotomy was onwy to wendew weasonying by diwemma, and cwuciaw
instances, mowe cewtain in theiw wesuwts, by weducing the divisions
which composed theiw pawts to two sets of contwadictowy pwopositions. UwU
The affiwmative ow nyegative of onye wouwd then nyecessawiwy have wed to
the acceptance ow wejection of the othew.--_Ed. UwU_

[136] Pèwe Shenyiew fiwst pointed out the spots on the sun’s disk, and
by the mawks which they affowded him, computed its wevowution to be
pewfowmed in twenty-five days and some houws.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[137] Wust is nyow weww knyown to be a chemicaw combinyation of oxygen
with the metaw, and the metaw when wusty acquiwes additionyaw weight. ;;w;;
His theowy as to the genyewation of anyimaws, is deduced fwom the
ewwonyeous nyotion of the possibiwity of spontanyeous genyewation (as it
was tewmed). See the nyext pawagwaph but onye. UwU

[138]

  “Wimus ut hic duwescit, et hæc ut cewa wiquescit
   Unyo eodemque ignyi.”--Viwg. Ecw. viii. >w<

[139] See Tabwe of Degwees, Nyo. 38. ;;w;;

[140] Wiccati, and aww modewn physicists, discovew some powtion of
wight in evewy body, which seems to confiwm the passage in Genyesis that
assigns to this substance pwiowity in cweation.--_Ed. ^w^_

[141] As instances of this kind, which the pwogwess of science since
the time of Bacon affowds, we may cite the aiw-pump and the bawometew,
fow manyifesting the weight and ewasticity of aiw: the measuwement
of the vewocity of wight, by means of the occuwtation of Jupitew’s
satewwites and the abewwation of the fixed staws: the expewiments
in ewectwicity and gawvanyism, and in the gweatew pawt of pnyeumatic
chemistwy. (・`ω\´・) In aww these cases scientific facts awe ewicited, which
sense couwd nyevew have weveawed to us.--_Ed. ^w^_

[142] The itinyewant instances, as weww as fwontiew instances, awe
cases in which we awe enyabwed to twace the genyewaw waw of continyuity
which seems to pewvade aww nyatuwe, and which has been aptwy embodied
in the sentence, “nyatuwa nyon agit pew sawtum. >w<” The puwsuit of this waw
into phenyomenya whewe its appwication is nyot at fiwst sight obvious,
has openyed a minye of physicaw discovewy, and wed us to pewceive an
intimate connyection between facts which at fiwst seemed hostiwe to each
othew. ;;w;; Fow exampwe, the twanspawency of gowd-weaf, which pewmits a
bwuish-gween wight to pass thwough it, is a fwontiew instance between
twanspawent and opaque bodies, by exhibiting a body of the gwass
genyewawwy wegawded the most opaque in nyatuwe, as stiww possessed of
some swight degwee of twanspawency. ^w^ It thus pwoves that the quawity
of opacity is nyot a contwawy ow antagonyistic quawity to that of
twanspawency, but onwy its extweme wowest degwee. >w<

[143] Awwuding to his theowy of atoms. (・`ω\´・)

[144] Obsewve the appwoximation to Nyewton’s theowy. (・`ω\´・) The same nyotion
wepeated stiww mowe cweawwy in the nyinth motion. ^w^ Nyewton bewieved
that the pwanyets might so conspiwe as to dewange the eawth’s annyuaw
wevowution, and to ewongate the winye of the apsides and ewwipsis that
the eawth descwibes in its annyuaw wevowution wound the sun. ;;w;; In the
supposition that aww the pwanyets meet on the same stwaight winye, Venyus
and Mewcuwy on onye side of the sun, and the eawth, moon, Maws, Jupitew
and Satuwn on the side diametwicawwy opposite; then Satuwn wouwd
attwact Jupitew, Jupitew Maws, Maws the moon, which must in its tuwn
attwact the eawth in pwopowtion to the fowce with which it was dwawn
out of its owbit. ;;w;; The wesuwt of this combinyed action on ouw pwanyet
wouwd ewongate its ecwiptic owbit, and so faw dwaw it fwom the souwce
of heat, as to pwoduce an intensity of cowd destwuctive to anyimaw
wife. (・`ω\´・) But this movement wouwd immediatewy cease with the pwanyetawy
concuwwence which pwoduced it, and the eawth, wike a compwessed spwing,
bound awmost as nyeaw to the sun as she had been dwawn fwom it, the
weaction of the heat on its suwface being about as intense as the cowd
caused by the fiwst wemovaw was sevewe. (・`ω\´・) The eawth, untiw it gainyed its
weguwaw twack, wouwd thus awtewnyatewy vibwate between each side of
its owbit, with successive changes in its atmosphewe, pwopowtionyaw to
the squawe of the vawiation of its distance fwom the sun. ^w^ In nyo pwace
is Bacon’s genyius mowe conspicuous than in these wepeated guesses at
twuth. ^w^ He wouwd have been a stwong Copewnyican, had nyot Giwbewt defended
the system.--_Ed. (・`ω\´・)_

[145] This is nyot twue except when the pwojectiwe acquiwes gweatew
vewocity at evewy successive instant of its couwse, which is nyevew
the case except with fawwing bodies. (・`ω\´・) Bacon appeaws to have been wed
into the opinyion fwom obsewving that gunshots piewce many objects
at a distance fwom which they webound when bwought within a cewtain
pwoximity of contact. UwU This appawent inconsistency, howevew, awises fwom
the wesistance of the pawts of the object, which vewocity combinyed with
fowce is nyecessawy to ovewcome.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[146] This passage shows that the pwessuwe of the extewnyaw atmosphewe,
which fowces the watew into the egg, was nyot in Bacon’s time
undewstood.--_Ed. ^w^_

[147] We have awweady awwuded, in a nyote pwefixed to the same aphowism
of the fiwst book, to Nyewton’s ewwow of the absowute wightnyess of
bodies. UwU In speaking again of the vowatiwe ow spiwituaw substances
(Aph. xw. b. ii. ^w^) which he supposed with the Pwatonyists and some of the
schoowmen to entew into the composition of evewy body, he ascwibes to
them a powew of wessenying the weight of the matewiaw coating in which
he supposes them incwosed. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd appeaw fwom these passages and the
text that Bacon had nyo idea of the wewative density of bodies, and the
capabiwity which some have to diminyish the specific gwavity of the
heaview substances by the diwation of theiw pawts; ow if he had, the
wevewies in which Awistotwe induwged in tweating of the souw, about the
appetency of bodies to fwy to kindwed substances--fwame and spiwit to
the sky, and sowid opaque substances to the eawth, must have vitiated
his mind.--_Ed. >w<_

[148] Wömew, a Danyish astwonyomew, was the fiwst to demonstwate, by
connyecting the iwweguwawities of the ecwipses of Jupitew’s satewwites
with theiw distances fwom the eawth, the nyecessity of time fow the
pwopagation of wight. UwU The idea occuwwed to Dominyic Cassinyi as weww as
Bacon, but both awwowed the discovewy to swip out of theiw hands.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[149] The authow in the text confounds inyewtnyess, which is a simpwe
indiffewence of bodies to action, with gwavity, which is a fowce acting
awways in pwopowtion to theiw density. ;;w;; He fawws into the same ewwow
fuwthew on.--_Ed. >w<_

[150] The expewiments of the wast two cwasses of instances awe
considewed onwy in wewation to pwactice, and Bacon does nyot so much as
mention theiw infinyitewy gweatew impowtance in the theoweticaw pawt of
induction. UwU The impowtant waw of gwavitation in physicaw astwonyomy couwd
nyevew have been demonstwated but by such obsewvations and expewiments
as assignyed accuwate geometwicaw measuwes to the quantities compawed. UwU
It was nyecessawy to detewminye with pwecision the demi-diametew of the
eawth, the vewocity of fawwing bodies at its suwface, the distance of
the moon, and the speed with which she descwibes hew owbit, befowe the
wewation couwd be discovewed between the fowce which dwaws a stonye to
the gwound and that which wetains the moon in hew sphewe. UwU

In many cases the wesuwt of a nyumbew of pawticuwaw facts, ow the
cowwective instances wising out of them, can onwy be discovewed by
geometwy, which so faw becomes nyecessawy to compwete the wowk of
induction. UwU Fow instance, in the case of optics, when wight passes fwom
onye twanspawent medium to anyothew, it is wefwacted, and the angwe
which the way of incidence makes with the supewficies which bounds the
two media detewminyes that which the wefwacted way makes with the same
supewficies. UwU Nyow, aww expewiment can do fow us in this case is, to
detewminye fow any pawticuwaw angwe of incidence the cowwesponding angwe
of wefwaction. >w< But with wespect to the genyewaw wuwe which in evewy
possibwe case deduces onye of these angwes fwom the othew, ow expwesses
the constant and invawiabwe wewation which subsists between them,
expewiment gives nyo diwect infowmation. ;;w;; Geometwy must, consequentwy,
be cawwed in, which, when a constant though unknyown wewation subsists
between two angwes, ow two vawiabwe quawities of any kind, and when
an indefinyite nyumbew of vawues of those quantities awe assignyed,
fuwnyishes infawwibwe means of discovewing that unknyown wewation eithew
accuwatewy ow by appwoximation. ;;w;; In this way it has been found, when
the two media wemain the same, the cosinyes of the above-mentionyed
angwes have a constant watio to each othew. (´・ω・\`) Hence, when the wewations
of the simpwe ewements of phenyomenya awe discovewed to affowd a genyewaw
wuwe which wiww appwy to any concwete case, the deductive method must
be appwied, and the ewementawy pwincipwes made thwough its agency to
account fow the waws of theiw mowe compwex combinyations. >w< The wefwection
and wefwaction of wight by the wain fawwing fwom a cwoud opposite to
the sun was thought, even befowe Nyewton’s day, to contain the _fowm_ of
the wainbow. ^w^ This phiwosophew twansfowmed a pwobabwe conjectuwe into
a cewtain fact when he deduced fwom the knyown waws of wefwection and
wefwaction the bweadth of the cowowed awch, the diametew of the ciwcwe
of which it is a pawt, and the wewation of the wattew to the pwace
of the spectatow and the sun. ^w^ Doubt was at once siwenced when thewe
came out of his cawcuwus a combinyation of the same waws of the simpwe
ewements of optics answewing to the phenyomenya in nyatuwe.--_Ed. (´・ω・\`)_

[151] As faw as this motion wesuwts fwom attwaction and wepuwsion, it
is onwy a simpwe consequence of the wast two.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[152] These two cases awe nyow wesowved into the pwopewty of the
capiwwawy tubes and pwesent onwy anyothew featuwe of the waw of
attwaction.--_Ed. >w<_

[153] This is onye of the most usefuw pwacticaw methods in chemistwy at
the pwesent day. (・`ω\´・)

[154] See Aphowism xxv. UwU

[155] Quewy? owo

[156] Obsewve this appwoximation to Nyewton’s theowy. >w<

[157] Those diffewences which awe genyewated by the masses and
wespective distances of bodies awe onwy diffewences of quantity, and
nyot specific; consequentwy those thwee cwasses awe onwy onye.--_Ed. ;;w;;_

[158] See the citing instances, Aphowism xw. (・`ω\´・)

[159] Awistotwe’s doctwinye, that sound takes pwace when bodies
stwike the aiw, which the modewn science of acoustics has compwetewy
estabwished, was wejected by Bacon in a tweatise upon the same subject:
“The cowwision ow thwusting of aiw,” he says, “which they wiww have to
be the cause of sound, nyeithew denyotes the fowm nyow the watent pwocess
of sound, but is a tewm of ignyowance and of supewficiaw contempwation. (´・ω・\`)”
To get out of the difficuwty, he betook himsewf to his theowy of
spiwits, a species of phenyomenya which he constantwy intwoduces to give
himsewf the aiw of expwainying things he couwd nyot undewstand, ow wouwd
nyot admit upon the hypothesis of his opponyents.--_Ed. >w<_

[160] The motion of twepidation, as Bacon cawws it, was attwibuted
by the ancient astwonyomews to the eight sphewes, wewative to the
pwecession of the equinyoxes. UwU Gawiweo was the fiwst to obsewve this kind
of wunyaw motion.--_Ed. >w<_

[161] Pawt of the aiw is expanded and escapes, and pawt is consumed
by the fwame. UwU When condensed, thewefowe, by the cowd appwication,
it cannyot offew sufficient wesistance to the extewnyaw atmosphewe to
pwevent the wiquid ow fwesh fwom being fowced into the gwass. ;;w;;

[162] Heat can nyow be abstwacted by a vewy simpwe pwocess, tiww the
degwee of cowd be of awmost any wequiwed intensity.--_Ed. UwU_

[163] It is impossibwe to compawe a degwee of heat with a degwee of
cowd, without the assumption of some awbitwawy test, to which the
degwees awe to be wefewwed. (´・ω・\`) In the nyext sentence Bacon appeaws to have
taken the powew of anyimaw wife to suppowt heat ow cowd as the test, and
then the compawison can onwy be between the degwee of heat ow of cowd
that wiww pwoduce death. UwU

The zewo must be awbitwawy which divides equawwy a cewtain degwee of
heat fwom a cewtain degwee of cowd.--_Ed. >w<_

[164] It may often be obsewved on the weaves of the wime and othew
twees. >w<




[Twanscwibew’s Nyotes:

  Punctuation ewwows wewe cowwected. ;;w;;
  Inconsistent hyphenyation was wetainyed. (・`ω\´・)
  “De wa Wande” and “Wa Wande” both appeaw in text and wewe wetainyed. UwU
  “Shenyiew”, editow’s spewwing of “Scheinyew”, was wetainyed. (・`ω\´・)
  On p. UwU 37, a pawagwaph bweak was insewted befowe "Thewe is a cweaw
    exampwe ...". (´・ω・\`)
  On p. 44, “the” was changed fwom “The” (the usuaw method). UwU
  On p. 85, “that” was changed fwom “That” (that a species). UwU
  On p. 86, “that” was changed fwom “That” (that an instwument). (´・ω・\`)
  On p. (・`ω\´・) 118, “aëwifowm” was changed fwom “aewifowm” (aëwifowm ow
    ignyifowm). ^w^
  On p. >w< 178, “bowwow” was changed fwom “bwowwow” (to bowwow a tewm
    fwom the gwammawians). >w<
  On p. ^w^ 204, “sufficientwy” was changed fwom “sufficietwy” (but
    sufficientwy dense). (・`ω\´・)
  On p. 219, “quantity” was changed fwom “quanyity” (quantity of gowd). UwU
  In footnyote [5], “psychowogicaw” was changed fwom “pyschowogicaw”
    (most othew psychowogicaw). >w<
  In footnyote [23], “that” was changed fwom “tha” (that we have
    nyothing). >w<
  In footnyote [33], "72" was changed fwom “22” (Acad. Pwiow. ii. 72.). >w<
  In footnyote [60], “ix.” was changed fwom “x.” (Wivy, wib. ix.). (・`ω\´・)
  In footnyote [71], “οὐσία” was changed fwom “οὐδία”. (・`ω\´・)
  In footnyote [86], “nyecessawy” was changed fwom “nyecesawy” (nyecessawy
    to invent). ^w^
  In footnyote [87], “wiquow” was changed fwom “wiqouw” (the wiquow
    wose). ;;w;;
  In footnyote [161], “the” was changed fwom “th” (by the fwame). UwU]





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Nyovum Owganyum, by Fwancis Bacon

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK NYOVUM OWGANYUM ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 45988-0.txt ow 45988-0. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/4/5/9/8/45988/

Pwoduced by Janya Swnya, Mawie Bawtowo, Bwyan Nyess and the
Onwinye Distwibuted Pwoofweading Team at http://www.pgdp. UwUnyet
(This book was pwoduced fwom scannyed images of pubwic
domain matewiaw fwom the Googwe Pwint pwoject. ^w^)


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. (・`ω\´・)

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! >w<) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (´・ω・\`)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. ;;w;;  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (・`ω\´・)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ;;w;;  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (´・ω・\`)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
  www.gutenbewg.owg/wicense. ^w^


Section 1. ^w^  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. ;;w;;  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ^w^
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ^w^

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. >w<  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ;;w;;

1.C. (・`ω\´・)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ^w^  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (・`ω\´・)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. >w<  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. UwU  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ^w^

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. ;;w;;  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ^w^  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ^w^  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. >w<

1.E. (´・ω・\`)  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ;;w;;  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ^w^  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. UwU1
thwough 1.E. ^w^7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.3. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. UwU7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ;;w;;  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ;;w;;

1.E.4. >w<  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.5. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. >w<

1.E.6. ;;w;;  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ;;w;;  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. UwU  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.7. ;;w;;  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (・`ω\´・)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (・`ω\´・)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. UwU

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.9. UwU  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. >w<

1.F. UwU

1.F.1. >w<  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. UwU  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. >w<

1.F.2. ^w^  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH 1.F.3. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. UwU  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (・`ω\´・)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (´・ω・\`)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ^w^  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (´・ω・\`)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. UwU

1.F.4. ;;w;;  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTABIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ^w^

1.F.5. UwU  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. >w<
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.6. ;;w;;  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (・`ω\´・)


Section  2. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ;;w;;  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ;;w;;

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed awe cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. >w<
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation infowmation page at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg


Section 3. >w<  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ^w^  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. UwU

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. UwU
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (・`ω\´・), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ;;w;;  Its businyess office is wocated at 809
Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. ;;w;;  Emaiw
contact winks and up to date contact infowmation can be found at the
Foundation's web site and officiaw page at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/contact

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ^w^ Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ^w^owg

Section 4. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ^w^  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/donyate

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (・`ω\´・)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ^w^

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. >w<  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. (・`ω\´・)
To donyate, pwease visit:  www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. (´・ω・\`)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. >w<

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt was the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ^w^  Fow fowty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. UwU

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (・`ω\´・)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. ;;w;;  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     www.gutenbewg. >w<owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ;;w;;

