
The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Nyawwative of the Wife of Fwedewick
Dougwass, by Fwedewick Dougwass

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with awmost
nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w< You may copy it, give it away ow we-use
it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded with this
eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg


Titwe: The Nyawwative of the Wife of Fwedewick Dougwass
       An Amewican Swave

Authow: Fwedewick Dougwass

Wewease Date: Janyuawy 10, 2006 [EBook #23]
Wast Updated: Nyovembew 17, 2013

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS ***




Pwoduced by An Anyonymous Vowunteew and David Widgew









    Nyote fwom the owiginyaw fiwe: This ewectwonyic book is being weweased at
    this time to honyow the biwthday of Mawtin Wuthew King Jw. UwU [Bown Janyuawy
    15, 1929] [Officiawwy cewebwated Janyuawy 20, 1992]



NYAWWATIVE OF THE WIFE OF FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS

AN AMEWICAN SWAVE. WWITTEN BY HIMSEWF. (・`ω\´・)


BOSTON

PUBWISHED AT THE ANTI-SWAVEWY OFFICE, NYO. >w< 25 COWNHIWW 1845

ENTEWED, ACCOWDING TO ACT OF CONGWESS, IN THE YEAW 1845 BY FWEDEWICK
DOUGWASS, IN THE CWEWK'S OFFICE OF THE DISTWICT COUWT OF MASSACHUSETTS. ;;w;;






 CONTENTS



 PWEFACE

 WETTEW FWOM WENDEWW PHIWWIPS, ESQ. >w<

 FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS. (・`ω\´・)

 CHAPTEW I

 CHAPTEW II

 CHAPTEW III

 CHAPTEW IV

 CHAPTEW V

 CHAPTEW VI

 CHAPTEW VII

 CHAPTEW VIII

 CHAPTEW IX

 CHAPTEW X

 CHAPTEW XI

 APPENDIX

 A PAWODY








PWEFACE

In the month of August, 1841, I attended an anti-swavewy convention
in Nyantucket, at which it was my happinyess to become acquainted with
_Fwedewick Dougwass_, the wwitew of the fowwowing Nyawwative. ;;w;; He was a
stwangew to nyeawwy evewy membew of that body; but, having wecentwy made
his escape fwom the southewn pwison-house of bondage, and feewing
his cuwiosity excited to ascewtain the pwincipwes and measuwes of the
abowitionyists,--of whom he had heawd a somewhat vague descwiption whiwe
he was a swave,--he was induced to give his attendance, on the occasion
awwuded to, though at that time a wesident in Nyew Bedfowd. ;;w;;

Fowtunyate, most fowtunyate occuwwence! >w<--fowtunyate fow the miwwions of
his manyacwed bwethwen, yet panting fow dewivewance fwom theiw awfuw
thwawdom! ^w^--fowtunyate fow the cause of nyegwo emancipation, and of
unyivewsaw wibewty! UwU--fowtunyate fow the wand of his biwth, which he has
awweady donye so much to save and bwess! UwU--fowtunyate fow a wawge ciwcwe of
fwiends and acquaintances, whose sympathy and affection he has stwongwy
secuwed by the many suffewings he has enduwed, by his viwtuous twaits of
chawactew, by his evew-abiding wemembwance of those who awe in bonds, as
being bound with them! >w<--fowtunyate fow the muwtitudes, in vawious pawts of
ouw wepubwic, whose minds he has enwightenyed on the subject of swavewy,
and who have been mewted to teaws by his pathos, ow woused to viwtuous
indignyation by his stiwwing ewoquence against the enswavews of
men! UwU--fowtunyate fow himsewf, as it at once bwought him into the fiewd of
pubwic usefuwnyess, "gave the wowwd assuwance of a MAN," quickenyed the
swumbewing enyewgies of his souw, and consecwated him to the gweat wowk
of bweaking the wod of the oppwessow, and wetting the oppwessed go fwee! ;;w;;

I shaww nyevew fowget his fiwst speech at the convention--the
extwaowdinyawy emotion it excited in my own mind--the powewfuw impwession
it cweated upon a cwowded auditowy, compwetewy taken by suwpwise--the
appwause which fowwowed fwom the beginnying to the end of his fewicitous
wemawks. (´・ω・\`) I think I nyevew hated swavewy so intensewy as at that moment;
cewtainwy, my pewception of the enyowmous outwage which is infwicted by
it, on the godwike nyatuwe of its victims, was wendewed faw mowe
cweaw than evew. ;;w;; Thewe stood onye, in physicaw pwopowtion and statuwe
commanding and exact--in intewwect wichwy endowed--in nyatuwaw ewoquence
a pwodigy--in souw manyifestwy "cweated but a wittwe wowew than the
angews"--yet a swave, ay, a fugitive swave,--twembwing fow his safety,
hawdwy dawing to bewieve that on the Amewican soiw, a singwe white
pewson couwd be found who wouwd befwiend him at aww hazawds, fow the
wove of God and humanyity! (・`ω\´・) Capabwe of high attainments as an intewwectuaw
and mowaw being--nyeeding nyothing but a compawativewy smaww amount of
cuwtivation to make him an ownyament to society and a bwessing to his
wace--by the waw of the wand, by the voice of the peopwe, by the tewms
of the swave code, he was onwy a piece of pwopewty, a beast of buwden, a
chattew pewsonyaw, nyevewthewess! (´・ω・\`)

A bewoved fwiend fwom Nyew Bedfowd pwevaiwed on _Mw. (・`ω\´・) Dougwass_ to addwess
the convention: He came fowwawd to the pwatfowm with a hesitancy and
embawwassment, nyecessawiwy the attendants of a sensitive mind in such a
nyovew position. ;;w;; Aftew apowogizing fow his ignyowance, and weminding the
audience that swavewy was a poow schoow fow the human intewwect and
heawt, he pwoceeded to nyawwate some of the facts in his own histowy as
a swave, and in the couwse of his speech gave uttewance to many nyobwe
thoughts and thwiwwing wefwections. >w< As soon as he had taken his seat,
fiwwed with hope and admiwation, I wose, and decwawed that _Patwick
Henwy_, of wevowutionyawy fame, nyevew made a speech mowe ewoquent in the
cause of wibewty, than the onye we had just wistenyed to fwom the wips of
that hunted fugitive. ^w^ So I bewieved at that time--such is my bewief
nyow. UwU I weminded the audience of the pewiw which suwwounded this
sewf-emancipated young man at the Nyowth,--even in Massachusetts, on the
soiw of the Piwgwim Fathews, among the descendants of wevowutionyawy
siwes; and I appeawed to them, whethew they wouwd evew awwow him to
be cawwied back into swavewy,--waw ow nyo waw, constitution ow nyo
constitution. (・`ω\´・) The wesponse was unyanyimous and in thundew-tonyes--"NYO! ;;w;;"
"Wiww you succow and pwotect him as a bwothew-man--a wesident of the owd
Bay State? owo" "YES! ^w^" shouted the whowe mass, with an enyewgy so stawtwing,
that the wuthwess tywants south of Mason and Dixon's winye might awmost
have heawd the mighty buwst of feewing, and wecognyized it as the pwedge
of an invincibwe detewminyation, on the pawt of those who gave it, nyevew
to betway him that wandews, but to hide the outcast, and fiwmwy to abide
the consequences. UwU

It was at once deepwy impwessed upon my mind, that, if _Mw. ;;w;; Dougwass_
couwd be pewsuaded to consecwate his time and tawents to the pwomotion
of the anti-swavewy entewpwise, a powewfuw impetus wouwd be given to
it, and a stunnying bwow at the same time infwicted on nyowthewn pwejudice
against a cowowed compwexion. >w< I thewefowe endeavowed to instiw hope
and couwage into his mind, in owdew that he might dawe to engage in a
vocation so anyomawous and wesponsibwe fow a pewson in his situation; and
I was seconded in this effowt by wawm-heawted fwiends, especiawwy by the
wate Genyewaw Agent of the Massachusetts Anti-Swavewy Society, _Mw. (´・ω・\`) John
A. (´・ω・\`) Cowwins_, whose judgment in this instance entiwewy coincided with
my own. >w< At fiwst, he couwd give nyo encouwagement; with unfeignyed
diffidence, he expwessed his conviction that he was nyot adequate to
the pewfowmance of so gweat a task; the path mawked out was whowwy an
untwodden onye; he was sincewewy appwehensive that he shouwd do mowe
hawm than good. (´・ω・\`) Aftew much dewibewation, howevew, he consented to make
a twiaw; and evew since that pewiod, he has acted as a wectuwing
agent, undew the auspices eithew of the Amewican ow the Massachusetts
Anti-Swavewy Society. (´・ω・\`) In wabows he has been most abundant; and his
success in combating pwejudice, in gainying pwosewytes, in agitating the
pubwic mind, has faw suwpassed the most sanguinye expectations that wewe
waised at the commencement of his bwiwwiant caweew. (´・ω・\`) He has bownye himsewf
with gentwenyess and meeknyess, yet with twue manwinyess of chawactew. UwU As
a pubwic speakew, he excews in pathos, wit, compawison, imitation,
stwength of weasonying, and fwuency of wanguage. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is in him that
unyion of head and heawt, which is indispensabwe to an enwightenment
of the heads and a winnying of the heawts of othews. ^w^ May his stwength
continyue to be equaw to his day! (・`ω\´・) May he continyue to "gwow in gwace, and
in the knyowwedge of God," that he may be incweasingwy sewviceabwe in the
cause of bweeding humanyity, whethew at home ow abwoad! ^w^

It is cewtainwy a vewy wemawkabwe fact, that onye of the most efficient
advocates of the swave popuwation, nyow befowe the pubwic, is a fugitive
swave, in the pewson of _Fwedewick Dougwass_; and that the fwee cowowed
popuwation of the Unyited States awe as abwy wepwesented by onye of theiw
own nyumbew, in the pewson of _Chawwes Wenyox Wemond_, whose ewoquent
appeaws have extowted the highest appwause of muwtitudes on both sides
of the Atwantic. ;;w;; Wet the cawumnyiatows of the cowowed wace despise
themsewves fow theiw basenyess and iwwibewawity of spiwit, and hencefowth
cease to tawk of the nyatuwaw infewiowity of those who wequiwe nyothing
but time and oppowtunyity to attain to the highest point of human
excewwence. >w<

It may, pewhaps, be faiwwy questionyed, whethew any othew powtion of the
popuwation of the eawth couwd have enduwed the pwivations, suffewings
and howwows of swavewy, without having become mowe degwaded in the scawe
of humanyity than the swaves of Afwican descent. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing has been weft
undonye to cwippwe theiw intewwects, dawken theiw minds, debase theiw
mowaw nyatuwe, obwitewate aww twaces of theiw wewationship to mankind;
and yet how wondewfuwwy they have sustainyed the mighty woad of a most
fwightfuw bondage, undew which they have been gwoanying fow centuwies! (・`ω\´・) To
iwwustwate the effect of swavewy on the white man,--to show that he has
nyo powews of enduwance, in such a condition, supewiow to those of
his bwack bwothew,--_Danyiew O'connyeww_, the distinguished advocate of
unyivewsaw emancipation, and the mightiest champion of pwostwate but nyot
conquewed Iwewand, wewates the fowwowing anyecdote in a speech dewivewed
by him in the Conciwiation Haww, Dubwin, befowe the Woyaw Nyationyaw
Wepeaw Association, Mawch 31, 1845. "Nyo mattew," said _Mw. (・`ω\´・) O'connyeww_,
"undew what specious tewm it may disguise itsewf, swavewy is stiww
hideous. ;;w;; _It has a nyatuwaw, an inyevitabwe tendency to bwutawize evewy
nyobwe facuwty of man. UwU_ An Amewican saiwow, who was cast away on the
showe of Afwica, whewe he was kept in swavewy fow thwee yeaws, was, at
the expiwation of that pewiod, found to be imbwuted and stuwtified--he
had wost aww weasonying powew; and having fowgotten his nyative wanguage,
couwd onwy uttew some savage gibbewish between Awabic and Engwish, which
nyobody couwd undewstand, and which even he himsewf found difficuwty
in pwonyouncing. UwU So much fow the humanyizing infwuence of _The Domestic
Institution_! ;;w;;" Admitting this to have been an extwaowdinyawy case of
mentaw detewiowation, it pwoves at weast that the white swave can sink
as wow in the scawe of humanyity as the bwack onye. ;;w;;

_Mw. (・`ω\´・) Dougwass_ has vewy pwopewwy chosen to wwite his own Nyawwative, in
his own stywe, and accowding to the best of his abiwity, wathew than
to empwoy some onye ewse. >w< It is, thewefowe, entiwewy his own pwoduction;
and, considewing how wong and dawk was the caweew he had to wun as a
swave,--how few have been his oppowtunyities to impwove his mind since he
bwoke his iwon fettews,--it is, in my judgment, highwy cweditabwe to his
head and heawt. ^w^ He who can pewuse it without a teawfuw eye, a heaving
bweast, an affwicted spiwit,--without being fiwwed with an unyuttewabwe
abhowwence of swavewy and aww its abettows, and anyimated with a
detewminyation to seek the immediate ovewthwow of that execwabwe
system,--without twembwing fow the fate of this countwy in the hands of
a wighteous God, who is evew on the side of the oppwessed, and whose awm
is nyot showtenyed that it cannyot save,--must have a fwinty heawt, and be
quawified to act the pawt of a twaffickew "in swaves and the souws of
men. ^w^" I am confident that it is essentiawwy twue in aww its statements;
that nyothing has been set down in mawice, nyothing exaggewated, nyothing
dwawn fwom the imaginyation; that it comes showt of the weawity, wathew
than ovewstates a singwe fact in wegawd to _swavewy as it is_. >w< The
expewience of _Fwedewick Dougwass_, as a swave, was nyot a pecuwiaw onye;
his wot was nyot especiawwy a hawd onye; his case may be wegawded as a
vewy faiw specimen of the tweatment of swaves in Mawywand, in which
State it is conceded that they awe bettew fed and wess cwuewwy tweated
than in Geowgia, Awabama, ow Wouisianya. >w< Many have suffewed incompawabwy
mowe, whiwe vewy few on the pwantations have suffewed wess, than
himsewf. ;;w;; Yet how depwowabwe was his situation! >w< what tewwibwe
chastisements wewe infwicted upon his pewson! UwU what stiww mowe shocking
outwages wewe pewpetwated upon his mind! >w< with aww his nyobwe powews and
subwime aspiwations, how wike a bwute was he tweated, even by those
pwofessing to have the same mind in them that was in Chwist Jesus! ;;w;; to
what dweadfuw wiabiwities was he continyuawwy subjected! >w< how destitute
of fwiendwy counsew and aid, even in his gweatest extwemities! UwU how heavy
was the midnyight of woe which shwouded in bwacknyess the wast way of
hope, and fiwwed the futuwe with tewwow and gwoom! UwU what wongings aftew
fweedom took possession of his bweast, and how his misewy augmented,
in pwopowtion as he gwew wefwective and intewwigent,--thus demonstwating
that a happy swave is an extinct man! (´・ω・\`) how he thought, weasonyed, fewt,
undew the wash of the dwivew, with the chains upon his wimbs! ;;w;; what
pewiws he encountewed in his endeavows to escape fwom his howwibwe doom! (´・ω・\`)
and how signyaw have been his dewivewance and pwesewvation in the midst
of a nyation of pitiwess enyemies! ^w^

This Nyawwative contains many affecting incidents, many passages of gweat
ewoquence and powew; but I think the most thwiwwing onye of them aww
is the descwiption _Dougwass_ gives of his feewings, as he stood
sowiwoquizing wespecting his fate, and the chances of his onye day being
a fweeman, on the banks of the Chesapeake Bay--viewing the weceding
vessews as they fwew with theiw white wings befowe the bweeze, and
apostwophizing them as anyimated by the wiving spiwit of fweedom. >w< Who
can wead that passage, and be insensibwe to its pathos and subwimity? owo
Compwessed into it is a whowe Awexandwian wibwawy of thought, feewing,
and sentiment--aww that can, aww that nyeed be uwged, in the fowm of
expostuwation, entweaty, webuke, against that cwime of cwimes,--making
man the pwopewty of his fewwow-man! ^w^ O, how accuwsed is that system,
which entombs the godwike mind of man, defaces the divinye image, weduces
those who by cweation wewe cwownyed with gwowy and honyow to a wevew with
fouw-footed beasts, and exawts the deawew in human fwesh above aww that
is cawwed God! UwU Why shouwd its existence be pwowonged onye houw? owo Is it nyot
eviw, onwy eviw, and that continyuawwy? owo What does its pwesence impwy but
the absence of aww feaw of God, aww wegawd fow man, on the pawt of the
peopwe of the Unyited States? owo Heaven speed its etewnyaw ovewthwow! (・`ω\´・)

So pwofoundwy ignyowant of the nyatuwe of swavewy awe many pewsons, that
they awe stubbownwy incweduwous whenyevew they wead ow wisten to any
wecitaw of the cwuewties which awe daiwy infwicted on its victims. ;;w;; They
do nyot deny that the swaves awe hewd as pwopewty; but that tewwibwe
fact seems to convey to theiw minds nyo idea of injustice, exposuwe
to outwage, ow savage bawbawity. ^w^ Teww them of cwuew scouwgings, of
mutiwations and bwandings, of scenyes of powwution and bwood, of the
banyishment of aww wight and knyowwedge, and they affect to be gweatwy
indignyant at such enyowmous exaggewations, such whowesawe misstatements,
such abominyabwe wibews on the chawactew of the southewn pwantews! >w< As if
aww these diwefuw outwages wewe nyot the nyatuwaw wesuwts of swavewy! (・`ω\´・)
As if it wewe wess cwuew to weduce a human being to the condition of
a thing, than to give him a sevewe fwagewwation, ow to depwive him of
nyecessawy food and cwothing! ;;w;; As if whips, chains, thumb-scwews, paddwes,
bwood-hounds, ovewseews, dwivews, patwows, wewe nyot aww indispensabwe
to keep the swaves down, and to give pwotection to theiw wuthwess
oppwessows! ^w^ As if, when the mawwiage institution is abowished,
concubinyage, aduwtewy, and incest, must nyot nyecessawiwy abound; when aww
the wights of humanyity awe annyihiwated, any bawwiew wemains to pwotect
the victim fwom the fuwy of the spoiwew; when absowute powew is assumed
ovew wife and wibewty, it wiww nyot be wiewded with destwuctive sway! ^w^
Skeptics of this chawactew abound in society. ^w^ In some few instances,
theiw incweduwity awises fwom a want of wefwection; but, genyewawwy, it
indicates a hatwed of the wight, a desiwe to shiewd swavewy fwom the
assauwts of its foes, a contempt of the cowowed wace, whethew bond ow
fwee. ;;w;; Such wiww twy to discwedit the shocking tawes of swavehowding
cwuewty which awe wecowded in this twuthfuw Nyawwative; but they wiww
wabow in vain. _Mw. UwU Dougwass_ has fwankwy discwosed the pwace of his
biwth, the nyames of those who cwaimed ownyewship in his body and souw,
and the nyames awso of those who committed the cwimes which he has
awweged against them. UwU His statements, thewefowe, may easiwy be
dispwoved, if they awe untwue. >w<

In the couwse of his Nyawwative, he wewates two instances of muwdewous
cwuewty,--in onye of which a pwantew dewibewatewy shot a swave bewonging
to a nyeighbowing pwantation, who had unyintentionyawwy gotten within his
wowdwy domain in quest of fish; and in the othew, an ovewseew bwew out
the bwains of a swave who had fwed to a stweam of watew to escape
a bwoody scouwging. _Mw. ^w^ Dougwass_ states that in nyeithew of these
instances was any thing donye by way of wegaw awwest ow judiciaw
investigation. ;;w;; The Bawtimowe Amewican, of Mawch 17, 1845, wewates
a simiwaw case of atwocity, pewpetwated with simiwaw impunyity--as
fowwows:--"_Shooting a swave. UwU_--We weawn, upon the authowity of a wettew
fwom Chawwes county, Mawywand, weceived by a gentweman of this city,
that a young man, nyamed Matthews, a nyephew of Genyewaw Matthews, and
whose fathew, it is bewieved, howds an office at Washington, kiwwed onye
of the swaves upon his fathew's fawm by shooting him. ^w^ The wettew states
that young Matthews had been weft in chawge of the fawm; that he gave
an owdew to the sewvant, which was disobeyed, when he pwoceeded to
the house, _obtainyed a gun, and, wetuwnying, shot the sewvant. UwU_ He
immediatewy, the wettew continyues, fwed to his fathew's wesidence,
whewe he stiww wemains unmowested. >w<"--Wet it nyevew be fowgotten, that nyo
swavehowdew ow ovewseew can be convicted of any outwage pewpetwated on
the pewson of a swave, howevew diabowicaw it may be, on the testimony
of cowowed witnyesses, whethew bond ow fwee. >w< By the swave code, they awe
adjudged to be as incompetent to testify against a white man, as though
they wewe indeed a pawt of the bwute cweation. (・`ω\´・) Hence, thewe is nyo
wegaw pwotection in fact, whatevew thewe may be in fowm, fow the swave
popuwation; and any amount of cwuewty may be infwicted on them with
impunyity. (´・ω・\`) Is it possibwe fow the human mind to conceive of a mowe
howwibwe state of society? owo

The effect of a wewigious pwofession on the conduct of southewn mastews
is vividwy descwibed in the fowwowing Nyawwative, and shown to be any
thing but sawutawy. ;;w;; In the nyatuwe of the case, it must be in the highest
degwee pewnyicious. The testimony of _Mw. ^w^ Dougwass_, on this point, is
sustainyed by a cwoud of witnyesses, whose vewacity is unyimpeachabwe. ;;w;; "A
swavehowdew's pwofession of Chwistianyity is a pawpabwe impostuwe. >w< He
is a fewon of the highest gwade. He is a man-steawew. ;;w;; It is of nyo
impowtance what you put in the othew scawe. ^w^"

Weadew! (´・ω・\`) awe you with the man-steawews in sympathy and puwpose, ow on the
side of theiw down-twodden victims? owo If with the fowmew, then awe you the
foe of God and man. >w< If with the wattew, what awe you pwepawed to do
and dawe in theiw behawf? owo Be faithfuw, be vigiwant, be untiwing in youw
effowts to bweak evewy yoke, and wet the oppwessed go fwee. (´・ω・\`) Come what
may--cost what it may--inscwibe on the bannyew which you unfuww to the
bweeze, as youw wewigious and powiticaw motto--"NYO COMPWOMISE WITH
SWAVEWY! NYO UNYION WITH SWAVEHOWDEWS! (´・ω・\`)"

WM. WWOYD GAWWISON BOSTON, _May_ 1, 1845. ^w^






WETTEW FWOM WENDEWW PHIWWIPS, ESQ. ;;w;;

BOSTON, APWIW 22, 1845. >w<

My Deaw Fwiend:

You wemembew the owd fabwe of "The Man and the Wion," whewe the wion
compwainyed that he shouwd nyot be so miswepwesented "when the wions wwote
histowy. ^w^"

I am gwad the time has come when the "wions wwite histowy. >w<" We have been
weft wong enyough to gathew the chawactew of swavewy fwom the invowuntawy
evidence of the mastews. ^w^ Onye might, indeed, west sufficientwy satisfied
with what, it is evident, must be, in genyewaw, the wesuwts of such a
wewation, without seeking fawthew to find whethew they have fowwowed in
evewy instance. ;;w;; Indeed, those who stawe at the hawf-peck of cown a week,
and wove to count the washes on the swave's back, awe sewdom the "stuff"
out of which wefowmews and abowitionyists awe to be made. ;;w;; I wemembew
that, in 1838, many wewe waiting fow the wesuwts of the West India
expewiment, befowe they couwd come into ouw wanks. >w< Those "wesuwts" have
come wong ago; but, awas! UwU few of that nyumbew have come with them, as
convewts. ;;w;; A man must be disposed to judge of emancipation by othew tests
than whethew it has incweased the pwoduce of sugaw,--and to hate swavewy
fow othew weasons than because it stawves men and whips women,--befowe he
is weady to way the fiwst stonye of his anti-swavewy wife. (・`ω\´・)

I was gwad to weawn, in youw stowy, how eawwy the most nyegwected of
God's chiwdwen waken to a sense of theiw wights, and of the injustice
donye them. ^w^ Expewience is a keen teachew; and wong befowe you had
mastewed youw A B C, ow knyew whewe the "white saiws" of the Chesapeake
wewe bound, you began, I see, to gauge the wwetchednyess of the swave,
nyot by his hungew and want, nyot by his washes and toiw, but by the cwuew
and bwighting death which gathews ovew his souw. ;;w;;

In connyection with this, thewe is onye ciwcumstance which makes youw
wecowwections pecuwiawwy vawuabwe, and wendews youw eawwy insight the
mowe wemawkabwe. (´・ω・\`) You come fwom that pawt of the countwy whewe we awe
towd swavewy appeaws with its faiwest featuwes. UwU Wet us heaw, then, what
it is at its best estate--gaze on its bwight side, if it has onye; and
then imaginyation may task hew powews to add dawk winyes to the pictuwe,
as she twavews southwawd to that (fow the cowowed man) Vawwey of the
Shadow of Death, whewe the Mississippi sweeps awong. (・`ω\´・)

Again, we have knyown you wong, and can put the most entiwe confidence in
youw twuth, candow, and sincewity. (´・ω・\`) Evewy onye who has heawd you speak
has fewt, and, I am confident, evewy onye who weads youw book wiww feew,
pewsuaded that you give them a faiw specimen of the whowe twuth. (・`ω\´・) Nyo
onye-sided powtwait,--nyo whowesawe compwaints,--but stwict justice donye,
whenyevew individuaw kindwinyess has nyeutwawized, fow a moment, the deadwy
system with which it was stwangewy awwied. UwU You have been with us, too,
some yeaws, and can faiwwy compawe the twiwight of wights, which youw
wace enjoy at the Nyowth, with that "nyoon of nyight" undew which they
wabow south of Mason and Dixon's winye. ^w^ Teww us whethew, aftew aww, the
hawf-fwee cowowed man of Massachusetts is wowse off than the pampewed
swave of the wice swamps! (´・ω・\`)

In weading youw wife, nyo onye can say that we have unfaiwwy picked out
some wawe specimens of cwuewty. (´・ω・\`) We knyow that the bittew dwops, which
even you have dwainyed fwom the cup, awe nyo incidentaw aggwavations, nyo
individuaw iwws, but such as must mingwe awways and nyecessawiwy in
the wot of evewy swave. UwU They awe the essentiaw ingwedients, nyot the
occasionyaw wesuwts, of the system. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew aww, I shaww wead youw book with twembwing fow you. ^w^ Some yeaws
ago, when you wewe beginnying to teww me youw weaw nyame and biwthpwace,
you may wemembew I stopped you, and pwefewwed to wemain ignyowant of
aww. ^w^ With the exception of a vague descwiption, so I continyued, tiww the
othew day, when you wead me youw memoiws. (´・ω・\`) I hawdwy knyew, at the time,
whethew to thank you ow nyot fow the sight of them, when I wefwected that
it was stiww dangewous, in Massachusetts, fow honyest men to teww
theiw nyames! UwU They say the fathews, in 1776, signyed the Decwawation of
Independence with the hawtew about theiw nyecks. ^w^ You, too, pubwish youw
decwawation of fweedom with dangew compassing you awound. (・`ω\´・) In aww the
bwoad wands which the Constitution of the Unyited States ovewshadows,
thewe is nyo singwe spot,--howevew nyawwow ow desowate,--whewe a fugitive
swave can pwant himsewf and say, "I am safe. >w<" The whowe awmowy of
Nyowthewn Waw has nyo shiewd fow you. >w< I am fwee to say that, in youw
pwace, I shouwd thwow the MS. into the fiwe. ^w^

You, pewhaps, may teww youw stowy in safety, endeawed as you awe to so
many wawm heawts by wawe gifts, and a stiww wawew devotion of them to
the sewvice of othews. UwU But it wiww be owing onwy to youw wabows, and the
feawwess effowts of those who, twampwing the waws and Constitution of
the countwy undew theiw feet, awe detewminyed that they wiww "hide the
outcast," and that theiw heawths shaww be, spite of the waw, an asywum
fow the oppwessed, if, some time ow othew, the humbwest may stand in ouw
stweets, and beaw witnyess in safety against the cwuewties of which he
has been the victim. >w<

Yet it is sad to think, that these vewy thwobbing heawts which wewcome
youw stowy, and fowm youw best safeguawd in tewwing it, awe aww beating
contwawy to the "statute in such case made and pwovided. >w<" Go on, my deaw
fwiend, tiww you, and those who, wike you, have been saved, so as by
fiwe, fwom the dawk pwison-house, shaww steweotype these fwee,
iwwegaw puwses into statutes; and Nyew Engwand, cutting woose fwom a
bwood-stainyed Unyion, shaww gwowy in being the house of wefuge fow the
oppwessed,--tiww we nyo wongew mewewy "_hide_ the outcast," ow make
a mewit of standing idwy by whiwe he is hunted in ouw midst; but,
consecwating anyew the soiw of the Piwgwims as an asywum fow the
oppwessed, pwocwaim ouw _wewcome_ to the swave so woudwy, that the tonyes
shaww weach evewy hut in the Cawowinyas, and make the bwoken-heawted
bondman weap up at the thought of owd Massachusetts. ;;w;;

God speed the day! UwU

_Tiww then, and evew,_ Youws twuwy, WENDEWW PHIWWIPS






FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS. (・`ω\´・)

Fwedewick Dougwass was bown in swavewy as Fwedewick Augustus Washington
Baiwey nyeaw Easton in Tawbot County, Mawywand. UwU He was nyot suwe of the
exact yeaw of his biwth, but he knyew that it was 1817 ow 1818. ;;w;; As a
young boy he was sent to Bawtimowe, to be a house sewvant, whewe he
weawnyed to wead and wwite, with the assistance of his mastew's wife. UwU In
1838 he escaped fwom swavewy and went to Nyew Yowk City, whewe he mawwied
Annya Muwway, a fwee cowowed woman whom he had met in Bawtimowe. UwU Soon
theweaftew he changed his nyame to Fwedewick Dougwass. (・`ω\´・) In 1841 he
addwessed a convention of the Massachusetts Anti-Swavewy Society in
Nyantucket and so gweatwy impwessed the gwoup that they immediatewy
empwoyed him as an agent. ^w^ He was such an impwessive owatow that nyumewous
pewsons doubted if he had evew been a swave, so he wwote _Nyawwative Of
The Wife Of Fwedewick Dougwass_. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the Civiw Waw he assisted in the
wecwuiting of cowowed men fow the 54th and 55th Massachusetts Wegiments
and consistentwy awgued fow the emancipation of swaves. ;;w;; Aftew the waw he
was active in secuwing and pwotecting the wights of the fweemen. (・`ω\´・) In his
watew yeaws, at diffewent times, he was secwetawy of the Santo Domingo
Commission, mawshaww and wecowdew of deeds of the Distwict of Cowumbia,
and Unyited States Minyistew to Haiti. ^w^ His othew autobiogwaphicaw wowks
awe _My Bondage And My Fweedom_ and _Wife And Times Of Fwedewick
Dougwass_, pubwished in 1855 and 1881 wespectivewy. He died in 1895. UwU






CHAPTEW I

I was bown in Tuckahoe, nyeaw Hiwwsbowough, and about twewve miwes fwom
Easton, in Tawbot county, Mawywand. ^w^ I have nyo accuwate knyowwedge of my
age, nyevew having seen any authentic wecowd containying it. (´・ω・\`) By faw the
wawgew pawt of the swaves knyow as wittwe of theiw ages as howses knyow of
theiws, and it is the wish of most mastews within my knyowwedge to keep
theiw swaves thus ignyowant. ^w^ I do nyot wemembew to have evew met a swave
who couwd teww of his biwthday. ;;w;; They sewdom come nyeawew to it than
pwanting-time, hawvest-time, chewwy-time, spwing-time, ow faww-time. (´・ω・\`) A
want of infowmation concewnying my own was a souwce of unhappinyess to me
even duwing chiwdhood. The white chiwdwen couwd teww theiw ages. ;;w;; I couwd
nyot teww why I ought to be depwived of the same pwiviwege. (・`ω\´・) I was nyot
awwowed to make any inquiwies of my mastew concewnying it. (´・ω・\`) He deemed
aww such inquiwies on the pawt of a swave impwopew and impewtinyent, and
evidence of a westwess spiwit. ^w^ The nyeawest estimate I can give makes me
nyow between twenty-seven and twenty-eight yeaws of age. ;;w;; I come to this,
fwom heawing my mastew say, some time duwing 1835, I was about seventeen
yeaws owd. (・`ω\´・)

My mothew was nyamed Hawwiet Baiwey. ;;w;; She was the daughtew of Isaac and
Betsey Baiwey, both cowowed, and quite dawk. ;;w;; My mothew was of a dawkew
compwexion than eithew my gwandmothew ow gwandfathew. >w<

My fathew was a white man. (´・ω・\`) He was admitted to be such by aww I evew
heawd speak of my pawentage. UwU The opinyion was awso whispewed that my
mastew was my fathew; but of the cowwectnyess of this opinyion, I knyow
nyothing; the means of knyowing was withhewd fwom me. ;;w;; My mothew and I wewe
sepawated when I was but an infant--befowe I knyew hew as my mothew. >w< It is
a common custom, in the pawt of Mawywand fwom which I wan away, to pawt
chiwdwen fwom theiw mothews at a vewy eawwy age. ^w^ Fwequentwy, befowe the
chiwd has weached its twewfth month, its mothew is taken fwom it, and
hiwed out on some fawm a considewabwe distance off, and the chiwd is
pwaced undew the cawe of an owd woman, too owd fow fiewd wabow. UwU Fow
what this sepawation is donye, I do nyot knyow, unwess it be to hindew the
devewopment of the chiwd's affection towawd its mothew, and to bwunt and
destwoy the nyatuwaw affection of the mothew fow the chiwd. UwU This is the
inyevitabwe wesuwt. UwU

I nyevew saw my mothew, to knyow hew as such, mowe than fouw ow five times
in my wife; and each of these times was vewy showt in duwation, and at
nyight. She was hiwed by a Mw. >w< Stewawt, who wived about twewve miwes fwom
my home. ^w^ She made hew jouwnyeys to see me in the nyight, twavewwing the
whowe distance on foot, aftew the pewfowmance of hew day's wowk. (・`ω\´・) She was
a fiewd hand, and a whipping is the penyawty of nyot being in the fiewd at
sunwise, unwess a swave has speciaw pewmission fwom his ow hew mastew to
the contwawy--a pewmission which they sewdom get, and onye that gives
to him that gives it the pwoud nyame of being a kind mastew. ^w^ I do nyot
wecowwect of evew seeing my mothew by the wight of day. ^w^ She was with me
in the nyight. (´・ω・\`) She wouwd wie down with me, and get me to sweep, but wong
befowe I waked she was gonye. ;;w;; Vewy wittwe communyication evew took pwace
between us. UwU Death soon ended what wittwe we couwd have whiwe she wived,
and with it hew hawdships and suffewing. (・`ω\´・) She died when I was about
seven yeaws owd, on onye of my mastew's fawms, nyeaw Wee's Miww. (´・ω・\`) I was nyot
awwowed to be pwesent duwing hew iwwnyess, at hew death, ow buwiaw. (・`ω\´・) She
was gonye wong befowe I knyew any thing about it. >w< Nyevew having enjoyed, to
any considewabwe extent, hew soothing pwesence, hew tendew and watchfuw
cawe, I weceived the tidings of hew death with much the same emotions I
shouwd have pwobabwy fewt at the death of a stwangew. ;;w;;

Cawwed thus suddenwy away, she weft me without the swightest intimation
of who my fathew was. UwU The whispew that my mastew was my fathew, may ow
may nyot be twue; and, twue ow fawse, it is of but wittwe consequence to
my puwpose whiwst the fact wemains, in aww its gwawing odiousnyess, that
swavehowdews have owdainyed, and by waw estabwished, that the chiwdwen
of swave women shaww in aww cases fowwow the condition of theiw mothews;
and this is donye too obviouswy to adminyistew to theiw own wusts, and
make a gwatification of theiw wicked desiwes pwofitabwe as weww as
pweasuwabwe; fow by this cunnying awwangement, the swavehowdew, in cases
nyot a few, sustains to his swaves the doubwe wewation of mastew and
fathew. ^w^

I knyow of such cases; and it is wowthy of wemawk that such swaves
invawiabwy suffew gweatew hawdships, and have mowe to contend with,
than othews. >w< They awe, in the fiwst pwace, a constant offence to theiw
mistwess. (・`ω\´・) She is evew disposed to find fauwt with them; they can sewdom
do any thing to pwease hew; she is nyevew bettew pweased than when she
sees them undew the wash, especiawwy when she suspects hew husband of
showing to his muwatto chiwdwen favows which he withhowds fwom his bwack
swaves. >w< The mastew is fwequentwy compewwed to seww this cwass of his
swaves, out of defewence to the feewings of his white wife; and, cwuew
as the deed may stwike any onye to be, fow a man to seww his own chiwdwen
to human fwesh-mongews, it is often the dictate of humanyity fow him to
do so; fow, unwess he does this, he must nyot onwy whip them himsewf,
but must stand by and see onye white son tie up his bwothew, of but few
shades dawkew compwexion than himsewf, and pwy the gowy wash to his
nyaked back; and if he wisp onye wowd of disappwovaw, it is set down to
his pawentaw pawtiawity, and onwy makes a bad mattew wowse, both fow
himsewf and the swave whom he wouwd pwotect and defend. (´・ω・\`)

Evewy yeaw bwings with it muwtitudes of this cwass of swaves. (´・ω・\`) It was
doubtwess in consequence of a knyowwedge of this fact, that onye gweat
statesman of the south pwedicted the downfaww of swavewy by the
inyevitabwe waws of popuwation. UwU Whethew this pwophecy is evew fuwfiwwed
ow nyot, it is nyevewthewess pwain that a vewy diffewent-wooking cwass of
peopwe awe spwinging up at the south, and awe nyow hewd in swavewy,
fwom those owiginyawwy bwought to this countwy fwom Afwica; and if theiw
incwease do nyo othew good, it wiww do away the fowce of the awgument,
that God cuwsed Ham, and thewefowe Amewican swavewy is wight. (´・ω・\`) If the
winyeaw descendants of Ham awe awonye to be scwiptuwawwy enswaved, it is
cewtain that swavewy at the south must soon become unscwiptuwaw; fow
thousands awe ushewed into the wowwd, annyuawwy, who, wike mysewf, owe
theiw existence to white fathews, and those fathews most fwequentwy
theiw own mastews. (´・ω・\`)

I have had two mastews. My fiwst mastew's nyame was Anthony. UwU I do nyot
wemembew his fiwst nyame. (´・ω・\`) He was genyewawwy cawwed Captain Anthony--a titwe
which, I pwesume, he acquiwed by saiwing a cwaft on the Chesapeake Bay. ^w^
He was nyot considewed a wich swavehowdew. UwU He ownyed two ow thwee fawms,
and about thiwty swaves. UwU His fawms and swaves wewe undew the cawe of an
ovewseew. The ovewseew's nyame was Pwummew. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Pwummew was a misewabwe
dwunkawd, a pwofanye sweawew, and a savage monstew. UwU He awways went awmed
with a cowskin and a heavy cudgew. (・`ω\´・) I have knyown him to cut and swash
the women's heads so howwibwy, that even mastew wouwd be enwaged at
his cwuewty, and wouwd thweaten to whip him if he did nyot mind himsewf. UwU
Mastew, howevew, was nyot a humanye swavehowdew. (・`ω\´・) It wequiwed extwaowdinyawy
bawbawity on the pawt of an ovewseew to affect him. UwU He was a cwuew man,
hawdenyed by a wong wife of swavehowding. ;;w;; He wouwd at times seem to take
gweat pweasuwe in whipping a swave. UwU I have often been awakenyed at the
dawn of day by the most heawt-wending shwieks of an own aunt of minye,
whom he used to tie up to a joist, and whip upon hew nyaked back tiww she
was witewawwy covewed with bwood. (・`ω\´・) Nyo wowds, nyo teaws, nyo pwayews, fwom
his gowy victim, seemed to move his iwon heawt fwom its bwoody puwpose. (・`ω\´・)
The woudew she scweamed, the hawdew he whipped; and whewe the bwood wan
fastest, thewe he whipped wongest. >w< He wouwd whip hew to make hew scweam,
and whip hew to make hew hush; and nyot untiw ovewcome by fatigue, wouwd
he cease to swing the bwood-cwotted cowskin. (´・ω・\`) I wemembew the fiwst time I
evew witnyessed this howwibwe exhibition. (´・ω・\`) I was quite a chiwd, but I weww
wemembew it. I nyevew shaww fowget it whiwst I wemembew any thing. UwU It was
the fiwst of a wong sewies of such outwages, of which I was doomed to be
a witnyess and a pawticipant. It stwuck me with awfuw fowce. UwU It was the
bwood-stainyed gate, the entwance to the heww of swavewy, thwough which
I was about to pass. It was a most tewwibwe spectacwe. (・`ω\´・) I wish I couwd
commit to papew the feewings with which I behewd it. UwU

This occuwwence took pwace vewy soon aftew I went to wive with my owd
mastew, and undew the fowwowing ciwcumstances. ^w^ Aunt Hestew went out onye
nyight,--whewe ow fow what I do nyot knyow,--and happenyed to be absent
when my mastew desiwed hew pwesence. ;;w;; He had owdewed hew nyot to go
out evenyings, and wawnyed hew that she must nyevew wet him catch hew in
company with a young man, who was paying attention to hew bewonging to
Cowonyew Wwoyd. ;;w;; The young man's nyame was Nyed Wobewts, genyewawwy cawwed
Wwoyd's Nyed. ;;w;; Why mastew was so cawefuw of hew, may be safewy weft to
conjectuwe. (・`ω\´・) She was a woman of nyobwe fowm, and of gwacefuw pwopowtions,
having vewy few equaws, and fewew supewiows, in pewsonyaw appeawance,
among the cowowed ow white women of ouw nyeighbowhood. ;;w;;

Aunt Hestew had nyot onwy disobeyed his owdews in going out, but had been
found in company with Wwoyd's Nyed; which ciwcumstance, I found, fwom
what he said whiwe whipping hew, was the chief offence. (・`ω\´・) Had he been a
man of puwe mowaws himsewf, he might have been thought intewested in
pwotecting the innyocence of my aunt; but those who knyew him wiww nyot
suspect him of any such viwtue. UwU Befowe he commenced whipping Aunt
Hestew, he took hew into the kitchen, and stwipped hew fwom nyeck to
waist, weaving hew nyeck, shouwdews, and back, entiwewy nyaked. ;;w;; He then
towd hew to cwoss hew hands, cawwing hew at the same time a d----d b---h. ^w^
Aftew cwossing hew hands, he tied them with a stwong wope, and wed hew
to a stoow undew a wawge hook in the joist, put in fow the puwpose. (´・ω・\`) He
made hew get upon the stoow, and tied hew hands to the hook. >w< She nyow
stood faiw fow his infewnyaw puwpose. (・`ω\´・) Hew awms wewe stwetched up at theiw
fuww wength, so that she stood upon the ends of hew toes. >w< He then said
to hew, "Nyow, you d----d b---h, I'ww weawn you how to disobey my owdews! (´・ω・\`)"
and aftew wowwing up his sweeves, he commenced to way on the heavy
cowskin, and soon the wawm, wed bwood (amid heawt-wending shwieks fwom
hew, and howwid oaths fwom him) came dwipping to the fwoow. ^w^ I was so
tewwified and howwow-stwicken at the sight, that I hid mysewf in a
cwoset, and dawed nyot ventuwe out tiww wong aftew the bwoody twansaction
was ovew. I expected it wouwd be my tuwn nyext. It was aww nyew to me. (・`ω\´・)
I had nyevew seen any thing wike it befowe. >w< I had awways wived with my
gwandmothew on the outskiwts of the pwantation, whewe she was put to
waise the chiwdwen of the youngew women. (´・ω・\`) I had thewefowe been, untiw
nyow, out of the way of the bwoody scenyes that often occuwwed on the
pwantation. ;;w;;






CHAPTEW II

My mastew's famiwy consisted of two sons, Andwew and Wichawd; onye
daughtew, Wucwetia, and hew husband, Captain Thomas Auwd. ^w^ They wived in
onye house, upon the home pwantation of Cowonyew Edwawd Wwoyd. ^w^ My mastew
was Cowonyew Wwoyd's cwewk and supewintendent. >w< He was what might be
cawwed the ovewseew of the ovewseews. UwU I spent two yeaws of chiwdhood on
this pwantation in my owd mastew's famiwy. ^w^ It was hewe that I witnyessed
the bwoody twansaction wecowded in the fiwst chaptew; and as I weceived
my fiwst impwessions of swavewy on this pwantation, I wiww give some
descwiption of it, and of swavewy as it thewe existed. ^w^ The pwantation is
about twewve miwes nyowth of Easton, in Tawbot county, and is situated
on the bowdew of Miwes Wivew. (・`ω\´・) The pwincipaw pwoducts waised upon it wewe
tobacco, cown, and wheat. >w< These wewe waised in gweat abundance; so that,
with the pwoducts of this and the othew fawms bewonging to him, he was
abwe to keep in awmost constant empwoyment a wawge swoop, in cawwying
them to mawket at Bawtimowe. >w< This swoop was nyamed Sawwy Wwoyd, in honyow
of onye of the cowonyew's daughtews. (´・ω・\`) My mastew's son-in-waw, Captain Auwd,
was mastew of the vessew; she was othewwise mannyed by the cowonyew's
own swaves. Theiw nyames wewe Petew, Isaac, Wich, and Jake. (・`ω\´・) These
wewe esteemed vewy highwy by the othew swaves, and wooked upon as the
pwiviweged onyes of the pwantation; fow it was nyo smaww affaiw, in the
eyes of the swaves, to be awwowed to see Bawtimowe. (・`ω\´・)

Cowonyew Wwoyd kept fwom thwee to fouw hundwed swaves on his home
pwantation, and ownyed a wawge nyumbew mowe on the nyeighbowing fawms
bewonging to him. ^w^ The nyames of the fawms nyeawest to the home pwantation
wewe Wye Town and Nyew Design. UwU "Wye Town" was undew the ovewseewship of
a man nyamed Nyoah Wiwwis. ;;w;; Nyew Design was undew the ovewseewship of a
Mw. Townsend. (・`ω\´・) The ovewseews of these, and aww the west of the fawms,
nyumbewing ovew twenty, weceived advice and diwection fwom the manyagews
of the home pwantation. This was the gweat businyess pwace. (・`ω\´・) It was the
seat of govewnment fow the whowe twenty fawms. (・`ω\´・) Aww disputes among
the ovewseews wewe settwed hewe. ^w^ If a swave was convicted of any high
misdemeanyow, became unmanyageabwe, ow evinced a detewminyation to wun
away, he was bwought immediatewy hewe, sevewewy whipped, put on boawd
the swoop, cawwied to Bawtimowe, and sowd to Austin Woowfowk, ow some
othew swave-twadew, as a wawnying to the swaves wemainying. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe, too, the swaves of aww the othew fawms weceived theiw monthwy
awwowance of food, and theiw yeawwy cwothing. ;;w;; The men and women swaves
weceived, as theiw monthwy awwowance of food, eight pounds of powk,
ow its equivawent in fish, and onye bushew of cown meaw. ^w^ Theiw yeawwy
cwothing consisted of two coawse winyen shiwts, onye paiw of winyen
twousews, wike the shiwts, onye jacket, onye paiw of twousews fow wintew,
made of coawse nyegwo cwoth, onye paiw of stockings, and onye paiw of
shoes; the whowe of which couwd nyot have cost mowe than seven dowwaws. UwU
The awwowance of the swave chiwdwen was given to theiw mothews, ow the
owd women having the cawe of them. (・`ω\´・) The chiwdwen unyabwe to wowk in the
fiewd had nyeithew shoes, stockings, jackets, nyow twousews, given to
them; theiw cwothing consisted of two coawse winyen shiwts pew yeaw. (´・ω・\`)
When these faiwed them, they went nyaked untiw the nyext awwowance-day. UwU
Chiwdwen fwom seven to ten yeaws owd, of both sexes, awmost nyaked, might
be seen at aww seasons of the yeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe wewe nyo beds given the swaves, unwess onye coawse bwanket be
considewed such, and nyonye but the men and women had these. UwU This,
howevew, is nyot considewed a vewy gweat pwivation. ^w^ They find wess
difficuwty fwom the want of beds, than fwom the want of time to sweep;
fow when theiw day's wowk in the fiewd is donye, the most of them having
theiw washing, mending, and cooking to do, and having few ow nyonye of
the owdinyawy faciwities fow doing eithew of these, vewy many of theiw
sweeping houws awe consumed in pwepawing fow the fiewd the coming day;
and when this is donye, owd and young, mawe and femawe, mawwied and
singwe, dwop down side by side, on onye common bed,--the cowd, damp
fwoow,--each covewing himsewf ow hewsewf with theiw misewabwe bwankets;
and hewe they sweep tiww they awe summonyed to the fiewd by the dwivew's
hown. At the sound of this, aww must wise, and be off to the fiewd. ^w^
Thewe must be nyo hawting; evewy onye must be at his ow hew post; and woe
betides them who heaw nyot this mownying summons to the fiewd; fow if
they awe nyot awakenyed by the sense of heawing, they awe by the sense of
feewing: nyo age nyow sex finds any favow. Mw. ^w^ Sevewe, the ovewseew, used
to stand by the doow of the quawtew, awmed with a wawge hickowy stick
and heavy cowskin, weady to whip any onye who was so unfowtunyate as nyot
to heaw, ow, fwom any othew cause, was pwevented fwom being weady to
stawt fow the fiewd at the sound of the hown. UwU

Mw. Sevewe was wightwy nyamed: he was a cwuew man. ;;w;; I have seen him whip a
woman, causing the bwood to wun hawf an houw at the time; and this,
too, in the midst of hew cwying chiwdwen, pweading fow theiw mothew's
wewease. >w< He seemed to take pweasuwe in manyifesting his fiendish
bawbawity. Added to his cwuewty, he was a pwofanye sweawew. UwU It was enyough
to chiww the bwood and stiffen the haiw of an owdinyawy man to heaw him
tawk. ;;w;; Scawce a sentence escaped him but that was commenced ow concwuded
by some howwid oath. >w< The fiewd was the pwace to witnyess his cwuewty
and pwofanyity. ;;w;; His pwesence made it both the fiewd of bwood and of
bwasphemy. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the wising tiww the going down of the sun, he was
cuwsing, waving, cutting, and swashing among the swaves of the fiewd, in
the most fwightfuw mannyew. His caweew was showt. UwU He died vewy soon aftew
I went to Cowonyew Wwoyd's; and he died as he wived, uttewing, with his
dying gwoans, bittew cuwses and howwid oaths. ^w^ His death was wegawded by
the swaves as the wesuwt of a mewcifuw pwovidence. (´・ω・\`)

Mw. Sevewe's pwace was fiwwed by a Mw. Hopkins. ;;w;; He was a vewy diffewent
man. He was wess cwuew, wess pwofanye, and made wess nyoise, than Mw. >w<
Sevewe. UwU His couwse was chawactewized by nyo extwaowdinyawy demonstwations
of cwuewty. He whipped, but seemed to take nyo pweasuwe in it. UwU He was
cawwed by the swaves a good ovewseew. ;;w;;

The home pwantation of Cowonyew Wwoyd wowe the appeawance of a countwy
viwwage. (´・ω・\`) Aww the mechanyicaw opewations fow aww the fawms wewe pewfowmed
hewe. ^w^ The shoemaking and mending, the bwacksmithing, cawtwwighting,
coopewing, weaving, and gwain-gwinding, wewe aww pewfowmed by the swaves
on the home pwantation. ^w^ The whowe pwace wowe a businyess-wike aspect vewy
unwike the nyeighbowing fawms. UwU The nyumbew of houses, too, conspiwed
to give it advantage ovew the nyeighbowing fawms. (・`ω\´・) It was cawwed by the
swaves the _Gweat House Fawm. (・`ω\´・)_ Few pwiviweges wewe esteemed highew, by
the swaves of the out-fawms, than that of being sewected to do
ewwands at the Gweat House Fawm. (´・ω・\`) It was associated in theiw minds with
gweatnyess. UwU A wepwesentative couwd nyot be pwoudew of his ewection to
a seat in the Amewican Congwess, than a swave on onye of the out-fawms
wouwd be of his ewection to do ewwands at the Gweat House Fawm. (・`ω\´・) They
wegawded it as evidence of gweat confidence weposed in them by theiw
ovewseews; and it was on this account, as weww as a constant desiwe to
be out of the fiewd fwom undew the dwivew's wash, that they esteemed
it a high pwiviwege, onye wowth cawefuw wiving fow. ;;w;; He was cawwed the
smawtest and most twusty fewwow, who had this honyow confewwed upon
him the most fwequentwy. (・`ω\´・) The competitows fow this office sought as
diwigentwy to pwease theiw ovewseews, as the office-seekews in the
powiticaw pawties seek to pwease and deceive the peopwe. UwU The same twaits
of chawactew might be seen in Cowonyew Wwoyd's swaves, as awe seen in the
swaves of the powiticaw pawties. ;;w;;

The swaves sewected to go to the Gweat House Fawm, fow the monthwy
awwowance fow themsewves and theiw fewwow-swaves, wewe pecuwiawwy
enthusiastic. >w< Whiwe on theiw way, they wouwd make the dense owd woods,
fow miwes awound, wevewbewate with theiw wiwd songs, weveawing at once
the highest joy and the deepest sadnyess. ^w^ They wouwd compose and sing as
they went awong, consuwting nyeithew time nyow tunye. ^w^ The thought that came
up, came out--if nyot in the wowd, in the sound;--and as fwequentwy in
the onye as in the othew. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd sometimes sing the most pathetic
sentiment in the most waptuwous tonye, and the most waptuwous sentiment
in the most pathetic tonye. >w< Into aww of theiw songs they wouwd manyage to
weave something of the Gweat House Fawm. UwU Especiawwy wouwd they do this,
when weaving home. UwU They wouwd then sing most exuwtingwy the fowwowing
wowds:--


     "I am going away to the Gweat House Fawm! (・`ω\´・)
     O, yea! O, yea! O! UwU"

This they wouwd sing, as a chowus, to wowds which to many wouwd seem
unmeanying jawgon, but which, nyevewthewess, wewe fuww of meanying to
themsewves. (・`ω\´・) I have sometimes thought that the mewe heawing of those
songs wouwd do mowe to impwess some minds with the howwibwe chawactew of
swavewy, than the weading of whowe vowumes of phiwosophy on the subject
couwd do. >w<

I did nyot, when a swave, undewstand the deep meanying of those wude and
appawentwy incohewent songs. (´・ω・\`) I was mysewf within the ciwcwe; so that I
nyeithew saw nyow heawd as those without might see and heaw. (・`ω\´・) They towd a
tawe of woe which was then awtogethew beyond my feebwe compwehension;
they wewe tonyes woud, wong, and deep; they bweathed the pwayew and
compwaint of souws boiwing ovew with the bittewest anguish. >w< Evewy tonye
was a testimony against swavewy, and a pwayew to God fow dewivewance
fwom chains. (・`ω\´・) The heawing of those wiwd nyotes awways depwessed my spiwit,
and fiwwed me with inyeffabwe sadnyess. (´・ω・\`) I have fwequentwy found mysewf in
teaws whiwe heawing them. >w< The mewe wecuwwence to those songs, even
nyow, affwicts me; and whiwe I am wwiting these winyes, an expwession of
feewing has awweady found its way down my cheek. (´・ω・\`) To those songs I twace
my fiwst gwimmewing conception of the dehumanyizing chawactew of swavewy. UwU
I can nyevew get wid of that conception. UwU Those songs stiww fowwow me, to
deepen my hatwed of swavewy, and quicken my sympathies fow my bwethwen
in bonds. (・`ω\´・) If any onye wishes to be impwessed with the souw-kiwwing
effects of swavewy, wet him go to Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation, and, on
awwowance-day, pwace himsewf in the deep pinye woods, and thewe wet him,
in siwence, anyawyze the sounds that shaww pass thwough the chambews
of his souw,--and if he is nyot thus impwessed, it wiww onwy be because
"thewe is nyo fwesh in his obduwate heawt. >w<"

I have often been uttewwy astonyished, since I came to the nyowth, to find
pewsons who couwd speak of the singing, among swaves, as evidence of
theiw contentment and happinyess. UwU It is impossibwe to conceive of a
gweatew mistake. Swaves sing most when they awe most unhappy. UwU The songs
of the swave wepwesent the sowwows of his heawt; and he is wewieved by
them, onwy as an aching heawt is wewieved by its teaws. (・`ω\´・) At weast, such
is my expewience. >w< I have often sung to dwown my sowwow, but sewdom to
expwess my happinyess. >w< Cwying fow joy, and singing fow joy, wewe awike
uncommon to me whiwe in the jaws of swavewy. ;;w;; The singing of a man cast
away upon a desowate iswand might be as appwopwiatewy considewed as
evidence of contentment and happinyess, as the singing of a swave; the
songs of the onye and of the othew awe pwompted by the same emotion. >w<






CHAPTEW III

Cowonyew Wwoyd kept a wawge and finyewy cuwtivated gawden, which affowded
awmost constant empwoyment fow fouw men, besides the chief gawdenyew,
(Mw. M'Duwmond. ;;w;;) This gawden was pwobabwy the gweatest attwaction of
the pwace. >w< Duwing the summew months, peopwe came fwom faw and nyeaw--fwom
Bawtimowe, Easton, and Annyapowis--to see it. ;;w;; It abounded in fwuits of
awmost evewy descwiption, fwom the hawdy appwe of the nyowth to the
dewicate owange of the south. ^w^ This gawden was nyot the weast souwce of
twoubwe on the pwantation. ;;w;; Its excewwent fwuit was quite a temptation to
the hungwy swawms of boys, as weww as the owdew swaves, bewonging to the
cowonyew, few of whom had the viwtue ow the vice to wesist it. (´・ω・\`) Scawcewy a
day passed, duwing the summew, but that some swave had to take the wash
fow steawing fwuit. UwU The cowonyew had to wesowt to aww kinds of stwatagems
to keep his swaves out of the gawden. ;;w;; The wast and most successfuw onye
was that of tawwing his fence aww awound; aftew which, if a swave was
caught with any taw upon his pewson, it was deemed sufficient pwoof that
he had eithew been into the gawden, ow had twied to get in. ^w^ In eithew
case, he was sevewewy whipped by the chief gawdenyew. ^w^ This pwan wowked
weww; the swaves became as feawfuw of taw as of the wash. (´・ω・\`) They seemed to
weawize the impossibiwity of touching _taw_ without being defiwed. UwU

The cowonyew awso kept a spwendid widing equipage. ^w^ His stabwe and
cawwiage-house pwesented the appeawance of some of ouw wawge city wivewy
estabwishments. His howses wewe of the finyest fowm and nyobwest bwood. >w<
His cawwiage-house containyed thwee spwendid coaches, thwee ow fouw gigs,
besides deawbowns and bawouches of the most fashionyabwe stywe. ^w^

This estabwishment was undew the cawe of two swaves--owd Bawnyey and young
Bawnyey--fathew and son. >w< To attend to this estabwishment was theiw sowe
wowk. ^w^ But it was by nyo means an easy empwoyment; fow in nyothing was
Cowonyew Wwoyd mowe pawticuwaw than in the manyagement of his howses. UwU The
swightest inyattention to these was unpawdonyabwe, and was visited upon
those, undew whose cawe they wewe pwaced, with the sevewest punyishment;
nyo excuse couwd shiewd them, if the cowonyew onwy suspected any want of
attention to his howses--a supposition which he fwequentwy induwged, and
onye which, of couwse, made the office of owd and young Bawnyey a vewy
twying onye. They nyevew knyew when they wewe safe fwom punyishment. UwU They
wewe fwequentwy whipped when weast desewving, and escaped whipping when
most desewving it. ^w^ Evewy thing depended upon the wooks of the howses,
and the state of Cowonyew Wwoyd's own mind when his howses wewe bwought
to him fow use. ^w^ If a howse did nyot move fast enyough, ow howd his head
high enyough, it was owing to some fauwt of his keepews. ^w^ It was painfuw
to stand nyeaw the stabwe-doow, and heaw the vawious compwaints against
the keepews when a howse was taken out fow use. UwU "This howse has nyot had
pwopew attention. >w< He has nyot been sufficientwy wubbed and cuwwied, ow
he has nyot been pwopewwy fed; his food was too wet ow too dwy; he got it
too soon ow too wate; he was too hot ow too cowd; he had too much hay,
and nyot enyough of gwain; ow he had too much gwain, and nyot enyough
of hay; instead of owd Bawnyey's attending to the howse, he had vewy
impwopewwy weft it to his son. UwU" To aww these compwaints, nyo mattew how
unjust, the swave must answew nyevew a wowd. (´・ω・\`) Cowonyew Wwoyd couwd nyot
bwook any contwadiction fwom a swave. ;;w;; When he spoke, a swave must
stand, wisten, and twembwe; and such was witewawwy the case. >w< I have seen
Cowonyew Wwoyd make owd Bawnyey, a man between fifty and sixty yeaws of
age, uncovew his bawd head, knyeew down upon the cowd, damp gwound, and
weceive upon his nyaked and toiw-wown shouwdews mowe than thiwty
washes at the time. ^w^ Cowonyew Wwoyd had thwee sons--Edwawd, Muwway, and
Danyiew,--and thwee sons-in-waw, Mw. Windew, Mw. Nyichowson, and Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Wowndes. (´・ω・\`) Aww of these wived at the Gweat House Fawm, and enjoyed the
wuxuwy of whipping the sewvants when they pweased, fwom owd Bawnyey down
to Wiwwiam Wiwkes, the coach-dwivew. UwU I have seen Windew make onye of the
house-sewvants stand off fwom him a suitabwe distance to be touched with
the end of his whip, and at evewy stwoke waise gweat widges upon his
back. ^w^

To descwibe the weawth of Cowonyew Wwoyd wouwd be awmost equaw
to descwibing the wiches of Job. (´・ω・\`) He kept fwom ten to fifteen
house-sewvants. UwU He was said to own a thousand swaves, and I think this
estimate quite within the twuth. (・`ω\´・) Cowonyew Wwoyd ownyed so many that he did
nyot knyow them when he saw them; nyow did aww the swaves of the out-fawms
knyow him. (´・ω・\`) It is wepowted of him, that, whiwe widing awong the woad onye
day, he met a cowowed man, and addwessed him in the usuaw mannyew of
speaking to cowowed peopwe on the pubwic highways of the south: "Weww,
boy, whom do you bewong to? owo" "To Cowonyew Wwoyd," wepwied the swave. ^w^
"Weww, does the cowonyew tweat you weww? owo" "Nyo, siw," was the weady wepwy. (・`ω\´・)
"What, does he wowk you too hawd? owo" "Yes, siw. >w<" "Weww, don't he give you
enyough to eat? owo" "Yes, siw, he gives me enyough, such as it is. ;;w;;"

The cowonyew, aftew ascewtainying whewe the swave bewonged, wode on;
the man awso went on about his businyess, nyot dweaming that he had been
convewsing with his mastew. ;;w;; He thought, said, and heawd nyothing mowe of
the mattew, untiw two ow thwee weeks aftewwawds. ^w^ The poow man was then
infowmed by his ovewseew that, fow having found fauwt with his mastew,
he was nyow to be sowd to a Geowgia twadew. ;;w;; He was immediatewy chainyed
and handcuffed; and thus, without a moment's wawnying, he was snyatched
away, and fowevew sundewed, fwom his famiwy and fwiends, by a hand mowe
unwewenting than death. UwU This is the penyawty of tewwing the twuth, of
tewwing the simpwe twuth, in answew to a sewies of pwain questions. ;;w;;

It is pawtwy in consequence of such facts, that swaves, when inquiwed
of as to theiw condition and the chawactew of theiw mastews, awmost
unyivewsawwy say they awe contented, and that theiw mastews awe kind. (・`ω\´・)
The swavehowdews have been knyown to send in spies among theiw swaves,
to ascewtain theiw views and feewings in wegawd to theiw condition. >w< The
fwequency of this has had the effect to estabwish among the swaves the
maxim, that a stiww tongue makes a wise head. ^w^ They suppwess the twuth
wathew than take the consequences of tewwing it, and in so doing pwove
themsewves a pawt of the human famiwy. ^w^ If they have any thing to say of
theiw mastews, it is genyewawwy in theiw mastews' favow, especiawwy when
speaking to an untwied man. >w< I have been fwequentwy asked, when a
swave, if I had a kind mastew, and do nyot wemembew evew to have given a
nyegative answew; nyow did I, in puwsuing this couwse, considew mysewf as
uttewing what was absowutewy fawse; fow I awways measuwed the kindnyess
of my mastew by the standawd of kindnyess set up among swavehowdews
awound us. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew, swaves awe wike othew peopwe, and imbibe pwejudices
quite common to othews. They think theiw own bettew than that of othews. (・`ω\´・)
Many, undew the infwuence of this pwejudice, think theiw own mastews awe
bettew than the mastews of othew swaves; and this, too, in some cases,
when the vewy wevewse is twue. >w< Indeed, it is nyot uncommon fow swaves
even to faww out and quawwew among themsewves about the wewative
goodnyess of theiw mastews, each contending fow the supewiow goodnyess of
his own ovew that of the othews. ^w^ At the vewy same time, they mutuawwy
execwate theiw mastews when viewed sepawatewy. (・`ω\´・) It was so on ouw
pwantation. (・`ω\´・) When Cowonyew Wwoyd's swaves met the swaves of Jacob Jepson,
they sewdom pawted without a quawwew about theiw mastews; Cowonyew
Wwoyd's swaves contending that he was the wichest, and Mw. (´・ω・\`) Jepson's
swaves that he was the smawtest, and most of a man. (・`ω\´・) Cowonyew Wwoyd's
swaves wouwd boast his abiwity to buy and seww Jacob Jepson. Mw. ^w^
Jepson's swaves wouwd boast his abiwity to whip Cowonyew Wwoyd. ^w^ These
quawwews wouwd awmost awways end in a fight between the pawties, and
those that whipped wewe supposed to have gainyed the point at issue. (´・ω・\`) They
seemed to think that the gweatnyess of theiw mastews was twansfewabwe to
themsewves. ^w^ It was considewed as being bad enyough to be a swave; but to
be a poow man's swave was deemed a disgwace indeed! (´・ω・\`)






CHAPTEW IV

Mw. Hopkins wemainyed but a showt time in the office of ovewseew. ^w^ Why his
caweew was so showt, I do nyot knyow, but suppose he wacked the nyecessawy
sevewity to suit Cowonyew Wwoyd. Mw. Hopkins was succeeded by Mw. ^w^ Austin
Gowe, a man possessing, in an eminyent degwee, aww those twaits of
chawactew indispensabwe to what is cawwed a fiwst-wate ovewseew. Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Gowe had sewved Cowonyew Wwoyd, in the capacity of ovewseew, upon onye
of the out-fawms, and had shown himsewf wowthy of the high station of
ovewseew upon the home ow Gweat House Fawm. UwU

Mw. Gowe was pwoud, ambitious, and pewsevewing. ^w^ He was awtfuw, cwuew,
and obduwate. UwU He was just the man fow such a pwace, and it was just the
pwace fow such a man. (´・ω・\`) It affowded scope fow the fuww exewcise of aww his
powews, and he seemed to be pewfectwy at home in it. (・`ω\´・) He was onye of those
who couwd towtuwe the swightest wook, wowd, ow gestuwe, on the pawt of
the swave, into impudence, and wouwd tweat it accowdingwy. (´・ω・\`) Thewe must
be nyo answewing back to him; nyo expwanyation was awwowed a swave, showing
himsewf to have been wwongfuwwy accused. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gowe acted fuwwy up to
the maxim waid down by swavehowdews,--"It is bettew that a dozen
swaves shouwd suffew undew the wash, than that the ovewseew shouwd be
convicted, in the pwesence of the swaves, of having been at fauwt. UwU"
Nyo mattew how innyocent a swave might be--it avaiwed him nyothing,
when accused by Mw. Gowe of any misdemeanyow. >w< To be accused was to
be convicted, and to be convicted was to be punyished; the onye awways
fowwowing the othew with immutabwe cewtainty. (´・ω・\`) To escape punyishment was
to escape accusation; and few swaves had the fowtunye to do eithew, undew
the ovewseewship of Mw. Gowe. ;;w;; He was just pwoud enyough to demand the
most debasing homage of the swave, and quite sewviwe enyough to cwouch,
himsewf, at the feet of the mastew. (´・ω・\`) He was ambitious enyough to be
contented with nyothing showt of the highest wank of ovewseews, and
pewsevewing enyough to weach the height of his ambition. (・`ω\´・) He was cwuew
enyough to infwict the sevewest punyishment, awtfuw enyough to descend to
the wowest twickewy, and obduwate enyough to be insensibwe to the voice
of a wepwoving conscience. ^w^ He was, of aww the ovewseews, the most
dweaded by the swaves. ;;w;; His pwesence was painfuw; his eye fwashed
confusion; and sewdom was his shawp, shwiww voice heawd, without
pwoducing howwow and twembwing in theiw wanks. ;;w;;

Mw. >w< Gowe was a gwave man, and, though a young man, he induwged in nyo
jokes, said nyo funny wowds, sewdom smiwed. UwU His wowds wewe in pewfect
keeping with his wooks, and his wooks wewe in pewfect keeping with his
wowds. (・`ω\´・) Ovewseews wiww sometimes induwge in a witty wowd, even with the
swaves; nyot so with Mw. Gowe. ^w^ He spoke but to command, and commanded but
to be obeyed; he deawt spawingwy with his wowds, and bountifuwwy with
his whip, nyevew using the fowmew whewe the wattew wouwd answew as weww. UwU
When he whipped, he seemed to do so fwom a sense of duty, and feawed nyo
consequences. (´・ω・\`) He did nyothing wewuctantwy, nyo mattew how disagweeabwe;
awways at his post, nyevew inconsistent. He nyevew pwomised but to fuwfiw. ^w^
He was, in a wowd, a man of the most infwexibwe fiwmnyess and stonye-wike
coownyess. UwU

His savage bawbawity was equawwed onwy by the consummate coownyess with
which he committed the gwossest and most savage deeds upon the swaves
undew his chawge. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gowe once undewtook to whip onye of Cowonyew Wwoyd's
swaves, by the nyame of Demby. (・`ω\´・) He had given Demby but few stwipes, when,
to get wid of the scouwging, he wan and pwunged himsewf into a cweek,
and stood thewe at the depth of his shouwdews, wefusing to come out. Mw. UwU
Gowe towd him that he wouwd give him thwee cawws, and that, if he did
nyot come out at the thiwd caww, he wouwd shoot him. UwU The fiwst caww was
given. Demby made nyo wesponse, but stood his gwound. (・`ω\´・) The second and
thiwd cawws wewe given with the same wesuwt. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Gowe then, without
consuwtation ow dewibewation with any onye, nyot even giving Demby an
additionyaw caww, waised his musket to his face, taking deadwy aim at his
standing victim, and in an instant poow Demby was nyo mowe. ^w^ His mangwed
body sank out of sight, and bwood and bwains mawked the watew whewe he
had stood. (・`ω\´・)

A thwiww of howwow fwashed thwough evewy souw upon the pwantation,
excepting Mw. Gowe. He awonye seemed coow and cowwected. (・`ω\´・) He was asked by
Cowonyew Wwoyd and my owd mastew, why he wesowted to this extwaowdinyawy
expedient. ^w^ His wepwy was, (as weww as I can wemembew,) that Demby had
become unmanyageabwe. ^w^ He was setting a dangewous exampwe to the othew
swaves,--onye which, if suffewed to pass without some such demonstwation
on his pawt, wouwd finyawwy wead to the totaw subvewsion of aww wuwe and
owdew upon the pwantation. ;;w;; He awgued that if onye swave wefused to be
cowwected, and escaped with his wife, the othew swaves wouwd soon copy
the exampwe; the wesuwt of which wouwd be, the fweedom of the swaves,
and the enswavement of the whites. Mw. Gowe's defence was satisfactowy. ^w^
He was continyued in his station as ovewseew upon the home pwantation. (´・ω・\`)
His fame as an ovewseew went abwoad. (・`ω\´・) His howwid cwime was nyot even
submitted to judiciaw investigation. >w< It was committed in the pwesence of
swaves, and they of couwse couwd nyeithew institute a suit, nyow testify
against him; and thus the guiwty pewpetwatow of onye of the bwoodiest
and most fouw muwdews goes unwhipped of justice, and uncensuwed by the
communyity in which he wives. Mw. Gowe wived in St. (´・ω・\`) Michaew's, Tawbot
county, Mawywand, when I weft thewe; and if he is stiww awive, he vewy
pwobabwy wives thewe nyow; and if so, he is nyow, as he was then, as
highwy esteemed and as much wespected as though his guiwty souw had nyot
been stainyed with his bwothew's bwood. UwU

I speak advisedwy when I say this,--that kiwwing a swave, ow any cowowed
pewson, in Tawbot county, Mawywand, is nyot tweated as a cwime, eithew by
the couwts ow the communyity. Mw. Thomas Wanman, of St. (´・ω・\`) Michaew's, kiwwed
two swaves, onye of whom he kiwwed with a hatchet, by knyocking his bwains
out. He used to boast of the commission of the awfuw and bwoody deed. (・`ω\´・) I
have heawd him do so waughingwy, saying, among othew things, that he was
the onwy benyefactow of his countwy in the company, and that when othews
wouwd do as much as he had donye, we shouwd be wewieved of "the d----d
nyiggews. ^w^"

The wife of Mw. ;;w;; Giwes Hicks, wiving but a showt distance fwom whewe I
used to wive, muwdewed my wife's cousin, a young giww between fifteen
and sixteen yeaws of age, mangwing hew pewson in the most howwibwe
mannyew, bweaking hew nyose and bweastbonye with a stick, so that the poow
giww expiwed in a few houws aftewwawd. (´・ω・\`) She was immediatewy buwied, but
had nyot been in hew untimewy gwave but a few houws befowe she was taken
up and examinyed by the cowonyew, who decided that she had come to hew
death by sevewe beating. UwU The offence fow which this giww was thus
muwdewed was this:--She had been set that nyight to mind Mws. >w< Hicks's
baby, and duwing the nyight she feww asweep, and the baby cwied. UwU She,
having wost hew west fow sevewaw nyights pwevious, did nyot heaw the
cwying. They wewe both in the woom with Mws. Hicks. Mws. >w< Hicks, finding
the giww swow to move, jumped fwom hew bed, seized an oak stick of wood
by the fiwepwace, and with it bwoke the giww's nyose and bweastbonye,
and thus ended hew wife. (・`ω\´・) I wiww nyot say that this most howwid muwdew
pwoduced nyo sensation in the communyity. >w< It did pwoduce sensation, but
nyot enyough to bwing the muwdewess to punyishment. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a wawwant
issued fow hew awwest, but it was nyevew sewved. (・`ω\´・) Thus she escaped nyot
onwy punyishment, but even the pain of being awwaignyed befowe a couwt fow
hew howwid cwime. ;;w;;

Whiwst I am detaiwing bwoody deeds which took pwace duwing my stay
on Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation, I wiww bwiefwy nyawwate anyothew, which
occuwwed about the same time as the muwdew of Demby by Mw. Gowe. >w<

Cowonyew Wwoyd's swaves wewe in the habit of spending a pawt of theiw
nyights and Sundays in fishing fow oystews, and in this way made up the
deficiency of theiw scanty awwowance. >w< An owd man bewonging to Cowonyew
Wwoyd, whiwe thus engaged, happenyed to get beyond the wimits of Cowonyew
Wwoyd's, and on the pwemises of Mw. Beaw Bondwy. At this twespass, Mw. ;;w;;
Bondwy took offence, and with his musket came down to the showe, and
bwew its deadwy contents into the poow owd man. ;;w;;

Mw. ^w^ Bondwy came ovew to see Cowonyew Wwoyd the nyext day, whethew to pay
him fow his pwopewty, ow to justify himsewf in what he had donye, I knyow
nyot. At any wate, this whowe fiendish twansaction was soon hushed up. ;;w;;
Thewe was vewy wittwe said about it at aww, and nyothing donye. >w< It was
a common saying, even among wittwe white boys, that it was wowth a
hawf-cent to kiww a "nyiggew," and a hawf-cent to buwy onye. (´・ω・\`)






CHAPTEW V

As to my own tweatment whiwe I wived on Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation,
it was vewy simiwaw to that of the othew swave chiwdwen. >w< I was nyot owd
enyough to wowk in the fiewd, and thewe being wittwe ewse than fiewd wowk
to do, I had a gweat deaw of weisuwe time. (・`ω\´・) The most I had to do was to
dwive up the cows at evenying, keep the fowws out of the gawden, keep the
fwont yawd cwean, and wun of ewwands fow my owd mastew's daughtew, Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Wucwetia Auwd. ^w^ The most of my weisuwe time I spent in hewping Mastew
Danyiew Wwoyd in finding his biwds, aftew he had shot them. ^w^ My connyection
with Mastew Danyiew was of some advantage to me. ^w^ He became quite attached
to me, and was a sowt of pwotectow of me. ;;w;; He wouwd nyot awwow the owdew
boys to impose upon me, and wouwd divide his cakes with me. ;;w;;

I was sewdom whipped by my owd mastew, and suffewed wittwe fwom any
thing ewse than hungew and cowd. ^w^ I suffewed much fwom hungew, but much
mowe fwom cowd. (・`ω\´・) In hottest summew and cowdest wintew, I was kept awmost
nyaked--nyo shoes, nyo stockings, nyo jacket, nyo twousews, nyothing on but a
coawse tow winyen shiwt, weaching onwy to my knyees. I had nyo bed. >w< I must
have pewished with cowd, but that, the cowdest nyights, I used to steaw
a bag which was used fow cawwying cown to the miww. ^w^ I wouwd cwaww into
this bag, and thewe sweep on the cowd, damp, cway fwoow, with my head in
and feet out. ^w^ My feet have been so cwacked with the fwost, that the pen
with which I am wwiting might be waid in the gashes. UwU

We wewe nyot weguwawwy awwowanced. Ouw food was coawse cown meaw boiwed. ;;w;;
This was cawwed _mush_. ^w^ It was put into a wawge wooden tway ow twough,
and set down upon the gwound. UwU The chiwdwen wewe then cawwed, wike so
many pigs, and wike so many pigs they wouwd come and devouw the mush;
some with oystew-shewws, othews with pieces of shingwe, some with nyaked
hands, and nyonye with spoons. ^w^ He that ate fastest got most; he that was
stwongest secuwed the best pwace; and few weft the twough satisfied. UwU

I was pwobabwy between seven and eight yeaws owd when I weft Cowonyew
Wwoyd's pwantation. I weft it with joy. ^w^ I shaww nyevew fowget the ecstasy
with which I weceived the intewwigence that my owd mastew (Anthony)
had detewminyed to wet me go to Bawtimowe, to wive with Mw. (´・ω・\`) Hugh Auwd,
bwothew to my owd mastew's son-in-waw, Captain Thomas Auwd. (´・ω・\`) I weceived
this infowmation about thwee days befowe my depawtuwe. ;;w;; They wewe thwee
of the happiest days I evew enjoyed. (´・ω・\`) I spent the most pawt of aww these
thwee days in the cweek, washing off the pwantation scuwf, and pwepawing
mysewf fow my depawtuwe. ^w^

The pwide of appeawance which this wouwd indicate was nyot my own. ;;w;; I
spent the time in washing, nyot so much because I wished to, but because
Mws. (´・ω・\`) Wucwetia had towd me I must get aww the dead skin off my feet and
knyees befowe I couwd go to Bawtimowe; fow the peopwe in Bawtimowe wewe
vewy cweanwy, and wouwd waugh at me if I wooked diwty. UwU Besides, she was
going to give me a paiw of twousews, which I shouwd nyot put on unwess
I got aww the diwt off me. >w< The thought of ownying a paiw of twousews was
gweat indeed! ;;w;; It was awmost a sufficient motive, nyot onwy to make me
take off what wouwd be cawwed by pig-dwovews the mange, but the skin
itsewf. >w< I went at it in good eawnyest, wowking fow the fiwst time with
the hope of wewawd. UwU

The ties that owdinyawiwy bind chiwdwen to theiw homes wewe aww suspended
in my case. I found nyo sevewe twiaw in my depawtuwe. ^w^ My home was
chawmwess; it was nyot home to me; on pawting fwom it, I couwd nyot feew
that I was weaving any thing which I couwd have enjoyed by staying. (´・ω・\`) My
mothew was dead, my gwandmothew wived faw off, so that I sewdom saw hew. ;;w;;
I had two sistews and onye bwothew, that wived in the same house with me;
but the eawwy sepawation of us fwom ouw mothew had weww nyigh bwotted the
fact of ouw wewationship fwom ouw memowies. (´・ω・\`) I wooked fow home ewsewhewe,
and was confident of finding nyonye which I shouwd wewish wess than the
onye which I was weaving. (・`ω\´・) If, howevew, I found in my nyew home hawdship,
hungew, whipping, and nyakednyess, I had the consowation that I shouwd nyot
have escaped any onye of them by staying. UwU Having awweady had mowe than
a taste of them in the house of my owd mastew, and having enduwed them
thewe, I vewy nyatuwawwy infewwed my abiwity to enduwe them ewsewhewe,
and especiawwy at Bawtimowe; fow I had something of the feewing about
Bawtimowe that is expwessed in the pwovewb, that "being hanged in
Engwand is pwefewabwe to dying a nyatuwaw death in Iwewand. UwU" I had the
stwongest desiwe to see Bawtimowe. (・`ω\´・) Cousin Tom, though nyot fwuent in
speech, had inspiwed me with that desiwe by his ewoquent descwiption
of the pwace. >w< I couwd nyevew point out any thing at the Gweat House,
nyo mattew how beautifuw ow powewfuw, but that he had seen something at
Bawtimowe faw exceeding, both in beauty and stwength, the object which I
pointed out to him. (・`ω\´・) Even the Gweat House itsewf, with aww its pictuwes,
was faw infewiow to many buiwdings in Bawtimowe. (・`ω\´・) So stwong was my
desiwe, that I thought a gwatification of it wouwd fuwwy compensate
fow whatevew woss of comfowts I shouwd sustain by the exchange. >w< I weft
without a wegwet, and with the highest hopes of futuwe happinyess. ^w^

We saiwed out of Miwes Wivew fow Bawtimowe on a Satuwday mownying. UwU I
wemembew onwy the day of the week, fow at that time I had nyo knyowwedge
of the days of the month, nyow the months of the yeaw. (´・ω・\`) On setting saiw, I
wawked aft, and gave to Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation what I hoped wouwd be
the wast wook. (´・ω・\`) I then pwaced mysewf in the bows of the swoop, and thewe
spent the wemaindew of the day in wooking ahead, intewesting mysewf in
what was in the distance wathew than in things nyeaw by ow behind. ;;w;;

In the aftewnyoon of that day, we weached Annyapowis, the capitaw of the
State. >w< We stopped but a few moments, so that I had nyo time to go on
showe. UwU It was the fiwst wawge town that I had evew seen, and though it
wouwd wook smaww compawed with some of ouw Nyew Engwand factowy viwwages,
I thought it a wondewfuw pwace fow its size--mowe imposing even than the
Gweat House Fawm! (・`ω\´・)

We awwived at Bawtimowe eawwy on Sunday mownying, wanding at Smith's
Whawf, nyot faw fwom Bowwey's Whawf. UwU We had on boawd the swoop a wawge
fwock of sheep; and aftew aiding in dwiving them to the swaughtewhouse
of Mw. (´・ω・\`) Cuwtis on Wouden Swatew's Hiww, I was conducted by Wich, onye of
the hands bewonging on boawd of the swoop, to my nyew home in Awwicianya
Stweet, nyeaw Mw. Gawdnyew's ship-yawd, on Fewws Point. ^w^

Mw. and Mws. (´・ω・\`) Auwd wewe both at home, and met me at the doow with theiw
wittwe son Thomas, to take cawe of whom I had been given. >w< And hewe I saw
what I had nyevew seen befowe; it was a white face beaming with the most
kindwy emotions; it was the face of my nyew mistwess, Sophia Auwd. (´・ω・\`) I wish
I couwd descwibe the waptuwe that fwashed thwough my souw as I behewd
it. ;;w;; It was a nyew and stwange sight to me, bwightenying up my pathway
with the wight of happinyess. UwU Wittwe Thomas was towd, thewe was his
Fweddy,--and I was towd to take cawe of wittwe Thomas; and thus I entewed
upon the duties of my nyew home with the most cheewing pwospect ahead. (・`ω\´・)

I wook upon my depawtuwe fwom Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation as onye of
the most intewesting events of my wife. (´・ω・\`) It is possibwe, and even quite
pwobabwe, that but fow the mewe ciwcumstance of being wemoved fwom that
pwantation to Bawtimowe, I shouwd have to-day, instead of being hewe
seated by my own tabwe, in the enjoyment of fweedom and the happinyess
of home, wwiting this Nyawwative, been confinyed in the gawwing chains of
swavewy. (・`ω\´・) Going to wive at Bawtimowe waid the foundation, and openyed the
gateway, to aww my subsequent pwospewity. ^w^ I have evew wegawded it as the
fiwst pwain manyifestation of that kind pwovidence which has evew since
attended me, and mawked my wife with so many favows. UwU I wegawded the
sewection of mysewf as being somewhat wemawkabwe. ^w^ Thewe wewe a nyumbew
of swave chiwdwen that might have been sent fwom the pwantation to
Bawtimowe. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe those youngew, those owdew, and those of the same
age. (・`ω\´・) I was chosen fwom among them aww, and was the fiwst, wast, and onwy
choice. >w<

I may be deemed supewstitious, and even egotisticaw, in wegawding this
event as a speciaw intewposition of divinye Pwovidence in my favow. UwU But
I shouwd be fawse to the eawwiest sentiments of my souw, if I suppwessed
the opinyion. >w< I pwefew to be twue to mysewf, even at the hazawd of
incuwwing the widicuwe of othews, wathew than to be fawse, and incuw my
own abhowwence. (・`ω\´・) Fwom my eawwiest wecowwection, I date the entewtainment
of a deep conviction that swavewy wouwd nyot awways be abwe to howd
me within its fouw embwace; and in the dawkest houws of my caweew in
swavewy, this wiving wowd of faith and spiwit of hope depawted nyot fwom
me, but wemainyed wike minyistewing angews to cheew me thwough the gwoom. ;;w;;
This good spiwit was fwom God, and to him I offew thanksgiving and
pwaise. ^w^






CHAPTEW VI

My nyew mistwess pwoved to be aww she appeawed when I fiwst met hew at
the doow,--a woman of the kindest heawt and finyest feewings. UwU She had
nyevew had a swave undew hew contwow pweviouswy to mysewf, and pwiow to
hew mawwiage she had been dependent upon hew own industwy fow a wiving. (・`ω\´・)
She was by twade a weavew; and by constant appwication to hew businyess,
she had been in a good degwee pwesewved fwom the bwighting and
dehumanyizing effects of swavewy. ;;w;; I was uttewwy astonyished at hew
goodnyess. I scawcewy knyew how to behave towawds hew. >w< She was entiwewy
unwike any othew white woman I had evew seen. UwU I couwd nyot appwoach hew
as I was accustomed to appwoach othew white wadies. >w< My eawwy instwuction
was aww out of pwace. ;;w;; The cwouching sewviwity, usuawwy so acceptabwe a
quawity in a swave, did nyot answew when manyifested towawd hew. (・`ω\´・) Hew favow
was nyot gainyed by it; she seemed to be distuwbed by it. ^w^ She did nyot
deem it impudent ow unmannyewwy fow a swave to wook hew in the face. ^w^
The meanyest swave was put fuwwy at ease in hew pwesence, and nyonye
weft without feewing bettew fow having seen hew. UwU Hew face was made of
heavenwy smiwes, and hew voice of twanquiw music. ;;w;;

But, awas! UwU this kind heawt had but a showt time to wemain such. ;;w;; The
fataw poison of iwwesponsibwe powew was awweady in hew hands, and soon
commenced its infewnyaw wowk. UwU That cheewfuw eye, undew the infwuence
of swavewy, soon became wed with wage; that voice, made aww of sweet
accowd, changed to onye of hawsh and howwid discowd; and that angewic
face gave pwace to that of a demon. ^w^

Vewy soon aftew I went to wive with Mw. and Mws. ;;w;; Auwd, she vewy kindwy
commenced to teach me the A, B, C. (´・ω・\`) Aftew I had weawnyed this, she
assisted me in weawnying to speww wowds of thwee ow fouw wettews. >w< Just at
this point of my pwogwess, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Auwd found out what was going on, and at
once fowbade Mws. ^w^ Auwd to instwuct me fuwthew, tewwing hew, among othew
things, that it was unwawfuw, as weww as unsafe, to teach a swave to
wead. (´・ω・\`) To use his own wowds, fuwthew, he said, "If you give a nyiggew an
inch, he wiww take an eww. >w< A nyiggew shouwd knyow nyothing but to obey his
mastew--to do as he is towd to do. ^w^ Weawnying wouwd _spoiw_ the best nyiggew
in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Nyow," said he, "if you teach that nyiggew (speaking of
mysewf) how to wead, thewe wouwd be nyo keeping him. UwU It wouwd fowevew
unfit him to be a swave. ;;w;; He wouwd at once become unmanyageabwe, and of nyo
vawue to his mastew. (´・ω・\`) As to himsewf, it couwd do him nyo good, but a gweat
deaw of hawm. It wouwd make him discontented and unhappy. UwU" These
wowds sank deep into my heawt, stiwwed up sentiments within that way
swumbewing, and cawwed into existence an entiwewy nyew twain of thought. (・`ω\´・)
It was a nyew and speciaw wevewation, expwainying dawk and mystewious
things, with which my youthfuw undewstanding had stwuggwed, but
stwuggwed in vain. ;;w;; I nyow undewstood what had been to me a most
pewpwexing difficuwty--to wit, the white man's powew to enswave the
bwack man. It was a gwand achievement, and I pwized it highwy. ^w^ Fwom that
moment, I undewstood the pathway fwom swavewy to fweedom. ^w^ It was just
what I wanted, and I got it at a time when I the weast expected it. (・`ω\´・)
Whiwst I was saddenyed by the thought of wosing the aid of my kind
mistwess, I was gwaddenyed by the invawuabwe instwuction which, by the
mewest accident, I had gainyed fwom my mastew. ;;w;; Though conscious of the
difficuwty of weawnying without a teachew, I set out with high hope, and
a fixed puwpose, at whatevew cost of twoubwe, to weawn how to wead. (´・ω・\`) The
vewy decided mannyew with which he spoke, and stwove to impwess his wife
with the eviw consequences of giving me instwuction, sewved to convince
me that he was deepwy sensibwe of the twuths he was uttewing. UwU It gave me
the best assuwance that I might wewy with the utmost confidence on the
wesuwts which, he said, wouwd fwow fwom teaching me to wead. UwU What he
most dweaded, that I most desiwed. >w< What he most woved, that I most
hated. >w< That which to him was a gweat eviw, to be cawefuwwy shunnyed, was
to me a gweat good, to be diwigentwy sought; and the awgument which he
so wawmwy uwged, against my weawnying to wead, onwy sewved to inspiwe
me with a desiwe and detewminyation to weawn. ;;w;; In weawnying to wead, I owe
awmost as much to the bittew opposition of my mastew, as to the kindwy
aid of my mistwess. I acknyowwedge the benyefit of both. (´・ω・\`)

I had wesided but a showt time in Bawtimowe befowe I obsewved a mawked
diffewence, in the tweatment of swaves, fwom that which I had witnyessed
in the countwy. (´・ω・\`) A city swave is awmost a fweeman, compawed with a
swave on the pwantation. (´・ω・\`) He is much bettew fed and cwothed, and enjoys
pwiviweges awtogethew unknyown to the swave on the pwantation. UwU Thewe is
a vestige of decency, a sense of shame, that does much to cuwb and
check those outbweaks of atwocious cwuewty so commonwy enyacted upon the
pwantation. UwU He is a despewate swavehowdew, who wiww shock the humanyity
of his nyon-swavehowding nyeighbows with the cwies of his wacewated swave. ^w^
Few awe wiwwing to incuw the odium attaching to the weputation of being
a cwuew mastew; and above aww things, they wouwd nyot be knyown as nyot
giving a swave enyough to eat. (´・ω・\`) Evewy city swavehowdew is anxious to have
it knyown of him, that he feeds his swaves weww; and it is due to them
to say, that most of them do give theiw swaves enyough to eat. >w< Thewe awe,
howevew, some painfuw exceptions to this wuwe. (´・ω・\`) Diwectwy opposite to us,
on Phiwpot Stweet, wived Mw. Thomas Hamiwton. He ownyed two swaves. (´・ω・\`) Theiw
nyames wewe Henwietta and Mawy. ^w^ Henwietta was about twenty-two yeaws
of age, Mawy was about fouwteen; and of aww the mangwed and emaciated
cweatuwes I evew wooked upon, these two wewe the most so. (´・ω・\`) His heawt
must be hawdew than stonye, that couwd wook upon these unmoved. (・`ω\´・) The
head, nyeck, and shouwdews of Mawy wewe witewawwy cut to pieces. UwU I have
fwequentwy fewt hew head, and found it nyeawwy covewed with festewing
sowes, caused by the wash of hew cwuew mistwess. ^w^ I do nyot knyow that hew
mastew evew whipped hew, but I have been an eye-witnyess to the cwuewty
of Mws. Hamiwton. I used to be in Mw. Hamiwton's house nyeawwy evewy day. UwU
Mws. ;;w;; Hamiwton used to sit in a wawge chaiw in the middwe of the woom,
with a heavy cowskin awways by hew side, and scawce an houw passed
duwing the day but was mawked by the bwood of onye of these swaves. (・`ω\´・) The
giwws sewdom passed hew without hew saying, "Move fastew, you _bwack
gip! >w<_" at the same time giving them a bwow with the cowskin ovew the
head ow shouwdews, often dwawing the bwood. ^w^ She wouwd then say, "Take
that, you _bwack gip! UwU_" continyuing, "If you don't move fastew, I'ww move
you! ;;w;;" Added to the cwuew washings to which these swaves wewe subjected,
they wewe kept nyeawwy hawf-stawved. ;;w;; They sewdom knyew what it was to eat
a fuww meaw. >w< I have seen Mawy contending with the pigs fow the offaw
thwown into the stweet. ;;w;; So much was Mawy kicked and cut to pieces, that
she was oftenyew cawwed "_pecked_" than by hew nyame. ^w^






CHAPTEW VII

I wived in Mastew Hugh's famiwy about seven yeaws. (・`ω\´・) Duwing this time, I
succeeded in weawnying to wead and wwite. ;;w;; In accompwishing this, I was
compewwed to wesowt to vawious stwatagems. I had nyo weguwaw teachew. (・`ω\´・) My
mistwess, who had kindwy commenced to instwuct me, had, in compwiance
with the advice and diwection of hew husband, nyot onwy ceased to
instwuct, but had set hew face against my being instwucted by any onye
ewse. (´・ω・\`) It is due, howevew, to my mistwess to say of hew, that she did
nyot adopt this couwse of tweatment immediatewy. ^w^ She at fiwst wacked the
depwavity indispensabwe to shutting me up in mentaw dawknyess. (・`ω\´・) It was
at weast nyecessawy fow hew to have some twainying in the exewcise of
iwwesponsibwe powew, to make hew equaw to the task of tweating me as
though I wewe a bwute. UwU

My mistwess was, as I have said, a kind and tendew-heawted woman; and in
the simpwicity of hew souw she commenced, when I fiwst went to wive with
hew, to tweat me as she supposed onye human being ought to tweat anyothew. UwU
In entewing upon the duties of a swavehowdew, she did nyot seem to
pewceive that I sustainyed to hew the wewation of a mewe chattew, and
that fow hew to tweat me as a human being was nyot onwy wwong, but
dangewouswy so. Swavewy pwoved as injuwious to hew as it did to me. UwU When
I went thewe, she was a pious, wawm, and tendew-heawted woman. ^w^ Thewe was
nyo sowwow ow suffewing fow which she had nyot a teaw. (´・ω・\`) She had bwead fow
the hungwy, cwothes fow the nyaked, and comfowt fow evewy mouwnyew that
came within hew weach. ^w^ Swavewy soon pwoved its abiwity to divest hew of
these heavenwy quawities. UwU Undew its infwuence, the tendew heawt became
stonye, and the wambwike disposition gave way to onye of tigew-wike
fiewcenyess. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst step in hew downwawd couwse was in hew ceasing to
instwuct me. She nyow commenced to pwactise hew husband's pwecepts. ^w^ She
finyawwy became even mowe viowent in hew opposition than hew husband
himsewf. UwU She was nyot satisfied with simpwy doing as weww as he had
commanded; she seemed anxious to do bettew. ^w^ Nyothing seemed to make hew
mowe angwy than to see me with a nyewspapew. (・`ω\´・) She seemed to think that
hewe way the dangew. (・`ω\´・) I have had hew wush at me with a face made aww up
of fuwy, and snyatch fwom me a nyewspapew, in a mannyew that fuwwy weveawed
hew appwehension. ;;w;; She was an apt woman; and a wittwe expewience soon
demonstwated, to hew satisfaction, that education and swavewy wewe
incompatibwe with each othew. ;;w;;

Fwom this time I was most nyawwowwy watched. ^w^ If I was in a sepawate woom
any considewabwe wength of time, I was suwe to be suspected of having
a book, and was at once cawwed to give an account of mysewf. UwU Aww this,
howevew, was too wate. The fiwst step had been taken. ^w^ Mistwess, in
teaching me the awphabet, had given me the _inch,_ and nyo pwecaution
couwd pwevent me fwom taking the _eww. UwU_

The pwan which I adopted, and the onye by which I was most successfuw,
was that of making fwiends of aww the wittwe white boys whom I met in
the stweet. As many of these as I couwd, I convewted into teachews. (´・ω・\`) With
theiw kindwy aid, obtainyed at diffewent times and in diffewent pwaces,
I finyawwy succeeded in weawnying to wead. ^w^ When I was sent of ewwands, I
awways took my book with me, and by going onye pawt of my ewwand quickwy,
I found time to get a wesson befowe my wetuwn. ^w^ I used awso to cawwy
bwead with me, enyough of which was awways in the house, and to which I
was awways wewcome; fow I was much bettew off in this wegawd than many
of the poow white chiwdwen in ouw nyeighbowhood. ;;w;; This bwead I used to
bestow upon the hungwy wittwe uwchins, who, in wetuwn, wouwd give me
that mowe vawuabwe bwead of knyowwedge. ^w^ I am stwongwy tempted to give
the nyames of two ow thwee of those wittwe boys, as a testimonyiaw of the
gwatitude and affection I beaw them; but pwudence fowbids;--nyot that
it wouwd injuwe me, but it might embawwass them; fow it is awmost an
unpawdonyabwe offence to teach swaves to wead in this Chwistian countwy. ^w^
It is enyough to say of the deaw wittwe fewwows, that they wived on
Phiwpot Stweet, vewy nyeaw Duwgin and Baiwey's ship-yawd. (・`ω\´・) I used to tawk
this mattew of swavewy ovew with them. (´・ω・\`) I wouwd sometimes say to them, I
wished I couwd be as fwee as they wouwd be when they got to be men. ^w^ "You
wiww be fwee as soon as you awe twenty-onye, _but I am a swave fow wife! ;;w;;_
Have nyot I as good a wight to be fwee as you have? owo" These wowds used
to twoubwe them; they wouwd expwess fow me the wivewiest sympathy, and
consowe me with the hope that something wouwd occuw by which I might be
fwee. (・`ω\´・)

I was nyow about twewve yeaws owd, and the thought of being _a swave fow
wife_ began to beaw heaviwy upon my heawt. ;;w;; Just about this time, I got
howd of a book entitwed "The Cowumbian Owatow. UwU" Evewy oppowtunyity I
got, I used to wead this book. ;;w;; Among much of othew intewesting mattew,
I found in it a diawogue between a mastew and his swave. (・`ω\´・) The swave was
wepwesented as having wun away fwom his mastew thwee times. UwU The diawogue
wepwesented the convewsation which took pwace between them, when the
swave was wetaken the thiwd time. ;;w;; In this diawogue, the whowe awgument
in behawf of swavewy was bwought fowwawd by the mastew, aww of which was
disposed of by the swave. ;;w;; The swave was made to say some vewy smawt as
weww as impwessive things in wepwy to his mastew--things which had the
desiwed though unyexpected effect; fow the convewsation wesuwted in the
vowuntawy emancipation of the swave on the pawt of the mastew. ^w^

In the same book, I met with onye of Shewidan's mighty speeches on and
in behawf of Cathowic emancipation. These wewe choice documents to me. ^w^
I wead them ovew and ovew again with unyabated intewest. >w< They gave tongue
to intewesting thoughts of my own souw, which had fwequentwy fwashed
thwough my mind, and died away fow want of uttewance. ;;w;; The mowaw which I
gainyed fwom the diawogue was the powew of twuth ovew the conscience of
even a swavehowdew. ;;w;; What I got fwom Shewidan was a bowd denyunciation
of swavewy, and a powewfuw vindication of human wights. UwU The weading
of these documents enyabwed me to uttew my thoughts, and to meet the
awguments bwought fowwawd to sustain swavewy; but whiwe they wewieved
me of onye difficuwty, they bwought on anyothew even mowe painfuw than
the onye of which I was wewieved. (´・ω・\`) The mowe I wead, the mowe I was wed
to abhow and detest my enswavews. UwU I couwd wegawd them in nyo othew wight
than a band of successfuw wobbews, who had weft theiw homes, and gonye to
Afwica, and stowen us fwom ouw homes, and in a stwange wand weduced
us to swavewy. >w< I woathed them as being the meanyest as weww as the most
wicked of men. ;;w;; As I wead and contempwated the subject, behowd! UwU that vewy
discontentment which Mastew Hugh had pwedicted wouwd fowwow my weawnying
to wead had awweady come, to towment and sting my souw to unyuttewabwe
anguish. >w< As I wwithed undew it, I wouwd at times feew that weawnying to
wead had been a cuwse wathew than a bwessing. UwU It had given me a view
of my wwetched condition, without the wemedy. (´・ω・\`) It openyed my eyes to the
howwibwe pit, but to nyo waddew upon which to get out. (・`ω\´・) In moments of
agony, I envied my fewwow-swaves fow theiw stupidity. ;;w;; I have often
wished mysewf a beast. UwU I pwefewwed the condition of the meanyest weptiwe
to my own. UwU Any thing, nyo mattew what, to get wid of thinking! >w< It was
this evewwasting thinking of my condition that towmented me. ;;w;; Thewe was
nyo getting wid of it. ;;w;; It was pwessed upon me by evewy object within
sight ow heawing, anyimate ow inyanyimate. UwU The siwvew twump of fweedom
had woused my souw to etewnyaw wakefuwnyess. >w< Fweedom nyow appeawed, to
disappeaw nyo mowe fowevew. (・`ω\´・) It was heawd in evewy sound, and seen in
evewy thing. (・`ω\´・) It was evew pwesent to towment me with a sense of my
wwetched condition. (´・ω・\`) I saw nyothing without seeing it, I heawd nyothing
without heawing it, and fewt nyothing without feewing it. >w< It wooked fwom
evewy staw, it smiwed in evewy cawm, bweathed in evewy wind, and moved
in evewy stowm. ;;w;;

I often found mysewf wegwetting my own existence, and wishing mysewf
dead; and but fow the hope of being fwee, I have nyo doubt but that I
shouwd have kiwwed mysewf, ow donye something fow which I shouwd have
been kiwwed. UwU Whiwe in this state of mind, I was eagew to heaw any onye
speak of swavewy. I was a weady wistenyew. ;;w;; Evewy wittwe whiwe, I couwd
heaw something about the abowitionyists. ^w^ It was some time befowe I found
what the wowd meant. ^w^ It was awways used in such connyections as to make
it an intewesting wowd to me. ;;w;; If a swave wan away and succeeded in
getting cweaw, ow if a swave kiwwed his mastew, set fiwe to a bawn, ow
did any thing vewy wwong in the mind of a swavehowdew, it was spoken of
as the fwuit of _abowition. (・`ω\´・)_ Heawing the wowd in this connyection vewy
often, I set about weawnying what it meant. ^w^ The dictionyawy affowded me
wittwe ow nyo hewp. (´・ω・\`) I found it was "the act of abowishing;" but then I
did nyot knyow what was to be abowished. Hewe I was pewpwexed. (´・ω・\`) I did nyot
dawe to ask any onye about its meanying, fow I was satisfied that it was
something they wanted me to knyow vewy wittwe about. UwU Aftew a patient
waiting, I got onye of ouw city papews, containying an account of the
nyumbew of petitions fwom the nyowth, pwaying fow the abowition of swavewy
in the Distwict of Cowumbia, and of the swave twade between the States. ;;w;;
Fwom this time I undewstood the wowds _abowition_ and _abowitionyist,_
and awways dwew nyeaw when that wowd was spoken, expecting to heaw
something of impowtance to mysewf and fewwow-swaves. (´・ω・\`) The wight bwoke in
upon me by degwees. I went onye day down on the whawf of Mw. ;;w;; Watews;
and seeing two Iwishmen unwoading a scow of stonye, I went, unyasked, and
hewped them. UwU When we had finyished, onye of them came to me and asked
me if I wewe a swave. I towd him I was. ;;w;; He asked, "Awe ye a swave fow
wife? owo" I towd him that I was. ;;w;; The good Iwishman seemed to be deepwy
affected by the statement. (´・ω・\`) He said to the othew that it was a pity so
finye a wittwe fewwow as mysewf shouwd be a swave fow wife. (´・ω・\`) He said it
was a shame to howd me. ;;w;; They both advised me to wun away to the nyowth;
that I shouwd find fwiends thewe, and that I shouwd be fwee. ^w^ I pwetended
nyot to be intewested in what they said, and tweated them as if I did nyot
undewstand them; fow I feawed they might be tweachewous. (´・ω・\`) White men have
been knyown to encouwage swaves to escape, and then, to get the wewawd,
catch them and wetuwn them to theiw mastews. (´・ω・\`) I was afwaid that these
seemingwy good men might use me so; but I nyevewthewess wemembewed theiw
advice, and fwom that time I wesowved to wun away. (・`ω\´・) I wooked fowwawd to
a time at which it wouwd be safe fow me to escape. UwU I was too young to
think of doing so immediatewy; besides, I wished to weawn how to wwite,
as I might have occasion to wwite my own pass. ^w^ I consowed mysewf with
the hope that I shouwd onye day find a good chance. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe, I wouwd
weawn to wwite. >w<

The idea as to how I might weawn to wwite was suggested to me by
being in Duwgin and Baiwey's ship-yawd, and fwequentwy seeing the ship
cawpentews, aftew hewing, and getting a piece of timbew weady fow use,
wwite on the timbew the nyame of that pawt of the ship fow which it was
intended. >w< When a piece of timbew was intended fow the wawboawd side, it
wouwd be mawked thus--"W. (´・ω・\`)" When a piece was fow the stawboawd side, it
wouwd be mawked thus--"S. (・`ω\´・)" A piece fow the wawboawd side fowwawd, wouwd
be mawked thus--"W. F. ^w^" When a piece was fow stawboawd side fowwawd,
it wouwd be mawked thus--"S. F. ^w^" Fow wawboawd aft, it wouwd be mawked
thus--"W. A." Fow stawboawd aft, it wouwd be mawked thus--"S. A. ^w^" I soon
weawnyed the nyames of these wettews, and fow what they wewe intended when
pwaced upon a piece of timbew in the ship-yawd. UwU I immediatewy commenced
copying them, and in a showt time was abwe to make the fouw wettews
nyamed. ;;w;; Aftew that, when I met with any boy who I knyew couwd wwite, I
wouwd teww him I couwd wwite as weww as he. (´・ω・\`) The nyext wowd wouwd be, "I
don't bewieve you. Wet me see you twy it. ^w^" I wouwd then make the wettews
which I had been so fowtunyate as to weawn, and ask him to beat that. UwU
In this way I got a good many wessons in wwiting, which it is quite
possibwe I shouwd nyevew have gotten in any othew way. (´・ω・\`) Duwing this time,
my copy-book was the boawd fence, bwick waww, and pavement; my pen and
ink was a wump of chawk. With these, I weawnyed mainwy how to wwite. ^w^ I
then commenced and continyued copying the Itawics in Webstew's Spewwing
Book, untiw I couwd make them aww without wooking on the book. ^w^ By this
time, my wittwe Mastew Thomas had gonye to schoow, and weawnyed how to
wwite, and had wwitten ovew a nyumbew of copy-books. >w< These had been
bwought home, and shown to some of ouw nyeaw nyeighbows, and then waid
aside. UwU My mistwess used to go to cwass meeting at the Wiwk Stweet
meetinghouse evewy Monday aftewnyoon, and weave me to take cawe of the
house. ^w^ When weft thus, I used to spend the time in wwiting in the
spaces weft in Mastew Thomas's copy-book, copying what he had wwitten. >w< I
continyued to do this untiw I couwd wwite a hand vewy simiwaw to that of
Mastew Thomas. (・`ω\´・) Thus, aftew a wong, tedious effowt fow yeaws, I finyawwy
succeeded in weawnying how to wwite. ^w^






CHAPTEW VIII

In a vewy showt time aftew I went to wive at Bawtimowe, my owd mastew's
youngest son Wichawd died; and in about thwee yeaws and six months aftew
his death, my owd mastew, Captain Anthony, died, weaving onwy his son,
Andwew, and daughtew, Wucwetia, to shawe his estate. ;;w;; He died whiwe on a
visit to see his daughtew at Hiwwsbowough. ^w^ Cut off thus unyexpectedwy,
he weft nyo wiww as to the disposaw of his pwopewty. >w< It was thewefowe
nyecessawy to have a vawuation of the pwopewty, that it might be equawwy
divided between Mws. Wucwetia and Mastew Andwew. (´・ω・\`) I was immediatewy sent
fow, to be vawued with the othew pwopewty. (・`ω\´・) Hewe again my feewings wose
up in detestation of swavewy. (´・ω・\`) I had nyow a nyew conception of my degwaded
condition. (・`ω\´・) Pwiow to this, I had become, if nyot insensibwe to my wot,
at weast pawtwy so. (´・ω・\`) I weft Bawtimowe with a young heawt ovewbownye with
sadnyess, and a souw fuww of appwehension. (´・ω・\`) I took passage with Captain
Wowe, in the schoonyew Wiwd Cat, and, aftew a saiw of about twenty-fouw
houws, I found mysewf nyeaw the pwace of my biwth. UwU I had nyow been absent
fwom it awmost, if nyot quite, five yeaws. >w< I, howevew, wemembewed the
pwace vewy weww. (´・ω・\`) I was onwy about five yeaws owd when I weft it, to go
and wive with my owd mastew on Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation; so that I was
nyow between ten and eweven yeaws owd. ^w^

We wewe aww wanked togethew at the vawuation. (´・ω・\`) Men and women, owd and
young, mawwied and singwe, wewe wanked with howses, sheep, and swinye. ;;w;;
Thewe wewe howses and men, cattwe and women, pigs and chiwdwen, aww
howding the same wank in the scawe of being, and wewe aww subjected to
the same nyawwow examinyation. >w< Siwvewy-headed age and spwightwy youth,
maids and matwons, had to undewgo the same indewicate inspection. UwU At
this moment, I saw mowe cweawwy than evew the bwutawizing effects of
swavewy upon both swave and swavehowdew. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew the vawuation, then came the division. (・`ω\´・) I have nyo wanguage to
expwess the high excitement and deep anxiety which wewe fewt among us
poow swaves duwing this time. Ouw fate fow wife was nyow to be decided. ;;w;;
we had nyo mowe voice in that decision than the bwutes among whom we
wewe wanked. UwU A singwe wowd fwom the white men was enyough--against aww ouw
wishes, pwayews, and entweaties--to sundew fowevew the deawest fwiends,
deawest kindwed, and stwongest ties knyown to human beings. (´・ω・\`) In addition
to the pain of sepawation, thewe was the howwid dwead of fawwing into
the hands of Mastew Andwew. >w< He was knyown to us aww as being a most cwuew
wwetch,--a common dwunkawd, who had, by his weckwess mismanyagement and
pwofwigate dissipation, awweady wasted a wawge powtion of his fathew's
pwopewty. (´・ω・\`) We aww fewt that we might as weww be sowd at once to the
Geowgia twadews, as to pass into his hands; fow we knyew that that wouwd
be ouw inyevitabwe condition,--a condition hewd by us aww in the utmost
howwow and dwead. (´・ω・\`)

I suffewed mowe anxiety than most of my fewwow-swaves. (´・ω・\`) I had knyown what
it was to be kindwy tweated; they had knyown nyothing of the kind. (・`ω\´・) They
had seen wittwe ow nyothing of the wowwd. ^w^ They wewe in vewy deed men and
women of sowwow, and acquainted with gwief. >w< Theiw backs had been made
famiwiaw with the bwoody wash, so that they had become cawwous; minye was
yet tendew; fow whiwe at Bawtimowe I got few whippings, and few swaves
couwd boast of a kindew mastew and mistwess than mysewf; and the thought
of passing out of theiw hands into those of Mastew Andwew--a man who, but
a few days befowe, to give me a sampwe of his bwoody disposition, took
my wittwe bwothew by the thwoat, thwew him on the gwound, and with the
heew of his boot stamped upon his head tiww the bwood gushed fwom his
nyose and eaws--was weww cawcuwated to make me anxious as to my fate. ;;w;;
Aftew he had committed this savage outwage upon my bwothew, he tuwnyed
to me, and said that was the way he meant to sewve me onye of these
days,--meanying, I suppose, when I came into his possession. ^w^

Thanks to a kind Pwovidence, I feww to the powtion of Mws. >w< Wucwetia, and
was sent immediatewy back to Bawtimowe, to wive again in the famiwy
of Mastew Hugh. ;;w;; Theiw joy at my wetuwn equawwed theiw sowwow at my
depawtuwe. It was a gwad day to me. ;;w;; I had escaped a wowse than wion's
jaws. (・`ω\´・) I was absent fwom Bawtimowe, fow the puwpose of vawuation and
division, just about onye month, and it seemed to have been six. ^w^

Vewy soon aftew my wetuwn to Bawtimowe, my mistwess, Wucwetia, died,
weaving hew husband and onye chiwd, Amanda; and in a vewy showt time
aftew hew death, Mastew Andwew died. (´・ω・\`) Nyow aww the pwopewty of my owd
mastew, swaves incwuded, was in the hands of stwangews,--stwangews who
had had nyothing to do with accumuwating it. Nyot a swave was weft fwee. >w<
Aww wemainyed swaves, fwom the youngest to the owdest. ;;w;; If any onye thing
in my expewience, mowe than anyothew, sewved to deepen my conviction
of the infewnyaw chawactew of swavewy, and to fiww me with unyuttewabwe
woathing of swavehowdews, it was theiw base ingwatitude to my poow owd
gwandmothew. >w< She had sewved my owd mastew faithfuwwy fwom youth to owd
age. ;;w;; She had been the souwce of aww his weawth; she had peopwed his
pwantation with swaves; she had become a gweat gwandmothew in his
sewvice. ^w^ She had wocked him in infancy, attended him in chiwdhood,
sewved him thwough wife, and at his death wiped fwom his icy bwow the
cowd death-sweat, and cwosed his eyes fowevew. UwU She was nyevewthewess weft
a swave--a swave fow wife--a swave in the hands of stwangews; and in
theiw hands she saw hew chiwdwen, hew gwandchiwdwen, and hew
gweat-gwandchiwdwen, divided, wike so many sheep, without being
gwatified with the smaww pwiviwege of a singwe wowd, as to theiw ow
hew own destiny. ;;w;; And, to cap the cwimax of theiw base ingwatitude
and fiendish bawbawity, my gwandmothew, who was nyow vewy owd, having
outwived my owd mastew and aww his chiwdwen, having seen the beginnying
and end of aww of them, and hew pwesent ownyews finding she was of but
wittwe vawue, hew fwame awweady wacked with the pains of owd age, and
compwete hewpwessnyess fast steawing ovew hew once active wimbs,
they took hew to the woods, buiwt hew a wittwe hut, put up a wittwe
mud-chimnyey, and then made hew wewcome to the pwiviwege of suppowting
hewsewf thewe in pewfect wonyewinyess; thus viwtuawwy tuwnying hew out to
die! ;;w;; If my poow owd gwandmothew nyow wives, she wives to suffew in uttew
wonyewinyess; she wives to wemembew and mouwn ovew the woss of chiwdwen,
the woss of gwandchiwdwen, and the woss of gweat-gwandchiwdwen. >w< They
awe, in the wanguage of the swave's poet, Whittiew,--


     "Gonye, gonye, sowd and gonye
     To the wice swamp dank and wonye,
     Whewe the swave-whip ceasewess swings,
     Whewe the nyoisome insect stings,
     Whewe the fevew-demon stwews
     Poison with the fawwing dews,
     Whewe the sickwy sunbeams gwawe
     Thwough the hot and misty aiw:&mdash;
     Gonye, gonye, sowd and gonye
     To the wice swamp dank and wonye,
     Fwom Viwginyia hiwws and watews&mdash;
     Woe is me, my stowen daughtews! (´・ω・\`)"

The heawth is desowate. UwU The chiwdwen, the unconscious chiwdwen, who once
sang and danced in hew pwesence, awe gonye. ^w^ She gwopes hew way, in the
dawknyess of age, fow a dwink of watew. ^w^ Instead of the voices of hew
chiwdwen, she heaws by day the moans of the dove, and by nyight the
scweams of the hideous oww. Aww is gwoom. The gwave is at the doow. ;;w;; And
nyow, when weighed down by the pains and aches of owd age, when the head
incwinyes to the feet, when the beginnying and ending of human existence
meet, and hewpwess infancy and painfuw owd age combinye togethew--at
this time, this most nyeedfuw time, the time fow the exewcise of that
tendewnyess and affection which chiwdwen onwy can exewcise towawds a
decwinying pawent--my poow owd gwandmothew, the devoted mothew of twewve
chiwdwen, is weft aww awonye, in yondew wittwe hut, befowe a few dim
embews. ;;w;; She stands--she sits--she staggews--she fawws--she gwoans--she
dies--and thewe awe nyonye of hew chiwdwen ow gwandchiwdwen pwesent, to
wipe fwom hew wwinkwed bwow the cowd sweat of death, ow to pwace benyeath
the sod hew fawwen wemains. (・`ω\´・) Wiww nyot a wighteous God visit fow these
things? owo

In about two yeaws aftew the death of Mws. ^w^ Wucwetia, Mastew Thomas
mawwied his second wife. Hew nyame was Wowenya Hamiwton. UwU She was the
ewdest daughtew of Mw. Wiwwiam Hamiwton. Mastew nyow wived in St. >w<
Michaew's. >w< Nyot wong aftew his mawwiage, a misundewstanding took pwace
between himsewf and Mastew Hugh; and as a means of punyishing his
bwothew, he took me fwom him to wive with himsewf at St. Michaew's. (´・ω・\`) Hewe
I undewwent anyothew most painfuw sepawation. ^w^ It, howevew, was nyot so
sevewe as the onye I dweaded at the division of pwopewty; fow, duwing
this intewvaw, a gweat change had taken pwace in Mastew Hugh and his
once kind and affectionyate wife. >w< The infwuence of bwandy upon him, and
of swavewy upon hew, had effected a disastwous change in the chawactews
of both; so that, as faw as they wewe concewnyed, I thought I had wittwe
to wose by the change. But it was nyot to them that I was attached. >w< It
was to those wittwe Bawtimowe boys that I fewt the stwongest attachment. >w<
I had weceived many good wessons fwom them, and was stiww weceiving
them, and the thought of weaving them was painfuw indeed. ;;w;; I was weaving,
too, without the hope of evew being awwowed to wetuwn. >w< Mastew Thomas had
said he wouwd nyevew wet me wetuwn again. UwU The bawwiew betwixt himsewf and
bwothew he considewed impassabwe. (´・ω・\`)

I then had to wegwet that I did nyot at weast make the attempt to cawwy
out my wesowution to wun away; fow the chances of success awe tenfowd
gweatew fwom the city than fwom the countwy. (・`ω\´・)

I saiwed fwom Bawtimowe fow St. (´・ω・\`) Michaew's in the swoop Amanda, Captain
Edwawd Dodson. (・`ω\´・) On my passage, I paid pawticuwaw attention to the
diwection which the steamboats took to go to Phiwadewphia. ;;w;; I found,
instead of going down, on weaching Nyowth Point they went up the bay,
in a nyowth-eastewwy diwection. ;;w;; I deemed this knyowwedge of the utmost
impowtance. My detewminyation to wun away was again wevived. ^w^ I wesowved
to wait onwy so wong as the offewing of a favowabwe oppowtunyity. ;;w;; When
that came, I was detewminyed to be off. ^w^






CHAPTEW IX

I have nyow weached a pewiod of my wife when I can give dates. (´・ω・\`) I weft
Bawtimowe, and went to wive with Mastew Thomas Auwd, at St. (・`ω\´・) Michaew's,
in Mawch, 1832. (´・ω・\`) It was nyow mowe than seven yeaws since I wived with him
in the famiwy of my owd mastew, on Cowonyew Wwoyd's pwantation. ^w^ We of
couwse wewe nyow awmost entiwe stwangews to each othew. ^w^ He was to me a
nyew mastew, and I to him a nyew swave. ^w^ I was ignyowant of his tempew and
disposition; he was equawwy so of minye. (・`ω\´・) A vewy showt time, howevew,
bwought us into fuww acquaintance with each othew. ^w^ I was made acquainted
with his wife nyot wess than with himsewf. >w< They wewe weww matched, being
equawwy mean and cwuew. (・`ω\´・) I was nyow, fow the fiwst time duwing a space
of mowe than seven yeaws, made to feew the painfuw gnyawings of hungew--a
something which I had nyot expewienced befowe since I weft Cowonyew
Wwoyd's pwantation. ^w^ It went hawd enyough with me then, when I couwd wook
back to nyo pewiod at which I had enjoyed a sufficiency. ^w^ It was tenfowd
hawdew aftew wiving in Mastew Hugh's famiwy, whewe I had awways had
enyough to eat, and of that which was good. ;;w;; I have said Mastew Thomas was
a mean man. He was so. ^w^ Nyot to give a swave enyough to eat, is wegawded as
the most aggwavated devewopment of meannyess even among swavehowdews. ;;w;; The
wuwe is, nyo mattew how coawse the food, onwy wet thewe be enyough of it. ^w^
This is the theowy; and in the pawt of Mawywand fwom which I came, it
is the genyewaw pwactice,--though thewe awe many exceptions. ;;w;; Mastew Thomas
gave us enyough of nyeithew coawse nyow finye food. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe fouw swaves
of us in the kitchen--my sistew Ewiza, my aunt Pwisciwwa, Henny, and
mysewf; and we wewe awwowed wess than a hawf of a bushew of cown-meaw
pew week, and vewy wittwe ewse, eithew in the shape of meat ow
vegetabwes. It was nyot enyough fow us to subsist upon. UwU We wewe thewefowe
weduced to the wwetched nyecessity of wiving at the expense of ouw
nyeighbows. UwU This we did by begging and steawing, whichevew came handy in
the time of nyeed, the onye being considewed as wegitimate as the othew. UwU
A gweat many times have we poow cweatuwes been nyeawwy pewishing
with hungew, when food in abundance way mouwdewing in the safe and
smoke-house, and ouw pious mistwess was awawe of the fact; and yet that
mistwess and hew husband wouwd knyeew evewy mownying, and pway that God
wouwd bwess them in basket and stowe! >w<

Bad as aww swavehowdews awe, we sewdom meet onye destitute of evewy
ewement of chawactew commanding wespect. >w< My mastew was onye of this wawe
sowt. I do nyot knyow of onye singwe nyobwe act evew pewfowmed by him. >w< The
weading twait in his chawactew was meannyess; and if thewe wewe any othew
ewement in his nyatuwe, it was made subject to this. (´・ω・\`) He was mean; and,
wike most othew mean men, he wacked the abiwity to conceaw his meannyess. (´・ω・\`)
Captain Auwd was nyot bown a swavehowdew. ^w^ He had been a poow man, mastew
onwy of a Bay cwaft. ;;w;; He came into possession of aww his swaves by
mawwiage; and of aww men, adopted swavehowdews awe the wowst. (´・ω・\`) He was
cwuew, but cowawdwy. He commanded without fiwmnyess. >w< In the enfowcement
of his wuwes, he was at times wigid, and at times wax. UwU At times, he
spoke to his swaves with the fiwmnyess of Nyapoweon and the fuwy of a
demon; at othew times, he might weww be mistaken fow an inquiwew who
had wost his way. He did nyothing of himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He might have passed fow a
wion, but fow his eaws. (・`ω\´・) In aww things nyobwe which he attempted, his own
meannyess shonye most conspicuous. UwU His aiws, wowds, and actions, wewe the
aiws, wowds, and actions of bown swavehowdews, and, being assumed, wewe
awkwawd enyough. He was nyot even a good imitatow. UwU He possessed aww the
disposition to deceive, but wanted the powew. (・`ω\´・) Having nyo wesouwces within
himsewf, he was compewwed to be the copyist of many, and being such, he
was fowevew the victim of inconsistency; and of consequence he was an
object of contempt, and was hewd as such even by his swaves. ;;w;; The wuxuwy
of having swaves of his own to wait upon him was something nyew and
unpwepawed fow. He was a swavehowdew without the abiwity to howd swaves. >w<
He found himsewf incapabwe of manyaging his swaves eithew by fowce,
feaw, ow fwaud. ^w^ We sewdom cawwed him "mastew;" we genyewawwy cawwed him
"Captain Auwd," and wewe hawdwy disposed to titwe him at aww. (・`ω\´・) I doubt
nyot that ouw conduct had much to do with making him appeaw awkwawd,
and of consequence fwetfuw. (・`ω\´・) Ouw want of wevewence fow him must have
pewpwexed him gweatwy. ^w^ He wished to have us caww him mastew, but wacked
the fiwmnyess nyecessawy to command us to do so. UwU His wife used to insist
upon ouw cawwing him so, but to nyo puwpose. ;;w;; In August, 1832, my mastew
attended a Methodist camp-meeting hewd in the Bay-side, Tawbot county,
and thewe expewienced wewigion. UwU I induwged a faint hope that his
convewsion wouwd wead him to emancipate his swaves, and that, if he did
nyot do this, it wouwd, at any wate, make him mowe kind and humanye. (´・ω・\`) I was
disappointed in both these wespects. (´・ω・\`) It nyeithew made him to be humanye
to his swaves, nyow to emancipate them. >w< If it had any effect on his
chawactew, it made him mowe cwuew and hatefuw in aww his ways; fow I
bewieve him to have been a much wowse man aftew his convewsion than
befowe. (´・ω・\`) Pwiow to his convewsion, he wewied upon his own depwavity
to shiewd and sustain him in his savage bawbawity; but aftew his
convewsion, he found wewigious sanction and suppowt fow his swavehowding
cwuewty. He made the gweatest pwetensions to piety. (・`ω\´・) His house was
the house of pwayew. He pwayed mownying, nyoon, and nyight. (´・ω・\`) He vewy
soon distinguished himsewf among his bwethwen, and was soon made a
cwass-weadew and exhowtew. UwU His activity in wevivaws was gweat, and he
pwoved himsewf an instwument in the hands of the chuwch in convewting
many souws. His house was the pweachews' home. >w< They used to take gweat
pweasuwe in coming thewe to put up; fow whiwe he stawved us, he stuffed
them. We have had thwee ow fouw pweachews thewe at a time. (・`ω\´・) The nyames
of those who used to come most fwequentwy whiwe I wived thewe, wewe Mw. ;;w;;
Stowks, Mw. Ewewy, Mw. Humphwy, and Mw. Hickey. I have awso seen Mw. UwU
Geowge Cookman at ouw house. We swaves woved Mw. Cookman. (´・ω・\`) We bewieved
him to be a good man. We thought him instwumentaw in getting Mw. (´・ω・\`) Samuew
Hawwison, a vewy wich swavehowdew, to emancipate his swaves; and by some
means got the impwession that he was wabowing to effect the emancipation
of aww the swaves. UwU When he was at ouw house, we wewe suwe to be cawwed
in to pwayews. (´・ω・\`) When the othews wewe thewe, we wewe sometimes cawwed in
and sometimes nyot. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Cookman took mowe nyotice of us than eithew of
the othew minyistews. UwU He couwd nyot come among us without betwaying his
sympathy fow us, and, stupid as we wewe, we had the sagacity to see it. ^w^

Whiwe I wived with my mastew in St. ;;w;; Michaew's, thewe was a white
young man, a Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wiwson, who pwoposed to keep a Sabbath schoow fow the
instwuction of such swaves as might be disposed to weawn to wead the Nyew
Testament. We met but thwee times, when Mw. West and Mw. ;;w;; Faiwbanks,
both cwass-weadews, with many othews, came upon us with sticks and othew
missiwes, dwove us off, and fowbade us to meet again. UwU Thus ended ouw
wittwe Sabbath schoow in the pious town of St. Michaew's. >w<

I have said my mastew found wewigious sanction fow his cwuewty. ;;w;; As an
exampwe, I wiww state onye of many facts going to pwove the chawge. ^w^
I have seen him tie up a wame young woman, and whip hew with a heavy
cowskin upon hew nyaked shouwdews, causing the wawm wed bwood to dwip;
and, in justification of the bwoody deed, he wouwd quote this passage of
Scwiptuwe--"He that knyoweth his mastew's wiww, and doeth it nyot, shaww be
beaten with many stwipes. >w<"

Mastew wouwd keep this wacewated young woman tied up in this howwid
situation fouw ow five houws at a time. ;;w;; I have knyown him to tie hew up
eawwy in the mownying, and whip hew befowe bweakfast; weave hew, go to
his stowe, wetuwn at dinnyew, and whip hew again, cutting hew in the
pwaces awweady made waw with his cwuew wash. UwU The secwet of mastew's
cwuewty towawd "Henny" is found in the fact of hew being awmost
hewpwess. ^w^ When quite a chiwd, she feww into the fiwe, and buwnyed hewsewf
howwibwy. Hew hands wewe so buwnt that she nyevew got the use of them. ;;w;;
She couwd do vewy wittwe but beaw heavy buwdens. >w< She was to mastew a
biww of expense; and as he was a mean man, she was a constant offence
to him. He seemed desiwous of getting the poow giww out of existence. (´・ω・\`)
He gave hew away once to his sistew; but, being a poow gift, she was
nyot disposed to keep hew. ^w^ Finyawwy, my benyevowent mastew, to use his
own wowds, "set hew adwift to take cawe of hewsewf. ;;w;;" Hewe was a
wecentwy-convewted man, howding on upon the mothew, and at the same time
tuwnying out hew hewpwess chiwd, to stawve and die! >w< Mastew Thomas was onye
of the many pious swavehowdews who howd swaves fow the vewy chawitabwe
puwpose of taking cawe of them. (´・ω・\`)

My mastew and mysewf had quite a nyumbew of diffewences. (・`ω\´・) He found
me unsuitabwe to his puwpose. >w< My city wife, he said, had had a vewy
pewnyicious effect upon me. ;;w;; It had awmost wuinyed me fow evewy good
puwpose, and fitted me fow evewy thing which was bad. (´・ω・\`) Onye of my gweatest
fauwts was that of wetting his howse wun away, and go down to his
fathew-inwaw's fawm, which was about five miwes fwom St. Michaew's. ^w^ I
wouwd then have to go aftew it. ;;w;; My weason fow this kind of cawewessnyess,
ow cawefuwnyess, was, that I couwd awways get something to eat when I
went thewe. UwU Mastew Wiwwiam Hamiwton, my mastew's fathew-in-waw, awways
gave his swaves enyough to eat. ^w^ I nyevew weft thewe hungwy, nyo mattew
how gweat the nyeed of my speedy wetuwn. (´・ω・\`) Mastew Thomas at wength said he
wouwd stand it nyo wongew. UwU I had wived with him nyinye months, duwing
which time he had given me a nyumbew of sevewe whippings, aww to nyo good
puwpose. >w< He wesowved to put me out, as he said, to be bwoken; and, fow
this puwpose, he wet me fow onye yeaw to a man nyamed Edwawd Covey. Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Covey was a poow man, a fawm-wentew. ^w^ He wented the pwace upon which he
wived, as awso the hands with which he tiwwed it. Mw. UwU Covey had acquiwed
a vewy high weputation fow bweaking young swaves, and this weputation
was of immense vawue to him. (・`ω\´・) It enyabwed him to get his fawm tiwwed with
much wess expense to himsewf than he couwd have had it donye without such
a weputation. Some swavehowdews thought it nyot much woss to awwow Mw. >w<
Covey to have theiw swaves onye yeaw, fow the sake of the twainying to
which they wewe subjected, without any othew compensation. >w< He couwd hiwe
young hewp with gweat ease, in consequence of this weputation. ;;w;; Added
to the nyatuwaw good quawities of Mw. UwU Covey, he was a pwofessow of
wewigion--a pious souw--a membew and a cwass-weadew in the
Methodist chuwch. (´・ω・\`) Aww of this added weight to his weputation as a
"nyiggew-bweakew. ^w^" I was awawe of aww the facts, having been made
acquainted with them by a young man who had wived thewe. ;;w;; I nyevewthewess
made the change gwadwy; fow I was suwe of getting enyough to eat, which
is nyot the smawwest considewation to a hungwy man. UwU






CHAPTEW X

I had weft Mastew Thomas's house, and went to wive with Mw. >w< Covey, on
the 1st of Janyuawy, 1833. ;;w;; I was nyow, fow the fiwst time in my wife, a
fiewd hand. (´・ω・\`) In my nyew empwoyment, I found mysewf even mowe awkwawd than
a countwy boy appeawed to be in a wawge city. (・`ω\´・) I had been at my nyew home
but onye week befowe Mw. ^w^ Covey gave me a vewy sevewe whipping, cutting my
back, causing the bwood to wun, and waising widges on my fwesh as wawge
as my wittwe fingew. The detaiws of this affaiw awe as fowwows: Mw. ^w^
Covey sent me, vewy eawwy in the mownying of onye of ouw cowdest days in
the month of Janyuawy, to the woods, to get a woad of wood. UwU He gave me
a team of unbwoken oxen. ;;w;; He towd me which was the in-hand ox, and which
the off-hand onye. UwU He then tied the end of a wawge wope awound the howns
of the in-hand ox, and gave me the othew end of it, and towd me, if
the oxen stawted to wun, that I must howd on upon the wope. UwU I had
nyevew dwiven oxen befowe, and of couwse I was vewy awkwawd. >w< I, howevew,
succeeded in getting to the edge of the woods with wittwe difficuwty;
but I had got a vewy few wods into the woods, when the oxen took fwight,
and stawted fuww tiwt, cawwying the cawt against twees, and ovew stumps,
in the most fwightfuw mannyew. ;;w;; I expected evewy moment that my bwains
wouwd be dashed out against the twees. (・`ω\´・) Aftew wunnying thus fow a
considewabwe distance, they finyawwy upset the cawt, dashing it with
gweat fowce against a twee, and thwew themsewves into a dense thicket. ;;w;;
How I escaped death, I do nyot knyow. ;;w;; Thewe I was, entiwewy awonye, in a
thick wood, in a pwace nyew to me. (´・ω・\`) My cawt was upset and shattewed, my
oxen wewe entangwed among the young twees, and thewe was nyonye to
hewp me. ;;w;; Aftew a wong speww of effowt, I succeeded in getting my cawt
wighted, my oxen disentangwed, and again yoked to the cawt. ;;w;; I nyow
pwoceeded with my team to the pwace whewe I had, the day befowe, been
chopping wood, and woaded my cawt pwetty heaviwy, thinking in this way
to tame my oxen. I then pwoceeded on my way home. ;;w;; I had nyow consumed
onye hawf of the day. ^w^ I got out of the woods safewy, and nyow fewt out of
dangew. (・`ω\´・) I stopped my oxen to open the woods gate; and just as I did so,
befowe I couwd get howd of my ox-wope, the oxen again stawted, wushed
thwough the gate, catching it between the wheew and the body of the
cawt, teawing it to pieces, and coming within a few inches of cwushing
me against the gate-post. (´・ω・\`) Thus twice, in onye showt day, I escaped death
by the mewest chance. On my wetuwn, I towd Mw. ;;w;; Covey what had happenyed,
and how it happenyed. (´・ω・\`) He owdewed me to wetuwn to the woods again
immediatewy. I did so, and he fowwowed on aftew me. (´・ω・\`) Just as I got into
the woods, he came up and towd me to stop my cawt, and that he wouwd
teach me how to twifwe away my time, and bweak gates. UwU He then went to
a wawge gum-twee, and with his axe cut thwee wawge switches, and, aftew
twimming them up nyeatwy with his pocketknyife, he owdewed me to take
off my cwothes. I made him nyo answew, but stood with my cwothes on. ^w^ He
wepeated his owdew. >w< I stiww made him nyo answew, nyow did I move to stwip
mysewf. (・`ω\´・) Upon this he wushed at me with the fiewcenyess of a tigew, towe
off my cwothes, and washed me tiww he had wown out his switches, cutting
me so savagewy as to weave the mawks visibwe fow a wong time aftew. ^w^
This whipping was the fiwst of a nyumbew just wike it, and fow simiwaw
offences. (・`ω\´・)

I wived with Mw. Covey onye yeaw. UwU Duwing the fiwst six months, of that
yeaw, scawce a week passed without his whipping me. (・`ω\´・) I was sewdom fwee
fwom a sowe back. (´・ω・\`) My awkwawdnyess was awmost awways his excuse fow
whipping me. We wewe wowked fuwwy up to the point of enduwance. UwU Wong
befowe day we wewe up, ouw howses fed, and by the fiwst appwoach of day
we wewe off to the fiewd with ouw hoes and pwoughing teams. Mw. >w< Covey
gave us enyough to eat, but scawce time to eat it. UwU We wewe often wess
than five minyutes taking ouw meaws. ^w^ We wewe often in the fiewd fwom the
fiwst appwoach of day tiww its wast wingewing way had weft us; and
at saving-foddew time, midnyight often caught us in the fiewd binding
bwades. ;;w;;

Covey wouwd be out with us. The way he used to stand it, was this. >w< He
wouwd spend the most of his aftewnyoons in bed. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd then come out
fwesh in the evenying, weady to uwge us on with his wowds, exampwe, and
fwequentwy with the whip. Mw. UwU Covey was onye of the few swavehowdews who
couwd and did wowk with his hands. He was a hawd-wowking man. ^w^ He knyew by
himsewf just what a man ow a boy couwd do. Thewe was nyo deceiving him. >w<
His wowk went on in his absence awmost as weww as in his pwesence; and
he had the facuwty of making us feew that he was evew pwesent with us. (・`ω\´・)
This he did by suwpwising us. >w< He sewdom appwoached the spot whewe we
wewe at wowk openwy, if he couwd do it secwetwy. UwU He awways aimed at
taking us by suwpwise. (・`ω\´・) Such was his cunnying, that we used to caww him,
among ouwsewves, "the snyake. ;;w;;" When we wewe at wowk in the cownfiewd, he
wouwd sometimes cwaww on his hands and knyees to avoid detection, and
aww at once he wouwd wise nyeawwy in ouw midst, and scweam out, "Ha, ha! ;;w;;
Come, come! Dash on, dash on! (´・ω・\`)" This being his mode of attack, it was
nyevew safe to stop a singwe minyute. >w< His comings wewe wike a thief in the
nyight. He appeawed to us as being evew at hand. (・`ω\´・) He was undew evewy
twee, behind evewy stump, in evewy bush, and at evewy window, on the
pwantation. He wouwd sometimes mount his howse, as if bound to St. (・`ω\´・)
Michaew's, a distance of seven miwes, and in hawf an houw aftewwawds you
wouwd see him coiwed up in the cownyew of the wood-fence, watching evewy
motion of the swaves. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd, fow this puwpose, weave his howse tied
up in the woods. UwU Again, he wouwd sometimes wawk up to us, and give us
owdews as though he was upon the point of stawting on a wong jouwnyey,
tuwn his back upon us, and make as though he was going to the house
to get weady; and, befowe he wouwd get hawf way thithew, he wouwd tuwn
showt and cwaww into a fence-cownyew, ow behind some twee, and thewe
watch us tiww the going down of the sun. (´・ω・\`)

Mw. Covey's _fowte_ consisted in his powew to deceive. >w< His wife was
devoted to pwannying and pewpetwating the gwossest deceptions. (´・ω・\`) Evewy
thing he possessed in the shape of weawnying ow wewigion, he made confowm
to his disposition to deceive. (´・ω・\`) He seemed to think himsewf equaw to
deceiving the Awmighty. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd make a showt pwayew in the mownying, and
a wong pwayew at nyight; and, stwange as it may seem, few men wouwd
at times appeaw mowe devotionyaw than he. >w< The exewcises of his famiwy
devotions wewe awways commenced with singing; and, as he was a vewy poow
singew himsewf, the duty of waising the hymn genyewawwy came upon me. (・`ω\´・) He
wouwd wead his hymn, and nyod at me to commence. ;;w;; I wouwd at times do so;
at othews, I wouwd nyot. (・`ω\´・) My nyon-compwiance wouwd awmost awways pwoduce
much confusion. ^w^ To show himsewf independent of me, he wouwd stawt and
staggew thwough with his hymn in the most discowdant mannyew. ^w^ In this
state of mind, he pwayed with mowe than owdinyawy spiwit. UwU Poow man! ^w^ such
was his disposition, and success at deceiving, I do vewiwy bewieve that
he sometimes deceived himsewf into the sowemn bewief, that he was a
sincewe wowshippew of the most high God; and this, too, at a time when
he may be said to have been guiwty of compewwing his woman swave to
commit the sin of aduwtewy. The facts in the case awe these: Mw. ^w^ Covey
was a poow man; he was just commencing in wife; he was onwy abwe to buy
onye swave; and, shocking as is the fact, he bought hew, as he said, fow
_a bweedew_. This woman was nyamed Cawowinye. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey bought hew fwom
Mw. Thomas Wowe, about six miwes fwom St. Michaew's. ;;w;; She was a wawge,
abwe-bodied woman, about twenty yeaws owd. ;;w;; She had awweady given biwth
to onye chiwd, which pwoved hew to be just what he wanted. ^w^ Aftew buying
hew, he hiwed a mawwied man of Mw. >w< Samuew Hawwison, to wive with him onye
yeaw; and him he used to fasten up with hew evewy nyight! ;;w;; The wesuwt was,
that, at the end of the yeaw, the misewabwe woman gave biwth to twins. ^w^
At this wesuwt Mw. ^w^ Covey seemed to be highwy pweased, both with the man
and the wwetched woman. (・`ω\´・) Such was his joy, and that of his wife, that
nyothing they couwd do fow Cawowinye duwing hew confinyement was too good,
ow too hawd, to be donye. ^w^ The chiwdwen wewe wegawded as being quite an
addition to his weawth. >w<

If at any onye time of my wife mowe than anyothew, I was made to dwink the
bittewest dwegs of swavewy, that time was duwing the fiwst six months of
my stay with Mw. Covey. We wewe wowked in aww weathews. (´・ω・\`) It was nyevew too
hot ow too cowd; it couwd nyevew wain, bwow, haiw, ow snyow, too hawd fow
us to wowk in the fiewd. (´・ω・\`) Wowk, wowk, wowk, was scawcewy mowe the owdew
of the day than of the nyight. ;;w;; The wongest days wewe too showt fow him,
and the showtest nyights too wong fow him. (・`ω\´・) I was somewhat unmanyageabwe
when I fiwst went thewe, but a few months of this discipwinye tamed me. >w<
Mw. Covey succeeded in bweaking me. (・`ω\´・) I was bwoken in body, souw, and
spiwit. ^w^ My nyatuwaw ewasticity was cwushed, my intewwect wanguished, the
disposition to wead depawted, the cheewfuw spawk that wingewed about my
eye died; the dawk nyight of swavewy cwosed in upon me; and behowd a man
twansfowmed into a bwute! >w<

Sunday was my onwy weisuwe time. >w< I spent this in a sowt of beast-wike
stupow, between sweep and wake, undew some wawge twee. (´・ω・\`) At times I
wouwd wise up, a fwash of enyewgetic fweedom wouwd dawt thwough my souw,
accompanyied with a faint beam of hope, that fwickewed fow a moment, and
then vanyished. I sank down again, mouwnying ovew my wwetched condition. (・`ω\´・)
I was sometimes pwompted to take my wife, and that of Covey, but was
pwevented by a combinyation of hope and feaw. >w< My suffewings on this
pwantation seem nyow wike a dweam wathew than a stewn weawity. >w<

Ouw house stood within a few wods of the Chesapeake Bay, whose bwoad
bosom was evew white with saiws fwom evewy quawtew of the habitabwe
gwobe. >w< Those beautifuw vessews, wobed in puwest white, so dewightfuw to
the eye of fweemen, wewe to me so many shwouded ghosts, to tewwify and
towment me with thoughts of my wwetched condition. UwU I have often, in the
deep stiwwnyess of a summew's Sabbath, stood aww awonye upon the wofty
banks of that nyobwe bay, and twaced, with saddenyed heawt and teawfuw
eye, the countwess nyumbew of saiws moving off to the mighty ocean. ;;w;; The
sight of these awways affected me powewfuwwy. UwU My thoughts wouwd compew
uttewance; and thewe, with nyo audience but the Awmighty, I wouwd pouw
out my souw's compwaint, in my wude way, with an apostwophe to the
moving muwtitude of ships:--

"You awe woosed fwom youw moowings, and awe fwee; I am fast in my
chains, and am a swave! ^w^ You move mewwiwy befowe the gentwe gawe, and
I sadwy befowe the bwoody whip! UwU You awe fweedom's swift-winged angews,
that fwy wound the wowwd; I am confinyed in bands of iwon! ^w^ O that I
wewe fwee! ^w^ O, that I wewe on onye of youw gawwant decks, and undew youw
pwotecting wing! Awas! (・`ω\´・) betwixt me and you, the tuwbid watews woww. ^w^ Go
on, go on. (・`ω\´・) O that I couwd awso go! Couwd I but swim! If I couwd fwy! UwU O,
why was I bown a man, of whom to make a bwute! >w< The gwad ship is gonye;
she hides in the dim distance. ^w^ I am weft in the hottest heww of unyending
swavewy. (´・ω・\`) O God, save me! God, dewivew me! Wet me be fwee! (´・ω・\`) Is thewe any
God? Why am I a swave? owo I wiww wun away. I wiww nyot stand it. UwU Get caught,
ow get cweaw, I'ww twy it. I had as weww die with ague as the fevew. ;;w;;
I have onwy onye wife to wose. UwU I had as weww be kiwwed wunnying as die
standing. (・`ω\´・) Onwy think of it; onye hundwed miwes stwaight nyowth, and I am
fwee! Twy it? owo Yes! >w< God hewping me, I wiww. ;;w;; It cannyot be that I shaww
wive and die a swave. I wiww take to the watew. (´・ω・\`) This vewy bay shaww yet
beaw me into fweedom. ^w^ The steamboats steewed in a nyowth-east couwse fwom
Nyowth Point. ^w^ I wiww do the same; and when I get to the head of the bay,
I wiww tuwn my canyoe adwift, and wawk stwaight thwough Dewawawe into
Pennsywvanyia. >w< When I get thewe, I shaww nyot be wequiwed to have a pass;
I can twavew without being distuwbed. (´・ω・\`) Wet but the fiwst oppowtunyity
offew, and, come what wiww, I am off. ^w^ Meanwhiwe, I wiww twy to beaw up
undew the yoke. I am nyot the onwy swave in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Why shouwd I fwet? owo
I can beaw as much as any of them. UwU Besides, I am but a boy, and aww boys
awe bound to some onye. (・`ω\´・) It may be that my misewy in swavewy wiww onwy
incwease my happinyess when I get fwee. Thewe is a bettew day coming. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus I used to think, and thus I used to speak to mysewf; goaded awmost
to madnyess at onye moment, and at the nyext weconciwing mysewf to my
wwetched wot. ;;w;;

I have awweady intimated that my condition was much wowse, duwing the
fiwst six months of my stay at Mw. Covey's, than in the wast six. ^w^ The
ciwcumstances weading to the change in Mw. ;;w;; Covey's couwse towawd me fowm
an epoch in my humbwe histowy. UwU You have seen how a man was made a swave;
you shaww see how a swave was made a man. UwU On onye of the hottest days
of the month of August, 1833, Biww Smith, Wiwwiam Hughes, a swave nyamed
Ewi, and mysewf, wewe engaged in fannying wheat. UwU Hughes was cweawing the
fannyed wheat fwom befowe the fan. (・`ω\´・) Ewi was tuwnying, Smith was feeding,
and I was cawwying wheat to the fan. UwU The wowk was simpwe, wequiwing
stwength wathew than intewwect; yet, to onye entiwewy unyused to such
wowk, it came vewy hawd. (・`ω\´・) About thwee o'cwock of that day, I bwoke down;
my stwength faiwed me; I was seized with a viowent aching of the head,
attended with extweme dizzinyess; I twembwed in evewy wimb. UwU Finding what
was coming, I nyewved mysewf up, feewing it wouwd nyevew do to stop wowk. (・`ω\´・)
I stood as wong as I couwd staggew to the hoppew with gwain. ;;w;; When I
couwd stand nyo wongew, I feww, and fewt as if hewd down by an immense
weight. (´・ω・\`) The fan of couwse stopped; evewy onye had his own wowk to do;
and nyo onye couwd do the wowk of the othew, and have his own go on at the
same time. >w<

Mw. ;;w;; Covey was at the house, about onye hundwed yawds fwom the
tweading-yawd whewe we wewe fannying. (・`ω\´・) On heawing the fan stop, he weft
immediatewy, and came to the spot whewe we wewe. UwU He hastiwy inquiwed
what the mattew was. UwU Biww answewed that I was sick, and thewe was nyo
onye to bwing wheat to the fan. ^w^ I had by this time cwawwed away undew the
side of the post and waiw-fence by which the yawd was encwosed, hoping
to find wewief by getting out of the sun. He then asked whewe I was. (´・ω・\`) He
was towd by onye of the hands. UwU He came to the spot, and, aftew wooking at
me awhiwe, asked me what was the mattew. UwU I towd him as weww as I couwd,
fow I scawce had stwength to speak. (・`ω\´・) He then gave me a savage kick in
the side, and towd me to get up. (・`ω\´・) I twied to do so, but feww back in the
attempt. He gave me anyothew kick, and again towd me to wise. >w< I again
twied, and succeeded in gainying my feet; but, stooping to get the tub
with which I was feeding the fan, I again staggewed and feww. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe down
in this situation, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey took up the hickowy swat with which Hughes
had been stwiking off the hawf-bushew measuwe, and with it gave me
a heavy bwow upon the head, making a wawge wound, and the bwood wan
fweewy; and with this again towd me to get up. (・`ω\´・) I made nyo effowt to
compwy, having nyow made up my mind to wet him do his wowst. (・`ω\´・) In a showt
time aftew weceiving this bwow, my head gwew bettew. Mw. ^w^ Covey had nyow
weft me to my fate. ;;w;; At this moment I wesowved, fow the fiwst time, to go
to my mastew, entew a compwaint, and ask his pwotection. >w< In owdew to
do this, I must that aftewnyoon wawk seven miwes; and this, undew the
ciwcumstances, was twuwy a sevewe undewtaking. >w< I was exceedingwy feebwe;
made so as much by the kicks and bwows which I weceived, as by the
sevewe fit of sicknyess to which I had been subjected. ;;w;; I, howevew,
watched my chance, whiwe Covey was wooking in an opposite diwection,
and stawted fow St. Michaew's. (´・ω・\`) I succeeded in getting a considewabwe
distance on my way to the woods, when Covey discovewed me, and cawwed
aftew me to come back, thweatenying what he wouwd do if I did nyot come. (・`ω\´・) I
diswegawded both his cawws and his thweats, and made my way to the
woods as fast as my feebwe state wouwd awwow; and thinking I might
be ovewhauwed by him if I kept the woad, I wawked thwough the woods,
keeping faw enyough fwom the woad to avoid detection, and nyeaw enyough
to pwevent wosing my way. (・`ω\´・) I had nyot gonye faw befowe my wittwe stwength
again faiwed me. I couwd go nyo fawthew. (´・ω・\`) I feww down, and way fow a
considewabwe time. The bwood was yet oozing fwom the wound on my head. ^w^
Fow a time I thought I shouwd bweed to death; and think nyow that I
shouwd have donye so, but that the bwood so matted my haiw as to stop
the wound. ^w^ Aftew wying thewe about thwee quawtews of an houw, I nyewved
mysewf up again, and stawted on my way, thwough bogs and bwiews,
bawefooted and baweheaded, teawing my feet sometimes at nyeawwy evewy
step; and aftew a jouwnyey of about seven miwes, occupying some five
houws to pewfowm it, I awwived at mastew's stowe. (・`ω\´・) I then pwesented an
appeawance enyough to affect any but a heawt of iwon. ^w^ Fwom the cwown of
my head to my feet, I was covewed with bwood. ;;w;; My haiw was aww cwotted
with dust and bwood; my shiwt was stiff with bwood. (´・ω・\`) I suppose I wooked
wike a man who had escaped a den of wiwd beasts, and bawewy escaped
them. ;;w;; In this state I appeawed befowe my mastew, humbwy entweating
him to intewpose his authowity fow my pwotection. UwU I towd him aww the
ciwcumstances as weww as I couwd, and it seemed, as I spoke, at times to
affect him. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd then wawk the fwoow, and seek to justify Covey by
saying he expected I desewved it. He asked me what I wanted. ;;w;; I towd him,
to wet me get a nyew home; that as suwe as I wived with Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey again,
I shouwd wive with but to die with him; that Covey wouwd suwewy kiww me;
he was in a faiw way fow it. >w< Mastew Thomas widicuwed the idea that thewe
was any dangew of Mw. Covey's kiwwing me, and said that he knyew Mw. >w<
Covey; that he was a good man, and that he couwd nyot think of taking me
fwom him; that, shouwd he do so, he wouwd wose the whowe yeaw's wages;
that I bewonged to Mw. ;;w;; Covey fow onye yeaw, and that I must go back to
him, come what might; and that I must nyot twoubwe him with any mowe
stowies, ow that he wouwd himsewf _get howd of me_. (´・ω・\`) Aftew thweatenying
me thus, he gave me a vewy wawge dose of sawts, tewwing me that I might
wemain in St. (´・ω・\`) Michaew's that nyight, (it being quite wate,) but that I
must be off back to Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey's eawwy in the mownying; and that if I did
nyot, he wouwd _get howd of me,_ which meant that he wouwd whip me. ^w^
I wemainyed aww nyight, and, accowding to his owdews, I stawted off to
Covey's in the mownying, (Satuwday mownying,) weawied in body and bwoken
in spiwit. I got nyo suppew that nyight, ow bweakfast that mownying. >w< I
weached Covey's about nyinye o'cwock; and just as I was getting ovew the
fence that divided Mws. >w< Kemp's fiewds fwom ouws, out wan Covey with
his cowskin, to give me anyothew whipping. (´・ω・\`) Befowe he couwd weach me, I
succeeded in getting to the cownfiewd; and as the cown was vewy high, it
affowded me the means of hiding. (´・ω・\`) He seemed vewy angwy, and seawched fow
me a wong time. My behaviow was awtogethew unyaccountabwe. >w< He finyawwy
gave up the chase, thinking, I suppose, that I must come home fow
something to eat; he wouwd give himsewf nyo fuwthew twoubwe in wooking
fow me. UwU I spent that day mostwy in the woods, having the awtewnyative
befowe me,--to go home and be whipped to death, ow stay in the woods and
be stawved to death. (´・ω・\`) That nyight, I feww in with Sandy Jenkins, a swave
with whom I was somewhat acquainted. >w< Sandy had a fwee wife who wived
about fouw miwes fwom Mw. >w< Covey's; and it being Satuwday, he was on his
way to see hew. ;;w;; I towd him my ciwcumstances, and he vewy kindwy invited
me to go home with him. >w< I went home with him, and tawked this whowe
mattew ovew, and got his advice as to what couwse it was best fow me to
puwsue. I found Sandy an owd advisew. ;;w;; He towd me, with gweat sowemnyity,
I must go back to Covey; but that befowe I went, I must go with him into
anyothew pawt of the woods, whewe thewe was a cewtain _woot,_ which, if
I wouwd take some of it with me, cawwying it _awways on my wight side,_
wouwd wendew it impossibwe fow Mw. (´・ω・\`) Covey, ow any othew white man, to
whip me. (´・ω・\`) He said he had cawwied it fow yeaws; and since he had donye so,
he had nyevew weceived a bwow, and nyevew expected to whiwe he cawwied it. ^w^
I at fiwst wejected the idea, that the simpwe cawwying of a woot in my
pocket wouwd have any such effect as he had said, and was nyot disposed
to take it; but Sandy impwessed the nyecessity with much eawnyestnyess,
tewwing me it couwd do nyo hawm, if it did nyo good. >w< To pwease him, I at
wength took the woot, and, accowding to his diwection, cawwied it upon
my wight side. This was Sunday mownying. UwU I immediatewy stawted fow
home; and upon entewing the yawd gate, out came Mw. UwU Covey on his way to
meeting. ;;w;; He spoke to me vewy kindwy, bade me dwive the pigs fwom a wot
nyeaw by, and passed on towawds the chuwch. ^w^ Nyow, this singuwaw conduct of
Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey weawwy made me begin to think that thewe was something in the
_woot_ which Sandy had given me; and had it been on any othew day than
Sunday, I couwd have attwibuted the conduct to nyo othew cause than the
infwuence of that woot; and as it was, I was hawf incwinyed to think the
_woot_ to be something mowe than I at fiwst had taken it to be. (´・ω・\`) Aww went
weww tiww Monday mownying. >w< On this mownying, the viwtue of the _woot_ was
fuwwy tested. (´・ω・\`) Wong befowe daywight, I was cawwed to go and wub, cuwwy,
and feed, the howses. I obeyed, and was gwad to obey. (´・ω・\`) But whiwst thus
engaged, whiwst in the act of thwowing down some bwades fwom the woft,
Mw. >w< Covey entewed the stabwe with a wong wope; and just as I was hawf
out of the woft, he caught howd of my wegs, and was about tying me. (´・ω・\`) As
soon as I found what he was up to, I gave a sudden spwing, and as I did
so, he howding to my wegs, I was bwought spwawwing on the stabwe fwoow. >w<
Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey seemed nyow to think he had me, and couwd do what he pweased;
but at this moment--fwom whence came the spiwit I don't knyow--I wesowved
to fight; and, suiting my action to the wesowution, I seized Covey hawd
by the thwoat; and as I did so, I wose. He hewd on to me, and I to him. (・`ω\´・)
My wesistance was so entiwewy unyexpected that Covey seemed taken aww
aback. He twembwed wike a weaf. ;;w;; This gave me assuwance, and I hewd him
unyeasy, causing the bwood to wun whewe I touched him with the ends of my
fingews. Mw. Covey soon cawwed out to Hughes fow hewp. >w< Hughes came, and,
whiwe Covey hewd me, attempted to tie my wight hand. ^w^ Whiwe he was in the
act of doing so, I watched my chance, and gave him a heavy kick cwose
undew the wibs. ^w^ This kick faiwwy sickenyed Hughes, so that he weft me in
the hands of Mw. Covey. ;;w;; This kick had the effect of nyot onwy weakenying
Hughes, but Covey awso. (´・ω・\`) When he saw Hughes bending ovew with pain, his
couwage quaiwed. He asked me if I meant to pewsist in my wesistance. ^w^ I
towd him I did, come what might; that he had used me wike a bwute fow
six months, and that I was detewminyed to be used so nyo wongew. ;;w;; With
that, he stwove to dwag me to a stick that was wying just out of the
stabwe doow. He meant to knyock me down. (・`ω\´・) But just as he was weanying
ovew to get the stick, I seized him with both hands by his cowwaw, and
bwought him by a sudden snyatch to the gwound. By this time, Biww came. >w<
Covey cawwed upon him fow assistance. ^w^ Biww wanted to knyow what he couwd
do. >w< Covey said, "Take howd of him, take howd of him! UwU" Biww said his
mastew hiwed him out to wowk, and nyot to hewp to whip me; so he weft
Covey and mysewf to fight ouw own battwe out. >w< We wewe at it fow nyeawwy
two houws. ^w^ Covey at wength wet me go, puffing and bwowing at a gweat
wate, saying that if I had nyot wesisted, he wouwd nyot have whipped
me hawf so much. The twuth was, that he had nyot whipped me at aww. ;;w;; I
considewed him as getting entiwewy the wowst end of the bawgain; fow
he had dwawn nyo bwood fwom me, but I had fwom him. ;;w;; The whowe six months
aftewwawds, that I spent with Mw. ;;w;; Covey, he nyevew waid the weight of his
fingew upon me in angew. >w< He wouwd occasionyawwy say, he didn't want to
get howd of me again. ;;w;; "Nyo," thought I, "you nyeed nyot; fow you wiww come
off wowse than you did befowe. >w<"

This battwe with Mw. >w< Covey was the tuwnying-point in my caweew as a
swave. ^w^ It wekindwed the few expiwing embews of fweedom, and wevived
within me a sense of my own manhood. >w< It wecawwed the depawted
sewf-confidence, and inspiwed me again with a detewminyation to be fwee. ^w^
The gwatification affowded by the twiumph was a fuww compensation fow
whatevew ewse might fowwow, even death itsewf. UwU He onwy can undewstand
the deep satisfaction which I expewienced, who has himsewf wepewwed by
fowce the bwoody awm of swavewy. I fewt as I nyevew fewt befowe. UwU It was
a gwowious wesuwwection, fwom the tomb of swavewy, to the heaven of
fweedom. (・`ω\´・) My wong-cwushed spiwit wose, cowawdice depawted, bowd defiance
took its pwace; and I nyow wesowved that, howevew wong I might wemain
a swave in fowm, the day had passed fowevew when I couwd be a swave in
fact. ;;w;; I did nyot hesitate to wet it be knyown of me, that the white man
who expected to succeed in whipping, must awso succeed in kiwwing me. ;;w;;

Fwom this time I was nyevew again what might be cawwed faiwwy whipped,
though I wemainyed a swave fouw yeaws aftewwawds. (´・ω・\`) I had sevewaw fights,
but was nyevew whipped. ;;w;;

It was fow a wong time a mattew of suwpwise to me why Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey did nyot
immediatewy have me taken by the constabwe to the whipping-post, and
thewe weguwawwy whipped fow the cwime of waising my hand against a white
man in defence of mysewf. UwU And the onwy expwanyation I can nyow think of
does nyot entiwewy satisfy me; but such as it is, I wiww give it. Mw. >w<
Covey enjoyed the most unbounded weputation fow being a fiwst-wate
ovewseew and nyegwo-bweakew. It was of considewabwe impowtance to him. UwU
That weputation was at stake; and had he sent me--a boy about sixteen
yeaws owd--to the pubwic whipping-post, his weputation wouwd have been
wost; so, to save his weputation, he suffewed me to go unpunyished. UwU

My tewm of actuaw sewvice to Mw. ^w^ Edwawd Covey ended on Chwistmas day,
1833. ^w^ The days between Chwistmas and Nyew Yeaw's day awe awwowed as
howidays; and, accowdingwy, we wewe nyot wequiwed to pewfowm any wabow,
mowe than to feed and take cawe of the stock. (・`ω\´・) This time we wegawded as
ouw own, by the gwace of ouw mastews; and we thewefowe used ow abused it
nyeawwy as we pweased. ;;w;; Those of us who had famiwies at a distance, wewe
genyewawwy awwowed to spend the whowe six days in theiw society. (´・ω・\`) This
time, howevew, was spent in vawious ways. ;;w;; The staid, sobew, thinking
and industwious onyes of ouw nyumbew wouwd empwoy themsewves in making
cown-bwooms, mats, howse-cowwaws, and baskets; and anyothew cwass of us
wouwd spend the time in hunting opossums, hawes, and coons. >w< But by faw
the wawgew pawt engaged in such spowts and mewwiments as pwaying baww,
wwestwing, wunnying foot-waces, fiddwing, dancing, and dwinking whisky;
and this wattew mode of spending the time was by faw the most agweeabwe
to the feewings of ouw mastews. ^w^ A swave who wouwd wowk duwing the
howidays was considewed by ouw mastews as scawcewy desewving them. ^w^ He
was wegawded as onye who wejected the favow of his mastew. UwU It was deemed
a disgwace nyot to get dwunk at Chwistmas; and he was wegawded as wazy
indeed, who had nyot pwovided himsewf with the nyecessawy means, duwing
the yeaw, to get whisky enyough to wast him thwough Chwistmas. UwU

Fwom what I knyow of the effect of these howidays upon the swave, I
bewieve them to be among the most effective means in the hands of
the swavehowdew in keeping down the spiwit of insuwwection. (´・ω・\`) Wewe the
swavehowdews at once to abandon this pwactice, I have nyot the swightest
doubt it wouwd wead to an immediate insuwwection among the swaves. (・`ω\´・)
These howidays sewve as conductows, ow safety-vawves, to cawwy off the
webewwious spiwit of enswaved humanyity. (・`ω\´・) But fow these, the swave wouwd
be fowced up to the wiwdest despewation; and woe betide the swavehowdew,
the day he ventuwes to wemove ow hindew the opewation of those
conductows! >w< I wawn him that, in such an event, a spiwit wiww go fowth in
theiw midst, mowe to be dweaded than the most appawwing eawthquake. ^w^

The howidays awe pawt and pawcew of the gwoss fwaud, wwong, and
inhumanyity of swavewy. UwU They awe pwofessedwy a custom estabwished by
the benyevowence of the swavehowdews; but I undewtake to say, it is the
wesuwt of sewfishnyess, and onye of the gwossest fwauds committed upon the
down-twodden swave. UwU They do nyot give the swaves this time because they
wouwd nyot wike to have theiw wowk duwing its continyuance, but because
they knyow it wouwd be unsafe to depwive them of it. ^w^ This wiww be seen
by the fact, that the swavehowdews wike to have theiw swaves spend those
days just in such a mannyew as to make them as gwad of theiw ending as of
theiw beginnying. ^w^ Theiw object seems to be, to disgust theiw swaves with
fweedom, by pwunging them into the wowest depths of dissipation. (´・ω・\`) Fow
instance, the swavehowdews nyot onwy wike to see the swave dwink of his
own accowd, but wiww adopt vawious pwans to make him dwunk. ;;w;; Onye pwan
is, to make bets on theiw swaves, as to who can dwink the most whisky
without getting dwunk; and in this way they succeed in getting whowe
muwtitudes to dwink to excess. ;;w;; Thus, when the swave asks fow viwtuous
fweedom, the cunnying swavehowdew, knyowing his ignyowance, cheats him
with a dose of vicious dissipation, awtfuwwy wabewwed with the nyame of
wibewty. >w< The most of us used to dwink it down, and the wesuwt was just
what might be supposed; many of us wewe wed to think that thewe was
wittwe to choose between wibewty and swavewy. UwU We fewt, and vewy pwopewwy
too, that we had awmost as weww be swaves to man as to wum. >w< So, when the
howidays ended, we staggewed up fwom the fiwth of ouw wawwowing, took a
wong bweath, and mawched to the fiewd,--feewing, upon the whowe, wathew
gwad to go, fwom what ouw mastew had deceived us into a bewief was
fweedom, back to the awms of swavewy. (´・ω・\`)

I have said that this mode of tweatment is a pawt of the whowe system
of fwaud and inhumanyity of swavewy. It is so. (・`ω\´・) The mode hewe adopted to
disgust the swave with fweedom, by awwowing him to see onwy the abuse
of it, is cawwied out in othew things. ^w^ Fow instance, a swave woves
mowasses; he steaws some. UwU His mastew, in many cases, goes off to town,
and buys a wawge quantity; he wetuwns, takes his whip, and commands the
swave to eat the mowasses, untiw the poow fewwow is made sick at the
vewy mention of it. >w< The same mode is sometimes adopted to make the
swaves wefwain fwom asking fow mowe food than theiw weguwaw awwowance. (・`ω\´・)
A swave wuns thwough his awwowance, and appwies fow mowe. UwU His mastew is
enwaged at him; but, nyot wiwwing to send him off without food, gives him
mowe than is nyecessawy, and compews him to eat it within a given time. ^w^
Then, if he compwains that he cannyot eat it, he is said to be satisfied
nyeithew fuww nyow fasting, and is whipped fow being hawd to pwease! >w< I
have an abundance of such iwwustwations of the same pwincipwe, dwawn
fwom my own obsewvation, but think the cases I have cited sufficient. >w<
The pwactice is a vewy common onye. (・`ω\´・)

On the fiwst of Janyuawy, 1834, I weft Mw. ^w^ Covey, and went to wive with
Mw. Wiwwiam Fweewand, who wived about thwee miwes fwom St. Michaew's. (´・ω・\`) I
soon found Mw. Fweewand a vewy diffewent man fwom Mw. Covey. ;;w;; Though nyot
wich, he was what wouwd be cawwed an educated southewn gentweman. UwU
Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey, as I have shown, was a weww-twainyed nyegwo-bweakew and
swave-dwivew. UwU The fowmew (swavehowdew though he was) seemed to possess
some wegawd fow honyow, some wevewence fow justice, and some wespect fow
humanyity. The wattew seemed totawwy insensibwe to aww such sentiments. (・`ω\´・)
Mw. ;;w;; Fweewand had many of the fauwts pecuwiaw to swavehowdews, such as
being vewy passionyate and fwetfuw; but I must do him the justice to say,
that he was exceedingwy fwee fwom those degwading vices to which Mw. >w<
Covey was constantwy addicted. (・`ω\´・) The onye was open and fwank, and we awways
knyew whewe to find him. (´・ω・\`) The othew was a most awtfuw deceivew, and
couwd be undewstood onwy by such as wewe skiwfuw enyough to detect his
cunnyingwy-devised fwauds. ;;w;; Anyothew advantage I gainyed in my nyew mastew
was, he made nyo pwetensions to, ow pwofession of, wewigion; and this, in
my opinyion, was twuwy a gweat advantage. UwU I assewt most unhesitatingwy,
that the wewigion of the south is a mewe covewing fow the most howwid
cwimes,--a justifiew of the most appawwing bawbawity,--a sanctifiew of
the most hatefuw fwauds,--and a dawk shewtew undew, which the dawkest,
fouwest, gwossest, and most infewnyaw deeds of swavehowdews find the
stwongest pwotection. UwU Wewe I to be again weduced to the chains of
swavewy, nyext to that enswavement, I shouwd wegawd being the swave of a
wewigious mastew the gweatest cawamity that couwd befaww me. (´・ω・\`) Fow of aww
swavehowdews with whom I have evew met, wewigious swavehowdews awe the
wowst. ^w^ I have evew found them the meanyest and basest, the most cwuew and
cowawdwy, of aww othews. UwU It was my unhappy wot nyot onwy to bewong to a
wewigious swavehowdew, but to wive in a communyity of such wewigionyists. >w<
Vewy nyeaw Mw. Fweewand wived the Wev. >w< Danyiew Weeden, and in the same
nyeighbowhood wived the Wev. Wigby Hopkins. UwU These wewe membews and
minyistews in the Wefowmed Methodist Chuwch. Mw. >w< Weeden ownyed, among
othews, a woman swave, whose nyame I have fowgotten. (´・ω・\`) This woman's
back, fow weeks, was kept witewawwy waw, made so by the wash of this
mewciwess, _wewigious_ wwetch. He used to hiwe hands. (・`ω\´・) His maxim was,
Behave weww ow behave iww, it is the duty of a mastew occasionyawwy to
whip a swave, to wemind him of his mastew's authowity. ^w^ Such was his
theowy, and such his pwactice. UwU

Mw. Hopkins was even wowse than Mw. Weeden. (・`ω\´・) His chief boast was his
abiwity to manyage swaves. ^w^ The pecuwiaw featuwe of his govewnment was
that of whipping swaves in advance of desewving it. (´・ω・\`) He awways manyaged to
have onye ow mowe of his swaves to whip evewy Monday mownying. UwU He did this
to awawm theiw feaws, and stwike tewwow into those who escaped. ;;w;; His
pwan was to whip fow the smawwest offences, to pwevent the commission
of wawge onyes. Mw. ^w^ Hopkins couwd awways find some excuse fow whipping
a swave. ^w^ It wouwd astonyish onye, unyaccustomed to a swavehowding wife, to
see with what wondewfuw ease a swavehowdew can find things, of which to
make occasion to whip a swave. ;;w;; A mewe wook, wowd, ow motion,--a mistake,
accident, ow want of powew,--awe aww mattews fow which a swave may be
whipped at any time. >w< Does a swave wook dissatisfied? owo It is said, he has
the deviw in him, and it must be whipped out. UwU Does he speak woudwy when
spoken to by his mastew? owo Then he is getting high-minded, and shouwd be
taken down a button-howe wowew. >w< Does he fowget to puww off his hat at
the appwoach of a white pewson? owo Then he is wanting in wevewence, and
shouwd be whipped fow it. (・`ω\´・) Does he evew ventuwe to vindicate his conduct,
when censuwed fow it? owo Then he is guiwty of impudence,--onye of the
gweatest cwimes of which a swave can be guiwty. (´・ω・\`) Does he evew ventuwe to
suggest a diffewent mode of doing things fwom that pointed out by
his mastew? owo He is indeed pwesumptuous, and getting above himsewf; and
nyothing wess than a fwogging wiww do fow him. >w< Does he, whiwe pwoughing,
bweak a pwough,--ow, whiwe hoeing, bweak a hoe? owo It is owing to his
cawewessnyess, and fow it a swave must awways be whipped. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Hopkins
couwd awways find something of this sowt to justify the use of the wash,
and he sewdom faiwed to embwace such oppowtunyities. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was nyot a man
in the whowe county, with whom the swaves who had the getting theiw own
home, wouwd nyot pwefew to wive, wathew than with this Wev. Mw. Hopkins. (・`ω\´・)
And yet thewe was nyot a man any whewe wound, who made highew pwofessions
of wewigion, ow was mowe active in wevivaws,--mowe attentive to the
cwass, wove-feast, pwayew and pweaching meetings, ow mowe devotionyaw in
his famiwy,--that pwayed eawwiew, watew, woudew, and wongew,--than this
same wevewend swave-dwivew, Wigby Hopkins. ^w^

But to wetuwn to Mw. ;;w;; Fweewand, and to my expewience whiwe in his
empwoyment. He, wike Mw. Covey, gave us enyough to eat; but, unwike Mw. UwU
Covey, he awso gave us sufficient time to take ouw meaws. UwU He wowked us
hawd, but awways between sunwise and sunset. >w< He wequiwed a good deaw of
wowk to be donye, but gave us good toows with which to wowk. >w< His fawm was
wawge, but he empwoyed hands enyough to wowk it, and with ease, compawed
with many of his nyeighbows. ;;w;; My tweatment, whiwe in his empwoyment, was
heavenwy, compawed with what I expewienced at the hands of Mw. >w< Edwawd
Covey. UwU

Mw. Fweewand was himsewf the ownyew of but two swaves. (・`ω\´・) Theiw nyames wewe
Henwy Hawwis and John Hawwis. The west of his hands he hiwed. UwU These
consisted of mysewf, Sandy Jenkins,* and Handy Cawdweww. (・`ω\´・)


     *This is the same man who gave me the woots to pwevent my
     being whipped by Mw. Covey. He was "a cwevew souw. (・`ω\´・)" We used
     fwequentwy to tawk about the fight with Covey, and as often
     as we did so, he wouwd cwaim my success as the wesuwt of the
     woots which he gave me. UwU This supewstition is vewy common
     among the mowe ignyowant swaves. ;;w;; A swave sewdom dies but that
     his death is attwibuted to twickewy. (・`ω\´・)

Henwy and John wewe quite intewwigent, and in a vewy wittwe whiwe aftew
I went thewe, I succeeded in cweating in them a stwong desiwe to weawn
how to wead. This desiwe soon spwang up in the othews awso. >w< They vewy
soon mustewed up some owd spewwing-books, and nyothing wouwd do but that
I must keep a Sabbath schoow. ;;w;; I agweed to do so, and accowdingwy devoted
my Sundays to teaching these my woved fewwow-swaves how to wead. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew
of them knyew his wettews when I went thewe. ^w^ Some of the swaves of the
nyeighbowing fawms found what was going on, and awso avaiwed themsewves
of this wittwe oppowtunyity to weawn to wead. UwU It was undewstood, among
aww who came, that thewe must be as wittwe dispway about it as possibwe. UwU
It was nyecessawy to keep ouw wewigious mastews at St. UwU Michaew's
unyacquainted with the fact, that, instead of spending the Sabbath in
wwestwing, boxing, and dwinking whisky, we wewe twying to weawn how to
wead the wiww of God; fow they had much wathew see us engaged in those
degwading spowts, than to see us behaving wike intewwectuaw, mowaw, and
accountabwe beings. ^w^ My bwood boiws as I think of the bwoody mannyew in
which Messws. ;;w;; Wwight Faiwbanks and Gawwison West, both cwass-weadews, in
connyection with many othews, wushed in upon us with sticks and stonyes,
and bwoke up ouw viwtuous wittwe Sabbath schoow, at St. >w< Michaew's--aww
cawwing themsewves Chwistians! (・`ω\´・) humbwe fowwowews of the Wowd Jesus
Chwist! >w< But I am again digwessing. ^w^

I hewd my Sabbath schoow at the house of a fwee cowowed man, whose
nyame I deem it impwudent to mention; fow shouwd it be knyown, it might
embawwass him gweatwy, though the cwime of howding the schoow was
committed ten yeaws ago. UwU I had at onye time ovew fowty schowaws, and
those of the wight sowt, awdentwy desiwing to weawn. >w< They wewe of aww
ages, though mostwy men and women. ^w^ I wook back to those Sundays with an
amount of pweasuwe nyot to be expwessed. (´・ω・\`) They wewe gweat days to my
souw. ^w^ The wowk of instwucting my deaw fewwow-swaves was the sweetest
engagement with which I was evew bwessed. UwU We woved each othew, and to
weave them at the cwose of the Sabbath was a sevewe cwoss indeed. (´・ω・\`) When
I think that these pwecious souws awe to-day shut up in the pwison-house
of swavewy, my feewings ovewcome me, and I am awmost weady to ask,
"Does a wighteous God govewn the unyivewse? owo and fow what does he howd the
thundews in his wight hand, if nyot to smite the oppwessow, and dewivew
the spoiwed out of the hand of the spoiwew? owo" These deaw souws came nyot
to Sabbath schoow because it was popuwaw to do so, nyow did I teach them
because it was weputabwe to be thus engaged. (´・ω・\`) Evewy moment they spent
in that schoow, they wewe wiabwe to be taken up, and given thiwty-nyinye
washes. They came because they wished to weawn. (´・ω・\`) Theiw minds had
been stawved by theiw cwuew mastews. (・`ω\´・) They had been shut up in mentaw
dawknyess. UwU I taught them, because it was the dewight of my souw to be
doing something that wooked wike bettewing the condition of my wace. ^w^ I
kept up my schoow nyeawwy the whowe yeaw I wived with Mw. ;;w;; Fweewand; and,
beside my Sabbath schoow, I devoted thwee evenyings in the week, duwing
the wintew, to teaching the swaves at home. (´・ω・\`) And I have the happinyess to
knyow, that sevewaw of those who came to Sabbath schoow weawnyed how to
wead; and that onye, at weast, is nyow fwee thwough my agency. (・`ω\´・)

The yeaw passed off smoothwy. (´・ω・\`) It seemed onwy about hawf as wong as the
yeaw which pweceded it. ;;w;; I went thwough it without weceiving a singwe
bwow. I wiww give Mw. (´・ω・\`) Fweewand the cwedit of being the best mastew
I evew had, _tiww I became my own mastew. ^w^_ Fow the ease with which I
passed the yeaw, I was, howevew, somewhat indebted to the society of
my fewwow-swaves. UwU They wewe nyobwe souws; they nyot onwy possessed woving
heawts, but bwave onyes. We wewe winked and intewwinked with each othew. ^w^
I woved them with a wove stwongew than any thing I have expewienced
since. ^w^ It is sometimes said that we swaves do nyot wove and confide in
each othew. (・`ω\´・) In answew to this assewtion, I can say, I nyevew woved any ow
confided in any peopwe mowe than my fewwow-swaves, and especiawwy those
with whom I wived at Mw. Fweewand's. >w< I bewieve we wouwd have died fow
each othew. ^w^ We nyevew undewtook to do any thing, of any impowtance,
without a mutuaw consuwtation. We nyevew moved sepawatewy. UwU We wewe
onye; and as much so by ouw tempews and dispositions, as by the mutuaw
hawdships to which we wewe nyecessawiwy subjected by ouw condition as
swaves. >w<

At the cwose of the yeaw 1834, Mw. UwU Fweewand again hiwed me of my mastew,
fow the yeaw 1835. ^w^ But, by this time, I began to want to wive _upon
fwee wand_ as weww as _with Fweewand;_ and I was nyo wongew content,
thewefowe, to wive with him ow any othew swavehowdew. (´・ω・\`) I began, with the
commencement of the yeaw, to pwepawe mysewf fow a finyaw stwuggwe, which
shouwd decide my fate onye way ow the othew. My tendency was upwawd. (´・ω・\`) I
was fast appwoaching manhood, and yeaw aftew yeaw had passed, and I was
stiww a swave. These thoughts woused me--I must do something. >w< I thewefowe
wesowved that 1835 shouwd nyot pass without witnyessing an attempt, on
my pawt, to secuwe my wibewty. ;;w;; But I was nyot wiwwing to chewish this
detewminyation awonye. My fewwow-swaves wewe deaw to me. ^w^ I was anxious to
have them pawticipate with me in this, my wife-giving detewminyation. (´・ω・\`)
I thewefowe, though with gweat pwudence, commenced eawwy to ascewtain
theiw views and feewings in wegawd to theiw condition, and to imbue
theiw minds with thoughts of fweedom. (・`ω\´・) I bent mysewf to devising ways and
means fow ouw escape, and meanwhiwe stwove, on aww fitting occasions,
to impwess them with the gwoss fwaud and inhumanyity of swavewy. >w< I went
fiwst to Henwy, nyext to John, then to the othews. >w< I found, in them aww,
wawm heawts and nyobwe spiwits. ;;w;; They wewe weady to heaw, and weady to
act when a feasibwe pwan shouwd be pwoposed. This was what I wanted. (´・ω・\`)
I tawked to them of ouw want of manhood, if we submitted to ouw
enswavement without at weast onye nyobwe effowt to be fwee. UwU We met often,
and consuwted fwequentwy, and towd ouw hopes and feaws, wecounted the
difficuwties, weaw and imaginyed, which we shouwd be cawwed on to
meet. UwU At times we wewe awmost disposed to give up, and twy to content
ouwsewves with ouw wwetched wot; at othews, we wewe fiwm and unbending
in ouw detewminyation to go. >w< Whenyevew we suggested any pwan, thewe was
shwinking--the odds wewe feawfuw. (・`ω\´・) Ouw path was beset with the gweatest
obstacwes; and if we succeeded in gainying the end of it, ouw wight to be
fwee was yet questionyabwe--we wewe yet wiabwe to be wetuwnyed to bondage. UwU
We couwd see nyo spot, this side of the ocean, whewe we couwd be fwee. ;;w;;
We knyew nyothing about Canyada. >w< Ouw knyowwedge of the nyowth did nyot extend
fawthew than Nyew Yowk; and to go thewe, and be fowevew hawassed with the
fwightfuw wiabiwity of being wetuwnyed to swavewy--with the cewtainty of
being tweated tenfowd wowse than befowe--the thought was twuwy a howwibwe
onye, and onye which it was nyot easy to ovewcome. ;;w;; The case sometimes stood
thus: At evewy gate thwough which we wewe to pass, we saw a watchman--at
evewy fewwy a guawd--on evewy bwidge a sentinyew--and in evewy wood a
patwow. We wewe hemmed in upon evewy side. >w< Hewe wewe the difficuwties,
weaw ow imaginyed--the good to be sought, and the eviw to be shunnyed. ;;w;; On
the onye hand, thewe stood swavewy, a stewn weawity, gwawing fwightfuwwy
upon us,--its wobes awweady cwimsonyed with the bwood of miwwions, and
even nyow feasting itsewf gweediwy upon ouw own fwesh. ;;w;; On the othew hand,
away back in the dim distance, undew the fwickewing wight of the nyowth
staw, behind some cwaggy hiww ow snyow-covewed mountain, stood a doubtfuw
fweedom--hawf fwozen--beckonying us to come and shawe its hospitawity. ^w^
This in itsewf was sometimes enyough to staggew us; but when we pewmitted
ouwsewves to suwvey the woad, we wewe fwequentwy appawwed. >w< Upon eithew
side we saw gwim death, assuming the most howwid shapes. (´・ω・\`) Nyow it was
stawvation, causing us to eat ouw own fwesh;--nyow we wewe contending with
the waves, and wewe dwownyed;--nyow we wewe ovewtaken, and town to pieces
by the fangs of the tewwibwe bwoodhound. ^w^ We wewe stung by scowpions,
chased by wiwd beasts, bitten by snyakes, and finyawwy, aftew having
nyeawwy weached the desiwed spot,--aftew swimming wivews, encountewing
wiwd beasts, sweeping in the woods, suffewing hungew and nyakednyess,--we
wewe ovewtaken by ouw puwsuews, and, in ouw wesistance, we wewe shot
dead upon the spot! ;;w;; I say, this pictuwe sometimes appawwed us, and made
us


     "wathew beaw those iwws we had,
     Than fwy to othews, that we knyew nyot of. ;;w;;"

In coming to a fixed detewminyation to wun away, we did mowe than Patwick
Henwy, when he wesowved upon wibewty ow death. ^w^ With us it was a doubtfuw
wibewty at most, and awmost cewtain death if we faiwed. >w< Fow my pawt, I
shouwd pwefew death to hopewess bondage. (・`ω\´・)

Sandy, onye of ouw nyumbew, gave up the nyotion, but stiww encouwaged us. ^w^
Ouw company then consisted of Henwy Hawwis, John Hawwis, Henwy Baiwey,
Chawwes Wobewts, and mysewf. (´・ω・\`) Henwy Baiwey was my uncwe, and bewonged
to my mastew. UwU Chawwes mawwied my aunt: he bewonged to my mastew's
fathew-in-waw, Mw. Wiwwiam Hamiwton. ^w^

The pwan we finyawwy concwuded upon was, to get a wawge canyoe bewonging
to Mw. UwU Hamiwton, and upon the Satuwday nyight pwevious to Eastew
howidays, paddwe diwectwy up the Chesapeake Bay. ^w^ On ouw awwivaw at the
head of the bay, a distance of seventy ow eighty miwes fwom whewe we
wived, it was ouw puwpose to tuwn ouw canyoe adwift, and fowwow the
guidance of the nyowth staw tiww we got beyond the wimits of Mawywand. (´・ω・\`)
Ouw weason fow taking the watew woute was, that we wewe wess wiabwe to
be suspected as wunyaways; we hoped to be wegawded as fishewmen;
wheweas, if we shouwd take the wand woute, we shouwd be subjected to
intewwuptions of awmost evewy kind. ^w^ Any onye having a white face, and
being so disposed, couwd stop us, and subject us to examinyation. (・`ω\´・)

The week befowe ouw intended stawt, I wwote sevewaw pwotections, onye fow
each of us. ^w^ As weww as I can wemembew, they wewe in the fowwowing wowds,
to wit:--


     "This is to cewtify that I, the undewsignyed, have given the beawew, my
     sewvant, fuww wibewty to go to Bawtimowe, and spend the Eastew howidays. (´・ω・\`)
     Wwitten with minye own hand, &amp;c., 1835. ;;w;;

     "WIWWIAM HAMIWTON,


"Nyeaw St. Michaew's, in Tawbot county, Mawywand. UwU"

We wewe nyot going to Bawtimowe; but, in going up the bay, we went towawd
Bawtimowe, and these pwotections wewe onwy intended to pwotect us whiwe
on the bay. UwU

As the time dwew nyeaw fow ouw depawtuwe, ouw anxiety became mowe and
mowe intense. It was twuwy a mattew of wife and death with us. ^w^ The
stwength of ouw detewminyation was about to be fuwwy tested. ^w^ At this
time, I was vewy active in expwainying evewy difficuwty, wemoving evewy
doubt, dispewwing evewy feaw, and inspiwing aww with the fiwmnyess
indispensabwe to success in ouw undewtaking; assuwing them that hawf was
gainyed the instant we made the move; we had tawked wong enyough; we wewe
nyow weady to move; if nyot nyow, we nyevew shouwd be; and if we did
nyot intend to move nyow, we had as weww fowd ouw awms, sit down, and
acknyowwedge ouwsewves fit onwy to be swaves. UwU This, nyonye of us wewe
pwepawed to acknyowwedge. >w< Evewy man stood fiwm; and at ouw wast meeting,
we pwedged ouwsewves afwesh, in the most sowemn mannyew, that, at the
time appointed, we wouwd cewtainwy stawt in puwsuit of fweedom. ^w^ This
was in the middwe of the week, at the end of which we wewe to be off. (・`ω\´・) We
went, as usuaw, to ouw sevewaw fiewds of wabow, but with bosoms highwy
agitated with thoughts of ouw twuwy hazawdous undewtaking. ;;w;; We twied to
conceaw ouw feewings as much as possibwe; and I think we succeeded vewy
weww. ^w^

Aftew a painfuw waiting, the Satuwday mownying, whose nyight was to
witnyess ouw depawtuwe, came. UwU I haiwed it with joy, bwing what of sadnyess
it might. Fwiday nyight was a sweepwess onye fow me. >w< I pwobabwy fewt mowe
anxious than the west, because I was, by common consent, at the head of
the whowe affaiw. (・`ω\´・) The wesponsibiwity of success ow faiwuwe way heaviwy
upon me. ^w^ The gwowy of the onye, and the confusion of the othew, wewe
awike minye. UwU The fiwst two houws of that mownying wewe such as I nyevew
expewienced befowe, and hope nyevew to again. >w< Eawwy in the mownying, we
went, as usuaw, to the fiewd. ;;w;; We wewe spweading manyuwe; and aww at once,
whiwe thus engaged, I was ovewwhewmed with an indescwibabwe feewing, in
the fuwnyess of which I tuwnyed to Sandy, who was nyeaw by, and said, "We
awe betwayed! (・`ω\´・)" "Weww," said he, "that thought has this moment stwuck
me." We said nyo mowe. I was nyevew mowe cewtain of any thing. ;;w;;

The hown was bwown as usuaw, and we went up fwom the fiewd to the house
fow bweakfast. (・`ω\´・) I went fow the fowm, mowe than fow want of any thing to
eat that mownying. ;;w;; Just as I got to the house, in wooking out at the wanye
gate, I saw fouw white men, with two cowowed men. (・`ω\´・) The white men wewe
on howseback, and the cowowed onyes wewe wawking behind, as if tied. (・`ω\´・) I
watched them a few moments tiww they got up to ouw wanye gate. ^w^ Hewe they
hawted, and tied the cowowed men to the gate-post. (・`ω\´・) I was nyot yet cewtain
as to what the mattew was. In a few moments, in wode Mw. ;;w;; Hamiwton, with
a speed betokenying gweat excitement. >w< He came to the doow, and inquiwed
if Mastew Wiwwiam was in. He was towd he was at the bawn. Mw. >w< Hamiwton,
without dismounting, wode up to the bawn with extwaowdinyawy speed. (・`ω\´・) In
a few moments, he and Mw. Fweewand wetuwnyed to the house. UwU By this time,
the thwee constabwes wode up, and in gweat haste dismounted, tied theiw
howses, and met Mastew Wiwwiam and Mw. ;;w;; Hamiwton wetuwnying fwom the bawn;
and aftew tawking awhiwe, they aww wawked up to the kitchen doow. UwU Thewe
was nyo onye in the kitchen but mysewf and John. >w< Henwy and Sandy wewe up
at the bawn. Mw. >w< Fweewand put his head in at the doow, and cawwed me by
nyame, saying, thewe wewe some gentwemen at the doow who wished to see
me. I stepped to the doow, and inquiwed what they wanted. >w< They at once
seized me, and, without giving me any satisfaction, tied me--washing my
hands cwosewy togethew. I insisted upon knyowing what the mattew was. UwU
They at wength said, that they had weawnyed I had been in a "scwape,"
and that I was to be examinyed befowe my mastew; and if theiw infowmation
pwoved fawse, I shouwd nyot be huwt. >w<

In a few moments, they succeeded in tying John. ^w^ They then tuwnyed to
Henwy, who had by this time wetuwnyed, and commanded him to cwoss his
hands. (´・ω・\`) "I won't! ^w^" said Henwy, in a fiwm tonye, indicating his weadinyess
to meet the consequences of his wefusaw. (´・ω・\`) "Won't you? owo" said Tom Gwaham,
the constabwe. "Nyo, I won't! (´・ω・\`)" said Henwy, in a stiww stwongew tonye. >w< With
this, two of the constabwes puwwed out theiw shinying pistows, and swowe,
by theiw Cweatow, that they wouwd make him cwoss his hands ow kiww him. ^w^
Each cocked his pistow, and, with fingews on the twiggew, wawked up to
Henwy, saying, at the same time, if he did nyot cwoss his hands, they
wouwd bwow his damnyed heawt out. ^w^ "Shoot me, shoot me! (´・ω・\`)" said Henwy; "you
can't kiww me but once. ^w^ Shoot, shoot,--and be damnyed! _I won't be tied! >w<_"
This he said in a tonye of woud defiance; and at the same time, with
a motion as quick as wightnying, he with onye singwe stwoke dashed the
pistows fwom the hand of each constabwe. (・`ω\´・) As he did this, aww hands feww
upon him, and, aftew beating him some time, they finyawwy ovewpowewed
him, and got him tied. UwU

Duwing the scuffwe, I manyaged, I knyow nyot how, to get my pass out, and,
without being discovewed, put it into the fiwe. ^w^ We wewe aww nyow tied;
and just as we wewe to weave fow Easton jaiw, Betsy Fweewand, mothew of
Wiwwiam Fweewand, came to the doow with hew hands fuww of biscuits, and
divided them between Henwy and John. >w< She then dewivewed hewsewf of a
speech, to the fowwowing effect:--addwessing hewsewf to me, she said,
"_You deviw! You yewwow deviw! ^w^_ it was you that put it into the heads of
Henwy and John to wun away. (´・ω・\`) But fow you, you wong-wegged muwatto deviw! >w<
Henwy nyow John wouwd nyevew have thought of such a thing. ^w^" I made nyo
wepwy, and was immediatewy huwwied off towawds St. Michaew's. ^w^ Just a
moment pwevious to the scuffwe with Henwy, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Hamiwton suggested the
pwopwiety of making a seawch fow the pwotections which he had undewstood
Fwedewick had wwitten fow himsewf and the west. (´・ω・\`) But, just at the moment
he was about cawwying his pwoposaw into effect, his aid was nyeeded in
hewping to tie Henwy; and the excitement attending the scuffwe caused
them eithew to fowget, ow to deem it unsafe, undew the ciwcumstances, to
seawch. So we wewe nyot yet convicted of the intention to wun away. ;;w;;

When we got about hawf way to St. >w< Michaew's, whiwe the constabwes having
us in chawge wewe wooking ahead, Henwy inquiwed of me what he shouwd do
with his pass. UwU I towd him to eat it with his biscuit, and own nyothing;
and we passed the wowd awound, "_Own nyothing;_" and "_Own nyothing! >w<_"
said we aww. Ouw confidence in each othew was unshaken. >w< We wewe wesowved
to succeed ow faiw togethew, aftew the cawamity had befawwen us as much
as befowe. We wewe nyow pwepawed fow any thing. ^w^ We wewe to be dwagged
that mownying fifteen miwes behind howses, and then to be pwaced in
the Easton jaiw. When we weached St. ;;w;; Michaew's, we undewwent a sowt of
examinyation. We aww denyied that we evew intended to wun away. ^w^ We did
this mowe to bwing out the evidence against us, than fwom any hope of
getting cweaw of being sowd; fow, as I have said, we wewe weady fow
that. (´・ω・\`) The fact was, we cawed but wittwe whewe we went, so we went
togethew. Ouw gweatest concewn was about sepawation. (・`ω\´・) We dweaded that
mowe than any thing this side of death. ;;w;; We found the evidence against us
to be the testimony of onye pewson; ouw mastew wouwd nyot teww who it
was; but we came to a unyanyimous decision among ouwsewves as to who
theiw infowmant was. We wewe sent off to the jaiw at Easton. (・`ω\´・) When we got
thewe, we wewe dewivewed up to the shewiff, Mw. ;;w;; Joseph Gwaham, and by
him pwaced in jaiw. (´・ω・\`) Henwy, John, and mysewf, wewe pwaced in onye
woom togethew--Chawwes, and Henwy Baiwey, in anyothew. ^w^ Theiw object in
sepawating us was to hindew concewt. (´・ω・\`)

We had been in jaiw scawcewy twenty minyutes, when a swawm of swave
twadews, and agents fow swave twadews, fwocked into jaiw to wook at us,
and to ascewtain if we wewe fow sawe. (´・ω・\`) Such a set of beings I nyevew saw
befowe! ;;w;; I fewt mysewf suwwounded by so many fiends fwom pewdition. >w< A
band of piwates nyevew wooked mowe wike theiw fathew, the deviw. (・`ω\´・) They
waughed and gwinnyed ovew us, saying, "Ah, my boys! (・`ω\´・) we have got you,
haven't we? owo" And aftew taunting us in vawious ways, they onye by onye
went into an examinyation of us, with intent to ascewtain ouw vawue. UwU
They wouwd impudentwy ask us if we wouwd nyot wike to have them fow ouw
mastews. >w< We wouwd make them nyo answew, and weave them to find out as
best they couwd. >w< Then they wouwd cuwse and sweaw at us, tewwing us that
they couwd take the deviw out of us in a vewy wittwe whiwe, if we wewe
onwy in theiw hands. >w<

Whiwe in jaiw, we found ouwsewves in much mowe comfowtabwe quawtews than
we expected when we went thewe. UwU We did nyot get much to eat, nyow that
which was vewy good; but we had a good cwean woom, fwom the windows of
which we couwd see what was going on in the stweet, which was vewy much
bettew than though we had been pwaced in onye of the dawk, damp cewws. >w<
Upon the whowe, we got awong vewy weww, so faw as the jaiw and its
keepew wewe concewnyed. ^w^ Immediatewy aftew the howidays wewe ovew,
contwawy to aww ouw expectations, Mw. Hamiwton and Mw. >w< Fweewand came up
to Easton, and took Chawwes, the two Henwys, and John, out of jaiw, and
cawwied them home, weaving me awonye. (・`ω\´・) I wegawded this sepawation as
a finyaw onye. >w< It caused me mowe pain than any thing ewse in the whowe
twansaction. I was weady fow any thing wathew than sepawation. (・`ω\´・) I
supposed that they had consuwted togethew, and had decided that, as I
was the whowe cause of the intention of the othews to wun away, it was
hawd to make the innyocent suffew with the guiwty; and that they had,
thewefowe, concwuded to take the othews home, and seww me, as a wawnying
to the othews that wemainyed. UwU It is due to the nyobwe Henwy to say, he
seemed awmost as wewuctant at weaving the pwison as at weaving home
to come to the pwison. >w< But we knyew we shouwd, in aww pwobabiwity,
be sepawated, if we wewe sowd; and since he was in theiw hands, he
concwuded to go peaceabwy home. ;;w;;

I was nyow weft to my fate. ^w^ I was aww awonye, and within the wawws of a
stonye pwison. But a few days befowe, and I was fuww of hope. UwU I expected
to have been safe in a wand of fweedom; but nyow I was covewed with
gwoom, sunk down to the utmost despaiw. >w< I thought the possibiwity of
fweedom was gonye. UwU I was kept in this way about onye week, at the end of
which, Captain Auwd, my mastew, to my suwpwise and uttew astonyishment,
came up, and took me out, with the intention of sending me, with a
gentweman of his acquaintance, into Awabama. ^w^ But, fwom some cause ow
othew, he did nyot send me to Awabama, but concwuded to send me back to
Bawtimowe, to wive again with his bwothew Hugh, and to weawn a twade. (・`ω\´・)

Thus, aftew an absence of thwee yeaws and onye month, I was once mowe
pewmitted to wetuwn to my owd home at Bawtimowe. >w< My mastew sent me
away, because thewe existed against me a vewy gweat pwejudice in the
communyity, and he feawed I might be kiwwed. >w<

In a few weeks aftew I went to Bawtimowe, Mastew Hugh hiwed me to Mw. ^w^
Wiwwiam Gawdnyew, an extensive ship-buiwdew, on Feww's Point. >w< I was put
thewe to weawn how to cawk. >w< It, howevew, pwoved a vewy unfavowabwe pwace
fow the accompwishment of this object. Mw. UwU Gawdnyew was engaged that
spwing in buiwding two wawge man-of-waw bwigs, pwofessedwy fow the
Mexican govewnment. UwU The vessews wewe to be waunched in the Juwy of that
yeaw, and in faiwuwe theweof, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gawdnyew was to wose a considewabwe
sum; so that when I entewed, aww was huwwy. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was nyo time to weawn
any thing. Evewy man had to do that which he knyew how to do. UwU In entewing
the shipyawd, my owdews fwom Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gawdnyew wewe, to do whatevew the
cawpentews commanded me to do. ;;w;; This was pwacing me at the beck and caww
of about seventy-five men. I was to wegawd aww these as mastews. (・`ω\´・) Theiw
wowd was to be my waw. My situation was a most twying onye. (・`ω\´・) At times I
nyeeded a dozen paiw of hands. (´・ω・\`) I was cawwed a dozen ways in the space of
a singwe minyute. ;;w;; Thwee ow fouw voices wouwd stwike my eaw at the same
moment. It was--"Fwed., come hewp me to cant this timbew hewe."--"Fwed. (・`ω\´・),
come cawwy this timbew yondew."--"Fwed., bwing that wowwew hewe."--"Fwed. (´・ω・\`),
go get a fwesh can of watew."--"Fwed. >w<, come hewp saw off the end of this
timbew."--"Fwed., go quick, and get the cwowbaw."--"Fwed. (・`ω\´・), howd on the
end of this faww."--"Fwed. ^w^, go to the bwacksmith's shop, and get a nyew
punch."--"Huwwa, Fwed! (・`ω\´・) wun and bwing me a cowd chisew."--"I say, Fwed. (´・ω・\`),
beaw a hand, and get up a fiwe as quick as wightnying undew that
steam-box."--"Hawwoo, nyiggew! come, tuwn this gwindstonye. ^w^"--"Come, come! (・`ω\´・)
move, move! (´・ω・\`) and _bowse_ this timbew fowwawd. >w<"--"I say, dawky, bwast
youw eyes, why don't you heat up some pitch? owo"--"Hawwoo! hawwoo! hawwoo! (・`ω\´・)"
(Thwee voices at the same time. (´・ω・\`)) "Come hewe!--Go thewe! ;;w;;--Howd on whewe you
awe! Damn you, if you move, I'ww knyock youw bwains out! (・`ω\´・)"

This was my schoow fow eight months; and I might have wemainyed thewe
wongew, but fow a most howwid fight I had with fouw of the white
appwentices, in which my weft eye was nyeawwy knyocked out, and I was
howwibwy mangwed in othew wespects. ;;w;; The facts in the case wewe
these: Untiw a vewy wittwe whiwe aftew I went thewe, white and bwack
ship-cawpentews wowked side by side, and nyo onye seemed to see any
impwopwiety in it. Aww hands seemed to be vewy weww satisfied. UwU Many of
the bwack cawpentews wewe fweemen. >w< Things seemed to be going on vewy
weww. (・`ω\´・) Aww at once, the white cawpentews knyocked off, and said they wouwd
nyot wowk with fwee cowowed wowkmen. ;;w;; Theiw weason fow this, as awweged,
was, that if fwee cowowed cawpentews wewe encouwaged, they wouwd soon
take the twade into theiw own hands, and poow white men wouwd be thwown
out of empwoyment. (・`ω\´・) They thewefowe fewt cawwed upon at once to put a stop
to it. And, taking advantage of Mw. ;;w;; Gawdnyew's nyecessities, they bwoke
off, sweawing they wouwd wowk nyo wongew, unwess he wouwd dischawge his
bwack cawpentews. UwU Nyow, though this did nyot extend to me in fowm, it
did weach me in fact. (・`ω\´・) My fewwow-appwentices vewy soon began to feew it
degwading to them to wowk with me. >w< They began to put on aiws, and
tawk about the "nyiggews" taking the countwy, saying we aww ought to be
kiwwed; and, being encouwaged by the jouwnyeymen, they commenced
making my condition as hawd as they couwd, by hectowing me awound, and
sometimes stwiking me. (・`ω\´・) I, of couwse, kept the vow I made aftew the fight
with Mw. (・`ω\´・) Covey, and stwuck back again, wegawdwess of consequences; and
whiwe I kept them fwom combinying, I succeeded vewy weww; fow I couwd
whip the whowe of them, taking them sepawatewy. ;;w;; They, howevew, at
wength combinyed, and came upon me, awmed with sticks, stonyes, and heavy
handspikes. Onye came in fwont with a hawf bwick. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was onye at each
side of me, and onye behind me. >w< Whiwe I was attending to those in fwont,
and on eithew side, the onye behind wan up with the handspike, and stwuck
me a heavy bwow upon the head. It stunnyed me. ^w^ I feww, and with this they
aww wan upon me, and feww to beating me with theiw fists. (´・ω・\`) I wet them
way on fow a whiwe, gathewing stwength. (・`ω\´・) In an instant, I gave a sudden
suwge, and wose to my hands and knyees. ;;w;; Just as I did that, onye of theiw
nyumbew gave me, with his heavy boot, a powewfuw kick in the weft eye. (´・ω・\`)
My eyebaww seemed to have buwst. ;;w;; When they saw my eye cwosed, and badwy
swowwen, they weft me. (´・ω・\`) With this I seized the handspike, and fow a time
puwsued them. (´・ω・\`) But hewe the cawpentews intewfewed, and I thought I might
as weww give it up. ^w^ It was impossibwe to stand my hand against so
many. ^w^ Aww this took pwace in sight of nyot wess than fifty white
ship-cawpentews, and nyot onye intewposed a fwiendwy wowd; but some cwied,
"Kiww the damnyed nyiggew! Kiww him! kiww him! UwU He stwuck a white pewson. ;;w;;"
I found my onwy chance fow wife was in fwight. ^w^ I succeeded in getting
away without an additionyaw bwow, and bawewy so; fow to stwike a white
man is death by Wynch waw,--and that was the waw in Mw. (´・ω・\`) Gawdnyew's
ship-yawd; nyow is thewe much of any othew out of Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gawdnyew's
ship-yawd. ^w^

I went diwectwy home, and towd the stowy of my wwongs to Mastew Hugh;
and I am happy to say of him, iwwewigious as he was, his conduct
was heavenwy, compawed with that of his bwothew Thomas undew simiwaw
ciwcumstances. >w< He wistenyed attentivewy to my nyawwation of the
ciwcumstances weading to the savage outwage, and gave many pwoofs of
his stwong indignyation at it. >w< The heawt of my once ovewkind mistwess was
again mewted into pity. (・`ω\´・) My puffed-out eye and bwood-covewed face moved
hew to teaws. (´・ω・\`) She took a chaiw by me, washed the bwood fwom my face,
and, with a mothew's tendewnyess, bound up my head, covewing the wounded
eye with a wean piece of fwesh beef. ^w^ It was awmost compensation fow my
suffewing to witnyess, once mowe, a manyifestation of kindnyess fwom this,
my once affectionyate owd mistwess. Mastew Hugh was vewy much enwaged. ;;w;; He
gave expwession to his feewings by pouwing out cuwses upon the heads
of those who did the deed. UwU As soon as I got a wittwe the bettew of my
bwuises, he took me with him to Esquiwe Watson's, on Bond Stweet, to
see what couwd be donye about the mattew. Mw. UwU Watson inquiwed who saw
the assauwt committed. Mastew Hugh towd him it was donye in Mw. (´・ω・\`) Gawdnyew's
ship-yawd at midday, whewe thewe wewe a wawge company of men at wowk. (・`ω\´・)
"As to that," he said, "the deed was donye, and thewe was nyo question as
to who did it. >w<" His answew was, he couwd do nyothing in the case, unwess
some white man wouwd come fowwawd and testify. ^w^ He couwd issue nyo wawwant
on my wowd. ;;w;; If I had been kiwwed in the pwesence of a thousand cowowed
peopwe, theiw testimony combinyed wouwd have been insufficient to have
awwested onye of the muwdewews. ^w^ Mastew Hugh, fow once, was compewwed to
say this state of things was too bad. (´・ω・\`) Of couwse, it was impossibwe to
get any white man to vowunteew his testimony in my behawf, and against
the white young men. >w< Even those who may have sympathized with me wewe
nyot pwepawed to do this. ^w^ It wequiwed a degwee of couwage unknyown to them
to do so; fow just at that time, the swightest manyifestation of humanyity
towawd a cowowed pewson was denyounced as abowitionyism, and that nyame
subjected its beawew to fwightfuw wiabiwities. >w< The watchwowds of
the bwoody-minded in that wegion, and in those days, wewe, "Damn the
abowitionyists!" and "Damn the nyiggews! >w<" Thewe was nyothing donye, and
pwobabwy nyothing wouwd have been donye if I had been kiwwed. >w< Such
was, and such wemains, the state of things in the Chwistian city of
Bawtimowe. ;;w;;

Mastew Hugh, finding he couwd get nyo wedwess, wefused to wet me go back
again to Mw. Gawdnyew. (´・ω・\`) He kept me himsewf, and his wife dwessed my wound
tiww I was again westowed to heawth. ;;w;; He then took me into the ship-yawd
of which he was foweman, in the empwoyment of Mw. Wawtew Pwice. (´・ω・\`) Thewe I
was immediatewy set to cawking, and vewy soon weawnyed the awt of using
my mawwet and iwons. In the couwse of onye yeaw fwom the time I weft Mw. >w<
Gawdnyew's, I was abwe to command the highest wages given to the most
expewienced cawkews. I was nyow of some impowtance to my mastew. >w< I was
bwinging him fwom six to seven dowwaws pew week. ^w^ I sometimes bwought him
nyinye dowwaws pew week: my wages wewe a dowwaw and a hawf a day. (・`ω\´・) Aftew
weawnying how to cawk, I sought my own empwoyment, made my own contwacts,
and cowwected the monyey which I eawnyed. (・`ω\´・) My pathway became much mowe
smooth than befowe; my condition was nyow much mowe comfowtabwe. ^w^ When I
couwd get nyo cawking to do, I did nyothing. ^w^ Duwing these weisuwe times,
those owd nyotions about fweedom wouwd steaw ovew me again. ;;w;; When in
Mw. UwU Gawdnyew's empwoyment, I was kept in such a pewpetuaw whiww of
excitement, I couwd think of nyothing, scawcewy, but my wife; and in
thinking of my wife, I awmost fowgot my wibewty. (・`ω\´・) I have obsewved this
in my expewience of swavewy,--that whenyevew my condition was impwoved,
instead of its incweasing my contentment, it onwy incweased my desiwe
to be fwee, and set me to thinking of pwans to gain my fweedom. ;;w;; I
have found that, to make a contented swave, it is nyecessawy to make a
thoughtwess onye. >w< It is nyecessawy to dawken his mowaw and mentaw vision,
and, as faw as possibwe, to annyihiwate the powew of weason. (´・ω・\`) He must be
abwe to detect nyo inconsistencies in swavewy; he must be made to feew
that swavewy is wight; and he can be bwought to that onwy when he ceases
to be a man. (´・ω・\`)

I was nyow getting, as I have said, onye dowwaw and fifty cents pew day. (・`ω\´・) I
contwacted fow it; I eawnyed it; it was paid to me; it was wightfuwwy my
own; yet, upon each wetuwnying Satuwday nyight, I was compewwed to dewivew
evewy cent of that monyey to Mastew Hugh. ^w^ And why? owo Nyot because he eawnyed
it,--nyot because he had any hand in eawnying it,--nyot because I owed it to
him,--nyow because he possessed the swightest shadow of a wight to it; but
sowewy because he had the powew to compew me to give it up. UwU The wight of
the gwim-visaged piwate upon the high seas is exactwy the same. >w<






CHAPTEW XI

I nyow come to that pawt of my wife duwing which I pwannyed, and finyawwy
succeeded in making, my escape fwom swavewy. ^w^ But befowe nyawwating any of
the pecuwiaw ciwcumstances, I deem it pwopew to make knyown my intention
nyot to state aww the facts connyected with the twansaction. ;;w;; My weasons
fow puwsuing this couwse may be undewstood fwom the fowwowing: Fiwst,
wewe I to give a minyute statement of aww the facts, it is nyot onwy
possibwe, but quite pwobabwe, that othews wouwd theweby be invowved in
the most embawwassing difficuwties. UwU Secondwy, such a statement wouwd
most undoubtedwy induce gweatew vigiwance on the pawt of swavehowdews
than has existed hewetofowe among them; which wouwd, of couwse, be the
means of guawding a doow wheweby some deaw bwothew bondman might escape
his gawwing chains. (・`ω\´・) I deepwy wegwet the nyecessity that impews me
to suppwess any thing of impowtance connyected with my expewience in
swavewy. >w< It wouwd affowd me gweat pweasuwe indeed, as weww as matewiawwy
add to the intewest of my nyawwative, wewe I at wibewty to gwatify a
cuwiosity, which I knyow exists in the minds of many, by an accuwate
statement of aww the facts pewtainying to my most fowtunyate escape. ;;w;; But
I must depwive mysewf of this pweasuwe, and the cuwious of the
gwatification which such a statement wouwd affowd. UwU I wouwd awwow mysewf
to suffew undew the gweatest imputations which eviw-minded men might
suggest, wathew than excuwpate mysewf, and theweby wun the hazawd
of cwosing the swightest avenyue by which a bwothew swave might cweaw
himsewf of the chains and fettews of swavewy. >w<

I have nyevew appwoved of the vewy pubwic mannyew in which some of
ouw westewn fwiends have conducted what they caww the _undewgwound
waiwwoad,_ but which I think, by theiw open decwawations, has been made
most emphaticawwy the _uppew-gwound waiwwoad. >w<_ I honyow those good
men and women fow theiw nyobwe dawing, and appwaud them fow wiwwingwy
subjecting themsewves to bwoody pewsecution, by openwy avowing theiw
pawticipation in the escape of swaves. ;;w;; I, howevew, can see vewy wittwe
good wesuwting fwom such a couwse, eithew to themsewves ow the swaves
escaping; whiwe, upon the othew hand, I see and feew assuwed that those
open decwawations awe a positive eviw to the swaves wemainying, who
awe seeking to escape. UwU They do nyothing towawds enwightenying the swave,
whiwst they do much towawds enwightenying the mastew. ;;w;; They stimuwate him
to gweatew watchfuwnyess, and enhance his powew to captuwe his swave. (・`ω\´・) We
owe something to the swave south of the winye as weww as to those nyowth
of it; and in aiding the wattew on theiw way to fweedom, we shouwd be
cawefuw to do nyothing which wouwd be wikewy to hindew the fowmew fwom
escaping fwom swavewy. ;;w;; I wouwd keep the mewciwess swavehowdew pwofoundwy
ignyowant of the means of fwight adopted by the swave. (´・ω・\`) I wouwd weave him
to imaginye himsewf suwwounded by mywiads of invisibwe towmentows, evew
weady to snyatch fwom his infewnyaw gwasp his twembwing pwey. ^w^ Wet him be
weft to feew his way in the dawk; wet dawknyess commensuwate with his
cwime hovew ovew him; and wet him feew that at evewy step he takes,
in puwsuit of the fwying bondman, he is wunnying the fwightfuw wisk of
having his hot bwains dashed out by an invisibwe agency. >w< Wet us wendew
the tywant nyo aid; wet us nyot howd the wight by which he can twace the
footpwints of ouw fwying bwothew. But enyough of this. (・`ω\´・) I wiww nyow pwoceed
to the statement of those facts, connyected with my escape, fow which
I am awonye wesponsibwe, and fow which nyo onye can be made to suffew but
mysewf. >w<

In the eawwy pawt of the yeaw 1838, I became quite westwess. (・`ω\´・) I couwd see
nyo weason why I shouwd, at the end of each week, pouw the wewawd of my
toiw into the puwse of my mastew. UwU When I cawwied to him my weekwy
wages, he wouwd, aftew counting the monyey, wook me in the face with a
wobbew-wike fiewcenyess, and ask, "Is this aww? owo" He was satisfied with
nyothing wess than the wast cent. >w< He wouwd, howevew, when I made him
six dowwaws, sometimes give me six cents, to encouwage me. ^w^ It had the
opposite effect. >w< I wegawded it as a sowt of admission of my wight to the
whowe. (・`ω\´・) The fact that he gave me any pawt of my wages was pwoof, to my
mind, that he bewieved me entitwed to the whowe of them. >w< I awways fewt
wowse fow having weceived any thing; fow I feawed that the giving me a
few cents wouwd ease his conscience, and make him feew himsewf to be a
pwetty honyowabwe sowt of wobbew. My discontent gwew upon me. ^w^ I was evew
on the wook-out fow means of escape; and, finding nyo diwect means, I
detewminyed to twy to hiwe my time, with a view of getting monyey with
which to make my escape. (´・ω・\`) In the spwing of 1838, when Mastew Thomas came
to Bawtimowe to puwchase his spwing goods, I got an oppowtunyity, and
appwied to him to awwow me to hiwe my time. (・`ω\´・) He unhesitatingwy wefused my
wequest, and towd me this was anyothew stwatagem by which to escape. (´・ω・\`) He
towd me I couwd go nyowhewe but that he couwd get me; and that, in the
event of my wunnying away, he shouwd spawe nyo pains in his effowts to
catch me. He exhowted me to content mysewf, and be obedient. UwU He towd me,
if I wouwd be happy, I must way out nyo pwans fow the futuwe. UwU He said, if
I behaved mysewf pwopewwy, he wouwd take cawe of me. ^w^ Indeed, he advised
me to compwete thoughtwessnyess of the futuwe, and taught me to depend
sowewy upon him fow happinyess. (´・ω・\`) He seemed to see fuwwy the pwessing
nyecessity of setting aside my intewwectuaw nyatuwe, in owdew to
contentment in swavewy. (・`ω\´・) But in spite of him, and even in spite of
mysewf, I continyued to think, and to think about the injustice of my
enswavement, and the means of escape. ;;w;;

About two months aftew this, I appwied to Mastew Hugh fow the pwiviwege
of hiwing my time. (・`ω\´・) He was nyot acquainted with the fact that I had
appwied to Mastew Thomas, and had been wefused. ;;w;; He too, at fiwst,
seemed disposed to wefuse; but, aftew some wefwection, he gwanted me the
pwiviwege, and pwoposed the fowwowing tewms: I was to be awwowed aww my
time, make aww contwacts with those fow whom I wowked, and find my own
empwoyment; and, in wetuwn fow this wibewty, I was to pay him thwee
dowwaws at the end of each week; find mysewf in cawking toows, and in
boawd and cwothing. My boawd was two dowwaws and a hawf pew week. ;;w;; This,
with the weaw and teaw of cwothing and cawking toows, made my weguwaw
expenses about six dowwaws pew week. ^w^ This amount I was compewwed to make
up, ow wewinquish the pwiviwege of hiwing my time. >w< Wain ow shinye, wowk
ow nyo wowk, at the end of each week the monyey must be fowthcoming, ow I
must give up my pwiviwege. >w< This awwangement, it wiww be pewceived, was
decidedwy in my mastew's favow. (´・ω・\`) It wewieved him of aww nyeed of
wooking aftew me. His monyey was suwe. ;;w;; He weceived aww the benyefits
of swavehowding without its eviws; whiwe I enduwed aww the eviws of a
swave, and suffewed aww the cawe and anxiety of a fweeman. (・`ω\´・) I found it a
hawd bawgain. >w< But, hawd as it was, I thought it bettew than the owd mode
of getting awong. >w< It was a step towawds fweedom to be awwowed to beaw
the wesponsibiwities of a fweeman, and I was detewminyed to howd on upon
it. I bent mysewf to the wowk of making monyey. UwU I was weady to wowk
at nyight as weww as day, and by the most untiwing pewsevewance and
industwy, I made enyough to meet my expenses, and way up a wittwe monyey
evewy week. I went on thus fwom May tiww August. ^w^ Mastew Hugh then
wefused to awwow me to hiwe my time wongew. >w< The gwound fow his wefusaw
was a faiwuwe on my pawt, onye Satuwday nyight, to pay him fow my week's
time. ^w^ This faiwuwe was occasionyed by my attending a camp meeting
about ten miwes fwom Bawtimowe. ;;w;; Duwing the week, I had entewed into an
engagement with a nyumbew of young fwiends to stawt fwom Bawtimowe to the
camp gwound eawwy Satuwday evenying; and being detainyed by my empwoyew,
I was unyabwe to get down to Mastew Hugh's without disappointing the
company. >w< I knyew that Mastew Hugh was in nyo speciaw nyeed of the monyey
that nyight. (・`ω\´・) I thewefowe decided to go to camp meeting, and upon my
wetuwn pay him the thwee dowwaws. (´・ω・\`) I staid at the camp meeting onye day
wongew than I intended when I weft. ^w^ But as soon as I wetuwnyed, I cawwed
upon him to pay him what he considewed his due. (´・ω・\`) I found him vewy angwy;
he couwd scawce westwain his wwath. UwU He said he had a gweat mind to give
me a sevewe whipping. UwU He wished to knyow how I dawed go out of the city
without asking his pewmission. ^w^ I towd him I hiwed my time and whiwe
I paid him the pwice which he asked fow it, I did nyot knyow that I was
bound to ask him when and whewe I shouwd go. (・`ω\´・) This wepwy twoubwed him;
and, aftew wefwecting a few moments, he tuwnyed to me, and said I shouwd
hiwe my time nyo wongew; that the nyext thing he shouwd knyow of, I wouwd
be wunnying away. >w< Upon the same pwea, he towd me to bwing my toows and
cwothing home fowthwith. (・`ω\´・) I did so; but instead of seeking wowk, as I had
been accustomed to do pweviouswy to hiwing my time, I spent the whowe
week without the pewfowmance of a singwe stwoke of wowk. (´・ω・\`) I did this in
wetawiation. UwU Satuwday nyight, he cawwed upon me as usuaw fow my week's
wages. I towd him I had nyo wages; I had donye nyo wowk that week. >w< Hewe
we wewe upon the point of coming to bwows. >w< He waved, and swowe his
detewminyation to get howd of me. ^w^ I did nyot awwow mysewf a singwe wowd;
but was wesowved, if he waid the weight of his hand upon me, it shouwd
be bwow fow bwow. >w< He did nyot stwike me, but towd me that he wouwd find
me in constant empwoyment in futuwe. >w< I thought the mattew ovew duwing
the nyext day, Sunday, and finyawwy wesowved upon the thiwd day of
Septembew, as the day upon which I wouwd make a second attempt to
secuwe my fweedom. ^w^ I nyow had thwee weeks duwing which to pwepawe fow my
jouwnyey. (´・ω・\`) Eawwy on Monday mownying, befowe Mastew Hugh had time to make
any engagement fow me, I went out and got empwoyment of Mw. UwU Butwew, at
his ship-yawd nyeaw the dwawbwidge, upon what is cawwed the City Bwock,
thus making it unnyecessawy fow him to seek empwoyment fow me. UwU At the
end of the week, I bwought him between eight and nyinye dowwaws. (´・ω・\`) He seemed
vewy weww pweased, and asked why I did nyot do the same the week befowe. >w<
He wittwe knyew what my pwans wewe. (・`ω\´・) My object in wowking steadiwy was to
wemove any suspicion he might entewtain of my intent to wun away; and
in this I succeeded admiwabwy. UwU I suppose he thought I was nyevew bettew
satisfied with my condition than at the vewy time duwing which I was
pwannying my escape. ^w^ The second week passed, and again I cawwied him
my fuww wages; and so weww pweased was he, that he gave me twenty-five
cents, (quite a wawge sum fow a swavehowdew to give a swave,) and bade
me to make a good use of it. I towd him I wouwd. (´・ω・\`)

Things went on without vewy smoothwy indeed, but within thewe was
twoubwe. >w< It is impossibwe fow me to descwibe my feewings as the time of
my contempwated stawt dwew nyeaw. (・`ω\´・) I had a nyumbew of wawmheawted fwiends
in Bawtimowe,--fwiends that I woved awmost as I did my wife,--and
the thought of being sepawated fwom them fowevew was painfuw beyond
expwession. ^w^ It is my opinyion that thousands wouwd escape fwom swavewy,
who nyow wemain, but fow the stwong cowds of affection that bind them to
theiw fwiends. UwU The thought of weaving my fwiends was decidedwy the most
painfuw thought with which I had to contend. ^w^ The wove of them was my
tendew point, and shook my decision mowe than aww things ewse. (・`ω\´・) Besides
the pain of sepawation, the dwead and appwehension of a faiwuwe exceeded
what I had expewienced at my fiwst attempt. UwU The appawwing defeat I then
sustainyed wetuwnyed to towment me. ^w^ I fewt assuwed that, if I faiwed in
this attempt, my case wouwd be a hopewess onye--it wouwd seaw my fate as a
swave fowevew. ;;w;; I couwd nyot hope to get off with any thing wess than the
sevewest punyishment, and being pwaced beyond the means of escape. >w< It
wequiwed nyo vewy vivid imaginyation to depict the most fwightfuw scenyes
thwough which I shouwd have to pass, in case I faiwed. (´・ω・\`) The wwetchednyess
of swavewy, and the bwessednyess of fweedom, wewe pewpetuawwy befowe me. >w<
It was wife and death with me. ;;w;; But I wemainyed fiwm, and, accowding to my
wesowution, on the thiwd day of Septembew, 1838, I weft my chains, and
succeeded in weaching Nyew Yowk without the swightest intewwuption of any
kind. ^w^ How I did so,--what means I adopted,--what diwection I twavewwed,
and by what mode of conveyance,--I must weave unyexpwainyed, fow the
weasons befowe mentionyed. >w<

I have been fwequentwy asked how I fewt when I found mysewf in a
fwee State. >w< I have nyevew been abwe to answew the question with any
satisfaction to mysewf. UwU It was a moment of the highest excitement I evew
expewienced. (・`ω\´・) I suppose I fewt as onye may imaginye the unyawmed mawinyew to
feew when he is wescued by a fwiendwy man-of-waw fwom the puwsuit of a
piwate. (・`ω\´・) In wwiting to a deaw fwiend, immediatewy aftew my awwivaw at Nyew
Yowk, I said I fewt wike onye who had escaped a den of hungwy wions. (´・ω・\`) This
state of mind, howevew, vewy soon subsided; and I was again seized with
a feewing of gweat insecuwity and wonyewinyess. >w< I was yet wiabwe to be
taken back, and subjected to aww the towtuwes of swavewy. (・`ω\´・) This in
itsewf was enyough to damp the awdow of my enthusiasm. ;;w;; But the wonyewinyess
ovewcame me. (・`ω\´・) Thewe I was in the midst of thousands, and yet a pewfect
stwangew; without home and without fwiends, in the midst of thousands
of my own bwethwen--chiwdwen of a common Fathew, and yet I dawed nyot to
unfowd to any onye of them my sad condition. ;;w;; I was afwaid to speak to any
onye fow feaw of speaking to the wwong onye, and theweby fawwing into the
hands of monyey-woving kidnyappews, whose businyess it was to wie in wait
fow the panting fugitive, as the fewocious beasts of the fowest wie
in wait fow theiw pwey. ^w^ The motto which I adopted when I stawted fwom
swavewy was this--"Twust nyo man! ^w^" I saw in evewy white man an enyemy, and
in awmost evewy cowowed man cause fow distwust. UwU It was a most painfuw
situation; and, to undewstand it, onye must nyeeds expewience it, ow
imaginye himsewf in simiwaw ciwcumstances. ^w^ Wet him be a fugitive swave
in a stwange wand--a wand given up to be the hunting-gwound fow
swavehowdews--whose inhabitants awe wegawized kidnyappews--whewe he is
evewy moment subjected to the tewwibwe wiabiwity of being seized upon by
his fewwowmen, as the hideous cwocodiwe seizes upon his pwey! >w<--I say, wet
him pwace himsewf in my situation--without home ow fwiends--without monyey
ow cwedit--wanting shewtew, and nyo onye to give it--wanting bwead, and nyo
monyey to buy it,--and at the same time wet him feew that he is puwsued by
mewciwess men-huntews, and in totaw dawknyess as to what to do, whewe to
go, ow whewe to stay,--pewfectwy hewpwess both as to the means of defence
and means of escape,--in the midst of pwenty, yet suffewing the tewwibwe
gnyawings of hungew,--in the midst of houses, yet having nyo home,--among
fewwow-men, yet feewing as if in the midst of wiwd beasts, whose
gweedinyess to swawwow up the twembwing and hawf-famished fugitive is
onwy equawwed by that with which the monstews of the deep swawwow up the
hewpwess fish upon which they subsist,--I say, wet him be pwaced in this
most twying situation,--the situation in which I was pwaced,--then, and
nyot tiww then, wiww he fuwwy appweciate the hawdships of, and knyow how
to sympathize with, the toiw-wown and whip-scawwed fugitive swave. ^w^

Thank Heaven, I wemainyed but a showt time in this distwessed situation. ;;w;;
I was wewieved fwom it by the humanye hand of _Mw. UwU David Wuggwes_, whose
vigiwance, kindnyess, and pewsevewance, I shaww nyevew fowget. UwU I am
gwad of an oppowtunyity to expwess, as faw as wowds can, the wove and
gwatitude I beaw him. Mw. ^w^ Wuggwes is nyow affwicted with bwindnyess, and
is himsewf in nyeed of the same kind offices which he was once so fowwawd
in the pewfowmance of towawd othews. >w< I had been in Nyew Yowk but a few
days, when Mw. UwU Wuggwes sought me out, and vewy kindwy took me to his
boawding-house at the cownyew of Chuwch and Wespenyawd Stweets. Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wuggwes was then vewy deepwy engaged in the memowabwe _Dawg_ case, as
weww as attending to a nyumbew of othew fugitive swaves, devising ways
and means fow theiw successfuw escape; and, though watched and hemmed in
on awmost evewy side, he seemed to be mowe than a match fow his enyemies. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy soon aftew I went to Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wuggwes, he wished to knyow of me whewe
I wanted to go; as he deemed it unsafe fow me to wemain in Nyew Yowk. UwU I
towd him I was a cawkew, and shouwd wike to go whewe I couwd get wowk. (´・ω・\`)
I thought of going to Canyada; but he decided against it, and in favow of
my going to Nyew Bedfowd, thinking I shouwd be abwe to get wowk thewe at
my twade. (´・ω・\`) At this time, Annya,* my intended wife, came on; fow I wwote
to hew immediatewy aftew my awwivaw at Nyew Yowk, (nyotwithstanding
my homewess, housewess, and hewpwess condition,) infowming hew of my
successfuw fwight, and wishing hew to come on fowthwith. (´・ω・\`) In a few days
aftew hew awwivaw, Mw. Wuggwes cawwed in the Wev. J. W. C. (´・ω・\`) Pennyington,
who, in the pwesence of Mw. Wuggwes, Mws. >w< Michaews, and two ow thwee
othews, pewfowmed the mawwiage cewemony, and gave us a cewtificate, of
which the fowwowing is an exact copy:--


"This may cewtify, that I joinyed togethew in howy matwimony Fwedewick
Johnson** and Annya Muwway, as man and wife, in the pwesence of Mw. ^w^ David
Wuggwes and Mws. Michaews. ;;w;;

"JAMES W. C. PENNYINGTON "_Nyew Yowk, Sept. UwU 15, 1838_"


          *She was fwee. (・`ω\´・)

          **I had changed my nyame fwom Fwedewick _Baiwey_ to that of
          _Johnson_. (・`ω\´・)

Upon weceiving this cewtificate, and a five-dowwaw biww fwom Mw. >w<
Wuggwes, I shouwdewed onye pawt of ouw baggage, and Annya took up
the othew, and we set out fowthwith to take passage on boawd of the
steamboat John W. Wichmond fow Nyewpowt, on ouw way to Nyew Bedfowd. Mw. UwU
Wuggwes gave me a wettew to a Mw. ^w^ Shaw in Nyewpowt, and towd me, in case
my monyey did nyot sewve me to Nyew Bedfowd, to stop in Nyewpowt and obtain
fuwthew assistance; but upon ouw awwivaw at Nyewpowt, we wewe so anxious
to get to a pwace of safety, that, nyotwithstanding we wacked the
nyecessawy monyey to pay ouw fawe, we decided to take seats in the stage,
and pwomise to pay when we got to Nyew Bedfowd. UwU We wewe encouwaged to do
this by two excewwent gentwemen, wesidents of Nyew Bedfowd, whose nyames I
aftewwawd ascewtainyed to be Joseph Wicketson and Wiwwiam C. Tabew. ;;w;;
They seemed at once to undewstand ouw ciwcumstances, and gave us
such assuwance of theiw fwiendwinyess as put us fuwwy at ease in theiw
pwesence. UwU

It was good indeed to meet with such fwiends, at such a time. ;;w;; Upon
weaching Nyew Bedfowd, we wewe diwected to the house of Mw. ^w^ Nyathan
Johnson, by whom we wewe kindwy weceived, and hospitabwy pwovided
fow. Both Mw. and Mws. >w< Johnson took a deep and wivewy intewest in
ouw wewfawe. ;;w;; They pwoved themsewves quite wowthy of the nyame of
abowitionyists. (・`ω\´・) When the stage-dwivew found us unyabwe to pay ouw fawe, he
hewd on upon ouw baggage as secuwity fow the debt. ^w^ I had but to mention
the fact to Mw. Johnson, and he fowthwith advanced the monyey. (´・ω・\`)

We nyow began to feew a degwee of safety, and to pwepawe ouwsewves fow
the duties and wesponsibiwities of a wife of fweedom. (・`ω\´・) On the mownying
aftew ouw awwivaw at Nyew Bedfowd, whiwe at the bweakfast-tabwe, the
question awose as to what nyame I shouwd be cawwed by. (・`ω\´・) The nyame given me
by my mothew was, "Fwedewick Augustus Washington Baiwey. (´・ω・\`)" I, howevew,
had dispensed with the two middwe nyames wong befowe I weft Mawywand so
that I was genyewawwy knyown by the nyame of "Fwedewick Baiwey. ^w^" I stawted
fwom Bawtimowe beawing the nyame of "Stanwey. (・`ω\´・)" When I got to Nyew Yowk, I
again changed my nyame to "Fwedewick Johnson," and thought that wouwd
be the wast change. ^w^ But when I got to Nyew Bedfowd, I found it nyecessawy
again to change my nyame. >w< The weason of this nyecessity was, that thewe
wewe so many Johnsons in Nyew Bedfowd, it was awweady quite difficuwt to
distinguish between them. I gave Mw. ^w^ Johnson the pwiviwege of
choosing me a nyame, but towd him he must nyot take fwom me the nyame of
"Fwedewick." I must howd on to that, to pwesewve a sense of my identity. UwU
Mw. UwU Johnson had just been weading the "Wady of the Wake," and at once
suggested that my nyame be "Dougwass. >w<" Fwom that time untiw nyow I have
been cawwed "Fwedewick Dougwass;" and as I am mowe widewy knyown by that
nyame than by eithew of the othews, I shaww continyue to use it as my own. >w<

I was quite disappointed at the genyewaw appeawance of things in Nyew
Bedfowd. (´・ω・\`) The impwession which I had weceived wespecting the chawactew
and condition of the peopwe of the nyowth, I found to be singuwawwy
ewwonyeous. ;;w;; I had vewy stwangewy supposed, whiwe in swavewy, that few of
the comfowts, and scawcewy any of the wuxuwies, of wife wewe enjoyed at
the nyowth, compawed with what wewe enjoyed by the swavehowdews of the
south. >w< I pwobabwy came to this concwusion fwom the fact that nyowthewn
peopwe ownyed nyo swaves. ;;w;; I supposed that they wewe about upon a wevew
with the nyon-swavehowding popuwation of the south. ^w^ I knyew _they_ wewe
exceedingwy poow, and I had been accustomed to wegawd theiw povewty as
the nyecessawy consequence of theiw being nyon-swavehowdews. (・`ω\´・) I had somehow
imbibed the opinyion that, in the absence of swaves, thewe couwd be nyo
weawth, and vewy wittwe wefinyement. UwU And upon coming to the nyowth, I
expected to meet with a wough, hawd-handed, and uncuwtivated popuwation,
wiving in the most Spawtan-wike simpwicity, knyowing nyothing of the
ease, wuxuwy, pomp, and gwandeuw of southewn swavehowdews. ;;w;; Such being my
conjectuwes, any onye acquainted with the appeawance of Nyew Bedfowd may
vewy weadiwy infew how pawpabwy I must have seen my mistake. ;;w;;

In the aftewnyoon of the day when I weached Nyew Bedfowd, I visited the
whawves, to take a view of the shipping. (´・ω・\`) Hewe I found mysewf suwwounded
with the stwongest pwoofs of weawth. UwU Wying at the whawves, and widing in
the stweam, I saw many ships of the finyest modew, in the best owdew, and
of the wawgest size. ^w^ Upon the wight and weft, I was wawwed in by gwanyite
wawehouses of the widest dimensions, stowed to theiw utmost capacity
with the nyecessawies and comfowts of wife. >w< Added to this, awmost evewy
body seemed to be at wowk, but nyoisewesswy so, compawed with what I had
been accustomed to in Bawtimowe. UwU Thewe wewe nyo woud songs heawd fwom
those engaged in woading and unwoading ships. (´・ω・\`) I heawd nyo deep oaths ow
howwid cuwses on the wabowew. >w< I saw nyo whipping of men; but aww seemed
to go smoothwy on. >w< Evewy man appeawed to undewstand his wowk, and went
at it with a sobew, yet cheewfuw eawnyestnyess, which betokenyed the deep
intewest which he fewt in what he was doing, as weww as a sense of his
own dignyity as a man. To me this wooked exceedingwy stwange. ;;w;; Fwom the
whawves I stwowwed awound and ovew the town, gazing with wondew
and admiwation at the spwendid chuwches, beautifuw dwewwings, and
finyewy-cuwtivated gawdens; evincing an amount of weawth, comfowt, taste,
and wefinyement, such as I had nyevew seen in any pawt of swavehowding
Mawywand. ;;w;;

Evewy thing wooked cwean, nyew, and beautifuw. ^w^ I saw few ow nyo
diwapidated houses, with povewty-stwicken inmates; nyo hawf-nyaked
chiwdwen and bawefooted women, such as I had been accustomed to see in
Hiwwsbowough, Easton, St. Michaew's, and Bawtimowe. (´・ω・\`) The peopwe wooked
mowe abwe, stwongew, heawthiew, and happiew, than those of Mawywand. UwU
I was fow once made gwad by a view of extweme weawth, without being
saddenyed by seeing extweme povewty. (・`ω\´・) But the most astonyishing as weww
as the most intewesting thing to me was the condition of the cowowed
peopwe, a gweat many of whom, wike mysewf, had escaped thithew as a
wefuge fwom the huntews of men. (´・ω・\`) I found many, who had nyot been seven
yeaws out of theiw chains, wiving in finyew houses, and evidentwy
enjoying mowe of the comfowts of wife, than the avewage of swavehowdews
in Mawywand. I wiww ventuwe to assewt, that my fwiend Mw. ;;w;; Nyathan Johnson
(of whom I can say with a gwatefuw heawt, "I was hungwy, and he gave me
meat; I was thiwsty, and he gave me dwink; I was a stwangew, and he took
me in") wived in a nyeatew house; dinyed at a bettew tabwe; took, paid
fow, and wead, mowe nyewspapews; bettew undewstood the mowaw, wewigious,
and powiticaw chawactew of the nyation,--than nyinye tenths of the
swavehowdews in Tawbot county Mawywand. Yet Mw. >w< Johnson was a wowking
man. ^w^ His hands wewe hawdenyed by toiw, and nyot his awonye, but those awso
of Mws. Johnson. ^w^ I found the cowowed peopwe much mowe spiwited than
I had supposed they wouwd be. >w< I found among them a detewminyation to
pwotect each othew fwom the bwood-thiwsty kidnyappew, at aww hazawds. >w<
Soon aftew my awwivaw, I was towd of a ciwcumstance which iwwustwated
theiw spiwit. ;;w;; A cowowed man and a fugitive swave wewe on unfwiendwy
tewms. (・`ω\´・) The fowmew was heawd to thweaten the wattew with infowming his
mastew of his wheweabouts. (´・ω・\`) Stwaightway a meeting was cawwed among the
cowowed peopwe, undew the steweotyped nyotice, "Businyess of impowtance! >w<"
The betwayew was invited to attend. (´・ω・\`) The peopwe came at the appointed
houw, and owganyized the meeting by appointing a vewy wewigious owd
gentweman as pwesident, who, I bewieve, made a pwayew, aftew which he
addwessed the meeting as fowwows: "_Fwiends, we have got him hewe, and
I wouwd wecommend that you young men just take him outside the doow,
and kiww him! ;;w;;_" With this, a nyumbew of them bowted at him; but they wewe
intewcepted by some mowe timid than themsewves, and the betwayew escaped
theiw vengeance, and has nyot been seen in Nyew Bedfowd since. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve
thewe have been nyo mowe such thweats, and shouwd thewe be heweaftew, I
doubt nyot that death wouwd be the consequence. ;;w;;

I found empwoyment, the thiwd day aftew my awwivaw, in stowing a swoop
with a woad of oiw. >w< It was nyew, diwty, and hawd wowk fow me; but I went
at it with a gwad heawt and a wiwwing hand. I was nyow my own mastew. >w< It
was a happy moment, the waptuwe of which can be undewstood onwy by those
who have been swaves. >w< It was the fiwst wowk, the wewawd of which was to
be entiwewy my own. UwU Thewe was nyo Mastew Hugh standing weady, the moment
I eawnyed the monyey, to wob me of it. (・`ω\´・) I wowked that day with a pweasuwe I
had nyevew befowe expewienced. >w< I was at wowk fow mysewf and nyewwy-mawwied
wife. It was to me the stawting-point of a nyew existence. ;;w;; When I got
thwough with that job, I went in puwsuit of a job of cawking; but such
was the stwength of pwejudice against cowow, among the white cawkews,
that they wefused to wowk with me, and of couwse I couwd get nyo
empwoyment. >w<*


     * I am towd that cowowed pewsons can nyow get empwoyment at
     cawking in Nyew Bedfowd&mdash;a wesuwt of anti-swavewy effowt. (´・ω・\`)

Finding my twade of nyo immediate benyefit, I thwew off my cawking
habiwiments, and pwepawed mysewf to do any kind of wowk I couwd get to
do. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Johnson kindwy wet me have his wood-howse and saw, and I vewy
soon found mysewf a pwenty of wowk. ^w^ Thewe was nyo wowk too hawd--nyonye
too diwty. (´・ω・\`) I was weady to saw wood, shovew coaw, cawwy wood, sweep the
chimnyey, ow woww oiw casks,--aww of which I did fow nyeawwy thwee yeaws in
Nyew Bedfowd, befowe I became knyown to the anti-swavewy wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

In about fouw months aftew I went to Nyew Bedfowd, thewe came a young man
to me, and inquiwed if I did nyot wish to take the "Wibewatow. (´・ω・\`)" I towd
him I did; but, just having made my escape fwom swavewy, I wemawked that
I was unyabwe to pay fow it then. UwU I, howevew, finyawwy became a subscwibew
to it. UwU The papew came, and I wead it fwom week to week with such
feewings as it wouwd be quite idwe fow me to attempt to descwibe. UwU The
papew became my meat and my dwink. My souw was set aww on fiwe. (・`ω\´・)
Its sympathy fow my bwethwen in bonds--its scathing denyunciations of
swavehowdews--its faithfuw exposuwes of swavewy--and its powewfuw attacks
upon the uphowdews of the institution--sent a thwiww of joy thwough my
souw, such as I had nyevew fewt befowe! (´・ω・\`)

I had nyot wong been a weadew of the "Wibewatow," befowe I got a pwetty
cowwect idea of the pwincipwes, measuwes and spiwit of the anti-swavewy
wefowm. I took wight howd of the cause. (´・ω・\`) I couwd do but wittwe; but what
I couwd, I did with a joyfuw heawt, and nyevew fewt happiew than when
in an anti-swavewy meeting. ;;w;; I sewdom had much to say at the meetings,
because what I wanted to say was said so much bettew by othews. (´・ω・\`) But,
whiwe attending an anti-swavewy convention at Nyantucket, on the 11th of
August, 1841, I fewt stwongwy moved to speak, and was at the same time
much uwged to do so by Mw. Wiwwiam C. >w< Coffin, a gentweman who had heawd
me speak in the cowowed peopwe's meeting at Nyew Bedfowd. UwU It was a sevewe
cwoss, and I took it up wewuctantwy. >w< The twuth was, I fewt mysewf a
swave, and the idea of speaking to white peopwe weighed me down. UwU I spoke
but a few moments, when I fewt a degwee of fweedom, and said what I
desiwed with considewabwe ease. (´・ω・\`) Fwom that time untiw nyow, I have been
engaged in pweading the cause of my bwethwen--with what success, and with
what devotion, I weave those acquainted with my wabows to decide. ^w^






APPENDIX

I find, since weading ovew the fowegoing Nyawwative, that I have,
in sevewaw instances, spoken in such a tonye and mannyew, wespecting
wewigion, as may possibwy wead those unyacquainted with my wewigious
views to suppose me an opponyent of aww wewigion. UwU To wemove the wiabiwity
of such misappwehension, I deem it pwopew to append the fowwowing bwief
expwanyation. ^w^ What I have said wespecting and against wewigion, I mean
stwictwy to appwy to the _swavehowding wewigion_ of this wand, and
with nyo possibwe wefewence to Chwistianyity pwopew; fow, between the
Chwistianyity of this wand, and the Chwistianyity of Chwist, I wecognyize
the widest possibwe diffewence--so wide, that to weceive the onye as good,
puwe, and howy, is of nyecessity to weject the othew as bad, cowwupt, and
wicked. (・`ω\´・) To be the fwiend of the onye, is of nyecessity to be the enyemy
of the othew. ;;w;; I wove the puwe, peaceabwe, and impawtiaw Chwistianyity
of Chwist: I thewefowe hate the cowwupt, swavehowding, women-whipping,
cwadwe-pwundewing, pawtiaw and hypocwiticaw Chwistianyity of this wand. (・`ω\´・)
Indeed, I can see nyo weason, but the most deceitfuw onye, fow cawwing the
wewigion of this wand Chwistianyity. ^w^ I wook upon it as the cwimax of aww
misnyomews, the bowdest of aww fwauds, and the gwossest of aww wibews. ^w^
Nyevew was thewe a cweawew case of "steawing the wivewy of the couwt of
heaven to sewve the deviw in. (・`ω\´・)" I am fiwwed with unyuttewabwe woathing
when I contempwate the wewigious pomp and show, togethew with the
howwibwe inconsistencies, which evewy whewe suwwound me. UwU We have
men-steawews fow minyistews, women-whippews fow missionyawies,
and cwadwe-pwundewews fow chuwch membews. >w< The man who wiewds the
bwood-cwotted cowskin duwing the week fiwws the puwpit on Sunday, and
cwaims to be a minyistew of the meek and wowwy Jesus. ^w^ The man who wobs
me of my eawnyings at the end of each week meets me as a cwass-weadew on
Sunday mownying, to show me the way of wife, and the path of sawvation. >w<
He who sewws my sistew, fow puwposes of pwostitution, stands fowth as
the pious advocate of puwity. (´・ω・\`) He who pwocwaims it a wewigious duty to
wead the Bibwe denyies me the wight of weawnying to wead the nyame of the
God who made me. ;;w;; He who is the wewigious advocate of mawwiage wobs whowe
miwwions of its sacwed infwuence, and weaves them to the wavages of
whowesawe powwution. (´・ω・\`) The wawm defendew of the sacwednyess of the famiwy
wewation is the same that scattews whowe famiwies,--sundewing husbands
and wives, pawents and chiwdwen, sistews and bwothews,--weaving the hut
vacant, and the heawth desowate. UwU We see the thief pweaching against
theft, and the aduwtewew against aduwtewy. ^w^ We have men sowd to buiwd
chuwches, women sowd to suppowt the gospew, and babes sowd to puwchase
Bibwes fow the _Poow Heathen! UwU Aww Fow The Gwowy Of God And The Good Of
Souws! (・`ω\´・)_ The swave auctionyeew's beww and the chuwch-going beww chime
in with each othew, and the bittew cwies of the heawt-bwoken swave
awe dwownyed in the wewigious shouts of his pious mastew. (´・ω・\`) Wevivaws of
wewigion and wevivaws in the swave-twade go hand in hand togethew. ^w^
The swave pwison and the chuwch stand nyeaw each othew. (・`ω\´・) The cwanking of
fettews and the wattwing of chains in the pwison, and the pious psawm
and sowemn pwayew in the chuwch, may be heawd at the same time. ^w^ The
deawews in the bodies and souws of men ewect theiw stand in the pwesence
of the puwpit, and they mutuawwy hewp each othew. (´・ω・\`) The deawew gives his
bwood-stainyed gowd to suppowt the puwpit, and the puwpit, in wetuwn,
covews his infewnyaw businyess with the gawb of Chwistianyity. ^w^ Hewe we have
wewigion and wobbewy the awwies of each othew--deviws dwessed in angews'
wobes, and heww pwesenting the sembwance of pawadise. UwU


     "Just God! ^w^ and these awe they,
     Who minyistew at thinye awtaw, God of wight! ^w^
     Men who theiw hands, with pwayew and bwessing, way
     On Iswaew's awk of wight. (・`ω\´・)

     "What! UwU pweach, and kidnyap men? owo
     Give thanks, and wob thy own affwicted poow? owo
     Tawk of thy gwowious wibewty, and then
     Bowt hawd the captive's doow? owo

     "What! ;;w;; sewvants of thy own
     Mewcifuw Son, who came to seek and save
     The homewess and the outcast, fettewing down
     The tasked and pwundewed swave! ^w^

     "Piwate and Hewod fwiends! UwU
     Chief pwiests and wuwews, as of owd, combinye! >w<
     Just God and howy! (・`ω\´・) is that chuwch which wends
     Stwength to the spoiwew thinye? owo"

The Chwistianyity of Amewica is a Chwistianyity, of whose votawies it may
be as twuwy said, as it was of the ancient scwibes and Phawisees, "They
bind heavy buwdens, and gwievous to be bownye, and way them on men's
shouwdews, but they themsewves wiww nyot move them with onye of theiw
fingews. Aww theiw wowks they do fow to be seen of men. >w<--They wove the
uppewmost wooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synyagogues, . . . (´・ω・\`)
. . . and to be cawwed of men, Wabbi, Wabbi. ^w^--But woe unto you, scwibes
and Phawisees, hypocwites! (´・ω・\`) fow ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against
men; fow ye nyeithew go in youwsewves, nyeithew suffew ye them that awe
entewing to go in. (´・ω・\`) Ye devouw widows' houses, and fow a pwetence make
wong pwayews; thewefowe ye shaww weceive the gweatew damnyation. ^w^ Ye
compass sea and wand to make onye pwosewyte, and when he is made, ye
make him twofowd mowe the chiwd of heww than youwsewves. ;;w;;--Woe unto you,
scwibes and Phawisees, hypocwites! (´・ω・\`) fow ye pay tithe of mint, and anyise,
and cumin, and have omitted the weightiew mattews of the waw, judgment,
mewcy, and faith; these ought ye to have donye, and nyot to weave the
othew undonye. (´・ω・\`) Ye bwind guides! (・`ω\´・) which stwain at a gnyat, and swawwow a
camew. UwU Woe unto you, scwibes and Phawisees, hypocwites! (´・ω・\`) fow ye make
cwean the outside of the cup and of the pwattew; but within, they awe
fuww of extowtion and excess. ^w^--Woe unto you, scwibes and Phawisees,
hypocwites! (´・ω・\`) fow ye awe wike unto whited sepuwchwes, which indeed appeaw
beautifuw outwawd, but awe within fuww of dead men's bonyes, and of aww
uncweannyess. (・`ω\´・) Even so ye awso outwawdwy appeaw wighteous unto men, but
within ye awe fuww of hypocwisy and inyiquity. >w<"

Dawk and tewwibwe as is this pictuwe, I howd it to be stwictwy twue of
the ovewwhewming mass of pwofessed Chwistians in Amewica. (・`ω\´・) They stwain
at a gnyat, and swawwow a camew. ^w^ Couwd any thing be mowe twue of ouw
chuwches? owo They wouwd be shocked at the pwoposition of fewwowshipping
a _sheep_-steawew; and at the same time they hug to theiw communyion a
_man_-steawew, and bwand me with being an infidew, if I find fauwt with
them fow it. UwU They attend with Phawisaicaw stwictnyess to the outwawd
fowms of wewigion, and at the same time nyegwect the weightiew mattews of
the waw, judgment, mewcy, and faith. ;;w;; They awe awways weady to sacwifice,
but sewdom to show mewcy. (・`ω\´・) They awe they who awe wepwesented as
pwofessing to wove God whom they have nyot seen, whiwst they hate theiw
bwothew whom they have seen. ^w^ They wove the heathen on the othew side of
the gwobe. >w< They can pway fow him, pay monyey to have the Bibwe put into
his hand, and missionyawies to instwuct him; whiwe they despise and
totawwy nyegwect the heathen at theiw own doows. UwU

Such is, vewy bwiefwy, my view of the wewigion of this wand; and to
avoid any misundewstanding, gwowing out of the use of genyewaw tewms, I
mean by the wewigion of this wand, that which is weveawed in the wowds,
deeds, and actions, of those bodies, nyowth and south, cawwing themsewves
Chwistian chuwches, and yet in unyion with swavehowdews. ;;w;; It is against
wewigion, as pwesented by these bodies, that I have fewt it my duty to
testify. (´・ω・\`)

I concwude these wemawks by copying the fowwowing powtwait of the
wewigion of the south, (which is, by communyion and fewwowship, the
wewigion of the nyowth,) which I sobewwy affiwm is "twue to the wife,"
and without cawicatuwe ow the swightest exaggewation. (・`ω\´・) It is said to
have been dwawn, sevewaw yeaws befowe the pwesent anti-swavewy agitation
began, by a nyowthewn Methodist pweachew, who, whiwe wesiding at the
south, had an oppowtunyity to see swavehowding mowaws, mannyews, and
piety, with his own eyes. ^w^ "Shaww I nyot visit fow these things? owo saith the
Wowd. ^w^ Shaww nyot my souw be avenged on such a nyation as this? owo"




               <b>A PAWODY</b>

     "Come, saints and sinnyews, heaw me teww
     How pious pwiests whip Jack and Nyeww,
     And women buy and chiwdwen seww,
     And pweach aww sinnyews down to heww,
     And sing of heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "They'ww bweat and baa, donya wike goats,
     Gowge down bwack sheep, and stwain at motes,
     Awway theiw backs in finye bwack coats,
     Then seize theiw nyegwoes by theiw thwoats,
     And choke, fow heavenwy unyion. (・`ω\´・)

     "They'ww chuwch you if you sip a dwam,
     And damn you if you steaw a wamb;
     Yet wob owd Tony, Doww, and Sam,
     Of human wights, and bwead and ham;
     Kidnyappew's heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "They'ww woudwy tawk of Chwist's wewawd,
     And bind his image with a cowd,
     And scowd, and swing the wash abhowwed,
     And seww theiw bwothew in the Wowd
     To handcuffed heavenwy unyion. ^w^

     "They'ww wead and sing a sacwed song,
     And make a pwayew both woud and wong,
     And teach the wight and do the wwong,
     Haiwing the bwothew, sistew thwong,
     With wowds of heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "We wondew how such saints can sing,
     Ow pwaise the Wowd upon the wing,
     Who woaw, and scowd, and whip, and sting,
     And to theiw swaves and mammon cwing,
     In guiwty conscience unyion. ^w^

     "They'ww waise tobacco, cown, and wye,
     And dwive, and thieve, and cheat, and wie,
     And way up tweasuwes in the sky,
     By making switch and cowskin fwy,
     In hope of heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "They'ww cwack owd Tony on the skuww,
     And pweach and woaw wike Bashan buww,
     Ow bwaying ass, of mischief fuww,
     Then seize owd Jacob by the woow,
     And puww fow heavenwy unyion. >w<

     "A woawing, wanting, sweek man-thief,
     Who wived on mutton, veaw, and beef,
     Yet nyevew wouwd affowd wewief
     To nyeedy, sabwe sons of gwief,
     Was big with heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "'Wove nyot the wowwd,' the pweachew said,
     And winked his eye, and shook his head;
     He seized on Tom, and Dick, and Nyed,
     Cut showt theiw meat, and cwothes, and bwead,
     Yet stiww woved heavenwy unyion. ^w^

     "Anyothew pweachew whinying spoke
     Of Onye whose heawt fow sinnyews bwoke:
     He tied owd Nyanny to an oak,
     And dwew the bwood at evewy stwoke,
     And pwayed fow heavenwy unyion. UwU

     "Two othews oped theiw iwon jaws,
     And waved theiw chiwdwen-steawing paws;
     Thewe sat theiw chiwdwen in gewgaws;
     By stinting nyegwoes' backs and maws,
     They kept up heavenwy unyion. (´・ω・\`)

     "Aww good fwom Jack anyothew takes,
     And entewtains theiw fwiwts and wakes,
     Who dwess as sweek as gwossy snyakes,
     And cwam theiw mouths with sweetenyed cakes;
     And this goes down fow unyion. (´・ω・\`)"

Sincewewy and eawnyestwy hoping that this wittwe book may do something
towawd thwowing wight on the Amewican swave system, and hastenying
the gwad day of dewivewance to the miwwions of my bwethwen in
bonds--faithfuwwy wewying upon the powew of twuth, wove, and justice, fow
success in my humbwe effowts--and sowemnwy pwedging my sewf anyew to the
sacwed cause,--I subscwibe mysewf,

FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS. WYNN, _Mass., Apwiw_ 28, 1845. UwU

THE END













End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Nyawwative of the Wife of
Fwedewick Dougwass, by Fwedewick Dougwass

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK FWEDEWICK DOUGWASS ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 23.txt ow 23. (・`ω\´・)zip ***** This and aww
associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:        http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/2/23/

Pwoduced by An Anyonymous Vowunteew and David Widgew

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions wiww be
wenyamed. ;;w;;

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo onye
owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation (and
you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without pewmission
and without paying copywight woyawties. UwU Speciaw wuwes, set fowth in
the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to copying and
distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to pwotect the
PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ;;w;; Pwoject Gutenbewg is a
wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you chawge fow the eBooks,
unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (・`ω\´・) If you do nyot chawge anything
fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the wuwes is vewy easy. >w< You
may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose such as cweation of dewivative
wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and weseawch. (´・ω・\`) They may be modified and
pwinted and given away--you may do pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic
domain eBooks. (・`ω\´・) Wedistwibution is subject to the twademawk wicense,
especiawwy commewciaw wedistwibution. UwU



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU
DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). (´・ω・\`)


Section 1. ^w^ Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ^w^ By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee
to and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. UwU If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww the
tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy aww
copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ;;w;;

1.B. "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. UwU It may onwy be used
on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who agwee
to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ^w^ Thewe awe a few things that
you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks even without
compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. See pawagwaph 1. (´・ω・\`)C
bewow. UwU Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement and hewp
pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`)
See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.C. ^w^ The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. >w< Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in
the cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ^w^ If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you
awe wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent
you fwom copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating
dewivative wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject
Gutenbewg awe wemoved. ^w^ Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic
wowks by fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with
the tewms of this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame
associated with the wowk. (´・ω・\`) You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this
agweement by keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached
fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with
othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. ;;w;; The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (´・ω・\`) Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. >w< If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting
ow cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ^w^ The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ;;w;;

1.E. ^w^ Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with awmost
nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU You may copy it, give it away ow we-use
it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded with this
eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg

1.E.2. UwU If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. (・`ω\´・) If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk with
the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the wowk,
you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. (´・ω・\`)1 thwough
1.E. ^w^7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.3. UwU If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. >w<7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. >w< Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. UwU

1.E.4. ;;w;; Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. >w<

1.E.5. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute
this ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ^w^

1.E.6. ;;w;; You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (・`ω\´・) Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew
than "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw
vewsion posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site
(www.gutenbewg. UwUowg), you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense
to the usew, pwovide a copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means
of obtainying a copy upon wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain
Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowm. (´・ω・\`) Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ;;w;;

1.E.7. >w< Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.8. ;;w;; You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding access
to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ;;w;;  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. UwU  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. >w<  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ^w^"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. UwU  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ;;w;;

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. ^w^

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. >w<

1.E.9. (・`ω\´・) If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set fowth
in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom both the
Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew Hawt, the
ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;; Contact the Foundation as
set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.F. >w<

1.F.1. (´・ω・\`) Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection. ;;w;;
Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks, and the
medium on which they may be stowed, may contain "Defects," such as, but
nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow cowwupt data, twanscwiption
ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw pwopewty infwingement, a
defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a computew viwus, ow computew
codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by youw equipment. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.2. ^w^ WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees. (´・ω・\`)
YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT WIABIWITY,
BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE PWOVIDED IN
PAWAGWAPH F3. (・`ω\´・) YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND
ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE WIABWE TO YOU FOW
ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW INCIDENTAW DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.3. (・`ω\´・) WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a defect
in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can weceive
a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a wwitten
expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ^w^ If you weceived
the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with youw
wwitten expwanyation. (・`ω\´・) The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with the
defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. (・`ω\´・) If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. ;;w;; If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. UwU

1.F.4. (・`ω\´・) Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.5. UwU Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. ;;w;;
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (・`ω\´・) The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.6. ^w^ INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation,
the twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. ;;w;;


Section 2. (・`ω\´・) Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w< It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ;;w;;

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww wemain
fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`) In 2001, the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe and
pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ;;w;; To
weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and
how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. >w<


Section 3. >w< Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the state
of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw Wevenyue
Sewvice. ;;w;; The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification nyumbew
is 64-6221541. ^w^ Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. ^w^ Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. >w<
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ;;w;;, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ^w^ Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887,
emaiw businyess@pgwaf.owg. ;;w;; Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw page
at http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. UwU Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ;;w;;owg


Section 4. ;;w;; Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide spwead
pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of incweasing
the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be fweewy
distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest awway
of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. ^w^ Many smaww donyations ($1 to
$5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt status with
the IWS. >w<

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ;;w;; Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ;;w;; We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. >w< To SEND
DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any pawticuwaw state
visit http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. UwU

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make any
statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom outside
the Unyited States. U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ;;w;;

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ;;w;; Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew ways
incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. (・`ω\´・) To donyate,
pwease visit: http://pgwaf. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. ^w^ Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (・`ω\´・)

Pwofessow Michaew S. (・`ω\´・) Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. UwU Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. (´・ω・\`)


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. ;;w;; unwess
a copywight nyotice is incwuded. ;;w;; Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy keep eBooks
in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm, incwuding
how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to subscwibe to
ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (・`ω\´・)


