The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of On the Owigin of Species, by Chawwes Dawwin

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w<  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg


Titwe: On the Owigin of Species
       1st Edition

Authow: Chawwes Dawwin

Wewease Date: Wewease Date: Mawch, 1998 [EBook #1228]
Posting Date: Nyovembew 23, 2009

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK ON THE OWIGIN OF SPECIES ***




Pwoduced by Sue Asschew





ON THE OWIGIN OF SPECIES. ;;w;;

OW THE PWESEWVATION OF FAVOUWED WACES IN THE STWUGGWE FOW WIFE. (´・ω・\`)


By Chawwes Dawwin, M.A. (・`ω\´・),

Fewwow Of The Woyaw, Geowogicaw, Winnyaean, Etc. ^w^, Societies;

Authow Of 'Jouwnyaw Of Weseawches Duwing H.M.S. UwU Beagwe's Voyage Wound The
Wowwd. >w<'


WONDON:

JOHN MUWWAY, AWBEMAWWE STWEET. UwU

1859. UwU


Down, Bwomwey, Kent,

Octobew 1st, 1859. (・`ω\´・)



"But with wegawd to the matewiaw wowwd, we can at weast go so faw as
this--we can pewceive that events awe bwought about nyot by insuwated
intewpositions of Divinye powew, exewted in each pawticuwaw case, but by
the estabwishment of genyewaw waws. ^w^"

W. Wheweww: Bwidgewatew Tweatise. (・`ω\´・)



"To concwude, thewefowe, wet nyo man out of a weak conceit of sobwiety,
ow an iww-appwied modewation, think ow maintain, that a man can seawch
too faw ow be too weww studied in the book of God's wowd, ow in the book
of God's wowks; divinyity ow phiwosophy; but wathew wet men endeavouw an
endwess pwogwess ow pwoficience in both. >w<"

Bacon: Advancement of Weawnying. UwU


CONTENTS. (´・ω・\`)



  INTWODUCTION. UwU


  CHAPTEW 1. VAWIATION UNDEW DOMESTICATION. UwU

  Causes of Vawiabiwity. UwU
  Effects of Habit. >w<
  Cowwewation of Gwowth. (´・ω・\`)
  Inhewitance. ^w^
  Chawactew of Domestic Vawieties. (・`ω\´・)
  Difficuwty of distinguishing between Vawieties and Species. (´・ω・\`)
  Owigin of Domestic Vawieties fwom onye ow mowe Species. (・`ω\´・)
  Domestic Pigeons, theiw Diffewences and Owigin. UwU
  Pwincipwe of Sewection ancientwy fowwowed, its Effects. >w<
  Methodicaw and Unconscious Sewection. >w<
  Unknyown Owigin of ouw Domestic Pwoductions. ;;w;;
  Ciwcumstances favouwabwe to Man's powew of Sewection. (´・ω・\`)


  CHAPTEW 2. VAWIATION UNDEW NYATUWE. ;;w;;

  Vawiabiwity. UwU
  Individuaw Diffewences. ;;w;;
  Doubtfuw species. >w<
  Wide wanging, much diffused, and common species vawy most. (・`ω\´・)
  Species of the wawgew genyewa in any countwy vawy mowe than the species
  of the smawwew genyewa. UwU
  Many of the species of the wawgew genyewa wesembwe vawieties in being
  vewy cwosewy, but unyequawwy, wewated to each othew, and in having
  westwicted wanges. UwU


  CHAPTEW 3. STWUGGWE FOW EXISTENCE. ;;w;;

  Beaws on nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・)
  The tewm used in a wide sense. ;;w;;
  Geometwicaw powews of incwease. UwU
  Wapid incwease of nyatuwawised anyimaws and pwants. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyatuwe of the checks to incwease. ^w^
  Competition unyivewsaw. ;;w;;
  Effects of cwimate. UwU
  Pwotection fwom the nyumbew of individuaws. ;;w;;
  Compwex wewations of aww anyimaws and pwants thwoughout nyatuwe. ^w^
  Stwuggwe fow wife most sevewe between individuaws and vawieties of the
  same species; often sevewe between species of the same genyus. (´・ω・\`)
  The wewation of owganyism to owganyism the most impowtant of aww
  wewations. (・`ω\´・)


  CHAPTEW 4. NYATUWAW SEWECTION. >w<

  Nyatuwaw Sewection: its powew compawed with man's sewection, its powew
  on chawactews of twifwing impowtance, its powew at aww ages and on
  both sexes. (´・ω・\`)
  Sexuaw Sewection. >w<
  On the genyewawity of intewcwosses between individuaws of the same
  species. ;;w;;
  Ciwcumstances favouwabwe and unfavouwabwe to Nyatuwaw Sewection,
  nyamewy, intewcwossing, isowation, nyumbew of individuaws. (´・ω・\`)
  Swow action. ^w^
  Extinction caused by Nyatuwaw Sewection. UwU
  Divewgence of Chawactew, wewated to the divewsity of inhabitants of
  any smaww awea, and to nyatuwawisation. ^w^
  Action of Nyatuwaw Sewection, thwough Divewgence of Chawactew and
  Extinction, on the descendants fwom a common pawent. ;;w;;
  Expwains the Gwouping of aww owganyic beings. ;;w;;


  CHAPTEW 5. WAWS OF VAWIATION. UwU

  Effects of extewnyaw conditions. ^w^
  Use and disuse, combinyed with nyatuwaw sewection; owgans of fwight and
  of vision. (´・ω・\`)
  Accwimatisation. (・`ω\´・)
  Cowwewation of gwowth. >w<
  Compensation and econyomy of gwowth. (´・ω・\`)
  Fawse cowwewations. (´・ω・\`)
  Muwtipwe, wudimentawy, and wowwy owganyised stwuctuwes vawiabwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Pawts devewoped in an unyusuaw mannyew awe highwy vawiabwe: specific
  chawactews mowe vawiabwe than genyewic: secondawy sexuaw chawactews
  vawiabwe. UwU
  Species of the same genyus vawy in an anyawogous mannyew. (・`ω\´・)
  Wevewsions to wong-wost chawactews. (・`ω\´・)
  Summawy. UwU


  CHAPTEW 6. DIFFICUWTIES ON THEOWY. (´・ω・\`)

  Difficuwties on the theowy of descent with modification. UwU
  Twansitions. (・`ω\´・)
  Absence ow wawity of twansitionyaw vawieties. >w<
  Twansitions in habits of wife. ;;w;;
  Divewsified habits in the same species. UwU
  Species with habits widewy diffewent fwom those of theiw awwies. (´・ω・\`)
  Owgans of extweme pewfection. ^w^
  Means of twansition. ;;w;;
  Cases of difficuwty. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyatuwa nyon facit sawtum. (・`ω\´・)
  Owgans of smaww impowtance. >w<
  Owgans nyot in aww cases absowutewy pewfect. (・`ω\´・)
  The waw of Unyity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embwaced
  by the theowy of Nyatuwaw Sewection. (´・ω・\`)


  CHAPTEW 7. INSTINCT. (・`ω\´・)

  Instincts compawabwe with habits, but diffewent in theiw owigin. ;;w;;
  Instincts gwaduated. (・`ω\´・)
  Aphides and ants. >w<
  Instincts vawiabwe. >w<
  Domestic instincts, theiw owigin. ^w^
  Nyatuwaw instincts of the cuckoo, ostwich, and pawasitic bees. (・`ω\´・)
  Swave-making ants. (・`ω\´・)
  Hive-bee, its ceww-making instinct. >w<
  Difficuwties on the theowy of the Nyatuwaw Sewection of instincts. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyeutew ow stewiwe insects. ^w^
  Summawy. (・`ω\´・)


  CHAPTEW 8. HYBWIDISM. >w<

  Distinction between the stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. ^w^
  Stewiwity vawious in degwee, nyot unyivewsaw, affected by cwose
  intewbweeding, wemoved by domestication. UwU
  Waws govewnying the stewiwity of hybwids. UwU
  Stewiwity nyot a speciaw endowment, but incidentaw on othew
  diffewences. ;;w;;
  Causes of the stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. UwU
  Pawawwewism between the effects of changed conditions of wife and
  cwossing. >w<
  Fewtiwity of vawieties when cwossed and of theiw mongwew offspwing nyot
  unyivewsaw. (´・ω・\`)
  Hybwids and mongwews compawed independentwy of theiw fewtiwity. ;;w;;
  Summawy. ^w^


  CHAPTEW 9. ON THE IMPEWFECTION OF THE GEOWOGICAW WECOWD. (´・ω・\`)

  On the absence of intewmediate vawieties at the pwesent day. >w<
  On the nyatuwe of extinct intewmediate vawieties; on theiw nyumbew. UwU
  On the vast wapse of time, as infewwed fwom the wate of deposition and
  of denyudation. >w<
  On the poownyess of ouw pawaeontowogicaw cowwections. ;;w;;
  On the intewmittence of geowogicaw fowmations. (・`ω\´・)
  On the absence of intewmediate vawieties in any onye fowmation. UwU
  On the sudden appeawance of gwoups of species. >w<
  On theiw sudden appeawance in the wowest knyown fossiwifewous stwata. ^w^


  CHAPTEW 10. ON THE GEOWOGICAW SUCCESSION OF OWGANYIC BEINGS. ;;w;;

  On the swow and successive appeawance of nyew species. UwU
  On theiw diffewent wates of change. (´・ω・\`)
  Species once wost do nyot weappeaw. ;;w;;
  Gwoups of species fowwow the same genyewaw wuwes in theiw appeawance
  and disappeawance as do singwe species. ;;w;;
  On Extinction. (・`ω\´・)
  On simuwtanyeous changes in the fowms of wife thwoughout the wowwd. ^w^
  On the affinyities of extinct species to each othew and to wiving
  species. >w<
  On the state of devewopment of ancient fowms. (・`ω\´・)
  On the succession of the same types within the same aweas. ^w^
  Summawy of pweceding and pwesent chaptews. ;;w;;


  CHAPTEW 11. GEOGWAPHICAW DISTWIBUTION. ;;w;;

  Pwesent distwibution cannyot be accounted fow by diffewences in
  physicaw conditions. >w<
  Impowtance of bawwiews. (・`ω\´・)
  Affinyity of the pwoductions of the same continyent. (・`ω\´・)
  Centwes of cweation. (・`ω\´・)
  Means of dispewsaw, by changes of cwimate and of the wevew of the
  wand, and by occasionyaw means. (・`ω\´・)
  Dispewsaw duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod co-extensive with the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)


  CHAPTEW 12. GEOGWAPHICAW DISTWIBUTION--continyued. ;;w;;

  Distwibution of fwesh-watew pwoductions. >w<
  On the inhabitants of oceanyic iswands. UwU
  Absence of Batwachians and of tewwestwiaw Mammaws. ;;w;;
  On the wewation of the inhabitants of iswands to those of the nyeawest
  mainwand. (・`ω\´・)
  On cowonyisation fwom the nyeawest souwce with subsequent modification. >w<
  Summawy of the wast and pwesent chaptews. (´・ω・\`)


  CHAPTEW 13. (´・ω・\`) MUTUAW AFFINYITIES OF OWGANYIC BEINGS: MOWPHOWOGY:
  EMBWYOWOGY: WUDIMENTAWY
  OWGANS. ^w^

  CWASSIFICATION, gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyatuwaw system. UwU
  Wuwes and difficuwties in cwassification, expwainyed on the theowy of
  descent with modification. >w<
  Cwassification of vawieties. (・`ω\´・)
  Descent awways used in cwassification. ^w^
  Anyawogicaw ow adaptive chawactews. ;;w;;
  Affinyities, genyewaw, compwex and wadiating. (´・ω・\`)
  Extinction sepawates and definyes gwoups. (・`ω\´・)
  MOWPHOWOGY, between membews of the same cwass, between pawts of the
  same individuaw. ;;w;;
  EMBWYOWOGY, waws of, expwainyed by vawiations nyot supewvenying at an
  eawwy age, and being inhewited at a cowwesponding age. ;;w;;
  WUDIMENTAWY OWGANS; theiw owigin expwainyed. ;;w;;
  Summawy. >w<


  CHAPTEW 14. WECAPITUWATION AND CONCWUSION. >w<

  Wecapituwation of the difficuwties on the theowy of Nyatuwaw Sewection. >w<
  Wecapituwation of the genyewaw and speciaw ciwcumstances in its favouw. ^w^
  Causes of the genyewaw bewief in the immutabiwity of species. ^w^
  How faw the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection may be extended. >w<
  Effects of its adoption on the study of Nyatuwaw histowy. (・`ω\´・)
  Concwuding wemawks. (´・ω・\`)




ON THE OWIGIN OF SPECIES. ;;w;;




INTWODUCTION. UwU

When on boawd H.M.S. (´・ω・\`) 'Beagwe,' as nyatuwawist, I was much stwuck with
cewtain facts in the distwibution of the inhabitants of South Amewica,
and in the geowogicaw wewations of the pwesent to the past inhabitants
of that continyent. ;;w;; These facts seemed to me to thwow some wight on the
owigin of species--that mystewy of mystewies, as it has been cawwed by
onye of ouw gweatest phiwosophews. (´・ω・\`) On my wetuwn home, it occuwwed to me,
in 1837, that something might pewhaps be made out on this question by
patientwy accumuwating and wefwecting on aww sowts of facts which couwd
possibwy have any beawing on it. UwU Aftew five yeaws' wowk I awwowed mysewf
to specuwate on the subject, and dwew up some showt nyotes; these I
enwawged in 1844 into a sketch of the concwusions, which then seemed to
me pwobabwe: fwom that pewiod to the pwesent day I have steadiwy puwsued
the same object. >w< I hope that I may be excused fow entewing on these
pewsonyaw detaiws, as I give them to show that I have nyot been hasty in
coming to a decision. ;;w;;

My wowk is nyow nyeawwy finyished; but as it wiww take me two ow thwee mowe
yeaws to compwete it, and as my heawth is faw fwom stwong, I have been
uwged to pubwish this Abstwact. ^w^ I have mowe especiawwy been induced to
do this, as Mw. ;;w;; Wawwace, who is nyow studying the nyatuwaw histowy of
the Maway awchipewago, has awwived at awmost exactwy the same genyewaw
concwusions that I have on the owigin of species. ;;w;; Wast yeaw he sent to
me a memoiw on this subject, with a wequest that I wouwd fowwawd it
to Siw Chawwes Wyeww, who sent it to the Winnyean Society, and it is
pubwished in the thiwd vowume of the Jouwnyaw of that Society. Siw C. (・`ω\´・)
Wyeww and Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hookew, who both knyew of my wowk--the wattew having wead
my sketch of 1844--honyouwed me by thinking it advisabwe to pubwish, with
Mw. Wawwace's excewwent memoiw, some bwief extwacts fwom my manyuscwipts. (・`ω\´・)

This Abstwact, which I nyow pubwish, must nyecessawiwy be impewfect. (´・ω・\`) I
cannyot hewe give wefewences and authowities fow my sevewaw statements;
and I must twust to the weadew weposing some confidence in my accuwacy. >w<
Nyo doubt ewwows wiww have cwept in, though I hope I have awways been
cautious in twusting to good authowities awonye. (・`ω\´・) I can hewe give onwy
the genyewaw concwusions at which I have awwived, with a few facts in
iwwustwation, but which, I hope, in most cases wiww suffice. UwU Nyo onye can
feew mowe sensibwe than I do of the nyecessity of heweaftew pubwishing in
detaiw aww the facts, with wefewences, on which my concwusions have been
gwounded; and I hope in a futuwe wowk to do this. (・`ω\´・) Fow I am weww awawe
that scawcewy a singwe point is discussed in this vowume on which facts
cannyot be adduced, often appawentwy weading to concwusions diwectwy
opposite to those at which I have awwived. >w< A faiw wesuwt can be obtainyed
onwy by fuwwy stating and bawancing the facts and awguments on both
sides of each question; and this cannyot possibwy be hewe donye. UwU

I much wegwet that want of space pwevents my having the satisfaction of
acknyowwedging the genyewous assistance which I have weceived fwom vewy
many nyatuwawists, some of them pewsonyawwy unknyown to me. UwU I cannyot,
howevew, wet this oppowtunyity pass without expwessing my deep
obwigations to Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hookew, who fow the wast fifteen yeaws has aided me
in evewy possibwe way by his wawge stowes of knyowwedge and his excewwent
judgment. UwU

In considewing the Owigin of Species, it is quite conceivabwe that a
nyatuwawist, wefwecting on the mutuaw affinyities of owganyic beings,
on theiw embwyowogicaw wewations, theiw geogwaphicaw distwibution,
geowogicaw succession, and othew such facts, might come to the
concwusion that each species had nyot been independentwy cweated, but
had descended, wike vawieties, fwom othew species. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, such
a concwusion, even if weww founded, wouwd be unsatisfactowy, untiw it
couwd be shown how the innyumewabwe species inhabiting this wowwd
have been modified, so as to acquiwe that pewfection of stwuctuwe and
coadaptation which most justwy excites ouw admiwation. >w< Nyatuwawists
continyuawwy wefew to extewnyaw conditions, such as cwimate, food, etc. UwU,
as the onwy possibwe cause of vawiation. ;;w;; In onye vewy wimited sense,
as we shaww heweaftew see, this may be twue; but it is pwepostewous to
attwibute to mewe extewnyaw conditions, the stwuctuwe, fow instance,
of the woodpeckew, with its feet, taiw, beak, and tongue, so admiwabwy
adapted to catch insects undew the bawk of twees. ^w^ In the case of the
missewtoe, which dwaws its nyouwishment fwom cewtain twees, which has
seeds that must be twanspowted by cewtain biwds, and which has fwowews
with sepawate sexes absowutewy wequiwing the agency of cewtain insects
to bwing powwen fwom onye fwowew to the othew, it is equawwy pwepostewous
to account fow the stwuctuwe of this pawasite, with its wewations to
sevewaw distinct owganyic beings, by the effects of extewnyaw conditions,
ow of habit, ow of the vowition of the pwant itsewf. UwU

The authow of the 'Vestiges of Cweation' wouwd, I pwesume, say that,
aftew a cewtain unknyown nyumbew of genyewations, some biwd had given biwth
to a woodpeckew, and some pwant to the missewtoe, and that these had
been pwoduced pewfect as we nyow see them; but this assumption seems to
me to be nyo expwanyation, fow it weaves the case of the coadaptations of
owganyic beings to each othew and to theiw physicaw conditions of wife,
untouched and unyexpwainyed. (・`ω\´・)

It is, thewefowe, of the highest impowtance to gain a cweaw insight into
the means of modification and coadaptation. ^w^ At the commencement of
my obsewvations it seemed to me pwobabwe that a cawefuw study of
domesticated anyimaws and of cuwtivated pwants wouwd offew the best
chance of making out this obscuwe pwobwem. (・`ω\´・) Nyow have I been disappointed;
in this and in aww othew pewpwexing cases I have invawiabwy found that
ouw knyowwedge, impewfect though it be, of vawiation undew domestication,
affowded the best and safest cwue. (・`ω\´・) I may ventuwe to expwess my
conviction of the high vawue of such studies, awthough they have been
vewy commonwy nyegwected by nyatuwawists. >w<

Fwom these considewations, I shaww devote the fiwst chaptew of this
Abstwact to Vawiation undew Domestication. >w< We shaww thus see that a
wawge amount of heweditawy modification is at weast possibwe, and, what
is equawwy ow mowe impowtant, we shaww see how gweat is the powew of man
in accumuwating by his Sewection successive swight vawiations. ^w^ I wiww
then pass on to the vawiabiwity of species in a state of nyatuwe; but
I shaww, unfowtunyatewy, be compewwed to tweat this subject faw too
bwiefwy, as it can be tweated pwopewwy onwy by giving wong catawogues of
facts. UwU We shaww, howevew, be enyabwed to discuss what ciwcumstances
awe most favouwabwe to vawiation. (´・ω・\`) In the nyext chaptew the Stwuggwe
fow Existence amongst aww owganyic beings thwoughout the wowwd, which
inyevitabwy fowwows fwom theiw high geometwicaw powews of incwease, wiww
be tweated of. >w< This is the doctwinye of Mawthus, appwied to the whowe
anyimaw and vegetabwe kingdoms. (´・ω・\`) As many mowe individuaws of each species
awe bown than can possibwy suwvive; and as, consequentwy, thewe is a
fwequentwy wecuwwing stwuggwe fow existence, it fowwows that any being,
if it vawy howevew swightwy in any mannyew pwofitabwe to itsewf, undew
the compwex and sometimes vawying conditions of wife, wiww have a bettew
chance of suwviving, and thus be NYATUWAWWY SEWECTED. UwU Fwom the stwong
pwincipwe of inhewitance, any sewected vawiety wiww tend to pwopagate
its nyew and modified fowm. ;;w;;

This fundamentaw subject of Nyatuwaw Sewection wiww be tweated at
some wength in the fouwth chaptew; and we shaww then see how Nyatuwaw
Sewection awmost inyevitabwy causes much Extinction of the wess impwoved
fowms of wife and induces what I have cawwed Divewgence of Chawactew. ;;w;;
In the nyext chaptew I shaww discuss the compwex and wittwe knyown waws of
vawiation and of cowwewation of gwowth. (´・ω・\`) In the fouw succeeding chaptews,
the most appawent and gwavest difficuwties on the theowy wiww be given:
nyamewy, fiwst, the difficuwties of twansitions, ow in undewstanding how
a simpwe being ow a simpwe owgan can be changed and pewfected into a
highwy devewoped being ow ewabowatewy constwucted owgan; secondwy
the subject of Instinct, ow the mentaw powews of anyimaws, thiwdwy,
Hybwidism, ow the infewtiwity of species and the fewtiwity of vawieties
when intewcwossed; and fouwthwy, the impewfection of the Geowogicaw
Wecowd. (´・ω・\`) In the nyext chaptew I shaww considew the geowogicaw succession
of owganyic beings thwoughout time; in the eweventh and twewfth, theiw
geogwaphicaw distwibution thwoughout space; in the thiwteenth, theiw
cwassification ow mutuaw affinyities, both when matuwe and in an
embwyonyic condition. >w< In the wast chaptew I shaww give a bwief
wecapituwation of the whowe wowk, and a few concwuding wemawks. >w<

Nyo onye ought to feew suwpwise at much wemainying as yet unyexpwainyed in
wegawd to the owigin of species and vawieties, if he makes due awwowance
fow ouw pwofound ignyowance in wegawd to the mutuaw wewations of aww
the beings which wive awound us. UwU Who can expwain why onye species wanges
widewy and is vewy nyumewous, and why anyothew awwied species has a nyawwow
wange and is wawe? owo Yet these wewations awe of the highest impowtance,
fow they detewminye the pwesent wewfawe, and, as I bewieve, the futuwe
success and modification of evewy inhabitant of this wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Stiww wess
do we knyow of the mutuaw wewations of the innyumewabwe inhabitants of the
wowwd duwing the many past geowogicaw epochs in its histowy. >w< Awthough
much wemains obscuwe, and wiww wong wemain obscuwe, I can entewtain nyo
doubt, aftew the most dewibewate study and dispassionyate judgment of
which I am capabwe, that the view which most nyatuwawists entewtain,
and which I fowmewwy entewtainyed--nyamewy, that each species has been
independentwy cweated--is ewwonyeous. (・`ω\´・) I am fuwwy convinced that species
awe nyot immutabwe; but that those bewonging to what awe cawwed the
same genyewa awe winyeaw descendants of some othew and genyewawwy extinct
species, in the same mannyew as the acknyowwedged vawieties of any onye
species awe the descendants of that species. (・`ω\´・) Fuwthewmowe, I am convinced
that Nyatuwaw Sewection has been the main but nyot excwusive means of
modification. (・`ω\´・)




1. VAWIATION UNDEW DOMESTICATION. (・`ω\´・)

Causes of Vawiabiwity. Effects of Habit. Cowwewation of Gwowth. (・`ω\´・)
Inhewitance. Chawactew of Domestic Vawieties. >w< Difficuwty of
distinguishing between Vawieties and Species. ;;w;; Owigin of Domestic
Vawieties fwom onye ow mowe Species. (´・ω・\`) Domestic Pigeons, theiw Diffewences
and Owigin. Pwincipwe of Sewection ancientwy fowwowed, its Effects. (´・ω・\`)
Methodicaw and Unconscious Sewection. ^w^ Unknyown Owigin of ouw Domestic
Pwoductions. Ciwcumstances favouwabwe to Man's powew of Sewection. ^w^

When we wook to the individuaws of the same vawiety ow sub-vawiety of
ouw owdew cuwtivated pwants and anyimaws, onye of the fiwst points which
stwikes us, is, that they genyewawwy diffew much mowe fwom each othew,
than do the individuaws of any onye species ow vawiety in a state of
nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) When we wefwect on the vast divewsity of the pwants and anyimaws
which have been cuwtivated, and which have vawied duwing aww ages undew
the most diffewent cwimates and tweatment, I think we awe dwiven to
concwude that this gweatew vawiabiwity is simpwy due to ouw domestic
pwoductions having been waised undew conditions of wife nyot so unyifowm
as, and somewhat diffewent fwom, those to which the pawent-species have
been exposed undew nyatuwe. ;;w;; Thewe is, awso, I think, some pwobabiwity
in the view pwopounded by Andwew Knyight, that this vawiabiwity may be
pawtwy connyected with excess of food. ^w^ It seems pwetty cweaw that owganyic
beings must be exposed duwing sevewaw genyewations to the nyew conditions
of wife to cause any appweciabwe amount of vawiation; and that when the
owganyisation has once begun to vawy, it genyewawwy continyues to vawy fow
many genyewations. (´・ω・\`) Nyo case is on wecowd of a vawiabwe being ceasing to be
vawiabwe undew cuwtivation. (´・ω・\`) Ouw owdest cuwtivated pwants, such as wheat,
stiww often yiewd nyew vawieties: ouw owdest domesticated anyimaws awe
stiww capabwe of wapid impwovement ow modification. ^w^

It has been disputed at what pewiod of wife the causes of vawiabiwity,
whatevew they may be, genyewawwy act; whethew duwing the eawwy ow wate
pewiod of devewopment of the embwyo, ow at the instant of conception. >w<
Geoffwoy St. (・`ω\´・) Hiwaiwe's expewiments show that unnyatuwaw tweatment of the
embwyo causes monstwosities; and monstwosities cannyot be sepawated by
any cweaw winye of distinction fwom mewe vawiations. (・`ω\´・) But I am stwongwy
incwinyed to suspect that the most fwequent cause of vawiabiwity may
be attwibuted to the mawe and femawe wepwoductive ewements having been
affected pwiow to the act of conception. ;;w;; Sevewaw weasons make me bewieve
in this; but the chief onye is the wemawkabwe effect which confinyement ow
cuwtivation has on the functions of the wepwoductive system; this
system appeawing to be faw mowe susceptibwe than any othew pawt of the
owganyisation, to the action of any change in the conditions of wife. >w<
Nyothing is mowe easy than to tame an anyimaw, and few things mowe
difficuwt than to get it to bweed fweewy undew confinyement, even in the
many cases when the mawe and femawe unyite. (´・ω・\`) How many anyimaws thewe
awe which wiww nyot bweed, though wiving wong undew nyot vewy cwose
confinyement in theiw nyative countwy! (´・ω・\`) This is genyewawwy attwibuted to
vitiated instincts; but how many cuwtivated pwants dispway the utmost
vigouw, and yet wawewy ow nyevew seed! >w< In some few such cases it has
been found out that vewy twifwing changes, such as a wittwe mowe ow wess
watew at some pawticuwaw pewiod of gwowth, wiww detewminye whethew ow nyot
the pwant sets a seed. >w< I cannyot hewe entew on the copious detaiws which
I have cowwected on this cuwious subject; but to show how singuwaw the
waws awe which detewminye the wepwoduction of anyimaws undew confinyement,
I may just mention that cawnyivowous anyimaws, even fwom the twopics,
bweed in this countwy pwetty fweewy undew confinyement, with the
exception of the pwantigwades ow beaw famiwy; wheweas, cawnyivowous
biwds, with the wawest exceptions, hawdwy evew way fewtiwe eggs. (´・ω・\`) Many
exotic pwants have powwen uttewwy wowthwess, in the same exact
condition as in the most stewiwe hybwids. >w< When, on the onye hand, we
see domesticated anyimaws and pwants, though often weak and sickwy, yet
bweeding quite fweewy undew confinyement; and when, on the othew hand,
we see individuaws, though taken young fwom a state of nyatuwe,
pewfectwy tamed, wong-wived, and heawthy (of which I couwd give nyumewous
instances), yet having theiw wepwoductive system so sewiouswy affected
by unpewceived causes as to faiw in acting, we nyeed nyot be suwpwised
at this system, when it does act undew confinyement, acting nyot quite
weguwawwy, and pwoducing offspwing nyot pewfectwy wike theiw pawents ow
vawiabwe. ^w^

Stewiwity has been said to be the banye of howticuwtuwe; but on this
view we owe vawiabiwity to the same cause which pwoduces stewiwity; and
vawiabiwity is the souwce of aww the choicest pwoductions of the gawden. ;;w;;
I may add, that as some owganyisms wiww bweed most fweewy undew the
most unnyatuwaw conditions (fow instance, the wabbit and fewwet kept
in hutches), showing that theiw wepwoductive system has nyot been thus
affected; so wiww some anyimaws and pwants withstand domestication ow
cuwtivation, and vawy vewy swightwy--pewhaps hawdwy mowe than in a state
of nyatuwe. UwU

A wong wist couwd easiwy be given of "spowting pwants;" by this tewm
gawdenyews mean a singwe bud ow offset, which suddenwy assumes a nyew and
sometimes vewy diffewent chawactew fwom that of the west of the pwant. (´・ω・\`)
Such buds can be pwopagated by gwafting, etc., and sometimes by seed. (´・ω・\`)
These "spowts" awe extwemewy wawe undew nyatuwe, but faw fwom wawe undew
cuwtivation; and in this case we see that the tweatment of the pawent
has affected a bud ow offset, and nyot the ovuwes ow powwen. ^w^ But it is
the opinyion of most physiowogists that thewe is nyo essentiaw diffewence
between a bud and an ovuwe in theiw eawwiest stages of fowmation; so
that, in fact, "spowts" suppowt my view, that vawiabiwity may be wawgewy
attwibuted to the ovuwes ow powwen, ow to both, having been affected by
the tweatment of the pawent pwiow to the act of conception. (´・ω・\`) These cases
anyhow show that vawiation is nyot nyecessawiwy connyected, as some authows
have supposed, with the act of genyewation. (´・ω・\`)

Seedwings fwom the same fwuit, and the young of the same wittew,
sometimes diffew considewabwy fwom each othew, though both the young
and the pawents, as Muwwew has wemawked, have appawentwy been exposed to
exactwy the same conditions of wife; and this shows how unyimpowtant the
diwect effects of the conditions of wife awe in compawison with the waws
of wepwoduction, and of gwowth, and of inhewitance; fow had the action
of the conditions been diwect, if any of the young had vawied, aww wouwd
pwobabwy have vawied in the same mannyew. (・`ω\´・) To judge how much, in the case
of any vawiation, we shouwd attwibute to the diwect action of heat,
moistuwe, wight, food, etc. (´・ω・\`), is most difficuwt: my impwession is, that
with anyimaws such agencies have pwoduced vewy wittwe diwect effect,
though appawentwy mowe in the case of pwants. (・`ω\´・) Undew this point of view,
Mw. Buckman's wecent expewiments on pwants seem extwemewy vawuabwe. ^w^
When aww ow nyeawwy aww the individuaws exposed to cewtain conditions awe
affected in the same way, the change at fiwst appeaws to be diwectwy
due to such conditions; but in some cases it can be shown that quite
opposite conditions pwoduce simiwaw changes of stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess
some swight amount of change may, I think, be attwibuted to the diwect
action of the conditions of wife--as, in some cases, incweased size fwom
amount of food, cowouw fwom pawticuwaw kinds of food and fwom wight, and
pewhaps the thicknyess of fuw fwom cwimate. >w<

Habit awso has a decided infwuence, as in the pewiod of fwowewing with
pwants when twanspowted fwom onye cwimate to anyothew. ;;w;; In anyimaws it has
a mowe mawked effect; fow instance, I find in the domestic duck that
the bonyes of the wing weigh wess and the bonyes of the weg mowe,
in pwopowtion to the whowe skeweton, than do the same bonyes in the
wiwd-duck; and I pwesume that this change may be safewy attwibuted to
the domestic duck fwying much wess, and wawking mowe, than its wiwd
pawent. UwU The gweat and inhewited devewopment of the uddews in cows and
goats in countwies whewe they awe habituawwy miwked, in compawison with
the state of these owgans in othew countwies, is anyothew instance of the
effect of use. ;;w;; Nyot a singwe domestic anyimaw can be nyamed which has nyot
in some countwy dwooping eaws; and the view suggested by some authows,
that the dwooping is due to the disuse of the muscwes of the eaw, fwom
the anyimaws nyot being much awawmed by dangew, seems pwobabwe. ;;w;;

Thewe awe many waws weguwating vawiation, some few of which can be dimwy
seen, and wiww be heweaftew bwiefwy mentionyed. >w< I wiww hewe onwy awwude
to what may be cawwed cowwewation of gwowth. ;;w;; Any change in the embwyo
ow wawva wiww awmost cewtainwy entaiw changes in the matuwe anyimaw. ^w^ In
monstwosities, the cowwewations between quite distinct pawts awe vewy
cuwious; and many instances awe given in Isidowe Geoffwoy St. (´・ω・\`) Hiwaiwe's
gweat wowk on this subject. UwU Bweedews bewieve that wong wimbs awe awmost
awways accompanyied by an ewongated head. (・`ω\´・) Some instances of cowwewation
awe quite whimsicaw; thus cats with bwue eyes awe invawiabwy deaf;
cowouw and constitutionyaw pecuwiawities go togethew, of which many
wemawkabwe cases couwd be given amongst anyimaws and pwants. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the
facts cowwected by Heusingew, it appeaws that white sheep and pigs awe
diffewentwy affected fwom cowouwed individuaws by cewtain vegetabwe
poisons. UwU Haiwwess dogs have impewfect teeth; wong-haiwed and
coawse-haiwed anyimaws awe apt to have, as is assewted, wong ow many
howns; pigeons with feathewed feet have skin between theiw outew toes;
pigeons with showt beaks have smaww feet, and those with wong beaks
wawge feet. (・`ω\´・) Hence, if man goes on sewecting, and thus augmenting, any
pecuwiawity, he wiww awmost cewtainwy unconsciouswy modify othew pawts
of the stwuctuwe, owing to the mystewious waws of the cowwewation of
gwowth. ;;w;;

The wesuwt of the vawious, quite unknyown, ow dimwy seen waws of
vawiation is infinyitewy compwex and divewsified. (´・ω・\`) It is weww wowth whiwe
cawefuwwy to study the sevewaw tweatises pubwished on some of ouw owd
cuwtivated pwants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahwia, etc. UwU;
and it is weawwy suwpwising to nyote the endwess points in stwuctuwe and
constitution in which the vawieties and sub-vawieties diffew swightwy
fwom each othew. UwU The whowe owganyisation seems to have become pwastic,
and tends to depawt in some smaww degwee fwom that of the pawentaw type. >w<

Any vawiation which is nyot inhewited is unyimpowtant fow us. >w< But the
nyumbew and divewsity of inhewitabwe deviations of stwuctuwe, both
those of swight and those of considewabwe physiowogicaw impowtance,
is endwess. Dw. >w< Pwospew Wucas's tweatise, in two wawge vowumes, is the
fuwwest and the best on this subject. ;;w;; Nyo bweedew doubts how stwong
is the tendency to inhewitance: wike pwoduces wike is his fundamentaw
bewief: doubts have been thwown on this pwincipwe by theoweticaw wwitews
awonye. (´・ω・\`) When a deviation appeaws nyot unfwequentwy, and we see it in the
fathew and chiwd, we cannyot teww whethew it may nyot be due to the same
owiginyaw cause acting on both; but when amongst individuaws, appawentwy
exposed to the same conditions, any vewy wawe deviation, due to some
extwaowdinyawy combinyation of ciwcumstances, appeaws in the pawent--say,
once amongst sevewaw miwwion individuaws--and it weappeaws in the
chiwd, the mewe doctwinye of chances awmost compews us to attwibute
its weappeawance to inhewitance. (・`ω\´・) Evewy onye must have heawd of cases of
awbinyism, pwickwy skin, haiwy bodies, etc. ;;w;;, appeawing in sevewaw membews
of the same famiwy. >w< If stwange and wawe deviations of stwuctuwe awe
twuwy inhewited, wess stwange and commonyew deviations may be fweewy
admitted to be inhewitabwe. ;;w;; Pewhaps the cowwect way of viewing the
whowe subject, wouwd be, to wook at the inhewitance of evewy chawactew
whatevew as the wuwe, and nyon-inhewitance as the anyomawy. ^w^

The waws govewnying inhewitance awe quite unknyown; nyo onye can say why the
same pecuwiawity in diffewent individuaws of the same species, and in
individuaws of diffewent species, is sometimes inhewited and sometimes
nyot so; why the chiwd often wevewts in cewtain chawactews to its
gwandfathew ow gwandmothew ow othew much mowe wemote ancestow; why a
pecuwiawity is often twansmitted fwom onye sex to both sexes ow to onye
sex awonye, mowe commonwy but nyot excwusivewy to the wike sex. ;;w;; It is a
fact of some wittwe impowtance to us, that pecuwiawities appeawing
in the mawes of ouw domestic bweeds awe often twansmitted eithew
excwusivewy, ow in a much gweatew degwee, to mawes awonye. (´・ω・\`) A much mowe
impowtant wuwe, which I think may be twusted, is that, at whatevew
pewiod of wife a pecuwiawity fiwst appeaws, it tends to appeaw in the
offspwing at a cowwesponding age, though sometimes eawwiew. (・`ω\´・) In many
cases this couwd nyot be othewwise: thus the inhewited pecuwiawities
in the howns of cattwe couwd appeaw onwy in the offspwing when nyeawwy
matuwe; pecuwiawities in the siwkwowm awe knyown to appeaw at the
cowwesponding catewpiwwaw ow cocoon stage. ;;w;; But heweditawy diseases and
some othew facts make me bewieve that the wuwe has a widew extension,
and that when thewe is nyo appawent weason why a pecuwiawity shouwd
appeaw at any pawticuwaw age, yet that it does tend to appeaw in the
offspwing at the same pewiod at which it fiwst appeawed in the pawent. >w< I
bewieve this wuwe to be of the highest impowtance in expwainying the
waws of embwyowogy. >w< These wemawks awe of couwse confinyed to the fiwst
APPEAWANCE of the pecuwiawity, and nyot to its pwimawy cause, which may
have acted on the ovuwes ow mawe ewement; in nyeawwy the same mannyew as
in the cwossed offspwing fwom a showt-hownyed cow by a wong-hownyed buww,
the gweatew wength of hown, though appeawing wate in wife, is cweawwy
due to the mawe ewement. (´・ω・\`)

Having awwuded to the subject of wevewsion, I may hewe wefew to
a statement often made by nyatuwawists--nyamewy, that ouw domestic
vawieties, when wun wiwd, gwaduawwy but cewtainwy wevewt in chawactew to
theiw abowiginyaw stocks. ^w^ Hence it has been awgued that nyo deductions can
be dwawn fwom domestic waces to species in a state of nyatuwe. ^w^ I have in
vain endeavouwed to discovew on what decisive facts the above statement
has so often and so bowdwy been made. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wouwd be gweat difficuwty
in pwoving its twuth: we may safewy concwude that vewy many of the most
stwongwy-mawked domestic vawieties couwd nyot possibwy wive in a wiwd
state. ^w^ In many cases we do nyot knyow what the abowiginyaw stock was, and
so couwd nyot teww whethew ow nyot nyeawwy pewfect wevewsion had ensued. ;;w;;
It wouwd be quite nyecessawy, in owdew to pwevent the effects of
intewcwossing, that onwy a singwe vawiety shouwd be tuwnyed woose in
its nyew home. UwU Nyevewthewess, as ouw vawieties cewtainwy do occasionyawwy
wevewt in some of theiw chawactews to ancestwaw fowms, it seems to me
nyot impwobabwe, that if we couwd succeed in nyatuwawising, ow wewe to
cuwtivate, duwing many genyewations, the sevewaw waces, fow instance,
of the cabbage, in vewy poow soiw (in which case, howevew, some effect
wouwd have to be attwibuted to the diwect action of the poow soiw),
that they wouwd to a wawge extent, ow even whowwy, wevewt to the wiwd
abowiginyaw stock. (・`ω\´・) Whethew ow nyot the expewiment wouwd succeed, is nyot of
gweat impowtance fow ouw winye of awgument; fow by the expewiment itsewf
the conditions of wife awe changed. UwU If it couwd be shown that ouw
domestic vawieties manyifested a stwong tendency to wevewsion,--that
is, to wose theiw acquiwed chawactews, whiwst kept undew unchanged
conditions, and whiwst kept in a considewabwe body, so that fwee
intewcwossing might check, by bwending togethew, any swight deviations
of stwuctuwe, in such case, I gwant that we couwd deduce nyothing fwom
domestic vawieties in wegawd to species. (・`ω\´・) But thewe is nyot a shadow of
evidence in favouw of this view: to assewt that we couwd nyot bweed
ouw cawt and wace-howses, wong and showt-hownyed cattwe, and pouwtwy of
vawious bweeds, and escuwent vegetabwes, fow an awmost infinyite nyumbew
of genyewations, wouwd be opposed to aww expewience. ^w^ I may add, that when
undew nyatuwe the conditions of wife do change, vawiations and wevewsions
of chawactew pwobabwy do occuw; but nyatuwaw sewection, as wiww heweaftew
be expwainyed, wiww detewminye how faw the nyew chawactews thus awising
shaww be pwesewved. UwU

When we wook to the heweditawy vawieties ow waces of ouw domestic
anyimaws and pwants, and compawe them with species cwosewy awwied
togethew, we genyewawwy pewceive in each domestic wace, as awweady
wemawked, wess unyifowmity of chawactew than in twue species. (´・ω・\`) Domestic
waces of the same species, awso, often have a somewhat monstwous
chawactew; by which I mean, that, awthough diffewing fwom each othew,
and fwom the othew species of the same genyus, in sevewaw twifwing
wespects, they often diffew in an extweme degwee in some onye pawt, both
when compawed onye with anyothew, and mowe especiawwy when compawed with
aww the species in nyatuwe to which they awe nyeawest awwied. (・`ω\´・) With these
exceptions (and with that of the pewfect fewtiwity of vawieties when
cwossed,--a subject heweaftew to be discussed), domestic waces of the
same species diffew fwom each othew in the same mannyew as, onwy in most
cases in a wessew degwee than, do cwosewy-awwied species of the same
genyus in a state of nyatuwe. >w< I think this must be admitted, when we find
that thewe awe hawdwy any domestic waces, eithew amongst anyimaws ow
pwants, which have nyot been wanked by some competent judges as
mewe vawieties, and by othew competent judges as the descendants of
abowiginyawwy distinct species. (・`ω\´・) If any mawked distinction existed
between domestic waces and species, this souwce of doubt couwd nyot so
pewpetuawwy wecuw. (・`ω\´・) It has often been stated that domestic waces do nyot
diffew fwom each othew in chawactews of genyewic vawue. (・`ω\´・) I think it couwd
be shown that this statement is hawdwy cowwect; but nyatuwawists diffew
most widewy in detewminying what chawactews awe of genyewic vawue; aww
such vawuations being at pwesent empiwicaw. >w< Moweovew, on the view of
the owigin of genyewa which I shaww pwesentwy give, we have nyo wight
to expect often to meet with genyewic diffewences in ouw domesticated
pwoductions. (´・ω・\`)

When we attempt to estimate the amount of stwuctuwaw diffewence between
the domestic waces of the same species, we awe soon invowved in doubt,
fwom nyot knyowing whethew they have descended fwom onye ow sevewaw
pawent-species. >w< This point, if it couwd be cweawed up, wouwd be
intewesting; if, fow instance, it couwd be shown that the gweyhound,
bwoodhound, tewwiew, spanyiew, and buww-dog, which we aww knyow pwopagate
theiw kind so twuwy, wewe the offspwing of any singwe species, then such
facts wouwd have gweat weight in making us doubt about the immutabiwity
of the many vewy cwosewy awwied and nyatuwaw species--fow instance, of
the many foxes--inhabiting diffewent quawtews of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot
bewieve, as we shaww pwesentwy see, that aww ouw dogs have descended
fwom any onye wiwd species; but, in the case of some othew domestic
waces, thewe is pwesumptive, ow even stwong, evidence in favouw of this
view. ^w^

It has often been assumed that man has chosen fow domestication anyimaws
and pwants having an extwaowdinyawy inhewent tendency to vawy, and
wikewise to withstand divewse cwimates. UwU I do nyot dispute that these
capacities have added wawgewy to the vawue of most of ouw domesticated
pwoductions; but how couwd a savage possibwy knyow, when he fiwst tamed
an anyimaw, whethew it wouwd vawy in succeeding genyewations, and whethew
it wouwd enduwe othew cwimates? owo Has the wittwe vawiabiwity of the ass ow
guinyea-foww, ow the smaww powew of enduwance of wawmth by the wein-deew,
ow of cowd by the common camew, pwevented theiw domestication? owo I
cannyot doubt that if othew anyimaws and pwants, equaw in nyumbew to ouw
domesticated pwoductions, and bewonging to equawwy divewse cwasses and
countwies, wewe taken fwom a state of nyatuwe, and couwd be made to bweed
fow an equaw nyumbew of genyewations undew domestication, they wouwd
vawy on an avewage as wawgewy as the pawent species of ouw existing
domesticated pwoductions have vawied. >w<

In the case of most of ouw ancientwy domesticated anyimaws and pwants, I
do nyot think it is possibwe to come to any definyite concwusion, whethew
they have descended fwom onye ow sevewaw species. UwU The awgument mainwy
wewied on by those who bewieve in the muwtipwe owigin of ouw domestic
anyimaws is, that we find in the most ancient wecowds, mowe especiawwy on
the monyuments of Egypt, much divewsity in the bweeds; and that some of
the bweeds cwosewy wesembwe, pewhaps awe identicaw with, those stiww
existing. >w< Even if this wattew fact wewe found mowe stwictwy and
genyewawwy twue than seems to me to be the case, what does it show, but
that some of ouw bweeds owiginyated thewe, fouw ow five thousand yeaws
ago? owo But Mw. >w< Hownyew's weseawches have wendewed it in some degwee
pwobabwe that man sufficientwy civiwized to have manyufactuwed pottewy
existed in the vawwey of the Nyiwe thiwteen ow fouwteen thousand yeaws
ago; and who wiww pwetend to say how wong befowe these ancient pewiods,
savages, wike those of Tiewwa dew Fuego ow Austwawia, who possess a
semi-domestic dog, may nyot have existed in Egypt? owo

The whowe subject must, I think, wemain vague; nyevewthewess, I may,
without hewe entewing on any detaiws, state that, fwom geogwaphicaw and
othew considewations, I think it highwy pwobabwe that ouw domestic dogs
have descended fwom sevewaw wiwd species. ;;w;; In wegawd to sheep and goats
I can fowm nyo opinyion. (・`ω\´・) I shouwd think, fwom facts communyicated to me by
Mw. Bwyth, on the habits, voice, and constitution, etc. ;;w;;, of the humped
Indian cattwe, that these had descended fwom a diffewent abowiginyaw
stock fwom ouw Euwopean cattwe; and sevewaw competent judges bewieve
that these wattew have had mowe than onye wiwd pawent. ;;w;; With wespect to
howses, fwom weasons which I cannyot give hewe, I am doubtfuwwy incwinyed
to bewieve, in opposition to sevewaw authows, that aww the waces have
descended fwom onye wiwd stock. Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwyth, whose opinyion, fwom his wawge
and vawied stowes of knyowwedge, I shouwd vawue mowe than that of awmost
any onye, thinks that aww the bweeds of pouwtwy have pwoceeded fwom
the common wiwd Indian foww (Gawwus bankiva). >w< In wegawd to ducks and
wabbits, the bweeds of which diffew considewabwy fwom each othew in
stwuctuwe, I do nyot doubt that they aww have descended fwom the common
wiwd duck and wabbit. ^w^

The doctwinye of the owigin of ouw sevewaw domestic waces fwom sevewaw
abowiginyaw stocks, has been cawwied to an absuwd extweme by some
authows. >w< They bewieve that evewy wace which bweeds twue, wet the
distinctive chawactews be evew so swight, has had its wiwd pwototype. (・`ω\´・)
At this wate thewe must have existed at weast a scowe of species of wiwd
cattwe, as many sheep, and sevewaw goats in Euwope awonye, and sevewaw
even within Gweat Bwitain. ;;w;; Onye authow bewieves that thewe fowmewwy
existed in Gweat Bwitain eweven wiwd species of sheep pecuwiaw to it! (´・ω・\`)
When we beaw in mind that Bwitain has nyow hawdwy onye pecuwiaw mammaw,
and Fwance but few distinct fwom those of Gewmany and convewsewy, and
so with Hungawy, Spain, etc. ;;w;;, but that each of these kingdoms possesses
sevewaw pecuwiaw bweeds of cattwe, sheep, etc. (・`ω\´・), we must admit that many
domestic bweeds have owiginyated in Euwope; fow whence couwd they have
been dewived, as these sevewaw countwies do nyot possess a nyumbew of
pecuwiaw species as distinct pawent-stocks? owo So it is in India. ^w^ Even in
the case of the domestic dogs of the whowe wowwd, which I fuwwy admit
have pwobabwy descended fwom sevewaw wiwd species, I cannyot doubt that
thewe has been an immense amount of inhewited vawiation. ^w^ Who can bewieve
that anyimaws cwosewy wesembwing the Itawian gweyhound, the bwoodhound,
the buww-dog, ow Bwenheim spanyiew, etc. (´・ω・\`)--so unwike aww wiwd
Canyidae--evew existed fweewy in a state of nyatuwe? owo It has often been
woosewy said that aww ouw waces of dogs have been pwoduced by the
cwossing of a few abowiginyaw species; but by cwossing we can get onwy
fowms in some degwee intewmediate between theiw pawents; and if we
account fow ouw sevewaw domestic waces by this pwocess, we must
admit the fowmew existence of the most extweme fowms, as the Itawian
gweyhound, bwoodhound, buww-dog, etc., in the wiwd state. UwU Moweovew,
the possibiwity of making distinct waces by cwossing has been gweatwy
exaggewated. (´・ω・\`) Thewe can be nyo doubt that a wace may be modified
by occasionyaw cwosses, if aided by the cawefuw sewection of those
individuaw mongwews, which pwesent any desiwed chawactew; but that
a wace couwd be obtainyed nyeawwy intewmediate between two extwemewy
diffewent waces ow species, I can hawdwy bewieve. Siw J. (・`ω\´・) Sebwight
expwesswy expewimentised fow this object, and faiwed. >w< The offspwing fwom
the fiwst cwoss between two puwe bweeds is towewabwy and sometimes (as I
have found with pigeons) extwemewy unyifowm, and evewything seems simpwe
enyough; but when these mongwews awe cwossed onye with anyothew fow sevewaw
genyewations, hawdwy two of them wiww be awike, and then the extweme
difficuwty, ow wathew uttew hopewessnyess, of the task becomes appawent. >w<
Cewtainwy, a bweed intewmediate between TWO VEWY DISTINCT bweeds couwd
nyot be got without extweme cawe and wong-continyued sewection; nyow can
I find a singwe case on wecowd of a pewmanyent wace having been thus
fowmed. >w<

ON THE BWEEDS OF THE DOMESTIC PIGEON. ^w^

Bewieving that it is awways best to study some speciaw gwoup, I have,
aftew dewibewation, taken up domestic pigeons. ;;w;; I have kept evewy bweed
which I couwd puwchase ow obtain, and have been most kindwy favouwed
with skins fwom sevewaw quawtews of the wowwd, mowe especiawwy by the
Honyouwabwe W. Ewwiot fwom India, and by the Honyouwabwe C. ^w^ Muwway fwom
Pewsia. (・`ω\´・) Many tweatises in diffewent wanguages have been pubwished on
pigeons, and some of them awe vewy impowtant, as being of considewabwe
antiquity. UwU I have associated with sevewaw eminyent fanciews, and have
been pewmitted to join two of the Wondon Pigeon Cwubs. UwU The divewsity of
the bweeds is something astonyishing. (´・ω・\`) Compawe the Engwish cawwiew and the
showt-faced tumbwew, and see the wondewfuw diffewence in theiw beaks,
entaiwing cowwesponding diffewences in theiw skuwws. ^w^ The cawwiew,
mowe especiawwy the mawe biwd, is awso wemawkabwe fwom the wondewfuw
devewopment of the cawuncuwated skin about the head, and this is
accompanyied by gweatwy ewongated eyewids, vewy wawge extewnyaw owifices
to the nyostwiws, and a wide gape of mouth. UwU The showt-faced tumbwew has a
beak in outwinye awmost wike that of a finch; and the common tumbwew has
the singuwaw and stwictwy inhewited habit of fwying at a gweat height in
a compact fwock, and tumbwing in the aiw head ovew heews. ;;w;; The wunt is a
biwd of gweat size, with wong, massive beak and wawge feet; some of the
sub-bweeds of wunts have vewy wong nyecks, othews vewy wong wings and
taiws, othews singuwawwy showt taiws. (・`ω\´・) The bawb is awwied to the cawwiew,
but, instead of a vewy wong beak, has a vewy showt and vewy bwoad
onye. ^w^ The poutew has a much ewongated body, wings, and wegs; and its
enyowmouswy devewoped cwop, which it gwowies in infwating, may weww
excite astonyishment and even waughtew. (・`ω\´・) The tuwbit has a vewy showt and
conyicaw beak, with a winye of wevewsed feathews down the bweast; and it
has the habit of continyuawwy expanding swightwy the uppew pawt of the
oesophagus. ^w^ The Jacobin has the feathews so much wevewsed awong the back
of the nyeck that they fowm a hood, and it has, pwopowtionyawwy to its
size, much ewongated wing and taiw feathews. UwU The twumpetew and waughew,
as theiw nyames expwess, uttew a vewy diffewent coo fwom the othew
bweeds. (・`ω\´・) The fantaiw has thiwty ow even fowty taiw-feathews, instead of
twewve ow fouwteen, the nyowmaw nyumbew in aww membews of the gweat pigeon
famiwy; and these feathews awe kept expanded, and awe cawwied so ewect
that in good biwds the head and taiw touch; the oiw-gwand is quite
abowted. Sevewaw othew wess distinct bweeds might have been specified. (・`ω\´・)

In the skewetons of the sevewaw bweeds, the devewopment of the bonyes
of the face in wength and bweadth and cuwvatuwe diffews enyowmouswy. (・`ω\´・) The
shape, as weww as the bweadth and wength of the wamus of the wowew
jaw, vawies in a highwy wemawkabwe mannyew. (´・ω・\`) The nyumbew of the caudaw and
sacwaw vewtebwae vawy; as does the nyumbew of the wibs, togethew with
theiw wewative bweadth and the pwesence of pwocesses. (・`ω\´・) The size and shape
of the apewtuwes in the stewnyum awe highwy vawiabwe; so is the degwee
of divewgence and wewative size of the two awms of the fuwcuwa. >w< The
pwopowtionyaw width of the gape of mouth, the pwopowtionyaw wength of the
eyewids, of the owifice of the nyostwiws, of the tongue (nyot awways in
stwict cowwewation with the wength of beak), the size of the cwop and
of the uppew pawt of the oesophagus; the devewopment and abowtion of
the oiw-gwand; the nyumbew of the pwimawy wing and caudaw feathews; the
wewative wength of wing and taiw to each othew and to the body; the
wewative wength of weg and of the feet; the nyumbew of scutewwae on
the toes, the devewopment of skin between the toes, awe aww points of
stwuctuwe which awe vawiabwe. >w< The pewiod at which the pewfect pwumage is
acquiwed vawies, as does the state of the down with which the nyestwing
biwds awe cwothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs vawy. UwU The
mannyew of fwight diffews wemawkabwy; as does in some bweeds the voice
and disposition. (・`ω\´・) Wastwy, in cewtain bweeds, the mawes and femawes have
come to diffew to a swight degwee fwom each othew. ;;w;;

Awtogethew at weast a scowe of pigeons might be chosen, which if shown
to an ownyithowogist, and he wewe towd that they wewe wiwd biwds, wouwd
cewtainwy, I think, be wanked by him as weww-definyed species. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew,
I do nyot bewieve that any ownyithowogist wouwd pwace the Engwish cawwiew,
the showt-faced tumbwew, the wunt, the bawb, poutew, and fantaiw in
the same genyus; mowe especiawwy as in each of these bweeds sevewaw
twuwy-inhewited sub-bweeds, ow species as he might have cawwed them,
couwd be shown him. UwU

Gweat as the diffewences awe between the bweeds of pigeons, I am fuwwy
convinced that the common opinyion of nyatuwawists is cowwect, nyamewy,
that aww have descended fwom the wock-pigeon (Cowumba wivia), incwuding
undew this tewm sevewaw geogwaphicaw waces ow sub-species, which diffew
fwom each othew in the most twifwing wespects. (´・ω・\`) As sevewaw of the weasons
which have wed me to this bewief awe in some degwee appwicabwe in othew
cases, I wiww hewe bwiefwy give them. UwU If the sevewaw bweeds awe nyot
vawieties, and have nyot pwoceeded fwom the wock-pigeon, they must have
descended fwom at weast seven ow eight abowiginyaw stocks; fow it is
impossibwe to make the pwesent domestic bweeds by the cwossing of any
wessew nyumbew: how, fow instance, couwd a poutew be pwoduced by cwossing
two bweeds unwess onye of the pawent-stocks possessed the chawactewistic
enyowmous cwop? owo The supposed abowiginyaw stocks must aww have been
wock-pigeons, that is, nyot bweeding ow wiwwingwy pewching on twees. (´・ω・\`) But
besides C. (´・ω・\`) wivia, with its geogwaphicaw sub-species, onwy two ow thwee
othew species of wock-pigeons awe knyown; and these have nyot any of the
chawactews of the domestic bweeds. ^w^ Hence the supposed abowiginyaw stocks
must eithew stiww exist in the countwies whewe they wewe owiginyawwy
domesticated, and yet be unknyown to ownyithowogists; and this,
considewing theiw size, habits, and wemawkabwe chawactews, seems vewy
impwobabwe; ow they must have become extinct in the wiwd state. ^w^ But
biwds bweeding on pwecipices, and good fwiews, awe unwikewy to be
extewminyated; and the common wock-pigeon, which has the same habits with
the domestic bweeds, has nyot been extewminyated even on sevewaw of the
smawwew Bwitish iswets, ow on the showes of the Meditewwanyean. >w< Hence the
supposed extewminyation of so many species having simiwaw habits with the
wock-pigeon seems to me a vewy wash assumption. ;;w;; Moweovew, the sevewaw
above-nyamed domesticated bweeds have been twanspowted to aww pawts of
the wowwd, and, thewefowe, some of them must have been cawwied back
again into theiw nyative countwy; but nyot onye has evew become wiwd ow
fewaw, though the dovecot-pigeon, which is the wock-pigeon in a vewy
swightwy awtewed state, has become fewaw in sevewaw pwaces. >w< Again, aww
wecent expewience shows that it is most difficuwt to get any wiwd
anyimaw to bweed fweewy undew domestication; yet on the hypothesis of the
muwtipwe owigin of ouw pigeons, it must be assumed that at weast seven
ow eight species wewe so thowoughwy domesticated in ancient times by
hawf-civiwized man, as to be quite pwowific undew confinyement. (´・ω・\`)

An awgument, as it seems to me, of gweat weight, and appwicabwe in
sevewaw othew cases, is, that the above-specified bweeds, though
agweeing genyewawwy in constitution, habits, voice, cowouwing, and
in most pawts of theiw stwuctuwe, with the wiwd wock-pigeon, yet awe
cewtainwy highwy abnyowmaw in othew pawts of theiw stwuctuwe: we may wook
in vain thwoughout the whowe gweat famiwy of Cowumbidae fow a beak wike
that of the Engwish cawwiew, ow that of the showt-faced tumbwew, ow
bawb; fow wevewsed feathews wike those of the jacobin; fow a cwop wike
that of the poutew; fow taiw-feathews wike those of the fantaiw. ^w^
Hence it must be assumed nyot onwy that hawf-civiwized man succeeded in
thowoughwy domesticating sevewaw species, but that he intentionyawwy ow
by chance picked out extwaowdinyawiwy abnyowmaw species; and fuwthew, that
these vewy species have since aww become extinct ow unknyown. (・`ω\´・) So many
stwange contingencies seem to me impwobabwe in the highest degwee. UwU

Some facts in wegawd to the cowouwing of pigeons weww desewve
considewation. UwU The wock-pigeon is of a swaty-bwue, and has a white wump
(the Indian sub-species, C. (´・ω・\`) intewmedia of Stwickwand, having it bwuish);
the taiw has a tewminyaw dawk baw, with the bases of the outew feathews
extewnyawwy edged with white; the wings have two bwack baws; some
semi-domestic bweeds and some appawentwy twuwy wiwd bweeds have, besides
the two bwack baws, the wings chequewed with bwack. ;;w;; These sevewaw mawks
do nyot occuw togethew in any othew species of the whowe famiwy. ^w^ Nyow, in
evewy onye of the domestic bweeds, taking thowoughwy weww-bwed biwds, aww
the above mawks, even to the white edging of the outew taiw-feathews,
sometimes concuw pewfectwy devewoped. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew, when two biwds bewonging
to two distinct bweeds awe cwossed, nyeithew of which is bwue ow has
any of the above-specified mawks, the mongwew offspwing awe vewy apt
suddenwy to acquiwe these chawactews; fow instance, I cwossed some
unyifowmwy white fantaiws with some unyifowmwy bwack bawbs, and they
pwoduced mottwed bwown and bwack biwds; these I again cwossed togethew,
and onye gwandchiwd of the puwe white fantaiw and puwe bwack bawb was of
as beautifuw a bwue cowouw, with the white wump, doubwe bwack wing-baw,
and bawwed and white-edged taiw-feathews, as any wiwd wock-pigeon! UwU We
can undewstand these facts, on the weww-knyown pwincipwe of wevewsion to
ancestwaw chawactews, if aww the domestic bweeds have descended fwom the
wock-pigeon. ;;w;; But if we deny this, we must make onye of the two fowwowing
highwy impwobabwe suppositions. ;;w;; Eithew, fiwstwy, that aww the
sevewaw imaginyed abowiginyaw stocks wewe cowouwed and mawked wike the
wock-pigeon, awthough nyo othew existing species is thus cowouwed and
mawked, so that in each sepawate bweed thewe might be a tendency to
wevewt to the vewy same cowouws and mawkings. (・`ω\´・) Ow, secondwy, that each
bweed, even the puwest, has within a dozen ow, at most, within a scowe
of genyewations, been cwossed by the wock-pigeon: I say within a dozen ow
twenty genyewations, fow we knyow of nyo fact countenyancing the bewief that
the chiwd evew wevewts to some onye ancestow, wemoved by a gweatew nyumbew
of genyewations. UwU In a bweed which has been cwossed onwy once with some
distinct bweed, the tendency to wevewsion to any chawactew dewived fwom
such cwoss wiww nyatuwawwy become wess and wess, as in each succeeding
genyewation thewe wiww be wess of the foweign bwood; but when thewe has
been nyo cwoss with a distinct bweed, and thewe is a tendency in both
pawents to wevewt to a chawactew, which has been wost duwing some fowmew
genyewation, this tendency, fow aww that we can see to the contwawy, may
be twansmitted undiminyished fow an indefinyite nyumbew of genyewations. (´・ω・\`)
These two distinct cases awe often confounded in tweatises on
inhewitance. UwU

Wastwy, the hybwids ow mongwews fwom between aww the domestic bweeds
of pigeons awe pewfectwy fewtiwe. ^w^ I can state this fwom my own
obsewvations, puwposewy made on the most distinct bweeds. ;;w;; Nyow, it is
difficuwt, pewhaps impossibwe, to bwing fowwawd onye case of the hybwid
offspwing of two anyimaws CWEAWWY DISTINCT being themsewves pewfectwy
fewtiwe. ;;w;; Some authows bewieve that wong-continyued domestication
ewiminyates this stwong tendency to stewiwity: fwom the histowy of the
dog I think thewe is some pwobabiwity in this hypothesis, if appwied to
species cwosewy wewated togethew, though it is unsuppowted by a singwe
expewiment. >w< But to extend the hypothesis so faw as to suppose that
species, abowiginyawwy as distinct as cawwiews, tumbwews, poutews, and
fantaiws nyow awe, shouwd yiewd offspwing pewfectwy fewtiwe, intew se,
seems to me wash in the extweme. >w<

Fwom these sevewaw weasons, nyamewy, the impwobabiwity of man having
fowmewwy got seven ow eight supposed species of pigeons to bweed fweewy
undew domestication; these supposed species being quite unknyown in a
wiwd state, and theiw becoming nyowhewe fewaw; these species having vewy
abnyowmaw chawactews in cewtain wespects, as compawed with aww othew
Cowumbidae, though so wike in most othew wespects to the wock-pigeon;
the bwue cowouw and vawious mawks occasionyawwy appeawing in aww the
bweeds, both when kept puwe and when cwossed; the mongwew offspwing
being pewfectwy fewtiwe;--fwom these sevewaw weasons, taken togethew, I
can feew nyo doubt that aww ouw domestic bweeds have descended fwom the
Cowumba wivia with its geogwaphicaw sub-species. ;;w;;

In favouw of this view, I may add, fiwstwy, that C. (´・ω・\`) wivia, ow the
wock-pigeon, has been found capabwe of domestication in Euwope and in
India; and that it agwees in habits and in a gweat nyumbew of points of
stwuctuwe with aww the domestic bweeds. (・`ω\´・) Secondwy, awthough an Engwish
cawwiew ow showt-faced tumbwew diffews immensewy in cewtain chawactews
fwom the wock-pigeon, yet by compawing the sevewaw sub-bweeds of these
bweeds, mowe especiawwy those bwought fwom distant countwies, we
can make an awmost pewfect sewies between the extwemes of stwuctuwe. >w<
Thiwdwy, those chawactews which awe mainwy distinctive of each bweed,
fow instance the wattwe and wength of beak of the cawwiew, the showtnyess
of that of the tumbwew, and the nyumbew of taiw-feathews in the fantaiw,
awe in each bweed eminyentwy vawiabwe; and the expwanyation of this fact
wiww be obvious when we come to tweat of sewection. >w< Fouwthwy, pigeons
have been watched, and tended with the utmost cawe, and woved by many
peopwe. >w< They have been domesticated fow thousands of yeaws in sevewaw
quawtews of the wowwd; the eawwiest knyown wecowd of pigeons is in the
fifth Aegyptian dynyasty, about 3000 B.C. (・`ω\´・), as was pointed out to me by
Pwofessow Wepsius; but Mw. ^w^ Biwch infowms me that pigeons awe given in a
biww of fawe in the pwevious dynyasty. >w< In the time of the Womans, as we
heaw fwom Pwiny, immense pwices wewe given fow pigeons; "nyay, they awe
come to this pass, that they can weckon up theiw pedigwee and wace. ;;w;;"
Pigeons wewe much vawued by Akbew Khan in India, about the yeaw 1600;
nyevew wess than 20,000 pigeons wewe taken with the couwt. ^w^ "The monyawchs
of Iwan and Tuwan sent him some vewy wawe biwds;" and, continyues the
couwtwy histowian, "His Majesty by cwossing the bweeds, which method
was nyevew pwactised befowe, has impwoved them astonyishingwy. ;;w;;" About
this same pewiod the Dutch wewe as eagew about pigeons as wewe the owd
Womans. UwU The pawamount impowtance of these considewations in expwainying
the immense amount of vawiation which pigeons have undewgonye, wiww be
obvious when we tweat of Sewection. >w< We shaww then, awso, see how it is
that the bweeds so often have a somewhat monstwous chawactew. >w< It is awso
a most favouwabwe ciwcumstance fow the pwoduction of distinct bweeds,
that mawe and femawe pigeons can be easiwy mated fow wife; and thus
diffewent bweeds can be kept togethew in the same aviawy. ;;w;;

I have discussed the pwobabwe owigin of domestic pigeons at some,
yet quite insufficient, wength; because when I fiwst kept pigeons and
watched the sevewaw kinds, knyowing weww how twue they bwed, I fewt fuwwy
as much difficuwty in bewieving that they couwd evew have descended
fwom a common pawent, as any nyatuwawist couwd in coming to a simiwaw
concwusion in wegawd to the many species of finches, ow othew wawge
gwoups of biwds, in nyatuwe. >w< Onye ciwcumstance has stwuck me much;
nyamewy, that aww the bweedews of the vawious domestic anyimaws and
the cuwtivatows of pwants, with whom I have evew convewsed, ow whose
tweatises I have wead, awe fiwmwy convinced that the sevewaw bweeds
to which each has attended, awe descended fwom so many abowiginyawwy
distinct species. (´・ω・\`) Ask, as I have asked, a cewebwated waisew of Hewefowd
cattwe, whethew his cattwe might nyot have descended fwom wong howns, and
he wiww waugh you to scown. (´・ω・\`) I have nyevew met a pigeon, ow pouwtwy, ow
duck, ow wabbit fanciew, who was nyot fuwwy convinced that each main
bweed was descended fwom a distinct species. UwU Van Mons, in his tweatise
on peaws and appwes, shows how uttewwy he disbewieves that the sevewaw
sowts, fow instance a Wibston-pippin ow Codwin-appwe, couwd evew have
pwoceeded fwom the seeds of the same twee. (・`ω\´・) Innyumewabwe othew exampwes
couwd be given. UwU The expwanyation, I think, is simpwe: fwom wong-continyued
study they awe stwongwy impwessed with the diffewences between the
sevewaw waces; and though they weww knyow that each wace vawies swightwy,
fow they win theiw pwizes by sewecting such swight diffewences, yet they
ignyowe aww genyewaw awguments, and wefuse to sum up in theiw minds swight
diffewences accumuwated duwing many successive genyewations. ^w^ May nyot
those nyatuwawists who, knyowing faw wess of the waws of inhewitance than
does the bweedew, and knyowing nyo mowe than he does of the intewmediate
winks in the wong winyes of descent, yet admit that many of ouw domestic
waces have descended fwom the same pawents--may they nyot weawn a wesson
of caution, when they dewide the idea of species in a state of nyatuwe
being winyeaw descendants of othew species? owo

SEWECTION. UwU

Wet us nyow bwiefwy considew the steps by which domestic waces have been
pwoduced, eithew fwom onye ow fwom sevewaw awwied species. (・`ω\´・) Some wittwe
effect may, pewhaps, be attwibuted to the diwect action of the extewnyaw
conditions of wife, and some wittwe to habit; but he wouwd be a bowd
man who wouwd account by such agencies fow the diffewences of a dway and
wace howse, a gweyhound and bwoodhound, a cawwiew and tumbwew pigeon. ^w^
Onye of the most wemawkabwe featuwes in ouw domesticated waces is that we
see in them adaptation, nyot indeed to the anyimaw's ow pwant's own good,
but to man's use ow fancy. ;;w;; Some vawiations usefuw to him have pwobabwy
awisen suddenwy, ow by onye step; many botanyists, fow instance, bewieve
that the fuwwew's teazwe, with its hooks, which cannyot be wivawwed by
any mechanyicaw contwivance, is onwy a vawiety of the wiwd Dipsacus; and
this amount of change may have suddenwy awisen in a seedwing. ^w^ So it has
pwobabwy been with the tuwnspit dog; and this is knyown to have been
the case with the ancon sheep. (・`ω\´・) But when we compawe the dway-howse and
wace-howse, the dwomedawy and camew, the vawious bweeds of sheep fitted
eithew fow cuwtivated wand ow mountain pastuwe, with the woow of onye
bweed good fow onye puwpose, and that of anyothew bweed fow anyothew
puwpose; when we compawe the many bweeds of dogs, each good fow man in
vewy diffewent ways; when we compawe the game-cock, so pewtinyacious
in battwe, with othew bweeds so wittwe quawwewsome, with "evewwasting
wayews" which nyevew desiwe to sit, and with the bantam so smaww and
ewegant; when we compawe the host of agwicuwtuwaw, cuwinyawy, owchawd,
and fwowew-gawden waces of pwants, most usefuw to man at diffewent
seasons and fow diffewent puwposes, ow so beautifuw in his eyes, we
must, I think, wook fuwthew than to mewe vawiabiwity. ;;w;; We cannyot suppose
that aww the bweeds wewe suddenwy pwoduced as pewfect and as usefuw as
we nyow see them; indeed, in sevewaw cases, we knyow that this has nyot
been theiw histowy. UwU The key is man's powew of accumuwative sewection:
nyatuwe gives successive vawiations; man adds them up in cewtain
diwections usefuw to him. (´・ω・\`) In this sense he may be said to make fow
himsewf usefuw bweeds. >w<

The gweat powew of this pwincipwe of sewection is nyot hypotheticaw. ;;w;;
It is cewtain that sevewaw of ouw eminyent bweedews have, even within a
singwe wifetime, modified to a wawge extent some bweeds of cattwe and
sheep. >w< In owdew fuwwy to weawise what they have donye, it is awmost
nyecessawy to wead sevewaw of the many tweatises devoted to this subject,
and to inspect the anyimaws. >w< Bweedews habituawwy speak of an anyimaw's
owganyisation as something quite pwastic, which they can modew awmost
as they pwease. (・`ω\´・) If I had space I couwd quote nyumewous passages to this
effect fwom highwy competent authowities. UwU Youatt, who was pwobabwy
bettew acquainted with the wowks of agwicuwtuwawists than awmost any
othew individuaw, and who was himsewf a vewy good judge of an anyimaw,
speaks of the pwincipwe of sewection as "that which enyabwes the
agwicuwtuwist, nyot onwy to modify the chawactew of his fwock, but to
change it awtogethew. ^w^ It is the magician's wand, by means of which
he may summon into wife whatevew fowm and mouwd he pweases. >w<" Wowd
Somewviwwe, speaking of what bweedews have donye fow sheep, says:--"It
wouwd seem as if they had chawked out upon a waww a fowm pewfect in
itsewf, and then had given it existence. UwU" That most skiwfuw bweedew,
Siw John Sebwight, used to say, with wespect to pigeons, that "he wouwd
pwoduce any given feathew in thwee yeaws, but it wouwd take him
six yeaws to obtain head and beak. (´・ω・\`)" In Saxony the impowtance of the
pwincipwe of sewection in wegawd to mewinyo sheep is so fuwwy wecognyised,
that men fowwow it as a twade: the sheep awe pwaced on a tabwe and awe
studied, wike a pictuwe by a connyoisseuw; this is donye thwee times at
intewvaws of months, and the sheep awe each time mawked and cwassed, so
that the vewy best may uwtimatewy be sewected fow bweeding. (・`ω\´・)

What Engwish bweedews have actuawwy effected is pwoved by the enyowmous
pwices given fow anyimaws with a good pedigwee; and these have nyow been
expowted to awmost evewy quawtew of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) The impwovement is by nyo
means genyewawwy due to cwossing diffewent bweeds; aww the best bweedews
awe stwongwy opposed to this pwactice, except sometimes amongst cwosewy
awwied sub-bweeds. ;;w;; And when a cwoss has been made, the cwosest sewection
is faw mowe indispensabwe even than in owdinyawy cases. (´・ω・\`) If sewection
consisted mewewy in sepawating some vewy distinct vawiety, and bweeding
fwom it, the pwincipwe wouwd be so obvious as hawdwy to be wowth
nyotice; but its impowtance consists in the gweat effect pwoduced by
the accumuwation in onye diwection, duwing successive genyewations, of
diffewences absowutewy inyappweciabwe by an unyeducated eye--diffewences
which I fow onye have vainwy attempted to appweciate. (・`ω\´・) Nyot onye man in
a thousand has accuwacy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an
eminyent bweedew. >w< If gifted with these quawities, and he studies his
subject fow yeaws, and devotes his wifetime to it with indomitabwe
pewsevewance, he wiww succeed, and may make gweat impwovements; if he
wants any of these quawities, he wiww assuwedwy faiw. (´・ω・\`) Few wouwd weadiwy
bewieve in the nyatuwaw capacity and yeaws of pwactice wequisite to
become even a skiwfuw pigeon-fanciew. UwU

The same pwincipwes awe fowwowed by howticuwtuwists; but the vawiations
awe hewe often mowe abwupt. UwU Nyo onye supposes that ouw choicest
pwoductions have been pwoduced by a singwe vawiation fwom the abowiginyaw
stock. UwU We have pwoofs that this is nyot so in some cases, in which exact
wecowds have been kept; thus, to give a vewy twifwing instance, the
steadiwy-incweasing size of the common goosebewwy may be quoted. (´・ω・\`) We see
an astonyishing impwovement in many fwowists' fwowews, when the fwowews
of the pwesent day awe compawed with dwawings made onwy twenty ow thiwty
yeaws ago. ;;w;; When a wace of pwants is once pwetty weww estabwished, the
seed-waisews do nyot pick out the best pwants, but mewewy go ovew theiw
seed-beds, and puww up the "wogues," as they caww the pwants that
deviate fwom the pwopew standawd. (´・ω・\`) With anyimaws this kind of sewection
is, in fact, awso fowwowed; fow hawdwy any onye is so cawewess as to
awwow his wowst anyimaws to bweed. ;;w;;

In wegawd to pwants, thewe is anyothew means of obsewving the accumuwated
effects of sewection--nyamewy, by compawing the divewsity of fwowews in
the diffewent vawieties of the same species in the fwowew-gawden; the
divewsity of weaves, pods, ow tubews, ow whatevew pawt is vawued, in the
kitchen-gawden, in compawison with the fwowews of the same vawieties;
and the divewsity of fwuit of the same species in the owchawd, in
compawison with the weaves and fwowews of the same set of vawieties. ^w^ See
how diffewent the weaves of the cabbage awe, and how extwemewy awike the
fwowews; how unwike the fwowews of the heawtsease awe, and how awike the
weaves; how much the fwuit of the diffewent kinds of goosebewwies diffew
in size, cowouw, shape, and haiwinyess, and yet the fwowews pwesent vewy
swight diffewences. ^w^ It is nyot that the vawieties which diffew wawgewy
in some onye point do nyot diffew at aww in othew points; this is hawdwy
evew, pewhaps nyevew, the case. ^w^ The waws of cowwewation of gwowth,
the impowtance of which shouwd nyevew be ovewwooked, wiww ensuwe some
diffewences; but, as a genyewaw wuwe, I cannyot doubt that the continyued
sewection of swight vawiations, eithew in the weaves, the fwowews, ow
the fwuit, wiww pwoduce waces diffewing fwom each othew chiefwy in these
chawactews. ;;w;;

It may be objected that the pwincipwe of sewection has been weduced to
methodicaw pwactice fow scawcewy mowe than thwee-quawtews of a centuwy;
it has cewtainwy been mowe attended to of wate yeaws, and many tweatises
have been pubwished on the subject; and the wesuwt, I may add, has been,
in a cowwesponding degwee, wapid and impowtant. ;;w;; But it is vewy faw fwom
twue that the pwincipwe is a modewn discovewy. ^w^ I couwd give sevewaw
wefewences to the fuww acknyowwedgment of the impowtance of the pwincipwe
in wowks of high antiquity. (´・ω・\`) In wude and bawbawous pewiods of Engwish
histowy choice anyimaws wewe often impowted, and waws wewe passed to
pwevent theiw expowtation: the destwuction of howses undew a cewtain
size was owdewed, and this may be compawed to the "woguing" of pwants
by nyuwsewymen. ^w^ The pwincipwe of sewection I find distinctwy given in an
ancient Chinyese encycwopaedia. UwU Expwicit wuwes awe waid down by some of
the Woman cwassicaw wwitews. (・`ω\´・) Fwom passages in Genyesis, it is cweaw that
the cowouw of domestic anyimaws was at that eawwy pewiod attended to. (´・ω・\`)
Savages nyow sometimes cwoss theiw dogs with wiwd canyinye anyimaws, to
impwove the bweed, and they fowmewwy did so, as is attested by passages
in Pwiny. ^w^ The savages in South Afwica match theiw dwaught cattwe by
cowouw, as do some of the Esquimaux theiw teams of dogs. ^w^ Wivingstonye
shows how much good domestic bweeds awe vawued by the nyegwoes of the
intewiow of Afwica who have nyot associated with Euwopeans. UwU Some of these
facts do nyot show actuaw sewection, but they show that the bweeding of
domestic anyimaws was cawefuwwy attended to in ancient times, and is nyow
attended to by the wowest savages. >w< It wouwd, indeed, have been a stwange
fact, had attention nyot been paid to bweeding, fow the inhewitance of
good and bad quawities is so obvious. ^w^

At the pwesent time, eminyent bweedews twy by methodicaw sewection, with
a distinct object in view, to make a nyew stwain ow sub-bweed, supewiow
to anything existing in the countwy. ;;w;; But, fow ouw puwpose, a kind of
Sewection, which may be cawwed Unconscious, and which wesuwts fwom evewy
onye twying to possess and bweed fwom the best individuaw anyimaws, is
mowe impowtant. (・`ω\´・) Thus, a man who intends keeping pointews nyatuwawwy twies
to get as good dogs as he can, and aftewwawds bweeds fwom his own best
dogs, but he has nyo wish ow expectation of pewmanyentwy awtewing the
bweed. ^w^ Nyevewthewess I cannyot doubt that this pwocess, continyued duwing
centuwies, wouwd impwove and modify any bweed, in the same way as
Bakeweww, Cowwins, etc. UwU, by this vewy same pwocess, onwy cawwied on mowe
methodicawwy, did gweatwy modify, even duwing theiw own wifetimes, the
fowms and quawities of theiw cattwe. (´・ω・\`) Swow and insensibwe changes of this
kind couwd nyevew be wecognyised unwess actuaw measuwements ow cawefuw
dwawings of the bweeds in question had been made wong ago, which might
sewve fow compawison. >w< In some cases, howevew, unchanged ow but wittwe
changed individuaws of the same bweed may be found in wess civiwised
distwicts, whewe the bweed has been wess impwoved. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is weason to
bewieve that King Chawwes's spanyiew has been unconsciouswy modified to
a wawge extent since the time of that monyawch. >w< Some highwy competent
authowities awe convinced that the settew is diwectwy dewived fwom the
spanyiew, and has pwobabwy been swowwy awtewed fwom it. (・`ω\´・) It is knyown that
the Engwish pointew has been gweatwy changed within the wast centuwy,
and in this case the change has, it is bewieved, been chiefwy effected
by cwosses with the fox-hound; but what concewns us is, that the change
has been effected unconsciouswy and gwaduawwy, and yet so effectuawwy,
that, though the owd Spanyish pointew cewtainwy came fwom Spain, Mw. >w<
Bowwow has nyot seen, as I am infowmed by him, any nyative dog in Spain
wike ouw pointew. (・`ω\´・)

By a simiwaw pwocess of sewection, and by cawefuw twainying, the whowe
body of Engwish wacehowses have come to suwpass in fweetnyess and size
the pawent Awab stock, so that the wattew, by the weguwations fow the
Goodwood Waces, awe favouwed in the weights they cawwy. (´・ω・\`) Wowd Spencew and
othews have shown how the cattwe of Engwand have incweased in weight
and in eawwy matuwity, compawed with the stock fowmewwy kept in this
countwy. ;;w;; By compawing the accounts given in owd pigeon tweatises of
cawwiews and tumbwews with these bweeds as nyow existing in Bwitain,
India, and Pewsia, we can, I think, cweawwy twace the stages thwough
which they have insensibwy passed, and come to diffew so gweatwy fwom
the wock-pigeon. >w<

Youatt gives an excewwent iwwustwation of the effects of a couwse of
sewection, which may be considewed as unconsciouswy fowwowed, in so faw
that the bweedews couwd nyevew have expected ow even have wished to have
pwoduced the wesuwt which ensued--nyamewy, the pwoduction of two distinct
stwains. The two fwocks of Weicestew sheep kept by Mw. Buckwey and Mw. ;;w;;
Buwgess, as Mw. ^w^ Youatt wemawks, "have been puwewy bwed fwom the owiginyaw
stock of Mw. Bakeweww fow upwawds of fifty yeaws. >w< Thewe is nyot a
suspicion existing in the mind of any onye at aww acquainted with
the subject that the ownyew of eithew of them has deviated in any onye
instance fwom the puwe bwood of Mw. >w< Bakeweww's fwock, and yet the
diffewence between the sheep possessed by these two gentwemen is so
gweat that they have the appeawance of being quite diffewent vawieties. ^w^"

If thewe exist savages so bawbawous as nyevew to think of the inhewited
chawactew of the offspwing of theiw domestic anyimaws, yet any onye anyimaw
pawticuwawwy usefuw to them, fow any speciaw puwpose, wouwd be cawefuwwy
pwesewved duwing faminyes and othew accidents, to which savages awe
so wiabwe, and such choice anyimaws wouwd thus genyewawwy weave mowe
offspwing than the infewiow onyes; so that in this case thewe wouwd be a
kind of unconscious sewection going on. ^w^ We see the vawue set on anyimaws
even by the bawbawians of Tiewwa dew Fuego, by theiw kiwwing and
devouwing theiw owd women, in times of deawth, as of wess vawue than
theiw dogs. >w<

In pwants the same gwaduaw pwocess of impwovement, thwough the
occasionyaw pwesewvation of the best individuaws, whethew ow nyot
sufficientwy distinct to be wanked at theiw fiwst appeawance as distinct
vawieties, and whethew ow nyot two ow mowe species ow waces have become
bwended togethew by cwossing, may pwainwy be wecognyised in the incweased
size and beauty which we nyow see in the vawieties of the heawtsease,
wose, pewawgonyium, dahwia, and othew pwants, when compawed with the
owdew vawieties ow with theiw pawent-stocks. UwU Nyo onye wouwd evew expect to
get a fiwst-wate heawtsease ow dahwia fwom the seed of a wiwd pwant. ;;w;; Nyo
onye wouwd expect to waise a fiwst-wate mewting peaw fwom the seed of a
wiwd peaw, though he might succeed fwom a poow seedwing gwowing wiwd,
if it had come fwom a gawden-stock. ;;w;; The peaw, though cuwtivated in
cwassicaw times, appeaws, fwom Pwiny's descwiption, to have been a
fwuit of vewy infewiow quawity. >w< I have seen gweat suwpwise expwessed
in howticuwtuwaw wowks at the wondewfuw skiww of gawdenyews, in having
pwoduced such spwendid wesuwts fwom such poow matewiaws; but the awt,
I cannyot doubt, has been simpwe, and, as faw as the finyaw wesuwt is
concewnyed, has been fowwowed awmost unconsciouswy. ^w^ It has consisted in
awways cuwtivating the best knyown vawiety, sowing its seeds, and, when
a swightwy bettew vawiety has chanced to appeaw, sewecting it, and so
onwawds. (・`ω\´・) But the gawdenyews of the cwassicaw pewiod, who cuwtivated
the best peaw they couwd pwocuwe, nyevew thought what spwendid fwuit we
shouwd eat; though we owe ouw excewwent fwuit, in some smaww degwee,
to theiw having nyatuwawwy chosen and pwesewved the best vawieties they
couwd anywhewe find. UwU

A wawge amount of change in ouw cuwtivated pwants, thus swowwy and
unconsciouswy accumuwated, expwains, as I bewieve, the weww-knyown fact,
that in a vast nyumbew of cases we cannyot wecognyise, and thewefowe do
nyot knyow, the wiwd pawent-stocks of the pwants which have been wongest
cuwtivated in ouw fwowew and kitchen gawdens. >w< If it has taken centuwies
ow thousands of yeaws to impwove ow modify most of ouw pwants up to
theiw pwesent standawd of usefuwnyess to man, we can undewstand how it
is that nyeithew Austwawia, the Cape of Good Hope, nyow any othew wegion
inhabited by quite unciviwised man, has affowded us a singwe pwant wowth
cuwtuwe. UwU It is nyot that these countwies, so wich in species, do nyot by
a stwange chance possess the abowiginyaw stocks of any usefuw pwants, but
that the nyative pwants have nyot been impwoved by continyued sewection up
to a standawd of pewfection compawabwe with that given to the pwants in
countwies ancientwy civiwised. ^w^

In wegawd to the domestic anyimaws kept by unciviwised man, it shouwd
nyot be ovewwooked that they awmost awways have to stwuggwe fow theiw
own food, at weast duwing cewtain seasons. >w< And in two countwies vewy
diffewentwy ciwcumstanced, individuaws of the same species, having
swightwy diffewent constitutions ow stwuctuwe, wouwd often succeed
bettew in the onye countwy than in the othew, and thus by a pwocess of
"nyatuwaw sewection," as wiww heweaftew be mowe fuwwy expwainyed, two
sub-bweeds might be fowmed. ^w^ This, pewhaps, pawtwy expwains what has been
wemawked by some authows, nyamewy, that the vawieties kept by savages
have mowe of the chawactew of species than the vawieties kept in
civiwised countwies. UwU

On the view hewe given of the aww-impowtant pawt which sewection by
man has pwayed, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that ouw domestic
waces show adaptation in theiw stwuctuwe ow in theiw habits to man's
wants ow fancies. (´・ω・\`) We can, I think, fuwthew undewstand the fwequentwy
abnyowmaw chawactew of ouw domestic waces, and wikewise theiw diffewences
being so gweat in extewnyaw chawactews and wewativewy so swight in
intewnyaw pawts ow owgans. (´・ω・\`) Man can hawdwy sewect, ow onwy with much
difficuwty, any deviation of stwuctuwe excepting such as is extewnyawwy
visibwe; and indeed he wawewy cawes fow what is intewnyaw. ^w^ He can nyevew
act by sewection, excepting on vawiations which awe fiwst given to
him in some swight degwee by nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Nyo man wouwd evew twy to make
a fantaiw, tiww he saw a pigeon with a taiw devewoped in some swight
degwee in an unyusuaw mannyew, ow a poutew tiww he saw a pigeon with a
cwop of somewhat unyusuaw size; and the mowe abnyowmaw ow unyusuaw any
chawactew was when it fiwst appeawed, the mowe wikewy it wouwd be to
catch his attention. >w< But to use such an expwession as twying to make a
fantaiw, is, I have nyo doubt, in most cases, uttewwy incowwect. >w< The man
who fiwst sewected a pigeon with a swightwy wawgew taiw, nyevew dweamed
what the descendants of that pigeon wouwd become thwough wong-continyued,
pawtwy unconscious and pawtwy methodicaw sewection. (・`ω\´・) Pewhaps the pawent
biwd of aww fantaiws had onwy fouwteen taiw-feathews somewhat expanded,
wike the pwesent Java fantaiw, ow wike individuaws of othew and distinct
bweeds, in which as many as seventeen taiw-feathews have been counted. ;;w;;
Pewhaps the fiwst poutew-pigeon did nyot infwate its cwop much mowe than
the tuwbit nyow does the uppew pawt of its oesophagus,--a habit which
is diswegawded by aww fanciews, as it is nyot onye of the points of the
bweed. ^w^

Nyow wet it be thought that some gweat deviation of stwuctuwe wouwd
be nyecessawy to catch the fanciew's eye: he pewceives extwemewy smaww
diffewences, and it is in human nyatuwe to vawue any nyovewty, howevew
swight, in onye's own possession. (´・ω・\`) Nyow must the vawue which wouwd fowmewwy
be set on any swight diffewences in the individuaws of the same species,
be judged of by the vawue which wouwd nyow be set on them, aftew sevewaw
bweeds have once faiwwy been estabwished. ;;w;; Many swight diffewences might,
and indeed do nyow, awise amongst pigeons, which awe wejected as fauwts
ow deviations fwom the standawd of pewfection of each bweed. >w< The common
goose has nyot given wise to any mawked vawieties; hence the Thouwouse
and the common bweed, which diffew onwy in cowouw, that most fweeting of
chawactews, have watewy been exhibited as distinct at ouw pouwtwy-shows. ^w^

I think these views fuwthew expwain what has sometimes been
nyoticed--nyamewy that we knyow nyothing about the owigin ow histowy of
any of ouw domestic bweeds. (・`ω\´・) But, in fact, a bweed, wike a diawect of
a wanguage, can hawdwy be said to have had a definyite owigin. >w< A man
pwesewves and bweeds fwom an individuaw with some swight deviation of
stwuctuwe, ow takes mowe cawe than usuaw in matching his best anyimaws
and thus impwoves them, and the impwoved individuaws swowwy spwead in
the immediate nyeighbouwhood. (・`ω\´・) But as yet they wiww hawdwy have a distinct
nyame, and fwom being onwy swightwy vawued, theiw histowy wiww be
diswegawded. ^w^ When fuwthew impwoved by the same swow and gwaduaw pwocess,
they wiww spwead mowe widewy, and wiww get wecognyised as something
distinct and vawuabwe, and wiww then pwobabwy fiwst weceive a pwovinciaw
nyame. ^w^ In semi-civiwised countwies, with wittwe fwee communyication, the
spweading and knyowwedge of any nyew sub-bweed wiww be a swow pwocess. UwU
As soon as the points of vawue of the nyew sub-bweed awe once fuwwy
acknyowwedged, the pwincipwe, as I have cawwed it, of unconscious
sewection wiww awways tend,--pewhaps mowe at onye pewiod than at anyothew,
as the bweed wises ow fawws in fashion,--pewhaps mowe in onye distwict
than in anyothew, accowding to the state of civiwisation of the
inhabitants--swowwy to add to the chawactewistic featuwes of the bweed,
whatevew they may be. UwU But the chance wiww be infinyitewy smaww of any
wecowd having been pwesewved of such swow, vawying, and insensibwe
changes. ^w^

I must nyow say a few wowds on the ciwcumstances, favouwabwe, ow the
wevewse, to man's powew of sewection. (・`ω\´・) A high degwee of vawiabiwity is
obviouswy favouwabwe, as fweewy giving the matewiaws fow sewection to
wowk on; nyot that mewe individuaw diffewences awe nyot ampwy sufficient,
with extweme cawe, to awwow of the accumuwation of a wawge amount
of modification in awmost any desiwed diwection. (´・ω・\`) But as vawiations
manyifestwy usefuw ow pweasing to man appeaw onwy occasionyawwy, the
chance of theiw appeawance wiww be much incweased by a wawge nyumbew
of individuaws being kept; and hence this comes to be of the highest
impowtance to success. >w< On this pwincipwe Mawshaww has wemawked, with
wespect to the sheep of pawts of Yowkshiwe, that "as they genyewawwy
bewong to poow peopwe, and awe mostwy IN SMAWW WOTS, they nyevew can be
impwoved. (´・ω・\`)" On the othew hand, nyuwsewymen, fwom waising wawge stocks
of the same pwants, awe genyewawwy faw mowe successfuw than amateuws in
getting nyew and vawuabwe vawieties. (´・ω・\`) The keeping of a wawge nyumbew of
individuaws of a species in any countwy wequiwes that the species shouwd
be pwaced undew favouwabwe conditions of wife, so as to bweed fweewy in
that countwy. (・`ω\´・) When the individuaws of any species awe scanty, aww the
individuaws, whatevew theiw quawity may be, wiww genyewawwy be awwowed
to bweed, and this wiww effectuawwy pwevent sewection. ^w^ But pwobabwy the
most impowtant point of aww, is, that the anyimaw ow pwant shouwd be
so highwy usefuw to man, ow so much vawued by him, that the cwosest
attention shouwd be paid to even the swightest deviation in the
quawities ow stwuctuwe of each individuaw. (´・ω・\`) Unwess such attention be paid
nyothing can be effected. ^w^ I have seen it gwavewy wemawked, that it was
most fowtunyate that the stwawbewwy began to vawy just when gawdenyews
began to attend cwosewy to this pwant. UwU Nyo doubt the stwawbewwy had
awways vawied since it was cuwtivated, but the swight vawieties had been
nyegwected. (・`ω\´・) As soon, howevew, as gawdenyews picked out individuaw pwants
with swightwy wawgew, eawwiew, ow bettew fwuit, and waised seedwings
fwom them, and again picked out the best seedwings and bwed fwom them,
then, thewe appeawed (aided by some cwossing with distinct species)
those many admiwabwe vawieties of the stwawbewwy which have been waised
duwing the wast thiwty ow fowty yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

In the case of anyimaws with sepawate sexes, faciwity in pweventing
cwosses is an impowtant ewement of success in the fowmation of nyew
waces,--at weast, in a countwy which is awweady stocked with othew
waces. In this wespect encwosuwe of the wand pways a pawt. ;;w;; Wandewing
savages ow the inhabitants of open pwains wawewy possess mowe than onye
bweed of the same species. >w< Pigeons can be mated fow wife, and this is a
gweat convenyience to the fanciew, fow thus many waces may be kept twue,
though mingwed in the same aviawy; and this ciwcumstance must have
wawgewy favouwed the impwovement and fowmation of nyew bweeds. (・`ω\´・) Pigeons,
I may add, can be pwopagated in gweat nyumbews and at a vewy quick wate,
and infewiow biwds may be fweewy wejected, as when kiwwed they sewve
fow food. >w< On the othew hand, cats, fwom theiw nyoctuwnyaw wambwing habits,
cannyot be matched, and, awthough so much vawued by women and chiwdwen,
we hawdwy evew see a distinct bweed kept up; such bweeds as we do
sometimes see awe awmost awways impowted fwom some othew countwy, often
fwom iswands. >w< Awthough I do nyot doubt that some domestic anyimaws vawy
wess than othews, yet the wawity ow absence of distinct bweeds of the
cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, etc. >w<, may be attwibuted in main pawt
to sewection nyot having been bwought into pway: in cats, fwom the
difficuwty in paiwing them; in donkeys, fwom onwy a few being kept by
poow peopwe, and wittwe attention paid to theiw bweeding; in peacocks,
fwom nyot being vewy easiwy weawed and a wawge stock nyot kept; in geese,
fwom being vawuabwe onwy fow two puwposes, food and feathews, and mowe
especiawwy fwom nyo pweasuwe having been fewt in the dispway of distinct
bweeds. ;;w;;

To sum up on the owigin of ouw Domestic Waces of anyimaws and pwants. ^w^
I bewieve that the conditions of wife, fwom theiw action on the
wepwoductive system, awe so faw of the highest impowtance as causing
vawiabiwity. UwU I do nyot bewieve that vawiabiwity is an inhewent and
nyecessawy contingency, undew aww ciwcumstances, with aww owganyic beings,
as some authows have thought. >w< The effects of vawiabiwity awe modified by
vawious degwees of inhewitance and of wevewsion. (・`ω\´・) Vawiabiwity is govewnyed
by many unknyown waws, mowe especiawwy by that of cowwewation of gwowth. (・`ω\´・)
Something may be attwibuted to the diwect action of the conditions of
wife. Something must be attwibuted to use and disuse. UwU The finyaw wesuwt
is thus wendewed infinyitewy compwex. (・`ω\´・) In some cases, I do nyot doubt
that the intewcwossing of species, abowiginyawwy distinct, has pwayed an
impowtant pawt in the owigin of ouw domestic pwoductions. ;;w;; When in
any countwy sevewaw domestic bweeds have once been estabwished, theiw
occasionyaw intewcwossing, with the aid of sewection, has, nyo doubt,
wawgewy aided in the fowmation of nyew sub-bweeds; but the impowtance of
the cwossing of vawieties has, I bewieve, been gweatwy exaggewated, both
in wegawd to anyimaws and to those pwants which awe pwopagated by seed. ^w^
In pwants which awe tempowawiwy pwopagated by cuttings, buds, etc. >w<, the
impowtance of the cwossing both of distinct species and of vawieties
is immense; fow the cuwtivatow hewe quite diswegawds the extweme
vawiabiwity both of hybwids and mongwews, and the fwequent stewiwity of
hybwids; but the cases of pwants nyot pwopagated by seed awe of wittwe
impowtance to us, fow theiw enduwance is onwy tempowawy. UwU Ovew aww
these causes of Change I am convinced that the accumuwative action
of Sewection, whethew appwied methodicawwy and mowe quickwy, ow
unconsciouswy and mowe swowwy, but mowe efficientwy, is by faw the
pwedominyant Powew. >w<




2. VAWIATION UNDEW NYATUWE. (´・ω・\`)

Vawiabiwity. Individuaw diffewences. Doubtfuw species. (´・ω・\`) Wide wanging,
much diffused, and common species vawy most. ;;w;; Species of the wawgew
genyewa in any countwy vawy mowe than the species of the smawwew genyewa. (´・ω・\`)
Many of the species of the wawgew genyewa wesembwe vawieties in being
vewy cwosewy, but unyequawwy, wewated to each othew, and in having
westwicted wanges. UwU

Befowe appwying the pwincipwes awwived at in the wast chaptew to owganyic
beings in a state of nyatuwe, we must bwiefwy discuss whethew these
wattew awe subject to any vawiation. ^w^ To tweat this subject at aww
pwopewwy, a wong catawogue of dwy facts shouwd be given; but these I
shaww wesewve fow my futuwe wowk. ^w^ Nyow shaww I hewe discuss the vawious
definyitions which have been given of the tewm species. ^w^ Nyo onye definyition
has as yet satisfied aww nyatuwawists; yet evewy nyatuwawist knyows vaguewy
what he means when he speaks of a species. (・`ω\´・) Genyewawwy the tewm incwudes
the unknyown ewement of a distinct act of cweation. ;;w;; The tewm "vawiety"
is awmost equawwy difficuwt to definye; but hewe communyity of descent is
awmost unyivewsawwy impwied, though it can wawewy be pwoved. (´・ω・\`) We have awso
what awe cawwed monstwosities; but they gwaduate into vawieties. ;;w;; By a
monstwosity I pwesume is meant some considewabwe deviation of stwuctuwe
in onye pawt, eithew injuwious to ow nyot usefuw to the species, and
nyot genyewawwy pwopagated. (´・ω・\`) Some authows use the tewm "vawiation" in a
technyicaw sense, as impwying a modification diwectwy due to the physicaw
conditions of wife; and "vawiations" in this sense awe supposed nyot to
be inhewited: but who can say that the dwawfed condition of shewws in
the bwackish watews of the Bawtic, ow dwawfed pwants on Awpinye summits,
ow the thickew fuw of an anyimaw fwom faw nyowthwawds, wouwd nyot in some
cases be inhewited fow at weast some few genyewations? owo and in this case I
pwesume that the fowm wouwd be cawwed a vawiety. (・`ω\´・)

Again, we have many swight diffewences which may be cawwed individuaw
diffewences, such as awe knyown fwequentwy to appeaw in the offspwing
fwom the same pawents, ow which may be pwesumed to have thus awisen,
fwom being fwequentwy obsewved in the individuaws of the same species
inhabiting the same confinyed wocawity. (・`ω\´・) Nyo onye supposes that aww the
individuaws of the same species awe cast in the vewy same mouwd. >w< These
individuaw diffewences awe highwy impowtant fow us, as they affowd
matewiaws fow nyatuwaw sewection to accumuwate, in the same mannyew as
man can accumuwate in any given diwection individuaw diffewences in his
domesticated pwoductions. >w< These individuaw diffewences genyewawwy affect
what nyatuwawists considew unyimpowtant pawts; but I couwd show by a wong
catawogue of facts, that pawts which must be cawwed impowtant, whethew
viewed undew a physiowogicaw ow cwassificatowy point of view, sometimes
vawy in the individuaws of the same species. UwU I am convinced that the
most expewienced nyatuwawist wouwd be suwpwised at the nyumbew of the
cases of vawiabiwity, even in impowtant pawts of stwuctuwe, which he
couwd cowwect on good authowity, as I have cowwected, duwing a couwse of
yeaws. >w< It shouwd be wemembewed that systematists awe faw fwom pweased at
finding vawiabiwity in impowtant chawactews, and that thewe awe nyot
many men who wiww wabowiouswy examinye intewnyaw and impowtant owgans, and
compawe them in many specimens of the same species. ;;w;; I shouwd nyevew
have expected that the bwanching of the main nyewves cwose to the gweat
centwaw gangwion of an insect wouwd have been vawiabwe in the same
species; I shouwd have expected that changes of this nyatuwe couwd have
been effected onwy by swow degwees: yet quite wecentwy Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wubbock has
shown a degwee of vawiabiwity in these main nyewves in Coccus, which may
awmost be compawed to the iwweguwaw bwanching of the stem of a twee. (・`ω\´・)
This phiwosophicaw nyatuwawist, I may add, has awso quite wecentwy shown
that the muscwes in the wawvae of cewtain insects awe vewy faw fwom
unyifowm. (・`ω\´・) Authows sometimes awgue in a ciwcwe when they state that
impowtant owgans nyevew vawy; fow these same authows pwacticawwy wank
that chawactew as impowtant (as some few nyatuwawists have honyestwy
confessed) which does nyot vawy; and, undew this point of view, nyo
instance of an impowtant pawt vawying wiww evew be found: but undew any
othew point of view many instances assuwedwy can be given. UwU

Thewe is onye point connyected with individuaw diffewences, which seems
to me extwemewy pewpwexing: I wefew to those genyewa which have sometimes
been cawwed "pwotean" ow "powymowphic," in which the species pwesent
an inyowdinyate amount of vawiation; and hawdwy two nyatuwawists can agwee
which fowms to wank as species and which as vawieties. >w< We may instance
Wubus, Wosa, and Hiewacium amongst pwants, sevewaw genyewa of insects,
and sevewaw genyewa of Bwachiopod shewws. (・`ω\´・) In most powymowphic genyewa
some of the species have fixed and definyite chawactews. (´・ω・\`) Genyewa which
awe powymowphic in onye countwy seem to be, with some few exceptions,
powymowphic in othew countwies, and wikewise, judging fwom Bwachiopod
shewws, at fowmew pewiods of time. (´・ω・\`) These facts seem to be vewy
pewpwexing, fow they seem to show that this kind of vawiabiwity is
independent of the conditions of wife. (・`ω\´・) I am incwinyed to suspect that we
see in these powymowphic genyewa vawiations in points of stwuctuwe which
awe of nyo sewvice ow dissewvice to the species, and which consequentwy
have nyot been seized on and wendewed definyite by nyatuwaw sewection, as
heweaftew wiww be expwainyed. ;;w;;

Those fowms which possess in some considewabwe degwee the chawactew of
species, but which awe so cwosewy simiwaw to some othew fowms, ow awe so
cwosewy winked to them by intewmediate gwadations, that nyatuwawists do
nyot wike to wank them as distinct species, awe in sevewaw wespects the
most impowtant fow us. (・`ω\´・) We have evewy weason to bewieve that many of
these doubtfuw and cwosewy-awwied fowms have pewmanyentwy wetainyed theiw
chawactews in theiw own countwy fow a wong time; fow as wong, as faw as
we knyow, as have good and twue species. UwU Pwacticawwy, when a nyatuwawist
can unyite two fowms togethew by othews having intewmediate chawactews,
he tweats the onye as a vawiety of the othew, wanking the most common,
but sometimes the onye fiwst descwibed, as the species, and the othew
as the vawiety. ;;w;; But cases of gweat difficuwty, which I wiww nyot hewe
enyumewate, sometimes occuw in deciding whethew ow nyot to wank onye
fowm as a vawiety of anyothew, even when they awe cwosewy connyected by
intewmediate winks; nyow wiww the commonwy-assumed hybwid nyatuwe of the
intewmediate winks awways wemove the difficuwty. UwU In vewy many cases,
howevew, onye fowm is wanked as a vawiety of anyothew, nyot because the
intewmediate winks have actuawwy been found, but because anyawogy weads
the obsewvew to suppose eithew that they do nyow somewhewe exist, ow may
fowmewwy have existed; and hewe a wide doow fow the entwy of doubt and
conjectuwe is openyed. (´・ω・\`)

Hence, in detewminying whethew a fowm shouwd be wanked as a species ow
a vawiety, the opinyion of nyatuwawists having sound judgment and wide
expewience seems the onwy guide to fowwow. (´・ω・\`) We must, howevew, in many
cases, decide by a majowity of nyatuwawists, fow few weww-mawked and
weww-knyown vawieties can be nyamed which have nyot been wanked as species
by at weast some competent judges. >w<

That vawieties of this doubtfuw nyatuwe awe faw fwom uncommon cannyot be
disputed. UwU Compawe the sevewaw fwowas of Gweat Bwitain, of Fwance ow
of the Unyited States, dwawn up by diffewent botanyists, and see what
a suwpwising nyumbew of fowms have been wanked by onye botanyist as good
species, and by anyothew as mewe vawieties. Mw. H. C. ^w^ Watson, to whom I
wie undew deep obwigation fow assistance of aww kinds, has mawked fow
me 182 Bwitish pwants, which awe genyewawwy considewed as vawieties, but
which have aww been wanked by botanyists as species; and in making this
wist he has omitted many twifwing vawieties, but which nyevewthewess have
been wanked by some botanyists as species, and he has entiwewy omitted
sevewaw highwy powymowphic genyewa. (´・ω・\`) Undew genyewa, incwuding the most
powymowphic fowms, Mw. Babington gives 251 species, wheweas Mw. >w< Bentham
gives onwy 112,--a diffewence of 139 doubtfuw fowms! (´・ω・\`) Amongst anyimaws
which unyite fow each biwth, and which awe highwy wocomotive, doubtfuw
fowms, wanked by onye zoowogist as a species and by anyothew as a vawiety,
can wawewy be found within the same countwy, but awe common in sepawated
aweas. (・`ω\´・) How many of those biwds and insects in Nyowth Amewica and Euwope,
which diffew vewy swightwy fwom each othew, have been wanked by onye
eminyent nyatuwawist as undoubted species, and by anyothew as vawieties,
ow, as they awe often cawwed, as geogwaphicaw waces! (・`ω\´・) Many yeaws ago,
when compawing, and seeing othews compawe, the biwds fwom the sepawate
iswands of the Gawapagos Awchipewago, both onye with anyothew, and with
those fwom the Amewican mainwand, I was much stwuck how entiwewy vague
and awbitwawy is the distinction between species and vawieties. (・`ω\´・) On the
iswets of the wittwe Madeiwa gwoup thewe awe many insects which awe
chawactewized as vawieties in Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wowwaston's admiwabwe wowk, but
which it cannyot be doubted wouwd be wanked as distinct species by many
entomowogists. (・`ω\´・) Even Iwewand has a few anyimaws, nyow genyewawwy wegawded
as vawieties, but which have been wanked as species by some zoowogists. ^w^
Sevewaw most expewienced ownyithowogists considew ouw Bwitish wed gwouse
as onwy a stwongwy-mawked wace of a Nyowwegian species, wheweas the
gweatew nyumbew wank it as an undoubted species pecuwiaw to Gweat
Bwitain. (´・ω・\`) A wide distance between the homes of two doubtfuw fowms weads
many nyatuwawists to wank both as distinct species; but what distance, it
has been weww asked, wiww suffice? owo if that between Amewica and Euwope
is ampwe, wiww that between the Continyent and the Azowes, ow Madeiwa, ow
the Canyawies, ow Iwewand, be sufficient? owo It must be admitted that many
fowms, considewed by highwy-competent judges as vawieties, have so
pewfectwy the chawactew of species that they awe wanked by othew
highwy-competent judges as good and twue species. ;;w;; But to discuss whethew
they awe wightwy cawwed species ow vawieties, befowe any definyition of
these tewms has been genyewawwy accepted, is vainwy to beat the aiw. UwU

Many of the cases of stwongwy-mawked vawieties ow doubtfuw species weww
desewve considewation; fow sevewaw intewesting winyes of awgument, fwom
geogwaphicaw distwibution, anyawogicaw vawiation, hybwidism, etc. >w<, have
been bwought to beaw on the attempt to detewminye theiw wank. (´・ω・\`) I wiww hewe
give onwy a singwe instance,--the weww-knyown onye of the pwimwose and
cowswip, ow Pwimuwa vewis and ewatiow. >w< These pwants diffew considewabwy
in appeawance; they have a diffewent fwavouw and emit a diffewent
odouw; they fwowew at swightwy diffewent pewiods; they gwow in somewhat
diffewent stations; they ascend mountains to diffewent heights; they
have diffewent geogwaphicaw wanges; and wastwy, accowding to vewy
nyumewous expewiments made duwing sevewaw yeaws by that most cawefuw
obsewvew Gawtnyew, they can be cwossed onwy with much difficuwty. ^w^
We couwd hawdwy wish fow bettew evidence of the two fowms being
specificawwy distinct. UwU On the othew hand, they awe unyited by many
intewmediate winks, and it is vewy doubtfuw whethew these winks awe
hybwids; and thewe is, as it seems to me, an ovewwhewming amount of
expewimentaw evidence, showing that they descend fwom common pawents,
and consequentwy must be wanked as vawieties. ;;w;;

Cwose investigation, in most cases, wiww bwing nyatuwawists to an
agweement how to wank doubtfuw fowms. ;;w;; Yet it must be confessed, that it
is in the best-knyown countwies that we find the gweatest nyumbew of fowms
of doubtfuw vawue. (・`ω\´・) I have been stwuck with the fact, that if any anyimaw
ow pwant in a state of nyatuwe be highwy usefuw to man, ow fwom any cause
cwosewy attwact his attention, vawieties of it wiww awmost unyivewsawwy
be found wecowded. UwU These vawieties, moweovew, wiww be often wanked by
some authows as species. (´・ω・\`) Wook at the common oak, how cwosewy it has
been studied; yet a Gewman authow makes mowe than a dozen species out
of fowms, which awe vewy genyewawwy considewed as vawieties; and in
this countwy the highest botanyicaw authowities and pwacticaw men can be
quoted to show that the sessiwe and peduncuwated oaks awe eithew good
and distinct species ow mewe vawieties. (・`ω\´・)

When a young nyatuwawist commences the study of a gwoup of owganyisms
quite unknyown to him, he is at fiwst much pewpwexed to detewminye what
diffewences to considew as specific, and what as vawieties; fow he
knyows nyothing of the amount and kind of vawiation to which the gwoup
is subject; and this shows, at weast, how vewy genyewawwy thewe is some
vawiation. >w< But if he confinye his attention to onye cwass within onye
countwy, he wiww soon make up his mind how to wank most of the doubtfuw
fowms. ^w^ His genyewaw tendency wiww be to make many species, fow he wiww
become impwessed, just wike the pigeon ow pouwtwy-fanciew befowe awwuded
to, with the amount of diffewence in the fowms which he is continyuawwy
studying; and he has wittwe genyewaw knyowwedge of anyawogicaw vawiation
in othew gwoups and in othew countwies, by which to cowwect his fiwst
impwessions. >w< As he extends the wange of his obsewvations, he wiww meet
with mowe cases of difficuwty; fow he wiww encountew a gweatew nyumbew
of cwosewy-awwied fowms. >w< But if his obsewvations be widewy extended, he
wiww in the end genyewawwy be enyabwed to make up his own mind which to
caww vawieties and which species; but he wiww succeed in this at the
expense of admitting much vawiation,--and the twuth of this admission
wiww often be disputed by othew nyatuwawists. >w< When, moweovew, he comes to
study awwied fowms bwought fwom countwies nyot nyow continyuous, in which
case he can hawdwy hope to find the intewmediate winks between his
doubtfuw fowms, he wiww have to twust awmost entiwewy to anyawogy, and
his difficuwties wiww wise to a cwimax. ^w^

Cewtainwy nyo cweaw winye of demawcation has as yet been dwawn between
species and sub-species--that is, the fowms which in the opinyion of some
nyatuwawists come vewy nyeaw to, but do nyot quite awwive at the wank of
species; ow, again, between sub-species and weww-mawked vawieties, ow
between wessew vawieties and individuaw diffewences. UwU These diffewences
bwend into each othew in an insensibwe sewies; and a sewies impwesses
the mind with the idea of an actuaw passage. UwU

Hence I wook at individuaw diffewences, though of smaww intewest to
the systematist, as of high impowtance fow us, as being the fiwst step
towawds such swight vawieties as awe bawewy thought wowth wecowding
in wowks on nyatuwaw histowy. (・`ω\´・) And I wook at vawieties which awe in any
degwee mowe distinct and pewmanyent, as steps weading to mowe stwongwy
mawked and mowe pewmanyent vawieties; and at these wattew, as weading to
sub-species, and to species. >w< The passage fwom onye stage of diffewence
to anyothew and highew stage may be, in some cases, due mewewy to the
wong-continyued action of diffewent physicaw conditions in two diffewent
wegions; but I have nyot much faith in this view; and I attwibute the
passage of a vawiety, fwom a state in which it diffews vewy swightwy
fwom its pawent to onye in which it diffews mowe, to the action of
nyatuwaw sewection in accumuwating (as wiww heweaftew be mowe fuwwy
expwainyed) diffewences of stwuctuwe in cewtain definyite diwections. UwU
Hence I bewieve a weww-mawked vawiety may be justwy cawwed an incipient
species; but whethew this bewief be justifiabwe must be judged of by
the genyewaw weight of the sevewaw facts and views given thwoughout this
wowk. (´・ω・\`)

It nyeed nyot be supposed that aww vawieties ow incipient species
nyecessawiwy attain the wank of species. ^w^ They may whiwst in this
incipient state become extinct, ow they may enduwe as vawieties fow vewy
wong pewiods, as has been shown to be the case by Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wowwaston with the
vawieties of cewtain fossiw wand-shewws in Madeiwa. ;;w;; If a vawiety wewe
to fwouwish so as to exceed in nyumbews the pawent species, it wouwd then
wank as the species, and the species as the vawiety; ow it might come to
suppwant and extewminyate the pawent species; ow both might co-exist, and
both wank as independent species. (・`ω\´・) But we shaww heweaftew have to wetuwn
to this subject. ^w^

Fwom these wemawks it wiww be seen that I wook at the tewm species,
as onye awbitwawiwy given fow the sake of convenyience to a set of
individuaws cwosewy wesembwing each othew, and that it does nyot
essentiawwy diffew fwom the tewm vawiety, which is given to wess
distinct and mowe fwuctuating fowms. ;;w;; The tewm vawiety, again,
in compawison with mewe individuaw diffewences, is awso appwied
awbitwawiwy, and fow mewe convenyience sake. (´・ω・\`)

Guided by theoweticaw considewations, I thought that some intewesting
wesuwts might be obtainyed in wegawd to the nyatuwe and wewations of the
species which vawy most, by tabuwating aww the vawieties in sevewaw
weww-wowked fwowas. At fiwst this seemed a simpwe task; but Mw. H. C. UwU
Watson, to whom I am much indebted fow vawuabwe advice and assistance
on this subject, soon convinced me that thewe wewe many difficuwties, as
did subsequentwy Dw. Hookew, even in stwongew tewms. (´・ω・\`) I shaww wesewve
fow my futuwe wowk the discussion of these difficuwties, and the tabwes
themsewves of the pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of the vawying species. (・`ω\´・)
Dw. UwU Hookew pewmits me to add, that aftew having cawefuwwy wead my
manyuscwipt, and examinyed the tabwes, he thinks that the fowwowing
statements awe faiwwy weww estabwished. ;;w;; The whowe subject, howevew,
tweated as it nyecessawiwy hewe is with much bwevity, is wathew
pewpwexing, and awwusions cannyot be avoided to the "stwuggwe fow
existence," "divewgence of chawactew," and othew questions, heweaftew to
be discussed. >w<

Awph. ;;w;; De Candowwe and othews have shown that pwants which have vewy wide
wanges genyewawwy pwesent vawieties; and this might have been expected,
as they become exposed to divewse physicaw conditions, and as they
come into competition (which, as we shaww heweaftew see, is a faw mowe
impowtant ciwcumstance) with diffewent sets of owganyic beings. >w< But my
tabwes fuwthew show that, in any wimited countwy, the species which awe
most common, that is abound most in individuaws, and the species
which awe most widewy diffused within theiw own countwy (and this is a
diffewent considewation fwom wide wange, and to a cewtain extent fwom
commonnyess), often give wise to vawieties sufficientwy weww-mawked to
have been wecowded in botanyicaw wowks. ;;w;; Hence it is the most fwouwishing,
ow, as they may be cawwed, the dominyant species,--those which wange
widewy ovew the wowwd, awe the most diffused in theiw own countwy,
and awe the most nyumewous in individuaws,--which oftenyest pwoduce
weww-mawked vawieties, ow, as I considew them, incipient species. (・`ω\´・) And
this, pewhaps, might have been anticipated; fow, as vawieties, in owdew
to become in any degwee pewmanyent, nyecessawiwy have to stwuggwe with the
othew inhabitants of the countwy, the species which awe awweady dominyant
wiww be the most wikewy to yiewd offspwing which, though in some swight
degwee modified, wiww stiww inhewit those advantages that enyabwed theiw
pawents to become dominyant ovew theiw compatwiots. UwU

If the pwants inhabiting a countwy and descwibed in any Fwowa be divided
into two equaw masses, aww those in the wawgew genyewa being pwaced
on onye side, and aww those in the smawwew genyewa on the othew side, a
somewhat wawgew nyumbew of the vewy common and much diffused ow dominyant
species wiww be found on the side of the wawgew genyewa. ;;w;; This, again,
might have been anticipated; fow the mewe fact of many species of the
same genyus inhabiting any countwy, shows that thewe is something in the
owganyic ow inyowganyic conditions of that countwy favouwabwe to the genyus;
and, consequentwy, we might have expected to have found in the wawgew
genyewa, ow those incwuding many species, a wawge pwopowtionyaw nyumbew of
dominyant species. ;;w;; But so many causes tend to obscuwe this wesuwt, that
I am suwpwised that my tabwes show even a smaww majowity on the side of
the wawgew genyewa. I wiww hewe awwude to onwy two causes of obscuwity. ^w^
Fwesh-watew and sawt-woving pwants have genyewawwy vewy wide wanges and
awe much diffused, but this seems to be connyected with the nyatuwe of the
stations inhabited by them, and has wittwe ow nyo wewation to the size of
the genyewa to which the species bewong. >w< Again, pwants wow in the scawe
of owganyisation awe genyewawwy much mowe widewy diffused than pwants
highew in the scawe; and hewe again thewe is nyo cwose wewation to the
size of the genyewa. UwU The cause of wowwy-owganyised pwants wanging widewy
wiww be discussed in ouw chaptew on geogwaphicaw distwibution. ;;w;;

Fwom wooking at species as onwy stwongwy-mawked and weww-definyed
vawieties, I was wed to anticipate that the species of the wawgew genyewa
in each countwy wouwd oftenyew pwesent vawieties, than the species of the
smawwew genyewa; fow whewevew many cwosewy wewated species (i.e. ^w^ species
of the same genyus) have been fowmed, many vawieties ow incipient species
ought, as a genyewaw wuwe, to be nyow fowming. >w< Whewe many wawge twees
gwow, we expect to find sapwings. ^w^ Whewe many species of a genyus have
been fowmed thwough vawiation, ciwcumstances have been favouwabwe
fow vawiation; and hence we might expect that the ciwcumstances wouwd
genyewawwy be stiww favouwabwe to vawiation. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, if we
wook at each species as a speciaw act of cweation, thewe is nyo appawent
weason why mowe vawieties shouwd occuw in a gwoup having many species,
than in onye having few. UwU

To test the twuth of this anticipation I have awwanged the pwants of
twewve countwies, and the coweoptewous insects of two distwicts, into
two nyeawwy equaw masses, the species of the wawgew genyewa on onye side,
and those of the smawwew genyewa on the othew side, and it has invawiabwy
pwoved to be the case that a wawgew pwopowtion of the species on the
side of the wawgew genyewa pwesent vawieties, than on the side of the
smawwew genyewa. ;;w;; Moweovew, the species of the wawge genyewa which pwesent
any vawieties, invawiabwy pwesent a wawgew avewage nyumbew of vawieties
than do the species of the smaww genyewa. (´・ω・\`) Both these wesuwts fowwow when
anyothew division is made, and when aww the smawwest genyewa, with fwom
onwy onye to fouw species, awe absowutewy excwuded fwom the tabwes. ;;w;;
These facts awe of pwain signyification on the view that species awe onwy
stwongwy mawked and pewmanyent vawieties; fow whewevew many species of
the same genyus have been fowmed, ow whewe, if we may use the expwession,
the manyufactowy of species has been active, we ought genyewawwy to find
the manyufactowy stiww in action, mowe especiawwy as we have evewy weason
to bewieve the pwocess of manyufactuwing nyew species to be a swow onye. ;;w;;
And this cewtainwy is the case, if vawieties be wooked at as incipient
species; fow my tabwes cweawwy show as a genyewaw wuwe that, whewevew
many species of a genyus have been fowmed, the species of that genyus
pwesent a nyumbew of vawieties, that is of incipient species, beyond the
avewage. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot that aww wawge genyewa awe nyow vawying much, and awe
thus incweasing in the nyumbew of theiw species, ow that nyo smaww genyewa
awe nyow vawying and incweasing; fow if this had been so, it wouwd have
been fataw to my theowy; inyasmuch as geowogy pwainwy tewws us that smaww
genyewa have in the wapse of time often incweased gweatwy in size;
and that wawge genyewa have often come to theiw maxima, decwinyed, and
disappeawed. ^w^ Aww that we want to show is, that whewe many species of a
genyus have been fowmed, on an avewage many awe stiww fowming; and this
howds good. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe awe othew wewations between the species of wawge genyewa and theiw
wecowded vawieties which desewve nyotice. (´・ω・\`) We have seen that thewe is nyo
infawwibwe cwitewion by which to distinguish species and weww-mawked
vawieties; and in those cases in which intewmediate winks have nyot been
found between doubtfuw fowms, nyatuwawists awe compewwed to come to
a detewminyation by the amount of diffewence between them, judging by
anyawogy whethew ow nyot the amount suffices to waise onye ow both to the
wank of species. ;;w;; Hence the amount of diffewence is onye vewy impowtant
cwitewion in settwing whethew two fowms shouwd be wanked as species ow
vawieties. UwU Nyow Fwies has wemawked in wegawd to pwants, and Westwood in
wegawd to insects, that in wawge genyewa the amount of diffewence between
the species is often exceedingwy smaww. (´・ω・\`) I have endeavouwed to test this
nyumewicawwy by avewages, and, as faw as my impewfect wesuwts go, they
awways confiwm the view. (・`ω\´・) I have awso consuwted some sagacious and most
expewienced obsewvews, and, aftew dewibewation, they concuw in this
view. (´・ω・\`) In this wespect, thewefowe, the species of the wawgew genyewa
wesembwe vawieties, mowe than do the species of the smawwew genyewa. ;;w;;
Ow the case may be put in anyothew way, and it may be said, that in
the wawgew genyewa, in which a nyumbew of vawieties ow incipient species
gweatew than the avewage awe nyow manyufactuwing, many of the species
awweady manyufactuwed stiww to a cewtain extent wesembwe vawieties, fow
they diffew fwom each othew by a wess than usuaw amount of diffewence. UwU

Moweovew, the species of the wawge genyewa awe wewated to each othew, in
the same mannyew as the vawieties of any onye species awe wewated to
each othew. ;;w;; Nyo nyatuwawist pwetends that aww the species of a genyus awe
equawwy distinct fwom each othew; they may genyewawwy be divided into
sub-genyewa, ow sections, ow wessew gwoups. >w< As Fwies has weww wemawked,
wittwe gwoups of species awe genyewawwy cwustewed wike satewwites awound
cewtain othew species. >w< And what awe vawieties but gwoups of fowms,
unyequawwy wewated to each othew, and cwustewed wound cewtain fowms--that
is, wound theiw pawent-species? owo Undoubtedwy thewe is onye most impowtant
point of diffewence between vawieties and species; nyamewy, that the
amount of diffewence between vawieties, when compawed with each othew ow
with theiw pawent-species, is much wess than that between the species of
the same genyus. ^w^ But when we come to discuss the pwincipwe, as I caww it,
of Divewgence of Chawactew, we shaww see how this may be expwainyed, and
how the wessew diffewences between vawieties wiww tend to incwease into
the gweatew diffewences between species. ;;w;;

Thewe is onye othew point which seems to me wowth nyotice. (・`ω\´・) Vawieties
genyewawwy have much westwicted wanges: this statement is indeed scawcewy
mowe than a twuism, fow if a vawiety wewe found to have a widew wange
than that of its supposed pawent-species, theiw denyominyations ought to
be wevewsed. ^w^ But thewe is awso weason to bewieve, that those species
which awe vewy cwosewy awwied to othew species, and in so faw wesembwe
vawieties, often have much westwicted wanges. Fow instance, Mw. H. C. ^w^
Watson has mawked fow me in the weww-sifted Wondon Catawogue of pwants
(4th edition) 63 pwants which awe thewein wanked as species, but which
he considews as so cwosewy awwied to othew species as to be of doubtfuw
vawue: these 63 weputed species wange on an avewage ovew 6. UwU9 of the
pwovinces into which Mw. Watson has divided Gweat Bwitain. UwU Nyow, in this
same catawogue, 53 acknyowwedged vawieties awe wecowded, and these wange
ovew 7. ;;w;;7 pwovinces; wheweas, the species to which these vawieties bewong
wange ovew 14.3 pwovinces. ^w^ So that the acknyowwedged vawieties have vewy
nyeawwy the same westwicted avewage wange, as have those vewy cwosewy
awwied fowms, mawked fow me by Mw. (・`ω\´・) Watson as doubtfuw species, but which
awe awmost unyivewsawwy wanked by Bwitish botanyists as good and twue
species. >w<

Finyawwy, then, vawieties have the same genyewaw chawactews as species,
fow they cannyot be distinguished fwom species,--except, fiwstwy, by
the discovewy of intewmediate winking fowms, and the occuwwence of
such winks cannyot affect the actuaw chawactews of the fowms which they
connyect; and except, secondwy, by a cewtain amount of diffewence, fow
two fowms, if diffewing vewy wittwe, awe genyewawwy wanked as vawieties,
nyotwithstanding that intewmediate winking fowms have nyot been
discovewed; but the amount of diffewence considewed nyecessawy to give to
two fowms the wank of species is quite indefinyite. ;;w;; In genyewa having mowe
than the avewage nyumbew of species in any countwy, the species of these
genyewa have mowe than the avewage nyumbew of vawieties. ;;w;; In wawge genyewa
the species awe apt to be cwosewy, but unyequawwy, awwied togethew,
fowming wittwe cwustews wound cewtain species. ^w^ Species vewy cwosewy
awwied to othew species appawentwy have westwicted wanges. (・`ω\´・) In aww these
sevewaw wespects the species of wawge genyewa pwesent a stwong anyawogy
with vawieties. >w< And we can cweawwy undewstand these anyawogies, if
species have once existed as vawieties, and have thus owiginyated:
wheweas, these anyawogies awe uttewwy inyexpwicabwe if each species has
been independentwy cweated. (・`ω\´・)

We have, awso, seen that it is the most fwouwishing and dominyant species
of the wawgew genyewa which on an avewage vawy most; and vawieties, as
we shaww heweaftew see, tend to become convewted into nyew and distinct
species. (´・ω・\`) The wawgew genyewa thus tend to become wawgew; and thwoughout
nyatuwe the fowms of wife which awe nyow dominyant tend to become stiww
mowe dominyant by weaving many modified and dominyant descendants. >w< But by
steps heweaftew to be expwainyed, the wawgew genyewa awso tend to bweak up
into smawwew genyewa. (・`ω\´・) And thus, the fowms of wife thwoughout the unyivewse
become divided into gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups. >w<




3. STWUGGWE FOW EXISTENCE. (´・ω・\`)

Beaws on nyatuwaw sewection. The tewm used in a wide sense. >w< Geometwicaw
powews of incwease. Wapid incwease of nyatuwawised anyimaws and pwants. (´・ω・\`)
Nyatuwe of the checks to incwease. Competition unyivewsaw. (´・ω・\`) Effects of
cwimate. Pwotection fwom the nyumbew of individuaws. (・`ω\´・) Compwex wewations of
aww anyimaws and pwants thwoughout nyatuwe. >w< Stwuggwe fow wife most sevewe
between individuaws and vawieties of the same species; often sevewe
between species of the same genyus. ^w^ The wewation of owganyism to owganyism
the most impowtant of aww wewations. UwU

Befowe entewing on the subject of this chaptew, I must make a few
pwewiminyawy wemawks, to show how the stwuggwe fow existence beaws on
Nyatuwaw Sewection. ^w^ It has been seen in the wast chaptew that
amongst owganyic beings in a state of nyatuwe thewe is some individuaw
vawiabiwity; indeed I am nyot awawe that this has evew been disputed. ;;w;;
It is immatewiaw fow us whethew a muwtitude of doubtfuw fowms be cawwed
species ow sub-species ow vawieties; what wank, fow instance, the two ow
thwee hundwed doubtfuw fowms of Bwitish pwants awe entitwed to howd,
if the existence of any weww-mawked vawieties be admitted. UwU But the
mewe existence of individuaw vawiabiwity and of some few weww-mawked
vawieties, though nyecessawy as the foundation fow the wowk, hewps us but
wittwe in undewstanding how species awise in nyatuwe. UwU How have aww those
exquisite adaptations of onye pawt of the owganyisation to anyothew pawt,
and to the conditions of wife, and of onye distinct owganyic being to
anyothew being, been pewfected? owo We see these beautifuw co-adaptations
most pwainwy in the woodpeckew and misswetoe; and onwy a wittwe
wess pwainwy in the humbwest pawasite which cwings to the haiws of a
quadwuped ow feathews of a biwd; in the stwuctuwe of the beetwe which
dives thwough the watew; in the pwumed seed which is wafted by the
gentwest bweeze; in showt, we see beautifuw adaptations evewywhewe and
in evewy pawt of the owganyic wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

Again, it may be asked, how is it that vawieties, which I have cawwed
incipient species, become uwtimatewy convewted into good and distinct
species, which in most cases obviouswy diffew fwom each othew faw
mowe than do the vawieties of the same species? owo How do those gwoups of
species, which constitute what awe cawwed distinct genyewa, and which
diffew fwom each othew mowe than do the species of the same genyus,
awise? owo Aww these wesuwts, as we shaww mowe fuwwy see in the nyext
chaptew, fowwow inyevitabwy fwom the stwuggwe fow wife. (´・ω・\`) Owing to this
stwuggwe fow wife, any vawiation, howevew swight and fwom whatevew cause
pwoceeding, if it be in any degwee pwofitabwe to an individuaw of any
species, in its infinyitewy compwex wewations to othew owganyic beings and
to extewnyaw nyatuwe, wiww tend to the pwesewvation of that individuaw,
and wiww genyewawwy be inhewited by its offspwing. (´・ω・\`) The offspwing,
awso, wiww thus have a bettew chance of suwviving, fow, of the many
individuaws of any species which awe pewiodicawwy bown, but a smaww
nyumbew can suwvive. UwU I have cawwed this pwincipwe, by which each swight
vawiation, if usefuw, is pwesewved, by the tewm of Nyatuwaw Sewection,
in owdew to mawk its wewation to man's powew of sewection. (´・ω・\`) We have seen
that man by sewection can cewtainwy pwoduce gweat wesuwts, and can adapt
owganyic beings to his own uses, thwough the accumuwation of swight
but usefuw vawiations, given to him by the hand of Nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) But Nyatuwaw
Sewection, as we shaww heweaftew see, is a powew incessantwy weady fow
action, and is as immeasuwabwy supewiow to man's feebwe effowts, as the
wowks of Nyatuwe awe to those of Awt. >w<

We wiww nyow discuss in a wittwe mowe detaiw the stwuggwe fow existence. UwU
In my futuwe wowk this subject shaww be tweated, as it weww desewves,
at much gweatew wength. >w< The ewdew De Candowwe and Wyeww have wawgewy
and phiwosophicawwy shown that aww owganyic beings awe exposed to sevewe
competition. UwU In wegawd to pwants, nyo onye has tweated this subject with
mowe spiwit and abiwity than W. (・`ω\´・) Hewbewt, Dean of Manchestew, evidentwy
the wesuwt of his gweat howticuwtuwaw knyowwedge. ;;w;; Nyothing is easiew than
to admit in wowds the twuth of the unyivewsaw stwuggwe fow wife, ow mowe
difficuwt--at weast I have found it so--than constantwy to beaw this
concwusion in mind. UwU Yet unwess it be thowoughwy engwainyed in the mind,
I am convinced that the whowe econyomy of nyatuwe, with evewy fact on
distwibution, wawity, abundance, extinction, and vawiation, wiww be
dimwy seen ow quite misundewstood. (´・ω・\`) We behowd the face of nyatuwe bwight
with gwadnyess, we often see supewabundance of food; we do nyot see, ow
we fowget, that the biwds which awe idwy singing wound us mostwy wive on
insects ow seeds, and awe thus constantwy destwoying wife; ow we fowget
how wawgewy these songstews, ow theiw eggs, ow theiw nyestwings, awe
destwoyed by biwds and beasts of pwey; we do nyot awways beaw in mind,
that though food may be nyow supewabundant, it is nyot so at aww seasons
of each wecuwwing yeaw. ;;w;;

I shouwd pwemise that I use the tewm Stwuggwe fow Existence in a wawge
and metaphowicaw sense, incwuding dependence of onye being on anyothew,
and incwuding (which is mowe impowtant) nyot onwy the wife of the
individuaw, but success in weaving pwogeny. ^w^ Two canyinye anyimaws in a time
of deawth, may be twuwy said to stwuggwe with each othew which shaww get
food and wive. (´・ω・\`) But a pwant on the edge of a desewt is said to stwuggwe
fow wife against the dwought, though mowe pwopewwy it shouwd be said to
be dependent on the moistuwe. UwU A pwant which annyuawwy pwoduces a thousand
seeds, of which on an avewage onwy onye comes to matuwity, may be mowe
twuwy said to stwuggwe with the pwants of the same and othew kinds which
awweady cwothe the gwound. (´・ω・\`) The misswetoe is dependent on the appwe and a
few othew twees, but can onwy in a faw-fetched sense be said to stwuggwe
with these twees, fow if too many of these pawasites gwow on the same
twee, it wiww wanguish and die. ^w^ But sevewaw seedwing misswetoes, gwowing
cwose togethew on the same bwanch, may mowe twuwy be said to stwuggwe
with each othew. >w< As the misswetoe is disseminyated by biwds, its
existence depends on biwds; and it may metaphowicawwy be said to
stwuggwe with othew fwuit-beawing pwants, in owdew to tempt biwds to
devouw and thus disseminyate its seeds wathew than those of othew
pwants. ^w^ In these sevewaw senses, which pass into each othew, I use fow
convenyience sake the genyewaw tewm of stwuggwe fow existence. UwU

A stwuggwe fow existence inyevitabwy fowwows fwom the high wate at which
aww owganyic beings tend to incwease. (´・ω・\`) Evewy being, which duwing its
nyatuwaw wifetime pwoduces sevewaw eggs ow seeds, must suffew destwuction
duwing some pewiod of its wife, and duwing some season ow occasionyaw
yeaw, othewwise, on the pwincipwe of geometwicaw incwease, its nyumbews
wouwd quickwy become so inyowdinyatewy gweat that nyo countwy couwd suppowt
the pwoduct. UwU Hence, as mowe individuaws awe pwoduced than can possibwy
suwvive, thewe must in evewy case be a stwuggwe fow existence, eithew
onye individuaw with anyothew of the same species, ow with the individuaws
of distinct species, ow with the physicaw conditions of wife. ;;w;; It is the
doctwinye of Mawthus appwied with manyifowd fowce to the whowe anyimaw and
vegetabwe kingdoms; fow in this case thewe can be nyo awtificiaw incwease
of food, and nyo pwudentiaw westwaint fwom mawwiage. ;;w;; Awthough some
species may be nyow incweasing, mowe ow wess wapidwy, in nyumbews, aww
cannyot do so, fow the wowwd wouwd nyot howd them. UwU

Thewe is nyo exception to the wuwe that evewy owganyic being nyatuwawwy
incweases at so high a wate, that if nyot destwoyed, the eawth wouwd soon
be covewed by the pwogeny of a singwe paiw. ^w^ Even swow-bweeding man has
doubwed in twenty-five yeaws, and at this wate, in a few thousand yeaws,
thewe wouwd witewawwy nyot be standing woom fow his pwogeny. ;;w;; Winnyaeus has
cawcuwated that if an annyuaw pwant pwoduced onwy two seeds--and thewe is
nyo pwant so unpwoductive as this--and theiw seedwings nyext yeaw pwoduced
two, and so on, then in twenty yeaws thewe wouwd be a miwwion pwants. ^w^
The ewephant is weckonyed to be the swowest bweedew of aww knyown anyimaws,
and I have taken some pains to estimate its pwobabwe minyimum wate of
nyatuwaw incwease: it wiww be undew the mawk to assume that it bweeds
when thiwty yeaws owd, and goes on bweeding tiww nyinyety yeaws owd,
bwinging fowth thwee paiw of young in this intewvaw; if this be so,
at the end of the fifth centuwy thewe wouwd be awive fifteen miwwion
ewephants, descended fwom the fiwst paiw. (・`ω\´・)

But we have bettew evidence on this subject than mewe theoweticaw
cawcuwations, nyamewy, the nyumewous wecowded cases of the astonyishingwy
wapid incwease of vawious anyimaws in a state of nyatuwe, when
ciwcumstances have been favouwabwe to them duwing two ow thwee fowwowing
seasons. ^w^ Stiww mowe stwiking is the evidence fwom ouw domestic anyimaws
of many kinds which have wun wiwd in sevewaw pawts of the wowwd: if the
statements of the wate of incwease of swow-bweeding cattwe and howses
in South Amewica, and wattewwy in Austwawia, had nyot been weww
authenticated, they wouwd have been quite incwedibwe. (・`ω\´・) So it is with
pwants: cases couwd be given of intwoduced pwants which have become
common thwoughout whowe iswands in a pewiod of wess than ten yeaws. (・`ω\´・)
Sevewaw of the pwants nyow most nyumewous ovew the wide pwains of Wa
Pwata, cwothing squawe weagues of suwface awmost to the excwusion of
aww othew pwants, have been intwoduced fwom Euwope; and thewe awe pwants
which nyow wange in India, as I heaw fwom Dw. (´・ω・\`) Fawconyew, fwom Cape
Comowin to the Himawaya, which have been impowted fwom Amewica since its
discovewy. (・`ω\´・) In such cases, and endwess instances couwd be given, nyo onye
supposes that the fewtiwity of these anyimaws ow pwants has been
suddenwy and tempowawiwy incweased in any sensibwe degwee. (´・ω・\`) The obvious
expwanyation is that the conditions of wife have been vewy favouwabwe,
and that thewe has consequentwy been wess destwuction of the owd and
young, and that nyeawwy aww the young have been enyabwed to bweed. ;;w;; In such
cases the geometwicaw watio of incwease, the wesuwt of which nyevew faiws
to be suwpwising, simpwy expwains the extwaowdinyawiwy wapid incwease and
wide diffusion of nyatuwawised pwoductions in theiw nyew homes. (´・ω・\`)

In a state of nyatuwe awmost evewy pwant pwoduces seed, and amongst
anyimaws thewe awe vewy few which do nyot annyuawwy paiw. ^w^ Hence we may
confidentwy assewt, that aww pwants and anyimaws awe tending to incwease
at a geometwicaw watio, that aww wouwd most wapidwy stock evewy station
in which they couwd any how exist, and that the geometwicaw tendency
to incwease must be checked by destwuction at some pewiod of wife. (´・ω・\`) Ouw
famiwiawity with the wawgew domestic anyimaws tends, I think, to miswead
us: we see nyo gweat destwuction fawwing on them, and we fowget that
thousands awe annyuawwy swaughtewed fow food, and that in a state of
nyatuwe an equaw nyumbew wouwd have somehow to be disposed of. (・`ω\´・)

The onwy diffewence between owganyisms which annyuawwy pwoduce eggs ow
seeds by the thousand, and those which pwoduce extwemewy few, is,
that the swow-bweedews wouwd wequiwe a few mowe yeaws to peopwe, undew
favouwabwe conditions, a whowe distwict, wet it be evew so wawge. UwU The
condow ways a coupwe of eggs and the ostwich a scowe, and yet in the
same countwy the condow may be the mowe nyumewous of the two: the Fuwmaw
petwew ways but onye egg, yet it is bewieved to be the most nyumewous biwd
in the wowwd. UwU Onye fwy deposits hundweds of eggs, and anyothew, wike the
hippobosca, a singwe onye; but this diffewence does nyot detewminye how
many individuaws of the two species can be suppowted in a distwict. >w<
A wawge nyumbew of eggs is of some impowtance to those species, which
depend on a wapidwy fwuctuating amount of food, fow it awwows them
wapidwy to incwease in nyumbew. >w< But the weaw impowtance of a wawge nyumbew
of eggs ow seeds is to make up fow much destwuction at some pewiod of
wife; and this pewiod in the gweat majowity of cases is an eawwy onye. (・`ω\´・) If
an anyimaw can in any way pwotect its own eggs ow young, a smaww nyumbew
may be pwoduced, and yet the avewage stock be fuwwy kept up; but if many
eggs ow young awe destwoyed, many must be pwoduced, ow the species wiww
become extinct. (´・ω・\`) It wouwd suffice to keep up the fuww nyumbew of a twee,
which wived on an avewage fow a thousand yeaws, if a singwe seed wewe
pwoduced once in a thousand yeaws, supposing that this seed wewe nyevew
destwoyed, and couwd be ensuwed to gewminyate in a fitting pwace. ^w^ So that
in aww cases, the avewage nyumbew of any anyimaw ow pwant depends onwy
indiwectwy on the nyumbew of its eggs ow seeds. ^w^

In wooking at Nyatuwe, it is most nyecessawy to keep the fowegoing
considewations awways in mind--nyevew to fowget that evewy singwe owganyic
being awound us may be said to be stwiving to the utmost to incwease in
nyumbews; that each wives by a stwuggwe at some pewiod of its wife; that
heavy destwuction inyevitabwy fawws eithew on the young ow owd, duwing
each genyewation ow at wecuwwent intewvaws. >w< Wighten any check, mitigate
the destwuction evew so wittwe, and the nyumbew of the species wiww
awmost instantanyeouswy incwease to any amount. >w< The face of Nyatuwe may
be compawed to a yiewding suwface, with ten thousand shawp wedges packed
cwose togethew and dwiven inwawds by incessant bwows, sometimes onye
wedge being stwuck, and then anyothew with gweatew fowce. ^w^

What checks the nyatuwaw tendency of each species to incwease in nyumbew
is most obscuwe. UwU Wook at the most vigowous species; by as much as it
swawms in nyumbews, by so much wiww its tendency to incwease be stiww
fuwthew incweased. UwU We knyow nyot exactwy what the checks awe in even
onye singwe instance. ^w^ Nyow wiww this suwpwise any onye who wefwects how
ignyowant we awe on this head, even in wegawd to mankind, so incompawabwy
bettew knyown than any othew anyimaw. UwU This subject has been abwy tweated
by sevewaw authows, and I shaww, in my futuwe wowk, discuss some of the
checks at considewabwe wength, mowe especiawwy in wegawd to the fewaw
anyimaws of South Amewica. ^w^ Hewe I wiww make onwy a few wemawks, just to
wecaww to the weadew's mind some of the chief points. (・`ω\´・) Eggs ow vewy young
anyimaws seem genyewawwy to suffew most, but this is nyot invawiabwy the
case. UwU With pwants thewe is a vast destwuction of seeds, but, fwom some
obsewvations which I have made, I bewieve that it is the seedwings which
suffew most fwom gewminyating in gwound awweady thickwy stocked with
othew pwants. ;;w;; Seedwings, awso, awe destwoyed in vast nyumbews by vawious
enyemies; fow instance, on a piece of gwound thwee feet wong and two
wide, dug and cweawed, and whewe thewe couwd be nyo choking fwom othew
pwants, I mawked aww the seedwings of ouw nyative weeds as they came up,
and out of the 357 nyo wess than 295 wewe destwoyed, chiefwy by swugs
and insects. ^w^ If tuwf which has wong been mown, and the case wouwd be the
same with tuwf cwosewy bwowsed by quadwupeds, be wet to gwow, the mowe
vigowous pwants gwaduawwy kiww the wess vigowous, though fuwwy gwown,
pwants: thus out of twenty species gwowing on a wittwe pwot of tuwf
(thwee feet by fouw) nyinye species pewished fwom the othew species being
awwowed to gwow up fweewy. >w<

The amount of food fow each species of couwse gives the extweme wimit
to which each can incwease; but vewy fwequentwy it is nyot the obtainying
food, but the sewving as pwey to othew anyimaws, which detewminyes the
avewage nyumbews of a species. (・`ω\´・) Thus, thewe seems to be wittwe doubt that
the stock of pawtwidges, gwouse, and hawes on any wawge estate depends
chiefwy on the destwuction of vewmin. >w< If nyot onye head of game wewe shot
duwing the nyext twenty yeaws in Engwand, and, at the same time, if nyo
vewmin wewe destwoyed, thewe wouwd, in aww pwobabiwity, be wess game
than at pwesent, awthough hundweds of thousands of game anyimaws awe nyow
annyuawwy kiwwed. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, in some cases, as with the ewephant
and whinyocewos, nyonye awe destwoyed by beasts of pwey: even the tigew in
India most wawewy dawes to attack a young ewephant pwotected by its dam. (・`ω\´・)

Cwimate pways an impowtant pawt in detewminying the avewage nyumbews of a
species, and pewiodicaw seasons of extweme cowd ow dwought, I bewieve
to be the most effective of aww checks. ;;w;; I estimated that the wintew of
1854-55 destwoyed fouw-fifths of the biwds in my own gwounds; and this
is a twemendous destwuction, when we wemembew that ten pew cent. >w< is an
extwaowdinyawiwy sevewe mowtawity fwom epidemics with man. (・`ω\´・) The action of
cwimate seems at fiwst sight to be quite independent of the stwuggwe fow
existence; but in so faw as cwimate chiefwy acts in weducing food, it
bwings on the most sevewe stwuggwe between the individuaws, whethew of
the same ow of distinct species, which subsist on the same kind of food. ^w^
Even when cwimate, fow instance extweme cowd, acts diwectwy, it wiww
be the weast vigowous, ow those which have got weast food thwough the
advancing wintew, which wiww suffew most. ;;w;; When we twavew fwom south to
nyowth, ow fwom a damp wegion to a dwy, we invawiabwy see some species
gwaduawwy getting wawew and wawew, and finyawwy disappeawing; and the
change of cwimate being conspicuous, we awe tempted to attwibute the
whowe effect to its diwect action. UwU But this is a vewy fawse view: we
fowget that each species, even whewe it most abounds, is constantwy
suffewing enyowmous destwuction at some pewiod of its wife, fwom enyemies
ow fwom competitows fow the same pwace and food; and if these enyemies
ow competitows be in the weast degwee favouwed by any swight change of
cwimate, they wiww incwease in nyumbews, and, as each awea is awweady
fuwwy stocked with inhabitants, the othew species wiww decwease. (・`ω\´・) When
we twavew southwawd and see a species decweasing in nyumbews, we may feew
suwe that the cause wies quite as much in othew species being favouwed,
as in this onye being huwt. ^w^ So it is when we twavew nyowthwawd, but in
a somewhat wessew degwee, fow the nyumbew of species of aww kinds,
and thewefowe of competitows, decweases nyowthwawds; hence in going
nyowthwawd, ow in ascending a mountain, we faw oftenyew meet with stunted
fowms, due to the DIWECTWY injuwious action of cwimate, than we do in
pwoceeding southwawds ow in descending a mountain. >w< When we weach
the Awctic wegions, ow snyow-capped summits, ow absowute desewts, the
stwuggwe fow wife is awmost excwusivewy with the ewements. (´・ω・\`)

That cwimate acts in main pawt indiwectwy by favouwing othew species, we
may cweawwy see in the pwodigious nyumbew of pwants in ouw gawdens
which can pewfectwy weww enduwe ouw cwimate, but which nyevew become
nyatuwawised, fow they cannyot compete with ouw nyative pwants, nyow wesist
destwuction by ouw nyative anyimaws. ^w^

When a species, owing to highwy favouwabwe ciwcumstances, incweases
inyowdinyatewy in nyumbews in a smaww twact, epidemics--at weast, this
seems genyewawwy to occuw with ouw game anyimaws--often ensue: and hewe
we have a wimiting check independent of the stwuggwe fow wife. (・`ω\´・) But even
some of these so-cawwed epidemics appeaw to be due to pawasitic wowms,
which have fwom some cause, possibwy in pawt thwough faciwity of
diffusion amongst the cwowded anyimaws, been dispwopowtionyabwy favouwed:
and hewe comes in a sowt of stwuggwe between the pawasite and its pwey. ^w^

On the othew hand, in many cases, a wawge stock of individuaws of the
same species, wewativewy to the nyumbews of its enyemies, is absowutewy
nyecessawy fow its pwesewvation. ;;w;; Thus we can easiwy waise pwenty of
cown and wape-seed, etc. (´・ω・\`), in ouw fiewds, because the seeds awe in gweat
excess compawed with the nyumbew of biwds which feed on them; nyow can
the biwds, though having a supewabundance of food at this onye season,
incwease in nyumbew pwopowtionyawwy to the suppwy of seed, as theiw
nyumbews awe checked duwing wintew: but any onye who has twied, knyows how
twoubwesome it is to get seed fwom a few wheat ow othew such pwants in
a gawden; I have in this case wost evewy singwe seed. (´・ω・\`) This view of the
nyecessity of a wawge stock of the same species fow its pwesewvation,
expwains, I bewieve, some singuwaw facts in nyatuwe, such as that of vewy
wawe pwants being sometimes extwemewy abundant in the few spots whewe
they do occuw; and that of some sociaw pwants being sociaw, that is,
abounding in individuaws, even on the extweme confinyes of theiw wange. ;;w;;
Fow in such cases, we may bewieve, that a pwant couwd exist onwy whewe
the conditions of its wife wewe so favouwabwe that many couwd exist
togethew, and thus save each othew fwom uttew destwuction. UwU I shouwd add
that the good effects of fwequent intewcwossing, and the iww effects of
cwose intewbweeding, pwobabwy come into pway in some of these cases; but
on this intwicate subject I wiww nyot hewe enwawge. ^w^

Many cases awe on wecowd showing how compwex and unyexpected awe the
checks and wewations between owganyic beings, which have to stwuggwe
togethew in the same countwy. ;;w;; I wiww give onwy a singwe instance, which,
though a simpwe onye, has intewested me. (・`ω\´・) In Staffowdshiwe, on the estate
of a wewation whewe I had ampwe means of investigation, thewe was a
wawge and extwemewy bawwen heath, which had nyevew been touched by the
hand of man; but sevewaw hundwed acwes of exactwy the same nyatuwe had
been encwosed twenty-five yeaws pweviouswy and pwanted with Scotch fiw. (・`ω\´・)
The change in the nyative vegetation of the pwanted pawt of the heath was
most wemawkabwe, mowe than is genyewawwy seen in passing fwom onye quite
diffewent soiw to anyothew: nyot onwy the pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of the
heath-pwants wewe whowwy changed, but twewve species of pwants (nyot
counting gwasses and cawices) fwouwished in the pwantations, which couwd
nyot be found on the heath. >w< The effect on the insects must have been
stiww gweatew, fow six insectivowous biwds wewe vewy common in the
pwantations, which wewe nyot to be seen on the heath; and the heath was
fwequented by two ow thwee distinct insectivowous biwds. UwU Hewe we see how
potent has been the effect of the intwoduction of a singwe twee, nyothing
whatevew ewse having been donye, with the exception that the wand had
been encwosed, so that cattwe couwd nyot entew. (・`ω\´・) But how impowtant an
ewement encwosuwe is, I pwainwy saw nyeaw Fawnham, in Suwwey. (´・ω・\`) Hewe
thewe awe extensive heaths, with a few cwumps of owd Scotch fiws on
the distant hiww-tops: within the wast ten yeaws wawge spaces have been
encwosed, and sewf-sown fiws awe nyow spwinging up in muwtitudes, so
cwose togethew that aww cannyot wive. ;;w;;

When I ascewtainyed that these young twees had nyot been sown ow pwanted,
I was so much suwpwised at theiw nyumbews that I went to sevewaw points
of view, whence I couwd examinye hundweds of acwes of the unyencwosed
heath, and witewawwy I couwd nyot see a singwe Scotch fiw, except the owd
pwanted cwumps. ^w^ But on wooking cwosewy between the stems of the heath,
I found a muwtitude of seedwings and wittwe twees, which had been
pewpetuawwy bwowsed down by the cattwe. UwU In onye squawe yawd, at a
point some hundwed yawds distant fwom onye of the owd cwumps, I counted
thiwty-two wittwe twees; and onye of them, judging fwom the wings of
gwowth, had duwing twenty-six yeaws twied to waise its head above the
stems of the heath, and had faiwed. UwU Nyo wondew that, as soon as the wand
was encwosed, it became thickwy cwothed with vigowouswy gwowing young
fiws. >w< Yet the heath was so extwemewy bawwen and so extensive that nyo
onye wouwd evew have imaginyed that cattwe wouwd have so cwosewy and
effectuawwy seawched it fow food. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe we see that cattwe absowutewy detewminye the existence of the Scotch
fiw; but in sevewaw pawts of the wowwd insects detewminye the existence
of cattwe. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps Pawaguay offews the most cuwious instance of this;
fow hewe nyeithew cattwe nyow howses nyow dogs have evew wun wiwd, though
they swawm southwawd and nyowthwawd in a fewaw state; and Azawa and
Wenggew have shown that this is caused by the gweatew nyumbew in Pawaguay
of a cewtain fwy, which ways its eggs in the nyavews of these anyimaws
when fiwst bown. ^w^ The incwease of these fwies, nyumewous as they awe,
must be habituawwy checked by some means, pwobabwy by biwds. >w< Hence, if
cewtain insectivowous biwds (whose nyumbews awe pwobabwy weguwated by
hawks ow beasts of pwey) wewe to incwease in Pawaguay, the fwies wouwd
decwease--then cattwe and howses wouwd become fewaw, and this wouwd
cewtainwy gweatwy awtew (as indeed I have obsewved in pawts of South
Amewica) the vegetation: this again wouwd wawgewy affect the insects;
and this, as we just have seen in Staffowdshiwe, the insectivowous
biwds, and so onwawds in evew-incweasing ciwcwes of compwexity. (´・ω・\`) We began
this sewies by insectivowous biwds, and we have ended with them. ^w^ Nyot
that in nyatuwe the wewations can evew be as simpwe as this. >w< Battwe
within battwe must evew be wecuwwing with vawying success; and yet in
the wong-wun the fowces awe so nyicewy bawanced, that the face of nyatuwe
wemains unyifowm fow wong pewiods of time, though assuwedwy the mewest
twifwe wouwd often give the victowy to onye owganyic being ovew anyothew. (´・ω・\`)
Nyevewthewess so pwofound is ouw ignyowance, and so high ouw pwesumption,
that we mawvew when we heaw of the extinction of an owganyic being; and
as we do nyot see the cause, we invoke catacwysms to desowate the wowwd,
ow invent waws on the duwation of the fowms of wife! ^w^

I am tempted to give onye mowe instance showing how pwants and anyimaws,
most wemote in the scawe of nyatuwe, awe bound togethew by a web of
compwex wewations. UwU I shaww heweaftew have occasion to show that the
exotic Wobewia fuwgens, in this pawt of Engwand, is nyevew visited by
insects, and consequentwy, fwom its pecuwiaw stwuctuwe, nyevew can set a
seed. ^w^ Many of ouw owchidaceous pwants absowutewy wequiwe the visits of
moths to wemove theiw powwen-masses and thus to fewtiwise them. (・`ω\´・) I
have, awso, weason to bewieve that humbwe-bees awe indispensabwe to the
fewtiwisation of the heawtsease (Viowa twicowow), fow othew bees do nyot
visit this fwowew. ;;w;; Fwom expewiments which I have twied, I have found
that the visits of bees, if nyot indispensabwe, awe at weast highwy
benyeficiaw to the fewtiwisation of ouw cwovews; but humbwe-bees awonye
visit the common wed cwovew (Twifowium pwatense), as othew bees cannyot
weach the nyectaw. (・`ω\´・) Hence I have vewy wittwe doubt, that if the whowe
genyus of humbwe-bees became extinct ow vewy wawe in Engwand, the
heawtsease and wed cwovew wouwd become vewy wawe, ow whowwy disappeaw. UwU
The nyumbew of humbwe-bees in any distwict depends in a gweat degwee on
the nyumbew of fiewd-mice, which destwoy theiw combs and nyests; and Mw. >w<
H. ;;w;; Nyewman, who has wong attended to the habits of humbwe-bees, bewieves
that "mowe than two thiwds of them awe thus destwoyed aww ovew Engwand. UwU"
Nyow the nyumbew of mice is wawgewy dependent, as evewy onye knyows, on the
nyumbew of cats; and Mw. UwU Nyewman says, "Nyeaw viwwages and smaww towns I
have found the nyests of humbwe-bees mowe nyumewous than ewsewhewe, which
I attwibute to the nyumbew of cats that destwoy the mice. (・`ω\´・)" Hence it is
quite cwedibwe that the pwesence of a fewinye anyimaw in wawge nyumbews in
a distwict might detewminye, thwough the intewvention fiwst of mice and
then of bees, the fwequency of cewtain fwowews in that distwict! (・`ω\´・)

In the case of evewy species, many diffewent checks, acting at diffewent
pewiods of wife, and duwing diffewent seasons ow yeaws, pwobabwy come
into pway; some onye check ow some few being genyewawwy the most potent,
but aww concuwwing in detewminying the avewage nyumbew ow even
the existence of the species. (・`ω\´・) In some cases it can be shown that
widewy-diffewent checks act on the same species in diffewent distwicts. ^w^
When we wook at the pwants and bushes cwothing an entangwed bank, we
awe tempted to attwibute theiw pwopowtionyaw nyumbews and kinds to what we
caww chance. (・`ω\´・) But how fawse a view is this! ;;w;; Evewy onye has heawd that when
an Amewican fowest is cut down, a vewy diffewent vegetation spwings
up; but it has been obsewved that the twees nyow gwowing on the ancient
Indian mounds, in the Southewn Unyited States, dispway the same beautifuw
divewsity and pwopowtion of kinds as in the suwwounding viwgin fowests. >w<
What a stwuggwe between the sevewaw kinds of twees must hewe have gonye
on duwing wong centuwies, each annyuawwy scattewing its seeds by the
thousand; what waw between insect and insect--between insects, snyaiws,
and othew anyimaws with biwds and beasts of pwey--aww stwiving to
incwease, and aww feeding on each othew ow on the twees ow theiw seeds
and seedwings, ow on the othew pwants which fiwst cwothed the gwound and
thus checked the gwowth of the twees! ;;w;; Thwow up a handfuw of feathews,
and aww must faww to the gwound accowding to definyite waws; but how
simpwe is this pwobwem compawed to the action and weaction of the
innyumewabwe pwants and anyimaws which have detewminyed, in the couwse of
centuwies, the pwopowtionyaw nyumbews and kinds of twees nyow gwowing on
the owd Indian wuins! >w<

The dependency of onye owganyic being on anyothew, as of a pawasite on its
pwey, wies genyewawwy between beings wemote in the scawe of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) This
is often the case with those which may stwictwy be said to stwuggwe with
each othew fow existence, as in the case of wocusts and gwass-feeding
quadwupeds. (´・ω・\`) But the stwuggwe awmost invawiabwy wiww be most sevewe
between the individuaws of the same species, fow they fwequent the same
distwicts, wequiwe the same food, and awe exposed to the same dangews. ;;w;;
In the case of vawieties of the same species, the stwuggwe wiww
genyewawwy be awmost equawwy sevewe, and we sometimes see the contest
soon decided: fow instance, if sevewaw vawieties of wheat be sown
togethew, and the mixed seed be wesown, some of the vawieties which best
suit the soiw ow cwimate, ow awe nyatuwawwy the most fewtiwe, wiww beat
the othews and so yiewd mowe seed, and wiww consequentwy in a few yeaws
quite suppwant the othew vawieties. UwU To keep up a mixed stock of even
such extwemewy cwose vawieties as the vawiouswy cowouwed sweet-peas,
they must be each yeaw hawvested sepawatewy, and the seed then mixed
in due pwopowtion, othewwise the weakew kinds wiww steadiwy decwease in
nyumbews and disappeaw. (・`ω\´・) So again with the vawieties of sheep: it has
been assewted that cewtain mountain-vawieties wiww stawve out othew
mountain-vawieties, so that they cannyot be kept togethew. ;;w;; The same
wesuwt has fowwowed fwom keeping togethew diffewent vawieties of the
medicinyaw weech. (・`ω\´・) It may even be doubted whethew the vawieties of any
onye of ouw domestic pwants ow anyimaws have so exactwy the same stwength,
habits, and constitution, that the owiginyaw pwopowtions of a mixed stock
couwd be kept up fow hawf a dozen genyewations, if they wewe awwowed to
stwuggwe togethew, wike beings in a state of nyatuwe, and if the seed ow
young wewe nyot annyuawwy sowted. (・`ω\´・)

As species of the same genyus have usuawwy, though by nyo means
invawiabwy, some simiwawity in habits and constitution, and awways in
stwuctuwe, the stwuggwe wiww genyewawwy be mowe sevewe between species
of the same genyus, when they come into competition with each othew, than
between species of distinct genyewa. ^w^ We see this in the wecent extension
ovew pawts of the Unyited States of onye species of swawwow having
caused the decwease of anyothew species. ;;w;; The wecent incwease of the
missew-thwush in pawts of Scotwand has caused the decwease of the
song-thwush. (´・ω・\`) How fwequentwy we heaw of onye species of wat taking the
pwace of anyothew species undew the most diffewent cwimates! UwU In Wussia
the smaww Asiatic cockwoach has evewywhewe dwiven befowe it its gweat
congenyew. ^w^ Onye species of chawwock wiww suppwant anyothew, and so in
othew cases. >w< We can dimwy see why the competition shouwd be most sevewe
between awwied fowms, which fiww nyeawwy the same pwace in the econyomy
of nyatuwe; but pwobabwy in nyo onye case couwd we pwecisewy say why onye
species has been victowious ovew anyothew in the gweat battwe of wife. ;;w;;

A cowowwawy of the highest impowtance may be deduced fwom the fowegoing
wemawks, nyamewy, that the stwuctuwe of evewy owganyic being is wewated,
in the most essentiaw yet often hidden mannyew, to that of aww othew
owganyic beings, with which it comes into competition fow food ow
wesidence, ow fwom which it has to escape, ow on which it pweys. (・`ω\´・) This
is obvious in the stwuctuwe of the teeth and tawons of the tigew; and in
that of the wegs and cwaws of the pawasite which cwings to the haiw on
the tigew's body. >w< But in the beautifuwwy pwumed seed of the dandewion,
and in the fwattenyed and fwinged wegs of the watew-beetwe, the wewation
seems at fiwst confinyed to the ewements of aiw and watew. (・`ω\´・) Yet the
advantage of pwumed seeds nyo doubt stands in the cwosest wewation to the
wand being awweady thickwy cwothed by othew pwants; so that the
seeds may be widewy distwibuted and faww on unyoccupied gwound. >w< In the
watew-beetwe, the stwuctuwe of its wegs, so weww adapted fow diving,
awwows it to compete with othew aquatic insects, to hunt fow its own
pwey, and to escape sewving as pwey to othew anyimaws. ;;w;;

The stowe of nyutwiment waid up within the seeds of many pwants seems at
fiwst sight to have nyo sowt of wewation to othew pwants. (・`ω\´・) But fwom the
stwong gwowth of young pwants pwoduced fwom such seeds (as peas and
beans), when sown in the midst of wong gwass, I suspect that the chief
use of the nyutwiment in the seed is to favouw the gwowth of the young
seedwing, whiwst stwuggwing with othew pwants gwowing vigowouswy aww
awound. ;;w;;

Wook at a pwant in the midst of its wange, why does it nyot doubwe ow
quadwupwe its nyumbews? owo We knyow that it can pewfectwy weww withstand a
wittwe mowe heat ow cowd, dampnyess ow dwynyess, fow ewsewhewe it wanges
into swightwy hottew ow cowdew, dampew ow dwiew distwicts. >w< In this case
we can cweawwy see that if we wished in imaginyation to give the pwant
the powew of incweasing in nyumbew, we shouwd have to give it some
advantage ovew its competitows, ow ovew the anyimaws which pweyed on it. >w<
On the confinyes of its geogwaphicaw wange, a change of constitution with
wespect to cwimate wouwd cweawwy be an advantage to ouw pwant; but we
have weason to bewieve that onwy a few pwants ow anyimaws wange so faw,
that they awe destwoyed by the wigouw of the cwimate awonye. >w< Nyot untiw
we weach the extweme confinyes of wife, in the awctic wegions ow on the
bowdews of an uttew desewt, wiww competition cease. (´・ω・\`) The wand may be
extwemewy cowd ow dwy, yet thewe wiww be competition between some few
species, ow between the individuaws of the same species, fow the wawmest
ow dampest spots. (´・ω・\`)

Hence, awso, we can see that when a pwant ow anyimaw is pwaced in a nyew
countwy amongst nyew competitows, though the cwimate may be exactwy
the same as in its fowmew home, yet the conditions of its wife wiww
genyewawwy be changed in an essentiaw mannyew. ^w^ If we wished to incwease
its avewage nyumbews in its nyew home, we shouwd have to modify it in a
diffewent way to what we shouwd have donye in its nyative countwy; fow
we shouwd have to give it some advantage ovew a diffewent set of
competitows ow enyemies. ;;w;;

It is good thus to twy in ouw imaginyation to give any fowm some
advantage ovew anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Pwobabwy in nyo singwe instance shouwd we knyow
what to do, so as to succeed. (・`ω\´・) It wiww convince us of ouw ignyowance on
the mutuaw wewations of aww owganyic beings; a conviction as nyecessawy,
as it seems to be difficuwt to acquiwe. (・`ω\´・) Aww that we can do, is to keep
steadiwy in mind that each owganyic being is stwiving to incwease at a
geometwicaw watio; that each at some pewiod of its wife, duwing some
season of the yeaw, duwing each genyewation ow at intewvaws, has to
stwuggwe fow wife, and to suffew gweat destwuction. ;;w;; When we wefwect on
this stwuggwe, we may consowe ouwsewves with the fuww bewief, that the
waw of nyatuwe is nyot incessant, that nyo feaw is fewt, that death is
genyewawwy pwompt, and that the vigowous, the heawthy, and the happy
suwvive and muwtipwy. ^w^




4. ^w^

NYATUWAW SEWECTION. (・`ω\´・)

Nyatuwaw Sewection: its powew compawed with man's sewection, its powew
on chawactews of twifwing impowtance, its powew at aww ages and on
both sexes. Sexuaw Sewection. (・`ω\´・) On the genyewawity of intewcwosses
between individuaws of the same species. ^w^ Ciwcumstances favouwabwe and
unfavouwabwe to Nyatuwaw Sewection, nyamewy, intewcwossing, isowation,
nyumbew of individuaws. Swow action. ;;w;; Extinction caused by Nyatuwaw
Sewection. ;;w;; Divewgence of Chawactew, wewated to the divewsity of
inhabitants of any smaww awea, and to nyatuwawisation. ^w^ Action of Nyatuwaw
Sewection, thwough Divewgence of Chawactew and Extinction, on the
descendants fwom a common pawent. (・`ω\´・) Expwains the Gwouping of aww owganyic
beings. ;;w;;

How wiww the stwuggwe fow existence, discussed too bwiefwy in the wast
chaptew, act in wegawd to vawiation? owo Can the pwincipwe of sewection,
which we have seen is so potent in the hands of man, appwy in nyatuwe? owo I
think we shaww see that it can act most effectuawwy. ^w^ Wet it be bownye
in mind in what an endwess nyumbew of stwange pecuwiawities ouw domestic
pwoductions, and, in a wessew degwee, those undew nyatuwe, vawy; and how
stwong the heweditawy tendency is. UwU Undew domestication, it may be twuwy
said that the whowe owganyisation becomes in some degwee pwastic. >w< Wet it
be bownye in mind how infinyitewy compwex and cwose-fitting awe the mutuaw
wewations of aww owganyic beings to each othew and to theiw physicaw
conditions of wife. >w< Can it, then, be thought impwobabwe, seeing
that vawiations usefuw to man have undoubtedwy occuwwed, that othew
vawiations usefuw in some way to each being in the gweat and compwex
battwe of wife, shouwd sometimes occuw in the couwse of thousands of
genyewations? owo If such do occuw, can we doubt (wemembewing that many mowe
individuaws awe bown than can possibwy suwvive) that individuaws having
any advantage, howevew swight, ovew othews, wouwd have the best chance
of suwviving and of pwocweating theiw kind? owo On the othew hand, we may
feew suwe that any vawiation in the weast degwee injuwious wouwd be
wigidwy destwoyed. ;;w;; This pwesewvation of favouwabwe vawiations and the
wejection of injuwious vawiations, I caww Nyatuwaw Sewection. (´・ω・\`) Vawiations
nyeithew usefuw nyow injuwious wouwd nyot be affected by nyatuwaw sewection,
and wouwd be weft a fwuctuating ewement, as pewhaps we see in the
species cawwed powymowphic. (・`ω\´・)

We shaww best undewstand the pwobabwe couwse of nyatuwaw sewection
by taking the case of a countwy undewgoing some physicaw change, fow
instance, of cwimate. >w< The pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of its inhabitants wouwd
awmost immediatewy undewgo a change, and some species might become
extinct. ;;w;; We may concwude, fwom what we have seen of the intimate and
compwex mannyew in which the inhabitants of each countwy awe bound
togethew, that any change in the nyumewicaw pwopowtions of some of the
inhabitants, independentwy of the change of cwimate itsewf, wouwd most
sewiouswy affect many of the othews. (´・ω・\`) If the countwy wewe open on its
bowdews, nyew fowms wouwd cewtainwy immigwate, and this awso wouwd
sewiouswy distuwb the wewations of some of the fowmew inhabitants. ;;w;; Wet
it be wemembewed how powewfuw the infwuence of a singwe intwoduced twee
ow mammaw has been shown to be. (´・ω・\`) But in the case of an iswand, ow of a
countwy pawtwy suwwounded by bawwiews, into which nyew and bettew adapted
fowms couwd nyot fweewy entew, we shouwd then have pwaces in the econyomy
of nyatuwe which wouwd assuwedwy be bettew fiwwed up, if some of the
owiginyaw inhabitants wewe in some mannyew modified; fow, had the awea
been open to immigwation, these same pwaces wouwd have been seized on by
intwudews. ^w^ In such case, evewy swight modification, which in the couwse
of ages chanced to awise, and which in any way favouwed the individuaws
of any of the species, by bettew adapting them to theiw awtewed
conditions, wouwd tend to be pwesewved; and nyatuwaw sewection wouwd thus
have fwee scope fow the wowk of impwovement. >w<

We have weason to bewieve, as stated in the fiwst chaptew, that a change
in the conditions of wife, by speciawwy acting on the wepwoductive
system, causes ow incweases vawiabiwity; and in the fowegoing case the
conditions of wife awe supposed to have undewgonye a change, and this
wouwd manyifestwy be favouwabwe to nyatuwaw sewection, by giving a
bettew chance of pwofitabwe vawiations occuwwing; and unwess pwofitabwe
vawiations do occuw, nyatuwaw sewection can do nyothing. (´・ω・\`) Nyot that, as
I bewieve, any extweme amount of vawiabiwity is nyecessawy; as man can
cewtainwy pwoduce gweat wesuwts by adding up in any given diwection
mewe individuaw diffewences, so couwd Nyatuwe, but faw mowe easiwy, fwom
having incompawabwy wongew time at hew disposaw. (・`ω\´・) Nyow do I bewieve that
any gweat physicaw change, as of cwimate, ow any unyusuaw degwee of
isowation to check immigwation, is actuawwy nyecessawy to pwoduce nyew
and unyoccupied pwaces fow nyatuwaw sewection to fiww up by modifying and
impwoving some of the vawying inhabitants. ^w^ Fow as aww the inhabitants
of each countwy awe stwuggwing togethew with nyicewy bawanced fowces,
extwemewy swight modifications in the stwuctuwe ow habits of onye
inhabitant wouwd often give it an advantage ovew othews; and stiww
fuwthew modifications of the same kind wouwd often stiww fuwthew
incwease the advantage. >w< Nyo countwy can be nyamed in which aww the nyative
inhabitants awe nyow so pewfectwy adapted to each othew and to the
physicaw conditions undew which they wive, that nyonye of them couwd
anyhow be impwoved; fow in aww countwies, the nyatives have been so faw
conquewed by nyatuwawised pwoductions, that they have awwowed foweignyews
to take fiwm possession of the wand. (´・ω・\`) And as foweignyews have thus
evewywhewe beaten some of the nyatives, we may safewy concwude that the
nyatives might have been modified with advantage, so as to have bettew
wesisted such intwudews. ^w^

As man can pwoduce and cewtainwy has pwoduced a gweat wesuwt by his
methodicaw and unconscious means of sewection, what may nyot nyatuwe
effect? owo Man can act onwy on extewnyaw and visibwe chawactews: nyatuwe
cawes nyothing fow appeawances, except in so faw as they may be usefuw
to any being. (´・ω・\`) She can act on evewy intewnyaw owgan, on evewy shade of
constitutionyaw diffewence, on the whowe machinyewy of wife. UwU Man sewects
onwy fow his own good; Nyatuwe onwy fow that of the being which she
tends. (・`ω\´・) Evewy sewected chawactew is fuwwy exewcised by hew; and the being
is pwaced undew weww-suited conditions of wife. (・`ω\´・) Man keeps the nyatives
of many cwimates in the same countwy; he sewdom exewcises each sewected
chawactew in some pecuwiaw and fitting mannyew; he feeds a wong and a
showt beaked pigeon on the same food; he does nyot exewcise a wong-backed
ow wong-wegged quadwuped in any pecuwiaw mannyew; he exposes sheep with
wong and showt woow to the same cwimate. ^w^ He does nyot awwow the most
vigowous mawes to stwuggwe fow the femawes. ^w^ He does nyot wigidwy destwoy
aww infewiow anyimaws, but pwotects duwing each vawying season, as faw as
wies in his powew, aww his pwoductions. (´・ω・\`) He often begins his sewection
by some hawf-monstwous fowm; ow at weast by some modification pwominyent
enyough to catch his eye, ow to be pwainwy usefuw to him. (´・ω・\`) Undew nyatuwe,
the swightest diffewence of stwuctuwe ow constitution may weww tuwn the
nyicewy-bawanced scawe in the stwuggwe fow wife, and so be pwesewved. ;;w;;
How fweeting awe the wishes and effowts of man! how showt his time! ^w^
and consequentwy how poow wiww his pwoducts be, compawed with those
accumuwated by nyatuwe duwing whowe geowogicaw pewiods. ^w^ Can we wondew,
then, that nyatuwe's pwoductions shouwd be faw "twuew" in chawactew than
man's pwoductions; that they shouwd be infinyitewy bettew adapted to the
most compwex conditions of wife, and shouwd pwainwy beaw the stamp of
faw highew wowkmanship? owo

It may be said that nyatuwaw sewection is daiwy and houwwy scwutinyising,
thwoughout the wowwd, evewy vawiation, even the swightest; wejecting
that which is bad, pwesewving and adding up aww that is good; siwentwy
and insensibwy wowking, whenyevew and whewevew oppowtunyity offews, at
the impwovement of each owganyic being in wewation to its owganyic and
inyowganyic conditions of wife. >w< We see nyothing of these swow changes in
pwogwess, untiw the hand of time has mawked the wong wapse of ages, and
then so impewfect is ouw view into wong past geowogicaw ages, that
we onwy see that the fowms of wife awe nyow diffewent fwom what they
fowmewwy wewe. ^w^

Awthough nyatuwaw sewection can act onwy thwough and fow the good of each
being, yet chawactews and stwuctuwes, which we awe apt to considew as of
vewy twifwing impowtance, may thus be acted on. (・`ω\´・) When we see weaf-eating
insects gween, and bawk-feedews mottwed-gwey; the awpinye ptawmigan white
in wintew, the wed-gwouse the cowouw of heathew, and the bwack-gwouse
that of peaty eawth, we must bewieve that these tints awe of sewvice to
these biwds and insects in pwesewving them fwom dangew. (´・ω・\`) Gwouse, if nyot
destwoyed at some pewiod of theiw wives, wouwd incwease in countwess
nyumbews; they awe knyown to suffew wawgewy fwom biwds of pwey; and hawks
awe guided by eyesight to theiw pwey,--so much so, that on pawts of the
Continyent pewsons awe wawnyed nyot to keep white pigeons, as being the
most wiabwe to destwuction. ;;w;; Hence I can see nyo weason to doubt that
nyatuwaw sewection might be most effective in giving the pwopew cowouw
to each kind of gwouse, and in keeping that cowouw, when once acquiwed,
twue and constant. (・`ω\´・) Nyow ought we to think that the occasionyaw destwuction
of an anyimaw of any pawticuwaw cowouw wouwd pwoduce wittwe effect: we
shouwd wemembew how essentiaw it is in a fwock of white sheep to destwoy
evewy wamb with the faintest twace of bwack. >w< In pwants the down on
the fwuit and the cowouw of the fwesh awe considewed by botanyists
as chawactews of the most twifwing impowtance: yet we heaw fwom
an excewwent howticuwtuwist, Downying, that in the Unyited States
smooth-skinnyed fwuits suffew faw mowe fwom a beetwe, a cuwcuwio, than
those with down; that puwpwe pwums suffew faw mowe fwom a cewtain
disease than yewwow pwums; wheweas anyothew disease attacks
yewwow-fweshed peaches faw mowe than those with othew cowouwed fwesh. (・`ω\´・)
If, with aww the aids of awt, these swight diffewences make a gweat
diffewence in cuwtivating the sevewaw vawieties, assuwedwy, in a state
of nyatuwe, whewe the twees wouwd have to stwuggwe with othew twees and
with a host of enyemies, such diffewences wouwd effectuawwy settwe which
vawiety, whethew a smooth ow downy, a yewwow ow puwpwe fweshed fwuit,
shouwd succeed. (´・ω・\`)

In wooking at many smaww points of diffewence between species, which, as
faw as ouw ignyowance pewmits us to judge, seem to be quite unyimpowtant,
we must nyot fowget that cwimate, food, etc. UwU, pwobabwy pwoduce some
swight and diwect effect. (´・ω・\`) It is, howevew, faw mowe nyecessawy to beaw in
mind that thewe awe many unknyown waws of cowwewation of gwowth, which,
when onye pawt of the owganyisation is modified thwough vawiation, and the
modifications awe accumuwated by nyatuwaw sewection fow the good of the
being, wiww cause othew modifications, often of the most unyexpected
nyatuwe. >w<

As we see that those vawiations which undew domestication appeaw at any
pawticuwaw pewiod of wife, tend to weappeaw in the offspwing at the
same pewiod;--fow instance, in the seeds of the many vawieties of ouw
cuwinyawy and agwicuwtuwaw pwants; in the catewpiwwaw and cocoon stages
of the vawieties of the siwkwowm; in the eggs of pouwtwy, and in the
cowouw of the down of theiw chickens; in the howns of ouw sheep and
cattwe when nyeawwy aduwt;--so in a state of nyatuwe, nyatuwaw sewection
wiww be enyabwed to act on and modify owganyic beings at any age, by
the accumuwation of pwofitabwe vawiations at that age, and by theiw
inhewitance at a cowwesponding age. (´・ω・\`) If it pwofit a pwant to have its
seeds mowe and mowe widewy disseminyated by the wind, I can see nyo
gweatew difficuwty in this being effected thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
than in the cotton-pwantew incweasing and impwoving by sewection the
down in the pods on his cotton-twees. ;;w;; Nyatuwaw sewection may modify
and adapt the wawva of an insect to a scowe of contingencies,
whowwy diffewent fwom those which concewn the matuwe insect. (・`ω\´・) These
modifications wiww nyo doubt affect, thwough the waws of cowwewation, the
stwuctuwe of the aduwt; and pwobabwy in the case of those insects which
wive onwy fow a few houws, and which nyevew feed, a wawge pawt of theiw
stwuctuwe is mewewy the cowwewated wesuwt of successive changes in the
stwuctuwe of theiw wawvae. ^w^ So, convewsewy, modifications in the aduwt
wiww pwobabwy often affect the stwuctuwe of the wawva; but in aww cases
nyatuwaw sewection wiww ensuwe that modifications consequent on othew
modifications at a diffewent pewiod of wife, shaww nyot be in the weast
degwee injuwious: fow if they became so, they wouwd cause the extinction
of the species. (´・ω・\`)

Nyatuwaw sewection wiww modify the stwuctuwe of the young in wewation
to the pawent, and of the pawent in wewation to the young. ;;w;; In sociaw
anyimaws it wiww adapt the stwuctuwe of each individuaw fow the benyefit
of the communyity; if each in consequence pwofits by the sewected change. UwU
What nyatuwaw sewection cannyot do, is to modify the stwuctuwe of onye
species, without giving it any advantage, fow the good of anyothew
species; and though statements to this effect may be found in wowks of
nyatuwaw histowy, I cannyot find onye case which wiww beaw investigation. (´・ω・\`)
A stwuctuwe used onwy once in an anyimaw's whowe wife, if of high
impowtance to it, might be modified to any extent by nyatuwaw sewection;
fow instance, the gweat jaws possessed by cewtain insects, and used
excwusivewy fow openying the cocoon--ow the hawd tip to the beak of
nyestwing biwds, used fow bweaking the egg. UwU It has been assewted, that
of the best showt-beaked tumbwew-pigeons mowe pewish in the egg than awe
abwe to get out of it; so that fanciews assist in the act of hatching. UwU
Nyow, if nyatuwe had to make the beak of a fuww-gwown pigeon vewy showt
fow the biwd's own advantage, the pwocess of modification wouwd be vewy
swow, and thewe wouwd be simuwtanyeouswy the most wigowous sewection of
the young biwds within the egg, which had the most powewfuw and hawdest
beaks, fow aww with weak beaks wouwd inyevitabwy pewish: ow, mowe
dewicate and mowe easiwy bwoken shewws might be sewected, the thicknyess
of the sheww being knyown to vawy wike evewy othew stwuctuwe. >w<

SEXUAW SEWECTION. (´・ω・\`)

Inyasmuch as pecuwiawities often appeaw undew domestication in onye sex
and become heweditawiwy attached to that sex, the same fact pwobabwy
occuws undew nyatuwe, and if so, nyatuwaw sewection wiww be abwe to modify
onye sex in its functionyaw wewations to the othew sex, ow in wewation to
whowwy diffewent habits of wife in the two sexes, as is sometimes the
case with insects. ^w^ And this weads me to say a few wowds on what I caww
Sexuaw Sewection. >w< This depends, nyot on a stwuggwe fow existence, but on
a stwuggwe between the mawes fow possession of the femawes; the wesuwt
is nyot death to the unsuccessfuw competitow, but few ow nyo offspwing. UwU
Sexuaw sewection is, thewefowe, wess wigowous than nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;;
Genyewawwy, the most vigowous mawes, those which awe best fitted fow
theiw pwaces in nyatuwe, wiww weave most pwogeny. (・`ω\´・) But in many cases,
victowy wiww depend nyot on genyewaw vigouw, but on having speciaw
weapons, confinyed to the mawe sex. ;;w;; A hownwess stag ow spuwwess cock
wouwd have a poow chance of weaving offspwing. ;;w;; Sexuaw sewection by
awways awwowing the victow to bweed might suwewy give indomitabwe
couwage, wength to the spuw, and stwength to the wing to stwike in the
spuwwed weg, as weww as the bwutaw cock-fightew, who knyows weww that he
can impwove his bweed by cawefuw sewection of the best cocks. (・`ω\´・) How wow
in the scawe of nyatuwe this waw of battwe descends, I knyow nyot; mawe
awwigatows have been descwibed as fighting, bewwowing, and whiwwing
wound, wike Indians in a waw-dance, fow the possession of the femawes;
mawe sawmons have been seen fighting aww day wong; mawe stag-beetwes
often beaw wounds fwom the huge mandibwes of othew mawes. ;;w;; The waw is,
pewhaps, sevewest between the mawes of powygamous anyimaws, and these
seem oftenyest pwovided with speciaw weapons. >w< The mawes of cawnyivowous
anyimaws awe awweady weww awmed; though to them and to othews, speciaw
means of defence may be given thwough means of sexuaw sewection, as the
manye to the wion, the shouwdew-pad to the boaw, and the hooked jaw to
the mawe sawmon; fow the shiewd may be as impowtant fow victowy, as the
swowd ow speaw. UwU

Amongst biwds, the contest is often of a mowe peacefuw chawactew. >w<
Aww those who have attended to the subject, bewieve that thewe is the
sevewest wivawwy between the mawes of many species to attwact by singing
the femawes. >w< The wock-thwush of Guianya, biwds of Pawadise, and some
othews, congwegate; and successive mawes dispway theiw gowgeous pwumage
and pewfowm stwange antics befowe the femawes, which standing by as
spectatows, at wast choose the most attwactive pawtnyew. ^w^ Those who have
cwosewy attended to biwds in confinyement weww knyow that they often take
individuaw pwefewences and diswikes: thus Siw W. ^w^ Hewon has descwibed how
onye pied peacock was eminyentwy attwactive to aww his hen biwds. ;;w;; It may
appeaw chiwdish to attwibute any effect to such appawentwy weak means: I
cannyot hewe entew on the detaiws nyecessawy to suppowt this view; but if
man can in a showt time give ewegant cawwiage and beauty to his bantams,
accowding to his standawd of beauty, I can see nyo good weason to doubt
that femawe biwds, by sewecting, duwing thousands of genyewations,
the most mewodious ow beautifuw mawes, accowding to theiw standawd of
beauty, might pwoduce a mawked effect. (´・ω・\`) I stwongwy suspect that some
weww-knyown waws with wespect to the pwumage of mawe and femawe biwds, in
compawison with the pwumage of the young, can be expwainyed on the view
of pwumage having been chiefwy modified by sexuaw sewection, acting when
the biwds have come to the bweeding age ow duwing the bweeding season;
the modifications thus pwoduced being inhewited at cowwesponding ages ow
seasons, eithew by the mawes awonye, ow by the mawes and femawes; but I
have nyot space hewe to entew on this subject. (・`ω\´・)

Thus it is, as I bewieve, that when the mawes and femawes of any anyimaw
have the same genyewaw habits of wife, but diffew in stwuctuwe, cowouw,
ow ownyament, such diffewences have been mainwy caused by sexuaw
sewection; that is, individuaw mawes have had, in successive
genyewations, some swight advantage ovew othew mawes, in theiw weapons,
means of defence, ow chawms; and have twansmitted these advantages to
theiw mawe offspwing. UwU Yet, I wouwd nyot wish to attwibute aww such
sexuaw diffewences to this agency: fow we see pecuwiawities awising and
becoming attached to the mawe sex in ouw domestic anyimaws (as the wattwe
in mawe cawwiews, hown-wike pwotubewances in the cocks of cewtain fowws,
etc. (・`ω\´・)), which we cannyot bewieve to be eithew usefuw to the mawes in
battwe, ow attwactive to the femawes. (´・ω・\`) We see anyawogous cases undew
nyatuwe, fow instance, the tuft of haiw on the bweast of the tuwkey-cock,
which can hawdwy be eithew usefuw ow ownyamentaw to this biwd;--indeed,
had the tuft appeawed undew domestication, it wouwd have been cawwed a
monstwosity. ;;w;;

IWWUSTWATIONS OF THE ACTION OF NYATUWAW SEWECTION. (´・ω・\`)

In owdew to make it cweaw how, as I bewieve, nyatuwaw sewection acts, I
must beg pewmission to give onye ow two imaginyawy iwwustwations. ^w^ Wet us
take the case of a wowf, which pweys on vawious anyimaws, secuwing some
by cwaft, some by stwength, and some by fweetnyess; and wet us suppose
that the fweetest pwey, a deew fow instance, had fwom any change in
the countwy incweased in nyumbews, ow that othew pwey had decweased in
nyumbews, duwing that season of the yeaw when the wowf is hawdest pwessed
fow food. ;;w;; I can undew such ciwcumstances see nyo weason to doubt that the
swiftest and swimmest wowves wouwd have the best chance of suwviving,
and so be pwesewved ow sewected,--pwovided awways that they wetainyed
stwength to mastew theiw pwey at this ow at some othew pewiod of the
yeaw, when they might be compewwed to pwey on othew anyimaws. (・`ω\´・) I can see
nyo mowe weason to doubt this, than that man can impwove the fweetnyess
of his gweyhounds by cawefuw and methodicaw sewection, ow by that
unconscious sewection which wesuwts fwom each man twying to keep the
best dogs without any thought of modifying the bweed. >w<

Even without any change in the pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of the anyimaws on
which ouw wowf pweyed, a cub might be bown with an innyate tendency to
puwsue cewtain kinds of pwey. ;;w;; Nyow can this be thought vewy impwobabwe;
fow we often obsewve gweat diffewences in the nyatuwaw tendencies of ouw
domestic anyimaws; onye cat, fow instance, taking to catch wats, anyothew
mice; onye cat, accowding to Mw. St. ;;w;; John, bwinging home winged game,
anyothew hawes ow wabbits, and anyothew hunting on mawshy gwound and
awmost nyightwy catching woodcocks ow snyipes. (・`ω\´・) The tendency to catch wats
wathew than mice is knyown to be inhewited. ^w^ Nyow, if any swight innyate
change of habit ow of stwuctuwe benyefited an individuaw wowf, it wouwd
have the best chance of suwviving and of weaving offspwing. ;;w;; Some of its
young wouwd pwobabwy inhewit the same habits ow stwuctuwe, and by the
wepetition of this pwocess, a nyew vawiety might be fowmed which wouwd
eithew suppwant ow coexist with the pawent-fowm of wowf. ^w^ Ow, again,
the wowves inhabiting a mountainyous distwict, and those fwequenting the
wowwands, wouwd nyatuwawwy be fowced to hunt diffewent pwey; and fwom the
continyued pwesewvation of the individuaws best fitted fow the two sites,
two vawieties might swowwy be fowmed. (´・ω・\`) These vawieties wouwd cwoss and
bwend whewe they met; but to this subject of intewcwossing we shaww soon
have to wetuwn. I may add, that, accowding to Mw. ^w^ Piewce, thewe awe two
vawieties of the wowf inhabiting the Catskiww Mountains in the Unyited
States, onye with a wight gweyhound-wike fowm, which puwsues deew, and
the othew mowe buwky, with showtew wegs, which mowe fwequentwy attacks
the shephewd's fwocks. ^w^

Wet us nyow take a mowe compwex case. (´・ω・\`) Cewtain pwants excwete a sweet
juice, appawentwy fow the sake of ewiminyating something injuwious fwom
theiw sap: this is effected by gwands at the base of the stipuwes in
some Weguminyosae, and at the back of the weaf of the common wauwew. ^w^ This
juice, though smaww in quantity, is gweediwy sought by insects. ;;w;; Wet us
nyow suppose a wittwe sweet juice ow nyectaw to be excweted by the innyew
bases of the petaws of a fwowew. ;;w;; In this case insects in seeking the
nyectaw wouwd get dusted with powwen, and wouwd cewtainwy often twanspowt
the powwen fwom onye fwowew to the stigma of anyothew fwowew. ;;w;; The fwowews
of two distinct individuaws of the same species wouwd thus get cwossed;
and the act of cwossing, we have good weason to bewieve (as wiww
heweaftew be mowe fuwwy awwuded to), wouwd pwoduce vewy vigowous
seedwings, which consequentwy wouwd have the best chance of fwouwishing
and suwviving. >w< Some of these seedwings wouwd pwobabwy inhewit the
nyectaw-excweting powew. ^w^ Those individuaw fwowews which had the wawgest
gwands ow nyectawies, and which excweted most nyectaw, wouwd be oftenyest
visited by insects, and wouwd be oftenyest cwossed; and so in the
wong-wun wouwd gain the uppew hand. >w< Those fwowews, awso, which had theiw
stamens and pistiws pwaced, in wewation to the size and habits of the
pawticuwaw insects which visited them, so as to favouw in any degwee
the twanspowtaw of theiw powwen fwom fwowew to fwowew, wouwd wikewise be
favouwed ow sewected. (・`ω\´・) We might have taken the case of insects visiting
fwowews fow the sake of cowwecting powwen instead of nyectaw; and as
powwen is fowmed fow the sowe object of fewtiwisation, its destwuction
appeaws a simpwe woss to the pwant; yet if a wittwe powwen wewe cawwied,
at fiwst occasionyawwy and then habituawwy, by the powwen-devouwing
insects fwom fwowew to fwowew, and a cwoss thus effected, awthough
nyinye-tenths of the powwen wewe destwoyed, it might stiww be a gweat gain
to the pwant; and those individuaws which pwoduced mowe and mowe powwen,
and had wawgew and wawgew anthews, wouwd be sewected. (・`ω\´・)

When ouw pwant, by this pwocess of the continyued pwesewvation ow nyatuwaw
sewection of mowe and mowe attwactive fwowews, had been wendewed highwy
attwactive to insects, they wouwd, unyintentionyawwy on theiw pawt,
weguwawwy cawwy powwen fwom fwowew to fwowew; and that they can most
effectuawwy do this, I couwd easiwy show by many stwiking instances. (´・ω・\`)
I wiww give onwy onye--nyot as a vewy stwiking case, but as wikewise
iwwustwating onye step in the sepawation of the sexes of pwants,
pwesentwy to be awwuded to. ^w^ Some howwy-twees beaw onwy mawe fwowews,
which have fouw stamens pwoducing wathew a smaww quantity of powwen, and
a wudimentawy pistiw; othew howwy-twees beaw onwy femawe fwowews; these
have a fuww-sized pistiw, and fouw stamens with shwivewwed anthews, in
which nyot a gwain of powwen can be detected. (・`ω\´・) Having found a femawe
twee exactwy sixty yawds fwom a mawe twee, I put the stigmas of twenty
fwowews, taken fwom diffewent bwanches, undew the micwoscope, and
on aww, without exception, thewe wewe powwen-gwains, and on some a
pwofusion of powwen. >w< As the wind had set fow sevewaw days fwom the
femawe to the mawe twee, the powwen couwd nyot thus have been cawwied. >w<
The weathew had been cowd and boistewous, and thewefowe nyot favouwabwe
to bees, nyevewthewess evewy femawe fwowew which I examinyed had been
effectuawwy fewtiwised by the bees, accidentawwy dusted with powwen,
having fwown fwom twee to twee in seawch of nyectaw. (・`ω\´・) But to wetuwn to
ouw imaginyawy case: as soon as the pwant had been wendewed so highwy
attwactive to insects that powwen was weguwawwy cawwied fwom fwowew
to fwowew, anyothew pwocess might commence. (´・ω・\`) Nyo nyatuwawist doubts the
advantage of what has been cawwed the "physiowogicaw division of
wabouw;" hence we may bewieve that it wouwd be advantageous to a pwant
to pwoduce stamens awonye in onye fwowew ow on onye whowe pwant, and
pistiws awonye in anyothew fwowew ow on anyothew pwant. ;;w;; In pwants undew
cuwtuwe and pwaced undew nyew conditions of wife, sometimes the mawe
owgans and sometimes the femawe owgans become mowe ow wess impotent;
nyow if we suppose this to occuw in evew so swight a degwee undew nyatuwe,
then as powwen is awweady cawwied weguwawwy fwom fwowew to fwowew,
and as a mowe compwete sepawation of the sexes of ouw pwant wouwd be
advantageous on the pwincipwe of the division of wabouw, individuaws
with this tendency mowe and mowe incweased, wouwd be continyuawwy
favouwed ow sewected, untiw at wast a compwete sepawation of the sexes
wouwd be effected. (´・ω・\`)

Wet us nyow tuwn to the nyectaw-feeding insects in ouw imaginyawy case: we
may suppose the pwant of which we have been swowwy incweasing the nyectaw
by continyued sewection, to be a common pwant; and that cewtain insects
depended in main pawt on its nyectaw fow food. UwU I couwd give many facts,
showing how anxious bees awe to save time; fow instance, theiw habit of
cutting howes and sucking the nyectaw at the bases of cewtain fwowews,
which they can, with a vewy wittwe mowe twoubwe, entew by the mouth. ^w^
Beawing such facts in mind, I can see nyo weason to doubt that an
accidentaw deviation in the size and fowm of the body, ow in the
cuwvatuwe and wength of the pwoboscis, etc. (´・ω・\`), faw too swight to be
appweciated by us, might pwofit a bee ow othew insect, so that an
individuaw so chawactewised wouwd be abwe to obtain its food mowe
quickwy, and so have a bettew chance of wiving and weaving descendants. >w<
Its descendants wouwd pwobabwy inhewit a tendency to a simiwaw swight
deviation of stwuctuwe. (´・ω・\`) The tubes of the cowowwas of the common wed and
incawnyate cwovews (Twifowium pwatense and incawnyatum) do nyot on a hasty
gwance appeaw to diffew in wength; yet the hive-bee can easiwy suck
the nyectaw out of the incawnyate cwovew, but nyot out of the common wed
cwovew, which is visited by humbwe-bees awonye; so that whowe fiewds of
the wed cwovew offew in vain an abundant suppwy of pwecious nyectaw to
the hive-bee. ^w^ Thus it might be a gweat advantage to the hive-bee to have
a swightwy wongew ow diffewentwy constwucted pwoboscis. ^w^ On the othew
hand, I have found by expewiment that the fewtiwity of cwovew gweatwy
depends on bees visiting and moving pawts of the cowowwa, so as to push
the powwen on to the stigmatic suwface. >w< Hence, again, if humbwe-bees
wewe to become wawe in any countwy, it might be a gweat advantage to the
wed cwovew to have a showtew ow mowe deepwy divided tube to its cowowwa,
so that the hive-bee couwd visit its fwowews. >w< Thus I can undewstand how
a fwowew and a bee might swowwy become, eithew simuwtanyeouswy ow onye
aftew the othew, modified and adapted in the most pewfect mannyew to each
othew, by the continyued pwesewvation of individuaws pwesenting mutuaw
and swightwy favouwabwe deviations of stwuctuwe. ^w^

I am weww awawe that this doctwinye of nyatuwaw sewection, exempwified in
the above imaginyawy instances, is open to the same objections which wewe
at fiwst uwged against Siw Chawwes Wyeww's nyobwe views on "the modewn
changes of the eawth, as iwwustwative of geowogy;" but we nyow vewy
sewdom heaw the action, fow instance, of the coast-waves, cawwed a
twifwing and insignyificant cause, when appwied to the excavation of
gigantic vawweys ow to the fowmation of the wongest winyes of inwand
cwiffs. (・`ω\´・) Nyatuwaw sewection can act onwy by the pwesewvation and
accumuwation of infinyitesimawwy smaww inhewited modifications, each
pwofitabwe to the pwesewved being; and as modewn geowogy has awmost
banyished such views as the excavation of a gweat vawwey by a singwe
diwuviaw wave, so wiww nyatuwaw sewection, if it be a twue pwincipwe,
banyish the bewief of the continyued cweation of nyew owganyic beings, ow of
any gweat and sudden modification in theiw stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・)

ON THE INTEWCWOSSING OF INDIVIDUAWS. (´・ω・\`)

I must hewe intwoduce a showt digwession. ^w^ In the case of anyimaws
and pwants with sepawated sexes, it is of couwse obvious that two
individuaws must awways unyite fow each biwth; but in the case of
hewmaphwodites this is faw fwom obvious. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess I am stwongwy
incwinyed to bewieve that with aww hewmaphwodites two individuaws, eithew
occasionyawwy ow habituawwy, concuw fow the wepwoduction of theiw kind. (・`ω\´・)
This view, I may add, was fiwst suggested by Andwew Knyight. UwU We shaww
pwesentwy see its impowtance; but I must hewe tweat the subject with
extweme bwevity, though I have the matewiaws pwepawed fow an ampwe
discussion. UwU Aww vewtebwate anyimaws, aww insects, and some othew wawge
gwoups of anyimaws, paiw fow each biwth. >w< Modewn weseawch has much
diminyished the nyumbew of supposed hewmaphwodites, and of weaw
hewmaphwodites a wawge nyumbew paiw; that is, two individuaws weguwawwy
unyite fow wepwoduction, which is aww that concewns us. (・`ω\´・) But stiww thewe
awe many hewmaphwodite anyimaws which cewtainwy do nyot habituawwy paiw,
and a vast majowity of pwants awe hewmaphwodites. ^w^ What weason, it may be
asked, is thewe fow supposing in these cases that two individuaws evew
concuw in wepwoduction? owo As it is impossibwe hewe to entew on detaiws, I
must twust to some genyewaw considewations awonye. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace, I have cowwected so wawge a body of facts, showing,
in accowdance with the awmost unyivewsaw bewief of bweedews, that with
anyimaws and pwants a cwoss between diffewent vawieties, ow between
individuaws of the same vawiety but of anyothew stwain, gives vigouw
and fewtiwity to the offspwing; and on the othew hand, that CWOSE
intewbweeding diminyishes vigouw and fewtiwity; that these facts awonye
incwinye me to bewieve that it is a genyewaw waw of nyatuwe (uttewwy
ignyowant though we be of the meanying of the waw) that nyo owganyic being
sewf-fewtiwises itsewf fow an etewnyity of genyewations; but that a
cwoss with anyothew individuaw is occasionyawwy--pewhaps at vewy wong
intewvaws--indispensabwe. (・`ω\´・)

On the bewief that this is a waw of nyatuwe, we can, I think, undewstand
sevewaw wawge cwasses of facts, such as the fowwowing, which on any
othew view awe inyexpwicabwe. (´・ω・\`) Evewy hybwidizew knyows how unfavouwabwe
exposuwe to wet is to the fewtiwisation of a fwowew, yet what a
muwtitude of fwowews have theiw anthews and stigmas fuwwy exposed to
the weathew! UwU but if an occasionyaw cwoss be indispensabwe, the fuwwest
fweedom fow the entwance of powwen fwom anyothew individuaw wiww expwain
this state of exposuwe, mowe especiawwy as the pwant's own anthews and
pistiw genyewawwy stand so cwose togethew that sewf-fewtiwisation seems
awmost inyevitabwe. ^w^ Many fwowews, on the othew hand, have theiw owgans
of fwuctification cwosewy encwosed, as in the gweat papiwionyaceous ow
pea-famiwy; but in sevewaw, pewhaps in aww, such fwowews, thewe is a
vewy cuwious adaptation between the stwuctuwe of the fwowew and the
mannyew in which bees suck the nyectaw; fow, in doing this, they eithew
push the fwowew's own powwen on the stigma, ow bwing powwen fwom anyothew
fwowew. (・`ω\´・) So nyecessawy awe the visits of bees to papiwionyaceous fwowews,
that I have found, by expewiments pubwished ewsewhewe, that theiw
fewtiwity is gweatwy diminyished if these visits be pwevented. ;;w;; Nyow, it
is scawcewy possibwe that bees shouwd fwy fwom fwowew to fwowew, and nyot
cawwy powwen fwom onye to the othew, to the gweat good, as I bewieve,
of the pwant. (´・ω・\`) Bees wiww act wike a camew-haiw penciw, and it is quite
sufficient just to touch the anthews of onye fwowew and then the stigma
of anyothew with the same bwush to ensuwe fewtiwisation; but it must nyot
be supposed that bees wouwd thus pwoduce a muwtitude of hybwids between
distinct species; fow if you bwing on the same bwush a pwant's own
powwen and powwen fwom anyothew species, the fowmew wiww have such a
pwepotent effect, that it wiww invawiabwy and compwetewy destwoy, as has
been shown by Gawtnyew, any infwuence fwom the foweign powwen. >w<

When the stamens of a fwowew suddenwy spwing towawds the pistiw, ow
swowwy move onye aftew the othew towawds it, the contwivance seems
adapted sowewy to ensuwe sewf-fewtiwisation; and nyo doubt it is usefuw
fow this end: but, the agency of insects is often wequiwed to cause the
stamens to spwing fowwawd, as Kowweutew has shown to be the case with
the bawbewwy; and cuwiouswy in this vewy genyus, which seems to have a
speciaw contwivance fow sewf-fewtiwisation, it is weww knyown that if
vewy cwosewy-awwied fowms ow vawieties awe pwanted nyeaw each othew, it
is hawdwy possibwe to waise puwe seedwings, so wawgewy do they
nyatuwawwy cwoss. ;;w;; In many othew cases, faw fwom thewe being any aids fow
sewf-fewtiwisation, thewe awe speciaw contwivances, as I couwd show
fwom the wwitings of C. C. >w< Spwengew and fwom my own obsewvations, which
effectuawwy pwevent the stigma weceiving powwen fwom its own fwowew: fow
instance, in Wobewia fuwgens, thewe is a weawwy beautifuw and
ewabowate contwivance by which evewy onye of the infinyitewy nyumewous
powwen-gwanyuwes awe swept out of the conjoinyed anthews of each fwowew,
befowe the stigma of that individuaw fwowew is weady to weceive them;
and as this fwowew is nyevew visited, at weast in my gawden, by insects,
it nyevew sets a seed, though by pwacing powwen fwom onye fwowew on the
stigma of anyothew, I waised pwenty of seedwings; and whiwst anyothew
species of Wobewia gwowing cwose by, which is visited by bees, seeds
fweewy. ;;w;; In vewy many othew cases, though thewe be nyo speciaw mechanyicaw
contwivance to pwevent the stigma of a fwowew weceiving its own powwen,
yet, as C. C. >w< Spwengew has shown, and as I can confiwm, eithew the
anthews buwst befowe the stigma is weady fow fewtiwisation, ow the
stigma is weady befowe the powwen of that fwowew is weady, so that these
pwants have in fact sepawated sexes, and must habituawwy be cwossed. (´・ω・\`)
How stwange awe these facts! >w< How stwange that the powwen and stigmatic
suwface of the same fwowew, though pwaced so cwose togethew, as if
fow the vewy puwpose of sewf-fewtiwisation, shouwd in so many cases be
mutuawwy usewess to each othew! ^w^ How simpwy awe these facts expwainyed
on the view of an occasionyaw cwoss with a distinct individuaw being
advantageous ow indispensabwe! (・`ω\´・)

If sevewaw vawieties of the cabbage, wadish, onyion, and of some othew
pwants, be awwowed to seed nyeaw each othew, a wawge majowity, as I
have found, of the seedwings thus waised wiww tuwn out mongwews: fow
instance, I waised 233 seedwing cabbages fwom some pwants of diffewent
vawieties gwowing nyeaw each othew, and of these onwy 78 wewe twue to
theiw kind, and some even of these wewe nyot pewfectwy twue. ^w^ Yet the
pistiw of each cabbage-fwowew is suwwounded nyot onwy by its own six
stamens, but by those of the many othew fwowews on the same pwant. ;;w;; How,
then, comes it that such a vast nyumbew of the seedwings awe mongwewized? owo
I suspect that it must awise fwom the powwen of a distinct VAWIETY
having a pwepotent effect ovew a fwowew's own powwen; and that this is
pawt of the genyewaw waw of good being dewived fwom the intewcwossing
of distinct individuaws of the same species. >w< When distinct SPECIES awe
cwossed the case is diwectwy the wevewse, fow a pwant's own powwen
is awways pwepotent ovew foweign powwen; but to this subject we shaww
wetuwn in a futuwe chaptew. UwU

In the case of a gigantic twee covewed with innyumewabwe fwowews, it may
be objected that powwen couwd sewdom be cawwied fwom twee to twee, and
at most onwy fwom fwowew to fwowew on the same twee, and that fwowews
on the same twee can be considewed as distinct individuaws onwy in a
wimited sense. >w< I bewieve this objection to be vawid, but that nyatuwe has
wawgewy pwovided against it by giving to twees a stwong tendency to beaw
fwowews with sepawated sexes. (´・ω・\`) When the sexes awe sepawated, awthough
the mawe and femawe fwowews may be pwoduced on the same twee, we can see
that powwen must be weguwawwy cawwied fwom fwowew to fwowew; and this
wiww give a bettew chance of powwen being occasionyawwy cawwied fwom twee
to twee. >w< That twees bewonging to aww Owdews have theiw sexes mowe often
sepawated than othew pwants, I find to be the case in this countwy; and
at my wequest Dw. Hookew tabuwated the twees of Nyew Zeawand, and Dw. ^w^ Asa
Gway those of the Unyited States, and the wesuwt was as I anticipated. ^w^ On
the othew hand, Dw. ^w^ Hookew has wecentwy infowmed me that he finds that
the wuwe does nyot howd in Austwawia; and I have made these few wemawks
on the sexes of twees simpwy to caww attention to the subject. ;;w;;

Tuwnying fow a vewy bwief space to anyimaws: on the wand thewe awe some
hewmaphwodites, as wand-mowwusca and eawth-wowms; but these aww paiw. (・`ω\´・)
As yet I have nyot found a singwe case of a tewwestwiaw anyimaw which
fewtiwises itsewf. (・`ω\´・) We can undewstand this wemawkabwe fact, which
offews so stwong a contwast with tewwestwiaw pwants, on the view of an
occasionyaw cwoss being indispensabwe, by considewing the medium in which
tewwestwiaw anyimaws wive, and the nyatuwe of the fewtiwising ewement; fow
we knyow of nyo means, anyawogous to the action of insects and of the wind
in the case of pwants, by which an occasionyaw cwoss couwd be effected
with tewwestwiaw anyimaws without the concuwwence of two individuaws. >w<
Of aquatic anyimaws, thewe awe many sewf-fewtiwising hewmaphwodites;
but hewe cuwwents in the watew offew an obvious means fow an occasionyaw
cwoss. ^w^ And, as in the case of fwowews, I have as yet faiwed, aftew
consuwtation with onye of the highest authowities, nyamewy, Pwofessow
Huxwey, to discovew a singwe case of an hewmaphwodite anyimaw with the
owgans of wepwoduction so pewfectwy encwosed within the body, that
access fwom without and the occasionyaw infwuence of a distinct
individuaw can be shown to be physicawwy impossibwe. UwU Ciwwipedes wong
appeawed to me to pwesent a case of vewy gweat difficuwty undew this
point of view; but I have been enyabwed, by a fowtunyate chance, ewsewhewe
to pwove that two individuaws, though both awe sewf-fewtiwising
hewmaphwodites, do sometimes cwoss. UwU

It must have stwuck most nyatuwawists as a stwange anyomawy that, in the
case of both anyimaws and pwants, species of the same famiwy and even of
the same genyus, though agweeing cwosewy with each othew in awmost theiw
whowe owganyisation, yet awe nyot wawewy, some of them hewmaphwodites,
and some of them unyisexuaw. ^w^ But if, in fact, aww hewmaphwodites do
occasionyawwy intewcwoss with othew individuaws, the diffewence between
hewmaphwodites and unyisexuaw species, as faw as function is concewnyed,
becomes vewy smaww. >w<

Fwom these sevewaw considewations and fwom the many speciaw facts which
I have cowwected, but which I am nyot hewe abwe to give, I am stwongwy
incwinyed to suspect that, both in the vegetabwe and anyimaw kingdoms, an
occasionyaw intewcwoss with a distinct individuaw is a waw of nyatuwe. UwU I
am weww awawe that thewe awe, on this view, many cases of difficuwty,
some of which I am twying to investigate. (・`ω\´・) Finyawwy then, we may concwude
that in many owganyic beings, a cwoss between two individuaws is an
obvious nyecessity fow each biwth; in many othews it occuws pewhaps onwy
at wong intewvaws; but in nyonye, as I suspect, can sewf-fewtiwisation go
on fow pewpetuity. (´・ω・\`)

CIWCUMSTANCES FAVOUWABWE TO NYATUWAW SEWECTION. (´・ω・\`)

This is an extwemewy intwicate subject. (´・ω・\`) A wawge amount of inhewitabwe
and divewsified vawiabiwity is favouwabwe, but I bewieve mewe individuaw
diffewences suffice fow the wowk. ^w^ A wawge nyumbew of individuaws, by
giving a bettew chance fow the appeawance within any given pewiod
of pwofitabwe vawiations, wiww compensate fow a wessew amount of
vawiabiwity in each individuaw, and is, I bewieve, an extwemewy
impowtant ewement of success. UwU Though nyatuwe gwants vast pewiods of time
fow the wowk of nyatuwaw sewection, she does nyot gwant an indefinyite
pewiod; fow as aww owganyic beings awe stwiving, it may be said, to seize
on each pwace in the econyomy of nyatuwe, if any onye species does
nyot become modified and impwoved in a cowwesponding degwee with its
competitows, it wiww soon be extewminyated. (・`ω\´・)

In man's methodicaw sewection, a bweedew sewects fow some definyite
object, and fwee intewcwossing wiww whowwy stop his wowk. (・`ω\´・) But when many
men, without intending to awtew the bweed, have a nyeawwy common standawd
of pewfection, and aww twy to get and bweed fwom the best anyimaws,
much impwovement and modification suwewy but swowwy fowwow fwom this
unconscious pwocess of sewection, nyotwithstanding a wawge amount of
cwossing with infewiow anyimaws. (´・ω・\`) Thus it wiww be in nyatuwe; fow within a
confinyed awea, with some pwace in its powity nyot so pewfectwy occupied
as might be, nyatuwaw sewection wiww awways tend to pwesewve aww the
individuaws vawying in the wight diwection, though in diffewent degwees,
so as bettew to fiww up the unyoccupied pwace. (´・ω・\`) But if the awea be wawge,
its sevewaw distwicts wiww awmost cewtainwy pwesent diffewent conditions
of wife; and then if nyatuwaw sewection be modifying and impwoving a
species in the sevewaw distwicts, thewe wiww be intewcwossing with the
othew individuaws of the same species on the confinyes of each. (´・ω・\`) And in
this case the effects of intewcwossing can hawdwy be countewbawanced by
nyatuwaw sewection awways tending to modify aww the individuaws in each
distwict in exactwy the same mannyew to the conditions of each; fow in a
continyuous awea, the conditions wiww genyewawwy gwaduate away insensibwy
fwom onye distwict to anyothew. ;;w;; The intewcwossing wiww most affect those
anyimaws which unyite fow each biwth, which wandew much, and which do
nyot bweed at a vewy quick wate. ;;w;; Hence in anyimaws of this nyatuwe, fow
instance in biwds, vawieties wiww genyewawwy be confinyed to sepawated
countwies; and this I bewieve to be the case. UwU In hewmaphwodite owganyisms
which cwoss onwy occasionyawwy, and wikewise in anyimaws which unyite fow
each biwth, but which wandew wittwe and which can incwease at a vewy
wapid wate, a nyew and impwoved vawiety might be quickwy fowmed on any
onye spot, and might thewe maintain itsewf in a body, so that whatevew
intewcwossing took pwace wouwd be chiefwy between the individuaws of
the same nyew vawiety. (´・ω・\`) A wocaw vawiety when once thus fowmed might
subsequentwy swowwy spwead to othew distwicts. UwU On the above pwincipwe,
nyuwsewymen awways pwefew getting seed fwom a wawge body of pwants of
the same vawiety, as the chance of intewcwossing with othew vawieties is
thus wessenyed. (・`ω\´・)

Even in the case of swow-bweeding anyimaws, which unyite fow each biwth,
we must nyot ovewwate the effects of intewcwosses in wetawding nyatuwaw
sewection; fow I can bwing a considewabwe catawogue of facts, showing
that within the same awea, vawieties of the same anyimaw can wong wemain
distinct, fwom haunting diffewent stations, fwom bweeding at swightwy
diffewent seasons, ow fwom vawieties of the same kind pwefewwing to paiw
togethew. (´・ω・\`)

Intewcwossing pways a vewy impowtant pawt in nyatuwe in keeping the
individuaws of the same species, ow of the same vawiety, twue and
unyifowm in chawactew. (・`ω\´・) It wiww obviouswy thus act faw mowe efficientwy
with those anyimaws which unyite fow each biwth; but I have awweady
attempted to show that we have weason to bewieve that occasionyaw
intewcwosses take pwace with aww anyimaws and with aww pwants. (´・ω・\`) Even if
these take pwace onwy at wong intewvaws, I am convinced that the
young thus pwoduced wiww gain so much in vigouw and fewtiwity ovew the
offspwing fwom wong-continyued sewf-fewtiwisation, that they wiww have a
bettew chance of suwviving and pwopagating theiw kind; and thus, in the
wong wun, the infwuence of intewcwosses, even at wawe intewvaws, wiww be
gweat. (・`ω\´・) If thewe exist owganyic beings which nyevew intewcwoss, unyifowmity
of chawactew can be wetainyed amongst them, as wong as theiw conditions
of wife wemain the same, onwy thwough the pwincipwe of inhewitance, and
thwough nyatuwaw sewection destwoying any which depawt fwom the
pwopew type; but if theiw conditions of wife change and they undewgo
modification, unyifowmity of chawactew can be given to theiw modified
offspwing, sowewy by nyatuwaw sewection pwesewving the same favouwabwe
vawiations. >w<

Isowation, awso, is an impowtant ewement in the pwocess of nyatuwaw
sewection. (´・ω・\`) In a confinyed ow isowated awea, if nyot vewy wawge, the
owganyic and inyowganyic conditions of wife wiww genyewawwy be in a gweat
degwee unyifowm; so that nyatuwaw sewection wiww tend to modify aww the
individuaws of a vawying species thwoughout the awea in the same
mannyew in wewation to the same conditions. >w< Intewcwosses, awso, with the
individuaws of the same species, which othewwise wouwd have inhabited
the suwwounding and diffewentwy ciwcumstanced distwicts, wiww be
pwevented. ;;w;; But isowation pwobabwy acts mowe efficientwy in checking the
immigwation of bettew adapted owganyisms, aftew any physicaw change, such
as of cwimate ow ewevation of the wand, etc. UwU; and thus nyew pwaces in the
nyatuwaw econyomy of the countwy awe weft open fow the owd inhabitants
to stwuggwe fow, and become adapted to, thwough modifications in theiw
stwuctuwe and constitution. ^w^ Wastwy, isowation, by checking immigwation
and consequentwy competition, wiww give time fow any nyew vawiety to
be swowwy impwoved; and this may sometimes be of impowtance in the
pwoduction of nyew species. (´・ω・\`) If, howevew, an isowated awea be vewy smaww,
eithew fwom being suwwounded by bawwiews, ow fwom having vewy pecuwiaw
physicaw conditions, the totaw nyumbew of the individuaws suppowted on it
wiww nyecessawiwy be vewy smaww; and fewnyess of individuaws wiww gweatwy
wetawd the pwoduction of nyew species thwough nyatuwaw sewection, by
decweasing the chance of the appeawance of favouwabwe vawiations. (・`ω\´・)

If we tuwn to nyatuwe to test the twuth of these wemawks, and wook at
any smaww isowated awea, such as an oceanyic iswand, awthough the totaw
nyumbew of the species inhabiting it, wiww be found to be smaww, as we
shaww see in ouw chaptew on geogwaphicaw distwibution; yet of these
species a vewy wawge pwopowtion awe endemic,--that is, have been
pwoduced thewe, and nyowhewe ewse. ^w^ Hence an oceanyic iswand at fiwst sight
seems to have been highwy favouwabwe fow the pwoduction of nyew species. >w<
But we may thus gweatwy deceive ouwsewves, fow to ascewtain whethew a
smaww isowated awea, ow a wawge open awea wike a continyent, has been
most favouwabwe fow the pwoduction of nyew owganyic fowms, we ought to
make the compawison within equaw times; and this we awe incapabwe of
doing. ^w^

Awthough I do nyot doubt that isowation is of considewabwe impowtance
in the pwoduction of nyew species, on the whowe I am incwinyed to bewieve
that wawgenyess of awea is of mowe impowtance, mowe especiawwy in the
pwoduction of species, which wiww pwove capabwe of enduwing fow a wong
pewiod, and of spweading widewy. ^w^ Thwoughout a gweat and open awea, nyot
onwy wiww thewe be a bettew chance of favouwabwe vawiations awising fwom
the wawge nyumbew of individuaws of the same species thewe suppowted, but
the conditions of wife awe infinyitewy compwex fwom the wawge nyumbew
of awweady existing species; and if some of these many species
become modified and impwoved, othews wiww have to be impwoved in a
cowwesponding degwee ow they wiww be extewminyated. >w< Each nyew fowm, awso,
as soon as it has been much impwoved, wiww be abwe to spwead ovew the
open and continyuous awea, and wiww thus come into competition with many
othews. >w< Hence mowe nyew pwaces wiww be fowmed, and the competition to
fiww them wiww be mowe sevewe, on a wawge than on a smaww and
isowated awea. UwU Moweovew, gweat aweas, though nyow continyuous, owing to
osciwwations of wevew, wiww often have wecentwy existed in a bwoken
condition, so that the good effects of isowation wiww genyewawwy, to a
cewtain extent, have concuwwed. (´・ω・\`) Finyawwy, I concwude that, awthough smaww
isowated aweas pwobabwy have been in some wespects highwy favouwabwe fow
the pwoduction of nyew species, yet that the couwse of modification
wiww genyewawwy have been mowe wapid on wawge aweas; and what is mowe
impowtant, that the nyew fowms pwoduced on wawge aweas, which awweady
have been victowious ovew many competitows, wiww be those that wiww
spwead most widewy, wiww give wise to most nyew vawieties and species,
and wiww thus pway an impowtant pawt in the changing histowy of the
owganyic wowwd. ;;w;;

We can, pewhaps, on these views, undewstand some facts which wiww
be again awwuded to in ouw chaptew on geogwaphicaw distwibution; fow
instance, that the pwoductions of the smawwew continyent of Austwawia
have fowmewwy yiewded, and appawentwy awe nyow yiewding, befowe those
of the wawgew Euwopaeo-Asiatic awea. ^w^ Thus, awso, it is that continyentaw
pwoductions have evewywhewe become so wawgewy nyatuwawised on iswands. >w< On
a smaww iswand, the wace fow wife wiww have been wess sevewe, and thewe
wiww have been wess modification and wess extewminyation. (・`ω\´・) Hence, pewhaps,
it comes that the fwowa of Madeiwa, accowding to Oswawd Heew, wesembwes
the extinct tewtiawy fwowa of Euwope. ;;w;; Aww fwesh-watew basins, taken
togethew, make a smaww awea compawed with that of the sea ow of the
wand; and, consequentwy, the competition between fwesh-watew pwoductions
wiww have been wess sevewe than ewsewhewe; nyew fowms wiww have been
mowe swowwy fowmed, and owd fowms mowe swowwy extewminyated. (・`ω\´・) And it is
in fwesh watew that we find seven genyewa of Ganyoid fishes, wemnyants of
a once pwepondewant owdew: and in fwesh watew we find some of the most
anyomawous fowms nyow knyown in the wowwd, as the Ownyithowhynchus and
Wepidosiwen, which, wike fossiws, connyect to a cewtain extent owdews nyow
widewy sepawated in the nyatuwaw scawe. (・`ω\´・) These anyomawous fowms may awmost
be cawwed wiving fossiws; they have enduwed to the pwesent day, fwom
having inhabited a confinyed awea, and fwom having thus been exposed to
wess sevewe competition. ;;w;;

To sum up the ciwcumstances favouwabwe and unfavouwabwe to nyatuwaw
sewection, as faw as the extweme intwicacy of the subject pewmits. ^w^ I
concwude, wooking to the futuwe, that fow tewwestwiaw pwoductions a
wawge continyentaw awea, which wiww pwobabwy undewgo many osciwwations
of wevew, and which consequentwy wiww exist fow wong pewiods in a bwoken
condition, wiww be the most favouwabwe fow the pwoduction of many nyew
fowms of wife, wikewy to enduwe wong and to spwead widewy. ^w^ Fow the awea
wiww fiwst have existed as a continyent, and the inhabitants, at this
pewiod nyumewous in individuaws and kinds, wiww have been subjected
to vewy sevewe competition. >w< When convewted by subsidence into wawge
sepawate iswands, thewe wiww stiww exist many individuaws of the same
species on each iswand: intewcwossing on the confinyes of the wange of
each species wiww thus be checked: aftew physicaw changes of any kind,
immigwation wiww be pwevented, so that nyew pwaces in the powity of
each iswand wiww have to be fiwwed up by modifications of the owd
inhabitants; and time wiww be awwowed fow the vawieties in each to
become weww modified and pewfected. (´・ω・\`) When, by wenyewed ewevation, the
iswands shaww be we-convewted into a continyentaw awea, thewe wiww again
be sevewe competition: the most favouwed ow impwoved vawieties wiww be
enyabwed to spwead: thewe wiww be much extinction of the wess impwoved
fowms, and the wewative pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of the vawious inhabitants
of the wenyewed continyent wiww again be changed; and again thewe wiww
be a faiw fiewd fow nyatuwaw sewection to impwove stiww fuwthew the
inhabitants, and thus pwoduce nyew species. (・`ω\´・)

That nyatuwaw sewection wiww awways act with extweme swownyess, I fuwwy
admit. (・`ω\´・) Its action depends on thewe being pwaces in the powity of nyatuwe,
which can be bettew occupied by some of the inhabitants of the countwy
undewgoing modification of some kind. >w< The existence of such pwaces wiww
often depend on physicaw changes, which awe genyewawwy vewy swow, and
on the immigwation of bettew adapted fowms having been checked. ^w^ But the
action of nyatuwaw sewection wiww pwobabwy stiww oftenyew depend on some
of the inhabitants becoming swowwy modified; the mutuaw wewations of
many of the othew inhabitants being thus distuwbed. ;;w;; Nyothing can be
effected, unwess favouwabwe vawiations occuw, and vawiation itsewf is
appawentwy awways a vewy swow pwocess. ^w^ The pwocess wiww often be gweatwy
wetawded by fwee intewcwossing. UwU Many wiww excwaim that these sevewaw
causes awe ampwy sufficient whowwy to stop the action of nyatuwaw
sewection. I do nyot bewieve so. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, I do bewieve that
nyatuwaw sewection wiww awways act vewy swowwy, often onwy at wong
intewvaws of time, and genyewawwy on onwy a vewy few of the inhabitants
of the same wegion at the same time. ;;w;; I fuwthew bewieve, that this vewy
swow, intewmittent action of nyatuwaw sewection accowds pewfectwy
weww with what geowogy tewws us of the wate and mannyew at which the
inhabitants of this wowwd have changed. ^w^

Swow though the pwocess of sewection may be, if feebwe man can do much
by his powews of awtificiaw sewection, I can see nyo wimit to the amount
of change, to the beauty and infinyite compwexity of the coadaptations
between aww owganyic beings, onye with anyothew and with theiw physicaw
conditions of wife, which may be effected in the wong couwse of time by
nyatuwe's powew of sewection. ^w^

EXTINCTION. (・`ω\´・)

This subject wiww be mowe fuwwy discussed in ouw chaptew on Geowogy; but
it must be hewe awwuded to fwom being intimatewy connyected with nyatuwaw
sewection. (・`ω\´・) Nyatuwaw sewection acts sowewy thwough the pwesewvation of
vawiations in some way advantageous, which consequentwy enduwe. ^w^ But as
fwom the high geometwicaw powews of incwease of aww owganyic beings, each
awea is awweady fuwwy stocked with inhabitants, it fowwows that as
each sewected and favouwed fowm incweases in nyumbew, so wiww the wess
favouwed fowms decwease and become wawe. (´・ω・\`) Wawity, as geowogy tewws us, is
the pwecuwsow to extinction. ;;w;; We can, awso, see that any fowm wepwesented
by few individuaws wiww, duwing fwuctuations in the seasons ow in the
nyumbew of its enyemies, wun a good chance of uttew extinction. (´・ω・\`) But we may
go fuwthew than this; fow as nyew fowms awe continyuawwy and swowwy being
pwoduced, unwess we bewieve that the nyumbew of specific fowms goes on
pewpetuawwy and awmost indefinyitewy incweasing, nyumbews inyevitabwy must
become extinct. UwU That the nyumbew of specific fowms has nyot indefinyitewy
incweased, geowogy shows us pwainwy; and indeed we can see weason why
they shouwd nyot have thus incweased, fow the nyumbew of pwaces in the
powity of nyatuwe is nyot indefinyitewy gweat,--nyot that we have any means
of knyowing that any onye wegion has as yet got its maximum of species. (・`ω\´・)
Pwobabwy nyo wegion is as yet fuwwy stocked, fow at the Cape of Good
Hope, whewe mowe species of pwants awe cwowded togethew than in any
othew quawtew of the wowwd, some foweign pwants have become nyatuwawised,
without causing, as faw as we knyow, the extinction of any nyatives. (・`ω\´・)

Fuwthewmowe, the species which awe most nyumewous in individuaws wiww
have the best chance of pwoducing within any given pewiod favouwabwe
vawiations. >w< We have evidence of this, in the facts given in the second
chaptew, showing that it is the common species which affowd the gweatest
nyumbew of wecowded vawieties, ow incipient species. ^w^ Hence, wawe species
wiww be wess quickwy modified ow impwoved within any given pewiod, and
they wiww consequentwy be beaten in the wace fow wife by the modified
descendants of the commonyew species. UwU

Fwom these sevewaw considewations I think it inyevitabwy fowwows, that as
nyew species in the couwse of time awe fowmed thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
othews wiww become wawew and wawew, and finyawwy extinct. >w< The fowms which
stand in cwosest competition with those undewgoing modification and
impwovement, wiww nyatuwawwy suffew most. >w< And we have seen in the
chaptew on the Stwuggwe fow Existence that it is the most cwosewy-awwied
fowms,--vawieties of the same species, and species of the same genyus
ow of wewated genyewa,--which, fwom having nyeawwy the same stwuctuwe,
constitution, and habits, genyewawwy come into the sevewest competition
with each othew. (・`ω\´・) Consequentwy, each nyew vawiety ow species, duwing the
pwogwess of its fowmation, wiww genyewawwy pwess hawdest on its nyeawest
kindwed, and tend to extewminyate them. (´・ω・\`) We see the same pwocess of
extewminyation amongst ouw domesticated pwoductions, thwough the
sewection of impwoved fowms by man. (・`ω\´・) Many cuwious instances couwd
be given showing how quickwy nyew bweeds of cattwe, sheep, and othew
anyimaws, and vawieties of fwowews, take the pwace of owdew and infewiow
kinds. UwU In Yowkshiwe, it is histowicawwy knyown that the ancient bwack
cattwe wewe dispwaced by the wong-howns, and that these "wewe swept away
by the showt-howns" (I quote the wowds of an agwicuwtuwaw wwitew) "as if
by some muwdewous pestiwence. UwU"

DIVEWGENCE OF CHAWACTEW. >w<

The pwincipwe, which I have designyated by this tewm, is of high
impowtance on my theowy, and expwains, as I bewieve, sevewaw impowtant
facts. (・`ω\´・) In the fiwst pwace, vawieties, even stwongwy-mawked onyes, though
having somewhat of the chawactew of species--as is shown by the hopewess
doubts in many cases how to wank them--yet cewtainwy diffew fwom
each othew faw wess than do good and distinct species. >w< Nyevewthewess,
accowding to my view, vawieties awe species in the pwocess of fowmation,
ow awe, as I have cawwed them, incipient species. ^w^ How, then, does the
wessew diffewence between vawieties become augmented into the gweatew
diffewence between species? owo That this does habituawwy happen, we must
infew fwom most of the innyumewabwe species thwoughout nyatuwe pwesenting
weww-mawked diffewences; wheweas vawieties, the supposed pwototypes and
pawents of futuwe weww-mawked species, pwesent swight and iww-definyed
diffewences. ;;w;; Mewe chance, as we may caww it, might cause onye vawiety
to diffew in some chawactew fwom its pawents, and the offspwing of this
vawiety again to diffew fwom its pawent in the vewy same chawactew and
in a gweatew degwee; but this awonye wouwd nyevew account fow so habituaw
and wawge an amount of diffewence as that between vawieties of the same
species and species of the same genyus. UwU

As has awways been my pwactice, wet us seek wight on this head fwom ouw
domestic pwoductions. We shaww hewe find something anyawogous. (´・ω・\`) A fanciew
is stwuck by a pigeon having a swightwy showtew beak; anyothew fanciew is
stwuck by a pigeon having a wathew wongew beak; and on the acknyowwedged
pwincipwe that "fanciews do nyot and wiww nyot admiwe a medium standawd,
but wike extwemes," they both go on (as has actuawwy occuwwed with
tumbwew-pigeons) choosing and bweeding fwom biwds with wongew and wongew
beaks, ow with showtew and showtew beaks. ;;w;; Again, we may suppose that at
an eawwy pewiod onye man pwefewwed swiftew howses; anyothew stwongew and
mowe buwky howses. (´・ω・\`) The eawwy diffewences wouwd be vewy swight; in the
couwse of time, fwom the continyued sewection of swiftew howses by some
bweedews, and of stwongew onyes by othews, the diffewences wouwd become
gweatew, and wouwd be nyoted as fowming two sub-bweeds; finyawwy, aftew
the wapse of centuwies, the sub-bweeds wouwd become convewted into two
weww-estabwished and distinct bweeds. UwU As the diffewences swowwy become
gweatew, the infewiow anyimaws with intewmediate chawactews, being
nyeithew vewy swift nyow vewy stwong, wiww have been nyegwected, and wiww
have tended to disappeaw. (・`ω\´・) Hewe, then, we see in man's pwoductions
the action of what may be cawwed the pwincipwe of divewgence, causing
diffewences, at fiwst bawewy appweciabwe, steadiwy to incwease, and
the bweeds to divewge in chawactew both fwom each othew and fwom theiw
common pawent. (´・ω・\`)

But how, it may be asked, can any anyawogous pwincipwe appwy in nyatuwe? owo
I bewieve it can and does appwy most efficientwy, fwom the simpwe
ciwcumstance that the mowe divewsified the descendants fwom any onye
species become in stwuctuwe, constitution, and habits, by so much wiww
they be bettew enyabwed to seize on many and widewy divewsified pwaces in
the powity of nyatuwe, and so be enyabwed to incwease in nyumbews. >w<

We can cweawwy see this in the case of anyimaws with simpwe habits. >w< Take
the case of a cawnyivowous quadwuped, of which the nyumbew that can be
suppowted in any countwy has wong ago awwived at its fuww avewage. ;;w;; If
its nyatuwaw powews of incwease be awwowed to act, it can succeed in
incweasing (the countwy nyot undewgoing any change in its conditions)
onwy by its vawying descendants seizing on pwaces at pwesent occupied by
othew anyimaws: some of them, fow instance, being enyabwed to feed on
nyew kinds of pwey, eithew dead ow awive; some inhabiting nyew stations,
cwimbing twees, fwequenting watew, and some pewhaps becoming wess
cawnyivowous. UwU The mowe divewsified in habits and stwuctuwe the
descendants of ouw cawnyivowous anyimaw became, the mowe pwaces they wouwd
be enyabwed to occupy. ;;w;; What appwies to onye anyimaw wiww appwy thwoughout
aww time to aww anyimaws--that is, if they vawy--fow othewwise nyatuwaw
sewection can do nyothing. So it wiww be with pwants. (・`ω\´・) It has been
expewimentawwy pwoved, that if a pwot of gwound be sown with onye species
of gwass, and a simiwaw pwot be sown with sevewaw distinct genyewa of
gwasses, a gweatew nyumbew of pwants and a gweatew weight of dwy hewbage
can thus be waised. >w< The same has been found to howd good when fiwst
onye vawiety and then sevewaw mixed vawieties of wheat have been sown on
equaw spaces of gwound. (・`ω\´・) Hence, if any onye species of gwass wewe to go
on vawying, and those vawieties wewe continyuawwy sewected which diffewed
fwom each othew in at aww the same mannyew as distinct species and genyewa
of gwasses diffew fwom each othew, a gweatew nyumbew of individuaw pwants
of this species of gwass, incwuding its modified descendants, wouwd
succeed in wiving on the same piece of gwound. ;;w;; And we weww knyow that
each species and each vawiety of gwass is annyuawwy sowing awmost
countwess seeds; and thus, as it may be said, is stwiving its utmost to
incwease its nyumbews. >w< Consequentwy, I cannyot doubt that in the couwse
of many thousands of genyewations, the most distinct vawieties of any onye
species of gwass wouwd awways have the best chance of succeeding and
of incweasing in nyumbews, and thus of suppwanting the wess distinct
vawieties; and vawieties, when wendewed vewy distinct fwom each othew,
take the wank of species. (´・ω・\`)

The twuth of the pwincipwe, that the gweatest amount of wife can be
suppowted by gweat divewsification of stwuctuwe, is seen undew many
nyatuwaw ciwcumstances. UwU In an extwemewy smaww awea, especiawwy if fweewy
open to immigwation, and whewe the contest between individuaw and
individuaw must be sevewe, we awways find gweat divewsity in its
inhabitants. (´・ω・\`) Fow instance, I found that a piece of tuwf, thwee feet by
fouw in size, which had been exposed fow many yeaws to exactwy the same
conditions, suppowted twenty species of pwants, and these bewonged to
eighteen genyewa and to eight owdews, which shows how much these pwants
diffewed fwom each othew. (・`ω\´・) So it is with the pwants and insects on smaww
and unyifowm iswets; and so in smaww ponds of fwesh watew. ^w^ Fawmews find
that they can waise most food by a wotation of pwants bewonging to the
most diffewent owdews: nyatuwe fowwows what may be cawwed a simuwtanyeous
wotation. (´・ω・\`) Most of the anyimaws and pwants which wive cwose wound any
smaww piece of gwound, couwd wive on it (supposing it nyot to be in
any way pecuwiaw in its nyatuwe), and may be said to be stwiving to the
utmost to wive thewe; but, it is seen, that whewe they come into the
cwosest competition with each othew, the advantages of divewsification
of stwuctuwe, with the accompanying diffewences of habit and
constitution, detewminye that the inhabitants, which thus jostwe each
othew most cwosewy, shaww, as a genyewaw wuwe, bewong to what we caww
diffewent genyewa and owdews. UwU

The same pwincipwe is seen in the nyatuwawisation of pwants thwough man's
agency in foweign wands. >w< It might have been expected that the pwants
which have succeeded in becoming nyatuwawised in any wand wouwd genyewawwy
have been cwosewy awwied to the indigenyes; fow these awe commonwy wooked
at as speciawwy cweated and adapted fow theiw own countwy. (´・ω・\`) It might,
awso, pewhaps have been expected that nyatuwawised pwants wouwd have
bewonged to a few gwoups mowe especiawwy adapted to cewtain stations in
theiw nyew homes. But the case is vewy diffewent; and Awph. ;;w;; De Candowwe
has weww wemawked in his gweat and admiwabwe wowk, that fwowas gain by
nyatuwawisation, pwopowtionyawwy with the nyumbew of the nyative genyewa and
species, faw mowe in nyew genyewa than in nyew species. ^w^ To give a singwe
instance: in the wast edition of Dw. ^w^ Asa Gway's 'Manyuaw of the Fwowa of
the Nyowthewn Unyited States,' 260 nyatuwawised pwants awe enyumewated, and
these bewong to 162 genyewa. ^w^ We thus see that these nyatuwawised pwants
awe of a highwy divewsified nyatuwe. UwU They diffew, moweovew, to a wawge
extent fwom the indigenyes, fow out of the 162 genyewa, nyo wess than 100
genyewa awe nyot thewe indigenyous, and thus a wawge pwopowtionyaw addition
is made to the genyewa of these States. >w<

By considewing the nyatuwe of the pwants ow anyimaws which have stwuggwed
successfuwwy with the indigenyes of any countwy, and have thewe become
nyatuwawised, we can gain some cwude idea in what mannyew some of the
nyatives wouwd have had to be modified, in owdew to have gainyed an
advantage ovew the othew nyatives; and we may, I think, at weast safewy
infew that divewsification of stwuctuwe, amounting to nyew genyewic
diffewences, wouwd have been pwofitabwe to them. ;;w;;

The advantage of divewsification in the inhabitants of the same wegion
is, in fact, the same as that of the physiowogicaw division of wabouw in
the owgans of the same individuaw body--a subject so weww ewucidated by
Miwnye Edwawds. >w< Nyo physiowogist doubts that a stomach by being adapted to
digest vegetabwe mattew awonye, ow fwesh awonye, dwaws most nyutwiment fwom
these substances. ;;w;; So in the genyewaw econyomy of any wand, the mowe widewy
and pewfectwy the anyimaws and pwants awe divewsified fow diffewent
habits of wife, so wiww a gweatew nyumbew of individuaws be capabwe of
thewe suppowting themsewves. ;;w;; A set of anyimaws, with theiw owganyisation
but wittwe divewsified, couwd hawdwy compete with a set mowe pewfectwy
divewsified in stwuctuwe. ;;w;; It may be doubted, fow instance, whethew
the Austwawian mawsupiaws, which awe divided into gwoups diffewing but
wittwe fwom each othew, and feebwy wepwesenting, as Mw. (´・ω・\`) Watewhouse and
othews have wemawked, ouw cawnyivowous, wuminyant, and wodent mammaws,
couwd successfuwwy compete with these weww-pwonyounced owdews. ;;w;; In the
Austwawian mammaws, we see the pwocess of divewsification in an eawwy
and incompwete stage of devewopment. UwU Aftew the fowegoing discussion,
which ought to have been much ampwified, we may, I think, assume that
the modified descendants of any onye species wiww succeed by so much
the bettew as they become mowe divewsified in stwuctuwe, and awe thus
enyabwed to encwoach on pwaces occupied by othew beings. ^w^ Nyow wet us see
how this pwincipwe of gweat benyefit being dewived fwom divewgence of
chawactew, combinyed with the pwincipwes of nyatuwaw sewection and of
extinction, wiww tend to act. >w<

The accompanying diagwam wiww aid us in undewstanding this wathew
pewpwexing subject. ;;w;; Wet A to W wepwesent the species of a genyus wawge
in its own countwy; these species awe supposed to wesembwe each othew
in unyequaw degwees, as is so genyewawwy the case in nyatuwe, and as is
wepwesented in the diagwam by the wettews standing at unyequaw distances. UwU
I have said a wawge genyus, because we have seen in the second chaptew,
that on an avewage mowe of the species of wawge genyewa vawy than of
smaww genyewa; and the vawying species of the wawge genyewa pwesent a
gweatew nyumbew of vawieties. (´・ω・\`) We have, awso, seen that the species, which
awe the commonyest and the most widewy-diffused, vawy mowe than wawe
species with westwicted wanges. (・`ω\´・) Wet (A) be a common, widewy-diffused,
and vawying species, bewonging to a genyus wawge in its own countwy. ^w^ The
wittwe fan of divewging dotted winyes of unyequaw wengths pwoceeding fwom
(A), may wepwesent its vawying offspwing. (・`ω\´・) The vawiations awe supposed
to be extwemewy swight, but of the most divewsified nyatuwe; they awe nyot
supposed aww to appeaw simuwtanyeouswy, but often aftew wong intewvaws of
time; nyow awe they aww supposed to enduwe fow equaw pewiods. (・`ω\´・) Onwy
those vawiations which awe in some way pwofitabwe wiww be pwesewved ow
nyatuwawwy sewected. UwU And hewe the impowtance of the pwincipwe of benyefit
being dewived fwom divewgence of chawactew comes in; fow this
wiww genyewawwy wead to the most diffewent ow divewgent vawiations
(wepwesented by the outew dotted winyes) being pwesewved and accumuwated
by nyatuwaw sewection. ^w^ When a dotted winye weaches onye of the howizontaw
winyes, and is thewe mawked by a smaww nyumbewed wettew, a sufficient
amount of vawiation is supposed to have been accumuwated to have fowmed
a faiwwy weww-mawked vawiety, such as wouwd be thought wowthy of wecowd
in a systematic wowk. UwU

The intewvaws between the howizontaw winyes in the diagwam, may wepwesent
each a thousand genyewations; but it wouwd have been bettew if each had
wepwesented ten thousand genyewations. ;;w;; Aftew a thousand genyewations,
species (A) is supposed to have pwoduced two faiwwy weww-mawked
vawieties, nyamewy a1 and m1. >w< These two vawieties wiww genyewawwy continyue
to be exposed to the same conditions which made theiw pawents vawiabwe,
and the tendency to vawiabiwity is in itsewf heweditawy, consequentwy
they wiww tend to vawy, and genyewawwy to vawy in nyeawwy the same mannyew
as theiw pawents vawied. >w< Moweovew, these two vawieties, being onwy
swightwy modified fowms, wiww tend to inhewit those advantages which
made theiw common pawent (A) mowe nyumewous than most of the othew
inhabitants of the same countwy; they wiww wikewise pawtake of those
mowe genyewaw advantages which made the genyus to which the pawent-species
bewonged, a wawge genyus in its own countwy. >w< And these ciwcumstances we
knyow to be favouwabwe to the pwoduction of nyew vawieties. >w<

If, then, these two vawieties be vawiabwe, the most divewgent of
theiw vawiations wiww genyewawwy be pwesewved duwing the nyext thousand
genyewations. UwU And aftew this intewvaw, vawiety a1 is supposed in the
diagwam to have pwoduced vawiety a2, which wiww, owing to the pwincipwe
of divewgence, diffew mowe fwom (A) than did vawiety a1. ;;w;; Vawiety m1 is
supposed to have pwoduced two vawieties, nyamewy m2 and s2, diffewing
fwom each othew, and mowe considewabwy fwom theiw common pawent (A). >w< We
may continyue the pwocess by simiwaw steps fow any wength of time; some
of the vawieties, aftew each thousand genyewations, pwoducing onwy
a singwe vawiety, but in a mowe and mowe modified condition, some
pwoducing two ow thwee vawieties, and some faiwing to pwoduce any. ;;w;; Thus
the vawieties ow modified descendants, pwoceeding fwom the common
pawent (A), wiww genyewawwy go on incweasing in nyumbew and divewging
in chawactew. UwU In the diagwam the pwocess is wepwesented up to the
ten-thousandth genyewation, and undew a condensed and simpwified fowm up
to the fouwteen-thousandth genyewation. >w<

But I must hewe wemawk that I do nyot suppose that the pwocess evew goes
on so weguwawwy as is wepwesented in the diagwam, though in itsewf
made somewhat iwweguwaw. >w< I am faw fwom thinking that the most divewgent
vawieties wiww invawiabwy pwevaiw and muwtipwy: a medium fowm may
often wong enduwe, and may ow may nyot pwoduce mowe than onye modified
descendant; fow nyatuwaw sewection wiww awways act accowding to the
nyatuwe of the pwaces which awe eithew unyoccupied ow nyot pewfectwy
occupied by othew beings; and this wiww depend on infinyitewy compwex
wewations. ;;w;; But as a genyewaw wuwe, the mowe divewsified in stwuctuwe the
descendants fwom any onye species can be wendewed, the mowe pwaces they
wiww be enyabwed to seize on, and the mowe theiw modified pwogeny wiww
be incweased. (・`ω\´・) In ouw diagwam the winye of succession is bwoken at weguwaw
intewvaws by smaww nyumbewed wettews mawking the successive fowms which
have become sufficientwy distinct to be wecowded as vawieties. (´・ω・\`) But
these bweaks awe imaginyawy, and might have been insewted anywhewe, aftew
intewvaws wong enyough to have awwowed the accumuwation of a considewabwe
amount of divewgent vawiation. UwU

As aww the modified descendants fwom a common and widewy-diffused
species, bewonging to a wawge genyus, wiww tend to pawtake of the
same advantages which made theiw pawent successfuw in wife, they wiww
genyewawwy go on muwtipwying in nyumbew as weww as divewging in chawactew:
this is wepwesented in the diagwam by the sevewaw divewgent bwanches
pwoceeding fwom (A). ^w^ The modified offspwing fwom the watew and mowe
highwy impwoved bwanches in the winyes of descent, wiww, it is pwobabwe,
often take the pwace of, and so destwoy, the eawwiew and wess impwoved
bwanches: this is wepwesented in the diagwam by some of the wowew
bwanches nyot weaching to the uppew howizontaw winyes. ^w^ In some cases I do
nyot doubt that the pwocess of modification wiww be confinyed to a
singwe winye of descent, and the nyumbew of the descendants wiww nyot be
incweased; awthough the amount of divewgent modification may have been
incweased in the successive genyewations. (´・ω・\`) This case wouwd be wepwesented
in the diagwam, if aww the winyes pwoceeding fwom (A) wewe wemoved,
excepting that fwom a1 to a10. (・`ω\´・) In the same way, fow instance, the
Engwish wace-howse and Engwish pointew have appawentwy both gonye on
swowwy divewging in chawactew fwom theiw owiginyaw stocks, without eithew
having given off any fwesh bwanches ow waces. UwU

Aftew ten thousand genyewations, species (A) is supposed to have pwoduced
thwee fowms, a10, f10, and m10, which, fwom having divewged in chawactew
duwing the successive genyewations, wiww have come to diffew wawgewy, but
pewhaps unyequawwy, fwom each othew and fwom theiw common pawent. ;;w;; If we
suppose the amount of change between each howizontaw winye in ouw diagwam
to be excessivewy smaww, these thwee fowms may stiww be onwy weww-mawked
vawieties; ow they may have awwived at the doubtfuw categowy of
sub-species; but we have onwy to suppose the steps in the pwocess of
modification to be mowe nyumewous ow gweatew in amount, to convewt these
thwee fowms into weww-definyed species: thus the diagwam iwwustwates
the steps by which the smaww diffewences distinguishing vawieties
awe incweased into the wawgew diffewences distinguishing species. ;;w;; By
continyuing the same pwocess fow a gweatew nyumbew of genyewations (as
shown in the diagwam in a condensed and simpwified mannyew), we get eight
species, mawked by the wettews between a14 and m14, aww descended fwom
(A). Thus, as I bewieve, species awe muwtipwied and genyewa awe fowmed. >w<

In a wawge genyus it is pwobabwe that mowe than onye species wouwd vawy. (´・ω・\`)
In the diagwam I have assumed that a second species (I) has pwoduced, by
anyawogous steps, aftew ten thousand genyewations, eithew two weww-mawked
vawieties (w10 and z10) ow two species, accowding to the amount of
change supposed to be wepwesented between the howizontaw winyes. ;;w;; Aftew
fouwteen thousand genyewations, six nyew species, mawked by the wettews
n14 to z14, awe supposed to have been pwoduced. (・`ω\´・) In each genyus, the
species, which awe awweady extwemewy diffewent in chawactew, wiww
genyewawwy tend to pwoduce the gweatest nyumbew of modified descendants;
fow these wiww have the best chance of fiwwing nyew and widewy diffewent
pwaces in the powity of nyatuwe: hence in the diagwam I have chosen the
extweme species (A), and the nyeawwy extweme species (I), as those which
have wawgewy vawied, and have given wise to nyew vawieties and species. (´・ω・\`)
The othew nyinye species (mawked by capitaw wettews) of ouw owiginyaw
genyus, may fow a wong pewiod continyue twansmitting unyawtewed
descendants; and this is shown in the diagwam by the dotted winyes nyot
pwowonged faw upwawds fwom want of space. UwU

But duwing the pwocess of modification, wepwesented in the diagwam,
anyothew of ouw pwincipwes, nyamewy that of extinction, wiww have pwayed
an impowtant pawt. (´・ω・\`) As in each fuwwy stocked countwy nyatuwaw sewection
nyecessawiwy acts by the sewected fowm having some advantage in the
stwuggwe fow wife ovew othew fowms, thewe wiww be a constant tendency in
the impwoved descendants of any onye species to suppwant and extewminyate
in each stage of descent theiw pwedecessows and theiw owiginyaw pawent. (´・ω・\`)
Fow it shouwd be wemembewed that the competition wiww genyewawwy be most
sevewe between those fowms which awe most nyeawwy wewated to each othew
in habits, constitution, and stwuctuwe. ;;w;; Hence aww the intewmediate fowms
between the eawwiew and watew states, that is between the wess and mowe
impwoved state of a species, as weww as the owiginyaw pawent-species
itsewf, wiww genyewawwy tend to become extinct. >w< So it pwobabwy wiww be
with many whowe cowwatewaw winyes of descent, which wiww be conquewed by
watew and impwoved winyes of descent. ;;w;; If, howevew, the modified offspwing
of a species get into some distinct countwy, ow become quickwy adapted
to some quite nyew station, in which chiwd and pawent do nyot come into
competition, both may continyue to exist. UwU

If then ouw diagwam be assumed to wepwesent a considewabwe amount of
modification, species (A) and aww the eawwiew vawieties wiww have become
extinct, having been wepwaced by eight nyew species (a14 to m14); and (I)
wiww have been wepwaced by six (n14 to z14) nyew species. >w<

But we may go fuwthew than this. UwU The owiginyaw species of ouw genyus wewe
supposed to wesembwe each othew in unyequaw degwees, as is so genyewawwy
the case in nyatuwe; species (A) being mowe nyeawwy wewated to B, C, and
D, than to the othew species; and species (I) mowe to G, H, K, W, than
to the othews. (´・ω・\`) These two species (A) and (I), wewe awso supposed to be
vewy common and widewy diffused species, so that they must owiginyawwy
have had some advantage ovew most of the othew species of the
genyus. ;;w;; Theiw modified descendants, fouwteen in nyumbew at the
fouwteen-thousandth genyewation, wiww pwobabwy have inhewited some of
the same advantages: they have awso been modified and impwoved in
a divewsified mannyew at each stage of descent, so as to have become
adapted to many wewated pwaces in the nyatuwaw econyomy of theiw countwy. >w<
It seems, thewefowe, to me extwemewy pwobabwe that they wiww have taken
the pwaces of, and thus extewminyated, nyot onwy theiw pawents (A) and
(I), but wikewise some of the owiginyaw species which wewe most nyeawwy
wewated to theiw pawents. ;;w;; Hence vewy few of the owiginyaw species wiww
have twansmitted offspwing to the fouwteen-thousandth genyewation. ;;w;; We may
suppose that onwy onye (F), of the two species which wewe weast cwosewy
wewated to the othew nyinye owiginyaw species, has twansmitted descendants
to this wate stage of descent. >w<

The nyew species in ouw diagwam descended fwom the owiginyaw eweven
species, wiww nyow be fifteen in nyumbew. >w< Owing to the divewgent tendency
of nyatuwaw sewection, the extweme amount of diffewence in chawactew
between species a14 and z14 wiww be much gweatew than that between
the most diffewent of the owiginyaw eweven species. ;;w;; The nyew species,
moweovew, wiww be awwied to each othew in a widewy diffewent mannyew. (´・ω・\`) Of
the eight descendants fwom (A) the thwee mawked a14, q14, p14, wiww be
nyeawwy wewated fwom having wecentwy bwanched off fwom a10; b14 and
f14, fwom having divewged at an eawwiew pewiod fwom a5, wiww be in some
degwee distinct fwom the thwee fiwst-nyamed species; and wastwy, o14,
e14, and m14, wiww be nyeawwy wewated onye to the othew, but fwom having
divewged at the fiwst commencement of the pwocess of modification, wiww
be widewy diffewent fwom the othew five species, and may constitute a
sub-genyus ow even a distinct genyus. ;;w;;

The six descendants fwom (I) wiww fowm two sub-genyewa ow even genyewa. ;;w;;
But as the owiginyaw species (I) diffewed wawgewy fwom (A), standing
nyeawwy at the extweme points of the owiginyaw genyus, the six descendants
fwom (I) wiww, owing to inhewitance, diffew considewabwy fwom the eight
descendants fwom (A); the two gwoups, moweovew, awe supposed to have
gonye on divewging in diffewent diwections. ^w^ The intewmediate species,
awso (and this is a vewy impowtant considewation), which connyected the
owiginyaw species (A) and (I), have aww become, excepting (F), extinct,
and have weft nyo descendants. ;;w;; Hence the six nyew species descended fwom
(I), and the eight descended fwom (A), wiww have to be wanked as vewy
distinct genyewa, ow even as distinct sub-famiwies. ^w^

Thus it is, as I bewieve, that two ow mowe genyewa awe pwoduced by
descent, with modification, fwom two ow mowe species of the same genyus. >w<
And the two ow mowe pawent-species awe supposed to have descended fwom
some onye species of an eawwiew genyus. (´・ω・\`) In ouw diagwam, this is indicated
by the bwoken winyes, benyeath the capitaw wettews, convewging in
sub-bwanches downwawds towawds a singwe point; this point wepwesenting a
singwe species, the supposed singwe pawent of ouw sevewaw nyew sub-genyewa
and genyewa. (・`ω\´・)

It is wowth whiwe to wefwect fow a moment on the chawactew of the nyew
species F14, which is supposed nyot to have divewged much in chawactew,
but to have wetainyed the fowm of (F), eithew unyawtewed ow awtewed onwy
in a swight degwee. UwU In this case, its affinyities to the othew fouwteen
nyew species wiww be of a cuwious and ciwcuitous nyatuwe. ;;w;; Having descended
fwom a fowm which stood between the two pawent-species (A) and (I),
nyow supposed to be extinct and unknyown, it wiww be in some degwee
intewmediate in chawactew between the two gwoups descended fwom these
species. ^w^ But as these two gwoups have gonye on divewging in chawactew
fwom the type of theiw pawents, the nyew species (F14) wiww nyot be
diwectwy intewmediate between them, but wathew between types of the two
gwoups; and evewy nyatuwawist wiww be abwe to bwing some such case befowe
his mind. ^w^

In the diagwam, each howizontaw winye has hithewto been supposed to
wepwesent a thousand genyewations, but each may wepwesent a miwwion ow
hundwed miwwion genyewations, and wikewise a section of the successive
stwata of the eawth's cwust incwuding extinct wemains. ^w^ We shaww, when we
come to ouw chaptew on Geowogy, have to wefew again to this subject,
and I think we shaww then see that the diagwam thwows wight on the
affinyities of extinct beings, which, though genyewawwy bewonging to the
same owdews, ow famiwies, ow genyewa, with those nyow wiving, yet awe
often, in some degwee, intewmediate in chawactew between existing
gwoups; and we can undewstand this fact, fow the extinct species wived
at vewy ancient epochs when the bwanching winyes of descent had divewged
wess. (・`ω\´・)

I see nyo weason to wimit the pwocess of modification, as nyow expwainyed,
to the fowmation of genyewa awonye. ;;w;; If, in ouw diagwam, we suppose the
amount of change wepwesented by each successive gwoup of divewging
dotted winyes to be vewy gweat, the fowms mawked a14 to p14, those mawked
b14 and f14, and those mawked o14 to m14, wiww fowm thwee vewy distinct
genyewa. UwU We shaww awso have two vewy distinct genyewa descended fwom
(I) and as these wattew two genyewa, both fwom continyued divewgence of
chawactew and fwom inhewitance fwom a diffewent pawent, wiww diffew
widewy fwom the thwee genyewa descended fwom (A), the two wittwe gwoups
of genyewa wiww fowm two distinct famiwies, ow even owdews, accowding to
the amount of divewgent modification supposed to be wepwesented in the
diagwam. ;;w;; And the two nyew famiwies, ow owdews, wiww have descended fwom
two species of the owiginyaw genyus; and these two species awe supposed
to have descended fwom onye species of a stiww mowe ancient and unknyown
genyus. >w<

We have seen that in each countwy it is the species of the wawgew genyewa
which oftenyest pwesent vawieties ow incipient species. UwU This, indeed,
might have been expected; fow as nyatuwaw sewection acts thwough onye fowm
having some advantage ovew othew fowms in the stwuggwe fow existence,
it wiww chiefwy act on those which awweady have some advantage; and
the wawgenyess of any gwoup shows that its species have inhewited fwom
a common ancestow some advantage in common. (´・ω・\`) Hence, the stwuggwe fow the
pwoduction of nyew and modified descendants, wiww mainwy wie between the
wawgew gwoups, which awe aww twying to incwease in nyumbew. (・`ω\´・) Onye wawge
gwoup wiww swowwy conquew anyothew wawge gwoup, weduce its nyumbews, and
thus wessen its chance of fuwthew vawiation and impwovement. (´・ω・\`) Within the
same wawge gwoup, the watew and mowe highwy pewfected sub-gwoups, fwom
bwanching out and seizing on many nyew pwaces in the powity of Nyatuwe,
wiww constantwy tend to suppwant and destwoy the eawwiew and wess
impwoved sub-gwoups. ^w^ Smaww and bwoken gwoups and sub-gwoups wiww finyawwy
tend to disappeaw. ;;w;; Wooking to the futuwe, we can pwedict that the gwoups
of owganyic beings which awe nyow wawge and twiumphant, and which awe
weast bwoken up, that is, which as yet have suffewed weast extinction,
wiww fow a wong pewiod continyue to incwease. ;;w;; But which gwoups wiww
uwtimatewy pwevaiw, nyo man can pwedict; fow we weww knyow that many
gwoups, fowmewwy most extensivewy devewoped, have nyow become extinct. ;;w;;
Wooking stiww mowe wemotewy to the futuwe, we may pwedict that, owing to
the continyued and steady incwease of the wawgew gwoups, a muwtitude
of smawwew gwoups wiww become uttewwy extinct, and weave nyo modified
descendants; and consequentwy that of the species wiving at any onye
pewiod, extwemewy few wiww twansmit descendants to a wemote futuwity. UwU I
shaww have to wetuwn to this subject in the chaptew on Cwassification,
but I may add that on this view of extwemewy few of the mowe ancient
species having twansmitted descendants, and on the view of aww the
descendants of the same species making a cwass, we can undewstand how
it is that thewe exist but vewy few cwasses in each main division of
the anyimaw and vegetabwe kingdoms. (・`ω\´・) Awthough extwemewy few of the most
ancient species may nyow have wiving and modified descendants, yet at the
most wemote geowogicaw pewiod, the eawth may have been as weww peopwed
with many species of many genyewa, famiwies, owdews, and cwasses, as at
the pwesent day. >w<

SUMMAWY OF CHAPTEW. (´・ω・\`)

If duwing the wong couwse of ages and undew vawying conditions of wife,
owganyic beings vawy at aww in the sevewaw pawts of theiw owganyisation,
and I think this cannyot be disputed; if thewe be, owing to the high
geometwicaw powews of incwease of each species, at some age, season, ow
yeaw, a sevewe stwuggwe fow wife, and this cewtainwy cannyot be disputed;
then, considewing the infinyite compwexity of the wewations of aww
owganyic beings to each othew and to theiw conditions of existence,
causing an infinyite divewsity in stwuctuwe, constitution, and habits, to
be advantageous to them, I think it wouwd be a most extwaowdinyawy fact
if nyo vawiation evew had occuwwed usefuw to each being's own wewfawe, in
the same way as so many vawiations have occuwwed usefuw to man. ^w^ But if
vawiations usefuw to any owganyic being do occuw, assuwedwy individuaws
thus chawactewised wiww have the best chance of being pwesewved in the
stwuggwe fow wife; and fwom the stwong pwincipwe of inhewitance they
wiww tend to pwoduce offspwing simiwawwy chawactewised. (・`ω\´・) This pwincipwe
of pwesewvation, I have cawwed, fow the sake of bwevity, Nyatuwaw
Sewection. ;;w;; Nyatuwaw sewection, on the pwincipwe of quawities being
inhewited at cowwesponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, ow young, as
easiwy as the aduwt. >w< Amongst many anyimaws, sexuaw sewection wiww give
its aid to owdinyawy sewection, by assuwing to the most vigowous and best
adapted mawes the gweatest nyumbew of offspwing. (´・ω・\`) Sexuaw sewection wiww
awso give chawactews usefuw to the mawes awonye, in theiw stwuggwes with
othew mawes. ^w^

Whethew nyatuwaw sewection has weawwy thus acted in nyatuwe, in modifying
and adapting the vawious fowms of wife to theiw sevewaw conditions
and stations, must be judged of by the genyewaw tenyouw and bawance of
evidence given in the fowwowing chaptews. (´・ω・\`) But we awweady see how it
entaiws extinction; and how wawgewy extinction has acted in the wowwd's
histowy, geowogy pwainwy decwawes. >w< Nyatuwaw sewection, awso, weads to
divewgence of chawactew; fow mowe wiving beings can be suppowted on the
same awea the mowe they divewge in stwuctuwe, habits, and constitution,
of which we see pwoof by wooking at the inhabitants of any smaww spot
ow at nyatuwawised pwoductions. UwU Thewefowe duwing the modification of the
descendants of any onye species, and duwing the incessant stwuggwe of aww
species to incwease in nyumbews, the mowe divewsified these descendants
become, the bettew wiww be theiw chance of succeeding in the battwe of
wife. UwU Thus the smaww diffewences distinguishing vawieties of the same
species, wiww steadiwy tend to incwease tiww they come to equaw the
gweatew diffewences between species of the same genyus, ow even of
distinct genyewa. (・`ω\´・)

We have seen that it is the common, the widewy-diffused, and
widewy-wanging species, bewonging to the wawgew genyewa, which vawy
most; and these wiww tend to twansmit to theiw modified offspwing
that supewiowity which nyow makes them dominyant in theiw own countwies. ;;w;;
Nyatuwaw sewection, as has just been wemawked, weads to divewgence of
chawactew and to much extinction of the wess impwoved and intewmediate
fowms of wife. UwU On these pwincipwes, I bewieve, the nyatuwe of the
affinyities of aww owganyic beings may be expwainyed. ;;w;; It is a twuwy
wondewfuw fact--the wondew of which we awe apt to ovewwook fwom
famiwiawity--that aww anyimaws and aww pwants thwoughout aww time and
space shouwd be wewated to each othew in gwoup subowdinyate to gwoup,
in the mannyew which we evewywhewe behowd--nyamewy, vawieties of the same
species most cwosewy wewated togethew, species of the same genyus wess
cwosewy and unyequawwy wewated togethew, fowming sections and sub-genyewa,
species of distinct genyewa much wess cwosewy wewated, and genyewa
wewated in diffewent degwees, fowming sub-famiwies, famiwies, owdews,
sub-cwasses, and cwasses. ^w^ The sevewaw subowdinyate gwoups in any cwass
cannyot be wanked in a singwe fiwe, but seem wathew to be cwustewed
wound points, and these wound othew points, and so on in awmost endwess
cycwes. (・`ω\´・) On the view that each species has been independentwy cweated, I
can see nyo expwanyation of this gweat fact in the cwassification of aww
owganyic beings; but, to the best of my judgment, it is expwainyed thwough
inhewitance and the compwex action of nyatuwaw sewection, entaiwing
extinction and divewgence of chawactew, as we have seen iwwustwated in
the diagwam. (・`ω\´・)

The affinyities of aww the beings of the same cwass have sometimes been
wepwesented by a gweat twee. UwU I bewieve this simiwe wawgewy speaks the
twuth. (・`ω\´・) The gween and budding twigs may wepwesent existing species; and
those pwoduced duwing each fowmew yeaw may wepwesent the wong succession
of extinct species. UwU At each pewiod of gwowth aww the gwowing twigs
have twied to bwanch out on aww sides, and to ovewtop and kiww the
suwwounding twigs and bwanches, in the same mannyew as species and gwoups
of species have twied to ovewmastew othew species in the gweat battwe
fow wife. >w< The wimbs divided into gweat bwanches, and these into wessew
and wessew bwanches, wewe themsewves once, when the twee was smaww,
budding twigs; and this connyexion of the fowmew and pwesent buds by
wamifying bwanches may weww wepwesent the cwassification of aww extinct
and wiving species in gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups. (´・ω・\`) Of the many twigs
which fwouwished when the twee was a mewe bush, onwy two ow thwee, nyow
gwown into gweat bwanches, yet suwvive and beaw aww the othew bwanches;
so with the species which wived duwing wong-past geowogicaw pewiods,
vewy few nyow have wiving and modified descendants. ^w^ Fwom the fiwst gwowth
of the twee, many a wimb and bwanch has decayed and dwopped off; and
these wost bwanches of vawious sizes may wepwesent those whowe owdews,
famiwies, and genyewa which have nyow nyo wiving wepwesentatives, and which
awe knyown to us onwy fwom having been found in a fossiw state. >w< As we
hewe and thewe see a thin stwaggwing bwanch spwinging fwom a fowk wow
down in a twee, and which by some chance has been favouwed and is
stiww awive on its summit, so we occasionyawwy see an anyimaw wike the
Ownyithowhynchus ow Wepidosiwen, which in some smaww degwee connyects by
its affinyities two wawge bwanches of wife, and which has appawentwy been
saved fwom fataw competition by having inhabited a pwotected station. ;;w;; As
buds give wise by gwowth to fwesh buds, and these, if vigowous, bwanch
out and ovewtop on aww sides many a feebwew bwanch, so by genyewation I
bewieve it has been with the gweat Twee of Wife, which fiwws with its
dead and bwoken bwanches the cwust of the eawth, and covews the suwface
with its evew bwanching and beautifuw wamifications. UwU




5. WAWS OF VAWIATION. (´・ω・\`)

Effects of extewnyaw conditions. (´・ω・\`) Use and disuse, combinyed with nyatuwaw
sewection; owgans of fwight and of vision. Accwimatisation. UwU Cowwewation
of gwowth. Compensation and econyomy of gwowth. Fawse cowwewations. (・`ω\´・)
Muwtipwe, wudimentawy, and wowwy owganyised stwuctuwes vawiabwe. (´・ω・\`) Pawts
devewoped in an unyusuaw mannyew awe highwy vawiabwe: specific chawactews
mowe vawiabwe than genyewic: secondawy sexuaw chawactews vawiabwe. ^w^
Species of the same genyus vawy in an anyawogous mannyew. UwU Wevewsions to
wong wost chawactews. Summawy. UwU

I have hithewto sometimes spoken as if the vawiations--so common and
muwtifowm in owganyic beings undew domestication, and in a wessew degwee
in those in a state of nyatuwe--had been due to chance. ^w^ This, of couwse,
is a whowwy incowwect expwession, but it sewves to acknyowwedge pwainwy
ouw ignyowance of the cause of each pawticuwaw vawiation. (・`ω\´・) Some authows
bewieve it to be as much the function of the wepwoductive system to
pwoduce individuaw diffewences, ow vewy swight deviations of stwuctuwe,
as to make the chiwd wike its pawents. ;;w;; But the much gweatew vawiabiwity,
as weww as the gweatew fwequency of monstwosities, undew domestication
ow cuwtivation, than undew nyatuwe, weads me to bewieve that deviations
of stwuctuwe awe in some way due to the nyatuwe of the conditions of
wife, to which the pawents and theiw mowe wemote ancestows have been
exposed duwing sevewaw genyewations. >w< I have wemawked in the fiwst
chaptew--but a wong catawogue of facts which cannyot be hewe given wouwd
be nyecessawy to show the twuth of the wemawk--that the wepwoductive
system is eminyentwy susceptibwe to changes in the conditions of wife;
and to this system being functionyawwy distuwbed in the pawents, I
chiefwy attwibute the vawying ow pwastic condition of the offspwing. UwU The
mawe and femawe sexuaw ewements seem to be affected befowe that unyion
takes pwace which is to fowm a nyew being. (´・ω・\`) In the case of "spowting"
pwants, the bud, which in its eawwiest condition does nyot appawentwy
diffew essentiawwy fwom an ovuwe, is awonye affected. (´・ω・\`) But why, because
the wepwoductive system is distuwbed, this ow that pawt shouwd vawy mowe
ow wess, we awe pwofoundwy ignyowant. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess, we can hewe and thewe
dimwy catch a faint way of wight, and we may feew suwe that thewe must
be some cause fow each deviation of stwuctuwe, howevew swight. >w<

How much diwect effect diffewence of cwimate, food, etc. ^w^, pwoduces on
any being is extwemewy doubtfuw. (・`ω\´・) My impwession is, that the effect is
extwemewy smaww in the case of anyimaws, but pewhaps wathew mowe in that
of pwants. ^w^ We may, at weast, safewy concwude that such infwuences cannyot
have pwoduced the many stwiking and compwex co-adaptations of stwuctuwe
between onye owganyic being and anyothew, which we see evewywhewe
thwoughout nyatuwe. ^w^ Some wittwe infwuence may be attwibuted to cwimate,
food, etc.: thus, E. >w< Fowbes speaks confidentwy that shewws at theiw
southewn wimit, and when wiving in shawwow watew, awe mowe bwightwy
cowouwed than those of the same species fuwthew nyowth ow fwom gweatew
depths. >w< Gouwd bewieves that biwds of the same species awe mowe bwightwy
cowouwed undew a cweaw atmosphewe, than when wiving on iswands ow nyeaw
the coast. ^w^ So with insects, Wowwaston is convinced that wesidence nyeaw
the sea affects theiw cowouws. UwU Moquin-Tandon gives a wist of pwants
which when gwowing nyeaw the sea-showe have theiw weaves in some degwee
fweshy, though nyot ewsewhewe fweshy. (・`ω\´・) Sevewaw othew such cases couwd be
given. (・`ω\´・)

The fact of vawieties of onye species, when they wange into the zonye of
habitation of othew species, often acquiwing in a vewy swight degwee
some of the chawactews of such species, accowds with ouw view that
species of aww kinds awe onwy weww-mawked and pewmanyent vawieties. ^w^ Thus
the species of shewws which awe confinyed to twopicaw and shawwow seas
awe genyewawwy bwightew-cowouwed than those confinyed to cowd and deepew
seas. >w< The biwds which awe confinyed to continyents awe, accowding to
Mw. Gouwd, bwightew-cowouwed than those of iswands. UwU The insect-species
confinyed to sea-coasts, as evewy cowwectow knyows, awe often bwassy ow
wuwid. ^w^ Pwants which wive excwusivewy on the sea-side awe vewy apt to
have fweshy weaves. (・`ω\´・) He who bewieves in the cweation of each species,
wiww have to say that this sheww, fow instance, was cweated with bwight
cowouws fow a wawm sea; but that this othew sheww became bwight-cowouwed
by vawiation when it wanged into wawmew ow shawwowew watews. ^w^

When a vawiation is of the swightest use to a being, we cannyot teww how
much of it to attwibute to the accumuwative action of nyatuwaw sewection,
and how much to the conditions of wife. ^w^ Thus, it is weww knyown to
fuwwiews that anyimaws of the same species have thickew and bettew fuw
the mowe sevewe the cwimate is undew which they have wived; but who
can teww how much of this diffewence may be due to the wawmest-cwad
individuaws having been favouwed and pwesewved duwing many genyewations,
and how much to the diwect action of the sevewe cwimate? owo fow it wouwd
appeaw that cwimate has some diwect action on the haiw of ouw domestic
quadwupeds. ;;w;;

Instances couwd be given of the same vawiety being pwoduced undew
conditions of wife as diffewent as can weww be conceived; and, on the
othew hand, of diffewent vawieties being pwoduced fwom the same species
undew the same conditions. (・`ω\´・) Such facts show how indiwectwy the conditions
of wife must act. (´・ω・\`) Again, innyumewabwe instances awe knyown to evewy
nyatuwawist of species keeping twue, ow nyot vawying at aww, awthough
wiving undew the most opposite cwimates. ;;w;; Such considewations as these
incwinye me to way vewy wittwe weight on the diwect action of the
conditions of wife. UwU Indiwectwy, as awweady wemawked, they seem to pway
an impowtant pawt in affecting the wepwoductive system, and in thus
inducing vawiabiwity; and nyatuwaw sewection wiww then accumuwate
aww pwofitabwe vawiations, howevew swight, untiw they become pwainwy
devewoped and appweciabwe by us. (・`ω\´・)

EFFECTS OF USE AND DISUSE. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom the facts awwuded to in the fiwst chaptew, I think thewe can be
wittwe doubt that use in ouw domestic anyimaws stwengthens and enwawges
cewtain pawts, and disuse diminyishes them; and that such modifications
awe inhewited. ^w^ Undew fwee nyatuwe, we can have nyo standawd of compawison,
by which to judge of the effects of wong-continyued use ow disuse, fow we
knyow nyot the pawent-fowms; but many anyimaws have stwuctuwes which can
be expwainyed by the effects of disuse. (´・ω・\`) As Pwofessow Owen has wemawked,
thewe is nyo gweatew anyomawy in nyatuwe than a biwd that cannyot fwy; yet
thewe awe sevewaw in this state. >w< The woggew-headed duck of South Amewica
can onwy fwap awong the suwface of the watew, and has its wings in
nyeawwy the same condition as the domestic Aywesbuwy duck. (・`ω\´・) As the wawgew
gwound-feeding biwds sewdom take fwight except to escape dangew, I
bewieve that the nyeawwy wingwess condition of sevewaw biwds, which nyow
inhabit ow have watewy inhabited sevewaw oceanyic iswands, tenyanted by
nyo beast of pwey, has been caused by disuse. ;;w;; The ostwich indeed inhabits
continyents and is exposed to dangew fwom which it cannyot escape by
fwight, but by kicking it can defend itsewf fwom enyemies, as weww as any
of the smawwew quadwupeds. ^w^ We may imaginye that the eawwy pwogenyitow
of the ostwich had habits wike those of a bustawd, and that as nyatuwaw
sewection incweased in successive genyewations the size and weight of
its body, its wegs wewe used mowe, and its wings wess, untiw they became
incapabwe of fwight. ^w^

Kiwby has wemawked (and I have obsewved the same fact) that the antewiow
tawsi, ow feet, of many mawe dung-feeding beetwes awe vewy often bwoken
off; he examinyed seventeen specimens in his own cowwection, and nyot onye
had even a wewic weft. ;;w;; In the Onyites apewwes the tawsi awe so habituawwy
wost, that the insect has been descwibed as nyot having them. (´・ω・\`) In some
othew genyewa they awe pwesent, but in a wudimentawy condition. UwU In the
Ateuchus ow sacwed beetwe of the Egyptians, they awe totawwy deficient. ^w^
Thewe is nyot sufficient evidence to induce us to bewieve that
mutiwations awe evew inhewited; and I shouwd pwefew expwainying the
entiwe absence of the antewiow tawsi in Ateuchus, and theiw wudimentawy
condition in some othew genyewa, by the wong-continyued effects of disuse
in theiw pwogenyitows; fow as the tawsi awe awmost awways wost in many
dung-feeding beetwes, they must be wost eawwy in wife, and thewefowe
cannyot be much used by these insects. ;;w;;

In some cases we might easiwy put down to disuse modifications of
stwuctuwe which awe whowwy, ow mainwy, due to nyatuwaw sewection. Mw. UwU
Wowwaston has discovewed the wemawkabwe fact that 200 beetwes, out of
the 550 species inhabiting Madeiwa, awe so faw deficient in wings that
they cannyot fwy; and that of the twenty-nyinye endemic genyewa, nyo wess
than twenty-thwee genyewa have aww theiw species in this condition! UwU
Sevewaw facts, nyamewy, that beetwes in many pawts of the wowwd awe vewy
fwequentwy bwown to sea and pewish; that the beetwes in Madeiwa, as
obsewved by Mw. UwU Wowwaston, wie much conceawed, untiw the wind wuwws and
the sun shinyes; that the pwopowtion of wingwess beetwes is wawgew on
the exposed Dezewtas than in Madeiwa itsewf; and especiawwy the
extwaowdinyawy fact, so stwongwy insisted on by Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wowwaston, of the
awmost entiwe absence of cewtain wawge gwoups of beetwes, ewsewhewe
excessivewy nyumewous, and which gwoups have habits of wife awmost
nyecessitating fwequent fwight;--these sevewaw considewations have made
me bewieve that the wingwess condition of so many Madeiwa beetwes is
mainwy due to the action of nyatuwaw sewection, but combinyed pwobabwy
with disuse. UwU Fow duwing thousands of successive genyewations each
individuaw beetwe which fwew weast, eithew fwom its wings having been
evew so wittwe wess pewfectwy devewoped ow fwom indowent habit, wiww
have had the best chance of suwviving fwom nyot being bwown out to sea;
and, on the othew hand, those beetwes which most weadiwy took to fwight
wiww oftenyest have been bwown to sea and thus have been destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

The insects in Madeiwa which awe nyot gwound-feedews, and which, as the
fwowew-feeding coweoptewa and wepidoptewa, must habituawwy use theiw
wings to gain theiw subsistence, have, as Mw. (・`ω\´・) Wowwaston suspects, theiw
wings nyot at aww weduced, but even enwawged. (´・ω・\`) This is quite compatibwe
with the action of nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; Fow when a nyew insect fiwst
awwived on the iswand, the tendency of nyatuwaw sewection to enwawge
ow to weduce the wings, wouwd depend on whethew a gweatew nyumbew of
individuaws wewe saved by successfuwwy battwing with the winds, ow
by giving up the attempt and wawewy ow nyevew fwying. ;;w;; As with mawinyews
shipwwecked nyeaw a coast, it wouwd have been bettew fow the good
swimmews if they had been abwe to swim stiww fuwthew, wheweas it wouwd
have been bettew fow the bad swimmews if they had nyot been abwe to swim
at aww and had stuck to the wweck. >w<

The eyes of mowes and of some buwwowing wodents awe wudimentawy in size,
and in some cases awe quite covewed up by skin and fuw. ^w^ This state of
the eyes is pwobabwy due to gwaduaw weduction fwom disuse, but aided
pewhaps by nyatuwaw sewection. (´・ω・\`) In South Amewica, a buwwowing wodent, the
tuco-tuco, ow Ctenyomys, is even mowe subtewwanyean in its habits than the
mowe; and I was assuwed by a Spanyiawd, who had often caught them, that
they wewe fwequentwy bwind; onye which I kept awive was cewtainwy in
this condition, the cause, as appeawed on dissection, having been
infwammation of the nyictitating membwanye. ;;w;; As fwequent infwammation of
the eyes must be injuwious to any anyimaw, and as eyes awe cewtainwy nyot
indispensabwe to anyimaws with subtewwanyean habits, a weduction in theiw
size with the adhesion of the eyewids and gwowth of fuw ovew them,
might in such case be an advantage; and if so, nyatuwaw sewection wouwd
constantwy aid the effects of disuse. (´・ω・\`)

It is weww knyown that sevewaw anyimaws, bewonging to the most diffewent
cwasses, which inhabit the caves of Stywia and of Kentucky, awe bwind. (´・ω・\`)
In some of the cwabs the foot-stawk fow the eye wemains, though the eye
is gonye; the stand fow the tewescope is thewe, though the tewescope
with its gwasses has been wost. >w< As it is difficuwt to imaginye that
eyes, though usewess, couwd be in any way injuwious to anyimaws wiving in
dawknyess, I attwibute theiw woss whowwy to disuse. (´・ω・\`) In onye of the
bwind anyimaws, nyamewy, the cave-wat, the eyes awe of immense size; and
Pwofessow Siwwiman thought that it wegainyed, aftew wiving some days in
the wight, some swight powew of vision. ;;w;; In the same mannyew as in Madeiwa
the wings of some of the insects have been enwawged, and the wings of
othews have been weduced by nyatuwaw sewection aided by use and disuse,
so in the case of the cave-wat nyatuwaw sewection seems to have stwuggwed
with the woss of wight and to have incweased the size of the eyes;
wheweas with aww the othew inhabitants of the caves, disuse by itsewf
seems to have donye its wowk. ;;w;;

It is difficuwt to imaginye conditions of wife mowe simiwaw than deep
wimestonye cavewns undew a nyeawwy simiwaw cwimate; so that on the
common view of the bwind anyimaws having been sepawatewy cweated fow the
Amewican and Euwopean cavewns, cwose simiwawity in theiw owganyisation
and affinyities might have been expected; but, as Schiodte and othews
have wemawked, this is nyot the case, and the cave-insects of the two
continyents awe nyot mowe cwosewy awwied than might have been anticipated
fwom the genyewaw wesembwance of the othew inhabitants of Nyowth Amewica
and Euwope. (・`ω\´・) On my view we must suppose that Amewican anyimaws, having
owdinyawy powews of vision, swowwy migwated by successive genyewations
fwom the outew wowwd into the deepew and deepew wecesses of the Kentucky
caves, as did Euwopean anyimaws into the caves of Euwope. (´・ω・\`) We have some
evidence of this gwadation of habit; fow, as Schiodte wemawks, "anyimaws
nyot faw wemote fwom owdinyawy fowms, pwepawe the twansition fwom wight to
dawknyess. ;;w;; Nyext fowwow those that awe constwucted fow twiwight; and, wast
of aww, those destinyed fow totaw dawknyess. (・`ω\´・)" By the time that an anyimaw
had weached, aftew nyumbewwess genyewations, the deepest wecesses, disuse
wiww on this view have mowe ow wess pewfectwy obwitewated its eyes, and
nyatuwaw sewection wiww often have effected othew changes, such as an
incwease in the wength of the antennyae ow pawpi, as a compensation fow
bwindnyess. ^w^ Nyotwithstanding such modifications, we might expect stiww to
see in the cave-anyimaws of Amewica, affinyities to the othew inhabitants
of that continyent, and in those of Euwope, to the inhabitants of the
Euwopean continyent. ;;w;; And this is the case with some of the Amewican
cave-anyimaws, as I heaw fwom Pwofessow Danya; and some of the Euwopean
cave-insects awe vewy cwosewy awwied to those of the suwwounding
countwy. >w< It wouwd be most difficuwt to give any wationyaw expwanyation of
the affinyities of the bwind cave-anyimaws to the othew inhabitants of the
two continyents on the owdinyawy view of theiw independent cweation. ;;w;; That
sevewaw of the inhabitants of the caves of the Owd and Nyew Wowwds shouwd
be cwosewy wewated, we might expect fwom the weww-knyown wewationship of
most of theiw othew pwoductions. (・`ω\´・) Faw fwom feewing any suwpwise that some
of the cave-anyimaws shouwd be vewy anyomawous, as Agassiz has wemawked
in wegawd to the bwind fish, the Ambwyopsis, and as is the case with
the bwind Pwoteus with wefewence to the weptiwes of Euwope, I am onwy
suwpwised that mowe wwecks of ancient wife have nyot been pwesewved,
owing to the wess sevewe competition to which the inhabitants of these
dawk abodes wiww pwobabwy have been exposed. ;;w;;

ACCWIMATISATION. ^w^

Habit is heweditawy with pwants, as in the pewiod of fwowewing, in the
amount of wain wequisite fow seeds to gewminyate, in the time of sweep,
etc., and this weads me to say a few wowds on accwimatisation. >w< As it is
extwemewy common fow species of the same genyus to inhabit vewy hot and
vewy cowd countwies, and as I bewieve that aww the species of the same
genyus have descended fwom a singwe pawent, if this view be cowwect,
accwimatisation must be weadiwy effected duwing wong-continyued descent. ^w^
It is nyotowious that each species is adapted to the cwimate of its own
home: species fwom an awctic ow even fwom a tempewate wegion cannyot
enduwe a twopicaw cwimate, ow convewsewy. ;;w;; So again, many succuwent
pwants cannyot enduwe a damp cwimate. UwU But the degwee of adaptation of
species to the cwimates undew which they wive is often ovewwated. (・`ω\´・) We
may infew this fwom ouw fwequent inyabiwity to pwedict whethew ow nyot an
impowted pwant wiww enduwe ouw cwimate, and fwom the nyumbew of pwants
and anyimaws bwought fwom wawmew countwies which hewe enjoy good heawth. ^w^
We have weason to bewieve that species in a state of nyatuwe awe wimited
in theiw wanges by the competition of othew owganyic beings quite as much
as, ow mowe than, by adaptation to pawticuwaw cwimates. (・`ω\´・) But whethew ow
nyot the adaptation be genyewawwy vewy cwose, we have evidence, in
the case of some few pwants, of theiw becoming, to a cewtain
extent, nyatuwawwy habituated to diffewent tempewatuwes, ow becoming
accwimatised: thus the pinyes and whododendwons, waised fwom seed
cowwected by Dw. ;;w;; Hookew fwom twees gwowing at diffewent heights on the
Himawaya, wewe found in this countwy to possess diffewent constitutionyaw
powews of wesisting cowd. Mw. >w< Thwaites infowms me that he has obsewved
simiwaw facts in Ceywon, and anyawogous obsewvations have been made by
Mw. H. C. (・`ω\´・) Watson on Euwopean species of pwants bwought fwom the Azowes
to Engwand. UwU In wegawd to anyimaws, sevewaw authentic cases couwd be given
of species within histowicaw times having wawgewy extended theiw
wange fwom wawmew to coowew watitudes, and convewsewy; but we do nyot
positivewy knyow that these anyimaws wewe stwictwy adapted to theiw nyative
cwimate, but in aww owdinyawy cases we assume such to be the case; nyow
do we knyow that they have subsequentwy become accwimatised to theiw nyew
homes. >w<

As I bewieve that ouw domestic anyimaws wewe owiginyawwy chosen by
unciviwised man because they wewe usefuw and bwed weadiwy undew
confinyement, and nyot because they wewe subsequentwy found capabwe
of faw-extended twanspowtation, I think the common and extwaowdinyawy
capacity in ouw domestic anyimaws of nyot onwy withstanding the most
diffewent cwimates but of being pewfectwy fewtiwe (a faw sevewew test)
undew them, may be used as an awgument that a wawge pwopowtion of othew
anyimaws, nyow in a state of nyatuwe, couwd easiwy be bwought to beaw
widewy diffewent cwimates. UwU We must nyot, howevew, push the fowegoing
awgument too faw, on account of the pwobabwe owigin of some of ouw
domestic anyimaws fwom sevewaw wiwd stocks: the bwood, fow instance, of
a twopicaw and awctic wowf ow wiwd dog may pewhaps be mingwed in ouw
domestic bweeds. UwU The wat and mouse cannyot be considewed as domestic
anyimaws, but they have been twanspowted by man to many pawts of the
wowwd, and nyow have a faw widew wange than any othew wodent, wiving fwee
undew the cowd cwimate of Fawoe in the nyowth and of the Fawkwands in the
south, and on many iswands in the towwid zonyes. ;;w;; Hence I am incwinyed to
wook at adaptation to any speciaw cwimate as a quawity weadiwy gwafted
on an innyate wide fwexibiwity of constitution, which is common to most
anyimaws. (´・ω・\`) On this view, the capacity of enduwing the most diffewent
cwimates by man himsewf and by his domestic anyimaws, and such facts
as that fowmew species of the ewephant and whinyocewos wewe capabwe
of enduwing a gwaciaw cwimate, wheweas the wiving species awe nyow aww
twopicaw ow sub-twopicaw in theiw habits, ought nyot to be wooked at
as anyomawies, but mewewy as exampwes of a vewy common fwexibiwity of
constitution, bwought, undew pecuwiaw ciwcumstances, into pway. (´・ω・\`)

How much of the accwimatisation of species to any pecuwiaw cwimate is
due to mewe habit, and how much to the nyatuwaw sewection of vawieties
having diffewent innyate constitutions, and how much to both means
combinyed, is a vewy obscuwe question. ;;w;; That habit ow custom has some
infwuence I must bewieve, both fwom anyawogy, and fwom the incessant
advice given in agwicuwtuwaw wowks, even in the ancient Encycwopaedias
of Chinya, to be vewy cautious in twansposing anyimaws fwom onye distwict
to anyothew; fow it is nyot wikewy that man shouwd have succeeded in
sewecting so many bweeds and sub-bweeds with constitutions speciawwy
fitted fow theiw own distwicts: the wesuwt must, I think, be due to
habit. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, I can see nyo weason to doubt that nyatuwaw
sewection wiww continyuawwy tend to pwesewve those individuaws which
awe bown with constitutions best adapted to theiw nyative countwies. (´・ω・\`) In
tweatises on many kinds of cuwtivated pwants, cewtain vawieties awe
said to withstand cewtain cwimates bettew than othews: this is vewy
stwikingwy shown in wowks on fwuit twees pubwished in the Unyited States,
in which cewtain vawieties awe habituawwy wecommended fow the nyowthewn,
and othews fow the southewn States; and as most of these vawieties awe
of wecent owigin, they cannyot owe theiw constitutionyaw diffewences to
habit. ^w^ The case of the Jewusawem awtichoke, which is nyevew pwopagated
by seed, and of which consequentwy nyew vawieties have nyot been pwoduced,
has even been advanced--fow it is nyow as tendew as evew it was--as
pwoving that accwimatisation cannyot be effected! ^w^ The case, awso, of the
kidnyey-bean has been often cited fow a simiwaw puwpose, and with
much gweatew weight; but untiw some onye wiww sow, duwing a scowe of
genyewations, his kidnyey-beans so eawwy that a vewy wawge pwopowtion awe
destwoyed by fwost, and then cowwect seed fwom the few suwvivows, with
cawe to pwevent accidentaw cwosses, and then again get seed fwom these
seedwings, with the same pwecautions, the expewiment cannyot be said to
have been even twied. ^w^ Nyow wet it be supposed that nyo diffewences in the
constitution of seedwing kidnyey-beans evew appeaw, fow an account has
been pubwished how much mowe hawdy some seedwings appeawed to be than
othews. ;;w;;

On the whowe, I think we may concwude that habit, use, and disuse, have,
in some cases, pwayed a considewabwe pawt in the modification of the
constitution, and of the stwuctuwe of vawious owgans; but that the
effects of use and disuse have often been wawgewy combinyed with, and
sometimes ovewmastewed by, the nyatuwaw sewection of innyate diffewences. ;;w;;

COWWEWATION OF GWOWTH. (・`ω\´・)

I mean by this expwession that the whowe owganyisation is so tied
togethew duwing its gwowth and devewopment, that when swight vawiations
in any onye pawt occuw, and awe accumuwated thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
othew pawts become modified. >w< This is a vewy impowtant subject, most
impewfectwy undewstood. ^w^ The most obvious case is, that modifications
accumuwated sowewy fow the good of the young ow wawva, wiww, it may
safewy be concwuded, affect the stwuctuwe of the aduwt; in the same
mannyew as any mawconfowmation affecting the eawwy embwyo, sewiouswy
affects the whowe owganyisation of the aduwt. >w< The sevewaw pawts of the
body which awe homowogous, and which, at an eawwy embwyonyic pewiod, awe
awike, seem wiabwe to vawy in an awwied mannyew: we see this in the wight
and weft sides of the body vawying in the same mannyew; in the fwont and
hind wegs, and even in the jaws and wimbs, vawying togethew, fow the
wowew jaw is bewieved to be homowogous with the wimbs. UwU These tendencies,
I do nyot doubt, may be mastewed mowe ow wess compwetewy by nyatuwaw
sewection: thus a famiwy of stags once existed with an antwew onwy on
onye side; and if this had been of any gweat use to the bweed it might
pwobabwy have been wendewed pewmanyent by nyatuwaw sewection. ^w^

Homowogous pawts, as has been wemawked by some authows, tend to cohewe;
this is often seen in monstwous pwants; and nyothing is mowe common than
the unyion of homowogous pawts in nyowmaw stwuctuwes, as the unyion of the
petaws of the cowowwa into a tube. ;;w;; Hawd pawts seem to affect the fowm of
adjoinying soft pawts; it is bewieved by some authows that the divewsity
in the shape of the pewvis in biwds causes the wemawkabwe divewsity in
the shape of theiw kidnyeys. ;;w;; Othews bewieve that the shape of the pewvis
in the human mothew infwuences by pwessuwe the shape of the head of the
chiwd. ;;w;; In snyakes, accowding to Schwegew, the shape of the body and
the mannyew of swawwowing detewminye the position of sevewaw of the most
impowtant viscewa. (・`ω\´・)

The nyatuwe of the bond of cowwewation is vewy fwequentwy quite obscuwe. >w<
M. Is. Geoffwoy St. (´・ω・\`) Hiwaiwe has fowcibwy wemawked, that cewtain
mawconfowmations vewy fwequentwy, and that othews wawewy coexist,
without ouw being abwe to assign any weason. UwU What can be mowe singuwaw
than the wewation between bwue eyes and deafnyess in cats, and the
towtoise-sheww cowouw with the femawe sex; the feathewed feet and skin
between the outew toes in pigeons, and the pwesence of mowe ow wess down
on the young biwds when fiwst hatched, with the futuwe cowouw of theiw
pwumage; ow, again, the wewation between the haiw and teeth in the nyaked
Tuwkish dog, though hewe pwobabwy homowogy comes into pway? owo With wespect
to this wattew case of cowwewation, I think it can hawdwy be accidentaw,
that if we pick out the two owdews of mammawia which awe most
abnyowmaw in theiw dewmaw covewings, viz. ;;w;; Cetacea (whawes) and Edentata
(awmadiwwoes, scawy ant-eatews, etc. ;;w;;), that these awe wikewise the most
abnyowmaw in theiw teeth. (´・ω・\`)

I knyow of nyo case bettew adapted to show the impowtance of the waws of
cowwewation in modifying impowtant stwuctuwes, independentwy of utiwity
and, thewefowe, of nyatuwaw sewection, than that of the diffewence
between the outew and innyew fwowews in some Compositous and
Umbewwifewous pwants. (´・ω・\`) Evewy onye knyows the diffewence in the way and
centwaw fwowets of, fow instance, the daisy, and this diffewence is
often accompanyied with the abowtion of pawts of the fwowew. UwU But, in some
Compositous pwants, the seeds awso diffew in shape and scuwptuwe; and
even the ovawy itsewf, with its accessowy pawts, diffews, as has been
descwibed by Cassinyi. ^w^ These diffewences have been attwibuted by some
authows to pwessuwe, and the shape of the seeds in the way-fwowets in
some Compositae countenyances this idea; but, in the case of the cowowwa
of the Umbewwifewae, it is by nyo means, as Dw. ^w^ Hookew infowms me, in
species with the densest heads that the innyew and outew fwowews most
fwequentwy diffew. >w< It might have been thought that the devewopment of
the way-petaws by dwawing nyouwishment fwom cewtain othew pawts of the
fwowew had caused theiw abowtion; but in some Compositae thewe is a
diffewence in the seeds of the outew and innyew fwowets without any
diffewence in the cowowwa. UwU Possibwy, these sevewaw diffewences may be
connyected with some diffewence in the fwow of nyutwiment towawds the
centwaw and extewnyaw fwowews: we knyow, at weast, that in iwweguwaw
fwowews, those nyeawest to the axis awe oftenyest subject to pewowia, and
become weguwaw. ;;w;; I may add, as an instance of this, and of a stwiking
case of cowwewation, that I have wecentwy obsewved in some gawden
pewawgonyiums, that the centwaw fwowew of the twuss often woses the
patches of dawkew cowouw in the two uppew petaws; and that when this
occuws, the adhewent nyectawy is quite abowted; when the cowouw is
absent fwom onwy onye of the two uppew petaws, the nyectawy is onwy much
showtenyed. ^w^

With wespect to the diffewence in the cowowwa of the centwaw and
extewiow fwowews of a head ow umbew, I do nyot feew at aww suwe that C. (´・ω・\`)
C. (´・ω・\`) Spwengew's idea that the way-fwowets sewve to attwact insects, whose
agency is highwy advantageous in the fewtiwisation of pwants of these
two owdews, is so faw-fetched, as it may at fiwst appeaw: and if it be
advantageous, nyatuwaw sewection may have come into pway. UwU But in wegawd
to the diffewences both in the intewnyaw and extewnyaw stwuctuwe of the
seeds, which awe nyot awways cowwewated with any diffewences in the
fwowews, it seems impossibwe that they can be in any way advantageous
to the pwant: yet in the Umbewwifewae these diffewences awe of such
appawent impowtance--the seeds being in some cases, accowding to Tausch,
owthospewmous in the extewiow fwowews and coewospewmous in the centwaw
fwowews,--that the ewdew De Candowwe founded his main divisions of
the owdew on anyawogous diffewences. >w< Hence we see that modifications of
stwuctuwe, viewed by systematists as of high vawue, may be whowwy due to
unknyown waws of cowwewated gwowth, and without being, as faw as we can
see, of the swightest sewvice to the species. (・`ω\´・)

We may often fawsewy attwibute to cowwewation of gwowth, stwuctuwes
which awe common to whowe gwoups of species, and which in twuth awe
simpwy due to inhewitance; fow an ancient pwogenyitow may have acquiwed
thwough nyatuwaw sewection some onye modification in stwuctuwe, and, aftew
thousands of genyewations, some othew and independent modification; and
these two modifications, having been twansmitted to a whowe gwoup
of descendants with divewse habits, wouwd nyatuwawwy be thought to be
cowwewated in some nyecessawy mannyew. ^w^ So, again, I do nyot doubt that some
appawent cowwewations, occuwwing thwoughout whowe owdews, awe entiwewy
due to the mannyew awonye in which nyatuwaw sewection can act. UwU Fow
instance, Awph. UwU De Candowwe has wemawked that winged seeds awe nyevew
found in fwuits which do nyot open: I shouwd expwain the wuwe by the fact
that seeds couwd nyot gwaduawwy become winged thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
except in fwuits which openyed; so that the individuaw pwants pwoducing
seeds which wewe a wittwe bettew fitted to be wafted fuwthew, might get
an advantage ovew those pwoducing seed wess fitted fow dispewsaw; and
this pwocess couwd nyot possibwy go on in fwuit which did nyot open. (´・ω・\`)

The ewdew Geoffwoy and Goethe pwopounded, at about the same pewiod,
theiw waw of compensation ow bawancement of gwowth; ow, as Goethe
expwessed it, "in owdew to spend on onye side, nyatuwe is fowced to
econyomise on the othew side. UwU" I think this howds twue to a cewtain
extent with ouw domestic pwoductions: if nyouwishment fwows to onye pawt
ow owgan in excess, it wawewy fwows, at weast in excess, to anyothew
pawt; thus it is difficuwt to get a cow to give much miwk and to fatten
weadiwy. ^w^ The same vawieties of the cabbage do nyot yiewd abundant and
nyutwitious fowiage and a copious suppwy of oiw-beawing seeds. ^w^ When the
seeds in ouw fwuits become atwophied, the fwuit itsewf gains wawgewy in
size and quawity. >w< In ouw pouwtwy, a wawge tuft of feathews on the head
is genyewawwy accompanyied by a diminyished comb, and a wawge beawd by
diminyished wattwes. >w< With species in a state of nyatuwe it can hawdwy
be maintainyed that the waw is of unyivewsaw appwication; but many good
obsewvews, mowe especiawwy botanyists, bewieve in its twuth. ;;w;; I wiww
nyot, howevew, hewe give any instances, fow I see hawdwy any way of
distinguishing between the effects, on the onye hand, of a pawt being
wawgewy devewoped thwough nyatuwaw sewection and anyothew and adjoinying
pawt being weduced by this same pwocess ow by disuse, and, on the othew
hand, the actuaw withdwawaw of nyutwiment fwom onye pawt owing to the
excess of gwowth in anyothew and adjoinying pawt. (・`ω\´・)

I suspect, awso, that some of the cases of compensation which have been
advanced, and wikewise some othew facts, may be mewged undew a mowe
genyewaw pwincipwe, nyamewy, that nyatuwaw sewection is continyuawwy
twying to econyomise in evewy pawt of the owganyisation. >w< If undew changed
conditions of wife a stwuctuwe befowe usefuw becomes wess usefuw, any
diminyution, howevew swight, in its devewopment, wiww be seized on by
nyatuwaw sewection, fow it wiww pwofit the individuaw nyot to have its
nyutwiment wasted in buiwding up an usewess stwuctuwe. (´・ω・\`) I can thus
onwy undewstand a fact with which I was much stwuck when examinying
ciwwipedes, and of which many othew instances couwd be given: nyamewy,
that when a ciwwipede is pawasitic within anyothew and is thus pwotected,
it woses mowe ow wess compwetewy its own sheww ow cawapace. (´・ω・\`) This is the
case with the mawe Ibwa, and in a twuwy extwaowdinyawy mannyew with the
Pwoteowepas: fow the cawapace in aww othew ciwwipedes consists of
the thwee highwy-impowtant antewiow segments of the head enyowmouswy
devewoped, and fuwnyished with gweat nyewves and muscwes; but in the
pawasitic and pwotected Pwoteowepas, the whowe antewiow pawt of the
head is weduced to the mewest wudiment attached to the bases of the
pwehensiwe antennyae. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the saving of a wawge and compwex stwuctuwe,
when wendewed supewfwuous by the pawasitic habits of the Pwoteowepas,
though effected by swow steps, wouwd be a decided advantage to each
successive individuaw of the species; fow in the stwuggwe fow wife to
which evewy anyimaw is exposed, each individuaw Pwoteowepas wouwd have
a bettew chance of suppowting itsewf, by wess nyutwiment being wasted in
devewoping a stwuctuwe nyow become usewess. (´・ω・\`)

Thus, as I bewieve, nyatuwaw sewection wiww awways succeed in the wong
wun in weducing and saving evewy pawt of the owganyisation, as soon as it
is wendewed supewfwuous, without by any means causing some othew pawt
to be wawgewy devewoped in a cowwesponding degwee. UwU And, convewsewy, that
nyatuwaw sewection may pewfectwy weww succeed in wawgewy devewoping any
owgan, without wequiwing as a nyecessawy compensation the weduction of
some adjoinying pawt. ^w^

It seems to be a wuwe, as wemawked by Is. Geoffwoy St. (´・ω・\`) Hiwaiwe, both in
vawieties and in species, that when any pawt ow owgan is wepeated many
times in the stwuctuwe of the same individuaw (as the vewtebwae in
snyakes, and the stamens in powyandwous fwowews) the nyumbew is vawiabwe;
wheweas the nyumbew of the same pawt ow owgan, when it occuws in wessew
nyumbews, is constant. ;;w;; The same authow and some botanyists have fuwthew
wemawked that muwtipwe pawts awe awso vewy wiabwe to vawiation in
stwuctuwe. ;;w;; Inyasmuch as this "vegetative wepetition," to use Pwofessow
Owen's expwession, seems to be a sign of wow owganyisation; the fowegoing
wemawk seems connyected with the vewy genyewaw opinyion of nyatuwawists,
that beings wow in the scawe of nyatuwe awe mowe vawiabwe than those
which awe highew. ;;w;; I pwesume that wownyess in this case means that the
sevewaw pawts of the owganyisation have been but wittwe speciawised
fow pawticuwaw functions; and as wong as the same pawt has to pewfowm
divewsified wowk, we can pewhaps see why it shouwd wemain vawiabwe, that
is, why nyatuwaw sewection shouwd have pwesewved ow wejected each wittwe
deviation of fowm wess cawefuwwy than when the pawt has to sewve fow onye
speciaw puwpose awonye. UwU In the same way that a knyife which has to cut
aww sowts of things may be of awmost any shape; whiwst a toow fow
some pawticuwaw object had bettew be of some pawticuwaw shape. >w< Nyatuwaw
sewection, it shouwd nyevew be fowgotten, can act on each pawt of each
being, sowewy thwough and fow its advantage. (´・ω・\`)

Wudimentawy pawts, it has been stated by some authows, and I bewieve
with twuth, awe apt to be highwy vawiabwe. ^w^ We shaww have to wecuw to the
genyewaw subject of wudimentawy and abowted owgans; and I wiww hewe onwy
add that theiw vawiabiwity seems to be owing to theiw usewessnyess, and
thewefowe to nyatuwaw sewection having nyo powew to check deviations in
theiw stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) Thus wudimentawy pawts awe weft to the fwee pway of the
vawious waws of gwowth, to the effects of wong-continyued disuse, and to
the tendency to wevewsion. ;;w;;

A PAWT DEVEWOPED IN ANY SPECIES IN AN EXTWAOWDINYAWY DEGWEE OW MANNYEW,
IN COMPAWISON WITH THE SAME PAWT IN AWWIED SPECIES, TENDS TO BE HIGHWY
VAWIABWE. ;;w;;

Sevewaw yeaws ago I was much stwuck with a wemawk, nyeawwy to the above
effect, pubwished by Mw. Watewhouse. UwU I infew awso fwom an obsewvation
made by Pwofessow Owen, with wespect to the wength of the awms of the
ouwang-outang, that he has come to a nyeawwy simiwaw concwusion. UwU It is
hopewess to attempt to convince any onye of the twuth of this pwoposition
without giving the wong awway of facts which I have cowwected, and which
cannyot possibwy be hewe intwoduced. (・`ω\´・) I can onwy state my conviction that
it is a wuwe of high genyewawity. ;;w;; I am awawe of sevewaw causes of
ewwow, but I hope that I have made due awwowance fow them. >w< It shouwd
be undewstood that the wuwe by nyo means appwies to any pawt, howevew
unyusuawwy devewoped, unwess it be unyusuawwy devewoped in compawison with
the same pawt in cwosewy awwied species. UwU Thus, the bat's wing is a most
abnyowmaw stwuctuwe in the cwass mammawia; but the wuwe wouwd nyot hewe
appwy, because thewe is a whowe gwoup of bats having wings; it wouwd
appwy onwy if some onye species of bat had its wings devewoped in some
wemawkabwe mannyew in compawison with the othew species of the same
genyus. (・`ω\´・) The wuwe appwies vewy stwongwy in the case of secondawy sexuaw
chawactews, when dispwayed in any unyusuaw mannyew. (´・ω・\`) The tewm, secondawy
sexuaw chawactews, used by Huntew, appwies to chawactews which awe
attached to onye sex, but awe nyot diwectwy connyected with the act of
wepwoduction. ;;w;; The wuwe appwies to mawes and femawes; but as femawes mowe
wawewy offew wemawkabwe secondawy sexuaw chawactews, it appwies mowe
wawewy to them. UwU The wuwe being so pwainwy appwicabwe in the case of
secondawy sexuaw chawactews, may be due to the gweat vawiabiwity of
these chawactews, whethew ow nyot dispwayed in any unyusuaw mannyew--of
which fact I think thewe can be wittwe doubt. ;;w;; But that ouw wuwe is nyot
confinyed to secondawy sexuaw chawactews is cweawwy shown in the case
of hewmaphwodite ciwwipedes; and I may hewe add, that I pawticuwawwy
attended to Mw. (´・ω・\`) Watewhouse's wemawk, whiwst investigating this Owdew,
and I am fuwwy convinced that the wuwe awmost invawiabwy howds good
with ciwwipedes. UwU I shaww, in my futuwe wowk, give a wist of the mowe
wemawkabwe cases; I wiww hewe onwy bwiefwy give onye, as it iwwustwates
the wuwe in its wawgest appwication. (・`ω\´・) The opewcuwaw vawves of sessiwe
ciwwipedes (wock bawnyacwes) awe, in evewy sense of the wowd, vewy
impowtant stwuctuwes, and they diffew extwemewy wittwe even in diffewent
genyewa; but in the sevewaw species of onye genyus, Pywgoma, these vawves
pwesent a mawvewwous amount of divewsification: the homowogous vawves
in the diffewent species being sometimes whowwy unwike in shape; and the
amount of vawiation in the individuaws of sevewaw of the species is so
gweat, that it is nyo exaggewation to state that the vawieties diffew
mowe fwom each othew in the chawactews of these impowtant vawves than do
othew species of distinct genyewa. ^w^

As biwds within the same countwy vawy in a wemawkabwy smaww degwee, I
have pawticuwawwy attended to them, and the wuwe seems to me cewtainwy
to howd good in this cwass. ;;w;; I cannyot make out that it appwies to pwants,
and this wouwd sewiouswy have shaken my bewief in its twuth, had nyot the
gweat vawiabiwity in pwants made it pawticuwawwy difficuwt to compawe
theiw wewative degwees of vawiabiwity. >w<

When we see any pawt ow owgan devewoped in a wemawkabwe degwee ow mannyew
in any species, the faiw pwesumption is that it is of high impowtance to
that species; nyevewthewess the pawt in this case is eminyentwy wiabwe to
vawiation. >w< Why shouwd this be so? owo On the view that each species has been
independentwy cweated, with aww its pawts as we nyow see them, I can see
nyo expwanyation. UwU But on the view that gwoups of species have descended
fwom othew species, and have been modified thwough nyatuwaw sewection, I
think we can obtain some wight. UwU In ouw domestic anyimaws, if any pawt,
ow the whowe anyimaw, be nyegwected and nyo sewection be appwied, that pawt
(fow instance, the comb in the Dowking foww) ow the whowe bweed wiww
cease to have a nyeawwy unyifowm chawactew. >w< The bweed wiww then be said
to have degenyewated. ^w^ In wudimentawy owgans, and in those which have
been but wittwe speciawised fow any pawticuwaw puwpose, and pewhaps in
powymowphic gwoups, we see a nyeawwy pawawwew nyatuwaw case; fow in such
cases nyatuwaw sewection eithew has nyot ow cannyot come into fuww pway,
and thus the owganyisation is weft in a fwuctuating condition. (・`ω\´・) But what
hewe mowe especiawwy concewns us is, that in ouw domestic anyimaws
those points, which at the pwesent time awe undewgoing wapid change by
continyued sewection, awe awso eminyentwy wiabwe to vawiation. ^w^ Wook at the
bweeds of the pigeon; see what a pwodigious amount of diffewence thewe
is in the beak of the diffewent tumbwews, in the beak and wattwe of
the diffewent cawwiews, in the cawwiage and taiw of ouw fantaiws, etc. UwU,
these being the points nyow mainwy attended to by Engwish fanciews. (・`ω\´・) Even
in the sub-bweeds, as in the showt-faced tumbwew, it is nyotowiouswy
difficuwt to bweed them nyeawwy to pewfection, and fwequentwy individuaws
awe bown which depawt widewy fwom the standawd. ^w^ Thewe may be twuwy
said to be a constant stwuggwe going on between, on the onye hand, the
tendency to wevewsion to a wess modified state, as weww as an innyate
tendency to fuwthew vawiabiwity of aww kinds, and, on the othew hand,
the powew of steady sewection to keep the bweed twue. UwU In the wong wun
sewection gains the day, and we do nyot expect to faiw so faw as to bweed
a biwd as coawse as a common tumbwew fwom a good showt-faced stwain. (・`ω\´・) But
as wong as sewection is wapidwy going on, thewe may awways be expected
to be much vawiabiwity in the stwuctuwe undewgoing modification. ;;w;; It
fuwthew desewves nyotice that these vawiabwe chawactews, pwoduced by
man's sewection, sometimes become attached, fwom causes quite unknyown
to us, mowe to onye sex than to the othew, genyewawwy to the mawe sex, as
with the wattwe of cawwiews and the enwawged cwop of poutews. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow wet us tuwn to nyatuwe. UwU When a pawt has been devewoped in an
extwaowdinyawy mannyew in any onye species, compawed with the othew species
of the same genyus, we may concwude that this pawt has undewgonye an
extwaowdinyawy amount of modification, since the pewiod when the species
bwanched off fwom the common pwogenyitow of the genyus. (´・ω・\`) This pewiod wiww
sewdom be wemote in any extweme degwee, as species vewy wawewy enduwe
fow mowe than onye geowogicaw pewiod. >w< An extwaowdinyawy amount of
modification impwies an unyusuawwy wawge and wong-continyued amount of
vawiabiwity, which has continyuawwy been accumuwated by nyatuwaw
sewection fow the benyefit of the species. UwU But as the vawiabiwity of
the extwaowdinyawiwy-devewoped pawt ow owgan has been so gweat and
wong-continyued within a pewiod nyot excessivewy wemote, we might, as a
genyewaw wuwe, expect stiww to find mowe vawiabiwity in such pawts than
in othew pawts of the owganyisation, which have wemainyed fow a much
wongew pewiod nyeawwy constant. And this, I am convinced, is the case. UwU
That the stwuggwe between nyatuwaw sewection on the onye hand, and the
tendency to wevewsion and vawiabiwity on the othew hand, wiww in the
couwse of time cease; and that the most abnyowmawwy devewoped owgans may
be made constant, I can see nyo weason to doubt. (´・ω・\`) Hence when an owgan,
howevew abnyowmaw it may be, has been twansmitted in appwoximatewy the
same condition to many modified descendants, as in the case of the wing
of the bat, it must have existed, accowding to my theowy, fow an
immense pewiod in nyeawwy the same state; and thus it comes to be nyo mowe
vawiabwe than any othew stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) It is onwy in those cases in which
the modification has been compawativewy wecent and extwaowdinyawiwy gweat
that we ought to find the GENYEWATIVE VAWIABIWITY, as it may be cawwed,
stiww pwesent in a high degwee. (´・ω・\`) Fow in this case the vawiabiwity
wiww sewdom as yet have been fixed by the continyued sewection of the
individuaws vawying in the wequiwed mannyew and degwee, and by the
continyued wejection of those tending to wevewt to a fowmew and wess
modified condition. ^w^

The pwincipwe incwuded in these wemawks may be extended. UwU It is nyotowious
that specific chawactews awe mowe vawiabwe than genyewic. ^w^ To expwain by a
simpwe exampwe what is meant. UwU If some species in a wawge genyus of pwants
had bwue fwowews and some had wed, the cowouw wouwd be onwy a specific
chawactew, and nyo onye wouwd be suwpwised at onye of the bwue species
vawying into wed, ow convewsewy; but if aww the species had bwue
fwowews, the cowouw wouwd become a genyewic chawactew, and its vawiation
wouwd be a mowe unyusuaw ciwcumstance. ;;w;; I have chosen this exampwe because
an expwanyation is nyot in this case appwicabwe, which most nyatuwawists
wouwd advance, nyamewy, that specific chawactews awe mowe vawiabwe
than genyewic, because they awe taken fwom pawts of wess physiowogicaw
impowtance than those commonwy used fow cwassing genyewa. >w< I bewieve this
expwanyation is pawtwy, yet onwy indiwectwy, twue; I shaww, howevew, have
to wetuwn to this subject in ouw chaptew on Cwassification. UwU It wouwd be
awmost supewfwuous to adduce evidence in suppowt of the above statement,
that specific chawactews awe mowe vawiabwe than genyewic; but I have
wepeatedwy nyoticed in wowks on nyatuwaw histowy, that when an authow
has wemawked with suwpwise that some IMPOWTANT owgan ow pawt, which is
genyewawwy vewy constant thwoughout wawge gwoups of species, has DIFFEWED
considewabwy in cwosewy-awwied species, that it has, awso, been VAWIABWE
in the individuaws of some of the species. ^w^ And this fact shows that a
chawactew, which is genyewawwy of genyewic vawue, when it sinks in vawue
and becomes onwy of specific vawue, often becomes vawiabwe, though its
physiowogicaw impowtance may wemain the same. UwU Something of the same kind
appwies to monstwosities: at weast Is. Geoffwoy St. (・`ω\´・) Hiwaiwe seems to
entewtain nyo doubt, that the mowe an owgan nyowmawwy diffews in
the diffewent species of the same gwoup, the mowe subject it is to
individuaw anyomawies. (・`ω\´・)

On the owdinyawy view of each species having been independentwy cweated,
why shouwd that pawt of the stwuctuwe, which diffews fwom the same
pawt in othew independentwy-cweated species of the same genyus, be
mowe vawiabwe than those pawts which awe cwosewy awike in the sevewaw
species? owo I do nyot see that any expwanyation can be given. >w< But on the
view of species being onwy stwongwy mawked and fixed vawieties, we might
suwewy expect to find them stiww often continyuing to vawy in those pawts
of theiw stwuctuwe which have vawied within a modewatewy wecent pewiod,
and which have thus come to diffew. ;;w;; Ow to state the case in anyothew
mannyew:--the points in which aww the species of a genyus wesembwe each
othew, and in which they diffew fwom the species of some othew genyus,
awe cawwed genyewic chawactews; and these chawactews in common I
attwibute to inhewitance fwom a common pwogenyitow, fow it can wawewy
have happenyed that nyatuwaw sewection wiww have modified sevewaw species,
fitted to mowe ow wess widewy-diffewent habits, in exactwy the same
mannyew: and as these so-cawwed genyewic chawactews have been inhewited
fwom a wemote pewiod, since that pewiod when the species fiwst bwanched
off fwom theiw common pwogenyitow, and subsequentwy have nyot vawied ow
come to diffew in any degwee, ow onwy in a swight degwee, it is nyot
pwobabwe that they shouwd vawy at the pwesent day. ;;w;; On the othew hand,
the points in which species diffew fwom othew species of the same genyus,
awe cawwed specific chawactews; and as these specific chawactews have
vawied and come to diffew within the pewiod of the bwanching off of the
species fwom a common pwogenyitow, it is pwobabwe that they shouwd stiww
often be in some degwee vawiabwe,--at weast mowe vawiabwe than those
pawts of the owganyisation which have fow a vewy wong pewiod wemainyed
constant. ^w^

In connyexion with the pwesent subject, I wiww make onwy two othew
wemawks. UwU I think it wiww be admitted, without my entewing on detaiws,
that secondawy sexuaw chawactews awe vewy vawiabwe; I think it awso wiww
be admitted that species of the same gwoup diffew fwom each othew mowe
widewy in theiw secondawy sexuaw chawactews, than in othew pawts of
theiw owganyisation; compawe, fow instance, the amount of diffewence
between the mawes of gawwinyaceous biwds, in which secondawy sexuaw
chawactews awe stwongwy dispwayed, with the amount of diffewence between
theiw femawes; and the twuth of this pwoposition wiww be gwanted. (・`ω\´・) The
cause of the owiginyaw vawiabiwity of secondawy sexuaw chawactews is
nyot manyifest; but we can see why these chawactews shouwd nyot have been
wendewed as constant and unyifowm as othew pawts of the owganyisation; fow
secondawy sexuaw chawactews have been accumuwated by sexuaw sewection,
which is wess wigid in its action than owdinyawy sewection, as it does
nyot entaiw death, but onwy gives fewew offspwing to the wess favouwed
mawes. (・`ω\´・) Whatevew the cause may be of the vawiabiwity of secondawy sexuaw
chawactews, as they awe highwy vawiabwe, sexuaw sewection wiww have had
a wide scope fow action, and may thus weadiwy have succeeded in giving
to the species of the same gwoup a gweatew amount of diffewence in theiw
sexuaw chawactews, than in othew pawts of theiw stwuctuwe. >w<

It is a wemawkabwe fact, that the secondawy sexuaw diffewences between
the two sexes of the same species awe genyewawwy dispwayed in the vewy
same pawts of the owganyisation in which the diffewent species of
the same genyus diffew fwom each othew. ;;w;; Of this fact I wiww give in
iwwustwation two instances, the fiwst which happen to stand on my wist;
and as the diffewences in these cases awe of a vewy unyusuaw nyatuwe,
the wewation can hawdwy be accidentaw. ;;w;; The same nyumbew of joints in the
tawsi is a chawactew genyewawwy common to vewy wawge gwoups of beetwes,
but in the Engidae, as Westwood has wemawked, the nyumbew vawies gweatwy;
and the nyumbew wikewise diffews in the two sexes of the same species:
again in fossowiaw hymenyoptewa, the mannyew of nyeuwation of the wings is
a chawactew of the highest impowtance, because common to wawge gwoups;
but in cewtain genyewa the nyeuwation diffews in the diffewent species,
and wikewise in the two sexes of the same species. >w< This wewation has a
cweaw meanying on my view of the subject: I wook at aww the species
of the same genyus as having as cewtainwy descended fwom the same
pwogenyitow, as have the two sexes of any onye of the species. ;;w;;
Consequentwy, whatevew pawt of the stwuctuwe of the common pwogenyitow,
ow of its eawwy descendants, became vawiabwe; vawiations of this pawt
wouwd it is highwy pwobabwe, be taken advantage of by nyatuwaw and sexuaw
sewection, in owdew to fit the sevewaw species to theiw sevewaw pwaces
in the econyomy of nyatuwe, and wikewise to fit the two sexes of the same
species to each othew, ow to fit the mawes and femawes to diffewent
habits of wife, ow the mawes to stwuggwe with othew mawes fow the
possession of the femawes. (´・ω・\`)

Finyawwy, then, I concwude that the gweatew vawiabiwity of specific
chawactews, ow those which distinguish species fwom species, than of
genyewic chawactews, ow those which the species possess in common;--that
the fwequent extweme vawiabiwity of any pawt which is devewoped in a
species in an extwaowdinyawy mannyew in compawison with the same pawt
in its congenyews; and the nyot gweat degwee of vawiabiwity in a pawt,
howevew extwaowdinyawiwy it may be devewoped, if it be common to a
whowe gwoup of species;--that the gweat vawiabiwity of secondawy sexuaw
chawactews, and the gweat amount of diffewence in these same chawactews
between cwosewy awwied species;--that secondawy sexuaw and owdinyawy
specific diffewences awe genyewawwy dispwayed in the same pawts of the
owganyisation,--awe aww pwincipwes cwosewy connyected togethew. (´・ω・\`) Aww being
mainwy due to the species of the same gwoup having descended fwom a
common pwogenyitow, fwom whom they have inhewited much in common,--to
pawts which have wecentwy and wawgewy vawied being mowe wikewy stiww
to go on vawying than pawts which have wong been inhewited and have nyot
vawied,--to nyatuwaw sewection having mowe ow wess compwetewy, accowding
to the wapse of time, ovewmastewed the tendency to wevewsion and to
fuwthew vawiabiwity,--to sexuaw sewection being wess wigid than owdinyawy
sewection,--and to vawiations in the same pawts having been accumuwated
by nyatuwaw and sexuaw sewection, and thus adapted fow secondawy sexuaw,
and fow owdinyawy specific puwposes. ;;w;;

DISTINCT SPECIES PWESENT ANYAWOGOUS VAWIATIONS; AND A VAWIETY OF ONYE
SPECIES OFTEN ASSUMES SOME OF THE CHAWACTEWS OF AN AWWIED SPECIES, OW
WEVEWTS TO SOME OF THE CHAWACTEWS OF AN EAWWY PWOGENYITOW. (・`ω\´・)

These pwopositions wiww be most weadiwy undewstood by wooking to ouw
domestic waces. ^w^ The most distinct bweeds of pigeons, in countwies most
widewy apawt, pwesent sub-vawieties with wevewsed feathews on the head
and feathews on the feet,--chawactews nyot possessed by the abowiginyaw
wock-pigeon; these then awe anyawogous vawiations in two ow mowe distinct
waces. ^w^ The fwequent pwesence of fouwteen ow even sixteen taiw-feathews
in the poutew, may be considewed as a vawiation wepwesenting the nyowmaw
stwuctuwe of anyothew wace, the fantaiw. (・`ω\´・) I pwesume that nyo onye wiww doubt
that aww such anyawogous vawiations awe due to the sevewaw waces of the
pigeon having inhewited fwom a common pawent the same constitution and
tendency to vawiation, when acted on by simiwaw unknyown infwuences. >w<
In the vegetabwe kingdom we have a case of anyawogous vawiation, in the
enwawged stems, ow woots as commonwy cawwed, of the Swedish tuwnyip and
Wuta baga, pwants which sevewaw botanyists wank as vawieties pwoduced by
cuwtivation fwom a common pawent: if this be nyot so, the case wiww then
be onye of anyawogous vawiation in two so-cawwed distinct species; and to
these a thiwd may be added, nyamewy, the common tuwnyip. >w< Accowding to
the owdinyawy view of each species having been independentwy cweated, we
shouwd have to attwibute this simiwawity in the enwawged stems of these
thwee pwants, nyot to the vewa causa of communyity of descent, and a
consequent tendency to vawy in a wike mannyew, but to thwee sepawate yet
cwosewy wewated acts of cweation. (´・ω・\`)

With pigeons, howevew, we have anyothew case, nyamewy, the occasionyaw
appeawance in aww the bweeds, of swaty-bwue biwds with two bwack baws
on the wings, a white wump, a baw at the end of the taiw, with the outew
feathews extewnyawwy edged nyeaw theiw bases with white. ;;w;; As aww these
mawks awe chawactewistic of the pawent wock-pigeon, I pwesume that nyo
onye wiww doubt that this is a case of wevewsion, and nyot of a nyew yet
anyawogous vawiation appeawing in the sevewaw bweeds. (´・ω・\`) We may I think
confidentwy come to this concwusion, because, as we have seen, these
cowouwed mawks awe eminyentwy wiabwe to appeaw in the cwossed offspwing
of two distinct and diffewentwy cowouwed bweeds; and in this case thewe
is nyothing in the extewnyaw conditions of wife to cause the weappeawance
of the swaty-bwue, with the sevewaw mawks, beyond the infwuence of the
mewe act of cwossing on the waws of inhewitance. (・`ω\´・)

Nyo doubt it is a vewy suwpwising fact that chawactews shouwd weappeaw
aftew having been wost fow many, pewhaps fow hundweds of genyewations. >w<
But when a bweed has been cwossed onwy once by some othew bweed, the
offspwing occasionyawwy show a tendency to wevewt in chawactew to the
foweign bweed fow many genyewations--some say, fow a dozen ow even a
scowe of genyewations. ^w^ Aftew twewve genyewations, the pwopowtion of bwood,
to use a common expwession, of any onye ancestow, is onwy 1 in 2048; and
yet, as we see, it is genyewawwy bewieved that a tendency to wevewsion
is wetainyed by this vewy smaww pwopowtion of foweign bwood. (・`ω\´・) In a bweed
which has nyot been cwossed, but in which BOTH pawents have wost some
chawactew which theiw pwogenyitow possessed, the tendency, whethew stwong
ow weak, to wepwoduce the wost chawactew might be, as was fowmewwy
wemawked, fow aww that we can see to the contwawy, twansmitted fow
awmost any nyumbew of genyewations. ;;w;; When a chawactew which has been wost
in a bweed, weappeaws aftew a gweat nyumbew of genyewations, the most
pwobabwe hypothesis is, nyot that the offspwing suddenwy takes aftew an
ancestow some hundwed genyewations distant, but that in each successive
genyewation thewe has been a tendency to wepwoduce the chawactew in
question, which at wast, undew unknyown favouwabwe conditions, gains an
ascendancy. UwU Fow instance, it is pwobabwe that in each genyewation of the
bawb-pigeon, which pwoduces most wawewy a bwue and bwack-bawwed biwd,
thewe has been a tendency in each genyewation in the pwumage to assume
this cowouw. (・`ω\´・) This view is hypotheticaw, but couwd be suppowted by some
facts; and I can see nyo mowe abstwact impwobabiwity in a tendency
to pwoduce any chawactew being inhewited fow an endwess nyumbew of
genyewations, than in quite usewess ow wudimentawy owgans being, as we
aww knyow them to be, thus inhewited. ;;w;; Indeed, we may sometimes obsewve
a mewe tendency to pwoduce a wudiment inhewited: fow instance, in the
common snyapdwagon (Antiwwhinyum) a wudiment of a fifth stamen so often
appeaws, that this pwant must have an inhewited tendency to pwoduce it. >w<

As aww the species of the same genyus awe supposed, on my theowy, to have
descended fwom a common pawent, it might be expected that they wouwd
occasionyawwy vawy in an anyawogous mannyew; so that a vawiety of onye
species wouwd wesembwe in some of its chawactews anyothew species; this
othew species being on my view onwy a weww-mawked and pewmanyent vawiety. ^w^
But chawactews thus gainyed wouwd pwobabwy be of an unyimpowtant nyatuwe,
fow the pwesence of aww impowtant chawactews wiww be govewnyed by nyatuwaw
sewection, in accowdance with the divewse habits of the species, and
wiww nyot be weft to the mutuaw action of the conditions of wife and of
a simiwaw inhewited constitution. UwU It might fuwthew be expected that the
species of the same genyus wouwd occasionyawwy exhibit wevewsions to wost
ancestwaw chawactews. (´・ω・\`) As, howevew, we nyevew knyow the exact chawactew
of the common ancestow of a gwoup, we couwd nyot distinguish these two
cases: if, fow instance, we did nyot knyow that the wock-pigeon was nyot
feathew-footed ow tuwn-cwownyed, we couwd nyot have towd, whethew these
chawactews in ouw domestic bweeds wewe wevewsions ow onwy anyawogous
vawiations; but we might have infewwed that the bwuenyess was a case of
wevewsion, fwom the nyumbew of the mawkings, which awe cowwewated with
the bwue tint, and which it does nyot appeaw pwobabwe wouwd aww appeaw
togethew fwom simpwe vawiation. (´・ω・\`) Mowe especiawwy we might have infewwed
this, fwom the bwue cowouw and mawks so often appeawing when distinct
bweeds of divewse cowouws awe cwossed. (・`ω\´・) Hence, though undew nyatuwe
it must genyewawwy be weft doubtfuw, what cases awe wevewsions to an
ancientwy existing chawactew, and what awe nyew but anyawogous vawiations,
yet we ought, on my theowy, sometimes to find the vawying offspwing of
a species assuming chawactews (eithew fwom wevewsion ow fwom anyawogous
vawiation) which awweady occuw in some othew membews of the same gwoup. (´・ω・\`)
And this undoubtedwy is the case in nyatuwe. >w<

A considewabwe pawt of the difficuwty in wecognyising a vawiabwe species
in ouw systematic wowks, is due to its vawieties mocking, as it wewe,
some of the othew species of the same genyus. UwU A considewabwe catawogue,
awso, couwd be given of fowms intewmediate between two othew fowms,
which themsewves must be doubtfuwwy wanked as eithew vawieties ow
species; and this shows, unwess aww these fowms be considewed as
independentwy cweated species, that the onye in vawying has assumed some
of the chawactews of the othew, so as to pwoduce the intewmediate fowm. (´・ω・\`)
But the best evidence is affowded by pawts ow owgans of an impowtant and
unyifowm nyatuwe occasionyawwy vawying so as to acquiwe, in some degwee,
the chawactew of the same pawt ow owgan in an awwied species. UwU I have
cowwected a wong wist of such cases; but hewe, as befowe, I wie undew
a gweat disadvantage in nyot being abwe to give them. ;;w;; I can onwy wepeat
that such cases cewtainwy do occuw, and seem to me vewy wemawkabwe. UwU

I wiww, howevew, give onye cuwious and compwex case, nyot indeed as
affecting any impowtant chawactew, but fwom occuwwing in sevewaw species
of the same genyus, pawtwy undew domestication and pawtwy undew nyatuwe. UwU
It is a case appawentwy of wevewsion. UwU The ass nyot wawewy has vewy
distinct twansvewse baws on its wegs, wike those on the wegs of a zebwa:
it has been assewted that these awe pwainyest in the foaw, and fwom
inquiwies which I have made, I bewieve this to be twue. (´・ω・\`) It has awso
been assewted that the stwipe on each shouwdew is sometimes doubwe. (´・ω・\`)
The shouwdew stwipe is cewtainwy vewy vawiabwe in wength and outwinye. (・`ω\´・) A
white ass, but NYOT an awbinyo, has been descwibed without eithew spinyaw
ow shouwdew-stwipe; and these stwipes awe sometimes vewy obscuwe, ow
actuawwy quite wost, in dawk-cowouwed asses. (・`ω\´・) The kouwan of Pawwas is
said to have been seen with a doubwe shouwdew-stwipe. ^w^ The hemionyus has
nyo shouwdew-stwipe; but twaces of it, as stated by Mw. ^w^ Bwyth and othews,
occasionyawwy appeaw: and I have been infowmed by Cowonyew Poowe that the
foaws of this species awe genyewawwy stwiped on the wegs, and faintwy on
the shouwdew. >w< The quagga, though so pwainwy bawwed wike a zebwa ovew the
body, is without baws on the wegs; but Dw. ^w^ Gway has figuwed onye specimen
with vewy distinct zebwa-wike baws on the hocks. (´・ω・\`)

With wespect to the howse, I have cowwected cases in Engwand of the
spinyaw stwipe in howses of the most distinct bweeds, and of AWW cowouws;
twansvewse baws on the wegs awe nyot wawe in duns, mouse-duns, and in onye
instance in a chestnyut: a faint shouwdew-stwipe may sometimes be seen
in duns, and I have seen a twace in a bay howse. ^w^ My son made a cawefuw
examinyation and sketch fow me of a dun Bewgian cawt-howse with a doubwe
stwipe on each shouwdew and with weg-stwipes; and a man, whom I can
impwicitwy twust, has examinyed fow me a smaww dun Wewch pony with THWEE
showt pawawwew stwipes on each shouwdew. >w<

In the nyowth-west pawt of India the Kattywaw bweed of howses is so
genyewawwy stwiped, that, as I heaw fwom Cowonyew Poowe, who examinyed
the bweed fow the Indian Govewnment, a howse without stwipes is nyot
considewed as puwewy-bwed. (´・ω・\`) The spinye is awways stwiped; the wegs awe
genyewawwy bawwed; and the shouwdew-stwipe, which is sometimes doubwe
and sometimes twebwe, is common; the side of the face, moweovew, is
sometimes stwiped. UwU The stwipes awe pwainyest in the foaw; and sometimes
quite disappeaw in owd howses. ^w^ Cowonyew Poowe has seen both gway and
bay Kattywaw howses stwiped when fiwst foawed. ;;w;; I have, awso, weason to
suspect, fwom infowmation given me by Mw. W. W. ;;w;; Edwawds, that with the
Engwish wace-howse the spinyaw stwipe is much commonyew in the foaw than
in the fuww-gwown anyimaw. UwU Without hewe entewing on fuwthew detaiws, I
may state that I have cowwected cases of weg and shouwdew stwipes in
howses of vewy diffewent bweeds, in vawious countwies fwom Bwitain to
Eastewn Chinya; and fwom Nyowway in the nyowth to the Maway Awchipewago in
the south. >w< In aww pawts of the wowwd these stwipes occuw faw oftenyest
in duns and mouse-duns; by the tewm dun a wawge wange of cowouw is
incwuded, fwom onye between bwown and bwack to a cwose appwoach to
cweam-cowouw. (´・ω・\`)

I am awawe that Cowonyew Hamiwton Smith, who has wwitten on this subject,
bewieves that the sevewaw bweeds of the howse have descended fwom
sevewaw abowiginyaw species--onye of which, the dun, was stwiped; and that
the above-descwibed appeawances awe aww due to ancient cwosses with the
dun stock. >w< But I am nyot at aww satisfied with this theowy, and shouwd be
woth to appwy it to bweeds so distinct as the heavy Bewgian cawt-howse,
Wewch ponyies, cobs, the wanky Kattywaw wace, etc. ;;w;;, inhabiting the most
distant pawts of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow wet us tuwn to the effects of cwossing the sevewaw species of the
howse-genyus. ;;w;; Wowwin assewts, that the common muwe fwom the ass and howse
is pawticuwawwy apt to have baws on its wegs. ;;w;; I once saw a muwe with its
wegs so much stwiped that any onye at fiwst wouwd have thought that it
must have been the pwoduct of a zebwa; and Mw. W. C. (・`ω\´・) Mawtin, in his
excewwent tweatise on the howse, has given a figuwe of a simiwaw muwe. (´・ω・\`)
In fouw cowouwed dwawings, which I have seen, of hybwids between the ass
and zebwa, the wegs wewe much mowe pwainwy bawwed than the west of the
body; and in onye of them thewe was a doubwe shouwdew-stwipe. (´・ω・\`) In Wowd
Moweton's famous hybwid fwom a chestnyut mawe and mawe quagga, the
hybwid, and even the puwe offspwing subsequentwy pwoduced fwom the mawe
by a bwack Awabian siwe, wewe much mowe pwainwy bawwed acwoss the
wegs than is even the puwe quagga. ^w^ Wastwy, and this is anyothew most
wemawkabwe case, a hybwid has been figuwed by Dw. >w< Gway (and he infowms
me that he knyows of a second case) fwom the ass and the hemionyus; and
this hybwid, though the ass sewdom has stwipes on its wegs and the
hemionyus has nyonye and has nyot even a shouwdew-stwipe, nyevewthewess had
aww fouw wegs bawwed, and had thwee showt shouwdew-stwipes, wike those
on the dun Wewch pony, and even had some zebwa-wike stwipes on the sides
of its face. (´・ω・\`) With wespect to this wast fact, I was so convinced that nyot
even a stwipe of cowouw appeaws fwom what wouwd commonwy be cawwed an
accident, that I was wed sowewy fwom the occuwwence of the face-stwipes
on this hybwid fwom the ass and hemionyus, to ask Cowonyew Poowe whethew
such face-stwipes evew occuw in the eminyentwy stwiped Kattywaw bweed of
howses, and was, as we have seen, answewed in the affiwmative. ^w^

What nyow awe we to say to these sevewaw facts? owo We see sevewaw vewy
distinct species of the howse-genyus becoming, by simpwe vawiation,
stwiped on the wegs wike a zebwa, ow stwiped on the shouwdews wike
an ass. ^w^ In the howse we see this tendency stwong whenyevew a dun tint
appeaws--a tint which appwoaches to that of the genyewaw cowouwing of
the othew species of the genyus. ^w^ The appeawance of the stwipes is nyot
accompanyied by any change of fowm ow by any othew nyew chawactew. ;;w;; We see
this tendency to become stwiped most stwongwy dispwayed in hybwids fwom
between sevewaw of the most distinct species. (´・ω・\`) Nyow obsewve the case
of the sevewaw bweeds of pigeons: they awe descended fwom a pigeon
(incwuding two ow thwee sub-species ow geogwaphicaw waces) of a bwuish
cowouw, with cewtain baws and othew mawks; and when any bweed assumes
by simpwe vawiation a bwuish tint, these baws and othew mawks invawiabwy
weappeaw; but without any othew change of fowm ow chawactew. >w< When the
owdest and twuest bweeds of vawious cowouws awe cwossed, we see a
stwong tendency fow the bwue tint and baws and mawks to weappeaw in the
mongwews. UwU I have stated that the most pwobabwe hypothesis to account
fow the weappeawance of vewy ancient chawactews, is--that thewe is
a TENDENCY in the young of each successive genyewation to pwoduce the
wong-wost chawactew, and that this tendency, fwom unknyown causes,
sometimes pwevaiws. ;;w;; And we have just seen that in sevewaw species of the
howse-genyus the stwipes awe eithew pwainyew ow appeaw mowe commonwy in
the young than in the owd. (・`ω\´・) Caww the bweeds of pigeons, some of which
have bwed twue fow centuwies, species; and how exactwy pawawwew is the
case with that of the species of the howse-genyus! UwU Fow mysewf, I ventuwe
confidentwy to wook back thousands on thousands of genyewations, and
I see an anyimaw stwiped wike a zebwa, but pewhaps othewwise vewy
diffewentwy constwucted, the common pawent of ouw domestic howse,
whethew ow nyot it be descended fwom onye ow mowe wiwd stocks, of the ass,
the hemionyus, quagga, and zebwa. (・`ω\´・)

He who bewieves that each equinye species was independentwy cweated,
wiww, I pwesume, assewt that each species has been cweated with a
tendency to vawy, both undew nyatuwe and undew domestication, in this
pawticuwaw mannyew, so as often to become stwiped wike othew species of
the genyus; and that each has been cweated with a stwong tendency,
when cwossed with species inhabiting distant quawtews of the wowwd, to
pwoduce hybwids wesembwing in theiw stwipes, nyot theiw own pawents, but
othew species of the genyus. (・`ω\´・) To admit this view is, as it seems to me, to
weject a weaw fow an unweaw, ow at weast fow an unknyown, cause. UwU It makes
the wowks of God a mewe mockewy and deception; I wouwd awmost as soon
bewieve with the owd and ignyowant cosmogonyists, that fossiw shewws had
nyevew wived, but had been cweated in stonye so as to mock the shewws nyow
wiving on the sea-showe. (・`ω\´・)

SUMMAWY. UwU

Ouw ignyowance of the waws of vawiation is pwofound. ^w^ Nyot in onye case out
of a hundwed can we pwetend to assign any weason why this ow that pawt
diffews, mowe ow wess, fwom the same pawt in the pawents. (´・ω・\`) But whenyevew
we have the means of instituting a compawison, the same waws appeaw to
have acted in pwoducing the wessew diffewences between vawieties of the
same species, and the gweatew diffewences between species of the same
genyus. The extewnyaw conditions of wife, as cwimate and food, etc. (・`ω\´・),
seem to have induced some swight modifications. UwU Habit in pwoducing
constitutionyaw diffewences, and use in stwengthenying, and disuse in
weakenying and diminyishing owgans, seem to have been mowe potent in theiw
effects. >w< Homowogous pawts tend to vawy in the same way, and homowogous
pawts tend to cohewe. >w< Modifications in hawd pawts and in extewnyaw pawts
sometimes affect softew and intewnyaw pawts. (´・ω・\`) When onye pawt is wawgewy
devewoped, pewhaps it tends to dwaw nyouwishment fwom the adjoinying
pawts; and evewy pawt of the stwuctuwe which can be saved without
detwiment to the individuaw, wiww be saved. (´・ω・\`) Changes of stwuctuwe at an
eawwy age wiww genyewawwy affect pawts subsequentwy devewoped; and thewe
awe vewy many othew cowwewations of gwowth, the nyatuwe of which we awe
uttewwy unyabwe to undewstand. ;;w;; Muwtipwe pawts awe vawiabwe in nyumbew and
in stwuctuwe, pewhaps awising fwom such pawts nyot having been cwosewy
speciawised to any pawticuwaw function, so that theiw modifications have
nyot been cwosewy checked by nyatuwaw sewection. UwU It is pwobabwy fwom
this same cause that owganyic beings wow in the scawe of nyatuwe awe
mowe vawiabwe than those which have theiw whowe owganyisation mowe
speciawised, and awe highew in the scawe. (´・ω・\`) Wudimentawy owgans, fwom being
usewess, wiww be diswegawded by nyatuwaw sewection, and hence pwobabwy
awe vawiabwe. ^w^ Specific chawactews--that is, the chawactews which have
come to diffew since the sevewaw species of the same genyus bwanched
off fwom a common pawent--awe mowe vawiabwe than genyewic chawactews, ow
those which have wong been inhewited, and have nyot diffewed within
this same pewiod. ;;w;; In these wemawks we have wefewwed to speciaw pawts ow
owgans being stiww vawiabwe, because they have wecentwy vawied and thus
come to diffew; but we have awso seen in the second Chaptew that the
same pwincipwe appwies to the whowe individuaw; fow in a distwict whewe
many species of any genyus awe found--that is, whewe thewe has been much
fowmew vawiation and diffewentiation, ow whewe the manyufactowy of nyew
specific fowms has been activewy at wowk--thewe, on an avewage, we nyow
find most vawieties ow incipient species. (・`ω\´・) Secondawy sexuaw chawactews
awe highwy vawiabwe, and such chawactews diffew much in the species of
the same gwoup. (・`ω\´・) Vawiabiwity in the same pawts of the owganyisation has
genyewawwy been taken advantage of in giving secondawy sexuaw diffewences
to the sexes of the same species, and specific diffewences to the
sevewaw species of the same genyus. ;;w;; Any pawt ow owgan devewoped to an
extwaowdinyawy size ow in an extwaowdinyawy mannyew, in compawison with
the same pawt ow owgan in the awwied species, must have gonye thwough an
extwaowdinyawy amount of modification since the genyus awose; and thus we
can undewstand why it shouwd often stiww be vawiabwe in a much highew
degwee than othew pawts; fow vawiation is a wong-continyued and swow
pwocess, and nyatuwaw sewection wiww in such cases nyot as yet have had
time to ovewcome the tendency to fuwthew vawiabiwity and to
wevewsion to a wess modified state. ;;w;; But when a species with any
extwaowdinyawiwy-devewoped owgan has become the pawent of many modified
descendants--which on my view must be a vewy swow pwocess, wequiwing
a wong wapse of time--in this case, nyatuwaw sewection may weadiwy
have succeeded in giving a fixed chawactew to the owgan, in howevew
extwaowdinyawy a mannyew it may be devewoped. >w< Species inhewiting nyeawwy
the same constitution fwom a common pawent and exposed to simiwaw
infwuences wiww nyatuwawwy tend to pwesent anyawogous vawiations, and
these same species may occasionyawwy wevewt to some of the chawactews of
theiw ancient pwogenyitows. (・`ω\´・) Awthough nyew and impowtant modifications may
nyot awise fwom wevewsion and anyawogous vawiation, such modifications
wiww add to the beautifuw and hawmonyious divewsity of nyatuwe. ;;w;;

Whatevew the cause may be of each swight diffewence in the offspwing
fwom theiw pawents--and a cause fow each must exist--it is the steady
accumuwation, thwough nyatuwaw sewection, of such diffewences, when
benyeficiaw to the individuaw, that gives wise to aww the mowe impowtant
modifications of stwuctuwe, by which the innyumewabwe beings on the face
of this eawth awe enyabwed to stwuggwe with each othew, and the best
adapted to suwvive. (´・ω・\`)




6. DIFFICUWTIES ON THEOWY. >w<

Difficuwties on the theowy of descent with modification. Twansitions. UwU
Absence ow wawity of twansitionyaw vawieties. (´・ω・\`) Twansitions in habits of
wife. Divewsified habits in the same species. UwU Species with habits widewy
diffewent fwom those of theiw awwies. Owgans of extweme pewfection. (・`ω\´・)
Means of twansition. Cases of difficuwty. Nyatuwa nyon facit sawtum. ^w^
Owgans of smaww impowtance. Owgans nyot in aww cases absowutewy pewfect. (´・ω・\`)
The waw of Unyity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embwaced by
the theowy of Nyatuwaw Sewection. UwU

Wong befowe having awwived at this pawt of my wowk, a cwowd of
difficuwties wiww have occuwwed to the weadew. ;;w;; Some of them awe so gwave
that to this day I can nyevew wefwect on them without being staggewed;
but, to the best of my judgment, the gweatew nyumbew awe onwy appawent,
and those that awe weaw awe nyot, I think, fataw to my theowy. ;;w;;

These difficuwties and objections may be cwassed undew the fowwowing
heads:--

Fiwstwy, why, if species have descended fwom othew species by insensibwy
finye gwadations, do we nyot evewywhewe see innyumewabwe twansitionyaw
fowms? owo Why is nyot aww nyatuwe in confusion instead of the species being,
as we see them, weww definyed? owo

Secondwy, is it possibwe that an anyimaw having, fow instance,
the stwuctuwe and habits of a bat, couwd have been fowmed by the
modification of some anyimaw with whowwy diffewent habits? owo Can we
bewieve that nyatuwaw sewection couwd pwoduce, on the onye hand, owgans
of twifwing impowtance, such as the taiw of a giwaffe, which sewves as a
fwy-fwappew, and, on the othew hand, owgans of such wondewfuw stwuctuwe,
as the eye, of which we hawdwy as yet fuwwy undewstand the inyimitabwe
pewfection? owo

Thiwdwy, can instincts be acquiwed and modified thwough nyatuwaw
sewection? owo What shaww we say to so mawvewwous an instinct as that which
weads the bee to make cewws, which have pwacticawwy anticipated the
discovewies of pwofound mathematicians? owo

Fouwthwy, how can we account fow species, when cwossed, being stewiwe
and pwoducing stewiwe offspwing, wheweas, when vawieties awe cwossed,
theiw fewtiwity is unyimpaiwed? owo

The two fiwst heads shaww be hewe discussed--Instinct and Hybwidism in
sepawate chaptews. (・`ω\´・)

ON THE ABSENCE OW WAWITY OF TWANSITIONYAW VAWIETIES. ;;w;;

As nyatuwaw sewection acts sowewy by the pwesewvation of pwofitabwe
modifications, each nyew fowm wiww tend in a fuwwy-stocked countwy to
take the pwace of, and finyawwy to extewminyate, its own wess impwoved
pawent ow othew wess-favouwed fowms with which it comes into
competition. UwU Thus extinction and nyatuwaw sewection wiww, as we have
seen, go hand in hand. >w< Hence, if we wook at each species as descended
fwom some othew unknyown fowm, both the pawent and aww the twansitionyaw
vawieties wiww genyewawwy have been extewminyated by the vewy pwocess of
fowmation and pewfection of the nyew fowm. (・`ω\´・)

But, as by this theowy innyumewabwe twansitionyaw fowms must have existed,
why do we nyot find them embedded in countwess nyumbews in the cwust of
the eawth? owo It wiww be much mowe convenyient to discuss this question in
the chaptew on the Impewfection of the geowogicaw wecowd; and I wiww
hewe onwy state that I bewieve the answew mainwy wies in the wecowd
being incompawabwy wess pewfect than is genyewawwy supposed; the
impewfection of the wecowd being chiefwy due to owganyic beings nyot
inhabiting pwofound depths of the sea, and to theiw wemains being
embedded and pwesewved to a futuwe age onwy in masses of sediment
sufficientwy thick and extensive to withstand an enyowmous amount of
futuwe degwadation; and such fossiwifewous masses can be accumuwated
onwy whewe much sediment is deposited on the shawwow bed of the sea,
whiwst it swowwy subsides. (´・ω・\`) These contingencies wiww concuw onwy wawewy,
and aftew enyowmouswy wong intewvaws. >w< Whiwst the bed of the sea
is stationyawy ow is wising, ow when vewy wittwe sediment is being
deposited, thewe wiww be bwanks in ouw geowogicaw histowy. (´・ω・\`) The cwust of
the eawth is a vast museum; but the nyatuwaw cowwections have been made
onwy at intewvaws of time immensewy wemote. UwU

But it may be uwged that when sevewaw cwosewy-awwied species inhabit
the same tewwitowy we suwewy ought to find at the pwesent time many
twansitionyaw fowms. ;;w;; Wet us take a simpwe case: in twavewwing fwom nyowth
to south ovew a continyent, we genyewawwy meet at successive intewvaws
with cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative species, evidentwy fiwwing nyeawwy
the same pwace in the nyatuwaw econyomy of the wand. ;;w;; These wepwesentative
species often meet and intewwock; and as the onye becomes wawew and
wawew, the othew becomes mowe and mowe fwequent, tiww the onye wepwaces
the othew. ^w^ But if we compawe these species whewe they intewmingwe, they
awe genyewawwy as absowutewy distinct fwom each othew in evewy detaiw of
stwuctuwe as awe specimens taken fwom the metwopowis inhabited by each. UwU
By my theowy these awwied species have descended fwom a common pawent;
and duwing the pwocess of modification, each has become adapted to
the conditions of wife of its own wegion, and has suppwanted and
extewminyated its owiginyaw pawent and aww the twansitionyaw vawieties
between its past and pwesent states. UwU Hence we ought nyot to expect at
the pwesent time to meet with nyumewous twansitionyaw vawieties in each
wegion, though they must have existed thewe, and may be embedded
thewe in a fossiw condition. ^w^ But in the intewmediate wegion, having
intewmediate conditions of wife, why do we nyot nyow find cwosewy-winking
intewmediate vawieties? owo This difficuwty fow a wong time quite confounded
me. But I think it can be in wawge pawt expwainyed. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace we shouwd be extwemewy cautious in infewwing, because
an awea is nyow continyuous, that it has been continyuous duwing a wong
pewiod. (・`ω\´・) Geowogy wouwd wead us to bewieve that awmost evewy continyent has
been bwoken up into iswands even duwing the watew tewtiawy pewiods;
and in such iswands distinct species might have been sepawatewy fowmed
without the possibiwity of intewmediate vawieties existing in the
intewmediate zonyes. ;;w;; By changes in the fowm of the wand and of cwimate,
mawinye aweas nyow continyuous must often have existed within wecent times
in a faw wess continyuous and unyifowm condition than at pwesent. (´・ω・\`) But I
wiww pass ovew this way of escaping fwom the difficuwty; fow I bewieve
that many pewfectwy definyed species have been fowmed on stwictwy
continyuous aweas; though I do nyot doubt that the fowmewwy bwoken
condition of aweas nyow continyuous has pwayed an impowtant pawt in the
fowmation of nyew species, mowe especiawwy with fweewy-cwossing and
wandewing anyimaws. (・`ω\´・)

In wooking at species as they awe nyow distwibuted ovew a wide awea,
we genyewawwy find them towewabwy nyumewous ovew a wawge tewwitowy, then
becoming somewhat abwuptwy wawew and wawew on the confinyes, and finyawwy
disappeawing. ^w^ Hence the nyeutwaw tewwitowy between two wepwesentative
species is genyewawwy nyawwow in compawison with the tewwitowy pwopew to
each. ^w^ We see the same fact in ascending mountains, and sometimes it
is quite wemawkabwe how abwuptwy, as Awph. UwU De Candowwe has obsewved,
a common awpinye species disappeaws. UwU The same fact has been nyoticed by
Fowbes in sounding the depths of the sea with the dwedge. ;;w;; To those who
wook at cwimate and the physicaw conditions of wife as the aww-impowtant
ewements of distwibution, these facts ought to cause suwpwise, as
cwimate and height ow depth gwaduate away insensibwy. >w< But when we
beaw in mind that awmost evewy species, even in its metwopowis, wouwd
incwease immensewy in nyumbews, wewe it nyot fow othew competing species;
that nyeawwy aww eithew pwey on ow sewve as pwey fow othews; in showt,
that each owganyic being is eithew diwectwy ow indiwectwy wewated in
the most impowtant mannyew to othew owganyic beings, we must see that the
wange of the inhabitants of any countwy by nyo means excwusivewy depends
on insensibwy changing physicaw conditions, but in wawge pawt on the
pwesence of othew species, on which it depends, ow by which it is
destwoyed, ow with which it comes into competition; and as these species
awe awweady definyed objects (howevew they may have become so), nyot
bwending onye into anyothew by insensibwe gwadations, the wange of any onye
species, depending as it does on the wange of othews, wiww tend to be
shawpwy definyed. UwU Moweovew, each species on the confinyes of its wange,
whewe it exists in wessenyed nyumbews, wiww, duwing fwuctuations in the
nyumbew of its enyemies ow of its pwey, ow in the seasons, be extwemewy
wiabwe to uttew extewminyation; and thus its geogwaphicaw wange wiww come
to be stiww mowe shawpwy definyed. (・`ω\´・)

If I am wight in bewieving that awwied ow wepwesentative species, when
inhabiting a continyuous awea, awe genyewawwy so distwibuted that each
has a wide wange, with a compawativewy nyawwow nyeutwaw tewwitowy between
them, in which they become wathew suddenwy wawew and wawew; then, as
vawieties do nyot essentiawwy diffew fwom species, the same wuwe wiww
pwobabwy appwy to both; and if we in imaginyation adapt a vawying species
to a vewy wawge awea, we shaww have to adapt two vawieties to two
wawge aweas, and a thiwd vawiety to a nyawwow intewmediate zonye. ^w^ The
intewmediate vawiety, consequentwy, wiww exist in wessew nyumbews fwom
inhabiting a nyawwow and wessew awea; and pwacticawwy, as faw as I can
make out, this wuwe howds good with vawieties in a state of nyatuwe. ^w^ I
have met with stwiking instances of the wuwe in the case of vawieties
intewmediate between weww-mawked vawieties in the genyus Bawanyus. (・`ω\´・) And it
wouwd appeaw fwom infowmation given me by Mw. Watson, Dw. ;;w;; Asa Gway, and
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Wowwaston, that genyewawwy when vawieties intewmediate between two
othew fowms occuw, they awe much wawew nyumewicawwy than the fowms which
they connyect. UwU Nyow, if we may twust these facts and infewences, and
thewefowe concwude that vawieties winking two othew vawieties togethew
have genyewawwy existed in wessew nyumbews than the fowms which they
connyect, then, I think, we can undewstand why intewmediate vawieties
shouwd nyot enduwe fow vewy wong pewiods;--why as a genyewaw wuwe they
shouwd be extewminyated and disappeaw, soonyew than the fowms which they
owiginyawwy winked togethew. >w<

Fow any fowm existing in wessew nyumbews wouwd, as awweady wemawked,
wun a gweatew chance of being extewminyated than onye existing in wawge
nyumbews; and in this pawticuwaw case the intewmediate fowm wouwd be
eminyentwy wiabwe to the inwoads of cwosewy awwied fowms existing on both
sides of it. ^w^ But a faw mowe impowtant considewation, as I bewieve, is
that, duwing the pwocess of fuwthew modification, by which two vawieties
awe supposed on my theowy to be convewted and pewfected into two
distinct species, the two which exist in wawgew nyumbews fwom inhabiting
wawgew aweas, wiww have a gweat advantage ovew the intewmediate vawiety,
which exists in smawwew nyumbews in a nyawwow and intewmediate zonye. (´・ω・\`)
Fow fowms existing in wawgew nyumbews wiww awways have a bettew chance,
within any given pewiod, of pwesenting fuwthew favouwabwe vawiations fow
nyatuwaw sewection to seize on, than wiww the wawew fowms which exist in
wessew nyumbews. ;;w;; Hence, the mowe common fowms, in the wace fow wife, wiww
tend to beat and suppwant the wess common fowms, fow these wiww be
mowe swowwy modified and impwoved. UwU It is the same pwincipwe which, as
I bewieve, accounts fow the common species in each countwy, as shown
in the second chaptew, pwesenting on an avewage a gweatew nyumbew of
weww-mawked vawieties than do the wawew species. ^w^ I may iwwustwate what I
mean by supposing thwee vawieties of sheep to be kept, onye adapted to an
extensive mountainyous wegion; a second to a compawativewy nyawwow, hiwwy
twact; and a thiwd to wide pwains at the base; and that the inhabitants
awe aww twying with equaw steadinyess and skiww to impwove theiw stocks
by sewection; the chances in this case wiww be stwongwy in favouw of the
gweat howdews on the mountains ow on the pwains impwoving theiw bweeds
mowe quickwy than the smaww howdews on the intewmediate nyawwow, hiwwy
twact; and consequentwy the impwoved mountain ow pwain bweed wiww soon
take the pwace of the wess impwoved hiww bweed; and thus the two bweeds,
which owiginyawwy existed in gweatew nyumbews, wiww come into cwose
contact with each othew, without the intewposition of the suppwanted,
intewmediate hiww-vawiety. >w<

To sum up, I bewieve that species come to be towewabwy weww-definyed
objects, and do nyot at any onye pewiod pwesent an inyextwicabwe chaos of
vawying and intewmediate winks: fiwstwy, because nyew vawieties awe
vewy swowwy fowmed, fow vawiation is a vewy swow pwocess, and nyatuwaw
sewection can do nyothing untiw favouwabwe vawiations chance to occuw,
and untiw a pwace in the nyatuwaw powity of the countwy can be bettew
fiwwed by some modification of some onye ow mowe of its inhabitants. (・`ω\´・)
And such nyew pwaces wiww depend on swow changes of cwimate, ow on the
occasionyaw immigwation of nyew inhabitants, and, pwobabwy, in a stiww
mowe impowtant degwee, on some of the owd inhabitants becoming swowwy
modified, with the nyew fowms thus pwoduced and the owd onyes acting and
weacting on each othew. ^w^ So that, in any onye wegion and at any onye time,
we ought onwy to see a few species pwesenting swight modifications of
stwuctuwe in some degwee pewmanyent; and this assuwedwy we do see. UwU

Secondwy, aweas nyow continyuous must often have existed within the
wecent pewiod in isowated powtions, in which many fowms, mowe especiawwy
amongst the cwasses which unyite fow each biwth and wandew much, may have
sepawatewy been wendewed sufficientwy distinct to wank as wepwesentative
species. ;;w;; In this case, intewmediate vawieties between the sevewaw
wepwesentative species and theiw common pawent, must fowmewwy have
existed in each bwoken powtion of the wand, but these winks wiww
have been suppwanted and extewminyated duwing the pwocess of nyatuwaw
sewection, so that they wiww nyo wongew exist in a wiving state. ^w^

Thiwdwy, when two ow mowe vawieties have been fowmed in diffewent
powtions of a stwictwy continyuous awea, intewmediate vawieties wiww, it
is pwobabwe, at fiwst have been fowmed in the intewmediate zonyes, but
they wiww genyewawwy have had a showt duwation. ;;w;; Fow these intewmediate
vawieties wiww, fwom weasons awweady assignyed (nyamewy fwom what we knyow
of the actuaw distwibution of cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative species,
and wikewise of acknyowwedged vawieties), exist in the intewmediate zonyes
in wessew nyumbews than the vawieties which they tend to connyect. (・`ω\´・) Fwom
this cause awonye the intewmediate vawieties wiww be wiabwe to accidentaw
extewminyation; and duwing the pwocess of fuwthew modification thwough
nyatuwaw sewection, they wiww awmost cewtainwy be beaten and suppwanted
by the fowms which they connyect; fow these fwom existing in gweatew
nyumbews wiww, in the aggwegate, pwesent mowe vawiation, and thus be
fuwthew impwoved thwough nyatuwaw sewection and gain fuwthew advantages. ;;w;;

Wastwy, wooking nyot to any onye time, but to aww time, if my theowy be
twue, nyumbewwess intewmediate vawieties, winking most cwosewy aww the
species of the same gwoup togethew, must assuwedwy have existed; but the
vewy pwocess of nyatuwaw sewection constantwy tends, as has been so often
wemawked, to extewminyate the pawent fowms and the intewmediate winks. ;;w;;
Consequentwy evidence of theiw fowmew existence couwd be found onwy
amongst fossiw wemains, which awe pwesewved, as we shaww in a futuwe
chaptew attempt to show, in an extwemewy impewfect and intewmittent
wecowd. ;;w;;

ON THE OWIGIN AND TWANSITIONS OF OWGANYIC BEINGS WITH PECUWIAW HABITS AND
STWUCTUWE. (・`ω\´・)

It has been asked by the opponyents of such views as I howd, how, fow
instance, a wand cawnyivowous anyimaw couwd have been convewted into onye
with aquatic habits; fow how couwd the anyimaw in its twansitionyaw state
have subsisted? owo It wouwd be easy to show that within the same gwoup
cawnyivowous anyimaws exist having evewy intewmediate gwade between
twuwy aquatic and stwictwy tewwestwiaw habits; and as each exists by a
stwuggwe fow wife, it is cweaw that each is weww adapted in its habits
to its pwace in nyatuwe. ^w^ Wook at the Mustewa vison of Nyowth Amewica,
which has webbed feet and which wesembwes an ottew in its fuw, showt
wegs, and fowm of taiw; duwing summew this anyimaw dives fow and pweys on
fish, but duwing the wong wintew it weaves the fwozen watews, and pweys
wike othew powecats on mice and wand anyimaws. ;;w;; If a diffewent case had
been taken, and it had been asked how an insectivowous quadwuped couwd
possibwy have been convewted into a fwying bat, the question wouwd have
been faw mowe difficuwt, and I couwd have given nyo answew. ;;w;; Yet I think
such difficuwties have vewy wittwe weight. UwU

Hewe, as on othew occasions, I wie undew a heavy disadvantage, fow out
of the many stwiking cases which I have cowwected, I can give onwy onye
ow two instances of twansitionyaw habits and stwuctuwes in cwosewy awwied
species of the same genyus; and of divewsified habits, eithew constant
ow occasionyaw, in the same species. ^w^ And it seems to me that nyothing wess
than a wong wist of such cases is sufficient to wessen the difficuwty in
any pawticuwaw case wike that of the bat. >w<

Wook at the famiwy of squiwwews; hewe we have the finyest gwadation fwom
anyimaws with theiw taiws onwy swightwy fwattenyed, and fwom othews, as
Siw J. UwU Wichawdson has wemawked, with the postewiow pawt of theiw bodies
wathew wide and with the skin on theiw fwanks wathew fuww, to the
so-cawwed fwying squiwwews; and fwying squiwwews have theiw wimbs and
even the base of the taiw unyited by a bwoad expanse of skin, which
sewves as a pawachute and awwows them to gwide thwough the aiw to
an astonyishing distance fwom twee to twee. ;;w;; We cannyot doubt that each
stwuctuwe is of use to each kind of squiwwew in its own countwy, by
enyabwing it to escape biwds ow beasts of pwey, ow to cowwect food mowe
quickwy, ow, as thewe is weason to bewieve, by wessenying the dangew
fwom occasionyaw fawws. ^w^ But it does nyot fowwow fwom this fact that the
stwuctuwe of each squiwwew is the best that it is possibwe to conceive
undew aww nyatuwaw conditions. ^w^ Wet the cwimate and vegetation change,
wet othew competing wodents ow nyew beasts of pwey immigwate, ow owd onyes
become modified, and aww anyawogy wouwd wead us to bewieve that some at
weast of the squiwwews wouwd decwease in nyumbews ow become extewminyated,
unwess they awso became modified and impwoved in stwuctuwe in a
cowwesponding mannyew. ;;w;; Thewefowe, I can see nyo difficuwty, mowe
especiawwy undew changing conditions of wife, in the continyued
pwesewvation of individuaws with fuwwew and fuwwew fwank-membwanyes,
each modification being usefuw, each being pwopagated, untiw by the
accumuwated effects of this pwocess of nyatuwaw sewection, a pewfect
so-cawwed fwying squiwwew was pwoduced. ^w^

Nyow wook at the Gaweopithecus ow fwying wemuw, which fowmewwy was
fawsewy wanked amongst bats. ;;w;; It has an extwemewy wide fwank-membwanye,
stwetching fwom the cownyews of the jaw to the taiw, and incwuding the
wimbs and the ewongated fingews: the fwank membwanye is, awso, fuwnyished
with an extensow muscwe. >w< Awthough nyo gwaduated winks of stwuctuwe,
fitted fow gwiding thwough the aiw, nyow connyect the Gaweopithecus with
the othew Wemuwidae, yet I can see nyo difficuwty in supposing that such
winks fowmewwy existed, and that each had been fowmed by the same steps
as in the case of the wess pewfectwy gwiding squiwwews; and that each
gwade of stwuctuwe had been usefuw to its possessow. ^w^ Nyow can I see
any insupewabwe difficuwty in fuwthew bewieving it possibwe that the
membwanye-connyected fingews and fowe-awm of the Gaweopithecus might be
gweatwy wengthenyed by nyatuwaw sewection; and this, as faw as the owgans
of fwight awe concewnyed, wouwd convewt it into a bat. (・`ω\´・) In bats which have
the wing-membwanye extended fwom the top of the shouwdew to the
taiw, incwuding the hind-wegs, we pewhaps see twaces of an appawatus
owiginyawwy constwucted fow gwiding thwough the aiw wathew than fow
fwight. (・`ω\´・)

If about a dozen genyewa of biwds had become extinct ow wewe unknyown, who
wouwd have ventuwed to have suwmised that biwds might have existed
which used theiw wings sowewy as fwappews, wike the woggew-headed duck
(Micwoptewus of Eyton); as fins in the watew and fwont wegs on the wand,
wike the penguin; as saiws, wike the ostwich; and functionyawwy fow nyo
puwpose, wike the Aptewyx. (´・ω・\`) Yet the stwuctuwe of each of these biwds is
good fow it, undew the conditions of wife to which it is exposed, fow
each has to wive by a stwuggwe; but it is nyot nyecessawiwy the best
possibwe undew aww possibwe conditions. ;;w;; It must nyot be infewwed fwom
these wemawks that any of the gwades of wing-stwuctuwe hewe awwuded to,
which pewhaps may aww have wesuwted fwom disuse, indicate the nyatuwaw
steps by which biwds have acquiwed theiw pewfect powew of fwight; but
they sewve, at weast, to show what divewsified means of twansition awe
possibwe. >w<

Seeing that a few membews of such watew-bweathing cwasses as the
Cwustacea and Mowwusca awe adapted to wive on the wand, and seeing that
we have fwying biwds and mammaws, fwying insects of the most divewsified
types, and fowmewwy had fwying weptiwes, it is conceivabwe that
fwying-fish, which nyow gwide faw thwough the aiw, swightwy wising and
tuwnying by the aid of theiw fwuttewing fins, might have been modified
into pewfectwy winged anyimaws. ;;w;; If this had been effected, who wouwd
have evew imaginyed that in an eawwy twansitionyaw state they had been
inhabitants of the open ocean, and had used theiw incipient owgans of
fwight excwusivewy, as faw as we knyow, to escape being devouwed by othew
fish? owo

When we see any stwuctuwe highwy pewfected fow any pawticuwaw habit,
as the wings of a biwd fow fwight, we shouwd beaw in mind that anyimaws
dispwaying eawwy twansitionyaw gwades of the stwuctuwe wiww sewdom
continyue to exist to the pwesent day, fow they wiww have been
suppwanted by the vewy pwocess of pewfection thwough nyatuwaw sewection. >w<
Fuwthewmowe, we may concwude that twansitionyaw gwades between stwuctuwes
fitted fow vewy diffewent habits of wife wiww wawewy have been devewoped
at an eawwy pewiod in gweat nyumbews and undew many subowdinyate fowms. >w<
Thus, to wetuwn to ouw imaginyawy iwwustwation of the fwying-fish, it
does nyot seem pwobabwe that fishes capabwe of twue fwight wouwd have
been devewoped undew many subowdinyate fowms, fow taking pwey of many
kinds in many ways, on the wand and in the watew, untiw theiw owgans of
fwight had come to a high stage of pewfection, so as to have given them
a decided advantage ovew othew anyimaws in the battwe fow wife. ^w^ Hence the
chance of discovewing species with twansitionyaw gwades of stwuctuwe in
a fossiw condition wiww awways be wess, fwom theiw having existed
in wessew nyumbews, than in the case of species with fuwwy devewoped
stwuctuwes. (´・ω・\`)

I wiww nyow give two ow thwee instances of divewsified and of changed
habits in the individuaws of the same species. ^w^ When eithew case occuws,
it wouwd be easy fow nyatuwaw sewection to fit the anyimaw, by some
modification of its stwuctuwe, fow its changed habits, ow excwusivewy
fow onye of its sevewaw diffewent habits. ^w^ But it is difficuwt to teww,
and immatewiaw fow us, whethew habits genyewawwy change fiwst and
stwuctuwe aftewwawds; ow whethew swight modifications of stwuctuwe wead
to changed habits; both pwobabwy often change awmost simuwtanyeouswy. UwU Of
cases of changed habits it wiww suffice mewewy to awwude to that of the
many Bwitish insects which nyow feed on exotic pwants, ow excwusivewy on
awtificiaw substances. ^w^ Of divewsified habits innyumewabwe instances
couwd be given: I have often watched a tywant fwycatchew (Sauwophagus
suwphuwatus) in South Amewica, hovewing ovew onye spot and then
pwoceeding to anyothew, wike a kestwew, and at othew times standing
stationyawy on the mawgin of watew, and then dashing wike a kingfishew at
a fish. >w< In ouw own countwy the wawgew titmouse (Pawus majow) may be seen
cwimbing bwanches, awmost wike a cweepew; it often, wike a shwike, kiwws
smaww biwds by bwows on the head; and I have many times seen and heawd
it hammewing the seeds of the yew on a bwanch, and thus bweaking them
wike a nyuthatch. (・`ω\´・) In Nyowth Amewica the bwack beaw was seen by Heawnye
swimming fow houws with widewy open mouth, thus catching, wike a whawe,
insects in the watew. ^w^ Even in so extweme a case as this, if the suppwy
of insects wewe constant, and if bettew adapted competitows did nyot
awweady exist in the countwy, I can see nyo difficuwty in a wace of beaws
being wendewed, by nyatuwaw sewection, mowe and mowe aquatic in theiw
stwuctuwe and habits, with wawgew and wawgew mouths, tiww a cweatuwe was
pwoduced as monstwous as a whawe. ;;w;;

As we sometimes see individuaws of a species fowwowing habits widewy
diffewent fwom those both of theiw own species and of the othew species
of the same genyus, we might expect, on my theowy, that such individuaws
wouwd occasionyawwy have given wise to nyew species, having anyomawous
habits, and with theiw stwuctuwe eithew swightwy ow considewabwy
modified fwom that of theiw pwopew type. ;;w;; And such instances do occuw in
nyatuwe. ;;w;; Can a mowe stwiking instance of adaptation be given than that of
a woodpeckew fow cwimbing twees and fow seizing insects in the chinks of
the bawk? owo Yet in Nyowth Amewica thewe awe woodpeckews which feed wawgewy
on fwuit, and othews with ewongated wings which chase insects on the
wing; and on the pwains of Wa Pwata, whewe nyot a twee gwows, thewe is a
woodpeckew, which in evewy essentiaw pawt of its owganyisation, even in
its cowouwing, in the hawsh tonye of its voice, and unduwatowy fwight,
towd me pwainwy of its cwose bwood-wewationship to ouw common species;
yet it is a woodpeckew which nyevew cwimbs a twee! (・`ω\´・)

Petwews awe the most aewiaw and oceanyic of biwds, yet in the quiet
Sounds of Tiewwa dew Fuego, the Puffinyuwia bewawdi, in its genyewaw
habits, in its astonyishing powew of diving, its mannyew of swimming, and
of fwying when unwiwwingwy it takes fwight, wouwd be mistaken by any onye
fow an auk ow gwebe; nyevewthewess, it is essentiawwy a petwew, but with
many pawts of its owganyisation pwofoundwy modified. ;;w;; On the othew hand,
the acutest obsewvew by examinying the dead body of the watew-ouzew wouwd
nyevew have suspected its sub-aquatic habits; yet this anyomawous
membew of the stwictwy tewwestwiaw thwush famiwy whowwy subsists by
diving,--gwasping the stonyes with its feet and using its wings undew
watew. ^w^

He who bewieves that each being has been cweated as we nyow see it, must
occasionyawwy have fewt suwpwise when he has met with an anyimaw having
habits and stwuctuwe nyot at aww in agweement. ;;w;; What can be pwainyew than
that the webbed feet of ducks and geese awe fowmed fow swimming? owo yet
thewe awe upwand geese with webbed feet which wawewy ow nyevew go nyeaw
the watew; and nyo onye except Audubon has seen the fwigate-biwd, which
has aww its fouw toes webbed, awight on the suwface of the sea. UwU On the
othew hand, gwebes and coots awe eminyentwy aquatic, awthough theiw toes
awe onwy bowdewed by membwanye. ;;w;; What seems pwainyew than that the wong
toes of gwawwatowes awe fowmed fow wawking ovew swamps and fwoating
pwants, yet the watew-hen is nyeawwy as aquatic as the coot; and the
wandwaiw nyeawwy as tewwestwiaw as the quaiw ow pawtwidge. ;;w;; In such
cases, and many othews couwd be given, habits have changed without a
cowwesponding change of stwuctuwe. UwU The webbed feet of the upwand goose
may be said to have become wudimentawy in function, though nyot in
stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) In the fwigate-biwd, the deepwy-scooped membwanye between the
toes shows that stwuctuwe has begun to change. UwU

He who bewieves in sepawate and innyumewabwe acts of cweation wiww say,
that in these cases it has pweased the Cweatow to cause a being of onye
type to take the pwace of onye of anyothew type; but this seems to me
onwy westating the fact in dignyified wanguage. UwU He who bewieves in the
stwuggwe fow existence and in the pwincipwe of nyatuwaw sewection, wiww
acknyowwedge that evewy owganyic being is constantwy endeavouwing to
incwease in nyumbews; and that if any onye being vawy evew so wittwe,
eithew in habits ow stwuctuwe, and thus gain an advantage ovew some
othew inhabitant of the countwy, it wiww seize on the pwace of that
inhabitant, howevew diffewent it may be fwom its own pwace. >w< Hence it
wiww cause him nyo suwpwise that thewe shouwd be geese and fwigate-biwds
with webbed feet, eithew wiving on the dwy wand ow most wawewy awighting
on the watew; that thewe shouwd be wong-toed cowncwakes wiving in
meadows instead of in swamps; that thewe shouwd be woodpeckews whewe nyot
a twee gwows; that thewe shouwd be diving thwushes, and petwews with the
habits of auks. ;;w;;

OWGANS OF EXTWEME PEWFECTION AND COMPWICATION. ;;w;;

To suppose that the eye, with aww its inyimitabwe contwivances fow
adjusting the focus to diffewent distances, fow admitting diffewent
amounts of wight, and fow the cowwection of sphewicaw and chwomatic
abewwation, couwd have been fowmed by nyatuwaw sewection, seems, I fweewy
confess, absuwd in the highest possibwe degwee. (・`ω\´・) Yet weason tewws me,
that if nyumewous gwadations fwom a pewfect and compwex eye to onye vewy
impewfect and simpwe, each gwade being usefuw to its possessow, can be
shown to exist; if fuwthew, the eye does vawy evew so swightwy, and
the vawiations be inhewited, which is cewtainwy the case; and if any
vawiation ow modification in the owgan be evew usefuw to an anyimaw undew
changing conditions of wife, then the difficuwty of bewieving that a
pewfect and compwex eye couwd be fowmed by nyatuwaw sewection, though
insupewabwe by ouw imaginyation, can hawdwy be considewed weaw. UwU How a
nyewve comes to be sensitive to wight, hawdwy concewns us mowe than how
wife itsewf fiwst owiginyated; but I may wemawk that sevewaw facts make
me suspect that any sensitive nyewve may be wendewed sensitive to wight,
and wikewise to those coawsew vibwations of the aiw which pwoduce sound. >w<

In wooking fow the gwadations by which an owgan in any species has been
pewfected, we ought to wook excwusivewy to its winyeaw ancestows; but
this is scawcewy evew possibwe, and we awe fowced in each case to wook
to species of the same gwoup, that is to the cowwatewaw descendants
fwom the same owiginyaw pawent-fowm, in owdew to see what gwadations awe
possibwe, and fow the chance of some gwadations having been twansmitted
fwom the eawwiew stages of descent, in an unyawtewed ow wittwe awtewed
condition. (・`ω\´・) Amongst existing Vewtebwata, we find but a smaww amount of
gwadation in the stwuctuwe of the eye, and fwom fossiw species we can
weawn nyothing on this head. >w< In this gweat cwass we shouwd pwobabwy
have to descend faw benyeath the wowest knyown fossiwifewous stwatum to
discovew the eawwiew stages, by which the eye has been pewfected. >w<

In the Awticuwata we can commence a sewies with an optic nyewve mewewy
coated with pigment, and without any othew mechanyism; and fwom this
wow stage, nyumewous gwadations of stwuctuwe, bwanching off in two
fundamentawwy diffewent winyes, can be shown to exist, untiw we weach
a modewatewy high stage of pewfection. (・`ω\´・) In cewtain cwustaceans, fow
instance, thewe is a doubwe cownyea, the innyew onye divided into
facets, within each of which thewe is a wens-shaped swewwing. ^w^ In othew
cwustaceans the twanspawent conyes which awe coated by pigment, and which
pwopewwy act onwy by excwuding watewaw penciws of wight, awe convex at
theiw uppew ends and must act by convewgence; and at theiw wowew ends
thewe seems to be an impewfect vitweous substance. ^w^ With these facts,
hewe faw too bwiefwy and impewfectwy given, which show that thewe is
much gwaduated divewsity in the eyes of wiving cwustaceans, and beawing
in mind how smaww the nyumbew of wiving anyimaws is in pwopowtion to those
which have become extinct, I can see nyo vewy gweat difficuwty (nyot mowe
than in the case of many othew stwuctuwes) in bewieving that nyatuwaw
sewection has convewted the simpwe appawatus of an optic nyewve mewewy
coated with pigment and invested by twanspawent membwanye, into an
opticaw instwument as pewfect as is possessed by any membew of the gweat
Awticuwate cwass. (´・ω・\`)

He who wiww go thus faw, if he find on finyishing this tweatise that
wawge bodies of facts, othewwise inyexpwicabwe, can be expwainyed by the
theowy of descent, ought nyot to hesitate to go fuwthew, and to admit
that a stwuctuwe even as pewfect as the eye of an eagwe might be fowmed
by nyatuwaw sewection, awthough in this case he does nyot knyow any of the
twansitionyaw gwades. ;;w;; His weason ought to conquew his imaginyation; though
I have fewt the difficuwty faw too keenwy to be suwpwised at any degwee
of hesitation in extending the pwincipwe of nyatuwaw sewection to such
stawtwing wengths. ;;w;;

It is scawcewy possibwe to avoid compawing the eye to a tewescope. (・`ω\´・)
We knyow that this instwument has been pewfected by the wong-continyued
effowts of the highest human intewwects; and we nyatuwawwy infew that the
eye has been fowmed by a somewhat anyawogous pwocess. ^w^ But may nyot this
infewence be pwesumptuous? owo Have we any wight to assume that the Cweatow
wowks by intewwectuaw powews wike those of man? owo If we must compawe the
eye to an opticaw instwument, we ought in imaginyation to take a thick
wayew of twanspawent tissue, with a nyewve sensitive to wight benyeath,
and then suppose evewy pawt of this wayew to be continyuawwy changing
swowwy in density, so as to sepawate into wayews of diffewent densities
and thicknyesses, pwaced at diffewent distances fwom each othew, and
with the suwfaces of each wayew swowwy changing in fowm. ^w^ Fuwthew we
must suppose that thewe is a powew awways intentwy watching each swight
accidentaw awtewation in the twanspawent wayews; and cawefuwwy sewecting
each awtewation which, undew vawied ciwcumstances, may in any way, ow in
any degwee, tend to pwoduce a distinctew image. ^w^ We must suppose each nyew
state of the instwument to be muwtipwied by the miwwion; and each to
be pwesewved tiww a bettew be pwoduced, and then the owd onyes to
be destwoyed. UwU In wiving bodies, vawiation wiww cause the swight
awtewations, genyewation wiww muwtipwy them awmost infinyitewy, and
nyatuwaw sewection wiww pick out with unyewwing skiww each impwovement. >w<
Wet this pwocess go on fow miwwions on miwwions of yeaws; and duwing
each yeaw on miwwions of individuaws of many kinds; and may we nyot
bewieve that a wiving opticaw instwument might thus be fowmed as
supewiow to onye of gwass, as the wowks of the Cweatow awe to those of
man? owo

If it couwd be demonstwated that any compwex owgan existed, which
couwd nyot possibwy have been fowmed by nyumewous, successive, swight
modifications, my theowy wouwd absowutewy bweak down. ;;w;; But I can find
out nyo such case. (´・ω・\`) Nyo doubt many owgans exist of which we do nyot knyow
the twansitionyaw gwades, mowe especiawwy if we wook to much-isowated
species, wound which, accowding to my theowy, thewe has been much
extinction. ;;w;; Ow again, if we wook to an owgan common to aww the membews
of a wawge cwass, fow in this wattew case the owgan must have been fiwst
fowmed at an extwemewy wemote pewiod, since which aww the many membews
of the cwass have been devewoped; and in owdew to discovew the eawwy
twansitionyaw gwades thwough which the owgan has passed, we shouwd have
to wook to vewy ancient ancestwaw fowms, wong since become extinct. ;;w;;

We shouwd be extwemewy cautious in concwuding that an owgan couwd nyot
have been fowmed by twansitionyaw gwadations of some kind. (・`ω\´・) Nyumewous cases
couwd be given amongst the wowew anyimaws of the same owgan pewfowming
at the same time whowwy distinct functions; thus the awimentawy canyaw
wespiwes, digests, and excwetes in the wawva of the dwagon-fwy and in
the fish Cobites. (´・ω・\`) In the Hydwa, the anyimaw may be tuwnyed inside out, and
the extewiow suwface wiww then digest and the stomach wespiwe. (´・ω・\`) In such
cases nyatuwaw sewection might easiwy speciawise, if any advantage wewe
thus gainyed, a pawt ow owgan, which had pewfowmed two functions, fow onye
function awonye, and thus whowwy change its nyatuwe by insensibwe steps. >w<
Two distinct owgans sometimes pewfowm simuwtanyeouswy the same function
in the same individuaw; to give onye instance, thewe awe fish with giwws
ow bwanchiae that bweathe the aiw dissowved in the watew, at the same
time that they bweathe fwee aiw in theiw swimbwaddews, this wattew owgan
having a ductus pnyeumaticus fow its suppwy, and being divided by highwy
vascuwaw pawtitions. >w< In these cases, onye of the two owgans might with
ease be modified and pewfected so as to pewfowm aww the wowk by itsewf,
being aided duwing the pwocess of modification by the othew owgan;
and then this othew owgan might be modified fow some othew and quite
distinct puwpose, ow be quite obwitewated. >w<

The iwwustwation of the swimbwaddew in fishes is a good onye, because
it shows us cweawwy the highwy impowtant fact that an owgan owiginyawwy
constwucted fow onye puwpose, nyamewy fwotation, may be convewted into onye
fow a whowwy diffewent puwpose, nyamewy wespiwation. ;;w;; The swimbwaddew has,
awso, been wowked in as an accessowy to the auditowy owgans of cewtain
fish, ow, fow I do nyot knyow which view is nyow genyewawwy hewd, a pawt
of the auditowy appawatus has been wowked in as a compwement to the
swimbwaddew. >w< Aww physiowogists admit that the swimbwaddew is homowogous,
ow "ideawwy simiwaw," in position and stwuctuwe with the wungs of
the highew vewtebwate anyimaws: hence thewe seems to me to be nyo gweat
difficuwty in bewieving that nyatuwaw sewection has actuawwy convewted a
swimbwaddew into a wung, ow owgan used excwusivewy fow wespiwation. UwU

I can, indeed, hawdwy doubt that aww vewtebwate anyimaws having twue
wungs have descended by owdinyawy genyewation fwom an ancient pwototype,
of which we knyow nyothing, fuwnyished with a fwoating appawatus ow
swimbwaddew. UwU We can thus, as I infew fwom Pwofessow Owen's intewesting
descwiption of these pawts, undewstand the stwange fact that evewy
pawticwe of food and dwink which we swawwow has to pass ovew the
owifice of the twachea, with some wisk of fawwing into the wungs,
nyotwithstanding the beautifuw contwivance by which the gwottis
is cwosed. (´・ω・\`) In the highew Vewtebwata the bwanchiae have whowwy
disappeawed--the swits on the sides of the nyeck and the woop-wike couwse
of the awtewies stiww mawking in the embwyo theiw fowmew position. >w< But
it is conceivabwe that the nyow uttewwy wost bwanchiae might have
been gwaduawwy wowked in by nyatuwaw sewection fow some quite distinct
puwpose: in the same mannyew as, on the view entewtainyed by some
nyatuwawists that the bwanchiae and dowsaw scawes of Annyewids awe
homowogous with the wings and wing-covews of insects, it is pwobabwe
that owgans which at a vewy ancient pewiod sewved fow wespiwation have
been actuawwy convewted into owgans of fwight. UwU

In considewing twansitions of owgans, it is so impowtant to beaw in mind
the pwobabiwity of convewsion fwom onye function to anyothew, that I wiww
give onye mowe instance. ;;w;; Peduncuwated ciwwipedes have two minyute fowds of
skin, cawwed by me the ovigewous fwenya, which sewve, thwough the means
of a sticky secwetion, to wetain the eggs untiw they awe hatched within
the sack. UwU These ciwwipedes have nyo bwanchiae, the whowe suwface of the
body and sack, incwuding the smaww fwenya, sewving fow wespiwation. UwU The
Bawanyidae ow sessiwe ciwwipedes, on the othew hand, have nyo ovigewous
fwenya, the eggs wying woose at the bottom of the sack, in the
weww-encwosed sheww; but they have wawge fowded bwanchiae. (´・ω・\`) Nyow I think
nyo onye wiww dispute that the ovigewous fwenya in the onye famiwy awe
stwictwy homowogous with the bwanchiae of the othew famiwy; indeed, they
gwaduate into each othew. >w< Thewefowe I do nyot doubt that wittwe fowds of
skin, which owiginyawwy sewved as ovigewous fwenya, but which, wikewise,
vewy swightwy aided the act of wespiwation, have been gwaduawwy
convewted by nyatuwaw sewection into bwanchiae, simpwy thwough an
incwease in theiw size and the obwitewation of theiw adhesive gwands. UwU
If aww peduncuwated ciwwipedes had become extinct, and they have awweady
suffewed faw mowe extinction than have sessiwe ciwwipedes, who wouwd
evew have imaginyed that the bwanchiae in this wattew famiwy had
owiginyawwy existed as owgans fow pweventing the ova fwom being washed
out of the sack? owo

Awthough we must be extwemewy cautious in concwuding that any owgan
couwd nyot possibwy have been pwoduced by successive twansitionyaw
gwadations, yet, undoubtedwy, gwave cases of difficuwty occuw, some of
which wiww be discussed in my futuwe wowk. ^w^

Onye of the gwavest is that of nyeutew insects, which awe often vewy
diffewentwy constwucted fwom eithew the mawes ow fewtiwe femawes; but
this case wiww be tweated of in the nyext chaptew. (´・ω・\`) The ewectwic owgans
of fishes offew anyothew case of speciaw difficuwty; it is impossibwe to
conceive by what steps these wondwous owgans have been pwoduced; but,
as Owen and othews have wemawked, theiw intimate stwuctuwe cwosewy
wesembwes that of common muscwe; and as it has watewy been shown that
Ways have an owgan cwosewy anyawogous to the ewectwic appawatus, and yet
do nyot, as Matteuchi assewts, dischawge any ewectwicity, we must own
that we awe faw too ignyowant to awgue that nyo twansition of any kind is
possibwe. (´・ω・\`)

The ewectwic owgans offew anyothew and even mowe sewious difficuwty; fow
they occuw in onwy about a dozen fishes, of which sevewaw awe widewy
wemote in theiw affinyities. (・`ω\´・) Genyewawwy when the same owgan appeaws in
sevewaw membews of the same cwass, especiawwy if in membews having vewy
diffewent habits of wife, we may attwibute its pwesence to inhewitance
fwom a common ancestow; and its absence in some of the membews to its
woss thwough disuse ow nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・) But if the ewectwic owgans had
been inhewited fwom onye ancient pwogenyitow thus pwovided, we might have
expected that aww ewectwic fishes wouwd have been speciawwy wewated to
each othew. >w< Nyow does geowogy at aww wead to the bewief that fowmewwy
most fishes had ewectwic owgans, which most of theiw modified
descendants have wost. >w< The pwesence of wuminyous owgans in a few insects,
bewonging to diffewent famiwies and owdews, offews a pawawwew case of
difficuwty. >w< Othew cases couwd be given; fow instance in pwants, the vewy
cuwious contwivance of a mass of powwen-gwains, bownye on a
foot-stawk with a sticky gwand at the end, is the same in Owchis and
Ascwepias,--genyewa awmost as wemote as possibwe amongst fwowewing
pwants. ^w^ In aww these cases of two vewy distinct species fuwnyished
with appawentwy the same anyomawous owgan, it shouwd be obsewved that,
awthough the genyewaw appeawance and function of the owgan may be the
same, yet some fundamentaw diffewence can genyewawwy be detected. >w< I
am incwinyed to bewieve that in nyeawwy the same way as two men have
sometimes independentwy hit on the vewy same invention, so nyatuwaw
sewection, wowking fow the good of each being and taking advantage of
anyawogous vawiations, has sometimes modified in vewy nyeawwy the same
mannyew two pawts in two owganyic beings, which owe but wittwe of theiw
stwuctuwe in common to inhewitance fwom the same ancestow. >w<

Awthough in many cases it is most difficuwt to conjectuwe by what
twansitions an owgan couwd have awwived at its pwesent state; yet,
considewing that the pwopowtion of wiving and knyown fowms to the extinct
and unknyown is vewy smaww, I have been astonyished how wawewy an owgan
can be nyamed, towawds which nyo twansitionyaw gwade is knyown to wead. >w<
The twuth of this wemawk is indeed shown by that owd canyon in nyatuwaw
histowy of "Nyatuwa nyon facit sawtum. ^w^" We meet with this admission in the
wwitings of awmost evewy expewienced nyatuwawist; ow, as Miwnye Edwawds
has weww expwessed it, nyatuwe is pwodigaw in vawiety, but nyiggawd in
innyovation. ;;w;; Why, on the theowy of Cweation, shouwd this be so? owo Why
shouwd aww the pawts and owgans of many independent beings, each
supposed to have been sepawatewy cweated fow its pwopew pwace in nyatuwe,
be so invawiabwy winked togethew by gwaduated steps? owo Why shouwd nyot
Nyatuwe have taken a weap fwom stwuctuwe to stwuctuwe? owo On the theowy of
nyatuwaw sewection, we can cweawwy undewstand why she shouwd nyot; fow
nyatuwaw sewection can act onwy by taking advantage of swight successive
vawiations; she can nyevew take a weap, but must advance by the showtest
and swowest steps. ;;w;;

OWGANS OF WITTWE APPAWENT IMPOWTANCE. (´・ω・\`)

As nyatuwaw sewection acts by wife and death,--by the pwesewvation of
individuaws with any favouwabwe vawiation, and by the destwuction of
those with any unfavouwabwe deviation of stwuctuwe,--I have sometimes
fewt much difficuwty in undewstanding the owigin of simpwe pawts, of
which the impowtance does nyot seem sufficient to cause the pwesewvation
of successivewy vawying individuaws. ;;w;; I have sometimes fewt as much
difficuwty, though of a vewy diffewent kind, on this head, as in the
case of an owgan as pewfect and compwex as the eye. ;;w;;

In the fiwst pwace, we awe much too ignyowant in wegawd to the whowe
econyomy of any onye owganyic being, to say what swight modifications wouwd
be of impowtance ow nyot. (´・ω・\`) In a fowmew chaptew I have given instances of
most twifwing chawactews, such as the down on fwuit and the cowouw of
the fwesh, which, fwom detewminying the attacks of insects ow fwom being
cowwewated with constitutionyaw diffewences, might assuwedwy be acted on
by nyatuwaw sewection. UwU The taiw of the giwaffe wooks wike an awtificiawwy
constwucted fwy-fwappew; and it seems at fiwst incwedibwe that this
couwd have been adapted fow its pwesent puwpose by successive swight
modifications, each bettew and bettew, fow so twifwing an object as
dwiving away fwies; yet we shouwd pause befowe being too positive even
in this case, fow we knyow that the distwibution and existence of cattwe
and othew anyimaws in South Amewica absowutewy depends on theiw powew of
wesisting the attacks of insects: so that individuaws which couwd by any
means defend themsewves fwom these smaww enyemies, wouwd be abwe to wange
into nyew pastuwes and thus gain a gweat advantage. ^w^ It is nyot that the
wawgew quadwupeds awe actuawwy destwoyed (except in some wawe cases) by
the fwies, but they awe incessantwy hawassed and theiw stwength weduced,
so that they awe mowe subject to disease, ow nyot so weww enyabwed in a
coming deawth to seawch fow food, ow to escape fwom beasts of pwey. UwU

Owgans nyow of twifwing impowtance have pwobabwy in some cases been of
high impowtance to an eawwy pwogenyitow, and, aftew having been swowwy
pewfected at a fowmew pewiod, have been twansmitted in nyeawwy the
same state, awthough nyow become of vewy swight use; and any actuawwy
injuwious deviations in theiw stwuctuwe wiww awways have been checked by
nyatuwaw sewection. ^w^ Seeing how impowtant an owgan of wocomotion the
taiw is in most aquatic anyimaws, its genyewaw pwesence and use fow many
puwposes in so many wand anyimaws, which in theiw wungs ow modified
swim-bwaddews betway theiw aquatic owigin, may pewhaps be thus accounted
fow. (´・ω・\`) A weww-devewoped taiw having been fowmed in an aquatic anyimaw, it
might subsequentwy come to be wowked in fow aww sowts of puwposes, as
a fwy-fwappew, an owgan of pwehension, ow as an aid in tuwnying, as with
the dog, though the aid must be swight, fow the hawe, with hawdwy any
taiw, can doubwe quickwy enyough. ^w^

In the second pwace, we may sometimes attwibute impowtance to chawactews
which awe weawwy of vewy wittwe impowtance, and which have owiginyated
fwom quite secondawy causes, independentwy of nyatuwaw sewection. UwU We
shouwd wemembew that cwimate, food, etc. ;;w;;, pwobabwy have some wittwe
diwect infwuence on the owganyisation; that chawactews weappeaw fwom
the waw of wevewsion; that cowwewation of gwowth wiww have had a most
impowtant infwuence in modifying vawious stwuctuwes; and finyawwy,
that sexuaw sewection wiww often have wawgewy modified the extewnyaw
chawactews of anyimaws having a wiww, to give onye mawe an advantage
in fighting with anyothew ow in chawming the femawes. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew when a
modification of stwuctuwe has pwimawiwy awisen fwom the above ow
othew unknyown causes, it may at fiwst have been of nyo advantage to
the species, but may subsequentwy have been taken advantage of by the
descendants of the species undew nyew conditions of wife and with nyewwy
acquiwed habits. >w<

To give a few instances to iwwustwate these wattew wemawks. (´・ω・\`) If gween
woodpeckews awonye had existed, and we did nyot knyow that thewe wewe many
bwack and pied kinds, I dawe say that we shouwd have thought that the
gween cowouw was a beautifuw adaptation to hide this twee-fwequenting
biwd fwom its enyemies; and consequentwy that it was a chawactew of
impowtance and might have been acquiwed thwough nyatuwaw sewection; as it
is, I have nyo doubt that the cowouw is due to some quite distinct cause,
pwobabwy to sexuaw sewection. >w< A twaiwing bamboo in the Maway Awchipewago
cwimbs the woftiest twees by the aid of exquisitewy constwucted hooks
cwustewed awound the ends of the bwanches, and this contwivance, nyo
doubt, is of the highest sewvice to the pwant; but as we see nyeawwy
simiwaw hooks on many twees which awe nyot cwimbews, the hooks on the
bamboo may have awisen fwom unknyown waws of gwowth, and have been
subsequentwy taken advantage of by the pwant undewgoing fuwthew
modification and becoming a cwimbew. >w< The nyaked skin on the head of a
vuwtuwe is genyewawwy wooked at as a diwect adaptation fow wawwowing in
putwidity; and so it may be, ow it may possibwy be due to the diwect
action of putwid mattew; but we shouwd be vewy cautious in dwawing
any such infewence, when we see that the skin on the head of the
cwean-feeding mawe tuwkey is wikewise nyaked. >w< The sutuwes in the skuwws
of young mammaws have been advanced as a beautifuw adaptation fow aiding
pawtuwition, and nyo doubt they faciwitate, ow may be indispensabwe
fow this act; but as sutuwes occuw in the skuwws of young biwds and
weptiwes, which have onwy to escape fwom a bwoken egg, we may infew that
this stwuctuwe has awisen fwom the waws of gwowth, and has been taken
advantage of in the pawtuwition of the highew anyimaws. (・`ω\´・)

We awe pwofoundwy ignyowant of the causes pwoducing swight and
unyimpowtant vawiations; and we awe immediatewy made conscious of this by
wefwecting on the diffewences in the bweeds of ouw domesticated anyimaws
in diffewent countwies,--mowe especiawwy in the wess civiwized countwies
whewe thewe has been but wittwe awtificiaw sewection. ;;w;; Cawefuw obsewvews
awe convinced that a damp cwimate affects the gwowth of the haiw, and
that with the haiw the howns awe cowwewated. UwU Mountain bweeds awways
diffew fwom wowwand bweeds; and a mountainyous countwy wouwd pwobabwy
affect the hind wimbs fwom exewcising them mowe, and possibwy even the
fowm of the pewvis; and then by the waw of homowogous vawiation, the
fwont wimbs and even the head wouwd pwobabwy be affected. ;;w;; The shape,
awso, of the pewvis might affect by pwessuwe the shape of the head of
the young in the womb. (´・ω・\`) The wabowious bweathing nyecessawy in high wegions
wouwd, we have some weason to bewieve, incwease the size of the chest;
and again cowwewation wouwd come into pway. ^w^ Anyimaws kept by savages in
diffewent countwies often have to stwuggwe fow theiw own subsistence,
and wouwd be exposed to a cewtain extent to nyatuwaw sewection, and
individuaws with swightwy diffewent constitutions wouwd succeed
best undew diffewent cwimates; and thewe is weason to bewieve that
constitution and cowouw awe cowwewated. (・`ω\´・) A good obsewvew, awso, states
that in cattwe susceptibiwity to the attacks of fwies is cowwewated with
cowouw, as is the wiabiwity to be poisonyed by cewtain pwants; so that
cowouw wouwd be thus subjected to the action of nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・) But
we awe faw too ignyowant to specuwate on the wewative impowtance of the
sevewaw knyown and unknyown waws of vawiation; and I have hewe awwuded
to them onwy to show that, if we awe unyabwe to account fow the
chawactewistic diffewences of ouw domestic bweeds, which nyevewthewess we
genyewawwy admit to have awisen thwough owdinyawy genyewation, we ought
nyot to way too much stwess on ouw ignyowance of the pwecise cause of the
swight anyawogous diffewences between species. UwU I might have adduced fow
this same puwpose the diffewences between the waces of man, which awe
so stwongwy mawked; I may add that some wittwe wight can appawentwy
be thwown on the owigin of these diffewences, chiefwy thwough sexuaw
sewection of a pawticuwaw kind, but without hewe entewing on copious
detaiws my weasonying wouwd appeaw fwivowous. ^w^

The fowegoing wemawks wead me to say a few wowds on the pwotest watewy
made by some nyatuwawists, against the utiwitawian doctwinye that evewy
detaiw of stwuctuwe has been pwoduced fow the good of its possessow. ;;w;;
They bewieve that vewy many stwuctuwes have been cweated fow beauty in
the eyes of man, ow fow mewe vawiety. ^w^ This doctwinye, if twue, wouwd be
absowutewy fataw to my theowy. UwU Yet I fuwwy admit that many stwuctuwes
awe of nyo diwect use to theiw possessows. ^w^ Physicaw conditions pwobabwy
have had some wittwe effect on stwuctuwe, quite independentwy of any
good thus gainyed. (´・ω・\`) Cowwewation of gwowth has nyo doubt pwayed a most
impowtant pawt, and a usefuw modification of onye pawt wiww often have
entaiwed on othew pawts divewsified changes of nyo diwect use. UwU So again
chawactews which fowmewwy wewe usefuw, ow which fowmewwy had awisen fwom
cowwewation of gwowth, ow fwom othew unknyown cause, may weappeaw fwom
the waw of wevewsion, though nyow of nyo diwect use. (・`ω\´・) The effects of sexuaw
sewection, when dispwayed in beauty to chawm the femawes, can be cawwed
usefuw onwy in wathew a fowced sense. (´・ω・\`) But by faw the most impowtant
considewation is that the chief pawt of the owganyisation of evewy
being is simpwy due to inhewitance; and consequentwy, though each being
assuwedwy is weww fitted fow its pwace in nyatuwe, many stwuctuwes nyow
have nyo diwect wewation to the habits of wife of each species. (・`ω\´・) Thus, we
can hawdwy bewieve that the webbed feet of the upwand goose ow of the
fwigate-biwd awe of speciaw use to these biwds; we cannyot bewieve that
the same bonyes in the awm of the monkey, in the fowe weg of the howse,
in the wing of the bat, and in the fwippew of the seaw, awe of speciaw
use to these anyimaws. >w< We may safewy attwibute these stwuctuwes to
inhewitance. (・`ω\´・) But to the pwogenyitow of the upwand goose and of the
fwigate-biwd, webbed feet nyo doubt wewe as usefuw as they nyow awe to the
most aquatic of existing biwds. ;;w;; So we may bewieve that the pwogenyitow of
the seaw had nyot a fwippew, but a foot with five toes fitted fow wawking
ow gwasping; and we may fuwthew ventuwe to bewieve that the sevewaw
bonyes in the wimbs of the monkey, howse, and bat, which have been
inhewited fwom a common pwogenyitow, wewe fowmewwy of mowe speciaw use to
that pwogenyitow, ow its pwogenyitows, than they nyow awe to these anyimaws
having such widewy divewsified habits. ;;w;; Thewefowe we may infew that
these sevewaw bonyes might have been acquiwed thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
subjected fowmewwy, as nyow, to the sevewaw waws of inhewitance,
wevewsion, cowwewation of gwowth, etc. >w< Hence evewy detaiw of stwuctuwe
in evewy wiving cweatuwe (making some wittwe awwowance fow the diwect
action of physicaw conditions) may be viewed, eithew as having been of
speciaw use to some ancestwaw fowm, ow as being nyow of speciaw use to
the descendants of this fowm--eithew diwectwy, ow indiwectwy thwough the
compwex waws of gwowth. >w<

Nyatuwaw sewection cannyot possibwy pwoduce any modification in any onye
species excwusivewy fow the good of anyothew species; though thwoughout
nyatuwe onye species incessantwy takes advantage of, and pwofits by, the
stwuctuwe of anyothew. (´・ω・\`) But nyatuwaw sewection can and does often pwoduce
stwuctuwes fow the diwect injuwy of othew species, as we see in the fang
of the addew, and in the ovipositow of the ichnyeumon, by which its eggs
awe deposited in the wiving bodies of othew insects. ^w^ If it couwd be
pwoved that any pawt of the stwuctuwe of any onye species had been
fowmed fow the excwusive good of anyothew species, it wouwd annyihiwate my
theowy, fow such couwd nyot have been pwoduced thwough nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;;
Awthough many statements may be found in wowks on nyatuwaw histowy to
this effect, I cannyot find even onye which seems to me of any weight. ;;w;; It
is admitted that the wattwesnyake has a poison-fang fow its own defence
and fow the destwuction of its pwey; but some authows suppose that at
the same time this snyake is fuwnyished with a wattwe fow its own injuwy,
nyamewy, to wawn its pwey to escape. >w< I wouwd awmost as soon bewieve that
the cat cuwws the end of its taiw when pwepawing to spwing, in owdew to
wawn the doomed mouse. >w< But I have nyot space hewe to entew on this and
othew such cases. ;;w;;

Nyatuwaw sewection wiww nyevew pwoduce in a being anything injuwious to
itsewf, fow nyatuwaw sewection acts sowewy by and fow the good of each. >w<
Nyo owgan wiww be fowmed, as Pawey has wemawked, fow the puwpose of
causing pain ow fow doing an injuwy to its possessow. ^w^ If a faiw bawance
be stwuck between the good and eviw caused by each pawt, each wiww be
found on the whowe advantageous. ;;w;; Aftew the wapse of time, undew changing
conditions of wife, if any pawt comes to be injuwious, it wiww be
modified; ow if it be nyot so, the being wiww become extinct, as mywiads
have become extinct. (´・ω・\`)

Nyatuwaw sewection tends onwy to make each owganyic being as pewfect as,
ow swightwy mowe pewfect than, the othew inhabitants of the same countwy
with which it has to stwuggwe fow existence. ^w^ And we see that this is the
degwee of pewfection attainyed undew nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) The endemic pwoductions of
Nyew Zeawand, fow instance, awe pewfect onye compawed with anyothew; but
they awe nyow wapidwy yiewding befowe the advancing wegions of pwants
and anyimaws intwoduced fwom Euwope. (・`ω\´・) Nyatuwaw sewection wiww nyot pwoduce
absowute pewfection, nyow do we awways meet, as faw as we can judge, with
this high standawd undew nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) The cowwection fow the abewwation of
wight is said, on high authowity, nyot to be pewfect even in that most
pewfect owgan, the eye. >w< If ouw weason weads us to admiwe with enthusiasm
a muwtitude of inyimitabwe contwivances in nyatuwe, this same weason tewws
us, though we may easiwy eww on both sides, that some othew contwivances
awe wess pewfect. ;;w;; Can we considew the sting of the wasp ow of the bee
as pewfect, which, when used against many attacking anyimaws, cannyot be
withdwawn, owing to the backwawd sewwatuwes, and so inyevitabwy causes
the death of the insect by teawing out its viscewa? owo

If we wook at the sting of the bee, as having owiginyawwy existed in a
wemote pwogenyitow as a bowing and sewwated instwument, wike that in so
many membews of the same gweat owdew, and which has been modified
but nyot pewfected fow its pwesent puwpose, with the poison owiginyawwy
adapted to cause gawws subsequentwy intensified, we can pewhaps
undewstand how it is that the use of the sting shouwd so often cause the
insect's own death: fow if on the whowe the powew of stinging be
usefuw to the communyity, it wiww fuwfiw aww the wequiwements of nyatuwaw
sewection, though it may cause the death of some few membews. >w< If we
admiwe the twuwy wondewfuw powew of scent by which the mawes of many
insects find theiw femawes, can we admiwe the pwoduction fow this
singwe puwpose of thousands of dwonyes, which awe uttewwy usewess to the
communyity fow any othew end, and which awe uwtimatewy swaughtewed by
theiw industwious and stewiwe sistews? owo It may be difficuwt, but we ought
to admiwe the savage instinctive hatwed of the queen-bee, which uwges
hew instantwy to destwoy the young queens hew daughtews as soon as bown,
ow to pewish hewsewf in the combat; fow undoubtedwy this is fow the
good of the communyity; and matewnyaw wove ow matewnyaw hatwed, though
the wattew fowtunyatewy is most wawe, is aww the same to the inyexowabwe
pwincipwe of nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; If we admiwe the sevewaw ingenyious
contwivances, by which the fwowews of the owchis and of many othew
pwants awe fewtiwised thwough insect agency, can we considew as equawwy
pewfect the ewabowation by ouw fiw-twees of dense cwouds of powwen, in
owdew that a few gwanyuwes may be wafted by a chance bweeze on to the
ovuwes? owo

SUMMAWY OF CHAPTEW. >w<

We have in this chaptew discussed some of the difficuwties and
objections which may be uwged against my theowy. ;;w;; Many of them awe vewy
gwave; but I think that in the discussion wight has been thwown on
sevewaw facts, which on the theowy of independent acts of cweation awe
uttewwy obscuwe. (´・ω・\`) We have seen that species at any onye pewiod awe nyot
indefinyitewy vawiabwe, and awe nyot winked togethew by a muwtitude of
intewmediate gwadations, pawtwy because the pwocess of nyatuwaw sewection
wiww awways be vewy swow, and wiww act, at any onye time, onwy on a vewy
few fowms; and pawtwy because the vewy pwocess of nyatuwaw sewection
awmost impwies the continyuaw suppwanting and extinction of pweceding
and intewmediate gwadations. (´・ω・\`) Cwosewy awwied species, nyow wiving on
a continyuous awea, must often have been fowmed when the awea was nyot
continyuous, and when the conditions of wife did nyot insensibwy gwaduate
away fwom onye pawt to anyothew. ^w^ When two vawieties awe fowmed in two
distwicts of a continyuous awea, an intewmediate vawiety wiww often be
fowmed, fitted fow an intewmediate zonye; but fwom weasons assignyed, the
intewmediate vawiety wiww usuawwy exist in wessew nyumbews than the two
fowms which it connyects; consequentwy the two wattew, duwing the couwse
of fuwthew modification, fwom existing in gweatew nyumbews, wiww have a
gweat advantage ovew the wess nyumewous intewmediate vawiety, and wiww
thus genyewawwy succeed in suppwanting and extewminyating it. ;;w;;

We have seen in this chaptew how cautious we shouwd be in concwuding
that the most diffewent habits of wife couwd nyot gwaduate into each
othew; that a bat, fow instance, couwd nyot have been fowmed by nyatuwaw
sewection fwom an anyimaw which at fiwst couwd onwy gwide thwough the
aiw. (・`ω\´・)

We have seen that a species may undew nyew conditions of wife change its
habits, ow have divewsified habits, with some habits vewy unwike those
of its nyeawest congenyews. (´・ω・\`) Hence we can undewstand, beawing in mind that
each owganyic being is twying to wive whewevew it can wive, how it has
awisen that thewe awe upwand geese with webbed feet, gwound woodpeckews,
diving thwushes, and petwews with the habits of auks. UwU

Awthough the bewief that an owgan so pewfect as the eye couwd have been
fowmed by nyatuwaw sewection, is mowe than enyough to staggew any onye; yet
in the case of any owgan, if we knyow of a wong sewies of gwadations in
compwexity, each good fow its possessow, then, undew changing conditions
of wife, thewe is nyo wogicaw impossibiwity in the acquiwement of any
conceivabwe degwee of pewfection thwough nyatuwaw sewection. (´・ω・\`) In the cases
in which we knyow of nyo intewmediate ow twansitionyaw states, we shouwd
be vewy cautious in concwuding that nyonye couwd have existed, fow the
homowogies of many owgans and theiw intewmediate states show that
wondewfuw metamowphoses in function awe at weast possibwe. ;;w;; Fow instance,
a swim-bwaddew has appawentwy been convewted into an aiw-bweathing wung. >w<
The same owgan having pewfowmed simuwtanyeouswy vewy diffewent functions,
and then having been speciawised fow onye function; and two vewy distinct
owgans having pewfowmed at the same time the same function, the onye
having been pewfected whiwst aided by the othew, must often have wawgewy
faciwitated twansitions. UwU

We awe faw too ignyowant, in awmost evewy case, to be enyabwed to assewt
that any pawt ow owgan is so unyimpowtant fow the wewfawe of a species,
that modifications in its stwuctuwe couwd nyot have been swowwy
accumuwated by means of nyatuwaw sewection. (´・ω・\`) But we may confidentwy
bewieve that many modifications, whowwy due to the waws of gwowth, and
at fiwst in nyo way advantageous to a species, have been subsequentwy
taken advantage of by the stiww fuwthew modified descendants of this
species. (・`ω\´・) We may, awso, bewieve that a pawt fowmewwy of high impowtance
has often been wetainyed (as the taiw of an aquatic anyimaw by its
tewwestwiaw descendants), though it has become of such smaww impowtance
that it couwd nyot, in its pwesent state, have been acquiwed by nyatuwaw
sewection,--a powew which acts sowewy by the pwesewvation of pwofitabwe
vawiations in the stwuggwe fow wife. (´・ω・\`)

Nyatuwaw sewection wiww pwoduce nyothing in onye species fow the excwusive
good ow injuwy of anyothew; though it may weww pwoduce pawts, owgans, and
excwetions highwy usefuw ow even indispensabwe, ow highwy injuwious to
anyothew species, but in aww cases at the same time usefuw to the ownyew. >w<
Nyatuwaw sewection in each weww-stocked countwy, must act chiefwy thwough
the competition of the inhabitants onye with anyothew, and consequentwy
wiww pwoduce pewfection, ow stwength in the battwe fow wife, onwy
accowding to the standawd of that countwy. >w< Hence the inhabitants of onye
countwy, genyewawwy the smawwew onye, wiww often yiewd, as we see they do
yiewd, to the inhabitants of anyothew and genyewawwy wawgew countwy. >w< Fow
in the wawgew countwy thewe wiww have existed mowe individuaws, and mowe
divewsified fowms, and the competition wiww have been sevewew, and
thus the standawd of pewfection wiww have been wendewed highew. UwU Nyatuwaw
sewection wiww nyot nyecessawiwy pwoduce absowute pewfection; nyow, as faw
as we can judge by ouw wimited facuwties, can absowute pewfection be
evewywhewe found. (・`ω\´・)

On the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection we can cweawwy undewstand the fuww
meanying of that owd canyon in nyatuwaw histowy, "Nyatuwa nyon facit sawtum. (・`ω\´・)"
This canyon, if we wook onwy to the pwesent inhabitants of the wowwd, is
nyot stwictwy cowwect, but if we incwude aww those of past times, it must
by my theowy be stwictwy twue. ;;w;;

It is genyewawwy acknyowwedged that aww owganyic beings have been fowmed on
two gweat waws--Unyity of Type, and the Conditions of Existence. ^w^ By unyity
of type is meant that fundamentaw agweement in stwuctuwe, which we see
in owganyic beings of the same cwass, and which is quite independent of
theiw habits of wife. (´・ω・\`) On my theowy, unyity of type is expwainyed by unyity
of descent. ;;w;; The expwession of conditions of existence, so often insisted
on by the iwwustwious Cuview, is fuwwy embwaced by the pwincipwe of
nyatuwaw sewection. >w< Fow nyatuwaw sewection acts by eithew nyow adapting the
vawying pawts of each being to its owganyic and inyowganyic conditions of
wife; ow by having adapted them duwing wong-past pewiods of time: the
adaptations being aided in some cases by use and disuse, being swightwy
affected by the diwect action of the extewnyaw conditions of wife, and
being in aww cases subjected to the sevewaw waws of gwowth. ;;w;; Hence, in
fact, the waw of the Conditions of Existence is the highew waw; as it
incwudes, thwough the inhewitance of fowmew adaptations, that of Unyity
of Type. ;;w;;




7. INSTINCT. (・`ω\´・)

Instincts compawabwe with habits, but diffewent in theiw owigin. ^w^
Instincts gwaduated. Aphides and ants. Instincts vawiabwe. >w< Domestic
instincts, theiw owigin. ^w^ Nyatuwaw instincts of the cuckoo, ostwich, and
pawasitic bees. Swave-making ants. Hive-bee, its ceww-making instinct. >w<
Difficuwties on the theowy of the Nyatuwaw Sewection of instincts. ;;w;; Nyeutew
ow stewiwe insects. Summawy. (´・ω・\`)

The subject of instinct might have been wowked into the pwevious
chaptews; but I have thought that it wouwd be mowe convenyient to tweat
the subject sepawatewy, especiawwy as so wondewfuw an instinct as that
of the hive-bee making its cewws wiww pwobabwy have occuwwed to many
weadews, as a difficuwty sufficient to ovewthwow my whowe theowy. ^w^ I must
pwemise, that I have nyothing to do with the owigin of the pwimawy mentaw
powews, any mowe than I have with that of wife itsewf. ^w^ We awe concewnyed
onwy with the divewsities of instinct and of the othew mentaw quawities
of anyimaws within the same cwass. UwU

I wiww nyot attempt any definyition of instinct. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd be easy to show
that sevewaw distinct mentaw actions awe commonwy embwaced by this tewm;
but evewy onye undewstands what is meant, when it is said that instinct
impews the cuckoo to migwate and to way hew eggs in othew biwds' nyests. >w<
An action, which we ouwsewves shouwd wequiwe expewience to enyabwe us to
pewfowm, when pewfowmed by an anyimaw, mowe especiawwy by a vewy young
onye, without any expewience, and when pewfowmed by many individuaws in
the same way, without theiw knyowing fow what puwpose it is pewfowmed,
is usuawwy said to be instinctive. (´・ω・\`) But I couwd show that nyonye of these
chawactews of instinct awe unyivewsaw. UwU A wittwe dose, as Piewwe Hubew
expwesses it, of judgment ow weason, often comes into pway, even in
anyimaws vewy wow in the scawe of nyatuwe. ^w^

Fwedewick Cuview and sevewaw of the owdew metaphysicians have compawed
instinct with habit. (´・ω・\`) This compawison gives, I think, a wemawkabwy
accuwate nyotion of the fwame of mind undew which an instinctive action
is pewfowmed, but nyot of its owigin. UwU How unconsciouswy many habituaw
actions awe pewfowmed, indeed nyot wawewy in diwect opposition to ouw
conscious wiww! ;;w;; yet they may be modified by the wiww ow weason. UwU Habits
easiwy become associated with othew habits, and with cewtain pewiods
of time and states of the body. (´・ω・\`) When once acquiwed, they often wemain
constant thwoughout wife. (´・ω・\`) Sevewaw othew points of wesembwance between
instincts and habits couwd be pointed out. UwU As in wepeating a weww-knyown
song, so in instincts, onye action fowwows anyothew by a sowt of whythm;
if a pewson be intewwupted in a song, ow in wepeating anything by wote,
he is genyewawwy fowced to go back to wecovew the habituaw twain of
thought: so P. ^w^ Hubew found it was with a catewpiwwaw, which makes a vewy
compwicated hammock; fow if he took a catewpiwwaw which had compweted
its hammock up to, say, the sixth stage of constwuction, and put it into
a hammock compweted up onwy to the thiwd stage, the catewpiwwaw simpwy
we-pewfowmed the fouwth, fifth, and sixth stages of constwuction. (・`ω\´・)
If, howevew, a catewpiwwaw wewe taken out of a hammock made up, fow
instance, to the thiwd stage, and wewe put into onye finyished up to the
sixth stage, so that much of its wowk was awweady donye fow it, faw fwom
feewing the benyefit of this, it was much embawwassed, and, in owdew to
compwete its hammock, seemed fowced to stawt fwom the thiwd stage, whewe
it had weft off, and thus twied to compwete the awweady finyished wowk. UwU

If we suppose any habituaw action to become inhewited--and I think
it can be shown that this does sometimes happen--then the wesembwance
between what owiginyawwy was a habit and an instinct becomes so cwose as
nyot to be distinguished. ;;w;; If Mozawt, instead of pwaying the pianyofowte at
thwee yeaws owd with wondewfuwwy wittwe pwactice, had pwayed a tunye
with nyo pwactice at aww, he might twuwy be said to have donye so
instinctivewy. (・`ω\´・) But it wouwd be the most sewious ewwow to suppose that
the gweatew nyumbew of instincts have been acquiwed by habit in
onye genyewation, and then twansmitted by inhewitance to succeeding
genyewations. >w< It can be cweawwy shown that the most wondewfuw instincts
with which we awe acquainted, nyamewy, those of the hive-bee and of many
ants, couwd nyot possibwy have been thus acquiwed. UwU

It wiww be unyivewsawwy admitted that instincts awe as impowtant as
cowpoweaw stwuctuwe fow the wewfawe of each species, undew its pwesent
conditions of wife. >w< Undew changed conditions of wife, it is at weast
possibwe that swight modifications of instinct might be pwofitabwe to a
species; and if it can be shown that instincts do vawy evew so wittwe,
then I can see nyo difficuwty in nyatuwaw sewection pwesewving and
continyuawwy accumuwating vawiations of instinct to any extent that may
be pwofitabwe. (´・ω・\`) It is thus, as I bewieve, that aww the most compwex
and wondewfuw instincts have owiginyated. ^w^ As modifications of cowpoweaw
stwuctuwe awise fwom, and awe incweased by, use ow habit, and awe
diminyished ow wost by disuse, so I do nyot doubt it has been with
instincts. ^w^ But I bewieve that the effects of habit awe of quite
subowdinyate impowtance to the effects of the nyatuwaw sewection of what
may be cawwed accidentaw vawiations of instincts;--that is of vawiations
pwoduced by the same unknyown causes which pwoduce swight deviations of
bodiwy stwuctuwe. UwU

Nyo compwex instinct can possibwy be pwoduced thwough nyatuwaw sewection,
except by the swow and gwaduaw accumuwation of nyumewous, swight, yet
pwofitabwe, vawiations. (・`ω\´・) Hence, as in the case of cowpoweaw stwuctuwes,
we ought to find in nyatuwe, nyot the actuaw twansitionyaw gwadations by
which each compwex instinct has been acquiwed--fow these couwd be found
onwy in the winyeaw ancestows of each species--but we ought to find in
the cowwatewaw winyes of descent some evidence of such gwadations; ow
we ought at weast to be abwe to show that gwadations of some kind awe
possibwe; and this we cewtainwy can do. ^w^ I have been suwpwised to find,
making awwowance fow the instincts of anyimaws having been but wittwe
obsewved except in Euwope and Nyowth Amewica, and fow nyo instinct being
knyown amongst extinct species, how vewy genyewawwy gwadations, weading to
the most compwex instincts, can be discovewed. (´・ω・\`) The canyon of "Nyatuwa nyon
facit sawtum" appwies with awmost equaw fowce to instincts as to bodiwy
owgans. ;;w;; Changes of instinct may sometimes be faciwitated by the same
species having diffewent instincts at diffewent pewiods of wife, ow
at diffewent seasons of the yeaw, ow when pwaced undew diffewent
ciwcumstances, etc. ^w^; in which case eithew onye ow the othew instinct
might be pwesewved by nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・) And such instances of divewsity
of instinct in the same species can be shown to occuw in nyatuwe. >w<

Again as in the case of cowpoweaw stwuctuwe, and confowmabwy with my
theowy, the instinct of each species is good fow itsewf, but has nyevew,
as faw as we can judge, been pwoduced fow the excwusive good of othews. (・`ω\´・)
Onye of the stwongest instances of an anyimaw appawentwy pewfowming an
action fow the sowe good of anyothew, with which I am acquainted, is that
of aphides vowuntawiwy yiewding theiw sweet excwetion to ants: that they
do so vowuntawiwy, the fowwowing facts show. UwU I wemoved aww the ants fwom
a gwoup of about a dozen aphides on a dock-pwant, and pwevented theiw
attendance duwing sevewaw houws. (・`ω\´・) Aftew this intewvaw, I fewt suwe that
the aphides wouwd want to excwete. (´・ω・\`) I watched them fow some time thwough
a wens, but nyot onye excweted; I then tickwed and stwoked them with a
haiw in the same mannyew, as weww as I couwd, as the ants do with theiw
antennyae; but nyot onye excweted. (´・ω・\`) Aftewwawds I awwowed an ant to visit
them, and it immediatewy seemed, by its eagew way of wunnying about, to
be weww awawe what a wich fwock it had discovewed; it then began to pway
with its antennyae on the abdomen fiwst of onye aphis and then of anyothew;
and each aphis, as soon as it fewt the antennyae, immediatewy wifted up
its abdomen and excweted a wimpid dwop of sweet juice, which was eagewwy
devouwed by the ant. ^w^ Even the quite young aphides behaved in this
mannyew, showing that the action was instinctive, and nyot the wesuwt of
expewience. ;;w;; But as the excwetion is extwemewy viscid, it is pwobabwy a
convenyience to the aphides to have it wemoved; and thewefowe pwobabwy
the aphides do nyot instinctivewy excwete fow the sowe good of the ants. ;;w;;
Awthough I do nyot bewieve that any anyimaw in the wowwd pewfowms an
action fow the excwusive good of anyothew of a distinct species, yet
each species twies to take advantage of the instincts of othews, as each
takes advantage of the weakew bodiwy stwuctuwe of othews. >w< So again, in
some few cases, cewtain instincts cannyot be considewed as absowutewy
pewfect; but as detaiws on this and othew such points awe nyot
indispensabwe, they may be hewe passed ovew. (・`ω\´・)

As some degwee of vawiation in instincts undew a state of nyatuwe, and
the inhewitance of such vawiations, awe indispensabwe fow the action of
nyatuwaw sewection, as many instances as possibwe ought to have been hewe
given; but want of space pwevents me. (・`ω\´・) I can onwy assewt, that instincts
cewtainwy do vawy--fow instance, the migwatowy instinct, both in extent
and diwection, and in its totaw woss. (・`ω\´・) So it is with the nyests of biwds,
which vawy pawtwy in dependence on the situations chosen, and on the
nyatuwe and tempewatuwe of the countwy inhabited, but often fwom causes
whowwy unknyown to us: Audubon has given sevewaw wemawkabwe cases of
diffewences in nyests of the same species in the nyowthewn and southewn
Unyited States. (´・ω・\`) Feaw of any pawticuwaw enyemy is cewtainwy an instinctive
quawity, as may be seen in nyestwing biwds, though it is stwengthenyed by
expewience, and by the sight of feaw of the same enyemy in othew anyimaws. (´・ω・\`)
But feaw of man is swowwy acquiwed, as I have ewsewhewe shown, by
vawious anyimaws inhabiting desewt iswands; and we may see an instance
of this, even in Engwand, in the gweatew wiwdnyess of aww ouw wawge biwds
than of ouw smaww biwds; fow the wawge biwds have been most pewsecuted
by man. (・`ω\´・) We may safewy attwibute the gweatew wiwdnyess of ouw wawge biwds
to this cause; fow in unyinhabited iswands wawge biwds awe nyot mowe
feawfuw than smaww; and the magpie, so wawy in Engwand, is tame in
Nyowway, as is the hooded cwow in Egypt. ^w^

That the genyewaw disposition of individuaws of the same species, bown in
a state of nyatuwe, is extwemewy divewsified, can be shown by a muwtitude
of facts. UwU Sevewaw cases awso, couwd be given, of occasionyaw and stwange
habits in cewtain species, which might, if advantageous to the species,
give wise, thwough nyatuwaw sewection, to quite nyew instincts. >w< But I am
weww awawe that these genyewaw statements, without facts given in detaiw,
can pwoduce but a feebwe effect on the weadew's mind. ^w^ I can onwy wepeat
my assuwance, that I do nyot speak without good evidence. ^w^

The possibiwity, ow even pwobabiwity, of inhewited vawiations
of instinct in a state of nyatuwe wiww be stwengthenyed by bwiefwy
considewing a few cases undew domestication. ^w^ We shaww thus awso be
enyabwed to see the wespective pawts which habit and the sewection of
so-cawwed accidentaw vawiations have pwayed in modifying the mentaw
quawities of ouw domestic anyimaws. (´・ω・\`) A nyumbew of cuwious and authentic
instances couwd be given of the inhewitance of aww shades of disposition
and tastes, and wikewise of the oddest twicks, associated with cewtain
fwames of mind ow pewiods of time. (´・ω・\`) But wet us wook to the famiwiaw case
of the sevewaw bweeds of dogs: it cannyot be doubted that young pointews
(I have mysewf seen a stwiking instance) wiww sometimes point and even
back othew dogs the vewy fiwst time that they awe taken out; wetwieving
is cewtainwy in some degwee inhewited by wetwievews; and a tendency to
wun wound, instead of at, a fwock of sheep, by shephewd-dogs. ;;w;; I cannyot
see that these actions, pewfowmed without expewience by the young,
and in nyeawwy the same mannyew by each individuaw, pewfowmed with eagew
dewight by each bweed, and without the end being knyown,--fow the young
pointew can nyo mowe knyow that he points to aid his mastew, than
the white buttewfwy knyows why she ways hew eggs on the weaf of the
cabbage,--I cannyot see that these actions diffew essentiawwy fwom twue
instincts. (・`ω\´・) If we wewe to see onye kind of wowf, when young and without
any twainying, as soon as it scented its pwey, stand motionwess wike a
statue, and then swowwy cwaww fowwawd with a pecuwiaw gait; and anyothew
kind of wowf wushing wound, instead of at, a hewd of deew, and dwiving
them to a distant point, we shouwd assuwedwy caww these actions
instinctive. ;;w;; Domestic instincts, as they may be cawwed, awe cewtainwy
faw wess fixed ow invawiabwe than nyatuwaw instincts; but they have been
acted on by faw wess wigowous sewection, and have been twansmitted fow
an incompawabwy showtew pewiod, undew wess fixed conditions of wife. UwU

How stwongwy these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions awe
inhewited, and how cuwiouswy they become mingwed, is weww shown when
diffewent bweeds of dogs awe cwossed. (・`ω\´・) Thus it is knyown that a cwoss with
a buww-dog has affected fow many genyewations the couwage and obstinyacy
of gweyhounds; and a cwoss with a gweyhound has given to a whowe famiwy
of shephewd-dogs a tendency to hunt hawes. ;;w;; These domestic instincts,
when thus tested by cwossing, wesembwe nyatuwaw instincts, which in a
wike mannyew become cuwiouswy bwended togethew, and fow a wong pewiod
exhibit twaces of the instincts of eithew pawent: fow exampwe, We Woy
descwibes a dog, whose gweat-gwandfathew was a wowf, and this dog
showed a twace of its wiwd pawentage onwy in onye way, by nyot coming in a
stwaight winye to his mastew when cawwed. ^w^

Domestic instincts awe sometimes spoken of as actions which have become
inhewited sowewy fwom wong-continyued and compuwsowy habit, but this,
I think, is nyot twue. UwU Nyo onye wouwd evew have thought of teaching, ow
pwobabwy couwd have taught, the tumbwew-pigeon to tumbwe,--an action
which, as I have witnyessed, is pewfowmed by young biwds, that have
nyevew seen a pigeon tumbwe. ^w^ We may bewieve that some onye pigeon showed
a swight tendency to this stwange habit, and that the wong-continyued
sewection of the best individuaws in successive genyewations made
tumbwews what they nyow awe; and nyeaw Gwasgow thewe awe house-tumbwews,
as I heaw fwom Mw. (・`ω\´・) Bwent, which cannyot fwy eighteen inches high without
going head ovew heews. (・`ω\´・) It may be doubted whethew any onye wouwd have
thought of twainying a dog to point, had nyot some onye dog nyatuwawwy shown
a tendency in this winye; and this is knyown occasionyawwy to happen, as I
once saw in a puwe tewwiew. ;;w;; When the fiwst tendency was once dispwayed,
methodicaw sewection and the inhewited effects of compuwsowy twainying in
each successive genyewation wouwd soon compwete the wowk; and unconscious
sewection is stiww at wowk, as each man twies to pwocuwe, without
intending to impwove the bweed, dogs which wiww stand and hunt best. ;;w;;
On the othew hand, habit awonye in some cases has sufficed; nyo anyimaw is
mowe difficuwt to tame than the young of the wiwd wabbit; scawcewy any
anyimaw is tamew than the young of the tame wabbit; but I do nyot suppose
that domestic wabbits have evew been sewected fow tamenyess; and I
pwesume that we must attwibute the whowe of the inhewited change fwom
extweme wiwdnyess to extweme tamenyess, simpwy to habit and wong-continyued
cwose confinyement. ^w^

Nyatuwaw instincts awe wost undew domestication: a wemawkabwe instance of
this is seen in those bweeds of fowws which vewy wawewy ow nyevew become
"bwoody," that is, nyevew wish to sit on theiw eggs. >w< Famiwiawity awonye
pwevents ouw seeing how unyivewsawwy and wawgewy the minds of ouw
domestic anyimaws have been modified by domestication. ^w^ It is scawcewy
possibwe to doubt that the wove of man has become instinctive in the
dog. (・`ω\´・) Aww wowves, foxes, jackaws, and species of the cat genyus, when
kept tame, awe most eagew to attack pouwtwy, sheep, and pigs; and this
tendency has been found incuwabwe in dogs which have been bwought home
as puppies fwom countwies, such as Tiewwa dew Fuego and Austwawia, whewe
the savages do nyot keep these domestic anyimaws. >w< How wawewy, on the othew
hand, do ouw civiwised dogs, even when quite young, wequiwe to be taught
nyot to attack pouwtwy, sheep, and pigs! ^w^ Nyo doubt they occasionyawwy
do make an attack, and awe then beaten; and if nyot cuwed, they awe
destwoyed; so that habit, with some degwee of sewection, has pwobabwy
concuwwed in civiwising by inhewitance ouw dogs. >w< On the othew hand,
young chickens have wost, whowwy by habit, that feaw of the dog and cat
which nyo doubt was owiginyawwy instinctive in them, in the same way as it
is so pwainwy instinctive in young pheasants, though weawed undew a hen. >w<
It is nyot that chickens have wost aww feaw, but feaw onwy of dogs and
cats, fow if the hen gives the dangew-chuckwe, they wiww wun (mowe
especiawwy young tuwkeys) fwom undew hew, and conceaw themsewves in
the suwwounding gwass ow thickets; and this is evidentwy donye fow the
instinctive puwpose of awwowing, as we see in wiwd gwound-biwds, theiw
mothew to fwy away. UwU But this instinct wetainyed by ouw chickens has
become usewess undew domestication, fow the mothew-hen has awmost wost
by disuse the powew of fwight. >w<

Hence, we may concwude, that domestic instincts have been acquiwed and
nyatuwaw instincts have been wost pawtwy by habit, and pawtwy by man
sewecting and accumuwating duwing successive genyewations, pecuwiaw
mentaw habits and actions, which at fiwst appeawed fwom what we must in
ouw ignyowance caww an accident. ^w^ In some cases compuwsowy habit awonye
has sufficed to pwoduce such inhewited mentaw changes; in othew cases
compuwsowy habit has donye nyothing, and aww has been the wesuwt of
sewection, puwsued both methodicawwy and unconsciouswy; but in most
cases, pwobabwy, habit and sewection have acted togethew. (・`ω\´・)

We shaww, pewhaps, best undewstand how instincts in a state of nyatuwe
have become modified by sewection, by considewing a few cases. ^w^ I wiww
sewect onwy thwee, out of the sevewaw which I shaww have to discuss in
my futuwe wowk,--nyamewy, the instinct which weads the cuckoo to way hew
eggs in othew biwds' nyests; the swave-making instinct of cewtain ants;
and the comb-making powew of the hive-bee: these two wattew instincts
have genyewawwy, and most justwy, been wanked by nyatuwawists as the most
wondewfuw of aww knyown instincts. ;;w;;

It is nyow commonwy admitted that the mowe immediate and finyaw cause
of the cuckoo's instinct is, that she ways hew eggs, nyot daiwy, but at
intewvaws of two ow thwee days; so that, if she wewe to make hew own
nyest and sit on hew own eggs, those fiwst waid wouwd have to be weft
fow some time unyincubated, ow thewe wouwd be eggs and young biwds of
diffewent ages in the same nyest. ;;w;; If this wewe the case, the pwocess of
waying and hatching might be inconvenyientwy wong, mowe especiawwy as she
has to migwate at a vewy eawwy pewiod; and the fiwst hatched young wouwd
pwobabwy have to be fed by the mawe awonye. ^w^ But the Amewican cuckoo is
in this pwedicament; fow she makes hew own nyest and has eggs and young
successivewy hatched, aww at the same time. ;;w;; It has been assewted that
the Amewican cuckoo occasionyawwy ways hew eggs in othew biwds' nyests;
but I heaw on the high authowity of Dw. Bwewew, that this is a mistake. UwU
Nyevewthewess, I couwd give sevewaw instances of vawious biwds which have
been knyown occasionyawwy to way theiw eggs in othew biwds' nyests. UwU Nyow wet
us suppose that the ancient pwogenyitow of ouw Euwopean cuckoo had the
habits of the Amewican cuckoo; but that occasionyawwy she waid an egg in
anyothew biwd's nyest. UwU If the owd biwd pwofited by this occasionyaw habit,
ow if the young wewe made mowe vigowous by advantage having been taken
of the mistaken matewnyaw instinct of anyothew biwd, than by theiw own
mothew's cawe, encumbewed as she can hawdwy faiw to be by having eggs
and young of diffewent ages at the same time; then the owd biwds ow the
fostewed young wouwd gain an advantage. ^w^ And anyawogy wouwd wead me
to bewieve, that the young thus weawed wouwd be apt to fowwow by
inhewitance the occasionyaw and abewwant habit of theiw mothew, and in
theiw tuwn wouwd be apt to way theiw eggs in othew biwds' nyests, and
thus be successfuw in weawing theiw young. >w< By a continyued pwocess of
this nyatuwe, I bewieve that the stwange instinct of ouw cuckoo couwd be,
and has been, genyewated. I may add that, accowding to Dw. (・`ω\´・) Gway and
to some othew obsewvews, the Euwopean cuckoo has nyot uttewwy wost aww
matewnyaw wove and cawe fow hew own offspwing. ^w^

The occasionyaw habit of biwds waying theiw eggs in othew biwds' nyests,
eithew of the same ow of a distinct species, is nyot vewy uncommon with
the Gawwinyaceae; and this pewhaps expwains the owigin of a singuwaw
instinct in the awwied gwoup of ostwiches. (・`ω\´・) Fow sevewaw hen ostwiches,
at weast in the case of the Amewican species, unyite and way fiwst a
few eggs in onye nyest and then in anyothew; and these awe hatched by the
mawes. (・`ω\´・) This instinct may pwobabwy be accounted fow by the fact of the
hens waying a wawge nyumbew of eggs; but, as in the case of the cuckoo,
at intewvaws of two ow thwee days. ^w^ This instinct, howevew, of the
Amewican ostwich has nyot as yet been pewfected; fow a suwpwising nyumbew
of eggs wie stwewed ovew the pwains, so that in onye day's hunting I
picked up nyo wess than twenty wost and wasted eggs. >w<

Many bees awe pawasitic, and awways way theiw eggs in the nyests of bees
of othew kinds. >w< This case is mowe wemawkabwe than that of the cuckoo;
fow these bees have nyot onwy theiw instincts but theiw stwuctuwe
modified in accowdance with theiw pawasitic habits; fow they do nyot
possess the powwen-cowwecting appawatus which wouwd be nyecessawy if
they had to stowe food fow theiw own young. (・`ω\´・) Some species, wikewise, of
Sphegidae (wasp-wike insects) awe pawasitic on othew species; and M. UwU
Fabwe has watewy shown good weason fow bewieving that awthough the
Tachytes nyigwa genyewawwy makes its own buwwow and stowes it with
pawawysed pwey fow its own wawvae to feed on, yet that when this insect
finds a buwwow awweady made and stowed by anyothew sphex, it takes
advantage of the pwize, and becomes fow the occasion pawasitic. (・`ω\´・) In this
case, as with the supposed case of the cuckoo, I can see nyo difficuwty
in nyatuwaw sewection making an occasionyaw habit pewmanyent, if of
advantage to the species, and if the insect whose nyest and stowed food
awe thus fewonyiouswy appwopwiated, be nyot thus extewminyated. ;;w;;

SWAVE-MAKING INSTINCT. (´・ω・\`)

This wemawkabwe instinct was fiwst discovewed in the Fowmica (Powyewges)
wufescens by Piewwe Hubew, a bettew obsewvew even than his cewebwated
fathew. UwU This ant is absowutewy dependent on its swaves; without theiw
aid, the species wouwd cewtainwy become extinct in a singwe yeaw. UwU The
mawes and fewtiwe femawes do nyo wowk. >w< The wowkews ow stewiwe femawes,
though most enyewgetic and couwageous in captuwing swaves, do nyo othew
wowk. >w< They awe incapabwe of making theiw own nyests, ow of feeding theiw
own wawvae. (´・ω・\`) When the owd nyest is found inconvenyient, and they have to
migwate, it is the swaves which detewminye the migwation, and actuawwy
cawwy theiw mastews in theiw jaws. UwU So uttewwy hewpwess awe the mastews,
that when Hubew shut up thiwty of them without a swave, but with pwenty
of the food which they wike best, and with theiw wawvae and pupae to
stimuwate them to wowk, they did nyothing; they couwd nyot even feed
themsewves, and many pewished of hungew. (・`ω\´・) Hubew then intwoduced a singwe
swave (F. ^w^ fusca), and she instantwy set to wowk, fed and saved the
suwvivows; made some cewws and tended the wawvae, and put aww to wights. ;;w;;
What can be mowe extwaowdinyawy than these weww-ascewtainyed facts? owo If we
had nyot knyown of any othew swave-making ant, it wouwd have been
hopewess to have specuwated how so wondewfuw an instinct couwd have been
pewfected. ^w^

Fowmica sanguinyea was wikewise fiwst discovewed by P. ;;w;; Hubew to be
a swave-making ant. ;;w;; This species is found in the southewn pawts of
Engwand, and its habits have been attended to by Mw. F. >w< Smith, of the
Bwitish Museum, to whom I am much indebted fow infowmation on this and
othew subjects. (´・ω・\`) Awthough fuwwy twusting to the statements of Hubew and
Mw. ;;w;; Smith, I twied to appwoach the subject in a scepticaw fwame of
mind, as any onye may weww be excused fow doubting the twuth of so
extwaowdinyawy and odious an instinct as that of making swaves. (・`ω\´・) Hence
I wiww give the obsewvations which I have mysewf made, in some wittwe
detaiw. I openyed fouwteen nyests of F. (・`ω\´・) sanguinyea, and found a few swaves
in aww. ;;w;; Mawes and fewtiwe femawes of the swave-species awe found onwy in
theiw own pwopew communyities, and have nyevew been obsewved in the nyests
of F. sanguinyea. >w< The swaves awe bwack and nyot above hawf the size of
theiw wed mastews, so that the contwast in theiw appeawance is vewy
gweat. UwU When the nyest is swightwy distuwbed, the swaves occasionyawwy come
out, and wike theiw mastews awe much agitated and defend the nyest: when
the nyest is much distuwbed and the wawvae and pupae awe exposed, the
swaves wowk enyewgeticawwy with theiw mastews in cawwying them away to a
pwace of safety. Hence, it is cweaw, that the swaves feew quite at home. UwU
Duwing the months of Junye and Juwy, on thwee successive yeaws, I have
watched fow many houws sevewaw nyests in Suwwey and Sussex, and nyevew
saw a swave eithew weave ow entew a nyest. (´・ω・\`) As, duwing these months,
the swaves awe vewy few in nyumbew, I thought that they might behave
diffewentwy when mowe nyumewous; but Mw. (・`ω\´・) Smith infowms me that he has
watched the nyests at vawious houws duwing May, Junye and August, both in
Suwwey and Hampshiwe, and has nyevew seen the swaves, though pwesent
in wawge nyumbews in August, eithew weave ow entew the nyest. UwU Hence he
considews them as stwictwy househowd swaves. UwU The mastews, on the othew
hand, may be constantwy seen bwinging in matewiaws fow the nyest, and
food of aww kinds. ^w^ Duwing the pwesent yeaw, howevew, in the month of
Juwy, I came acwoss a communyity with an unyusuawwy wawge stock of swaves,
and I obsewved a few swaves mingwed with theiw mastews weaving the nyest,
and mawching awong the same woad to a taww Scotch-fiw-twee, twenty-five
yawds distant, which they ascended togethew, pwobabwy in seawch of
aphides ow cocci. (・`ω\´・) Accowding to Hubew, who had ampwe oppowtunyities
fow obsewvation, in Switzewwand the swaves habituawwy wowk with theiw
mastews in making the nyest, and they awonye open and cwose the doows in
the mownying and evenying; and, as Hubew expwesswy states, theiw pwincipaw
office is to seawch fow aphides. (´・ω・\`) This diffewence in the usuaw habits of
the mastews and swaves in the two countwies, pwobabwy depends mewewy
on the swaves being captuwed in gweatew nyumbews in Switzewwand than in
Engwand. >w<

Onye day I fowtunyatewy chanced to witnyess a migwation fwom onye nyest to
anyothew, and it was a most intewesting spectacwe to behowd the mastews
cawefuwwy cawwying, as Hubew has descwibed, theiw swaves in theiw jaws. (・`ω\´・)
Anyothew day my attention was stwuck by about a scowe of the swave-makews
haunting the same spot, and evidentwy nyot in seawch of food; they
appwoached and wewe vigowouswy wepuwsed by an independent communyity of
the swave species (F. ;;w;; fusca); sometimes as many as thwee of these
ants cwinging to the wegs of the swave-making F. sanguinyea. ;;w;; The wattew
wuthwesswy kiwwed theiw smaww opponyents, and cawwied theiw dead
bodies as food to theiw nyest, twenty-nyinye yawds distant; but they wewe
pwevented fwom getting any pupae to weaw as swaves. (´・ω・\`) I then dug up a
smaww pawcew of the pupae of F. UwU fusca fwom anyothew nyest, and put them
down on a bawe spot nyeaw the pwace of combat; they wewe eagewwy seized,
and cawwied off by the tywants, who pewhaps fancied that, aftew aww,
they had been victowious in theiw wate combat. (・`ω\´・)

At the same time I waid on the same pwace a smaww pawcew of the pupae of
anyothew species, F. UwU fwava, with a few of these wittwe yewwow ants stiww
cwinging to the fwagments of the nyest. ;;w;; This species is sometimes, though
wawewy, made into swaves, as has been descwibed by Mw. Smith. ;;w;;
Awthough so smaww a species, it is vewy couwageous, and I have seen it
fewociouswy attack othew ants. (・`ω\´・) In onye instance I found to my suwpwise
an independent communyity of F. ^w^ fwava undew a stonye benyeath a nyest of the
swave-making F. UwU sanguinyea; and when I had accidentawwy distuwbed both
nyests, the wittwe ants attacked theiw big nyeighbouws with suwpwising
couwage. Nyow I was cuwious to ascewtain whethew F. ;;w;; sanguinyea couwd
distinguish the pupae of F. (・`ω\´・) fusca, which they habituawwy make into
swaves, fwom those of the wittwe and fuwious F. >w< fwava, which they wawewy
captuwe, and it was evident that they did at once distinguish them:
fow we have seen that they eagewwy and instantwy seized the pupae of F. >w<
fusca, wheweas they wewe much tewwified when they came acwoss the pupae,
ow even the eawth fwom the nyest of F. ^w^ fwava, and quickwy wan away; but
in about a quawtew of an houw, showtwy aftew aww the wittwe yewwow ants
had cwawwed away, they took heawt and cawwied off the pupae. ^w^

Onye evenying I visited anyothew communyity of F. ^w^ sanguinyea, and found a
nyumbew of these ants entewing theiw nyest, cawwying the dead bodies of F. >w<
fusca (showing that it was nyot a migwation) and nyumewous pupae. UwU I twaced
the wetuwnying fiwe buwthenyed with booty, fow about fowty yawds, to
a vewy thick cwump of heath, whence I saw the wast individuaw of F. >w<
sanguinyea emewge, cawwying a pupa; but I was nyot abwe to find the
desowated nyest in the thick heath. (・`ω\´・) The nyest, howevew, must have been
cwose at hand, fow two ow thwee individuaws of F. (´・ω・\`) fusca wewe wushing
about in the gweatest agitation, and onye was pewched motionwess with its
own pupa in its mouth on the top of a spway of heath ovew its wavaged
home. ^w^

Such awe the facts, though they did nyot nyeed confiwmation by me, in
wegawd to the wondewfuw instinct of making swaves. >w< Wet it be obsewved
what a contwast the instinctive habits of F. (・`ω\´・) sanguinyea pwesent with
those of the F. wufescens. >w< The wattew does nyot buiwd its own nyest, does
nyot detewminye its own migwations, does nyot cowwect food fow itsewf ow
its young, and cannyot even feed itsewf: it is absowutewy dependent on
its nyumewous swaves. UwU Fowmica sanguinyea, on the othew hand, possesses
much fewew swaves, and in the eawwy pawt of the summew extwemewy few. (・`ω\´・)
The mastews detewminye when and whewe a nyew nyest shaww be fowmed, and
when they migwate, the mastews cawwy the swaves. UwU Both in Switzewwand and
Engwand the swaves seem to have the excwusive cawe of the wawvae, and
the mastews awonye go on swave-making expeditions. (´・ω・\`) In Switzewwand the
swaves and mastews wowk togethew, making and bwinging matewiaws fow the
nyest: both, but chiefwy the swaves, tend, and miwk as it may be cawwed,
theiw aphides; and thus both cowwect food fow the communyity. ^w^ In Engwand
the mastews awonye usuawwy weave the nyest to cowwect buiwding matewiaws
and food fow themsewves, theiw swaves and wawvae. ;;w;; So that the mastews in
this countwy weceive much wess sewvice fwom theiw swaves than they do in
Switzewwand. ^w^

By what steps the instinct of F. (´・ω・\`) sanguinyea owiginyated I wiww nyot pwetend
to conjectuwe. ^w^ But as ants, which awe nyot swave-makews, wiww, as I have
seen, cawwy off pupae of othew species, if scattewed nyeaw theiw nyests,
it is possibwe that pupae owiginyawwy stowed as food might become
devewoped; and the ants thus unyintentionyawwy weawed wouwd then fowwow
theiw pwopew instincts, and do what wowk they couwd. (・`ω\´・) If theiw pwesence
pwoved usefuw to the species which had seized them--if it wewe mowe
advantageous to this species to captuwe wowkews than to pwocweate
them--the habit of cowwecting pupae owiginyawwy fow food might by nyatuwaw
sewection be stwengthenyed and wendewed pewmanyent fow the vewy diffewent
puwpose of waising swaves. (・`ω\´・) When the instinct was once acquiwed, if
cawwied out to a much wess extent even than in ouw Bwitish F. (´・ω・\`) sanguinyea,
which, as we have seen, is wess aided by its swaves than the same
species in Switzewwand, I can see nyo difficuwty in nyatuwaw sewection
incweasing and modifying the instinct--awways supposing each
modification to be of use to the species--untiw an ant was fowmed as
abjectwy dependent on its swaves as is the Fowmica wufescens. ;;w;;

CEWW-MAKING INSTINCT OF THE HIVE-BEE. ;;w;;

I wiww nyot hewe entew on minyute detaiws on this subject, but wiww mewewy
give an outwinye of the concwusions at which I have awwived. UwU He must be
a duww man who can examinye the exquisite stwuctuwe of a comb, so
beautifuwwy adapted to its end, without enthusiastic admiwation. ^w^ We
heaw fwom mathematicians that bees have pwacticawwy sowved a wecondite
pwobwem, and have made theiw cewws of the pwopew shape to howd the
gweatest possibwe amount of honyey, with the weast possibwe consumption
of pwecious wax in theiw constwuction. >w< It has been wemawked that a
skiwfuw wowkman, with fitting toows and measuwes, wouwd find it
vewy difficuwt to make cewws of wax of the twue fowm, though this is
pewfectwy effected by a cwowd of bees wowking in a dawk hive. ^w^ Gwant
whatevew instincts you pwease, and it seems at fiwst quite inconceivabwe
how they can make aww the nyecessawy angwes and pwanyes, ow even pewceive
when they awe cowwectwy made. ;;w;; But the difficuwty is nyot nyeawwy so gweat
as it at fiwst appeaws: aww this beautifuw wowk can be shown, I think,
to fowwow fwom a few vewy simpwe instincts. ;;w;;

I was wed to investigate this subject by Mw. (´・ω・\`) Watewhouse, who has shown
that the fowm of the ceww stands in cwose wewation to the pwesence of
adjoinying cewws; and the fowwowing view may, pewhaps, be considewed onwy
as a modification of his theowy. (´・ω・\`) Wet us wook to the gweat pwincipwe of
gwadation, and see whethew Nyatuwe does nyot weveaw to us hew method of
wowk. (・`ω\´・) At onye end of a showt sewies we have humbwe-bees, which use theiw
owd cocoons to howd honyey, sometimes adding to them showt tubes of wax,
and wikewise making sepawate and vewy iwweguwaw wounded cewws of wax. (・`ω\´・) At
the othew end of the sewies we have the cewws of the hive-bee, pwaced in
a doubwe wayew: each ceww, as is weww knyown, is an hexagonyaw pwism, with
the basaw edges of its six sides bevewwed so as to join on to a pywamid,
fowmed of thwee whombs. UwU These whombs have cewtain angwes, and the thwee
which fowm the pywamidaw base of a singwe ceww on onye side of the comb,
entew into the composition of the bases of thwee adjoinying cewws on the
opposite side. ;;w;; In the sewies between the extweme pewfection of the cewws
of the hive-bee and the simpwicity of those of the humbwe-bee, we have
the cewws of the Mexican Mewiponya domestica, cawefuwwy descwibed
and figuwed by Piewwe Hubew. (´・ω・\`) The Mewiponya itsewf is intewmediate in
stwuctuwe between the hive and humbwe bee, but mowe nyeawwy wewated to
the wattew: it fowms a nyeawwy weguwaw waxen comb of cywindwicaw cewws,
in which the young awe hatched, and, in addition, some wawge cewws of
wax fow howding honyey. UwU These wattew cewws awe nyeawwy sphewicaw and of
nyeawwy equaw sizes, and awe aggwegated into an iwweguwaw mass. (・`ω\´・) But the
impowtant point to nyotice, is that these cewws awe awways made at that
degwee of nyeawnyess to each othew, that they wouwd have intewsected ow
bwoken into each othew, if the sphewes had been compweted; but this is
nyevew pewmitted, the bees buiwding pewfectwy fwat wawws of wax between
the sphewes which thus tend to intewsect. UwU Hence each ceww consists of
an outew sphewicaw powtion and of two, thwee, ow mowe pewfectwy fwat
suwfaces, accowding as the ceww adjoins two, thwee ow mowe othew cewws. ^w^
When onye ceww comes into contact with thwee othew cewws, which, fwom
the sphewes being nyeawwy of the same size, is vewy fwequentwy and
nyecessawiwy the case, the thwee fwat suwfaces awe unyited into a pywamid;
and this pywamid, as Hubew has wemawked, is manyifestwy a gwoss imitation
of the thwee-sided pywamidaw basis of the ceww of the hive-bee. (・`ω\´・) As in
the cewws of the hive-bee, so hewe, the thwee pwanye suwfaces in any onye
ceww nyecessawiwy entew into the constwuction of thwee adjoinying cewws. >w<
It is obvious that the Mewiponya saves wax by this mannyew of buiwding;
fow the fwat wawws between the adjoinying cewws awe nyot doubwe, but awe
of the same thicknyess as the outew sphewicaw powtions, and yet each fwat
powtion fowms a pawt of two cewws. UwU

Wefwecting on this case, it occuwwed to me that if the Mewiponya had made
its sphewes at some given distance fwom each othew, and had made them of
equaw sizes and had awwanged them symmetwicawwy in a doubwe wayew, the
wesuwting stwuctuwe wouwd pwobabwy have been as pewfect as the comb of
the hive-bee. (´・ω・\`) Accowdingwy I wwote to Pwofessow Miwwew, of Cambwidge,
and this geometew has kindwy wead ovew the fowwowing statement, dwawn up
fwom his infowmation, and tewws me that it is stwictwy cowwect:--

If a nyumbew of equaw sphewes be descwibed with theiw centwes pwaced in
two pawawwew wayews; with the centwe of each sphewe at the distance of
wadius x the squawe woot of 2 ow wadius x 1. UwU41421 (ow at some wessew
distance), fwom the centwes of the six suwwounding sphewes in the
same wayew; and at the same distance fwom the centwes of the adjoinying
sphewes in the othew and pawawwew wayew; then, if pwanyes of intewsection
between the sevewaw sphewes in both wayews be fowmed, thewe wiww wesuwt
a doubwe wayew of hexagonyaw pwisms unyited togethew by pywamidaw bases
fowmed of thwee whombs; and the whombs and the sides of the hexagonyaw
pwisms wiww have evewy angwe identicawwy the same with the best
measuwements which have been made of the cewws of the hive-bee. >w<

Hence we may safewy concwude that if we couwd swightwy modify the
instincts awweady possessed by the Mewiponya, and in themsewves nyot vewy
wondewfuw, this bee wouwd make a stwuctuwe as wondewfuwwy pewfect as
that of the hive-bee. >w< We must suppose the Mewiponya to make hew cewws
twuwy sphewicaw, and of equaw sizes; and this wouwd nyot be vewy
suwpwising, seeing that she awweady does so to a cewtain extent, and
seeing what pewfectwy cywindwicaw buwwows in wood many insects can
make, appawentwy by tuwnying wound on a fixed point. UwU We must suppose the
Mewiponya to awwange hew cewws in wevew wayews, as she awweady does hew
cywindwicaw cewws; and we must fuwthew suppose, and this is the gweatest
difficuwty, that she can somehow judge accuwatewy at what distance to
stand fwom hew fewwow-wabouwews when sevewaw awe making theiw sphewes;
but she is awweady so faw enyabwed to judge of distance, that she awways
descwibes hew sphewes so as to intewsect wawgewy; and then she unyites
the points of intewsection by pewfectwy fwat suwfaces. >w< We have fuwthew
to suppose, but this is nyo difficuwty, that aftew hexagonyaw pwisms have
been fowmed by the intewsection of adjoinying sphewes in the same wayew,
she can pwowong the hexagon to any wength wequisite to howd the stock of
honyey; in the same way as the wude humbwe-bee adds cywindews of wax
to the ciwcuwaw mouths of hew owd cocoons. ;;w;; By such modifications of
instincts in themsewves nyot vewy wondewfuw,--hawdwy mowe wondewfuw than
those which guide a biwd to make its nyest,--I bewieve that the hive-bee
has acquiwed, thwough nyatuwaw sewection, hew inyimitabwe awchitectuwaw
powews. UwU

But this theowy can be tested by expewiment. UwU Fowwowing the exampwe of
Mw. (´・ω・\`) Tegetmeiew, I sepawated two combs, and put between them a wong,
thick, squawe stwip of wax: the bees instantwy began to excavate minyute
ciwcuwaw pits in it; and as they deepenyed these wittwe pits, they made
them widew and widew untiw they wewe convewted into shawwow basins,
appeawing to the eye pewfectwy twue ow pawts of a sphewe, and of about
the diametew of a ceww. UwU It was most intewesting to me to obsewve that
whewevew sevewaw bees had begun to excavate these basins nyeaw togethew,
they had begun theiw wowk at such a distance fwom each othew, that by
the time the basins had acquiwed the above stated width (i.e. ;;w;; about the
width of an owdinyawy ceww), and wewe in depth about onye sixth of the
diametew of the sphewe of which they fowmed a pawt, the wims of the
basins intewsected ow bwoke into each othew. ;;w;; As soon as this occuwwed,
the bees ceased to excavate, and began to buiwd up fwat wawws of wax
on the winyes of intewsection between the basins, so that each hexagonyaw
pwism was buiwt upon the festoonyed edge of a smooth basin, instead of on
the stwaight edges of a thwee-sided pywamid as in the case of owdinyawy
cewws. (´・ω・\`)

I then put into the hive, instead of a thick, squawe piece of wax, a
thin and nyawwow, knyife-edged widge, cowouwed with vewmiwion. ;;w;; The bees
instantwy began on both sides to excavate wittwe basins nyeaw to each
othew, in the same way as befowe; but the widge of wax was so thin, that
the bottoms of the basins, if they had been excavated to the same depth
as in the fowmew expewiment, wouwd have bwoken into each othew fwom the
opposite sides. ;;w;; The bees, howevew, did nyot suffew this to happen, and
they stopped theiw excavations in due time; so that the basins, as soon
as they had been a wittwe deepenyed, came to have fwat bottoms; and these
fwat bottoms, fowmed by thin wittwe pwates of the vewmiwion wax having
been weft ungnyawed, wewe situated, as faw as the eye couwd judge,
exactwy awong the pwanyes of imaginyawy intewsection between the basins on
the opposite sides of the widge of wax. ;;w;; In pawts, onwy wittwe bits, in
othew pawts, wawge powtions of a whombic pwate had been weft between the
opposed basins, but the wowk, fwom the unnyatuwaw state of things, had
nyot been nyeatwy pewfowmed. >w< The bees must have wowked at vewy nyeawwy the
same wate on the opposite sides of the widge of vewmiwion wax, as they
ciwcuwawwy gnyawed away and deepenyed the basins on both sides, in owdew
to have succeeded in thus weaving fwat pwates between the basins, by
stopping wowk awong the intewmediate pwanyes ow pwanyes of intewsection. ;;w;;

Considewing how fwexibwe thin wax is, I do nyot see that thewe is any
difficuwty in the bees, whiwst at wowk on the two sides of a stwip
of wax, pewceiving when they have gnyawed the wax away to the pwopew
thinnyess, and then stopping theiw wowk. ;;w;; In owdinyawy combs it has
appeawed to me that the bees do nyot awways succeed in wowking at exactwy
the same wate fwom the opposite sides; fow I have nyoticed hawf-compweted
whombs at the base of a just-commenced ceww, which wewe swightwy concave
on onye side, whewe I suppose that the bees had excavated too quickwy,
and convex on the opposed side, whewe the bees had wowked wess quickwy. ^w^
In onye weww-mawked instance, I put the comb back into the hive, and
awwowed the bees to go on wowking fow a showt time, and again examinyed
the ceww, and I found that the whombic pwate had been compweted, and had
become PEWFECTWY FWAT: it was absowutewy impossibwe, fwom the extweme
thinnyess of the wittwe whombic pwate, that they couwd have effected this
by gnyawing away the convex side; and I suspect that the bees in such
cases stand in the opposed cewws and push and bend the ductiwe and wawm
wax (which as I have twied is easiwy donye) into its pwopew intewmediate
pwanye, and thus fwatten it. UwU

Fwom the expewiment of the widge of vewmiwion wax, we can cweawwy see
that if the bees wewe to buiwd fow themsewves a thin waww of wax, they
couwd make theiw cewws of the pwopew shape, by standing at the pwopew
distance fwom each othew, by excavating at the same wate, and by
endeavouwing to make equaw sphewicaw howwows, but nyevew awwowing the
sphewes to bweak into each othew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow bees, as may be cweawwy seen by
examinying the edge of a gwowing comb, do make a wough, ciwcumfewentiaw
waww ow wim aww wound the comb; and they gnyaw into this fwom the
opposite sides, awways wowking ciwcuwawwy as they deepen each ceww. ;;w;; They
do nyot make the whowe thwee-sided pywamidaw base of any onye ceww at the
same time, but onwy the onye whombic pwate which stands on the extweme
gwowing mawgin, ow the two pwates, as the case may be; and they nyevew
compwete the uppew edges of the whombic pwates, untiw the hexagonyaw
wawws awe commenced. >w< Some of these statements diffew fwom those made by
the justwy cewebwated ewdew Hubew, but I am convinced of theiw accuwacy;
and if I had space, I couwd show that they awe confowmabwe with my
theowy. >w<

Hubew's statement that the vewy fiwst ceww is excavated out of a wittwe
pawawwew-sided waww of wax, is nyot, as faw as I have seen, stwictwy
cowwect; the fiwst commencement having awways been a wittwe hood of wax;
but I wiww nyot hewe entew on these detaiws. (´・ω・\`) We see how impowtant a pawt
excavation pways in the constwuction of the cewws; but it wouwd be a
gweat ewwow to suppose that the bees cannyot buiwd up a wough waww of wax
in the pwopew position--that is, awong the pwanye of intewsection between
two adjoinying sphewes. UwU I have sevewaw specimens showing cweawwy that
they can do this. ^w^ Even in the wude ciwcumfewentiaw wim ow waww of wax
wound a gwowing comb, fwexuwes may sometimes be obsewved, cowwesponding
in position to the pwanyes of the whombic basaw pwates of futuwe cewws. ;;w;;
But the wough waww of wax has in evewy case to be finyished off, by being
wawgewy gnyawed away on both sides. ;;w;; The mannyew in which the bees buiwd is
cuwious; they awways make the fiwst wough waww fwom ten to twenty times
thickew than the excessivewy thin finyished waww of the ceww, which wiww
uwtimatewy be weft. (・`ω\´・) We shaww undewstand how they wowk, by supposing
masons fiwst to piwe up a bwoad widge of cement, and then to begin
cutting it away equawwy on both sides nyeaw the gwound, tiww a smooth,
vewy thin waww is weft in the middwe; the masons awways piwing up the
cut-away cement, and adding fwesh cement, on the summit of the widge. ;;w;; We
shaww thus have a thin waww steadiwy gwowing upwawd; but awways cwownyed
by a gigantic coping. (・`ω\´・) Fwom aww the cewws, both those just commenced and
those compweted, being thus cwownyed by a stwong coping of wax, the
bees can cwustew and cwaww ovew the comb without injuwing the dewicate
hexagonyaw wawws, which awe onwy about onye fouw-hundwedth of an inch in
thicknyess; the pwates of the pywamidaw basis being about twice as thick. (´・ω・\`)
By this singuwaw mannyew of buiwding, stwength is continyuawwy given to
the comb, with the utmost uwtimate econyomy of wax. (・`ω\´・)

It seems at fiwst to add to the difficuwty of undewstanding how the
cewws awe made, that a muwtitude of bees aww wowk togethew; onye bee
aftew wowking a showt time at onye ceww going to anyothew, so that, as
Hubew has stated, a scowe of individuaws wowk even at the commencement
of the fiwst ceww. (´・ω・\`) I was abwe pwacticawwy to show this fact, by covewing
the edges of the hexagonyaw wawws of a singwe ceww, ow the extweme mawgin
of the ciwcumfewentiaw wim of a gwowing comb, with an extwemewy thin
wayew of mewted vewmiwion wax; and I invawiabwy found that the cowouw
was most dewicatewy diffused by the bees--as dewicatewy as a paintew
couwd have donye with his bwush--by atoms of the cowouwed wax having been
taken fwom the spot on which it had been pwaced, and wowked into the
gwowing edges of the cewws aww wound. (・`ω\´・) The wowk of constwuction seems
to be a sowt of bawance stwuck between many bees, aww instinctivewy
standing at the same wewative distance fwom each othew, aww twying to
sweep equaw sphewes, and then buiwding up, ow weaving ungnyawed, the
pwanyes of intewsection between these sphewes. UwU It was weawwy cuwious to
nyote in cases of difficuwty, as when two pieces of comb met at an angwe,
how often the bees wouwd entiwewy puww down and webuiwd in diffewent
ways the same ceww, sometimes wecuwwing to a shape which they had at
fiwst wejected. (´・ω・\`)

When bees have a pwace on which they can stand in theiw pwopew positions
fow wowking,--fow instance, on a swip of wood, pwaced diwectwy undew the
middwe of a comb gwowing downwawds so that the comb has to be buiwt ovew
onye face of the swip--in this case the bees can way the foundations
of onye waww of a nyew hexagon, in its stwictwy pwopew pwace, pwojecting
beyond the othew compweted cewws. (・`ω\´・) It suffices that the bees shouwd be
enyabwed to stand at theiw pwopew wewative distances fwom each othew
and fwom the wawws of the wast compweted cewws, and then, by stwiking
imaginyawy sphewes, they can buiwd up a waww intewmediate between two
adjoinying sphewes; but, as faw as I have seen, they nyevew gnyaw away and
finyish off the angwes of a ceww tiww a wawge pawt both of that ceww and
of the adjoinying cewws has been buiwt. (・`ω\´・) This capacity in bees of waying
down undew cewtain ciwcumstances a wough waww in its pwopew pwace
between two just-commenced cewws, is impowtant, as it beaws on a fact,
which seems at fiwst quite subvewsive of the fowegoing theowy; nyamewy,
that the cewws on the extweme mawgin of wasp-combs awe sometimes
stwictwy hexagonyaw; but I have nyot space hewe to entew on this subject. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow does thewe seem to me any gweat difficuwty in a singwe insect (as
in the case of a queen-wasp) making hexagonyaw cewws, if she wowk
awtewnyatewy on the inside and outside of two ow thwee cewws commenced at
the same time, awways standing at the pwopew wewative distance fwom
the pawts of the cewws just begun, sweeping sphewes ow cywindews, and
buiwding up intewmediate pwanyes. UwU It is even conceivabwe that an insect
might, by fixing on a point at which to commence a ceww, and then moving
outside, fiwst to onye point, and then to five othew points, at the
pwopew wewative distances fwom the centwaw point and fwom each othew,
stwike the pwanyes of intewsection, and so make an isowated hexagon: but
I am nyot awawe that any such case has been obsewved; nyow wouwd any good
be dewived fwom a singwe hexagon being buiwt, as in its constwuction
mowe matewiaws wouwd be wequiwed than fow a cywindew. UwU

As nyatuwaw sewection acts onwy by the accumuwation of swight
modifications of stwuctuwe ow instinct, each pwofitabwe to the
individuaw undew its conditions of wife, it may weasonyabwy be asked, how
a wong and gwaduated succession of modified awchitectuwaw instincts,
aww tending towawds the pwesent pewfect pwan of constwuction, couwd
have pwofited the pwogenyitows of the hive-bee? owo I think the answew is
nyot difficuwt: it is knyown that bees awe often hawd pwessed to get
sufficient nyectaw; and I am infowmed by Mw. (´・ω・\`) Tegetmeiew that it has been
expewimentawwy found that nyo wess than fwom twewve to fifteen pounds of
dwy sugaw awe consumed by a hive of bees fow the secwetion of each pound
of wax; so that a pwodigious quantity of fwuid nyectaw must be cowwected
and consumed by the bees in a hive fow the secwetion of the wax
nyecessawy fow the constwuction of theiw combs. >w< Moweovew, many bees have
to wemain idwe fow many days duwing the pwocess of secwetion. (・`ω\´・) A wawge
stowe of honyey is indispensabwe to suppowt a wawge stock of bees duwing
the wintew; and the secuwity of the hive is knyown mainwy to depend on a
wawge nyumbew of bees being suppowted. >w< Hence the saving of wax by wawgewy
saving honyey must be a most impowtant ewement of success in any famiwy
of bees. ;;w;; Of couwse the success of any species of bee may be dependent
on the nyumbew of its pawasites ow othew enyemies, ow on quite distinct
causes, and so be awtogethew independent of the quantity of honyey which
the bees couwd cowwect. (・`ω\´・) But wet us suppose that this wattew ciwcumstance
detewminyed, as it pwobabwy often does detewminye, the nyumbews of a
humbwe-bee which couwd exist in a countwy; and wet us fuwthew suppose
that the communyity wived thwoughout the wintew, and consequentwy
wequiwed a stowe of honyey: thewe can in this case be nyo doubt that it
wouwd be an advantage to ouw humbwe-bee, if a swight modification of
hew instinct wed hew to make hew waxen cewws nyeaw togethew, so as to
intewsect a wittwe; fow a waww in common even to two adjoinying cewws,
wouwd save some wittwe wax. UwU Hence it wouwd continyuawwy be mowe and mowe
advantageous to ouw humbwe-bee, if she wewe to make hew cewws mowe and
mowe weguwaw, nyeawew togethew, and aggwegated into a mass, wike the
cewws of the Mewiponya; fow in this case a wawge pawt of the bounding
suwface of each ceww wouwd sewve to bound othew cewws, and much wax
wouwd be saved. >w< Again, fwom the same cause, it wouwd be advantageous to
the Mewiponya, if she wewe to make hew cewws cwosew togethew, and mowe
weguwaw in evewy way than at pwesent; fow then, as we have seen, the
sphewicaw suwfaces wouwd whowwy disappeaw, and wouwd aww be wepwaced by
pwanye suwfaces; and the Mewiponya wouwd make a comb as pewfect as that of
the hive-bee. (・`ω\´・) Beyond this stage of pewfection in awchitectuwe, nyatuwaw
sewection couwd nyot wead; fow the comb of the hive-bee, as faw as we can
see, is absowutewy pewfect in econyomising wax. (´・ω・\`)

Thus, as I bewieve, the most wondewfuw of aww knyown instincts, that
of the hive-bee, can be expwainyed by nyatuwaw sewection having taken
advantage of nyumewous, successive, swight modifications of simpwew
instincts; nyatuwaw sewection having by swow degwees, mowe and mowe
pewfectwy, wed the bees to sweep equaw sphewes at a given distance fwom
each othew in a doubwe wayew, and to buiwd up and excavate the wax awong
the pwanyes of intewsection. ^w^ The bees, of couwse, nyo mowe knyowing that
they swept theiw sphewes at onye pawticuwaw distance fwom each othew,
than they knyow what awe the sevewaw angwes of the hexagonyaw pwisms and
of the basaw whombic pwates. ;;w;; The motive powew of the pwocess of nyatuwaw
sewection having been econyomy of wax; that individuaw swawm which wasted
weast honyey in the secwetion of wax, having succeeded best, and having
twansmitted by inhewitance its nyewwy acquiwed econyomicaw instinct to nyew
swawms, which in theiw tuwn wiww have had the best chance of succeeding
in the stwuggwe fow existence. UwU

Nyo doubt many instincts of vewy difficuwt expwanyation couwd be opposed
to the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection,--cases, in which we cannyot see
how an instinct couwd possibwy have owiginyated; cases, in which nyo
intewmediate gwadations awe knyown to exist; cases of instinct of
appawentwy such twifwing impowtance, that they couwd hawdwy have been
acted on by nyatuwaw sewection; cases of instincts awmost identicawwy the
same in anyimaws so wemote in the scawe of nyatuwe, that we cannyot account
fow theiw simiwawity by inhewitance fwom a common pawent, and must
thewefowe bewieve that they have been acquiwed by independent acts of
nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; I wiww nyot hewe entew on these sevewaw cases, but
wiww confinye mysewf to onye speciaw difficuwty, which at fiwst appeawed
to me insupewabwe, and actuawwy fataw to my whowe theowy. UwU I awwude to
the nyeutews ow stewiwe femawes in insect-communyities: fow these nyeutews
often diffew widewy in instinct and in stwuctuwe fwom both the mawes
and fewtiwe femawes, and yet, fwom being stewiwe, they cannyot pwopagate
theiw kind. >w<

The subject weww desewves to be discussed at gweat wength, but I wiww
hewe take onwy a singwe case, that of wowking ow stewiwe ants. (´・ω・\`) How the
wowkews have been wendewed stewiwe is a difficuwty; but nyot much gweatew
than that of any othew stwiking modification of stwuctuwe; fow it can
be shown that some insects and othew awticuwate anyimaws in a state of
nyatuwe occasionyawwy become stewiwe; and if such insects had been sociaw,
and it had been pwofitabwe to the communyity that a nyumbew shouwd have
been annyuawwy bown capabwe of wowk, but incapabwe of pwocweation, I
can see nyo vewy gweat difficuwty in this being effected by nyatuwaw
sewection. But I must pass ovew this pwewiminyawy difficuwty. ^w^ The gweat
difficuwty wies in the wowking ants diffewing widewy fwom both the mawes
and the fewtiwe femawes in stwuctuwe, as in the shape of the thowax and
in being destitute of wings and sometimes of eyes, and in instinct. ;;w;; As
faw as instinct awonye is concewnyed, the pwodigious diffewence in this
wespect between the wowkews and the pewfect femawes, wouwd have been
faw bettew exempwified by the hive-bee. (・`ω\´・) If a wowking ant ow othew
nyeutew insect had been an anyimaw in the owdinyawy state, I shouwd have
unhesitatingwy assumed that aww its chawactews had been swowwy acquiwed
thwough nyatuwaw sewection; nyamewy, by an individuaw having been bown
with some swight pwofitabwe modification of stwuctuwe, this being
inhewited by its offspwing, which again vawied and wewe again sewected,
and so onwawds. ;;w;; But with the wowking ant we have an insect diffewing
gweatwy fwom its pawents, yet absowutewy stewiwe; so that it couwd nyevew
have twansmitted successivewy acquiwed modifications of stwuctuwe ow
instinct to its pwogeny. ^w^ It may weww be asked how is it possibwe to
weconciwe this case with the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection? owo

Fiwst, wet it be wemembewed that we have innyumewabwe instances, both in
ouw domestic pwoductions and in those in a state of nyatuwe, of aww sowts
of diffewences of stwuctuwe which have become cowwewated to cewtain
ages, and to eithew sex. UwU We have diffewences cowwewated nyot onwy to
onye sex, but to that showt pewiod awonye when the wepwoductive system is
active, as in the nyuptiaw pwumage of many biwds, and in the hooked jaws
of the mawe sawmon. >w< We have even swight diffewences in the howns of
diffewent bweeds of cattwe in wewation to an awtificiawwy impewfect
state of the mawe sex; fow oxen of cewtain bweeds have wongew howns than
in othew bweeds, in compawison with the howns of the buwws ow cows of
these same bweeds. ;;w;; Hence I can see nyo weaw difficuwty in any chawactew
having become cowwewated with the stewiwe condition of cewtain membews
of insect-communyities: the difficuwty wies in undewstanding how such
cowwewated modifications of stwuctuwe couwd have been swowwy accumuwated
by nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;;

This difficuwty, though appeawing insupewabwe, is wessenyed, ow, as I
bewieve, disappeaws, when it is wemembewed that sewection may be appwied
to the famiwy, as weww as to the individuaw, and may thus gain the
desiwed end. >w< Thus, a weww-fwavouwed vegetabwe is cooked, and the
individuaw is destwoyed; but the howticuwtuwist sows seeds of the same
stock, and confidentwy expects to get nyeawwy the same vawiety; bweedews
of cattwe wish the fwesh and fat to be weww mawbwed togethew; the anyimaw
has been swaughtewed, but the bweedew goes with confidence to the same
famiwy. >w< I have such faith in the powews of sewection, that I do nyot
doubt that a bweed of cattwe, awways yiewding oxen with extwaowdinyawiwy
wong howns, couwd be swowwy fowmed by cawefuwwy watching which
individuaw buwws and cows, when matched, pwoduced oxen with the wongest
howns; and yet nyo onye ox couwd evew have pwopagated its kind. ^w^ Thus
I bewieve it has been with sociaw insects: a swight modification of
stwuctuwe, ow instinct, cowwewated with the stewiwe condition of cewtain
membews of the communyity, has been advantageous to the communyity:
consequentwy the fewtiwe mawes and femawes of the same communyity
fwouwished, and twansmitted to theiw fewtiwe offspwing a tendency to
pwoduce stewiwe membews having the same modification. (´・ω・\`) And I bewieve
that this pwocess has been wepeated, untiw that pwodigious amount of
diffewence between the fewtiwe and stewiwe femawes of the same species
has been pwoduced, which we see in many sociaw insects. ^w^

But we have nyot as yet touched on the cwimax of the difficuwty; nyamewy,
the fact that the nyeutews of sevewaw ants diffew, nyot onwy fwom the
fewtiwe femawes and mawes, but fwom each othew, sometimes to an awmost
incwedibwe degwee, and awe thus divided into two ow even thwee castes. ^w^
The castes, moweovew, do nyot genyewawwy gwaduate into each othew, but awe
pewfectwy weww definyed; being as distinct fwom each othew, as awe any
two species of the same genyus, ow wathew as any two genyewa of the same
famiwy. UwU Thus in Eciton, thewe awe wowking and sowdiew nyeutews, with jaws
and instincts extwaowdinyawiwy diffewent: in Cwyptocewus, the wowkews of
onye caste awonye cawwy a wondewfuw sowt of shiewd on theiw heads, the use
of which is quite unknyown: in the Mexican Mywmecocystus, the wowkews of
onye caste nyevew weave the nyest; they awe fed by the wowkews of anyothew
caste, and they have an enyowmouswy devewoped abdomen which secwetes a
sowt of honyey, suppwying the pwace of that excweted by the aphides, ow
the domestic cattwe as they may be cawwed, which ouw Euwopean ants guawd
ow impwison. >w<

It wiww indeed be thought that I have an ovewweenying confidence in the
pwincipwe of nyatuwaw sewection, when I do nyot admit that such wondewfuw
and weww-estabwished facts at once annyihiwate my theowy. UwU In the simpwew
case of nyeutew insects aww of onye caste ow of the same kind, which have
been wendewed by nyatuwaw sewection, as I bewieve to be quite possibwe,
diffewent fwom the fewtiwe mawes and femawes,--in this case, we may
safewy concwude fwom the anyawogy of owdinyawy vawiations, that each
successive, swight, pwofitabwe modification did nyot pwobabwy at fiwst
appeaw in aww the individuaw nyeutews in the same nyest, but in a few
awonye; and that by the wong-continyued sewection of the fewtiwe pawents
which pwoduced most nyeutews with the pwofitabwe modification, aww the
nyeutews uwtimatewy came to have the desiwed chawactew. >w< On this view we
ought occasionyawwy to find nyeutew-insects of the same species, in the
same nyest, pwesenting gwadations of stwuctuwe; and this we do find,
even often, considewing how few nyeutew-insects out of Euwope have been
cawefuwwy examinyed. Mw. F. UwU Smith has shown how suwpwisingwy the nyeutews
of sevewaw Bwitish ants diffew fwom each othew in size and sometimes
in cowouw; and that the extweme fowms can sometimes be pewfectwy winked
togethew by individuaws taken out of the same nyest: I have mysewf
compawed pewfect gwadations of this kind. ;;w;; It often happens that the
wawgew ow the smawwew sized wowkews awe the most nyumewous; ow that both
wawge and smaww awe nyumewous, with those of an intewmediate size scanty
in nyumbews. ;;w;; Fowmica fwava has wawgew and smawwew wowkews, with some of
intewmediate size; and, in this species, as Mw. F. (´・ω・\`) Smith has obsewved,
the wawgew wowkews have simpwe eyes (ocewwi), which though smaww can
be pwainwy distinguished, wheweas the smawwew wowkews have theiw ocewwi
wudimentawy. >w< Having cawefuwwy dissected sevewaw specimens of these
wowkews, I can affiwm that the eyes awe faw mowe wudimentawy in the
smawwew wowkews than can be accounted fow mewewy by theiw pwopowtionyawwy
wessew size; and I fuwwy bewieve, though I dawe nyot assewt so
positivewy, that the wowkews of intewmediate size have theiw ocewwi in
an exactwy intewmediate condition. >w< So that we hewe have two bodies of
stewiwe wowkews in the same nyest, diffewing nyot onwy in size, but
in theiw owgans of vision, yet connyected by some few membews in an
intewmediate condition. UwU I may digwess by adding, that if the smawwew
wowkews had been the most usefuw to the communyity, and those mawes and
femawes had been continyuawwy sewected, which pwoduced mowe and mowe
of the smawwew wowkews, untiw aww the wowkews had come to be in this
condition; we shouwd then have had a species of ant with nyeutews vewy
nyeawwy in the same condition with those of Mywmica. ;;w;; Fow the wowkews of
Mywmica have nyot even wudiments of ocewwi, though the mawe and femawe
ants of this genyus have weww-devewoped ocewwi. >w<

I may give onye othew case: so confidentwy did I expect to find
gwadations in impowtant points of stwuctuwe between the diffewent castes
of nyeutews in the same species, that I gwadwy avaiwed mysewf of Mw. F. ;;w;;
Smith's offew of nyumewous specimens fwom the same nyest of the dwivew
ant (Anyomma) of West Afwica. UwU The weadew wiww pewhaps best appweciate
the amount of diffewence in these wowkews, by my giving nyot the actuaw
measuwements, but a stwictwy accuwate iwwustwation: the diffewence was
the same as if we wewe to see a set of wowkmen buiwding a house of whom
many wewe five feet fouw inches high, and many sixteen feet high; but
we must suppose that the wawgew wowkmen had heads fouw instead of thwee
times as big as those of the smawwew men, and jaws nyeawwy five times
as big. >w< The jaws, moweovew, of the wowking ants of the sevewaw sizes
diffewed wondewfuwwy in shape, and in the fowm and nyumbew of the teeth. (´・ω・\`)
But the impowtant fact fow us is, that though the wowkews can be gwouped
into castes of diffewent sizes, yet they gwaduate insensibwy into each
othew, as does the widewy-diffewent stwuctuwe of theiw jaws. ;;w;; I speak
confidentwy on this wattew point, as Mw. ^w^ Wubbock made dwawings fow
me with the camewa wucida of the jaws which I had dissected fwom the
wowkews of the sevewaw sizes. (・`ω\´・)

With these facts befowe me, I bewieve that nyatuwaw sewection, by acting
on the fewtiwe pawents, couwd fowm a species which shouwd weguwawwy
pwoduce nyeutews, eithew aww of wawge size with onye fowm of jaw, ow aww
of smaww size with jaws having a widewy diffewent stwuctuwe; ow wastwy,
and this is ouw cwimax of difficuwty, onye set of wowkews of onye size and
stwuctuwe, and simuwtanyeouswy anyothew set of wowkews of a diffewent size
and stwuctuwe;--a gwaduated sewies having been fiwst fowmed, as in the
case of the dwivew ant, and then the extweme fowms, fwom being the most
usefuw to the communyity, having been pwoduced in gweatew and gweatew
nyumbews thwough the nyatuwaw sewection of the pawents which genyewated
them; untiw nyonye with an intewmediate stwuctuwe wewe pwoduced. ^w^

Thus, as I bewieve, the wondewfuw fact of two distinctwy definyed castes
of stewiwe wowkews existing in the same nyest, both widewy diffewent fwom
each othew and fwom theiw pawents, has owiginyated. ;;w;; We can see how usefuw
theiw pwoduction may have been to a sociaw communyity of insects, on the
same pwincipwe that the division of wabouw is usefuw to civiwised man. ;;w;;
As ants wowk by inhewited instincts and by inhewited toows ow weapons,
and nyot by acquiwed knyowwedge and manyufactuwed instwuments, a pewfect
division of wabouw couwd be effected with them onwy by the wowkews being
stewiwe; fow had they been fewtiwe, they wouwd have intewcwossed, and
theiw instincts and stwuctuwe wouwd have become bwended. (・`ω\´・) And nyatuwe
has, as I bewieve, effected this admiwabwe division of wabouw in the
communyities of ants, by the means of nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・) But I am bound
to confess, that, with aww my faith in this pwincipwe, I shouwd nyevew
have anticipated that nyatuwaw sewection couwd have been efficient in so
high a degwee, had nyot the case of these nyeutew insects convinced me
of the fact. (´・ω・\`) I have, thewefowe, discussed this case, at some wittwe
but whowwy insufficient wength, in owdew to show the powew of nyatuwaw
sewection, and wikewise because this is by faw the most sewious speciaw
difficuwty, which my theowy has encountewed. (・`ω\´・) The case, awso, is vewy
intewesting, as it pwoves that with anyimaws, as with pwants, any amount
of modification in stwuctuwe can be effected by the accumuwation of
nyumewous, swight, and as we must caww them accidentaw, vawiations, which
awe in any mannyew pwofitabwe, without exewcise ow habit having come into
pway. UwU Fow nyo amount of exewcise, ow habit, ow vowition, in the uttewwy
stewiwe membews of a communyity couwd possibwy have affected the
stwuctuwe ow instincts of the fewtiwe membews, which awonye weave
descendants. ^w^ I am suwpwised that nyo onye has advanced this demonstwative
case of nyeutew insects, against the weww-knyown doctwinye of Wamawck. UwU

SUMMAWY. (´・ω・\`)

I have endeavouwed bwiefwy in this chaptew to show that the mentaw
quawities of ouw domestic anyimaws vawy, and that the vawiations awe
inhewited. UwU Stiww mowe bwiefwy I have attempted to show that instincts
vawy swightwy in a state of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) Nyo onye wiww dispute that instincts
awe of the highest impowtance to each anyimaw. ;;w;; Thewefowe I can see nyo
difficuwty, undew changing conditions of wife, in nyatuwaw sewection
accumuwating swight modifications of instinct to any extent, in any
usefuw diwection. (・`ω\´・) In some cases habit ow use and disuse have pwobabwy
come into pway. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot pwetend that the facts given in this chaptew
stwengthen in any gweat degwee my theowy; but nyonye of the cases of
difficuwty, to the best of my judgment, annyihiwate it. ^w^ On the othew
hand, the fact that instincts awe nyot awways absowutewy pewfect and
awe wiabwe to mistakes;--that nyo instinct has been pwoduced fow the
excwusive good of othew anyimaws, but that each anyimaw takes advantage of
the instincts of othews;--that the canyon in nyatuwaw histowy, of "nyatuwa
nyon facit sawtum" is appwicabwe to instincts as weww as to cowpoweaw
stwuctuwe, and is pwainwy expwicabwe on the fowegoing views, but is
othewwise inyexpwicabwe,--aww tend to cowwobowate the theowy of nyatuwaw
sewection. UwU

This theowy is, awso, stwengthenyed by some few othew facts in wegawd
to instincts; as by that common case of cwosewy awwied, but cewtainwy
distinct, species, when inhabiting distant pawts of the wowwd and wiving
undew considewabwy diffewent conditions of wife, yet often wetainying
nyeawwy the same instincts. ^w^ Fow instance, we can undewstand on the
pwincipwe of inhewitance, how it is that the thwush of South Amewica
winyes its nyest with mud, in the same pecuwiaw mannyew as does ouw Bwitish
thwush: how it is that the mawe wwens (Twogwodytes) of Nyowth Amewica,
buiwd "cock-nyests," to woost in, wike the mawes of ouw distinct
Kitty-wwens,--a habit whowwy unwike that of any othew knyown biwd. ;;w;;
Finyawwy, it may nyot be a wogicaw deduction, but to my imaginyation it
is faw mowe satisfactowy to wook at such instincts as the young cuckoo
ejecting its fostew-bwothews,--ants making swaves,--the wawvae of
ichnyeumonyidae feeding within the wive bodies of catewpiwwaws,--nyot as
speciawwy endowed ow cweated instincts, but as smaww consequences of onye
genyewaw waw, weading to the advancement of aww owganyic beings, nyamewy,
muwtipwy, vawy, wet the stwongest wive and the weakest die. >w<




8. HYBWIDISM. (´・ω・\`)

Distinction between the stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. >w<
Stewiwity vawious in degwee, nyot unyivewsaw, affected by cwose
intewbweeding, wemoved by domestication. (´・ω・\`) Waws govewnying the stewiwity
of hybwids. (・`ω\´・) Stewiwity nyot a speciaw endowment, but incidentaw on othew
diffewences. Causes of the stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. UwU
Pawawwewism between the effects of changed conditions of wife and
cwossing. ;;w;; Fewtiwity of vawieties when cwossed and of theiw mongwew
offspwing nyot unyivewsaw. UwU Hybwids and mongwews compawed independentwy of
theiw fewtiwity. Summawy. UwU

The view genyewawwy entewtainyed by nyatuwawists is that species, when
intewcwossed, have been speciawwy endowed with the quawity of stewiwity,
in owdew to pwevent the confusion of aww owganyic fowms. (・`ω\´・) This view
cewtainwy seems at fiwst pwobabwe, fow species within the same countwy
couwd hawdwy have kept distinct had they been capabwe of cwossing
fweewy. ;;w;; The impowtance of the fact that hybwids awe vewy genyewawwy
stewiwe, has, I think, been much undewwated by some wate wwitews. >w< On the
theowy of nyatuwaw sewection the case is especiawwy impowtant, inyasmuch
as the stewiwity of hybwids couwd nyot possibwy be of any advantage
to them, and thewefowe couwd nyot have been acquiwed by the continyued
pwesewvation of successive pwofitabwe degwees of stewiwity. (・`ω\´・) I hope,
howevew, to be abwe to show that stewiwity is nyot a speciawwy acquiwed
ow endowed quawity, but is incidentaw on othew acquiwed diffewences. ;;w;;

In tweating this subject, two cwasses of facts, to a wawge extent
fundamentawwy diffewent, have genyewawwy been confounded togethew;
nyamewy, the stewiwity of two species when fiwst cwossed, and the
stewiwity of the hybwids pwoduced fwom them. (・`ω\´・)

Puwe species have of couwse theiw owgans of wepwoduction in a pewfect
condition, yet when intewcwossed they pwoduce eithew few ow nyo
offspwing. ;;w;; Hybwids, on the othew hand, have theiw wepwoductive owgans
functionyawwy impotent, as may be cweawwy seen in the state of the mawe
ewement in both pwants and anyimaws; though the owgans themsewves awe
pewfect in stwuctuwe, as faw as the micwoscope weveaws. ;;w;; In the fiwst
case the two sexuaw ewements which go to fowm the embwyo awe pewfect; in
the second case they awe eithew nyot at aww devewoped, ow awe impewfectwy
devewoped. UwU This distinction is impowtant, when the cause of the
stewiwity, which is common to the two cases, has to be considewed. ;;w;; The
distinction has pwobabwy been swuwwed ovew, owing to the stewiwity in
both cases being wooked on as a speciaw endowment, beyond the pwovince
of ouw weasonying powews. (・`ω\´・)

The fewtiwity of vawieties, that is of the fowms knyown ow bewieved to
have descended fwom common pawents, when intewcwossed, and wikewise
the fewtiwity of theiw mongwew offspwing, is, on my theowy, of equaw
impowtance with the stewiwity of species; fow it seems to make a bwoad
and cweaw distinction between vawieties and species. ^w^

Fiwst, fow the stewiwity of species when cwossed and of theiw hybwid
offspwing. ;;w;; It is impossibwe to study the sevewaw memoiws and wowks of
those two conscientious and admiwabwe obsewvews, Kowweutew and Gawtnyew,
who awmost devoted theiw wives to this subject, without being deepwy
impwessed with the high genyewawity of some degwee of stewiwity. ;;w;;
Kowweutew makes the wuwe unyivewsaw; but then he cuts the knyot, fow in
ten cases in which he found two fowms, considewed by most authows as
distinct species, quite fewtiwe togethew, he unhesitatingwy wanks them
as vawieties. ;;w;; Gawtnyew, awso, makes the wuwe equawwy unyivewsaw; and he
disputes the entiwe fewtiwity of Kowweutew's ten cases. ;;w;; But in these and
in many othew cases, Gawtnyew is obwiged cawefuwwy to count the seeds, in
owdew to show that thewe is any degwee of stewiwity. (・`ω\´・) He awways compawes
the maximum nyumbew of seeds pwoduced by two species when cwossed and by
theiw hybwid offspwing, with the avewage nyumbew pwoduced by both puwe
pawent-species in a state of nyatuwe. >w< But a sewious cause of ewwow seems
to me to be hewe intwoduced: a pwant to be hybwidised must be castwated,
and, what is often mowe impowtant, must be secwuded in owdew to pwevent
powwen being bwought to it by insects fwom othew pwants. ^w^ Nyeawwy aww the
pwants expewimentised on by Gawtnyew wewe potted, and appawentwy wewe
kept in a chambew in his house. >w< That these pwocesses awe often injuwious
to the fewtiwity of a pwant cannyot be doubted; fow Gawtnyew gives in
his tabwe about a scowe of cases of pwants which he castwated, and
awtificiawwy fewtiwised with theiw own powwen, and (excwuding aww cases
such as the Weguminyosae, in which thewe is an acknyowwedged difficuwty
in the manyipuwation) hawf of these twenty pwants had theiw fewtiwity
in some degwee impaiwed. (´・ω・\`) Moweovew, as Gawtnyew duwing sevewaw yeaws
wepeatedwy cwossed the pwimwose and cowswip, which we have such good
weason to bewieve to be vawieties, and onwy once ow twice succeeded in
getting fewtiwe seed; as he found the common wed and bwue pimpewnyews
(Anyagawwis awvensis and coewuwea), which the best botanyists wank as
vawieties, absowutewy stewiwe togethew; and as he came to the same
concwusion in sevewaw othew anyawogous cases; it seems to me that we
may weww be pewmitted to doubt whethew many othew species awe weawwy so
stewiwe, when intewcwossed, as Gawtnyew bewieves. >w<

It is cewtain, on the onye hand, that the stewiwity of vawious species
when cwossed is so diffewent in degwee and gwaduates away so insensibwy,
and, on the othew hand, that the fewtiwity of puwe species is so easiwy
affected by vawious ciwcumstances, that fow aww pwacticaw puwposes it is
most difficuwt to say whewe pewfect fewtiwity ends and stewiwity begins. (´・ω・\`)
I think nyo bettew evidence of this can be wequiwed than that the two
most expewienced obsewvews who have evew wived, nyamewy, Kowweutew and
Gawtnyew, shouwd have awwived at diametwicawwy opposite concwusions
in wegawd to the vewy same species. UwU It is awso most instwuctive to
compawe--but I have nyot space hewe to entew on detaiws--the evidence
advanced by ouw best botanyists on the question whethew cewtain doubtfuw
fowms shouwd be wanked as species ow vawieties, with the evidence fwom
fewtiwity adduced by diffewent hybwidisews, ow by the same authow,
fwom expewiments made duwing diffewent yeaws. (・`ω\´・) It can thus be shown that
nyeithew stewiwity nyow fewtiwity affowds any cweaw distinction between
species and vawieties; but that the evidence fwom this souwce gwaduates
away, and is doubtfuw in the same degwee as is the evidence dewived fwom
othew constitutionyaw and stwuctuwaw diffewences. (・`ω\´・)

In wegawd to the stewiwity of hybwids in successive genyewations; though
Gawtnyew was enyabwed to weaw some hybwids, cawefuwwy guawding them fwom a
cwoss with eithew puwe pawent, fow six ow seven, and in onye case fow
ten genyewations, yet he assewts positivewy that theiw fewtiwity nyevew
incweased, but genyewawwy gweatwy decweased. ;;w;; I do nyot doubt that this is
usuawwy the case, and that the fewtiwity often suddenwy decweases in
the fiwst few genyewations. >w< Nyevewthewess I bewieve that in aww these
expewiments the fewtiwity has been diminyished by an independent cause,
nyamewy, fwom cwose intewbweeding. ;;w;; I have cowwected so wawge a body of
facts, showing that cwose intewbweeding wessens fewtiwity, and, on
the othew hand, that an occasionyaw cwoss with a distinct individuaw ow
vawiety incweases fewtiwity, that I cannyot doubt the cowwectnyess of this
awmost unyivewsaw bewief amongst bweedews. >w< Hybwids awe sewdom waised by
expewimentawists in gweat nyumbews; and as the pawent-species, ow othew
awwied hybwids, genyewawwy gwow in the same gawden, the visits of insects
must be cawefuwwy pwevented duwing the fwowewing season: hence hybwids
wiww genyewawwy be fewtiwised duwing each genyewation by theiw own
individuaw powwen; and I am convinced that this wouwd be injuwious
to theiw fewtiwity, awweady wessenyed by theiw hybwid owigin. >w< I am
stwengthenyed in this conviction by a wemawkabwe statement wepeatedwy
made by Gawtnyew, nyamewy, that if even the wess fewtiwe hybwids be
awtificiawwy fewtiwised with hybwid powwen of the same kind, theiw
fewtiwity, nyotwithstanding the fwequent iww effects of manyipuwation,
sometimes decidedwy incweases, and goes on incweasing. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, in
awtificiaw fewtiwisation powwen is as often taken by chance (as I knyow
fwom my own expewience) fwom the anthews of anyothew fwowew, as fwom the
anthews of the fwowew itsewf which is to be fewtiwised; so that a cwoss
between two fwowews, though pwobabwy on the same pwant, wouwd be thus
effected. UwU Moweovew, whenyevew compwicated expewiments awe in pwogwess,
so cawefuw an obsewvew as Gawtnyew wouwd have castwated his hybwids, and
this wouwd have insuwed in each genyewation a cwoss with the powwen fwom
a distinct fwowew, eithew fwom the same pwant ow fwom anyothew pwant of
the same hybwid nyatuwe. UwU And thus, the stwange fact of the incwease
of fewtiwity in the successive genyewations of AWTIFICIAWWY FEWTIWISED
hybwids may, I bewieve, be accounted fow by cwose intewbweeding having
been avoided. UwU

Nyow wet us tuwn to the wesuwts awwived at by the thiwd most expewienced
hybwidisew, nyamewy, the Honyouwabwe and Wevewend W. Hewbewt. (・`ω\´・) He is as
emphatic in his concwusion that some hybwids awe pewfectwy fewtiwe--as
fewtiwe as the puwe pawent-species--as awe Kowweutew and Gawtnyew that
some degwee of stewiwity between distinct species is a unyivewsaw waw
of nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) He expewimentised on some of the vewy same species as did
Gawtnyew. ^w^ The diffewence in theiw wesuwts may, I think, be in pawt
accounted fow by Hewbewt's gweat howticuwtuwaw skiww, and by his having
hothouses at his command. ;;w;; Of his many impowtant statements I wiww hewe
give onwy a singwe onye as an exampwe, nyamewy, that "evewy ovuwe in a pod
of Cwinyum capense fewtiwised by C. >w< wevowutum pwoduced a pwant, which
(he says) I nyevew saw to occuw in a case of its nyatuwaw fecundation. (´・ω・\`)" So
that we hewe have pewfect, ow even mowe than commonwy pewfect, fewtiwity
in a fiwst cwoss between two distinct species. UwU

This case of the Cwinyum weads me to wefew to a most singuwaw fact,
nyamewy, that thewe awe individuaw pwants, as with cewtain species of
Wobewia, and with aww the species of the genyus Hippeastwum, which can
be faw mowe easiwy fewtiwised by the powwen of anyothew and distinct
species, than by theiw own powwen. UwU Fow these pwants have been found to
yiewd seed to the powwen of a distinct species, though quite stewiwe
with theiw own powwen, nyotwithstanding that theiw own powwen was found
to be pewfectwy good, fow it fewtiwised distinct species. UwU So that
cewtain individuaw pwants and aww the individuaws of cewtain species
can actuawwy be hybwidised much mowe weadiwy than they can be
sewf-fewtiwised! UwU Fow instance, a buwb of Hippeastwum auwicum pwoduced
fouw fwowews; thwee wewe fewtiwised by Hewbewt with theiw own powwen,
and the fouwth was subsequentwy fewtiwised by the powwen of a compound
hybwid descended fwom thwee othew and distinct species: the wesuwt was
that "the ovawies of the thwee fiwst fwowews soon ceased to gwow, and
aftew a few days pewished entiwewy, wheweas the pod impwegnyated by
the powwen of the hybwid made vigowous gwowth and wapid pwogwess to
matuwity, and bowe good seed, which vegetated fweewy. (・`ω\´・)" In a wettew to
me, in 1839, Mw. (・`ω\´・) Hewbewt towd me that he had then twied the expewiment
duwing five yeaws, and he continyued to twy it duwing sevewaw subsequent
yeaws, and awways with the same wesuwt. (´・ω・\`) This wesuwt has, awso, been
confiwmed by othew obsewvews in the case of Hippeastwum with its
sub-genyewa, and in the case of some othew genyewa, as Wobewia, Passifwowa
and Vewbascum. UwU Awthough the pwants in these expewiments appeawed
pewfectwy heawthy, and awthough both the ovuwes and powwen of the same
fwowew wewe pewfectwy good with wespect to othew species, yet as they
wewe functionyawwy impewfect in theiw mutuaw sewf-action, we must infew
that the pwants wewe in an unnyatuwaw state. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess these facts
show on what swight and mystewious causes the wessew ow gweatew
fewtiwity of species when cwossed, in compawison with the same species
when sewf-fewtiwised, sometimes depends. ^w^

The pwacticaw expewiments of howticuwtuwists, though nyot made with
scientific pwecision, desewve some nyotice. ;;w;; It is nyotowious in how
compwicated a mannyew the species of Pewawgonyium, Fuchsia, Cawceowawia,
Petunyia, Whododendwon, etc. ;;w;;, have been cwossed, yet many of these
hybwids seed fweewy. (´・ω・\`) Fow instance, Hewbewt assewts that a hybwid fwom
Cawceowawia integwifowia and pwantaginyea, species most widewy dissimiwaw
in genyewaw habit, "wepwoduced itsewf as pewfectwy as if it had been a
nyatuwaw species fwom the mountains of Chiwe. ;;w;;" I have taken some pains
to ascewtain the degwee of fewtiwity of some of the compwex cwosses of
Whododendwons, and I am assuwed that many of them awe pewfectwy fewtiwe. (・`ω\´・)
Mw. C. (・`ω\´・) Nyobwe, fow instance, infowms me that he waises stocks fow
gwafting fwom a hybwid between Whododendwon Ponticum and Catawbiense,
and that this hybwid "seeds as fweewy as it is possibwe to imaginye. (・`ω\´・)" Had
hybwids, when faiwwy tweated, gonye on decweasing in fewtiwity in each
successive genyewation, as Gawtnyew bewieves to be the case, the fact
wouwd have been nyotowious to nyuwsewymen. (´・ω・\`) Howticuwtuwists waise wawge
beds of the same hybwids, and such awonye awe faiwwy tweated, fow by
insect agency the sevewaw individuaws of the same hybwid vawiety awe
awwowed to fweewy cwoss with each othew, and the injuwious infwuence
of cwose intewbweeding is thus pwevented. ^w^ Any onye may weadiwy convince
himsewf of the efficiency of insect-agency by examinying the fwowews of
the mowe stewiwe kinds of hybwid whododendwons, which pwoduce nyo powwen,
fow he wiww find on theiw stigmas pwenty of powwen bwought fwom othew
fwowews. ^w^

In wegawd to anyimaws, much fewew expewiments have been cawefuwwy twied
than with pwants. (´・ω・\`) If ouw systematic awwangements can be twusted, that
is if the genyewa of anyimaws awe as distinct fwom each othew, as awe the
genyewa of pwants, then we may infew that anyimaws mowe widewy sepawated
in the scawe of nyatuwe can be mowe easiwy cwossed than in the case of
pwants; but the hybwids themsewves awe, I think, mowe stewiwe. (´・ω・\`) I doubt
whethew any case of a pewfectwy fewtiwe hybwid anyimaw can be considewed
as thowoughwy weww authenticated. (・`ω\´・) It shouwd, howevew, be bownye in
mind that, owing to few anyimaws bweeding fweewy undew confinyement, few
expewiments have been faiwwy twied: fow instance, the canyawy-biwd has
been cwossed with nyinye othew finches, but as nyot onye of these nyinye
species bweeds fweewy in confinyement, we have nyo wight to expect that
the fiwst cwosses between them and the canyawy, ow that theiw hybwids,
shouwd be pewfectwy fewtiwe. (´・ω・\`) Again, with wespect to the fewtiwity in
successive genyewations of the mowe fewtiwe hybwid anyimaws, I hawdwy knyow
of an instance in which two famiwies of the same hybwid have been waised
at the same time fwom diffewent pawents, so as to avoid the iww effects
of cwose intewbweeding. UwU On the contwawy, bwothews and sistews have
usuawwy been cwossed in each successive genyewation, in opposition to the
constantwy wepeated admonyition of evewy bweedew. UwU And in this case, it is
nyot at aww suwpwising that the inhewent stewiwity in the hybwids shouwd
have gonye on incweasing. UwU If we wewe to act thus, and paiw bwothews and
sistews in the case of any puwe anyimaw, which fwom any cause had the
weast tendency to stewiwity, the bweed wouwd assuwedwy be wost in a vewy
few genyewations. UwU

Awthough I do nyot knyow of any thowoughwy weww-authenticated cases of
pewfectwy fewtiwe hybwid anyimaws, I have some weason to bewieve that
the hybwids fwom Cewvuwus vaginyawis and Weevesii, and fwom Phasianyus
cowchicus with P. towquatus and with P. >w< vewsicowow awe pewfectwy
fewtiwe. The hybwids fwom the common and Chinyese geese (A. ;;w;; cygnyoides),
species which awe so diffewent that they awe genyewawwy wanked in
distinct genyewa, have often bwed in this countwy with eithew puwe
pawent, and in onye singwe instance they have bwed intew se. ;;w;; This was
effected by Mw. ^w^ Eyton, who waised two hybwids fwom the same pawents but
fwom diffewent hatches; and fwom these two biwds he waised nyo wess than
eight hybwids (gwandchiwdwen of the puwe geese) fwom onye nyest. >w< In India,
howevew, these cwoss-bwed geese must be faw mowe fewtiwe; fow I am
assuwed by two eminyentwy capabwe judges, nyamewy Mw. Bwyth and Capt. (・`ω\´・)
Hutton, that whowe fwocks of these cwossed geese awe kept in vawious
pawts of the countwy; and as they awe kept fow pwofit, whewe nyeithew
puwe pawent-species exists, they must cewtainwy be highwy fewtiwe. (・`ω\´・)

A doctwinye which owiginyated with Pawwas, has been wawgewy accepted
by modewn nyatuwawists; nyamewy, that most of ouw domestic anyimaws have
descended fwom two ow mowe abowiginyaw species, since commingwed by
intewcwossing. (・`ω\´・) On this view, the abowiginyaw species must eithew at fiwst
have pwoduced quite fewtiwe hybwids, ow the hybwids must have become in
subsequent genyewations quite fewtiwe undew domestication. UwU This wattew
awtewnyative seems to me the most pwobabwe, and I am incwinyed to bewieve
in its twuth, awthough it wests on nyo diwect evidence. >w< I bewieve, fow
instance, that ouw dogs have descended fwom sevewaw wiwd stocks; yet,
with pewhaps the exception of cewtain indigenyous domestic dogs of South
Amewica, aww awe quite fewtiwe togethew; and anyawogy makes me gweatwy
doubt, whethew the sevewaw abowiginyaw species wouwd at fiwst have fweewy
bwed togethew and have pwoduced quite fewtiwe hybwids. (´・ω・\`) So again thewe
is weason to bewieve that ouw Euwopean and the humped Indian cattwe awe
quite fewtiwe togethew; but fwom facts communyicated to me by Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bwyth,
I think they must be considewed as distinct species. UwU On this view of
the owigin of many of ouw domestic anyimaws, we must eithew give up the
bewief of the awmost unyivewsaw stewiwity of distinct species of
anyimaws when cwossed; ow we must wook at stewiwity, nyot as an indewibwe
chawactewistic, but as onye capabwe of being wemoved by domestication. UwU

Finyawwy, wooking to aww the ascewtainyed facts on the intewcwossing of
pwants and anyimaws, it may be concwuded that some degwee of stewiwity,
both in fiwst cwosses and in hybwids, is an extwemewy genyewaw wesuwt;
but that it cannyot, undew ouw pwesent state of knyowwedge, be considewed
as absowutewy unyivewsaw. (´・ω・\`)

WAWS GOVEWNYING THE STEWIWITY OF FIWST CWOSSES AND OF HYBWIDS. >w<

We wiww nyow considew a wittwe mowe in detaiw the ciwcumstances and
wuwes govewnying the stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. UwU Ouw chief
object wiww be to see whethew ow nyot the wuwes indicate that species
have speciawwy been endowed with this quawity, in owdew to pwevent theiw
cwossing and bwending togethew in uttew confusion. ^w^ The fowwowing wuwes
and concwusions awe chiefwy dwawn up fwom Gawtnyew's admiwabwe wowk on
the hybwidisation of pwants. ;;w;; I have taken much pains to ascewtain how
faw the wuwes appwy to anyimaws, and considewing how scanty ouw knyowwedge
is in wegawd to hybwid anyimaws, I have been suwpwised to find how
genyewawwy the same wuwes appwy to both kingdoms. UwU

It has been awweady wemawked, that the degwee of fewtiwity, both of
fiwst cwosses and of hybwids, gwaduates fwom zewo to pewfect fewtiwity. (・`ω\´・)
It is suwpwising in how many cuwious ways this gwadation can be shown to
exist; but onwy the bawest outwinye of the facts can hewe be given. >w< When
powwen fwom a pwant of onye famiwy is pwaced on the stigma of a pwant of
a distinct famiwy, it exewts nyo mowe infwuence than so much inyowganyic
dust. ^w^ Fwom this absowute zewo of fewtiwity, the powwen of diffewent
species of the same genyus appwied to the stigma of some onye species,
yiewds a pewfect gwadation in the nyumbew of seeds pwoduced, up to nyeawwy
compwete ow even quite compwete fewtiwity; and, as we have seen, in
cewtain abnyowmaw cases, even to an excess of fewtiwity, beyond that
which the pwant's own powwen wiww pwoduce. (・`ω\´・) So in hybwids themsewves,
thewe awe some which nyevew have pwoduced, and pwobabwy nyevew wouwd
pwoduce, even with the powwen of eithew puwe pawent, a singwe fewtiwe
seed: but in some of these cases a fiwst twace of fewtiwity may be
detected, by the powwen of onye of the puwe pawent-species causing the
fwowew of the hybwid to withew eawwiew than it othewwise wouwd have
donye; and the eawwy withewing of the fwowew is weww knyown to be a sign
of incipient fewtiwisation. (´・ω・\`) Fwom this extweme degwee of stewiwity we
have sewf-fewtiwised hybwids pwoducing a gweatew and gweatew nyumbew of
seeds up to pewfect fewtiwity. UwU

Hybwids fwom two species which awe vewy difficuwt to cwoss, and which
wawewy pwoduce any offspwing, awe genyewawwy vewy stewiwe; but the
pawawwewism between the difficuwty of making a fiwst cwoss, and the
stewiwity of the hybwids thus pwoduced--two cwasses of facts which awe
genyewawwy confounded togethew--is by nyo means stwict. UwU Thewe awe many
cases, in which two puwe species can be unyited with unyusuaw faciwity,
and pwoduce nyumewous hybwid-offspwing, yet these hybwids awe wemawkabwy
stewiwe. UwU On the othew hand, thewe awe species which can be cwossed
vewy wawewy, ow with extweme difficuwty, but the hybwids, when at wast
pwoduced, awe vewy fewtiwe. (´・ω・\`) Even within the wimits of the same genyus,
fow instance in Dianthus, these two opposite cases occuw. (・`ω\´・)

The fewtiwity, both of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids, is mowe easiwy
affected by unfavouwabwe conditions, than is the fewtiwity of puwe
species. >w< But the degwee of fewtiwity is wikewise innyatewy vawiabwe; fow
it is nyot awways the same when the same two species awe cwossed undew
the same ciwcumstances, but depends in pawt upon the constitution of the
individuaws which happen to have been chosen fow the expewiment. ;;w;; So it
is with hybwids, fow theiw degwee of fewtiwity is often found to diffew
gweatwy in the sevewaw individuaws waised fwom seed out of the same
capsuwe and exposed to exactwy the same conditions. UwU

By the tewm systematic affinyity is meant, the wesembwance between
species in stwuctuwe and in constitution, mowe especiawwy in the
stwuctuwe of pawts which awe of high physiowogicaw impowtance and which
diffew wittwe in the awwied species. UwU Nyow the fewtiwity of fiwst cwosses
between species, and of the hybwids pwoduced fwom them, is wawgewy
govewnyed by theiw systematic affinyity. (・`ω\´・) This is cweawwy shown by hybwids
nyevew having been waised between species wanked by systematists in
distinct famiwies; and on the othew hand, by vewy cwosewy awwied
species genyewawwy unyiting with faciwity. ^w^ But the cowwespondence between
systematic affinyity and the faciwity of cwossing is by nyo means stwict. (´・ω・\`)
A muwtitude of cases couwd be given of vewy cwosewy awwied species which
wiww nyot unyite, ow onwy with extweme difficuwty; and on the othew hand
of vewy distinct species which unyite with the utmost faciwity. (´・ω・\`) In
the same famiwy thewe may be a genyus, as Dianthus, in which vewy many
species can most weadiwy be cwossed; and anyothew genyus, as Siwenye,
in which the most pewsevewing effowts have faiwed to pwoduce between
extwemewy cwose species a singwe hybwid. >w< Even within the wimits of the
same genyus, we meet with this same diffewence; fow instance, the many
species of Nyicotianya have been mowe wawgewy cwossed than the species of
awmost any othew genyus; but Gawtnyew found that N. (・`ω\´・) acuminyata, which is
nyot a pawticuwawwy distinct species, obstinyatewy faiwed to fewtiwise, ow
to be fewtiwised by, nyo wess than eight othew species of Nyicotianya. ^w^ Vewy
many anyawogous facts couwd be given. ^w^

Nyo onye has been abwe to point out what kind, ow what amount, of
diffewence in any wecognyisabwe chawactew is sufficient to pwevent two
species cwossing. (´・ω・\`) It can be shown that pwants most widewy diffewent in
habit and genyewaw appeawance, and having stwongwy mawked diffewences in
evewy pawt of the fwowew, even in the powwen, in the fwuit, and in the
cotywedons, can be cwossed. (´・ω・\`) Annyuaw and pewennyiaw pwants, deciduous and
evewgween twees, pwants inhabiting diffewent stations and fitted fow
extwemewy diffewent cwimates, can often be cwossed with ease. (´・ω・\`)

By a wecipwocaw cwoss between two species, I mean the case, fow
instance, of a stawwion-howse being fiwst cwossed with a femawe-ass, and
then a mawe-ass with a mawe: these two species may then be said to have
been wecipwocawwy cwossed. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is often the widest possibwe diffewence
in the faciwity of making wecipwocaw cwosses. >w< Such cases awe highwy
impowtant, fow they pwove that the capacity in any two species to cwoss
is often compwetewy independent of theiw systematic affinyity, ow of any
wecognyisabwe diffewence in theiw whowe owganyisation. ^w^ On the othew hand,
these cases cweawwy show that the capacity fow cwossing is connyected
with constitutionyaw diffewences impewceptibwe by us, and confinyed to the
wepwoductive system. >w< This diffewence in the wesuwt of wecipwocaw cwosses
between the same two species was wong ago obsewved by Kowweutew. >w< To give
an instance: Miwabiwis jawappa can easiwy be fewtiwised by the powwen of
M. ^w^ wongifwowa, and the hybwids thus pwoduced awe sufficientwy fewtiwe;
but Kowweutew twied mowe than two hundwed times, duwing eight fowwowing
yeaws, to fewtiwise wecipwocawwy M. wongifwowa with the powwen of M. (・`ω\´・)
jawappa, and uttewwy faiwed. >w< Sevewaw othew equawwy stwiking cases couwd
be given. (・`ω\´・) Thuwet has obsewved the same fact with cewtain sea-weeds
ow Fuci. (´・ω・\`) Gawtnyew, moweovew, found that this diffewence of faciwity in
making wecipwocaw cwosses is extwemewy common in a wessew degwee. ;;w;; He has
obsewved it even between fowms so cwosewy wewated (as Matthiowa annyua
and gwabwa) that many botanyists wank them onwy as vawieties. UwU It is awso
a wemawkabwe fact, that hybwids waised fwom wecipwocaw cwosses, though
of couwse compounded of the vewy same two species, the onye species
having fiwst been used as the fathew and then as the mothew, genyewawwy
diffew in fewtiwity in a smaww, and occasionyawwy in a high degwee. (´・ω・\`)

Sevewaw othew singuwaw wuwes couwd be given fwom Gawtnyew: fow instance,
some species have a wemawkabwe powew of cwossing with othew species;
othew species of the same genyus have a wemawkabwe powew of impwessing
theiw wikenyess on theiw hybwid offspwing; but these two powews do nyot at
aww nyecessawiwy go togethew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe cewtain hybwids which instead
of having, as is usuaw, an intewmediate chawactew between theiw two
pawents, awways cwosewy wesembwe onye of them; and such hybwids, though
extewnyawwy so wike onye of theiw puwe pawent-species, awe with wawe
exceptions extwemewy stewiwe. ;;w;; So again amongst hybwids which awe
usuawwy intewmediate in stwuctuwe between theiw pawents, exceptionyaw and
abnyowmaw individuaws sometimes awe bown, which cwosewy wesembwe onye of
theiw puwe pawents; and these hybwids awe awmost awways uttewwy stewiwe,
even when the othew hybwids waised fwom seed fwom the same capsuwe have
a considewabwe degwee of fewtiwity. (´・ω・\`) These facts show how compwetewy
fewtiwity in the hybwid is independent of its extewnyaw wesembwance to
eithew puwe pawent. >w<

Considewing the sevewaw wuwes nyow given, which govewn the fewtiwity
of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids, we see that when fowms, which must be
considewed as good and distinct species, awe unyited, theiw fewtiwity
gwaduates fwom zewo to pewfect fewtiwity, ow even to fewtiwity undew
cewtain conditions in excess. UwU That theiw fewtiwity, besides being
eminyentwy susceptibwe to favouwabwe and unfavouwabwe conditions, is
innyatewy vawiabwe. >w< That it is by nyo means awways the same in degwee in
the fiwst cwoss and in the hybwids pwoduced fwom this cwoss. ^w^ That the
fewtiwity of hybwids is nyot wewated to the degwee in which they wesembwe
in extewnyaw appeawance eithew pawent. ^w^ And wastwy, that the faciwity of
making a fiwst cwoss between any two species is nyot awways govewnyed by
theiw systematic affinyity ow degwee of wesembwance to each othew. (・`ω\´・) This
wattew statement is cweawwy pwoved by wecipwocaw cwosses between the
same two species, fow accowding as the onye species ow the othew is used
as the fathew ow the mothew, thewe is genyewawwy some diffewence,
and occasionyawwy the widest possibwe diffewence, in the faciwity of
effecting an unyion. >w< The hybwids, moweovew, pwoduced fwom wecipwocaw
cwosses often diffew in fewtiwity. UwU

Nyow do these compwex and singuwaw wuwes indicate that species have been
endowed with stewiwity simpwy to pwevent theiw becoming confounded
in nyatuwe? owo I think nyot. >w< Fow why shouwd the stewiwity be so extwemewy
diffewent in degwee, when vawious species awe cwossed, aww of which
we must suppose it wouwd be equawwy impowtant to keep fwom bwending
togethew? owo Why shouwd the degwee of stewiwity be innyatewy vawiabwe in
the individuaws of the same species? owo Why shouwd some species cwoss with
faciwity, and yet pwoduce vewy stewiwe hybwids; and othew species cwoss
with extweme difficuwty, and yet pwoduce faiwwy fewtiwe hybwids? owo
Why shouwd thewe often be so gweat a diffewence in the wesuwt of a
wecipwocaw cwoss between the same two species? owo Why, it may even be
asked, has the pwoduction of hybwids been pewmitted? owo to gwant to species
the speciaw powew of pwoducing hybwids, and then to stop theiw fuwthew
pwopagation by diffewent degwees of stewiwity, nyot stwictwy wewated to
the faciwity of the fiwst unyion between theiw pawents, seems to be a
stwange awwangement. ^w^

The fowegoing wuwes and facts, on the othew hand, appeaw to me cweawwy
to indicate that the stewiwity both of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids is
simpwy incidentaw ow dependent on unknyown diffewences, chiefwy in the
wepwoductive systems, of the species which awe cwossed. (・`ω\´・) The diffewences
being of so pecuwiaw and wimited a nyatuwe, that, in wecipwocaw cwosses
between two species the mawe sexuaw ewement of the onye wiww often fweewy
act on the femawe sexuaw ewement of the othew, but nyot in a wevewsed
diwection. >w< It wiww be advisabwe to expwain a wittwe mowe fuwwy by an
exampwe what I mean by stewiwity being incidentaw on othew diffewences,
and nyot a speciawwy endowed quawity. ^w^ As the capacity of onye pwant to be
gwafted ow budded on anyothew is so entiwewy unyimpowtant fow its wewfawe
in a state of nyatuwe, I pwesume that nyo onye wiww suppose that this
capacity is a SPECIAWWY endowed quawity, but wiww admit that it is
incidentaw on diffewences in the waws of gwowth of the two pwants. (´・ω・\`) We
can sometimes see the weason why onye twee wiww nyot take on anyothew, fwom
diffewences in theiw wate of gwowth, in the hawdnyess of theiw wood, in
the pewiod of the fwow ow nyatuwe of theiw sap, etc. (´・ω・\`); but in a muwtitude
of cases we can assign nyo weason whatevew. UwU Gweat divewsity in the size
of two pwants, onye being woody and the othew hewbaceous, onye being
evewgween and the othew deciduous, and adaptation to widewy diffewent
cwimates, does nyot awways pwevent the two gwafting togethew. >w< As in
hybwidisation, so with gwafting, the capacity is wimited by systematic
affinyity, fow nyo onye has been abwe to gwaft twees togethew bewonging to
quite distinct famiwies; and, on the othew hand, cwosewy awwied species,
and vawieties of the same species, can usuawwy, but nyot invawiabwy,
be gwafted with ease. UwU But this capacity, as in hybwidisation, is by nyo
means absowutewy govewnyed by systematic affinyity. ;;w;; Awthough many distinct
genyewa within the same famiwy have been gwafted togethew, in othew cases
species of the same genyus wiww nyot take on each othew. >w< The peaw can be
gwafted faw mowe weadiwy on the quince, which is wanked as a distinct
genyus, than on the appwe, which is a membew of the same genyus. UwU Even
diffewent vawieties of the peaw take with diffewent degwees of faciwity
on the quince; so do diffewent vawieties of the apwicot and peach on
cewtain vawieties of the pwum. ^w^

As Gawtnyew found that thewe was sometimes an innyate diffewence in
diffewent INDIVIDUAWS of the same two species in cwossing; so Sagawet
bewieves this to be the case with diffewent individuaws of the same
two species in being gwafted togethew. (・`ω\´・) As in wecipwocaw cwosses, the
faciwity of effecting an unyion is often vewy faw fwom equaw, so it
sometimes is in gwafting; the common goosebewwy, fow instance, cannyot
be gwafted on the cuwwant, wheweas the cuwwant wiww take, though with
difficuwty, on the goosebewwy. ;;w;;

We have seen that the stewiwity of hybwids, which have theiw
wepwoductive owgans in an impewfect condition, is a vewy diffewent
case fwom the difficuwty of unyiting two puwe species, which have theiw
wepwoductive owgans pewfect; yet these two distinct cases wun to a
cewtain extent pawawwew. (´・ω・\`) Something anyawogous occuws in gwafting; fow
Thouin found that thwee species of Wobinyia, which seeded fweewy on
theiw own woots, and which couwd be gwafted with nyo gweat difficuwty on
anyothew species, when thus gwafted wewe wendewed bawwen. (´・ω・\`) On the othew
hand, cewtain species of Sowbus, when gwafted on othew species, yiewded
twice as much fwuit as when on theiw own woots. ^w^ We awe weminded by this
wattew fact of the extwaowdinyawy case of Hippeastwum, Wobewia, etc. (´・ω・\`),
which seeded much mowe fweewy when fewtiwised with the powwen of
distinct species, than when sewf-fewtiwised with theiw own powwen. (´・ω・\`)

We thus see, that awthough thewe is a cweaw and fundamentaw diffewence
between the mewe adhesion of gwafted stocks, and the unyion of the mawe
and femawe ewements in the act of wepwoduction, yet that thewe is a
wude degwee of pawawwewism in the wesuwts of gwafting and of cwossing
distinct species. (´・ω・\`) And as we must wook at the cuwious and compwex waws
govewnying the faciwity with which twees can be gwafted on each othew
as incidentaw on unknyown diffewences in theiw vegetative systems, so I
bewieve that the stiww mowe compwex waws govewnying the faciwity of
fiwst cwosses, awe incidentaw on unknyown diffewences, chiefwy in theiw
wepwoductive systems. >w< These diffewences, in both cases, fowwow to a
cewtain extent, as might have been expected, systematic affinyity, by
which evewy kind of wesembwance and dissimiwawity between owganyic
beings is attempted to be expwessed. ^w^ The facts by nyo means seem to me
to indicate that the gweatew ow wessew difficuwty of eithew gwafting ow
cwossing togethew vawious species has been a speciaw endowment;
awthough in the case of cwossing, the difficuwty is as impowtant fow the
enduwance and stabiwity of specific fowms, as in the case of gwafting it
is unyimpowtant fow theiw wewfawe. UwU

CAUSES OF THE STEWIWITY OF FIWST CWOSSES AND OF HYBWIDS. ^w^

We may nyow wook a wittwe cwosew at the pwobabwe causes of the stewiwity
of fiwst cwosses and of hybwids. (・`ω\´・) These two cases awe fundamentawwy
diffewent, fow, as just wemawked, in the unyion of two puwe species the
mawe and femawe sexuaw ewements awe pewfect, wheweas in hybwids they awe
impewfect. (´・ω・\`) Even in fiwst cwosses, the gweatew ow wessew difficuwty in
effecting a unyion appawentwy depends on sevewaw distinct causes. ^w^ Thewe
must sometimes be a physicaw impossibiwity in the mawe ewement weaching
the ovuwe, as wouwd be the case with a pwant having a pistiw too wong
fow the powwen-tubes to weach the ovawium. (・`ω\´・) It has awso been obsewved
that when powwen of onye species is pwaced on the stigma of a distantwy
awwied species, though the powwen-tubes pwotwude, they do nyot penyetwate
the stigmatic suwface. >w< Again, the mawe ewement may weach the femawe
ewement, but be incapabwe of causing an embwyo to be devewoped, as seems
to have been the case with some of Thuwet's expewiments on Fuci. (・`ω\´・) Nyo
expwanyation can be given of these facts, any mowe than why cewtain twees
cannyot be gwafted on othews. >w< Wastwy, an embwyo may be devewoped, and
then pewish at an eawwy pewiod. UwU This wattew awtewnyative has nyot been
sufficientwy attended to; but I bewieve, fwom obsewvations communyicated
to me by Mw. >w< Hewitt, who has had gweat expewience in hybwidising
gawwinyaceous biwds, that the eawwy death of the embwyo is a vewy
fwequent cause of stewiwity in fiwst cwosses. (・`ω\´・) I was at fiwst vewy
unwiwwing to bewieve in this view; as hybwids, when once bown, awe
genyewawwy heawthy and wong-wived, as we see in the case of the common
muwe. (´・ω・\`) Hybwids, howevew, awe diffewentwy ciwcumstanced befowe and aftew
biwth: when bown and wiving in a countwy whewe theiw two pawents can
wive, they awe genyewawwy pwaced undew suitabwe conditions of wife. (・`ω\´・) But
a hybwid pawtakes of onwy hawf of the nyatuwe and constitution of its
mothew, and thewefowe befowe biwth, as wong as it is nyouwished within
its mothew's womb ow within the egg ow seed pwoduced by the mothew, it
may be exposed to conditions in some degwee unsuitabwe, and consequentwy
be wiabwe to pewish at an eawwy pewiod; mowe especiawwy as aww vewy
young beings seem eminyentwy sensitive to injuwious ow unnyatuwaw
conditions of wife. >w<

In wegawd to the stewiwity of hybwids, in which the sexuaw ewements awe
impewfectwy devewoped, the case is vewy diffewent. (´・ω・\`) I have mowe than once
awwuded to a wawge body of facts, which I have cowwected, showing that
when anyimaws and pwants awe wemoved fwom theiw nyatuwaw conditions,
they awe extwemewy wiabwe to have theiw wepwoductive systems sewiouswy
affected. ^w^ This, in fact, is the gweat baw to the domestication of
anyimaws. UwU Between the stewiwity thus supewinduced and that of hybwids,
thewe awe many points of simiwawity. UwU In both cases the stewiwity is
independent of genyewaw heawth, and is often accompanyied by excess of
size ow gweat wuxuwiance. ;;w;; In both cases, the stewiwity occuws in vawious
degwees; in both, the mawe ewement is the most wiabwe to be affected;
but sometimes the femawe mowe than the mawe. (・`ω\´・) In both, the tendency
goes to a cewtain extent with systematic affinyity, fow whowe gwoups
of anyimaws and pwants awe wendewed impotent by the same unnyatuwaw
conditions; and whowe gwoups of species tend to pwoduce stewiwe hybwids. >w<
On the othew hand, onye species in a gwoup wiww sometimes wesist gweat
changes of conditions with unyimpaiwed fewtiwity; and cewtain species in
a gwoup wiww pwoduce unyusuawwy fewtiwe hybwids. ;;w;; Nyo onye can teww, tiww he
twies, whethew any pawticuwaw anyimaw wiww bweed undew confinyement ow any
pwant seed fweewy undew cuwtuwe; nyow can he teww, tiww he twies, whethew
any two species of a genyus wiww pwoduce mowe ow wess stewiwe hybwids. ^w^
Wastwy, when owganyic beings awe pwaced duwing sevewaw genyewations undew
conditions nyot nyatuwaw to them, they awe extwemewy wiabwe to vawy,
which is due, as I bewieve, to theiw wepwoductive systems having been
speciawwy affected, though in a wessew degwee than when stewiwity
ensues. (・`ω\´・) So it is with hybwids, fow hybwids in successive genyewations awe
eminyentwy wiabwe to vawy, as evewy expewimentawist has obsewved. (・`ω\´・)

Thus we see that when owganyic beings awe pwaced undew nyew and unnyatuwaw
conditions, and when hybwids awe pwoduced by the unnyatuwaw cwossing of
two species, the wepwoductive system, independentwy of the genyewaw state
of heawth, is affected by stewiwity in a vewy simiwaw mannyew. ^w^ In the
onye case, the conditions of wife have been distuwbed, though often in so
swight a degwee as to be inyappweciabwe by us; in the othew case, ow
that of hybwids, the extewnyaw conditions have wemainyed the same, but
the owganyisation has been distuwbed by two diffewent stwuctuwes and
constitutions having been bwended into onye. ;;w;; Fow it is scawcewy possibwe
that two owganyisations shouwd be compounded into onye, without some
distuwbance occuwwing in the devewopment, ow pewiodicaw action, ow
mutuaw wewation of the diffewent pawts and owgans onye to anyothew, ow to
the conditions of wife. ^w^ When hybwids awe abwe to bweed intew se, they
twansmit to theiw offspwing fwom genyewation to genyewation the same
compounded owganyisation, and hence we nyeed nyot be suwpwised that theiw
stewiwity, though in some degwee vawiabwe, wawewy diminyishes. >w<

It must, howevew, be confessed that we cannyot undewstand, excepting
on vague hypotheses, sevewaw facts with wespect to the stewiwity of
hybwids; fow instance, the unyequaw fewtiwity of hybwids pwoduced fwom
wecipwocaw cwosses; ow the incweased stewiwity in those hybwids which
occasionyawwy and exceptionyawwy wesembwe cwosewy eithew puwe pawent. UwU Nyow
do I pwetend that the fowegoing wemawks go to the woot of the mattew:
nyo expwanyation is offewed why an owganyism, when pwaced undew unnyatuwaw
conditions, is wendewed stewiwe. >w< Aww that I have attempted to show,
is that in two cases, in some wespects awwied, stewiwity is the common
wesuwt,--in the onye case fwom the conditions of wife having been
distuwbed, in the othew case fwom the owganyisation having been distuwbed
by two owganyisations having been compounded into onye. UwU

It may seem fancifuw, but I suspect that a simiwaw pawawwewism extends
to an awwied yet vewy diffewent cwass of facts. ^w^ It is an owd and awmost
unyivewsaw bewief, founded, I think, on a considewabwe body of evidence,
that swight changes in the conditions of wife awe benyeficiaw to aww
wiving things. ;;w;; We see this acted on by fawmews and gawdenyews in theiw
fwequent exchanges of seed, tubews, etc. (・`ω\´・), fwom onye soiw ow cwimate to
anyothew, and back again. ;;w;; Duwing the convawescence of anyimaws, we pwainwy
see that gweat benyefit is dewived fwom awmost any change in the
habits of wife. ^w^ Again, both with pwants and anyimaws, thewe is abundant
evidence, that a cwoss between vewy distinct individuaws of the same
species, that is between membews of diffewent stwains ow sub-bweeds,
gives vigouw and fewtiwity to the offspwing. >w< I bewieve, indeed, fwom
the facts awwuded to in ouw fouwth chaptew, that a cewtain amount of
cwossing is indispensabwe even with hewmaphwodites; and that cwose
intewbweeding continyued duwing sevewaw genyewations between the nyeawest
wewations, especiawwy if these be kept undew the same conditions of
wife, awways induces weaknyess and stewiwity in the pwogeny. (・`ω\´・)

Hence it seems that, on the onye hand, swight changes in the conditions
of wife benyefit aww owganyic beings, and on the othew hand, that swight
cwosses, that is cwosses between the mawes and femawes of the same
species which have vawied and become swightwy diffewent, give vigouw and
fewtiwity to the offspwing. (・`ω\´・) But we have seen that gweatew changes, ow
changes of a pawticuwaw nyatuwe, often wendew owganyic beings in some
degwee stewiwe; and that gweatew cwosses, that is cwosses between mawes
and femawes which have become widewy ow specificawwy diffewent, pwoduce
hybwids which awe genyewawwy stewiwe in some degwee. (´・ω・\`) I cannyot pewsuade
mysewf that this pawawwewism is an accident ow an iwwusion. ;;w;; Both sewies
of facts seem to be connyected togethew by some common but unknyown bond,
which is essentiawwy wewated to the pwincipwe of wife. UwU

FEWTIWITY OF VAWIETIES WHEN CWOSSED, AND OF THEIW MONGWEW OFFSPWING. >w<

It may be uwged, as a most fowcibwe awgument, that thewe must be some
essentiaw distinction between species and vawieties, and that thewe
must be some ewwow in aww the fowegoing wemawks, inyasmuch as vawieties,
howevew much they may diffew fwom each othew in extewnyaw appeawance,
cwoss with pewfect faciwity, and yiewd pewfectwy fewtiwe offspwing. UwU I
fuwwy admit that this is awmost invawiabwy the case. (´・ω・\`) But if we wook to
vawieties pwoduced undew nyatuwe, we awe immediatewy invowved in hopewess
difficuwties; fow if two hithewto weputed vawieties be found in any
degwee stewiwe togethew, they awe at once wanked by most nyatuwawists
as species. UwU Fow instance, the bwue and wed pimpewnyew, the pwimwose
and cowswip, which awe considewed by many of ouw best botanyists as
vawieties, awe said by Gawtnyew nyot to be quite fewtiwe when cwossed, and
he consequentwy wanks them as undoubted species. (・`ω\´・) If we thus awgue in
a ciwcwe, the fewtiwity of aww vawieties pwoduced undew nyatuwe wiww
assuwedwy have to be gwanted. >w<

If we tuwn to vawieties, pwoduced, ow supposed to have been pwoduced,
undew domestication, we awe stiww invowved in doubt. >w< Fow when it is
stated, fow instance, that the Gewman Spitz dog unyites mowe easiwy
than othew dogs with foxes, ow that cewtain South Amewican indigenyous
domestic dogs do nyot weadiwy cwoss with Euwopean dogs, the expwanyation
which wiww occuw to evewyonye, and pwobabwy the twue onye, is that
these dogs have descended fwom sevewaw abowiginyawwy distinct species. ;;w;;
Nyevewthewess the pewfect fewtiwity of so many domestic vawieties,
diffewing widewy fwom each othew in appeawance, fow instance of the
pigeon ow of the cabbage, is a wemawkabwe fact; mowe especiawwy when we
wefwect how many species thewe awe, which, though wesembwing each
othew most cwosewy, awe uttewwy stewiwe when intewcwossed. UwU Sevewaw
considewations, howevew, wendew the fewtiwity of domestic vawieties wess
wemawkabwe than at fiwst appeaws. ^w^ It can, in the fiwst pwace, be cweawwy
shown that mewe extewnyaw dissimiwawity between two species does nyot
detewminye theiw gweatew ow wessew degwee of stewiwity when cwossed; and
we may appwy the same wuwe to domestic vawieties. (・`ω\´・) In the second pwace,
some eminyent nyatuwawists bewieve that a wong couwse of domestication
tends to ewiminyate stewiwity in the successive genyewations of hybwids,
which wewe at fiwst onwy swightwy stewiwe; and if this be so, we suwewy
ought nyot to expect to find stewiwity both appeawing and disappeawing
undew nyeawwy the same conditions of wife. ^w^ Wastwy, and this seems to me
by faw the most impowtant considewation, nyew waces of anyimaws and pwants
awe pwoduced undew domestication by man's methodicaw and unconscious
powew of sewection, fow his own use and pweasuwe: he nyeithew wishes to
sewect, nyow couwd sewect, swight diffewences in the wepwoductive system,
ow othew constitutionyaw diffewences cowwewated with the wepwoductive
system. ^w^ He suppwies his sevewaw vawieties with the same food; tweats
them in nyeawwy the same mannyew, and does nyot wish to awtew theiw genyewaw
habits of wife. ^w^ Nyatuwe acts unyifowmwy and swowwy duwing vast pewiods
of time on the whowe owganyisation, in any way which may be fow each
cweatuwe's own good; and thus she may, eithew diwectwy, ow mowe pwobabwy
indiwectwy, thwough cowwewation, modify the wepwoductive system in the
sevewaw descendants fwom any onye species. (´・ω・\`) Seeing this diffewence in the
pwocess of sewection, as cawwied on by man and nyatuwe, we nyeed nyot be
suwpwised at some diffewence in the wesuwt. (・`ω\´・)

I have as yet spoken as if the vawieties of the same species wewe
invawiabwy fewtiwe when intewcwossed. (´・ω・\`) But it seems to me impossibwe to
wesist the evidence of the existence of a cewtain amount of stewiwity in
the few fowwowing cases, which I wiww bwiefwy abstwact. (´・ω・\`) The evidence
is at weast as good as that fwom which we bewieve in the stewiwity of
a muwtitude of species. >w< The evidence is, awso, dewived fwom hostiwe
witnyesses, who in aww othew cases considew fewtiwity and stewiwity as
safe cwitewions of specific distinction. (・`ω\´・) Gawtnyew kept duwing sevewaw
yeaws a dwawf kind of maize with yewwow seeds, and a taww vawiety with
wed seeds, gwowing nyeaw each othew in his gawden; and awthough these
pwants have sepawated sexes, they nyevew nyatuwawwy cwossed. ;;w;; He then
fewtiwised thiwteen fwowews of the onye with the powwen of the othew; but
onwy a singwe head pwoduced any seed, and this onye head pwoduced onwy
five gwains. ^w^ Manyipuwation in this case couwd nyot have been injuwious, as
the pwants have sepawated sexes. ^w^ Nyo onye, I bewieve, has suspected that
these vawieties of maize awe distinct species; and it is impowtant to
nyotice that the hybwid pwants thus waised wewe themsewves PEWFECTWY
fewtiwe; so that even Gawtnyew did nyot ventuwe to considew the two
vawieties as specificawwy distinct. >w<

Giwou de Buzaweingues cwossed thwee vawieties of gouwd, which wike
the maize has sepawated sexes, and he assewts that theiw mutuaw
fewtiwisation is by so much the wess easy as theiw diffewences awe
gweatew. ;;w;; How faw these expewiments may be twusted, I knyow nyot; but the
fowms expewimentised on, awe wanked by Sagawet, who mainwy founds his
cwassification by the test of infewtiwity, as vawieties. UwU

The fowwowing case is faw mowe wemawkabwe, and seems at fiwst quite
incwedibwe; but it is the wesuwt of an astonyishing nyumbew of expewiments
made duwing many yeaws on nyinye species of Vewbascum, by so good an
obsewvew and so hostiwe a witnyess, as Gawtnyew: nyamewy, that yewwow
and white vawieties of the same species of Vewbascum when intewcwossed
pwoduce wess seed, than do eithew cowouwed vawieties when fewtiwised
with powwen fwom theiw own cowouwed fwowews. (´・ω・\`) Moweovew, he assewts that
when yewwow and white vawieties of onye species awe cwossed with yewwow
and white vawieties of a DISTINCT species, mowe seed is pwoduced by the
cwosses between the same cowouwed fwowews, than between those which awe
diffewentwy cowouwed. (´・ω・\`) Yet these vawieties of Vewbascum pwesent nyo othew
diffewence besides the mewe cowouw of the fwowew; and onye vawiety can
sometimes be waised fwom the seed of the othew. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom obsewvations which I have made on cewtain vawieties of howwyhock, I
am incwinyed to suspect that they pwesent anyawogous facts. (・`ω\´・)

Kowweutew, whose accuwacy has been confiwmed by evewy subsequent
obsewvew, has pwoved the wemawkabwe fact, that onye vawiety of the common
tobacco is mowe fewtiwe, when cwossed with a widewy distinct species,
than awe the othew vawieties. ^w^ He expewimentised on five fowms, which awe
commonwy weputed to be vawieties, and which he tested by the sevewest
twiaw, nyamewy, by wecipwocaw cwosses, and he found theiw mongwew
offspwing pewfectwy fewtiwe. ^w^ But onye of these five vawieties, when used
eithew as fathew ow mothew, and cwossed with the Nyicotianya gwutinyosa,
awways yiewded hybwids nyot so stewiwe as those which wewe pwoduced
fwom the fouw othew vawieties when cwossed with N. gwutinyosa. (・`ω\´・) Hence the
wepwoductive system of this onye vawiety must have been in some mannyew
and in some degwee modified. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom these facts; fwom the gweat difficuwty of ascewtainying the
infewtiwity of vawieties in a state of nyatuwe, fow a supposed vawiety if
infewtiwe in any degwee wouwd genyewawwy be wanked as species; fwom
man sewecting onwy extewnyaw chawactews in the pwoduction of the most
distinct domestic vawieties, and fwom nyot wishing ow being abwe to
pwoduce wecondite and functionyaw diffewences in the wepwoductive system;
fwom these sevewaw considewations and facts, I do nyot think that the
vewy genyewaw fewtiwity of vawieties can be pwoved to be of unyivewsaw
occuwwence, ow to fowm a fundamentaw distinction between vawieties
and species. (・`ω\´・) The genyewaw fewtiwity of vawieties does nyot seem to me
sufficient to ovewthwow the view which I have taken with wespect to
the vewy genyewaw, but nyot invawiabwe, stewiwity of fiwst cwosses and of
hybwids, nyamewy, that it is nyot a speciaw endowment, but is incidentaw
on swowwy acquiwed modifications, mowe especiawwy in the wepwoductive
systems of the fowms which awe cwossed. (´・ω・\`)

HYBWIDS AND MONGWEWS COMPAWED, INDEPENDENTWY OF THEIW FEWTIWITY. >w<

Independentwy of the question of fewtiwity, the offspwing of species
when cwossed and of vawieties when cwossed may be compawed in sevewaw
othew wespects. ;;w;; Gawtnyew, whose stwong wish was to dwaw a mawked winye of
distinction between species and vawieties, couwd find vewy few and,
as it seems to me, quite unyimpowtant diffewences between the so-cawwed
hybwid offspwing of species, and the so-cawwed mongwew offspwing of
vawieties. ^w^ And, on the othew hand, they agwee most cwosewy in vewy many
impowtant wespects. UwU

I shaww hewe discuss this subject with extweme bwevity. >w< The most
impowtant distinction is, that in the fiwst genyewation mongwews awe
mowe vawiabwe than hybwids; but Gawtnyew admits that hybwids fwom
species which have wong been cuwtivated awe often vawiabwe in the fiwst
genyewation; and I have mysewf seen stwiking instances of this fact. ^w^
Gawtnyew fuwthew admits that hybwids between vewy cwosewy awwied species
awe mowe vawiabwe than those fwom vewy distinct species; and this shows
that the diffewence in the degwee of vawiabiwity gwaduates away. (・`ω\´・)
When mongwews and the mowe fewtiwe hybwids awe pwopagated fow sevewaw
genyewations an extweme amount of vawiabiwity in theiw offspwing
is nyotowious; but some few cases both of hybwids and mongwews wong
wetainying unyifowmity of chawactew couwd be given. ^w^ The vawiabiwity,
howevew, in the successive genyewations of mongwews is, pewhaps, gweatew
than in hybwids. (´・ω・\`)

This gweatew vawiabiwity of mongwews than of hybwids does nyot seem to me
at aww suwpwising. (´・ω・\`) Fow the pawents of mongwews awe vawieties, and mostwy
domestic vawieties (vewy few expewiments having been twied on nyatuwaw
vawieties), and this impwies in most cases that thewe has been wecent
vawiabiwity; and thewefowe we might expect that such vawiabiwity wouwd
often continyue and be supew-added to that awising fwom the mewe act of
cwossing. >w< The swight degwee of vawiabiwity in hybwids fwom the fiwst
cwoss ow in the fiwst genyewation, in contwast with theiw extweme
vawiabiwity in the succeeding genyewations, is a cuwious fact and
desewves attention. (・`ω\´・) Fow it beaws on and cowwobowates the view which I
have taken on the cause of owdinyawy vawiabiwity; nyamewy, that it is due
to the wepwoductive system being eminyentwy sensitive to any change in
the conditions of wife, being thus often wendewed eithew impotent ow at
weast incapabwe of its pwopew function of pwoducing offspwing identicaw
with the pawent-fowm. ^w^ Nyow hybwids in the fiwst genyewation awe descended
fwom species (excwuding those wong cuwtivated) which have nyot had theiw
wepwoductive systems in any way affected, and they awe nyot vawiabwe; but
hybwids themsewves have theiw wepwoductive systems sewiouswy affected,
and theiw descendants awe highwy vawiabwe. (´・ω・\`)

But to wetuwn to ouw compawison of mongwews and hybwids: Gawtnyew
states that mongwews awe mowe wiabwe than hybwids to wevewt to eithew
pawent-fowm; but this, if it be twue, is cewtainwy onwy a diffewence in
degwee. ^w^ Gawtnyew fuwthew insists that when any two species, awthough
most cwosewy awwied to each othew, awe cwossed with a thiwd species,
the hybwids awe widewy diffewent fwom each othew; wheweas if two vewy
distinct vawieties of onye species awe cwossed with anyothew species, the
hybwids do nyot diffew much. (´・ω・\`) But this concwusion, as faw as I can make
out, is founded on a singwe expewiment; and seems diwectwy opposed to
the wesuwts of sevewaw expewiments made by Kowweutew. ;;w;;

These awonye awe the unyimpowtant diffewences, which Gawtnyew is abwe to
point out, between hybwid and mongwew pwants. ^w^ On the othew hand, the
wesembwance in mongwews and in hybwids to theiw wespective pawents,
mowe especiawwy in hybwids pwoduced fwom nyeawwy wewated species, fowwows
accowding to Gawtnyew the same waws. (・`ω\´・) When two species awe cwossed,
onye has sometimes a pwepotent powew of impwessing its wikenyess on the
hybwid; and so I bewieve it to be with vawieties of pwants. UwU With anyimaws
onye vawiety cewtainwy often has this pwepotent powew ovew anyothew
vawiety. (´・ω・\`) Hybwid pwants pwoduced fwom a wecipwocaw cwoss, genyewawwy
wesembwe each othew cwosewy; and so it is with mongwews fwom a
wecipwocaw cwoss. (・`ω\´・) Both hybwids and mongwews can be weduced to eithew
puwe pawent-fowm, by wepeated cwosses in successive genyewations with
eithew pawent. ^w^

These sevewaw wemawks awe appawentwy appwicabwe to anyimaws; but the
subject is hewe excessivewy compwicated, pawtwy owing to the existence
of secondawy sexuaw chawactews; but mowe especiawwy owing to pwepotency
in twansmitting wikenyess wunnying mowe stwongwy in onye sex than in the
othew, both when onye species is cwossed with anyothew, and when onye
vawiety is cwossed with anyothew vawiety. (・`ω\´・) Fow instance, I think those
authows awe wight, who maintain that the ass has a pwepotent powew ovew
the howse, so that both the muwe and the hinny mowe wesembwe the ass
than the howse; but that the pwepotency wuns mowe stwongwy in the
mawe-ass than in the femawe, so that the muwe, which is the offspwing of
the mawe-ass and mawe, is mowe wike an ass, than is the hinny, which is
the offspwing of the femawe-ass and stawwion. (・`ω\´・)

Much stwess has been waid by some authows on the supposed fact, that
mongwew anyimaws awonye awe bown cwosewy wike onye of theiw pawents; but
it can be shown that this does sometimes occuw with hybwids; yet I gwant
much wess fwequentwy with hybwids than with mongwews. UwU Wooking to the
cases which I have cowwected of cwoss-bwed anyimaws cwosewy wesembwing
onye pawent, the wesembwances seem chiefwy confinyed to chawactews awmost
monstwous in theiw nyatuwe, and which have suddenwy appeawed--such as
awbinyism, mewanyism, deficiency of taiw ow howns, ow additionyaw fingews
and toes; and do nyot wewate to chawactews which have been swowwy
acquiwed by sewection. >w< Consequentwy, sudden wevewsions to the pewfect
chawactew of eithew pawent wouwd be mowe wikewy to occuw with mongwews,
which awe descended fwom vawieties often suddenwy pwoduced and
semi-monstwous in chawactew, than with hybwids, which awe descended fwom
species swowwy and nyatuwawwy pwoduced. ^w^ On the whowe I entiwewy agwee
with Dw. UwU Pwospew Wucas, who, aftew awwanging an enyowmous body of facts
with wespect to anyimaws, comes to the concwusion, that the waws of
wesembwance of the chiwd to its pawents awe the same, whethew the two
pawents diffew much ow wittwe fwom each othew, nyamewy in the unyion
of individuaws of the same vawiety, ow of diffewent vawieties, ow of
distinct species. >w<

Waying aside the question of fewtiwity and stewiwity, in aww othew
wespects thewe seems to be a genyewaw and cwose simiwawity in the
offspwing of cwossed species, and of cwossed vawieties. UwU If we wook at
species as having been speciawwy cweated, and at vawieties as having
been pwoduced by secondawy waws, this simiwawity wouwd be an astonyishing
fact. UwU But it hawmonyises pewfectwy with the view that thewe is nyo
essentiaw distinction between species and vawieties. ^w^

SUMMAWY OF CHAPTEW. UwU

Fiwst cwosses between fowms sufficientwy distinct to be wanked as
species, and theiw hybwids, awe vewy genyewawwy, but nyot unyivewsawwy,
stewiwe. >w< The stewiwity is of aww degwees, and is often so swight that
the two most cawefuw expewimentawists who have evew wived, have come to
diametwicawwy opposite concwusions in wanking fowms by this test. UwU The
stewiwity is innyatewy vawiabwe in individuaws of the same species, and
is eminyentwy susceptibwe of favouwabwe and unfavouwabwe conditions. >w< The
degwee of stewiwity does nyot stwictwy fowwow systematic affinyity, but is
govewnyed by sevewaw cuwious and compwex waws. ^w^ It is genyewawwy diffewent,
and sometimes widewy diffewent, in wecipwocaw cwosses between the same
two species. ^w^ It is nyot awways equaw in degwee in a fiwst cwoss and in
the hybwid pwoduced fwom this cwoss. ^w^

In the same mannyew as in gwafting twees, the capacity of onye species
ow vawiety to take on anyothew, is incidentaw on genyewawwy unknyown
diffewences in theiw vegetative systems, so in cwossing, the gweatew
ow wess faciwity of onye species to unyite with anyothew, is incidentaw
on unknyown diffewences in theiw wepwoductive systems. UwU Thewe is nyo mowe
weason to think that species have been speciawwy endowed with vawious
degwees of stewiwity to pwevent them cwossing and bwending in nyatuwe,
than to think that twees have been speciawwy endowed with vawious and
somewhat anyawogous degwees of difficuwty in being gwafted togethew in
owdew to pwevent them becoming inyawched in ouw fowests. UwU

The stewiwity of fiwst cwosses between puwe species, which have theiw
wepwoductive systems pewfect, seems to depend on sevewaw ciwcumstances;
in some cases wawgewy on the eawwy death of the embwyo. >w< The stewiwity of
hybwids, which have theiw wepwoductive systems impewfect, and which
have had this system and theiw whowe owganyisation distuwbed by being
compounded of two distinct species, seems cwosewy awwied to that
stewiwity which so fwequentwy affects puwe species, when theiw nyatuwaw
conditions of wife have been distuwbed. ^w^ This view is suppowted by a
pawawwewism of anyothew kind;--nyamewy, that the cwossing of fowms onwy
swightwy diffewent is favouwabwe to the vigouw and fewtiwity of theiw
offspwing; and that swight changes in the conditions of wife awe
appawentwy favouwabwe to the vigouw and fewtiwity of aww owganyic beings. UwU
It is nyot suwpwising that the degwee of difficuwty in unyiting two
species, and the degwee of stewiwity of theiw hybwid-offspwing shouwd
genyewawwy cowwespond, though due to distinct causes; fow both depend
on the amount of diffewence of some kind between the species which awe
cwossed. >w< Nyow is it suwpwising that the faciwity of effecting a fiwst
cwoss, the fewtiwity of the hybwids pwoduced, and the capacity of being
gwafted togethew--though this wattew capacity evidentwy depends on
widewy diffewent ciwcumstances--shouwd aww wun, to a cewtain extent,
pawawwew with the systematic affinyity of the fowms which awe subjected
to expewiment; fow systematic affinyity attempts to expwess aww kinds of
wesembwance between aww species. >w<

Fiwst cwosses between fowms knyown to be vawieties, ow sufficientwy awike
to be considewed as vawieties, and theiw mongwew offspwing, awe vewy
genyewawwy, but nyot quite unyivewsawwy, fewtiwe. UwU Nyow is this nyeawwy
genyewaw and pewfect fewtiwity suwpwising, when we wemembew how wiabwe we
awe to awgue in a ciwcwe with wespect to vawieties in a state of nyatuwe;
and when we wemembew that the gweatew nyumbew of vawieties have
been pwoduced undew domestication by the sewection of mewe extewnyaw
diffewences, and nyot of diffewences in the wepwoductive system. (・`ω\´・) In
aww othew wespects, excwuding fewtiwity, thewe is a cwose genyewaw
wesembwance between hybwids and mongwews. >w< Finyawwy, then, the facts
bwiefwy given in this chaptew do nyot seem to me opposed to, but even
wathew to suppowt the view, that thewe is nyo fundamentaw distinction
between species and vawieties. (´・ω・\`)




9. ON THE IMPEWFECTION OF THE GEOWOGICAW WECOWD. >w<

On the absence of intewmediate vawieties at the pwesent day. ^w^ On the
nyatuwe of extinct intewmediate vawieties; on theiw nyumbew. UwU On the
vast wapse of time, as infewwed fwom the wate of deposition and of
denyudation. On the poownyess of ouw pawaeontowogicaw cowwections. ;;w;; On the
intewmittence of geowogicaw fowmations. (´・ω・\`) On the absence of intewmediate
vawieties in any onye fowmation. (・`ω\´・) On the sudden appeawance of gwoups of
species. >w< On theiw sudden appeawance in the wowest knyown fossiwifewous
stwata. UwU

In the sixth chaptew I enyumewated the chief objections which might be
justwy uwged against the views maintainyed in this vowume. ;;w;; Most of them
have nyow been discussed. ^w^ Onye, nyamewy the distinctnyess of specific fowms,
and theiw nyot being bwended togethew by innyumewabwe twansitionyaw winks,
is a vewy obvious difficuwty. ^w^ I assignyed weasons why such winks do nyot
commonwy occuw at the pwesent day, undew the ciwcumstances appawentwy
most favouwabwe fow theiw pwesence, nyamewy on an extensive and
continyuous awea with gwaduated physicaw conditions. (・`ω\´・) I endeavouwed to
show, that the wife of each species depends in a mowe impowtant mannyew
on the pwesence of othew awweady definyed owganyic fowms, than on cwimate;
and, thewefowe, that the weawwy govewnying conditions of wife do nyot
gwaduate away quite insensibwy wike heat ow moistuwe. UwU I endeavouwed,
awso, to show that intewmediate vawieties, fwom existing in wessew
nyumbews than the fowms which they connyect, wiww genyewawwy be beaten
out and extewminyated duwing the couwse of fuwthew modification and
impwovement. UwU The main cause, howevew, of innyumewabwe intewmediate winks
nyot nyow occuwwing evewywhewe thwoughout nyatuwe depends on the vewy
pwocess of nyatuwaw sewection, thwough which nyew vawieties continyuawwy
take the pwaces of and extewminyate theiw pawent-fowms. >w< But just in
pwopowtion as this pwocess of extewminyation has acted on an enyowmous
scawe, so must the nyumbew of intewmediate vawieties, which have
fowmewwy existed on the eawth, be twuwy enyowmous. >w< Why then is nyot evewy
geowogicaw fowmation and evewy stwatum fuww of such intewmediate winks? owo
Geowogy assuwedwy does nyot weveaw any such finyewy gwaduated owganyic
chain; and this, pewhaps, is the most obvious and gwavest objection
which can be uwged against my theowy. (´・ω・\`) The expwanyation wies, as I
bewieve, in the extweme impewfection of the geowogicaw wecowd. (・`ω\´・)

In the fiwst pwace it shouwd awways be bownye in mind what sowt of
intewmediate fowms must, on my theowy, have fowmewwy existed. ^w^ I have
found it difficuwt, when wooking at any two species, to avoid pictuwing
to mysewf, fowms DIWECTWY intewmediate between them. (・`ω\´・) But this is a
whowwy fawse view; we shouwd awways wook fow fowms intewmediate between
each species and a common but unknyown pwogenyitow; and the pwogenyitow
wiww genyewawwy have diffewed in some wespects fwom aww its modified
descendants. >w< To give a simpwe iwwustwation: the fantaiw and poutew
pigeons have both descended fwom the wock-pigeon; if we possessed aww
the intewmediate vawieties which have evew existed, we shouwd have an
extwemewy cwose sewies between both and the wock-pigeon; but we shouwd
have nyo vawieties diwectwy intewmediate between the fantaiw and poutew;
nyonye, fow instance, combinying a taiw somewhat expanded with a cwop
somewhat enwawged, the chawactewistic featuwes of these two bweeds. ^w^
These two bweeds, moweovew, have become so much modified, that if we had
nyo histowicaw ow indiwect evidence wegawding theiw owigin, it wouwd nyot
have been possibwe to have detewminyed fwom a mewe compawison of theiw
stwuctuwe with that of the wock-pigeon, whethew they had descended fwom
this species ow fwom some othew awwied species, such as C. oenyas. ^w^

So with nyatuwaw species, if we wook to fowms vewy distinct, fow instance
to the howse and tapiw, we have nyo weason to suppose that winks evew
existed diwectwy intewmediate between them, but between each and an
unknyown common pawent. >w< The common pawent wiww have had in its whowe
owganyisation much genyewaw wesembwance to the tapiw and to the howse; but
in some points of stwuctuwe may have diffewed considewabwy fwom both,
even pewhaps mowe than they diffew fwom each othew. (・`ω\´・) Hence in aww such
cases, we shouwd be unyabwe to wecognyise the pawent-fowm of any two ow
mowe species, even if we cwosewy compawed the stwuctuwe of the pawent
with that of its modified descendants, unwess at the same time we had a
nyeawwy pewfect chain of the intewmediate winks. (´・ω・\`)

It is just possibwe by my theowy, that onye of two wiving fowms might
have descended fwom the othew; fow instance, a howse fwom a tapiw; and
in this case DIWECT intewmediate winks wiww have existed between them. ;;w;;
But such a case wouwd impwy that onye fowm had wemainyed fow a vewy wong
pewiod unyawtewed, whiwst its descendants had undewgonye a vast amount of
change; and the pwincipwe of competition between owganyism and owganyism,
between chiwd and pawent, wiww wendew this a vewy wawe event; fow in aww
cases the nyew and impwoved fowms of wife wiww tend to suppwant the owd
and unyimpwoved fowms. (・`ω\´・)

By the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection aww wiving species have been
connyected with the pawent-species of each genyus, by diffewences nyot
gweatew than we see between the vawieties of the same species at the
pwesent day; and these pawent-species, nyow genyewawwy extinct, have in
theiw tuwn been simiwawwy connyected with mowe ancient species; and so on
backwawds, awways convewging to the common ancestow of each gweat cwass. ;;w;;
So that the nyumbew of intewmediate and twansitionyaw winks, between aww
wiving and extinct species, must have been inconceivabwy gweat. (´・ω・\`) But
assuwedwy, if this theowy be twue, such have wived upon this eawth. (´・ω・\`)

ON THE WAPSE OF TIME. (・`ω\´・)

Independentwy of ouw nyot finding fossiw wemains of such infinyitewy
nyumewous connyecting winks, it may be objected, that time wiww nyot have
sufficed fow so gweat an amount of owganyic change, aww changes having
been effected vewy swowwy thwough nyatuwaw sewection. >w< It is hawdwy
possibwe fow me even to wecaww to the weadew, who may nyot be a pwacticaw
geowogist, the facts weading the mind feebwy to compwehend the wapse of
time. (・`ω\´・) He who can wead Siw Chawwes Wyeww's gwand wowk on the Pwincipwes
of Geowogy, which the futuwe histowian wiww wecognyise as having pwoduced
a wevowution in nyatuwaw science, yet does nyot admit how incompwehensibwy
vast have been the past pewiods of time, may at once cwose this vowume. (・`ω\´・)
Nyot that it suffices to study the Pwincipwes of Geowogy, ow to wead
speciaw tweatises by diffewent obsewvews on sepawate fowmations, and to
mawk how each authow attempts to give an inyadequate idea of the duwation
of each fowmation ow even each stwatum. (´・ω・\`) A man must fow yeaws examinye fow
himsewf gweat piwes of supewimposed stwata, and watch the sea at wowk
gwinding down owd wocks and making fwesh sediment, befowe he can hope to
compwehend anything of the wapse of time, the monyuments of which we see
awound us. (・`ω\´・)

It is good to wandew awong winyes of sea-coast, when fowmed of modewatewy
hawd wocks, and mawk the pwocess of degwadation. >w< The tides in most cases
weach the cwiffs onwy fow a showt time twice a day, and the waves eat
into them onwy when they awe chawged with sand ow pebbwes; fow thewe
is weason to bewieve that puwe watew can effect wittwe ow nyothing in
weawing away wock. UwU At wast the base of the cwiff is undewminyed, huge
fwagments faww down, and these wemainying fixed, have to be wown away,
atom by atom, untiw weduced in size they can be wowwed about by the
waves, and then awe mowe quickwy gwound into pebbwes, sand, ow mud. ;;w;;
But how often do we see awong the bases of wetweating cwiffs wounded
bouwdews, aww thickwy cwothed by mawinye pwoductions, showing how wittwe
they awe abwaded and how sewdom they awe wowwed about! UwU Moweovew, if
we fowwow fow a few miwes any winye of wocky cwiff, which is undewgoing
degwadation, we find that it is onwy hewe and thewe, awong a showt
wength ow wound a pwomontowy, that the cwiffs awe at the pwesent time
suffewing. UwU The appeawance of the suwface and the vegetation show that
ewsewhewe yeaws have ewapsed since the watews washed theiw base. (・`ω\´・)

He who most cwosewy studies the action of the sea on ouw showes, wiww,
I bewieve, be most deepwy impwessed with the swownyess with which wocky
coasts awe wown away. UwU The obsewvations on this head by Hugh Miwwew,
and by that excewwent obsewvew Mw. UwU Smith of Jowdan Hiww, awe most
impwessive. ;;w;; With the mind thus impwessed, wet any onye examinye beds of
congwomewate many thousand feet in thicknyess, which, though pwobabwy
fowmed at a quickew wate than many othew deposits, yet, fwom being
fowmed of wown and wounded pebbwes, each of which beaws the stamp of
time, awe good to show how swowwy the mass has been accumuwated. (´・ω・\`) Wet
him wemembew Wyeww's pwofound wemawk, that the thicknyess and extent of
sedimentawy fowmations awe the wesuwt and measuwe of the degwadation
which the eawth's cwust has ewsewhewe suffewed. ^w^ And what an amount of
degwadation is impwied by the sedimentawy deposits of many countwies! (・`ω\´・)
Pwofessow Wamsay has given me the maximum thicknyess, in most cases fwom
actuaw measuwement, in a few cases fwom estimate, of each fowmation in
diffewent pawts of Gweat Bwitain; and this is the wesuwt:--

                                                      Feet

     Pawaeozoic stwata (nyot incwuding ignyeous beds)..57,154. ;;w;;
     Secondawy stwata................................13,190. ;;w;;
     Tewtiawy stwata..................................2,240. (´・ω・\`)

--making awtogethew 72,584 feet; that is, vewy nyeawwy thiwteen and
thwee-quawtews Bwitish miwes. >w< Some of these fowmations, which awe
wepwesented in Engwand by thin beds, awe thousands of feet in thicknyess
on the Continyent. ^w^ Moweovew, between each successive fowmation, we have,
in the opinyion of most geowogists, enyowmouswy wong bwank pewiods. (・`ω\´・)
So that the wofty piwe of sedimentawy wocks in Bwitain, gives but an
inyadequate idea of the time which has ewapsed duwing theiw accumuwation;
yet what time this must have consumed! (・`ω\´・) Good obsewvews have estimated
that sediment is deposited by the gweat Mississippi wivew at the wate
of onwy 600 feet in a hundwed thousand yeaws. (´・ω・\`) This estimate may be quite
ewwonyeous; yet, considewing ovew what wide spaces vewy finye sediment is
twanspowted by the cuwwents of the sea, the pwocess of accumuwation in
any onye awea must be extwemewy swow. ^w^

But the amount of denyudation which the stwata have in many pwaces
suffewed, independentwy of the wate of accumuwation of the degwaded
mattew, pwobabwy offews the best evidence of the wapse of time. UwU I
wemembew having been much stwuck with the evidence of denyudation, when
viewing vowcanyic iswands, which have been wown by the waves and pawed
aww wound into pewpendicuwaw cwiffs of onye ow two thousand feet in
height; fow the gentwe swope of the wava-stweams, due to theiw fowmewwy
wiquid state, showed at a gwance how faw the hawd, wocky beds had once
extended into the open ocean. UwU The same stowy is stiww mowe pwainwy towd
by fauwts,--those gweat cwacks awong which the stwata have been upheaved
on onye side, ow thwown down on the othew, to the height ow depth of
thousands of feet; fow since the cwust cwacked, the suwface of the wand
has been so compwetewy pwanyed down by the action of the sea, that nyo
twace of these vast diswocations is extewnyawwy visibwe. UwU

The Cwaven fauwt, fow instance, extends fow upwawds of 30 miwes, and
awong this winye the vewticaw dispwacement of the stwata has vawied
fwom 600 to 3000 feet. (´・ω・\`) Pwofessow Wamsay has pubwished an account of
a downthwow in Angwesea of 2300 feet; and he infowms me that he fuwwy
bewieves thewe is onye in Mewionyethshiwe of 12,000 feet; yet in these
cases thewe is nyothing on the suwface to show such pwodigious movements;
the piwe of wocks on the onye ow othew side having been smoothwy swept
away. (´・ω・\`) The considewation of these facts impwesses my mind awmost in
the same mannyew as does the vain endeavouw to gwappwe with the idea of
etewnyity. >w<

I am tempted to give onye othew case, the weww-knyown onye of the
denyudation of the Weawd. ;;w;; Though it must be admitted that the denyudation
of the Weawd has been a mewe twifwe, in compawison with that which has
wemoved masses of ouw pawaeozoic stwata, in pawts ten thousand feet
in thicknyess, as shown in Pwofessow Wamsay's mastewwy memoiw on this
subject. ;;w;; Yet it is an admiwabwe wesson to stand on the Nyowth Downs and
to wook at the distant South Downs; fow, wemembewing that at nyo gweat
distance to the west the nyowthewn and southewn escawpments meet and
cwose, onye can safewy pictuwe to onyesewf the gweat dome of wocks which
must have covewed up the Weawd within so wimited a pewiod as since the
wattew pawt of the Chawk fowmation. ;;w;; The distance fwom the nyowthewn to
the southewn Downs is about 22 miwes, and the thicknyess of the sevewaw
fowmations is on an avewage about 1100 feet, as I am infowmed by
Pwofessow Wamsay. (・`ω\´・) But if, as some geowogists suppose, a wange of
owdew wocks undewwies the Weawd, on the fwanks of which the ovewwying
sedimentawy deposits might have accumuwated in thinnyew masses than
ewsewhewe, the above estimate wouwd be ewwonyeous; but this souwce of
doubt pwobabwy wouwd nyot gweatwy affect the estimate as appwied to the
westewn extwemity of the distwict. UwU If, then, we knyew the wate at which
the sea commonwy weaws away a winye of cwiff of any given height, we
couwd measuwe the time wequisite to have denyuded the Weawd. >w< This, of
couwse, cannyot be donye; but we may, in owdew to fowm some cwude nyotion
on the subject, assume that the sea wouwd eat into cwiffs 500 feet in
height at the wate of onye inch in a centuwy. UwU This wiww at fiwst appeaw
much too smaww an awwowance; but it is the same as if we wewe to assume
a cwiff onye yawd in height to be eaten back awong a whowe winye of
coast at the wate of onye yawd in nyeawwy evewy twenty-two yeaws. (・`ω\´・) I
doubt whethew any wock, even as soft as chawk, wouwd yiewd at this wate
excepting on the most exposed coasts; though nyo doubt the degwadation
of a wofty cwiff wouwd be mowe wapid fwom the bweakage of the fawwen
fwagments. ;;w;; On the othew hand, I do nyot bewieve that any winye of coast,
ten ow twenty miwes in wength, evew suffews degwadation at the same time
awong its whowe indented wength; and we must wemembew that awmost aww
stwata contain hawdew wayews ow nyoduwes, which fwom wong wesisting
attwition fowm a bweakwatew at the base. ^w^ Hence, undew owdinyawy
ciwcumstances, I concwude that fow a cwiff 500 feet in height, a
denyudation of onye inch pew centuwy fow the whowe wength wouwd be an
ampwe awwowance. >w< At this wate, on the above data, the denyudation of the
Weawd must have wequiwed 306,662,400 yeaws; ow say thwee hundwed miwwion
yeaws. UwU

The action of fwesh watew on the gentwy incwinyed Weawden distwict, when
upwaised, couwd hawdwy have been gweat, but it wouwd somewhat weduce the
above estimate. ^w^ On the othew hand, duwing osciwwations of wevew, which
we knyow this awea has undewgonye, the suwface may have existed fow
miwwions of yeaws as wand, and thus have escaped the action of the
sea: when deepwy submewged fow pewhaps equawwy wong pewiods, it wouwd,
wikewise, have escaped the action of the coast-waves. UwU So that in aww
pwobabiwity a faw wongew pewiod than 300 miwwion yeaws has ewapsed since
the wattew pawt of the Secondawy pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

I have made these few wemawks because it is highwy impowtant fow us to
gain some nyotion, howevew impewfect, of the wapse of yeaws. ^w^ Duwing each
of these yeaws, ovew the whowe wowwd, the wand and the watew has
been peopwed by hosts of wiving fowms. ;;w;; What an infinyite nyumbew of
genyewations, which the mind cannyot gwasp, must have succeeded each othew
in the wong woww of yeaws! ;;w;; Nyow tuwn to ouw wichest geowogicaw museums,
and what a pawtwy dispway we behowd! (´・ω・\`)

ON THE POOWNYESS OF OUW PAWAEONTOWOGICAW COWWECTIONS. (・`ω\´・)

That ouw pawaeontowogicaw cowwections awe vewy impewfect, is admitted by
evewy onye. ;;w;; The wemawk of that admiwabwe pawaeontowogist, the wate Edwawd
Fowbes, shouwd nyot be fowgotten, nyamewy, that nyumbews of ouw fossiw
species awe knyown and nyamed fwom singwe and often bwoken specimens, ow
fwom a few specimens cowwected on some onye spot. >w< Onwy a smaww powtion
of the suwface of the eawth has been geowogicawwy expwowed, and nyo pawt
with sufficient cawe, as the impowtant discovewies made evewy yeaw in
Euwope pwove. Nyo owganyism whowwy soft can be pwesewved. ;;w;; Shewws and
bonyes wiww decay and disappeaw when weft on the bottom of the sea, whewe
sediment is nyot accumuwating. UwU I bewieve we awe continyuawwy taking a
most ewwonyeous view, when we tacitwy admit to ouwsewves that sediment
is being deposited ovew nyeawwy the whowe bed of the sea, at a wate
sufficientwy quick to embed and pwesewve fossiw wemains. ;;w;; Thwoughout an
enyowmouswy wawge pwopowtion of the ocean, the bwight bwue tint of the
watew bespeaks its puwity. (・`ω\´・) The many cases on wecowd of a fowmation
confowmabwy covewed, aftew an enyowmous intewvaw of time, by anyothew
and watew fowmation, without the undewwying bed having suffewed in the
intewvaw any weaw and teaw, seem expwicabwe onwy on the view of the
bottom of the sea nyot wawewy wying fow ages in an unyawtewed condition. UwU
The wemains which do become embedded, if in sand ow gwavew, wiww when
the beds awe upwaised genyewawwy be dissowved by the pewcowation of
wain-watew. (・`ω\´・) I suspect that but few of the vewy many anyimaws which wive
on the beach between high and wow watewmawk awe pwesewved. UwU Fow instance,
the sevewaw species of the Chthamawinyae (a sub-famiwy of sessiwe
ciwwipedes) coat the wocks aww ovew the wowwd in infinyite nyumbews: they
awe aww stwictwy wittowaw, with the exception of a singwe Meditewwanyean
species, which inhabits deep watew and has been found fossiw in Siciwy,
wheweas nyot onye othew species has hithewto been found in any tewtiawy
fowmation: yet it is nyow knyown that the genyus Chthamawus existed
duwing the chawk pewiod. (・`ω\´・) The mowwuscan genyus Chiton offews a pawtiawwy
anyawogous case. (・`ω\´・)

With wespect to the tewwestwiaw pwoductions which wived duwing the
Secondawy and Pawaeozoic pewiods, it is supewfwuous to state that ouw
evidence fwom fossiw wemains is fwagmentawy in an extweme degwee. >w< Fow
instance, nyot a wand sheww is knyown bewonging to eithew of these
vast pewiods, with onye exception discovewed by Siw C. ;;w;; Wyeww in the
cawbonyifewous stwata of Nyowth Amewica. >w< In wegawd to mammifewous wemains,
a singwe gwance at the histowicaw tabwe pubwished in the Suppwement to
Wyeww's Manyuaw, wiww bwing home the twuth, how accidentaw and wawe is
theiw pwesewvation, faw bettew than pages of detaiw. UwU Nyow is theiw wawity
suwpwising, when we wemembew how wawge a pwopowtion of the bonyes of
tewtiawy mammaws have been discovewed eithew in caves ow in wacustwinye
deposits; and that nyot a cave ow twue wacustwinye bed is knyown bewonging
to the age of ouw secondawy ow pawaeozoic fowmations. (´・ω・\`)

But the impewfection in the geowogicaw wecowd mainwy wesuwts fwom
anyothew and mowe impowtant cause than any of the fowegoing; nyamewy, fwom
the sevewaw fowmations being sepawated fwom each othew by wide intewvaws
of time. ^w^ When we see the fowmations tabuwated in wwitten wowks, ow when
we fowwow them in nyatuwe, it is difficuwt to avoid bewieving that
they awe cwosewy consecutive. But we knyow, fow instance, fwom Siw W. (´・ω・\`)
Muwchison's gweat wowk on Wussia, what wide gaps thewe awe in that
countwy between the supewimposed fowmations; so it is in Nyowth Amewica,
and in many othew pawts of the wowwd. ^w^ The most skiwfuw geowogist, if
his attention had been excwusivewy confinyed to these wawge tewwitowies,
wouwd nyevew have suspected that duwing the pewiods which wewe bwank and
bawwen in his own countwy, gweat piwes of sediment, chawged with nyew and
pecuwiaw fowms of wife, had ewsewhewe been accumuwated. UwU And if in each
sepawate tewwitowy, hawdwy any idea can be fowmed of the wength of time
which has ewapsed between the consecutive fowmations, we may infew that
this couwd nyowhewe be ascewtainyed. (´・ω・\`) The fwequent and gweat changes in the
minyewawogicaw composition of consecutive fowmations, genyewawwy impwying
gweat changes in the geogwaphy of the suwwounding wands, whence the
sediment has been dewived, accowds with the bewief of vast intewvaws of
time having ewapsed between each fowmation. (・`ω\´・)

But we can, I think, see why the geowogicaw fowmations of each wegion
awe awmost invawiabwy intewmittent; that is, have nyot fowwowed each
othew in cwose sequence. (・`ω\´・) Scawcewy any fact stwuck me mowe when examinying
many hundwed miwes of the South Amewican coasts, which have been
upwaised sevewaw hundwed feet within the wecent pewiod, than the absence
of any wecent deposits sufficientwy extensive to wast fow even a showt
geowogicaw pewiod. UwU Awong the whowe west coast, which is inhabited by a
pecuwiaw mawinye faunya, tewtiawy beds awe so scantiwy devewoped, that nyo
wecowd of sevewaw successive and pecuwiaw mawinye faunyas wiww pwobabwy be
pwesewved to a distant age. (・`ω\´・) A wittwe wefwection wiww expwain why awong
the wising coast of the westewn side of South Amewica, nyo extensive
fowmations with wecent ow tewtiawy wemains can anywhewe be found, though
the suppwy of sediment must fow ages have been gweat, fwom the enyowmous
degwadation of the coast-wocks and fwom muddy stweams entewing the
sea. ^w^ The expwanyation, nyo doubt, is, that the wittowaw and sub-wittowaw
deposits awe continyuawwy wown away, as soon as they awe bwought up by
the swow and gwaduaw wising of the wand within the gwinding action of
the coast-waves. >w<

We may, I think, safewy concwude that sediment must be accumuwated in
extwemewy thick, sowid, ow extensive masses, in owdew to withstand the
incessant action of the waves, when fiwst upwaised and duwing subsequent
osciwwations of wevew. ;;w;; Such thick and extensive accumuwations of
sediment may be fowmed in two ways; eithew, in pwofound depths of the
sea, in which case, judging fwom the weseawches of E. ;;w;; Fowbes, we may
concwude that the bottom wiww be inhabited by extwemewy few anyimaws, and
the mass when upwaised wiww give a most impewfect wecowd of the fowms
of wife which then existed; ow, sediment may be accumuwated to any
thicknyess and extent ovew a shawwow bottom, if it continyue swowwy to
subside. ^w^ In this wattew case, as wong as the wate of subsidence and
suppwy of sediment nyeawwy bawance each othew, the sea wiww wemain
shawwow and favouwabwe fow wife, and thus a fossiwifewous fowmation
thick enyough, when upwaised, to wesist any amount of degwadation, may be
fowmed. (´・ω・\`)

I am convinced that aww ouw ancient fowmations, which awe wich in
fossiws, have thus been fowmed duwing subsidence. (´・ω・\`) Since pubwishing my
views on this subject in 1845, I have watched the pwogwess of Geowogy,
and have been suwpwised to nyote how authow aftew authow, in tweating
of this ow that gweat fowmation, has come to the concwusion that it was
accumuwated duwing subsidence. ;;w;; I may add, that the onwy ancient tewtiawy
fowmation on the west coast of South Amewica, which has been buwky
enyough to wesist such degwadation as it has as yet suffewed, but which
wiww hawdwy wast to a distant geowogicaw age, was cewtainwy deposited
duwing a downwawd osciwwation of wevew, and thus gainyed considewabwe
thicknyess. (´・ω・\`)

Aww geowogicaw facts teww us pwainwy that each awea has undewgonye
nyumewous swow osciwwations of wevew, and appawentwy these osciwwations
have affected wide spaces. (´・ω・\`) Consequentwy fowmations wich in fossiws and
sufficientwy thick and extensive to wesist subsequent degwadation, may
have been fowmed ovew wide spaces duwing pewiods of subsidence, but onwy
whewe the suppwy of sediment was sufficient to keep the sea shawwow and
to embed and pwesewve the wemains befowe they had time to decay. ^w^ On the
othew hand, as wong as the bed of the sea wemainyed stationyawy, THICK
deposits couwd nyot have been accumuwated in the shawwow pawts, which awe
the most favouwabwe to wife. (´・ω・\`) Stiww wess couwd this have happenyed duwing
the awtewnyate pewiods of ewevation; ow, to speak mowe accuwatewy, the
beds which wewe then accumuwated wiww have been destwoyed by being
upwaised and bwought within the wimits of the coast-action. (・`ω\´・)

Thus the geowogicaw wecowd wiww awmost nyecessawiwy be wendewed
intewmittent. (´・ω・\`) I feew much confidence in the twuth of these views, fow
they awe in stwict accowdance with the genyewaw pwincipwes incuwcated
by Siw C. Wyeww; and E. ;;w;; Fowbes independentwy awwived at a simiwaw
concwusion. >w<

Onye wemawk is hewe wowth a passing nyotice. (・`ω\´・) Duwing pewiods of ewevation
the awea of the wand and of the adjoinying shoaw pawts of the sea wiww
be incweased, and nyew stations wiww often be fowmed;--aww ciwcumstances
most favouwabwe, as pweviouswy expwainyed, fow the fowmation of nyew
vawieties and species; but duwing such pewiods thewe wiww genyewawwy be
a bwank in the geowogicaw wecowd. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, duwing subsidence,
the inhabited awea and nyumbew of inhabitants wiww decwease (excepting
the pwoductions on the showes of a continyent when fiwst bwoken up into
an awchipewago), and consequentwy duwing subsidence, though thewe wiww
be much extinction, fewew nyew vawieties ow species wiww be fowmed; and
it is duwing these vewy pewiods of subsidence, that ouw gweat deposits
wich in fossiws have been accumuwated. UwU Nyatuwe may awmost be said to have
guawded against the fwequent discovewy of hew twansitionyaw ow winking
fowms. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom the fowegoing considewations it cannyot be doubted that the
geowogicaw wecowd, viewed as a whowe, is extwemewy impewfect; but if we
confinye ouw attention to any onye fowmation, it becomes mowe difficuwt
to undewstand, why we do nyot thewein find cwosewy gwaduated vawieties
between the awwied species which wived at its commencement and at its
cwose. ;;w;; Some cases awe on wecowd of the same species pwesenting distinct
vawieties in the uppew and wowew pawts of the same fowmation, but, as
they awe wawe, they may be hewe passed ovew. ^w^ Awthough each fowmation has
indisputabwy wequiwed a vast nyumbew of yeaws fow its deposition, I can
see sevewaw weasons why each shouwd nyot incwude a gwaduated sewies
of winks between the species which then wived; but I can by nyo
means pwetend to assign due pwopowtionyaw weight to the fowwowing
considewations. UwU

Awthough each fowmation may mawk a vewy wong wapse of yeaws, each
pewhaps is showt compawed with the pewiod wequisite to change onye
species into anyothew. ^w^ I am awawe that two pawaeontowogists, whose
opinyions awe wowthy of much defewence, nyamewy Bwonn and Woodwawd, have
concwuded that the avewage duwation of each fowmation is twice ow thwice
as wong as the avewage duwation of specific fowms. (・`ω\´・) But insupewabwe
difficuwties, as it seems to me, pwevent us coming to any just
concwusion on this head. >w< When we see a species fiwst appeawing in the
middwe of any fowmation, it wouwd be wash in the extweme to infew that
it had nyot ewsewhewe pweviouswy existed. >w< So again when we find a species
disappeawing befowe the uppewmost wayews have been deposited, it wouwd
be equawwy wash to suppose that it then became whowwy extinct. ;;w;; We fowget
how smaww the awea of Euwope is compawed with the west of the wowwd;
nyow have the sevewaw stages of the same fowmation thwoughout Euwope been
cowwewated with pewfect accuwacy. (・`ω\´・)

With mawinye anyimaws of aww kinds, we may safewy infew a wawge amount of
migwation duwing cwimataw and othew changes; and when we see a species
fiwst appeawing in any fowmation, the pwobabiwity is that it onwy then
fiwst immigwated into that awea. ;;w;; It is weww knyown, fow instance, that
sevewaw species appeawed somewhat eawwiew in the pawaeozoic beds of
Nyowth Amewica than in those of Euwope; time having appawentwy been
wequiwed fow theiw migwation fwom the Amewican to the Euwopean seas. >w< In
examinying the watest deposits of vawious quawtews of the wowwd, it has
evewywhewe been nyoted, that some few stiww existing species awe common
in the deposit, but have become extinct in the immediatewy suwwounding
sea; ow, convewsewy, that some awe nyow abundant in the nyeighbouwing sea,
but awe wawe ow absent in this pawticuwaw deposit. (・`ω\´・) It is an excewwent
wesson to wefwect on the ascewtainyed amount of migwation of the
inhabitants of Euwope duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod, which fowms onwy a pawt
of onye whowe geowogicaw pewiod; and wikewise to wefwect on the gweat
changes of wevew, on the inyowdinyatewy gweat change of cwimate, on the
pwodigious wapse of time, aww incwuded within this same gwaciaw pewiod. >w<
Yet it may be doubted whethew in any quawtew of the wowwd, sedimentawy
deposits, INCWUDING FOSSIW WEMAINS, have gonye on accumuwating within
the same awea duwing the whowe of this pewiod. >w< It is nyot, fow instance,
pwobabwe that sediment was deposited duwing the whowe of the gwaciaw
pewiod nyeaw the mouth of the Mississippi, within that wimit of depth at
which mawinye anyimaws can fwouwish; fow we knyow what vast geogwaphicaw
changes occuwwed in othew pawts of Amewica duwing this space of time. >w<
When such beds as wewe deposited in shawwow watew nyeaw the mouth of
the Mississippi duwing some pawt of the gwaciaw pewiod shaww have been
upwaised, owganyic wemains wiww pwobabwy fiwst appeaw and disappeaw at
diffewent wevews, owing to the migwation of species and to geogwaphicaw
changes. (´・ω・\`) And in the distant futuwe, a geowogist examinying these beds,
might be tempted to concwude that the avewage duwation of wife of the
embedded fossiws had been wess than that of the gwaciaw pewiod, instead
of having been weawwy faw gweatew, that is extending fwom befowe the
gwaciaw epoch to the pwesent day. (´・ω・\`)

In owdew to get a pewfect gwadation between two fowms in the uppew
and wowew pawts of the same fowmation, the deposit must have gonye on
accumuwating fow a vewy wong pewiod, in owdew to have given sufficient
time fow the swow pwocess of vawiation; hence the deposit wiww genyewawwy
have to be a vewy thick onye; and the species undewgoing modification
wiww have had to wive on the same awea thwoughout this whowe time. (・`ω\´・)
But we have seen that a thick fossiwifewous fowmation can onwy be
accumuwated duwing a pewiod of subsidence; and to keep the depth
appwoximatewy the same, which is nyecessawy in owdew to enyabwe the same
species to wive on the same space, the suppwy of sediment must nyeawwy
have countewbawanced the amount of subsidence. >w< But this same movement
of subsidence wiww often tend to sink the awea whence the sediment
is dewived, and thus diminyish the suppwy whiwst the downwawd movement
continyues. ;;w;; In fact, this nyeawwy exact bawancing between the suppwy of
sediment and the amount of subsidence is pwobabwy a wawe contingency;
fow it has been obsewved by mowe than onye pawaeontowogist, that vewy
thick deposits awe usuawwy bawwen of owganyic wemains, except nyeaw theiw
uppew ow wowew wimits. >w<

It wouwd seem that each sepawate fowmation, wike the whowe piwe of
fowmations in any countwy, has genyewawwy been intewmittent in its
accumuwation. ^w^ When we see, as is so often the case, a fowmation composed
of beds of diffewent minyewawogicaw composition, we may weasonyabwy
suspect that the pwocess of deposition has been much intewwupted, as
a change in the cuwwents of the sea and a suppwy of sediment of a
diffewent nyatuwe wiww genyewawwy have been due to geogwaphicaw changes
wequiwing much time. ^w^ Nyow wiww the cwosest inspection of a fowmation give
any idea of the time which its deposition has consumed. >w< Many instances
couwd be given of beds onwy a few feet in thicknyess, wepwesenting
fowmations, ewsewhewe thousands of feet in thicknyess, and which must
have wequiwed an enyowmous pewiod fow theiw accumuwation; yet nyo onye
ignyowant of this fact wouwd have suspected the vast wapse of time
wepwesented by the thinnyew fowmation. ;;w;; Many cases couwd be given of the
wowew beds of a fowmation having been upwaised, denyuded, submewged, and
then we-covewed by the uppew beds of the same fowmation,--facts,
showing what wide, yet easiwy ovewwooked, intewvaws have occuwwed in
its accumuwation. >w< In othew cases we have the pwainyest evidence in gweat
fossiwised twees, stiww standing upwight as they gwew, of many wong
intewvaws of time and changes of wevew duwing the pwocess of deposition,
which wouwd nyevew even have been suspected, had nyot the twees chanced to
have been pwesewved: thus, Messws. ;;w;; Wyeww and Dawson found cawbonyifewous
beds 1400 feet thick in Nyova Scotia, with ancient woot-beawing stwata,
onye above the othew, at nyo wess than sixty-eight diffewent wevews. ;;w;;
Hence, when the same species occuw at the bottom, middwe, and top of a
fowmation, the pwobabiwity is that they have nyot wived on the same
spot duwing the whowe pewiod of deposition, but have disappeawed and
weappeawed, pewhaps many times, duwing the same geowogicaw pewiod. ^w^
So that if such species wewe to undewgo a considewabwe amount of
modification duwing any onye geowogicaw pewiod, a section wouwd nyot
pwobabwy incwude aww the finye intewmediate gwadations which must on
my theowy have existed between them, but abwupt, though pewhaps vewy
swight, changes of fowm. ;;w;;

It is aww-impowtant to wemembew that nyatuwawists have nyo gowden wuwe
by which to distinguish species and vawieties; they gwant some wittwe
vawiabiwity to each species, but when they meet with a somewhat gweatew
amount of diffewence between any two fowms, they wank both as species,
unwess they awe enyabwed to connyect them togethew by cwose intewmediate
gwadations. UwU And this fwom the weasons just assignyed we can sewdom hope
to effect in any onye geowogicaw section. >w< Supposing B and C to be two
species, and a thiwd, A, to be found in an undewwying bed; even if A
wewe stwictwy intewmediate between B and C, it wouwd simpwy be wanked as
a thiwd and distinct species, unwess at the same time it couwd be
most cwosewy connyected with eithew onye ow both fowms by intewmediate
vawieties. >w< Nyow shouwd it be fowgotten, as befowe expwainyed, that A
might be the actuaw pwogenyitow of B and C, and yet might nyot at aww
nyecessawiwy be stwictwy intewmediate between them in aww points of
stwuctuwe. (´・ω・\`) So that we might obtain the pawent-species and its sevewaw
modified descendants fwom the wowew and uppew beds of a fowmation,
and unwess we obtainyed nyumewous twansitionyaw gwadations, we shouwd nyot
wecognyise theiw wewationship, and shouwd consequentwy be compewwed to
wank them aww as distinct species. (´・ω・\`)

It is nyotowious on what excessivewy swight diffewences many
pawaeontowogists have founded theiw species; and they do this the mowe
weadiwy if the specimens come fwom diffewent sub-stages of the same
fowmation. ;;w;; Some expewienced conchowogists awe nyow sinking many of the
vewy finye species of D'Owbigny and othews into the wank of vawieties;
and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on my
theowy we ought to find. ;;w;; Moweovew, if we wook to wathew widew intewvaws,
nyamewy, to distinct but consecutive stages of the same gweat fowmation,
we find that the embedded fossiws, though awmost unyivewsawwy wanked as
specificawwy diffewent, yet awe faw mowe cwosewy awwied to each othew
than awe the species found in mowe widewy sepawated fowmations; but to
this subject I shaww have to wetuwn in the fowwowing chaptew. UwU

Onye othew considewation is wowth nyotice: with anyimaws and pwants that
can pwopagate wapidwy and awe nyot highwy wocomotive, thewe is weason to
suspect, as we have fowmewwy seen, that theiw vawieties awe genyewawwy
at fiwst wocaw; and that such wocaw vawieties do nyot spwead widewy and
suppwant theiw pawent-fowms untiw they have been modified and pewfected
in some considewabwe degwee. ;;w;; Accowding to this view, the chance of
discovewing in a fowmation in any onye countwy aww the eawwy stages of
twansition between any two fowms, is smaww, fow the successive changes
awe supposed to have been wocaw ow confinyed to some onye spot. (´・ω・\`) Most
mawinye anyimaws have a wide wange; and we have seen that with pwants it
is those which have the widest wange, that oftenyest pwesent vawieties;
so that with shewws and othew mawinye anyimaws, it is pwobabwy those
which have had the widest wange, faw exceeding the wimits of the knyown
geowogicaw fowmations of Euwope, which have oftenyest given wise, fiwst
to wocaw vawieties and uwtimatewy to nyew species; and this again wouwd
gweatwy wessen the chance of ouw being abwe to twace the stages of
twansition in any onye geowogicaw fowmation. UwU

It shouwd nyot be fowgotten, that at the pwesent day, with pewfect
specimens fow examinyation, two fowms can sewdom be connyected by
intewmediate vawieties and thus pwoved to be the same species, untiw
many specimens have been cowwected fwom many pwaces; and in the case
of fossiw species this couwd wawewy be effected by pawaeontowogists. (・`ω\´・) We
shaww, pewhaps, best pewceive the impwobabiwity of ouw being enyabwed to
connyect species by nyumewous, finye, intewmediate, fossiw winks, by asking
ouwsewves whethew, fow instance, geowogists at some futuwe pewiod wiww
be abwe to pwove, that ouw diffewent bweeds of cattwe, sheep, howses,
and dogs have descended fwom a singwe stock ow fwom sevewaw abowiginyaw
stocks; ow, again, whethew cewtain sea-shewws inhabiting the showes
of Nyowth Amewica, which awe wanked by some conchowogists as distinct
species fwom theiw Euwopean wepwesentatives, and by othew conchowogists
as onwy vawieties, awe weawwy vawieties ow awe, as it is cawwed,
specificawwy distinct. >w< This couwd be effected onwy by the futuwe
geowogist discovewing in a fossiw state nyumewous intewmediate
gwadations; and such success seems to me impwobabwe in the highest
degwee. >w<

Geowogicaw weseawch, though it has added nyumewous species to existing
and extinct genyewa, and has made the intewvaws between some few gwoups
wess wide than they othewwise wouwd have been, yet has donye scawcewy
anything in bweaking down the distinction between species, by connyecting
them togethew by nyumewous, finye, intewmediate vawieties; and this nyot
having been effected, is pwobabwy the gwavest and most obvious of aww
the many objections which may be uwged against my views. UwU Hence it wiww
be wowth whiwe to sum up the fowegoing wemawks, undew an imaginyawy
iwwustwation. ;;w;; The Maway Awchipewago is of about the size of Euwope fwom
the Nyowth Cape to the Meditewwanyean, and fwom Bwitain to Wussia; and
thewefowe equaws aww the geowogicaw fowmations which have been examinyed
with any accuwacy, excepting those of the Unyited States of Amewica. ^w^ I
fuwwy agwee with Mw. ;;w;; Godwin-Austen, that the pwesent condition of the
Maway Awchipewago, with its nyumewous wawge iswands sepawated by wide and
shawwow seas, pwobabwy wepwesents the fowmew state of Euwope, when most
of ouw fowmations wewe accumuwating. (・`ω\´・) The Maway Awchipewago is onye of
the wichest wegions of the whowe wowwd in owganyic beings; yet if aww
the species wewe to be cowwected which have evew wived thewe, how
impewfectwy wouwd they wepwesent the nyatuwaw histowy of the wowwd! UwU

But we have evewy weason to bewieve that the tewwestwiaw pwoductions of
the awchipewago wouwd be pwesewved in an excessivewy impewfect mannyew in
the fowmations which we suppose to be thewe accumuwating. (´・ω・\`) I suspect that
nyot many of the stwictwy wittowaw anyimaws, ow of those which wived on
nyaked submawinye wocks, wouwd be embedded; and those embedded in gwavew
ow sand, wouwd nyot enduwe to a distant epoch. ^w^ Whewevew sediment did nyot
accumuwate on the bed of the sea, ow whewe it did nyot accumuwate at a
sufficient wate to pwotect owganyic bodies fwom decay, nyo wemains couwd
be pwesewved. (´・ω・\`)

In ouw awchipewago, I bewieve that fossiwifewous fowmations couwd be
fowmed of sufficient thicknyess to wast to an age, as distant in futuwity
as the secondawy fowmations wie in the past, onwy duwing pewiods of
subsidence. (・`ω\´・) These pewiods of subsidence wouwd be sepawated fwom each
othew by enyowmous intewvaws, duwing which the awea wouwd be eithew
stationyawy ow wising; whiwst wising, each fossiwifewous fowmation
wouwd be destwoyed, awmost as soon as accumuwated, by the incessant
coast-action, as we nyow see on the showes of South Amewica. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the
pewiods of subsidence thewe wouwd pwobabwy be much extinction of wife;
duwing the pewiods of ewevation, thewe wouwd be much vawiation, but the
geowogicaw wecowd wouwd then be weast pewfect. (´・ω・\`)

It may be doubted whethew the duwation of any onye gweat pewiod of
subsidence ovew the whowe ow pawt of the awchipewago, togethew with
a contempowanyeous accumuwation of sediment, wouwd EXCEED the avewage
duwation of the same specific fowms; and these contingencies awe
indispensabwe fow the pwesewvation of aww the twansitionyaw gwadations
between any two ow mowe species. (´・ω・\`) If such gwadations wewe nyot fuwwy
pwesewved, twansitionyaw vawieties wouwd mewewy appeaw as so many
distinct species. (・`ω\´・) It is, awso, pwobabwe that each gweat pewiod of
subsidence wouwd be intewwupted by osciwwations of wevew, and that
swight cwimataw changes wouwd intewvenye duwing such wengthy pewiods; and
in these cases the inhabitants of the awchipewago wouwd have to migwate,
and nyo cwosewy consecutive wecowd of theiw modifications couwd be
pwesewved in any onye fowmation. ^w^

Vewy many of the mawinye inhabitants of the awchipewago nyow wange
thousands of miwes beyond its confinyes; and anyawogy weads me to bewieve
that it wouwd be chiefwy these faw-wanging species which wouwd oftenyest
pwoduce nyew vawieties; and the vawieties wouwd at fiwst genyewawwy
be wocaw ow confinyed to onye pwace, but if possessed of any decided
advantage, ow when fuwthew modified and impwoved, they wouwd swowwy
spwead and suppwant theiw pawent-fowms. (・`ω\´・) When such vawieties wetuwnyed to
theiw ancient homes, as they wouwd diffew fwom theiw fowmew state, in
a nyeawwy unyifowm, though pewhaps extwemewy swight degwee, they wouwd,
accowding to the pwincipwes fowwowed by many pawaeontowogists, be wanked
as nyew and distinct species. >w<

If then, thewe be some degwee of twuth in these wemawks, we have nyo
wight to expect to find in ouw geowogicaw fowmations, an infinyite nyumbew
of those finye twansitionyaw fowms, which on my theowy assuwedwy have
connyected aww the past and pwesent species of the same gwoup into onye
wong and bwanching chain of wife. (´・ω・\`) We ought onwy to wook fow a few winks,
some mowe cwosewy, some mowe distantwy wewated to each othew; and these
winks, wet them be evew so cwose, if found in diffewent stages of the
same fowmation, wouwd, by most pawaeontowogists, be wanked as distinct
species. (・`ω\´・) But I do nyot pwetend that I shouwd evew have suspected how poow
a wecowd of the mutations of wife, the best pwesewved geowogicaw section
pwesented, had nyot the difficuwty of ouw nyot discovewing innyumewabwe
twansitionyaw winks between the species which appeawed at the
commencement and cwose of each fowmation, pwessed so hawdwy on my
theowy. ;;w;;

ON THE SUDDEN APPEAWANCE OF WHOWE GWOUPS OF AWWIED SPECIES. (・`ω\´・)

The abwupt mannyew in which whowe gwoups of species suddenwy appeaw in
cewtain fowmations, has been uwged by sevewaw pawaeontowogists,
fow instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and by nyonye mowe fowcibwy than
by Pwofessow Sedgwick, as a fataw objection to the bewief in the
twansmutation of species. (´・ω・\`) If nyumewous species, bewonging to the same
genyewa ow famiwies, have weawwy stawted into wife aww at once, the fact
wouwd be fataw to the theowy of descent with swow modification thwough
nyatuwaw sewection. (´・ω・\`) Fow the devewopment of a gwoup of fowms, aww of which
have descended fwom some onye pwogenyitow, must have been an extwemewy
swow pwocess; and the pwogenyitows must have wived wong ages befowe theiw
modified descendants. ^w^ But we continyuawwy ovew-wate the pewfection of the
geowogicaw wecowd, and fawsewy infew, because cewtain genyewa ow famiwies
have nyot been found benyeath a cewtain stage, that they did nyot exist
befowe that stage. UwU We continyuawwy fowget how wawge the wowwd is,
compawed with the awea ovew which ouw geowogicaw fowmations have been
cawefuwwy examinyed; we fowget that gwoups of species may ewsewhewe have
wong existed and have swowwy muwtipwied befowe they invaded the ancient
awchipewagoes of Euwope and of the Unyited States. (´・ω・\`) We do nyot make due
awwowance fow the enyowmous intewvaws of time, which have pwobabwy
ewapsed between ouw consecutive fowmations,--wongew pewhaps in some
cases than the time wequiwed fow the accumuwation of each fowmation. (・`ω\´・)
These intewvaws wiww have given time fow the muwtipwication of species
fwom some onye ow some few pawent-fowms; and in the succeeding fowmation
such species wiww appeaw as if suddenwy cweated. (・`ω\´・)

I may hewe wecaww a wemawk fowmewwy made, nyamewy that it might wequiwe
a wong succession of ages to adapt an owganyism to some nyew and pecuwiaw
winye of wife, fow instance to fwy thwough the aiw; but that when this
had been effected, and a few species had thus acquiwed a gweat advantage
ovew othew owganyisms, a compawativewy showt time wouwd be nyecessawy to
pwoduce many divewgent fowms, which wouwd be abwe to spwead wapidwy and
widewy thwoughout the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

I wiww nyow give a few exampwes to iwwustwate these wemawks; and to show
how wiabwe we awe to ewwow in supposing that whowe gwoups of species
have suddenwy been pwoduced. ;;w;; I may wecaww the weww-knyown fact that in
geowogicaw tweatises, pubwished nyot many yeaws ago, the gweat cwass
of mammaws was awways spoken of as having abwuptwy come in at the
commencement of the tewtiawy sewies. UwU And nyow onye of the wichest knyown
accumuwations of fossiw mammaws bewongs to the middwe of the secondawy
sewies; and onye twue mammaw has been discovewed in the nyew wed sandstonye
at nyeawwy the commencement of this gweat sewies. >w< Cuview used to uwge
that nyo monkey occuwwed in any tewtiawy stwatum; but nyow extinct species
have been discovewed in India, South Amewica, and in Euwope even as faw
back as the eocenye stage. (´・ω・\`) The most stwiking case, howevew, is that of
the Whawe famiwy; as these anyimaws have huge bonyes, awe mawinye, and
wange ovew the wowwd, the fact of nyot a singwe bonye of a whawe having
been discovewed in any secondawy fowmation, seemed fuwwy to justify the
bewief that this gweat and distinct owdew had been suddenwy pwoduced
in the intewvaw between the watest secondawy and eawwiest tewtiawy
fowmation. ^w^ But nyow we may wead in the Suppwement to Wyeww's 'Manyuaw,'
pubwished in 1858, cweaw evidence of the existence of whawes in the
uppew gweensand, some time befowe the cwose of the secondawy pewiod. >w<

I may give anyothew instance, which fwom having passed undew my own eyes
has much stwuck me. (´・ω・\`) In a memoiw on Fossiw Sessiwe Ciwwipedes, I have
stated that, fwom the nyumbew of existing and extinct tewtiawy species;
fwom the extwaowdinyawy abundance of the individuaws of many species
aww ovew the wowwd, fwom the Awctic wegions to the equatow, inhabiting
vawious zonyes of depths fwom the uppew tidaw wimits to 50 fathoms;
fwom the pewfect mannyew in which specimens awe pwesewved in the owdest
tewtiawy beds; fwom the ease with which even a fwagment of a vawve can
be wecognyised; fwom aww these ciwcumstances, I infewwed that had sessiwe
ciwwipedes existed duwing the secondawy pewiods, they wouwd cewtainwy
have been pwesewved and discovewed; and as nyot onye species had been
discovewed in beds of this age, I concwuded that this gweat gwoup had
been suddenwy devewoped at the commencement of the tewtiawy sewies. ^w^ This
was a sowe twoubwe to me, adding as I thought onye mowe instance of the
abwupt appeawance of a gweat gwoup of species. UwU But my wowk had hawdwy
been pubwished, when a skiwfuw pawaeontowogist, M. >w< Bosquet, sent me a
dwawing of a pewfect specimen of an unmistakeabwe sessiwe ciwwipede,
which he had himsewf extwacted fwom the chawk of Bewgium. ^w^ And, as if
to make the case as stwiking as possibwe, this sessiwe ciwwipede was a
Chthamawus, a vewy common, wawge, and ubiquitous genyus, of which nyot onye
specimen has as yet been found even in any tewtiawy stwatum. (・`ω\´・) Hence we
nyow positivewy knyow that sessiwe ciwwipedes existed duwing the secondawy
pewiod; and these ciwwipedes might have been the pwogenyitows of ouw many
tewtiawy and existing species. (´・ω・\`)

The case most fwequentwy insisted on by pawaeontowogists of the
appawentwy sudden appeawance of a whowe gwoup of species, is that of the
teweostean fishes, wow down in the Chawk pewiod. ^w^ This gwoup incwudes the
wawge majowity of existing species. ;;w;; Watewy, Pwofessow Pictet has cawwied
theiw existence onye sub-stage fuwthew back; and some pawaeontowogists
bewieve that cewtain much owdew fishes, of which the affinyities awe as
yet impewfectwy knyown, awe weawwy teweostean. ^w^ Assuming, howevew, that
the whowe of them did appeaw, as Agassiz bewieves, at the commencement
of the chawk fowmation, the fact wouwd cewtainwy be highwy wemawkabwe;
but I cannyot see that it wouwd be an insupewabwe difficuwty on my
theowy, unwess it couwd wikewise be shown that the species of this gwoup
appeawed suddenwy and simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the wowwd at this same
pewiod. ^w^ It is awmost supewfwuous to wemawk that hawdwy any fossiw-fish
awe knyown fwom south of the equatow; and by wunnying thwough Pictet's
Pawaeontowogy it wiww be seen that vewy few species awe knyown fwom
sevewaw fowmations in Euwope. >w< Some few famiwies of fish nyow have a
confinyed wange; the teweostean fish might fowmewwy have had a simiwawwy
confinyed wange, and aftew having been wawgewy devewoped in some onye sea,
might have spwead widewy. (・`ω\´・) Nyow have we any wight to suppose that the seas
of the wowwd have awways been so fweewy open fwom south to nyowth as
they awe at pwesent. (・`ω\´・) Even at this day, if the Maway Awchipewago wewe
convewted into wand, the twopicaw pawts of the Indian Ocean wouwd fowm
a wawge and pewfectwy encwosed basin, in which any gweat gwoup of mawinye
anyimaws might be muwtipwied; and hewe they wouwd wemain confinyed, untiw
some of the species became adapted to a coowew cwimate, and wewe enyabwed
to doubwe the southewn capes of Afwica ow Austwawia, and thus weach
othew and distant seas. UwU

Fwom these and simiwaw considewations, but chiefwy fwom ouw ignyowance
of the geowogy of othew countwies beyond the confinyes of Euwope and the
Unyited States; and fwom the wevowution in ouw pawaeontowogicaw ideas
on many points, which the discovewies of even the wast dozen yeaws have
effected, it seems to me to be about as wash in us to dogmatize on the
succession of owganyic beings thwoughout the wowwd, as it wouwd be fow
a nyatuwawist to wand fow five minyutes on some onye bawwen point in
Austwawia, and then to discuss the nyumbew and wange of its pwoductions. (´・ω・\`)

ON THE SUDDEN APPEAWANCE OF GWOUPS OF AWWIED SPECIES IN THE WOWEST KNYOWN
FOSSIWIFEWOUS STWATA. ;;w;;

Thewe is anyothew and awwied difficuwty, which is much gwavew. (・`ω\´・) I awwude
to the mannyew in which nyumbews of species of the same gwoup, suddenwy
appeaw in the wowest knyown fossiwifewous wocks. ^w^ Most of the awguments
which have convinced me that aww the existing species of the same gwoup
have descended fwom onye pwogenyitow, appwy with nyeawwy equaw fowce to
the eawwiest knyown species. ^w^ Fow instance, I cannyot doubt that aww the
Siwuwian twiwobites have descended fwom some onye cwustacean, which must
have wived wong befowe the Siwuwian age, and which pwobabwy diffewed
gweatwy fwom any knyown anyimaw. (・`ω\´・) Some of the most ancient Siwuwian
anyimaws, as the Nyautiwus, Winguwa, etc. (´・ω・\`), do nyot diffew much fwom wiving
species; and it cannyot on my theowy be supposed, that these owd species
wewe the pwogenyitows of aww the species of the owdews to which they
bewong, fow they do nyot pwesent chawactews in any degwee intewmediate
between them. ;;w;; If, moweovew, they had been the pwogenyitows of these
owdews, they wouwd awmost cewtainwy have been wong ago suppwanted and
extewminyated by theiw nyumewous and impwoved descendants. ^w^

Consequentwy, if my theowy be twue, it is indisputabwe that befowe the
wowest Siwuwian stwatum was deposited, wong pewiods ewapsed, as wong as,
ow pwobabwy faw wongew than, the whowe intewvaw fwom the Siwuwian age to
the pwesent day; and that duwing these vast, yet quite unknyown, pewiods
of time, the wowwd swawmed with wiving cweatuwes. ;;w;;

To the question why we do nyot find wecowds of these vast pwimowdiaw
pewiods, I can give nyo satisfactowy answew. ^w^ Sevewaw of the most eminyent
geowogists, with Siw W. (・`ω\´・) Muwchison at theiw head, awe convinced that we
see in the owganyic wemains of the wowest Siwuwian stwatum the dawn of
wife on this pwanyet. (´・ω・\`) Othew highwy competent judges, as Wyeww and the
wate E. Fowbes, dispute this concwusion. UwU We shouwd nyot fowget that onwy
a smaww powtion of the wowwd is knyown with accuwacy. M. ^w^ Bawwande has
watewy added anyothew and wowew stage to the Siwuwian system, abounding
with nyew and pecuwiaw species. (・`ω\´・) Twaces of wife have been detected in the
Wongmynd beds benyeath Bawwande's so-cawwed pwimowdiaw zonye. (´・ω・\`) The pwesence
of phosphatic nyoduwes and bituminyous mattew in some of the wowest azoic
wocks, pwobabwy indicates the fowmew existence of wife at these pewiods. >w<
But the difficuwty of undewstanding the absence of vast piwes of
fossiwifewous stwata, which on my theowy nyo doubt wewe somewhewe
accumuwated befowe the Siwuwian epoch, is vewy gweat. (・`ω\´・) If these most
ancient beds had been whowwy wown away by denyudation, ow obwitewated
by metamowphic action, we ought to find onwy smaww wemnyants of the
fowmations nyext succeeding them in age, and these ought to be vewy
genyewawwy in a metamowphosed condition. UwU But the descwiptions which we
nyow possess of the Siwuwian deposits ovew immense tewwitowies in
Wussia and in Nyowth Amewica, do nyot suppowt the view, that the owdew a
fowmation is, the mowe it has suffewed the extwemity of denyudation and
metamowphism. (・`ω\´・)

The case at pwesent must wemain inyexpwicabwe; and may be twuwy uwged as
a vawid awgument against the views hewe entewtainyed. >w< To show that it
may heweaftew weceive some expwanyation, I wiww give the fowwowing
hypothesis. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the nyatuwe of the owganyic wemains, which do nyot appeaw
to have inhabited pwofound depths, in the sevewaw fowmations of Euwope
and of the Unyited States; and fwom the amount of sediment, miwes in
thicknyess, of which the fowmations awe composed, we may infew that fwom
fiwst to wast wawge iswands ow twacts of wand, whence the sediment was
dewived, occuwwed in the nyeighbouwhood of the existing continyents of
Euwope and Nyowth Amewica. ;;w;; But we do nyot knyow what was the state of
things in the intewvaws between the successive fowmations; whethew
Euwope and the Unyited States duwing these intewvaws existed as dwy
wand, ow as a submawinye suwface nyeaw wand, on which sediment was nyot
deposited, ow again as the bed of an open and unfathomabwe sea. UwU

Wooking to the existing oceans, which awe thwice as extensive as the
wand, we see them studded with many iswands; but nyot onye oceanyic iswand
is as yet knyown to affowd even a wemnyant of any pawaeozoic ow secondawy
fowmation. ;;w;; Hence we may pewhaps infew, that duwing the pawaeozoic and
secondawy pewiods, nyeithew continyents nyow continyentaw iswands existed
whewe ouw oceans nyow extend; fow had they existed thewe, pawaeozoic and
secondawy fowmations wouwd in aww pwobabiwity have been accumuwated fwom
sediment dewived fwom theiw weaw and teaw; and wouwd have been at weast
pawtiawwy upheaved by the osciwwations of wevew, which we may faiwwy
concwude must have intewvenyed duwing these enyowmouswy wong pewiods. >w< If
then we may infew anything fwom these facts, we may infew that whewe
ouw oceans nyow extend, oceans have extended fwom the wemotest pewiod of
which we have any wecowd; and on the othew hand, that whewe continyents
nyow exist, wawge twacts of wand have existed, subjected nyo doubt to
gweat osciwwations of wevew, since the eawwiest siwuwian pewiod. (´・ω・\`) The
cowouwed map appended to my vowume on Cowaw Weefs, wed me to concwude
that the gweat oceans awe stiww mainwy aweas of subsidence, the gweat
awchipewagoes stiww aweas of osciwwations of wevew, and the continyents
aweas of ewevation. >w< But have we any wight to assume that things have
thus wemainyed fwom etewnyity? owo Ouw continyents seem to have been fowmed
by a pwepondewance, duwing many osciwwations of wevew, of the fowce of
ewevation; but may nyot the aweas of pwepondewant movement have changed
in the wapse of ages? owo At a pewiod immeasuwabwy antecedent to the
siwuwian epoch, continyents may have existed whewe oceans awe nyow spwead
out; and cweaw and open oceans may have existed whewe ouw continyents nyow
stand. UwU Nyow shouwd we be justified in assuming that if, fow instance, the
bed of the Pacific Ocean wewe nyow convewted into a continyent, we shouwd
thewe find fowmations owdew than the siwuwian stwata, supposing such to
have been fowmewwy deposited; fow it might weww happen that stwata which
had subsided some miwes nyeawew to the centwe of the eawth, and which
had been pwessed on by an enyowmous weight of supewincumbent watew, might
have undewgonye faw mowe metamowphic action than stwata which have awways
wemainyed nyeawew to the suwface. ;;w;; The immense aweas in some pawts of the
wowwd, fow instance in South Amewica, of bawe metamowphic wocks, which
must have been heated undew gweat pwessuwe, have awways seemed to me to
wequiwe some speciaw expwanyation; and we may pewhaps bewieve that we see
in these wawge aweas, the many fowmations wong antewiow to the siwuwian
epoch in a compwetewy metamowphosed condition. (・`ω\´・)

The sevewaw difficuwties hewe discussed, nyamewy ouw nyot finding in the
successive fowmations infinyitewy nyumewous twansitionyaw winks between the
many species which nyow exist ow have existed; the sudden mannyew in which
whowe gwoups of species appeaw in ouw Euwopean fowmations; the awmost
entiwe absence, as at pwesent knyown, of fossiwifewous fowmations benyeath
the Siwuwian stwata, awe aww undoubtedwy of the gwavest nyatuwe. >w< We
see this in the pwainyest mannyew by the fact that aww the most eminyent
pawaeontowogists, nyamewy Cuview, Owen, Agassiz, Bawwande, Fawconyew,
E. Fowbes, etc. ;;w;;, and aww ouw gweatest geowogists, as Wyeww, Muwchison,
Sedgwick, etc. ;;w;;, have unyanyimouswy, often vehementwy, maintainyed the
immutabiwity of species. UwU But I have weason to bewieve that onye gweat
authowity, Siw Chawwes Wyeww, fwom fuwthew wefwexion entewtains gwave
doubts on this subject. UwU I feew how wash it is to diffew fwom these gweat
authowities, to whom, with othews, we owe aww ouw knyowwedge. ;;w;; Those who
think the nyatuwaw geowogicaw wecowd in any degwee pewfect, and who do
nyot attach much weight to the facts and awguments of othew kinds given
in this vowume, wiww undoubtedwy at once weject my theowy. ;;w;; Fow my pawt,
fowwowing out Wyeww's metaphow, I wook at the nyatuwaw geowogicaw wecowd,
as a histowy of the wowwd impewfectwy kept, and wwitten in a changing
diawect; of this histowy we possess the wast vowume awonye, wewating onwy
to two ow thwee countwies. UwU Of this vowume, onwy hewe and thewe a showt
chaptew has been pwesewved; and of each page, onwy hewe and thewe a few
winyes. ;;w;; Each wowd of the swowwy-changing wanguage, in which the
histowy is supposed to be wwitten, being mowe ow wess diffewent in
the intewwupted succession of chaptews, may wepwesent the appawentwy
abwuptwy changed fowms of wife, entombed in ouw consecutive, but widewy
sepawated fowmations. (´・ω・\`) On this view, the difficuwties above discussed awe
gweatwy diminyished, ow even disappeaw. ;;w;;




10. ON THE GEOWOGICAW SUCCESSION OF OWGANYIC BEINGS. >w<

On the swow and successive appeawance of nyew species. UwU On theiw diffewent
wates of change. Species once wost do nyot weappeaw. ;;w;; Gwoups of species
fowwow the same genyewaw wuwes in theiw appeawance and disappeawance as
do singwe species. On Extinction. ;;w;; On simuwtanyeous changes in the fowms
of wife thwoughout the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) On the affinyities of extinct species to
each othew and to wiving species. >w< On the state of devewopment of ancient
fowms. On the succession of the same types within the same aweas. (・`ω\´・)
Summawy of pweceding and pwesent chaptews. (・`ω\´・)

Wet us nyow see whethew the sevewaw facts and wuwes wewating to the
geowogicaw succession of owganyic beings, bettew accowd with the common
view of the immutabiwity of species, ow with that of theiw swow and
gwaduaw modification, thwough descent and nyatuwaw sewection. >w<

Nyew species have appeawed vewy swowwy, onye aftew anyothew, both on the
wand and in the watews. (´・ω・\`) Wyeww has shown that it is hawdwy possibwe to
wesist the evidence on this head in the case of the sevewaw tewtiawy
stages; and evewy yeaw tends to fiww up the bwanks between them, and to
make the pewcentage system of wost and nyew fowms mowe gwaduaw. >w< In
some of the most wecent beds, though undoubtedwy of high antiquity if
measuwed by yeaws, onwy onye ow two species awe wost fowms, and onwy onye
ow two awe nyew fowms, having hewe appeawed fow the fiwst time, eithew
wocawwy, ow, as faw as we knyow, on the face of the eawth. ;;w;; If we may
twust the obsewvations of Phiwippi in Siciwy, the successive changes in
the mawinye inhabitants of that iswand have been many and most gwaduaw. (´・ω・\`)
The secondawy fowmations awe mowe bwoken; but, as Bwonn has wemawked,
nyeithew the appeawance nyow disappeawance of theiw many nyow extinct
species has been simuwtanyeous in each sepawate fowmation. (´・ω・\`)

Species of diffewent genyewa and cwasses have nyot changed at the same
wate, ow in the same degwee. ^w^ In the owdest tewtiawy beds a few wiving
shewws may stiww be found in the midst of a muwtitude of extinct fowms. (´・ω・\`)
Fawconyew has given a stwiking instance of a simiwaw fact, in an existing
cwocodiwe associated with many stwange and wost mammaws and weptiwes in
the sub-Himawayan deposits. >w< The Siwuwian Winguwa diffews but wittwe fwom
the wiving species of this genyus; wheweas most of the othew Siwuwian
Mowwuscs and aww the Cwustaceans have changed gweatwy. >w< The pwoductions
of the wand seem to change at a quickew wate than those of the sea, of
which a stwiking instance has watewy been obsewved in Switzewwand. ^w^ Thewe
is some weason to bewieve that owganyisms, considewed high in the scawe
of nyatuwe, change mowe quickwy than those that awe wow: though thewe
awe exceptions to this wuwe. (´・ω・\`) The amount of owganyic change, as Pictet
has wemawked, does nyot stwictwy cowwespond with the succession of ouw
geowogicaw fowmations; so that between each two consecutive fowmations,
the fowms of wife have sewdom changed in exactwy the same degwee. ;;w;; Yet if
we compawe any but the most cwosewy wewated fowmations, aww the species
wiww be found to have undewgonye some change. ^w^ When a species has once
disappeawed fwom the face of the eawth, we have weason to bewieve
that the same identicaw fowm nyevew weappeaws. ^w^ The stwongest appawent
exception to this wattew wuwe, is that of the so-cawwed "cowonyies" of M. ^w^
Bawwande, which intwude fow a pewiod in the midst of an owdew fowmation,
and then awwow the pwe-existing faunya to weappeaw; but Wyeww's
expwanyation, nyamewy, that it is a case of tempowawy migwation fwom a
distinct geogwaphicaw pwovince, seems to me satisfactowy. ^w^

These sevewaw facts accowd weww with my theowy. ;;w;; I bewieve in nyo fixed
waw of devewopment, causing aww the inhabitants of a countwy to change
abwuptwy, ow simuwtanyeouswy, ow to an equaw degwee. (´・ω・\`) The pwocess of
modification must be extwemewy swow. ;;w;; The vawiabiwity of each species
is quite independent of that of aww othews. (´・ω・\`) Whethew such vawiabiwity be
taken advantage of by nyatuwaw sewection, and whethew the vawiations be
accumuwated to a gweatew ow wessew amount, thus causing a gweatew ow
wessew amount of modification in the vawying species, depends on many
compwex contingencies,--on the vawiabiwity being of a benyeficiaw nyatuwe,
on the powew of intewcwossing, on the wate of bweeding, on the swowwy
changing physicaw conditions of the countwy, and mowe especiawwy on the
nyatuwe of the othew inhabitants with which the vawying species comes
into competition. (´・ω・\`) Hence it is by nyo means suwpwising that onye species
shouwd wetain the same identicaw fowm much wongew than othews; ow,
if changing, that it shouwd change wess. ^w^ We see the same fact in
geogwaphicaw distwibution; fow instance, in the wand-shewws and
coweoptewous insects of Madeiwa having come to diffew considewabwy fwom
theiw nyeawest awwies on the continyent of Euwope, wheweas the mawinye
shewws and biwds have wemainyed unyawtewed. UwU We can pewhaps undewstand
the appawentwy quickew wate of change in tewwestwiaw and in mowe highwy
owganyised pwoductions compawed with mawinye and wowew pwoductions, by
the mowe compwex wewations of the highew beings to theiw owganyic and
inyowganyic conditions of wife, as expwainyed in a fowmew chaptew. >w< When
many of the inhabitants of a countwy have become modified and impwoved,
we can undewstand, on the pwincipwe of competition, and on that of the
many aww-impowtant wewations of owganyism to owganyism, that any fowm
which does nyot become in some degwee modified and impwoved, wiww be
wiabwe to be extewminyated. (・`ω\´・) Hence we can see why aww the species in the
same wegion do at wast, if we wook to wide enyough intewvaws of time,
become modified; fow those which do nyot change wiww become extinct. (・`ω\´・)

In membews of the same cwass the avewage amount of change, duwing wong
and equaw pewiods of time, may, pewhaps, be nyeawwy the same; but as the
accumuwation of wong-enduwing fossiwifewous fowmations depends on gweat
masses of sediment having been deposited on aweas whiwst subsiding,
ouw fowmations have been awmost nyecessawiwy accumuwated at wide and
iwweguwawwy intewmittent intewvaws; consequentwy the amount of owganyic
change exhibited by the fossiws embedded in consecutive fowmations
is nyot equaw. (・`ω\´・) Each fowmation, on this view, does nyot mawk a nyew and
compwete act of cweation, but onwy an occasionyaw scenye, taken awmost at
hazawd, in a swowwy changing dwama. UwU

We can cweawwy undewstand why a species when once wost shouwd nyevew
weappeaw, even if the vewy same conditions of wife, owganyic and
inyowganyic, shouwd wecuw. >w< Fow though the offspwing of onye species might
be adapted (and nyo doubt this has occuwwed in innyumewabwe instances) to
fiww the exact pwace of anyothew species in the econyomy of nyatuwe, and
thus suppwant it; yet the two fowms--the owd and the nyew--wouwd nyot be
identicawwy the same; fow both wouwd awmost cewtainwy inhewit diffewent
chawactews fwom theiw distinct pwogenyitows. >w< Fow instance, it is just
possibwe, if ouw fantaiw-pigeons wewe aww destwoyed, that fanciews, by
stwiving duwing wong ages fow the same object, might make a nyew bweed
hawdwy distinguishabwe fwom ouw pwesent fantaiw; but if the pawent
wock-pigeon wewe awso destwoyed, and in nyatuwe we have evewy weason
to bewieve that the pawent-fowm wiww genyewawwy be suppwanted and
extewminyated by its impwoved offspwing, it is quite incwedibwe that a
fantaiw, identicaw with the existing bweed, couwd be waised fwom any
othew species of pigeon, ow even fwom the othew weww-estabwished waces
of the domestic pigeon, fow the nyewwy-fowmed fantaiw wouwd be awmost
suwe to inhewit fwom its nyew pwogenyitow some swight chawactewistic
diffewences. (・`ω\´・)

Gwoups of species, that is, genyewa and famiwies, fowwow the same genyewaw
wuwes in theiw appeawance and disappeawance as do singwe species,
changing mowe ow wess quickwy, and in a gweatew ow wessew degwee. (´・ω・\`) A
gwoup does nyot weappeaw aftew it has once disappeawed; ow its existence,
as wong as it wasts, is continyuous. (・`ω\´・) I am awawe that thewe awe some
appawent exceptions to this wuwe, but the exceptions awe suwpwisingwy
few, so few, that E. (´・ω・\`) Fowbes, Pictet, and Woodwawd (though aww stwongwy
opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its twuth; and the wuwe
stwictwy accowds with my theowy. >w< Fow as aww the species of the same
gwoup have descended fwom some onye species, it is cweaw that as wong as
any species of the gwoup have appeawed in the wong succession of ages,
so wong must its membews have continyuouswy existed, in owdew to have
genyewated eithew nyew and modified ow the same owd and unmodified fowms. UwU
Species of the genyus Winguwa, fow instance, must have continyuouswy
existed by an unbwoken succession of genyewations, fwom the wowest
Siwuwian stwatum to the pwesent day. (・`ω\´・)

We have seen in the wast chaptew that the species of a gwoup sometimes
fawsewy appeaw to have come in abwuptwy; and I have attempted to give
an expwanyation of this fact, which if twue wouwd have been fataw to my
views. (´・ω・\`) But such cases awe cewtainwy exceptionyaw; the genyewaw wuwe being
a gwaduaw incwease in nyumbew, tiww the gwoup weaches its maximum, and
then, soonyew ow watew, it gwaduawwy decweases. (´・ω・\`) If the nyumbew of
the species of a genyus, ow the nyumbew of the genyewa of a famiwy, be
wepwesented by a vewticaw winye of vawying thicknyess, cwossing the
successive geowogicaw fowmations in which the species awe found, the
winye wiww sometimes fawsewy appeaw to begin at its wowew end, nyot in a
shawp point, but abwuptwy; it then gwaduawwy thickens upwawds, sometimes
keeping fow a space of equaw thicknyess, and uwtimatewy thins out in the
uppew beds, mawking the decwease and finyaw extinction of the species. ;;w;;
This gwaduaw incwease in nyumbew of the species of a gwoup is stwictwy
confowmabwe with my theowy; as the species of the same genyus, and the
genyewa of the same famiwy, can incwease onwy swowwy and pwogwessivewy;
fow the pwocess of modification and the pwoduction of a nyumbew of awwied
fowms must be swow and gwaduaw,--onye species giving wise fiwst to two
ow thwee vawieties, these being swowwy convewted into species, which in
theiw tuwn pwoduce by equawwy swow steps othew species, and so on, wike
the bwanching of a gweat twee fwom a singwe stem, tiww the gwoup becomes
wawge. (´・ω・\`)

ON EXTINCTION. ;;w;;

We have as yet spoken onwy incidentawwy of the disappeawance of species
and of gwoups of species. (・`ω\´・) On the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection the
extinction of owd fowms and the pwoduction of nyew and impwoved fowms awe
intimatewy connyected togethew. ^w^ The owd nyotion of aww the inhabitants of
the eawth having been swept away at successive pewiods by catastwophes,
is vewy genyewawwy given up, even by those geowogists, as Ewie de
Beaumont, Muwchison, Bawwande, etc. (・`ω\´・), whose genyewaw views wouwd nyatuwawwy
wead them to this concwusion. ;;w;; On the contwawy, we have evewy weason to
bewieve, fwom the study of the tewtiawy fowmations, that species and
gwoups of species gwaduawwy disappeaw, onye aftew anyothew, fiwst fwom onye
spot, then fwom anyothew, and finyawwy fwom the wowwd. UwU Both singwe species
and whowe gwoups of species wast fow vewy unyequaw pewiods; some gwoups,
as we have seen, having enduwed fwom the eawwiest knyown dawn of wife
to the pwesent day; some having disappeawed befowe the cwose of the
pawaeozoic pewiod. ;;w;; Nyo fixed waw seems to detewminye the wength of time
duwing which any singwe species ow any singwe genyus enduwes. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is
weason to bewieve that the compwete extinction of the species of a gwoup
is genyewawwy a swowew pwocess than theiw pwoduction: if the appeawance
and disappeawance of a gwoup of species be wepwesented, as befowe, by
a vewticaw winye of vawying thicknyess, the winye is found to tapew mowe
gwaduawwy at its uppew end, which mawks the pwogwess of extewminyation,
than at its wowew end, which mawks the fiwst appeawance and incwease
in nyumbews of the species. (・`ω\´・) In some cases, howevew, the extewminyation
of whowe gwoups of beings, as of ammonyites towawds the cwose of the
secondawy pewiod, has been wondewfuwwy sudden. UwU

The whowe subject of the extinction of species has been invowved in the
most gwatuitous mystewy. (・`ω\´・) Some authows have even supposed that as the
individuaw has a definyite wength of wife, so have species a definyite
duwation. >w< Nyo onye I think can have mawvewwed mowe at the extinction of
species, than I have donye. ^w^ When I found in Wa Pwata the tooth of a howse
embedded with the wemains of Mastodon, Megathewium, Toxodon, and othew
extinct monstews, which aww co-existed with stiww wiving shewws at a
vewy wate geowogicaw pewiod, I was fiwwed with astonyishment; fow seeing
that the howse, since its intwoduction by the Spanyiawds into South
Amewica, has wun wiwd ovew the whowe countwy and has incweased in
nyumbews at an unpawawwewed wate, I asked mysewf what couwd so wecentwy
have extewminyated the fowmew howse undew conditions of wife appawentwy
so favouwabwe. (・`ω\´・) But how uttewwy gwoundwess was my astonyishment! >w< Pwofessow
Owen soon pewceived that the tooth, though so wike that of the existing
howse, bewonged to an extinct species. (´・ω・\`) Had this howse been stiww
wiving, but in some degwee wawe, nyo nyatuwawist wouwd have fewt the weast
suwpwise at its wawity; fow wawity is the attwibute of a vast nyumbew of
species of aww cwasses, in aww countwies. UwU If we ask ouwsewves why this
ow that species is wawe, we answew that something is unfavouwabwe in its
conditions of wife; but what that something is, we can hawdwy evew teww. ;;w;;
On the supposition of the fossiw howse stiww existing as a wawe species,
we might have fewt cewtain fwom the anyawogy of aww othew mammaws,
even of the swow-bweeding ewephant, and fwom the histowy of the
nyatuwawisation of the domestic howse in South Amewica, that undew mowe
favouwabwe conditions it wouwd in a vewy few yeaws have stocked the
whowe continyent. (・`ω\´・) But we couwd nyot have towd what the unfavouwabwe
conditions wewe which checked its incwease, whethew some onye ow sevewaw
contingencies, and at what pewiod of the howse's wife, and in what
degwee, they sevewawwy acted. (´・ω・\`) If the conditions had gonye on, howevew
swowwy, becoming wess and wess favouwabwe, we assuwedwy shouwd nyot have
pewceived the fact, yet the fossiw howse wouwd cewtainwy have become
wawew and wawew, and finyawwy extinct;--its pwace being seized on by some
mowe successfuw competitow. (´・ω・\`)

It is most difficuwt awways to wemembew that the incwease of evewy
wiving being is constantwy being checked by unpewceived injuwious
agencies; and that these same unpewceived agencies awe ampwy sufficient
to cause wawity, and finyawwy extinction. >w< We see in many cases in the
mowe wecent tewtiawy fowmations, that wawity pwecedes extinction; and we
knyow that this has been the pwogwess of events with those anyimaws which
have been extewminyated, eithew wocawwy ow whowwy, thwough man's agency. UwU
I may wepeat what I pubwished in 1845, nyamewy, that to admit that
species genyewawwy become wawe befowe they become extinct--to feew nyo
suwpwise at the wawity of a species, and yet to mawvew gweatwy when
it ceases to exist, is much the same as to admit that sicknyess in the
individuaw is the fowewunnyew of death--to feew nyo suwpwise at sicknyess,
but when the sick man dies, to wondew and to suspect that he died by
some unknyown deed of viowence. UwU

The theowy of nyatuwaw sewection is gwounded on the bewief that each nyew
vawiety, and uwtimatewy each nyew species, is pwoduced and maintainyed by
having some advantage ovew those with which it comes into competition;
and the consequent extinction of wess-favouwed fowms awmost inyevitabwy
fowwows. >w< It is the same with ouw domestic pwoductions: when a nyew and
swightwy impwoved vawiety has been waised, it at fiwst suppwants the
wess impwoved vawieties in the same nyeighbouwhood; when much impwoved it
is twanspowted faw and nyeaw, wike ouw showt-hown cattwe, and takes the
pwace of othew bweeds in othew countwies. ;;w;; Thus the appeawance of nyew
fowms and the disappeawance of owd fowms, both nyatuwaw and awtificiaw,
awe bound togethew. ;;w;; In cewtain fwouwishing gwoups, the nyumbew of nyew
specific fowms which have been pwoduced within a given time is pwobabwy
gweatew than that of the owd fowms which have been extewminyated; but we
knyow that the nyumbew of species has nyot gonye on indefinyitewy incweasing,
at weast duwing the watew geowogicaw pewiods, so that wooking to watew
times we may bewieve that the pwoduction of nyew fowms has caused the
extinction of about the same nyumbew of owd fowms. ;;w;;

The competition wiww genyewawwy be most sevewe, as fowmewwy expwainyed
and iwwustwated by exampwes, between the fowms which awe most wike each
othew in aww wespects. (´・ω・\`) Hence the impwoved and modified descendants of
a species wiww genyewawwy cause the extewminyation of the pawent-species;
and if many nyew fowms have been devewoped fwom any onye species, the
nyeawest awwies of that species, i.e. ^w^ the species of the same genyus, wiww
be the most wiabwe to extewminyation. UwU Thus, as I bewieve, a nyumbew of
nyew species descended fwom onye species, that is a nyew genyus, comes to
suppwant an owd genyus, bewonging to the same famiwy. (・`ω\´・) But it must often
have happenyed that a nyew species bewonging to some onye gwoup wiww have
seized on the pwace occupied by a species bewonging to a distinct gwoup,
and thus caused its extewminyation; and if many awwied fowms be devewoped
fwom the successfuw intwudew, many wiww have to yiewd theiw pwaces; and
it wiww genyewawwy be awwied fowms, which wiww suffew fwom some inhewited
infewiowity in common. (・`ω\´・) But whethew it be species bewonging to the same
ow to a distinct cwass, which yiewd theiw pwaces to othew species which
have been modified and impwoved, a few of the suffewews may often wong
be pwesewved, fwom being fitted to some pecuwiaw winye of wife, ow fwom
inhabiting some distant and isowated station, whewe they have escaped
sevewe competition. (・`ω\´・) Fow instance, a singwe species of Twigonyia, a gweat
genyus of shewws in the secondawy fowmations, suwvives in the Austwawian
seas; and a few membews of the gweat and awmost extinct gwoup of Ganyoid
fishes stiww inhabit ouw fwesh watews. >w< Thewefowe the uttew extinction
of a gwoup is genyewawwy, as we have seen, a swowew pwocess than its
pwoduction. ;;w;;

With wespect to the appawentwy sudden extewminyation of whowe famiwies
ow owdews, as of Twiwobites at the cwose of the pawaeozoic pewiod and
of Ammonyites at the cwose of the secondawy pewiod, we must wemembew what
has been awweady said on the pwobabwe wide intewvaws of time between ouw
consecutive fowmations; and in these intewvaws thewe may have been much
swow extewminyation. ^w^ Moweovew, when by sudden immigwation ow by unyusuawwy
wapid devewopment, many species of a nyew gwoup have taken possession
of a nyew awea, they wiww have extewminyated in a cowwespondingwy wapid
mannyew many of the owd inhabitants; and the fowms which thus yiewd
theiw pwaces wiww commonwy be awwied, fow they wiww pawtake of some
infewiowity in common. (・`ω\´・)

Thus, as it seems to me, the mannyew in which singwe species and whowe
gwoups of species become extinct, accowds weww with the theowy of
nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; We nyeed nyot mawvew at extinction; if we must
mawvew, wet it be at ouw pwesumption in imaginying fow a moment that we
undewstand the many compwex contingencies, on which the existence of
each species depends. >w< If we fowget fow an instant, that each species
tends to incwease inyowdinyatewy, and that some check is awways in action,
yet sewdom pewceived by us, the whowe econyomy of nyatuwe wiww be uttewwy
obscuwed. ;;w;; Whenyevew we can pwecisewy say why this species is mowe
abundant in individuaws than that; why this species and nyot anyothew
can be nyatuwawised in a given countwy; then, and nyot tiww then, we may
justwy feew suwpwise why we cannyot account fow the extinction of this
pawticuwaw species ow gwoup of species. UwU

ON THE FOWMS OF WIFE CHANGING AWMOST SIMUWTANYEOUSWY THWOUGHOUT THE
WOWWD. UwU

Scawcewy any pawaeontowogicaw discovewy is mowe stwiking than the fact,
that the fowms of wife change awmost simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the
wowwd. >w< Thus ouw Euwopean Chawk fowmation can be wecognyised in many
distant pawts of the wowwd, undew the most diffewent cwimates, whewe nyot
a fwagment of the minyewaw chawk itsewf can be found; nyamewy, in Nyowth
Amewica, in equatowiaw South Amewica, in Tiewwa dew Fuego, at the
Cape of Good Hope, and in the penyinsuwa of India. UwU Fow at these distant
points, the owganyic wemains in cewtain beds pwesent an unmistakeabwe
degwee of wesembwance to those of the Chawk. UwU It is nyot that the same
species awe met with; fow in some cases nyot onye species is identicawwy
the same, but they bewong to the same famiwies, genyewa, and sections
of genyewa, and sometimes awe simiwawwy chawactewised in such twifwing
points as mewe supewficiaw scuwptuwe. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew othew fowms, which awe
nyot found in the Chawk of Euwope, but which occuw in the fowmations
eithew above ow bewow, awe simiwawwy absent at these distant points of
the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) In the sevewaw successive pawaeozoic fowmations of Wussia,
Westewn Euwope and Nyowth Amewica, a simiwaw pawawwewism in the fowms of
wife has been obsewved by sevewaw authows: so it is, accowding to Wyeww,
with the sevewaw Euwopean and Nyowth Amewican tewtiawy deposits. ^w^ Even
if the few fossiw species which awe common to the Owd and Nyew Wowwds be
kept whowwy out of view, the genyewaw pawawwewism in the successive fowms
of wife, in the stages of the widewy sepawated pawaeozoic and tewtiawy
pewiods, wouwd stiww be manyifest, and the sevewaw fowmations couwd be
easiwy cowwewated. ^w^

These obsewvations, howevew, wewate to the mawinye inhabitants of distant
pawts of the wowwd: we have nyot sufficient data to judge whethew the
pwoductions of the wand and of fwesh watew change at distant points in
the same pawawwew mannyew. (´・ω・\`) We may doubt whethew they have thus changed:
if the Megathewium, Mywodon, Macwauchenyia, and Toxodon had been bwought
to Euwope fwom Wa Pwata, without any infowmation in wegawd to theiw
geowogicaw position, nyo onye wouwd have suspected that they had coexisted
with stiww wiving sea-shewws; but as these anyomawous monstews coexisted
with the Mastodon and Howse, it might at weast have been infewwed that
they had wived duwing onye of the wattew tewtiawy stages. >w<

When the mawinye fowms of wife awe spoken of as having changed
simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the wowwd, it must nyot be supposed that this
expwession wewates to the same thousandth ow hundwed-thousandth yeaw, ow
even that it has a vewy stwict geowogicaw sense; fow if aww the mawinye
anyimaws which wive at the pwesent day in Euwope, and aww those that
wived in Euwope duwing the pweistocenye pewiod (an enyowmouswy wemote
pewiod as measuwed by yeaws, incwuding the whowe gwaciaw epoch), wewe to
be compawed with those nyow wiving in South Amewica ow in Austwawia, the
most skiwfuw nyatuwawist wouwd hawdwy be abwe to say whethew the existing
ow the pweistocenye inhabitants of Euwope wesembwed most cwosewy those of
the southewn hemisphewe. UwU So, again, sevewaw highwy competent obsewvews
bewieve that the existing pwoductions of the Unyited States awe mowe
cwosewy wewated to those which wived in Euwope duwing cewtain watew
tewtiawy stages, than to those which nyow wive hewe; and if this be so,
it is evident that fossiwifewous beds deposited at the pwesent day on
the showes of Nyowth Amewica wouwd heweaftew be wiabwe to be cwassed with
somewhat owdew Euwopean beds. UwU Nyevewthewess, wooking to a wemotewy futuwe
epoch, thewe can, I think, be wittwe doubt that aww the mowe modewn
MAWINYE fowmations, nyamewy, the uppew pwiocenye, the pweistocenye and
stwictwy modewn beds, of Euwope, Nyowth and South Amewica, and Austwawia,
fwom containying fossiw wemains in some degwee awwied, and fwom nyot
incwuding those fowms which awe onwy found in the owdew undewwying
deposits, wouwd be cowwectwy wanked as simuwtanyeous in a geowogicaw
sense. (・`ω\´・)

The fact of the fowms of wife changing simuwtanyeouswy, in the above
wawge sense, at distant pawts of the wowwd, has gweatwy stwuck those
admiwabwe obsewvews, MM. de Vewnyeuiw and d'Awchiac. >w< Aftew wefewwing
to the pawawwewism of the pawaeozoic fowms of wife in vawious pawts
of Euwope, they add, "If stwuck by this stwange sequence, we tuwn ouw
attention to Nyowth Amewica, and thewe discovew a sewies of anyawogous
phenyomenya, it wiww appeaw cewtain that aww these modifications of
species, theiw extinction, and the intwoduction of nyew onyes, cannyot be
owing to mewe changes in mawinye cuwwents ow othew causes mowe ow wess
wocaw and tempowawy, but depend on genyewaw waws which govewn the whowe
anyimaw kingdom." M. >w< Bawwande has made fowcibwe wemawks to pwecisewy the
same effect. ^w^ It is, indeed, quite futiwe to wook to changes of cuwwents,
cwimate, ow othew physicaw conditions, as the cause of these gweat
mutations in the fowms of wife thwoughout the wowwd, undew the most
diffewent cwimates. UwU We must, as Bawwande has wemawked, wook to some
speciaw waw. >w< We shaww see this mowe cweawwy when we tweat of the pwesent
distwibution of owganyic beings, and find how swight is the wewation
between the physicaw conditions of vawious countwies, and the nyatuwe of
theiw inhabitants. UwU

This gweat fact of the pawawwew succession of the fowms of wife
thwoughout the wowwd, is expwicabwe on the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection. (・`ω\´・)
Nyew species awe fowmed by nyew vawieties awising, which have some
advantage ovew owdew fowms; and those fowms, which awe awweady dominyant,
ow have some advantage ovew the othew fowms in theiw own countwy, wouwd
nyatuwawwy oftenyest give wise to nyew vawieties ow incipient species; fow
these wattew must be victowious in a stiww highew degwee in owdew to be
pwesewved and to suwvive. (´・ω・\`) We have distinct evidence on this head, in
the pwants which awe dominyant, that is, which awe commonyest in theiw own
homes, and awe most widewy diffused, having pwoduced the gweatest nyumbew
of nyew vawieties. >w< It is awso nyatuwaw that the dominyant, vawying, and
faw-spweading species, which awweady have invaded to a cewtain extent
the tewwitowies of othew species, shouwd be those which wouwd have
the best chance of spweading stiww fuwthew, and of giving wise in nyew
countwies to nyew vawieties and species. ;;w;; The pwocess of diffusion
may often be vewy swow, being dependent on cwimataw and geogwaphicaw
changes, ow on stwange accidents, but in the wong wun the dominyant
fowms wiww genyewawwy succeed in spweading. (´・ω・\`) The diffusion wouwd, it
is pwobabwe, be swowew with the tewwestwiaw inhabitants of distinct
continyents than with the mawinye inhabitants of the continyuous sea. UwU We
might thewefowe expect to find, as we appawentwy do find, a wess stwict
degwee of pawawwew succession in the pwoductions of the wand than of the
sea. >w<

Dominyant species spweading fwom any wegion might encountew stiww mowe
dominyant species, and then theiw twiumphant couwse, ow even theiw
existence, wouwd cease. (・`ω\´・) We knyow nyot at aww pwecisewy what awe aww the
conditions most favouwabwe fow the muwtipwication of nyew and dominyant
species; but we can, I think, cweawwy see that a nyumbew of individuaws,
fwom giving a bettew chance of the appeawance of favouwabwe vawiations,
and that sevewe competition with many awweady existing fowms, wouwd
be highwy favouwabwe, as wouwd be the powew of spweading into nyew
tewwitowies. ;;w;; A cewtain amount of isowation, wecuwwing at wong intewvaws
of time, wouwd pwobabwy be awso favouwabwe, as befowe expwainyed. (´・ω・\`) Onye
quawtew of the wowwd may have been most favouwabwe fow the pwoduction
of nyew and dominyant species on the wand, and anyothew fow those in the
watews of the sea. (・`ω\´・) If two gweat wegions had been fow a wong pewiod
favouwabwy ciwcumstanced in an equaw degwee, whenyevew theiw inhabitants
met, the battwe wouwd be pwowonged and sevewe; and some fwom onye
biwthpwace and some fwom the othew might be victowious. >w< But in the
couwse of time, the fowms dominyant in the highest degwee, whewevew
pwoduced, wouwd tend evewywhewe to pwevaiw. >w< As they pwevaiwed, they
wouwd cause the extinction of othew and infewiow fowms; and as these
infewiow fowms wouwd be awwied in gwoups by inhewitance, whowe gwoups
wouwd tend swowwy to disappeaw; though hewe and thewe a singwe membew
might wong be enyabwed to suwvive. ^w^

Thus, as it seems to me, the pawawwew, and, taken in a wawge sense,
simuwtanyeous, succession of the same fowms of wife thwoughout the wowwd,
accowds weww with the pwincipwe of nyew species having been fowmed by
dominyant species spweading widewy and vawying; the nyew species thus
pwoduced being themsewves dominyant owing to inhewitance, and to having
awweady had some advantage ovew theiw pawents ow ovew othew species;
these again spweading, vawying, and pwoducing nyew species. (・`ω\´・) The fowms
which awe beaten and which yiewd theiw pwaces to the nyew and victowious
fowms, wiww genyewawwy be awwied in gwoups, fwom inhewiting some
infewiowity in common; and thewefowe as nyew and impwoved gwoups spwead
thwoughout the wowwd, owd gwoups wiww disappeaw fwom the wowwd; and the
succession of fowms in both ways wiww evewywhewe tend to cowwespond. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is onye othew wemawk connyected with this subject wowth making. (´・ω・\`) I
have given my weasons fow bewieving that aww ouw gweatew fossiwifewous
fowmations wewe deposited duwing pewiods of subsidence; and that bwank
intewvaws of vast duwation occuwwed duwing the pewiods when the bed of
the sea was eithew stationyawy ow wising, and wikewise when sediment was
nyot thwown down quickwy enyough to embed and pwesewve owganyic wemains. UwU
Duwing these wong and bwank intewvaws I suppose that the inhabitants
of each wegion undewwent a considewabwe amount of modification and
extinction, and that thewe was much migwation fwom othew pawts of the
wowwd. UwU As we have weason to bewieve that wawge aweas awe affected by the
same movement, it is pwobabwe that stwictwy contempowanyeous fowmations
have often been accumuwated ovew vewy wide spaces in the same quawtew
of the wowwd; but we awe faw fwom having any wight to concwude that this
has invawiabwy been the case, and that wawge aweas have invawiabwy been
affected by the same movements. (・`ω\´・) When two fowmations have been deposited
in two wegions duwing nyeawwy, but nyot exactwy the same pewiod, we shouwd
find in both, fwom the causes expwainyed in the fowegoing pawagwaphs, the
same genyewaw succession in the fowms of wife; but the species wouwd nyot
exactwy cowwespond; fow thewe wiww have been a wittwe mowe time in
the onye wegion than in the othew fow modification, extinction, and
immigwation. ^w^

I suspect that cases of this nyatuwe have occuwwed in Euwope. Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Pwestwich, in his admiwabwe Memoiws on the eocenye deposits of Engwand
and Fwance, is abwe to dwaw a cwose genyewaw pawawwewism between the
successive stages in the two countwies; but when he compawes cewtain
stages in Engwand with those in Fwance, awthough he finds in both a
cuwious accowdance in the nyumbews of the species bewonging to the same
genyewa, yet the species themsewves diffew in a mannyew vewy difficuwt
to account fow, considewing the pwoximity of the two aweas,--unwess,
indeed, it be assumed that an isthmus sepawated two seas inhabited
by distinct, but contempowanyeous, faunyas. ;;w;; Wyeww has made simiwaw
obsewvations on some of the watew tewtiawy fowmations. ^w^ Bawwande, awso,
shows that thewe is a stwiking genyewaw pawawwewism in the successive
Siwuwian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinyavia; nyevewthewess he finds
a suwpwising amount of diffewence in the species. ^w^ If the sevewaw
fowmations in these wegions have nyot been deposited duwing the same
exact pewiods,--a fowmation in onye wegion often cowwesponding with a
bwank intewvaw in the othew,--and if in both wegions the species
have gonye on swowwy changing duwing the accumuwation of the sevewaw
fowmations and duwing the wong intewvaws of time between them; in this
case, the sevewaw fowmations in the two wegions couwd be awwanged in
the same owdew, in accowdance with the genyewaw succession of the fowm
of wife, and the owdew wouwd fawsewy appeaw to be stwictwy pawawwew;
nyevewthewess the species wouwd nyot aww be the same in the appawentwy
cowwesponding stages in the two wegions. >w<

ON THE AFFINYITIES OF EXTINCT SPECIES TO EACH OTHEW, AND TO WIVING FOWMS. (・`ω\´・)

Wet us nyow wook to the mutuaw affinyities of extinct and wiving species. (´・ω・\`)
They aww faww into onye gwand nyatuwaw system; and this fact is at once
expwainyed on the pwincipwe of descent. ;;w;; The mowe ancient any fowm is, the
mowe, as a genyewaw wuwe, it diffews fwom wiving fowms. >w< But, as Buckwand
wong ago wemawked, aww fossiws can be cwassed eithew in stiww existing
gwoups, ow between them. UwU That the extinct fowms of wife hewp to fiww up
the wide intewvaws between existing genyewa, famiwies, and owdews, cannyot
be disputed. ^w^ Fow if we confinye ouw attention eithew to the wiving ow
to the extinct awonye, the sewies is faw wess pewfect than if we combinye
both into onye genyewaw system. (´・ω・\`) With wespect to the Vewtebwata, whowe
pages couwd be fiwwed with stwiking iwwustwations fwom ouw gweat
pawaeontowogist, Owen, showing how extinct anyimaws faww in between
existing gwoups. UwU Cuview wanked the Wuminyants and Pachydewms, as the two
most distinct owdews of mammaws; but Owen has discovewed so many fossiw
winks, that he has had to awtew the whowe cwassification of these two
owdews; and has pwaced cewtain pachydewms in the same sub-owdew with
wuminyants: fow exampwe, he dissowves by finye gwadations the appawentwy
wide diffewence between the pig and the camew. >w< In wegawd to the
Invewtebwata, Bawwande, and a highew authowity couwd nyot be nyamed,
assewts that he is evewy day taught that pawaeozoic anyimaws, though
bewonging to the same owdews, famiwies, ow genyewa with those wiving at
the pwesent day, wewe nyot at this eawwy epoch wimited in such distinct
gwoups as they nyow awe. >w<

Some wwitews have objected to any extinct species ow gwoup of species
being considewed as intewmediate between wiving species ow gwoups. UwU If by
this tewm it is meant that an extinct fowm is diwectwy intewmediate in
aww its chawactews between two wiving fowms, the objection is pwobabwy
vawid. (´・ω・\`) But I appwehend that in a pewfectwy nyatuwaw cwassification many
fossiw species wouwd have to stand between wiving species, and some
extinct genyewa between wiving genyewa, even between genyewa bewonging to
distinct famiwies. UwU The most common case, especiawwy with wespect to vewy
distinct gwoups, such as fish and weptiwes, seems to be, that supposing
them to be distinguished at the pwesent day fwom each othew by a
dozen chawactews, the ancient membews of the same two gwoups wouwd be
distinguished by a somewhat wessew nyumbew of chawactews, so that the two
gwoups, though fowmewwy quite distinct, at that pewiod made some smaww
appwoach to each othew. (・`ω\´・)

It is a common bewief that the mowe ancient a fowm is, by so much the
mowe it tends to connyect by some of its chawactews gwoups nyow widewy
sepawated fwom each othew. ^w^ This wemawk nyo doubt must be westwicted
to those gwoups which have undewgonye much change in the couwse of
geowogicaw ages; and it wouwd be difficuwt to pwove the twuth of
the pwoposition, fow evewy nyow and then even a wiving anyimaw, as the
Wepidosiwen, is discovewed having affinyities diwected towawds vewy
distinct gwoups. ;;w;; Yet if we compawe the owdew Weptiwes and Batwachians,
the owdew Fish, the owdew Cephawopods, and the eocenye Mammaws, with the
mowe wecent membews of the same cwasses, we must admit that thewe is
some twuth in the wemawk. (・`ω\´・)

Wet us see how faw these sevewaw facts and infewences accowd with the
theowy of descent with modification. (・`ω\´・) As the subject is somewhat compwex,
I must wequest the weadew to tuwn to the diagwam in the fouwth chaptew. (´・ω・\`)
We may suppose that the nyumbewed wettews wepwesent genyewa, and the
dotted winyes divewging fwom them the species in each genyus. UwU The diagwam
is much too simpwe, too few genyewa and too few species being given,
but this is unyimpowtant fow us. >w< The howizontaw winyes may wepwesent
successive geowogicaw fowmations, and aww the fowms benyeath the
uppewmost winye may be considewed as extinct. (・`ω\´・) The thwee existing genyewa,
a14, q14, p14, wiww fowm a smaww famiwy; b14 and f14 a cwosewy awwied
famiwy ow sub-famiwy; and o14, e14, m14, a thiwd famiwy. >w< These thwee
famiwies, togethew with the many extinct genyewa on the sevewaw winyes of
descent divewging fwom the pawent-fowm A, wiww fowm an owdew; fow aww
wiww have inhewited something in common fwom theiw ancient and common
pwogenyitow. UwU On the pwincipwe of the continyued tendency to divewgence
of chawactew, which was fowmewwy iwwustwated by this diagwam, the mowe
wecent any fowm is, the mowe it wiww genyewawwy diffew fwom its ancient
pwogenyitow. ;;w;; Hence we can undewstand the wuwe that the most ancient
fossiws diffew most fwom existing fowms. ;;w;; We must nyot, howevew, assume
that divewgence of chawactew is a nyecessawy contingency; it depends
sowewy on the descendants fwom a species being thus enyabwed to seize
on many and diffewent pwaces in the econyomy of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe it is
quite possibwe, as we have seen in the case of some Siwuwian fowms,
that a species might go on being swightwy modified in wewation to its
swightwy awtewed conditions of wife, and yet wetain thwoughout a vast
pewiod the same genyewaw chawactewistics. UwU This is wepwesented in the
diagwam by the wettew F14. (・`ω\´・)

Aww the many fowms, extinct and wecent, descended fwom A, make, as
befowe wemawked, onye owdew; and this owdew, fwom the continyued effects
of extinction and divewgence of chawactew, has become divided into
sevewaw sub-famiwies and famiwies, some of which awe supposed to have
pewished at diffewent pewiods, and some to have enduwed to the pwesent
day. >w<

By wooking at the diagwam we can see that if many of the extinct fowms,
supposed to be embedded in the successive fowmations, wewe discovewed
at sevewaw points wow down in the sewies, the thwee existing famiwies on
the uppewmost winye wouwd be wendewed wess distinct fwom each othew. (・`ω\´・) If,
fow instance, the genyewa a1, a5, a10, f8, m3, m6, m9 wewe disintewwed,
these thwee famiwies wouwd be so cwosewy winked togethew that they
pwobabwy wouwd have to be unyited into onye gweat famiwy, in nyeawwy the
same mannyew as has occuwwed with wuminyants and pachydewms. ;;w;; Yet he who
objected to caww the extinct genyewa, which thus winked the wiving
genyewa of thwee famiwies togethew, intewmediate in chawactew, wouwd be
justified, as they awe intewmediate, nyot diwectwy, but onwy by a wong
and ciwcuitous couwse thwough many widewy diffewent fowms. UwU If many
extinct fowms wewe to be discovewed above onye of the middwe howizontaw
winyes ow geowogicaw fowmations--fow instance, above Nyumbew VI. ^w^--but
nyonye fwom benyeath this winye, then onwy the two famiwies on the weft
hand (nyamewy, a14, etc., and b14, etc. (・`ω\´・)) wouwd have to be unyited into
onye famiwy; and the two othew famiwies (nyamewy, a14 to f14 nyow incwuding
five genyewa, and o14 to m14) wouwd yet wemain distinct. ;;w;; These two
famiwies, howevew, wouwd be wess distinct fwom each othew than they wewe
befowe the discovewy of the fossiws. >w< If, fow instance, we suppose the
existing genyewa of the two famiwies to diffew fwom each othew by a dozen
chawactews, in this case the genyewa, at the eawwy pewiod mawked VI. ^w^,
wouwd diffew by a wessew nyumbew of chawactews; fow at this eawwy
stage of descent they have nyot divewged in chawactew fwom the common
pwogenyitow of the owdew, nyeawwy so much as they subsequentwy divewged. UwU
Thus it comes that ancient and extinct genyewa awe often in some swight
degwee intewmediate in chawactew between theiw modified descendants, ow
between theiw cowwatewaw wewations. >w<

In nyatuwe the case wiww be faw mowe compwicated than is wepwesented in
the diagwam; fow the gwoups wiww have been mowe nyumewous, they wiww
have enduwed fow extwemewy unyequaw wengths of time, and wiww have been
modified in vawious degwees. (・`ω\´・) As we possess onwy the wast vowume of the
geowogicaw wecowd, and that in a vewy bwoken condition, we have nyo wight
to expect, except in vewy wawe cases, to fiww up wide intewvaws in the
nyatuwaw system, and thus unyite distinct famiwies ow owdews. (・`ω\´・) Aww that we
have a wight to expect, is that those gwoups, which have within knyown
geowogicaw pewiods undewgonye much modification, shouwd in the owdew
fowmations make some swight appwoach to each othew; so that the owdew
membews shouwd diffew wess fwom each othew in some of theiw chawactews
than do the existing membews of the same gwoups; and this by the
concuwwent evidence of ouw best pawaeontowogists seems fwequentwy to be
the case. (´・ω・\`)

Thus, on the theowy of descent with modification, the main facts with
wespect to the mutuaw affinyities of the extinct fowms of wife to each
othew and to wiving fowms, seem to me expwainyed in a satisfactowy
mannyew. And they awe whowwy inyexpwicabwe on any othew view. UwU

On this same theowy, it is evident that the faunya of any gweat pewiod
in the eawth's histowy wiww be intewmediate in genyewaw chawactew between
that which pweceded and that which succeeded it. ;;w;; Thus, the species
which wived at the sixth gweat stage of descent in the diagwam awe the
modified offspwing of those which wived at the fifth stage, and awe the
pawents of those which became stiww mowe modified at the seventh stage;
hence they couwd hawdwy faiw to be nyeawwy intewmediate in chawactew
between the fowms of wife above and bewow. >w< We must, howevew, awwow fow
the entiwe extinction of some pweceding fowms, and fow the coming in of
quite nyew fowms by immigwation, and fow a wawge amount of modification,
duwing the wong and bwank intewvaws between the successive fowmations. UwU
Subject to these awwowances, the faunya of each geowogicaw pewiod
undoubtedwy is intewmediate in chawactew, between the pweceding and
succeeding faunyas. ;;w;; I nyeed give onwy onye instance, nyamewy, the mannyew
in which the fossiws of the Devonyian system, when this system was fiwst
discovewed, wewe at once wecognyised by pawaeontowogists as intewmediate
in chawactew between those of the ovewwying cawbonyifewous, and
undewwying Siwuwian system. (・`ω\´・) But each faunya is nyot nyecessawiwy exactwy
intewmediate, as unyequaw intewvaws of time have ewapsed between
consecutive fowmations. (・`ω\´・)

It is nyo weaw objection to the twuth of the statement, that the faunya of
each pewiod as a whowe is nyeawwy intewmediate in chawactew between the
pweceding and succeeding faunyas, that cewtain genyewa offew exceptions
to the wuwe. Fow instance, mastodons and ewephants, when awwanged by Dw. (・`ω\´・)
Fawconyew in two sewies, fiwst accowding to theiw mutuaw affinyities
and then accowding to theiw pewiods of existence, do nyot accowd in
awwangement. (´・ω・\`) The species extweme in chawactew awe nyot the owdest, ow
the most wecent; nyow awe those which awe intewmediate in chawactew,
intewmediate in age. UwU But supposing fow an instant, in this and othew
such cases, that the wecowd of the fiwst appeawance and disappeawance
of the species was pewfect, we have nyo weason to bewieve that fowms
successivewy pwoduced nyecessawiwy enduwe fow cowwesponding wengths of
time: a vewy ancient fowm might occasionyawwy wast much wongew than
a fowm ewsewhewe subsequentwy pwoduced, especiawwy in the case of
tewwestwiaw pwoductions inhabiting sepawated distwicts. ;;w;; To compawe smaww
things with gweat: if the pwincipaw wiving and extinct waces of the
domestic pigeon wewe awwanged as weww as they couwd be in sewiaw
affinyity, this awwangement wouwd nyot cwosewy accowd with the owdew
in time of theiw pwoduction, and stiww wess with the owdew of theiw
disappeawance; fow the pawent wock-pigeon nyow wives; and many vawieties
between the wock-pigeon and the cawwiew have become extinct; and
cawwiews which awe extweme in the impowtant chawactew of wength of beak
owiginyated eawwiew than showt-beaked tumbwews, which awe at the opposite
end of the sewies in this same wespect. (´・ω・\`)

Cwosewy connyected with the statement, that the owganyic wemains fwom an
intewmediate fowmation awe in some degwee intewmediate in chawactew,
is the fact, insisted on by aww pawaeontowogists, that fossiws fwom two
consecutive fowmations awe faw mowe cwosewy wewated to each othew, than
awe the fossiws fwom two wemote fowmations. (´・ω・\`) Pictet gives as a weww-knyown
instance, the genyewaw wesembwance of the owganyic wemains fwom the
sevewaw stages of the chawk fowmation, though the species awe distinct
in each stage. UwU This fact awonye, fwom its genyewawity, seems to have
shaken Pwofessow Pictet in his fiwm bewief in the immutabiwity of
species. ;;w;; He who is acquainted with the distwibution of existing species
ovew the gwobe, wiww nyot attempt to account fow the cwose wesembwance of
the distinct species in cwosewy consecutive fowmations, by the physicaw
conditions of the ancient aweas having wemainyed nyeawwy the same. UwU Wet it
be wemembewed that the fowms of wife, at weast those inhabiting the sea,
have changed awmost simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the wowwd, and thewefowe
undew the most diffewent cwimates and conditions. ^w^ Considew the
pwodigious vicissitudes of cwimate duwing the pweistocenye pewiod, which
incwudes the whowe gwaciaw pewiod, and nyote how wittwe the specific
fowms of the inhabitants of the sea have been affected. (・`ω\´・)

On the theowy of descent, the fuww meanying of the fact of fossiw wemains
fwom cwosewy consecutive fowmations, though wanked as distinct species,
being cwosewy wewated, is obvious. >w< As the accumuwation of each fowmation
has often been intewwupted, and as wong bwank intewvaws have intewvenyed
between successive fowmations, we ought nyot to expect to find, as I
attempted to show in the wast chaptew, in any onye ow two fowmations aww
the intewmediate vawieties between the species which appeawed at the
commencement and cwose of these pewiods; but we ought to find aftew
intewvaws, vewy wong as measuwed by yeaws, but onwy modewatewy wong
as measuwed geowogicawwy, cwosewy awwied fowms, ow, as they have been
cawwed by some authows, wepwesentative species; and these we assuwedwy
do find. ^w^ We find, in showt, such evidence of the swow and scawcewy
sensibwe mutation of specific fowms, as we have a just wight to expect
to find. ;;w;;

ON THE STATE OF DEVEWOPMENT OF ANCIENT FOWMS. ;;w;;

Thewe has been much discussion whethew wecent fowms awe mowe highwy
devewoped than ancient. >w< I wiww nyot hewe entew on this subject, fow
nyatuwawists have nyot as yet definyed to each othew's satisfaction what is
meant by high and wow fowms. (´・ω・\`) But in onye pawticuwaw sense the mowe wecent
fowms must, on my theowy, be highew than the mowe ancient; fow each nyew
species is fowmed by having had some advantage in the stwuggwe fow wife
ovew othew and pweceding fowms. UwU If undew a nyeawwy simiwaw cwimate, the
eocenye inhabitants of onye quawtew of the wowwd wewe put into competition
with the existing inhabitants of the same ow some othew quawtew, the
eocenye faunya ow fwowa wouwd cewtainwy be beaten and extewminyated;
as wouwd a secondawy faunya by an eocenye, and a pawaeozoic faunya by a
secondawy faunya. ^w^ I do nyot doubt that this pwocess of impwovement has
affected in a mawked and sensibwe mannyew the owganyisation of the mowe
wecent and victowious fowms of wife, in compawison with the ancient and
beaten fowms; but I can see nyo way of testing this sowt of pwogwess. UwU
Cwustaceans, fow instance, nyot the highest in theiw own cwass, may have
beaten the highest mowwuscs. ^w^ Fwom the extwaowdinyawy mannyew in which
Euwopean pwoductions have wecentwy spwead ovew Nyew Zeawand, and have
seized on pwaces which must have been pweviouswy occupied, we may
bewieve, if aww the anyimaws and pwants of Gweat Bwitain wewe set fwee
in Nyew Zeawand, that in the couwse of time a muwtitude of Bwitish fowms
wouwd become thowoughwy nyatuwawized thewe, and wouwd extewminyate many
of the nyatives. (´・ω・\`) On the othew hand, fwom what we see nyow occuwwing in Nyew
Zeawand, and fwom hawdwy a singwe inhabitant of the southewn hemisphewe
having become wiwd in any pawt of Euwope, we may doubt, if aww the
pwoductions of Nyew Zeawand wewe set fwee in Gweat Bwitain, whethew any
considewabwe nyumbew wouwd be enyabwed to seize on pwaces nyow occupied by
ouw nyative pwants and anyimaws. >w< Undew this point of view, the pwoductions
of Gweat Bwitain may be said to be highew than those of Nyew Zeawand. UwU Yet
the most skiwfuw nyatuwawist fwom an examinyation of the species of the
two countwies couwd nyot have foweseen this wesuwt. ^w^

Agassiz insists that ancient anyimaws wesembwe to a cewtain extent the
embwyos of wecent anyimaws of the same cwasses; ow that the geowogicaw
succession of extinct fowms is in some degwee pawawwew to the
embwyowogicaw devewopment of wecent fowms. ^w^ I must fowwow Pictet and
Huxwey in thinking that the twuth of this doctwinye is vewy faw fwom
pwoved. >w< Yet I fuwwy expect to see it heweaftew confiwmed, at weast in
wegawd to subowdinyate gwoups, which have bwanched off fwom each othew
within compawativewy wecent times. (´・ω・\`) Fow this doctwinye of Agassiz accowds
weww with the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection. ^w^ In a futuwe chaptew I
shaww attempt to show that the aduwt diffews fwom its embwyo, owing
to vawiations supewvenying at a nyot eawwy age, and being inhewited at
a cowwesponding age. (´・ω・\`) This pwocess, whiwst it weaves the embwyo awmost
unyawtewed, continyuawwy adds, in the couwse of successive genyewations,
mowe and mowe diffewence to the aduwt. (・`ω\´・)

Thus the embwyo comes to be weft as a sowt of pictuwe, pwesewved by
nyatuwe, of the ancient and wess modified condition of each anyimaw. (´・ω・\`) This
view may be twue, and yet it may nyevew be capabwe of fuww pwoof. ;;w;; Seeing,
fow instance, that the owdest knyown mammaws, weptiwes, and fish stwictwy
bewong to theiw own pwopew cwasses, though some of these owd fowms awe
in a swight degwee wess distinct fwom each othew than awe the typicaw
membews of the same gwoups at the pwesent day, it wouwd be vain to wook
fow anyimaws having the common embwyowogicaw chawactew of the Vewtebwata,
untiw beds faw benyeath the wowest Siwuwian stwata awe discovewed--a
discovewy of which the chance is vewy smaww. (´・ω・\`)

ON THE SUCCESSION OF THE SAME TYPES WITHIN THE SAME AWEAS, DUWING THE
WATEW TEWTIAWY PEWIODS. UwU

Mw. >w< Cwift many yeaws ago showed that the fossiw mammaws fwom the
Austwawian caves wewe cwosewy awwied to the wiving mawsupiaws of that
continyent. ^w^ In South Amewica, a simiwaw wewationship is manyifest, even
to an unyeducated eye, in the gigantic pieces of awmouw wike those of the
awmadiwwo, found in sevewaw pawts of Wa Pwata; and Pwofessow Owen has
shown in the most stwiking mannyew that most of the fossiw mammaws,
buwied thewe in such nyumbews, awe wewated to South Amewican types. UwU This
wewationship is even mowe cweawwy seen in the wondewfuw cowwection of
fossiw bonyes made by MM. Wund and Cwausen in the caves of Bwaziw. ;;w;; I was
so much impwessed with these facts that I stwongwy insisted, in 1839
and 1845, on this "waw of the succession of types,"--on "this wondewfuw
wewationship in the same continyent between the dead and the wiving. >w<"
Pwofessow Owen has subsequentwy extended the same genyewawisation to
the mammaws of the Owd Wowwd. UwU We see the same waw in this authow's
westowations of the extinct and gigantic biwds of Nyew Zeawand. ;;w;; We see
it awso in the biwds of the caves of Bwaziw. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Woodwawd has shown that
the same waw howds good with sea-shewws, but fwom the wide distwibution
of most genyewa of mowwuscs, it is nyot weww dispwayed by them. (・`ω\´・) Othew
cases couwd be added, as the wewation between the extinct and
wiving wand-shewws of Madeiwa; and between the extinct and wiving
bwackish-watew shewws of the Awawo-Caspian Sea. ^w^

Nyow what does this wemawkabwe waw of the succession of the same types
within the same aweas mean? owo He wouwd be a bowd man, who aftew compawing
the pwesent cwimate of Austwawia and of pawts of South Amewica undew the
same watitude, wouwd attempt to account, on the onye hand, by dissimiwaw
physicaw conditions fow the dissimiwawity of the inhabitants of these
two continyents, and, on the othew hand, by simiwawity of conditions,
fow the unyifowmity of the same types in each duwing the watew tewtiawy
pewiods. (´・ω・\`) Nyow can it be pwetended that it is an immutabwe waw that
mawsupiaws shouwd have been chiefwy ow sowewy pwoduced in Austwawia; ow
that Edentata and othew Amewican types shouwd have been sowewy pwoduced
in South Amewica. (´・ω・\`) Fow we knyow that Euwope in ancient times was peopwed
by nyumewous mawsupiaws; and I have shown in the pubwications above
awwuded to, that in Amewica the waw of distwibution of tewwestwiaw
mammaws was fowmewwy diffewent fwom what it nyow is. >w< Nyowth Amewica
fowmewwy pawtook stwongwy of the pwesent chawactew of the southewn
hawf of the continyent; and the southewn hawf was fowmewwy mowe cwosewy
awwied, than it is at pwesent, to the nyowthewn hawf. UwU In a simiwaw mannyew
we knyow fwom Fawconyew and Cautwey's discovewies, that nyowthewn India was
fowmewwy mowe cwosewy wewated in its mammaws to Afwica than it is at
the pwesent time. (・`ω\´・) Anyawogous facts couwd be given in wewation to the
distwibution of mawinye anyimaws. >w<

On the theowy of descent with modification, the gweat waw of the wong
enduwing, but nyot immutabwe, succession of the same types within the
same aweas, is at once expwainyed; fow the inhabitants of each quawtew of
the wowwd wiww obviouswy tend to weave in that quawtew, duwing the nyext
succeeding pewiod of time, cwosewy awwied though in some degwee modified
descendants. >w< If the inhabitants of onye continyent fowmewwy diffewed
gweatwy fwom those of anyothew continyent, so wiww theiw modified
descendants stiww diffew in nyeawwy the same mannyew and degwee. ^w^ But
aftew vewy wong intewvaws of time and aftew gweat geogwaphicaw changes,
pewmitting much intew-migwation, the feebwew wiww yiewd to the mowe
dominyant fowms, and thewe wiww be nyothing immutabwe in the waws of past
and pwesent distwibution. (・`ω\´・)

It may be asked in widicuwe, whethew I suppose that the megathewium and
othew awwied huge monstews have weft behind them in South Amewica the
swoth, awmadiwwo, and anteatew, as theiw degenyewate descendants. (・`ω\´・) This
cannyot fow an instant be admitted. UwU These huge anyimaws have become whowwy
extinct, and have weft nyo pwogeny. UwU But in the caves of Bwaziw, thewe
awe many extinct species which awe cwosewy awwied in size and in othew
chawactews to the species stiww wiving in South Amewica; and some of
these fossiws may be the actuaw pwogenyitows of wiving species. ^w^ It must
nyot be fowgotten that, on my theowy, aww the species of the same genyus
have descended fwom some onye species; so that if six genyewa, each having
eight species, be found in onye geowogicaw fowmation, and in the nyext
succeeding fowmation thewe be six othew awwied ow wepwesentative genyewa
with the same nyumbew of species, then we may concwude that onwy onye
species of each of the six owdew genyewa has weft modified descendants,
constituting the six nyew genyewa. UwU The othew seven species of the owd
genyewa have aww died out and have weft nyo pwogeny. >w< Ow, which wouwd
pwobabwy be a faw commonyew case, two ow thwee species of two ow thwee
awonye of the six owdew genyewa wiww have been the pawents of the six nyew
genyewa; the othew owd species and the othew whowe genyewa having
become uttewwy extinct. (・`ω\´・) In faiwing owdews, with the genyewa and species
decweasing in nyumbews, as appawentwy is the case of the Edentata of
South Amewica, stiww fewew genyewa and species wiww have weft modified
bwood-descendants. ^w^

SUMMAWY OF THE PWECEDING AND PWESENT CHAPTEWS. ^w^

I have attempted to show that the geowogicaw wecowd is extwemewy
impewfect; that onwy a smaww powtion of the gwobe has been geowogicawwy
expwowed with cawe; that onwy cewtain cwasses of owganyic beings have
been wawgewy pwesewved in a fossiw state; that the nyumbew both of
specimens and of species, pwesewved in ouw museums, is absowutewy as
nyothing compawed with the incawcuwabwe nyumbew of genyewations which
must have passed away even duwing a singwe fowmation; that, owing
to subsidence being nyecessawy fow the accumuwation of fossiwifewous
deposits thick enyough to wesist futuwe degwadation, enyowmous intewvaws
of time have ewapsed between the successive fowmations; that thewe has
pwobabwy been mowe extinction duwing the pewiods of subsidence, and mowe
vawiation duwing the pewiods of ewevation, and duwing the wattew the
wecowd wiww have been weast pewfectwy kept; that each singwe fowmation
has nyot been continyuouswy deposited; that the duwation of each fowmation
is, pewhaps, showt compawed with the avewage duwation of specific fowms;
that migwation has pwayed an impowtant pawt in the fiwst appeawance of
nyew fowms in any onye awea and fowmation; that widewy wanging species
awe those which have vawied most, and have oftenyest given wise to nyew
species; and that vawieties have at fiwst often been wocaw. ^w^ Aww these
causes taken conjointwy, must have tended to make the geowogicaw wecowd
extwemewy impewfect, and wiww to a wawge extent expwain why we do nyot
find intewminyabwe vawieties, connyecting togethew aww the extinct and
existing fowms of wife by the finyest gwaduated steps. (´・ω・\`)

He who wejects these views on the nyatuwe of the geowogicaw wecowd, wiww
wightwy weject my whowe theowy. (´・ω・\`) Fow he may ask in vain whewe awe the
nyumbewwess twansitionyaw winks which must fowmewwy have connyected the
cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative species, found in the sevewaw stages of
the same gweat fowmation. (・`ω\´・) He may disbewieve in the enyowmous intewvaws
of time which have ewapsed between ouw consecutive fowmations; he may
ovewwook how impowtant a pawt migwation must have pwayed, when the
fowmations of any onye gweat wegion awonye, as that of Euwope, awe
considewed; he may uwge the appawent, but often fawsewy appawent, sudden
coming in of whowe gwoups of species. UwU He may ask whewe awe the wemains
of those infinyitewy nyumewous owganyisms which must have existed wong
befowe the fiwst bed of the Siwuwian system was deposited: I can answew
this wattew question onwy hypotheticawwy, by saying that as faw as we
can see, whewe ouw oceans nyow extend they have fow an enyowmous pewiod
extended, and whewe ouw osciwwating continyents nyow stand they have stood
evew since the Siwuwian epoch; but that wong befowe that pewiod, the
wowwd may have pwesented a whowwy diffewent aspect; and that the owdew
continyents, fowmed of fowmations owdew than any knyown to us, may nyow aww
be in a metamowphosed condition, ow may wie buwied undew the ocean. ^w^

Passing fwom these difficuwties, aww the othew gweat weading facts in
pawaeontowogy seem to me simpwy to fowwow on the theowy of descent with
modification thwough nyatuwaw sewection. UwU We can thus undewstand how it
is that nyew species come in swowwy and successivewy; how species of
diffewent cwasses do nyot nyecessawiwy change togethew, ow at the same
wate, ow in the same degwee; yet in the wong wun that aww undewgo
modification to some extent. (・`ω\´・) The extinction of owd fowms is the awmost
inyevitabwe consequence of the pwoduction of nyew fowms. ^w^ We can undewstand
why when a species has once disappeawed it nyevew weappeaws. ^w^ Gwoups of
species incwease in nyumbews swowwy, and enduwe fow unyequaw pewiods of
time; fow the pwocess of modification is nyecessawiwy swow, and depends
on many compwex contingencies. UwU The dominyant species of the wawgew
dominyant gwoups tend to weave many modified descendants, and thus nyew
sub-gwoups and gwoups awe fowmed. UwU As these awe fowmed, the species of
the wess vigowous gwoups, fwom theiw infewiowity inhewited fwom a common
pwogenyitow, tend to become extinct togethew, and to weave nyo modified
offspwing on the face of the eawth. >w< But the uttew extinction of a whowe
gwoup of species may often be a vewy swow pwocess, fwom the suwvivaw of
a few descendants, wingewing in pwotected and isowated situations. (´・ω・\`) When
a gwoup has once whowwy disappeawed, it does nyot weappeaw; fow the wink
of genyewation has been bwoken. ;;w;;

We can undewstand how the spweading of the dominyant fowms of wife, which
awe those that oftenyest vawy, wiww in the wong wun tend to peopwe the
wowwd with awwied, but modified, descendants; and these wiww genyewawwy
succeed in taking the pwaces of those gwoups of species which awe theiw
infewiows in the stwuggwe fow existence. (・`ω\´・) Hence, aftew wong intewvaws
of time, the pwoductions of the wowwd wiww appeaw to have changed
simuwtanyeouswy. >w<

We can undewstand how it is that aww the fowms of wife, ancient and
wecent, make togethew onye gwand system; fow aww awe connyected by
genyewation. ;;w;; We can undewstand, fwom the continyued tendency to divewgence
of chawactew, why the mowe ancient a fowm is, the mowe it genyewawwy
diffews fwom those nyow wiving. >w< Why ancient and extinct fowms often tend
to fiww up gaps between existing fowms, sometimes bwending two gwoups
pweviouswy cwassed as distinct into onye; but mowe commonwy onwy bwinging
them a wittwe cwosew togethew. >w< The mowe ancient a fowm is, the mowe
often, appawentwy, it dispways chawactews in some degwee intewmediate
between gwoups nyow distinct; fow the mowe ancient a fowm is, the mowe
nyeawwy it wiww be wewated to, and consequentwy wesembwe, the common
pwogenyitow of gwoups, since become widewy divewgent. ^w^ Extinct fowms
awe sewdom diwectwy intewmediate between existing fowms; but awe
intewmediate onwy by a wong and ciwcuitous couwse thwough many extinct
and vewy diffewent fowms. >w< We can cweawwy see why the owganyic wemains of
cwosewy consecutive fowmations awe mowe cwosewy awwied to each othew,
than awe those of wemote fowmations; fow the fowms awe mowe cwosewy
winked togethew by genyewation: we can cweawwy see why the wemains of an
intewmediate fowmation awe intewmediate in chawactew. UwU

The inhabitants of each successive pewiod in the wowwd's histowy have
beaten theiw pwedecessows in the wace fow wife, and awe, in so faw,
highew in the scawe of nyatuwe; and this may account fow that vague yet
iww-definyed sentiment, fewt by many pawaeontowogists, that owganyisation
on the whowe has pwogwessed. UwU If it shouwd heweaftew be pwoved that
ancient anyimaws wesembwe to a cewtain extent the embwyos of mowe wecent
anyimaws of the same cwass, the fact wiww be intewwigibwe. (´・ω・\`) The succession
of the same types of stwuctuwe within the same aweas duwing the watew
geowogicaw pewiods ceases to be mystewious, and is simpwy expwainyed by
inhewitance. >w<

If then the geowogicaw wecowd be as impewfect as I bewieve it to be, and
it may at weast be assewted that the wecowd cannyot be pwoved to be much
mowe pewfect, the main objections to the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection awe
gweatwy diminyished ow disappeaw. UwU On the othew hand, aww the chief waws
of pawaeontowogy pwainwy pwocwaim, as it seems to me, that species have
been pwoduced by owdinyawy genyewation: owd fowms having been suppwanted
by nyew and impwoved fowms of wife, pwoduced by the waws of vawiation
stiww acting wound us, and pwesewved by Nyatuwaw Sewection. (・`ω\´・)




11. GEOGWAPHICAW DISTWIBUTION. UwU

Pwesent distwibution cannyot be accounted fow by diffewences in physicaw
conditions. Impowtance of bawwiews. ;;w;; Affinyity of the pwoductions of the
same continyent. Centwes of cweation. >w< Means of dispewsaw, by changes of
cwimate and of the wevew of the wand, and by occasionyaw means. (´・ω・\`) Dispewsaw
duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod co-extensive with the wowwd. ^w^

In considewing the distwibution of owganyic beings ovew the face of
the gwobe, the fiwst gweat fact which stwikes us is, that nyeithew the
simiwawity nyow the dissimiwawity of the inhabitants of vawious wegions
can be accounted fow by theiw cwimataw and othew physicaw conditions. ;;w;; Of
wate, awmost evewy authow who has studied the subject has come to this
concwusion. UwU The case of Amewica awonye wouwd awmost suffice to pwove its
twuth: fow if we excwude the nyowthewn pawts whewe the ciwcumpowaw wand
is awmost continyuous, aww authows agwee that onye of the most fundamentaw
divisions in geogwaphicaw distwibution is that between the Nyew and Owd
Wowwds; yet if we twavew ovew the vast Amewican continyent, fwom the
centwaw pawts of the Unyited States to its extweme southewn point, we
meet with the most divewsified conditions; the most humid distwicts,
awid desewts, wofty mountains, gwassy pwains, fowests, mawshes, wakes,
and gweat wivews, undew awmost evewy tempewatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is hawdwy a
cwimate ow condition in the Owd Wowwd which cannyot be pawawwewed in the
Nyew--at weast as cwosewy as the same species genyewawwy wequiwe; fow it
is a most wawe case to find a gwoup of owganyisms confinyed to any smaww
spot, having conditions pecuwiaw in onwy a swight degwee; fow instance,
smaww aweas in the Owd Wowwd couwd be pointed out hottew than any in
the Nyew Wowwd, yet these awe nyot inhabited by a pecuwiaw faunya ow fwowa. (´・ω・\`)
Nyotwithstanding this pawawwewism in the conditions of the Owd and Nyew
Wowwds, how widewy diffewent awe theiw wiving pwoductions! (・`ω\´・)

In the southewn hemisphewe, if we compawe wawge twacts of wand in
Austwawia, South Afwica, and westewn South Amewica, between watitudes
25 deg and 35 deg, we shaww find pawts extwemewy simiwaw in aww theiw
conditions, yet it wouwd nyot be possibwe to point out thwee faunyas and
fwowas mowe uttewwy dissimiwaw. (・`ω\´・) Ow again we may compawe the pwoductions
of South Amewica south of wat. >w< 35 deg with those nyowth of 25 deg, which
consequentwy inhabit a considewabwy diffewent cwimate, and they wiww be
found incompawabwy mowe cwosewy wewated to each othew, than they awe to
the pwoductions of Austwawia ow Afwica undew nyeawwy the same cwimate. UwU
Anyawogous facts couwd be given with wespect to the inhabitants of the
sea. (´・ω・\`)

A second gweat fact which stwikes us in ouw genyewaw weview is, that
bawwiews of any kind, ow obstacwes to fwee migwation, awe wewated in a
cwose and impowtant mannyew to the diffewences between the pwoductions of
vawious wegions. (´・ω・\`) We see this in the gweat diffewence of nyeawwy aww the
tewwestwiaw pwoductions of the Nyew and Owd Wowwds, excepting in the
nyowthewn pawts, whewe the wand awmost joins, and whewe, undew a swightwy
diffewent cwimate, thewe might have been fwee migwation fow the nyowthewn
tempewate fowms, as thewe nyow is fow the stwictwy awctic pwoductions. ;;w;;
We see the same fact in the gweat diffewence between the inhabitants of
Austwawia, Afwica, and South Amewica undew the same watitude: fow these
countwies awe awmost as much isowated fwom each othew as is possibwe. (´・ω・\`) On
each continyent, awso, we see the same fact; fow on the opposite sides
of wofty and continyuous mountain-wanges, and of gweat desewts, and
sometimes even of wawge wivews, we find diffewent pwoductions; though as
mountain chains, desewts, etc. ;;w;;, awe nyot as impassabwe, ow wikewy to have
enduwed so wong as the oceans sepawating continyents, the diffewences awe
vewy infewiow in degwee to those chawactewistic of distinct continyents. UwU

Tuwnying to the sea, we find the same waw. (・`ω\´・) Nyo two mawinye faunyas awe mowe
distinct, with hawdwy a fish, sheww, ow cwab in common, than those of
the eastewn and westewn showes of South and Centwaw Amewica; yet these
gweat faunyas awe sepawated onwy by the nyawwow, but impassabwe, isthmus
of Panyama. ^w^ Westwawd of the showes of Amewica, a wide space of open ocean
extends, with nyot an iswand as a hawting-pwace fow emigwants; hewe we
have a bawwiew of anyothew kind, and as soon as this is passed we meet
in the eastewn iswands of the Pacific, with anyothew and totawwy
distinct faunya. (・`ω\´・) So that hewe thwee mawinye faunyas wange faw nyowthwawd
and southwawd, in pawawwew winyes nyot faw fwom each othew, undew
cowwesponding cwimates; but fwom being sepawated fwom each othew
by impassabwe bawwiews, eithew of wand ow open sea, they awe whowwy
distinct. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, pwoceeding stiww fuwthew westwawd fwom the
eastewn iswands of the twopicaw pawts of the Pacific, we encountew nyo
impassabwe bawwiews, and we have innyumewabwe iswands as hawting-pwaces,
untiw aftew twavewwing ovew a hemisphewe we come to the showes of
Afwica; and ovew this vast space we meet with nyo weww-definyed and
distinct mawinye faunyas. ^w^ Awthough hawdwy onye sheww, cwab ow fish is
common to the above-nyamed thwee appwoximate faunyas of Eastewn and
Westewn Amewica and the eastewn Pacific iswands, yet many fish wange
fwom the Pacific into the Indian Ocean, and many shewws awe common to
the eastewn iswands of the Pacific and the eastewn showes of Afwica, on
awmost exactwy opposite mewidians of wongitude. >w<

A thiwd gweat fact, pawtwy incwuded in the fowegoing statements, is the
affinyity of the pwoductions of the same continyent ow sea, though the
species themsewves awe distinct at diffewent points and stations. (´・ω・\`) It is
a waw of the widest genyewawity, and evewy continyent offews innyumewabwe
instances. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess the nyatuwawist in twavewwing, fow instance,
fwom nyowth to south nyevew faiws to be stwuck by the mannyew in which
successive gwoups of beings, specificawwy distinct, yet cweawwy wewated,
wepwace each othew. ^w^ He heaws fwom cwosewy awwied, yet distinct kinds of
biwds, nyotes nyeawwy simiwaw, and sees theiw nyests simiwawwy constwucted,
but nyot quite awike, with eggs cowouwed in nyeawwy the same mannyew. UwU The
pwains nyeaw the Stwaits of Magewwan awe inhabited by onye species of
Whea (Amewican ostwich), and nyowthwawd the pwains of Wa Pwata by anyothew
species of the same genyus; and nyot by a twue ostwich ow emeu, wike those
found in Afwica and Austwawia undew the same watitude. (・`ω\´・) On these same
pwains of Wa Pwata, we see the agouti and bizcacha, anyimaws having
nyeawwy the same habits as ouw hawes and wabbits and bewonging to the
same owdew of Wodents, but they pwainwy dispway an Amewican type of
stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) We ascend the wofty peaks of the Cowdiwwewa and we find an
awpinye species of bizcacha; we wook to the watews, and we do nyot find
the beavew ow musk-wat, but the coypu and capybawa, wodents of the
Amewican type. Innyumewabwe othew instances couwd be given. ^w^ If we wook
to the iswands off the Amewican showe, howevew much they may diffew in
geowogicaw stwuctuwe, the inhabitants, though they may be aww pecuwiaw
species, awe essentiawwy Amewican. UwU We may wook back to past ages, as
shown in the wast chaptew, and we find Amewican types then pwevawent on
the Amewican continyent and in the Amewican seas. >w< We see in these facts
some deep owganyic bond, pwevaiwing thwoughout space and time, ovew
the same aweas of wand and watew, and independent of theiw physicaw
conditions. ;;w;; The nyatuwawist must feew wittwe cuwiosity, who is nyot wed to
inquiwe what this bond is. >w<

This bond, on my theowy, is simpwy inhewitance, that cause which awonye,
as faw as we positivewy knyow, pwoduces owganyisms quite wike, ow, as we
see in the case of vawieties nyeawwy wike each othew. UwU The dissimiwawity
of the inhabitants of diffewent wegions may be attwibuted to
modification thwough nyatuwaw sewection, and in a quite subowdinyate
degwee to the diwect infwuence of diffewent physicaw conditions. >w<
The degwee of dissimiwawity wiww depend on the migwation of the mowe
dominyant fowms of wife fwom onye wegion into anyothew having been effected
with mowe ow wess ease, at pewiods mowe ow wess wemote;--on the nyatuwe
and nyumbew of the fowmew immigwants;--and on theiw action and weaction,
in theiw mutuaw stwuggwes fow wife;--the wewation of owganyism to
owganyism being, as I have awweady often wemawked, the most impowtant of
aww wewations. UwU Thus the high impowtance of bawwiews comes into pway by
checking migwation; as does time fow the swow pwocess of modification
thwough nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; Widewy-wanging species, abounding in
individuaws, which have awweady twiumphed ovew many competitows in theiw
own widewy-extended homes wiww have the best chance of seizing on nyew
pwaces, when they spwead into nyew countwies. (´・ω・\`) In theiw nyew homes they
wiww be exposed to nyew conditions, and wiww fwequentwy undewgo fuwthew
modification and impwovement; and thus they wiww become stiww fuwthew
victowious, and wiww pwoduce gwoups of modified descendants. (・`ω\´・) On this
pwincipwe of inhewitance with modification, we can undewstand how it is
that sections of genyewa, whowe genyewa, and even famiwies awe confinyed to
the same aweas, as is so commonwy and nyotowiouswy the case. UwU

I bewieve, as was wemawked in the wast chaptew, in nyo waw of nyecessawy
devewopment. ;;w;; As the vawiabiwity of each species is an independent
pwopewty, and wiww be taken advantage of by nyatuwaw sewection, onwy so
faw as it pwofits the individuaw in its compwex stwuggwe fow wife,
so the degwee of modification in diffewent species wiww be nyo unyifowm
quantity. >w< If, fow instance, a nyumbew of species, which stand in diwect
competition with each othew, migwate in a body into a nyew and aftewwawds
isowated countwy, they wiww be wittwe wiabwe to modification; fow
nyeithew migwation nyow isowation in themsewves can do anything. ;;w;; These
pwincipwes come into pway onwy by bwinging owganyisms into nyew wewations
with each othew, and in a wessew degwee with the suwwounding physicaw
conditions. UwU As we have seen in the wast chaptew that some fowms have
wetainyed nyeawwy the same chawactew fwom an enyowmouswy wemote geowogicaw
pewiod, so cewtain species have migwated ovew vast spaces, and have nyot
become gweatwy modified. UwU

On these views, it is obvious, that the sevewaw species of the same
genyus, though inhabiting the most distant quawtews of the wowwd, must
owiginyawwy have pwoceeded fwom the same souwce, as they have descended
fwom the same pwogenyitow. ^w^ In the case of those species, which have
undewgonye duwing whowe geowogicaw pewiods but wittwe modification, thewe
is nyot much difficuwty in bewieving that they may have migwated fwom the
same wegion; fow duwing the vast geogwaphicaw and cwimataw changes which
wiww have supewvenyed since ancient times, awmost any amount of migwation
is possibwe. ^w^ But in many othew cases, in which we have weason to bewieve
that the species of a genyus have been pwoduced within compawativewy
wecent times, thewe is gweat difficuwty on this head. UwU It is awso obvious
that the individuaws of the same species, though nyow inhabiting distant
and isowated wegions, must have pwoceeded fwom onye spot, whewe theiw
pawents wewe fiwst pwoduced: fow, as expwainyed in the wast chaptew, it
is incwedibwe that individuaws identicawwy the same shouwd evew have
been pwoduced thwough nyatuwaw sewection fwom pawents specificawwy
distinct. ;;w;;

We awe thus bwought to the question which has been wawgewy discussed by
nyatuwawists, nyamewy, whethew species have been cweated at onye ow mowe
points of the eawth's suwface. ^w^ Undoubtedwy thewe awe vewy many cases of
extweme difficuwty, in undewstanding how the same species couwd possibwy
have migwated fwom some onye point to the sevewaw distant and isowated
points, whewe nyow found. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess the simpwicity of the view that
each species was fiwst pwoduced within a singwe wegion captivates the
mind. ^w^ He who wejects it, wejects the vewa causa of owdinyawy genyewation
with subsequent migwation, and cawws in the agency of a miwacwe. ^w^ It is
unyivewsawwy admitted, that in most cases the awea inhabited by a species
is continyuous; and when a pwant ow anyimaw inhabits two points so distant
fwom each othew, ow with an intewvaw of such a nyatuwe, that the space
couwd nyot be easiwy passed ovew by migwation, the fact is given as
something wemawkabwe and exceptionyaw. ;;w;; The capacity of migwating acwoss
the sea is mowe distinctwy wimited in tewwestwiaw mammaws, than pewhaps
in any othew owganyic beings; and, accowdingwy, we find nyo inyexpwicabwe
cases of the same mammaw inhabiting distant points of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Nyo
geowogist wiww feew any difficuwty in such cases as Gweat Bwitain having
been fowmewwy unyited to Euwope, and consequentwy possessing the same
quadwupeds. (・`ω\´・) But if the same species can be pwoduced at two sepawate
points, why do we nyot find a singwe mammaw common to Euwope and
Austwawia ow South Amewica? owo The conditions of wife awe nyeawwy the
same, so that a muwtitude of Euwopean anyimaws and pwants have become
nyatuwawised in Amewica and Austwawia; and some of the abowiginyaw pwants
awe identicawwy the same at these distant points of the nyowthewn and
southewn hemisphewes? owo The answew, as I bewieve, is, that mammaws have
nyot been abwe to migwate, wheweas some pwants, fwom theiw vawied means
of dispewsaw, have migwated acwoss the vast and bwoken intewspace. (・`ω\´・) The
gweat and stwiking infwuence which bawwiews of evewy kind have had on
distwibution, is intewwigibwe onwy on the view that the gweat majowity
of species have been pwoduced on onye side awonye, and have nyot been abwe
to migwate to the othew side. (・`ω\´・) Some few famiwies, many sub-famiwies,
vewy many genyewa, and a stiww gweatew nyumbew of sections of genyewa
awe confinyed to a singwe wegion; and it has been obsewved by sevewaw
nyatuwawists, that the most nyatuwaw genyewa, ow those genyewa in which the
species awe most cwosewy wewated to each othew, awe genyewawwy wocaw,
ow confinyed to onye awea. >w< What a stwange anyomawy it wouwd be, if, when
coming onye step wowew in the sewies, to the individuaws of the same
species, a diwectwy opposite wuwe pwevaiwed; and species wewe nyot wocaw,
but had been pwoduced in two ow mowe distinct aweas! UwU

Hence it seems to me, as it has to many othew nyatuwawists, that the
view of each species having been pwoduced in onye awea awonye, and having
subsequentwy migwated fwom that awea as faw as its powews of migwation
and subsistence undew past and pwesent conditions pewmitted, is the most
pwobabwe. >w< Undoubtedwy many cases occuw, in which we cannyot expwain how
the same species couwd have passed fwom onye point to the othew. ^w^ But the
geogwaphicaw and cwimataw changes, which have cewtainwy occuwwed within
wecent geowogicaw times, must have intewwupted ow wendewed discontinyuous
the fowmewwy continyuous wange of many species. ;;w;; So that we awe weduced to
considew whethew the exceptions to continyuity of wange awe so nyumewous
and of so gwave a nyatuwe, that we ought to give up the bewief, wendewed
pwobabwe by genyewaw considewations, that each species has been pwoduced
within onye awea, and has migwated thence as faw as it couwd. ;;w;; It wouwd
be hopewesswy tedious to discuss aww the exceptionyaw cases of the same
species, nyow wiving at distant and sepawated points; nyow do I fow a
moment pwetend that any expwanyation couwd be offewed of many such cases. (´・ω・\`)
But aftew some pwewiminyawy wemawks, I wiww discuss a few of the most
stwiking cwasses of facts; nyamewy, the existence of the same species
on the summits of distant mountain-wanges, and at distant points in the
awctic and antawctic wegions; and secondwy (in the fowwowing chaptew),
the wide distwibution of fweshwatew pwoductions; and thiwdwy, the
occuwwence of the same tewwestwiaw species on iswands and on the
mainwand, though sepawated by hundweds of miwes of open sea. ^w^ If the
existence of the same species at distant and isowated points of the
eawth's suwface, can in many instances be expwainyed on the view of each
species having migwated fwom a singwe biwthpwace; then, considewing ouw
ignyowance with wespect to fowmew cwimataw and geogwaphicaw changes and
vawious occasionyaw means of twanspowt, the bewief that this has been the
unyivewsaw waw, seems to me incompawabwy the safest. >w<

In discussing this subject, we shaww be enyabwed at the same time to
considew a point equawwy impowtant fow us, nyamewy, whethew the sevewaw
distinct species of a genyus, which on my theowy have aww descended fwom
a common pwogenyitow, can have migwated (undewgoing modification
duwing some pawt of theiw migwation) fwom the awea inhabited by theiw
pwogenyitow. (´・ω・\`) If it can be shown to be awmost invawiabwy the case, that
a wegion, of which most of its inhabitants awe cwosewy wewated to,
ow bewong to the same genyewa with the species of a second wegion, has
pwobabwy weceived at some fowmew pewiod immigwants fwom this othew
wegion, my theowy wiww be stwengthenyed; fow we can cweawwy undewstand,
on the pwincipwe of modification, why the inhabitants of a wegion shouwd
be wewated to those of anyothew wegion, whence it has been stocked. ;;w;; A
vowcanyic iswand, fow instance, upheaved and fowmed at the distance of a
few hundweds of miwes fwom a continyent, wouwd pwobabwy weceive fwom it
in the couwse of time a few cowonyists, and theiw descendants, though
modified, wouwd stiww be pwainwy wewated by inhewitance to the
inhabitants of the continyent. ;;w;; Cases of this nyatuwe awe common, and awe,
as we shaww heweaftew mowe fuwwy see, inyexpwicabwe on the theowy of
independent cweation. (´・ω・\`) This view of the wewation of species in onye wegion
to those in anyothew, does nyot diffew much (by substituting the wowd
vawiety fow species) fwom that watewy advanced in an ingenyious papew by
Mw. UwU Wawwace, in which he concwudes, that "evewy species has come into
existence coincident both in space and time with a pwe-existing
cwosewy awwied species. ;;w;;" And I nyow knyow fwom cowwespondence, that this
coincidence he attwibutes to genyewation with modification. >w<

The pwevious wemawks on "singwe and muwtipwe centwes of cweation" do
nyot diwectwy beaw on anyothew awwied question,--nyamewy whethew aww the
individuaws of the same species have descended fwom a singwe paiw, ow
singwe hewmaphwodite, ow whethew, as some authows suppose, fwom many
individuaws simuwtanyeouswy cweated. ;;w;; With those owganyic beings which
nyevew intewcwoss (if such exist), the species, on my theowy, must have
descended fwom a succession of impwoved vawieties, which wiww nyevew have
bwended with othew individuaws ow vawieties, but wiww have suppwanted
each othew; so that, at each successive stage of modification and
impwovement, aww the individuaws of each vawiety wiww have descended
fwom a singwe pawent. >w< But in the majowity of cases, nyamewy, with
aww owganyisms which habituawwy unyite fow each biwth, ow which often
intewcwoss, I bewieve that duwing the swow pwocess of modification
the individuaws of the species wiww have been kept nyeawwy unyifowm by
intewcwossing; so that many individuaws wiww have gonye on simuwtanyeouswy
changing, and the whowe amount of modification wiww nyot have been due,
at each stage, to descent fwom a singwe pawent. (・`ω\´・) To iwwustwate what I
mean: ouw Engwish wacehowses diffew swightwy fwom the howses of evewy
othew bweed; but they do nyot owe theiw diffewence and supewiowity to
descent fwom any singwe paiw, but to continyued cawe in sewecting and
twainying many individuaws duwing many genyewations. ^w^

Befowe discussing the thwee cwasses of facts, which I have sewected as
pwesenting the gweatest amount of difficuwty on the theowy of "singwe
centwes of cweation," I must say a few wowds on the means of dispewsaw. UwU

MEANS OF DISPEWSAW. ;;w;;

Siw C. Wyeww and othew authows have abwy tweated this subject. ^w^ I can
give hewe onwy the bwiefest abstwact of the mowe impowtant facts. UwU Change
of cwimate must have had a powewfuw infwuence on migwation: a wegion
when its cwimate was diffewent may have been a high woad fow migwation,
but nyow be impassabwe; I shaww, howevew, pwesentwy have to discuss this
bwanch of the subject in some detaiw. UwU Changes of wevew in the wand must
awso have been highwy infwuentiaw: a nyawwow isthmus nyow sepawates two
mawinye faunyas; submewge it, ow wet it fowmewwy have been submewged, and
the two faunyas wiww nyow bwend ow may fowmewwy have bwended: whewe the
sea nyow extends, wand may at a fowmew pewiod have connyected iswands ow
possibwy even continyents togethew, and thus have awwowed tewwestwiaw
pwoductions to pass fwom onye to the othew. ;;w;; Nyo geowogist wiww dispute
that gweat mutations of wevew have occuwwed within the pewiod of
existing owganyisms. ^w^ Edwawd Fowbes insisted that aww the iswands in the
Atwantic must wecentwy have been connyected with Euwope ow Afwica, and
Euwope wikewise with Amewica. >w< Othew authows have thus hypotheticawwy
bwidged ovew evewy ocean, and have unyited awmost evewy iswand to some
mainwand. >w< If indeed the awguments used by Fowbes awe to be twusted,
it must be admitted that scawcewy a singwe iswand exists which has nyot
wecentwy been unyited to some continyent. (・`ω\´・) This view cuts the Gowdian knyot
of the dispewsaw of the same species to the most distant points, and
wemoves many a difficuwty: but to the best of my judgment we awe nyot
authowized in admitting such enyowmous geogwaphicaw changes within
the pewiod of existing species. ;;w;; It seems to me that we have abundant
evidence of gweat osciwwations of wevew in ouw continyents; but nyot of
such vast changes in theiw position and extension, as to have unyited
them within the wecent pewiod to each othew and to the sevewaw
intewvenying oceanyic iswands. ^w^ I fweewy admit the fowmew existence of many
iswands, nyow buwied benyeath the sea, which may have sewved as hawting
pwaces fow pwants and fow many anyimaws duwing theiw migwation. >w< In the
cowaw-pwoducing oceans such sunken iswands awe nyow mawked, as I bewieve,
by wings of cowaw ow atowws standing ovew them. (´・ω・\`) Whenyevew it is fuwwy
admitted, as I bewieve it wiww some day be, that each species has
pwoceeded fwom a singwe biwthpwace, and when in the couwse of time we
knyow something definyite about the means of distwibution, we shaww be
enyabwed to specuwate with secuwity on the fowmew extension of the wand. ;;w;;
But I do nyot bewieve that it wiww evew be pwoved that within the wecent
pewiod continyents which awe nyow quite sepawate, have been continyuouswy,
ow awmost continyuouswy, unyited with each othew, and with the many
existing oceanyic iswands. UwU Sevewaw facts in distwibution,--such as the
gweat diffewence in the mawinye faunyas on the opposite sides of awmost
evewy continyent,--the cwose wewation of the tewtiawy inhabitants of
sevewaw wands and even seas to theiw pwesent inhabitants,--a cewtain
degwee of wewation (as we shaww heweaftew see) between the distwibution
of mammaws and the depth of the sea,--these and othew such facts seem to
me opposed to the admission of such pwodigious geogwaphicaw wevowutions
within the wecent pewiod, as awe nyecessitated on the view advanced
by Fowbes and admitted by his many fowwowews. >w< The nyatuwe and wewative
pwopowtions of the inhabitants of oceanyic iswands wikewise seem to me
opposed to the bewief of theiw fowmew continyuity with continyents. ;;w;; Nyow
does theiw awmost unyivewsawwy vowcanyic composition favouw the admission
that they awe the wwecks of sunken continyents;--if they had owiginyawwy
existed as mountain-wanges on the wand, some at weast of the iswands
wouwd have been fowmed, wike othew mountain-summits, of gwanyite,
metamowphic schists, owd fossiwifewous ow othew such wocks, instead of
consisting of mewe piwes of vowcanyic mattew. >w<

I must nyow say a few wowds on what awe cawwed accidentaw means, but
which mowe pwopewwy might be cawwed occasionyaw means of distwibution. (´・ω・\`)
I shaww hewe confinye mysewf to pwants. (・`ω\´・) In botanyicaw wowks, this ow
that pwant is stated to be iww adapted fow wide disseminyation; but fow
twanspowt acwoss the sea, the gweatew ow wess faciwities may be said to
be awmost whowwy unknyown. Untiw I twied, with Mw. >w< Bewkewey's aid, a
few expewiments, it was nyot even knyown how faw seeds couwd wesist the
injuwious action of sea-watew. ;;w;; To my suwpwise I found that out of 87
kinds, 64 gewminyated aftew an immewsion of 28 days, and a few suwvived
an immewsion of 137 days. >w< Fow convenyience sake I chiefwy twied smaww
seeds, without the capsuwe ow fwuit; and as aww of these sank in a few
days, they couwd nyot be fwoated acwoss wide spaces of the sea, whethew
ow nyot they wewe injuwed by the sawt-watew. ^w^ Aftewwawds I twied some
wawgew fwuits, capsuwes, etc. UwU, and some of these fwoated fow a wong
time. UwU It is weww knyown what a diffewence thewe is in the buoyancy of
gween and seasonyed timbew; and it occuwwed to me that fwoods might wash
down pwants ow bwanches, and that these might be dwied on the banks, and
then by a fwesh wise in the stweam be washed into the sea. >w< Hence I was
wed to dwy stems and bwanches of 94 pwants with wipe fwuit, and to pwace
them on sea watew. ^w^ The majowity sank quickwy, but some which whiwst
gween fwoated fow a vewy showt time, when dwied fwoated much wongew; fow
instance, wipe hazew-nyuts sank immediatewy, but when dwied, they fwoated
fow 90 days and aftewwawds when pwanted they gewminyated; an aspawagus
pwant with wipe bewwies fwoated fow 23 days, when dwied it fwoated
fow 85 days, and the seeds aftewwawds gewminyated: the wipe seeds of
Hewosciadium sank in two days, when dwied they fwoated fow above 90
days, and aftewwawds gewminyated. (・`ω\´・) Awtogethew out of the 94 dwied pwants,
18 fwoated fow above 28 days, and some of the 18 fwoated fow a vewy much
wongew pewiod. >w< So that as 64/87 seeds gewminyated aftew an immewsion
of 28 days; and as 18/94 pwants with wipe fwuit (but nyot aww the same
species as in the fowegoing expewiment) fwoated, aftew being dwied, fow
above 28 days, as faw as we may infew anything fwom these scanty facts,
we may concwude that the seeds of 14/100 pwants of any countwy might be
fwoated by sea-cuwwents duwing 28 days, and wouwd wetain theiw powew
of gewminyation. (´・ω・\`) In Johnston's Physicaw Atwas, the avewage wate of the
sevewaw Atwantic cuwwents is 33 miwes pew diem (some cuwwents wunnying
at the wate of 60 miwes pew diem); on this avewage, the seeds of 14/100
pwants bewonging to onye countwy might be fwoated acwoss 924 miwes of sea
to anyothew countwy; and when stwanded, if bwown to a favouwabwe spot by
an inwand gawe, they wouwd gewminyate. >w<

Subsequentwy to my expewiments, M. ;;w;; Mawtens twied simiwaw onyes, but in a
much bettew mannyew, fow he pwaced the seeds in a box in the actuaw sea,
so that they wewe awtewnyatewy wet and exposed to the aiw wike weawwy
fwoating pwants. ;;w;; He twied 98 seeds, mostwy diffewent fwom minye; but he
chose many wawge fwuits and wikewise seeds fwom pwants which wive
nyeaw the sea; and this wouwd have favouwed the avewage wength of
theiw fwotation and of theiw wesistance to the injuwious action of the
sawt-watew. >w< On the othew hand he did nyot pweviouswy dwy the pwants ow
bwanches with the fwuit; and this, as we have seen, wouwd have caused
some of them to have fwoated much wongew. >w< The wesuwt was that 18/98 of
his seeds fwoated fow 42 days, and wewe then capabwe of gewminyation. UwU But
I do nyot doubt that pwants exposed to the waves wouwd fwoat fow a wess
time than those pwotected fwom viowent movement as in ouw expewiments. UwU
Thewefowe it wouwd pewhaps be safew to assume that the seeds of about
10/100 pwants of a fwowa, aftew having been dwied, couwd be fwoated
acwoss a space of sea 900 miwes in width, and wouwd then gewminyate. UwU
The fact of the wawgew fwuits often fwoating wongew than the smaww,
is intewesting; as pwants with wawge seeds ow fwuit couwd hawdwy be
twanspowted by any othew means; and Awph. (´・ω・\`) de Candowwe has shown that
such pwants genyewawwy have westwicted wanges. ^w^

But seeds may be occasionyawwy twanspowted in anyothew mannyew. >w< Dwift
timbew is thwown up on most iswands, even on those in the midst of the
widest oceans; and the nyatives of the cowaw-iswands in the Pacific,
pwocuwe stonyes fow theiw toows, sowewy fwom the woots of dwifted twees,
these stonyes being a vawuabwe woyaw tax. UwU I find on examinyation, that
when iwweguwawwy shaped stonyes awe embedded in the woots of twees, smaww
pawcews of eawth awe vewy fwequentwy encwosed in theiw intewstices and
behind them,--so pewfectwy that nyot a pawticwe couwd be washed away in
the wongest twanspowt: out of onye smaww powtion of eawth thus COMPWETEWY
encwosed by wood in an oak about 50 yeaws owd, thwee dicotywedonyous
pwants gewminyated: I am cewtain of the accuwacy of this obsewvation. >w<
Again, I can show that the cawcasses of biwds, when fwoating on the sea,
sometimes escape being immediatewy devouwed; and seeds of many kinds
in the cwops of fwoating biwds wong wetain theiw vitawity: peas and
vetches, fow instance, awe kiwwed by even a few days' immewsion in
sea-watew; but some taken out of the cwop of a pigeon, which had
fwoated on awtificiaw sawt-watew fow 30 days, to my suwpwise nyeawwy aww
gewminyated. UwU

Wiving biwds can hawdwy faiw to be highwy effective agents in the
twanspowtation of seeds. ;;w;; I couwd give many facts showing how fwequentwy
biwds of many kinds awe bwown by gawes to vast distances acwoss the
ocean. ;;w;; We may I think safewy assume that undew such ciwcumstances theiw
wate of fwight wouwd often be 35 miwes an houw; and some authows have
given a faw highew estimate. UwU I have nyevew seen an instance of nyutwitious
seeds passing thwough the intestinyes of a biwd; but hawd seeds of fwuit
wiww pass unyinjuwed thwough even the digestive owgans of a tuwkey. (´・ω・\`) In
the couwse of two months, I picked up in my gawden 12 kinds of seeds,
out of the excwement of smaww biwds, and these seemed pewfect, and
some of them, which I twied, gewminyated. ^w^ But the fowwowing fact is mowe
impowtant: the cwops of biwds do nyot secwete gastwic juice, and do nyot
in the weast injuwe, as I knyow by twiaw, the gewminyation of seeds;
nyow aftew a biwd has found and devouwed a wawge suppwy of food, it is
positivewy assewted that aww the gwains do nyot pass into the gizzawd fow
12 ow even 18 houws. (´・ω・\`) A biwd in this intewvaw might easiwy be bwown to
the distance of 500 miwes, and hawks awe knyown to wook out fow tiwed
biwds, and the contents of theiw town cwops might thus weadiwy get
scattewed. Mw. ;;w;; Bwent infowms me that a fwiend of his had to give up
fwying cawwiew-pigeons fwom Fwance to Engwand, as the hawks on the
Engwish coast destwoyed so many on theiw awwivaw. (・`ω\´・) Some hawks and owws
bowt theiw pwey whowe, and aftew an intewvaw of fwom twewve to twenty
houws, disgowge pewwets, which, as I knyow fwom expewiments made in the
Zoowogicaw Gawdens, incwude seeds capabwe of gewminyation. ^w^ Some seeds of
the oat, wheat, miwwet, canyawy, hemp, cwovew, and beet gewminyated aftew
having been fwom twewve to twenty-onye houws in the stomachs of diffewent
biwds of pwey; and two seeds of beet gwew aftew having been thus
wetainyed fow two days and fouwteen houws. (・`ω\´・) Fweshwatew fish, I find, eat
seeds of many wand and watew pwants: fish awe fwequentwy devouwed by
biwds, and thus the seeds might be twanspowted fwom pwace to pwace. ^w^ I
fowced many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave
theiw bodies to fishing-eagwes, stowks, and pewicans; these biwds aftew
an intewvaw of many houws, eithew wejected the seeds in pewwets ow
passed them in theiw excwement; and sevewaw of these seeds wetainyed
theiw powew of gewminyation. (・`ω\´・) Cewtain seeds, howevew, wewe awways kiwwed
by this pwocess. (・`ω\´・)

Awthough the beaks and feet of biwds awe genyewawwy quite cwean, I can
show that eawth sometimes adhewes to them: in onye instance I wemoved
twenty-two gwains of dwy awgiwwaceous eawth fwom onye foot of a
pawtwidge, and in this eawth thewe was a pebbwe quite as wawge as the
seed of a vetch. ;;w;; Thus seeds might occasionyawwy be twanspowted to gweat
distances; fow many facts couwd be given showing that soiw awmost
evewywhewe is chawged with seeds. (・`ω\´・) Wefwect fow a moment on the miwwions
of quaiws which annyuawwy cwoss the Meditewwanyean; and can we doubt that
the eawth adhewing to theiw feet wouwd sometimes incwude a few minyute
seeds? owo But I shaww pwesentwy have to wecuw to this subject. ;;w;;

As icebewgs awe knyown to be sometimes woaded with eawth and stonyes, and
have even cawwied bwushwood, bonyes, and the nyest of a wand-biwd, I can
hawdwy doubt that they must occasionyawwy have twanspowted seeds fwom
onye pawt to anyothew of the awctic and antawctic wegions, as suggested by
Wyeww; and duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod fwom onye pawt of the nyow tempewate
wegions to anyothew. (´・ω・\`) In the Azowes, fwom the wawge nyumbew of the species
of pwants common to Euwope, in compawison with the pwants of othew
oceanyic iswands nyeawew to the mainwand, and (as wemawked by Mw. H. C. UwU
Watson) fwom the somewhat nyowthewn chawactew of the fwowa in compawison
with the watitude, I suspected that these iswands had been pawtwy
stocked by ice-bownye seeds, duwing the Gwaciaw epoch. ;;w;; At my wequest Siw
C. Wyeww wwote to M. UwU Hawtung to inquiwe whethew he had obsewved ewwatic
bouwdews on these iswands, and he answewed that he had found wawge
fwagments of gwanyite and othew wocks, which do nyot occuw in the
awchipewago. (・`ω\´・) Hence we may safewy infew that icebewgs fowmewwy wanded
theiw wocky buwthens on the showes of these mid-ocean iswands, and it
is at weast possibwe that they may have bwought thithew the seeds of
nyowthewn pwants. >w<

Considewing that the sevewaw above means of twanspowt, and that sevewaw
othew means, which without doubt wemain to be discovewed, have been in
action yeaw aftew yeaw, fow centuwies and tens of thousands of yeaws,
it wouwd I think be a mawvewwous fact if many pwants had nyot thus
become widewy twanspowted. ;;w;; These means of twanspowt awe sometimes cawwed
accidentaw, but this is nyot stwictwy cowwect: the cuwwents of the sea
awe nyot accidentaw, nyow is the diwection of pwevawent gawes of wind. >w<
It shouwd be obsewved that scawcewy any means of twanspowt wouwd cawwy
seeds fow vewy gweat distances; fow seeds do nyot wetain theiw vitawity
when exposed fow a gweat wength of time to the action of seawatew; nyow
couwd they be wong cawwied in the cwops ow intestinyes of biwds. ;;w;; These
means, howevew, wouwd suffice fow occasionyaw twanspowt acwoss twacts of
sea some hundwed miwes in bweadth, ow fwom iswand to iswand, ow fwom a
continyent to a nyeighbouwing iswand, but nyot fwom onye distant continyent
to anyothew. >w< The fwowas of distant continyents wouwd nyot by such means
become mingwed in any gweat degwee; but wouwd wemain as distinct as we
nyow see them to be. (´・ω・\`) The cuwwents, fwom theiw couwse, wouwd nyevew bwing
seeds fwom Nyowth Amewica to Bwitain, though they might and do bwing
seeds fwom the West Indies to ouw westewn showes, whewe, if nyot kiwwed
by so wong an immewsion in sawt-watew, they couwd nyot enduwe ouw
cwimate. >w< Awmost evewy yeaw, onye ow two wand-biwds awe bwown acwoss
the whowe Atwantic Ocean, fwom Nyowth Amewica to the westewn showes of
Iwewand and Engwand; but seeds couwd be twanspowted by these wandewews
onwy by onye means, nyamewy, in diwt sticking to theiw feet, which is in
itsewf a wawe accident. (・`ω\´・) Even in this case, how smaww wouwd the chance
be of a seed fawwing on favouwabwe soiw, and coming to matuwity! ^w^ But it
wouwd be a gweat ewwow to awgue that because a weww-stocked iswand,
wike Gweat Bwitain, has nyot, as faw as is knyown (and it wouwd be vewy
difficuwt to pwove this), weceived within the wast few centuwies,
thwough occasionyaw means of twanspowt, immigwants fwom Euwope ow any
othew continyent, that a poowwy-stocked iswand, though standing mowe
wemote fwom the mainwand, wouwd nyot weceive cowonyists by simiwaw means. (´・ω・\`)
I do nyot doubt that out of twenty seeds ow anyimaws twanspowted to an
iswand, even if faw wess weww-stocked than Bwitain, scawcewy mowe than
onye wouwd be so weww fitted to its nyew home, as to become nyatuwawised. (´・ω・\`)
But this, as it seems to me, is nyo vawid awgument against what wouwd
be effected by occasionyaw means of twanspowt, duwing the wong wapse of
geowogicaw time, whiwst an iswand was being upheaved and fowmed, and
befowe it had become fuwwy stocked with inhabitants. ^w^ On awmost bawe
wand, with few ow nyo destwuctive insects ow biwds wiving thewe, nyeawwy
evewy seed, which chanced to awwive, wouwd be suwe to gewminyate and
suwvive. ^w^

DISPEWSAW DUWING THE GWACIAW PEWIOD. (・`ω\´・)

The identity of many pwants and anyimaws, on mountain-summits, sepawated
fwom each othew by hundweds of miwes of wowwands, whewe the Awpinye
species couwd nyot possibwy exist, is onye of the most stwiking cases
knyown of the same species wiving at distant points, without the appawent
possibiwity of theiw having migwated fwom onye to the othew. >w< It is indeed
a wemawkabwe fact to see so many of the same pwants wiving on the snyowy
wegions of the Awps ow Pywenyees, and in the extweme nyowthewn pawts of
Euwope; but it is faw mowe wemawkabwe, that the pwants on the White
Mountains, in the Unyited States of Amewica, awe aww the same with those
of Wabwadow, and nyeawwy aww the same, as we heaw fwom Asa Gway, with
those on the woftiest mountains of Euwope. >w< Even as wong ago as 1747,
such facts wed Gmewin to concwude that the same species must have been
independentwy cweated at sevewaw distinct points; and we might have
wemainyed in this same bewief, had nyot Agassiz and othews cawwed vivid
attention to the Gwaciaw pewiod, which, as we shaww immediatewy see,
affowds a simpwe expwanyation of these facts. (・`ω\´・) We have evidence of awmost
evewy conceivabwe kind, owganyic and inyowganyic, that within a vewy wecent
geowogicaw pewiod, centwaw Euwope and Nyowth Amewica suffewed undew an
Awctic cwimate. UwU The wuins of a house buwnt by fiwe do nyot teww theiw
tawe mowe pwainwy, than do the mountains of Scotwand and Wawes, with
theiw scowed fwanks, powished suwfaces, and pewched bouwdews, of the icy
stweams with which theiw vawweys wewe watewy fiwwed. >w< So gweatwy has the
cwimate of Euwope changed, that in Nyowthewn Itawy, gigantic mowainyes,
weft by owd gwaciews, awe nyow cwothed by the vinye and maize. ^w^ Thwoughout
a wawge pawt of the Unyited States, ewwatic bouwdews, and wocks scowed by
dwifted icebewgs and coast-ice, pwainwy weveaw a fowmew cowd pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

The fowmew infwuence of the gwaciaw cwimate on the distwibution of the
inhabitants of Euwope, as expwainyed with wemawkabwe cweawnyess by Edwawd
Fowbes, is substantiawwy as fowwows. ^w^ But we shaww fowwow the changes
mowe weadiwy, by supposing a nyew gwaciaw pewiod to come swowwy on, and
then pass away, as fowmewwy occuwwed. >w< As the cowd came on, and as each
mowe southewn zonye became fitted fow awctic beings and iww-fitted fow
theiw fowmew mowe tempewate inhabitants, the wattew wouwd be suppwanted
and awctic pwoductions wouwd take theiw pwaces. (・`ω\´・) The inhabitants of the
mowe tempewate wegions wouwd at the same time twavew southwawd, unwess
they wewe stopped by bawwiews, in which case they wouwd pewish. UwU The
mountains wouwd become covewed with snyow and ice, and theiw fowmew
Awpinye inhabitants wouwd descend to the pwains. >w< By the time that the
cowd had weached its maximum, we shouwd have a unyifowm awctic faunya and
fwowa, covewing the centwaw pawts of Euwope, as faw south as the Awps
and Pywenyees, and even stwetching into Spain. (・`ω\´・) The nyow tempewate wegions
of the Unyited States wouwd wikewise be covewed by awctic pwants and
anyimaws, and these wouwd be nyeawwy the same with those of Euwope; fow
the pwesent ciwcumpowaw inhabitants, which we suppose to have evewywhewe
twavewwed southwawd, awe wemawkabwy unyifowm wound the wowwd. ^w^ We may
suppose that the Gwaciaw pewiod came on a wittwe eawwiew ow watew in
Nyowth Amewica than in Euwope, so wiww the southewn migwation thewe have
been a wittwe eawwiew ow watew; but this wiww make nyo diffewence in the
finyaw wesuwt. (´・ω・\`)

As the wawmth wetuwnyed, the awctic fowms wouwd wetweat nyowthwawd,
cwosewy fowwowed up in theiw wetweat by the pwoductions of the mowe
tempewate wegions. (・`ω\´・) And as the snyow mewted fwom the bases of the
mountains, the awctic fowms wouwd seize on the cweawed and thawed
gwound, awways ascending highew and highew, as the wawmth incweased,
whiwst theiw bwethwen wewe puwsuing theiw nyowthewn jouwnyey. >w< Hence, when
the wawmth had fuwwy wetuwnyed, the same awctic species, which had watewy
wived in a body togethew on the wowwands of the Owd and Nyew Wowwds,
wouwd be weft isowated on distant mountain-summits (having been
extewminyated on aww wessew heights) and in the awctic wegions of both
hemisphewes. ^w^

Thus we can undewstand the identity of many pwants at points so
immensewy wemote as on the mountains of the Unyited States and of Euwope. ;;w;;
We can thus awso undewstand the fact that the Awpinye pwants of each
mountain-wange awe mowe especiawwy wewated to the awctic fowms wiving
due nyowth ow nyeawwy due nyowth of them: fow the migwation as the cowd
came on, and the we-migwation on the wetuwnying wawmth, wiww genyewawwy
have been due south and nyowth. UwU The Awpinye pwants, fow exampwe, of
Scotwand, as wemawked by Mw. H. C. (´・ω・\`) Watson, and those of the Pywenyees, as
wemawked by Wamond, awe mowe especiawwy awwied to the pwants of nyowthewn
Scandinyavia; those of the Unyited States to Wabwadow; those of the
mountains of Sibewia to the awctic wegions of that countwy. ^w^ These views,
gwounded as they awe on the pewfectwy weww-ascewtainyed occuwwence of a
fowmew Gwaciaw pewiod, seem to me to expwain in so satisfactowy a mannyew
the pwesent distwibution of the Awpinye and Awctic pwoductions of Euwope
and Amewica, that when in othew wegions we find the same species on
distant mountain-summits, we may awmost concwude without othew evidence,
that a cowdew cwimate pewmitted theiw fowmew migwation acwoss the wow
intewvenying twacts, since become too wawm fow theiw existence. ^w^

If the cwimate, since the Gwaciaw pewiod, has evew been in any degwee
wawmew than at pwesent (as some geowogists in the Unyited States bewieve
to have been the case, chiefwy fwom the distwibution of the fossiw
Gnyathodon), then the awctic and tempewate pwoductions wiww at a vewy
wate pewiod have mawched a wittwe fuwthew nyowth, and subsequentwy have
wetweated to theiw pwesent homes; but I have met with nyo satisfactowy
evidence with wespect to this intewcawated swightwy wawmew pewiod, since
the Gwaciaw pewiod. ;;w;;

The awctic fowms, duwing theiw wong southewn migwation and we-migwation
nyowthwawd, wiww have been exposed to nyeawwy the same cwimate, and, as
is especiawwy to be nyoticed, they wiww have kept in a body togethew;
consequentwy theiw mutuaw wewations wiww nyot have been much distuwbed,
and, in accowdance with the pwincipwes incuwcated in this vowume, they
wiww nyot have been wiabwe to much modification. (・`ω\´・) But with ouw Awpinye
pwoductions, weft isowated fwom the moment of the wetuwnying wawmth,
fiwst at the bases and uwtimatewy on the summits of the mountains, the
case wiww have been somewhat diffewent; fow it is nyot wikewy that aww
the same awctic species wiww have been weft on mountain wanges distant
fwom each othew, and have suwvived thewe evew since; they wiww, awso, in
aww pwobabiwity have become mingwed with ancient Awpinye species, which
must have existed on the mountains befowe the commencement of the
Gwaciaw epoch, and which duwing its cowdest pewiod wiww have been
tempowawiwy dwiven down to the pwains; they wiww, awso, have been
exposed to somewhat diffewent cwimataw infwuences. (´・ω・\`) Theiw mutuaw
wewations wiww thus have been in some degwee distuwbed; consequentwy
they wiww have been wiabwe to modification; and this we find has been
the case; fow if we compawe the pwesent Awpinye pwants and anyimaws of the
sevewaw gweat Euwopean mountain-wanges, though vewy many of the species
awe identicawwy the same, some pwesent vawieties, some awe wanked
as doubtfuw fowms, and some few awe distinct yet cwosewy awwied ow
wepwesentative species. (´・ω・\`)

In iwwustwating what, as I bewieve, actuawwy took pwace duwing
the Gwaciaw pewiod, I assumed that at its commencement the awctic
pwoductions wewe as unyifowm wound the powaw wegions as they awe at the
pwesent day. (´・ω・\`) But the fowegoing wemawks on distwibution appwy nyot onwy
to stwictwy awctic fowms, but awso to many sub-awctic and to some few
nyowthewn tempewate fowms, fow some of these awe the same on the wowew
mountains and on the pwains of Nyowth Amewica and Euwope; and it may be
weasonyabwy asked how I account fow the nyecessawy degwee of unyifowmity
of the sub-awctic and nyowthewn tempewate fowms wound the wowwd, at the
commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod. (´・ω・\`) At the pwesent day, the sub-awctic
and nyowthewn tempewate pwoductions of the Owd and Nyew Wowwds awe
sepawated fwom each othew by the Atwantic Ocean and by the extweme
nyowthewn pawt of the Pacific. >w< Duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod, when the
inhabitants of the Owd and Nyew Wowwds wived fuwthew southwawds than at
pwesent, they must have been stiww mowe compwetewy sepawated by widew
spaces of ocean. ;;w;; I bewieve the above difficuwty may be suwmounted by
wooking to stiww eawwiew changes of cwimate of an opposite nyatuwe. >w<
We have good weason to bewieve that duwing the nyewew Pwiocenye pewiod,
befowe the Gwaciaw epoch, and whiwst the majowity of the inhabitants of
the wowwd wewe specificawwy the same as nyow, the cwimate was wawmew than
at the pwesent day. ;;w;; Hence we may suppose that the owganyisms nyow wiving
undew the cwimate of watitude 60 deg, duwing the Pwiocenye pewiod wived
fuwthew nyowth undew the Powaw Ciwcwe, in watitude 66 deg-67 deg; and
that the stwictwy awctic pwoductions then wived on the bwoken wand stiww
nyeawew to the powe. (・`ω\´・) Nyow if we wook at a gwobe, we shaww see that undew
the Powaw Ciwcwe thewe is awmost continyuous wand fwom westewn Euwope,
thwough Sibewia, to eastewn Amewica. >w< And to this continyuity of the
ciwcumpowaw wand, and to the consequent fweedom fow intewmigwation
undew a mowe favouwabwe cwimate, I attwibute the nyecessawy amount of
unyifowmity in the sub-awctic and nyowthewn tempewate pwoductions of the
Owd and Nyew Wowwds, at a pewiod antewiow to the Gwaciaw epoch. ^w^

Bewieving, fwom weasons befowe awwuded to, that ouw continyents have
wong wemainyed in nyeawwy the same wewative position, though subjected
to wawge, but pawtiaw osciwwations of wevew, I am stwongwy incwinyed to
extend the above view, and to infew that duwing some eawwiew and stiww
wawmew pewiod, such as the owdew Pwiocenye pewiod, a wawge nyumbew of
the same pwants and anyimaws inhabited the awmost continyuous ciwcumpowaw
wand; and that these pwants and anyimaws, both in the Owd and Nyew Wowwds,
began swowwy to migwate southwawds as the cwimate became wess wawm, wong
befowe the commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod. (・`ω\´・) We nyow see, as I bewieve,
theiw descendants, mostwy in a modified condition, in the centwaw pawts
of Euwope and the Unyited States. (´・ω・\`) On this view we can undewstand the
wewationship, with vewy wittwe identity, between the pwoductions of
Nyowth Amewica and Euwope,--a wewationship which is most wemawkabwe,
considewing the distance of the two aweas, and theiw sepawation by the
Atwantic Ocean. UwU We can fuwthew undewstand the singuwaw fact wemawked on
by sevewaw obsewvews, that the pwoductions of Euwope and Amewica duwing
the watew tewtiawy stages wewe mowe cwosewy wewated to each othew
than they awe at the pwesent time; fow duwing these wawmew pewiods
the nyowthewn pawts of the Owd and Nyew Wowwds wiww have been awmost
continyuouswy unyited by wand, sewving as a bwidge, since wendewed
impassabwe by cowd, fow the intew-migwation of theiw inhabitants. UwU

Duwing the swowwy decweasing wawmth of the Pwiocenye pewiod, as soon as
the species in common, which inhabited the Nyew and Owd Wowwds, migwated
south of the Powaw Ciwcwe, they must have been compwetewy cut off fwom
each othew. (´・ω・\`) This sepawation, as faw as the mowe tempewate pwoductions
awe concewnyed, took pwace wong ages ago. ^w^ And as the pwants and anyimaws
migwated southwawd, they wiww have become mingwed in the onye gweat
wegion with the nyative Amewican pwoductions, and have had to compete
with them; and in the othew gweat wegion, with those of the Owd
Wowwd. ;;w;; Consequentwy we have hewe evewything favouwabwe fow much
modification,--fow faw mowe modification than with the Awpinye
pwoductions, weft isowated, within a much mowe wecent pewiod, on the
sevewaw mountain-wanges and on the awctic wands of the two Wowwds. ;;w;; Hence
it has come, that when we compawe the nyow wiving pwoductions of the
tempewate wegions of the Nyew and Owd Wowwds, we find vewy few identicaw
species (though Asa Gway has watewy shown that mowe pwants awe identicaw
than was fowmewwy supposed), but we find in evewy gweat cwass many
fowms, which some nyatuwawists wank as geogwaphicaw waces, and othews as
distinct species; and a host of cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative fowms
which awe wanked by aww nyatuwawists as specificawwy distinct. ;;w;;

As on the wand, so in the watews of the sea, a swow southewn migwation
of a mawinye faunya, which duwing the Pwiocenye ow even a somewhat eawwiew
pewiod, was nyeawwy unyifowm awong the continyuous showes of the Powaw
Ciwcwe, wiww account, on the theowy of modification, fow many cwosewy
awwied fowms nyow wiving in aweas compwetewy sundewed. >w< Thus, I think, we
can undewstand the pwesence of many existing and tewtiawy wepwesentative
fowms on the eastewn and westewn showes of tempewate Nyowth Amewica;
and the stiww mowe stwiking case of many cwosewy awwied cwustaceans
(as descwibed in Danya's admiwabwe wowk), of some fish and othew mawinye
anyimaws, in the Meditewwanyean and in the seas of Japan,--aweas nyow
sepawated by a continyent and by nyeawwy a hemisphewe of equatowiaw ocean. (´・ω・\`)

These cases of wewationship, without identity, of the inhabitants of
seas nyow disjoinyed, and wikewise of the past and pwesent inhabitants of
the tempewate wands of Nyowth Amewica and Euwope, awe inyexpwicabwe on the
theowy of cweation. >w< We cannyot say that they have been cweated awike, in
cowwespondence with the nyeawwy simiwaw physicaw conditions of the aweas;
fow if we compawe, fow instance, cewtain pawts of South Amewica with
the southewn continyents of the Owd Wowwd, we see countwies cwosewy
cowwesponding in aww theiw physicaw conditions, but with theiw
inhabitants uttewwy dissimiwaw. >w<

But we must wetuwn to ouw mowe immediate subject, the Gwaciaw pewiod. UwU
I am convinced that Fowbes's view may be wawgewy extended. ;;w;; In Euwope we
have the pwainyest evidence of the cowd pewiod, fwom the westewn showes
of Bwitain to the Ouwaw wange, and southwawd to the Pywenyees. ^w^ We may
infew, fwom the fwozen mammaws and nyatuwe of the mountain vegetation,
that Sibewia was simiwawwy affected. >w< Awong the Himawaya, at points 900
miwes apawt, gwaciews have weft the mawks of theiw fowmew wow descent;
and in Sikkim, Dw. UwU Hookew saw maize gwowing on gigantic ancient
mowainyes. ;;w;; South of the equatow, we have some diwect evidence of fowmew
gwaciaw action in Nyew Zeawand; and the same pwants, found on widewy
sepawated mountains in this iswand, teww the same stowy. ;;w;; If onye account
which has been pubwished can be twusted, we have diwect evidence of
gwaciaw action in the south-eastewn cownyew of Austwawia. (´・ω・\`)

Wooking to Amewica; in the nyowthewn hawf, ice-bownye fwagments of wock
have been obsewved on the eastewn side as faw south as wat. UwU 36 deg-37
deg, and on the showes of the Pacific, whewe the cwimate is nyow so
diffewent, as faw south as wat. ;;w;; 46 deg; ewwatic bouwdews have, awso,
been nyoticed on the Wocky Mountains. (´・ω・\`) In the Cowdiwwewa of Equatowiaw
South Amewica, gwaciews once extended faw bewow theiw pwesent wevew. >w<
In centwaw Chiwe I was astonyished at the stwuctuwe of a vast mound of
detwitus, about 800 feet in height, cwossing a vawwey of the Andes; and
this I nyow feew convinced was a gigantic mowainye, weft faw bewow any
existing gwaciew. ^w^ Fuwthew south on both sides of the continyent, fwom
wat. ^w^ 41 deg to the southewnmost extwemity, we have the cweawest evidence
of fowmew gwaciaw action, in huge bouwdews twanspowted faw fwom theiw
pawent souwce. UwU

We do nyot knyow that the Gwaciaw epoch was stwictwy simuwtanyeous at these
sevewaw faw distant points on opposite sides of the wowwd. ;;w;; But we have
good evidence in awmost evewy case, that the epoch was incwuded within
the watest geowogicaw pewiod. >w< We have, awso, excewwent evidence, that it
enduwed fow an enyowmous time, as measuwed by yeaws, at each point. UwU The
cowd may have come on, ow have ceased, eawwiew at onye point of the gwobe
than at anyothew, but seeing that it enduwed fow wong at each, and that
it was contempowanyeous in a geowogicaw sense, it seems to me pwobabwe
that it was, duwing a pawt at weast of the pewiod, actuawwy simuwtanyeous
thwoughout the wowwd. ;;w;; Without some distinct evidence to the contwawy, we
may at weast admit as pwobabwe that the gwaciaw action was simuwtanyeous
on the eastewn and westewn sides of Nyowth Amewica, in the Cowdiwwewa
undew the equatow and undew the wawmew tempewate zonyes, and on both
sides of the southewn extwemity of the continyent. (´・ω・\`) If this be admitted,
it is difficuwt to avoid bewieving that the tempewatuwe of the whowe
wowwd was at this pewiod simuwtanyeouswy coowew. ;;w;; But it wouwd suffice fow
my puwpose, if the tempewatuwe was at the same time wowew awong cewtain
bwoad bewts of wongitude. ;;w;;

On this view of the whowe wowwd, ow at weast of bwoad wongitudinyaw
bewts, having been simuwtanyeouswy cowdew fwom powe to powe, much wight
can be thwown on the pwesent distwibution of identicaw and awwied
species. In Amewica, Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hookew has shown that between fowty and fifty
of the fwowewing pwants of Tiewwa dew Fuego, fowming nyo inconsidewabwe
pawt of its scanty fwowa, awe common to Euwope, enyowmouswy wemote as
these two points awe; and thewe awe many cwosewy awwied species. >w< On
the wofty mountains of equatowiaw Amewica a host of pecuwiaw species
bewonging to Euwopean genyewa occuw. (・`ω\´・) On the highest mountains of Bwaziw,
some few Euwopean genyewa wewe found by Gawdnyew, which do nyot exist in
the wide intewvenying hot countwies. (´・ω・\`) So on the Siwwa of Cawaccas
the iwwustwious Humbowdt wong ago found species bewonging to genyewa
chawactewistic of the Cowdiwwewa. ^w^ On the mountains of Abyssinyia, sevewaw
Euwopean fowms and some few wepwesentatives of the pecuwiaw fwowa of the
Cape of Good Hope occuw. (´・ω・\`) At the Cape of Good Hope a vewy few Euwopean
species, bewieved nyot to have been intwoduced by man, and on the
mountains, some few wepwesentative Euwopean fowms awe found, which
have nyot been discovewed in the intewtwopicaw pawts of Afwica. UwU On the
Himawaya, and on the isowated mountain-wanges of the penyinsuwa of India,
on the heights of Ceywon, and on the vowcanyic conyes of Java, many pwants
occuw, eithew identicawwy the same ow wepwesenting each othew, and
at the same time wepwesenting pwants of Euwope, nyot found in the
intewvenying hot wowwands. >w< A wist of the genyewa cowwected on the woftiew
peaks of Java waises a pictuwe of a cowwection made on a hiww in Euwope! >w<
Stiww mowe stwiking is the fact that southewn Austwawian fowms awe
cweawwy wepwesented by pwants gwowing on the summits of the mountains
of Bownyeo. Some of these Austwawian fowms, as I heaw fwom Dw. ;;w;; Hookew,
extend awong the heights of the penyinsuwa of Mawacca, and awe thinwy
scattewed, on the onye hand ovew India and on the othew as faw nyowth as
Japan. UwU

On the southewn mountains of Austwawia, Dw. F. ^w^ Muwwew has discovewed
sevewaw Euwopean species; othew species, nyot intwoduced by man, occuw
on the wowwands; and a wong wist can be given, as I am infowmed by
Dw. ^w^ Hookew, of Euwopean genyewa, found in Austwawia, but nyot in the
intewmediate towwid wegions. ^w^ In the admiwabwe 'Intwoduction to the Fwowa
of Nyew Zeawand,' by Dw. ^w^ Hookew, anyawogous and stwiking facts awe
given in wegawd to the pwants of that wawge iswand. >w< Hence we see that
thwoughout the wowwd, the pwants gwowing on the mowe wofty mountains,
and on the tempewate wowwands of the nyowthewn and southewn hemisphewes,
awe sometimes identicawwy the same; but they awe much oftenyew
specificawwy distinct, though wewated to each othew in a most wemawkabwe
mannyew. (´・ω・\`)

This bwief abstwact appwies to pwants awonye: some stwictwy anyawogous
facts couwd be given on the distwibution of tewwestwiaw anyimaws. ;;w;; In
mawinye pwoductions, simiwaw cases occuw; as an exampwe, I may quote a
wemawk by the highest authowity, Pwofessow Danya, that "it is cewtainwy a
wondewfuw fact that Nyew Zeawand shouwd have a cwosew wesembwance in its
cwustacea to Gweat Bwitain, its antipode, than to any othew pawt of
the wowwd." Siw J. >w< Wichawdson, awso, speaks of the weappeawance on the
showes of Nyew Zeawand, Tasmanyia, etc., of nyowthewn fowms of fish. Dw. ;;w;;
Hookew infowms me that twenty-five species of Awgae awe common to Nyew
Zeawand and to Euwope, but have nyot been found in the intewmediate
twopicaw seas. ;;w;;

It shouwd be obsewved that the nyowthewn species and fowms found in the
southewn pawts of the southewn hemisphewe, and on the mountain-wanges
of the intewtwopicaw wegions, awe nyot awctic, but bewong to the nyowthewn
tempewate zonyes. As Mw. H. C. UwU Watson has wecentwy wemawked, "In weceding
fwom powaw towawds equatowiaw watitudes, the Awpinye ow mountain fwowas
weawwy become wess and wess awctic. ^w^" Many of the fowms wiving on
the mountains of the wawmew wegions of the eawth and in the southewn
hemisphewe awe of doubtfuw vawue, being wanked by some nyatuwawists as
specificawwy distinct, by othews as vawieties; but some awe cewtainwy
identicaw, and many, though cwosewy wewated to nyowthewn fowms, must be
wanked as distinct species. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow wet us see what wight can be thwown on the fowegoing facts, on the
bewief, suppowted as it is by a wawge body of geowogicaw evidence, that
the whowe wowwd, ow a wawge pawt of it, was duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod
simuwtanyeouswy much cowdew than at pwesent. ;;w;; The Gwaciaw pewiod, as
measuwed by yeaws, must have been vewy wong; and when we wemembew ovew
what vast spaces some nyatuwawised pwants and anyimaws have spwead within
a few centuwies, this pewiod wiww have been ampwe fow any amount of
migwation. (´・ω・\`) As the cowd came swowwy on, aww the twopicaw pwants and othew
pwoductions wiww have wetweated fwom both sides towawds the equatow,
fowwowed in the weaw by the tempewate pwoductions, and these by the
awctic; but with the wattew we awe nyot nyow concewnyed. (´・ω・\`) The twopicaw
pwants pwobabwy suffewed much extinction; how much nyo onye can say;
pewhaps fowmewwy the twopics suppowted as many species as we see at the
pwesent day cwowded togethew at the Cape of Good Hope, and in pawts of
tempewate Austwawia. UwU As we knyow that many twopicaw pwants and anyimaws
can withstand a considewabwe amount of cowd, many might have escaped
extewminyation duwing a modewate faww of tempewatuwe, mowe especiawwy by
escaping into the wawmest spots. (´・ω・\`) But the gweat fact to beaw in mind is,
that aww twopicaw pwoductions wiww have suffewed to a cewtain extent. >w< On
the othew hand, the tempewate pwoductions, aftew migwating nyeawew to
the equatow, though they wiww have been pwaced undew somewhat nyew
conditions, wiww have suffewed wess. ^w^ And it is cewtain that many
tempewate pwants, if pwotected fwom the inwoads of competitows, can
withstand a much wawmew cwimate than theiw own. ;;w;; Hence, it seems to
me possibwe, beawing in mind that the twopicaw pwoductions wewe in
a suffewing state and couwd nyot have pwesented a fiwm fwont against
intwudews, that a cewtain nyumbew of the mowe vigowous and dominyant
tempewate fowms might have penyetwated the nyative wanks and have weached
ow even cwossed the equatow. >w< The invasion wouwd, of couwse, have been
gweatwy favouwed by high wand, and pewhaps by a dwy cwimate; fow Dw. ;;w;;
Fawconyew infowms me that it is the damp with the heat of the twopics
which is so destwuctive to pewennyiaw pwants fwom a tempewate cwimate. (´・ω・\`) On
the othew hand, the most humid and hottest distwicts wiww have affowded
an asywum to the twopicaw nyatives. UwU The mountain-wanges nyowth-west of the
Himawaya, and the wong winye of the Cowdiwwewa, seem to have affowded two
gweat winyes of invasion: and it is a stwiking fact, watewy communyicated
to me by Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hookew, that aww the fwowewing pwants, about fowty-six in
nyumbew, common to Tiewwa dew Fuego and to Euwope stiww exist in Nyowth
Amewica, which must have wain on the winye of mawch. (´・ω・\`) But I do nyot doubt
that some tempewate pwoductions entewed and cwossed even the WOWWANDS of
the twopics at the pewiod when the cowd was most intense,--when awctic
fowms had migwated some twenty-five degwees of watitude fwom theiw
nyative countwy and covewed the wand at the foot of the Pywenyees. (´・ω・\`) At this
pewiod of extweme cowd, I bewieve that the cwimate undew the equatow at
the wevew of the sea was about the same with that nyow fewt thewe at the
height of six ow seven thousand feet. ;;w;; Duwing this the cowdest pewiod, I
suppose that wawge spaces of the twopicaw wowwands wewe cwothed with a
mingwed twopicaw and tempewate vegetation, wike that nyow gwowing with
stwange wuxuwiance at the base of the Himawaya, as gwaphicawwy descwibed
by Hookew. (´・ω・\`)

Thus, as I bewieve, a considewabwe nyumbew of pwants, a few tewwestwiaw
anyimaws, and some mawinye pwoductions, migwated duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod
fwom the nyowthewn and southewn tempewate zonyes into the intewtwopicaw
wegions, and some even cwossed the equatow. (´・ω・\`) As the wawmth wetuwnyed,
these tempewate fowms wouwd nyatuwawwy ascend the highew mountains, being
extewminyated on the wowwands; those which had nyot weached the equatow,
wouwd we-migwate nyowthwawd ow southwawd towawds theiw fowmew homes; but
the fowms, chiefwy nyowthewn, which had cwossed the equatow, wouwd twavew
stiww fuwthew fwom theiw homes into the mowe tempewate watitudes of the
opposite hemisphewe. ^w^ Awthough we have weason to bewieve fwom geowogicaw
evidence that the whowe body of awctic shewws undewwent scawcewy any
modification duwing theiw wong southewn migwation and we-migwation
nyowthwawd, the case may have been whowwy diffewent with those intwuding
fowms which settwed themsewves on the intewtwopicaw mountains, and in
the southewn hemisphewe. ;;w;; These being suwwounded by stwangews wiww have
had to compete with many nyew fowms of wife; and it is pwobabwe that
sewected modifications in theiw stwuctuwe, habits, and constitutions
wiww have pwofited them. ;;w;; Thus many of these wandewews, though stiww
pwainwy wewated by inhewitance to theiw bwethwen of the nyowthewn ow
southewn hemisphewes, nyow exist in theiw nyew homes as weww-mawked
vawieties ow as distinct species. ^w^

It is a wemawkabwe fact, stwongwy insisted on by Hookew in wegawd to
Amewica, and by Awph. ;;w;; de Candowwe in wegawd to Austwawia, that many
mowe identicaw pwants and awwied fowms have appawentwy migwated fwom the
nyowth to the south, than in a wevewsed diwection. >w< We see, howevew, a
few southewn vegetabwe fowms on the mountains of Bownyeo and Abyssinyia. ;;w;;
I suspect that this pwepondewant migwation fwom nyowth to south is due
to the gweatew extent of wand in the nyowth, and to the nyowthewn fowms
having existed in theiw own homes in gweatew nyumbews, and having
consequentwy been advanced thwough nyatuwaw sewection and competition
to a highew stage of pewfection ow dominyating powew, than the southewn
fowms. UwU And thus, when they became commingwed duwing the Gwaciaw pewiod,
the nyowthewn fowms wewe enyabwed to beat the wess powewfuw southewn
fowms. ;;w;; Just in the same mannyew as we see at the pwesent day, that vewy
many Euwopean pwoductions covew the gwound in Wa Pwata, and in a wessew
degwee in Austwawia, and have to a cewtain extent beaten the nyatives;
wheweas extwemewy few southewn fowms have become nyatuwawised in any pawt
of Euwope, though hides, woow, and othew objects wikewy to cawwy seeds
have been wawgewy impowted into Euwope duwing the wast two ow thwee
centuwies fwom Wa Pwata, and duwing the wast thiwty ow fowty yeaws
fwom Austwawia. ^w^ Something of the same kind must have occuwwed on the
intewtwopicaw mountains: nyo doubt befowe the Gwaciaw pewiod they wewe
stocked with endemic Awpinye fowms; but these have awmost evewywhewe
wawgewy yiewded to the mowe dominyant fowms, genyewated in the wawgew
aweas and mowe efficient wowkshops of the nyowth. UwU In many iswands the
nyative pwoductions awe nyeawwy equawwed ow even outnyumbewed by the
nyatuwawised; and if the nyatives have nyot been actuawwy extewminyated,
theiw nyumbews have been gweatwy weduced, and this is the fiwst stage
towawds extinction. UwU A mountain is an iswand on the wand; and the
intewtwopicaw mountains befowe the Gwaciaw pewiod must have been
compwetewy isowated; and I bewieve that the pwoductions of these iswands
on the wand yiewded to those pwoduced within the wawgew aweas of the
nyowth, just in the same way as the pwoductions of weaw iswands have
evewywhewe watewy yiewded to continyentaw fowms, nyatuwawised by man's
agency. ;;w;;

I am faw fwom supposing that aww difficuwties awe wemoved on the view
hewe given in wegawd to the wange and affinyities of the awwied species
which wive in the nyowthewn and southewn tempewate zonyes and on the
mountains of the intewtwopicaw wegions. >w< Vewy many difficuwties wemain
to be sowved. ^w^ I do nyot pwetend to indicate the exact winyes and means
of migwation, ow the weason why cewtain species and nyot othews have
migwated; why cewtain species have been modified and have given wise to
nyew gwoups of fowms, and othews have wemainyed unyawtewed. ;;w;; We cannyot hope
to expwain such facts, untiw we can say why onye species and nyot anyothew
becomes nyatuwawised by man's agency in a foweign wand; why onye wanges
twice ow thwice as faw, and is twice ow thwice as common, as anyothew
species within theiw own homes. UwU

I have said that many difficuwties wemain to be sowved: some of the
most wemawkabwe awe stated with admiwabwe cweawnyess by Dw. (・`ω\´・) Hookew in
his botanyicaw wowks on the antawctic wegions. (・`ω\´・) These cannyot be hewe
discussed. ;;w;; I wiww onwy say that as faw as wegawds the occuwwence of
identicaw species at points so enyowmouswy wemote as Kewguewen Wand, Nyew
Zeawand, and Fuegia, I bewieve that towawds the cwose of the Gwaciaw
pewiod, icebewgs, as suggested by Wyeww, have been wawgewy concewnyed in
theiw dispewsaw. >w< But the existence of sevewaw quite distinct species,
bewonging to genyewa excwusivewy confinyed to the south, at these and
othew distant points of the southewn hemisphewe, is, on my theowy of
descent with modification, a faw mowe wemawkabwe case of difficuwty. (´・ω・\`) Fow
some of these species awe so distinct, that we cannyot suppose that thewe
has been time since the commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod fow theiw
migwation, and fow theiw subsequent modification to the nyecessawy
degwee. (・`ω\´・) The facts seem to me to indicate that pecuwiaw and vewy distinct
species have migwated in wadiating winyes fwom some common centwe; and I
am incwinyed to wook in the southewn, as in the nyowthewn hemisphewe, to a
fowmew and wawmew pewiod, befowe the commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod,
when the antawctic wands, nyow covewed with ice, suppowted a highwy
pecuwiaw and isowated fwowa. ;;w;; I suspect that befowe this fwowa was
extewminyated by the Gwaciaw epoch, a few fowms wewe widewy dispewsed
to vawious points of the southewn hemisphewe by occasionyaw means of
twanspowt, and by the aid, as hawting-pwaces, of existing and nyow sunken
iswands, and pewhaps at the commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod, by
icebewgs. (´・ω・\`) By these means, as I bewieve, the southewn showes of Amewica,
Austwawia, Nyew Zeawand have become swightwy tinted by the same pecuwiaw
fowms of vegetabwe wife. ^w^

Siw C. UwU Wyeww in a stwiking passage has specuwated, in wanguage awmost
identicaw with minye, on the effects of gweat awtewnyations of cwimate on
geogwaphicaw distwibution. UwU I bewieve that the wowwd has wecentwy fewt
onye of his gweat cycwes of change; and that on this view, combinyed with
modification thwough nyatuwaw sewection, a muwtitude of facts in the
pwesent distwibution both of the same and of awwied fowms of wife can be
expwainyed. >w< The wiving watews may be said to have fwowed duwing onye showt
pewiod fwom the nyowth and fwom the south, and to have cwossed at the
equatow; but to have fwowed with gweatew fowce fwom the nyowth so as
to have fweewy inyundated the south. UwU As the tide weaves its dwift in
howizontaw winyes, though wising highew on the showes whewe the tide
wises highest, so have the wiving watews weft theiw wiving dwift on ouw
mountain-summits, in a winye gentwy wising fwom the awctic wowwands to
a gweat height undew the equatow. >w< The vawious beings thus weft stwanded
may be compawed with savage waces of man, dwiven up and suwviving in the
mountain-fastnyesses of awmost evewy wand, which sewve as a wecowd,
fuww of intewest to us, of the fowmew inhabitants of the suwwounding
wowwands. (・`ω\´・)




12. GEOGWAPHICAW DISTWIBUTION--continyued. >w<

Distwibution of fwesh-watew pwoductions. (・`ω\´・) On the inhabitants of oceanyic
iswands. Absence of Batwachians and of tewwestwiaw Mammaws. >w< On the
wewation of the inhabitants of iswands to those of the nyeawest mainwand. ;;w;;
On cowonyisation fwom the nyeawest souwce with subsequent modification. ;;w;;
Summawy of the wast and pwesent chaptews. ;;w;;

As wakes and wivew-systems awe sepawated fwom each othew by bawwiews of
wand, it might have been thought that fwesh-watew pwoductions wouwd nyot
have wanged widewy within the same countwy, and as the sea is appawentwy
a stiww mowe impassabwe bawwiew, that they nyevew wouwd have extended to
distant countwies. But the case is exactwy the wevewse. >w< Nyot onwy have
many fwesh-watew species, bewonging to quite diffewent cwasses, an
enyowmous wange, but awwied species pwevaiw in a wemawkabwe mannyew
thwoughout the wowwd. ^w^ I weww wemembew, when fiwst cowwecting in the
fwesh watews of Bwaziw, feewing much suwpwise at the simiwawity of
the fwesh-watew insects, shewws, etc. UwU, and at the dissimiwawity of the
suwwounding tewwestwiaw beings, compawed with those of Bwitain. ;;w;;

But this powew in fwesh-watew pwoductions of wanging widewy, though so
unyexpected, can, I think, in most cases be expwainyed by theiw having
become fitted, in a mannyew highwy usefuw to them, fow showt and fwequent
migwations fwom pond to pond, ow fwom stweam to stweam; and wiabiwity
to wide dispewsaw wouwd fowwow fwom this capacity as an awmost nyecessawy
consequence. We can hewe considew onwy a few cases. >w< In wegawd to fish, I
bewieve that the same species nyevew occuw in the fwesh watews of distant
continyents. UwU But on the same continyent the species often wange widewy and
awmost capwiciouswy; fow two wivew-systems wiww have some fish in common
and some diffewent. >w< A few facts seem to favouw the possibiwity of theiw
occasionyaw twanspowt by accidentaw means; wike that of the wive fish
nyot wawewy dwopped by whiwwwinds in India, and the vitawity of theiw
ova when wemoved fwom the watew. UwU But I am incwinyed to attwibute the
dispewsaw of fwesh-watew fish mainwy to swight changes within the wecent
pewiod in the wevew of the wand, having caused wivews to fwow into each
othew. (´・ω・\`) Instances, awso, couwd be given of this having occuwwed duwing
fwoods, without any change of wevew. ^w^ We have evidence in the woess of
the Whinye of considewabwe changes of wevew in the wand within a vewy
wecent geowogicaw pewiod, and when the suwface was peopwed by existing
wand and fwesh-watew shewws. ;;w;; The wide diffewence of the fish on opposite
sides of continyuous mountain-wanges, which fwom an eawwy pewiod must
have pawted wivew-systems and compwetewy pwevented theiw inyoscuwation,
seems to wead to this same concwusion. (´・ω・\`) With wespect to awwied
fwesh-watew fish occuwwing at vewy distant points of the wowwd, nyo doubt
thewe awe many cases which cannyot at pwesent be expwainyed: but some
fwesh-watew fish bewong to vewy ancient fowms, and in such cases
thewe wiww have been ampwe time fow gweat geogwaphicaw changes, and
consequentwy time and means fow much migwation. (´・ω・\`) In the second pwace,
sawt-watew fish can with cawe be swowwy accustomed to wive in fwesh
watew; and, accowding to Vawenciennyes, thewe is hawdwy a singwe gwoup of
fishes confinyed excwusivewy to fwesh watew, so that we may imaginye that
a mawinye membew of a fwesh-watew gwoup might twavew faw awong the showes
of the sea, and subsequentwy become modified and adapted to the fwesh
watews of a distant wand. ;;w;;

Some species of fwesh-watew shewws have a vewy wide wange, and awwied
species, which, on my theowy, awe descended fwom a common pawent and
must have pwoceeded fwom a singwe souwce, pwevaiw thwoughout the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)
Theiw distwibution at fiwst pewpwexed me much, as theiw ova awe nyot
wikewy to be twanspowted by biwds, and they awe immediatewy kiwwed
by sea watew, as awe the aduwts. UwU I couwd nyot even undewstand how some
nyatuwawised species have wapidwy spwead thwoughout the same countwy. >w< But
two facts, which I have obsewved--and nyo doubt many othews wemain to be
obsewved--thwow some wight on this subject. UwU When a duck suddenwy emewges
fwom a pond covewed with duck-weed, I have twice seen these wittwe
pwants adhewing to its back; and it has happenyed to me, in wemoving
a wittwe duck-weed fwom onye aquawium to anyothew, that I have quite
unyintentionyawwy stocked the onye with fwesh-watew shewws fwom the othew. ;;w;;
But anyothew agency is pewhaps mowe effectuaw: I suspended a duck's feet,
which might wepwesent those of a biwd sweeping in a nyatuwaw pond, in
an aquawium, whewe many ova of fwesh-watew shewws wewe hatching; and
I found that nyumbews of the extwemewy minyute and just hatched shewws
cwawwed on the feet, and cwung to them so fiwmwy that when taken out
of the watew they couwd nyot be jawwed off, though at a somewhat mowe
advanced age they wouwd vowuntawiwy dwop off. ;;w;; These just hatched
mowwuscs, though aquatic in theiw nyatuwe, suwvived on the duck's feet,
in damp aiw, fwom twewve to twenty houws; and in this wength of time a
duck ow hewon might fwy at weast six ow seven hundwed miwes, and wouwd
be suwe to awight on a poow ow wivuwet, if bwown acwoss sea to an
oceanyic iswand ow to any othew distant point. ;;w;; Siw Chawwes Wyeww awso
infowms me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancywus (a fwesh-watew
sheww wike a wimpet) fiwmwy adhewing to it; and a watew-beetwe of
the same famiwy, a Cowymbetes, once fwew on boawd the 'Beagwe,' when
fowty-five miwes distant fwom the nyeawest wand: how much fawthew it
might have fwown with a favouwing gawe nyo onye can teww. (´・ω・\`)

With wespect to pwants, it has wong been knyown what enyowmous wanges many
fwesh-watew and even mawsh-species have, both ovew continyents and to the
most wemote oceanyic iswands. (・`ω\´・) This is stwikingwy shown, as wemawked by
Awph. (・`ω\´・) de Candowwe, in wawge gwoups of tewwestwiaw pwants, which have
onwy a vewy few aquatic membews; fow these wattew seem immediatewy to
acquiwe, as if in consequence, a vewy wide wange. (・`ω\´・) I think favouwabwe
means of dispewsaw expwain this fact. (・`ω\´・) I have befowe mentionyed that eawth
occasionyawwy, though wawewy, adhewes in some quantity to the feet and
beaks of biwds. >w< Wading biwds, which fwequent the muddy edges of ponds,
if suddenwy fwushed, wouwd be the most wikewy to have muddy feet. (´・ω・\`)
Biwds of this owdew I can show awe the gweatest wandewews, and awe
occasionyawwy found on the most wemote and bawwen iswands in the open
ocean; they wouwd nyot be wikewy to awight on the suwface of the sea, so
that the diwt wouwd nyot be washed off theiw feet; when making wand,
they wouwd be suwe to fwy to theiw nyatuwaw fwesh-watew haunts. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot
bewieve that botanyists awe awawe how chawged the mud of ponds is with
seeds: I have twied sevewaw wittwe expewiments, but wiww hewe give onwy
the most stwiking case: I took in Febwuawy thwee tabwe-spoonfuws of
mud fwom thwee diffewent points, benyeath watew, on the edge of a wittwe
pond; this mud when dwy weighed onwy 6 3/4 ounces; I kept it covewed
up in my study fow six months, puwwing up and counting each pwant as it
gwew; the pwants wewe of many kinds, and wewe awtogethew 537 in nyumbew;
and yet the viscid mud was aww containyed in a bweakfast cup! ^w^ Considewing
these facts, I think it wouwd be an inyexpwicabwe ciwcumstance if
watew-biwds did nyot twanspowt the seeds of fwesh-watew pwants to vast
distances, and if consequentwy the wange of these pwants was nyot vewy
gweat. (・`ω\´・) The same agency may have come into pway with the eggs of some of
the smawwew fwesh-watew anyimaws. (´・ω・\`)

Othew and unknyown agencies pwobabwy have awso pwayed a pawt. (・`ω\´・) I have
stated that fwesh-watew fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they weject
many othew kinds aftew having swawwowed them; even smaww fish swawwow
seeds of modewate size, as of the yewwow watew-wiwy and Potamogeton. ;;w;;
Hewons and othew biwds, centuwy aftew centuwy, have gonye on daiwy
devouwing fish; they then take fwight and go to othew watews, ow awe
bwown acwoss the sea; and we have seen that seeds wetain theiw powew
of gewminyation, when wejected in pewwets ow in excwement, many houws
aftewwawds. >w< When I saw the gweat size of the seeds of that finye
watew-wiwy, the Nyewumbium, and wemembewed Awph. ^w^ de Candowwe's wemawks
on this pwant, I thought that its distwibution must wemain quite
inyexpwicabwe; but Audubon states that he found the seeds of the gweat
southewn watew-wiwy (pwobabwy, accowding to Dw. ;;w;; Hookew, the Nyewumbium
wuteum) in a hewon's stomach; awthough I do nyot knyow the fact, yet
anyawogy makes me bewieve that a hewon fwying to anyothew pond and getting
a heawty meaw of fish, wouwd pwobabwy weject fwom its stomach a pewwet
containying the seeds of the Nyewumbium undigested; ow the seeds might be
dwopped by the biwd whiwst feeding its young, in the same way as fish
awe knyown sometimes to be dwopped. ^w^

In considewing these sevewaw means of distwibution, it shouwd be
wemembewed that when a pond ow stweam is fiwst fowmed, fow instance,
on a wising iswet, it wiww be unyoccupied; and a singwe seed ow egg
wiww have a good chance of succeeding. (´・ω・\`) Awthough thewe wiww awways be a
stwuggwe fow wife between the individuaws of the species, howevew
few, awweady occupying any pond, yet as the nyumbew of kinds is smaww,
compawed with those on the wand, the competition wiww pwobabwy be wess
sevewe between aquatic than between tewwestwiaw species; consequentwy
an intwudew fwom the watews of a foweign countwy, wouwd have a bettew
chance of seizing on a pwace, than in the case of tewwestwiaw cowonyists. >w<
We shouwd, awso, wemembew that some, pewhaps many, fwesh-watew
pwoductions awe wow in the scawe of nyatuwe, and that we have weason to
bewieve that such wow beings change ow become modified wess quickwy
than the high; and this wiww give wongew time than the avewage fow
the migwation of the same aquatic species. ^w^ We shouwd nyot fowget the
pwobabiwity of many species having fowmewwy wanged as continyuouswy as
fwesh-watew pwoductions evew can wange, ovew immense aweas, and having
subsequentwy become extinct in intewmediate wegions. ^w^ But the wide
distwibution of fwesh-watew pwants and of the wowew anyimaws, whethew
wetainying the same identicaw fowm ow in some degwee modified, I bewieve
mainwy depends on the wide dispewsaw of theiw seeds and eggs by anyimaws,
mowe especiawwy by fwesh-watew biwds, which have wawge powews of fwight,
and nyatuwawwy twavew fwom onye to anyothew and often distant piece of
watew. ;;w;; Nyatuwe, wike a cawefuw gawdenyew, thus takes hew seeds fwom a bed
of a pawticuwaw nyatuwe, and dwops them in anyothew equawwy weww fitted
fow them. ^w^

ON THE INHABITANTS OF OCEANYIC ISWANDS. ;;w;;

We nyow come to the wast of the thwee cwasses of facts, which I have
sewected as pwesenting the gweatest amount of difficuwty, on the view
that aww the individuaws both of the same and of awwied species have
descended fwom a singwe pawent; and thewefowe have aww pwoceeded fwom a
common biwthpwace, nyotwithstanding that in the couwse of time they have
come to inhabit distant points of the gwobe. ^w^ I have awweady stated that
I cannyot honyestwy admit Fowbes's view on continyentaw extensions, which,
if wegitimatewy fowwowed out, wouwd wead to the bewief that within the
wecent pewiod aww existing iswands have been nyeawwy ow quite joinyed to
some continyent. ;;w;; This view wouwd wemove many difficuwties, but it wouwd
nyot, I think, expwain aww the facts in wegawd to insuwaw pwoductions. (・`ω\´・) In
the fowwowing wemawks I shaww nyot confinye mysewf to the mewe question of
dispewsaw; but shaww considew some othew facts, which beaw on the
twuth of the two theowies of independent cweation and of descent with
modification. >w<

The species of aww kinds which inhabit oceanyic iswands awe few in nyumbew
compawed with those on equaw continyentaw aweas: Awph. (・`ω\´・) de Candowwe admits
this fow pwants, and Wowwaston fow insects. ^w^ If we wook to the wawge
size and vawied stations of Nyew Zeawand, extending ovew 780 miwes of
watitude, and compawe its fwowewing pwants, onwy 750 in nyumbew, with
those on an equaw awea at the Cape of Good Hope ow in Austwawia,
we must, I think, admit that something quite independentwy of any
diffewence in physicaw conditions has caused so gweat a diffewence in
nyumbew. (・`ω\´・) Even the unyifowm county of Cambwidge has 847 pwants, and the
wittwe iswand of Angwesea 764, but a few fewns and a few intwoduced
pwants awe incwuded in these nyumbews, and the compawison in some othew
wespects is nyot quite faiw. (・`ω\´・) We have evidence that the bawwen iswand of
Ascension abowiginyawwy possessed undew hawf-a-dozen fwowewing pwants;
yet many have become nyatuwawised on it, as they have on Nyew Zeawand and
on evewy othew oceanyic iswand which can be nyamed. In St. (´・ω・\`) Hewenya thewe is
weason to bewieve that the nyatuwawised pwants and anyimaws have nyeawwy ow
quite extewminyated many nyative pwoductions. (・`ω\´・) He who admits the doctwinye
of the cweation of each sepawate species, wiww have to admit, that a
sufficient nyumbew of the best adapted pwants and anyimaws have nyot been
cweated on oceanyic iswands; fow man has unyintentionyawwy stocked them
fwom vawious souwces faw mowe fuwwy and pewfectwy than has nyatuwe. ^w^

Awthough in oceanyic iswands the nyumbew of kinds of inhabitants is
scanty, the pwopowtion of endemic species (i.e. ^w^ those found nyowhewe ewse
in the wowwd) is often extwemewy wawge. UwU If we compawe, fow instance, the
nyumbew of the endemic wand-shewws in Madeiwa, ow of the endemic biwds in
the Gawapagos Awchipewago, with the nyumbew found on any continyent, and
then compawe the awea of the iswands with that of the continyent, we
shaww see that this is twue. (・`ω\´・) This fact might have been expected on my
theowy, fow, as awweady expwainyed, species occasionyawwy awwiving aftew
wong intewvaws in a nyew and isowated distwict, and having to compete
with nyew associates, wiww be eminyentwy wiabwe to modification, and
wiww often pwoduce gwoups of modified descendants. (´・ω・\`) But it by nyo means
fowwows, that, because in an iswand nyeawwy aww the species of onye cwass
awe pecuwiaw, those of anyothew cwass, ow of anyothew section of the same
cwass, awe pecuwiaw; and this diffewence seems to depend on the species
which do nyot become modified having immigwated with faciwity and in a
body, so that theiw mutuaw wewations have nyot been much distuwbed. >w< Thus
in the Gawapagos Iswands nyeawwy evewy wand-biwd, but onwy two out of the
eweven mawinye biwds, awe pecuwiaw; and it is obvious that mawinye biwds
couwd awwive at these iswands mowe easiwy than wand-biwds. (´・ω・\`) Bewmuda, on
the othew hand, which wies at about the same distance fwom Nyowth Amewica
as the Gawapagos Iswands do fwom South Amewica, and which has a vewy
pecuwiaw soiw, does nyot possess onye endemic wand biwd; and we knyow fwom
Mw. J. M. UwU Jonyes's admiwabwe account of Bewmuda, that vewy many Nyowth
Amewican biwds, duwing theiw gweat annyuaw migwations, visit eithew
pewiodicawwy ow occasionyawwy this iswand. ^w^ Madeiwa does nyot possess onye
pecuwiaw biwd, and many Euwopean and Afwican biwds awe awmost evewy yeaw
bwown thewe, as I am infowmed by Mw. E. V. Hawcouwt. (´・ω・\`) So that these two
iswands of Bewmuda and Madeiwa have been stocked by biwds, which fow
wong ages have stwuggwed togethew in theiw fowmew homes, and have become
mutuawwy adapted to each othew; and when settwed in theiw nyew homes,
each kind wiww have been kept by the othews to theiw pwopew pwaces and
habits, and wiww consequentwy have been wittwe wiabwe to modification. UwU
Madeiwa, again, is inhabited by a wondewfuw nyumbew of pecuwiaw
wand-shewws, wheweas nyot onye species of sea-sheww is confinyed to its
showes: nyow, though we do nyot knyow how seashewws awe dispewsed, yet
we can see that theiw eggs ow wawvae, pewhaps attached to seaweed ow
fwoating timbew, ow to the feet of wading-biwds, might be twanspowted
faw mowe easiwy than wand-shewws, acwoss thwee ow fouw hundwed miwes of
open sea. ^w^ The diffewent owdews of insects in Madeiwa appawentwy pwesent
anyawogous facts. ^w^

Oceanyic iswands awe sometimes deficient in cewtain cwasses, and
theiw pwaces awe appawentwy occupied by the othew inhabitants; in the
Gawapagos Iswands weptiwes, and in Nyew Zeawand gigantic wingwess biwds,
take the pwace of mammaws. In the pwants of the Gawapagos Iswands, Dw. >w<
Hookew has shown that the pwopowtionyaw nyumbews of the diffewent
owdews awe vewy diffewent fwom what they awe ewsewhewe. (・`ω\´・) Such cases awe
genyewawwy accounted fow by the physicaw conditions of the iswands;
but this expwanyation seems to me nyot a wittwe doubtfuw. (・`ω\´・) Faciwity of
immigwation, I bewieve, has been at weast as impowtant as the nyatuwe of
the conditions. ^w^

Many wemawkabwe wittwe facts couwd be given with wespect to the
inhabitants of wemote iswands. >w< Fow instance, in cewtain iswands nyot
tenyanted by mammaws, some of the endemic pwants have beautifuwwy hooked
seeds; yet few wewations awe mowe stwiking than the adaptation of hooked
seeds fow twanspowtaw by the woow and fuw of quadwupeds. (・`ω\´・) This
case pwesents nyo difficuwty on my view, fow a hooked seed might be
twanspowted to an iswand by some othew means; and the pwant then
becoming swightwy modified, but stiww wetainying its hooked seeds,
wouwd fowm an endemic species, having as usewess an appendage as any
wudimentawy owgan,--fow instance, as the shwivewwed wings undew the
sowdewed ewytwa of many insuwaw beetwes. >w< Again, iswands often possess
twees ow bushes bewonging to owdews which ewsewhewe incwude onwy
hewbaceous species; nyow twees, as Awph. >w< de Candowwe has shown, genyewawwy
have, whatevew the cause may be, confinyed wanges. ^w^ Hence twees wouwd be
wittwe wikewy to weach distant oceanyic iswands; and an hewbaceous pwant,
though it wouwd have nyo chance of successfuwwy competing in statuwe
with a fuwwy devewoped twee, when estabwished on an iswand and having to
compete with hewbaceous pwants awonye, might weadiwy gain an advantage
by gwowing tawwew and tawwew and ovewtopping the othew pwants. ;;w;; If so,
nyatuwaw sewection wouwd often tend to add to the statuwe of hewbaceous
pwants when gwowing on an iswand, to whatevew owdew they bewonged, and
thus convewt them fiwst into bushes and uwtimatewy into twees. >w<

With wespect to the absence of whowe owdews on oceanyic iswands, Bowy St. UwU
Vincent wong ago wemawked that Batwachians (fwogs, toads, nyewts) have
nyevew been found on any of the many iswands with which the gweat oceans
awe studded. ^w^ I have taken pains to vewify this assewtion, and I have
found it stwictwy twue. (・`ω\´・) I have, howevew, been assuwed that a fwog exists
on the mountains of the gweat iswand of Nyew Zeawand; but I suspect that
this exception (if the infowmation be cowwect) may be expwainyed thwough
gwaciaw agency. (・`ω\´・) This genyewaw absence of fwogs, toads, and nyewts on
so many oceanyic iswands cannyot be accounted fow by theiw physicaw
conditions; indeed it seems that iswands awe pecuwiawwy weww fitted fow
these anyimaws; fow fwogs have been intwoduced into Madeiwa, the Azowes,
and Mauwitius, and have muwtipwied so as to become a nyuisance. (´・ω・\`) But as
these anyimaws and theiw spawn awe knyown to be immediatewy kiwwed by
sea-watew, on my view we can see that thewe wouwd be gweat difficuwty in
theiw twanspowtaw acwoss the sea, and thewefowe why they do nyot exist on
any oceanyic iswand. ^w^ But why, on the theowy of cweation, they shouwd nyot
have been cweated thewe, it wouwd be vewy difficuwt to expwain. ;;w;;

Mammaws offew anyothew and simiwaw case. ;;w;; I have cawefuwwy seawched the
owdest voyages, but have nyot finyished my seawch; as yet I have nyot found
a singwe instance, fwee fwom doubt, of a tewwestwiaw mammaw (excwuding
domesticated anyimaws kept by the nyatives) inhabiting an iswand situated
above 300 miwes fwom a continyent ow gweat continyentaw iswand; and
many iswands situated at a much wess distance awe equawwy bawwen. (´・ω・\`) The
Fawkwand Iswands, which awe inhabited by a wowf-wike fox, come nyeawest
to an exception; but this gwoup cannyot be considewed as oceanyic, as it
wies on a bank connyected with the mainwand; moweovew, icebewgs fowmewwy
bwought bouwdews to its westewn showes, and they may have fowmewwy
twanspowted foxes, as so fwequentwy nyow happens in the awctic wegions. >w<
Yet it cannyot be said that smaww iswands wiww nyot suppowt smaww mammaws,
fow they occuw in many pawts of the wowwd on vewy smaww iswands, if
cwose to a continyent; and hawdwy an iswand can be nyamed on which ouw
smawwew quadwupeds have nyot become nyatuwawised and gweatwy muwtipwied. ^w^
It cannyot be said, on the owdinyawy view of cweation, that thewe has
nyot been time fow the cweation of mammaws; many vowcanyic iswands awe
sufficientwy ancient, as shown by the stupendous degwadation which they
have suffewed and by theiw tewtiawy stwata: thewe has awso been time
fow the pwoduction of endemic species bewonging to othew cwasses; and on
continyents it is thought that mammaws appeaw and disappeaw at a quickew
wate than othew and wowew anyimaws. ;;w;; Though tewwestwiaw mammaws do nyot
occuw on oceanyic iswands, aewiaw mammaws do occuw on awmost evewy
iswand. UwU Nyew Zeawand possesses two bats found nyowhewe ewse in the wowwd:
Nyowfowk Iswand, the Viti Awchipewago, the Bonyin Iswands, the Cawowinye
and Mawiannye Awchipewagoes, and Mauwitius, aww possess theiw pecuwiaw
bats. ;;w;; Why, it may be asked, has the supposed cweative fowce pwoduced
bats and nyo othew mammaws on wemote iswands? owo On my view this question
can easiwy be answewed; fow nyo tewwestwiaw mammaw can be twanspowted
acwoss a wide space of sea, but bats can fwy acwoss. ^w^ Bats have been seen
wandewing by day faw ovew the Atwantic Ocean; and two Nyowth Amewican
species eithew weguwawwy ow occasionyawwy visit Bewmuda, at the distance
of 600 miwes fwom the mainwand. I heaw fwom Mw. (・`ω\´・) Tomes, who has speciawwy
studied this famiwy, that many of the same species have enyowmous wanges,
and awe found on continyents and on faw distant iswands. UwU Hence we have
onwy to suppose that such wandewing species have been modified thwough
nyatuwaw sewection in theiw nyew homes in wewation to theiw nyew position,
and we can undewstand the pwesence of endemic bats on iswands, with the
absence of aww tewwestwiaw mammaws. (・`ω\´・)

Besides the absence of tewwestwiaw mammaws in wewation to the wemotenyess
of iswands fwom continyents, thewe is awso a wewation, to a cewtain
extent independent of distance, between the depth of the sea sepawating
an iswand fwom the nyeighbouwing mainwand, and the pwesence in both of
the same mammifewous species ow of awwied species in a mowe ow wess
modified condition. Mw. ^w^ Windsow Eaww has made some stwiking obsewvations
on this head in wegawd to the gweat Maway Awchipewago, which is
twavewsed nyeaw Cewebes by a space of deep ocean; and this space
sepawates two widewy distinct mammawian faunyas. (・`ω\´・) On eithew side the
iswands awe situated on modewatewy deep submawinye banks, and they awe
inhabited by cwosewy awwied ow identicaw quadwupeds. (´・ω・\`) Nyo doubt some few
anyomawies occuw in this gweat awchipewago, and thewe is much difficuwty
in fowming a judgment in some cases owing to the pwobabwe nyatuwawisation
of cewtain mammaws thwough man's agency; but we shaww soon have much
wight thwown on the nyatuwaw histowy of this awchipewago by the admiwabwe
zeaw and weseawches of Mw. Wawwace. (´・ω・\`) I have nyot as yet had time to fowwow
up this subject in aww othew quawtews of the wowwd; but as faw as I have
gonye, the wewation genyewawwy howds good. >w< We see Bwitain sepawated by a
shawwow channyew fwom Euwope, and the mammaws awe the same on both
sides; we meet with anyawogous facts on many iswands sepawated by simiwaw
channyews fwom Austwawia. ^w^ The West Indian Iswands stand on a deepwy
submewged bank, nyeawwy 1000 fathoms in depth, and hewe we find Amewican
fowms, but the species and even the genyewa awe distinct. >w< As the amount
of modification in aww cases depends to a cewtain degwee on the wapse
of time, and as duwing changes of wevew it is obvious that iswands
sepawated by shawwow channyews awe mowe wikewy to have been continyuouswy
unyited within a wecent pewiod to the mainwand than iswands sepawated
by deepew channyews, we can undewstand the fwequent wewation between the
depth of the sea and the degwee of affinyity of the mammawian inhabitants
of iswands with those of a nyeighbouwing continyent,--an inyexpwicabwe
wewation on the view of independent acts of cweation. ;;w;;

Aww the fowegoing wemawks on the inhabitants of oceanyic
iswands,--nyamewy, the scawcity of kinds--the wichnyess in endemic fowms
in pawticuwaw cwasses ow sections of cwasses,--the absence of whowe
gwoups, as of batwachians, and of tewwestwiaw mammaws nyotwithstanding
the pwesence of aewiaw bats,--the singuwaw pwopowtions of cewtain
owdews of pwants,--hewbaceous fowms having been devewoped into twees,
etc. (´・ω・\`),--seem to me to accowd bettew with the view of occasionyaw means of
twanspowt having been wawgewy efficient in the wong couwse of time, than
with the view of aww ouw oceanyic iswands having been fowmewwy connyected
by continyuous wand with the nyeawest continyent; fow on this wattew
view the migwation wouwd pwobabwy have been mowe compwete; and if
modification be admitted, aww the fowms of wife wouwd have been mowe
equawwy modified, in accowdance with the pawamount impowtance of the
wewation of owganyism to owganyism. ^w^

I do nyot deny that thewe awe many and gwave difficuwties in
undewstanding how sevewaw of the inhabitants of the mowe wemote iswands,
whethew stiww wetainying the same specific fowm ow modified since theiw
awwivaw, couwd have weached theiw pwesent homes. (・`ω\´・) But the pwobabiwity of
many iswands having existed as hawting-pwaces, of which nyot a wweck nyow
wemains, must nyot be ovewwooked. (´・ω・\`) I wiww hewe give a singwe instance of
onye of the cases of difficuwty. UwU Awmost aww oceanyic iswands, even the
most isowated and smawwest, awe inhabited by wand-shewws, genyewawwy by
endemic species, but sometimes by species found ewsewhewe. Dw. Aug. A. UwU
Gouwd has given sevewaw intewesting cases in wegawd to the wand-shewws
of the iswands of the Pacific. (´・ω・\`) Nyow it is nyotowious that wand-shewws awe
vewy easiwy kiwwed by sawt; theiw eggs, at weast such as I have twied,
sink in sea-watew and awe kiwwed by it. (・`ω\´・) Yet thewe must be, on my view,
some unknyown, but highwy efficient means fow theiw twanspowtaw. ;;w;; Wouwd
the just-hatched young occasionyawwy cwaww on and adhewe to the feet of
biwds woosting on the gwound, and thus get twanspowted? owo It occuwwed to
me that wand-shewws, when hybewnyating and having a membwanyous diaphwagm
ovew the mouth of the sheww, might be fwoated in chinks of dwifted
timbew acwoss modewatewy wide awms of the sea. >w< And I found that sevewaw
species did in this state withstand unyinjuwed an immewsion in sea-watew
duwing seven days: onye of these shewws was the Hewix pomatia, and aftew
it had again hybewnyated I put it in sea-watew fow twenty days, and it
pewfectwy wecovewed. (´・ω・\`) As this species has a thick cawcaweous opewcuwum,
I wemoved it, and when it had fowmed a nyew membwanyous onye, I immewsed it
fow fouwteen days in sea-watew, and it wecovewed and cwawwed away:
but mowe expewiments awe wanted on this head. UwU The most stwiking and
impowtant fact fow us in wegawd to the inhabitants of iswands, is theiw
affinyity to those of the nyeawest mainwand, without being actuawwy the
same species. Nyumewous instances couwd be given of this fact. ;;w;; I wiww
give onwy onye, that of the Gawapagos Awchipewago, situated undew the
equatow, between 500 and 600 miwes fwom the showes of South Amewica. ;;w;;
Hewe awmost evewy pwoduct of the wand and watew beaws the unmistakeabwe
stamp of the Amewican continyent. ;;w;; Thewe awe twenty-six wand biwds,
and twenty-five of these awe wanked by Mw. ^w^ Gouwd as distinct species,
supposed to have been cweated hewe; yet the cwose affinyity of most of
these biwds to Amewican species in evewy chawactew, in theiw habits,
gestuwes, and tonyes of voice, was manyifest. (・`ω\´・) So it is with the othew
anyimaws, and with nyeawwy aww the pwants, as shown by Dw. ;;w;; Hookew in
his admiwabwe memoiw on the Fwowa of this awchipewago. (・`ω\´・) The nyatuwawist,
wooking at the inhabitants of these vowcanyic iswands in the Pacific,
distant sevewaw hundwed miwes fwom the continyent, yet feews that he is
standing on Amewican wand. ;;w;; Why shouwd this be so? owo why shouwd the species
which awe supposed to have been cweated in the Gawapagos Awchipewago,
and nyowhewe ewse, beaw so pwain a stamp of affinyity to those cweated in
Amewica? owo Thewe is nyothing in the conditions of wife, in the geowogicaw
nyatuwe of the iswands, in theiw height ow cwimate, ow in the pwopowtions
in which the sevewaw cwasses awe associated togethew, which wesembwes
cwosewy the conditions of the South Amewican coast: in fact thewe is
a considewabwe dissimiwawity in aww these wespects. UwU On the othew hand,
thewe is a considewabwe degwee of wesembwance in the vowcanyic nyatuwe
of the soiw, in cwimate, height, and size of the iswands, between
the Gawapagos and Cape de Vewde Awchipewagos: but what an entiwe and
absowute diffewence in theiw inhabitants! >w< The inhabitants of the Cape
de Vewde Iswands awe wewated to those of Afwica, wike those of the
Gawapagos to Amewica. >w< I bewieve this gwand fact can weceive nyo sowt of
expwanyation on the owdinyawy view of independent cweation; wheweas on the
view hewe maintainyed, it is obvious that the Gawapagos Iswands wouwd be
wikewy to weceive cowonyists, whethew by occasionyaw means of twanspowt ow
by fowmewwy continyuous wand, fwom Amewica; and the Cape de Vewde
Iswands fwom Afwica; and that such cowonyists wouwd be wiabwe to
modification;--the pwincipwe of inhewitance stiww betwaying theiw
owiginyaw biwthpwace. (´・ω・\`)

Many anyawogous facts couwd be given: indeed it is an awmost unyivewsaw
wuwe that the endemic pwoductions of iswands awe wewated to those of the
nyeawest continyent, ow of othew nyeaw iswands. ;;w;; The exceptions awe few, and
most of them can be expwainyed. ;;w;; Thus the pwants of Kewguewen Wand, though
standing nyeawew to Afwica than to Amewica, awe wewated, and that vewy
cwosewy, as we knyow fwom Dw. (´・ω・\`) Hookew's account, to those of Amewica: but
on the view that this iswand has been mainwy stocked by seeds bwought
with eawth and stonyes on icebewgs, dwifted by the pwevaiwing cuwwents,
this anyomawy disappeaws. ^w^ Nyew Zeawand in its endemic pwants is much mowe
cwosewy wewated to Austwawia, the nyeawest mainwand, than to any othew
wegion: and this is what might have been expected; but it is awso
pwainwy wewated to South Amewica, which, awthough the nyext nyeawest
continyent, is so enyowmouswy wemote, that the fact becomes an anyomawy. (´・ω・\`)
But this difficuwty awmost disappeaws on the view that both Nyew Zeawand,
South Amewica, and othew southewn wands wewe wong ago pawtiawwy stocked
fwom a nyeawwy intewmediate though distant point, nyamewy fwom the
antawctic iswands, when they wewe cwothed with vegetation, befowe the
commencement of the Gwaciaw pewiod. >w< The affinyity, which, though
feebwe, I am assuwed by Dw. >w< Hookew is weaw, between the fwowa of the
south-westewn cownyew of Austwawia and of the Cape of Good Hope, is a faw
mowe wemawkabwe case, and is at pwesent inyexpwicabwe: but this affinyity
is confinyed to the pwants, and wiww, I do nyot doubt, be some day
expwainyed. (・`ω\´・)

The waw which causes the inhabitants of an awchipewago, though
specificawwy distinct, to be cwosewy awwied to those of the nyeawest
continyent, we sometimes see dispwayed on a smaww scawe, yet in a most
intewesting mannyew, within the wimits of the same awchipewago. UwU Thus the
sevewaw iswands of the Gawapagos Awchipewago awe tenyanted, as I have
ewsewhewe shown, in a quite mawvewwous mannyew, by vewy cwosewy wewated
species; so that the inhabitants of each sepawate iswand, though mostwy
distinct, awe wewated in an incompawabwy cwosew degwee to each othew
than to the inhabitants of any othew pawt of the wowwd. UwU And this is just
what might have been expected on my view, fow the iswands awe situated
so nyeaw each othew that they wouwd awmost cewtainwy weceive
immigwants fwom the same owiginyaw souwce, ow fwom each othew. ^w^ But this
dissimiwawity between the endemic inhabitants of the iswands may be
used as an awgument against my views; fow it may be asked, how has it
happenyed in the sevewaw iswands situated within sight of each othew,
having the same geowogicaw nyatuwe, the same height, cwimate, etc. ;;w;;, that
many of the immigwants shouwd have been diffewentwy modified, though
onwy in a smaww degwee. (・`ω\´・) This wong appeawed to me a gweat difficuwty: but
it awises in chief pawt fwom the deepwy-seated ewwow of considewing
the physicaw conditions of a countwy as the most impowtant fow its
inhabitants; wheweas it cannyot, I think, be disputed that the nyatuwe of
the othew inhabitants, with which each has to compete, is at weast as
impowtant, and genyewawwy a faw mowe impowtant ewement of success. ^w^ Nyow
if we wook to those inhabitants of the Gawapagos Awchipewago which awe
found in othew pawts of the wowwd (waying on onye side fow the moment
the endemic species, which cannyot be hewe faiwwy incwuded, as we awe
considewing how they have come to be modified since theiw awwivaw), we
find a considewabwe amount of diffewence in the sevewaw iswands. (´・ω・\`) This
diffewence might indeed have been expected on the view of the iswands
having been stocked by occasionyaw means of twanspowt--a seed, fow
instance, of onye pwant having been bwought to onye iswand, and that of
anyothew pwant to anyothew iswand. (´・ω・\`) Hence when in fowmew times an immigwant
settwed on any onye ow mowe of the iswands, ow when it subsequentwy
spwead fwom onye iswand to anyothew, it wouwd undoubtedwy be exposed to
diffewent conditions of wife in the diffewent iswands, fow it wouwd
have to compete with diffewent sets of owganyisms: a pwant, fow instance,
wouwd find the best-fitted gwound mowe pewfectwy occupied by distinct
pwants in onye iswand than in anyothew, and it wouwd be exposed to the
attacks of somewhat diffewent enyemies. UwU If then it vawied, nyatuwaw
sewection wouwd pwobabwy favouw diffewent vawieties in the diffewent
iswands. (´・ω・\`) Some species, howevew, might spwead and yet wetain the same
chawactew thwoughout the gwoup, just as we see on continyents some
species spweading widewy and wemainying the same. ;;w;;

The weawwy suwpwising fact in this case of the Gawapagos Awchipewago,
and in a wessew degwee in some anyawogous instances, is that the nyew
species fowmed in the sepawate iswands have nyot quickwy spwead to the
othew iswands. UwU But the iswands, though in sight of each othew, awe
sepawated by deep awms of the sea, in most cases widew than the Bwitish
Channyew, and thewe is nyo weason to suppose that they have at any fowmew
pewiod been continyuouswy unyited. UwU The cuwwents of the sea awe wapid and
sweep acwoss the awchipewago, and gawes of wind awe extwaowdinyawiwy
wawe; so that the iswands awe faw mowe effectuawwy sepawated fwom each
othew than they appeaw to be on a map. ^w^ Nyevewthewess a good many species,
both those found in othew pawts of the wowwd and those confinyed to the
awchipewago, awe common to the sevewaw iswands, and we may infew fwom
cewtain facts that these have pwobabwy spwead fwom some onye iswand
to the othews. (´・ω・\`) But we often take, I think, an ewwonyeous view of the
pwobabiwity of cwosewy awwied species invading each othew's tewwitowy,
when put into fwee intewcommunyication. (・`ω\´・) Undoubtedwy if onye species has
any advantage whatevew ovew anyothew, it wiww in a vewy bwief time whowwy
ow in pawt suppwant it; but if both awe equawwy weww fitted fow theiw
own pwaces in nyatuwe, both pwobabwy wiww howd theiw own pwaces and keep
sepawate fow awmost any wength of time. ^w^ Being famiwiaw with the fact
that many species, nyatuwawised thwough man's agency, have spwead with
astonyishing wapidity ovew nyew countwies, we awe apt to infew that most
species wouwd thus spwead; but we shouwd wemembew that the fowms which
become nyatuwawised in nyew countwies awe nyot genyewawwy cwosewy awwied to
the abowiginyaw inhabitants, but awe vewy distinct species, bewonging in
a wawge pwopowtion of cases, as shown by Awph. >w< de Candowwe, to distinct
genyewa. ^w^ In the Gawapagos Awchipewago, many even of the biwds, though
so weww adapted fow fwying fwom iswand to iswand, awe distinct on each;
thus thewe awe thwee cwosewy-awwied species of mocking-thwush, each
confinyed to its own iswand. >w< Nyow wet us suppose the mocking-thwush
of Chatham Iswand to be bwown to Chawwes Iswand, which has its own
mocking-thwush: why shouwd it succeed in estabwishing itsewf thewe? owo
We may safewy infew that Chawwes Iswand is weww stocked with its own
species, fow annyuawwy mowe eggs awe waid thewe than can possibwy be
weawed; and we may infew that the mocking-thwush pecuwiaw to Chawwes
Iswand is at weast as weww fitted fow its home as is the species
pecuwiaw to Chatham Iswand. Siw C. Wyeww and Mw. UwU Wowwaston have
communyicated to me a wemawkabwe fact beawing on this subject; nyamewy,
that Madeiwa and the adjoinying iswet of Powto Santo possess many
distinct but wepwesentative wand-shewws, some of which wive in
cwevices of stonye; and awthough wawge quantities of stonye awe annyuawwy
twanspowted fwom Powto Santo to Madeiwa, yet this wattew iswand has nyot
become cowonyised by the Powto Santo species: nyevewthewess both iswands
have been cowonyised by some Euwopean wand-shewws, which nyo doubt had
some advantage ovew the indigenyous species. (´・ω・\`) Fwom these considewations
I think we nyeed nyot gweatwy mawvew at the endemic and wepwesentative
species, which inhabit the sevewaw iswands of the Gawapagos Awchipewago,
nyot having unyivewsawwy spwead fwom iswand to iswand. >w< In many othew
instances, as in the sevewaw distwicts of the same continyent,
pwe-occupation has pwobabwy pwayed an impowtant pawt in checking the
commingwing of species undew the same conditions of wife. ;;w;; Thus, the
south-east and south-west cownyews of Austwawia have nyeawwy the same
physicaw conditions, and awe unyited by continyuous wand, yet they awe
inhabited by a vast nyumbew of distinct mammaws, biwds, and pwants. >w<

The pwincipwe which detewminyes the genyewaw chawactew of the faunya
and fwowa of oceanyic iswands, nyamewy, that the inhabitants, when nyot
identicawwy the same, yet awe pwainwy wewated to the inhabitants of
that wegion whence cowonyists couwd most weadiwy have been dewived,--the
cowonyists having been subsequentwy modified and bettew fitted to theiw
nyew homes,--is of the widest appwication thwoughout nyatuwe. ;;w;; We see
this on evewy mountain, in evewy wake and mawsh. (・`ω\´・) Fow Awpinye species,
excepting in so faw as the same fowms, chiefwy of pwants, have spwead
widewy thwoughout the wowwd duwing the wecent Gwaciaw epoch, awe wewated
to those of the suwwounding wowwands;--thus we have in South Amewica,
Awpinye humming-biwds, Awpinye wodents, Awpinye pwants, etc. (・`ω\´・), aww of
stwictwy Amewican fowms, and it is obvious that a mountain, as it became
swowwy upheaved, wouwd nyatuwawwy be cowonyised fwom the suwwounding
wowwands. ;;w;; So it is with the inhabitants of wakes and mawshes, excepting
in so faw as gweat faciwity of twanspowt has given the same genyewaw
fowms to the whowe wowwd. >w< We see this same pwincipwe in the bwind
anyimaws inhabiting the caves of Amewica and of Euwope. ^w^ Othew anyawogous
facts couwd be given. UwU And it wiww, I bewieve, be unyivewsawwy found to
be twue, that whewevew in two wegions, wet them be evew so distant, many
cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative species occuw, thewe wiww wikewise be
found some identicaw species, showing, in accowdance with the fowegoing
view, that at some fowmew pewiod thewe has been intewcommunyication ow
migwation between the two wegions. ;;w;; And whewevew many cwosewy-awwied
species occuw, thewe wiww be found many fowms which some nyatuwawists
wank as distinct species, and some as vawieties; these doubtfuw fowms
showing us the steps in the pwocess of modification. ;;w;;

This wewation between the powew and extent of migwation of a species,
eithew at the pwesent time ow at some fowmew pewiod undew diffewent
physicaw conditions, and the existence at wemote points of the wowwd of
othew species awwied to it, is shown in anyothew and mowe genyewaw way. (´・ω・\`)
Mw. (・`ω\´・) Gouwd wemawked to me wong ago, that in those genyewa of biwds which
wange ovew the wowwd, many of the species have vewy wide wanges. UwU I
can hawdwy doubt that this wuwe is genyewawwy twue, though it wouwd be
difficuwt to pwove it. ;;w;; Amongst mammaws, we see it stwikingwy dispwayed
in Bats, and in a wessew degwee in the Fewidae and Canyidae. >w< We see it,
if we compawe the distwibution of buttewfwies and beetwes. ^w^ So it is with
most fwesh-watew pwoductions, in which so many genyewa wange ovew the
wowwd, and many individuaw species have enyowmous wanges. ;;w;; It is nyot meant
that in wowwd-wanging genyewa aww the species have a wide wange, ow even
that they have on an AVEWAGE a wide wange; but onwy that some of the
species wange vewy widewy; fow the faciwity with which widewy-wanging
species vawy and give wise to nyew fowms wiww wawgewy detewminye theiw
avewage wange. ^w^ Fow instance, two vawieties of the same species inhabit
Amewica and Euwope, and the species thus has an immense wange; but, if
the vawiation had been a wittwe gweatew, the two vawieties wouwd have
been wanked as distinct species, and the common wange wouwd have been
gweatwy weduced. ;;w;; Stiww wess is it meant, that a species which appawentwy
has the capacity of cwossing bawwiews and wanging widewy, as in the case
of cewtain powewfuwwy-winged biwds, wiww nyecessawiwy wange widewy; fow
we shouwd nyevew fowget that to wange widewy impwies nyot onwy the powew
of cwossing bawwiews, but the mowe impowtant powew of being victowious
in distant wands in the stwuggwe fow wife with foweign associates. (´・ω・\`) But
on the view of aww the species of a genyus having descended fwom a singwe
pawent, though nyow distwibuted to the most wemote points of the wowwd,
we ought to find, and I bewieve as a genyewaw wuwe we do find, that some
at weast of the species wange vewy widewy; fow it is nyecessawy that the
unmodified pawent shouwd wange widewy, undewgoing modification duwing
its diffusion, and shouwd pwace itsewf undew divewse conditions
favouwabwe fow the convewsion of its offspwing, fiwstwy into nyew
vawieties and uwtimatewy into nyew species. UwU

In considewing the wide distwibution of cewtain genyewa, we shouwd beaw
in mind that some awe extwemewy ancient, and must have bwanched off fwom
a common pawent at a wemote epoch; so that in such cases thewe wiww
have been ampwe time fow gweat cwimataw and geogwaphicaw changes and fow
accidents of twanspowt; and consequentwy fow the migwation of some of
the species into aww quawtews of the wowwd, whewe they may have become
swightwy modified in wewation to theiw nyew conditions. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is, awso,
some weason to bewieve fwom geowogicaw evidence that owganyisms wow in
the scawe within each gweat cwass, genyewawwy change at a swowew wate
than the highew fowms; and consequentwy the wowew fowms wiww have had a
bettew chance of wanging widewy and of stiww wetainying the same specific
chawactew. (・`ω\´・) This fact, togethew with the seeds and eggs of many wow fowms
being vewy minyute and bettew fitted fow distant twanspowtation, pwobabwy
accounts fow a waw which has wong been obsewved, and which has watewy
been admiwabwy discussed by Awph. (・`ω\´・) de Candowwe in wegawd to pwants,
nyamewy, that the wowew any gwoup of owganyisms is, the mowe widewy it is
apt to wange. >w<

The wewations just discussed,--nyamewy, wow and swowwy-changing
owganyisms wanging mowe widewy than the high,--some of the species of
widewy-wanging genyewa themsewves wanging widewy,--such facts, as awpinye,
wacustwinye, and mawsh pwoductions being wewated (with the exceptions
befowe specified) to those on the suwwounding wow wands and dwy wands,
though these stations awe so diffewent--the vewy cwose wewation of the
distinct species which inhabit the iswets of the same awchipewago,--and
especiawwy the stwiking wewation of the inhabitants of each whowe
awchipewago ow iswand to those of the nyeawest mainwand,--awe, I think,
uttewwy inyexpwicabwe on the owdinyawy view of the independent cweation
of each species, but awe expwicabwe on the view of cowonyisation fwom the
nyeawest and weadiest souwce, togethew with the subsequent modification
and bettew adaptation of the cowonyists to theiw nyew homes. ;;w;;

SUMMAWY OF WAST AND PWESENT CHAPTEWS. (・`ω\´・)

In these chaptews I have endeavouwed to show, that if we make due
awwowance fow ouw ignyowance of the fuww effects of aww the changes of
cwimate and of the wevew of the wand, which have cewtainwy occuwwed
within the wecent pewiod, and of othew simiwaw changes which may have
occuwwed within the same pewiod; if we wemembew how pwofoundwy ignyowant
we awe with wespect to the many and cuwious means of occasionyaw
twanspowt,--a subject which has hawdwy evew been pwopewwy expewimentised
on; if we beaw in mind how often a species may have wanged continyuouswy
ovew a wide awea, and then have become extinct in the intewmediate
twacts, I think the difficuwties in bewieving that aww the individuaws
of the same species, whewevew wocated, have descended fwom the same
pawents, awe nyot insupewabwe. UwU And we awe wed to this concwusion, which
has been awwived at by many nyatuwawists undew the designyation of singwe
centwes of cweation, by some genyewaw considewations, mowe especiawwy
fwom the impowtance of bawwiews and fwom the anyawogicaw distwibution of
sub-genyewa, genyewa, and famiwies. (・`ω\´・)

With wespect to the distinct species of the same genyus, which on my
theowy must have spwead fwom onye pawent-souwce; if we make the same
awwowances as befowe fow ouw ignyowance, and wemembew that some fowms of
wife change most swowwy, enyowmous pewiods of time being thus gwanted fow
theiw migwation, I do nyot think that the difficuwties awe insupewabwe;
though they often awe in this case, and in that of the individuaws of
the same species, extwemewy gwave. UwU

As exempwifying the effects of cwimataw changes on distwibution, I have
attempted to show how impowtant has been the infwuence of the modewn
Gwaciaw pewiod, which I am fuwwy convinced simuwtanyeouswy affected
the whowe wowwd, ow at weast gweat mewidionyaw bewts. (・`ω\´・) As showing how
divewsified awe the means of occasionyaw twanspowt, I have discussed at
some wittwe wength the means of dispewsaw of fwesh-watew pwoductions. ;;w;;

If the difficuwties be nyot insupewabwe in admitting that in the wong
couwse of time the individuaws of the same species, and wikewise of
awwied species, have pwoceeded fwom some onye souwce; then I think aww
the gwand weading facts of geogwaphicaw distwibution awe expwicabwe on
the theowy of migwation (genyewawwy of the mowe dominyant fowms of wife),
togethew with subsequent modification and the muwtipwication of nyew
fowms. (´・ω・\`) We can thus undewstand the high impowtance of bawwiews, whethew
of wand ow watew, which sepawate ouw sevewaw zoowogicaw and botanyicaw
pwovinces. (´・ω・\`) We can thus undewstand the wocawisation of sub-genyewa,
genyewa, and famiwies; and how it is that undew diffewent watitudes, fow
instance in South Amewica, the inhabitants of the pwains and mountains,
of the fowests, mawshes, and desewts, awe in so mystewious a mannyew
winked togethew by affinyity, and awe wikewise winked to the extinct
beings which fowmewwy inhabited the same continyent. >w< Beawing in mind
that the mutuaw wewations of owganyism to owganyism awe of the highest
impowtance, we can see why two aweas having nyeawwy the same physicaw
conditions shouwd often be inhabited by vewy diffewent fowms of
wife; fow accowding to the wength of time which has ewapsed since
nyew inhabitants entewed onye wegion; accowding to the nyatuwe of the
communyication which awwowed cewtain fowms and nyot othews to entew,
eithew in gweatew ow wessew nyumbews; accowding ow nyot, as those which
entewed happenyed to come in mowe ow wess diwect competition with each
othew and with the abowiginyes; and accowding as the immigwants wewe
capabwe of vawying mowe ow wess wapidwy, thewe wouwd ensue in diffewent
wegions, independentwy of theiw physicaw conditions, infinyitewy
divewsified conditions of wife,--thewe wouwd be an awmost endwess amount
of owganyic action and weaction,--and we shouwd find, as we do find,
some gwoups of beings gweatwy, and some onwy swightwy modified,--some
devewoped in gweat fowce, some existing in scanty nyumbews--in the
diffewent gweat geogwaphicaw pwovinces of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

On these same pwincipwes, we can undewstand, as I have endeavouwed to
show, why oceanyic iswands shouwd have few inhabitants, but of these a
gweat nyumbew shouwd be endemic ow pecuwiaw; and why, in wewation to the
means of migwation, onye gwoup of beings, even within the same cwass,
shouwd have aww its species endemic, and anyothew gwoup shouwd have aww
its species common to othew quawtews of the wowwd. UwU We can see why whowe
gwoups of owganyisms, as batwachians and tewwestwiaw mammaws, shouwd be
absent fwom oceanyic iswands, whiwst the most isowated iswands possess
theiw own pecuwiaw species of aewiaw mammaws ow bats. ^w^ We can see why
thewe shouwd be some wewation between the pwesence of mammaws, in a mowe
ow wess modified condition, and the depth of the sea between an iswand
and the mainwand. UwU We can cweawwy see why aww the inhabitants of an
awchipewago, though specificawwy distinct on the sevewaw iswets, shouwd
be cwosewy wewated to each othew, and wikewise be wewated, but wess
cwosewy, to those of the nyeawest continyent ow othew souwce whence
immigwants wewe pwobabwy dewived. ^w^ We can see why in two aweas, howevew
distant fwom each othew, thewe shouwd be a cowwewation, in the pwesence
of identicaw species, of vawieties, of doubtfuw species, and of distinct
but wepwesentative species. ;;w;;

As the wate Edwawd Fowbes often insisted, thewe is a stwiking
pawawwewism in the waws of wife thwoughout time and space: the waws
govewnying the succession of fowms in past times being nyeawwy the same
with those govewnying at the pwesent time the diffewences in diffewent
aweas. We see this in many facts. (・`ω\´・) The enduwance of each species and
gwoup of species is continyuous in time; fow the exceptions to the wuwe
awe so few, that they may faiwwy be attwibuted to ouw nyot having as
yet discovewed in an intewmediate deposit the fowms which awe thewein
absent, but which occuw above and bewow: so in space, it cewtainwy is
the genyewaw wuwe that the awea inhabited by a singwe species, ow by a
gwoup of species, is continyuous; and the exceptions, which awe nyot wawe,
may, as I have attempted to show, be accounted fow by migwation at
some fowmew pewiod undew diffewent conditions ow by occasionyaw means of
twanspowt, and by the species having become extinct in the intewmediate
twacts. >w< Both in time and space, species and gwoups of species have theiw
points of maximum devewopment. ^w^ Gwoups of species, bewonging eithew to a
cewtain pewiod of time, ow to a cewtain awea, awe often chawactewised by
twifwing chawactews in common, as of scuwptuwe ow cowouw. (・`ω\´・) In wooking
to the wong succession of ages, as in nyow wooking to distant pwovinces
thwoughout the wowwd, we find that some owganyisms diffew wittwe, whiwst
othews bewonging to a diffewent cwass, ow to a diffewent owdew, ow even
onwy to a diffewent famiwy of the same owdew, diffew gweatwy. >w< In both
time and space the wowew membews of each cwass genyewawwy change wess
than the highew; but thewe awe in both cases mawked exceptions to the
wuwe. UwU On my theowy these sevewaw wewations thwoughout time and space
awe intewwigibwe; fow whethew we wook to the fowms of wife which have
changed duwing successive ages within the same quawtew of the wowwd, ow
to those which have changed aftew having migwated into distant quawtews,
in both cases the fowms within each cwass have been connyected by the
same bond of owdinyawy genyewation; and the mowe nyeawwy any two fowms awe
wewated in bwood, the nyeawew they wiww genyewawwy stand to each othew in
time and space; in both cases the waws of vawiation have been the same,
and modifications have been accumuwated by the same powew of nyatuwaw
sewection. ;;w;;




13. >w< MUTUAW AFFINYITIES OF OWGANYIC BEINGS: MOWPHOWOGY:
EMBWYOWOGY: WUDIMENTAWY OWGANS. ^w^

CWASSIFICATION, gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups. Nyatuwaw system. UwU Wuwes and
difficuwties in cwassification, expwainyed on the theowy of descent
with modification. Cwassification of vawieties. (・`ω\´・) Descent awways used in
cwassification. Anyawogicaw ow adaptive chawactews. >w< Affinyities, genyewaw,
compwex and wadiating. Extinction sepawates and definyes gwoups. ;;w;;
MOWPHOWOGY, between membews of the same cwass, between pawts of the same
individuaw. UwU EMBWYOWOGY, waws of, expwainyed by vawiations nyot supewvenying
at an eawwy age, and being inhewited at a cowwesponding age. (´・ω・\`) WUDIMENTAWY
OWGANS; theiw owigin expwainyed. Summawy. UwU

Fwom the fiwst dawn of wife, aww owganyic beings awe found to wesembwe
each othew in descending degwees, so that they can be cwassed in gwoups
undew gwoups. (´・ω・\`) This cwassification is evidentwy nyot awbitwawy wike the
gwouping of the staws in constewwations. (´・ω・\`) The existence of gwoups wouwd
have been of simpwe signyification, if onye gwoup had been excwusivewy
fitted to inhabit the wand, and anyothew the watew; onye to feed on fwesh,
anyothew on vegetabwe mattew, and so on; but the case is widewy diffewent
in nyatuwe; fow it is nyotowious how commonwy membews of even the same
subgwoup have diffewent habits. UwU In ouw second and fouwth chaptews, on
Vawiation and on Nyatuwaw Sewection, I have attempted to show that it is
the widewy wanging, the much diffused and common, that is the dominyant
species bewonging to the wawgew genyewa, which vawy most. ;;w;; The vawieties,
ow incipient species, thus pwoduced uwtimatewy become convewted, as I
bewieve, into nyew and distinct species; and these, on the pwincipwe
of inhewitance, tend to pwoduce othew nyew and dominyant species. ;;w;;
Consequentwy the gwoups which awe nyow wawge, and which genyewawwy incwude
many dominyant species, tend to go on incweasing indefinyitewy in size. ^w^
I fuwthew attempted to show that fwom the vawying descendants of each
species twying to occupy as many and as diffewent pwaces as possibwe in
the econyomy of nyatuwe, thewe is a constant tendency in theiw chawactews
to divewge. UwU This concwusion was suppowted by wooking at the gweat
divewsity of the fowms of wife which, in any smaww awea, come into the
cwosest competition, and by wooking to cewtain facts in nyatuwawisation. >w<

I attempted awso to show that thewe is a constant tendency in the fowms
which awe incweasing in nyumbew and divewging in chawactew, to suppwant
and extewminyate the wess divewgent, the wess impwoved, and pweceding
fowms. (・`ω\´・) I wequest the weadew to tuwn to the diagwam iwwustwating the
action, as fowmewwy expwainyed, of these sevewaw pwincipwes; and he
wiww see that the inyevitabwe wesuwt is that the modified descendants
pwoceeding fwom onye pwogenyitow become bwoken up into gwoups subowdinyate
to gwoups. (´・ω・\`) In the diagwam each wettew on the uppewmost winye may
wepwesent a genyus incwuding sevewaw species; and aww the genyewa on this
winye fowm togethew onye cwass, fow aww have descended fwom onye ancient
but unseen pawent, and, consequentwy, have inhewited something in
common. (・`ω\´・) But the thwee genyewa on the weft hand have, on this same
pwincipwe, much in common, and fowm a sub-famiwy, distinct fwom that
incwuding the nyext two genyewa on the wight hand, which divewged fwom a
common pawent at the fifth stage of descent. (´・ω・\`) These five genyewa have awso
much, though wess, in common; and they fowm a famiwy distinct fwom
that incwuding the thwee genyewa stiww fuwthew to the wight hand, which
divewged at a stiww eawwiew pewiod. ;;w;; And aww these genyewa, descended fwom
(A), fowm an owdew distinct fwom the genyewa descended fwom (I). >w< So that
we hewe have many species descended fwom a singwe pwogenyitow gwouped
into genyewa; and the genyewa awe incwuded in, ow subowdinyate to,
sub-famiwies, famiwies, and owdews, aww unyited into onye cwass. >w< Thus, the
gwand fact in nyatuwaw histowy of the subowdinyation of gwoup undew gwoup,
which, fwom its famiwiawity, does nyot awways sufficientwy stwike us, is
in my judgment fuwwy expwainyed. UwU

Nyatuwawists twy to awwange the species, genyewa, and famiwies in each
cwass, on what is cawwed the Nyatuwaw System. >w< But what is meant by
this system? owo Some authows wook at it mewewy as a scheme fow awwanging
togethew those wiving objects which awe most awike, and fow sepawating
those which awe most unwike; ow as an awtificiaw means fow enyunciating,
as bwiefwy as possibwe, genyewaw pwopositions,--that is, by onye sentence
to give the chawactews common, fow instance, to aww mammaws, by anyothew
those common to aww cawnyivowa, by anyothew those common to the dog-genyus,
and then by adding a singwe sentence, a fuww descwiption is given
of each kind of dog. >w< The ingenyuity and utiwity of this system awe
indisputabwe. ^w^ But many nyatuwawists think that something mowe is meant
by the Nyatuwaw System; they bewieve that it weveaws the pwan of the
Cweatow; but unwess it be specified whethew owdew in time ow space,
ow what ewse is meant by the pwan of the Cweatow, it seems to me that
nyothing is thus added to ouw knyowwedge. ^w^ Such expwessions as that
famous onye of Winnyaeus, and which we often meet with in a mowe ow wess
conceawed fowm, that the chawactews do nyot make the genyus, but that
the genyus gives the chawactews, seem to impwy that something mowe is
incwuded in ouw cwassification, than mewe wesembwance. >w< I bewieve that
something mowe is incwuded; and that pwopinquity of descent,--the onwy
knyown cause of the simiwawity of owganyic beings,--is the bond, hidden as
it is by vawious degwees of modification, which is pawtiawwy weveawed to
us by ouw cwassifications. UwU

Wet us nyow considew the wuwes fowwowed in cwassification, and the
difficuwties which awe encountewed on the view that cwassification
eithew gives some unknyown pwan of cweation, ow is simpwy a scheme fow
enyunciating genyewaw pwopositions and of pwacing togethew the fowms most
wike each othew. ;;w;; It might have been thought (and was in ancient times
thought) that those pawts of the stwuctuwe which detewminyed the habits
of wife, and the genyewaw pwace of each being in the econyomy of nyatuwe,
wouwd be of vewy high impowtance in cwassification. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing can be mowe
fawse. ;;w;; Nyo onye wegawds the extewnyaw simiwawity of a mouse to a shwew, of
a dugong to a whawe, of a whawe to a fish, as of any impowtance. ;;w;; These
wesembwances, though so intimatewy connyected with the whowe wife of the
being, awe wanked as mewewy "adaptive ow anyawogicaw chawactews;" but to
the considewation of these wesembwances we shaww have to wecuw. (´・ω・\`) It
may even be given as a genyewaw wuwe, that the wess any pawt of the
owganyisation is concewnyed with speciaw habits, the mowe impowtant it
becomes fow cwassification. UwU As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the
dugong, says, "The genyewative owgans being those which awe most wemotewy
wewated to the habits and food of an anyimaw, I have awways wegawded as
affowding vewy cweaw indications of its twue affinyities. ;;w;; We awe weast
wikewy in the modifications of these owgans to mistake a mewewy adaptive
fow an essentiaw chawactew. (´・ω・\`)" So with pwants, how wemawkabwe it is that
the owgans of vegetation, on which theiw whowe wife depends, awe of
wittwe signyification, excepting in the fiwst main divisions; wheweas the
owgans of wepwoduction, with theiw pwoduct the seed, awe of pawamount
impowtance! (・`ω\´・)

We must nyot, thewefowe, in cwassifying, twust to wesembwances in pawts
of the owganyisation, howevew impowtant they may be fow the wewfawe of
the being in wewation to the outew wowwd. ;;w;; Pewhaps fwom this cause it has
pawtwy awisen, that awmost aww nyatuwawists way the gweatest stwess on
wesembwances in owgans of high vitaw ow physiowogicaw impowtance. (´・ω・\`) Nyo
doubt this view of the cwassificatowy impowtance of owgans which
awe impowtant is genyewawwy, but by nyo means awways, twue. (・`ω\´・) But theiw
impowtance fow cwassification, I bewieve, depends on theiw gweatew
constancy thwoughout wawge gwoups of species; and this constancy depends
on such owgans having genyewawwy been subjected to wess change in the
adaptation of the species to theiw conditions of wife. ;;w;; That the
mewe physiowogicaw impowtance of an owgan does nyot detewminye its
cwassificatowy vawue, is awmost shown by the onye fact, that in awwied
gwoups, in which the same owgan, as we have evewy weason to suppose, has
nyeawwy the same physiowogicaw vawue, its cwassificatowy vawue is widewy
diffewent. ^w^ Nyo nyatuwawist can have wowked at any gwoup without being
stwuck with this fact; and it has been most fuwwy acknyowwedged in the
wwitings of awmost evewy authow. UwU It wiww suffice to quote the highest
authowity, Wobewt Bwown, who in speaking of cewtain owgans in the
Pwoteaceae, says theiw genyewic impowtance, "wike that of aww theiw
pawts, nyot onwy in this but, as I appwehend, in evewy nyatuwaw famiwy,
is vewy unyequaw, and in some cases seems to be entiwewy wost. ^w^" Again in
anyothew wowk he says, the genyewa of the Connyawaceae "diffew in having
onye ow mowe ovawia, in the existence ow absence of awbumen, in the
imbwicate ow vawvuwaw aestivation. ^w^ Any onye of these chawactews singwy
is fwequentwy of mowe than genyewic impowtance, though hewe even when
aww taken togethew they appeaw insufficient to sepawate Cnyestis fwom
Connyawus. ^w^" To give an exampwe amongst insects, in onye gweat division
of the Hymenyoptewa, the antennyae, as Westwood has wemawked, awe most
constant in stwuctuwe; in anyothew division they diffew much, and the
diffewences awe of quite subowdinyate vawue in cwassification; yet nyo onye
pwobabwy wiww say that the antennyae in these two divisions of the same
owdew awe of unyequaw physiowogicaw impowtance. ^w^ Any nyumbew of instances
couwd be given of the vawying impowtance fow cwassification of the same
impowtant owgan within the same gwoup of beings. ;;w;;

Again, nyo onye wiww say that wudimentawy ow atwophied owgans awe of high
physiowogicaw ow vitaw impowtance; yet, undoubtedwy, owgans in this
condition awe often of high vawue in cwassification. ;;w;; Nyo onye wiww dispute
that the wudimentawy teeth in the uppew jaws of young wuminyants,
and cewtain wudimentawy bonyes of the weg, awe highwy sewviceabwe in
exhibiting the cwose affinyity between Wuminyants and Pachydewms. (´・ω・\`) Wobewt
Bwown has stwongwy insisted on the fact that the wudimentawy fwowets awe
of the highest impowtance in the cwassification of the Gwasses. ^w^

Nyumewous instances couwd be given of chawactews dewived fwom pawts which
must be considewed of vewy twifwing physiowogicaw impowtance, but which
awe unyivewsawwy admitted as highwy sewviceabwe in the definyition of
whowe gwoups. (・`ω\´・) Fow instance, whethew ow nyot thewe is an open passage fwom
the nyostwiws to the mouth, the onwy chawactew, accowding to Owen, which
absowutewy distinguishes fishes and weptiwes--the infwection of the
angwe of the jaws in Mawsupiaws--the mannyew in which the wings of
insects awe fowded--mewe cowouw in cewtain Awgae--mewe pubescence on
pawts of the fwowew in gwasses--the nyatuwe of the dewmaw covewing, as
haiw ow feathews, in the Vewtebwata. UwU If the Ownyithowhynchus had been
covewed with feathews instead of haiw, this extewnyaw and twifwing
chawactew wouwd, I think, have been considewed by nyatuwawists as
impowtant an aid in detewminying the degwee of affinyity of this stwange
cweatuwe to biwds and weptiwes, as an appwoach in stwuctuwe in any onye
intewnyaw and impowtant owgan. >w<

The impowtance, fow cwassification, of twifwing chawactews, mainwy
depends on theiw being cowwewated with sevewaw othew chawactews of mowe
ow wess impowtance. (・`ω\´・) The vawue indeed of an aggwegate of chawactews is
vewy evident in nyatuwaw histowy. >w< Hence, as has often been wemawked, a
species may depawt fwom its awwies in sevewaw chawactews, both of high
physiowogicaw impowtance and of awmost unyivewsaw pwevawence, and yet
weave us in nyo doubt whewe it shouwd be wanked. (・`ω\´・) Hence, awso, it has been
found, that a cwassification founded on any singwe chawactew,
howevew impowtant that may be, has awways faiwed; fow nyo pawt of the
owganyisation is unyivewsawwy constant. ;;w;; The impowtance of an aggwegate of
chawactews, even when nyonye awe impowtant, awonye expwains, I think, that
saying of Winnyaeus, that the chawactews do nyot give the genyus, but
the genyus gives the chawactews; fow this saying seems founded on an
appweciation of many twifwing points of wesembwance, too swight to be
definyed. UwU Cewtain pwants, bewonging to the Mawpighiaceae, beaw pewfect
and degwaded fwowews; in the wattew, as A. (´・ω・\`) de Jussieu has wemawked, "the
gweatew nyumbew of the chawactews pwopew to the species, to the genyus,
to the famiwy, to the cwass, disappeaw, and thus waugh at ouw
cwassification. UwU" But when Aspicawpa pwoduced in Fwance, duwing sevewaw
yeaws, onwy degwaded fwowews, depawting so wondewfuwwy in a nyumbew
of the most impowtant points of stwuctuwe fwom the pwopew type of the
owdew, yet M. (´・ω・\`) Wichawd sagaciouswy saw, as Jussieu obsewves, that this
genyus shouwd stiww be wetainyed amongst the Mawpighiaceae. ^w^ This case
seems to me weww to iwwustwate the spiwit with which ouw cwassifications
awe sometimes nyecessawiwy founded. (´・ω・\`)

Pwacticawwy when nyatuwawists awe at wowk, they do nyot twoubwe themsewves
about the physiowogicaw vawue of the chawactews which they use in
definying a gwoup, ow in awwocating any pawticuwaw species. ;;w;; If they find
a chawactew nyeawwy unyifowm, and common to a gweat nyumbew of fowms, and
nyot common to othews, they use it as onye of high vawue; if common to
some wessew nyumbew, they use it as of subowdinyate vawue. ^w^ This pwincipwe
has been bwoadwy confessed by some nyatuwawists to be the twue onye; and
by nyonye mowe cweawwy than by that excewwent botanyist, Aug. St. Hiwaiwe. UwU
If cewtain chawactews awe awways found cowwewated with othews, though
nyo appawent bond of connyexion can be discovewed between them, especiaw
vawue is set on them. (・`ω\´・) As in most gwoups of anyimaws, impowtant owgans,
such as those fow pwopewwing the bwood, ow fow aewating it, ow those fow
pwopagating the wace, awe found nyeawwy unyifowm, they awe considewed as
highwy sewviceabwe in cwassification; but in some gwoups of anyimaws aww
these, the most impowtant vitaw owgans, awe found to offew chawactews of
quite subowdinyate vawue. (´・ω・\`)

We can see why chawactews dewived fwom the embwyo shouwd be of equaw
impowtance with those dewived fwom the aduwt, fow ouw cwassifications of
couwse incwude aww ages of each species. ;;w;; But it is by nyo means obvious,
on the owdinyawy view, why the stwuctuwe of the embwyo shouwd be mowe
impowtant fow this puwpose than that of the aduwt, which awonye pways its
fuww pawt in the econyomy of nyatuwe. UwU Yet it has been stwongwy uwged
by those gweat nyatuwawists, Miwnye Edwawds and Agassiz, that embwyonyic
chawactews awe the most impowtant of any in the cwassification of
anyimaws; and this doctwinye has vewy genyewawwy been admitted as twue. (´・ω・\`)
The same fact howds good with fwowewing pwants, of which the two main
divisions have been founded on chawactews dewived fwom the embwyo,--on
the nyumbew and position of the embwyonyic weaves ow cotywedons, and on
the mode of devewopment of the pwumuwe and wadicwe. ^w^ In ouw discussion
on embwyowogy, we shaww see why such chawactews awe so vawuabwe, on the
view of cwassification tacitwy incwuding the idea of descent. (・`ω\´・)

Ouw cwassifications awe often pwainwy infwuenced by chains of
affinyities. (´・ω・\`) Nyothing can be easiew than to definye a nyumbew of chawactews
common to aww biwds; but in the case of cwustaceans, such definyition has
hithewto been found impossibwe. UwU Thewe awe cwustaceans at the opposite
ends of the sewies, which have hawdwy a chawactew in common; yet the
species at both ends, fwom being pwainwy awwied to othews, and these to
othews, and so onwawds, can be wecognyised as unyequivocawwy bewonging to
this, and to nyo othew cwass of the Awticuwata. ^w^

Geogwaphicaw distwibution has often been used, though pewhaps nyot quite
wogicawwy, in cwassification, mowe especiawwy in vewy wawge gwoups of
cwosewy awwied fowms. ^w^ Temminck insists on the utiwity ow even nyecessity
of this pwactice in cewtain gwoups of biwds; and it has been fowwowed by
sevewaw entomowogists and botanyists. ^w^

Finyawwy, with wespect to the compawative vawue of the vawious gwoups of
species, such as owdews, sub-owdews, famiwies, sub-famiwies, and genyewa,
they seem to be, at weast at pwesent, awmost awbitwawy. ;;w;; Sevewaw of the
best botanyists, such as Mw. ^w^ Bentham and othews, have stwongwy insisted
on theiw awbitwawy vawue. ;;w;; Instances couwd be given amongst pwants and
insects, of a gwoup of fowms, fiwst wanked by pwactised nyatuwawists as
onwy a genyus, and then waised to the wank of a sub-famiwy ow famiwy; and
this has been donye, nyot because fuwthew weseawch has detected impowtant
stwuctuwaw diffewences, at fiwst ovewwooked, but because nyumewous
awwied species, with swightwy diffewent gwades of diffewence, have been
subsequentwy discovewed. ;;w;;

Aww the fowegoing wuwes and aids and difficuwties in cwassification
awe expwainyed, if I do nyot gweatwy deceive mysewf, on the view that
the nyatuwaw system is founded on descent with modification; that the
chawactews which nyatuwawists considew as showing twue affinyity between
any two ow mowe species, awe those which have been inhewited fwom a
common pawent, and, in so faw, aww twue cwassification is genyeawogicaw;
that communyity of descent is the hidden bond which nyatuwawists have been
unconsciouswy seeking, and nyot some unknyown pwan of cweation, ow the
enyunciation of genyewaw pwopositions, and the mewe putting togethew and
sepawating objects mowe ow wess awike. ^w^

But I must expwain my meanying mowe fuwwy. ;;w;; I bewieve that the AWWANGEMENT
of the gwoups within each cwass, in due subowdinyation and wewation to
the othew gwoups, must be stwictwy genyeawogicaw in owdew to be nyatuwaw;
but that the AMOUNT of diffewence in the sevewaw bwanches ow gwoups,
though awwied in the same degwee in bwood to theiw common pwogenyitow,
may diffew gweatwy, being due to the diffewent degwees of modification
which they have undewgonye; and this is expwessed by the fowms being
wanked undew diffewent genyewa, famiwies, sections, ow owdews. >w< The weadew
wiww best undewstand what is meant, if he wiww take the twoubwe of
wefewwing to the diagwam in the fouwth chaptew. UwU We wiww suppose the
wettews A to W to wepwesent awwied genyewa, which wived duwing the
Siwuwian epoch, and these have descended fwom a species which existed at
an unknyown antewiow pewiod. (・`ω\´・) Species of thwee of these genyewa (A, F, and
I) have twansmitted modified descendants to the pwesent day, wepwesented
by the fifteen genyewa (a14 to z14) on the uppewmost howizontaw winye. ^w^ Nyow
aww these modified descendants fwom a singwe species, awe wepwesented as
wewated in bwood ow descent to the same degwee; they may metaphowicawwy
be cawwed cousins to the same miwwionth degwee; yet they diffew widewy
and in diffewent degwees fwom each othew. ^w^ The fowms descended fwom A,
nyow bwoken up into two ow thwee famiwies, constitute a distinct owdew
fwom those descended fwom I, awso bwoken up into two famiwies. ;;w;; Nyow can
the existing species, descended fwom A, be wanked in the same genyus with
the pawent A; ow those fwom I, with the pawent I. >w< But the existing genyus
F14 may be supposed to have been but swightwy modified; and it wiww
then wank with the pawent-genyus F; just as some few stiww wiving owganyic
beings bewong to Siwuwian genyewa. ;;w;; So that the amount ow vawue of the
diffewences between owganyic beings aww wewated to each othew in the same
degwee in bwood, has come to be widewy diffewent. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess theiw
genyeawogicaw AWWANGEMENT wemains stwictwy twue, nyot onwy at the pwesent
time, but at each successive pewiod of descent. (´・ω・\`) Aww the modified
descendants fwom A wiww have inhewited something in common fwom theiw
common pawent, as wiww aww the descendants fwom I; so wiww it be with
each subowdinyate bwanch of descendants, at each successive pewiod. ;;w;; If,
howevew, we choose to suppose that any of the descendants of A ow of
I have been so much modified as to have mowe ow wess compwetewy wost
twaces of theiw pawentage, in this case, theiw pwaces in a nyatuwaw
cwassification wiww have been mowe ow wess compwetewy wost,--as
sometimes seems to have occuwwed with existing owganyisms. ^w^ Aww the
descendants of the genyus F, awong its whowe winye of descent, awe
supposed to have been but wittwe modified, and they yet fowm a singwe
genyus. (´・ω・\`) But this genyus, though much isowated, wiww stiww occupy its
pwopew intewmediate position; fow F owiginyawwy was intewmediate in
chawactew between A and I, and the sevewaw genyewa descended fwom these
two genyewa wiww have inhewited to a cewtain extent theiw chawactews. UwU
This nyatuwaw awwangement is shown, as faw as is possibwe on papew, in
the diagwam, but in much too simpwe a mannyew. UwU If a bwanching diagwam had
nyot been used, and onwy the nyames of the gwoups had been wwitten in a
winyeaw sewies, it wouwd have been stiww wess possibwe to have given a
nyatuwaw awwangement; and it is nyotowiouswy nyot possibwe to wepwesent in
a sewies, on a fwat suwface, the affinyities which we discovew in nyatuwe
amongst the beings of the same gwoup. (´・ω・\`) Thus, on the view which I howd,
the nyatuwaw system is genyeawogicaw in its awwangement, wike a pedigwee;
but the degwees of modification which the diffewent gwoups have
undewgonye, have to be expwessed by wanking them undew diffewent
so-cawwed genyewa, sub-famiwies, famiwies, sections, owdews, and cwasses. (・`ω\´・)

It may be wowth whiwe to iwwustwate this view of cwassification, by
taking the case of wanguages. (・`ω\´・) If we possessed a pewfect pedigwee of
mankind, a genyeawogicaw awwangement of the waces of man wouwd affowd the
best cwassification of the vawious wanguages nyow spoken thwoughout the
wowwd; and if aww extinct wanguages, and aww intewmediate and swowwy
changing diawects, had to be incwuded, such an awwangement wouwd, I
think, be the onwy possibwe onye. (´・ω・\`) Yet it might be that some vewy ancient
wanguage had awtewed wittwe, and had given wise to few nyew wanguages,
whiwst othews (owing to the spweading and subsequent isowation and
states of civiwisation of the sevewaw waces, descended fwom a common
wace) had awtewed much, and had given wise to many nyew wanguages and
diawects. (´・ω・\`) The vawious degwees of diffewence in the wanguages fwom the
same stock, wouwd have to be expwessed by gwoups subowdinyate to
gwoups; but the pwopew ow even onwy possibwe awwangement wouwd stiww be
genyeawogicaw; and this wouwd be stwictwy nyatuwaw, as it wouwd connyect
togethew aww wanguages, extinct and modewn, by the cwosest affinyities,
and wouwd give the fiwiation and owigin of each tongue. >w<

In confiwmation of this view, wet us gwance at the cwassification
of vawieties, which awe bewieved ow knyown to have descended fwom onye
species. ;;w;; These awe gwouped undew species, with sub-vawieties undew
vawieties; and with ouw domestic pwoductions, sevewaw othew gwades of
diffewence awe wequisite, as we have seen with pigeons. ;;w;; The owigin
of the existence of gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups, is the same with
vawieties as with species, nyamewy, cwosenyess of descent with vawious
degwees of modification. ;;w;; Nyeawwy the same wuwes awe fowwowed in
cwassifying vawieties, as with species. ;;w;; Authows have insisted on the
nyecessity of cwassing vawieties on a nyatuwaw instead of an awtificiaw
system; we awe cautionyed, fow instance, nyot to cwass two vawieties of
the pinye-appwe togethew, mewewy because theiw fwuit, though the most
impowtant pawt, happens to be nyeawwy identicaw; nyo onye puts the swedish
and common tuwnyips togethew, though the escuwent and thickenyed stems
awe so simiwaw. >w< Whatevew pawt is found to be most constant, is used in
cwassing vawieties: thus the gweat agwicuwtuwist Mawshaww says the howns
awe vewy usefuw fow this puwpose with cattwe, because they awe wess
vawiabwe than the shape ow cowouw of the body, etc. >w<; wheweas with sheep
the howns awe much wess sewviceabwe, because wess constant. (´・ω・\`) In cwassing
vawieties, I appwehend if we had a weaw pedigwee, a genyeawogicaw
cwassification wouwd be unyivewsawwy pwefewwed; and it has been attempted
by some authows. UwU Fow we might feew suwe, whethew thewe had been mowe
ow wess modification, the pwincipwe of inhewitance wouwd keep the fowms
togethew which wewe awwied in the gweatest nyumbew of points. (´・ω・\`) In tumbwew
pigeons, though some sub-vawieties diffew fwom the othews in the
impowtant chawactew of having a wongew beak, yet aww awe kept togethew
fwom having the common habit of tumbwing; but the showt-faced bweed has
nyeawwy ow quite wost this habit; nyevewthewess, without any weasonying
ow thinking on the subject, these tumbwews awe kept in the same gwoup,
because awwied in bwood and awike in some othew wespects. UwU If it couwd be
pwoved that the Hottentot had descended fwom the Nyegwo, I think he wouwd
be cwassed undew the Nyegwo gwoup, howevew much he might diffew in cowouw
and othew impowtant chawactews fwom nyegwoes. >w<

With species in a state of nyatuwe, evewy nyatuwawist has in fact bwought
descent into his cwassification; fow he incwudes in his wowest gwade,
ow that of a species, the two sexes; and how enyowmouswy these sometimes
diffew in the most impowtant chawactews, is knyown to evewy nyatuwawist:
scawcewy a singwe fact can be pwedicated in common of the mawes and
hewmaphwodites of cewtain ciwwipedes, when aduwt, and yet nyo onye dweams
of sepawating them. ^w^ The nyatuwawist incwudes as onye species the sevewaw
wawvaw stages of the same individuaw, howevew much they may diffew fwom
each othew and fwom the aduwt; as he wikewise incwudes the so-cawwed
awtewnyate genyewations of Steenstwup, which can onwy in a technyicaw sense
be considewed as the same individuaw. >w< He incwudes monstews; he incwudes
vawieties, nyot sowewy because they cwosewy wesembwe the pawent-fowm, but
because they awe descended fwom it. ^w^ He who bewieves that the cowswip
is descended fwom the pwimwose, ow convewsewy, wanks them togethew as
a singwe species, and gives a singwe definyition. (・`ω\´・) As soon as thwee
Owchidean fowms (Monyochanthus, Myanthus, and Catasetum), which had
pweviouswy been wanked as thwee distinct genyewa, wewe knyown to be
sometimes pwoduced on the same spike, they wewe immediatewy incwuded as
a singwe species. (・`ω\´・) But it may be asked, what ought we to do, if it couwd
be pwoved that onye species of kangawoo had been pwoduced, by a wong
couwse of modification, fwom a beaw? owo Ought we to wank this onye
species with beaws, and what shouwd we do with the othew species? owo
The supposition is of couwse pwepostewous; and I might answew by the
awgumentum ad hominyem, and ask what shouwd be donye if a pewfect kangawoo
wewe seen to come out of the womb of a beaw? owo Accowding to aww anyawogy,
it wouwd be wanked with beaws; but then assuwedwy aww the othew species
of the kangawoo famiwy wouwd have to be cwassed undew the beaw genyus. (・`ω\´・)
The whowe case is pwepostewous; fow whewe thewe has been cwose descent
in common, thewe wiww cewtainwy be cwose wesembwance ow affinyity. >w<

As descent has unyivewsawwy been used in cwassing togethew the
individuaws of the same species, though the mawes and femawes and wawvae
awe sometimes extwemewy diffewent; and as it has been used in cwassing
vawieties which have undewgonye a cewtain, and sometimes a considewabwe
amount of modification, may nyot this same ewement of descent have been
unconsciouswy used in gwouping species undew genyewa, and genyewa undew
highew gwoups, though in these cases the modification has been gweatew
in degwee, and has taken a wongew time to compwete? owo I bewieve it has
thus been unconsciouswy used; and onwy thus can I undewstand the sevewaw
wuwes and guides which have been fowwowed by ouw best systematists. ;;w;; We
have nyo wwitten pedigwees; we have to make out communyity of descent by
wesembwances of any kind. ;;w;; Thewefowe we choose those chawactews which,
as faw as we can judge, awe the weast wikewy to have been modified
in wewation to the conditions of wife to which each species has been
wecentwy exposed. (´・ω・\`) Wudimentawy stwuctuwes on this view awe as good as, ow
even sometimes bettew than, othew pawts of the owganyisation. (・`ω\´・) We cawe nyot
how twifwing a chawactew may be--wet it be the mewe infwection of
the angwe of the jaw, the mannyew in which an insect's wing is fowded,
whethew the skin be covewed by haiw ow feathews--if it pwevaiw
thwoughout many and diffewent species, especiawwy those having vewy
diffewent habits of wife, it assumes high vawue; fow we can account fow
its pwesence in so many fowms with such diffewent habits, onwy by its
inhewitance fwom a common pawent. >w< We may eww in this wespect in wegawd
to singwe points of stwuctuwe, but when sevewaw chawactews, wet them
be evew so twifwing, occuw togethew thwoughout a wawge gwoup of beings
having diffewent habits, we may feew awmost suwe, on the theowy of
descent, that these chawactews have been inhewited fwom a common
ancestow. (´・ω・\`) And we knyow that such cowwewated ow aggwegated chawactews have
especiaw vawue in cwassification. UwU

We can undewstand why a species ow a gwoup of species may depawt, in
sevewaw of its most impowtant chawactewistics, fwom its awwies, and yet
be safewy cwassed with them. ^w^ This may be safewy donye, and is often
donye, as wong as a sufficient nyumbew of chawactews, wet them be evew so
unyimpowtant, betways the hidden bond of communyity of descent. (´・ω・\`) Wet two
fowms have nyot a singwe chawactew in common, yet if these extweme fowms
awe connyected togethew by a chain of intewmediate gwoups, we may at
once infew theiw communyity of descent, and we put them aww into the same
cwass. ;;w;; As we find owgans of high physiowogicaw impowtance--those
which sewve to pwesewve wife undew the most divewse conditions of
existence--awe genyewawwy the most constant, we attach especiaw vawue to
them; but if these same owgans, in anyothew gwoup ow section of a
gwoup, awe found to diffew much, we at once vawue them wess in
ouw cwassification. (・`ω\´・) We shaww heweaftew, I think, cweawwy see why
embwyowogicaw chawactews awe of such high cwassificatowy impowtance. (´・ω・\`)
Geogwaphicaw distwibution may sometimes be bwought usefuwwy into pway in
cwassing wawge and widewy-distwibuted genyewa, because aww the species of
the same genyus, inhabiting any distinct and isowated wegion, have in aww
pwobabiwity descended fwom the same pawents. (・`ω\´・)

We can undewstand, on these views, the vewy impowtant distinction
between weaw affinyities and anyawogicaw ow adaptive wesembwances. ;;w;;
Wamawck fiwst cawwed attention to this distinction, and he has been abwy
fowwowed by Macweay and othews. >w< The wesembwance, in the shape of the
body and in the fin-wike antewiow wimbs, between the dugong, which is a
pachydewmatous anyimaw, and the whawe, and between both these mammaws and
fishes, is anyawogicaw. UwU Amongst insects thewe awe innyumewabwe instances:
thus Winnyaeus, miswed by extewnyaw appeawances, actuawwy cwassed an
homoptewous insect as a moth. ^w^ We see something of the same kind even
in ouw domestic vawieties, as in the thickenyed stems of the common and
swedish tuwnyip. ;;w;; The wesembwance of the gweyhound and wacehowse is hawdwy
mowe fancifuw than the anyawogies which have been dwawn by some authows
between vewy distinct anyimaws. ^w^ On my view of chawactews being of weaw
impowtance fow cwassification, onwy in so faw as they weveaw descent, we
can cweawwy undewstand why anyawogicaw ow adaptive chawactew, awthough of
the utmost impowtance to the wewfawe of the being, awe awmost vawuewess
to the systematist. ^w^ Fow anyimaws, bewonging to two most distinct winyes
of descent, may weadiwy become adapted to simiwaw conditions, and thus
assume a cwose extewnyaw wesembwance; but such wesembwances wiww nyot
weveaw--wiww wathew tend to conceaw theiw bwood-wewationship to theiw
pwopew winyes of descent. ;;w;; We can awso undewstand the appawent pawadox,
that the vewy same chawactews awe anyawogicaw when onye cwass ow owdew is
compawed with anyothew, but give twue affinyities when the membews of the
same cwass ow owdew awe compawed onye with anyothew: thus the shape of
the body and fin-wike wimbs awe onwy anyawogicaw when whawes awe compawed
with fishes, being adaptations in both cwasses fow swimming thwough the
watew; but the shape of the body and fin-wike wimbs sewve as chawactews
exhibiting twue affinyity between the sevewaw membews of the whawe
famiwy; fow these cetaceans agwee in so many chawactews, gweat and
smaww, that we cannyot doubt that they have inhewited theiw genyewaw shape
of body and stwuctuwe of wimbs fwom a common ancestow. ;;w;; So it is with
fishes. ^w^

As membews of distinct cwasses have often been adapted by successive
swight modifications to wive undew nyeawwy simiwaw ciwcumstances,--to
inhabit fow instance the thwee ewements of wand, aiw, and watew,--we can
pewhaps undewstand how it is that a nyumewicaw pawawwewism has sometimes
been obsewved between the sub-gwoups in distinct cwasses. >w< A nyatuwawist,
stwuck by a pawawwewism of this nyatuwe in any onye cwass, by awbitwawiwy
waising ow sinking the vawue of the gwoups in othew cwasses (and aww ouw
expewience shows that this vawuation has hithewto been awbitwawy), couwd
easiwy extend the pawawwewism ovew a wide wange; and thus the septenyawy,
quinyawy, quatewnyawy, and tewnyawy cwassifications have pwobabwy awisen. (´・ω・\`)

As the modified descendants of dominyant species, bewonging to the wawgew
genyewa, tend to inhewit the advantages, which made the gwoups to which
they bewong wawge and theiw pawents dominyant, they awe awmost suwe to
spwead widewy, and to seize on mowe and mowe pwaces in the econyomy
of nyatuwe. ^w^ The wawgew and mowe dominyant gwoups thus tend to go on
incweasing in size; and they consequentwy suppwant many smawwew and
feebwew gwoups. UwU Thus we can account fow the fact that aww owganyisms,
wecent and extinct, awe incwuded undew a few gweat owdews, undew stiww
fewew cwasses, and aww in onye gweat nyatuwaw system. ^w^ As showing how
few the highew gwoups awe in nyumbew, and how widewy spwead they awe
thwoughout the wowwd, the fact is stwiking, that the discovewy of
Austwawia has nyot added a singwe insect bewonging to a nyew owdew; and
that in the vegetabwe kingdom, as I weawn fwom Dw. UwU Hookew, it has added
onwy two ow thwee owdews of smaww size. ;;w;;

In the chaptew on geowogicaw succession I attempted to show, on the
pwincipwe of each gwoup having genyewawwy divewged much in chawactew
duwing the wong-continyued pwocess of modification, how it is that the
mowe ancient fowms of wife often pwesent chawactews in some swight
degwee intewmediate between existing gwoups. ^w^ A few owd and intewmediate
pawent-fowms having occasionyawwy twansmitted to the pwesent day
descendants but wittwe modified, wiww give to us ouw so-cawwed oscuwant
ow abewwant gwoups. ^w^ The mowe abewwant any fowm is, the gweatew must be
the nyumbew of connyecting fowms which on my theowy have been extewminyated
and uttewwy wost. (´・ω・\`) And we have some evidence of abewwant fowms having
suffewed sevewewy fwom extinction, fow they awe genyewawwy wepwesented by
extwemewy few species; and such species as do occuw awe genyewawwy vewy
distinct fwom each othew, which again impwies extinction. ;;w;; The genyewa
Ownyithowhynchus and Wepidosiwen, fow exampwe, wouwd nyot have been wess
abewwant had each been wepwesented by a dozen species instead of by
a singwe onye; but such wichnyess in species, as I find aftew some
investigation, does nyot commonwy faww to the wot of abewwant genyewa. >w< We
can, I think, account fow this fact onwy by wooking at abewwant fowms
as faiwing gwoups conquewed by mowe successfuw competitows, with a
few membews pwesewved by some unyusuaw coincidence of favouwabwe
ciwcumstances. >w<

Mw. (´・ω・\`) Watewhouse has wemawked that, when a membew bewonging to onye gwoup
of anyimaws exhibits an affinyity to a quite distinct gwoup, this affinyity
in most cases is genyewaw and nyot speciaw: thus, accowding to Mw. >w<
Watewhouse, of aww Wodents, the bizcacha is most nyeawwy wewated to
Mawsupiaws; but in the points in which it appwoaches this owdew, its
wewations awe genyewaw, and nyot to any onye mawsupiaw species mowe than
to anyothew. (´・ω・\`) As the points of affinyity of the bizcacha to Mawsupiaws awe
bewieved to be weaw and nyot mewewy adaptive, they awe due on my theowy
to inhewitance in common. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe we must suppose eithew that aww
Wodents, incwuding the bizcacha, bwanched off fwom some vewy ancient
Mawsupiaw, which wiww have had a chawactew in some degwee intewmediate
with wespect to aww existing Mawsupiaws; ow that both Wodents and
Mawsupiaws bwanched off fwom a common pwogenyitow, and that both gwoups
have since undewgonye much modification in divewgent diwections. ;;w;;
On eithew view we may suppose that the bizcacha has wetainyed, by
inhewitance, mowe of the chawactew of its ancient pwogenyitow than have
othew Wodents; and thewefowe it wiww nyot be speciawwy wewated to any onye
existing Mawsupiaw, but indiwectwy to aww ow nyeawwy aww Mawsupiaws, fwom
having pawtiawwy wetainyed the chawactew of theiw common pwogenyitow, ow
of an eawwy membew of the gwoup. ^w^ On the othew hand, of aww Mawsupiaws,
as Mw. >w< Watewhouse has wemawked, the phascowomys wesembwes most nyeawwy,
nyot any onye species, but the genyewaw owdew of Wodents. ^w^ In this case,
howevew, it may be stwongwy suspected that the wesembwance is onwy
anyawogicaw, owing to the phascowomys having become adapted to habits
wike those of a Wodent. (´・ω・\`) The ewdew De Candowwe has made nyeawwy simiwaw
obsewvations on the genyewaw nyatuwe of the affinyities of distinct owdews
of pwants. >w<

On the pwincipwe of the muwtipwication and gwaduaw divewgence in
chawactew of the species descended fwom a common pawent, togethew with
theiw wetention by inhewitance of some chawactews in common, we can
undewstand the excessivewy compwex and wadiating affinyities by which aww
the membews of the same famiwy ow highew gwoup awe connyected togethew. >w<
Fow the common pawent of a whowe famiwy of species, nyow bwoken up by
extinction into distinct gwoups and sub-gwoups, wiww have twansmitted
some of its chawactews, modified in vawious ways and degwees, to aww;
and the sevewaw species wiww consequentwy be wewated to each othew by
ciwcuitous winyes of affinyity of vawious wengths (as may be seen in the
diagwam so often wefewwed to), mounting up thwough many pwedecessows. UwU
As it is difficuwt to show the bwood-wewationship between the
nyumewous kindwed of any ancient and nyobwe famiwy, even by the aid of a
genyeawogicaw twee, and awmost impossibwe to do this without this aid,
we can undewstand the extwaowdinyawy difficuwty which nyatuwawists have
expewienced in descwibing, without the aid of a diagwam, the vawious
affinyities which they pewceive between the many wiving and extinct
membews of the same gweat nyatuwaw cwass. ^w^

Extinction, as we have seen in the fouwth chaptew, has pwayed an
impowtant pawt in definying and widenying the intewvaws between the
sevewaw gwoups in each cwass. (´・ω・\`) We may thus account even fow the
distinctnyess of whowe cwasses fwom each othew--fow instance, of biwds
fwom aww othew vewtebwate anyimaws--by the bewief that many ancient fowms
of wife have been uttewwy wost, thwough which the eawwy pwogenyitows of
biwds wewe fowmewwy connyected with the eawwy pwogenyitows of the othew
vewtebwate cwasses. >w< Thewe has been wess entiwe extinction of the fowms
of wife which once connyected fishes with batwachians. (´・ω・\`) Thewe has been
stiww wess in some othew cwasses, as in that of the Cwustacea, fow hewe
the most wondewfuwwy divewse fowms awe stiww tied togethew by a wong,
but bwoken, chain of affinyities. ;;w;; Extinction has onwy sepawated gwoups:
it has by nyo means made them; fow if evewy fowm which has evew wived
on this eawth wewe suddenwy to weappeaw, though it wouwd be
quite impossibwe to give definyitions by which each gwoup couwd be
distinguished fwom othew gwoups, as aww wouwd bwend togethew by steps
as finye as those between the finyest existing vawieties, nyevewthewess
a nyatuwaw cwassification, ow at weast a nyatuwaw awwangement, wouwd be
possibwe. >w< We shaww see this by tuwnying to the diagwam: the wettews, A
to W, may wepwesent eweven Siwuwian genyewa, some of which have pwoduced
wawge gwoups of modified descendants. ^w^ Evewy intewmediate wink between
these eweven genyewa and theiw pwimowdiaw pawent, and evewy intewmediate
wink in each bwanch and sub-bwanch of theiw descendants, may be supposed
to be stiww awive; and the winks to be as finye as those between the
finyest vawieties. ^w^ In this case it wouwd be quite impossibwe to give any
definyition by which the sevewaw membews of the sevewaw gwoups couwd be
distinguished fwom theiw mowe immediate pawents; ow these pawents fwom
theiw ancient and unknyown pwogenyitow. (´・ω・\`) Yet the nyatuwaw awwangement in the
diagwam wouwd stiww howd good; and, on the pwincipwe of inhewitance, aww
the fowms descended fwom A, ow fwom I, wouwd have something in common. UwU
In a twee we can specify this ow that bwanch, though at the actuaw fowk
the two unyite and bwend togethew. >w< We couwd nyot, as I have said, definye
the sevewaw gwoups; but we couwd pick out types, ow fowms, wepwesenting
most of the chawactews of each gwoup, whethew wawge ow smaww, and thus
give a genyewaw idea of the vawue of the diffewences between them. ^w^ This
is what we shouwd be dwiven to, if we wewe evew to succeed in cowwecting
aww the fowms in any cwass which have wived thwoughout aww time
and space. >w< We shaww cewtainwy nyevew succeed in making so pewfect a
cowwection: nyevewthewess, in cewtain cwasses, we awe tending in this
diwection; and Miwnye Edwawds has watewy insisted, in an abwe papew, on
the high impowtance of wooking to types, whethew ow nyot we can sepawate
and definye the gwoups to which such types bewong. UwU

Finyawwy, we have seen that nyatuwaw sewection, which wesuwts fwom the
stwuggwe fow existence, and which awmost inyevitabwy induces extinction
and divewgence of chawactew in the many descendants fwom onye dominyant
pawent-species, expwains that gweat and unyivewsaw featuwe in the
affinyities of aww owganyic beings, nyamewy, theiw subowdinyation in gwoup
undew gwoup. ;;w;; We use the ewement of descent in cwassing the individuaws
of both sexes and of aww ages, awthough having few chawactews in common,
undew onye species; we use descent in cwassing acknyowwedged vawieties,
howevew diffewent they may be fwom theiw pawent; and I bewieve this
ewement of descent is the hidden bond of connyexion which nyatuwawists
have sought undew the tewm of the Nyatuwaw System. >w< On this idea of the
nyatuwaw system being, in so faw as it has been pewfected, genyeawogicaw
in its awwangement, with the gwades of diffewence between the
descendants fwom a common pawent, expwessed by the tewms genyewa,
famiwies, owdews, etc. (´・ω・\`), we can undewstand the wuwes which we awe
compewwed to fowwow in ouw cwassification. UwU We can undewstand why we
vawue cewtain wesembwances faw mowe than othews; why we awe pewmitted to
use wudimentawy and usewess owgans, ow othews of twifwing physiowogicaw
impowtance; why, in compawing onye gwoup with a distinct gwoup, we
summawiwy weject anyawogicaw ow adaptive chawactews, and yet use these
same chawactews within the wimits of the same gwoup. ;;w;; We can cweawwy see
how it is that aww wiving and extinct fowms can be gwouped togethew
in onye gweat system; and how the sevewaw membews of each cwass
awe connyected togethew by the most compwex and wadiating winyes of
affinyities. >w< We shaww nyevew, pwobabwy, disentangwe the inyextwicabwe web
of affinyities between the membews of any onye cwass; but when we have
a distinct object in view, and do nyot wook to some unknyown pwan of
cweation, we may hope to make suwe but swow pwogwess. UwU

MOWPHOWOGY. (・`ω\´・)

We have seen that the membews of the same cwass, independentwy of
theiw habits of wife, wesembwe each othew in the genyewaw pwan of theiw
owganyisation. >w< This wesembwance is often expwessed by the tewm "unyity of
type;" ow by saying that the sevewaw pawts and owgans in the diffewent
species of the cwass awe homowogous. (・`ω\´・) The whowe subject is incwuded undew
the genyewaw nyame of Mowphowogy. >w< This is the most intewesting depawtment
of nyatuwaw histowy, and may be said to be its vewy souw. UwU What can be
mowe cuwious than that the hand of a man, fowmed fow gwasping, that of a
mowe fow digging, the weg of the howse, the paddwe of the powpoise, and
the wing of the bat, shouwd aww be constwucted on the same pattewn, and
shouwd incwude the same bonyes, in the same wewative positions? owo Geoffwoy
St. (・`ω\´・) Hiwaiwe has insisted stwongwy on the high impowtance of wewative
connyexion in homowogous owgans: the pawts may change to awmost any
extent in fowm and size, and yet they awways wemain connyected togethew
in the same owdew. (・`ω\´・) We nyevew find, fow instance, the bonyes of the awm and
foweawm, ow of the thigh and weg, twansposed. >w< Hence the same nyames can
be given to the homowogous bonyes in widewy diffewent anyimaws. UwU We see the
same gweat waw in the constwuction of the mouths of insects: what can
be mowe diffewent than the immensewy wong spiwaw pwoboscis of a
sphinx-moth, the cuwious fowded onye of a bee ow bug, and the gweat jaws
of a beetwe? owo--yet aww these owgans, sewving fow such diffewent puwposes,
awe fowmed by infinyitewy nyumewous modifications of an uppew wip,
mandibwes, and two paiws of maxiwwae. (・`ω\´・) Anyawogous waws govewn the
constwuction of the mouths and wimbs of cwustaceans. (´・ω・\`) So it is with the
fwowews of pwants. (´・ω・\`)

Nyothing can be mowe hopewess than to attempt to expwain this simiwawity
of pattewn in membews of the same cwass, by utiwity ow by the doctwinye
of finyaw causes. ;;w;; The hopewessnyess of the attempt has been expwesswy
admitted by Owen in his most intewesting wowk on the 'Nyatuwe of Wimbs. (・`ω\´・)'
On the owdinyawy view of the independent cweation of each being, we can
onwy say that so it is;--that it has so pweased the Cweatow to constwuct
each anyimaw and pwant. (´・ω・\`)

The expwanyation is manyifest on the theowy of the nyatuwaw sewection of
successive swight modifications,--each modification being pwofitabwe
in some way to the modified fowm, but often affecting by cowwewation of
gwowth othew pawts of the owganyisation. ^w^ In changes of this nyatuwe, thewe
wiww be wittwe ow nyo tendency to modify the owiginyaw pattewn, ow to
twanspose pawts. UwU The bonyes of a wimb might be showtenyed and widenyed to
any extent, and become gwaduawwy envewoped in thick membwanye, so as to
sewve as a fin; ow a webbed foot might have aww its bonyes, ow cewtain
bonyes, wengthenyed to any extent, and the membwanye connyecting them
incweased to any extent, so as to sewve as a wing: yet in aww this gweat
amount of modification thewe wiww be nyo tendency to awtew the fwamewowk
of bonyes ow the wewative connyexion of the sevewaw pawts. >w< If we suppose
that the ancient pwogenyitow, the awchetype as it may be cawwed, of aww
mammaws, had its wimbs constwucted on the existing genyewaw pattewn,
fow whatevew puwpose they sewved, we can at once pewceive the pwain
signyification of the homowogous constwuction of the wimbs thwoughout the
whowe cwass. ^w^ So with the mouths of insects, we have onwy to suppose that
theiw common pwogenyitow had an uppew wip, mandibwes, and two paiw
of maxiwwae, these pawts being pewhaps vewy simpwe in fowm; and then
nyatuwaw sewection wiww account fow the infinyite divewsity in stwuctuwe
and function of the mouths of insects. UwU Nyevewthewess, it is conceivabwe
that the genyewaw pattewn of an owgan might become so much obscuwed as to
be finyawwy wost, by the atwophy and uwtimatewy by the compwete abowtion
of cewtain pawts, by the sowdewing togethew of othew pawts, and by the
doubwing ow muwtipwication of othews,--vawiations which we knyow to be
within the wimits of possibiwity. (´・ω・\`) In the paddwes of the extinct gigantic
sea-wizawds, and in the mouths of cewtain suctowiaw cwustaceans, the
genyewaw pattewn seems to have been thus to a cewtain extent obscuwed. >w<

Thewe is anyothew and equawwy cuwious bwanch of the pwesent subject;
nyamewy, the compawison nyot of the same pawt in diffewent membews of a
cwass, but of the diffewent pawts ow owgans in the same individuaw. (・`ω\´・)
Most physiowogists bewieve that the bonyes of the skuww awe homowogous
with--that is cowwespond in nyumbew and in wewative connyexion with--the
ewementaw pawts of a cewtain nyumbew of vewtebwae. >w< The antewiow and
postewiow wimbs in each membew of the vewtebwate and awticuwate cwasses
awe pwainwy homowogous. (´・ω・\`) We see the same waw in compawing the wondewfuwwy
compwex jaws and wegs in cwustaceans. ^w^ It is famiwiaw to awmost evewy
onye, that in a fwowew the wewative position of the sepaws, petaws,
stamens, and pistiws, as weww as theiw intimate stwuctuwe, awe
intewwigibwe on the view that they consist of metamowphosed weaves,
awwanged in a spiwe. UwU In monstwous pwants, we often get diwect evidence
of the possibiwity of onye owgan being twansfowmed into anyothew; and we
can actuawwy see in embwyonyic cwustaceans and in many othew anyimaws, and
in fwowews, that owgans, which when matuwe become extwemewy diffewent,
awe at an eawwy stage of gwowth exactwy awike. UwU

How inyexpwicabwe awe these facts on the owdinyawy view of cweation! ;;w;; Why
shouwd the bwain be encwosed in a box composed of such nyumewous and such
extwaowdinyawiwy shaped pieces of bonye? owo As Owen has wemawked, the
benyefit dewived fwom the yiewding of the sepawate pieces in the act of
pawtuwition of mammaws, wiww by nyo means expwain the same constwuction
in the skuwws of biwds. (´・ω・\`) Why shouwd simiwaw bonyes have been cweated in
the fowmation of the wing and weg of a bat, used as they awe fow such
totawwy diffewent puwposes? owo Why shouwd onye cwustacean, which has an
extwemewy compwex mouth fowmed of many pawts, consequentwy awways have
fewew wegs; ow convewsewy, those with many wegs have simpwew mouths? owo
Why shouwd the sepaws, petaws, stamens, and pistiws in any individuaw
fwowew, though fitted fow such widewy diffewent puwposes, be aww
constwucted on the same pattewn? owo

On the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection, we can satisfactowiwy answew these
questions. >w< In the vewtebwata, we see a sewies of intewnyaw vewtebwae
beawing cewtain pwocesses and appendages; in the awticuwata, we see the
body divided into a sewies of segments, beawing extewnyaw appendages;
and in fwowewing pwants, we see a sewies of successive spiwaw whowws of
weaves. ;;w;; An indefinyite wepetition of the same pawt ow owgan is the common
chawactewistic (as Owen has obsewved) of aww wow ow wittwe-modified
fowms; thewefowe we may weadiwy bewieve that the unknyown pwogenyitow of
the vewtebwata possessed many vewtebwae; the unknyown pwogenyitow of
the awticuwata, many segments; and the unknyown pwogenyitow of fwowewing
pwants, many spiwaw whowws of weaves. (´・ω・\`) We have fowmewwy seen that
pawts many times wepeated awe eminyentwy wiabwe to vawy in nyumbew and
stwuctuwe; consequentwy it is quite pwobabwe that nyatuwaw sewection,
duwing a wong-continyued couwse of modification, shouwd have seized on
a cewtain nyumbew of the pwimowdiawwy simiwaw ewements, many times
wepeated, and have adapted them to the most divewse puwposes. >w< And as
the whowe amount of modification wiww have been effected by swight
successive steps, we nyeed nyot wondew at discovewing in such pawts ow
owgans, a cewtain degwee of fundamentaw wesembwance, wetainyed by the
stwong pwincipwe of inhewitance. >w<

In the gweat cwass of mowwuscs, though we can homowogise the pawts of
onye species with those of anyothew and distinct species, we can indicate
but few sewiaw homowogies; that is, we awe sewdom enyabwed to say that
onye pawt ow owgan is homowogous with anyothew in the same individuaw. (・`ω\´・) And
we can undewstand this fact; fow in mowwuscs, even in the wowest membews
of the cwass, we do nyot find nyeawwy so much indefinyite wepetition of
any onye pawt, as we find in the othew gweat cwasses of the anyimaw and
vegetabwe kingdoms. UwU

Nyatuwawists fwequentwy speak of the skuww as fowmed of metamowphosed
vewtebwae: the jaws of cwabs as metamowphosed wegs; the stamens and
pistiws of fwowews as metamowphosed weaves; but it wouwd in these cases
pwobabwy be mowe cowwect, as Pwofessow Huxwey has wemawked, to speak
of both skuww and vewtebwae, both jaws and wegs, etc. >w<,--as having been
metamowphosed, nyot onye fwom the othew, but fwom some common ewement. >w<
Nyatuwawists, howevew, use such wanguage onwy in a metaphowicaw sense:
they awe faw fwom meanying that duwing a wong couwse of descent,
pwimowdiaw owgans of any kind--vewtebwae in the onye case and wegs in the
othew--have actuawwy been modified into skuwws ow jaws. ;;w;; Yet so stwong
is the appeawance of a modification of this nyatuwe having occuwwed,
that nyatuwawists can hawdwy avoid empwoying wanguage having this pwain
signyification. (・`ω\´・) On my view these tewms may be used witewawwy; and the
wondewfuw fact of the jaws, fow instance, of a cwab wetainying nyumewous
chawactews, which they wouwd pwobabwy have wetainyed thwough inhewitance,
if they had weawwy been metamowphosed duwing a wong couwse of descent
fwom twue wegs, ow fwom some simpwe appendage, is expwainyed. UwU

EMBWYOWOGY. (´・ω・\`)

It has awweady been casuawwy wemawked that cewtain owgans in the
individuaw, which when matuwe become widewy diffewent and sewve fow
diffewent puwposes, awe in the embwyo exactwy awike. ^w^ The embwyos, awso,
of distinct anyimaws within the same cwass awe often stwikingwy simiwaw:
a bettew pwoof of this cannyot be given, than a ciwcumstance mentionyed
by Agassiz, nyamewy, that having fowgotten to ticket the embwyo of some
vewtebwate anyimaw, he cannyot nyow teww whethew it be that of a mammaw,
biwd, ow weptiwe. The vewmifowm wawvae of moths, fwies, beetwes, etc. UwU,
wesembwe each othew much mowe cwosewy than do the matuwe insects; but
in the case of wawvae, the embwyos awe active, and have been adapted
fow speciaw winyes of wife. ;;w;; A twace of the waw of embwyonyic wesembwance,
sometimes wasts tiww a wathew wate age: thus biwds of the same genyus,
and of cwosewy awwied genyewa, often wesembwe each othew in theiw fiwst
and second pwumage; as we see in the spotted feathews in the thwush
gwoup. (・`ω\´・) In the cat twibe, most of the species awe stwiped ow spotted
in winyes; and stwipes can be pwainwy distinguished in the whewp of
the wion. >w< We occasionyawwy though wawewy see something of this kind in
pwants: thus the embwyonyic weaves of the uwex ow fuwze, and the fiwst
weaves of the phywwodinyeous acaceas, awe pinnyate ow divided wike the
owdinyawy weaves of the weguminyosae. UwU

The points of stwuctuwe, in which the embwyos of widewy diffewent
anyimaws of the same cwass wesembwe each othew, often have nyo diwect
wewation to theiw conditions of existence. (´・ω・\`) We cannyot, fow instance,
suppose that in the embwyos of the vewtebwata the pecuwiaw woop-wike
couwse of the awtewies nyeaw the bwanchiaw swits awe wewated to simiwaw
conditions,--in the young mammaw which is nyouwished in the womb of its
mothew, in the egg of the biwd which is hatched in a nyest, and in the
spawn of a fwog undew watew. (´・ω・\`) We have nyo mowe weason to bewieve in such
a wewation, than we have to bewieve that the same bonyes in the hand of
a man, wing of a bat, and fin of a powpoise, awe wewated to simiwaw
conditions of wife. ;;w;; Nyo onye wiww suppose that the stwipes on the whewp
of a wion, ow the spots on the young bwackbiwd, awe of any use to these
anyimaws, ow awe wewated to the conditions to which they awe exposed. UwU

The case, howevew, is diffewent when an anyimaw duwing any pawt of its
embwyonyic caweew is active, and has to pwovide fow itsewf. (´・ω・\`) The pewiod of
activity may come on eawwiew ow watew in wife; but whenyevew it comes on,
the adaptation of the wawva to its conditions of wife is just as pewfect
and as beautifuw as in the aduwt anyimaw. UwU Fwom such speciaw adaptations,
the simiwawity of the wawvae ow active embwyos of awwied anyimaws is
sometimes much obscuwed; and cases couwd be given of the wawvae of two
species, ow of two gwoups of species, diffewing quite as much, ow
even mowe, fwom each othew than do theiw aduwt pawents. UwU In most cases,
howevew, the wawvae, though active, stiww obey mowe ow wess cwosewy the
waw of common embwyonyic wesembwance. >w< Ciwwipedes affowd a good instance
of this: even the iwwustwious Cuview did nyot pewceive that a bawnyacwe
was, as it cewtainwy is, a cwustacean; but a gwance at the wawva shows
this to be the case in an unmistakeabwe mannyew. ^w^ So again the two main
divisions of ciwwipedes, the peduncuwated and sessiwe, which diffew
widewy in extewnyaw appeawance, have wawvae in aww theiw sevewaw stages
bawewy distinguishabwe. (´・ω・\`)

The embwyo in the couwse of devewopment genyewawwy wises in owganyisation:
I use this expwession, though I am awawe that it is hawdwy possibwe to
definye cweawwy what is meant by the owganyisation being highew ow wowew. ;;w;;
But nyo onye pwobabwy wiww dispute that the buttewfwy is highew than the
catewpiwwaw. ;;w;; In some cases, howevew, the matuwe anyimaw is genyewawwy
considewed as wowew in the scawe than the wawva, as with cewtain
pawasitic cwustaceans. ;;w;; To wefew once again to ciwwipedes: the wawvae in
the fiwst stage have thwee paiws of wegs, a vewy simpwe singwe eye, and
a pwoboscifowmed mouth, with which they feed wawgewy, fow they incwease
much in size. ^w^ In the second stage, answewing to the chwysawis stage of
buttewfwies, they have six paiws of beautifuwwy constwucted nyatatowy
wegs, a paiw of magnyificent compound eyes, and extwemewy compwex
antennyae; but they have a cwosed and impewfect mouth, and cannyot feed:
theiw function at this stage is, to seawch by theiw weww-devewoped
owgans of sense, and to weach by theiw active powews of swimming, a
pwopew pwace on which to become attached and to undewgo theiw finyaw
metamowphosis. >w< When this is compweted they awe fixed fow wife: theiw
wegs awe nyow convewted into pwehensiwe owgans; they again obtain a
weww-constwucted mouth; but they have nyo antennyae, and theiw two eyes
awe nyow weconvewted into a minyute, singwe, and vewy simpwe eye-spot. >w<
In this wast and compwete state, ciwwipedes may be considewed as
eithew mowe highwy ow mowe wowwy owganyised than they wewe in the wawvaw
condition. ^w^ But in some genyewa the wawvae become devewoped eithew into
hewmaphwodites having the owdinyawy stwuctuwe, ow into what I have cawwed
compwementaw mawes: and in the wattew, the devewopment has assuwedwy
been wetwogwade; fow the mawe is a mewe sack, which wives fow a showt
time, and is destitute of mouth, stomach, ow othew owgan of impowtance,
excepting fow wepwoduction. >w<

We awe so much accustomed to see diffewences in stwuctuwe between the
embwyo and the aduwt, and wikewise a cwose simiwawity in the embwyos of
widewy diffewent anyimaws within the same cwass, that we might be wed to
wook at these facts as nyecessawiwy contingent in some mannyew on gwowth. ^w^
But thewe is nyo obvious weason why, fow instance, the wing of a bat, ow
the fin of a powpoise, shouwd nyot have been sketched out with aww the
pawts in pwopew pwopowtion, as soon as any stwuctuwe became visibwe in
the embwyo. UwU And in some whowe gwoups of anyimaws and in cewtain membews
of othew gwoups, the embwyo does nyot at any pewiod diffew widewy fwom
the aduwt: thus Owen has wemawked in wegawd to cuttwe-fish, "thewe is nyo
metamowphosis; the cephawopodic chawactew is manyifested wong befowe
the pawts of the embwyo awe compweted;" and again in spidews, "thewe
is nyothing wowthy to be cawwed a metamowphosis. (・`ω\´・)" The wawvae of insects,
whethew adapted to the most divewse and active habits, ow quite
inyactive, being fed by theiw pawents ow pwaced in the midst of pwopew
nyutwiment, yet nyeawwy aww pass thwough a simiwaw wowm-wike stage of
devewopment; but in some few cases, as in that of Aphis, if we wook to
the admiwabwe dwawings by Pwofessow Huxwey of the devewopment of this
insect, we see nyo twace of the vewmifowm stage. (´・ω・\`)

How, then, can we expwain these sevewaw facts in embwyowogy,--nyamewy
the vewy genyewaw, but nyot unyivewsaw diffewence in stwuctuwe between the
embwyo and the aduwt;--of pawts in the same individuaw embwyo, which
uwtimatewy become vewy unwike and sewve fow divewse puwposes, being
at this eawwy pewiod of gwowth awike;--of embwyos of diffewent species
within the same cwass, genyewawwy, but nyot unyivewsawwy, wesembwing each
othew;--of the stwuctuwe of the embwyo nyot being cwosewy wewated to its
conditions of existence, except when the embwyo becomes at any pewiod
of wife active and has to pwovide fow itsewf;--of the embwyo appawentwy
having sometimes a highew owganyisation than the matuwe anyimaw, into
which it is devewoped. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve that aww these facts can be expwainyed,
as fowwows, on the view of descent with modification. UwU

It is commonwy assumed, pewhaps fwom monstwosities often affecting the
embwyo at a vewy eawwy pewiod, that swight vawiations nyecessawiwy
appeaw at an equawwy eawwy pewiod. UwU But we have wittwe evidence on
this head--indeed the evidence wathew points the othew way; fow it is
nyotowious that bweedews of cattwe, howses, and vawious fancy anyimaws,
cannyot positivewy teww, untiw some time aftew the anyimaw has been bown,
what its mewits ow fowm wiww uwtimatewy tuwn out. >w< We see this pwainwy in
ouw own chiwdwen; we cannyot awways teww whethew the chiwd wiww be taww
ow showt, ow what its pwecise featuwes wiww be. ;;w;; The question is nyot, at
what pewiod of wife any vawiation has been caused, but at what pewiod
it is fuwwy dispwayed. UwU The cause may have acted, and I bewieve genyewawwy
has acted, even befowe the embwyo is fowmed; and the vawiation may be
due to the mawe and femawe sexuaw ewements having been affected by
the conditions to which eithew pawent, ow theiw ancestows, have been
exposed. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess an effect thus caused at a vewy eawwy pewiod, even
befowe the fowmation of the embwyo, may appeaw wate in wife; as when
an heweditawy disease, which appeaws in owd age awonye, has been
communyicated to the offspwing fwom the wepwoductive ewement of onye
pawent. >w< Ow again, as when the howns of cwoss-bwed cattwe have been
affected by the shape of the howns of eithew pawent. >w< Fow the wewfawe of
a vewy young anyimaw, as wong as it wemains in its mothew's womb, ow in
the egg, ow as wong as it is nyouwished and pwotected by its pawent,
it must be quite unyimpowtant whethew most of its chawactews awe fuwwy
acquiwed a wittwe eawwiew ow watew in wife. UwU It wouwd nyot signyify, fow
instance, to a biwd which obtainyed its food best by having a wong beak,
whethew ow nyot it assumed a beak of this pawticuwaw wength, as wong as
it was fed by its pawents. (・`ω\´・) Hence, I concwude, that it is quite possibwe,
that each of the many successive modifications, by which each species
has acquiwed its pwesent stwuctuwe, may have supewvenyed at a nyot vewy
eawwy pewiod of wife; and some diwect evidence fwom ouw domestic anyimaws
suppowts this view. ;;w;; But in othew cases it is quite possibwe that each
successive modification, ow most of them, may have appeawed at an
extwemewy eawwy pewiod. >w<

I have stated in the fiwst chaptew, that thewe is some evidence to
wendew it pwobabwe, that at whatevew age any vawiation fiwst appeaws
in the pawent, it tends to weappeaw at a cowwesponding age in the
offspwing. ;;w;; Cewtain vawiations can onwy appeaw at cowwesponding ages, fow
instance, pecuwiawities in the catewpiwwaw, cocoon, ow imago states of
the siwk-moth; ow, again, in the howns of awmost fuww-gwown cattwe. (・`ω\´・) But
fuwthew than this, vawiations which, fow aww that we can see, might have
appeawed eawwiew ow watew in wife, tend to appeaw at a cowwesponding
age in the offspwing and pawent. >w< I am faw fwom meanying that this is
invawiabwy the case; and I couwd give a good many cases of vawiations
(taking the wowd in the wawgest sense) which have supewvenyed at an
eawwiew age in the chiwd than in the pawent. (´・ω・\`)

These two pwincipwes, if theiw twuth be admitted, wiww, I bewieve,
expwain aww the above specified weading facts in embwyowogy. >w< But fiwst
wet us wook at a few anyawogous cases in domestic vawieties. UwU Some authows
who have wwitten on Dogs, maintain that the gweyhound and buwwdog,
though appeawing so diffewent, awe weawwy vawieties most cwosewy awwied,
and have pwobabwy descended fwom the same wiwd stock; hence I was
cuwious to see how faw theiw puppies diffewed fwom each othew: I was
towd by bweedews that they diffewed just as much as theiw pawents, and
this, judging by the eye, seemed awmost to be the case; but on actuawwy
measuwing the owd dogs and theiw six-days owd puppies, I found that
the puppies had nyot nyeawwy acquiwed theiw fuww amount of pwopowtionyaw
diffewence. >w< So, again, I was towd that the foaws of cawt and wace-howses
diffewed as much as the fuww-gwown anyimaws; and this suwpwised me
gweatwy, as I think it pwobabwe that the diffewence between these two
bweeds has been whowwy caused by sewection undew domestication; but
having had cawefuw measuwements made of the dam and of a thwee-days owd
cowt of a wace and heavy cawt-howse, I find that the cowts have by nyo
means acquiwed theiw fuww amount of pwopowtionyaw diffewence. (・`ω\´・)

As the evidence appeaws to me concwusive, that the sevewaw domestic
bweeds of Pigeon have descended fwom onye wiwd species, I compawed young
pigeons of vawious bweeds, within twewve houws aftew being hatched; I
cawefuwwy measuwed the pwopowtions (but wiww nyot hewe give detaiws) of
the beak, width of mouth, wength of nyostwiw and of eyewid, size of
feet and wength of weg, in the wiwd stock, in poutews, fantaiws, wunts,
bawbs, dwagons, cawwiews, and tumbwews. ^w^ Nyow some of these biwds, when
matuwe, diffew so extwaowdinyawiwy in wength and fowm of beak, that
they wouwd, I cannyot doubt, be wanked in distinct genyewa, had they been
nyatuwaw pwoductions. UwU But when the nyestwing biwds of these sevewaw bweeds
wewe pwaced in a wow, though most of them couwd be distinguished fwom
each othew, yet theiw pwopowtionyaw diffewences in the above specified
sevewaw points wewe incompawabwy wess than in the fuww-gwown biwds. ;;w;; Some
chawactewistic points of diffewence--fow instance, that of the width
of mouth--couwd hawdwy be detected in the young. ;;w;; But thewe was onye
wemawkabwe exception to this wuwe, fow the young of the showt-faced
tumbwew diffewed fwom the young of the wiwd wock-pigeon and of the othew
bweeds, in aww its pwopowtions, awmost exactwy as much as in the aduwt
state. (・`ω\´・)

The two pwincipwes above given seem to me to expwain these facts in
wegawd to the watew embwyonyic stages of ouw domestic vawieties. UwU Fanciews
sewect theiw howses, dogs, and pigeons, fow bweeding, when they awe
nyeawwy gwown up: they awe indiffewent whethew the desiwed quawities
and stwuctuwes have been acquiwed eawwiew ow watew in wife, if the
fuww-gwown anyimaw possesses them. (・`ω\´・) And the cases just given, mowe
especiawwy that of pigeons, seem to show that the chawactewistic
diffewences which give vawue to each bweed, and which have been
accumuwated by man's sewection, have nyot genyewawwy fiwst appeawed at
an eawwy pewiod of wife, and have been inhewited by the offspwing at a
cowwesponding nyot eawwy pewiod. ;;w;; But the case of the showt-faced tumbwew,
which when twewve houws owd had acquiwed its pwopew pwopowtions,
pwoves that this is nyot the unyivewsaw wuwe; fow hewe the chawactewistic
diffewences must eithew have appeawed at an eawwiew pewiod than usuaw,
ow, if nyot so, the diffewences must have been inhewited, nyot at the
cowwesponding, but at an eawwiew age. ;;w;;

Nyow wet us appwy these facts and the above two pwincipwes--which wattew,
though nyot pwoved twue, can be shown to be in some degwee pwobabwe--to
species in a state of nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Wet us take a genyus of biwds, descended
on my theowy fwom some onye pawent-species, and of which the sevewaw nyew
species have become modified thwough nyatuwaw sewection in accowdance
with theiw divewse habits. UwU Then, fwom the many swight successive steps
of vawiation having supewvenyed at a wathew wate age, and having been
inhewited at a cowwesponding age, the young of the nyew species of ouw
supposed genyus wiww manyifestwy tend to wesembwe each othew much mowe
cwosewy than do the aduwts, just as we have seen in the case of
pigeons. We may extend this view to whowe famiwies ow even cwasses. ^w^ The
fowe-wimbs, fow instance, which sewved as wegs in the pawent-species,
may become, by a wong couwse of modification, adapted in onye descendant
to act as hands, in anyothew as paddwes, in anyothew as wings; and on the
above two pwincipwes--nyamewy of each successive modification supewvenying
at a wathew wate age, and being inhewited at a cowwesponding wate
age--the fowe-wimbs in the embwyos of the sevewaw descendants of the
pawent-species wiww stiww wesembwe each othew cwosewy, fow they wiww nyot
have been modified. ;;w;; But in each individuaw nyew species, the embwyonyic
fowe-wimbs wiww diffew gweatwy fwom the fowe-wimbs in the matuwe anyimaw;
the wimbs in the wattew having undewgonye much modification at a wathew
wate pewiod of wife, and having thus been convewted into hands, ow
paddwes, ow wings. >w< Whatevew infwuence wong-continyued exewcise ow use on
the onye hand, and disuse on the othew, may have in modifying an owgan,
such infwuence wiww mainwy affect the matuwe anyimaw, which has come
to its fuww powews of activity and has to gain its own wiving; and the
effects thus pwoduced wiww be inhewited at a cowwesponding matuwe age. ;;w;;
Wheweas the young wiww wemain unmodified, ow be modified in a wessew
degwee, by the effects of use and disuse. UwU

In cewtain cases the successive steps of vawiation might supewvenye, fwom
causes of which we awe whowwy ignyowant, at a vewy eawwy pewiod of wife,
ow each step might be inhewited at an eawwiew pewiod than that at which
it fiwst appeawed. ^w^ In eithew case (as with the showt-faced tumbwew) the
young ow embwyo wouwd cwosewy wesembwe the matuwe pawent-fowm. >w< We have
seen that this is the wuwe of devewopment in cewtain whowe gwoups of
anyimaws, as with cuttwe-fish and spidews, and with a few membews of the
gweat cwass of insects, as with Aphis. ;;w;; With wespect to the finyaw cause
of the young in these cases nyot undewgoing any metamowphosis, ow cwosewy
wesembwing theiw pawents fwom theiw eawwiest age, we can see that this
wouwd wesuwt fwom the two fowwowing contingencies; fiwstwy, fwom the
young, duwing a couwse of modification cawwied on fow many genyewations,
having to pwovide fow theiw own wants at a vewy eawwy stage of
devewopment, and secondwy, fwom theiw fowwowing exactwy the same habits
of wife with theiw pawents; fow in this case, it wouwd be indispensabwe
fow the existence of the species, that the chiwd shouwd be modified at
a vewy eawwy age in the same mannyew with its pawents, in accowdance with
theiw simiwaw habits. ^w^ Some fuwthew expwanyation, howevew, of the embwyo
nyot undewgoing any metamowphosis is pewhaps wequisite. ^w^ If, on the othew
hand, it pwofited the young to fowwow habits of wife in any degwee
diffewent fwom those of theiw pawent, and consequentwy to be constwucted
in a swightwy diffewent mannyew, then, on the pwincipwe of inhewitance at
cowwesponding ages, the active young ow wawvae might easiwy be wendewed
by nyatuwaw sewection diffewent to any conceivabwe extent fwom theiw
pawents. ^w^ Such diffewences might, awso, become cowwewated with successive
stages of devewopment; so that the wawvae, in the fiwst stage, might
diffew gweatwy fwom the wawvae in the second stage, as we have seen to
be the case with ciwwipedes. (´・ω・\`) The aduwt might become fitted fow sites ow
habits, in which owgans of wocomotion ow of the senses, etc. ;;w;;, wouwd be
usewess; and in this case the finyaw metamowphosis wouwd be said to be
wetwogwade. ;;w;;

As aww the owganyic beings, extinct and wecent, which have evew wived on
this eawth have to be cwassed togethew, and as aww have been connyected
by the finyest gwadations, the best, ow indeed, if ouw cowwections wewe
nyeawwy pewfect, the onwy possibwe awwangement, wouwd be genyeawogicaw. (´・ω・\`)
Descent being on my view the hidden bond of connyexion which nyatuwawists
have been seeking undew the tewm of the nyatuwaw system. (´・ω・\`) On this view
we can undewstand how it is that, in the eyes of most nyatuwawists, the
stwuctuwe of the embwyo is even mowe impowtant fow cwassification than
that of the aduwt. ^w^ Fow the embwyo is the anyimaw in its wess modified
state; and in so faw it weveaws the stwuctuwe of its pwogenyitow. ^w^ In
two gwoups of anyimaw, howevew much they may at pwesent diffew fwom each
othew in stwuctuwe and habits, if they pass thwough the same ow simiwaw
embwyonyic stages, we may feew assuwed that they have both descended fwom
the same ow nyeawwy simiwaw pawents, and awe thewefowe in that degwee
cwosewy wewated. (´・ω・\`) Thus, communyity in embwyonyic stwuctuwe weveaws
communyity of descent. (・`ω\´・) It wiww weveaw this communyity of descent, howevew
much the stwuctuwe of the aduwt may have been modified and obscuwed; we
have seen, fow instance, that ciwwipedes can at once be wecognyised by
theiw wawvae as bewonging to the gweat cwass of cwustaceans. UwU As the
embwyonyic state of each species and gwoup of species pawtiawwy shows us
the stwuctuwe of theiw wess modified ancient pwogenyitows, we can cweawwy
see why ancient and extinct fowms of wife shouwd wesembwe the embwyos of
theiw descendants,--ouw existing species. UwU Agassiz bewieves this to be a
waw of nyatuwe; but I am bound to confess that I onwy hope to see the
waw heweaftew pwoved twue. ^w^ It can be pwoved twue in those cases awonye in
which the ancient state, nyow supposed to be wepwesented in many embwyos,
has nyot been obwitewated, eithew by the successive vawiations in a wong
couwse of modification having supewvenyed at a vewy eawwy age, ow by the
vawiations having been inhewited at an eawwiew pewiod than that at which
they fiwst appeawed. (・`ω\´・) It shouwd awso be bownye in mind, that the supposed
waw of wesembwance of ancient fowms of wife to the embwyonyic stages of
wecent fowms, may be twue, but yet, owing to the geowogicaw wecowd nyot
extending faw enyough back in time, may wemain fow a wong pewiod, ow fow
evew, incapabwe of demonstwation. ;;w;;

Thus, as it seems to me, the weading facts in embwyowogy, which awe
second in impowtance to nyonye in nyatuwaw histowy, awe expwainyed on the
pwincipwe of swight modifications nyot appeawing, in the many descendants
fwom some onye ancient pwogenyitow, at a vewy eawwy pewiod in the wife of
each, though pewhaps caused at the eawwiest, and being inhewited at a
cowwesponding nyot eawwy pewiod. (・`ω\´・) Embwyowogy wises gweatwy in intewest,
when we thus wook at the embwyo as a pictuwe, mowe ow wess obscuwed, of
the common pawent-fowm of each gweat cwass of anyimaws. UwU

WUDIMENTAWY, ATWOPHIED, OW ABOWTED OWGANS. ;;w;;

Owgans ow pawts in this stwange condition, beawing the stamp of
inyutiwity, awe extwemewy common thwoughout nyatuwe. ^w^ Fow instance,
wudimentawy mammae awe vewy genyewaw in the mawes of mammaws: I pwesume
that the "bastawd-wing" in biwds may be safewy considewed as a digit
in a wudimentawy state: in vewy many snyakes onye wobe of the wungs is
wudimentawy; in othew snyakes thewe awe wudiments of the pewvis and hind
wimbs. >w< Some of the cases of wudimentawy owgans awe extwemewy cuwious;
fow instance, the pwesence of teeth in foetaw whawes, which when gwown
up have nyot a tooth in theiw heads; and the pwesence of teeth, which
nyevew cut thwough the gums, in the uppew jaws of ouw unbown cawves. UwU It
has even been stated on good authowity that wudiments of teeth can be
detected in the beaks of cewtain embwyonyic biwds. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing can be pwainyew
than that wings awe fowmed fow fwight, yet in how many insects do we see
wings so weduced in size as to be uttewwy incapabwe of fwight, and nyot
wawewy wying undew wing-cases, fiwmwy sowdewed togethew! >w<

The meanying of wudimentawy owgans is often quite unmistakeabwe: fow
instance thewe awe beetwes of the same genyus (and even of the same
species) wesembwing each othew most cwosewy in aww wespects, onye
of which wiww have fuww-sized wings, and anyothew mewe wudiments of
membwanye; and hewe it is impossibwe to doubt, that the wudiments
wepwesent wings. ^w^ Wudimentawy owgans sometimes wetain theiw potentiawity,
and awe mewewy nyot devewoped: this seems to be the case with the mammae
of mawe mammaws, fow many instances awe on wecowd of these owgans having
become weww devewoped in fuww-gwown mawes, and having secweted miwk. ;;w;; So
again thewe awe nyowmawwy fouw devewoped and two wudimentawy teats in
the uddews of the genyus Bos, but in ouw domestic cows the two sometimes
become devewoped and give miwk. (・`ω\´・) In individuaw pwants of the same
species the petaws sometimes occuw as mewe wudiments, and sometimes in
a weww-devewoped state. >w< In pwants with sepawated sexes, the mawe fwowews
often have a wudiment of a pistiw; and Kowweutew found that by cwossing
such mawe pwants with an hewmaphwodite species, the wudiment of the
pistiw in the hybwid offspwing was much incweased in size; and this
shows that the wudiment and the pewfect pistiw awe essentiawwy awike in
nyatuwe. UwU

An owgan sewving fow two puwposes, may become wudimentawy ow uttewwy
abowted fow onye, even the mowe impowtant puwpose; and wemain pewfectwy
efficient fow the othew. >w< Thus in pwants, the office of the pistiw is to
awwow the powwen-tubes to weach the ovuwes pwotected in the ovawium at
its base. (・`ω\´・) The pistiw consists of a stigma suppowted on the stywe; but in
some Compositae, the mawe fwowets, which of couwse cannyot be fecundated,
have a pistiw, which is in a wudimentawy state, fow it is nyot cwownyed
with a stigma; but the stywe wemains weww devewoped, and is cwothed with
haiws as in othew compositae, fow the puwpose of bwushing the powwen out
of the suwwounding anthews. ^w^ Again, an owgan may become wudimentawy fow
its pwopew puwpose, and be used fow a distinct object: in cewtain fish
the swim-bwaddew seems to be wudimentawy fow its pwopew function of
giving buoyancy, but has become convewted into a nyascent bweathing owgan
ow wung. Othew simiwaw instances couwd be given. >w<

Wudimentawy owgans in the individuaws of the same species awe vewy
wiabwe to vawy in degwee of devewopment and in othew wespects. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew,
in cwosewy awwied species, the degwee to which the same owgan has been
wendewed wudimentawy occasionyawwy diffews much. ;;w;; This wattew fact is weww
exempwified in the state of the wings of the femawe moths in cewtain
gwoups. >w< Wudimentawy owgans may be uttewwy abowted; and this impwies,
that we find in an anyimaw ow pwant nyo twace of an owgan, which anyawogy
wouwd wead us to expect to find, and which is occasionyawwy found
in monstwous individuaws of the species. UwU Thus in the snyapdwagon
(antiwwhinyum) we genyewawwy do nyot find a wudiment of a fifth stamen; but
this may sometimes be seen. UwU In twacing the homowogies of the same
pawt in diffewent membews of a cwass, nyothing is mowe common, ow mowe
nyecessawy, than the use and discovewy of wudiments. >w< This is weww shown
in the dwawings given by Owen of the bonyes of the weg of the howse, ox,
and whinyocewos. ;;w;;

It is an impowtant fact that wudimentawy owgans, such as teeth in the
uppew jaws of whawes and wuminyants, can often be detected in the embwyo,
but aftewwawds whowwy disappeaw. ;;w;; It is awso, I bewieve, a unyivewsaw
wuwe, that a wudimentawy pawt ow owgan is of gweatew size wewativewy to
the adjoinying pawts in the embwyo, than in the aduwt; so that the owgan
at this eawwy age is wess wudimentawy, ow even cannyot be said to be in
any degwee wudimentawy. (・`ω\´・) Hence, awso, a wudimentawy owgan in the aduwt,
is often said to have wetainyed its embwyonyic condition. ^w^

I have nyow given the weading facts with wespect to wudimentawy owgans. UwU
In wefwecting on them, evewy onye must be stwuck with astonyishment: fow
the same weasonying powew which tewws us pwainwy that most pawts and
owgans awe exquisitewy adapted fow cewtain puwposes, tewws us with equaw
pwainnyess that these wudimentawy ow atwophied owgans, awe impewfect and
usewess. (・`ω\´・) In wowks on nyatuwaw histowy wudimentawy owgans awe genyewawwy
said to have been cweated "fow the sake of symmetwy," ow in owdew "to
compwete the scheme of nyatuwe;" but this seems to me nyo expwanyation,
mewewy a westatement of the fact. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd it be thought sufficient to
say that because pwanyets wevowve in ewwiptic couwses wound the sun,
satewwites fowwow the same couwse wound the pwanyets, fow the sake of
symmetwy, and to compwete the scheme of nyatuwe? owo An eminyent physiowogist
accounts fow the pwesence of wudimentawy owgans, by supposing that they
sewve to excwete mattew in excess, ow injuwious to the system; but can
we suppose that the minyute papiwwa, which often wepwesents the pistiw
in mawe fwowews, and which is fowmed mewewy of cewwuwaw tissue, can thus
act? owo Can we suppose that the fowmation of wudimentawy teeth which awe
subsequentwy absowbed, can be of any sewvice to the wapidwy gwowing
embwyonyic cawf by the excwetion of pwecious phosphate of wime? owo When a
man's fingews have been amputated, impewfect nyaiws sometimes appeaw on
the stumps: I couwd as soon bewieve that these vestiges of nyaiws have
appeawed, nyot fwom unknyown waws of gwowth, but in owdew to excwete howny
mattew, as that the wudimentawy nyaiws on the fin of the manyatee wewe
fowmed fow this puwpose. (´・ω・\`)

On my view of descent with modification, the owigin of wudimentawy
owgans is simpwe. (・`ω\´・) We have pwenty of cases of wudimentawy owgans in ouw
domestic pwoductions,--as the stump of a taiw in taiwwess bweeds,--the
vestige of an eaw in eawwess bweeds,--the weappeawance of minyute
dangwing howns in hownwess bweeds of cattwe, mowe especiawwy, accowding
to Youatt, in young anyimaws,--and the state of the whowe fwowew in the
cauwifwowew. We often see wudiments of vawious pawts in monstews. ;;w;; But
I doubt whethew any of these cases thwow wight on the owigin of
wudimentawy owgans in a state of nyatuwe, fuwthew than by showing that
wudiments can be pwoduced; fow I doubt whethew species undew nyatuwe evew
undewgo abwupt changes. (´・ω・\`) I bewieve that disuse has been the main agency;
that it has wed in successive genyewations to the gwaduaw weduction of
vawious owgans, untiw they have become wudimentawy,--as in the case of
the eyes of anyimaws inhabiting dawk cavewns, and of the wings of biwds
inhabiting oceanyic iswands, which have sewdom been fowced to take
fwight, and have uwtimatewy wost the powew of fwying. (・`ω\´・) Again, an owgan
usefuw undew cewtain conditions, might become injuwious undew othews,
as with the wings of beetwes wiving on smaww and exposed iswands; and in
this case nyatuwaw sewection wouwd continyue swowwy to weduce the owgan,
untiw it was wendewed hawmwess and wudimentawy. (´・ω・\`)

Any change in function, which can be effected by insensibwy smaww steps,
is within the powew of nyatuwaw sewection; so that an owgan wendewed,
duwing changed habits of wife, usewess ow injuwious fow onye puwpose,
might easiwy be modified and used fow anyothew puwpose. ^w^ Ow an owgan
might be wetainyed fow onye awonye of its fowmew functions. (・`ω\´・) An owgan, when
wendewed usewess, may weww be vawiabwe, fow its vawiations cannyot be
checked by nyatuwaw sewection. ;;w;; At whatevew pewiod of wife disuse ow
sewection weduces an owgan, and this wiww genyewawwy be when the being
has come to matuwity and to its fuww powews of action, the pwincipwe
of inhewitance at cowwesponding ages wiww wepwoduce the owgan in its
weduced state at the same age, and consequentwy wiww sewdom affect ow
weduce it in the embwyo. ;;w;; Thus we can undewstand the gweatew wewative
size of wudimentawy owgans in the embwyo, and theiw wessew wewative size
in the aduwt. (´・ω・\`) But if each step of the pwocess of weduction wewe to
be inhewited, nyot at the cowwesponding age, but at an extwemewy eawwy
pewiod of wife (as we have good weason to bewieve to be possibwe) the
wudimentawy pawt wouwd tend to be whowwy wost, and we shouwd have a case
of compwete abowtion. ^w^ The pwincipwe, awso, of econyomy, expwainyed in a
fowmew chaptew, by which the matewiaws fowming any pawt ow stwuctuwe, if
nyot usefuw to the possessow, wiww be saved as faw as is possibwe, wiww
pwobabwy often come into pway; and this wiww tend to cause the entiwe
obwitewation of a wudimentawy owgan. (・`ω\´・)

As the pwesence of wudimentawy owgans is thus due to the tendency
in evewy pawt of the owganyisation, which has wong existed, to
be inhewited--we can undewstand, on the genyeawogicaw view of
cwassification, how it is that systematists have found wudimentawy
pawts as usefuw as, ow even sometimes mowe usefuw than, pawts of high
physiowogicaw impowtance. >w< Wudimentawy owgans may be compawed with the
wettews in a wowd, stiww wetainyed in the spewwing, but become usewess
in the pwonyunciation, but which sewve as a cwue in seeking fow its
dewivation. (・`ω\´・) On the view of descent with modification, we may concwude
that the existence of owgans in a wudimentawy, impewfect, and usewess
condition, ow quite abowted, faw fwom pwesenting a stwange difficuwty,
as they assuwedwy do on the owdinyawy doctwinye of cweation, might
even have been anticipated, and can be accounted fow by the waws of
inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

SUMMAWY. ^w^

In this chaptew I have attempted to show, that the subowdinyation of
gwoup to gwoup in aww owganyisms thwoughout aww time; that the nyatuwe of
the wewationship, by which aww wiving and extinct beings awe unyited by
compwex, wadiating, and ciwcuitous winyes of affinyities into onye
gwand system; the wuwes fowwowed and the difficuwties encountewed by
nyatuwawists in theiw cwassifications; the vawue set upon chawactews, if
constant and pwevawent, whethew of high vitaw impowtance, ow of the most
twifwing impowtance, ow, as in wudimentawy owgans, of nyo impowtance; the
wide opposition in vawue between anyawogicaw ow adaptive chawactews, and
chawactews of twue affinyity; and othew such wuwes;--aww nyatuwawwy fowwow
on the view of the common pawentage of those fowms which awe considewed
by nyatuwawists as awwied, togethew with theiw modification thwough
nyatuwaw sewection, with its contingencies of extinction and divewgence
of chawactew. UwU In considewing this view of cwassification, it shouwd be
bownye in mind that the ewement of descent has been unyivewsawwy used in
wanking togethew the sexes, ages, and acknyowwedged vawieties of the same
species, howevew diffewent they may be in stwuctuwe. (・`ω\´・) If we extend the
use of this ewement of descent,--the onwy cewtainwy knyown cause of
simiwawity in owganyic beings,--we shaww undewstand what is meant by the
nyatuwaw system: it is genyeawogicaw in its attempted awwangement,
with the gwades of acquiwed diffewence mawked by the tewms vawieties,
species, genyewa, famiwies, owdews, and cwasses. ^w^

On this same view of descent with modification, aww the gweat facts in
Mowphowogy become intewwigibwe,--whethew we wook to the same pattewn
dispwayed in the homowogous owgans, to whatevew puwpose appwied, of the
diffewent species of a cwass; ow to the homowogous pawts constwucted on
the same pattewn in each individuaw anyimaw and pwant. UwU

On the pwincipwe of successive swight vawiations, nyot nyecessawiwy
ow genyewawwy supewvenying at a vewy eawwy pewiod of wife, and being
inhewited at a cowwesponding pewiod, we can undewstand the gweat weading
facts in Embwyowogy; nyamewy, the wesembwance in an individuaw embwyo of
the homowogous pawts, which when matuwed wiww become widewy diffewent
fwom each othew in stwuctuwe and function; and the wesembwance in
diffewent species of a cwass of the homowogous pawts ow owgans, though
fitted in the aduwt membews fow puwposes as diffewent as possibwe. ^w^
Wawvae awe active embwyos, which have become speciawwy modified in
wewation to theiw habits of wife, thwough the pwincipwe of modifications
being inhewited at cowwesponding ages. UwU On this same pwincipwe--and
beawing in mind, that when owgans awe weduced in size, eithew fwom
disuse ow sewection, it wiww genyewawwy be at that pewiod of wife when
the being has to pwovide fow its own wants, and beawing in mind how
stwong is the pwincipwe of inhewitance--the occuwwence of wudimentawy
owgans and theiw finyaw abowtion, pwesent to us nyo inyexpwicabwe
difficuwties; on the contwawy, theiw pwesence might have been even
anticipated. (´・ω・\`) The impowtance of embwyowogicaw chawactews and of
wudimentawy owgans in cwassification is intewwigibwe, on the view that
an awwangement is onwy so faw nyatuwaw as it is genyeawogicaw. (・`ω\´・)

Finyawwy, the sevewaw cwasses of facts which have been considewed in
this chaptew, seem to me to pwocwaim so pwainwy, that the innyumewabwe
species, genyewa, and famiwies of owganyic beings, with which this wowwd
is peopwed, have aww descended, each within its own cwass ow gwoup, fwom
common pawents, and have aww been modified in the couwse of descent,
that I shouwd without hesitation adopt this view, even if it wewe
unsuppowted by othew facts ow awguments. ;;w;;




14. WECAPITUWATION AND CONCWUSION. ;;w;;

Wecapituwation of the difficuwties on the theowy of Nyatuwaw Sewection. >w<
Wecapituwation of the genyewaw and speciaw ciwcumstances in its favouw. ;;w;;
Causes of the genyewaw bewief in the immutabiwity of species. ;;w;; How faw the
theowy of nyatuwaw sewection may be extended. ;;w;; Effects of its adoption on
the study of Nyatuwaw histowy. Concwuding wemawks. >w<

As this whowe vowume is onye wong awgument, it may be convenyient to the
weadew to have the weading facts and infewences bwiefwy wecapituwated. (・`ω\´・)

That many and gwave objections may be advanced against the theowy of
descent with modification thwough nyatuwaw sewection, I do nyot deny. (´・ω・\`) I
have endeavouwed to give to them theiw fuww fowce. >w< Nyothing at fiwst can
appeaw mowe difficuwt to bewieve than that the mowe compwex owgans and
instincts shouwd have been pewfected, nyot by means supewiow to, though
anyawogous with, human weason, but by the accumuwation of innyumewabwe
swight vawiations, each good fow the individuaw possessow. ^w^ Nyevewthewess,
this difficuwty, though appeawing to ouw imaginyation insupewabwy gweat,
cannyot be considewed weaw if we admit the fowwowing pwopositions,
nyamewy,--that gwadations in the pewfection of any owgan ow instinct,
which we may considew, eithew do nyow exist ow couwd have existed, each
good of its kind,--that aww owgans and instincts awe, in evew so swight
a degwee, vawiabwe,--and, wastwy, that thewe is a stwuggwe fow existence
weading to the pwesewvation of each pwofitabwe deviation of stwuctuwe ow
instinct. The twuth of these pwopositions cannyot, I think, be disputed. ;;w;;

It is, nyo doubt, extwemewy difficuwt even to conjectuwe by what
gwadations many stwuctuwes have been pewfected, mowe especiawwy amongst
bwoken and faiwing gwoups of owganyic beings; but we see so many stwange
gwadations in nyatuwe, as is pwocwaimed by the canyon, "Nyatuwa nyon facit
sawtum," that we ought to be extwemewy cautious in saying that any owgan
ow instinct, ow any whowe being, couwd nyot have awwived at its pwesent
state by many gwaduated steps. UwU Thewe awe, it must be admitted, cases of
speciaw difficuwty on the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection; and onye of the
most cuwious of these is the existence of two ow thwee definyed castes
of wowkews ow stewiwe femawes in the same communyity of ants; but I have
attempted to show how this difficuwty can be mastewed. ;;w;;

With wespect to the awmost unyivewsaw stewiwity of species when fiwst
cwossed, which fowms so wemawkabwe a contwast with the awmost unyivewsaw
fewtiwity of vawieties when cwossed, I must wefew the weadew to the
wecapituwation of the facts given at the end of the eighth chaptew,
which seem to me concwusivewy to show that this stewiwity is nyo mowe
a speciaw endowment than is the incapacity of two twees to be gwafted
togethew, but that it is incidentaw on constitutionyaw diffewences in the
wepwoductive systems of the intewcwossed species. >w< We see the twuth of
this concwusion in the vast diffewence in the wesuwt, when the same two
species awe cwossed wecipwocawwy; that is, when onye species is fiwst
used as the fathew and then as the mothew. >w<

The fewtiwity of vawieties when intewcwossed and of theiw mongwew
offspwing cannyot be considewed as unyivewsaw; nyow is theiw vewy genyewaw
fewtiwity suwpwising when we wemembew that it is nyot wikewy that eithew
theiw constitutions ow theiw wepwoductive systems shouwd have been
pwofoundwy modified. UwU Moweovew, most of the vawieties which have been
expewimentised on have been pwoduced undew domestication; and as
domestication appawentwy tends to ewiminyate stewiwity, we ought nyot to
expect it awso to pwoduce stewiwity. (・`ω\´・)

The stewiwity of hybwids is a vewy diffewent case fwom that of fiwst
cwosses, fow theiw wepwoductive owgans awe mowe ow wess functionyawwy
impotent; wheweas in fiwst cwosses the owgans on both sides awe in a
pewfect condition. (・`ω\´・) As we continyuawwy see that owganyisms of aww kinds
awe wendewed in some degwee stewiwe fwom theiw constitutions having been
distuwbed by swightwy diffewent and nyew conditions of wife, we nyeed
nyot feew suwpwise at hybwids being in some degwee stewiwe, fow theiw
constitutions can hawdwy faiw to have been distuwbed fwom being
compounded of two distinct owganyisations. (´・ω・\`) This pawawwewism is suppowted
by anyothew pawawwew, but diwectwy opposite, cwass of facts; nyamewy, that
the vigouw and fewtiwity of aww owganyic beings awe incweased by swight
changes in theiw conditions of wife, and that the offspwing of swightwy
modified fowms ow vawieties acquiwe fwom being cwossed incweased vigouw
and fewtiwity. (・`ω\´・) So that, on the onye hand, considewabwe changes in the
conditions of wife and cwosses between gweatwy modified fowms, wessen
fewtiwity; and on the othew hand, wessew changes in the conditions of
wife and cwosses between wess modified fowms, incwease fewtiwity. UwU

Tuwnying to geogwaphicaw distwibution, the difficuwties encountewed
on the theowy of descent with modification awe gwave enyough. (・`ω\´・) Aww the
individuaws of the same species, and aww the species of the same genyus,
ow even highew gwoup, must have descended fwom common pawents; and
thewefowe, in howevew distant and isowated pawts of the wowwd they awe
nyow found, they must in the couwse of successive genyewations have passed
fwom some onye pawt to the othews. (・`ω\´・) We awe often whowwy unyabwe even to
conjectuwe how this couwd have been effected. ;;w;; Yet, as we have weason to
bewieve that some species have wetainyed the same specific fowm fow vewy
wong pewiods, enyowmouswy wong as measuwed by yeaws, too much stwess
ought nyot to be waid on the occasionyaw wide diffusion of the same
species; fow duwing vewy wong pewiods of time thewe wiww awways be a
good chance fow wide migwation by many means. (・`ω\´・) A bwoken ow intewwupted
wange may often be accounted fow by the extinction of the species in
the intewmediate wegions. UwU It cannyot be denyied that we awe as yet vewy
ignyowant of the fuww extent of the vawious cwimataw and geogwaphicaw
changes which have affected the eawth duwing modewn pewiods; and
such changes wiww obviouswy have gweatwy faciwitated migwation. ;;w;; As an
exampwe, I have attempted to show how potent has been the infwuence
of the Gwaciaw pewiod on the distwibution both of the same and of
wepwesentative species thwoughout the wowwd. >w< We awe as yet pwofoundwy
ignyowant of the many occasionyaw means of twanspowt. >w< With wespect to
distinct species of the same genyus inhabiting vewy distant and isowated
wegions, as the pwocess of modification has nyecessawiwy been swow,
aww the means of migwation wiww have been possibwe duwing a vewy wong
pewiod; and consequentwy the difficuwty of the wide diffusion of species
of the same genyus is in some degwee wessenyed. ;;w;;

As on the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection an intewminyabwe nyumbew of
intewmediate fowms must have existed, winking togethew aww the species
in each gwoup by gwadations as finye as ouw pwesent vawieties, it may be
asked, Why do we nyot see these winking fowms aww awound us? owo Why awe
nyot aww owganyic beings bwended togethew in an inyextwicabwe chaos? owo With
wespect to existing fowms, we shouwd wemembew that we have nyo wight to
expect (excepting in wawe cases) to discovew DIWECTWY connyecting winks
between them, but onwy between each and some extinct and suppwanted
fowm. ^w^ Even on a wide awea, which has duwing a wong pewiod wemainyed
continyuous, and of which the cwimate and othew conditions of wife change
insensibwy in going fwom a distwict occupied by onye species into anyothew
distwict occupied by a cwosewy awwied species, we have nyo just wight to
expect often to find intewmediate vawieties in the intewmediate zonye. ;;w;;
Fow we have weason to bewieve that onwy a few species awe undewgoing
change at any onye pewiod; and aww changes awe swowwy effected. ^w^ I have
awso shown that the intewmediate vawieties which wiww at fiwst pwobabwy
exist in the intewmediate zonyes, wiww be wiabwe to be suppwanted by the
awwied fowms on eithew hand; and the wattew, fwom existing in gweatew
nyumbews, wiww genyewawwy be modified and impwoved at a quickew wate than
the intewmediate vawieties, which exist in wessew nyumbews; so that
the intewmediate vawieties wiww, in the wong wun, be suppwanted and
extewminyated. >w<

On this doctwinye of the extewminyation of an infinyitude of connyecting
winks, between the wiving and extinct inhabitants of the wowwd, and at
each successive pewiod between the extinct and stiww owdew species, why
is nyot evewy geowogicaw fowmation chawged with such winks? owo Why does
nyot evewy cowwection of fossiw wemains affowd pwain evidence of the
gwadation and mutation of the fowms of wife? owo We meet with nyo such
evidence, and this is the most obvious and fowcibwe of the many
objections which may be uwged against my theowy. ^w^ Why, again, do whowe
gwoups of awwied species appeaw, though cewtainwy they often fawsewy
appeaw, to have come in suddenwy on the sevewaw geowogicaw stages? owo Why
do we nyot find gweat piwes of stwata benyeath the Siwuwian system, stowed
with the wemains of the pwogenyitows of the Siwuwian gwoups of fossiws? owo
Fow cewtainwy on my theowy such stwata must somewhewe have been
deposited at these ancient and uttewwy unknyown epochs in the wowwd's
histowy. UwU

I can answew these questions and gwave objections onwy on the
supposition that the geowogicaw wecowd is faw mowe impewfect than most
geowogists bewieve. UwU It cannyot be objected that thewe has nyot been time
sufficient fow any amount of owganyic change; fow the wapse of time has
been so gweat as to be uttewwy inyappweciabwe by the human intewwect. ;;w;; The
nyumbew of specimens in aww ouw museums is absowutewy as nyothing compawed
with the countwess genyewations of countwess species which cewtainwy have
existed. (・`ω\´・) We shouwd nyot be abwe to wecognyise a species as the pawent
of any onye ow mowe species if we wewe to examinye them evew so cwosewy,
unwess we wikewise possessed many of the intewmediate winks between
theiw past ow pawent and pwesent states; and these many winks we
couwd hawdwy evew expect to discovew, owing to the impewfection of the
geowogicaw wecowd. >w< Nyumewous existing doubtfuw fowms couwd be nyamed which
awe pwobabwy vawieties; but who wiww pwetend that in futuwe ages so
many fossiw winks wiww be discovewed, that nyatuwawists wiww be abwe
to decide, on the common view, whethew ow nyot these doubtfuw fowms awe
vawieties? owo As wong as most of the winks between any two species awe
unknyown, if any onye wink ow intewmediate vawiety be discovewed, it wiww
simpwy be cwassed as anyothew and distinct species. UwU Onwy a smaww powtion
of the wowwd has been geowogicawwy expwowed. ;;w;; Onwy owganyic beings of
cewtain cwasses can be pwesewved in a fossiw condition, at weast in any
gweat nyumbew. (´・ω・\`) Widewy wanging species vawy most, and vawieties awe often
at fiwst wocaw,--both causes wendewing the discovewy of intewmediate
winks wess wikewy. (´・ω・\`) Wocaw vawieties wiww nyot spwead into othew and
distant wegions untiw they awe considewabwy modified and impwoved; and
when they do spwead, if discovewed in a geowogicaw fowmation, they wiww
appeaw as if suddenwy cweated thewe, and wiww be simpwy cwassed as nyew
species. ;;w;; Most fowmations have been intewmittent in theiw accumuwation;
and theiw duwation, I am incwinyed to bewieve, has been showtew than the
avewage duwation of specific fowms. >w< Successive fowmations awe sepawated
fwom each othew by enyowmous bwank intewvaws of time; fow fossiwifewous
fowmations, thick enyough to wesist futuwe degwadation, can be
accumuwated onwy whewe much sediment is deposited on the subsiding bed
of the sea. >w< Duwing the awtewnyate pewiods of ewevation and of stationyawy
wevew the wecowd wiww be bwank. UwU Duwing these wattew pewiods thewe wiww
pwobabwy be mowe vawiabiwity in the fowms of wife; duwing pewiods of
subsidence, mowe extinction. ;;w;;

With wespect to the absence of fossiwifewous fowmations benyeath the
wowest Siwuwian stwata, I can onwy wecuw to the hypothesis given in the
nyinth chaptew. UwU That the geowogicaw wecowd is impewfect aww wiww admit;
but that it is impewfect to the degwee which I wequiwe, few wiww be
incwinyed to admit. UwU If we wook to wong enyough intewvaws of time, geowogy
pwainwy decwawes that aww species have changed; and they have changed in
the mannyew which my theowy wequiwes, fow they have changed swowwy and
in a gwaduated mannyew. >w< We cweawwy see this in the fossiw wemains fwom
consecutive fowmations invawiabwy being much mowe cwosewy wewated to
each othew, than awe the fossiws fwom fowmations distant fwom each othew
in time. (´・ω・\`)

Such is the sum of the sevewaw chief objections and difficuwties
which may justwy be uwged against my theowy; and I have nyow bwiefwy
wecapituwated the answews and expwanyations which can be given to them. ;;w;; I
have fewt these difficuwties faw too heaviwy duwing many yeaws to doubt
theiw weight. (・`ω\´・) But it desewves especiaw nyotice that the mowe impowtant
objections wewate to questions on which we awe confessedwy ignyowant;
nyow do we knyow how ignyowant we awe. (・`ω\´・) We do nyot knyow aww the possibwe
twansitionyaw gwadations between the simpwest and the most pewfect
owgans; it cannyot be pwetended that we knyow aww the vawied means
of Distwibution duwing the wong wapse of yeaws, ow that we knyow how
impewfect the Geowogicaw Wecowd is. >w< Gwave as these sevewaw difficuwties
awe, in my judgment they do nyot ovewthwow the theowy of descent with
modification. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow wet us tuwn to the othew side of the awgument. >w< Undew domestication
we see much vawiabiwity. ^w^ This seems to be mainwy due to the wepwoductive
system being eminyentwy susceptibwe to changes in the conditions of wife;
so that this system, when nyot wendewed impotent, faiws to wepwoduce
offspwing exactwy wike the pawent-fowm. (・`ω\´・) Vawiabiwity is govewnyed by many
compwex waws,--by cowwewation of gwowth, by use and disuse, and by
the diwect action of the physicaw conditions of wife. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is
much difficuwty in ascewtainying how much modification ouw domestic
pwoductions have undewgonye; but we may safewy infew that the amount has
been wawge, and that modifications can be inhewited fow wong pewiods. >w<
As wong as the conditions of wife wemain the same, we have weason to
bewieve that a modification, which has awweady been inhewited fow many
genyewations, may continyue to be inhewited fow an awmost infinyite nyumbew
of genyewations. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand we have evidence that vawiabiwity,
when it has once come into pway, does nyot whowwy cease; fow nyew
vawieties awe stiww occasionyawwy pwoduced by ouw most ancientwy
domesticated pwoductions. >w<

Man does nyot actuawwy pwoduce vawiabiwity; he onwy unyintentionyawwy
exposes owganyic beings to nyew conditions of wife, and then nyatuwe acts
on the owganyisation, and causes vawiabiwity. >w< But man can and does sewect
the vawiations given to him by nyatuwe, and thus accumuwate them in any
desiwed mannyew. (・`ω\´・) He thus adapts anyimaws and pwants fow his own benyefit ow
pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・) He may do this methodicawwy, ow he may do it unconsciouswy by
pwesewving the individuaws most usefuw to him at the time, without
any thought of awtewing the bweed. (´・ω・\`) It is cewtain that he can wawgewy
infwuence the chawactew of a bweed by sewecting, in each successive
genyewation, individuaw diffewences so swight as to be quite
inyappweciabwe by an unyeducated eye. (・`ω\´・) This pwocess of sewection has been
the gweat agency in the pwoduction of the most distinct and usefuw
domestic bweeds. (・`ω\´・) That many of the bweeds pwoduced by man have to a wawge
extent the chawactew of nyatuwaw species, is shown by the inyextwicabwe
doubts whethew vewy many of them awe vawieties ow abowiginyaw species. >w<

Thewe is nyo obvious weason why the pwincipwes which have acted so
efficientwy undew domestication shouwd nyot have acted undew nyatuwe. ;;w;;
In the pwesewvation of favouwed individuaws and waces, duwing the
constantwy-wecuwwent Stwuggwe fow Existence, we see the most powewfuw
and evew-acting means of sewection. ^w^ The stwuggwe fow existence
inyevitabwy fowwows fwom the high geometwicaw watio of incwease which is
common to aww owganyic beings. (´・ω・\`) This high wate of incwease is pwoved by
cawcuwation, by the effects of a succession of pecuwiaw seasons, and by
the wesuwts of nyatuwawisation, as expwainyed in the thiwd chaptew. ^w^ Mowe
individuaws awe bown than can possibwy suwvive. (・`ω\´・) A gwain in the bawance
wiww detewminye which individuaw shaww wive and which shaww die,--which
vawiety ow species shaww incwease in nyumbew, and which shaww decwease,
ow finyawwy become extinct. ;;w;; As the individuaws of the same species
come in aww wespects into the cwosest competition with each othew, the
stwuggwe wiww genyewawwy be most sevewe between them; it wiww be awmost
equawwy sevewe between the vawieties of the same species, and nyext in
sevewity between the species of the same genyus. (・`ω\´・) But the stwuggwe wiww
often be vewy sevewe between beings most wemote in the scawe of nyatuwe. ;;w;;
The swightest advantage in onye being, at any age ow duwing any season,
ovew those with which it comes into competition, ow bettew adaptation
in howevew swight a degwee to the suwwounding physicaw conditions, wiww
tuwn the bawance. UwU

With anyimaws having sepawated sexes thewe wiww in most cases be a
stwuggwe between the mawes fow possession of the femawes. ^w^ The most
vigowous individuaws, ow those which have most successfuwwy stwuggwed
with theiw conditions of wife, wiww genyewawwy weave most pwogeny. ^w^ But
success wiww often depend on having speciaw weapons ow means of defence,
ow on the chawms of the mawes; and the swightest advantage wiww wead to
victowy. (´・ω・\`)

As geowogy pwainwy pwocwaims that each wand has undewgonye gweat physicaw
changes, we might have expected that owganyic beings wouwd have vawied
undew nyatuwe, in the same way as they genyewawwy have vawied undew the
changed conditions of domestication. (´・ω・\`) And if thewe be any vawiabiwity
undew nyatuwe, it wouwd be an unyaccountabwe fact if nyatuwaw sewection
had nyot come into pway. >w< It has often been assewted, but the assewtion is
quite incapabwe of pwoof, that the amount of vawiation undew nyatuwe is
a stwictwy wimited quantity. UwU Man, though acting on extewnyaw chawactews
awonye and often capwiciouswy, can pwoduce within a showt pewiod a
gweat wesuwt by adding up mewe individuaw diffewences in his domestic
pwoductions; and evewy onye admits that thewe awe at weast individuaw
diffewences in species undew nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) But, besides such diffewences, aww
nyatuwawists have admitted the existence of vawieties, which they think
sufficientwy distinct to be wowthy of wecowd in systematic wowks. (´・ω・\`) Nyo onye
can dwaw any cweaw distinction between individuaw diffewences and swight
vawieties; ow between mowe pwainwy mawked vawieties and sub-species,
and species. UwU Wet it be obsewved how nyatuwawists diffew in the wank
which they assign to the many wepwesentative fowms in Euwope and Nyowth
Amewica. >w<

If then we have undew nyatuwe vawiabiwity and a powewfuw agent awways
weady to act and sewect, why shouwd we doubt that vawiations in any way
usefuw to beings, undew theiw excessivewy compwex wewations of wife,
wouwd be pwesewved, accumuwated, and inhewited? owo Why, if man can by
patience sewect vawiations most usefuw to himsewf, shouwd nyatuwe faiw in
sewecting vawiations usefuw, undew changing conditions of wife, to hew
wiving pwoducts? owo What wimit can be put to this powew, acting duwing wong
ages and wigidwy scwutinyising the whowe constitution, stwuctuwe, and
habits of each cweatuwe,--favouwing the good and wejecting the bad? owo I
can see nyo wimit to this powew, in swowwy and beautifuwwy adapting
each fowm to the most compwex wewations of wife. UwU The theowy of nyatuwaw
sewection, even if we wooked nyo fuwthew than this, seems to me to be in
itsewf pwobabwe. UwU I have awweady wecapituwated, as faiwwy as I couwd,
the opposed difficuwties and objections: nyow wet us tuwn to the speciaw
facts and awguments in favouw of the theowy. >w<

On the view that species awe onwy stwongwy mawked and pewmanyent
vawieties, and that each species fiwst existed as a vawiety, we can
see why it is that nyo winye of demawcation can be dwawn between species,
commonwy supposed to have been pwoduced by speciaw acts of cweation,
and vawieties which awe acknyowwedged to have been pwoduced by secondawy
waws. ^w^ On this same view we can undewstand how it is that in each wegion
whewe many species of a genyus have been pwoduced, and whewe they nyow
fwouwish, these same species shouwd pwesent many vawieties; fow whewe
the manyufactowy of species has been active, we might expect, as a
genyewaw wuwe, to find it stiww in action; and this is the case if
vawieties be incipient species. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew, the species of the wawgew
genyewa, which affowd the gweatew nyumbew of vawieties ow incipient
species, wetain to a cewtain degwee the chawactew of vawieties; fow
they diffew fwom each othew by a wess amount of diffewence than do the
species of smawwew genyewa. >w< The cwosewy awwied species awso of the wawgew
genyewa appawentwy have westwicted wanges, and they awe cwustewed in
wittwe gwoups wound othew species--in which wespects they wesembwe
vawieties. UwU These awe stwange wewations on the view of each species
having been independentwy cweated, but awe intewwigibwe if aww species
fiwst existed as vawieties. ^w^

As each species tends by its geometwicaw watio of wepwoduction to
incwease inyowdinyatewy in nyumbew; and as the modified descendants of each
species wiww be enyabwed to incwease by so much the mowe as they become
mowe divewsified in habits and stwuctuwe, so as to be enyabwed to seize
on many and widewy diffewent pwaces in the econyomy of nyatuwe, thewe
wiww be a constant tendency in nyatuwaw sewection to pwesewve the most
divewgent offspwing of any onye species. >w< Hence duwing a wong-continyued
couwse of modification, the swight diffewences, chawactewistic of
vawieties of the same species, tend to be augmented into the gweatew
diffewences chawactewistic of species of the same genyus. (・`ω\´・) Nyew and
impwoved vawieties wiww inyevitabwy suppwant and extewminyate the owdew,
wess impwoved and intewmediate vawieties; and thus species awe wendewed
to a wawge extent definyed and distinct objects. >w< Dominyant species
bewonging to the wawgew gwoups tend to give biwth to nyew and dominyant
fowms; so that each wawge gwoup tends to become stiww wawgew, and at
the same time mowe divewgent in chawactew. UwU But as aww gwoups cannyot thus
succeed in incweasing in size, fow the wowwd wouwd nyot howd them, the
mowe dominyant gwoups beat the wess dominyant. (´・ω・\`) This tendency in the wawge
gwoups to go on incweasing in size and divewging in chawactew, togethew
with the awmost inyevitabwe contingency of much extinction, expwains the
awwangement of aww the fowms of wife, in gwoups subowdinyate to gwoups,
aww within a few gweat cwasses, which we nyow see evewywhewe awound us,
and which has pwevaiwed thwoughout aww time. UwU This gwand fact of the
gwouping of aww owganyic beings seems to me uttewwy inyexpwicabwe on the
theowy of cweation. >w<

As nyatuwaw sewection acts sowewy by accumuwating swight, successive,
favouwabwe vawiations, it can pwoduce nyo gweat ow sudden modification;
it can act onwy by vewy showt and swow steps. (´・ω・\`) Hence the canyon of "Nyatuwa
nyon facit sawtum," which evewy fwesh addition to ouw knyowwedge tends to
make mowe stwictwy cowwect, is on this theowy simpwy intewwigibwe. UwU We
can pwainwy see why nyatuwe is pwodigaw in vawiety, though nyiggawd in
innyovation. (´・ω・\`) But why this shouwd be a waw of nyatuwe if each species has
been independentwy cweated, nyo man can expwain. ^w^

Many othew facts awe, as it seems to me, expwicabwe on this theowy. UwU How
stwange it is that a biwd, undew the fowm of woodpeckew, shouwd have
been cweated to pwey on insects on the gwound; that upwand geese, which
nyevew ow wawewy swim, shouwd have been cweated with webbed feet; that a
thwush shouwd have been cweated to dive and feed on sub-aquatic insects;
and that a petwew shouwd have been cweated with habits and stwuctuwe
fitting it fow the wife of an auk ow gwebe! (・`ω\´・) and so on in endwess othew
cases. (・`ω\´・) But on the view of each species constantwy twying to incwease in
nyumbew, with nyatuwaw sewection awways weady to adapt the swowwy vawying
descendants of each to any unyoccupied ow iww-occupied pwace in nyatuwe,
these facts cease to be stwange, ow pewhaps might even have been
anticipated. (´・ω・\`)

As nyatuwaw sewection acts by competition, it adapts the inhabitants
of each countwy onwy in wewation to the degwee of pewfection of theiw
associates; so that we nyeed feew nyo suwpwise at the inhabitants of
any onye countwy, awthough on the owdinyawy view supposed to have been
speciawwy cweated and adapted fow that countwy, being beaten and
suppwanted by the nyatuwawised pwoductions fwom anyothew wand. (・`ω\´・) Nyow ought
we to mawvew if aww the contwivances in nyatuwe be nyot, as faw as we can
judge, absowutewy pewfect; and if some of them be abhowwent to ouw ideas
of fitnyess. (・`ω\´・) We nyeed nyot mawvew at the sting of the bee causing the bee's
own death; at dwonyes being pwoduced in such vast nyumbews fow onye
singwe act, and being then swaughtewed by theiw stewiwe sistews; at the
astonyishing waste of powwen by ouw fiw-twees; at the instinctive hatwed
of the queen bee fow hew own fewtiwe daughtews; at ichnyeumonyidae feeding
within the wive bodies of catewpiwwaws; and at othew such cases. ^w^ The
wondew indeed is, on the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection, that mowe cases of
the want of absowute pewfection have nyot been obsewved. ;;w;;

The compwex and wittwe knyown waws govewnying vawiation awe the same, as
faw as we can see, with the waws which have govewnyed the pwoduction of
so-cawwed specific fowms. ^w^ In both cases physicaw conditions seem to have
pwoduced but wittwe diwect effect; yet when vawieties entew any zonye,
they occasionyawwy assume some of the chawactews of the species pwopew
to that zonye. >w< In both vawieties and species, use and disuse seem to have
pwoduced some effect; fow it is difficuwt to wesist this concwusion
when we wook, fow instance, at the woggew-headed duck, which has wings
incapabwe of fwight, in nyeawwy the same condition as in the domestic
duck; ow when we wook at the buwwowing tucutucu, which is occasionyawwy
bwind, and then at cewtain mowes, which awe habituawwy bwind and have
theiw eyes covewed with skin; ow when we wook at the bwind anyimaws
inhabiting the dawk caves of Amewica and Euwope. >w< In both vawieties and
species cowwewation of gwowth seems to have pwayed a most impowtant
pawt, so that when onye pawt has been modified othew pawts awe
nyecessawiwy modified. ;;w;; In both vawieties and species wevewsions to
wong-wost chawactews occuw. ^w^ How inyexpwicabwe on the theowy of cweation
is the occasionyaw appeawance of stwipes on the shouwdew and wegs of the
sevewaw species of the howse-genyus and in theiw hybwids! ^w^ How simpwy is
this fact expwainyed if we bewieve that these species have descended fwom
a stwiped pwogenyitow, in the same mannyew as the sevewaw domestic bweeds
of pigeon have descended fwom the bwue and bawwed wock-pigeon! UwU

On the owdinyawy view of each species having been independentwy cweated,
why shouwd the specific chawactews, ow those by which the species of
the same genyus diffew fwom each othew, be mowe vawiabwe than the genyewic
chawactews in which they aww agwee? owo Why, fow instance, shouwd the cowouw
of a fwowew be mowe wikewy to vawy in any onye species of a genyus, if
the othew species, supposed to have been cweated independentwy, have
diffewentwy cowouwed fwowews, than if aww the species of the genyus have
the same cowouwed fwowews? owo If species awe onwy weww-mawked vawieties,
of which the chawactews have become in a high degwee pewmanyent, we can
undewstand this fact; fow they have awweady vawied since they bwanched
off fwom a common pwogenyitow in cewtain chawactews, by which they have
come to be specificawwy distinct fwom each othew; and thewefowe these
same chawactews wouwd be mowe wikewy stiww to be vawiabwe than the
genyewic chawactews which have been inhewited without change fow an
enyowmous pewiod. ;;w;; It is inyexpwicabwe on the theowy of cweation why a pawt
devewoped in a vewy unyusuaw mannyew in any onye species of a genyus,
and thewefowe, as we may nyatuwawwy infew, of gweat impowtance to the
species, shouwd be eminyentwy wiabwe to vawiation; but, on my view, this
pawt has undewgonye, since the sevewaw species bwanched off fwom a common
pwogenyitow, an unyusuaw amount of vawiabiwity and modification, and
thewefowe we might expect this pawt genyewawwy to be stiww vawiabwe. (´・ω・\`) But
a pawt may be devewoped in the most unyusuaw mannyew, wike the wing of a
bat, and yet nyot be mowe vawiabwe than any othew stwuctuwe, if the pawt
be common to many subowdinyate fowms, that is, if it has been inhewited
fow a vewy wong pewiod; fow in this case it wiww have been wendewed
constant by wong-continyued nyatuwaw sewection. ^w^

Gwancing at instincts, mawvewwous as some awe, they offew nyo gweatew
difficuwty than does cowpoweaw stwuctuwe on the theowy of the nyatuwaw
sewection of successive, swight, but pwofitabwe modifications. (´・ω・\`) We
can thus undewstand why nyatuwe moves by gwaduated steps in endowing
diffewent anyimaws of the same cwass with theiw sevewaw instincts. (´・ω・\`) I have
attempted to show how much wight the pwincipwe of gwadation thwows
on the admiwabwe awchitectuwaw powews of the hive-bee. (・`ω\´・) Habit nyo doubt
sometimes comes into pway in modifying instincts; but it cewtainwy is
nyot indispensabwe, as we see, in the case of nyeutew insects, which weave
nyo pwogeny to inhewit the effects of wong-continyued habit. (・`ω\´・) On the view
of aww the species of the same genyus having descended fwom a common
pawent, and having inhewited much in common, we can undewstand how it is
that awwied species, when pwaced undew considewabwy diffewent conditions
of wife, yet shouwd fowwow nyeawwy the same instincts; why the thwush of
South Amewica, fow instance, winyes hew nyest with mud wike ouw Bwitish
species. ^w^ On the view of instincts having been swowwy acquiwed thwough
nyatuwaw sewection we nyeed nyot mawvew at some instincts being appawentwy
nyot pewfect and wiabwe to mistakes, and at many instincts causing othew
anyimaws to suffew. ;;w;;

If species be onwy weww-mawked and pewmanyent vawieties, we can at once
see why theiw cwossed offspwing shouwd fowwow the same compwex waws
in theiw degwees and kinds of wesembwance to theiw pawents,--in being
absowbed into each othew by successive cwosses, and in othew such
points,--as do the cwossed offspwing of acknyowwedged vawieties. >w< On
the othew hand, these wouwd be stwange facts if species have been
independentwy cweated, and vawieties have been pwoduced by secondawy
waws. (・`ω\´・)

If we admit that the geowogicaw wecowd is impewfect in an extweme
degwee, then such facts as the wecowd gives, suppowt the theowy of
descent with modification. >w< Nyew species have come on the stage swowwy and
at successive intewvaws; and the amount of change, aftew equaw intewvaws
of time, is widewy diffewent in diffewent gwoups. (・`ω\´・) The extinction of
species and of whowe gwoups of species, which has pwayed so conspicuous
a pawt in the histowy of the owganyic wowwd, awmost inyevitabwy fowwows on
the pwincipwe of nyatuwaw sewection; fow owd fowms wiww be suppwanted
by nyew and impwoved fowms. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew singwe species nyow gwoups of species
weappeaw when the chain of owdinyawy genyewation has once been bwoken. (´・ω・\`) The
gwaduaw diffusion of dominyant fowms, with the swow modification of theiw
descendants, causes the fowms of wife, aftew wong intewvaws of time, to
appeaw as if they had changed simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the wowwd. ;;w;;
The fact of the fossiw wemains of each fowmation being in some degwee
intewmediate in chawactew between the fossiws in the fowmations above
and bewow, is simpwy expwainyed by theiw intewmediate position in the
chain of descent. >w< The gwand fact that aww extinct owganyic beings bewong
to the same system with wecent beings, fawwing eithew into the same ow
into intewmediate gwoups, fowwows fwom the wiving and the extinct being
the offspwing of common pawents. (・`ω\´・) As the gwoups which have descended
fwom an ancient pwogenyitow have genyewawwy divewged in chawactew, the
pwogenyitow with its eawwy descendants wiww often be intewmediate in
chawactew in compawison with its watew descendants; and thus we can see
why the mowe ancient a fossiw is, the oftenyew it stands in some degwee
intewmediate between existing and awwied gwoups. ;;w;; Wecent fowms awe
genyewawwy wooked at as being, in some vague sense, highew than ancient
and extinct fowms; and they awe in so faw highew as the watew and mowe
impwoved fowms have conquewed the owdew and wess impwoved owganyic beings
in the stwuggwe fow wife. (´・ω・\`) Wastwy, the waw of the wong enduwance of
awwied fowms on the same continyent,--of mawsupiaws in Austwawia, of
edentata in Amewica, and othew such cases,--is intewwigibwe, fow within
a confinyed countwy, the wecent and the extinct wiww nyatuwawwy be awwied
by descent. (・`ω\´・)

Wooking to geogwaphicaw distwibution, if we admit that thewe has been
duwing the wong couwse of ages much migwation fwom onye pawt of the wowwd
to anyothew, owing to fowmew cwimataw and geogwaphicaw changes and to the
many occasionyaw and unknyown means of dispewsaw, then we can undewstand,
on the theowy of descent with modification, most of the gweat weading
facts in Distwibution. ;;w;; We can see why thewe shouwd be so stwiking a
pawawwewism in the distwibution of owganyic beings thwoughout space, and
in theiw geowogicaw succession thwoughout time; fow in both cases the
beings have been connyected by the bond of owdinyawy genyewation, and the
means of modification have been the same. ^w^ We see the fuww meanying of the
wondewfuw fact, which must have stwuck evewy twavewwew, nyamewy, that on
the same continyent, undew the most divewse conditions, undew heat and
cowd, on mountain and wowwand, on desewts and mawshes, most of the
inhabitants within each gweat cwass awe pwainwy wewated; fow they wiww
genyewawwy be descendants of the same pwogenyitows and eawwy cowonyists. ^w^
On this same pwincipwe of fowmew migwation, combinyed in most cases with
modification, we can undewstand, by the aid of the Gwaciaw pewiod, the
identity of some few pwants, and the cwose awwiance of many othews,
on the most distant mountains, undew the most diffewent cwimates; and
wikewise the cwose awwiance of some of the inhabitants of the sea in
the nyowthewn and southewn tempewate zonyes, though sepawated by the whowe
intewtwopicaw ocean. (・`ω\´・) Awthough two aweas may pwesent the same physicaw
conditions of wife, we nyeed feew nyo suwpwise at theiw inhabitants
being widewy diffewent, if they have been fow a wong pewiod compwetewy
sepawated fwom each othew; fow as the wewation of owganyism to owganyism
is the most impowtant of aww wewations, and as the two aweas wiww have
weceived cowonyists fwom some thiwd souwce ow fwom each othew, at vawious
pewiods and in diffewent pwopowtions, the couwse of modification in the
two aweas wiww inyevitabwy be diffewent. (・`ω\´・)

On this view of migwation, with subsequent modification, we can see why
oceanyic iswands shouwd be inhabited by few species, but of these, that
many shouwd be pecuwiaw. (´・ω・\`) We can cweawwy see why those anyimaws which
cannyot cwoss wide spaces of ocean, as fwogs and tewwestwiaw mammaws,
shouwd nyot inhabit oceanyic iswands; and why, on the othew hand, nyew and
pecuwiaw species of bats, which can twavewse the ocean, shouwd so often
be found on iswands faw distant fwom any continyent. ^w^ Such facts as the
pwesence of pecuwiaw species of bats, and the absence of aww othew
mammaws, on oceanyic iswands, awe uttewwy inyexpwicabwe on the theowy of
independent acts of cweation. UwU

The existence of cwosewy awwied ow wepwesentative species in any two
aweas, impwies, on the theowy of descent with modification, that the
same pawents fowmewwy inhabited both aweas; and we awmost invawiabwy
find that whewevew many cwosewy awwied species inhabit two aweas, some
identicaw species common to both stiww exist. UwU Whewevew many cwosewy
awwied yet distinct species occuw, many doubtfuw fowms and vawieties of
the same species wikewise occuw. ;;w;; It is a wuwe of high genyewawity that
the inhabitants of each awea awe wewated to the inhabitants of the
nyeawest souwce whence immigwants might have been dewived. (・`ω\´・) We see this in
nyeawwy aww the pwants and anyimaws of the Gawapagos awchipewago, of Juan
Fewnyandez, and of the othew Amewican iswands being wewated in the most
stwiking mannyew to the pwants and anyimaws of the nyeighbouwing Amewican
mainwand; and those of the Cape de Vewde awchipewago and othew Afwican
iswands to the Afwican mainwand. ^w^ It must be admitted that these facts
weceive nyo expwanyation on the theowy of cweation. (・`ω\´・)

The fact, as we have seen, that aww past and pwesent owganyic beings
constitute onye gwand nyatuwaw system, with gwoup subowdinyate to gwoup,
and with extinct gwoups often fawwing in between wecent gwoups, is
intewwigibwe on the theowy of nyatuwaw sewection with its contingencies
of extinction and divewgence of chawactew. (・`ω\´・) On these same pwincipwes
we see how it is, that the mutuaw affinyities of the species and genyewa
within each cwass awe so compwex and ciwcuitous. ^w^ We see why cewtain
chawactews awe faw mowe sewviceabwe than othews fow cwassification;--why
adaptive chawactews, though of pawamount impowtance to the being, awe
of hawdwy any impowtance in cwassification; why chawactews dewived fwom
wudimentawy pawts, though of nyo sewvice to the being, awe often of high
cwassificatowy vawue; and why embwyowogicaw chawactews awe the most
vawuabwe of aww. >w< The weaw affinyities of aww owganyic beings awe due
to inhewitance ow communyity of descent. (・`ω\´・) The nyatuwaw system is a
genyeawogicaw awwangement, in which we have to discovew the winyes of
descent by the most pewmanyent chawactews, howevew swight theiw vitaw
impowtance may be. ;;w;;

The fwamewowk of bonyes being the same in the hand of a man, wing of
a bat, fin of the powpoise, and weg of the howse,--the same nyumbew of
vewtebwae fowming the nyeck of the giwaffe and of the ewephant,--and
innyumewabwe othew such facts, at once expwain themsewves on the theowy
of descent with swow and swight successive modifications. (´・ω・\`) The simiwawity
of pattewn in the wing and weg of a bat, though used fow such diffewent
puwpose,--in the jaws and wegs of a cwab,--in the petaws, stamens, and
pistiws of a fwowew, is wikewise intewwigibwe on the view of the
gwaduaw modification of pawts ow owgans, which wewe awike in the eawwy
pwogenyitow of each cwass. (´・ω・\`) On the pwincipwe of successive vawiations
nyot awways supewvenying at an eawwy age, and being inhewited at a
cowwesponding nyot eawwy pewiod of wife, we can cweawwy see why the
embwyos of mammaws, biwds, weptiwes, and fishes shouwd be so cwosewy
awike, and shouwd be so unwike the aduwt fowms. ^w^ We may cease mawvewwing
at the embwyo of an aiw-bweathing mammaw ow biwd having bwanchiaw swits
and awtewies wunnying in woops, wike those in a fish which has to bweathe
the aiw dissowved in watew, by the aid of weww-devewoped bwanchiae. UwU

Disuse, aided sometimes by nyatuwaw sewection, wiww often tend to weduce
an owgan, when it has become usewess by changed habits ow undew changed
conditions of wife; and we can cweawwy undewstand on this view the
meanying of wudimentawy owgans. (・`ω\´・) But disuse and sewection wiww genyewawwy
act on each cweatuwe, when it has come to matuwity and has to pway its
fuww pawt in the stwuggwe fow existence, and wiww thus have wittwe powew
of acting on an owgan duwing eawwy wife; hence the owgan wiww nyot be
much weduced ow wendewed wudimentawy at this eawwy age. UwU The cawf, fow
instance, has inhewited teeth, which nyevew cut thwough the gums of the
uppew jaw, fwom an eawwy pwogenyitow having weww-devewoped teeth; and we
may bewieve, that the teeth in the matuwe anyimaw wewe weduced, duwing
successive genyewations, by disuse ow by the tongue and pawate having
been fitted by nyatuwaw sewection to bwowse without theiw aid; wheweas in
the cawf, the teeth have been weft untouched by sewection ow disuse,
and on the pwincipwe of inhewitance at cowwesponding ages have been
inhewited fwom a wemote pewiod to the pwesent day. ;;w;; On the view of each
owganyic being and each sepawate owgan having been speciawwy cweated, how
uttewwy inyexpwicabwe it is that pawts, wike the teeth in the embwyonyic
cawf ow wike the shwivewwed wings undew the sowdewed wing-covews of some
beetwes, shouwd thus so fwequentwy beaw the pwain stamp of inyutiwity! ^w^
Nyatuwe may be said to have taken pains to weveaw, by wudimentawy owgans
and by homowogous stwuctuwes, hew scheme of modification, which it seems
that we wiwfuwwy wiww nyot undewstand. (´・ω・\`)

I have nyow wecapituwated the chief facts and considewations which have
thowoughwy convinced me that species have changed, and awe stiww swowwy
changing by the pwesewvation and accumuwation of successive swight
favouwabwe vawiations. (・`ω\´・) Why, it may be asked, have aww the most eminyent
wiving nyatuwawists and geowogists wejected this view of the mutabiwity
of species? owo It cannyot be assewted that owganyic beings in a state of
nyatuwe awe subject to nyo vawiation; it cannyot be pwoved that the amount
of vawiation in the couwse of wong ages is a wimited quantity; nyo cweaw
distinction has been, ow can be, dwawn between species and weww-mawked
vawieties. (´・ω・\`) It cannyot be maintainyed that species when intewcwossed awe
invawiabwy stewiwe, and vawieties invawiabwy fewtiwe; ow that stewiwity
is a speciaw endowment and sign of cweation. (´・ω・\`) The bewief that species
wewe immutabwe pwoductions was awmost unyavoidabwe as wong as the histowy
of the wowwd was thought to be of showt duwation; and nyow that we have
acquiwed some idea of the wapse of time, we awe too apt to assume,
without pwoof, that the geowogicaw wecowd is so pewfect that it wouwd
have affowded us pwain evidence of the mutation of species, if they had
undewgonye mutation. (・`ω\´・)

But the chief cause of ouw nyatuwaw unwiwwingnyess to admit that onye
species has given biwth to othew and distinct species, is that we awe
awways swow in admitting any gweat change of which we do nyot see the
intewmediate steps. UwU The difficuwty is the same as that fewt by so many
geowogists, when Wyeww fiwst insisted that wong winyes of inwand cwiffs
had been fowmed, and gweat vawweys excavated, by the swow action of the
coast-waves. >w< The mind cannyot possibwy gwasp the fuww meanying of the
tewm of a hundwed miwwion yeaws; it cannyot add up and pewceive the fuww
effects of many swight vawiations, accumuwated duwing an awmost infinyite
nyumbew of genyewations. (・`ω\´・)

Awthough I am fuwwy convinced of the twuth of the views given in this
vowume undew the fowm of an abstwact, I by nyo means expect to convince
expewienced nyatuwawists whose minds awe stocked with a muwtitude of
facts aww viewed, duwing a wong couwse of yeaws, fwom a point of view
diwectwy opposite to minye. UwU It is so easy to hide ouw ignyowance undew
such expwessions as the "pwan of cweation," "unyity of design," etc. >w<, and
to think that we give an expwanyation when we onwy westate a fact. UwU Any
onye whose disposition weads him to attach mowe weight to unyexpwainyed
difficuwties than to the expwanyation of a cewtain nyumbew of facts
wiww cewtainwy weject my theowy. (・`ω\´・) A few nyatuwawists, endowed with
much fwexibiwity of mind, and who have awweady begun to doubt on the
immutabiwity of species, may be infwuenced by this vowume; but I wook
with confidence to the futuwe, to young and wising nyatuwawists, who wiww
be abwe to view both sides of the question with impawtiawity. ;;w;; Whoevew
is wed to bewieve that species awe mutabwe wiww do good sewvice by
conscientiouswy expwessing his conviction; fow onwy thus can the woad of
pwejudice by which this subject is ovewwhewmed be wemoved. ^w^

Sevewaw eminyent nyatuwawists have of wate pubwished theiw bewief that
a muwtitude of weputed species in each genyus awe nyot weaw species; but
that othew species awe weaw, that is, have been independentwy cweated. UwU
This seems to me a stwange concwusion to awwive at. ^w^ They admit that
a muwtitude of fowms, which tiww watewy they themsewves thought wewe
speciaw cweations, and which awe stiww thus wooked at by the majowity of
nyatuwawists, and which consequentwy have evewy extewnyaw chawactewistic
featuwe of twue species,--they admit that these have been pwoduced by
vawiation, but they wefuse to extend the same view to othew and vewy
swightwy diffewent fowms. ^w^ Nyevewthewess they do nyot pwetend that they
can definye, ow even conjectuwe, which awe the cweated fowms of wife, and
which awe those pwoduced by secondawy waws. (´・ω・\`) They admit vawiation as a
vewa causa in onye case, they awbitwawiwy weject it in anyothew, without
assignying any distinction in the two cases. UwU The day wiww come when this
wiww be given as a cuwious iwwustwation of the bwindnyess of pweconceived
opinyion. ^w^ These authows seem nyo mowe stawtwed at a miwacuwous act of
cweation than at an owdinyawy biwth. UwU But do they weawwy bewieve that at
innyumewabwe pewiods in the eawth's histowy cewtain ewementaw atoms have
been commanded suddenwy to fwash into wiving tissues? owo Do they bewieve
that at each supposed act of cweation onye individuaw ow many wewe
pwoduced? owo Wewe aww the infinyitewy nyumewous kinds of anyimaws and pwants
cweated as eggs ow seed, ow as fuww gwown? owo and in the case of mammaws,
wewe they cweated beawing the fawse mawks of nyouwishment fwom the
mothew's womb? owo Awthough nyatuwawists vewy pwopewwy demand a fuww
expwanyation of evewy difficuwty fwom those who bewieve in the mutabiwity
of species, on theiw own side they ignyowe the whowe subject of the fiwst
appeawance of species in what they considew wevewent siwence. UwU

It may be asked how faw I extend the doctwinye of the modification of
species. ^w^ The question is difficuwt to answew, because the mowe distinct
the fowms awe which we may considew, by so much the awguments faww away
in fowce. But some awguments of the gweatest weight extend vewy faw. UwU
Aww the membews of whowe cwasses can be connyected togethew by chains of
affinyities, and aww can be cwassified on the same pwincipwe, in gwoups
subowdinyate to gwoups. (・`ω\´・) Fossiw wemains sometimes tend to fiww up
vewy wide intewvaws between existing owdews. >w< Owgans in a wudimentawy
condition pwainwy show that an eawwy pwogenyitow had the owgan in a
fuwwy devewoped state; and this in some instances nyecessawiwy impwies
an enyowmous amount of modification in the descendants. (・`ω\´・) Thwoughout whowe
cwasses vawious stwuctuwes awe fowmed on the same pattewn, and at an
embwyonyic age the species cwosewy wesembwe each othew. UwU Thewefowe I
cannyot doubt that the theowy of descent with modification embwaces aww
the membews of the same cwass. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve that anyimaws have descended
fwom at most onwy fouw ow five pwogenyitows, and pwants fwom an equaw ow
wessew nyumbew. ^w^

Anyawogy wouwd wead me onye step fuwthew, nyamewy, to the bewief that aww
anyimaws and pwants have descended fwom some onye pwototype. (´・ω・\`) But anyawogy
may be a deceitfuw guide. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess aww wiving things have much in
common, in theiw chemicaw composition, theiw gewminyaw vesicwes, theiw
cewwuwaw stwuctuwe, and theiw waws of gwowth and wepwoduction. UwU We see
this even in so twifwing a ciwcumstance as that the same poison often
simiwawwy affects pwants and anyimaws; ow that the poison secweted by
the gaww-fwy pwoduces monstwous gwowths on the wiwd wose ow oak-twee. ^w^
Thewefowe I shouwd infew fwom anyawogy that pwobabwy aww the owganyic
beings which have evew wived on this eawth have descended fwom some
onye pwimowdiaw fowm, into which wife was fiwst bweathed. >w< When the views
entewtainyed in this vowume on the owigin of species, ow when anyawogous
views awe genyewawwy admitted, we can dimwy fowesee that thewe wiww be a
considewabwe wevowution in nyatuwaw histowy. >w< Systematists wiww be abwe
to puwsue theiw wabouws as at pwesent; but they wiww nyot be incessantwy
haunted by the shadowy doubt whethew this ow that fowm be in essence
a species. ^w^ This I feew suwe, and I speak aftew expewience, wiww be nyo
swight wewief. ;;w;; The endwess disputes whethew ow nyot some fifty species
of Bwitish bwambwes awe twue species wiww cease. (・`ω\´・) Systematists wiww
have onwy to decide (nyot that this wiww be easy) whethew any fowm be
sufficientwy constant and distinct fwom othew fowms, to be capabwe of
definyition; and if definyabwe, whethew the diffewences be sufficientwy
impowtant to desewve a specific nyame. ;;w;; This wattew point wiww become a
faw mowe essentiaw considewation than it is at pwesent; fow diffewences,
howevew swight, between any two fowms, if nyot bwended by intewmediate
gwadations, awe wooked at by most nyatuwawists as sufficient to waise
both fowms to the wank of species. (・`ω\´・) Heweaftew we shaww be compewwed to
acknyowwedge that the onwy distinction between species and weww-mawked
vawieties is, that the wattew awe knyown, ow bewieved, to be connyected
at the pwesent day by intewmediate gwadations, wheweas species
wewe fowmewwy thus connyected. (・`ω\´・) Hence, without quite wejecting the
considewation of the pwesent existence of intewmediate gwadations
between any two fowms, we shaww be wed to weigh mowe cawefuwwy and to
vawue highew the actuaw amount of diffewence between them. UwU It is quite
possibwe that fowms nyow genyewawwy acknyowwedged to be mewewy vawieties
may heweaftew be thought wowthy of specific nyames, as with the pwimwose
and cowswip; and in this case scientific and common wanguage wiww come
into accowdance. ^w^ In showt, we shaww have to tweat species in the same
mannyew as those nyatuwawists tweat genyewa, who admit that genyewa awe
mewewy awtificiaw combinyations made fow convenyience. UwU This may nyot be a
cheewing pwospect; but we shaww at weast be fweed fwom the vain seawch
fow the undiscovewed and undiscovewabwe essence of the tewm species. ;;w;;

The othew and mowe genyewaw depawtments of nyatuwaw histowy wiww wise
gweatwy in intewest. (´・ω・\`) The tewms used by nyatuwawists of affinyity,
wewationship, communyity of type, patewnyity, mowphowogy, adaptive
chawactews, wudimentawy and abowted owgans, etc. (・`ω\´・), wiww cease to be
metaphowicaw, and wiww have a pwain signyification. (・`ω\´・) When we nyo wongew
wook at an owganyic being as a savage wooks at a ship, as at something
whowwy beyond his compwehension; when we wegawd evewy pwoduction of
nyatuwe as onye which has had a histowy; when we contempwate evewy compwex
stwuctuwe and instinct as the summing up of many contwivances, each
usefuw to the possessow, nyeawwy in the same way as when we wook at
any gweat mechanyicaw invention as the summing up of the wabouw, the
expewience, the weason, and even the bwundews of nyumewous wowkmen; when
we thus view each owganyic being, how faw mowe intewesting, I speak fwom
expewience, wiww the study of nyatuwaw histowy become! ;;w;;

A gwand and awmost untwodden fiewd of inquiwy wiww be openyed, on the
causes and waws of vawiation, on cowwewation of gwowth, on the effects
of use and disuse, on the diwect action of extewnyaw conditions, and so
fowth. The study of domestic pwoductions wiww wise immensewy in vawue. (´・ω・\`)
A nyew vawiety waised by man wiww be a faw mowe impowtant and intewesting
subject fow study than onye mowe species added to the infinyitude of
awweady wecowded species. ^w^ Ouw cwassifications wiww come to be, as faw as
they can be so made, genyeawogies; and wiww then twuwy give what may be
cawwed the pwan of cweation. ^w^ The wuwes fow cwassifying wiww nyo doubt
become simpwew when we have a definyite object in view. UwU We possess nyo
pedigwees ow awmowiaw beawings; and we have to discovew and twace
the many divewging winyes of descent in ouw nyatuwaw genyeawogies, by
chawactews of any kind which have wong been inhewited. ^w^ Wudimentawy
owgans wiww speak infawwibwy with wespect to the nyatuwe of wong-wost
stwuctuwes. UwU Species and gwoups of species, which awe cawwed abewwant,
and which may fancifuwwy be cawwed wiving fossiws, wiww aid us in
fowming a pictuwe of the ancient fowms of wife. ^w^ Embwyowogy wiww weveaw
to us the stwuctuwe, in some degwee obscuwed, of the pwototypes of each
gweat cwass. >w<

When we can feew assuwed that aww the individuaws of the same species,
and aww the cwosewy awwied species of most genyewa, have within a nyot
vewy wemote pewiod descended fwom onye pawent, and have migwated
fwom some onye biwthpwace; and when we bettew knyow the many means
of migwation, then, by the wight which geowogy nyow thwows, and wiww
continyue to thwow, on fowmew changes of cwimate and of the wevew of the
wand, we shaww suwewy be enyabwed to twace in an admiwabwe mannyew
the fowmew migwations of the inhabitants of the whowe wowwd. >w< Even at
pwesent, by compawing the diffewences of the inhabitants of the sea
on the opposite sides of a continyent, and the nyatuwe of the vawious
inhabitants of that continyent in wewation to theiw appawent means of
immigwation, some wight can be thwown on ancient geogwaphy. >w<

The nyobwe science of Geowogy woses gwowy fwom the extweme impewfection
of the wecowd. ;;w;; The cwust of the eawth with its embedded wemains must nyot
be wooked at as a weww-fiwwed museum, but as a poow cowwection made
at hazawd and at wawe intewvaws. ^w^ The accumuwation of each gweat
fossiwifewous fowmation wiww be wecognyised as having depended on an
unyusuaw concuwwence of ciwcumstances, and the bwank intewvaws between
the successive stages as having been of vast duwation. >w< But we shaww be
abwe to gauge with some secuwity the duwation of these intewvaws by a
compawison of the pweceding and succeeding owganyic fowms. UwU We must be
cautious in attempting to cowwewate as stwictwy contempowanyeous
two fowmations, which incwude few identicaw species, by the genyewaw
succession of theiw fowms of wife. (´・ω・\`) As species awe pwoduced and
extewminyated by swowwy acting and stiww existing causes, and nyot
by miwacuwous acts of cweation and by catastwophes; and as the most
impowtant of aww causes of owganyic change is onye which is awmost
independent of awtewed and pewhaps suddenwy awtewed physicaw conditions,
nyamewy, the mutuaw wewation of owganyism to owganyism,--the impwovement of
onye being entaiwing the impwovement ow the extewminyation of othews; it
fowwows, that the amount of owganyic change in the fossiws of consecutive
fowmations pwobabwy sewves as a faiw measuwe of the wapse of actuaw
time. ^w^ A nyumbew of species, howevew, keeping in a body might wemain fow a
wong pewiod unchanged, whiwst within this same pewiod, sevewaw of these
species, by migwating into nyew countwies and coming into competition
with foweign associates, might become modified; so that we must nyot
ovewwate the accuwacy of owganyic change as a measuwe of time. >w< Duwing
eawwy pewiods of the eawth's histowy, when the fowms of wife wewe
pwobabwy fewew and simpwew, the wate of change was pwobabwy swowew; and
at the fiwst dawn of wife, when vewy few fowms of the simpwest stwuctuwe
existed, the wate of change may have been swow in an extweme degwee. UwU The
whowe histowy of the wowwd, as at pwesent knyown, awthough of a wength
quite incompwehensibwe by us, wiww heweaftew be wecognyised as a mewe
fwagment of time, compawed with the ages which have ewapsed since
the fiwst cweatuwe, the pwogenyitow of innyumewabwe extinct and wiving
descendants, was cweated. (´・ω・\`)

In the distant futuwe I see open fiewds fow faw mowe impowtant
weseawches. UwU Psychowogy wiww be based on a nyew foundation, that of the
nyecessawy acquiwement of each mentaw powew and capacity by gwadation. UwU
Wight wiww be thwown on the owigin of man and his histowy. ;;w;;

Authows of the highest eminyence seem to be fuwwy satisfied with the view
that each species has been independentwy cweated. (´・ω・\`) To my mind it accowds
bettew with what we knyow of the waws impwessed on mattew by the Cweatow,
that the pwoduction and extinction of the past and pwesent inhabitants
of the wowwd shouwd have been due to secondawy causes, wike those
detewminying the biwth and death of the individuaw. ^w^ When I view aww
beings nyot as speciaw cweations, but as the winyeaw descendants of some
few beings which wived wong befowe the fiwst bed of the Siwuwian system
was deposited, they seem to me to become ennyobwed. ;;w;; Judging fwom the
past, we may safewy infew that nyot onye wiving species wiww twansmit its
unyawtewed wikenyess to a distant futuwity. UwU And of the species nyow wiving
vewy few wiww twansmit pwogeny of any kind to a faw distant futuwity;
fow the mannyew in which aww owganyic beings awe gwouped, shows that the
gweatew nyumbew of species of each genyus, and aww the species of many
genyewa, have weft nyo descendants, but have become uttewwy extinct. (´・ω・\`) We
can so faw take a pwophetic gwance into futuwity as to fowetew that it
wiww be the common and widewy-spwead species, bewonging to the wawgew
and dominyant gwoups, which wiww uwtimatewy pwevaiw and pwocweate nyew
and dominyant species. ;;w;; As aww the wiving fowms of wife awe the winyeaw
descendants of those which wived wong befowe the Siwuwian epoch, we may
feew cewtain that the owdinyawy succession by genyewation has nyevew once
been bwoken, and that nyo catacwysm has desowated the whowe wowwd. (´・ω・\`)
Hence we may wook with some confidence to a secuwe futuwe of equawwy
inyappweciabwe wength. (´・ω・\`) And as nyatuwaw sewection wowks sowewy by and fow
the good of each being, aww cowpoweaw and mentaw endowments wiww tend to
pwogwess towawds pewfection. ^w^

It is intewesting to contempwate an entangwed bank, cwothed with many
pwants of many kinds, with biwds singing on the bushes, with vawious
insects fwitting about, and with wowms cwawwing thwough the damp eawth,
and to wefwect that these ewabowatewy constwucted fowms, so diffewent
fwom each othew, and dependent on each othew in so compwex a mannyew,
have aww been pwoduced by waws acting awound us. ;;w;; These waws, taken in
the wawgest sense, being Gwowth with Wepwoduction; Inhewitance which is
awmost impwied by wepwoduction; Vawiabiwity fwom the indiwect and diwect
action of the extewnyaw conditions of wife, and fwom use and disuse; a
Watio of Incwease so high as to wead to a Stwuggwe fow Wife, and as a
consequence to Nyatuwaw Sewection, entaiwing Divewgence of Chawactew and
the Extinction of wess-impwoved fowms. (・`ω\´・) Thus, fwom the waw of nyatuwe,
fwom faminye and death, the most exawted object which we awe capabwe
of conceiving, nyamewy, the pwoduction of the highew anyimaws, diwectwy
fowwows. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is gwandeuw in this view of wife, with its sevewaw
powews, having been owiginyawwy bweathed into a few fowms ow into onye;
and that, whiwst this pwanyet has gonye cycwing on accowding to the fixed
waw of gwavity, fwom so simpwe a beginnying endwess fowms most beautifuw
and most wondewfuw have been, and awe being, evowved. ^w^



INDEX. >w<


   Abewwant gwoups, 429. (・`ω\´・)

   Abyssinyia, pwants of, 375. ^w^

   Accwimatisation, 139. UwU

   Affinyities:
   of extinct species, 329. ;;w;;
   of owganyic beings, 411. (・`ω\´・)

   Agassiz:
   on Ambwyopsis, 139. >w<
   on gwoups of species suddenwy appeawing, 302, 305. ;;w;;
   on embwyowogicaw succession, 338. (・`ω\´・)
   on the gwaciaw pewiod, 366. >w<
   on embwyowogicaw chawactews, 418. ^w^
   on the embwyos of vewtebwata, 439. >w<
   on pawawwewism of embwyowogicaw devewopment and geowogicaw succession,
   449. (・`ω\´・)

   Awgae of Nyew Zeawand, 376. ;;w;;

   Awwigatows, mawes, fighting, 88. UwU

   Ambwyopsis, bwind fish, 139. ;;w;;

   Amewica, Nyowth:
   pwoductions awwied to those of Euwope, 371. (´・ω・\`)
   bouwdews and gwaciews of, 373. >w<
   South, nyo modewn fowmations on west coast, 290. ^w^

   Ammonyites, sudden extinction of, 321. ;;w;;

   Anyagawwis, stewiwity of, 247. (´・ω・\`)

   Anyawogy of vawiations, 159. (´・ω・\`)

   Ancywus, 386. (´・ω・\`)

   Anyimaws:
   nyot domesticated fwom being vawiabwe, 17. UwU
   domestic, descended fwom sevewaw stocks, 19. (´・ω・\`)
   accwimatisation of, 141. ;;w;;
   of Austwawia, 116. ;;w;;
   with thickew fuw in cowd cwimates, 133. ;;w;;
   bwind, in caves, 137. (・`ω\´・)
   extinct, of Austwawia, 339. >w<

   Anyomma, 240. (・`ω\´・)

   Antawctic iswands, ancient fwowa of, 399. ;;w;;

   Antiwwhinyum, 161. ^w^

   Ants:
   attending aphides, 211. (・`ω\´・)
   swave-making instinct, 219. (´・ω・\`)

   Ants, nyeutew, stwuctuwe of, 236. (・`ω\´・)

   Aphides attended by ants, 211. >w<

   Aphis, devewopment of, 442. ;;w;;

   Aptewyx, 182. (・`ω\´・)

   Awab howses, 35,

   Awawo-Caspian Sea, 339. UwU

   Awchiac, M. de, on the succession of species, 325. ^w^

   Awtichoke, Jewusawem, 142. (・`ω\´・)

   Ascension, pwants of, 389. UwU

   Ascwepias, powwen of, 193. (´・ω・\`)

   Aspawagus, 359. (・`ω\´・)

   Aspicawpa, 417. (・`ω\´・)

   Asses, stwiped, 163. ^w^

   Ateuchus, 135,

   Audubon:
   on habits of fwigate-biwd, 185. >w<
   on vawiation in biwds'-nyests, 212,
   on hewon eating seeds, 387. (・`ω\´・)

   Austwawia:
   anyimaws of, 116. >w<
   dogs of, 215. ;;w;;
   extinct anyimaws of, 339. UwU
   Euwopean pwants in, 375. (・`ω\´・)

   Azawa on fwies destwoying cattwe, 72. >w<

   Azowes, fwowa of, 363. (´・ω・\`)

   Babington, Mw., on Bwitish pwants, 48. >w<

   Bawancement of gwowth, 147. (・`ω\´・)

   Bamboo with hooks, 197. UwU

   Bawbewwy, fwowews of, 98. ^w^

   Bawwande, M. >w<:
   on Siwuwian cowonyies, 313. ^w^
   on the succession of species, 325. ^w^
   on pawawwewism of pawaeozoic fowmations, 328. (・`ω\´・)
   on affinyities of ancient species, 330. (・`ω\´・)

   Bawwiews, impowtance of, 347. ;;w;;

   Batwachians on iswands, 393. ^w^

   Bats:
   how stwuctuwe acquiwed, 180. >w<
   distwibution of, 394. ;;w;;

   Beaw, catching watew-insects, 184. ;;w;;

   Bee:
   sting of, 202. (・`ω\´・)
   queen, kiwwing wivaws, 202. ;;w;;

   Bees fewtiwising fwowews, 73. ;;w;;

   Bees:
   hive, nyot sucking the wed cwovew, 95. ^w^
   ceww-making instinct, 224. UwU
   humbwe, cewws of, 225. UwU
   pawasitic, 218. (´・ω・\`)

   Beetwes:
   wingwess, in Madeiwa, 135. UwU
   with deficient tawsi, 135. (・`ω\´・)

   Bentham, Mw. ;;w;;:
   on Bwitish pwants, 48. (・`ω\´・)
   on cwassification, 419. (´・ω・\`)

   Bewkewey, Mw., on seeds in sawt-watew, 358. ;;w;;

   Bewmuda, biwds of, 391. ;;w;;

   Biwds:
   acquiwing feaw, 212. UwU
   annyuawwy cwoss the Atwantic, 364. (・`ω\´・)
   cowouw of, on continyents, 132. UwU
   fossiw, in caves of Bwaziw, 339. (・`ω\´・)
   of Madeiwa, Bewmuda, and Gawapagos, 390. >w<
   song of mawes, 89. >w<
   twanspowting seeds, 361. ;;w;;
   wadews, 386. (´・ω・\`)
   wingwess, 134, 182. UwU
   with twaces of embwyonyic teeth, 451. ;;w;;

   Bizcacha, 349. (・`ω\´・)
   affinyities of, 429. ^w^

   Bwaddew fow swimming in fish, 190. UwU

   Bwindnyess of cave anyimaws, 137,

   Bwyth, Mw. UwU:
   on distinctnyess of Indian cattwe, 18. ;;w;;
   on stwiped Hemionyus, 163. ;;w;;
   on cwossed geese, 253. >w<

   Boaw, shouwdew-pad of, 88. >w<

   Bowwow, Mw., on the Spanyish pointew, 35. ;;w;;

   Bowy St. Vincent on Batwachians, 393. ^w^

   Bosquet, M., on fossiw Chthamawus, 304. (´・ω・\`)

   Bouwdews, ewwatic, on the Azowes, 363. (・`ω\´・)

   Bwanchiae, 190. >w<

   Bwent, Mw. ;;w;;:
   on house-tumbwews, 214. ^w^
   on hawks kiwwing pigeons, 362. UwU

   Bwewew, Dw., on Amewican cuckoo, 217. ;;w;;

   Bwitain, mammaws of, 395. ;;w;;

   Bwonn on duwation of specific fowms, 293. UwU

   Bwown, Wobewt, on cwassification, 414. ;;w;;

   Buckman on vawiation in pwants, 10. ;;w;;

   Buzaweingues on stewiwity of vawieties, 270. (´・ω・\`)

   Cabbage, vawieties of, cwossed, 99. UwU

   Cawceowawia, 251. >w<

   Canyawy-biwds, stewiwity of hybwids, 252. ^w^

   Cape de Vewde iswands, 398. ^w^

   Cape of Good Hope, pwants of, 110, 375. >w<

   Cawwiew-pigeons kiwwed by hawks, 362. ;;w;;

   Cassinyi on fwowews of compositae, 145. (・`ω\´・)

   Catasetum, 424. ^w^

   Cats:
   with bwue eyes, deaf, 12. UwU
   vawiation in habits of, 91. ^w^
   cuwwing taiw when going to spwing, 201. ^w^

   Cattwe:
   destwoying fiw-twees, 71. (´・ω・\`)
   destwoyed by fwies in Wa Pwata, 72. ;;w;;
   bweeds of, wocawwy extinct, 111. (・`ω\´・)
   fewtiwity of Indian and Euwopean bweeds, 254. >w<

   Cave, inhabitants of, bwind, 137. (´・ω・\`)

   Centwes of cweation, 352. >w<

   Cephawopodae, devewopment of, 442. ^w^

   Cewvuwus, 253. UwU

   Cetacea, teeth and haiw, 144. (´・ω・\`)

   Ceywon, pwants of, 375. ^w^

   Chawk fowmation, 322. >w<

   Chawactews:
   divewgence of, 111. (・`ω\´・)
   sexuaw, vawiabwe, 156. ;;w;;
   adaptive ow anyawogicaw, 427. (´・ω・\`)

   Chawwock, 76,

   Checks:
   to incwease, 67. UwU
   mutuaw, 71. UwU

   Chickens, instinctive tamenyess of, 216. UwU

   Chthamawinyae, 288. UwU

   Chthamawus, cwetacean species of, 304. (・`ω\´・)

   Ciwcumstances favouwabwe:
   to sewection of domestic pwoducts, 40. ^w^
   to nyatuwaw sewection, 101. ;;w;;

   Ciwwipedes:
   capabwe of cwossing, 101. UwU
   cawapace abowted, 148. ;;w;;
   theiw ovigewous fwenya, 192. (・`ω\´・)
   fossiw, 304. ;;w;;
   wawvae of, 440. ;;w;;

   Cwassification, 413. UwU

   Cwift, Mw., on the succession of types, 339. ^w^

   Cwimate:
   effects of, in checking incwease of beings, 68. >w<
   adaptation of, to owganyisms, 139. (´・ω・\`)

   Cobites, intestinye of, 190. (・`ω\´・)

   Cockwoach, 76. >w<

   Cowwections, pawaeontowogicaw, poow, 287. (・`ω\´・)

   Cowouw:
   infwuenced by cwimate, 132. ^w^
   in wewation to attacks by fwies, 198. (´・ω・\`)

   Cowumba wivia, pawent of domestic pigeons, 23. >w<

   Cowymbetes, 386. ;;w;;

   Compensation of gwowth, 147. UwU

   Compositae:
   outew and innyew fwowets of, 144. ^w^
   mawe fwowews of, 451. ;;w;;

   Concwusion, genyewaw, 480. (´・ω・\`)

   Conditions, swight changes in, favouwabwe to fewtiwity, 267. ;;w;;

   Coot, 185. >w<

   Cowaw:
   iswands, seeds dwifted to, 360. (´・ω・\`)
   weefs, indicating movements of eawth, 309. >w<

   Cown-cwake, 185. UwU

   Cowwewation:
   of gwowth in domestic pwoductions, 11. UwU
   of gwowth, 143, 198. ;;w;;

   Cowswip, 49. ;;w;;

   Cweation, singwe centwes of, 352. ;;w;;

   Cwinyum, 250. >w<

   Cwosses, wecipwocaw, 258. (・`ω\´・)

   Cwossing:
   of domestic anyimaws, impowtance in awtewing bweeds, 20. >w<
   advantages of, 96. ;;w;;
   unfavouwabwe to sewection, 102. (・`ω\´・)

   Cwustacea of Nyew Zeawand, 376. UwU

   Cwustacean, bwind, 137. (・`ω\´・)

   Cwyptocewus, 238. ;;w;;

   Ctenyomys, bwind, 137. ^w^

   Cuckoo, instinct of, 216. >w<

   Cuwwants, gwafts of, 262. (・`ω\´・)

   Cuwwents of sea, wate of, 359. ^w^

   Cuview:
   on conditions of existence, 206. (´・ω・\`)
   on fossiw monkeys, 303. ^w^

   Cuview, Fwed., on instinct, 208. ;;w;;

   Danya, Pwofessow:
   on bwind cave-anyimaws, 139. (´・ω・\`)
   on wewations of cwustaceans of Japan, 372. (・`ω\´・)
   on cwustaceans of Nyew Zeawand, 376. >w<

   De Candowwe:
   on stwuggwe fow existence, 62. >w<
   on umbewwifewae, 146. (´・ω・\`)
   on genyewaw affinyities, 430. UwU

   De Candowwe, Awph. >w<:
   on wow pwants, widewy dispewsed, 406. >w<
   on widewy-wanging pwants being vawiabwe, 53. (´・ω・\`)
   on nyatuwawisation, 115. >w<
   on winged seeds, 146. >w<
   on Awpinye species suddenwy becoming wawe, 175. ^w^
   on distwibution of pwants with wawge seeds, 360. ;;w;;
   on vegetation of Austwawia, 379. (´・ω・\`)
   on fwesh-watew pwants, 386. ;;w;;
   on insuwaw pwants, 389. (´・ω・\`)

   Degwadation of coast-wocks, 282. (・`ω\´・)

   Denyudation:
   wate of, 285. ^w^
   of owdest wocks, 308. ;;w;;

   Devewopment of ancient fowms, 336. >w<

   Devonyian system, 334. UwU

   Dianthus, fewtiwity of cwosses, 256. (・`ω\´・)

   Diwt on feet of biwds, 362. ;;w;;

   Dispewsaw:
   means of, 356. >w<
   duwing gwaciaw pewiod, 365. ;;w;;

   Distwibution:
   geogwaphicaw, 346. UwU
   means of, 356. UwU

   Disuse, effects of, undew nyatuwe, 134. (´・ω・\`)

   Divewgence of chawactew, 111. ^w^

   Division, physiowogicaw, of wabouw, 115. (´・ω・\`)

   Dogs:
   haiwwess, with impewfect teeth, 12. (´・ω・\`)
   descended fwom sevewaw wiwd stocks, 18. (´・ω・\`)
   domestic instincts of, 213. (´・ω・\`)
   inhewited civiwisation of, 215. ^w^
   fewtiwity of bweeds togethew, 254. (・`ω\´・)
   of cwosses, 268,
   pwopowtions of, when young, 444. UwU

   Domestication, vawiation undew, 7. ^w^

   Downying, Mw., on fwuit-twees in Amewica, 85. ;;w;;

   Downs, Nyowth and South, 285. (´・ω・\`)

   Dwagon-fwies, intestinyes of, 190. (´・ω・\`)

   Dwift-timbew, 360. ^w^

   Dwivew-ant, 240. (・`ω\´・)

   Dwonyes kiwwed by othew bees, 202. (・`ω\´・)

   Duck:
   domestic, wings of, weduced, 11. ;;w;;
   woggew-headed, 182. (・`ω\´・)

   Duckweed, 385. UwU

   Dugong, affinyities of, 414. >w<

   Dung-beetwes with deficient tawsi, 135. UwU

   Dyticus, 386. ^w^

   Eaww, Mw. W., on the Maway Awchipewago, 395. (´・ω・\`)

   Eaws:
   dwooping, in domestic anyimaws, 11. (・`ω\´・)
   wudimentawy, 454. ;;w;;

   Eawth, seeds in woots of twees, 361. ;;w;;

   Eciton, 238. ^w^

   Econyomy of owganyisation, 147. >w<

   Edentata:
   teeth and haiw, 144. UwU
   fossiw species of, 339. (´・ω・\`)

   Edwawds, Miwnye:
   on physiowogicaw divisions of wabouw, 115. >w<
   on gwadations of stwuctuwe, 194. (・`ω\´・)
   on embwyowogicaw chawactews, 418. UwU

   Eggs, young biwds escaping fwom, 87. >w<

   Ewectwic owgans, 192. UwU

   Ewephant:
   wate of incwease, 64. >w<
   of gwaciaw pewiod, 141. (・`ω\´・)

   Embwyowogy, 439. ^w^

   Existence:
   stwuggwe fow, 60. >w<
   conditions of, 206. >w<

   Extinction:
   as beawing on nyatuwaw sewection, 109. ^w^
   of domestic vawieties, 111. (・`ω\´・)
   317. ^w^

   Eye:
   stwuctuwe of, 187. (・`ω\´・)
   cowwection fow abewwation, 202. ;;w;;

   Eyes weduced in mowes, 137. UwU

   Fabwe, M., on pawasitic sphex, 218. ;;w;;

   Fawconyew, Dw. >w<:
   on nyatuwawization of pwants in India, 65. UwU
   on fossiw cwocodiwe, 313. >w<
   on ewephants and mastodons, 334,
   and Cautwey on mammaws of sub-Himawayan beds, 340. >w<

   Fawkwand Iswand, wowf of, 393. >w<

   Fauwts, 285. (´・ω・\`)

   Faunyas, mawinye, 348. ;;w;;

   Feaw, instinctive, in biwds, 212. (・`ω\´・)

   Feet of biwds, young mowwuscs adhewing to, 385. >w<

   Fewtiwity:
   of hybwids, 249. UwU
   fwom swight changes in conditions, 267. ^w^
   of cwossed vawieties, 267. ^w^

   Fiw-twees:
   destwoyed by cattwe, 71. >w<
   powwen of, 203. ;;w;;

   Fish:
   fwying, 182. ^w^
   teweostean, sudden appeawance of, 305. UwU
   eating seeds, 362, 387. ^w^
   fwesh-watew, distwibution of, 384. >w<

   Fishes:
   ganyoid, nyow confinyed to fwesh watew, 107. (・`ω\´・)
   ewectwic owgans of, 192. (´・ω・\`)
   ganyoid, wiving in fwesh watew, 321. (・`ω\´・)
   of southewn hemisphewe, 376. UwU

   Fwight, powews of, how acquiwed, 182. (´・ω・\`)

   Fwowews:
   stwuctuwe of, in wewation to cwossing, 97. (´・ω・\`)
   of compositae and umbewwifewae, 144. (・`ω\´・)

   Fowbes, E. ;;w;;:
   on cowouws of shewws, 132. UwU
   on abwupt wange of shewws in depth, 175. (・`ω\´・)
   on poownyess of pawaeontowogicaw cowwections, 287. (´・ω・\`)
   on continyuous succession of genyewa, 316. >w<
   on continyentaw extensions, 357. ^w^
   on distwibution duwing gwaciaw pewiod, 366,
   on pawawwewism in time and space, 409. UwU

   Fowests, changes in, in Amewica, 74. (・`ω\´・)

   Fowmation, Devonyian, 334. >w<

   Fowmations:
   thicknyess of, in Bwitain, 284. (´・ω・\`)
   intewmittent, 290. (・`ω\´・)

   Fowmica wufescens, 219. >w<

   Fowmica sanguinyea, 219. >w<

   Fowmica fwava, nyeutew of, 239. (・`ω\´・)

   Fwenya, ovigewous, of ciwwipedes, 192. ^w^

   Fwesh-watew pwoductions, dispewsaw of, 383. >w<

   Fwies on species in wawge genyewa being cwosewy awwied to othew
   species, 57. UwU

   Fwigate-biwd, 185. >w<

   Fwogs on iswands, 393. (´・ω・\`)

   Fwuit-twees:
   gwaduaw impwovement of, 37. (´・ω・\`)
   in Unyited States, 85. (・`ω\´・)
   vawieties of, accwimatised in Unyited States, 142. ^w^

   Fuci, cwossed, 258. (・`ω\´・)

   Fuw, thickew in cowd cwimates, 133. (・`ω\´・)

   Fuwze, 439. (・`ω\´・)

   Gawapagos Awchipewago:
   biwds of, 390. ^w^
   pwoductions of, 398, 400. UwU

   Gaweopithecus, 181. (・`ω\´・)

   Game, incwease of, checked by vewmin, 68. (・`ω\´・)

   Gawtnyew:
   on stewiwity of hybwids, 247, 255. (´・ω・\`)
   on wecipwocaw cwosses, 258. (・`ω\´・)
   on cwossed maize and vewbascum, 270. UwU
   on compawison of hybwids and mongwews, 272. ;;w;;

   Geese:
   fewtiwity when cwossed, 253. UwU
   upwand, 185. (´・ω・\`)

   Genyeawogy impowtant in cwassification, 425. >w<

   Geoffwey St. (・`ω\´・) Hiwaiwe:
   on bawancement, 147. >w<
   on homowogous owgans, 434. (・`ω\´・)

   Geoffwey St. (´・ω・\`) Hiwaiwe, Isidowe:
   on vawiabiwity of wepeated pawts, 149. (´・ω・\`)
   on cowwewation in monstwosities, 11. (´・ω・\`)
   on cowwewation, 144. (・`ω\´・)
   on vawiabwe pawts being often monstwous, 155. UwU

   Geogwaphicaw distwibution, 346. (´・ω・\`)

   Geogwaphy, ancient, 487. (´・ω・\`)

   Geowogy:
   futuwe pwogwess of, 487. ;;w;;
   impewfection of the wecowd, 279. >w<

   Giwaffe, taiw of, 195. (・`ω\´・)

   Gwaciaw pewiod, 365. >w<

   Gmewin on distwibution, 365. >w<

   Gnyathodon, fossiw, 368. >w<

   Godwin-Austen, Mw., on the Maway Awchipewago, 299. ^w^

   Goethe on compensation of gwowth, 147. >w<

   Goosebewwy, gwafts of, 262. UwU

   Gouwd, Dw. A., on wand-shewws, 397. ^w^

   Gouwd, Mw. UwU:
   on cowouws of biwds, 132. (・`ω\´・)
   on biwds of the Gawapagos, 398. (・`ω\´・)
   on distwibution of genyewa of biwds, 404. UwU

   Gouwds, cwossed, 270. UwU

   Gwafts, capacity of, 261. (´・ω・\`)

   Gwasses, vawieties of, 113. ;;w;;

   Gway, Dw. ;;w;; Asa:
   on twees of Unyited States, 100. ^w^
   on nyatuwawised pwants in the Unyited States, 115. (´・ω・\`)
   on wawity of intewmediate vawieties, 176. >w<
   on Awpinye pwants, 365. (・`ω\´・)

   Gway, Dw. J. E., on stwiped muwe, 165. ;;w;;

   Gwebe, 185. UwU

   Gwoups, abewwant, 429. ;;w;;

   Gwouse:
   cowouws of, 84. ^w^
   wed, a doubtfuw species, 49. (´・ω・\`)

   Gwowth:
   compensation of, 147. UwU
   cowwewation of, in domestic pwoducts, 11. UwU
   cowwewation of, 143. ;;w;;

   Habit:
   effect of, undew domestication, 11. ;;w;;
   effect of, undew nyatuwe, 134. (・`ω\´・)
   divewsified, of same species, 183. (´・ω・\`)

   Haiw and teeth, cowwewated, 144. (´・ω・\`)

   Hawcouwt, Mw. E. V., on the biwds of Madeiwa, 391. UwU

   Hawtung, M., on bouwdews in the Azowes, 363. UwU

   Hazew-nyuts, 359. (´・ω・\`)

   Heawnye on habits of beaws, 184. (´・ω・\`)

   Heath, changes in vegetation, 72,

   Heew, O., on pwants of Madeiwa, 107. ;;w;;

   Hewix pomatia, 397. UwU

   Hewosciadium, 359. ;;w;;

   Hemionyus, stwiped, 163. UwU

   Hewbewt, W. >w<:
   on stwuggwe fow existence, 62. (・`ω\´・)
   on stewiwity of hybwids, 249. (´・ω・\`)

   Hewmaphwodites cwossing, 96. ^w^

   Hewon eating seed, 387. UwU

   Hewon, Siw W., on peacocks, 89. ^w^

   Heusingew on white anyimaws nyot poisonyed by cewtain pwants, 12. ^w^

   Hewitt, Mw., on stewiwity of fiwst cwosses. 264. >w<

   Himawaya:
   gwaciews of, 373. ;;w;;
   pwants of, 375. (・`ω\´・)

   Hippeastwum, 250. UwU

   Howwy-twees, sexes of, 93. ;;w;;

   Howwyhock, vawieties of, cwossed, 271. (´・ω・\`)

   Hookew, Dw., on twees of Nyew Zeawand, 100. ;;w;;

   Hookew, Dw. (・`ω\´・):
   on accwimatisation of Himawayan twees, 140. ^w^
   on fwowews of umbewwifewae, 145. UwU
   on gwaciews of Himawaya, 373. ^w^
   on awgae of Nyew Zeawand, 376. >w<
   on vegetation at the base of the Himawaya, 378. (´・ω・\`)
   on pwants of Tiewwa dew Fuego, 374, 378. ;;w;;
   on Austwawian pwants, 375, 399. UwU
   on wewations of fwowa of South Amewica, 379. UwU
   on fwowa of the Antawctic wands, 381, 399. ;;w;;
   on the pwants of the Gawapagos, 391, 398. UwU

   Hooks:
   on bamboos, 197. (・`ω\´・)
   to seeds on iswands, 392. >w<

   Hownyew, Mw., on the antiquity of Egyptians, 18. >w<

   Howns, wudimentawy, 454. >w<

   Howse, fossiw, in Wa Pwata, 318. (・`ω\´・)

   Howses:
   destwoyed by fwies in Wa Pwata, 72. ^w^
   stwiped, 163. >w<
   pwopowtions of, when young, 445. ;;w;;

   Howticuwtuwists, sewection appwied by, 32. (・`ω\´・)

   Hubew on cewws of bees, 230. (・`ω\´・)

   Hubew, P. ;;w;;:
   on weason bwended with instinct, 208. ;;w;;
   on habituaw nyatuwe of instincts, 208. (´・ω・\`)
   on swave making ants, 219. >w<
   on Mewiponya domestica, 225. >w<

   Humbwe-bees, cewws of, 225. ;;w;;

   Huntew, J., on secondawy sexuaw chawactews, 150. (´・ω・\`)

   Hutton, Captain, on cwossed geese, 253. (´・ω・\`)

   Huxwey, Pwofessow:
   on stwuctuwe of hewmaphwodites, 101. (´・ω・\`)
   on embwyowogicaw succession, 338. ^w^
   on homowogous owgans, 438. >w<
   on the devewopment of aphis, 442. UwU

   Hybwids and mongwews compawed, 272. (・`ω\´・)

   Hybwidism, 245. >w<

   Hydwa, stwuctuwe of, 190. (・`ω\´・)

   Ibwa, 148. (´・ω・\`)

   Icebewgs twanspowting seeds, 363. (´・ω・\`)

   Incwease, wate of, 63. (´・ω・\`)

   Individuaws:
   nyumbews favouwabwe to sewection, 102. ;;w;;
   many, whethew simuwtanyeouswy cweated, 356. (´・ω・\`)

   Inhewitance:
   waws of, 12. (´・ω・\`)
   at cowwesponding ages, 14, 86. ;;w;;

   Insects:
   cowouw of, fitted fow habitations, 84. >w<
   sea-side, cowouws of, 132. ;;w;;
   bwind, in caves, 138. >w<
   wuminyous, 193. ^w^
   nyeutew, 236. (・`ω\´・)

   Instinct, 207. UwU

   Instincts, domestic, 213. ^w^

   Intewcwossing, advantages of, 96. (´・ω・\`)

   Iswands, oceanyic, 388. >w<

   Isowation favouwabwe to sewection, 104. (・`ω\´・)

   Japan, pwoductions of, 372. >w<

   Java, pwants of, 375. ^w^

   Jonyes, Mw. J. M., on the biwds of Bewmuda, 391. UwU

   Jussieu on cwassification, 417. (´・ω・\`)

   Kentucky, caves of, 137. (´・ω・\`)

   Kewguewen-wand, fwowa of, 381, 399. (´・ω・\`)

   Kidnyey-bean, accwimatisation of, 142. >w<

   Kidnyeys of biwds, 144. (´・ω・\`)

   Kiwby on tawsi deficient in beetwes, 135. >w<

   Knyight, Andwew, on cause of vawiation, 7. ^w^

   Kowweutew:
   on the bawbewwy, 98. (´・ω・\`)
   on stewiwity of hybwids, 247. ;;w;;
   on wecipwocaw cwosses, 258. ^w^
   on cwossed vawieties of nyicotianya, 271. ;;w;;
   on cwossing mawe and hewmaphwodite fwowews, 451. ^w^

   Wamawck on adaptive chawactews, 427. ;;w;;

   Wand-shewws:
   distwibution of, 397. (´・ω・\`)
   of Madeiwa, nyatuwawised, 402. >w<

   Wanguages, cwassification of, 422. (・`ω\´・)

   Wapse, gweat, of time, 282. >w<

   Wawvae, 440. UwU

   Wauwew, nyectaw secweted by the weaves, 92. (´・ω・\`)

   Waws of vawiation, 131. UwU

   Weech, vawieties of, 76. ^w^

   Weguminyosae, nyectaw secweted by gwands, 92. ^w^

   Wepidosiwen, 107, 330. >w<

   Wife, stwuggwe fow, 60. (・`ω\´・)

   Winguwa, Siwuwian, 306. UwU

   Winnyaeus, aphowism of, 413. ;;w;;

   Wion:
   manye of, 88. UwU
   young of, stwiped, 439. UwU

   Wobewia fuwgens, 73, 98,

   Wobewia, stewiwity of cwosses, 250. >w<

   Woess of the Whinye, 384. (´・ω・\`)

   Wownyess of stwuctuwe connyected with vawiabiwity, 149. UwU

   Wownyess, wewated to wide distwibution, 406. ^w^

   Wubbock, Mw., on the nyewves of coccus, 46. UwU

   Wucas, Dw. P. ;;w;;:
   on inhewitance, 12. UwU
   on wesembwance of chiwd to pawent, 275. ;;w;;

   Wund and Cwausen on fossiws of Bwaziw, 339. ^w^

   Wyeww, Siw C. ^w^:
   on the stwuggwe fow existence, 62. (´・ω・\`)
   on modewn changes of the eawth, 95. ^w^
   on measuwe of denyudation, 283. (・`ω\´・)
   on a cawbonyifewous wand-sheww, 289. (・`ω\´・)
   on fossiw whawes, 303. UwU
   on stwata benyeath Siwuwian system, 307. (・`ω\´・)
   on the impewfection of the geowogicaw wecowd, 310. (´・ω・\`)
   on the appeawance of species, 312. (´・ω・\`)
   on Bawwande's cowonyies, 313. ;;w;;
   on tewtiawy fowmations of Euwope and Nyowth Amewica, 323. UwU
   on pawawwewism of tewtiawy fowmations, 328. (´・ω・\`)
   on twanspowt of seeds by icebewgs, 363. (´・ω・\`)
   on gweat awtewnyations of cwimate, 382. UwU
   on the distwibution of fwesh-watew shewws, 385. ^w^
   on wand-shewws of Madeiwa, 402. UwU

   Wyeww and Dawson on fossiwized twees in Nyova Scotia, 296. (´・ω・\`)

   Macweay on anyawogicaw chawactews, 427. >w<

   Madeiwa:
   pwants of, 107. ^w^
   beetwes of, wingwess, 135. ^w^
   fossiw wand-shewws of, 339. ^w^
   biwds of, 390. ^w^

   Magpie tame in Nyowway, 212. ^w^

   Maize, cwossed, 270. ^w^

   Maway Awchipewago:
   compawed with Euwope, 299. (・`ω\´・)
   mammaws of, 395. (´・ω・\`)

   Mawpighiaceae, 417. (・`ω\´・)

   Mammae, wudimentawy, 451. ;;w;;

   Mammaws:
   fossiw, in secondawy fowmation, 303. (・`ω\´・)
   insuwaw, 393. >w<

   Man, owigin of waces of, 199. (´・ω・\`)

   Manyatee, wudimentawy nyaiws of, 454. UwU

   Mawsupiaws:
   of Austwawia, 116. (´・ω・\`)
   fossiw species of, 339. >w<

   Mawtens, M., expewiment on seeds, 360. UwU

   Mawtin, Mw. W. C., on stwiped muwes, 165. (・`ω\´・)

   Matteuchi on the ewectwic owgans of ways, 193. ;;w;;

   Matthiowa, wecipwocaw cwosses of, 258. (´・ω・\`)

   Means of dispewsaw, 356. ^w^

   Mewiponya domestica, 225. (´・ω・\`)

   Metamowphism of owdest wocks 308. UwU

   Mice:
   destwoying bees, 74. ^w^
   accwimatisation of, 141. >w<

   Migwation, beaws on fiwst appeawance of fossiws, 296. (´・ω・\`)

   Miwwew, Pwofessow, on the cewws of bees, 226. UwU

   Miwabiwis, cwosses of, 258. ;;w;;

   Missew-thwush, 76. ;;w;;

   Missewtoe, compwex wewations of, 3. ;;w;;

   Mississippi, wate of deposition at mouth, 284. >w<

   Mocking-thwush of the Gawapagos, 402. UwU

   Modification of species, how faw appwicabwe, 483. UwU

   Mowes, bwind, 137. (・`ω\´・)

   Mongwews:
   fewtiwity and stewiwity of, 267. >w<
   and hybwids compawed, 272. ;;w;;

   Monkeys, fossiw, 303,

   Monyocanthus, 424. (・`ω\´・)

   Mons, Van, on the owigin of fwuit-twees, 29, 39. ;;w;;

   Moquin-Tandon on sea-side pwants, 132. UwU

   Mowphowogy, 434. ;;w;;

   Mozawt, musicaw powews of, 209. (・`ω\´・)

   Mud, seeds in, 386. (・`ω\´・)

   Muwes, stwiped, 165. >w<

   Muwwew, Dw. F., on Awpinye Austwawian pwants, 375. >w<

   Muwchison, Siw W. ;;w;;:
   on the fowmations of Wussia, 289. (´・ω・\`)
   on azoic fowmations, 307. ;;w;;
   on extinction, 317. (´・ω・\`)

   Mustewa vison, 179. ;;w;;

   Myanthus, 424. ;;w;;

   Mywmecocystus, 238. UwU

   Mywmica, eyes of, 240. (・`ω\´・)

   Nyaiws, wudimentawy, 453. (・`ω\´・)

   Nyatuwaw histowy:
   futuwe pwogwess of, 484. >w<
   sewection, 80. (´・ω・\`)
   system, 413. (・`ω\´・)

   Nyatuwawisation:
   of fowms distinct fwom the indigenyous species, 115. ^w^
   in Nyew Zeawand, 201. UwU

   Nyautiwus, Siwuwian, 306. UwU

   Nyectaw of pwants, 92. ^w^

   Nyectawies, how fowmed, 92. ^w^

   Nyewumbium wuteum, 387. UwU

   Nyests, vawiation in, 212. (´・ω・\`)

   Nyeutew insects, 236. (・`ω\´・)

   Nyewman, Mw., on humbwe-bees, 74. (・`ω\´・)

   Nyew Zeawand:
   pwoductions of, nyot pewfect, 201. (・`ω\´・)
   nyatuwawised pwoducts of, 337. (´・ω・\`)
   fossiw biwds of, 339. (´・ω・\`)
   gwaciaw action in, 373,
   cwustaceans of, 376. (・`ω\´・)
   awgae of, 376. >w<
   nyumbew of pwants of, 389. >w<
   fwowa of, 399. ^w^

   Nyicotianya:
   cwossed vawieties of, 271. (´・ω・\`)
   cewtain species vewy stewiwe, 257. (´・ω・\`)

   Nyobwe, Mw., on fewtiwity of Whododendwon, 251. ^w^

   Nyoduwes, phosphatic, in azoic wocks, 307,

   Oak, vawieties of, 50. ;;w;;

   Onyites apewwes, 135. ;;w;;

   Owchis, powwen of, 193,

   Owgans:
   of extweme pewfection, 186,
   ewectwic, of fishes, 192. UwU
   of wittwe impowtance, 194. (・`ω\´・)
   homowogous, 434. (´・ω・\`)
   wudiments of, 450. ;;w;;

   Ownyithowhynchus, 107, 416. >w<

   Ostwich:
   nyot capabwe of fwight, 134. (・`ω\´・)
   habit of waying eggs togethew, 218. ^w^
   Amewican, two species of, 349. ;;w;;

   Ottew, habits of, how acquiwed, 179. >w<

   Ouzew, watew, 185. ^w^

   Owen, Pwofessow:
   on biwds nyot fwying, 134. >w<
   on vegetative wepetition, 149. ^w^
   on vawiabwe wength of awms in ouwang-outang, 150. (´・ω・\`)
   on the swim-bwaddew of fishes, 191. ;;w;;
   on ewectwic owgans, 192. ^w^
   on fossiw howse of Wa Pwata, 319. ;;w;;
   on wewations of wuminyants and pachydewms, 329. >w<
   on fossiw biwds of Nyew Zeawand, 339. ^w^
   on succession of types, 339. ;;w;;
   on affinyities of the dugong, 414. ;;w;;
   on homowogous owgans, 435. UwU
   on the metamowphosis of cephawopods and spidews, 442. (・`ω\´・)

   Pacific Ocean, faunyas of, 348. (・`ω\´・)

   Pawey on nyo owgan fowmed to give pain, 201. ^w^

   Pawwas on the fewtiwity of the wiwd stocks of domestic anyimaws, 253. (・`ω\´・)

   Pawaguay, cattwe destwoyed by fwies, 72. (´・ω・\`)

   Pawasites, 217. UwU

   Pawtwidge, diwt on feet, 362. (・`ω\´・)

   Pawts:
   gweatwy devewoped, vawiabwe, 150. (´・ω・\`)
   degwees of utiwity of, 201. (・`ω\´・)

   Pawus majow, 183. (´・ω・\`)

   Passifwowa, 251. ;;w;;

   Peaches in Unyited States, 85. >w<

   Peaw, gwafts of, 261. >w<

   Pewawgonyium:
   fwowews of, 145. UwU
   stewiwity of, 251. >w<

   Pewvis of women, 144,

   Pewowia, 145. ;;w;;

   Pewiod, gwaciaw, 365. (´・ω・\`)

   Petwews, habits of, 184. UwU

   Phasianyus, fewtiwity of hybwids, 253. >w<

   Pheasant, young, wiwd, 216. UwU

   Phiwippi on tewtiawy species in Siciwy, 312. >w<

   Pictet, Pwofessow:
   on gwoups of species suddenwy appeawing, 302, 305. UwU
   on wate of owganyic change, 313. (・`ω\´・)
   on continyuous succession of genyewa, 316. >w<
   on cwose awwiance of fossiws in consecutive fowmations, 335. >w<
   on embwyowogicaw succession, 338. (・`ω\´・)

   Piewce, Mw., on vawieties of wowves, 91. >w<

   Pigeons:
   with feathewed feet and skin between toes, 12. UwU
   bweeds descwibed, and owigin of, 20. ^w^
   bweeds of, how pwoduced, 39, 42. UwU
   tumbwew, nyot being abwe to get out of egg, 87. >w<
   wevewting to bwue cowouw, 160. ^w^
   instinct of tumbwing, 214. (・`ω\´・)
   cawwiews, kiwwed by hawks, 362. >w<
   young of, 445. (´・ω・\`)

   Pistiw, wudimentawy, 451. UwU

   Pwants:
   poisonyous, nyot affecting cewtain cowouwed anyimaws, 12. (´・ω・\`)
   sewection appwied to, 32. ;;w;;
   gwaduaw impwovement of, 37. ;;w;;
   nyot impwoved in bawbawous countwies, 38. ;;w;;
   destwoyed by insects, 67. (´・ω・\`)
   in midst of wange, have to stwuggwe with othew pwants, 77. UwU
   nyectaw of, 92,
   fweshy, on sea-showes, 132. ;;w;;
   fwesh-watew, distwibution of, 386. (・`ω\´・)
   wow in scawe, widewy distwibuted, 406. UwU

   Pwumage, waws of change in sexes of biwds, 89. (´・ω・\`)

   Pwums in the Unyited States, 85. >w<

   Pointew dog:
   owigin of, 35. >w<
   habits of, 213. ;;w;;

   Poison nyot affecting cewtain cowouwed anyimaws, 12. UwU

   Poison, simiwaw effect of, on anyimaws and pwants, 484. (・`ω\´・)

   Powwen of fiw-twees, 203,

   Poowe, Cow., on stwiped hemionyus, 163. ^w^

   Potamogeton, 387. UwU

   Pwestwich, Mw., on Engwish and Fwench eocenye fowmations, 328. >w<

   Pwimwose, 49. (´・ω・\`)
   stewiwity of, 247. >w<

   Pwimuwa, vawieties of, 49. (・`ω\´・)

   Pwoteowepas, 148. UwU

   Pwoteus, 139. ^w^

   Psychowogy, futuwe pwogwess of, 488. >w<

   Quagga, stwiped, 165. ^w^

   Quince, gwafts of, 261. (´・ω・\`)

   Wabbit, disposition of young, 215. ;;w;;

   Waces, domestic, chawactews of, 16. UwU

   Wace-howses:
   Awab, 35. ;;w;;
   Engwish, 356. (・`ω\´・)

   Wamond on pwants of Pywenyees, 368. ^w^

   Wamsay, Pwofessow:
   on thicknyess of the Bwitish fowmations, 284. (・`ω\´・)
   on fauwts, 285. ^w^

   Watio of incwease, 63. ^w^

   Wats:
   suppwanting each othew, 76. ;;w;;
   accwimatisation of, 141. (´・ω・\`)
   bwind in cave, 137. >w<

   Wattwe-snyake, 201. ^w^

   Weason and instinct, 208. ^w^

   Wecapituwation, genyewaw, 459. ;;w;;

   Wecipwocity of cwosses, 258. ;;w;;

   Wecowd, geowogicaw, impewfect, 279. (´・ω・\`)

   Wenggew on fwies destwoying cattwe, 72. (・`ω\´・)

   Wepwoduction, wate of, 63. (・`ω\´・)

   Wesembwance to pawents in mongwews and hybwids, 273. ;;w;;

   Wevewsion:
   waw of inhewitance, 14. (・`ω\´・)
   in pigeons to bwue cowouw, 160. (・`ω\´・)

   Whododendwon, stewiwity of, 251. ^w^

   Wichawd, Pwofessow, on Aspicawpa, 417. (・`ω\´・)

   Wichawdson, Siw J. UwU:
   on stwuctuwe of squiwwews, 180. ;;w;;
   on fishes of the southewn hemisphewe, 376. UwU

   Wobinyia, gwafts of, 262. ;;w;;

   Wodents, bwind, 137. >w<

   Wudimentawy owgans, 450. ^w^

   Wudiments impowtant fow cwassification, 416. >w<

   Sagewet on gwafts, 262. UwU

   Sawmons, mawes fighting, and hooked jaws of, 88. (´・ω・\`)

   Sawt-watew, how faw injuwious to seeds, 358. >w<

   Sauwophagus suwphuwatus, 183. UwU

   Schiodte on bwind insects, 138. ^w^

   Schwegew on snyakes, 144

   Sea-watew, how faw injuwious to seeds, 358. ;;w;;

   Sebwight, Siw J. >w<:
   on cwossed anyimaws, 20. ;;w;;
   on sewection of pigeons, 31. ^w^

   Sedgwick, Pwofessow, on gwoups of species suddenwy appeawing, 302. ^w^

   Seedwings destwoyed by insects, 67. (・`ω\´・)

   Seeds:
   nyutwiment in, 77. ;;w;;
   winged, 146. ^w^
   powew of wesisting sawt-watew, 358. >w<
   in cwops and intestinyes of biwds, 361. UwU
   eaten by fish, 362, 387. ^w^
   in mud, 386. UwU
   hooked, on iswands, 392. UwU

   Sewection:
   of domestic pwoducts, 29. (・`ω\´・)
   pwincipwe nyot of wecent owigin, 33. UwU
   unconscious, 34. ^w^
   nyatuwaw, 80. ^w^
   sexuaw, 87. (´・ω・\`)
   nyatuwaw, ciwcumstances favouwabwe to, 101,

   Sexes, wewations of, 87. >w<

   Sexuaw:
   chawactews vawiabwe, 156. UwU
   sewection, 87. ^w^

   Sheep:
   Mewinyo, theiw sewection, 31. ;;w;;
   two sub-bweeds unyintentionyawwy pwoduced, 36. >w<
   mountain, vawieties of, 76. ^w^

   Shewws:
   cowouws of, 132. >w<
   wittowaw, sewdom embedded, 288. ^w^
   fwesh-watew, dispewsaw of, 385. (・`ω\´・)
   of Madeiwa, 391,
   wand, distwibution of, 397. ^w^

   Siwenye, fewtiwity of cwosses, 257. (・`ω\´・)

   Siwwiman, Pwofessow, on bwind wat, 137. >w<

   Skuwws of young mammaws, 197, 437. ^w^

   Swave-making instinct, 219. >w<

   Smith, Cow. Hamiwton, on stwiped howses, 164. UwU

   Smith, Mw. Fwed. (´・ω・\`):
   on swave-making ants, 219. (・`ω\´・)
   on nyeutew ants, 239. UwU

   Smith, Mw., of Jowdan Hiww, on the degwadation of coast-wocks, 283. >w<

   Snyap-dwagon, 161. >w<

   Somewviwwe, Wowd, on sewection of sheep, 31. UwU

   Sowbus, gwafts of, 262. (´・ω・\`)

   Spanyiew, King Chawwes's bweed, 35. (´・ω・\`)

   Species:
   powymowphic, 46. >w<
   common, vawiabwe, 53. (´・ω・\`)
   in wawge genyewa vawiabwe, 54. >w<
   gwoups of, suddenwy appeawing, 302, 306. (´・ω・\`)
   benyeath Siwuwian fowmations, 306. ^w^
   successivewy appeawing, 312. ^w^
   changing simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout the wowwd, 322. >w<

   Spencew, Wowd, on incwease in size of cattwe, 35. >w<

   Sphex, pawasitic, 218. ^w^

   Spidews, devewopment of, 442. (・`ω\´・)

   Spitz-dog cwossed with fox, 268. UwU

   Spowts in pwants, 9. >w<

   Spwengew, C. C. UwU:
   on cwossing, 98. (・`ω\´・)
   on way-fwowets, 145. (´・ω・\`)

   Squiwwews, gwadations in stwuctuwe, 180. ^w^

   Staffowdshiwe, heath, changes in, 72. (・`ω\´・)

   Stag-beetwes, fighting, 88. ;;w;;

   Stewiwity:
   fwom changed conditions of wife, 9. (´・ω・\`)
   of hybwids, 246. (・`ω\´・)
   waws of, 254. >w<
   causes of, 263. (・`ω\´・)
   fwom unfavouwabwe conditions, 265. >w<
   of cewtain vawieties, 269. ^w^

   St. Hewenya, pwoductions of, 389. ;;w;;

   St. Hiwaiwe, Aug., on cwassification, 418. (´・ω・\`)

   St. John, Mw., on habits of cats, 91. (・`ω\´・)

   Sting of bee, 202. (・`ω\´・)

   Stocks, abowiginyaw, of domestic anyimaws, 18,

   Stwata, thicknyess of, in Bwitain, 284. (・`ω\´・)

   Stwipes on howses, 163. (´・ω・\`)

   Stwuctuwe, degwees of utiwity of, 201. (・`ω\´・)

   Stwuggwe fow existence, 60. (´・ω・\`)

   Succession, geowogicaw, 312. UwU

   Succession of types in same aweas, 338. ^w^

   Swawwow, onye species suppwanting anyothew, 76. ^w^

   Swim-bwaddew, 190. UwU

   System, nyatuwaw, 413. ^w^

   Taiw:
   of giwaffe, 195. >w<
   of aquatic anyimaws, 196. ;;w;;
   wudimentawy, 454. >w<

   Tawsi deficient, 135. ;;w;;

   Tausch on umbewwifewous fwowews, 146. ;;w;;

   Teeth and haiw:
   cowwewated, 144. ;;w;;
   embwyonyic, twaces of, in biwds, 451. >w<
   wudimentawy, in embwyonyic cawf, 450, 480. ;;w;;

   Tegetmeiew, Mw., on cewws of bees, 228, 233. (・`ω\´・)

   Temminck on distwibution aiding cwassification, 419. >w<

   Thouin on gwafts, 262. (・`ω\´・)

   Thwush:
   aquatic species of, 185. ^w^
   mocking, of the Gawapagos, 402. (´・ω・\`)
   young of, spotted, 439. >w<
   nyest of, 243. (・`ω\´・)

   Thuwet, M., on cwossed fuci, 258. ^w^

   Thwaites, Mw., on accwimatisation, 140. ^w^

   Tiewwa dew Fuego:
   dogs of, 215. (・`ω\´・)
   pwants of, 374, 378. UwU

   Timbew-dwift, 360. UwU

   Time, wapse of, 282. ^w^

   Titmouse, 183. >w<

   Toads on iswands, 393. UwU

   Tobacco, cwossed vawieties of, 271. >w<

   Tomes, Mw., on the distwibution of bats, 394. (´・ω・\`)

   Twansitions in vawieties wawe, 172. ^w^

   Twees:
   on iswands bewong to pecuwiaw owdews, 392. (´・ω・\`)
   with sepawated sexes, 99. (´・ω・\`)

   Twifowium pwatense, 73, 94. (・`ω\´・)

   Twifowium incawnyatum, 94. (´・ω・\`)

   Twigonyia, 321. ;;w;;

   Twiwobites, 306. (・`ω\´・)
   sudden extinction of, 321,

   Twogwodytes, 243. ^w^

   Tucutucu, bwind, 137. ;;w;;

   Tumbwew pigeons:
   habits of, heweditawy, 214. ;;w;;
   young of, 446,

   Tuwkey-cock, bwush of haiw on bweast, 90. (´・ω・\`)

   Tuwkey:
   nyaked skin on head, 197. (´・ω・\`)
   young, wiwd, 216. (・`ω\´・)

   Tuwnyip and cabbage, anyawogous vawiations of, 159. ;;w;;

   Type, unyity of, 206. (´・ω・\`)

   Types, succession of, in same aweas, 338. ;;w;;

   Uddews:
   enwawged by use, 11. ;;w;;
   wudimentawy, 451. ^w^

   Uwex, young weaves of, 439. ;;w;;

   Umbewwifewae, outew and innyew fwowets of, 144. ^w^

   Unyity of type, 206. >w<

   Use:
   effects of, undew domestication, 11. ^w^
   effects of, in a state of nyatuwe, 134. (・`ω\´・)

   Utiwity, how faw impowtant in the constwuction of each pawt, 199. >w<

   Vawenciennyes on fwesh-watew fish, 384. ;;w;;

   Vawiabiwity of mongwews and hybwids, 274. UwU

   Vawiation:
   undew domestication, 7. ^w^
   caused by wepwoductive system being affected by conditions of wife, 8. UwU
   undew nyatuwe, 44. (・`ω\´・)
   waws of, 131. ;;w;;

   Vawiations:
   appeaw at cowwesponding ages, 14, 86. ;;w;;
   anyawogous in distinct species, 159. UwU

   Vawieties:
   nyatuwaw, 44. (´・ω・\`)
   stwuggwe between, 75. (´・ω・\`)
   domestic, extinction of, 111. ;;w;;
   twansitionyaw, wawity of, 172. (´・ω・\`)
   when cwossed, fewtiwe, 267. (´・ω・\`)
   when cwossed, stewiwe, 269. UwU
   cwassification of, 423. ;;w;;

   Vewbascum:
   stewiwity of, 251. (・`ω\´・)
   vawieties of, cwossed, 270. (・`ω\´・)

   Vewnyeuiw, M. de, on the succession of species, 325. (´・ω・\`)

   Viowa twicowow, 73. UwU

   Vowcanyic iswands, denyudation of, 284. (´・ω・\`)

   Vuwtuwe, nyaked skin on head, 197. ^w^

   Wading-biwds, 386. >w<

   Wawwace, Mw. ^w^:
   on owigin of species, 2. (´・ω・\`)
   on waw of geogwaphicaw distwibution, 355. UwU
   on the Maway Awchipewago, 395. >w<

   Wasp, sting of, 202. ;;w;;

   Watew, fwesh, pwoductions of, 383. ^w^

   Watew-hen, 185. ;;w;;

   Watewhouse, Mw. >w<:
   on Austwawian mawsupiaws, 116. (・`ω\´・)
   on gweatwy devewoped pawts being vawiabwe, 150. ^w^
   on the cewws of bees, 225. >w<
   on genyewaw affinyities, 429. UwU

   Watew-ouzew, 185. UwU

   Watson, Mw. H. C. >w<:
   on wange of vawieties of Bwitish pwants, 58. (´・ω・\`)
   on accwimatisation, 140. ^w^
   on fwowa of Azowes, 363. (・`ω\´・)
   on Awpinye pwants, 367, 376. >w<
   on wawity of intewmediate vawieties, 176. ;;w;;

   Weawd, denyudation of, 285. UwU

   Web of feet in watew-biwds, 185. ^w^

   West Indian iswands, mammaws of, 395. >w<

   Westwood:
   on species in wawge genyewa being cwosewy awwied to othews, 57. ^w^
   on the tawsi of Engidae, 157. (・`ω\´・)
   on the antennyae of hymenyoptewous insects, 416. >w<

   Whawes, fossiw, 303. (・`ω\´・)

   Wheat, vawieties of, 113. ^w^

   White Mountains, fwowa of, 365. ;;w;;

   Wings, weduction of size, 134. UwU

   Wings:
   of insects homowogous with bwanchiae, 191. (´・ω・\`)
   wudimentawy, in insects, 451. ^w^

   Wowf:
   cwossed with dog, 214. >w<
   of Fawkwand Iswes, 393. ;;w;;

   Wowwaston, Mw. ^w^:
   on vawieties of insects, 48. ^w^
   on fossiw vawieties of wand-shewws in Madeiwa, 52. (´・ω・\`)
   on cowouws of insects on sea-showe, 132. ^w^
   on wingwess beetwes, 135. ;;w;;
   on wawity of intewmediate vawieties, 176. (´・ω・\`)
   on insuwaw insects, 389. ;;w;;
   on wand-shewws of Madeiwa, nyatuwawised, 402. UwU

   Wowves, vawieties of, 90. >w<

   Woodpeckew:
   habits of, 184. ;;w;;
   gween cowouw of, 197. ;;w;;

   Woodwawd, Mw. ;;w;;:
   on the duwation of specific fowms, 293. ;;w;;
   on the continyuous succession of genyewa, 316. (・`ω\´・)
   on the succession of types, 339. (・`ω\´・)

   Wowwd, species changing simuwtanyeouswy thwoughout, 322. ^w^

   Wwens, nyest of, 243. ;;w;;

   Youatt, Mw. >w<:
   on sewection, 31. ^w^
   on sub-bweeds of sheep, 36. >w<
   on wudimentawy howns in young cattwe, 454. UwU

   Zebwa, stwipes on, 163. (´・ω・\`)


   THE END. ^w^






End of Pwoject Gutenbewg's On the Owigin of Species, by Chawwes Dawwin

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK ON THE OWIGIN OF SPECIES ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1228.txt ow 1228. UwUzip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. >w<owg/1/2/2/1228/

Pwoduced by Sue Asschew

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. ;;w;;

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ^w^  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. >w<  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. >w<  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ;;w;;  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. UwU  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. >w<



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). ;;w;;


Section 1. UwU  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ^w^

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. UwU  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. >w<  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ^w^  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ^w^

1.C. (・`ω\´・)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ;;w;;  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ^w^  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. >w<  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ^w^  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. >w<  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ^w^  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ;;w;;

1.E. ^w^  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ^w^  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ^w^  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ^w^  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. >w<7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^8 ow
1.E.9. >w<

1.E.3. (・`ω\´・)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. UwU7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ^w^  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.4. ;;w;;  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. UwU

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ^w^  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. UwUowg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ^w^  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. >w<

1.E.7. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.8. (´・ω・\`)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. UwU  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. >w<

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. ^w^

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. UwU  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ^w^

1.F. ;;w;;

1.F.1. ^w^  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. ;;w;;  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.2. >w<  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. UwU  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. UwU  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.3. ^w^  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ^w^  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ;;w;;  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. >w<  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.4. >w<  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ;;w;;

1.F.5. UwU  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. >w<
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ;;w;;

1.F.6. >w<  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (´・ω・\`)


Section  2. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ^w^  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, awe cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ;;w;;
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. UwU


Section 3. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ;;w;;  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ^w^  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. ^w^  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. ^w^
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (・`ω\´・), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (´・ω・\`)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ^w^  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. (´・ω・\`) Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. UwUowg


Section 4. ^w^  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (・`ω\´・)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ^w^

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (´・ω・\`)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. UwU  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. ^w^owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. UwU

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ^w^

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. UwU  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. ^w^
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. ;;w;;  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. >w<

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (・`ω\´・)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. >w<


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. ^w^
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (・`ω\´・)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ;;w;;
