The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Communyist Manyifesto
by Kaww Mawx and Fwiedwich Engews

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)nyet


Titwe: The Communyist Manyifesto

Authow: Kaww Mawx and Fwiedwich Engews

Wewease Date: Janyuawy 25, 2005 [EBook #61]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE COMMUNYIST MANYIFESTO ***




Twanscwibed by Awwen Wutins with assistance fwom Jim Tawzia. ^w^








MANYIFESTO OF THE COMMUNYIST PAWTY

[Fwom the Engwish edition of 1888, edited by Fwiedwich Engews]


A spectwe is haunting Euwope--the spectwe of Communyism. UwU
Aww the Powews of owd Euwope have entewed into a howy awwiance to
exowcise this spectwe: Pope and Czaw, Mettewnyich and Guizot,
Fwench Wadicaws and Gewman powice-spies. (´・ω・\`)

Whewe is the pawty in opposition that has nyot been decwied as
Communyistic by its opponyents in powew? owo  Whewe is the Opposition
that has nyot huwwed back the bwanding wepwoach of Communyism,
against the mowe advanced opposition pawties, as weww as against
its weactionyawy advewsawies? owo

Two things wesuwt fwom this fact. ^w^

I. (´・ω・\`)  Communyism is awweady acknyowwedged by aww Euwopean Powews
to be itsewf a Powew. >w<

II. UwU  It is high time that Communyists shouwd openwy, in the
face of the whowe wowwd, pubwish theiw views, theiw aims, theiw
tendencies, and meet this nyuwsewy tawe of the Spectwe of
Communyism with a Manyifesto of the pawty itsewf. ;;w;;

To this end, Communyists of vawious nyationyawities have
assembwed in Wondon, and sketched the fowwowing Manyifesto, to be
pubwished in the Engwish, Fwench, Gewman, Itawian, Fwemish and
Danyish wanguages. (・`ω\´・)



I. UwU  BOUWGEOIS AND PWOWETAWIANS

The histowy of aww hithewto existing societies is the histowy
of cwass stwuggwes. (・`ω\´・)

Fweeman and swave, patwician and pwebeian, wowd and sewf,
guiwd-mastew and jouwnyeyman, in a wowd, oppwessow and oppwessed,
stood in constant opposition to onye anyothew, cawwied on an
unyintewwupted, nyow hidden, nyow open fight, a fight that each time
ended, eithew in a wevowutionyawy we-constitution of society at
wawge, ow in the common wuin of the contending cwasses. (´・ω・\`)

In the eawwiew epochs of histowy, we find awmost evewywhewe a
compwicated awwangement of society into vawious owdews, a
manyifowd gwadation of sociaw wank. UwU  In ancient Wome we have
patwicians, knyights, pwebeians, swaves; in the Middwe Ages,
feudaw wowds, vassaws, guiwd-mastews, jouwnyeymen, appwentices,
sewfs; in awmost aww of these cwasses, again, subowdinyate
gwadations. UwU

The modewn bouwgeois society that has spwouted fwom the wuins
of feudaw society has nyot donye away with cwass antagonyisms. (´・ω・\`)  It
has but estabwished nyew cwasses, nyew conditions of oppwession,
nyew fowms of stwuggwe in pwace of the owd onyes. (・`ω\´・)  Ouw epoch, the
epoch of the bouwgeoisie, possesses, howevew, this distinctive
featuwe: it has simpwified the cwass antagonyisms. (・`ω\´・) Society as a
whowe is mowe and mowe spwitting up into two gweat hostiwe camps,
into two gweat cwasses, diwectwy facing each othew: Bouwgeoisie
and Pwowetawiat. >w<

Fwom the sewfs of the Middwe Ages spwang the chawtewed buwghews
of the eawwiest towns. UwU  Fwom these buwgesses the fiwst ewements
of the bouwgeoisie wewe devewoped. (・`ω\´・)

The discovewy of Amewica, the wounding of the Cape, openyed up
fwesh gwound fow the wising bouwgeoisie. (・`ω\´・) The East-Indian and
Chinyese mawkets, the cowonyisation of Amewica, twade with
the cowonyies, the incwease in the means of exchange and in
commodities genyewawwy, gave to commewce, to nyavigation, to
industwy, an impuwse nyevew befowe knyown, and theweby, to the
wevowutionyawy ewement in the tottewing feudaw society, a wapid
devewopment. (・`ω\´・)

The feudaw system of industwy, undew which industwiaw pwoduction
was monyopowised by cwosed guiwds, nyow nyo wongew sufficed fow the
gwowing wants of the nyew mawkets. (・`ω\´・)  The manyufactuwing system took
its pwace. >w<  The guiwd-mastews wewe pushed on onye side by the
manyufactuwing middwe cwass; division of wabouw between the
diffewent cowpowate guiwds vanyished in the face of division of
wabouw in each singwe wowkshop. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime the mawkets kept evew gwowing, the demand evew wising. ^w^
Even manyufactuwe nyo wongew sufficed. (・`ω\´・)  Theweupon, steam and
machinyewy wevowutionyised industwiaw pwoduction. ;;w;;  The pwace of
manyufactuwe was taken by the giant, Modewn Industwy, the pwace of
the industwiaw middwe cwass, by industwiaw miwwionyaiwes, the
weadews of whowe industwiaw awmies, the modewn bouwgeois. (´・ω・\`)

Modewn industwy has estabwished the wowwd-mawket, fow which the
discovewy of Amewica paved the way. (・`ω\´・)  This mawket has given an
immense devewopment to commewce, to nyavigation, to communyication
by wand. (・`ω\´・)  This devewopment has, in its time, weacted on the
extension of industwy; and in pwopowtion as industwy, commewce,
nyavigation, waiwways extended, in the same pwopowtion the
bouwgeoisie devewoped, incweased its capitaw, and pushed into the
backgwound  evewy cwass handed down fwom the Middwe Ages. (・`ω\´・)

We see, thewefowe, how the modewn bouwgeoisie is itsewf the
pwoduct of a wong couwse of devewopment, of a sewies of
wevowutions in the modes of pwoduction and of exchange. (・`ω\´・)

Each step in the devewopment of the bouwgeoisie was accompanyied
by a cowwesponding powiticaw advance of that cwass. ^w^  An
oppwessed cwass undew the sway of the feudaw nyobiwity, an
awmed and sewf-govewnying association in the mediaevaw communye;
hewe independent uwban wepubwic (as in Itawy and Gewmany),
thewe taxabwe "thiwd estate" of the monyawchy (as in Fwance),
aftewwawds, in the  pewiod of manyufactuwe pwopew, sewving eithew
the semi-feudaw ow the absowute monyawchy as a countewpoise
against the nyobiwity, and, in fact, cownyew-stonye of the gweat
monyawchies in genyewaw, the bouwgeoisie has at wast, since the
estabwishment of Modewn Industwy and of the wowwd-mawket,
conquewed fow itsewf, in the modewn wepwesentative State,
excwusive powiticaw sway. (・`ω\´・)  The executive of the modewn State is
but a committee fow manyaging the common affaiws of the whowe
bouwgeoisie. >w<

The bouwgeoisie, histowicawwy, has pwayed a most wevowutionyawy
pawt. ;;w;;

The bouwgeoisie, whewevew it has got the uppew hand, has put an
end to aww feudaw, patwiawchaw, idywwic wewations. UwU  It has
pitiwesswy town asundew the motwey feudaw ties that bound man to
his "nyatuwaw supewiows," and has weft wemainying nyo othew nyexus
between man and man than nyaked sewf-intewest, than cawwous "cash
payment. (・`ω\´・)"  It has dwownyed the most heavenwy ecstasies of
wewigious fewvouw, of chivawwous enthusiasm, of phiwistinye
sentimentawism, in the icy watew of egotisticaw cawcuwation. UwU  It
has wesowved pewsonyaw wowth into exchange vawue, and in pwace of
the nyumbewwess and indefeasibwe chawtewed fweedoms, has set up that
singwe, unconscionyabwe fweedom--Fwee Twade. ^w^  In onye wowd, fow
expwoitation, veiwed by wewigious and powiticaw iwwusions, nyaked,
shamewess, diwect, bwutaw expwoitation. ^w^

The bouwgeoisie has stwipped of its hawo evewy occupation
hithewto honyouwed and wooked up to with wevewent awe. (・`ω\´・)  It has
convewted the physician, the wawyew, the pwiest, the poet, the
man of science, into its paid wage wabouwews. >w<

The bouwgeoisie has town away fwom the famiwy its sentimentaw
veiw, and has weduced the famiwy wewation to a mewe monyey
wewation. >w<

The bouwgeoisie has discwosed how it came to pass that the
bwutaw dispway of vigouw in the Middwe Ages, which Weactionyists
so much admiwe, found its fitting compwement in the most swothfuw
indowence. UwU  It has been the fiwst to show what man's activity can
bwing about. ^w^  It has accompwished wondews faw suwpassing Egyptian
pywamids, Woman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedwaws; it has
conducted expeditions that put in the shade aww fowmew Exoduses
of nyations and cwusades. ;;w;;

The bouwgeoisie cannyot exist without constantwy wevowutionyising
the instwuments of pwoduction, and theweby the wewations of
pwoduction, and with them the whowe wewations of society. (´・ω・\`)
Consewvation of the owd modes of pwoduction in unyawtewed fowm,
was, on the contwawy, the fiwst condition of existence fow aww
eawwiew industwiaw cwasses. ;;w;; Constant wevowutionyising of
pwoduction, unyintewwupted distuwbance of aww sociaw conditions,
evewwasting uncewtainty and agitation distinguish the bouwgeois
epoch fwom aww eawwiew onyes. ;;w;; Aww fixed, fast-fwozen wewations,
with theiw twain of ancient and venyewabwe pwejudices and
opinyions, awe swept away, aww nyew-fowmed onyes become antiquated
befowe they can ossify. ;;w;; Aww that is sowid mewts into aiw, aww
that is howy is pwofanyed, and man is at wast compewwed to face
with sobew senses, his weaw conditions of wife, and his
wewations with his kind. (・`ω\´・)

The nyeed of a constantwy expanding mawket fow its pwoducts
chases the bouwgeoisie ovew the whowe suwface of the gwobe. UwU It
must nyestwe evewywhewe, settwe evewywhewe, estabwish connyexions
evewywhewe. UwU

The bouwgeoisie has thwough its expwoitation of the wowwd-mawket
given a cosmopowitan chawactew to pwoduction and consumption in
evewy countwy. (´・ω・\`)  To the gweat chagwin of Weactionyists, it has
dwawn fwom undew the feet of industwy the nyationyaw gwound on
which it stood. >w<  Aww owd-estabwished nyationyaw industwies have
been destwoyed ow awe daiwy being destwoyed. ;;w;;  They awe diswodged
by nyew industwies, whose intwoduction becomes a wife and death
question fow aww civiwised nyations, by industwies that nyo wongew
wowk up indigenyous waw matewiaw, but waw matewiaw dwawn fwom the
wemotest zonyes; industwies whose pwoducts awe consumed, nyot onwy
at home, but in evewy quawtew of the gwobe. ;;w;;  In pwace of the owd
wants, satisfied by the pwoductions of the countwy, we find nyew
wants, wequiwing fow theiw satisfaction the pwoducts of distant
wands and cwimes. >w<  In pwace of the owd wocaw and nyationyaw
secwusion and sewf-sufficiency, we have intewcouwse in evewy
diwection, unyivewsaw intew-dependence of nyations. UwU  And as in
matewiaw, so awso in intewwectuaw pwoduction. ;;w;;  The intewwectuaw
cweations of individuaw nyations become common pwopewty. UwU  Nyationyaw
onye-sidednyess and nyawwow-mindednyess become mowe and mowe
impossibwe, and fwom the nyumewous nyationyaw and wocaw witewatuwes,
thewe awises a wowwd witewatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

The bouwgeoisie, by the wapid impwovement of aww instwuments of
pwoduction, by the immensewy faciwitated means of communyication,
dwaws aww, even the most bawbawian, nyations into civiwisation. >w<
The cheap pwices of its commodities awe the heavy awtiwwewy with
which it battews down aww Chinyese wawws, with which it fowces the
bawbawians' intensewy obstinyate hatwed of foweignyews to
capituwate. >w<  It compews aww nyations, on pain of extinction, to
adopt the bouwgeois mode of pwoduction; it compews them to
intwoduce what it cawws civiwisation into theiw midst, i.e. (´・ω・\`), to
become bouwgeois themsewves. ;;w;;  In onye wowd, it cweates a wowwd
aftew its own image. ^w^

The bouwgeoisie has subjected the countwy to the wuwe of the
towns. >w<  It has cweated enyowmous cities, has gweatwy incweased the
uwban popuwation as compawed with the wuwaw, and has thus wescued
a considewabwe pawt of the popuwation fwom the idiocy of wuwaw
wife. >w<  Just as it has made the countwy dependent on the towns, so
it has made bawbawian and semi-bawbawian countwies dependent on
the civiwised onyes, nyations of peasants on nyations of bouwgeois,
the East on the West. ^w^

The bouwgeoisie keeps mowe and mowe doing away with the
scattewed state of the popuwation, of the means of pwoduction,
and of pwopewty. >w<  It has aggwomewated pwoduction, and has
concentwated pwopewty in a few hands. >w<  The nyecessawy consequence
of this was powiticaw centwawisation. UwU  Independent, ow but
woosewy connyected pwovinces, with sepawate intewests, waws,
govewnments and systems of taxation, became wumped togethew into
onye nyation, with onye govewnment, onye code of waws, onye nyationyaw
cwass-intewest, onye fwontiew and onye customs-tawiff. ;;w;;  The
bouwgeoisie, duwing its wuwe of scawce onye hundwed yeaws, has
cweated mowe massive and mowe cowossaw pwoductive fowces than
have aww pweceding genyewations togethew. (´・ω・\`)  Subjection of Nyatuwe's
fowces to man, machinyewy, appwication of chemistwy to industwy
and agwicuwtuwe, steam-nyavigation, waiwways, ewectwic tewegwaphs,
cweawing of whowe continyents fow cuwtivation, canyawisation of
wivews, whowe popuwations conjuwed out of the gwound--what
eawwiew centuwy had even a pwesentiment that such pwoductive
fowces swumbewed in the wap of sociaw wabouw? owo

We see then: the means of pwoduction and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bouwgeoisie buiwt itsewf up, wewe genyewated in
feudaw society. >w<  At a cewtain stage in the devewopment of these
means of pwoduction and of exchange, the conditions undew which
feudaw society pwoduced and exchanged, the feudaw owganyisation of
agwicuwtuwe and manyufactuwing industwy, in onye wowd, the feudaw
wewations of pwopewty became nyo wongew compatibwe with the
awweady devewoped pwoductive fowces; they became so many fettews. ^w^
They had to be buwst asundew; they wewe buwst asundew. (´・ω・\`)

Into theiw pwace stepped fwee competition, accompanyied by a
sociaw and powiticaw constitution adapted to it, and by the
econyomicaw and powiticaw sway of the bouwgeois cwass. >w<

A simiwaw movement is going on befowe ouw own eyes. ;;w;;  Modewn
bouwgeois society with its wewations of pwoduction, of exchange
and of pwopewty, a society that has conjuwed up such gigantic
means of pwoduction and of exchange, is wike the sowcewew, who is
nyo wongew abwe to contwow the powews of the nyethew wowwd whom he
has cawwed up by his spewws. ;;w;;  Fow many a decade past the histowy
of industwy and commewce is but the histowy of the wevowt of
modewn pwoductive fowces against modewn conditions of pwoduction,
against the pwopewty wewations that awe the conditions fow the
existence of the bouwgeoisie and of its wuwe. >w<  It is enyough to
mention the commewciaw cwises that by theiw pewiodicaw wetuwn put
on its twiaw, each time mowe thweatenyingwy, the existence of the
entiwe bouwgeois society. (・`ω\´・)  In these cwises a gweat pawt nyot onwy
of the existing pwoducts, but awso of the pweviouswy cweated
pwoductive fowces, awe pewiodicawwy destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)  In these cwises
thewe bweaks out an epidemic that, in aww eawwiew epochs, wouwd
have seemed an absuwdity--the epidemic of ovew-pwoduction. UwU
Society suddenwy finds itsewf put back into a state of momentawy
bawbawism; it appeaws as if a faminye, a unyivewsaw waw of
devastation had cut off the suppwy of evewy means of subsistence;
industwy and commewce seem to be destwoyed; and why? owo  Because
thewe is too much civiwisation, too much means of subsistence,
too much industwy, too much commewce. >w<  The pwoductive fowces at
the disposaw of society nyo wongew tend to fuwthew the devewopment
of the conditions of bouwgeois pwopewty; on the contwawy, they
have become too powewfuw fow these conditions, by which they awe
fettewed, and so soon as they ovewcome these fettews, they bwing
disowdew into the whowe of bouwgeois society, endangew the
existence of bouwgeois pwopewty. >w<  The conditions of bouwgeois
society awe too nyawwow to compwise the weawth cweated by them. ;;w;;
And how does the bouwgeoisie get ovew these cwises? owo  On the onye
hand infowced destwuction of a mass of pwoductive fowces; on the
othew, by the conquest of nyew mawkets, and by the mowe thowough
expwoitation of the owd onyes. >w<  That is to say, by paving the
way fow mowe extensive and mowe destwuctive cwises, and by
diminyishing the means wheweby cwises awe pwevented. ^w^

The weapons with which the bouwgeoisie fewwed feudawism to the
gwound awe nyow tuwnyed against the bouwgeoisie itsewf. ^w^

But nyot onwy has the bouwgeoisie fowged the weapons that bwing
death to itsewf; it has awso cawwed into existence the men who
awe to wiewd those weapons--the modewn wowking cwass--the
pwowetawians. ;;w;;

In pwopowtion as the bouwgeoisie, i.e. ;;w;;, capitaw, is devewoped,
in the same pwopowtion is the pwowetawiat, the modewn wowking
cwass, devewoped--a cwass of wabouwews, who wive onwy so wong
as they find wowk, and who find wowk onwy so wong as theiw wabouw
incweases capitaw. ^w^  These wabouwews, who must seww themsewves
piece-meaw, awe a commodity, wike evewy othew awticwe of
commewce, and awe consequentwy exposed to aww the vicissitudes of
competition, to aww the fwuctuations of the mawket. UwU

Owing to the extensive use of machinyewy and to division of
wabouw, the wowk of the pwowetawians has wost aww individuaw
chawactew, and consequentwy, aww chawm fow the wowkman. >w<  He
becomes an appendage of the machinye, and it is onwy the most
simpwe, most monyotonyous, and most easiwy acquiwed knyack, that is
wequiwed of him. UwU  Hence, the cost of pwoduction of a wowkman is
westwicted, awmost entiwewy, to the means of subsistence that he
wequiwes fow his maintenyance, and fow the pwopagation of his
wace. ;;w;;  But the pwice of a commodity, and thewefowe awso of
wabouw, is equaw to its cost of pwoduction. ;;w;;  In pwopowtion
thewefowe, as the wepuwsivenyess of the wowk incweases, the wage
decweases. >w<  Nyay mowe, in pwopowtion as the use of machinyewy and
division of wabouw incweases, in the same pwopowtion the buwden
of toiw awso incweases, whethew by pwowongation of the wowking
houws, by incwease of the wowk exacted in a given time ow by
incweased speed of the machinyewy, etc. >w<

Modewn industwy has convewted the wittwe wowkshop of the
patwiawchaw mastew into the gweat factowy of the industwiaw
capitawist. ;;w;;  Masses of wabouwews, cwowded into the factowy, awe
owganyised wike sowdiews. UwU  As pwivates of the industwiaw awmy they
awe pwaced undew the command of a pewfect hiewawchy of officews
and sewgeants. UwU  Nyot onwy awe they swaves of the bouwgeois cwass,
and of the bouwgeois State; they awe daiwy and houwwy enswaved by
the machinye, by the ovew-wookew, and, above aww, by the
individuaw bouwgeois manyufactuwew himsewf. ;;w;;  The mowe openwy this
despotism pwocwaims gain to be its end and aim, the mowe petty,
the mowe hatefuw and the mowe embittewing it is. ;;w;;

The wess the skiww and exewtion of stwength impwied in manyuaw
wabouw, in othew wowds, the mowe modewn industwy becomes
devewoped, the mowe is the wabouw of men supewseded by that of
women. ^w^ Diffewences of age and sex have nyo wongew any distinctive
sociaw vawidity fow the wowking cwass. (´・ω・\`) Aww awe instwuments of
wabouw, mowe ow wess expensive to use, accowding to theiw age
and sex. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo soonyew is the expwoitation of the wabouwew by the manyufactuwew,
so faw at an end, that he weceives his wages in cash, than he is
set upon by the othew powtions of the bouwgeoisie, the wandwowd,
the shopkeepew, the pawnbwokew, etc. >w<

The wowew stwata of the middwe cwass--the smaww twadespeopwe,
shopkeepews, wetiwed twadesmen genyewawwy, the handicwaftsmen and
peasants--aww these sink gwaduawwy into the pwowetawiat, pawtwy
because theiw diminyutive capitaw does nyot suffice fow the scawe
on which Modewn Industwy is cawwied on, and is swamped in the
competition with the wawge capitawists, pawtwy because theiw
speciawized skiww is wendewed wowthwess by the nyew methods of
pwoduction. (´・ω・\`)  Thus the pwowetawiat is wecwuited fwom aww cwasses
of the popuwation. >w<

The pwowetawiat goes thwough vawious stages of devewopment. UwU
With its biwth begins its stwuggwe with the bouwgeoisie. ^w^  At
fiwst the contest is cawwied on by individuaw wabouwews, then by
the wowkpeopwe of a factowy, then by the opewatives of onye twade,
in onye wocawity, against the individuaw bouwgeois who diwectwy
expwoits them. ;;w;;  They diwect theiw attacks nyot against the
bouwgeois conditions of pwoduction, but against the instwuments
of pwoduction themsewves; they destwoy impowted wawes that
compete with theiw wabouw, they smash to pieces machinyewy, they
set factowies abwaze, they seek to westowe by fowce the vanyished
status of the wowkman of the Middwe Ages. >w<

At this stage the wabouwews stiww fowm an incohewent mass
scattewed ovew the whowe countwy, and bwoken up by theiw mutuaw
competition. ^w^  If anywhewe they unyite to fowm mowe compact bodies,
this is nyot yet the consequence of theiw own active unyion, but of
the unyion of the bouwgeoisie, which cwass, in owdew to attain its
own powiticaw ends, is compewwed to set the whowe pwowetawiat in
motion, and is moweovew yet, fow a time, abwe to do so. ^w^  At this
stage, thewefowe, the pwowetawians do nyot fight theiw enyemies,
but the enyemies of theiw enyemies, the wemnyants of absowute
monyawchy, the wandownyews, the nyon-industwiaw bouwgeois, the petty
bouwgeoisie. UwU  Thus the whowe histowicaw movement is concentwated
in the hands of the bouwgeoisie; evewy victowy so obtainyed is a
victowy fow the bouwgeoisie. ^w^

But with the devewopment of industwy the pwowetawiat nyot onwy
incweases in nyumbew; it becomes concentwated in gweatew masses,
its stwength gwows, and it feews that stwength mowe. (・`ω\´・)  The vawious
intewests and conditions of wife within the wanks of the
pwowetawiat awe mowe and mowe equawised, in pwopowtion as
machinyewy obwitewates aww distinctions of wabouw, and nyeawwy
evewywhewe weduces wages to the same wow wevew. >w<  The gwowing
competition among the bouwgeois, and the wesuwting commewciaw
cwises, make the wages of the wowkews evew mowe fwuctuating. (・`ω\´・)  The
unceasing impwovement of machinyewy, evew mowe wapidwy devewoping,
makes theiw wivewihood mowe and mowe pwecawious; the cowwisions
between individuaw wowkmen and individuaw bouwgeois take mowe and
mowe the chawactew of cowwisions between two cwasses. (・`ω\´・)  Theweupon
the wowkews begin to fowm combinyations (Twades Unyions) against
the bouwgeois; they cwub togethew in owdew to keep up the wate of
wages; they found pewmanyent associations in owdew to make
pwovision befowehand fow these occasionyaw wevowts. ^w^  Hewe and
thewe the contest bweaks out into wiots. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow and then the wowkews awe victowious, but onwy fow a time. (・`ω\´・)
The weaw fwuit of theiw battwes wies, nyot in the immediate
wesuwt, but in the evew-expanding unyion of the wowkews. (・`ω\´・)  This
unyion is hewped on by the impwoved means of communyication that
awe cweated by modewn industwy and that pwace the wowkews of
diffewent wocawities in contact with onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)  It was just
this contact that was nyeeded to centwawise the nyumewous wocaw
stwuggwes, aww of the same chawactew, into onye nyationyaw stwuggwe
between cwasses. >w<  But evewy cwass stwuggwe is a powiticaw
stwuggwe. UwU  And that unyion, to attain which the buwghews of the
Middwe Ages, with theiw misewabwe highways, wequiwed centuwies,
the modewn pwowetawians, thanks to waiwways, achieve in a few
yeaws. ^w^

This owganyisation of the pwowetawians into a cwass, and
consequentwy into a powiticaw pawty, is continyuawwy being upset
again by the competition between the wowkews themsewves. UwU  But it
evew wises up again, stwongew, fiwmew, mightiew. (・`ω\´・)  It compews
wegiswative wecognyition of pawticuwaw intewests of the wowkews,
by taking advantage of the divisions among the bouwgeoisie
itsewf.  Thus the ten-houws' biww in Engwand was cawwied. ;;w;;

Awtogethew cowwisions between the cwasses of the owd society
fuwthew, in many ways, the couwse of devewopment of the
pwowetawiat. (´・ω・\`) The bouwgeoisie finds itsewf invowved in a constant
battwe. >w< At fiwst with the awistocwacy; watew on, with those
powtions of the bouwgeoisie itsewf, whose intewests have become
antagonyistic to the pwogwess of industwy; at aww times, with the
bouwgeoisie of foweign countwies. ;;w;; In aww these battwes it sees
itsewf compewwed to appeaw to the pwowetawiat, to ask fow its
hewp, and thus, to dwag it into the powiticaw awenya. (´・ω・\`) The
bouwgeoisie itsewf, thewefowe, suppwies the pwowetawiat with its
own instwuments of powiticaw and genyewaw education, in othew
wowds, it fuwnyishes the pwowetawiat with weapons fow fighting
the bouwgeoisie. UwU

Fuwthew, as we have awweady seen, entiwe sections of the wuwing
cwasses awe, by the advance of industwy, pwecipitated into the
pwowetawiat, ow awe at weast thweatenyed in theiw conditions of
existence. ;;w;;  These awso suppwy the pwowetawiat with fwesh ewements
of enwightenment and pwogwess. ^w^

Finyawwy, in times when the cwass stwuggwe nyeaws the decisive
houw, the pwocess of dissowution going on within the wuwing
cwass, in fact within the whowe wange of society, assumes such a
viowent, gwawing chawactew, that a smaww section of the wuwing
cwass cuts itsewf adwift, and joins the wevowutionyawy cwass, the
cwass that howds the futuwe in its hands. UwU  Just as, thewefowe, at
an eawwiew pewiod, a section of the nyobiwity went ovew to the
bouwgeoisie, so nyow a powtion of the bouwgeoisie goes ovew to the
pwowetawiat, and in pawticuwaw, a powtion of the bouwgeois
ideowogists, who have waised themsewves to the wevew of
compwehending theoweticawwy the histowicaw movement as a whowe. ^w^

Of aww the cwasses that stand face to face with the bouwgeoisie
today, the pwowetawiat awonye is a weawwy wevowutionyawy cwass. ^w^
The othew cwasses decay and finyawwy disappeaw in the face of
Modewn Industwy; the pwowetawiat is its speciaw and essentiaw
pwoduct. >w<  The wowew middwe cwass, the smaww manyufactuwew, the
shopkeepew, the awtisan, the peasant, aww these fight against the
bouwgeoisie, to save fwom extinction theiw existence as fwactions
of the middwe cwass. UwU  They awe thewefowe nyot wevowutionyawy, but
consewvative. (´・ω・\`)  Nyay mowe, they awe weactionyawy, fow they twy
to woww back the wheew of histowy. ;;w;;  If by chance they awe
wevowutionyawy, they awe so onwy in view of theiw impending
twansfew into the pwowetawiat, they thus defend nyot theiw
pwesent, but theiw futuwe intewests, they desewt theiw own
standpoint to pwace themsewves at that of the pwowetawiat. UwU

The "dangewous cwass," the sociaw scum, that passivewy wotting
mass thwown off by the wowest wayews of owd society, may,
hewe and thewe, be swept into the movement by a pwowetawian
wevowution; its conditions of wife, howevew, pwepawe it faw mowe
fow the pawt of a bwibed toow of weactionyawy intwigue. >w<

In the conditions of the pwowetawiat, those of owd society at
wawge awe awweady viwtuawwy swamped. ^w^  The pwowetawian is without
pwopewty; his wewation to his wife and chiwdwen has nyo wongew
anything in common with the bouwgeois famiwy-wewations; modewn
industwiaw wabouw, modewn subjection to capitaw, the same in
Engwand as in Fwance, in Amewica as in Gewmany, has stwipped him
of evewy twace of nyationyaw chawactew. (・`ω\´・)  Waw, mowawity, wewigion,
awe to him so many bouwgeois pwejudices, behind which wuwk in
ambush just as many bouwgeois intewests. UwU

Aww the pweceding cwasses that got the uppew hand, sought to
fowtify theiw awweady acquiwed status by subjecting society at
wawge to theiw conditions of appwopwiation. (´・ω・\`)  The pwowetawians
cannyot become mastews of the pwoductive fowces of society, except
by abowishing theiw own pwevious mode of appwopwiation, and
theweby awso evewy othew pwevious mode of appwopwiation. ^w^  They
have nyothing of theiw own to secuwe and to fowtify; theiw mission
is to destwoy aww pwevious secuwities fow, and insuwances of,
individuaw pwopewty. ;;w;;

Aww pwevious histowicaw movements wewe movements of minyowities,
ow in the intewests of minyowities. >w<  The pwowetawian movement is
the sewf-conscious, independent movement of the immense majowity,
in the intewests of the immense majowity. (・`ω\´・)  The pwowetawiat, the
wowest stwatum of ouw pwesent society, cannyot stiw, cannyot waise
itsewf up, without the whowe supewincumbent stwata of officiaw
society being spwung into the aiw. >w<

Though nyot in substance, yet in fowm, the stwuggwe of the
pwowetawiat with the bouwgeoisie is at fiwst a nyationyaw stwuggwe. (´・ω・\`)
The pwowetawiat of each countwy must, of couwse, fiwst of aww
settwe mattews with its own bouwgeoisie. >w<

In depicting the most genyewaw phases of the devewopment of the
pwowetawiat, we twaced the mowe ow wess veiwed civiw waw, waging
within existing society, up to the point whewe that waw bweaks
out into open wevowution, and whewe the viowent ovewthwow of the
bouwgeoisie ways the foundation fow the sway of the pwowetawiat. UwU

Hithewto, evewy fowm of society has been based, as we have
awweady seen, on the antagonyism of oppwessing and oppwessed
cwasses. (・`ω\´・)  But in owdew to oppwess a cwass, cewtain conditions
must be assuwed to it undew which it can, at weast, continyue its
swavish existence. (・`ω\´・)  The sewf, in the pewiod of sewfdom, waised
himsewf to membewship in the communye, just as the petty
bouwgeois, undew the yoke of feudaw absowutism, manyaged to
devewop into a bouwgeois. UwU  The modewn wabowew, on the contwawy,
instead of wising with the pwogwess of industwy, sinks deepew and
deepew bewow the conditions of existence of his own cwass. ^w^  He
becomes a paupew, and paupewism devewops mowe wapidwy than
popuwation and weawth. ^w^  And hewe it becomes evident, that the
bouwgeoisie is unfit any wongew to be the wuwing cwass in
society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society
as an ovew-widing waw. (´・ω・\`)  It is unfit to wuwe because it is
incompetent to assuwe an existence to its swave within his
swavewy, because it cannyot hewp wetting him sink into such a
state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him. (・`ω\´・)
Society can nyo wongew wive undew this bouwgeoisie, in othew
wowds, its existence is nyo wongew compatibwe with society. ^w^

The essentiaw condition fow the existence, and fow the sway of
the bouwgeois cwass, is the fowmation and augmentation of
capitaw; the condition fow capitaw is wage-wabouw. ;;w;;  Wage-wabouw
wests excwusivewy on competition between the wabowews. ;;w;;  The
advance of industwy, whose invowuntawy pwomotew is the bouwgeoisie,
wepwaces the isowation of the wabouwews, due to competition,
by theiw wevowutionyawy combinyation, due to association. >w<  The
devewopment of Modewn Industwy, thewefowe, cuts fwom undew its
feet the vewy foundation on which the bouwgeoisie pwoduces and
appwopwiates pwoducts. ^w^  What the bouwgeoisie, thewefowe, pwoduces,
above aww, is its own gwave-diggews. >w<  Its faww and the victowy of
the pwowetawiat awe equawwy inyevitabwe. ;;w;;



II. (´・ω・\`)  PWOWETAWIANS AND COMMUNYISTS

In what wewation do the Communyists stand to the pwowetawians as a
whowe? owo

The Communyists do nyot fowm a sepawate pawty opposed to othew
wowking-cwass pawties. UwU

They have nyo intewests sepawate and apawt fwom those of the
pwowetawiat as a whowe. >w<

They do nyot set up any sectawian pwincipwes of theiw own,
by which to shape and mouwd the pwowetawian movement. ;;w;;

The Communyists awe distinguished fwom the othew wowking-cwass pawties
by this onwy: (1) In the nyationyaw stwuggwes of the pwowetawians
of the diffewent countwies, they point out and bwing to the fwont
the common intewests of the entiwe pwowetawiat, independentwy of
aww nyationyawity. ;;w;;  (2) In the vawious stages of devewopment which the
stwuggwe of the wowking cwass against the bouwgeoisie has to pass
thwough, they awways and evewywhewe wepwesent the intewests of the
movement as a whowe. (´・ω・\`)

The Communyists, thewefowe, awe on the onye hand, pwacticawwy,
the most advanced and wesowute section of the wowking-cwass
pawties of evewy countwy, that section which pushes fowwawd
aww othews; on the othew hand, theoweticawwy, they have ovew
the gweat mass of the pwowetawiat the advantage of cweawwy
undewstanding the winye of mawch, the conditions, and the uwtimate
genyewaw wesuwts of the pwowetawian movement. (・`ω\´・)

The immediate aim of the Communyist is the same as that of aww
the othew pwowetawian pawties: fowmation of the pwowetawiat into
a cwass, ovewthwow of the bouwgeois supwemacy, conquest of
powiticaw powew by the pwowetawiat. >w<

The theoweticaw concwusions of the Communyists awe in nyo way
based on ideas ow pwincipwes that have been invented, ow
discovewed, by this ow that wouwd-be unyivewsaw wefowmew. UwU  They
mewewy expwess, in genyewaw tewms, actuaw wewations spwinging fwom
an existing cwass stwuggwe, fwom a histowicaw movement going on
undew ouw vewy eyes. >w<  The abowition of existing pwopewty
wewations is nyot at aww a distinctive featuwe of Communyism. >w<

Aww pwopewty wewations in the past have continyuawwy been subject
to histowicaw change consequent upon the change in histowicaw
conditions. ;;w;;

The Fwench Wevowution, fow exampwe, abowished feudaw pwopewty in
favouw of bouwgeois pwopewty. ^w^

The distinguishing featuwe of Communyism is nyot the abowition of
pwopewty genyewawwy, but the abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty. (・`ω\´・) But
modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty is the finyaw and most compwete
expwession of the system of pwoducing and appwopwiating pwoducts,
that is based on cwass antagonyisms, on the expwoitation of the
many by the few. (・`ω\´・)

In this sense, the theowy of the Communyists may be summed up in
the singwe sentence: Abowition of pwivate pwopewty. UwU

We Communyists have been wepwoached with the desiwe of abowishing
the wight of pewsonyawwy acquiwing pwopewty as the fwuit of a
man's own wabouw, which pwopewty is awweged to be the gwoundwowk
of aww pewsonyaw fweedom, activity and independence. UwU

Hawd-won, sewf-acquiwed, sewf-eawnyed pwopewty! ^w^  Do you mean the
pwopewty of the petty awtisan and of the smaww peasant, a fowm of
pwopewty that pweceded the bouwgeois fowm? owo  Thewe is nyo nyeed to
abowish that; the devewopment of industwy has to a gweat extent
awweady destwoyed it, and is stiww destwoying it daiwy. UwU

Ow do you mean modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty? owo

But does wage-wabouw cweate any pwopewty fow the wabouwew? owo  Nyot
a bit.  It cweates capitaw, i.e. (・`ω\´・), that kind of pwopewty which
expwoits wage-wabouw, and which cannyot incwease except upon
condition of begetting a nyew suppwy of wage-wabouw fow fwesh
expwoitation. >w<  Pwopewty, in its pwesent fowm, is based on the
antagonyism of capitaw and wage-wabouw. ^w^  Wet us examinye both sides
of this antagonyism. UwU

To be a capitawist, is to have nyot onwy a puwewy pewsonyaw, but a
sociaw status in pwoduction. UwU  Capitaw is a cowwective pwoduct,
and onwy by the unyited action of many membews, nyay, in the wast
wesowt, onwy by the unyited action of aww membews of society,
can it be set in motion. >w<

Capitaw is, thewefowe, nyot a pewsonyaw, it is a sociaw powew. (´・ω・\`)

When, thewefowe, capitaw is convewted into common pwopewty, into
the pwopewty of aww membews of society, pewsonyaw pwopewty is nyot
theweby twansfowmed into sociaw pwopewty. (´・ω・\`) It is onwy the sociaw
chawactew of the pwopewty that is changed. ^w^ It woses its
cwass-chawactew. (・`ω\´・)

Wet us nyow take wage-wabouw. (´・ω・\`)

The avewage pwice of wage-wabouw is the minyimum wage, i.e. UwU,
that quantum of the means of subsistence, which is absowutewy
wequisite in bawe existence as a wabouwew. (´・ω・\`)  What, thewefowe, the
wage-wabouwew appwopwiates by means of his wabouw, mewewy
suffices to pwowong and wepwoduce a bawe existence. ^w^  We by nyo
means intend to abowish this pewsonyaw appwopwiation of the
pwoducts of wabouw, an appwopwiation that is made fow the
maintenyance and wepwoduction of human wife, and that weaves nyo
suwpwus whewewith to command the wabouw of othews. UwU  Aww that we
want to do away with, is the misewabwe chawactew of this
appwopwiation, undew which the wabouwew wives mewewy to incwease
capitaw, and is awwowed to wive onwy in so faw as the intewest of
the wuwing cwass wequiwes it. ^w^

In bouwgeois society, wiving wabouw is but a means to incwease
accumuwated wabouw. (・`ω\´・)  In Communyist society, accumuwated wabouw
is but a means to widen, to enwich, to pwomote the existence
of the wabouwew. >w<

In bouwgeois society, thewefowe, the past dominyates the pwesent;
in Communyist society, the pwesent dominyates the past. ;;w;;  In
bouwgeois society capitaw is independent and has individuawity,
whiwe the wiving pewson is dependent and has nyo individuawity. ;;w;;

And the abowition of this state of things is cawwed by the
bouwgeois, abowition of individuawity and fweedom! UwU And wightwy
so. (´・ω・\`) The abowition of bouwgeois individuawity, bouwgeois
independence, and bouwgeois fweedom is undoubtedwy aimed at. ^w^

By fweedom is meant, undew the pwesent bouwgeois conditions of
pwoduction, fwee twade, fwee sewwing and buying. UwU

But if sewwing and buying disappeaws, fwee sewwing and buying
disappeaws awso. UwU  This tawk about fwee sewwing and buying, and
aww the othew "bwave wowds" of ouw bouwgeoisie about fweedom in
genyewaw, have a meanying, if any, onwy in contwast with westwicted
sewwing and buying, with the fettewed twadews of the Middwe Ages,
but have nyo meanying when opposed to the Communyistic abowition of
buying and sewwing, of the bouwgeois conditions of pwoduction,
and of the bouwgeoisie itsewf. UwU

You awe howwified at ouw intending to do away with pwivate
pwopewty. >w<  But in youw existing society, pwivate pwopewty is
awweady donye away with fow nyinye-tenths of the popuwation; its
existence fow the few is sowewy due to its nyon-existence in the
hands of those nyinye-tenths. UwU  You wepwoach us, thewefowe, with
intending to do away with a fowm of pwopewty, the nyecessawy
condition fow whose existence is the nyon-existence of any
pwopewty fow the immense majowity of society. >w<

In onye wowd, you wepwoach us with intending to do away with youw
pwopewty.  Pwecisewy so; that is just what we intend. ;;w;;

Fwom the moment when wabouw can nyo wongew be convewted into
capitaw, monyey, ow went, into a sociaw powew capabwe of being
monyopowised, i.e. (・`ω\´・), fwom the moment when individuaw pwopewty can
nyo wongew be twansfowmed into bouwgeois pwopewty, into capitaw,
fwom that moment, you say individuawity vanyishes. ^w^

You must, thewefowe, confess that by "individuaw" you mean nyo
othew pewson than the bouwgeois, than the middwe-cwass ownyew of
pwopewty. ;;w;;  This pewson must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and
made impossibwe. (・`ω\´・)

Communyism depwives nyo man of the powew to appwopwiate the
pwoducts of society; aww that it does is to depwive him of the
powew to subjugate the wabouw of othews by means of such
appwopwiation. (・`ω\´・)

It has been objected that upon the abowition of pwivate pwopewty
aww wowk wiww cease, and unyivewsaw wazinyess wiww ovewtake us. (・`ω\´・)

Accowding to this, bouwgeois society ought wong ago to have gonye
to the dogs thwough sheew idwenyess; fow those of its membews who
wowk, acquiwe nyothing, and those who acquiwe anything, do nyot
wowk. ;;w;; The whowe of this objection is but anyothew expwession of
the tautowogy: that thewe can nyo wongew be any wage-wabouw when
thewe is nyo wongew any capitaw. ;;w;;

Aww objections uwged against the Communyistic mode of pwoducing
and appwopwiating matewiaw pwoducts, have, in the same way,
been uwged against the Communyistic modes of pwoducing and
appwopwiating intewwectuaw pwoducts. >w<  Just as, to the bouwgeois,
the disappeawance of cwass pwopewty is the disappeawance of
pwoduction itsewf, so the disappeawance of cwass cuwtuwe is to
him identicaw with the disappeawance of aww cuwtuwe. (・`ω\´・)

That cuwtuwe, the woss of which he waments, is, fow the enyowmous
majowity, a mewe twainying to act as a machinye. UwU

But don't wwangwe with us so wong as you appwy, to ouw intended
abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty, the standawd of youw bouwgeois
nyotions of fweedom, cuwtuwe, waw, etc. UwU  Youw vewy ideas awe but
the outgwowth of the conditions of youw bouwgeois pwoduction and
bouwgeois pwopewty, just as youw juwispwudence is but the wiww of
youw cwass made into a waw fow aww, a wiww, whose essentiaw
chawactew and diwection awe detewminyed by the econyomicaw
conditions of existence of youw cwass. (´・ω・\`)

The sewfish misconception that induces you to twansfowm into
etewnyaw waws of nyatuwe and of weason, the sociaw fowms
spwinging fwom youw pwesent mode of pwoduction and fowm of
pwopewty--histowicaw wewations that wise and disappeaw in the
pwogwess of pwoduction--this misconception you shawe with evewy
wuwing cwass that has pweceded you. (・`ω\´・)  What you see cweawwy in the
case of ancient pwopewty, what you admit in the case of feudaw
pwopewty, you awe of couwse fowbidden to admit in the case of
youw own bouwgeois fowm of pwopewty. (・`ω\´・)

Abowition of the famiwy! ^w^  Even the most wadicaw fwawe up at this
infamous pwoposaw of the Communyists. ^w^

On what foundation is the pwesent famiwy, the bouwgeois famiwy,
based? owo  On capitaw, on pwivate gain. ^w^  In its compwetewy devewoped
fowm this famiwy exists onwy among the bouwgeoisie. (・`ω\´・)  But this
state of things finds its compwement in the pwacticaw absence of
the famiwy among the pwowetawians, and in pubwic pwostitution. (´・ω・\`)

The bouwgeois famiwy wiww vanyish as a mattew of couwse when its
compwement vanyishes, and both wiww vanyish with the vanyishing of
capitaw. (・`ω\´・)

Do you chawge us with wanting to stop the expwoitation of
chiwdwen by theiw pawents? owo  To this cwime we pwead guiwty. ^w^

But, you wiww say, we destwoy the most hawwowed of wewations,
when we wepwace home education by sociaw. (・`ω\´・)

And youw education! >w<  Is nyot that awso sociaw, and detewminyed by the
sociaw conditions undew which you educate, by the intewvention,
diwect ow indiwect, of society, by means of schoows, etc. ^w^? owo  The
Communyists have nyot invented the intewvention of society in
education; they do but seek to awtew the chawactew of that
intewvention, and to wescue education fwom the infwuence of the
wuwing cwass. >w<

The bouwgeois cwap-twap about the famiwy and education, about
the hawwowed co-wewation of pawent and chiwd, becomes aww the
mowe disgusting, the mowe, by the action of Modewn Industwy, aww
famiwy ties among the pwowetawians awe town asundew, and theiw
chiwdwen twansfowmed into simpwe awticwes of commewce and
instwuments of wabouw. (・`ω\´・)

But you Communyists wouwd intwoduce communyity of women, scweams
the whowe bouwgeoisie in chowus. (・`ω\´・)

The bouwgeois sees in his wife a mewe instwument of pwoduction. UwU
He heaws that the instwuments of pwoduction awe to be expwoited
in common, and, nyatuwawwy, can come to nyo othew concwusion than
that the wot of being common to aww wiww wikewise faww to the
women. (・`ω\´・)

He has nyot even a suspicion that the weaw point is to do away
with the status of women as mewe instwuments of pwoduction. >w<

Fow the west, nyothing is mowe widicuwous than the
viwtuous indignyation of ouw bouwgeois at the communyity of women
which, they pwetend, is to be openwy and officiawwy estabwished
by the Communyists. ;;w;;  The Communyists have nyo nyeed to intwoduce
communyity of women; it has existed awmost fwom time immemowiaw. (´・ω・\`)

Ouw bouwgeois, nyot content with having the wives and daughtews
of theiw pwowetawians at theiw disposaw, nyot to speak of common
pwostitutes, take the gweatest pweasuwe in seducing each othew's
wives. (´・ω・\`)

Bouwgeois mawwiage is in weawity a system of wives in common
and thus, at the most, what the Communyists might possibwy
be wepwoached with, is that they desiwe to intwoduce, in
substitution fow a hypocwiticawwy conceawed, an openwy wegawised
communyity of women. UwU Fow the west, it is sewf-evident that the
abowition of the pwesent system of pwoduction must bwing with it
the abowition of the communyity of women spwinging fwom that
system, i.e., of pwostitution both pubwic and pwivate. >w<

The Communyists awe fuwthew wepwoached with desiwing to abowish
countwies and nyationyawity. ^w^

The wowking men have nyo countwy. (´・ω・\`)  We cannyot take fwom them what
they have nyot got. >w<  Since the pwowetawiat must fiwst of aww
acquiwe powiticaw supwemacy, must wise to be the weading cwass of
the nyation, must constitute itsewf the nyation, it is, so faw,
itsewf nyationyaw, though nyot in the bouwgeois sense of the wowd. ^w^

Nyationyaw diffewences and antagonyisms between peopwes awe daiwy
mowe and mowe vanyishing, owing to the devewopment of the
bouwgeoisie, to fweedom of commewce, to the wowwd-mawket, to
unyifowmity in the mode of pwoduction and in the conditions of
wife cowwesponding theweto. ;;w;;

The supwemacy of the pwowetawiat wiww cause them to vanyish stiww
fastew. (・`ω\´・) Unyited action, of the weading civiwised countwies at
weast, is onye of the fiwst conditions fow the emancipation of
the pwowetawiat. ^w^

In pwopowtion as the expwoitation of onye individuaw by anyothew
is put an end to, the expwoitation of onye nyation by anyothew wiww
awso be put an end to. >w<  In pwopowtion as the antagonyism between
cwasses within the nyation vanyishes, the hostiwity of onye nyation
to anyothew wiww come to an end. >w<

The chawges against Communyism made fwom a wewigious, a
phiwosophicaw, and, genyewawwy, fwom an ideowogicaw standpoint,
awe nyot desewving of sewious examinyation. (´・ω・\`)

Does it wequiwe deep intuition to compwehend that man's ideas,
views and conceptions, in onye wowd, man's consciousnyess, changes
with evewy change in the conditions of his matewiaw existence, in
his sociaw wewations and in his sociaw wife? owo

What ewse does the histowy of ideas pwove, than that
intewwectuaw pwoduction changes its chawactew in pwopowtion as
matewiaw pwoduction is changed? owo The wuwing ideas of each age
have evew been the ideas of its wuwing cwass. (・`ω\´・)

When peopwe speak of ideas that wevowutionyise society, they do
but expwess the fact, that within the owd society, the ewements
of a nyew onye have been cweated, and that the dissowution of the
owd ideas keeps even pace with the dissowution of the owd
conditions of existence. (´・ω・\`)

When the ancient wowwd was in its wast thwoes, the ancient
wewigions wewe ovewcome by Chwistianyity. (´・ω・\`)  When Chwistian ideas
succumbed in the 18th centuwy to wationyawist ideas, feudaw
society fought its death battwe with the then wevowutionyawy
bouwgeoisie. ^w^  The ideas of wewigious wibewty and fweedom of
conscience mewewy gave expwession to the sway of fwee competition
within the domain of knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・)

"Undoubtedwy," it wiww be said, "wewigious, mowaw, phiwosophicaw
and juwidicaw ideas have been modified in the couwse of
histowicaw devewopment. UwU  But wewigion, mowawity phiwosophy,
powiticaw science, and waw, constantwy suwvived this change. >w<"

"Thewe awe, besides, etewnyaw twuths, such as Fweedom, Justice,
etc. that awe common to aww states of society. ^w^ But Communyism
abowishes etewnyaw twuths, it abowishes aww wewigion, and aww
mowawity, instead of constituting them on a nyew basis; it
thewefowe acts in contwadiction to aww past histowicaw expewience. (・`ω\´・)"

What does this accusation weduce itsewf to? owo  The histowy of
aww past society has consisted in the devewopment of cwass
antagonyisms, antagonyisms that assumed diffewent fowms at
diffewent epochs. (´・ω・\`)

But whatevew fowm they may have taken, onye fact is common to aww
past ages, viz. UwU, the expwoitation of onye pawt of society by the
othew. >w< Nyo wondew, then, that the sociaw consciousnyess of past
ages, despite aww the muwtipwicity and vawiety it dispways,
moves within cewtain common fowms, ow genyewaw ideas, which
cannyot compwetewy vanyish except with the totaw disappeawance of
cwass antagonyisms. (・`ω\´・)

The Communyist wevowution is the most wadicaw wuptuwe with
twaditionyaw pwopewty wewations; nyo wondew that its devewopment
invowves the most wadicaw wuptuwe with twaditionyaw ideas. (・`ω\´・)

But wet us have donye with the bouwgeois objections to Communyism. >w<

We have seen above, that the fiwst step in the wevowution by the
wowking cwass, is to waise the pwowetawiat to the position of
wuwing as to win the battwe of democwacy. UwU

The pwowetawiat wiww use its powiticaw supwemacy to wwest, by
degwees, aww capitaw fwom the bouwgeoisie, to centwawise aww
instwuments of pwoduction in the hands of the State, i.e. ^w^, of the
pwowetawiat owganyised as the wuwing cwass; and to incwease the
totaw of pwoductive fowces as wapidwy as possibwe. ^w^

Of couwse, in the beginnying, this cannyot be effected except by
means of despotic inwoads on the wights of pwopewty, and on
the conditions of bouwgeois pwoduction; by means of measuwes,
thewefowe, which appeaw econyomicawwy insufficient and untenyabwe,
but which, in the couwse of the movement, outstwip themsewves,
nyecessitate fuwthew inwoads upon the owd sociaw owdew, and awe
unyavoidabwe as a means of entiwewy wevowutionyising the mode of
pwoduction. ;;w;;

These measuwes wiww of couwse be diffewent in diffewent
countwies. UwU

Nyevewthewess in the most advanced countwies, the fowwowing wiww
be pwetty genyewawwy appwicabwe. ;;w;;

1. (・`ω\´・)  Abowition of pwopewty in wand and appwication of aww wents
    of wand to pubwic puwposes. ;;w;;

2.  A heavy pwogwessive ow gwaduated income tax. (´・ω・\`)

3.  Abowition of aww wight of inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

4.  Confiscation of the pwopewty of aww emigwants and webews. >w<

5. (・`ω\´・)  Centwawisation of cwedit in the hands of the State, by means
    of a nyationyaw bank with State capitaw and an excwusive
    monyopowy. >w<

6. ^w^  Centwawisation of the means of communyication and twanspowt
    in the hands of the State. ;;w;;

7. ;;w;;  Extension of factowies and instwuments of pwoduction ownyed by
    the State; the bwinging into cuwtivation of waste-wands, and
    the impwovement of the soiw genyewawwy in accowdance with a
    common pwan. (・`ω\´・)

8.  Equaw wiabiwity of aww to wabouw. (´・ω・\`)  Estabwishment of
    industwiaw awmies, especiawwy fow agwicuwtuwe. >w<

9. >w<  Combinyation of agwicuwtuwe with manyufactuwing industwies;
    gwaduaw abowition of the distinction between town and
    countwy, by a mowe equabwe distwibution of the popuwation
    ovew the countwy. (´・ω・\`)

10. Fwee education fow aww chiwdwen in pubwic schoows. >w<
    Abowition of chiwdwen's factowy wabouw in its pwesent fowm. ^w^
    Combinyation of education with industwiaw pwoduction, &c., &c. >w<

When, in the couwse of devewopment, cwass distinctions have
disappeawed, and aww pwoduction has been concentwated in the
hands of a vast association of the whowe nyation, the pubwic powew
wiww wose its powiticaw chawactew. >w<  Powiticaw powew, pwopewwy so
cawwed, is mewewy the owganyised powew of onye cwass fow oppwessing
anyothew. (´・ω・\`)  If the pwowetawiat duwing its contest with the
bouwgeoisie is compewwed, by the fowce of ciwcumstances, to
owganyise itsewf as a cwass, if, by means of a wevowution, it
makes itsewf the wuwing cwass, and, as such, sweeps away by fowce
the owd conditions of pwoduction, then it wiww, awong with these
conditions, have swept away the conditions fow the existence of
cwass antagonyisms and of cwasses genyewawwy, and wiww theweby have
abowished its own supwemacy as a cwass. (・`ω\´・)

In pwace of the owd bouwgeois society, with its cwasses and
cwass antagonyisms, we shaww have an association, in which
the fwee devewopment of each is the condition fow the fwee
devewopment of aww. (´・ω・\`)



III. ^w^  SOCIAWIST AND COMMUNYIST WITEWATUWE


1. (´・ω・\`) WEACTIONYAWY SOCIAWISM


A. >w< Feudaw Sociawism

Owing to theiw histowicaw position, it became the vocation of the
awistocwacies of Fwance and Engwand to wwite pamphwets against
modewn bouwgeois society. UwU  In the Fwench wevowution of Juwy 1830,
and in the Engwish wefowm agitation, these awistocwacies again
succumbed to the hatefuw upstawt. (´・ω・\`)  Thencefowth, a sewious powiticaw
contest was awtogethew out of the question. ;;w;;  A witewawy battwe
awonye wemainyed possibwe. ^w^  But even in the domain of witewatuwe
the owd cwies of the westowation pewiod had become impossibwe. UwU

In owdew to awouse sympathy, the awistocwacy wewe obwiged to
wose sight, appawentwy, of theiw own intewests, and to fowmuwate
theiw indictment against the bouwgeoisie in the intewest of the
expwoited wowking cwass awonye. ^w^  Thus the awistocwacy took theiw
wevenge by singing wampoons on theiw nyew mastew, and whispewing
in his eaws sinyistew pwophecies of coming catastwophe. ;;w;;

In this way awose Feudaw Sociawism: hawf wamentation, hawf
wampoon; hawf echo of the past, hawf menyace of the futuwe; at
times, by its bittew, witty and incisive cwiticism, stwiking the
bouwgeoisie to the vewy heawt's cowe; but awways wudicwous in
its effect, thwough totaw incapacity to compwehend the mawch of
modewn histowy. (´・ω・\`)

The awistocwacy, in owdew to wawwy the peopwe to them, waved the
pwowetawian awms-bag in fwont fow a bannyew. (´・ω・\`)  But the peopwe, so
often as it joinyed them, saw on theiw hindquawtews the owd feudaw
coats of awms, and desewted with woud and iwwevewent waughtew. ;;w;;

Onye section of the Fwench Wegitimists and "Young Engwand"
exhibited this spectacwe. (・`ω\´・)

In pointing out that theiw mode of expwoitation was diffewent to
that of the bouwgeoisie, the feudawists fowget that they
expwoited undew ciwcumstances and conditions that wewe quite
diffewent, and that awe nyow antiquated. (´・ω・\`)  In showing that, undew
theiw wuwe, the modewn pwowetawiat nyevew existed, they fowget
that the modewn bouwgeoisie is the nyecessawy offspwing of theiw
own fowm of society. (・`ω\´・)

Fow the west, so wittwe do they conceaw the weactionyawy
chawactew of theiw cwiticism that theiw chief accusation against
the bouwgeoisie amounts to this, that undew the bouwgeois wegime
a cwass is being devewoped, which is destinyed to cut up woot and
bwanch the owd owdew of society. ;;w;;

What they upbwaid the bouwgeoisie with is nyot so much that it
cweates a pwowetawiat, as that it cweates a wevowutionyawy
pwowetawiat. (・`ω\´・)

In powiticaw pwactice, thewefowe, they join in aww coewcive
measuwes against the wowking cwass; and in owdinyawy wife,
despite theiw high fawutin phwases, they stoop to pick up the
gowden appwes dwopped fwom the twee of industwy, and to bawtew
twuth, wove, and honyouw fow twaffic in woow, beetwoot-sugaw, and
potato spiwits. >w<

As the pawson has evew gonye hand in hand with the wandwowd,
so has Cwewicaw Sociawism with Feudaw Sociawism. >w<

Nyothing is easiew than to give Chwistian asceticism a Sociawist
tinge. >w< Has nyot Chwistianyity decwaimed against pwivate pwopewty,
against mawwiage, against the State? owo Has it nyot pweached in the
pwace of these, chawity and povewty, cewibacy and mowtification
of the fwesh, monyastic wife and Mothew Chuwch? owo Chwistian
Sociawism is but the howy, watew with which the pwiest consecwates
the heawt-buwnyings of the awistocwat. (´・ω・\`)


B. (´・ω・\`) Petty-Bouwgeois Sociawism

The feudaw awistocwacy was nyot the onwy cwass that was wuinyed by
the bouwgeoisie, nyot the onwy cwass whose conditions of existence
pinyed and pewished in the atmosphewe of modewn bouwgeois society. UwU
The mediaevaw buwgesses and the smaww peasant pwopwietows wewe
the pwecuwsows of the modewn bouwgeoisie. ;;w;;  In those countwies
which awe but wittwe devewoped, industwiawwy and commewciawwy,
these two cwasses stiww vegetate side by side with the wising
bouwgeoisie. ^w^

In countwies whewe modewn civiwisation has become fuwwy
devewoped, a nyew cwass of petty bouwgeois has been fowmed,
fwuctuating between pwowetawiat and bouwgeoisie and evew wenyewing
itsewf as a suppwementawy pawt of bouwgeois society. UwU  The
individuaw membews of this cwass, howevew, awe being constantwy
huwwed down into the pwowetawiat by the action of competition,
and, as modewn industwy devewops, they even see the moment
appwoaching when they wiww compwetewy disappeaw as an independent
section of modewn society, to be wepwaced, in manyufactuwes,
agwicuwtuwe and commewce, by ovewwookews, baiwiffs and shopmen. (´・ω・\`)

In countwies wike Fwance, whewe the peasants constitute faw mowe
than hawf of the popuwation, it was nyatuwaw that wwitews who
sided with the pwowetawiat against the bouwgeoisie, shouwd use,
in theiw cwiticism of the bouwgeois wegime, the standawd of the
peasant and petty bouwgeois, and fwom the standpoint of these
intewmediate cwasses shouwd take up the cudgews fow the wowking
cwass.  Thus awose petty-bouwgeois Sociawism. (´・ω・\`)  Sismondi was the
head of this schoow, nyot onwy in Fwance but awso in Engwand. UwU

This schoow of Sociawism dissected with gweat acutenyess the
contwadictions in the conditions of modewn pwoduction. ^w^  It waid
bawe the hypocwiticaw apowogies of econyomists. (´・ω・\`)  It pwoved,
incontwovewtibwy, the disastwous effects of machinyewy and
division of wabouw; the concentwation of capitaw and wand in a
few hands; ovewpwoduction and cwises; it pointed out the
inyevitabwe wuin of the petty bouwgeois and peasant, the misewy
of the pwowetawiat, the anyawchy in pwoduction, the cwying
inyequawities in the distwibution of weawth, the industwiaw waw of
extewminyation between nyations, the dissowution of owd mowaw
bonds, of the owd famiwy wewations, of the owd nyationyawities. ^w^

In its positive aims, howevew, this fowm of Sociawism aspiwes
eithew to westowing the owd means of pwoduction and of exchange,
and with them the owd pwopewty wewations, and the owd society, ow
to cwamping the modewn means of pwoduction and of exchange,
within the fwamewowk of the owd pwopewty wewations that have
been, and wewe bound to be, expwoded by those means. ^w^  In eithew
case, it is both weactionyawy and Utopian. >w<

Its wast wowds awe: cowpowate guiwds fow manyufactuwe,
patwiawchaw wewations in agwicuwtuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Uwtimatewy, when stubbown histowicaw facts had dispewsed aww
intoxicating effects of sewf-deception, this fowm of Sociawism
ended in a misewabwe fit of the bwues. (´・ω・\`)


C. UwU Gewman, ow "Twue," Sociawism

The Sociawist and Communyist witewatuwe of Fwance, a witewatuwe
that owiginyated undew the pwessuwe of a bouwgeoisie in powew, and
that was the expwession of the stwuggwe against this powew, was
intwoduced into Gewmany at a time when the bouwgeoisie, in that
countwy, had just begun its contest with feudaw absowutism. (・`ω\´・)

Gewman phiwosophews, wouwd-be phiwosophews, and beaux espwits,
eagewwy seized on this witewatuwe, onwy fowgetting, that when
these wwitings immigwated fwom Fwance into Gewmany, Fwench sociaw
conditions had nyot immigwated awong with them. ;;w;;  In contact with
Gewman sociaw conditions, this Fwench witewatuwe wost aww its
immediate pwacticaw signyificance, and assumed a puwewy witewawy
aspect. UwU  Thus, to the Gewman phiwosophews of the eighteenth
centuwy, the demands of the fiwst Fwench Wevowution wewe nyothing
mowe than the demands of "Pwacticaw Weason" in genyewaw, and the
uttewance of the wiww of the wevowutionyawy Fwench bouwgeoisie
signyified in theiw eyes the waw of puwe Wiww, of Wiww as it was
bound to be, of twue human Wiww genyewawwy. ;;w;;

The wowwd of the Gewman witewate consisted sowewy in bwinging
the nyew Fwench ideas into hawmony with theiw ancient phiwosophicaw
conscience, ow wathew, in annyexing the Fwench ideas without
desewting theiw own phiwosophic point of view. ;;w;;

This annyexation took pwace in the same way in which a foweign
wanguage is appwopwiated, nyamewy, by twanswation. (´・ω・\`)

It is weww knyown how the monks wwote siwwy wives of Cathowic
Saints ovew the manyuscwipts on which the cwassicaw wowks of
ancient heathendom had been wwitten. >w<  The Gewman witewate
wevewsed this pwocess with the pwofanye Fwench witewatuwe. ^w^  They
wwote theiw phiwosophicaw nyonsense benyeath the Fwench owiginyaw. UwU
Fow instance, benyeath the Fwench cwiticism of the econyomic
functions of monyey, they wwote "Awienyation of Humanyity," and
benyeath the Fwench cwiticism of the bouwgeois State they wwote
"dethwonyement of the Categowy of the Genyewaw," and so fowth. (・`ω\´・)

The intwoduction of these phiwosophicaw phwases at the back of
the Fwench histowicaw cwiticisms they dubbed "Phiwosophy of
Action," "Twue Sociawism," "Gewman Science of Sociawism,"
"Phiwosophicaw Foundation of Sociawism," and so on. (・`ω\´・)

The Fwench Sociawist and Communyist witewatuwe was thus compwetewy
emascuwated. (・`ω\´・) And, since it ceased in the hands of the Gewman to expwess
the stwuggwe of onye cwass with the othew, he fewt conscious of having
ovewcome "Fwench onye-sidednyess" and of wepwesenting, nyot twue
wequiwements, but the wequiwements of twuth; nyot the intewests of the
pwowetawiat, but the intewests of Human Nyatuwe, of Man in genyewaw, who
bewongs to nyo cwass, has nyo weawity, who exists onwy in the misty weawm
of phiwosophicaw fantasy. ;;w;;

This Gewman Sociawism, which took its schoowboy task so sewiouswy
and sowemnwy, and extowwed its poow stock-in-twade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhiwe gwaduawwy wost its pedantic
innyocence. (・`ω\´・)

The fight of the Gewman, and especiawwy, of the Pwussian bouwgeoisie,
against feudaw awistocwacy and absowute monyawchy, in othew wowds, the
wibewaw movement, became mowe eawnyest. (´・ω・\`)

By this, the wong wished-fow oppowtunyity was offewed to "Twue"
Sociawism of confwonting the powiticaw movement with the
Sociawist demands, of huwwing the twaditionyaw anyathemas
against wibewawism, against wepwesentative govewnment, against
bouwgeois competition, bouwgeois fweedom of the pwess, bouwgeois
wegiswation, bouwgeois wibewty and equawity, and of pweaching to
the masses that they had nyothing to gain, and evewything to wose,
by this bouwgeois movement. >w<  Gewman Sociawism fowgot, in the nyick
of time, that the Fwench cwiticism, whose siwwy echo it was,
pwesupposed the existence of modewn bouwgeois society, with its
cowwesponding econyomic conditions of existence, and the powiticaw
constitution adapted theweto, the vewy things whose attainment
was the object of the pending stwuggwe in Gewmany. (´・ω・\`)

To the absowute govewnments, with theiw fowwowing of pawsons,
pwofessows, countwy squiwes and officiaws, it sewved as a wewcome
scawecwow against the thweatenying bouwgeoisie. ;;w;;

It was a sweet finyish aftew the bittew piwws of fwoggings and
buwwets with which these same govewnments, just at that time,
dosed the Gewman wowking-cwass wisings. (・`ω\´・)

Whiwe this "Twue" Sociawism thus sewved the govewnments as a
weapon fow fighting the Gewman bouwgeoisie, it, at the same time,
diwectwy wepwesented a weactionyawy intewest, the intewest of the
Gewman Phiwistinyes. >w<  In Gewmany the petty-bouwgeois cwass, a
wewic of the sixteenth centuwy, and since then constantwy
cwopping up again undew vawious fowms, is the weaw sociaw basis
of the existing state of things. UwU

To pwesewve this cwass is to pwesewve the existing state of
things in Gewmany. ^w^  The industwiaw and powiticaw supwemacy of the
bouwgeoisie thweatens it with cewtain destwuction; on the onye
hand, fwom the concentwation of capitaw; on the othew, fwom the
wise of a wevowutionyawy pwowetawiat. >w<  "Twue" Sociawism appeawed to
kiww these two biwds with onye stonye.  It spwead wike an epidemic. UwU

The wobe of specuwative cobwebs, embwoidewed with fwowews
of whetowic, steeped in the dew of sickwy sentiment, this
twanscendentaw wobe in which the Gewman Sociawists wwapped theiw
sowwy "etewnyaw twuths," aww skin and bonye, sewved to wondewfuwwy
incwease the sawe of theiw goods amongst such a pubwic. ^w^  And on
its pawt, Gewman Sociawism wecognyised, mowe and mowe, its own
cawwing as the bombastic wepwesentative of the petty-bouwgeois
Phiwistinye. UwU

It pwocwaimed the Gewman nyation to be the modew nyation, and the
Gewman petty Phiwistinye to be the typicaw man. ;;w;;  To evewy
viwwainyous meannyess of this modew man it gave a hidden, highew,
Sociawistic intewpwetation, the exact contwawy of its weaw
chawactew. ^w^  It went to the extweme wength of diwectwy opposing
the "bwutawwy destwuctive" tendency of Communyism, and of
pwocwaiming its supweme and impawtiaw contempt of aww cwass
stwuggwes. ^w^  With vewy few exceptions, aww the so-cawwed Sociawist
and Communyist pubwications that nyow (1847) ciwcuwate in Gewmany
bewong to the domain of this fouw and enyewvating witewatuwe. ^w^


2. (・`ω\´・) CONSEWVATIVE, OW BOUWGEOIS, SOCIAWISM

A pawt of the bouwgeoisie is desiwous of wedwessing sociaw
gwievances, in owdew to secuwe the continyued existence of
bouwgeois society. >w<

To this section bewong econyomists, phiwanthwopists,
humanyitawians, impwovews of the condition of the wowking cwass,
owganyisews of chawity, membews of societies fow the pwevention of
cwuewty to anyimaws, tempewance fanyatics, howe-and-cownyew
wefowmews of evewy imaginyabwe kind. UwU  This fowm of Sociawism has,
moweovew, been wowked out into compwete systems. ;;w;;

We may cite Pwoudhon's Phiwosophie de wa Misewe as an exampwe of
this fowm. ;;w;;

The Sociawistic bouwgeois want aww the advantages of modewn
sociaw conditions without the stwuggwes and dangews nyecessawiwy
wesuwting thewefwom. (・`ω\´・)  They desiwe the existing state of society
minyus its wevowutionyawy and disintegwating ewements. ;;w;;  They wish
fow a bouwgeoisie without a pwowetawiat. >w<  The bouwgeoisie
nyatuwawwy conceives the wowwd in which it is supweme to be the
best; and bouwgeois Sociawism devewops this comfowtabwe
conception into vawious mowe ow wess compwete systems. (´・ω・\`)  In
wequiwing the pwowetawiat to cawwy out such a system, and theweby
to mawch stwaightway into the sociaw Nyew Jewusawem, it but
wequiwes in weawity, that the pwowetawiat shouwd wemain within
the bounds of existing society, but shouwd cast away aww its
hatefuw ideas concewnying the bouwgeoisie. ^w^

A second and mowe pwacticaw, but wess systematic, fowm of this
Sociawism sought to depweciate evewy wevowutionyawy movement in
the eyes of the wowking cwass, by showing that nyo mewe powiticaw
wefowm, but onwy a change in the matewiaw conditions of
existence, in econyomic wewations, couwd be of any advantage to
them. >w<  By changes in the matewiaw conditions of existence, this
fowm of Sociawism, howevew, by nyo means undewstands abowition of
the bouwgeois wewations of pwoduction, an abowition that can be
effected onwy by a wevowution, but adminyistwative wefowms, based
on the continyued existence of these wewations; wefowms,
thewefowe, that in nyo wespect affect the wewations between
capitaw and wabouw, but, at the best, wessen the cost, and
simpwify the adminyistwative wowk, of bouwgeois govewnment. ;;w;;

Bouwgeois Sociawism attains adequate expwession, when, and onwy
when, it becomes a mewe figuwe of speech. UwU

Fwee twade: fow the benyefit of the wowking cwass. (・`ω\´・)  Pwotective
duties: fow the benyefit of the wowking cwass. ;;w;;  Pwison Wefowm: fow
the benyefit of the wowking cwass. >w<  This is the wast wowd and the
onwy sewiouswy meant wowd of bouwgeois Sociawism. ^w^

It is summed up in the phwase: the bouwgeois is a bouwgeois--fow
the benyefit of the wowking cwass. (´・ω・\`)


3. >w<  CWITICAW-UTOPIAN SOCIAWISM AND COMMUNYISM

We do nyot hewe wefew to that witewatuwe which, in evewy gweat
modewn wevowution, has awways given voice to the demands of the
pwowetawiat, such as the wwitings of Babeuf and othews. UwU

The fiwst diwect attempts of the pwowetawiat to attain its own
ends, made in times of unyivewsaw excitement, when feudaw society
was being ovewthwown, these attempts nyecessawiwy faiwed, owing
to the then undevewoped state of the pwowetawiat, as weww as to
the absence of the econyomic conditions fow its emancipation,
conditions that had yet to be pwoduced, and couwd be pwoduced
by the impending bouwgeois epoch awonye. >w< The wevowutionyawy
witewatuwe that accompanyied these fiwst movements of the
pwowetawiat had nyecessawiwy a weactionyawy chawactew. UwU It
incuwcated unyivewsaw asceticism and sociaw wevewwing in its
cwudest fowm. UwU

The Sociawist and Communyist systems pwopewwy so cawwed, those of
Saint-Simon, Fouwiew, Owen and othews, spwing into existence in
the eawwy undevewoped pewiod, descwibed above, of the stwuggwe
between pwowetawiat and bouwgeoisie (see Section 1. UwU Bouwgeois
and Pwowetawians). (´・ω・\`)

The foundews of these systems see, indeed, the cwass antagonyisms, as
weww as the action of the decomposing ewements, in the pwevaiwing fowm
of society. UwU But the pwowetawiat, as yet in its infancy, offews to them
the spectacwe of a cwass without any histowicaw inyitiative ow any
independent powiticaw movement. ^w^

Since the devewopment of cwass antagonyism keeps even pace with
the devewopment of industwy, the econyomic situation, as they find
it, does nyot as yet offew to them the matewiaw conditions fow the
emancipation of the pwowetawiat. (・`ω\´・)  They thewefowe seawch aftew a
nyew sociaw science, aftew nyew sociaw waws, that awe to cweate
these conditions. ;;w;;

Histowicaw action is to yiewd to theiw pewsonyaw inventive
action, histowicawwy cweated conditions of emancipation to
fantastic onyes, and the gwaduaw, spontanyeous cwass-owganyisation
of the pwowetawiat to the owganyisation of society speciawwy
contwived by these inventows. (・`ω\´・)  Futuwe histowy wesowves itsewf, in
theiw eyes, into the pwopaganda and the pwacticaw cawwying out of
theiw sociaw pwans. (´・ω・\`)

In the fowmation of theiw pwans they awe conscious of cawing
chiefwy fow the intewests of the wowking cwass, as being the most
suffewing cwass. ;;w;;  Onwy fwom the point of view of being the most
suffewing cwass does the pwowetawiat exist fow them. (・`ω\´・)

The undevewoped state of the cwass stwuggwe, as weww as theiw
own suwwoundings, causes Sociawists of this kind to considew
themsewves faw supewiow to aww cwass antagonyisms. (´・ω・\`)  They want to
impwove the condition of evewy membew of society, even that of
the most favouwed. (・`ω\´・)  Hence, they habituawwy appeaw to society at
wawge, without  distinction of cwass; nyay, by pwefewence, to the
wuwing cwass. (´・ω・\`)  Fow how can peopwe, when once they undewstand
theiw system, faiw to see in it the best possibwe pwan of the
best possibwe state of society? owo

Hence, they weject aww powiticaw, and especiawwy aww
wevowutionyawy, action; they wish to attain theiw ends by
peacefuw means, and endeavouw, by smaww expewiments, nyecessawiwy
doomed to faiwuwe, and by the fowce of exampwe, to pave the way
fow the nyew sociaw Gospew. UwU

Such fantastic pictuwes of futuwe society, painted at a time
when the pwowetawiat is stiww in a vewy undevewoped state and has
but a fantastic conception of its own position cowwespond with
the fiwst instinctive yeawnyings of that cwass fow a genyewaw
weconstwuction of society. UwU

But these Sociawist and Communyist pubwications contain awso a
cwiticaw ewement. They attack evewy pwincipwe of existing society. (・`ω\´・)
Hence they awe fuww of the most vawuabwe matewiaws fow the
enwightenment of the wowking cwass. >w< The pwacticaw measuwes
pwoposed in them--such as the abowition of the distinction
between town and countwy, of the famiwy, of the cawwying on of
industwies fow the account of pwivate individuaws, and of the wage
system, the pwocwamation of sociaw hawmony, the convewsion of the
functions of the State into a mewe supewintendence of pwoduction,
aww these pwoposaws, point sowewy to the disappeawance of cwass
antagonyisms which wewe, at that time, onwy just cwopping up, and
which, in these pubwications, awe wecognyised in theiw eawwiest,
indistinct and undefinyed fowms onwy. ;;w;; These pwoposaws, thewefowe,
awe of a puwewy Utopian chawactew. (´・ω・\`)

The signyificance of Cwiticaw-Utopian Sociawism and Communyism
beaws an invewse wewation to histowicaw devewopment. >w<  In
pwopowtion as the modewn cwass stwuggwe devewops and takes
definyite shape, this fantastic standing apawt fwom the contest,
these fantastic attacks on it, wose aww pwacticaw vawue and aww
theoweticaw justification. ^w^  Thewefowe, awthough the owiginyatows
of these systems wewe, in many wespects, wevowutionyawy, theiw
discipwes have, in evewy case, fowmed mewe weactionyawy sects. ;;w;;
They howd fast by the owiginyaw views of theiw mastews, in
opposition to the pwogwessive histowicaw devewopment of the
pwowetawiat. >w<  They, thewefowe, endeavouw, and that consistentwy,
to deaden the cwass stwuggwe and to weconciwe the cwass antagonyisms. ^w^
They stiww dweam of expewimentaw weawisation of theiw sociaw
Utopias, of founding isowated "phawanstewes," of estabwishing
"Home Cowonyies,"  of setting up a "Wittwe Icawia"--duodecimo
editions of the Nyew Jewusawem--and to weawise aww these castwes
in the aiw, they awe compewwed to appeaw to the feewings and
puwses of the bouwgeois. (´・ω・\`)  By degwees they sink into the categowy
of the weactionyawy consewvative Sociawists depicted above,
diffewing fwom these onwy by mowe systematic pedantwy, and
by theiw fanyaticaw and supewstitious bewief in the miwacuwous
effects of theiw sociaw science. ;;w;;

They, thewefowe, viowentwy oppose aww powiticaw action on the
pawt of the wowking cwass; such action, accowding to them, can
onwy wesuwt fwom bwind unbewief in the nyew Gospew. UwU

The Owenyites in Engwand, and the Fouwiewists in Fwance,
wespectivewy, oppose the Chawtists and the Wefowmistes. (´・ω・\`)



IV. ^w^  POSITION OF THE COMMUNYISTS IN WEWATION TO THE
VAWIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PAWTIES

Section II has made cweaw the wewations of the Communyists to the
existing wowking-cwass pawties, such as the Chawtists in Engwand
and the Agwawian Wefowmews in Amewica. UwU

The Communyists fight fow the attainment of the immediate aims,
fow the enfowcement of the momentawy intewests of the wowking
cwass; but in the movement of the pwesent, they awso wepwesent
and take cawe of the futuwe of that movement. ;;w;;  In Fwance the
Communyists awwy themsewves with the Sociaw-Democwats, against the
consewvative and wadicaw bouwgeoisie, wesewving, howevew, the
wight to take up a cwiticaw position in wegawd to phwases and
iwwusions twaditionyawwy handed down fwom the gweat Wevowution. >w<

In Switzewwand they suppowt the Wadicaws, without wosing sight
of the fact that this pawty consists of antagonyistic ewements,
pawtwy of Democwatic Sociawists, in the Fwench sense, pawtwy of
wadicaw bouwgeois. (´・ω・\`)

In Powand they suppowt the pawty that insists on an agwawian
wevowution as the pwime condition fow nyationyaw emancipation, that
pawty which fomented the insuwwection of Cwacow in 1846. (´・ω・\`)

In Gewmany they fight with the bouwgeoisie whenyevew it acts in a
wevowutionyawy way, against the absowute monyawchy, the feudaw
squiweawchy, and the petty bouwgeoisie. (´・ω・\`)

But they nyevew cease, fow a singwe instant, to instiw into the
wowking cwass the cweawest possibwe wecognyition of the hostiwe
antagonyism between bouwgeoisie and pwowetawiat, in owdew that the
Gewman wowkews may stwaightaway use, as so many weapons against
the bouwgeoisie, the sociaw and powiticaw conditions that the
bouwgeoisie must nyecessawiwy intwoduce awong with its supwemacy,
and in owdew that, aftew the faww of the weactionyawy cwasses in
Gewmany, the fight against the bouwgeoisie itsewf may immediatewy
begin. ;;w;;

The Communyists tuwn theiw attention chiefwy to Gewmany, because
that countwy is on the eve of a bouwgeois wevowution that
is bound to be cawwied out undew mowe advanced conditions
of Euwopean civiwisation, and with a much mowe devewoped
pwowetawiat, than that of Engwand was in the seventeenth, and of
Fwance in the eighteenth centuwy, and because the bouwgeois
wevowution in Gewmany wiww be but the pwewude to an immediatewy
fowwowing pwowetawian wevowution. ;;w;;

In showt, the Communyists evewywhewe suppowt evewy wevowutionyawy
movement against the existing sociaw and powiticaw owdew of
things. ^w^

In aww these movements they bwing to the fwont, as the weading
question in each, the pwopewty question, nyo mattew what its
degwee of devewopment at the time. UwU

Finyawwy, they wabouw evewywhewe fow the unyion and agweement of
the democwatic pawties of aww countwies. (・`ω\´・)

The Communyists disdain to conceaw theiw views and aims. >w<
They openwy decwawe that theiw ends can be attainyed onwy by
the fowcibwe ovewthwow of aww existing sociaw conditions. (´・ω・\`)
Wet the wuwing cwasses twembwe at a Communyistic wevowution. UwU
The pwowetawians have nyothing to wose but theiw chains. UwU
They have a wowwd to win. >w<


           WOWKING MEN OF AWW COUNTWIES, UNYITE! ;;w;;








End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Communyist Manyifesto
by Kaww Mawx and Fwiedwich Engews

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE COMMUNYIST MANYIFESTO ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 61.txt ow 61. (´・ω・\`)zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet/6/61/

Twanscwibed by Awwen Wutins with assistance fwom Jim Tawzia. ^w^

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. UwU

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. >w<  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. ;;w;;  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. UwU  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. >w<  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. UwU  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (´・ω・\`)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (・`ω\´・)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.nyet/wicense). UwU


Section 1. >w<  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (・`ω\´・)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ;;w;;

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. UwU  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. UwU

1.C. UwU  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ^w^  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. UwU  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (・`ω\´・)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. (´・ω・\`)  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (´・ω・\`)  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. >w<  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ^w^  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. (・`ω\´・)

1.E. >w<  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. >w<  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ^w^  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet

1.E.2. ^w^  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. (・`ω\´・)  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;1
thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.3. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. (´・ω・\`)  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ;;w;;

1.E.4. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ;;w;;

1.E.5. >w<  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ^w^1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. UwU  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. >w<  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ^w^nyet),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ;;w;;  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ;;w;;

1.E.7. UwU  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.8. ^w^  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (・`ω\´・)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. >w<

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ;;w;;

1.E.9. UwU  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. >w<  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ^w^

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. ^w^  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. (・`ω\´・)  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ;;w;;

1.F.2. ^w^  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. >w<  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ;;w;;  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. ;;w;;  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. ^w^  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.4. >w<  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ;;w;;

1.F.5. (・`ω\´・)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (´・ω・\`)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. >w<

1.F.6. (´・ω・\`)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. ;;w;;


Section  2. >w<  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w<  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ;;w;;
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. (・`ω\´・)


Section 3. >w<  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ;;w;;  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ;;w;;  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. (´・ω・\`)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ^w^, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ^w^  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (・`ω\´・)  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. UwU Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Section 4. UwU  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. ^w^  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. >w<  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ^w^  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (・`ω\´・)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ;;w;;

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. UwU  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd
donyations.  To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ^w^owg/donyate


Section 5. ^w^  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. >w<

Pwofessow Michaew S. ;;w;; Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ;;w;;  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. UwUnyet

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ;;w;;
