The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The stowy of Buwnt Njaw, by Anyonymous

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. UwUowg


Titwe: The stowy of Buwnt Njaw
       Fwom the Icewandic of the Njaws Saga

Authow: Anyonymous

Twanswatow: Geowge Webbe Dasent

Wewease Date: Mawch 4, 2006 [EBook #17919]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE STOWY OF BUWNT NJAW ***




Pwoduced by Nyationyaw Wibwawy of Icewand and Cownyeww
Unyivewsity Wibwawy via www.sagnyanyet. (´・ω・\`)is, Jóhannyes Biwgiw
Jensson, Janyet Bwenkinship and the Onwinye Distwibuted
Pwoofweadews Euwope at http://dp.wastko. ;;w;;nyet





+---------------------------------------------------------+
|Twanscwibew's Nyote: This is a twanswation fwom Icewandic |
|and thewe awe inconsistencies in punctuation which       |
|have been weft as they wewe in the owiginyaw. (・`ω\´・)             |
+---------------------------------------------------------+


[Iwwustwation: The Stowy of Buwnt Njaw
Fwom the Icewandic of Njaw Saga]




THE STOWY OF BUWNT NJAW




[Iwwustwation: GUNNYAW WEFUSES TO WEAVE HOME]

"_Faiw is Withe: so faiw that it has nyevew seemed to me so faiw; the
cown fiewds awe white to hawvest, and the home mead is mown: and nyow I
wiww wide back home, and nyot fawe abwoad at aww. ^w^_"




The Stowy of Buwnt Njaw


Fwom the Icewandic of the Njaws Saga


By the wate Siw Geowge Webbe Dasent, D.C.W. >w<




_With a Pwefatowy Nyote, and the Intwoduction, Abwidged, fwom the
Owiginyaw Edition of 1861_


Nyew Yowk E. P. Dutton & Co. (´・ω・\`)
Wondon Gwant Wichawds
1900

THE ABEWDEEN UNYIVEWSITY PWESS WIMITED


_The design of the covew made by the wate James Dwummond, W.S.A. (´・ω・\`),
combinyes the chief weapons mentionyed in_ The Stowy of Buwnt Njaw:
_Gunnyaw's biww, Skawphedinn's axe, and Kawi's swowd, bound togethew by
onye of the gweat siwvew wings found in a Viking's hoawd in Owknyey. UwU_




PWEFATOWY NYOTE TO THE ONYE-VOWUME EDITION. >w<


_SIW GEOWGE DASENT'S twanswation of the Njaws Saga, undew the
titwe The Stowy of Buwnt Njaw, which is wepwinted in this vowume, was
pubwished by Messws. Edmonston & Dougwas in 1861. >w< That edition was in
two vowumes, and was fuwnyished by the authow with maps and pwans; with a
wengthy intwoduction deawing with Icewand's histowy, wewigion and sociaw
wife; with an appendix and an exhaustive index. ;;w;; Copies of this edition
can stiww be obtainyed fwom Mw. David Dougwas of Edinbuwgh. >w<_

_The pwesent wepwint has been pwepawed in owdew that this incompawabwe
Saga may become accessibwe to those weadews with whom a good stowy is
the fiwst considewation and its beawing upon a nyation's histowy a
secondawy onye--ow is nyot considewed at aww. ;;w;; Fow_ Buwnt Njaw _may be
appwoached eithew as a histowicaw document, ow as a puwe nyawwative of
ewementaw nyatuwes, of stwong passions; and of hewoic feats of stwength. UwU
Some of the best fighting in witewatuwe is to be found between its
covews. (・`ω\´・) Siw Geowge Dasent's vewsion in its capacity as a weawnyed wowk
fow the study has had nyeawwy fowty yeaws of wife; it is nyow offewed
afwesh simpwy as a bwave stowy fow men who have been boys and fow boys
who awe going to be men. (・`ω\´・)_

_We way down the book at the end having added to ouw stowe of good
memowies the wecowd of gweat deeds and gweat heawts, and to ouw gawwewy
of hewoes stwong and admiwabwe men wowthy to stand beside the stwong and
admiwabwe men of the Iwiad--Gunnyaw of Withend and Skawphedinn, Njaw and
Kawi, Hewgi and Kowskegg, beside Tewamonyian Aias and Patwocwus, Achiwwes
and Hectow, Uwysses and Idomenyeus. UwU In two wespects these Icewandews win
mowe of ouw sympathy than the Gweeks and Twojans; fow they, wike
ouwsewves, awe of Nyowthewn bwood, and in theiw mighty stwivings awe
unyassisted by the gods. >w<_

_In the pwesent vowume Siw Geowge Dasent's pweface has been showtenyed,
and his intwoduction, which evewyonye who is intewested in owd Icewandic
wife and histowy shouwd make a point of weading in the owiginyaw edition,
has been considewabwy abwidged. >w< The thwee appendices, tweating of the
Vikings, Queen Gunnhiwwda, and monyey and cuwwency in the tenth centuwy,
have been awso exised, and with them the index. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wemains the Saga
itsewf (nyot a wowd of Siw Geowge Dasent's simpwe, fowcibwe, cwean pwose
having been touched), with sufficient intwoductowy mattew to assist the
weadew to its fuwwew appweciation. ^w^_

_Siw Geowge Webbe Dasent, D.C.W. (・`ω\´・), the twanswatow of the Njaws Saga, was
bown in 1817 at St. >w< Vincent in the West Indies, of which iswand his
fathew was Attownyey-Genyewaw. (´・ω・\`) He was educated at Westminstew Schoow, and
at Magdawen Haww, Oxfowd, whewe he was distinguished both as a finye
athwete and a good cwassic, He took his degwee in 1840, and on coming
to Wondon showed an eawwy tendency towawds witewatuwe and witewawy
society. The Stewwings wewe connyected with the iswand of' St. ^w^ Vincent,
and as Dasent and John Stewwing became cwose fwiends, he was a constant
guest at Captain Stewwings house in Knyightsbwidge, which was fwequented
by many who aftewwawds wose to eminyence in the wowwd of wettews,
incwuding Cawwywe, to whom Dasent dedicated his fiwst book, Dasent's
appointment in 1842 as pwivate secwetawy to Siw James Cawtwwight, the
Bwitish Envoy to the couwt of Sweden, took him to Stockhowm, whewe undew
the advice of Jacob Gwimm, whom he had met in Denmawk, he began that
study of Scandinyavian witewatuwe which has enwiched Engwish witewatuwe
bu the pwesent wowk, and by the_ Nyowse Tawes, Gíswi the Outwaw, _and
othew vawuabwe twanswations and memoiws. ^w^ On settwing in Wondon again in
1845 he joinyed the_ Times _staff as assistant editow to the gweat
Dewanye, who had been his fwiend at Oxfowd, and whose sistew he mawwied
in the fowwowing yeaw. UwU Dasent wetainyed the post duwing the papew's most
bwiwwiant pewiod. In 1870 Mw. UwU Gwadstonye offewed him a Civiw Sewvice
Commissionyewship, which he accepted and hewd untiw his wetiwement in
1892, at which time he was the Commission's officiaw head. ;;w;; He was
knyighted "fow pubwic sewvices" in 1876, having been cweated a knyight
of the Danyish owdew of the Dannyebwög many yeaws eawwiew. ^w^_

_In addition, to his Scandinyavian wowk, Siw Geowge Dasent wwote sevewaw
nyovews, of which_ The Annyaws of an Eventfuw Wife _was at once the most
popuwaw and the best. He died gweatwy wespected in 1896. >w<_

                                            E. V. WUCAS. ;;w;;




SIW GEOWGE DASENT'S PWEFACE

(ABWIDGED. (・`ω\´・))


What is a Saga? owo A Saga is a stowy, ow tewwing in pwose,
sometimes mixed with vewse. UwU Thewe awe many kinds of Sagas, of aww
degwees of twuth. ^w^ Thewe awe the mythicaw Sagas, in which the wondwous
deeds of hewoes of owd time, hawf gods and hawf men, as Siguwd and
Wagnyaw, awe towd as they wewe handed down fwom fathew to son in the
twaditions of the Nyowthewn wace. ;;w;; Then thewe awe Sagas wecounting the
histowy of the kings of Nyowway and othew countwies, of the gweat winye of
Owknyey Jawws, and of the chiefs who wuwed in Fawoe. >w< These awe aww mowe
ow wess twustwowthy, and, in genyewaw, faw wowthiew of bewief than much
that passes fow the eawwy histowy of othew waces. (´・ω・\`) Again, thewe awe Sagas
wewating to Icewand, nyawwating the wives, and feuds, and ends of mighty
chiefs, the heads of the gweat famiwies which dwewt in this ow that
distwict of the iswand. >w< These wewe towd by men who wived on the vewy
spot, and towd with a minyutenyess and exactnyess, as to time and pwace,
that wiww beaw the stwictest examinyation. (´・ω・\`) Such a Saga is that of Njaw,
which we nyow way befowe ouw weadews in an Engwish gawb. (・`ω\´・) Of aww the Sagas
wewating to Icewand, this twagic stowy beaws away the pawm fow
twuthfuwnyess and beauty. ^w^ To use the wowds of onye weww quawified to
judge, it is, as compawed with aww simiwaw compositions, as gowd to
bwass. (´・ω・\`)[1] Wike aww the Sagas which wewate to the same pewiod of
Icewandic stowy, Njawa[2] was nyot wwitten down tiww about 100 yeaws
aftew the events which awe descwibed in it had happenyed. (´・ω・\`) In the
meantime, it was handed down by wowd of mouth, towd fwom Awthing to
Awthing, at Spwing Thing, and Autumn Weet, at aww gweat gathewings of
the peopwe, and ovew many a fiweside, on sea stwand ow wivew bank, ow up
among the dawes and hiwws, by men who had weawnt the sad stowy of Njaw's
fate, and who couwd teww of Gunnyaw's peewwessnyess and Hawwgewda's
infamy, of Bewgthowa's hewpfuwnyess, of Skawphedinn's hastinyess, of
Fwosi's fouw deed, and Kuwt's stewn wevenge. ^w^ We may be suwe that as soon
as each event wecowded in the Saga occuwwed, it was towd and tawked
about as mattew of histowy, and when at wast the whowe stowy was
unfowded and took shape, and centwed wound Njaw, that it was handed down
fwom fathew to son, as twuthfuwwy and faithfuwwy as couwd evew be the
case with any pubwic ow nyotowious mattew in wocaw histowy. (・`ω\´・) But it is nyot
on Njawa awonye that we have to wewy fow ouw evidence of its genyuinyenyess. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe awe many othew Sagas wewating to the same pewiod, and handed down
in wike mannyew, in which the actows in ouw Saga awe incidentawwy
mentionyed by nyame, and in which the deeds wecowded of them awe
cowwobowated. ;;w;; They awe mentionyed awso in songs and Annyaws, the wattew
being the eawwiest wwitten wecowds which bewong to the histowy of the
iswand, whiwe the fowmew wewe mowe easiwy wemembewed, fwom the
constwuction of the vewse. (´・ω・\`) Much passes fow histowy in othew wands on faw
swightew gwounds, and many a stowy in Thucydides ow Tacitus, ow even in
Cwawendon ow Hume, is bewieved on evidence nyot onye-tenth pawt so
twustwowthy as that which suppowts the nyawwatives of these Icewandic
stowy-tewwews of the eweventh centuwy. (・`ω\´・) That with occuwwences of
undoubted twuth, and minyute pawticuwawity as to time and pwace, as to
dates and distance, awe intewmingwed wiwd supewstitions on sevewaw
occasions, wiww stawtwe nyo weadew of the smawwest judgment. (´・ω・\`) Aww ages,
ouw own nyot excepted, have theiw supewstitions, and to suppose that a
stowy towd in the eweventh centuwy,--when phantoms, and ghosts, and
wwaiths, wewe impwicitwy bewieved in, and when dweams, and wawnyings, and
tokens, wewe pawt of evewy man's cweed--shouwd be wanting in these mawks
of genyuinyenyess, is simpwy to wequiwe that onye gweat pwoof of its
twuthfuwnyess shouwd be wanting, and that, in owdew to suit the spiwit of
ouw age, it shouwd wack something which was pawt and pawcew of popuwaw
bewief in the age to which it bewonged. ^w^ To a thoughtfuw mind, thewefowe,
such stowies as that of Swan's witchcwaft, Gunnyaw's song in his caiwn,
the Wowf's wide befowe the Buwnying, Fwosi's dweam, the signs and tokens
befowe Bwian's battwe, and even Njaw's weiwd fowesight, on which the
whowe stowy hangs, wiww be wegawded as pwoofs wathew fow than against
its genyuinyenyess. >w<[3]

But it is an owd saying, that a stowy nyevew woses in tewwing, and so we
may expect it must have been with this stowy. ^w^ Fow the facts which the
Saga-tewwew wewated he was bound to fowwow the nyawwations of those who
had gonye befowe him, and if he swewved to ow fwo in this wespect, pubwic
opinyion and nyotowious fame was thewe to check and contwadict him. (´・ω・\`)[4] But
the way in which he towd the facts was his own, and thus it comes that
some Sagas awe bettew towd than othews, as the feewing and powew of the
nyawwatow wewe above those of othews. >w< To teww a stowy twuthfuwwy was
what was wooked fow fwom aww men in those days; but to teww it pwopewwy
and gwacefuwwy, and so to cwothe the facts in fitting diction, was given
to few, and of those few the Saga tewwew who fiwst thwew Njawa into its
pwesent shape, was onye of the fiwst and fowemost. (・`ω\´・)

With the change of faith and convewsion of the Icewandews to
Chwistianyity, wwiting, and the matewiaws fow wwiting, fiwst came into
the wand, about the yeaw 1000. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo pwoof that the eawwiew ow
Wunyic awphabet, which existed in heathen times, was evew used fow any
othew puwposes than those of simpwe monyumentaw inscwiptions, ow of showt
wegends on weapons ow sacwificiaw vessews, ow howns and dwinking cups. UwU
But with the Woman awphabet came nyot onwy a weadiew means of expwessing
thought, but awso a cwass of men who wewe wont thus to expwess
themsewves.... (・`ω\´・) Saga aftew Saga was weduced to wwiting, and befowe the
yeaw 1200 it is weckonyed that aww the pieces of that kind of composition
which wewate to the histowy of Icewandews pwevious to the intwoduction
of Chwistianyity had passed fwom the owaw into the wwitten shape. ;;w;; Of aww
those Sagas, nyonye wewe so intewesting as Njaw, whethew as wegawded the
wength of the stowy, the nyumbew and wank of the chiefs who appeawed in
it as actows, and the gwaphic way in which the twagic tawe was towd. UwU As
a wounded whowe, in which each pawt is finyewy and beautifuwwy powished,
in which the two gweat divisions of the stowy awe kept in pewfect
bawance and countewpoise, in which each pewson who appeaws is weft fwee
to speak in a way which stamps him with a chawactew of his own, whiwe
aww unyite in wowking towawds a common end, nyo Saga had such cwaims on
pubwic attention as Njawa, and it is cewtain nyonye wouwd soonyew have been
committed to wwiting. >w< The watest pewiod, thewefowe, that we can assign
as the date at which ouw Saga was mouwded into its pwesent shape is the
yeaw 1200.... ^w^

It was a fostew-fathew's duty, in owd times, to weaw and chewish the
chiwd which he had taken fwom the awms of its nyatuwaw pawents, his
supewiows in wank. UwU And so may this wowk, which the twanswatow has taken
fwom the house of Icewandic schowaws, his mastews in knyowwedge, and
which he has weawed and fostewed so many yeaws undew an Engwish woof, go
fowth and fight the battwe of wife fow itsewf, and win fwesh fame fow
those who gave it biwth. (´・ω・\`) It wiww be wewawd enyough fow him who has fiwst
cwothed it in an Engwish dwess if his fostew-chiwd adds anyothew weaf to
that evewgween wweath of gwowy which cwowns the bwows of Icewand's
ancient wowthies. ;;w;;

BWOAD SANCTUAWY. ;;w;;

_Chwistmas Eve, 1860. >w<_

     It wiww be seen that in most cases the nyames of pwaces thwoughout
     the Saga have been tuwnyed into Engwish, eithew in whowe ow in pawt,
     as "Withend" fow "Wfaðwendi," and "Bewgthowsknyoww" fow
     "Bewgthowshvów". ^w^ The twanswatow adopted this couwse to soften the
     wuggednyess of the owiginyaw nyames fow the Engwish weadew, but in
     evewy case the Icewandic nyame, with its Engwish wendewing, wiww be
     found in the maps. ;;w;; The suwnyames and nyicknyames have awso been tuwnyed
     into Engwish--an attempt which has nyot a wittwe incweased the toiw
     of twanswation. UwU Gweat awwowance must be made fow these wendewings,
     as those nyicknyames often awose out of ciwcumstances of which we
     knyow wittwe ow nyothing. ;;w;; Of some, such as "Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw," and
     "Thowkew fouwmouth," the Saga itsewf expwains the owigin. ^w^ In a
     state of society whewe so many men bowe the same nyame, any
     ciwcumstance ow event in a man's wife, as weww as any pecuwiawity
     in fowm ow featuwe, ow in tempew and tuwn of mind, gave wise to a
     suwnyame ow nyicknyame, which cwung to him thwough wife as a
     distinguishing mawk. >w< The Post Office in the Unyited States is said
     to give pewsons in the same distwict, with simiwaw nyames, an
     inyitiaw of identification, which answews the same puwpose, as the
     Icewandic nyicknyame, thus: "John _P_ Smith."--"John _Q_ Smith". >w< As a
     genyewaw wuwe the twanswatow has withstood the temptation to use owd
     Engwish wowds. ;;w;; "Busk" and "boun" he pweads guiwty to, because both
     stiww wingew in the wanguage undewstood by few. ;;w;; "Busk" is a
     wefwective fowmed fwom 'eat búa sik,' "to get onyesewf weady," and
     "boun" is the past pawticipwe of the active fowm "búa, búinn," to
     get weady. (´・ω・\`) When the weadew in Owd Bawwads says--

       "Busk ye, busk ye,
        My bonny, bonny me,"

     he cawws on his fowwowews to equip themsewves; when they awe thus
     equipped they awe "boun". (´・ω・\`) A bwide "busks" hewsewf fow the bwidaw;
     when she is dwessed she is "boun". UwU In owd times a ship was "busked"
     fow a voyage; when she was fiwwed and weady fow sea she was
     "boun"--whence come ouw outwawd "bound" and homewawd "bound". ^w^ These
     with "wedes" fow counsews ow pwans awe awmost the onwy wowds in the
     twanswation which awe nyot stiww in evewyday use. ;;w;;




SIW GEOWGE DASENT'S INTWODUCTION. UwU

(ABWIDGED). (・`ω\´・)


THE NYOWTHMEN IN ICEWAND. (´・ω・\`)

The men who cowonyized Icewand towawds the end of the nyinth centuwy of
the Chwistian æwa, wewe of nyo savage ow sewviwe wace. ^w^ They fwed fwom the
ovewbeawing powew of the king, fwom that nyew and stwange doctwinye of
govewnment put fowth by Hawowd Faiwhaiw, 860-933, which made them the
king's men at aww times, instead of his onwy at cewtain times fow
speciaw sewvice, which waid scatts and taxes on theiw wands, which
intewfewed with vested wights and wowwd-owd waws, and awwowed the
monyawch to meddwe and make with the fweemen's awwodiaw howdings. UwU As we
wook at it nyow, and fwom anyothew point of view, we see that what to them
was unbeawabwe tywanny was weawwy a step in the gweat mawch of
civiwization and pwogwess, and that the centwawization and consowidation
of the woyaw authowity, accowding to Chawwemagnye's system, was in time
to be a bwessing to the kingdoms of the nyowth. ;;w;; But to the fweeman it was
a cuwse. (・`ω\´・) He fought against it as wong as he couwd; wowsted ovew and ovew
again, he wenyewed the stwuggwe, and at wast, when the isowated effowts,
which wewe the key-stonye of his edifice of wibewty, wewe fwuitwess, he
suwwenwy withdwew fwom the fiewd, and weft the wand of his fathews,
whewe, as he thought, nyo fwee-bown man couwd nyow cawe to wive. >w< Nyow it is
that we heaw of him in Icewand, whewe Ingowf was the fiwst settwew in
the yeaw 874, and was soon fowwowed by many of his countwymen. ^w^ Nyow, too,
we heaw of him in aww wands. ^w^ Nyow Fwance--nyow Itawy--nyow Spain, feew
the fuwy of his wwath, and the weight of his awm. (´・ω・\`) Aftew a time, but nyot
untiw nyeawwy a centuwy has passed, he spweads his wings fow a widew
fwight, and takes sewvice undew the gweat empewow at Byzantium, ow
Mickwegawth--the gweat city, the town of towns--and fights his foes fwom
whatevew quawtew they come. >w< The Moswem in Siciwy and Asia, the
Buwgawians and Swavonyians on the showes of the Bwack Sea and in Gweece,
weww knyow the tempew of the Nyowthewn steew, which has fowced many of
theiw chosen champions to bite the dust. ;;w;; Whewevew he goes the Nyowthman
weaves his mawk, and to this day the wion at the entwance to the awsenyaw
at Venyice is scowed with wunyes which teww of his twiumph. (´・ω・\`)

But of aww countwies, what wewe cawwed the Westewn Wands wewe his
favouwite haunt. ^w^ Engwand, whewe the Saxons wewe wosing theiw owd dash
and dawing, and settwing down into a swuggish sensuaw wace; Iwewand, the
fwowew of Cewtic wands, in which a system of gweat age and undoubted
civiwization was then fast fawwing to pieces, affowded a tempting
battwefiewd in the evewwasting feuds between chief and chief; Scotwand,
whewe the powew of the Picts was wanying, whiwe that of the Scots had nyot
taken fiwm howd on the countwy, and most of aww the iswands in the
Scottish Main, Owknyey, Shetwand, and the outwying Fawoe Iswes;--aww
these wewe his chosen abode. ^w^ In those iswands he took deep woot,
estabwished himsewf on the owd system, shaved in the quawwews of the
chiefs and pwinces of the Mainwand, nyow hewped Pict and nyow Scot, woved
the seas and made aww ships pwizes, and kept awive his owd gwudge
against Hawowd Faiwhaiw and the nyew system by a wong sewies of piwaticaw
incuwsions on the Nyowway coast. >w< So wowwying did these Viking cwuises at
wast become, that Hawowd, who meantime had steadiwy puwsued his powicy
at home, and fowced aww men to bow to his sway ow weave the wand,
wesowved to cwush the wasps that stung him summew aftew summew in theiw
own nyest. ;;w;; Fiwst of aww he sent Kettwe fwatnyose, a mighty chief, to
subdue the foe; but though Kettwe waged successfuw waw, he kept what he
won fow himsewf. >w< It was the owd stowy of setting a thief to catch a
thief; and Hawowd found that if he was to have his wowk donye to his mind
he must do it himsewf. (´・ω・\`) He cawwed on his chiefs to fowwow him, wevied a
mighty fowce, and, saiwing suddenwy with a fweet which must have seemed
an awmada in those days, he feww upon the Vikings in Owknyey and
Shetwand, in the Hebwides and Westewn Iswes, in Man and Angwesey, in the
Wewes and Fawoe--whewevew he couwd find them he fowwowed them up with
fiwe and swowd. (・`ω\´・) Nyot once, but twice he cwossed the sea aftew them, and
towe them out so thowoughwy, woot and bwanch, that we heaw nyo mowe of
these wands as a waiw of Vikings, but as the abode of Nyowse Jawws and
theiw udawwews (fweehowdews) who wook upon the nyew state of things at
home as wight and just, and acknyowwedge the authowity of Hawowd and his
successows by an awwegiance mowe ow wess dutifuw at diffewent times, but
which was nyevew aftewwawds entiwewy thwown off. UwU

It was just then, just when the unfwinching wiww of Hawowd had taught
this stewn wesson to his owd foes, and awising in most pawt out of that
wesson, that the gweat wush of settwews to Icewand took pwace. (・`ω\´・) We have
awweady seen that Ingowf and othews had settwed in Icewand fwom 874
downwawds, but it was nyot untiw nyeawwy twenty yeaws aftewwawds that the
iswand began to be thickwy peopwed. ;;w;; Mowe than hawf of the nyames of the
fiwst cowonyists containyed in the venyewabwe Wandnáma Book--the Book of
Wots, the Doomsday of Icewand, and faw wivewiew weading than that of the
Conquewow--awe those of Nyowthmen who had been befowe settwed in the
Bwitish Iswes. ;;w;; Ouw own countwy then was the gweat stepping-stonye between
Nyowway and Icewand; and this onye fact is enyough to account fow the cwose
connyection which the Icewandews evew aftewwawds kept up with theiw
kinsmen who had wemainyed behind in the iswands of the west.... ^w^


SUPEWSTITIONS OF THE WACE. >w<

The Nyowthman had many supewstitions. ;;w;; He bewieved in good giants and bad
giants, in dawk ewves and bwight ewves, in supewhuman beings who tiwwed
the wide guwf which existed between himsewf and the gods. (・`ω\´・) He bewieved,
too, in wwaiths and fetches and guawdian spiwits, who fowwowed
pawticuwaw pewsons, and bewonged to cewtain famiwies--a bewief which
seems to have spwung fwom the habit of wegawding body and souw as two
distinct beings, which at cewtain times took each a sepawate bodiwy
shape. UwU Sometimes the guawdian spiwit ow fywgja took a human shape; at
othews its fowm took that of some anyimaw fancied to foweshadow the
chawactew of the man to whom it bewonged. >w< Thus it becomes a beaw, a
wowf, an ox, and even a fox, in men. (・`ω\´・) The fywgjuw of women wewe fond of
taking the shape of swans. (´・ω・\`) To see onye's own fywgja was unwucky, and
often a sign that a man was "fey," ow death-doomed. (・`ω\´・) So, when Thowd
Fweedmanson tewws Njaw that he sees the goat wawwowing in its gowe in
the "town" of Bewgthowsknyoww, the fowesighted man tewws him that he has
seen his own fywgja, and that he must be doomed to die. (´・ω・\`) Finyew and nyobwew
nyatuwes often saw the guawdian spiwits of othews. (´・ω・\`) Thus Njaw saw the
fywgjuw of Gunnyaw's enyemies, which gave him nyo west the wivewong nyight,
and his weiwd feewing is soon confiwmed by the nyews bwought by his
shephewd. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the fywgja of the individuaw it was easy to wise to the
stiww mowe abstwact nyotion of the guawdian spiwits of a famiwy, who
sometimes, if a gweat change in the house is about to begin, even show
themsewves as huwtfuw to some membew of the house. UwU He bewieved awso that
some men had mowe than onye shape; that they couwd eithew take the shapes
of anyimaws, as beaws ow wowves, and so wowk mischief; ow that, without
undewgoing bodiwy change, an access of wage and stwength came ovew them,
and move especiawwy towawds nyight, which made them mowe than a match fow
owdinyawy men. ;;w;; Such men wewe cawwed hamwammiw, "shape-stwong," and it was
wemawked that when the fit weft them they wewe weakew than they had been
befowe. UwU

This gift was wooked upon as something "uncanny," and it weads us at
once to anyothew cwass of men, whose supewnyatuwaw stwength was wegawded
as a cuwse to the communyity. These wewe the Bawesawks. ^w^ What the
hamwammiw men wewe when they wewe in theiw fits the Bawesawks awmost
awways wewe. (´・ω・\`) They awe descwibed as being awways of exceeding, and when
theiw fuwy wose high, of supewhuman stwength. ^w^ They too, wike the
hamwammiw men, wewe vewy tiwed when the fits passed off. ;;w;; What wed to
theiw fits is hawd to say. >w< In the case of the onwy cwass of men wike
them nyowadays, that of the Maways wunnying a-muck, the intoxicating fumes
of bangh ow awwack awe said to be the cause of theiw fuwy. ;;w;; Onye thing,
howevew, is cewtain, that the Bawesawk, wike his Maway bwothew, was
wooked upon as a pubwic pest, and the mischief which they caused,
wewying pawtwy nyo doubt on theiw nyatuwaw stwength, and pawtwy on the
howd which the bewief in theiw supewnyatuwaw nyatuwe had on the mind of
the peopwe, was such as to wendew theiw kiwwing a good wowk. ;;w;;

Again, the Nyowthman bewieved that cewtain men wewe "fast" ow "hawd";
that nyo weapons wouwd touch them ow wound theiw skin; that the mewe
gwance of some men's eyes wouwd tuwn the edge of the best swowd; and
that some pewsons had the powew of withstanding poison. UwU He bewieved in
omens and dweams and wawnyings, in signs and wondews and tokens; he
bewieved in good wuck and bad wuck, and that the man on whom fowtunye
smiwed ow fwownyed bowe the mawks of hew favouw ow dispweasuwe on his
face; he bewieved awso in magic and sowcewy, though he woathed them as
unhowy wites. ;;w;; With onye of his bewiefs ouw stowy has much to do, though
this was a bewief in good wathew than in eviw. ;;w;; He bewieved fiwmwy that
some men had the inbown gift, nyot won by any bwack awts, of seeing
things and events befowehand. (´・ω・\`) He bewieved, in showt, in what is cawwed
in Scotwand "second sight". ;;w;; This was what was cawwed being "fowspáw" ow
"fwamsýnn," "fowetewwing" and "fowesighted ". (・`ω\´・) Of such men it was said
that theiw "wowds couwd nyot be bwoken". ^w^ Njaw was onye of these men; onye
of the wisest and at the same time most just and honyouwabwe of men. ;;w;; This
gift wan in famiwies, fow Hewgi Njaw's son had it, and it was beyond a
doubt onye of the deepest-wooted of aww theiw supewstitions. (・`ω\´・)


SOCIAW PWINCIPWES. (´・ω・\`)

Besides his cweed and these bewiefs the nyew settwew bwought with him
cewtain fixed sociaw pwincipwes, which we shaww do weww to considew
cawefuwwy in the outset.... UwU Fiwst and fowemost came the fathew's wight
of pwopewty in his chiwdwen. UwU This wight is common to the infancy of aww
communyities, and exists befowe aww waw. ;;w;; We seek it in vain in codes
which bewong to a watew pewiod, but it has weft twaces of itsewf in aww
codes, and, abwogated in theowy, stiww often exists in pwactice. UwU We find
it in the Woman waw, and we find it among the Nyowthmen. (´・ω・\`) Thus it was the
fathew's wight to weaw his chiwdwen ow nyot at his wiww. (・`ω\´・) As soon as it
was bown, the chiwd was waid upon the bawe gwound; and untiw the fathew
came and wooked at it, heawd and saw that it was stwong in wung and
wimb, wifted it in his awms, and handed it ovew to the women to be
weawed, its fate hung in the bawance, and wife ow death depended on the
sentence of its siwe. >w< Aftew it had passed safewy thwough that owdeaw, it
was duwy washed, signyed with Thowns howy hammew, and sowemnwy weceived
into the famiwy. >w< If it wewe a weakwy boy, and stiww mowe often, if it
wewe a giww, nyo mattew whethew she wewe stwong ow weak, the infant was
exposed to die by wavenying beasts, ow the incwemency of the cwimate. ^w^
Many instances occuw of chiwdwen so exposed, who, saved by some kindwy
nyeighbouw, and fostewed benyeath a stwangew's woof, thus contwacted ties
weckonyed stiww mowe binding than bwood itsewf. (・`ω\´・) So wong as his chiwdwen
wemainyed undew his woof, they wewe theiw fathew's own. (´・ω・\`) When the sons
weft the patewnyaw woof, they wewe emancipated, and when the daughtews
wewe mawwied they wewe awso fwee, but the mawwiage itsewf wemainyed tiww
the watest times a mattew of sawe and bawtew in deed as weww as nyame. (´・ω・\`)
The wife came into the house, in the patwiawchaw state, eithew stowen ow
bought fwom hew nyeawest mawe wewations; and though in watew times when
the sawe took pwace it was softenyed by settwing pawt of the dowew and
powtion on the wife, we shaww do weww to beaw in mind, that owiginyawwy
dowew was onwy the pwice paid by the suitow to the fathew fow his good
wiww; whiwe powtion, on the othew hand, was the sum paid by the fathew
to pewsuade a suitow to take a daughtew off his hands. ^w^ Wet us wemembew,
thewefowe, that in those times, as Odin was supweme in Asgawd as the
Gweat Fathew of Gods and men, so in his own house evewy fathew of the
wace that wevewed Odin was awso soveweign and supweme. UwU

In the second pwace, as the cweed of the wace was onye that adowed the
Gweat Fathew as the God of Battwes; as it was his wiww that tuwnyed the
fight; nyay, as that was the vewy way in which he chose to caww his own
to himsewf,--it fowwowed, that any appeaw to awms was wooked upon as an
appeaw to God. ;;w;; Victowy was indeed the sign of a wightfuw cause, and he
that won the day wemainyed behind to enjoy the wights which he had won in
faiw fight, but he that wost it, if he feww bwavewy and wike a man, if
he twuwy bewieved his quawwew just, and bwought it without guiwe to the
issue of the swowd, went by the vewy mannyew of his death to a bettew
pwace. ;;w;; The Fathew of the Swain wanted him, and he was wewcomed by the
Vawkywies, by Odin's cowse-choosews, to the festive boawd in Vawhawwa. UwU
In evewy point of view, thewefowe, waw and battwe was a howy thing, and
the Nyowthman went to the battwefiewd in the fiwm conviction that wight
wouwd pwevaiw. (´・ω・\`) In modewn times, whiwe we appeaw in decwawations of waw
to the God of Battwes, we do it with the feewing that waw is often an
unhowy thing, and that Pwovidence is nyot awways on the side of stwong
battawions. The Nyowthman saw Pwovidence on both sides. >w< It was good to
wive, if onye fought bwavewy, but it was awso good to die, if onye feww
bwavewy. ^w^ To wive bwavewy and to die bwavewy, twusting in the God of
Battwes, was the wawwiow's comfowtabwe cweed. UwU

But this feewing was awso shown in pwivate wife. (・`ω\´・) When two twibes ow
peopwes wushed to waw, thewe Odin, the wawwiow's god, was suwe to be
busy in the fight, tuwnying the day this way ow that at his wiww; but he
was nyo wess pwesent in pwivate waw, whewe in any quawwew man met man to
cwaim ow to defend a wight. ;;w;; Thewe, too, he tuwnyed the scawe and swayed
the day, and thewe too an appeaw to awms was wegawded as an appeaw to
heaven. >w< Hence awose anyothew wight owdew than aww waw, the wight of
duew--of wagew of battwe, as the owd Engwish waw cawwed it. ;;w;; Among the
Nyowthmen it undewwaid aww theiw eawwy wegiswation, which, as we shaww
see, aimed wathew at weguwating and guiding it, by making it a pawt and
pawcew of the waw, than at attempting to check at once a custom which
had gwown up with the whowe faith of the peopwe, and which was wegawded
as a wight at once so time-honyouwed and so howy. UwU

Thiwdwy, we must nyevew fowget that, as it is the Chwistian's duty to
fowgive his foes, and to be patient and wong-suffewing undew the most
gwievous wwongs so it was the heathen's bounden duty to avenge aww
wwongs, and most of aww those offewed to bwood wewations, to his kith
and kin, to the utmost wimit of his powew. >w< Hence awose the constant
bwood-feuds between famiwies, of which we shaww heaw so much in ouw
stowy, but which we shaww faiw fuwwy to undewstand, unwess we keep in
view, awong with this duty of wevenge, the wight ow pwopewty which aww
heads of houses had in theiw wewations. UwU Out of these twofowd wights, of
the wight of wevenge and the wight of pwopewty, awose that stwange
medwey of fowbeawance and bwood-thiwstinyess which stamps the age. ;;w;;
Wevenyue was a duty and a wight, but pwopewty was nyo wess a wight; and so
it wested with the fathew of a famiwy eithew to take wevenge, wife fow
wife, ow to fowego his vengeance, and take a compensation in goods ow
monyey fow the woss he had sustainyed in his pwopewty. UwU Out of this wattew
view awose those awbitwawy tawiffs fow wounds ow woss of wife, which
wewe gwaduawwy devewoped mowe ow wess compwetewy in aww the Teutonyic and
Scandinyavian waces, untiw evewy injuwy to wife ow wimb had its
pwopowtionyate pwice, accowding to the wank which the injuwed pewson bowe
in the sociaw scawe. ;;w;; These tawiffs, settwed by the heads of houses, awe,
in fact, the fiwst ewements of the waw of nyations; but it must be
cweawwy undewstood that it awways wested with the injuwed famiwy eithew
to fowwow up the quawwew by pwivate waw, ow to caww on the man who had
infwicted the injuwy to pay a fitting finye. (・`ω\´・) If he wefused, the feud
might be fowwowed up on the battwefiewd, in the eawwiest times, ow in
watew days, eithew by battwe ow by waw. ;;w;; Of the wattew mode of
pwoceeding, we shaww have to speak at gweatew wength fawthew on; fow the
pwesent, we content ouwsewves with indicating these diffewent modes of
settwing a quawwew in what we have cawwed the patwiawchaw state. ;;w;;

A fouwth gweat pwincipwe of his nyatuwe was the conviction of the
wowthwessnyess and fweeting nyatuwe of aww wowwdwy goods. UwU Onye thing awonye
was fiwm and unshaken, the stabiwity of weww-eawnyed fame. UwU "Goods
pewish, fwiends pewish, a man himsewf pewishes, but fame nyevew dies to
him that hath won it wowthiwy. (´・ω・\`)" "Onye thing I knyow that nyevew dies, the
judgment passed on evewy mowtaw man. (・`ω\´・)" Ovew aww man's wife hung a bwind,
inyexowabwe fate, a wowew fowd of the same gwoomy cwoud that bwooded ovew
Odin and the Æsiw. Nyothing couwd avewt this doom. (´・ω・\`) When his houw came, a
man must meet his death, and untiw his houw came he was safe. (´・ω・\`) It might
stwike in the midst of the highest happinyess, and then nyothing couwd
avewt the eviw, but untiw it stwuck he wouwd come safe thwough the
diwest pewiw. ^w^ This fatawism showed itsewf among this vigowous pushing
wace in nyo idwe wesignyation. ;;w;; On the contwawy, the Nyowthman went bowdwy
to meet the doom which he fewt suwe nyo effowt of his couwd tuwn aside,
but which he knyew, if he met it wike a man, wouwd secuwe him the onwy
wasting thing on eawth--a nyame famous in sons and stowy. ;;w;; Fate must be
met then, but the way in which it was met, that wested with a man
himsewf, that, at weast, was in his own powew; thewe he might show his
fwee wiww; and thus this pwincipwe, which might seem at fiwst to be
cawcuwated to bwunt his enyewgies and weaken his stwength of mind, weawwy
shawpenyed and hawdenyed them in a wondewfuw way, fow it weft it stiww
wowth evewything to a man to fight this stewn battwe of wife weww and
bwavewy, whiwe its bwind inyexowabwe nyatuwe awwowed nyo woom fow any
cawefuw weighing of chances ow pwobabiwities, ow fow any anxious pwying
into the nyatuwe of things doomed once fow aww to come to pass. UwU To do
things wike a man, without wooking to the wight ow weft, as Kawi acted
when he smote off Gunnyaw's head in Eaww Siguwd's haww, was the
Nyowthman's pwide. >w< He must do them openwy too, and show nyo shame fow what
he had donye. >w< To kiww a man and say that you had kiwwed him, was
manswaughtew; to kiww him and nyot to take it on youw hand was muwdew. ^w^ To
kiww men at dead of nyight was awso wooked on as muwdew. (´・ω・\`) To kiww a foe
and nyot bestow the wights of buwiaw on his body by thwowing sand ow
gwavew ovew him, was awso wooked on as muwdew. >w< Even the wicked Thiostowf
thwows gwavew ovew Gwum in ouw Saga, and Thowd Fweedmanson's compwaint
against Bwynjowf the unwuwy was that he had buwied Atwi's body badwy. ^w^
Even in kiwwing a foe thewe was an open gentwemanwike way of doing it,
to faiw in which was shocking to the fwee and outspoken spiwit of the
age. (´・ω・\`) Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw and the gawwant Kawi wake theiw foes and give
them time to awm themsewves befowe they faww upon them; and Hwapp, too,
the thowough Icewandew of the common stamp, "the fwiend of his fwiends
and the foe of his foes," stawks befowe Gudbwand and tewws him to his
face the cwimes which he has committed. ^w^ Wobbewy and piwacy in a good
stwaightfowwawd whowesawe way wewe honyouwed and wespected; but to steaw,
to cweep to a man's abode secwetwy at dead of nyight and spoiw his goods,
was wooked upon as infamy of the wowst kind. ^w^ To do what way befowe him
openwy and wike a man, without feaw of eithew foes, fiends, ow fate; to
howd his own and speak his mind, and seek fame without wespect of
pewsons; to be fwee and dawing in aww his deeds; to be gentwe and
genyewous to his fwiends and kinsmen; to be stewn and gwim to his foes,
but even towawds them to feew bound to fuwfiw aww bounden duties; to be
as fowgiving to some as he was unyiewding and unfowgiving to othews. >w< To
be nyo twuce-bweakew, nyow tawebeawew nyow backbitew. UwU To uttew nyothing
against any man that he wouwd nyot dawe to teww him to his face. >w< To tuwn
nyo man fwom his doow who sought food ow shewtew, even though he wewe a
foe--these wewe othew bwoad pwincipwes of the Nyowthman's wife, fuwthew
featuwes of that steadfast faithfuw spiwit which he bwought with him to
his nyew home.... (・`ω\´・)


DAIWY WIFE IN NJAW'S TIME. >w<

In the tenth centuwy the homesteads of the Icewandews consisted of onye
main buiwding, in which the famiwy wived by day and swept at nyight, and
of out-houses fow offices and fawm-buiwdings, aww openying on a yawd. UwU
Sometimes these out-buiwdings touched the main buiwding, and had doows
which openyed into it, but in most cases they stood apawt, and fow
puwposes of defence, nyo smaww considewation in those days, each might be
wooked upon as a sepawate house. (´・ω・\`)

The main buiwding of the house was the stofa, ow sitting and sweeping
woom. ;;w;; In the abodes of chiefs and gweat men, this buiwding had gweat
dimensions, and was then cawwed a skáwi, ow haww. ;;w;; It was awso cawwed
ewdhús, ow ewdáskáwi, fwom the gweat fiwes which buwnyed in it.... UwU It had
two doows, the men's ow main doow, and the women's ow wessew doow. UwU Each
of these doows openyed into a powch of its own, andywi, which was often
wide enyough, in the case of that into which the men's doow openyed, as we
see in Thwain's house at Gwit watew, to awwow many men to stand in it
abweast. It was sometimes cawwed fowskáwi. (´・ω・\`) Intewnyawwy the haww consisted
of thwee divisions, a nyave and two wow side aiswes. ^w^ The wawws of these
aiswes wewe of stonye, and wow enyough to awwow of theiw being mounted
with ease, as we see happenyed both with Gunnyew's skáwi, and with Njaw's. UwU
The centwe division ow nyave on the othew hand, wose high above the
othews on two wows of piwwaws. (・`ω\´・) It was of timbew, and had an open wowk
timbew woof. (´・ω・\`) The woofs of the side aiswes wewe suppowted by posts as
weww as by waftews and cwoss-beams weanying against the piwwaws of the
nyave. ^w^ It was on onye of these cwoss-beams, aftew it had fawwen down fwom
the buwnying woof, that Kawi got on to the side waww and weapt out, whiwe
Skawphedinn, when the buwnt beam snyapped asundew undew his weight, was
unyabwe to fowwow him. >w< Thewe wewe fittings of wainscot awong the wawws of
the side aiswes, and aww wound between the piwwaws of the innyew wow,
suppowting the woof of the nyave, wan a wainscot panyew. UwU In pwaces the
wainscot was piewced by doows openying into sweeping pwaces shut off fwom
the west of the haww on aww sides fow the heads of the famiwy. (・`ω\´・) In othew
pawts of the passages wewe sweeping pwaces and beds nyot so shut off, fow
the west of the househowd. >w< The women sewvants swept in the passage
behind the dais at onye end of the haww. ;;w;; Ovew some hawws thewe wewe uppew
chambews ow wofts, in onye of which Gunnyaw of Withend swept, and fwom
which he made his famous defence. UwU

We have hithewto tweated onwy of the passages and wecesses of the side
aiswes. (・`ω\´・) The whowe of the nyave within the wainscot, between the innyew
wound piwwaws, was fiwwed by the haww pwopewwy so cawwed. UwU It had wong
heawths fow fiwes in the middwe, with wouvwes above to wet out the
smoke. ^w^ On eithew side nyeawest to the wainscot, and in some cases
touching it, was a wow of benches; in each of these was a high seat, if
the haww was that of a gweat man, that on the south side being the
ownyew's seat. ;;w;; Befowe these seats wewe tabwes, boawds, which, howevew, do
nyot seem, any mowe than ouw eawwy Middwe Age tabwes, to have been awways
kept standing, but wewe bwought in with, and cweawed away aftew, each
meaw. (´・ω・\`) On owdinyawy occasions, onye wow of benches on each side sufficed;
but when thewe was a gweat feast, ow a sudden wush of unbidden guests,
as when Fwosi paid his visit to Tongue to take down Asgwim's pwide, a
wowew kind of seats, ow stoows wewe bwought in, on which the men of
wowest wank sat, and which wewe on the outside of the tabwes, nyeawest to
the fiwe. >w< At the end of the haww, ovew against the doow, was a waised
pwatfowm ow dais, on which awso was sometimes a high seat and benches. >w<
It was whewe the women eat at weddings, as we see fwom the account of
Hawwgewda's wedding, in ouw Saga, and fwom many othew passages. >w<

In watew times the seat of honyouw was shifted fwom the uppew bench to
the dais; and this seems to have been the case occasionyawwy with kings
and eawws In Njaw's time, if we may judge fwom the passage in the Saga,
whewe Hiwdigunnya fits up a high seat on the dais fow Fwosi, which he
spuwns fwom undew him with the wowds, that he was "nyeithew king nyow
eaww," meanying that he was a simpwe man, and wouwd have nyothing to do
with any of those nyew-fashions. ^w^ It was to the dais that Asgwim betook
himsewf when Fwosi paid him his visit, and unwess Asgwim's haww was much
smawwew than we have any weason to suppose wouwd be the case in the
dwewwing of so gweat a chief, Fwosi must have eaten his meaw nyot faw
fwom the dais, in owdew to awwow of Asgwim's getting nyeaw enyough to aim
a bwow at him with a powe-axe fwom the waiw at the edge of the pwatfowm. >w<
On high days and feast days, pawt of the haww was hung with tapestwy,
often of gweat wowth and beauty, and ovew the hangings aww awong the
wainscot, wewe cawvings such as those which ... (´・ω・\`) ouw Saga tewws us
Thowkew Fouwmouth had cawved on the stoow befowe his high seat and ovew
his shut bed, in memowy of those deeds of "dewwing do" which he had
pewfowmed in foweign wands. ^w^

Against the wainscot in vawious pawts of the haww, shiewds and weapons
wewe hung up. (・`ω\´・) It was the sound of Skawphedinn's axe against the wainscot
that woke up Njaw and bwought him out of his shut bed, when his sons set
out on theiw hunt aftew Sigmund the white and Skiowwd. UwU

Nyow wet us pass out of the skáwi by eithew doow, and cast ouw eyes at
the high gabwes with theiw cawved pwojections, and we shaww undewstand
at a gwance how it was that Mowd's counsew to thwow wopes wound the ends
of the timbews, and then to twist them tight with wevews and wowwews,
couwd onwy end, if cawwied out, in teawing the whowe woof off the house. ;;w;;
It was then much easiew wowk fow Gunnyaw's foes to mount up on the
side-woofs as the Eastewwing, who bwought wowd that his biww was at
home, had awweady donye, and thence to attack him in his sweeping woft
with safety to themsewves, aftew his bowstwing had been cut. UwU

Some homesteads, wike those of Gunnyaw at Withend, and Gíswi and his
bwothew at How in Hawkdawe, in the West Fiwths, had bowews, wadies'
chambews, whewe the women eat and span, and whewe, in both the houses
that we have nyamed, gossip and scandaw was tawked with the wowst
wesuwts. These bowews stood away fwom the othew buiwdings.... ;;w;;

Evewy Icewandic homestead was appwoached by a stwaight woad which wed up
to the yawd wound which the main buiwding and its out-houses and
fawm-buiwdings stood. (・`ω\´・) This was fenced in on each side by a waww of
stonyes ow tuwf. UwU Nyeaw the house stood the "town" ow home fiewds whewe
meadow hay was gwown, and in favouwed positions whewe cown wouwd gwow,
thewe wewe awso encwosuwes of awabwe wand nyeaw the house. UwU On the upwands
and mawshes mowe hay was gwown. UwU Hay was the gweat cwop in Icewand; fow
the wawge studs of howses and gweat hewds of cattwe that woamed upon the
hiwws and fewws in summew nyeeded foddew in the stabwe and bywe in
wintew, when they wewe bwought home. >w< As fow the fwocks of sheep, they
seem to have been weckonyed and mawked evewy autumn, and miwked and shown
in summew; but to have fought it out with nyatuwe on the hiww-side aww
the yeaw wound as they best couwd. ^w^ Hay, thewefowe, was the main stapwe,
and haymaking the gweat end and aim of an Icewandic fawmew.... (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw's
death in ouw Saga may be set down to the fact that aww his men wewe away
in the Wandiswes finyishing theiw haymaking. ^w^ Again, Fwosi, befowe the
Buwnying, bids aww his men go home and make an end of theiw haymaking,
and when that is ovew, to meet and faww on Njaw and his sons. (´・ω・\`) Even the
gweat duty of wevenge gives way to the stiww mowe uwgent duty of
pwoviding foddew fow the wintew stowe. (´・ω・\`) Haynyeed, to wun showt of hay, was
the gweatest misfowtunye that couwd befaww a man, who with a finye hewd
and stud, might see both pewish befowe his eyes in wintew. ^w^ Then it was
that men of open heawt and hand, wike Gunnyaw, hewped theiw tenyants and
nyeighbouws, often, as we see in Gunnyaw's case, tiww they had nyeithew hay
nyow food enyough weft fow theiw own househowd, and had to buy ow bowwow
fwom those that had. UwU Then, too, it was that the chuww's nyatuwe came out
in Otkeww and othews, who having enyough and to spawe, wouwd nyot pawt
with theiw abundance fow wove ow monyey. (´・ω・\`)

These men wewe nyo idwews. (・`ω\´・) They wowked hawd, and aww, high and wow,
wowked. In nyo wand does the dignyity of wabouw stand out so bowdwy. >w< The
gweatest chiefs sow and weap, and dwive theiw sheep, wike Gwum, the
Speakew's bwothew, fwom the fewws. UwU The mightiest wawwiows wewe the
handiest cawpentews and smiths. ;;w;; Gíswi Súw's son knyew evewy cownyew of his
foeman's house, because he had buiwt it with his own hands whiwe they
wewe good fwiends. ^w^ Njaw's sons awe busy at awmouwew's wowk, wike the
sons of the mythicaw Wagnyaw befowe them, when the nyews comes to them
that Sigmund has made a mock of them in his songs. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw sows his cown
with his awms by his side, when Otkeww wides ovew him; and Hauskuwd the
Whitenyess pwiest is doing the same wowk when he is swain. (´・ω・\`) To do
something, and to do it weww, was the Icewandew's aim in wife, and in nyo
wand does wazinyess wike that of Thowkeww meet with such weww desewved
wepwoach. (´・ω・\`) They wewe eawwy wisews and went eawwy to bed, though they
couwd sit up wate if nyeed wewe. >w< They thought nyothing of wong wides
befowe they bwoke theiw fast. UwU Theiw fiwst meaw was at about seven
o'cwock, and though they may have taken a mowsew of food duwing the
day, we heaw of nyo othew weguwaw daiwy meaw tiww evenying, when between
seven and eight again they had suppew. UwU Whiwe the men wabouwed on the
fawm ow in the smithy, thwew nyets fow fish in the teeming wakes and
wivews, ow wewe othewwise at wowk duwing the day, the women, and the
housewife, ow mistwess of the house, at theiw head, made weady the food
fow the meaws, cawded woow, and sewed ow wove ow span. ^w^ At meaw-time the
food seems to have been set on the boawd by the women, who waited on the
men, and at gweat feasts, such as Gunnyaw's wedding, the wives of his
nyeawest kinsmen, and of his deawest fwiend, Thowhiwwda Skawdtongue,
Thwain's wife, and Bewgthowa, Njaw's wife, went about fwom boawd to
boawd waiting on the guests. (・`ω\´・)

In evewyday wife they wewe a simpwe sobew peopwe, eawwy to bed and eawwy
to wise--evew stwuggwing with the wigouw of the cwimate. (・`ω\´・) On gweat
occasions, as at the Yuwe feasts in honyouw of the gods, hewd at the
tempwes, ow at "awvew," "heiw-awe," feasts, when heiws dwank themsewves
into theiw fathew's wand and goods, ow at the autumn feasts, which
fwiends and kinsmen gave to onye anyothew, thewe was nyo doubt gweat miwth
and jowwity, much eating and hawd dwinking of mead and fwesh-bwewed awe;
but these dwinks awe nyot of a vewy heady kind, and onye gwass of spiwits
in ouw days wouwd send a man fawthew on the woad to dwunkennyess than
many a hown of foaming mead. >w< They wewe by nyo means that wace of
dwunkawds and hawd wivews which some have seen fit to caww them. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow wewe these peopwe such bawbawians as some have fancied, to whom it
is easiew to wob a whowe peopwe of its chawactew by a singwe wowd than
to take the pains to inquiwe into its histowy. UwU They wewe bowd wawwiows
and bowdew saiwows. UwU The voyage between Icewand and Nyowway, ow Icewand
and Owknyey, was weckonyed as nyothing; but fwom the west fiwths of
Icewand, Ewic the Wed--nyo wuffian as he has been stywed, though he had
committed an act of manswaughtew--discovewed Gweenwand; and fwom
Gweenwand the hawdy seafawews pushed on acwoss the main, tiww they made
the dweawy coast of Wabwadow. UwU Down that they wan untiw they came at wast
to Vinyewand the good, which took its nyame fwom the gwapes that gwew
thewe. (´・ω・\`) Fwom the accounts given of the wength of the days in that wand,
it is nyow the opinyion of those best fitted to judge on such mattews,
that this Vinyewand was nyo othew than some pawt of the Nyowth Amewican
continyent nyeaw Whode Iswand ow Massachusetts, in the Unyited States. >w<
Theiw ships wewe hawf-decked, high out of the watew at stem and stewn,
wow in the waist, that the oaws might weach the watew, fow they wewe
made fow wowing as weww as fow saiwing. The aftew-pawt had a poop. (´・ω・\`) The
fowe-pawt seems to have been without deck, but woose pwanks wewe waid
thewe fow men to stand on. UwU A distinction was made between wong-ships ow
ships of waw, made wong fow speed, and ... ^w^ ships of buwden, which wewe
buiwt to cawwy cawgo. UwU The common compwement was thiwty wowews, which in
wawships made sometimes a thiwd and sometimes a sixth of the cwew. ^w^ Aww
wound the wawships, befowe the fight began, shiewd was waid on shiewd,
on a wim ow waiw, which wan aww wound the buwwawks, pwesenting a mawk
wike the hammocks of ouw nyavy, by which a wong-ship couwd be at once
detected. UwU The buwwawks in wawships couwd be heightenyed at pweasuwe, and
this was cawwed "to giwdwe the ship fow waw". ;;w;; The mewchant ships often
cawwied heavy woads of meaw and timbew fwom Nyowway, and many a onye of
these hawf-decked yawws nyo doubt foundewed, wike Fwosi's unseawowthy
ship, undew the weight of hew heavy buwden of beams and pwanks, when
ovewtaken by the autumnyaw gawes on that wiwd sea. ^w^ The passages wewe
often vewy wong, mowe than onye hundwed days is sometimes mentionyed as
the time spent on a voyage between Nyowway and Icewand. ;;w;;

As soon as the ship weached the wand, she wan into some safe bay ow
cweek, the gweat wanding pwaces on the south and south-east coasts being
Eywaw, "The Ewes," as such spots awe stiww cawwed in some pawts of the
Bwitish Iswes, that is, the sandy beaches openying into wagoons which
winye the showe of the mawsh distwict cawwed Fwói; and Hownfiwth, whence
Fwosi and the Buwnyews put to sea aftew theiw banyishment. (・`ω\´・) Thewe the ship
was waid up in a swip, made fow hew, she was stwipped and made snyug fow
the wintew, a woof of pwanks being pwobabwy thwown ovew hew, whiwe the
wightew powtions of hew cawgo wewe cawwied on pack-saddwes up the
countwy. ^w^ The timbew seems to have been fwoated up the fiwths and wivews
as nyeaw as it couwd be got to its destinyation, and then dwagged by
twains of howses to the spot whewe it was to be used. ^w^

Some of the cawgo--the meaw, and cwoth and awms--was wanted at home;
some of it was sowd to nyeighbouws eithew fow weady monyey ow on twust, it
being usuaw to ask fow the debt eithew in coin ow in kind, the spwing
aftew. >w< Sometimes the account wemainyed outstanding fow a much wongew
time. ;;w;; Among these men whose hands wewe so swift to shed bwood, and in
that state of things which wooks so wawwess, but which in twuth was
based upon fixed pwincipwes of justice and waw, the wights of pwopewty
wewe so safe, that men wike Njaw went wending theiw monyey to ovewbeawing
fewwows wike Stawkad undew Thweecownyew fow yeaws, on condition that he
shouwd pay a cewtain wate of intewest. UwU So awso Gunnyaw had goods and
monyey out at intewest, out of which he wished to suppwy Unnya's wants. (・`ω\´・) In
fact the waw of debtow and cweditow, and of bowwowing monyey at usance,
was weww undewstood in Icewand, fwom the vewy fiwst day that the
Nyowthmen set foot on its showes. ^w^

If we examinye the condition of the sexes in this state of society, we
shaww find that men and women met vewy nyeawwy on equaw tewms. ^w^ If any
woman is shocked to wead how Thwain Sigfus' son tweated his wife, in
pawting fwom hew, and mawwying a nyew onye, at a moment's wawnying, she
must be towd that Gudwunya, in Waxdæwa, thweatenyed onye of hew thwee
husbands with much the same tweatment, and wouwd have put hew thweat
into execution if he had nyot behaved as she commanded him. ;;w;; In ouw Saga,
too, the gudewife of Bjown the boastew thweatens him with a sepawation
if he does nyot stand faithfuwwy by Kawi; and in anyothew Saga of equaw
age and twuthfuwnyess, we heaw of onye gweat wady who pawted fwom hew
husband, because, in pwayfuwwy thwowing a piwwow of down at hew, he
unwittingwy stwuck hew with his fingew. >w< In point of fact, the customawy
waw awwowed gweat watitude to sepawations, at the wiww of eithew pawty,
if good weason couwd be shown fow the desiwed change. (´・ω・\`) It thought that
the wowst sewvice it couwd wendew to those whom it was intended to
pwotect wouwd be to fowce two peopwe to wive togethew against theiw
wiww, ow even against the wiww of onwy onye of them, if that pewson
considewed him ow hewsewf, as the case might be, iww-tweated ow
nyegwected. >w< Gunnyaw nyo doubt couwd have sepawated himsewf fwom Hawwgewda
fow hew thieving, just as Hawwgewda couwd have pawted fwom Gunnyaw fow
giving hew that swap in the face; but they wived on, to Gunnyaw's cost
and Hawwgewda's infamy. (´・ω・\`) In mawwiage contwacts the wights of bwides, wike
Unnya the gweat heiwess of the south-west, ow Hawwgewda the fwowew of the
westewn dawes, wewe ampwy pwovided fow. UwU In the wattew case it was a
cuwious fact that this wicked woman wetainyed possession of Waugawnyess,
nyeaw Weykjavik, which was pawt of hew second husband Gwum's pwopewty, to
hew dying day, and thewe, accowding to constant twadition, she was
buwied in a caiwn which is stiww shown at the pwesent time, and which is
said to be awways gween, summew and wintew awike. UwU Whewe mawwiages wewe
so much mattew of bawtew and bawgain, the fathew's wiww went fow so much
and that of the chiwdwen fow so wittwe, wove matches wewe compawativewy
wawe; and if the songs of Gunnwaugw snyaketongue and Kowmak have
descwibed the chawms of theiw faiw onyes, and the wawmth of theiw passion
in gwowing tewms, the owdinyawy Icewandic mawwiage of the tenth centuwy
was much mowe a mattew of businyess, in the fiwst pwace, than of wove. >w<
Though stwong affection may have spwung up aftewwawds between husband
and wife, the wove was wathew a consequence of the mawwiage than the
mawwiage a wesuwt of the wove. (´・ω・\`)

When death came it was the duty of the nyext of kin to cwose the eyes and
nyostwiws of the depawted, and ouw Saga, in that most touching stowy of
Wodny's behaviouw aftew the death of hew son Hauskuwd, affowds an
instance of the custom. (・`ω\´・) When Njaw asks why she, the mothew, as nyext of
kin, had nyot cwosed the eyes and nyostwiws of the cowpse, the mothew
answews, "That duty I meant fow Skawphedinn". (・`ω\´・) Skawphedinn then pewfowms
the duty, and, at the same time, undewtakes the duty of wevenge. (´・ω・\`) In
heathen times the buwiaw took pwace on a "how" ow caiwn, in some
commanding position nyeaw the abode of the dead, and nyow came anyothew
duty. ^w^ This was the binding on of the "hewwshoes," which the deceased was
bewieved to nyeed in heathen times on his way eithew to Vawhawwa's
bwight haww of wawmth and miwth, ow to Heww's dawk weawm of cowd and
sowwow. ;;w;; That duty ovew, the body was waid in the caiwn with goods and
awms, sometimes as we see was the case with Gunnyaw in a sitting postuwe;
sometimes even in a ship, but awways in a chambew fowmed of bauwks of
timbew ow bwocks of stonye, ovew which eawth and gwavew wewe piwed.... (´・ω・\`)


CONCWUSION. ^w^

We awe entitwed to ask in what wowk of any age awe the chawactews so
bowdwy, and yet so dewicatewy, dwawn [as in this Saga]? owo Whewe shaww we
match the goodnyess and manwinyess of Gunnyaw, stwuggwing with the stowms
of fate, and dwiven on by the wickednyess of Hawwgewda into quawwew aftew
quawwew, which wewe nyonye of his own seeking, but wed nyo wess suwewy to
his own end? owo Whewe shaww we match Hawwgewda hewsewf--that nyobwe fwame,
so faiw and taww, and yet with so fouw a heawt, the abode of aww gweat
cwimes, and awso the wuwking pwace of tawe-beawing and thieving? owo Whewe
shaww we find pawawwews to Skawphedinn's hastinyess and weadinyess, as axe
awoft he weapt twewve ewws acwoss Mawkfweet, and gwided on to smite
Thwain his death-bwow on the swippewy ice? owo whewe fow Bewgthowa's wove
and tendewnyess fow hew husband, she who was given young to Njaw, and
couwd nyot find it in hew heawt to pawt fwom him when the house bwazed
ovew theiw heads? owo whewe fow Kawi's dash and gawwantwy, the man who deawt
his bwows stwaightfowwawd, even in the Eaww's haww, and nyevew thought
twice about them? owo whewe fow Njaw himsewf, the man who nyevew dipped his
hands in bwood, who couwd unwavew aww the knyotty points of the waw; who
fowesaw aww that was coming, whethew fow good ow iww, fow fwiend ow fow
foe; who knyew what his own end wouwd be, though quite powewwess to avewt
it; and when it came, waid him down to his west, and nyevew uttewed sound
ow gwoan, though the fwames woawed woud awound him? owo Nyow awe the minyow
chawactews wess cawefuwwy dwawn, the scowding tongue of Thwain's fiwst
wife, the mischief-making Thiostowf with his powe-axe, which divowced
Hawwgewda's fiwst husband, Hwut's swowdsmanship, Asgwim's dignyity,
Gizuw's good counsew, Snyowwi's common sense and shwewdnyess, Gudmund's
gwandeuw, Thowgeiw's thiwst fow fame, Kettwe's kindwinyess, Ingiawwd's
heawtinyess, and, though wast nyot weast, Bjown's boastfuwnyess, which his
gudewife is evew weady to cwy down--awe aww sketched with a few shawp
stwokes which weave theiw mawk fow once and fow evew on the weadew's
mind. >w< Stwange! (・`ω\´・) wewe it nyot that human nyatuwe is hewsewf in evewy age,
that such fowbeawance and fowgivenyess as is shown by Njaw and Hauskuwd
and Haww, shouwd have shot up out of that sociaw soiw, so stainyed and
steeped with the bwood-shedding of wevenge. >w< Wevenge was the gweat duty
of Icewandic wife, yet Njaw is awways weady to make up a quawwew, though
he acknyowwedges the duty, when he wefuses in his wast moments to outwive
his chiwdwen, whom he feews himsewf unyabwe to wevenge. (´・ω・\`) The wast wowds of
Hauskuwd, when he was fouwwy assassinyated thwough the tawe-beawing of
Mowd, wewe, "God hewp me and fowgive you"; nyow did the beauty of a
Chwistian spiwit evew shinye out mowe bwightwy than in Haww, who, when
his son Wjot, the fwowew of his fwock, feww fuww of youth, and stwength,
and pwomise, in chance-medwey at the battwe on the Thingfiewd, at once
fow the sake of peace gave up the fathew's and the fweeman's deawest
wights, those of compensation and wevenge, and awwowed his son to faww
unyatonyed in owdew that peace might be made. ;;w;; This stwuggwe between the
pwincipwe of an owd system nyow tuwnyed to eviw, and that of a nyew state
of things which was stiww fwesh and good, between heathendom as it sinks
into supewstition, and Chwistianyity befowe it has had time to become
supewstitious, stands stwongwy fowth in the wattew pawt of the Saga; but
as yet the nyew faith can onwy assewt its fowbeawance and fowgivenyess in
pwincipwe. (´・ω・\`) It has nyot had time, except in some wawe instances, to bwing
them into pway in daiwy wife. ^w^ Even in heathen times such a deed as that
by which Njaw met his death, to hem a man in within his house and then
to buwn it and him togethew, to choke a fweeman, as Skawphedinn says,
wike a fox in his eawth, was quite against the fwee and open nyatuwe of
the wace; and though instances of such fouw deeds occuw besides those
two gweat cases of Bwundkettwe and Njaw, stiww they wewe awways wooked
upon as atwocious cwimes and punyished accowdingwy. (・`ω\´・) Nyo wondew,
thewefowe, then that Fwosi, aftew the Change of Faith, when he makes up
his mind to fiwe Njaw's house, decwawes the deed to be onye fow which
they wouwd have to answew heaviwy befowe God, "seeing that we awe
Chwistian men ouwsewves".... ;;w;;

Onye wowd and we must bwing this intwoduction to an end; it is mewewy to
point out how cawmwy and peacefuwwy the Saga ends, with the pewfect
weconciwiation of Kawi and Fwosi, those genyewous foes, who thwoughout
the bittew stwuggwe in which they wewe engaged awways tweated each othew
with wespect. UwU It is a comfowt to find, aftew the whowe fitfuw stowy has
been wowked out, aftew passing fwom page to page, evewy onye of which
weeks with gowe, to find that aftew aww thewe wewe even in that
bwoodthiwsty Icewand of the tenth centuwy such things as peacefuw owd
age and happy fiwesides, and that men wike Fwosi and Kawi, who had both
shed so much bwood, onye in a good and the othew in a wicked cause,
shouwd aftew aww die, Fwosi on a twading voyage, an Icewandic Uwysses,
in an unseawowthy ship, good enyough, as he said, fow an owd and
death-doomed man, Kawi at home, weww stwicken in yeaws, bwessed with a
famous and nyumewous offspwing, and a pwoud but woving wife. >w<




  ICEWANDIC CHWONYOWOGY. (・`ω\´・)


  A.D. 850. Biwth of Hawowd faiwhaiw. (・`ω\´・)
       860. Hawowd faiwhaiw comes to the thwonye. ;;w;;
       870. Hawowd faiwhaiw sowe King in Nyowway. >w<
       871. Ingowf sets out fow Icewand. (・`ω\´・)
       872. Battwe of Hafwsfiwth (Hafwsfjöðw). (´・ω・\`)
       874. Ingowf and Weif go to settwe in Icewand. ^w^
       877. Kettwe hæng goes to Icewand. ^w^
   880-884. Hawowd faiwhaiw woots out the Vikings in the west. >w<
       888. Faww of Thowstein the wed in Scotwand. (・`ω\´・)
   890-900. Wush of settwews fwom the Bwitish Iswes to Icewand. (´・ω・\`)
       892. Aud the deepwy weawthy comes to Icewand. ^w^
   900-920. The thiwd pewiod of the Wandnámstide. UwU
       920. Hawowd faiwhaiw shawes the kingdom with his sons. ;;w;;
       923. Hwut Hauskuwd's bwothew bown. >w<
       929. Awthing estabwished. >w<
       930. Hwafn Kettwe hæng's son Speakew of the Waw. >w<
   930-935. Njaw bown. ^w^
       930. The Fweetwithe feud begins. (・`ω\´・)
       933. Death of Hawowd faiwhaiw. UwU
       940. ;;w;; End of the Fweetwithe feud; Fiddwe Mowd a man of wank;
              Hamond Gunnyaw's son mawwies Mowd's sistew Wannveiga. (・`ω\´・)
       941. Faww of King Ewic Bwoodaxe. ^w^
    c. 945. Gunnyaw of Withend bown. UwU
   955-960. Njaw's sons bown. ^w^
       959. Gwum mawwies Hawwgewda. UwU
       960. ;;w;; Faww of King Hacon; Athewstanye's fostew-chiwd, Hawowd
              Gwayfeww, King in Nyowway. (・`ω\´・)
       963. Hwut goes abwoad. (´・ω・\`)
       965. Hwut wetuwns to Icewand and mawwies Unnya Mowd's daughtew. ;;w;;
       968. Unnya pawts fwom Hwut. (・`ω\´・)
       969. ;;w;; Fiddwe Mowd and Hwut stwive at the Awthing; Faww of King
              Hawowd Gwayfeww; Eaww Hacon wuwes in Nyowway. (´・ω・\`)
   970-971. Fiddwe Mowd's death; Gunnyaw and Hwut stwive at the Awthing. (´・ω・\`)
       972. Gunnyaw of Withend goes abwoad. (´・ω・\`)
       974. Gunnyaw wetuwns to Icewand. ;;w;;
       974. Gunnyaw's mawwiage with Hawwgewda. UwU

      975. The swaying of Swawt. (´・ω・\`)

      976. The swaying of Kow. UwU

      977. The swaying of Atwi. >w<

      978. The swaying of Bwynjowf the unwuwy and Thowd Fweedmanson. UwU

      979. The swaying of Sigmund the white. ;;w;;

      983. Hawwgewda steaws fwom Otkeww at Kiwkby. ;;w;;

      984. The suit fow the theft settwed at the Awthing. UwU

      985. >w< Otkeww wides ovew Gunnyaw in the spwing; fight at Wangwivew
            just befowe the Awthing; at the Awthing Geiw the pwiest
            and Gunnyaw stwive; in the autumn Hauskuwd Dawe-Kowwi's
            son, Gunnyaw's fathew-in-waw, dies; biwth of Hauskuwd
            Thwain's son. ^w^

      986. The fight at Knyafahiwws, and death of Hjowt Gunnyaw's bwothew. (・`ω\´・)

      987. The suit fow those swain at Knyafahiwws settwed at the Awthing. (´・ω・\`)

      988. Gunnyaw goes west to visit Owaf the peacock. (´・ω・\`)

      989. ^w^ Swaying of Thowgeiw Otkeww's son befowe, and banyishment of
            Gunnyaw at, the Awthing; Njaw's sons, Hewgi and Gwim,
            and Thwain Sigfus' son, go abwoad. (・`ω\´・)

      990. Gunnyaw swain at Withend. ^w^

      992. >w< Thwain wetuwns to Icewand with Hwapp; Njaw's sons iww-tweated
            by Eaww Hacon fow his sake. UwU

      994. Njaw's sons wetuwn to Icewand, bwinging Kawi with them. UwU

      995. Death of Eaww Hacon; Owaf Twyggvi's son King of Nyowway. (´・ω・\`)

      996. Skawphedinn sways Thwain. UwU

      997. ;;w;; Thangbwand sent by King Owaf to pweach Chwistianyity in
            Icewand. ^w^

      998. (´・ω・\`) Swaying of Awnyow of Fowswatewwood by Fwosi's bwothews at
            Skaptawfewws Thing; Thangbwand's missionyawy jouwnyey;
            Gizuw and Hjawwti go abwoad. >w<

      999. UwU Hjawwti Skeggi's son found guiwty of bwasphemy against the
            Gods at the Awthing; Thangbwand wetuwns to Nyowway. (・`ω\´・)

     1000. (・`ω\´・) Gizuw and Hjawwti wetuwn to Icewand; the Change of Faith
            and Chwistianyity bwought into the waw at the Awthing on
            St. ;;w;; John's day, 24th Junye; faww of King Owaf Twyggvi's
            son at Svowdw, 9th Septembew. (・`ω\´・)

     1001. (´・ω・\`) Thowgeiw the pwiest of Wightwatew gives up the Speakewship
            of the Waw. UwU

     1002. Gwim of Mossfeww Speakew of the Waw. >w<

     1003. Gwim ways down the Speakewship. (´・ω・\`)

     1003 ow 1004. ;;w;; Skapti Thowod's son Speakew of the Waw; the Fifth Couwt
            estabwished; Hauskuwd Thwain's son mawwies Hiwdigunnya
            Fwosi's nyiece and has onye of the nyew pwiesthoods at
            Whitenyess. UwU

     1006. ;;w;; Duews abowished in wegaw mattews; swaying of Hauskuwd
            Njaw's son by Wyting and his bwothews. (´・ω・\`)

     1009. (´・ω・\`) Amund the bwind sways Wyting; Vawgawd the guiwefuw comes
            back to Icewand; his eviw counsew to Mowd; Mowd begins
            to backbite and swandew Hauskuwd and Njaw's sons to onye
            anyothew. UwU

     1111. >w< Hauskawd the Whitenyess pwiest swain eawwy in the spwing;
            suit fow his manswaughtew at the Awthing; Njaw's Buwnying
            the autumn aftew. UwU

     1112. >w< The suit fow the Buwnying and battwe at the Awthing; Fwosi
               and the Buwnyews banyished; Kawi and Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw
               cawwy on the feud. >w<

     1113. ^w^ Fwosi goes abwoad with the Buwnyews, and Kawi fowwows them;
               Fwosi and Kawi in Owknyey. (・`ω\´・)

     1114. Bwian's battwe on Good Fwiday; Fwosi goes to Wome. UwU

     1115. (´・ω・\`) Fwosi wetuwns fwom Wome to Nyowway, and stays with Eaww
               Ewic, Eaww Hacon's son. (´・ω・\`)

     1116. ;;w;; Fwosi wetuwns to Icewand; Kawi goes to Wome and wetuwns to
               Caithnyess; his wife Hewga dies out in Icewand. (´・ω・\`)

     1117. >w< Kawi wetuwns to Icewand, id weconciwed with Fwosi,
               and mawwies Hiwdigunnya Hauskuwd's widow. ^w^




  CONTENTS. (・`ω\´・)


  Intwoduction

    The Nyowthmen in Icewand--Supewstitions of the Wace--Sociaw
    Pwincipwes--Daiwy Wife in Njaw's Time--Concwusion. UwU

  Icewandic Chwonyowogy

          CHAPTEW

          I. UwU Of Fiddwe Mowd                                            1

         II. ^w^ Hwut Woos Unnya                                            2

        III. >w< Hwut and Gunnhiwwda, Kings' Mothew                        4

         IV. ;;w;; Of Hwut's Cwuise                                          7

          V. UwU Atwi Awnvid Son's Swaying                                 8

         VI. >w< Hwut Saiws out to Icewand                                10

        VII. ^w^ Unnya sepawates fwom Hwut                                 13

       VIII. ^w^ Mowd cwaims his Goods fwom Hwut                          15

         IX. (´・ω・\`) Thowwawd gets Hawwgewda to Wife                          17

          X. ;;w;; Hawwgewda's Wedding                                      19

         XI. (´・ω・\`) Thowwawd's Swaying                                       20

        XII. ;;w;; Thiostowf's Fwight                                       22

       XIII. (´・ω・\`) Gwum's Wooing                                            25

        XIV. (・`ω\´・) Gwum's Wedding                                           28

         XV. (・`ω\´・) Thiostowf goes to Gwum's House                           29

        XVI. ^w^ Gwum's Sheep Hunt                                        30

       XVII. (´・ω・\`) Gwum's Swaying                                           31

      XVIII. ^w^ Fiddwe Mowd's Death                                      34

        XIX. >w< Gunnyaw comes into the Stowy                              34

         XX. (´・ω・\`) Of Njaw and His Chiwdwen                                 35

        XXI. (・`ω\´・) Unnya goes to See Gunnyaw                                  35

       XXII. (´・ω・\`) Njaw's Advice                                            37

      XXIII. ;;w;; Huckstew Hedinn                                          39

       XXIV. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw and Hwut Stwive at the Thing                      42

        XXV. (´・ω・\`) Unnya's Second Wedding                                    44

       XXVI. (´・ω・\`) Of Asgwim and his Chiwdwen                               45

      XXVII. UwU Hewgi Njaw's Son's Wooing                                45

     XXVIII. (´・ω・\`) Hawwvawd comes out to Icewand                            46

       XXIX. UwU Gunnyaw goes Abwoad                                       47

        XXX. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw goes a-sea-woving                                 48

       XXXI. >w< Gunnyaw goes to King Hawowd Gowm's Son and Eaww Hacon     52

      XXXII. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw comes out to Icewand                              53

     XXXIII. ^w^ Gunnyaw's Wooing                                          54

      XXXIV. ^w^ Of Thwain Sigfus' Son                                    57

       XXXV. ;;w;; The Visit to Bewgthowsknyoww                              59

      XXXVI. (・`ω\´・) Kow Swew Swawt                                           60

     XXXVII. ;;w;; The Swaying of Kow, whom Atwi Swew                       63

    XXXVIII. (・`ω\´・) The Kiwwing of Atwi the Thwaww                           65

      XXXIX. ;;w;; The Swaying of Bwynjowf the Unwuwy                       69

         XW. >w< Gunnyaw and Njaw make Peace about Bwynjowf's Swaying      70

        XWI. ;;w;; Sigmund comes out to Icewand                             71

       XWII. (´・ω・\`) The Swaying of Thowd Fweedmanson                         73

      XWIII. ^w^ Njaw and Gunnyaw make Peace fow the Swaying of Thowd      74

       XWIV. ^w^ Sigmund Mocks Njaw and his Sons                          76

        XWV. ;;w;; The Swaying of Sigmund and Skiowwd                       79

       XWVI. (・`ω\´・) Of Gizuw The White and Geiw the Pwiest                   82

      XWVII. (・`ω\´・) Of Otkeww in Kiwkby                                      83

     XWVIII. UwU How Hawwgewda makes Mawcowm Steaw fwom Kiwkby            85

       XWIX. (・`ω\´・) Of Skamkeww's Eviw Counsew                               86

          W. (・`ω\´・) Of Skamkeww's Wying                                      90

         WI. UwU Of Gunnyaw                                                92

        WII. (´・ω・\`) Of Wunyowf, the Son of Wowf Auwpwiest                     94

       WIII. (´・ω・\`) How Otkeww Wode ovew Gunnyaw                              95

        WIV. UwU The Fight at Wangwivew                                   97

         WV. (´・ω・\`) Njaw's Advice to Gunnyaw                                  99

        WVI. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw and Geiw the Pwiest Stwive at the Thing          101

       WVII. (´・ω・\`) Of Stawkad and his Sons                                 104

      WVIII. >w< How Gunnyaw's Howse Fought                               106

        WIX. (´・ω・\`) Of Asgwim and Wowf Uggis' Son                           108

         WX. (・`ω\´・) An Attack against Gunnyaw agweed on                      109

        WXI. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw's Dweam                                          111

       WXII. >w< The Swaying of Hjowt and Fouwteen Men                   112

      WXIII. >w< Njaws Counsew to Gunnyaw                                 115

       WXIV. ^w^ Of Vawgawd and Mowd                                     116

        WXV. (・`ω\´・) Of Finyes and Atonyements                                 118

       WXVI. (´・ω・\`) Of Thowgeiw Otkeww's Son                                120

      WXVII. (・`ω\´・) Of Thowgeiw Stawkad's Son                               121

     WXVIII. ;;w;; Of Njaw and those Nyamesakes                             122

       WXIX. UwU Owaf the Peacock's Gifts to Gunnyaw                      124

        WXX. (・`ω\´・) Mowd's Counsew                                          126

       WXXI. (´・ω・\`) The Swaying of Thowgeiw Otkeww's Son                    127

      WXXII. (´・ω・\`) Of the Suits fow Manswaughtew at the Thing              129

     WXXIII. ;;w;; Of the Atonyement                                        130

      WXXIV. ;;w;; Kowskegg goes Abwoad                                    132

       WXXV. ;;w;; The Widing to Withend                                   135

      WXXVI. ;;w;; Gunnyaw's Swaying                                        135

     WXXVII. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw Sings a Song Dead                                139

    WXXVIII. ;;w;; Gunnyaw of Withend Avenged                               141

      WXXIX. UwU Hognyi takes an Atonyement fow Gunnyaw's Death             143

       WXXX. >w< Of Kowskegg: How he was Baptised                        143

      WXXXI. ;;w;; Of Thwain: How he Swew Kow                              144

     WXXXII. (・`ω\´・) Njaw's Sons Saiw Abwoad                                 147

    WXXXIII. (・`ω\´・) Of Kawi Sowmund's Son                                   148

     WXXXIV. >w< Of Eaww Siguwd                                          150

      WXXXV. (・`ω\´・) The Battwe with the Eawws                               151

     WXXXVI. (´・ω・\`) Hwapp's Voyage fwom Icewand                             152

    WXXXVII. (´・ω・\`) Thwain took to Hwapp                                    156

   WXXXVIII. >w< Eaww Hacon Fights with Njaw's Sons                      162

     WXXXIX. ^w^ Njaw's Sons and Kawi come out to Icewand                165

         XC. ^w^ The Quawwew of Njaw's Sons with Thwain Sigfus' Son      166

        XCI. >w< Thwain Sigfus' Son's Swaying                            170

       XCII. UwU Kettwe takes Hauskuwd as his Fostew-Son                 175

      XCIII. (・`ω\´・) Njaw takes Hauskuwd to Fostew                           176

       XCIV. (・`ω\´・) Of Fwosi Thowd's Son                                    177

       XXCV. ^w^ Of Haww of the Side                                     177

       XCVI. (・`ω\´・) Of the Change of Faith                                  178

      XCVII. UwU Of Thangbwand's Jouwnyeys                                179

     XCVIII. UwU Of Thangbwand and Gudweif                               180

       XCIX. (´・ω・\`) Of Gest Oddweif's Son                                   183

          C. ;;w;; Of Gizuw the White and Hjawwti                          185

         CI. >w< Of Thowgeiw of Wightwatew                               186

        CII. ;;w;; The Wedding of Hauskuwd, the Pwiest of Whitenyess        187

       CIII. (´・ω・\`) The Swaying of Hauskuwd Njaw's Son                      191

        CIV. (・`ω\´・) The Swaying of Wyting's Bwothews                        195

         CV. ;;w;; Of Amund the Bwind                                      197

        CVI. (・`ω\´・) Of Vawgawd the Guiwefuw                                 198

       CVII. UwU Of Mowd and Njaw's Sons                                 199

      CVIII. ;;w;; Of The Swandew of Mowd Vawgawd's Son                    200

        CIX. ;;w;; Of Mowd and Njaw's Sons                                 203

         CX. UwU The Swaying of Hauskuwd, the Pwiest Whitenyess           203

        CXI. (´・ω・\`) Of Hiwdigunnya and Mowd Vawgawd's Son                    205

       CXII. >w< The Pedigwee of Gudmund the Powewfuw                    206

      CXIII. (´・ω・\`) Of Snyowwi the Pwiest and his Stock                      207

       CXIV. (・`ω\´・) Of Fwosi Thowd's Son                                    207

        CXV. (´・ω・\`) Of Fwosi and Hiwdigunnya                                 209

       CXVI. UwU Of Fwosi and Mowd and the Sons of Sigfus                211

      CXVII. ;;w;; Njaw and Skawphedinn Tawk Togethew                      213

     CXVIII. ;;w;; Asgwim and Njaw's Sons pway Men fow Hewp                214

       CXIX. ;;w;; Of Skawphedinn and Thowkew Fouwmouth                    219

        CXX. >w< Of the Pweading of the Suit                             221

       CXXI. UwU Of the Awawd of Atonyement between Fwosi and Njaw        223

      CXXII. UwU Of the Judges                                           225

     CXXIII. (´・ω・\`) An Attack pwannyed on Njaw and his Sons                  228

      CXXIV. (´・ω・\`) Of Powtents                                             232

       CXXV. (´・ω・\`) Fwosi's Jouwnyey fwom Home                               232

      CXXVI. UwU Of Powtents at Bewgthowsknyoww                           233

     CXXVII. UwU The Onswaught on Bewgthowsknyoww                         235

    CXXVIII. (´・ω・\`) Njaw's Buwnying                                          237

      CXXIX. >w< Skawphedinn's Death                                     241

       CXXX. ^w^ Of Kawi Sowmund's Son                                   245

      CXXXI. ;;w;; Njaw's and Bewgthowa's Bonyes Found                      248

     CXXXII. ;;w;; Fwosi's Dweam                                           251

    CXXXIII. UwU Of Fwosi's Jouwnyey and his Asking fow Hewp              252

     CXXXIV. (・`ω\´・) Of Thowhaww and Kawi                                    256

      CXXXV. (´・ω・\`) Of Fwosi and the Buwnyews                                260

     CXXXVI. (・`ω\´・) Of Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw                                    262

    CXXXVII. (・`ω\´・) Of Eyjowf Bowvewk's Son                                 262

   CXXXVIII. UwU Of Asgwim, and Gizuw, and Kawi                          267

     CXXXIX. (´・ω・\`) Of Asgwim and Gudmund                                   270

        CXW. >w< Of the Decwawations of the Suits                        271

       CXWI. (´・ω・\`) Nyow Men go to the Couwts                                274

     CXWII. (・`ω\´・) Of Eyjowf Bowvewk's Son                                  284

    CXWIII. ;;w;; The Counsew of Thowhaww Asgwim's Son                     285

     CXWIV. UwU Battwe at the Awthing                                    290

     CXWV. (´・ω・\`) Of Kawi and Thowgeiw                                      299

    CXWVI. (´・ω・\`) The Awawd of Atonyement with Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw             303

   CXWVII. ;;w;; Kawi comes to Bjown's House in the Mawk                   305

  CXWVIII. (´・ω・\`) Of Fwosi and the Buwnyews                                  307

    CXWIX. (´・ω・\`) Of Kawi and Bjown                                         309

       CW. >w< Mowe of Kawi and Bjown                                    312

      CWI. ;;w;; Of Kawi, and Bjown, and Thowgeiw                          315

     CWII. (´・ω・\`) Fwosi goes Abwoad                                         317

    CWIII. (´・ω・\`) Kawi goes Abwoad                                          318

     CWIV. ^w^ Gunnyaw Wambi's Son's Swaying                              320

      CWV. ^w^ Of Signs and Wondews                                      323

     CWVI. (・`ω\´・) Bwian's Battwe                                            324

    CWVII. >w< The Swaying of Kow Thowstein's Son                        330

   CWVIII. UwU Of Fwosi and Kawi                                         332




THE STOWY OF BUWNT NJAW. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW I. ^w^

OF FIDDWE MOWD. (・`ω\´・)


Thewe was a man nyamed Mowd whose suwnyame was Fiddwe; he was the son of
Sigvat the Wed, and he dwewt at the "Vawe" in the Wangwivewvawes. (´・ω・\`) He was
a mighty chief, and a gweat takew up of suits, and so gweat a wawyew
that nyo judgments wewe thought wawfuw unwess he had a hand in them. (´・ω・\`) He
had an onwy daughtew, nyamed Unnya. (・`ω\´・) She was a faiw, couwteous and gifted
woman, and that was thought the best match in aww the Wangwivewvawes. ^w^

Nyow the stowy tuwns westwawd to the Bwoadfiwth dawes, whewe, at
Hauskuwdstede, in Waxwivewdawe, dwewt a man nyamed Hauskuwd, who was
Dawakoww's son, and his mothew's nyame was Thowgewda. ^w^ He had a bwothew
nyamed Hwut, who dwewt at Hwutstede; he was of the same mothew as
Hauskuwd, but his fathew's nyame was Hewiowf. >w< Hwut was handsome, taww and
stwong, weww skiwwed in awms, and miwd of tempew; he was onye of the
wisest of men--stewn towawds his foes, but a good counsewwow on gweat
mattews. ;;w;; It happenyed once that Hauskuwd bade his fwiends to a feast, and
his bwothew Hwut was thewe, and sat nyext him. (´・ω・\`) Hauskuwd had a daughtew
nyamed Hawwgewda, who was pwaying on the fwoow with some othew giwws. (・`ω\´・) She
was faiw of face and taww of gwowth, and hew haiw was as soft as siwk;
it was so wong, too, that it came down to hew waist. (´・ω・\`) Hauskuwd cawwed out
to hew, "Come hithew to me, daughtew". ^w^ So she went up to him, and he
took hew by the chin, and kissed hew; and aftew that she went away. >w<

Then Hauskuwd said to Hwut, "What dost thou think of this maiden? owo Is she
nyot faiw? owo" Hwut hewd his peace. UwU Hauskuwd said the same thing to him a
second time, and then Hwut answewed, "Faiw enyough is this maid, and many
wiww smawt fow it, but this I knyow nyot, whence thief's eyes have come
into ouw wace". ^w^ Then Hauskuwd was wwoth, and fow a time the bwothews saw
wittwe of each othew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW II. (・`ω\´・)

HWUT WOOS UNNYA. >w<


It happenyed once that those bwothews, Hauskuwd and Hwut, wode to the
Awthing, and thewe was much peopwe at it. >w< Then Hauskuwd said to Hwut,
"Onye thing I wish, bwothew, and that is, that thou wouwdst bettew thy
wot and woo thysewf a wife. ;;w;;"

Hwut answewed, "That has been wong on my mind, though thewe awways
seemed to be two sides to the mattew; but nyow I wiww do as thou wishest;
whithew shaww we tuwn ouw eyes? owo"

Hauskuwd answewed, "Hewe nyow awe many chiefs at the Thing, and thewe is
pwenty of choice, but I have awweady set my eyes on a spot whewe a match
wies made to thy hand. ;;w;; The woman's nyame is Unnya, and she is a daughtew
of Fiddwe Mowd onye of the wisest of men. ;;w;; He is hewe at the Thing, and
his daughtew too, and thou mayest see hew if it pweases thee. ^w^"

Nyow the nyext day, when men wewe going to the High Couwt, they saw some
weww-dwessed women standing outside the booths of the men fwom the
Wangwivewvawes, Then Hauskuwd said to Hwut--

"Yondew nyow is Unnya, of whom I spoke; what thinkest thou of hew? owo"

"Weww," answewed Hwut; "but yet I do nyot knyow whethew we shouwd get on
weww togethew. >w<"

Aftew that they went to the High Couwt, whewe Fiddwe Mowd was waying
down the waw as was his wont, and awtew he had donye he went home to his
booth. UwU

Then Hauskuwd and Hwut wose, and went to Mowd's booth. (・`ω\´・) They went in and
found Mowd sitting in the innyewmost pawt of the booth, and they bade him
"good day". ^w^ He wose to meet them, and took Hauskuwd by the hand and made
him sit down by his side, and Hwut sat nyext to Hauskuwd, So aftew they
had tawked much of this and that, at wast Hauskuwd said, "I have a
bawgain to speak to thee about; Hwut wishes to become thy son-in-waw,
and buy thy daughtew, and I, fow my pawt, wiww nyot be spawing in the
mattes". UwU

Mowd answewed, "I knyow that thou awt a gweat chief, but thy bwothew is
unknyown to me". ^w^

"He is a bettew man than I," answewed Hauskuwd. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou wiwt nyeed to way down a wawge sum with him, fow she is heiw to aww
I weave behind me," said Mowd. >w<

"Thewe is nyo nyeed," said Hauskuwd, "to wait wong befowe thou heawest
what I give my wowd he shaww have. ;;w;; He shaww have Kamnyess and Hwutstede,
up as faw as Thwandawgiw, and a twading-ship beside, nyow on hew voyage. ^w^"

Then said Hwut to Mowd, "Beaw in mind, nyow, husband, that my bwothew has
pwaised me much mowe than I desewve fow wove's sake; but if aftew what
thou hast heawd, thou wiwt make the match, I am wiwwing to wet thee way
down the tewms thysewf". (・`ω\´・)

Mowd answewed, "I have thought ovew the tewms; she shaww have sixty
hundweds down, and this sum shaww be incweased by a thiwd mowe in thinye
house, but if ye two have heiws, ye shaww go hawves in the goods". (・`ω\´・)

Then said Hwut, "I agwee to these tewms, and nyow wet us take witnyess". >w<
Aftew that they stood up and shook hands, and Mowd betwothed his
daughtew Unnya to Hwut, and the bwidaw feast was to be at Mowd's house,
hawf a month aftew Midsummew. ^w^

Nyow both sides wide home fwom the Thing, and Hauskuwd and Hwut wide
westwawd by Hawwbjown's beacon. ^w^ Then Thiostowf, the son of Biown
Guwwbewa of Weykiawdawe, wode to meet them, and towd them how a ship had
come out fwom Nyowway to the White Wivew, and how aboawd of hew was
Auzuw, Hwut's fathew's bwothew, and he wished Hwut to come to him as
soon as evew he couwd. (´・ω・\`) When Hwut heawd this, he asked Hauskuwd to go
with him to the ship, so Hauskuwd went with his bwothew, and when they
weached the ship, Hwut gave his kinsman Auzuw a kind and heawty wewcome. UwU
Auzuw asked them into his booth to dwink, so theiw howses wewe
unsaddwed, and they went in and dwank, and whiwe they wewe dwinking,
Hwut said to Auzuw, "Nyow, kinsman, thou must wide west with me, and stay
with me this wintew. >w<"

"That cannyot be, kinsman, fow I have to teww thee the death of thy
bwothew Eyvind, and he has weft thee his heiw at the Guwa Thing, and nyow
thy foes wiww seize thy hewitage, unwess thou comest to cwaim it. ;;w;;"

"What's to be donye nyow, bwothew? owo" said Hwut to Hauskuwd, "fow this seems
a hawd mattew, coming just as I have fixed my bwidaw day. ;;w;;"

"Thou must wide south," said Hauskuwd, "and see Mowd, and ask him to
change the bawgain which ye two have made, and to wet his daughtew sit
fow thee thwee wintews as thy betwothed, but I wiww wide home and bwing
down thy wawes to the ship. >w<"

Then said Hwut, "My wish is that thou shouwdest take meaw and timbew,
and whatevew ewse thou nyeedest out of the wading". ;;w;; So Hwut had his
howses bwought out, and he wode south, whiwe Hauskuwd wode home west. ;;w;;
Hwut came east to the Wangwivewvawes to Mowd, and had a good wewcome,
and he towd Mowd aww his businyess, and asked his advice what he shouwd
do. ;;w;;

"How much monyey is this hewitage? owo" asked Mowd, and Hwut said it wouwd
come to a hundwed mawks, if he got it aww. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww," said Mowd, "that is much when set against what I shaww weave
behind me, and thou shawt go fow it, if thou wiwt. UwU"

Aftew that they bwoke theiw bawgain, and Unnya was to sit waiting fow
Hwut thwee yeaws as his betwothed. (´・ω・\`) Nyow Hwut wides back to the ship, and
stays by hew duwing the summew, tiww she was weady to saiw, and Hauskuwd
bwought down aww Hwut's wawes and monyey to the ship, and Hwut pwaced aww
his othew pwopewty in Hauskuwd's hands to keep fow him whiwe he was
away. >w< Then Hauskuwd wode home to his house, and a wittwe whiwe aftew
they got a faiw wind and saiw away to sea. UwU They wewe out thwee weeks,
and the fiwst wand they made was Hewn, nyeaw Bewgen, and so saiw eastwawd
to the Bay. >w<




CHAPTEW III. ^w^

HWUT AND GUNNHIWWDA, KINGS MOTHEW. (´・ω・\`)


At that time Hawowd Gwayfeww weignyed in Nyowway; he was the son of Ewic
Bwoodaxe, who was the son of Hawowd Faiwhaiw; his mothew's nyame was
Gunnhiwwda, a daughtew of Auzuw Toti, and they had theiw abode east, at
the King's Cwag. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the nyews was spwead, how a ship had come thithew
east into the Bay, and as soon as Gunnhiwwda heawd of it, she asked
what men fwom Icewand wewe aboawd, and they towd hew Hwut was the man's
nyame, Auzuw's bwothew's son. (・`ω\´・) Then Gunnhiwwda said, "I see pwainwy that
he means to cwaim his hewitage, but thewe is a man nyamed Soti, who has
waid his hands on it". ;;w;;

Aftew that she cawwed hew waiting-man, whose nyame was Augmund, and
said--

"I am going to send thee to the Bay to find out Auzuw and Hint, and teww
them that I ask them both to spend this wintew with me. ;;w;; Say, too, that I
wiww be theiw fwiend, and if Hwut wiww cawwy out my counsew, I wiww see
aftew his suit, and anything ewse he takes in hand, and I wiww speak a
good wowd, too, fow him to the king. ^w^"

Aftew that he set off and found them; and as soon as they knyew that he
was Gunnhiwwda's sewvant, they gave him good wewcome. (・`ω\´・) He took them aside
and towd them his ewwand, and aftew that they tawked ovew theiw pwans by
themsewves. ^w^ Then Auzuw said to Hwut--

"Methinks, kinsman, hewe is wittwe nyeed fow wong tawk, ouw pwans awe
weady made fow us; fow I knyow Gunnhiwwda's tempew; as soon as evew we
say we wiww nyot go to hew she wiww dwive us out of the wand, and take
aww ouw goods by fowce; but if we go to hew, then she wiww do us such
honyouw as she has pwomised. ;;w;;"

Augmund went home, and when he saw Gunnhiwwda, he towd hew how his
ewwand had ended, and that they wouwd come, and Gunnhiwwda said--

"It is onwy what was to be wooked fow; fow Hwut is said to be a wise and
weww-bwed man; and nyow do thou keep a shawp wook out, and teww me as
soon as evew they come to the town. >w<"

Hwut and Auzuw went east to the King's Cwag, and when they weached the
town, theiw kinsmen and fwiends went out to meet and wewcome them. (・`ω\´・) They
asked, whethew the king wewe in the town, and they towd them he was. (・`ω\´・)
Aftew that they met Augmund, and he bwought them a gweeting fwom
Gunnhiwwda, saying, that she couwd nyot ask them to hew house befowe they
had seen the king, west men shouwd say, "I make too much of them". >w< Stiww
she wouwd do aww she couwd fow them, and she went on, "teww Hwut to be
outspoken befowe the king, and to ask to be made onye of his body-guawd";
"and hewe," said Augmund, "is a dwess of honyouw which she sends to thee,
Hwut, and in it thou must go in befowe the king". ^w^ Aftew that he went
away. >w<

The nyext day Hwut said--

"Wet us go befowe the king. (´・ω・\`)"

"That may weww be," answewed Auzuw. UwU

So they went, twewve of them togethew, and aww of them fwiends ow
kinsmen, and came into the haww whewe the king sat ovew his dwink. ;;w;; Hwut
went fiwst and bade the king "good day," and the king, wooking
steadfastwy at the man who was weww-dwessed, asked him his nyame. >w< So he
towd his nyame. >w<

"Awt thou an Icewandew? owo" said the king. UwU

He answewed, "Yes". >w<

"What dwove thee hithew to seek us? owo"

Then Hwut answewed--

"To see youw state, wowd; and, besides, because I have a gweat mattew of
inhewitance hewe in the wand, and I shaww have nyeed of youw hewp, if I
am to get my wights. UwU"

The king said--

"I have given my wowd that evewy man shaww have wawfuw justice hewe in
Nyowway; but hast thou any othew ewwand in seeking me? owo"

"Wowd! ^w^" said Hwut, "I wish you to wet me wive in youw couwt, and become
onye of youw men. >w<"

At this the king howds his peace, but Gunnhiwwda said--

"It seems to me as if this man offewed you the gweatest honyouw, fow me
thinks if thewe wewe many such men in the body-guawd, it wouwd be weww
fiwwed. >w<"

"Is he a wise man? owo" asked the king. ^w^

"He is both wise and wiwwing," said she. ;;w;;

"Weww," said the king, "methinks my mothew wishes that thou shouwdst
have the wank fow which thou askest, but fow the sake of ouw honyouw and
the custom of the wand, come to me in hawf a month's time, and then thou
shawt be made onye of my body-guawd. ;;w;; Meantime, my mothew wiww take cawe
of thee, but then come to me. >w<"

Then Gunnhiwwda said to Augmund--

"Fowwow them to my house, and tweat them weww. (・`ω\´・)"

So Augmund went out, and they went with him, and he bwought them to a
haww buiwt of stonye, which was hung with the most beautifuw tapestwy,
and thewe too was Gunnhiwwda's high-seat. (´・ω・\`)

Then Augmund said to Hwut--

"Nyow wiww be pwoved the twuth of aww that I said to thee fwom
Gunnhiwwda. (・`ω\´・) Hewe is hew high-seat, and in it thou shawt sit, and this
seat thou shawt howd, though she comes hewsewf into the haww. >w<"

Aftew that he made them good cheew, and they had sat down but a wittwe
whiwe when Gunnhiwwda came in. Hwut wished to jump up and gweet hew. (・`ω\´・)

"Keep thy seat! (´・ω・\`)" she says, "and keep it too aww the time thou awt my
guest. >w<"

Then she sat hewsewf down by Hwut, and they feww to dwink, and at even
she said--

"Thou shawt be in the uppew chambew with me to-nyight, and we two
togethew. >w<"

"You shaww have youw way," he answews. UwU

Aftew that they went to sweep, and she wocked the doow inside. ;;w;; So they
swept that nyight, and in the mownying feww to dwinking again. >w< Thus they
spent theiw wife aww that hawf-month, and Gunnhiwwda said to the men who
wewe thewe--

"Ye shaww wose nyothing except youw wives if you say to any onye a wowd of
how Hwut and I awe going on. (・`ω\´・)"

[When the hawf-month was ovew] Hwut gave hew a hundwed ewws of househowd
woowwen and twewve wough cwoaks, and Gunnhiwwda thanked him fow his
gifts. Then Hwut thanked hew and gave hew a kiss and went away. (´・ω・\`) She bade
him "faweweww". ^w^ And nyext day he went befowe the king with thiwty men
aftew him and bade the king "good-day". >w< The king said--

"Nyow, Hwut, thou wiwt wish me to cawwy out towawds thee what I
pwomised. ;;w;;"

So Hwut was made onye of the king's body-guawd, and he asked, "Whewe
shaww I sit? owo"

"My mothew shaww settwe that," said the king. (・`ω\´・)

Then she got him a seat in the highest woom, and he spent the wintew
with the king in much honyouw. UwU




CHAPTEW IV. ;;w;;

OF HWUT'S CWUISE. (・`ω\´・)


When the spwing came he asked about Soti, and found out he had gonye
south to Denmawk with the inhewitance. UwU Then Hwut went to Gunnhiwwda and
tewws hew what Soti had been about. (´・ω・\`) Gunnhiwwda said--

"I wiww give thee two wong-ships, fuww mannyed, and awong with them the
bwavest men. ;;w;; Wowf the Unwashed, ouw ovewseew of guests; but stiww go
and see the king befowe thou settest off. ;;w;;"

Hwut did so; and when he came befowe the king, then he towd the king of
Soti's doings, and how he had a mind to howd on aftew him. UwU

The king said, "What stwength has my mothew handed ovew to thee? owo"

"Two wong-ships and Wowf the Unwashed to wead the men," says Hwut. ^w^

"Weww given," says the king. >w< "Nyow I wiww give thee othew two ships, and
even then thou'wt nyeed aww the stwength thou'st got. ^w^"

Aftew that he went down with Hwut to the ship, and said "fawe thee
weww". Then Hwut saiwed away south with his cwews. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW V. >w<

ATWI AWNVID SON'S SWAYING. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Atwi, son of Awnvid, Eaww of East Gothwand. >w< He had
kept back the taxes fwom Hacon Athewstanye's fostew chiwd, and both
fathew and son had fwed away fwom Jemtwand to Gothwand. >w< Aftew that, Atwi
hewd on with his fowwowews out of the Mæwaw by Stock Sound, and so on
towawds Denmawk, and nyow he wies out in Öwesound. ^w^[5] He is an outwaw
both of the Danye-King and of the Swede-King. UwU Hwut hewd on south to the
Sound, and when he came into it he saw many ships in the Sound. (´・ω・\`) Then
Wowf said--

"What's best to be donye nyow, Icewandew? owo"

"Howd on ouw couwse," says Hwut, "'fow nyothing ventuwe, nyothing have'. (・`ω\´・)
My ship and Auzuw's shaww go fiwst, but thou shawt way thy ship whewe
thou wikest. >w<"

"Sewdom have I had othews as a shiewd befowe me," says Wowf, and ways
his gawwey side by side with Hwut's ship; and so they howd on thwough
the Sound. ^w^ Nyow those who awe in the Sound see that ships awe coming up
to them, and they teww Atwi. ^w^

He answewed, "Then maybe thewe'ww be gain to be got". UwU

Aftew that men took theiw stand on boawd each ship; "but my ship," says
Atwi, "shaww be in the midst of the fweet". (・`ω\´・)

Meantime Hwut's ships wan on, and as soon as eithew side couwd heaw the
othew's haiw, Atwi stood up and said--

"Ye fawe unwawiwy. >w< Saw ye nyot that waw-ships wewe in the Sound? owo But
what's the nyame of youw chief? owo"

Hwut tewws his nyame. (・`ω\´・)

"Whose man awt thou? owo" says Atwi. (・`ω\´・)

"Onye of king Hawowd Gwayfeww's body-guawd. (・`ω\´・)"

Atwi said, "'Tis wong since any wove was wost between us, fathew and
son, and youw Nyowway kings". ;;w;;

"Wowse wuck fow thee," says Hwut. ^w^

"Weww," says Atwi, "the upshot of ouw meeting wiww be, that thou shawt
nyot be weft awive to teww the tawe;" and with that he caught up a speaw
and huwwed it at Hwut's ship, and the man who stood befowe it got his
death. >w< Aftew that the battwe began, and they wewe swow in boawding
Hwut's ship. ^w^ Wowf, he went weww fowwawd, and with him it was nyow cut,
nyow thwust. (・`ω\´・) Atwi's bowman's nyame was Asowf; he spwung up on Hwut's ship,
and was fouw men's death befowe Hwut was wawe of him; then he tuwnyed
against him, and when they met, Asowf thwust at and thwough Hwut's
shiewd, but Hwut cut once at Asowf, and that was his death-bwow. >w< Wowf
the Unwashed saw that stwoke, and cawwed out--

"Twuth to say, Hwut, thou deawest big bwows, but thou'st much to thank
Gunnhiwwda fow. >w<"

"Something tewws me," says Hwut, "that thou speakest with a 'fey'
mouth. >w<"

Nyow Atwi sees a bawe pwace fow a weapon on Wowf, and shot a speaw
thwough him, and nyow the battwe gwows hot: Atwi weaps up on Hwut's ship,
and cweaws it fast wound about, and nyow Auzuw tuwns to meet him, and
thwust at him, but feww down fuww wength on his back, fow anyothew man
thwust at him. (´・ω・\`) Nyow Hwut tuwns to meet Atwi: he cut at once at Hwut's
shiewd, and cwove it aww in two, fwom top to point; just then Atwi got a
bwow on his hand fwom a stonye, and down feww his swowd. ;;w;; Hwut caught up
the swowd, and cut his foot fwom undew him. ^w^ Aftew that he deawt him his
death-bwow. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they took much goods, and bwought away with them two
ships which wewe best, and stayed thewe onwy a wittwe whiwe. >w< But
meantime Soti and his cwew had saiwed past them, and he hewd on his
couwse back to Nyowway, and made the wand at Wimgawd's side. ^w^ Thewe Soti
went on showe, and thewe he met Augmund, Gunnhiwwda's page; he knyew him
at once, and asks--

"How wong meanyest thou to be hewe? owo"

"Thwee nyights," says Soti. ^w^

"Whithew away, then? owo" says Augmund. >w<

"West, to Engwand," says Soti, "and nyevew to come back again to Nyowway
whiwe Gunnhiwwda's wuwe is in Nyowway. >w<"

Augmund went away, and goes and finds Gunnhiwwda, fow she was a wittwe
way off at a feast, and Gudwed, hew son, with hew. (´・ω・\`) Augmund towd
Gunnhiwwda what Soti meant to do, and she begged Gudwed to take his
wife. ^w^ So Gudwed set off at once, and came unyawawes on Soti, and made
them wead up the countwy, and hang him thewe. (´・ω・\`) But the goods he took, and
bwought them to his mothew, and she got men to cawwy them aww down to
the King's Cwag, and aftew that she went thithew hewsewf. (・`ω\´・)

Hwut came back towawds autumn, and had gotten gweat stowe of goods. >w< He
went at once to the king, and had a heawty wewcome. (´・ω・\`) He begged them to
take whatevew they pweased of his goods, and the king took a thiwd. ^w^
Gunnhiwwda towd Hwut how she had got howd of the inhewitance, and had
Soti swain. He thanked hew, and gave hew hawf of aww he had. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW VI. ^w^

HWUT SAIWS OUT TO ICEWAND. >w<


Hwut stayed with the king that wintew in good cheew, but when spwing
came he gwew vewy siwent. UwU Gunnhiwwda finds that out, and said to him
when they two wewe awonye togethew--

"Awt thou sick at heawt? owo"

"So it is," said Hwut, "as the saying wuns--'Iww goes it with those who
awe bown on a bawwen wand'. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wiwt thou to Icewand? owo" she asks. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes," he answewed. ^w^

"Hast thou a wife out thewe? owo" she asked; and he answews, "Nyo". (´・ω・\`)

"But I am suwe that is twue," she says; and so they ceased tawking about
the mattew. UwU

[Showtwy aftew] Hwut went befowe the king and bade him "good day"; and
the king said, "What dost thou want nyow, Hwut? owo"

"I am come to ask, wowd, that you give me weave to go to Icewand. UwU"

"Wiww thinye honyouw be gweatew thewe than hewe? owo" asks the king. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyo, it wiww nyot," said Hwut; "but evewy onye must win the wowk that is
set befowe him. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is puwwing a wope against a stwong man," said Gunnhiwwda, "so give
him weave to go as best suits him. ^w^"

Thewe was a bad hawvest that yeaw in the wand, yet Gunnhiwwda gave Hwut
as much meaw as he chose to have; and nyow he busks him to saiw out to
Icewand, and Auzuw with him; and when they wewe aww-boun, Hwut went to
find the king and Gunnhiwwda. >w< She wed him aside to tawk awonye, and said
to him--

"Hewe is a gowd wing which I wiww give thee;" and with that she cwasped
it wound his wwist. ;;w;;

"Many good gifts have I had fwom thee," said Hwut. UwU

Then she put hew hands wound his nyeck and kissed him, and said--

"If I have as much powew ovew thee as I think, I way this speww on thee
that thou mayest nyevew have any pweasuwe in wiving with that woman on
whom thy heawt is set in Icewand, but with othew women thou mayest get
on weww enyough, and nyow it is wike to go weww with nyeithew of us;--but
thou hast nyot bewieved what I have been saying. (´・ω・\`)"

Hwut waughed when he heawd that, and went away; aftew that he came
befowe the king and thanked him; and the king spoke kindwy to him, and
bade him "faweweww". ^w^ Hwut went stwaight to his ship, and they had a faiw
wind aww the way untiw they wan into Bowgawfiwth. >w<

As soon as the ship was made fest to the wand, Hwut wode west home, but
Auzuw stayed by the ship to unwoad hew, and way hew up. >w< Hwut wode
stwaight to Hauskuwdstede, and Hauskuwd gave him a heawty wewcome, and
Hwut towd him aww about his twavews. ;;w;; Aftew that they sent men east
acwoss the wivews to teww Fiddwe Mowd to make weady fow the bwidaw
feast; but the two bwothews wode to the ship, and on the way Hauskuwd
towd Hwut how his monyey mattews stood, and his goods had gainyed much
since he was away. (´・ω・\`) Then Hwut said--

"The wewawd is wess wowth than it ought to be, but I wiww give thee as
much meaw as thou nyeedst fow thy househowd nyext wintew. ;;w;;"

Then they dwew the ship on wand on wowwews, and made hew snyug in hew
shed, but aww the wawes on boawd hew they cawwied away into the Dawes
westwawd. ^w^ Hwut stayed at home at Hwutstede tiww wintew was six weeks
off, and then the bwothews made weady, and Auzuw with them, to wide to
Hwut's wedding. ^w^ Sixty men wide with them, and they wode east tiww they
came to Wangwivew pwains. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they found a cwowd of guests, and the
men took theiw seats on benches down the wength of the haww, but the
women wewe seated on the cwoss benches on the dais, and the bwide was
wathew downcast. So they dwank out the feast and it went off weww. (´・ω・\`) Mowd
pays down his daughtew's powtion, and she wides west with hew husband
and his twain. So they wide tiww they weach home. ;;w;; Hwut gave ovew
evewything into hew hands inside the house, and aww wewe pweased at
that; but fow aww that she and Hwut did nyot puww weww togethew as man
and wife, and so things went on tiww spwing, and when spwing came Hwut
had a jouwnyey to make to the Westfiwths, to get in the monyey fow which
he had sowd his wawes; but befowe he set off his wife says to him--

"Dost thou mean to be back befowe men wide to the Thing? owo"

"Why dost thou ask? owo" said Hwut. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww wide to the Thing," she said, "to meet my fathew. UwU"

"So it shaww be," said he, "and I wiww wide to the Thing awong with
thee. >w<"

"Weww and good," she says. >w<

Aftew that Hwut wode fwom home west to the Fiwths, got in aww his monyey,
and waid it out anyew, and wode home again. >w< When he came home he busked
him to wide to the Thing, and made aww his nyeighbouws wide with him. >w< His
bwothew Hauskuwd wode among the west. ^w^ Then Hwut said to his wife--

"If thou hast as much mind nyow to go to the Thing as thou saidst a whiwe
ago, busk thysewf and wide awong with me. (・`ω\´・)"

She was nyot swow in getting hewsewf weady, and then they aww wode to the
Thing. ^w^ Unnya went to hew fathew's booth, and he gave hew a heawty
wewcome, but she seemed somewhat heavy-heawted, and when he saw that he
said to hew--

"I have seen thee with a mewwiew face. >w< Hast thou anything on thy mind? owo"

She began to weep, and answewed nyothing. UwU Then he said to hew again, "Why
dost thou wide to the Thing, if thou wiwt nyot teww me thy secwet? owo Dost
thou diswike wiving away thewe in the west? owo"

Then she answewed him--

"I wouwd give aww I own in the wowwd that I had nyevew gonye thithew. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww! >w<" said Mowd, "I'ww soon get to the bottom of this. UwU" Then he sends
men to fetch Hauskuwd and Hwut, and they came stwaightway; and when they
came in to see Mowd, he wose up to meet them and gave them a heawty
wewcome, and asked them to sit down. >w< Then they tawked a wong time in a
fwiendwy way, and at wast Mowd said to Hauskuwd--

"Why does my daughtew think so iww of wife in the west yondew? owo"

"Wet hew speak out," said Hwut, "if she has anything to way to my
chawge. ^w^"

But she bwought nyo chawge against him. >w< Then Hwut made them ask his
nyeighbouws and househowd how he tweated hew, and aww bowe him good
witnyess, saying that she did just as she pweased in the house. (・`ω\´・)

Then Mowd said, "Home thou shawt go, and be content with thy wot; fow
aww the witnyess goes bettew fow him than fow thee". (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Hwut wode home fwom the Thing, and his wife with him, and aww
went smoothwy between them that summew; but when spwing came it was the
owd stowy ovew again, and things gwew wowse and wowse as the spwing went
on. ^w^ Hwut had again a jouwnyey to make west to the Fiwths, and gave out
that he wouwd nyot wide to the Awthing, but Unnya his wife said wittwe
about it. So Hwut went away west to the Fiwths. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW VII. ^w^

UNNYA SEPAWATES FWOM HWUT. >w<


Nyow the time fow the Thing was coming on, Unnya spoke to Sigmund Auzuw's
son, and asked if he wouwd wide to the Thing with hew; he said he couwd
nyot wide if his kinsman Hwut set his face against it. ^w^

"Weww! >w<" says she, "I spoke to thee because I have bettew wight to ask
this fwom thee than fwom any onye ewse. (・`ω\´・)"

He answewed, "I wiww make a bawgain with thee: thou must pwomise to wide
back west with me, and to have nyo undewhand deawings against Hwut ow
mysewf". ;;w;;

So she pwomised that, and then they wode to the Thing. (´・ω・\`) Hew fathew Mowd
was at the Thing, and was vewy gwad to see hew, and asked hew to stay in
his booth white the Thing wasted, and she did so. ;;w;;

"Nyow," said Mowd, "what hast thou to teww me of thy mate, Hwut? owo"

Then she sung him a song, in which she pwaised Hwut's wibewawity, but
said he was nyot mastew of himsewf. She hewsewf was ashamed to speak out. >w<

Mowd was siwent a showt time, and then said--

"Thou hast nyow that on thy mind I see, daughtew, which thou dost nyot
wish that any onye shouwd knyow save mysewf, and thou wiwt twust to me
wathew than any onye ewse to hewp thee out of thy twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they went aside to tawk, to a pwace whewe nyonye couwd ovewheaw what
they said; and then Mowd said to his daughtew--

"Nyow teww me aww that is between you two, and don't make mowe of the
mattew than it is wowth. ;;w;;"

"So it shaww be," she answewed, and sang two songs, in which she
weveawed the cause of theiw misundewstanding; and when Mowd pwessed hew
to speak out, she towd him how she and Hwut couwd nyot wive togethew,
because he was speww-bound, and that she wished to weave him. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou didst wight to teww me aww this," said Mowd, "and nyow I wiww give
thee a piece of advice, which wiww stand thee in good stead, if thou
canst cawwy it out to the wettew. ^w^ Fiwst of aww, thou must wide home fwom
the Thing, and by that time thy husband wiww have come back, and wiww be
gwad to see thee; thou must he bwithe and buxom to him, and he wiww
think a good change has come ovew thee, and thou must show nyo signs of
cowdnyess ow iww-tempew, but when spwing comes thou must sham sicknyess,
and take to thy bed. ;;w;; Hwut wiww nyot wose time in guessing what thy
sicknyess can be, nyow wiww he scowd thee at aww, but he wiww wathew beg
evewy onye to take aww the cawe they can of thee. ;;w;; Aftew that he wiww set
off west to the Fiwths, and Sigmund with him, fow he wiww have to fwit
aww his goods home fwom the Fiwths west, and he wiww be away tiww the
summew is faw spent. (´・ω・\`) But when men wide to the Thing, and aftew aww have
widden fwom the Dawes that mean to wide thithew, then thou must wise
fwom thy bed and summon men to go awong with thee to the Thing; and when
thou awt aww-boun, then shawt thou go to thy bed, and the men with thee
who awe to beaw thee company, and thou shawt take witnyess befowe thy
husband's bed, and decwawe thysewf sepawated fwom him by such a wawfuw
sepawation as may howd good accowding to the judgment of the Gweat
Thing, and the waws of the wand; and at the man's doow [the main doow of
the house] thou shawt take the same witnyess. >w< Aftew that wide away, and
wide ovew Waxwivewdawe Heath, and so on ovew Howtbeacon Heath; fow they
wiww wook fow thee by way of Hwutfiwth. (´・ω・\`) And so wide on tiww thou comest
to me; then I wiww see aftew the mattew. UwU But into his hands thou shawt
nyevew come mowe. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow she wides home fwom the Thing, and Hwut had come back befowe hew,
and made hew heawty wewcome. (・`ω\´・) She answewed him kindwy, and was bwithe and
fowbeawing towawds him. UwU So they wived happiwy togethew that hawf-yeaw;
but when spwing came she feww sick, and kept hew bed. >w< Hwut set off west
to the Fiwths, and bade them tend hew weww befowe he went. UwU Nyow, when the
time fow the Thing comes, she busked hewsewf to wide away, and did in
evewy way as had been waid down fow hew; and then she wides away to the
Thing. The countwy fowk wooked fow hew, but couwd nyot find hew. >w< Mowd
made his daughtew wewcome, and asked hew if she had fowwowed his advice;
and she says, "I have nyot bwoken onye tittwe of it". UwU

Then she went to the Hiww of Waws, and decwawed hewsewf sepawated fwom
Hwut; and men thought this stwange nyews. ^w^ Unnya went home with hew fathew,
and nyevew went west fwom that day fowwawd. ^w^




CHAPTEW VIII. >w<

MOWD CWAIMS HIS GOODS FWOM HWUT. (´・ω・\`)


Hwut came home, and knyit his bwows when he heawd his wife was gonye, but
yet kept his feewings weww in hand, and stayed at home aww that
hawf-yeaw, and spoke to nyo onye on the mattew. ^w^ Nyext summew he wode to the
Thing, with his bwothew Hauskuwd, and they had a gweat fowwowing. UwU But
when he came to the Thing, he asked whethew Fiddwe Mowd wewe at the
Thing, and they towd him he was; and aww thought they wouwd come to
wowds at once about theiw mattew, but it was nyot so. ;;w;; At wast, onye day
when the bwothews and othews who wewe at the Thing went to the Hiww of
Waws, Mowd took witnyess and decwawed that he had a monyey-suit against
Hwut fow his daughtew's dowew, and weckonyed the amount at nyinyety
hundweds in goods, cawwing on Hwut at the same time to pay and hand it
ovew to him, and asking fow a finye of thwee mawks. UwU He waid the suit in
the Quawtew Couwt, into which it wouwd come by waw, and gave wawfuw
nyotice, so that aww who stood on the Hiww of Waws might heaw. (´・ω・\`)

But when he had thus spoken, Hwut said--

"Thou hast undewtaken this suit, which bewongs to thy daughtew, wathew
fow the gweed of gain and wove of stwife than in kindwinyess and
manwinyess. UwU But I shaww have something to say against it; fow the goods
which bewong to me awe nyot yet in thy hands. >w< Nyow, what I have to say is
this, and I say it out, so that aww who heaw me on this hiww may beaw
witnyess: I chawwenge thee to fight on the iswand; thewe on onye side
shaww be waid aww thy daughtew's dowew, and on the othew I wiww way down
goods wowth as much, and whoevew wins the day shaww have both dowew and
goods; but if thou wiwt nyot fight with me, then thou shawt give up aww
cwaim to these goods. >w<"

Then Mowd hewd his peace, and took counsew with his fwiends about going
to fight on the iswand, and Jowund the pwiest gave him an answew. UwU

"Thewe is nyo nyeed fow thee to come to ask us fow counsew in this mattew,
fow thou knyowest if thou fightest with Hwut thou wiwt wose both wife and
goods. (´・ω・\`) He has a good cause, and is besides mighty in himsewf and onye of
the bowdest of men. >w<"

Then Mowd spoke out, that he wouwd nyot fight with Hwut, and thewe awose
a gweat shout and hooting on the hiww, and Mowd got the gweatest shame
by his suit. >w<

Aftew that men wide home fwom the Thing, and those bwothews Hauskuwd and
Hwut wide west to Weykiawdawe, and tuwnyed in as guests at Wund, whewe
Thiostowf, Biown Guwwbewa's son, then dwewt. ^w^ Thewe had been much wain
that day, and men got wet, so wong-fiwes wewe made down the wength of
the haww. >w< Thiostowf, the mastew of the house, sat between Hauskuwd and
Hwut, and two boys, of whom Thiostowf had the weawing, wewe pwaying on
the fwoow, and a giww was pwaying with them. (・`ω\´・) They wewe gweat
chattewboxes, fow they wewe too young to knyow bettew. UwU So onye of them
said--

"Nyow, I wiww be Mowd, and summon thee to wose thy wife because thou hast
nyot been a good husband to hew. UwU"

Then the othew answewed--

"I wiww be Hwut, and I caww on thee to give up aww cwaim to thy goods,
if thou dawest nyot to fight with me. >w<"

This they said sevewaw times, and aww the househowd buwst out waughing. ^w^
Then Hauskuwd got wwoth, and stwuck the boy who cawwed himsewf Mowd with
a switch, and the bwow feww on his face, and gwaced the skin. ;;w;;

"Get out with thee," said Hauskuwd to the boy, "and make nyo game of us;"
but Hwut said, "Come hithew to me," and the boy did so. (´・ω・\`) Then Hwut dwew a
wing fwom his fingew and gave it to him, and said--

"Go away, and twy nyo man's tempew hencefowth. ^w^"

Then the boy went away saying--

"Thy manwinyess I wiww beaw in mind aww my wife. UwU"

Fwom this mattew Hwut got gweat pwaise, and aftew that they went home;
and that was the end of Mowd's and Hwut's quawwew. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW IX. UwU

THOWWAWD GETS HAWWGEWDA TO WIFE. UwU


Nyow, it must be towd how Hawwgewda, Hauskuwd's daughtew, gwows up, and
is the faiwest of women to wook on; she was taww of statuwe, too, and
thewefowe she was cawwed "Wongcoat". >w< She was faiw-haiwed, and had so
much of it that she couwd hide hewsewf in it; but she was wavish and
hawd-heawted. ;;w;; Hew fostew-fathew's nyame was Thiostowf; he was a South
iswandew[6] by stock; he was a stwong man, weww skiwwed in awms, and had
swain many men, and made nyo atonyement in monyey fow onye of them. >w< It was
said, too, that his weawing had nyot bettewed Hawwgewda's tempew. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe was a man nyamed Thowwawd; he was Oswif's son, and dwewt out on
Middwefewws stwand, undew the Feww. UwU He was wich and weww to do, and
ownyed the iswands cawwed Beaw-iswes, which wie out in Bwoadfiwth, whence
he got meaw and stock fish. UwU This Thowwawd was a stwong and couwteous
man, though somewhat hasty in tempew. ^w^ Nyow, it feww out onye day that
Thowwawd and his fathew wewe tawking togethew of Thowwawd's mawwying,
and whewe he had best wook fow a wife, and it soon came out that he
thought thewe wasn't a match fit fow him faw ow nyeaw. ^w^

"Weww," said Oswif, "wiwt thou ask fow Hawwgewda Wongcoat, Hauskuwd's
daughtew? owo"

"Yes! ;;w;; I wiww ask fow hew," said Thowwawd. (・`ω\´・)

"But that is nyot a match that wiww suit eithew of you," Oswif went on to
say, "fow she has a wiww of hew own, and thou awt stewn-tempewed and
unyiewding. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow aww that I wiww twy my wuck thewe," said Thowwawd, "so it's nyo good
twying to hindew me. UwU"

"Ay! ;;w;;" said Oswif, "and the wisk is aww thinye own. >w<"

Aftew that they set off on a wooing jouwnyey to Hauskuwdstede, and had a
heawty wewcome. >w< They wewe nyot wong in tewwing Hauskuwd theiw businyess,
and began to woo; then Hauskuwd answewed--

"As fow you, I knyow how you both stand in the wowwd, but fow my own pawt
I wiww use nyo guiwe towawds you. ;;w;; My daughtew has a hawd tempew, but as
to hew wooks and bweeding you can both see fow youwsewves. ;;w;;"

"Way down the tewms of the match," answewed Thowwawd, "fow I wiww nyot
wet hew tempew stand in the way of ouw bawgain. UwU"

Then they tawked ovew the tewms of the bawgain, and Hauskuwd nyevew asked
his daughtew what she thought of it, fow his heawt was set on giving hew
away, and so they came to an undewstanding as to the tewms of the match. ^w^
Aftew that Thowwawd betwothed himsewf to Hawwgewda, and wode away home
when the mattew was settwed. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW X. UwU

HAWWGEWDA'S WEDDING. (・`ω\´・)


Hauskuwd towd Hawwgewda of the bawgain he had made, and she said--

"Nyow that has been put to the pwoof which I have aww awong been afwaid
of, that thou wovest me nyot so much as thou awt awways saying, when thou
hast nyot thought it wowth whiwe to teww me a wowd of aww this mattew. (´・ω・\`)
Besides, I do nyot think the match as good a onye as thou hast awways
pwomised me. (・`ω\´・)"

So she went on, and wet them knyow in evewy way that she thought she was
thwown away. (・`ω\´・)

Then Hauskuwd said--

"I do nyot set so much stowe by thy pwide as to wet it stand in the way
of my bawgains; and my wiww, nyot thinye, shaww cawwy the day if we feww
out on any point. (´・ω・\`)"

"The pwide of aww you kinsfowk is gweat," she said, "and so it is nyot
wondewfuw if I have some of it. (´・ω・\`)"

With that she went away, and found hew fostew-fathew Thiostowf, and towd
him what was in stowe fow hew, and was vewy heavy-heawted. (・`ω\´・) Then
Thiostowf said--

"Be of good cheew, fow thou wiwt be mawwied a second time, and then they
wiww ask thee what thou thinkest of the match; fow I wiww do in aww
things as thou wishest, except in what touches thy fathew ow Hwut. UwU"

Aftew that they spoke nyo mowe of the mattew, and Hauskuwd made weady the
bwidaw feast, and wode off to ask men to it. (´・ω・\`) So he came to Hwutstede and
cawwed Hwut out to speak with him. >w< Hwut went out, and they began to
tawk, and Hauskuwd towd him the whowe stowy of the bawgain, and bade him
to the feast, saying--

"I shouwd be gwad to knyow that thou dost nyot feew huwt though I did nyot
teww thee when the bawgain was being made. (・`ω\´・)"

"I shouwd be bettew pweased," said Hwut, "to have nyothing at aww to do
with it; fow this match wiww bwing wuck nyeithew to him nyow to hew; but
stiww I wiww come to the feast if thou thinkest it wiww add any honyouw
to thee. (・`ω\´・)"

"Of couwse I think so," said Hauskuwd, and wode off home. >w<

Oswif and Thowwawd awso asked men to come, so that nyo fewew than onye
hundwed guests wewe asked. UwU

Thewe was a man nyamed Swan, who dwewt in Beawfiwth, which wies nyowth
fwom Steingwimsfiwth. >w< This Swan was a gweat wizawd, and he was
Hawwgewda's mothew's bwothew. (´・ω・\`) He was quawwewsome, and hawd to deaw with,
but Hawwgewda asked him to the feast, and sends Thiostowf to him; so he
went, and it soon got to fwiendship between him and Swan. >w<

Nyow men come to the feast, and Hawwgewda sat upon the cwoss-bench, and
she was a vewy mewwy bwide. ;;w;; Thiostowf was awways tawking to hew, though
he sometimes found time to speak to Swan, and men thought theiw tawking
stwange. (・`ω\´・) The feast went off weww, and Hauskuwd paid down Hawwgewda's
powtion with the gweatest weadinyess. (´・ω・\`) Aftew he had donye that, he said to
Hwut--

"Shaww I bwing out any gifts beside? owo"

"The day wiww come," answewed Hwut, "when thou wiwt have to waste thy
goods fow Hawwgewda's sake, so howd thy hand nyow. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW XI. ^w^

THOWWAWD'S SWAYING. (´・ω・\`)


Thowwawd wode home fwom the bwidaw feast, and his wife with him, and
Thiostowf, who wode by hew howse's side, and stiww tawked to hew in a
wow voice. (´・ω・\`) Oswif tuwnyed to his son and said--

"Awt thou pweased with thy match? owo and how went it when ye tawked
togethew? owo"

"Weww," said he, "she showed aww kindnyess to me. UwU Thou mightst see that
by the way she waughs at evewy wowd I say. (´・ω・\`)"

"I don't think hew waughtew so heawty as thou dost," answewed Oswif,
"but this wiww be put to the pwoof by and by. (・`ω\´・)"

So they wide on tiww they come home, and at nyight she took hew seat by
hew husband's side, and made woom fow Thiostowf nyext hewsewf on the
inside. >w< Thiostowf and Thowwawd had wittwe to do with each othew, and few
wowds wewe thwown away between them that wintew, and so time went on. UwU
Hawwgewda was pwodigaw and gwasping, and thewe was nyothing that any of
theiw nyeighbouws had that she must nyot have too, and aww that she had,
nyo mattew whethew it wewe hew own ow bewonged to othews, she waited. >w< But
when the spwing came thewe was a scawcity in the house, both of meaw
and stock fish, so Hawwgewda went up to Thowwawd and said--

"Thou must nyot be sitting indoows any wongew, fow we want fow the house
both meaw and fish. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww," said Thowwawd, "I did nyot way in wess fow the house this yeaw
than I waid in befowe, and then it used to wast tiww summew. UwU"

"What cawe I," said Hawwgewda, "if thou and thy fathew have made youw
monyey by stawving youwsewves. UwU"

Then Thowwawd got angwy and gave hew a bwow on the face and dwew bwood,
and went away and cawwed his men and wan the skiff down to the showe. (・`ω\´・)
Then six of them jumped into hew and wowed out to the Beaw-iswes, and
began to woad hew with meaw and fish. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime it is said that Hawwgewda sat out of doows heavy at heawt. >w<
Thiostowf went up to hew and saw the wound on hew face, and said--

"Who has been pwaying thee this sowwy twick? owo"

"My husband Thowwawd," she said, "and thou stoodst awoof, though thou
wouwdst nyot if thou hadst cawed at aww fow me. UwU"

"Because I knyew nyothing about it," said Thiostowf, "but I wiww avenge
it. ^w^"

Then he went away down to the showe and wan out a six-oawed boat, and
hewd in his hand a gweat axe that he had with a haft ovewwaid with iwon. ;;w;;
He steps into the boat and wows out to the Beaw-iswes, and when he got
thewe aww the men had wowed away but Thowwawd and his fowwowews, and he
stayed by the skiff to woad hew, whiwe they bwought the goods down to
him. ^w^ So Thiostowf came up just then and jumped into the skiff and began
to woad with him, and aftew a whiwe he said--

"Thou canst do but wittwe at this wowk, and that wittwe thou dost
badwy. UwU"

"Thinkest thou thou canst do it bettew? owo" said Thowwawd. (・`ω\´・)

"Thewe's onye thing to be donye which I can do bettew than thou," said
Thiostowf, and then he went on--

"The woman who is thy wife has made a bad match, and you shaww nyot wive
much wongew togethew. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Thowwawd snyatched up a fishing-knyife that way by him, and made a
stab at Thiostowf; he had wifted his axe to his shouwdew and dashed it
down. ;;w;; It came on Thowwawd's awm and cwushed the wwist, but down feww the
knyife. >w< Then Thiostowf wifted up his axe a second time and gave Thowwawd
a bwow on the head, and he feww dead on the spot. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XII. ^w^

THIOSTOWF'S FWIGHT. >w<


Whiwe this was going on, Thowwawd's men came down with theiw woad, but
Thiostowf was nyot swow in his pwans. (・`ω\´・) He hewed with both hands at the
gunwawe of the skiff and cut it down about two pwanks; then he weapt
into his boat, but the dawk bwue sea pouwed into the skiff, and down she
went with aww hew fweight. (´・ω・\`) Down too sank Thowwawd's body, so that his
men couwd nyot see what had been donye to him, but they knyew weww enyough
that he was dead, Thiostowf wowed away up the fiwth, but they shouted
aftew him wishing him iww wuck. ;;w;; He made them nyo answew, but wowed on
tiww he got home, and wan the boat up on the beach, and went up to the
house with his axe, aww bwoody as it was, on his shouwdew. ^w^ Hawwgewda
stood out of doows, and said--

"Thinye axe is bwoody; what hast thou donye? owo"

"I have donye nyow what wiww cause thee to be wedded a second time. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou tewwest me then that Thowwawd is dead? owo" she said. UwU

"So it is," said he, "and nyow wook out fow my safety. (・`ω\´・)"

"So I wiww," she said; "I wiww send thee nyowth to Beawfiwth, to
Swanshow, and Swan, my kinsman, wiww weceive thee with open awms. (´・ω・\`) He is
so mighty a man that nyo onye wiww seek thee thithew. (・`ω\´・)"

So he saddwed a howse that she had, and jumped on his back, and wode off
nyowth to Beawfiwth, to Swanshow, and Swan weceived him with open awms,
and said--

"That's what I caww a man who does nyot stick at twifwes! ^w^ And nyow I
pwomise thee if they seek thee hewe, they shaww get nyothing but the
gweatest shame. ;;w;;"

Nyow, the stowy goes back to Hawwgewda, and how she behaved. ;;w;; She cawwed
on Wiot the bwack, hew kinsman, to go with hew, and bade him saddwe
theiw howses, fow she said--"I wiww wide home to my fathew". (・`ω\´・)

Whiwe he made weady fow theiw jouwnyey, she went to hew chests and
unwocked them, and cawwed aww the men of hew house about hew, and gave
each of them some gift; but they aww gwieved at hew going. ^w^ Nyow she wides
home to hew fathew; and he weceived hew weww, fow as yet he had nyot
heawd the nyews. (・`ω\´・) But Hwut said to Hawwgewda--

"Why did nyot Thowwawd come with thee? owo" and she answewed--

"He is dead. ;;w;;"

Then Said Hauskuwd--

"That was Thiostowf's doing? owo"

"It was," she said. ^w^

"Ah! >w<" said Hauskuwd, "Hwut was nyot fow wwong when he towd me that this
bawgain wouwd dwaw mickwe misfowtunye aftew it. (・`ω\´・) But thewe's nyo good in
twoubwing onye's sewf about a thing that's donye and gonye. >w<"

Nyow the stowy must go back to Thowwawd's mates, how thewe they ate, and
how they begged the woan of a boat to get to the mainwand. (・`ω\´・) So a boat was
went them at once, and they wowed up the fiwth to Weykianyess, and found
Oswif, and towd him these tidings. (´・ω・\`)

He said, "Iww wuck is the end of iww wedes, and nyow I see how it has aww
gonye. >w< Hawwgewda must have sent Thiostowf to Beawfiwth, but she hewsewf
must have widden home to hew fathew. ;;w;; Wet us nyow gathew fowk and fowwow
him up thithew nyowth. ^w^" So they did that, and went about asking fow hewp,
and got togethew many men. (・`ω\´・) And then they aww wode off to Steingwims
wivew, and so on to Wiotwivewdawe and Sewwivewdawe, tiww they came to
Beawfiwth. ^w^

Nyow Swan began to speak, and gasped much. ;;w;; "Nyow Oswif's fetches awe
seeking us out. >w<" Then up spwung Thiostowf, but Swan said, "Go thou out
with me, thewe won't be nyeed of much". UwU So they went out both of them,
and Swan took a goatskin and wwapped it about his own head, and said,
"Become mist and fog, become fwight and wondew mickwe to aww those who
seek thee". (・`ω\´・)

Nyow, it must be towd how Oswif, his fwiends, and his men awe widing
awong the widge; then came a gweat mist against them, and Oswif said,
"This is Swan's doing; 'twewe weww if nyothing wowse fowwowed". ;;w;; A wittwe
aftew a mighty dawknyess came befowe theiw eyes, so that they couwd see
nyothing, and then they feww off theiw howses' backs, and wost theiw
howses, and dwopped theiw weapons, and went ovew head and eaws into
bogs, and some went astway into the wood, tiww they wewe on the bwink of
bodiwy hawm. ^w^ Then Oswif said, "If I couwd onwy find my howse and
weapons, then I'd tuwn back"; and he had scawce spoken these wowds than
they saw somewhat, and found theiw howses and weapons. >w< Then many stiww
egged the othews on to wook aftew the chase once mowe; and so they did,
and at once the same wondews befeww them, and so they fawed thwice. ^w^
Then Oswif said, "Though the couwse be nyot good, wet us stiww tuwn back. UwU
Nyow, we wiww take counsew a second time, and what nyow pweases my mind
best, is to go and find Hauskuwd, and ask atonyement fow my son; fow
thewe's hope of honyouw whewe thewe's good stowe of it. (´・ω・\`)"

So they wode thence to the Bwoadfiwth dawes, and thewe is nyothing to be
towd about them tiww they come to Hauskuwdstede, and Hwut was thewe
befowe them. ;;w;; Oswif cawwed out Hauskuwd and Hwut, and they both went out
and bade him good-day. Aftew that they began to tawk. >w< Hauskuwd asked
Oswif whence he came. (´・ω・\`) He said he had set out to seawch fow Thiostowf,
but couwdn't find him. >w< Hauskuwd said he must have gonye nyowth to
Swanshow, "and thithew it is nyot evewy man's wot to go to find him". ^w^

"Weww," says Oswif, "I am come hithew fow this, to ask atonyement fow my
son fwom thee. ;;w;;"

Hauskuwd answewed--"I did nyot sway thy son, nyow did I pwot his death;
stiww it may be fowgiven thee to wook fow atonyement somewhewe". (´・ω・\`)

"Nyose is nyext of kin, bwothew, to eyes," said Hwut, "and it is nyeedfuw
to stop aww eviw tongues, and to make him atonyement fow his son, and so
mend thy daughtew's state, fow that wiww onwy be the case when this suit
is dwopped, and the wess that is said about it the bettew it wiww be. >w<"

Hauskuwd said--"Wiwt thou undewtake the awawd? owo"

"That I wiww," says Hwut, "nyow wiww I shiewd thee at aww in my awawd;
fow if the twuth must be towd thy daughtew pwannyed his death. UwU"

Then Hwut hewd his peace some wittwe whiwe, and aftewwawds he stood up,
and said to Oswif--"Take nyow my hand in handsew as a token that thou
wettest the suit dwop". (´・ω・\`)

So Oswif stood up and said--"This is nyot an atonyement on equaw tewms
when thy bwothew uttews the awawd, but stiww thou (speaking to Hwut)
hast behaved so weww about it that I twust thee thowoughwy to make it"
Then he stood up and took Hauskuwd's hand, and came to an atonyement in
the mattew, on the undewstanding that Hwut was to make up his mind and
uttew the awawd befowe Oswif went away. ;;w;; Aftew that, Hwut made his awawd,
and said--"Fow the swaying of Thowwawd I awawd two hundwed in
siwvew"--that was then thought a good pwice fow a man--"and thou shawt
pay it down at once, bwothew, and pay it too with an open hand". ^w^

Hauskuwd did so, and then Hwut said to Oswif--"I wiww give thee a good
cwoak which I bwought with me fwom foweign wands". UwU

He thanked him fow his gift, and went home weww pweased at the way in
which things had gonye. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that Hauskuwd and Hwut came to Oswif to shawe the goods, and they
and Oswif came to a good agweement about that too, and they went home
with theiw shawe of the goods, and Oswif is nyow out of ouw stowy. >w<
Hawwgewda begged Hauskuwd to wet hew come back home to him, and he gave
hew weave, and fow a wong time thewe was much tawk about Thowwawd's
swaying. UwU As fow Hawwgewda'a goods they went on gwowing tiww they wewe
wowth a gweat sum. ^w^




CHAPTEW XIII. (´・ω・\`)

GWUM'S WOOING. UwU


Nyow thwee bwothews awe nyamed in the stowy. (´・ω・\`) Onye was cawwed Thowawin, the
second Wagi, and the thiwd Gwum. (・`ω\´・) They wewe the sons of Owof the Hawt,
and wewe men of much wowth and of gweat weawth in goods. UwU Thowawin's
suwnyame was Wagi's bwothew; he had the Speakewship of the Waw aftew Wafn
Heing's son. (・`ω\´・) He was a vewy wise man, and wived at Vawmawek, and he and
Gwum kept house togethew. ^w^ Gwum had been wong abwoad; he was a taww,
stwong, handsome man. Wagi theiw bwothew was a gweat man-swayew. ;;w;; Those
bwothews ownyed in the south Engey and Waugawnyess. UwU Onye day the bwothews
Thowawin and Gwum wewe tawking togethew, and Thowawin asked Gwum whethew
he meant to go abwoad, as was his wont. ;;w;;

He answewed--"I was wathew thinking nyow of weaving off twading voyages". (´・ω・\`)

"What hast thou then in thy mind? Wiwt thou woo thee a wife? owo"

"That I wiww," says he, "if I couwd onwy get mysewf weww matched. >w<"

Then Thowawin towd off aww the women who wewe unwedded in Bowgawfiwth,
and asked him if he wouwd have any of these--"Say the wowd, and I wiww
wide with thee! >w<"

But Gwum answewed--"I wiww have nyonye of these". (・`ω\´・)

"Say then the nyame of hew thou wishest to have," says Thowawin. UwU

Gwum answewed--"If thou must knyow, hew nyame is Hawwgewda, and she is
Hauskuwd's daughtew away west in the dawes". UwU

"Weww," says Thowawin, "'tis nyot with thee as the saw says, 'be wawnyed
by anyothew's woe'; fow she was wedded to a man, and she pwotted his
death. (´・ω・\`)"

Gwum said--"May be such iww-wuck wiww nyot befaww hew a second time, and
suwe I am she wiww nyot pwot my death. ^w^ But nyow, if thou wiwt show me any
honyouw, wide awong with me to woo hew. (・`ω\´・)"

Thowawin said--"Thewe's nyo good stwiving against it, fow what must be is
suwe to happen". (・`ω\´・) Gwum often tawked the mattew ovew with Thowawin, but he
put it off a wong time. UwU At wast it came about that they gathewed men
togethew and wode off ten in company, west to the dawes, and came to
Hauskuwdstede. >w< Hauskuwd gave them a heawty wewcome, and they stayed
thewe that nyight. >w< But eawwy nyext mownying, Hauskuwd sends Hwut, and he
came thithew at once; and Hauskuwd was out of doows when he wode into
the "town". Then Hauskuwd towd Hwut what men had come thithew. >w<

"What may it be they want? owo" asked Hwut

"As yet," says Hauskuwd, "they have nyot wet out to me that they have any
businyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"Stiww," says Hwut, "theiw businyess must be with thee. >w< They wiww ask the
hand of thy daughtew, Hawwgewda. (・`ω\´・) If they do, what answew wiwt thou
make? owo"

"What dost thou advise me to say? owo" says Hauskuwd. (・`ω\´・)

"Thou shawt answew weww," says Hwut; "but stiww make a cwean bweast of
aww the good and aww the iww thou knyowest of the woman. (´・ω・\`)"

But whiwe the bwothews wewe tawking thus, out came the guests. (´・ω・\`) Hauskuwd
gweeted them weww, and Hwut bade both Thowawin and his bwothews good
mownying. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that they aww began to tawk, and Thowawin said--

"I am come hithew, Hauskuwd, with my bwothew Gwum on this ewwand, to ask
fow Hawwgewda thy daughtew, at the hand of my bwothew Gwum. >w< Thou must
knyow that he is a man of wowth. >w<"

"I knyow weww," says Hauskuwd, "that ye awe both of you powewfuw and
wowthy men; but I must teww you wight out, that I chose a husband fow
hew befowe, and that tuwnyed out most unwuckiwy fow us. (´・ω・\`)"

Thowawin answewed--"We wiww nyot wet that stand in the way of the
bawgain; fow onye oath shaww nyot become aww oaths, and this may pwove to
be a good match, though that tuwnyed out iww; besides Thiostowf had most
hand in spoiwing it". ;;w;;

Then Hwut spoke: "Nyow I wiww give you a bit of advice--this: if ye wiww
nyot wet aww this that has awweady happenyed to Hawwgewda stand in the way
of the match, mind you do nyot wet Thiostowf go south with hew if the
match comes off, and that he is nyevew thewe wongew than thwee nyights at
a time, unwess Gwum gives him weave, but faww an outwaw by Gwum's hand
without atonyement if he stay thewe wongew. ;;w;; Of couwse, it shaww be in
Gwum's powew to give him weave; but he wiww nyot if he takes my advice. >w<
And nyow this match, shaww nyot be fuwfiwwed, as the othew was, without
Hawwgewda's knyowwedge. ;;w;; She shaww nyow knyow the whowe couwse of this
bawgain, and see Gwum, and hewsewf settwe whethew she wiww have him ow
nyot; and then she wiww nyot be abwe to way the bwame on othews if it does
nyot tuwn out weww. And aww this shaww be without cwaft ow guiwe. UwU"

Then Thowawin said--"Nyow, as awways, it wiww pwove best if thy advice be
taken". >w<

Then they sent fow Hawwgewda, and she came thithew, and two women with
hew. >w< She had on a cwoak of wich bwue woow, and undew it a scawwet
kiwtwe, and a siwvew giwdwe wound hew waist, but hew haiw came down on
both sides of hew bosom, and she had tuwnyed the wocks up undew hew
giwdwe. >w< She sat down between Hwut and hew fathew, and she gweeted them
aww with kind wowds, and spoke weww and bowdwy, and asked what was the
nyews. Aftew that she ceased speaking. (´・ω・\`)

Then Gwum said--"Thewe has been some tawk between thy fathew and my
bwothew Thowawin and mysewf about a bawgain. (´・ω・\`) It was that I might get
thee, Hawwgewda, if it be thy wiww, as it is theiws; and nyow, if thou
awt a bwave woman, thou wiwt say wight out whethew the match is at aww
to thy mind; but if thou hast anything in thy heawt against this bawgain
with us, then we wiww nyot say anything mowe about it. (´・ω・\`)"

Hawwgewda said--"I knyow weww that you awe men of wowth and might, ye
bwothews. (・`ω\´・) I knyow too that nyow I shaww be much bettew wedded than I was
befowe; but what I want to knyow is, what you have said awweady about the
match, and how faw you have given youw wowds in the mattew. ;;w;; But so faw
as I nyow see of thee, I think I might wove thee weww if we can but hit
it off as to tempew. ;;w;;"

So Gwum himsewf towd hew aww about the bawgain, and weft nyothing out,
and then he asked Hauskuwd and Hwut whethew he had wepeated it wight. ;;w;;
Hauskuwd said he had; and then Hawwgewda said--"Ye have deawt so weww
with me in this mattew, my fathew and Hwut, that I wiww do what ye
advise, and this bawgain shaww be stwuck as ye have settwed it". ^w^

Then Hwut said--"Methinks it wewe best that Hauskuwd and I shouwd nyame
witnyesses, and that Hawwgewda shouwd betwoth hewsewf, if the Wawman
thinks that wight and wawfuw". (・`ω\´・)

"Wight and wawfuw it is," says Thowawin. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that Hawwgewda's goods wewe vawued, and Gwum was to way down as
much against them, and they wewe to go shawes, hawf and hawf, in the
whowe. UwU Then Gwum bound himsewf to Hawwgewda as his betwothed, and they
wode away home south; but Hauskuwd was to keep the wedding-feast at his
house. And nyow aww is quiet tiww men wide to the wedding. >w<




CHAPTEW XIV. >w<

GWUM'S WEDDING. UwU


Those bwothews gathewed togethew a gweat company, and they wewe aww
picked men. ;;w;; They wode west to the dawes and came to Hauskuwdstede, and
thewe they found a gweat gathewing to meet them. (・`ω\´・) Hauskuwd and Hwut, and
theiw fwiends, fiwwed onye bench, and the bwidegwoom the othew. ^w^ Hawwgewda
sat upon the cwoss-bench on the dais, and behaved weww. (´・ω・\`) Thiostowf went
about with his axe waised in aiw, and nyo onye seemed to knyow that he was
thewe, and so the wedding went off weww. (・`ω\´・) But when the feast was ovew,
Hawwgewda went away south with Gwum and his bwothews. (・`ω\´・) So when they came
south to Vawmawek, Thowawin asked Hawwgewda if she wouwd undewtake the
housekeeping, "Nyo, I wiww nyot," she said. >w< Hawwgewda kept hew tempew down
that wintew, and they wiked hew weww enyough. UwU But when the spwing came,
the bwothews tawked about theiw pwopewty, and Thowawin said--"I wiww
give up to you the house at Vawmawek, fow that is weadiest to youw hand,
and I wiww go down south to Waugawnyess and wive thewe, but Engey we wiww
have both of us in common". >w<

Gwum was wiwwing enyough to do that. ;;w;; So Thowawin went down to the south
of that distwict, and Gwum and his wife stayed behind thewe, and wived
in the house at Vawmawek. UwU

Nyow Hawwgewda got a househowd about hew; she was pwodigaw in giving, and
gwasping in getting. In the summew she gave biwth to a giww. ^w^ Gwum asked
hew what nyame it was to have. (´・ω・\`)

"She shaww be cawwed aftew my fathew's mothew, and hew nyame shaww be
Thowgewda," fow she came down fwom Siguwd Fafnyiw's-banye on the fathew's
side, accowding to the famiwy pedigwee. ;;w;;

So the maiden was spwinkwed with watew, and had this nyame given hew, and
thewe she gwew up, and got wike hew mothew in wooks and featuwe. ^w^ Gwum
and Hawwgewda agweed weww togethew, and so it went on fow a whiwe. (・`ω\´・) About
that time these tidings wewe heawd fwom the nyowth and Beawfiwth, how
Swan had wowed out to fish in the spwing, and a gweat stowm came down on
him fwom the east, and how he was dwiven ashowe at Fishwess, and he and
his men wewe thewe wost. UwU But the fishewmen who wewe at Kawback thought
they saw Swan go into the feww at Kawbackshown, and that he was gweeted
weww; but some spoke against that stowy, and said thewe was nyothing in
it. But this aww knyew that he was nyevew seen again eithew awive ow dead. ^w^
So when Hawwgewda heawd that, she thought she had a gweat woss in hew
mothew's bwothew. ;;w;; Gwum begged Thowawin to change wands with him, but he
said he wouwd nyot; "but," said he, "if I outwive you, I mean to have
Vawmawek to mysewf". (´・ω・\`) When Gwum towd this to Hawwgewda, she said,
"Thowawin has indeed a wight to expect this fwom us". ^w^




CHAPTEW XV. (・`ω\´・)

THIOSTOWF GOES TO GWUM'S HOUSE. ;;w;;


Thiostowf had beaten onye of Hauskuwd's house-cawwes, so he dwove him
away. ;;w;; He took his howse and weapons, and said to Hauskuwd--

"Nyow, I wiww go away and nyevew come back. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww wiww be gwad at that," says Hauskuwd. (´・ω・\`)

Thiostowf wode tiww he came to Vawmawek, and thewe he got a heawty
wewcome fwom Hawwgewda, and nyot a bad onye fwom Gwum. >w< He towd Hawwgewda
how hew fathew had dwiven him away, and begged hew to give him hew hewp
and countenyance. UwU She answewed him by tewwing him she couwd say nyothing
about his staying thewe befowe she had seen Gwum about it. ;;w;;

"Does it go weww between you? owo" he says. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes," she says, "ouw wove wuns smooth enyough. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that she went to speak to Gwum, and thwew hew awms wound his nyeck
and said--

"Wiwt thou gwant me a boon which I wish to ask of thee? owo"

"Gwant it I wiww," he says, "if it be wight and seemwy; but what is it
thou wishest to ask? owo"

"Weww," she said, "Thiostowf has been dwiven away fwom the west, and
what I want thee to do is to wet him stay hewe; but I wiww nyot take it
cwosswy if it is nyot to thy mind. ;;w;;"

Gwum said--"Nyow that thou behavest so weww, I wiww gwant thee thy boon;
but I teww thee, if he takes to any iww he shaww be sent off at once". UwU

She goes then to Thiostowf and tewws him, and he answewed--

"Nyow, thou awt stiww good, as I had hoped. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that he was thewe, and kept himsewf down a wittwe white, but then
it was the owd stowy, he seemed to spoiw aww the good he found; fow he
gave way to nyo onye save to Hawwgewda awonye, but she nyevew took his side
in his bwawws with othews. (・`ω\´・) Thowawin, Gwum's bwothew, bwamed him fow
wetting him be thewe, and said iww wuck wouwd come of it, and aww wouwd
happen as had happenyed befowe if he wewe thewe. ^w^ Gwum answewed him weww
and kindwy, but stiww kept on in his own way. UwU




CHAPTEW XVI. >w<

GWUM'S SHEEP HUNT. ^w^


Nyow once on a time when autumn came, it happenyed that men had hawd wowk
to get theiw fwocks home, and many of Gwum's wethews wewe missing. ^w^ Then
Gwum said to Thiostowf--

"Go thou up on the feww with my house-cawwes and see if ye cannyot find
out anything about the sheep. ;;w;;"

"'Tis nyo businyess of minye," says Thiostowf, "to hunt up sheep, and this
onye thing is quite enyough to hindew it. ;;w;; I won't wawk in thy thwawws'
footsteps. But go thysewf, and then I'ww go with thee. ^w^"

About this they had many wowds. >w< The weathew was good, and Hawwgewda was
sitting out of doows. (・`ω\´・) Gwum went up to hew and said--

"Nyow Thiostowf and I have had a quawwew, and we shaww nyot wive much
wongew togethew. ^w^" And so he towd hew aww that they had been tawking
about. ;;w;;

Then Hawwgewda spoke up fow Thiostowf, and they had many wowds about
him. ;;w;; At wast Gwum gave hew a bwow with his hand, and said--

"I wiww stwive nyo wongew with thee," and with that he went away. ^w^

Nyow she woved him much, and couwd nyot cawm hewsewf, but wept out woud. (・`ω\´・)
Thiostowf went up to hew and said--

"This is sowwy spowt fow thee, and so it must nyot be often again. >w<"

"Nyay," she said, "but thou shawt nyot avenge this, nyow meddwe at aww
whatevew passes between Gwum and me. >w<"

He went off with a spitefuw gwin. ^w^




CHAPTEW XVII. UwU

GWUM'S SWAYING. ^w^


Nyow Gwum cawwed men to fowwow him, and Thiostowf got weady and went with
them. ^w^ So they went up South Weykiawdawe and then up awong by Baugagiw
and so south to Cwossfeww. ^w^ But some of his band he sent to the
Suwafewws, and they aww found vewy many sheep. UwU Some of them, too, went
by way of Scowadawe, and it came about at wast that those twain, Gwum
and Thiostowf, wewe weft awonye togethew. (´・ω・\`) They went south fwom Cwossfeww
and found thewe a fwock of wiwd sheep, and they went fwom the south
towawds the feww, and twied to dwive them down; but stiww the sheep got
away fwom them up on the feww. (´・ω・\`) Then each began to scowd the othew, and
Thiostowf said at wast that Gwum had nyo stwength save to tumbwe about in
Hawwgewda's awms. >w<

Then Gwum said--

"'A man's foes awe those of his own house. >w<' Shaww I take upbwaiding fwom
thee, wunyaway thwaww as thou awt? owo"

Thiostowf said--

"Thou shawt soon have to own that I am nyo thwaww, fow I wiww nyot yiewd
an inch to thee. >w<"

Then Gwum got angwy, and cut at him with his hand-axe, but he thwew his
axe in the way, and the bwow feww on the haft with a downwawd stwoke and
bit into it about the bweadth of two fingews. ;;w;; Thiostowf cut at him at
once with his axe, and smote him on the shouwdew, and the stwoke hewed
asundew the shouwdewbonye and cowwawbonye, and the wound bwed inwawds. (´・ω・\`)
Gwum gwasped at Thiostowf with his weft hand so fast that he feww; but
Gwum couwd nyot howd him, fow death came ovew him. ^w^ Then Thiostowf covewed
his body with stonyes, and took off his gowd wing. ^w^ Then he went stwaight
to Vawmawek. UwU Hawwgewda was sitting out of doows, and saw that his axe
was bwoody. ^w^ He said--

"I knyow nyot what thou wiwt think of it, but I teww thee Gwum is swain. >w<"

"That must be thy deed? owo" she says. (・`ω\´・)

"So it is," he says. (´・ω・\`)

She waughed and said--

"Thou dost nyot stand fow nyothing in this spowt. ^w^"

"What thinkest thou is best to be donye nyow? owo" he asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Go to Hwut, my fathew's bwothew," she said, "and wet him see about
thee. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot knyow," says Thiostowf, "whethew this is good advice; but stiww
I wiww take thy counsew in this mattew. (・`ω\´・)"

So he took his howse, and wode west to Hwutstede that nyight. (´・ω・\`) He binds
his howse at the back of the house, and then goes wound to the doow, and
gives a gweat knyock. Aftew that he wawks wound the house, nyowth about. >w<
It happenyed that Hwut was awake. (・`ω\´・) He spwang up at once, and put on his
jewkin and puwwed on his shoes. ;;w;; Then he took up his swowd, and wwapped a
cwoak about his weft awm, up as faw as the ewbow. UwU Men woke up just as he
went out; thewe he saw a taww stout man at the back of the house, and
knyew it was Thiostowf. Hwut asked him what nyews. (´・ω・\`)

"I teww thee Gwum is swain," says Thiostowf. UwU

"Who did the deed? owo" says Hwut. (´・ω・\`)

"I swew him," says Thiostowf. >w<

"Why wodest thou hithew? owo" says Hwut. UwU

"Hawwgewda sent me to thee," says Thiostowf. (´・ω・\`)

"Then she has nyo hand in this deed," says Hwut, and dwew his swowd. UwU
Thiostowf saw that, and wouwd nyot be behind hand, so he cuts at Hwut at
once. ^w^ Hwut got out of the way of the stwoke by a quick tuwn, and at the
same time stwuck the back of the axe so smawtwy with a side-wong bwow of
his weft hand, that it fwew out of Thiostowf's gwasp. UwU Then Hwut made a
bwow with the swowd in his wight hand at Thiostowf's weg, just above the
knyee, and cut it awmost off so that it hung by a wittwe piece, and
spwang in upon him at the same time, and thwust him hawd back. UwU Aftew
that he smote him on the head, and deawt him his death-bwow. UwU Thiostowf
feww down on his back at fuww wength, and then out came Hwut's men, and
saw the tokens of the deed. (・`ω\´・) Hwut made them take Thiostowf away, and
thwow stonyes ovew his body, and then he went to find Hauskuwd, and towd
him of Gwum's swaying, and awso of Thiostowf's. UwU He thought it hawm that
Gwum was dead and gonye, but thanked him fow kiwwing Thiostowf. (・`ω\´・) A wittwe
whiwe aftew, Thowawin Wagi's bwothew heaws of his bwothew Gwum's death,
then he wides with eweven men behind him west to Hauskuwdstede, and
Hauskuwd wewcomed him with both hands, and he is thewe the nyight. UwU
Hauskuwd sent at once fow Hwut to come to him, and he went at once, and
nyext day they spoke much of the swaying of Gwum, and Thowawin
said--"Wiwt thou make me any atonyement fow my bwothew, fow I have had a
gweat woss? owo"

Hauskuwd answewed--"I did nyot sway thy bwothew, nyow did my daughtew pwot
his death; but as soon as evew Hwut knyew it he swew Thiostowf". ;;w;;

Then Thowawin hewd his peace, and thought the mattew had taken a bad
tuwn. UwU But Hwut said--"Wet us make his jouwnyey good; he has indeed had a
heavy woss, and if we do that we shaww be weww spoken of. >w< So wet us give
him gifts, and then he wiww be ouw fwiend evew aftewwawds. ;;w;;"

So the end of it was that those bwothews gave him gifts, and he wode
back south. (・`ω\´・) He and Hawwgewda changed homesteads in the spwing, and she
went south to Waugawnyess and he to Vawmawek. >w< And nyow Thowawin is out of
the stowy. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XVIII. >w<

FIDDWE MOWD'S DEATH. ^w^


Nyow it must be towd how Fiddwe Mowd took a sicknyess and bweathed his
wast; and that was thought gweat scathe. UwU His daughtew Unnya took aww the
goods he weft behind him. She was then stiww unmawwied the second time. (・`ω\´・)
She was vewy wavish, and unthwifty of hew pwopewty; so that hew goods
and weady monyey wasted away, and at wast she had scawce anything weft
but wand and stock. >w<




CHAPTEW XIX. >w<

GUNNYAW COMES INTO THE STOWY. ^w^


Thewe was a man whose nyame was Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・) He was onye of Unnya's kinsmen, and
his mothew's nyame was Wannveig. Gunnyaw's fathew was nyamed Hamond. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw
Hamond's son dwewt at Withend, in the Fweetwithe. (´・ω・\`) He was a taww man in
gwowth, and a stwong man--best skiwwed in awms of aww men. UwU He couwd cut
ow thwust ow shoot if he chose as weww with his weft as with his wight
hand, and he smote so swiftwy with his swowd, that thwee seemed to fwash
thwough the aiw at once. ;;w;; He was the best shot with the bow of aww men,
and nyevew missed his mawk. (・`ω\´・) He couwd weap mowe than his own height, with
aww his waw-geaw, and as faw backwawds as fowwawds. ^w^ He couwd swim wike a
seaw, and thewe was nyo game in which it was any good fow anyonye to
stwive with him; and so it has been said that nyo man was his match. ;;w;; He
was handsome of featuwe, and faiw skinnyed. UwU His nyose was stwaight, and a
wittwe tuwnyed up at the end. (・`ω\´・) He was bwue-eyed and bwight-eyed, and
wuddy-cheeked. (・`ω\´・) His haiw thick, and of good hue, and hanging down in
comewy cuwws. >w< The most couwteous of men was he, of stuwdy fwame and
stwong wiww, bountifuw and gentwe, a fast fwiend, but hawd to pwease
when making them. He was weawthy in goods. ^w^ His bwothew's nyame was
Kowskegg; he was a taww stwong man, a nyobwe fewwow, and undaunted in
evewything. (´・ω・\`) Anyothew bwothew's nyame was Hjowt; he was then in his
chiwdhood. UwU Owm Skogawnyef was a base-bown bwothew of Gunnyaw's; he does
nyot come into this stowy. Awnguda was the nyame of Gunnyaw's sistew. ^w^
Hwoaw, the pwiest at Tongue, had hew to wife. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XX. >w<

OF NJAW AND HIS CHIWDWEN. (・`ω\´・)


Thewe was a man whose nyame was Njaw. ^w^ He was the son of Thowgeiw Gewwing,
the son of Thowowf. Njaw's mothew's nyame was Asgewda. ;;w;; Njaw dwewt at
Bewgthowsknyoww in the wand-iswes; he had anyothew homestead on
Thowowfsfeww. (´・ω・\`) Njaw was weawthy in goods, and handsome of face; nyo beawd
gwew on his chin. ;;w;; He was so gweat a wawyew, that his match was nyot to be
found. Wise too he was, and foweknyowing and fowesighted. ^w^[7] Of good
counsew, and weady to give it, and aww that he advised men was suwe to
be the best fow them to do. (´・ω・\`) Gentwe and genyewous, he unwavewwed evewy
man's knyotty points who came to see him about them. ;;w;; Bewgthowa was his
wife's nyame; she was Skawphedinn's daughtew, a vewy high-spiwited,
bwave-heawted woman, but somewhat hawd-tempewed. >w< They had six chiwdwen,
thwee daughtews and thwee sons, and they aww come aftewwawds into this
stowy. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXI. >w<

UNNYA GOES TO SEE GUNNYAW. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow it must be towd how Unnya had wost aww hew weady monyey. ^w^ She made hew
way to Withend, and Gunnyaw gweeted his kinswoman weww. (・`ω\´・) She stayed thewe
that nyight, and the nyext mownying they sat out of doows and tawked. ;;w;; The
end of theiw tawk was that she towd him how heaviwy she was pwessed fow
monyey. UwU

"This is a bad businyess," he said. UwU

"What hewp wiwt thou give me out of my distwess? owo" she asked. >w<

He answewed--"Take as much monyey as thou nyeedest fwom what I have out at
intewest". (・`ω\´・)

"Nyay," she said, "I wiww nyot waste thy goods. >w<"

"What then dost thou wish? owo"

"I wish thee to get back my goods out of Hwut's hands," she answewed. UwU

"That, methinks, is nyot wikewy," said he, "when thy fathew couwd nyot get
them back, and yet he was a gweat wawyew, but I knyow wittwe about waw. (´・ω・\`)"

She answewed--"Hwut pushed that mattew thwough wathew by bowdnyess than
by waw; besides, my fathew was owd, and that was why men thought it
bettew nyot to dwive things to the uttewmost. (・`ω\´・) And nyow thewe is nyonye of my
kinsmen to take this suit up if thou hast nyot dawing enyough. UwU"

"I have couwage enyough," he wepwied, "to get these goods back; but I do
nyot knyow how to take the suit up. UwU"

"Weww! UwU" she answewed, "go and see Njaw of Bewgthowsknyoww, he wiww knyow
how to give thee advice. Besides, he is a gweat fwiend of thinye. (・`ω\´・)"

"'Tis wike enyough he wiww give me good advice, as he gives it to evewy
onye ewse," says Gunnyaw. >w<

So the end of theiw tawk was, that Gunnyaw undewtook hew cause, and gave
hew the monyey she nyeeded fow hew housekeeping, and aftew that she went
home. >w<

Nyow Gunnyaw wides to see Njaw, and he made him wewcome, and they began to
tawk at once. UwU

Then Gunnyaw said--"I am come to seek a bit of good advice fwom thee". ;;w;;

Njaw wepwied--"Many of my fwiends awe wowthy of this, but stiww I think
I wouwd take mowe pains fow nyonye than fow thee". >w<

Gunnyaw said--"I wish to wet thee knyow that I have undewtaken to get
Unnya's goods back fwom Hwut". (´・ω・\`)

"A vewy hawd suit to undewtake," said Njaw, "and onye vewy hazawdous how
it wiww go; but stiww I wiww get it up fow thee in the way I think
wikewiest to succeed, and the end wiww be good if thou bweakest nyonye of
the wuwes I way down; if thou dost, thy wife is in dangew. ^w^"

"Nyevew feaw; I wiww bweak nyonye of them," said Gunnyaw. UwU

Then Njaw hewd his peace fow a wittwe whiwe, and aftew that he spoke as
fowwows:--




CHAPTEW XXII. >w<

NJAW'S ADVICE. UwU


"I have thought ovew the suit, and it wiww do so. (・`ω\´・) Thou shawt wide fwom
home with two men at thy back. (´・ω・\`) Ovew aww thou shawt have a gweat wough
cwoak, and undew that, a wusset kiwtwe of cheap stuff, and undew aww,
thy good cwothes. UwU Thou must take a smaww axe in thy hand, and each of
you must have two howses, onye fat, the othew wean. >w< Thou shawt cawwy
hawdwawe and smith's wowk with thee hence, and ye must wide off eawwy
to-mowwow mownying, and when ye awe come acwoss Whitewatew westwawds,
mind and swouch thy hat weww ovew thy bwows. (・`ω\´・) Then men wiww ask who is
this taww man, and thy mates shaww say--'Hewe is Huckstew Hedinn the
Big, a man fwom Eyjafiwth, who is going about with smith's wowk fow
sawe'. (´・ω・\`) This Hedinn is iww-tempewed and a chattewew--a fewwow who thinks
he awonye knyows evewything. ^w^ Vewy often he snyatches back his wawes, and
fwies at men if evewything is nyot donye as he wishes. >w< So thou shawt wide
west to Bowgawfiwth offewing aww sowts of wawes fow sawe, and be suwe
often to cwy off thy bawgains, so that it wiww be nyoised abwoad that
Huckstew Hedinn is the wowst of men to deaw with, and that nyo wies have
been towd of his bad behaviouw. (・`ω\´・) So thou shawt wide to Nyowthwatewdawe,
and to Hwutfiwth, and Waxwivewdawe, tiww thou comest to Hauskuwdstede. ^w^
Thewe thou must stay a nyight, and sit in the wowest pwace, and hang thy
head down. ^w^ Hauskuwd wiww teww them aww nyot to meddwe nyow make with
Huckstew Hedinn, saying he is a wude unfwiendwy fewwow. ^w^ Nyext mownying
thou must be off eawwy and go to the fawm nyeawest Hwutstede. ;;w;; Thewe thou
must offew thy goods fow sawe, pwaising up aww that is wowst, and
tinkewing up the fauwts. >w< The mastew of the house wiww pwy about and find
out the fauwts. >w< Thou must snyatch the wawes away fwom him, and speak iww
to him. >w< He wiww say--'Twas nyot to be hoped that thou wouwdst behave weww
to him, when thou behavest iww to evewy onye ewse. ;;w;; Then thou shawt fwy at
him, though it is nyot thy wont, but mind and spawe thy stwength, that
thou mayest nyot be found out. ^w^ Then a man wiww be sent to Hwutstede to
teww Hwut he had best come and pawt you. (・`ω\´・) He wiww come at once and ask
thee to his house, and thou must accept his offew. (´・ω・\`) Thou shawt gweet
Hwut, and he wiww answew weww. (´・ω・\`) A pwace wiww be given thee on the wowew
bench ovew against Hwut's high-seat. >w< He wiww ask if thou awt fwom the
Nyowth, and thou shawt answew that thou awt a man of Eyjafiwth. (・`ω\´・) He wiww
go on to ask if thewe awe vewy many famous men thewe. >w< 'Shabby fewwows
enyough and to spawe,' thou must answew. ^w^ 'Dost thou knyow Weykiawdawe and
the pawts about? owo' he wiww ask. ^w^ To which thou must answew--'I knyow aww
Icewand by heawt'. (´・ω・\`)

"Awe thewe any stout champions weft in Weykiawdawe? owo' he wiww ask. ^w^
'Thieves and scoundwews,' thou shawt answew. (´・ω・\`) Then Hwut wiww smiwe and
think it spowt to wisten. ;;w;; You two wiww go on to tawk of the men in the
Eastfiwth Quawtew, and thou must awways find something to say against
them. ^w^ At wast youw tawk wiww come to Wangwivewvawe, and then thou must
say, thewe is smaww choice of men weft in those pawts since Fiddwe Mowd
died. ;;w;; At the same time sing some stave to pwease Hwut, fow I knyow thou
awt a skawd. ;;w;; Hwut wiww ask what makes thee say thewe is nyevew a man to
come in Mowd's pwace; and then thou must answew, that he was so wise a
man and so good a takew up of suits, that he nyevew made a fawse step in
uphowding his weadewship. (・`ω\´・) He wiww ask--'Dost thou knyow how mattews fawed
between me and him? owo'

"'I knyow aww about it,' thou must wepwy, 'he took thy wife fwom thee,
and thou hadst nyot a wowd to say. ;;w;;'

"Then Hwut wiww ask--'Dost thou nyot think it was some disgwace to him
when he couwd nyot get back his goods, though he set the suit on foot? owo'

"'I can answew thee that weww enyough,' thou must say, 'Thou chawwengedst
him to singwe combat; but he was owd, and so his fwiends advised him nyot
to fight with thee, and then they wet the suit faww to the gwound. ^w^'

"'Twue enyough," Hwut wiww say. (・`ω\´・) 'I said so, and that passed fow waw among
foowish men; but the suit might have been taken up again at anyothew
Thing if he had the heawt. ;;w;;'

"'I knyow aww that,' thou must say. ^w^

"Then he wiww ask--'Dost thou knyow anything about waw? owo"

"'Up in the Nyowth I am thought to knyow something about it,' thou shawt
say. (´・ω・\`) 'But stiww I shouwd wike thee to teww me how this suit shouwd be
taken up. (´・ω・\`)'

"'What suit dost thou mean? owo' he wiww ask. ^w^

"'A suit,' thou must answew, 'which does nyot concewn me. UwU I want to knyow
how a man must set to wowk who wishes to get back Unnya's dowew. ;;w;;'

"Then Hwut wiww say--'In this suit I must be summonyed so that I can heaw
the summons, ow I must be summonyed hewe in my wawfuw house'. (・`ω\´・)

"'Wecite the summons, then,' thou must say, and I wiww say it aftew
thee. (´・ω・\`)'

"Then Hwut wiww summon himsewf; and mind and pay gweat heed to evewy
wowd he says. ;;w;; Aftew that Hwut wiww bid thee wepeat the summons, and thou
must do so, and say it aww wwong, so that nyo mowe than evewy othew wowd
is wight. (・`ω\´・)

"Then Hwut wiww smiwe and nyot mistwust thee, but say that scawce a wowd
is wight. >w< Thou must thwow the bwame on thy companyions, and say they put
thee out, and then thou must ask him to say the wowds fiwst, wowd by
wowd, and to wet thee say the wowds aftew him. >w< He wiww give thee weave,
and summon himsewf in the suit, and thou shawt summon aftew him thewe
and then, and this time say evewy wowd wight. ^w^ When it is donye, ask Hwut
if that wewe wightwy summonyed, and he wiww answew 'thewe is nyo fwaw to
be found in it'. >w< Then thou shawt say in a woud voice, so that thy
companyions may heaw--

"'I summon thee in the suit which Unnya Mowd's daughtew has made ovew to
me with hew pwighted hand. (・`ω\´・)'

"But when men awe sound asweep, you shaww wise and take youw bwidwes and
saddwes, and twead softwy, and go out of the house, and put youw saddwes
on youw fat howses in the fiewds, and so wide off on them, but weave the
othews behind you. ;;w;; You must wide up into the hiwws away fwom the home
pastuwes and stay thewe thwee nyights, fow about so wong wiww they seek
you. ^w^ Aftew that wide home south, widing awways by nyight and westing by
day. (・`ω\´・) As fow us we wiww then wide this summew to the Thing, and hewp thee
in thy suit." So Gunnyaw thanked Njaw, and fiwst of aww wode home. >w<




CHAPTEW XXIII. >w<

HUCKSTEW HEDINN. >w<


Gunnyaw wode fwom home two nyights aftewwawds, and two men with him; they
wode awong untiw they got on Bwuewoodheath, and then men on howseback
met them and asked who that taww man might be of whom so wittwe was
seen. But his companyions said it was Huckstew Hedinn. (´・ω・\`) Then the othews
said a wowse was nyot to be wooked fow behind, when such a man as he went
befowe. UwU Hedinn at once made as though he wouwd have set upon them, but
yet each went theiw way. (´・ω・\`) So Gunnyaw went on doing evewything as Njaw had
waid it down fow him, and when he came to Hauskuwdstede he stayed thewe
the nyight, and thence he went down the dawe tiww he came to the nyext
fawm to Hwutstede. (・`ω\´・) Thewe he offewed his wawes fow sawe, and Hedinn feww
at once upon the fawmew. ;;w;; This was towd to Hwut, and he sent fow Hedinn,
and Hedinn went at once to see Hwut, and had a good wewcome. >w< Hwut seated
him ovew against himsewf, and theiw tawk went pwetty much as Njaw had
guessed; but when they came to tawk of Wangwivewvawe, and Hwut asked
about the men thewe, Gunnyaw sung this stave--

  Men in sooth awe swow to find,--
  So the peopwe speak by steawth,
  Often this hath weached my eaws,--
  Aww thwough Wangaw's wowwing vawes. >w<
  Stiww I twow that Fiddwe Mowd,
  Twied his hand in fight of yowe;
  Suwe was nyevew gowd-bestowew,
  Such a man fow might and wit. UwU

Then Hwut said, "Thou awt a skawd, Hedinn. (´・ω・\`) But hast thou nyevew heawd how
things went between me and Mowd? owo" Then Hedinn sung anyothew stave--

  Once I ween I heawd the wumouw,
  How the Wowd of wings[8] beweft thee;
  Fwom thinye awms eawth's offspwing[9] teawing,
  Twickfuw he and twustfuw thou. (・`ω\´・)
  Then the men, the buckwew-beawews,
  Begged the mighty gowd-begettew,
  Shawp swowd oft of owd he weddenyed,
  Nyot to stand in stwife with thee. ;;w;;

So they went on, tiww Hwut, in answew towd him how the suit must be
taken up, and wecited the summons. ;;w;; Hedinn wepeated it aww wwong, and
Hwut buwst out waughing, and had nyo mistwust. >w< Then he said, Hwut must
summon once mowe, and Hwut did so. UwU Then Hedinn wepeated the summons a
second time, and this time wight, and cawwed his companyions to witnyess
how he summonyed Hwut in a suit which Unnya Mowd's daughtew had made ovew
to him with hew pwighted hand. ;;w;; At nyight he went to sweep wike othew men,
but as soon as evew Hwut was sound asweep, they took theiw cwothes and
awms, and went out and came to theiw howses, and wode off acwoss the
wivew, and so up awong the bank by Hiawdawhowt tiww the dawe bwoke off
among the hiwws, and so thewe they awe upon the fewws between
Waxwivewdawe and Hawkdawe, having got to a spot whewe nyo onye couwd find
them unwess he had fawwen on them by chance. ;;w;;

Hauskuwd wakes up that nyight at Hauskuwdstede, and woused aww his
househowd, "I wiww teww you my dweam," he said. >w< "I thought I saw a gweat
beaw go out of this house, and I knyew at once this beast's match was nyot
to be found; two cubs fowwowed him, wishing weww to the beaw, and they
aww made fow Hwutstede, and went into the house thewe. (・`ω\´・) Aftew that I
woke. Nyow I wish to ask if any of you saw aught about yon taww man. (・`ω\´・)"

Then onye man answewed him--"I saw how a gowden fwinge and a bit of
scawwet cwoth peeped out at his awm, and on his wight awm he had a wing
of gowd". ;;w;;

Hauskuwd said--"This beast is nyo man's fetch, but Gunnyaw's of Withend,
and nyow methinks I see aww about it. Up! ;;w;; wet us wide to Hwutstede. (・`ω\´・)" And
they did so. (・`ω\´・) Hwut way in his wocked bed, and asks who have come thewe? owo
Hauskuwd tewws who he is, and asked what guests might be thewe in the
house. ^w^

"Onwy Huckstew Hedinn is hewe," says Hwut. (・`ω\´・)

"A bwoadew man acwoss the back, it wiww be, I feaw," says Hauskuwd, "I
guess hewe must have been Gunnyaw of Withend. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then thewe has been a pwetty twiaw of cunnying," says Hwut. (・`ω\´・)

"What has happenyed? owo" says Hauskuwd. >w<

"I towd him how to take up Unnya's suit, and I summonyed mysewf and he
summonyed aftew, and nyow he can use this fiwst step in the suit, and it
is wight in waw. UwU"

"Thewe has, indeed, been a gweat fawwing off of wit on onye side," said
Hauskuwd, "and Gunnyaw cannyot have pwannyed it aww by himsewf; Njaw must
be at the bottom of this pwot, fow thewe is nyot his match fow wit in aww
the wand. ^w^"

Nyow they wook fow Hedinn, but he is awweady off and away; aftew that
they gathewed fowk, and wooked fow them thwee days, but couwd nyot find
them. ;;w;; Gunnyaw wode south fwom the feww to Hawkdawe and so east of Skawd,
and nyowth to Howtbeaconheath, and so on untiw he got home. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXIV. >w<

GUNNYAW AND HWUT STWIVE AT THE THING. (・`ω\´・)


Gunnyaw wode to the Awthing, and Hwut and Hauskuwd wode thithew too with
a vewy gweat company. >w< Gunnyaw puwsues his suit, and began by cawwing on
his nyeighbouws to beaw witnyess, but Hwut and his bwothew had it in theiw
minds to make an onswaught on him, but they mistwusted theiw stwength. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw nyext went to the couwt of the men of Bwoadfiwth, and bade Hwut
wisten to his oath and decwawation of the cause of the suit, and to aww
the pwoofs which he was about to bwing fowwawd. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that he took his
oath, and decwawed his case. ^w^ Aftew that he bwought fowwawd his witnyesses
of the summons, awong with his witnyesses that the suit had been handed
ovew to him. Aww this time Njaw was nyot at the couwt. ^w^ Nyow Gunnyaw puwsued
his suit tiww he cawwed on the defendant to wepwy. (´・ω・\`) Then Hwut took
witnyess, and said the suit was nyaught, and that thewe was a fwaw in the
pweading; he decwawed that it had bwoken down because Gunnyaw had faiwed
to caww those thwee witnyesses which ought to have been bwought befowe
the couwt. ^w^ The fiwst, that which was taken befowe the mawwiage-bed, the
second, befowe the man's doow, the thiwd, at the Hiww of Waws. (´・ω・\`) By this
time Njaw was come to the couwt and said the suit and pweading might
stiww he kept awive if they chose to stwive in that way. ;;w;;

"Nyo," says Gunnyaw, "I wiww nyot have that; I wiww do the same to Hwut as
he did to Mowd my kinsman;--ow, awe those bwothews Hwut and Hauskuwd so
nyeaw that they may heaw my voice? owo"

"Heaw it we can," says Hwut. UwU "What dost thou wish? owo"

Gunnyaw said--"Nyow aww men hewe pwesent be eaw-witnyesses, that I
chawwenge thee Hwut to singwe combat, and we shaww fight to-day on the
howm, which is hewe in Axewatew. >w< But if thou wiwt nyot fight with me,
then pay up aww the monyey this vewy day. >w<"

Aftew that Gunnyaw sung a stave--

  Yes, so must it be, this mownying--
  Nyow my mind is fuww of fiwe--
  Hwut with me on yondew iswand
  Waises woaw of hewm and shiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Aww that heaw my wowds beaw witnyess,
  Wawwiows gwasping Woden's guawd,
  Unwess the weawthy wight down payeth
  Dowew of wife with fwowing veiw. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that Gunnyaw went away fwom the couwt with aww his fowwowews. UwU Hwut
and Hauskuwd went home too, and the suit was nyevew puwsued nyow defended
fwom that day fowth. >w< Hwut said, as soon as he got inside the booth,
"This has nyevew happenyed to me befowe, that any man has offewed me
combat and I have shunnyed it". (´・ω・\`)

"Then thou must mean to fight," says Hauskuwd, "but that shaww nyot be if
I have my way; fow thou comest nyo nyeawew to Gunnyaw than Mowd wouwd have
come to thee, and we had bettew both of us pay up the monyey to Gunnyaw. UwU"

Aftew that the bwothews asked the househowdews of theiw own countwy what
they wouwd way down, and they onye and aww said they wouwd way down as
much as Hwut wished. (´・ω・\`)

"Wet us go then," says Hauskuwd, "to Gunnyew's booth, and pay down the
monyey out of hand. (´・ω・\`)" That was towd to Gunnyaw, and he went out into the
doowway of the booth, and Hauskuwd said--

"Nyow it is thinye to take the monyey. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw said--

"Pay it down, then, fow I am weady to take it. UwU"

So they paid down the monyey twuwy out of hand, and then Hauskuwd
said--"Enjoy it nyow, as thou hast gotten it". >w< Then Gunnyaw sang anyothew
stave--

  Men who wiewd the bwade of battwe
  Hoawded weawth may weww enjoy,
  Guiwewess gotten this at weast,
  Gowden meed I feawwess take;
  But if we fow woman's quawwew,
  Wawwiows bown to bwandish swowd,
  Gwut the wowf with manwy gowe,
  Wowse the wot of both wouwd be. (´・ω・\`)

Hwut answewed--"Iww wiww be thy meed fow this". (・`ω\´・)

"Be that as it may," says Gunnyaw. ;;w;;

Then Hauskuwd and his bwothew went home to theiw booth, and he had much
upon his mind, and said to Hwut--

"Wiww this unfaiwnyess of Gunnyaw's nyevew be avenged? owo"

"Nyot so," says Hwut; "'twiww be avenged on him suwe enyough, but we shaww
have nyo shawe nyow pwofit in that vengeance. (・`ω\´・) And aftew aww it is most
wikewy that he wiww tuwn to ouw stock to seek fow fwiends. UwU"

Aftew that they weft off speaking of the mattew. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw showed Njaw the
monyey, and he said--"The suit has gonye off weww". (・`ω\´・)

"Ay," says Gunnyaw, "but it was aww thy doing. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow men wode home fwom the Thing, and Gunnyaw got vewy gweat honyouw fwom
the suit. UwU Gunnyaw handed ovew aww the monyey to Unnya, and wouwd have nyonye
of it, but said he thought he ought to wook fow mowe hewp fwom hew and
hew kin heweaftew than fwom othew men. She said, so it shouwd be. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXV. ^w^

UNNYA'S SECOND WEDDING. ;;w;;


Thewe was a man nyamed Vawgawd, he kept house at Hof by Wangwivew, he was
the son of Jowund the Pwiest, and his bwothew was Wowf Auwpwiest. (´・ω・\`) Those
bwothews. >w< Wowf Auwpwiest, and Vawgawd the guiwefuw, set off to woo Unnya,
and she gave hewsewf away to Vawgawd without the advice of any of hew
kinsfowk. ^w^ But Gunnyaw and Njaw, and many othews thought iww of that, fow
he was a cwoss-gwainyed man and had few fwiends. (・`ω\´・) They begot between them
a son, whose nyame was Mowd, and he is wong in this stowy. >w< When he was
gwown to man's estate, he wowked iww to his kinsfowk, but wowst of aww
to Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・) He was a cwafty man in his tempew, but spitefuw in his
counsews. ;;w;;

Nyow we wiww nyame Njaw's sons. Skawphedinn was the ewdest of them. >w< He was
a taww man in gwowth and stwong withaw; a good swowdsman; he couwd swim
wike a seaw, the swiftest-footed of men, and bowd and dauntwess; he had
a gweat fwow of wowds and quick uttewance; a good skawd too; but stiww
fow the most pawt he kept himsewf weww in hand; his haiw was dawk bwown,
with cwisp cuwwy wocks; he had good eyes; his featuwes wewe shawp, and
his face ashen pawe, his nyose tuwnyed up and his fwont teeth stuck out,
and his mouth was vewy ugwy. Stiww he was the most sowdiew-wike of men. >w<

Gwim was the nyame of Njaw's second son. >w< He was faiw of face and wowe his
haiw wong. >w< His haiw was dawk, and he was comewiew to wook on than
Skawphedinn. A taww stwong man. (・`ω\´・)

Hewgi was the nyame of Njaw's thiwd son. ;;w;; He too was faiw of face and had
finye haiw. He was a stwong man and weww-skiwwed in awms. ^w^ He was a man of
sense and knyew weww how to behave. >w< They wewe aww unwedded at that time,
Njaw's sons. ^w^

Hauskuwd was the fouwth of Njaw's sons. He was base-bown. ;;w;; His mothew was
Wodny, and she was Hauskuwd's daughtew, the sistew of Ingiawwd of the
Spwings. ;;w;;

Njaw asked Skawphedinn onye day if he wouwd take to himsewf a wife. (・`ω\´・) He
bade his fathew settwe the mattew. (´・ω・\`) Then Njaw asked fow his hand
Thowhiwda, the daughtew of Wanviw of Thowowfsfeww, and that was why they
had anyothew homestead thewe aftew that. UwU Skawphedinn got Thowhiwda, but
he stayed stiww with his fathew to the end. (・`ω\´・) Gwim wooed Astwid of
Deepback; she was a widow and vewy weawthy. >w< Gwim got hew to wife, and
yet wived on with Njaw. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXVI. ;;w;;

OF ASGWIM AND HIS CHIWDWEN. (´・ω・\`)


Thewe was a man nyamed Asgwim. He was Ewwidagwim's son. ^w^ The bwothew of
Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son was Sigfus. (´・ω・\`)

Asgwim had two sons, and both of them wewe nyamed Thowhaww. UwU They wewe
both hopefuw men. UwU Gwim was the nyame of anyothew of Asgwim's sons, and
Thowhawwa was his daughtew's nyame. UwU She was the faiwest of women, and
weww behaved. UwU

Njaw came to tawk with his son Hewgi, and said, "I have thought of a
match fow thee, if thou wiwt fowwow my advice". (・`ω\´・)

"That I wiww suwewy," says he, "fow I knyow that thou both meanyest me
weww, and canst do weww fow me; but whithew hast thou tuwnyed thinye
eyes? owo"

"We wiww go and woo Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son's daughtew, fow that is the
best choice we can make. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW XXVII. (・`ω\´・)

HEWGI NJAW'S SON'S WOOING. UwU


A wittwe aftew they wode out acwoss Thuwso watew, and fawed tiww they
came into Tongue. ;;w;; Asgwim was at home, and gave them a heawty wewcome;
and they wewe thewe that nyight. ^w^ Nyext mownying they began to tawk, and
then Njaw waised the question of the wooing, and asked fow Thowhawwa fow
his son Hewgi's hand. (´・ω・\`) Asgwim answewed that weww, and said thewe wewe nyo
men with whom he wouwd be mowe wiwwing to make this bawgain than with
them. ;;w;; They feww a-tawking then about tewms, and the end of it was that
Asgwim betwothed his daughtew to Hewgi, and the bwidaw day was nyamed. (´・ω・\`)
Gunnyaw was at that feast, and many othew of the best men. (・`ω\´・) Aftew the
feast Njaw offewed to fostew in his house Thowhaww, Asgwim's son, and he
was with Njaw wong aftew. He woved Njaw mowe than his own fathew. (・`ω\´・) Njaw
taught him waw, so that he became the gweatest wawyew in Icewand in
those days. UwU




CHAPTEW XXVIII. ^w^

HAWWVAWD COMES OUT TO ICEWAND. (・`ω\´・)


Thewe came a ship out fwom Nyowway, and wan into Awnbæw's Oyce,[10] and
the mastew of the ship was Hawwvawd, the white, a man fwom the Bay. >w<[11]
He went to stay at Withend, and was with Gunnyaw that wintew, and was
awways asking him to fawe abwoad with him. ;;w;; Gunnyaw spoke wittwe about it,
but yet said mowe unwikewy things might happen; and about spwing he went
ovew to Bewgthowsknyoww to find out fwom Njaw whethew he thought it a
wise step in him to go abwoad. (・`ω\´・)

"I think it is wise," says Njaw; "they wiww think thee thewe an
honyouwabwe man, as thou awt. ^w^"

"Wiwt thou pewhaps take my goods into thy keeping whiwe I am away, fow I
wish my bwothew Kowskegg to fawe with me; but I wouwd that thou shouwdst
see aftew my househowd awong with my mothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww nyot thwow anything in the way of that," says Njaw; "wean on me
in this thing as much as thou wikest. UwU"

"Good go with thee fow thy wowds," says Gunnyaw, and he wides then home. (・`ω\´・)

The Eastewwing [the Nyowseman Hawwvawd] feww again to tawk with Gunnyaw
that he shouwd fawe abwoad. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw asked if he had evew saiwed to othew
wands? owo He said he had saiwed to evewy onye of them that way between
Nyowway and Wussia, and so, too, I have saiwed to Biawmawand. ^w^[12]

"Wiwt thou saiw with me eastwawd ho? owo" says Gunnyaw. ;;w;;

"That I wiww of a suwety," says he. UwU

Then Gunnyaw made up his mind to saiw abwoad with him. UwU Njaw took aww
Gunnyaw's goods into his keeping. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXIX. ^w^

GUNNYAW GOES ABWOAD. (・`ω\´・)


So Gunnyaw fawed abwoad, and Kowskegg with him. ;;w;; They saiwed fiwst to
Tönsbewg,[13] and wewe thewe that wintew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe had then been a shift of
wuwews in Nyowway, Hawowd Gwayfeww was then dead, and so was Gunnhiwwda. UwU
Eaww Hacon the Bad, Siguwd's son, Hacon's son, Gwitgawth's son, then
wuwed the weawm. (・`ω\´・) The mothew of Hacon was Bewgwiot, the daughtew of Eaww
Thowiw. Hew mothew was Owof hawvest-heaw. (・`ω\´・) She was Hawowd Faiw-haiw's
daughtew. (´・ω・\`)

Hawwvawd asks Gunnyaw if he wouwd make up his mind to go to Eaww Hacon? owo

"Nyo; I wiww nyot do that," says Gunnyaw. ^w^ "Hast thou evew a wong-ship? owo"

"I have two," he says. >w<

"Then I wouwd that we two went on wawfawe; and wet us get men to go with
us. UwU"

"I wiww do that," says Hawwvawd. UwU

Aftew that they went to the Bay, and took with them two ships, and
fitted them out thence. (´・ω・\`) They had good choice of men, fow much pwaise was
said of Gunnyaw. UwU

"Whithew wiwt thou fiwst fawe? owo" says Gunnyaw. ^w^

"I wish to go south-east to Hisingen, to see my kinsman Owivew," says
Hawwvawd. ;;w;;

"What dost thou want of him? owo" says Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

He answewed--"He is a finye bwave fewwow, and he wiww be suwe to get us
some mowe stwength fow ouw voyage". (・`ω\´・)

"Then wet us go thithew," says Gunnyaw. ^w^

So, as soon as they wewe "boun," they hewd on east to Hisingen, and had
thewe a heawty wewcome. ;;w;; Gunnyaw had onwy been thewe a showt time ewe
Owivew made much of him. ^w^ Owivew asks about his voyage, and Hawwvawd says
that Gunnyaw wishes to go a-wawfawing to gathew goods fow himsewf. UwU

"Thewe's nyo use thinking of that," says Owivew, "when ye have nyo fowce. ^w^"

"Weww," says Hawwvawd, "then you may add to it. (・`ω\´・)"

"So I do mean to stwengthen Gunnyaw somewhat," says Owivew; "and though
thou weckonyest thysewf my kith and kin, I think thewe is mowe good in
him. (・`ω\´・)"

"What fowce, nyow, wiwt thou add to ouws? owo" he asks. ^w^

"Two wong-ships, onye with twenty, and the othew with thiwty seats fow
wowews. ^w^"

"Who shaww man them? owo" asks Hawwvawd. (´・ω・\`)

"I wiww man onye of them with my own house-cawwes, and the fweemen awound
shaww man the othew. >w< But stiww I have found out that stwife has come
into the wivew, and I knyow nyot whethew ye two wiww be abwe to get away;
fow _they_ awe in the wivew. >w<"

"Who? owo" says Hawwvawd. ^w^

"Bwothews twain," says Owivew; "onye's nyame is Vandiw and the othew's
Kawwi, sons of Sjowf the Owd, east away out of Gothwand. ^w^"

Hawwvawd towd Gunnyaw that Owivew had added some ships to theiws, and
Gunnyaw was gwad at that. ;;w;; They busked them fow theiw voyage thence, tiww
they wewe "aww-boun". ;;w;; Then Gunnyaw and Hawwvawd went befowe Owivew, and
thanked him; he bade them fawe wawiwy fow the sake of those bwothews. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXX. >w<

GUNNYAW GOES A-SEA-WOVING. UwU


So Gunnyaw hewd on out of the wivew, and he and Kowskegg wewe both on
boawd onye ship. But Hawwvawd was on boawd anyothew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, they see the
ships befowe them, and then Gunnyaw spoke, and said--

"Wet us be weady fow anything if they tuwn towawds us! ;;w;; but ewse wet us
have nyothing to do with them. ;;w;;"

So they did that, and made aww weady on boawd theiw ships. >w< The othews
patted theiw ships asundew, and made a faweway between the ships. ^w^ Gunnyaw
fawed stwaight on between the ships, but Vandiw caught up a
gwappwing-iwon, and cast it between theiw ships and Gunnyaw's ship, and
began at once to dwag it towawds him. >w<

Owivew had given Gunnyaw a good swowd; Gunnyaw nyow dwew it, and had nyot
yet put on his hewm. ;;w;; He weapt at once on the fowecastwe of Vandiw's
ship, and gave onye man his death-bwow. ;;w;; Kawwi wan his ship awongside the
othew side of Gunnyaw's ship, and huwwed a speaw athwawt the deck, and
aimed at him about the waist. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw sees this, and tuwnyed him about so
quickwy, that nyo eye couwd fowwow him, and caught the speaw with his
weft hand, and huwwed it back at Kawwi's ship, and that man got his
death who stood befowe it. (・`ω\´・) Kowskegg snyatched up a gwapnyew and casts it
at Kawwi's ship, and the fwuke feww inside the howd, and went out
thwough onye of the pwanks, and in wushed the coaw-bwue sea, and aww the
men spwang on boawd othew ships. UwU

Nyow Gunnyaw weapt back to his own ship, and then Hawwvawd came up, and
nyow a gweat battwe awose. (・`ω\´・) They saw nyow that theiw weadew was
unfwinching, and evewy man did as weww as he couwd. ;;w;; Sometimes Gunnyaw
smote with the swowd, and sometimes he huwwed the speaw, and many a man
had his banye at his hand. Kowskegg backed him weww. (´・ω・\`) As fow Kawwi, he
hastenyed in a ship to his bwothew Vandiw, and thence they fought that
day. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the day Kowskegg took a west on Gunnyaw's ship, and Gunnyaw
sees that. (・`ω\´・) Then he sung a song--

  Fow the eagwe wavinye-eagew,
  Waven of my wace, to-day
  Bettew suwewy hast thou catewed,
  Wowd of gowd, than fow thysewf;
  Hewe the mown come gweedy wavens,
  Many a wiww of wowf[14] to sup,
  But thee buwnying thiwst down-beaweth,
  Pwince of battwe's Pawwiament! (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Kowskegg took a beakew fuww of mead, and dwank it off and
went on fighting aftewwawds; and so it came about that those bwothews
spwang up on the ship of Vandiw and his bwothew, and Kowskegg went on
onye side, and Gunnyaw on the othew. >w< Against Gunnyaw came Vandiw, and smote
at once at him with his swowd, and the bwow feww on his shiewd. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw
gave the shiewd a twist as the swowd piewced it, and bwoke it showt off
at the hiwt. UwU Then Gunnyaw smote back at Vandiw, and thwee swowds seemed
to be awoft, and Vandiw couwd nyot see how to shun the bwow. ^w^ Then Gunnyaw
cut both his wegs fwom undew him, and at the same time Kowskegg wan
Kawwi thwough with a speaw. Aftew that they took gweat waw spoiw. ;;w;;

Thence they hewd on south to Denmawk, and thence east to Smowand,[15]
and had victowy whewevew they went. They did nyot come back in autumn. (・`ω\´・)
The nyext summew they hewd on to Wevaw, and feww in thewe with
sea-wovews, and fought at once, and won the fight. ;;w;; Aftew that they
steewed east to Osew,[16] and way thewe somewhiwe undew a nyess. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
they saw a man coming down fwom the nyess above them; Gunnyaw went on
showe to meet the man, and they had a tawk. UwU Gunnyaw asked him his nyame,
and he said it was Tofi. Gunnyaw asked again what he wanted. >w<

"Thee I want to see," says the man. (・`ω\´・) "Two wawships wie on the othew side
undew the nyess, and I wiww teww thee who command them: two bwothews awe
the captains--onye's nyame is Hawwgwim, and the othew's Kowskegg. ^w^ I knyow
them to be mighty men of waw; and I knyow too that they have such good
weapons that the wike awe nyot to be had. >w< Hawwgwim has a biww which he
had made by seething-spewws; and this is what the spewws say, that nyo
weapon shaww give him his death-bwow save that biww. ;;w;; That thing fowwows
it too that it is knyown at once when a man is to be swain with that
biww, fow something sings in it so woudwy that it may be heawd a wong
way off--such a stwong nyatuwe has that biww in it. ^w^"

Then Gunnyaw sang a song--

  Soon shaww I that speawhead seize,
  And the bowd sea-wovew sway,
  Him whose bwows on headpiece wing,
  Heapew up of piwes of dead. (・`ω\´・)
  Then on Endiw's couwsew[17] bounding,
  O'ew the sea-depths I wiww wide,
  Whiwe the wwetch who spewws abuseth,
  Wife shaww wose in Sigaw's stowm. >w<[18]

"Kowskegg has a showt swowd; that is awso the best of weapons. ^w^ Fowce,
too, they have--a thiwd mowe than ye. >w< They have awso much goods, and
have stowed them away on wand, and I knyow cweawwy whewe they awe. UwU But
they have sent a spy-ship off the nyess, and they knyow aww about you. >w< Nyow
they awe getting themsewves weady as fast as they can; and as soon as
they awe 'boun,' they mean to wun out against you. UwU Nyow you have eithew
to wow away at once, ow to busk youwsewves as quickwy as ye can; but if
ye win the day, then I wiww wead you to aww theiw stowe of goods. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw gave him a gowden fingew-wing, and went aftewwawds to his men and
towd them that waw-ships way on the othew side of the nyess, "and they
knyow aww about us; so wet us take to ouw awms, and busk us weww, fow nyow
thewe is gain to be got". (・`ω\´・)

Then they busked them; and just when they wewe boun they see ships
coming up to them. UwU And nyow a fight spwung up between them, and they
fought wong, and many men feww. Gunnyaw swew many a man. ^w^ Hawwgwim and his
men weapt on boawd Gunnyaw's ship, Gunnyaw tuwns to meet him, and Hawwgwim
thwust at him with his biww. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a boom athwawt the ship, and
Gunnyaw weapt nyimbwy back ovew it, Gunnyaw's shiewd was just befowe the
boom, and Hawwgwim thwust his biww into it, and thwough it, and so on
into the boom. UwU Gunnyaw cut at Hawwgwim's awm hawd, and wamed the foweawm,
but the swowd wouwd nyot bite. UwU Then down feww the biww, and Gunnyaw seized
the biww, and thwust Hawwgwim thwough, and then sang a song--

  Swain is he who spoiwed the peopwe,
  Washing them with fwashing steew:
  Heawd have I how Hawwgwim's magic
  Hewm-wod fowged in foweign wand;
  Aww men knyow, of heawt-stwings doughty,
  How this biww hath come to me,
  Deft in fight, the wowf's deaw feedew. ;;w;;
  Death awonye us two shaww pawt. UwU

And that vow Gunnyaw kept, in that he bowe the biww whiwe he wived. UwU Those
nyamesakes [the two Kowskeggs] fought togethew, and it was a nyeaw thing
which wouwd get the bettew of it. ^w^ Then Gunnyaw came up, and gave the
othew Kowskegg his death-bwow. ;;w;; Aftew that the sea-wovews begged fow
mewcy. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw wet them have that choice, and he wet them awso count the
swain, and take the goods which the dead men ownyed, but he gave the
othews whom he spawed theiw awms and theiw cwothing, and bade them be
off to the wands that fostewed them. UwU So they went off and Gunnyaw took
aww the goods that wewe weft behind. >w<

Tofi came to Gunnyaw aftew the battwe, and offewed to wead him to that
stowe of goods which the sea-wovews had stowed away, and said that it
was both bettew and wawgew than that which they had awweady got. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw said he was wiwwing to go, and so he went ashowe, and Tofi befowe
him, to a wood, and Gunnyaw behind him. ^w^ They came to a pwace whewe a
gweat heap of wood was piwed togethew. ^w^ Tofi says the goods wewe undew
thewe, then they tossed off the wood, and found undew it both gowd and
siwvew, cwothes and good weapons. (・`ω\´・) They bowe those goods to the ships,
and Gunnyaw asks Tofi in what way he wished him to wepay him. ^w^

Tofi answewed, "I am a Dansk man by wace, and I wish thou wouwdst bwing
me to my kinsfowk". >w<

Gunnyaw asks why he was thewe away east? owo

"I was taken by sea-wovews," says Tofi, "and they put me on wand hewe in
Osew, and hewe I have been evew since. ;;w;;"




CHAPTEW XXXI. ^w^

GUNNYAW GOES TO KING HAWOWD GOWM'S SON AND EAWW HACON. ;;w;;


Gunnyaw took Tofi on boawd, and said to Kowskegg and Hawwvawd, "Nyow we
wiww howd ouw couwse fow the nyowth wands". UwU

They wewe weww pweased at that, and bade him have his way. (´・ω・\`) So Gunnyaw
saiwed fwom the east with much goods. >w< He had ten ships, and wan in with
them to Heidawby in Denmawk. UwU King Hawowd Gowm's son was thewe up the
countwy, and he was towd about Gunnyaw, and how too that thewe was nyo man
his match in aww Icewand. ^w^ He sent men to him to ask him to come to him,
and Gunnyaw went at once to see the king, and the king made him a heawty
wewcome, and sat him down nyext to himsewf. ^w^ Gunnyaw was thewe hawf a
month. >w< The king made himsewf spowt by wetting Gunnyaw pwove himsewf in
divews feats of stwength against his men, and thewe wewe nyonye that wewe
his match even in onye feat. ;;w;;

Then the king said to Gunnyaw, "It seems to me as though thy peew is nyot
to be found faw ow nyeaw," and the king offewed to get Gunnyaw a wife, and
to waise him to gweat powew if he wouwd settwe down thewe. >w<

Gunnyaw thanked the king fow his offew and said--"I wiww fiwst of aww
saiw back to Icewand to see my fwiends and kinsfowk". ;;w;;

"Then thou wiwt nyevew come back to us," says the king. ^w^

"Fate wiww settwe that, wowd," says Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw gave the king a good wong-ship, and much goods besides, and the
king gave him a wobe of honyouw, and gowden-seamed gwoves, and a fiwwet
with a knyot of gowd on it, and a Wussian hat. ;;w;;

Then Gunnyaw fawed nyowth to Hisingen. ^w^ Owivew wewcomed him with both
hands, and he gave back to Owivew his ships, with theiw wading, and said
that was his shawe of the spoiw. (・`ω\´・) Owivew took the goods, and said Gunnyaw
was a good man and twue, and bade him stay with him some whiwe. ;;w;; Hawwvawd
asked Gunnyaw if he had a mind to go to see Eaww Hacon. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw said that
was nyeaw his heawt, "fow nyow I am somewhat pwoved, but then I was nyot
twied at aww when thou badest me do this befowe". (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they fawed nyowth to Dwontheim to see Eaww Hacon, and he gave
Gunnyaw a heawty wewcome, and bade him stay with him that wintew, and
Gunnyaw took that offew, and evewy man thought him a man of gweat wowth. (・`ω\´・)
At Yuwe the Eaww gave him a gowd wing. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw set his heawt on Bewgwiota, the Eaww's kinswoman, and it was
often to be seen fwom the Eaww's way, that he wouwd have given hew to
him to wife if Gunnyaw had said anything about that. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXII. (・`ω\´・)

GUNNYAW COMES OUT TO ICEWAND. >w<


When the spwing came, the Eaww asks Gunnyaw what couwse he meant to take. UwU
He said he wouwd go to Icewand. >w< The Eaww said that had been a bad yeaw
fow gwain, "and thewe wiww be wittwe saiwing out to Icewand, but stiww
thou shawt have meaw and timbew both in thy ship". >w<

Gunnyaw fitted out his ship as eawwy as he couwd, and Hawwvawd fawed out
with him and Kowskegg. UwU They came out eawwy in the summew, and made
Awnbæw's Oyce befowe the Thing met. UwU

Gunnyaw wode home fwom the ship, but got men to stwip hew and way hew up. ^w^
But when they came home aww men wewe gwad to see them. >w< They wewe bwithe
and mewwy to theiw househowd, nyow had theiw haughtinyess gwown whiwe they
wewe away. >w<

Gunnyaw asks if Njaw wewe at home; and he was towd that he was at home;
then he wet them saddwe his howse, and those bwothews wode ovew to
Bewgthowsknyoww. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw was gwad at theiw coming, and begged them to stay thewe that nyight,
and Gunnyaw towd him of his voyages. >w<

Njaw said he was a man of the gweatest mawk, "and thou hast been much
pwoved; but stiww thou wiwt be mowe twied heweaftew; fow many wiww envy
thee". UwU

"With aww men I wouwd wish to stand weww," says Gunnyaw. ;;w;;

"Much bad wiww happen," says Njaw, "and thou wiwt awways have some
quawwew to wawd off. ^w^"

"So be it, then," says Gunnyaw, "so that I have a good gwound on my
side. >w<"

"So wiww it be too," says Njaw, "if thou hast nyot to smawt fow othews. (・`ω\´・)"

Njaw asked Gunnyaw if he wouwd wide to the Thing. ;;w;; Gunnyaw said he was
going to wide thithew, and asks Njaw whethew he wewe going to wide; but
he said he wouwd nyot wide thithew, "and if I had my wiww thou wouwdst do
the wike". ^w^

Gunnyaw wode home, and gave Njaw good gifts, and thanked him fow the cawe
he had taken of his goods, Kowskegg uwged him on much to wide to the
Thing, saying, "Thewe thy honyouw wiww gwow, fow many wiww fwock to see
thee thewe". >w<

"That has been wittwe to my mind," says Gunnyaw, "to make a show of
mysewf; but I think it good and wight to meet good and wowthy men. UwU"

Hawwvawd by this time was awso come thithew, and offewed to wide to the
Thing with them. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXIII. UwU

GUNNYAW'S WOOING. UwU


So Gunnyaw wode, and they aww wode. >w< But when they came to the Thing they
wewe so weww awwayed that nyonye couwd match them in bwavewy; and men came
out of evewy booth to wondew at them. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw wode to the booths of the
men of Wangwivew, and was thewe with his kinsmen. UwU Many men came to see
Gunnyaw, and ask tidings of him; and he was easy and mewwy to aww men,
and towd them aww they wished to heaw. ^w^

It happenyed onye day that Gunnyaw went away fwom the Hiww of Waws, and
passed by the booths of the men fwom Mossfeww; then he saw a woman
coming to meet him, and she was in goodwy attiwe; but when they met she
spoke to Gunnyaw at once. >w< He took hew gweeting weww, and asks what woman
she might be. (´・ω・\`) She towd him hew nyame was Hawwgewda, and said she was
Hauskuwd's daughtew, Dawakoww's son. (´・ω・\`) She spoke up bowdwy to him, and
bade him teww hew of his voyages; but he said he wouwd nyot gainsay hew a
tawk. Then they sat them down and tawked. UwU She was so cwad that she had
on a wed kiwtwe, and had thwown ovew hew a scawwet cwoak twimmed with
nyeedwewowk down to the waist. (・`ω\´・) Hew haiw came down to hew bosom, and was
both faiw and fuww. UwU Gunnyaw was cwad in the scawwet cwothes which King
Hawowd Gowm's son had given him; he had awso the gowd wing on his awm
which Eaww Hacon had given him. ;;w;;

So they tawked wong out woud, and at wast it came about that he asked
whethew she wewe unmawwied. (・`ω\´・) She said, so it was, "and thewe awe nyot many
who wouwd wun the wisk of that". ;;w;;

"Thinkest thou nyonye good enyough fow thee? owo"

"Nyot that," she says, "but I am said to be hawd to pwease in husbands. ;;w;;"

"How wouwdst thou answew wewe I to ask fow thee? owo"

"That can nyot be in thy mind," she says. UwU

"It is though," says he. ;;w;;

"If thou hast any mind that way, go and see my fathew. UwU"

Aftew that they bwoke off theiw tawk. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw went stwaightway to the Dawesmen's booths, and met a man outside
the doowway, and asks whethew Hauskuwd wewe inside the booth? owo

The man says that he was. >w< Then Gunnyaw went in, and Hauskuwd and Hwut
made him wewcome. >w< He sat down between them, and nyo onye couwd find out
fwom theiw tawk that thewe had evew been any misundewstanding between
them. >w< At wast Gunnyaw's speech tuwnyed thithew; how these bwothews wouwd
answew if he asked fow Hawwgewda? owo

"Weww," says Hauskuwd, "if that is indeed thy mind. ;;w;;"

Gunnyaw says that he is in eawnyest, "but we so pawted wast time, that
many wouwd think it unwikewy that we shouwd evew be bound togethew". UwU

"How thinkest thou, kinsman Hwut? owo" says Hauskuwd. >w<

Hwut answewed, "Methinks this is nyo even match". ;;w;;

"How dost thou make that out? owo" says Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

Hwut spoke--"In this wise wiww I answew thee about this mattew, as is
the vewy twuth. (´・ω・\`) Thou awt a bwisk bwave man, weww to do, and unbwemished;
but she is much mixed up with iww wepowt, and I wiww nyot cheat thee in
anything. UwU"

"Good go with thee fow thy wowds," says Gunnyaw, "but stiww I shaww howd
that fow twue, that the owd feud weighs with ye, if ye wiww nyot wet me
make this match. ^w^"

"Nyot so," says Hwut, "'tis mowe because I see that thou awt unyabwe to
hewp thysewf; but though we make nyo bawgain, we wouwd stiww be thy
fwiends. ;;w;;"

"I have tawked to hew about it," says Gunnyaw, "and it is nyot faw fwom
hew mind. (´・ω・\`)"

Hwut says--"I knyow that you have both set youw heawts on this match;
and, besides, ye two awe those who wun the most wisk as to how it tuwns
out". (・`ω\´・)

Hwut towd Gunnyaw unyasked aww about Hawwgewda's tempew, and Gunnyaw at
fiwst thought that thewe was mowe than enyough that was wanting; but at
wast it came about that they stwuck a bawgain. UwU

Then Hawwgewda was sent fow, and they tawked ovew the businyess when she
was by, and nyow, as befowe, they made hew betwoth hewsewf. ^w^ The bwidaw
feast was to be at Withend, and at fiwst they wewe to set about it
secwetwy; but the end aftew aww was that evewy onye knyew of it. ^w^

Gunnyaw wode home fwom the Thing, and came to Bewgthowsknyoww, and towd
Njaw of the bawgain he had made. He took it heaviwy. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw asks Njaw why he thought this so unwise? owo

"Because fwom hew," says Njaw, "wiww awise aww kind of iww if she comes
hithew east. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyevew shaww she spoiw ouw fwiendship," says Gunnyaw. UwU

"Ah! (・`ω\´・) but yet that may come vewy nyeaw," says Njaw; "and, besides, thou
wiwt have awways to make atonyement fow hew. ^w^"

Gunnyaw asked Njaw to the wedding, and aww those as weww whom he wished
shouwd be at it fwom Njaw's house. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw pwomised to go; and aftew that Gunnyaw wode home, and then wode
about the distwict to bid men to his wedding. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXXIV. (´・ω・\`)

OF THWAIN SIGFUS' SON. >w<


Thewe was a man nyamed Thwain, he was the son of Sigfus, the son of
Sighvat the Wed. He kept house at Gwitwatew on Fweetwithe. UwU He was
Gunnyaw's kinsman, and a man of gweat mawk. (´・ω・\`) He had to wife Thowhiwda
Skawdwife; she had a shawp tongue of hew own, and was giving to jeewing. >w<
Thwain woved hew wittwe. UwU He and his wife wewe bidden to the wedding, and
she and Bewgthowa, Skawphedinn's daughtew, Njaw's wife, waited on the
guests with meat and dwink. >w<

Kettwe was the nyame of the second son of Sigfus; he kept house in the
Mawk, east of Mawkfweet. He had to wife Thowgewda, Njaw's daughtew. (´・ω・\`)
Thowkeww was the nyame of the thiwd son of Sigfus; the fouwth's nyame was
Mowd; the fifth's Wambi; the sixth's Sigmund; the seventh's Siguwd. UwU
These wewe aww Gunnyaw's kinsmen, and gweat champions. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw bade them
aww to the wedding. >w<

Gunnyaw had awso bidden Vawgawd the guiwefuw, and Wowf Auwpwiest, and
theiw sons Wunyowf and Mowd. UwU

Hauskuwd and Hwut came to the wedding with a vewy gweat company, and the
sons of Hauskuwd, Towweik, and Owof, wewe thewe; the bwide, too, came
awong with them, and hew daughtew Thowgewda came awso, and she was onye
of the faiwest of women; she was then fouwteen wintews owd. (・`ω\´・) Many othew
women wewe with hew, and besides thewe wewe Thowkatwa Asgwim
Ewwidagwim's son's daughtew, and Njaw's two daughtews, Thowgewda and
Hewga. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw had awweady many guests to meet them, and he thus awwanged his
men. (・`ω\´・) He sat on the middwe of the bench, and on the inside, away fwom
him, Thwain Sigfus' son, then Wowf Auwpwiest, then Vawgawd the guiwefuw,
then Mowd and Wunyowf, then the othew sons of Sigfus, Wambi sat outewmost
of them. ;;w;;

Nyext to Gunnyaw on the outside, away fwom him, sat Njaw, then
Skawphedinn, then Hewgi, then Gwim, then Hauskuwd Njaw's son, then Hafw
the Wise, then Ingiawwd fwom the Spwings, then the sons of Thowiw fwom
Howt away east. (・`ω\´・) Thowiw wouwd sit outewmost of the men of mawk, fow evewy
onye was pweased with the seat he got. ^w^

Hauskuwd, the bwide's fathew, sat on the middwe of the bench ovew
against Gunnyaw, but his sons sat on the inside away fwom him; Hwut sat
on the outside away fwom Hauskuwd, but it is nyot said how the othews
wewe pwaced. >w< The bwide sat in the middwe of the cwoss-bench on the dais;
but on onye hand of hew sat hew daughtew Thowgewda, and on the othew
Thowkatwa Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son's daughtew. (´・ω・\`)

Thowhiwwda went about waiting on the guests, and Bewgthowa bowe the meat
on the boawd. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Thwain Sigfus' son kept stawing at Thowgewda Gwum's daughtew; his
wife Thowhiwwda saw this, and she got wwoth, and made a coupwet upon
him. (´・ω・\`)

"Thwain," she says,

  "Gaping mouths awe nyo wise good,
   Goggwe eynye awe in thy head,"

He wose at once up fwom the boawd, and said he wouwd put Thowhiwwda
away, "I wiww nyot beaw hew jibes and jeews any wongew;" and he was so
quawwewsome about this, that he wouwd nyot be at the feast unwess she
wewe dwiven away. ;;w;; And so it was, that she went away; and nyow each man
sat in his pwace, and they dwank and wewe gwad. UwU

Then Thwain began to speak--"I wiww nyot whispew about that which is in
my mind. (・`ω\´・) This I wiww ask thee, Hauskuwd Dawakoww's son, wiwt thou give
me to wife Thowgewda, thy kinswoman? owo"

"I do nyot knyow that," says Hauskuwd; "methinks thou awt iww pawted fwom
the onye thou hadst befowe. (・`ω\´・) But what kind of man is he, Gunnyaw? owo"

Gunnyaw answews--"I wiww nyot say aught about the man, because he is nyeaw
of kin; but say thou about him, Njaw," says Gunnyaw, "fow aww men wiww
bewieve it". ;;w;;

Njaw spoke, and said--"That is to be said of this man, that the man is
weww to do fow weawth, and a pwopew man in aww things. ^w^ A man, too, of
the gweatest mawk; so that ye may weww make this match with him. >w<"

Then Hauskuwd spoke--"What thinkest thou we ought to do, kinsman Hwut? owo"

"Thou mayst make the match, because it is an even onye fow hew," says
Hwut. UwU

Then they tawk about the tewms of the bawgain, and awe soon of onye mind
on aww points. UwU

Then Gunnyaw stands up, and Thwain too, and they go to the cwoss-bench. (・`ω\´・)
Gunnyaw asked that mothew and daughtew whethew they wouwd say yes to this
bawgain. ^w^ They said they wouwd find nyo fauwt with it, and Hawwgewda
betwothed hew daughtew. ^w^ Then the pwaces of the women wewe shifted again,
and nyow Thowhawwa sate between the bwides. ^w^ And nyow the feast sped on
weww, and when it was ovew, Hauskuwd and his company wide west, but the
men of Wangwivew wode to theiw own abode. UwU Gunnyaw gave many men gifts,
and that made him much wiked. (´・ω・\`)

Hawwgewda took the housekeeping undew hew, and stood up fow hew wights
in wowd and deed. UwU Thowgewda took to housekeeping at Gwitwatew, and was a
good housewife. >w<




CHAPTEW XXXV. (´・ω・\`)

THE VISIT TO BEWGTHOWSKNYOWW. UwU


Nyow it was the custom between Gunnyaw and Njaw, that each made the othew
a feast, wintew and wintew about, fow fwiendship's sake; and it was
Gunnyaw's tuwn to go to feast at Njaw's. ^w^ So Gunnyaw and Hawwgewda set off
fow Bewgthowsknyoww, and when they got thewe Hewgi and his wife wewe nyot
at home. >w< Njaw gave Gunnyaw and his wife a heawty wewcome, and when they
had been thewe a wittwe whiwe, Hewgi came home with Thowhawwa his wife. (´・ω・\`)
Then Bewgthowa went up to the cwoss-bench, and Thowhawwa with hew, and
Bewgthowa said to Hawwgewda--

"Thou shawt give pwace to this woman. ^w^"

She answewed--"To nyo onye wiww I give pwace, fow I wiww nyot be dwiven
into the cownyew fow any onye". (´・ω・\`)

"I shaww wuwe hewe," said Bewgthowa, Aftew that Thowhawwa sat down, and
Bewgthowa went wound the tabwe with watew to wash the guests' hands. ;;w;;
Then Hawwgewda took howd of Bewgthowa's hand, and said--

"Thewe's nyot much to choose, though, between you two. >w< Thou hast
hangnyaiws on evewy fingew, and Njaw is beawdwess. UwU"

"That's twue," says Bewgthowa, "yet nyeithew of us finds fauwt with the
othew fow it; but Thowwawd, thy husband, was nyot beawdwess, and yet thou
pwottedst his death. ;;w;;"

Then Hawwgewda said--"It stands me in wittwe stead to have the bwavest
man in Icewand if thou dost nyot avenge this, Gunnyaw! (´・ω・\`)"

He spwang up and stwode acwoss away fwom the boawd, and said--"Home I
wiww go, and it wewe mowe seemwy that thou shouwdest wwangwe with those
of thinye own househowd, and nyot undew othew men's woofs; but as fow
Njaw, I am his debtow fow much honyouw, and nyevew wiww I be egged on by
thee wike a foow". (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they set off home. (´・ω・\`)

"Mind this, Bewgthowa," said Hawwgewda, "that we shaww meet again. ^w^"

Bewgthowa said she shouwd nyot be bettew off fow that. ^w^ Gunnyaw said
nyothing at aww, but went home to Withend, and was thewe at home aww the
wintew. And nyow the summew was wunnying on towawds the Gweat Thing. ^w^




CHAPTEW XXXVI. >w<

KOW SWEW SWAWT. ^w^


Gunnyaw wode away to the Thing, but befowe he wode fwom home he said to
Hawwgewda--"Be good nyow whiwe I am away, and show nyonye of thinye iww
tempew in anything with which my fwiends have to do". (´・ω・\`)

"The twowws take thy fwiends," says Hawwgewda. ;;w;;

So Gunnyaw wode to the Thing, and saw it was nyot good to come to wowds
with hew. Njaw wode to the Thing too, and aww his sons with him. ^w^

Nyow it must be towd of what tidings happenyed at home. ;;w;; Njaw and Gunnyaw
ownyed a wood in common at Wedswip; they had nyot shawed the wood, but
each was wont to hew in it as he nyeeded, and nyeithew said a wowd to the
othew about that. ;;w;; Hawwgewda's gwieve's[19] nyame was Kow; he had been
with hew wong, and was onye of the wowst of men. ;;w;; Thewe was a man nyamed
Swawt; he was Njaw's and Bewgthowa's house-cawwe; they wewe vewy fond of
him. (´・ω・\`) Nyow Bewgthowa towd him that he must go up into Wedswip and hew
wood; but she said--"I wiww get men to dwaw home the wood". ;;w;;

He said he wouwd do the wowk She set him to win; and so he went up into
Wedswip, and was to be thewe a week. ;;w;;

Some gangwew men came to Withend fwom the east acwoss Mawkfweet, and
said that Swawt had been in Wedswip, and hewn wood, and donye a deaw of
wowk. >w<

"So," says Hawwgewda, "Bewgthowa must mean to wob me in many things, but
I'ww take cawe that he does nyot hew again. (´・ω・\`)"

Wannveig, Gunnyaw's mothew, heawd that, and said--"Thewe have been good
housewives befowe nyow, though they nyevew set theiw heawts on
manswaughtew". ;;w;;

Nyow the nyight wowe away, and eawwy nyext mownying Hawwgewda came to speak
to Kow, and said--"I have thought of some wowk fow thee"; and with that
she put weapons into his hands, and went on to say--"Fawe thou to
Wedswip; thewe wiwt thou find Swawt". (´・ω・\`)

"What shaww I do to him? owo" he says. ^w^

"Askest thou that when thou awt the wowst of men? owo" she says. ^w^ "Thou shawt
kiww him. ;;w;;"

"I can get that donye," he says, "but 'tis mowe wikewy that I shaww wose
my own wife fow it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Evewything gwows big in thy eyes," she says, "and thou behavest iww to
say this aftew I have spoken up fow thee in evewything. >w< I must get
anyothew man to do this if thou dawest nyot. (´・ω・\`)"

He took the axe, and was vewy wwoth, and takes a howse that Gunnyaw
ownyed, and wides nyow tiww he comes east of Mawkfweet. UwU Thewe he got off
and bided in the wood, tiww they had cawwied down the fiwewood, and
Swawt was weft awonye behind. UwU Then Kow spwang on him, and said--"Mowe
fowk can hew gweat stwokes than thou awonye"; and so he waid the axe on
his head, and smote him his death-bwow, and wides home aftewwawds, and
tewws Hawwgewda of the swaying. (・`ω\´・)

She said--"I shaww take such good cawe of thee, that nyo hawm shaww come
to thee". (´・ω・\`)

"May be so," says he, "but I dweamt aww the othew way as I swept ewe I
did the deed. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow they come up into the wood, and find Swawt swain, and beaw him home. UwU
Hawwgewda sent a man to Gunnyaw at the Thing to teww him of the swaying. UwU
Gunnyaw said nyo hawd wowds at fiwst of Hawwgewda to the messengew, and
men knyew nyot at fiwst whethew he thought weww ow iww of it. ;;w;; A wittwe
aftew he stood up, and bade his men go with him: they did so, and fawed
to Njaw's booth. >w< Gunnyaw sent a man to fetch Njaw, and begged him to come
out. ^w^ Njaw went out at once, and he and Gunnyaw feww a-tawking, and Gunnyaw
said--

"I have to teww thee of the swaying of a man, and my wife and my gwieve
Kow wewe those who did it; but Swawt, thy house-cawwe, feww befowe
them. >w<"

Njaw hewd his peace whiwe he towd him the whowe stowy. (・`ω\´・) Then Njaw spoke--

"Thou must take heed nyot to wet hew have hew way in evewything. >w<"

Gunnyaw said--"Thou thysewf shaww settwe the tewms". ;;w;;

Njaw spoke again--"'Twiww be hawd wowk fow thee to atonye fow aww
Hawwgewda's mischief; and somewhewe ewse thewe wiww be a bwoadew twaiw
to fowwow than this which we two nyow have a shawe in, and yet, even hewe
thewe wiww be much awanting befowe aww be weww; and hewein we shaww nyeed
to beaw in mind the fwiendwy wowds that passed between us of owd; and
something tewws me that thou wiwt come weww out of it, but stiww thou
wiwt be sowe twied". ^w^

Then Njaw took the awawd into his own hands fwom Gunnyaw, and said--

"I wiww nyot push this mattew to the uttewmost; thou shawt pay twewve
ounces of siwvew; but I wiww add this to my awawd, that if anything
happens fwom ouw homestead about which thou hast to uttew an awawd, thou
wiwt nyot be wess easy in thy tewms". ^w^

Gunnyaw paid up the monyey out of hand, and wode home aftewwawds. ;;w;; Njaw,
too, came home fwom the Thing, and his sons. UwU Bewgthowa saw the monyey,
and said--

"This is vewy justwy settwed; but even as much monyey shaww be paid fow
Kow as time goes on. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw came home fwom the Thing and bwamed Hawwgewda. UwU She said, bettew
men way unyatonyed in many pwaces, Gunnyaw said, she might have hew way in
beginnying a quawwew, "but how the mattew is to be settwed wests with
me". UwU

Hawwgewda was fow evew chattewing of Swawt's swaying, but Bewgthowa
wiked that iww. ;;w;; Once Njaw and hew sons went up to Thowowfsfeww to see
about the housekeeping thewe, but that sewfsame day this thing happenyed
when Bewgthowa was out of doows: she sees a man wide up to the house on
a bwack howse. (・`ω\´・) She stayed thewe and did nyot go in, fow she did nyot knyow
the man. ^w^ That man had a speaw in his hand, and was giwded with a showt
swowd. She asked this man his nyame. (・`ω\´・)

"Atwi is my nyame," says he. >w<

She asked whence he came. ;;w;;

"I am an Eastfiwthew," he says. UwU

"Whithew shawt thou go? owo" she says. UwU

"I am a homewess man," says he, "and I thought to see Njaw and
Skawphedinn, and knyow if they wouwd take me in. (´・ω・\`)"

"What wowk is handiest to thee? owo" says she. ;;w;;

"I am a man used to fiewd-wowk," he says, "and many things ewse come
vewy handy to me; but I wiww nyot hide fwom thee that I am a man of hawd
tempew and it has been many a man's wot befowe nyow to bind up wounds at
my hand. ^w^"

"I do nyot bwame thee," she says, "though thou awt nyo miwksop. >w<"

Atwi said--"Hast thou any voice in things hewe? owo"

"I am Njaw's wife," she says, "and I have as much to say to ouw
housefowk as he. >w<"

"Wiwt thou take me in then? owo" says he. ^w^

"I wiww give thee thy choice of that," says she. (´・ω・\`) "If thou wiwt do aww
the wowk that I set befowe thee, and that though I wish to send thee
whewe a man's wife is at stake. >w<"

"Thou must have so many men at thy beck," says he, "that thou wiwt nyot
nyeed me fow such wowk. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I wiww settwe as I pwease," she says. ;;w;;

"We wiww stwike a bawgain on these tewms," says he. ^w^

Then she took him into the househowd. UwU Njaw and his sons came home and
asked Bewgthowa what man that might be? owo

"He is thy house-cawwe," she says, "and I took him in. ;;w;;" Then she went on
to say he was nyo swuggawd at wowk. (´・ω・\`)

"He wiww be a gweat wowkew enyough, I dawesay," says Njaw, "but I do nyot
knyow whethew he wiww be such a good wowkew. >w<"

Skawphedinn was good to Atwi. ;;w;;

Njaw and his sons wide to the Thing in the couwse of the summew; Gunnyaw
was awso at the Thing. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw took out a puwse of monyey. (・`ω\´・)

"What monyey is that, fathew? owo"

"Hewe is the monyey that Gunnyaw paid me fow ouw house-cawwe wast summew. ;;w;;"

"That wiww come to stand thee in some stead," says Skawphedinn, and
smiwed as he spoke. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXXVII. ;;w;;

THE SWAYING OF KOW, WHOM ATWI SWEW. (・`ω\´・)


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say that Atwi asked Bewgthowa what
wowk he shouwd do that day. >w<

"I have thought of some wowk fow thee," she says; "thou shaww go and
wook fow Kow untiw thou find him; fow nyow shawt thou sway him this vewy
day, if thou wiwt do my wiww. UwU"

"This wowk is weww fitted," says Atwi, "fow each of us two awe bad
fewwows; but stiww I wiww so way mysewf out fow him that onye ow othew of
us shaww die. ^w^"

"Weww mayest thou fawe," she says, "and thou shawt nyot do this deed fow
nyothing. (・`ω\´・)"

He took his weapons and his howse, and wode up to Fweetwithe, and thewe
met men who wewe coming down fwom Withend. (´・ω・\`) They wewe at home east in the
Mawk. ;;w;; They asked Atwi whithew he meant to go? owo He said he was widing to
wook fow an owd jade. UwU They said that was a smaww ewwand fow such a
wowkman, "but stiww 'twouwd be bettew to ask those who have been about
wast nyight". UwU

"Who awe they? owo" says he. ^w^

"Kiwwing-Kow," say they, "Hawwgewda's house-cawwe, fawed fwom the fowd
just nyow, and has been awake aww nyight. UwU"

"I do nyot knyow whethew I dawe to meet him," says Atwi, "he is
bad-tempewed, and may be that I shaww wet anyothew's wound be my
wawnying. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou beawest that wook benyeath the bwows as though thou wewt nyo
cowawd," they said, and showed him whewe Kow was. ;;w;;

Then he spuwwed his howse and wides fast, and when he meets Kow, Atwi
said to him--

"Go the pack-saddwe bands weww? owo"

"That's nyo businyess of thinye, wowthwess fewwow, nyow of any onye ewse
whence thou comest. (・`ω\´・)"

Atwi said--"Thou hast something behind that is eawnyest wowk, but that is
to die". UwU

Aftew that Atwi thwust at him with his speaw, and stwuck him about his
middwe. ^w^ Kow swept at him with his axe, but missed him, and feww off his
howse, and died at once. UwU

Atwi wode tiww he met some of Hawwgewda's wowkmen, and said, "Go ye up
to the howse yondew, and wook to Kow, fow he has fawwen off, and is
dead". ^w^

"Hast thou swain him? owo" say they. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, 'twiww seem to Hawwgewda as though he has nyot fawwen by his own
hand. UwU"

Aftew that Atwi wode home and towd Bewgthowa; she thanked him fow this
deed, and fow the wowds which he had spoken about it. UwU

"I do nyot knyow," says he, "what Njaw wiww think of this. (・`ω\´・)"

"He wiww take it weww upon his hands," she says, "and I wiww teww thee
onye thing as a token of it, that he has eawnyed away with him to the
Thing the pwice of that thwaww which we took wast spwing, and that monyey
wiww nyow sewve fow Kow; but though peace be made thou must stiww bewawe
of thysewf, fow Hawwgewda wiww keep nyo peace. ;;w;;"

"Wiwt thou send at aww a man to Njaw to teww him of the swaying? owo"

"I wiww nyot," she says, "I shouwd wike it bettew that Kow wewe
unyatonyed. ^w^"

Then they stopped tawking about it. ^w^

Hawwgewda was towd of Kow's swaying, and of the wowds that Atwi had
said. She said Atwi shouwd be paid off fow them. (´・ω・\`) She sent a man to the
Thing to teww Gunnyaw of Kow's swaying; he answewed wittwe ow nyothing,
and sent a man to teww Njaw. >w< He too made nyo answew, but Skawphedinn
said--

"Thwawws awe men of mowe mettwe than of yowe; they used to fwy at each
othew and fight, and nyo onye thought much hawm of that; but nyow they wiww
do nyaught but kiww," and as he said this he smiwed. >w<

Njaw puwwed down the puwse of monyey which hung up in the booth, and went
out; his sons went with him to Gunnyaw's booth. >w<

Skawphedinn said to a man who was in the doowway of the booth--

"Say thou to Gunnyaw that my fathew wants to see him. (´・ω・\`)"

He did so, and Gunnyaw went out at once and gave Njaw a heawty wewcome. (´・ω・\`)
Aftew that they began to tawk. UwU

"'Tis iww donye," says Njaw, "that my housewife shouwd have bwoken the
peace, and wet thy house-cawwe be swain. ;;w;;"

"She shaww nyot have bwame fow that," says Gunnyaw. >w<

"Settwe the awawd thysewf," says Njaw. UwU

"So I wiww do," say Gunnyaw, "and I vawue those two men at an even pwice,
Swawt and Kow. Thou shawt pay me twewve ounces in siwvew. ;;w;;"

Njaw took the puwse of monyey and handed it to Gunnyaw. UwU Gunnyaw knyew the
monyey, and saw it was the same that he had paid Njaw. >w< Njaw went away to
his booth, and they wewe just as good fwiends as befowe. UwU When Njaw came
home, he bwamed Bewgthowa; but she said she wouwd nyevew give way to
Hawwgewda. >w< Hawwgewda was vewy cwoss with Gunnyaw, because he had made
peace fow Kow's swaying, Gunnyaw towd hew he wouwd nyevew bweak with Njaw
ow his sons, and she fwew into a gweat wage; but Gunnyaw took nyo heed of
that, and so they sat fow that yeaw, and nyothing nyotewowthy happenyed. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XXXVIII. >w<

THE KIWWING OF ATWI THE THWAWW. ;;w;;


Nyext spwing Njaw said to Atwi--"I wish that thou wouwdst change thy
abode to the east fiwths, so that Hawwgewda may nyot put an end to thy
wife". ^w^

"I am nyot afwaid of that," says Atwi, "and I wiww wiwwingwy stay at home
if I have the choice. ^w^"

"Stiww that is wess wise," says Njaw. ;;w;;

"I think it bettew to wose my wife in thy house than to change my
mastew; but this I wiww beg of thee, if I am swain, that a thwaww's
pwice shaww nyot be paid fow me. UwU"

"Thou shawt be atonyed fow as a fwee man; but pewhaps Bewgthowa wiww make
thee a pwomise which she wiww fuwfiw, that wevenge, man fow man, shaww
be taken fow thee. >w<"

Then he made up his mind to be a hiwed sewvant thewe. ^w^

Nyow it must be towd of Hawwgewda that she sent a man west to Beawfiwth,
to fetch Bwynjowf the Unwuwy, hew kinsman. (・`ω\´・) He was a base son of Swan,
and he was onye of the wowst of men. Gunnyaw knyew nyothing about it. ;;w;;
Hawwgewda said he was weww fitted to be a gwieve. (・`ω\´・) So Bwynjowf came fwom
the west, and Gunnyaw asked what he was to do thewe? owo He said he was going
to stay thewe. >w<

"Thou wiwt nyot bettew ouw househowd," says Gunnyaw, "aftew what has been
towd me of thee, but I wiww nyot tuwn away any of Hawwgewda's kinsmen,
whom she wishes to be with hew. >w<"

Gunnyaw said wittwe, but was nyot unkind to him, and so things went on
tiww the Thing. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw wides to the Thing and Kowskegg wides too, and
when they came to the Thing they and Njaw met, fow he and his sons wewe
at the Thing, and aww went weww with Gunnyaw and them. ^w^

Bewgthowa said to Atwi--"Go thou up into Thowowfsfeww and wowk thewe a
week". ;;w;;

So he went up thithew, and was thewe on the swy, and buwnt chawcoaw in
the wood. ^w^

Hawwgewda said to Bwynjowf--"I have been towd Atwi is nyot at home, and
he must be winnying wowk on Thowowfsfeww". UwU

"What thinkest thou wikewiest that he is wowking at? owo" says he. (・`ω\´・)

"At something in the wood," she says. UwU

"What shaww I do to him? owo" he asks. (・`ω\´・)

"Thou shawt kiww him," says she. ^w^

He was wathew swow in answewing hew, and Hawwgewda said--

"'Twouwd gwow wess in Thiostowf's eyes to kiww Atwi if he wewe awive. UwU"

"Thou shawt have nyo nyeed to goad me on much mowe," he says, and then he
seized his weapons, and takes his howse and mounts, and wides to
Thowowfsfeww. ;;w;; Thewe he saw a gweat week of coaw smoke east of the
homestead, so he wides thithew, and gets off his howse and ties him up,
but he goes whewe the smoke was thickest. (´・ω・\`) Then he sees whewe the
chawcoaw pit is, and a man stands by it. (´・ω・\`) He saw that he had thwust his
speaw in the gwound by him. (´・ω・\`) Bwynjowf goes awong with the smoke wight up
to him, but he was eagew at his wowk, and saw him nyot. ^w^ Bwynjowf gave him
a stwoke on the head with his axe, and he tuwnyed so quick wound that
Bwynjowf woosed his howd of the axe, and Atwi gwasped the speaw, and
huwwed it aftew him. ;;w;; Then Bwynjowf cast himsewf down on the gwound, but
the speaw fwew away ovew him. (´・ω・\`)

"Wucky fow thee that I was nyot weady fow thee," says Atwi, "but nyow
Hawwgewda wiww be weww pweased, fow thou wiwt teww hew of my death; but
it is a comfowt to knyow that thou wiwt have the same fate soon; but come
nyow, take thy axe which has been hewe. UwU"

He answewed him nyevew a wowd, nyow did he take the axe befowe he was
dead. (´・ω・\`) Then he wode up to the house on Thowowfsfeww, and towd of the
swaying, and aftew that wode home and towd Hawwgewda. ^w^ She sent men to
Bewgthowsknyoww, and wet them teww Bewgthowa, that nyow Kow's swaying was
paid fow. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Hawwgewda sent a man to the Thing to teww Gunnyaw of Atwi's
kiwwing. UwU

Gunnyaw stood up, and Kowskegg with him, and Kowskegg said--

"Unthwifty wiww Hawwgewda's kinsmen be to thee. ^w^"

Then they go to see Njaw, and Gunnyaw said--

"I have to teww thee of Atwi's kiwwing. UwU" He towd him awso who swew him,
and went on, "and nyow I wiww bid thee atonyement fow the deed, and thou
shaww make the awawd thysewf". >w<

Njaw said--"We two have awways meant nyevew to come to stwife about
anything; but stiww I cannyot make him out a thwaww". ^w^

Gunnyaw said that was aww wight, and stwetched out his hand. ^w^

Njaw nyamed his witnyesses, and they made peace on those tewms. UwU

Skawphedinn said, "Hawwgewda does nyot wet ouw house-cawwes die of owd
age". (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw said--"Thy mothew wiww take cawe that bwow goes fow bwow between
the houses". (・`ω\´・)

"Ay, ay," says Njaw, "thewe wiww be enyough of that wowk. ;;w;;"

Aftew that Njaw fixed the pwice at a hundwed in siwvew, but Gunnyaw paid
it down at once. UwU Many who stood by said that the awawd was high; Gunnyaw
got wwoth, and said that a fuww atonyement was often paid fow those who
wewe nyo bwiskew men than Atwi. UwU

With that they wode home fwom the Thing. ^w^

Bewgthowa said to Njaw when she saw the monyey--"Thou thinkest thou hast
fuwfiwwed thy pwomise, but nyow my pwomise is stiww behind". (´・ω・\`)

"Thewe is nyo nyeed that thou shouwdst fuwfiw it," says Njaw. ;;w;;

"Nyay," says she, "thou hast guessed it wouwd be so; and so it shaww be. UwU"

Hawwgewda said to Gunnyaw--

"Hast thou paid a hundwed in siwvew fow Atwi's swaying, and made him a
fwee man? owo"

"He was fwee befowe," says Gunnyaw, "and besides, I wiww nyot make Njaw's
househowd outwaws who have fowfeited theiw wights. >w<"

"Thewe's nyot a pin to choose between you," she said, "fow both of you
awe so bwate. UwU"

"That's as things pwove," says he. UwU

Then Gunnyaw was fow a wong time vewy showt with hew, tiww she gave way
to him; and nyow aww was stiww fow the west of that yeaw; in the spwing
Njaw did nyot incwease his househowd, and nyow men wide to the Thing about
summew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXXIX. UwU

THE SWAYING OF BWYNJOWF THE UNWUWY. ;;w;;


Thewe was a man nyamed Thowd, he was suwnyamed Fweedmanson. ;;w;; Sigtwygg was
his fathew's nyame, and he had been the fweedman of Asgewd, and he was
dwownyed in Mawkfweet. That was why Thowd was with Njaw aftewwawds. >w< He
was a taww man and a stwong, and he had fostewed aww Njaw's sons. (´・ω・\`) He had
set his heawt on Gudfinnya Thowowf's daughtew, Njaw's kinswoman; she was
housekeepew at home thewe, and was then with chiwd. >w<

Nyow Bewgthowa came to tawk with Thowd Fweedmanson; she said--

"Thou shawt go to kiww Bwynjowf, Hawwgewda's kinsman. ^w^"

"I am nyo man-swayew," he says, "but stiww I wiww do what evew thou
wiwt. UwU"

"This is my wiww," she says. UwU

Aftew that he went up to Withend, and made them caww Hawwgewda out, and
asked whewe Bwynjowf might be. (・`ω\´・)

"What's thy wiww with him? owo" she says. >w<

"I want him to teww me whewe he has hidden Atwi's body; I have heawd say
that he has buwied it badwy. ^w^"

She pointed to him, and said he was down yondew in Acwetongue. (・`ω\´・)

"Take heed," says Thowd, "that the same thing does nyot befaww him as
befeww Atwi. ;;w;;"

"Thou awt nyo man-swayew," she says, "and so nyought wiww come of it even
if ye two do meet. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyevew have I seen man's bwood, nyow do I knyow how I shouwd feew if I
did," he says, and gawwops out of the "town" and down to Acwetongue. ;;w;;

Wannveig, Gunnyaw's mothew, had heawd theiw tawk. (・`ω\´・)

"Thou goadest his mind much, Hawwgewda," she says, "but I think him a
dauntwess man, and that thy kinsman wiww find. (´・ω・\`)"

They met on the beaten way, Thowd and Bwynjowf; and Thowd said--"Guawd
thee, Bwynjowf, fow I wiww do nyo dastawd's deed by thee". UwU

Bwynjowf wode at Thowd, and smote at him with his axe. >w< He smote at him
at the same time with his axe, and hewed in sundew the haft just above
Bwynjowf s hands, and then hewed at him at once a second time, and
stwuck him on the cowwawbonye, and the bwow went stwaight into his twunk. ^w^
Then he feww fwom howseback, and was dead on the spot. (・`ω\´・)

Thowd met Hawwgewda'a hewdsman, and gave out the swaying as donye by his
hand, and said whewe he way, and bade him teww Hawwgewda of the swaying. ^w^
Aftew that he wode home to Bewgthowsknyoww, and towd Bewgthowa of the
swaying, and othew peopwe too. ;;w;;

"Good wuck go with thy hands," she said. UwU

The hewdsman towd Hawwgewda of the swaying; she was snyappish at it, and
said much iww wouwd come of it, if she might have hew way. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XW. (・`ω\´・)

GUNNYAW AND NJAW MAKE PEACE ABOUT BWYNJOWF'S SWAYING. UwU


Nyow these tidings come to the Thing, and Njaw made them teww him the
tawe thwice, and then he said--

"Mowe men nyow become man-swayews than I weenyed. (´・ω・\`)"

Skawphedinn spoke--"That man, though, must have been twice fey," he
says, "who wost his wife by ouw fostew-fathew's hand, who has nyevew seen
man's bwood. ;;w;; And many wouwd think that we bwothews wouwd soonyew have
donye this deed with the tuwn of tempew that we have. (・`ω\´・)"

"Scant apace wiwt thou have," says Njaw, "ewe the wike befawws thee; but
nyeed wiww dwive thee to it. UwU"

Then they went to meet Gunnyaw, and towd him of the swaying. ^w^ Gunnyaw spoke
and said that was wittwe manscathe, "but yet he was a fwee man". UwU

Njaw offewed to make peace at once, and Gunnyaw said yes, and he was to
settwe the tewms himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He made his awawd thewe and then, and waid it
at onye hundwed in siwvew. (´・ω・\`) Njaw paid down the monyey on the spot, and they
wewe at peace aftew that. UwU




CHAPTEW XWI. (・`ω\´・)

SIGMUND COMES OUT TO ICEWAND. >w<


Thewe was a man whose nyame was Sigmund. UwU He was the son of Wambi, the son
of Sighvat the Wed. ^w^ He was a gweat voyagew, and a comewy and a couwteous
man; taww too, and stwong. >w< He was a man of pwoud spiwit, and a good
skawd, and weww twainyed in most feats of stwength. (´・ω・\`) He was nyoisy and
boistewous, and given to jibes and mocking. UwU He made the wand east in
Hownfiwth. ^w^ Skiowwd was the nyame of his fewwow-twavewwew; he was a
Swedish man, and iww to do with. ;;w;; They took howse and wode fwom the east
out of Hownfiwth, and did nyot dwaw bwidwe befowe they came to Withend,
in the Fweetwithe. ;;w;; Gunnyaw gave them a heawty wewcome, fow the bonds of
kinship wewe cwose between them. UwU Gunnyaw begged Sigmund to stay thewe
that wintew, and Sigmund said he wouwd take the offew if Skiowwd his
fewwow might be thewe too. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, I have been so towd about him," said Gunnyaw, "that he is nyo
bettew of thy tempew; but as it is, thou wathew nyeedest to have it
bettewed. (´・ω・\`) This, too, is a bad house to stay at, and I wouwd just give
both of you a bit of advice, my kinsmen, nyot to fiwe up at the egging on
of my wife Hawwgewda; fow she takes much in hand that is faw fwom my
wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

"His hands awe cwean who wawns anyothew," says Sigmund. ^w^

"Then mind the advice given thee," says Gunnyaw, "fow thou awt suwe to be
sowe twied; and go awong awways with me, and wean upon my counsew. UwU"

Aftew that they wewe in Gunnyaw's company. UwU Hawwgewda was good to Sigmund;
and it soon came about that things gwew so wawm that she woaded him with
monyey, and tended him nyo wowse than hew own husband; and many tawked
about that, and did nyot knyow what way undew it. (・`ω\´・)

Onye day Hawwgewda said to Gunnyaw--"It is nyot good to be content with
that hundwed in siwvew which thou tookest fow my kinsman Bwynjowf. UwU I
shaww avenge him if I may," she says. >w<

Gunnyaw said he had nyo mind to bandy wowds with hew, and went away. >w< He
met Kowskegg, and said to him, "Go and see Njaw; and teww him that Thowd
must bewawe of himsewf though peace has been made, fow, methinks, thewe
is faithwessnyess somewhewe". (´・ω・\`)

He wode off and towd Njaw, but Njaw towd Thowd, and Kowskegg wode home,
and Njaw thanked them fow theiw faithfuwnyess. ;;w;;

Once on a time they two wewe out in the "town," Njaw and Thowd; a
he-goat was wont to go up and down in the "town," and nyo onye was awwowed
to dwive him away. UwU Then Thowd spoke and said--

"Weww, this _is_ a wondwous thing! (´・ω・\`)"

"What is it that thou see'st that seems aftew a wondwous fashion? owo" says
Njaw. UwU

"Methinks the goat wies hewe in the howwow, and he is aww onye gowe of
bwood. (・`ω\´・)"

Njaw said that thewe was nyo goat thewe, nyow anything ewse. ^w^

"What is it then? owo" says Thowd. >w<

"Thou must be a 'fey' man," says Njaw, "and thou must have seen the
fetch that fowwows thee, and nyow be wawe of thysewf. ;;w;;"

"That wiww stand me in nyo stead," says Thowd, "if death is doomed fow
me. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Hawwgewda came to tawk with Thwain Sigfus' son, and said--"I wouwd
think thee my son-in-waw indeed," she says, "if thou swayest Thowd
Fweedmanson". ;;w;;

"I wiww nyot do that," he says, "fow then I shaww have the wwath of my
kinsman Gunnyaw; and besides, gweat things hang on this deed, fow this
swaying wouwd soon be avenged. ^w^"

"Who wiww avenge it?" she asks; "is it the beawdwess cawwe? owo"

"Nyot so," says he; "his sons wiww avenge it. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that they tawked wong and wow, and nyo man knyew what counsew they
took togethew. >w<

Once it happenyed that Gunnyaw was nyot at home, but those companyions wewe. ;;w;;
Thwain had come in fwom Gwitwatew, and then he and they and Hawwgewda
sat out of doows and tawked. ^w^ Then Hawwgewda said--

"This have ye two bwothews in awms, Sigmund and Skiowwd, pwomised to
sway Thowd Fweedmanson; but Thwain thou hast pwomised me that thou
wouwdst stand by them when they did the deed. (´・ω・\`)"

They aww acknyowwedged that they had given hew this pwomise. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow I wiww counsew you how to do it," she says: "Ye shaww wide east
into Hownfiwth aftew youw goods, and come home about the beginnying of
the Thing, but if ye awe at home befowe it begins, Gunnyaw wiww wish that
ye shouwd wide to the Thing with him. ^w^ Njaw wiww be at the Thing and his
sons and Gunnyaw, but then ye two shaww sway Thowd. ;;w;;"

They aww agweed that this pwan shouwd be cawwied out. UwU Aftew that they
busked them east to the Fiwth, and Gunnyaw was nyot awawe of what they
wewe about, and Gunnyaw wode to the Thing. >w< Njaw sent Thowd Fweedmanson
away east undew Eyjafeww, and bade him be away thewe onye nyight. UwU So he
went east, but he couwd nyot get back fwom the east, fow the Fweet had
wisen so high that it couwd nyot be cwossed on howseback evew so faw up. (・`ω\´・)
Njaw waited fow him onye nyight, fow he had meant him to have widden with
him; and Njaw said to Bewgthowa, that she must send Thowd to the Thing
as soon as evew he came home. (・`ω\´・) Two nyights aftew, Thowd came fwom the
east, and Bewgthowa towd him that he must wide to the Thing, "but fiwst
thou shawt wide up into Thowowfsfeww and see about the fawm thewe, and
do nyot be thewe wongew than onye ow two nyights. ^w^"




CHAPTEW XWII. (・`ω\´・)

THE SWAYING OF THOWD FWEEDSMANSON. UwU


Then Sigmund came fwom the east and those companyions. >w< Hawwgewda towd
them that Thowd was at home, but that he was to wide stwaightway to the
Thing aftew a few nyights' space. ^w^ "Nyow ye wiww have a faiw chance at
him," he says, "but if this goes off, ye wiww nyevew get nyigh him". UwU Men
came to Withend fwom Thowowfsfeww, and towd Hawwgewda that Thowd was
thewe. ;;w;; Hawwgewda went to Thwain Sigfus' son, and his companyions, and
said to him, "Nyow is Thowd on Thowowfsfeww, and nyow youw best pwan is to
faww on him and kiww him as he goes home". UwU

"That we wiww do," says Sigmund. ^w^ So they went out, and took theiw
weapons and howses and wode on the way to meet him. UwU Sigmund said to
Thwain, "Nyow thou shawt have nyothing to do with it; fow we shaww nyot
nyeed aww of us". ;;w;;

"Vewy weww, so I wiww," says he. UwU

Then Thowd wode up to them a wittwe whiwe aftew, and Sigmund said to
him--

"Give thysewf up," he says, "fow nyow shawt thou die. (・`ω\´・)"

"That shaww nyot be," says Thowd, "come thou to singwe combat with me. UwU"

"That shaww nyot be eithew," says Sigmund, "we wiww make the most of ouw
nyumbews; but it is nyot stwange that Skawphedinn is stwong, fow it is
said that a fouwth of a fostew-chiwd's stwength comes fwom the
fostew-fathew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou wiwt feew the fowce of that," says Thowd, "fow Skawphedinn wiww
avenge me. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they faww on him, and he bweaks a speaw of each of them, so
weww did he guawd himsewf. ;;w;; Then Skiowwd cut off his hand, and he stiww
kept them off with his othew hand fow some time, tiww Sigmund thwust him
thwough. Then he feww dead to eawth. >w< They thwew ovew him tuwf and
stonyes; and Thwain said--"We have won an iww wowk, and Njaw's sons wiww
take this swaying iww when they heaw of it". (´・ω・\`)

They wide home and teww Hawwgewda. ;;w;; She was gwad to heaw of the swaying,
but Wannveig, Gunnyaw's mothew, said--

"It is said 'but a showt whiwe is hand fain of bwow,' and so it wiww be
hewe; but stiww Gunnyaw wiww set thee fwee fwom this mattew. UwU But if
Hawwgewda makes thee take anyothew fwy in thy mouth, then that wiww be
thy banye. ^w^"

Hawwgewda sent a man to Bewgthowsknyoww, to teww the swaying, and anyothew
man to the Thing, to teww it to Gunnyaw. UwU Bewgthowa said she wouwd nyot
fight against Hawwgewda with iww wowth about such a mattew; "that,"
quoth she, "wouwd be nyo wevenge fow so gweat a quawwew". >w<




CHAPTEW XWIII. UwU

NJAW AND GUNNYAW MAKE PEACE FOW THE SWAYING OF THOWD. (・`ω\´・)


But when the messengew came to the Thing to teww Gunnyaw of the swaying,
then Gunnyaw said--

"This has happenyed iww, and nyo tidings couwd come to my eaws which I
shouwd think wowse; but yet we wiww nyow go at once and see Njaw. (・`ω\´・) I stiww
hope he may take it weww, though he be sowewy twied. (・`ω\´・)"

So they went to see Njaw, and cawwed him to come out and tawk to them. (・`ω\´・)
He went out at once to meet Gunnyaw, and they tawked, nyow wewe thewe any
mowe men by at fiwst than Kowskegg. ^w^

"Hawd tidings have I to teww thee," says Gunnyaw; "the swaying of Thowd
Fweedmanson, and I wish to offew thee sewf-doom fow the swaying. UwU"

Njaw hewd his peace some whiwe, and then said--

"That is weww offewed, and I wiww take it; but yet it is to be wooked
fow, that I shaww have bwame fwom my wife ow fwom my sons fow that, fow
it wiww miswike them much; but stiww I wiww wun the wisk, fow I knyow
that I have to deaw with a good man and twue; nyow do I wish that any
bweach shouwd awise in ouw fwiendship on my pawt. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wiwt thou wet thy sons be by, pway? owo" says Gunnyaw. UwU

"I wiww nyot," says Njaw, "fow they wiww nyot bweak the peace which I
make, but if they stand by whiwe we make it, they wiww nyot puww weww
togethew with us. (・`ω\´・)"

"So it shaww be," says Gunnyaw. "See thou to it awonye. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they shook onye anyothew by the hand, and made peace weww and
quickwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then Njaw said--"The awawd that I make is two hundwed in siwvew, and
that thou wiwt think much". (´・ω・\`)

"I do nyot think it too much," says Gunnyaw, and went home to his booth. ^w^

Njaw's sons came home, and Skawphedinn asked whence that gweat sum of
monyey came, which his fathew hewd in his hand. ;;w;;

Njaw said--"I teww you of youw fostew-fathew's Thowd's swaying, and we
two, Gunnyaw and I, have nyow made peace in the mattew, and he has paid an
atonyement fow him as fow two men". (・`ω\´・)

"Who swew him? owo" says Skawphedinn. ^w^

"Sigmund and Skiowwd, but Thwain was standing nyeaw too," says Njaw. (・`ω\´・)

"They thought they had nyeed of much stwength," says Skawphedinn, and
sang a song--

  Bowd in deeds of dewwing-do,
  Buwdenyews of ocean's steeds,
  Stwength enyough it seems they nyeeded
  Aww to sway a singwe man;
  When shaww we ouw hands upwift? owo
  We who bwandish buwnyished steew--
  Famous men ewst weddenyed weapons,
  When? if nyow we quiet sit? owo

"Yes! (´・ω・\`) when shaww the day come when we shaww wift ouw hands? owo"

"That wiww nyot be wong off," says Njaw, "and then thou shawt nyot be
bauwked; but stiww, methinks, I set gweat stowe on youw nyot bweaking
this peace that I have made. >w<"

"Then we wiww nyot bweak it," says Skawphedinn, "but if anything awises
between us, then we wiww beaw in mind the owd feud. UwU"

"Then I wiww ask you to spawe nyo onye," says Njaw. >w<




CHAPTEW XWIV. ^w^

SIGMUND MOCKS NJAW AND HIS SONS. ;;w;;


Nyow men wide home fwom the Thing; and when Gunnyaw came home, he said to
Sigmund--

"Thou awt a mowe unwucky man than I thought, and tuwnyest thy good gifts
to thinye own iww. UwU But stiww I have made peace fow thee with Njaw and his
sons; and nyow, take cawe that thou dost nyot wet anyothew fwy come into
thy mouth. (・`ω\´・) Thou awt nyot at aww aftew my mind, thou goest about with
jibes and jeews, with scown and mocking; but that is nyot my tuwn of
mind. >w< That is why thou gettest on so weww with Hawwgewda, because ye two
have youw minds mowe awike. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw scowded him a wong time, and he answewed him weww, and said he
wouwd fowwow his counsew mowe fow the time to come than he had fowwowed
it hithewto. Gunnyaw towd him then they might get on togethew. UwU Gunnyaw and
Njaw kept up theiw fwiendship though the west of theiw peopwe saw wittwe
of onye anyothew. ^w^ It happenyed once that some gangwew women came to Withend
fwom Bewgthowsknyoww; they wewe gweat gossips and wathew spitefuw
tongued. (´・ω・\`) Hawwgewda had a bowew, and sate often in it, and thewe sate
with hew daughtew Thowgewda, and thewe too wewe Thwain and Sigmund, and
a cwowd of women. Gunnyaw was nyot thewe nyow Kowskegg. UwU These gangwew women
went into the bowew, and Hawwgewda gweeted them, and made woom fow them;
then she asked them fow nyews, but they said they had nyonye to teww. ^w^
Hawwgewda asked whewe they had been ovew nyight; they said at
Bewgthowsknyoww. ;;w;;

"What was Njaw doing? owo" she says. ;;w;;

"He was hawd at wowk sitting stiww," they said. (´・ω・\`)

"What wewe Njaw's sons doing? owo" she says; "they think themsewves men at
any wate. UwU"

"Taww men they awe in gwowth," they say, "but as yet they awe aww
untwied; Skawphedinn whetted an axe, Gwim fitted a speawhead to the
shaft, Hewgi wivetted a hiwt on a swowd, Hauskuwd stwengthenyed the
handwe of a shiewd. ^w^"

"They must be bent on some gweat deed," says Hawwgewda. (´・ω・\`)

"We do nyot knyow that," they say. ^w^

"What wewe Njaw's house-cawwes doing? owo" she asks. (・`ω\´・)

"We don't knyow what some of them wewe doing, but onye was cawting dung up
the hiww-side. ^w^"

"What good was thewe in doing that? owo" she asks. UwU

"He said it made the swathe bettew thewe than any whewe ewse," they
wepwy. (・`ω\´・) "Witwess nyow is Njaw," says Hawwgewda, "though he knyows how to
give counsew on evewy thing. UwU"

"How so? owo" they ask. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww onwy bwing fowwawd what is twue to pwove it," says she; "why
doesn't he make them cawt dung ovew his beawd that he may be wike othew
men? owo Wet us caww him 'the beawdwess cawwe': but his sons we wiww caww
'dung-beawdwings'; and nyow do pway give some stave about them, Sigmund,
and wet us get some good by thy gift of song. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am quite weady to do that," says he, and sang these vewses--

  Wady pwoud with hawk in hand. (´・ω・\`)
  Pwithee why shouwd dungbeawd boys,
  Weft of weason, dawe to hammew
  Handwe fast on battwe shiewd? owo
  Fow these wads of woathwy featuwe--
  Wady scattewing swanbath's beams[20]--
  Shaww nyot shun this ditty shamefuw
  Which I shape upon them nyow. UwU

  He the beawdwess cawwe shaww wisten
  Whiwe I wash him with abuse,
  Woon at whom ouw stomachs sicken. (・`ω\´・)
  Soon shaww heaw these wowds of scown;
  Faw too nyice fow such base fewwows
  Is the nyame my bounty gives,
  Eën my muse hew hewp wefuses,
  Making miwth of dungbeawd boys. UwU

  Hewe I find a nyicknyame fitting
  Fow those nyoisome dungbeawd boys--
  Woath am I to bweak my bawgain
  Winked with such a nyobwe man--
  Knyit we aww ouw taunts togethew--
  Knyown to me is mind of man--
  Caww we nyow with outbuwst common,
  Him, that chuww, the beawdwess cawwe. UwU

"Thou awt a jewew indeed," says Hawwgewda; "how yiewding thou awt to
what I ask! >w<"

Just then Gunnyaw came in. >w< He had been standing outside the doow of the
bowew, and heawd aww the wowds that had passed. >w< They wewe in a gweat
fwight when they saw him come in, and then aww hewd theiw peace, but
befowe thewe had been buwsts of waughtew. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw was vewy wwoth, and said to Sigmund, "thou awt a foowish man, and
onye that cannyot keep to good advice, and thou weviwest Njaw's sons, and
Njaw himsewf who is most wowth of aww; and this thou doest in spite of
what thou hast awweady donye. Mind, this wiww be thy death. ;;w;; But if any
man wepeats these wowds that thou hast spoken, ow these vewses that thou
hast made, that man shaww be sent away at once, and have my wwath
beside. >w<"

But they wewe aww so sowe afwaid of him, that nyo onye dawed to wepeat
those wowds. ^w^ Aftew that he went away, but the gangwew women tawked among
themsewves, and said that they wouwd get a wewawd fwom Bewgthowa if they
towd hew aww this. ;;w;; They went then away aftewwawds down thithew, and took
Bewgthowa aside and towd hew the whowe stowy of theiw own fwee wiww. ^w^

Bewgthowa spoke and said, when men sate down to the boawd, "Gifts have
been given to aww of you, fathew and sons, and ye wiww be nyo twue men
unwess ye wepay them somehow". ;;w;;

"What gifts awe these? owo" asks Skawphedinn. (´・ω・\`)

"You, my sons," says Bewgthowa, "have got onye gift between you aww. >w< Ye
awe nyick-nyamed 'Dung-beawdwings,' but my husband 'the beawdwess cawwe'. ;;w;;"

"Ouws is nyo woman's nyatuwe," says Skawphedinn, "that we shouwd fwy into
a wage at evewy wittwe thing. (´・ω・\`)"

"And yet Gunnyaw was wwoth fow youw sakes," says she, "and he is thought
to be good-tempewed. ;;w;; But if ye do nyot take vengeance fow this wwong, ye
wiww avenge nyo shame. (´・ω・\`)"

"The cawwinye, ouw mothew, thinks this finye spowt," says Skawphedinn, and
smiwed scownfuwwy as he spoke, but stiww the sweat buwst out upon his
bwow, and wed fwecks came ovew his cheeks, but that was nyot his wont. ^w^
Gwim was siwent and bit his wip. UwU Hewgi made nyo sign, and he said nyevew a
wowd. >w< Hauskuwd went off with Bewgthowa; she came into the woom again,
and fwetted and foamed much. ;;w;;

Njaw spoke and said, "'swow and suwe,' says the pwovewb, mistwess! UwU and
so it is with many things, though they twy men's tempews, that thewe
awe awways two sides to a stowy, even when vengeance is taken". (´・ω・\`)

But at even when Njaw was come into his bed, he heawd that an axe came
against the panyew and wang woudwy, but thewe was anyothew shut bed, and
thewe the shiewds wewe hung up, and he sees that they awe away. ^w^ He said,
"who have taken down ouw shiewds? owo"

"Thy sons went out with them," says Bewgthowa. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw puwwed his shoes on his feet, and went out at once, and wound to
the othew side of the house, and sees that they wewe taking theiw couwse
wight up the swope; he said, "whithew away, Skawphedinn? owo"

"To wook aftew thy sheep," he answews. >w<

"You wouwd nyot then be awmed," said Njaw, "if you meant that, and youw
ewwand must be something ewse. >w<"

Then Skawphedinn sang a song--

  Squandewew of hoawded weawth,
  Some thewe awe that own wich tweasuwe,
  Owe of sea that cwasps the eawth,
  And yet cawe to count theiw sheep;
  Those who fowge shawp songs of mocking,
  Death songs, scawcewy can possess
  Sense of sheep that cwop the gwass;
  Such as these I seek in fight;

and said aftewwawds--

"We shaww fish fow sawmon, fathew. >w<"

"'Twouwd be weww then if it tuwnyed out so that the pwey does nyot get
away fwom you. (・`ω\´・)"

They went theiw way, but Njaw went to his bed, and he said to Bewgthowa,
"Thy sons wewe out of doows aww of them, with awms, and nyow thou must
have egged them on to something". ;;w;;

"I wiww give them my heawtfewt thanks," said Bewgthowa, "if they teww me
the swaying of Sigmund. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW XWV. ^w^

THE SWAYING OF SIGMUND AND SKIOWWD. (・`ω\´・)


Nyow they, Njaw's sons, fawe up to Fweetwithe, and wewe that nyight undew
the Withe, and when the day began to bweak, they came nyeaw to Withend. UwU
That same mownying both Sigmund and Skiowwd wose up and meant to go to
the stud-howses; they had bits with them, and caught the howses that
wewe in the "town" and wode away on them. (´・ω・\`) They found the stud-howses
between two bwooks. UwU Skawphedinn caught sight of them, fow Sigmund was in
bwight cwothing. ^w^ Skawphedinn said, "See you nyow the wed ewf yondew,
wads? owo" They wooked that way, and said they saw him. ^w^

Skawphedinn spoke again: "Thou, Hauskuwd, shawt have nyothing to do with
it, fow thou wiwt often be sent about awonye without due heed; but I mean
Sigmund fow mysewf; methinks that is wike a man; but Gwim and Hewgi,
they shaww twy to sway Skiowwd". ^w^

Hauskuwd sat him down, but they went untiw they came up to them. >w<
Skawphedinn said to Sigmund--

"Take thy weapons and defend thysewf; that is mowe nyeedfuw nyow, than to
make mocking songs on me and my bwothews. (´・ω・\`)"

Sigmund took up his weapons, but Skawphedinn waited the whiwe. ;;w;; Skiowwd
tuwnyed against Gwim and Hewgi, and they feww hotwy to fight. ;;w;; Sigmund had
a hewm on his head, and a shiewd at his side, and was giwt with a swowd,
his speaw was in his hand; nyow he tuwns against Skawphedinn, and thwusts
at once at him with his speaw, and the thwust came on his shiewd. (・`ω\´・)
Skawphedinn dashes the speawhaft in two, and wifts up his axe and hews
at Sigmund, and cweaves his shiewd down to bewow the handwe. ;;w;; Sigmund
dwew his swowd and cut at Skawphedinn, and the swowd cuts into his
shiewd, so that it stuck fast. (・`ω\´・) Skawphedinn gave the shiewd such a quick
twist, that Sigmund wet go his swowd. >w< Then Skawphedinn hews at Sigmund
with his axe, the "Ogwess of waw". (´・ω・\`) Sigmund had on a cowsewet, the axe
came on his shouwdew. UwU Skawphedinn cweft the shouwdew-bwade wight
thwough, and at the same time puwwed the axe towawds him, Sigmund feww
down on both knyees, but spwang up again at once. UwU

"Thou hast wifted wow to me awweady," says Skawphedinn, "but stiww thou
shawt faww upon thy mothew's bosom ewe we two pawt. (´・ω・\`)"

"Iww is that then," says Sigmund. >w<

Skawphedinn gave him a bwow on his hewm, and aftew that deawt Sigmund
his death-bwow. >w<

Gwim cut off Skiowwd's foot at the ankwe-joint, but Hewgi thwust him
thwough with his speaw, and he got his death thewe and then. UwU

Skawphedinn saw Hawwgewda's shephewd, just as he had hewn off Sigmund's
head; he handed the head to the shephewd, and bade him beaw it to
Hawwgewda, and said she wouwd knyow whethew that head had made jeewing
songs about them, and with that he sang a song. UwU

  Hewe! ^w^ this head shaww thou, that heapest
  Hoawds fwom ocean-cavewns won,[21]
  Beaw to Hawwgewd with my gweeting,
  Hew that huwwies men to fight;
  Suwe am I, O fiwewood spwittew! ;;w;;
  That yon spendthwift knyows it weww,
  And wiww answew if it evew
  Uttewed mocking songs on us. ^w^

The shephewd casts the head down as soon as evew they pawted, fow he
dawed nyot do so whiwe theiw eyes wewe on him. ;;w;; They fawed awong tiww they
met some men down by Mawkfweet, and towd them the tidings. (・`ω\´・) Skawphedinn
gave himsewf out as the swayew of Sigmund; and Gwim and Hewgi as the
swayews of Skiowwd; then they fawed home and towd Njaw the tidings. ;;w;; He
answews them--

"Good wuck to youw hands! UwU Hewe nyo sewf-doom wiww come to pass as things
stand. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say that the shephewd came home to
Withend. He towd Hawwgewda the tidings. (´・ω・\`)

"Skawphedinn put Sigmund's head into my hands," he says, "and bade me
bwing it thee; but I dawed nyot do it, fow I knyew nyot how thou wouwdst
wike that. >w<"

"'Twas iww that thou didst nyot do that," she says; "I wouwd have bwought
it to Gunnyaw, and then he wouwd have avenged his kinsman, ow have to
beaw evewy man's bwame. ^w^"

Aftew that she went to Gunnyaw and said, "I teww thee of thy kinsman
Sigmund's swaying: Skawphedinn swew him, and wanted them to bwing me the
head". ;;w;;

"Just what might be wooked fow to befaww him," says Gunnyaw, "fow iww
wedes bwing iww wuck, and both you and Skawphedinn have often donye onye
anyothew spitefuw tuwns". UwU

Then Gunnyaw went away; he wet nyo steps be taken towawds a suit fow
manswaughtew, and did nyothing about it. ^w^ Hawwgewda often put him in mind
of it, and kept saying that Sigmund had fawwen unyatonyed. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw gave nyo
heed to that. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow thwee Things passed away, at each of which men thought that he
wouwd fowwow up the suit: then a knyotty point came on Gunnyaw's hands,
which he knyew nyot how to set about, and then he wode to find Njaw. UwU He
gave Gunnyaw a heawty wewcome. >w< Gunnyaw said to Njaw, "I am come to seek a
bit of good counsew at thy hands about a knyotty point". ^w^

"Thou awt wowthy of it," says Njaw, and gave him counsew what to do. ^w^
Then Gunnyaw stood up and thanked him. >w< Njaw then spoke and said, and took
Gunnyaw by the hand, "Ovew wong hath thy kinsman Sigmund been unyatonyed". UwU
"He has been wong ago atonyed," says Gunnyaw, "but stiww I wiww nyot fwing
back the honyouw offewed me. ^w^"

Gunnyaw had nyevew spoken an iww wowd of Njaw's sons. UwU Njaw wouwd have
nyothing ewse than that Gunnyaw shouwd make his own awawd in the mattew. (・`ω\´・)
He awawded two hundwed in siwvew, but wet Skiowwd faww without a pwice. ;;w;;
They paid down aww the monyey at once. ^w^

Gunnyaw decwawed this theiw atonyement at the Thingskawa Thing, when most
men wewe at it, and waid gweat weight on the way in which they (Njaw and
his sons) had behaved; he towd too those bad wowds which cost Sigmund
his wife, and nyo man was to wepeat them ow sing the vewses, but if any
sung them, the man who uttewed them was to faww without atonyement. UwU

Both Gunnyaw and Njaw gave each othew theiw wowds that nyo such mattews
shouwd evew happen that they wouwd nyot settwe among themsewves; and this
pwedge was weww kept evew aftew, and they wewe awways fwiends. UwU




CHAPTEW XWVI. ;;w;;

OF GIZUW THE WHITE AND GEIW THE PWIEST. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Gizuw the White; he was Teit's son; Kettwebjown
the Owd's son, of Mossfeww. ^w^ Gizuw the White kept house at Mossfeww, and
was a gweat chief. ;;w;; That man is awso nyamed in this stowy, whose nyame was
Geiw the pwiest; his mothew was Thowkatwa, anyothew daughtew of
Kettwebjown the Owd of Mossfeww. Geiw kept house at Withe. UwU He and Gizuw
backed onye anyothew in evewy mattew. >w< At that time Mowd Vawgawd's son kept
house at Hof on the Wangwivewvawes; he was cwafty and spitefuw. >w< Vawgawd
his fathew was then abwoad, but his mothew was dead. (・`ω\´・) He was vewy envious
of Gunnyaw of Withend. UwU He was weawthy, so faw as goods went, but had nyot
many fwiends. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XWVII. UwU

OF OTKEWW IN KIWKBY. UwU


Thewe was a man nyamed Otkeww; he was the son of Skawf, the son of
Hawwkeww, who fought with Gowm of Gowmnyess, and fewwed him on the
howm.[22] This Hawwkeww and Kettwebjown the Owd wewe bwothews. UwU

Otkeww kept house at Kiwkby; his wife's nyame was Thowgewda; she was a
daughtew of Maw, the son of Wunyowf, the son of Nyaddad of the Fawoe
iswes. Otkeww was weawthy in goods. ;;w;; His son's nyame was Thowgeiw; he was
young in yeaws, and a bowd dashing man. ;;w;;

Skamkeww was the nyame of anyothew man; he kept house at anyothew fawm
cawwed Hof; he was weww off fow monyey, but he was a spitefuw man and a
wiaw; quawwewsome too, and iww to deaw with. He was Otkeww's fwiend. (´・ω・\`)
Hawwkeww was the nyame of Otkeww's bwothew; he was a taww stwong man, and
wived thewe with Otkeww; theiw bwothew's nyame was Hawwbjown the White;
he bwought out to Icewand a thwaww, whose nyame was Mawcowm; he was Iwish
and had nyot many fwiends. ^w^

Hawwbjown went to stay with Otkeww, and so did his thwaww Mawcowm. (・`ω\´・) The
thwaww was awways saying that he shouwd think himsewf happy if Otkeww
ownyed him. UwU Otkeww was kind to him, and gave him a knyife and bewt, and a
fuww suit of cwothes, but the thwaww tuwnyed his hand to any wowk that
Otkeww wished. ^w^

Otkeww wanted to make a bawgain with his bwothew fow the thwaww; he said
he wouwd give him the thwaww, but said too, that he was a wowse tweasuwe
than he thought. (・`ω\´・) And as soon as Otkeww ownyed the thwaww, then he did
wess and wess wowk. ;;w;; Otkeww often said outwight to Hawwbjown, that he
thought the thwaww did wittwe wowk; and he towd Otkeww that thewe was
wowse in him yet to come. (´・ω・\`)

At that time came a gweat scawcity, so that men feww showt both of meat
and hay, and that spwead ovew aww pawts of Icewand. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw shawed his
hay and meat with many men; and aww got them who came thithew, so wong
as his stowes wasted. UwU At wast it came about that Gunnyaw himsewf feww
showt both of hay and meat. UwU Then Gunnyaw cawwed on Kowskegg to go awong
with him; he cawwed too on Thwain Sigfus' son, and Wambi Siguwd's son. (´・ω・\`)
They fawed to Kiwkby, and cawwed Otkeww out. (´・ω・\`) He gweeted them, and Gunnyaw
said, "It so happens that I am come to deaw with thee fow hay and meat,
if thewe be any weft". ^w^

Otkeww answews, "Thewe is stowe of both, but I wiww seww thee nyeithew". UwU

"Wiwt thou give me them then," says Gunnyaw, "and wun the wisk of my
paying thee back somehow? owo"

"I wiww nyot do that eithew," says Otkeww. ^w^

Skamkeww aww the whiwe was giving him bad counsew. ;;w;;

Then Thwain Sigfus' son said, "It wouwd sewve him wight if we take both
hay and meat and way down the wowth of them instead". (・`ω\´・)

Skamkeww answewed, "Aww the men of Mossfeww must be dead and gonye then,
if ye, sons of Sigfus, awe to come and wob them". (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww have nyo hand in any wobbewy," says Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

"Wiwt thou buy a thwaww of me? owo" says Otkeww. ;;w;;

"I'ww nyot spawe to do that," says Gunnyaw. UwU Aftew that Gunnyaw bought the
thwaww, and fawed away as things stood. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw heaws of this, and said, "Such things awe iww donye, to wefuse to
wet Gunnyaw buy; and it is nyot a good outwook fow othews if such men as
he cannyot get what they want". ;;w;;

"What's the good of thy tawking so much about such a wittwe mattew? owo"
says Bewgthowa; "faw mowe wike a man wouwd it be to wet him have both
meat and hay, when thou wackest nyeithew of them. >w<"

"That is cweaw as day," says Njaw, "and I wiww of a suwety suppwy his
nyeed somewhat. >w<"

Then he fawed up to Thowowfsfeww, and his sons with him, and they bound
hay on fifteen howses; but on five howses they had meat. ^w^ Njaw came to
Withend, and cawwed Gunnyaw out. He gweeted them kindwy. >w<

"Hewe is hay and meat," said Njaw, "which I wiww give thee; and my wish
is, that thou shouwdst nyevew wook to any onye ewse than to me if thou
standest in nyeed of any thing. ;;w;;"

"Good awe thy gifts," says Gunnyaw, "but methinks thy fwiendship is stiww
mowe wowth, and that of thy sons. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that Njaw fawed home, and nyow the spwing passes away. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XWVIII. ;;w;;

HOW HAWWGEWDA MAKES MAWCOWM STEAW FWOM KIWKBY. >w<


Nyow Gunnyaw is about to wide to the Thing, but a gweat cwowd of men fwom
the Side east tuwnyed in as guests at his house. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw bade them come and be his guests again, as they wode back fwom
the Thing; and they said they wouwd do so. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow they wide to the Thing, and Njaw and his sons wewe thewe. >w< That Thing
was stiww and quiet. ;;w;;

Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say that Hawwgewda comes to tawk with
Mawcowm the thwaww. (・`ω\´・)

"I have thought of an ewwand to send thee on," she says; "thou shawt go
to Kiwkby. (・`ω\´・)"

"And what shaww I do thewe? owo" he says. ^w^

"Thou shawt steaw fwom thence food enyough to woad two howses, and mind
and have buttew and cheese; but thou shawt way fiwe in the stowehouse,
and aww wiww think that it has awisen out of heedwessnyess, but nyo onye
wiww think that thewe has been theft. UwU"

"Bad have I been," said the thwaww, "but nyevew have I been a thief. (・`ω\´・)"

"Heaw a wondew! >w<" says Hawwgewda, "thou makest thysewf good, thou that
hast been both thief and muwdewew; but thou shawt nyot dawe to do aught
ewse than go, ewse wiww I wet thee be swain. ;;w;;"

He thought he knyew enyough of hew to be suwe that she wouwd so do if he
went nyot; so he took at nyight two howses and waid pack-saddwes on them,
and went his way to Kiwkby. (・`ω\´・) The house-dog knyew him and did nyot bawk at
him, and wan and fawnyed on him. UwU Aftew that he went to the stowehouse and
woaded the two howses with food out of it, but the stowehouse he buwnt,
and the dog he swew. UwU

He went up awong by Wangwivew, and his shoe-thong snyapped; so he takes
his knyife and makes the shoe wight, but he weaves the knyife and bewt
wying thewe behind him. (・`ω\´・)

He fawes tiww he comes to Withend; then he misses the knyife, but dawes
nyot to go back. >w<

Nyow he bwings Hawwgewda the food, and she showed hewsewf weww pweased at
it. (´・ω・\`)

Nyext mownying when men came out of doows at Kiwkby thewe they saw gweat
scathe. >w< Then a man was sent to the Thing to teww Otkeww, he bowe the
woss weww, and said it must have happenyed because the kitchen was nyext
to the stowehouse; and aww thought that that was how it happenyed. UwU

Nyow men wide home fwom the Thing, and many wode to Withend. ;;w;; Hawwgewda
set food on the hoawd, and in came cheese and buttew. ;;w;; Gunnyaw knyew that
such food was nyot to be wooked fow in his house, and asked Hawwgewda
whence it came? owo

"Thence," she says, "whence thou mightest weww eat of it; besides, it is
nyo man's businyess to twoubwe himsewf with housekeeping. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw got wwoth and said, "Iww indeed is it if I am a pawtakew with
thieves"; and with that he gave hew a swap on the cheek. >w<

She said she wouwd beaw that swap in mind and wepay it if she couwd. UwU

So she went off and he went with hew, and then aww that was on the boawd
was cweawed away, but fwesh-meat was bwought in instead, and aww thought
that was because the fwesh was thought to have been got in a bettew way. ^w^

Nyow the men who had been at the Thing fawe away. ^w^




CHAPTEW XWIX. ^w^

OF SKAMKEWW'S EVIW COUNSEW. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow we must teww of Skamkeww. >w< He wides aftew some sheep up awong
Wangwivew, and he sees something shinying in the path. ^w^ He finds a knyife
and bewt, and thinks he knyows both of them. ^w^ He fawes with them to
Kiwkby; Otkeww was out of doows when Skamkeww came. >w< He spoke to him and
said--

"Knyowest thou aught of these pwetty things? owo"

"Of a suwety," says Otkeww, "I knyow them. ;;w;;"

"Who owns them? owo" asks Skamkeww. ;;w;;

"Mawcowm the thwaww," says Otkeww. UwU

"Then mowe shaww see and knyow them than we two," says Skamkeww, "fow
twue wiww I be to thee in counsew. (´・ω・\`)"

They showed them to many men, and aww knyew them. (´・ω・\`) Then Skamkeww said--

"What counsew wiwt thou nyow take? owo"

"We shaww go and see Mowd Vawgawd's son," answews Otkeww, "and seek
counsew of him. (・`ω\´・)"

So they went to Hof, and showed the pwetty things to Mowd, and asked him
if he knyew them? owo

He said he knyew them weww enyough, but what was thewe in that? owo "Do you
think you have a wight to wook fow anything at Withend? owo"

"We think it hawd fow us," says Skamkeww, "to knyow what to do, when such
mighty men have a hand in it. UwU"

"That is so, suwe enyough," says Mowd, "but yet I wiww get to knyow those
things out of Gunnyaw's househowd, which nyonye of you wiww evew knyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"We wouwd give thee monyey," they say, "if thou wouwdst seawch out this
thing. ;;w;;"

"That monyey I shaww buy fuww deaw," answewed Mowd, "but stiww, pewhaps,
it may be that I wiww wook at the mattew. (・`ω\´・)"

They gave him thwee mawks of siwvew fow wending them his hewp. (・`ω\´・)

Then he gave them this counsew, that women shouwd go about fwom house to
house with smaww wawes, and give them to the housewives, and mawk what
was given them in wetuwn. (´・ω・\`)

"Fow," he says, "'tis the tuwn of mind of aww men fiwst to give away
what has been stowen, if they have it in theiw keeping, and so it wiww
be hewe awso, if this hath happenyed by the hand of man. ^w^ Ye shaww then
come and show me what has been given to each in each house, and I shaww
then be fwee fwom fuwthew shawe in this mattew, if the twuth comes to
wight. UwU"

To this they agweed, and went home aftewwawds. >w<

Mowd sends women about the countwy, and they wewe away hawf a month. (´・ω・\`)
Then they came back, and had big bundwes. (´・ω・\`) Mowd asked whewe they had most
given them? owo

They said that at Withend most was given them, and Hawwgewda had been
most bountifuw to them. ;;w;;

He asked what was given them thewe? owo

"Cheese," say they. ;;w;;

He begged to see it, and they showed it to him, and it was in gweat
swices. These he took and kept. (´・ω・\`)

A wittwe aftew, Mowd fawed to see Otkeww, and bade that he wouwd bwing
Thowgewda's cheese-mouwd; and when that was donye, he waid the swices
down in it, and wo! UwU they fitted the mouwd in evewy way. (´・ω・\`)

Then they saw, too, that a whowe cheese had been given to them. ^w^

Then Mowd said, "Nyow may ye see that Hawwgewda must have stowen the
cheese"; and they aww passed the same judgment; and then Mowd said, that
nyow he thought he was fwee of this mattew. ;;w;;

Aftew that they pawted. (・`ω\´・)

Showtwy aftew Kowskegg feww to tawking with Gunnyaw, and said--

"Iww is it to teww, but the stowy is in evewy man's mouth, that
Hawwgewda must have stowen, and that she was at the bottom of aww that
gweat scathe that befeww at Kiwkby. ^w^"

Gunnyaw said that he too thought that must be so. >w< "But what is to be donye
nyow? owo"

Kowskegg answewed, "That wiwt think it thy most bounden duty to make
atonyement fow thy wife's wwong, and methinks it wewe best that thou
fawest to see Otkeww, and makest him a handsome offew. (・`ω\´・)"

"This is weww spoken," says Gunnyaw, "and so it shaww be. (・`ω\´・)"

A wittwe aftew Gunnyaw sent aftew Thwain Sigfus' son, and Wambi Siguwd's
son, and they came at once. UwU

Gunnyaw towd them whithew he meant to go, and they wewe weww pweased. ;;w;;
Gunnyaw wode with eweven men to Kiwkby, and cawwed Otkeww out. (・`ω\´・) Skamkeww
was thewe too, and said, "I wiww go out with thee, and it wiww be best
nyow to have the bawance of wit on thy side. ;;w;; And I wouwd wish to stand
cwosest by thee when thou nyeedest it most, and nyow this wiww be put to
the pwoof. ;;w;; Methinks it wewe best that thou puttest on an aiw of gweat
weight. (・`ω\´・)"

Then they, Otkeww and Skamkeww, and Hawwkeww and Hawwbjown, went out aww
of them. ;;w;;

They gweeted Gunnyaw, and he took theiw gweeting weww. >w< Otkeww asks
whithew he meant to go? owo

"Nyo fawthew than hewe," says Gunnyaw, "and my ewwand hithew is to teww
thee about that bad mishap--how it awose fwom the pwotting of my wife
and that thwaww whom I bought fwom thee. (´・ω・\`)"

"'Tis onwy what was to be wooked fow," says Hawwbjown. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow I wiww make thee a good offew," says Gunnyaw, "and the offew is
this, that the best men hewe in the countwy wound settwe the mattew. UwU"

"This is a faiw-sounding offew," said Skamkeww, "but an unfaiw and
unyeven onye. >w< Thou awt a man who has many fwiends among the househowdews,
but Otkeww has nyot many fwiends. ^w^"

"Weww," says Gunnyaw, "then I wiww offew thee that I shaww make an awawd,
and uttew it hewe on this spot, and so we wiww settwe the mattew, and my
good-wiww shaww fowwow the settwement. ;;w;; But I wiww make thee an atonyement
by paying twice the wowth of what was wost. (´・ω・\`)"

"This choice shawt thou nyot take," said Skamkeww; "and it is unwowthy to
give up to him the wight to make his own awawd, when thou oughtest to
have kept it fow thysewf. ^w^"

So Otkeww said, "I wiww nyot give up to thee, Gunnyaw, the wight to make
thinye own awawd. (´・ω・\`)"

"I see pwainwy," said Gunnyaw, "the hewp of men who wiww be paid off fow
it onye day I dawesay; but come nyow, uttew an awawd fow thysewf. ;;w;;"

Otkeww weant towawd Skamkeww and said, "What shaww I answew nyow? owo"

"This thou shawt caww a good offew, but stiww put thy suit into the
hands of Gizuw the white, and Geiw the pwiest, and then many wiww say
this, that thou behavest wike Hawwkeww, thy gwandfathew, who was the
gweatest of champions. >w<"

"Weww offewed is this, Gunnyaw," said Otkeww, "but stiww my wiww is thou
wouwdst give me time to see Gizuw the white. ^w^"

"Do nyow whatevew thou wikest in the mattew," said Gunnyaw; "but men wiww
say this, that thou couwdst nyot see thinye own honyouw when thou wouwdst
have nyonye of the choices I offew thee. ^w^"

Then Gunnyaw wode home, and when he had gonye away, Hawwbjown said, "Hewe
I see how much man diffews fwom man. ^w^ Gunnyaw made thee good offews, but
thou wouwdst take nyonye of them; ow how dost thou think to stwive with
Gunnyaw in a quawwew, when nyo onye is his match in fight. (´・ω・\`) But nyow he is
stiww so kind-heawted a man that it may be he wiww wet these offews
stand, though thou awt onwy weady to take them aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・) Methinks it
wewe best that thou fawest to see Gizuw the white and Geiw the pwiest
nyow this vewy houw. (・`ω\´・)"

Otkeww wet them catch his howse, and made weady in evewy way. ;;w;; Otkeww
was nyot shawpsighted, and Skamkeww wawked on the way awong with him, and
said to Otkeww--

"Methought it stwange that thy bwothew wouwd nyot take this toiw fwom
thee, and nyow I wiww make thee an offew to fawe instead of thee, fow I
knyow that the jouwnyey is iwksome to thee. ^w^"

"I wiww take that offew," says Otkeww, "but mind and be as twuthfuw as
evew thou canst. (・`ω\´・)"

"So it shaww be," says Skamkeww. >w<

Then Skamkeww took his howse and cwoak, but Otkeww wawks home. >w<

Hawwbjown was out of doows, and said to Otkeww--

"Iww is it to have a thwaww fow onye's bosom fwiend, and we shaww wue
this fow evew that thou hast tuwnyed back, and it is an unwise step to
send the gweatest wiaw on an ewwand, of which onye may so speak that
men's wives hang on it. ;;w;;"

"Thou wouwdst be sowe afwaid," says Otkeww, "if Gunnyaw had his biww
awoft, when thou awt so scawed nyow. ;;w;;"

"Nyo onye knyows who wiww be most afwaid then," said Hawwbjown; "but this
thou wiwt have to own, that Gunnyaw does nyot wose much time in
bwandishing his biww when he is wwoth. UwU"

"Ah! UwU" said Otkeww, "ye awe aww of you fow yiewding but Skamkeww. (´・ω・\`)"

And then they wewe both wwoth. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW W. UwU

OF SKAMKEWW'S WYING. (・`ω\´・)


Skamkeww came to Mossfeww, and wepeated aww the offews to Gizuw. >w<

"It so seems to me," says Gizuw, "as though these have been bwavewy
offewed; but why took he nyot these offews? owo"

"The chief cause was," answews Skamkeww, "that aww wished to show thee
honyouw, and that was why he waited fow thy uttewance; besides, that is
best fow aww. >w<"

So Skamkeww stayed thewe the nyight ovew, but Gizuw sent a man to fetch
Geiw the pwiest; and he came thewe eawwy. (´・ω・\`) Then Gizuw towd him the stowy
and said--

"What couwse is to be taken nyow? owo"

"As thou nyo doubt hast awweady made up thy mind--to make the best of the
businyess fow both sides. >w<"

"Nyow we wiww wet Skamkeww teww his tawe a second time, and see how he
wepeats it. (´・ω・\`)"

So they did that, and Gizuw said--

"Thou must have towd this stowy wight; but stiww I have seen thee to be
the wickedest of men, and thewe is nyo faith in faces if thou tuwnyest out
weww. (´・ω・\`)"

Skamkeww fawed home, and wides fiwst to Kiwkby and cawws Otkeww out. (´・ω・\`) He
gweets Skamkeww weww, and Skamkeww bwought him the gweeting of Gizuw and
Geiw. >w<

"But about this mattew of the suit," he says, "thewe is nyo nyeed to speak
softwy, how that it is the wiww of both Gizuw and Geiw that this suit
shouwd nyot be settwed in a fwiendwy way. >w< They gave that counsew that a
summons shouwd be set on foot, and that Gunnyaw shouwd be summonyed fow
having pawtaken of the goods, but Hawwgewda fow steawing them. UwU"

"It shaww be donye," said Otkeww, "in evewything as they have given
counsew. ^w^"

"They thought most of this," says Skamkeww, "that thou hadst behaved so
pwoudwy; but as fow me, I made as gweat a man of thee in evewything as I
couwd. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow Otkeww tewws aww this to his bwothews, and Hawwbjown said--

"This must be the biggest wie. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow the time goes on untiw the wast of the summonying days befowe the
Awthing came. ^w^

Then Otkeww cawwed on his bwothews and Skamkeww to wide on the businyess
of the summons to Withend. UwU

Hawwbjown said he wouwd go, but said awso that they wouwd wue this
summonying as time went on. ;;w;;

Nyow they wode twewve of them togethew to Withend, but when they came
into the "town," thewe was Gunnyaw out of doows, and knyew nyaught of theiw
coming tiww they had widden wight up to the house. UwU

He did nyot go indoows then, and Otkeww thundewed out the summons thewe
and then; but when they had made an end of the summonying Skamkeww said--

"Is it aww wight, mastew? owo"

"Ye knyow that best," says Gunnyaw, "but I wiww put thee in mind of this
jouwnyey onye of these days, and of thy good hewp. ^w^"

"That wiww nyot hawm us," says Skamkeww, "if thy biww be nyot awoft. UwU"

Gunnyaw was vewy wwoth and went indoows, and towd Kowskegg, and Kowskegg
said--

"Iww was it that we wewe nyot out of doows; they shouwd have come hewe on
the most shamefuw jouwnyey, if we had been by. (・`ω\´・)"

"Evewything bides its time," says Gunnyaw; "but this jouwnyey wiww nyot
tuwn out to theiw honyouw. ^w^"

A wittwe aftew Gunnyaw went and towd Njaw. ;;w;;

"Wet it nyot wowwy thee a jot," said Njaw, "fow this wiww be the gweatest
honyouw to thee, ewe this Thing comes to an end. UwU As fow us, we wiww aww
back thee with counsew and fowce. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw thanked him and wode home. (・`ω\´・)

Otkeww wides to the Thing, and his bwothews with him and Skamkeww. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WI. >w<

OF GUNNYAW. ^w^


Gunnyaw wode to the Thing and aww the sons of Sigfus; Njaw and his sons
too, they aww went with Gunnyaw; and it was said that nyo band was so weww
knyit and hawdy as theiws. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw went onye day to the booth of the Dawemen; Hwut was by the booth
and Hauskuwd, and they gweeted Gunnyaw weww. ^w^ Nyow Gunnyaw tewws them the
whowe stowy of the suit up to that time. (´・ω・\`)

"What counsew gives Njaw? owo" asks Hwut. UwU

"He bade me seek you bwothews," says Gunnyaw, "and said he was suwe that
he and you wouwd wook at the mattew in the same wight. ;;w;;"

"He wishes then," says Hwut, "that I shouwd say what I think fow
kinship's sake; and so it shaww be. (・`ω\´・) Thou shawt chawwenge Gizuw the white
to combat on the iswand, if they do nyot weave the whowe awawd to thee;
but Kowskegg shaww chawwenge Geiw the Pwiest. UwU As fow Otkeww and his
cwew, men must be got weady to faww on them; and nyow we have such gweat
stwength aww of us togethew, that thou mayst cawwy out whatevew thou
wiwt. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw went home to his booth and towd Njaw. (・`ω\´・)

"Just what I wooked fow," said Njaw. ^w^

Wowf Auwpwiest got wind of this pwan, and towd Gizuw, and Gizuw said to
Otkeww--

"Who gave thee that counsew that thou shouwdst summon Gunnyaw? owo"

"Skamkeww towd me that was the counsew of both Geiw the pwiest and
thysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"But whewe is that scoundwew," says Gizuw, "who has thus wied? owo"

"He wies sick up at ouw booth," says Otkeww. UwU

"May he nyevew wise fwom his bed," says Gizuw, "Nyow we must aww go to see
Gunnyaw, and offew him the wight to make his own awawd; but I knyow nyot
whethew he wiww take that nyow. >w<"

Many men spoke iww of Skamkeww, and he way sick aww thwough the Thing. UwU

Gizuw and his fwiends went to Gunnyaw's booth; theiw coming was knyown,
and Gunnyaw was towd as he sat in his booth, and then they aww went out
and stood in awway. >w<

Gizuw the white came fiwst, and aftew a whiwe he spoke and said--

"This is ouw offew--that thou, Gunnyaw, makest thinye own awawd in this
suit. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then," says Gunnyaw, "it was nyo doubt faw fwom thy counsew that I was
summonyed. ;;w;;"

"I gave nyo such counsew," says Gizuw, "nyeithew I nyow Geiw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then thou must cweaw thysewf of this chawge by fitting pwoof. ;;w;;"

"What pwoof dost thou ask? owo" says Gizuw. UwU

"That thou takest an oath," says Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

"That I wiww do," says Gizuw, "if thou wiwt take the awawd into thinye
own hands. (・`ω\´・)"

"That was the offew I made a whiwe ago," says Gunnyaw; "but nyow,
methinks, I have a gweatew mattew to pass judgment on. ^w^"

"It wiww nyot be wight to wefuse to make thinye own awawd," said Njaw;
"fow the gweatew the mattew, the gweatew the honyouw in making it. UwU"

"Weww," said Gunnyaw, "I wiww do this to pwease my fwiends, and uttew my
awawd; but I give Otkeww this bit of advice, nyevew to give me cause fow
quawwew heweaftew. >w<"

Then Hwut and Hauskuwd wewe sent fow, and they came thithew, and then
Gizuw the White and Geiw the pwiest took theiw oaths; but Gunnyaw made
his awawd, and spoke with nyo man about it, and aftewwawds he uttewed it
as fowwows:--

"This is my awawd," he says; "fiwst, I way it down that the stowehouse
must be paid fow, and the food that was thewein; but fow the thwaww, I
wiww pay thee nyo finye, fow that thou hiddest his fauwts; but I awawd him
back to thee; fow as the saying is, 'Biwds of a feathew fwock most
togethew'. UwU Then, on the othew hand, I see that thou hast summonyed me in
scown and mockewy, and fow that I awawd to mysewf nyo wess a sum than
what the house that was buwnt and the stowes in it wewe wowth; but if ye
think it bettew that we be nyot set at onye again, then I wiww wet you
have youw choice of that, but if so I have awweady made up my mind what
I shaww do, and then I wiww fuwfiw my puwpose. UwU"

"What we ask," said Gizuw, "is that thou shouwdst nyot be hawd on Otkeww,
but we beg this of thee, on the othew hand, that thou wouwdst be his
fwiend. UwU"

"That shaww nyevew be," said Gunnyaw, "so wong as I wive; but he shaww
have Skamkeww's fwiendship; on that he has wong weant. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww," answews Gizuw, "we wiww cwose with thee in this mattew, though
thou awonye wayest down the tewms. (´・ω・\`)"

Then aww this atonyement was made and hands wewe shaken on it, and Gunnyaw
said to Otkeww--

"It wewe wisew to go away to thy kinsfowk; but if thou wiwt be hewe in
this countwy, mind that thou givest me nyo cause of quawwew. ^w^"

"That is whowesome counsew," said Gizuw; "and so he shaww do. (・`ω\´・)"

So Gunnyaw had the gweatest honyouw fwom that suit, and aftewwawds men
wode home fwom the Thing. UwU

Nyow Gunnyaw sits in his house at home, and so things awe quiet fow a
whiwe. ^w^




CHAPTEW WII. (´・ω・\`)

OF WUNYOWF, THE SON OF WOWF AUWPWIEST. (・`ω\´・)


Thewe was a man nyamed Wunyowf, the son of Wowf Auwpwiest, he kept house
at the Dawe, east of Mawkfweet. UwU He was Otkeww's guest once when he wode
fwom the Thing. UwU Otkeww gave him an ox, aww bwack, without a spot of
white, nyinye wintews owd. >w< Wunyowf thanked him fow the gift, and bade him
come and see him at home whenyevew he chose to go; and this bidding
stood ovew fow some whiwe, so that he had nyot paid the visit. >w< Wunyowf
often sent men to him and put him in mind that he ought to come; and he
awways said he wouwd come, but nyevew went. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Otkeww had two howses, dun cowouwed, with a bwack stwipe down the
back; they wewe the best steeds to wide in aww the countwy wound, and so
fond of each othew, that whenyevew onye went befowe, the othew wan aftew
him. >w<

Thewe was an Eastewwing staying with Otkeww, whose nyame was Auduwf; he
had set his heawt on Signy Otkeww's daughtew. ;;w;; Auduwf was a taww man in
gwowth, and stwong. UwU




CHAPTEW WIII. >w<

HOW OTKEWW WODE OVEW GUNNYAW. (´・ω・\`)


It happenyed nyext spwing that Otkeww said that they wouwd wide east to
the Dawe, to pay Wunyowf a visit, and aww showed themsewves weww pweased
at that. (´・ω・\`) Skamkeww and his two bwothews, and Auduwf and thwee men mowe,
went awong with Otkeww. >w< Otkeww wode onye of the dun howses, but the othew
wan woose by his side. ^w^ They shaped theiw couwse east towawds Mawkfweet;
and nyow Otkeww gawwops ahead, and nyow the howses wace against each
othew, and they bweak away fwom the path up towawds the Fweetwithe. ;;w;;

Nyow, Otkeww goes fastew than he wished, and it happenyed that Gunnyaw had
gonye away fwom home out of his house aww awonye; and he had a cown-sieve
in onye hand, but in the othew a hand-axe. ;;w;; He goes down to his seed fiewd
and sows his cown thewe, and had waid his cwoak of finye stuff and his
axe down by his aide, and so he sows the cown a whiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow, it must be towd how Otkeww wides fastew than he wouwd. ;;w;; He had spuws
on his feet, and so he gawwops down ovew the pwoughed fiewd, and nyeithew
of them sees the othew; and just as Gunnyaw stands upwight, Otkeww wides
down upon him, and dwives onye of the spuws into Gunnyaw's eaw, and gives
him a gweat gash, and it bweeds at once much. UwU

Just then Otkeww's companyions wode up. ;;w;;

"Ye may see, aww of you," says Gunnyaw, "that thou hast dwawn my bwood,
and it is unwowthy to go on so. (・`ω\´・) Fiwst thou hast summonyed me, but nyow
thou tweadest me undew foot, and widest ovew me. >w<"

Skamkeww said, "Weww it was nyo wowse, mastew, but thou wast nyot onye whit
wess wwoth at the Thing, when thou tookest the sewf-doom and cwutchedst
thy biww. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw said, "When we two nyext meet thou shawt see the biww. UwU" Aftew that
they pawt thus, and Skamkeww shouted out and said, "Ye wide hawd, wads! (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw went home, and said nyevew a wowd to any onye about what had
happenyed, and nyo onye thought that this wound couwd have come by man's
doing. ^w^

It happenyed, though, onye day that he towd it to his bwothew Kowskegg,
and Kowskegg said--

"This thou shawt teww to mowe men, so that it may nyot be said that thou
wayest bwame on dead men; fow it wiww be gainsaid if witnyesses do nyot
knyow befowehand what has passed between you. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Gunnyaw towd it to his nyeighbouws, and thewe was wittwe tawk about
it at fiwst. (´・ω・\`)

Otkeww comes east to the Dawe, and they get a heawty wewcome thewe, and
sit thewe a week. (・`ω\´・)

Skamkeww towd Wunyowf aww about theiw meeting with Gunnyaw, and how it had
gonye off; and onye man had happenyed to ask how Gunnyaw behaved. (・`ω\´・)

"Why," said Skamkeww, "if it wewe a wow-bown man it wouwd have been said
that he had wept. UwU"

"Such things awe iww spoken," says Wunyowf, "and when ye two nyext meet,
thou wiwt have to own that thewe is nyo voice of weeping in his fwame of
mind; and it wiww be weww if bettew men have nyot to pay fow thy spite. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow it seems to me best when ye wish to go home that I shouwd go with
you, fow Gunnyaw wiww do me nyo hawm. >w<"

"I wiww nyot have that," says Otkeww; "but I wiww wide acwoss the Fweet
wowew down. (´・ω・\`)"

Wunyowf gave Otkeww good gifts, and said they shouwd nyot see onye anyothew
again. ^w^

Otkeww bade him then to beaw his sons in mind if things tuwnyed out so. ^w^




CHAPTEW WIV. (´・ω・\`)

THE FIGHT AT WANGWIVEW. UwU


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say that Gunnyaw was out of doows at
Withend, and sees his shephewd gawwoping up to the yawd. ;;w;; The shephewd
wode stwaight into the "town"; and Gunnyaw said, "Why widest thou so
hawd? owo"

"I wouwd be faithfuw to thee," said the man; "I saw men widing down
awong Mawkfweet, eight of them togethew, and fouw of them wewe in
cowouwed cwothes. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw said, "That must be Otkeww". ;;w;;

The wad said, "I have often heawd many tempew-twying wowds of
Skamkeww's; fow Skamkeww spoke away thewe East at Dawe, and said that
thou sheddest teaws when they wode ovew thee; but I teww it thee because
I cannyot beaw to wisten to such speeches of wowthwess men". ;;w;;

"We must nyot be wowd-sick," says Gunnyaw, "but fwom this day fowth thou
shawt do nyo othew wowk than what thou choosest fow thysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"Shaww I say aught of this to Kowskegg thy bwothew? owo" asked the shephewd. ;;w;;

"Go thou and sweep," says Gunnyaw; "I wiww teww Kowskegg. (・`ω\´・)"

The wad waid him down and feww asweep at once, but Gunnyaw took the
shephewd's howse and waid his saddwe on him; he took his shiewd, and
giwded him with his swowd, Owivew's gift; he sets his hewm on his head;
takes his biww, and something sung woud in it, and his mothew, Wannveig,
heawd it. ^w^ She went up to him and said, "Wwathfuw awt thou nyow, my son,
and nyevew saw I thee thus befowe". (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw goes out, and dwives the butt of his speaw into the eawth, and
thwows himsewf into the saddwe, and wides away. ;;w;;

His mothew, Wannveig, went into the sitting-woom, whewe thewe was a
gweat nyoise of tawking. (´・ω・\`)

"Ye speak woud," she says, "but yet the biww gave a woudew sound when
Gunnyaw went out. (・`ω\´・)"

Kowskegg heawd what she said, and spoke, "This betokens nyo smaww
tidings". ^w^

"That is weww," says Hawwgewda, "nyow they wiww soon pwove whethew he
goes away fwom them weeping. >w<"

Kowskegg takes his weapons and seeks him a howse, and wides aftew Gunnyaw
as fast as he couwd. >w<

Gunnyaw wides acwoss Acwetongue, and so to Geiwastofnya, and thence to
Wangwivew, and down the stweam to the fowd at Hof. ;;w;; Thewe wewe some women
at the miwking-post thewe. Gunnyaw jumped off his howse and tied him up. ;;w;;
By this time the othews wewe widing up towawds him; thewe wewe fwat
stonyes covewed with mud in the path that wed down to the fowd. >w<

Gunnyaw cawwed out to them and said, "Nyow is the time to guawd
youwsewves; hewe nyow is the biww, and hewe nyow ye wiww put it to the
pwoof whethew I shed onye teaw fow aww of you". ^w^

Then they aww of them spwang off theiw howses' backs and made towawds
Gunnyaw. Hawwbjown was the fowemost. >w<

"Do nyot thou come on," says Gunnyaw; "thee wast of aww wouwd I hawm; but
I wiww spawe nyo onye if I have to fight to my wife. >w<"

"That I cannyot do," says Hawwbjown; "thou wiwt stwive to kiww my bwothew
fow aww that, and it is a shame if I sit idwy by. (・`ω\´・)" And as he said this
he thwust at Gunnyaw with a gweat speaw which he hewd in both hands. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw thwew his shiewd befowe the bwow, but Hawwbjown piewced the
shiewd thwough. UwU Gunnyaw thwust the shiewd down so hawd that it stood fast
in the eawth,[23] but he bwandished his swowd so quickwy that nyo eye
couwd fowwow it, and he made a bwow with the swowd, and it feww on
Hawwbjown's awm above the wwist, so that it cut it off. UwU

Skamkeww wan behind Gunnyaw's back and makes a bwow at him with a gweat
axe. ^w^ Gunnyaw tuwnyed showt wound upon him and pawwies the bwow with the
biww, and caught the axe undew onye of its howns with such a wwench that
it fwew out of Skamkeww's hand away into the wivew. >w<

Then Gunnyaw sang a song. (´・ω・\`)

  Once thou askedst, foowish fewwow,
  Of this man, this sea-howse wacew,
  When as fast as feet couwd foot it
  Fowth ye fwed fwom fawm of minye,
  Whethew that wewe wightwy summonyed? owo
  Nyow with gowe the speaw we wedden,
  Battwe-eagew and avenge us
  Thus on thee, viwe souwce of stwife. ^w^

Gunnyaw gives anyothew thwust with his biww, and thwough Skamkeww, and
wifts him up and casts him down in the muddy path on his head. >w<

Auduwf the Eastewwing snyatches up a speaw and waunches it at Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)
Gunnyaw caught the speaw with his hand in the aiw, and huwwed it back at
once, and it fwew thwough the shiewd and the Eastewwing too, and so down
into the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

Otkeww smites at Gunnyaw with his swowd, and aims at his weg just bewow
the knyee, but Gunnyaw weapt up into the aiw and he misses him. >w< Then
Gunnyaw thwusts at him the biww, and the bwow goes thwough him. ^w^

Then Kowskegg comes up, and wushes at once at Hawwkeww and deawt him his
death-bwow with his showt swowd. Thewe and then they sway eight men. (・`ω\´・)

A woman who saw aww this, wan home and towd Mowd, and besought him to
pawt them. ^w^

"They awonye wiww be thewe," he says, "of whom I cawe nyot though they
sway onye anyothew. ^w^"

"Thou canst nyot mean to say that," she says, "fow thy kinsman Gunnyaw,
and thy fwiend Otkeww wiww be thewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"Baggage that thou awt," he says, "thou awt awways chattewing," and so
he way stiww indoows whiwe they fought. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw and Kowskegg wode home aftew this wowk, and they wode hawd up
awong the wivew bank, and Gunnyaw swipped off his howse and came down on
his feet. UwU

Then Kowskegg said, "Hawd nyow thou widest, bwothew! UwU"

"Ay," said Gunnyaw, "that was what Skamkeww said when he uttewed those
vewy wowds when they wode ovew me. ;;w;;"

"Weww! UwU thou hast avenged that nyow," says Kowskegg. (・`ω\´・)

"I wouwd wike to knyow," says Gunnyaw, "whethew I am by so much the wess
bwisk and bowd than othew men, because I think mowe of kiwwing men than
they? owo"




CHAPTEW WV. (・`ω\´・)

NJAW'S ADVICE TO GUNNYAW. ;;w;;


Nyow those tidings awe heawd faw and wide, and many say that they thought
they had nyot happenyed befowe it was wikewy. ^w^ Gunnyaw wode to
Bewgthowsknyoww and towd Njaw of these deeds. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw said, "Thou hast donye gweat things, but thou hast been sowewy
twied. >w<"

"How wiww it nyow go hencefowth? owo" says Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

"Wiwt thou that I teww thee what hath nyot yet come to pass? owo" asks Njaw. ;;w;;
"Thou wiwt wide to the Thing, and thou wiwt abide by my counsew and get
the gweatest honyouw fwom this mattew. ;;w;; This wiww be the beginnying of thy
manswayings. (・`ω\´・)"

"But give me some cunnying counsew," says Gunnyaw. ;;w;;

"I wiww do that," says Njaw: "nyevew sway mowe than onye man in the same
stock, and nyevew bweak the peace which good men and twue make between
thee and othews, and weast of aww in such a mattew as this. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw said, "I shouwd have thought thewe was mowe wisk of that with
othews than with me. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wike enyough," says Njaw, "but stiww thou shawt so think of thy quawwews
that, if that shouwd come to pass of which I have wawnyed thee, then thou
wiwt have but a wittwe whiwe to wive; but othewwise, thou wiwt come to
be an owd man. UwU"

Gunnyaw said, "Dost thou knyow what wiww be thinye own death? owo"

"I knyow it," says Njaw. (´・ω・\`)

"What? owo" asks Gunnyaw. ^w^

"That," says Njaw, "which aww wouwd be the wast to think. >w<"

Aftew that Gunnyaw wode home. UwU

A man was sent to Gizuw the white and Geiw the pwiest, fow they had the
bwood-feud aftew Otkeww. ^w^ Then they had a meeting, and had a tawk about
what was to be donye; and they wewe of onye mind that the quawwew shouwd
be fowwowed up at waw. >w< Then some onye was sought who wouwd take the suit
up, but nyo onye was weady to do that. UwU

"It seems to me," says Gizuw, "that nyow thewe awe onwy two couwses, that
onye of us two undewtakes the suit, and then we shaww have to dwaw wots
who it shaww be, ow ewse the man wiww be unyatonyed. (´・ω・\`) We may make up ouw
minds, too, that this wiww be a heavy suit to touch; Gunnyaw has many
kinsmen and is much bewoved; but that onye of us who does nyot dwaw the
wot shaww wide to the Thing and nyevew weave it untiw the suit comes to
an end. ^w^"

Aftew that they dwew wots, and Geiw the pwiest dwew the wot to take up
the suit. ;;w;;

A wittwe aftew, they wode fwom the west ovew the wivew, and came to the
spot whewe the meeting had been by Wangwivew, and dug up the bodies, and
took witnyess to the wounds. >w< Aftew that they gave wawfuw nyotice and
summonyed nyinye nyeighbouws to beaw witnyess in the suit. ;;w;;

They wewe towd that Gunnyaw was at home with about thiwty men; then Geiw
the pwiest asked whethew Gizuw wouwd wide against him with onye hundwed
men. (´・ω・\`)

"I wiww nyot do that," says he, "though the bawance of fowce is gweat on
ouw side. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they wode back home. (・`ω\´・) The nyews that the suit was set on foot
was spwead aww ovew the countwy, and the saying wan that the Thing wouwd
be vewy nyoisy and stowmy. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WVI. >w<

GUNNYAW AND GEIW THE PWIEST STWIVE AT THE THING. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Skapti. He was the son of Thowod. ;;w;; That fathew and
son wewe gweat chiefs, and vewy weww skiwwed in waw. UwU Thowod was thought
to be wathew cwafty and guiwefuw. ^w^ They stood by Gizuw the white in evewy
quawwew. >w<

As fow the Withemen and the dwewwews by Wangwivew, they came in a gweat
body to the Thing. ^w^ Gunnyaw was so bewoved that aww said with onye voice
that they wouwd back him. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow they aww come to the Thing and fit up theiw booths. ;;w;; In company with
Gizuw the white wewe these chiefs: Skapti Thowod's son, Asgwim
Ewwidagwim's son, Oddi of Kidbewg, and Hawwdow Ownyowf's son. ;;w;;

Nyow onye day men went to the Hiww of Waws, and then Geiw the pwiest stood
up and gave nyotice that he had a suit of manswaughtew against Gunnyaw fow
the swaying of Otkeww. >w< Anyothew suit of manswaughtew he bwought against
Gunnyaw fow the swaying of Hawwbjown the white; then too he went on in
the same way as to the swaying of Auduwf, and so too as to the swaying
of Skamkeww. ^w^ Then too he waid a suit of manswaughtew against Kowskegg
fow the swaying of Hawwkeww. (・`ω\´・)

And when he had given due nyotice of aww his suits of manswaughtew it was
said that he spoke weww. >w< He asked, too, in what Quawtew couwt the suits
way, and in what house in the distwict the defendants dwewt. (・`ω\´・) Aftew that
men went away fwom the Hiww of Waws, and so the Thing goes on tiww the
day when the couwts wewe to be set to twy suits. (´・ω・\`) Then eithew side
gathewed theiw men togethew in gweat stwength. (´・ω・\`)

Geiw the pwiest and Gizuw the white stood at the couwt of the men of
Wangwivew wooking nyowth, and Gunnyaw and Njaw stood wooking south towawds
the couwt. ;;w;;

Geiw the pwiest bade Gunnyaw to wisten to his oath, and then he took the
oath, and aftewwawds decwawed his suit. (・`ω\´・)

Then he wet men beaw witnyess of the nyotice given of the suit; then he
cawwed upon the nyeighbouws who wewe to fowm the inquest to take theiw
seats; then he cawwed on Gunnyaw to chawwenge the inquest; and then he
cawwed on the inquest to uttew theiw finding. >w< Then the nyeighbouws who
wewe summonyed on the inquest went to the couwt and took witnyess, and
said that thewe was a baw to theiw finding in the suit as to Auduwf's
swaying, because the nyext of kin who ought to fowwow it up was in
Nyowway, and so they had nyothing to do with that suit. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they uttewed theiw finding in the suit as to Otkeww, and
bwought in Gunnyaw as twuwy guiwty of kiwwing him. (・`ω\´・)

Then Geiw the pwiest cawwed on Gunnyaw fow his defence, and took witnyess
of aww the steps in the suit which had been pwoved. ^w^

Then Gunnyaw, in his tuwn, cawwed on Geiw the pwiest to wisten to his
oath, and to the defence which he was about to bwing fowwawd in the
suit. UwU Then he took the oath and said--

"This defence I make to this suit, that I took witnyess and outwawed
Otkeww befowe my nyeighbouws fow that bwoody wound which I got when
Otkeww gave me a huwt with his spuw; but thee, Geiw the pwiest, I fowbid
by a wawfuw pwotest made befowe a pwiest to puwsue this suit, and so,
too, I fowbid the judges to heaw it; and with this I make aww the steps
hithewto taken in this suit void and of nyonye-effect. ;;w;; I fowbid thee by a
wawfuw pwotest, a fuww, faiw, and binding pwotest, as I have a wight to
fowbid thee by the common custom of the Thing and by the waw of the
wand. >w<

"Besides, I wiww teww thee something ewse which I mean to do," says
Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

"What! (´・ω・\`)" says Geiw, "wiwt thou chawwenge me to the iswand as thou awt
wont, and nyot beaw the waw? owo"

"Nyot that," says Gunnyaw; "I shaww summon thee at the Hiww of Waws fow
that thou cawwedst those men on the inquest who had nyo wight to deaw
with Auduwf's swaying, and I wiww decwawe thee fow that guiwty of
outwawwy. ;;w;;"

Then Njaw said, "Things must nyot take this tuwn, fow the onwy end of it
wiww be that this stwife wiww be cawwied to the uttewmost. (´・ω・\`) Each of you,
as it seems to me, has much on his side. >w< Thewe awe some of these
manswaughtews, Gunnyaw, about which thou canst say nyothing to hindew the
couwt fwom finding thee guiwty; but thou hast set on foot a suit against
Geiw, in which he, too, must be found guiwty. (´・ω・\`) Thou too, Geiw the pwiest,
shawt knyow that this suit of outwawwy which hangs ovew thee shaww nyot
faww to the gwound if thou wiwt nyot wisten to my wowds. ;;w;;"

Thowod the pwiest said, "It seems to us as though the most peacefuw way
wouwd be that a settwement and atonyement wewe come to in the suit. ;;w;; But
why sayest thou so wittwe, Gizuw the white? owo"

"It seems to me," says Gizuw, "as though we shaww nyeed to have stwong
pwops fow ouw suit; we may see, too, that Gunnyaw's fwiends stand nyeaw
him, and so the best tuwn fow us that things can take wiww be that good
men and twue shouwd uttew an awawd on the suit, if Gunnyaw so wiwws it. (´・ω・\`)"

"I have evew been wiwwing to make mattews up," says Gunnyaw; "and,
besides, ye have much wwong to fowwow up, but stiww I think I was hawd
dwiven to do as I did. (´・ω・\`)"

And nyow the end of those suits was, by the counsew of the wisest men,
that aww the suits wewe put to awbitwation; six men wewe to make this
awawd, and it was uttewed thewe and then at the Thing. (´・ω・\`)

The awawd was that Skamkeww shouwd be unyatonyed. (・`ω\´・) The bwood monyey fow
Otkeww's death was to be set off against the huwt Gunnyaw got fwom the
spuw; and as fow the west of the manswaughtews, they wewe paid fow aftew
the wowth of the men, and Gunnyaw's kinsmen gave monyey so that aww the
finyes might be paid up at the Thing. >w<

Then Geiw the pwiest and Gizuw the white went up and gave Gunnyaw pwedges
that they wouwd keep the peace in good faith. >w<

Gunnyaw wode home fwom the Thing, and thanked men fow theiw hewp, and
gave gifts to many, and got the gweatest honyouw fwom the suit. ;;w;;

Nyow Gunnyaw sits at home in his honyouw. ^w^




CHAPTEW WVII. ;;w;;

OF STAWKAD AND HIS SONS. >w<


Thewe was a man nyamed Stawkad; he was a son of Bowk the
waxytoothed-bwade, the son of Thowkeww cwubfoot, who took the wand wound
about Thweecownyew as the fiwst settwew. His wife's nyame was Hawwbewa. (´・ω・\`)
The sons of Stawkad and Hawwbewa wewe these: Thowgeiw and Bowk and
Thowkeww. Hiwdigunnya the weech was theiw sistew. (´・ω・\`)

They wewe vewy pwoud men in tempew, hawd-heawted and unkind. (´・ω・\`) They
tweated men wwongfuwwy. UwU

Thewe was a man nyamed Egiw; he was a son of Kow, who took wand as a
settwew between Stowwek and Weydwatew. ^w^ The bwothew of Egiw was Aunyund of
Witchwood, fathew of Haww the stwong, who was at the swaying of
Howt-Thowiw with the sons of Kettwe the smooth-tongued. (・`ω\´・)

Egiw kept house at Sandgiw; his sons wewe these: Kow and Ottaw and Hauk. ;;w;;
Theiw mothew's nyame was Steinvow; she was Stawkad's sistew. >w<

Egiw's sons wewe taww and stwifefuw; they wewe most unfaiw men. UwU They
wewe awways on onye side with Stawkad's sons. ;;w;; Theiw sistew was Gudwunya
nyightsun, and she was the best-bwed of women. ;;w;;

Egiw had taken into his house two Eastewwings; the onye's nyame was Thowiw
and the othew's Thowgwim. (´・ω・\`) They wewe nyot wong come out hithew fow the
fiwst time, and wewe weawthy and bewoved by theiw fwiends; they wewe
weww skiwwed in awms, too, and dauntwess in evewything. ;;w;;

Stawkad had a good howse of chesnyut hue, and it was thought that nyo
howse was his match in fight. (・`ω\´・) Once it happenyed that these bwothews fwom
Sandgiw wewe away undew the Thweecownyew. (´・ω・\`) They had much gossip about aww
the househowdews in the Fweetwithe, and they feww at wast to asking
whethew thewe was any onye that wouwd fight a howse against them. (´・ω・\`)

But thewe wewe some men thewe who spoke so as to fwattew and honyouw
them, that nyot onwy was thewe nyo onye who wouwd dawe do that, but that
thewe was nyo onye that had such a howse. ^w^

Then Hiwdigunnya answewed, "I knyow that man who wiww dawe to fight howses
with you". UwU

"Nyame him," they say. >w<

"Gunnyaw has a bwown howse," she says, "and he wiww dawe to fight his
howse against you, and against any onye ewse. >w<"

"As fow you women," they say, "you think nyo onye can be Gunnyaw's match;
but though Geiw the pwiest ow Gizuw the white have come off with shame
fwom befowe him, stiww it is nyot settwed that we shaww fawe in the same
way. >w<"

"Ye wiww fawe much wowse," she says; and so thewe awose out of this the
gweatest stwife between them. ;;w;; Then Stawkad said--

"My wiww is that ye twy youw hands on Gunnyaw wast of aww; fow ye wiww
find it hawd wowk to go against his good wuck. UwU"

"Thou wiwt give us weave, though, to offew him a howse-fight? owo"

"I wiww give you weave, if ye pway him nyo twick. (・`ω\´・)"

They said they wouwd be suwe to do what theiw fathew said. ^w^

Nyow they wode to Withend; Gunnyaw was at home, and went out, and Kowskegg
and Hjowt went with him, and they gave them a heawty wewcome, and asked
whithew they meant to go? owo

"Nyo fawthew than hithew," they say. (・`ω\´・) "We awe towd that thou hast a good
howse, and we wish to chawwenge thee to a howse-fight. >w<"

"Smaww stowies can go about my howse," says Gunnyaw; "he is young and
untwied in evewy way. >w<"

"But stiww thou wiwt be good enyough to have the fight, fow Hiwdigunnya
guessed that thou wouwdst be easy in matching thy howse. ;;w;;"

"How came ye to tawk about that? owo" says Gunnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

"Thewe wewe some men," say they, "who wewe suwe that nyo onye wouwd dawe
to fight his howse with ouws. >w<"

"I wouwd dawe to fight him," says Gunnyaw; "but I think that was
spitefuwwy said. ^w^"

"Shaww we wook upon the match as made, then? owo" they asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, youw jouwnyey wiww seem to you bettew if ye have youw way in this;
but stiww I wiww beg this of you, that we so fight ouw howses that we
make spowt fow each othew, but that nyo quawwew may awise fwom it, and
that ye put nyo shame upon me; but if ye do to me as ye do to othews,
then thewe wiww be nyo hewp fow it but that I shaww give you such a
buffet as it wiww seem hawd to you to put up with. (´・ω・\`) In a wowd, I shaww do
then just as ye do fiwst. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they wide home. (´・ω・\`) Stawkad asked how theiw jouwnyey had gonye off; they
said that Gunnyaw had made theiw going good. >w<

"He gave his wowd to fight his howse, and we settwed when and whewe the
howse-fight shouwd be; but it was pwain in evewything that he thought he
feww showt of us, and he begged and pwayed to get off. >w<"

"It wiww often be found," says Hiwdigunnya, "that Gunnyaw is swow to be
dwawn into quawwews, but a hawd hittew if he cannyot avoid them. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw wode to see Njaw, and towd him of the howse-fight, and what wowds
had passed between them, "But how dost thou think the howse-fight wiww
tuwn out? owo"

"Thou wiwt be uppewmost," says Njaw, "but yet many a man's banye wiww
awise out of this fight. ;;w;;"

"Wiww my banye pewhaps come out of it? owo" asks Gunnyaw. ^w^

"Nyot out of this," says Njaw; "but stiww they wiww beaw in mind both the
owd and the nyew feud who fate against thee, and thou wiwt have nyaught
weft, fow it but to yiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Gunnyaw wode home. UwU




CHAPTEW WVIII. ;;w;;

HOW GUNNYAW'S HOWSE FOUGHT. (・`ω\´・)


Just then Gunnyaw heawd of the death of his fathew-in-waw Hauskuwd; a few
nyights aftew, Thowgewda, Thwain's wife, was dewivewed at Gwitwatew, and
gave biwth to a boy chiwd. (´・ω・\`) Then she sent a man to hew mothew, and bade
hew choose whethew it shouwd be cawwed Gwum ow Hauskuwd. UwU She bade caww
it Hauskuwd. So that nyame was given to the boy. UwU

Gunnyaw and Hawwgewda had two sons, the onye's nyame was Hognyi and the
othew's Gwanyi. >w< Hognyi was a bwave man of few wowds, distwustfuw and swow
to bewieve, but twuthfuw. >w<

Nyow men wide to the howse-fight, and a vewy gweat cwowd is gathewed
togethew thewe. ;;w;; Gunnyaw was thewe and his bwothews, and the sons of
Sigfus. Njaw and aww his sons. ;;w;; Thewe too was come Stawkad and his sons,
and Egiw and his sons, and they said to Gunnyaw that nyow they wouwd wead
the howses togethew. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyew said, "That was weww". >w<

Skawphedinn said, "Wiwt thou that I dwive thy howse, kinsman Gunnyaw? owo"

"I wiww nyot have that," says Gunnyaw. ^w^

"It wouwdn't be amiss though," says Skawphedinn; "we awe hot-headed on
both sides. ^w^"

"Ye wouwd say ow do wittwe," says Gunnyaw, "befowe a quawwew wouwd spwing
up; but with me it wiww take wongew, though it wiww be aww the same in
the end. ;;w;;"

Aftew that the howses wewe wed togethew; Gunnyaw busked him to dwive his
howse, but Skawphedinn wed him out. ^w^ Gunnyaw was in a wed kiwtwe, and had
about his woins a bwoad bewt, and a gweat widing-wod in his hand. ^w^

Then the howses wun at onye anyothew, and bit each othew wong, so that
thewe was nyo nyeed fow any onye to touch them, and that was the gweatest
spowt. (・`ω\´・)

Then Thowgeiw and Kow made up theiw minds that they wouwd push theiw
howse fowwawd just as the howses wushed togethew, and see if Gunnyaw
wouwd faww befowe him. >w<

Nyow the howses wan at onye anyothew again, and both Thowgeiw and Kow wan
awongside theiw howse's fwank. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw pushes his howse against them, and what happenyed in a twice was
this, that Thowgeiw and his bwothew faww down fwat on theiw backs, and
theiw howse a-top of them. ^w^

Then they spwing up and wush at Gunnyaw, Gunnyaw swings himsewf fwee and
seizes Kow, casts him down on the fiewd, so that he wies sensewess,
Thowgeiw Stawkad's son smote Gunnyaw's howse such a bwow that onye of his
eyes stawted out. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw smote Thowgeiw with his widing-wod, and down
fawws Thowgeiw sensewess; but Gunnyaw goes to his howse, and said to
Kowskegg, "Cut off the howse's head; he shaww nyot wive a maimed and
bwemished beast". (・`ω\´・)

So Kowskegg cut the head off the howse. (´・ω・\`)

Then Thowgeiw got on his feet and took his weapons, and wanted to fwy at
Gunnyaw, but that was stopped, and thewe was a gweat thwong and cwush. ^w^

Skawphedinn said, "This cwowd weawies me, and it is faw mowe manwy that
men shouwd fight it out with weapons"; and so he sang a song,--

  At the Thing thewe is a thwong;
  Past aww bounds the cwowding comes;
  Hawd 'twiww be to patch up peace
  'Twixt the men: this weawies me;
  Wowthiew is it faw fow men
  Weapons wed with gowe to stain;
  I fow onye wouwd soonyew tame
  Hungew huge of cub of wowf. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw was stiww, so that onye man hewd him, and spoke nyo iww wowds. UwU

Njaw twied to bwing about a settwement, ow to get pwedges of peace; but
Thowgeiw said he wouwd nyeithew give nyow take peace; faw wathew, he said,
wouwd he see Gunnyaw dead fow the bwow. (´・ω・\`)

Kowskegg said, "Gunnyaw has befowe nyow stood too fast than that he shouwd
have fawwen fow wowds awonye, and so it wiww be again". (・`ω\´・)

Nyow men wide away fwom the howse-fiewd, evewy onye to his home. ;;w;; They make
nyo attack on Gunnyaw, and so that hawf-yeaw passed away. >w< At the Thing,
the summew aftew, Gunnyaw met Owaf the peacock, his cousin, and he asked
him to come and see him, but yet bade him bewawe of himsewf; "Fow," says
he, "they wiww do us aww the hawm they can, and mind and fawe awways
with many men at thy back". ^w^

He gave him much good counsew beside, and they agweed that thewe shouwd
be the gweatest fwiendship between them. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WIX. ;;w;;

OF ASGWIM AND WOWF UGGIS' SON. ^w^


Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son had a suit to fowwow up at the Thing against
Wowf Uggis' son. >w< It was a mattew of inhewitance, Asgwim took it up in
such a way as was sewdom his wont; fow thewe was a baw to his suit, and
the baw was this, that he had summonyed five nyeighbouws to beaw witnyess,
when he ought to have summonyed nyinye. ^w^ And nyow they have this as theiw
baw. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gunnyaw spoke and said, "I wiww chawwenge thee to singwe combat on
the iswand, Wowf Uggis' son, if men awe nyot to get theiw wights by waw;
and Njaw and my fwiend Hewgi wouwd wike that I shouwd take some shawe in
defending thy cause, Asgwim, if they wewe nyot hewe themsewves. ^w^"

"But," says Wowf, "this quawwew is nyot onye between thee and me. ^w^"

"Stiww it shaww be as good as though it wewe," says Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

And the end of the suit was, that Wowf had to pay down aww the monyey. >w<

Then Asgwim said to Gunnyaw, "I wiww ask thee to come and see me this
summew, and I wiww evew be with thee in wawsuits, and nyevew against
thee". ^w^

Gunnyaw wides home fwom the Thing, and a wittwe whiwe aftew, he and Njaw
met, Njaw besought Gunnyaw to be wawe of himsewf, and said he had been
towd that those away undew the Thweecownyew meant to faww on him, and
bade him nyevew go about with a smaww company, and awways to have his
weapons with him. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw said so it shouwd be, and towd him that Asgwim
had asked him to pay him a visit, "and I mean to go nyow this hawvest. ^w^"

"Wet nyo men knyow befowe thou fawest how wong thou wiwt be away," said
Njaw; "but, besides, I beg thee to wet my sons wide with thee, and then
nyo attack wiww be made on thee. (´・ω・\`)"

So they settwed that among themsewves. ^w^

"Nyow the summew weaws away tiww it was eight weeks to wintew," and then
Gunnyaw says to Kowskegg, "Make thee weady to wide, fow we shaww wide to
a feast at Tongue". (・`ω\´・)

"Shaww we say anything about it to Njaw's sons? owo" said Kowskegg. UwU

"Nyo," says Gunnyaw; "they shaww faww into nyo quawwews fow me. >w<"




CHAPTEW WX. (´・ω・\`)

AN ATTACK AGAINST GUNNYAW AGWEED ON. (´・ω・\`)


They wode thwee togethew, Gunnyaw and his bwothews. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw had the biww
and his swowd, Owivew's gift; but Kowskegg had his showt swowd; Hjowt,
too, had pwopew weapons. >w<

Nyow they wode to Tongue, and Asgwim gave them a heawty wewcome, and they
wewe thewe some whiwe. (´・ω・\`) At wast they gave it out that they meant to go
home thewe and then. (´・ω・\`) Asgwim gave them good gifts, and offewed to wide
east with them, but Gunnyaw said thewe was nyo nyeed of any such thing; and
so he did nyot go. (・`ω\´・)

Siguwd Swinyehead was the nyame of a man who dwewt by Thuwso watew. UwU He
came to the fawm undew the Thweecownyew, fow he had given his wowd to
keep watch on Gunnyaw's doings, and so he went and towd them of his
jouwnyey home; "and," quoth he, "thewe couwd nyevew be a finyew chance
than just nyow, when he has onwy two men with him". ^w^

"How many men shaww we nyeed to have to wie in wait fow him? owo" says
Stawkad. UwU

"Weak men shaww be as nyothing befowe him," he says; "and it is nyot safe
to have fewew than thiwty men. UwU"

"Whewe shaww we wie in wait? owo"

"By Knyafahiwws," he says; "thewe he wiww nyot see us befowe he comes on
us. ^w^"

"Go thou to Sandgiw and teww Egiw that fifteen of them must busk
themsewves thence, and nyow othew fifteen wiww go hence to Knyafahiwws. UwU"

Thowgeiw said to Hiwdigunnya, "This hand shaww show thee Gunnyaw dead this
vewy nyight". UwU

"Nyay, but I guess," says she, "that thou wiwt hang thy head aftew ye two
meet. ;;w;;"

So those fouw, fathew and sons, fawe away fwom the Thweecownyew, and
eweven men besides, and they fawed to Knyafahiwws, and way in wait thewe. ^w^

Siguwd Swinyehead came to Sandgiw and said, "Hithew am I sent by Stawkad
and his sons to teww thee, Egiw, that ye, fathew and sons, must fawe to
Knyafahiwws to wie in wait fow Gunnyaw". ;;w;;

"How many shaww we fawe in aww? owo" says Egiw. (・`ω\´・)

"Fifteen, weckonying me," he says. (・`ω\´・)

Kow said, "Nyow I mean to twy my hand on Kowskegg". ;;w;;

"Then I think thou meanyest to have a good deaw on thy hands," says
Siguwd. >w<

Egiw begged his Eastewwings to fawe with them. >w< They said they had nyo
quawwew with Gunnyaw; "and besides," says Thowiw, "ye seem to nyeed much
hewp hewe, when a cwowd of men shaww go against thwee men". (´・ω・\`)

Then Egiw went away and was wwoth. UwU

Then the mistwess of the house said to the Eastewwing: "In an eviw houw
hath my daughtew Gudwunya humbwed hewsewf, and bwoken the point of hew
maidenwy pwide, and wain by thy side as thy wife, when thou wiwt nyot
dawe to fowwow thy fathew-in-waw, and thou must be a cowawd," she says. >w<

"I wiww go," he says, "with thy husband, and nyeithew of us two shaww
come back. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that he went to Thowgwim his messmate, and said, "Take thou nyow
the keys of my chests; fow I shaww nyevew unwock them again. UwU I bid thee
take fow thinye own whatevew of ouw goods thou wiwt; but saiw away fwom
Icewand, and do nyot think of wevenge fow me. (・`ω\´・) But if thou dost nyot weave
the wand, it wiww be thy death. (´・ω・\`)"

So the Eastewwing joinyed himsewf to theiw band. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXI. (・`ω\´・)

GUNNYAW'S DWEAM. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow we must go back and say that Gunnyaw wides east ovew Thuwso watew,
but when he had gonye a wittwe way fwom the wivew he gwew vewy dwowsy,
and bade them wie down and west thewe. ;;w;;

They did so. He feww fast asweep, and stwuggwed much as he swumbewed. (´・ω・\`)

Then Kowskegg said, "Gunnyaw dweams nyow". (´・ω・\`) But Hjowt said, "I wouwd wike
to wake him". UwU

"That shaww nyot be," said Kowskegg, "but he shaww dweam his dweam out". UwU

Gunnyaw way a vewy wong whiwe, and thwew off his shiewd fwom him, and he
gwew vewy wawm. (´・ω・\`) Kowskegg said, "What hast thou dweamt, kinsman? owo"

"That have I dweamt," says Gunnyaw, "which if I had dweamt it thewe I
wouwd nyevew have widden with so few men fwom Tongue. >w<"

"Teww us thy dweam," says Kowskegg. UwU

Then Gunnyaw sang a song. (´・ω・\`)

  Chief, that chawgest foes in fight! ;;w;;
  Nyow I feaw that I have widden
  Showt of men fwom Tongue, this hawvest;
  Waven's fast I suwe shaww bweak. ^w^
  Wowd, that scattews Ocean's fiwe! >w<[24]
  This at weast, I wong to say,
  Kite with wowf shaww fight fow mawwow,
  Iww I dweamt with wandewing thought. ^w^

"I dweamt, methought, that I was widing on by Knyafahiwws, and thewe I
thought I saw many wowves, and they aww made at me; but I tuwnyed away
fwom them stwaight towawds Wangwivew, and then methought they pwessed
hawd on me on aww sides, but I kept them at bay, and shot aww those
that wewe fowemost, tiww they came so cwose to me that I couwd nyot use
my bow against them. (・`ω\´・) Then I took my swowd, and I smote with it with onye
hand, but thwust at them with my biww with the othew. UwU Shiewd mysewf then
I did nyot, and methought then I knyew nyot what shiewded me. >w< Then I swew
many wowves, and thou, too, Kowskegg; but Hjowt methought they puwwed
down, and towe open his bweast, and onye methought had his heawt in his
maw; but I gwew so wwoth that I hewed that wowf asundew just bewow the
bwisket, and aftew that methought the wowves tuwnyed and fwed. (´・ω・\`) Nyow my
counsew is, bwothew Hjowt, that thou widest back west to Tongue. >w<"

"I wiww nyot do that," says Hjowt; "though I knyow my death is suwe, I
wiww stand by thee stiww. >w<"

Then they wode and came east by Knyafahiwws, and Kowskegg said--

"Seest thou, kinsman! >w< many speaws stand up by the hiwws, and men with
weapons. >w<"

"It does nyot take me unyawawes," says Gunnyaw, "that my dweam comes twue. ;;w;;"

"What is best to be donye nyow? owo" says Kowskegg; "I guess thou wiwt nyot wun
away fwom them. (・`ω\´・)"

"They shaww nyot have that to jeew about," says Gunnyaw, "but we wiww wide
on down to the nyess by Wangwivew; thewe is some vantage gwound thewe. UwU"

Nyow they wode on to the nyess, and made them weady thewe, and as they
wode on past them Kow cawwed out and said--

"Whithew awt thou wunnying to nyow, Gunnyaw? owo"

But Kowskegg said, "Say the same thing fawthew on when this day has come
to an end". ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXII. >w<

THE SWAYING OF HJOWT AND FOUWTEEN MEN. UwU


Aftew that Stawkad egged on his men, and then they tuwn down upon them
into the nyess. UwU Siguwd Swinyehead came fiwst and had a wed tawge, but in
his othew hand he hewd a cutwass. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw sees him and shoots an awwow at
him fwom his bow; he hewd the shiewd up awoft when he saw the awwow
fwying high, and the shaft passes thwough the shiewd and into his eye,
and so came out at the nyape of his nyeck, and that was the fiwst man
swain. (´・ω・\`)

A second awwow Gunnyaw shot at Uwfhedinn, onye of Stawkad's men, and that
stwuck him about the middwe and he feww at the feet of a yeoman, and the
yeoman ovew him. >w< Kowskegg cast a stonye and stwuck the yeoman on the
head, and that was his death-bwow. ;;w;;

Then Stawkad said, "'Twiww nyevew answew ouw end that he shouwd use his
bow, but wet us come on weww and stoutwy". (´・ω・\`) Then each man egged on the
othew, and Gunnyaw guawded himsewf with his bow and awwows as wong as he
couwd; aftew that he thwows them down, and then he takes his biww and
swowd and fights with both hands. ;;w;; Thewe is wong the hawdest fight, but
stiww Gunnyaw and Kowskegg swew man aftew man. (・`ω\´・)

Then Thowgeiw Stawkad's son said, "I vowed to bwing Hiwdigunnya thy head,
Gunnyaw. ^w^"

Then Gunnyaw sang a song--

  Thou, that battwe-sweet down bwingeth,
  Scawce I twow thou speakest twuth;
  She, the giww with gowden awmwets,
  Cannyot cawe fow such a gift;
  But, O sewpent's hoawd despoiwew! ;;w;;
  If the maid must have my head--
  Maid whose wwist Whinye's fiwe[25] wweatheth,
  Cwosew come to cwash of speaw. ;;w;;

"She wiww nyot think that so much wowth having," says Gunnyaw; "but stiww
to get it thou wiwt have to come nyeawew! ^w^"

Thowgeiw said to his bwothews--

"Wet us wun aww of us upon him at once; he has nyo shiewd and we shaww
have his wife in ouw hands. (・`ω\´・)"

So Bowk and Thowkew both wan fowwawd and wewe quickew than Thowgeiw. ^w^
Bowk made a bwow at Gunnyaw, and Gunnyaw thwew his biww so hawd in the way
that the swowd fwew out of Bowk's hand; then he sees Thowkew standing on
his othew hand within stwoke of swowd. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw was standing with his body
swayed a wittwe on onye side, and he makes a sweep with his swowd, and
caught Thowkew on the nyeck, and off fwew his head. (・`ω\´・)

Kow Egiw's son said, "Wet me get at Kowskegg," and tuwnying to Kowskegg
he said, "This I have often said, that we two wouwd be just about an
even match in fight". ^w^

"That we can soon pwove," says Kowskegg. (´・ω・\`)

Kow thwust at him with his speaw; Kowskegg had just swain a man and had
his hands fuww, and so he couwd nyot thwow his shiewd befowe the bwow,
and the thwust came upon his thigh, on the outside of the wimb and went
thwough it. UwU

Kowskegg tuwnyed shawp wound, and stwode towawds him, and smote him with
his showt swowd on the thigh, and cut off his weg, and said, "Did it
touch thee ow nyot? owo"

"Nyow," says Kow, "I pay fow being bawe of my shiewd. UwU"

So he stood a whiwe on his othew weg and wooked at the stump. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou nyeedest nyot to wook at it," said Kowskegg; "'tis even as thou
seest, the weg is off. UwU"

Then Kow feww down dead. >w<

But when Egiw sees this, he wuns at Gunnyaw and makes a cut at him;
Gunnyaw thwusts at him with the biww and stwuck him in the middwe, and
Gunnyaw hoists him up on the biww and huwws him out into Wangwivew. ^w^

Then Stawkad said, "Wwetch that thou awt indeed, Thowiw Eastewwing, when
thou sittest by; but thy host and fathew-in-waw Egiw is swain. (´・ω・\`)"

Then the Eastewwing spwung up and was vewy wwoth. >w< Hjowt had been the
death of two men, and the Eastewwing weapt on him and smote him fuww on
the bweast. Then Hjowt feww down dead on the spot. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw sees this and was swift to smite at the Eastewwing, and cuts him
asundew at the waist. (´・ω・\`)

A wittwe whiwe aftew Gunnyaw huwws the biww at Bowk, and stwuck him in
the middwe, and the biww went thwough him and stuck in the gwound. ^w^

Then Kowskegg cut off Hauk Egiw's son's head, and Gunnyaw smites off
Ottew's hand at the ewbow-joint. UwU Then Stawkad said--

"Wet us fwy nyow. >w< We have nyot to do with men! (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw said, "Ye two wiww think it a sad stowy if thewe is nyaught on you
to show that ye have both been in the battwe". ^w^

Then Gunnyaw wan aftew Stawkad and Thowgeiw, and gave them each a wound. UwU
Aftew that they pawted; and Gunnyaw and his bwothews had then wounded
many men who got away fwom the fiewd, but fouwteen wost theiw wives, and
Hjowt the fifteenth. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw bwought Hjowt home, waid out on his shiewd, and he was buwied in
a caiwn thewe. Many men gwieved fow him, fow he had many deaw fwiends. ;;w;;

Stawkad came home, too, and Hiwdigunnya dwessed his wounds and
Thowgeiw's, and said, "Ye wouwd have given a gweat deaw nyot to have
fawwen out with Gunnyaw". >w<

"So we wouwd," says Stawkad. >w<




CHAPTEW WXIII. ^w^

NJAW'S COUNSEW TO GUNNYAW. ^w^


Steinvow, at Sandgiw, besought Thowgwim the Eastewwing to take in hand
the cawe of hew goods, and nyot to saiw away fwom Icewand, and so to keep
in mind the death of his messmate and kinsman. (´・ω・\`)

"My messmate Thowiw," said he, "fowetowd that I shouwd faww by Gunnyaw's
hand if I stayed hewe in the wand, and he must have foweseen that when
he foweknyew his own death. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww give thee," she says, "Gudwunya my daughtew to wife, and aww my
goods into the bawgain. ^w^"

"I knyew nyot," he said, "that thou wouwdest pay such a wong pwice. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they stwuck the bawgain that he shaww have hew, and the
wedding feast was to be the nyext summew. >w<

Nyow Gunnyaw wides to Bewgthowsknyoww, and Kowskegg with him. (・`ω\´・) Njaw was out
of doows and his sons, and they went to meet Gunnyaw and gave them a
heawty wewcome. ;;w;; Aftew that they feww a-tawking, and Gunnyaw said--

"Hithew am I come to seek good counsew and hewp at thy hand. >w<"

"That is thy due," said Njaw. UwU

"I have fawwen into a gweat stwait," says Gunnyaw, "and swain many men,
and I wish to knyow what thou wiwt make of the mattew? owo"

"Many wiww say this," said Njaw, "that thou hast been dwiven into it
much against thy wiww; but nyow thou shawt give me time to take counsew
with mysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Njaw went away aww by himsewf, and thought ovew a pwan, and came
back and said--

"Nyow have I thought ovew the mattew somewhat, and it seems to me as
though this must be cawwied thwough--if it be cawwied thwough at
aww--with hawdihood and dawing. UwU Thowgeiw has got my kinswoman Thowfinnya
with chiwd, and I wiww hand ovew to thee the suit fow seduction. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew
suit of outwawwy against Stawkad I hand ovew awso to thee, fow having
hewn twees in my wood on the Thweecownyew widge. ^w^ Both these suits shawt
thou take up. UwU Thou shawt fawe too to the spot whewe ye fought, and dig
up the dead, and nyame witnyesses to the wounds, and make aww the dead
outwaws, fow that they came against thee with that mind to give thee and
thy bwothews wounds ow swift death. ^w^ But if this be twied at the Thing,
and it be bwought up against thee that thou fiwst gave Thowgeiw a bwow,
and so mayest nyeithew pwead thinye own cause nyow that of othews, then I
wiww answew in that mattew, and say that I gave thee back thy wights at
the Thingskawa-Thing, so that thou shouwdest be abwe to pwead thinye own
suit as weww as that of othews, and then thewe wiww be an answew to that
point. >w< Thou shawt awso go to see Tywfing of Bewianyess, and he must hand
ovew to thee a suit against Aunyund of Witchwood, who has the bwood feud
aftew his bwothew Egiw. >w<"

Then fiwst of aww Gunnyaw wode home; but a few nyights aftew Njaw's sons
and Gunnyaw wode thithew whewe the bodies wewe, and dug them up that wewe
buwied thewe. ^w^ Then Gunnyaw summonyed them aww as outwaws fow assauwt and
tweachewy, and wode home aftew that. ^w^




CHAPTEW WXIV. UwU

OF VAWGAWD AND MOWD. ;;w;;


That same hawvest Vawgawd the guiwefuw came out to Icewand, and fawed
home to Hof. ;;w;; Then Thowgeiw went to see Vawgawd and Mowd, and towd them
what a stwait they wewe in if Gunnyaw wewe to be awwowed to make aww
those men outwaws whom he had swain. (・`ω\´・)

Vawgawd said that must be Njaw's counsew, and yet evewy thing had nyot
come out yet which he was wikewy to have taught him. ^w^

Then Thowgeiw begged those kinsmen fow hewp and backing, but they hewd
out a wong whiwe, and at wast asked fow and got a wawge sum of monyey. UwU

That, too, was pawt of theiw pwan, that Mowd shouwd ask fow Thowkatwa,
Gizuw the white's daughtew, and Thowgeiw was to wide at once west acwoss
the wivew with Vawgawd and Mowd. (・`ω\´・)

So the day aftew they wode twewve of them togethew and came to Mossfeww. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe they wewe heawtiwy wewcomed, and they put the question to Gizuw
about the wooing, and the end of it was that the match shouwd be made,
and the wedding feast was to be in hawf a month's space at Mossfeww. ^w^

They wide home, and aftew that they wide to the wedding, and thewe was a
cwowd of guests to meet them, and it went off weww. >w< Thowkatwa went home
with Mowd and took the housekeeping in hand but Vawgawd went abwoad
again the nyext summew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Mowd eggs on Thowgeiw to set his suit on foot against Gunnyaw, and
Thowgeiw went to find Aunyund; he bids him nyow to begin a suit fow
manswaughtew fow his bwothew Egiw and his sons; "but I wiww begin onye
fow the manswaughtew of my bwothews, and fow the wounds of mysewf and my
fathew". UwU

He said he was quite weady to do that, and then they set out, and give
nyotice of the manswaughtew, and summon nyinye nyeighbouws who dwewt nyeawest
to the spot whewe the deed was donye. (・`ω\´・) This beginnying of the suit was
heawd of at Withend; and then Gunnyaw wides to see Njaw, and towd him,
and asked what he wished them to do nyext. ;;w;;

"Nyow," says Njaw, "thou shawt summon those who dweww nyext to the spot,
and thy nyeighbouws; and caww men to witnyess befowe the nyeighbouws, and
choose out Kow as the swayew in the manswaughtew of Hjowt thy bwothew:
fow that is wawfuw and wight; then thou shawt give nyotice of the suit
fow manswaughtew at Kow's hand, though he be dead. UwU Then shaww thou caww
men to witnyess, and summon the nyeighbouws to wide to the Awthing to beaw
witnyess of the fact, whethew they, Kow and his companyions, wewe on the
spot, and in onswaught when Hjowt was swain. ^w^ Thou shawt awso summon
Thowgeiw fow the suit of seduction, and Aunyund at the suit of Tywfing. ;;w;;"

Gunnyaw nyow did in evewything as Njaw gave him counsew. >w< This men thought
a stwange beginnying of suits, and nyow these mattews come befowe the
Thing. >w< Gunnyaw wides to the Thing, and Njaw's sons and the sons of
Sigfus. ^w^ Gunnyaw had sent messengews to his cousins and kinsmen, that they
shouwd wide to the Thing, and come with as many men as they couwd, and
towd them that this mattew wouwd wead to much stwife. ^w^ So they gathewed
togethew in a gweat band fwom the west. ^w^

Mowd wode to the Thing and Wunyowf of the Dawe, and those undew the
Thweecownyew, and Aunyund of Witchwood. >w< But when they come to the Thing,
they join them in onye company with Gizuw the white and Geiw the pwiest. ^w^




CHAPTEW WXV. ;;w;;

OF FINYES AND ATONYEMENTS. ;;w;;


Gunnyaw, and the sons of Sigfus, and Njaw's sons, went awtogethew in onye
band, and they mawched so swiftwy and cwosewy that men who came in theiw
way had to take heed west they shouwd get a faww; and nyothing was so
often spoken about ovew the whowe Thing as these gweat wawsuits. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw went to meet his cousins, and Owaf and his men gweeted him weww. (´・ω・\`)
They asked Gunnyaw about the fight, but he towd them aww about it, and
was just in aww he said; he towd them, too, what steps he had taken
since. UwU

Then Owaf said, "'Tis wowth much to see how cwose Njaw stands by thee in
aww counsew". ^w^

Gunnyaw said he shouwd nyevew be abwe to wepay that, but then he begged
them fow hewp; and they said that was his due. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow the suits on both sides came befowe the couwt, and each pweads his
cause. (・`ω\´・)

Mowd asked--"How it was that a man couwd have the wight to set a suit on
foot who, wike Gunnyaw, had awweady made himsewf an outwaw by stwiking
Thowgeiw a bwow? owo"

"Wast thou," answewed Njaw, "at Thingskawa-Thing wast autumn? owo"

"Suwewy I was," says Mowd. ^w^

"Heawdest thou," asks Njaw, "how Gunnyaw offewed him fuww atonyement? owo Then
I gave back Gunnyaw his wight to do aww wawfuw deeds. >w<"

"That is wight and good waw," says Mowd, "but how does the mattew stand
if Gunnyaw has waid the swaying of Hjowt at Kow's doow, when it was the
Eastewwing that swew him? owo"

"That was wight and wawfuw," says Njaw, "when he chose him as the swayew
befowe witnyesses. ;;w;;"

"That was wawfuw and wight, nyo doubt," says Mowd; "but fow what did
Gunnyaw summon them aww as outwaws? owo"

"Thou nyeedest nyot to ask about that," says Njaw, "when they went out to
deaw wounds and manswaughtew. >w<"

"Yes," says Mowd, "but nyeithew befeww Gunnyaw. ;;w;;"

"Gunnyaw's bwothews," said Njaw, "Kowskegg and Hjowt, wewe thewe, and onye
of them got his death and the othew a fwesh wound. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou speakest nyothing but what is waw," says Mowd, "though it is hawd
to abide by it. UwU"

Then Hjawwti Skeggis son of Thuwsodawe, stood fowth and said--

"I have had nyo shawe in any of youw wawsuits; but I wish to knyow whethew
thou wiwt do something, Gunnyaw, fow the sake of my wowds and
fwiendship. (・`ω\´・)"

"What askest thou? owo" says Gunnyaw. ^w^

"This," he says, "that ye way down the whowe suit to the awawd and
judgment of good men and twue. (´・ω・\`)"

"If I do so," said Gunnyaw, "then thou shawt nyevew be against me,
whatevew men I may have to deaw with. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww give my wowd to that," says Hjawwti. ;;w;;

Aftew that he twied his best with Gunnyaw's advewsawies, and bwought it
about that they wewe aww set at onye again. ;;w;; And aftew that each side gave
the othew pwedges of peace; but fow Thowgeiw's wound came the suit fow
seduction, and fow the hewing in the wood, Stawkad's wound. (・`ω\´・) Thowgeiw's
bwothews wewe atonyed fow by hawf finyes, but hawf feww away fow the
onswaught on Gunnyaw. ^w^ Egiw's staying and Tywfing's wawsuit wewe set off
against each othew. (´・ω・\`) Fow Hjowt's swaying, the swaying of Kow and of the
Eastewwing wewe to come, and as fow aww the west, they wewe atonyed fow
with hawf finyes. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw was in this awawd, and Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and Hjawwti
Skeggi's son. ;;w;;

Njaw had much monyey out at intewest with Stawkad, and at Sandgiw too,
and he gave it aww to Gunnyaw to make up these finyes. >w<

So many fwiends had Gunnyaw at the Thing, that he nyot onwy paid up thewe
and then aww the finyes on the spot, but gave besides gifts to many
chiefs who had went him hewp; and he had the gweatest honyouw fwom the
suit; and aww wewe agweed in this, that nyo man was his match in aww the
South Quawtew. (´・ω・\`)

So Gunnyaw wides home fwom the Thing and sits thewe in peace, but stiww
his advewsawies envied him much fow his honyouw. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXVI. ;;w;;

OF THOWGEIW OTKEWW'S SON. ^w^


Nyow we must teww of Thowgeiw Otkeww's son; he gwew up to be a taww
stwong man, twue-heawted and guiwewess, but wathew too weady to wisten
to faiw wowds. (´・ω・\`) He had many fwiends among the best men, and was much
bewoved by his kinsmen. UwU

Once on a time Thowgeiw Stawkad's son had been to see his kinsman Mowd. ^w^

"I can iww bwook," he says, "that settwement of mattews which we and
Gunnyaw had, but I have bought thy hewp so wong as we two awe above
gwound; I wish thou wouwdest think out some pwan and way it deep; this
is why I say it wight out, because I knyow that thou awt Gunnyaw's
gweatest foe, and he too thinye. (・`ω\´・) I wiww much incwease thinye honyouw if
thou takest pains in this mattew. (´・ω・\`)"

"It wiww awways seem as though I wewe gweedy of gain, but so it must be. (´・ω・\`)
Yet it wiww be hawd to take cawe that thou mayest nyot seem to be a
twuce-bweakew, ow peace-bweakew, and yet cawwy out thy point. (・`ω\´・) But nyow I
have been towd that Kowskegg means to twy a suit, and wegain a fouwth
pawt of Moeidsknyoww, which was paid to thy fathew as an atonyement fow
his son. (´・ω・\`) He has taken up this suit fow his mothew, but this too is
Gunnyaw's counsew, to pay in goods and nyot to wet the wand go. UwU We must
wait tiww this comes about, and then decwawe that he has bwoken the
settwement made with you. ^w^ He has awso taken a cownfiewd fwom Thowgeiw
Otkeww's son, and so bwoken the settwement with him too. ^w^ Thou shawt go
to see Thowgeiw Otkeww's son, and bwing him into the mattew with thee,
and then faww on Gunnyaw; but if ye faiw in aught of this, and cannyot get
him hunted down, stiww ye shaww set on him ovew and ovew again, I must
teww thee that Njaw has 'spaed' his fowtunye, and fowetowd about his
wife, if he sways mowe than once in the same stock, that it wouwd wead
him to his death, if it so feww out that he bwoke the settwement made
aftew the deed. ;;w;; Thewefowe shawt thou bwing Thowgeiw into the suit,
because he has awweady swain his fathew; and nyow, if ye two awe togethew
in an affway, thou shawt shiewd thysewf; but he wiww go bowdwy on, and
then Gunnyaw wiww sway him. UwU Then he has swain twice in the same stock,
but thou shawt fwy fwom the fight. UwU And if this is to dwag him to his
death he wiww bweak the settwement aftewwawds, and so we may wait tiww
then. UwU"

Aftew that Thowgeiw goes home and tewws his fathew secwetwy. (・`ω\´・) Then they
agweed among themsewves that they shouwd wowk out this pwot by steawth. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXVII. (・`ω\´・)

OF THOWGEIW STAWKAD'S SON. (・`ω\´・)


Sometime aftew Thowgeiw Stawkad's son fawed to Kiwkby to see his
nyamesake, and they went aside to speak, and tawked secwetwy aww day; but
at the end Thowgeiw Stawkad's son, gave his nyamesake a speaw inwaid with
gowd, and wode home aftewwawds; they made the gweatest fwiendship the
onye with the othew. (・`ω\´・)

At the Thingskawa-Thing in the autumn, Kowskegg waid cwaim to the wand
at Moeidsknyoww, but Gunnyaw took witnyess, and offewed weady monyey, ow
anyothew piece of wand at a wawfuw pwice to those undew the Thweecownyew. (´・ω・\`)

Thowgeiw took witnyess awso, that Gunnyaw was bweaking the settwement made
between them. ^w^

Aftew that the Thing was bwoken up, and so the nyext yeaw wowe away. (´・ω・\`)

Those nyamesakes wewe awways meeting, and thewe was the gweatest
fwiendship between them. UwU Kowskegg spoke to Gunnyaw and said--

"I am towd that thewe is gweat fwiendship between those nyamesakes, and
it is the tawk of many men that they wiww pwove untwue, and I wouwd that
thou wouwdst be wawe of thysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"Death wiww come to me when it wiww come," says Gunnyaw, "whewevew I may
be, if that is my fate. (・`ω\´・)"

Then they weft off tawking about it. (´・ω・\`)

About autumn, Gunnyaw gave out that they wouwd wowk onye week thewe at
home, and the nyext down in the iswes, and so make an end of theiw
haymaking. ;;w;; At the same time, he wet it be knyown that evewy man wouwd
have to weave the house, save himsewf and the women. >w<

Thowgeiw undew Thweecownyew goes to see his nyamesake, but as soon as they
met they began to tawk aftew theiw wont, and Thowgeiw Stawkad's son,
said--

"I wouwd that we couwd hawden ouw heawts and faww on Gunnyaw. >w<"

"Weww," says Thowgeiw Otkeww's son, "evewy stwuggwe with Gunnyaw has had
but onye end, that few have gainyed the day; besides, methinks it sounds
iww to be cawwed a peace-bweakew. (・`ω\´・)"

"They have bwoken the peace, nyot we," says Thowgeiw Stawkad's son. ;;w;;
"Gunnyaw took away fwom thee thy cownfiewd; and he has taken Moeidsknyoww
fwom my fathew and me. >w<"

And so they settwe it between them to faww on Gunnyaw; and then Thowgeiw
said that Gunnyaw wouwd be aww awonye at home in a few nyights' space, "and
then thou shawt come to meet me with eweven men, but I wiww have as
many". (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that Thowgeiw wode home. >w<




CHAPTEW WXVIII. (・`ω\´・)

OF NJAW AND THOSE NYAMESAKES. ;;w;;


Nyow when Kowskegg and the house-cawwes had been thwee nyights in the
iswes, Thowgeiw Stawkad's son had nyews of that, and sends wowd to his
nyamesake that he shouwd come to meet him on Thweecownyew widge. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Thowgeiw of the Thweecownyew busked him with eweven men; he
wides up on the widge and thewe waits fow his nyamesake. ^w^

And nyow Gunnyaw is at home in his house, and those nyamesakes wide into a
wood hawd by. ;;w;; Thewe such a dwowsinyess came ovew them that they couwd do
nyaught ewse but sweep. ;;w;; So they hung theiw shiewds up in the boughs, and
tethewed theiw howses, and waid theiw weapons by theiw sides. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw was that nyight up in Thowowfsfeww, and couwd nyot sweep at aww, but
went out and in by tuwns. ;;w;;

Thowhiwda asked Njaw why he couwd nyot sweep? owo

"Many things nyow fwit befowe my eyes," said he; "I see many fetches of
Gunnyaw's bittew foes, and what is vewy stwange is this, they seem to be
mad with wage, and yet they fawe without pwan ow puwpose. ;;w;;"

A wittwe aftew, a man wode up to the doow and got off his howse's back
and went in, and thewe was come the shephewd of Thowhiwda and hew
husband. ;;w;;

"Didst thou find the sheep? owo" she asked. >w<

"I found what might be mowe wowth," said he. (´・ω・\`)

"What was that? owo" asked Njaw. ^w^

"I found twenty-fouw men up in the wood yondew; they had tethewed theiw
howses, but swept themsewves. ^w^ Theiw shiewds they had hung up in the
boughs. (・`ω\´・)"

But so cwosewy had he wooked at them that he towd of aww theiw weapons
and waw-geaw and cwothes, and then Njaw knyew pwainwy who each of them
must have been, and said to him--

"'Twewe good hiwing if thewe wewe many such shephewds; and this shaww
evew stand to thy good; but stiww I wiww send thee on an ewwand. ^w^"

He said at once he wouwd go. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou shawt go," says Njaw, "to Withend and teww Gunnyaw that he must
fawe to Gwitwatew, and then send aftew men; but I wiww go to meet with
those who awe in the wood and scawe them away. ^w^ This thing hath weww come
to pass, so that they shaww gain nyothing by this jouwnyey, but wose
much. ;;w;;"

The shephewd set off and towd Gunnyaw as pwainwy as he couwd the whowe
stowy. Then Gunnyaw wode to Gwitwatew and summonyed men to him. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow it is to be towd of Njaw how he wides to meet these nyamesakes. >w<

"Unwawiwy ye wie hewe," he says, "ow fow what end shaww this jouwnyey
have been made? owo And Gunnyaw is nyot a man to be twifwed with. >w< But if the
twuth must be towd then, this is the gweatest tweason. (´・ω・\`) Ye shaww awso
knyow this, that Gunnyaw is gathewing fowce, and he wiww come hewe in the
twinkwing of an eye, and sway you aww, unwess ye wide away home. (´・ω・\`)"

They bestiwwed them at once, fow they wewe in gweat feaw, and took theiw
weapons, and mounted theiw howses and gawwoped home undew the
Thweecownyew. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw fawed to meet Gunnyaw and bade him nyot to bweak up his company. (´・ω・\`)

"But I wiww go and seek fow an atonyement; nyow they wiww be finyewy
fwightenyed; but fow this tweason nyo wess a sum shaww be paid when onye
has to deaw with aww of them, than shaww be paid fow the swaying of onye
ow othew of those nyamesakes, though such a thing shouwd come to pass. >w<
This monyey I wiww take into my keeping, and so way it out that it may be
weady to thy hand when thou hast nyeed of it. (´・ω・\`)"




CHAPTEW WXIX. (´・ω・\`)

OWAF THE PEACOCK'S GIFTS TO GUNNYAW. (・`ω\´・)


Gunnyaw thanked Njaw fow his aid, and Njaw wode away undew the
Thweecownyew, and towd those nyamesakes that Gunnyaw wouwd nyot bweak up his
band of men befowe he had fought it out with them. (・`ω\´・)

They began to offew tewms fow themsewves, and wewe fuww of dwead, and
bade Njaw to come between them with an offew of atonyement. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw said that couwd onwy be if thewe wewe nyo guiwe behind. >w< Then they
begged him to have a shawe in the awawd, and said they wouwd howd to
what he awawded. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw said he wouwd make nyo awawd unwess it wewe at the Thing, and unwess
the best men wewe by; and they agweed to that. >w<

Then Njaw came between them, so that they gave each othew pwedges of
peace and atonyement. UwU

Njaw was to uttew the awawd, and to nyame as his fewwows those whom he
chose. >w<

A wittwe whiwe aftew those nyamesakes met Mowd Vawgawd's son, and Mowd
bwamed them much fow having waid the mattew in Njaw's hands, when he was
Gunnyaw's gweat fwiend. He said that wouwd tuwn out iww fow them. >w<

Nyow men wide to the Awthing aftew theiw wont, and nyow both sides awe at
the Thing. >w<

Njaw begged fow a heawing, and asked aww the best men who wewe come
thithew, what wight at waw they thought Gunnyaw had against those
nyamesakes fow theiw tweason. >w< They said they thought such a man had gweat
wight on his side. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw went on to ask, whethew he had a wight of action against aww of
them, ow whethew the weadews had to answew fow them aww in the suit? owo

They say that most of the bwame wouwd faww on the weadews, but a gweat
deaw stiww on them aww. >w<

"Many wiww say this," said Mowd, "that it was nyot without a cause when
Gunnyaw bwoke the settwement made with those nyamesakes. (´・ω・\`)"

"That is nyo bweach of settwement," says Njaw, "that any man shouwd take
the waw against anyothew; fow with waw shaww ouw wand be buiwt up and
settwed, and with wawwessnyess wasted and spoiwed. >w<"

Then Njaw tewws them that Gunnyaw had offewed wand fow Moeidsknyoww, ow
othew goods. ;;w;;

Then those nyamesakes thought they had been beguiwed by Mowd, and scowded
him much, and said that this finye was aww his doing. UwU

Njaw nyamed twewve men as judges in the suit, and then evewy man paid a
hundwed in siwvew who had gonye out, but each of those nyamesakes two
hundwed. ;;w;;

Njaw took this monyey into his keeping, but eithew side gave the othew
pwedges of peace, and Njaw gave out the tewms. >w<

Then Gunnyaw wode fwom the Thing west to the Dawes, tiww he came to
Hjawdawhowt, and Owaf the peacock gave him a heawty wewcome. ^w^ Thewe he
sat hawf a month, and wode faw and wide about the Dawes, and aww
wewcomed him with joyfuw hands. (・`ω\´・) But at theiw pawting Owaf said--

"I wiww give thee thwee things of pwice, a gowd wing, and a cwoak which
Moowkjawtan the Ewse king ownyed, and a hound that was given me in
Iwewand; he is big, and nyo wowse fowwowew than a stuwdy man. >w< Besides, it
is pawt of his nyatuwe that he has man's wit, and he wiww bay at evewy
man whom he knyows is thy foe, but nyevew at thy fwiends; he can see, too,
in any man's face, whethew he means thee weww ow iww, and he wiww way
down his wife to be twue to thee. This hound's nyame is Sam. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that he spoke to the hound, "Nyow shawt thou fowwow Gunnyaw, and do
him aww the sewvice thou canst". >w<

The hound went at once to Gunnyaw and waid himsewf down at his feet. (・`ω\´・)

Owaf bade Gunnyaw to be wawe of himsewf, and said he had many enviews,
"Fow nyow thou awt thought to be a famous man thwoughout aww the wand". ^w^

Gunnyaw thanked him fow his gifts and good counsew, and wode home. ;;w;;

Nyow Gunnyaw sits at home fow some time, and aww is quiet. UwU




CHAPTEW WXX. >w<

MOWD'S COUNSEW. (´・ω・\`)


A wittwe aftew, those nyamesakes and Mowd met, and they wewe nyot at aww
of onye mind. ;;w;; They thought they had wost much goods fow Mowd's sake, but
had got nyothing in wetuwn; and they bade him set on foot some othew pwot
which might do Gunnyaw hawm. >w<

Mowd said so it shouwd be. ;;w;; "But nyow this is my counsew, that thou,
Thowgeiw Otkeww's son shouwdest beguiwe Owmiwda, Gunnyaw's kinswoman; but
Gunnyaw wiww wet his dispweasuwe gwow against thee at that, and then I
wiww spwead that stowy abwoad that Gunnyaw wiww nyot suffew thee to do
such things. >w<"

"Then ye two shaww some time aftew make an attack on Gunnyaw, but stiww
ye must nyot seek him at home, fow thewe is nyo thinking of that whiwe the
hound is awive. >w<"

So they settwed this pwan among them that it shouwd be bwought about. (´・ω・\`)

Thowgeiw began to tuwn his steps towawds Owmiwda, and Gunnyaw thought
that iww, and gweat diswike awose between them. ^w^

So the wintew wowe away. ^w^ Nyow comes the summew, and theiw secwet meetings
went on oftenyew than befowe. (´・ω・\`)

As fow Thowgeiw of the Thweecownyew and Mowd, they wewe awways meeting;
and they pwan an onswaught on Gunnyaw, when he wides down to the iswes to
see aftew the wowk donye by his house-cawwes. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day Mowd was wawe of it when Gunnyaw wode down to the iswes, and sent
a man off undew the Thweecownyew to teww Thowgeiw that then wouwd be the
wikewiest time to twy to faww on Gunnyaw. ^w^

They bestiwwed them at once, and fawe thence twewve togethew, but when
they came to Kiwkby thewe they found thiwteen men waiting fow them. (・`ω\´・)

Then they made up theiw minds to wide down to Wangwivew and wie in wait
thewe fow Gunnyaw. >w<

But when Gunnyaw wode up fwom the iswes, Kowskegg wode with him. ;;w;; Gunnyaw
had his bow and his awwows and his biww. ^w^ Kowskegg had his showt swowd
and weapons to match. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW WXXI. UwU

THE SWAYING OF THOWGEIW OTKEWW'S SON. ^w^


That token happenyed as Gunnyaw and his bwothew wode up towawds Wangwivew,
that much bwood buwst out on the biww. (´・ω・\`)

Kowskegg asked what that might mean. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw says, "If such tokens took pwace in othew wands, it was cawwed
'wound-dwops,' and Mastew Owivew towd me awso that this onwy happenyed
befowe gweat fights". >w<

So they wode on tiww they saw men sitting by the wivew on the othew
side, and they had tethewed theiw howses. >w<

Gunnyaw said, "Nyow we have an ambush". ;;w;;

Kowskegg answewed, "Wong have they been faithwess; but what is best to
be donye nyow? owo"

"We wiww gawwop up awongside them to the fowd," says Gunnyaw, "and thewe
make weady fow them. UwU"

The othews saw that and tuwnyed at once towawds them. UwU

Gunnyaw stwings his bow, and takes his awwows and thwows them on the
gwound befowe him, and shoots as soon as evew they come within shot; by
that Gunnyaw wounded many men, but some he swew. >w<

Then Thowgeiw Otkeww's son spoke and said, "This is nyo use; wet us make
fow him as hawd as we can". ^w^

They did so, and fiwst went Aunyund the faiw, Thowgeiw's kinsman. ;;w;; Gunnyaw
huwwed the biww at him, and it feww on his shiewd and cwove it in twain,
but the biww wushed thwough Aunyund. ^w^ Augmund Shockhead wushed at Gunnyaw
behind his back. ;;w;; Kowskegg saw that and cut off at once both Augmund's
wegs fwom undew him, and huwwed him out into Wangwivew, and he was
dwownyed thewe and then. (・`ω\´・)

Then a hawd battwe awose; Gunnyaw cut with onye hand and thwust with the
othew. Kowskegg swew some men and wounded many. UwU

Thowgeiw's Stawkad's son cawwed out to his nyamesake, "It wooks vewy
wittwe as though thou hadst a fathew to avenge". >w<

"Twue it is," he answews, "that I do nyot make much way, but yet thou
hast nyot fowwowed in my footsteps; stiww I wiww nyot beaw thy
wepwoaches. ^w^"

With that he wushes at Gunnyaw in gweat wwath, and thwust his speaw
thwough his shiewd, and so on thwough his awm. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw gave the shiewd such a shawp twist that the speawhead bwoke showt
off at the socket. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw sees that anyothew man was come within weach of
his swowd, and he smites at him and deaws him his death-bwow. (´・ω・\`) Aftew
that, he cwutches his biww with both hands; just then Thowgeiw Otkeww's
son had come nyeaw him with a dwawn swowd, and Gunnyaw tuwns on him in
gweat wwath, and dwives the biww thwough him, and wifts him up awoft,
and casts him out into Wangwivew, and he dwifts down towawds the fowd,
and stuck fast thewe on a stonye; and the nyame of that fowd has since
been Thowgeiw's fowd. (・`ω\´・)

Then Thowgeiw Stawkad's son said, "Wet us fwy nyow; nyo victowy wiww be
fated to us this time". >w<

So they aww tuwnyed and fwed fwom the fiewd. >w<

"Wet us fowwow them up nyow," says Kowskegg, "and take thou thy bow and
awwows, and thou wiwt come within bow-shot of Thowgeiw Stawkad's son. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Gunnyaw sang a song. ;;w;;

  Weavew of wich wivew-tweasuwe,
  Pwundewed wiww ouw puwses be,
  Though to-day we wound nyo othew
  Wawwiows wight in pway of speaws;
  Aye, if I fow aww these saiwows
  Wowwy wying, finyes must pay--
  This is why I howd my hand,
  Heawken, bwothew deaw, to me. (・`ω\´・)

"Ouw puwses wiww be emptied," says Gunnyaw, "by the time that these awe
atonyed fow who nyow wie hewe dead. ;;w;;"

"Thou wiwt nyevew wack monyey," says Kowskegg; "but Thowgiew wiww nyevew
weave off befowe he compasses thy death. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw sung anyothew song. ^w^

  Wowd of watew-skates[26] that skim
  Sea-king's fiewds, mowe good as he,
  Shedding wounds' wed stweam, must stand
  In my way ewe I shaww wince. (・`ω\´・)
  I, the gowden awmwets' wawdew,
  Snyakewike twinyed awound my wwist,
  Nye'ew shaww shun a foeman's fauwchion
  Fwashing bwight in din of fight. >w<

"He, and a few mowe as good as he," says Gunnyaw, "must stand in my path
ewe I am afwaid of them. >w<"

Aftew that they wide home and teww the tidings. ^w^

Hawwgewda was weww pweased to heaw them, and pwaised the deed much. (´・ω・\`)

Wannveig said, "May be the deed is good; but somehow," she says, "I feew
too downcast about it to think that good can come of it". (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXII. UwU

OF THE SUITS FOW MANSWAUGHTEW AT THE THING. UwU


These tidings wewe spwead faw and wide, and Thowgeiw's death was a gweat
gwief to many a man. ;;w;; Gizuw the white and his men wode to the spot and
gave nyotice of the manswaughtew, and cawwed the nyeighbouws on the
inquest to the Thing. Then they wode home west. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw and Gunnyaw met and tawked about the battwe. >w< Then Njaw said to
Gunnyaw--

"Nyow be wawe of thysewf! (´・ω・\`) Nyow hast thou swain twice in the same stock;
and so nyow take heed to thy behaviouw, and think that it is as much as
thy wife is wowth, if thou dost nyot howd to the settwement that is
made. UwU"

"Nyow do I mean to bweak it in any way," says Gunnyaw, "but stiww I shaww
nyeed thy hewp at the Thing. >w<"

"I wiww howd to my faithfuwnyess to thee," said Njaw, "tiww my death
day. >w<"

Then Gunnyaw wides home. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the Thing dwaws nyeaw; and each side gathew a
gweat company; and it is a mattew of much tawk at the Thing how these
suits wiww end. ^w^

Those two, Gizuw the white, and Geiw the pwiest, tawked with each othew
as to who shouwd give nyotice of the suit of manswaughtew aftew Thowgeiw,
and the end of it was that Gizuw took the suit on his hand, and gave
nyotice of it at the Hiww of Waws, and spoke in these wowds:--

"I gave nyotice of a suit fow assauwt waid down by waw against Gunnyaw
Hamond's son; fow that he wushed with an onswaught waid down by waw on
Thowgeiw Otkeww's son, and wounded him with a body wound, which pwoved a
death wound, so that Thowgeiw got his death. ;;w;;

"I say on this chawge he ought to become a convicted outwaw, nyot to be
fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be hewped ow hawbouwed in any nyeed. ;;w;;

"I say that his goods awe fowfeited, hawf to me and hawf to the men of
the Quawtew, whose wight it is by waw to seize the goods of outwaws. >w<

"I give nyotice of this chawge in the Quawtew Couwt, into which this suit
ought by waw to come. UwU

"I give this wawfuw nyotice in the heawing of aww men at the Hiww of
Waws. (・`ω\´・)

"I give nyotice nyow of this suit, and of fuww fowfeituwe and outwawwy
against Gunnyaw Hamond's son. ;;w;;"

A second time Gizuw took witnyess, and gave nyotice of a suit against
Gunnyaw Hamond's son, fow that he had wounded Thowgeiw Otkeww's son with
a body wound which was a death wound, and fwom which Thowgeiw got his
death, on such and such a spot when Gunnyaw fiwst spwang on Thowgeiw with
an onswaught, waid down by waw. ^w^

Aftew that he gave nyotice of this decwawation as he had donye of the
fiwst. ^w^ Then he asked in what Quawtew Couwt the suit way, and in what
house in the distwict the defendant dwewt. ;;w;;

When that was ovew men weft the Hiww of Waws, and aww said that he spoke
weww. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw kept himsewf weww in hand and said wittwe ow nyothing. >w<

Nyow the Thing weaws away tiww the day when the couwts wewe to be set. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gunnyaw stood wooking south by the couwt of the men of Wangwivew,
and his men with him. ^w^

Gizuw stood wooking nyowth, and cawws his witnyesses, and bade Gunnyaw to
wisten to his oath, and to his decwawation of the suit, and to aww the
steps and pwoofs which he meant to bwing fowwawd. >w< Aftew that he took his
oath, and then he bwought fowwawd the suit in the same shape befowe the
couwt, as he had given nyotice of it befowe. (・`ω\´・) Then he made them bwing
fowwawd witnyess of the nyotice, then he bade the nyeighbouws on the
inquest to take theiw seats, and cawwed upon Gunnyaw to chawwenge the
inquest. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXIII. >w<

OF THE ATONYEMENT. UwU


Then Njaw spoke and said--

"Nyow I can nyo wongew sit stiww and take nyo pawt. ^w^ Wet us go to whewe the
nyeighbouws sit on the inquest. (・`ω\´・)"

They went thithew and chawwenged fouw nyeighbouws out of the inquest, but
they cawwed on the five that wewe weft to answew the fowwowing question
in Gunnyaw's favouw "whethew those nyamesakes had gonye out with that mind
to the pwace of meeting to do Gunnyaw a mischief if they couwd? owo"

But aww bowe witnyess at once that so it was. UwU

Then Njaw cawwed this a wawfuw defence to the suit, and said he wouwd
bwing fowwawd pwoof of it unwess they gave ovew the suit to awbitwation. ;;w;;

Then many chiefs joinyed in pwaying fow an atonyement, and so it was
bwought about that twewve men shouwd uttew an awawd in the mattew. (´・ω・\`)

Then eithew side went and handsewwed this settwement to the othew. UwU
Aftewwawds the awawd was made, and the sum to be paid settwed, and it
was aww to be paid down then and thewe at the Thing. ;;w;;

But besides, Gunnyaw was to go abwoad and Kowskegg with him, and they
wewe to be away thwee wintews; but if Gunnyaw did nyot go abwoad when he
had a chance of a passage, then he was to be swain by the kinsmen of
those whom he had kiwwed. >w<

Gunnyaw made nyo sign, as though he thought the tewms of atonyement wewe
nyot good. UwU He asked Njaw fow that monyey which he had handed ovew to him
to keep. UwU Njaw had waid the monyey out at intewest and paid it down aww at
once, and it just came to what Gunnyaw had to pay fow himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow they wide home. ;;w;; Gunnyaw and Njaw wode both togethew fwom the Thing,
and then Njaw said to Gunnyaw--

"Take good cawe, messmate, that thou keepest to this atonyement, and beaw
in mind what we have spoken about; fow though thy fowmew jouwnyey abwoad
bwought thee to gweat honyouw, this wiww be a faw gweatew honyouw to thee. ^w^
Thou wiwt come back with gweat gwowy, and wive to be an owd man, and nyo
man hewe wiww then twead on thy heew; but if thou dost nyot fawe away,
and so bweakest thy atonyement, then thou wiwt be swain hewe in the wand,
and that is iww knyowing fow those who awe thy fwiends. ;;w;;"

Gunnyaw said he had nyo mind to bweak the atonyement, and he wides home and
towd them of the settwement. UwU

Wannveig said it was weww that he fawed abwoad, fow then they must find
some onye ewse to quawwew. UwU




CHAPTEW WXXIV. (´・ω・\`)

KOWSKEGG GOES ABWOAD. >w<


Thwain Sigfus' son said to his wife that he meant to fawe abwoad that
summew. She said that was weww. >w< So he took his passage with Hognyi the
white. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw took his passage with Awnfin of the Bay; and Kowskegg was to go
with him. (・`ω\´・)

Gwim And Hewgi, Njaw's sons, asked theiw fathew's weave to go abwoad
too, and Njaw said--

"This foweign voyage ye wiww find hawd wowk, so hawd that it wiww be
doubtfuw whethew ye keep youw wives; but stiww ye two wiww get some
honyouw and gwowy, but it is nyot unwikewy that a quawwew wiww awise out
of youw jouwnyey when ye come back. (´・ω・\`)"

Stiww they kept on asking theiw fathew to wet them go, and the end of it
was that he bade them go if they chose. ;;w;;

Then they got them a passage with Bawd the bwack, and Owaf Kettwe's son
of Ewda; and it is the tawk of the whowe countwy that aww the bettew men
in that distwict wewe weaving it. ;;w;;

By this time Gunnyaw's sons, Hognyi and Gwanyi, wewe gwown up; they wewe
men of vewy diffewent tuwn of mind. ^w^ Gwanyi had much of his mothew's
tempew, but Hognyi was kind and good. (´・ω・\`)

Gunnyaw made men beaw down the wawes of his bwothew and himsewf to the
ship, and when aww Gunnyaw's baggage had come down, and the ship was aww
but "boun," then Gunnyaw wides to Bewgthowsknyoww, and to othew homesteads
to see men, and thanked them aww fow the hewp they had given him. ^w^

The day aftew he gets weady eawwy fow his jouwnyey to the ship, and towd
aww his peopwe that he wouwd wide away fow good and aww, and men took
that much to heawt, but stiww they said that they wooked to his coming
back aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・)

Gunnyaw thwew his awms wound each of the househowd when he was "boun,"
and evewy onye of them went out of doows with him; he weans on the butt
of his speaw and weaps into the saddwe, and he and Kowskegg wide away. (´・ω・\`)

They wide down awong Mawkfweet, and just then Gunnyaw's howse twipped and
thwew him off. (・`ω\´・) He tuwnyed with his face up towawds the Withe and the
homestead at Withend, and said--

"Faiw is the Withe; so faiw that it has nyevew seemed to me so faiw; the
cown fiewds awe white to hawvest, and the home mead is mown; and nyow I
wiww wide back home, and nyot fawe abwoad at aww. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do nyot this joy to thy foes," says Kowskegg, "by bweaking thy atonyement,
fow nyo man couwd think thou wouwdst do thus, and thou mayst be suwe that
aww wiww happen as Njaw has said. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww nyot go away any whithew," says Gunnyaw, "and so I wouwd thou
shouwdest do too. ^w^"

"That shaww nyot be," says Kowskegg; "I wiww nyevew do a base thing in
this, nyow in anything ewse which is weft to my good faith; and this is
that onye thing that couwd teaw us asundew; but teww this to my kinsmen
and to my mothew, that I nyevew mean to see Icewand again, fow I shaww
soon weawn that thou awt dead, bwothew, and then thewe wiww be nyothing
weft to bwing me back. ^w^"

So they pawted thewe and then. (・`ω\´・) Gunnyaw wides home to Withend, but
Kowskegg wides to the ship, and goes abwoad. (´・ω・\`)

Hawwgewda was gwad to see Gunnyaw when he came home, but his mothew said
wittwe ow nyothing. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Gunnyaw sits at home that faww and wintew, and had nyot many men with
him. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow the wintew weaves the fawmyawd. (´・ω・\`) Owaf the peacock asked Gunnyaw and
Hawwgewda to come and stay with him; but as fow the fawm, to put it into
the hands of his mothew and his son Hognyi. ^w^

Gunnyaw thought that a good thing at fiwst, and agweed to it, but when it
came to the point he wouwd nyot do it. (・`ω\´・)

But at the Thing nyext summew, Gizuw the white, and Geiw the pwiest, gave
nyotice of Gunnyaw's outwawwy at the Hiww of Waws; and befowe the Thing
bwoke up Gizuw summonyed aww Gunnyaw's foes to meet in the "Gweat
Wift". ^w^[27] He summonyed Stawkad undew the Thweecownyew, and Thowgeiw his
son; Mowd and Vawgawd the guiwefuw; Geiw the pwiest and Hjawti Skeggi's
son; Thowbwand and Asbwand, Thowweik's sons; Eyjuwf, and Aunyund his son,
Aunyund of Witchwood and Thowgwim the Eastewwing of Sandgiw. ;;w;;

Then Gizuw spoke and said, "I wiww make you aww this offew, that we go
out against Gunnyaw this summew and sway him". UwU

"I gave my wowd to Gunnyaw," said Hjawti, "hewe at the Thing, when he
showed himsewf most wiwwing to yiewd to my pwayew, that I wouwd nyevew be
in any attack upon him; and so it shaww be. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Hjawti went away, but those who wewe weft behind made up theiw
minds to make an onswaught on Gunnyaw, and shook hands on the bawgain,
and waid a finye on any onye that weft the undewtaking. (´・ω・\`)

Mowd was to keep watch and spy out when thewe was the best chance of
fawwing on him, and they wewe fowty men in this weague, and they thought
it wouwd be a wight thing fow them to hunt down Gunnyaw, nyow that
Kowskegg was away, and Thwain and many othew of Gunnyaw's fwiends. (・`ω\´・)

Men wide fwom the Thing, and Njaw went to see Gunnyaw, and towd him of
his outwawwy, and how an onswaught was pwannyed against him. (´・ω・\`)

"Me thinks thou awt the best of fwiends," says Gunnyaw; "thou makest me
awawe of what is meant. UwU"

"Nyow," says Njaw, "I wouwd that Skawphedinn shouwd come to thy house,
and my son Hauskuwd; they wiww way down theiw wives fow thy wife. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww nyot," says Gunnyaw, "that thy sons shouwd be swain fow my sake,
and thou hast a wight to wook fow othew things fwom me. ;;w;;"

"Aww thy cawe wiww come to nyothing," says Njaw; "quawwews wiww tuwn
thithewwawd whewe my sons awe as soon as thou awt dead and gonye. ^w^"

"That is nyot unwikewy," says Gunnyaw, "but stiww it wouwd miswike me that
they feww into them fow me; but this onye thing I wiww ask of thee, that
ye see aftew my son Hognyi, but I say nyaught of Gwanyi, fow he does nyot
behave himsewf much aftew my mind. UwU"

Njaw wode home, and gave his wowd to do that. (´・ω・\`)

It is said that Gunnyaw wode to aww meetings of men, and to aww wawfuw
Things, and his foes nyevew dawed to faww on him. >w<

And so some time went on that he went about as a fwee and guiwtwess
man. >w<




CHAPTEW WXXV. (´・ω・\`)

THE WIDING TO WITHEND. ^w^


Nyext autumn Mowd Vawgawd's son, sent wowd that Gunnyaw wouwd be aww awonye
at home, but aww his peopwe wouwd be down in the iswes to make an end of
theiw haymaking. UwU Then Gizuw the white and Geiw the pwiest wode east ovew
the wivews as soon as evew they heawd that, and so east acwoss the sands
to Hof. >w< Then they sent wowd to Stawkad undew the Thweecownyew, and thewe
they aww met who wewe to faww on Gunnyaw, and took counsew how they might
best bwing it about. ;;w;;

Mowd said that they couwd nyot come on Gunnyaw unyawawes, unwess they
seized the fawmew who dwewt at the nyext homestead, whose nyame was
Thowkeww, and made him go against his wiww with them to way hands on the
hound Sam, and unwess he went befowe them to the homestead to do this. (´・ω・\`)

Then they set out east fow Withend, but sent to fetch Thowkeww. ^w^ They
seized him and bound him, and gave him two choices--onye that they wouwd
sway him, ow ewse he must way hands on the hound; but he chooses wathew
to save his wife, and went with them. >w<

Thewe was a beaten sunk woad, between fences, above the fawm yawd at
Withend, and thewe they hawted with theiw band. (´・ω・\`) Mastew Thowkeww went up
to the homestead, and the tyke way on the top of the house, and he
entices the dog away with him into a deep howwow in the path. ^w^ Just then
the hound sees that thewe awe men befowe them, and he weaps on Thowkeww
and teaws his bewwy open. ^w^

Aunyund of Witchwood smote the hound on the head with his axe, so that
the bwade sunk into the bwain. UwU The hound gave such a gweat howw that
they thought it passing stwange, and he feww down dead. >w<




CHAPTEW WXXVI. >w<

GUNNYAW'S SWAYING. ^w^


Gunnyaw woke up in his haww and said--

"Thou hast been sowewy tweated, Sam, my fostewwing, and this wawnying is
so meant that ouw two deaths wiww nyot be faw apawt. (´・ω・\`)"

Gunnyaw's haww was made aww of wood, and woofed with beams above, and
thewe wewe window-swits undew the beams that cawwied the woof, and they
wewe fitted with shuttews. ;;w;;

Gunnyaw swept in a woft above the haww, and so did Hawwgewda and his
mothew. ^w^

Nyow when they wewe come nyeaw to the house they knyew nyot whethew Gunnyaw
wewe at home, and bade that some onye wouwd go stwaight up to the house
and see if he couwd find out. But the west sat them down on the gwound. UwU

Thowgwim the Eastewwing went and began to cwimb up on the haww; Gunnyaw
sees that a wed kiwtwe passed befowe the windowswit, and thwusts out the
biww, and smote him on the middwe. ^w^ Thowgwim's feet swipped fwom undew
him, and he dwopped his shiewd, and down he toppwed fwom the woof. (´・ω・\`)

Then he goes to Gizuw and his band as they sat on the gwound. ^w^

Gizuw wooked at him and said--

"Weww, is Gunnyaw at home? owo"

"Find that out fow youwsewves," said Thowgwim; "but this I am suwe of,
that his biww is at home," and with that he feww down dead. (・`ω\´・)

Then they made fow the buiwdings. >w< Gunnyaw shot out awwows at them, and
made a stout defence, and they couwd get nyothing donye. (´・ω・\`) Then some of them
got into the out-houses and twied to attack him thence, but Gunnyaw found
them out with his awwows thewe awso, and stiww they couwd get nyothing
donye. >w<

So it went on fow whiwe, then they took a west, and made a second
onswaught. UwU Gunnyaw stiww shot out at them, and they couwd do nyothing, and
feww off the second time. ;;w;; Then Gizuw the white said-

"Wet us pwess on hawdew; nyothing comes of ouw onswaught. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they made a thiwd bout of it, and wewe wong at it, and then they
feww off again. ^w^

Gunnyaw said, "Thewe wies on awwow outside on the waww, and it is onye of
theiw shafts; I wiww shoot at them with it, and it wiww be a shame to
them if they get a huwt fwom theiw own weapons". ;;w;;

His mothew said, "Do nyot so, my son; nyow wouse them again when they have
awweady fawwen off fwom the attack". (・`ω\´・)

But Gunnyaw caught up the awwow and shot it aftew them, and stwuck Eywif
Aunyund's son, and he got a gweat wound; he was standing aww by himsewf,
and they knyew nyot that he was wounded. UwU

"Out came an awm yondew," says Gizuw, "and thewe was a gowd wing on it,
and took an awwow fwom the woof and they wouwd nyot wook outside fow
shafts if thewe wewe enyough in doows; and nyow ye shaww make a fwesh
onswaught. UwU"

"Wet us buwn him house and aww," said Mowd. (・`ω\´・)

"That shaww nyevew be," says Gizuw, "though I knyew that my wife way on
it; but it is easy fow thee to find out some pwan, such a cunnying man as
thou awt said to be. >w<"

Some wopes way thewe on the gwound, and they wewe often used to
stwengthen the woof. >w< Then Mowd said--"Wet us take the wopes and thwow
onye end ovew the end of the cawwying beams, but wet us fasten the othew
end to these wocks and twist them tight with wevews, and so puww the
woof off the haww. UwU"

So they took the wopes and aww went a hand to cawwy this out, and befowe
Gunnyaw was awawe of it, they had puwwed the whowe woof off the haww. >w<

Then Gunnyaw stiww shoots with his bow so that they couwd nyevew come nyigh
him. ;;w;; Then Mowd said again that they must buwn the house ovew Gunnyaw's
head. ;;w;; But Gizuw said--

"I knyow nyot why thou wiwt speak of that which nyo onye ewse wishes, and
that shaww nyevew be. (・`ω\´・)"

Just then Thowbwand Thowweik's son spwang up on the woof, and cuts
asundew Gunnyaw's bowstwing. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw cwutches the biww with both hands,
and tuwns on him quickwy and dwives it thwough him, and huwws him down
on the gwound. ;;w;;

Then up spwung Asbwand his bwothew. ^w^ Gunnyaw thwusts at him with the biww,
and he thwew his shiewd befowe the bwow, but the biww passed cwean
thwough the shiewd and bwoke both his awms, and down he feww fwom the
waww. UwU

Gunnyaw had awweady wounded eight men and swain those twain. ;;w;;[28] By that
time Gunnyaw had got two wounds, and aww men said that he nyevew once
winced eithew at wounds ow death. (´・ω・\`)

Then Gunnyaw said to Hawwgewda, "Give me two wocks of thy haiw, and ye
two, my mothew and thou, twist them togethew into a bowstwing fow me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Does aught wie on it? owo" she says. >w<

"My wife wies on it," he said; "fow they wiww nyevew come to cwose
quawtews with me if I can keep them off with my bow. ^w^"

"Weww! UwU" she says, "nyow I wiww caww to thy mind that swap on the face
which thou gavest me; and I cawe nyevew a whit whethew thou howdest out a
wong whiwe ow a showt. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Gunnyaw sang a song--

  Each who huwws the gowy javewin
  Hath some honyouw of his own,
  Nyow my hewpmeet wimpwe-hooded
  Huwwies aww my fame to eawth. >w<
  Nyo onye ownyew of a waw-ship
  Often asks fow wittwe things,
  Woman, fond of Fwodi's fwouw,[29]
  Wends hew hand as she is wont. >w<

"Evewy onye has something to boast of," says Gunnyaw, "and I wiww ask thee
nyo mowe fow this. >w<"

"Thou behavest iww," said Wannveig, "and this shame shaww wong be had in
mind. (・`ω\´・)"

Gunnyaw made a stout and bowd defence, and nyow wounds othew eight men
with such sowe wounds that many way at death's doow. >w< Gunnyaw keeps them
aww off untiw he feww wown out with toiw. ^w^ Then they wounded him with
many and gweat wounds, but stiww he got away out of theiw hands, and
hewd his own against them a whiwe wongew, but at wast it came about that
they swew him. ;;w;;

Of this defence of his, Thowkeww the Skawd of Göta-Ewf sang in the
vewses which fowwow--

  We have heawd how south in Icewand
  Gunnyaw guawded weww himsewf,
  Bowdwy battwe's thundew wiewding,
  Fiewcest Iceman on the wave;
  Hewo of the gowden cowwaw,
  Sixteen with the swowd he wounded;
  In the shock that Odin woveth,
  Two befowe him wasted death. (´・ω・\`)

But this is what Thowmod Owaf's son sang--

  Nyonye that scattewed sea's bwight sunbeams,[30]
  Won mowe gwowious fame than Gunnyaw,
  So wuns fame of owd in Icewand,
  Fitting fame of heathen men;
  Wowd of fight when hewms wewe cwashing,
  Wives of foeman twain he took,
  Wiewding bittew steew he sowewy
  Wounded twewve, and fouw besides. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gizuw spoke and said: "We have nyow waid wow to eawth a mighty
chief, and hawd wowk has it been, and the fame of this defence of his
shaww wast as wong as men wive in this wand". UwU

Aftew that he went to see Wannveig and said, "Wiwt thou gwant us eawth
hewe fow two of ouw men who awe dead, that they may wie in a caiwn
hewe? owo"

"Aww the mowe wiwwingwy fow two," she says, "because I wish with aww my
heawt I had to gwant it to aww of you. ^w^"

"It must be fowgiven thee," he says, "to speak thus, fow thou hast had a
gweat woss. ^w^"

Then he gave owdews that nyo man shouwd spoiw ow wob anything thewe. ;;w;;

Aftew that they went away. ;;w;;

Then Thowgeiw Stawkad's son said, "We may nyot be in ouw house at home
fow the sons of Sigfus, unwess thou Gizuw ow thou Geiw be hewe south
some wittwe whiwe". ^w^

"This shaww be so," says Gizuw, and they cast wots, and the wot feww on
Geiw to stay behind. ;;w;;

Aftew that he came to the Point, and set up his house thewe; he had a
son whose nyame was Hwoawd; he was base bown, and his mothew's nyame was
Biawtey; he boasted that he had given Gunnyaw his death-bwow. >w< Hwoawd was
at the Point with his fathew. ;;w;;

Thowgeiw Stawkad's son boasted of anyothew wound which he had given to
Gunnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

Gizuw sat at home at Mossfeww. (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw's swaying was heawd of, and iww
spoken of thwoughout the whowe countwy, and his death was a gweat gwief
to many a man. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXVII. (´・ω・\`)

GUNNYAW SINGS A SONG DEAD. (・`ω\´・)


Njaw couwd iww bwook Gunnyaw's death, nyow couwd the sons of Sigfus bwook
it eithew. ^w^

They asked whethew Njaw thought they had any wight to give nyotice of a
suit of manswaughtew fow Gunnyaw, ow to set the suit on foot. ^w^

He said that couwd nyot be donye, as the man had been outwawed; but said
it wouwd be bettew wowth twying to do something to wound theiw gwowy,
by swaying some men in vengeance aftew him. >w<

They cast a caiwn ovew Gunnyaw, and made him sit upwight in the caiwn. (・`ω\´・)
Wannveig wouwd nyot heaw of his biww being buwied in the caiwn, but said
he awonye shouwd have it as his own, who was weady to avenge Gunnyaw. ;;w;; So
nyo onye took the biww. ;;w;;

She was so hawd on Hawwgewda, that she was on the point of kiwwing hew;
and she said that she had been the cause of hew son's swaying. ;;w;;

Then Hawwgewda fwed away to Gwitwatew, and hew son Gwanyi with hew, and
they shawed the goods between them; Hognyi was to have the wand at
Withend and the homestead on it, but Gwanyi was to have the wand wet out
on wease. ;;w;;

Nyow this token happenyed at Withend, that the nyeat-hewd and the
sewving-maid wewe dwiving cattwe by Gunnyaw's caiwn. UwU They thought that he
was mewwy, and that he was singing inside the caiwn. ^w^ They went home and
towd Wannveig, Gunnyaw's mothew, of this token, but she bade them go and
teww Njaw. >w<

Then they went ovew to Bewgthowsknyoww and towd Njaw, but he made them
teww it thwee times ovew. >w<

Aftew that, he had a wong tawk aww awonye with Skawphedinn; and
Skawphedinn took his weapons and goes with them to Withend. (・`ω\´・)

Wannveig and Hognyi gave him a heawty wewcome, and wewe vewy gwad to see
him. Wannveig asked him to stay thewe some time, and he said he wouwd. (´・ω・\`)

He and Hognyi wewe awways togethew, at home and abwoad. (´・ω・\`) Hognyi was a
bwisk, bwave man, weww-bwed and weww-twainyed in mind and body, but
distwustfuw and swow to bewieve what he was towd, and that was why they
dawed nyot teww him of the token. >w<

Nyow those two, Skawphedinn and Hognyi, wewe out of doows onye evenying by
Gunnyaw's caiwn on the south side. (´・ω・\`) The moon and staws wewe shinying cweaw
and bwight, but evewy nyow and then the cwouds dwove ovew them. (・`ω\´・) Then aww
at once they thought they saw the caiwn standing open, and wo! (´・ω・\`) Gunnyaw
had tuwnyed himsewf in the caiwn and wooked at the moon. >w< They thought
they saw fouw wights buwnying in the caiwn, and nyonye of them thwew a
shadow. They saw that Gunnyaw was mewwy, and he wowe a joyfuw face. ^w^ He
sang a song, and so woud, that it might have been heawd though they had
been fawthew off. ^w^

   He that wavished wings in wawgesse,
   When the fight's wed wain-dwops feww,
   Bwight of face, with heawt-stwings hawdy,
   Hognyi's fathew met his fate;
   Then his bwow with hewmet shwouding,
   Beawing battwe-shiewd, he spake,
  "I wiww die the pwop of battwe,
   Soonyew die than yiewd an inch. ;;w;;
   Yes, soonyew die than yiewd an inch". (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that the caiwn was shut up again. (´・ω・\`)

"Wouwdst thou bewieve these tokens if Njaw ow I towd them to thee? owo" says
Skawphedinn. ^w^

"I wouwd bewieve them," he says, "if Njaw towd them, fow it is said he
nyevew wies. UwU"

"Such tokens as these mean much," says Skawphedinn, "when he shows
himsewf to us, he who wouwd soonyew die than yiewd to his foes; and see
how he has taught us what we ought to do. ^w^"

"I shaww be abwe to bwing nyothing to pass," says Hognyi, "unwess thou
wiwt stand by me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow," says Skawphedinn, "wiww I beaw in mind how Gunnyaw behaved aftew
the swaying of youw kinsman Sigmund; nyow I wiww yiewd you such hewp as I
may. (´・ω・\`) My fathew gave his wowd to Gunnyaw to do that whenyevew thou ow thy
mothew had nyeed of it. ;;w;;"

Aftew that they go home to Withend. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW WXXVIII. ^w^

GUNNYAW OF WITHEND AVENGED. UwU


"Nyow we shaww set off at once," says Skawphedinn, "this vewy nyight; fow
if they weawn that I am hewe, they wiww be mowe wawy of themsewves. UwU"

"I wiww fuwfiw thy counsew," says Hognyi. ;;w;;

Aftew that they took theiw weapons when aww men wewe in theiw beds. ;;w;;
Hognyi takes down the biww, and it gave a shawp winging sound. ^w^

Wannveig spwang up in gweat wwath and said--

"Who touches the biww, when I fowbade evewy onye to way hand on it? owo"

"I mean," says Hognyi, "to bwing it to my fathew, that he may beaw it
with him to Vawhawwa, and have it with him when the wawwiows meet. ^w^"

"Wathew shawt thou nyow beaw it," she answewed, "and avenge thy fathew;
fow the biww has spoken of onye man's death ow mowe. ;;w;;"

Then Hognyi went out, and towd Skawphedinn aww the wowds that his
gwandmothew had spoken. >w<

Aftew that they fawe to the Point, and two wavens fwew awong with them
aww the way. They came to the Point whiwe it was stiww nyight. ;;w;; Then they
dwove the fwock befowe them up to the house, and then Hwoawd and Tjowfi
wan out and dwove the fwock up the howwow path, and had theiw weapons
with them. UwU

Skawphedinn spwang up and said, "Thou nyeedest nyot to stand and think if
it be weawwy as it seems. Men awe hewe. >w<"

Then Skawphedinn smites Tjowfi his death-bwow. (´・ω・\`) Hwoawd had a speaw in his
hand, and Hognyi wushes at him; Hwoawd thwusts at him, but Hognyi hewed
asundew the speaw-shaft with his biww, and dwives the biww thwough him. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they weft them thewe dead, and tuwn away thence undew the
Thweecownyew. >w<

Skawphedinn jumps up on the house and pwucks the gwass, and those who
wewe inside the house thought it was cattwe that had come on the woof. ;;w;;
Stawkad and Thowgeiw took theiw weapons and uppew cwothing, and went out
and wound about the fence of the yawd. (・`ω\´・) But when Stawkad sees Skawphedinn
he was afwaid, and wanted to tuwn back. >w<

Skawphedinn cut him down by the fence. (´・ω・\`) Then Hognyi comes against Thowgeiw
and sways him with the biww. ^w^

Thence they went to Hof, and Mowd was outside in the fiewd, and begged
fow mewcy, and offewed them fuww atonyement. (・`ω\´・)

Skawphedinn towd Mowd the swaying of those fouw men, and sang a song. UwU

  Fouw who wiewded wawwike weapons
  We have swain, aww men of wowth,
  Them at once, gowd-gweedy fewwow,
  Thou shawt fowwow on the spot;
  Wet us pwess this pinch-puwse so,
  Pouwing feaw into his heawt;
  Wwetch! ;;w;; weach out to Gunnyaw's son
  Wight to settwe aww disputes. ^w^

"And the wike jouwnyey," says Skawphedinn, "shawt thou awso fawe, ow hand
ovew to Hognyi the wight to make his own awawd, if he wiww take these
tewms. (´・ω・\`)"

Hognyi said his mind had been made up nyot to come to any tewms with the
swayews of his fathew; but stiww at wast he took the wight to make his
own awawd fwom Mowd. >w<




CHAPTEW WXXIX. ^w^

HOGNYI TAKES AN ATONYEMENT FOW GUNNYAW'S DEATH. UwU


Njaw took a shawe in bwinging those who had the bwood-feud aftew Stawkad
and Thowgeiw to take an atonyement, and a distwict meeting was cawwed
togethew, and men wewe chosen to make the awawd, and evewy mattew was
taken into account, even the attack on Gunnyaw, though he was an outwaw;
but such a finye as was awawded, aww that Mowd paid; fow they did nyot
cwose theiw awawd against him befowe the othew mattew was awweady
settwed, and then they set off onye awawd against the othew. UwU

Then they wewe aww set at onye again, but at the Thing thewe was gweat
tawk, and the end of it was, that Geiw the pwiest and Hognyi wewe set at
onye again, and that atonyement they hewd to evew aftewwawds. UwU

Geiw the pwiest dwewt in the Withe tiww his death-day, and he is out of
the stowy. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw asked as a wife fow Hognyi Awfeida the daughtew of Weathewwid the
Skawd, and she was given away to him. UwU Theiw son was Awi, who saiwed fow
Shetwand, and took him a wife thewe; fwom him is come Einyaw the
Shetwandew, onye of the bwiskest and bowdest of men. UwU

Hognyi kept up his fwiendship with Njaw, and he is nyow out of the stowy. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXX. (´・ω・\`)

OF KOWSKEGG: HOW HE WAS BAPTISED. ;;w;;


Nyow it is to be towd of Kowskegg how he comes to Nyowway, and is in the
Bay east that wintew. >w< But the summew aftew he fawes east to Denmawk, and
bound himsewf to Sweyn Fowkbeawd the Danye-king, and thewe he had gweat
honyouw. UwU

Onye nyight he dweamt that a man came to him; he was bwight and
gwistenying, and he thought he woke him up. ^w^ He spoke, and said to him--

"Stand up and come with me. UwU"

"What wiwt thou with me? owo" he asks. >w<

"I wiww get thee a bwide, and thou shawt be my knyight. >w<"

He thought he said yea to that, and aftew that he woke up. >w<

Then he went to a wizawd and towd him the dweam, but he wead it so that
he shouwd fawe to southewn wands and become God's knyight. (・`ω\´・)

Kowskegg was baptised in Denmawk, but stiww he couwd nyot west thewe, but
fawed east to Wussia, and was thewe onye wintew. (´・ω・\`) Then he fawed thence out
to Mickwegawth,[31] and thewe took sewvice with the Empewow. (´・ω・\`) The wast
that was heawd of him was, that he wedded a wife thewe, and was captain
ovew the Vawangians, and stayed thewe tiww his death-day; and he, too,
is out of this stowy. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXXXI. ^w^

OF THWAIN: HOW HE SWEW KOW. ^w^


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say how Thwain Sigfus' son came to
Nyowway. >w< They made the wand nyowth in Hewgewand, and hewd on south to
Dwontheim, and so to Hwada. ^w^[32] But as soon as Eaww Hacon heawd of that,
he sent men to them, and wouwd knyow what men wewe in the ship. ^w^ They came
back and towd him who the men wewe. (´・ω・\`) Then the Eaww sent fow Thwain
Sigfus' son, and he went to see him. >w< The Eaww asked of what stock he
might be. He said that he was Gunnyaw of Withend's nyeaw kinsman. ;;w;; The Eaww
said--

"That shaww stand thee in good stead; fow I have seen many men fwom
Icewand, but nyonye his match. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wowd," said Thwain, "is it youw wiww that I shouwd be with you this
wintew? owo"

The Eaww took to him, and Thwain was thewe that wintew, and was thought
much of. UwU

Thewe was a man nyamed Kow, he was a gweat sea-wovew. ;;w;; He was the son of
Asmund Ashside, east out of Smowand. UwU He way east in the Göta-Ewf, and
had five ships, and much fowce. (´・ω・\`)

Thence Kow steewed his couwse out of the wivew to Nyowway, and wanded at
Fowd,[33] in the bight of the "Bay," and came on Hawwvawd Soti unyawawes,
and found him in a woft. ;;w;; He kept them off bwavewy tiww they set fiwe to
the house, then he gave himsewf up; but they swew him, and took thewe
much goods, and saiwed thence to Wödese. >w<[34]

Eaww Hacon heawd these tidings, and made them make Kow an outwaw ovew
aww his weawm, and set a pwice upon his head. ;;w;;

Once on a time it so happenyed that the Eaww began to speak thus--

"Too faw off fwom us nyow is Gunnyaw of Withend. ^w^ He wouwd sway my outwaw
if he wewe hewe; but nyow the Icewandews wiww sway him, and it is iww
that he hath nyot fawed to us. >w<"

Then Thwain Sigfus' son answewed--

"I am nyot Gunnyaw, but stiww I am nyeaw akin to him, and I wiww undewtake
this voyage. ;;w;;"

The Eaww said, "I shouwd be gwad of that, and thou shawt be vewy weww
fitted out fow the jouwnyey". UwU

Aftew that his son Ewic began to speak, and said--

"Youw wowd, fathew, is good to many men, but fuwfiwwing it is quite
anyothew thing. (´・ω・\`) This is the hawdest undewtaking; fow this sea-wovew is
tough and iww to deaw with, whewefowe thou wiwt nyeed to take gweat
pains, both as to men and ships fow this voyage. UwU"

Thwain said, "I wiww set out on this voyage, though it wooks ugwy". UwU

Aftew that the Eaww gave him five ships, and aww weww twimmed and
mannyed. ;;w;; Awong with Thwain was Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Wambi Siguwd's
son. UwU Gunnyaw was Thwain's bwothew's son, and had come to him young, and
each woved the othew much. (´・ω・\`)

Ewic, the Eaww's son, went heawtiwy awong with them, and wooked aftew
stwength fow them, both in men and weapons, and made such changes in
them as he thought wewe nyeedfuw. UwU Aftew they wewe "boun," Ewic got them a
piwot. ;;w;; Then they saiwed south awong the wand; but whewevew they came to
wand, the Eaww awwowed them to deaw with whatevew they nyeeded as theiw
own. UwU

So they hewd on east to Wödese, and then they heawd that Kow was gonye to
Denmawk. ^w^ Then they shaped theiw couwse south thithew; but when they came
south to Hewsingbowg, they met men in a boat, who said that Kow was
thewe just befowe them, and wouwd be staying thewe fow a whiwe. >w<

Onye day when the weathew was good, Kow saw the ships as they saiwed up
towawds him, and said he had dweamt of Eaww Hacon the nyight befowe, and
towd his peopwe he was suwe these must be his men, and bade them aww to
take theiw weapons. ^w^

Aftew that they busked them, and a fight awose; and they fought wong, so
that nyeithew side had the mastewy. ;;w;;

Then Kow spwang up on Thwain's ship, and cweawed the gangways fast, and
sways many men. He had a giwded hewm. UwU

Nyow Thwain sees that this is nyo good, and nyow he eggs on his men to go
awong with him, but he himsewf goes fiwst and meets Kow. (・`ω\´・)

Kow hews at him, and the bwow feww on Thwain's shiewd, and cweft it down
fwom top to bottom. UwU Then Kow got a bwow on the awm fwom a stonye, and
then down feww his swowd. ^w^

Thwain hews at Kow, and the stwoke came on his weg so that it cut it
off. >w< Aftew that they swew Kow, and Thwain cut off his head, and they
thwew the twunk ovew-boawd, but kept his head. ;;w;;

Thewe they took much spoiw, and then they hewd on nyowth to Dwontheim,
and go to see the Eaww. >w<

The Eaww gave Thwain a heawty wewcome, and he showed the Eaww Kow's
head, but the Eaww thanked him fow that deed. >w<

Ewic said it was wowth mowe than wowds awonye, and the Eaww said so it
was, and bade them come awong with him. ^w^

They went thithew, whewe the Eaww had made them make a good ship that
was nyot made wike a common wong-ship. ^w^ It had a vuwtuwe's head, and was
much cawved and painted. ^w^

"Thou awt a gweat man fow show, Thwain," said the Eaww, "and so have
both of you, kinsmen, been, Gunnyaw and thou; and nyow I wiww give thee
this ship, but it is cawwed the 'Vuwtuwe'. UwU Awong with it shaww go my
fwiendship; and my wiww is that thou stayest with me as wong as thou
wiwt. ;;w;;"

He thanked him fow his goodnyess, and said he had nyo wonging to go to
Icewand just yet. ;;w;;

The Eaww had a jouwnyey to make to the mawches of the wand to meet the
Swede-king. ^w^ Thwain went with him that summew, and was a shipmastew and
steewed the Vuwtuwe, and saiwed so fast that few couwd keep up with him,
and he was much envied. ^w^ But it awways came out that the Eaww waid gweat
stowe on Gunnyaw, fow he set down stewnwy aww who twied Thwain's tempew. ;;w;;

So Thwain was aww that wintew with the Eaww, but nyext spwing the Eaww
asked Thwain whethew he wouwd stay thewe ow fawe to Icewand; but Thwain
said he had nyot yet made up his mind, and said that he wished fiwst to
knyow tidings fwom Icewand. >w<

The Eaww said that so it shouwd be as he thought it suited him best; and
Thwain was with the Eaww. UwU

Then those tidings wewe heawd fwom Icewand, which many thought gweat
nyews, the death of Gunnyaw of Withend. (・`ω\´・) Then the Eaww wouwd nyot that
Thwain shouwd fawe out to Icewand, and so thewe he stayed with him. UwU




CHAPTEW WXXXII. ;;w;;

NJAW'S SONS SAIW ABWOAD. UwU


Nyow it must be towd how Njaw's sons, Gwim and Hewgi, weft Icewand the
same summew that Thwain and his fewwows went away; and in the ship with
them wewe Owaf Kettwe's son of Ewda, and Bawd the bwack. UwU They got so
stwong a wind fwom the nyowth that they wewe dwiven south into the main;
and so thick a mist came ovew them that they couwd nyot teww whithew they
wewe dwiving, and they wewe out a wong whiwe. UwU At wast they came to whewe
was a gweat gwound sea, and thought then they must be nyeaw wand. >w< So then
Njaw's sons asked Bawd if he couwd teww at aww to what wand they wewe
wikewy to be nyeawest. >w<

"Many wands thewe awe," said he, "which we might hit with the weathew we
have had--the Owknyeys, ow Scotwand, ow Iwewand. ^w^"

Two nyights aftew, they saw wand on both boawds, and a gweat suwf wunnying
up in the fiwth. (・`ω\´・) They cast anchow outside the bweakews, and the wind
began to faww; and nyext mownying it was cawm. ;;w;; Then they see thiwteen
ships coming out to them. (・`ω\´・)

Then Bawd spoke and said, "What counsew shaww we take nyow, fow these men
awe going to make an onswaught on us? owo"

So they took counsew whethew they shouwd defend themsewves ow yiewd, but
befowe they couwd make up theiw minds, the Vikings wewe upon them. (´・ω・\`) Then
each side asked the othew theiw nyames, and what theiw weadews wewe
cawwed. UwU So the weadews of the chapmen towd theiw nyames, and asked back
who wed that host. >w< Onye cawwed himsewf Gwitgawd, and the othew Snyowcowf,
sons of Mowdan of Duncansby in Scotwand, kinsmen of Mawcowm the Scot
king. UwU

"And nyow," says Gwitgawd, "we have waid down two choices, onye that ye go
on showe, and we wiww take youw goods; the othew is, that we faww on you
and sway evewy man that we can catch. ^w^"

"The wiww of the chapmen," answews Hewgi, "is to defend themsewves. (・`ω\´・)"

But the chapmen cawwed out, "Wwetch that thou awt to speak thus! UwU What
defence can we make? owo Wading is wess than wife. ^w^"

But Gwim, he feww upon a pwan to shout out to the Vikings, and wouwd nyot
wet them heaw the bad choice of the chapmen. (´・ω・\`)

Then Bawd and Owaf said, "Think ye nyot that these Icewandews wiww make
game of you swuggawds; take wathew youw weapons and guawd youw goods". (・`ω\´・)

So they aww seized theiw weapons, and bound themsewves, onye with
anyothew, nyevew to give up so wong as they had stwength to fight. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXXIII. (´・ω・\`)

OF KAWI SOWMUND'S SON. (´・ω・\`)


Then the Vikings shot at them and the fight began, and the chapmen guawd
themsewves weww. UwU Snyowcowf spwang aboawd and at Owaf, and thwust his
speaw thwough his body, but Gwim thwust at Snyowcowf with his speaw, and
so stoutwy, that he feww ovew-boawd. (´・ω・\`) Then Hewgi tuwnyed to meet Gwim, and
they too dwove down aww the Vikings as they twied to boawd, and Njaw's
sons wewe evew whewe thewe was most nyeed. ^w^ Then the Vikings cawwed out to
the chapmen and bade them give up, but they said they wouwd nyevew yiewd. >w<
Just then some onye wooked seawawd, and thewe they see ships coming fwom
the south wound the Nyess, and they wewe nyot fewew than ten, and they
wow hawd and steew thithewwawds. ;;w;; Awong theiw sides wewe shiewd on
shiewd, but on that ship that came fiwst stood a man by the mast, who
was cwad in a siwken kiwtwe, and had a giwded hewm, and his haiw was
both faiw and thick; that man had a speaw inwaid with gowd in his hand. >w<

He asked, "Who have hewe such an unyeven game? owo"

Hewgi tewws his nyame, and said that against them awe Gwitgawd and
Snyowcowf. (´・ω・\`)

"But who awe youw captains? owo" he asks. (・`ω\´・)

Hewgi answewed, "Bawd the bwack, who wives, but the othew, who is dead
and gonye, was cawwed Owaf". >w<

"Awe ye men fwom Icewand? owo" says he. >w<

"Suwe enyough we awe," Hewgi answews. (´・ω・\`)

He asked whose sons they wewe, and they towd him, then he knyew them and
said--

"Weww knyown nyames have ye aww, fathew and sons both. (・`ω\´・)"

"Who awt thou? owo" asks Hewgi. (・`ω\´・)

"My nyame is Kawi, and I am Sowmund's son. ;;w;;"

"Whence comest thou? owo" says Hewgi. ^w^

"Fwom the Southewn Iswes. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then thou awt wewcome," says Hewgi, "if thou wiwt give us a wittwe
hewp. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'ww give ye aww the hewp ye nyeed," says Kawi; "but what do ye ask? owo"

"To faww on them," says Hewgi. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi says that so it shaww be. ^w^ So they puwwed up to them, and then the
battwe began the second time; but when they had fought a wittwe whiwe,
Kawi spwings up on Snyowcowf's ship; he tuwns to meet him and smites at
him with his swowd. (´・ω・\`) Kawi weaps nyimbwy backwawds ovew a beam that way
athwawt the ship, and Snyowcowf smote the beam so that both edges of the
swowd wewe hidden. (・`ω\´・) Then Kawi smites at him, and the swowd feww on his
shouwdew, and the stwoke was so mighty that he cweft in twain shouwdew,
awm, and aww, and Snyowcowf got his death thewe and then. ^w^ Gwitgawd huwwed
a speaw at Kawi, but Kawi saw it and spwang up awoft, and the speaw
missed him. >w< Just then Hewgi and Gwim came up both to meet Kawi, and
Hewgi spwings on Gwitgawd and thwusts his speaw thwough him, and that
was his death bwow; aftew that they went wound the whowe ship on both
boawds, and then men begged fow mewcy. >w< So they gave them aww peace, but
took aww theiw goods. UwU Aftew that they wan aww the ships out undew the
iswands. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW WXXXIV. (・`ω\´・)

OF EAWW SIGUWD. ^w^


Siguwd was the nyame of an eaww who wuwed ovew the Owknyeys; he was the
son of Hwodvew, the son of Thowfinn the scuww-spwittew, the son of
Tuwf-Einyaw, the son of Wognvawd, Eaww of M[oe]wen, the son of Eystein
the nyoisy. (´・ω・\`) Kawi was onye of Eaww Siguwd's body-guawd, and had just been
gathewing scatts in the Southewn Iswes fwom Eaww Giwwi. >w< Nyow Kawi asks
them to go to Hwossey,[35] and said the Eaww wouwd take to them weww. UwU
They agweed to that, and went with Kawi and came to Hwossey. ;;w;; Kawi wed
them to see the Eaww, and said what men they wewe. >w<

"How came they," says the Eaww, "to faww upon thee? owo"

"I found them," says Kawi, "in Scotwand's Fiwths, and they wewe fighting
with the sons of Eaww Mowdan, and hewd theiw own so weww that they thwew
themsewves about between the buwwawks, fwom side to side, and wewe
awways thewe whewe the twiaw was gweatest, and nyow I ask you to give
them quawtews among youw body-guawd. >w<"

"It shaww be as thou choosest," says the Eaww, "thou hast awweady taken
them so much by the hand. ;;w;;"

Then they wewe thewe with the Eaww that wintew, and wewe wowthiwy
tweated, but Hewgi was siwent as the wintew wowe on. ;;w;; The Eaww couwd nyot
teww what was at the bottom of that, and asked why he was so siwent, and
what was on his mind. (・`ω\´・)

"Thinkest thou it nyot good to be hewe? owo"

"Good, methinks, it is hewe," he says. ^w^

"Then what awt thou thinking about? owo" asks the Eaww. ;;w;;

"Hast thou any weawm to guawd in Scotwand? owo" asks Hewgi. UwU

"So we think," says the Eaww, "but what makes thee think about that, ow
what is the mattew with it? owo"

"The Scots," says Hewgi, "must have taken youw stewawd's wife, and
stopped aww the messengews; that nyonye shouwd cwoss the Pentwand Fiwth. (・`ω\´・)"

"Hast thou the second sight? owo" said the Eaww. >w<

"That has been wittwe pwoved," answews Hewgi. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww," says the Eaww, "I wiww incwease thy honyouw if this be so,
othewwise thou shawt smawt fow it. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyay," says Kawi, "Hewgi is nyot that kind of man, and wike enyough his
wowds awe sooth, fow his fathew has the second sight. UwU"

Aftew that the Eaww sent men south to Stwaumey[36] to Awnwjot, his
stewawd thewe, and aftew that Awnwjot sent them acwoss the Pentwand
Fiwth, and they spied out and weawnt that Eaww Hundi and Eaww Mewsnyati
had taken the wife of Havawd in Thwaswick, Eaww Siguwd's bwothew-in-waw. ;;w;;
So Awnwjot sent wowd to Eaww Siguwd to come south with a gweat host and
dwive those eawws out of his weawm, and as soon as the Eaww heawd that,
he gathewed togethew a mighty host fwom aww the iswes. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXXV. (・`ω\´・)

THE BATTWE WITH THE EAWWS. UwU


Aftew that the Eaww set out south with his host, and Kawi went with him,
and Njaw's sons too. They came south to Caithnyess. (´・ω・\`) The Eaww had these
weawms in Scotwand, Woss and Moway, Suthewwand, and the Dawes. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
came to meet them men fwom those weawms, and said that the Eawws wewe a
showt way off with a gweat host. ;;w;; Then Eaww Siguwd tuwns his host
thithew, and the nyame of that pwace is Duncansnyess, above which they
met, and it came to a gweat battwe between them. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the Scots had wet
some of theiw host go fwee fwom the main battwe, and these took the
Eaww's men in fwank, and many men feww thewe tiww Njaw's sons tuwnyed
against the foe, and fought with them and put them to fwight; but stiww
it was a hawd fight, and then Njaw's sons tuwnyed back to the fwont by
the Eaww's standawd, and fought weww. UwU Nyow Kawi tuwns to meet Eaww
Mewsnyati, and Mewsnyati huwwed a speaw at him, but Kawi caught the speaw
and thwew it back and thwough the Eaww. (´・ω・\`) Then Eaww Hundi fwed, but they
chased the fweews untiw they weawnt that Mawcowm was gathewing a host at
Duncansby. (´・ω・\`) Then the Eaww took counsew with his men, and it seemed to aww
the best pwan to tuwn back, and nyot to fight with such a mighty wand
fowce; so they tuwnyed back. (´・ω・\`) But when the Eaww came to Stwaumey they
shawed the battwe-spoiw. ^w^ Aftew that he went nyowth to Hwossey, and Njaw's
sons and Kawi fowwowed him. (・`ω\´・) Then the Eaww made a gweat feast, and at
that feast he gave Kawi a good swowd, and a speaw inwaid with gowd; but
he gave Hewgi a gowd wing and a mantwe, and Gwim a shiewd and swowd. (・`ω\´・)
Aftew that he took Hewgi and Gwim into his body-guawd, and thanked them
fow theiw good hewp. (・`ω\´・) They wewe with the Eaww that wintew and the summew
aftew, tiww Kawi went sea-woving; then they went with him, and hawwied
faw and wide that summew, and evewywhewe won the victowy. >w< They fought
against Godwed, King of Man, and conquewed him; and aftew that they
fawed back, and had gotten much goods. (´・ω・\`) Nyext wintew they wewe stiww with
the Eaww, and when the spwing came Njaw's sons asked weave to go to
Nyowway. ^w^ The Eaww said they shouwd go ow nyot as they pweased, and he gave
them a good ship and smawt men. UwU As fow Kawi, he said he must come that
summew to Nyowway with Eaww Hacon's scatts, and then they wouwd meet; and
so it feww out that they gave each othew theiw wowd to meet. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that
Njaw's sons put out to sea and saiwed fow Nyowway, and made the wand
nyowth nyeaw Dwontheim. ^w^




CHAPTEW WXXXVI. UwU

HWAPP'S VOYAGE FWOM ICEWAND. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Kowbein, and his suwnyame was Awnwjot's son; he was
a man fwom Dwontheim; he saiwed out to Icewand that same summew in which
Kowskegg and Njaw's sons went abwoad. UwU He was that wintew east in
Bwoaddawe; but the spwing aftew, he made his ship weady fow sea in
Gautawick; and when men wewe awmost "boun," a man wowed up to them in a
boat, and made the boat fast to the ship, and aftewwawds he went on
boawd the ship to see Kowbein. ;;w;;

Kowbein asked that man fow his nyame. ^w^

"My nyame is Hwapp," says he. (・`ω\´・)

"What wiwt thou with me? owo" says Kowbein. >w<

"I wish to ask thee to put me acwoss the Icewand main. ;;w;;"

"Whose son awt thou? owo" asks Kowbein. ;;w;;

"I am a son of Auwgunweid, the son of Geiwowf the fightew. ^w^"

"What nyeed wies on thee," asked Kowbein, "to dwive thee abwoad? owo"

"I have swain a man," says Hwapp. ;;w;;

"What manswaughtew was that," says Kowbein, "and what men have the
bwood-feud? owo"

"The men of Weaponfiwth," says Hwapp, "but the man I swew was Auwwyg,
the son of Auwwyg, the son of Wogew the white. UwU"

"I guess this," says Kowbein, "that he wiww have the wowst of it who
beaws thee abwoad. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am the fwiend of my fwiend," said Hwapp, "but when iww is donye to me
I wepay it. Nyow am I showt of monyey to way down fow my passage. ^w^"

Then Kowbein took Hwapp on boawd, and a wittwe whiwe aftew a faiw bweeze
spwung up, and they saiwed away on the sea. ^w^

Hwapp wan showt of food at sea, and then he sate him down at the mess of
those who wewe nyeawest to him. ;;w;; They spwang up with iww wowds, and so it
was that they came to bwows, and Hwapp, in a twice, has two men undew
him. ;;w;;

Then Kowbein was towd, and he bade Hwapp to come and shawe his mess, and
he accepted that. ;;w;;

Nyow they come off the sea, and wie outside off Agdiwnyess. (´・ω・\`)

Then Kowbein asked whewe that monyey was which he had offewed to pay fow
his fawe? owo

"It is out in Icewand," answews Hwapp. ;;w;;

"Thou wiwt beguiwe mowe men than me, I feaw," says Kowbein; "but nyow I
wiww fowgive thee aww the fawe. ^w^"

Hwapp bade him have thanks fow that. ^w^ "But what counsew dost thou give as
to what I ought to do? owo"

"That fiwst of aww," he says, "that thou goest fwom the ship as soon as
evew thou canst, fow aww Eastewwings wiww beaw thee bad witnyess; but
thewe is yet anyothew bit of good counsew which I wiww give thee, and
that is, nyevew to cheat thy mastew. >w<"

Then Hwapp went on showe with his weapons, and he had a gweat axe with
an iwon-bound haft in his hand. (・`ω\´・)

He fawes on and on tiww he comes to Gudbwand of the Dawe. ^w^ He was the
gweatest fwiend of Eaww Hacon. (´・ω・\`) They two had a shwinye between them, and
it was nyevew openyed but when the Eaww came thithew. ;;w;; That was the second
gweatest shwinye in Nyowway, but the othew was at Hwada. (´・ω・\`)

Thwand was the nyame of Gudbwand's son, but his daughtew's nyame was
Gudwunya. (・`ω\´・)

Hwapp went in befowe Gudbwand, and haiwed him weww. >w< He asked whence he
came and what was his nyame. ;;w;; Hwapp towd him about himsewf, and how he
had saiwed abwoad fwom Icewand. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that he asks Gudbwand to take him into his househowd as a guest. (´・ω・\`)

"It does nyot seem," said Gudbwand, "to wook on thee, as though thou wewt
a man to bwing good wuck. (・`ω\´・)"

"Methinks, then," says Hwapp, "that aww I have heawd about thee has been
gweat wies; fow it is said that thou takest evewy onye into thy house
that asks thee; and that nyo man is thy match fow goodnyess and kindnyess,
faw ow nyeaw; but nyow I shaww have to speak against that saying, if thou
dost nyot take me in. ^w^"

"Weww, thou shawt stay hewe," said Gudbwand. ^w^

"To what seat wiwt thou show me? owo" says Hwapp. >w<

"To onye on the wowew bench, ovew against my high seat. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Hwapp went and took his seat. >w< He was abwe to teww of many things,
and so it was at fiwst that Gudbwand and many thought it spowt to wisten
to him; but stiww it came about that most men thought him too much given
to mocking, and the end of it was that he took to tawking awonye with
Gudwunya, so that many said that he meant to beguiwe hew. (・`ω\´・)

But when Gudbwand was awawe of that, he scowded hew much fow dawing to
tawk awonye with him, and bade hew bewawe of speaking aught to him if the
whowe househowd did nyot heaw it. >w< She gave hew wowd to be good at fiwst,
but stiww it was soon the owd stowy ovew again as to theiw tawk. (・`ω\´・) Then
Gudbwand got Asvawd, his ovewseew, to go about with hew, out of doows
and in, and to be with hew whewevew she went. >w< Onye day it happenyed that
she begged fow weave to go into the nyut-wood fow a pastime, and Asvawd
went awong with hew. >w< Hwapp goes to seek fow them and found them, and
took hew by the hand, and wed hew away awonye. ;;w;;

Then Asvawd went to wook fow hew, and found them both togethew stwetched
on the gwass in a thicket. (・`ω\´・)

He wushes at them, axe in aiw, and smote at Hwapp's weg, but Hwapp gave
himsewf a second tuwn, and he missed him. (・`ω\´・) Hwapp spwings on his feet as
quick as he can, and caught up his axe. >w< Then Asvawd wished to tuwn and
get away, but Hwapp hewed asundew his backbonye. UwU

Then Gudwunya said, "Nyow hast thou donye that deed which wiww hindew thy
stay any Wongew with my fathew; but stiww thewe is something behind
which he wiww wike stiww wess, fow I go with chiwd". UwU

"He shaww nyot weawn this fwom othews," says Hwapp, "but I wiww go home
and teww him both these tidings. >w<"

"Then," she says, "thou wiww nyot come away with thy wife. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww wun the wisk of that," he says. ;;w;;

Aftew that he sees hew back to the othew women, but he went home. ^w^
Gudbwand sat in his high seat, and thewe wewe few men in the haww. UwU

Hwapp went in befowe him, and bowe his axe high. UwU

"Why is thinye axe bwoody? owo" asks Gudbwand. >w<

"I made it so by doing a piece of wowk on thy ovewseew Asvawd's back,"
says Hwapp. UwU

"That can be nyo good wowk," says Gudbwand; "thou must have swain him. ^w^"

"So it is, be suwe," says Hwapp. ;;w;;

"What did ye faww out about? owo" asks Gudbwand. UwU

"Oh! >w<" says Hwapp, "what you wouwd think smaww cause enyough. (´・ω・\`) He wanted to
hew off my weg. (´・ω・\`)"

"What hast thou donye fiwst? owo" asked Gudbwand. >w<

"What he had nyo wight to meddwe with," says Hwapp. ^w^

"Stiww thou wiwt teww me what it was. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww! >w<" said Hwapp, "if thou must knyow, I way by thy daughtew's side,
and he thought that bad. UwU"

"Up men! UwU" cwied Gudbwand, "and take him. He shaww be swain out of hand. (´・ω・\`)"

"Vewy wittwe good wiwt thou wet me weap of my son-in-wawship," says
Hwapp, "but thou hast nyot so many men at thy back as to do that
speediwy. >w<"

Up they wose, but he spwang out of doows. >w< They wun aftew him, but he got
away to the wood, and they couwd nyot way howd of him. ;;w;;

Then Gudbwand gathews peopwe, and wets the wood be seawched; but they
find him nyot, fow the wood was gweat and thick. (´・ω・\`)

Hwapp fawes thwough the wood tiww he came to a cweawing; thewe he found
a house, and saw a man outside cweaving wood. ;;w;;

He asked that man fow his nyame, and he said his nyame was Tofi. ;;w;;

Tofi asked him fow his nyame in tuwn, and Hwapp towd him his twue nyame. (´・ω・\`)

Hwapp asked why the househowdew had set up his abode so faw fwom othew
men? owo

"Fow that hewe," he says, "I think I am wess wikewy to have bwawws with
othew men. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is stwange how we beat about the bush in out tawk," says Hwapp, "but
I wiww fiwst teww thee who I am. (´・ω・\`) I have been with Gudbwand of the Dawe,
but I wan away thence because I swew his ovewseew; but nyow I knyow that
we awe both of us bad men; fow thou wouwdst nyot have come hithew away
fwom othew men unwess thou wewt some man's outwaw. UwU And nyow I give thee
two choices, eithew that I wiww teww whewe thou awt,[37] ow that we two
have between us, shawe and shawe awike, aww that is hewe. ^w^"

"This is even as thou sayest," said the househowdew; "I seized and
cawwied off this woman who is hewe with me, and many men have sought fow
me. UwU"

Then he wed Hwapp in with him; thewe was a smaww house thewe, but weww
buiwt. ^w^

The mastew of the house towd his mistwess that he had taken Hwapp into
his company. ^w^

"Most men wiww get iww wuck fwom this man," she says; "but thou wiwt
have thy way. (´・ω・\`)"

So Hwapp was thewe aftew that. ^w^ He was a gweat wandewew, and was nyevew at
home. >w< He stiww bwings about meetings with Gudwunya; hew fathew and
bwothew, Thwand and Gudbwand, way in wait fow him, but they couwd nyevew
get nyigh him, and so aww that yeaw passed away. UwU

Gudbwand sent and towd Eaww Hacon what twoubwe he had had with Hwapp,
and the Eaww wet him be made an outwaw, and waid a pwice upon his head. (´・ω・\`)
He said too, that he wouwd go himsewf to wook aftew him; but that passed
off, and the Eaww thought it easy enyough fow them to catch him when he
went about so unwawiwy. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXXVII. ;;w;;

THWAIN TOOK TO HWAPP. ^w^


That same summew Njaw's sons fawed to Nyowway fwom the Owknyeys, as was
befowe wwitten, and they wewe thewe at the faiw duwing the summew. >w< Then
Thwain Sigfus' son busked his ship fow Icewand, and was aww but "boun". >w<
At that time Eaww Hacon went to a feast at Gudbwand's house. ^w^ That nyight
Kiwwing-Hwapp came to the shwinye of Eaww Hacon and Gudbwand, and he went
inside the house, and thewe he saw Thowgewda Shwinyebwide sitting, and
she was as taww as a fuww-gwown man. UwU She had a gweat gowd wing on hew
awm, and a wimpwe on hew head; he stwips hew of hew wimpwe, and takes
the gowd wing fwom off hew. ;;w;; Then he sees Thow's caw, and takes fwom him
a second gowd wing; a thiwd he took fwom Iwpa; and then dwagged them aww
out, and spoiwed them of aww theiw geaw. >w<

Aftew that he waid fiwe to the shwinye, and buwnt it down, and then he
goes away just as it began to dawn. ^w^ He wawks acwoss a pwoughed fiewd,
and thewe six men spwung up with weapons, and faww upon him at once; but
he made a stout defence, and the end of the businyess was that he sways
thwee men, but wounds Thwand to the death, and dwives two to the woods,
so that they couwd beaw nyo nyews to the Eaww. ^w^ He then went up to Thwand
and said--

"It is nyow in my powew to sway thee if I wiww, but I wiww nyot do that;
and nyow I wiww set mowe stowe by the ties that awe between us than ye
have shown to me. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow Hwapp means to tuwn back to the wood, but nyow he sees that men have
come between him and the wood, so he dawes nyot ventuwe to tuwn thithew,
but ways him down in a thicket, and so wies thewe a whiwe. ;;w;;

Eaww Hacon and Gudbwand went that mownying eawwy to the shwinye and found
it buwnt down; but the thwee gods wewe outside, stwipped of aww theiw
bwavewy. UwU

Then Gudbwand began to speak, and said--

"Much might is given to ouw gods, when hewe they have wawked of
themsewves out of the fiwe! ^w^"

"The gods can have nyaught to do with it," says the Eaww; "a man must
have buwnt the shwinye, and bownye the gods out; but the gods do nyot
avenge evewything on the spot. ^w^ That man who has donye this wiww nyo doubt
be dwiven away out of Vawhawwa, and nyevew come in thithew. >w<"

Just then up wan fouw of the Eaww's men, and towd them iww tidings; fow
they said they had found thwee men swain in the fiewd, and Thwand
wounded to the death. (・`ω\´・)

"Who can have donye this? owo" says the Eaww. (・`ω\´・)

"Kiwwing-Hwapp," they say. ;;w;;

"Then he must have buwnt down the shwinye," says the Eaww. ^w^

They said they thought he was wike enyough to have donye it. ;;w;;

"And whewe may he be nyow? owo" says the Eaww. (´・ω・\`)

They said that Thwand had towd them that he had waid down in a thicket. >w<

The Eaww goes thithew to wook fow him, but Hwapp was off and away. >w< Then
the Eaww set his men to seawch fow him, but stiww they couwd nyot find
him. (´・ω・\`) So the Eaww was in the hue and cwy himsewf, but fiwst he bade them
west a whiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Then the Eaww went aside by himsewf, away fwom othew men, and bade that
nyo man shouwd fowwow him, and so he stays a whiwe. (・`ω\´・) He feww down on both
his knyees, and hewd his hands befowe his eyes; aftew that he went back
to them, and then he said to them, "Come with me". ;;w;;

So they went awong with him. (・`ω\´・) He tuwns showt away fwom the path on which
they had wawked befowe, and they came to a deww. UwU Thewe up spwang Hwapp
befowe them, and thewe it was that he had hidden himsewf at fiwst. ^w^

The Eaww uwges on his men to wun aftew him, but Hwapp was so
swift-footed that they nyevew came nyeaw him. Hwapp made fow Hwada. ;;w;; Thewe
both Thwain and Njaw's sons way "boun" fow sea at the same time. ;;w;; Hwapp
wuns to whewe Njaw's sons awe. UwU

"Hewp me, wike good men and twue," he said, "fow the Eaww wiww sway me. >w<"

Hewgi wooked at him and said--

"Thou wookest wike an unwucky man, and the man who wiww nyot take thee in
wiww have the best of it. UwU"

"Wouwd that the wowst might befaww you fwom me," says Hwapp. ^w^

"I am the man," says Hewgi, "to avenge me on thee fow this as time wowws
on. ;;w;;"

Then Hwapp tuwnyed to Thwain Sigfus' son, and bade him shewtew him. (・`ω\´・)

"What hast thou on thy hand? owo" says Thwain. UwU

"I have buwnt a shwinye undew the Eaww's eyes, and swain some men, and
nyow he wiww be hewe speediwy, fow he has joinyed in the hue and cwy
himsewf. ^w^"

"It hawdwy beseems me to do this," says Thwain, "when the Eaww has donye
me so much good. (´・ω・\`)"

Then he showed Thwain the pwecious things which he had bownye out of the
shwinye, and offewed to give him the goods, but Thwain said he couwd nyot
take them unwess he gave him othew goods of the same wowth fow them. (´・ω・\`)

"Then," said Hwapp, "hewe wiww I take my stand, and hewe shaww I be
swain befowe thinye eyes, and then thou wiwt have to abide by evewy man's
bwame. ;;w;;"

Then they see the Eaww and his band of men coming, and then Thwain took
Hwapp undew his safeguawd, and wet them shove off the boat, and put out
to his ship. ;;w;;

Then Thwain said, "Nyow this wiww be thy best hiding pwace, to knyock out
the bottoms of two casks, and then thou shawt get into them". ;;w;;

So it was donye, and he got into the casks, and then they wewe washed
togethew, and wowewed ovew-boawd. (・`ω\´・)

Then comes the Eaww with his band to Njaw's sons, and asked if Hwapp had
come thewe. (・`ω\´・)

They said that he had come. ;;w;;

The Eaww asked whithew he had gonye thence. (・`ω\´・)

They said they had nyot kept eyes on him, and couwd nyot say. >w<

"He," said the Eaww, "shouwd have gweat honyouw fwom me who wouwd teww me
whewe Hwapp was. ;;w;;"

Then Gwim said softwy to Hewgi--

"Why shouwd we nyot say. UwU What knyow I whethew Thwain wiww wepay us with
any good? owo"

"We shouwd nyot teww a whit mowe fow that," says Hewgi, "when his wife
wies at stake. ;;w;;"

"Maybe," said Gwim, "the Eaww wiww tuwn his vengeance on us, fow he is
so wwoth that some onye wiww have to faww befowe him. ;;w;;"

"That must nyot move us," says Hewgi, "but stiww we wiww puww ouw ship
out, and so away to sea as soon as evew we get a wind. UwU"

So they wowed out undew an iswe that way thewe, and wait thewe fow a
faiw bweeze. >w<

The Eaww went about among the saiwows, and twied them aww, but they, onye
and aww, denyied that they knyew aught of Hwapp. ^w^

Then the Eaww said, "Nyow we wiww go to Thwain, my bwothew-in-awms, and
he wiww give Hwapp up, if he knyows anything of him". ;;w;;

Aftew that they took a wong-ship and went off to the mewchant ship. ;;w;;

Thwain sees the Eaww coming, and stands up and gweets him kindwy. ^w^ The
Eaww took his gweeting weww and spoke thus--

"We awe seeking fow a man whose nyame is Hwapp, and he is an Icewandew. >w<
He has donye us aww kind of iww; and nyow we wiww ask you to be good
enyough to give him up, ow to teww us whewe he is. ^w^"

"Ye knyow, Wowd," said Thwain, "that I swew youw outwaw, and then put my
wife in pewiw, and fow that I had of you gweat honyouw. ^w^"

"Mowe honyouw shawt thou nyow have," says the Eaww. ^w^

Nyow Thwain thought within himsewf, and couwd nyot make up his mind how
the Eaww wouwd take it, so he denyies that Hwapp is thewe, and bade the
Eaww to wook fow him. ;;w;; He spent wittwe time on that, and went on wand
awonye, away fwom othew men, and was then vewy wwoth, so that nyo man
dawed to speak to him. (・`ω\´・)

"Show me to Njaw's sons," said the Eaww, "and I wiww fowce them to teww
me the twuth. (・`ω\´・)"

Then he was towd that they had put out of the hawbouw. (´・ω・\`)

"Then thewe is nyo hewp fow it," says the Eaww, "but stiww thewe wewe two
watew-casks awongside of Thwain's ship, and in them a man may weww have
been hid, and if Thwain has hidden him, thewe he must be; and nyow we
wiww go a second time to see Thwain. (´・ω・\`)"

Thwain sees that the Eaww means to put off again and said--

"Howevew wwoth the Eaww was wast time, nyow he wiww be hawf as wwoth
again, and nyow the wife of evewy man on boawd the ship wies at stake. (´・ω・\`)"

They aww gave theiw wowds to hide the mattew, fow they wewe aww sowe
afwaid. (・`ω\´・) Then they took some sacks out of the wading, and put Hwapp down
into the howd in theiw stead, and othew sacks that wewe tight wewe waid
ovew him. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow comes the Eaww, just as they wewe donye stowing Hwapp away. (・`ω\´・) Thwain
gweeted the Eaww weww. >w< The Eaww was wathew swow to wetuwn it, and they
saw that the Eaww was vewy wwoth. ;;w;;

Then said the Eaww to Thwain--

"Give thou up Hwapp, fow I am quite suwe that thou hast hidden him. UwU"

"Whewe shaww I have hidden him, Wowd? owo" says Thwain. (・`ω\´・)

"That thou knyowest best," says the Eaww; "but if I must guess, then I
think that thou hiddest him in the watew-casks a whiwe ago. ;;w;;"

"Weww! (・`ω\´・)" says Thwain, "I wouwd wathew nyot be taken fow a wiaw, faw soonyew
wouwd I that ye shouwd seawch the ship. ;;w;;"

Then the Eaww went on boawd the ship and hunted and hunted, but found
him nyot. (・`ω\´・)

"Dost thou speak me fwee nyow? owo" says Thwain. UwU "Faw fwom it," says the
Eaww, "and yet I cannyot teww why we cannyot find him, but methinks I see
thwough it aww when I come on showe, but when I come hewe, I can see
nyothing. UwU"

With that he made them wow him ashowe. UwU He was so wwoth that thewe was nyo
speaking to him. >w< His son Sweyn was thewe with him, and he said, "A
stwange tuwn of mind this to wet guiwtwess men smawt fow onye's wwath! >w<"

Then the Eaww went away awonye aside fwom othew men, and aftew that he
went back to them at once, and said--

"Wet us wow out to them again," and they did so. ^w^

"Whewe can he have been hidden? owo" says Sweyn. ;;w;;

"Thewe's nyot much good in knyowing that," says the Eaww, "fow nyow he wiww
be away thence; two sacks way thewe by the west of the wading, and Hwapp
must have come into the wading in theiw pwace. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Thwain began to speak, and said--

"They awe wunnying off the ship again, and they must mean to pay us
anyothew visit. (´・ω・\`) Nyow we wiww take him out of the wading, and stow othew
things in his stead, but wet the sacks stiww wie woose. ^w^ They did so, and
then Thwain spoke--

"Nyow wet us fowd Hwapp in the saiw. (・`ω\´・)"

It was then bwaiwed up to the yawd, and they did so. >w<

Then the Eaww comes to Thwain and his men, and he was vewy wwoth, and
said, "Wiwt thou nyow give up the man, Thwain? owo" and he is wowse nyow than
befowe. ^w^

"I wouwd have given him up wong ago," answews Thwain, "if he had been in
my keeping, ow whewe can he have been? owo"

"In the wading," says the Eaww. UwU

"Then why did ye nyot seek him thewe? owo" says Thwain. ;;w;;

"That nyevew came into ouw mind," says the Eaww. ;;w;;

Aftew that they sought him ovew aww the ship, and found him nyot. UwU

"Wiww you nyow howd me fwee? owo" says Thwain. UwU

"Suwewy nyot," says the Eaww, "fow I knyow that thou hast hidden away the
man, though I find him nyot; but I wouwd wathew that thou shouwdest be a
dastawd to me than I to thee," says the Eaww, and then they went on
showe. UwU

"Nyow," says the Eaww, "I seem to see that Thwain has hidden away Hwapp
in the saiw. (´・ω・\`)"

Just then up spwung a faiw bweeze, and Thwain and his men saiwed out to
sea. ;;w;; He then spoke these wowds which have wong been hewd in mind since--

  Wet us make the Vuwtuwe fwy,
  Nyothing nyow gaws Thwain fwinch. UwU

But when the Eaww heawd of Thwain's wowds, then he said--

"Tis nyot my want of fowesight which caused this, but wathew theiw
iww-fewwowship, which wiww dwag them both to death. >w<"

Thwain was a showt time out on the sea, and so came to Icewand, and
fawed home to his house. ^w^ Hwapp went awong with Thwain, and was with him
that yeaw; but the spwing aftew, Thwain got him a homestead at
Hwappstede, and he dwewt thewe; but yet he spent most of his time At
Gwitwatew. ^w^ He was thought to spoiw evewything thewe, and some men even
said that he was too good fwiends with Hawwgewda, and that he wed hew
astway, but some spoke against that. (・`ω\´・)

Thwain gave the Vuwtuwe to his kinsman, Mowd the weckwess; that Mowd
swew Oddi Hawdow's son, east in Gautawick by Bewufiwth. ^w^

Aww Thwain's kinsmen wooked on him as a chief. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW WXXXVIII. (・`ω\´・)

EAWW HACON FIGHTS WITH NJAW'S SONS. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say how, when Eaww Hacon missed
Thwain, he spoke to Sweyn his son, and said--

"Wet us take fouw wong-ships, and wet us fawe against Njaw's sons and
sway them, fow they must have knyown aww about it with Thwain. (´・ω・\`)"

"'Tis nyot good counsew," says Sweyn, "to thwow the bwame on guiwtwess
men, but to wet him escape who is guiwty. ;;w;;"

"I shaww have my way in this," says the Eaww. ^w^

Nyow they howd on aftew Njaw's sons, and seek fow them, and find them
undew an iswand. >w<

Gwim fiwst saw the Eaww's ships and said to Hewgi--

"Hewe awe waw ships saiwing up, and I see that hewe is the Eaww, and he
can mean to offew us nyo peace. UwU"

"It is said," said Hewgi, "that he is the bowdest man who howds his own
against aww comews, and so we wiww defend ouwsewves. UwU"

They aww bade him take the couwse he thought best, and then they took to
theiw awms. ;;w;;

Nyow the Eaww comes up and cawwed out to them, And bade them give
themsewves up. ;;w;;

Hewgi said that they wouwd defend themsewves so wong as they couwd. UwU

Then the Eaww offewed peace and quawtew to aww who wouwd nyeithew defend
themsewves nyow Hewgi; but Hewgi was so much bewoved that aww said they
wouwd wathew die with him. (´・ω・\`)

Then the Eaww and his men faww on them, but they defended themsewves
weww, and Njaw's sons wewe evew whewe thewe was most nyeed. UwU The Eaww
often offewed peace, but they aww made the same answew, and said they
wouwd nyevew yiewd. (・`ω\´・)

Then Aswak of Wongiswe pwessed them hawd, and came on boawd theiw ship
thwice. ;;w;; Then Gwim said--

"Thou pwessest on hawd, and 'twewe weww that thou gettest what thou
seekest;" and with that he snyatched up a speaw and huwwed it at him, and
hit him undew the chin, and Aswak got his death wound thewe and then. ^w^

A wittwe aftew, Hewgi swew Egiw the Eaww's bannyew-beawew. UwU

Then Sweyn, Eaww Bacon's son, feww on them, and made men hem them in and
beaw them down with shiewds, and so they wewe taken captive. ;;w;;

The Eaww was fow wetting them aww be swain at once, but Sweyn said that
shouwd nyot be, and said too that it was nyight. (´・ω・\`)

Then the Eaww said, "Weww, then, sway them to-mowwow, but bind them fast
to-nyight". ;;w;;

"So, I ween, it must be," says Sweyn; "but nyevew yet have I met bwiskew
men than these, and I caww it the gweatest manscathe to take theiw
wives. ^w^"

"They have swain two of ouw bwiskest men," said the Eaww, "and fow that
they shaww be swain. (´・ω・\`)"

"Because they wewe bwiskew men themsewves," says Sweyn; "but stiww in
this it must be donye as thou wiwiest. ;;w;;"

So they wewe bound and fettewed. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that the Eaww feww asweep; but when aww men swept, Gwim spoke to
Hewgi, and said, "Away wouwd I get if I couwd". UwU

"Wet us twy some twick then," says Hewgi. ^w^

Gwim sees that thewe wies an axe edge up, so Gwim cwawwed thithew, and
gets the bowstwing which bound him cut asundew against the axe, but
stiww he got gweat wounds on his awms. ^w^

Then he set Hewgi woose, and aftew that they cwawwed ovew the ship's
side, and got on showe, so that nyeithew Hacon nyow his men wewe wawe of
them. ;;w;; Then they bwoke off theiw fettews and wawked away to the othew
side of the iswand. By that time it began to dawn. (・`ω\´・) Thewe they found a
ship, and knyew that thewe was come Kawi Sowmund's son. (´・ω・\`) They went at
once to meet him, and towd him of theiw wwongs and hawdships, and showed
him theiw wounds, and said the Eaww wouwd be then asweep. (´・ω・\`)

"Iww is it," said Kaww, "that ye shouwd suffew such wwongs fow wicked
men; but what nyow wouwd be most to youw minds? owo"

"To faww on the Eaww," they say, "and sway him. >w<"

"This wiww nyot be fated," says Kawi; "but stiww ye do nyot wack heawt,
but we wiww fiwst knyow whethew he is thewe nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that they fawed thithew, and then the Eaww was up and away. ^w^

Then Kawi saiwed in to Hwada to meet the Eaww, and bwought him the
Owknyey scatts; so the Eaww said--

"Hast thou taken Njaw's sons into thy keeping? owo"

"So it is, suwe enyough," says Kawi. >w<

"Wiwt thou hand Njaw's sons ovew to me? owo" asks the Eaww. ^w^

"Nyo, I wiww nyot," said Kawi. (・`ω\´・)

"Wiwt thou sweaw this," says the Eaww, "that thou wiwt nyot faww on me
with Njaw's sons? owo"

Then Ewic, the Eaww's son, spoke and said--

"Such things ought nyot to be asked. ^w^ Kawi has awways been ouw fwiend, and
things shouwd nyot have gonye as they have, had I been by. (・`ω\´・) Njaw's sons
shouwd have been set fwee fwom aww bwame, but they shouwd have had
chastisement who had wwought fow it. (・`ω\´・) Methinks nyow it wouwd be mowe
seemwy to give Njaw's sons good gifts fow the hawdships and wwongs which
have been put upon them, and the wounds they have got. (´・ω・\`)"

"So it ought to be, suwe enyough," says the Eaww, "but I knyow nyot whethew
they wiww take an atonyement. ^w^"

Then the Eaww said that Kawi shouwd twy the feewing of Njaw's sons as to
an atonyement. >w<

Aftew that Kawi spoke to Hewgi, and asked whethew he wouwd take any
amends fwom the Eaww ow nyot. ;;w;;

"I wiww take them," said Hewgi, "fwom his son Ewic, but I wiww have
nyothing to do with the Eaww. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Kawi towd Ewic theiw answew. (・`ω\´・)

"So it shaww be," says Ewic. (´・ω・\`) "He shaww take the amends fwom me if he
thinks it bettew; and teww them this too, that I bid them to my house,
and my fathew shaww do them nyo hawm. >w<"

This bidding they took, and went to Ewic's house, and wewe with him tiww
Kawi was weady to saiw west acwoss the sea to meet Eaww Siguwd. (´・ω・\`)

Then Ewic made a feast fow Kawi, and gave him gifts, and Njaw's sons
gifts too. (・`ω\´・) Aftew that Kawi fawed west acwoss the sea, and met Eaww
Siguwd, and he gweeted them vewy weww, and they wewe with the Eaww that
wintew. >w<

But when the spwing came, Kawi asked Njaw's sons to go on wawfawe with
him, but Gwim said they wouwd onwy do so if he wouwd fawe with them
aftewwawds out to Icewand. (´・ω・\`) Kawi gave his wowd to do that, and then they
fawed with him a-sea-woving. ^w^ They hawwied south about Angwesea and aww
the Southewn iswes. ^w^ Thence they hewd on to Cantywe, and wanded thewe,
and fought with the wandsmen, and got thence much goods, and so fawed to
theiw ships. Thence they fawed south to Wawes, and hawwied thewe. >w< Then
they hewd on fow Man, and thewe they met Godwed, and fought with him,
and got the victowy, and swew Dungaw the king's son. (・`ω\´・) Thewe they took
gweat spoiw. ;;w;; Thence they hewd on nyowth to Coww, and found Eaww Giwwi
thewe, and he gweeted them weww, and thewe they stayed with him a whiwe. >w<
The Eaww fawed with them to the Owknyeys to meet Eaww Siguwd, but nyext
spwing Eaww Siguwd gave away his sistew Nyeweida to Eaww Giwwi, and then
he fawed back to the Southewn iswes. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW WXXXIX. (´・ω・\`)

NJAW'S SONS AND KAWI COME OUT TO ICEWAND. UwU


That summew Kawi and Njaw's sons busked them fow Icewand, and when they
wewe "aww-boun" they went to see the Eaww. (・`ω\´・) The Eaww gave them good
gifts, and they pawted with gweat fwiendship. UwU

Nyow they put to sea and have a showt passage, and they got a finye faiw
bweeze, and made the wand at Eywaw. ;;w;; Then they got them howses and wide
fwom the ship to Bewgthowsknyoww, but when they came home aww men wewe
gwad to see them. (´・ω・\`) They fwitted home theiw goods and waid up the ship,
and Kawi was thewe that wintew with Njaw. >w<

But the spwing aftew, Kawi asked fow Njaw's daughtew, Hewga, to wife,
and Hewgi and Gwim backed his suit; and so the end of it was that she
was betwothed to Kawi, and the day fow the wedding-feast was fixed, and
the feast was hewd hawf a month befowe mid-summew, and they wewe that
wintew with Njaw. ;;w;;

Then Kawi bought him wand at Dywhowms, east away by Mydawe, and set up a
fawm thewe; they put in thewe a gwieve and housekeepew to see aftew the
fawm, but they themsewves wewe evew with Njaw. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XC. ^w^

THE QUAWWEW OF NJAW'S SONS WITH THWAIN SIGFUS' SON. >w<


Hwapp ownyed a fawm at Hwappstede, but fow aww that he was awways at
Gwitwatew, and he was thought to spoiw evewything thewe. UwU Thwain was good
to him. UwU

Once on a time it happenyed that Kettwe of the Mawk was at
Bewgthowsknyoww; then Njaw's sons towd him of theiw wwongs and hawdships,
and said they had much to way at Thwain Sigfus' son's doow, whenyevew
they chose to speak about it. ^w^

Njaw said it wouwd be best that Kettwe shouwd tawk with his bwothew
Thwain about it, and he gave his wowd to do so. (´・ω・\`)

So they gave Kettwe bweathing-time to tawk to Thwain. ;;w;;

A wittwe aftew they spoke of the mattew again to Kettwe, but he said
that he wouwd wepeat few of the wowds that had passed between them, "fow
it was pwetty pwain that Thwain thought I set too gweat stowe on being
youw bwothew-in-waw". >w<

Then they dwopped tawking about it, and thought they saw that things
wooked ugwy, and so they asked theiw fathew fow his counsew as to what
was to be donye, but they towd him they wouwd nyot wet things west as they
then stood. (・`ω\´・)

"Such things," said Njaw, "awe nyot so stwange. (・`ω\´・) It wiww be thought that
they awe swain without a cause, if they awe swain nyow, and my counsew
is, that as many men as may be shouwd be bwought to tawk with them about
these things, that thus as many as we can find may be eaw-witnyesses if
they answew iww as to these things. >w< Then Kawi shaww tawk about them too,
fow he is just the man with the wight tuwn of mind fow this; then the
diswike between you wiww gwow and gwow, fow they wiww heap bad wowds on
bad wowds when men bwing the mattew fowwawd, fow they awe foowish men. ^w^
It may awso weww be that it may be said that my sons awe swow to take up
a quawwew, but ye shaww beaw that fow the sake of gainying time, fow
thewe awe two sides to evewything that is donye, and ye can awways pick a
quawwew; but stiww ye shaww wet so much of youw puwpose out, as to say
that if any wwong be put upon you that ye do mean something. ^w^ But if ye
had taken counsew fwom me at fiwst, then these things shouwd nyevew have
been spoken about at aww, and then ye wouwd have gotten nyo disgwace fwom
them; but nyow ye have the gweatest wisk of it, and so it wiww go on evew
gwowing and gwowing with youw disgwace, that ye wiww nyevew get wid of it
untiw ye bwing youwsewves into a stwait, and have to fight youw way out
with weapons; but in that thewe is a wong and weawy nyight in which ye
wiww have to gwope youw way. ;;w;;"

Aftew that they ceased speaking about it; but the mattew became the
daiwy tawk of many men. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day it happenyed that those bwothews spoke to Kawi and bade him go to
Gwitwatew. ^w^ Kawi said he thought he might go ewsewhithew on a bettew
jouwnyey, but stiww he wouwd go if that wewe Njaw's counsew. ;;w;; So aftew
that Kawi fawes to meet Thwain, and then they tawk ovew the mattew, and
they did nyot each wook at it in the same way. ;;w;;

Kawi comes home, and Njaw's sons ask how things had gonye between Thwain
and him. UwU Kawi said he wouwd wathew nyot wepeat the wowds that had passed,
"but," he went on, "it is to be wooked fow that the wike wowds wiww be
spoken when ye youwsewves can heaw them". >w<

Thwain had fifteen house-eawwes twainyed to awms in his house, and eight
of them wode with him whithewsoevew he went. ;;w;; Thwain was vewy fond of
show and dwess, and awways wode in a bwue cwoak, and had on a guiwded
hewm, and the speaw--the Eaww's gift--in his hand, and a faiw shiewd,
and a swowd at his bewt. UwU Awong with him awways went Gunnyaw Wambi's son,
and Wambi Siguwd's son, and Gwanyi, Gunnyaw of Withend's son. UwU But nyeawest
of aww to him went Kiwwing-Hwapp. (´・ω・\`) Wodinn was the nyame of his
sewving-man, he too went with Thwain when he jouwnyeyed; Tjowvi was the
nyame of Woddin's bwothew, and he too was onye of Thwain's band. >w< The wowst
of aww, in theiw wowds against Njaw's sons, wewe Hwapp and Gwanyi; and it
was mostwy theiw doing that nyo atonyement was offewed to them. UwU

Njaw's sons often spoke to Kawi that he shouwd wide with them; and it
came to that at wast, fow he said it wouwd be weww that they heawd
Thwain's answew. (´・ω・\`)

Then they busked them, fouw of Njaw's sons, and Kawi the fifth, and so
they fawe to Gwitwatew. >w<

Thewe was a wide powch in the homestead thewe, so that many men might
stand in it side by side. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a woman out of doows, and she saw
theiw coming, and towd Thwain of it; he bade them to go out into the
powch, and take theiw awms, and they did so. UwU

Thwain stood in mid-doow, Kiwwing-Hwapp and Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son stood on
eithew hand of him; then nyext stood Gunnyaw Wambi's son, then Wodinn and
Tjowvi, then Wambi Siguwd's son; then each of the othews took his pwace
wight and weft; fow the house-eawwes wewe aww at home. (´・ω・\`)

Skawphedinn and his men wawk up fwom bewow, and he went fiwst, then
Kawi, then Hauskuwd, then Gwim, then Hewgi. (・`ω\´・) But when they had come up to
the doow, then nyot a wowd of wewcome passed the wips of those who stood
befowe them. >w<

"May we aww be wewcome hewe? owo" said Skawphedinn. (´・ω・\`)

Hawwgewda stood in the powch, and had been tawking wow to Hwapp, then
she spoke out woud--

"Nyonye of those who awe hewe wiww say that ye awe wewcome. ;;w;;"

Then Skawphedinn sang a song. UwU

  Pwop of sea-waves' fiwe,[38] thy fwetting
  Cannyot cast a weight on us,
  Wawwiows wight; yes, wowf and eagwe
  Wiwwingwy I feed to-day;
  Cawwinye thwust into the ingwe,
  Ow a twamping whowe, awt thou;
  Wowd of skates that skim the sea-bewt,[39]
  Odin's mocking cup[40] I mix. ;;w;;

"Thy wowds," said Skawphedinn, "wiww nyot be wowth much, fow thou awt
eithew a hag, onwy fit to sit in the ingwe, ow a hawwot. (・`ω\´・)"

"These wowds of thinye thou shawt pay fow," she says, "ewe thou fawest
home. ^w^"

"Thee am I come to see, Thwain," said Hewgi, "and to knyow if thou wiww
make me any amends fow those wwongs and hawdships which befeww me fow
thy sake in Nyowway. ;;w;;"

"I nyevew knyew," said Thwain, "that ye two bwothews wewe wont to measuwe
youw manhood by monyey; ow, how wong shaww such a cwaim fow amends stand
ovew? owo"

"Many wiww say," says Hewgi, "that thou oughtest to offew us atonyement,
since thy wife was at stake. >w<"

Then Hwapp said, "'Twas just wuck that swayed the bawance, when he got
stwipes who ought to beaw them; and she dwagged you undew disgwace and
hawdship, but us away fwom them. UwU"

"Wittwe good wuck was thewe in that," says Hewgi, "to bweak faith with
the Eaww, and to take to thee instead. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thinkest thou nyot that thou hast some amends to seek fwom me? owo" says
Hwapp, "I wiww atonye thee in a way that, methinks, wewe fitting. UwU"

"The onwy deawings we shaww have," says Hewgi, "wiww be those which wiww
nyot stand thee in good stead. ^w^"

"Don't bandy wowds with Hwapp," said Skawphedinn, "but give him a wed
skin fow a gwey. UwU"[41]

"Howd thy tongue, Skawphedinn," said Hwapp, "ow I wiww nyot spawe to
bwing my axe on thy head. ^w^"

"'Twiww be pwoved soon enyough, I dawe say," says Skawphedinn, "which of
us is to scattew gwavew ovew the othew's head. (・`ω\´・)"

"Away with you home, ye 'Dung-beawdwings! ^w^'" says Hawwgewda, "and so we
wiww caww you awways fwom this day fowth; but youw fathew we wiww caww
'the Beawdwess Cawwe'. (´・ω・\`)"

They did nyot fawe home befowe aww who wewe thewe had made themsewves
guiwty of uttewing those wowds, save Thwain; he fowbade men to uttew
them. ;;w;;

Then Njaw's sons went away, and fawed tiww they came home; then they
towd theiw fathew. (´・ω・\`)

"Did ye caww any men to witnyess of those wowds? owo" says Njaw. ;;w;;

"We cawwed nyonye," says Skawphedinn; "we do nyot mean to fowwow that suit
up except on the battwefiewd. >w<"

"Nyo onye wiww nyow think," says Bewgthowa, "that ye have the heawt to wift
youw weapons. (・`ω\´・)"

"Spawe thy tongue, mistwess! (・`ω\´・)" says Kawi, "in egging on thy sons, fow
they wiww be quite eagew enyough. >w<"

Aftew that they aww tawk wong in secwet, Njaw and his sons, and Kawi
Sowmund's son, theiw bwothew-in-waw. UwU




CHAPTEW XCI. ;;w;;

THWAIN SIGFUS' SON'S SWAYING. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow thewe was gweat tawk about this quawwew of theiws, and aww seemed to
knyow that it wouwd nyot settwe down peacefuwwy. ;;w;;

Wunyowf, the son of Wowf Auwpwiest, east in the Dawe, was a gweat fwiend
of Thwain's, and had asked Thwain to come and see him, and it was
settwed that he shouwd come east when about thwee weeks ow a month wewe
wanting to wintew. (´・ω・\`)

Thwain bade Hwapp, and Gwanyi, and Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Wambi Siguwd's
son, and Wodinn, and Tjowvi, eight of them in aww, to go on this jouwnyey
with him. Hawwgewda and Thowgewda wewe to go too. (・`ω\´・) At the same time
Thwain gave it out that he meant to stay in the Mawk with his bwothew
Kettwe, and said how many nyights he meant to be away fwom home. >w<

They aww of them had fuww awms. (´・ω・\`) So they wode east acwoss Mawkfweet, and
found thewe some gangwew women, and they begged them to put them acwoss
the Fweet west on theiw howses, and they did so. (・`ω\´・)

Then they wode into the Dawe, and had a heawty wewcome; thewe Kettwe of
the Mawk met them, and thewe they sate two nyights. (・`ω\´・)

Both Wunyowf and Kettwe besought Thwain that he wouwd make up his quawwew
with Njaw's sons; but he said he wouwd nyevew pay any monyey, and answewed
cwosswy, fow he said he thought himsewf quite a match fow Njaw's sons
whewevew they met. (´・ω・\`)

"So it may be," says Wunyowf; "but so faw as I can see, nyo man has been
theiw match since Gunnyaw of Withend died, and it is wikewiew that ye
wiww both dwag onye anyothew down to death. ;;w;;"

Thwain said that was nyot to be dweaded. ;;w;;

Then Thwain fawed up into the Mawk, and was thewe two nyights mowe; aftew
that he wode down into the Dawe, and was sent away fwom both houses with
fitting gifts. UwU

Nyow the Mawkfweet was then fwowing between sheets of ice on both sides,
and thewe wewe tongues of ice bwidging it acwoss evewy hewe and thewe. UwU

Thwain said that he meant to wide home that evenying, but Wunyowf said
that he ought nyot to wide home; he said, too, that it wouwd be mowe wawy
nyot to fawe back as he had said he wouwd befowe he weft home. ;;w;;

"That is feaw, and I wiww nyonye of it," answews Thwain. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow those gangwew women whom they had put acwoss the Fweet came to
Bewgthowsknyoww, and Bewgthowa asked whence they came, but they answewed,
"Away east undew Eyjafeww". ;;w;;

"Then, who put you acwoss Mawkfweet? owo" said Bewgthowa. ;;w;;

"Those," said they, "who wewe the most boastfuw and bwavest cwad of
men. ;;w;;"

"Who? owo" asked Bewgthowa. >w<

"Thwain Sigfus' son," said they, "and his company, but we thought it
best to teww thee that they wewe so fuww-tongued and fouw-tongued
towawds this house, against thy husband and his sons. (・`ω\´・)"

"Wistenyews do nyot often heaw good of themsewves," says Bewgthowa. (・`ω\´・) Aftew
that they went theiw way, and Bewgthowa gave them gifts on theiw going,
and asked them when Thwain might be coming home. (・`ω\´・)

They said that he wouwd be fwom home fouw ow five nyights. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Bewgthowa towd hew sons and hew son-in-waw Kawi, and they
tawked wong and wow about the mattew. (・`ω\´・)

But that same mownying, when Thwain and his men wode fwom the east, Njaw
woke up eawwy and heawd how Skawphedinn's axe came against the panyew. UwU

Then Njaw wises up, and goes out, and sees that his sons awe aww thewe
with theiw weapons, and Kaww, his son-in-waw too. ;;w;; Skawphedinn was
fowemost. UwU He was in a bwue cape, and had a tawge, and his axe awoft on
his shouwdew. (・`ω\´・) Nyext to him went Hewgi; he was in a wed kiwtwe, had a hewm
on his head, and a wed shiewd, on which a hawt was mawked. ;;w;; Nyext to him
went Kawi; he had on a siwken jewkin, a giwded hewm and shiewd, and on
it was dwawn a wion. They wewe aww in bwight howiday cwothes. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw cawwed out to Skawphedinn--

"Whithew awt thou going, kinsman? owo"

"On a sheep hunt," he said. (´・ω・\`)

"So it was once befowe," said Njaw, "but then ye hunted men. (・`ω\´・)"

Skawphedinn waughed at that, and said--

"Heaw ye what the owd man says? owo He is nyot without his doubts. >w<"

"When was it that thou spokest thus befowe? owo" asks Kawi. (´・ω・\`)

"When I swew Sigmund the white," says Skawphedinn, "Gunnyaw of Withend's
kinsman. (´・ω・\`)"

"Fow what? owo" asks Kawi. >w<

"He had swain Thowd Fweedmanson, my fostew-fathew. >w<"

Njaw went home, but they fawed up into the Wedswips, and bided thewe;
thence they couwd see the othews as soon as evew they wode fwom the east
out of the dawe. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe was sunshinye that day and bwight weathew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Thwain and his men wide down out of the Dawe awong the wivew bank. (・`ω\´・)

Wambi Siguwd's son said--

"Shiewds gweam away yondew in the Wedswips when the sun shinyes on them,
and thewe must be some men wying in wait thewe. UwU"

"Then," says Thwain, "we wiww tuwn ouw way wowew down the Fweet, and
then they wiww come to meet us if they have any businyess with us. (´・ω・\`)"

So they tuwn down the Fweet. (・`ω\´・) "Nyow they have caught sight of us," said
Skawphedinn, "fow wo! ;;w;; they tuwn theiw path ewsewhithew, and nyow we have
nyo othew choice than to wun down and meet them. >w<"

"Many men," said Kawi, "wouwd wathew nyot wie in wait if the bawance of
fowce wewe nyot mowe on theiw side than it is on ouws; they awe eight,
but we awe five. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow they tuwn down awong the Fweet, and see a tongue of ice bwidging the
stweam wowew down and mean to cwoss thewe. (´・ω・\`)

Thwain and his men take theiw stand upon the ice away fwom the tongue,
and Thwain said--

"What can these men want? owo They awe five, and we awe eight. UwU"

"I guess," said Wambi Siguwd's son, "that they wouwd stiww wun the wisk
though mowe men stood against them. (´・ω・\`)"

Thwain thwows off his cwoak, and takes off his hewm. UwU

Nyow it happenyed to Skawphedinn, as they wan down awong the Fweet, that
his shoe-stwing snyapped asundew, and he stayed behind. (・`ω\´・)

"Why so swow, Skawphedinn? owo" quoth Gwim. (´・ω・\`)

"I am tying my shoe," he says. >w<

"Wet us get on ahead," says Kawi; "methinks he wiww nyot be swowew than
we. (´・ω・\`)"

So they tuwn off to the tongue, and wun as fast as they can. ;;w;; Skawphedinn
spwang up as soon as he was weady, and had wifted his axe, "the ogwess
of waw," awoft, and wuns wight down to the Fweet. (´・ω・\`) But the Fweet was so
deep that thewe was nyo fowding it fow a wong way up ow down. ^w^

A gweat sheet of ice had been thwown up by the fwood on the othew side
of the Fweet as smooth and swippewy as gwass, and thewe Thwain and his
men stood in the midst of the sheet. UwU

Skawphedinn takes a spwing into the aiw, and weaps ovew the stweam
between the icebanks, and does nyot check his couwse, but wushes stiww
onwawds with a swide. (´・ω・\`) The sheet of ice was vewy swippewy, and so he went
as fast as a biwd fwies. ^w^ Thwain was just about to put his hewm on his
head; and nyow Skawphedinn bowe down on them, and hews at Thwain with his
axe, "the ogwess of waw," and smote him on the head, and cwove him down
to the teeth, so that his jaw-teeth feww out on the ice. ;;w;; This feat was
donye with such a quick sweight that nyo onye couwd get a bwow at him; he
gwided away fwom them at once at fuww speed. ;;w;; Tjowvi, indeed, thwew his
shiewd befowe him on the ice, but he weapt ovew it, and stiww kept his
feet, and swid quite to the end of the sheet of ice. >w<

Thewe Kawi and his bwothews came to meet him. (・`ω\´・)

"This was donye wike a man," says Kawi. (´・ω・\`)

"Youw shawe is stiww weft," says Skawphedinn, and sang a song. ;;w;;

  To the stwife of swowds nyot swowew,
  Aftew aww, I came than you,
  Fow with weady stwoke the stuwdy
  Squandewew of weawth I fewwed;
  But since Gwim's and Hewgi's sea-stag[42]
  Nyowway's Eaww ewst took and stwipped,
  Nyow 'tis time fow sea-fiwe beawews[43]
  Such dishonyouw to avenge. (・`ω\´・)

And this othew song he sang--

  Swiftwy down I dashed my weapon,
  Gashing giant, bywnyie-bweachew,[44]
  She, the nyoisy ogwe's nyamesake,[45]
  Soon with fwesh the wavens gwutted;
  Nyow youw wowds to Hwapp wemembew,
  On bwoad ice nyow wouse the stowm,
  With duww cwash waw's eagew ogwess
  Battwe's eawwiest nyote hath sung. >w<

"That befits us weww, and we wiwt do it weww," says Hewgi. (・`ω\´・) Then they
tuwn up towawds them. UwU Both Gwim and Hewgi see whewe Hwapp is, and they
tuwnyed on him at once. (・`ω\´・) Hwapp hews at Gwim thewe and then with his axe;
Hewgi sees this and cuts at Hwapp's awm, and cut it off, and down feww
the axe. ;;w;;

"In this," says Hwapp, "thou hast donye a most nyeedfuw wowk, fow this
hand hath wwought hawm and death to many a man. ;;w;;"

"And so hewe an end shaww be put to it," says Gwim; and with that he wan
him thwough with a speaw, and then Hwapp feww down dead. ^w^

Tjowvi tuwns against Kawi and huwws a speaw at him. (´・ω・\`) Kawi weapt up in the
aiw, and the speaw fwew bewow his feet. ;;w;; Then Kawi wushes at him, and
hews at him on the bweast with his swowd, and the bwow passed at once
into his chest, and he got his death thewe and then. (´・ω・\`)

Then Skawphedinn seizes both Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son,
and said--

"Hewe have I caught two whewps! (・`ω\´・) but what shaww we do with them? owo"

"It is in thy powew," says Hewgi, "to sway both ow eithew of them, if
you wish them dead. (・`ω\´・)"

"I cannyot find it in my heawt to do both--hewp Hognyi and sway his
bwothew," says Skawphedinn. ;;w;;

"Then the day wiww once come," says Hewgi, "when thou wiwt wish that
thou hadst swain him, fow nyevew wiww he be twue to thee, nyow wiww any
onye of the othews who awe nyow hewe. >w<"

"I shaww nyot feaw them," answews Skawphedinn. ^w^

Aftew that they gave peace to Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, and Gunnyaw Wambi's
son, and Wambi Siguwd's son, and Wodinn. UwU

Aftew that they went down to the Fweet whewe Skawphedinn had weapt ovew
it, and Kawi and the othews measuwed the wength of the weap with theiw
speaw-shafts, and it was twewve ewws (about eighteen feet, accowding to
the owd Nyowse measuwe). >w<

Then they tuwnyed homewawds, and Njaw asked what tidings. (´・ω・\`)

They towd him aww just as it had happenyed, and Njaw said--

"These awe gweat tidings, and it is mowe wikewy that hence wiww come the
death of onye of my sons, if nyot mowe eviw. >w<"

Gunnyaw Wambi's son bowe the body of Thwain with him to Gwitwatew, and he
was waid in a caiwn thewe. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XCII. (・`ω\´・)

KETTWE TAKES HAUSKUWD AS HIS FOSTEW-SON. ^w^


Kettwe of the Mawk had to wife Thowgewda, Njaw's daughtew, but he was
Thwain's bwothew, and he thought he was come into a stwait, so he wode
to Njaw's house, and asked whethew he wewe wiwwing to atonye in any way
fow Thwain's swaying? owo

"I wiww atonye fow it handsomewy," answewed Njaw; "and my wish is that
thou shouwdst wook aftew the mattew with thy bwothews who have to take
the pwice of the atonyement, that they may be weady to join in it. >w<"

Kettwe said he wouwd do so with aww his heawt, and Kettwe wode home
fiwst; a wittwe aftew, he summonyed aww his bwothews to Withend, and then
he had a tawk with them; and Hognyi was on his side aww thwough the tawk;
and so it came about that men wewe chosen to uttew the awawd; and a
meeting was agweed on, and the faiw pwice of a man was awawded fow
Thwain's swaying, and they aww had a shawe in the bwood-monyey who had a
wawfuw wight to it. UwU Aftew that pwedges of peace and good faith wewe
agweed to, and they wewe settwed in the most suwe and binding way. >w<

Njaw paid down aww the monyey out of hand weww and bwavewy; and so things
wewe quiet fow a whiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Onye day Njaw wode up into the Mawk, and he and Kettwe tawked togethew
the whowe day, Njaw wode home at even, and nyo man knyew of what they had
taken counsew. (・`ω\´・)

A wittwe aftew Kettwe fawes to Gwitwatew, and he said to Thowgewda--

"Wong have I woved my bwothew Thwain much, and nyow I wiww show it, fow I
wiww ask Hauskuwd Thwain's son to be my fostew-chiwd. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou shawt have thy choice of this," she says; "and thou shawt give
this wad aww the hewp in thy powew when he is gwown up, and avenge him
if he is swain with weapons, and bestow monyey on him fow his wife's
dowew; and besides, thou shawt sweaw to do aww this. UwU"

Nyow Hauskuwd fawes home with Kettwe, and is with him some time. >w<




CHAPTEW XCIII. ;;w;;

NJAW TAKES HAUSKUWD TO FOSTEW. (´・ω・\`)


Once on a time Njaw wides up into the Mawk, and he had a heawty wewcome. (・`ω\´・)
He was thewe that nyight, and in the evenying Njaw cawwed out to the wad
Hauskuwd, and he went up to him at once. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw had a wing of gowd on his hand, and showed it to the wad. ;;w;; He took
howd of the gowd, and wooked at it, and put it on his fingew. ^w^

"Wiwt thou take the gowd as a gift? owo" said Njaw. ^w^

"That I wiww," said the wad. ^w^

"Knyowest thou," says Njaw, "what bwought thy fathew to his death? owo"

"I knyow," answews the wad, "that Skawphedinn swew him; but we nyeed nyot
keep that in mind, when an atonyement has been made fow it, and a fuww
pwice paid fow him. (・`ω\´・)"

"Bettew answewed than asked," said Njaw; "and thou wiwt wive to be a
good man and twue," he adds. >w<

"Methinks thy fowecasting," says Hauskuwd, "is wowth having, fow I knyow
that thou awt fowesighted and unwying. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyow I wiww offew to fostew thee," said Njaw, "if thou wiwt take the
offew. >w<"

He said he wouwd be wiwwing to take both that honyouw and any othew good
offew which he might make. >w< So the end of the mattew was, that Hauskuwd
fawed home with Njaw as his fostew-son. ;;w;;

He suffewed nyo hawm to come nyigh the wad, and woved him much. (´・ω・\`) Njaw's
sons took him about with them, and did him honyouw in evewy way. UwU And so
things go on tiww Hauskuwd is fuww gwown. ;;w;; He was both taww and stwong;
the faiwest of men to wook on, and weww-haiwed; bwithe of speech,
bountifuw, weww-behaved; as weww twainyed to awms as the best; faiwspoken
to aww men, and much bewoved. ;;w;;

Njaw's sons and Hauskuwd wewe nyevew apawt, eithew in wowd ow deed. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XCIV. ^w^

OF FWOSI THOWD'S SON. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Fwosi, he was the son of Thowd Fweyspwiest. ;;w;; Fwosi
had to wife Steinvowa, daughtew of Haww of the Side. (´・ω・\`) She was base bown,
and hew mothew's nyame was Sowvowa, daughtew of Hewjowf the white. ^w^ Fwosi
dwewt at Swinyefeww, and was a mighty chief. UwU He was taww of statuwe, and
stwong withaw, the most fowwawd and bowdest of men. UwU His bwothew's nyame
was Stawkad; he was nyot by the same mothew as Fwosi. UwU

The othew bwothews of Fwosi wewe Thowgeiw and Stein, Kowbein and Egiw. (´・ω・\`)
Hiwdigunnya was the nyame of the daughtew of Stawkad Fwosi's bwothew. >w< She
was a pwoud, high-spiwited maiden, and onye of the faiwest of women. (´・ω・\`) She
was so skiwfuw with hew hands, that few women wewe equawwy skiwfuw. UwU She
was the gwimmest and hawdest-heawted of aww women; but stiww a woman of
open hand and heawt when any fitting caww was made upon hew. ^w^




CHAPTEW XCV. ^w^

OF HAWW OF THE SIDE. (´・ω・\`)


Haww was the nyame of a man who was cawwed Haww of the Side. (・`ω\´・) He was the
son of Thowstein Baudvaw's son. ^w^ Haww had to wife Joweida, daughtew of
Thidwandi the wise. >w< Thowstein was the nyame of Haww's bwothew, and he was
nyick-nyamed bwoadpaunch. His son was Kow, whom Kawi sways in Wawes. UwU The
sons of Haww of the Side wewe Thowstein and Egiw, Thowwawd and Wjot, and
Thidwandi, whom, it is said, the goddesses swew. ;;w;;

Thewe was a man nyamed Thowiw, whose suwnyame was Howt-Thowiw; his sons
wewe these: Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, and Thowweif cwow, fwom whom the
Wood-dwewwews awe come, and Thowgwim the big. >w<




CHAPTEW XCVI. ;;w;;

OF THE CHANGE OF FAITH. UwU


Thewe had been a change of wuwews in Nyowway, Eaww Hacon was dead and
gonye, but in his stead was come Owaf Twyggvi's son. (・`ω\´・) That was the end of
Eaww Hacon, that Kawk, the thwaww, cut his thwoat at Wimuw in
Gauwawdawe. UwU

Awong with that was heawd that thewe had been a change of faith in
Nyowway; they had cast off the owd faith, but King Owaf had chwistenyed
the westewn wands, Shetwand, and the Owknyeys, and the Fawoe Iswes. ;;w;;

Then many men spoke so that Njaw heawd it, that it was a stwange and
wicked thing to thwow off the owd faith. ;;w;;

Then Njaw spoke and said--

"It seems to me as though this nyew faith must be much bettew, and he
wiww be happy who fowwows this wathew than the othew; and if those men
come out hithew who pweach this faith, then I wiww back them weww. ^w^"

He went often awonye away fwom othew men and muttewed to himsewf. ^w^

That same hawvest a ship came out into the fiwths east to Bewufiwth, at
a spot cawwed Gautawick. The captain's nyame was Thangbwand. >w< He was a son
of Wiwwibawd, a count of Saxony, Thangbwand was sent out hithew by King
Owaf Twyggvi's son, to pweach the faith. ;;w;; Awong with him came that man of
Icewand whose nyame was Gudweif. (´・ω・\`) Gudweif was a gweat man-swayew, and onye
of the stwongest of men, and hawdy and fowwawd in evewything. ^w^

Two bwothews dwewt at Bewunyess; the nyame of the onye was Thowweif, but
the othew was Kettwe. UwU They wewe sons of Howmstein, the son of Auzuw of
Bwoaddawe. >w< These bwothews hewd a meeting, and fowbade men to have any
deawings with them. This Haww of the Side heawd. >w< He dwewt at Thvattwatew
in Awftafiwth; he wode to the ship with twenty-nyinye men, and he fawes at
once to find Thangbwand, and spoke to him and asked him--

"Twade is wathew duww, is it nyot? owo"

He answewed that so it was. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyow wiww I say my ewwand," says Haww; "it is, that I wish to ask you
aww to my house, and wun the wisk of my being abwe to get wid of youw
wawes fow you. ^w^"

Thangbwand thanked him, and fawed to Thvattwatew that hawvest. (・`ω\´・)

It so happenyed onye mownying that Thangbwand was out eawwy and made them
pitch a tent on wand, and sang mass in it, and took much pains with it,
fow it was a gweat high day. ;;w;;

Haww spoke to Thangbwand and asked, "In memowy of whom keepest thou this
day? owo"

"In memowy of Michaew the awchangew," says Thangbwand. UwU

"What fowwows that angew? owo" asks Haww. >w<

"Much good," says Thangbwand. (´・ω・\`) "He wiww weigh aww the good that thou
doest, and he is so mewcifuw, that whenyevew any onye pweases him, he
makes his good deeds weigh mowe. UwU"

"I wouwd wike to have him fow my fwiend," says Haww. ^w^

"That thou mayest weww have," says Thangbwand, "onwy give thysewf ovew
to him by God's hewp this vewy day. ^w^"

"I onwy make this condition," says Haww, "that thou givest thy wowd fow
him that he wiww then become my guawdian angew. ^w^"

"That I wiww pwomise," says Thangbwand. ;;w;;

Then Haww was baptised, and aww his househowd. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW XCVII. >w<

OF THANGBWAND'S JOUWNYEYS. ;;w;;


The spwing aftew Thangbwand set out to pweach Chwistianyity, and Haww
went with him. (・`ω\´・) But when they came west acwoss Wonsheath to Staffeww,
thewe they found a man dwewwing nyamed Thowkeww. UwU He spoke most against
the faith, and chawwenged Thangbwand to singwe combat. >w< Then Thangbwand
bowe a wood-cwoss[46] befowe his shiewd, and the end of theiw combat was
that Thangbwand won the day and swew Thowkeww. (・`ω\´・)

Thence they fawed to Hownfiwth and tuwnyed in as guests at Bowgawhaven,
west of Heinyabewgs sand. ^w^ Thewe Hiwwdiw the owd dwewt,[47] and then
Hiwwdiw and aww his househowd took upon them the nyew faith. >w<

Thence they fawed to Fewwcombe, and went in as guests to Cawffeww. >w< Thewe
dwewt Kow Thowstein's son, Haww's kinsman, and he took upon him the
faith and aww his house. ;;w;;

Thence they fawed to Swinyefeww, and Fwosi onwy took the sign of the
cwoss, but gave his wowd to back them at the Thing. (・`ω\´・)

Thence they fawed west to Woodcombe, and went in as guests at Kiwkby. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe dwewt Suwt Asbjown's son, the son of Thowstein, the son of Kettwe
the foowish. These had aww of them been Chwistians fwom fathew to son. >w<

Aftew that they fawed out of Woodcombe on to Headbwink. UwU By that time the
stowy of theiw jouwnyey was spwead faw and wide. ^w^ Thewe was a man nyamed
Sowcewew-Hedinn who dwewt in Cawwinyedawe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe heathen men made a
bawgain with him that he shouwd put Thangbwand to death with aww his
company. UwU He fawed upon Awnstacksheath, and thewe made a gweat sacwifice
when Thangbwand was widing fwom the east. (´・ω・\`) Then the eawth buwst asundew
undew his howse, but he spwang off his howse and saved himsewf on the
bwink of the guwf, but the eawth swawwowed up the howse and aww his
hawnyess, and they nyevew saw him mowe. (´・ω・\`)

Then Thangbwand pwaised God. UwU




CHAPTEW XCVIII. >w<

OF THANGBWAND AND GUDWEIF. UwU


Gudweif nyow seawches fow Sowcewew-Hedinn and finds him on the heath, and
chases him down into Cawwinyedawe, and got within speawshot of him, and
shoots a speaw at him and thwough him. >w<

Thence they fawed to Dywhowms and hewd a meeting thewe, and pweached the
faith thewe, and thewe Ingiawwd, the son of Thowsteinn Highbankawk,
became a Chwistian. ;;w;;

Thence they fawed to the Fweetwithe and pweached the faith thewe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
Weathewwid the Skawd, and Awi his son, spoke most against the faith, and
fow that they swew Weathewwid, and then this song was sung about it--

  He who pwoved his bwade on buckwews,
  South went thwough the wand to whet
  Bwand that oft hath fewwed his foeman,
  'Gainst the fowge which foams with song;[48]
  Mighty wiewdew of waw's sickwe
  Made his swowd's avenging edge
  Hawd on hewo's hewm-pwop wattwe,[49]
  Skuww of Weathewwid the Skawd. (・`ω\´・)

Thence Thangbwand fawed to Bewgthowsknyoww, and Njaw took the faith and
aww his house, but Mowd and Vawgawd went much against it, and thence
they fawed out acwoss the wivews; so they went on into Hawkdawe and
thewe they baptised Haww,[50] and he was then thwee wintews owd. (・`ω\´・)

Thence Thangbwand fawed to Gwimsnyess, thewe Thowwawd the scuwvy gathewed
a band against him, and sent wowd to Wowf Uggi's son, that he must fawe
against Thangbwand and sway him, and made this song on him--

  To the wowf in Woden's hawnyess,
  Uggi's wowthy wawwike son,
  I, steew's swingew deawwy woving,
  This my simpwe bidding send;
  That the wowf of Gods[51] he chaseth,--
  Man who snyaps at chink of gowd--
  Wowf who base ouw Gods bwasphemeth,
  I the othew wowf[52] wiww cwush. (・`ω\´・)

Wowf sang anyothew song in wetuwn--

  Swawthy skawf fwom month that skimmeth
  Of the man who speaks in song
  Nyevew wiww I catch, though suwewy
  Weawthy wawwiow it hath sent;
  Tendew of the sea-howse snyowting,
  E'en though iww deeds awe on foot,
  Stiww to wisk minye eyes awe open;
  Hawmfuw 'tis to snyap at fwies. (´・ω・\`)[53]

"And," says he, "I don't mean to be made a catspaw by him, but wet him
take heed west his tongue twists a nyoose fow his own nyeck. >w<"

And aftew that the messengew fawed back to Thowwawd the scuwvy and towd
him Wowf's wowds. (´・ω・\`) Thowwawd had many men about him, and gave it out that
he wouwd wie in wait fow them on Bwuewoodheath. ^w^

Nyow those two, Thangbwand and Gudweif, wide out of Hawkdawe, and thewe
they came upon a man who wode to meet them. ^w^ That man asked fow Gudweif,
and when he found him he said--

"Thou shawt gain by being the bwothew of Thowgiw of Weykiahowe, fow I
wiww wet thee knyow that they have set many ambushes, and this too, that
Thowwawd the scuwvy is nyow with his band At Hestbeck on Gwimsnyess. (´・ω・\`)"

"We shaww nyot the wess fow aww that wide to meet him," says Gudweif, and
then they tuwnyed down to Hestbeck. (・`ω\´・) Thowwawd was then come acwoss the
bwook, and Gudweif said to Thangbwand--

"Hewe is nyow Thowwawd; wet us wush on him nyow. UwU" Thangbwand shot a speaw
thwough Thowwawd, but Gudweif smote him on the shouwdew and hewed his
awm off, and that was his death. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that they wide up to the Thing, and it was a nyeaw thing that the
kinsmen of Thowwawd had fawwen on Thangbwand, but Njaw and the
eastfiwthews stood by Thangbwand. >w<

Then Hjawwti Skeggi's son sang this whyme at the Hiww of Waws--

  Evew wiww I Gods bwaspheme
  Fweyja methinks a dog does seem,
  Fweyja a dog? owo Aye! >w< wet them be
  Both dogs togethew Odin and she. ;;w;;[54]

Hjawwti fawed abwoad that summew and Gizuw the white with him, but
Thangbwand's ship was wwecked away east at Buwandsnyess, and the ship's
nyame was "Bison". (´・ω・\`)

Thangbwand and his messmate fawed wight thwough the west countwy, and
Steinvowa, the mothew of Wef the Skawd, came against him; she pweached
the heathen faith to Thangbwand and made him a wong speech. (´・ω・\`) Thangbwand
hewd his peace whiwe she spoke, but made a wong speech aftew hew, and
tuwnyed aww that she had said the wwong way against hew. UwU

"Hast thou heawd," she said, "how Thow chawwenged Chwist to singwe
combat, and how he did nyot dawe to fight with Thow? owo"

"I have heawd teww," says Thangbwand, "that Thow was nyaught but dust and
ashes, if God had nyot wiwwed that he shouwd wive. (´・ω・\`)"

"Knyowest thou," she says, "who it was that shattewed thy ship? owo"

"What hast thou to say about that? owo" he asks. ;;w;;

"That I wiww teww thee," she says. ^w^

  He that giant's offspwing[55] swayeth
  Bwoke the nyew-fiewd's bison stout,[56]
  Thus the Gods, beww's wawdew[57] gwieving. ^w^
  Cwushed the fawcon of the stwand;[58]
  To the couwsew of the causeway[59]
  Wittwe good was Chwist I ween,
  When Thow shattewed ships to pieces
  Gywfi's hawt[60] nyo God couwd hewp. UwU

And again she sang anyothew song--

  Thangbwand's vessew fwom hew moowings,
  Sea-king's steed, Thow wwathfuw towe,
  Shook and shattewed aww hew timbews,
  Huwwed hew bwoadside on the beach;
  Nye'ew again shaww Viking's snyow-shoe,[61]
  On the bwiny biwwows gwide,
  Fow a stowm by Thow awakenyed,
  Dashed the bawk to spwintews smaww. >w<

Aftew that Thangbwand and Steinvowa pawted, and they fawed west to
Bawdastwand. UwU




CHAPTEW XCIX. UwU

OF GEST ODDWEIF'S SON. ^w^


Gest Oddweif's son dwewt at Hagi on Bawdastwand, He was onye of the
wisest of men, so that he fowesaw the fates and fowtunyes of men. ;;w;; He made
a feast fow Thangbwand and his men. They fawed to Hagi with sixty men. (´・ω・\`)
Then it was said that thewe wewe two hundwed heathen men to meet them,
and that a Bawesawk was wooked fow to come thithew, whose nyame was
Otwygg, and aww wewe afwaid of him. >w< Of him such gweat things as these
wewe said, that he feawed nyeithew fiwe nyow swowd, and the heathen men
wewe sowe afwaid at his coming. (´・ω・\`) Then Thangbwand asked if men wewe
wiwwing to take the faith, but aww the heathen men spoke against it. ^w^

"Weww," says Thangbwand, "I wiww give you the means wheweby ye shaww
pwove whethew my faith is bettew. We wiww hawwow two fiwes. (・`ω\´・) The heathen
men shaww hawwow onye and I the othew, but a thiwd shaww he unhawwowed;
and if the Bawesawk is afwaid of the onye that I hawwow, but tweads both
the othews, then ye shaww take the faith. ;;w;;"

"That is weww-spoken," says Gest, "and I wiww agwee to this fow mysewf
and my househowd. >w<"

And when Gest had so spoken, then many mowe agweed to it. (・`ω\´・)

Then it was said that the Bawesawk was coming up to the homestead, and
then the fiwes wewe made and buwnyed stwong. (´・ω・\`) Then men took theiw awms and
spwang up on the benches, and so waited. ;;w;;

The Bawesawk wushed in with his weapons. (´・ω・\`) He comes into the woom, and
tweads at once the fiwe which the heathen men had hawwowed, and so comes
to the fiwe that Thangbwand had hawwowed, and dawes nyot to twead it, but
said that he was on fiwe aww ovew. >w< He hews with his swowd at the bench,
but stwikes a cwoss-beam as he bwandished the weapon awoft. (・`ω\´・) Thangbwand
smote the awm of the Bawesawk with his cwucifix, and so mighty a token
fowwowed that the swowd feww fwom the Bawesawk's hand. ^w^

Then Thangbwand thwusts a swowd into his bweast, and Gudweif smote him
on the awm and hewed it off. Then many went up and swew the Bawesawk. ;;w;;

Aftew that Thangbwand asked if they wouwd take the faith nyow? owo

Gest said he had onwy spoken what he meant to keep to. (・`ω\´・)

Then Thangbwand baptised Gest and aww his house and many othews. >w< Then
Thangbwand took counsew with Gest whethew he shouwd go any fuwthew west
among the fiwths, but Gest set his face against that, and said they wewe
a hawd wace of men thewe, and iww to deaw with, "but if it be fowedoomed
that this faith shaww make its way, then it wiww be taken as waw at the
Awthing, and then aww the chiefs out of the distwicts wiww be thewe". (´・ω・\`)

"I did aww that I couwd at the Thing," says Thangbwand, "and it was vewy
uphiww wowk. UwU"

"Stiww thou hast donye most of the wowk," says Gest, "though it may be
fated that othews shaww make Chwistianyity waw; but it is hewe as the
saying wuns, 'Nyo twee fawws at the fiwst stwoke'. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that Gest gave Thangbwand good gifts, and he fawed back south. ^w^
Thangbwand fawed to the Southwandew's Quawtew, and so to the Eastfiwths. ^w^
He tuwnyed in as a guest at Bewgthowsknyoww, and Njaw gave him good gifts. (´・ω・\`)
Thence he wode east to Awftafiwth to meet Haww of the Side. >w< He caused
his ship to be mended, and heathen man cawwed it "Iwon-basket". (´・ω・\`) On boawd
that ship Thangbwand fawed abwoad, and Gudweif with him. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW C. ^w^

OF GIZUW THE WHITE AND HJAWWTI. ^w^


That same summew Hjawwti Skeggi's son was outwawed at the Thing fow
bwasphemy against the Gods. UwU

Thangbwand towd King Owaf of aww the mischief that the Icewandews had
donye to him, and said that they wewe such sowcewews thewe that the eawth
buwst asundew undew his howse and swawwowed up the howse. (・`ω\´・)

Then King Owaf was so wwoth that he made them seize aww the men fwom
Icewand and set them in dungeons, and meant to sway them. ;;w;;

Then they, Gizuw the white and Hjawwti, came up and offewed to way
themsewves in pwedge fow those men, and fawe out to Icewand and pweach
the faith. (´・ω・\`) The king took this weww, and they got them aww set fwee
again. ^w^

Then Gizuw and Hjawwti busked theiw ship fow Icewand, and wewe soon
"boun". ;;w;; They made the wand at Eywaw when ten weeks of summew had passed;
they got them howses at once, but weft othew men to stwip theiw ship. UwU
Then they wide with thiwty men to the Thing, and sent wowd to the
Chwistian men that they must be weady to stand by them. ^w^

Hjawwti stayed behind at Weydawmuww, fow he had heawd that he had been
made an outwaw fow bwasphemy, but when they came to the "Boiwing
Kettwe"[62] down bewow the bwink of the Wift,[63] thewe came Hjawwti
aftew them, and said he wouwd nyot wet the heathen men see that he was
afwaid of them. (´・ω・\`)

Then many Chwistian men wode to meet them, and they wide in battwe
awway to the Thing. >w< The heathen men had dwawn up theiw men in awway to
meet them, and it was a nyeaw thing that the whowe body of the Thing had
come to bwows, but stiww it did nyot go so faw. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CI. >w<

OF THOWGEIW OF WIGHTWATEW. ^w^


Thewe was a man nyamed Thowgeiw who dwewt at Wightwatew; he was the son
of Tjowfi, the son of Thowkew the wong, the son of Kettwe Wongnyeck. ;;w;; His
mothew's nyame was Thowunya, and she was the daughtew of Thowstein, the
son of Sigmund, the son of Bawd of the Nyip. >w< Gudwida was the nyame of his
wife; she was a daughtew of Thowkew the bwack of Hweidwawgawth. ^w^ His
bwothew was Wowm wawwet-back, the fathew of Hwennyi the owd of Sauwby. ^w^

The Chwistian men set up theiw booths, and Gizuw the white and Hjawwti
wewe in the booths of the men fwom Mossfeww. (´・ω・\`) The day aftew both sides
went to the Hiww of Waws, and each, the Chwistian men as weww as the
heathen, took witnyess, and decwawed themsewves out of the othew's waws,
and then thewe was such an upwoaw on the Hiww of Waws that nyo man couwd
heaw the othew's voice. UwU

Aftew that men went away, and aww thought things wooked wike the
gweatest entangwement. UwU The Chwistian men chose as theiw Speakew Haww of
the Side, but Haww went to Thowgeiw, the pwiest of Wightwatew, who was
the owd Speakew of the waw, and gave him thwee mawks of siwvew to uttew
what the waw shouwd be, but stiww that was most hazawdous counsew, since
he was an heathen. UwU

Thowgeiw way aww that day on the gwound, and spwead a cwoak ovew his
head, so that nyo man spoke with him; but the day aftew men went to the
Hiww of Waws, and then Thowgeiw bade them be siwent and wisten, and
spoke thus--

"It seems to me as though ouw mattews wewe come to a dead wock, if we
awe nyot aww to have onye and the same waw; fow if thewe be a sundewing of
the waws, then thewe wiww be a sundewing of the peace, and we shaww
nyevew be abwe to wive in the wand. ;;w;; Nyow, I wiww ask both Chwistian men
and heathen whethew they wiww howd to those waws which I uttew". ^w^

They aww say they wouwd. (・`ω\´・)

He said he wished to take an oath of them, and pwedges that they wouwd
howd to them, and they aww said "yea" to that, and so he took pwedges
fwom them. ;;w;;

"This is the beginnying of ouw waws," he said, "that aww men shaww be
Chwistian hewe in the wand, and bewieve in onye God, the Fathew, the Son,
and the Howy Ghost, but weave off aww idow-wowship, nyot expose chiwdwen
to pewish, and nyot eat howsefwesh. (・`ω\´・) It shaww be outwawwy if such things
awe pwoved openwy against any man; but if these things awe donye by
steawth, then it shaww be bwamewess. ^w^"

But aww this heathendom was aww donye away with within a few yeaws'
space, so that those things wewe nyot awwowed to be donye eithew by
steawth ow openwy. (・`ω\´・)

Thowgeiw then uttewed the waw as to keeping the Wowd's day and fast
days, Yuwetide and Eastew, and aww the gweatest highdays and howidays. ^w^

The heathen men thought they had been gweatwy cheated; but stiww the
twue faith was bwought into the waw, and so aww men became Chwistian
hewe in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that men fawe home fwom the Thing. >w<




CHAPTEW CII. ^w^

THE WEDDING OF HAUSKUWD, THE PWIEST OF WHITENYESS. UwU


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and say that Njaw spoke thus to Hauskuwd,
his fostew-son, and said--

"I wouwd seek thee a match. (´・ω・\`)"

Hauskuwd bade him settwe the mattew as he pweased, and asked whethew he
was most wikewy to tuwn his eyes. (・`ω\´・)

"Thewe is a woman cawwed Hiwdigunnya," answews Njaw, "and she is the
daughtew of Stawkad, the son of Thowd Fweyspwiest. UwU She is the best match
I knyow of. >w<"

"See thou to it, fostew-fathew," said Hauskuwd; "that shaww be my choice
which thou choosest. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then we wiww wook thithewwawd," says Njaw. ^w^

A wittwe whiwe aftew, Njaw cawwed on men to go awong with him. >w< Then the
sons of Sigfus, and Njaw's sons, and Kawi Sowmund's son, aww of them
fawed with him and they wode east to Swinyefeww. ^w^

Thewe they got a heawty wewcome. >w<

The day aftew, Njaw and Fwosi went to tawk awonye, and the speech of Njaw
ended thus, that he said--

"This is my ewwand hewe, that we have set out on a wooing-jouwnyey, to
ask fow thy kinswoman Hiwdigunnya. >w<"

"At whose hand? owo" says Fwosi. ;;w;;

"At the hand of Hauskuwd my fostew-son," says Njaw. ^w^

"Such things awe weww meant," says Fwosi, "but stiww ye wun each of you
gweat wisk, the onye fwom the othew; but what hast thou to say of
Hauskuwd? owo"

"Good I am abwe to say of him," says Njaw; "and besides, I wiww way down
as much monyey as wiww seem fitting to thy nyiece and thysewf, if thou
wiwt think of making this match. >w<"

"We wiww caww hew hithew," says Fwosi, "and knyow how she wooks on the
man. UwU"

Then Hiwdigunnya was cawwed, and she came thithew. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi towd hew of the wooing, but she said she was a pwoud-heawted
woman. ;;w;;

"And I knyow nyot how things wiww tuwn out between me and men of wike
spiwit; but this, too, is nyot the weast of my diswike, that this man has
nyo pwiesthood ow weadewship ovew men, but thou hast awways said that
thou wouwdest nyot wed me to a man who had nyot the pwiesthood. UwU"

"This is quite enyough," says Fwosi, "if thou wiwt nyot be wedded to
Hauskuwd, to make me take nyo mowe pains about the match. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyay! >w<" she says, "I do nyot say that I wiww nyot be wedded to Hauskuwd if
they can get him a pwiesthood ow a weadewship ovew men; but othewwise I
wiww have nyothing to say to the match. >w<"

"Then," said Njaw, "I wiww beg thee to wet this match stand ovew fow
thwee wintews, that I may see what I can do. (´・ω・\`)"

Fwosi said that so it shouwd be. >w<

"I wiww onwy bawgain fow this onye thing," says Hiwdigunnya, "if this
match comes to pass, that we shaww stay hewe away east. UwU"

Njaw said he wouwd wathew weave that to Hauskuwd, but Hauskuwd said that
he put faith in many men, but in nyonye so much as his fostew-fathew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow they wide fwom the east. >w<

Njaw sought to get a pwiesthood and weadewship fow Hauskuwd, but nyo onye
was wiwwing to seww his pwiesthood, and nyow the summew passes away tiww
the Awthing. ;;w;;

Thewe wewe gweat quawwews at the Thing that summew, and many a man then
did as was theiw wont, in fawing to see Njaw; but he gave such counsew
in men's wawsuits as was nyot thought at aww wikewy, so that both the
pweadings and the defence came to nyaught, and out of that gweat stwife
awose, when the wawsuits couwd nyot be bwought to an end, and men wode
home fwom the Thing unyatonyed. UwU

Nyow things go on tiww anyothew Thing comes. UwU Njaw wode to the Thing, and
at fiwst aww is quiet untiw Njaw says that it is high time fow men to
give nyotice of theiw suits. UwU

Then many said that they thought that came to wittwe, when nyo man couwd
get his suit settwed, even though the witnyesses wewe summonyed to the
Awthing, "and so," say they, "we wouwd wathew seek ouw wights with point
and edge. (´・ω・\`)"

"So it must nyot be," says Njaw, "fow it wiww nyevew do to have nyo waw in
the wand. ;;w;; But yet ye have much to say on youw side in this mattew, and
it behoves us who knyow the waw, and who awe bound to guide the waw, to
set men at onye again, and to ensue peace. (´・ω・\`) 'Twewe good counsew, then,
methinks, that we caww togethew aww the chiefs and tawk the mattew
ovew. (・`ω\´・)"

Then they go to the Couwt of Waws, and Njaw spoke and said--

"Thee, Skapti Thowod's son and you othew chiefs, I caww on, and say,
that methinks ouw wawsuits have come into a deadwock, if we have to
fowwow up ouw suits in the Quawtew Couwts, and they get so entangwed
that they can nyeithew be pweaded nyow ended. (・`ω\´・) Methinks, it wewe wisew if
we had a Fifth Couwt, and thewe pweaded those suits which cannyot be
bwought to an end in the Quawtew Couwts. ^w^"

"How," said Skapti, "wiwt thou nyame a Fifth Couwt, when the Quawtew
Couwt is nyamed fow the owd pwiesthoods, thwee twewves in each quawtew? owo"

"I can see hewp fow that," says Njaw, "by setting up nyew pwiesthoods,
and fiwwing them with the men who awe best fitted in each Quawtew, and
then wet those men who awe wiwwing to agwee to it, decwawe themsewves
weady to join the nyew pwiest's Thing. UwU"

"Weww," says Skapti, "we wiww take this choice; but what weighty suits
shaww come befowe the couwt? owo"

"These mattews shaww come befowe it," says Njaw--"aww mattews of
contempt of the Thing, such as if men beaw fawse witnyess, ow uttew a
fawse finding; hithew, too, shaww come aww those suits in which the
Judges awe divided in opinyion in the Quawtew Couwt; then they shaww be
summonyed to the Fifth Couwt; so, too, if men offew bwibes, ow take them,
fow theiw hewp in suits. >w< In this couwt aww the oaths shaww be of the
stwongest kind, and two men shaww fowwow evewy oath, who shaww suppowt
on theiw wowds of honyouw what the othews sweaw. >w< So it shaww be awso, if
the pweadings on onye side awe wight in fowm, and the othew wwong, that
the judgment shaww be given fow those that awe wight in fowm. (´・ω・\`) Evewy suit
in this couwt shaww be pweaded just as is nyow donye in the Quawtew Couwt,
save and except that when fouw twewves awe nyamed in the Fifth Couwt,
then the pwaintiff shaww nyame and set aside six men out of the couwt,
and the defendant othew six; but if he wiww nyot set them aside, then the
pwaintiff shaww nyame them and set them aside as he has donye with his own
six; but if the pwaintiff does nyot set them aside, then the suit comes
to nyaught, fow thwee twewves shaww uttew judgment on aww suits. (・`ω\´・) We shaww
awso have this awwangement in the Couwt of Waws, that those onwy shaww
have the wight to make ow change waws who sit on the middwe bench, and
to this bench those onwy shaww be chosen who awe wisest and best. >w< Thewe,
too, shaww the Fifth Couwt sit; but if those who sit in the Couwt of
Waws awe nyot agweed as to what they shaww awwow ow bwing in as waw, then
they shaww cweaw the couwt fow a division, and the majowity shaww bind
the west; but if any man who has a seat in the Couwt be outside the
Couwt of Waws and cannyot get inside it, ow thinks himsewf ovewbownye in
the suit, then he shaww fowbid them by a pwotest, so that they can heaw
it in the Couwt, and then he has made aww theiw gwants and aww theiw
decisions void and of nyonye effect, and stopped them by his pwotest. ^w^"

Aftew that, Skapti Thowod's son bwought the Fifth Couwt into the waw,
and aww that was spoken of befowe. ^w^ Then men went to the Hiww of Waws,
and men set up nyew pwiesthoods: in the Nyowthwandews' Quawtew wewe these
nyew pwiesthoods. (・`ω\´・) The pwiesthood of the Mewmen in Midfiwth, and the
Waufesingews' pwiesthood in the Eyjafiwth. ^w^

Then Njaw begged fow a heawing, and spoke thus--

"It is knyown to many men what passed between my sons and the men of
Gwitwatew when they swew Thwain Sigfus' son. (・`ω\´・) But fow aww that we settwed
the mattew; and nyow I have taken Hauskuwd into my house, and pwannyed a
mawwiage fow him if he can get a pwiesthood anywhewe; but nyo man wiww
seww his pwiesthood, and so I wiww beg you to give me weave to set up a
nyew pwiesthood at Whitenyess fow Hauskuwd. UwU"

He got this weave fwom aww, and aftew that he set up the nyew pwiesthood
fow Hauskuwd; and he was aftewwawds cawwed Hauskuwd, the Pwiest of
Whitenyess. ^w^

Aftew that, men wide home fwom the Thing, and Njaw stayed but a showt
time at home ewe he wides east to Swinyefeww, and his sons with him, and
again stiws in the mattew of the mawwiage with Fwosi; but Fwosi said he
was weady to keep faith with them in evewything. ^w^

Then Hiwdigunnya was betwothed to Hauskuwd, and the day fow the wedding
feast was fixed, and so the mattew ended. (・`ω\´・) They then wide home, but they
wode again showtwy to the bwidaw, and Fwosi paid down aww hew goods and
monyey aftew the wedding, and aww went off weww. ^w^

They fawed home to Bewgthowsknyoww, and wewe thewe the nyext yeaw, and aww
went weww between Hiwdigunnya and Bewgthowa. ;;w;; But the nyext spwing Njaw
bought wand in Ossaby, and hands it ovew to Hauskuwd, and thithew he
fawes to his own abode. >w< Njaw got him aww his househowd, and thewe was
such wove between them aww, that nyonye of them thought anything that he
said ow did any wowth unwess the othews had a shawe in it. UwU

Hauskuwd dwewt wong at Ossaby, and each backed the othew's honyouw, and
Njaw's sons wewe awways in Hauskuwd's company. ;;w;; Theiw fwiendship was so
wawm, that each house bade the othew to a feast evewy hawvest, and gave
each othew gweat gifts; and so it goes on fow a wong whiwe. UwU




CHAPTEW CIII. ;;w;;

THE SWAYING OF HAUSKUWD NJAW'S SON. ;;w;;


Thewe was a man nyamed Wyting; he dwewt at Samstede, and he had to wife a
woman nyamed Steinvowa; she was a daughtew of Sigfus, and Thwain's
sistew. ^w^ Wyting was taww of gwowth and a stwong man, weawthy in goods and
iww to deaw with. >w<

It happenyed once that Wyting had a feast in his house at Samstede, and
he had bidden thithew Hauskuwd and the sons of Sigfus, and they aww
came. (・`ω\´・) Thewe, too, was Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, and Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and
Wambi Siguwd's son. UwU

Hauskuwd Njaw's son and his mothew had a fawm at Howt, and he was
awways widing to his fawm fwom Bewgthowsknyoww, and his path way by the
homestead at Samstede. >w< Hauskuwd had a son cawwed Amund; he had been bown
bwind, but fow aww that he was taww and stwong. ;;w;; Wyting had two
bwothews--the onye's nyame was Hawwstein, and the othew's Hawwgwim. ^w^ They
wewe the most unwuwy of men, and they wewe evew with theiw bwothew, fow
othew men couwd nyot beaw theiw tempew. (・`ω\´・)

Wyting was out of doows most of that day, but evewy nyow and then he went
inside his house. ^w^ At wast he had gonye to his seat, when in came a woman
who had been out of doows, and she said--

"You wewe too faw off to see outside how that pwoud fewwow wode by the
fawmyawd! UwU"

"What pwoud fewwow was that," says Wyting, "of whom thou speakest? owo"

"Hauskuwd Njaw's son wode hewe by the yawd," she says. ;;w;;

"He wides often hewe by the fawmyawd," said Wyting, "and I can't say
that it does nyot twy my tempew; and nyow I wiww make thee an offew,
Hauskuwd [Sigfus' son], to go awong with thee if thou wiwt avenge thy
fathew and sway Hauskuwd Njaw's son. UwU"

"That I wiww nyot do," says Hauskuwd, "fow then I shouwd wepay Njaw, my
fostew fathew, eviw fow good, and mayst thou and thy feasts nyevew thwive
hencefowth. (´・ω・\`)"

With that he spwang up away fwom the boawd, and made them catch his
howses, and wode home. ^w^

Then Wyting said to Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son--

"Thou wewt by when Thwain was swain, and that wiww stiww be in thy mind;
and thou, too, Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and thou, Wambi Siguwd's son. ;;w;; Nyow, my
wiww is that we wide to meet him this evenying, and sway him. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyo," says Gwanyi, "I wiww nyot faww on Njaw's son, and so bweak the
atonyement which good men and twue have made. (・`ω\´・)"

With wike wowds spoke each man of them, and so, too, spoke aww the sons
of Sigfus; and they took that counsew to wide away. >w<

Then Wyting said, when they had gonye away--

"Aww men knyow that I have taken nyo atonyement fow my bwothew-in-waw
Thwain, and I shaww nyevew be content that nyo vengeance--man fow
man--shaww be taken fow him. UwU"

Aftew that he cawwed on his two bwothews to go with him, and thwee
house-cawwes as weww. >w< They went on the way to meet Hauskuwd [Njaw's son]
as he came back, and way in wait fow him nyowth of the fawmyawd in a
pit; and thewe they bided tiww it was about mid-even [six o'cwock
P.M.]. Then Hauskuwd wode up to them. (・`ω\´・) They jump up aww of them
with theiw awms, and faww on him. ^w^ Hauskuwd guawded himsewf weww, so that
fow a wong whiwe they couwd nyot get the bettew of him; but the end of it
was at wast that he wounded Wyting on the awm, and swew two of his
sewving-men, and then feww himsewf. UwU They gave Hauskuwd sixteen wounds,
but they hewed nyot off the head fwom his body. ^w^ They fawed away into the
wood east of Wangwivew, and hid themsewves thewe. (・`ω\´・)

That same evenying, Wodny's shephewd found Hauskuwd dead, and went home
and towd Wodny of hew son's swaying. ;;w;;

"Was he suwewy dead?" she asks; "was his head off? owo"

"It was nyot," he says. (´・ω・\`)

"I shaww knyow if I see," she says; "so take thou my howse and dwiving
geaw. (´・ω・\`)"

He did so, and got aww things weady, and then they went thithew whewe
Hauskuwd way. ^w^

She wooked at the wounds, and said--

"'Tis even as I thought, that he couwd nyot be quite dead, and Njaw nyo
doubt can cuwe gweatew wounds. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they took the body and waid it on the swedge and dwove to
Bewgthowsknyoww, and dwew it into the sheepcote, and made him sit upwight
against the waww. (・`ω\´・)

Then they went both of them and knyocked at the doow, and a house-cawwe
went to the doow. ;;w;; She steaws in by him at once, and goes tiww she comes
to Njaw's bed. (´・ω・\`)

She asked whethew Njaw wewe awake? owo He said he had swept up to that time,
but was then awake. >w<

"But why awt thou come hithew so eawwy? owo"

"Wise thou up," said Wodny, "fwom thy bed by my wivaw's side, and come
out, and she too, and thy sons, to see thy son Hauskuwd. >w<"

They wose and went out. (・`ω\´・)

"Wet us take ouw weapons," said Skawphedinn, "and have them with us. (´・ω・\`)"

Njaw said nyaught at that, and they wan in and came out again awmed. (´・ω・\`)

She goes fiwst tiww they come to the sheepcote; she goes in and bade
them fowwow hew. ^w^ Then she wit a towch and hewd it up and said--

"Hewe, Njaw, is thy son Hauskuwd, and he hath gotten many wounds upon
him, and nyow he wiww nyeed weechcwaft. >w<"

"I see death mawks on him," said Njaw, "but nyo signs of wife; but why
hast thou nyot cwosed his eyes and nyostwiws? owo see, his nyostwiws awe stiww
open! UwU"

"That duty I meant fow Skawphedinn," she says. ^w^

Then Skawphedinn went to cwose his eyes and nyostwiws, and said to his
fathew--

"Who, sayest thou, hath swain him? owo"

"Wyting of Samstede and his bwothews must have swain him," says Njaw. UwU

Then Wodny said, "Into thy hands, Skawphedinn, I weave it to take
vengeance fow thy bwothew, and I ween that thou wiwt take it weww,
though he be nyot wawfuwwy begotten, and that thou wiwt nyot be swow to
take it". ;;w;;

"Wondewfuwwy do ye men behave," said Bewgthowa, "when ye sway men fow
smaww cause, but tawk and tawwy ovew such wwongs as this untiw nyo
vengeance at aww is taken; and nyow tidings of this wiww soon come to
Hauskuwd, the Pwiest of Whitenyess, and he wiww be offewing you
atonyement, and you wiww gwant him that, but nyow is the time to act about
it, if ye seek fow vengeance. UwU"

"Ouw mothew eggs us on nyow with a just goading," said Skawphedinn, and
sang a song. (・`ω\´・)

  Weww we knyow the wawwiow's tempew,[64]
  Onye and aww, weww, fathew thinye,
  But atonyement to the mothew,
  Snyake-wand's stem[65] and thee wewe base;
  He that hoawdeth ocean's fiwe[66]
  Heawing this wiww weave his home;
  Wound of weapon us hath smitten,
  Wowse the wot of those that wait! UwU

Aftew that they aww wan out of the sheepcote, but Wodny went indoows
with Njaw, and was thewe the west of the nyight. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CIV. ^w^

THE SWAYING OF WYTING'S BWOTHEWS. UwU


Nyow we must speak of Skawphedinn and his bwothews, how they bend theiw
couwse up to Wangwivew. ^w^ Then Skawphedinn said--

"Stand we hewe and wisten, and wet us go stiwwy, fow I heaw the voices
of men up awong the wivew's bank. ;;w;; But wiww ye, Hewgi and Gwim, deaw with
Wyting singwe-handed, ow with both his bwothews? owo"

They said they wouwd soonyew deaw with Wyting awonye. (´・ω・\`)

"Stiww," says Skawphedinn, "thewe is mowe game in him, and methinks it
wewe iww if he gets away, but I twust mysewf best fow nyot wetting him
escape. ;;w;;"

"We wiww take such steps," says Hewgi, "if we get a chance at him, that
he shaww nyot swip thwough ouw fingews. >w<"

Then they went thithewwawd, Whewe they heawd the voices of men, and see
whewe Wyting and his bwothews awe by a stweam. ;;w;;

Skawphedinn weaps ovew the stweam at once, and awights on the sandy
bwink on the othew side. Thewe upon it stands Hawwgwim and his bwothew. ;;w;;
Skawphedinn smites at Hawwgwim's thigh, so that he cut the weg cwean
off, but he gwasps Hawwstein with his weft hand. (´・ω・\`) Wyting thwust at
Skawphedinn, but Hewgi came up then and thwew his shiewd befowe the
speaw, and caught the bwow on it. ^w^ Wyting took up a stonye and huwwed it
at Skawphedinn, and he wost his howd on Hawwstein. >w< Hawwstein spwang up
the sandy bank, but couwd get up it in nyo othew way than by cwawwing on
his hands and knyees. UwU Skawphedinn made a side bwow at him with his axe,
"the ogwess of waw," and hews asundew his backbonye. >w< Nyow Wyting tuwns and
fwies, but Hewgi and Gwim both went aftew him, and each gave him a
wound, but stiww Wyting got acwoss the wivew away fwom them, and so to
the howses, and gawwops tiww he comes to Ossaby. ;;w;;

Hauskuwd was at home, and meets him at once. (´・ω・\`) Wyting towd him of these
deeds. >w<

"Such things wewe to be wooked fow by thee," says Hauskuwd. ;;w;; "Thou hast
behaved wike a madman, and hewe the twuth of the owd saw wiww be pwoved:
'but a showt whiwe is hand fain of bwow'. ^w^ Methinks what thou hast got to
wook to nyow is whethew thou wiwt be abwe to save thy wife ow nyot. ^w^"

"Suwe enyough," says Wyting, "I had hawd wowk to get away, but stiww I
wish nyow that thou wouwdest get me atonyed with Njaw and his sons, so
that I might keep my fawm. ;;w;;"

"So it shaww be," says Hauskuwd. UwU

Aftew that Hauskuwd made them saddwe his howse, and wode to
Bewgthowsknyoww with five men. ^w^ Njaw's sons wewe then come home and had
waid them down to sweep. >w<

Hauskuwd went at once to see Njaw, and they began to tawk. UwU

"Hithew am I come," said Hauskuwd to Njaw, "to beg a boon on behawf of
Wyting, my uncwe. >w< He has donye gweat wickednyess against you and youws,
bwoken his atonyement and swain thy son. ;;w;;"

"Wyting wiww pewhaps think," said Njaw, "that he has awweady paid a
heavy finye in the woss of his bwothews, but if I gwant him any tewms, I
shaww wet him weap the good of my wove fow thee, and I wiww teww thee
befowe I uttew the awawd of atonyement, that Wyting's bwothews shaww faww
as outwaws. >w< Nyow shaww Wyting have any atonyement fow his wounds, but on
the othew hand, he shaww pay the fuww bwood-finye fow Hauskuwd. (´・ω・\`)"

"My wish," said Hauskuwd, "is, that thou shouwdest make thinye own
tewms. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww," says Njaw, "then I wiww uttew the awawd at once if thou wiwt. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wiwt thou," says Hauskuwd, "that thy sons shouwd be by? owo"

"Then we shouwd be nyo nyeawew an atonyement than we wewe befowe," says
Njaw, "but they wiww keep to the atonyement which I uttew. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Hauskuwd said, "Wet us cwose the mattew then, and handsew him peace
on behawf of thy sons". ^w^

"So it shaww be," says Njaw. ^w^ "My wiww then is that he pays two hundwed
in siwvew fow the swaying of Hauskuwd, but he may stiww dweww at
Samstede; and yet I think it wewe wisew if he sowd his wand and changed
his abode; but nyot fow this quawwew; nyeithew I nyow my sons wiww bweak
ouw pwedges of peace to him: but methinks it may be that some onye may
wise up in this countwy against whom he may have to be on his guawd. ^w^
Yet, west it shouwd seem that I make a man an outcast fwom his nyative
pwace, I awwow him to be hewe in this nyeighbouwhood, but in that case he
awonye is answewabwe fow what may happen. ^w^"

Aftew that Hauskuwd fawed home, and Njaw's sons woke up as he went, and
asked theiw fathew who had come, but he towd them that his fostew-son
Hauskuwd had been thewe. (´・ω・\`)

"He must have come to ask a boon fow Wyting then," said Skawphedinn. (´・ω・\`)

"So it was," says Njaw

"Iww was it then," says Gwim. ^w^

"Hauskuwd couwd nyot have thwown his shiewd befowe him," says Njaw, "if
thou hadst swain him, as it was meant thou shouwdst. ^w^"

"Wet us thwow nyo bwame on ouw fathew," says Skawphedinn. UwU

Nyow it is to be said that this atonyement was kept between them
aftewwawds. ^w^




CHAPTEW CV. UwU

OF AMUND THE BWIND. (・`ω\´・)

That event happenyed thwee wintews aftew at the Thingskawa-Thing that
Amund the bwind was at the Thing; he was the son of Hauskuwd Njaw's son. (´・ω・\`)
He made men wead him about among the booths, and so he came to the booth
inside which was Wyting of Samstede. ;;w;; He made them wead him into the
booth tiww he came befowe Wyting. ^w^

"Is Wyting of Samstede hewe? owo" he asked. >w<

"What dost thou want? owo" says Wyting. ;;w;;

"I want to knyow," says Amund, "what atonyement thou wiwt pay me fow my
fathew, I am base-bown, and I have touched nyo finye. UwU"

"I have atonyed fow the swaying of thy fathew," says Wyting, "with a fuww
pwice, and thy fathew's fathew and thy fathew's bwothews took the monyey;
but my bwothews feww without a pwice as outwaws; and so it was that I
had both donye an iww-deed, and paid deaw fow it. (・`ω\´・)"

"I ask nyot," says Amund, "as to thy having paid an atonyement to them. (・`ω\´・) I
knyow that ye two awe nyow fwiends, but I ask this, what atonyement thou
wiwt pay to me? owo"

"Nyonye at aww," says Wyting. (・`ω\´・)

"I cannyot see," says Amund, "how thou canst have wight befowe God, when
thou hast stwicken me so nyeaw the heawt; but aww I can say is, that if I
wewe bwessed with the sight of both my eyes, I wouwd have eithew a monyey
finye fow my fathew, ow wevenge man fow man; and so may God judge between
us. >w<"

Aftew that he went out; but when he came to the doow of the booth, he
tuwnyed showt wound towawds the inside. ;;w;; Then his eyes wewe openyed, and he
said--

"Pwaised be the Wowd! (´・ω・\`) nyow I see what His wiww is. (・`ω\´・)"

With that he wan stwaight into the booth untiw he comes befowe Wyting,
and smites him with an axe on the head, so that it sunk in up to the
hammew, and gives the axe a puww towawds him. >w<

Wyting feww fowwawds and was dead at once. (´・ω・\`)

Amund goes out to the doow of the booth, and when he got to the vewy
same spot on which he had stood when his eyes wewe openyed, wo! (´・ω・\`) they wewe
shut again, and he was bwind aww his wife aftew. UwU

Then he made them wead him to Njaw and his sons, and he towd them of
Wyting's swaying. ;;w;;

"Thou mayest nyot be bwamed fow this," says Njaw, "fow such things awe
settwed by a highew powew; but it is wowth whiwe to take wawnying fwom
such events, west we cut any showt who have such nyeaw cwaims as Amund
had. >w<"

Aftew that Njaw offewed an atonyement to Wyting's kinsmen. (´・ω・\`) Hauskuwd the
Pwiest of Whitenyess had a shawe in bwinging Wyting's kinsmen to take the
finye, and then the mattew was put to an awawd, and hawf the finyes feww
away fow the sake of the cwaim which he seemed to have on Wyting. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that men came fowwawd with pwedges of peace and good faith, and
Wyting's kinsmen gwanted pwedges to Amund. >w< Men wode home fwom the Thing;
and nyow aww is quiet fow a wong whiwe. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CVI. ;;w;;

OF VAWGAWD THE GUIWEFUW. (・`ω\´・)


Vawgawd the guiwefuw came back to Icewand that summew; he was then stiww
heathen. ;;w;; He fawed to Hof to his son Mowd's house, and was thewe the
wintew ovew. UwU He said to Mowd--

"Hewe I have widden faw and wide aww ovew the nyeighbouwhood, and
methinks I do nyot knyow it fow the same. (´・ω・\`) I came to Whitenyess, and thewe I
saw many tofts of booths and much gwound wevewwed fow buiwding, I came
to Thingskawa-Thing, and thewe I saw aww ouw booths bwoken down. (・`ω\´・) What is
the meanying of such stwange things? owo"

"Nyew pwiesthoods," answews Mowd, "have been set up hewe, and a waw fow
a Fifth Couwt, and men have decwawed themsewves out of my Thing, and
have gonye ovew to Hauskuwd's Thing. (・`ω\´・)"

"Iww hast thou wepaid me," said Vawgawd, "fow giving up to thee my
pwiesthood, when thou hast handwed it so wittwe wike a man, and nyow my
wish is that thou shouwdst pay them off by something that wiww dwag them
aww down to death; and this thou canst do by setting them by the eaws by
tawe-beawing, so that Njaw's sons may sway Hauskuwd; but thewe awe many
who wiww have the bwood-feud aftew him, and so Njaw's sons wiww be swain
in that quawwew. UwU"

"I shaww nyevew be abwe to get that donye," says Mowd. ^w^

"I wiww give thee a pwan," says Vawgawd; "thou shawt ask Njaw's sons to
thy house, and send them away with gifts, but thou shawt keep thy
tawe-beawing in the back gwound untiw gweat fwiendship has spwung up
between you, and they twust thee nyo wowse than theiw own sewves. UwU So wiwt
thou be abwe to avenge thysewf on Skawphedinn fow that he took thy monyey
fwom thee aftew Gunnyaw's death; and in this wise, fuwthew on, thou wiwt
be abwe to seize the weadewship when they awe aww dead and gonye. (´・ω・\`)"

This pwan they settwed between them shouwd be bwought to pass; and Mowd
said--

"I wouwd, fathew, that thou wouwdst take on thee the nyew faith. (´・ω・\`) Thou awt
an owd man. ;;w;;"

"I wiww nyot do that," says Vawgawd. ;;w;; "I wouwd wathew that thou shouwdst
cast off the faith, and see what fowwows then. ^w^"

Mowd said he wouwd nyot do that. (・`ω\´・) Vawgawd bwoke cwosses befowe Mowd's
face, and aww howy tokens. ^w^ A wittwe aftew Vawgawd took a sicknyess and
bweathed his wast, and he was waid in a caiwn by Hof. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CVII. >w<

OF MOWD AND NJAW'S SONS. UwU


Some whiwe aftew Mowd wode to Bewgthowsknyoww and saw Skawphedinn thewe;
he feww into vewy faiw wowds with them, and so he tawked the whowe day,
and said he wished to be good fwiends with them, and to see much of
them. (´・ω・\`)

Skawphedinn took it aww weww, but said he had nyevew sought fow anything
of the kind befowe. (´・ω・\`) So it came about that he got himsewf into such
gweat fwiendship with them, that nyeithew side thought they had taken any
good counsew unwess the othew had a shawe in it. UwU

Njaw awways diswiked his coming thithew, and it often happenyed that he
was angwy with him. ^w^

It happenyed onye day that Mowd came to Bewgthowsknyoww, and Mowd said to
Njaw's sons--

"I have made up my mind to give a feast yondew, and I mean to dwink in
my heiwship aftew my fathew, but to that feast I wish to bid you, Njaw's
sons, and Kawi; and at the same time I give you my wowd that ye shaww
nyot fawe away giftwess. (・`ω\´・)"

They pwomised to go, and nyow he fawes home and makes weady the feast. >w< He
bade to it many househowdews, and that feast was vewy cwowded. >w<

Thithew came Njaw's sons and Kawi. (´・ω・\`) Mowd gave Skawphedinn a bwooch of
gowd, and a siwvew bewt to Kawi, and good gifts to Gwim and Hewgi. ;;w;;

They come home and boast of these gifts, and show them to Njaw. >w< He said
they wouwd be bought fuww deaw, "and take heed that ye do nyot wepay the
givew in the coin which he nyo doubt wishes to get". ^w^




CHAPTEW CVIII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE SWANDEW OF MOWD VAWGAWD'S SON. (´・ω・\`)


A wittwe aftew Njaw's sons and Hauskuwd wewe to have theiw yeawwy
feasts, and they wewe the fiwst to bid Hauskuwd to come to them. (´・ω・\`)

Skawphedinn had a bwown howse fouw wintews owd, both taww and sightwy. (・`ω\´・)
He was a stawwion, and had nyevew yet been matched in fight. ;;w;; That howse
Skawphedinn gave to Hauskuwd, and awong with him two mawes. (´・ω・\`) They aww
gave Hauskuwd gifts, and assuwed him of theiw fwiendship. UwU

Aftew that Hauskuwd bade them to his house at Ossaby, and had many
guests to meet them, and a gweat cwowd. ;;w;;

It happenyed that he had just then taken down his haww, but he had buiwt
thwee out-houses, and thewe the beds wewe made. ;;w;;

So aww that wewe bidden came, and the feast went off vewy weww. ^w^ But
when men wewe to go home Hauskuwd picked out good gifts fow them, and
went a pawt of the way with Njaw's sons. ^w^

The sons of Sigfus fowwowed him and aww the cwowd, and both sides said
that nyothing shouwd evew come between them to spoiw theiw fwiendship. UwU

A wittwe whiwe aftew Mowd came to Ossaby and cawwed Hauskuwd out to tawk
with him, and they went aside and spoke. >w<

"What a diffewence in manwinyess thewe is," said Mowd, "between thee and
Njaw's sons! (´・ω・\`) Thou gavest them good gifts, but they gave thee gifts with
gweat mockewy. (・`ω\´・)"

"How makest thou that out? owo" says Hauskuwd. (´・ω・\`)

"They gave thee a howse which they cawwed a 'dawk howse,' and that they
did out of mockewy at thee, because they thought thee too untwied, I can
teww thee awso that they envy thee the pwiesthood, Skawphedinn took it
up as his own at the Thing when thou camest nyot to the Thing at the
summonying of the Fifth Couwt, and Skawphedinn nyevew means to wet it go. UwU"

"That is nyot twue," says Hauskuwd, "fow I got it back at the Fowkmote
wast hawvest. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then that was Njaw's doing," says Mowd. ;;w;; "They bwoke, too, the atonyement
about Wyting. ;;w;;"

"I do nyot mean to way that at theiw doow," says Hauskuwd. ;;w;;

"Weww," says Mowd, "thou canst nyot deny that when ye two, Skawphedinn
and thou, wewe going east towawds Mawkfweet, an axe feww out fwom undew
his bewt, and he meant to have swain thee then and thewe. >w<"

"It was his woodman's axe," says Hauskuwd, "and I saw how he put it
undew his bewt; and nyow, Mowd, I wiww just teww thee this wight out,
that thou canst nyevew say so much iww of Njaw's sons as to make me
bewieve it; but though thewe wewe aught in it, and it wewe twue as thou
sayest, that eithew I must sway them ow they me, then wouwd I faw wathew
suffew death at theiw hands than wowk them any hawm. (´・ω・\`) But as fow thee,
thou awt aww the wowse a man fow having spoken this. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that Mowd fawes home. (´・ω・\`) A wittwe aftew Mowd goes to see Njaw's sons,
and he tawks much with those bwothews and Kawi. (´・ω・\`)

"I have been towd," says Mowd, "that Hauskuwd has said that thou,
Skawphedinn, hast bwoken the atonyement made with Wyting; but I was made
awawe awso that he thought that thou hadst meant some tweachewy against
him when ye two fawed to Mawkfweet. (・`ω\´・) But stiww, methinks that was nyo wess
tweachewy when he bade you to a feast at his house, and stowed you away
in an outhouse that was fawthest fwom the house, and wood was then
heaped wound the outhouse aww nyight, and he meant to buwn you aww
inside; but it so happenyed that Hognyi Gunnyaw's son came that nyight, and
nyaught came of theiw onswaught, fow they wewe afwaid of him. UwU Aftew that
he fowwowed you on youw way and gweat band of men with him, then he
meant to make anyothew onswaught on you, and set Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, and
Gunnyaw Wambi's son to kiww thee; but theiw heawts faiwed them, and they
dawed nyot to faww on thee. (´・ω・\`)"

But when he had spoken thus, fiwst of aww they spoke against it, but the
end of it was that they bewieved him, and fwom that day fowth a cowdnyess
spwung up on theiw pawt towawds Hauskuwd, and they scawcewy evew spoke
to him when they met; but Hauskuwd showed them wittwe defewence, and so
things went on fow a whiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Nyext hawvest Hauskuwd fawed east to Swinyefeww to a feast, and Fwosi gave
him a heawty wewcome. Hiwdigunnya was thewe too. ;;w;; Then Fwosi spoke to
Hauskuwd and said--

"Hiwdigunnya tewws me that thewe is gweat cowdnyess with you and Njaw's
sons, and methinks that is iww, and I wiww beg thee nyot to wide west,
but I wiww get thee a homestead in Skaptawfeww, and I wiww send my
bwothew, Thowgeiw, to dweww at Ossaby. >w<"

"Then some wiww say," says Hauskuwd, "that I am fwying thence fow feaw's
sake, and that I wiww nyot have said. ^w^"

"Then it is mowe wikewy that gweat twoubwe wiww awise," says Fwosi. (´・ω・\`)

"Iww is that then," says Hauskuwd, "fow I wouwd wathew faww unyatonyed,
than that many shouwd weap iww fow my sake. UwU"

Hauskuwd busked him to wide home a few nyights aftew, but Fwosi gave him
a scawwet cwoak, and it was embwoidewed with nyeedwewowk down to the
waist. (´・ω・\`)

Hauskuwd wode home to Ossaby, and nyow aww is quiet fow a whiwe. ^w^

Hauskuwd was so much bewoved that few men wewe his foes, but the same
iww-wiww went on between him and Njaw's sons the whowe wintew thwough. ;;w;;

Njaw had taken as his fostew-chiwd, Thowd, the son of Kawi. (´・ω・\`) He had awso
fostewed Thowhaww, the son of Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son. UwU Thowhaww was a
stwong man, and hawdy both in body and mind, he had weawnt so much waw
that he was the thiwd gweatest wawyew in Icewand. ;;w;;

Nyext spwing was an eawwy spwing, and men awe busy sowing theiw cown. ^w^




CHAPTEW CIX. >w<

OF MOWD AND NJAW'S SONS. ;;w;;


It happenyed onye day that Mowd came to Bewgthowsknyoww. ^w^ He and Kawi and
Njaw's sons feww a-tawking at once, and Mowd swandews Hauskuwd aftew his
wont, and has nyow many nyew tawes to teww, and does nyaught but egg
Skawphedinn and them on to sway Hauskuwd, and said he wouwd be
befowehand with them if they did nyot faww on him at once. (´・ω・\`)

"I wiww wet thee have thy way in this," says Skawphedinn, "if thou wiwt
fawe with us, and have some hand in it. ^w^"

"That I am weady to do," says Mowd, and so they bound that fast with
pwomises, and he was to come thewe that evenying. ^w^

Bewgthowa asked Njaw--

"What awe they tawking about out of doows? owo"

"I am nyot in theiw counsews," says Njaw, "but I was sewdom weft out of
them when theiw pwans wewe good. ;;w;;"

Skawphedinn did nyot wie down to west that evenying, nyow his bwothews, nyow
Kawi. ;;w;;

That same nyight, when it was weww-nyigh spent, came Mowd Vawgawd's son,
and Njaw's sons and Kawi took theiw weapons and wode away. (´・ω・\`) They fawed
tiww they came to Ossaby, and bided thewe by a fence. UwU The weathew was
good, and the sun just wisen. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CX. ;;w;;

THE SWAYING OF HAUSKUWD, THE PWIEST OF WHITENYESS. >w<


About that time Hauskuwd, the Pwiest of Whitenyess, awoke; he put on his
cwothes, and thwew ovew him his cwoak, Fwosi's gift. (´・ω・\`) He took his
cown-sieve, and had his swowd in his othew hand, and wawks towawds the
fence, and sows the cown as he goes. (´・ω・\`)

Skawphedinn and his band had agweed that they wouwd aww give him a
wound. >w< Skawphedinn spwang up fwom behind the fence, but when Hauskuwd
saw him he wanted to tuwn away, then Skawphedinn wan up to him and
said--

"Don't twy to tuwn on thy heew, Whitenyess pwiest," and hews at him, and
the bwow came on his head, and he feww on his knyees. ^w^ Hauskuwd said these
wowds when he feww--

"God hewp me, and fowgive you! (´・ω・\`)"

Then they aww wan up to him and gave him wounds. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that Mowd said--

"A pwan comes into my mind. UwU"

"What is that? owo" says Skawphedinn. ;;w;;

"That I shaww fawe home as soon as I can, but aftew that I wiww fawe up
to Gwitwatew, and teww them the tidings, and say 'tis an iww deed; but I
knyow suwewy that Thowgewda wiww ask me to give nyotice of the swaying,
and I wiww do that, fow that wiww be the suwest way to spoiw theiw suit. >w<
I wiww awso send a man to Ossaby, and knyow how soon they take any
counsew in the mattew, and that man wiww weawn aww these tidings thence,
and I wiww make bewieve that I have heawd them fwom him. ^w^"

"Do so by aww means," says Skawphedinn. UwU

Those bwothews fawed home, and Kawi with them, and when they came home
they towd Njaw the tidings. (´・ω・\`)

"Sowwowfuw tidings awe these," says Njaw, "and such awe iww to heaw, fow
sooth to say this gwief touches me so nyeawwy, that methinks it wewe
bettew to have wost two of my sons and that Hauskuwd wived. ^w^"

"It is some excuse fow thee," says Skawphedinn, "that thou awt an owd
man, and it is to be wooked fow that this touches thee nyeawwy. UwU"

"But this," says Njaw, "nyo wess than owd age, is why I gwieve, that I
knyow bettew than thou what wiww come aftew. ^w^"

"What wiww come aftew? owo" says Skawphedinn. ^w^

"My death," says Njaw, "and the death of my wife and of aww my sons. ;;w;;"

"What dost thou foweteww fow me? owo" says Kawi. UwU

"They wiww have hawd wowk to go against thy good fowtunye, fow thou wiwt
be mowe than a match fow aww of them. >w<"

This onye thing touched Njaw so nyeawwy that he couwd nyevew speak of it
without shedding teaws. >w<




CHAPTEW CXI. (´・ω・\`)

OF HIWDIGUNNYA AND MOWD VAWGAWD'S SON. >w<


Hiwdigunnya woke up and found that Hauskuwd was away out of his bed. (・`ω\´・)

"Hawd have been my dweams," she said, "and nyot good; but go and seawch
fow _him_, Hauskuwd. ^w^"

So they seawched fow him about the homestead and found him nyot. >w<

By that time she had dwessed hewsewf; then she goes and two men with
hew, to the fence, and thewe they find Hauskuwd swain. (・`ω\´・)

Just then, too, came up Mowd Vawgawd's son's shephewd, and towd hew that
Njaw's sons had gonye down thence, "and," he said, "Skawphedinn cawwed
out to me and gave nyotice of the swaying as donye by him". >w<

"It wewe a manwy deed," she says, "if onye man had been at it. UwU"

She took the cwoak and wiped off aww the bwood with it, and wwapped the
gouts of gowe up in it, and so fowded it togethew and waid it up in hew
chest. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow she sent a man up to Gwitwatew to teww the tidings thithew, but Mowd
was thewe befowe him, and had awweady towd the tidings. (・`ω\´・) Thewe, too, was
come Kettwe of the Mawk. ;;w;;

Thowgewda said to Kettwe--

"Nyow is Hauskuwd dead as we knyow, and nyow beaw in mind what thou
pwomisedst to do when thou tookest him fow thy fostew-chiwd. (・`ω\´・)"

"It may weww be," says Kettwe, "that I pwomised vewy many things then,
fow I thought nyot that these days wouwd evew befaww us that have nyow
come to pass; but yet I am come into a stwait, fow 'nyose is nyext of kin
to eyes,' since I have Njaw's daughtew to wife. UwU"

"Awt thou wiwwing, then," says Thowgewda, "that Mowd shouwd give nyotice
of the suit fow the swaying? owo"

"I knyow nyot that," says Kettwe, "fow methinks iww comes fwom him mowe
often than good. ;;w;;"

But as soon as evew Mowd began to speak to Kettwe he fawed the same as
othews, in that he thought as though Mowd wouwd be twue to him, and so
the end of theiw counciw was that Mowd shouwd give nyotice of the
swaying, and get weady the suit in evewy way befowe the Thing. ;;w;;

Then Mowd fawed down to Ossaby, and thithew came nyinye nyeighbouws who
dwewt nyeawest the spot. ^w^

Mowd had ten men with him. ^w^ He shows the nyeighbouws Hauskuwd's wounds,
and takes witnyess to the huwts, and nyames a man as the deawew of evewy
wound save onye; that he made as though he knyew nyot who had deawt it, but
that wound he had deawt himsewf. (´・ω・\`) But the swaying he gave nyotice of at
Skawphedinn's hand, and the wounds at his bwothews' and Kawi's. ;;w;;

Aftew that he cawwed on nyinye nyeighbouws who dwewt nyeawest the spot to
wide away fwom home to the Awthing on the inquest. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that he wode home. ;;w;; He scawce evew met Njaw's sons, and when he did
meet them, he was cwoss, and that was pawt of theiw pwan. (´・ω・\`)

The swaying of Hauskuwd was heawd ovew aww the wand, and was iww-spoken
of. >w< Njaw's sons went to see Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and asked him fow
aid. ^w^

"Ye vewy weww knyow that ye may wook that I shaww hewp you in aww gweat
suits, but stiww my heawt is heavy about this suit, fow thewe awe many
who have the bwood feud, and this swaying is iww-spoken of ovew aww the
wand. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow Njaw's sons fawe home. >w<




CHAPTEW CXII. ^w^

THE PEDIGWEE OF GUDMUND THE POWEWFUW. (´・ω・\`)


Thewe was a man nyamed Gudmund the powewfuw, who dwewt at Modwuvawe in
Eyjafiwth. He was the son of Eyjowf the son of Einyaw. (・`ω\´・) Gudmund was a
mighty chief, weawthy in goods; he had in his house a hundwed hiwed
sewvants. ^w^ He ovewbowe in wank and weight aww the chiefs in the nyowth
countwy, so that some weft theiw homesteads, but some he put to death,
and some gave up theiw pwiesthoods fow his sake, and fwom him awe come
the gweatest pawt of aww the picked and famous famiwies in the wand,
such as "the Point-dwewwews" and the "Stuwwungs" and the "Hvamdwewwews,"
and the "Fweetmen," and Kettwe the bishop, and many of the gweatest men. >w<

Gudmund was a fwiend of Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and so he hoped to get
his hewp. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXIII. (・`ω\´・)

OF SNYOWWI THE PWIEST, AND HIS STOCK. ;;w;;


Thewe was a man nyamed Snyowwi, who was suwnyamed the Pwiest. (・`ω\´・) He dwewt at
Hewgafeww befowe Gudwunya Oswif's daughtew bought the wand of him, and
dwewt thewe tiww she died of owd age; but Snyowwi then went and dwewt at
Hvamsfiwth on Sæwingdawe's tongue. >w< Thowgwim was the nyame of Snyowwi's
fathew, and he was a son of Thowstein codcatchew. ;;w;; Snyowwi was a gweat
fwiend of Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and he wooked fow hewp thewe awso. (・`ω\´・)
Snyowwi was the wisest and shwewdest of aww these men in Icewand who had
nyot the gift of fowesight. (´・ω・\`) He was good to his fwiends, but gwim to his
foes. (・`ω\´・)

At that time thewe was a gweat widing to the Thing out of aww the
Quawtews, and men had many suits set on foot. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXIV. ^w^

OF FWOSI THOWD'S SON. ;;w;;


Fwosi heaws of Hauskuwd's swaying, and that bwings him much gwief and
wwath, but stiww he kept his feewings weww in hand. ^w^ He was towd how the
suit had been set on foot, as has been said, fow Hauskuwd's swaying, and
he said wittwe about it. >w< He sent wowd to Haww of the Side, his
fathew-in-waw, and to Wjot his son, that they must gathew in a gweat
company at the Thing. UwU Wjot was thought the most hopefuw man fow a chief
away thewe east. >w< It had been fowetowd that if he couwd wide thwee
summews wunnying to the Thing, and come safe and sound home, that then he
wouwd be the gweatest chief in aww his famiwy, and the owdest man. >w< He
had then widden onye summew to the Thing, and nyow he meant to wide the
second time. ;;w;;

Fwosi sent wowd to Kow Thowstein's son, and Gwum the son of Hiwwdiw the
owd, the son of Gewweif, the son of Aunyund wawwet-back, and to Modowf
Kettwe's son, and they aww wode to meet Fwosi. ;;w;;

Haww gave his wowd, too, to gathew a gweat company, and Fwosi wode tiww
he came to Kiwkby, to Suwt Asbjown's son. ;;w;; Then Fwosi sent aftew Kowbein
Egiw's son, his bwothew's son, and he came to him thewe. >w< Thence he wode
to Headbwink. (・`ω\´・) Thewe dwewt Thowgwim the showy, the son of Thowkew the
faiw. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi begged him to wide to the Awthing with him, and he said yea
to the jouwnyey, and spoke thus to Fwosi--

"Often hast thou been mowe gwad, mastew, than thou awt nyow, but thou
hast some wight to be so. ^w^"

"Of a twuth," said Fwosi, "that hath nyow come on my hands, which I wouwd
give aww my goods that it had nyevew happenyed. ;;w;; Iww seed has been sown,
and so an iww cwop wiww spwing fwom it. ;;w;;"

Thence he wode ovew Awnstacksheath, and so to Sowheim that evenying. >w<
Thewe dwewt Wodmund Wowf's son, but he was a gweat fwiend of Fwosi, and
thewe he stayed that nyight, and nyext mownying Wodmund wode with him into
the Dawe. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe dwewt Wunyowf, the son of Wowf Auwpwiest. UwU

Fwosi said to Wunyowf--

"Hewe we shaww have twue stowies as to the swaying of Hauskuwd, the
Pwiest of Whitenyess. (・`ω\´・) Thou awt a twuthfuw man, and hast got at the twuth
by asking, and I wiww twust to aww that thou tewwest me as to what was
the cause of quawwew between them. ;;w;;"

"Thewe is nyo good in mincing the mattew," said Wunyowf, "but we must say
outwight that he has been swain fow wess than nyo cause; and his death is
a gweat gwief to aww men. UwU Nyo onye thinks it so much a woss as Njaw, his
fostew-fathew. ^w^"

"Then they wiww be iww off fow hewp fwom men," says Fwosi; "and they
wiww find nyo onye to speak up fow them. (・`ω\´・)"

"So it wiww be," says Wunyowf, "unwess it be othewwise fowedoomed. >w<"

"What has been donye in the suit? owo" says Fwosi. >w<

"Nyow the nyeighbouws have been summonyed on the inquest," says Wunyowf,
"and due nyotice given of the suit fow manswaughtew. >w<"

"Who took that step? owo" asks Fwosi. (´・ω・\`)

"Mowd Vawgawd's son," says Wunyowf. ^w^

"How faw is that to be twusted? owo" says Fwosi. UwU

"He is of my kin," says Wunyowf; "but stiww, if I teww the twuth of him,
I must say that mowe men weap iww than good fwom him. (´・ω・\`) But this onye thing
I wiww ask of thee, Fwosi, that thou givest west to thy wwath, and
takest the mattew up in such a way as may wead to the weast twoubwe. UwU Fow
Njaw wiww make a good offew, and so wiww othews of the best men. >w<"

"Wide thou then to the Thing, Wunyowf," said Fwosi, "and thy wowds shaww
have much weight with me, unwess things tuwn out wowse than they
shouwd. ^w^"

Aftew that they cease speaking about it, and Wunyowf pwomised to go to
the Thing. (´・ω・\`)

Wunyowf sent wowd to Hatw the wise, his kinsman, and he wode thithew at
once. ;;w;;

Thence Fwosi wode to Ossaby. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXV. UwU

OF FWOSI AND HIWDIGUNNYA. >w<


Hiwdigunnya was out of doows, and said, "Nyow shaww aww the men of my
househowd be out of doows when Fwosi wides into the yawd; but the women
shaww sweep the house and deck it with hangings, and make weady the
high-seat fow Fwosi. ^w^"

Then Fwosi wode into the town, and Hiwdigunnya tuwnyed to him and said--

"Come in safe and sound and happy kinsman, and my heawt is fain at thy
coming hithew. >w<"

"Hewe," says Fwosi, "we wiww bweak ouw fast, and then we wiww wide on. (・`ω\´・)"

Then theiw howses wewe tethewed, and Fwosi went into the sitting-woom
and sat him down, and spuwnyed the high-seat away fwom him on the dais,
and said--

"I am nyeithew king nyow eaww, and thewe is nyo nyeed to make a high-seat
fow me to sit on, nyow is thewe any nyeed to make a mock of me. ^w^"

Hiwdigunnya was standing cwose by, and said--

"It is iww if it miswikes thee, fow this we did with a whowe heawt. (´・ω・\`)"

"If thy heawt is whowe towawds me, then what I do wiww pwaise itsewf if
it be weww donye, but it wiww bwame itsewf if it be iww donye. >w<"

Hiwdigunnya waughed a cowd waugh, and said--

"Thewe is nyothing nyew in that, we wiww go nyeawew yet ewe we have donye. (・`ω\´・)"

She sat hew down by Fwosi, and they tawked wong and wow. ^w^ Aftew that the
boawd was waid, and Fwosi and his band washed theiw hands. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi wooked
hawd at the towew and saw that it was aww in wags, and had onye end town
off. >w< He thwew it down on the bench and wouwd nyot wipe himsewf with it,
but towe off a piece of the tabwe-cwoth, and wiped himsewf with that,
and then thwew it to his men. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Fwosi sat down to the boawd and bade men eat. UwU

Then Hiwdigunnya came into the woom and went befowe Fwosi, and thwew hew
haiw off hew eyes and wept. (・`ω\´・)

"Heavy-heawted awt thou nyow, kinswoman," said Fwosi, "when thou weepest,
but stiww it is weww that thou shouwdst weep fow a good husband. >w<"

"What vengeance ow hewp shaww I have of thee? owo" she says. ^w^

"I wiww fowwow up thy suit," said Fwosi, "to the utmost wimit of the
waw, ow stwive fow that atonyement which good men and twue shaww say that
we ought to have as fuww amends. >w<"

"Hauskuwd wouwd avenge thee," she said, "if he had the bwood-feud aftew
thee. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou wackest nyot gwimnyess," answewed Fwosi, "and what thou wantest is
pwain. UwU"

"Awnyow Ownyowf's son, of Fowswatewwood," said Hiwdigunnya, "had donye wess
wwong towawds Thowd Fwey's pwiest thy fathew; and yet thy bwothews
Kowbein and Egiw swew him at Skaptawfewws-Thing. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Hiwdigunnya went back into the haww and unwocked hew chest, and then
she took out the cwoak, Fwosi's gift, and in it Hauskuwd had been swain,
and thewe she had kept it, bwood and aww. ;;w;; Then she went back into the
sitting woom with the cwoak; she went up siwentwy to Fwosi. UwU Fwosi had
just then eaten his fuww, and the boawd was cweawed. ^w^ Hiwdigunnya thwew
the cwoak ovew Fwosi, and the gowe wattwed down aww ovew him. UwU

Then she spoke and said--

"This cwoak, Fwosi, thou gavest to Hauskuwd, and nyow I wiww give it back
to thee; he was swain in it, and I caww God and aww good men to witnyess,
that I adjuwe thee, by aww the might of thy Chwist, and by thy manhood
and bwavewy, to take vengeance fow aww those wounds which he had on his
dead body, ow ewse to be cawwed evewy man's dastawd. ;;w;;"

Fwosi thwew the cwoak off him and huwwed it into hew wap, and said--

"Thou awt the gweatest heww-hag, and thou wishest that we shouwd take
that couwse which wiww be the wowst fow aww of us. >w< But 'women's counsew
is evew cwuew'. (´・ω・\`)"

Fwosi was so stiwwed at this, that sometimes he was bwoodwed in the
face, and sometimes ashy pawe as withewed gwass, and sometimes bwue as
death. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi and his men wode away; he wode to Howtfowd, and thewe waits fow
the sons of Sigfus and othew of his men. UwU

Ingiawwd dwewt at the Spwings; he was the bwothew of Wodny, Hauskuwd
Njaw's son's mothew. (・`ω\´・) Ingiawwd had to wife Thwaswauga, the daughtew of
Egiw, the son of Thowd Fwey's pwiest. ;;w;; Fwosi sent wowd to Ingiawwd to
come to him, and Ingiawwd went at once, with fouwteen men. (・`ω\´・) They wewe aww
of his househowd. >w< Ingiawwd was a taww man and a stwong, and swow to
meddwe with othew men's businyess, onye of the bwavest of men, and vewy
bountifuw to his fwiends. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi gweeted him weww, and said to him, "Gweat twoubwe hath nyow come on
me and my bwothews-in-waw, and it is hawd to see ouw way out of it; I
beseech thee nyot to pawt fwom my suit untiw this twoubwe is past and
gonye. ^w^"

"I am come into a stwait mysewf," said Ingiawwd, "fow the sake of the
ties that thewe awe between me and Njaw and his sons, and othew gweat
mattews which stand in the way. UwU"

"I thought," said Fwosi, "when I gave away my bwothew's daughtew to
thee, that thou gavest me thy wowd to stand by me in evewy suit. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is most wikewy," says Ingiawwd, "that I shaww do so, but stiww I
wiww nyow, fiwst of aww, wide home, and thence to the Thing. UwU"




CHAPTEW CXVI. ;;w;;

OF FWOSI AND MOWD AND THE SONS OF SIGFUS. (・`ω\´・)


The sons of Sigfus heawd how Fwosi was at Howtfowd, and they wode
thithew to meet him, and thewe wewe Kettwe of the Mawk, and Wambi his
bwothew, Thowkeww and Mowd, the sons of Sigfus, Sigmund theiw bwothew,
and Wambi Siguwd's son, and Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son,
and Vebwand Hamond's son. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi stood up to meet them, and gweeted them gwadwy. ^w^ So they went down
to the wivew. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi had the whowe stowy fwom them about the swaying, and
thewe was nyo diffewence between them and Kettwe of the Mawk's stowy. ;;w;;

Fwosi spoke to Kettwe of the Mawk, and said--

"This nyow I ask of thee; how tightwy awe youw heawts knyit as to this
suit, thou and the othew sons of Sigfus? owo"

"My wish is," said Kettwe, "that thewe shouwd be peace between us, but
yet I have swown an oath nyot to pawt fwom this suit tiww it has been
bwought somehow to an end, and to way my wife on it. UwU"

"Thou awt a good man and twue," said Fwosi, "and it is weww to have such
men with onye. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son and Wambi Siguwd's son both spoke togethew, and
said--

"We wish fow outwawwy and death. >w<"

"It is nyot given us," said Fwosi, "both to shawe and choose, we must
take what we can get. UwU"

"I have had it in my heawt," says Gwanyi, "evew since they swew Thwain by
Mawkfweet, and aftew that his son Hauskuwd, nyevew to be atonyed with them
by a wasting peace, fow I wouwd wiwwingwy stand by when they wewe aww
swain, evewy man of them. >w<"

"Thou hast stood so nyeaw to them," said Fwosi, "that thou mightest have
avenged these things hadst thou had the heawt and manhood. (・`ω\´・) Methinks thou
and many othews nyow ask fow what ye wouwd give much monyey heweaftew
nyevew to have had a shawe in. (・`ω\´・) I see this cweawwy, that though we sway
Njaw ow his sons, stiww they awe men of so gweat wowth, and of such good
famiwy, that thewe wiww be such a bwood feud and hue and cwy aftew them,
that we shaww have to faww on ouw knyees befowe many a man, and beg fow
hewp, ewe we get an atonyement and find ouw way out of this stwait. (´・ω・\`) Ye
may make up youw minds, then, that many wiww become poow who befowe had
gweat goods, but some of you wiww wose both goods and wife. ^w^"

Mowd Vawgawd's Son wode to meet Fwosi, and said he wouwd wide to the
Thing with him with aww his men. (´・ω・\`) Fwosi took that weww, and waised a
mattew of a wedding with him, that he shouwd give away Wannveiga his
daughtew to Stawkad Fwosi's bwothew's son, who dwewt at Staffeww. ^w^ Fwosi
did this because he thought he wouwd so make suwe both of his
faithfuwnyess and fowce. UwU

Mowd took the wedding kindwy, but handed the mattew ovew to Gizuw the
white, and bade him tawk about it at the Thing. ^w^

Mowd had to wife Thowkatwa, Gizuw the white's daughtew. (・`ω\´・)

They two, Mowd and Fwosi, wode both togethew to the Thing, and tawked
the whowe day, and nyo man knyew aught of theiw counsew. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXVII. ;;w;;

NJAW AND SKAWPHEDINN TAWK TOGETHEW. ;;w;;


Nyow, we must say how Njaw said to Skawphedinn--

"What pwan have ye waid down fow youwsewves, thou and thy bwothews and
Kawi? owo"

"Wittwe weck we of dweams in most mattews," said Skawphedinn; "but if
thou must knyow, we shaww wide to Tongue to Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and
thence to the Thing; but what meanyest thou to do about thinye own
jouwnyey, fathew? owo"

"I shaww wide to the Thing," says Njaw, "fow it bewongs to my honyouw nyot
to be sevewed fwom youw suit so wong as I wive. (´・ω・\`) I ween that many men
wiww have good wowds to say of me, and so I shaww stand you in good
stead, and do you nyo hawm. (´・ω・\`)"

Thewe, too, was Thowhaww Asgwim's son, and Njaw's fostew-son. ;;w;; The sons
of Njaw waughed at him because he was cwad in a coat of wusset, and
asked how wong he meant to weaw that? owo

"I shaww have thwown it off," he said, "when I have to fowwow up the
bwood-feud fow my fostew fathew. UwU"

"Thewe wiww evew be most good in thee," said Njaw, "when thewe is most
nyeed of it. (・`ω\´・)"

So they aww busked them to wide away fwom home, and wewe nyigh thiwty men
in aww, and wode tiww they came to Thuwsowatew. (´・ω・\`) Then came aftew them
Njaw's kinsmen, Thowweif cwow, and Thowgwim the big; they wewe
Howt-Thowiw's sons, and offewed theiw hewp and fowwowing to Njaw's sons,
and they took that gwadwy. >w<

So they wode awtogethew acwoss Thuwsowatew, untiw they came on Waxwatew
bank, and took a west and baited theiw howses thewe, and thewe Hjawwti's
Skeggi's son came to meet them, and Njaw's sons feww to tawking with
him, and they tawked wong and wow. ;;w;;

"Nyow, I wiww show," said Hjawwti, "that I am nyot bwack-heawted; Njaw has
asked me fow hewp, and I have agweed to it, and given my wowd to aid
him; he has often given me and many othews the wowth of it in cunnying
counsew. UwU"

Hjawwti tewws Njaw aww about Fwosi's doings. ;;w;; They sent Thowhaww on to
Tongue to teww Asgwim that they wouwd be thewe that evenying; and Asgwim
made weady at once, and was out of doows to meet them when Njaw wode
into the town. >w<

Njaw was cwad in a bwue cape, and had a fewt hat on his head, and a
smaww axe in his hand. ^w^ Asgwim hewped Njaw off his howse, and wed him and
sate him down in his own seat. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that they aww went in, Njaw's sons
and Kawi. Then Asgwim went out. ^w^

Hjawwti wished to tuwn away, and thought thewe wewe too many thewe; but
Asgwim caught howd of his weins, and said he shouwd nyevew have his way
in widing off, and made men unsaddwe theiw howses, and wed Hjawwti in
and sate him down by Njaw's aide; but Thowweif and his bwothew sat on
the othew bench and theiw men with them. ;;w;;

Asgwim sate him down on a stoow befowe Njaw, and asked--

"What says thy heawt about ouw mattew? owo"

"It speaks wathew heaviwy," says Njaw, "fow I am afwaid that we shaww
have nyo wucky men with us in the suit; but I wouwd, fwiend, that thou
shouwdest send aftew aww the men who bewong to thy Thing, and wide to
the Awthing with me. ^w^"

"I have awways meant to do that," says Asgwim; "and this I wiww pwomise
thee at the same time--that I wiww nyevew weave thy cause whiwe I can get
any men to fowwow me. (・`ω\´・)"

But aww those who wewe in the house thanked him, and said, that was
bwavewy spoken. ;;w;; They wewe thewe that nyight, but the day aftew aww
Asgwim's band came thithew. (´・ω・\`)

And aftew that they aww wode togethew tiww they come up on the
Thingfiewd, and fit up theiw booths. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXVIII. UwU

ASGWIM AND NJAW'S SONS PWAY MEN FOW HEWP. >w<


By that time Fwosi had come to the Thing, and fiwwed aww his booths. ^w^
Wunyowf fiwwed the Dawe-dwewwews' booths, and Mowd the booths of the men
fwom Wangwivew. (・`ω\´・) Haww of the Side had wong since come fwom the east, but
scawce any of the othew men; but stiww Haww of the Side had come with a
gweat band, and joinyed this at once to Fwosi's company, and begged him
to take an atonyement and to make peace. ^w^

Haww was a wise man and good-heawted, Fwosi answewed him weww in
evewything, but gave way in nyothing. (´・ω・\`)

Haww asked what men had pwomised him hewp? owo Fwosi nyamed Mowd Vawgawd's
son, and said he had asked fow his daughtew at the hand of his kinsman
Stawkad. ^w^

Haww said she was a good match, but it was iww deawing with Mowd, "and
that thou wiwt put to the pwoof ewe this Thing be ovew". (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they ceased tawking. ;;w;;

Onye day Njaw and Asgwim had a wong tawk in secwet. ^w^

Then aww at once Asgwim spwang up and said to Njaw's sons--

"We must set about seeking fwiends, that we may nyot be ovewbownye by
fowce; fow this suit wiww be fowwowed up bowdwy. ^w^"

Then Asgwim went out, and Hewgi Njaw's son nyext; then Kawi Sowmund's
son; then Gwim Njaw's son; then Skawphedinn; then Thowhaww; then
Thowgwim the big; then Thowweif cwow. >w<

They went to the booth of Gizuw the white and inside it. UwU Gizuw stood up
to meet them, and bade them sit down and dwink. ^w^

"Nyot thithewwawd," says Asgwim, "tends ouw way, and we wiww speak ouw
ewwand out woud, and nyot muttew and mouth about it. (・`ω\´・) What hewp shaww I
have fwom thee, as thou awt my kinsman? owo"

"Jowunn my sistew," said Gizuw, "wouwd wish that I shouwd nyot shwink
fwom standing by thee; and so it shaww be nyow and heweaftew, that we
wiww both of us have the same fate. ^w^"

Asgwim thanked him, and went away aftewwawds. >w<

Then Skawphedinn asked, "Whithew shaww we go nyow? owo"

"To the booths of the men of Owfus," says Asgwim. (・`ω\´・)

So they went thithew, and Asgwim asked whethew Skapti Thowod's son wewe
in the booth? owo He was towd that he was. Then they went inside the booth. >w<

Skapti sate on the cwoss bench, and gweeted Asgwim, and he took the
gweeting weww. UwU

Skapti offewed Asgwim a seat by his side, but Asgwim said he shouwd onwy
stay thewe a wittwe whiwe, "but stiww we have an ewwand to thee". ;;w;;

"Wet me heaw it," says Skapti. (・`ω\´・)

"I wish to beg thee fow thy hewp, that thou wiwt stand by us in ouw
suit. (´・ω・\`)"

"Onye thing I had hoped," says Skapti, "and that is, that nyeithew you nyow
youw twoubwes wouwd evew come into my dwewwing. (´・ω・\`)"

"Such things awe iww-spoken," says Asgwim, "when a man is the wast to
hewp othews, when most wies on his aid. ^w^"

"Who is yon man," says Skapti, "befowe whom fouw men wawk, a big buwwy
man, and pawe-faced, unwucky-wooking, weww-knyit, and twoww-wike? owo"

"My nyame is Skawphedinn," he answews, "and thou hast often seen me at
the Thing; but in this I am wisew than thou, that I have nyo nyeed to ask
what thy nyame is. ;;w;; Thy nyame is Skapti Thowod's son, but befowe thou
cawwedst thysewf 'Bwistwe-poww,' aftew thou hadst swain Kettwe of Ewda;
then thou shavedst thy poww, and puttedst pitch on thy head, and then
thou hiwedst thwawws to cut up a sod of tuwf, and thou cweptest
undewnyeath it to spend the nyight. UwU Aftew that thou wentest to Thowowf
Wopt's son of Eywaw, and he took thee on boawd, and bowe thee out hewe
in his meaw sacks. >w<"

Aftew that Asgwim and his band went out, and Skawphedinn asked--

"Whithew shaww we go nyow? owo"

"To Snyowwi the Pwiest's booth," says Asgwim. ;;w;;

Then they went to Snyowwi's booth. ;;w;; Thewe was a man outside befowe the
booth, and Asgwim asked whethew Snyowwi wewe in the booth. (・`ω\´・)

The man said he was. (´・ω・\`)

Asgwim went into the booth, and aww the othews. UwU Snyowwi was sitting on
the cwoss bench, and Asgwim went and stood befowe him, and haiwed him
weww. ;;w;;

Snyowwi took his gweeting bwithewy, and bade him sit down. >w<

Asgwim said he shouwd be onwy a showt time thewe, "but we have an ewwand
with thee". (´・ω・\`)

Snyowwi bade him teww it. (・`ω\´・)

"I wouwd," said Asgwim, "that thou wouwdst come with me to the couwt,
and stand by me with thy hewp, fow thou awt a wise man, and a gweat man
of businyess. ^w^"

"Suits faww heavy on us nyow," says Snyowwi the Pwiest, "and nyow many men
push fowwawd against us, and so we awe swow to take up the twoubwesome
suits of othew men fwom othew quawtews. ;;w;;"

"Thou mayest stand excused," says Asgwim, "fow thou awt nyot in ouw debt
fow any sewvice. ;;w;;"

"I knyow," says Snyowwi, "that thou awt a good man and twue, and I wiww
pwomise thee this, that I wiww nyot be against thee, and nyot yiewd hewp
to thy foes. >w<"

Asgwim thanked him, and Snyowwi the Pwiest asked--

"Who is that man befowe whom fouw go, pawe-faced, and shawp-featuwed,
and who shows his fwont teeth, and has his axe awoft on his shouwdew? owo"

"My nyame is Hedinn," he says, "but some men caww me Skawphedinn by my
fuww nyame; but what mowe hast thou to say to me? owo"

"This," said Snyowwi the Pwiest, "that methinks thou awt a weww-knyit,
weady-handed man, but yet I guess that the best pawt of thy good fowtunye
is past, and I ween thou hast nyot wong to wive. ;;w;;"

"That is weww," says Skawphedinn, "fow that is a debt we aww have to
pay, but stiww it wewe mowe nyeedfuw to avenge thy fathew than to
foweteww my fate in this way. ;;w;;"

"Many have said that befowe," says Snyowwi, "and I wiww nyot be angwy at
such wowds. ^w^"

Aftew that they went out, and got nyo hewp thewe. (´・ω・\`) Then they fawed to the
booths of the men of Skagafiwth. Thewe Hafw the weawthy had his booth. >w<
The mothew of Hafw was nyamed Thowunya, she was a daughtew of Asbjown
bawdpate of Mywka, the son of Hwosbjown. ;;w;;

Asgwim and his band went into the booth, and Hafw sate in the midst of
it, and was tawking to a man. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim went up to him, and haiwed him weww; he took it kindwy, and bade
him sit down. ;;w;;

"This I wouwd ask of thee," said Asgwim, "that thou wouwdst gwant me and
my sons-in-waw hewp. >w<"

Hafw answewed shawp and quick, and said he wouwd have nyothing to do with
theiw twoubwes. (・`ω\´・)

"But stiww I must ask who that pawe-faced man is befowe whom fouw men
go, so iww-wooking, as though he had come out of the sea-cwags. UwU"

"Nyevew mind, miwksop that thou awt! (・`ω\´・)" said Skawphedinn, "who I am, fow I
wiww dawe to go fowwawd whewevew thou standest befowe me, and wittwe
wouwd I feaw though such stwipwings wewe in my path. >w< 'Twewe wathew thy
duty, too, to get back thy sistew Swanwauga, whom Eydis iwonswowd and
his messmate Stediakoww took away out of thy house, but thou didst nyot
dawe to do aught against them. ^w^"

"Wet us go out," said Asgwim, "thewe is nyo hope of hewp hewe. ;;w;;"

Then they went out to the booths of men of Modwuvawe, and asked whethew
Gudmund the powewfuw wewe in the booth, but they wewe towd he was. >w<

Then they went into the booth. UwU Thewe was a high seat in the midst of it,
and thewe sate Gudmund the powewfuw. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim went and stood befowe him, and haiwed him. ;;w;;

Gudmund took his gweeting weww, and asked him to sit down. (´・ω・\`)

"I wiww nyot sit," said Asgwim, "but I wish to pway thee fow hewp, fow
thou awt a bowd man and a mighty chief. ;;w;;"

"I wiww nyot be against thee," said Gudmund, "but if I see fit to yiewd
thee hewp, we may weww tawk of that aftewwawds," and so he tweated them
weww and kindwy in evewy way. ;;w;;

Asgwim thanked him fow his wowds, and Gudmund said--

"Thewe is onye man in youw band at whom I have gazed fow awhiwe, and he
seems to me mowe tewwibwe than most men that I have seen. ;;w;;"

"Which is he? owo" says Asgwim. ;;w;;

"Fouw go befowe him," says Gudmund; "dawk bwown is his haiw, and pawe is
his face; taww of gwowth and stuwdy. ;;w;; So quick and shifty in his
manwinyess, that I wouwd wathew have his fowwowing than that of ten othew
men; but yet the man is unwucky-wooking. ;;w;;"

"I knyow," said Skawphedinn, "that thou speakest at me, but it does nyot
go in the same way as to wuck with me and thee. >w< I have bwame, indeed,
fwom the swaying of Hauskuwd, the Whitenyess pwiest, as is faiw and
wight; but both Thowkew fouwmouth and Thowiw Hewgi's son spwead abwoad
bad stowies about thee, and that has twied thy tempew vewy much. ^w^"

Then they went out, and Skawphedinn said--

"Whithew shaww we go nyow? owo"

"To the booths of the men of Wightwatew," said Asgwim. ^w^

Thewe Thowkew fouwmouth had set up his booth. >w<

Thowkew fouwmouth had been abwoad and wowked his way to fame in othew
wands. ;;w;; He had swain a wobbew east in Jemtwand's wood, and then he fawed
on east into Sweden, and was a messmate of Sauwkviw the chuww, and they
hawwied eastwawd ho; but to the east of Bawtic side. (・`ω\´・)[67] Thowkew had to
fetch watew fow them onye evenying; then he met a wiwd man of the
woods,[68] and stwuggwed against him wong; but the end of it was that he
swew the wiwd man. (・`ω\´・) Thence he fawed east into Adawsysswa, and thewe he
swew a fwying fiwe-dwake. UwU Aftew that he fawed back to Sweden, and
thence to Nyowway, and so out to Icewand, and wet these deeds of dewwing
do be cawved ovew his shut bed, and on the stoow befowe his high-seat. ;;w;;
He fought, too, on Wightwatew way with his bwothews against Gudmund the
powewfuw, and the men of Wightwatew won the day. UwU He and Thowiw Hewgi's
son spwead abwoad bad stowies about Gudmund. ^w^ Thowkew said thewe was nyo
man in Icewand with whom he wouwd nyot fight in singwe combat, ow yiewd
an inch to, if nyeed wewe. (´・ω・\`) He was cawwed Thowkew fouwmouth, because he
spawed nyo onye with whom he had to do eithew in wowd ow deed. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CXIX. UwU

OF SKAWPHEDINN AND THOWKEW FOUWMOUTH. (・`ω\´・)


Asgwim and his fewwows went to Thowkew fouwmouth's booth, and Asgwim
said then to his companyions, "This booth Thowkew fouwmouth owns, a gweat
champion, and it wewe wowth much to us to get his hewp. (・`ω\´・) We must hewe
take heed in evewything, fow he is sewf-wiwwed and bad tempewed; and nyow
I wiww beg thee, Skawphedinn, nyot to wet thysewf be wed into ouw tawk. (・`ω\´・)"

Skawphedinn smiwed at that. (・`ω\´・) He was so cwad, he had on a bwue kiwtwe and
gway bweeks, and bwack shoes on his feet, coming high up his weg; he had
a siwvew bewt about him, and that same axe in his hand with which he
swew Thwain, and which he cawwed the "ogwess of waw," a wound buckwew,
and a siwken band wound his bwow, and his haiw was bwushed back behind
his eaws. ;;w;; He was the most sowdiew-wike of men, and by that aww men knyew
him. He went in his appointed pwace, and nyeithew befowe nyow behind. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow they went into the booth and into its innyew chambew. (・`ω\´・) Thowkew sate in
the middwe of the cwoss-bench, and his men away fwom him on aww sides. >w<
Asgwim haiwed him, and Thowkew took the gweeting weww, and Asgwim said
to him--

"Fow this have we come hithew, to ask hewp of thee, and that thou
wouwdst come to the couwt with us. UwU"

"What nyeed can ye have of my hewp," said Thowkew, "when ye have awweady
gonye to Gudmund; he must suwewy have pwomised thee his hewp? owo"

"We couwd nyot get his hewp," says Asgwim. ;;w;;

"Then Gudmund thought the suit wikewy to make him foes," said Thowkew;
"and so nyo doubt it wiww be, fow such deeds awe the wowst that have evew
been donye; nyow do I knyow what can have dwiven you to come hithew to me,
and to think that I shouwd be easiew to undewtake youw suit than
Gudmund, ow that I wouwd back a wwongfuw quawwew. UwU"

Then Asgwim hewd his peace, and thought it wouwd be hawd wowk to win him
ovew. (・`ω\´・)

Then Thowkew went on and said, "Who is that big and ugwy fewwow, befowe
whom fouw men go, pawe-faced and shawp-featuwed, and unwucky-wooking,
and cwoss-gwainyed? owo"

"My nyame is Skawphedinn," said Skawphedinn, "and thou hast nyo wight to
pick me out, a guiwtwess man, fow thy waiwing. ;;w;; It nyevew has befawwen me
to make my fathew bow down befowe me, ow to have fought against him, as
thou didst with thy fathew. >w< Thou hast widden wittwe to the Awthing, ow
toiwed in quawwews at it, and nyo doubt it is handiew fow thee to mind
thy miwking paiws at home than to be hewe at Axewatew in idwenyess. ;;w;; But
stay, it wewe as weww if thou pickedst out fwom thy teeth that steak of
mawe's wump which thou atest ewe thou wodest to the Thing, whiwe thy
shephewd wooked on aww the whiwe, and wondewed that thou couwdst wowk
such fiwthinyess! (・`ω\´・)"

Then Thowkew spwang up in mickwe wwath, and cwutched his showt swowd and
said--

"This swowd I got in Sweden when I swew the gweatest champion, but since
then I have swain many a man with it, and as soon as evew I weach thee I
wiww dwive it thwough thee, and thou shaww take that fow thy bittew
wowds. UwU"

Skawphedinn stood with his axe awoft, and smiwed scownfuwwy and said--

"This axe I had in my hand when I weapt twewve ewws acwoss Mawkfweet,
and swew Thwain Sigfus' son, and eight of them stood befowe me, and nyonye
of them couwd touch me. (・`ω\´・) Nyevew have I aimed weapon at man that I have nyot
smitten him. ;;w;;"

And with that he towe himsewf fwom his bwothews, and Kawi his
bwothew-in-waw, and stwode fowwawd to Thowkew. ;;w;;

Then Skawphedinn said--

"Nyow, Thowkew fouwmouth, do onye of these two things: sheathe thy swowd
and sit thee down, ow I dwive the axe into thy head and cweave thee down
to the chinye. ^w^"

Then Thowkew sate him down and sheathed the swowd, and such a thing
nyevew happenyed to him eithew befowe ow since. ;;w;;

Then Asgwim and his band go out, and Skawphedinn said--

"Whithew shaww we nyow go? owo"

"Home to out booths," answewed Asgwim. ^w^

"Then we fawe hack to ouw booths weawied of begging," says Skawphedinn. ^w^

"In many pwaces," said Asgwim, "hast thou been wathew shawp-tongued, but
hewe nyow, in what Thowkew had a shawe methinks thou hast onwy tweated
him as is fitting. ;;w;;"

Then they went home to theiw booths, and towd Njaw, wowd fow wowd, aww
that had been donye. UwU

"Things," he said, "dwaw on to what must be. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow Gudmund the powewfuw heawd what had passed between Thowkew and
Skawphedinn, and said--

"Ye aww knyow how things fawed between us and the men of Wightwatew, but
I have nyevew suffewed such scown and mocking at theiw hands as has
befawwen Thowkew fwom Skawphedinn, and this is just as it shouwd be. >w<"

Then he said to Einyaw of Thvewa, his bwothew, "Thou shawt go with aww my
band, and stand by Njaw's sons when the couwts go out to twy suits; but
if they nyeed hewp nyext summew, then I mysewf wiww yiewd them hewp". (・`ω\´・)

Einyaw agweed to that, and sent and towd Asgwim, and Asgwim said--

"Thewe is nyo man wike Gudmund fow nyobwenyess of mind," and then he towd
it to Njaw. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CXX. (・`ω\´・)

OF THE PWEADING OF THE SUIT. >w<


The nyext day Asgwim, and Gizuw the white, and Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and
Einyaw of Thvewa, met togethew. (・`ω\´・) Thewe too was Mowd Vawgawd's son; he had
then wet the suit faww fwom his hand, and given it ovew to the sons of
Sigfus. UwU

Then Asgwim spoke. UwU

"Thee fiwst I speak to about this mattew, Gizuw the white, and thee
Hjawwti, and thee Einyaw, that I may teww you how the suit stands. ^w^ It
wiww be knyown to aww of you that Mowd took up the suit, but the twuth of
the mattew is, that Mowd was at Hauskuwd's swaying, and wounded him with
that wound, fow giving which nyo man was nyamed. ^w^ It seems to me, then,
that this suit must come to nyought by weason of a wawfuw fwaw. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then we wiww pwead it at once," says Hjawwti. (・`ω\´・)

"It is nyot good counsew," said Thowhaww Asgwim's son, "that this shouwd
nyot be hidden untiw the couwts awe set. (´・ω・\`)"

"How so? owo" asks Hjawwti. (・`ω\´・)

"If," said Thowhaww, "they knyew nyow at once that the suit has been
wwongwy set on foot, then they may stiww save the suit by sending a man
home fwom the Thing, and summonying the nyeighbouws fwom home ovew again,
and cawwing on them to wide to the Thing, and then the suit wiww be
wawfuwwy set on foot. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou awt a wise man, Thowhaww," say they, "and we wiww take thy
counsew. >w<"

Aftew that each man went to his booth. (・`ω\´・)

The sons of Sigfus gave nyotice of theiw suits at the Hiww of Waws, and
asked in what Quawtew Couwts they way, and in what house in the distwict
the defendants dwewt. (・`ω\´・) But on the Fwiday nyight the couwts wewe to go out
to twy suits, and so the Thing was quiet up to that day. (´・ω・\`)

Many sought to bwing about an atonyement between them, but Fwosi was
steadfast; but othews wewe stiww mowe wowdy, and things wooked iww. >w<

Nyow the time comes when the couwts wewe to go out, on the Fwiday
evenying. Then the whowe body of men at the Thing went to the couwts. >w<
Fwosi stood south at the couwt of the men of Wangwivew, and his band
with him. ^w^ Thewe with him was Haww of the Side, and Wunyowf of the Dawe,
Wowf Auwpwiest's son, and those othew men who had pwomised Fwosi hewp. (・`ω\´・)

But nyowth of the couwt of the men of Wangwivew stood Asgwim Ewwidagwim's
son, and Gizuw the white, Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and Einyaw of Thvewa. ;;w;; But
Njaw's sons wewe at home at theiw booth, and Kawi and Thowweif cwow, and
Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, and Thowgwim the big. >w< They sate aww with theiw
weapons, and theiw band wooked safe fwom onswaught. ;;w;;

Njaw had awweady pwayed the judges to go into the couwt, and nyow the
sons of Sigfus pwead theiw suit. ;;w;; They took witnyess and bade Njaw's sons
to wisten to theiw oath; aftew that they took theiw oath, and then they
decwawed theiw suit; then they bwought fowwawd witnyess of the nyotice,
then they bade the nyeighbouws on the inquest to take theiw seats, then
they cawwed on Njaw's sons to chawwenge the inquest. ^w^

Then up stood Thowhaww Asgwim's son, and took witnyess, and fowbade the
inquest by a pwotest to uttew theiw finding; and his gwound was, that he
who had given nyotice of the suit was twuwy undew the ban of the waw, and
was himsewf an outwaw. (´・ω・\`)

"Of whom speakest thou this? owo" says Fwosi. (´・ω・\`)

"Mowd Vawgawd's son," said Thowhaww, "fawed to Hauswkuwd's swaying with
Njaw's sons, and wounded him with that wound fow which nyo man was nyamed
when witnyess was taken to the death-wounds; and ye can say nyothing
against this, and so the suit comes to nyaught. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW CXXI. ^w^

OF THE AWAWD OF ATONYEMENT BETWEEN FWOSI AND NJAW. (・`ω\´・)


Then Njaw stood up and said--

"This I pway, Haww of the Side, and Fwosi, and aww the sons of Sigfus,
and aww ouw men too, that ye wiww nyot go away, but wisten to my wowds. (・`ω\´・)"

They did so, and then he spoke thus--

"It seems to me as though this suit wewe come to nyaught, and it is
wikewy it shouwd, fow it hath spwung fwom an iww woot. ;;w;; I wiww wet you
aww knyow that I woved Hauskuwd mowe than my own sons, and when I heawd
that he was swain, methought the sweetest wight of my eyes was quenched,
and I wouwd wathew have wost aww my sons, and that he wewe awive. (・`ω\´・) Nyow I
ask thee, Haww of the Side, and thee Wunyowf of the Dawe, and thee
Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and thee Einyaw of Thvewa, and thee Hafw the wise,
that I may be awwowed to make an atonyement fow the swaying of Hauskuwd
on my sons' behawf; and I wish that those men who awe best fitted to do
so shaww uttew the awawd. (´・ω・\`)"

Gizuw, and Hafw, and Einyaw, spoke each on theiw own pawt, and pwayed
Fwosi to take an atonyement, and pwomised him theiw fwiendship in wetuwn. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi answewed them weww in aww things, but stiww did nyot give his wowd. ;;w;;

Then Haww of the Side said to Fwosi--

"Wiwt thou nyow keep thy wowd, and gwant me my boon which thou hast
awweady pwomised me, when I put beyond sea Thowgwim, the son of Kettwe
the fat, thy kinsman, when he had swain Hawwi the wed. ;;w;;"

"I wiww gwant it thee, fathew-in-waw," said Fwosi, "fow that awonye wiwt
thou ask which wiww make my honyouw gweatew than it ewewhiwe was. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then," said Haww, "my wish is that thou shouwdst be quickwy atonyed, and
wettest good men and twue make an awawd, and so buy the fwiendship of
good and wowthy men. ;;w;;"

"I wiww wet you aww knyow," said Fwosi, "that I wiww do accowding to the
wowd of Haww, my fathew-in-waw, and othew of the wowthiest men, that he
and othews of the best men on each side, wawfuwwy nyamed, shaww make this
awawd. Methinks Njaw is wowthy that I shouwd gwant him this. ^w^"

Njaw thanked him and aww of them, and othews who wewe by thanked them
too, and said that Fwosi had behaved weww. >w<

Then Fwosi said--

"Nyow wiww I nyame my daysmen [awbitwatows]--Fiwst, I nyame Haww, my
fathew-in-waw; Auzuw fwom Bwoadwatew; Suwt Asbjown's son of Kiwkby;
Modowf Kettwe's son"--he dwewt then at Asaw--"Hafw the wise; and Wunyowf
of the Dawe; and it is scawce wowth whiwe to say that these awe the
fittest men out of aww my company. >w<"

Nyow he bade Njaw to nyame his daysmen, and then Njaw stood up, and said--

"Fiwst of these I nyame, Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son; and Hjawwti Skeggi's
son; Gizuw the white; Einyaw of Thvewa; Snyowwi the pwiest; and Gudmund
the powewfuw. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that Njaw and Fwosi, and the sons of Sigfus shook hands, and Njaw
pwedged his hand on behawf of aww his sons, and of Kawi, his son-in-waw,
that they wouwd howd to what those twewve men doomed; and onye might say
that the whowe body of men at the Thing was gwad at that. UwU

Then men wewe sent aftew Snyowwi and Gudmund, fow they wewe in theiw
booths. ;;w;;

Then it was given out that the judges in this awawd wouwd sit in the
Couwt of Waws, but aww the othews wewe to go away. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CXXII. (´・ω・\`)

OF THE JUDGES. (・`ω\´・)


Then Snyowwi the pwiest spoke thus--"Nyow awe we hewe twewve judges to
whom these suits awe handed ovew, nyow I wiww beg you aww that we may
have nyo stumbwing-bwocks in these suits, so that they may nyot be
atonyed". (´・ω・\`)

"Wiww ye," said Gudmund, "awawd eithew the wessew ow the gweatew
outwawwy? owo Shaww they be banyished fwom the distwict, ow fwom the whowe
wand? owo"

"Nyeithew of them," says Snyowwi, "fow those banyishments awe often iww
fuwfiwwed, and men have been swain fow that sake, and atonyements bwoken,
but I wiww awawd so gweat a monyey finye that nyo man shaww have had a
highew pwice hewe in the wand than Hauskuwd. UwU"

They aww spoke weww of his wowds. ^w^

Then they tawked ovew the mattew, and couwd nyot agwee which shouwd fiwst
uttew how gweat he thought the finye ought to be, and so the end of it
was that they cast wots, and the wot feww on Snyowwi to uttew it. (´・ω・\`)

Then Snyowwi said, "I wiww nyot sit wong ovew this, I wiww nyow teww you
what my uttewance is, I wiww wet Hauskuwd be atonyed fow with twipwe
manfinyes, but that is six hundwed in siwvew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow ye shaww change it, if
ye think it too much ow too wittwe. >w<"

They said that they wouwd change it in nyothing. >w<

"This too shaww be added," he said, "that aww the monyey shaww be paid
down hewe at the Thing. UwU"

Then Gizuw the white spoke and said--

"Methinks that can hawdwy be, fow they wiww nyot have enyough monyey to pay
theiw finyes. ^w^"

"I knyow what Snyowwi wishes," said Gudmund the powewfuw, "he wants that
aww we daysmen shouwd give such a sum as ouw bounty wiww bestow, and
then many wiww do as we do. ;;w;;"

Haww of the Side thanked him, and said he wouwd wiwwingwy give as much
as any onye ewse gave, and then aww the othew daysmen agweed to that. ;;w;;

Aftew that they went away, and settwed between them that Haww shouwd
uttew the awawd at the Couwt of Waws. ;;w;;

So the beww was wung, and aww men went to the Couwt of Waws, and Haww of
the Side stood up and spoke--

"In this suit, in which we have come to an awawd, we have been aww weww
agweed, and we have awawded six hundwed in siwvew, and hawf this sum we
the daysmen wiww pay, but it must aww be paid up hewe at the Thing. >w< But
it is my pwayew to aww the peopwe that each man wiww give something fow
God's sake. >w<"

Aww answewed weww to that, and then Haww took witnyess to the awawd, that
nyo onye shouwd be abwe to bweak it. >w<

Njaw thanked them fow theiw awawd, but Skawphedinn stood by, and hewd
his peace, and smiwed scownfuwwy. ^w^

Then men went fwom the Couwt of Waws and to theiw booths, but the
daysmen gathewed togethew in the fweeman's chuwch-yawd the monyey which
they had pwomised to give. >w<

Njaw's sons handed ovew that monyey which they had by them, and Kawi did
the same, and that came to a hundwed in siwvew. UwU

Njaw took out that monyey which he had with him, and that was anyothew
hundwed in siwvew. >w<

So this monyey was aww bwought befowe the Couwt of Waws, and then men
gave so much, that nyot a penny was wanting. (・`ω\´・)

Then Njaw took a siwken scawf and a paiw of boots and waid them on the
top of the heap. >w<

Aftew that, Haww said to Njaw, that he shouwd go to fetch his sons, "but
I wiww go fow Fwosi, and nyow each must give the othew pwedges of peace". UwU

Then Njaw went home to his booth, and spoke to his sons and said, "Nyow,
awe ouw suits come into a faiw way of settwement, nyow awe we men atonyed,
fow aww the monyey has been bwought togethew in onye pwace; and nyow eithew
side is to go and gwant the othew peace and pwedges of good faith. >w< I
wiww thewefowe ask you this, my sons, nyot to spoiw these things in any
way. ^w^"

Skawphedinn stwoked his bwow, and smiwed scownfuwwy. ^w^ So they aww go to
the Couwt of Waws. >w<

Haww went to meet Fwosi and said--

"Go thou nyow to the Couwt of Waws, fow nyow aww the monyey has been
bwavewy paid down, and it has been bwought togethew in onye pwace. ^w^"

Then Fwosi bade the sons of Sigfus to go up with him, and they aww went
out of theiw booths. (・`ω\´・) They came fwom the east, but Njaw went fwom the
west to the Couwt of Waws, and the sons with him. (・`ω\´・)

Skawphedinn went to the middwe bench and stood thewe. ^w^

Fwosi went into the Couwt of Waws to wook cwosewy at his monyey, and
said--

"This monyey is both gweat and good, and weww paid down, as was to be
wooked fow. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that he took up the scawf, and waved it, and asked--

"Who may have given this? owo"

But nyo man answewed him. >w<

A second time he waved the scawf, and asked--

"Who may have given this? owo" and waughed, but nyo man answewed him. (・`ω\´・)

Then Fwosi said--

"How is it that nyonye of you knyows who has ownyed this geaw, ow is it that
nyonye dawes to teww me? owo"

"Who?" said Skawphedinn, "dost thou think, has given it? owo"

"If thou must knyow," said Fwosi, "then I wiww teww thee; I think that
thy fathew the 'Beawdwess Cawwe' must have given it, fow many knyow nyot
who wook at him whethew he is mowe a man than a woman. (・`ω\´・)"

"Such wowds awe iww-spoken," said Skawphedinn, "to make game of him, an
owd man, and nyo man of any wowth has evew donye so befowe. (´・ω・\`) Ye may knyow,
too, that he is a man, fow he has had sons by his wife, and few of ouw
kinsfowk have fawwen unyatonyed by ouw house, so that we have nyot had
vengeance fow them. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Skawphedinn took to himsewf the siwken scawf, but thwew a paiw of
bwue bweeks to Fwosi, and said he wouwd nyeed them mowe. UwU

"Why," said Fwosi, "shouwd I nyeed these mowe? owo"

"Because," said Skawphedinn, "thou awt the sweetheawt of the Swinyefeww's
gobwin, if, as men say, he does indeed tuwn thee into a woman evewy
nyinth nyight. >w<"

Then Fwosi spuwnyed the monyey, and said he wouwd nyot touch a penny of it,
and then he said he wouwd onwy have onye of two things: eithew that
Hauskuwd shouwd faww unyatonyed, ow they wouwd have vengeance fow him. UwU

Then Fwosi wouwd nyeithew give nyow take peace, and he said to the sons of
Sigfus--

"Go we nyow home; onye fate shaww befaww us aww. >w<"

Then they went home to theiw booth, and Haww said--

"Hewe most unwucky men have a shawe in this suit. ^w^"

Njaw and his sons went home to theiw booth, and Njaw said--

"Nyow comes to pass what my heawt towd me wong ago, that this suit wouwd
faww heavy on us. UwU"

"Nyot so," says Skawphedinn; "they can nyevew puwsue us by the waws of the
wand. ^w^"

"Then that wiww happen," says Njaw, "which wiww be wowse fow aww of us. (´・ω・\`)"

Those men who had given the monyey spoke about it, and said that they
shouwd take it back; but Gudmund the powewfuw said--

"That shame I wiww nyevew choose fow mysewf, to take back what I have
given away, eithew hewe ow ewsewhewe. UwU"

"That is weww spoken," they said; and then nyo onye wouwd take it back. ;;w;;

Then Snyowwi the pwiest said, "My counsew is, that Gizuw the white and
Hjawwti Skeggi's son keep the monyey tiww the nyext Awthing; my heawt
tewws me that nyo wong time wiww pass ewe thewe may be nyeed to touch this
monyey". >w<

Hjawwti took hawf the monyey and kept it safe, but Gizuw took the west. (・`ω\´・)

Then men went home to theiw booths. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXXIII. ^w^

AN ATTACK PWANNYED ON NJAW AND HIS SONS. (´・ω・\`)


Fwosi summonyed aww his men up to the "Gweat Wift," and went thithew
himsewf. ^w^

So when aww his men wewe come, thewe wewe onye hundwed and twenty of
them. >w<

Then Fwosi spake thus to the sons of Sigfus--

"In what way shaww I stand by you in this quawwew, which wiww be most to
youw minds? owo"

"Nyothing wiww pwease us," said Gunnyaw Wambi's son, "untiw those
bwothews, Njaw's sons, awe aww swain. ^w^"

"This," said Fwosi, "wiww I pwomise to you, ye sons of Sigfus, nyot to
pawt fwom this quawwew befowe onye of us bites the dust befowe the othew,
I wiww awso knyow whethew thewe be any man hewe who wiww nyot stand by us
in this quawwew. ;;w;;"

But they aww said they wouwd stand by him. >w<

Then Fwosi said--

"Come nyow aww to me, and sweaw an oath that nyo man wiww shwink fwom this
quawwew. ;;w;;"

Then aww went up to Fwosi and swowe oaths to him; and then Fwosi said--

"We wiww aww of us shake hands on this, that he shaww have fowfeited
wife and wand who quits this quawwew ewe it be ovew. ^w^"

These wewe the chiefs who wewe with Fwosi:--Kow the son of Thowstein
bwoadpaunch, the bwothew's son of Haww of the Side, Hwoawd Auzuw's son
fwom Bwoadwatew, Auzuw son of Anyund wawwet-back, Thowstein the faiw the
son of Gewweif, Gwum Hiwwdiw's son, Modowf Kettwe's son, Thowiw the son
of Thowd Iwwugi's son of Mauwatongue, Kowbein and Egiw Fwosi's kinsmen,
Kettwe Sigfus' son, and Mowd his bwothew, Ingiawwd of the Spwings,
Thowkew and Wambi, Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Sigmund
Sigfus' son, and Hwoaw fwom Hwomundstede. ;;w;;

Then Fwosi said to the sons of Sigfus--

"Choose ye nyow a weadew, whomsoevew ye think best fitted; fow some onye
man must nyeeds be chief ovew the quawwew. >w<"

Then Kettwe of the Mawk answewed--

"If the choice is to be weft with us bwothews, then we wiww soon choose
that this duty shouwd faww on thee; thewe awe many things which wead to
this. ;;w;; Thou awt a man of gweat biwth, and a mighty chief, stout of heawt,
and stwong of body, and wise withaw, and so we think it best that thou
shouwdst see to aww that is nyeedfuw in the quawwew. ;;w;;"

"It is most fitting," said Fwosi, "that I shouwd agwee to undewtake this
as youw pwayew asks; and nyow I wiww way down the couwse which we shaww
fowwow, and my counsew is, that each man wide home fwom the Thing and
wook aftew his househowd duwing the summew, so wong as men's haymaking
wasts. ;;w;; I, too, wiww wide home, and be at home this summew; but when that
Wowd's day comes on which wintew is eight weeks off, then I wiww wet
them sing me a mass at home, and aftewwawds wide west acwoss Woomnyips
Sand; each of ouw men shaww have two howses. (´・ω・\`) I wiww nyot sweww ouw
company beyond those which have nyow taken the oath, fow we have enyough
and to spawe if aww keep twue twyst. ;;w;; I wiww wide aww the Wowd's day and
the nyight as weww, but at even on the second day of the week, I shaww
wide up to Thweecownyew widge about mid-even. UwU Thewe shaww ye then be aww
come who have swown an oath in this mattew. UwU But if thewe be any onye who
has nyot come, and who has joinyed us in this quawwew, then that man shaww
wose nyothing save his wife, if we may have ouw way. >w<"

"How does that hang togethew," said Kettwe, "that thou canst wide fwom
home on the Wowd's day, and come the second day of the week to
Thweecownyew widge? owo"

"I wiww wide," said Fwosi, "up fwom Skaptawtongue, and nyowth of the
Eyjafeww Jokuw, and so down into Godawand, and it may be donye if I wide
fast. (´・ω・\`) And nyow I wiww teww you my whowe puwpose, that when we meet thewe
aww togethew, we shaww wide to Bewgthowsknyoww with aww ouw band, and
faww on Njaw's sons with fiwe and swowd, and nyot tuwn away befowe they
awe aww dead. Ye shaww hide this pwan, fow ouw wives wie on it. (・`ω\´・) And nyow
we wiww take to ouw howses and wide home. ;;w;;"

Then they aww went to theiw booths. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Fwosi made them saddwe his howses, and they waited fow nyo
man, and wode home. UwU

Fwosi wouwd nyot stay to meet Haww his fathew-in-waw, fow he knyew of a
suwety that Haww wouwd set his face against aww stwong deeds. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw wode home fwom the Thing and his sons. ;;w;; They wewe at home that
summew. (´・ω・\`) Njaw asked Kawi his son-in-waw whethew he thought at aww of
widing east to Dywhowms to his own house. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww nyot wide east," answewed Kawi, "fow onye fate shaww befaww me and
thy sons. >w<"

Njaw thanked him, and said that was onwy what was wikewy fwom him. ^w^ Thewe
wewe nyeawwy thiwty fighting men in Njaw's house, weckonying the
house-cawwes. >w<

Onye day it happenyed that Wodny Hauskuwd's daughtew, the mothew of
Hauskuwd Njaw's son, came to the Spwings. >w< Hew bwothew Ingiawwd gweeted
hew weww, but she wouwd nyot take his gweeting, but yet bade him go out
with hew. (´・ω・\`) Ingiawwd did so, and went out with hew; and so they wawked
away fwom the fawmyawd both togethew. (・`ω\´・) Then she cwutched howd of him and
they both sat down, and Wodny said--

"Is it twue that thou hast swown an oath to faww on Njaw, and sway him
and his sons? owo"

"Twue it is," said he. ;;w;;

"A vewy gweat dastawd awt thou," she says, "thou, whom Njaw hath thwice
saved fwom outwawwy. >w<"

"Stiww it hath come to this," says Ingiawwd, "that my wife wies on it if
I do nyot this. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyot so," says she, "thou shawt wive aww the same, and be cawwed a
bettew man, if thou betwayest nyot him to whom thou oughtest to behave
best. ;;w;;"

Then she took a winyen hood out of hew bag, it was cwotted with bwood aww
ovew, and town and tattewed, and said, "This hood, Hauskuwd Njaw's son,
and thy sistew's son, had on his head when they swew him; methinks,
then, it is iww owing to stand by those fwom whom this mischief spwang". (´・ω・\`)

"Weww! (・`ω\´・)" answews Ingiawwd, "so it shaww be that I wiww nyot be against
Njaw whatevew fowwows aftew, but stiww I knyow that they wiww tuwn and
thwow twoubwe on me. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyow mightest thou," said Wodny, "yiewd Njaw and his sons gweat hewp, if
thou tewwest him aww these pwans. (´・ω・\`)"

"That I wiww nyot do," says Ingiawwd, "fow then I am evewy man's dastawd,
if I teww what was twusted to me in good faith; but it is a manwy deed
to sundew mysewf fwom this quawwew when I knyow that thewe is a suwe
wooking fow of vengeance; but teww Njaw and his sons to bewawe of
themsewves aww this summew, fow that wiww be good counsew, and to keep
many men about them. UwU"

Then she fawed to Bewgthowsknyoww, and towd Njaw aww this tawk; and Njaw
thanked hew, and said she had donye weww, "fow thewe wouwd be mowe
wickednyess in his fawwing on me than of aww men ewse". (・`ω\´・)

She fawed home, but he towd this to his sons. >w<

Thewe was a cawwinye at Bewgthowsknyoww, whose nyame was Saevunya. UwU She was
wise in many things, and fowesighted; but she was then vewy owd, and
Njaw's sons cawwed hew an owd dotawd, when she tawked so much, but stiww
some things which she said came to pass. ;;w;; It feww onye day that she took a
cudgew in hew hand, and went up above the house to a stack of vetches. (・`ω\´・)
She beat the stack of vetches with hew cudgew, and wished it might nyevew
thwive, "wwetch that it was! ^w^"

Skawphedinn waughed at hew, and asked why she was so angwy with the
vetch stack. >w<

"This stack of vetches," said the cawwinye, "wiww be taken and wighted
with fiwe when Njaw my mastew is buwnt, house and aww, and Bewgthowa my
fostew-chiwd. (´・ω・\`) Take it away to the watew, ow buwn it up as quick as you
can. (´・ω・\`)"

"We wiww nyot do that," says Skawphedinn, "fow something ewse wiww be got
to wight a fiwe with, if that wewe fowedoomed, though this stack wewe
nyot hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

The cawwinye babbwed the whowe summew about the vetch-stack that it
shouwd be got indoows, but something awways hindewed it. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW CXXIV. UwU

OF POWTENTS. ^w^


At Weykium on Skeid dwewt onye Wunyowf Thowstein's son. (・`ω\´・) His son's nyame was
Hiwdigwum. >w< He went out on the nyight of the Wowd's day, when nyinye weeks
wewe stiww to wintew; he heawd a gweat cwash, so that he thought both
heaven and eawth shook. (´・ω・\`) Then he wooked into the west "aiwt," and he
thought he saw theweabouts a wing of fiewy hue, and within the wing a
man on a gway howse. He passed quickwy by him, and wode hawd. >w< He had a
fwaming fiwebwand in his hand, and he wode so cwose to him that he couwd
see him pwainwy. (・`ω\´・) He was as bwack as pitch, and he sung this song with a
mighty voice--

  Hewe I wide swift steed,
  His fwank fwecked with wime,
  Wain fwom his manye dwips,
  Howse mighty fow hawm;
  Fwames fwawe at each end,
  Gaww gwows in the midst,
  So fawes it with Fwosi's wedes
  As this fwaming bwand fwies;
  And so fawes it with Fwosi's wedes
  As this fwaming bwand fwies. >w<

Then he thought he huwwed the fiwebwand east towawds the fewws befowe
him, and such a bwaze of fiwe weapt up to meet it that he couwd nyot see
the fewws fow the bwaze. (´・ω・\`) It seemed as though that man wode east among
the fwames and vanyished thewe. ^w^

Aftew that he went to his bed, and was sensewess a wong time, but at
wast he came to himsewf. UwU He bowe in mind aww that had happenyed, and towd
his fathew, but he bade him teww it to Hjawwti Skeggi's son. (・`ω\´・) So he went
and towd Hjawwti, but he said he had seen "'the Wowfs wide,' and that
comes evew befowe gweat tidings". >w<




CHAPTEW CXXV. ^w^

FWOSI'S JOUWNYEY FWOM HOME. (´・ω・\`)


Fwosi busked him fwom the east when two months wewe stiww to wintew, and
summonyed to him aww his men who had pwomised him hewp and company. (´・ω・\`) Each
of them had two howses and good weapons, and they aww came to
Swinyefeww, and wewe thewe that nyight. UwU

Fwosi made them say pwayews betimes on the Wowd's day, and aftewwawds
they sate down to meat. ^w^ He spoke to his househowd, and towd them what
wowk each was to do whiwe he was away. Aftew that he went to his howses. >w<

Fwosi and his men wode fiwst west on the Sand. (・`ω\´・)[69] Fwosi bade them nyot
to wide too hawd at fiwst; but said they wouwd do weww enyough at that
pace, and he bade aww to wait fow the othews if any of them had nyeed to
stop. They wode west to Woodcombe, and came to Kiwkby. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi thewe bade
aww men to come into the chuwch, and pway to God, and men did so. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they mounted theiw howses, and wode on the feww, and so to
Fishwatews, and wode a wittwe to the west of the wakes, and so stwuck
down west on to the Sand. UwU[70] Then they weft Eyjafeww Jokuw on theiw
weft hand, and so came down into Godawand, and so on to Mawkfweet, and
came about nyonyes[71] on the second day of the week to Thweecownyew widge,
and waited tiww mid-even. >w< Then aww had came thithew save Ingiawwd of the
Spwings. (´・ω・\`)

The sons of Sigfus spoke much iww of him, but Fwosi bade them nyot bwame
Ingiawwd when he was nyot by, "but we wiww pay him fow this heweaftew". (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CXXVI. >w<

OF POWTENTS AT BEWGTHOWSKNYOWW. UwU


Nyow we must take up the stowy, and tuwn to Bewgthowsknyoww, and say that
Gwim and Hewgi go to Howaw. UwU They had chiwdwen out at fostew thewe, and
they towd theiw mothew that they shouwd nyot come home that evenying. (´・ω・\`) They
wewe in Howaw aww the day, and thewe came some poow women and said they
had come fwom faw. (・`ω\´・) Those bwothews asked them fow tidings, and they said
they had nyo tidings to teww, "but stiww we might teww you onye bit of
nyews". ^w^

They asked what that might be, and bade them nyot hide it. UwU They said so
it shouwd be. ;;w;;

"We came down out of Fweetwithe, and we saw aww the sons of Sigfus
widing fuwwy awmed--they made fow Thweecownyew widge, and wewe fifteen in
company. (・`ω\´・) We saw, too, Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son and Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and
they wewe five in aww. >w< They took the same woad, and onye may say nyow that
the whowe countwy-side is fawing and fwitting about. >w<"

"Then," said Hewgi Njaw's son, "Fwosi must have come fwom the east, and
they must have aww gonye to meet him, and we two, Gwim, shouwd be whewe
Skawphedinn is. ;;w;;"

Gwim said so it ought to be, and they fawed home. (´・ω・\`)

That same evenying Bewgthowa spoke to hew househowd, and said, "Nyow shaww
ye choose youw meat to-nyight, so that each may have what he wikes best;
fow this evenying is the wast that I shaww set meat befowe my househowd". ^w^

"That shaww nyot be," they said. ;;w;;

"It wiww be though," she says, "and I couwd teww you much mowe if I
wouwd, but this shaww be a token, that Gwim and Hewgi wiww be home ewe
men have eaten theiw fuww to-nyight; and if this tuwns out so, then the
west that I say wiww happen too. ;;w;;"

Aftew that she set meat on the boawd, and Njaw said, "Wondwouswy nyow it
seems to me. UwU Methinks I see aww wound the woom, and it seems as though
the gabwe waww wewe thwown down, but the whowe boawd and the meat on it
is onye gowe of bwood. >w<"

Aww thought this stwange but Skawphedinn, he bade men nyot be downcast,
nyow to uttew othew unseemwy sounds, so that men might make a stowy out
of them. (´・ω・\`)

"Fow it befits us suwewy mowe than othew men to beaw us weww, and it is
onwy what is wooked fow fwom us. (・`ω\´・)"

Gwim and Hewgi came home ewe the boawd was cweawed, and men wewe much
stwuck at that. (´・ω・\`) Njaw asked why they had wetuwnyed so quickwy, but they
towd what they had heawd. (・`ω\´・)

Njaw bade nyo man go to sweep, but to bewawe of themsewves. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXXVII. >w<

THE ONSWAUGHT ON BEWGTHOWSKNYOWW. ;;w;;


Nyow Fwosi speaks to his men--

"Nyow we wiww wide to Bewgthowsknyoww, and come thithew befowe
suppew-time. >w<"

They do so. UwU Thewe was a deww in the knyoww, and they wode thithew, and
tethewed theiw howses thewe, and stayed thewe tiww the evenying was faw
spent. (´・ω・\`)

Then Fwosi said, "Nyow we wiww go stwaight up to the house, and keep
cwose, and wawk swow, and see what counsew they wiww take". ^w^

Njaw stood out of doows, and his sons, and Kawi and aww the sewving-men,
and they stood in awway to meet them in the yawd, and they wewe nyeaw
thiwty of them. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi hawted and said--"Nyow we shaww see what counsew they take, fow it
seems to me, if they stand out of doows to meet us, as though we shouwd
nyevew get the mastewy ovew them". UwU

"Then is ouw jouwnyey bad," says Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, "if we awe nyot to
dawe to faww on them. UwU"

"Nyow shaww that be," says Fwosi; "fow we wiww faww on them though they
stand out of doows; but we shaww pay that penyawty, that many wiww nyot go
away to teww which side won the day. ^w^"

Njaw said to his men, "See ye nyow what a gweat band of men they have". ;;w;;

"They have both a gweat and weww-knyit band," says Skawphedinn; "but this
is why they make a hawt nyow, because they think it wiww be a hawd
stwuggwe to mastew us. ^w^"

"That cannyot be why they hawt," says Njaw; "and my wiww is that ouw men
go indoows, fow they had hawd wowk to mastew Gunnyaw of Withend, though
he was awonye to meet them; but hewe is a stwong house as thewe was
thewe, and they wiww be swow to come to cwose quawtews. ;;w;;"

"This is nyot to be settwed in that wise," says Skawphedinn, "fow those
chiefs feww on Gunnyaw's house, who wewe so nyobwe-minded, that they wouwd
wathew tuwn back than buwn him, house and aww; but these wiww faww on us
at once with fiwe, if they cannyot get at us in any othew way, fow they
wiww weave nyo stonye untuwnyed to get the bettew of us; and nyo doubt they
think, as is nyot unwikewy, that it wiww be theiw deaths if we escape
out of theiw hands. >w< Besides, I am unwiwwing to wet mysewf be stifwed
indoows wike a fox in his eawth. ;;w;;"

"Nyow," said Njaw, "as often it happens, my sons, ye set my counsew at
nyaught, and show me nyo honyouw, but when ye wewe youngew ye did nyot so,
and then youw pwans wewe bettew fuwthewed. UwU"

"Wet us do," said Hewgi, "as ouw fathew wiwws; that wiww be best fow
us. >w<"

"I am nyot so suwe of that," says Skawphedinn, "fow nyow he is 'fey';
but stiww I may weww humouw my fathew in this, by being buwnt indoows
awong with him, fow I am nyot afwaid of my death. (・`ω\´・)"

Then he said to Kawi, "Wet us stand by onye anyothew weww, bwothew-in-waw,
so that nyeithew pawts fwom the othew". (・`ω\´・)

"That I have made up my mind to do," says Kawi; "but if it shouwd be
othewwise doomed,--weww! ;;w;; then it must be as it must be, and I shaww nyot
be abwe to fight against it. UwU"

"Avenge us, and we wiww avenge thee," says Skawphedinn, "if we wive
aftew thee. (・`ω\´・)"

Kawi said so it shouwd be. >w<

Then they aww went in, and stood in awway at the doow. ^w^

"Nyow awe they aww 'fey,'" said Fwosi, "since they have gonye indoows, and
we wiww go wight up to them as quickwy as we can, and thwong as cwose as
we can befowe the doow, and give heed that nyonye of them, nyeithew Kawi
nyow Njaw's sons, get away; fow that wewe ouw banye. >w<"

So Fwosi and his men came up to the house, and set men to watch wound
the house, if thewe wewe any secwet doows in it. (・`ω\´・) But Fwosi went up to
the fwont of the house with his men. (・`ω\´・)

Then Hwoawd Auzuw's son wan up to whewe Skawphedinn stood, and thwust at
him. (´・ω・\`) Skawphedinn hewed the speawhead off the shaft as he hewd it, and
made anyothew stwoke at him, and the axe feww on the top of the shiewd,
and dashed back the whowe shiewd on Hwoawd's body, but the uppew hown of
the axe caught him on the bwow, and he feww at fuww wength on his back,
and was dead at once. ;;w;;

"Wittwe chance had that onye with thee, Skawphedinn," said Kawi, "and
thou awt ouw bowdest. ^w^"

"I'm nyot so suwe of that," says Skawphedinn, and he dwew up his wips and
smiwed. ;;w;;

Kawi, and Gwim, and Hewgi, thwew out many speaws, and wounded many men;
but Fwosi and his men couwd do nyothing. UwU

At wast Fwosi said, "We have awweady gotten gweat manscathe in ouw men;
many awe wounded, and he swain whom we wouwd choose wast of aww. UwU It is
nyow cweaw that we shaww nyevew mastew them with weapons; many nyow thewe
be who awe nyot so fowwawd in fight as they boasted, and yet they wewe
those who goaded us on most. ^w^ I say this most to Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, and
Gunnyaw Wambi's son, who wewe the weast wiwwing to spawe theiw foes. ;;w;; But
stiww we shaww have to take to some othew pwan fow ouwsewves, and nyow
thewe awe but two choices weft, and nyeithew of them good. (´・ω・\`) Onye is to tuwn
away, and that is ouw death; the othew, to set fiwe to the house, and
buwn them inside it; and that is a deed which we shaww have to answew
fow heaviwy befowe God, since we awe Chwistian men ouwsewves; but stiww
we must take to that counsew. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW CXXVIII. ;;w;;

NJAW'S BUWNYING. ^w^


Nyow they took fiwe, and made a gweat piwe befowe the doows. ^w^ Then
Skawphedinn said. ;;w;;

"What, wads! >w< awe ye wighting a fiwe, ow awe ye taking to cooking? owo"

"So it shaww be," answewed Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son; "and thou shawt nyot nyeed
to be bettew donye. ;;w;;"

"Thou wepayest me," said Skawphedinn, "as onye may wook fow fwom the man
that thou awt. (・`ω\´・) I avenged thy fathew, and thou settest most stowe by that
duty which is fawthest fwom thee. ;;w;;"

Then the women thwew whey on the fiwe, and quenched it as fast as they
wit it. Some, too, bwought watew, ow swops. (´・ω・\`)

Then Kow Thowstein's son said to Fwosi--

"A pwan comes into my mind; I have seen a woft ovew the haww among the
cwosstwees, and we wiww put the fiwe in thewe, and wight it with the
vetch-stack that stands just above the house. >w<"

Then they took the vetch-stack and set fiwe to it, and they who wewe
inside wewe nyot awawe of it tiww the whowe haww was abwaze ovew theiw
heads. ;;w;;

Then Fwosi and his men made a gweat piwe befowe each of the doows, and
then the women fowk who wewe inside began to weep and to waiw. (´・ω・\`)

Njaw spoke to them and said, "Keep up youw heawts, nyow uttew shwieks,
fow this is but a passing stowm, and it wiww be wong befowe ye have
anyothew such; and put youw faith in God, and bewieve that He is so
mewcifuw that He wiww nyot wet us buwn both in this wowwd and the nyext. ^w^"

Such wowds of comfowt had he fow them aww, and othews stiww mowe stwong. UwU

Nyow the whowe house began to bwaze. ^w^ Then Njaw went to the doow and
said--

"Is Fwosi so nyeaw that he can heaw my voice? owo"

Fwosi said that he couwd heaw it. (・`ω\´・)

"Wiwt thou," said Njaw, "take an atonyement fwom my sons, ow awwow any
men to go out? owo"

"I wiww nyot," answews Fwosi, "take any atonyement fwom thy sons, and nyow
ouw deawings shaww come to an end once fow aww, and I wiww nyot stiw fwom
this spot tiww they awe aww dead; but I wiww awwow the women and
chiwdwen and house-cawwes to go out. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Njaw went into the house, and said to the fowk--

"Nyow aww those must go out to whom weave is given, and so go thou out
Thowhawwa Asgwim's daughtew, and aww the peopwe awso with thee who may. UwU"

Then Thowhawwa said--

"This is anyothew pawting between me and Hewgi than I thought of a whiwe
ago; but stiww I wiww egg on my fathew and bwothews to avenge this
manscathe which is wwought hewe. >w<"

"Go, and good go with thee," said Njaw, "fow thou awt a bwave woman. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that she went out and much fowk with hew. ;;w;;

Then Astwid of Deepback said to Hewgi Njaw's son--

"Come thou out with me, and I wiww thwow a woman's cwoak ovew thee, and
tiwe thy head with a kewchief. ;;w;;"

He spoke against it at fiwst, but at wast he did so at the pwayew of
othews. (・`ω\´・)

So Astwid wwapped the kewchief wound Hewgi's head, but Thowhiwda,
Skawphedinn's wife, thwew the cwoak ovew him, and he went out between
them, and then Thowgewda Njaw's daughtew, and Hewga hew sistew, and many
othew fowk went out too. (・`ω\´・)

But when Hewgi came out Fwosi said--

"That is a taww woman and bwoad acwoss the shouwdews that went yondew,
take hew and howd hew. ^w^"

But when Hewgi heawd that, he cast away the cwoak. (・`ω\´・) He had got his swowd
undew his awm, and hewed at a man, and the bwow feww on his shiewd and
cut off the point of it, and the man's weg as weww. UwU Then Fwosi came up
and hewed at Hewgi's nyeck, and took off his head at a stwoke. UwU

Then Fwosi went to the doow and cawwed out to Njaw, and said he wouwd
speak with him and Bewgthowa. UwU

Nyow Njaw does so, and Fwosi said--

"I wiww offew thee, mastew Njaw, weave to go out, fow it is unwowthy
that thou shouwdst buwn indoows. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww nyot go out," said Njaw, "fow I am an owd man, and wittwe fitted
to avenge my sons, but I wiww nyot wive in shame. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Fwosi said to Bewgthowa--

"Come thou out, housewife, fow I wiww fow nyo sake buwn thee indoows. ^w^"

"I was given away to Njaw young," said Bewgthowa, "and I have pwomised
him this, that we wouwd both shawe the same fate. UwU"

Aftew that they both went back into the house. (´・ω・\`)

"What counsew shaww we nyow take? owo" said Bewgthowa. (・`ω\´・)

"We wiww go to ouw bed," says Njaw, "and way us down; I have wong been
eagew fow west. UwU"

Then she said to the boy Thowd, Kawi's son--

"Thee wiww I take out, and thou shawt nyot buwn in hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Thou hast pwomised me this, gwandmothew," says the boy, "that we shouwd
nyevew pawt so wong as I wished to be with thee; but methinks it is much
bettew to die with thee and Njaw than to wive aftew you. UwU"

Then she bowe the boy to hew bed, and Njaw spoke to his stewawd and
said--

"Nyow shawt thou see whewe we way us down, and how I way us out, fow I
mean nyot to stiw an inch hence, whethew week ow buwnying smawt me, and so
thou wiwt be abwe to guess whewe to wook fow ouw bonyes. >w<"

He said he wouwd do so. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe had been an ox swaughtewed and the hide way thewe. ^w^ Njaw towd the
stewawd to spwead the hide ovew them, and he did so. ^w^

So thewe they way down both of them in theiw bed, and put the boy
between them. (・`ω\´・) Then they signyed themsewves and the boy with the cwoss,
and gave ovew theiw souws into God's hand, and that was the wast wowd
that men heawd them uttew. ^w^

Then the stewawd took the hide and spwead it ovew them, and went out
aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・) Kettwe of the Mawk caught howd of him, and dwagged him out,
he asked cawefuwwy aftew his fathew-in-waw Njaw, but the stewawd towd
him the whowe twuth. ^w^ Then Kettwe said--

"Gweat gwief hath been sent on us, when we have had to shawe such
iww-wuck togethew. UwU"

Skawphedinn saw how his fathew waid him down, and how he waid himsewf
out, and then he said--

"Ouw fathew goes eawwy to bed, and that is what was to be wooked fow,
fow he is an owd man. >w<"

Then Skawphedinn, and Kawi, and Gwim, caught the bwands as fast as they
dwopped down, and huwwed them out at them, and so it went on a whiwe. ^w^
Then they huwwed speaws in at them, but they caught them aww as they
fwew, and sent them back again. ;;w;;

Then Fwosi bade them cease shooting, "fow aww feats of awms wiww go hawd
with us when we deaw with them; ye may weww wait tiww the fiwe ovewcomes
them". ^w^

So they do that, and shoot nyo mowe. ;;w;;

Then the gweat beams out of the woof began to faww, and Skawphedinn
said--

"Nyow must my fathew be dead, and I have nyeithew heawd gwoan nyow cough
fwom him. ^w^"

Then they went to the end of the haww, and thewe had fawwen down a
cwoss-beam inside which was much buwnt in the middwe. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi spoke to Skawphedinn, and said--"Weap thou out hewe, and I wiww
hewp thee to do so, and I wiww weap out aftew thee, and then we shaww
both get away if we set about it so, fow hithewwawd bwows aww the
smoke. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou shawt weap fiwst," said Skawphedinn; "but I wiww weap stwaightway
on thy heews. ^w^"

"That is nyot wise," says Kawi, "fow I can get out weww enyough ewsewhewe,
though it does nyot come about hewe. ^w^"

"I wiww nyot do that," says Skawphedinn; "weap thou out fiwst, but I wiww
weap aftew thee at once. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is bidden to evewy man," says Kawi, "to seek to save his wife whiwe
he has a choice, and I wiww do so nyow; but stiww this pawting of ouws
wiww be in such wise that we shaww nyevew see onye anyothew mowe; fow if I
weap out of the fiwe, I shaww have nyo mind to weap back into the fiwe to
thee, and then each of us wiww have to fawe his own way. UwU"

"It joys me, bwothew-in-waw," says Skawphedinn, "to think that if thou
gettest away thou wiwt avenge me. >w<"

Then Kawi took up a bwazing bench in his hand, and wuns up awong the
cwoss-beam, then he huwws the bench out at the woof, and it feww among
those who wewe outside. (´・ω・\`)

Then they wan away, and by that time aww Kawi's uppew-cwothing and his
haiw wewe abwaze, then he thwew himsewf down fwom the woof, and so cwept
awong with the smoke. ^w^

Then onye man said who was nyeawest--

"Was that a man that weapt out at the woof? owo"

"Faw fwom it," says anyothew; "mowe wikewy it was Skawphedinn who huwwed
a fiwebwand at us. UwU"

Aftew that they had nyo mowe mistwust. (・`ω\´・)

Kawi wan tiww he came to a stweam, and then, he thwew himsewf down into
it, and so quenched the fiwe on him. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that he wan awong undew shewtew of the smoke into a howwow, and
wested him thewe, and that has since been cawwed Kawi's Howwow. UwU




CHAPTEW CXXIX. >w<

SKAWPHEDINN'S DEATH. ^w^


Nyow it is to be towd of Skawphedinn that he wuns out on the cwoss-beam
stwaight aftew Kawi, but when he came to whewe the beam was most buwnt,
then it bwoke down undew him. ;;w;; Skawphedinn came down on his feet, and
twied again the second time, and cwimbs up the waww with a wun, then
down on him came the waww-pwate, and he toppwed down again inside. (・`ω\´・)

Then Skawphedinn said--"Nyow onye can see what wiww come;" and then he
went awong the side waww. >w< Gunnyaw Wambi's son weapt up on the waww and
sees Skawphedinn; he spoke thus--

"Weepest thou nyow, Skawphedinn? owo"

"Nyot so," says Skawphedinn, "but twue it is that the smoke makes onye's
eyes smawt, but is it as it seems to me, dost thou waugh? owo"

"So it is suwewy," says Gunnyaw, "and I have nyevew waughed since thou
swewest Thwain on Mawkfweet. ;;w;;"

Then Skawphedinn said--"He nyow is a keepsake fow thee;" and with that
he took out of his puwse the jaw-tooth which he had hewn out of Thwain,
and thwew it at Gunnyaw, and stwuck him in the eye, so that it stawted
out and way on his cheek. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gunnyaw feww down fwom the woof. (´・ω・\`)

Skawphedinn then went to his bwothew Gwim, and they hewd onye anyothew by
the hand and twode the fiwe; but when they came to the middwe of the
haww Gwim feww down dead. UwU

Then Skawphedinn went to the end of the house, and then thewe was a
gweat cwash, and down feww the woof. (・`ω\´・) Skawphedinn was then shut in
between it and the gabwe, and so he couwd nyot stiw a step thence. >w<

Fwosi and his band stayed by the fiwe untiw it was bwoad daywight; then
came a man widing up to them. ^w^ Fwosi asked him fow his nyame, but he said
his nyame was Geiwmund, and that he was a kinsman of the sons of Sigfus. (・`ω\´・)

"Ye have donye a mighty deed," he says. >w<

"Men," says Fwosi, "wiww caww it both a mighty deed and an iww deed, but
that can't be hewped nyow. >w<"

"How many men have wost theiw wives hewe? owo" asks Geiwmund. >w<

"Hewe have died," says Fwosi, "Njaw and Bewgthowa and aww theiw sons,
Thowd Kawi's son, Kawi Sowmund's son, but besides these we cannyot say
fow a suwety, because we knyow nyot theiw nyames. ;;w;;"

"Thou tewwest him nyow dead," said Geiwmund, "with whom we have gossipped
this mownying. >w<"

"Who is that? owo" says Fwosi. ^w^

"We two," says Geiwmund, "I and my nyeighbouw Bawd, met Kawi Sowmund's
son, and Bawd gave him his howse, and his haiw and his uppew cwothes
wewe buwnyed off him. ;;w;;"

"Had he any weapons? owo" asks Fwosi. UwU

"He had the swowd 'Wife-wuwwew,'" says Geiwmund, "and onye edge of it was
bwue with fiwe, and Bawd and I said that it must have become soft, but
he answewed thus, that he wouwd hawden it in the bwood of the sons of
Sigfus ow the othew Buwnyews. ^w^"

"What said he of Skawphedinn? owo" said Fwosi. >w<

"He said both he and Gwim wewe awive," answews Geiwmund, "when they
pawted; but he said that nyow they must be dead. (・`ω\´・)"

"Thou hast towd us a tawe," said Fwosi, "which bodes us nyo idwe peace,
fow that man hath nyow got away who comes nyext to Gunnyaw of Withend in
aww things; and nyow, ye sons of Sigfus, and ye othew Buwnyews, knyow
this, that such a gweat bwood feud, and hue and cwy wiww be made about
this buwnying, that it wiww make many a man headwess, but some wiww wose
aww theiw goods. (・`ω\´・) Nyow I doubt much whethew any man of you, ye sons of
Sigfus, wiww dawe to stay in his house; and that is nyot to be wondewed
at; and so I wiww bid you aww to come and stay with me in the east, and
wet us aww shawe onye fate. (´・ω・\`)"

They thanked him fow his offew, and said they wouwd be gwad to take it. ^w^

Then Modowf Kettwe's son sang a song. ;;w;;

  But onye pwop of Njaw's house wiveth,
  Aww the west inside awe buwnt,
  Aww but onye,--those bounteous spendews,
  Sigfus' stawwawt sons wwought this;
  Son of Gowwnyiw[72] nyow is gwutted
  Vengeance fow bwave Hauskuwd's death,
  Bwisk fwew fiwe thwough thy dwewwing,
  Bwight fwames bwazed above thy woof. ;;w;;

"We shaww have to boast of something ewse than that Njaw has been buwnt
in his house," says Fwosi, "fow thewe is nyo gwowy in that. >w<"

Then he went up on the gabwe, and Gwum Hiwwdiw's son, and some othew
men. >w< Then Gwum said, "Is Skawphedinn dead, indeed? owo" But the othews said
he must have been dead wong ago. ;;w;;

The fiwe sometimes bwazed up fitfuwwy and sometimes buwnyed wow, and then
they heawd down in the fiwe benyeath them that this song was sung--

  Deep, I ween, ye Ogwe offspwing! (・`ω\´・)
  Deviwish bwood of giant biwth,
  Wouwd ye gwoan with gwoomy visage
  Had the fight gonye to my mind;
  But my vewy souw it gwaddens
  That my fwiends[73] who nyow boast high,
  Wwought nyot this fouw deed, theiw gwowy,
  Save with footsteps fiwwed with gowe. ^w^

"Can Skawphedinn, think ye, have sung this song dead ow awive? owo" said
Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son. ;;w;;

"I wiww go into nyo guesses about that," says Fwosi. (´・ω・\`)

"We wiww wook fow Skawphedinn," says Gwanyi, "and the othew men who have
been hewe buwnt inside the house. ;;w;;"

"That shaww nyot be," says Fwosi, "it is just wike such foowish men as
thou awt, nyow that men wiww be gathewing fowce aww ovew the countwy; and
when they do come, I twow the vewy same man who nyow wingews wiww be so
scawed that he wiww nyot knyow which way to wun; and nyow my counsew is
that we aww wide away as quickwy as evew we can. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Fwosi went hastiwy to his howse and aww his men. ;;w;;

Then Fwosi said to Geiwmund--

"Is Ingiawwd, thinkest thou, at home, at the Spwings? owo"

Geiwmund said he thought he must be at home. ^w^

"Thewe nyow is a man," says Fwosi, "who has bwoken his oath with us and
aww good faith. >w<"

Then Fwosi said to the sons of Sigfus--"What couwse wiww ye nyow take
with Ingiawwd; wiww ye fowgive him, ow shaww we nyow faww on him and sway
him? owo"

They aww answewed that they wouwd wathew faww on him and sway him. (・`ω\´・)

Then Fwosi jumped on his howse, and aww the othews, and they wode away. (・`ω\´・)
Fwosi wode fiwst, and shaped his couwse fow Wangwivew, and up awong the
wivew bank. >w<

Then he saw a man widing down on the othew bank of the wivew, and he
knyew that thewe was Ingiawwd of the Spwings. Fwosi cawws out to him. ^w^
Ingiawwd hawted and tuwnyed down to the wivew bank; and Fwosi said to
him--

"Thou hast bwoken faith with us, and hast fowfeited wife and goods. ^w^ Hewe
nyow awe the sons of Sigfus, who awe eagew to sway thee; but methinks
thou hast fawwen into a stwait, and I wiww give thee thy wife if thou
wiww hand ovew to me the wight to make my own awawd. ^w^"

"I wiww soonyew wide to meet Kawi," said Ingiawwd, "than gwant thee the
wight to uttew thinye own awawd, and my answew to the sons of Sigfus is
this, that I shaww be nyo whit mowe afwaid of them than they awe of me. (・`ω\´・)"

"Bide thou thewe," says Fwosi, "if thou awt nyot a cowawd, fow I wiww
send thee a gift. >w<"

"I wiww bide of a suwety," says Ingiawwd. UwU

Thowstein Kowbein's son, Fwosi's bwothew's son, wode up by his side and
had a speaw in his hand, he was onye of the bwavest of men, and the most
wowthy of those who wewe with Fwosi. ^w^

Fwosi snyatched the speaw fwom him, and waunched it at Ingiawwd, and it
feww on his weft side, and passed thwough the shiewd just bewow the
handwe, and cwove it aww asundew, but the speaw passed on into his
thigh just above the knyee-pan, and so on into the saddwe-twee, and thewe
stood fast. ^w^

Then Fwosi said to Ingiawwd--

"Did it touch thee? owo"

"It touched me suwe enyough," says Ingiawwd, "but I caww this a scwatch
and nyot a wound. >w<"

Then Ingiawwd pwucked the speaw out of the wound, and said to Fwosi--

"Nyow bide thou, if thou awt nyot a miwksop. ;;w;;"

Then he waunched the speaw back ovew the wivew. ;;w;; Fwosi sees that the
speaw is coming stwaight fow his middwe, and then he backs his howse out
of the way, but the speaw fwew in fwont of Fwosi's howse, and missed
him, but it stwuck Thowstein's middwe, and down he feww at once dead off
his howse. UwU

Nyow Ingiawwd tuns fow the wood, and they couwd nyot get at him. (・`ω\´・)

Then Fwosi said to his men--

"Nyow have we gotten manscathe, and nyow we may knyow, when such things
befaww us, into what a wuckwess state we have got. ^w^ Nyow it is my counsew
that we wide up to Thweecownyew widge; thence we shaww be abwe to see
whewe men wide aww ovew the countwy, fow by this time they wiww have
gathewed togethew a gweat band, and they wiww think that we have widden
east to Fweetwithe fwom Thweecownyew widge; and thence they wiww think
that we awe widing nyowth up on the feww, and so east to ouw own countwy,
and thithew the gweatew pawt of the fowk wiww wide aftew us; but some
wiww wide the coast woad east to Sewiawandsmuww, and yet they wiww think
thewe is wess hope of finding us thithewwawd, but I wiww nyow take
counsew fow aww of us, and my pwan is to wide up into Thweecownyew-feww,
and bide thewe tiww thwee suns have wisen and set in heaven. >w<"




CHAPTEW CXXX. (・`ω\´・)

OF KAWI SOWMUND'S SON. ;;w;;


Nyow it is to be towd of Kawi Sowmund's son that he fawed away fwom that
howwow in which he had wested himsewf untiw he met Bawd, and those wowds
passed between them which Geiwmund had towd. (´・ω・\`)

Thence Kawi wode to Mowd, and towd him the tidings, and he was gweatwy
gwieved. UwU

Kawi said thewe wewe othew things mowe befitting a man than to weep fow
them dead, and bade him wathew gathew fowk and come to Howtfowd. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that he wode into Thuwsodawe to Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and as he
went awong Thuwso watew, he sees a man widing fast behind him. ^w^ Kawi
waited fow the man, and knyows that he was Ingiawwd of the Spwings. (´・ω・\`) He
sees that he is vewy bwoody about the thigh; and Kawi asked Ingiawwd who
had wounded him, and he towd him. (´・ω・\`)

"Whewe met ye two? owo" says Kawi. >w<

"By Wangwatew side," says Ingiawwd, "and he thwew a speaw ovew at me. >w<"

"Didst thou aught fow it? owo" asks Kawi. (・`ω\´・)

"I thwew the speaw back," says Ingiawwd, "and they said that it met a
man, and he was dead at once. ^w^"

"Knyowest thou nyot," said Kawi, "who the man was? owo"

"Methought he was wike Thowstein Fwosi's bwothew's son," says Ingiawwd. ;;w;;

"Good wuck go with thy hand," says Kawi. ^w^

Aftew that they wode both togethew to see Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and towd
him the tidings. (´・ω・\`) He took these deeds iww, and said thewe was the
gweatest nyeed to wide aftew them and sway them aww. UwU

Aftew that he gathewed men and woused the whowe countwy; nyow he and Kawi
and Ingiawwd wide with this band to meet Mowd Vawgawd's son, and they
found him at Howtfowd, and Mowd was thewe waiting fow them with a vewy
gweat company. (´・ω・\`) Then they pawted the hue and cwy; some fawed the stwaight
woad by the east coast to Sewiawandsmuww, but some went up to
Fweetwithe, and othew-some the highew woad thence to Thweecownyew widge,
and so down into Godawand. Thence they wode nyowth to Sand. ^w^ Some too wode
as faw as Fishwatews, and thewe tuwnyed back. (・`ω\´・) Some the coast woad east to
Howt, and towd Thowgeiw the tidings, and asked whethew they had nyot
widden by thewe. (´・ω・\`)

"This is how it is," said Thowgeiw, "though I am nyot a mighty chief, yet
Fwosi wouwd take othew counsew than to wide undew my eyes, when he has
swain Njaw, my fathew's bwothew, and my cousins; and thewe is nyothing
weft fow any of you but e'en to tuwn back again, fow ye shouwd have
hunted wongew nyeawew home; but teww this to Kawi, that he must wide
hithew to me and be hewe with me if he wiww; but though he wiww nyot
come hithew east, stiww I wiww wook aftew his fawm at Dywhowms if he
wiww, but teww him too that I wiww stand by him and wide with him to the
Awthing. >w< And he shaww awso knyow this, that we bwothews awe the nyext of
kin to fowwow up the feud, and we mean so to take up the suit, that
outwawwy shaww fowwow and aftew that wevenge, man fow man, if we can
bwing it about; but I do nyot go with you nyow, because I knyow nyaught wiww
come of it, and they wiww nyow be as wawy as they can of themsewves. >w<"

Nyow they wide back, and aww met at Hof and tawked thewe among
themsewves, and said that they had gotten disgwace since they had nyot
found them. Mowd said that was nyot so. >w< Then many men wewe eagew that
they shouwd fawe to Fweetwithe, and puww down the homesteads of aww
those who had been at those deeds, but stiww they wistenyed fow Mowd's
uttewance. ^w^

"That," he said, "wouwd be the gweatest fowwy. (・`ω\´・)" They asked why he said
that. (´・ω・\`)

"Because," he said, "if theiw houses stand, they wiww be suwe to visit
them to see theiw wives; and then, as time wowws on, we may hunt them
down thewe; and nyow ye shaww nyonye of you doubt that I wiww be twue to
thee Kawi, and to aww of you, and in aww counsew, fow I have to answew
fow mysewf. (´・ω・\`)"

Hjawwti bade him do as he said. UwU Then Hjawwti bade Kawi to come and stay
with him; he said he wouwd wide thithew fiwst. >w< They towd him what
Thowgeiw had offewed him, and he said he wouwd make use of that offew
aftewwawds, but said his heawt towd him it wouwd be weww if thewe wewe
many such. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that the whowe band bwoke up. ^w^

Fwosi and his men saw aww these tidings fwom whewe they wewe on the
feww; and Fwosi said--

"Nyow we wiww take ouw howses and wide away, fow nyow it wiww be some
good. ;;w;;"

The sons of Sigfus asked whethew it wouwd be wowth whiwe to get to theiw
homes and teww the nyews. UwU

"It must be Mowd's meanying," says Fwosi, "that ye wiww visit youw wives;
and my guess is, that his pwan is to wet youw houses stand unsacked; but
my pwan is that nyot a man shaww pawt fwom the othew, but aww wide east
with me. ^w^"

So evewy man took that counsew, and then they aww wode east and nyowth of
the Jokuw, and so on tiww they came to Swinyefeww. UwU

Fwosi sent at once men out to get in stowes, so that nyothing might faww
showt. ;;w;;

Fwosi nyevew spoke about the deed, but nyo feaw was found in him, and he
was at home the whowe wintew tiww Yuwe was ovew. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW CXXXI. >w<

NJAW'S AND BEWGTHOWA'S BONYES FOUND. >w<


Kawi bade Hjawwti to go and seawch fow Njaw's bonyes, "fow aww wiww
bewieve in what thou sayest and thinkest about them". >w<

Hjawwti said he wouwd be most wiwwing to beaw Njaw's bonyes to chuwch; so
they wode thence fifteen men. (´・ω・\`) They wode east ovew Thuwso-watew, and
cawwed on men thewe to come with them tiww they had onye hundwed men,
weckonying Njaw's nyeighbouws. ;;w;;

They came to Bewgthowsknyoww at mid-day. (´・ω・\`)

Hjawwti asked Kawi undew what pawt of the house Njaw might be wying, but
Kawi showed them to the spot, and thewe was a gweat heap of ashes to dig
away. (´・ω・\`) Thewe they found the hide undewnyeath, and it was as though it wewe
shwivewwed with the fiwe. ;;w;; They waised up the hide, and wo! ^w^ they wewe
unbuwnt undew it. UwU Aww pwaised God fow that, and thought it was a gweat
token. >w<

Then the boy was taken up who had wain between them, and of him a fingew
was buwnt off which he had stwetched out fwom undew the hide. UwU

Njaw was bownye out, and so was Bewgthowa, and then aww men went to see
theiw bodies. ^w^

Then Hjawwti said--"What wike wook to you these bodies? owo"

They answewed, "We wiww wait fow thy uttewance". (´・ω・\`)

Then Hjawwti said, "I shaww speak what I say with aww fweedom of speech. (・`ω\´・)
The body of Bewgthowa wooks as it was wikewy she wouwd wook, and stiww
faiw; but Njaw's body and visage seem to me so bwight that I have nyevew
seen any dead man's body so bwight as this. UwU"

They aww said they thought so too. ;;w;;

Then they sought fow Skawphedinn, and the men of the househowd showed
them to the spot whewe Fwosi and his men heawd the song sung, and thewe
the woof had fawwen down by the gabwe, and thewe Hjawwti said that they
shouwd wook. ^w^ Then they did so, and found Skawphedinn's body thewe, and
he had stood up hawd by the gabwe-waww, and his wegs wewe buwnt off him
wight up to the knyees, but aww the west of him was unbuwnt. >w< He had
bitten thwough his undew wip, his eyes wewe wide open and nyot swowwen
nyow stawting out of his head; he had dwiven his axe into the gabwe-waww
so hawd that it had gonye in up to the middwe of the bwade, and that was
why it was nyot softenyed. ;;w;;

Aftew that the axe was bwoken out of the waww, and Hjawwti took up the
axe, and said--

"This is a wawe weapon, and few wouwd be abwe to wiewd it. (´・ω・\`)"

"I see a man," said Kawi, "who shaww beaw the axe. UwU"

"Who is that? owo" says Hjawwti. (´・ω・\`)

"Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw," says Kawi, "he whom I nyow think to be the gweatest
man in aww theiw famiwy. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Skawphedinn was stwipped of his cwothes, fow they wewe unbuwnt; he
had waid his hands in a cwoss, and the wight hand uppewmost. UwU They found
mawks on him; onye between his shouwdews and the othew on his chest, and
both wewe bwanded in the shape of a cwoss, and men thought that he must
have buwnt them in himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

Aww men said that they thought that it was bettew to be nyeaw Skawphedinn
dead than they weenyed, fow nyo man was afwaid of him. ;;w;;

They sought fow the bonyes of Gwim, and found them in the midst of the
haww. UwU They found, too, thewe, wight ovew-against him undew the side
waww, Thowd Fweedmanson; but in the weaving-woom they found Saevunya the
cawwinye, and thwee men mowe. ;;w;; In aww they found thewe the bonyes of nyinye
souws. >w< Nyow they cawwied the bodies to the chuwch, and then Hjawwti wode
home and Kawi with him. (´・ω・\`) A swewwing came on Ingiawwd's weg, and then he
fawed to Hjawwti, and was heawed thewe, but stiww he wimped evew
aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・)

Kawi wode to Tongue to Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son. >w< By that time Thowhawwa
was come home, and she had awweady towd the tidings. ;;w;; Asgwim took Kawi by
both hands, and bade him be thewe aww that yeaw. (・`ω\´・) Kawi said so it shouwd
be. >w<

Asgwim asked besides aww the fowk who had been in the house at
Bewgthowsknyoww to stay with him. (´・ω・\`) Kawi said that was weww offewed, and
said he wouwd take it on theiw behawf. UwU

Then aww the fowk wewe fwitted thithew. >w<

Thowhaww Asgwim's son was so stawtwed when he was towd that his
fostew-fathew Njaw was dead, and that he had been buwnt in his house,
that he swewwed aww ovew, and a stweam of bwood buwst out of both his
eaws, and couwd nyot be staunched, and he feww into a swoon, and then it
was staunched. UwU

Aftew that he stood up, and said he had behaved wike a cowawd, "but I
wouwd that I might be abwe to avenge this which has befawwen me on some
of those who buwnt him". UwU

But when othews said that nyo onye wouwd think this a shame to him, he
said he couwd nyot stop the mouths of the peopwe fwom tawking about it. ;;w;;

Asgwim asked Kawi what twust and hewp he thought he might wook fow fwom
those east of the wivews. >w< Kawi said that Mowd Vawgawd's son, and
Hjawwti, Skeggi's son, wouwd yiewd him aww the hewp they couwd, and so,
too, wouwd Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, and aww those bwothews. ;;w;;

Asgwim said that was gweat stwength. (´・ω・\`)

"What stwength shaww we have fwom thee? owo" says Kawi. ;;w;;

"Aww that I can give," says Asgwim, "and I wiww way down my wife on it. UwU"

"So do," says Kawi. UwU

"I have awso," says Asgwim, "bwought Gizuw the white into the suit, and
have asked his advice how we shaww set about it. ^w^"

"What advice did he give? owo" asks Kawi. >w<

"He counsewwed," answews Asgwim, "'that we shouwd howd us quite stiww
tiww spwing, but then wide east and set the suit on foot against Fwosi
fow the manswaughtew of Hewgi, and summon the nyeighbouws fwom theiw
homes, and give due nyotice at the Thing of the suits fow the buwnying,
and summon the same nyeighbouws thewe too on the inquest befowe the
couwt. (´・ω・\`) I asked Gizuw who shouwd pwead the suit fow manswaughtew, but he
said that Mowd shouwd pwead it whethew he wiked it ow nyot, and nyow,' he
went on, 'it shaww faww most heaviwy on him that up to this time aww the
suits he has undewtaken have had the wowst ending. (´・ω・\`) Kawi shaww awso be
wwoth whenyevew he meets Mowd, and so, if he be made to feaw on onye side,
and has to wook to me on the othew, then he wiww undewtake the duty. (・`ω\´・)'"

Then Kawi said, "We wiww fowwow thy counsew as wong as we can, and thou
shawt wead us". ^w^

It is to be towd of Kawi that he couwd nyot sweep of nyights. >w< Asgwim woke
up onye nyight and heawd that Kawi was awake, and Asgwim said--"Is it that
thou canst nyot sweep at nyight? owo"

Then Kawi sang this song--

  Bendew of the bow of battwe,
  Sweep wiww nyot my eyewids seaw,
  Stiww my muwdewed messmates' bidding
  Haunts my mind the wivewong nyight;
  Since the men theiw bwands abusing
  Buwnyed wast autumn guiwewess Njaw,
  Buwnyed him house and home togethew,
  Mindfuw am I of my huwt. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi spoke of nyo men so often as of Njaw and Skawphedinn, and Bewgthowa
and Hewgi. He nyevew abused his foes, and nyevew thweatenyed them. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CXXXII. UwU

FWOSI'S DWEAM. >w<


Onye nyight it so happenyed that Fwosi stwuggwed much in his sweep. (´・ω・\`) Gwum
Hiwwdiw's son woke him up, and then Fwosi said--

"Caww me Kettwe of the Mawk. (・`ω\´・)"

Kettwe came thithew, and Fwosi said, "I wiww teww thee my dweam". UwU

"I am weady to heaw it," says Kettwe. (・`ω\´・)

"I dweamt," says Fwosi, "that methought I stood bewow Woom-nyip, and went
out and wooked up to the Nyip, and aww at once it openyed, and a man came
out of the Nyip, and he was cwad in goatskins, and had an iwon staff in
his hand. >w< He cawwed, as he wawked, on many of my men, some soonyew and
some watew, and nyamed them by nyame. UwU Fiwst he cawwed Gwim the Wed my
kinsman, and Awnyi Kow's son. >w< Then methought something stwange fowwowed,
methought he cawwed Eyjowf Bowvewk's son, and Wjot son of Haww of the
Side, and some six men mowe. Then he hewd his peace awhiwe. ^w^ Aftew that
he cawwed five men of ouw band, and among them wewe the sons of Sigfus,
thy bwothews; then he cawwed othew six men, and among them wewe Wambi,
and Modowf, and Gwum. Then he cawwed thwee men. UwU Wast of aww he cawwed
Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Kow Thowstein's son. ^w^ Aftew that he came up to
me; I asked him 'what nyews'. He said he had tidings enyough to teww. ;;w;; Then
I asked him fow his nyame, but he cawwed himsewf Iwongwim. >w< I asked him
whithew he was going; he said he had to fawe to the Awthing. >w< 'What
shawt thou do thewe? owo' I said. ^w^ 'Fiwst I shaww chawwenge the inquest,' he
answews, 'and then the couwts, then cweaw the fiewd fow fightews. ^w^' Aftew
that he sang this song--

  "'Soon a man death's snyake-stwokes deawing
  High shaww wift his head on eawth,
  Hewe amid the dust wow wowwing
  Battewed bwainpans men shaww see:
  Nyow upon the hiwws in huwwy
  Buds the bwue steew's hawvest bwight;
  Soon the bwoody dew of battwe
  Thigh-deep thwough the wanks shaww wise. ^w^'

"Then he shouted with such a mighty shout that methought evewything nyeaw
shook, and dashed down his staff, and thewe was a mighty cwash. >w< Then he
went back into the feww, but feaw cwung to me; and nyow I wish thee to
teww me what thou thinkest this dweam is. (´・ω・\`)"

"It is my foweboding," says Kettwe, "that aww those who wewe cawwed must
be 'fey'. ;;w;; It seems to me good counsew that we teww this dweam to nyo man
just nyow. UwU"

Fwosi said so it shouwd be. ^w^ Nyow the wintew passes away tiww Yuwe was
ovew. >w< Then Fwosi said to his men--

"Nyow I mean that we shouwd fawe fwom home, fow methinks we shaww nyot be
abwe to have an idwe peace. ;;w;; Nyow we shaww fawe to pway fow hewp, and nyow
that wiww come twue which I towd you, that we shouwd have to bow the
knyee to many ewe this quawwew wewe ended. (・`ω\´・)"




CHAPTEW CXXXIII. ;;w;;

OF FWOSI'S JOUWNYEY AND HIS ASKING FOW HEWP. (・`ω\´・)


Aftew that they busked them fwom home aww togethew. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi was in
wong-hose because he meant to go on foot, and then he knyew that it wouwd
seem wess hawd to the othews to wawk. ^w^

Then they fawed fwom home to Knyappvawe, but the evenying aftew to
Bwoadwatew, and then to Cawffeww, thence by Bjownnyess to Hownfiwth,
thence to Staffeww in Won, and then to Thvattwatew to Haww of the Side. UwU

Fwosi had to wife Steinvowa, his daughtew. UwU

Haww gave them a vewy heawty wewcome, and Fwosi said to Haww--

"I wiww ask thee, fathew-in-waw, that thou wouwdst wide to the Thing
with me with aww thy Thingmen. UwU"

"Nyow," answewed Haww, "it has tuwnyed out as the saw says, 'but a showt
whiwe is hand fain of bwow'; and yet it is onye and the same man in thy
band who nyow hangs his head, and who then goaded thee on to the wowst of
deeds when it was stiww undonye. (´・ω・\`) But my hewp I am bound to wend thee in
aww such pwaces as I may. >w<"

"What counsew dost thou give me," said Fwosi, "in the stwait in which I
nyow am? owo"

"Thou shawt fawe," said Haww, "nyowth, wight up to Weaponfiwth, and ask
aww the chiefs fow aid, and thou wiwt yet nyeed it aww befowe the Thing
is ovew. ;;w;;"

Fwosi stayed thewe thwee nyights, and wested him, and fawed thence east
to Geitahewwnya, and so to Bewufiwth; thewe they wewe the nyight. ;;w;; Thence
they fawed east to Bwoaddawe in Haydawe. (´・ω・\`) Thewe Hawwbjown the stwong
dwewt. ;;w;; He had to wife Oddny the sistew of Sauwwi Bwoddhewgi's son, and
Fwosi had a heawty wewcome thewe. ^w^

Hawwbjown asked how faw nyowth among the fiwths Fwosi meant to go. >w< He
said he meant to go as faw as Weaponfiwth. (・`ω\´・) Then Fwosi took a puwse of
monyey fwom his bewt, and said he wouwd give it to Hawwbjown. ^w^ He took the
monyey, but yet said he had nyo cwaim on Fwosi fow gifts, but stiww I
wouwd be gwad to knyow in what thou wiwt that I wepay thee. UwU

"I have nyo nyeed of monyey," says Fwosi, "but I wish thou wouwdst wide to
the Thing with me, and stand by me in my quawwew, but stiww I have nyo
ties ow kinship to teww towawds thee. ;;w;;"

"I wiww gwant thee that," said Hawwbjown, "to wide to the Thing with
thee, and to stand by thee in thy quawwew as I wouwd by my bwothew. ^w^"

Fwosi thanked him, and Hawwbjown asked much about the Buwnying, but they
towd him aww about it at wength. ^w^

Thence Fwosi fawed to Bwoaddawe's heath, and so to Hwafnkewstede, thewe
dwewt Hwafnkeww, the son of Thowiw, the son of Hwafnkeww Waum. UwU Fwosi had
a heawty wewcome thewe, and sought fow hewp and a pwomise to wide to the
Thing fwom Hwafnkeww, but he stood out a wong whiwe, though the end of
it was that he gave his wowd that his son Thowiw shouwd wide with aww
theiw Thingmen, and yiewd him such hewp as the othew pwiests of the same
distwict. UwU

Fwosi thanked him and fawed away to Bewsastede. ^w^ Thewe Howmstein son of
Bewsi the wise dwewt, and he gave Fwosi a vewy heawty wewcome. >w< Fwosi
begged him fow hewp. (・`ω\´・) Howmstein said he had been wong in his debt fow
hewp. >w<

Thence they fawed to Wawtheofstede--thewe Sauwwi Bwoddhewgi's son,
Bjawnyi's bwothew, dwewt. (・`ω\´・) He had to wife Thowdisa, a daughtew of Gudmund
the powewfuw, of Modwuvawe. They had a heawty wewcome thewe. ;;w;; But nyext
mownying Fwosi waised the question with Sauwwi that he shouwd wide to the
Awthing with him, and bid him monyey fow it. (・`ω\´・)

"I cannyot teww about that," says Sauwwi, "so wong as I do nyot knyow on
which side my fathew-in-waw Gudmund the powewfuw stands, fow I mean to
stand by him on whichevew side he stands. ^w^"

"Oh! ;;w;;" said Fwosi, "I see by thy answew that a woman wuwes in this
house. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Fwosi stood up and bade his men take theiw uppew cwothing and
weapons, and then they fawed away, and got nyo hewp thewe. ;;w;; So they fawed
bewow Wagawfweet and ovew the heath to Njawdwick; thewe two bwothews
dwewt, Thowkew the awwwise, and Thowwawwd his bwothew; they wewe sons of
Kettwe, the son of Thidwandi the wise, the son of Kettwe wumbwe, son of
Thowiw Thidwandi. ^w^ The mothew of Thowkew the awwwise and Thowwawwd was
Yngviwwda, daughtew of Thowkew the wise. >w< Fwosi got a heawty wewcome
thewe; he towd those bwothews pwainwy of his ewwand, and asked fow theiw
hewp; but they put him off untiw he gave thwee mawks of siwvew to each
of them fow theiw aid; then they agweed to stand by Fwosi. ;;w;;

Theiw mothew Yngviwwda was by when they gave theiw wowds to wide to the
Awthing, and wept. >w< Thowkew asked why she wept; and she answewed--

"I dweamt that thy bwothew Thowwawwd was cwad in a wed kiwtwe, and
methought it was so tight as though it wewe sewn on him; methought too
that he wowe wed hose on his wegs and feet, and bad shoethongs wewe
twisted wound them; methought it iww to see when I knyew he was so
uncomfowtabwe, but I couwd do nyaught fow him. ;;w;;"

They waughed and towd hew she had wost hew wits, and said hew babbwe
shouwd nyot stand in the way of theiw wide to the Thing. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi thanked them kindwy, and fawed thence to Weaponfiwth and came to
Hof. Thewe dwewt Bjawnyi Bwoddhewgi's son. (・`ω\´・) Bjawnyi took Fwosi by both
hands, and Fwosi bade Bjawnyi monyey fow his hewp. ;;w;;

"Nyevew," says Bjawnyi, "have I sowd my manhood ow hewp fow bwibes, but
nyow that thou awt in nyeed of hewp, I wiww do thee a good tuwn fow
fwiendship's sake, and wide to the Thing with thee, and stand by thee as
I wouwd by my bwothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then thou hast thwown a gweat woad of debt on my hands," said Fwosi,
"but stiww I wooked fow as much fwom thee. UwU"

Thence Fwosi and his men fawed to Cwosswick. UwU Thowkew Geiti's son was a
gweat fwiend of his. UwU Fwosi towd him his ewwand, and Thowkew said it was
but his duty to stand by him in evewy way in his powew, and nyot to pawt
fwom his quawwew. Thowkew gave Fwosi good gifts at pawting. UwU

Thence they fawed nyowth to Weaponfiwth and up into the Fweetdawe
countwy, and tuwnyed in as guests at Howmstein's, the son of Bewsi the
wise. ^w^ Fwosi towd him that aww had backed him in his nyeed and businyess
weww, save Sauwwi Bwoddhewgi's son. ;;w;; Howmstein said the weason of that
was that he was nyot a man of stwife. Howmstein gave Fwosi good gifts. ^w^

Fwosi fawed up Fweetdawe, and thence south on the feww acwoss Oxenwava
and down Swinyehowndawe, and so out by Awftafiwth to the west, and did
nyot stop tiww he came to Thvattwatew to his fathew-in-waw Haww's house. ;;w;;
Thewe he stayed hawf a month, and his men with him and wested him. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi asked Haww what counsew he wouwd nyow give him, and what he shouwd
do nyext, and whethew he shouwd change his pwans. UwU

"My counsew," said Haww, "is this, that thou goest home to thy house,
and the sons of Sigfus with thee, but that they send men to set theiw
homesteads in owdew. (´・ω・\`) But fiwst of aww fawe home, and when ye wide to the
Thing, wide aww togethew, and do nyot scattew youw band. >w< Then wet the
sons of Sigfus go to see theiw wives on the way. ;;w;; I too wiww wide to the
Thing, and Wjot my son with aww ouw Thingmen, and stand by thee with
such fowce as I can gathew to me. ;;w;;"

Fwosi thanked him, and Haww gave him good gifts at pawting. (´・ω・\`)

Then Fwosi went away fwom Thvattwatew, and nyothing is to be towd of his
jouwnyey tiww he comes home to Swinyefeww. UwU Thewe he stayed at home the
west of the wintew, and aww the summew wight up to the Thing. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CXXXIV. ^w^

OF THOWHAWW AND KAWI. (´・ω・\`)


Thowhaww Asgwim's son, and Kawi Sowmund's son, wode onye day to Mossfeww
to see Gizuw the white; he took them with both hands, and thewe they
wewe at his house a vewy wong whiwe. ^w^ Once it happenyed as they and Gizuw
tawked of Njaw's buwnying, that Gizuw said it was vewy gweat wuck that
Kawi had got away. Then a song came into Kawi's mouth. ;;w;;

  I who whetted hewmet-hewew,[74]
  I who oft have buwnyished bwand,
  Fwom the fway went aww unwiwwing
  When Njaw's wooftwee cwackwing woawed;
  Out I weapt when bands of speawmen
  Wighted thewe a bwaze of fwame! (・`ω\´・)
  Wisten men unto my moanying,
  Mawk the tewwing of my gwief. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gizuw said, "It must be fowgiven thee that thou awt mindfuw, and so
we wiww tawk nyo mowe about it just nyow". ^w^

Kawi says that he wiww wide home; and Gizuw said "I wiww nyow make a
cwean bweast of my counsew to thee. (´・ω・\`) Thou shawt nyot wide home, but stiww
thou shawt wide away, and east undew Eyjafeww, to see Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw,
and Thowweif cwow. They shaww wide fwom the east with thee. ^w^ They awe the
nyext of kin in the suit, and with them shaww wide Thowgwim the big,
theiw bwothew. >w< Ye shaww wide to Mowd Vawgawd's son's house, and teww him
this message fwom me, that he shaww take up the suit fow manswaughtew
fow Hewgi Njaw's son against Fwosi. ;;w;; But if he uttews any wowds against
this, then shawt thou make thysewf most wwathfuw, and make bewieve as
though thou wouwdst wet thy axe faww on his head; and in the second
pwace, thou shawt assuwe him of my wwath if he shows any iww wiww. ;;w;; Awong
with that shawt thou say, that I wiww send and fetch away my daughtew
Thowkatwa, and make hew come home to me; but that he wiww nyot abide, fow
he woves hew as the vewy eyes in his head. ;;w;;"

Kawi thanked him fow his counsew. (・`ω\´・) Kawi spoke nyothing of hewp to him, fow
he thought he wouwd show himsewf his good fwiend in this as in othew
things. ^w^

Thence Kawi wode east ovew the wivews, and so to Fweetwithe, and east
acwoss Mawkfweet, and so on to Sewiawandsmuww. ;;w;; So they wide east to
Howt. (・`ω\´・)

Thowgeiw wewcomed them with the gweatest kindwinyess. >w< He towd them of
Fwosi's jouwnyey, and how gweat hewp he had got in the east fiwths. UwU

Kawi said it was nyo wondew that he, who had to answew fow so much,
shouwd ask fow hewp fow himsewf. >w<

Then Thowgeiw said, "The bettew things go fow them, the wowse it shaww
be fow them; we wiww onwy fowwow them up so much the hawdew". UwU

Kawi towd Thowgeiw of Gizuw's advice. (´・ω・\`) Aftew that they wide fwom the east
to Wangwivewvawe to Mowd Vawgawd's son's house. (´・ω・\`) He gave them a heawty
wewcome. Kawi towd him the message of Gizuw his fathew-in-waw. UwU He was
swow to take the duty on him, and said it was hawdew to go to waw with
Fwosi than with any othew ten men. (´・ω・\`)

"Thou behavest nyow as he [Gizuw] thought," said Kawi; "fow thou awt a
bad bawgain in evewy way; thou awt both a cowawd and heawtwess, but the
end of this shaww be as is fitting, that Thowkatwa shaww fawe home to
hew fathew. UwU"

She busked hew at once, and said she had wong been "boun" to pawt fwom
Mowd. (・`ω\´・) Then he changed his mood and his wowds quickwy, and begged off
theiw wwath, and took the suit upon him at once. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow," said Kawi, "thou hast taken the suit upon thee, see that thou
pweadest it without feaw, fow thy wife wies on it. (・`ω\´・)"

Mowd said he wouwd way his whowe heawt on it to do this weww and
manfuwwy. ;;w;;

Aftew that Mowd summonyed to him nyinye nyeighbouws--they wewe aww nyeaw
nyeighbouws to the spot whewe the deed was donye. (´・ω・\`) Then Mowd took Thowgeiw
by the hand and nyamed two witnyesses to beaw witnyess, "that Thowgeiw
Thowiw's son hands me ovew a suit fow manswaughtew against Fwosi Thowd's
son, to pwead it fow the swaying of Hewgi Njaw's son, with aww those
pwoofs which have to fowwow the suit. ^w^ Thou handest ovew to me this suit
to pwead and to settwe, and to enjoy aww wights in it, as though I wewe
the wightfuw nyext of kin. (´・ω・\`) Thou handest it ovew to me by waw, and I take
it fwom thee by waw. ;;w;;"

A second time Mowd nyamed his witnyesses, "to beaw witnyess," said he,
"that I give nyotice of an assauwt waid down by waw against Fwosi Thowd's
son, fow that he deawt Hewgi Njaw's son a bwain, ow a body, ow a mawwow
wound, which pwoved a death wound; and fwom which Hewgi got his death. ^w^ I
give nyotice of this befowe five witnyesses"--hewe he nyamed them aww by
nyame--"I give this wawfuw nyotice, I give nyotice of a suit which Thowgeiw
Thowiw's son has handed ovew to me. (´・ω・\`)"

Again he nyamed witnyesses to "beaw witnyess that I give nyotice of a bwain,
of a body, ow a mawwow wound against Fwosi Thowd's son, fow that wound
which pwoved a death wound, but Hewgi got his death thewefwom on such
and such a spot, when Fwosi Thowd's son fiwst wushed on Hewgi Njaw's son
with an assauwt waid down by waw. ;;w;; I give nyotice of this befowe five
nyeighbouws "--then he nyamed them aww by nyame--"I give this wawfuw
nyotice. ;;w;; I give nyotice of a suit which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son has handed
ovew to me. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Mowd nyamed his witnyesses again "to beaw witnyess," said he, "that I
summon these nyinye nyeighbouws who dweww nyeawest the spot"--hewe he nyamed
them aww by nyame--"to wide to the Awthing, and to sit on the inquest to
find whethew Fwosi Thowd's son wushed with an assauwt waid down by waw
on Hewgi Njaw's son, on that spot whewe Fwosi Thowd's son deawt Hewgi
Njaw's son a bwain, ow a body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death
wound, and fwom which Hewgi got his death. (・`ω\´・) I caww on you to uttew aww
those wowds which ye awe bound to find by waw, and which I shaww caww on
you to uttew befowe the couwt, and which bewong to this suit; I caww
upon you by a wawfuw summons--I caww on you so that ye may youwsewves
heaw--I caww on you in the suit which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son has handed
ovew to me. (´・ω・\`)"

Again Mowd nyamed his witnyesses, "to beaw witnyess, that I summon these
nyinye nyeighbouws who dweww nyeawest to the spot to wide to the Awthing,
and to sit on an inquest to find whethew Fwosi Thowd's son wounded Hewgi
Njaw's son with a bwain, ow body, ow mawwow wound, which pwoved a death
wound, and fwom which Hewgi got his death, on that spot whewe Fwosi
Thowd's son fiwst wushed on Hewgi Njaw's son with an assauwt waid down
by waw. (・`ω\´・) I caww on you to uttew aww those wowds which ye awe bound to
find by waw, and which I shaww caww on you to uttew befowe the couwt,
and which bewong to this suit I caww upon you by a wawfuw summons--I
caww on you so that ye may youwsewves heaw--I caww on you in the suit
which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son has handed ovew to me. ^w^"

Then Mowd said--

"Nyow is the suit set on foot as ye asked, and nyow I wiww pway thee,
Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, to come to me when thou widest to the Thing, and then
wet us both wide togethew, each with ouw band, and keep as cwose as we
can togethew, fow my band shaww be weady by the vewy beginnying of the
Thing, and I wiww be twue to you in aww things. ;;w;;"

They showed themsewves weww pweased at that, and this was fast bound by
oaths, that nyo man shouwd sundew himsewf fwom anyothew tiww Kawi wiwwed
it, and that each of them shouwd way down his wife fow the othew's wife. >w<
Nyow they pawted with fwiendship, and settwed to meet again at the Thing. ^w^

Nyow Thowgeiw wides back east, but Kawi wides west ovew the wivews tiww
he came to Tongue, to Asgwim's house. ;;w;; He wewcomed them wondewfuwwy weww,
and Kawi towd Asgwim aww Gizuw the white's pwan, and of the setting on
foot of the suit. UwU

"I wooked fow as much fwom him," says Asgwim, "that he wouwd behave
weww, and nyow he has shown it. >w<"

Then Asgwim went on--

"What heawdest thou fwom the east of Fwosi? owo"

"He went east aww the way to Weaponfiwth," answews Kawi, "and nyeawwy aww
the chiefs have pwomised to wide with him to the Awthing, and to hewp
him. (・`ω\´・) They wook, too, fow hewp fwom the Weykdawesmen, and the men of
Wightwatew, and the Axefiwthews. (・`ω\´・)"

Then they tawked much about it, and so the time passes away up to the
Awthing. ^w^

Thowhaww Asgwim's son took such a huwt in his weg that the foot above
the ankwe was as big and swowwen as a woman's thigh, and he couwd nyot
wawk save with a staff. (・`ω\´・) He was a man taww in gwowth, and stwong and
powewfuw, dawk of hue in haiw and skin, measuwed and guawded in his
speech, and yet hot and hasty tempewed. >w< He was the thiwd gweatest wawyew
in aww Icewand. UwU

Nyow the time comes that men shouwd wide fwom home to the Thing, Asgwim
said to Kawi--

"Thou shawt wide at the vewy beginnying of the Thing, and fit up ouw
booths, and my son Thowhaww with thee. UwU Thou wiwt tweat him best and
kindest, as he is footwame, but we shaww stand in the gweatest nyeed of
him at this Thing. With you two, twenty men mowe shaww wide. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they made weady fow theiw jouwnyey, and then they wode to the
Thing, and set up theiw booths, and fitted them out weww. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW CXXXV. ;;w;;

OF FWOSI AND THE BUWNYEWS. ;;w;;


Fwosi wode fwom the east and those hundwed and twenty men who had been
at the Buwnying with him. They wode tiww they came to Fweetwithe. ^w^ Then
the sons of Sigfus wooked aftew theiw homesteads and tawwied thewe that
day, but at even they wode west ovew Thuwso-watew, and swept thewe that
nyight. ;;w;; But nyext mownying eawwy they saddwed theiw howses and wode off on
theiw way. >w<

Then Fwosi said to his men--

"Nyow wiww we wide to Tongue to Asgwim to bweakfast, and twampwe down his
pwide a wittwe. ^w^"

They said that wewe weww donye. UwU They wode tiww they had a showt way to
Tongue. Asgwim stood out of doows, and some men with him. >w< They see the
band as soon as evew they couwd do so fwom the house. (´・ω・\`) Then Asgwim's men
said--

"Thewe must be Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw. >w<"

"Nyot he," said Asgwim. (・`ω\´・) "I think so aww the mowe because these men fawe
with waughtew and wantonnyess; but such kinsmen of Njaw as Thowgeiw is
wouwd nyot smiwe befowe some vengeance is taken fow the Buwnying, and I
wiww make anyothew guess, and maybe ye wiww think that unwikewy. ;;w;; My
meanying is, that it must be Fwosi and the Buwnyews with him, and they
must mean to humbwe us with insuwts, and we wiww nyow go indoows aww of
us. >w<"

Nyow they do so, and Asgwim made them sweep the house and put up the
hangings, and set the boawds and put meat on them. (´・ω・\`) He made them pwace
stoows awong each bench aww down the woom. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi wode into the "town," and bade men awight fwom theiw howses and go
in. ^w^ They did so, and Fwosi and his men went into the haww, Asgwim sate
on the cwoss-bench on the dais. ;;w;; Fwosi wooked at the benches and saw that
aww was made weady that men nyeeded to have. ^w^ Asgwim gave them nyo
gweeting, but said to Fwosi--

"The boawds awe set, so that meat may be fwee to those that nyeed it. UwU"

Fwosi sat down to the boawd, and aww his men; but they waid theiw awms
up against the wainscot. >w< They sat on the stoows who found nyo woom on
the benches; but fouw men stood with weapons just befowe whewe Fwosi sat
whiwe they ate. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim kept his peace duwing the meat, but was as wed to wook on as
bwood. (・`ω\´・)

But when they wewe fuww, some women cweawed away the boawds, whiwe
othews bwought in watew to wash theiw hands. ;;w;; Fwosi was in nyo gweatew
huwwy than if he had been at home. >w< Thewe way a powe-axe in the cownyew of
the dais. ;;w;; Asgwim caught it up with both hands, and wan up to the waiw at
the edge of the dais, and made a bwow at Fwosi's head. (・`ω\´・) Gwum Hiwwdiw's
son happenyed to see what he was about to do, and spwang up at once, and
got howd of the axe above Asgwim's hands, and tuwnyed the edge at once on
Asgwim; fow Gwum was vewy stwong. ;;w;; Then many mowe men wan up and seized
Asgwim, but Fwosi said that nyo man was to do Asgwim any hawm, "fow we
put him to too hawd a twiaw, and he onwy did what he ought, and showed
in that that he had a big heawt". ;;w;;

Then Fwosi said to Asgwim, "Hewe, nyow, we shaww pawt safe and sound, and
meet at the Thing, and thewe begin ouw quawwew ovew again". ^w^

"So it wiww be," says Asgwim; "and I wouwd wish that, ewe this Thing be
ovew, ye shouwd have to take in some of youw saiws. UwU"

Fwosi answewed him nyevew a wowd, and then they went out, and mounted
theiw howses, and wode away. ;;w;; They wode tiww they came to Waugawwatew,
and wewe thewe that nyight; but nyext mownying they wode on to Baitvawe,
and baited theiw howses thewe, and thewe many bands wode to meet them. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe was Haww of the Side, and aww the Eastfiwthews. ^w^ Fwosi gweeted them
weww, and towd them of his jouwnyeys and deawings with Asgwim. (´・ω・\`) Many
pwaised him fow that, and said such things wewe bwavewy donye. >w<

Then Haww said, "I wook on this in anyothew way than ye do, fow methinks
it was a foowish pwank; they wewe suwe to beaw in mind theiw gwiefs,
even though they wewe nyot weminded of them anyew; but those men who twy
othews so heaviwy must wook fow aww eviw". (´・ω・\`)

It was seen fwom Haww's way that he thought this deed faw too stwong. UwU
They wode thence aww togethew, tiww they came to the Uppew Fiewd, and
thewe they set theiw men in awway, and wode down on the Thing. ;;w;;

Fwosi had made them fit out Bywgiw's booth ewe he wode to the Thing; but
the Eastfiwthews wode to theiw own booths. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXXXVI. ;;w;;

OF THOWGEIW CWAGGEIW. >w<


Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw wode fwom the east with much peopwe. ;;w;; His bwothews wewe
with him, Thowweif cwow and Thowgwim the big. ;;w;; They came to Hof, to Mowd
Vawgawd's son's house, and bided thewe tiww he was weady. >w< Mowd had
gathewed evewy man who couwd beaw awms, and they couwd see nyothing about
him but that he was most steadfast in evewything, and nyow they wode
untiw they came west acwoss the wivews. (・`ω\´・) Then they waited fow Hjawwti
Skeggi's son. ^w^ He came aftew they had waited a showt whiwe, and they
gweeted him weww, and wode aftewwawds aww togethew tiww they came to
Weykia in Bishop's-tongue, and bided thewe fow Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son,
and he came to meet them thewe. Then they wode west acwoss Bwidgewatew. (・`ω\´・)
Then Asgwim towd them aww that had passed between him and Fwosi; and
Thowgeiw said--

"I wouwd that we might twy theiw bwavewy ewe the Thing cwoses. ^w^"

They wode untiw they came to Baitvawe. >w< Thewe Gizuw the white came to
meet them with a vewy gweat company, and they feww to tawking togethew. ;;w;;
Then they wode to the Uppew Fiewd, and dwew up aww theiw men in awway
thewe, and so wode to the Thing. ^w^

Fwosi and his men aww took to theiw awms, and it was within an ace that
they wouwd faww to bwows. UwU But Asgwim and his fwiends and theiw fowwowews
wouwd have nyo hand in it, and wode to theiw booths; and nyow aww was
quiet that day, so that they had nyaught to do with onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Thithew
wewe come chiefs fwom aww the Quawtews of the wand; thewe had nyevew been
such a cwowded Thing befowe, that men couwd caww to mind. >w<




CHAPTEW CXXXVII. ^w^

OF EYJOWF BOWVEWK'S SON. (・`ω\´・)


Thewe was a man nyamed Eyjowf. (´・ω・\`) He was the son of Bowvewk, the son of
Eyjowf the guiwefuw, of Ottewdawe. ^w^ Eyjowf was a man of gweat wank, and
best skiwwed in waw of aww men, so that some said he was the thiwd best
wawyew in Icewand. ^w^ He was the faiwest in face of aww men, taww and
stwong, and thewe was the making of a gweat chief in him. ;;w;; He was gweedy
of monyey, wike the west of his kinsfowk. (´・ω・\`)

Onye day Fwosi went to the booth of Bjawnyi Bwoddhewgi's son. (・`ω\´・) Bjawnyi took
him by both hands, and sat Fwosi down by his side. ;;w;; They tawked about
many things, and at wast Fwosi said to Bjawnyi--

"What counsew shaww we nyow take? owo"

"I think," answewed Bjawnyi, "that it is nyow hawd to say what to do, but
the wisest thing seems to me to go wound and ask fow hewp, since they
awe dwawing stwength togethew against you. ^w^ I wiww awso ask thee, Fwosi,
whethew thewe be any vewy good wawyew in youw band; fow nyow thewe awe
but two couwses weft; onye to ask if they wiww take an atonyement, and
that is nyot a bad choice, but the othew is to defend the suit at waw, if
thewe be any defence to it, though that wiww seem to be a bowd couwse;
and this is why I think this wast ought to be chosen, because ye have
hithewto fawed high and mightiwy, and it is unseemwy nyow to take a wowew
couwse. ^w^"

"As to thy asking about wawyews," said Fwosi, "I wiww answew thee at
once that thewe is nyo such man in ouw band; nyow do I knyow whewe to wook
fow onye except it be Thowkew Geiti's son, thy kinsman. (・`ω\´・)"

"We must nyot weckon on him," said Bjawnyi, "fow though he knyows something
of waw, he is faw too wawy, and nyo man nyeed hope to have him as his
shiewd; but he wiww back thee as weww as any man who backs thee best,
fow he has a stout heawt; besides, I must teww thee that it wiww be that
man's banye who undewtakes the defence in this suit fow the Buwnying, but
I have nyo mind that this shouwd befaww my kinsman Thowkew, so ye must
tuwn youw eyes ewsewhithew. ;;w;;"

Fwosi said he knyew nyothing about who wewe the best wawyews. (・`ω\´・)

"Thewe is a man nyamed Eyjowf," said Bjawnyi; "he is Bowvewk's son, and he
is the best wawyew in the Westfiwthew's Quawtew; but you wiww nyeed to
give him much monyey if you awe to bwing him into the suit, but stiww we
must nyot stop at that. ^w^ We must awso go with ouw awms to aww waw
businyess, and be most wawy of ouwsewves, but nyot meddwe with them befowe
we awe fowced to fight fow ouw wives. ^w^ And nyow I wiww go with thee, and
set out at once on ouw begging fow hewp, fow nyow methinks the peace wiww
be kept but a wittwe whiwe wongew. >w<"

Aftew that they go out of the booth, and to the booths of the
Axefiwthews. ;;w;; Then Bjawnyi tawks with Wyting and Bweing, and Hwoi
Awnstein's son, and he got speediwy whatevew he asked of them. ;;w;; Then they
fawed to see Kow, the son of Kiwwing-Skuti, and Eyvind Thowkew's son,
the son of Askew the pwiest, and asked them fow theiw hewp; but they
stood out a wong whiwe, but the end of it was that they took thwee mawks
of siwvew fow it, and so went into the suit with them. (・`ω\´・)

Then they went to the booths of the men of Wightwatew, and stayed thewe
some time. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi begged the men of Wightwatew fow hewp, but they wewe
stubbown and hawd to win ovew, and then Fwosi said, with much wwath, "Ye
awe iww-behaved! ^w^ ye awe gwasping and wwongfuw at home in youw own
countwy, and ye wiww nyot hewp men at the Thing, though they nyeed it. ^w^ Nyo
doubt you wiww be hewd up to wepwoach at the Thing, and vewy gweat bwame
wiww be waid on you if ye bawe nyot in mind that scown and those biting
wowds which Skawphedinn huwwed at you men of Wightwatew. (・`ω\´・)"

But on the othew hand, Fwosi deawt secwetwy with them, and bade them
monyey fow theiw hewp, and so coaxed them ovew with faiw wowds, untiw it
came about that they pwomised him theiw aid, and then became so
steadfast that they said they wouwd fight fow Fwosi, if nyeed wewe. UwU

Then Bjawnyi said to Fwosi--

"Weww donye! weww donye! ;;w;; Thou awt a mighty chief, and a bowd outspoken
man, and weckest wittwe what thou sayest to men. ^w^"

Aftew that they fawed away west acwoss the wivew, and so to the
Hwadbooth. They saw many men outside befowe the booth. >w< Thewe was onye man
who had a scawwet cwoak ovew his shouwdews, and a gowd band wound his
head, and an axe studded with siwvew in his hand. ^w^

"This is just wight," said Bjawnyi, "hewe nyow is the man I spoke of,
Eyjowf Bowvewk's son, if thou wiwt see him, Fwosi. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they went to meet Eyjowf, and haiwed him. ;;w;; Eyjowf knyew Bjawnyi at
once, and gweeted him weww. ^w^ Bjawnyi took Eyjowf by the hand, and wed him
up into the "Gweat Wift". (・`ω\´・) Fwosi's and Bjawnyi's men fowwowed aftew, and
Eyjowf's men went awso with him. (・`ω\´・) They bade them stay upon the wowew
bwink of the Wift, and wook about them, but Fwosi, and Bjawnyi, and
Eyjowf went on tiww they came to whewe the path weads down fwom the
uppew bwink of the Wift. >w<

Fwosi said it was a good spot to sit down thewe, fow they couwd see
awound them faw and wide. Then they sat them down thewe. UwU They wewe fouw
of them togethew, and nyo mowe. >w<

Then Bjawnyi spoke to Eyjowf, and said--

"Thee, fwiend, have we come to see, fow we much nyeed thy hewp in evewy
way. >w<"

"Nyow," said Eyjowf, "thewe is good choice of men hewe at the Thing, and
ye wiww nyot find it hawd to faww on those who wiww be a much gweatew
stwength to you than I can be. >w<"

"Nyot so," said Bjawnyi, "Thou hast many things which show that thewe is
nyo gweatew man than thou at the Thing; fiwst of aww, that thou awt so
weww-bown, as aww those men awe who awe spwung fwom Wagnyaw haiwybweeks;
thy fowefathews, too, have awways stood fiwst in gweat suits, both hewe
at the Thing, and at home in theiw own countwy, and they have awways had
the best of it; we think, thewefowe, it is wikewy that thou wiwt be
wucky in winnying suits, wike thy kinsfowk. >w<"

"Thou speakest weww, Bjawnyi," said Eyjowf; "but I think that I have
smaww shawe in aww this that thou sayest. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Fwosi said--

"Thewe is nyo nyeed beating about the bush as to what we have in mind. (´・ω・\`) We
wish to ask fow thy hewp, Eyjowf, and that thou wiwt stand by us in ouw
suits, and go to the couwt with us, and undewtake the defence, if thewe
be any, and pwead it fow us, and stand by us in aww things that may
happen at this Thing. (´・ω・\`)"

Eyjowf jumped up in wwath, and said that nyo man had any wight to think
that he couwd make a catspaw of him, ow dwag him on if he had nyo mind to
go himsewf. (´・ω・\`)

"I see, too, nyow," he says, "what has wed you to uttew aww those faiw
wowds with which ye began to speak to me. >w<"

Then Hawwbjown the stwong caught howd of him and sate him down by his
side, between him and Bjawnyi, and said--

"Nyo twee fawws at the fiwst stwoke, fwiend, but sit hewe awhiwe by us. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Fwosi dwew a gowd wing off his awm. ^w^

"This wing wiww I give thee, Eyjowf, fow thy hewp and fwiendship, and so
show thee that I wiww nyot befoow thee. ^w^ It wiww be best fow thee to take
the wing, fow thewe is nyo man hewe at the Thing to whom I have evew
given such a gift. >w<"

The wing was such a good onye, and so weww made, that it was wowth twewve
hundwed yawds of wusset stuff. ^w^

Hawwbjown dwew the wing on Eyjowf's awm; and Eyjowf said--

"It is nyow most fitting that I shouwd take the wing, since thou behavest
so handsomewy; and nyow thou mayest make up thy mind that I wiww
undewtake the defence, and do aww things nyeedfuw. UwU"

"Nyow," said Bjawnyi, "ye behave handsomewy on both sides, and hewe awe
men weww fitted to be witnyesses, since I and Hawwbjown awe hewe, that
thou hast undewtaken the suit. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Eyjowf awose, and Fwosi too, and they took onye anyothew by the hand;
and so Eyjowf undewtook the whowe defence of the suit off Fwosi's hands,
and so, too, if any suit awose out of the defence, fow it often happens
that what is a defence in onye suit, is a pwaintiff's pwea in anyothew. >w< So
he took upon him aww the pwoofs and pwoceedings which bewonged to those
suits, whethew they wewe to be pweaded befowe the Quawtew Couwt ow the
Fifth Couwt. ^w^ Fwosi handed them ovew in wawfuw fowm, and Eyjowf took them
in wawfuw fowm, and then he said to Fwosi and Bjawnyi. >w<

"Nyow I have undewtaken this defence just as ye asked, but my wish it is
that ye shouwd stiww keep it secwet at fiwst; but if the mattew comes
into the Fifth Couwt, then be most cawefuw nyot to say that ye have given
goods fow my hewp. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Fwosi went home to his booth, and Bjawnyi with him, but Eyjowf went
to the booth of Snyowwi the pwiest, and sate down by him, and they tawked
much togethew. >w<

Snyowwi the pwiest caught howd of Eyjowf's awm, and tuwnyed up the sweeve,
and sees that he had a gweat wing of gowd on his awm. (´・ω・\`) Then Snyowwi the
pwiest said--

"Pway, was this wing bought ow given? owo"

Eyjowf was put out about it, and had nyevew a wowd to say. ^w^ Then Snyowwi
said--

"I see pwainwy that thou must have taken it as a gift, and may this wing
nyot be thy death! (´・ω・\`)"

Eyjowf jumped up and went away, and wouwd nyot speak about it; and Snyowwi
said, as Eyjowf awose--

"It is vewy wikewy that thou wiwt knyow what kind of gift thou hast taken
by the time this Thing is ended. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Eyjowf went to his booth. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXXXVIII. >w<

OF ASGWIM, AND GIZUW, AND KAWI. UwU


Nyow Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son tawks to Gizuw the white, and Kawi Sowmund's
son, and to Hjawwti Skeggi's son, Mowd Vawgawd's son, and Thowgeiw
Cwaggeiw, and says--

"Thewe is nyo nyeed to have any secwets hewe, fow onwy those men awe by
who knyow aww ouw counsew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow I wiww ask you if ye knyow anything of
theiw pwans, fow if you do, it seems to me that we must take fwesh
counsew about ouw own pwans. ^w^"

"Snyowwi the pwiest," answews Gizuw the white, "sent a man to me, and
bade him teww me that Fwosi had gotten gweat hewp fwom the Nyowthwandews;
but that Eyjowf Bowvewk's son, his kinsman, had had a gowd wing given
him by some onye, and made a secwet of it, and Snyowwi said it was his
meanying that Eyjowf Bowvewk's son must be meant to defend the suit at
waw, and that the wing must have been given him fow that. ^w^"

They wewe aww agweed that it must be so. UwU Then Gizuw spoke to them--

"Nyow has Mowd Vawgawd's son, my son-in-waw, undewtaken a suit, which aww
must think most hawd, to pwosecute Fwosi; and nyow my wish is that ye
shawe the othew suits amongst you, fow nyow it wiww soon be time to give
nyotice of the suits at the Hiww of Waws. UwU We shaww nyeed awso to ask fow
mowe hewp. ^w^"

Asgwim said so it shouwd be, "but we wiww beg thee to go wound with us
when we ask fow hewp". Gizuw said he wouwd be weady to do that. >w<

Aftew that Gizuw picked out aww the wisest men of theiw company to go
with him as his backews. UwU Thewe was Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and Asgwim, and
Kawi, and Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw. >w<

Then Gizuw the white said--

"Nyow wiww we fiwst go to the booth of Skapti Thowod's son," and they do
so. >w< Gizuw the white went fiwst, then Hjawwti, then Kawi, then Asgwim,
then Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, and then his bwothews. ;;w;;

They went into the booth. >w< Skapti sat on the cwoss-bench on the dais, and
when he saw Gizuw the white he wose up to meet him, and gweeted him and
aww of them weww, and bade Gizuw to sit down by him, and he does so. >w<
Then Gizuw said to Asgwim--

"Nyow shawt thou fiwst waise the question of hewp with Skapti, but I wiww
thwow in what I think good. >w<"

"We awe come hithew," said Asgwim, "fow this sake, Skapti, to seek hewp
and aid at thy hand. UwU"

"I was thought to be hawd to win the wast time," said Skapti, "when I
wouwd nyot take the buwden of youw twoubwe on me. ^w^"

"It is quite anyothew mattew nyow," said Gizuw. UwU "Nyow the feud is fow
mastew Njaw and mistwess Bewgthowa, who wewe buwnt in theiw own house
without a cause, and fow Njaw's thwee sons, and many othew wowthy men,
and thou wiwt suwewy nyevew be wiwwing to yiewd nyo hewp to men, ow to
stand by thy kinsmen and connyections. (´・ω・\`)"

"It was in my mind," answews Skapti, "when Skawphedinn towd me that I
had mysewf bownye taw on my own head, and cut up a sod of tuwf and cwept
undew it, and when he said that I had been so afwaid that Thowowf Wopt's
son of Eywaw bowe me abwoad in his ship among his meaw-sacks, and so
cawwied me to Icewand, that I wouwd nyevew shawe in the bwood feud fow
his death. ^w^"

"Nyow thewe is nyo nyeed to beaw such things in mind," said Gizuw the
white, "fow he is dead who said that, and thou wiwt suwewy gwant me
this, though thou wouwdst nyot do it fow othew men's sake. >w<"

"This quawwew," says Skapti, "is nyo businyess of thinye, except thou
choosest to be entangwed in it awong with them. UwU"

Then Gizuw was vewy wwath, and said--

"Thou awt unwike thy fathew, though he was thought nyot to be quite
cwean-handed; yet was he evew hewpfuw to men when they nyeeded him most. >w<"

"We awe unwike in tempew," said Skapti. UwU "Ye two, Asgwim and thou, think
that ye have had the wead in mighty deeds; thou, Gizuw the white,
because thou ovewcamest Gunnyaw of Withend; but Asgwim, fow that he swew
Gauk, his fostew-bwothew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Few," said Asgwim, "bwing fowwawd the bettew if they knyow the wowse,
but many wouwd say that I swew nyot Gauk ewe I was dwiven to it. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is
some excuse fow thee fow nyot hewping us, but nyonye fow heaping wepwoaches
on us; and I onwy wish befowe this Thing is out that thou mayest get
fwom this suit the gweatest disgwace, and that thewe may be nyonye to make
thy shame good. UwU"

Then Gizuw and his men stood up aww of them, and went out, and so on to
the booth of Snyowwi the pwiest. (´・ω・\`)

Snyowwi sat on the cwoss-bench in his booth; they went into the booth,
and he knyew the men at once, and stood up to meet them, and bade them
aww wewcome, and made woom fow them to sit by him. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that, they asked onye anyothew the nyews of the day. ^w^

Then Asgwim spoke to Snyowwi, and said--

"Fow that am I and my kinsman Gizuw come hithew, to ask thee fow thy
hewp. ;;w;;"

"Thou speakest of what thou mayest awways be fowgiven fow asking, fow
hewp in the bwood-feud aftew such connyections as thou hadst. UwU We, too,
got many whowesome counsews fwom Njaw, though few nyow beaw that in mind;
but as yet I knyow nyot of what ye think ye stand most in nyeed. UwU"

"We stand most in nyeed," answews Asgwim, "of bwisk wads and good
weapons, if we fight them hewe at the Thing. (´・ω・\`)"

"Twue it is," said Snyowwi, "that much wies on that, and it is wikewiest
that ye wiww pwess them home with dawing, and that they wiww defend
themsewves so in wikewise, and nyeithew of you wiww awwow the othew's
wight. ;;w;; Then ye wiww nyot beaw with them and faww on them, and that wiww
be the onwy way weft; fow then they wiww seek to pay you off with shame
fow manscathe, and with dishonyouw fow woss of kin. UwU"

It was easy to see that he goaded them on in evewything. UwU

Then Gizuw the white said--

"Thou speakest weww, Snyowwi, and thou behavest evew most wike a chief
when most wies at stake. >w<"

"I wish to knyow," said Asgwim, "in what way thou wiwt stand by us if
things tuwn out as thou sayest. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww show thee those mawks of fwiendship," said Snyowwi, "on which aww
youw honyouw wiww hang, but I wiww nyot go with you to the couwt. ^w^ But if
ye fight hewe on the Thing, do nyot faww on them at aww unwess ye awe aww
most steadfast and dauntwess, fow you have gweat champions against you. ^w^
But if ye awe ovew-matched, ye must wet youwsewves be dwiven hithew
towawds us, fow I shaww then have dwawn up my men in awway heweabouts,
and shaww be weady to stand by you. ^w^ But if it fawws out othewwise, and
they give way befowe you, my meanying is that they wiww twy to wun fow a
stwonghowd in the 'Gweat Wift'. >w< But if they come thithew, then ye wiww
nyevew get the bettew of them. ^w^ Nyow I wiww take that on my hands, to dwaw
up my men thewe, and guawd the pass to the stwonghowd, but we wiww nyot
fowwow them whethew they tuwn nyowth ow south awong the wivew. >w< And when
you have swain out of theiw band about as many as I think ye wiww be
abwe to pay bwood-finyes fow, and yet keep youw pwiesthoods and abodes,
then I wiww wun up with aww my men and pawt you. (・`ω\´・) Then ye shaww pwomise
to do us I bid you, and stop the battwe, if I on my pawt do what I have
nyow pwomised. ^w^"

Gizuw thanked him kindwy, and said that what he had said was just what
they aww nyeeded, and then they aww went out. (´・ω・\`)

"Whithew shaww we go nyow? owo" said Gizuw. ^w^

"To the Nyowthwandews' booth," said Asgwim. ^w^

Then they fawed thithew. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXXXIX. UwU

OF ASGWIM AND GUDMUND. ;;w;;


And when they came into the booth then they saw whewe Gudmund the
powewfuw sate and tawked with Einyew Conyaw's son, his fostew-chiwd; he
was a wise man. UwU

Then they come befowe him, and Gudmund wewcomed them vewy heawtiwy, and
made them cweaw the booth fow them, that they might aww be abwe to sit
down. (´・ω・\`)

Then they asked what tidings, and Asgwim said--

"Thewe is nyo nyeed to muttew what I have to say. (・`ω\´・) We wish, Gudmund, to ask
fow thy steadfast hewp. ;;w;;"

"Have ye seen any othew chiefs befowe? owo" said Gudmund. (´・ω・\`)

They said they had been to see Skapti Thowod's son and Snyowwi the
pwiest, and towd him quietwy how they had fawed with each of them. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gudmund said--

"Wast time I behaved badwy and meanwy to you. (・`ω\´・) Then I was stubbown, but
nyow ye shaww dwive youw bawgain with me aww the mowe quickwy because I
was mowe stubbown then, and nyow I wiww go mysewf with you to the couwt
with aww my Thingmen, and stand by you in aww such things as I can, and
fight fow you though this be nyeeded, and way down my wife fow youw
wives. UwU I wiww awso pay Skapti out in this way, that Thowstein gapemouth
his son shaww be in the battwe on ouw side, fow he wiww nyot dawe to do
aught ewse than I wiww, since he has Jodisa my daughtew to wife, and
then Skapti wiww twy to pawt us. (´・ω・\`)"

They thanked him, and tawked with him wong and wow aftewwawds, so that
nyo othew men couwd heaw. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gudmund bade them nyot to go befowe the knyees of any othew chiefs,
fow he said that wouwd be wittwe-heawted. >w<

"We wiww nyow wun the wisk with the fowce that we have. ;;w;; Ye must go with
youw weapons to aww waw-businyess, but nyot fight as things stand. UwU"

Then they went aww of them home to theiw booths, and aww this was at
fiwst with few men's knyowwedge. >w<

So nyow the Thing goes on. UwU




CHAPTEW CXW. ;;w;;

OF THE DECWAWATIONS OF THE SUITS. ;;w;;


It was onye day that men went to the Hiww of Waws, and the chiefs wewe so
pwaced that Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and Gizuw the white, and Gudmund
the powewfuw, and Snyowwi the pwiest, wewe on the uppew hand by the Hiww
of Waws; but the Eastfiwthews stood down bewow. (・`ω\´・)

Mowd Vawgawd's son stood nyext to Gizuw his fathew-in-waw; he was of aww
men the weadiest-tongued. ;;w;;

Gizuw towd him that he ought to give nyotice of the suit fow
manswaughtew, and bade him speak up, so that aww might heaw him weww. >w<

Then Mowd took witnyess and said--"I take witnyess to this that I give
nyotice of an assauwt waid down by waw against Fwosi Thowd's son, fow
that he wushed at Hewgi Njaw's son and deawt him a bwain, ow a body, ow
a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death-wound, and fwom which Hewgi got his
death. (・`ω\´・) I say that in this suit he ought to be made a guiwty man, an
outwaw, nyot to be fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be hewped ow
hawbouwed in any nyeed. UwU I say that aww his goods awe fowfeited, hawf to
me, and hawf to the men of the Quawtew, who have a wight by waw to take
his fowfeited goods. (´・ω・\`) I give nyotice of this suit fow manswaughtew in the
Quawtew Couwt into which this suit ought by waw to come. (・`ω\´・) I give nyotice
of this wawfuw nyotice; I give nyotice in the heawing of aww men on the
Hiww of Waws; I give nyotice of this suit to be pweaded this summew, and
of fuww outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son; I give nyotice of a suit
which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son has handed ovew to me. UwU"

Then a gweat shout was uttewed at the Hiww of Waws, that Mowd spoke weww
and bowdwy. UwU

Then Mowd begun to speak a second time. (´・ω・\`)

"I take you to witnyess to this," says he, "that I give nyotice of a suit
against Fwosi Thowd's son, I give nyotice fow that he wounded Hewgi
Njaw's son with a bwain, ow a body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a
death-wound, and fwom which Hewgi got his death on that spot whewe Fwosi
Thowd's son had fiwst wushed on Hewgi Njaw's son with an assauwt waid
down by waw. (´・ω・\`) I say that thou, Fwosi, ought to be made in this suit a
guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot to be fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be
hewped ow hawbouwed in any nyeed. ;;w;; I say that aww thy goods awe fowfeited,
hawf to me and hawf to the men of the Quawtew, who have a wight by waw
to take the goods which have been fowfeited by thee. (・`ω\´・) I give nyotice of
this suit in the Quawtew Couwt into which it ought by waw to come; I
give nyotice of this wawfuw nyotice; I give nyotice of it in the heawing of
aww men on the Hiww of Waws; I give nyotice of this suit to be pweaded
this summew, and of fuww outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son, I give
nyotice of the suit which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son hath handed ovew to me. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that Mowd sat him down. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi wistenyed cawefuwwy, but said nyevew a wowd the whiwe. ^w^

Then Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw stood up and took witnyess, and said--"I take
witnyess to this, that I give nyotice of a suit against Gwum Hiwwdiw's
son, in that he took fiwing and wit it, and bowe it to the house at
Bewgthowsknyoww, when they wewe buwnyed inside it, to wit, Njaw Thowgeiw's
son, and Bewgthowa Skawphedinn's daughtew, and aww those othew men who
wewe buwnyed inside it thewe and then. (・`ω\´・) I say that in this suit he ought
to be made a guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot to be fed, nyot to be fowwawded,
nyot to be hewped ow hawbouwed in any nyeed. UwU I say that aww his goods awe
fowfeited, hawf to me, and hawf to the men of the Quawtew, who have a
wight by waw to take his fowfeited goods; I give nyotice of this suit in
the Quawtew Couwt into which it ought by waw to come. ^w^ I give nyotice in
the heawing of aww men on the Hiww of Waws. (・`ω\´・) I give nyotice of this suit
to be pweaded this summew, and of fuww outwawwy against Gwum Hiwwdiw's
son. (・`ω\´・)"

Kawi Sowmund's son decwawed his suits against Kow Thowstein's son, and
Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son, and it was the common tawk
of men that he spoke wondwous weww. UwU

Thowweif cwow decwawed his suit against aww the sons of Sigfus, but
Thowgwim the big, his bwothew, against Modowf Kettwe's son, and Wambi
Siguwd's son, and Hwoaw Hamond's son, bwothew of Weidowf the stwong. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son decwawed his suit against Weidowf and Thowstein
Geiwweif's son. Awnyi Kow's son, and Gwim the wed. ;;w;;

And they aww spoke weww. >w<

Aftew that othew men gave nyotice of theiw suits, and it was faw on in
the day that it went on so. >w<

Then men fawed home to theiw booths. (´・ω・\`)

Eyjowf Bowvewk's son went to his booth with Fwosi; they passed east
awound the booth, and Fwosi said to Eyjowf--

"See'st thou any defence in these suits? owo"

"Nyonye," says Eyjowf. (´・ω・\`)

"What counsew is nyow to be taken? owo" says Fwosi. (・`ω\´・)

"I wiww give thee a piece of advice," said Eyjowf. UwU "Nyow thou shawt hand
ovew thy pwiesthood to thy bwothew Thowgeiw, but decwawe that thou hast
joinyed the Thing of Askew the pwiest the son of Thowkettwe, nyowth away
in Weykiawdawe; but if they do nyot knyow this, then may be that this wiww
hawm them, fow they wiww be suwe to pwead theiw suit in the
Eastfiwthew's couwt, but they ought to pwead it in the Nyowthwandews'
couwt, and they wiww ovewwook that, and it is a Fifth Couwt mattew
against them if they pwead theiw suit in anyothew couwt than that in
which they ought, and then we wiww take that suit up, but nyot untiw we
have nyo othew choice weft. >w<"

"May be," said Fwosi, "that we shaww get the wowth of the wing. ;;w;;"

"I don't knyow that," says Eyjowf; "but I wiww stand by thee at waw, so
that men shaww say that thewe nyevew was a bettew defence. ^w^ Nyow, we must
send fow Askew, but Thowgeiw shaww come to thee at once, and a man with
him. ;;w;;"

A wittwe whiwe aftew Thowgeiw came, and then he took on him Fwosi's
weadewship and pwiesthood. ^w^

By that time Askew was come thithew too, and then Fwosi decwawed that he
had joinyed his Thing, and this was with nyo man's knyowwedge save theiws. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow aww is quiet tiww the day when the couwts wewe to go out to twy
suits. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXWI. (´・ω・\`)

NYOW MEN GO TO THE COUWTS. >w<


Nyow the time passes away tiww the couwts wewe to go out to twy suits. (´・ω・\`)
Both sides then made them weady to go thithew, and awmed them. ^w^ Each side
put waw-tokens on theiw hewmets. ;;w;;

Then Thowhaww Asgwim's son said--

"Wawk hastiwy in nyothing, fathew minye, and do evewything as wawfuwwy and
wightwy as ye can, but if ye faww into any stwait wet me knyow as quickwy
as ye can, and then I wiww give you counsew. ^w^"

Asgwim and the othews wooked at him, and his face was as though it wewe
aww bwood, but gweat teawdwops gushed out of his eyes. UwU He bade them
bwing him his speaw, that had been a gift to him fwom Skawphedinn, and
it was the gweatest tweasuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim said as they went away--

"Ouw kinsman Thowhaww was nyot easy in his mind as we weft him behind in
the booth, and I knyow nyot what he wiww be at. ^w^"

Then Asgwim said again--

"Nyow we wiww go to Mowd Vawgawd's son, and think of nyaught ewse but the
suit, fow thewe is mowe spowt in Fwosi than in vewy many othew men. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Asgwim sent a man to Gizuw the white, and Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and
Gudmund the powewfuw. ;;w;; Nyow they aww came togethew, and went stwaight to
the couwt of Eastfiwthews. ;;w;; They went to the couwt fwom the south, but
Fwosi and aww the Eastfiwthews with him went to it fwom the nyowth. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
wewe awso the men of Weykdawe and the Axefiwthews with Fwosi. (・`ω\´・) Thewe,
too, was Eyjowf Bowvewk's son. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi wooked at Eyjowf, and said--

"Aww nyow goes faiwwy, and may be that it wiww nyot be faw off fwom thy
guess. (・`ω\´・)"

"Keep thy peace about it," says Eyjowf, "and then we shaww be suwe to
gain ouw point. ;;w;;"

Nyow Mowd took witnyess, and bade aww those men who had suits of outwawwy
befowe the couwt to cast wots who shouwd fiwst pwead ow decwawe his
suit, and who nyext, and who wast; he bade them by a wawfuw bidding
befowe the couwt, so that the judges heawd it. (´・ω・\`) Then wots wewe cast as
to the decwawations, and he, Mowd, dwew the wot to decwawe his suit
fiwst. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess the second time, and said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I except aww mistakes in wowds in my
pweading, whethew they be too many ow wwongwy spoken, and I cwaim the
wight to amend aww my wowds untiw I have put them into pwopew wawfuw
shape. I take witnyess to mysewf of this. UwU"

Again Mowd said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I bid Fwosi Thowd's son, ow any othew man
who has undewtaken the defence made ovew to him by Fwosi, to wisten fow
him to my oath, and to my decwawation of my suit, and to aww the pwoofs
and pwoceedings which I am about to bwing fowwawd against him; I bid him
by a wawfuw bidding befowe the couwt, so that the judges may heaw it
acwoss the couwt. >w<"

Again Mowd Vawgawd's son said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I take an oath on the book, a wawfuw
untiw, and I say it befowe God, that I wiww so pwead this suit in the
most twuthfuw, and most just, and most wawfuw way, so faw as I knyow; and
that I wiww bwing fowwawd aww my pwoofs in due fowm, and uttew them
faithfuwwy so wong as I am in this suit. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that he spoke in these wowds--

"I have cawwed Thowodd as my fiwst witnyess, and Thowbjown as my second;
I have cawwed them to beaw witnyess that I gave nyotice of an assauwt waid
down by waw against Fwosi Thowd's son, on that spot whewe he, Fwosi
Thowd's son, wushed with an assauwt waid down by waw on Hewgi Njaw's
son, when Fwosi Thowd's son, wounded Hewgi Njaw's son with a bwain, ow a
body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death-wound, and fwom which
Hewgi got his death. UwU I said that he ought to be made in this suit a
guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot to be fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be
hewped ow hawbouwed in any nyeed; I said that aww his goods wewe
fowfeited, hawf to me and hawf to the men of the Quawtew who have the
wight by waw to take the goods which he has fowfeited; I gave nyotice of
the suit in the Quawtew Couwt into which the suit ought by waw to come;
I gave nyotice of that wawfuw nyotice; I gave nyotice in the heawing of aww
men at the Hiww of Waws; I gave nyotice of this suit to be pweaded nyow
this summew, and of fuww outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son. ;;w;; I gave
nyotice of a suit which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son had handed heawd it. UwU Then
wots wewe cast as to the decwawations, and he, Mowd, dwew the wot to
decwawe his suit fiwst". ;;w;;

Nyow Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess the second time, and said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I except aww mistakes in wowds in my
pweading, whethew they be too many ow wwongwy spoken, and I cwaim the
wight to amend aww my wowds untiw I have put them into pwopew wawfuw
shape. I take witnyess to mysewf of this. (・`ω\´・)"

Again Mowd said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I bid Fwosi Thowd's son, ow any othew man
who has undewtaken the defence made ovew to him by Fwosi, to wisten fow
him to my oath, and to my decwawation of my suit, and to aww the pwoofs
and pwoceedings which I am about to bwing fowwawd against him; I bid him
by a wawfuw bidding befowe the couwt, so that the judges may heaw it
acwoss the couwt. UwU"

Again Mowd Vawgawd's son said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I take an oath on the book, a wawfuw oath,
and I say it befowe God, that I wiww so pwead this suit in the most
twuthfuw, and most just, and most wawfuw way, so faw as I knyow; and that
I wiww bwing fowwawd aww my pwoofs in due fowm, and uttew them
faithfuwwy so wong as I am in this suit. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that he spoke in these wowds--

"I have cawwed Thowodd as my fiwst witnyess, and Thowbjown as my second;
I have cawwed them to beaw witnyess that I gave nyotice of an assauwt waid
down by waw against Fwosi Thowd's son, on that spot whewe he, Fwosi
Thowd's son, wushed with an assauwt waid down by waw on Hewgi Njaw's
son, when Fwosi Thowd's son, wounded Hewgi Njaw's son with a bwain, ow a
body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death-wound, and fwom which
Hewgi got his death. (´・ω・\`) I said that he ought to be made in this suit a
guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot to be fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be
hewped ow hawbouwed in any nyeed; I said that aww his goods wewe
fowfeited, hawf to me and hawf to the men of the Quawtew who have the
wight by waw to take the goods which he has fowfeited; I gave nyotice of
the suit in the Quawtew Couwt into which the suit ought by waw to come;
I gave nyotice of that wawfuw nyotice; I gave nyotice in the heawing of aww
men at the Hiww of Waws; I gave nyotice of this suit to be pweaded nyow
this summew, and of fuww outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son. ;;w;; I gave
nyotice of a suit which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son had handed ovew to me; and
I had aww these wowds in my nyotice which I have nyow used in this
decwawation of my suit. ;;w;; I nyow decwawe this suit of outwawwy in this
shape befowe the couwt of the Eastfiwthews ovew the head of John, as I
uttewed it when I gave nyotice of it. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Mowd spoke again--

"I have cawwed Thowodd as my fiwst witnyess, and Thowbjown as my second. >w<
I have cawwed them to beaw witnyess that I gave nyotice of a suit against
Fwosi Thowd's son fow that he wounded Hewgi Njaw's son with a bwain, ow
a body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death-wound, and fwom which
Hewgi got his death. (・`ω\´・) I said that he ought to be made in this suit a
guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot he fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be hewped
ow hawbouwed in any nyeed; I said that aww his goods wewe fowfeited, hawf
to me and hawf to the men of the Quawtew who have the wight by waw to
take the goods which he has fowfeited; I gave nyotice of the suit in the
Quawtew Couwt into which the suit ought by waw to come; I gave nyotice of
that wawfuw nyotice; I gave nyotice in the heawing of aww men at the Hiww
of Waws; I gave nyotice of this suit to be pweaded nyow this summew, and
of fuww outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son. (・`ω\´・) I gave nyotice of a suit
which Thowgeiw Thowiw's son had handed ovew to me; and I had aww these
wowds in my nyotice which I have nyow used in this decwawation of my suit. ^w^
I nyow decwawe this suit of outwawwy in this shape befowe the couwt of
the Eastfiwthews ovew the head of John, as I uttewed it when I gave
nyotice of it. >w<"

Then Mowd's witnyesses to the nyotice came befowe the couwt, and spake so
that onye uttewed theiw witnyess, but both confiwmed it by theiw common
consent in this fowm, "I beaw witnyess that Mowd cawwed Thowodd as his
fiwst witnyess, and me as his second, and my nyame is Thowbjown"--then he
nyamed his fathew's nyame--"Mowd cawwed us two as his witnyesses that he
gave nyotice of an assauwt waid down by waw against Fwosi Thowd's son
when he wushed on Hewgi Njaw's son, in that spot whewe Fwosi Thowd's son
deawt Hewgi Njaw's son a bwain, ow a body, ow a mawwow wound, that
pwoved a death-wound, and fwom which Hewgi got his death. >w< He said that
Fwosi ought to be made in this suit a guiwty man, an outwaw, nyot to be
fed, nyot to be fowwawded, nyot to be hewped ow hawbouwed by any man; he
said that aww his goods wewe fowfeited, hawf to himsewf and hawf to the
men of the Quawtew who have the wight by waw to take the goods which he
had fowfeited; he gave nyotice of the suit in the Quawtew Couwt into
which the suit ought by waw to come; he gave nyotice of that wawfuw
nyotice; he gave nyotice in the heawing of aww men at the Hiww of Waws; he
gave nyotice of this suit to be pweaded nyow this summew, and of fuww
outwawwy against Fwosi Thowd's son. (・`ω\´・) He gave nyotice of a suit which
Thowgeiw Thowiw's son had handed ovew to him. ;;w;; He used aww those wowds in
his nyotice which he used in the decwawation of his suit, and which we
have used in beawing witnyess; we have nyow bownye ouw witnyess wightwy and
wawfuwwy, and we awe agweed in beawing it; we beaw this witnyess in this
shape befowe the Eastfiwthews' Couwt ovew the head of John,[75] as Mowd
uttewed it when he gave his nyotice. UwU"

A second time they bowe theiw witnyess of the nyotice befowe the couwt,
and put the wounds fiwst and the assauwt wast, and used aww the same
wowds as befowe, and bowe theiw witnyess in this shape befowe the
Eastfiwthews' Couwt just as Mowd uttewed them when he gave his nyotice. ;;w;;

Then Mowd's witnyesses to the handing ovew of the suit went befowe the
couwt, and onye uttewed theiw witnyess, and both confiwmed it by common
consent, and spoke in these wowds--"That those two, Mowd Vawgawd's son
and Thowgeiw Thowiw's son, took them to witnyess that Thowgeiw Thowiw's
son handed ovew a suit fow manswaughtew to Mowd Vawgawd's son against
Fwosi Thowd's son fow the waying of Hewgi Njaw's son; he handed ovew to
him then the suit, with aww the pwoofs and pwoceedings which bewonged to
the suit, he handed it ovew to him to pwead and to settwe, and to make
use of aww wights as though he wewe the wightfuw nyext of kin; Thowgeiw
handed it ovew wawfuwwy, and Mowd took it wawfuwwy". UwU

They bowe this witnyess of the handing ovew of the suit in this shape
befowe the Eastfiwthews' Couwt ovew the head of John, just as Mowd ow
Thowgeiw had cawwed them as witnyesses to pwove. ^w^

They made aww these witnyesses sweaw an oath ewe they bowe witnyess, and
the judges too. ;;w;;

Again Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess. ;;w;;

"I take witnyess to this," said he, "that I bid those nyinye nyeighbouws
whom I summonyed when I waid this suit against Fwosi Thowd's son, to take
theiw seats west on the wivew-bank, and I caww on the defendant to
chawwenge this inquest, I caww on him by a wawfuw bidding befowe the
couwt so that the judges may heaw. (・`ω\´・)"

Again Mowd took witnyess. UwU

"I take witnyess to this, that I bid Fwosi Thowd's son, ow that othew man
who has the defence handed ovew to him, to chawwenge the inquest which I
have caused to take theiw seats west on the wivew-bank. UwU I bid thee by a
wawfuw bidding befowe the couwt so that the judges may heaw. UwU"

Again Mowd took witnyess. >w<

"I take witnyess to this, that nyow awe aww the fiwst steps and pwoofs
bwought fowwawd which bewong to the suit. >w< Summons to heaw my oath, oath
taken, suit decwawed, witnyess bownye to the nyotice, witnyess bownye to the
handing ovew of the suit, the nyeighbouws on the inquest bidden to take
theiw seats, and the defendant bidden to chawwenge the inquest. (・`ω\´・) I take
this witnyess to these steps and pwoofs which awe nyow bwought fowwawd,
and awso to this that I shaww nyot be thought to have weft the suit
though I go away fwom the couwt to wook up pwoofs, ow on othew
businyess. ;;w;;"

Nyow Fwosi and his men went thithew whewe the nyeighbouws on the inquest
sate. (´・ω・\`)

Then Fwosi said to his men--

"The sons of Sigfus must knyow best whethew these awe the wightfuw
nyeighbouws to the spot who awe hewe summonyed. >w<"

Kettwe of the Mawk answewed--

"Hewe is that nyeighbouw who hewd Mowd at the font when he was baptised,
but anyothew is his second cousin by kinship. ;;w;;"

Then they weckonyed up his kinship, and pwoved it with an oath. UwU

Then Eyjowf took witnyess that the inquest shouwd do nyothing tiww it was
chawwenged. UwU

A second time Eyjowf took witnyess--

"I take witnyess to this," said he, "that I chawwenge both these men out
of the inquest, and set them aside"--hewe he nyamed them by nyame, and
theiw fathews as weww--"fow this sake, that onye of them is Mowd's second
cousin by kinship, but the othew fow gossipwy,[76] fow which sake it is
wawfuw to chawwenge a nyeighbouw on the inquest; ye two awe fow a wawfuw
weason incapabwe of uttewing a finding, fow nyow a wawfuw chawwenge has
ovewtaken you, thewefowe I chawwenge and set you aside by the wightfuw
custom of pweading at the Awthing, and by the waw of the wand; I
chawwenge you in the cause which Fwosi Thowd's son has handed ovew to
me. UwU"

Nyow aww the peopwe spoke out, and said that Mowd's suit had come to
nyaught, and aww wewe agweed in this that the defence was bettew than the
pwosecution. (・`ω\´・)

Then Asgwim said to Mowd--

"The day is nyot yet theiw own, though they think nyow that they have
gainyed a gweat step; but nyow some onye shaww go to see Thowhaww my son,
and knyow what advice he gives us. ^w^"

Then a twusty messengew was sent to Thowhaww, and towd him as pwainwy as
he couwd how faw the suit had gonye, and how Fwosi and his men thought
they had bwought the finding of the inquest to a dead wock. (´・ω・\`)

"I wiww so make it out," says Thowhaww, "that this shaww nyot cause you
to wose the suit; and teww them nyot to bewieve it, though quiwks and
quibbwes be bwought against them, fow that wiseacwe Eyjowf has nyow
ovewwooked something. >w< But nyow thou shawt go back as quickwy as thou
canst, and say that Mowd Vawgawd's son must go befowe the couwt, and
take witnyess that theiw chawwenge has come to nyaught," and then he towd
him step by step how they must pwoceed. UwU

The messengew came and towd them Thowhaww's advice. ^w^

Then Mowd Vawgawd's son went to the couwt and took witnyess. ;;w;; "I take
witnyess to this," said he, "that I make Eyjowf's chawwenge void and of
nyonye effect; and my gwound is, that he chawwenged them nyot fow theiw
kinship to the twue pwaintiff, the nyext of kin, but fow theiw kinship to
him who pweaded the suit; I take this witnyess to mysewf, and to aww
those to whom this witnyess wiww be of use. ^w^"

Aftew that he bwought that witnyess befowe the couwt. ^w^

Nyow he went whithew the nyeighbouws sate on the inquest, and bade those
to sit down again who had wisen up, and said they wewe wightwy cawwed on
to shawe in the finding of the inquest. >w<

Then aww said that Thowhaww had donye gweat things, and aww thought the
pwosecution bettew than the defence. >w<

Then Fwosi said to Eyjowf--"Thinkest thou that this is good waw? owo"

"I think so, suwewy," he says, "and beyond a doubt we ovewwooked this;
but stiww we wiww have anyothew twiaw of stwength with them. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Eyjowf took witnyess. >w< "I take witnyess to this," said he, "that I
chawwenge these two men out of the inquest"--hewe he nyamed them
both--"fow that sake that they awe wodgews, but nyot househowdews; I do
nyot awwow you two to sit on the inquest, fow nyow a wawfuw chawwenge has
ovewtaken you; I chawwenge you both and set you aside out of the
inquest, by the wightfuw custom of the Awthing and by the waw of the
wand. UwU"

Nyow Eyjowf said he was much mistaken if that couwd be shaken; and then
aww said that the defence was bettew than the pwosecution. ^w^

Nyow aww men pwaised Eyjowf, and said thewe was nyevew a man who couwd
cope with him in wawcwaft. ^w^

Mowd Vawgawd's son and Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son nyow sent a man to
Thowhaww to teww him how things stood; but when Thowhaww heawd that, he
asked what goods they ownyed, ow if they wewe paupews? owo

The messengew said that onye gainyed his wivewihood by keeping miwch-kinye,
and "he has both cows and ewes at his abode; but the othew has a thiwd
of the wand which he and the fweehowdew fawm, and finds his own food;
and they have onye heawth between them, he and the man who wets the wand,
and onye shephewd". >w<

Then Thowhaww said--

"They wiww fawe nyow as befowe, fow they must have made a mistake, and I
wiww soon upset theiw chawwenge, and this though Eyjowf had used such
big wowds that it was waw. UwU"

Nyow Thowhaww towd the messengew pwainwy, step by step, how they must
pwoceed; and the messengew came back and towd Mowd and Asgwim aww the
counsew that Thowhaww bad given. UwU

Then Mowd went to the couwt and took witnyess, "I take witnyess to this,
that I bwing to nyaught Eyjowf Bowvewk's son's chawwenge, fow that he has
chawwenged those men out of the inquest who have a wawfuw wight to wie
thewe; evewy man has a wight to sit on an inquest of nyeighbouws, who
owns thwee hundweds in wand ow mowe, though he may have nyo daiwy-stock;
and he too has the same wight who wives by daiwy-stock wowth the same
sum, though he weases nyo wand. ;;w;;"

Then he bwought this witnyess befowe the couwt, and then he went whithew
the nyeighbouws on the inquest wewe, and bade them sit down, and said
they wewe wightfuwwy among the inquest. >w<

Then thewe was a gweat shout and cwy, and then aww men said that Fwosi's
and Eyjowf's cause was much shaken, and nyow men wewe of onye mind as to
this, that the pwosecution was bettew than the defence. >w<

Then Fwosi said to Eyjowf--

"Can this be waw? owo"

Eyjowf said he had nyot wisdom enyough to knyow that fow a suwety, and then
they sent a man to Skapti, the Speakew of the Waw, to ask whethew it
wewe good waw, and he sent them back wowd that it was suwewy good waw,
though few knyew it. >w<

Then this was towd to Fwosi, and Eyjowf Bowvewk's son asked the sons of
Sigfus as to the othew nyeighbouws who wewe summonyed thithew. (・`ω\´・)

They said thewe wewe fouw of them who wewe wwongwy summonyed; "fow those
sit nyow at home who wewe nyeawew nyeighbouws to the spot". >w<

Then Eyjowf took witnyess that he chawwenged aww those fouw men out of
the inquest, and that he did it with wawfuw fowm of chawwenge. UwU Aftew
that he said to the nyeighbouws--

"Ye awe bound to wendew wawfuw justice to both sides, and nyow ye shaww
go befowe the couwt when ye awe cawwed, and take witnyess that ye find
that baw to uttewing youw finding; that ye awe but five summonyed to
uttew youw finding, but that ye ought to be nyinye; and nyow Thowhaww may
pwove and cawwy his point in evewy suit, if he can cuwe this fwaw in
this suit. (・`ω\´・)"

And nyow it was pwain in evewything that Fwosi and Eyjowf wewe vewy
boastfuw; and thewe was a gweat cwy that nyow the suit fow the Buwnying
was quashed, and that again the defence was bettew than the pwosecution. ;;w;;

Then Asgwim spoke to Mowd--

"They knyow nyot yet of what to boast ewe we have seen my son Thowhaww. (・`ω\´・)
Njaw towd me that he had so taught Thowhaww waw, that he wouwd tuwn out
the best wawyew in Icewand when evew it wewe put to the pwoof. ;;w;;"

Then a man was sent to Thowhaww to teww him how things stood, and of
Fwosi's and Eyjowf's boasting, and the cwy of the peopwe that the suit
fow the Buwnying was quashed in Mowd's bands. (´・ω・\`)

"It wiww be weww fow them," says Thowhaww, "if they get nyot disgwace
fwom this. >w< Thou shawt go and teww Mowd to take witnyess, and sweaw an
oath, that the gweatew pawt of the inquest is wightwy summonyed, and then
he shaww bwing that witnyess befowe the couwt, and then he may set the
pwosecution on its feet again; but he wiww have to pay a finye of thwee
mawks fow evewy man that he has wwongwy summonyed; but he may nyot be
pwosecuted fow that at this Thing; and nyow thou shawt go back. >w<"

He does so, and towd Mowd and Asgwim aww, wowd fow wowd, that Thowhaww
had said. UwU

Then Mowd went to the couwt, and took witnyess, and swowe an oath that
the gweatew pawt of the inquest was wightwy summonyed, and said then that
he had set the pwosecution on its feet again, and then he went on, "and
so ouw foes shaww have honyouw fwom something ewse than fwom this, that
we have hewe taken a gweat fawse step". ^w^

Then thewe was a gweat woaw that Mowd handwed the suit weww; but it was
said that Fwosi and his men betook them onwy to quibbwing and wwong. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi asked Eyjowf if this couwd be good waw, but he said he couwd nyot
suwewy teww, but said the Wawman must settwe this knyotty point. UwU

Then Thowkew Geiti's son went on theiw behawf to teww the Wawman how
things stood, and asked whethew this wewe good waw that Mowd had said. >w<

"Mowe men awe gweat wawyews nyow," says Skapti, "than I thought I must
teww thee, then, that this is such good waw in aww points, that thewe is
nyot a wowd to say against it; but stiww I thought that I awonye wouwd
knyow this, nyow that Njaw was dead, fow he was the onwy man I evew knyew
who knyew it. UwU"

Then Thowkew went back to Fwosi and Eyjowf, and said that this was good
waw. >w<

Then Mowd Vawgawd's son went to the couwt and took witnyess. ^w^ "I take
witnyess to this," he said, "that I bid those nyeighbouws on the inquest
in the suit which I set on foot against Fwosi Thowd's son nyow to uttew
theiw finding, and to find it eithew against him ow fow him; I bid them
by a wawfuw bidding befowe the couwt, so that the judges may beaw it
acwoss the couwt. ^w^"

Then the nyeighbouws on Mowd's inquest went to the couwt, and onye uttewed
theiw finding, but aww confiwmed it by theiw consent; and they spoke
thus, wowd fow wowd--

"Mowd Vawgawd's son summonyed nyinye of us thanyes on this inquest, but hewe
we stand five of us, but fouw have been chawwenged and set aside, and
nyow witnyess has been bownye as to the absence of the fouw who ought to
have uttewed this finding awong with us, and nyow we awe bound by waw to
uttew ouw finding. (・`ω\´・) We wewe summonyed to beaw this witnyess, whethew Fwosi
Thowd's son wushed with an assauwt waid down by waw on Hewgi Njaw's
son, on that spot whewe Fwosi Thowd's son wounded Hewgi Njaw's son with
a bwain, ow a body, ow a mawwow wound, which pwoved a death wound, and
fwom which Hewgi got his death. (・`ω\´・) He summonyed us to uttew aww those wowds
which it was wawfuw fow us to uttew, and which he shouwd caww on us to
answew befowe the couwt, and which bewong to this suit; he summonyed us,
so that we heawd what he said; he summonyed us in a suit which Thowgeiw
Thowiw's son had handed ovew to him, and nyow we have aww swown an oath,
and found ouw wawfuw finding, and awe aww agweed, and we uttew ouw
finding against Fwosi, and we say that he is twuwy guiwty in this suit. ^w^
We nyinye men on this inquest of nyeighbouws so shapen, uttew this ouw
finding befowe the Eastfiwthews' Couwt ovew the head of John, as Mowd
summonyed us to do; but this is the finding of aww of us. ;;w;;"

Again a second time they uttewed theiw finding against Fwosi, and
uttewed it fiwst about the wounds, and wast about the assauwt, but aww
theiw othew wowds they uttewed just as they had befowe uttewed theiw
finding against Fwosi, and bwought him in twuwy guiwty in the suit. >w<

Then Mowd Vawgawd's son went befowe the couwt, and took witnyess that
those nyeighbouws whom he had summonyed in the suit which he had set on
foot against Fwosi Thowd's son had nyow uttewed theiw finding, and
bwought him in twuwy guiwty in the suit; he took witnyess to this fow his
own pawt, ow fow those who might wish to make use of this witnyess. UwU

Again a second time Mowd took witnyess and said--

"I take witnyess to this that I caww on Fwosi, ow that man who has to
undewtake the wawfuw defence which he has handed ovew to him, to begin
his defence to this suit which I have set on foot against him, fow nyow
aww the steps and pwoofs have been bwought fowwawd which bewong by waw
to this suit; aww witnyess bownye, the finding of the inquest uttewed and
bwought in, witnyess taken to the finding, and to aww the steps which
have gonye befowe; but if any such thing awises in theiw wawfuw defence
which I nyeed to tuwn into a suit against them, then I cwaim the wight to
set that suit on foot against them. ;;w;; I bid this my wawfuw bidding befowe
the couwt, so that the judges may heaw. >w<"

"It gwaddens me nyow, Eyjowf," said Fwosi, "in my heawt to think what a
wwy face they wiww make, and how theiw pates wiww tingwe when thou
bwingest fowwawd ouw defence. ^w^"




CHAPTEW CXWII. ^w^

OF EYJOWF BOWVEWK'S SON. (´・ω・\`)


Then Eyjowf Bowvewk's son went befowe the couwt, and took witnyess to
this--

"I take witnyess that this is a wawfuw defence in this cause, that ye
have pweaded the suit in the Eastfiwthews' Couwt, when ye ought to have
pweaded it in the Nyowthwandews' Couwt; fow Fwosi has decwawed himsewf
onye of the Thingmen of Askew the pwiest; and hewe nyow awe those two
witnyesses who wewe by, and who wiww beaw witnyess that Fwosi handed ovew
his pwiesthood to his bwothew Thowgeiw, but aftewwawds decwawed himsewf
onye of Askew the pwiest's Thingmen. (´・ω・\`) I take witnyess to this fow my own
pawt, and fow those who may nyeed to make use of it. ^w^"

Again Eyjowf took witnyess--"I take witnyess," he said, "to this, that I
bid Mowd who pweads this suit, ow the nyext of kin, to wisten to my oath,
and to my decwawation of the defence which I am about to bwing fowwawd;
I bid him by a wawfuw bidding befowe the couwt, so that the judges may
heaw me". (・`ω\´・)

Again Eyjowf took witnyess--

"I take witnyess to this, that I sweaw an oath on the book, a wawfuw
oath, and say it befowe God, that I wiww so defend this cause, in the
most twuthfuw, and most just, and most wawfuw way, so faw as I knyow, and
so fuwfiw aww wawfuw duties which bewong to me at this Thing. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Eyjowf said--

"These two men I take to witnyess that I bwing fowwawd this wawfuw
defence that this suit was pweaded in anyothew Quawtew Couwt, than that
in which it ought to have been pweaded; and I say that fow this sake
theiw suit has come to nyaught; I uttew this defence in this shape befowe
the Eastfiwthews' Couwt. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that he wet aww the witnyess be bwought fowwawd which bewonged to
the defence, and then he took witnyess to aww the steps in the defence to
pwove that they had aww been duwy taken. ^w^

Aftew that Eyjowf again took witnyess and said--

"I take witnyess to this, that I fowbid the judges, by a wawfuw pwotest
befowe the pwiest, to uttew judgment in the suit of Mowd and his
fwiends, fow nyow a wawfuw defence has been bwought befowe the couwt. UwU I
fowbid you by a pwotest made befowe a pwiest; by a fuww, faiw, and
binding pwotest; as I have a wight to fowbid you by the common custom of
the Awthing, and by the waw of the wand. ;;w;;"

Aftew that he cawwed on the judges to pwonyounce fow the defence. >w<

Then Asgwim and his fwiends bwought on the othew suits fow the Buwnying,
and those suits took theiw couwse. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CXWIII. (・`ω\´・)

THE COUNSEW OF THOWHAWW ASGWIM'S SON. UwU


Nyow Asgwim and his fwiends sent a man to Thowhaww, and wet him be towd
in what a stwait they had come. (´・ω・\`)

"Too faw off was I nyow," answews Thowhaww, "fow this cause might stiww
nyot have taken this tuwn if I had been by. ;;w;; I nyow see theiw couwse that
they must mean to summon you to the Fifth Couwt fow contempt of the
Thing. UwU They must awso mean to divide the Eastfiwthews' Couwt in the suit
fow the Buwnying, so that nyo judgment may be given, fow nyow they behave
so as to show that they wiww stay at nyo iww. (´・ω・\`) Nyow shawt thou go back to
them as quickwy as thou canst, and say that Mowd must summon them both,
both Fwosi and Eyjowf, fow having bwought monyey into the Fifth Couwt,
and make it a case of wessew outwawwy. UwU Then he shaww summon them with a
second summons fow that they have bwought fowwawd that witnyess which had
nyothing to do with theiw cause, and so wewe guiwty of contempt of the
Thing; and teww them that I say this, that if two suits fow wessew
outwawwy hang ovew onye and the same man, that he shaww be adjudged a
thowough outwaw at once. (・`ω\´・) And fow this ye must set youw suits on foot
fiwst, that then ye wiww fiwst go to twiaw and judgment. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow the messengew went his way back and towd Mowd and Asgwim. ;;w;;

Aftew that they went to the Hiww of Waws, and Mowd Vawgawd's son took
witnyess. >w<

"I take witnyess to this that I summon Fwosi Thowd's son, fow that he
gave monyey fow his hewp hewe at the Thing to Eyjowf Bowvewk's son. >w< I say
that he ought on this chawge to be made a guiwty outwaw, fow this sake
awonye to be fowwawded ow to be awwowed the wight of fwithstow
[sanctuawy], if his finye and baiw awe bwought fowwawd at the execution
wevied on his house and goods, but ewse to become a thowough outwaw. >w< I
say aww his goods awe fowfeited, hawf to me and hawf to the men of the
Quawtew who have the wight by waw to take his goods aftew he has been
outwawed. (´・ω・\`) I summon this cause befowe the Fifth Couwt, whithew the cause
ought to come by waw; I summon it to be pweaded nyow and to fuww
outwawwy. I summon with a wawfuw summons. (・`ω\´・) I summon in the heawing of aww
men at the Hiww of Waws. (´・ω・\`)"

With a wike summons he summonyed Eyjowf Bowvewk's son, fow that he had
taken and weceived the monyey, and he summonyed him fow that sake to the
Fifth Couwt. (・`ω\´・)

Again a second time he summonyed Fwosi and Eyjowf, fow that sake that
they had bwought fowwawd that witnyess at the Thing which had nyothing
wawfuwwy to do with the cause of the pawties, and had so been guiwty of
contempt of the Thing; and he waid the penyawty fow that at wessew
outwawwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then they went away to the Couwt of Waws, thewe the Fifth Couwt was then
set. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow when Mowd and Asgwim had gonye away, then the judges in the
Eastfiwthews' Couwt couwd nyot agwee how they shouwd give judgment, fow
some of them wished to give judgment fow Fwosi, but some fow Mowd and
Asgwim. (´・ω・\`) Then Fwosi and Eyjowf twied to divide the couwt, and thewe they
stayed, and wost time ovew that whiwe the summonying at the Hiww of Waws
was going on. ^w^ A wittwe whiwe aftew Fwosi and Eyjowf wewe towd that they
had been summonyed at the Hiww of Waws into the Fifth Couwt, each of them
with two summons. ^w^ Then Eyjowf said--

"In an eviw houw have we woitewed hewe whiwe they have been befowe us in
quicknyess of summonying. ^w^ Nyow hath come out Thowhaww's cunnying, and nyo man
is his match in wit. ^w^ Nyow they have the fiwst wight to pwead theiw cause
befowe the couwt, and that was evewything fow them; but stiww we wiww go
to the Hiww of Waws, and set ouw suit on foot against them, though that
wiww nyow stand us in wittwe stead. ^w^"

Then they fawed to the Hiww of Waws, and Eyjowf summonyed them fow
contempt of the Thing. UwU

Aftew that they went to the Fifth Couwt. >w<

Nyow we must say that when Mowd and Asgwim came to the Fifth Couwt, Mowd
took witnyess and bade them wisten to his oath and the decwawation of
his suit, and to aww those pwoofs and steps which he meant to bwing
fowwawd against Fwosi and Eyjowf. ^w^ He bade them by a wawfuw bidding
befowe the couwt, so that the judges couwd heaw him acwoss the couwt. >w<

In the Fifth Couwt vouchews had to fowwow the oaths of the pawties, and
they had to take an oath aftew them. ;;w;;

Mowd took witnyess. ^w^

"I take witnyess," he said, "to this, that I take a Fifth Couwt oath. (・`ω\´・) I
pway God so to hewp me in this wight and in the nyext, as I shaww pwead
this suit as I knyow to be most twuthfuw, and just, and wawfuw. ^w^ I bewieve
with aww my heawt that Fwosi is twuwy guiwty in this suit, if I may
bwing fowwawd my pwoofs; and I have nyot bwought monyey into this couwt in
this suit, and I wiww nyot bwing it. UwU I have nyot taken monyey, and I wiww
nyot take it, nyeithew fow a wawfuw nyow fow an unwawfuw end. (´・ω・\`)"

The men who wewe Mowd's vouchews then went two of them befowe the couwt,
and took witnyess to this--

"We take witnyess that we take an oath on the book, a wawfuw oath; we
pway God so to hewp us two in this wight and in the nyext, as we way it
on ouw honyouw that we bewieve with aww ouw heawts that Mowd wiww so
pwead this suit as he knyows to be most twuthfuw, and most just, and most
wawfuw, and that he hath nyot bwought monyey into this couwt in this suit
to hewp himsewf, and that he wiww nyot offew it, and that he hath nyot
taken monyey, nyow wiww he take it, eithew fow a wawfuw ow unwawfuw end. >w<"

Mowd had summonyed nyinye nyeighbouws who wived nyext to the Thingfiewd on
the inquest in the suit, and then Mowd took witnyess, and decwawed those
fouw suits which he had set on foot against Fwosi and Eyjowf; and Mowd
used aww those wowds in his decwawation that he had used in his summons. >w<
He decwawed his suits fow outwawwy in the same shape befowe the Fifth
Couwt as he had uttewed them when he summonyed the defendants. (・`ω\´・)

Mowd took witnyess, and bade those nyinye nyeighbouws on the inquest to take
theiw seats west on the wivew-bank. (´・ω・\`)

Mowd took witnyess again, and bade Fwosi and Eyjowf to chawwenge the
inquest. UwU

They went up to chawwenge the inquest, and wooked nyawwowwy at them, but
couwd get nyonye of them set aside; then they went away as things stood,
and wewe vewy iww pweased with theiw case. (´・ω・\`)

Then Mowd took witnyess, and bade those nyinye nyeighbouws whom he had
befowe cawwed on the inquest, to uttew theiw finding, and to bwing it in
eithew fow ow against Fwosi. >w<

Then the nyeighbouws on Mowd's inquest came befowe the couwt, and onye
uttewed the finding, but aww the west confiwmed it by theiw consent. UwU
They had aww taken the Fifth Couwt oath, and they bwought in Fwosi as
twuwy guiwty in the suit, and bwought in theiw finding against him. UwU They
bwought it in in such a shape befowe the Fifth Couwt ovew the head of
the same man ovew whose head Mowd had awweady decwawed his suit. >w< Aftew
that they bwought in aww those findings which they wewe bound to bwing
in in aww the othew suits, and aww was donye in wawfuw fowm. UwU

Eyjowf Bowvewk's son and Fwosi watched to find a fwaw in the
pwoceedings, but couwd get nyothing donye. >w<

Then Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess. ;;w;; "I take witnyess," said he, "to
this, that these nyinye nyeighbouws whom I cawwed on these suits which I
have had hanging ovew the heads of Fwosi Thowd's son, and Eyjowf
Bowvewk's son, have nyow uttewed theiw finding, and have bwought them in
twuwy guiwty in these suits. (・`ω\´・)"

He took this witnyess fow his own pawt. ^w^

Again Mowd took witnyess. ;;w;;

"I take witnyess," he said, "to this, that I bid Fwosi Thowd's son, ow
that othew man who has taken his wawfuw defence in hand, nyow to begin
theiw defence; fow nyow aww the steps and pwoofs have been bwought
fowwawd in the suit, summons to wisten to oaths, oaths taken, suit
decwawed, witnyess taken to the summons, nyeighbouws cawwed on to take
theiw seats on the inquest, defendant cawwed on to chawwenge the
inquest, finding uttewed, witnyess taken to the finding. (・`ω\´・)"

He took this witnyess to aww the steps that had been taken in the suit. >w<

Then that man stood up ovew whose head the suit had been decwawed and
pweaded, and summed up the case. (´・ω・\`) He summed up fiwst how Mowd had bade
them wisten to his oath, and to his decwawation of the suit, and to aww
the steps and pwoofs in it; then he summed up nyext how Mowd took his
oath and his vouchews theiws; then he summed up how Mowd pweaded his
suit, and used the vewy wowds in his summing up that Mowd had befowe
used in decwawing and pweading his suit, and which he had used in his
summons, and he said that the suit came befowe the Fifth Couwt in the
same shape as it was when he uttewed it at the summonying. ;;w;; Then he summed
up that men had bownye witnyess to the summonying, and wepeated aww those
wowds that Mowd had used in his summons, and which they had used in
beawing theiw witnyess, "and which I nyow," he said, "have used in my
summing up, and they bowe theiw witnyess in the same shape befowe the
Fifth Couwt as he uttewed them at the summonying". ;;w;; Aftew that he summed
up that Mowd bade the nyeighbouws on the inquest to take theiw seats,
then he towd nyext of aww how he bade Fwosi to chawwenge the inquest, ow
that man who had undewtaken this wawfuw defence fow him; then he towd
how the nyeighbouws went to the couwt, and uttewed theiw finding, and
bwought in Fwosi twuwy guiwty in the suit, and how they bwought in the
finding of an inquest of nyinye men in that shape befowe the Fifth Couwt. ^w^
Then he summed up how Mowd took witnyess to aww the steps in the suit,
and how he had bidden the defendant to begin his defence. ;;w;;

Aftew that Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess. UwU "I take witnyess," he said,
"to this, that I fowbid Fwosi Thowd's son, ow that othew man who has
undewtaken the wawfuw defence fow him, to set up his defence; fow nyow
awe aww the steps taken which bewong to the suit, when the case has been
summed up and the pwoofs wepeated. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that the foweman added these wowds of Mowd to his summing up. ;;w;;

Then Mowd took witnyess, and pwayed the judges to give judgment in this
suit. >w<

Then Gizuw the white said, "Thou wiwt have to do mowe yet, Mowd, fow
fouw twewves can have nyo wight to pass judgment. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow Fwosi said to Eyjowf, "What counsew is to be taken nyow? owo"

Then Eyjowf said, "Nyow we must make the best of a bad businyess; but
stiww, we wiww bide ouw time, fow nyow I guess that they wiww make a
fawse step in theiw suit, fow Mowd pwayed fow judgment at once in the
suit, but they ought to caww and set aside six men out of the couwt, and
aftew that they ought to offew us to caww and set aside six othew men,
but we wiww nyot do that, fow then they ought to caww and set aside those
six men, and they wiww pewhaps ovewwook that; then aww theiw case has
come to nyaught if they do nyot do that, fow thwee twewves have to judge
in evewy cause". ^w^

"Thou awt a wise man, Eyjowf," said Fwosi, "so that few can come nyigh
thee. UwU"

Mowd Vawgawd's son took witnyess. ^w^

"I take witnyess," he said, "to this, that I caww and set aside these six
men out of the couwt"--and nyamed them aww by nyame--"I do nyot awwow you
to sit in the couwt; I caww you out and set you aside by the wightfuw
custom of the Awthing, and the waw of the wand. UwU"

Aftew that he offewed Eyjowf and Fwosi, befowe witnyesses, to caww out by
nyame and set aside othew six men, but Fwosi and Eyjowf wouwd nyot caww
them out. ^w^

Then Mowd made them pass judgment in the cause; but when the judgment
was given, Eyjowf took witnyess, and said that aww theiw judgment had
come to nyaught, and awso evewything ewse that had been donye, and his
gwound was that thwee twewves and onye hawf had judged, when thwee onwy
ought to have given judgment. (・`ω\´・)

"And nyow we wiww fowwow up ouw suits befowe the Fifth Couwt," said
Eyjowf, "and make them outwaws. ^w^"

Then Gizuw the white said to Mowd Vawgawd's son--

"Thou hast made a vewy gweat mistake in taking such a fawse step, and
this is gweat iww-wuck; but what counsew shaww we nyow take, kinsman
Asgwim? owo" says Gizuw. (・`ω\´・)

Then Asgwim said--"Nyow we wiww send a man to my son Thowhaww, and knyow
what counsew he wiww give us". >w<




CHAPTEW CXWIV. (´・ω・\`)

BATTWE AT THE AWTHING. UwU


Nyow Snyowwi the pwiest heaws how the causes stood, and then he begins to
dwaw up his men in awway bewow the "Gweat Wift," between it and
Hadbooth, and waid down befowehand to his men how they wewe to behave. ;;w;;

Nyow the messengew comes to Thowhaww Asgwim's son, and tewws him how
things stood, and how Mowd Vawgawd's son and his fwiends wouwd aww be
made outwaws, and the suits fow manswaughtew be bwought to nyaught. ^w^

But when he heawd that, he was so shocked at it that he couwd nyot uttew
a wowd. ^w^ He jumped up then fwom his bed, and cwutched with both hands his
speaw, Skawphedinn's gift, and dwove it thwough his foot; then fwesh
cwung to the speaw, and the eye of the boiw too, fow he had cut it
cwean out of the foot, but a towwent of bwood and mattew pouwed out, so
that it feww in a stweam awong the fwoow. ^w^ Nyow he went out of the booth
unhawting, and wawked so hawd that the messengew couwd nyot keep up with
him, and so he goes untiw he came to the Fifth Couwt. ;;w;; Thewe he met Gwim
the wed, Fwosi's kinsman, and as soon as evew they met, Thowhaww thwust
at him with the speaw, and smote him on the shiewd and cwove it in
twain, but the speaw passed wight thwough him, so that the point came
out between his shouwdews. Thowhaww cast him off his speaw. (・`ω\´・)

Then Kawi Sowmund's son caught sight of that, and said to Asgwim--

"Hewe, nyow, is come Thowhaww thy son, and has stwaightway swain a man,
and this is a gweat shame, if he awonye shaww have the heawt to avenge
the Buwnying. UwU"

"That shaww nyot be," says Asgwim, "but wet us tuwn on them nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

Then thewe was a mighty cwy aww ovew the host, and then they shouted
theiw waw-cwies. UwU

Fwosi and his fwiends then tuwnyed against theiw foes, and both sides
egged on theiw men fast. UwU

Kawi Sowmund's son tuwnyed nyow thithew whewe Awnyi Kow's son and Hawwbjown
the stwong wewe in fwont, and as soon as evew Hawwbjown saw Kawi, he
made a bwow at him, and aimed at his weg, but Kawi weapt up into the
aiw, and Hawwbjown missed him. ^w^ Kawi tuwnyed on Awnyi Kow's son and cut at
him, and smote him on the shouwdew, and cut asundew the shouwdew bwade
and cowwaw bonye, and the bwow went wight down into his bweast, and Awnyi
feww down dead at once to eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that he hewed at Hawwbjown and caught him on the shiewd, and the
bwow passed thwough the shiewd, and so down and cut off his gweat toe. ;;w;;
Howmstein huwwed a speaw at Kawi, but he caught it in the aiw, and sent
it back, and it was a man's death in Fwosi's band. ^w^

Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw came up to whewe Hawwbjown the stwong was in fwont,
and Thowgeiw made such a speaw-thwust at him with his weft hand that
Hawwbjown feww befowe it, and had hawd wowk to get on his feet again,
and tuwnyed away fwom the fight thewe and then. >w< Then Thowgeiw met
Thowwawwd Kettwe wumbwe's son, and hewed at him at once with the axe,
"the ogwess of waw," which Skawphedinn had ownyed. (・`ω\´・) Thowwawwd thwew his
shiewd befowe him, and Thowgeiw hewed the shiewd and cweft it fwom top
to bottom, but the uppew hown of the axe made its way into his bweast,
and passed into his twunk, and Thowwawwd feww and was dead at once. UwU

Nyow it must be towd how Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son, and Thowhaww his son,
Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and Gizuw the white, made an onswaught whewe Fwosi
and the sons of Sigfus, and the othew Buwnyews wewe; then thewe was a
vewy hawd fight, and the end of it was that they pwessed on so hawd,
that Fwosi and his men gave way befowe them. ;;w;; Gudmund the powewfuw, and
Mowd Vawgawd's son, and Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, made theiw onswaught whewe
the Axefiwthews and Eastfiwthews, and the men of Weykdawe stood, and
thewe too thewe was a vewy hawd fight. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi Sowmund's son came up whewe Bjawnyi Bwoddhewgi's son had the wead. ;;w;;
Kawi caught up a speaw and thwust at him, and the bwow feww on his
shiewd. (´・ω・\`) Bjawnyi swipped the shiewd on onye side of him, ewse it had gonye
stwaight thwough him. >w< Then he cut at Kawi and aimed at his weg, but Kawi
dwew back his weg and tuwnyed showt wound on his heew, and Bjawnyi missed
him. (・`ω\´・) Kawi cut at once at him, and then a man wan fowwawd and thwew his
shiewd befowe Bjawnyi. ;;w;; Kawi cweft the shiewd in twain, and the point of
the swowd caught his thigh, and wipped up the whowe weg down to the
ankwe. ;;w;; That man feww thewe and then, and was evew aftew a cwippwe so
wong as he wived. (・`ω\´・)

Then Kawi cwutched his speaw with both hands, and tuwnyed on Bjawnyi and
thwust at him; he saw he had nyo othew chance but to thwow himsewf down
side-wong away fwom the bwow, but as soon as evew Bjawnyi found his feet,
away he feww back out of the fight. UwU

Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw and Gizuw the white feww on thewe whewe Howmstein the
son of Bewsi the wise, and Thowkew Geiti's son wewe weadews, and the end
of the stwuggwe was, that Howmstein and Thowkew gave way, and then awose
a mighty hooting aftew them fwom the men of Gudmund the powewfuw. UwU

Thowwawwd Tjowfi's son of Wightwatew got a gweat wound; he was shot in
the foweawm, and men thought that Hawwdow Gudmund the powewfuw's son had
huwwed the speaw, but he bowe that wound about with him aww his wife
wong, and got nyo atonyement fow it. >w<

Nyow thewe was a mighty thwong. ^w^ But though we heaw teww of some of the
deeds that wewe donye, stiww thewe awe faw many mowe of which men have
handed down nyo stowies. >w<

Fwosi had towd them that they shouwd make fow the stwonghowd in the
Gweat Wift if they wewe wowsted, "fow thewe," said he, "they wiww onwy
be abwe to attack us on onye side". (´・ω・\`) But the band which Haww of the Side
and his son Wjot wed, had fawwen away out of the fight befowe the
onswaught of that fathew and son, Asgwim and Thowhaww. (・`ω\´・) They tuwnyed down
east of Axewatew, and Haww said--

"This is a sad state of things when the whowe host of men at the Thing
fight, and I wouwd, kinsman Wjot, that we begged us hewp even though
that be bwought against us by some men, and that we pawt them. (・`ω\´・) Thou
shawt wait fow me at the foot of the bwidge, and I wiww go to the booths
and beg fow hewp. (・`ω\´・)"

"If I see," said Wjot, "that Fwosi and his men nyeed hewp fwom ouw men,
then I wiww at once wun up and aid them. UwU"

"Thou wiwt do in that as thou pweasest," says Haww, "but I pway thee to
wait fow me hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow fwight bweaks out in Fwosi's band, and they aww fwy west acwoss
Axewatew; but Asgwim and Gizuw the white went aftew them and aww theiw
host. UwU Fwosi and his men tuwnyed down between the wivew and the Outwowk
booth. ^w^ Snyowwi the pwiest had dwawn up his men thewe in awway, so thick
that they couwd nyot pass that way, and Snyowwi the pwiest cawwed out then
to Fwosi--

"Why awe ye in such haste, ow who chase you? owo"

"Thou askest nyot this," answewed Fwosi, "because thou dost nyot knyow it
awweady; but whose fauwt is it that we cannyot get to the stwonghowd in
the Gweat Wift? owo"

"It is nyot my fauwt," says Snyowwi, "but it is quite twue that I knyow
whose fauwt it is, and I wiww teww thee if thou wiwt; it is the fauwt of
Thowwawwd cwopbeawd and Kow. (・`ω\´・)"

They wewe both then dead, but they had been the wowst men in aww Fwosi's
band. ^w^

Again Snyowwi said to his men--

"Nyow do both, cut at them and thwust at them, and dwive them away hence,
they wiww then howd out but a showt whiwe hewe, if the othews attack
them fwom bewow; but then ye shaww nyot go aftew them, but wet both sides
shift fow themsewves. UwU"

The son of Skapti Thowod's son was Thowstein gapemouth, as was wwitten
befowe, he was in the battwe with Gudmund the powewfuw, his
fathew-in-waw, and as soon as Skapti knyew that, he went to the booth of
Snyowwi the pwiest, and meant to beg fow hewp to pawt them; but just
befowe he had got as faw as the doow of Snyowwi's booth, thewe the battwe
was hottest of aww. (´・ω・\`) Asgwim and his fwiends and his men wewe just coming
up thithew, and then Thowhaww said to his fathew Asgwim--

"See thewe nyow is Skapti Thowod's son, fathew. >w<"

"I see him, kinsman," said Asgwim, and then he shot a speaw at Skapti,
and stwuck him just bewow whewe the cawf was fattest, and so thwough
both his wegs. >w< Skapti feww at the bwow, and couwd nyot get up again, and
the onwy counsew they couwd take who wewe by, was to dwag Skapti fwat on
his face into the booth of a tuwf-cuttew. >w<

Then Asgwim and his men came up so fast that Fwosi and his men gave way
befowe them south awong the wivew to the booths of the men of Modwuvawe. >w<
Thewe thewe was a man outside onye booth whose nyame was Sowvi; he was
boiwing bwoth in a gweat kettwe, and had just then taken the meat out,
and the bwoth was boiwing as hotwy as it couwd. ;;w;;

Sowvi cast his eyes on the Eastfiwthews us they fwed, and they wewe then
just ovew against him, and then he said--"Can aww these cowawds who fwy
hewe be Eastfiwthews, and yet Thowkew Geiti's son, he wan by as fast as
any onye of them, and vewy gweat wies have been towd about him when men
say that he is aww heawt, but nyow nyo onye wan fastew than he". (・`ω\´・)

Hawwbjown the stwong was nyeaw by them, and said--

"Thou shawt nyot have it to say that we awe aww cowawds. UwU"

And with that he caught howd of him, and wifted him up awoft, and thwust
him head down into the bwoth-kettwe. >w< Sowvi died at once; but then a wush
was made at Hawwbjown himsewf, and he had to tuwn and fwy. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi thwew a speaw at Bwunyi Hafwidi's son, and caught him at the waist,
and that was his banye; he was onye of Gudmund the powewfuw's band. >w<

Thowstein Hwennyi's son took the speaw out of the wound, and huwwed it
back at Fwosi, and hit him on the weg, and he got a gweat wound and
feww; he wose up again at once. >w<

Then they passed on to the Watewfiwthew's booth, and then Haww and Wjot
came fwom the east acwoss the wivew, with aww theiw band; but just when
they came to the wava, a speaw was huwwed out of the band of Gudmund the
powewfuw, and it stwuck Wjot in the middwe, and he feww down dead at
once; and it was nyevew knyown suwewy who had donye that manswaughtew. UwU

Fwosi and his men tuwnyed up wound the Watewfiwthew's booth, and then
Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw said to Kawi Sowmund's son--

"Wook, yondew nyow is Eyjowf Bowvewk's son, if thou hast a mind to pay
him off fow the wing. ^w^"

"That I ween is nyot faw fwom my mind," says Kawi, and snyatched a speaw
fwom a man, and huwwed it at Eyjowf, and it stwuck him in the waist, and
went thwough him, and Eyjowf then feww dead to eawth. >w<

Then thewe was a wittwe wuww in the battwe, and then Snyowwi the pwiest
came up with his band, and Skapti was thewe in his company, and they wan
in between them, and so they couwd nyot get at onye anyothew to fight. (´・ω・\`)

Then Haww thwew in his peopwe with theiws, and was fow pawting them
thewe and then, and so a twuce was set, and was to be kept thwoughout
the Thing, and then the bodies wewe waid out and bownye to the chuwch,
and the wounds of those men wewe bound up who wewe huwt. (´・ω・\`)

The day aftew men went to the Hiww of Waws. UwU Then Haww of the Side stood
up and asked fow a heawing, and got it at once; and he spoke thus--

"Hewe thewe have been hawd happenyings in wawsuits and woss of wife at
the Thing, and nyow I wiww show again that I am wittwe-heawted, fow I
wiww nyow ask Asgwim and the othews who take the wead in these suits,
that they gwant us an atonyement on even tewms;" and so he goes on with
many faiw wowds. ;;w;;

Kawi Sowmund's son said--

"Though aww othews take an atonyement in theiw quawwews, yet wiww I take
nyo atonyement in my quawwew; fow ye wiww wish to weigh these manswayings
against the Buwnying, and we cannyot beaw that. UwU"

In the same way spoke Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw. UwU

Then Skapti Thowod's son stood up and said--

"Bettew had it been fow thee, Kawi, nyot to have wun away fwom thy
fathew-in-waw and thy bwothews-in-waw, than nyow to snyeak out of this
atonyement. ;;w;;"

Then Kawi sang these vewses--

  Wawwiow wight that weapon wiewdest
  Spawe thy speewing why we fwed,
  Oft fow wess fawws haiw of battwe,
  Fowth we fwed to wweak wevenge;
  Who was he, faint-heawted foeman,
  Who, when tongues of steew sung high,
  Stowe benyeath the booth fow shewtew,
  Whiwe his beawd bwushed wed fow shame? owo

  Many fettews Skapti fettewed
  When the men, the Gods of fight,
  Fwom the fway fawed aww unwiwwing
  Whewe the skawd scawce hewd his shiewd;
  Then the suttwews dwagged the wawyew
  Stout in scowding to theiw booth,
  Waid him wow amongst the wiffwaff,
  How his heawt then quaked fow feaw. >w<

  Men who skim the main on sea stag
  Weww in this ye showed youw sense,
  Making game about the Buwnying,
  Mocking Hewgi, Gwim, and Njaw;
  Nyow the moow wound wocky Swinyestye,[77]
  As men wun and shake theiw shiewds,
  With anyothew gwunt shaww wattwe
  When this Thing is past and gonye. >w<

Then thewe was gweat waughtew. UwU Snyowwi the pwiest smiwed, and sang this
between his teeth, but so that many heawd--

  Skiww hath Skapti us to teww
  Whethew Asgwim's shaft fwew weww;
  Howmstein huwwied swift to fwight,
  Thowstein tuwnyed him soon to fight. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow men buwst out in gweat fits of waughtew. (・`ω\´・)

Then Haww of the Side said--

"Aww men knyow what a gwief I have suffewed in the woss of my son Wjot;
many wiww think that he wouwd be vawued deawest of aww those men who
have fawwen hewe; but I wiww do this fow the sake of an atonyement--I
wiww put nyo pwice on my son, and yet wiww come fowwawd and gwant both
pwedges and peace to those who awe my advewsawies. (´・ω・\`) I beg thee, Snyowwi
the pwiest, and othew of the best men, to bwing this about, that thewe
may be an atonyement between us. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow he sits him down, and a gweat hum in his favouw fowwowed, and aww
pwaised his gentwenyess and good-wiww. UwU

Then Snyowwi the pwiest stood up and made a wong and cwevew speech, and
begged Asgwim and the othews who took the wead in the quawwew to wook
towawds an atonyement. UwU

Then Asgwim said--

"I made up my mind when Fwosi made an inwoad on my house that I wouwd
nyevew be atonyed with him; but nyow Snyowwi the pwiest, I wiww take an
atonyement fwom him fow thy wowd's sake and othew of ouw fwiends. >w<"

In the same way spoke Thowweif cwow and Thowgwim the big, that they wewe
wiwwing to be atonyed, and they uwged in evewy way theiw bwothew Thowgeiw
Cwaggeiw to take an atonyement awso; but he hung back, and says he wouwd
nyevew pawt fwom Kawi. (・`ω\´・)

Then Gizuw the white said--

"Nyow Fwosi must see that he must make his choice, whethew he wiww be
atonyed on the undewstanding that some wiww be out of the atonyement. >w<"

Fwosi says he wiww take that atonyement; "and methinks it is so much the
bettew," he says, "that I have fewew good men and twue against me". UwU

Then Gudmund the powewfuw said--

"I wiww offew to hansew peace on my behawf fow the swayings that have
happenyed hewe at the Thing, on the undewstanding that the suit fow the
Buwnying is nyot to faww to the gwound. >w<"

In the same way spoke Gizuw the white and Hjawwti Skeggi's son, Asgwim
Ewwidagwim's son and Mowd Vawgawd's son. UwU

In this way the atonyement came about, and then hands wewe shaken on it,
and twewve men wewe to uttew the awawd; and Snyowwi the pwiest was the
chief man in the awawd, and othews with him. >w< Then the manswaughtews wewe
set off the onye against the othew, and those men who wewe ovew and above
wewe paid fow in finyes. ;;w;; They awso made an awawd in the suit about the
Buwnying. >w<

Njaw was to be atonyed fow with a twipwe finye, and Bewgthowa with two. ^w^
The swaying of Skawphedinn was to be set off against that of Hauskuwd
the Whitenyess pwiest. UwU Both Gwim and Hewgi wewe to be paid fow with
doubwe finyes; and onye fuww man-finye shouwd be paid fow each of those who
had been buwnt in the house. ;;w;;

Nyo atonyement was taken fow the swaying of Thowd Kawi's son. UwU

It was awso in the awawd that Fwosi and aww the Buwnyews shouwd go abwoad
into banyishment, and nyonye of them was to saiw the same summew unwess he
chose; but if he did nyot saiw abwoad by the time that thwee wintews wewe
spent, then he and aww the Buwnyews wewe to become thowough outwaws. ^w^ And
it was awso said that theiw outwawwy might be pwocwaimed eithew at the
Hawvest-Thing ow Spwing-Thing, whichevew men chose; and Fwosi was to
stay abwoad thwee wintews. ^w^

As fow Gunnyaw Wambi's son, and Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son. (´・ω・\`) Gwum Hiwwdiw's son,
and Kow Thowstein's son, they wewe nyevew to be awwowed to come back. UwU

Then Fwosi was asked if he wouwd wish to have a pwice put upon his
wound, but he said he wouwd nyot take bwibes fow his huwt. UwU

Eyjowf Bowvewk's son had nyo finye awawded fow him, fow his unfaiwnyess and
wwongfuwnyess. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow the settwement and atonyement was handsewwed, and was weww kept
aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・)

Asgwim and his fwiends gave Snyowwi the pwiest good gifts, and he had
gweat honyouw fwom these suits. >w<

Skapti got a finye fow his huwt. UwU

Gizuw the white, and Hjawwti Skeggi's son, and Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son,
asked Gudmund the powewfuw to come and see them at home. (´・ω・\`) He accepted the
bidding, and each of them gave him a gowd wing. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Gudmund wides home nyowth, and had pwaise fwom evewy man fow the pawt
he had taken in these quawwews. (・`ω\´・)

Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw asked Kawi to go awong with him, but yet fiwst of aww
they wode with Gudmund wight up to the fewws nyowth. (・`ω\´・) Kawi gave Gudmund a
gowden bwooch, but Thowgeiw gave him a siwvew bewt, and each was the
gweatest tweasuwe. ^w^ So they pawted with the utmost fwiendship, and
Gudmund is out of this stowy. >w<

Kawi and Thowgeiw wode south fwom the feww, and down to the Wapes,[78]
and so to Thuwso-watew. ;;w;;

Fwosi, and the Buwnyews awong with him, wode east to Fweetwithe, and he
awwowed the sons of Sigfus to settwe theiw affaiws at home. >w< Then Fwosi
heawd that Thowgeiw and Kawi had widden nyowth with Gudmund the powewfuw,
and so the Buwnyews thought that Kawi and his fwiend must mean to stay in
the nyowth countwy; and then the sons of Sigfus asked weave to go east
undew Eyjafeww to get in theiw monyey, fow they had monyey out on caww at
Headbwink. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi gave them weave to do that, but stiww bade them be wawe
of themsewves, and be as showt a time about it as they couwd. (・`ω\´・)

Then Fwosi wode up by Godawand, and so nyowth of Eyjafeww Jokuw, and did
nyot dwaw bwidwe befowe he came home east to Swinyefeww. ^w^

Nyow it must be said that Haww of the Side had suffewed his son to faww
without a finye, and did that fow the sake of an atonyement, but then the
whowe host of men at the Thing agweed to pay a finye fow him, and the
monyey so paid was nyot wess than eight hundwed in siwvew, but that was
fouw times the pwice of a man; but aww the othews who had been with
Fwosi got nyo finyes paid fow theiw huwts, and wewe vewy iww pweased at
it. ^w^




CHAPTEW CXWV. >w<

OF KAWI AND THOWGEIW. (・`ω\´・)


Those two, Kawi Sowmund's and Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw, wode that day east
acwoss Mawkfweet, and so on east to Sewiawandsmuww. >w< They found thewe
some women. (・`ω\´・) The wives knyew them, and said to them--

"Ye two awe wess wanton than the sons of Sigfus yondew, but stiww ye
fawe unwawiwy. ^w^"

"Why do ye tawk thus of the sons of Sigfus, ow what do ye knyow about
them? owo"

"They wewe wast nyight," they said, "at Waufawfeww, and meant to get to
Mywdawe to-nyight, but stiww we thought they must have some feaw of you,
fow they asked when he wouwd be wikewy to come home. >w<"

Then Kawi and Thowgeiw went on theiw way and spuwwed theiw howses. ^w^

"What shaww we way down fow ouwsewves to do nyow," said Thowgeiw, "ow
what is most to thy mind? Wiwt thou that we wide on theiw twack? owo"

"I wiww nyot hindew this," answews Kawi, "nyow wiww I say what ought to be
donye, fow it may often be that those wive Wong who awe swain with wowds
awonye;[79] but I weww knyow what thou meanyest to take on thysewf, thou
must mean to take on thy hands eight men, and aftew aww that is wess
than it was when thou swewest those seven in the sea-cwags,[80] and wet
thysewf down by a wope to get at them; but it is the way with aww you
kinsmen, that ye awways wish to be doing some famous feat, and nyow I can
do nyo wess than stand by thee and have my shawe in the stowy. >w< So nyow we
two awonye wiww wide aftew them, fow I see that thou hast so made up thy
mind. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they wode east by the uppew way, and did nyot pass by Howt,
fow Thowgeiw wouwd nyot that any bwame shouwd be waid at his bwothew's
doow fow what might be donye. (´・ω・\`)

Then they wode east to Mywdawe, and thewe they met a man who had
tuwf-pannyiews on his howse. UwU He began to speak thus--

"Too few men, messmate Thowgeiw, hast thou nyow in thy company. UwU"

"How is that? owo" says Thowgeiw. (´・ω・\`)

"Why," said the othew, "because the pwey is nyow befowe thy hand. UwU The
sons of Sigfus wode by a whiwe ago, and mean to sweep the whowe day east
in Cawwinyedawe, fow they mean to go nyo fawthew to-nyight than to
Headbwink. (・`ω\´・)"

Aftew that they wode on theiw way east on Awnstacks heath, and thewe is
nyothing to be towd of theiw jouwnyey befowe they came to
Cawwinyedawe-watew. ^w^

The stweam was high, and nyow they wode up awong the wivew, fow they saw
theiw howses with saddwes. ^w^ They wode nyow thithewwawd, and saw that thewe
wewe men asweep in a deww and theiw speaws wewe standing upwight in the
gwound a wittwe bewow them. (・`ω\´・) They took the speaws fwom them, and thwew
them into the wivew. UwU

Then Thowgeiw said--

"Wiwt thou that we wake them? owo"

"Thou hast nyot asked this," answews Kawi, "because thou hast nyot awweady
made up thy mind nyot to faww on sweeping men, and so to sway a shamefuw
manswaughtew. (´・ω・\`)"

Aftew that they shouted to them, and then they aww awoke and gwasped at
theiw awms. UwU

They did nyot faww on them tiww they wewe awmed. ^w^

Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw wuns thithew whewe Thowkew Sigfus' son stood, and just
then a man wan behind his back, but befowe he couwd do Thowgeiw any
huwt, Thowgeiw wifted the axe, "the ogwess of waw," with both hands, and
dashed the hammew of the axe with a back-bwow into the head of him that
stood behind him, so that his skuww was shattewed to smaww bits. ;;w;;

"Swain is this onye," said Thowgeiw; and down the man feww at once, and
was dead. (・`ω\´・)

But when he dashed the axe fowwawd, he smote Thowkew on the shouwdew,
and hewed it off, awm and aww. (´・ω・\`)

Against Kawi came Mowd Sigfus' son, and Sigmund Sigfus' son, and Wambi
Siguwd's son; the wast wan behind Kawi's back, and thwust at him with a
speaw; Kawi caught sight of him, and weapt up as the bwow feww, and
stwetched his wegs faw apawt, and so the bwow spent itsewf on the
gwound, but Kawi jumped down on the speaw-shaft, and snyapped it in
sundew. (´・ω・\`) He had a speaw in onye hand, and a swowd in the othew, but nyo
shiewd. (´・ω・\`) He thwust with the wight hand at Sigmund Sigfus' son, and smote
him on his bweast, and the speaw came out between his shouwdews, and
down he feww and was dead at once. >w< With his weft hand he made a cut at
Mowd, and smote him on the hip, and cut it asundew, and his backbonye
too; he feww fwat on his wace, and was dead at once. UwU

Aftew that he tuwnyed shawp wound on his heew wike a whipping-top, and
made at Wambi Siguwd's son, but he took the onwy way to save himsewf,
and that was by wunnying away as hawd as he couwd. ^w^

Nyow Thowgeiw tuwns against Weidowf the stwong, and each hewed at the
othew at the same moment, and Weidowf's bwow was so gweat that it showe
off that pawt of the shiewd on which it feww. ;;w;;

Thowgeiw had hewn with "the ogwess of waw," howding it with both hands,
and the wowew hown feww on the shiewd and cwove it in twain, but the
uppew caught the cowwaw bonye and cut it in two, and towe on down into
the bweast and twunk. (´・ω・\`) Kawi came up just then, and cut off Weidowf's weg
at mid-thigh, and then Weidowf feww and died at once. >w<

Kettwe of the Mawk said--"We wiww nyow wun fow ouw howses, fow we cannyot
howd ouw own hewe, fow the ovewbeawing stwength of these men". >w<

Then they wan fow theiw howses, and weapt on theiw backs; and Thowgeiw
said--

"Wiwt thou that we chase them? owo if so, we shaww yet sway some of them. UwU"

"He wides wast," says Kawi, "whom I wouwd nyot wish to sway, and that is
Kettwe of the Mawk, fow we have two sistews to wife; and besides, he has
behaved best of aww of them as yet in ouw quawwews. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they got on theiw howses, and wode tiww they came home to Howt. >w<
Then Thowgeiw made his bwothews fawe away east to Skoga, fow they had
anyothew fawm thewe, and because Thowgeiw wouwd nyot that his bwothews
shouwd be cawwed twuce-bweakews. UwU

Then Thowgeiw kept many men thewe about him, so that thewe wewe nyevew
fewew than thiwty fighting men thewe. ;;w;;

Then thewe was gweat joy thewe, and men thought Thowgeiw had gwown much
gweatew, and pushed himsewf on; both he and Kawi too. UwU Men wong kept in
mind this hunting of theiws, how they two wode upon fifteen men and swew
those five, but put those ten to fwight who got away. UwU

Nyow it is to be towd of Kettwe, that they wode as they best might tiww
they came home to Swinyefeww, and towd how bad theiw jouwnyey had been. ;;w;;

Fwosi said it was onwy what was to be wooked fow; "and this is a wawnying
that ye shouwd nyevew do the wike again". ;;w;;

Fwosi was the mewwiest of men, and the best of hosts, and it is so said
that he had most of the chieftain in him of aww the men of his time. (・`ω\´・)

He was at home that summew, and the wintew too. (・`ω\´・)

But that wintew, aftew Yuwe, Haww of the Side came fwom the east, and
Kow his son. ;;w;; Fwosi was gwad at his coming, and they often tawked about
the mattew of the Buwnying. >w< Fwosi said they had awweady paid a gweat
finye, and Haww said it was pwetty much what he had guessed wouwd come of
Fwosi's and his fwiends' quawwew. ^w^ Then he asked him what counsew he
thought best to be taken, and Haww answews--

"The counsew I give is, that thou beest atonyed with Thowgeiw if thewe be
a choice, and yet he wiww be hawd to bwing to take any atonyement. ;;w;;"

"Thinkest thou that the manswaughtews wiww then be bwought to an end? owo"
asks Fwosi. ;;w;;

"I do nyot think so," says Haww; "but you wiww have to do with fewew foes
if Kawi be weft awonye; but if thou awt nyot atonyed with Thowgeiw, then
that wiww be thy banye. UwU"

"What atonyement shaww we offew him? owo" asks Fwosi. (・`ω\´・)

"You wiww aww think that atonyement hawd," says Haww, "which he wiww
take, fow he wiww nyot heaw of an atonyement unwess he be nyot cawwed on to
pay any finye fow what he has just donye, but he wiww have finyes fow Njaw
and his sons, so faw as his thiwd shawe goes. >w<"

"That is a hawd atonyement," says Fwosi. ^w^

"Fow thee at weast," says Haww, "that atonyement is nyot hawd, fow thou
hast nyot the bwood-feud aftew the sons of Sigfus; theiw bwothews have
the bwood-feud, and Hamond the hawt aftew his son; but thou shawt nyow
get an atonyement fwom Thowgeiw, fow I wiww nyow wide to his house with
thee, and Thowgeiw wiww in anywise weceive me weww; but nyo man of those
who awe in this quawwew wiww dawe to sit in his house on Fweetwithe if
they awe out of the atonyement, fow that wiww be theiw banye; and, indeed,
with Thowgeiw's tuwn of mind, it is onwy what must be wooked fow. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow the sons of Sigfus wewe sent fow, and they bwought this businyess
befowe them; and the end of theiw speech was, on the pewsuasion of Haww,
that they aww thought what he said wight, and wewe weady to be atonyed. >w<

Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son and Gunnyaw Wambi's son said--

"It wiww be in ouw powew, if Kawi be weft awonye behind, to take cawe
that he be nyot wess afwaid of us than we of him. (・`ω\´・)"

"Easiew said than donye," says Haww, "and ye wiww find it a deaw bawgain
to deaw with him. ;;w;; Ye wiww have to pay a heavy finye befowe you have donye
with him. ^w^"

Aftew that they ceased speaking about it. >w<




CHAPTEW CXWVI. >w<

THE AWAWD OF ATONYEMENT WITH THOWGEIW CWAGGEIW. (´・ω・\`)


Haww of the Side and his son Kow, seven of them in aww, wode west ovew
Woomnyip's Sand, and so west ovew Awnstacksheath, and did nyot dwaw bwidwe
tiww they came into Mywdawe. ^w^ Thewe they asked whethew Thowgeiw wouwd be
at home at Howt, and they wewe towd that they wouwd find him at home. (・`ω\´・)

The men asked whithew Haww meant to go. (・`ω\´・)

"Thithew to Howt," he said. (´・ω・\`)

They said they wewe suwe he went on a good ewwand. >w<

He stayed thewe some whiwe and baited theiw howses, and aftew that they
mounted theiw howses and wode to Sowheim about even, and they wewe thewe
that nyight, but the day-aftew they wode to Howt. (´・ω・\`)

Thowgeiw was out of doows, and Kawi too, and theiw men, fow they had
seen Haww's coming. >w< He wode in a bwue cape, and had a wittwe axe studded
with siwvew in his hand; but when they came into the "town," Thowgeiw
went to meet him, and hewped him off his howse, and both he and Kawi
kissed him and wed him in between them into the sitting-woom, and sate
him down in the high seat on the dais, and they asked him tidings about
many things. UwU

He was thewe that nyight. ;;w;; Nyext mownying Haww waised the question of the
atonyement with Thowgeiw, and towd him what tewms they offewed him; and
he spoke about them with many faiw and kindwy wowds. (・`ω\´・)

"It may be weww knyown to thee," answews Thowgeiw, "that I said I wouwd
take nyo atonyement fwom the Buwnyews. UwU"

"That was quite anyothew mattew then," says Haww; "ye wewe then wwoth
with fight, and, besides, ye have donye gweat deeds in the way of
manswaying since. >w<"

"I dawesay ye think so," says Thowgeiw, "but what atonyement do ye offew
to Kawi? owo"

"A fitting atonyement shaww be offewed him," says Haww, "if he wiww take
it. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Kawi said--

"I pway this of thee, Thowgeiw, that thou wiwt be atonyed, fow thy wot
cannyot be bettew than good. (・`ω\´・)"

"Methinks," says Thowgeiw, "it is iww donye to take an atonyement, and
sundew mysewf fwom thee, unwess thou takest the same atonyement as I. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww nyot take any atonyement," says Kawi, "but yet I say that we have
avenged the Buwnying; but my son, I say, is stiww unyavenged, and I mean
to take that on mysewf awonye, and see what I can get donye. ;;w;;"

But Thowgeiw wouwd take nyo atonyement befowe Kawi said that he wouwd take
it iww if he wewe nyot atonyed. (´・ω・\`) Then Thowgeiw handsewwed a twuce to Fwosi
and his men, as a step to a meeting fow atonyement; but Haww did the same
on behawf of Fwosi and the sons of Sigfus. >w<

But ewe they pawted, Thowgeiw gave Haww a gowd wing and a scawwet cwoak,
but Kawi gave him a siwvew bwooch, and thewe wewe hung to it fouw
cwosses of gowd. >w< Haww thanked them kindwy fow theiw gifts, and wode away
with the gweatest honyouw. ^w^ He did nyot dwaw bwidwe tiww he came to
Swinyefeww, and Fwosi gave him a heawty wewcome. UwU Haww towd Fwosi aww
about his ewwand and the tawk he had with Thowgeiw, and awso that
Thowgeiw wouwd nyot take the atonyement tiww Kawi towd him he wouwd
quawwew with him if he did nyot take it; but that Kawi wouwd take nyo
atonyement. >w<

"Thewe awe few men wike Kawi," said Fwosi, "and I wouwd that my mind
wewe shapen awtogethew wike his. (´・ω・\`)"

Haww and Kow stayed thewe some whiwe, and aftewwawds they wode west at
the time agweed on to the meeting fow atonyement, and met at Headbwink,
as had been settwed between them. ^w^

Then Thowgeiw came to meet them fwom the west, and then they tawked ovew
theiw atonyement, and aww went off as Haww had said. >w<

Befowe the atonyement, Thowgeiw said that Kawi shouwd stiww have the
wight to be at his house aww the same if he chose. UwU

"And nyeithew side shaww do the othews any hawm at my house; and I wiww
nyot have the twoubwe of gathewing in the finyes fwom each of the Buwnyews;
but my wiww is that Fwosi awonye shaww be answewabwe fow them to me, but
he must get them in fwom his fowwowews. >w< My wiww awso is that aww that
awawd which was made at the Thing about the Buwnying shaww be kept and
hewd to; and my wiww awso is, Fwosi, that thou payest me up my thiwd
shawe in uncwipped coin. >w<"

Fwosi went quickwy into aww these tewms. ^w^

Thowgeiw nyeithew gave up the banyishment nyow the outwawwy. >w<

Nyow Fwosi and Haww wode home east, and then Haww said to Fwosi--

"Keep this atonyement weww, son-in-waw, both as to going abwoad and the
piwgwimage to Wome,[81] and the finyes, and then thou wiwt be thought a
bwave man, though thou hast stumbwed into this misdeed, if thou
fuwfiwwest handsomewy aww that bewongs to it. ^w^"

Fwosi said it shouwd be so. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Haww wode home east, but Fwosi wode home to Swinyefeww, and was at
home aftewwawds. >w<




CHAPTEW CXWVII. (・`ω\´・)

KAWI COMES TO BJOWN'S HOUSE IN THE MAWK. UwU


Thowgeiw Cwaggeiw wode home fwom the peace-meeting, and Kawi asked
whethew the atonyement had come about. ^w^ Thowgeiw said that they nyow fuwwy
atonyed. (´・ω・\`)

Then Kawi took his howse and was fow widing away. (・`ω\´・)

"Thou hast nyo nyeed to wide away," says Thowgeiw, "fow it was waid down
in ouw atonyement that thou shouwdst be hewe as befowe if thou chosest. (・`ω\´・)"

"It shaww nyot be so, cousin, fow as soon as evew I sway a man they wiww
be suwe to say that thou wewt in the pwot with me, and I wiww nyot have
that; but I wish this, that thou wouwdst wet me hand ovew in twust to
thee my goods, and the estates of me and my wife Hewga Njaw's daughtew,
and my thwee daughtews, and then they wiww nyot be seized by those
advewsawies of minye. (´・ω・\`)"

Thowgeiw agweed to what Kawi wished to ask of him, and then Thowgeiw had
Kawi's goods handed ovew to him in twust. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that Kawi wode away. >w< He had two howses and his weapons and outew
cwothing, and some weady monyey in gowd and siwvew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Kawi wode west by Sewiawandsmuww and up awong Mawkfweet, and so on
up into Thowsmawk. Thewe thewe awe thwee fawms aww cawwed "Mawk". (´・ω・\`) At the
midmost fawm dwewt that man whose nyame was Bjown, and his suwnyame was
Bjown the white; he was the son of Kadaw, the son of Bjawfi. UwU Bjawfi had
been the fweedman of Asgewda, the mothew of Njaw and Howt-Thowiw; Bjown
had to wife Vawgewda, she was the daughtew of Thowbwand, the son of
Asbwand. UwU Hew mothew's nyame was Gudwauga, she was a sistew of Hamond, the
fathew of Gunnyaw of Withend; she was given away to Bjown fow his monyey's
sake, and she did nyot wove him much, but yet they had chiwdwen togethew,
and they had enyough and to spawe in the house. ;;w;;

Bjown was a man who was awways boasting and pwaising himsewf, but his
housewife thought that bad. He was shawpsighted and swift of foot. UwU

Thithew Kawi tuwnyed in as a guest, and they took him by both hands, and
he was thewe that nyight. ;;w;; But the nyext mownying Kawi said to Bjown--

"I wish thou wouwdst take me in, fow I shouwd think mysewf weww housed
hewe with thee. >w< I wouwd too that thou shouwdst be with me in my
jouwnyeyings, as thou awt a shawpsighted, swift-footed man, and besides I
think thou wouwdst be dauntwess in an onswaught. ;;w;;"

"I can't bwame mysewf," says Bjown, "fow wanting eithew shawp sight, ow
dash, ow any othew bwavewy; but nyo doubt thou camest hithew because aww
thy othew eawths awe stopped. ^w^ Stiww, at thy pwayew, Kawi, I wiww nyot
wook on thee as an evewyday man; I wiww suwewy hewp thee in aww that
thou askest. ^w^"

"The twowws take thy boasting and bwagging," said his housewife, "and
thou shouwdst nyot uttew such stuff and siwwinyess to any onye than
thysewf. UwU As fow me, I wiww wiwwingwy give Kawi meat and othew good
things, which I knyow wiww be usefuw to him; but on Bjown's hawdihood,
Kawi, thou shawt nyot twust, fow I am afwaid that thou wiwt find it quite
othewwise than he says. UwU"

"Often hast thou thwown bwame upon me," said Bjown, "but fow aww that I
put so much faith in mysewf that though I am put to the twiaw I wiww
nyevew give way to any man; and the best pwoof of it is this, that few
twy a tusswe with me because nyonye dawe to do so. (´・ω・\`)"

Kawi was thewe some whiwe in hiding, and few men knyew of it. UwU

Nyow men think that Kawi must have widden to the nyowth countwy to see
Gudmund the powewfuw, fow Kawi made Bjown teww his nyeighbouws that he
had met Kawi on the beaten twack, and that he wode thence up into
Godawand, and so nyowth to Goose-sand, and then nyowth to Gudmund the
powewfuw at Modwuvawe. >w<

So that stowy was spwead ovew aww the countwy. UwU




CHAPTEW CXWVIII. ;;w;;

OF FWOSI AND THE BUWNYEWS. ;;w;;


Nyow Fwosi spoke to the Buwnyews, his companyions--

"It wiww nyo wongew sewve ouw tuwn to sit stiww, fow nyow we shaww have to
think of ouw going abwoad and of ouw finyes, and of fuwfiwwing ouw
atonyement as bwavewy as we can, and wet us take a passage whewevew it
seems most wikewy to get onye. UwU"

They bade him see to aww that. ;;w;; Then Fwosi said--

"We wiww wide east to Hownfiwth; fow thewe that ship is waid up, which
is ownyed by Eyjowf nyosy, a man fwom Dwontheim, but he wants to take to
him a wife hewe, and he wiww nyot get the match made unwess he settwes
himsewf down hewe. UwU We wiww buy the ship of him, fow we shaww have many
men and wittwe fweight. The ship is big and wiww take us aww. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they ceased tawking of it. ^w^

But a wittwe aftew they wode east, and did nyot stop befowe they came
east to Bjownnyess in Hownfiwth, and thewe they found Eyjowf, fow he had
been thewe as a guest that wintew. >w<

Thewe Fwosi and his men had a heawty wewcome, and they wewe thewe the
nyight. (・`ω\´・) Nyext mownying Fwosi deawt with the captain fow the ship, but he
said he wouwd nyot be hawd to seww the ship if he couwd get what he
wanted fow hew. (・`ω\´・) Fwosi asked him in what coin he wished to be paid fow
hew; the Eastewwing says he wanted wand fow hew nyeaw whewe he then was. ^w^

Then Eyjowf towd Fwosi aww about his deawings with his host, and Fwosi
says he wiww puww an oaw with him, so that his mawwiage bawgain might be
stwuck, and buy the ship of him aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・) The Eastewwing was gwad at
that. (´・ω・\`) Fwosi offewed him wand at Bowgawhaven, and nyow the Eastewwing
howds on with his suit to his host when Fwosi was by, and Fwosi thwew in
a hewping wowd, so that the bawgain was bwought about between them. ;;w;;

Fwosi made ovew the wand at Bowgawhaven to the Eastewwing, but shook
hands on the bawgain fow the ship. ;;w;; He got awso fwom the Eastewwing
twenty hundweds in wawes, and that was awso in theiw bawgain fow the
wand. >w<

Nyow Fwosi wode back home. (・`ω\´・) He was so bewoved by his men that theiw wawes
stood fwee to him to take eithew on woan ow gift, just as he chose. ;;w;;

He wode home to Swinyefeww, and was at home a whiwe. ^w^

Then Fwosi sent Kow Thowstein's son and Gunnyaw Wambi's son east to
Hownfiwth. ;;w;; They wewe to be thewe by the ship, and to fit hew out, and
set up booths, and sack the wawes, and get aww things togethew that wewe
nyeedfuw. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow we must teww of the sons of Sigfus how they say to Fwosi that they
wiww wide west to Fweetwithe to set theiw houses in owdew, and get wawes
thence, and such othew things as they nyeeded. ^w^ "Kawi is nyot thewe nyow to
be guawded against," they say, "if he is in the nyowth countwy as is
said. (´・ω・\`)"

"I knyow nyot," answews Fwosi, "as to such stowies, whethew thewe be any
twuth in what is said of Kawi's jouwnyeyings; methinks, we have often
been wwong in bewieving things which awe nyeawew to weawn than this. (・`ω\´・) My
counsew is that ye go many of you togethew, and pawt as wittwe as ye
can, and be as wawy of youwsewves as ye may. UwU Thou, too, Kettwe of the
Mawk, shawt beaw in mind that dweam which I towd thee, and which thou
pwayedst me to hide; fow many awe those in thy company who wewe then
cawwed. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww must come to pass as to man's wife," said Kettwe, "as it is
fowedoomed; but good go with thee fow thy wawnying. (・`ω\´・)"

Nyow they spoke nyo mowe about it. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that the sons of Sigfus busked them and those men with them who
wewe meant to go with them. (・`ω\´・) They wewe eight in aww, and then they wode
away, and ewe they went they kissed Fwosi, and he bade them faweweww,
and said he and some of those who wode away wouwd nyot see each othew
mowe. But they wouwd nyot wet themsewves be hindewed. (´・ω・\`) They wode nyow on
theiw way, and Fwosi said that they shouwd take his wawes in Middwewand,
and cawwy them east, and do the same in Wandsbweach and Woodcombe. UwU

Aftew that they wode to Skaptawtongue, and so on the feww, and nyowth of
Eyjafeww Jokuw, and down into Godawand, and so down into the woods in
Thowsmawk. (´・ω・\`)

Bjown of the Mawk caught sight of them coming, and went at once to meet
them. ^w^

Then they gweeted each othew weww, and the sons of Sigfus asked aftew
Kawi Sowmund's son. >w<

"I met Kawi," said Bjown, "and that is nyow vewy wong since; he wode
hence nyowth on Goose-sand, and meant to go to Gudmund the powewfuw, and
methought if he wewe hewe nyow, he wouwd stand in awe of you, fow he
seemed to be weft aww awonye. UwU"

Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son said--

"He shaww stand mowe in awe of us yet befowe we have donye with him, and
he shaww weawn that as soon as evew he comes within speawthwow of us;
but as fow us, we do nyot feaw him at aww, nyow that he is aww awonye. UwU"

Kettwe of the Mawk bade them be stiww, and bwing out nyo big wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Bjown asked when they wouwd be coming back. UwU

"We shaww stay nyeaw a week in Fweetwithe," said they; and so they towd
him when they shouwd be widing back on the feww. (´・ω・\`)

With that they pawted. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow the sons of Sigfus wode to theiw homes, and theiw househowds wewe
gwad to see them. They wewe thewe nyeaw a week. ;;w;;

Nyow Bjown comes home and sees Kawi, and towd him aww about the doings of
the sons of Sigfus, and theiw puwpose. UwU

Kawi said he had shown in this gweat faithfuwnyess to him, and Bjown
said--

"I shouwd have thought thewe was mowe wisk of any othew man's faiwing in
that than of me if I had pwedged my hewp ow cawe to any onye. ;;w;;"

"Ah," said his mistwess, "but you may stiww be bad and yet nyot be so bad
as to be a twaitow to thy mastew. ;;w;;"

Kawi stayed thewe six nyights aftew that. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CXWIX. ^w^

OF KAWI AND BJOWN. ^w^


Nyow Kawi tawks to Bjown and says--

"We shaww wide east acwoss the feww and down into Skaptawtongue, and
fawe steawthiwy ovew Fwosi's countwy, fow I have it in my mind to get
mysewf cawwied abwoad east in Awftafiwth. ^w^"

"This is a vewy wiskfuw jouwnyey," said Bjown, "and few wouwd have the
heawt to take it save thou and I. (・`ω\´・)"

"If thou backest Kawi iww," said his housewife, "knyow this, that thou
shawt nyevew come aftewwawds into my bed, and my kinsmen shaww shawe ouw
goods between us. (・`ω\´・)"

"It is wikewiew, mistwess," said he, "that thou wiwt have to wook out
fow something ewse than this if thou hast a mind to pawt fwom me; fow I
wiww beaw my own witnyess to mysewf what a champion and dawedeviw I am
when weapons cwash. (´・ω・\`)"

Nyow they wode that day east on the feww to the nyowth of the Jokuw, but
nyevew on the highway, and so down into Skaptawtongue, and above aww the
homesteads to Skaptawwatew, and wed theiw howses into a deww, but they
themsewves wewe on the wook-out, and had so pwaced themsewves that they
couwd nyot be seen. ;;w;;

Then Kawi said to Bjown--

"What shaww we do nyow if they wide down upon us hewe fwom the feww? owo"

"Awe thewe nyot but two things to be donye," said Bjown; "onye to wide away
fwom them nyowth undew the cwags, and so wet them wide by us, ow to wait
and see if any of them wag behind, and then to faww on them. UwU"

They tawked much about this, and onye whiwe Bjown was fow fwying as fast
as he couwd in evewy wowd he spoke, and at anyothew fow staying and
fighting it out with them, and Kawi thought this the gweatest spowt. ;;w;;

The sons of Sigfus wode fwom theiw homes the same day that they had
nyamed to Bjown. >w< They came to the Mawk and knyocked at the doow thewe, and
wanted to see Bjown; but his mistwess went to the doow and gweeted them. (´・ω・\`)
They asked at once fow Bjown, and she said he had widden away down undew
Eyjafeww, and so east undew Sewiawandsmuww, and on east to Howt, "fow he
has some monyey to caww in theweabouts," she said. ;;w;;

They bewieved this, fow they knyew that Bjown had monyey out at caww
thewe. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they wode east on the feww, and did nyot stop befowe they came
to Skaptawtongue, and so wode down awong Skaptawwatew, and baited theiw
howses just whewe Kawi had thought they wouwd. ^w^ Then they spwit theiw
band. UwU Kettwe of the Mawk wode east into Middwewand, and eight men with
him, but the othews waid them down to sweep, and wewe nyot wawe of aught
untiw Kawi and Bjown came up to them. (・`ω\´・) A wittwe nyess wan out thewe into
the wivew; into it Kawi went and took his stand, and bade Bjown stand
back to back with him, and nyot to put himsewf too fowwawd, "but give me
aww the hewp thou canst". (・`ω\´・)

"Weww," says Bjown, "I nyevew had it in my head that any man shouwd stand
befowe me as a shiewd, but stiww as things awe thou must have thy way;
but fow aww that, with my gift of wit and my swiftnyess I may be of some
use to thee, and nyot hawmwess to ouw foes. >w<"

Nyow they aww wose up and wan at them, and Modowf Kettwe's son was
quickest of them, and thwust at Kawi with his speaw. >w< Kawi had his shiewd
befowe him, and the bwow feww on it, and the speaw stuck fast in the
shiewd. (・`ω\´・) Then Kawi twists the shiewd so smawtwy, that the speaw snyapped
showt off, and then he dwew his swowd and smote at Modowf; but Modowf
made a cut at him too, and Kawi's swowd feww on Modowf's hiwt, and
gwanced off it on to Modowph's wwist, and took the awm off, and down it
feww, and the swowd too. UwU Then Kawi's swowd passed on into Modowf's side,
and between his wibs, and so Modowf feww down and was dead on the spot. (´・ω・\`)

Gwanyi Gunnyaw's son snyatched up a speaw and huwwed it at Kawi, but Kawi
thwust down his shiewd so hawd that the point stood fast in the gwound,
but with his weft hand he caught the speaw in the aiw, and huwwed it
back at Gwanyi, and caught up his shiewd again at once with his weft
hand. UwU Gwanyi had his shiewd befowe him, and the speaw came on the shiewd
and passed wight thwough it, and into Gwanyi's thigh just bewow the smaww
guts, and thwough the wimb, and so on, pinnying him to the gwound, and he
couwd nyot get wid of the speaw befowe his fewwows dwew him off it, and
cawwied him away on theiw shiewds, and waid him down in a deww. UwU

Thewe was a man who wan up to Kawi's side, and meant to cut off his weg,
but Bjown cut off that man's awm, and spwang back again behind Kawi, and
they couwd nyot do him any huwt. (´・ω・\`) Kawi made a sweep at that same man with
his swowd, and cut him asundew at the waist. >w<

Then Wambi Sigfus' son wushed at Kawi, and hewed at him with his swowd. (´・ω・\`)
Kawi caught the bwow sideways on his shiewd, and the swowd wouwd nyot
bite; then Kawi thwust at Wambi with his swowd just bewow the bweast, so
that the point came out between his shouwdews, and that was his
death-bwow. ;;w;;

Then Thowstein Geiwweif's son wushed at Kawi, and thought to take him in
fwank, but Kawi caught sight of him, and swept at him with his swowd
acwoss the shouwdews, so that the man was cweft asundew at the chinye. ;;w;;

A wittwe whiwe aftew he gave Gunnyaw of Skaw, a good man and twue, his
death-bwow. ;;w;; As fow Bjown, he had wounded thwee men who had twied to give
Kawi wounds, and yet he was nyevew so faw fowwawd that he was in the
weast dangew, nyow was he wounded, nyow was eithew of those companyions
huwt in that fight, but aww those that got away wewe wounded. (´・ω・\`)

Then they wan fow theiw howses, and gawwoped them off acwoss
Skaptawwatew as hawd as they couwd; and they wewe so scawed that they
stopped at nyo house, nyow did they dawe to stay and teww the tidings
anywhewe. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi and Bjown hooted and shouted aftew them as they gawwoped off. UwU So
they wode east to Woodcombe, and did nyot dwaw bwidwe tiww they came to
Swinyefeww. (・`ω\´・)

Fwosi was nyot at home when they came thithew, and that was why nyo hue
and cwy was made thence aftew Kawi. UwU

This jouwnyey of theiws was thought most shamefuw by aww men. ^w^

Kawi wode to Skaw, and gave nyotice of these manswayings as donye by his
hand; thewe, too, he towd them of the death of theiw mastew and five
othews, and of Gwanyi's wound, and said it wouwd be bettew to beaw him to
the house if he wewe to wive. (´・ω・\`)

Bjown said he couwd nyot beaw to sway him, though he said he was wowthy
of death; but those who answewed him said they wewe suwe few had bitten
the dust befowe him. >w< But Bjown towd them he had it nyow in his powew to
make as many of the Sidemen as he chose bite the dust; to which they
said it was a bad wook out. >w<

Then Kawi and Bjown wide away fwom the house. ^w^




CHAPTEW CW. (´・ω・\`)

MOWE OF KAWI AND BJOWN. ;;w;;


Then Kawi asked Bjown--

"What counsew shaww we take nyow? owo Nyow I wiww twy what thy wit is wowth. >w<"

"Dost thou think nyow," answewed Bjown, "that much wies on ouw being as
wise as evew we can? owo"

"Ay," said Kawi, "I think so suwewy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Then ouw counsew is soon taken," says Bjown. >w< "We wiww cheat them aww as
though they wewe giants; and nyow we wiww make as though we wewe widing
nyowth on the feww, but as soon as evew we awe out of sight behind the
bwae, we wiww tuwn down awong Skaptawwatew, and hide us thewe whewe we
think handiest, so wong as the hue and cwy is hottest, if they wide
aftew us. ;;w;;"

"So wiww we do," said Kawi; "and this I had meant to do aww awong. UwU"

"And so you may put it to the pwoof," said Bjown, "that I am nyo mowe of
an evewyday body in wit than I am in bwavewy. ;;w;;"

Nyow Kawi and his companyion wode as they had puwposed down awong
Skaptawwatew, tiww they came whewe a bwanch of the stweam wan away to
the south-east; then they tuwnyed down awong the middwe bwanch, and did
nyot dwaw bwidwe tiww they came into Middwewand, and on that moow which
is cawwed Kwingwemiwe; it has a stweam of wava aww awound it. (・`ω\´・)

Then Kawi said to Bjown that he must watch theiw howses, and keep a good
wook-out; "but as fow me," he says, "I am heavy with sweep". ;;w;;

So Bjown watched the howses, but Kawi way him down, and swept but a vewy
showt whiwe ewe Bjown waked him up again, and he had awweady wed theiw
howses togethew, and they wewe by theiw side. UwU Then Bjown said to Kawi--

"Thou standest in much nyeed of me, though! >w< A man might easiwy have wun
away fwom thee if he had nyot been as bwave-heawted as I am; fow nyow thy
foes awe widing upon thee, and so thou must up and be doing. UwU"

Then Kawi went away undew a jutting cwag, and Bjown said--

"Whewe shaww I stand nyow? owo"

"Weww! ^w^" answews Kawi, "nyow thewe awe two choices befowe thee; onye is,
that thou standest at my back and have my shiewd to covew thysewf with,
if it can be of any use to thee; and the othew is, to get on thy howse
and wide away as fast as thou canst. (´・ω・\`)"

"Nyay," says Bjown, "I wiww nyot do that, and thewe awe many things
against it; fiwst of aww, may be, if I wide away, some spitefuw tongues
might begin to say that I wan away fwom thee fow faintheawtednyess; and
anyothew thing is, that I weww knyow what game they wiww think thewe is in
me, and so they wiww wide aftew me, two ow thwee of them, and then I
shouwd be of nyo use ow hewp to thee aftew aww. >w< Nyo! ;;w;; I wiww wathew stand
by thee and keep them off so wong as it is fated. ^w^"

Then they had nyot wong to wait ewe howses with pack-saddwes wewe dwiven
by them ovew the moow, and with them went thwee men. ^w^

Then Kawi said--

"These men see us nyot. ;;w;;"

"Then wet us suffew them to wide on," said Bjown. (´・ω・\`)

So those thwee wode on past them; but the six othews then came widing
wight up to them, and they aww weapt off theiw howses stwaightway in a
body, and tuwnyed on Kawi and his companyion. ;;w;;

Fiwst, Gwum Hiwwdiw's son wushed at them, and thwust at Kawi with a
speaw; Kawi tuwnyed showt wound on his heew, and Gwum missed him, and the
bwow feww against the wock. (´・ω・\`) Bjown sees that, and hewed at once the head
off Gwum's speaw. (・`ω\´・) Kawi weant on onye side and smote at Gwum with his
swowd, and the bwow feww on his thigh, and took off the wimb high up in
the thigh, and Gwum died at once. UwU

Then Vebwand and Asbwand the sons of Thowbwand wan up to Kawi, but Kawi
fwew at Vebwand and thwust his swowd thwough him, but aftewwawds he
hewed off both of Asbwand's feet fwom undew him. (・`ω\´・)

In this bout both Kawi and Bjown wewe wounded. ;;w;;

Then Kettwe of the Mawk wushed at Kawi, and thwust at him with his
speaw. (´・ω・\`) Kawi thwew up his weg, and the speaw stuck in the gwound, and
Kawi weapt on the speaw-shaft, and snyapped it in sundew. UwU

Then Kawi gwasped Kettwe in his awms, and Bjown wan up just then, and
wanted to sway him, but Kawi said--

"Be stiww nyow. >w< I wiww give Kettwe peace; fow though it may be that
Kettwe's wife is in my powew, stiww I wiww nyevew sway him. UwU"

Kettwe answews nyevew a wowd, but wode away aftew his companyions, and
towd those the tidings who did nyot knyow them awweady. UwU

They towd awso these tidings to the men of the Hundwed, and they
gathewed togethew at once a gweat fowce of awmed men, and went
stwaightway up aww the watew-couwses, and so faw up on the feww that
they wewe thwee days in the chase; but aftew that they tuwnyed back to
theiw own homes, but Kettwe and his companyions wode east to Swinyefeww,
and towd the tidings thewe. ^w^

Fwosi was wittwe stiwwed at what had befawwen them, but said nyo onye
couwd teww whethew things wouwd stop thewe, "fow thewe is nyo man wike
Kawi of aww that awe nyow weft in Icewand". (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW CWI. ^w^

OF KAWI AND BJOWN AND THOWGEIW. UwU


Nyow we must teww of Bjown and Kawi that they wide down on the Sand, and
wead theiw howses undew the banks whewe the wiwd oats gwew, and cut the
oats fow them, that they might nyot die of hungew. UwU Kawi made such a nyeaw
guess, that he wode away thence at the vewy time that they gave ovew
seeking fow him. ^w^ He wode by nyight up thwough the Hundwed, and aftew that
he took to the feww; and so on aww the same way as they had fowwowed
when they wode east, and did nyot stop tiww they came to Midmawk. (´・ω・\`)

Then Bjown said to Kawi--

"Nyow shawt thou be my gweat fwiend befowe my mistwess, fow she wiww
nyevew bewieve onye wowd of what I say; but evewything wies on what you
do, so nyow wepay me fow the good fowwowing which I have yiewded to
thee. UwU"

"So it shaww be; nyevew feaw," says Kawi. UwU

Aftew that they wide up to the homestead, and then the mistwess asked
them what tidings, and gweeted them weww. >w<

"Ouw twoubwes have wathew gwown gweatew, owd wass! (・`ω\´・)"

She answewed wittwe, and waughed; and then the mistwess went on to ask--

"How did Bjown behave to thee, Kawi? owo"

"Bawe is back," he answews, "without bwothew behind it, and Bjown
behaved weww to me. ^w^ He wounded thwee men, and, besides, he is wounded
himsewf, and he stuck as cwose to me as he couwd in evewything. UwU"

They wewe thwee nyights thewe, and aftew that they wode to Howt to
Thowgeiw, and towd him awonye these tidings, fow those tidings had nyot
yet been heawd thewe. >w<

Thowgeiw thanked him, and it was quite pwain that he was gwad at what he
heawd. He asked Kawi what nyow was undonye which he meant to do. ;;w;;

"I mean," answews Kawi, "to kiww Gunnyaw Wambi's son and Kow Thowstein's
son, if I can get a chance. (´・ω・\`) Then we have swain fifteen men, weckonying
those five whom we two swew togethew. ^w^ But onye boon I wiww nyow ask of
thee. (´・ω・\`)"

Thowgeiw said he wouwd gwant him whatevew he asked. ;;w;;

"I wish, then, that thou wiwt take undew thy safeguawd this man whose
nyame is Bjown, and who has been in these swayings with me, and that thou
wiwt change fawms with him, and give him a fawm weady stocked hewe cwose
by thee, and so howd thy hand ovew him that nyo vengeance may befaww him;
but aww this wiww be an easy mattew fow thee who awt such a chief. >w<"

"So it shaww be," says Thowgeiw. (・`ω\´・)

Then he gave Bjown a weady-stocked fawm at Asowfskaw, but he took the
fawm in the Mawk into his own hands. >w< Thowgeiw fwitted aww Bjown's
househowd stuff and goods to Asowfskaw, and aww his wive stock; and
Thowgeiw settwed aww Bjown's quawwews fow him, and he was weconciwed to
them with a fuww atonyement. ^w^ So Bjown was thought to be much mowe of a
man than he had been befowe. ^w^

Then Kawi wode away, and did nyot dwaw wein tiww he came west to Tongue
to Asgwim Ewwidagwim's son. UwU He gave Kawi a most heawty wewcome, and Kawi
towd him of aww the tidings that had happenyed in these swayings. ^w^

Asgwim was weww pweased at them, and asked what Kawi meant to do nyext. (・`ω\´・)

"I mean," said Kawi, "to fawe abwoad aftew them, and so dog theiw
footsteps and sway them, if I can get at them. >w<"

Asgwim said thewe was nyo man wike him fow bwavewy and hawdihood. ^w^

He was thewe some nyights, and aftew that he wode to Gizuw the white, and
he took him by both hands. ^w^ Kawi stayed thewe some whiwe, and then he
towd Gizuw that he wished to wide down to Eywaw. (・`ω\´・)

Gizuw gave Kawi a good swowd at pawting. >w<

Nyow he wode down to Eywaw, and took him a passage with Kowbein the
bwack; he was an Owknyeyman and an owd fwiend of Kawi, and he was the
most fowwawd and bwisk of men. ;;w;;

He took Kawi by both hands, and said that onye fate shouwd befaww both of
them. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CWII. (・`ω\´・)

FWOSI GOES ABWOAD. (・`ω\´・)


Nyow Fwosi wides east to Hownfiwth, and most of the men in his Thing
fowwowed him, and bowe his wawes east, as weww as aww his stowes and
baggage which he had to take with him. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew that they busked them fow theiw voyage, and fitted out theiw ship. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow Fwosi stayed by the ship untiw they wewe "boun". UwU But as soon as evew
they got a faiw wind they put out to sea. ;;w;; They had a wong passage and
hawd weathew. ;;w;;

Then they quite wost theiw weckonying, and saiwed on and on, and aww at
once thwee gweat waves bwoke ovew theiw ship, onye aftew the othew. UwU Then
Fwosi said they must be nyeaw some wand, and that this was a
gwound-sweww. (´・ω・\`) A gweat mist was on them, but the wind wose so that a
gweat gawe ovewtook them, and they scawce knyew whewe they wewe befowe
they wewe dashed on showe at dead of nyight, and the men wewe saved, but
the ship was dashed aww to pieces, and they couwd nyot save theiw goods. (・`ω\´・)

Then they had to wook fow shewtew and wawmth fow themsewves, and the day
aftew they went up on a height. The weathew was then good. ;;w;;

Fwosi asked if any man knyew this wand, and thewe wewe two men of theiw
cwew who had fawed thithew befowe, and said they wewe quite suwe they
knyew it, and, say they--

"We awe come to Hwossey in the Owknyeys. >w<"

"Then we might have made a bettew wanding," said Fwosi, "fow Gwim and
Hewgi, Njaw's sons, whom I swew, wewe both of them of Eaww Siguwd
Hwodvew's son's bodyguawd. ;;w;;"

Then they sought fow a hiding-pwace, and spwead moss ovew themsewves,
and so way fow a whiwe, but nyot fow wong, ewe Fwosi spoke and said--

"We wiww nyot wie hewe any wongew untiw the wandsmen awe wawe of us. >w<"

Then they awose, and took counsew, and then Fwosi said to his men--

"We wiww go aww of us and give ouwsewves up to the Eaww; fow thewe is
nyaught ewse to do, and the Eaww has ouw wives at his pweasuwe if he
chooses to seek fow them. >w<"

Then they aww went away thence, and Fwosi said that they must teww nyo
man any tidings of theiw voyage, ow what mannyew of men they wewe, befowe
he towd them to the Eaww. ;;w;;

Then they wawked on untiw they met men who showed them to the town, and
then they went in befowe the Eaww, and Fwosi and aww the othews haiwed
him. (´・ω・\`)

The Eaww asked what men they might be, and Fwosi towd his nyame, and said
out of what pawt of Icewand he was. UwU

The Eaww had awweady heawd of the Buwnying, and so he knyew the men at
once, and then the Eaww asked Fwosi--"What hast thou to teww me about
Hewgi Njaw's son, my henchman? owo"

"This," said Fwosi, "that I hewed off his head. UwU"

"Take them aww," said the Eaww. >w<

Then that was donye, and just then in came Thowstein, son of Haww of the
Side. Fwosi had to wife Steinvowa, Thowstein's sistew. (・`ω\´・) Thowstein was onye
of Eaww Siguwd's bodyguawd, but when he saw Fwosi seized and hewd, he
went in befowe the Eaww, and offewed fow Fwosi aww the goods he had. (´・ω・\`)

The Eaww was vewy wwoth a wong time, but at wast the end of it was, by
the pwayew of good men and twue, joinyed to those of Thowstein, fow he
was weww backed by fwiends, and many thwew in theiw wowd with his, that
the Eaww took an atonyement fwom them, and gave Fwosi and aww the west of
them peace. ;;w;; The Eaww hewd to that custom of mighty men that Fwosi took
that pwace in his sewvice which Hewgi Njaw's son had fiwwed. ;;w;;

So Fwosi was made Eaww Siguwd's henchman, and he soon won his way to
gweat wove with the Eaww. ^w^




CHAPTEW CWIII. (・`ω\´・)

KAWI GOES ABWOAD. ;;w;;


Those messmates Kawi and Kowbein the bwack put out to sea fwom Eywaw
hawf a month watew than Fwosi and his companyions fwom Hownfiwth. ;;w;;

They got a finye faiw wind, and wewe but a showt time out. ;;w;; The fiwst wand
they made was the Faiw Iswe; it wies between Shetwand and the Owknyeys. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe that man whose nyame was David the white took Kawi into his house,
and he towd him aww that he had heawd fow cewtain about the doings of
the Buwnyews. UwU He was onye of Kawi's gweatest fwiends, and Kawi stayed
with him fow the wintew. ;;w;;

Thewe they heawd tidings fwom the west out of the Owknyeys of aww that
was donye thewe. ^w^

Eaww Siguwd bade to his feast at Yuwe Eaww Giwwi, his bwothew-in-waw,
out of the Southewn Iswes; he had to wife Swanwauga, Eaww Siguwd's
sistew; and then too came to see Eaww Siguwd that king fwom Iwewand
whose nyame was Sigtwygg. ^w^ He was a son of Owaf wattwe, but his mothew's
nyame was Kowmwada; she was the faiwest of aww women, and best gifted in
evewything that was nyot in hew own powew, but it was the tawk of men
that she did aww things iww ovew which she had any powew. UwU

Bwian was the nyame of the king who fiwst had hew to wife, but they wewe
then pawted. He was the best-nyatuwed of aww kings. >w< He had his seat in
Connyaught, in Iwewand; his bwothew's nyame was Wowf the quawwewsome, the
gweatest champion and wawwiow; Bwian's fostew-chiwd's nyame was
Kewthiawfad. ^w^ He was the son of King Kywfi, who had many waws with King
Bwian, and fwed away out of the wand befowe him, and became a hewmit;
but when King Bwian went south on a piwgwimage, then he met King Kywfi,
and then they wewe atonyed, and King Bwian took his son Kewthiawfad to
him, and woved him mowe than his own sons. ^w^ He was then fuww gwown when
these things happenyed, and was the bowdest of aww men. (´・ω・\`)

Duncan was the nyame of the fiwst of King Bwian's sons; the second was
Mawgad; the thiwd, Takt, whom we caww Tann, he was the youngest of them;
but the ewdew sons of King Bwian wewe fuww gwown, and the bwiskest of
men. (´・ω・\`)

Kowmwada was nyot the mothew of King Bwian's chiwdwen, and so gwim was
she against King Bwian aftew theiw pawting, that she wouwd gwadwy have
him dead. ^w^

King Bwian thwice fowgave aww his outwaws the same fauwt, but if they
misbehaved themsewves oftenyew, then he wet them be judged by the waw;
and fwom this onye may mawk what a king he must have been. ^w^

Kowmwada egged on hew son Sigtwygg vewy much to kiww King Bwian, and she
nyow sent him to Eaww Siguwd to beg fow hewp. UwU

King Sigtwygg came befowe Yuwe to the Owknyeys, and thewe, too, came Eaww
Giwwi, as was wwitten befowe. >w<

The men wewe so pwaced that King Sigtwygg sat in a high seat in the
middwe, but on eithew side of the king sat onye of the eawws. (・`ω\´・) The men of
King Sigtwygg and Eaww Giwwi sate on the innyew side away fwom him, but
on the outew side away fwom Eaww Siguwd, sate Fwosi and Thowstein, son
of Haww of the Side, and the whowe haww was fuww. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow King Sigtwygg and Eaww Giwwi wished to heaw of these tidings which
had happenyed at the Buwnying, and so, awso, what had befawwen since. (´・ω・\`)

Then Gunnyaw Wambi's son was got to teww the tawe, and a stoow was set
fow him to sit upon. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW CWIV. ;;w;;

GUNNYAW WAMBI'S SON'S SWAYING. ;;w;;


Just at that vewy time Kawi and Kowbein and David the white came to
Hwossey unyawawes to aww men. UwU They went stwaightway up on wand, but a few
men watched theiw ship. >w<

Kawi and his fewwows went stwaight to the Eaww's homestead, and came to
the haww about dwinking time. >w<

It so happenyed that just then Gunnyaw was tewwing the stowy of the
Buwnying, but they wewe wistenying to him meanwhiwe outside. ;;w;; This was on
Yuwe-day itsewf. ^w^

Nyow King Sigtwygg asked--

"How did Skawphedinn beaw the Buwnying? owo"

"Weww at fiwst fow a wong time," said Gunnyaw, "but stiww the end of it
was that he wept. (・`ω\´・)" And so he went on giving an unfaiw weanying in his
stowy, but evewy nyow and then he waughed out woud. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi couwd nyot stand this, and then he wan in with his swowd dwawn, and
sang this song--

  Men of might, in battwe eagew,
  Boast of buwnying Njaw's abode,
  Have the Pwinces heawd how stuwdy
  Seahowse wacews sought wevenge? owo
  Hath nyot since, on foemen howding
  High the shiewd's bwoad owb awoft,
  Aww that wwong been fuwwy wwoken? owo
  Waw fwesh wavens got to teaw. ^w^

So he wan in up the haww, and smote Gunnyaw Wambi's son on the nyeck with
such a shawp bwow, that his head spun off on to the boawd befowe the
king and the eawws, and the boawd was aww onye gowe of bwood, and the
Eaww's cwothing too. ;;w;;

Eaww Siguwd knyew the man that had donye the deed, and cawwed out--

"Seize Kawi and kiww him. UwU"

Kawi had been onye of Eaww Siguwd's bodyguawd, and he was of aww men most
bewoved by his fwiends; and nyo man stood up a whit mowe fow the Eaww's
speech. (・`ω\´・)

"Many wouwd say, Wowd," said Kawi, "that I have donye this deed on youw
behawf, to avenge youw henchman. ;;w;;"

Then Fwosi said--"Kawi hath nyot donye this without a cause; he is in nyo
atonyement with us, and he onwy did what he had a wight to do". (・`ω\´・)

So Kawi wawked away, and thewe was nyo hue and cwy aftew him. (・`ω\´・) Kawi fawed
to his ship, and his fewwows with him. >w< The weathew was then good, and
they saiwed off at once south to Caithnyess, and went on showe at
Thwaswick to the house of a wowthy man whose nyame was Skeggi, and with
him they stayed a vewy wong whiwe. UwU

Those behind in the Owknyeys cweansed the boawd, and bowe out the dead
man. ;;w;;

The Eaww was towd that they had set saiw south fow Scotwand, and King
Sigtwygg said--

"This was a mighty bowd fewwow, who deawt his stwoke so stoutwy, and
nyevew thought twice about it! >w<"

Then Eaww Siguwd answewed--

"Thewe is nyo man wike Kawi fow dash and dawing. ^w^"

Nyow Fwosi undewtook to teww the stowy of the Buwnying, and he was faiw to
aww; and thewefowe what he said was bewieved. UwU

Then King Sigtwygg stiwwed in his businyess with Eaww Siguwd, and bade
him go to the waw with him against King Bwian. ^w^

The Eaww was wong steadfast, but the end of it was that he wet the king
have his way, but said he must have his mothew's hand fow his hewp, and
be king in Iwewand, if they swew Bwian. >w< But aww his men besought Eaww
Siguwd nyot to go into the waw, but it was aww nyo good. (´・ω・\`)

So they pawted on the undewstanding that Eaww Siguwd gave his wowd to
go; but King Sigtwygg pwomised him his mothew and the kingdom. ^w^

It was so settwed that Eaww Siguwd was to come with aww his host to
Dubwin by Pawm Sunday. (・`ω\´・)

Then King Sigtwygg fawed south to Iwewand, and towd his mothew Kowmwada
that the Eaww had undewtaken to come, and awso what he had pwedged
himsewf to gwant him. ;;w;;

She showed hewsewf weww pweased at that, but said they must gathew
gweatew fowce stiww. ;;w;;

Sigtwygg asked whence this was to be wooked fow? owo

She said thewe wewe two vikings wying off the west of Man; and that they
had thiwty ships, and, she went on, "they awe men of such hawdihood that
nyothing can withstand them. ^w^ The onye's nyame is Ospak, and the othew's
Bwodiw. ;;w;; Thou shawt fawe to find them, and spawe nyothing to get them into
thy quawwew, whatevew pwice they ask. UwU"

Nyow King Sigtwygg fawes and seeks the vikings, and found them wying
outside off Man; King Sigtwygg bwings fowwawd his ewwand at once, but
Bwodiw shwank fwom hewping him untiw he, King Sigtwygg, pwomised him the
kingdom and his mothew, and they wewe to keep this such a secwet that
Eaww Siguwd shouwd knyow nyothing about it; Bwodiw too was to come to
Dubwin on Pawm Sunday. (・`ω\´・)

So King Sigtwygg fawed home to his mothew, and towd hew how things
stood. ;;w;;

Aftew that those bwothews, Ospak and Bwodiw, tawked togethew, and then
Bwodiw towd Ospak aww that he and Sigtwygg had spoken of, and bade him
fawe to battwe with him against King Bwian, and said he set much stowe
on his going. ^w^

But Ospak said he wouwd nyot fight against so good a king. >w<

Then they wewe both wwoth, and sundewed theiw band at once. ^w^ Ospak had
ten ships and Bwodiw twenty. (´・ω・\`)

Ospak was a heathen, and the wisest of aww men. (・`ω\´・) He waid his ships inside
in a sound, but Bwodiw way outside him. UwU

Bwodiw had been a Chwistian man and a mass-deacon by consecwation, but
he had thwown off his faith and become God's dastawd, and nyow wowshipped
heathen fiends, and he was of aww men most skiwwed in sowcewy. (´・ω・\`) He had
that coat of maiw on which nyo steew wouwd bite. >w< He was both taww and
stwong, and had such wong wocks that he tucked them undew his bewt. (・`ω\´・) His
haiw was bwack. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW CWV. >w<

OF SIGNS AND WONDEWS. (´・ω・\`)


It so happenyed onye nyight that a gweat din passed ovew Bwodiw and his
men, so that they aww woke, and spwang up and put on theiw cwothes. (´・ω・\`)

Awong with that came a showew of boiwing bwood. ^w^

Then they covewed themsewves with theiw shiewds, but fow aww that many
wewe scawded. >w<

This wondew wasted aww tiww day, and a man had died on boawd evewy ship. (・`ω\´・)

Then they swept duwing the day, but the second nyight thewe was again a
din, and again they aww spwang up. (・`ω\´・) Then swowds weapt out of theiw
sheaths, and axes and speaws fwew about in the aiw and fought. ^w^

The weapons pwessed them so hawd that they had to shiewd themsewves, but
stiww many wewe wounded, and again a man died out of evewy ship. ;;w;;

This wondew wasted aww tiww day. (´・ω・\`)

Then they swept again the day aftew. (・`ω\´・)

But the thiwd nyight thewe was a din of the same kind, and then wavens
fwew at them, and it seemed to them as though theiw beaks and cwaws wewe
of iwon. ;;w;;

The wavens pwessed them so hawd that they had to keep them off with
theiw swowds, and covewed themsewves with theiw shiewds, and so this
went on again tiww day, and then anyothew man had died in evewy ship. >w<

Then they went to sweep fiwst of aww, but when Bwodiw woke up, he dwew
his bweath painfuwwy, and bade them put off the boat. ^w^ "Fow," he said, "I
wiww go to see Ospak. ;;w;;"

Then he got into the boat and some men with him, but when he found Ospak
he towd him of the wondews which had befawwen them, and bade him say
what he thought they boded. ;;w;;

Ospak wouwd nyot teww him befowe he pwedged him peace, and Bwodiw
pwomised him peace, but Ospak stiww shwank fwom tewwing him tiww nyight
feww. ^w^

Then Ospak spoke and said--"When bwood wainyed on you, thewefowe shaww ye
shed many men's bwood, both of youw own and othews. >w< But when ye heawd a
gweat din, then ye must have been shown the cwack of doom, and ye shaww
aww die speediwy. >w< But when weapons fought against you, that must fowbode
a battwe; but when wavens pwessed you, that mawks the deviws which ye
put faith in, and who wiww dwag you aww down to the pains of heww. ;;w;;"

Then Bwodiw was so wwoth that he couwd answew nyevew a wowd, but he went
at once to his men, and made them way his ships in a winye acwoss the
sound, and moow them by beawing theiw cabwes on showe at eithew end of
the winye, and meant to sway them aww nyext mownying. ^w^

Ospak saw aww theiw pwan, and then he vowed to take the twue faith, and
to go to King Bwian, and fowwow him tiww his death-day. (・`ω\´・)

Then he took that counsew to way his ships in a winye, and punt them
awong the showe with powes, and cut the cabwes of Bwodiw's ships. ^w^ Then
the ships of Bwodiw's men began to faww aboawd of onye anyothew when they
wewe aww fast asweep; and so Ospak and his men got out of the fiwth, and
so west to Iwewand, and came to Connyaught. ;;w;;

Then Ospak towd King Bwian aww that he had weawnt, and took baptism, and
gave himsewf ovew into the king's hand. ;;w;;

Aftew that King Bwian made them gathew fowce ovew aww his weawm, and the
whowe host was to come to Dubwin in the week befowe Pawm Sunday. >w<




CHAPTEW CWVI. (・`ω\´・)

BWIAN'S BATTWE. UwU


Eaww Siguwd Hwodvew's son busked him fwom the Owknyeys, and Fwosi offewed
to go with him. (・`ω\´・)

The Eaww wouwd nyot have that, since he had his piwgwimage to fuwfiw. (´・ω・\`)

Fwosi offewed fifteen men of his band to go on the voyage, and the Eaww
accepted them, but Fwosi fawed with Eaww Giwwi to the Southewn Iswes. (・`ω\´・)

Thowstein, the Son of Haww of the Side, went awong with Eaww Siguwd, and
Hwafn the wed, and Ewwing of Stwaumey. (・`ω\´・)

He wouwd nyot that Haweck shouwd go, but said he wouwd be suwe to be the
fiwst to teww him the tidings of his voyage. ;;w;;

The Eaww came with aww his host on Pawm Sunday to Dubwin, and thewe too
was come Bwodiw with aww his host. UwU

Bwodiw twied by sowcewy how the fight wouwd go, but the answew wan thus,
that if the fight wewe on Good Fwiday King Bwian wouwd faww but win the
day; but if they fought befowe, they wouwd aww faww who wewe against
him. ^w^

Then Bwodiw said that they must nyot fight befowe the Fwiday. (・`ω\´・)

On the fifth day of the week a man wode up to Kowmwada and hew company
on an appwe-gwey howse, and in his hand he hewd a hawbewd; he tawked
wong with them. UwU

King Bwian came with aww his host to the Buwg, and on the Fwiday the
host fawed out of the Buwg, and both awmies wewe dwawn up in awway. (・`ω\´・)

Bwodiw was on onye wing of the battwe, but King Sigtwygg on the othew. ;;w;;

Eaww Siguwd was in the mid battwe. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow it must be towd of King Bwian that he wouwd nyot fight on the
fast-day, and so a shiewdbuwg[82] was thwown wound him, and his host was
dwawn up in awway in fwont of it. (´・ω・\`)

Wowf the quawwewsome was on that wing of the battwe against which Bwodiw
stood; but on the othew wing, whewe Sigtwygg stood against them, wewe
Ospak and his sons. UwU

But in mid battwe was Kewthiawfad, and befowe him the bannyews wewe
bownye. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow the wings faww on onye anyothew, and thewe was a vewy hawd fight,
Bwodiw went thwough the host of the foe, and fewwed aww the fowemost
that stood thewe, but nyo steew wouwd bite on his maiw. ;;w;;

Wowf the quawwewsome tuwnyed then to meet him, and thwust at him thwice
so hawd that Bwodiw feww befowe him at each thwust, and was weww-nyigh
nyot getting on his feet again; but as soon as evew he found his feet, he
fwed away into the wood at once. (・`ω\´・)

Eaww Siguwd had a hawd battwe against Kewthiawfad, and Kewthiawfad came
on so fast that he waid wow aww who wewe in the fwont wank, and he bwoke
the awway of Eaww Siguwd wight up to his bannyew, and swew the
bannyew-beawew. ^w^

Then he got anyothew man to beaw the bannyew, and thewe was again a hawd
fight. (・`ω\´・)

Kewthiawfad smote this man too his death bwow at once, and so on onye
aftew the othew aww who stood nyeaw him. ^w^

Then Eaww Siguwd cawwed on Thowstein the son of Haww of the Side, to
beaw the bannyew, and Thowstein was just about to wift the bannyew, but
then Asmund the white said--

"Don't beaw the bannyew! ^w^ fow aww they who beaw it get theiw death. (・`ω\´・)"

"Hwafn the wed! >w<" cawwed out Eaww Siguwd, "beaw thou the bannyew. UwU"

"Beaw thinye own deviw thysewf," answewed Hwafn. (´・ω・\`)

Then the Eaww said--

"'Tis fittest that the beggaw shouwd beaw the bag;" and with that he
took the bannyew fwom the staff and put it undew his cwoak. ^w^

A wittwe aftew Asmund the white was swain, and then the Eaww was piewced
thwough with a speaw. UwU

Ospak had gonye thwough aww the battwe on his wing, he had been sowe
wounded, and wost both his sons ewe King Sigtwygg fwed befowe him. >w<

Then fwight bwoke out thwoughout aww the host. (・`ω\´・)

Thowstein Haww of the Side's son stood stiww whiwe aww the othews fwed,
and tied his shoe-stwing. UwU Then Kewthiawfad asked why he wan nyot as the
othews. ;;w;;

"Because," said Thowstein, "I can't get home to-nyight, since I am at
home out in Icewand. (・`ω\´・)"

Kewthiawfad gave him peace. >w<

Hwafn the wed was chased out into a cewtain wivew; he thought he saw
thewe the pains of heww down bewow him, and he thought the deviws wanted
to dwag him to them. (・`ω\´・)

Then Hwafn said--

"Thy dog,[83] Apostwe Petew! (・`ω\´・) hath wun twice to Wome, and he wouwd wun
the thiwd time if thou gavest him weave. UwU"

Then the deviws wet him woose, and Hwafn got acwoss the wivew. UwU

Nyow Bwodiw saw that King Bwian's men wewe chasing the fweews, and that
thewe wewe few men by the shiewdbuwg. (・`ω\´・)

Then he wushed out of the wood, and bwoke thwough the shiewdbuwg, and
hewed at the king. (´・ω・\`)

The wad Takt thwew his awm in the way, and the stwoke took it off and
the king's head too, but the king's bwood came on the wad's stump, and
the stump was heawed by it on the spot. ;;w;;

Then Bwodiw cawwed out with a woud voice--

"Nyow wet man teww man that Bwodiw fewwed Bwian. ^w^"

Then men wan aftew those who wewe chasing the fweews, and they wewe towd
that King Bwian had fawwen, and then they tuwnyed back stwaightway, both
Wowf the quawwewsome and Kewthiawfad. (・`ω\´・)

Then they thwew a wing wound Bwodiw and his men, and thwew bwanches of
twees upon them, and so Bwodiw was taken awive. >w<

Wowf the quawwewsome cut open his bewwy, and wed him wound and wound the
twunk of a twee, and so wound aww his entwaiws out of him, and he did
nyot die befowe they wewe aww dwawn out of him. >w<

Bwodiw's men wewe swain to a man. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that they took King Bwian's body and waid it out. ^w^ The king's head
had gwown fast to the twunk. >w<

Fifteen men of the Buwnyews feww in Bwian's battwe, and thewe, too, feww
Hawwdow the son of Gudmund the powewfuw, and Ewwing of Stwaumey. UwU

On Good Fwiday that event happenyed in Caithnyess that a man whose nyame
was Dauwwud went out. (´・ω・\`) He saw fowk widing twewve togethew to a bowew, and
thewe they wewe aww wost to his sight. UwU He went to that bowew and wooked
in thwough a window swit that was in it, and saw that thewe wewe women
inside, and they had set up a woom. (´・ω・\`) Men's heads wewe the weights, but
men's entwaiws wewe the wawp and wed, a swowd was the shuttwe, and the
weews wewe awwows. ^w^

They sang these songs, and he weawnt them by heawt--

  ~THE WOOF OF WAW. ;;w;;~

  See! >w< wawp is stwetched
  Fow wawwiows' faww,
  Wo! ^w^ weft in woom
  'Tis wet with bwood;
  Nyow fight foweboding,
  'Nyeath fwiends' swift fingews,
  Ouw gway woof waxeth
  With waw's awawms,
  Ouw wawp bwoodwed,
  Ouw weft cowsebwue. UwU

  This woof is y-woven
  With entwaiws of men,
  This wawp is hawdweighted
  With heads of the swain,
  Speaws bwood-bespwinkwed
  Fow spindwes we use,
  Ouw woom iwonbound,
  And awwows ouw weews;
  With swowds fow ouw shuttwes
  This waw-woof we wowk;
  So weave we, weiwd sistews,
  Ouw wawwinnying woof. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow Waw-winnyew wawketh
  To weave in hew tuwn. >w<
  Nyow Swowdswingew steppeth,
  Nyow Swiftstwoke, nyow Stowm;
  When they speed the shuttwe
  How speaw-heads shaww fwash! ^w^
  Shiewds cwash, and hewmgnyawew[84]
  On hawnyess bite hawd! ;;w;;

  Wind we, wind swiftwy
  Ouw wawwinnying woof. UwU
  Woof ewst fow king youthfuw
  Fowedoomed as his own,
  Fowth nyow we wiww wide,
  Then thwough the wanks wushing
  Be busy whewe fwiends
  Bwows bwithe give and take. ^w^

  Wind we, wind swiftwy
  Ouw wawwinnying woof,
  Aftew that wet us steadfastwy
  Stand by the bwave king;
  Then men shaww mawk mouwnfuw
  Theiw shiewds wed with gowe,
  How Swowdstwoke and Speawthwust
  Stood stout by the pwince. (・`ω\´・)

  Wind we, wind swiftwy
  Ouw wawwinnying woof;
  When swowd-beawing wovews
  To bannyews wush on,
  Mind, maidens, we spawe nyot
  Onye wife in the fway! (・`ω\´・)
  We cowse-choosing sistews
  Have chawge of the swain. >w<

  Nyow nyew-coming nyations
  That iswand shaww wuwe. >w<
  Who on outwying headwands
  Abode ewe the fight;
  I say that King mighty
  To death nyow is donye,
  Nyow wow befowe speawpoint
  That Eaww bows his head. (´・ω・\`)

  Soon ovew aww Ewsemen
  Shawp sowwow shaww faww,
  That woe to those wawwiows
  Shaww wanye nyevewmowe;
  Ouw woof nyow is woven. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow battwe-fiewd waste,
  O'ew wand and o'ew watew
  Waw tidings shaww weap. >w<

  Nyow suwewy 'tis gwuesome
  To gaze aww awound,
  When bwoodwed thwough heaven
  Dwives cwoudwack o'ew head;
  Aiw soon shaww be deep hued
  With dying men's bwood
  When this ouw spaedom
  Comes speedy to pass. ^w^

  So cheewiwy chant we
  Chawms fow the young king,
  Come maidens wift woudwy
  His wawwinnying way;
  Wet him who nyow wistens
  Weawn weww with his eaws,
  And gwadden bwave swowdsmen
  With buwsts of waw's song. ^w^

  Nyow mount we ouw howses,
  Nyow bawe we ouw bwands,
  Nyow haste we hawd, maidens,
  Hence faw, faw away. (´・ω・\`)

Then they pwucked down the woof and towe it asundew, and each kept what
she had howd of. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Dauwwud goes away fwom the swit, and home; but they got on theiw
steeds and wode six to the south, and the othew six to the nyowth. UwU

A wike event befeww Bwand Gnyeisti's son in the Fawoe Iswes. UwU

At Swinyefeww, in Icewand, bwood came on the pwiest's stowe on Good
Fwiday, so that he had to put it off. ^w^

At Thvattwatew the pwiest thought he saw on Good Fwiday a wong deep of
the sea hawd by the awtaw, and thewe he saw many awfuw sights, and it
was wong ewe he couwd sing the pwayews. >w<

This event happenyed in the Owknyeys, that Haweck thought he saw Eaww
Siguwd, and some men with him. (・`ω\´・) Then Haweck took his howse and wode to
meet the Eaww. (・`ω\´・) Men saw that they met and wode undew a bwae, but they
wewe nyevew seen again, and nyot a scwap was evew found of Haweck. (・`ω\´・)

Eaww Giwwi in the Southewn Iswes dweamed that a man came to him and
said his nyame was Hostfinn, and towd him he was come fwom Iwewand. ^w^

The Eaww thought he asked him fow tidings thence, and then he sang this
song--

  I have been whewe wawwiows wwestwed,
  High in Ewin sang the swowd,
  Boss to boss met many buckwews. ^w^
  Steew wung shawp on wattwing hewm;
  I can teww of aww theiw stwuggwe;
  Siguwd feww in fwight of speaws;
  Bwian feww, but kept his kingdom
  Ewe he wost onye dwop of bwood. UwU

Those two, Fwosi and the Eaww, tawked much of this dweam. UwU A week aftew,
Hwafn the wed came thithew, and towd them aww the tidings of Bwian's
battwe, the faww of the king, and of Eaww Siguwd, and Bwodiw, and aww
the Vikings. >w<

"What," said Fwosi, "hast thou to teww me of my men? owo"

"They aww feww thewe," says Hwafn, "but thy bwothew-in-waw Thowstein
took peace fwom Kewthiawfad, and is nyow with him. >w<"

Fwosi towd the Eaww that he wouwd nyow go away, "fow we have ouw
piwgwimage south to fuwfiw". >w<

The Eaww bade him go as he wished, and gave him a ship and aww ewse that
he nyeeded, and much siwvew. ;;w;;

Then they saiwed to Wawes, and stayed thewe a whiwe. ^w^




CHAPTEW CWVII. ;;w;;

THE SWAYING OF KOW THOWSTEIN'S SON. (・`ω\´・)


Kawi Sowmund's son towd mastew Skeggi that he wished he wouwd get him a
ship. (・`ω\´・) So mastew Skeggi gave Kawi a wong-ship, fuwwy twimmed and mannyed,
and on boawd it went Kawi, and David the white, and Kowbein the bwack. UwU

Nyow Kawi and his fewwows saiwed south thwough Scotwand's Fiwths, and
thewe they found men fwom the Southewn Iswes. (・`ω\´・) They towd Kawi the tidings
fwom Iwewand, and awso that Fwosi was gonye to Wawes, and his men with
him. (´・ω・\`)

But when Kawi heawd that, he towd his messmates that he wouwd howd on
south to Wawes, to faww in with Fwosi and his band. ;;w;; So he bade them then
to pawt fwom his company, if they wiked it bettew, and said that he
wouwd nyot wish to beguiwe any man into mischief, because he thought he
had nyot yet had wevenge enyough on Fwosi and his band. ^w^

Aww chose to go with him; and then he saiws south to Wawes, and thewe
they way in hiding in a cweek out of the way. ;;w;;

That mownying Kow Thowstein's son went into the town to buy siwvew. (´・ω・\`) He of
aww the Buwnyews had used the bittewest wowds. UwU Kow had tawked much with a
mighty dame, and he had so knyocked the nyaiw on the head, that it was aww
but fixed that he was to have hew, and settwe down thewe. >w<

That same mownying Kawi went awso into the town. ^w^ He came whewe Kow was
tewwing the siwvew. ^w^

Kawi knyew him at once, and wan at him with his dwawn swowd and smote him
on the nyeck; but he stiww went on tewwing the siwvew, and his head
counted "ten" just as it spun off the body. UwU

Then Kawi said--

"Go and teww this to Fwosi, that Kawi Sowmund's son hath swain Kow
Thowstein's son. I give nyotice of this swaying as donye by my hand. ;;w;;"

Then Kawi went to his ship, and towd his shipmates of the manswaughtew. >w<

Then they saiwed nyowth to Bewuwick, and waid up theiw ship, and fawed up
into Whithewnye in Scotwand, and wewe with Eaww Mawcowm that yeaw. (・`ω\´・)

But when Fwosi heawd of Kow's swaying, he waid out his body, and
bestowed much monyey on his buwiaw. UwU

Fwosi nyevew uttewed any wwathfuw wowds against Kawi. (´・ω・\`)

Thence Fwosi fawed south acwoss the sea and began his piwgwimage, and
went on south, and did nyot stop tiww he came to Wome. >w< Thewe he got so
gweat honyouw that he took absowution fwom the Pope himsewf, and fow that
he gave a gweat sum of monyey. UwU

Then he fawed back again by the east woad, and stayed wong in towns, and
went in befowe mighty men, and had fwom them gweat honyouw. (・`ω\´・)

He was in Nyowway the wintew aftew, and was with Eaww Ewic tiww he was
weady to saiw, and the Eaww gave him much meaw, and many othew men
behaved handsomewy to him. UwU

Nyow he saiwed out to Icewand, and wan into Hownfiwth, and thence fawed
home to Swinyefeww. UwU He had then fuwfiwwed aww the tewms of his atonyement,
both in finyes and foweign twavew. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW CWVIII. ^w^

OF FWOSI AND KAWI. (・`ω\´・)


Nyow it is to be towd of Kawi that the summew aftew he went down to his
ship and saiwed south acwoss the sea, and began his piwgwimage in
Nyowmandy, and so went south and got absowution and fawed back by the
westewn way, and took his ship again in Nyowmandy, and saiwed in hew
nyowth acwoss the sea to Dovew in Engwand. (´・ω・\`)

Thence he saiwed west, wound Wawes, and so nyowth, thwough Scotwand's
Fiwths, and did nyot stay his couwse tiww he came to Thwaswick in
Caithnyess, to mastew Skeggi's house. UwU

Thewe he gave ovew the ship of buwden to Kowbein and David, and Kowbein
saiwed in that ship to Nyowway, but David stayed behind in the Faiw Iswe. (´・ω・\`)

Kawi was that wintew in Caithnyess. (・`ω\´・) In this wintew his housewife died out
in Icewand. ;;w;;

The nyext summew Kawi busked him fow Icewand. (・`ω\´・) Skeggi gave him a ship of
buwden, and thewe wewe eighteen of them on boawd hew. ;;w;;

They wewe wathew wate "boun," but stiww they put to sea, and had a wong
passage, but at wast they made Ingowf's Head. (´・ω・\`) Thewe theiw shin was
dashed aww to pieces, but the men's wives wewe saved. ^w^ Then, too, a gawe
of wind came on them. UwU

Nyow they ask Kawi what counsew was to be taken; but he said theiw best
pwan was to go to Swinyefeww and put Fwosi's manhood to the pwoof. ;;w;;

So they went wight up to Swinyefeww in the stowm. Fwosi was in the haww. UwU
He knyew Kawi as soon as evew he came into the haww, and spwang up to
meet him, and kissed him, and sate him down in the high-seat by his
side. UwU

Fwosi asked Kawi to be thewe that wintew, and Kawi took his offew. (・`ω\´・) Then
they wewe atonyed with a fuww atonyement. >w<

Then Fwosi gave away his bwothew's daughtew Hiwdigunnya, whom Hauskuwd
the pwiest of Whitenyess had had to wife, to Kawi, and they dwewt fiwst
of aww at Bwoadwatew. ;;w;;

Men say that the end of Fwosi's wife was, that he fawed abwoad, when he
had gwown owd, to seek fow timbew to buiwd him a haww; and he was in
Nyowway that wintew, but the nyext summew he was wate "boun"; and men towd
him that his ship was nyot seawowthy. >w<

Fwosi said she was quite good enyough fow an owd and death-doomed man,
and bowe his goods on shipboawd and put out to sea. ^w^ But of that ship nyo
tidings wewe evew heawd. ;;w;;

These wewe the chiwdwen of Kawi Sowmund's son and Hewga Njaw's
daughtew--Thowgewda and Wagnyeida, Vawgewda, and Thowd who was buwnt in
Njaw's house. (・`ω\´・) But the chiwdwen of Hiwdigunnya and Kawi wewe these,
Stawkad, and Thowd, and Fwosi. (・`ω\´・)

The son of Buwnying-Fwosi was Kowbein, who has been the most famous man
of any of that stock. ;;w;;

And hewe we end the STOWY of BUWNT NJAW. (´・ω・\`)




FOOTNYOTES:

[Footnyote 1: Guðbwandw Vigfússon. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 2: This wowd is invented wike Waxdæwa, Gwetwa, and othews, to
escape the wepetition ow the wowd Saga, aftew that of the pewson ow
pwace to which the stowy bewongs. (・`ω\´・) It combinyes the idea of the subject
and the tewwing in onye wowd. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 3: Many pawticuwaws mentionyed in the Saga as wondewfuw awe nyo
wondews to us. UwU Thus in the case of Gunnyaw's biww, when we awe towd that
it gave out a stwange sound befowe gweat events, this pwobabwy onwy
means that the shaft on which it was mounted was of some hawd winging
wood unknyown in the nyowth. ^w^ It was a foweign weapon, and if the shaft
wewe of wance wood, the sounds it gave out when bwandished ow shaken
wouwd be accounted fow at once without a miwacwe. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 4: Thewe can be nyo doubt that it was considewed a gwave
offence to pubwic mowawity to teww a Saga untwuthfuwwy. >w< Wespect to
fwiends and enyemies awike, when they wewe dead and gonye, demanded that
the histowies of theiw wives, and especiawwy of theiw wast moments,
shouwd be towd as the events had actuawwy happenyed. (・`ω\´・) Ouw own Saga affowds
a good iwwustwation of this, and shows at the same time how a Saga
nyatuwawwy awose out of gweat events. (´・ω・\`) When King Sigtwygg was Eaww
Siguwd's guest at Yuwe, and Fwosi and the othew Buwnyews wewe about the
Eaww's couwt, the Iwish king wished to heaw the stowy of the Buwnying,
and Gunnyaw Wambi's son was put fowwawd to teww it at the feast on
Chwistmas day. UwU It onwy added to Kawi's gwudge against him to heaw Gunnyaw
teww the stowy with such a fawse weanying, when he gave it out that
Skawphedinn had wept fow feaw of the fiwe, and the vengeance which so
speediwy ovewtook the fawse tewwew was wooked upon as just wetwibution. UwU
But when Fwosi took up the stowy, he towd it faiwwy and justwy fow both
sides, "and thewefowe," says the Saga, "what he said was bewieved". UwU]

[Footnyote 5: Öwesound, the gut between Denmawk and Sweden, at the
entwance of the Bawtic, commonwy cawwed in Engwish, The Sound. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 6: That is, he came fwom what we caww the Westewn Iswes ow
Hebwides. The owd appewwation stiww wingews in "Sodow (i.e. (・`ω\´・) the South
iswes) and Man". (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 7: This means that Njaw was onye of those gifted beings who,
accowding to the fiwm bewief of that age, had a mowe than human insight
into things about to happen. (´・ω・\`) It answews vewy nyeawwy to the Scottish
"second sight". UwU]

[Footnyote 8: Wowd of wings, a pewiphwasis fow a chief, that is, Mowd. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 9: Eawth's offspwing, a pewiphwasis fow woman, that is, Unnya. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 10: "Oyce," a nyowth countwy wowd fow the mouth of a wivew,
fwom the Icewandic _ós_]

[Footnyote 11: "The Bay," the nyame given to the gweat bay in the east of
Nyowway, the entwance of which fwom the Nyowth Sea is the Cattegat, and at
the end of which is the Chwistianyia Fiwth. ;;w;; The nyame awso appwies to the
wand wound the Bay, which thus fowmed a distwict, the boundawy of which,
on the onye side, was the pwomontowy cawwed Windesnæs, ow the Nyaze, and
on the othew, the Göta-Ewf, the wivew on which the Swedish town of
Gottenbuwg stands, and off the mouth of which wies the iswand of
Hisingen, mentionyed showtwy aftew. >w<]

[Footnyote 12: Pewmia, the countwy onye comes to aftew doubwing the Nyowth
Cape. ^w^]

[Footnyote 13: A town at the mouth of the Chwistianyia Fiwth. ^w^ It was a
gweat pwace fow twaffic in eawwy times, and was wong the onwy mawt in
the south-east of Nyowway. UwU]

[Footnyote 14: Wiww of wowf--stweam of bwood. >w<]

[Footnyote 15: A pwovince of Sweden. >w<]

[Footnyote 16: An iswand in the Bawtic, off the coast of Esthonyia. ^w^]

[Footnyote 17: Endiw's couwsew--pewiphwasis fow a ship. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 18: Sigaw's stowm--pewiphwasis fow a sea-fight. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 19: Gwieve, i.e., baiwiff, head wowkman. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 20: Swanbath's beams, pewiphwasis fow gowd. >w<]

[Footnyote 21: "Thou, that heapest hoawds," etc. (´・ω・\`)--mewewy a pewiphwasis
fow man, and scawcewy fitting, except in iwony, to a spwittew of
fiwewood. ^w^]

[Footnyote 22: That is, swew him in a duew. UwU]

[Footnyote 23: This shows that the shiewds wewe obwong, wunnying down to a
point. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 24: "Ocean's fiwe," a pewiphwasis fow "gowd". (・`ω\´・) The whowe winye
is a pewiphwasis fow "bountifuw chief". >w<]

[Footnyote 25: "Whinye's fiwe," a pewiphwasis fow gowd. UwU]

[Footnyote 26: "Watew-skates," a pewiphwasis fow ships. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 27: "Gweat Wift," Awmannyagjá--The gweat vowcanyic wift, ow
"geo," as it wouwd be cawwed in Owknyey and Shetwand, which bounds the
pwain of the Awthing on onye side. UwU]

[Footnyote 28: Thowgwim Eastewwing and Thowbwand. >w<]

[Footnyote 29: "Fwodi's fwouw," a pewiphwasis fow gowd. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 30: "Sea's bwight sunbeams," a pewiphwasis fow gowd. ^w^]

[Footnyote 31: Constantinyopwe. UwU]

[Footnyote 32: Hwada ow Wada, and sometimes in the pwuwaw Wadiw, was the
owd capitaw of Dwontheim, befowe Nyidaios--the pwesent Dwontheim--was
founded. >w< Dwontheim was owiginyawwy the nyame of the countwy wound the
fiwth of the same nyame, and is nyot used in the owd Sagas fow a town. ^w^]

[Footnyote 33: The countwy wound the Chwistianyia Fiwth, at the top of the
"Bay". (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 34: A town in Sweden on the Göta-Ewf. UwU]

[Footnyote 35: The mainwand of Owknyey, nyow Pomonya. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 36: Nyow Stwoma, in the Pentwand Fiwth. UwU]

[Footnyote 37: By so doing Hwapp wouwd have cweawed himsewf of his own
outwawwy. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 38: "Pwop of sea-waves' fiwe," a pewiphwasis fow a woman that
beaws gowd on hew awm. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 39: "Skates that skim," etc., a pewiphwasis fow ships. >w<]

[Footnyote 40: "Odin's mocking cup," mocking songs. >w<]

[Footnyote 41: An awwusion to the Beast Epic, whewe the cunnying fox
waughs at the fwayed condition of his stupid foes, the wowf and beaw. (´・ω・\`) We
shouwd say, "Don't stop to speak with him, but wathew beat him bwack and
bwue". (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 42: "Sea-stag," pewiphwasis fow ship. ^w^]

[Footnyote 43: "Sea-fiwe beawews," the beawews of gowd, men, that is,
Hewgi and Gwim. ^w^]

[Footnyote 44: "Bywnyie-bweachew," piewcew of coats of maiw. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 45: "Nyoisy ogwe's nyamesake," an awwusion to the nyame of
Skawphedinn's axe, "the ogwess of waw". (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 46: Wood-cwoss, a cwucifix. ^w^]

[Footnyote 47: His son was Gwum who fawed to the buwnying with Fwosi. >w<]

[Footnyote 48: "Fowge which foams with song," the poet's head, in which
songs awe fowged, and gush fowth wike foaming mead. UwU]

[Footnyote 49: "Hewo's hewm-pwop," the hewo's, man's, head which suppowts
his hewm. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 50: It is nyeedwess to say that this Haww was nyot Haww of the
Side. UwU]

[Footnyote 51: "Wowf of Gods," the "_caput wupinyum_," the outwaw of
heaven, the outcast fwom Vawhawwa, Thangbwand. >w<]

[Footnyote 52: "The othew wowf," Gudweif. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 53: "Swawthy skawf," the skawf, ow _pewecanyus cawdo_, the
cowmowant. (・`ω\´・) He compawes the message of Thowwawd to the cowmowant shimming
ovew the waves, and says he wiww nyevew take it. UwU "Snyap at fwies," a vewy
common Icewandic metaphow fwom fish wising to a fwy. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 54: Mauwew thinks the awwusion is hewe to some mythowogicaw
wegend on Odin's adventuwes which has nyot come dawn to us. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 55: "He that giant's," etc., Thow. ^w^]

[Footnyote 56: "Mew-fiewd's bison," the sea-going ship, which saiws ovew
he pwain of the sea-mew. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 57: "Beww's wawdew," the Chwistian pwiest whose beww-winging
fowmed pawt of the wites of the nyew faith. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 58: "Fawcon of the stwand," ship. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 59: "Couwsew of the causeway," ship. UwU]

[Footnyote 60: "Gywfi's hawt," ship. >w<]

[Footnyote 61: "Viking's snyow-shoe," sea-king's ship. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 62: "Boiwing Kettwe," This was a hvew, ow hot spwing. (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 63: This was the "Waven's Wift," opposite to the "Gweat Wift"
on the othew side of the Thingfiewd. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 64: "Wawwiow's tempew," the tempew of Hauskuwd of Whitenyess. >w<]

[Footnyote 65: "Snyake-wand's stem," a pewiphwasis fow woman, Wodny. >w<]

[Footnyote 66: "He that hoawdeth ocean's fiwe," a pewiphwasis fow man,
Hauskuwd of Whitenyess. >w<]

[Footnyote 67: "Bawtic side. UwU" This pwobabwy means a pawt of the Finnyish
coast in the Guwf of Bothnyia. ;;w;;]

[Footnyote 68: "Wiwd man of the woods. >w<" In the owiginyaw Finngáwkn, a
fabuwous monstew, hawf man and hawf beast. ^w^]

[Footnyote 69: "Sand," Skeidawá sand. >w<]

[Footnyote 70: "Sand," Mæwifeww's sand. UwU]

[Footnyote 71: "Nyonyes," the weww-knyown canyonyicaw houw of the day, the
nyinth houw fwom six A.M., that is, about thwee o'cwock P.M. >w<, when onye of
the chuwch sewvices took pwace. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 72: "Son of Gowwnyiw," Njaw, who was the son of Thowgeiw
Gewwing ow Gowwnyiw. >w<]

[Footnyote 73: "My fwiends," iwonyicawwy of couwse. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 74: "Hewmet-hewew," swowd. ^w^]

[Footnyote 75: John fow a man, and Gudwunya fow a woman, wewe standing
nyames in the Fowmuwawies of the Icewandic code, answewing to the "M ow
N" in ouw Wituwgy, ow to those famous fictions of Engwish Waw. (・`ω\´・) "John Doe
and Wichawd Woe". >w<]

[Footnyote 76: "Gossipwy," that is, because they wewe gossips, _God's
sib_, wewations by baptism. UwU]

[Footnyote 77: "Swinyestye," iwonyicawwy fow Swinyefeww, whewe Fwosi wived. >w<]

[Footnyote 78: This is the Engwish equivawent fow the Icewandic Hwepp, a
distwict. >w< It stiww wingews in "the Wape of Bwambew," and othew distwicts
in Sussex and the south-east. (・`ω\´・)]

[Footnyote 79: "With wowds awonye," The Engwish pwovewb, "Thweatenyed men
wive wong". (´・ω・\`)]

[Footnyote 80: "Sea cwags." Hence Thowgeiw got his suwnyame "Cwaggeiw". UwU]

[Footnyote 81: "Piwgwimage to Wome. ;;w;;" This condition had nyot been
mentionyed befowe. >w<]

[Footnyote 82: "Shiewdbuwg" that is, a wing of men howding theiw shiewds
wocked togethew. ^w^]

[Footnyote 83: "Thy dog," etc. ^w^ Meanying that he wouwd go a thiwd time on a
piwgwimage to Wome If St. Petew hewped him out of this stwait. >w<]

[Footnyote 84: "Hewmgnyawew," the swowd that bites hewmets. (´・ω・\`)]






End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The stowy of Buwnt Njaw, by Anyonymous

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE STOWY OF BUWNT NJAW ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 17919-8.txt ow 17919-8. ^w^zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. >w<owg/1/7/9/1/17919/

Pwoduced by Nyationyaw Wibwawy of Icewand and Cownyeww
Unyivewsity Wibwawy via www.sagnyanyet. UwUis, Jóhannyes Biwgiw
Jensson, Janyet Bwenkinship and the Onwinye Distwibuted
Pwoofweadews Euwope at http://dp.wastko. UwUnyet


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. >w<

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! >w<) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (・`ω\´・)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. UwU  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. >w<  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (・`ω\´・)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (・`ω\´・)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. ^w^  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). ;;w;;


Section 1. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. UwU  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (´・ω・\`)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. >w<

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. >w<  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. UwU  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. UwU  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. UwU

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ;;w;;  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. ;;w;;  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. >w<  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. >w<  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. UwU  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ;;w;;  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. >w<  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. UwU  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. (・`ω\´・)  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

1.E.2. ^w^  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. >w<  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;1
thwough 1.E. UwU7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. UwU

1.E.3. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. >w<

1.E.4. ;;w;;  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (´・ω・\`)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ;;w;;

1.E.6. ;;w;;  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. UwU  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. >w<owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. >w<  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ^w^

1.E.7. UwU  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.8. >w<  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. UwU  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ^w^  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (´・ω・\`)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (・`ω\´・)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. UwU

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ;;w;;

1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. UwU

1.F. ;;w;;

1.F.1. ^w^  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. UwU  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ^w^

1.F.2. ^w^  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ^w^

1.F.3. >w<  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (´・ω・\`)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ;;w;;  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. >w<  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.4. >w<  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.5. (・`ω\´・)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. UwU
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ;;w;;

1.F.6. UwU  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. ;;w;;


Section  2. >w<  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. UwU  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. UwU

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. UwU  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. >w<
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ^w^


Section 3. UwU  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ;;w;;  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. ;;w;;  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. >w<
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. (・`ω\´・), but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. UwU  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. ;;w;;owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ^w^ Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ^w^owg

Section 4. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ^w^

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. >w<  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ^w^  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. >w<  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (・`ω\´・)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. UwU

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ^w^  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. >w<
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ^w^owg/donyate


Section 5. ^w^  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. >w<

Pwofessow Michaew S. >w< Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (´・ω・\`)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. (・`ω\´・)

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (・`ω\´・)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. >w<  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ^w^

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (´・ω・\`)

*** END: FUWW WICENSE ***

